Matthew's Bible (1537) (John Rogers (as Thomas Matthew), 1537)
Public domain.
Source: Internet Archive (matthew-1537).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

======================================================================

he Ralender


eis gs
arp 1 ¢ 2 Be
pater dannen dem e . a" rb
j
iy se Siete 10 bj 2 5
1 * a rij : iwabebe ep mill
d oct. entes ij
ur e Oct Homag mur. v Marche
viii e a vi
4 E ir @Famary 500 ii Beets res ee
wxpete eee 4 o K een i . 2 H j
tent volume ofthe Wyble. : 6 Pauletpather, EY k Martyn 1*
& Calendar with an a manack. He 2 öden By rir 4 tty
Ss ii) Viti b duct;
he lg ar ble serra 1 tae 51 5 2 eee. 1
és elbe jie . reed 2 * 16 é * epaticpon Capnt felix 0
of. vin a . martitig .
n i) Agapevit
Sree adores en, See E
wut 5 ri
2 0 eee ae eee f
‘Thenames ot allche bone of the Byble/ wyth the : . esbitgine Ly * n
or the Chapters / and . 1 & siren 220 wine ee 707
2 byee reberfall dectar „ e m. ru) vi . op Foi
mae tone ac anche eee ix 2 Kauen en aper ane. fx Aueh Edwarde kynge ae
oli € me bij ii Spee s 8 * nm
ne oft bokeare tere aoeo ‘ bj eB feconde rij 5 MBenctabl ret
‘ P 0
Santee, taco places 1 5 U. 2 £ gheorpcte 20
in
ir b ela Li
FTebꝛuar 0, pels ;
i 8 aer. be § Barer n bi
5 2 Pen 2
xi kityet — i} 1 xx
at Se e,
1 5
wt) 4 Apaill
* pat ba a reg abe mone pir
it ppolione vi j a
„ e, ee
8 op


*


ll 4 erpetuug biſbop


d C hetunne in t.
f sai anita


0


ty


Ter
1 0


ie


: Bi


=
3
u
1 TO .
au See Ss


2


e Wederde and Spidaroe.
b Sate teen Eee


ir OY 3 S


Cine. xe. E


) bij 5 88 efunne in Cancer.


faynt Batelbplhop. iy


i x g ‘ae


nid K
i Weterof Mylan,
E-


ath. rr da foe .
ri 1 Jobilipand games Apo jp


xir 3 Ane rufe erolle i


viij e
1 1 SapnetwWodarde
ee wen , a


peer ot Michael. wy

xiii & Trantoklayntmicolag ix
ii d Sozdian and epimach 1
f @nthonpmartyz 5


5 8 Seruatius contettoz 10
© qhetunnett Gemmixi
a Pan poeta inet Se 4


rh 0 Sant odr ſemarde
mit bK Binden brd
Dunſtanne bytop
5 Bernardyne
t .
uliane brꝛgrn
te c Werpderp martyz
d Frant. ok S. Francys
yoti e Didelmebptoop
bi b eier e


5 ij 1


1j


c Cranſia. ot ſaynt ædward


mr & d Pealbur


at

Te — a)
apnt Krelcens 415
il. rt


x [ae 15


. 25


f


See


oe Cititpbithop
en brothers mar.
Cranſi S aynt Benet
Naboꝛ andgfelir.


t@ A tes,


* su o


age


*
‘ is, arith 3 as 25
erh arr. wone. xxx. ty 45 SFnocbentatens 2240
A e n f geren n: 28
ar ment üturn i oe b colncanewamiane — i,
ri but k Mécbactar l
5 ‘a yy b armee 2
„ 4 „ttober. 4
es 2 5 . D r. 6
rif Pit 0 5
5 i ut 5 tig
¢ "rine „5
* wy og ee 2
tse roitt I Pelage vit
2 500 bit &
. 4 rb 5 b We en 2
rv be ret tit yl 6
a. ee, e ee
fili 2 Barecimew apoie 125 "Az Suan ty 1
i k Letops henge arbeitenden : 0
1
Fe # Sutayne 25 roi e 1 cru Sue .
101 2 Kapo ann Ex bi 4 uttebatte pn te
5 pi dl xxx g A thoutande virgyn rps :
brmrn xd rin gq Parva me tri
September ne
ox d 0 lachend mne sep. a 2 ae enden. 205
b a bed ache. i
8 11 e i bit 3 Simon bees 770
5 8 bi
: 5 Herne abboce a 6 Ane 1
e. f Saurer bil ouember.
2 a Se erbe 15 th xxx. daxes. che mone. ean
5 n isu 2 Great ofall tapnecs 1 6
% b Mercer, e b igen 3
n d Maurtitusdytop rit) 3 amen n ia .
e ral of thebolycrote, Hi rx FL Leite piedde 2
wee n „ Laber. xb 4 Teonarde tf
a rat ben La © Bapltrpdearchbyt, be ‘ i
6 4 25 Pa m8 batt 4
5 Atctoz nd 5 115 heodore R 1
e e
n i A Batememartye 11


eT ne
The Halenver.
rilf ¢ Habbe abpote
c Cranſ. ot erhenw. pif rot d Concrp.oCour K an
d @ ht funnem sagt. vy ¢ Puente de
ire Edmuͤde archbr. k Pycoias byw.
ie pew by. ro xa Capnane abbote
sot mots arty. i ‘waits
al A
. F comune en ii ¢ helme cen.
xi ¢ Pꝛelente. ol out lad 1 d Lucpe virgene
% d Cectlpbirgin
a 2 :
é Srpfogone mar.
Mf ahbe.


¶ An erbortacponito the ſtudpe ok the f


gathered out of the Bybie.


LCheilt vntothepecople, John, v,


Apcarch the Seripturrs fo tber are ther tbat teſtptie of me.


Haul to Tymothy, ij. Tymo.iij.
Ill Scripture; bp intpiracyh of got) iß profitable to teache / to mpꝛouie/ ro amede
eto mrutt mr tte im OF God mare bepertect e peparedtoalgoad works,

The ſame to the Nom. xy


wyat tyynges fo euer are wyptten / are wsptten los our lernyng: that we thoꝛou pacyẽce
‘Indcomfogth oF the Socripture/mpghehaue hope.


Salomon Pꝛouerb. xxx.
Bilehe wo7de of & od is pure a cleane / itis a Hyive vnto thẽ that put theirtrult init. Put
nothrnge vnto hes wozdes / let he repꝛoue the and thou be found a par.
Holes to the people. Deu. c.


— — hem good in bys atone eves: But whatloeuer
commaunde vou / that take hede re do: and put noughe therto / ner tone ought therlrom.


The Loꝛde vnto Pata. ‘voies.


© on Let not the bone of this lawe departe oute or thy mouth: But recoarde therin dare and


*


e
* 22
it Lazarus bithop
15 6 Beactane butpop


at OD
85 ( eee pone


December


huth. ai art. Che Mone. xx x.


2222872 2 3 2


Bere Oſmund 1 Cant. ot Zams
q ott.
Warberu ban Sriuelet


29 2822 A5 Akan a SS


nyobt / that thou maxeſt be circuml pect todo accozdyng to all that is wepttentherm . oz

n roti. . Zi 3 out haue vn 4

An Tlmanacz to; roi H.peares, then walt thou make thy wave pꝛolpcrous / and chen walt thou haue pnderftandpnge.

5 ft Abe eie Type leite ! Cume therfromnetherto the trat hande / ner tothe leite: ihat thou maxelt haue vnder⸗
Ane catr. nomber⸗ dominical. ’ flandpnge in all that thou take t in hande.


The lame tothe pcoplc. Eros.
And thou Malt bew thy conne at that tynie / aringe: his is done beraule ot that whych
the L onde drd vnto me when J came out of Egbpte. Cherkoze tt Wall bea Cygne onto the
pponthrnehande and a remebzaunce betwene ihne epes / that ihe L ozdes lawe mare
be inthy mouth. Foz wrtha ronge bande the Lozde bzoughe the oute ol Egypte.


Poles, Deutero. xxx).
Sethat chouirende this lawe befoze all Ilrael in their eares. Gather the people coge ·
1 ther / both men) wemen / and chridren and the Uraungers that are in thy crtres: that they
maxe heare / ieme / and keare the Loꝛde pour God / to nepe all the wowee bs lawe.
. a,


*


a


@


@


*


15


Farge wayannseayraksye


dai: onethes. ti cds, anibonedape,
eee e 5
un.


(Thelſummec content ofall the bol


Otripture / both of the olde and nerve tet


seo ott the holy wꝛytynges


aut whomn ther is nothrnge whrchisrpgpttwes g merep fut: and
.... 2 eee ah


hen that God byd create


woꝛide / loch and fo greate /
vnto kenne / deeth / and danmsc on / bought bndert


Naam al


iden to


27 2 5 F eu 4 11 5
watt of 410 the bokes of the newe x


kamkt we are taught that z cht to 0 Celine
ments kent of Plather / ar loch tyme as he bad determpned

Capea all wycheones flozpthed, Andthat he was lent not es
(fos hep all were nee butto theneent thathe wolde truly wewe theaboundantry.
hes oF bisgrace/ which he bad pꝛomefed.


© guthe neluc tefament therfore it is
moſt dupdentty declared / that Fetus Chilli the true lambe ahoi / is to thyntentto
reconckle us ta che father / paping on che crode the punyſhment die vnto our fynnes:and
todelpuet bs From the bondage of che deuell ontotbom we ferued thzoughe Synne)andto
Nabe bs the fonnes of Good p be hath geu bs the true peace and tranqupl e of cone
GENE hatte no lnigeraa arte ames these eae is pura are tent)


fnners: which is ot ſo great ppi ey haue it /delpꝛeto perfozme alls duties
CHiouetoallmensatertechanpie vic b fen et g rere God geueth hes


Eapib/Chzittes father( which is become ouresaliotozcu that Chzvt our
beate ann Aso raden Foss fonnesitmputpnge not oute lynnes bnto ba /


7 focuerbath not declareth chat he bath not faptl in Cypit,
Wanenbem wem anne a lawUNT Mace ben ln


ing Nee un. 2
is gat cis w 24.
iF ai Lint Fel 7 A
eas AS Cai itt, is mouth chalet in pps mayettye
and Judge all men /geupng onto euerp one the wozekes o¢bpsbodpe / arcowynge to that
he hatt done / Alrbeg 10D 07 bade Ind that (hall faye ontochem that kbalbe on hig
eebde bende. Lan pebledeD cyplnpen of mp fatyre / inbevet ve the Ryngdome prepared
G07 vou from the begennynge of the warde: And onto them chat thalbie on hys left hand /
Departe from me pe curied/ in to eucrlattinge Eyre: which ts prepared fon the deuell and
biG aungels.qhen Halthe ende come g he wal deluer bp d to Godthe father,


‘ : i 11 N K te
neee


geuen Rrowe(9| beleue ere and
i his cg tobunbebathteneane chet belenyag ne ule bear fleht
thozow


brsname. :
Another feundatyon lien
manlaye And fayne' b a preachers 1 —
eee io


CT thet mooſt noble and gratyous


e eee of England and of Araunte /
sand nder Goo the chere
“ote ae ee ea


550 —.— 4.57 W

feel manbboleiges Poccupyen n

e haupng fauecondet ¢ bepng put

F
d

but allo laüdable haue pourefyngular And rate


te


eines a eng cone kene in) mb
Sa oa —
— 2 nfo rab
nest diefe eber here 1


Vnto the Rynges Kluge 1

ol Frael / partapneth vnto all

Anceg dice name. bat be there callety the latwe in to bs che holp icripture p
woldec? mom bole ¢ mpgheie Hod Mute, (eucty one urbis donut

. — m beret anotthevate ofall me sone pepper lao aig


Other princes of dure en vnto this cõ·
tmaundement of bis feruaunt Moves /s to at enges chat do
Soddes 28 pach allo pour eyes to ſe ei ia es


partect
the latoe can meint lat anddebprate
Saacroudptabnec, go A nothing mplrult bur that tt tal molt asceptably come into


neth a
lar good patrone is
‘a@betendat/¢! nonother puto . ma .


wich abeck ¢ pet ts i¢fome tyme; fotheredog bent red beche arde 6
Jodie prences. Longe ¢ oft wi ened,
‘rae ee . — a n ing


agel

pveatest berg e tulars to be confosinable to Ge men penn

We rache beleu trad ee an oyariechat the pices yeas

intotbeteb; ba eget of fupertttépon and Zooiatyye,

of sab onto Mabylave 1 and the per: .negum. b.
u d e 66. nen v..


Lebe cco aple inthe fc 2
. * e
rende ol che la we kounde in r Te nean rl.


pons geha w aun 1 — ab e ee i
Saen . 5 — i


i
8
8
1
5
i


10 a
what his father badmott govip renzetied:e tovetapne 3 — and
cutomes all ale tocra

dene al tbat by ane means Geto out 02 x totrue


mund e 2
/@ OF Coch as wartedg i „
5 1 ‘Foolatrye.4 * is


iene ee oc real ae e
FEE


“ CCathexheptten Readers.


„ Thegrace and peaceok God be geuen vnto yduby Jelus Chyitte. tad
: 5 * As the bees oplpuentipde gacpertagether kwete towers, to make by nacuralt cratt thelwetehornprtohand. ”
a t tl ct K n ts Maitſlyt 9 Late ne h werb r en erte GT wyrch are oꝛdened alter the maner ol a table, fo¢
intothe Kynges Matellye |, , PS
otveth any man what chaiige may fall But to $foztut ¢ F ei i . : : BED at
820 karre ee poute graces Reaulme) are are ce + Compared one wyth another: to thintent that the pꝛudent Meader (by the kpzete of God) mape beare awaye
thanclies to be geuen nto the L onde of Ho weg. which bath dealt e 4 pure and eleare teln Ioherby euer man (as he is bounde) mape be made readr / üronge and gar⸗
inhabptauntes therok / as to lende thema Piruce that cont buchen 5 bee * Huſbed toantwere to all them that ache hem a reafon of bys tapth. hrs is allo profptable to the part pcillar
ryched in all poyntes oktrue godlyncs . Udo Wa L 2 aad pie deed | ‘amp generall ergoztacpons twhych we make tocertapne perfonages/o2 römune people: ¢ fozto antwort trulp
alone vngodlp but alfo wzetched. Kor loche a since agsgeu Toc) aporlofy bledynigto do Heretrkes c to confounde the: erlaries of the woꝛde ol God. In the which allo we may kynde (y which, yet-
dect ura DAC) rage ge COTTE. : : bet greatly che ſtudpe of the readers )theopenynge ok certarne Hebzewe tropes / tranlacpons / lem plxtubeg /
acer pat hezemah and Fottal weve onto Jirgel che fame is poure grace onto d Menume : i aud maners of fpeatipnges(tobpdh te call heaves) cdtrpneD in the Zpbie.dnd fos the moze catvip to Fyre the
of englans :pee the godly Hate greatebopechat poure pate Halbe fart aboue theirs, tters delpꝛedbecaule thatdpto der engendzeth conkulpon) J haue procened after the ober oF un Alphabete:
hey opheide the verktpe a true wo ypp nge of God/but oncly ko tere awne times. go chrntente that none be depzpuedok fo precpous a krealureethe whpch ve ſhall ble to the honoure and glozpe
Jour graces wyldome /tllumpned of Sed call we truid) ro Epameiy labipwe the trade of ok God / and to the edytpinge othys Churche. How be f(good Reader) pt thou Fyrde not the thynges in thus ta⸗


Gennes fn yOu un rat onder paeyaut pute) os bees ge. . erpꝛelled / in the lame letters of the chapters wherin ther are aurgned: vouchlaue to iotze in pletter goinge


Apert betoze of inthe letter next kolowynge.
diele as calbe permanent and durable and fotuerlp grounded / that the wont iuggeirng We 125
ſemous perlualtons of falke aß chalinoc be fo nopfome onto poure pokerkte⸗ 8 . . 1 .
aach bang bene pntnche konnt ave gseh eleganten olle rens dnn F contepned of etjotaphat..fPatalip xx gts ot gotta tif men.
nacpons in poure graces goodnes 'moch moate they ef pout awnereauline, oche consi in the Bpbie / in wyrch the readers may kynde and xxit. a / et Paral xxii. a. xxiiiit
dence haue cher ccnceaned by pour kommer actes wherthzougb oure grace bath loerca. 4 : „ pꝛactple many commune places, Che mynpſters ought to pꝛeache agaynſte abules
Dpngip profptenthis aflapre. Che euerkturng Kolo p. ce pelts Beene er t 5 5 Eräplein John Bapelte. Mat. piu. a. Alloin SS. Paul
onto Coch effect thatehethinge may be cotprualty which pe baue be gone: And Co rege 22 5 60 ‘whch rebuked the abuted of the Cozinthpans: fo2 ha⸗
oute his imyghtphande and wozche fo ürögeip in pou that no tonne of faite Prophetes i : Abhompnacpott. upnge lectes t. C oʒin i. b.c / alto becauſe that they luſfe ·
(che berpoe rovers of Princes and Mealmes)maye hereafter be able toertynct the Kut“ 7 Phonignacvon bekoze God are Folks a Images. red a fomicatof amöge them v a Allo hecauſe that they
gebeten busen nn bern ren er eee ee : oe the people do bowe thé felues- Put. Aloe dete ec ; 1
e mare the better accompiech yourmoat godipintent-And eulprze och Area pi d. xxvij . c 8 8 allo becaul ey fast with the Getyleg in

mes cart bm po bzeatt that 20 verter tothe noe mapeleaue Pebende . Chat man is abhompnacpon / chat toraheth $ true Gate wih the ok chetrlactiticeg. bt: .
pou this teſtymonpe of glozvesthat vehauettufe othe pure fayth or ond mn. to lerue Bolles g that doth delpyte ihe truthe tor chat they abuled Plupper of the Lozve.
kepned bis holy wo7de/fuppzetlen Cuperityevon/deleate put aware Adolatrpe, ended the ophane doctt pries. lap. xli. x thepdouted of the relurrercid xb. anü chunt they payed
b in a tonge that men vnderſtode not. xiili. o

Any maner of mere tradycpous of man are abules.


A
Hi ji Inne vnto the crue trade ot 1
Tage ang te pucteattopta on [| brpauscwot gary wae ane Pi toe oughenetaflone te e ng ee
Fen ae g her aud aer er gene haligedeDACeConatutt/ fend which ien ettemetode excellent / is abbomx⸗ eee


rewarde ol cyon befoze God. Lu. xvid ſccepcyon
rden and cael ere Wee ee ’ Che tranigredouirs of Geddes commaundementes — Accepepon ot vesvones (15 to haue veryecte co the
no eare hearde no; can alcende into the herte . t 9 e abhompnacpon. Ieuitt xxvi e gondyc ron ol the man / 07 tohys nacy
ol man. Oo be it. ‘ 5 Cheabhommacpon Ganpengein the boty places is not godly. Deu rd. Para Fire Mama. il b 1. d.
erulalem alleged of her enemies Mat. rxuij. g. Marc. bi b. K olof lil b. Act. r. And the fan thyng alfo/ought
b. Luh J not to be in man James ii. a quuus i e · &ccli xx c xlu.a
GaAccutacyon
One ought to accute his bꝛocher to the church / pe he
e alter he hath had bꝛotherly monxeyon ·
At. xvflt.
: Noaccufacpon ought to be receaued agapnſt the mi⸗
Che lacrykpces / feſtes / metes / and all out warde ce. nylter / vndertwo oz the wytneſleg. i imo ve Weare
att abꝛogated Ole vic Ela ſcix.a. / Samu, acculed befoze god / bythe malpce of Satan: 4.
peFere xxxi f; Batu ij Mich. ij chi c Amos. b.. Sac. Apocyij-c.Aitobyourawnenaughtines- Fer-1}
Pall che oder of pyellhode is abꝛogated · Ebꝛedu b bp our awne ronkctence. rom jc. Allo by the lcrypture.
8 Abſtynence 0 b gſiet os erke accute out elucs-pzou bie
che abapnence of a chnten manis to Hauler Gavan.
bem Celfe from yn: f obi t. b. Cella iii. ai Pet lg By Adam we are al lynnerg / or whõ we haue z incly⸗
fe. Cothem that hene u bſtynẽce wildome is geuen · Mae nacxon to do euell. rombbd/ And byhnn we are fubtect
Id · and bodely hrallh/ Ecclt xxxviſ d to death t Coꝛxvo /c
An exanpie of abitynence in Foon Baptylt. Mat ii Adam wasa kygure ol chꝛiſt to rome / the whych is
se PLB NEN
Adulter


youre graces tapthfull a true ſubiect
‘Thomas Matthew.


g — of thepepneppall matters


Adulterars are ſtonedto death. WDeuteronome.. Ir. ntich ig chaungeth the


een

derung: ar pon: brenn. Hea l

Aegis anner pm deh

deb Meg rc. Sat; atric pattie Pees 3
my lterp dytameth the percoſſe. Pꝛouerb bi. d Eccle⸗


all
One aught to deware ok adulterarg Deut. b. b
Hod wytneddeth agaynſt adulterarß. Mala. ff. b
Btpe nil b. ee kopthe cuſpeccpan of adulter.


mb.
ex me nat fopfake bys wyle to; caute of adultery. !
ol


duo
r wefde
uocate: but only in. i. 40. it a: in the whieh yet Tela ch a
prea de ee nde the father nee is in —


@
pecyon afte the maner oF ebeferppeue 48 call
bu cena CoP Byer San — —
t ili bilxv kente: and akter this chu is oure Apotel,
Sethe ne eee alllpecpons to them whpch an aber ele cS
haue truſt in anp other then in bpm only. Beut.rrgio:. Che tpotties are a 8 —— be Si
Jolu. xxliſt.e:and thertoꝛe he toꝛgaue the cor t A the falte cen cart: avy. g,
knee nem eigen hne . Aeries of God. coz⸗ ee lt. i. cos.
an oughtto ince em ata age Eccie · Delperd and twogcners tity with God f. co i. a 15
ant ö 2 e 0


Gebe be aug Amonge wh
5 bite 1. ite ee Warden aon


Hy the an
un. Reg oe


i se
GArmours of chatten men.
——


pantel ot Erne dl. — lit a . 8


the Bpbles “i


tonne / and oftye holy got. og. gat petty
Apoſties dae ee
are D
5 aued pthehee gooſt / betoze he


— — bly Coyne dene ng the holy gots,
e bleuynge his dit baer
11 5 a: raphe ko delyuer Ehe gelded man of DQuene Camac beleued (and
tes. lal. therfore bap wace)beeoye Ye was baptpꝛed. Act · bit. c
10 ebe. 15 0 1 eb. dee ype rebel ze the kace Aga that faye that {uttpfpcacpon is made
Lene ſebz ix. Aoma vis g / and to pzepare vn choꝛow 1 eſterche tothe Nom i. d. ij a.c. ph.
ij


ohn x tu b. Gala. ij d iii. a. where laynt Paul ſbeweth phat
e et d rrght


9 95


hand derbe not branx wozcke whatloe
rt. a: From whe ce he walnot uertt

ue bh ct. eee
are which n ehy: 1
in Chak Nom. vt a. o put ondhhld Salle


bodely poetence learn the apottles tore ·
of Palo John · vit k.
alcentpon all power was geu
tPetitf, es Gauimes-
ene wen tall meno oure re atone 8 b.
obi ti b iS ꝛouer ili b. Tun iſtid / and al epee, Soap
erampleconoalmes, Act xa. 1 60 elk. a. n
ee e doch not make ams pooze Gee mot ebota
Lad — ake 10 Mar x. t Lu. xijt
9 55 eee / abideth notin chatite-t John. eatptude / oz bleſledn
a os therfore dit eee vnto b pooze. ear eT fg geh
Ila. xxvii un chen Doth counte it done vnto hem D God / and ot Ch yt tente by
neuer . — to a 8 c sBeatytude ee tulnes ¢ abundaunce of alt
to 1 Ab. Hl. b. x. ia W Pal xvit· b xxvit a/ rrroi b Bes. rli c rb. c.


nabam Gen vit
c. Ge. ul orgacob gene 0
e deſtrope all . ö of
alte kynge inbys gloꝛpe. Nav.


l. sien poles
— ebz xi b chic
ese erbten fa,
eos grunts choy Lull xrif. c.


te aoe 170 blellednes / excepte he be
lens g beenden. pra |
pes @ Baptrme. rxxit a.
Ts, a Judith. ritb. eee. |
ag — eens bg Pieteoare hep that Culler toy rubtwemes tale


Baptrme
905 dureh wr 2 lf. c
/ bytge which wwe are — Blellebis marr/ by caule che beleued Lutte.
Diesen Ege Ble neaed ave thee eatan bere ee ware of Sod ans
= sap Lu. xi Co
ie enen en sb
By te ecu aie enam bsp gb ie ui.
een eon et Tablede/istotnereate to geue abolaunce/ ato
e dibclplddid rxrd. xxxix a


baptlze / but 0 — fitj.a. make goodes to encreace Gene.
ee ent / not to baptrꝛe / dut , Tobletie / s to cue pomercotnereate Gen cr.


ang 5
e made eae


Co be bielker/ig to be delyuered fxs al maner at cur
Wecebehterolnche ran: ott tather mmo. e. hie h tn f tomtyme teat


c. Luke. bl. e


Curled are they / which are
Clalph


Pb.
Atpretual b.
ee
ht notto dwen in oure bodyes / to obeye
the delpꝛeßz of it. Roma. vi. a. b. But mu
bpibetpreotgeosnetame chapeet, e


We arconebodyeand one fpzete: RO
when * one pott e phiit c. ita. no
00


. cepin xi.
che is the bodye ol Ephe! he
e
ti


frbi.c.tco;
was Chellt-t-cozin x. a

‘Cheteriptn ag at eo bs / tl intent

ut lefte vnto vs / to

we Ghulve beleue that Zelus is the ge U pred
ted tonne ol God / and that we / in beicurnge it /
hate euerlatynge lpke John. r g ?
We cannot beleue inſeſle we here preachyng Nom.
c. herloꝛe be that commeth to God mult beleue in


eb? xi. bd :
Cher that are bone ol God do beleue / and they to


ee:


l. c. Har xi c Lub. xrii bras the rocke


e.


5


ibethatis led brthe yet or don


Let us biedle oure perteruters. om Hi ct. cox iti. ii.e. which are taught of God a oh. bl e. eco bo


Bledled is the md é carne dg appereth that to beleue is che gytte of God.


‘Che blalphempe aga pnt the holy gotte all neuer . * 15


¶ Boꝛne agarne. 5
We are home a newe bp tz woꝛde of God / wht
, Dmepicachesbnto tel ie Fes pla ma be not bome
agamme (that att boctrpne bp the boly got) be 2


tothe kyngdom of heut / a beleue
fl. a Chertoze they 6 are lo bone sei aba


„ al malpce a as et boꝛne childxẽ deter the mite of


worde of God ! Pet. la. 4
pots fo; an ebatts necelaretothie 1

ab f n this prete oh

: coen-soitia pack. e ought co be eaten pty:
beate of oure face Gene in d. and geuen to the poze;
Ela. plil c. An example in Heltleus iit Meg itt g.
_ Che bzead ofipte/ ia tte lache of chat which is gez
* wert br to cake though tapthteleupnae ? bee
e
C ˙ eeu ee


Pharao · Exo x · c. And Senaherib ut. Ne b. Alco nd i Pet. ib it.
pi Ex g. xix. ſhall haue iope a 1 Pet. i b it. u. Ela · xxxb a
I 5 eed


konteyned in he @pble 9. tii,


Blonde. ; a 05 Soenoze Pour cbt. a b. xrrvi dae
cchrs worde blowde dot) irgnpkpecpnne concupys N. dit d. Edit. be rxittt crx. d. Allo Ole.ritt c. Allo
andaäll chat is not of the tpzete of God Plaft i Vit. bit ir. ri. alta. ij. Coꝛin t.. ij alto. Gala. v.
F lpreof cuereman Lewitt. rotl.c, Wppe.t.e,an Debus:
{here wasnothinge pourgedinthe onelawerwitys ⸗ „e GCouctoulnes,
but blonde. Leut. Toi c. Deb tre Couetoulnes ig § rote ofall euell t Timo bt. whleh
Chebloude ok Chat allieth remit ofourtynnes/ ie Jdolatrle. €pbe.v.b.Colot.t.Fets tobnden vsves
butthe bloude of Abellac ted vengegunce. Pebz erf k. 1ürapteie Kuße ri berbe vn bebe nutte
Bpthebloude or Chuiltche redempcpon rempüxon Theres nathenge mon wpcked chenthe couetous


6 putgaci ot our cynneg is made. E ph.. b. Hebs ax cad eee ou eat
gc xl da. Pet j a. and. i. q on. i c. Apocal ib Pep hateth couetoulnd hal ipuc lig. Pou. xxbiti. 8
. Bondage Che L onde is angepe with vs / Foz the iniquptye of


Godbath delpuered os Hd che bondage ok che deuell, sure couetoumesececk zoll B,
Peutct. b. ä. which thinges men ought to teache ther: Cutten behe that getteth any thyrige in to his houle
chelduen / that it is done by Chat. dr d. Let vs cherkoze by couetoutnes Habacuc. ij.c.
feruefynne nontoze Noni ri. b/c/d Couctouthes doth hurte tohis neyghbour / as apes

cprcumcpt pon g other worckes or the lawe are rpth br Jezabel/which made Haboth conve foz his vi⸗
fenuptude oz bondage Gala kt. a. b.. From which we neparde. ih. N yng. rl a. Pꝛouerb. i b. Allo by Judag the


ave peTpuered thzougy dhe Ven d eden ee pin at kuowathtt pf
0 ouctoutnes dytam at koloweth it. Pꝛo ·
che commpnge of c hict in the lech. uer. xb. b. Eccli.xxxt.a 125 one?


commpng ok Ghͤlt was Prompted chene rite — Thegouerners of the peo} wulde be without co ⸗
b. — nome. xbiſt. c. Beuel. ix. g. An eg. uetuoutnes Exo. xpiiſ c. 12 *
Bag fl. b. Hach. al. c. He that ppilech chalbe pplled Ela xrrlit.a

Che commpuge of Ch lt was delpzed Elay. lv. b. He tall dwell with God / that is without couetoul⸗
ria. and was fuleplied when the tyme was kulcome. neß. Ela. xrxiijib.(c.

Salat. fllt a. e couetuous man is neuer content. Ecclẽ. p. o

By the commynge of ch ult we are delpuered from e couctous man darre not cate bys belykull
evel Hope d Cite. it d. it b. Act. ii, d. Cool.. b. & Eccleltaltes v. a.
doreck aue all goodnes. Ea. xi. d. Jere. iti. a. Luk. ix. g They all udp after couetouſneg . Jeremp. vi. c. viii.
xx. b. John. lll. b. il. g Elap. lv. d. il. d. Amog ix. a .

Che commynge of Chzitt agapnt deth kynne and Prpaces/ Pie) Prophetes and all the worde
helle Abacuctit a. Chough chathe be humdle/ temple is full of couetoulnes - Ela. Io. a. Jere. bj.. vii. d. xxij. s
gentyll o without pꝛyde. lat. xta. Jere rut baach ix b ij. Pet. ij c. and pyllars of the people. Mich. ij a

Che commpnge of Chꝛiſt into vs Che couetous people haue not the Kyngdome ok


0 comet eco ee at - eee eople do kall intothe Shaves ok the
worde. xilij.c. 4
pet eh comipiite of abate to Judgment. peuellj atmo.) b. :


Chit yall come to inge goodimen d euell. etre Let bs ther foze be without couetoulnes Heb. rij a

Roma. Flitſ. b. l. Co:. b. b. Peal. rcb. cli xi, Eccli. i. Ceremonpes.

Accompanied W elderg of bis people a with the ane Betaule of the truſt that the Jewes had in ceremo⸗
18. Mat. xi. j. Cella. l. ant. bih ofthe which dave d nyes / God deteſted them Pal. l. c Clap. j c. ere vij.e.
oure are to vs vncertayne. Matth. xxüui. t. Gedalo. v. Amos. b f. Mich. vj. b. Zach · bij. b at
Cella fx Act. 1 b. An it is ät Haide. Ela. ri M. Phil. Che ceremonpes are caſt of€o2 their weneneg a vn ·

5 Ws Goby e een. or molke pꝛokitablenes: but they were tometymegeuk. eu. b.

thendetpze it. Hebz. ri and warte toit. Mat rrüitl. ax e. ko to bꝛynge mẽ to greater trutte Heb. vi) car. c

Lae eden that Lanne ape toe Mall Haul Pezoune c

o ryghtwelnes. i. Cin ib Ok which Wes Les. Coin. x. g. Eh. b c. C olol iſ c

are. Mat. xxb. a. ij. Cella ij. a. i. Cella. iiij. d ij. Pet. ij. b. Charite oꝛ loue.

Judas . g. God is charpte onde a

¶ Fre chovte oꝛ fre wylt. Che charite of Godis declared onto vs: for he hath
his worde: kre hoyle /o7 (ag lome men callit) fre ſent his tonne. John. it) b. g j John uit. b :

woll s not in ali the holy tcrfpttiverbut is tnuentenby Che charptẽ ot cod is dene koꝛth in oure hertes ·

pꝛoude men / which woſde let bp their awne riahtwel:⸗ Moma bag. f

nes / s put downe the ryahtwemnes of God. Mponthe God had chewedhys charpte / ingeuynge bys Conte

which atfothey haue grounded thetr merttes attribu- vnto the deeth Foz vs kynnerg. Mom v. b

tynge ryghtwelnes a laluacyon to thetr woꝛckes. By Ho thinge oughte to tepavate vs Crom the charpte

che thenge / they denye the merites ofthe patton ok Ed. Goma bingen .

Aude which we ars iulttkled. Bom ih e. Gala. Al che commaunyeinentesio lee bs to chatyee,


we that their inuencion is kalle / damp⸗ elmo ff Cin ie. F Küng g omar


table of the


e won) dburtapnedin he Syble,


Lets be roted in chautre. Erbe td te a bebe ip. Ce churcheie detended by Chu Zach rule.
swith another uit a. x to gro we moze ¢ moze ing H 0 * Rs bebe se utctorpoftenne/ofveaty, Che tapthfull gathered uud. n ene heute ate a
PH te to prouokieoneanotherto diate heb pres ace bich krähteth agarnſt the type bate cep all thrnges to enen *
88 . 17 a. . Chrldꝛen ought to be chaltyled Ecclĩ xxx a. b. Pꝛo


F. k. G.. Cella llt. b. 8. i. Timo tht... Cedga Concupticences ought to be moꝛtet a
4 F bog at ts PE: breche wage ue N rttent eee ade Y. vtorétot
e htc ¢ e wor cence oF ia dx. d xi ip j. a i Pet.ijd Rom e dugbt to commaunde okkepe the woꝛde
1 eee out all feave, och e Ly wae ne 5 : 1 . ois evn ”
r 2 i ing eng in new fe 10 Folot Un Mat · xxbij. f. fette . e pa 0 ye. eu ·xxi d pꝛo r o
Che charite ot God is to heye his cõmaundemẽtet. thert awneconcupticences.t) Pet. l b ee * een . ee tear Che pec of cpployetotoat cbeitathers be din


t. Jobi ben Che pretes were ſtoned ro their who; rh lj d. bib. Hebꝛixg. lala chatwe Color d.
Charyte coucreth allnmes nauer r pt pe tub tence Bam rut. e ee Dante n en, Cau ben e biet, goon. Cbey are d rahe chyldyẽ of god / whych are tend by
God loueth vs ina perpetuall chartte. Jere. xxl. a. Concupilcence is fozbioden vs. Exo · xx c. Deut. b. eet eripatbe e dune eto m ant Co che lpꝛete ot God. N om bill. c. And of Abꝛahã / whpch
The Apockitb C02 to kolowe cher iu cos / doleaue vi dran example in Paul. Act. xx. g anne. fco uin. bc. dokolow bys kapth in chzilt Mo. x. by d which kapth
iudgement and charite vndone Lune. xi. After that concupitcence bath conceaued that is t ‘Chyitt is ren agapne the furtt ot all thé that wall we ave made F chridꝛẽ of God. Gala tli d John i d. le ·
Character o: marcke. faye bath delpucred) che bzyngeth forth kenne. Jama syfe agapne ! Co xu. c/ DApotbcololtc:toshis relur are then herzes Nom -viit.c Let as then beholr eu
Character / is the marche that Anttchzilt putteth .d. Let us not therloꝛe couet anyeell thinges. Con yeccpon is oure iuſtikpcacton. N oma iiij d Hill ache worde knoweth not the cheldyen ol God ·
in the hande oꝛ koꝛehede of his. L poca. xtii.d. x · bEcclĩ xviij d. Nom · vt b * Chatt chall appere agapne dleconde tyme heb ix g John it a.
one mape in the nyngdome of Antichzit retigne He that coueteth another mans wyke / is an adulte I with whom we Mall appere in glozie Colo. 1% 8. Laue
change oz receaue benetpees yr he haue not hrs Chas rer Mat · dd · Pꝛouer· vic. Eccli· xxvd Chat wewed bekoze tohis apoſtleg chat he wude. Jod doth curte the ble ſynges of the preattes) and
backer op marche. Ppoca ritt d CContedpon riot be alwapegcozpozallpwith the at- xxol b: But bletleth thelrcurllengt Wals ils: an example in Ba⸗
Hetharwoshinpech the Image of Antteh ao he. Coutetlyon/forgeupnge o€ thanckes ¢ pray thathe ſbulde be wich chem by bes tpzete wontothe ende lam eut xt a Jain run b. Naas
Aale imd eRe OF ode th 0, m to God. l. Cho pot d. . c ho · xx e. ij. Reg. ih d. Mar okthe worlde. Mat. bij d . Ude ought coblette the that curue vs 1 Pet tiia · An
eee, : JET ]2ꝛ
them ere u iD Loke in the wi encyon. . llc.
1 e egg en nn
ig faite pꝛophete / ther eat 2 Antiochians were kyꝛſt called chꝛyſten Act xt d. Tt d. Leut xxol. b. ,
Character /and: which wortboppe Vip Image nee 4 ee aay o Seb. goa l oon be Sin Se TESCO a eee ee eat
Clapne by thetwerde / that pꝛocedeth out the mouth of 4 Ce purenes ofthe chꝛpcden / to the knowledge or? va. they may not curſẽ their pertecuters: No xu ·


him chat tptteth on the hoꝛdde. Apo. xix d. ¢ to; abfolucpon ll. ca. xi. b. 5 Che comune welthe.
GChattyte, : tbo aya one aac Ge vave othe cpt toy cher delkueratee boa Che cHmune welthe dyd flo pc / pꝛolpere a go well
Chalk pte is the gte of od. Dayt. vil d. which is Judas which conkelled hym kelke to che pzeſkeg oe z nde ChAlt ela ix. a. to warde whẽ the rrgbtuous dy draygne Pou xxvin ·
not geuen to all men. Mat. rix. b. lawe / and notto God / is damned. Mat. xxbij a Woche geurngb of thachesof ö chicken tos themercr b rtr a b.
Könntet Ipuechatte/ougye tomarp l cor bil a. Paulconfesedbim leléto cymothee /a to an ea Of God / whrch cometh vnto hem bp chzill Ela · rtl a. Che cimune welthe ig kepte by good councel/ a not


of


is greatip cõmended ok S Paul 1. Coin. ders oz herars of his Epiſtell / that be cust olle. bytpianne / toꝛce and conttrapnynge: Pꝛou xt b
bit d/e kan example of chattyte in 81 8 eee 1 * ehecrote isalimaner ofaduertpte gerybulals: .
che. ene rxxix br Alte in Darah. Cobt. li. callo in u Notie were baptpled ot John / which conteled which euery m ought tobeare after cht / all 6 Daves Cave Peuell ·


Ath. Judith. vit a: Ilko in Sulanna / which lowed tas 33 uel okhrs ipke Mat xut d- Mar büft d. Luke ir c onhe wall Cheweuel / that is to Cave an euell ſpeker ¢ acter.


cher to dye / chen to leale her chatite. Dant. rin · nede of the redempcxon of Chꝛiſt b 5 kyngdö of chat Mat. xx. c. Mar xc Che inkpdeles are the fede ol the Beuel. Matt xiit a ·
co chalick. Nee eee eee benen rate pecanmoe ee (John iti b Holde in captrupte at hig wyil il. im il d.
God doth chattyle bs for oure intquttſeg. Cabt. xl. c. Before men /is chewed Act ilk xix. d  teyplect halt mor the menpüer dib rs woßde. ar p. qhedompnacyon bre the deuenhpadvpon be /s

it. a/ For he doth chat pre his. Jere txri. c. heb xu. b. Contedpon ts reconcpliacpon and agrement wr d. Ecki. a. deſtrued by chat Hebz ü bt. John fit b. :
Apoca it) d. In erample in Dautd ii. Neg. rü. dure bzother Mat v. d. Cu. xi. g Paul reiopteth him ofthe crotke that in oethe alur⸗ Cfiedeueni kneipe held echt Forbode ben to
C Circumcyipon. Cocöelle our lynnes one to another / is to comloti i cpons wüych he Cutered toꝛ⸗ chattt Gala vid preache it Mat vlt d. Marci ft. b ba: Lune. i g. bit.


Citcumcytroncranptpech the nacyon ot the ques. dure felues /ozto. athe councell i 4 ische power off kapth⸗ deche Came dpo Paul Act rot dri e Kos toſbewthatwe
Sab ech le pers Cot us alhcge under Kochewehem lelecoche e Talk rekte/ 0 mlt nt che cherche. oughte not to haue kellochtppe wthe deuels. i. coꝛ. xc ·
that ts / to lape a pꝛeacher cent to the Jues. Roma. xv. 0 not auticular cõteupon. but to otter an oblacxon after} Che churchets thebonye ach alt. Epbstderloctd ~  Gwitcppies.
Whe carnall civcumcplion/was 8 tyanebps which the lawe ·Leuit xiij· a xiiij.a. che houle of God Cim iii d the poste of chit. Pral, hey are the dicppies of chyilt which do abyde in &
E —— k the fathers l W fox the tohech chat bat g — ee arty Zohn Ott beche vutcpples of chill / ems
¢ Ae Gala tty a:toz Bbzal age ot the co church ¢ v
was vightuous by faith /befoze be receauedit . Sen roh 10 heb la an hom ere . — panera ee haute loue one to another. John. xi.


N. Eta xt lid.
Circumefyon is nothynge:but che fapthin cyst knowledge /s tunes ot p diupne Coloc tg e churche is rempttyon oftpnnes. Era yxriit. d. Hecannot de Chztkesottcyple that loueth moze his
, . paretesthenbpm- Baten. |

chen it is not necearp. Gala ia. v a: But the circum⸗ in the bꝛalen lerpente. Num xtc a ot |. thebead-eph-td-Colofén- De ptoplbe chalttes dilciple / et him lonecag he pill
on ob the herte. ere. iti a. Roma. xi d. Deute x d. chu is the pꝛoppciacyon areconcyliacyd to oure I Chechurche cannot be dellrued be d youre ot bell. buplde a houte /o begynne ware whetherhe haue the
xxx b. Colot ij e. W Cones Nom. v. b. John. ta til c / the lauyoꝛ or ß word. Mat xbic. gplte of Gon foztoendure fos chꝛicts lake Au. xi f r

bnckrcumcrledinberte Ack. oe Lube ii b t John fit Ita rrbitid xlr b Gene. xte b / Inche churche are many admyniſqtracrs i coꝛ xi a. GDplobenpence- P
cards Bigge ties a e beer eee e Aache churchegllts holy Sach kifßd. ne en bene bay ade vs lynner /
9 5 icvon an * pcxon ·Colol ·· d. cd. Pute ucat᷑ . Ae W sa bebpob tothe woe of G 210% accurled⸗


150


ili. Deutz


Atable of ehepipneppall matters


Deutero. xrbiij. bgere . xxo. a xxtx b. Exod · xi. c.
Wall woztelp dre. Beute. rr d. An exãple o€ the pꝛo·
pete.) Reg. ib d. Ind be that oberednot vnto the len.
tence ol ch unge eninge rn. et
lawe / was dane. eto · xvij c. 1

Achan beyng dplobedyent és ſtoned Jou · tf d · And
Aer


zonckenes

Aman ought to beware o dgonchenes. Luke ·xxſ t ·
Ephe vd. Piouer. xxxi a

Che inconuenpences ot djonckenes · Pꝛouer xxiij d
Eccleliatti rxxib.c. 0 i

Noe being dꝛonckẽ is mocked othis lonne. Sen ix c

Loth being dzonchken cömptteth incene oz hamerul
lechery wyth hys daughterg. Gene · xix l

Benhadab beyng dzonché a a contempner of Godis
dyrut a wape from Godby Ahaz. l Meg. xx · c
5 00 Ae is Magne ot hrs leruaũt Fame

yi ij. Reg ro. c :

Ann bepng dꝛonckẽ is Mayne of Ablald.ij-reg. xiijt

Dꝛonchardes Hal not polleſle the kingdome of hea ·
uen. j. Coʒin vi. d

¶ Death


Death is 1 eee to the trantgreſſours of the
woꝛde ol God, Gene. ile Went xxx · d and toꝛ the lynne
oF one man. Roma vc. Jc is oꝛdened that all all dre.
Pebꝛ. ix g. c he remembꝛaũcę wherot is bytter· E ccii.
Tl. a. indche dave incettayne Lu xu e

Aman chuldnot al ne any chynge at the dee dloꝛ the
conky / macxan of oure Fapth: 02 the golpell ig tuffictet
£07 to lerne to lrue well. Luc vi. g. Etap viii d Heute.
Potit.a.b Agapnſt the whych Saul dd thrnckynge
i A Aa. ALON but they were deuels ·

Reg xxvitt a. b.

The Pzettes ought not to be aliyſtẽt at b buryalles
Op kuneralles of the decd. Leut xxi. a

chin ac k. Steve hg bpstoue{

de xk. ynge vs hy loue t Fo.
lij. c to thyntent that the grace ol God were in b hib.
ij b. He bath twalowe d ¢ deſtroped death to thyntent
we beleuing this / ulde be hepzes of euerlalting ipte

Job lit b. . Pet iti d and it. E ino tc. He bath alto de ⸗

kroped the power ok the deupl / koz to deipuer bs fro the

bondage of the lawe. Joh. ite. Hebz tid. Satyckyinge
bp his death onlp / loꝛ all cure iynnes / to thintent that
we chulde nomoze return vnto them agarne Rom-b-b

De che cfiecte of the denth of Chit / ſolle Rom · iiit d
Heb. ix d Colo tic n. Coin be Roma v d. A poca t. b

Co dye with Chuiſt / a to be baptyled in bys death / a
durped wyth hym / is to be tultykyed and pourged from
lynne / a to dye from kynne makinge it to tane an ende
bs. Roma bi. a b. Atem todre wyth cbzttte from the
elementes a ozdynauinces ok thyg woꝛlde: is / not to be
bounde onto tradtexong which koꝛbydde vs to touch


thys oꝛ to catethat.colot ij d.

Cher wall dpethat beleue not in Chapt (that is to
faye by the inter pꝛetacvõ of fame John) that che wꝛallh
Of God abpdeth opd them Johr li d. but nut t dye / s
tobaue euerlaſtrnglpfe Ich bie Cher then ö beleue ok alah. Reg. vit. a. to whom God dd lende in che


inhym / ipal neuer de. Jah. b d / it r xt d


2 C Kleccvon
Dur elects is bgtace / a not by work! Noli
er deere Seuche ager eevee
Ol
wilt Bet ea before thecontipeucpaot. —


ercommmnyeacpon ts tyetepecaspon

|

cen carn Late

e

obtimate toners art h. .
„W
He chatis excõmunpcate o ’
Pani sin wotenn te


We ought ko efchuc him that is ercdmunicace all


ter the Epztt and feconde roꝛreccyon. Tit. ij. c

Che reaton my aul dydercdmunpcate. i cim .id ·
Cher that contelſed Chzpſt“ were thut out of the
nage hal wer if ömmes dab re


CFieth.
Fleſh / is Come tyme taken in a
wete £02 loktenes ii. Coin iti ache ＋ N
Achat doch not pzocede or the lpytte of god / g lieh
Gen pi. a. Deb. ix b. Col. ih. d. Gal. b. c. J. fn. ai Pe. ii
Flesh a bioudelthatis)allcher that folowe their“
cuptfcéces)Mhal not pottedte p kingdome of god co. xo
Che lle ch cannot pleate God. Koma ufd c
Che Heth lightech agapne the lpopte. Gala. b c.
Che work’ oF p flew are adulter tom pcacpõ / vn
2 — . — 4 e t
nydten man ought to crucyty hym leite /that
to lape / moꝛtyfp bis het a his cd en 0
Chellech is to weake. Wat.rrot.o
Chellech is talié for Sbody.F0.£.0/Roty.ai.pe.tiiia
Co cate lleche is no cynne. ĩ Eim iiij. a: In example


moꝛnynge and in the euenynge bꝛead and flece.


Fables


: neee.


N ritunn th. c/o d. Pet. iin. b. j. Pet. iij c


tontapnen the Byble.
? e
; 5 i where Warth eber
a drang goes) he hole hut in a. „ Wem eae cape yD Front Bas
seterpatisfotape /incomocnynge.ti pen b. — télyp.r¢.e.sf02 vt we do not biel ed worde / it
Che gues delpprynge the cömaundemetes ol 0d/ Pottery nothynge to beare tt Pebriltea
areas afable.Deut.proits d. amen bpbearynge, Noma vc, whyey
eee, fee
Laender en le ee ene critis chana gpite or God. Phrippi. b.
able / no in d commaunde⸗ i. Petr. ba ; ;
seen, ecm, d. ee he Fapth ts meceiary for bum chat cömetyto ahne


: i t. bzb ‘ ;
- qamutpemenctoie mb ea hepenot thous CherPtbtuoustyuet by fave ple. g


rot d. Beute xrpilj b. A xxxId. Epe tapey uckrkiech Gene rb. b. Mom. ihn e v. d
Mane tenes ayn). Oram ae, eee e cathe /ov at pft
si er ene Ree Mab dal. Starch we Witte ute alu oy ga ne Fx oure
Ce oe eon t Cob Ole DUD, Le aera oon eee
Lenke oe . ae eee


che lalle prophetes are knowen by their frutes) or bis chridre Sala iltd Bleürd of hem / by whole power
we ought tobe warre Mat vu c ide oughe not we ate kepte i. Petr ta
Hheretaltewrtnes erer ext spp fapth we relztethedeuen / zouercome him anit
ebe kkarchtull. the wozlde i John i b. ! Pet ber Forts is oute tying
che karthrull are callentheboute of Godt Pet td Epbe. bie / a bꝛeſt plate f & ec v b.
Cberealon whys. Pet ita: Alco the te ple ofthe Ipuing Paul warnith bs to be ſüronge in the layth Con.
God. il Co: bi ci Alto beloued ot God. Judas Ta: Wabes xv. G. Act rita, a.
Ipttelonesin Ch7te/chplozen pounge men roungeſka Tbetartp whetots. aul bath ro moche (poke?
thers / olde men i John it b. tit a: Alo trulp tree John. is that ich woꝛcketh by charite / le pꝛouohyng
bit d. Sainctes.ephe.t a. vs to good wozckeg. Gala b au Bhich is che rocke and
Che kapthful know how to ce all creatures with⸗ foundacyon of the churche/ aga nt the which the po.
dul lynne· Citum i d. wers ok hell Wallnot pꝛeuarie Mat . rot. c: Foz the end
Che kapthkull dugbtto haue no alpaunce with the ok our kapth is? helth ot our louie Wet thtas appea⸗
unkapthkull. l. Cos. vl. c. A reth by the thete which is laued byplame-Luk. xxilt t.
Che kapchiuineg regupred in the mynüſters l. Corz. Chelarth nech chu requyzed inauhrs mers.
lil a chat they mape teache that / whpch Chzitt hath cles was to, beleue / p he coulde geue that / wyych was
dömalided. Mat Trbilt d: C hat is f Golpel. Mar. rl. 5 requpzed or him as. appereth by e er. Mat vil a
Che lapthkull ought allwape to be readyto geue a And bothetwo Ulynde men. Mat tr. d.
Seaton oktheir karth. i. Pet i. c. jaan be eh ee ee ee
erfacpon of d favthEull in good woꝛckes. mu noch
— ee 5 7 bath it: foꝛ be (hall ouercõme allthyngesto the glozve
mnpcat Aal tebrelchurd ! ccyx bg {abet r chenden tslynne. u oma gin v.
tto be elchued. l Corr. b Faber. 5
64. Ve nn d che augen nente gere Chep chat haue receaued che tapth a theholp gooſt /
anne gte C0 fa far theFoppeacouts eunnge 3 alfotattedthe @otpell of Kop feche do fovtabett/
zapnſt theft atone bodye / wall not haue the kingdome and blalpheme it / wyllynge to be taued by other facry⸗
pf eonkcormt ind ebz.ritt.a Epcethen 5p of Chzttte:vo abyoe the ludgement ot God /
— tictore offompcatourst, Coin. wythout mercp Hebz vi. b. K e. ij Pet ltd,
b 5/aterche example ohm that Paulexcommunp: Deſthak teachech che ipuelpkaßch in Cysvtt bun
cated. l. Conn. b. a. Gehe Arselptes whch commptted deth che buplopnge ¢doctryne of Pod t. Kuno. a de
pcacpon wyth the daughters of Moab )amonge the whpch ner vier e h the aer wesen
5 Pöpnehes kpiled Jamt. Domb. xrb b Kcontpnuaunce. Colol. c Ach ru a to: the is in euerx
8 Cocomptte toꝛnpcacpon wyth traunge Goddess place acured. Plal. cxxx ed che be pꝛoued
to cõmpt Idolatrye / and to koꝛcane God. Exo. xxxiiii / b / thoꝛow dyuerle temptacpons i Pet i. b
c. Beu. xxi.d Judges tic. vi. ache fapeh intrybulacp / cauleth pacpence Fam. ta
God called the kompcacpon of che people and che ct b ae opted be N inthe
wanna inkidelrte. ame Coz.vitib stage which
Domb git slid me meres Vet 5 wi belyꝛe in pꝛayer Mat. xi b. Mar ri. c / and by ye
SSeghes to owe the loꝛnrracron ofa woman br.


aw


mber or the layntes / in receaung
whych we are of no cht 1


Atable ot thepypneppall matters
ee — 454 saa


ee cnet ne a coute


vybitj. a.
— 4 60 inen teu

beth. ‘Hom! ate erfoze tothe intente that we —.—
23
1 ey are . Meg.
f stan ae dete e

* — ought tobe cast ees e uch

31 * / that


krute ol
—


see 1


ung enn
Gebe tüte n of Fhe Dead
Ecele Triiitd Eta Fee
Eoblactogdo profet nothing boblinate peopie Je it b
Fat “LC eee eee


wen en
pies. lopned wyth pꝛaper. Cob xit. d Examples 2. 1.
ct. rij a xiſiſd.ij Cos · bi b᷑ Lu ij. c. . «i many: Edel xis
en ih b / Ludg xx. eee b anni 55 bys e u b. e, wal
if. N oper gytte ot God t. Coꝛ bit h


5 . Erh il a
mot God to bnderitande p ccryptures. Ly;
foe whee | Ghz openeth oure ondertay


Seema tata 0
dus rb aati se begeucn pilengly ext


Koche [sas mode Side ange adde
b/the 9 1760 Testperde cc 0
Matt. ry. a· Matt vij. a: mi
eae 15 dba 25 . dochrs. Bene Coz. xv he wyldome of God · Mat
Pꝛouer. cro) 1 Colo iii


theng was done. Col cet
rng aim sna 5

fede. Mat. ritt. a. pꝛoueth the fame:
e een oc
ne 5.0 esto teche


n


e ot gd 0/5 f. fang ol ß ede.
catch 9 aa ae
t. b. g. Luk. bt. *


one ts good / but on gob ar J
God is good to Aicher 25 ae.
Ixxili.a·cxxb.a: ¢ to thé p truſt inhem· Plal. Ixxiiſ.a Wee made g.

terrybie 1 5 oe 05 agaynſt the del


Fee eee oy OF the golpel ii Cetit.
doth


all / a in bs al motdwellenge in temples made i meng e bychop doth z offpce o of an @uSgeipt ft lm
handes.t-Cozt-vitt-b.eph 10 0 Bost). ny bit. k. Cher that tect oon
Sn dan rt fe . en e 0e
00 rode on we are ſanctyeyed / tho⸗ e eee
ae eg
Corte / whpehistaclleateotnepen beado cots, era nese ics ne nt oF the


tounges rrbit c.the twhych thynge
25 — it. a b Spohr
batte. an. che is gathered to gerber i 152555 4 am


b ben ain het gabe i Sober des. Gene nr ebe Tohenge tor


cbe


tonteyned in
e


eh ach. 5 11 a/ / Hth.D/ 2


— . e ee abe h of
de Sets. 20 l d. £6; hil
eng bntabpit


ey
if t. rij. alpde theters

3 e
dach Kan

e gore


Mar. f.
lter. Rom. 9 dither tte .
teach. Bal 25 ae se bs aie Wade


ov.

* of Chz desbeeinted bp che gotpele. §,

estate bbs
01

al are glory to God onelp. Apo. fh. d. Phüll,


Guter to; abetaree iB HB. Gal.b 1
they whit 100 beleaue in 717
90 Degas — 15 ok f Jewes. Jo.


be eersisha Se mopene oe dar zes om pity delet
sbegeucnDntott/As ten. Hebz. xil d:
te prape ants RY
Eccixriiſa no Co pofall ching: but pen

eee pei


Bychegrace ol sonatas


3 through Chick ln. Tym. ia
3 tobe reccaued in barney


9
eos
Pee


F by
se I. U. a let vs thertoze truſt in the fame
b only, en /by the golpel . . Pe ti. o
Aman o geue thanckes alterhe hath eaten.
Deu. biiſb. ree Be fn bre Abate Fry arc.
2 ur g Selb ihe K. e


ai
peel on SO ra vite ol


ed ton pipnces /ppwerg . nge en cpi
Aeg gd. di k. ca. . ö. Amos 4x a
ont 718 Bbheadot h church. Exh tay o/. d co⸗


Girke gehen of man. l. Coꝛpn. fla
Sieben then dr dun n
ee ks bzoben bp cue / enoe
ne. li. c
Aechre e ingame ealpa apte
„ All. Co
See ofa recruit. en. bla
unowe the depenes of the herte / dothe
oueteant nee eh . bl eg. vilt. d
1 i. Cell. ij. /i. Johan · ui · d. A pot ii d Ecclel·
65000 1 b
Sod openety the countell ofthe hartes · oz. ſitia
it” Sah che harte pꝛocede eucll choughtes. Mat · xv ·


tt
1125 cyicumeyled of God / to the intent J le
ſhulde loue none ot her F exterioꝛ


E
.


orden ee


2


My
ill: wozche/butin Cod only. ei


2 SE pe 18 ents Hae Ensch iD xxxvi t Jere
Che bertemult teilt be opened Scene

. man can geue heade tothe worde of Sod Act role
Let bs not ape in eee oure ryahtu ·
God hatß geuen bs euerlaltyng lle Deut tra
ee. oure bd tmge e ialmes Henner and


oe cane esas ina taith⸗


aan en outs soars but
let bs only dos which God! Baue ae. Höbyyv · d


byeham ound yspoubobe ts pe war
4 8 OF God. Gene. xbiit.

Be that mi 2 0 an inte

2 ( Polpdapeg

Che Lone hat. ac 650 b da ah. d. aims blk.

auskenne them 5 kepepbolydapes Gal lib


Okthe e pe eter Let ae pont.
ane de deren od. xxxilit. c · Leu. xbt. t. xxiti.d


in which hol Van ee behoued thE to offer thinges ay⸗
rg e e Cl. f.


Lai


Marc. ti. b


Weener leu ah


cd. Mat. xrb d. "i
Chait path bought and regenerat vs to thintẽt 100
we chulde enherite the hyngdome of heauen, Cite. i b.
the which is kepte fo; vs in heauen j. Petr. la.
Chꝛiſte is the enheritour ok all eb. ta. Luxx /w
whome we are allo heyꝛes / being by kaych the chydzen
ol God. Gala. (tif 9 5 .


onoure

Vonoure to father and mother. Exo. xr b. Deu bib.
is to mynpſter vnto them thyngesnecedary to lxue br.
Mat. xb a. whych chyng thzough couetournes / d Pha ·
ee ladle Mar.
bit a. Mat xo a

— allo is dewe vnto kynges i pet ti.c. to
elderg. Leuit · pix b allo to them that do helpe toꝛth
Gofpell / byanp mynpſtracpon. i Conn. xp. c. a

Let bs geue honour onto al mẽ / ko: Gort lane. tippe.
ij. d geuing ponour to thé Phonoure belogeth. No xiti c

that honoureth not Chzttt / bybeleuyng in hym /
drſhonoꝛeth bis father which lente hym. Lohn vd
R GCHumplyte


Co humble / lo: to punplh ö dave Jug il. ditt d
Cobumbie tor cofubmpeceatnanestelteonber
che mpabepe bande of God / a to caſte all his care bpon


him. Pet. db
chat humbleth hymſehat ig chmcketb lotolp and
ech no eſtymacpon ot hem Celfe ) walbe exalted ol
Bodiſ Reg. bid: Luhe. Let bs therkoze haue humplpte
in hert / without preferring of our lelkeaboue anymã /
bparrogance· Ephele nit . Coloden . lll.b. b. b. OF
the which thinge hilt doth warne vs / inthe parable
eee
. e,. .
i Let the bumble Chspen ms bere int druers ats
fliccyons reiopce / lo in that is he great beEore God ·
James I b/andtherkoze hall he beeralted. Mattew.
Frit b. Cu xitii c. An exaple of $ vublicane Lu xdiit b
Che pꝛapte ofbumplyte Pꝛouer xot c
he holy Gooſt. 5
Cheholp gook isthe holp and deurne power by the


Llxb.at w
we ought to acke it gere. xvii b/thoꝛow C hzpſt. Jude
Eg Anche power or whoin ig dure healthe. Mat. ring
whypch is the creatoꝛ a lauybur o€ the woꝛide eb.
v. c. f. John. lit c. a i. Cimio. cit. c. 4 fl. Cimo t. dq
which is come koꝛ to laur vs Mat biit b. Luck xix l
Joh lt b / thoꝛow mere / not by our woꝛckes 07 my
tytesico thyitent that no man wulde boaſte hym
Eph ii a b Cite. ii b. Andtheie is helth in none och
but in bpm Act. iii. b
Helthe / koꝛ vyctoꝛv. Judg. xb d. aij Req xxiti b. alli
(if Reg. v a/ an example iS aul / which dyd atcrph
bps belth( g is to tape his bictozy) to God / a not to b
atone ſtrength. i Reg. xi dilo / d helth ol men is ba
Plalme ix ẽ re


crytye 8


Apo 2
Preachers ought to repꝛoue SZpocrptye ot mance


all pporr the
5 cxiij


woche. Ela. lois a/ as the pꝛophjete dyd S la xxix da
1 17417 will neuer knowledge their i ynneß M
Che hope ot qpocritz ts bapne . Job bih c. xx a xrbiſ
Che iudgement/ contul pon / and dylparze ol 9
crptes Job Prot. b


‘Agapne pocrvtesthat do only glozptye thé leute Me


ok p name of God a denpe the in their dedd. Ela. bin


pee


enden


the pꝛophet dott atc
Hye peopleto Zelatep. rech bis
n nipedtal ofthe grunen ib


n (nuencyon agapntt the Londe God ts accuried,
eee
peut. 03 ; .

5 out of the houlẽ of God / koꝛ their Anuenc vons.


Innocen
gates enden beter Cob Krob rita) um.
hij e neuertheles he that kylleth an innocẽt in $ tpabt
man / ls accurled. Deut xxviid / a wall not abyde vn ·
ö de pe ber one both bnd Eccl lie
e 0

= ocencpe ot Cobi Cob iſ. b. Job Herweth Cozth

— —
Cothemi that calle vpon the name of God / be health.


m
d. Allo Woles


called bpõ in trrbul
thofe are kapthtull


Agaynt thele Ipocrptes / which do ju ltrxe che tele


ues by their outwärde dedes Cfatirot.a


Apräxeragapnſt J pocrytpr. Pral. cxxxix. Ot
crylpe lone Pꝛouer.xij c / xilij b / xxx bis

Chavit geuecheraht curtynges agapnts Apocrptz:
ſpectaliy becaute hep Hutte vp the kyngdome of hea
uen g e And that they make a conuert wozle then then
kelues g c. loke vpõ the texte all together. Mat. xiij b


which mẽnes hertes are renued krõ heauen. i Reg. xe che


Co thyntent they mape cöpzehende the thynges of God
1 li can wytnes ont
. Qu6 Cope Nt alo we


raunger.eut.rD '
e terrpbie Zudgement of God / agaynſt thole whych
deleaue not the golpel. tt tell. i c /a hole that woꝛawe
the tarthtul from the truth of che golpel gal v. b / which


Petr. fifta/pzou ri to; our coꝛteccpon / to thpntent that
we be nat candempned wyth the woꝛld. l. co · xl g. Chen
pig to punycb. gene rv. c/ deut. xxxii.e i. Re. lit. c

e chachrarethchzpſt / a beleueth bps golpellis not
dged J b. d / a he that beleucth it not / is lunged alrede

No. int. c becauſe he derppleth the wozde of the gofpell,
nat xiii.c. Jo. xiſ. g. Chen ſhall euer man be tudged ac⸗
ondyng to hys kapth. mat xo d
T begenera Judgemene 1
Or the genetal Fudgemet-Plal.vedit- eta fl c xxbili
cbt. e/ the which is nyghe. No. id / e Wal rome as
chele in the npabe. fo2 it is vncertapne / we mut
chertoꝛe watch Mat. xxtiüi.d· Lu. xi. / which dare in


v. c. rb. d / out


hich ch.
In the angels
them chat warte toy healch mat ꝓrb f rDrx gan
Wall make open che councellof mennes hattest. Cox
nil. a. In the which dape allo / the apo! tec ee
Gall tudge. t. Cos. bi. a/ mat xvid / b the teare ot mech
„Aach pdinduce the pharvlyes to the chdungeok ipte
Matt ut. / Lu. it. ul. EBumagne nt. 22

Che tudges oughe to do rpabteous tungem t,
yng accopdynge to the aufwalde
aperatice. pꝛou priiii.c / Ecclxi.a / noz pet peruertynge
Serie oper ofmane rener beer.
agree ope’ oF manr / to: e bythetn 0.
xi. a/ te ſawe allo doch ktoꝛbydde ko to iudge or the


mi ſexcepte he be knowen to be loch a one Jo vii e / ko


he chatiudgeth his bꝛother / ludgeth che lawẽ Zac it.
et be not fudge then accozdpng tothe dutwarde ewe
Jo. vit. cnoꝛ bẽtoꝛe thetxme ĩ coꝛ iii a Che lygnes a
wonderg / whyeh god dyn betoze Pharao / are calied iud⸗
gementes Sera Ft nene eder
Che office ot a Judge. exo xxſſi a jeu xx a/deut. fa
whd me mutt obepe bnder d papne of death. deut. ui c
Arrghteous iudge ought not to accepte pertones;
Exo. xxũi· a/ Leu. xi coz be mercptull to the fathers
les in a wꝛõgekull caule pꝛo ij. a/ Eccl. ili h/ but iudge


pam. acco:dyng tothe lawe of the people. deu Kbit b / but ma.


ny ate bipnded thꝛough gyktes. Eccl xr. d. In example
in the chlidꝛen ot kanu eil i Reg bin. a/ ti. Ne xxi.c/d
is ozdened of God hys lather / to be Judge ol ß
gupche ¢ ol the derd / ol the good and of the eũel· At x. g.
No. xtiit. b / eb xi / Co whom it is geuen to geue iud /
. Juſtyipcacron. .

Co betutityed/istobe taucd / redemed ir al intgut ·
tie / pourged / walched / lanctit ped regenerate renuwed
by the (prpte of god / a chat tynne be not imputed vn⸗
tops fo2 the louẽ of Chepſtibut foꝛgeuen byhrs grace
tothintent that we ſpuid do good wozneg - Cit· l. d · il ⸗ b
Act. xitt.t. il. oni. v. obi. c. Che which is done by
fapth- No. lit dev a. o amd mutt be tpiſt a new cred⸗
ture inchzyli / betoze he do any good wozhes. Luk . t. g.
Cit id / Eph .. v Co themthat wyl be luſtilied by the
hezy tawe ofgovittelfe./ Chziſt is deen in vapne gala,
ti dia bys gratedoth pꝛolet chem nothynge. gal v. d. he
4 . accult vs.

om · vit. g
a n, eres.

Che kepes are the lawe andthe word ol od / bythe
eee

churche. e
> Chapt onlp geueth the heves tobpnd and lolle by his
wozde-Fob-rr.£.-Fla Uribe e
— kelled w. so nele 11 pos
0

188 b done bp dh J ate


oloruer


Atable of thepꝛyntypall matters


Wos manera pulbe be Put d / Gadetone ef Stoa bg
tene w — 155 e e, Godis che God of pece a loue ſi.coꝛ rid teherte /
4 the ſcrength of bys: Godioucth al /a hateth nothpnac of b — nf allerterpoꝛ truſt. Seute . rrx. b. Loleinthe tete ol
Piou rr. a b: 2 are Sah xt and doth delpuer vs kr cue) ate
Che kynge ought to reade the boke of neutronomp


Lee e e Apel aut achtes.
. e e nen 8 to dan ln en 3 od cha
DH


0 evontoloucs Kohn füt d. Jolut. xxiiſ
Be bree chintent that we chulde louẽ Gap with al
/ with all oure loule / te purgeth dure herteg

1

Labour
re hier ai yer who he loucth.prou4-b-Ha, che pꝛapte or labour. Eccli. 00 bx d. hꝛoueib xij b.
rij. a. xx. xx viii.
. — vs wythout koꝛgettynge vs Ela · rlix acpong to laboure. j. C ela tt. c. fi. Cela ii c.
3 ie — — e
ekerſte e e ci Tob. piii. a pc tt} A

@ spat Nawe ipo the 02 their lynne. Gen. ij d. Fach.pttt b.
Oure loue towarde God An rale Adam. Sene · lit. d. Alco in Baule. f. Coꝛ.
n. cl. n b.labourpnge nygbte ¢ daße to chincent
shat he myghe be chargeabie to none j. Cedlal fl. b. Act
biliary g · But we chulde not laboure to be rech. Pꝛo⸗


er. xxiui.a
Leuen.

Men ſyulde caſte koꝛih the leuen of olde malpce ·
count. ba

Leuen fo; euell doctryne and example. Matt xl. a.
Mat. vit Lu xit. a. Salat v a. wherot a man muſt take
h at. xl a

coe Ao inthe oblacyons. Leut ita
He that dydeate leuen in the celebzacpon ofthe pal ·
üer / drd r xi c. es a. b.


Saen men are r Hf c. John bil c · In eriple
aul t. Coꝛin.ix c
Bot he Ipbexty e which is gottẽ vs by Chk. Elape
tc Tito ofthe lpbertye ol the golpel. Gal ita whych
fi pee aol make an occalxũ tothe leh Gala. bb
ct. loc.
Lrbertpe to eate 3 thpnges-t Coin vit. d


Che latwe is the power oktyme / bp whpeh we feale.
che pulſpong of l vnne in vs · ·Coꝛint. xv. g. Roma. vii · a
ohe oma iti c. tit b


+ induces bes pe
en ob ter


Let vs loue god eure elk rtl g. Roma vii
¶ ure loue toward oure ne xa boure
Sure ede e ent,


8855


0. 0 of
: nrngdome ache gene eee
is che knowledge cogs oF eg 103 aecbucche ga e. another · Eecl.
r anh at at 961
ande / oo wh bate —
att b. g. wech

. ee
ie Es Sr me ble, amt, ae i
8795 Steuen. Act. . mth bee we ought


bogoonto . e Fr
4 0 be 2
Abpaham. ran


pnryaiytuots manſlipers. 4c Kimo 40 Bpibe which
man hath tmowleage ol lenne. Rom itt. c.
Che ende of the ia we ig Chi · Rom · x. a. which onix
hath fülkplledit. t. Coin t.
Che lawe and the Pꝛophetes . inthe kat
ndche leconde commaundement. Mat. xxti.d
Che laweis fulfplted in loupnge oure nerghboure /
Gala b. b Roma. xiii. c.
b Che lawe was the ſundowe of thynges / whrch Guld .
ne — bon the

, e lawe and p zoyhetes were redde vpon t Sas
och dapez. Act.


Ch quote oreanen contpled not mente
oꝛ dyncke / noꝛ yet in woꝛd / but in power which doth to
make Cubtecte the bertes of men onto God. Ko pit. c.
i. Coꝛin ili d. Ind by the fame meanes the ch cb che
oF an Lan ri che kapthtun / ot which chzilt is the


5 tat ane e n ease with bio.
: — enden Hb chat is toche ag u
detyerbntott/ thepoetpite thetvatone
leke een mother) for the great
they haue Lace e e e nf /

e ere the kyngdome of beau
. b pode half be


Aeg. l. b. allo of


kalle pꝛoph dꝛawe
bout ete erat nbich toe ounbe toteuct
notto be harde / but ought to be putto death Deu.


tontayned inthe Syble.


Sopnne was in ne before 5 iawe was genen /
Lohe. Mont. b. b. vis. b

God cõmaundeth to reade the lawe dave amdnight:
to thyntent that we mape knowe what he kfoꝛbyddeth.
Tolu . ib x.: hewhich ama ought to haue in his hert /
and befoze his eyes. C eui xix d. B eutt. xl c. B herunto
we bemonpthenby Moles to hearcken / to ent to
kepe it Put tijd: Ind by Jolua. Jolu xxil.a
Fü he lawe ol che Golpen is / a what it geueth.

m. xix.

Che lawwe ts a good. Rom.bij.c. Yea man
peelt! lawkully i. timo. b. Andit is tpitituall ¢ fulfple
ledbythe tyꝛete· Nom. vy c. Wherunto the wyldome of
the fletihe can not be lubiect Roma ·

Che lawe of Chuſtis the lawe of perkecte lybertye.
Jam · d iy c / wyych is more excellent than the lawe ol
Moles. ij. Cozint. f c

Pe that kepech all g lawand a in one poynte
is culpable of the wholle James. ij b

Chere is but one lawegeuer James iii. b

Che wages oz rewardẽ of them that kepe 1
andthe payne or tranlgrelloures. Batuch · ili a

Kar che lawe pklacrypces / loke . Leuit. bi. b. via xit
g. Deu rb · b. Hum b. e xix a. b

Che lawe cõmaundeth chynges 0h blltr. John bf koꝛ noth
Arength. Peut b. a. Exo xx. c N om. bij. bl ix· Lohn vi
Act xb. Mat v. xx. Galath. v

Agaynt them that malte talte and wycked la wes
Ela F. a. Che lawe fuſtikpeth not. Hal tif. b. N f. li iii
How we latplkre che lawe Nom bil Gala. l


br noni tenner created ot God


God is lyaht . . John. lcwhych Dioeneth in the lrght
that no man can attapne i. Cimo vi c
vn ue te wendete iy lohn ta
ttb ra . ohn k. bei Phich monpibeth vs to beleue in
bomytpatis che irght· John xi t
abe 815 the pabt of the worde. Math vu.
Bethat bateth Wns brothers notin lygbt. John gy
2 woꝛckes ofipabt.cphe.b
. of on ont d


oa jraveconanatietnerye: Ecclelt xxiij a. Loke
„ thie wore Itetpe) 07 adubutrx / o Cognicacpon al


77


e geut eee utero te pete
Dether 75

Job! ulla ih 1 eee ö
Longe! Ipte ts prometedthem thal — theft fae

ther and mother. Exo xx. c. Peut b. b. Ephe. bi. a.
Chris che ipke John rit a. Collol l i. Johr. t. a/

which hath deckroped death: tothyntent that we chulde

be the inherptours ok euerlaſtynge ipte · i Pet. .d

1 et 6 bzedd of lyte which geueth euerlaltyng

dott bath ewesateng yee tnbishanties 8 25


nt 2 2 — i — 2 3 i
bees, Atable afthepzntppall matters. . ., _contapned in the die..
e d e pee ist MHal.r}-c.Kaphacl ceachety cout dow ama ud Chem piders wude keade then uche / and not de⸗ beipethenerenite or am nepabbour Col ft-b:téz met
. pꝛompted / ts declared onto Cobi. l ö An example ot chake matrimony in Sau dure k. Joan erte : By Us prOMietD co ee mieCptull33e bs. 8 bieüeng

an, atycinaa, od tlic unguche meters gude be great charice/the ble). Spank din rl, ber er. 1
44 0 Chet eee e Brela cp bultay nf. 00 r Bere ef Berbnomery al eee tpgrment ity
ehewupnge Geh was he othe ot he Cathers.sButh 0 . war narbe Ceparat but top anuoutry, Say” ien eee en ; e mere, Jam if c Avbyecok the Pharyies are rebuten
* Co a bil ban we 8 1 arr. ; Mabatthe louc ofampnplier oughe to be / tuwatde Wat kriit c. Auch ik

x A 90855 4 oy de un g 2h 8 cemchat he pzeacheth co-Pbplyps a Che peaple of mercy. pꝛouer.xiitt c.xix c: in ex:
eee CR a ee OE ERE AN TE arn


ryita. Kuh xx. ö po ed ortptpcacpon.


t Peter. liti.c.
i : pꝛaped God with other Act. a che mpnptierdo preache any wozckes necenarx Wm mut monktrepmeb.
zes or the body of cynne.
Becaule p chua doth lrue / we Wal all ipue. Jo xliitc fo; che remplpon of renner /he is abompnable ander · Col iit.a /a g euety daxe Coz cen a a g.
. Paul alter che rapie or Chzitt/ doth beare hemor
reg are warnedto lullre all thynges foz erlringe of pad in bes body’ being euery Dave fette
e


f Oecbratoz.
mee do all ixue i dye to f glory ot God. Nom rut. b. Onelx Chzyſt is medratos betwene God and ma
P Ipucty not to hym leite / but vnto ae o/ ul. cob bx. tx la uhu gj communpate. Salat. i. b
. Cor v yi +b-Rom-b-a-bitf-Foys.
io en 5
due pie e uche bnntre of our member we aremeuedtoc Vater b Let bg not murtnure Agapnd God to thintent that
. area Fy bce Oe ES OF oty Che myn we aer u et
bsthen do all chynge without mürmurpng Philip tb
Foramanought to Gonne tt, Sapiens. DE mummu⸗-
en be perceas tyngloke Hume. xl. Ac. xilt. d filita ri. xx. a. rrt. b.
. f. b. Tito Exod. xbi.a bit a. Allo Meutero. i d.e
c. Oz EBeates
God dd Hewebnto Peter in abplys/ b it is lawful
vnto the kapthlull / fo? to eate of all maner of meates.
pieot che hr ⸗ Actu x. b. Moma.Fiitt.a
ip) /wöph Dpd helpe Capnt Paul. Pyrlpp Alt. 5 eatet are ode yned of qyod / lo to take them wilh
ee eee een
; den e goopmpry „ toy Epe me oꝛde ol God and
; das co bis bol purpore and N 0 4 Cella b eAnbvonoureehem.s, Cetato.t b. . e Re i
Berod cauten che cypiozé of Flraci to ve attic vs betoze all txme.ij. & : pacles che choyle ol meates / a mũ ought not faz offen
any Sbpmetech an e Lier werd t che Prophete iohych wel wuhrawe men tyyousy) de oma nl
f Impracies /Exoni the true loue ug not tobe hearde / Coteache that men are bounde koꝛto abſteyne front
th but apne Beuteronome xu ; certapme meates 16 5 0 n de ig rim lila
0 Che power to do mpacſes As geuen by the tprete of 6
God. l. Con. it b/Acte.tit b. bil, car the conkrzmacrd (che name ot God
Of the worde. . xbl d / Act. xi. a Heb. ij a. Lone in che name of Gad ouabt notto be taken in varne.
Mit Reg. nit. ox manymrꝛacles-. Exo. xx. a. am Red.

Aman ought not to reiopce that he hath vower todo Che callers bps the natue of Bod ought to Ceparate
impaacles but becaute that he hath his name wyrten in them kelues from all intgupte. fl. Cymö. ti.c. a8 Enogs
beauen. Lu. r. c dpd / in whole tyme / men beganto cal pon the name of

Abe mercy of God to warde vs. God. Gene. lt. d 2

God ls epche in mercp. Ep . l. a a. Cort aij Neg. Cheretz none other name geuẽ onto men / wherby
xxilij c xxlit. Joel id che pꝛapſe wherol ts Ec. they can be Caued / but § name of Fetus Chꝛiſt. Act. iii
cleftattt roll. d, Roi. a: In exäple in Baud. l. reg vid b. he which we pꝛape zit map be declared / celebzate /

Samucl tettechthe mercp ot God before the peo all
ple/ whpch alneth alter a Heng . Megum rh b
God hach dei uered bys people chözowmercp. Exo.
pb. c. E ech. xxbj e. And geueth bs all thinges b mer⸗
cp /wythout dure ſtrengch Ben. vill d. r l. Reg. xi. d

Mercpto chem that cyaunge their ipfe krom euell
onto good. Deu. xx. g Erl a Eich. Tol kot. e. Ole.
xiilj e. Elap. lo. b. 10 0 Godbath pzeden pngte a foze-
kene todo it / Rem ix. c/ an crampie in . Paul i. Cle
mo. iii c. alta tn the gentrlen. Roma xi. d

che mercy ofmen towarde men Moles Deuter xxxit a. W hofoeuer thertozedoth call

Mercy is moze then lacrifice. at ix britta Mer vpon the name of God walbe taued Joel /g
tl c. Ole. di. c Prout xxt. a. A et vs then de mercifun W ew
a glad wil Jo rtib/as our father in heaut. Lu bt t. ko; Che newe tettamentis the remyiſpon ok lynnes br
geuing one another eu as God bath dane onto vs tho: the bloud ol hit Mat rrot-c-Warriti.c. Lube rey


dow Chive .€pb . li. g Cothrntent allothat we mar bibpthe which Godhath prometeotogeue n 5


tontayned in the Byble,
in ourhertes / a not to haue remẽ bꝛaunce of oure mplptude. Luk. xl. 8. xbti.a. Cothe which thinge eſtylence 25 xix. cz che whichis Cometymegené to cuell men. Mot.
nes Pe vitld. x. c. Sene. il. c. ok the which Paul hath dulhe chene. Kr burg site pg gy ye Goddoth tende ßeſtlence / whẽ men dodplobepebis dil d. Anexsplein Haul . Reg roilt ito of Capphas.
receaued the dycpenlacon ii Coꝛin iui.b. Eyb. bit c. collaalll.a. f. l ted v. d. and S Peter ipktwyle I worde. Seu Foie b Leuiti- Expi d. lt. Regu. vitty, John. rig. kon them that wy! not beleueit Meg crite.
He ought tobe a new creature g beleueth in Chilt. 1. Pe. lll. b. lo: the contynuali pꝛaper ot q rygytuous is dyd chole peſtilẽce / to thyntent that he myght Chere are two fygnes of true pꝛophecye: the one vr
Gala.ot.d-¢ walckemthe nemnep olle. Roma.vt.s very acceptableto god Jam bed. An enfample in Cliah dre with other l. Regi rrütte-Che which ceated ak. ehechinge wypch the prophete heath dewed before do
doing all his woꝛckes by the lpꝛete of God. Nom. vill. d iii. Reg xbii.a. And thertkoꝛe Gulbe we pꝛape purely in ter that he had unowledgedhys lynne ui. Ne xxuu.c come to pale. Deut vnc. Che other pr he do not with
Let bs therkoze do onthe ntwe man / which he bath euer place, without wrath oz drürncpon i. Cuno. il c. 8 Prete 4 8 dꝛawe the people krom the true woꝛchyppyng: whyck
create in vs. Ephe. ſili.e/to tyintent that we mape rue John. li. ceelal. ci, CFeace. Loe opon the wozde Sacrptpar / hereatter in the to kerueintprete etructh one goponeir Deutr. fill.
in ryghtuolnes and holpnes. Peace doch lygnikpe the iope ok contctence atuernes I jeter. D. ¶ Pꝛedeſtynacpon Soche pꝛophetes can not Ipeake / but toch thynges as
CRNeghboure Agapnt che deuclloure aduerkarpe: And gencralipthe MM Che pꝛedeſtynate are lapnctes oz holp people, made god hath put in their mouth iu reg xxii. c. And ate not
Hobofoeucr bath necedptpe o7 nede ot ourbelpe / is aboundaunce of all cpirituall gocdnes: becaute dure Iphe co the Image ok h Conne ol God Ind called /iuſtt⸗ wythout autoꝛpte Mich. iũ pee and that in the lyght ol
dur neahbour wa we oupht to helpe:as chuttecherh kennen are ko eue bs bp chzit: Ok whrch thinge oke. tpeds glorptredbrbem. Roma, vite 2 Aynges . iltl· eg · vc
vs bythe parable of thelamarptane. Lu. e tanpuge Skat fi. Jere Ixil. Ole. . Che wörch h rnge ailo & ‘Godhad prevettpnacbefoze the makyng ot d word / Co pꝛophecpe/ tos to teach in n themx⸗
care c charge of bpm Ech. rn. b with out delprtpng Paul doch wyllhe vnto thé thathe wzyteth vnto. Rom! ton to rebeme vs bp the bloude or hys lonnẽ (kon to laue ſterpes of the holp lerppture i Coin. xt. a x. t drill k.
or bun. Maia. t.band{elaunderyng hem. Ech pir.b pc Ephe r.. J. Cella ih. d. DE which god ig 5 autheß J emake babis chydzen by adopcron / accondeng tote Paul doch putte drkkerence betwene a hophete ga
andéndgeng hem Lam ui o. but pleakenge hm vnto t.@ella.o.d1-c07-rilt).£ And cht § preacher-c ph ih J purpole of ts will kor todeclare bis mercpmozeclere» teacher: 407 a peopheteishe that teacher che thynge
brsedpfeng Nord. a. And lourng hym as our ſelle. Pence be with pou (is a maner of gretyng berpfamy ironto the worlde/by the whychbe hatyrecontpledds whpcy god bath opened onto hym by bys kpiete /to >
Leu nix. c/ Mat. xxiid: to: info dopng the lawe is ful Haramdge p Zewes. Foz which we lape: God laue pon / onto hem teilte / oy che meanes oe hes, dere lonne Fetus edifying ok the churry.Eph.tti-buta teächeris ye/that
kiued Mom. vit. aD 02 godépede peu. . Me rv a. gene. rt e. Judg. ira chu. pb t att Timo. ci Pet i. d. Lone Mom ix. c. teacheth Ponty worde,of Hod hauig fyatt bene taught
3 © Oblacron oz offrynge, Chri decy ett peace to his apolt les. Luke Friiit f. fr te eco fd fc) Be bc. Furt. EO it by men: which thynge fo all 6 /be cänot do without
blacpon for lpnne pleateth nor od Pralm. xl / Jo. Fi. d vi. fr. e: wyych chynge can not be compze. a b rd. Amos ih, b. ere x. ¶ amẽ ui e. Ec ci vij b. ri. b the gykte of Godstoz ic is one the lame ſpꝛete whych
Peb. x. b. lo: Chzptte is ones ore in anoblacponfo hended by mannes realon Philip. liij.b. ſneg ia b. d r. d it Reg 1j. 5. J0. bl. d. Tri. b. Mat. r.c. wofcheth all thynges inan men id oz. ru d. seis
Ourlynns/¢ £02 out lantytxing · eb. ix. g / he nedeth e oughte to haue peace with all men. Noma. ij. Ela xi. a. ij. the · lila · Chen the carnall and fenfuait Sometpme pꝛophetes haue bene calledlears i Re
therfore nomoze tobe oled Heb vit re Hedy rh E phe miha. Pera. h. wich them that do call I people cänot cöpꝛchende the eleccpũ a pꝛedeſkinacrö of ir b. Dp whom God was wonte toanfwere thote that
Chrptte hach geuenhym eite toꝛ vs onto God / an Hops 9 nameokthe Loꝛde. i Kim. l. b. And w thempnte Sobtbecaule they Erpuc fo to laue the lelues/bytyeiv athed councell at them.]. Reg xrvil a. a to withdzawe
kae se re eee . Abe pong of God.Ceh ih. e-Ferthe Kun hath HB atone woꝛckes ¢ mevites / whych int beau beh r aot ene:
. F. . o peace a e · Colloc · ij. el chꝛiſt. oure hund
Ol the oblacpons ofthe olve teſtament lone. Leuf. ch 0 oo. e e en ae e Aenus che Ahab /fo2 to make warveagapnt Mamoth Galaab /
bi. c/ix. a/ xrlic. Num vii a xo. c / xxix a mne Wal baue all wapes poze amöge vs Mat xrbi. b Ko preache / s to proybecy dexpounde the woe or but Aicyeasthe prophete ofthe Lo d being but one
3 heres . Meur.b:Corwbomnien oughee to do good. Lu. ne CGodj.Pe-iijc which cyyngenoms ought ko do) ercept manatlonedyd councell thecontrardti meg pra.
Dmanmutl obepe onto thevoyce of god · xo. xb.g Nom rij. b. v. k. j coꝛ vill. b {r.a/b/c. But we alinot I de be lente. Noma. x. c A man oughe not then to delpple pꝛophectes .. Cel b. d:
Db. xxx. defor be that obepeth it is bleed. Peutrd. baue chin alwapes cozpozalip os 0. . a. Ma Preachers old word or god are pꝛomered. Ela xxx. e But rather pave fo to haue hachie a gyfte. coz.rittta
Fl. nandge that obe peth it not / is call ok. In eram- Frou bsalehounb H be wermadepooze fob l, cg. bi. Buna a prophetede preachechpchatiscome-Lusi.e Agarnſt the peng prophetes.csecy.citt.c 5
plein pauls de d ob rene Ban Fotuoiidtet b.Lecvsthenhaue pptie ponts Proucr sri. b: og ‘Chote preachers p preache any other thynge/then erempe cöplapneth of kalle pꝛophetes.Rere. xiili.b
bs echyldzen of obedpence. l. Pet. lc cpecxally to which is done vnto ß one ig done bntoch rid. Mat. rrbd I thegotpell of chꝛrtt / are to be refuled h. John lc the Ot who amb ought totakeheade- Maroy ar opthelr
God moze then mä. Act. v e: Alco to our parents . Exo. Pacpence. wyckednet ol whom is fet out ij Pet it. a. b · c doctryne a doctrine of the pꝛeſtes is Cult of tyes a coue⸗
Ex. b Nu. xir. a/ Peu · p. b/ Cobt iii. a. An exampie in Pacpence is pꝛapled Pꝛouer. xvid / p necedarye fo: ¶ Pꝛape. touſnes. Jere. viii: Becaule ther pꝛeache for nothynge
SONG Lia h g Phu b Mato our fupen ours Er rr chien men. Peöz r g:Fo7 teengendseth trpall Mom Chivt pꝛayeth to bg · Joh. xui f. rvij b. eb. bild xt but ko lucre op argnes l Meg rin. v.
4 Peb rich c anexample in b Iraclites. Seu. krrii,b b, dn example in the pꝛophetes. ach. b. c. Ich in Jod. ron be knoweth that he is hearde of bys father John xi e Pꝛouidence.
4, Godhad leuer that we oberedhis cömaundemences xia, Item in obi. j ba tem in ault. cost. Als Bes wel pape ought to komeue. War rie Che pꝛourdence of God to warde bys Ceruauntes.
then conotacrptyce bntohrm. Keg xv.e cle lt.. inthe Tedalontcenies ij Tefla.b USe oughte then to be Zan nuf ppape ber ath mynde. j Cotxtitte Pal. crib. b. Douro a fix. c. Mala nt. r man mape
F K pFtwoozthye beage m ot thendenge the prowydence of GoD. rele: Foy
Sine de n od lengen Ged. B.. Kollo h be b. Jam. 0b: Forhe chat I üied together in che name ok Cr, ther barobrapne Elaperepzouechehe tha denrete rlicap g.
Seue pꝛaple vnto God. J poca xix. a hath charptpeis packe raftcoz xiſj. anddoth cxerclſe hm J allthat theprequyze. Jamin, Makth. ritt. c. So Bythe proupdence ofgodvall thynges happen on⸗
Godts oute prayte wrom we thulbe laude know telke in good woꝛckeg. Jam He tobs.ercit.r1.0. anecampleing samaritan’, biel
Tedgpuge that.all that webaue/commeth ohm. Exo. GPerkecucyon. HiRegviitdet Pipnceg wolde not beleue the lepers that wbewed the the greate
fea Deus-nAneramplein the cents Kloß Perlecucron tothem that wrll ixue atter the wozde pres are thempnpttcrs of god Roma ritf.a-b. Böger to cömeſbp ire proud ce of god lil. Meg bh bee
. sito Anna J. Meg. l. a. Alto in Salomon. Reg. ok Chuſt ii. Kimo. tj. e:wherok Chuſt doth warne bs which dughttobe wets opletetes expete- Beute ib. Alto bythe proupdéce of god/Abymelech dd not led
Apetter Lupin. f. Allo in the iron the node sl Sd ib dee Sue ale Se malice) au ul 4 dc Se yreneg he amet 4 nh
Tun LUE om o7de OF Cod. Mak fiib: I rio c. tia Alco Amos bi aa Mich ii ac people ol I. a sae
eren i Seb nige r re ot parte nto benen n , . sie b a aan pape tne Bani ito pu
ee x. c. Ano at the perfecucpons come ot 2 of Saul. f. Reg. roti 6 O»
are baton rutin omg. bea avis: Ftomwblchbecandelpuecmen.anceamplen |W“ ehsrtisthepsince of patoures-{4Oe.b, Anoeye’ upoencelokes Reg.vie.chrot.sxtt.b.rep.callo,
 Prayleisdpicomendablein amannesatnemouty, D. Paul j.cim ii. c. A manmuſte thentakethempas « bead ot all pryncppalite- Colo b . Ba Scart Sots donnern urch ni m,
Prnuer.rrdtt.a.torbethat prapleth hemfelt is not cõ. cientip l. Cor iii co p2a e £02 bis pertecuters. Wath. Che prpnce of toys worde is che deuell / wyrch is Cbere is nothrng ; comkostech a faptpkumma moze
eee Gba. count . . b. r baynqupten @ ouerconeby chev Foon rie-epy Ha Atte nO ee e cakes oF
: ce in the truth / is geuẽ OF chi : out the pꝛouydence of god
Che waer b chain teacheth vs War. vl. b. Lu yt: a -fapthtullécoy.a.ecdthe urch be both coterie 30 Propbetveseue gore organ gat bp BboIPgoOR: onebeare ofbystiend. Nat xd. dno helharbeleueth
„ Mhevraper of te chzptten oughe tobe contynuall/ zw: gorhe that cötyntweth onto ß ende ( although ß be ere weed men Rosi bécor TALE pet. not che pꝛoupdence ot god / is not worthy to lyue.
b bbe —


Pleruent the which henge Chapt weweth bs bra tr. begreatiy pertecuted hal be lgued Mat. roc td · Che which ipꝛete beareth wyrnes ol cht. Apocal. Plaue. dilit rij. piu
“ Pelli 5 : : .


A table of the hyncppall matters


A Table ofthepep


Pꝛudẽce is tomtyme taken mb lcrppture koꝛ a cer⸗
taynetubtelepe bp 9 which § carnal ms doch gauerne
byni(eif warelp in bis vulpnes. lu. ot:wgich. f. Paule
ralieth wozidely wyrdome / which is death befoze god.
No. bini. a: Bar ii c. b d which a man Hulve not go-
uerne him i eee ee
Eull-it Ne xiit.a. Jee prudence is tak? toz an aduile⸗
met / vy which eny m taketh hede to ouerpalle p tame
thpnge to d whichhe is called: Co thuntẽt he myghe
feruc bglozy of God a d pꝛoket ol his neghboure And
thys todo / chzilt doch warne vg. Mat. r. b. 3e. C Pet.
1 Pet llt. b. Psudence g wildom oz lapiẽcẽ are Tops
ned comenty together in the terppture:wherot wildom
oz lapiẽce/doth caule one to vnderſtande thole tens


which be ot God. i. coz a all. a · ¢ prudence to perleuer wh


oz contynue ſtyll in che lame. Exh · . ou. xiiii.dto the
which we are ex hosted. pꝛou. i. a. lit b / vii · l. x. A xbi. b.
In exaple in Bauid i. Re. xolii. bc. C Plalmes.
We mule lynge onto God wyth Pralmes / Hymn!
@ lpyntuallcongeg / wyth geuynge of thannes in the
dpi bte a hert. Judg. v.a. i. co xi c / Eyh. v. d. Col. il. c
Pal. vl d/r. a. Judit. xt. a Publpcaneg
Pubipcanes are thole that do gouerne the: comune
chꝛealures / cpecpauptolles oꝛ tate / Che which were
tomtyme in greatreputacyd among} Nomanes: but
odpous to the Pharytpes/becauſe iher dd gathertri⸗
bute of $ Jewegin d names of demperour vt Rome:
Andtherkozedyd they cattein the apottels teatb / that
chꝛilt did eate dd the publican Luũ v. tand becauſe be
was their krende. Lu vi. e. Ot Publicanes lobe Mat ·
voin. b xxi.c lu iii. GPurgatorve
Cs wozde purgatorpe is not in the Weble: but che
purgacpon ¢ rempſqrò of our lynnes is made vs by >
abundaunt mercy of God. Lu. l. g · Mar. ii. a: onelp
by Chit. Mat. i. A bythe cpedeng ok his bloud. Mat.
xol. c. Mar. ritttc, Cu. xrii. p. Ac. xlii. g Epi b heb.
i. a. ix di · pett iil.c.i. gh · ie / li. bꝛã poc.ĩ. b Foʒhe is §
reconcpleng ok al b tynnes of d whole wozld 1. J0.
lilt · c: a bath ſhewedhĩ leit taking on hym ourẽ fet /
Gallo ding / beryng ourtpnnes vpdõ bys backe / kor to
dothẽ awape i. J0 t. & om uit d / . pet. li: Co thintẽt ?
he mxaht purge vs of lynneslin p whych thys wonde
was damn 0 u r ned 1058 inhym which
is the lame. Jo. i.d / once offered kozal: So H there re ·
mapneth none other / which c& frõ hence forth pourge
vs of ourfynnes, Pebz ir gx. che then g wel pourge
bs lynnes / though kxer / oi byanx other meanes the
the padrö okchzct denpeth hrs ard padtyon as it
is to lee by d places befoze aleged:a Mal be greuoullx
punpched) becaule he bath delpyſed lo greate a grace.
eb x· e 1 OCRyghtuoug


ox. pat
No man is rightuous in the fpght of God-Job.ttif-b
lr. a xxb. b · Eccle. bita· Abꝛah is reputedrightuous
becaule he beleued. Gen xv. a Wards e 5
tuous /hauing perkapt charitte / is not of God t. J0 ii b
Co therpabtuous is no lawe geuen : fozhe doth al
Chyng krely by the Cpzete of god. Sal v. d. Tim. b


ntipall matters
U


pꝛaper allo is very acceptable. Jam b. d. Pꝛou. xb .d.
Che rigytubus are wih moche a do laued in thy
woflde. f 18 / elcape trybulacrõs fo2 $ name ot cht
Pet iii. o/ by the which he is pꝛoued. Eccli i a. xxvij a
Ppoucr xvijã Hannes ryahtwelnes.

Chert is no rrahtwelnes in man no not in them
oly. Job . din. d. x. A. xb. b. Elal . xliij d. Lett vs not they


are not lubtecte to the ſult yce oF God, Moma . r. a

Che rpgbtiveines of God is made tnowe vnto vs
hes wozckes. Job. rxxbi. a · Txxviſla. Chic is outy
Teghtoummes! C0 .d. Ecat lll. b. ib. b. lt. b/the whlc
(8 geuen vs of Godthzough Chale . Phlllph wc. ay
ch allo we chulde wapte Foz by kapth. Gal ba

Che are free fF iuſtyce / b is to tape baue no
welnes / wyych are feruauntes Koma vi.
ther is no kelochyppe betwene


es
welnes ij cos. vic Fo the wrath of ma doth not ni


welnes ot God.Jam.f.c/the tute wherot oughte to!
foweninpeace-Jamiij-o. Rulers. 4

Cuelltulers pate notopon the caules of the poox
Pꝛou. xxix. b. Bndfo; all g men muſte be obedpent pit
the. Batu. ij. not wichltãdyng 5 they be inkrdeles i Pei
jc. Col. iiſ d. Eph ij. b. But lochat ther comm unde no}
thenge agapnſt God Act. ve Olthe obedpence den
vntoß ruſers lone. Nom xiit.a /b /c. Co the which chi
paped trybute. Mat. xbii d. gat the rulers ſbuld be.
Exo x vin d. Deut. xvi.d. Chat is to fave / ſuche as J ethn
lapde vnto Moles Exo. xvid. Seutt. c. Co the why
men owe reuerẽce. Exo. xxiid pʒouer. xi. b. rij d xixi
xx a · Ind not to detracte o ſpeabe eueil ot the Exo xn
d / no to eſteme cha leaht Eccle vit. a


Gabi. l

Rabl inHebzeutpgnitiech(mpmaker Jo t.) which

chynge one chulde not del per to be called · Mat · xxiũ·
Kealon.


exterior oz:


buchte to eg ct iuſte · Leuſ ix. g
on.
to oblerupngelnot of clopſtre rules) but
opepned ol Cob. Exo. lf. A. Leu. vil d. ri. g,
git. Melrgron, korthe fecte ofthe
onde Ipocrites 3 full of ceremonpes / ot
S. Paul was ät the Tpꝛſt. A


— vans dl Ddely punpchemet / cometh to thé ptake d fupper vnwoz⸗


ich obepe not the commaunde>
Veſte 8 Held to
ri


racles. Actes.
‘pp the that beleuein hy


©
vnto euerp mBaccozdyng to thettfapth a


1 vl. d. it. Re.
acht dem ve whrchmabech rhef ame


tontapned in the Byble⸗


bk out foules i. Pe. it d. or wi the mynpfters Wange
accoũte. eb. ritti.c Che loules of the b were Hayne
SVV


upper
Che lupper of our L ond / is a holpritertiorve a geuyng


/ okthankes / fo2 5 deth of Chuck. Mat ric. Wav rit),


C. Lu. xxſi.i.coi. ie. .d Che lupper dughtto be done in
charpte. tcoz. rid: to: wholdeuer cthither vnwoꝛ⸗
thelp( p is ww out kapth däneth hymkelk- cht rt. g Bo-


theip i cos. xf. g Che ple ol $ fupper was in d tyme ar
D. Paul lum what conupt / co which caute mant were
punpched iicoz N eg Streng ‘
Godis oure Strength - Exo. b. a f. Reg xxit. a. Jol.
xxit.e. 5 which Hannah Conkeſled (Me. Pharao
tefpttenthe rength of God / b the power or cho myahe
$ better be knowen. Exc r c, Mo fx. b d welde.
God is tardto whette bys werd when he wyl punt
Peut. xxxil. ft. Che lwerdets lente of God / agarndt tye
# wozſhippe Images. Heu xrrütd / a kepe not byscd:
maundemeẽtes. Leu. bt. d He 5 drphech wihe werd
thalperpth Wehe werde. Mal. Ebi. e: Apo. flit e Che
ryght or 6 fiver chen ir. a. Exo. xxi.b / Leut xxute deu.
Fix d. Wyerkoze 5 rulers do beare Pcwerde lone Ro. ri b
Cbel werd of che Cprvte cuttynge on boch lydes (ig the


it. woꝛd ol god / which a ma ought to take foz to ouctcome


our enempe. Geb. xi. c A poc.xixc/Ephe pic, Che
He i cbates bende Detoyeto tbe wold Hall
mapntapne 5 gotpel-Date.0 © Sacrifice orholt
Chyrck ts the lacriſice. eb. vit. d / vit. a:oftred once fos
vs / xb / which multe be okrednomoze: ko thzough hym
are our confcpences pourged kr lynne/ which no
bre pr bend edtya ebnen
ekygul it / g —
Wale God beyng cötent with the only lactpyce of


© Chive doth vefute al other offeyng’ ¢ oblacrös. Bebreb


ep wüpch wyllyngelr do foztake the golpel / c by
’ 4 5 — be pourged krö thett kynnes. hebz. bt. br. e
Good cSuerfacponts called a faceptyce a an holt pht⸗
up c Co geue unte d pooze /iga lacrplyce acceptae
bie to god. Hebz rin c. Phi. flit. d Letbsofire bnto god
through chzttt Pfacritice ofthankes geurng. Heb-
‘Lobe bpon p Cacrpfpces of p olbetettament L eu ita
b. bd / bta Mu · xb c xvij· ES weare
Tn othe is a confyzmacyon of thpnges / tohych arein
ueltpon amonge men / by enthob


Reden
wech ache be. We whulde then be ſotrue one or vs
to ancther / carefull to tape the ttutheahat our cõmu ·
nngcacpon dude be / ere naß e dure Jam. vc.


. Sauk. 5
abe! ousipueth bp tapth Rom.t.c-Pebzr.g. warde wozcke. WHI. li. d: G of Soule / to: euerpipuing mä. Ad. nit. a. l. Pet tt d. a o Eccit xrbiſ. h cit re '
bpoishom eres or the l 00 re ome ‘a hate aro be Be 2 2e Lu Fel nh fl b. Acud Chet is dbichoy Vert i aworche ott fe er “<a


ot table of the pꝛ


baue theirrule. Exo xx c. Okthem that moue trpee.
Pꝛou erb x. b. rb b. vi). c xpiij a xriii.d j. c·
Aman is bounde to pacitpe itryte a debates. In exã⸗
plein Moes. Exo. j. bt. Collere
Mällaughter is kozbiddẽ. Gen · ix. a Ex xr. c Beu b. b
Che pꝛoude man was ſlayne / which oplobeped piud-
gement ofthe Judges chat iudged accozopng tothe law
OF pod. Deu xöthc, Pertbat lle pet aman ought to be
Harne. Leui Ixil b t. xb. He that devery with 6
Swerde ought to be lane w the cwerde · Sen ix a Mat.
role. Apo. Fü. c. God cömaundeth to leve the Pꝛo⸗
kaun ch thozowmpꝛacles doch withozawe Fpeople
his wozde: whether it be bꝛother / tonne / daughter
O wyfe. Peu fi. a b. He 5 le peth his bzotherlecret⸗
dus accurledot Gd Deut xrbt d. Hob hplleih a quyc⸗
Beneth what hem lult. Deu, xrxte.k. Men kille chole
that maye be a deſtruccpon vnto the people. Deut. vij.c.
ellepeth his bother / § is angep td him / oz by worde
ozligne doth curle hyim. Mat b. cl. J0 fie. CSpnne.
All ö is done without kapth is lynne / and Cots all int
gupte. Bo-vitt) dj. Jo. fi. a ö d. Andhe ß beleueth not
Solpell is aſynner. i Pe iin. a Chere is none fre from
ne / g therkoze all haue nede of Ch ut to laue them. tit,
eg. vtij c. Pꝛouer. xx. b. Ela xy g li. c cel, vic No.
life j. J0 . c Chiiſt is without lynne .. Jo .it. a J. Pe. j
b:Hut God laping all oure runes bpont / bath made
bpm ſnneſthat is to tape /a Cacepfpce ko the catiſtactyõ
ol dure lynneg) and euen lo by ſynnelthat is by ð lacry⸗
fece olted ops the tree of the cromte ye hach tant awaxe /
condempned a done awaye oure lynne il. Cozt. b. d. Hoe
viit.a J. Pe. Id. Srnnes are not imputed to the that
beleue Palm. xxxuͤll. Coz they are purgedthoꝛow fapth.
Pꝛoner. rb.d :  Spnnes be forgeué by god onlp. Exo.
Exxiiit.a xi. c. Matix a.
nat able to be foꝛgeut᷑ / is the lynne agaynſt $ holy got.
Mat. xiſ.c. to which a man ought not to pꝛaxe · Jo bd
which challnot be kozgeuen in this wozlde nether in the
woꝛlde to come: that is to laye / neuer. Mar tid.
Upctozy is geuen vs of Godthozow Chill / agaynſt
fynne / hell / death. j. Coin xv g. Paule doth warne
vs loꝛ to wake fr the lleape of ſynne / a to put it awaxe
that it rapgne not in our moztall body & thozot $ de⸗
ce pte therot / our herte be nothardened in vnbeleke. No.
bib. Eph. b c. eb. ih. c. xij.a. Jo f. a.
He that hath lynned hach chzitt to his adugcate j J0 11
n. o whom we chulde contelle oure lynneg. Jo. i det oz
god may make bs without cynne a cpotte. Judas. l. g. In
Ceample oF the prodpaall conne. Lu xb c. Nto of the ien ·
ner Lu bij k. Liko of che theate. Mat. xxvt. ¶ Stone.
Gon geueth water out of z tone Exo. xvit. b. Hu xx. b
Chuit is the ttone of offence tothem whych tumble


ul met. Pritt a. cris Wey pb. gere rnit. c becautey
God bpd vette vpon the leuẽth dare zthatis/cealed fr
the mühinge ok any mo newe creatures Genelis. f
Exo xx b. Allo in the remembzaunce o€ the vette / Cat
hehadgeuen tothe chylozen of Alraell / in delpuerpnyl
th? out or the captpuptpe of Egypte · Deut v. b. Aloche
the leruauntes ¢ beaſtes myght rete. Exo xxit b.
Chis tudpcyall ceremonpe is cegled:ko: we mut


to be aniõge vs: chatig to reſte ¢corctrapne oure lelfy
fed the wozches of oure mynde 02 wyll. Ecai ii. a. Ibi
drthe which thinge ought to be perpetuall wos Ela in
G-Heb.titid.in applpinge oure lelues onto the wozckg
ol kapth / that is / to helpe one another by charptie. 6 0
Wee aner enk ear

acramẽt Comtpme foz a a thinge
vnknowẽ 07 hpdde: ß which foz alß / is opened ina cey
tapne tyme, whet is the pleaturt of Syd. Conn tif
Col id ph. t. b. dh. a. . g J. Cim ii.) Osa

Sacrbepce in the tupeure lignitleth generallp /

was offered on the aulter : wheror is ſponen Exo


Chstk(becaute it was a faccptice)ts called tynn e.
27 oe allo to eate the facrptices of the dead /
ea


Che lynne irtempupbie o: Ela.


(B glare offended atthe woꝛde not beleuing it j Pe. ib b.


Chait ts the tone vpon the which the Fewes dod lone
pd thoꝛobe fapth / beleurnge chat he chuſde afterwarde
come oute of whom they dpd dzawe out the Cpirituall
Nncke f. Corr. ä. Che cone / that is totave the fapch
a e eee church.

‘i aboth oz vette

The Saboth oz dave of rette/astouchyng the obter⸗


uacpon theroF after the letter was bery Ataytty cömad. N..


EDGY Lewes Ero ht err b xrr arb. e,


E piophecke dt alarah


tontayned in the Bpble;


fe. Akcerthe o er ok MHeicvitenec euermoze
0 tox to pꝛaxe toꝛ bs to god his tather· hes
557. bl. vil. vt. a. Pfal. c.. arpncte ozholx.
Che wozde larnct 07 holf / is take diuerd in g brble:
esto lave ‘fo the boly place of ptẽple, in the which the
people ofthe Je wes ought to pꝛapbe god · Pal Tx xxl. cl.
Che which hach bene euell vnderä ade of § Sophitters,
which haue gloled that place. Plal.cl.toꝛ the pꝛapeng to
fapnctes cotrarp to S. Jerome which hath trãclated it.
Laudate dominũ in lancto eius: 2 is to vnderũande/
pꝛaple god in bis holy place /oꝛholx chzttt / wyych is the
fayntotlapnct(. Sapnctes is take allo Coz all thẽ p are
tin herte / by the ka pth ok 3 clus chꝛilt / wherby they
belapncütred. 0 xbii. No. i. co/.i.ij coꝛijephj-. i b. Phil.
Here s there ĩmoge p Plalmes. A8 in $ Ptal cxitx. All
kabthtull men then are ſaynctes. Deut. rilij. a. Hu. xb. d ·
Exo xixd. Ko bi e. ri. 4/0 Ephe l. a Philips d. Phil.
tlaſb - Hebz. ij a. Ot whom cht / beynge lett ond right
hande ol hes Cather is the myniſter⸗ Hebe vüt. And fo;
whõ we are boundeto pꝛape W contynual pꝛaver a ſer ·
ingpꝛete Ephe vi.e Che ſaynctẽ do pꝛape foꝛ their
l xxxui. Co whõ god is mercytun /all though


be punithe them tomtyme. Palm. Irxxix. Let vs then be


es in dur conuerlacpon i. Pet i c/ to god is holy.

rig xix. a.xx h xxi b. Loe ow we ought to helpe

ches. IO. xi. ccoz.xbi.a· co. via. ¶ Satan.

‘ is an aduerlarpe. Mar vili d. Sathan doth

blue ö hertes of d vnveleuerg. Co thintẽt p they culd

not deleue 8 golpell. t. Col. fl.. takinge papne to to

nawe 9 fapthEull kr the knowledge ol itt. Cel. iii

b. Lohe or Satan. Job. 1. b. xli.a / Lu. xxiſ.c. i coin. v. b
Dtandalon / in Englych tclaunder oz offence.


ald ig a Greke worde / which kignilteth a hm⸗


zlette:a is trallated onto Cpirituall chinges: oz

e that hitteth agaynſt a done / is lette / So map

an pluche backe wytholde and wythdiawe bis

our / teaching in matters of fapth anp thinge cõ⸗

tanto the woꝛde Of God / bythe which he is lelaunde⸗

red that is to tape / lette 07 piucked back ro trueth

wherok is (poke Mat rut a. A man mape alfooftende

ozCclaunderbis bzother / as touching chatitte chat is to

ape / vohẽ amd doth not thinke bps the necediite of him /

Aap he troubleth d cõmune pece / o geueth euell exam ·
le /o herot pe mape fet, C02. bild. Wat roi d.

Ge kclaunder oz offende allo ig to gene an occatiũ ot

Jallig / thoꝛow tribulaciõ oꝛ any:


uerit he / which thig Chꝛilt memedbetoze to his Apoſt⸗
SDeruauntes.


neg. Mat. xxbt.s eru

Me ate all the feruatites of God / bx grace: to chintẽt
chat boche helpe othim / we chulde do ) wozkes of righ-
tuauſnes. Jo bit. d. Ro. vj d. which chit heweth
intwo parables. Cu. xii.e.t Dotp Ceruatites ought to
behaue wb felucs towarde thelr malters · Eph vi a. Col
kad 74 ESygne

Chl eAAth leakt vs i lignes ſkoꝛ to Mew eprotette
eue. fore his church: is tofape d water of bap⸗
me


meanes / howloe⸗ ch


roldꝛg d bꝛead ¢ wyne ces bolp upper.


crons baingetb death. fl. og. vj c. SOrcle.

Sycle wherokts tpoken Ge srt}. Ex. iu. is atrer For
lephus mende ut dragmas which amountetg as Bue
deus lapth xx cpyllinges ſterling. C Cite.

A tree / ba fpmyplptude is euerymũ i. Mat. ii: c. xit.
c Mar. pili.c. Liu pi f. Iche be tapthtul he is a good
tree / bꝛyngynge foꝛth good krute as well in doctryne as
bp woꝛchkẽ. Mat. vii. c. But yr he be without the krute ol
tapth / he ts wycked. Judas. 1d. C Crtbes. 8

Che Cythes were tanctifped to gov-Leut xxvii d.

God cßmandedp the mentters /äraügers / father eb /
o wedowes ſhulde be can tythes Deu xiiii d

Che tythes were as wel eatẽ of Fpeople / as ot my
hikers. ku. xil d. xiliic Che Pharices tening marcp/
kapth (aß ppinctpall wozches of the iawe. vndone wee

dpligét topape the trthes. Mat ric. C Cechars.

Cechars in the churche of chzilt. t coꝛ xi d. Eph ili. h

Che chnſdean is taught of god John. o c. He bz. bit.
d. i. John · v d. Ela. litit.d. ie aughte to teache ß woꝛde
ol Gop one to another. Deut. b. b. ii. c. i cell. v. c
wilch I queſtionarp doctozs o techars. i. ct ot. b.

which is the hollome lernynge. Tit ita /a whych the
deuelche i. Tim. iiita Chey that bꝛyng other learning
chen Chzites / are notto be receaued · j Joh. c,agaynit
thé ſpeneth Paul ij. Cinio. ij b.

Pe that techeth any other thynge then the woꝛde of
God / ls accurleo Sala. t b. f. Coß. xa ruf.

He P truſtech in gad / is bleed. Jere xvil. b Pzouce.
xbic. Che Alraelites truſtyng in their awne ſtregth /
were vanqup bed of the Bentamites Judg xx cd.

Let vg haue truſt 5 we thalbe lauẽed by the bloude ol
chat. eb xp /to thd we bugute to go/ with great cis
tpökce. Pebs. ld. Che Jues haue trust in their Ama
ges / in tyme ol trybulacyon· P eut xxxii.e

Fodtaheth awape alltruſt from che trantgreſloꝛs ae
bis cömaundementes. Peu rrbiitg. Che ure truſt
i, to beleuep Gon well neuer koꝛcg ke his Plal. crxb. e.
Exäpleg of teu in A ca fl. chꝛo xiiii.c. Chꝛon· viii b / in

Judas Machabe⸗ J Mac i. b Cheffe.

Ama mute not robbe, Kro xx. c. Letx.b: fo2 theuts
are accurled. Zach / b. a. and therfoze they ſhall nothas
ue the kyngdome ok god. . coß. bi. b. Nett theues thers
fozelabour Wtheir hädes ko to helpe $ poozt. eh. lief

Di the paſtoures are theues g bepbers whycl will
bipng mé byanp other tape bnto health then ibꝛough

. 20. ra. Chen one ſbu ide not haue any cõuerlacion
with ꝛ0 rü. d ( Cabernacles.

Ytabernacle/ tente / oꝛ pauylpon / is the habytacyon
02 place / wherin men of ware do vle to Ive: which doth
legnikpe g the people of god do in Coche wyle dwell in &
churche / 8 ther haue alwayes battaple agarnſt tynne/
the woꝛide athe deuellt. 10. ln. c. which thyng belongct
to the moꝛtikring of h aide man. Pfal ru Itẽtaberna
Geis ſomtyme takt koꝛ a detenced cytie tal. xxrt.

Item loꝛ che body in the which the Toute dweſleth. it.
Pet t.c/ which theng D. Paul calleth an earthip mane
kon. it. co. v.a. Alo the tabernacles ot C od / are the
Godly congregacrons of people inthe holpchurche ol

child. Hum. Trull. Pal ixxrilii Pꝛouer rij. & healle⸗


gozvokbtwotabernacles of Moles. eb. fr. b St ß mas
berlall tabernacle,


e Exo. xxv. a adi a. xxxb . a. xrxvi
N e cenie ·


7


*


Atable of che pꝛyntypall matters


Cemplein the ode teſtament / was a certapne place /
e ra l eee air enna sara
li Beg bia bitt a. But Paull eat ur boty rot
Dwell in the teples made of mennes . Act. bi t xoti
ii Meg bill. c. Ela ixvi. a/ becaule encry chaten man
is thebolptéple of God t Cop int cat. Coz. bt. c ph. l. d

God Hall delt rope him that doth polute oz vrolate his

tempel. Coy itt. a f dure membes are the temple of
ole god Con bid
4 cem


cron.

Cotempte is to pꝛoue : Gene. xrij.a. Exo. xb. t. xbi.a.
Heut blilta. Cemptacpon kon aftipccvon. Deut ptlic.
Job if c. bia Che rightuous are pꝛoued ough n
kacpons.Eccli xxpil a. Judith bitt. b. Ba. „a. An
example in Ezemah / which was lo laken ok the Loꝛde
cos to proue him i Para zx il.

Atem of Elias the which berng kamyched / was lent
tod woman that was lynewyle fampſped / koꝛ to be no ·
rplbed of beri} eg xv · b /c Atem of Job ij a.

In che tyme ol temptacyon a man dught to cõmytte
bpm felt all wholy vnto god Ptahhxxi: man oughe not
totempte God Peut vic. Gat üih. drto thyntent that he
perplbe not / as the Fetes dd. . Cozin. x. b. Exo xvit a b.
Hume. riiſi.d Chzidt tempted ok thedeuell. Mat tun. a
Seb 1 be myght helpe them that be tempted

ze. i d li

Euery man ls tempted ok bis awne cõcupiſcens a not
Of God Fam. i. bbut God wyll not fuffre bs to be tẽpted
aboue that wemape bere i. oꝛ.ixcitoꝛ he delyuereth vs
from temptacyon gatiyccpon ij Pt ti b

Chile cdmaundeth bis to watch a pꝛape / tochentẽt

they fall not in to temptacron. Mat. xxl. d. Co entre

en in to temptacyon / is to cémpt a thynge agarnt che
karth ie at oi b.
ame


nt.
olde teftamét that is to laxe the couenaũt / made
heally % the Fewes. No. ix. a) was conlecrate by bloud.
Exo xxitc. Bebz. x. e/ but tnex had a vaple betoze their
dertes / lo that they coulde not vnderſt ande it. it coz. i d.
Che new tetamét is pꝛompled tos true beleuers Jee
re. xxl. k. Bar. tg. a cõlectat by p bloude of Chziſt. Mat.
Mbt Mar xoſſt · b · Lu. xxit. b. of which he is the medpa-
tour. eb. bill. b. Che newe tettamét cõliſteth not in $
ae
1 0 en tho; a
Wadde de teen


0 cron
Crxbulactõg to come vnto the which beleue in Chꝛiſt
l. Pe . l. b. tilt. d. Jo. rvi. a /c j tecca. ii. b. Che which neuer.
thelete we cinot endure without p grace of god. Phil k. d
Lon by thẽ we are pꝛoued i. Pe init c / and do eñtre into the
Byngdome ot heauẽ. Act. xiiltd / h. ella tc
_ Cribulacps doth engendze pacpẽce. No xti.cp. a. a the
wa pahte ol glozpe .it. oni iii · de to thoꝛow tribulacron
god doth conttrayne his / lo to teturne bnto $ chatige of
ipte. Ela xxvi ci. pe bc In the tyme oftrbulacyon/a
man ought to pꝛapte God. fal. it. iti In exũpie in Saul
K Ontas. Oct. rot. e. Ind to glory in the. Gala. . Con.
vi Abt. a if. timo. f. d. putezng bis truſt in Gon. Ea bitt
cela ft she only wörch doth del duer us. l Re ric Exc d


The prayer ot hym that is in trybulacxon / Peal ru
Co the pe rtecuterg a troublers/eternall papne / a c
thẽ chat be troubled / relte ij tell. c: wherkoze no trihul
Spb ought fovtofepatatbos Fra be e of god, oss
Chik istructh/Job-riit}.£-a hisgotpellst Pe j c.
which we d without fapnynge ( tH
lape / without truſt yng in anx other / onder p colour ol §
ferupnge orhym) Jolu · itil. ct. Ne cit. d 0
Ctueth ought ta bein the zudges. Ero xpiit cꝛtoꝛa ni
ought to do nothingeagaynt it. Mich vi b ‘
Gu.  wnbeiete. :
che hertes ofthe bnbeleuers be fo blended / ö theyln
hot the ipght ofthe gorpel/ fir ttt /a For which thingy
cher Wail kaule in to $ terribie tudgement of god. thet}
Ul. c. which is eucrlattyng payne ij teln. i. c.. Pe. ih 54
therkoze we oughtto haue no parte with chẽ. ii. Coſ. vic
Che woꝛdes of onbeleuers touching § knowledge u
God. Joh xxüj. b. E zech vie  CGUengeaunce
Wengeatice belögech vnto God. Pe. xxxij. f. No xi
Wengeaticeis ko: biddẽ ꝛouer . xx. c. Ecclt xvij c. xx
d xxvin a Chziſt taketh bengeatice ol him ß decea
bis brother. / Cet litt, b d 5 dothdetpple Chait. Pebz
xiertue 0; power. 14
coe verte of be pee. dt gob both ber 12 5
golpel Mom i. b · Che power ok Godis P beaieyeons
fapthtullicozic/ekepetl thẽ in kath. ( Petta
Co be clothed wthe vertue krõ aboue / i to receaue $
bolpgoſte. Lu Tri. g. Acttb Cupigyne
obatSy. Paul wolde z men chuld do / as concemym
rener e Lokepponthe lawe of vn
gues g ok vyꝛgynttre. Leurrt cœxo xriſ.c Aud. xi. g i
d Hum. xxĩ Deut rij c Cupne
Chatisthetruespne.job.ro-a Ceoppiyte
Co bplyte foꝛ to remembꝛe· Exo e e
Co vplite toꝛ to take care / Ole · iiid Co bycpte in
totake bengeaunce- Ela. x. c @unvte
wnpteis cmended vnto ys · Phil deja i Pe. ii b
Che onite of chziké people cõmethok Chztt, Fo roi
d. nohich was in the
i pꝛapled Eph litt. a. Me are all one in Chit Gal. ld
@ Wocacyor oz callynge, ;
Mocaciõ whatit is No. xij d. Weare called ot
tx. a ij. tim. ic. ij: Pe i. q. as apereth inthe parabix Mat.


xx. a. che callyng ot p gen ies ¢ of che Aeweg to bg
Godhath piedectynate chore whs he cal . vil

t · Gal. i. a.a they heate when ther be called

1 Sade called os onto bis glory though chat


pce of


pꝛymatpue cp Renters which.


tontayned in the Byble,


. Che which thing a mã may kepe oz leue vndon
‘ag che annoyntyng doth reach a man) which of themis
moſteto Cet Forty eye glozp of God:but pet after fache
that a man do puttenomerpte oz holynes in ?
„Anexample of hym / wypch made bes herd to

be dhauẽ in cench zes. Act · viii. e
Covowe onto God / is comenly takẽ to to canctylie

oz cenſecrate / in Leui. rot

no wes are tre a at theltberte of man. An craple of
which vowed koꝛ to geue onto God / the tonne


which god had geuẽ her This vowe was not perpetual.


amuel was the mynpſter of Elt / which ought to
to soar n nee dle eo tte r pea de the. L.
(accopyng to the lawe of God / which is wzrtẽ pu. n)
Andthen akterwarde it was lawful ko: hem to wyth⸗

hum kelk / as the ttozy doth declare tos atterwarde
Peeoateth tbe pourra ofbps kather in Ramoth and
was Judge many peares in Atraelll. Reg. vil. g

‘Helcanad willing fo2 to offre his bowel His to faye his
politary offing, which we cal comély deuocid / wet bp
e ee 2 koz tolwere · . e xu d
1 5.

God koꝛbiddeth to geuc in blurp / an ymaner of thins
de whatloeuerit be Deut. xxiii c.

Hehentiah Repte the people / which wolde haue ge⸗
uen the lelues to blurp/Nehe. vb God doth kozbydde
blurpto be done bpon his pooze people / Exo xxii d

Iman ought to noych his pooze bꝛother / without
taking blury or hem / Leui. rr /e He geueth not
his money onto vlurp / a taketh no gylte of the pooꝛe a
nedy man thall dweil in the tabernacte of god Pal. xv

Cd lende Coz vlurpis agaynſtiuſtyce / & ꝛech yvi /b

uur pe doth dylpleate God Ezech. xu · c

. Woꝛchyppe.
Co woiwyppe one God onlx Exo xr. a. Deut ba v.


Dal dere xxil d no


Pal lxbt.a Ixxxvt b Ala. Irvi: g. Mat
Cor xi 2 pern rn In pete atruthe John.
li. b. udithout Images Exo · xx · a. xxiut. b. Leuit xix.a ·
xb. a. Deut xx biic
Let og worchyppe tb the herte / a not with lxppd. Ila ·
xxix d. Math. xo · b. Mar · vii. a. Ind in all places: John.
iiij.d. Plalm.clij.cb j. para · xvib la. xii.a.
Co woꝛchype is lometyme taken toꝛ to do reuerence
bp certẽ out warde lynnes / as: Se. rbill. a rix a xxriil. a
xibit. b. Reg zx g xxb d. Mat iſ.a Cowozthype/ for
‘to geuc thäck to god. Judg vil d Exot. b. Ge rpttt.b
Che angell wolde not be worthypped ok 20. Apo. xix
brrülb. Allthey ö are not wzpete in p boke of lpfe /
do woꝛſbype the beſte. Aporitta /c. Foz the whych ther
are punyched. L poc xo · c. Co walcke
„ Co walcke o7 to treade in the leripture / is put foz to
Iꝑue / oꝛ to cõtynue in a ſtrõge tapth Plal xv. xxxiiit. c
No. vlit.a:thertoꝛeis it laxd of Enoch z he walcked bes
koze God. Gene b. d. Allo of Abꝛabam- Gen rbij a
Co waiche in the wave of the x ond. isto hepebis cõ⸗
maſidemẽtes /iiſ. Re. ii. bꝛthe which God techeth. Deu.
vill. b/ and requyzeth. Beute x. c xt. c
Co waiche in iyght is to beleue in chꝛiſt Joh · riſ.e
Co walc ke in tructh / is to loue God wyth all oure
herte / and with all dure roule. rij. eg ij a
Co walcke after § maner ot man / i to be canal /s


to ixuein Gupte and didencpon . Co. f. 4

Cotwalche inthe pete / is to moztpeve the deades ol
e wude cr opioay 4

eahetn § tayth⸗ not be dyrdapned of

ſtröge. Nori. a. b. ai. Cel v.c. Co > weake Paule
became weake. 1. Cozin ix d. il. Coꝛi xt. home a man
Ought not to oltende / by catyng of meate . i Coꝛi.viti.c. d

God choleth the weake thynges kor to conkounde
the ſtronge i Coꝛ id. Anexa

I wronge

Rather tovistire ont then ama to pleate in law
agaynt his bzother t. Con bt. b koz chat forbyoneth thes
reuẽ gyng of wionge. Mat v. ka therfore ſhulde we de⸗
(pple it Eccii xa without hauyng any mynde of it. Le⸗
ul · xix d · An exãple in Joſeph Gene. lc

God punpcheth d) wo arc b A ARe.Fot be


1 Givzath o

Che wzach of God ops manx tar $ ſynne ot one on ·
Ip-Jolu-ryit.v.by § which Pharao was deſtroyed. Gen.
rob Jos the wath Of God ts ppd the vnbeleuers. Col.
lil. b. Joh ih. d. An example in the Jewes. i. Ceiij.d. Jud.
.d. Hu. xi a. Peu. ix. cc xoxxxiic

Che rrche men ot this wozide / doheape bp ko them
lelues the wꝛath of God. Jam. va. Bx nature we are
che child ze of wꝛath Ep. ii. a · but thoꝛow d hit we ar ·
delpuered krõ the wath to come. i Cella. b.c

Cath oꝛ paſſpon of man 1
Let vs calt alpde wrath frd vs M om xi d ph iii g


Col in. b- Eck. vit. b xi. d ou. xxdij. a: to he p is aua


wyth bys bzother / hylleth hym. Mat. p. c

Ik any ma be angryagatt his bꝛother / acterhe hath
pꝛãped / he ought to recontple bm telt. i. C im it.ciloꝛ 5
wzath ol mA tolo weth not d rightuoulnes of God Ja. o

Let wꝛathtull men be ouercome w iwetenes ou.
xb. b. wich whom we chulde matze none alxaunce. Pꝛou.
2 chpde ihk. Eccll vii d Che wozlde.

Che woꝛide made by the woꝛde of od. J0. i. a. in the
whlch we haue no thinge t. Coz ix. t. and ibich patter
awaxe with the concupplcẽ ces therol vit. e t. Joh ij c

ech dun ts full of wechednes.sFoH-b DE o pte
faye /the luſt ofthe llech the del er oF the exes / a Havoe
of ie. t. Jo. iſ.c. Che trendihxp of which ig enemz to god.
Jam tilt a. For he that loueth this wo id loueth not god
Jh. il b. f hnoweth him not. John J. xpit. d. Letnot
vs then loue the woꝛlde / noz p which is in it. i. John i. b
„Che wozddehatech 9 kapchkull 4 why. J. 1b. G. t. J0.
lit. c· Che whych thoꝛow fapth do ouercome it i. Jo. ba U
Allo they wall fudge it.. Coin. vi.a

¶ che woꝛde ok God

Che woꝛde of God ought to bein oure hert. Deu. bb
xi. xxx g Che pꝛapſẽ ot p woꝛde ot Ged 270 xxx a

An exhoztaciõ fo toheare p woꝛde of God / Ela ib. a.
eee e

out any ot y dymen

. ep poe arte ae

Che woꝛde of Godabpdeth euermoze:p is thegolpel
which is pꝛeached vnto bs. Ela xl. ad dee which
is the worde oftruthe.epht c. Dteternall pte. acte b 5
go recontpipacrd it. c o p. dibytte trhych we do ouer⸗
F


lpurnge. Ela. bit) d. xxviij d


pie in pain r. Cop, TA „


Zachun er Lacher 0 vil i, Reafte Fcis.


ACableoktheppneipallmactersec, — Frehenames ofall the Sr er sas ist


be Yworde of God san oflence oy dam eng block DI ei b. 8 fl. xxbi.a. xxvil.c.i. cini
tothe unbeleners Mama prb 6c gos tee a Gee tooe
Men ougheto sonne Shote that wichen acne a cot pꝛaper dyd on toberin che bokes begynne Wee thyrde of ect 2 ii Lest tte
from the woꝛde of God. Roma. branes Sa W Dac 0 1 0 bones of the olde tettamentt, he eure wis Tbapters rot. B
che oonvoesoN/ which Chngrelech mv, J the packet Motes. Khapters k. Eeatie.ta Jh n geha Khapters Full. Lende pipe a
apyecpous Gones)oughe nottobe preached noz Colbe tome rerum ie art . Ebantcas aeameercg  SEMDOLSEDAUD, | ADaEES EM: “Rene pola
to dogg / fstofape/aduerfariersnozinipugners:noz ctii/b/Eccli iD asa ee fom oftjare Chapters.frvdAeaf-erroulb The yoke of ene Bite Ties p. Lat rg
“nue pcb repentant oA e e dn r tee Mano . f, er. See
8 * 2 {rbig.a le
npthed, Dat.r.b.Bed.,a.clay-rroiti.ary.cHeute, , Che sk nae Snail: 0 Chapters esti Lear Irxri. b Se Prophet: with to the Epidile ot Jerempe
bil tise : . ange cen pene, Sour tene
ee Aae sear mee men got | ee Tiff. nb cue . F al 5 e
mus. Col. U. c. G bit map bc preachengdeclarcdouct al Che ware of godis ryghtuous/eu.rrvit/a, feconde <a a the bee of tbe menses Ae — Thapter r Lee
tl. Ted fn. a bp what occal ps to euer it be il. Tim. ti a 175 ro,b ee Wwe ought to Folone er eie Teal cb ; E Luan eat
Fozit is the iyght ko le by. Ptal crix:a. . Pe. id the kon. it i Re xxii.cwhch thrnge t 2 15 ei danse 4220 1 Eis aun kei 2 702 9 — — ral (erg.
kapne ol wyldome. Elap.to.a-€ccitiat.axthe kode or? tr. c rute ge Cy e ge en 1 he Seel ot spate campers soi g
Coule. Matt. illi. a. Aere: xb. 42 be beimet, ol health and en pathmadeailtyengesbpbys atone tien ters rrir. Teae ¢ Ade GHolpell or Marche Chapters t. Ted
werde of the lpꝛetẽ · Eyh vic @twhoze t b. Apoca. iii d. he whych is tmmutable-prouer sii . oe Botpellof fo Anne Ayapters rp, Leaesrri.y
Chere wap o bene ibozemongernoz cen dene da n bara ui loo, Genet pe i tt as *. 7. Men, b. ure. dt feed ef dl Ade, Toer, rie Healer


people of God. Deut xxiit c Amar wulde thenllpe ple ol Ahab · ii para. viii g. Alloot᷑ Balam u


eren ane e eme s he afar cages b gf ge ——


Tbäpters x. Leake crx Tbl. d C5. Paul to che Momapnes. Chapters. xv. Leaffe. ixiſſ. b


an harlot is one body with her t. Conn · vl d Eph-b-d.F07 he that doth it is a Chailtẽ ms. 5 5 Thapters rig. Leatle elf Te fp to the Tobnchrans Chapters rot. Teaſſe trira
Che whozes and the pubipcanes do enter into the 2 c. Aneranpie in Jolue a Caleb ume. xxxii b Plulmes 4 ite heat 70.4 E Kpapters rig. pater 7
kyngdome of god / and beleue the golpell: Futthe Pha: — Feisthetwyll of Godthat we be fanctytped a guy denk the — ede US cute: 82 9 . — Aer bl. he rae ben
vite beleue not. Mat. xxic geb ok oure lynnes by hilt. eb. ij c Co thyntet char ce. „ othe WhMippians tees tie is ry ore
Che brlronokthegreat whore / wich whs the nyngt F Dogme sels of baetes of Ralomonrs Cantu canticorum " othe aiodians buyers ie Rea 17708
ok the ad eee poc . xvii a. we do ſtoppe the mouthes of the wycked i e ile — vit. Teaſe cc. xiv. b eee e erte bapters. A t. (pride
ir oughta rape 3 0 l o ‘Gaye Pioppetes. 9 e ene e . ati (ants
// to Sat rit Se iy “puns zal 0: S tee ee Lal u
e memes Beenie
605 Jb. In tohom ehecveat jome ¢ OF now · . Flog.a x
Aa aypbeen collet 5 ‘Bll oughe to be cOmpttento the went tg captees Tg. Leg pie: 5 Kb weet e v. Leere 1.
aun ne one gam t-8 tiid Job. xxbiit. a. xxxit Car inJoteph.@ene-rio: — . A S am 1905 Ag Se; 1 pate 7406 Hy
neuron eke tah uo e Co. Paul Mom. xb g. 4 chin, t d. rot. Super, ih. Leit kr ö Teka of che oaptee l. deatfe 768
sita We oughtto be kpiled wpch al wyrdome in godd⸗ A man ought not todobysatone wyll Ech ron : Saler e Leute ere Teach ene a 2 Lente Folia
nes / tobe emp cued Nom xo. C but the ne 0 od koꝛ he 5 doth that / ren Abd ETbepters 1. Leafle Arran 00 6 Moapters riß. Leake rettiie
27 mores Jos.caepot not Selben. ure ee, Ae e b a “Opies Mares
A mancughteobeate otaltewptnete-ero.es, Ciwages wan aie benen . Beate terres Sep e — —


Aman eugene anon wages oF the ka abacus Ahapeers (ib. Lealle err rp. b,
Che toptnedte whych god had made vs of hrs tonne / bourer. Peu rb. b. cal . or the hrt /
is thatbyörm only we haue euerlaſtyng lyte l. 40. v. c. One a the fame . is geuen to the lyꝛt and and the auowoledge of the trueth. Eccle. xi. c.


Arthe wytnetle of two oꝛchze witne des the Joolas che lalt / to thintẽt that a man 6
ant bis Bag Banga ge bury geen pte ce 8 e Men fericethe bewemmpnge of he wonde / tito this eam


e punptmét of a kalle twptnetie, Deu. xix. d be e t e pu x i Mcceccr e eee nes /
N 2 5 se ae 5 ane „ r ng to : alter the reckenpnge of eufebius ¢ other Shzonpciers- *
e bol a 2 j
gegen nee det of 5 7e . it! rafter the rove he Coane of he toys aden Seh.
; ofthe relurreccxon. Lu · xxiut· g· Jah. '
w gi . EO. PS estos bengeaunce.cte of: zon snot ve ere ee
: . conunaunbety allmento welehe Gar, Che zele of Sodagarnſt eum. Deut sritt
e ee „ e e
1 03. / e q N 8
: 1 oa, sper thos Colt tia ate 5 gene eee 1 oe: unte
of Coste. ol which playa erescpon donde 5
A man ought to do no hurte vnto wydowes Exo / xxit thebarlottes. Hum. rb h. nn a — Kaen r gen
d. Deut rriit.d:butratherto noi them. Deu xi d. Che zele ot Euiah iu. Neg. xviii d 122 175 of Adem Daud E. lt.
ale Feerdtane e of ee de. @nemeot thetable ofthe pspncepate caida N ee a.
. out tal {7 5 ol the ok the
_ Gestaplenge gnibetamedapicec e 5 K F e ee


etreatpon
Bribe.


zügen a
Pim. ih. c.


ext. xxxi. t.


a heauen. And God


and moꝛneng
odlarde: let the
derhe


cheerth.
brought


Che kyil boke of Hotes caller
cenelis.


created greate whales a
all maner of creatures p lpũe a mouẽ᷑ / which
the waters brought koch in their kondes ¢
all maner of kedered koules in their kyndeg. 5
And God lawe that it was good:¢ Govier a. gere label
fen thens lapinge: Srowe ¢ multpplpe GFL cynge tane fox
the waters of the lees and let the koulesmul encreatynge 4.
tpplpe bpon the erth. And ko of the euenynge wultwipenge.
and moznynge was made the kylth dave.

And Godkapderlet che eve bynge lozthly
uynge creatures in chetrkpndes : catell and
wozmes ¢ beattes oF p erth in their kyndes /
5 it came to pate, And God made the bea⸗


tes ol the erth in cheir kyndes / and catell in


their kindes / all maner wormes ob the erth


in cheir kyndes e God lawe z it was good.


cert, A
keene utter dhe peine oF ub creaceD ee
hethem.


And gralle kor to eate / d euen lo it was. And Deut. ri. s
od behelde all that he had nude / and foo excl e
they were erceadpnge goodrandlookthe eue⸗ Varo n
nynge ¢ moznpng was made the fprte Daye,

Che Chapter that went before is here repeted

agapnesthe halowing of the Saboth bape: thefoure


~ Floudes ok paradpte: The lettynge in or man in para


Andfoit was.

Ipghtesa te torule thenaye/ e
8 lee lyght to rule the nyght:a he made ſter
res allo. And sod pur them in the kyymameẽt
or heauen to type vpon the erth / ard to rule
the daye am ie nygůt: a todeuyde the lyaht


krom darchurſle. And God fave that it was


d. vi. d


good: and fo vi: the euenynge and moꝛmynge


was made thr fourth pave,

And God cpder let $ water brynge forth

creatures that mouee haue lpte / z koules foꝛ
tmament


to flee ouer the erch vnder the


betes the tree of knowledge ns Fozbydden hem: how
dam named all creatures; the creacpon of Gua: the
inttitut pon of marpage.

Che.iſ.


2
peh heb b. Wie here es
feuenthdaye eo all bis works tobe) he had rg es aant
made, And Sod' bleed the Ceueth daye / ache n win
elanctykped it / koꝛ in it he reſted krom all hys u nch
wolkes which bebad created andnade. scence n
Chele are the generacyog ok heauẽ a ert) romachetotaye
when they were created / in the tyme thé che aso dedicatee
Losde Gud created heauen Gerth and alt dhe hne


ar Gyzubbes of the bade eine cbe wer auh e


and. x.b.


Adam.


erty. Ind all z herbes ok the kelde betoyethey
Eppange/ fo2 use Loide Godhad vet tent no
apne bpd the erth / nether was there pet any
e Supten, x. a. man to tile p; erch. But there arole a myſte
Cobi.vig.b. out ol the


Sick. xh b the exth: the Lode God“ (ope man /


=
*


3 ardeteanelb che women. he Ceepte the
Some dyn ere neee g,
radile. Chia oure faupour is pꝛompled. 8


D/ K watered aflthe face ok


Beué ofthermoulse of teeth, ebzetheninto ayy


2 a. n bys face the brech oklyke. Dol ma was made

27. C0. rv. t. ä kupnge loulc. 5

ci Che Loꝛde God allo planted a garden in
Eden from the begpimynge / chere he lette
man tohõ he had fozmeo. andthe Loꝛde God
made to ſpꝛynge out of the erth / all maner
trees bewtr tui tothe lygyt and plealant to

c. pꝛoler, ih. t eate / the · tree of ipfe in myddd orß garde:

Apocalt.g. b. g allo the tree of ünowledge or good Genel,


e. Eden ſygni
fleth reer gr


*Gccli. xxtiij d


e trees OF the garden le thou egte:


the Cerpét was fotpiler cha all
fpebeatiev tte tei tobe he
L
Te
pent ofthe frute of the trees inthe Garde we


on


etre ol knowledge of good a bad dynge. And tobe of thi


ina b &hat ufd
God bes pielentt.


gau
onto the koules of g apze/ebntoalt And
~ mance beattes of the kelde. But ther was no g


War x a. phe.
v. g. i.tcoꝛ. di. d


.


9 andwered Ehe @ ©
woman whych thou to bere me com⸗
the tobe me of che tree / a J ate, And the
bonito che :


fapoebnto the terpẽt:
becaule thou hake ſo dane mofte curled be
thou ok all cated ¢ of all beaſtes of the felde:
bpon chr belp ait thou go: and erth thalt
SO EAR NRE HER Roars


dilpapz 15 is curted.
wall Lame;


thutacl / Cut


apde e ch
bys


genera
ch / Heth and


40


N
not dg


ne
ood and holde thou “Ea ibe ‘
hand face of che erth / a krõ thy ante mul J hyde
q mutt be toi e anda vaga
bunde vpon the erth: Moꝛeouer wholoeuer


e Kere
ia eanraas


me. Andthe Loꝛde lav


bem
je Face oF


a


1


.
a gat en e de :


e they
nobis


pen anten onto bys pues ag
care my bopce ve wyueg oF Lamecl


a ſbe bare a tonne ecalied
aij,


5


— a Genelis,


hys name fo2 Sodſeg e
ee Waden aan Aanewwpne Flore we dr dung hanes


e
at a ſonne / Uy
Karger eno Enos. And in that trme began men
Lorde is tore s “call on the name ofthe Loꝛde.
auger allehyn⸗ C. Che genealogye or Adam vnto sere
ges of hym und Che v. C
pin genung A eS vis che bone ofthe
hum the bo oF man. In che dave whe God cyea-
howe aud too; ted man ¢ made him alter the lymt
Chyp that belon l Alptude of God. Wale and female
e ade ye them/¢ called thetcnames man in
bs 25 Dave when ther were created. And when
d twas an hundzede thyyty vere old he be
gat a ſonne after bys lycknelle a fmplicude:
* uta td. meg bebe e Lead
mat e ſ/ were
doedpere / bb ote K daughters, er


ral dne G10,

pere and begat fonnese daughters:¢ 25 te
hen 8 bute &. b. pere / c
5 ped. Ind Kenan lpued xx. debe ker


alaliel. And Renan after he had be⸗
an . biti. Ht toyed And. xl.


pere /a
5 a .
pere/e begat Jared And Wahalallel after


bebabbegot Jared tpued.bitj.bundzed ne


Geel hii a And Gob after)
e ulgla fir hundred pere /a be


tame Mall comforte vx:as conc


we haue about the it the Loꝛde
in Sate roamed ererbten


Hoe. b. hundoed / npnetpe ¢.b.pere/and begat


„ the dayes ol La
e e oc ned tus buries por
olde / he begat denn, an ud

ehe ebe


e the 0
l not all 0
“Stem erate eae 2


e pet ipace an. 1558 men are


e


/ late ol the


e €

Tott was copnuptestoz allel ban commute baat es

bes wapenponche erth. 1 a
an lapde God to Moe: the ende of all

llech is come before me oz the exth is full of

Garman sree wyll deſtrope .

eerch. Mane


wyth aon, bc na And all the dares or wyth th


70 00695 9p ed gi. Ib. pere / ethan
wall. i seen


u ipke aes
gue atl bundzed and


benge
des sea ichen Machulala

Alter he had begot Namech / lyued. bit. hun⸗

ue 5 255 Se.


iche dares of Machulala
ene
a F.


Ehe length
dꝛed Area ae of tt. cs
the bepth ol it. xx.
Ge wien
cubpte copatie chalt thou kpnpſh tk. Indthe
doze ol che arcke Walt thou lette inthe iyde
eve. a eve on der mane i fal fi ungen
CCC :


33 efemale
in their kynde / z of beattes
of all 17 8 8
boden euerp thing .
to the to kepe eee
lage ebend beg id epg ad tmapbemeate
007 „ em
bothe £02 the and fo2 them: DPD:
dinge to all that od commaunded hem.


See- Tr Boe ol Hoe aa i dane erh


22 5 ; tif.


were allche e. Chern.
ee
oe EU ee a arne bn a fhe
bung en 2 Soe c
Ache toed eee e ;
fen er eee ‘an —
all aner of catell itt cheir or rue


bres Wende al naneroc wormen thar urpe bps ep tet


the erty in chetr kynde / a all maner ol byzdes wall waters
inthere hende e an mumer or Fowles what Co Sone toe ann
euer had keders. And they came vnto becher. the
to $ arcke by couples /of all llech b had bzeth rioune,
ol lpfe in it. andther chat came / canie malee
tie La ga ‘Ob,

vm. e cut 102€
edb woo wear ace neren 1

e
bare vp the arcke / Gewalten ck
the erch. And che water pꝛeuapled Sew i
4 44 the erthse the arcke wes,
bpontye coppe of the waters. 4 no thet
ters pꝛeuapledexc de bp ch 600
poe eg nie tid te Are
er äliche pa . ere cover

cuurtes he pꝛeuapled the witer
e en werd cone

ch that moued on the erth / bothe
besten tuo beatie per ed wyth all


at had the breth ol nien che noctrels of it
mol gut all HAL wis ondrpelande dred. pen. time
Chug deſtroped all that was vpon the 5

erty / boch man / beaſtes / wo mes ¢ foules oF

the ayꝛe / ſo that they were deſtroyed krö the

erthllaue Hoe was relerued only e they that

e were with him in the arcke. And the waters

i preuapico ops the erth an hundzeda. daes.

r the Cent th ol the rau ¢ the doue Por

0 Warchehe oeh backe chen n

Ice


4 2 crepte on the erth a amen: ſo that all


egdes wall ehecatelt that were
N Keep n bpd ge


Les for opens
i went out / euer
ai, = Gong


and kyll the erth. Che keare als S. wih.
e dꝛede of pow be vpon all bea⸗
dies of the erth / z vpõ all foules of the apꝛe /
gbpanall that crepety on the erth / ard vpon
all krches of the lee / wypche are geuen onto
poure handes. And all that mouth pon the
erth baupng iple / hall be poure meate: Euẽ
as the herbes ſogeue q vou all thing.
e.
oz berelp the * bloude of pou wherin : Lene g


hd 4
poure Ixues ave wyll g requpꝛe: Euen of the. n
ebe bande ofall beattes wyll A requypzett/ gokcrg. —


"he


Pp
Gene. lcd. Pet
Ae 5 erth.


together.
8 d Hoe made an aulter vnto the Loꝛde
bn. rl. g toke of all maner of * clene beackes / ¢ all
2. Che And Maner ok lene foules/ a offved lacrilice bpd
tuclignge of Cheaulter, And the Wozde * fmeliyd a Cwere
Favour 626s the Tauour /a apd in bys hert: J well henceforth
alowice of the no moze cure the ert foz mannes Cake kot
Se eat ne Saar ot
OTK Ete e bere m. Mon
Wee. un en nen tanh a r Tuc)
3 as J haue done. Nether Hall Cowpnge tyme
andharuelk / colde andhete / lomer and wyn⸗
ter / dape and nyght cealle / as lunge as the
erty endureth.


God bleffeth Por and hys lonneg Be fozbyddeth to
Seeder e
o mates blonde. The lawe of the werde de mak
A tournaunt that he dettrope the woꝛid no moze
by water / and geucth the rapnebowe as a toheng con
Firmacyon of the fame. Moe in bꝛoncktn / and Oam vn
rouet eth hem / and getteth bis rurle.


che. ir. Chapter.


the hande of man and ok the hande of euerr broden min
mannes bzother wyll J requpze the Ife of «hat peal
man: fo that he whpch chedech manes bioude 2 — —
thal haue his bloun then bp man agapne:tor mache len
God* made man after bys awne lychnelle. ure ne
Se that ve encreave/e ware / be occupped eue d
pon the erth / and multypive therin,

Furthermoze God (paßte bnto Noe and to
his fonnes with hm / lapinge: Dee IAmale i
amp bond with vou ¢ poure feed alter you /a ens. dg


pere in the cloudeg. And than welt J thenke
bpon mp teſtament whyche N haue made be⸗
tiene me and vo / and all that krueth what
toeuer fet) it be. Hothat hencekoꝛth there . Ecell. uz
Wall be nomoze waters to make a floud to g
deſtrope all fle.
Che bowe halbe in the cloudes /a J weit
loke bpd it / o remembꝛe the eucriattyng te⸗
ftament betwene God a allthat Ipueth bps
the erth / what foener lech it be. And God
fade vnto Hoe: Thys is che tygne ol thete⸗
ſtamẽt which haue made betwene me and
all flech thatis prays
Che tonnes of Moe that came out ol che


eth arche were: Dem Pam and Japhet). And


Ham he is the father ol Canaan. hele are
che. tij. fonnes ol Noe / and of thele was alt
the woꝛde ouertpꝛed.

And Noe bernge anbutband man / went
toꝛth e planted a brnererde / e dꝛache of the


Genelis.


red and .
nee tomes of han were: Chus
Serre dn Feu


sei gus. Mabe
L on


OF Ls 557
8 rf


ob oth /K Cas
se aaa
18 a great erte. And Mine bega


Ludim / Enamim / Leabim / Haphtuhim / pa C

thaulim ¢ Calluhim: rom whence came the

Pllpſtyns / and the Capththerrnes.
Canaan alto begat Sidon his eldeſt donne

e Heth /Febuli/eEmozt/ Girgoli / Pim / ark /

Dint / aruadt / demart a Ha „Andakter


Ward Oprlige the hynveds of the Cananptes.


Andche coſtes of the Cananptes were from
Spoon tyil thou come to Gerara a to Ata /æ
teil thou come to Dodoma / Gomorra / Ada⸗
ma Seboim / euẽ vnto Lata, Chele were the
chpldzen ol Ham in their kynredes / tonges /
landes and nacpong.

And Sem the father of all the chyldꝛen ol


And Eber / g che eldelt bꝛocher ol Japheth begat


chridzẽ alto. Andhys Cornes were glam, al⸗
kur / Arphachlad / Lud a Aram. Andthe chyl⸗
Ten ok Aram tweresoss/Dul/ ether aaas. 2


And Arphachlad begat Bala / ¢ Bala be- Pare. U


gat Eber. And Eber begat two fonnes. The
names of the one was Peleg /foz in hys tyme
the erch was deurded. And the name of bps
Wagen ke ain

FJaketan begat Almodad / Daleph / Pyꝛar⸗
mioneth / Jarah / Hadozam /ailal / Pinela /
Obal / a bimael / Scha / Ophir / Heuila ¢Fo
bab. All thete are the lonnes ol Janetan. And
the dwellynge of them was fd Mela vntyll
thou come bnto Sephara a mountayne ok
the eaſt lande Chele are the fonnes of Sent
in their kynredes / languages / contrees and
nacpös. E hele are the yntedes ol te lonnes
ol Hoe / in their generacvons ¢ naciong. And
ol thele came the people p were in the woꝛld
alter the lloude.

Che buplopng of the tower of Wabel. The conkn

not tonges. Che generacpon ok hem the lonne of
Hoe vntpll Abzä which goeth with Lot vnto haran.

er =T


dwelled. And thep lapde one toanother: come


was on /let vs make bzycke a burne it with kpꝛe.


Do bꝛycke was their ſtone and liyme was
their mozter. And they larde: Come on / let vs
bupſde vs a cyte d atoure /p che toppe max
teach vnto heauẽ. And let vs make vs a name
Foz perauenture we tall be tratered abzude

: a ilij. ouer


242


Genelis.


Lode came: downe
had bupived anv te Lene
n he rache a, fapbe:Soee/ the people ig one and haue one
moge men hat amonge them all. And thrs haue ther
ned to ür done: began tobo/ and wl not beau of from all
edo bebone: chat cher haute purnaled to da. Come on/ let
Thewpnge hom bs delcende / and mpngell ther: tonge euen
felfepretentas chere / chat one vnderlkande not what ano⸗
bene enden hus the Lorde Luhe ee
bonne, lein from chene yon. all the erty. And they let
e
md. c. xlit. a.
Ace chere confoundenthe tͤge or allthe wonlde.
teinot hat ul And hecaute tac che Lo de From thence ka
» tymes-butone kredchem abzode pon allche erth.
chu be e, Chele are the genevactds of Den: Sem
eth ym celee was anhundzed pere olde a begat Arphach⸗
and Co been fa sy pere after the Eloude, And Kdemkrued
dee ne EEL He Hed Ck nt
.. b 5b Airhachlab d rkg. pece@ pe.
S gat dann ¢leucpatterbebadbegat sala
eile guter, u Herdzed rere g ü a begat formes adaugg
kers denne olte ters. And ala wag. rr. pere old and begat
the geneeacion budget 15 Vegas obe
of Capnan / the 4
tuba ees eber FHI Pee oe De
the Goines ve Sat Peleg/Glpucd arterye had begot Peleg
at aaa ampel. e eae Cone
ie xxx · .
Zb ech whenhe was rrr. pere olde be
gat Regu / a lyued atter he had begot Regu
indeed g ar. pere“ begat flonnes Adaugh


pere ok age. In
ce. ij. g.


telg. And Regu whe he had ipued. rrxiſ. pere th


begat Serug / and lyued alter he had begot
Serug. ij. hundzed and. vij. rere / and begat
konnes and daughters.

And when Serug was . xrr. pete oldehe


907. ij hundzed pere 2 begat fonnes a daugh
keis. And Hahaz whe he was. rrix pere olde /
begat Cerah / and lpuedatter he had begot
Ceah / an hundzed and. ir. pere / and begat

tonnes and daughters.
ee eee

K bram/ .

wo amuepetearetpegencrarvisot*aera.
1, Para d. qerab begat Abjam /Pabog and Haran.
Folie. FFI. a. And begat Wot And dyedbe⸗
foze Ferah bys father inthe
tas bozne/ at wu in Chaldea. And Abzam
and Hahor tone them wyues. Abꝛams wyle
twas called Dara. And Nabors wyle Mpl⸗
Kcche doughter of Paran wh rche was fa-
. ther of Wyplca Got Jeſca. But Sarat was

* bebe. xi. c. haren / and had no Abe
ae e Sco

eld e. ir. b. q

daughter in laine / hrs tonne Abzams wpe.


.


/


begat Mahoꝛ / a lvued alter he had begot Ma


wherehe into


Andther went worth bym from uz in Chale
dea / to goo into the lande of Chanaan. Ind
cher came to Haran anddwelled there And
when Cerah was two hundꝛed pere olde and
krue he dyed in Haran. 8

CAbꝛam is blellsd of God / and goeth with Lot into
aſtraunge lande that apered to bpm in Canaan. And
Sod pꝛompleth to geue the Came lande to hym and to
his Cede. And ar ter warde goeth Abzam into Egypt s
cauſtth Savai his wyfe to tape that che is his

And che was rauplched or Pharao fo; af
aaa be


tt be a bi And
bare eee


were come intothe lande ok


into the lande tril he came onto hich
& place called Sichem / and onto the one of ron


chen inn g


Moe. And the Cananytes dwelled


by Londe ap
favd:onto thy *feed wyll


tt fybe/ and Sp ont
ed cherean auler unte


de. And than Abzam departed
tourney couthwarde.

Atter this there came a derth inthe lande.
And Abzam went doune in to Egypte / to


to
foiourne there to: bunt ings ore in tye .


lde. And thé he was come to
rei deinen . wrke.


.
iche the


Abzam,
Egypclis Cate the wann that He was very
karte. And Pharaos lodeg lawe yz allo / a
zapled by2 vnto Pharag: Ho that the was
taken into Pharaos houle / which entreated
Abꝛũ well fo2 hyꝛ lane / ſo that he had hepe
he attes, eruantes / made


Genelis, b,


Sodome. But zmen of odome were wyc

ned / e lynned exceadyngiy 0 bah b Loꝛde.
Andthe Loꝛde lapde onto Abzaham / akter

eiger departed from hym: Lpkte vp vgn: vat
wine eyes / E loke kr the place where thou Gene aba


der art northwardſlouthward/caltward a welt Jar vg n.


ward, for all' the lande whyche thou teptte
ontothe eto thy feed oz veuer. ure unde org


welle
was And Amal thy leed / as the Dil OF the cpme wythout


oa
4


20 Loꝛde.
ot allo which wee with hym had thepe/
catell and tentes: fo that the lande was not


togeier fostoertubltance ot ere
to gecher / foz ane eir rp.

3 was lo greate chat they coulde not dwell to

Bgether. And there fella trpfebetwene the

ſerdmen of A bꝛams catell / and the herdmen

Gene. ri. b ot Lots catell. Moꝛeouer the Cananpteg a

. e Pherelptes dwelled at that tyme in the

a. Che be / ande. Chan fayde A bꝛũ onto Lot: Let there

abe bp itz be no Urkkel d vaaye the}betwenc the me/

krone brother and betwene mp heromen and thrne / fo we

aincvetus/cot-be* bzethze.98 not all the hole lade befoze

nse ncpboue he? Departe J pape the Frome. Fe thou

tahe che lẽkte hande / J wyn take the

t hande J wit

hrs eres / and


erth: to that vr a man can nombze the duſt of ende : but 707
eerth chan wall chr feed alto be nombzed gan dach ut
ean walke about inthe lande /in che hn een
ſength of it g in the bzenth/ koꝛ J wpil geue bed Ero. h. C
it vnto the. Chan Abz6 toke downe his tente c. bs in che
@ wet a dwelledinthe ohegroue or Mamre vamcofa cite
be pidg che Lade. de there anal hen arb
e Loꝛde. bs
e e victoꝛy or Abs of the yee muy
Sodomptes. Lot is delpuered by Abzam. Welchile ⸗ burped. 0 40 in
dech ollreth gykten onto bam. Abzam papeth tythes ps ia 10.5
tuto Melchitedech. Ab ram hoideth nothenge of ihe Bene. ih. d.
kynge of Bodomes goodes.
¶ Che. xi. Chapter.
AIAMD ie haunted wythin a whrie /A
at Amraphel kyng of Spnear/
lrioch kynge of Ellalar / Gedozlao
2 102 Hynge of Klam and Chydeall
ipnge of the nacpong / made warre with Be
ra kynge of Hodome / a wych Birla kynge
of Gomtozra /and woth Spineab nge ol ant
‘Adama and with Semeabar Enge or Fe: ade aher lat
boim / and with the kenge of Bela / whyche delyꝛed fo: his
Bela is called Zoär. All hele came together refuge whe he
vnto the bale of Sptdoitn / which ig now the came oute of
fait tec, C welus pere were thep Cubiecte 10 Sener we
kynge Thepoglaomio2/a in ehe.riti pere rebel⸗ Gene. e
led. Therkoze in the. xitt{ ere came Redozlao
map and the hynges that were with hym / ¢
ſmote the *Raphayms in Ataroth Rarnaim d. Maphalme
ante soultmsm amt / ethe enpmsin e
SabeBariathaim ard the Worymsin their tor gpaumees-
awne mounte Heir vnto the plane ok Pha as in. h. Meg.
ran / whyche bogdzeth vponthe wyldernelle. v. p. Ec. wih
And chen turned they a came to the well or tach tpued of
iugmente whych isCades/and bote all the bett robber?
contre of the Amalechrtes / a allo the amo⸗
— ran
Chan went out the kynge of Sodome / a
the kynge of Gomoꝛra / a the kynge of Ada⸗
ma and che kynge ol ebam / a the kynge
ok Bela now called Soar. And tette their mẽ
in arap to tyght with the in the vate of pd
dym / that is to laye / wych Redoꝛlaomoꝛ the
kenge OF Clam and with Chrdeall kynge ol
the Hacions / and wyth Amvaphel kynge ol
pnear. And with a rloch kynge of Ellalar⸗
koure Bynges agenſte kpue. And that bale ol
SDrddym was Full ot uyme pyttes.
And che kynges old odome and omoꝛta
Fie / x kell there. And the relpdue Fed to the
e ee ee,
Oe


Ahram,


Sodome ¢ Gomogte and all thep2 ovtaltes/

and went ther: wave. And thep coke Lot al-

fo Abzams bzothers fone and hes goon(toz

bedr at S>opome) annnevarted chan

came one that bad efcaped/ and tolde Abzam

ewes hin . .
xen. ih. d. 0 nite pte / bother

Aner: confederate with Aba


* 2 le
C novendbzam bearoe chat hin brother was ta
abe


ben che awaße
vnto Hoba: lekte bande of


Etrnelis.


herꝛe / but one ß Wal come out of cyt


FEC
2 .
mt mae >


out ok the dozes / a card: lone bp vnto


tell cherddarrz prthau be able to ndbze the. 3a nen
Etell the ſtarrd v. ee ts tall be. kes


thy led be.


al the good /


the women allo and the people.
And as he returned agarne fd che
wo ohen ache kynge of
pm,
to miete him in the bale of aue / which now
is called kynges dale.
Than“ Melchiledech : wie Salen
ent.. brought kosch breed a wyne. Andbe bernge
c. Che gewwes the Pꝛeſte ol the molt beat ett God / bleſled
Suppose, pedemtcapinge? 2lede be ürsumethe mol
Len che donne Baber cBcd/Dottettoz of Yeaucn grt, And
Of Hoe becaute Diedied be God the mot hygheſt / which hach
he 11 after delpuered thyne enempes thy bandes,
bude pere, And ideen gaue yom epthes Ocal.
ubiet deilb. Gba faye the krnge of Spodome onto
ofAbzahamcbp Aba: & ue me the koules / atake the goode
godes piomden to thy leite. And Abzam antwered the Hynge
o ots WONT of Spodame : J locke bo mp baride ume the
b. were be Lönde God mot henhe pottetio; or heauen a
Abzam / that is eth / that wyll not take ot all that is chrne
piapled be Ar lo moche aga thzed oz a Moulachet let thou
beo belhr bates Ainet Cape / A haur made Sbyam ryche,
bene Gb“ Dauconly chat whiche the pongemen haue
asitis in@ene Caten and the partes ol the men which went
fispivs.b. with me / aner / Echol and Mamre. Let the
e. Souleg are tate their partes.
mens women F a he lande ok Canaan is pet agayne pꝛompred to
aa@ene-tlbt-¢ Ahram. Sad prompleth bym tech
e Beute. . d. zuckiepeb. The piophecpe of the bondage wherin the
chyldzen of Ilraclthuld be vnder Pharao / of their
delyurance t᷑rom the lame.


thyngebnto vo dp Men h Abꝛam ant wered: Loꝛde


Biesen ache neren our l er :


lelle / A the cater of myne houlle / tops elea-
meemtures lar ot Damalco hach a tonne. and Abzam
and (pecially mlapde: De / to me halt thou geuen no led: lo /
ab nch ar a lab home mp Houde bempneheyze.

ache OF the. beholde / che worde of the Lade pate
Lahner, onto Ab zam /daptnge: e all not be turne


laugh: bell on


aware e tonne was doune;
fella . ey ma


not onto the baue g


che aentreate the euell


-e beleueth eus th


Harel geucth Abzem ieaue to fhedgr hyr ma ie
to wyke. Agar decppled by: mapftres: te

S
aa br lde. and Ree
metyys it eopibg promple hp: Cede. And nar


Che rot. 2
—
ſanen reren whore name


ena


4


t. Chia we
went bel


no oet,, ogi
Mayde onto bp: -


ham. . G *
bes marde the Egyptian l after Abꝛain
dwellrd. r. pere in ante ele.
bertobpzbutbond Abꝛam to be his wete,
And he wente in onto Agar / the conceas
ued, And when the fate 5 the had cöcexued:
bs maſtrede was delppled in br? kyghte.
yg Than Cayoe Spatal onto Aram Chou do
. Bom tos A haue geuen me maybe in


of
105


Be


Ree hath cöceaued, y Aatndetypten in ep

1 Hayne fu ene the and nie.

itn pears dener pleat te
um che e.
2 Anm berule ara faved Foule Wher /
fled From her. And che Angell al the Lorde
follde her befpoe a fountayne ok water in the


He


7


5
1
E


#2
a8
5
=


der


that kal
jou att f God p lokeſt onme/foz lber
feth of a ſuertie fenebere $ backe parte
Atze hem p tech me.tiobertoze the called weil
Enncherkper 5 weil ol che rung P kerth me which well
'uclacid of my ig betwene Cavese Bared. And Pagar bare
faber eker bra kanne Abzs called bps fons name
1 3 ind by was
of 0D. pere old whẽ Hagar barebimgytmacl,
CAbzam is called Abzahs ¢ Sarat ts named Hara.
e
mfled. Abraham pꝛapeth To: Flmacl,
: ¶ Che. xvii. Chapter.
Hen AbzA was nynetpe pere olde
fand. ix. he Lope speateoto Ge.


penge:gam thealmpaytic
walne befoꝛe me a be bie
will make mp bonde be twene che


Genelis.


sme bmrrghte,
em- tothpöbolome:q now becaule che feeth 5 che euerla


24
vj.
2% J wyilnnutpplle § eredrngiy (a well
maße nactés ol F: ve a rng? Shall ne be
out of the. Moꝛeouer z well make my bi DE as
*bettwene ine ethe/anid thy Ceedatter che n act. vg. d.
cheir tymes to bean eueriattynge tetamẽt /
Dochat J will be cod unto the etothy tech
alter che And J wyllgeue vnto the ¢ tothe
leed alter che / che lande where in chou arte a
Uraunger: Eu all the lade of Canas /o an

Cyne potietion 8 wil be their cod.
teten derb ren ech soe Chon hee
Aiden ee ou ethy feed alterthe
h uch


ene. xxi.a.
Luce. .d. Le⸗
uf).


u. Che ſcrin
ture vlech to


foz an euerlaſtyng⸗ to call thetigne


circũcpled macy


bere: And Abzaham lade vnto God. O that h. d.
Almgel myghte lrueinthvlpahte.
The fayde God: Dara thy wife (hall *bere : ene. xvih b
che a donne in dede athou thalt call his name rx wa
And J well make my bond with him
be an cueriattyng bonde een Elna xxlig. a


allo!
bietie
ex
gato abe
bi


ag many as
o Abzahäs
kyme of their


beaks: as Godhadfapde


e he cut ok F ko
nrnetre pere olde a nyne / whẽ he ere pie


Abzaham


rechne ok his klech and his tonne


Genellss.


was. riiſ pere olde whethe fazer hime of his a


lech was crcumerſed. Che lelke lame dare
was Abrahä circſcrled c Aumael his fonne:
Andall the men in hys hoülle/ whether ther
were bonne in bys bowtie or bought wyth
money(th they were ſtraungers) were
circumcpled wyln m.
EChere apered the men vnto Abraham; Ilan is
piompled to hyn agapne / at wych Sara laughed.
The deckrucc on of the Bodomites 1s declared onto
Ayzaham.2bzabam prayeth kor them.
¶ Che. cviij. Chapter.
4 dhe dene apeateo onto em in
1 the onegroue of Ap amre as he fat
à Che beate in bis dent doze tn the heate oF tye
ok the bape is
tale for none. Ioolied: g lo / chr men ſtode not fare kro hem.
aa helge heran mete rd
the tent dope / a kell to the groũde and tayde:
Lopde vr haue Cotte fauouve in thy lrayt:
‘goo not bythy leruaunte. Let a lytle water
e kett / awalb kete g reſt poure felues
„ zudl. rede vnder the tree: nd J wyll tett a* mozlell of
inte Be pave bebe to cOEozte poure harten withall And
is vnderſtonde (Ha Goo poure wapes / lo euẽ therloze ar ve
all maner oe conte to poure feruaſſte Andtherankwered:
eg ‘mete ko: Oo euen foagthoubat fapoe. and Abzahã
1
wih n
Eee. hende fe matte cakes, And abyabilvan
vnto his beattes ¢ fett a calfe 5 was tendze
and good / a gaue it onto a vonge ma whych
made it redy attonce. Andhe coke butter and
mylene ¢ the calfe whych he had pꝛepared /
Kobe, xh. d. ¢ fett it befoze them / and code hym leite by
Judi. riß. e. them vnder the tree: and ther ate.
And they larde onto him: ndhere is Dara
thy wyfe: And he tarde : in the tent. And he
Blapde. J will coine agapne vnto the as lone
ag p krute can lyue. Ind loo: Dara thy wile
Wall haue a lonne Chat herde Hara out oF
40 tent dooze whych was behind his backe.
bahn 6 Dara were both oldeg well trpae
in age / alt cealed to be with Dara alter the
maner ag it is w wrues. And Dara laughed
inbpe ſelle fayinge: Dowd am tnareD ode /
* e tel. xrv.a wal geue my felfe tor luſt / my lo me olde.
Alfo- Kha Capd che L ode onto Abzaba-wher
foze noth Dara laughe ta
Cuettie bere a chile now whe Z


* Cyome. And Ab; t eden
onthe wape And the tozde larde: Can I hyde
kr Abpays that thinge whrch Fam aboute


dare ⸗Andhe lpkte pphis eres ard fade Wrlt th


of
all the woꝛlde do acoꝛdynge to And
the Loꝛde larde: JE J kynde in Hodome. J.
rightwes wythin the cyte / Fj wll (pare all


Loꝛde be angrpe / that A Cpeake vet / but
een once moze oniy. hat vr ten be kounde
there: And he lapde g well not deltrop them
ko; x. lake. Ind the Loꝛde went his wave as
foone as he had lekte comenynge wyth Abꝛa
ham. And Abzaha returned onto bys place.


1s Clot receaued two Angeles into bys boule. Che


fpleby luttes of the Ssovomptes . Lot 1 delpuered 2
Detpzeth to dwell in che cptre Koax. Lottes topfe 18
tozned into a ppler of (alt. Sadome is deſtroped. Loe


is dꝛonnen 6 ipeth wyth his daughters tobpeh con _


ctaued chplozen by bpm.
N.


ofthe cyte. And Lot lawe them / a


role bpko mete thé he * bowed , Sen.


bin fete tothe geoioe wü bis nee Karbe


Gentelis.


chr merrygreat / wyych thou thewwert vnto
me in faving my lyke. or I can not laue my
fel€in d moũtapns Ack lone miltoꝛtune tali
bpd me ag dpe. Beholde / here is a cite by / to
fice vnto / and it is a ſytle one:let me laue my
lelte cherin as it not a lytle one / b my foule
map lpue: And he larde to Bana che chu re
ceaued thy requett as cõcerning this thing /
that J wpll not ouerthzowe thys cytie tog
the whych thou halt lponen. Date we / and
laue chy (elfe there / koꝛ J ran donothpng tyll


fap thou be come in thither. and therkoꝛe dname


cane in
out vnto
wrth chem.


n mode ch haue kn
5. no m / chẽ will J bzynge out onto vou: do W
chẽ as it femetl pou good: Only vnto thele
m donotheng tor therfore came ther vrder
cheſhadowe ot mprote Armee fayde:come
cher. And they layde:camelt thou not into


sane


ol che cyte is called Soar. And the fone was

bpd p erth whe Lot was entred in to Boar m. n b. e
Chan the Loꝛde rapned vvon“ Sodom re. .f. Grzteh.
Gomoꝛra / bꝛymſtone a Fyre frõ the Loꝛde xvit .

out of heauẽ / a ouerthꝛewe thole cytes and

all the regis / & all that dwelled in theeytes /

Kthat that deen vpon the erth. And Lots

wels lone beypne her a was turned it £0 e

à pyllar of lalte.Abꝛaham role vp early and

got hym to the place where he tore before

the Londe / 4 Ioned toward Sodome a Go-

moꝛra toward all che londe of that cõtre.

And as he loked beholde p Muoke of § cötre

arole as it had bene the ſmohe ol a koꝛnace.


But pet whe God deſtroped the cyties ok the


what fo euer thou batt in the epte / eit
out ot thys place: koꝛ we muſt destroy
Gin. yoih. c Place /becaute > cry of che is great beroreg
onde. nherkoꝛe he bath Cent bs to deſtropit.
And Lot wet out ¢lpake vnto his fonnes
in lawe which chulde hauemariedhis dough.
terg / s fapde:ftonde vp a get vow out ofthis


regid /he thought vpon Abꝛahã: a lent Lot
Fout krö $ däger ok the ouerthzowege, whet f. et. be
he ouertbzewe  cpties where Loc dwelled. nnd dn
And Lot departed out ok Soar a dwelled urvz. F ue
inche monitayns a hrs l. doüghters Hint de. . b.
fo he keared to tarpin Soar:hedwelled ther
koze ina caue /bothe he a his Al. doughters
allo. Chũ tapdthe elder vnto p vonger : ure
er is olde / a there are no moo mien in the
erth to come in vnto bs after d maner ok all
e woꝛld. Come therkoꝛe / let vs geue oure la G
er wyne to dꝛyncke / a let vs lye wyth hvm
we may laue keed ol oure father. And they
JCaue their Father wyne to dꝛynke that ſame
nyghte. And the elder doughter went a laye


But Wherkather. And he perceaued it not nether


And as he prot
boch h 1 72


when the fave doune nether whe che role vp.

And on the moꝛowe the elder fayoe vnto d
voͤger:beholde vetternpabt layed with my ta
ther. Let bs geue him wyne to dꝛynche this
nrght alto / a gothou e lye with him / a let vs
laue teed of oure tather. Ind they gaue their
father wyne to dzinche p nyght alto. And the
ine meh ¢lape Whym. And he perceaued

not: nether when che lape Downe / nether


e when ſhe role vp. Chu were both the dough


er aden mere as typ end
ath Cownne grace in thy lobte / now make


ters ol Lot with chylde by their kather. And
the elder bare a tonne / and called hym 502
ab / which is the father of the Moabytes vn⸗
to thys dape. And the ponger bare a tonne / e
called bpm Ben amm / which is the father of
the enot Ammon pita this


ab wen zen dear mea yrtanbcoteiee
var. Che unge oF Gerar taketh awape 6 0% i


„ Gentle.


Abimel is wyfe a his . —
Mace ber e the Losde had


dwelled -clofed to /-allthe of the boute of


w@enesrgute 1 Arie of &


AND xxvi. b.
aft ata aware,
33
tohrm: De / chou art but a


og


weunedice 30g


Abimelech becaule of Saradbzabhas wife,
CHfaac is bose. Agar is cak oute wyth bye pounge
fonne Almgel. Che Abu comkozteth Agar. The


3 couenaunt bettoene Abimelech and Abraham.


called
a ate bag


a ‘ontobim.and Dara 42105

e roche : Foz

who wolde haue poe ome mela
|

13 . ce luck Loe 2
de haue bone hym a fonne in his olde

age: C. echide nnen p was mende

ham made a great feat / the tame dave that


lac was wened. Sara lawe the Conne or


poe tolde vnto Abzaha: put


all thele es in thetr eaves / and the men
C werẽ Cope al e. And Abimelech called
Abꝛahũ a lapde nto hym: what halt chou


done vnto vs / what! olfendedthe / x
thou whul peed ee


Hert eon me and on my nt
dome lo great a inne: thou halt done dedes
vnto me chat ought not to be done. And Abt
melech faydemozouer onto Abzahã
lawell thou none the to do this thinge?

2. Che feare AndAbzabha antwered. I thought chat per
or God amöge the * keare of God was not in thys
the Bebzewes place / B cher Crude flepme for my wyles
taut fun the ho kale: et tnberp deve (he vs my Cpiter / che
hour mean . ae u Aud une wied
that te oe my wpte. And alter oo Sund
Datogape chat e ae UL OF np fathers boute,
deln e onen Ch ys hyndneſle Walt thou
eee Se eine
to the father, 2

Chan toke .


e

ae bee che / dwell where it
nee e belt. And vnto faye:
3 e e Sere


ces of
d. Touerpnge a d c
. are wpeheh ard bntoall men


chinge that
e a thee 55


Cyghte,
ung Lopde fapoe vnto Abzahä: ee


Baus bate /becaute of the ladd g ot thy
moe Babe all that Dara bath Ca


„hat baat peatebpr e stnac al


p feed be called, Mozeouer of che fonne of,
chr lend. ne a mn / nea


— bp early tates


bondw
caule he is
And Abz


29 . Peni with Kuß egaue,
topth toca aivoyatent era And
5 ware. And We


e wüdzed in
e
abu) cect c latt her out of agent


19250


dete
4220 10 555 — —
un dee toe Dogars


Aa 1854 $


“ab fo ebase 600


zaham.


Sine rb. pro


dhe went ¢ klled the boten with water and
e the bope dernle. And God was wyth
Bead, lad / ahe grewe and dweldin the wylder⸗
neue / a became an archer. Andhe dweldin
che wyddernelle or Pharan. And his mother
gott him a wyfe out or the land of Egypte,
And it chaunced the fame ſleaton / chat Abi⸗
miele 4 Phicoll his cere captayne ſpane
bzahs laping : Goo ts mpl the mall
Spat hes bod sete benen bn r
kuẽ here by God / chat tou wylt nothurtme
no: mp clyprdze/ noꝛ np cheldꝛens chplozen,


Fo ety eee :


tre where thou art a ctraunger /acozopnge
vntothe fic that Ahaue ewes the.
Shen ge beben gehe e


And bꝛaham rebuke a bimelech fora


well of water / which btmelechs teruatites
had tank awape. and Abimelech antwered
Awyſt not whodrdit: Allo thou toldeſt me
not / nether herde J ol it / but chys dave. and
2500800 coke ſhepe and oren e gaue them
vnto Abimelech. Aud chey made both of thé
a bonde together. And Abzahant (ett. bij.
lambes bp thé ſelues. And Abimelech larde . tb!
vnto Abzahã: what meane chele. vi. —
which thou haſt let by the lelues. And he
kwered. bfi. bes caltthou take ofmy!
that it maxe be a wytnelle vntome / ay 8
Bene ent well: wherkoꝛe the place
called Berleba / becaule they Cware both
ok thẽ. Thus made they a bondẽ to gether at
Berleba. abs abinteieeya Poical bis chefe
Captapne role bp a turned agapne bnto the
Lande of se bla. And Abzahä piäted
fame of he Lome toe curtlange er
0; ecuerlattynge
Phlliſtin lande a longẽ alan.


A. Che fayth of Abzaham is pꝛoued im o
farsa none — spunea f
generãtpon ot Hachoꝛ Abꝛahams brother.


e
U
Ade W opfa/@tacritycedyim there kon adacrt


wyl
che And in thy feed hall a


Genelis,


. — atoke Eyre in his bane aa impke.
went both of them together.
ber d tear onto w be ane
cher etapre: er? Andhe ankwered
my hg nd be fayoe: He here
is Fyze and word/but where is the Hepe fog
. e ben tenia te.
pꝛourde hyma thepe fog lacrykx⸗
5 8


And whe cher came dtothe place whych
God ſhewed hym / Abzaham made an aulter
there Gdzedeo the wadd & botonde Faac his ,
fonne ela 555 onthe auiter/abouc bpoy nenne
the wodd. And Abꝛaham ſtretched forth bps
hande / ¢ tobe the knyke to haue kplled hye
konne. Chan the angell oe Loꝛde called
bare be heauẽ fay beaham Abꝛa
eantwered: ere am J. And he
kurdelereheelhr handes bpd the chylde / ne
ther do any thyng at all vnto him / to: now a . 3 notes
V imowe that thou keareſt God /in that thou that 6-4 haue
aſt not ne pte chyne only tonne frome And E. experleco
pb7abs ipteb op hrs epes ¢ lobed aboute : Pa Pod ann
and bẽholde / chere wag a ram caught by 95 Philippt ahl
hoꝛnes in a thpkette. And he wet a tole
ram and offved bpm vp koꝛ a ſacryłyce in the
fteade of his ſonne. And Abzaham calledthe
name of the place / the Conde wyll (ce-wher
fore it is a conten fapnge thes dave sin the
mounte wyll the Lozoe be ſene.
„Andthe Angell of the Loꝛde cryed onto
Abzabã fro heauẽ the feconde tre SOP: 5 a cy,
bpm kelke haue z a cwomeſkapth the Lae 21 hn 5
de becaule thou Hatt none this An 91 1115 riuß a eb vic
not ſpared thy only tonne / that er
che z multyplpe thy feed ag the tar
uen a as the onde vpũ the fee lde. wie Gene xxuz g
feed thalt pottette the Ache Hehrs enpmies.
the* nacions ol the * Gene rü a.
erth be blelled / becaule thou haſt obexed my act. jd Gala.
vopce. Do turned Abzays agayne bntohys 9».
yo e inen / a they role bp a went together
erleba And Abzaha dwelt at Werteba,


7 aoe chaunted after thefe thynges that


pong mé:byoe here
: tata eet When ane ce


agapne the
Bwodd of Bact e it bpon laat


one tolde Abzahä lapnge; Beholde / Wilchg


‘hep eat) alo sehe den an brated


ichoz: Hus bys eldeſt Conne and Bus hys
brother / and temuel the father of the Sp⸗
rang a Celed / and Paco / * il a


Abzaham.


ſedlaph / a Bethuel. And Vethuel begat Ne
ecca. heit. vii. drd ah ulcha beretoMachor
Abrahams bother. And hys concubpne cal
Jed Rheuma che bare allo Tebah / Gaham /
Chaas and Maacha.
¶ Sara dpeth ¢ is burped in the kelde that Abꝛaham
dought of Ephꝛon the tzethite.
Che. xxitj. Chapter.
ra was an hundred ¢. xrvij. pere
e (Foz co longe lyued the) a than
in aheade cyte called ebzon
the lande of Canañ Chan Abza⸗
zam came to moꝛne Dara / andto wepe Coz
er. And a bꝛaham ckode vp From the coozte/
talked wych the fonnes ol Heth layinge: J
uma ſtraungerg a kozpner amöge vou, geue
mea buremen to burpe in wyth vou chat J
map burpmp dead out of mp tyabt , Andche
chyldzen of Heth andwered Abzaham laying
vntohym Peare vs Loꝛde / thou art a pꝛynce
ol God amonge vs. In the chefelt of dure le⸗
breche burpthp dead: None ok bs Mall for
wo the bps lepulchze / that thou Muldett not
B bury thy deade theryn. Abꝛaham (ode vp /
and bowed him lelke befoze the people of the
lande the chyldzen or Heth, And he comonde
with thẽ la pinge: ge it be youre myndes that
A Mall burp my dẽade out of my tyght / heare
nie and lpene koꝛ me to Ephꝛonthe konne of
Soar:and let hym grue me the dubbyll caue
which he hath in the ende ol ys kelde kor as
moche monep as ib is woꝛth / let hym geue it
me in the pꝛelence of vou / ko a pottedtpor to
nue a 15 ee amonge the
eden ok Heth. N
Chan ph zon che Hethite anlweredd ba
ham in the audyẽce ok the chyldzẽ ol Heth a
ok all that went in at the gates ok bys cpte/
layinge: Not lo my loꝛde / but heare me: Che
lelde geuie I the / a the caue p therin is geue
Athe allo: ewe in the pretence of the lonnes
okmy people geue J it the to bury chy deede
Cin, Chan Abiaham bowed hym lelfe befoze
the people of § jande / a pale vnto Ephnõ in
a audiẽce ol the people of the cõtre faping:
pꝛape the heare me / J wyll geue Cpluer foꝛ
che keſde / take it of me /a lo well 10 Ker nix


Genelis.


ham Foz a pottettpon / in the lyght of the chl⸗
dꝛen ok Heth / aok all chat wet in at the gates
ofthe cyte And then Abꝛaham burved⸗ Hara
vs wyte in the double caue of the kelde that
Ipeth befoze Mamre / ocherwopre called cbꝛõ
inthe lande of Canaan. Andlo both the kelde
andthe caue that is therin was made pnto
Abꝛaham a lure polleũxon to bury in / of the
Connes of Heth.

‘CAbzaham maketh hys Cevuant to Cwwere, x Cendeth
him to kene a wpfe fo: Flaachis fonne. Che teruant
was ah er and brought Nebecca / whpch Jlaac
toke to his wyke


0 a
¶ Che. xriiiſ. Chapter.
Brabham was olde and ſtryken in
dapes /a the Lomehad bledledhim
in allchrnges. Andhe layde vnto
his eldelt keruaunte of his houle
had the rule ouer all g he had: »Put a. con
thvhande vnder mp thye that J mapeniane band vn
chelwere by the Londe that is od okheauẽ eb.
e adokche erch chat chou Mpalenot kane a been


wyle vnto my lonne / ok the daughters of the in coche


Canaanptes / amonge whych Jdwell. But aper

chalt goo vnto my contre and to mr kynred / wo teas

and there take a wyle onto mp donne Algac. Brun
Chan Capde the leruaunte onto him: what rivg,g,

aht the womé wyll not agree to come wyth

me vnto this lande hall J bꝛynge thy tonne

agapne onto the lade which thoũ cameſt out

ok: And Ababa fapde vnto him. bewarre ol

that / that thou beyng not my fone thyther.

Che Loꝛde God or heauẽ which toke me krõ

mp fathers houle a from the lande where

wy iu hued talon pe

unge ꝛönto thy fe Ue cen

deen he ended agel ef ee Sent.

that thou mapt take a wyte vnto my fonne

x6 thence Neuertheletle pt the womũ wyll

not agree to come with the tha walt thou

wich out dafiger of this ooth. But aboue

ching bzynge not my fonne thrther agayne,

And the teruaũt put his hand vnderthechre

of Abzays ECwareto him as cöcernpnge ?

matter. And theferuaunt tobe. x. cameſs ok


doune out the cytie
—— ae


come out to dꝛame


Lode Fodor my maſtera bzahã
good lpede and ſhewe mercy vnto
mpmaſter Ababa, Lo J ſtonde here by the
well of water and the doughters of the men
come out to dꝛawe water:


hid · ol the


aha,
che allo / 5 tame is the that thou halt o
pen fache dal my


wall J knowe b th ed merer on


mymaſter. And it came to pale per he had ar


ynge / that Rebecca came out the


dame


ge


not. And as § camels had leit dꝛynckrng he


1 eee a of halle a licle weght /


two bzacelettes korhrshandeg ol x.clcles

ae e ‘of gold / and lapde onto ber: Hebote
att thou tell me:isthere rownie in
mop tyethy fathers houle for bs to lodge in: And whe
Sind bra faye vnto him fam the daughter of Bathe
ilcha twhych che bare onto

onto hem: we


Genelis.


epee gtherbr bach


Andhrz
was


it,

am Abꝛahäs teruaunt / a the Lorde

öblelledmymaſter out or mealure / P dap ureter)

heis become greate/ebath geus bom wepe swe eye Doe
en / cpiuer a golde menterusurites mayDencrpten:e civ

ſeruauntes / camels d alles. and Sara mpien bs würn he

matters wyte bare him a lone / whẽ the was mord ehemae

Olde s bntohym bath he geue all 2 he bath. ware.

And my maſter made me were taping: thou

walt not take a wyle to my fone amoge the

Doughters ofthe Cananptes in whole lande


Idwell. But thou Halt go onto my fathers


joule and to my kynred / ¢ there tane a wyle
bnto mp lonne. Ind Jlarde onto my matter:
what pk the wyle well not folowe me? And

e larde vnto me: Che Lorde before whome

walkke / wyll lende bis angell with the / and
Prolpere thy lournep chat thou Walt tale a
‘wopte fog my lonne / ot my kynred e of my fa
thers 15 — But ¢ vt (when thou comet vn
to my kynredſthey wyl not geue p one / than
halt chou bere no perell of mpne oothe.

And came tyis dape vnto F well ¢ fapoe:
> J ode the God ol my matter Abzahave

t be lo p thou makeſt my tourney which 1
go /prolperdus behode J ftonde by chis well
ol water / and when a bitayn cometh koꝛth to
dꝛawe water / a J lape to her: geue me a lptle
water ol chr pitcher to dꝛyncke / and che layc
agapne to me dꝛyncke chou / and J wyll alto
dawe water fo7 thy camels that fame is the
wyle whomthe Loꝛde hath pꝛepared koꝛ ny


matters tonne.

Ind before J had made an ende of (peas
emmynk harte: behode Rebecca came
ahr pitcher onlyp: Mulder, a ce wee

Douné vnto the well u dzewe. And Atapde vn
toher:geue me duncke. And che made halt /
tobe doune hyꝛ pitcher fr of hys / and lapde:
deincke / z A wyll geue thy camels duncke al
10. And dzäcke / a Megauep camels deincke


3 Alden tebe aati arora


a po Dab Let 112 an gend ol
Bathuei Hahozs lonne ica bare, Sen rig. b
o im Anm 2 put b carpng ppb faccecpruice.


ringe Hyebyactiettes bvh bands: dz bowed e. Were


elke /* wozcheppedche L. Ode /a Flelled n h lie
che Lorde Coder mematter bahn which rage
yay Emme che ryght ware /to kale mPracheweplcas

fers bꝛothers doughtervnto bys tonne. cure gettynes?
Pow therfore pt ve wyll bealesmercpfuul page ug e d.
amd trutp with my macker tell me and penot 4. Gerat
fee: e ey
8 an ancwecensLaban eBathuel caping: one hm — 115
thyng és procededeus out of the L bade other that 5


brs 4 can not therfoze fay vnto che / ether good map wnowwe


520 05
emo ate age
Shau 5


bad beholde Rebecca bekoze thy face/talie whsrevnto to
ber 9900 / and let her be dp matters fonnes he att 14a
5 9 de hach lerde, And when hib en.
keruaũthearde t Me i
. 01


Abzaham,


owed hym lelle vntothe Loe / flate vpon
the erth. And the lerualit tobe koꝛth ieweiles
of fuer ¢ tewelles of gold e rarmẽt / a gaue
thé to Rebecca: but vnto hyꝛ bzother ¢ to hyꝛ
mother he gaue spyces. And then they ate a


Genelis.


et lyuedheaſtward / vntothe eat contre.
5 elearechebaheg ot


ke of Abzahã


which he rued:angundzed o. Ixxv. pere and · Senn.


thanfe.t lene ö dped / ingeludtpe agelwhe he zer d
Hablpued ough) ¢ tase pur oneobis perde on


dꝛache / boch be a the men z were w him / and ple. And hrs


tarted all nyght and role vp in the moꝛnyng.

And he lapde:let me departe vnto mymã⸗
ſter. Bit yz bꝛother and by?
let the damlell abyde with vs a while / a it be


mother larde: Which


but euen. x. dapes / and than goo thy wapes. ra hrs


And he larde onto the hender me not / lo the
Loꝛde hath pꝛolpered my tourney. Dende
me awaye chat J maye goo vnto my maſter.
G And theplapde-let vs call the dameil / a witt
what the fapth to the matter. And they called
koꝛth Rebecca / ¢fayde vntoher: welt thou

goo with this man: ind ſhe larde: ee.
SHothey let Rebecca their klter go with
her noꝛſe a A bꝛahams ſeruaunte / ¢ che men
g. Co bleſte a that were wyth hym. And ther a blelſed Ree
mans nepbour becca / a lapde vnto her: Chou art oure ſpſter
ben ie wech grote m torhoutande thoufandes (and thy
Hem goon: and feed polled 5 gatt oftheir encmpes. dnd ne
not to wagge: Decca avofe Ahh: damlels / i late thẽ vp bpd
treo fingers oe the camelg / ¢ wẽt their wave afterthe man.
üer hin. nd p leruaat tone n ebecca / awẽt his ware.
And Tenge arena from the well
v ctne. xvi. d. ol the yuynge a leynge / loz he dwelt in the
louth cötre g was gonẽ out to walke in hes
ob, ub. ert bmedptacpos befoze the euẽ tyde. And he iyct
eller the tyre OV HES epa 6 lonted/ and beholde the camels
rites lpftpnge were coming. And Rebecea ive op by; eres ⸗
vp the mynde g when the fatwe Flaac/(he ipghted ofthe ca
io God. mel / g larde vnto the teruaumt: what manis
this that cometh agaynſt v in the teld: And
the lerugunt lapdent is my maſter. And then
pe toke hyz mantel / a put it about her. And
the leruaüt tolde Jlaacall ard he had done.
Chen Iſaac bꝛoughte her in to hys er
Saras tente / and tolle Rebecca / and Whe bes
came bys wyke / a he loued her: a fo was Jla⸗

ac comkoted ouerhys mother.


are the fonnes of gimael / achele are their na


mes / in their towñes g cactels “. ri. pꝛices ofa pent


nacpig. And thete are the peres ot
fimael/anbundzede.rrrbt. pere a than he
ell (che a dped / a was larde vnto his people.
And he dweid Hd Euila vnto Dur ß is bekoꝛe
Aatrtäs. And


n bn Ws wee begetteth call fpzpng


ananp thpldzen.Abzabg dpeth ¢ geuech all his goodes


400 a Si geen wo Jae hc toe ga ma th


cob and Eau. Elau Celicth his byꝛt


ol potage.

. a ¶ Che. xxv. Chapter.
a. Concuby⸗
nes in the (cere

ture are not


Mis called


che polinger.


And when bp? cyme was come tobe delp⸗ Se


uered beholde there were two twynes in hyꝛ
wonibe. Andhe ß came out fyꝛſt was redde
ett ouer all ag it were an upeamn tice

name tau. And afterward his bꝛo
cher came out / a his hande holdyng E lau bx


worl unn u gere nnen be
te


bl .


ſobebre. rj. e. ſa


bzede a potag


Genelis.


houſholde:lo that the Phlliſttäs had enutp at

hym: in lo moche p they ſtopped g kpiled bp

cob Werth all the weile which his fathers fer-

uafites dygged in his father A bꝛahüs tyme.

Chan lapde Abimelech onto Flac: gett the

krö me, for thou art mightier chen we a great
deale. Chan Ffaac departed thente/¢ pitched

is tente in the baley Gerar / a dwelt there.


gaue
And he ate and


dꝛoncke g role bp/ A went hrs wape. And fo
Elau noe hf


is te.

ognepe oF Fac toward Abimelech. Che pro
3 his Ceede. Iluac ee
Abimeſech Foz Calleng biewyfe in (per. Che chy⸗
dong of the ſhepardes

ted. The atonemkt betwene Abimelech s Ita.


es.
And Faacdwelledin Gerar. And ß men o


tene. tij.c.
114.


. egret was great
beben puede bert bens ampovee


bypthzigh!
eof
fox the weſies. laat is comfoz


. er.
Haber Chapt in the lande /


5 oto thy
e aco rt
caute that Abzaha harkene
Sheer mene omtnadces cGmaurbeners dyggeda w


a well.
Chan came Abimelech tohymkrõ Gerar gf
ane dane and Phicollhys chefe
e. A.


e a nd Flaaclapde vnto themswher=
ee besbpr eren fate ca be fove come yecome / leyng ve hate me a haue


*tpttersfozbe feared fo call ber e
rea ee che place wuld haue put me aware fro pour Than kapde they we
nilled him kor hyr kane beraule che was bew
erkull to $ exe. Andit happened alter he had


fatutes and law


etwixte vs g the / z that we wolde make a
bee wichen thou ſbuldeſt do vs no
hurte / as we haue not touched che / and haue
done bnto the noth nge but good / alent che
atoape in peace: fo7 thou art now the bleſſed
ofthe Loꝛde And he made them a keaſt / and
thep ate a dzöcke. And they role vp by cymes
inthe mompnge / and bware one to another,
And Flagc tent them awape. Ind they depar qs
ted krom hym in peace. And that lame dare
came Jlaacs Ceruauntes / ¢ tolde hym of a
well tobi derbe opagen:an larde vnto
him / that cher had kounde water. And he cal⸗
led it Seba / wherkoꝛe the name of the cyte
i called Berteba vnto this dare.

ieth the blegynge from & lau byhis mor
Herred. u lau me. The
L bitredor San toward Jacob.
chert ch


boch


pope kor it.
ac lowed in that lande / a founde in
Kare pere an. bees sEozthe Londe
Dieflenhim/ethe man wared! / wet


when


vpon the name ok the Loꝛde / and there pit⸗vecrapneth ue
chedhys tente. Andthere Jlaacs bemaunten z


fame that the; Loꝛde was wich the / and ther hene. xl. c.
koze welnrdechar there chulde be an oothe Judi. xi b.


ww that ny
map wyl
good and


te in the
foule/ that per


2


nee


Genelis,


Plaac,. Genelis,


Elauxhated Jacob / becauſe of g blet⸗
_ Synge that bis Sather blelted hem with an a

kayde in hrs harte: Che dapes of me
 fozotne are athande / kor J well Gey my bzo
eter jacob; Andthele wozdes oF Elau bye
— e e
5 called Jacob hr; rögeſt canne / x lapde

e broüght hem, 5 t

topneaito/e be - ied .


topp or it reached vp to beaut Andle / the an
gels ol God went vp a downe vpon it / yee a
the Voꝛde tone vpon it a Capes .
e
e the God ol Ilgac: Che lande e 8
‘hou tlepets pon well 4 geucthe chplerd. - Barfuß
And thy teen Wall be ag the duſt ob the erth.
thou ſhalt Cpzeade abzode: welt / eat noꝛth ¢


e föuthAndchorowthe ach keedcau all the . che in


of the erth be bleled And (FF am ye pit han


kymedes
rie wich /a wylbe thy heperin all places whe rer ok. Gene. e


ther thou goeſt /a wyl baynge the agarne in


from to this . leaue the bntplt 3


dape: and Rebecca tpake to Paac:
e
BE Heth loche one as there are or of f

ddt lie wh dd wald bene ien.


5 11
: 1255 of ontoiLabany/:
ae e beg
“aie
bina charge,


tate
beta:


ks when Aine was awaken out ol bis depe
hetapoes e


haue made good all p J haue prompledeye..


ely d Loꝛde is in this place / a J h calleth
was not aware. And he was akrapeda lade. . — 07
ay Eeavtull is type place? tis none otier/ the houthotbe
eus the youre of Bod ) gate ot heäuk. . ages 5
ed ennie er e
toke the ſtone 5 he had lapde vnder his head / ner call the


he. xij.
eib


Atoward the eat coütre. and as he
lloked aboute beholde there was a
Iwen in the keide / and li flockes of
thepe lave herby (Fo at that well were the
watered) a there lave a great tone


1 at ß well mouth. And § maner was to being


the locke chyther / to roull the Gone fro
che welles mouch / e to water the chepe / a to
putthe fone agapne vpö the wellen m
Into bis place. And Jacob tapde onto. tyes
breche whence be pe; Andthey kayde:ok Ha
ran are we. And he fapde vnto thé: knowe xe
Laban the Conne of Hahoꝛ And thep larde:
we knowe hym. And he fapoe bnito thesis he
in Wesen ep lade: he is in good
3a bchold his doughter Mabel cornech 3
Wihe chepe. And he lapde lo tis yet a great
! band be gehend bog tyme that the ca
Guloe be gathered together: water the


in wepe / and go s Fede chem. And they karde we


Was

put it önder his hende / L aye bent pptone in
che lame place to nd he eamed: d be
a Pinetree neater che a


map not/ontyll all che flockes be rough tan
gether / athe tone be roulled fro the weſles
bai. mouth /


hurband wyll loue me. And che conceaued
eee ee 2 >
0; bes &
geb wech some afore Bc alle hien, ott soar : ee
mean. And the cõceaued pet / e bare a lonne / 2 doche
@fapdesnotw this once wil my hulband hepe slate call en
me company / becaule I haue bozne hm il. 4
fonnes:¢ therfore che called his name Leut. Gach pu he
Knee mid e veh eee Ui 1 t raat cep
Seeufer name Juda /d left bearinge. om nother lorne a8 i chan douche unde e be
CHachels Les being bothe baren gene there mepdes cob 4 ae eh hate
paca dene buifoanbergchep bare yp chy. 38c08 = peed ts e are
ae 0h ehe ee. wahtes,mentaruauntes/camels x ade.


e xxx. Chapter. 5 8
arn See
cob no che enuped hir ky⸗ n tone
fev etatbconto erh enen bes fachers pages: aban folototh 3acabs bee,
chplngé/o7 els J ain butdecd. Tha 0 i ee

eee e eee 15 3
in e he} . n 5 . 9265
Dpongh e olthy wombe? Chen the larde: here is N Connes how thep karde: Fa:


; cob bath takẽ aware gil chat wa
my marde Bilha:go in onto her p che maxe 0 ers / and r cute fathers


ure Fach
beare bpd my lappe / thatz may be encreated ‘codes bath he goté al onoute.And
by ber. And we gauc hyn Buhs bye band bande Beye mtd ene laben
1 8 maxde to wyke. And Jacob went in bnta her: tt was not toward hem gg it was in comes
neue herche ch beneide Babel 3 vate a pal nae epee
A x ein tothe ſande ers eto!
toanothermanbpde cherforewith me, aum rde lg buch alfobeardempbopce and tere 9 85 eens
wit do th ſent a call ell. 4 Lea to the felve vnto
er Cemedontobym but a kewe daes kor ? bim Ban. And Biha Bahels märde concea chepe / v lapde onto the J le pour fathers
fouehebadtober.And Jacob larde pnto ka dedagarne / and bare Jacob anotherfonne, a shepe th Wanner ac enormen
Sd ne en aue e e And Rabel karde: od is turned / and A haue tymes pat. GPozcoucr 6 God of mp father
hir. Kor the tyme appopntedme is come. made a challge wmp tylter/¢ haue e jacke pepe bene wyth me. And ve Uno we how
Chan Laban bade all men ok that place æ bpperhad. And the calledhis name: . ue lerued poure father allmpmpghe.
made a keact. And when euen was come / he — nohen Lea lawe that he had lelt bearing / 5 poure Father hach dilceaued me achad
„ tokeLeahisd er Jun 1 Un yer tobi woe toe Spilpha' dich lead bare D God futired hm
chene rl. c. K he wet; in vnte Per. And Laban gaue bn⸗ cob to wyfe. And Sofipha Leas marde bare
kohrs doughter Nea / Zliphahrs marde / to Jacab a konne. Chan lapde Lea: Goodluck:
be bir fevuatite And whe the moznpnge was an calico big natn anche l 2
come / beholde it was Lea. Chan laydehe to mapde bare Jacob another fonne. Tha lapd a ant
Haban:inbertore bat thou lapedthus wich Lea: happy am 9/foz 5 doughters wyn call res
me: dyd not J ferue the toꝛ Mahel/ wherkoze mer blelſed. And called his name Aller. biet,
Hatt chou begyled me: L aba ant wered: 1
48 not the maner of his place / to marre $ told 0 :
vogeſt be oye the ence. ale Ou Heier. ‘Lea. Cha fapowabel tox ea tun
Bean halt ti g allo be geuẽ the Foz thefer- gene miüädzagozas. 4 bo 0 Hea
were ty) thou ſhalt lerue me pet vii. peres 5 2 8
Shen dende ge en Ache be eg aber bu chene ene e Ane eh parte eve
5 a i . on the epe are
tectotpre allo an Naben gaueto Raber 5 een are laben bee. e be bene ehe al
co am 9


Ozte. rh. d Ser an daten tent oz Rahel / . geuen mie a fonne, Chertoze called che


utpe:
thea

doughter / Bilha his hardmayoe tobe! ed 12

Kalle Se er aayelalor@ Touee 85 miapmedit Sen xrbih d


8 bod morethan Lea / and erued hem ret
v. peres m


.
„ bsbenthe l ode rawe that Nen was bet
bog mar bee buten gt Habel aga ; tot ;
3 : .
smrutesroipyath lohed bps mp keibülstiö, and nowme imp hal . ae
igs ; :


Jacob, . Genelis, - Hacob.


eaten vp the price ot os Mozeouer all the ri
ches which Godhath take krö oure father / e
tg oures a dure chrldzes. How therkoze what
doeuer God hath layde vnto the / E da. Chan
Jacob role vp / a ſet hys ſonnes & wrues vy
bpd camels /d caried awar all his catell a al
bis Gubttice which he had in Melopo⸗
tamia/foz to goto Aaachig father vnta the
2 Cen. rrrvti lade of Canas. Laban was gone to pere
d. J Meg. ih. e hig chepe / a Rabel had ſtolẽ by fathers yma
danthe Senke tale awape the bert of Ka⸗
anthe Sypzlen / in p he tolde hem not 5 be
fed. Do fled he a all that he had / s made him
felfe redy / e patted ouer the rxuerg / ¢ let his
face ſtreyght toward the mounte Gilead.
Upon the chr de day akter / was it told la
ban 5 Jacob ed. Chan he toke his bzethze
‘Sh hpni ¢ kolowed alterhym . viſ dapes ſour⸗
ner / a ouer tole himattde mounte Gilead.


JO And God came to Laban the Strian in a 4%


dꝛeame bynyght / a tard vnto him: take hede
to thp leike / chat zou tpeate not to Jacob
ought raue good. And Laban ouer to 6e.
cob: M acob had pitched his tẽte ind moũte.
And Laban w his bzethzẽ pitched their tẽte
allo vpõ the mounte Gilead. Chan larde La
ban tog acob: whyhaſt thou thys done to
ſteale awape np hert and carpe awaxe mx
doughterg as though they had bene tanẽ cap
tyue tb the lwerde? wherkoze wenteſt thou
awape ſecretip vnknowne to me / and drdeſt
nottellme / s A mpght haue bꝛought the on
che ware wb mprth kongrngſtrmels ¢ bar


haue N trelpaced oꝛ what haue z otkended /

ed al my ttuffe/¢ what halt thou founde of
all thy houſbold elerch huge d. befoze thy
byethaé s mene elet *
both. Chis. xx. pere that 3 haue bene w the / ol that
thy hepe a thy gootes haue not bene barẽ / c
the rammes ok chr locke haue 0 not eaten.
What focuer wast tome of beatz brought
it not vnto che / but made it good mp Celfe: oF


myhande ts
waͤs Hollen by daye ognpght. Moꝛeouer br .
dare the hete conllüned me andthe colde by T
nygit/@my dlepe de parted kronnne eres.
Thus haue bene. rr. rere in thy houle /
ſerued the* xi. veres koꝛ thx. ij. doughters / x ent. ach
bl pere £07 thy chepe / a hon halt chageump
e warde. x. tymes. Ind except the God orm
God ol Abzahã / d God whome
Sfeareth had bene ww me:Curely thou a. Fene!
i ſent me aware now all enptie. But taser £0;


fete


pes /a halt not luttred nie to hile my chyidꝛẽ th


weg · cih · l. EMP daughters: Chou walt a kolẽ to doit
5. Par. vi. fo: Nam ableto do pou eupil. But 5 God of
ee e onto me peſterdape lapig:

take hede 6 thou lpeake not to Jacob ought

ſaue good. Amd now though thou wẽteſt thy
wape / becaule thou logett akter thy fathers,
houle / vetwherloꝛe halt thou ſtolẽ my gant?

‘Jacob ant wered ¢fapdeto Laba:becaute,


J was akraped / a thought chat thou woldeſt


Ebaue tale awaye thy doughters krome. But
with whome locuer thou kyndeſt thy godds /
let him dye here befoze oure bꝛethꝛen. ele
that thyne is byme / z take it to b :roꝛ Jacob
wyſcnot 6 Rahelhad ccolen che. Than went
Laban in to Jacobs téte/ g into Leas tẽte /


ue
peine
na. bib


Kintorit. mardes tentes: but lounde thẽ not. that 3


Chan went he out of Leas tente / a entred in


to Rahels tẽte. And Rahel toke the pmages
Kputthẽ in che camels . —


hpon the. And l aban ferche all the tẽte but


founde thé not Shan lade he to hy father:
ip loꝛde / be not ar that? can not ryſe vp


b ee ee th


ime. Spofearched he mit kounde thé not.
“Jacob was wzͤbth /f chode wich Laban.
Jacobalſo am wered and larde to him: what


in che bell. And ca
roreope rah


4
Genelis.
‘ ters / z blelled thé edeparted and went onto
aa lowedeſt after mme? Chou batt lear⸗ bis piace ope oat tem went forth on
bistournep.and the angels or God came d
judge betwi, e pee re emen
judge b fayoe: oft:
2 Wige / 0 be place/Babanat, 5
ede Een, Ponger een


mene e
bel chon requyzeit wyetherit BN (Galeoeraus ps bother bntoche and
ol Heir ö che keidor Edom. And.


xiij.


fo f chyrde / alchewwyre all that kalowed the
dioueg lapinge ol this maner le ß vetpeake
vnto €fau when ve mete him / a layde moze
duer. Beholde thy leruaunte Jacob cometty
alter vt / toꝛ he tapd. J win peale bys wꝛath
with the pꝛeſent that goth befoze me a alter
ward J well lee hem my kelke / fo peraduen⸗
ture he wyll receaue me to grace. So went
the pꝛelent befoze him and he taried all that
nyghte in the tente / x role vp d lame nighte


rm „tone hrs. il. wyues a eto we e ape


Fecne ag wet ouer the foozde Jabot.

e toke the g lent Che ouertherpuer / eCent

duer 6 he had ataried behind hunkelk alone.
And chere *watticos man with him vnto Oe. v6. l.
e bꝛeahynge ol $ dare. And when he lawe
the coulde not pꝛeuaple agarnſt him / he


mmote hrm onder the thpe / f the ſenowe ol


obs chre ſbzanke ag he wzaſtled whum,

he lardꝛlet me goo / koꝛ d dape bꝛeaneth

And he la pd: wyll not lett the goo / excepte

thou biefie nie. Andhe lapde vnto him: what

thyname? He anlwered: Jacob. Andhe
fapd:thou ſhalt be called acoh no moꝛe / but ene. xxo u


bim * Akraell. Foz thou halt wzactled wyth God


a hatt pꝛeuapled. 8
0 AChedhimtapinge, telt me thy
name. Amd he lard, wherfoze do thou ache Jude c.
alter my* name? che blelled himthere. And
acob talled p name ol p place Pheniel / koꝛ v. co fe Gb
haue fene Bod face b to tace / a yee is my face to face 1s
fe reletued And ag he went our PHentel an eure don
che tome role bps him a he haltcbbpö hes edge obig
thpe: wherfore the ch ridꝛen of Ilraell cate merh
not of the fenow ſbꝛancke vnder the thve /
vnto thys dave: becaule 5 Wetmore Jacob
vnder the thye in the lenow that chꝛonche.
CE laut Jacob art agrecd /s Jacob came into Sicht,
geber dhapter.
‘cob lite vp his eyes a lawe bys 4
bzother Elau come d whym. fi.
hundzed men. And he deupded the
childꝛen onto Lea @ onto Rabel @
dite F. mardeg. Andhe put the mayors. x
their 0 koꝛmoſt/ aM ea ¢hy2 childꝛẽ ats
ter /a Rahel and Joleph hindermolt. Andhe
went beloze thenĩ ¢ fell 7 eher
tymes / vntyll he came vnto his brother.
Elauranne to mete him a enbꝛacced um


err and fell on his necke ¢ kyſſed hin / ard they
. mente. dnp ye ch gp ar eves & ſawe the
Ather chit;


ye/e ſapd : what are there’


euer ies t
favinge. which tHouthere bat? Ano be frpd:they are
F path geuethy wre.
Chan came the mapoens forth / e dydchetr


obeplatice. Lea alto c hp chylore came and


ſerülaiſte dpb their obaplaunce. Ind laſt of all came


Jolepp & Rabel and vd their obaplaunce.


Ard he lapde what LE thou Wall the
. 4 et Ama Seana


Imett. And heantwered:to
bo. kynde


Gentlis. see


haue


doughrer e olighte not to be
. Coreen lege a


p loule ol my tonne Dichẽ lõgeth lo: poure


e Doughter: geue her bint to toxic /¢ make ma
oughtersgeueber 8


riages wos geü e


At Regi. xt.
Beſter · xv. d


E


Klebe bed


e roure doudhters /
Hallbegk bone e adwell W
all be at route nleature,dwell
-poure pofielios®
ontoby; father
velo grace in youre

een wis
e
vntome / z geue me the Panel to were.
Then che anlwered to
iche o Bemo; his father decertekullx be⸗
1
ar we wilde gelle oure fplter to one that


J. (oncivcticylep/ fon chat were aamebnto


And lau laxde:let me pet leaue lome ok
mp folie sb the And he fapne: what neadeth
it let me tynde grace in d (yghte of my loꝛd.


10 So Clauwenthis toa agave tbat fame:


dave vnto Deit. Ind Jacob tone bystour-,
ddt önnen a enten: worth
„and made booches for his catell : wherol the
mameof cane cally oucod), :
And Jacob came pealablp in tothe cite or


chem in the lande of Canaan / alter that.


e tag come krom Melovotamia /a pitched;
befoze the erte / a bought a parcell of groũd:
where he pitched hys kent / or the cyilagen ok.
Hemoz Slchẽs kather / kor anhüdzed läbes.


he made there an aufter / a there called
done 9 „ Seaupacion épeutn, Anm the lade terme


bponthe myghtie God of Irrael.
zauelchyng ol 18 Jacobs daughter by the,
made ech Mpocibegect samme titeege one
by the tones ot Jacob. eae
¶ Che. xxxiiiſ. Chapter,
Eng the Doughter of Lea whych!
ce bare vnto Jacob went outto:
tee che doughterg or the lde. nd


a. Co lye wil
bez dot 2
Gene rix. g.
5. eg · x e,


nne }
Ayerforebe hedde
come eben


v8. Only in this wyll we confentontoyour


I ye wyllbe as we be / chat all the men chyl
deen amonge pou be eircümeyted / chan wyll
we geue dure doughter to vou stake poures:
to vs / a will dwell with vou a be one people.
But e yt pe wyn notharke vnto bs to be cer
cumicpied / than wyll we take oure doughter·
€Go0 dure wapes And thet wozdes pleated C
Hemoz:a Sichem his tonne. And the vonge
m deferde not fo2 todo the e / becaute
he hada luſttegacobs doughter he was allo
mot fect by of all that were in bys fathers
houle.Thäthemoz ¢ Sptchem went onto the
gate oßthetr cyte / a comened wyth the men
ok their cyte faving: thele men are peatable
with vs / a wp dwell inthe lande a do


pnough for the, jet os take cher


ers
towpucs a geue thé oures: only herin wyll


they cölent onto vs koꝛ to dwell with vs a to


be one people:pt al che men childꝛẽ chat are
amonge vs be cireũcyſed as they are Cheir
goodes and cheir lubſtance a al their catel
are oures / ori let vs colente vnto the / that
cher mae dmell wychbs.


me / hat wit


booze:

uch anit
jacob: cla ark
Machel Dpeth


= arile

get the vp to Bethel / and dwell

there. And make there an aulter

vnto Godthat apeared vnto the /

when thou fleddeſt From; Elau thy brother.

Chã lapd Jacob onto his houſboldeg co all

1. Th ſerty that were with him / put away the * ſtraſige


calle alt
wea) allgopdes that are amoge pou anbimakeyoure


or pMagES/;


wh
zan ped * Debora:
waß burped benethe Bethel under an coke,
And the name ol it was called the ooke of la
tr. rh. a. mentacton. And God appeared onto Jacob


apne atter he came dut ot MPefopotamia whi


@ bleſled him a fave vnto him: thy name is

Jacob. Hot wichſtondynge thou Walt beno

b tmoze called * Jacob / but Ffrael walbe chr

name. And Co was his name called Iraell.
And God lapde vnto Jam God

growe anmiltiplpe ton people and

halt tpzynge ok the /


€ whp


ym tin che place where he taſned with him.
mp gacob fet op a marke in § place where
be talked with him:euen a pilloure ok ttoney
Kpowzed dzrnkeoüringe theron a powꝛed
allo ople therõ / called the name ol $ place
where God (pake with him / Bethel.
as bat departed from Bethel / ¢ when
ag but a feld bꝛede krõcphzath / Mahel
egã to trauell. And in trauelynge che was
in perell. And as the was in papnes ol hye
laboure the mrdwyple fapde vnto her:keare
not /fo2 thou halt haue thps konne allo.
Chen as hyꝛ loule was a departynge / that
when mult dpe:che called bis name Ben Ont. „t meg. u. v.
But bis kathercalled him! Pen amt. And hr mehrten
chusdped Ravel a was buryed in che wave ncaciye rye
to €phzath which now is called Bethlehẽ. had au rygye
And Jacob lett vp a pyller vpon hir graue / ande 19 talen
ie am gern wachen apf Into fung on foe
ches dave. And Bevel wet thence a pitched
vphis tent beyonde the toure of der. And iche. ui. c
it ced as Jirgel dwelt in z lande / that
Ruben wet elave* with Bilha his kathers v enc. lx. u.
cjcubyne / and it came to Ilraels eare. Che D
formes ol Jacob were. i in nöbze. Che tone
nes of Lea MubenFacobs eldeſt ſonne / and
Simeon / Leut / Juda Itachar / a Sabuton,
Che lonnes of Rahel:Foleph a Ben Jamin.
e ſonnes ol Bilhanahels mayde; Van a
Hepthalt. Che lonnes ol Silpha Leag mayd
Gad a ler. Chele are the tones of gacob
which were boꝛne him in Wefopotantia,
Chen Jacob went vnto Alaac hys kather
to Marea principatt cyte / ocherwyle called
Hebꝛon: where Abꝛaham e Jlaac ſogeozned
üg ſtraungers. And the dapes ol Ffaac were
an hundzed g. xxx. peres: ¢ than fell he lee c. aco ve put
e dped / and was put vnto his people beyng vnto his people
Olde and Lull ol daes. And his lonnes Erau lone m Gene.
and Jacob buried hym. n
¶ cche wines of e tau. Jacobs G lau are ryche. Che
genealogie of Elau. Glau dwelleth in the hell Steir.
Che. xxxbi. Chapter.
ele are the genergclons of Eau zl
wp fg 1995 coat tone big
pues ofthe daughters of Cana
[PZ SD Aa the daughter ol lon an He⸗
chite / and Ahalibama che daughter of Ana /
ch Ana was the lonne of dibeon an He
upte / and Palmath zlmaels daughter and, wen.erbij.a
fitter of Hebaioth. And ada bare vntoc lau /
Eliphas:and Balmath bare Reguel: And a, Wacmath⸗
Ahalibama bare Jeus / Jaelam and Mora. ache a
eleare thefonnes ok fan wiyych were aneh macher
bome him in che lande of Canaan, places 19 there
Am lau toke bys wyues / bys lonnes adyuerg names
daughters Gall the foules of hyshouteihrs an tone per
goodes and all hig catell ¢all bie lubckance an.
whych he had gott in the lande of Canan“


e awaye krom hys
front and went in ts acount 34 brother


Jatob.


ol. Wera. l. c Klan


duke Gael / dune Kozah there dukes came
ok Ahallbama the doughter of Ana claus
wyfke. Chele are the chplore of lar / a thele
are the dunes of them: which grau is called
Edom. Chele are the chudꝛẽ of Deirthe Ho


Gentlis. wet


in $ land ot Edom before th


/
Duke Kenas, dune cheman / dune Mibꝛar /
dune Magdiel uke Jram Chele be the du
kes of Edomen in heir habitacpons / in the
lande of their polleſlang. Chis Elau is the
father or the Edomptes.

necnfeth hys brethzen. Joleph became!

San a 25 Vd che da
Jacob c


rite (ye in habitoure of the lande: Lochan / ea


obal/Fibeo Ana /WDiton./ Eler a E
S pete ae the tues ar hallesche cuz


e
d etre endes Em Aud he pls 0


Den of Lothan we. e: Mont a Hemant.
Lothans tpiter was called Thymna.

Che chůͤdꝛẽ of S> obal were thele⸗Eluan /
Manapath / bal Sepho ¢ Onam. chee
esch Fibeon. Jia g Ana hrs
was that Ina that tollde the mules in p wil
demeß / as he kedhrs father Zibeons alles.
Che chyidꝛen of Ana were thele.Diton and


Abatibama $ ter or ang cheteares . bnita hem. .
chyldzen ol Pilon Pemdan efban/


L Cheran. Che chyldzen of zer N
Saen denen e eee


Dilan were a: Iran. Gyele are $ dukes:


Lothan/ dune Da


Genelis.


dure Renge o2 Walt chou repane ouer vs?
And ther hated hum pet themoze / becaute of
his dꝛeame and of his twozdes,

C And he dꝛeamed pet anocher dꝛeame a cold


ithis bꝛethꝛen tayinge:beholde / Jhaue had by


one dꝛeame moꝛe: me thought the tonne and
che moone and ri. dtarres made obeptaunce
tome. And whe he had told it vnto his father
and his bꝛethꝛen / hrs kather rebuned hem a
fapdebnto him: what meaneth this dꝛe ame
which chou haſt dꝛeamed:chall J and thy mo
cher and chy bꝛethꝛen come and fall on the
nde befoze the: Andhis bꝛethzen hated

but his kather noted the lapinge.
Piß bzechꝛen went to kepe their fathers
pe hee Sichem/andFlrael fapoe vnto Jo⸗
do notthy becthzen kepe in Aer
come that A map lend the to che. And he an⸗
eg ih. c. Iwered here an J. Andhe fapdebnto hem:
G00 fee whether it be well wichthr 2 25
€the chepe / a bꝛynge me wozde agapne. And
fent him out of the vale of Hebzon / ko to go
to Sichem. And a certayne ma tounde bem
wandꝛynge out ol his wave in the kelde / and
axed hun what he foughte. Andhe and wered:
lenke my bꝛethaẽ tell me J pꝛape che where
cher kepe ſbepe. And the manſlapde / chey are
departedhence / koz J herde the tar let vs goo
Dynto Dothan. Thus went goleph alter hrs

bꝛethzen / and founde them in Dothan.


rh,
kyled vpon hin: toꝛ he is oure bꝛother a oure

filet, Andhis bꝛethzen were content han

as the Madianites marchaunt men palled

bp / cheydꝛewe Joleph out of the pytt a lold

om onto the Ilmaelptes fog. xx. peces of cyl

üer. Ind they bꝛoughthim into Egypte.

And when Ruben came agarne ones the . nent bys
pptt and kolſde not Joleph there ſhe arent hig glorßer e wia
cloothes and went agayre vnto his bꝛethzen Specially vled
fapnge:the lad is not ponder / a whether ſhall amonge the he
4900“ Andther tohie Forephs conte F kiledchen aachen
àgocte / adrpped the coote inthe bioud. And wür the glosie
che lent that gay coote and cauled it to be of bob wan ch
bꝛought vnto their father e layd: This haue tepnedao heres
we koũde:ſe / whether it be thy onnes conte © where they
pzho.AtbeRNeWweit ping it is mp formes f, wie de
coote/a wycked beaſt hach deuoured hym / e bruch awne
Joleyh is rent in peces. And Jacob rent hys biocher.
Clothes / and put facke clothe aboute bys Gens. ge
lornes g loꝛowed Fo bys lonne a longe lea⸗

Lon. Cha came all his fonnes ¢ all his dough

ters to comtozte him. Andhe wold not be co⸗

korted but fapbe :3} wpll godounein tothe

graue vnto my lone / mournpnge. And thus

bis father wepte Foz him. And the Madtany , 40 cat cu.
kes“ lolde hun in Egppte onto Putiphara Zonpicn.z.ce
Loꝛde ol Pharaos: his cheke marſpall.


And whẽ theytawe hyma farre of befoze 1


he came at them / ther tone councell agaynſt
put gl. d. Hin / kor to llenhini ¢fapoe one to another
Beholde thys* dꝛeamer cometh / come now
and let vs dep hyin and caſt hym in to ſome
tt / and let vg Cave that Come wycked beat
ich deuoured him / and let vs lee what hrs
Dzeames wyll come to.
when Mubenherde that / he went aboute
e
not hp bin, uber
r fig. d pntothe / thedenothis*bloube but cattbint
in to this pte that is in the wpidernes and
laye nohandes pon bint: Coz he wolde haue
rrddhym out of their handes and delpuiered
Ehymtohys father agarne.


p coote that was vpon hym / and ther toe
and caſt hym in ko a pptt: But the


8 eth it that we lle dure
Fuctbg.b. his bloude tecrett come on / let vs ell hem
‘F coche Jangelltes / x iet not oure hanes be de⸗


.
Ades tone as Jolepi was came vnto pg
bys bꝛethzen / they uürppte hym out of bys hirn,


te oF ? Lord, wherfoze the Lo de llewe ori love 19
Chan fapde Judas vnto Onan: Goo in to ware in
to thy bothers wyle ¢ marpe her / ¢ ſtyꝛre twpciconens
bp feed vnto thy bot! Serpe Ona per hnowinge chat
ceaued that the feed Gulve not be bysither. the sore tert
fore whenbe went in tobys brothers topFe/topit not uspete
be fpyiien it on the grofive becaulehe wold 45,

not geue feed vnto his bꝛother. Ind p thinge

whych he drd / dplpleaten the Loꝛde / wher⸗

fozehe few hym allo. Than lapde Judas

to Thamarhys daughter in lawe: remapne

a wydow at thy fathers houle / yl ela uw

konne be growne:koz he keared leſt he chulde


bꝛethzendyd. Thus
baue dred allo / as hrs bꝛethzen dd 1 1


a olpereth Jotepy. Phar 80s
Cet Scat in pꝛelon. God hath mercpe


pon hem.
e. xxxix. Chapter.
Sc e bray onto carpe 1
g ee
jefe mar
bought him of PFmaclites wht
er. And che Loꝛde was


ont


b
1 Gent. rr. in
6j. Reg xi · e.


to wi
we gen gde bee/vecpougptithad fo


face, And 5 meat
fapde/come J prave the

kene zer ont tact washispaughtert
lawe. And the lard what wilt thou gyue me /


00.
E


5 jooze there.
daher e we be dhamed: 602 Atente d urdd
nD


ebrewe


‘


Genelis.


oley ,
J 1 de tod hemacoz⸗ to thrne ofitceagayne / a thou ſpalt delpuer


denge to there wong lapinge. Chisebmes pharaos cuppe into his hande / alter the old
Dferuaumte which ‘Houbat iber vnto vs Maner/cuch as thou dpoek when thou walt
came into me to do me chame. But asfoone. bys butlar. But thynke on me w the / when
ag I lylt bp my voyce and eyed / he lekt hs thou art in good cate / a ewe mercpe onto
net wich mie a lled out. nhen his nalter me. And maße mencion ol me to Pharao / c
bete § woozdes of bis wyle which we tade helpe to bꝛynge me out ok thys houle: for
hem lapinge alter chys maner dyd thyler⸗ was ſtollen out of che land of the Pebzues /
aunte tome ſhe dura puch ¢ here allo haue 2 done nothing at ali wher
And he toke Joleph a put him in ? pꝛytan: koze ther chulde haue put me in tothys done
euẽ in the place where the kynges . geon, nehẽ the chete baker lawe that he had
Jape bounde. And there continued he in pze⸗ well interpꝛetate it / he lapde vnto Joleph /
fon / but the Lozde was wyth Joreph ¢ the- me chought allo inn dzeame/ that J had.
wedhymmercie / a gott hym fauoure inthe wpkerbathettes on mheade. And in the vp
ſxghte of the heper ot the pꝛelon which com permoſt bathet of all manerbakemeates for
miptted to Toleuhs bande all che prefoners Pharao. And the byzves ate them out or the
P were in P pꝛelonhouſle. And what toeuer bälket vponmiphead. 4
Was done there that drd he. Andthe neperak Joleph anlweredandfapoe: this is thein
che pꝛelon iohed vnto nothynge chat was vn terpꝛetaciõ therok. Che ij. bachzettes are. i.
der his hande / becaule the L onde was wyth daes, kor thys dapk. ij. dapes chall Pharao
hyni / and becaule that what toeuer he dd / 8 tale thy heade From the/and ſyall hange the


Loꝛde made it come Iuchelptopatte,
ECFoleph erpoundeth the dꝛeamts ot the two pꝛrlo⸗
ners.


A


L th
egvpte.and Pharao
Ace ene inbps chefe
houle:euen in the pꝛelon where F was
bownd. and the cheke marchall gaue Foreph
a charge withthem / and he leruẽd them. And
they contynued a lealon in warde.
Andther dꝛeamed ether ol them in one
nyghte:both the butlar and the baker of the
linge of Egypte which were bownde in the
pꝛelon houle / ether of them his dꝛeame / and
eche mannes dꝛeame ola ſondzie zeta
clon. hen Foteph came in onto them in the
wee and Ane arenen olde / they
were be athed them lapinge / wher
foꝛe lone ve fo ſadly todape: Cher
him / we haue deeamed a dꝛeame / a haue no
inan to declare it. And Joleph lapd vnto chẽ.
Interpꝛetynge belongeth to ch od but tel me


tet. And the chele butlar tolde his dzeame to noꝛed z


Foreph and faye vntohrm. In mp dꝛeame
me thought there ſtode a bynẽ befoze me / a
inche byne were ul bꝛaunches / and it was
as though it budded / and her blolloms chott
Loth: e the grapes there of wared rype. And
{had Pharaos cuppe in my hande and tone

__ OF hegrapes ¢ wꝛonge chem into Pharaos
Ccuppe / a delxuered haraos cuppe in to hig
ande. And Fofeph larde pnto him / thisis 8
Dave : fy dene tbe Daves all Pe.

$ e dapes 4

tab Ipłt vp thyncheade / and reſtoze the bn⸗


ona tree / and the byꝛdes wall eate thy fle
krom ot the.
And it came to palle the thyꝛde daye which 5
was Pharaos! byzth dave / that he made a rut. ru.
ft onto all his teruauntes. And he lykted


2 OB hande / and hůged the chete bauer:
CUE as Joleph had interpzetated bnto them.
Potioethtonyng the chefe buttelar remen

ved not Zoleph / but koꝛgat him.

Spheres dꝛeämeg are crpounded bp Joteph. be
ismadeculer ouer all Egypt. Be hath two lonnes /
Sap and Sphꝛaun The derth begynneth in


Che. xli. Chapter.

dit kozluned at. ij. yeres ende / 5 N
a Pharao dzeatmed / c thought that
edodebrarruers lode / and that
there caine out ok the rpuer. vil.
odlp kptie & fattlledhed / and fedd in a me⸗
dowe and hym thought that. vii. other nyne
came pp alter them out of che ryuer euelka⸗
wozedand leane fleſhed a ſtode by the other
vpan $ bꝛynke of the ryuer. and the euyll ta
leane flefihcd kyne:ate vp ß. vu. wel
fausozed and katt kyne: and he awoke ther
with. And he lepte agapne and dꝛeamed the
fecond tyme that. vii. peares of coꝛne grewe
ps one ſtalke vache ¢ goodly, Ano chat. bit.
th vnne eaves blaſted wb the wynde / ſpꝛange
vpakter theme that the. vit. chynne eareg de
uowzerdthe. vit. rancke and full caves. Ind

chã Pharao awaked: a le / here is his dꝛeame js
When the momvnge came / his cpꝛete was
troubled .Andhe tent and called fo all the
Cothetapers of Egypte a all p wyle mé ther
ot / and told them dee


Joleph.


„incl. . cher made ins hatte out of * peel


none ofthe that couldeinterpzetate it vnta

rao. Chan pakethe chete butteiar vnto

nao laping. Ado remẽbꝛe mp kawte this
dape. Pharao was angrie Whigferuauntes
g put in warde in che chete marſpals houle
both me 6 the cheke baker . And we dꝛeamed
both ol vs in one nyght a ech manes dꝛeame
ok a fondzve interpꝛetacion.


Andthere was wyth vs a ponge man an


Bal. n r opp be ane


fall. And we told hem / and he declared oure


dieames to bs act to ether of oure


Genelis.


e al conliume the tande:to that d
.. Ee alene in the
land by reacon of that hüger that Hall come


alter / to it halbe exceadinge great. And as


cöcernynge thatthe dꝛeame was doubled vn

to ore aatpe tecota eme it betoneneth 6

e thenge is cevtanly prepared of God / and
at God wyll (portly bevnge it to patie,

‘Moto cherfore let Pharao powyoe ko: &

Fondertondpng ¢ wyroome / andfete

pte. And let Pha


dzeames. And as he declaredtveniontoos/ th


euen Coit came to pale J was reſtoꝛed to
mne office agapne / and he was hanged.
Chan Pharao lent and called 145 ae
fon.
cbauedhim felf and chauriged bis raymẽt / &
wet in to Pharao. And Pharab lapd onto Jo
fepl:7 haue dzeameda dzenme ono man can
interpyetate it / but J haue herde faye ok the
Pastooncas thou hearecka dꝛeame thou
doſte interpzetate it. Ind Jolepg ancwered
Phatao Capinge:Goo Wall geue Pharao an
antwere ol peace wicholit me. Pharao larde
onto Taler in mp bermemeege
ſtode bp a puer lrde ard there came out o
the rpuer.bij,fatt flethen and well FauozeD
Fyne ard kedd in che medowe And then. vil.
other kyne came bp after chem / pooze a verr
euell Fauozed ar leane fleched lo that neuer
lawe theiripke in all the lande of Egeptein
euell kauozdnede. And che. vin leane d euell
kauoped kyne ate bp the kpalt. vil katt Bene,
And when they had eaten the vp ama coutde
not percraue that chep had eaten them: for


Led Pharao e all his &


jaya vnto his fer


.
01 0
is no man of bnderckondpnge 02 of werd


they were dll as eutl fauosed ag they were che pn


at p beg e. And awoke, And Jlawe
agayne mpdzeame. viſteares ſpꝛynge out
of one talk kull and good C. bil. other cares:
wytherd / chrune a bi ted w wynd / lpꝛynge
bp afterthe And thechrnne cares deuomed
the. pit. bod eares- And Jhaue tolde it onto
the fothfave ut no man can tell me what
femeaneth Khen Jolepp lard onto Pharao


ſatnog dꝛeäines are one Und god doth daughter


avao what he is aboute to do. The
Gene pot pevesarntbe 61.400


eares are leuen vere alco / and it is but one 1


ame Line wple/ the. bit thynne a euell fa
unten jeg out after thé / are. vii.
DP cares.atye.oiemptiee biatted cares Haibe
biſ. peares or hunger Chrs ts that which F
lapde nen Pharao / 8 Hod doth (ewe Phã⸗
rao what he is aboute to do.
Beholde there all come. vj pere ol great
plenteoucnes though out all the lande of


5 1
Egypte a put


Egypte. Andchere hall arte attertgem vil. ſeph


8 olhunger. Ho 5 all the plenteoumes
eae n dhe lende t erbte. ind


„laben


ib.


bewe
＋


Gor
ot


h.
out nombre. And onto Jolepg were hame.
Scene beloꝛe 5 pe apna
Bath the doughter of Putiphar pꝛealt of
On / barẽ vnto him. And he called the nanie


Ge. loi. ot the Evatt tonne Manaſbe / co Godllarde


heſhath made me to gett all mx laboure and
ali my fathers houchold. Che lecande called
be epbzaim / Foz Godllarde he) bath cauled
ine to growe in the lande or my trouble.
And when the. vil. eres ot plenteoutnes
that was in the land of Egypte were ended
than came the. bij. eres of* derth / aco:dyng
as Joleph had larde. And z derth was in all
lardes: but in the land ol Egypte was there
koode. rohen now all the iande of Egypt
to hunger / chan erped the people to
harao foz bꝛead. And Pharao farde nto
all Egvpte: goo vnto Joſeph / and what he
fapth to vou that doo. And when the derth
was thoꝛow out all che land / Joſeph opened
all that was in the cyties and tolde vnto che
Egppcrans. And hunger waren loze in the
lande of Egypte. And all countrees came to
Egypte to Joleph koꝛ to bye come: becaule
che hunger was lo foze in all landes.
Colephs biethzen come into Egppte to bye comes
And he hnoweth them and tryeth them. Apmeor is
putin pꝛyton the other retogne to their kather to
ketche Bend amin. bis Father is tothe to let hyin go⸗
but at the lad be graunted tt.
¶ Che. xliſ. Chapter.
en Jacob lawe that there was
A come to belolde in Egypt / he lard
into hys lonnes: wh are pe neg⸗
gent? beholde / J haue hearde ?
ere is comme to be lolde in Egypte.Gete
pou thyther and bye vs cone kromthence ?
we mape lxue a not dre. Do went Jolephs
ten bzethzen doune to bye coꝛne in E&gypte⸗
fo2 Benq amin Forephs bꝛother woſd notga
cob lende ww bys other brethzen:fo2 be larde:
fome myctoꝛtune myght happen hym.
Andche ſonnes of krael came to bye come
alone that cãme / fo2 there was derth
allo in the lande of Canas. Ind Foteph was
eum the ſande and foie come to all
eof the land = abs bretti came/
i att on the grounde befoze him when
lawe bis bꝛethzẽ ſhe knewe the ⸗ Wut
zunge bnto chem / and tpake rughly


Genet,


nofpies.andbe Capdbnto them:napberely/
but euen to be where the lande is tocahers
poure comynge. And they larde: we thy fers
uauntes ate riſ bꝛethien / che tones or one
man in the lande of Canaan. Che vongeſt is c
pet with dure kather / and one no mid Woteth
where he is Joleph larde onto them that is
itchat J larde vnto von / chat ve are Cuvelye
Gpies Here by ve wall be pꝛoued. Foz by the
Ipfe of Pharao/ve wall not goohence until
poure põgeſt bꝛother be come hither „ende
therfoze one of vou and tect yom ett youre
bother / ve walbe in pꝛealon in d meane
feafon.. And thereby chall poure woꝛdes be
pꝛoued / whether there be any trueth in you:
ges bp the Ipfe of Pharao / pe are but tpies

ind he put them in warde thee daves.

And Jolfeph Capoe vnto che the thyzd dave:


xvij.


his doo andlpute / fo J Feave God. FE pe


meane nohurte / let one of poure bꝛethiẽ be
bounde in the pꝛealon / and goo ve a pzynge
thenecefarte toode vnto youre houſholdes /
and bꝛynge voure pongeſt bzother onto me:
chat dure woꝛdes mape be beleued / that
pe dpe not. And they dyd lo.

Chan they ſapde one toa nother we haue
perelp lvnned agaynſt oure bꝛother / in that
we lawe the angupch of bys tou when he
befought vs / a wold not hrare him: therkoꝛe
ecu troubpli come vpon vs. Muben atta

ered them taxinge.carde J not vnto vou ß
pe ſhunde not! lynne agapnit the lad hut ye
wolde not heare. And now verelplee /yys *s


en. xxxvij. 9
Co reguper


bloudets* requpzed. They were not aware che lone of


that Jo
vnto them by an interpꝛeter. And he turned ¢
krom them a wepte / and than turned to them


vnderſtonde them koꝛhe lpalie the hade of ang


ther / 15 to
take betty


gtaunce of the


Agayne a comened with thẽ / a tone out dy .
meon from amonge them and bownde, bene bun aaa


befoze their eyes /a cömaundedto kyll their
kackes wyth cope / andto put euerx mans


eres. w. a.


lal. ix. b and


money bys e wert t . vitale 24%


to lpende by the wave. And to it was done
tothem. And ther laded their alles wyth the
cone & departed thence. And as one ok them
opened his ſacke / lor to geue his alle pꝛauen
der in the Inne, he lppẽd uus moncy in hes
lachs mouth. And he faydebnto his bꝛethzé:
my moner is reſto ed me agapne / a is cue in
my lackes mouth. Chan their hartes farled
them / and were aſtoynped and larde one to a
nother haw cometh ft chatcbod dealeth thus
vs. Andchey came bntoFacob their Fa ꝙ


wyth
ther bnto the land of canaan and tolde him


uaũtes are come. e are ali one mans lon⸗
net / s meane Fuel / and thx leruauntez are


all p had happened them tapinge. Che lorde
ofthe lande kpake rughly to vs / and toe bs
for Cppes to kerche the coũtre. And we larde
vnto him: we meane truely a are noſcppes.
we be. xl. bꝛethꝛen formes of oure father

che is aware / andthe rongelt e 5 uth


mite father in the lande of Cangan. Ind the
loꝛde ol che countre larde vnto vs: here by
ball A knowe pe ve meane truelpdleaue one
ok poute bꝛethzẽ here wrth me / a take toode
neceflary fo2 voure houcholdes and get pou
aaper¢ bupnge poure po ett bdcher bn-
tome. anvtbereby Wall's unowe 5 pe are
no ſpyes / but meane truelp: Do welt J delp
uer pou poure bother agaxn / a ve Wall cz
cuppe in the lande.


Joleph:


d ex emptied their ſarkes / behold: 6


lor money was in his cacke


And Jacob their father fapde onto thẽ: Me
haue ye robbed of my chyidꝛen: goles


atoay/and Zoymeon is awape / añd ye well ch


take Benjamin aware. Ail cheſe thynges
fall vpon me. Ruben anfwered hys father
lapinge: Spice my two fonnes / vt J bꝛrnge
him not to theagapn. Welpuerhim therfore
tompbonde / and J wpll bꝛynge hym to the
agapne: And he tapde my lonne Mail not go
downe wyth pou for his bꝛocher is dead / ¢
he is lelt alone. Moꝛeduer fome mylkoꝛtune


might happen vpon him bythe ware which and
ve ra ts whuld ' pe lnngemegiar bend 1


60 ur he toith fozotwe unto the graut.
den e 8 af haper bese hy epretorned with
115 deathſas in goeth alpde and wepeih. hey Feat together ·
The. xliit. Chapter.
che derch waredtozein i land.


Gaxxxvig.


nd woe ther had cate vp g come

which ther brought outol p lande

ok Egrpte / their kather layne vnto

them. goo agapne ¢ by vs a lxtie Food. Chan

lapde Juda onto him: the ma dꝛd teſtitxe vn

Gene. fil. d. fo bg lapinge* lone ) peer notmo face ex⸗

cepte poure bꝛother be w you. Cherfoze pk

thou wylt lende dure bother wos / we wyll

go a bye d food. But vr thou wylt not tende

him / we wyll not goo: koz the man lade vn⸗

to ver loke that ve lee not my face / excepte

poure bother be with vou. And Ilrael tayo:

whertoze delt ve fo cruellx We / as to tell

che man b pehad et another brother? And

B they larde: The ma acked vs of oure kynred

fapinge: is poure father pet alyue: haue ve

not another bꝛother⸗ Ind we tolde him acoz

drng to chele word. How cowid we bnowe

6 he wold brdvs bzpngeoure bꝛotherdowne

Wg. Ch tard Juda bnto J crael his facher:

Sendthe lad wie / a we wyll ryte a goo/

we maye Ipue g not dye both we thou d allo

dure chyldꝛen. I wylbe fuertpe toꝛ hym / and

ol mp handes requrze hin bee him
bn. Flltön not tothe Fett hym before:

ls jet me bere the blame ko euer. For except

we had made ches tarxeng: by chrs we had


gpftes. peda u delpuertd ont al pzpcbn. Joer b FP:


e ebes / „ ths ther ancwwerede ch.


Genelis


> 5 Sink *
bene there twyle and come agarne. *
Than their father gcrael t axd vnto them:
yt it mut nedd be Conow:than do thus / take C
ofthe belt krutes ok the lande in poure vel⸗
elles / and bzynge the mé a pꝛelent / a curte⸗
fpe bawime / and a curtelpe of honpApices &
mpꝛre / dates a almdes. Andtake as moch
moner moze wyth vou. Andthe monepthat
wat bꝛought agapne in poure aches / take
itagayne worth vou / peraduenture it was
fome ouercpghte.
Cale allo youre brother with vou / a arple
g goo agarne to the ma and God dent an
geue vou mercie in the ſyghte of thema and
fend you poure other bꝛocher and allo Ben⸗
Jamin / and J wylbe as a man robbed or his


ldzen. :

Thus tone they the pꝛelent and twyle fo
moch moze monep with them / and Ben Za⸗
min. And role vp / went do wne to Egypt / ¢
pꝛelented thé lelte to Joleph. when Joleph D
fate Ben Jamin with them he tardẽ to the
ruelar of his houle: bꝛynge thete men honie
alley and make rede: fo2 they (hall dyne w


ought them in to Jo
thep were brought to


monep that came in oure lackes mouthes at
nk tyme / are we bꝛought / to pyke a qua
rell with bs and to lave fome thinge to cure ·
charge to bypnge vs in bi eoure alles
allo. Chertoze came theytoche man ö was
the ruelar over Jolephs boule / acomened e
wyth him at the dooze and layde.

On / we came hyther at the zt tyme to
bye food / a as we canie to an inne. ¢ opened


oure faches:beholde / euerr mannes moner w@ene.


was in hys Cache full werghte: But we
haw brought it agerne w b8/¢ other mony
aue we bꝛought alto in oure handes / to bre
koode / but we can nat tell who put oure mo⸗
ner in ure fackes Ind he larde: be of good
bau auen put yu dere
ou du
poe 1 tor’ had poure money andhe
ꝛought Sime out to the a ledthẽ in to Zo
lephs hoüͤle / a gaue thé water to wache their
tete / a gaue their ales pꝛauender: And
made kedpe their prefent agarndt Joceph
came at none ftoꝛ cher herde lar p che cbuld
drne there. eng of came home / they,
biougbt id ent into d houleto him which
they had in their hadd / a fell lat on p greũde
bekoze HimaAndbhe welcomedthé courtcouty
fapinge:is poure father? old man whych ve
told me ot / in goodhealth : a ls he pet alpue?
red: hy leruaunte oure father is
in good health / and is vet alvuc. And ther
bowed thé felues and fell to the grounde. 25


Joleph.


Ard he kpkte pp his eren a behelde his bo

cher BenFaminbis mochers fore) ¢ favo:

vm. riß. i thys youre pongeſt bother of whome pe

fapdebnto me: And lapde: Sd be mercpeult

© pneo 8 my lone. Ind Jolepb made batt (Foz

ig. den · i. d. Ih hert dyd melt vpõ his bother) a cought

where to wepe / centred in tohis chambꝛe /

toꝛ to wepe there. Andhe walſhedhys face a

came out q relrayned hym lelke / i bad lett
bead on the table. 9 25

Andther prepared £02 hem by hem tele /

Shed ere ei him henne ecaute

is map not eate bead wich the


e
en Bees to; tat isan gabhommacions thy!


uit to che Egypcians. And they latt befoze him.
seed the emdelt acoꝛdynge vnto bys age andthe
pongeſt acazvyng onto his youth. And the
men marueled amöge chem lelues.Andther
bꝛoughte rewardes vntothem krom bekoꝛe
bom: but Benjamins parte was fpue ty
mes to moch as any of chetrs. And thepate

and thepdzontie/¢ were dꝛonke with him.
( Joteph accusterh his bꝛother oF theft. Juda become

meth kurety to: Bengamm.
, Che xliti. chapter.

aiMobhe commaunded the rueler ot
vs houle lapinge: krli the mens
ches with kood / as moch asthey


cd carpe / a put euer mas maner


e mouth / a put my lyluer cuppe


in bys ba
12 ol che pongeſt and hrs


in the ſackes mon


cogne money allo. And he dpo as oleph had


faye. And in the mournypnge as ſoone agit
was Ipabte / the men were let goo wichthelr
alles. And when they were out ol the cytie a.
not pet kerre awape / Joleph fayoe vnto the
muelar of his houle: bp and folowe alter tue
men and ouertake them / and fave vnto thé:
wherkope haue ve rewarded euell ko good⸗
is that not the cuppe of which my loꝛde dern


keth / and doth he not pꝛrophelpe therin? ve


haue euelldone that ehaue dane.

And he ouertone them and lad the fame

Paneele ne er web
obe fa 2

5 th Cetuauntes wulde doo to Be⸗


fpluer oꝛgolde⸗ wyth holo
uaumtes it be kounde let hym dpe / and let vs
allo be my loꝛdes bondmen. Andhe carde
Now therfore gcomdyng bhto youre 00706
baker halbe ele halbe my leruaũte:
ut pe / walbe harmelede.
And attonce euery mantoke downe hrs


Genelis,


xx viij.
edeſt and lekt at the vongelt. And the cuppe
was koũde in Ben Jaming lacke. Chen they
*rent their clothes /and laded eucey un hys , een xxrvült
alle and went agapne vntothe cptie. And ausn
da a hys bꝛethren came to Jolephs houle /
koꝛhe was pet there / Kthepkell before hem
on the grounde. And Joleph lade onto tye:
what dede is this which ve haue done ? wilt
re not that loch a man as A can pꝛophelye:

Chen Capde Juda: what hall we ape vn⸗
to my loꝛde / what Malt we lpeake oꝛ what


clas ercufe can we make? Godbath kollde out 6 v


wenednelke of thy leruaũtes. Beyold / boch
we andhe w whom the cuppe is kounde / are
leruauntes. And he ancwered: od fo?
bpdthat z chulde do lo / the man w whõ the
cuppe is Eounde / he walbe my lerugunte:
but go ye in peace vnto poure father.
Then Juda went vnto hum and fayoes
ob mp lozd / let thy feruatite tpeake a worde
in my loꝛdes eare / and be not wꝛooth wyth
8 thou art euen ag Pharao.
loꝛde axed his feruaunte lapinge: haue c
re a father oꝛ a bother? And we antwered
my lo de / we haue a father that is olde / ea Gene. rl. e.
ponge lad which be begat inhis age:and the *
brother of the tapde lad ig dead he ts all b 8
is let of that mother. And his father louech
penser fapoe mp lozdontobts feruatites
yenge hym vnto nie / 5 J mape tett mpne
eyes bpon him. And we anlwered my loꝛde /
that the lad coulde not goo From bys lather /
toꝛ yt he chuld leaue hrs kather he werebut
a derd man. Chan ſardeſt thou onto thy ler⸗
uafites*ercepte poure pogett bꝛother come. Gent. lh
vou / loke that ve te my kace no moare. =~
ind whẽ we came onto thy leruaũt cure
father / we chewedhym what my loꝛde had
ſapde. Aud when oure kather tapde vnto vs /
95 agapne ¢ bye vs a lptle fone: we layde /
we coulde not yoo. Meucrthelede pt dure
voũgeſte bꝛother go w vs then wyll we go /
for we mape not tee the maͤnes face excepte
oure poungett brother be thos hen larde g
thy feruatit oure father vnto vs Je hnowe
that my wyle bare metj.fonnes-Andthe one


went out front me ¢ it is ſayde ol a ſuertye


that he is toꝛne in peaces of wyld beaſtes / chen xxxvij g
and g fawe hym not fence, Ak ve chall take
chis allo awaye krom me andlome mylkoz⸗
tune happẽ bps him / chen call ye bꝛynge v Gene. xiß
v Chat ſoꝛow vnto the graue.
oy therkcze when J come to thy teruaũt
mip facher / ykthe lad be not wich me:fepinge
that his Ipfe hageth by che laddes lpfe / then
ag loone as he leech p the lad is not come /
e wyll dye. Do Mall we thy feruahhtes
the graphedde of thy leruaunt dure


man opened kaher wich tozow vnto the graue. Foꝛ I thy


-_ Nacheto the grounbe / generb
che Sno peteecpes / an began ac tbe


‘feruatit became fuertie fozthe lad vnto my
5 “father


Joleph.
Joleph. and fapde:
the agapne Iwill vete § vlameall my tele
_ Foge. Morw therfore jet mechr leruadt byoe
here fo2 the lad / and be my Lobes dandman:
end let che ladgoo home weth bis bzethzen.
G02 how can J goo vntomp father / and the
lad not wych mie: le I wulde Cee che wꝛet⸗

chednes that all cone on my father.
( Zoleyb maneth hym elfe ano vnte hrs bath t⸗
and lendeth Foz his rather,

Abe. iv. Chapter.
d Foleph coulde no longer re⸗
A krapne bekoze all themthät ſkode
abcutehym / but cömaunded that
5 they chuld gos all out from hem /
that chere ſhuld be nõ man Whim, whvle he
Sees ee arenen oe
/ fans a che
run b houe of ehargoherdeit Andbekarde onto
ps bzeih zen: J am Joleph / doth my father
pet lyue : But hys bꝛethzen coulde not an⸗
were him / koꝛ they were abalhed at his pꝛe
ſence. And Joleph fayde onto hys bzethzen:
come nee to me / and ther came nere. And he
. Actn. vil. b. Lad: J am Joleph voure bꝛother whom pe
Gene. rxxvig f lolde in to Ed xpte. And now be Ache
ther with / neiher let itteme a cruel thinge in
peure eres / p ve ſold me hyther. Foz goddrd
fend me befoze vou to laue lpfe. * soz thys
is the feconde pere of dert in the lande and
tyuẽ moo are behrnd in which there Hall ne⸗
ther be caryngenoz herueſt.

wWherkoße God tent me 5 vou to make
dn pe myghte continue in che erth
und to laue poure lpiies by a greate delpue⸗
rance. Fa nom it wag not pe that fent me
bythet/butdod:andbe bath made me father
vnto Pharao and lo:de duer all bis houſe / a
rueler in all the lande of Egypte. Mat vou c
oo to my father a tell bym / this ſapeih thp
C tonne Joleph: God hath made me loꝛde over
all Cgvpte. Come downe vnto me and tarye
not. And thou (halt dwell in the lande of Go⸗
lan and be hyme: both thou and thy chridꝛẽ /
and chy chyldꝛens chyldꝛen: and thr thepe/


Genc. d.


Genelis.


0 i te 8 Yolen teh were ae
MervAbsngebimnotbito raos houfe ? Kolephs beth,


itplealed Pharao wen Ean hist 5
And Pharao tpake onto Joſeph: ſaye vn ge


* to the poi cing tod slabde poure beeſtes


get vou hence / Ind when pe be come bnee
the lande of Canaan, take youre father and
poure houtholves a come bntome / A wyl


geue you the belt ol the land ol Egxytt / and


de ſhall eate che fatt ol the lande. And com
maunded allo This do pe: take chavettes id
vou out ofthe lane of e een ee roure chit
dꝛẽ a Foz Youre wrues: a Tee uten ce
g come. Alto / regarde not poure cult oz the
Zoodes of alt $ land of egypt cpalbe 8

And the chridzẽ of Acrae lord euen do / and
Jolepß gau idem charetees at the cömadd⸗
inent of Pharao/and gaue them bitarle alto ge
to ſpende by d wave. Andhe vnto eche
ok them chaunge of rayment but vnto Ben⸗
Janun he gau. iiſ hundzed peces ollpluer a
d. chaunge ofrapment . And vnto his father
he lent alter the Came maner x. alles laden
with good out ol Egypt / g. x. che alles laden
with coꝛne / bꝛed and meate: to ſerue hes fas
ther be the ware. Do tent hehrg biethzen
awape / and they departed. Ind he ſarde vnto
e

er

Mtache lade oF Canad uneo'sacob thers
cher / A told him laringe. ofeph is pet a lxue
and ig gouerner ouer all the land of Egxpte.
And Jacobs bert wauered forhe belcued
eee ee
‘oben he lawe the charettes wypch Joleyh
had lent to carre bim / 4 — Cpzites reut⸗
ued. And Atrael Capoe.F haue yndugh / vt o
ſeph my tonne be vet alrue: 4 well god and
te hem / ver that z dre.

racob with all his houcholde goth to Joſeph in to
S r 2 eter tates bes

at her.
*  ehesivt
SDrael toh


andbectes a all that thou halt. here well


Z make proutlyon fo; the: to there remapne
et. b. eres of berth, lelt thou and thr houl⸗
fold and all that thou batt perpch.
Beholde / youre eves do le / and the eres al⸗
ſo ot my brother Ben Jamin that I Cpeake
Dio ron mouth. Therfove tell my father ol
all my honcure which 3 haue in Egypt and
or all that ye haue lenẽ / and mate halt and
bryngeme kather hrther. CAndhe fell on
bis 19 95 Benz anuns neckea wepte / and


07 J will make ok Pagreat⸗ peoples will been
o downe wehe in to Egypt and J will alfo Mer?


zenge f bp agarne / TAoleph Call put bhi:
3 i ach rot bn d 5
ſeba. And $ fonnes ot


Joleph.


And came in to Egypte: both Jacob a all hys
feed wych hym / rs fonnes and bys Connes
Connes Whrm hrs doughters a hs tonnes
mtb Kall his ſeed bꝛoughthe w hym


into €gypte. a

B. Cheteare thenames ofthe ehrldꝛẽ of Al⸗
3 rael which came in to e / both Jacob a
beg ur g Connes*iRube Jacobs fyzttfonne pe
um rxvi achyldzen of Ruben Panoch , Pallu / Pezron
I Para. ua. and Charmi. The chyldꝛen of Srmeon: Je⸗
muel/ Jam / Ohad / Jachin / Solſar à Dau
5 + theforine ofa Cananttith woman. Che chel
. tra. bl abi of Leul@erton/ Rabath and ADerart,
as Bar. ja ghe chyldzen or; Fuva:€r/ Onan / Sela
Phares & Derah / but Er and Onan dyedin
e
ezron ¢ Hamul. Che chyldz en o at:
Cola / Phua / Job and Hemlon Che chyſdaẽ
ok Zabulon: Sered / Elon a Jaheleel. Chele
be che chyldꝛen of Lea which the bare vnto
C Jacob in Melopotamia with bys daughter
Ding. All thele foules of bys lonnes and

Doughters manie . xxx. and. itſ.
Che childꝛẽ or Gad: Siphion / waggt / Du
m / Exbon / Ert A rodi and Irelt. che chyldꝛẽ
dbu. bz. fake Aller Jenna Fetus /Fetut Erne Se
rah their cpſter. And § chplozé of Bra were
Heber and Malchtel Thele are the chuldꝛen
of Dilpha whom Laban gaue to Leabrs
nannte rb thele ſhe bare vnto Jacob in

nonibze. rot. couleg.


Che chyldꝛen ol n lacobg wyfe: Jo⸗


leph and Ben Janin. nico Joleph in ß
lande of Egypte were boꝛne: Manalles and
Cen. rl. g · Ephzaim which; Alnath the daughter of Pit
tiphar preatt of Onbaredntobim.che chil
Rez. 5 deen ots Ben Famin-wela,echer/ Abel /
aan. Gera / Haeman hi Mos, Wupim Pupum
€ Ard. Chele are the chridꝛen of rahel which
were bone vnto Jacob. xiiij. Coules all toge
cher. Che chridꝛen of Dam hulim. The cpt
den of Hepthali:Jahezeel / unt, Tezerand
Sillem. CThele are A} Connes of Biſha which
Laban gaue vnto Rabel bys daughter / and
he bare thete vnto Jacob / all together. bil.
foules. Ali the“ foules that came a c he
cob in to Egypte whych came out of

lopng (betpde bys formes wyfes) were all to⸗
ether Ir. K. vi. loules. And the fonnes ol Jo⸗
which were boꝛne himin Egypte were
tl. loules: So that all the foules of the houle

ol Jacob which came in to Egypte are. rr.

dhe tent Juda betoꝛeyrm bnto Jotert
that the wave myghte be chewed hxm̃ vnto
Solan / and they came in to the lande ol Go⸗
fan. And Jolephj made redye bys charett and
wet tomete Atrael bys father vnto Golan
@ pꝛelentedhym tele onto him / a fell on bes
necke a wepte vpö his necke a good whple.
WAnd Wrack faye vnto Joleyh: Now am A


Genelis, N


‘content to dye / in tamoch J haue tene the /
that thou art yet alvu s.. :
And Foleph lade onto hys bꝛethꝛen and
vnto his kathers houle: J weil goo ¢ ſhewe
Pharao and tell hynnthat my bzethꝛen a my
kachers houle which were in the lande of Ca
naan are come vnto me / a how they are ſe⸗
pardes(koꝛ they were men of catelhand they
haue bꝛought their hepe and their oren a
allthacther halle wpth che- Ik Pparao call
vou und are vou what poure occupacion is /
tape: thy leruauntes haue bene occuppeo
aboute catell / crom oure chylhode onto thys
tyme: both we z oure fathers / that ve ma xe
dwell in d land of Golan. Foz the Ed vptins
abhoꝛe all ſheppardes: .
(Jacob cometh béfoze pharao ¢ vnto hym is gene
the lande of Golan. xe lweret h his lonnẽ koz hiß bu


pal.
¶ Che. xlvii. Chapter. :
GA MOFoleph went ¢ tolde Pharao
0 and faye: my father and np bꝛe⸗
U eh2é theie pepe and their beattes
EE all that they haue / are come out
ol the lande of Canaan and are in the lande
ol Golan And oleph toke a parte of his bze
thꝛen.euẽ kyuẽ of them / and pꝛelented them
vnto Pharao. And Pharao lavd vnto hus bee
chꝛen: what is poure-occupacion ? Andthey
fapde vnto Pharao: Meppardes are thy ler⸗
uauntes / both we g aſco cure facherg. hey
apd mozeoucrontoPharao:£o to ſogeoꝛne ene. xxiſ. g
in che lande are we come / koꝛthyleruauntes
haue no patture Coz their chepe fo toꝛe is the
fametpmnétin the land ok Canaan ow ther
1 dwell in the lande ol
alan.
And Pharao tayd vnto Joleph:thy father
and thy bꝛechꝛẽ are come onto the. Che land
ol Egypte is open before p: In $ belt place
ol che lande make both thy fathers thy bꝛe⸗
thꝛen dwell: and euen in che lande of Golan
let the dwell. Moꝛeouer yl thou knowe any
men ok actiupte amonge chem / malie them
ruelarg ouer my catell. Ind Joleph bꝛought
in Jacob his father and lett hym bekoꝛe Pha
rad. And Jacob bletted Pharao, And Pharao
axed Jacob how olde art thou: And Jacob
fapde bnto Pharao:thedayes ok mya pilgre⸗ a. Che dapes
mage are an hundzed and. Exr. eres. Fewe gor bv pilgree
euelt baue the dapes or mp tpfebene/ a haue geit, we thut
not attapned onto the peres of $ lpke or MY he lpued/ ao in
fathers in the dayes ol their pugremages. Job. ruh c. and
And Jacobs bleed Pharao and went out / fal. cuß.
krom hem And Jolept prepared dwellinges p. cro pic s
for bis kacherand hs brethzen /K gauelßemeaenelhane
pollelions inthe land of egppte/ inthe beiten ko mthe
ok the lande: euen in the lande of Nameles / ui of wene.d
as Pharao connnaunded. And Joleph made and. i. Lo.. y.
pꝛouption toꝛ bps father bys eigen 0 a
caij.


fathers houlhode / as ronge chyddꝛẽ are
wych bead.
e
exceal z: fot
bi beanie ot bor. ane gore bought
teafon o .
together all themoney that was keen
lande of Egypte ¢ of Canaan / Coz the come
which ther boughte: he lardevp che moner
in Pharaos houle. nohen money tapled in p
lande of Egypte ¢ of Canaan / all the Egrr⸗
clang came vnto Jolenh andfayde: geue vs
futtenatice s wherfoze kütkreſt thou bs tone
befoze $:fo7 oute moner is ſpent. Chen card
J Jolephibzrnge youre catell“ 2 wyll geue
foe foz pour catell t
e
and E and alles lohe fen them with bꝛead
Foz all their catell that pere.
When chat rere was ended / ther came vn⸗
to him the nexte pere and fapde vnto him: we
wyll not hrde it From my loꝛde / how that we
baue nether monep nop catell ko: my tozde:
chere is no moare left koꝛ my lo de / but euen
oute bodpes and oure lädes. noherfoꝛe lateſt
thou vs dye befoze thrne eyes / and the lande
to goo to noughte⸗ bye vs and oure lands toꝛ
bꝛead:a let both vs and oure aves be bonde
to Pharao. Seue vg (eed / that we may lyue
e
nd Joleph bout
Phra. or the lang lolde kuerx


Joleph.


20


ons therin / and cher grewe ¢ multpplled


be without maney.


Genelis. 1


exceadyngiy. Moꝛeouer Jacob Ixued inthe
lande of Egypte. xvit. pere / fo that the hole &
age of Jacob was an hundzed f. lpij. pere.
When the tyme dꝛewe npe / 6 Alrael muſt
dpechẽ lent kor his tonne oleph & ſarde vn⸗
tohrm: t J haue folide grace in thy lxghte /


chr hande under my othye and deale mer d Coy:
Potuity and cruel? with me / that thou burye hand vnd


grote: but let meipe by my La- One


me not in
therg / and carie me out of Egypte / a burye
me in their burpall. Andhe antwered⸗ A will


do as thou halt ſarde. And he ſarde “ were“. Gene.


dnto nie. Andhe ware vnto him. And than
Ilrael bowed hym vnto the beddes head.


Turok


fatt bp on the bedd / a lad onto Jolcph: cod
all myghtie apeared vnto me at; Lug in the


lande of Canaan /a ble led me / a ſaxde vnto «Bere rH,


merbeholde / J wyll make the growẽ a well
multyplie the / a wyll make a great * ndbze
of people of the / a well geue
the a vnto thy feed after the vnto an euerla⸗
poſlellid. Now therfore thr. Hlonnes
anattes ¢ Ephꝛaim which were bozne vn
to che bekoze N came to the / in to e
walbe mrne: eué as Ruben e Soymed all
they be vnto me. and the chiidiẽ which thou
etett after thé / halbe thyne awne but
e called wyth the names of their bzethzẽ in
eit enheritaunces. And alter J came from
efopotamia/ Rabel * dyed vpon my hand
ya


toh pch


; the
bone kene bled h. ind the eres of Jl⸗
rael were dymme koꝛ age / fo g he coulde not
well lee. Andhe bz them tohrm / and
be hylled them and embraced them. And Fe
rael card vnto Fofeph: I had not thoughẽ to
haue fene thy face / afid pet loo / Bod bath
ſhewed it me and allo thy feed. And Fotepy C
tone thẽ awaye from bys lappe / ¢ they fell
onthe groundebefoze hym.

tn gps epee bane tomate eee

e
band ¢-dpanades tnbie ettbanbe rene


island brio e.


Jacob dyeth.


ielg byghte bande / and bz thé onto
9 m. And Icrael ſtretched out hys te
1. he put hände lade it bps E phꝛaims head which
bn onen was the ponger Anphes bote Bande ppon
paws one’ Banale perd /croftinge pes
Sebtewa we Dpanatles was the elder. And he bleed Jo
cher cömended leph laping: God betoꝛe whome my kathers
111
. w. mea longe vnto
Ad pape brochen nbd nde
red me krom all eupll/blede thele laddes: g
they mape be called after my name / K atter
eee r /and that they

maye growe and multtplye vpon the erth.


es ko: bal


Genelis.


be their wꝛath Coz it was ſtronge / and their
kearlnes koꝛ it was cruell. J wyll therkoꝛe B
deuyde the in Jacob / elcater the in Irael.
Juda / chr bꝛethzẽ Mall prapte the / a thrne
ind (halbe in the neche ol thyne enimpes / F. Waralt. va
Ethp kathers chyldzen (hall Loupe vnto the.
kinn chan art e whelpe / From Cpople mya ich. v. .
onne thou art come an hye: he lapde hym 5
downe and oouchedhym Celée as a lxon / and Num riß. b
as a“ lionele. Who dare ſtere him bp? The a. Sceptre is
„Teeptre thall not departe krom Zuda, no: a Vere taken foz
ta¢lat From betwene bis legaes/ontyll SDP bignptic. eve
lor come vnto whome 5 people thall herne salto proplyece
He Hall byndehys kole onto che vyne / a hys ed the cominge


alles colt vnto the vyne bꝛaunche / and all of Ehe /d in


wach hes garment in wynie andhys mantell G rw. a


inche blond ok grapes / hys epes are roudier


aims Shanyopne/ aby teeth bitter thenmplie,


he ph
And Icrael Cayde ones
dye. And God chalbe wi


ſacob bleſleth all his awne ſonnes and Chetweth the
at is to come. He apoynteth where he wylbe bů⸗


in out ol


and heare pe fonnes of Jacob / and herken
vnto Jtrael youre father.
RB my
an egynnyng ok mr 7
cheke in receauynge and chete in power. 45
bnitable as water wat chou thou chaltcher
e@ene¢rrd, pfozenot bethecheteſt / koꝛ thou“ wenſt by
Parana, lp rd hat 9 Foil a dekpledelt
ou my couche 5
tron Che bzechzen Symeon and Leut / weed
e lucpde che inſtrumentes ave their wepons. Into their
ane a es | kecretkes come nor mp foule / and pnto their


mme cbnt of he np honoure not coupled koz
i elt ag u ele tnpath they gere am macher


Sent. xxx. t


50. Seite well ther * houghed an ore. Cured is that whych their att


Dabulon Hall dwell in the haut o€ p lee Jou. rir. a.
and in the porte of ſhyppes / and Mall reache
vnto Spoon,
Ilachar is a ſtronge alle / he couched hym
doiwne betwene. il. boderg / and lawe that
reſt was do and the land that it was plea
unt / and bowed hys ſhulder to beare / and be
came a ſeruaunte vnto trybute. Dan watt
Lludge his people/as one os the trybes ok Ar „ nge hy
vael Banchelbe n terpent inthe ware and zfſenhehe
an edder in the path / a bpte the hoꝛleheles /hethatt vue e
fo that hrs rpder Mail fall bacwarde , HEtergouccne chen.
thy faupnge lone J Loz, 0 En ruh
Gad. men of watre chall inuade him. And
be call turnethemtollrght.
Ol Adder cometh + Fatt bꝛeed / andhe thall c. Fat bꝛede⸗
geue plealures fora kynge. kde mene.
Hepthalim fs attoptt honde / geueth een meee
Goodly wozdes, Chatllozpahrnge chylde o ce o€ cogne ann
feph/ that flozittyinge chylde and goodly ion other ether ⸗
tothe epe.thevaughters ran opon the wall. wit) Chall frve
‘The worem haue enupedhrmand chpoo vw Ngee ese
brmandhatedhym / and yet hys bowe bode ag. 5. Cd. yr.
kalt /c his armes a his hades were ſtronge /
by che handes ofthe mightye God ol Jacob:
(hall come an herde man a tone
1 Thy fathers god chal helpe the /
the almygtie Hail blen the woleüynges
tromheauen aboue / and with bleuynges of
the water that lech vnder / a with blelſpngd
ok the bꝛeſtes and ol the wombe. The bler⸗
Syncs of thy father were ſtꝛonge : euenag
the bledpnges of my elders / akter the delyꝛe
wal dle in the worlde athele bleuynges
hail tall on the head ok Joleph / and on the
8 brmichar was leparätt v Wott fs
Ven Jamin iSatauetyenge>wolte. gnfamecchacer
the mognpnge he Mall deuoure his pꝛape / quent preacher
at nyghte he hall deupde bys Chople. of, Lodes waer
All ehetearc the.ris.telbes of Brace cis in a8 ae
er Wei tee fe vevitich
c. iiij. en


Jacob,


when he bletted them euery man with a fe
uerall bleüpnge. Andhe charged thé K carde
Gent xxv. a pnto the. J Wallbe put bnto mp peoplette 8
pe burpe in me with my kachers in the caue
ene zon the Hethrte / in


e double caue 5; is in 8 kee before Mare that


in the lande of Canaan. 1 hich kelde Ababa
boughte of Ephꝛon the Heth pte C07 a
klon to durre in. There
§ Spares wet ee
Rebecca his wyle. And there
which kelde and the caue that i cherin / was
bought of the chplnzen of Peth.

sehen Jacob bad commaunded allchache
wold bite his fonties he plucked op bis bete
pon the bed and dped / and was? put vnto
bus people. And Jolepb Cell opd bys fathers
kace / and wepte vpon him / and krüed hem.

en. tthe


BAC diet.


fo löge doth the enbawminge iat


and the €gppctans bewepte hem. ix. dapes.


ald when the daves of wepyng were en⸗
ded, Joleph pale onto thehoute of Parag
pec haue founde kauoure in poure
eyes)


cate vnto Pharao and tell him / how

chat my tather made mel were and layd: loo

8 Senestos.9 fich te that thou* burpe me in my graue
which haue made me in the lande of Ca⸗

Bnaan Mobo thertoze let me goo a burre mx

father / and than wyll J come agapne. And


arged vs befoze his eth ſaping.
r onto Joteph / loꝛgeur I prave


of Manatles were chyldꝛen
phs knees.
his bꝛeth.


Pharao larde / goo a bürpe thy tather / acoꝛ⸗ pow


iu n erh we che lwere.
nd Joleph went vp to burrehys lather /


and wich him went all che ſeruaũtes ol Pha .


rao that were the elders or his houte / and all
the eiders ol Eg pte / and all thehoule of Jo
feph and hrs beethzen a hrs kathers houle:
only their chyldzen and their cbepe and their
catell lecte they behende them in the land o
Golan. And there went with hem allo Chas
rettes and hoꝛtemen lo that ther were an ex
ceadynge great compan


e. ‘
And when cher came to the kewe ot Acad
beponde Joꝛdane / chere they made great i é


v Ecciieyg.v. exceadpna kose lamétactd. ano hemourn
fo his Cather vi dapes nohen $ enbabiters
of Hof § Cananptes fave $ mournyng
inf keld of Atad/they larde: this ig a greate
mournyng which che male. her
fore the name ak the place is called Abel
mizraim / whych place lpech beponde Joz⸗
dane. Ard his Connes drd nto him acoꝛoyng

aGene, ligt ds he geld corumaundedchem.

Act. bh. b. And his lannes caryedhrm in tothe land


aher
Egrpte.


che end or the krſt bone of Moles.


a tachar/ Haben Sefa
nn / Dan / Mephtali / Gad q Aler. All there
foules that came out of the lornes ol gacob


@Folepy was in Egppte allredie. 3.


were. Ixx. ef.

thé Foreph was dead g all his bether ¢ all
5 Len tig hehe ol Atrael Jen

At. uit e creafen multiplied 9 waxed mp
Pall cg. etierlo that che lande was Cull oe chem.
Chenchere role vp a new beng in Egypte
which une we not Joleph. And he ſarde vnto
is koſke:beholde the people of the childꝛẽ of
rae} are moo and mightier than we. Come
vn / let vs plave wilelp with them: leſt ther
multiple / and chen (pe chere chaunce any
soarte)they iarne them lelues vrito oure ent
mies and kyghte agent vs / and to gete the

out ot the lande.

And he lette tathematters oucr them to


nepe them pnder with burthens. And ther Pyar


bpite onto Pharao treature cittes Pprtong


Nameleg. But che moze ther bexedthe ! the Sey


moare they multiplied ¢grewe:fo p ther ab
bozted the chilzen of Flract Andthe cgrp⸗
klans helde the childꝛen of Akrael in ge
without mercie / and made thetr pues bitter
vnto them with cruel laboure in clape and
byicke / and all maner wonke in the feldes / ¢
in all maner of leruice / which ther cauled
them to wozhe cruelly.

Andthe enge of Egypte Cayde unte the
mpdwiues


C Boles is bozne and cat into the flagges. Pe is tar
bp of Pharaos daughter. he uplleth the Egyppcian.
Hefipech v marpeth a wre. Che gtraclites cepe vn
to the Loꝛde.
Che teconde chapter,
py Ad ther wẽt a man ok § houte ok a.
Leut. And tone a daughter of L. e⸗ Exodl. vic.
ut. And 5 wyke conceaued e bare a . para. xij. b.
Yronne. And whe the fawe Pit was
pope childe / hehydhym thze Ll a
ge. And whe Me coude no longer hydehum
the toheabathet of bulrulches g damwbedit


gh Walrme & pptche elard d chüdtherm F put


it in d lagg by 6 rivers bꝛynke. And his li
ter fone akerre ok to wete what wold come pt xviß. 8
okit.“ Andthevoughter or para came eth. el
Doune to ß riuer to wache ker fete / ahirmap Hebꝛe. xi. v.
beng tained along’ by the riuers lyde. And
when che fawe the ballet amonge the fag-
betet fent one orhirmardes ¢ caufedit to
¢ ket. And when Gye had opened it che Carve
che childe. a behold / che babe wepte. and the
had compation on it and lapde it is one of
Ebrues chidzen. Chen lapde his titer onto
os doughter: wall 3 go and call vnto
theanutle of the Cbzues wem to nurſe 8
ide: And p mapde vanes called d chplog
mother. Chen Pharaos doughter lapde vn⸗
tober. Cake this chylde awã pe aud nurle it
kor me / a J wyilrewarde > £02 thy laboure.
And d worm tone the childe / a nurledit vp.

Ard when the childe was growne he . Holen n,
bꝛought it vnto Pharaos doughter (and tang gt name
was made hir tonne / a the called it: Moes /q u tigutwcls
becaute(Capde the) coke him out ok the wa pearoen out ul
ter. And ithappened in thele dares the Mo emer.
les was warte grcatthathe went out brito pepe

is bꝛethzen andiched on their burdeng / G19, derlurro
led an Egyptian imytynge one of his bze- hi teife co haue
chꝛen an €bzuc And he oled round aboule Cuche ee
ardwhenhe tate that chere was no man he Jernelttes
bybe® demethe capptian and bya hun in ihne were the
the tonde. Andhe went outa notherdaye ; a people of gabe
behodde / cwo Ehyues ſtroue together. And that gaze
helapdevnto himthatdrothe weongewher decem ohen
foze impteſt thou thine nerghboure⸗And he that po vio
ancwered: who hach made che a ruler oz a thee Chute tut
fudge oucr da intendel thou to lun me /a8 c ee
chou nilledſt the gitar Then Wotes™ of theene
kearedandlarde sof a fuerte the hinge ia n eon aer
knowne. And Pharao herde o€ it and went alp pe tiewen
aboute to dee Moles: but he fled From Pha⸗ hom kelle to be


and rab and dwelt in the fande ot Madian / and piepen of


a
an, as n


Eine. of.. Ch Pyarao


he lat doune by a welles ſyde. theloꝛde / to be
Che preatk of Wadtan had vii doughters ner of the gle
which came and dzew water and kylled cheractytes,
5 c. trcughes :


faotes, 3 15


te es / toꝛ to water their fathers mepe.

And che Hepardes came d dzoue the aware:

uti TOGA but oc tone bp ende ane

5 eit weye. And whe they came to Maguel
cho / but is the

father of He eit kather / he larde: how che

Fee ae erer er ate

wund ale he ven os 10 thecbepardes /g lo dzeme vs wa⸗

pꝛeſte ot apa, ter / c watered the thepe, And he larde vnto

dian. For ie hig doughterg: wher is he: why haue ve tele


wo anne the man: Soo call hym he may eate bꝛed. ebony:


ber with them And Woles was content to pwell with the


BP wh. Andhegaue Moles Zephoza his dough oF
emo an tei bate a onne/ se e complay


nue polleger Con:Fo2 he lade: haue bene a ſtraunger in
Miche. big raue kde gn Ge bare pet another
Conne/ whomhe called Elieler / tapinge:the
God or my kather is myne helper / and hach
ryd me out of the handes oF Pharao.
And it chauneed in procette ol tyme / that
the kynge ol Egypte dred / and che chyldaen
d.tooked vps OF Ffrael tyghed by the realon ot laboure / ꝛ
thes that ie be erped. And heir cõplaynt came bp vnto God
eld er rom the laboure. And Sodremembzed hrs
Tiere fooge ia Peontple with Abzaha / BWaac ¢ Jacob. And
bours/as Deu God d lohedbyon the chyldꝛẽ or Ftrael/ and
tero. xxvid. knewe them.
CM oles hepeth chepe. God appereth vnto hym in a
dub Cendeth bm t
Drennan eheldzen of Zlvael / and to


kyꝛe /g conſumed
wyll goo hence /


ace the @opot Jacob, Am


9
and
Ae


into the wpweimetke that wem facttfice


Exodus.


wich all my wonders which
i And alter that he will let
. pougoo. And! J will gett this people fa-
nese uoute in the fighte ofthe Egyptians: do that
zinda when pe goo / ve alt not Goo emptie: but
aufe ae abe all nh hire e
note chat and okher P fogeozneth in hirhoule / iewels
raue and of fyluer and of gold and rapmẽt. And pe Mal
Wi deer put chenton our fonnes and doughters /

note bat Mall erobbe the Egrptians.
was bone at C. Holes recenucth lignes ok his callpnge and twas
8 cömaun fent into G epte. B ts wwrke sephora ciecumestech hic
ee thers ſonne. Aaron meteth with Holes. Moles taketh his

foe was it a ebe ait


s hand and caught
ga pne in his hand / that cher max beleue ?
2 e Loꝛde God of cheir Fathers / che God of
2 / the God ol Flaac andthe God ol
Jacob hath appeared vnto the.
And the Londe lard kozcher moze vnto him
aut thine hande in to thy bolome. And he
niſt his hande in to his bolome and toke tt
oll. Atid behold / his hand was leperous euk
as owe. And he layde: put chine hande into


1 Jr. tf Lozde : Jamnot eloquent / no not in
patt and namely fence thou haft token vn⸗


kochp leruaunte but Jam dowe mouthed g k


Motor „And che L onde larde onto bi:

Popa mane —＋L. /o: who bath

made the domme 02 the dealt the leynge oz

$ bipnde-hauenotZ the Loꝛde? Go therfoz

* eee 8
what chou cha 8 5

Lone ſſend pray the whom thou wilt. And


che Loꝛde was angrie with Moles ardtard fe


unowe Taronchy brother the leuite that
can tpeaue. And mozouer behold / he cos


meth to mete the / and when he leyth the / he
wilbe glad this hert. And chen walken
vnto him and put the woꝛdes in his mouth /
and J wilbe with thy mouth and wich his
mouth / and will teach vou what pe cpall do.
And he chalbe thylpokeiman vnto che peſ⸗
plera he chall be thy mouth a chou Walt be a bechalde
bis God: and cake this rood in chy hande / PMO, ay
wherwich thou Wale do mpꝛacles. {pene far ihc
And Moles went and returned to Fethz2oas 30h. ir. t
hig father in lawe agayne and leyde vito he
let me goo( J pꝛape the) a turne agapne vn⸗
to my bzethzen which are in Egypte / that 3
may le whether they be pet alyue. And FC:
chꝛo ſardto Holes: Zoo ĩ peace. and § L070
kard onto Moes in Madl: returne agarn
in to Egypt fo: they are dead which went. Matt. 3. d
aboute to kyll F. Ind Moles toke his wyfe
Khiglönen ore 51 on an ade ¢ wt agarn
to ggypte / g tone $ rod of God in his hade.
And the Loꝛde fapde vnto Mole: when
thou art come in to &gypte agapne / te chat
thou doo all ) wödzeß befoze Pharao which
Ahaue put in thx hand: but F will hardẽ his r
herte / lo that he hall not let the people goo. F
And tell Pharao / thus larth the Loꝛde: Ft
rael is myne eldeſt lonne / and thertoꝛe fapty
vnto the: let m rane gota —
2 go: 2
e
unced by the e pine
chat the Loꝛde mett hy a wolde haue kyl
led him. Than elle toke a ſtone ¢ circum
ciſed by fonne @ fell at bys fette / and lapde:
a bloudrhucbandart thou vnto me. Andhe
lett him goo. Ohe lapde a bloudr hulbonde /
becaule of the circũcitlon. han lapde the
Londe onto Aaron gomete Motes in p wil
derer. Andhe wet a mett hin in d mount
OF God a killed hym And Motes told Aaron gs
. ope off Loꝛde which he had tent
by hum / all the tohens which he had char⸗
genbn nit) All. Do went


Aaron cold all the wozdes which
habtpoke bnto Motes / Odydthe
in the kyght of the people / a peo⸗
Pater spe cobrenof nee an pan
e 1
cobponthels cher bowen the ensues rout
feluesard twozthipped, emen in
85 ofese Aaron goeth vnto Pharag. Chepeopte 40557.
Traclarr oppzeſfed moze and moze / and they text
ee Shaper
n Mees ealaron went @ lea
arao/thus lartg the Lozd God
of Itrael. Let my people goo / that


they may kepe holde dare onto me
in $ wildernelke dbu


ag —
8 25
. eech tai
nota bumznee 2 Keane enen
15 8 haue 80050 a/ into e e canes pra
gure elt he
3 K ettiléce o7 with (werde. Chen lapde ß
all hardened: rr onge of Egypte vnto them: wherkoꝛe do ye
darkes thathae Cotes and Aaron letche people krom their
a thefeareymophie / get pou vnto pour laboure.And Pha
2078 e rv capo nchen beholde there is moch
6 CDE ere people mthe lande and ke make chem plape
and iet cheir woꝛke ſtonde.
And Pharao cõmaunded the lame dape vn
tothetathematters ouer the people / a onto
the offpcers Caping: le thar oc pre $ people
15 moe ſtrawe 9 bꝛpcke with all / as


yng which being


ae an bene ie onen otthe chine of
o laynge:


nto
Ree ee eputius ey went 2


5 tes: thereig t ph gent tonto thy ler⸗
udumteg / and vet ther tape vnto vs : make
Eck. an lob /eprenuautes ar beaten
and thy people fs foule intreated. And
Cieven:poHll ar ve yoill and therfore ve eye
let bs gooand do facrifice pnto the Loꝛde.
Soo therfore and wonke / Foz there Hall no
ſtrawe be geuen vou / and yet lee that ve delx
uer che hole tale oe bꝛycke.
When the officers ot the childern ok rrael
baue emen ſhode cale lin he lade pes.


re wall mee ee, of youtedatve ma⸗
hinge of bzpche)than thepmett Moles and
Aaron ſtondinge in there waxe as ther came
out from Pharao / and lapde dito them Che
Loꝛde loke vnto vou and tudge / koꝛ ye haue


made the lauoure or bs*ttincke in the igbte brig


of Pharao and of bis feruauntes and haue md cn
puta lwerde in to theirhandes to fice vs. a

Moles returned vnto the Lozde & nee be yom
Lopve wherfoze dealeſt thou cruelly wi n
this people’: ane o ba mae i
Jontence A cametoPharactotpere in thpoe Phar
name / he hach eaten foutl wich this kolke betete
vet chou halt not dae end sar nd Sm bos thathe
Then the Loꝛde Cayde onto Moles: Row h, bate
Walt thou lee what’y will doo hto Pharao bre
fo? with a myghtie hande wall he let them
go / and with a myghtie hand hall he bzpue
them out or hrs lande.

fod prompleth delyueraunce of ſcraelites /
e eee


appeared into
8 }Zacob an ail


emembzed np pomplte,

o herkoze faye vnto e children of
Pam the Lozde/¢ will beynge vou out
önder the burdeng of the Egeptlans / w
rydd vou u e
uer pou with a ſtretched out arme and wopth 1
Fee ann be 6 ang Gch ml Ache wg ae
my people and wilbe to pou a God —
thal knowe that Jam the Log pure CoS Gor!

e pou out from vnder the bur:

dens o€ the Egyptians. Ind aa zung
vou bnto the ionde ouer the
bp my hande to geue it vnto 405
D —.— will parted onto 11


ower e
dene g eng Ca eae 5 on


seccobpynge the chile bn lp
ue eedes oe
5 abe * 78 of 1965


ee 1 Ee
nh soptesthete are the of


kynrerdeg
ara age Giclee un ie ihe Ste


. sine anh Secon rt, eher cherte


hün⸗ keth vnto pou a


"ij ok oa
bare him Aaron and sis And am


5 e abe boxe


ear: Norah / Mepheg and d.
Mone. deen of etic: e


aber


ites. Aude
1 ol thedoughters


drcgebte


che Dee
erde ae been
e.
eee


port Bi
the childzen ol Ffraci from
and Aaron drd as the
maunided th
Pharao. ann ibe ane toate n 5 5
02
kes and Aaron fapinge : when Pharao cpea⸗
chewe a wondze
ou fave vnto Aaron / take the rodda
toe Pharao and it (ait turne to a
Chan went Motes ¢ Aaron in onto
Pharao / and dyd euen as E 5 — 15
mäunded. And Aaron calk forth his
Pharao and bi reruns
5 Chan Pharao called
men and! ae en HG im ih b
3 E
ee


tale


oF Putut
earch neha ce pid the pe


ball kathers of
Chele are . to wi
e L onde karde: carie the chilozen OF Alrael
Sache land of: 1 Once
Thele are that h. —
cpane AL — Stes
npghte b ethe childꝛen o 9 228 a
11 2 in the dave ande bt gp

Motes inthe lande o be ede fo

3 apg Lope

tye henge


7


— n l —
5. 7


bother call Speake bnto P haraoethat he


Ae l ee
eymape ferue me in the wiſdernes:
to 1 eon ate


the 1. o/ J wil
—


Moles,
2 Che kralt andlmote the waters that were in che riuer
plage. . in the Cyghte of Pharao a in $ frabte of bis
feruauntes/e all the water that was in che
xpuer / turned in to bloud . And $ kilb 8 was
in the rpuer dred . and the rruer ſtanke: lo p
that the Egppcans coude not dzinke oF che
water ot the rruer. And there was bloude
thoꝛowe out all the lande of Egypte.

And the enchaunters of Egppte drd Irke
wyle with their enchauntmentes / co ? Pba-
dog hardened @ dyd not regarde
chem as the Loide had larde. And Pharao
turned him teilte and went in to his houtte/

b. Helke net ann echt eng herte chere vnto. Ind the E⸗
art thers:
Pees ene He aye
ger moued him al je wat 4
ee aue alter ß the ‘Lorde had tmyté N rpuer


2 ruhe
ciiij.c.


e or klyeg.


dyoged round about the rpuer fo papi


Exodus, ee


Lope And Motes tarde vnto Pharao An-
poynte chou che txme onto me / when g chan
pave for the a thy ſleruauntes ard thy peo⸗
ple / co dꝛxue aware che krogges From: the e
tp boulle/ o s ther Walt remapne but in ?
ryuer only. And he fapdeto mozow . And he
larde:euen as thou hat lade b thou mard
knowe that chere is nene like vnto che Le
pave diab. ana che bee call departe fd
che and from chrne he amd From thy fe
e ee
m e
e
mo 0 apon
opnemet of GS he hadmade
band poatac enthe Tae ö uren?


tothe faving ol Moles. Ard 5 krogges


declared in i 4
Ga. xing. b Cache plage ee eber eth to Phara thi


* Exo. ß. c.
tx. Ax. .


arb


0
frommmp people and J wil et che people:
00, eae eee ere 50 ade orto We


of helanve
the londe —


—


grounde where


onthep are. Bal g mill erer: the dene e
dave the londe or Golan poe DEODIE


are / lo that there Wall. no fixes be there:that:
thou mapſte knowe that Jam the Lose
vponthe erth. And J will pũtt a dewilts bes
twene my people and chyne. And euen to
moꝛomw wall this mrꝛacle be done. a
And the Loꝛde dyd euen loꝛand ther came
in to his leruauntes houlles and in to alt the
donde of Eg pte g che londe was 1 :


nropfom fives im to the boulle of Pharac/and a, che


che v.


gut ſooꝛes with biaynes both in man e beeſt pl.


And Pharao lapde: J will let yougoo /
ye mape cacritice onto che Loꝛd youre God
inthe wildernes: only goo not karre awaye /
ele that ve piape fo2 me. And Motes larde:
beholde / J will goo out from the and pꝛaye

vnto the Loꝛde / a the fixes (hall departe fr
Pharao ¢ kromhis feruatites and krom big
people to moꝛow. But let Pharao HO hence
koꝛth delreaue no moare / that he will not let

the people goo to Sacrifice bnto the Loꝛde.
nd Moles went out from Pharao and
“prayed onto the L od And the Lopde dyd ag
oles had lad / a toke atwaye the fes fro
Pharao ¢ krõ his ſeruaũtes a fd bys people
io b there remayned not one. But koꝛ all p /
Pharao hardened his herte euen then allo g

wolde not let the people goo,

eber ied a pt ih of 1 — and

epble vehouder ¢ lrghtenpnge.

¶ che. ix. Chapt.


er.

dithe Lozde Capde vnto Moes /
goo onto Pharao ¢ tell him / thus
apeth p Lo God of the Ebzies:
let mp people goo that ther mave
lerue me. It thou will not lerthem goo but
wilt holde them ſtyll: beholde / the bande ol
the Loꝛd halbe apon thy catell which thou
haft in d feld/apon hozles / alleg / cameis / orẽ
cheve / wa mightre great mozrarne. But
the Lob call make a deurſtõ betwene the
canoes f tere atncepngorc ora

0 dre of al
chat pertepneth ko the chilozé of Ftracl. And

Loa atpme


nd they tobe aaes dit or the fore


Aypte.
nate / and ſtode betove Baran and dhe


rij


tpꝛengeid it vp in to $ ape: And there bꝛaße v he. vi:


lo that the loꝛcerers could not ſtonde befoze
Moles / toꝛ there were botches vponthe en⸗
chaunters and apon all the AS / Bult
de eee enden g he Lom ba
faybe nits Pole. denies


iat


chere ts none Iyke me in
wil Kretch out mp han


ert.
ue g lterred
niche andeode fr


Bae teefore ard ee yomethp Decree
And all that thou hack in che Felne..sfoz apon


kosth benden
.
Bnd Potes


Lon:tahe poure handeg full of aſſhes out or feld of Egypt.


the koꝛnace / and let Moles tpzynkel it vp in
tothe apꝛe in thelyghte of Pharao / and it
Wall turne to Dutt in all che lande of Egypte
Kchall make lwellpng foozes with blapnes
both on man and beck in all che lande ol E⸗


d
. Topaplepan che tan OF x:
iran topes pat ere


shapie Kerze megteds city. te
me


lage.


T Koma. er. e


he. vil.
plage.


guter


moles


3 i kelde
5
a inthe land of Golan where


debe; to de
without the 552 ar che ehormer God a haxle mare
Freee o ye ene eng 1 an pou and ve (bal £8
dobnes oF
Sena oy Fone ae ain out of be atic a walltprede
without hope abzone mp handes vnto the Wozde / and the h
geodnen at Suv ehéiney hall ceatte nether Mall chere be aw.
anaes orp Hache bavle: that thou maptt knowe bow
we cannot pa is the Loꝛdeg. But FZ knowe g
i

219 Ol 9225 tes pet feare not the Loꝛd I.
22157 eee e
, ba as Geo are re was
ther oller the boulled:but the whete and the rye were not

to de taught meren / coꝛ ther were late lowne.
toother/asit And Moles went out or che citte krõ Pha g.
Aa mo and lpꝛede abzode bis bandes vnto the
in El. bh. 5 Nord ee e thunder and harle cealed / ne⸗
on moare bpon the erch / wyẽ
Denne 0 late that che rayne and che hayle a
were ceated / befprmed agarn and
hardenedhis herte: both he ¢ bis feruatites.
o was the bert of Pharao hardened / that
e wolde not let ld de of Ffrael goo / as

the on hene bp $2 baraois te of God
Then he thiche barchnes.


poe and
e -trees open the
houlles and
ihe houlles Kal
maner: as nether thy


ede :


erg nor chp fathers:


Porat ech scl wot tyme ther were
sn erch bntothrsdape, And he turned
ote — — ‘out from Pharao
Pharaos feruauntes larde onto him:
. e


oo ye that are men and fete the Lade
fo2 that wag poure delpze. And ther thautt 3
925 85 ol Pharaos pretence.


e
inate etayoe: pave be


‘Lojde poute Gab
2 me bet nx lvnne onke


ac che


e


48 95


Holes,


e Londe voure God ö he mape take 1 —
Kommethisderh oy. And he wet out

fame 5 pꝛaped unto the Loide : gf L

uned p wynde in to a myghtre dröge welt

a it be anafeche are Gioppers and

2 nie c chere was not

1 gebe de ren eg dee

ue e Lozve*har
wold ade ann ont Hoe el go.


toß youre oxen 1 — but let peure
: ing pou. And . — antiwered: —.—
10 ffrynges & burnt


et Chapter


N a woe 1 fayoe onto — the:


0 Ippon


Exodus,


rb.
Andchere Malbe a great crye chozoto gut all
krom the lande of Egyptẽ: fo that there was neuer
none irhe no; Wallbe. And amonge all che
chrwren of Arräel wall nota dogg moue his
tonge / nor pet man oz beaſt: 195 ve Saad
ame bow the Lozde
betwenethe pera hack And chele 4
pfevuatites hail come dome brko me“ A prgla per
1 befoze me g ſape:get che out d all p peo de perconnes >
Bebe an 27/8 0 1 Ripon departe. tess a s Pa
Are Lore tapoe onto Aenne 25 fleet
thallnotregavne you /? many wondzes map d he chaps
bewsoughtinthelanve of carpe. And Ao ter that goeth
letz a Hav drdallchele wondzes before Pha betone.
rad. But $ Loꝛde hardened Pharaos herte /
60 bediene. e chridꝛẽ ol Jlrael
go dut och s land
che padcoher Bean. Che ſwete bede. Q her
i teache thete chplozen what the palleouer ſigny⸗
deckencepd of the fpr degotte in Ezppt.
er oF the Egypclano. Ehe goynge out oF


the Heaclptes.
che xij. Chapter
serLombetpane onto Molesg a
Aavd in che land ol Egypt laing
mone! oneth welpe poue chete
moneth:cu€ or the kyꝛt moneih of
the pere Mall. it be onto you. Speake pe brie
e to allche telowchyp of Itrael tapinge:-Chat
theptake the. x. dape ofthis moneth to euerx
ode / a thepe. FE p houſholde be to few
i errno
poule / tale acoidinge
tothe nome of thetoules/acounteontoaware wore
wepe aco; to euerpmans eatynge. A rent to be tale
Ghepe withouttpot ¢a mate of one pere obve oe bee
Shallit be and from amöge thelambes and“ ot
che gootes Wall pe take it,
And ve. thall kepe hym in / vntyll the. xitit.
dave of the lame moneth. And euerp man o£
of Alcugel hall hyllhim about
eu. Andthep Hall take of che bloud ¢ trike
it onthe ii lide poltz e on the ppperdoꝛepolt
ot outes wherinther eatehrm. Andthey
wall estechellewchelamenpaht, rot wich d. che tain
the a W bnleuended bꝛead / % fowze 1 called de
cher walleateit. Se that pe cate not cherok palcouce: hat
rawe ner ſoden in water / but roſt wich kpꝛe: a
both g head tete apurtenäce together. And 8 hun
. — maynebunnete wee en kepe in memo⸗
mozming pt oughtremapne burne ie. eye what was
Okthis maner Hail ye eate it. wich poure bai they


i, omnes gpibed/¢ hors on vou fte/ pour apc nf


wyllg go dutamonge
alltherplboneing lande
dye: ions une .
arab that litteth on his ſeate / vnto
hozne ot the mardele dune arte oh
een al the krꝛtbozne of the catell,


lache onen Hall eate itin

haltet is che Lozdes u palleouer / foꝛ4 Hertntenlelh
dupil go aboute inthe lande of Egypte thps often/callynge
anche ae weil e the kpaltvome n mana 0


och of man g 151047
abponall he Cedega torn 200 iy te


te wylg che fr
HLapoeva crecution, date bloune all be 15


Ilrael Exod


vnto you a token vpon the houles wherin ve

ave / loꝛ whẽ Ile che bloude / Jwyil pate ouer

vou / a che plage Wall not be vpon vou tade⸗

Warth bape Mallbe onto po a eren.

indthis bape e bnto pou a remem⸗

pere babe nn ratice/epe hall Repettholy untgchef oer


ug,


teme 58090 euen choꝛow out youre generacrõs atter vor


ende / but
mhle enbe is kor cuer. Otuk Daves wall pe eate bnleukded
na erlernt. bead a chat cuen the rad nave pe Mall put
ned / aum , awapeleut out of poure houſles. Fo wholo


Shen 2 cuereatech leuended bzead fed the kpact dave fr;


dz v oo pt pl che. vii. dape / hac toute Wall be pluce
darnſg. ſiep out from Ilrael. The Evatt bape ſbalbea
Akkus. riß a holp feaſt onto you / x the. viſ allo. There hat
ume x vih. c. be no maner or wozche done in them caue
about that only which euery man mutt cate
that onſymay pe do. And ſeẽ that ve kepe pou


2 (hall xe kepe it hol dape / that it be a cuſtome


20
vonne o


bo vnleuended bzeed. Foz bpa chat tanie dare wh


Awyll bzrnge youre armpes out ol the lande
Of Cg ypte / therkoze pe tall oblerue this dave
gall youre chyldꝛen after vou / that it be a cu⸗
tome for euer. Ehe kpꝛſt moneih ¢ the. xüiil.
dave of the moneth at euẽ / ve Mall cate lwete
bꝛeed onto the, rr. dave of the moneth at euẽ
agapne. Deuẽ dapes fe that there be no leuẽ⸗
ded bzead kounde in voure houlleg. Foꝛ wholo
eutr eateth leuended bꝛead / that loule chalbe
roted out krõ the multytude or Irrael: whe⸗
therhe be a ſtraunger oꝛ boꝛne in the lande.
Ehertoʒe le that pe eate not leuended bꝛead /
but ire habitacths eate twete bꝛead.

nd Moles called foz the elders of J fract
Klapde onto them: chole out a take to tuery
houlbolde a cbepe / K Kell paſſeouer. And take
à bunch of plope / e dyppẽ it in the bloud that
is in the bal yn / and lirycke it vpon the bpper
polte d on the. il. erde poſtes / ¢ fe that none
ol vou go oũit at the doꝛe ol hys houle vntyll
the mozneng. Foz the Lorde well gooaboute
|e ſmyte Egppte.And when he leyth che bloud
bponthe öpper dooꝛpoſte ¢ onthe two foe


hath baer of Akad which a dere
wast


nyghte taping: Nyle vp / a get ycu out frem
amonge my people: both pe salto the chyldzẽ
ol Ffrael/ego a ſerue the Loꝛde as ve haue
ſapde. and take youre ſhepe a voure oxen W
pol ag pe haue lapde /a departe &*biekem
allo. And the Egypcians were ferce byon t
people / a made hatte to fend them out ol the
lande: tos thep layde: we be all deed men.
And the people toke the dough befoze it
was ſowered whyche ther had in ſtoare / and
bounde it in clothes /a put it bpõ their Mout:
ders. And the chyldzẽ ol Flrael dyd acoꝛdyng
to che laping of Moles: and they boꝛowed of
the gypcrans tewels of ſyluer / a iewels ol
Sancerre che Loꝛde gat the people
auour in the fpahte of the Cappcvas:and fo
they boꝛowed ¢ robbed the €appepans.
Ahustohe the childꝛẽ of Akrael their pours Ff


hep krõ Rameles to“ SHuchoth.b7.hundzep*otherioes
thouland men ol foote/betyde on ae 060th,


moch comon people went allo with thé / and
ſhepe / x oren / a catell exceading moche. Ind
ther bahedfwete cakes of the dough whiche
they bꝛoughte out of Egypte / ko it was not
towered : becaule they were thꝛuſt out of
Egypte a coulde not tarpe / nether had iher
preparedany other pꝛouplpon otmeate.

Ind the tyme of che dwellynge ot the chpt
ding gypte /
50 . lll. hundsed a. xxx. pere. And when the c
Git. hundzed . xxx. peres were exppꝛed/ euen
the lelle lame dape departed all the hoſtes ol
the Loꝛde out of the lande ol Egypt. Chis is


4 tto beobleruedtothe L onde / becault
; e eim uot he gl ep,


the people bow
Sclucs ¢ wozkhypped . Andthe chplozé of Fle
“vael went / and dyd as the Loꝛde had cõmaim
ded Moles d Aaron. 5

| Amd at mrdnrahethe L ode tmote all the


Chrs ig a npghte of che Loꝛde to be hepte of
allthe chplozen of trael and of their genera
cxons alter them. 5

And the Lorde larde onto Motes a Dard:


this is che maner or Palleouer: ther ans 8


In prcher


geuẽẽ it the / chen thou walt apoynte vnto the
Lopde ail that openeth che matryte / all the
Eibe be males Aral ce which thou hack
e males Andau che keactbome of ß e
Alles / thou chalt redeme wa chepe: yr thou
redeme hym not / then bꝛeake his necke. But
— tye fenton amonge thy chylozen Hate


ou t. 5
And when thy tonne axeth the in tyme to
come fapinge: what is thys: thou chalt faye
vntohym: with a myghtxe hande the Love
bꝛought vs out of Egppte / out ot the houtte
ol bondage. And when Pharao was looth to


the let vs gos / che Loꝛde ſlewe all the Fyatbozne


asthe Londe com } BBO
tele aaron Anden the elke ume dare 5. Dep


e ili. Cpapter.
Mothe Lorde cpane vnto Moes
ſaping: Sanctpepe onto me all S
e
88 well of men as ot beeſtes: oz thep are


TLopdyoontome
Werten wall bes
thyne handea vem


tn the lande of Eg ppttas well the kyalt boꝛne
ol men as oF beaſtes. Andtherkoze z facritice
vnto the Loꝛde all the males that ope the ma
trſce / but all the kyꝛſtboꝛne of my chyidꝛen
imu redeme. And chys thalbe ag a token in
chrne hand / g as a ching hanged vp betwene
chene eyes: becaule the Lozde bꝛoughte vs
out ol Egypte with a myghtve hande.
hen Fharaohad let che people go/ God w
caried thé not thoꝛow the lande ok che Philt-
fpnes though it were a nye waye. Foz God
lapde:che people myght happely repet when
ep te warte / a lo turne agarne to Egypte:
erfoze God led thé aboute thoꝛow the wyl⸗


Gene. l. d. 7
Jolue xxlij. g.


Hume. xi. c
t. Coꝛ int. x.a.


u Hehemt. ix. d


Da

they

Sentring oF
dole a the lee toward 11
foze that hall be pitch open e lee. foꝛ Pha
rao wyll fave ol S chyldꝛẽ of Icraeli they are
tangled in che lande che wyderneſle hach
hut chẽ in. And J wyllharden his harte / chat
be ſhall folowe after he / that Imap gett me -


t hondure spon Pharao eporiall bys holle /


Cananrtes / as he
chr kachers / ahath


chacche cpans mave knowe that am
th


from Eqy pte,

ESP Pte, che krnge ot Egrypxt
thatthe people fied / tha Phavacs harte and
all hrs Ceruauntes cummed vnto the people @
ſapde: why haue we thys done that we haue

B let Forael go out of oureferuyce? a he made
readie his charette a toke his people w rm
and tone. vi. hüdꝛed cholen charettes and all
che chavettes ot Egypte ¢ captaynes bpd all
bis people or? Told hardenev the hatte of
chen . e W 5 he folowed after

acl Yo
nh 0; atch ehanee § Cavpclasfolowes mpghte
me. axxxv b. 1 eech wherether Hite
by ß lee / Spall e hozties a charett’ of Pha⸗
rao ¢ this hozllemẽ et bis holte: eué fatibp
95 entrynge ok Hiroth eal f
Pharao dzewe nye / a when the chridzen
ol Itrael lytt vp their eves c Cate how .
he Egyptians kolowedatter the / ther were
toe a Frapde g erxed out vnto the Lozde.
D Chan lapde they vnto — .. werethere
ene foz vs in Egypte / but thou mult
zunge bs awape £02 to bye in the wylder⸗
nelle: wherfoze halt thou lerued vs thusfoz
to carpe vs out of Egypte? Ppd not we cell
che this in Egypte Capi Act os be in vek a
ferue the Egypcians? foꝛ it had bene better
£07 bs to haue ſerued the ¢ / than koꝛ
to dye in che wpldernetic And Moles fave
bonito the people:feare pe not but onde tylt
and beholde how the Loꝛde Mall faue you
, this dape: Foꝛ as pe le the Egyptians thys
dape / Mall ve fe the nomoze foz euer tyll the
ape shalt holde wöide ende he Lone wan krghte foz pou
youre peace: and⸗ pe (all holde youre peace,

ke r oat cir hene e eh An

em, ou vnto me ntoche c

abe Koche v „den cr lcae epaecpen goo kowarde. But

toigenorvens lolte chou bp chprodd ¢ ttretch out thy hand

fe 15 bate 29 205 Ng 1 815 at tye’ dave
im toy nen o map goo on deve grounde
artes as a, thozow the mrodeſt chere. And bape 2


delper / as , wol
„ wpilharden the hertes of the Egypt idan
ker webe rue thepmape folowe pou. And J well gett

a woßdr. And fo honoure bpon Pharao a vpoñ ali 918g
chende em e carpe ch f bpõ his hoꝛſe men.“ And fe

hynge of nopis thee
fpanitpe cho ⸗whan
row oute 15 00 bis charettes ¢ vpon his hoꝛlemen.
18 01 10 And the angell of God which wet befoze
78 dal. bas. a cebogeel feacl vemoued a went bebinide
Beate ent, And che cloudépyler that was before &
coon 4270 pie aren
ene the hoſte ok the Eappciis g the ho⸗
15 pipi Je was aden clowde / a gaue
ipghte bympghte:fo at all the a tong

je one coulde not conte atthe ott

Jana eas? * when now Motes retapen koch hes ¢

‘plat iyug.vbalibe oct the ee / the Kode caried atoaye.


Ecclixxrix. c. the lee wa lröge calt wende that bicwe ni 8


exodus,


8 Hall knowe g Jam che Loꝛd
aue gotten me honoure vpon ha Eg


Ex odus,


Motes,
ger dete


fathers God a J will tte him op anhre.


en, he 1290 a man ot warre⸗ a 15 90 is


e


ch tor all wet oute


made the we
ter deurded keel ain tber ol Braet
We beet e mpddeſt ol the fee vpon
grollde. cen adde g en der
both on their rygbthave ¢ on their
wert ande. 2. Bebe Spree hace ef
in after them to the mppnelt ot the lee /
with att Pinos bos) Frs charettes¢
bis hozllemen. And in the mognpnge watch /
the che coe 3 hoſte ol che Egrp⸗
clang out ot and clowor prller / and
Saen ome € imo ok their charett
— eine them doune to La 1 a
the Egypctans: Let
ele oy ebe Loma che 0
8. Chũ fapde the Lozdbnto 1
outthpne bande ouer the tee / aoe
mape conte agapne: 22 id Egrpcias ops
cheir charettes and hort
Chan ſtretched fozth. 9 Peres hir bande G
duer the lee / z it came a to his courte ¶ Che lu
erly in uh a che Egypclans fledd pla?
5 ie it. F Loꝛde ouerthzewe the
Egypclans in the mydoett of the lee / ¢ wa
ter returned a coucred the charettes andthe
bozlemé: fo that of all re ee eae of Pharao 5
came in to the 52075
not one. But the
dzve lande in 5 —
Rotte ban ofthe alo et the nie
the Logbdelpucted Itrael the telte Sun. 0
ie tame daye out ofthe honde o 5824


L Alraellawe the c
eye na aben debt


EMolesand the people wyth the we men


e. at
880 1 se 2


ebptker waters were wett.
o Slum.


2


unn


Acheter
este went out into the wyldemetie of
dhe wrdernete / coufae fende no water At


is name: Pharaos 6 botke

he caſt intoß lee. bs (alpecapeapnes

are diowned in the read lee / the depe waters

haue coueredthẽ:chey loncke to the botome

agattone. Chrne hand Loꝛde is gloztous

e aad og 5

been at

fentelk loꝛth thy w. it conlumed them
kuen as ftobell,


nebo 18
rea


eallthe
Been d the⸗grea
C chem be as Kyll as a ſtone: wh le che
Palle horot ome pte e people pate
thozowwe / wh


et feare a dꝛeade Fall vpon ien e
tnefle ol thyne arme / a let
people


ich thou hall
in / a plante them in


ote,


nn :
. —


epi,


che laſt they tante to Mara: but they coulde
not dꝛyncke of the waters koꝛ bitternelle / ko
e name ok p place


ote was called Chen the people murmu⸗


red aga ales lapinge what call we, x
peanut: And Motes 9 bean tl ec Ace
he ſbewed hema Led ge be rath into the
imaters/qnd tyep tha
e a law /
eeempeco toe eave: Ik ve wyll
Becuzintodiebovce ottie Loe peur
‘@wplldo aner nrw ln inbigtyghee e. We mug
n 1 bis cömaundemeten “do zwa: wür
denne chen we wyll aig sean 9 975
ene oF ec baieatte pantie tobias ne
oe bpon che Aa 0¹ anithe e
1
2 cane sre cam int e delert of Soin. J.


rope chem. ¶ Che. roi. Ch
i.


1 alter 5 they were caine out of the
lande of Egrpte. e ee . of


888 555 ae ee che wyldernelle 115

cbesmonetoGoainebaoeabe 8 ban

F at kate Plandeofegrpt/whewelatt
dares A ate bꝛed Gi uach n full/
we dene koi honger.


N


au halt made Foz to dwell in / the — 3


eb rargne euer Gall ware.
e


Makes brought Frael fro
nd they went the dapes longe in


Lieth 1 ep Gather
dale. Ann Holes $400 are nee ‘et


ch
it is the Loide / whych b;
Ot thelanoe oF dee anointuemamnpae pet
pale penne ete ok the Loꝛde: aud un e
. Cori, ii c.de
eee eee ede


fayde che Tode pnto Mole beho
28
cat ape pe cage bbe


mape pioue then whether th thet
. no. Che. n b baci EEE e
ard
e 1 8 7 une per ung a ‘taken fox
of; :
widzé OF Alcael: at euen ve (hal anowe vet Wok 0


Manna.


C. Loꝛde:foꝛ what are we B pe chuld murmure


agapnſt bs. And moꝛecuer tpake Moles. It wag th.


eurn the Loꝛde wyli geue vou llech to eate / a
in the mognpnge bzead ynough/ becaule che
Loꝛde hath hearde poure murmure which ve
muLmuvagayntt hirn: fo: what ave we: pour
murmurpng is not agaynſt bs / but agaynſt


e Londe.
ie Aud Holen ſpake vnto Dard; Say onto
ali the cõpanpe ol the childzẽ e
koꝛi) bekoꝛe 8 Conde: toꝛ he hath hearde pour
rudgynges And as Aaron fpake vntothe
ole muſtrtude of the chyldꝛẽ of Irrael / ther


Exodus,


The rock


as Motes bad / a it ſtancke not / nether
1 ere any wonnes therin. And Motes
fapdesthat cate this dape:toꝛ to daxe itis the
Londes Spaboth:to dave ve Wall kunde none
in § felo. Soisedayes ve all gather chern
bij is the Spaboth:there chalbe nonetherin.
ichſtondeng there wet out oF the peo

ple in the te ee a
founde none. Chen the l oꝛdẽ lapde onto M


Combe ach genere
geet) pout


{ohed toward the wploernete:¢ beholde che Brde th


gloꝛie of the Loꝛde apeared in a clowde. and
the Londe kpae onto Moles faving haue
hearde ß murmuring of 8 chyldze of Itrael /
tell thé cherkoꝛe e lape that at cue toe wall
eate lieh / ain the mozneng they Mall be kyl⸗
led w bzed/¢ ve chall hnowe PF am 5 Loꝛde


D youre God. And at euen the quaples came a N.


couered the grounde where ther laye. And in
the moꝛupng the dewe lave rounde about the


„ ptallerdé.chotte And when che dewe was fallebehold in wiiderne


boch apl. it Tape ppon the e in the wyldernele /
mote balearen ag hebozetrot onthe
grounde. when the dyploze of g crael ſawe it

thep lapde one to another hat is this: oz

ey wiſt not what it was. And Moles tayo:

n.. Cotint. r.a. this is the bꝛeed which the Loꝛde path Lad
poi to cate. Chig is the chung which F Lord

bath comaunded/that pe gather euerp man

pnough Foz hm to eate: a gomer full Foz &

man accoꝛdynge to the nombze of Pout / an

and gather euery man Foz them which are in


8 kente.
wee robe chyldꝛẽ of Alrael dd euen lo / and
gathered fome moze fome lelle / a dydmete it
vj. Con vi. c with a gomer. And vnto him that had gathe
red moche remapned no thynge ouer / a vnto
hm 5 had gathered Iytle was ther no lache:
but cuery man had gathered tufficyét toy his
eating. And Moles fapde vnto the: De
no man ict oughte remarne of it tyll the moz
tronge soe worth onbeng the erte cen
vnto Moles: but tome of them lekte of it vn⸗
tpl the moꝛnyng / a it warte kun of wozmes
¢ ſtancke / a Motes wag angry with them.
And they gathered it all mognpnges: euern
„man as moche as futkrled fo2 bis catrng / e

* Gene viß. n as fooneas the hete ol the lonne came ic
nome See bi.dave they gathered twile
ko moch bꝛed. ij gomerg fo one man: a ß rue⸗
lars of the multitude came & tolde Moles.
Andhe lärde nto che: chis is that ma the
Loꝛde hath faye: to mozow ig the Saboth
Fokthe holpe reſt ol Tewel lech 6 1 ve
wyllbane a lethe b pe wyll lethe / a ich
remapneth lav vp los vou / a kepe it tyll the


momnge. ard ther lapde it vp Celt the moze.


to Aaron: tane a crule a put à Gomer full ot
Man therin / a lave it vp betoꝛe the L ode to
be kept £07 poure chylozen after pou / as che
Loꝛde cõniaunded Moes. Ind Aaron lapde
it pp befoze the tettymonve there to be kept,
Andthe chyldꝛen or Jlrael ate man. xl. pere ag. cf
vntyll they came vnto a lande inhabited. And Judi
lo ther ate Man / euẽ ontyil they came vnto
che bozders of the lande ol Canad. And a Go⸗
mo is the tenth part of an Epha.
e Jlraelitd come into Raphidim, rudge.
S en chte tren poly Hats
vp his handes o ¢


Jcbe ri chapter.
Nd ra e company of the chyldie-y
ol Ilrael went on their iournecs


pytchedin Raphidim: where was no wa⸗
gene e g the people aon


Moles onto them. B70!


ker todzinke, Ind Mole taybe Lane g
chende pe wych me/ and wwhertoze do pe grp wi
Spee Te 5 oan


‘There ye people eee ‘Soph


8 . 8
Motes andtayde: geue bs wär d toi


The rocke.
foz water / and luurmured agernſt Motes €
layde:wherkoze batt thou bzoughte vs out ot
B Egypte / eo kyll bs and oure chifozen & oure

catell with thpelte⸗

And Holes cried onto the Loꝛde faynge
what Mall Foo vnto this people: they be all
moſt redye to ſtone me. And the Loꝛde layde
vnto Moles:goo before the people / a take
with the ot the elderg of Akrael: and thy rod

thou ſmoteſt the ryuer take in thyne

ande and goo. Beholde / J will ſtonde there
fozethe vpon a rocke in oꝛeb: and thou

alt impte the rocke / and there tall come

toatet out chcvot/ 6 the people mapedzynke

€ And Moles dyd euen lo befoze the

. ib Werg ol Itrael. Andhe called the name of
b. the place: Maſſa and Meriba: becaule of


caute they tempted the Lozde laynge: ig the
Lope amonge bs 02 not?


lac
220


ban


en. rl. a
Ba


this fozaremembzaunce inaboke and tell
it vnto Joſua / koꝛ J will put out the remem⸗
bꝛauncẽ ot Amelech krõ onder heauen. And
Moles made an alter and called the name

aye ene ene for de erte bande

2 is ots che keate of the Loꝛde / that the Loꝛde
will haue warre with Amelech thoꝛow out
all generati


re ons,
UJethros councell is receaued of Moles.

¶ Che. xpfil. Chapter.
Ethꝛo the pelt or Wadi Motes
ther in lawe herde of all p God
ad done vnto Moles and to Alra⸗
e eer
zoughte Zerael ou 5 e
toke iphoza Moles wykt / after che was
tente backe / and hir. ij. ſonnes / ok which the
one was called Gerlon / kor he larde: Ahaue
bene an alient in a ſtraunge lande. And the
other was called Eltelar: foꝛche Godolme


a


s€r0d.9.«
7 5.


Exodus.
tes &


keh,
Father was men helpe and delyuered me krõ
che werd ol Pharao, And Jethꝛo Moles fa
cher in lawe came this two lonnes and his
wpe vnto Motes in to $ wilderneſle where
hee wen tente bp 8 mount of God.
dhe lent woꝛde to Moles: J thy father in

lawe Jethzo am come tothe /a thy wyte allo
ahr twotonnes wher. And Motes went
out to mete his Father in lawe and dyd obeyl
ſaunce and kylled him / and they faluted etch
other g came in tothe tent. And Moles told
his lather in lawe all thatthe Loꝛd had done
vnto Pharao g tothe Egypctũs for Ilraels
lake / and all the trauaple that had happened
thé by the ware and how the Loꝛd had delp⸗
üered che. And Jethzo reioyled ouer all the
15 which the Loꝛde haddoneto Jrael / a

ecaule he had delpucred thé out or che hade
ok the cgypcians. And Jethꝛo lapde: bleſſed
be the Loide which hach delpucred pou out
ol the hand of the Egypcians and out of the
hande of Pharao / which hath delyuered bis
people tro nder the power ok che Egypeig
Now knowe that the Lozde is greater the
all goddes/foz becaute g they dealt pꝛowdly
with the. And Jethzo Woleg father in lawe
offred burnt: gg A lacrikyces vnto God
And Aaron g ali che elders or Flracl cam to
tate bꝛed W Motes father ĩ law befoze od

And it chaunced on the moꝛow / chat Mo⸗
les latt to iudge g people / æ the people ſtode
aboute Motes tom mompnge vnto euen.
We his kather in lawe fawe all that he dyd
vnto the people / he lapde: what is this chat
oer doelt vnto che people: why lytteſt thou

plelk aletteſt all the people donde abaute
the from moznynge vnto euen: And Motes
ſayd vnto his father in lawe:becaute the peo
ple came vnto me to fehe councell of God.
Foz whe theyhaue a matter / they cone vn⸗
tome / and q mutt iudge betwene euerp mã
his nergboure / a mutt thewe them the oꝛ⸗
dihaunces of Gon thigiawes, Nea

And hig father in lawe layde vnto him: it
ts not well P thou doelt. Chou doeſt bnivy-
ry 125 is people 1910 70 tb eee

e thinge is to greuous koꝛ the * a thou art lb.
notable todottthptelte alone. But heate eit. 0
myvorce / and J will geue the councell / and
God Halbe wich the. Be thou bute the peo⸗
ple to Godward / and bꝛynge the cautes vn⸗
to God and pꝛoupde them oꝛdinaunces and
lawes / and ſbewe thé the wave wherin ther
mutt wake and the werkes that they mult
doo. Moꝛouer fete out amonge all the peo;
ple (men of actiuite «which keare God ande. Che condp
men that are true and hate couetoulnes : ¢ cions that Jud
make thẽ heedes ouer the people / captaynes ges chuld haue
ouerehoufandes ouerhüdzedes / ouerkyktte u co Judge
Euer ten. And ler them® iuage the people mere. Gene,

dall. at all!


The. X.


at all featons Akthere be any greate matter
let thé bꝛinge that onto the / d let them fudge
all lmall cautes them felues/¢ cate thy leite
Flet them bere with the. Jethou chalt do this
ching / then thou Malt be able to endure that
which Godchargeth the wich alt / d all this
people Hall goo to their places quictip,
nd Moles hearde the voce oF his father
in lawe / and dyd all chat he had fayo/e chole
act yue men out ok all Icrael and madechem
heedes ouer the people / captaynes ouer thou
fandes ſouex hundꝛedg / auer fyktpe and ouer
ten. And they iudged the people at all ſea⸗
Tong / e bꝛoughte che harde caules onto Mo
fesse fudged all tmall maters them ſelues.
And than poles let hys father in lawe de⸗
parte / and he went in to his awne lande.


che chyldzen ot Itrael tome to the moumte Hinat.
he people of vod are holps aropalt preſthode. He
that toncheth the hill dpeth. Bod appereth vnto Ao
tes vpon the mounte in chonder a wahteneng.
Che xix. Chapter.
Bethpzde moneth alter the childoẽ
OF Zlrael were gone out of Egypt:
che lame dae ther came in to the
e Awyiderneſſe oc Spinat, * Kos they
were Departed fxd Maphtdim a were come
to the delert of Dinar / and had pitched their
tentes in the wyldernelle. And there Ilrael
pitched bekoze the mounte. and Apotes wet
bp onto God. And § Lorde called to hem out
ok the mofitayne/ laping:thus faye vnto the
houle of Jacob / a telithe chridꝛen ol Icrael:
be haue lene what Adyd vnto the Egpperas
and how J tone you bp vpon egies wynges
A haue bought pou onto my ſeike. Mow cher
koꝛe pk ve wyllheare myvopce a hepe myne
appapntemẽt: pe (hall be mpne atone aboue
all nactons/fog all the erth is myne. Ve (hall
be vnto me a kyngdome ok pꝛeſtes ¢ an holy
people: theſe are the words wluch thou Wait
fave onto the chyldꝛen or Strack,

And Moles came g called foz the eſders
ok Akrael /a lapde befoze thé all thele woꝛdes
wiſich the Lozde had cõmaunded bynt, And
11 people ant wered all to gether and fapde:

All that the Loꝛde bath lade / we well doo.
And Moles bꝛought the woes ol the peo⸗
ple onto the onde. Andthe Loꝛde lapde vn⸗
to Moles: Lo / A wyll come vnto the in a

„ chypcke clowde / that the people mare heare

ch: 0 dere euer Auch with the / e alto beleue the Foz
purge ¢ clente euer. And Mores ſhewed the wo des oF the
idem from e he 10 Londe.

kplehenes 18 indthe Loꝛde lade vnto Mpofes:Gobn-

chen body and ko the people , lanctrepe themto dare ¢ to
few body en mnopoto/ @ Tet them wach cher clothes: that
in in this Came they maye be redp agaynſt the chyzde dape.

chapter bencth Foz the thyzddave f Loꝛde will come doune
al. d. r. xxx. c in che ght ok an the people vpon mounte


Exodus.


tdat ye come not at youre wyues. And th
chrꝛde dape in the moznyng there was
der lpghtenyng ga thicke clowde bpd the
mofite/ethebopce of the home wared ercka p. chat put
dyng lowde / a all the people that was in the you al uty
Deople ou oftyerorescomete ty Bode caren
people out of the tentes to od /
they node vnderchehpil. 790 65 N
And mounte Sinai was all to gether on a e abap
fmolte: becauſe che Loꝛde dercended Downe 1
po it in kyꝛe. And the fmoke therof alcended : Kone.
bh as it had bene che moke of a tplte/ @ alt (0% bn
the mount was exceadyng fearful. And the
vopce of the hoꝛne blewe a waxed lowder ¢ though cost
lowder-Moleg pale / 2 God anlweredhem had ane.
f with avorce. And 5 Lone camedowne 1
vpon mounte Sinat/eué in the toppe ol the
bpll/¢ called Motes bp into the toppe of the
bpll.and Moles went vp.
And 5 Loz layde vnto Moles:go downe
charge the people that they pꝛeale not vp
onto the Loꝛde Coz tofe byt ( a co many oF
thé peril. And let p pꝛeſtes allo which come
tothe Lozdes pꝛelence ſanctykve the lelues:
leſt the Loꝛde Ompte thẽ. Chen Moles layde
vnto the Lose ste people can not come vp
into g mofite Dinat / koꝛ thou chargedelt us
faping:fet markes about the hyll / ecanctikie
it. Ind the Loꝛde fapde vntohrm: awape / g
get the downe:¢ conte vp both thou ¢ Tarom
with che. But let not the Pꝛeaſtes a the peo
ple pꝛelume Coz to come pp onto the Loꝛde:
leſt he impte them. And Motes went downe
vnto the people / and tolde them.
Che. x.commaundementes are gtuen. Che altart
‘pk seth.
1 ( che


2


“eros,


aue bꝛought the out ofthe lande
f Egypte and out of the houle ol


aa 5
abt.


pall aura Chou walt not tale the name ok d WLozve
dealer ang typ gop in varne / ta; J Lone twill not holde
pat f bin giltlede that taketh his name in varne.
ine loueth! Meine bze the Sabbath dave that thou lan
dur gedlpnas ctifte it. Sixe dacs mape thou laboure ¢
il scree 20 all 8 thou halt Co do but the Ceuenty bape
is the Sabbath of the Lone thy God / in it

thou ſhalt do no maner woꝛke: nether thou

noꝛ thy lonne / noz thy doughter / nether thy

man fernauntenoz thy mapde leruaunte / ne

t the llraunger 2 18


lpe them in
sie age pe


Pep be pooze s


nether ſhalt couet thy neghbaurs wyke / hys
man feruafite his maxde his ore / hys alle oꝛ
wg chat is his.

Drutev.c, - kAnd all the people tawechechunder ache
erh. e. lyghteninge a the novle of $ hoꝛne / ¢ howe
a je mountayne (moked. Ind when $ people

lawe it / they remoued a ſtode a ferte ol and
ſayde vnto Moles: talke thou with vs a we


brut. rwiß.e will heare ; but let not aun ae vſ leſt


we dye And Moles ſapd vnto p people keare

D not / koꝛ god is come to pꝛoue vou / a that his
feare ma pe be amonge pou 6 ve cynne not.
„Andthe people ſtode a terte ot / 2 Poles

wet in to he thiche clowde where God was.
Andthe Lon layde vnto Moles: thus thou
ſhalt fave vnto the childẽ of trael: e haue
ſene how that J haue talhed with vou front
aut ok heauẽ. Ye hall not male therkoꝛe W
me goddes or Fpluce noꝛ goddes OF golde: in


ERIE,
no wyle (hall ve do it. An alter ot. ou Deute. rxvij.
Walt make onto me and theron cae Hatt oi .
Burntotkerynges a thy peace otlerynges /
thy ſpepe and thyne oxen. And in all places
where z chall put che remembꝛaũce ok mm
name / chither J will come onto the * biete ene. xh. b.
the. But and vt thou wylt make me an alter
ok ſtone / le thou make it nat ol hewed ſtone /
£02 yl chou lte vp thy tole bpd it chou halt
ae Ee 5 er a 2 not pe op

ompne alter / that thy naz
kednelle be not ſhewed there on, :


Malt fet betoze the.“ Ir thou bye Lawes.
ſeruaũtethat is an hebzue / pre A eule. rv. c.
; Peres be wall lerue Kthekeuenth J med e
be Wall goo out fre paynge nothinge. Ir he Leute rut
came alone / he ſhall god out alone: Ik he
came maried / his pte Mail goo out whine
And pe his maſter haue geuenhym a wylt a
wee haue boznehym fonnes 02 daughters:
then P wyfe a hy chile halbe hir alters
G he Hail goo out alone. But and pr the ter
uaunte tape I loue my matter ¢ mp wyke a
my chrldꝛk, J wyll not goo out kre. chen iet 7
big matter bꝛinge him onto then Bonds and 1. Judges and
fete bpm tothenooze o2 the dozepott/ eboze fo inder
015 Pen nn ep r an let him be ture often y⸗
a mes goddes: be
Ika ma Cell his doughter to be a ſeruaſite: ule ther vee
fhe tall noe geo eee Her 630
doo. FE the pleate not hur maſter / lo thac he in xo xx. b.
hath geuẽ her to no m6 to wife / then Mall he which the a⸗
let hirgo krerto Cell her vnto a traüge nacib role caltceyy
Hall be haue na power becaule he deppled h an. ne
her. Ache baue piompled her vnto hrs lonne pid
to wle / he hall deale wier as men do with
their doughterg. Ik he take hem another
wile / yet hir foderaymet a dutie of mariage,
call mms mpntdhe.Fehedo not thele thꝛe
onto her then tall the goo out free pave no .
paanee pe 6 chuptecha man p he dre hal! Dente. riria
e dapne ko it qt a mi lape not awapte but
God delyuer him in to his hude / then 3 wyll
popnte the a place whether he ail fle. Aka
man come peefumptuoudp bpon bis neygh
boure ¢ fee him Waglle / thou walt take bint
kro myne alter that he dye. And he that Imy⸗
teth his father 02 his mother / all dye koꝛit.
Hethat ſtealech a man g fellech himept it
be pꝛoued vpon bym)thall be flayne koz it. 2
And be that curteth his Cather or mother, P. net ee
Wall be püc ta dech kor tt. Armen ſtrpue to ach. ..
getherg one fupte another wyth a ftone 02 Mar. ö. b.
with his kylte / to that he dye not / but Ipeth
in bedd:pfberple agarne a walne wythout
bpon his alte then chall he that cmote him
go qupte:ſaue only be ande e


. b.


Lawes.


whyle he lape in hed ¢ pape for his healyng.
ea mi imptedis tenuate op psn rde

Wa Gaffe $ they dye vnderhis had / it halbe
Cauenged. But and pé they cõtinue a dape oꝛ


two / it chall not be auenged koꝛ ther are hys


money. nhen men lerrue a mite woman
Wchyide lo that hyꝛ frute departe fd her a
vet no milkoztune koloweth: then challhe be
merled / acoꝛdynge as the womans hulbond

„ will lape tohis charge / a he Hall page as 8

Tarte b make men appopnte him. Sut * an fanny

btb. . mille tune folowe chen all he pape ite

: £02 Ive / eye ko eye / toth foztoth / hande koꝛ

hand / kote koꝛ tote / burnynge koꝛ burnynge /
wounde Foz wounde and ſtrype foz ſtrypẽ.

ta mũ Mmpte bis ſeruaunte oꝛ bysmapd

keiche geladen ah eee

02 the eyes lane Allo pe he Cin er

Schr Tr see opismavDes orb e al Tet the

that the bneea go out kre Foz the tothes fake. Al an oregoze

Conable beate a man F dye / then the* ore

rau bye thet” Walde ttoned/ ahr ödlelh wall not be aten:

AcCh cag atvape And his maſter wall go quyte,

Ik the oxe were wont to runne at men in
tyme patt a ithath bene tolde hes matter / ¢
he hach not kepte hym / but he hath hylled
a man oꝛ a womiithen the ore halbe toned
and hys matter Wall dre alco Ac he be let to
alumme ol moner / then he hall geue fo
delpueraunce ot his lpke / aco dynge to all
is put vnto him. And whether he hath goꝛed
afonne o7 a doughter / he albeferued after
the tame maner. But pt it be a leruaunt oz
opamayde thatthe ore hach goꝛed / then he
Mall geue onto their matter the Cuntme o

b ltle)akter Err redes ache ore chall be ſtoned.
theckbiewes n Ia ma open a well oz drggea pytt a couer
alter he grade not but thatan ore Han alle fall thevitt/
seemed ie che dinner of the pptt wan make it good ¢
but the fourth geue money vnto their matter / and the dead
part ok an oun beet halbe his.
eth. be gern, Irene mans orehurte anothers Ihe dpe:
ae here then chey challleilche pur ore @ deurde che
binhpch is ken moner / ö che deed ore allo they Mall deurde.
pence Geripng Put é yrit be knowẽ chat the ore hath bled
ö eherenboule to gudthe in tymes palt then becaute bys

mater hath not hepte hin / he call pape ore
koꝛ ore / and the deed 808 bis atone,
CSHochelyhelatoes as are in the chapter aboue.
8 G Cheri, chapter.
fa man ſteale an ore oz ſhepe and
uüylle it 07 Celie it / be Halt reſtoze
b,oren Foz an oxe and ill. cbepetoz
d a (hepe. 36 a theke be kounde bzea-
unge vp z be that he de there hall
no bloude be ched Foz hym: ercepte the tonne
be vp when he is kounde / then chere chalbe
bioude ſhed koꝛ hym.
A theke call make rellitucpon: Ar he haue
not wherwith / he albe cold to his cherte.


Exodus.


the thette be kollde in his hade alxuecwae
ſerit be ore / alle 02 pepe )be wall reltoze
double. t a mã do hurte felde oz vrnexarde /
lo that he put in his beet to kede in another
mans kelde: or the bett of his owne telde / and
of the beſt of hrs awne vrneyarde / wall he
make reſtytucpon. 3
k Epze bꝛeaße out ¢ catch in the thoꝛnes
tothat the ſtackes of come oz the ſtandynge
come oz telde be conlumed ther with: he chat
kyndled the kyꝛe wall make rettrtucron.
Aka man deluer his neghboure money o7 25
tutte to kepe / a it be ſtolen out of his houle:
k d chele be kollde / he call pave double. FE
e thẽte be not lounde / then the goodmã OF
houle thalbe bꝛought vnto the goddes a
were / whether he haue put hys bande vnto
his hegbboutes good.
Ind in all maner of cretpace /whetherit be
ore / alle (pepe /rapment oz any maner loſt


thynge which another chalengeth to be his /
the cutout) ptes Gail. come befoze


bande


be toꝛne with wyide beeſtes / then lethym sono; y


b bꝛynge vecozde ok the teeryng: a he (hall not of ourenny


make it good. nohen ama bazoweth e roten
ol his neghbour pert behurte oz els dpe / and alen vorn
pr the owner therol be not b he Mall make za: v.
it good: Ik the ownertherok be by / he wall
nod mans it good namely vl it be an heꝛed
thynge and came fo2 hre.

Ia man begyle a mayde chat is not bee
traüthed a lpe with her he tpallctoote bes!
and tale herto his wyte: I hir father retule
to geue her vnto hym / he (hall pave money
e

jour (halt no a twitch to rue.
tontertpee with abet tate apne torte =e
He that offreth onto ony goddes faue vnto
2 Loꝛde only / let him dye without redẽpciõ.
ce
q ve were ſtraunge he larid ot
e hail trouble no wedowe noꝛ fathertetie * sacha.t
chylde: Ik ve Halttrouble them: they call „
ccpebnto me /a J will furelp heave their crpe cr coeet
@then wyll mp twzath ware hoote a J well rare bebe
Rll you with p fwerde/epoure wpucs Hal this tert.
be wedowes and poure chploren katherlelle.
Ik chou lende money to ani ol my people 6 D

is vooze by $ / thou ſhalt not be as en


‘


ping,


80. Cd
aot ech kept


all, Ex
him / nether chaltoppꝛelle him with pres
kthou take typ negyboursrapmentta
nae te p chou delpuer it vntohim agayn
p thine che donne goo doune. Foz that i bys
couetſet onlx:euẽ che rarmẽt toꝛ his nine
he gepeth: o els he will erve vnto me
and J wyll heare him ko Jam mercpfull.
Chou Walt not raple pon the goddes / ne
ther curle the ruelar ol thy people.
o krurd whetherther be dzpe oz moyſt)
notbacke Ch Eiritboznefonne


under ODE then alk geueme: irnewple Male tyousDoo


geo t


paucd it
% m


pptbeot chyne oxen and of thy cepe. .


ie
. Mb
fg tooꝛnẽ of becttes tn kelde. But Wall cal


imo. u. ait to dogges.


re 3 tet no ſome: becaule 3 wolde all men ſhuld
pe ‘ee chapter thozow oute / aud the two pet
next befoze alto. —


5


dus,


2


1


che rere oh
out ol


hatta: thou


khalt noe Cethe
mot gens ie
y


vi tt fo lo
Bebholoe/F lende myne angell befoze the / ducbech or as
ti gegeben che wepeg tale robe prone ahne:
$ place wörch Jhaue prepared Beware of elf woche not
bim a heate his vopce a angre him not: ko⸗ panes thehpd,
he wyll not tpare youre mproenes / vee and
m name is in him. But a pł chou chalt her⸗
nen pnto his bopce & hepe all 6 3 Mail tei
che / che J wylbe an enimpe bnto thyne ene⸗
mies and an aduerlarie vnto thine adirerfas
rieg. when myne angell goth befoze the and
bath bzought the in bnto the Amozites pez
chites Pheresites’/ Cananites / Heuites g
ebulikeß e 4 wall haue deſtroped them / l
fou mmontbtppe not weten ole erferue
1 ö wozhes oF thé ut OUT rps
owe thé a breakedoune the places ol thé
Er lds aad sd tas Loꝛde youre God /
he call bleũe thy bꝛcd athy water / a J wyll
take all Cychneties awape krõ amonge pou.
Mozeduerchere chalbe no woman child:
elle oz bn krutekull in thy land / a $ nombze
ol the daes J wyll fulkpil. I wyn tende nix
fegre befoze the and will hyll all the people
whether thou walt go. And will make all
thyne enemies turnẽ their bäckes vnto the /
4 will fend v hoꝛnettes before the / they v. Abo met is
Wall derue out the Heuttes/ tye Kaname a walpe
S the Hethites befoze the. J wil not cack the che ofa more
out i one beetle Tlädegrowe to a wldert seas
efle:ethe beettes of the ede mufetpileppa worden
che. But a iptle Ga lytie 3 willdzpue the olit in Beit. vß e
Before the / vneril thou be incregked z thou d J0 fur e
maxi enheret the land. And J will ma coy .
coftes rb the red fee vnto the fee oF the Wht:
Uſtines and from thedeferte vnto the rpuer:
koika che eh ok the lande in
chrnshände ¢thou wal derue them out. dente;
befoze the.* Bnd thou thalt make none aß Cruz b.
R rage


ee
mal apne me:
cher govoeg"ic wall cutelybe thydecape,


sevemoripes, ;


* Exo. b


Atrael / and woꝛchyppe a ferve or.
And Moes went hm kelte alone onto che
Loꝛde / but they came not nye / nether came
Ero, riy.a the people vp with hum.“ And Motes came
Stolde the people all the wozdes ol ) Lorde
@ all the lawes. And all $. people. ant wered
with one popce ¢ fapdesall the woꝛdes which
Bthe Lord hath tard will wee doo. Chen Mo
les wzote all the woꝛdes of the Loꝛde q role
bp carly and made an alter vnder the heul
rij. pilers acoꝛdynge to the nombꝛe of the.
trbeg of Flracl / andlent yonge men oF the
childꝛẽ of Itraei to lacrikpce burntokrynges
a. Pegtept⸗ And ko ofive* peaceofirrnges of oren onto
fepnge isto reche Logde. and Motes tobe halke of the
coneile Bod to bloude @ put it in batens/and the other halte


rie in ba
taple-


T

Brack * Ind Motes went in to che mpun⸗ zern n
darne. And Moes was in the mount p. x I,.
daxes and. xl nyghtes. ; ;
G Che Loz cheweth Moles the ee e holß


place and the ehynges pertarnenge ther
¶ Che forme of the arke of we
bys ſtaues and cherubp


be. xv. Chapter.

Hoche Lowe talned with Motes
e ee n be ol
rael that ther geue me an heue

ollrynge / a ot euẽry man p geueth


it willingly with his herte / ve hall take it.
* Auch


theheucofirynge which ve Mal ers. n
take of them: gold / liluer and bꝛaſſe: and Ja⸗
cyncte coloure / ccarlet / purpull / bpſſe and
gootes here rams Capnnes that are red / and
thelhpnnes ot taxus and lethim wodd / oyle
02 lightes / and fpices koꝛ a noyntynge ople
and lz c wete cente: Oni ones and fett ſto a hu
nes koꝛ che; Ephod and foz the bꝛeſtlappe. garment
Andthey hall make me a lanctuarpe chat an ama.


ene th wall


an

re gold both within a with

an hye vpõ it a crowne of gold roũde aboute.
And chou whale: an che pnaes ok golde foz,
it and put them in the ff. comers cherot S
Aer an onthe pee ol it and. i. on the
other. And thou ſhalt make ſtaues of ſethim
wodd and cower. them wich golde / and put
che ſtaues in the rynges alonge by the iydes
of the arke / to bere it with all. And $ ſtaues
wall abpde in che renges of che arke ¢ hall
not be ta nen aware. Ind thou thalt put in


ve ok the heñlin che lyghte or che hren er. the arke / d witnene which à hall see soe


rentonpes,


Whe Facion of geneigte w. is lam ~
e eee me.


And chou Halt malte a mercifeate of pure
pobesscubeter and an halle longe and a cu

pte and an halte bꝛode. Ind ma ne. il. cheru⸗
byns ol thycne golde on the. i endes ol the
mercpleate: and lett the one cherub on the
one ende and the other on the other ende ot
Y mercyfeate: ko le that thou make them on
the i. endes therok. And the Cherubrns
Wall Uretch their wynges abꝛode auer an
he / and couer the mevcpleate wyth their
wynges / a their faces hall lone one to anos
ther: euẽ to the mercpleate warde wall the
Faces of the cherubpns be. And thou walt

ut the mercyleate aboue bpon the arne /
9 E 11 8 555 halt put g wetnette He

geue the.

There J wyll metethe and welt camon
with the from vpon the mercpleate from be
twene the two cherubyns which are vpon
che arne of wytnelee / of all thynge which J
wyll geue the in commaundment vnto the
chylozen ok Acrael.

C. Chou chalt allo makea table ot tethym
wod of two cubytes longe and one cuhptt
bꝛode and a cubptt and an balfe hre. And


.

halt fett b. table nee Syewbrerd b.

me i se Myewtieey verw alle teas 11
CA ctadle of Hewzeed with the loues of bꝛeed

5 vron Mzand hig other veflels. 8


bent aue
unt
„ aetbeboites


nd thou Male make a candvittyche of
pureshiese gol mito bis ttt bradches,
lies / knoppes and floures poceadpnge
there out Sopre bzaüches cal pꝛocede out
ol the lydes of the candelſticke. ul. out of the:
. —.—
amd lo e vnto almondes w
Anoppes and doures vpon euerp one of the


bi. bzauncheg thatpzocede out of the candel


ſexcke: a in che candeldtycke lelle. ini. cuppes
Inc onto almondes with cheir Ruoppepano
that there be a knope vnder euerx. it
bꝛaũches 7 ſyre that pꝛocede out of the
candelſtpcke. Andthe knoppes ¢ the bꝛaun⸗
80 sabe e togaber one pece of pure
And chou ſhalt make. vit. lampes and put
them an bye there on / to geue lighte vnto the
ocher fyoe thatis oucragaynt it: w Moffers
@ Eyre pannes ot pure golde. And an hundzed
pounde weyghte of Fyne: Aue call inake it „ebze, big..
wich all the apparell, * Andle § thou make act. bf. e.
the ane facyon that was ibewedthe in


couer tt with pure gold and make thereto a the mounte,


crotvne of golde roünde aboute .Anomake
vnto that an whope ol nil. kyngers bꝛode /
rounde aboute / And male a golden crowne
allo toß whope roũde aboute. And make foz
it. iliſ. rynges ot golde and put e
Cogners that are on the tut tete therolteuen
harde vnder the whope hall che rynges be /
to put in ſtaues to bete the table wall. And
ee e a

lave golde / le
mapebe bone with chem. Andthou walt
make his didhes cpones pottes a flatpeces
to poure out witball or bene gold. And thou


5 chapter alto deterybet lte fone sit
Fon 0 e eine te
CLYDE. ‘. 0

chou Wait nahe an babitacion catsavqolcise

0 Wten curtapnes of twyned bylle / is alto ape
SFacwnctefcarlet and purpull /¢ ahr clone of

Galt mae chem wed cherubpns thecat:out hee

oF bꝛodem work. Che lenghte ofa curtayne re vt is tauen
ſpalbe. xxviti. cubptes / and the bꝛedth. tit, ontyfoz the co
and ther ſhalbe all of one meature: Epue city tore 08 Jacynce
taynes thalbe coupled to gether one to ano- cf which color
thersand the other Epuc Itketwyte ſbalbe cous wut vr oben
pled together one to another. toꝛe ĩthe. xxva


Groans,

2 And thou walt make bozdes for che habtta

clon ot ethim wod vp rxghte:ten cu

bytes longe thall euerg donde be / a cubite

ee ope eller
0 {

bead mate nto all g bond of d habitaciõ.


e facion of the boꝛdes ot ehe tabernaele
Gag . barres.


remonyes,
Hit be in both the comers. And lo chere

Se enh all &. xi. Cochettes of

cpluer. fl fockettes vnder kuerx boꝛde.

And thou ſbalt make barres of ſethimwod
fyucfoz the boꝛdes of the one lxde of the ta⸗
bernacle / x fpue kor the other fyoe/ andkrue
£2 the boꝛdes of the welt ende. And § mydie
barre (yall goo alonge thozowe the mrddeg
of the boꝛdes a bare thé together kram the
one ende vnto the other. and thou Malt cor
auer the bo des with golde and male golden

rynges koꝛ chem to put the barres tyo7ow / e

walt couer the bartes with golde alfo. And

rere bp the habitacion acozbrnge to the
ston therok 5 was ſhewed the in the mount.


Ceremonyes,


€


— LL


10


of the vtmoſt curtapne that is 5
other lde. Feltre kes —
e in one curtapne / Andthou.haitmake.rr.bozdes fo2 che hn
bitacid unthe fouth iyde / a thou chalt make
8 IAochettes of ſyiuer a put thé onder the.
od if. cockettꝭ onder euerx boꝛde / ko their
Alete In iphe mance in d nogth kde of Sha
bitacrö there ualbe xx. bod f. rl. lockettes &
ol {pluer: two fohettes vnder euerp boꝛde.


¶ Epe tation of the coꝛner boꝛdes with
thet fete fochettesand bar ren.


for thew f B habitacid walt ,
—— i bs bom noe .
decdred⸗ rer there two bordes be coupled cogerber beriety y “AMA
another aboue all of tarus Chennes, and lrkewyle ab a Cettinathyngsspertapmpnge to tye de,


Exodus.


oe i é
¶ Che. xxvij. Chapter. xx J


Md thou Male make anauitare oF
lethim wodd: kyue cubptes longe
f. v. cubytes bꝛode / chat it be tou⸗
Areſquare /a. iii. cubytes hre. and
makett boznes piocedyng out in the. iii. coꝛ
hers ok it / a couer it w bzafle. And ane his
allhepannes / chouelg / balens /ülechhones /
kpꝛepannes and all the apparel therof / ol
bzadeandthou Halt make a gredpern allo
Ihe a net / ot bꝛade: po whole. ini. coꝛners
halbe iu. bꝛalen ryngz: a the gredyern Mall
reache vnto the myddz ok p altare. Ano tou
walt make ſtaues kos the altare of fethym
wodd / ¢ couer the with bꝛalle / a let them be
put in rynges alonge by the lydes of the ale
tate to beste it wich al and make the aulter
holowe with boꝛdes:euen as it was Hewes
the in the mount / lo let them male t.

And thou ait maße a acourte onto the z
habitacion/ which halt haue in ö touch tyre a. he cowste
Hac v iges ol twyned bye / beyng an hüdzel n that wurch
Cubytes longer ppfers cheret! w their darch oe
xx. ſochettes of bꝛaſſe: but the knoppes ol 8
the pylerg and their whopes thatbe tyiuer.
ig Iphewwple on the nozth fyoe there chalbe

1 ok anhüdꝛed cubptes longe errs
pilers w their locketteg ol Aw in knop⸗
bens ß whopes of lyluer. And in d hzeadty
oft — ae ate 11 walbe 11
Gpnges ol kyltie cu onge / kx. pplerg
‘with their x.lockettes. And mi the bꝛeadth ol
the courte eaſtwarde towarde feretonge
ol the fonne/Halbe higynges of.L.cubptes, C
Che figureot the ogdevpnge of the oznamentes

which muſt Candein the tabernacle.


Hang enges of.xb.cubytes in che one Fyne of
it with ii. pylers a. iii ockettes:a line wyle
onthe other kor chalbe hangunges ok w.
cubptes with. iii. pylerg and. iũ. lochettes.
Amd in ihe gate of the courte arias


dien or 3.
Chalo tent


done
nelis. xiij. d.


el /

Bhemay mpnpltre onto me / bothe

aron / Hadab / Apihu / Eleazar & Fthamar

Aarons konnes. And thou walt make holpe

rapment koꝛ Aaron thy bꝛother / boch honoza

bie & glozpoug. APozcouer tpeake vnto all

that are wyte harted / which J haue kylled w

the tte ok wyldomeithat they make Larös

sAPMEt to cölecrate him w / that he may my⸗
nyſtre vntome. 5
Chele are the f

garmétes which


a. Wiegluppe thep Wal male:
07 bacttfappe a⸗bzeſtlapp /
ssfocheaflappe phod / a tunpele /


us 10 f the bit
ol a cope.


aa ftrapte cote / a


mpterandagyz
dell. And chery
thall make boty

rmentes ko:


te


bie.


two (holders ofthe Ephod / ther
ones OF remembꝛaunce vnto che
el. And Mars thallbeare

oze the Loꝛde vpon bps two oz a
remembꝛzaunce. And thou ſpalt make bokes
ok golde e two chepnes ot kyne golde: Inne⸗
wozke and wzethed / and fatten the wzethed
chepnes to the hoßes. 8
Andthou Walt makethe bꝛeſtlappe ok iud
gemẽt th bzoderd woꝛkeꝛeuẽ after the woꝛke
ofthe Ephod thaltthou make it ok golve/ tas
cpncte/tcarlet purple and twyned bptle halt
chou make it. Foꝛe ſauare it chalbe ¢double
dan hatin bzede longe anhand bꝛede bꝛode. #el
And chou ſhalt Evi ĩt w. ij. rowes ol tones.
In the kyꝛlt rowe ſwalbe a Dardlos / a
ps dr Smavagn? Che lecond rowe / a

pe a4
rios an Ac

cas / Onix and Jalpis. And ther chaibe ſet in
Golde inthetr incloters. Andthe ones ſpalbe
grauẽ as lignettes be graue: Wthe names ol
che chyldzẽ ot Irrael cue with. xi. names eue D
rp one w his name acoꝛding to che xiſ tribes.

Andshou Halt make spon the bꝛeſtlappe

two laſtenyng cheynes of pure golde a wie⸗


p ranges
e.
che Ephod. che

Amada alle enaes ot Sec €

dien ok Akrael inthe bzeſtlappe of zudgem

vpd his bert / when he goth in to 6 hol place
fo2 aremembꝛaũce betoze the Romenner.
And thou Malt put in thebsekiappe: en


Ttremonyes,


irg Piamonde Che theben aU savor
69 Zarge touna ck tarsi


v. m ment* vim and chumin:that they be euen

amen / vpon Aarõs herte when he goeth in beloꝛe

re dtm che Lone and Karon Wall bere the enfante

nator igpeple of the chyldꝛen of Nrael vpon bis herte
umm per bekoꝛe the Loꝛde alwape.

A And thou Hale make the tunpele vnto ß
Ephod all to gether ol Jacyncte. And thers
pp Malbe anhole fozthe heed in che myddes ol
ait / and let there be a bonde of wouen woꝛke


7 that
/évounde aboute the coler of it as it were the


and


tcaule mech out / that he dye not.

uch re And thou ſhalt make a plate of pure gol⸗
den gebs de and Argue there on(as fpgnettes are gra
todoo uen) Che holynes of the Londe / a put it on
alace o pacyncte e it vnto the mytre /
° the koꝛekront ol it / p it be bpon darõs
that Aaron bere the Lynne ok the
0 ies whych the chplbzer of Fact
ebatowed in all theirholpe gpttes. And
eee

d ep mape be acce .
4 Ai chou halt mans an albe of byde ant
r chou halt make amytre ot byte a a grꝛdell

mep.via or nedle woke. :
foe ane Andthou Maltmake foz Barons fonnes
fe che tyne: allo Cotes / gyzdels and bonettes honourable
2 the offepng and gloꝛious / and thou halt put them vpon
foxtpnne” A at on chy bꝛother and on bps konnes wyth
don. digga. him & walt anopnte them ¢ kpll their hands
ond cofecrate them chat ther mave miniltrẽ
bnto me. And thou baltmake them inen
bꝛeches to couer their pꝛeupties: fromthe
lopnes vntothe thres Mall ther reach. And
cher ſhalbe vpon Aaron a his tonnes / when
Lobe xo. they goo in to the* tabernacle of witnelie / oꝛ
.d. hen ther go vntothe altare tomprtttre in
ſolpnes / that they bere no lynne and lodre.
Hehe in Bee And it chabe a latve og euer onto Aaron g
d. hig leedakterhim.


che contecratton of Aaron and his lonnes.


twete bꝛedtempered wych ople ¢ waters ol
Sete bꝛed anornted t orlel of whete floure


rodus,


od, j
xxxiij.
whalt thou make them) a put thé in a mative x
and bainge them in the maunde with the ove
and the. il. rammes. x
ind bꝛynge Aaron and hrs fonnes vnto
the dooꝛe of the tabernacle ot wytnelſe / and
Swath thé with water /a take the garmentes /
and put vpon Laron:the ſtrayte cote / andthe
tunycle of the Ephod and the Epyod and the
bꝛeſtlappe: a thẽ to hym with the bꝛo⸗
deredgyndell OF p Ephod. And put themytre
vpon his heed and put the holy crowne bpo
the mytre. Chen take the anoyntynge ople
and poure it vpon his heed and anoynte him
Andbryngebys lonnes and put albes vpan
Tame and gyed them wyth gpzdels ag well
ſaron as his tonnes. and put the bonettes
on them pᷣ the preattes office mae be theirg
foza perpetuall lawe.
And Fpl che handes ol Aarons and okhys
tones / and bꝛynge the ore befoze thetaber- i
nacle of wptnetie. And let Aaron andhys «Benita
fonnes put ehetrbanbes ps hrs heed a ll
him befoze the Lozve in the doze ol the taber
nacle of wytneſle. And take of the bloude ol
the oxe and put it bpd the homes of the alter
we ar roh K poure all the bloude ops
2 — ofthe alter / and take all the fate
t couereth the inwardes / a ß Hall that is 4
onthe ruer and the. l nrdners withthe fact
chat is bpon them: and burne them bpd the
alter: But the fet ok the oxe and his ckynne
and bps donge chalt thou pide pie
without the hoſte. Foz it is a lynneoltkeryng.
Chen take one or the rammies / a let Hard
and hys fonnes put their hondes bpon the
heade of the ram / a caule hym to be laynẽ /
andtake of his bloude and lpꝛennell itroſide
aboute vpon the alter / and cutt the ram in
peces and wach the inwardes ok him and hig
bend an puctyem vntothe peces a vnto his
bed / and burne the hole ram vpon the alter.
Foꝛ it is a burnt evntothe Loꝛde /
aal wete lauoure ofthe Lordes kacrptice. u. ohne
Andtakrethe other ram and ier Karon a frechen ken
bis fonnes put their hondes ppon bys heed an en eng
and lett hym than be kylled. And tale orhys Ezech. et.
bloude a put it vponthe trppe ofthe rrahte
eate of Haron and ok hys fonnes / and bpon
the thombe of their rpghte bandes and vpon
the great too of their rpabte kete a lpꝛennell
the blonde vpon the alter rounde aboute,
Chen take ot che bloude that is vvon ce
alter and of che anoyntynge oyle / andlpzen⸗
hellitbpon Laron and his vellimentes / and
ppon his fonnes and vpon their garmentes
alto. Chen is he and hit clo eule andhis
fonnes and their clothes holpe allo.
Chen take the katt of the ram and bys
rompe athe fatt that couereth the inwardes
and the kall of the luer a Me atts


Ceremonyes. Exod


G


andthe fate that is vpon them and the ryghe
fhoulter(For chat ram ig a kulloffeyng) and a
kpmnell ok bzede a cake of opled bed anda
waer out or the backett of wete bꝛed that
is before the Lozd/e put allvpon the hande
ok Aaron and on the handes of hys Connes:
and waue them in and out a waueoſkrpnge
vnto the Lose. hen take it from ok their
Agne burnett pi the alter: euẽ vpõ the
urntottrynge / to be a lauoure of cwetneſle
bekoze the 107d Foꝛit is alaccifyce onto the
€ Loꝛd The take 5 brett or d ram p is Aarös
ulloftrynge and wae it a waueoltryng be⸗
koꝛe the Loꝛde / x lett that be thy parte. And
ſanctifye the bꝛeſt ol the wane ge and
the cholilder or the heueolkrynge whpche is
waued and heued vp ok the ram whiche ic;
Eulloffrynge of Aarö and ok his fonnes, And
it halbe Tarõs e his lonnes dutye ko euer /
of the chyldꝛen ok Jrael / koz it is an heueok⸗
krynge. Andtheheucofiryng chalbe ) Lord
dutpe oF 5 cheldie ok Wlrael:eut of thetacri=
fyte ol their peaceolltyngd which they heue
onto $ 10 d. And holpe garmetes or Aard
ſhalbe hys fonnes akterhym / to anoynte the
therin / and to kylltheir handes therin. And
chat lonne 6 is pꝛeaſt in his ſtede alter him /
wall put them on leuen dapes: that he goo
into che tabernacle of wytnelle / tomrniſtre
in the holpe place,

Chen take the ram 5 ig the kullokrynge
Elethe his Het in an holpe place. Ind Aarons
and bis fonnes wall eate the flech of hym / ¢

F che bꝛedchat is in the backet: euẽ in the doze
ol the tabernacle of wytnelle. Andther Malt
eate thẽ / becaule the attonement was made


v lobe in ee chertwpth to kel their handes @to*fanctitie


16618. h. a


chem: but a ſtraunger wall not eate therot /
becaule they are halpe.

Sfoughte ofthe fle or the Fulloffcynges:
o20F the bed remapne vnto the moznpnge/
thou chalt burne it with kpze; fz it cpall not
be eaten / becaule tt is holpe. And le thou doo
vnto Aaron andhrs lonnes / euen to in all
thenges Henan commaundedthe: that
thou kyil ther handes feuen dapes and
euery daye an ore koꝛ a cynneolrpnge ko to
recöcyle with all. Andthou ſpalchalowe the
alter whe chou recõcyleſt it / a Halt anopnte
it tofanctifpe it. Deuendaxes thou Maitre
concyle the alter and lanctykre it / p it maxe

Gbe an alter moſt holpe to that noman mare
touche it but they that be conlecrate.

Chis is that which chou Walt offre vpon

tte alter it. lambes o one vere olde daye by
pave koꝛ euer / the one thou Walt offre inthe
moꝛnynge and the otherat euen. And vnto
the one lambe take atench deale of floure
mengled woth the kourth parte o anhin ot
beaten oyle / athe kourth parte of an hin ol


us,


wyne / tor a dꝛynckeoktrynge. And che other
lambe thou ſbalt offer at euen and ſhalt doo
cherto aco dynge to the meateokrynge and
dꝛinckeolkrynge in the moꝛmynge / to be an
odoure ok a kwete fauoure of the lacrifpce ol
the Loꝛde. And it ſbalbe a continuall burnt⸗
okkrynge amonge poute chridzen atter vou /


in the dooꝛe of the tabernacle of wytnee be


koꝛe the Loꝛde / where g wyll mete ou to
Wehren owe a wels niete w

e chyldzen ol F(rael/ and wplbe fanctikped
inmpnehonoure. And J wyllkanctprpe the
tabernacte ot wytnelte ¢ the alter: o J welt
fanctitye allo boch Haron and hys fonnesta


be my pꝛeaſtes And mozeouer J wilt dwell
amonge the childꝛen of Acrael ¢ wylbe their
God. And they Hall knowe that Jam the
Loꝛde cheir God that bꝛoughte them out ot
the lande of Egypt koꝛ to dwel amonge thẽ:
euen I the Lozde their God.

Che forme deel 3 with all that bee


nede /a befoze the merepleate that is bekoꝛe
the wytneſee / where J well mete the. 3


emonpes,


GB And Aatö wall burne theron twete cenve
euerymoznyng when he dzetteth the apes:
and iphewple at euen when be Cetteth v
che lampes he hall burne cente perpetuallp
betoꝛe the Loꝛde thoꝛow out youre genera⸗
cpons. Ve thall put no ſtraũge cenle tyeron/

nether burntlacrpkpce noꝛ meateolkringe /
nether poure any dznkeo! theron,
And Aaron chall reconcple bpon the
hoꝛnes ot it once in a ere / wyth the bloude
ol the fynneotirynge of reconcylinge: euen
once in the pere tall he veconcple it choꝛow
voure generacyons. And lo is ĩt moſt holpe
onto the Lo,


g, kycle is xx.
chi fin iche heueoffeynge vnto the Lozd. And al chat


are nombzed of thé that are. Lx. pere olde a
aboue fall. geue an heueokkrynge vnto the
Loꝛde. The riche call not palle / othe pooze
{hall not goo onder halke atycie when che
geue an heueokkrynge onto che Loꝛde wort
attonement of their Coules . And thou
take the reconcplinge money of the chyldꝛẽ
ot Icrael and ſhalt put it vnto the vle ofthe
ernacle of witnelle / a it hall be a memo⸗
Mall of che chyldꝛẽ of Alrael bekoze $ Lo: /
tontate arsneconement Fos they Looe
‘ott.


a —.—


allo ol


ic betwene the tabernacle of wyrnede a che with wylde


alter and put water thevinnchat daran and


Exodus.


nn conneg mare walh boch telt hade and
their kete therout / Abe pdt


P tabernacle of wytneſſe / o when they go vn⸗


tothe altare to mpnittre a to burne d Lon
olkrynge / lelt ther dre. And it halbe an oz
nauncẽ foz euer vnto hym this feed amoge
poure chyldꝛen after vou. 4
Andthe Lozd (pake onto Motes fayinge:
take pꝛincypall (pices: o£ purempzve Epue
hundꝛed fpcles / or lwete cynamonie hatte lo
moch two hũdzed and kyttie Cycles of lwete
calampte / two hundred and. l Ok callia /t wo


hundred and d alter the holpe ſpcle / a ok ople .


isholp


olpue an hin. Ind make okthe hol pe anopn-auepnthng ble
ale ople euẽ an ople compounde after the doth figueetye
ctatte of the apoticarye. And noynte the ta⸗veriue of the
bernacle of toptnetic therewith / the arcke denden


ok wytnelle / and the table w


all hes ap- wrd by ihe


parell / and the candelſtyck wyth all his oꝛdy worde of god:
naunce / and the alter of incente ! e the altere detcendpnge.
of burnetacrpfice and all his vedkels ano tye eher arg
lauer and his Eote.Andtaccityetyem d thep yuh ehe
mape be moſt holpe: ſothat no man touche ¢ contequentiy

é but they that be halowed. And anoynte D Ape


Javon and his fonnes and contecrate the to
myniſtre vnto me. 1


ſpoſtles
all the fapth ⸗
kull / a i J tal,


e hou fait fpeahetneo che cyptort Of xxx. a.


Ilrael Capinge: chys chalbe an holpe oyn⸗
tynge opie vnto me / thoꝛow out poure gene⸗
raciag. Momas llech halbe anopnted theres
with:nether chall ye make any other after p
mahynge of it koꝛ tis holpe/ſe thertoze that
ve take it forbolve: wholdeuer maheth phe
/: whotoewer putteth any ot it vpon a

— . perych krom amonge bys
Andthe Loꝛd layde vnto Moleg:take vn
to che Cwete ſpices:ſtacte / onycha were gal
Kpure ktänencks / ok eiche ipke moch:
make cens of thé cõpoũde alter } cratte ot


apoticarie / nungled together /d it mayebe


made pure a holpe. And beate it to powder
and püt it betoze the wytneſſe in thetabemm


Cle ot wytnelle / where J wyll mete the / but


let it be vnto vou holpe-Andtethat ve make
none alter the makynge ok that / but let it be
vnto you holpe koꝛ the Lod. And wholoeuer
Chall mate ipke vnto that / to tmellthereto /
thall perity from amonge his people.

che caliynge of wesalecland Ahaltab the woozk⸗


men. Tho babolh i commaundeb » -1
— aregeneh sets, maunded . Che tables of


OCbherrsi.chapter,
5 a tbe oe tah no ets


eborDe* BI haue called bp ex xb


bene engeren

= put e trybe of Juda.

— Ty
e ant

ledge: euen in all maner wehe oa


The Golven


fotle teapts / to woꝛke in gold ſyluer a bꝛalle
and with the crafte to graue ſtones / to lett a
to carue in tynibze a to woꝛke in all maner
woꝛkmanchipe. And beholde / Thaue geuen
hemto be his companion Ahaliab the konne
o Ahilaniach or the trybe of Ban e in the
hertes of all that are wyle harted z haue put


Bwyldome to mahe all tyat 3 haue cömaun⸗


dedthe:the tabernacle of wytnelle / and the
arcke of witneſte / and the mercyleate that is
there vpon all the omamentes of the taber⸗
nacle / and the table with bys odinaunce ! &
the pure candelckike myth all his apparell /
and the alter ofincens/ a the alter of burnt⸗
üynges with allhis veſlels and the lauer
ch bys kote / a the veſtimentes to mynt


Exodus.


ue lande of Egypt / we wotte not what ys
ecome. 3

And Aaron Cavde vnto them: plucke of the
golden earynges wyych are in the cates ol
poure wyues / voure Comes and of youre
daughters and bꝛynge them bnto me. And

pid ad aie ee plucked of the gold earinges

that were be eares / and bꝛoughte chem

vnto Aaron. Indhe * receaued them oF ther » 9.45
bens and facponed it with a Ache e made

ica calke of molten metall. ther lade:


Chis is thy God OI crael / whiche bought ae n


the out ofthe lande of Egypte.
And whẽ Hard Cawwe chat / he made an al⸗
tave befoze it / amade a pꝛoclamaciõ ſapinge


tre to moꝛow chalbe holy dave vnto the Lozde.


Ind they role vp in the moznpnge and offred
burntotfrynges / and bought ofrpnges ol
attonement allo.“ And than thee kattthem «iso
be / role vp agarne
o pape.
Chen the Lopde ſarde onto Molege go Dent
et the doune / Coz thy people tohych thou
ꝛoughteſt out of thelandeot Egypte haue
marred ali /thepate turned at once out of 5
wape whiche J cmatived che c haue made Plan


the a calte of molten metall a haue wozch


u ro. xxl. c HENGE


and rr. d.


8. With the


he ene ban aner of wytnede which


were or stone and wyittẽ wich the tynger ot


God.
epa : wih, Sr ch Joe ute erm the golden enge eee
prite of Pabelh ron them puternge cor, in remembzauiceot


the (pyrite:
God / or wit!
- the power o


panpeth aol
205) an nA ut. Böcke ele


Fi. c.


a


‘of bis promple. Bc breaketh the tables for anget. Oe
chpbeth Aaron: The poolatees ave fapne« 8
iH co forgeue lo toput bin drs tbe


Thesrris.chapeer
8 aap wen the people


edit a haue oftredtherto eo pech bra is

g thy God thou Alrael {whic bath ꝛought
the out ol the lañde ot Egypte. And the Loꝛd
favd vnto Moles:beholde ! I te this people ¢


that it is a pfeneched people / a now ther⸗ Exo. m


fore luttre me 6 my wzath ape ware hote
ppon thẽ / and chat mave conlume thé: and
then wyll make ofthea myghtte people.
Chen Motes beccugbte the Loꝛde hes
God F fayde:D Lozde why Hulothy wath
‘ware hote vpon thy people whych chou halt
bꝛought out of the lande ofegypte d great


vo wer and with a myghtie hade? * wherfoze unt


hulnthe Egypcians kpeake and laye: soz
a mylchete dyd he bꝛynge them out: euen koꝛ
to llee them in the mountapns / and to con⸗
lume them from the face of the erth. Curne
from thy tearle waath and hae compaqton
ouer the wykednelle or thy people. emébze E
Abzahã / Itaac and Flracl thy ſeruauntes /
to whom thou lwoꝛzelt bychrne owne felfe a


lapdeſt vnto them: J well multiple voure 5
feedasthe ttarres oft eau a allthes Lande g :


which g hauefapde/ J will geue vnto poure
feed:¢ thep hall enberet it fo2 cuer. And the
Losderetrapnedhym ſelle krom chat euel /
110 5 lade he wolde do vnto bis people
nd Mole turned his backe a wet doune
rom the bell / a the. l. fables of mytnelte in


bis hid: which were wꝛittẽ on both ð leaues


v and were the woꝛke of od / ne


was the wzrtingt ol Gad grauen v. e
tables. Ind w
: e


Calle.


eople as they thouted / he tarde vnto Mo⸗

ferahere ig a nople of warre in § hoſte 5
he lapdent is not the crpe ol chem that haue
che maſtrre / noꝛ of the that haue the woꝛle:
but J doo heare the nople or lyngynge.

E And as ſoone as he came npe vnto che holte
and lawe the calfe and che daunſynge / bys
wzath waxed hote / and he calt the tables out
ol his hande / and bꝛale them cué at che hyll


tote. Ind he tone the calke whych they had


made and burned it with fpze / and ſtampt it
vnto powder and ſtrawed it in the water a
made the chyiden oF Arael dzprke. And tha


Motes Cayde vnto Aaron : what opo toys l


people onto the that thou halt bought fo
great a tynne vpon them.
And Aaron lade: jet not the wreath ol my
Jog ware fearte / thou knoweſt the people
B thepare euen lett on myccheke: cher fapde
vnto me: make vs a god to go before bs ! £02
we wote not what is become ol Moles the
felow 6 bꝛought vs out ok the land of Egypt
And kapde vntothem let them chat haue
godde / cane and bꝛynge it me:and A catt it in
tothe fyꝛe / and there of came out calfe.
g When Moles ſawe that the people were
nated(fo2 Haron had madethem naked vnto
their chame when ther made inturrectiõ) he
went ¢ tone in the gate ol the holte glapde.
It anp man pertapne vnto the Lord / let him
come to me. And all the lonnes of Leut ga⸗
thered them lelues together and came vnto
him. And he lapde onto them / chus lapeth the


aum, rv. Lorde of Flrack* put euerpman bys werde


bphis tyoe / and goo in and out from gate to
te thoꝛow out the holte: ard dee eucry ma
de bꝛether / euery man his krende and euerp
man his neghboure. And the chyldꝛẽ of Leu
drdas Moes had ſarde.“ Andthere were
dapne ofthe people the lame dave /aboute
the thoulande men. Khen opfes lardkpll
poure hands onto the Lozde this dave euery
man vpon bis lonne a vpon big bꝛother: to
bꝛvnge vpon pou a blellynge this dare.


405. x. b


And on the moꝛowe Moyles larde vnto ppler


G § people: e haue fynneda greattynne But
now J twpll goo vp onto the Loꝛde / to wytt
’ 150 er q can mate an attonemẽt koꝛ vou⸗


e lade which Nlard onto the: beholde /
all Goo befoze the. Heuerthe⸗
myen Jr wel. v pplet


Exodus.


re xxv.
theirfpnne bps thé And the Lom plagedthe v. Ko dytee
people / becaule cher made the cake whpch (9 anne
Aaron made. bub rent,


cht L020 Cendeth an angelt bekozehis people. The inte dap
Tord denpeth to goovp with che people. Ehe iene urch if a6 ut


Tamene thei pn. a9 otes talteth wpth the Lordeg Bent. (8
delpꝛeth ko le his face; and is commaunded to ande
vpon the rocke.


Che. xrxiij. Chapter.

Mdthe Lone Cayde vnto Moles: 7H
departe a goohence: boch thou a

b people whichthou batt bzought


and Jacob tapinge:vnto thy teed J will geue
it. And J wyil lende an angel befoze the/¢ Ero. xxiſ e.
wyll call out the Cananptes / che Amoꝛites ⸗
the Hethites / the Pherezites the Peuiteg / a
the Jebulptes: that thou matt go into a lade
that lloweth with mplke and honpe. But z
wyll not god among vou my lelte / fo ve are
a ftyfnechen people elt Z conlume pou by ß
wape. And when the people heard this euell
tydinges / they ſoꝛowed:andnoman dyd put
on his beſt rayment.

And the Lozolpakebnto Moles / fave one
tothe chyldren ol Alrael:pe are a ſtyinecked
people: muſt come once lodenlyvpon vou /
a make an ende of vou. But now put poure
goodlprapmét From por / chat Amaxe wete
what ko do onto vou. Andchechrldzen ot Jr⸗
rael larde thett goodly rapment krom them zz
euen vnder the mount Poꝛeb.

And Moles toke the tabernacle a pytched
it wichout the holte a Ferre ok frõ che hoſte /
Kcalledit § tabernacle of wytnelte. And all
that wold axe any quetti ot the Hovde / wẽt
out vnto the tabernacle of wytnelle which
was without thehoſle. And when Motes
went out nto the tabernacle/all the people
role vp and tone eueryman inhis tent doze
andioked after Mole / vntyllhe was gone
in toche tabernacle. Ind as fone as Molen
was entred in to the tabernacle / the clouden
delcended and ode in the Doze of che
kabernacle / and he talfied with Wales. And
when all the people lawe the clouden ppler
ſtande in the tabernacle doze/ ther role vp &
wozcbipped:euerpman inhis tent dose.

And the Lode tpake vnto Moles a face
toface/asamantpeateth vntohis krende. Aoi Gon
And when Moles curnedagarne in tothe son kae to
holte / che lad Forua bis feruatite the tonne ¢acenssto naue
ol Nun departed not out of the tabernacle, a menpkelte e
And Mores tayde ontothe Lozde: fe / thou C i. 9 55
fapnett vnto merleade this people fozth / bunt „ in asenetig.
chou Hhetwelt me not whom thou welt fend xx. g ·
with me. And halt fapde moꝛecuer knowe
the byname ard thou batt allo feũde grace


How therfore PET haue fende
in ms tüte: Now th 2 a ha apres


Ceremonyes.


fauoure in thy tyghte / then chewe me thy
waype d let me know the: that A maye kynde

race in thytygyte. And loke on this allo /

hbovwthat this nacyon is thy people.

And he lapde:nip pretence challgoo wyth
the / and 2 wll geue the reſt. And he carde:
Ikthy pꝛelence gon not wyth me / carpe vs
not Meaty Foz how wall it be hnownenow


that both d andthy people haue kounde fa- .


uoure in thy lyghte / but in that chou goeſt
with bs: that boch Jand chr people hauen
pꝛeempnence beko all che people that are
bpon the face ok the erih. Ind the Loꝛde card
vnto Mole J well doo chys allo that thou
D halt larde tos thou hast founde grace in my
te / and Juno we the bynamẽ.

And he Cape: beleche the / hewe methy
glozte:And he taßd⸗Awiil make all my good
00 befoꝛe the / and J wyll be called in chys
name g ehouah before 5 /a will chewe mercr
to whom J chew mercr / and well haue com
patton on whom Jhadie cõ padlon. And he
faye furthermoze:thou mapſt not le my fac

50 There n ce /Fo2 *ehere chan no man femeandipue,
baer und tun; And che Lorde fapde /bebolde) thereisa
Hot thut thek place byme / a thou Malt ondebps a rocke
ceok god which and whple my glozve goeth forth J wyll put
8 the face of the in a clykte of the roche / a well put mne


e


them that Cert. Wpll tale awaye mpne ade / and chou Malt


fo2 the fapntes le my backe partes: but my kace cal not be
that are in he fene.
nien do in dede


le it. Wut that ache tables are renued. The mereye ol od. Co

none that ip⸗ haue tclowhip with the gentyles 16 fozbidden/ and

ne th in ‘te bos their pdolatrie alto. Che tcatt of (wete bzeade. Che

dpe can le ner Fir begotte. Che Saboch. The feat of ij.wehes,

c be de Che kit keutes. Motes kalt / Holes kace gipſtreth.
Face: ut mug ¶ Che. xxxiiii. Chapter.

be tpt pu⸗ J Id the Loꝛde ſayde onto Motes:

ralped by ewe the. ij. tables of ſtone like vn

ene mape werte in

ofen cee we ich were in the

kpzct. i. tables / which thou bzahet And be

redye agavnſt the moꝛninge that thou mart

come vp early vnto the niodt of Sinai and

ſtande me there vpon the toppe of the mount

But let no man come vp with the / nether let

any man be kene thoꝛow aut all the mount /

: eth let epeno; orẽ pager the hyll.

And holes hewed r tables ok (tone ipke

vnto the Epett and role vp early inthe moz-

nynge and went vp vntothe mounte ok i⸗

nat as the Loꝛde cammaundedhim:andtoße

inhis hande the. lt. tables of tone. And the

Lozd defcendedin the cloude / and tobe with

Ee him there: and he called vpdõ the name ot the


Exodus.


Repel mercy in ſtoꝛe kozthoulandr / and fog
eueſt wynednelle / trelpace and ynne ( Foz
Heres no man ynnocent befoze the)and vy⸗
liteſt the wyhrdneſle ofthe fathersopontye
chyldꝛen and vpon chyldzens chyldzen / euen x5
nto che thzrd and fourth generacion. And
Motes bowed him ſelk tothe erth qupcklx /a
wozſbypped efayd: Ik A haue tounde grace
in th kyghte o Loꝛdẽ / chen let mx Loꝛde go
with vs (ko it is a tuburne people) g haue
mercy vpon oure wyckhedneſſe a dure inne /
and let va be enheritaunce.
And he cayd beholde / J make an appoynt-
ment bekoꝛe all this people / that a wyl doo
maruellg:foch aß haue not bene done in all
the woꝛlde / nether amonge anpnacyon. And
all che people amonge which thou art / Wall
Ce the wozke ofthe Loꝛde:toz it is a terrrble
thinge that J wyll do with the: kepe all that
I commaunde the this dape / and beholde⸗ A
Wyll catt out bekoze the: the Amozites / Car
naanites / Hethites /Pheresites / Peuttes
and Jebulites *aahe hede to thy leite / that: Deut
thou make no compacte with the inhabtters ih. wen.
ok the lande whether thou goetk leſt it be
caule oł ruyne amůge vou But ouerthꝛowe
their alters andbzehe their pylers / and cutt
Downe theirgroues / koz thou ſwalt woꝛchip⸗
pe no ſtraunge God, Foꝛ the CLoꝛde is called
gelous / becaule he is agelous God: let yt
thou male anp agrement wyth the inhabi⸗
ters ok the lande / whenther go a whoozpnge
alter their goddes and do factifice vntothelr
andes / they call the and thou cate of their
faceptpce : and thou tate of their — —
vnto thylonnes / and when their da
goo a twhoozpnge after their goddes / cher
mate thy Cones gooa whoozenge after
their goddes allo. ds, aC
Chou ſhalt make the no goddes of metall
Che fett of cwete bꝛed chalkthou kepe / g. vit
dapes thou Halt eate vnleuended bꝛedi as
commaunded the in the tyme apoynted in
moneth ol Abib: ko inchemoneth of Abi
thou camelt out ot E All chat bzea- mareyce!
Rech vp the matryce e myne / K all that sail the f
bzeaheth the matryce amonge thy catell / vl born n
lebe male: whether it be ore oz fhepe But g ver
kirſt ok the alle thou thalt by out wa thepe /
02 pr thou redeme him notte thou bꝛeanehis
neche. All the kirltboꝛne of thy fonnes thou
muſt nedes redeme. And le that no man ap


Exo.
Gcli.
Deutz


Loꝛde. And when the Loꝛde walked betoze che fir


ert · xxx · o him he crped: Loꝛde Logne God full of cd


pallion and mercr / which art not lyghely an


grye but abundant in meror and truech and


emonpes,


Alraek ko! 3 wyll cact out the nacyds betone


. that noman ch


Cpe thx lande / wyple thou goers bp
to appeare befoze the face ot the Loꝛde the
God / thꝛrte in the pere. 8

2 -*Chou Halt not offre che blaude of mp la
gas xxxiſ . e cricycẽ wich leuẽded bꝛedenether Hall ought
ful: fuß. c. ofthe tacrikyce of the tealt at Padeouer / be

lefte onto the moznyng.
frutes ofthplande / thou walt e vnto
boule of the Lozbe thy God. And that
ou lethe not a kydd in bis mothers mrlke.
Andthe Loꝛde lapde vnto Motes: wpte
thele woꝛdes / ko; bpon thefe woꝛdes haue
made a couenaũt with the and with the ctl
n rb. open of Jirgel. Ardhe was chere wyth the
opel dapes d. xl. nightes andnecher ate
bꝛednotdꝛantte water. Andhe wrote in the
2 woꝛdes ol the couenaſit: euen ten
verkes.
And Motes came doune krom most St-
nat e che. ij. tables of wytnelle tn his hande /
e petche wyft not chat the fhynne of his face
hone wrth beames ok his comenynge wyth
bent. And when Aaron ard all the chriozen
OF Icrael loked vvon Woles and tawe that
¥. che ge - che lupnne ol his o face Hone wych beames
n $900 ep were a krapde to come nee him. Buthe
bn called them to him andchen Aaron ¢aBlthe


aug. ae bie ontobimn/ §So-


atten wich chem.
kana e laſt ali the chudzen of glrael ca⸗
tie vnto him / andhe commaunded them all
atthe Londe hadlarde vnto him in mount
inat And as loone ag he had made an ende
dt comenynge with the / he put a couerpnge
vpon his face. But when he went betoze the
Loꝛde tocpeale with him he toke the coue⸗
tyng ol vnt yllhe came out. Andhe came out
Klpane onto the chyldzen ok Acrael 6 which
he was commaunded.and the chyldze of al
670 race ty sae tort) ames but ores
8 jon N
25 cou ebpo his face/ontell he wet
to comen wich hym.
che both. Che fprſt krutes art requpred. be
el the people tooffer. Bezaletl and Abaliab
debrebcr ge and fete 5 ss 3
Che. rxxv. Chapter.

d Motes gathered anche compa
8 ) ape ofthe chplozen of Ftracl toge-

cher and tapd vnto them: thele are

8 chynges which the Lorde bath
omatived to do: Sire daves ve thall wozke /
but 6 leuẽth dave thall be vnto you the holy
Sabboth ok the Lon reſt: co p wholoeuer
doth . therin/ thall dre. Mone;
bear ba ersd ps de Saeed dere
oure cyon 5
And Motes fpake vnto all the multitude


Exodus,


e kpꝛſt ol d firlt⸗


ee
rx vj.
DE the chyndzen ok gtrael tapinge : this is the r Exo. xxo. i:
vnge which che Loꝛde cõmaũded fapinge:
Seue. krom amonge vou an heueckrpnge/
vntothe Loe. :
All that are wyllynge in their hartes /
wall bꝛynge heueolkrynges onto the Loꝛde:
golde / lpluer / bꝛaſſe / acyncte / ſcarlet / pur⸗ nt it
pul/bpliea'gootes hearrerams Chines redz eee in the
and taxus ckynnes and Sethim wodd: and rrvi. a.
ople Coz lyghtes a lpices fo2 the anoyntynge b. Gotespearre
ople and foz the twete cens: And Hnixſtones in that 175
3 be fett kor the Ephad and fog ™*Fattebavret
ebzeſtlappe.
And let all the that are wyreharted amõge
vou / come and male all that the Loꝛde hath B
comaundedꝛthe habitacion a the tenttherot
with his couervnge and his rynges / boddes /
Darves / pplers ¢ lockettes: the arne and the
faves cherok with d merepleate a the vaple
that couereth it: table and his ſtaues with
all chat pertapneth therto ¢ the ſhewebꝛed:
the candelſticke ot iyghte wyth his apparell
and his lampes andthe ople oz thelvabtes:
the cens alter a his ſtauet / the anorntynge
ople andthe l wete cens and the hägynge be⸗
loge the tabernacle doze:the alter of burntla
erlfyces and his beaten gredyꝛẽ that longeth
therto with his ſtaueg d all hys oꝛdinaünce
andthe lauer and his kote che hangynges ol
che courte with his pylers ¢ their lockettes /
and the hangynge to the doze ok the courte:
the ppnnes of the habitacion and thepynnes
okthe courte with their boozdes: the myny⸗
ſtrynge garmentes to mpnpltre with in ho⸗
Ipnetle) and the holp veltimentes of Aaron
the pꝛeaſt and the veſtimentes ok his lonneg
an al ¢ the chpldzen ot
all the companye ofthe chyldꝛen ol
erael departed fro the pretence of Moles. C
ndchey wentlas many as their hartes co⸗
raged the a as manpas their ſpirites mabe
them willynge) and bꝛought beucofiryngcs
tonto the Loꝛde / to the mah ynge of the taber
nacle of wytneſle ¢ £02 ali his bfes ¢ for. the
holpbettimétes. And the men came with the
wemenſeuẽ as manycas were willynge har
tedhand bꝛought bꝛacelettes / earvnges / rvn⸗
es & gy:dels and al maner Jewels of gold.
indall the men that waued waueotkrynges
ol golde vnto the Loꝛde and cuery man with
whom was seeraearee oy deo dige ot
byte 02 govteshearte 02 pnnes o
names 07 tar? lüpnneg/brougbtit. Ind all P ne uh br
houe bp golde oꝛ bzafle / bꝛought an heueok⸗; ther it be tylbe
krynge vnto the Loꝛde. And all men w wh or iruen.
was toũde fethim wodd mete koꝛ any maner
woꝛke 03 ſerupce / bꝛought it.
And all the wemen that were wple herted
to wozke Wiheirhandes panne / a bought
che tponne woꝛke / both of Jacyncte / lcarlet /
. ij. vnrpul


Levemonypes,


purpul and byte Indall che wemen that ex
celled in wyrdöme beg iger the gotes
hapꝛe. And the loꝛdes brought Onix ones
and fetttones £o2 the Evod / and koꝛ the bꝛeſt
lappe / and ſpyce ¢ ople: both fo; the Iyghtes

and fo2 the anorntrnge ople ¢ Foz the we
D cens Andehe cyploze or Flract bꝛought wel
~ Ipngeoffeynges onto the Lozde/both inen a
wemen:as many as their hartes made them
wyllpuge to bꝛynge / koz all maner worhes
which the Logde had commaunded to mabe

bp the bande of Motes.

ind Moles fapde vnto the chyldꝛen ot FF


od. xrrra rgelibeholde che Loꝛde hach called hy name


Bezaleel § conne ot Mr p konne of Hur oF
che trpbe of Juda / and hath kpiled him meth
che lpzete of God / wyth wyfdome / önder⸗
ſtandynge and knowiege / euen in all maner
worn / tofynde out curpous wozkes co
woꝛke in golde / lyluer and beatie : and wych
unge of ſtones to lett / with hecupnge

n wodd / and to twozhe in all maner of Cote

woꝛks. and ahm put in his harte $ grace
to teache:both kunden en J konne of A-
hilamach of che trybe ol Pan hath he kylled


w wyldome okherte / to woꝛke all maner of
grauen wozhe: they are alto bꝛzoderers and
wozkers with nedle / In Jacyncte / ccarlet /
purple and byte / and are weuers that can
make all maner woe / and can deupte lot⸗


le wopkes.


©, Che thynges that weynleel and Ahal ab made taz
thebolpplaceot che Lose, i :


¶ Che. xxrvi. Chapter.
Od Bezaleel weought ¢ Abaltab
L all wile harted men to whom the
Londe had geuen wyldome and
nderſtandynge / to owe how to
‘Swozhe all maner twozke koz $ holpe lerupce /
in al that the Loꝛde cõmaunded. And Mo⸗
kes called Foz Bezaleel Ahaliab e all $ wyle
herted men in whole hertes p L oꝛd had put


wyldome / euẽ as many as thetrhartes coꝛaa


ged to come onto ) woꝛketo woꝛkeit. And
they receaued of Moles alt b beucofiryngs
which the chplnze of Ftrael had bzought foz
the woꝛke of che holve feruice tomake it w
all. And they bꝛought belyde that wyllynge
offrynges euery moznung.

And ali che wyle men that wrought all the
holye wozke / came euer man fd his twozhe
which they made / and kane vnto Moes
lapingeithe people bzynge to moch ¢aboue
that i ynough to lerue fo2 the werke which
the Lozdehath commaunded to make. And
then Motes gaue a cõmaũdmẽt / ¢ they cau
ledit to be pꝛoclamed thoꝛow out the holte
lapinge:ſe that netherman noꝛ woman pꝛe
pave anx moare woꝛke for the boly heueok⸗


Exodus.


Ecphige / nd fothe people were to den to:
bꝛynge: kor the tutte ther had / was lutkyciẽt
to them onto all the worn / to mabe it and


to moch. as —. 2

And all the wyte harted men amonge the
that wꝛoughte in che wozlie ofthe habpta⸗
cyon made: eu. x coꝛtarnes of twyned belle
Füller aheunben and purple / and made the

Hot cherubyng with bꝛoder woꝛke. Che
length of one curtarne was. xxvitſ. cubpte s
and the biedch ili and were all of one lte. 3
And cher coupled fpue curtayns by them tet
ued / and other krue by thé leiueg. And ther
made kyltye louppes of Jacyncte alonge bp
the edge of the vtmoſt cürtapne / euen in the
keluege of che couplynge courtayne: And ir⸗
newple cher made on the ſyde of che vtmoſt
couplenge curtayne on che other ede kyktle
loupes ther made in the one curtapne / and
kylt ye in the edgeolk d couplynge courtapne
on che other cydẽ do thatthe loupes were one
ouer agentt another.

And they mane kyetpe rynges of golde
coupled the curtaynes one to another wy
the rynges:and lo was it made a dwellynge


place. :

Andehep made. xr. curtaynes. of gootes
hayre to bea tent ouer the tabernacſe xxx.
cubttes longe a pece and iti. cubptes bꝛode /
ether all. xi of one lyle. Andthey coupled. v
by them kelues / and. bi. by chem kelues / and
they made kyktye loupes alonge by the boz⸗
der ol the otmott couptonge courtapne on
the one lide / and kyltie in the edge of the cots
plynge curtapne on the other cyde. And ther
made kyltye rynges of bꝛaſſe to couple the
tent together that it night be one. And they c
made a cou erynge vnto the tent of rammes
fhynnes red / and vet a nother of taxus tuyn⸗
nes a boue all.

And they made bordes for the dwellynge
9 — ob le wodthat ſtode vpꝛight euerx
ode. T. cubites longe ¢a cubite ¢an halkẽ
bꝛode. And they made. if tete to euery booze
of the dwellynge place loyninge one to ano⸗
cher. And they made. xx booꝛdð Foz the loutch⸗
fyoe of the habrtacton /a. rl. Cochettes ol lxl⸗
uer vnder the. xx. booꝛdes. ij lockettes vnder
euery booꝛde ſeuen koꝛ the. ij kete ol thẽ. And
foz the other ſyde or the dwellynge towarde
the noꝛth / cher made other. xx. boo:des wyll
xi. cockettes of lyluer. ii ſockettes vnder eue
rp booꝛde. And behynde in che ende ot the tas
bernacle towarde the welt / cher made. vt.
booꝛdes g. it other boꝛdes koꝛ the coꝛners ol
the habrtacion behynde / a they were ioyned
clolle both beneth and allo abdue with clä⸗
pes andthus thep dy to boch the comerstap
thep were in ail. bit. booꝛdes and. rot. ſoc⸗
kettes / vnder eucry dee alder.


ones,


And they made barres ol Sethim wodd. v
toꝛ the boꝛdes ol the one Syne ok the habpta⸗
cxon ¢.b.F02 the aher a krue kon the bozes
ofthe welt ende of the habptacvon. And chey
made the mrddell bare to Mote thozowe the
boꝛdes: euen krom the one ende tothe other /
and ouerlayde the boꝛdes with golde / a made
hE rings of gold to chꝛult che bãrres thozow /
und couered the barres wich golde. Andther
F

e and ttorned 202
bed wehe ud maden l, pelts of
A pen ouerlayde them with gold.
Their knoppes were allo of gold e cher cat
loꝛthẽ iti ſockettꝭ ol lyluer. And they made
an nge koꝛ the tabernacle doze: ol Ja⸗
cincte / lcarſet / purple ¢ tw yned byte ok nẽdle
woꝛke / a the pplevs of it were Epue with their
knoppes and oucriapde the headeg of —
andthe whooppes with gold / with their
tockettes of bzattc,

E che arcke of witirelle. Che mercpteate. Che tar
ble. Che candelſtyckt. The lpghtes, Che altar e and
the mcente. =
¶ Che. xrxvti. chapter. 8
Md Bezaleel made the arche ol fe-
Aſchrm wodd two cubptt ¢ an halte
long a a cubyte and abalfe biode /
a cubyt a ahalke hre:g ouerlarde
it with Ene golde bothe within a without / a
made a crotyne of golde toit rounde about / a
caſt £07 it.iiiſ.rynges of golde Fo? the. tiſj.coꝛ
hers of itetwo rynges fo2 che one ſyde a two
korg other / e mad: ſtaues of Dethim wodd
dere the with golde / and put the ſtaues


or an hande bꝛede rounde aboute / and made
onto the whope a crowne of goſde rounde
aboute / and caſt foꝛ it. inij.rynges chene
put the rynges in the. lil. coꝛners by the fete:
ue vnder the whope to put ſtaues in to bere


N
€ the table wich all Andbe made ſtaues of Se


wodd and couered them wyth golde to


Exodus.


bere the table wich all / and mane the veel /
b were on the table of pure golde / the dylſhes
tones flatpeces g poktes to poure wich all,
And he made ß candelſticke of pure thicke
Golde: bothe the candelſtycke and hys chat:
with bzaunces/ Bolles / anoppes and floures
pꝛocedyng out ok it. Spire bꝛaunches pꝛoce⸗
drnge out ok the kydes therof. fl. out or the
one kde / a. it. out or the other. And on euery
bjafiche were ij cuppes Iphe vnto almödes
with hnoppes a floures thoꝛow out the lire
tan ches 5 pꝛoceded out ol ß candelitycke,
nd pon the candelſtycke kelte were tilt.
cuppes after the kacyon ok almondes wyth
hnoppes ¢ floures: vnder every two bꝛaun⸗
perl: 0 the knoppes a the bꝛaun
es pꝛoceded out ol it / a were all one pece
ok pure thyche golde. And he made feuen
lampes therto Jani tye Moffers cherok / and
rue es OF pure gold. An hundꝛed warb 8
ok pure golde / made bothe it and all that be⸗
longedcherto.
Ande made the cẽs alter ok Hethim wood
ok a tubit lõg ¢a cubyt bꝛode: euẽ. iii ſquare
two cubptes bye with homes pꝛocedynge
out ok it. And he couered it with pure golde /
— the toppe a the lydes rounde about and
the hoꝛnes ot it / a made vnto it a crowne of
Golde rounde about. And he made two ringes
ol golde vnto it / euen vnder the croune vpon
ether fpde ol it / to put ſtaues in koꝛto bere it
with all: a made ſtaues of Sethim wodd / ¢
ouerlapde them with golde. And he made the
holy anopntynge ople e the lwete pure incẽg
alter the apothecarys cratte.
altare of burn tolſerpnges. ht bzale ny
Then ok that epo eo toeoupiopng
Of the babptacponof the Kode.
EThe.xrrpditi.chapter,
dhe made the burntollryng alter zg
ol Sethim wodd. v. cubptes lög a
v. cubptes bꝛode: euẽ ii. cquare /
and lit, cubytes bye . Andhẽ made
hognes in the. it. coꝛnerg ol it pꝛoceding out
ok it / a ouerlapde it with bzate. Andhe made
all che bettels of Salter: h cauldzög / chouelg /
balpng / lecholes a colepannes all ot bzade,
And he made a bꝛalen gredyꝛẽ of netwoke
onto the alter rounde about alowe beneth
vnder the compalle ok the altcr:fo chat it rea⸗
chen onto halte the altare / a caſt iii. rynges
OF bꝛalle fo the ſuit endes ok the gredyꝛen to
put Canes in. And he made taucs of fetyint
dd ECoucredtyem with bate (a putthe
ftauesin Laa alonge by the alter tyde
to bere it with all/ made the alter holowe
with bozdeg And he made the lauerok bzalle
athe Cote oF it allo of bꝛaſſe in the Cyghte ol
chem that dyd watch before the doꝛe or the ta
bernacle ol
e. v. And


„


__ derbi


Lervemonyes:
aint


>

he made the courte with hangynges
dk twyned bylle ofan hundzed cubrtes long
ban chefouthhine z mne pes a lers

kettes or bꝛalle but p noppes of the ppl
che whopes were fyluer, And on the noꝛth
{poe $ hanginges were an hundꝛed cubptes
jonge wrth . xx. prlers and. xx. ſockettes of
bꝛalle / but the knoppes a the whopes ol the
pplers were of lyluer. And on the welt iyde /
were hangynges ot. l. cubrtes lunge / 8. x. pr
lers wrth their r. lockettes / a the knopes d
the whopes ol the pylers were liluer. Andon
e eatt iyde towarde the fonne rylyng / were
hangynges of l. cubptes: che hang enges ok
the one ide ol the gate were ftftene cubytes
longe / ard their pplers. Ait. with their. it foc⸗
kettes. And a anbgg rr abr court gate
were hangynges alto ok. xv cubptes longe /
C a their prlers fit. with. ti lockettes. dw
all the haͤginges ofthe courte rounde about /

were of twyned byſle / and the fochett of
pylers were bꝛalle: but the knoppeß and the
swhoopes ol the pylers were Cplucr / andche
heedes were duerlarde with (luer /s allthe
C — opedabout with


luer. Andthehangyngeot the gate ol the


courte was nedle wo e / or tacyncte / lcarlet /


Epuein ö bzently /accozdpng to the hangen
ok the courte. Andthe pylers 2


tii. fochettes ofbzatte/a the nnoppes ok fy: 4


uer / athe heedes oueria pde wych Cyluctand
whopedaboute with Hiner a all the pynnes
ok the tabernacle and ot the courte rounde
about were bꝛalle.

Chis is the lumme of che habitaclõ of wit
nelle / which wag counted atthe cömaunde⸗
ment of Moles:and was the office ol che Le
uptes by the bande ot thamar fonne to Aa⸗
ron the pzeatt, Ind Pezaleel conne of ust


konne to Hur ok the tribe ot Juda made al th


thatthe Lozve commaunded poles / with
him Ahaliab konne of Ahllamach ok ß tribe
ok Ban / a cönyng grauer aa worker of ned⸗
le woz ze in iacincte / tcarlet / purple a byte,

All the golde that was occupped vpon all
the woke of the holp place (which was the
Golde OF che waucoficrpnge) was. rrix hun⸗
died wepaht and teuen hundzed and rr tr⸗
cles accopppnge to the holy kpcle. And the
ſumme ok tinter that came of the multitude
was.b.Ccozebundzed weyaht e a thoulande
feud hundzed g. Ixxb cycles ot the holy fycte,
Euerpman oftrpnge halle a kecle after.
Swepabt of che holp lycle amöge thé that
to bengbzedkrö. rr. pere ode ¢ abouc/amoge
di hundzedthoulande and. itt. thoulande and


v. hundzed and J. men.
Andche b. fcoꝛe hundzed werght ol crluer
went tothe caltynge of the for! of the


Exodus.


lers th


all the pynnes of the habitacvon / and all the


Ea d bog e bpp


ge Curcas / an onix ea Jalp
ol golde


fanctuary a che tockett ot the vayle: an hum⸗
dꝛed lockẽttz of the kiue lcoꝛe hundꝛed weight
an hundzed weraht to euerp lockette. And the
outande leuẽ hundꝛed a. Ixxv. Cycles) made
Anoppes to em duerlapde d heedes


and whoped them.

Andthe bade of the waucofferynge was
li bann atte lara icy

bundzed fickes And thertorty he made the
Sockets to che noze of the tabernacle of wit⸗
neiſe / g the beaten altare / and the bzaten gre
drzen that longech cherto / J all thebelicis of

alter / athe Cochettes of p courte rounde
about / d che tockettz ol the courte gate and


ppnnes ol the courte rounde aboute.
Che mebynge of Aaron g bps fonnesapparell. Ali
er iche Lobe commasnded was ollred.
She ackern
7 ok the iacyncte / ſcarlet / purple 2
Mandtwpned byde / ther made p ves
ſſtxmentes ol mpnyltracpon to do
in that holp place / a made
tes that pereapned, to Aarð /


1


grauen un hers ofthe chploze of Ff
re 00 put
cheldzen of Icrael / as the Loꝛde commaun⸗
ded Motes.

And they made the bzeltlappe of connyng
woꝛke / atterthe wozhe of the Ephodreuẽ oF


Felt Ather ie urple and twyned
plle. and they made it. i 5 double /


a


anhande bzeadeth long gan hande bzeadetly
rode, Ind ther kylled it wyth. lit. rowes ol
3 kit rowe Sardtos / a T


in their inclölers. And the xis. tones
were grauen as kygnettes wrth the names
ofthe chridzen of Alrael: euerr fone wyth
his name / accoꝛdyng to the it. kribes. -
Andthey made spon the bꝛeſtlappe / two D
taſtenyng chernes of wꝛethẽ woꝛcke ¢ pure


tmonyes.


golde. And they made two bokes ol gold and


two godde rynges /e put the two ryndes vpõ
the two comers of the bzelklappe. Andther
put the emo charnes of golden 6


i. rynges /
inthe copiers of the bꝛeltlappe. And the two
endeg of the two chaynes they fattened in the
two hohes / and put them on the cpoulderg ol
the Ephod vpon the koꝛekront of it.

And they made two other rynges ol golde
and put the on the two other cozners of the
bel lappe a löge bys the edge of tt/ toward
the int rde of the Ephod chat is ouer agaynſt
it. And they made vet two other golde rong’.
put theni on the two lydes of the Ephod be
neth on the koꝛelpde of it:euẽ where p lydes
go kogether / aboue vponthe bzonzyng ofthe
Ephod / a ther ſtrayned the bꝛeſtlappẽ byhis
rynges onto the rynges of the epbod/ myth
laces of iacincte / chat it mpahtive fat vpon
the bꝛodꝛynge of the Ephod / a chulde not be
ĩowled front ol the Ephod: as the Loꝛde com
maunded Mole. 5

And he made the tunpcle onto the Ephod
ol wouen woꝛlte / a all together ok tacincte/
the heade ok the tunicle was in the middelt
ol seas the colce ok a partlet / wyih a bonde
rounde aboute the coler / that it chulde not
tent. And they made beneth vpon the hem oF
the tunpcle: põgranates of tacincte / ccarlet /
belle Etwpned byte. And ther made lptle
elles of pure golde / a put them amonge the


‘pomgranates rounde aboute vpon the edge al


ofthe tunpcle a bell a a pomgranate / a bell
Scheunen rounde about the hemmes
ofthe tunycle tomynyſtre in / as the Loꝛde
conimaunded Moles.

And chey made cotes ok byte of wouen
woꝛcke fz Laron and his fonnes/eamptre
of bylle / a goodlp bonettes ol byte / a lynen
breches ortwyned bylle / a a gyꝛdell of twy⸗
ned bylde / iacyncte / tcaviet and purple:euen
OF nedlewoꝛcke / as the Loꝛde commaunded

6 Moles. Andthey made the plate of the hole
ckoune ot Epne golde / ¢ wꝛote vpon it wrth
grauen wozhe / the holxnes ol che Lozde:and
tped it to a lace of tacincte to fatten it an
hre vponthe mitre / as the Loꝛde commaun⸗


den Moſes.
Fhus was all the woꝛke of the habitactõ


ol / and the niercpteate:the table g all the ondt


Erodus.


And wach


naunce erol / and the wewbꝛed / e the pure


Ce ee re
andelltycke / and the lampes pep: kr.
candelſtycke / at ie te
onto wich ithe vedeis epee, eno the onte


Che tabernacle is reared vp. Che gloꝛye ok the
Cah eset ‘a aber couctpng the te


the courte gate. : 5
And tale the anoynting oyle and anoynt
the habitactö & all thatis cherin (& halowe w Exod. xc.
it and all chat belongeth therto thatitmave
beholpe. And anoynte the altar of the burnt:
of es Kall his vellelg / and lanctik ve che
altar that it may be moot holp. And anoynte
allo che lauer a his kote / z lanctyrye itt.
Chan bzynge Aaron and hys fonnes onto
the doze of che tabemacle oF wyrnelle, and
them with water. And put opon Faro
the holp vellpmetes / and anopntehym e ſan
ctylxe hym that he mare mynpſtre vnto me⸗
that cheir anoyntyng may be an euerlaſting
pꝛeaſthode onto then chozow out their gene
racpons.* And Moles drd arco:dynge to all z Num vj. a.
that che Londe commannided him.
hus was the tabernacle reared bp che
keitt dave in the kyꝛt moneth in the feconde @
pere. And Woresreartdop the tabewacle a
fattened his lockettes / and let vp evans


* Exo. xxx Le


v Bumert. vc


ter in the tabernacle ol witnelle befoze the
barle / and bꝛent lwete cens een ag the
‘Lopde commaunded Moleg. And let vp the
hang nge in the doze of the habrtacron / and
fet the burntoffering alter bekoze the doze or
the tabernacle of witneſſe, and offted burnt⸗
olkrynges and meatolfrynges theron as the
Lorde commaunded Moles.

And he fet the lauer betwene the taber⸗
nacle of wytnelle and we alter / and poured
watertherinto wach Wall. And boch Wo⸗
ſeg / Lard a hys Connes wachrdtheirhandes
their fete therat: both when they went in
to the tabernacle of witnette / 02 when they


went to che alter / as the Loꝛde commaunded


Moles. And he reared vp the courte rounde
about the habytacyon andthe alter / a ler vp
the hangyng of the courte gate: and io Wo⸗
les fpnythed the woꝛke.

And the clowde couered the tabernacle oF


wytneſſe / and the glozpe ok the Loꝛde ktyiled


the habytacron: io that Motes coulde not
entre in to p tabemacle of witnedle / becaule
the clowde abode therin / and the gloꝛpe ol
the Loꝛde kylled the habrtacyon.
when the clowde was taken vp krö of the
abitacton / the chplozen ol Irraei tone their
omeys as olte as they hadio meped. And vl
$ dlomde departed not / cher tozneped not tyll
bon tpebabicacyobpoape r bene
on the pe / e Eyre bynyght:
1 e ſyahte ot all the houte ol Arat in all
their io eyes.


¶ Che ende or the tecond bone
ol Motes,


„ F


¶ Che oꝛder of burutoſfringes / whether it be ol emal
oz great cateil or foules,
2 leg / and cpake vnto hym oute
ae

9 G ze
ajozen of Acrael / faye vnto the:

catell:euen ofthe oxen and of the ſhepe.
call bungelſim to the doze ofthe tabernacle


Che Fort chapter.
Nd the Lord called o

of the tab ernacle ot wytnelle

faving: Speakebnto the chyl

N who o focuct of pou thallbzinge
‘ebnto the Lowe / dall bzpnge it of che

Akhe bꝛynge a burntoũrynge ok the oven
be Mail bꝛynge a male without blemych / a
Of witnelle that he maxe be accepted befoze
the Lope die lethym⸗ put hys bande vpon


b heed ot § burntlacritice / z kaudure Halle Sn


geuẽ byni to make an attonemẽt foꝛhym / a
let him hyli the ore bekoze the l oꝛde. And let
the preattes Aaros tonnes bzynge the bloud
€ lecthem Cpzpnchell it rounde aboute port
the alter that is befoze the doze ol thetaber⸗
nacle of wytnelle. Ind let che burntoſfryngg
be ſtrypped and hewed in peceg. And then ſet
the fonnes ol Aaron the pꝛeaſt put lyꝛe vpõ
the alter / a put wodd vpon the kyꝛe / let thé
lave the peces with the heed a the kacte / vp
the wodd that is on che fyze in the alter. But


che inwardes ac wen bunden wall wath in


water / aß pꝛeaſt wall burne altogither vpõ
b alter / p it be a burntſacrikrce a an offving
of ab lwete odoure vnto $ Loꝛde. y the writ
oller a burntlacrikice of the bepe whether it
be of the lambes 03 ok the gootesthe wall of-
ker a male without blenuſh. Ind let him kyll
It on $ noꝛthlide of the alter / betoꝛe Loꝛde.


the bloude ol it rounde aboute vpon the al⸗
ter. And letit be cut in peces: euen
heed a his katte / a let Pꝛeaſt put


And letche Preattes Aavss tonnes teenie dalle


remonpes,
e the / a burnttactitice and an oftring

— — bonito the Lowe.
Che older of meatroffrynges / of cwete cates / uf


Fpneflower-of Franchencens.¢ ce with oute leuen z
with oute honp / but not with oute lalt.
8 ¶ Che. ij. Chapter. 2
4a ant Coule wpll offer a meatoe-
krrng unto the Lone, his offrynge
ſcpalbe kine floure /a he Mall poure
nenceng


a


4 faptb ul
m pont. 28 a thpnge mot holy of the Cactitpces of the
mip Aor" = Lode. Ar aup man bepnge a meatoffreng ß
leich Oésbakeninthe ouen /lechym bꝛynge twete
1 0 cahes ol kyne floure myngled with ople / and
tr al vnleuended wakers anopnted wopth ole. FE
10 chr meatoffryng be banen in the krrẽg van /
+ thenit chalbe of Cwetefloure myngled with
ople. Andthou chalt mynce it mali /a poure

oble theron:¢ lo it is a meatolfrynge.

Fethy mea ebe achynge bꝛoyled
bpon the gredyzen / of loure myngled wyth
ople it halbe. And thou thait bzynge ß meat
offrpnge chat is made oF thele thynges vnto
the Lozde/¢ Halt delruer it onto the preatt/

C andhe Wall beynge it bntoche alter / hall
heue bp parte ok themeatofirynge koz ame⸗
moꝛiall /a hall burne it ops the alter: an of-
eokalwete ſauoure vnto the Loꝛde.
€ And z which is lekt of che meatoffrynge tail
abe be arons hrs tonnes as a chenge chat is
faceptyt moſt holy of the olkrynges of the Lozde,
Sayin Al s meat eß which pe lball binge
900 nite the Lozde / haſbe made without leuen.
5 Fon pe Mali necher burne leuen no honge in
any offering. of the Loꝛde:Motwith


T. Ant


Teuititus.


yi 2505
r Ker
Che order of peactoftcingeswhyche wercoffcred -

foz thekeppnge of peact / made of oxen / hepe / lanbes


onto.
i: ¶ Che aii. Chapter.


= Ff anp man bꝛynge a* peaceoffring 4B

See the oren: whether it be male oz (xo. xx ij. b

kemale / he Wall bꝛynge loche as is
without blemity / befoze the Loꝛde:


t let hym put his hande vpon the heed of his
oltervng / and kiyll it before the doꝛe ol che ta-
bernacle of witneſſe. Ind Aarons ſonnes the


Pꝛeaſtes Mali fpzynhle the blown ays theal-25
kerrounde


e aboute. And they Mall offre of the
peaceolkring to be a ſacritice vnto the Loꝛde:
the fat that couereth the inwardes ¢ all the
katt that is vpõ the inwardes: the two kyd⸗


ners with the Fatt chat pech bpd the lopnes.


and the Kall that is on the Ipuer they wall
stake awape with the hyonepes And Aarög
konnes (hall burne them vpon the alter with chekat / the
Fette batte which is bps the wodd on wardesithe. .

etre. Chat is a lacrytpce of a Cwete ta⸗pdne vn u the
uoure vnto the Loꝛde. halle is Cignify

Jaman bzpngea peaceofkrynge onto the pe wee ete
Logde from oF the llocke / whether it be male iivete cacritice
oz kemale / it Maret teeny aoe blemych. FE he onto the Lorde
offve a lambe / he hall bzynge it beFoze the we mutt cut of
LKonde and put hie bande opon bis olkernges ae naughir
heede / pil it in the dooze of the tabernacir petpzes of the
OF wymetke a Aarons lonnes chall (pziniile g Aethe and
the Dloude therol rounde about the alter. theeuell we

Andot the peaceottemg they allt enge be an me
alacrrifyce onto the Wozde:the katt therok a cubduen moz-
the rompealltogether / which they call tale tytycoure attec
ok harde by the backe bone: a the fatt that co= tides offve the
uereth che inwardes gallche fatt chat is ops luca the
theintwardes ¢ the two kpöneves with Z kätto e the cconeas
that lpeth vnon and vpon the lopnes / alayth the 75 20
the kall that is vpon the lyuerhe Mall take phete Plälm.
awape wyth the hyonepes. And the Pzealt rv. a.

Wall burne them vpon the alter to Fede the
Loꝛdes ol e withall.

Ilthe e be a goote / he chall bꝛynge
it betoze the Lozde/ ¢ püc hig hande pon the
head ok it / and kel it bekoꝛe the tabernacle of.
wittnelle / and the fonnes ok Aaröõ call ipꝛin⸗
hile the bloude therok pon the alter rounde
about. Andhe hall bꝛinge therok his olkryng
vntothe L oꝛdes factiftce: the fatt that coue⸗
rech the inwardes all the fatt that is vpon
che inwardes a the two kpdneveß ¢ the Fate
chat lyeth vpon them and vponche loynes /
Shall ö is bpd the lpuer he wall take awape


a. Wythe tae
hpng awape of


D


dt with p nydnepes. And the Pꝛeaſt Mail burne


Wan nt the alter to kede the Lozderacrikice
all / a to make a ſwete lauoure. And thus
Chall all tye kat be the Loꝛdes / and it halbe


n alawe koꝛeuerämonge poure generacyons


alter vou in youredwellynge places: that ve
cate nether kat nog bloude. 1
: Gabe


Levemonyes,


Che offeprg made Foz fynnes done oF ignozaunces
OThe titi, chapter,

2 bis Horde tpake onto Motes
öde Eee emal chyldzen of
Klare when akoulekenneth
W

ol tho 4
beende cömaundemetes to be done: ye
the Pꝛealt that is anopnted Lynne amake 6
opie to do ample. /be ſball özynge ko hrs
e which he hath done: an ore without ble
e

e

etnacle attapenete beloze b Londe / & wall


A Lobe Gee _ putes bane upon e orebeade/and Ryil


nelis. xlvij.c. bpm


Leuiti.i. b.


ode. Ind the Pꝛeaſt that is
*anopnted thall tante of the ore bloude / and
bꝛynge tt in tothe tabernacle of witnelle /e
Wall dyppe bis kinger in the bloud ¢tpzintle
therok. bij tymes before the Loꝛde: euen be⸗
foze che hanging of d holy place. And he Wall
put tome of che blonde vpon the hoznes ok
alter of lwete cens befoze the Loꝛde which is
in ö tabernacle of twitnette/¢ call poure all
the bloude of the ore bpon the botonte ol che
alter ol but es which is by the doze
ol ö tabernacle of witnelle. Andhe hail take
awa pe all the att of the ore that is the lynne
okkryng: che fatt chat couereth the inwardes


ng
and all tye katt chat isaboutetheny/ Ethel.


Apdneyes with the face that Iyceh opor the ¢
bpon the ames an the hall pon the lyuer
let them tale aware allo vb the kyonepes:as
it was taken kr the ore of the peaceolkring /


let the erat burne them pponthe altare fo,


Col burntokkringes. But the Cyne ol the ore
Kall his llech with hig hecdc/his legges hrs
inwardes wich his doge / ſhallhe carpe alto⸗
gither out of che holte vnto a clene place euẽ
where p allhes are poured out / a burne him
on wodd wyth kyꝛe: euen bon the heape oF
Ik che hole comenalte ol the chylozé ol
krael Cynic chozow ignozaunce/¢ che ching
e yy From their b chineh ch haue com
mytted any of thele thinges which the L ode
hath koꝛbydden to be done in his commaunde
meẽtes and haue olkended / che tynne whiche

ep haue linned be akterwarde knowne / th


DD Wail they offre an ore toꝛ à ĩynneottryng/ a


whut ij. b.


wall binge him bekoze $ tabernacle of wit⸗
nelle / a the elders of che multtude thal


Gelben bponyisbeebbetoye the Koe. burnto!


And the Preatk 5 is anopnted hall bz
e
Kbhall drppehys Enger in the bloude / an
pcre cee tomes before the L onde: euẽ
efoze the vaple. And chall put of che bioude
bpon che homes of che alter which is befoze
the Loꝛde in the tabernacle of wytnene / and
Gail poure all the blonde bps the botome oF


$ 5 ol the burn


Lenitiens,
the


alter of hurntolkrynges which is by the
doze ok? tabernacle of witnelſe /a ball take
all bps fat from hym / a bume it vpõ the al⸗E
ter / & wall do wich his ore as he yd with the
ſyrmeokkryng oxe. Ind the Pꝛeaſt hal mabe
an attonemẽt foz chem / e lo it Walbe foꝛge⸗
uen thẽ. And he chall bꝛynge the ore wichout
che holte / aburne him as he burned the kyzt:
fois this-6 lpnneokkryng of the comenaite.
When a Lozde fynneth and commptteth
bore Ignozatice hach thete things which
e Lode his God hath fozbynden to be done
in his commaundemetes ¢ bath Co offended:
when his tynneis chewed vnto hem / which
e hath lynned / he Hall unge fo2 hrs of:
rynge an he goote without blempſh ¢ lave
his hande vpon te heed ok it / a kyll it in the
place where the bumtokkrynges are kylled
efoze D Lone:chit is a ſpnncotkring. Then
let the Pꝛeaſt take of the bloude of the lynne
bone ee bes kenger / e put it vpon the
offen alter / and poure
rs bloude bpon the botome of che burntot⸗
kryng alter / a burne all bps fatt vponthe al⸗
ter / as he dotheche fatt of the peace A
And the Pzek ſhall make an attonement tog
bem as cocempng bis eme lo it walbe
oꝛgeu
10 one ot $ comẽ people of the lande lxnne Ff
ſoꝛowe ignoꝛaunce & d od den n
thenges which the L onde hath kozbydden
bis commaundementes to be done & co hath
krelpaled when hys nne which he hach irn
ned is come to his hnowlege/be wall
e
£07 e ehe a
bis hande bpon the heed of the kynneolfryng /


che Pera manag OF burntokkringes. And Atull


zraſt hall take of the bioude withhys
kynger / z put it vpõ the hoꝛnes of the burnt⸗
okkrynge alter / a poure all the bloude vpon
the botome of the alter a Malltake awape
all his fattas che fatt ofthe peaceoktrynges
is taken aware. andthe Prratk wall büͤrnte
ie vpö the alter foz afwetefaucurepritethe
Lozde and the Preat wall make an attone⸗
mae en it chalbe toꝛgeuen hem.


he
he bzinge a female wythout
5
ateot the bloube of etormecetonge itd
pre ton er / and put it bpon the homes ofthe

eff gal ba poute af bw


cheral onto che botome of the alter. Andhe Leut


chall take awaye all the fat therol / as the kat
ofthe thepe of che peaceo! was tal
awape. And the Pꝛeaſt hall itvpõ the
alter toꝛ che l oꝛdes cacritice / and che Break


eu Bes
Standes otterittoyetoune G 5


: eeemonpes,


1


hall male an attonement koꝛ his tyre / and
it halbe koꝛgeuen hem.


. Okoothtb. Che cleantynge of yym that toucbeeh ”


—.— 7 —— ‘purgacyon of anothe and or
e Done bp ignozauuice,

ii Che. b. chapter.

Hen a loulehath lenned a herdeß

opce oF curlynge a is a wytnelle:

Za whether he hach lene o7 knowne

Dol it vt he haue not vtteredit / he

Spall bere his ſynne.Ether when a man tou⸗

cheth any vnclene thynge:whecher it be the

carxon ofan vnclene beet oz ol bnclene ca⸗

tell o vnclene wozme ats not warre ot it he

is allo vnclene a hath olended. Ether when

he toucheth any vnclenelle ol man ( what fo

euer bnefencte it be that a manis defpled


wich all) cis not warre ol it and after warde


cometh to the nne welege of it/he is a trelpa
Bler. Ether when a kouſe Sweareth:fo that he
proncficery W his Iyppes to do euell oztodo
good (whatloeuer it be p a man pꝛonoũceth
iwpth an othe) and the thynge be out ol hrs
monde K alter ward cometh to che knowlege
ok it / then he bath offended in one ok thele.
Chen when he hath lynned in one ol thete
ges / he Mall cõtede that wherin he hath
fynned / and ſhall bꝛrnge bps tretpaceotte=


vnto the Loꝛde fo his ſynne which he th


Cynned.& female kromche flocke whe⸗
ther it be a lane 02 athe goote / toꝛ afynne-
And the Pꝛeaſt hall make an atto⸗


. uit. anmenker bpm £07 bps fenine Aout Pee be


not able to bꝛynge a ſhepe / then et bym
bꝛynge fo2 his tretpace which he hath ſinned
two turtyl doues 07 two vounge pxgeõs vn
tothe Lozde / one fo2 a fynneofiving andano
5 — foz a burntoklringe. And he chall byinge
em vnto the Peal whyche fall olker the
knneokkring fpꝛit / a wzirge p necke a lun⸗

¶ die ot it / but piucke it not clene of, And let
him ltpꝛynkle of the bloude of the lynneok⸗
Frpnge vpon the lyde of the alter / and let the
reſte of the bloude blede bpon the botome ol
the alter / a then it is a lynneokkryng. Andlet
bpm offer the fecond koz a burntokkrynge as
the maner 18: lo (hall the Pzeak maße an
attonement koꝛ hym koꝛ the tynne whiche he
hath tynned / and it tatbe toꝛgeuẽ hem. and
pet pt he be not able to bꝛyñge two turtyll
Doues 07 two pounge pracons / then techy
bꝛrnge his offvyng foz bis fynne:*tye tenth
parte ofan Epha of tyne floure koꝛ a fyrne


Offrynge / but put none ople thereto nether -


putany kranckencẽs therd/foztt is a tynne
seceeng.anptet ym by eit to the pꝛeaſt /
Kthe Break hall take his hand full of it / a
burne it vpon the alter koꝛ a remembzaunce
to be a ſacritice fo2 the Loꝛdꝛthat is a ſynne⸗

And let the Pꝛeack make an attone⸗


Teuititus.


xl.
ment £07 hym koz his trie (whatfoeuer of
Auch bath lennedyand it walbe kozgeuen.
che remnaunte walbe the Pꝛelles / as it

itis in the meatottrynge. 5

And the Loꝛde comened W Moles taping: 2
when a ſoule trefpaceth a ſynneth thoꝛow
ignoꝛaunce in anꝝ of the holy thynges of the
Lonbe / he call bꝛynge for his trelpace vnto
che Loꝛde a ram without blemych out of the
flocke balued at two lpcles after the lyele
ok the ſanctuary / foꝛ a treipaceoſfryng. and
0 Wall make amendes ko the harnie that he
ath done in the holy thynge / e mit the kyte
parte moze to /a geue it vnto the Pꝛeaſt. and
the Pꝛealt chall make an attenemẽt foꝛhim
swith the ram ol the trelpaceolfrynge / and it
walbe koꝛgeuen hm.

When a toule tynneth a commytteth any
ol thele thunges whych are foꝛbyoden to be
done by the conmaundemétes ok the Lowe:
enen he wp it not / he hath vet offended a
45 in kynne / hall bꝛinge a ram without ble⸗
myſh out of the locke that is eſtemed to be
woꝛrche a ſynneolfryng / onto the Pꝛeaſt. and
the Pꝛealt all make an attonemẽt fo: hym
koz the ignoꝛaunce which he dyd / a was not
ware / and it chalbe foꝛgeuen hym. This is a
2 koꝛ he tretpaced agaynſt

de.


Che offeinges for ſynnes which are done wyllyn⸗
Nl. The lawe of the burntolfringeg. Chefpre mut
Abpdecucrmoze vpon the aulter. The offrynges ol
Aaron and hys tonnes,
¶ Che. vi. Chapter.
d the Loꝛde tales with Moles
lapinge: when a louie lynneth and
Itrelpäcech agaynſt the Coꝛde / and
denped vnto bps neyghboure that
which was taken bpm to kepe / or that wags
put vnder his hande / oꝛ p which he hath vio⸗
lentip talié awaxe / oꝛ that which he hath de⸗
ceauedhis ncvahbouve ot sb fotvite/ oꝛhath
kounde that which was loſte and denpeth it /
elwereth fallely / in whatloeuerthingeit be
that a man doth a lynneth therin. Then whe
he bath lynned oꝛ trelpaced / he Wall reſtoꝛe
agapne that he tone vpolentip awape / oꝛ the
wꝛonge which he dd / oꝛ that which was de⸗
Ixuerẽd hym to kepe / oꝛ the loſt thinge which


ui to inp ner
he kounde / oꝛ whatloeuer it be aboute which z. au
he bath worms falfety /*he wall vettoze Alam un
agayne in the whole lumme / and (al! adde cyon / but vuto
che Epéte parte moare thereto /a geue it onto sodrepetaunce
hemko whom it pertarneih / the lame dave fr ne ht
B he offereth koꝛ his trelpace / a thall bainge ges blonde isa
toꝛ his trelpace offerpnge onto the CLoꝛde a full tatiſfaccꝛb
ram without blemych out ok the flocke / chat? 2
is eſtemed woꝛth a treſpaceokkryng vnto che wich or all


Dꝛeaſt. And the Pꝛeaſt chall make an atto⸗
iment koꝛ hem betoze the Loꝛde / a 1255
4


Ceremonyes.


be koꝛgeuen hem / in whattoeuer thyng it be
that aan both F trelpaceth cherin.

And che Loꝛde (pate onto Motes faving:
Commaunde Aaron and his Conries Cay
this is lawe of the burn Cheb
värpnt 0


baue gene them
of mp tackitice all not be baken with leuẽ /
£o2 {tis mott holpe / as ig the krnneokkrynge
K trelpaceoktrynge. Ail che males amonge
the chridzen ok Haron call eate ok it: and it
chalbe a dutpe foz euer vnto poure genera⸗
cpons ok the facrifices OF the Lozde /nether


i Ht halany manrcouche it / but he b ishatowed,
Ae woche N ondelpale unt Moles taping:
bleed thee ne nale ok Aaron Koc his fonnes

„ which he ball ot
debut be hat When they are anopnted: the tech parte of ant


er bnto the Loꝛde in d dave


ktloure / which isa darlr meatothing
me Hein tbenosnyng ballet
a ete

ofr pig


bnitothe Londe.


that ig anopnte


e courte of the tabernacie of
(Mall touche the llech therok


gc in dhe Wotp placer tis mote Hore uhren


8 thefpnneo!


kryng which he bath offered. And all $ meat
okkrynges that are baken in the ouen / and
all that is dielled vpon the gredyren and in
the kryenge pan / walbe the preattes that of-
freth them. Andall the meatofferynges that
are myngled woyle ozd2pe / wall pertayne
vnto all che lonnes of Hard / a one chall haue 8
as moche as another. Chis ig the lawe of
Lese thalbe okkred

e Lozde.
ſhall bringe bnto


oute krped / a he alba
e vpon canes made ot leuended bꝛed
‘ranckottepng ofbis peaceotfuingt/


1 Teeth fos bah: ae
ol one lawe feructh koꝛ both: a it ſhall aus
bethe Preattes that reconcrieth ther wih. Senn
And che preat chat offereda mans burntok⸗ 5e
krynge / eee oak. a the burnto€ proc,


Leuiticus, .


dich art acou
bomedto be ol


: offtinges which


Gootes:neucrthclater the tatt ol the beat
dpeth alone a the Fatt ofthat whych is toꝛne
with wylde beaſtes / maye be occupped in all
maner vles: but ye call in no wife cate ok it.
Fos wholoen er eateth the katt ofthe beatt ol
men bꝛinge an o ontop Loꝛde /
chat loule that eateth it chall perich tron his


ut. vj d pevple. Moꝛeouer ve* Mall eate no maner


ok blond / rherloeuer e dwell / whether it be


® offoule oz ofbeatt. nohatloeuer ſoulè it be g


eateth any maner of bloude the lame foule
wall neryuhe from his peonle
And the Lozde talked wich Moles faving:
fpeake bnto 5 chyldzẽ of Flract elape:be g
offreth his peaceofiring sntothe Loꝛde / all
byynge his gytte vnto the L onde of his peace
olirynges his awne handes thall bzynge the
offrynge of the Loꝛde:euen the fatt bponthe
bꝛeſt he hall bꝛynge wyth the bꝛelt to wane
it awaneofiringe betoze che Loꝛde. And the
at hall butne the katt ppõ the alter / e ß
lt chalbe J arõg a his tonnes. And drygyt
Woudder ther wall geue onto b peak / tobe
an ing / ob theit peaceanttinges. And
Platte that offvetl the blond ok the peaceok⸗
kringes ¢ the fatt/amBgethe fonnes of Aarõ
Halibaue the right ſhoulder vnto hys parte /
kon the wauebꝛeſt a theheueſhoudder J haue
taken ofthe chyldzen ol Ilrael eien dk Heit
peaceolkringes /a haue geub it vnto A arõ the
Preak a vnto hys tonnes: tobe a dutye toz
euer okthe chyrdzen ol Alrgelt 55
cchts is the anopneynge of Baron got the


lacrifices of the L onde / in thedaye whẽ they
were offered tothe Pzeattes onto tye 1 —
which the Lowe cõmaunded to be gene chem
in te dape when he anoynted thé / or the chyl⸗
dꝛen ol A craei / a to be a diitie toꝛ euer amoge
cheir generaciõg. Chis is the la we ol burnt⸗
offrynges / or meato ok lynneoſiringt /
oel eg, won e Eulofivings / of peace⸗
Loꝛde comaunned Ae ofes.
in ß moat of Sinat/ in z dare when he com
maũded p chyldꝛẽ of Acrael to offer their of
tringdvnto p Loꝛde in d wildernelle ofSpinat,
EC Thcanopntpnge and conlecracpon of Aaron and
‘bis tonnes, a he bit ot
Che. vil. er.
Adche Lande ſpake onto Motes 5
lapinge: take Aaron a hys tonnes
with hem / a the veſtures a the an:
opntpng oxle / a an ore toꝛ a lynne⸗
unge a two rammes ¢abalhet of iwete
bzeed: ¢ getherall the comentpe to gether bn
toche doze ofthe tabernacle of witnede. And
Motes dydas the Lorde cimaunded hym / ¢
the people gathered the feluegto gether vn⸗
to the doze ok the tabernacle of wineche. And
Moles kapde onto the people: this is pihing
which the Lone conimaunded to do.

And Moles brought Aa ron a hys tonnes
@watthed chem with water / a put pon him
che albe ¢ grwedhem with a gyꝛdeſf / a put
vpon him the tunpcle / z put theckphod chers /
andgyzdedhym wych the bꝛoderd gyꝛdell or
che E phod / bounde ii vnto hym therwit
Andhe put the bettlappe theron / and 12
the bꝛeſklappe wzim and Thumim.


e
as the
ole ¢ oꝛde cõ


Aub dboieetoke the map eng oyle and
anopnted the habitacpö Gall 2 was therin/
and kanctitied them / a lpꝛynkled therot bpo
che alter ſeuẽ tymes / and anoynted the alter
Kallbts vedelg /¢ che lauer wich his kote / to
fanctptpe them. And he poured ofthe anoyn⸗
tynge ople vpon Aarons heed / and anopnted
hym̃ to tanctikte hym. And he brought dards
fonnes a put albes dpi them / i gpabed chen
wich gyrdels / and put bonettes bpon their
heedes tas che Lorde commaunded ne

Andthe tonneofirynge was brought. And
Aaron ¢ bys tonnes put theirhandes vpon
che heed of the ore ol che lynne e. And
when it was darne / Moles tone of bloud /
put it ppon the hopnes of the alter rounde
about Whis könger / aputifienit/ a poured
che bloud onto the borome ok the alter g lan⸗
ctytped it a reconcpled it. And he toke all the
fatt that was vpon the inwardes /a the Kall
eee ee n e


re amin. a i
putthempter bponbisheed/ @putbpontie merle.


rtmonyes.


with their att / a burned it bpd the alter. But


andhes donge/ he vntell
dent were cht oe anende.F02,btj.daves mutt voure handes be
kylled / as they were this dave: euẽ to ß Londe
bath cõmaunded to do / to reconcyle pou with
all. Se therkoze that pe abrde inthe doze oF
the tabernacte of wytnelle dave e nyght leuẽ
dapes longe: e hepe the watche of the ‘Lorde
that ve dye not.fo2 lo am cOmaunded. And
Hard ehistonnesovdall thinges which che
Loꝛde cõmaunded by the bande ok Motes.


burne wexze without the holte / as the Loꝛde


commaunded Doles. a aan
Andhe bzought che ram of $ burhtofireng
D e Baron g his tonnes put their han Cod
ehead ol the ram / eit was kyiled. and Mo
kes kpunkleb the brown ops the alter rounde
about / and cut che ram in peces a burnt the
head / the peces ethe katte / 41 waahed the in
wardes g the legges in water / and burnt the
ram euery whit vpon che alter. That was a
burntfacrpfyce of a twete fauouve and an
maunded iy 5 Loꝛde / as the Loꝛde com⸗
ma ates,
And be brought the other ram that was &
kuloũrynge / ¢ Aaron ¢ bis fonnes put ther


ofthe tabernacle of witne de feud ayes lg


the dayes of youre fulofitingcs be at


adab & Abi.


Tone n.
af thet
Ache. rig


4444 1
Teuiticus. Flij.
olfrynge / a llewe it a ollered it koꝛ a tynneok⸗ And Moes tarde onto Aard e vnto Elea⸗
krynge as he drd the kroſt. And chen bought zar 3 his eldelt tones: oncouer not
the burntotirpnge/ ¢ offered it as the maner vourẽ heed nether rent youre clothes / lett ve
was / a bzought the meatotkryng ¢ kylled his dye and wꝛath come vpon all the people / iet
bande therok / e burnt it vpõ che alter / belxde poure bꝛoͤthꝛen the hole houtte of Irael be⸗
the burntlacrpkpce in the moznynge. wepe the burnpnge whyche the Loꝛde hach

Chen he llewe the ore a the ram that were burnt. But go pe not out fd che doze oF che
che peoples peaceoſtringes /a Larõs tonnes tabernacle of witnelle lett pe dye: koꝛ the an⸗
brought the bloud vnto hym / ahe tpꝛynkled oyntynge opie ok the Loꝛde is bpd vou. And
it vpon the alter rounde about / and toke the they dr as Mole bad.
fat ot the ore oł the ram: the rope and the Andthe Lone ſpake vnto Aaron laying:
fatt that cou ereth the inwardes and che rd⸗ dꝛyncke no wyne no ſtronge dꝛyncke / nether
nepes a the hall ofthe lyuer:a put them vpõ chou noꝛ thx lonnes wych che: when e go in
the bzeltes a burnt it vpon the alter: but the to the tabernacle of witnelle / lelt ye dye. And
bꝛeſtes andthe ryght choulderg Aard waued let it be a lawe foꝛeuer vnto youre chyldꝛen
befoze the Loꝛde / ag the Loꝛde cõmaunded after pou:that pe may put differéce betwene
Moles. Ind Aaron lyt̃te vp hys hande ouer holx ¢ vnholp / a betwene vncleane a cleane /


0 ead of the ram: and when che people a bleſſed thẽ / a came doune Erom and chat pe map teach the chyldzen of Aerael
fas dayne 2 i e offtpng offynneotirynges /bumntofiringes @ all tye opdpnaunces which the L onde hath cd
peaceaftemnges «hen wordt u cant out maunded them by the handed of Moles.

intothe tabernacle of wytnelle @ came out And Motes Cayde onto Aaron and vnto c

agapne and blefled che people, and che glarve Eleazar ¢ Athamar hrs lonnes p were lefte:

ofthe Loꝛde appered vnto all $ people. And take the mẽatotkringe that remapneth of the

put ol e there came a lbꝛe out From befoze the Loꝛde / kacrikpces of the Lozde/ g eate it wichout le⸗

eare ol and concumed vpõ the alter the burntoltring uen belſde the alter / ko; it is moſt holp:eate it

andthe katt. And all the people ſawe it / and therfoze in che holy place / becaule it is chp

whowted / and felle on their kaces. ebe pe gemengt ae

„de: ko fo g am commaunded. Ind the

Sen hr Seng üben nne 0 apes wauebzelt a heüechoulder rate in a cleane

ze which dew ot the faceafice the 4 zeatkes cate, place: bothe thou dough:

che. l. kydnepes with their 2 ani g ters with che. Foz ane tonne

nd Cet i 2 col


‘og euer / it
eve taken


cg waued it a tare
d les toke eim alto / as the
1 Ode commaunded Doles. —


And Haron went onto the alter / and are


e ok the people andmake agre⸗


ue
. Goze che 'o2 thé betoze the Lozde? Behode the


fs er betymetes wirh butthefied ¢ 1 1 SB, 1 eat
bre 2 Ly tuithout Hhebote, After werde he terme ef


a Famine 5 ‘i
v xobixxk f N chere regte it e hꝛeadthat ig in the nge im in peces a
Fi in th vnto h. ft
xodt xxx 20 1 90


eee re fae
of fulofiryng’, Allo and he burn it spon the alter / and drd bonnes.
denten eren and e lone ell eare palhechr namen dim the inge a but ms
Soe ae neee cee ene de re eg
rad / bin 8 ‘
note cate pare Hokttom the booze tobe te goote hat toate peoples fen


¶ Ot braſtes which be cleanels which vncleane.


che. xi. .
eee And


Mevemonyes,


ees Mote Lorde lpake onto Moles
e
e childꝛen of Alrael & lape/thele
are the bea ſtes which ve chall eate
amonge all the beaſtes chat are on the exth:
what foeiter hath hole and deurdeth it in to
two clawes a cheweth cud amöge the beat
chat Mal ve cate Helierthele le chele cal ve
not eate ol the that chewe cud a haue holes.
Che camel / fos he cheweth cud but he deup⸗
deth not che boote in totwo clawes /therfoze
he hail be vncleane onto vou. And the conpe
for he cheweth the cud but deurdeth not the
hooke in to two clawes / therkoꝛe he is vn⸗
cleane to vou. And the hare / ko he lpkewyre
cheweth the cud / but deupdeth not h hoote in
to two clawes he istherkoꝛe vnclene to pou,
And d (wrne / Foz chough he deurde, che holte
in to. ij. clawes / pet he cheweth not the cud / ¢
erkoze is bncleane to pou, DE their llech le
that ve eate not / a their carkalles fe that ve
touche not / ko ther are vncleane to you.
Chele chall ye cate ot all q are in the wa⸗
ters: what loeuerhath kinnes a ckales in the
waters fees a rpuers“ P Wall pe eate. And
all that haue not kinnes ¢ Chales in the Cees
and rpuers of all that moue a lpue in d waz
ters thal pe abhozre. Sechat ye eate not ol
their klech / and alto that ve abho we ther car
Kalte: for all that haue no kinnes nor ſcales
inthe waters / halbe abominaciõ vnto vou.
Chele are the koules which ye Hall abhoꝛre
¢ which chall not be eat? / lo thepare an ab⸗
hom pnaciö. C he egle / che gomaute/the coꝛ⸗
mozatite / che kpete / che vultur a an his kynd
ali kynde of rauens / che eltrich the nught⸗
© grote the cocow / the parowhauke a alithe
fipnde :the Iptle oule / che ſtozcke / the great
oule / che back / the pellicane/ the ppe / che he⸗
ron / the tape with the kynde, lappwynge a
the walowe. And all koules that crepe and
5 vpon all foure ſhalbe an abominacvon
oon.


2 F0etthete maye ve eate ok all the foules 6


moue and goo apon. it. fete:euen thole that
haue no knees aboue vpon their Fete to lepe
wyth all pon the erthe / euen theſe ol them


Leuititus.


And all that goeth vpon his handes amge e
allmaner bea ſtes 5 goo on all Coure tete are
vnclene vnto vou: aas maup as touche their
carhalles / thalbe vnclene pntyll che euen.
And he that bearech the carhate or thẽ / wall
wallhe his clothes ¢ be vncleane oneyll the
euen / to foche are vncleane vnto vou.

nd chele are allo vnclene to you amonge
the thynges that crepe vpon the erth: the
wetell / che moule/the toode a all his kynde
the hedgehogge / lteilio / che licerte / d Maple
e moule:thete are vncleane to vou amoge
all that moue / K all that couche them when
455 bedead / halbe vncleane ontyil the rue.

what loeuer anp ot § dead cathatles ot
chem fall vpon / chalbe vncleane: whatloeuer
veſlel of wodd it be / oꝛ rapment / oꝛ Chynne/.
oz bagge 07 what ſoeuer it be that anx
worke is wzoughte withall. Ind cher Halbe
plunged in ) water / a be pncleane vntill the
euen / a then ther halbe clene agapne.

Al maner ok erthen veel wher in to anpef

OF thé falleth is oncleane wich all thatcherin
tg:and* pe Hall bꝛeaheit. dN maner meate,


Tutti
is eaten / yt any Coche: water .


albe pncleane. And all maner dꝛyncke that
is döcke in all maner koche velleis Halbe vn
cleane and whether it be ong oꝛ kettel it gal
be bꝛonen. Ko; e and chalbe
bncleane onto pouſgeuerthelater pet ) fod
tapnes and weſles ep es OF water / Walbe
cleane ſtyll. But. euer toucheth their
carkades / mall be vnclenme. ;
Gabi dead carkadle ot Alry loch fall bps ane
ced died to lowe / it chan pet be cleane ſtyll:
but and yr anx water be poured vpõ the leed
and akterward the dead carketle of them Fall
theron / then it chalbe vncleane vnto pou,

It any beat of which ve may eate dye / he
tousheth ö deadcarhatle halve vncleane vn
tel the euen. Andhe that eateth ok any loche
dead carkalle / Wall wadhe hys clothes eres
mapne vncleane ontpll § euẽ. Ind he alloß
beareth the care ſſe ol it / wall walſhe bys
clothes / and be vncleane ontyll euen.

All that tcraulech bps the erth / is an —
mypnacpon / and all not be eaten. And


C lawe how wemen chulde be purge alter their
delpueraunce.
¶ Che. xi


plage ol jepꝛolpe be in a mã / let hm xz
ought vnto the Pꝛeaſt / gletche Piealt


let the Pꝛeact ſe hyn
other oz thetpnneot. ged onto whyte / let
wall make an attone⸗ feat cleane andthen


Ccche Wzeates are appopnted to tudge who are
Teptts.


led a leper
which per


+ Arbe, Sela Pe mape eaterthe derbe & all bis Hynde: the koeuergoeth ops the bzeatt / and whatfocuce
Hargol, hagad Spelaam with all his kynde che Pargol and eth vpon. lil. oz moo fete amonge all chat
See Renee af all the hynde the Bagab eallhishynde.aAN kerauleth vp berch / ok that ke pe eatenotsfog
enteo rant other foutes B moue Khan i et pepe thep ate a nable. Mane not poure
auen canbe abhompnacron nta vou. In loch ve chalbe koules avom enable with nothinge that cre-
e af .
e wholo them: chat ve Hul e Foz e turned onto wyyte / ache hrmaparte. bij dapes. It it tp
nes do not now 4 .
euer bereth the carkalle ol thẽ / Wall wache amege Lore vouve Sch sbe anctfien er be lower then the kurnne ol che ineane ceaton / chen let che Pre
a babes know. hig clothes / z fo Walbe vnclene vntpileuen. fove peng, bebotptoy¥erabolp-sbetic dne ape ce We ale nc l bios
Amonge all maner beattes /thathaue not poureloules with any maner thing that
hoofes g deurde che notintotwo clawes of crepeth pa the ert Lo Jamthe Lorthyat in d ckyme
chat chewe not the cud / chalbe vnclene nto bought vou out of tye lande ok Egypt to be 4 the
Pou: gall that toucheth the walbe vncleane. r other


Kreg
02 altogether wh
nende e


e oF lepꝛolpe is ina cloth: c. Orthen
02 wollen ve arhether t (eof da


Tipng out vpon thehced oꝛ the beerde let


feitAndpettappeare lowerthan the dk Chynne/then it is a verp lepzorpe/e mut ny en
acti Herbe therin golden hapꝛes be ſhewedynto 6 pꝛeaſt. And whe the pꝛealt clothes,


then / let p Pzeat iudge hym vncleane / to: leyth $ plage / let him ſhut it vp. vt. dapeg / ¢
ae out of lepzolpe vpö the heed ler hm lone ond 15 ethe. vil dare Je it be
02 berde. ( when che Dreatt loßeth onthe increaled in P clöch whether it bein Rwarpe
bꝛeakynge out) be le chat itis no lower then oz wolle ozina chynne oz in any thinge chat
the othertionne ar 5 there are blackehapꝛes is made ok ckynneſthen p plage is a treating
cherin / let hem chuthym vp. bij dapeß. And fepꝛolpe /a it is vncleane: ¢ that cloth halbe
ict p Pꝛealt lone onthe dyleate the. bij daye: burnt / ether warpe oz wolfe / whether it be
g pr the bꝛeayng out be gone no other ne⸗ wollen oz lynẽ o any thynge that is made ot
ther be any golden hapꝛes therin nether the ckynne where 12 0 e is / loꝛ it is a krea⸗
fcabbe belowerthen the other cynne/ chen denge lepꝛorpe / a balbe burnt inthe krꝛe.
pit bles ſhauen / but lett hin not ſhaue the It d pꝛeaſt le p the plage bath kreatẽ no fure
fcabbe: g let p pꝛeaſt chut hum vp biſ.daxes her in the clotih ether in d warpe oz wolfe og
moo. And let che pꝛealt lone on the bꝛeanung in whattoeuer iheng ol ckynne it be chen let
out ö. bij. daye agayne⸗Akthe breakyng out the pꝛeaſt cOmaunde thé to watlhe $ 00h.
be gone no further in the caynne noz nioare d e m chut it vp. vi.
lower then d other clrnne / then let § pꝛeaſt dapes moo. Ind let h pzeact lone onitagarne
zudge hym cleane / and let hom wauhehys alter öthe plage is wadhed. FE p plagehaue
F clothes / then he is cleane. Arche bꝛeanung not chalged his faction though it be lpꝛed no
out growe inthe tuynne atter that he is once further abzode / iti vet vncleane. And ſe dye
iudged cleane / jet the pꝛeaſt lee him Ar it be burme it in p kyꝛe / ko itis kreat inward: whe⸗
grown ab zode in dede in the cuynne / iet the cher in parte oz in all together. ute ve the
pꝛeaſt lene no further koꝛ any goldẽ hayzes / Pitat te b itis fomubae black alter that
koꝛ he is vncleane. But and vt he tethat the it is wallhed / let him rẽt it out of the cloth / oꝛ
fcabbe ſtande ſtyii / 6 there is blackẽ harꝛe out ol che fupnne oz out off warpe oz wolfe.
growne pp therin / then che ccabbe is healed But d pe it appeareanp moare in the cloth
Che is cleane: the Pꝛeaſt call indge hym etherin Were the wolle oz in any
cleane. t there be ounde in ß chynne or che chunge made ok | dh — it is a waringe
flech orman oꝛ woman aglylteryng whyte / plage. Ind le p ve bume that w kyꝛe / wherin
letthe Pꝛeaſt ſe it. Ak there appeare in their the plageis. Moꝛecuer 5 cloth ether warpe
fletha glpttcrypng wöyte fomwhat blackech / 07 wolfe oz what loeuer thing or ck ynne it
then it is but krekels growẽ bpm kenne: which thou hattwatlhed ethe plage be depar
n,, Hs eblaweot plage otiazo
a mi e fall oF his heed / chen he cleane.
bebbade cent 4700s barret ee ſie ina cloth whether tthe wi ae


emonpes.
er it be in the warpe oz wolte / oz in
1 made OF Fhynnes / to iudge it
cleane 07 bncleane.
che cicantynge of the lepers and ot the haute that


he is in.
¶ Che. xiiii Chapter.

I Hdthe Loꝛde lpake vnto Moles
laing: this is the lawe ol a leper
when he chalbe ciented: He halbe
bꝛought onto the Pꝛeaſt / and the

Pꝛeatt Mall go out without the hoſte g lone
pon him. Ik the plage ol lepꝛolpe be healed
in the leper / then wall the eat cõmaunde
that there be brought koz hym that walbe
clented two lyuynge byꝛdes that are cleane /
and cedar wood, ¢ a pece ot purple cloth and
plope And the Pzeal Mall cõmaunde p one
ok the byꝛdes be liylled in an erthen veel W
rennyng water. and the Peat walltane ?
Ipuyng byzde a the cedar wadd a the purple
the plope/ a ball dyppechẽ a the lxuynge
byꝛde in the bloude of the larne byꝛde / a in
che Knyng water a lpzynkle topo him that
mutt be ciented ol bys lepꝛolpe feuen tymes
and clenle yym / g wall let the lyuynge byꝛd
goo kre in to che teldes.

Andhe bis clenten hail wache his clothes
ethaue orate hapꝛe / a wath him telle in
water / a then he is cleane, And alter that he
(hall come into $ holte / but hall tarpe wich⸗
out his tent. vi dapes. when the leuẽth daxe
is come / he ſhall haue of au bis hape bothe
bpon his heade a his berde ¢ 1 7 bꝛowes:
c cut all the hape p is on him / halbe hauẽ
ok. And he thall watibe his clothes a his lech
in water / and then he ſhalbe cleane.

And when p vil daxe is come / lethim take
Kaercher en

a e without blemypch / and ii
deales of Epne floure foz a meatofiring mrn⸗


A logue of gled wich orle / and a logge of ole. Chan let

din meu: de P, eat 6 ak ane te
npng, biman 8 is made cleane W thole ching’,

m Gtteche Lozde onto the doze of the tabernacle of

urs, — wptnette.AndIet the Pꝛeaſt take one of the


efoze


Leuititus. xlju


hand / a let him tpꝛynkle it whis kynger. bij.
tymes befoze the Loꝛde. Ind ofthe reſt ol
the ople that is iu hys hande / chall the pꝛealt
ut vpõ the typpe of righte care or hym 5

& clented/ebpon the thombe of bys ryghte
hande / a bps ae great too of his vighte Cote:
euen vpon the bloud of the treſpaceokkringe.
And the remnaunte ol the oyle that is in the
Preattes hande/ he wall poure bps the heen
de hrmthat is clented: ¢ fo Hall the Pꝛeaſte
take an attonemẽt £o2 him bekoze p Loꝛde.
Chen ler che Pꝛeact offer the lynneokkring

emane an attonemét for hum that is clenled
Coz his vnclenneſſe. and then let d burntok⸗
Frpnize be dayne / a let the peatt put boty the
burntokkryng ¢ the meatolkryng ops the al⸗
terse mahe an attonemét for hym / a then he
thalbe cleane. Ik he be pooze ¢ can not gelt
lo moch / then lethym bꝛinge one lambe fo2 a
trerpaceotkryng to waue it to make an at⸗
tonemẽt toꝛ him / a tẽth deale of kyne floure
myngled v ople koa meatokkring /a a logge
ol ople / a two turtyll doues oꝛ two voũge pis
beate whicheheis able to gett / allet the one
ea tenneotkryng a bother a burntoffring,


And e the mt dave £02 his 3


clenfyng vnto ealt to p doze ot the ta⸗
bernacle of toitnette betoꝛe the Loꝛde.

And lec the Pꝛeaſt take che lambe that is
the trerpaceorkrvng a he logge of opie / and
waue them bekoze che Loꝛde. And when the
lambe of the trelpaceokkrynge is kyſled / the
Weaſt Wall take ofthe bioud of the trelpace
olkryng / e put it bps the typpe ol his rygůte
eave that 18 clenled / a bpan the thombe ok his
righte hande / and vpon the greate too or bys
ryght tote. And the Pꝛeaſt thall poure ofthe
opleintohys rpghte hande / a Mall tpꝛynkle
with his tynger ol the oyle that is in hys lelt
bande leuen tymes befoze the Loꝛde.

And the Break hall put on che ople that is
in his handel vps the typpe of the righte cave
ok hynithat is clented / e vpon the thombe ol
his ryghte hande / a vpon the great too of bis
Vighte kote:euẽ in the place where the bloude
ol the treſpaceoftring was put. And the relte
ol the ople that is in his hand / he Halt poure
vpon the heed ol hyni that is clenled:to mae
an attonemẽt foꝛ hym befoze the Loꝛde. And
he wall offer one of the turtyll doues 02 ol &
potige pigeons / loche ag he can gett:the one
koꝛ a lynne offerynge a the other koꝛ a burnt:


2 olkryng bpd the alter. And lo challthe Pꝛealt


e t
pale obi le


make an attonemẽt for hym that is clenled
befoze che Loꝛde. Chys is the lawe of hym
chat hath che plage ok lepꝛolye / whole hande
ts notable to gettchat whych pertapneth to


clenfpnge,
ndche Loßde pak vnto Moles a ars
faying:when ve be 15650 lande ene
ij. al


5


Levemonypes,


naan which q geue vou to potletle: peg put
the plage ol gare in anphoulſe of lande
of poure podlelvon / let hyni that oweth the
houle go 6 tell the preatt taying :methpnke
that there is ag it were a lepꝛolp in § Houde.
ind the Pꝛealt chall cõmaunde themtorrd
all thyng out of the yout /betoze the Peak
goo in to fe the plage: that he make not all
that is in the houlle vncleane and then the
b. Che lepte paealt Wall goin g te che houle.

of the howfes Af the preatt lethat the plage is inbwalles
fs any thynge ok the houfle / 4 that there be holowe Aratics
iber to pertaß, pale op vende which leme to be lowerthen )
abe duelle other partes or the wall/ chen lietche Prealt
might take har GO out at thehoudde dozes / Hut vp d boutte
nie in helth or oz bi dapes. And let ö pzealt come agarne
padre the Ceusth dave ale it: hethe plage be meres
ar bes codes leb in che walles oF the hoe let che break
or dberwyle comaunbe themtotalle awape the ſtones in
as yf tt ttoode which the plage is / and let them cact them in
man euel apze. q touie place wilhout the citie / a lcrape the
n houlle within rounde about: a poure out the
Dut wilhoutthe cytpe in afoule place, And
let them tale other tones / e put them inthe
places ol thole ſtones / and other moꝛter / and
Platter thehouſſe with all. JE now the plage
come agapne ¢bzeake out in p houtte / akter
that therhaue take awaye the tones a ſcra⸗
ed the houſſe / a a€ter that the houlte is plap⸗
bered ane we: let the Pꝛeaſt come e le it. And
ve then he perceaue that the plage hath cate
turther in the houlde / then it is a kretynge le⸗
pꝛolbe that is in the houtte/ a it is vncleane.
Chen they Hail bzeake doune ö heute: boch
ſtones / tynibꝛe ¢ all the moꝛter of the houlie /
g carpe it out ol the citye vnto a foute place.
MBozeouer he that goeth in to the houge all
the whyle that it is wut vp / balbe vncleane
Ht nyght. And he that cle peth in the hourte
ſhali watthe his clothes / ehe allo that eateth

in the houlle wall wadhe hrs clothes.
But and yl che Pꝛealt come ele that the
plage hath Cpzede no Eurtherintheboutte af:
ter dit is new plaſtered / then let him make it
cleane / to: the plage is healed. And let hem
take to clente the houſſe with alk two pyꝛde
cedar wodd / A purple clothe d vlope. Andlet
hym kli one of the byzdes in an erthẽ vellell
with runnyng water: z take the cedar wodd /
the plope / che purple ¢ che lung byzde/and
dyppe them in the bloude ol the Hayne byzde
Kin the runnyng water e lpzinkle vpon the
houlle leuen tymes / a clenfe the houlle with
the bloud ofthe byzde ¢ with runnyng wa⸗
ter (g wich the Ipupng byd e with the cedar
wodd / and the plope/ and the purple clothe,
Andhe hall lett the tyuynge byzde fle oute
ol the towne in tothe wyldẽ kelde / aco make
an attonement £07 the houlle / and it chalbe
cltane. Chis is the lawe of all maner plage


Leuititus. 8


of leprofve ¢ byeakyng but / zoethe leprote


ok clothe and houlle: and of rylinges / ccabbes
and glyſterynge whpte / to teache when a
chyng is vncleane oz cleane. This is § lawe
or lepꝛolpe.


¶ The maner of purging the vntlennes bothe ol men
ald wemen.


¶ che. xv. Chapter.
aa Mo the Lozde ipane onto Moles H


0 erp bi

pate in hys fletyis vncleane by the reafon
ok hrs ple. and hereby tall it be nnowne
when he is vncleane. Ir hys le che runne / 02
pehrs flet congele by the reaton ot his yaue
then heis bncleane Euery couche wheron he
pech and euery thyng wheron he kytteth Mak
be vncleane. S Be that toucheth his wah
Hall wach his clothes / a bath hym telle wi
water / and be vncleane oneplt the euen.
tere that eptteth on P wheron he tat / Malt
wach bys clothes and bathe Celfe wept
water / and be vncleane vntyil the euenynge.
And hethat toucheth bys Het wall wathe
his clothes / and bathe hem lelke in water /@
be vncleane vnto the euen. Ir anp toche tyrt
vponhymthat is cleane, heult wallhe bys
clothes / and bathe bpm felte in water / and be


vncleane vntpll euen. And what ſoeu er 8


Cadell that he bydeth vpon / walbe vncleane.
And wholoeuer toucheth an thynge ? was
vnderhym / chalbe vncleane onto the euen.
Indhe ihat beareth any loche thynges (hall
walh his clothes / and bathe hem telfe in wa
ter e be vncleane onto the euen / and whoto-
euer he toucheth( yl he haue not hooper a
his handes in water mut wally. bis clothes
Abathehym felfe in water / and be vncleane


nto the euenpnge. And pihe touche a pel⸗ .


fell of ces chalbe bꝛonken: and all betiels ol
wodd chalbe rpneled in water.

Fidhen he that bath an yllueis clenled ol
bis yſliie / let hym numbꝛe. bij daves alter he
ig cleane / a walche his clothes / and bathe bis
lech in runnynge water /a then he is cleane.
And the. otf. dane let hem take two kurt
doues 07 two potige prgeons / a come before
the Londe vnto the doze of the tabernacle of
iwptnette/eqeue chem onto the Pꝛeaſt. And
the Break Chall offer thẽ the one for a fynne
offrpnge / and the other foz a burntofiryng:¢
make an hc bad bine befoze the Loz
as concernynge by . 3
Ak anp mis feendeparte krom hym in his
liepe / he chall watthe hys lech in water g be
vncleane bntyll euen. And allthe clothes oz
furres wheron luche feed chaunteth chalbe
ached w water be vncleane onto beat


Teuitit


And yta woman Ive wyth koche a one / ther
C Hal wach them ſelues wyth water ¢ be vn⸗
cleane vntyi euen. .
ha womit natural courte of bloud
runneth / ſhe thaibe put aparte. viſ. dayes: ¢
wholoeuer toucheth her halbe vncleane vn
to the euen. And all 6 che lxeth oꝛ ſytteh opd
as longe ag the is put a parte Malbe vn⸗
clene. and wholoeuer toucheth her couche
Mall wach his clothes a bathe hym ſelke w
ter a bebncleane vnto the eu. and who⸗
deuertoucheth any thinge that che tat vpõ /
wall wachhis cloth ö wache hym kelke allo
in water / a be vncleane vnto the euẽ lo that
whether he touch ber couche o2 any thynge
hereon the hach Cyete he chalbe vnclene vn
to the euen / and ya man tye with her in the
meane tyme/ he ſhalbe put aparte was well
as the ¢ chalbe vncleane. vij dapes / aal his
couche wherin he depeth ſbalbe vncleane.
25 A iphen a woméss bloude runneth longe
tyme: out of the tyme olher natural courte:
as longe as her vnclennelle rüneth / te Mal
be vncleane arterthe maner as when che is
put a parte. All hex couches wherd the lpeth
às longe as her pllue laſtech) halbe vnto her
ag her couche when che is put a parte. And
whatſoeuer che Cyeteth vpõ / halbe vncleane
as is her vnclennelle whe che is put a parte.
And wholoeuer toucheth them / walbe vn⸗
cleane / ¢ thall wadlhe bys clothes and bathe
him leike in water z be vncleane vnto euen.
Kr But yt the be cleane ot hir vue / lett her
cofite her feucn daes / alter g che is cleane.
And the. viiſ. da ye let her tale two turtils 02
two pofige pigeons e bz mae thembnto the
pꝛeaſt onto the doze ol 1 tabernacte of wet:
nelle. And the pꝛeaſt Mallofierthe one fo2a
cynneoſtrynge andthe other koꝛ a burntoſte⸗
ronge: and lo make an attonemét foz her be⸗
fore the L ode / as concernynge her vncleane
vlue. & Malte the chyldzẽ of Ffrael to kepe
chem Celucs from their vnclennelle/thatther
dye not in their vnclennelle: when ther haue
detiled my habytacionthat is amonge them,
bis is the lawe or hem z hath a run⸗
nynge loꝛe & of him whole ceed runneth fro
him in his flepe a is deépled therwith / and ol
her that hath an vue of bloude as longe as
che is put a parte / and orf wholdeuer hath a
runnynge ſoꝛe whether it be ma 07 woman /
Sem open that lepeth wyth her that is vn⸗


EWhat gart mute do o he enter into the hol

The cleancyng . — 0 bleibe Be
— Maron eset Ge nes of | ie
Spon bps deb. er thelpue goote s putteth the


che bt. Chapter.


us, 3 Flu.
d the Loꝛde a
N ane ebend den enen cen


76


By the clout
vnderſtade the
Cinoke of the
cence,


Saco ae


Ypng.Butthe goote on which the lotte Fellto
ſcape / he (hail fettiatpue befoze $ Loꝛde to
reconerle with ¢ ko ler him goo tte in tothe g
wyldernede. And Aard ball bzynge the bul⸗
lock ol his lynneoltryng / ¢ recöcple foꝛhym
felfe and fo2 his houthoide/and kyllhim.
And then hie Walltale a center ful ol bur
hyng coles out ol the alter that is befoze the
Loꝛde / and his handfull of lwete cens beten
tmall e bꝛynge them within the vaple a put
the cens vpon the fire befoze the Lozde: that
the cloude of the cens maye couer the mercy
ſeate that is vpon the wytnelle / that hedyẽ


not.“ Andhe hall take of the bloude ok the zpeb rc ru
be


bullock ¢ lpepnkle it with his kpuger bett
che mercpkeate eaſtwarde:euen. bij tymes.

Chen Hail he kyll the goote that is the
peoples ſynneottrynge / a bꝛynge his bloude
within the vaple / and doo wrth bys bloude
ag he dyd with the bloude or the bulloch / and
let him tpzinkiete toward the mercyleate /
and befoze the mercyleate:and reconcple the
holy place trom the bnclennefle of the chyl⸗
deen oF Icrael / and from thetytretpaces¢ all
thelr fyhnes . And lo let hym doo allo vnto S
ee peas ned — W

onge theit vnclenneſles.
And there Wale
ele ol witnenee / when he goeth into make an
kb. atto⸗


eno bodremthetaberna⸗ Lu.


Lertmonpes. —
e
for


Teuititus,

onthe holy iynen clothes a hole veſlimẽtes
emẽt dee the holp lanctuary andthe ta
felfe and koꝛ his houcholde / a koꝛ all bernacle of witnerte æthe alter / a hall make


ge multitude ol Akrael Chen he Hall goout an attonement allo kor the peattes a fo; all
tno the alert ſtödeth betoze the Loꝛde / the people of the cOgregacio . And this thal-
and leconcrle it / and chall tale or the bloude be an*eucrlatinge ogdpriauuntce onen ano zit
ok the bullock ¢ ok the blonde of the goote “ maheanattonement fo2 the cheldren or Zee nec and
put it vponche hones oethe altare rounde rael fo7 all theivfpnnes oncea pere:e in was
aboute / and tpꝛynckle of the bloude vpon it done euen as the Loe cõmaunded Moles.


with his kynger


e vnclenne les ot the chri⸗ .
halowe it krom th the chp! 3 —


den ok Jcrael.
And when he ath made an ende ol recõer
e
e ache a
amie Javon put both his handes vpon the


then come
Andthe bullock of the tynokterynge a the
poote atthe Cynofferpng| whole bloude was
ought in to make an atonemet tn theboly
e
ach anche bange Auw lethim f hne
eee eee
lein 5

en jatice Foz euer vnto


irs plop
24, vd ae i
pt lat
Ta a
ee bon, Andere nee tenth dave o€ the cru
+ Hooke in the moneth/ve hall“ humble poure Coules and


ih. K hap e. ſhall do no wosheat all:-whether tt be one ot
poure leiues oꝛ a ftraunger that Cofaurn
amonge vou / for p dave (all an attonem
he made toꝛ vou to clente pou from all youre
kynnes betoꝛe the L ond / g pe thall be cleane.
Gt thalbe a Dabboth ol relt onto por / and
ve Galt nite coer Coules / and it halbe
an oꝛdpnaunce ko euer.
And the treat that is an a whole
hande was fplled to myntitre in hrs kathers
eade / hall make the attonemẽta Mall put


ſentymes andclente it. cæ Sau caceitpce mute be bought to the doze ofthe tae


deuels map they not offers Blonde and


And this haibe an oꝛdynaunce Foz euer vn⸗
to pou thoꝛow out youre generacpons. tounge
ndthou walt tape vnto them: whatto⸗ co Gd
euer man it be ot the houſſe of Ffracl oꝛ of doch
e kraungers that fofourne amonge vou er men
t olkereth a burntockerynge oz any ocher ehen a
offeryngeand bꝛyngeth it not vnto the doꝛe fer hime
ok the tabernacle of wytnelle to offer vnto
che Logd/ that telow (hall perpth fd amoge
is people. Ind whatloeuer man it be ofthe
oute of Ffrael oꝛ of the ſtraungert that ſo⸗ 5
iourne am̃onge vou that eateh any maner ene
or bloude / J wyil ett my face agaynſt that
ſoule that ẽateth bloud ¢ wyll deſkropehim
from amonge his people / foz the lte of che
llech is in the bloude / and haue geuẽ it vn⸗
to you vponthe alter to m̃ane an attonemẽt
koꝛ voure coules / foz bloude shall make an
attonemẽt £02 the foule. And therfoze 9 tape
vnto the chplnzé of Itrael: le that no foute ol
pom cate Boat hoz pet any ſtraunger that
fofourneth amonge von. what


emonyts.


Ane c.


z. intheirozdinaunces
a menteg /a hee mne ozdpnafices/to walne


what deu er man it be of the chyldꝛen of
Itrael oz of 5 ſtraũgers g foiourne amdge
vou 5; honteth a catcheth any beeſt oꝛ koule
6 mape be eatẽ/he foal poure out the bloude


2 Sinche bien erthe / koꝛ the Ipfe ofall lech


inthe bloude / therkoꝛe J ſapde vnto the
childze ol Alrael ! pe Mail cate the bloude of
no moner of lech / koꝛ the lle ofall flech is
in his bloud / and wholoeuer therfoze eateth
it hall peryſh. And whatloeuer loule it be
5 eateth that which dyed alone oz 6 whych
was toꝛne with wylde beeſtes: whether it be
vne ok poure lelues 02 Craunget /be call
wallhe his clothes abathe him Celfe in wa⸗
ter / a halbe vncleane vnto the euen / a then
is he cleane. But and yt he walhe them not
hoz walhe his dle ch he hall beare his renne.


C What degrers or hynred may marpe to geather
what not. 4
¶ che. viii. Chapter.


a GA | Md the Loꝛde talked with Moes


ſapinge: ſpeake onto the chudzen

ok lrael / a lape vnto them / Jam

the Loꝛde youre God. Wherkoze

alter ſhe aun of the lande ol Egypte
wherin ve dwelt / ce that ye doo not: nether
cane nil Cynge pou metyer balken.
erg wi ve

but dar iudge⸗


therin:foz J amthe Loe poure God. Nepe
therfozempne oꝛdynaunces / and mr iudge⸗
mentes each a man doo he thall true
therbp:fo2'7 am the Loꝛde.

Sethat ve goto none of pourenpahert
kynred koꝛ to vncouer their Cecrettes / fo23,
amthe Loꝛde. he lecrettes of thy father ã
thy mother / ſe thou vnhyll not: we is chy
mother / therloꝛe halt thou not difcoucrber
ſeerettes. Che lecrettes of thy fathers wpe
Malt thou not dilcouer / fo2 theparethp ta


Bthers lerrettt. C hou Halt not dilcouer § pre


ulte ok ihylyller / b daughter of thy father oꝛ
oftopmettertaedet we be bone athome


. Qe without. c hou ſhaltnot vncouer the tee


crettꝭ cf thpfonnes daughter oꝛ thy daugh⸗
ters daughter / foꝛ 6 is th vne atone pꝛeulte:
Chou ſhalt not vncouerthe ſetrettes ol thy
fathers wyues daughter / which the bare to
thy father / fo2 the isthy tyſter; thou thalt

evfoze not dilcouer her Cecrettes. Chou
Walt not pncouer the tecrette ok chr fathers
lyſter / koꝛ che is thy fathers nexte kyntwo⸗
man. Thou (halt not dplcouer the fecrettes
ok thy mothers ſyſter / to the is thy mothers
nerte nyntwoman.


Leuititus.


eee
| Elvi⸗
ter in lawe che is thy Conties wpfe : therfore
vncduer not her lerrettes. Chou wale not C
vnhyll ad fecrettes of thy brothers wyke /
kor that is thy bother pꝛeuyte. chou chalt
not dyrcouer the pꝛeuptes of the wyle a her
daughter allo / nether thait thou take her
Cones daughter oz ber daughters daughter
tobneditet heir bob /thep areher nexte
rnit were therfore wizidneſte⸗ Chou Halt
not tane a wyfe a her fptter therto / to ere
her g thou wolvert open her tecrett as loge
a8 dhe lxueth. Chou halt not go vnto a wo:
mi to pncouer her pzeuttie as loge as the is
put a parte for het onclennete. scr Chou rut. xx v.
Walt nat ipe wh thy nerghbours wyte / ta de⸗
kple thy leite wher. Chou chait not geue ol
the Ccedtovfierit onto’ Moloch / z chou de a. Cby terde /
e not $ name of thy god / o; Jam 5 Lond. that wibygce
chou walk not ipe wpch mahynde ag w Merson / chy
womankrnde kor B isaboniinacton, Chou dungen :
Walt Ive wuo mener ol beeſte to dekpie thy b. Poloch
elle therwith / nether Mall anp womid ctöde lobe in che. rx.
befoze.a beet to lye doune therto / oy that is Zwar ati
abhominacion. 2
Ky Wekite not poure feluesinany of there
chings / co; wall chete thinges are thele naz
clons defiled whiche J caſt out befoze youꝛa
che lade is detiled / 4 J wyll biter the wined⸗
ner therofbponit/¢ che lande (hall cpewe
Sutherinbabiters.* Repepetheroe mene n . d.
Ozdinaunces ¢ tudgemetes / Kle that ye coz rx. b.
mrtt none of chele abominacios: nether any
ot you noꝛ any ſtraunger that fotourneth a
moge vou(foz allthele abhominacids haue
the men of the lande done whiche werethere
befoze vou / athe land is dekpledhleſt that the
lande fpewe pou out whe ye haue defied it /
as it fpewed out thenactos that were there
befoze you-Forwhofoeuer (all compte anp
of thele abhominactds the fame foules that
comimpt 55 Chali perich from amonge their
people. hertoꝛe fe that ye kepe myne oꝛdi⸗
naunces / chat ve cõmptt none of thele abho⸗
2 dian bean occ tiated be:
ze vou: that ve defile not youre lelues ther
with Foz Jam the Loꝛde youre God. gs


CA vepetpcion of certayne lawes pertapning to the
— — derte on foꝛ the pooze


pou
Chou chalt not vncouer the fecrettes ot


fb Fathers beother:thatis than fhalt not go
Into bis wyle / fo ſhe is chyne atonte. Thou
halt not difcouerthe lecrettes ok thedaugh⸗


e wall not ture puto pool. noꝛ make pow
Joddes ol metall: A am the pc a
ert


Ceremonpes.


aphen de obere youre peaceotierynges ons
tothe L ond / pe thall okerthem that re mare
be accepted. And it walbe eatẽ the Camedave
offer it ¢ on tHe mozowe / Lut whatloeuer

it lette on the thirde dape halbe burnt inche
B lpie. Atit be cate § theꝛde dape / it halbe vn⸗
cleane anot accepted. Andhe that cateth it

Schall berehis ſyine / becaute he bath desilen
che halowedchenges of the Lobe / and chat
foule hall perich krom amonge his people.


*ndhẽ ye reape doune d type coe ol poure
Akut. yiſ. d land / pe Mall nos repedoune theptmoſt boz-
ders


ofpoure fed / nether Halt thou gather
Serechuld we g which is lett beh vnd in th harueck. Thou
e, pee bee n egen Chat ae
if 10

e aie Buchau tbat lac tHe C07 te Dore


¢ € ftraunger.9 amt the Lozd youre God.


be ene ee
Lacions nether robbe olentip / nethe
Walch wophmens le oure abyde with the
T pnepll che moznpnge. Chou walt notcurſe ?

the denz nether put a töblenge bloche be⸗
fozethe blend but (halt keare thy god. Aam

the Conde. Ye (hall doo no vnrpahtedülnes

„beute. 1.6.5 iin tüdgement.“ Chou Male not fauoure. the
bd. Jag. ö b pooze no: honoute che mpghtie / but Malt
wgethynerahbeurerruhteoule n.

Thou chalt not goo bp ¢ doune a peup

accufer amdge typ people nether walk eon

Welpeto Gene the bloube ofthynevalboue:

wt Joch. be Jam the Mond. Chou Walt not hace thy bo:

N cher in thyne hart


bunte chynerghbour: B thou bere not nne


e Corhys treſ⸗
othe


s worde mape g
snot bempngled
with ypoccely.


t alt in anp wyle re⸗


„


ere olmen este / wen l


markes vpd


not pollute


daughter / that
mayntene her to be an twhooze-lelt the lande


fall to whoꝛedome / and ware full of wened⸗
nelle. De g ve hepe mp Sabbothes ¢ trate
my länctuarp: Jam the Lone. Cume not
to them that worte wi


de ol am the Lozde poure God.
155 Vece dei eherne intudge-
mentnether. in meteyerde / wepaht oz mea-


dure. But pe Hall haue true balances true


werghte / A truecpha g A true hin. J am the
Loꝛde poure God which bꝛoughte pou out
ok the land of Egypt / that e Wulde obferue
all myne pzdinaunices and iudgementes and
that ve chulde keye them q am the Loꝛde.
5 al by
ee


i


loch he Chall dye fo2
wel ove un uh 5


m face vpon that kelowe and wer ildeſtrope


le becaule he hach


pont i A 2 to dekple


bed eche e obige their


192005


8
; the
perphh in the lyghte of their people / he hath
fence his lyſters lecretnelle / he chalitherkoꝛe
beare his lynne. Ika mai ive Wa womã
in tyme of her natural dyteale and vncouer
her lecrettes and open her fountayne / a be
Allo open the fountayne aher biqiide / they
Galt both peryche from amonge the people.
kr Chou ſhaſt not vncouer the tecrettes of
thy mothers lpſter noz of thy fathers fptter/
foz he 5 doth lo / vncouereth hrs nerte nyn:
and ther Mall beare their myldopinge:

ben wander c FE a ms Ipe th his vncles were he hach vn
fucatly e. coueren his bncles fecrettes:chep Mall beare

babs pea beteConne/and thall dpe chridlene. ‘
dh, nr Akamä take his brothers wore / tis an
tmnt D oncleane thyng / be! mp nconceep Wis zoe
amar being thers fecrettt / chey Matbe childlelle cherte.
ba Se that ye kepe thertoꝛe all myne oz⸗
pu,” benen ch kd wie „and that
cult. pig. d pe doo themithat the Lard whether Hb pige
don todwell therin / cpewe pou not dut. And


2 ve ö

xlvij.

te chat ye walt not in themaners or the na⸗ ‘
cyõs whihe J caſt oute betoꝛe vou: Foz they
compttedall thele thyngd / a Jabhozred the.

But A haue lapde vnto vou chat ve Wall
eniope their lande / a that J wyll geue it vn⸗
to vou to poſſeſſe itieut a lande that floweth
with mplhe and honpe. Jam the Loꝛd voure
God / whiche haue teparated you krom other
hacions:* that pe chulde put difference be⸗ 1 cui l.
twene cleane beattes and vncleane / and be⸗
twene vncleane koules and them that are
cleane. Make not poure foules therfore ab⸗
hominable wich beattes and koules / 4 wyth
all maner Hinge p crepech bps the groũde /
which Ahatie keparated vnto pou to holde
them bncleane. Bebhoip onto me / ko: the
Londe am holy and haue feuered vou trom
other nacions that xe ſhulde be myne.

Akthere bea ma o wom that wo neth went. wich b
with a lpzyte o; en hald tohens they i. Reg. vxvih. a
wall dpe közit. Men wall ſtone them wyth
ones / a their bioude walbe vpon them.

e pꝛealt is for byddE to be at the dea
Frteneneke of 3 ait rede ted
Aber aue pee mut bea mare, he pres
ie.
aughter map not be an harlott. ee Oe reas
che. xrt. Chapter.
Mo the L oꝛde layde vnto Motes: +
Cpeake vnto the peattes p Conny
of Aaronandtapebnto them. Aa che pen
peat cballdekile him elke at the bewarned that
deth ar none or hi people / but vpõ his kyn p cher call not
is nye vnto him: as his mother / kather donne come at the ce
daughter ¢ bother: gonbisfytter ag longe ian pn or
ashe is a märde ¢ dwellech ne him g was he deedieg
neuer geuen to man: on her he mape dekple they chuld ther
him leſke. But he chall not make hym Celfe by be the mone
öncleane ppon a ruelar ok his people to po- ura toda
lutehim elke wich all. pd ea
or Chey Mall make chem no batonetle vpon they were pꝛo⸗
their heedes oꝛ chaue ok the lockes ok their perly appopn⸗
beardeg/noz make anp markes tn their fed (er ana let
Tbep tal be holp onto their God and noe spe? ces Le
polute che name ol their God / koꝛ the lacriſigeue an ocea⸗
ces ol the Loꝛde and the bead o€ their God konto deckrope
they do offer:therfoze ther muſt be holy. the be debe
6 Chey Hhalltakeno wore § isan whooze%> he sete
oꝛ poluted / oꝛ put kromher hulbande: fo2 a che dead.
pratt is holy vnto his God. Sanctitie him
therfoze/to2 he offereth bp the bzead ol God:
he thal therfoze/ be bol vnto the / koꝛ Athe
Loꝛde whiche lanctikpe vou / am holp.
Ika pꝛeaſtes daughter fall to playe the
toh oze/the poluteth ber father: therkoze the
hall be burnt wich ke. .
wre bis thebyepzeatt amogebisbzethz
vpon whofebeadtheanopntpnge oyle tas
‘poured a whole hande was kyflled to put on
che veſtimentes / wall not vncouer .


sevemonyes,


no renthis clothes nether wall goo to any
C deed body noꝛ make hrm leite vncleane: no
not on his father 02 mother / nether tail 12
out of the lanctuarxe / that he polute not ihe
hol place of his God / koꝛ the croune of the
anorntynge orie of God / is bpon him. Jam
the Loꝛde. e (hall take a mayne vnto his
wyle: but no wedowe noꝛ deuoꝛled noz pont
ted whooze. Buthe chall take a mapde of
his awne people to wple / chat he delyle not


his seen vpon his people:tor Küng L oe .


ich fanctify 5 .
Andche Lan (yaents Mole lapinge /


ſpene vnto Daron andlare: Mo man of thy


ſeed in their generacios that hath anp dekoꝛ⸗
mote bponbynt/thall pꝛeace £07 to offer the
D bꝛed of his God: fog none that bath any ble⸗
mph Mall come nere: wetherbe be blynde⸗
lame / cot noled / oꝛ that hath any .
mebze / oꝛ bꝛokẽ foted/ 07 bꝛonen handed / oꝛ
crohe bached/oz perleyed / 02 gogeleyen /02
mafige,o7 chaulde / oꝛ bath bys ttont bzoke.
_. Nomar 5 is deformed ofthe leedok dard
the preatt hall 0
ces okthe Lowe. hepa 8 dekozmyte / he
ſhall not pꝛeace to offer che bꝛedothis God.
Hot with ſtandynge he hall eate ok che bꝛed
orhis Godꝛeuen a well ofthe moſt holx / as
ok che holp:but call not goo in vnto d baple
noz come npe che alter / becaute he is dekoz⸗
medthat he polute not my Canctuary / coz
amthe Loꝛde that fanctifie them. And Mo⸗
les tolde it vnto Lavon and to his tonnes / a
vnto all the Chyldꝛen ot Jcrael.
at mater perfones ought to abckapne from
Kann be 1. that were red. ots what 6
wen cher chülde be offerd,
¶ Che. xxij. Chapter.
Md the Lone comened with Mo⸗
Wes taping: byd Aar e his Cones
chat cher abitepne from the halo ⸗
L Swen chrnges of the cyplozé ol FE
rael which ther hauẽ halowed vnto me / that
oe polute not my holy name: fo J am
e Lozde. Hape bnto chem: twhofocuerbe


be ok all voure feed amöge youre generaciõ therwith


akter vou / Fgoeth vnto the halowedthenges
which the chyidꝛẽ of Jlrael cwallhaue halo⸗
web bnto the Lo de / bys vnclennes walbe
vpon him: and that toule Gall perych krom
out o my lpghte. am the Lozde/
None of the terd ok Aaron that is a leper
07 that bath a runnyng loꝛe / hall eate ofthe
halowed b e be cleane. And who
koeuer toucheth am vncleane fouleo2 man
whofe feed runneth From him by npahte / oꝛ
wholdeuer toucheth atp woꝛme that is vn⸗
cleane to him / oꝛ man $ is vncleane to him /
whättoeuer vnclenneſhe be bath the fame
coule that hath any loch thenge/ aibe vn⸗


Teuititus.


Loĩde which kanctptye them.


e nyeto offer the tacrikt⸗


N eremonpes,
cleane vntin euen / and Mall not eate of the 5
dec with water vnti he haue waqhedbis
wich water. Anachen when the tonne

is doune he chalbe cleane a thal afterward
eate of the halowen thyngs kor they are bys
kode. Oka beet? dieth alone oy is rent W. od
wlde beattes/ he Mall not eate / to dekple Ez
him lelte therwith: J am the Loꝛde. But let

ey igo tome option enten E ;

ep e vpon them edpetherin
ep haue dekpled chem lelues: fo2F amthe


ſhall no ftraunger cate of the ha⸗
lomenthinges nether a gett ofthe preattes/
oꝛanhyzed teruaünte. But yr the preatt bre


anp loule with money he mape cate ok it / € es vn / lo p pe leaue none ok it vntill the moꝛo⸗
he allo chat is bone in his houſſe maye cate. geupnge ts we. Foz J am the Loꝛde / hepenow my com⸗
ol his bed. Fe the pꝛealles daughter be mas en the bene maundementes a do the/ foꝛ J amthe Lord.


rped vnto a er / the maße not eate oF
the balotenbeucotmngy #otwttb song
pethepreattes daughter be a wedowe 07 dẽ⸗
noꝛted a haue no childe but is returned vnto
her kathers houtte agayne / che thall eate ol
her fathers bꝛed as well as the dyd in her
pouth. But therechall no ſtraunger eate
chert. Ia man cate of the halowed thyngy
thiwittingly / be hall put p kytte parte ther
vnto / ne pꝛealt the halo⸗
wedthrnge. And let che preattes le 8 cher
dekple not the halo wed thynges ofthe chpl-
dren ok Ilrael which thephaue offered vnto
che Logb/lett they lade thé lelues with myl⸗
dopnge a trefpace in eatynge their halowed
thingẽ / lo Fam} Loꝛde which halowe the.
And che Logdtpake vnto Moles laying: C
ſpeake vnto Aaron a bys Connes ¢ bntoall
the chyldꝛen of Ftracl ¢ fave vnto the / what⸗
foeuerbe be ofthe houtte of Ftrael oz ſtraũ⸗
ger in Itrael that wyll offer bis o nge:
zattoeuer vowe 02 krewyllollerrnge it be
ich they wyll offer vnto the Lo de foz a
bnrnto e to reconcyle them felues / it
muſt be a male without blempty of b oxen /
ſhepe oꝛgootes / let thé oller nochynge that
tg N toz ther hall gett no kauoure


1 Fauler the Loꝛde which halo we von / and


Ika mũ will oller a peaceoftring vnto the
Ln and leparate a vowe 07 a trewyll orke⸗
rynge ol the oxen oꝛ the flocke / it mutt be
without dekonmpte / p it mape be accepted.

ere mape be no blempch therin: whether
it be blinde / bꝛokẽ wounded 07 haue a wen /
02 be maunge oꝛ ſcabbed / le that ye offre no
loch vnto the L ode / noꝛ put an offerynge ok
any foch vpon the alter vnto the Loꝛde.

An ore oz a ſhepethathath any membꝛe
out of pꝛopoꝛciũ / mayſt thou offer toꝛ a fre-
swilloffergnae:butin abowe tt thall not be x
accepted. Thou Malt not offer vnto $ 1070
that which is bꝛooled ——


a. che cn
eee ‘J genre onto pou g rent


Teuititus.


pebaue brought an offerprig vnto your God
ea lawe foz euer vnto voure


Levemonpes


any maner wozhe that dare / che tame J will
deſtrope kromamonge his people. Sechat
pe do no maner wozke cherkoꝛe . And it Hal-
be a lawe koꝛ euer vnto poure generacvons
c. Habothes/ After vou in all voure dwellyngd. J labboth
fetes e newe of vette it thalbe vnto vou / and pe wallhuni⸗
che zer gin bie poure Coules Ahe ir dave of tye moncty
un dt ihr ale at euen and lo Costh ro eu to cuen agayne/
ftitcergecents BE wall hepe your Sabboth.”
wpngofma F Ande Lozd pale vnto Moles lapenge:
aid hren Cpeahebntoche cyploven of Arael amp Cape:
bbs rig rom dhe. b. dape or che fame Ceueth moneth wal⸗
oure awne be the featt of tabernacleg. vij. dapes onto
woozches/ not 5 Loꝛde. Ehe pst dave chalbean holpkeact /
dopige oure fo 5 ve Mall doo no laborious wozke therin.
gaben which SDeuten daes ve Mall offer faccpeyce onto
dwoorchet in the Aan pan a echter e an holy
vs thozou bys feaſt vnto vou ¢ ve hall offer facrptice vnto
Gotpelt ¢ glad the Wosde. It is the ende of the lealt / and ve
Hoeigenmet Tballdono faber eus woke therin. ;
bene lt. Gyech. Chele are the feattes o€ the 1 ond whiche
xx. b. pe (hall poclayine holy feattes / £02 to offer
lacrytpee onto the Lozde/burntoferynges/
meatofivynges and dzynkeolfrynges cuery


Teuititus.


the vayle of wytnelle within theta bernacle
okwytne le. And Aaron chall dz eſſe them
boch euen and moꝛnynge bekozetze Lodal⸗
wapes. And it Halbe a ſawe for euer amõge
voure chyldꝛen alter vou. Ind he call delle
the lampes vpon the pure cande il iene be⸗
koze the Loꝛde perpetually. .

And thou ſpalt tale kyne floure and bale
rij. wattels therok ! two tenthdeales Wall


euerp waſtell be. and male two rowes ok a. w
thẽ / lyre on a rowe spon the pure table be⸗ Aae


koze the Loꝛde / and put pure krankenceng hae
pot the rowes And it calbe bed of remẽ⸗
bꝛaunce /s an ollerynge to the Lozde. Euer 5,
Sabboth he (all pur them in roweg befoze
che Loꝛd euermeare / geuẽ of the chridzen ot
Itrael / that it be an euerlactyng couenatite,
nd ther Mal be Larong and hes fonnes / a


daye: belyde the labbothes of the Lom / and J.


befyne voure gyltes / and all youre vowes
all pour frewpllofirynges whiche ve chall
geue vnto the Loꝛde. * 8
Mozeouer in the. vv. daye ol the leuenth
moneth after that ve haue gathered in the
krutes ol the lande / ve call hepe holy dape
G vntothe I. oꝛd. vij. dapes ige. g he kyꝛſt dave
Wall be a dape or reſte / a che. pitj ave chal⸗
be a dape ok rect. And pe chall take pou the
fpeſt daye / the krutes of goodly trees andthe
bꝛaunches ol palme trees and the bowes or
iche trees / and wylowes ot the bꝛohte / and
Mall reiople befoze the Lond. vil. dapes. And
pe (hall kepe it holp dave vntothe Loꝛde. vii
Daves in the pere. Ind it halbe a lawe for
euer vnto poure chyldꝛen alter vou that ve
nepe that keaſt in the leuenth moneth. And
ve Hail dwell in hoothes ſeuẽ daves: eu all
Bare Iccaelites bozne / Mall dwell in boo:
thes /that youve chyldzen after you maxe
nnowe howe that made the chyldzé of Ic⸗
rac dwell in boothes / whẽ J beoughte them
out ot the land of Egypt:foz J am the Loꝛde
voure od. Ind Moles colve all the feattes:
ol che Lope vnto che chyldꝛen ol gtrael.
©The ople for the e
ok remembꝛaunce o; jede be that curte th mi
bean de bet ee ‘pa by lied. gc. ane


¶ Che xritij. chapter.


x
a \aitrach that chep um


otpueb


pure
poure in Co the lampes alware / wethout


beatt fo beatt.Jea mi mapmehrs nevgh= Minn
baute/ns ve ae oone/tofalliebebene ro fe
himagayne:bzote koz bꝛoke / eye fo2 exe and traben
maxmed a m / m ah


toth koz toth:euen as hehath
Co challhe be marmed agarne. Sonowe
. e


haue one maner of lawe amonge vou: euren v


fo2 the kraägeras welas fo2 one of youre g.


felues/fozF am the Loꝛde youre God.
And Poles tolde the chyldzen of Atraei /
that ther chulde bꝛinge him that had curted /


out ok the hoſte / and ſtone him wrth ſtones.


Andthe chyldꝛen ol Ikrael :
— rhe .
abe


emonpes,


K the. bf. eres and or the pere ol
telbzechern gte called the kyrtye wee a


¶ Che. xxv. Chapter.


2 Md the Lozde tyakebnto Moleß
in mount Sinat layinge / Cpeake
vnto the chyldꝛen ol Ilrael a Cape
vnto them. when pe be come in to

e lande whyche J geuẽ vou let the lande
relta Sabboth ontothe Lose. Sire peres
thou ſhalt Cowe thy kelde / and Cyre vere thou
Walt cut thy bynes a gether in thy krutes,
But the feuenth pere hall bea Sabboth of
rett vnto the lande. Che Loꝛdes Sabboch it
fhalbe / and thou halt nethertowe thy telde /
no2 cut thy


1 Tacken. An


Ttuititus-


„ klix.
God. Foz amthe L onde poure God. Mher⸗ the chocen bal
koze re myne ozbinatices and hepe mp be tree
lawes and do them chat pe mape den in a mtched⸗
in the land in lalette. And the lade Mall geue nes pouertpe⸗
her krute / and pe wall cate voure Elle and anguptyee ope
dwell then fafette, : a alice eu

“GE ve hal faye what wall we eate the errang
uenth pere in as moche as we Kall not lowe in hz that
hoz gether in dure encreale J wöll tende mp thozow the
bleuvnge bpon pou in the cyrte vere / andit Diss of 92 bs
wall ange kozch krute Foz char peres: and pe käbenawoße.


wall lowe the epabte pere and eate of olde


ttute bntyll the. ix pere / and euen ontyl her
krutꝭ come / pe hall eate of old dog
foze the lande call not be fol euet/ bes


caute that the lande is myne / a ve but ftratt-
gets and fotourners with me: and pe Hall
hoꝛowe oute all the land of poure pollen /
let the lande gohame kre agapne.
hen thy bꝛother is waxed pooze and Kuth. lid. a.
bath lolde aware of his pottetiion: vr anp ol
bis hipn come to redeme it/he wall by out 8
whiche his bꝛother told And bares
no man to redeme it loꝛhim / vet yr hrs hand
ran get lulliciẽt to bye it oute agapne / then
let hem counte how longe it hath be tolde /
and delxuer the ret vnto hym to whome he
Solve it / a lo he Wall retourne vnto hs pol⸗
kellion apayne ut an yl his hande ran nor
Cufficient to reſtoꝛe it tohym agapne /
n b whiche is olde ſpall remaynẽ in oe
bad ofbimtbat hath boughte it / ontyll the
belpe: and in the pere of Jubelpe tt Walt
come out / c he thail retouĩne vnto his pol⸗
ree hore
Akama ell anwellyng houle in a walled
eptte/ he maxe bye it out agayne any tyme
within a hole pere after it is tolde: and that
thalbe the (pace in which he mae redeme it E


ch agarn. But a vk itbe not bought out agarn


de and acozdynge to the kewnelle ot veres chou
chalt mynpch che pꝛyce: fo2 the nombze of


within che l pace ol a full pere / then houle
Inthe walled citie chalbe ſtabliched foz euer
vnto him that boughte it and to his ſuccel⸗
Coures alter him and call not go out in the
pere of iubelpe. But the houles in vyllages
which haue no walles rounde aboute them /
thaibe counted lẽpke vnto the keldes of the
countre / ¢mave be boughte out agarne at
oe e and chall go out fre in the vere
oftubelye.

Notwithttandpnge the cyties ok the le⸗
uptes and che houles in the cyties of their
potedions the leuptes mäpe redeme at all
ceatons. And vt a m purchate ought or the
Leuiteg: whether it be houle o2 cytye 8 cher
poftette the bargyne wall go out in the pere
of iubelxe fo2 the houles ol the crties ot the
leuptes/ate these pouemg che ire dünne

of Atrael. But che keldes thatipe rounde

aboute thets orties / wall not boule ie


sevemonpes,


they are their pottettions fo2 euer.
F Jethy brother be waxed pooze and kallẽ in
decay w the / receaue him as a ftrafiger oz


wEront.reG. e a toiourner / s let him lyue by the. And thou
re ret 5 Walk cake none bfuvye uehrm nn pet ban-
debt FPN v tage. But walt eave thy God/ that thy b70-


cher mape Ipue th he. Chou chait not lende
bim thy money vpon vlurpe / no; lende hem
of thy Eode to haue auantage bp it: tor J am
the Lose paire God whych bzoughte vou


Leuititus.


the be not bought fre in the meane tyme /
chen he wall goo out in the vere ol iubeiye a
his chymdzen with him: lo the chyldꝛen org l⸗
rael are my ſeruauntes which J bꝛoughte
out ok the lande of Egypte.

Images are foꝛbydden. Bleſled are they that kepe


thole thpnges that God byddeth and mot curledare
they that nipe them not.


out of che fande or Eg pte co geuẽ pou che


lande of Canaan and to be poure God.
Jechy brother that dwelleth by the ware
pod ze and tell him felfe vnto the / chou alt
not let hi laboure as a bondleruaite doeth:
but as anhrzed ſeruaunte and as a fotouv-
ner he ſbalbe with the / and chall lerue the vn
to p vere of iubeipe / z then wall he departe
Crom the: both he and his chyldꝛen with him /


vmage / nether reare pou vp any
piler / netherye wal lett vp any
pmage of tone in youre land to bowe poure


and (hall retourne vnto bys awne kynred


agapne a vnto the poſlellions of his fathers:


oz they are my leruaũtes which J bꝛought
out ol the lande of Egypte / and call not be
kolde as bondmen. De therkoꝛe that thou
raygne not ouer hyni cruellp / but keare the

ue bondleruauntes and


em a geue them vnto youre
den after vou / to pottette them koꝛ euer:


e hail reken with him that boughte hym /


b

from the pere that he was lolde in onto the
pere / or tubelxe / and the pꝛyce ok his byenge
chalbe acoꝛdynge vnto the nombꝛe ol peres/
he chalbe with hym as a hyꝛed feruaunte,
Ikthere be vet many peres behynde / accoꝛ⸗
dynge vnto the he Hall geue agapne koꝛ bys
delpueraunce / ok ? money thathe was lolde
£02.Y there remapne but few peres vnto the
vere of ſubelpe / he chall fo counte with him /
€ 20s cd Menor tas agayn
ro: his redẽ pclon a thalbe wich him vere by
vere as an hyꝛed feruaunte a the other hall
not rargne cruelly ouer him in thx trghte.


e amonge pou
andmy foule wagt he pou Ju wil
walke amonge pou and wribe voure God /
and ve halbe my people. F023 am the Lozd
poure God / whiche bꝛoughte pou out ol the
land of the Egypcians / that ve thuldenot be
eee 1 bowes ol

made you go bp ryghte.
But and pt pe will ni


on pk pe Hhalldetppte myne oꝛdinaũces ether
pt voure Coules refute my lawes / lo that ye
wyll not do all my cõmaundmẽtes / but Malt
bee aua
o pour! et vou
beracions Cwellyng ¢ keuerg /f Call alt g
voure eyes dalell /a 1b Cozowes of herte. and
re ſpall fowe youre feed in vayne / toꝛ poure
enemres Mall eate it / And Au ferme
cc


hen trio me/ zwang
N02 wyll do all chele my c aunbemenceg) ö. Wu


3
enempes / a ther cha

due pou /anb pe ſhall fice when no man fo-
lowetg


ges / and calt poure carhatles bpon the
obpes OF poure pdolles / andmp coule chall
abhoꝛre pou. And A well make youre crties
delolate / and beynae poure ſanctuaries vn⸗
tonought / and will not ſmell the ſauoures
ol fwete odoureg.
ind J wyll bzrngethe lande vnto a wyl⸗
dernelle: lothat youre enempes which drocll
therin Cee 1 Pe | 155 1
vou amõge e en e ot
al werde after you / and poure lande thalbe
walt / and youre cyttes delolate. Chen the
Lande chall reiople in her Spabbothes / ag
longe as it lyeth vorde and pe in poure ene⸗
myes lande: euen hen thal the jande kepe
Aude dape and retopte in her Sabbothes.
nd as longe as it lrethvorde it call reit /


remonyes. Teuititus. l.


oz that it coulde not reſte in voure Sabbo⸗
thes / when pe dwelt cherin.

And bpon them that are lekt alpue of vou
we lende a tapntnelee in co cheir hertes

the land of their enempes: lo p the lounde
oba let that kalleth / hall chace them at they
wall fler as though they fled a werde / and
fhall fall no man kolowinge them. And they
wall fall one vpõ another / as it were bekoze
a lwerde euen no man kolowyngethem / and
ve ſball haueno powerto fave befoze youre
enempes: And ve Hall perpch amonge the
hethen / and the land ol youre enempes wall
eate vou bp.

And they that are left of you / hall pyne
awape in thelr vnryghteoulmes / euẽ in their
enempes lande / and allo in the myldeades ol
their katherg (hall they canlume . Andthey
wall conkelle their mildeades and the myl⸗
deades ok their fathers in their trelpaces
which they haue trelpaced agayntt me / a Foz
Ballo s cher haue walked cotvary onto me, os
Cherkoze J allo wyll walke contrary vnto
them / and wyll bꝛynge them in to the lande
of their enempes. And then at the leet wape
their vncircumcyled hertes tail be tamed /
and then they hall make an attonement foz
their myldeadeg.


And q will remembꝛe mybonde with Faz Mercy in ne⸗


cob andmptenament topth Slaac / and mp itt hre


teſtament with Abꝛaham and wyll chynke

on che lande. For the lande tbaltbeere of"
thé and chall haue pleaturein her Sabbo-
thes / whyle che lyeth walt without them / a
they (ail make an attonemẽt fo2 theirmil⸗
deades / becaule they delpyled my lawes and
their toules refuted myne oꝛdinaunces. And
vet Foz all that when they be in the lande ol


cheir enempe / A wll not fo catt chẽ awape . weute ii. e.


noꝛ my foule all not ſo abhoꝛre them / that
J wil vtterlpe deftrope them and bꝛeane
Mypneappoyntment with chem:fo2 Jam the
Loꝛde their God. J wril tyerfoze remembze
vnto them the kyꝛü couenaunt made when
Abzoughte them out of che lande ok Egypte
in the lyghte of the hechen to be their God:
foꝛ Jan the Losde.

Chele axe 8 opoinaunces /iuogemétes/¢
lawes which the Loꝛde made betwene hym
and the chyldꝛen of Alrael in mount Sinai
by the hande ol Moles.

kdiuerte vowes and the redemynge of the fame


howe bntothe Loꝛde acoꝛdyng to the value
or hrs loule / then hall the 1


Ceremonyes.


ume. jg pere vnto ix be fet at kyttie cycles of ſiluer /
aͤkterthe tycle ofthe fanctuary/¢ the female
at. xxx. ſpeles. And krom. v. veres to.xx.the
male Whalbe ſet at. xx cycles / and the female
at. x lpcles. And krom a moneth vnto. b. pere

themale halbe tet at. v. lpcles of lyluer /a ;
female at thze. Andthe man that is. Ax. and
aboue / Walbe valued at. xv. cycles / and the
wom at r. Iche be to pooze Coto be let / che
lett hym come befoze the pꝛeaſt: andlett the
peat value him / co dynge as the hande of

him that vopped is able to gett. 5

Ilit be ofthe beaſtes or which men binge
an olleryng vnto the Lozb: all that any man
geueth orloch vnto 5 Lob / walbe hol. He
ape not alterit noz chaunge it:a good fo2 a
bad oꝛ a bad foz agood . It he chaunge beak
fo2 beatt / then boch the (ame beat andit allo
ertwich it was chaunged chalbe bore. ae

it be any maner ol bneleane beat of which
men mae not offer brito the Loꝛde / let hem
pra van beaſt befoze the pꝛeaſt lett the
value it. And whether it be good 07


ea
bio AS the Prenk letteth it / fo chall it be. th


And yehe wil bye it agapne / lect him geue
the fyfte parte moate tothat it was let at.
Afanpman dedicate his houle it chalbe
hold onto the Lozde, And the peatt Mall fet
it / whether it be good oꝛ bad / ¢ as the pzealt
Chath let it / lo it halbe. It he chat tanctitped
wyllredeme bys houte/ let hym geue the
kyltẽ parte of the money that it was iudged
at therto / and it chalbe his.
eovaiows , Aa man halowe a pece okhigenhereted
10 tankikie ave lande onto che Lo de tt thalbe tet acozopnge
potheone/ what to F it beareth. Feit beare an homer of bats
lanétyfteng lo Ipe / it hall be fet at tyttie Cycles ob lyluer. At
lohe Gene hahe halowe his Feld immediatly from 8 pere
ok iubelp / it walbe woꝛth acoꝛdynge as it is
ellemed. But ¢ k he halo we his keld atter d
trompet pere / the preatt Mall reckẽ the price
‘him acozdynge tothe peres that remapne
vnto the trompẽt pere / and there alter it hal
be lowerkett.
Ithe that canctitredthe ke wyll redeme
tagapneslecbim put the kylte parte of the
5 pine that ie was ket aechere bnto/ eit wal⸗
ebys/pebe woll not it calbe redemed no⸗
moare. But when the felde goeth out in the
pere of ſubelpe / it cbalbe holp vnto the Lozd:
euen as a chynge dedreated / and it challbe
the pzeattes polellton.


Leutticus,


cpenombseotehe


armpe of Plraelt.
CTbe fourth
ol Poles called Mumert,


iu that are apte fo: batell are nombzed. Che
Pa ee — —-—


ache. chapter.


Ika ma Canctifve vnto the Loꝛde a teld / x
wpich he bath boughte and is not obs en⸗ z. 10m e,
heritaunce / chen the peat wall reken wyth 15.
him what it is woꝛth onto ð pere of iubelpe /
and he dall geue the pzpce that it is let at?
lame daxe / and it halbe bolp vntorthe Lord. potp 44
But in the pere of tubelve / the kelde Mal ves tpcic vt ty
turne onto hem of whome he boughte it / —
whole enheritaunee ok land it was. be botheen

And all ſettynge chalbe acoꝛdynge to the
*holy Cycle. One tycle maketh. xx. Geras. |
But the fyskbogne of ö beaſtes that per⸗
tapne onto the Loꝛde / mapeno man lancti⸗
kye: whether it be ore oꝛ ſhepe / toꝛ ther are 8
Lozdes allredy. It it be an vncleaneè beat /
pa let him redem̃e it as it is (ett at / a geue e:
e Evite parte moare therto. Ak it be not re⸗ t
demed / then let it be folde as it is rated.
Hotwichſtandynge no dedytated thynge ,
ata man dedycateth vnto the Lozde/of ail
b Sood / tohetherit be ma oz bead oz land

bis enheritaunce / cpalbe folne oꝛ redemed:

ie kene soobelate henge eee
e. 0 die
is dedicate of m / mar be redemed / hut mut


nedes dye.

All thele trthes of the lande / whether it
be ol the come ofthe teldoꝛ frute of $ trees ⸗
walbe holx vnto the Loꝛde. It anx man will
redemẽ oughte ol his tythes / let hun adde &
kplte parte moare therto . Andthe tytheg of
orẽ ard thepeand We walten vnder the


kepynge / Walbe es vn⸗
4 Lord. e iche


on

ot : Hell ehe cl
fonne of Pelon. Am

b sof Ephꝛaim / Eilan

dor Manalle / Gamaliel


ol Dan / Ahlezer


‘of
Deda
ol @edeont
hege mi Dadaitok Aler / Pagtel tl
cranioł Gad / Elitaph the tonne of Peguel:


ali / Abira the ſonne ol Enan.
5 eek Pelican gen 7


ch
Che Lone gaue Moes in charge
vnto che childꝛen of Arrael in mount
gacion ¢ loꝛdes in the tribes oftheir fa
and captapnes ouer thoulandes in Ilrael.
And Moles and a arõ toke thele men aboue
named and gethered all the congregacid to⸗
gether / the ipꝛlt dave of the leconde moneth /
Ghouls wer tasers bp name Home
ou
pereandaboue hed br hed / as the Loꝛde coz


a & Sl


Numeri.
boke


‘
lj,
toldey ok all che males kro. xx. teres a aboue /
whattoeuer was mete £02 the warte: were
nombzed inthe trybe ol Simeon. lix. thou⸗
lande and ii hunded. ere Ok God.
Amonge the chyldzen ol Gad: theirgene⸗ C
racponincheir krnredes and houſholdes of-
their fathers / when they were tolde by name
krom. xx. pere and abouẽ / all that were mete
warre: were nombzed in thetrybe of
lb. thoulande tyxe hundꝛed and kyktie.
Amonge the chyldzen of Juda: theirgene⸗ Or Zuda.
racion in their kynredes and houles of their
fatherg( by the nombꝛe ol names) krom. xx.
pere and aboue / all that were able to ware /
were tole in che trybe of Juda. rxiiij. thou⸗
kande and lyre hundꝛed. :
Amonge the chplozen oF Flachar their Ot stachar.
generacioñ in their hynredes and houles of D
their fathers (when their names were coun⸗
ted kroni xx. pere ¢ aboue / whatloeuer was
apte Foz warre / were nombꝛed in the trybe
i achar tt eae abst Huandied,
mong the chploren ol Sabuion: theirge DF savuton,
neracyon / in their krnredes and houles of
eir kathers ( after the nombze or names)
ere and aboue /


Naim. xl. thoulande / and pre hundꝛed.
monde the chridaen ol anale: their Oe Wanaltes.
generacpon / in their kynredes and houles
of their tathers when the names okall that
were apte to warre were toldeltkrom rx. and
aboue were nombꝛed in the trybe of Ma⸗
naſle.xxxiſ.thoulande and twohundzed.
Amonge the chyldꝛt ol Wen Jamin:iheir Ot iam
Generacpon/ in their uynredes and houles
ol their fathers(bp the tale of names) front
twentye vere and aboue ofall that were
mete ko: warre / were nombzed in the trybe
ol Ben Jamin. repo, thautande / and. tit,


maunded Moles / euen to he nambꝛed them hunde!


Fathers toh

Becneuctpng bpnam all her were males
krom. xx. pere and aboue / as many
dein in warre were nombꝛed
dug

“bone i. cel dende and banker of
neräcpon in chert hynrenes and houtes ok
cher fathers (when curry mans name was


ed.
Amonge the chrldzen of Dan: their ge⸗ Y wan.
hneracton in ehele Rpnreded an houtes of.
8e eet the lumme of names ok all
was apte to warre kromt went ye vere
andaboue / were nombzed in the trpbe or
rt choulande and vit hund ed.
e chyldzen of Aler:therr gene Ol acer.
Hpnredt and houles of their
were lummed by name)


It. choulande and v. hundred.


g.. Amonge


Ltremonpes.

Ot Herhtan. Amonge the chyldzen ol Qerhthaũ: their
generacpen ſin their Anrede and houles ok
theit fathers (when their names were tolde)
krom xx. peres and abaue / whatloeuer was
mete to warre: were nombzed in the trrbe
of Mephthale chꝛwe and krttre thouland and
nit. huindzed.

Chele are the nombꝛes which Wotes and


© seronnombzed woth the. iL, princes OF Al⸗


rael: of euerphoute or their fathers a man. that


And all the nonibꝛes of the chpldzen ol zl⸗
rael / inthe houtes ol their fathers / from
twentye pere and aboue / whatloeuer was
mete koꝛ the warre in Alrael dꝛewe vnto the
Comme of kyre hundꝛed and thze thoulande /
kyue hundzed and Epttye. But the Leuites in
the trpbe of their fathers were not nambꝛed
amonge them.

And the Lozd pak vnto Moles favinge:
only fe that thou nombze not the trybe of
Leui / nether take the comme ol thé amonge
the chrldꝛen of Ilrael. But thou walt ap-
popnte the leuites onto the habitacid of wit
nelle / and to all the appareil therof and vn⸗
to all chat lögeth therto. Foz ther wall beare
the tabernacle and allche oꝛdinaũce therot /
andther Wall mpnifive it and tail perce
their tentes rounde aboute it. And when the
tabernacle gocth forth the leuites wall talte
it doune: and the the tabernacle is pitched /
they Wall lettit bp oz pr anp Gradger come
nere / he thall dye. And che chyldzen ok Aerael
Wall pytch their tentes /enery man in bys
owne companpe and euerr mu ur his atone
ſtandert tho ow out all their hoſtes But the
leuites wall pytche rounde aboute the ha-
bitacyd of wytnelle / that there kal no wzath


Numeri.


and. bi. hund ned. Andnexte onto hym Mall

beladen erkenne beche
0

9.2 Zachar his holte and the nombze ok them

lun choulande and litt. bundzed.

And chen the trybe ol abuton: WW Ellab
the fonne ol Selon / captarne ouer the chyl⸗
die of Zabulon / and his holte in che nombze
oktheni. vit thoulande g. int. hundzed. S
all all hep that parteyne vnto the holte
of Juda / are an hundzed thoufande. Ixxxvi.
thoufande and. (it hundzed in ther; com⸗
panxeg: and thele Wall go in the toꝛeront /
Winden the lauge andert of the On ide aug

on the e ftandert of the Oude
hotte of Aaken tall ire with their pee beh ons
npes ethe captapne ouer thefonncs ol Kus Sime
ben / Eltzurthe konne of Sedeur / and hrs
hotte and the nombꝛe ot thẽ. ribi. tyoulande /

6. v. hundzed. And fat by hym chal the trybe
ok Simeon pptche / and the capteyne ouer
che fortes of Simeon. Dalumiel the tonne
ol Juri Sadat / and his holte and the num⸗
bye of them. tx. choukande and. il. hundzed.

Andthe trybe ofGad allo: Andthe captayne

ouer the lonnes of Gad / Cllataph che fonne
ol Deguel and his holte and the noinbze of

thoulande. vi. hundzed and. l. ne


bpon the congregacion of the chploze or A- in his


acl / e the leüttẽs Malt warte vpon the ha⸗
bitacion of wytnedle. And the chrldzen of Ac⸗
rael dyd acozörnge to all that the Lom com⸗
maunded pokes, :


C The order of thepptehpng ofthetentes rounder
Doutethe tabernacle of wyrnelle. Che heades and
chett Loꝛdes of thebpnredes of J lrael rt named.


The. ii. Chapter.


ge Lande cpane vnto Motes
javon fal Che chplozen
frael chall 19 0 a by
On the eat th che armes
tyde the cöpa
upe of Juda

ſtachar z Z

ulon.

holte of Juda pytch


Hahellion the tonne or ã nunadab chalbe cap⸗


tayne ouer thefonnes al Juda And his holte 1.
lane and


andthe nombze of then. xxl. ch


them xxrv. ch.

ee

and an hundzed inchetrhoſtes: sthep walb
enduro 9 ther 8


che captarn


te. c.


hotte ethenumbze of the. Kit, thoufande a
bil hundzed. And kalt by hym tall the trybe
ok Aler pitche ache captapne duer £ fonnes
Doka ler) Pagiel the Conne of Pcran andhes
hate ¢thenombze of them. rif.thoulande z
v hundzed. And the tribe of Meplythalt alto/e
che captapne ouer the chplozen ol Nephtalt:
Ahira the donne of €nan: c his holte and the
numbze of the. lil thoulande g. lift hundred.
So that the holenumbze ot all 6 pertayned
britothe hotte of Dan / was an hädzedthou⸗
lande Iott.cyoutande G. vi. humdied Andther
chal be $ lat in 6 tourney w there Ganvett,
‘Thete are the fummes ok the chyldꝛẽ ol Al⸗
racl inthe houles of their kathers eue all the
nombꝛes of thehottes wiheir cöpanpeg. vl.
ed thoulande. ii. choulande. b. hundzed
g kyltre. And pet the Leultes were not nam⸗
bed amöge the chplozé or Firael/as P Lode
cömaunded Moles. And 8 chridge of Jcrael
drdaccoꝛdyng to all that the Londe cõmaun
ded Moles / z To they pitched wich their ttan-
dertes / abo they iouinerd euer man in hys
kynred / and in the houcholde of his Father,


ich were Pꝛeaſtes

led to mynyſtre /

nando
ype betoze
nat andba


bpo
of ey
geuen onto him ok che chploze ok Arael. And


thou chalt appopnte Aaron hrs lonnes to
wapte on cher Pꝛeaſtes office:¢ d ſtraüger


Numtri


ter the lonne ol Ammt Hava: andhis rael/ co b thenLeuptes walbe myne:becaule a. Leurtecom


vt
lij.
all the Epettbozne are mpne: tor $ famedape (me fyguifye
that A (mote allthe fpzteoome in che fande ok auer os cove
Egpßte/halowed onto me al d kpꝛſtbozne naunt / as here
in 0 man and beaſt / myne they aud Ela. ixvig
chalbe: fo: J am the Loꝛde. 0
Andthe Lozde fpakebneo Moles in che

wylderneſte of Dina lapinge⸗Hombꝛe the
chridꝛen of Leüt in the hoüles of their ka⸗
thers a kynredes / al that are males fro a mo
neth olde g aboue. And Woles nombzed the
at the worde of the Loꝛde / as he was coin⸗
maunded. And thele are the names of d chrl⸗
dꝛen of Leui: erlon / Cahath and Merarl.
And chele are d names of the chpldze of wer-
fon in cheir kynredes: Libni ¢ Syemet, And
ſhe lonnes of Cahath in their kynredes were

mram / Zezehar / Hebꝛon a Oziel Andthe
fonnes of Merari in their kynredes were
Paya and Muli. Thele are che kynredeg
Of Leui in the houlles of their fathers.

And ok Gercon came 9 kpnred ok the Lib- ™
nites and the Spemeites/ which ave che kon⸗ Che Ger Conte
redes of the Gerfonites.dnd z lumme of CHER oe
(when all the males were tolde) from a mo-
neth olde and aboue, were. vi choulande and
krue hundꝛed. And the kynredes ok the Ger⸗
fonptes pitched behynde the babitacton welt
warde. And the captapne of the molt aunciẽt
houſe amöge the Gerlonites was Elialaph
che tonne of Lael. And p offtce of the chyldꝛẽ
of Gerlon in the tabernacle of witnede was
tohepe thehabitacyd athe tente with the co
ueringe therof and the bangpnge of the doze
ol the tabernacle of twptnelie / and the han⸗
Gynges ok the courte / and the curtapne ofthe
Doze oF the courte: which courte went rounde
about the dwellyng / and the alter / a the coz
Bi ertepned onto all the ferupce therok.

DE Cabath camethehpneed of tye Am⸗ Che aug
vamites andthe ünred ok the Jezeharites theca syerany
ste Bebe and ofthe Drielites : And tyne,
thele are the kynrede ok the Cahathttes. And
che nombze of all the males from a moneth
olde and aboue / was. vil thoukande andrixe
hůͤdzed: which wapted on the holy place and
the kynred of the childern of Cahath / pitched
on che louthlide of che dwelung. And the cap:
tapne in the moſt auncyét boutte of che kyn⸗
redes of the Cahathites was Elitaphan the
tonne of O ziel / theiv office was to nepe the
arche / che table / the candelſtyck / a the alter /

g the holy bettels to minpſtre Wa the vaple
wych all that ferued therto. And Eleazar
the fonne of Aaron the p2eatt/ was captayne
ouctallthe captapnes of the Leuites (and


n hadthe ouerfyabte of them that wapted — 8


jon the holy thynges.
9 And ok Merart camethe hynredes of the aes rtd
Mahelites and ok the Wut i and chere hero


The offpce


are the kynredeg ok the Merarites. andthe
nombze of chem when all p males frõ a mo⸗
neth olde a abeue was tolde) dae we vnto. vj.
thoulande 4. il hundzed. And the captapne of
che mok aunciẽthoulle amöge the kynredes
ol the Merarites / was Surtel the tonne of
Abihael which pitcher on the noꝛth lyde ol b
dweilyng. and p offtce of plonnes of Merart
was to kepe 8 boꝛdes ol the dwellyng g the
barres / pylers with the lockettes therot / and
all the inärumentes ihero o all that ſerued
therto: and the pplers of the courte rounde
aboute a their iockettes with their pynnes


a
‘Moles ¢ Mavd cordes, But on the fozctrde of iht habitacxõ


¢
uche cantive : 1 0 Stabernacic ot witnetic call warde /


oles & Aaron ahrs lonnes vrtehe
warte on the lanctuarp in che Meade ok the
chridzen ok jfiael. And the ſtraüger that cos
Fmeth npe / al dre koz it and the hole tumme
ok the Leuites which Moles d Aaron nom⸗
bꝛedſat the comaundemét of 6 Lod thozow
out their kyntedes, euen of al themalcs ora
moneth olde a aboue / wat. xxiſ thoufande,

Andthe Loꝛde ſayde vnto Moles: Pom⸗
bꝛe all che fpꝛũ bogne b are males amöge $
chyldzẽ of A trael / trõ a moneth olde a aboue
tale the nombze of their names. And thou
walt appopnte the Leuttesto me the Londe⸗
koꝛ all the kyꝛſtboꝛne amonge the chyidzen of
Fonebiche catell ofthe Leuiteg ko C fyzlt

jogne ok the chyldzen or tract. and oes
nombꝛed as the Loꝛde comaundedbimall$
kpzüboꝛne of d chridze of g lrael. Andall the
kpallbozne males in the ſümme ok names /
from a moneth olde ¢ aboue / were nQmbꝛed
xxij.choulande.ij. hundꝛed and. xxiij.

And the Love fpake onto Moles faving:
take the Leuites Coz all the Epattbozne of the
chyldꝛẽ ok Flracl/a the catell ofthe Leuites
fo2 their cãtell:andthe Leuites ſhalbe myne
which am the Loꝛde. And koꝛ the redemynge
ol the two hundꝛed and. lrxiij. which arc moo
then the Leuites in $ fyꝛſtboꝛne of the cyyl⸗
dien ol Itrael / take. v. lpcles of euerx pece /


5 Sa baler We fycle of the holp place.rr.geras the
Att, un 1
Tegen. Donne auc toe money tobe: d odde


them is redcmed / vnto Aarõ and
his lonneg. And Moles toke the redempeyd
money of che ouerplus that were moo then
the Leuites / amũgẽ the tyꝛllboꝛne of the sa
dien ok Itrael:and it came to a thoulande. fil.
hundꝛed d. Ixb. lpcles oF the holpe fycie. And
he gaue that redempcryon money vnto Tard
@bis lonnes at the woꝛde ofthe Loꝛde / euen
as the Loꝛde commaunded Moles.


The offyces of the Leuptes
tüte here kanreg. ten euer ant etter the


¶ Che. iii. Chapter.


Rumer,
5


Ind the Loꝛde Aba e Goſes a
land Aaron and bad them take the
dumme ok the chylbzenof Cabath
ES from amõge the fonnes of Leut/
in their kynredes e höules ok their fathers/
krom. xxx. pere ¢ aboue vntyll tyttye all that
were able to warre / ſoz todo $ wozkein the
tabernacle of witnette. This ſhalbe the office
ok the chyldzẽ of Rahath in the tabernacle of
witnelle which is mook holp. And when the
hoſte remoueth / Aaron and hrs Connes ſhall
come ¢ take doune the vaxle / a couer ß arcke
of wytnelle there with / a wall put theron a
ccuerynge of tarus kürnnes a Wall ipꝛedes
cloth p is altogether ot tacyncte aboue ali /
put the ſtauescherok in. And vpõ whe hewe
table / ther call tpꝛede abꝛode a cloth of tas
cincte / a put theron the dyches / lpones / lat
pects and pottes to poure wth / a ade

ead habe theron: they wall cpꝛeade opi
them a couerpnge of purple / andcoucrthe
fame with a couerpnge of taxus inynnes / a
put the ſtaues thezot in. ve

Andthcy Wall take a cloth ol iacincte a co⸗
uer the canvelttyche ol lyght a her lampes a
and her moers / a lyꝛe panet / & all her orie
velieis which they occuppe aboute it / a Halk
put vpon her and on gu her inſtrumentes / a
couerynge of taxus Chrnnes / ¢ put it vpon
ſtaues. And vpon the golden alter they Malt
ſpꝛede a cloth of & ac pncte / and put on her
Haues. And they chall take all che chinges
which they occupxe to nunpſtre with in ho⸗
place / a put a cioch of Facyncte vpõ them
and couer ihem with a cduerynge of tarus
Chynnes and put them cn Gaues. Ind ther
Hall cake awaye the atthes out of the alter 15
and Cpzede a fcarlet cloth theron: and put
aboute it / the kyꝛe pannes / the flew bokes/
the ſhouels / che batens ¢ all chat belongeth
e.

cus tkpnnes /g put an

ſtaues ot it. And whedarog his bonnes hae
made an ende ol couerynge thefanctuary @
all the thinges ol the lanctuarpe / agenſt that
the hoſte remoue / then thefonnes of Cahath
wall come in toꝛ to beare / a Co let them not
touched fanctuary leaſt they dre. And this


eng

redes ok the Cahathites among

Leuites. But thus do vnto them Gch
F maß


the Leuites.


Ipue and not dye / when they go vnto
cheat holy place, Aaron and hes tonnes
hall go in and put thé euer man onto bys
ferupce and vnto his burthen. But let them
not goin e couer the ſanctua⸗

2


e fpake vnto Moles fapenge
Fake the umme of the chilvern of Gerton /
inthe houles of their fathers ¢intheirhyn-
redes: krom. xxx. pere and abouie / vntyll. l. all
chat are able to goo toꝛth in warre ko todo
fetupcein the tabernacle of witnege. And
this is $ ſerupce of the kynred ol the Gerto-
nites / to lerue eto bare. Cher wall beare g
curtapnes ok the dwellyng ¢ $ routle ofthe
tabernacle ol witnelle and bis couerynge a
couerpng ot taxus thynnes that is an hre
aboue W the hangynge of the doze
ofthe tabernacle of witnedke a the hangeng
ol the courte and the Yangynge of the gate
of the courte that is rounde about the dwel⸗
lynge a the altare/and the condes of the / all


che indtrumentes that lerue bnto them dall This


chat is made koꝛ them. Andat che mouth of
Tarom and his tones / Wall all } terupce of

e childern of the Gertonites be done / in all

ely charges and in all their lerupce / and ve

n appopnte them vnto all theyz charges
that they chall warte pon. Andthisis the
ſerupce ot the kynred ol the childzen of the
Gertonites in the tabernacle ol witneſle / a
their wapte ſhalbe in the hande of Ithamar
che fonne of Aaron the pꝛeaſt.

Andthou tale nomüze the lonnes of Me
tart in their kynredes ¢ in ß houles of their
fathers / krom xxx. peres and aboue vnta l.
All that is able to go forth in warre / todo

e terupce of the tabernacte of witnele.

ind this is the charge that they mutt wa!
vppon in al that they mutt ferue in the ta⸗

bvernacle of witnelte: Che bo des ol the dwel
Inge / a che barres / pylers / lokettes therol
and the ppiers of the courte rounde aboute/
andtheirkokettes / pynneg a coꝛdes all
that pertayneth and kerueth vnto them. And


bp name pe hal renen the thynges that ther


mut wapte bpd to beare. Chysiss ſerupce
ofthe kynredes ok z tonnes of Merart in

thep2 lerurce in d tabernacle ot witneſe by

of gchamar p tonne ol Aarõ the pꝛeaſt.

And Motes and Aaron and the princes

ofthe multitude nombzed the Connes of the

Cahachites in their kynredes and houles oF


chers fathers / krom. xxx. pere and aboue vnto g.


Epitie / all that were able to go fort in the
hoſte and to do lerupce in ie tabernacle of
Soltnetie And the nombꝛe of thé th ther: kyn
redes were two nen 2 15.
and. I. Chele are the nombzes of che kyn⸗
redes OF e Cahathites / or al that dd lerupce


all put thẽ out of $ holte / that


Numtri.


in the tabernacle of witnedte / wyych WMoles
and Aaron drdnombꝛe at the commaunde⸗
ment of the Loꝛde by the hande of Mole.

And the Connes of Gerlon were nombꝛed
tn cheyz kynredes and in che boutes of they:
fathers / crö. xxx. vere bp onto fyltye / all that
were able to go fozth in the holte toꝛ todo
lerupce inthe kabemacle or wirnelle. And ß
nombꝛe ol them in therꝛ krnredes e inthe
b bn ok thep2 kathers / was two thouland

e hundꝛed and. xx. Chrs is the nombze
ok the kynredes ot the Connes ol Gerlon / ol
all that dyd leruice in the tabernacle of wit⸗
neſſe / which Moles and Aaron dyd nombꝛe
atthe commaundement ol the Lozve,

And the kynredes of che tonnes ol Mera⸗
vi were nombꝛedin ther krnredes and in ß
houles of they fathers / krom. xxx. vere vy on
to kyltye:all that were able to go kozth wrth
the hoſte / todo leruice in Stabernacte of wit⸗
neſſe. And the nombze ok them was intheyꝛ
krnredes chze thoulande and two hundzed.

is the nombze of the kynredes of the
fonnes of Merari / whiche Moles and Aa⸗
ron nombꝛed at the byddynge of the Loꝛde /
bythe hande ol Moles. i

Ehe whole lumme which Motes / Aaron

andthe loꝛdes of 750 nombzed amonge
the Leuttes in their kynredes a houſholdeg
ok their kathers / krom. xxx. vere vy vnto. I.
euery man to do hig offyce and ferupce and
tobeare his burthé in the tabernacle of wit⸗
nelle: was. vtiſ.choulande / kxxue hundꝛed and
Ixxx. which they nombꝛedat the commaun⸗
dement of the Loꝛde by the hande ol Moles
euery man bnto his lerupce and burthen: as
the Loꝛde commaunded Moles.
eee

e A
deut of ignozaunce. che latwe of the kein frutesra


or geloulpe.
¶ Che kylte Chapter,

FIND che Lozde kpake bnto Molen
fayinge: commaunde the chplozen
ocd Ithat they put out ok the

2 botte all the lepers d all thathaue
phues and all that are dekpled bpon the deed
whether cheybe males 02 femates ve call
tentes amöge which ve dwel pawl ch

ich vedwell. childe
OF Iltael dd to / e put them out ol che holte
euen as the Lozde commaunded Moes / lo


PSEC» echis torts
to be vnderſtä⸗


Leremonpes,


mutt the hurt they haut done in the hole / and putthe kylte
bchettep pate baut of it moare thereto / and geue it vnto
mote cherte bum whom he hath tretpated agenſte. But
Ik the partpe AND pk he that maketh the amendes haue no
Temapned not ni to do it to/ chen the amendes that is made
dane there qyatbe the rande and dhe Preattes / betyde
due ner ano che ram of cYcattonement offerynge ber;
bis ieakullhea⸗withhemaketh an attonement, fo2 him ſelke.
reo chen V And all heue ockerpnges ot all the halowed
1955 ts ache which the chyidzen or Itracl bꝛynge
gen renege aconco che pecatte wipe the rad ane
ahne tyme had mans alowed chynges Waibe bys atwne /
no nother ue hut what ſoeuer any man geueth the pꝛeaſt /
lode. it halbe the preattes .
si a ops oat
eatie bnto /
kapebnte chem. It any mis wyte goo alpde
ano tretpate er ch bpm / lo Chat another
man ipe with her tlechelx and the chynge be⸗
hy krom the eves ok ber hulbande and is
not come to lighte that the is dekpledckoꝛ cher
18 no wytnelle agent ber ) in as moche as
b. Che hole ME was not taten with the maner / and the
Tate of vous fpzete of geloulve cometh aponhimand, be
fie lemeth tobe is geloute ouer his wpke and che defplen /
aun ben eln happely the cpiete of geloulpe cometh vpd
o wünes chat imm and YE is geloute ouer his wife and che
thep chulde be pet öndekvled. Chen let berhucband bunge
obebter other her onto the preatte and bzpnge an olle⸗
hhutoaden, cone png, koꝛher: the tenthe parte of an Epha
babbeal ahn OF baripe mecle / but au poure none ople
foche as gene therevnto /noz put krankencens theron: ko:
no oceatibto be it is an offerynge of geloulpe / and an olle⸗
10 9 9 9925 rpnge thatmaketh remembzaunce of lynne.
fase whple ie, „id ſet the peng bapnge her and fete her
pt the Inder bekoze the Loide fädlet hum taͤne holy water
hept thy
ggaucthe non inan ercyen vettell a of che Dut chat is in the
cio to rene C flooze ofthehabptacyon / and put it in tothe
a e Lone dete ber hear an pet
migbtbaue co, che Wozde an ue
me in fone Cus
{pect s lo hae whiche is the geloulpe olkerynge / ¢ f peak
ne 0 (hall hauebptter and cutkynge water in his
bete NE bande andbhe Pall conture yer and gau Cave
gregacron. ontoher. Ik no man haue iyen wyth the nes
ther halte gone alpde / and dekpled thp lelke be
Meth er n 0 chenbaue d thou no har⸗
nie ok this bytter curkpn 8
But and ache bad gone alpde behynde
thyne hulbande and art dekpled come 2 —
man hath lye wich the belpde chrne hulbäde
and let the pꝛeaſte conture her with che con
iuracpon of the curle and lape onto her) the
Loꝛde make the a curle anda contutacpon
amonge thy people:fo that the Loꝛde make
commen (an gly thpe rotteandthp bely Cwell this bitter
Opener curlpnge water goo in to the bowels of the /
buen 0 bea that chy belp CwelLandthp ihre rotte / adihe
be it fat ani 4 .
ee, ne af tal trate cis cute
ndthe pea 2 is curle in


lewer / appꝛo ·


Numeri.


abplland wache toutinehe brtterwater. rt


And when ige curlynge water vs yn her that P un
t is bytter / wen let the prea take the gelou⸗ arte
cpollerpnge out ofthe topics bande / ¢ waue wens
ttbefozethe Lone / andbzynge it vnto the bie tan


alter: and he Mall take an handckull of the teih rag


memozpall otkerpnge and burne it apon the ug,
alter / and then nian her derncke che water 37h
and 15 hehath made her dzynke the water
FE che bevefpled and haue tretpaled agent
erhutband / then tall the curfynge water
gootn tones a be lo bitter / chat her belp hall
ell andherthye hall rotte / and che walbe
a curte amiongeher people. And pk the benot
del pled but is cleane / then tbe call haue no
harime / but that che mae conceaue.
Chis is the laweof geloulxe / when a wyfe
Goeth a fpde behrnde bps hulbande andis des
kxled / o when the ſpirite of geloulpe cometh
apon a ma / lo chathe is gelouſe ouerhiswike
then he Wall bꝛonge her befoze che Loꝛde
and the pꝛealt thall minittre all this lawe vn
toher / and che man thalbe gtitiede / and tze
wyle wall beare her tyne,
¶ The lawe ot them that tone vppon them altpnence
he maner of blellpng the people.
¶ Che. di. Chapter.
MD the L. onde kpake bnto Motes 1
penigestpeabe vnto che cyplozen ge
ot A frael and lape vnto them: when vowen
ether mano: woma appopnteth to che one
Howe a bowe ok abltinécefo2 to abſterne vn mend
tothe Lo de/he Wall abſterrie fro wene and eee
ſtröge dꝛonke / and hall dꝛynche no ppnagre chat a
ol wynẽ 07 OF ſtröge dꝛynne / non Mall dꝛynze man va
what loeuer is predicD out ok grapes: & wall dog
cate no frech grapes nether zer deped a8 Loge fete
as hig abſtinence endureth. Mozeouer he as irish
chal eate nothyng that is made of ö vyne tre non
Hohe Sony a8 the coꝛnels oz the hulne ol
e


the memozpall of the olkerynge in her handes che gray


And as longe ag che bowe of his abſinẽ⸗ S
ce endureth / there call no ralure noz theres
come apon ins heed / vntill his dapes be out
whichhe kaſteth vnto the Loꝛde / andhe Mal-
be holx and wall let the locke of bis hapze
ae 16g as he ablteyneth onto p 1030 b ren

e Mali come at nodead Pope: he Wall not ß
maße himkelte vncleane at the deach of his her
father / mother / bꝛother 02 lpſter: Foz ther ab=a tonen
ſtynence or hys Gobis vpon hs head. And tung
cherkoze as lunge as his abdtpnence latteth / ob
he walbeholpontoche Lorde. tebe

And pt it koꝛtune that any man by chaunce payee a
dye fonenty befoze him / and defile the heeDoe deen
his abſtinence / chen mutt he Tyaue bie bee pu
the dape of his cletenge.enen the Ceucth dave Lie
ye Chait 92 15 ar ock te etn he

zunge. i turtelg oz i pofige pigeon gee
preat onto the doze ofthe tabernacle of wit wei


mremonyes


nelle. And the west thal offer the one kz a


g b

kerne bn che Lozde the tyme of his abiti-
oer ge eer
olde foza ce o 8 0
were befoze are loſt /becaute his ab e
was dekpled. Chis is the lawe ok the ab⸗

C ſtexner / when d tyme al his abtingcets out
he lhalbe bꝛoughte onto che doze oF § taber⸗
nacle of wiknelle he zunge his olle⸗
renge bnto 7 Lowe: an be läbe ofa rere olde
swith out blempch koz a burntofferyngeanda
che läbe ok a pere olde without blemoc fo;
alpnolferynge / a ram without blempſd allo
ko a peaceo ge / and a backet of fwete
bꝛeed oh pada mpngled with opie and
walerg of fwete bꝛead anopnerd with ole sd
meatoſferynges and dernno es that
Jonge thereto.

And the preatt wall bzengehimm before ?
ode ¢ offer bis fynofferynge ¢ his burnt⸗
olerynge / a Mall offer p ram fo2 a peaceofte
vynge onto y Lozde with the bathed or kwete
dzede / and the preat wall ocker allo bis meat

8 walten berd n bene E ab⸗
Leyner Hall waue his heed in doze of $ tas
bernacle of witnete ¢ Malltake che hare ot
bis lober herd g put ie in p kae which is vn⸗
derche peaceokkerrnge. Then the prest Wall
take $ fonder cpoulder of 9 ram ¢ one lwete
cake out of $ backet a one twete waler allo
g putthem in the have ok che abllerner atter


bleſſe them. i. :
655 g of the Lezbesdind hennes of Jiraelt
che kabecnaclt was let vßd⸗


Ache bil chapter,


Ned when Moles had kull lett op


5 Vea
pee ele l uche betes there of:then


the pꝛynces of Jcrgell heedes ouer ö houtes
ot their Eathers which were the l oꝛdes of the
trybes B ſtode a nombꝛed / offered bꝛought
thepz giktes befoze the L oꝛde fixe couered
fee
i zoughte

bekoze che habrtacvon. 8 9

And the Lozde tpake vnto Moles fapinge
take it of thé a let them be to do the ferupce
of the tabernacle ok witnele / and geue them
vnto ? Leuites/euerp man accoꝛdynge vnto
his office And Moles toke the charettes aud
the oxen / a 1110 them onto p Leuites. ij. cha
rettes and. ũtij. oxen he gaue nto the fonnes
of Gerlon acoꝛdynge gnto thepꝛ office. And
till. charettes and eyght oren he gaue vnto ?
tonne of Merart acozdynge onto they; offt
ce / vnder the handes of Ithamar the konne
ol aron the pꝛeaſt. But bnto the tonnes ol
Cahath he galie none / to the office that per⸗
tegnedto the was holp / ö therkoꝛe ther mutt
bearebpon choulders . :

pel of ces offered vnto the dedpca⸗
tynge ofthe alter in the dare it was anorn⸗
ked and bioughechelrgiltes bekoze the alter z
Andthe Lozde larde vnto Moles: let the prt
ces bꝛynge therꝛ olkerynges / euer dare one
e gu to

L (4 fe L rpige

veſwwas Mahe don the bonne Amed okol Wahelon.
che trrbe of Juda. And his offerpnge was:
cHuer charger ot an hundꝛed and x r icles
wepght: ¢a fplucr boule of. ire Cicles of the
holp licle / boch ol thé Full of kyne whetẽ flou-
remyngled wich orle Foz ameatoftervnge:g
a ſpone ot᷑ x. lictes ot golde full of cens:d an
bullock /a ram and a lambe ot a pere olde fo2
burrtollerrnges /ganbe goes Tor atynots
ferpnge.andtoz peace offernges. i oren. v.
rammeg. v. he gootes and.b.lambes ofa pere
ae ae chis was the grtte ot Nahellon the


e OF b.
Che leconde dare yd Hathaneel older P ache ott pige
fonacor Suu apa hngt Z ꝛ8char. Ader gehen
bis oflerynge which he bzoughte was a Cpls
üer charger ol an bundzed und. Xr. Cicles

tsand a kluer boule or kx licles of 9
Hoty Acle:¢ both full of EmeBoure myngled
with ople foz a meatofferynge : and agolben
Tpone of. r. pcles Full of cee, Ind a bulfock/-
a ram and a lambe of a pere olde £0) burnt:
offerprises / and ko peaceokterpnmes it aren
b.vamines / kytie he gootes and krue larbes
nf one pete olde. And this was the olkerynge

85 che lonne of Zur.


Theotiryn ts,


Che offepnge
oeiane 3


he ihyꝛde daye / Eliab the fonne or Helon
the tee amonge the chüdꝛen of abulon /
brought his offerpnge. And his offernge
was / a lyiuer charger or an hundzed and. xxx
ficles weyghte / and a clluer boule ol. xx. ll
cles of 5 holy ticle/æ both kull of kyne floure
mypngled with ople koꝛa meatofferpnge: and
à golden tpone ol. x. licles full of cẽs: and an
ore and aram
burntofierpnges/and an he goote for acyn⸗
Offerpnge:and ko; peaceofterynacs i oren. b
vanes, p. he gootes and. v lambes of one
pete A1 1 Med was the offerpnge of Ell⸗
ab the donne of .
je Fou pe / lizur the ſonne of Se-
Theatrende deur cheke loꝛde amonge the children of Au⸗
HES hen bꝛoughte bis ockerpnge. And bis gikte
was: lyluer charger ok an hundꝛed and. xxx
licles werght / and a tyluer boule ok. xx. li⸗
cles ok the holy licle / a both full of fynefloure
myngled with opie toz a me ge: and
a golden cpone ok. r. (icles full of cens:anda
buͤllock / a ram a a lambe ot a pere olde for
burntolterynges / z an be goote koz alpnollc⸗
ge: and Foz peaccofferynges. iI. oren. v.
rämes p. he gootes ¢.0. lambes.oF one pere
115 sue — the offerpnge of Elizur
e lone of be
1 Che tptti daye / Delumtel § tonne ok Zu⸗
rl Dadal / chele loꝛde amonge the chyldꝛen oF
Simeon offre , whole gikte was a kyluer
charger ofanhundzed g. rr ſicles werghte:
and a fyluer boule ot. x. cicles ofthe holpſi⸗
cle:a both full ot kyne floure myngled wich
ople to a meatofferpnge:¢ a golden (pone oF
x. licies full of cens. And a buſlock / a ram a a
lambe ot a vere old koꝛ burntoltrynges / a an
he goote for a Cynofferynge: @foz peaceotke⸗
linge. il. oxen. v. ramnieg v. he gootes d. v.
Vibes ok a pere olde And this was h ollerynge
OF Delumiel the tonne ok Zurt Sadat,
85 achechele tate tina de cane bt
e oftepnge e chefe loꝛde am.
l. Dap/esetensiahote giitetmassa deiuer char⸗
ger ot an hund zed and. Xr. licles werghte:
jue boule ok. r. (icles ofthe holp
6s boch Gull of Fyne floure myngled wir!
ople foz a meatollerynge and a golden lpone
ok. k. fleleg full of cens . And an dxe / a ram a
a lambe ofa pere olde fo burntotterynges / e
anhe goote toꝛ atyn And Eon peace⸗
eg. li. oren. v. ramimes v.he gootes
and. b. 5 ok one pere . oad $
olkerynge of Elialaph
Che leuenth dave / Elifama the fonne of
‘Anrfud/$ chefelore of $ chyldꝛen of Euhꝛs
im / olkered. And his gifte was a liluerchar⸗
gerok anhundzed and xxx. licles wepahe:¢.
‘Afpluer bowle ot. xx. icles of the holy licle⸗
@ both Full ol Fyne floure myngled with ole,


ofte'
eim.


e offerpnge
ain.


umeri. N


fozameatotiermgesanda goToentponents
ficles / kull of cens. And a bullock/atam a a
lambe of a pere olde foz burntol


ferynges /

anhe goote koꝛ a tynoſterynge: and koꝛ peace

offerpnges i. oren. v rammes v he gogtes gd

v. lambes of a pere elde. And this was b okke⸗

rynge of Elilama the lonne ol Amiud.
Che. vůt. daxe / okered Gamalict the con⸗ abe og


and a lambe ot a pere olde ko: ne ok Pedazur / che chele loꝛde ofthe chyldꝛen or Samay)


of Manadle. And his gykte was: a kyluer
charger of an hundzed g. xxx. licles werght:
and alxluer boule ok. xx. ticles of the holy
licle:q both kull of kyne foure myngled with
ople toꝛ a meato e:and a golden {pone
ol. x. lycles / full ot cẽs. And a büllock /a ram
and aiambe ot a ver olde for burntofferyne
gesvanipan be goote fozafpnofterpnge sand
oz peaceofferynges i. oxeg. v. rameß / Ipue
he gootes and kxue bes of a pere olde. And
this was the olkerynge or Gamalict the fon
ne ok Pedazur. MEA
Che. ix. dave / Abidan 5 fonne of Eedeom pes
d chele loꝛd o git childꝛen ol Ben Fann Som,
offered. And his gikte was:a lyluer charger
ok anhundꝛed and xxx licles werght: anda
ſpluer boule of. xx. kpcles / ot the holx ſycle / e
both kull of kyne floure myngled with ople
koꝛà meatofferynge:and a goſden (pone ot. x
lieleg / kull ot cens:¢ a bulſock / a ram anda
lambe of one pere olde toꝛ burntokferynges:
gan he goote ko afynofferinge:e foꝛ peace⸗
offerpnges li. oxen. b. rammes. b.he gooteg g
v. lambẽs of one vere olde, And this was the
olkerynge of Abidan the lonne of Gedeotit.

Che F. dave / Ahiezerche kanne oe Immt. The ok
Saba cel opde amioges change Wan gp
Offered, And his gikte was: a lyluer charger
ok an hundꝛed d. xxx. lycles wepyght: a ſylũer
e

och full of loure mi
ko; ameatofferpnge:anda Torben {pore oke
licles full of cens and a buſlock / a rame and
a lambe ot a pere olde £02 burntoklerynges / a
an he goote for. a fynofferyng:andfoz peace⸗
eigne kerzen rea np toes the
‘ eg ok a pereoide . a
ol Ahiezer ß tonne of Amin Sarat.
the cyt Ange ibe cifven of 4.20
fer offered Andhis aie toassa fyluercbare
ger ol au hundsed and. xxx Cycles werghten
ipluer boule ot. Ixx. cycles of che bole e
A both full of fyne floure myngled with bye
koz a meateoflerpnge:anda golden tpone vk.
arcles / kuli of cens. And a bullock /a ram ¢
à lambe of one pere olde koꝛ bumtofferinges:
and an he goote fo? a fynneotte and £03.
péaceol ges: two bxen / yue Woche
gootes g. p. bes of one pere pide. And
was 5 eee,


dare / Paglel the tonne of Devas Teh


onyts,


geoltrng oe Che. Ni. dape / Ahira the lone ol Enan /


apie,


chetelogeamonge ß chpldzen of Nephebalt
offered, And his gilte was:atyluet charger
ofan hundzed a. xxx. lycles werghte:a kylũer
boule of: int. cycles of the holpẽ Cycle / both
kull ok kyne Houre myngled with orle fora
meatoflerpnge:¢a golden ſpone of twentye
kpcles / tuli ot cens. And a bullock / a ramand
à lambe o one pere olde toꝛ burntoterynges
and an he goote koꝛ al and 702
peace. es / two oxen. v rammes. b.be
Gootes and. b. lambes of one pere olde. And
9 was the offerpnge of Abiva /the tonne
m.
6. eee gre
er when it was anopnted onto $ whiche
was bzoughte ol the pꝛpnces ol Alraell x11,
chargers of lyluer. vj. cyiuer bortſeg and. pit.
fpones of golde: eue rx charger contaynvnge
hundꝛed and xxx. ipcles of iyluer / euery
boule kr lo chat all the fpluer or all che ver⸗
tels / was two thoufande and. iii. hundzed
y Acles o the olptycle. And the. ru. golden
Spones were full or ceng / contaxned
ten lycles a pece of the holy cycle: co that alt
the pee the ſpones / was an hund ed and
xx.


All the oxen that werebzoughte Coz the

es were. rij and the tůmes . xij.

Fe the labes. r. ok a pere olde a pece worth the
tmeateofferpn:


ges: wich he gootes Foz tynne⸗
olkynges. and all the oren ol the peaceolle⸗
rynges were. xxitit.the ranuneg. x. the goo⸗
tes. ir. and lambes of a vere olde a pece. ix.
this was the dedicacron ol the alter / atter B
it was ano vnted. 2

And when Moles was uh the ta⸗
bernacle of wilneſle to Cpehe with him / he
Lege deere en eee

eate as bpon e

foftnee : ellen From betwene the two cheru⸗
bens he fpakebntobim,


F che diqpoticlan and ozder of the tampes. Che
Kant of che candeidyck. The cleantyng and rtr:
ehe eie. Abeetee che. ri


che viti. chapter.

Mothe Lozde tpake nto Moe
raving: (peahebnto Aaron fave
onto him: then chou putteſt on

: lampes fe that they lighte all
on 21 one ad ok thecandelttiche. And
aron dyd kuen lo / and put the lampes vpon
990 ment wanricns
omimtiaunded Mole once ofthe
Schein as oie go bt je hate
@ the floured therof.Andaccopingebitto che
bifvon which the Lozdehad wewed Moles
euen lo he made the candelſticke.
And F L onde fpake vnto Moles ſareuge:


Numeri,


a Ib;
take the Leuites kromam e en
ol Ikrael / and cleante oem
chem when thou cleanlelt che cpꝛinckle waz
kerol purityengetpon thein an mate ara,
Sure to runne alonge vpon all che fete of
them / and let chem wache thepz clothes / and
then they thall be cleane And let take a
bullocke and his meatofferpnge / kyne floure
mengled with ople: a another buliocke halt
thou take to be a ſynneollerpnge.
bꝛrnge the Leuites before the taber⸗
nacle of witneſſe and gether the hole multi⸗
tude ol the chyldzen of Altael together. And
beinge the Leultes betoze the L onde / and let
the chpipzen ok Itrael put theirhandes vpon
Leuites. And let Aaron heue the Leuites
eloze the Lozbe/Eo2 an beucofterpnge geuen
ok Hchplozen ok Ilrael / a then let the be ap⸗
poynted to warte vpon $ ferupce of ß Lozde
And let the Leuptes put they handes vpõ
cheheedes of che bulloches / a then offer thé:
che one Foz a Cynncottrrpnge and the other koꝛ
aburnto! vnto the Loꝛdt / to matic an
attonemét taz the Leuttes And make the Le
ultes ſtande bekoze Aaron and bys lonnes /
ebeue them to be an heueollerynge vnto ß
Londe. And thou walt teparate the Leuttes
kromamonge $ chidzen of krael / chat cher
be mne: and after that let them go and do
the Cerutce of the tabernacle ok witnelſe.
Eleanke them a waue the / lor theparegeuen c
vnto me krom amonge the chrldzen of 9 fracl
o haue taken them ontome ko; all the, numer Il. c.
kxoſt bozne that open any matryce amonge
Ag eee among tec
02 itbogne among the chyldzen
of gtvaclatentpnebath mane beetsvecaure © PF
Came tyme that J tmote the Evattbozne in
e lande of Egypte / I fanctytyoe chem koꝛ
mr kelfe: and Jhaue taken the Leuites £02 al
the kyztboꝛnẽ amonge p chplozen of Irrael /
and haue geuen them bnto Aaron and his
99209 ip 117 cen i a 8
lerupce of the chyld⸗ trac
e 8 wy a
2 zen of Jirgel / that
there beno plage amonge the ena
rael / yk thex come nxe vnto the tanctuary.
And Holes and Aaron and all che con⸗ 9
gregacpon oF the chydzen ol 10 afl wt che
the Leuptes accozdrnge brite all chat the
wLogde commaunded Mores. And the Le⸗
uites purffped them lelues / and watched cheir
klothes And Aaron waued them bekoꝛe the
Loꝛde / and made an attonement koꝛ them to
cleanle them, and alter p they went in todo
ther ſerupce in the tabernacle of wytnele /
before Hard a his lonneg. Ind acozdpnge as
the Lozde had cömaunded Moes as concer⸗
nuynge p Leuttes / cuen to cherdröbnte ge


sevemonyes.


5 ind the Lope tpane vnto Moles larẽg:
Num. lh. c. this Malbe the maner oF the Leulteg: Tram
xb. pere vpwarde ther Wall go in to wapte
bpon p lerupce in the tabernacle of witnelle⸗
Kat kyltre chey thall ceaue waptrng von ?
kerupce therok and chall laboure no moare:
but thal minictre vnto their bꝛetheren in the
tabernacle of witnele / and there warte / hut
whall do no moare ſerupce. Andtethat thou
do alter this maner vnto che Leuites in their
waßtynge tymes.
feouce offeinge of the eleane and vn
fame ume ours ie — —
the hoſte. 5


2 rod. xh. a, 8
. rig. a lande ot Eg.
Se ara offre
ULC yvi. d. ziti dave 4 —
kepe it in his teafon / accozdpn
o dinaunces a maners therok. And Moes
bad the chridzen ok Jrrael that ther chulde
offer Palleouer / a ther offeren Pateoucr d
xiili dave oł the tyꝛſt moneth at euen in the
wildernege of Sinai: and dyd acco dinge to
all chat che Loꝛde commaunded Moceß.
ind it chaunced p certayne men whyche


inthe lande.
habitactõ was


were dekyled with a deed cozle g they myght the h


not offer Palleouer the lame dape / came bes

koꝛe Moles and Aaron the lame tyme / and

Blapde: nde are dekpled vpon a dead corte /

wherkoꝛe are we kepte backe that we maxe

not offer an offerpnge vnto the Loꝛde in the

due lealon / amonge the chyldzen of Alraell⸗

And Motes larde vnto them:tarp / chat J

mape heave thatthe Loide wille commas

unde pou, And the Loz fpake vnto Moles

Capenge:fpeatic vnto the chylozen of Ftraclt

andlape. Ir anp man amonge vou or youre

chyldꝛen a be vncleane by the realon

ofa corte 07 is in che waye kerre ot / chen let

bm offer Pallrouer vnte p Lose dhe. rt

Daye of the feconde moneth at euen / and cate

HW Croctebzead a loure herbes / Klet them

leaue none of it ontop moznynge no bꝛealke

‘any boone of it. Ind accoꝛdynge to all che oz⸗
dinaunce of che Pallesuer let chem oller it.

But vt a man be cleane æ noc let in a tour⸗

a.gulpkemé, ne / bet was negligẽt to offer Pate

ner 1s tt wih che fame foule Mall perich krom bis people!
‘es moute wi becgute he broughenot an okkerrnge vnte

pura ode f. de in big bue keadon and ge tpall bere his

heuer wie cone And when a Arager bwellech amoge

doch nor C yous and well offer Padeoucr onto the oꝛde

reuevently tte Acco dende to the pgbinaunce of Pateoucr

cron dr nun and manner epexoe Gall he ce ft. Aud e


npnde whrehe wall haue one lawe boch koꝛthe ſraunger a


mouth ol the
of


1
ar t from Sinai. Che es of the
bade are none Bovab eee ee Whole
Che. x. Chapter.
d the 107d Motes
ſtapenge: Make the two tröpettes
ol besten krluer / that thou mayſt
fe thẽ to call the cögregacion tos
Gether/ o when the holte Hall tourney. when
cher biowe tb het / all the multrtude tall
velozte to the / vnto the doze of the tabemacle


See ö e


of witnedle. Ar but one trumpet blowe ano! a cal
ouer th


Numeri,


fle timen ppeattcs tall blowe che krompettes d


ali
haue them and it walbe a lawe moron foz


che, euevandamonge poure chyldꝛen after vou.


nel / ant
Pian


And when ve thall go to warre in poure


aitye, Bande agent poure enempes that bere vou /


hall e trompe with the tronipettes and xe


ve
b. zn tymeot ba lbe remẽbzed befoze ? L oꝛde youre Go
1 and laued krom poure enenwes. Alſo when
ch teumpe . pe be Mery in poure keſt dapes and in che fii
which ſya / dapes OF youre monethes / pe Mall blowe the
eth when trompettes ouer voure burnt Cactifices and


i nende 16


ges / chat it mape be a remem⸗
zaunce ot᷑ pou befoze poure God. Jamthe


‘and (pfs Lozde poure God.


n of che


And l came to pate he. rx dae of the le


bt to Sodconde moneth in d leconde vere / p the clou⸗


rde was take bp from of the habptacpon ok
wiltneſle. And the chyldꝛẽ 0. in tole their
iourney out of the delerte ol Sinat / and the
cloude reſted in p wildernelle of Phar. And
they kirſt tone their journey até mouth ofthe
Londe / by che hůd or Moleg:euen g Aäderte
ol $ holte of Juda remoued ye with they:
armpes whole captapne was Mabaton the
tonne of Aminadab . Ind ouer the hotte of d
trybe of the chyldꝛen of Flachar/was Matha
nael p Conne of zuar. And ouer the holte off
trpbe of the chyldꝛen of Zabulon / was Ellab
the fonne ol Helon. Ind the habytacvon was
taken doune: and the ſonnes of Gerlon and
Merart went koꝛch beg pace $ babitacyon,

Cbẽ the ſtandert of p hotte of Ruben wee
fozth ib chev, armpes / whole captayne was
Eltzurthe konne of Hedeur. And ouer öhoſte
Ehe trybe of ö chplozen of Himeon was
Salamtei ß fonne ol Burt laddat and ouer
che hoſte of the tribe of the chyldꝛen ol Gad
was Eltalaph the fonne of Deguel. Chen
Cahathites went koꝛwarde and bare the holy
chynges / and the other dꝛd let vp the habyta⸗
cpon agenſt N

Chen the ſtandert ot the hoſte of the dypl-
dꝛen oF Ephzaim went Forth w they armies
whole captayne was Elilama the ſonne of
Amiud. And ouerthe hotte of the trybe of the
fonnesot Mana / was Gamaliel $ tonne
ol Pedazur. And outer Jem ol the trpbe
Of the fonnes ol Ben Jamin / was Abidan
che ol Gedeont.

And oft ok allthe hoſte came z ctan⸗
dert of the holte ot the chrwꝛen of Ban wich
Same gk aun captayne was / Ahie zer

lonne ok Ammi Spaddat . And ouer $ holte


OF the trybe ok the chploz€ of Aler / was! Pa⸗ it in


I. giel the konne of Ochzan And ouer the holte
ofthe trybe of the an ar erlich a
Ahtra the tonne ol Enan ok this maner were
the tournepes of the chyldꝛen of Flract / wich
when they remoued.


Dtherzarmtes
ub ide And Motes karde onto“ Hobab che tonne


„ Ibi.


ol Maguel the Madianpte / Moleg father came which be
in la we: we goo bnto the place of which the done 12580
Loidfarde A will gene it ou. G50 with bs @ {029 tH 004
we will doo che good / koꝛ the Loꝛde hath pꝛo⸗ſome placed
myledgood onto Flracl. Andhe Capo onto daz as Ollas is
him: wyll not: but well goto myne awne Allo caller Asae
lande and ko mp Reime Andedoles karde oh cher guße ole
hap/leaue bs not/Eo, thou Eno weſt wiereis gues eather
beft £02 vs to pitche inthe wilderneſſe:a chou to zephoꝛa Wo
walt be oure eyes. And prthou go wich bp / es wefesall be
Toke what goodnetie the Tode cheweth apo it pokern.
8 the lame we will heweaponthe, -- dug pern,
And they departed from the mount ok the led her kather⸗
Lozde ii dayes iourner / aß arcke of $ teſta not becaute he
ment ok § ‘Lozde went Before the inthe tty, tas beach
Daves fourney to ferche out arettpnge piace wan yer fhe
£02 thé. Andß cloude of ß Lozde was duer thE thers father 2)
bydape/ when they went out of che tentes. wpich mance

And whens arcke wet koꝛth / Moles ſapde ob pranvng ix
Arie ppl ode letthpne encmpes be toate: mg Pe
red a let the that hate the flee befoze the, And ccrppturc.
whẽ § avche reſted / he lapde retourne Loꝛde «AD: apdee.
vnto the many thoulandes ol Irrael.

e people murmureth ¢ is punnyched with kpꝛe.

ee genres Spe eh cane ben
ryng and wauereng th of Motes, Che Loꝛde dy⸗
updeth the burden or Moles to leuentye of the aun.
cpentes / and they pꝛophelpe. Eldad and Medad do allo
piophelpe in the howe. It rayneth quaples. Che lech
rautners are punnpched.


aberah lig ·
eth-bpnds
15 inlampng
02 kpreng.
35


oughte


pannes and made kakes of it. Andthe
taſt of it was lyne onto the taſt of an opie
kake. And when the dewe ken aboute n holte
in the nyghte / che Manna fell ther wich.
And when Moles herde the people wepe
intherrhoucholdes eueryman in the doze of
his kent / then the wrath or the Loꝛde waren


on eas
onto all this people? oz
tapenge gens Op


fauoure in thi fyghtand KMuswele
mp wzechedneſle. 5
Pp Andthe Lorde layde vnto Mol es gether


vnto me. irrt ok gelder of Acrael which dou. nev
x ol § 15 ih ch


unoweſt b they are the e people

; and officers duer them / ¢bzpnge them vnto

v. Ftopll come the tabernacle of witnelle / and let thé ande
deine ane Be rive with the And J well © comedoune and


ne. ot ereja it
Ghat is gtalhe w the there / F take of g Cpirite which
wil entpove> fe opon the and put apon theand apon
them with the and they tall bere with the in the burthen of
famelprrte~ the people /a lo Walt thou not beare 3
5 And kaße vnn 6 people helowe poute (ele


ues agent tomozow that xe maye cate Lely
£07 ve haue whyned in the cares of the L oꝛde


kapnge: who thal geue vs flety to eate / co we pla


were happie when we were in Egypte? thers
. ande w nae e 1


lich
J will geue them


oꝛdes hade waxed chozte
ther my woꝛde * Mall coc


„utter the gre Thou halt fe ——


bes thecl vnto


Some /


ge


Pharan.


kapthtull in all myne houle. ante ppm
Mouth to a mouth to mouth & be saith the ate
mouth Cand the facron ofthe Lozde/andnot thoꝛow
rpdels. Wherkoꝛe thé were penot afrapedto


Numtri.,


ij.


lande of Canaan / ¢lapde vnto thẽ: gett pou Feboruats 12
land wink ane adp. erica
lande what mance thynge it is a che people
b dwelleth cherin: whether ther be ctronge
02 weake / ether kewe oꝛ many / and what the


and lade is chat they dwell in whether it he good


re

then uerne they

ers of Flracl/gatthe —— )
Zuttyce ma
tember


b oles and the
in tothe holte.


byeopon 45
ople ſtode vp all chat bape a all that te
and onthe mozowe/¢ gethered quaples. And
Andhe that gethered che lett / gethered x. bos
mers full, And ther kylled them rounde
aboute the hoſte.


Jud tye bene wen rer betwinechele
teeth / per it was chewen pp the wzach of che


cer that let her be receaued in agayne. and
‘am was chutt out of holte. vil daxes


Ran Lerten ave tend to fearehe the land of Canan:

Loꝛde wared vpon che people / and f. ltr ug. which beyng with the acloniter of grapes for alignẽ

F a ac en

* tbzat ebecaufe ther DU: meer oled the Lorde pate onto Woreg
ere 0


02 bad / z what maner of cities they dwell in
whether thep dwell in kentes 02 walled tow⸗
nes / a what maner or lande it is: whether it
‘be fatt oz leane / and whether there be trees
therin oꝛ not. And be ofa good courage / and
bꝛynge of the krutes of the lande. And it was
aboute the tyme that grapes are kpꝛſt rype.
And cher wet vp a ed out che lande
from the wyddernene of Sin vnto Rehob /
as men go to Hemath / cher alcended onto
b Couth d came vnto Hebson/ where Abia
was ¢ Hefat and Chalman the fonnes of f
+ Engcße Hebzon was byit wtf pere befozet Sz
So in Egipte. And they came vnto d ryuer Tants / alter
ol Elcol e chey cutt doune there a bꝛaunchtwehe Thaide.
one clouſter of grapes € bare it bps a ſtatte
betwene twapne / and allo ok the pomgra⸗
nates and ol the 25 ol the place. Che v. Nebel col
rpuct was called v Meveletcol/becaute of neren
the cloutter of grapes whiche the chilozen of ihe rpuer oF
Glracl cute doune there, the grape oꝛ a8
And they turned backe agayne krö tear⸗ me wplt che
‘chinge the lande/at.r1.napes ende. Andtbepdélcreae de
went and came to Motes and Aaron ano
all the multitude of the chyndzen ot Jlrael /
vnto the wildemelle ot Pharan: eucn onto
Cades / and bꝛoughte them wore and allo


J vnto all che congregacvon / and chewedthem


eroth / and bode at


Gan de. e agarng goles. Mie.
zam — ot —— 2255
Prayer ot Moles.


phat the Conne of Hozt. In the trybe or Zuda the


Caleph the fonne of Fephune. In thektybe

of ger, geal the tonne of Joleph.

3 be of Ephzatm / Molea the lonne ol
San tye trybe of Ben Jamin Falch $ Conne
ok Raphu In the trpbe of Jabulon / Sadlel
che tonne of Spodt , In the trybe of Foreph:
that was of SPanatie / Gaddi the conne ol
Dull. In che trybe ol Wan / Imiel the lonne
dk emal. In the trybe ol Aler / Dethur p
konne of Micheel. In ß trpbeot Nephthalt
Hahebt the tonne of ma phii. In the trybe of
Gad / Suel che tonne of Macht. Chele are
the names or the men whiche Moles lent to
Cpve out che lande. And Poles called the
Holen che tonne ol Nun. Jolua.
And Motes Cent them forth to pie out §


went out boch of thet

mp wondes Fe there be aps
mati pou wlll Gee bntohm
ina bild ¢ wil tpeake vnto him ina dzeame
But my teruaunte gp oles is notlo which s


ſolus og


che krute ol the lande. And they tolde hym
1 we came vnto Ke chou. lot
Fendett bs / andfurely tt isa landethat dior h wehe,
weth with mile andbonve a here is of gehe that la⸗
krute ok it-Heuerthelelle $ people be kronge full of goon pa
that dwell in the lande and the etres are pe elo
walled and exceabpoge greate /and tt02¢0 e cece, pie
uer / we lawe the chyldꝛen ol Enack there. taunt woodes
Che Amaleckes dwel in the fouth contre / to that onder
ethites Jebulites and che Aniozitesbeut deren
Divell tn the mollkarnes /r Can antes diwelchotenpenceoe
by the ler a a longe by the cofte of Jordan, grounde for a
And Caleb ſtplled the murmur ok thevoundance aud
people agent Moes lapinge: let bs go ppPlentcoutnes,
and conquere it / fo2 we be able to ouercome
it. Bul che men chat went vp with him /
lade: de be not able to go vp agẽſt the peo⸗
5 e / loꝛ they are ſtrongẽr then we: And they
eee e ite were seat

ep had nto the cheldꝛen ol F frac
lapinge: Che lanve whpche we haut denen er
thoꝛowe to lerche it out / is a lande that? ca-veth ehem not
teth bp the inbabiters therok/and the people oh are
that wefawetnttare menok karure. Andi catgee,
there we ſawe allo weatites / the chyldꝛen OF untes contue
Knack which are of the .


femedin dure cht as it were gretpoppers
and lo we dꝛd in there lyght.


ple taryng of tõmyng to the land pꝛo⸗
At bee geg Gosling wal uc oe
ned Taleb and Jolue. The lcarchers ot the landd re.
Amalech ürllech the Jeraeutes.


Murmuryng,


=I pecitccrunteae eve but / 4
zo out tat


\) the people wepte
nvabt/ ¢ al the childzen of Flrael
: murmuredagent’ Moes ¢ Lard
Ind iche whole conaregacton faye onto thes
wolde od that we had dyed in the land of
Egipte / ether we wolde that we had dyed in
thys wilderneſle. neherkoze bath the Loꝛde
bzoughte vs vntochis lande to fall vpon the
e / th at boch oure wyues / a alto oure
chyldzen ſhulde be a pꝛape: is it not better d
we retourne onto Egipte agarne: Andther
Tayde ane to snarbertetos maken captapne
andtetoti


Egipte agarne.


veleue his
wondes ag in
the Pal. v. c.
8. .


umeri.


of the / will peake fapinge: becaule ; L oꝛde
ee not able to bꝛynge in thps people into
che lande which he lware onto thé / therkoze
he üewe chem in the wyderneſle.
Do now let the power or my Lorde be
te / acoꝛdyng as chou halt cponẽ taping:

e Loꝛde is longe verbe be anqrxe / and full
ok merey / and lultereth cynne and trelpace
and leaueth no man innocent / andbiticety

bnepghteoutnene ofthe fathers vpon the

lden / euẽ opon the chirde and fourth ge⸗
neracid / be metcyfull Ibeteche the thertoꝛe D
woch ateate nevey/onbeccomingeas ou
to mercp/and acco
hat foꝛgeuen this people from egipte euen


onto this . 8
5 anche orbetapbe: haue koꝛgeuẽ it /
accoꝛdynge to chy requett. But as trulye as


Alxueſal che erth walbe kriled with me glo gr


. Fos ok all thole me whiche haue lene mv
1512 A weenie me dydin Egip⸗
te


12
in. the wilderneſle / ¢ pet haue tẽpted me de wil


cymes g haue not herkened onto uren


ere cha not one te land whiche hen


OF thE that raxled vpon me / le it
02 Baut Kale becauce berets an


k kulkre fo2 youre”
daten


But my ler⸗ oute the
erma Wil.


weg ·
foie ii b.


mes


0 righteoulnes. xl. pere / a ve Mall tele mꝝ ven
geaunce I the L onde haue laped that will
doit vntõ all this euell congregacpon that
are gethered together agenſt mẽ:euẽ in this
twploernette ve thalbe conſumed / and here


all dye.
5 Anbhe men which Moles tent to lerche


che lande / a which when they came agayne)


made all the people to murmure agent it in
bte vp a lclaunder bpon the
eft bꝛynginge vp that euell


bp koꝛ the Lo: de is not amonge pou that ye
de not dlapne befoze poure enempes. For the
Amaleckptes and the Cananites are thee
befoze von / and ye wyll Fall vpon the lwerde
becaufe ve are tourned a wave krõ the Loz⸗
de / a therkoꝛe the Loꝛde wyll not be with pou

But they were blynded to go vp in to the
hyll toppe: Neuer the latter / che arcke ol the
teſtament of the Loe and Moles departed
not out ol che holte. chen $ Amaleckptes ¢


theCananttes which dwelt in that hill / came


doune and Cmotethem and hewed thẽ: euen wheth


vnto Pozma,


chofferinges ok tor that enter ito che lde
. ent ahr death of 22295
‘2 elde. Ehe man is Mooned that gethered apenes
e eee mut be made bpd che quace
ters of chers garmentes.
¶ Che. xv. Chapter.
EA Mo the Lozde ſpake vnto Moes
\2)\Cavenge:tpeake onto the chpidzen
lof Itrael a Cave vnto thé:when pe
be come in tothe lde ol pourebas
bitacton which J geue vnto vou /a will
an acer vpon the kyze vnto the Loꝛte
whether it be a burntofferynge 02 a ſpecyall
vowe oꝛ krewillofferyng 07 t it be in youre
Ba gramaretedae
e Kode / ok the oxen o ok the locke.
bis offerpng


Numtri.


Ipiij.
and ofter wich ß burntoſterynge oꝛ any other
offerynge when itis a lambe. And vnto a rã B a
chou walt offer a meatollerynge of i. tenth
deales of lloure / myngled with d thyꝛde pare
te ol an hin of ole / and to a dꝛprickoterynge
thou Wait offer the thy de parte of anhin ok
wyne to be a lwete lauoure vnto the Loꝛde.
When thou oferpſt an ore to a burntolle⸗
rynge oz in any (pecyall vowe oꝛ peaceolle⸗
ringe unte d WLozde/tyen chou Malt bꝛynge
vnto an oxe /a meatofferynge ot. ij. tenth dea
les oklloure myngled whale anhin of opie,
And thou walt bzynge koz a dzynchofieringe
halke an hin ol wynẽ / chat is an offerynge ol
a fwetefauoure onto the C oꝛde. C his is the,
manerthat palbe done vnto one ore / one rã
a lambe oꝛ a hyo. And aco:dynge to the no⸗
bye ok loche offerynges / thou chalt encreale
the meatofterpnges ¢ the dzynnollerynges.
Allchat are of youre flues ſhall do thele
es alter this maner / when he offerety
an offerynge of fwete fauoure onto § Loꝛde
And yl there be a ſtraunger with vou oz be
amonge pou in youre generacions / and will
offer an olferynge ot arwete lauoure vntoß
Loꝛde:euen as pe do / ſo he ſhalldo Mne oꝛ⸗ a. Chis inae
drnaunce (hall lerue boch fo2 vou of the con. undement was
a clon and alto top the trraunger. and it Geihermg of
albean ornaunce fozeucranige voute gencpies G the
chyldꝛen alter you / that the ſtraunger and ve heben in to
Shalbe lyne befoze the Loꝛde. One lawe and one church of
one maner pal lere / both for you and fop r. fue
the ſtraumgerthacdwellech wi you. der h he bre
And the Loꝛde Cpake onto Moles lapẽge: rence betwene
fpeake vnto the chyldꝛen ok Flracl and faye the Hebzue oz
vnto chem: noben pe be come into the lande Jer and the
r wil bzpnge pou then tobe pe wil nd poeteiepie
kate of the bꝛead of the lde / xe chall geue an zen and atraun⸗
heueotkkerynge onto the Loa de. Ye Mali geue ger oz foꝛener
à kake ol the kirſt of poure dowe vnto anhe⸗
ueofkerynge: as pe do the heueokterynge ol
che barne / euen to ve Wal heue it. DE che
pat ot poure dowe pe muſt geue onto the
Loꝛde an heueofferynge / thoꝛow out youre
Genevacpons,
It ve ouerle poure felucg and oblerue not
allchele commaundemẽtes which the L oꝛde
bach onen vnto Motes / all B the Lorde
bath e ded von bp $ hande of Mpotes/
from the kyꝛſt dave fozwarde that the Loꝛde
cõmaunded amonge poure generacion: whe
oughte is commytted ignoꝛantlp befoze the
epes of the congregacion / chen all the multi⸗
tude ſhall offer acalfe foz.a burntokkerynge
to be a lwete fauoure vnto the Loꝛde / a the
meatoffergnge e the Drynhofferynge ther⸗
1 — to the 2997 al Pan ade
foza(pnofterynge. preatt hhallmake
anattonemét fo2 allt mültitude of b chiloze


offerpnge of Acraeli / x it walbe kogeuẽ the for it was


bay. iguoꝛaũce


Chozah. Dathan


v. Hetellptye


ignozaunce. Andthey halk bꝛynge their at=


tes vnto the ofterpnge ob the Loꝛde / a theyz


fynofferprge befoze the Lozde Foz ther iK. h.


noꝛaunce. And it halbe koꝛgeuen vnto all
miiltitude ot the chyldꝛen of Alrael / a onto
ſtraũger chat dwelleth amonge pou : koꝛ the
ignoꝛauncye pertapneth vnto ali the people.
Ik anp one loule Cynne thoꝛow ignoꝛaunce
Ge thalibzyngea che goote ot a pere olde toꝛ
alpnofterynge. And the pꝛealt all male
an atonement Foz the toule that ſynned igs
nozauntly with the tynofferynge befoze the


ozde and reconcple him / and it walbe foz= ©


geuen him. And both thou that art bone one
dk the chpldzen of Ilracl and the ſtraunger p
dwelleth amonge vou Malt haue both one la
we. yk ve lynne thoꝛow ignoꝛauncy?e.
And the loule that doch ought pꝛelump⸗
tuoudy/ whether he be an Icraeiſte oꝛ a trait
ger / the lame bath delpyled the Loꝛde. And
that ſoule ſhalbe deſtroped krom amonge his
people / becaule he hath delpyled the woꝛde
ol the Loꝛde and bath bzohen his commaun⸗
dementes that ſoule therfoze hall perych a
his lynne halbe vpon him. 5
And whyle the chyldꝛen ol Flract were in


done hum not the wildernelee / they kounde ã man” gethe⸗
to gether Rete rynge (ttches pan the Sabotl dae uud


nes o therfore
wan he woore
thpe his cruell
death /foz as


prlebto ee wurde kosik wasnot declared


the woozbe ol
thek oꝛde wher
vnto he was fo
ſtrapklye coma
unded to geue
eare on the fae
voth dare.


c. Sochegardts
chulde the char
ſten haue depe
letired there


they that kounde him getherynge tyches /
bꝛoughte him onto Moes and davon a vn⸗
to all che congregacion:and they — dont —
ul
be done vnto him And the Loꝛde fapoe vnto
Moles: the man ſhalldpe:ſet all § multitude
ftone bint with ſtoneg without p holte. And
all themuititude bꝛoughte him without the
holte and ſkoſſedhim with tones / g he dyed
us the Loꝛde commaunded Moes.

And ß Logde ſpale vnto Motes favenge:
kpeake vnto the chyldzen ok Ftracif and yd
them / that they make chem gardes vpon the
quartets of there garmentes thozow out


“Spertesicantyoe chepz generacpons / and let them make the


Ting what ther egaldeg of


are bounde to
the Lozde / of
‘what god what
a lerupte they
haue kane vps
the: that they
mpaht with al
dpligeces cpr
eimer ulli
kyl that whieh
they haue pꝛo⸗
miled ac.


* Domewrete
hopehthe 1
fonne of 338
22825 teh
X Some toy}
Abirom.


rybandes of Jacyncte. And the
garde tall be vnto pou fo lone vpon it / that
‘peremembze all che commaundementes ol
the L onde and do the chat ve (eke not a wae


alter youre awne 5 d alter voure awne


epeg / lo to goa whoring alter thẽ:but z yere
mébze d do almy cãmaündmentes e be holy
nto youre God / ko: am § Loꝛde youre od
‘wl t-b bꝛoughte pou out of p lande of Egipte
koꝛ to be route God. Jam the Loꝛde God.


Che revellise retpRaunce of Cozah Datha
m he erth . e me


¶ Che. rvi. chapter.

d. Coꝛah the konne ot Fescharh

0 bonne ot Cabath the tonne of Leut
and Dathan a; Abiramthe tonne
OF Eltab / and On the lonne ol Pe⸗


Numtri.


leth / § lonne of Ruben:(tove bp befoze Mo⸗
fed with other ol the chyloren of Alrael . ii.
undꝛed and kyktie / heedes ok the congrega⸗
cion / and councelers / and men of fame / and
they gathered them Celues together agent
Moles and Taron and fayed onto them: ve
haue done pnough. Foz all tye are
holy euerp one of them a the L onde is amon
Gethe. nohptherkoze heue ye oure telues vp
aboue the congregacpon of the Loꝛde.

hen Moles hearde it / he fel vponhis
face andfpate onto Coꝛah and vnto all his
companye lapenge:to mozow the l oꝛde will
ewe who is his and whois holp and wyll
take them vnto hym / and whom lo euer he
hath cholen / he will caule to come tohim.
his do: tale fyzepannes / thou Coꝛah and
all thr companpe / and do fyze tevin a put
cens therte befoze the Loꝛde to moꝛowe.
And then whd loeuer the Loꝛde doth chole /
che lame is holy. Ye make vnough todo re
chyldzen of Leut.

And Moles faved onto Cozah : heare ve
childiẽ or Leui / Semeth it but a mall hyn a
ge bnte vou / chat the God of Ilrael hath te⸗

arated vou from the multitude ol Irrael to
hernge pou to him / to do the ſeruyce of the
Divellpnge place of the Loꝛde / and to ſtande
beko ze the people to minpitrevnto them: he
path taken the to him and all thy bzethzen 6
fonnes ol Leul with the / a ve leke the office
orthe pꝛeaſt allo. Koz which caule both thou
andallthy companye ate gathered togecher
agenſt the sozbe:£02 what is Aaron / that ve
fhulde niurmure agenſt him.

And Motes bent to call Dathan € Abt⸗
ram the lonnes of Eliad / and they ant wered
we will not come. Semeth it almallchynge
vnto the that thou bat bꝛoughte bs ot of a
lande that loweth with mylke and honpe / to
nyll vs in d wildernelle. But that thou Hut
deſt raygne ouer vs allo? Moꝛe ouer thou
batt bꝛoughte vs vnto no lande that floweth
with mylne and honxe / nether halt geuen vs
polle ons ol keldes 07 ol vynes. Echer wilt
thou pull out the exes of thele men! we tpl
not come. oe <

And Moles waxed beryangrpe and ſfaxed
vnto ß Loꝛde: Turne not nto their otterzn⸗
ges. Fhaue not taken to moch as an ade C.
from them / nether haue vexed any ot them.
Chen Motes ſaped onto Coꝛah: Be thou a
all thy cOpanve befoze the Loꝛde: boch tout
they and avon to moꝛowe. And take every
man his center and put cens in them / and coe
me befoze the Lone euery man with bys cẽ⸗
ker:two hundzed and kyette centers and Aa
ron wich his cenſer. And ther tone euern
man his center and put kpꝛe in them a layed


theron. / and Stone in the doꝛe ol the
3 he faber


. Abiram.


ernacte of witnelle / and Moles and Aa⸗
ron allo. And Coꝛah gethered all che congre⸗

on agenſt chem vnto the doze of chẽ ta⸗
ey? of wytnelle.


the gloꝛpe ol apered vnto
all the c a the Lorde [pake
vnto es aron fapenge:


Srnopetpane one the con


departe,


Numtri.


Hu.
the altare. Foz they olkred them befoze the encample vnto
Lone / and therfore they are holpe and they other io faves
walbe a lyane onto the chyldzen of Ilrael. 1
And Eleazar the preatt tone the bꝛaten
centers which cher chat were burnt had of-
kered / ¢ beat them and fattened the oppon}
altaxe / to be a remebzaunce onto the chyldꝛẽ
ok Acrael / chat no ſtraunger which is not ol
the feed ok Aaron / comẽ nere to offer cens
bekoꝛe the Lozde / that he be not made lyke
vnto Coꝛah and his companpe:as the Loꝛde
ſaped vnto him by the hande ol Moles.
And onthe mozowe all the multitude ol
e chydꝛen or Araell murmured agente
jofes and Aaron lavenge: ve haue kylled
the people ok the Loꝛde. And when the mul⸗
de was gethered agenſte Motes a Aarõ
e e tabernacle of witnelſe.
no beholde / the cloude had couered it and
the glozve old Lode appeared. And Moles
& Haron went betoze the tabernacle ol wit⸗
neſſe. And the Lozde (pake onto Moles G
lapenge: Gett you from this congregacxon /
that J maye conſume them qupcklpe. And
0h lt they? faces,
nd Moles fayde onto Aard:tahe acens
ter and put fyze therin out of the alter / and
poute oncens / g go qurcklx vntoche cogre⸗
facpon and make an attonement koꝛ them.
705 chere is wzath gone out from the Loꝛde
and there is a plage begone. Ind Aaron tone
as. Moles commaunded him / and ran vnto
the congregacron: a beholde / the plage was


„ begonne amonge the people / and he put on c. Aaron ishea


cens /a made an attoriement kor the people. . i f uve ok


And he ſtode betwene the deed / and ihẽ that is the mye!
were alpue / and the plage cealed. Andthetourcberwene
nombze ot them that dyed in the Plage were church
Hi thoulande and leu humdzedebelrde che caramect the
that dyed aboute the bulynes of Cozah And Zuct vengeaun
Aaron went agayne vnto Motes onto the de of God to:
oa off 5 of witneſſe / and the the ne of

ge cealed.


which helpeth
CAsrons rodde buddeth and beareth blolomts.


the cholen whe
che. xvij. Chapter patos 8
the Lozbe kpaße bnto Poleg
fayenge : tpeate onto the chplozen
of Ffrael and take of thé / £07 eue⸗
2 ry pwncypall houſe a rod / ol theyꝛ
prpnces ouer the houles of therz fathers :
euen. rij. roddes / werte euerp mans name
vpon his rod. Ind wꝛyte Aarons name vpon
the ſtalle or Leut: £02 every heedman ouer
Ag of their fathers (hall haue a rod.
d put them in the tabernacle of witneſſe 25
where 3 wyll mete vou. And his rod whom
Ichoke / chall blouome: Spo J wyll malie
e
e nt you.
9 put And


Aarons rodde.


And Motes tpahe vnto the chylozen ol

Atrael /e all the pꝛynces gaue hint foz —
-Papnee ouer ther: fathers houles / a rod

i roddrs / ¢ che rod of Aaron was amonge

Ehe roddes And ene $ roddes before

e Loꝛde in the tabernacle of witnelle. And

on the moꝛowe / Moles went into the taber⸗

nacle:and beholde che rod ol Aaron ok the

n hebe · ix. b. houle ok Leut was büidded ¢ bare blolomes

and almondes. And
® tye anes from before the Lozve/onto all &
chyldzen of Jrael / andthey toned bpo them /
erp man bis tt


¢ Of the Lenites. Che tythesand yet
kee hun be geusn chen Karan herveages *


Che. roitj. Chapter.


ty i
nne the holt betieis ache alter, cher
and pe allo dye not. And let them be by the a
wapte on the tabernacle of witniecke and on
all the leruyce ol the tabernacle / and let no

ſtraunger come npẽ vnto vou.

noa ptetherloꝛe vpon the holxe place and
vpon che alter / there kall no moare wꝛath
pon the chywdzen ok Irrael beholde Ahaue
taken poure bzethzen the Leuites Erom a⸗
mouge the chplozen of Arrael / to be voures /
as ghktes geuen vnto the Loꝛdeto doche ler
upce ot the tabernacle ot wytnege. And fe
that both thou and thy fonnes with che tane

hede vnto youre pꝛeaſtes office/ in all
that pertapne vnto the alter and w 2


Sees bzoughce aura vnto


Numtri.


And the Lozde tpake vnto Aaron: betolde
Ihaue geuenthe the kepynge ol myne heue
8 in allthe holowed thynges oF the
chyldꝛen or Flract.And onto the J haue geué
chem onto anopntynge and to thy fonnes : to
bea dutre koz euer. Chis thall be thyne ok
moſt boty facttEyces. All their gifts / chorow
out al cheir meatofferynges Cynneofterpnges
and trefpa Cher babe whiche chey bꝛinge
me. They halbe mot holy vnto the a
onto thy tonnes And ve thal tate tt in ‚moct
55 ace: all that are males ſhall cate of it
zit chalbe holpe vnto the.
Aueh Haloc Wynestyebioues es
dynes de ene Aue 4paue
e en o 2 J pau
9 ano g tanned h ene
with the tobe-avutye korkuer: and allthat
are cleane in thy houte / hall rate ot it / all the
fatt of the oyle / or the wyne and ol the coꝛne:
their Ey2tt krutes which they geue onto the
onde thathaue J geuen onto the. Che kyrſt
Frutes ot all that is in they landes whych
they bzynge vnto the Lozde cwalbe chyne:
7 al a axe cleane in thyne houle / all
eate ol ie. 2


Alldedicate chinges in giraei / Walbetby- ¢


ne. All that bregheth che matrice of all let
AL et ‘othe Lozde / bothe of mã
and heat / Heuerthelater the
kyꝛltboꝛne o J

fyzttbozne of vncleane beattes chalbe tenes
meaPndtheir redempcrons thaibeatamo-


neth olde / haluedat.b. Cycles of fpluet/ of
oly Cycle A kpcle maketh twentye Ges


and thou chalt Cpzintle chien vpon che
alter / and walt burne their fat to be a lacri⸗
e of a twete fauoure vnto the Loꝛde.
ind the flech ok chem chalbe chyne / as the
wauebzeaſt g all the rraht choulder is thyne
all the hole heuer whiche the chpl⸗
den oc Nrael heue bntothe Lorde / Ageue
v ſonnes and ch


vaple. And fe that ye terue ko: J haue geuen hh.


‘poure pꝛeaſtes office vnto po fora gitte to


do lerupre: and the Rraunget that cometh Keutes gel bsthe feruyce np tabemact


nye pale,


TCeremonyes.

a lawe ko euer vnto poure chyldꝛen after
D pou: But amonge the chplozen of Flrael they
fall enheret none enheritauncẽ. Foz che
tithes ol the chyldꝛen oF Icrael whyche they
heue vnto the Loꝛde / haue geuen the Le⸗
uites to enherct. Wherkoze I haue Capen vn⸗
to them: Amonge che chyldzen ol Jlraell ve
{hail enherett none enheritaunce.
And ß Loꝛde ſpake onto Motes:

ſpeake vnto the Leuites and laxe onto
when pe take ot the chplozen of Icrael che ti⸗
thes whiche J haue geuẽ vou of thé to youre
enheritauncẽ / pe all take an heueoltrynge
of that lame koꝛ the Loꝛde:euen the tenth of
that tythe. And it Halbe rehened onto pou
to voure heueofterynge / euen as though ve
gaue coꝛne out of $ bãrne oꝛ a tulloſterynge
kromthe wyne pꝛelle.
And of this maner ve call heue an heueolle⸗
tenge vnto the L onde / of all youre tithes
which pe receaue of the chyldzen of Flraelt/
and pe (hall geue thereokthe ozves heueok⸗
ferpnge bnto Aaron the pzeaſt. Ok all poure
gyttes / pe Mall take out the Loꝛdes heue of-
kerynge: euen the fatt of all ther: halo wed


es.
ben thou thait tape vnto them: when ve


haue tante awape the fatt ot itkrit / tt albe ppp:


counted vnto the Leuttes / as the encreate
of coꝛne and wyne. Ind ve Hall eate it in all
laces both ve and voure houſholdes / koꝛ it
‘youre rewarde koꝛ youre leruyce in the ta⸗
bernacle of witnette . And ve thatl beare no
Sune’ the realon ok it / when ve haue tan
trom


we che halowed thynges oF the chylozen ol
Ictael / and to call ve not dre.


eher vnto Eleazar the peat
ge her ith out che holte g


itopon tye kowe as che bürneth. And lerthe
Peat wat his clothes and bathe bis tech in


Numtri.


&
Fatt of it: nether Mallyebnbalo- a


water / and then come in to the holte / and the
preaſt ſhalbe vncleane vnto ee ced 2 0
And he that burneth her / wall wach his B
clothes in water a bathe hig lech allo in wa⸗
ter / be vncleane vntilleuen. And one chat
ig cleane / call go and tahe bpp the alches of
the kowe / and put them without the holte in
acleane place / where they thall be kepte to
make ſpꝛynklynge water koꝛ che multitude
of ß chridzen olg rael:koꝛ itis a fynofierynge
And let him that gathered the altes of the
kowe / wach his clothes a remavne vncleane
vntyll euen. Andthys thalbe onto che chyl-
dꝛen ol Alrael and onto the ſtraunger chat 8
dwellech amonge them / a maner⸗kos euer, ufo: euer lau
He that toucheth anpdeed perlone / alde dene. ig. d.
vncleane. voti dapes, Andhe Wal purikre him
elle with the alches the thyꝛde dave and then
he ſhalbe cleane the leuenth dave. And yt he G


purifpe not him felte the thpꝛde dave / then d
keuenth dave ſhe Wall not be cleane. wholo⸗
euer toucheth any perlone 5 dyeth a lpꝛyn⸗

leth not him lelle / dekylech the dwelipnge ol
theLozde:¢therfoze that foule halbe v voted u gs they werb
out ot Alrael / becaule he hath not pens Defpled wich
diesne water vppon him he halbe the touchpug


E „
is vnclenne lee call remapne me dhe te


Chis is the lawe of the man that in recs oo
a tent: al that come in to the tent and all that thep commype
is inthe tent / balbe vncleane. piſ dapes. And derdip donne:
allche veces that be ope which baucnolyd abu wih
noꝛ couerpnge pon them / ate bncleane. And cates tacvps
who loeuer toucheth one that is ſlapne with Dp fyce aud
erde in the leides / oꝛ a deed perlone / o a corns
bone of adtedman/oz a graue: Mall be on: egen that
cleanepiſ daxes Heaton bea
And ther Mal take fof an oncteaneperto- bre aap seth
ne ol the burnt alfies of the fynofterpnge /¢ oF Thul oure
put Tunnpnge water therto in to a betel. epee lie
ind a cleanẽ perfone thal takeFlope a dippe pis toute dhatt
it inthe water ano tprpnnte teopons tent be roots oute
vpon all the vellels a on the foules hat were fd among the
chere / and vpon hin that touched a bone oꝛa (holen.
lane perfone oi a deed hade oz a graue. And
the cleane perlone thall lpꝛynkle bpd the vn⸗
cleane the chyꝛde dape and the feuenth dave,
And pleuenth dave he Hall purifve him lelke
and walche his clothes and bathe him telfe
in water / aud thalbe cleane at euen.
I any be vncleane a lpꝛynkle not him telle
Flame Coule chalbe deſttoped fro amäögethe
cögregacid:toꝛ he bath defiled holy place of
HLogde a is not cpꝛynklediwd Cprinkiyng wa
tertherfoze is he vncleane. And this halbe a
perpetual lawe onto che. Andheßz ſpainkleth
4 dhe, water / chal walt his clothes
And he that toucheth the tpꝛynklynge wa
ter / chalbe vncleane vntill euen And what
toeuer p vncleane perlone toucheth / halve
hit. vncleane.


vncleane / and
on him.


Ki certe o


Dyed Pirzam / and was buried there. More
ouer there was no water foz the multitude⸗
wherkoꝛe they gathered thé felues together
agenk Moles ¢ ages Aarö. And the people
clone Motes e fpake ſapenge: wold God
that we had perylched whe oure bzethzen pe⸗


the congregacid of the Loꝛde onto this wil⸗
dernege / p both we a oure catell chulde dre
here Mherkoze brought ye bs out of Egipte
to bꝛynge vs in to this vngracious place /
which is no place ot feed noz of kygget noꝛ
vynes noꝛ of pomgranates / nether is there
any water to dzynne:
And Motes ¢ Aaron went fro the congre⸗
B gaciò bnto the doze of the tabernacle of wit⸗
nelle / a fell vpon theps faces, And the glozve
ofthe Lozdeappered onto the. And ) Lorde
cpane vnto Motes fapengestane b latte / a
ether thou a thy bꝛother Larõ p congrega⸗


es / chat he geue forth his Water du toou
alt bꝛynge the water out ok ß rocke a Malt
geueß cöpanp dꝛynke / and their beatts allo.
And Moles tote the ſtalle fd befoze the
‘Loabe/ashe connnaunded him. And Moles
and Aaron gethered dn erde toge⸗
thevbefoze the rocke / andhe fayed onto them
heare pe rebellyons mutt we fet vou water
dut ok this rocke: and goes likte vp his ba
de with his ſtatte and Cmote the rockẽ. iſ.ty⸗
mes / and the water came out abundantlxy /
the multitude dꝛancke and their beeſtes alto
Andthe Lozde lpake vnto Moles ¢ Aa⸗


C
ron becaule ve beleued me not /to* fanctttye
dere ta mein the eves ofthe chyldzen ol Irrael / ther⸗
weand declare foze pe Chall not beuge this congregacion
our ö in in to che lande which


ue geuen chem.
Chis is the water o le / becaute the
chyldzen of Flraell trouc with the Loꝛde / a
he was lanctikyed vpon them.

And Moles tent metlengers krom Cades
vntothe henge ok Edom. Thus lapeth thy
bꝛother Iltael: Chou knoweſt all the trauell
2 bath happened bs / how oure fathers went
doune in to Egipte / and how we haue dwelt
in Egipte a longe tyme and he w the Egip⸗
cians vexed bothe vs and oure fathers. Chen
we crped vnto the Loꝛde and he herde oure
votes / and lent an angell a hath fect vs out


S people dwelt at Cades Andthere n.


2 be regent tonthies aire eir th


pe allnot go chozow. And Edom came out D
rylched betozeß L 0d. hy haue pe brought ag


Denard hep went opin Comat o in the
lyghte o


ſcrsel vanguelchtth uyng Arad. be kyerpe ſer⸗
Lale Ernge them but when ther oke at thebzaten
kerpent which the Lord commannded Motes to lot
‘op/thepare healed. Chebpnges vthon and Deg ars
ouercomt 8855


Ae kee cananite


e fouth partves“

1 canie by che

wave that the fpies had loũde out

he came @ foughte with rrael ¢ tone fome


ok them pꝛeloners. Chen Alrael bowed a vo⸗
we önto che Loꝛde and laped: Ik chou wilt
geue this people in to oure handes / we welt
deſtrope theyz cyties. And the Loꝛde hee
che vopce of Fraeil/ and delpuered hem che
Eananites. And ther deſtroped both then e
ther erer caltcaehe re Borer.


heferpent,


B Chen they departed krommount Poꝛ to-


ward the red lee:to cõpalſe the land of Edõ.
Andthe Coules ot the people karnted bythe
ape. And the people tpake agenſt God and
agent Moleg: wherfoze halt chou bꝛought
vs out ol Egypte / foꝛ to dye in the wylder⸗


Oicbatis to nelle Foz here is nether bzeadnoz water / and

ſllwoonth. cure foules lotheth this * lyghte bzead,

ſcheplage Then the Hozd lent krere kerpetesamöge
tes the people, which Honge them:fo that moch


people dped in Atael. andthe people came
to Moles and laped: we haue lynned / koꝛ we
baue fpoken agent the Loꝛde and agenſt 6


C make intercet site oe Lane tbat hetake


awaxe the lerpẽts krõ bs. And Moes made
interceſſion koꝛ the people. And the Lozde
lapde vnto Moles: make the a ferpent and
hange it bp fo2 a lygne / and lett as many as


are bytten lohe vpon it and they wall lyue.


And Moles made a lerpent of brace ¢ let it
vp foz afygne. And when the ſerpenteg had
bytté any man / he went and behelde the ler⸗
pent ol bꝛalle and recouered.

And the chyldꝛen of J rael remoued and
pitchedin Oboth. And they departed krom
Dboth pel at Egebarim in che wyider⸗
neſſe which is befoze Moab on the eatt Cpe
And they remoued thence/ and pitched bpon
therpuer ol zarad. Andtheydeparted thence
and pitched on the other lyde of Arnõ / which
rruer is tn the wylderneſee / and cometh out
ok the coftes of the Amozites:fo7 Arnonis p
bozdcrof Moab / betwene Moab aß Amo⸗
rites. noherloꝛe it is ſponen inthe* boke of


fyeathetwarte ok che L oꝛde:goo with a vpolence /
tobe the bo⸗ both on the ryuer ol Arnd and on the ryuers
oF unges. heed / whiche thotety doune to dwell at Ar / a


eu them water. Chen Atrael lange this
fongecatpte ‘Dp weil / tyngẽ therto: Che ell


— alen. Bi — on. An alen which boweth toward


nd Flract ſent mellengers vn⸗


vs go thoꝛow thy lande: we wyll not tourne
in to thy keldes noꝛ in to thy vrnepardes / ne⸗
cher diyntke of the water of the welles: but
we will go alonge by the cõmen wape / vntill
we be paſt thy cofitre And dehõ woldegeue

frael no lieence to paſſe thoꝛow bys coũtre /


gethered all his people togethera went


Numtri.


Balam,
out agenſt Ilrael in to the wylderneſſe. And
he came to Jahera and koughte with Irrael.
And Ilrael tmote him with the edgẽ ofthe
lwerde ¢ conquered his lande / krom Arnon
vnto Jabock:euẽ vnto the childꝛẽ ol ammõ.
Foꝛ the boꝛders ok the chyldꝛen of Ammon /
are ſtroüge. And Alrael coke all thele cytpes N
€ dwelt in all the cyties ol the Amoꝛites: in
on e in all the towneß 5 longe therto.
‘02 Helbon was p citie of Sehon the nung
OF che Amozites which Sehon had kought
befoze with the hynge of the Moabites / and
had také all his lande out ofits bande /eué
bnto Arnon. mherkoze it is apzouerbe / go
to helbon a lett the cytie of Sdehon be bylt
Aniade readie koꝛthere is a kyre gone out ol
Hel bon e a flame from the citie of Dehon a
hath contumed Ax of the Moabiteg and the
men ol $ belies ot Arnd.tt90 be to § Moab:
o people of* Chamos ve are vndone. His G


lonnes are put to fipghte and his daughters; Lhamos ts
byoughe captpueonto Hehon konge oF the Me name of a
Dmopites. aheweipghée rs dutkromhelbon “ten mne.


vnto Wibon and we made a wylvernietle eue
onto Nopha whiche reacheth vnto Mediba.
And thus Ikrael dwelt in d land ok the Amo⸗
rites. And Moles tent to lerche oute Jaezer /
ether toke the townes belongynge therto ¢
conquered the A moꝛites that were there.

And then they tourned ¢ went vp toward
Balan. And Gg thehynge of Balan came
nean ade oth he and all his people /
to warte at Adel. Andihe Loꝛde kayde vnto
Moles:feare hym not / Foz Jhaue delpuered
him in to chphädes with all bys people a his
lade. And thou Male do Whim as thou dpdell
w Sehon the kynge of the Amoꝛltes which
dwelt at Hetbon. And ther lmote him a hrs
ſonnes and all bis people / vntyll therwag
nothynge ſelt him. And ther conqueredhys
lande and the chyldzẽ of Ilrael remoued and
prtched in the teldeg of Moab / on the other
ide of Joꝛdane / by Jericho.


ERyng Walac cendeth Foz Walam to thyntent that
He chuld curte Ilenel: but Balam can do nothynge a

zapuſt the wpil of the Loꝛde Walams alle lpeaneth to
ban in the wapt.


Che. xxij. Chapter.


Id Walac 5 ſonne ot Ziphoꝛ lawe.
all 5 Alrael had done tothe Amo⸗
Artes andthe Moabites were loze
krapedocche people becauſe they
were manp / and abhozred the chyldꝛen oF FL:
rael: And Moab lapde vnto the eiderg of
Madian / now Hall this companve ivchke
bpall that are rounde aboute vs / ag an ore
iwer e die oa

ye tonne ol Siphoꝛ was henge ofthe Woa⸗
bites at that trnie.


9. v. And


2


Salam.


Deut. xxihja


Andhe kent mellangers onto * Balamthe
tonne ok Beoꝛ / the interpzeter whiche dwelt
vpon che rruer of the lande ol the childꝛen oF
his Colhe/ to call himtaxinge : behoide / chere
is a people come out of Egppte which coue⸗
reth the face of the erthe and lpeth cue harde
by mé. Come nowe a kelolhtppe and curle

me this people. Foz they are to myghtie for
me / lo perauẽture à mighte be able to cmyte
chem ¢ to dꝛyue them oute of the lande. oz
wote 6 whome thou bleſleſt calbe biel⸗
and whome thou curleſt calbe curled.

Andthe elders of Moab went wrth the
elders ot Madiã / g the rewarde of the tothe
ſapinge in their handes. Andthey came vn⸗
to Balam and tolde him the woꝛdes ol Ba⸗
lac. And he la rde onto thẽ tarv here allnight
and J woll bꝛynge pou wozde /euen as the
Londe ſhall tape vnto me. And the loꝛdes of
Woab abode with Salant.

And Cod came vnto Balam a lapd: what
men are chele which are with ther and Bals
layde vnto god: Balacche fonne of Ziphoz

Rynge of M oab hath tent onto me layinge:
bebelde chere is a people come out of Egypt
and couereth the face or che erche: come now
therfoze and curte me the / that lo peraduen⸗
ture g mave beable to duercome thẽ in ba⸗
tell /¢ to dzpue the out, And God larde vnto
Bald: chou Martaot go vb thé / nether curle
the people / loꝛ they are bleded.
nd Balam role vp in the moꝛnynge and
fayde vnto the loꝛdes of Balac:get pou vnto
poure lande / co che L oꝛd wen not fuffreme
to go with vou. Andthe lobe of Moab role
vp ¢ went onto Balac andlard Balz wolde
not come with vs. And Balac tent agayne a
reatter cõpanpe of loꝛdes a moze honoza-
bie then ther. And they came to Balam and
tolde him: Ehus lapeth Balac the fonne ol
Siphoꝛꝛoh / let nothpnge let the to come vn⸗
tome / ko: J wyllgreatip promote the vnto
great hondure / and will do whattoeuer thou


favett bnto me / come therloꝛe J pape the / chen


curle me this people. 8
And Balam anlwered and arde vnto ß
fernatites of Balac * Ak Balac wolde geue
mebishoutfull o liluer and golde / J can go
no kurther then the woꝛde of the Loꝛde mp
God / to do lelle oꝛ moare. Meuerthelelle tarie
ve here all nrgyte that z mave wete what
e Loꝛde wyll fave vnto me once moare.
Am God came onto Balam by nrghte and
fayde onto him: Ikthe men come to fete the /
ryle bp and go with them: but what J fave
vnto the / that onlye thou chaltdo.

‘And Balam role bp carly andladeldehvs
alle and went with the loꝛdes of Moab. But
Sod was angrye becaule he went . Andthe

angel ofthe Lob ſtode in the ware agente


V um. xxiih e


Numeri.


bim. And he ryd bps his alle a two teruanteg


with him. And when the afte ſawethe angell
ok the Loꝛde ſtande in the wae a his lwerde
dꝛawen in his hand / che turned a ſpde oute ol
the waye ¢ went out in to the kelde. And Ba⸗
lam (mote p alle / to tune her in to ß waye,
Andche angell ok the Loꝛde went ¢ Hove
ina path betwene § vineyardes / where was
a wall on che one tyde e another on p other.
When the ate ta we the angeil of tye L ode /
the wꝛenched vnto the waile and chꝛult Ba⸗
Jams fote vnto the wall / and he lmote her
agapn. And d angel of the L ozd wet foꝛther
and ſtode in ã narowe place / where was no
waye to tourne / ether to the rxght hande of
to the lytte. Ind when the alle fawe p angell
Da a kell downe vnder Balam: g
Balam was wꝛath and lmote che alle with
a ſtaſte. And the Loꝛde opened the mouthe ol
che alle / a the laped onto Salam : what haue
J done onto che / p thou imptelt me thus lil.
ktymes⸗ And Balam Cayde onto the Alle: be⸗
caule thou halt mocked me: J wolde that FZ
had a lwerde in myne hande / that Amrghte
now byl the. And the alle fayd onto Balam:
am not q thyne Ade whiche thou halt rydden
vpon fence thou watt borne onto this Daye?
Wag J euer wont to do lo vnto the? And he
lade / nav.
Andthe Lozde opened the eves ol Balam
p he lawethe angell of the Lozde ſtandinge
in the wave / with his Cwerde dꝛawen in bys
ande. Andhe bowed him lelke a ten flat on
ig face. And the angell of che Loꝛde lapde
nto amber tet thou thyne alſe
thus. ii tymes : behold I came oute to reſyſt
the / lo the wave is contrary vnto me / a the
alle lawe me and auoyded me thze tymes: oz
elle had che not turned kro me) Jhad tucrip
flapne the and laued her alpue. And Balam
lapdebntothe angell of the Loꝛde: baue
kynned:kfoꝛ g wilt not that thou ſtodeſt in the
waye agẽlt me. Now thertoze ve it dilpleale
e eyes /g wyll turne agapne, And p an⸗
gell layd vnto Balam / go with the men: but
in any wyle / what J fave vnto the /p faye,
And Balam went wich che loꝛdes of Balac.
And when Balac herde that Batam was &
come he went out agent him vnto a cptic ol
Moab 5 ſtode in $ border ok Arnd / whiche
was the vtmoſt parte de hys countre. And
VBalac fap onto Balam: yd not lende fog -
che / to call the? wherkoꝛe cameſt thou not vn
tomeethinkeſt thou 6 J amnot able to pꝛo⸗
mote $ vnto honoure: And Bal Capo onto
Balac: loo F am come vnto the. But J can
fayenothyng at all laue what God putteth


inmpmouthe that mult J peake. Ind Ba- rale
lam went wich alac/@ thep came vptorhe gut o


large cytie. And Balae offered ore z 1 in he


*


1


alam,
d tent For Balam and koꝛ the lores that
ele with him, 8 .


CWalam bleſleth the people / where he was required
tocurte thé and pꝛophelpeth that thep ſwalbe agreate


¶ Che xriij. Chapter.

don the momynge Balar toke
Balam and bought hym vy in to
Gi the pe place of Baal / and thence
he lawe vnto the vtmoſt parte of
the people. And Balam fapoe onto Balac:
bylde me here leuẽ alters a pꝛouide here leuẽ
bullockes and ſeuẽ rammes. And Balac dyd
a8 Balam Cayde.And Balac and Balam of-
fered on euerp alter a bullock anda ram.
And Balam fayde onto Balac:ſtande by the
lacriłpce / whyle J goo to wete whether the
Loꝛde wyll come a mete me / a whatloeuer
he cheweth me / z will tell the / he wẽt koꝛth
with. And God came vnto Balã / and Baia


Bout or che mountarnes of the eaſte favinge:


Speake tt / which the Lose bat in mi
2 5 — Balac ſarde ‘neo 3 Come
dhe hs dad ‘bnto another place whéce
jou hale le them / a walt le but tyebtmotte
parte of them and halt not fe them all and
Ccurle me themthere Andhe bꝛought hymin
to a plarne kelde where men myght fe tarre /
keuen to che toppe of Phalgah / c bylt. vij al⸗
ters and offered a bullock g à ram on euery
alter. And he taydynto Balac: ſtande here by
thylacritpce wüple J goo vonder. And the
Loꝛde mett Balam and put wozdes in bps
mouth and fayd: go agapne vnto Balac and
thus tape. And whe he came to him beholde⸗
he tone by hrs tacrikpce and the Loꝛdes ol


Numeri.


rij.
Moab with him. And Balac tapd onto him:
tlapeth the Loꝛde: ig
nd he tone vp his parable and rayde: xyle
bp Balac and heare / ¢herkien onto ine thou
fonne of Siphoꝛ. Che L oꝛde is not a man /
that he can lye / nether the fonne ol a man p
he can repent: chulde he faye and not doo / oz
wulde he (peake and not mate it good? be⸗
holde / J haue begon to bleſſe and haue bler⸗
led / and can note goo backe cherkro. Me be⸗ v. chev ions
heide no winedneſſe in Jacob noz ſawe Ado⸗propie weh,
latrre in Alrael: Che N onde his od is wych 2 uu
him and che *tepumphe ofa tinge antonge ther petgltacl
them. God that bꝛought thé out or Egypte / hut Cod lo⸗
Is ag the ſtrengih ol an vnpcoꝛne vnto them / nech not on hie
kor there is no lozcerer / in Jacob / no fotl)- Ye wareth noe
faperingtracl. when the tpnie cometh „ite he unh
wylbe fa pde ok gacob and ok Ilrael / what geth it not aco
Godhath wꝛoudht. Beholde / 5 people Mall cozdynge as it
ryle bp as alponette and heue vp hym elke Deter ueth- du
as a pon, and all not lpe domne agapne / pungres
butyl he haue eaten ol the pꝛaye and donne a Thalhab ita
ol the bioude ol them that are dane. Cio dwellpug
ind Balac lapde vnto Bala: nether cure viate ot courte
them noꝛ biede chem. And Balam ant wered
laxde vnto Balac:tolde not J the ſayinge:
all that the L ode byddeth me / chat mut
doo: And Balac fade onto Balam: come ¥
pꝛape the /A wyll bynge 5 vet onto another
place:fo péraducnture it thaltpleate God / 5
thou mapt chile chem there. And Balac
bꝛoughte Balam bnto the toppe of Peoꝛ /
chat boweth towarde the wylderneſſe. and
Balam ſayde vnto Balacanake mehere. vij
alters / and pꝛepare me here. vii. bullocnes
and. vil ranunes And Balac dyd as Balam
had lapde / and oſtered a bullocke and a ram
on euerpalter. :


Balam pꝛophelleth ol the yngdome of Jergel and
Of the compng or Khꝛzit Walac is angrie whith Wa⸗
lam. The dtſtruction of the Amelichites and ot the
Benptes.


Che. xriitj. Chapter.
3 that it plealed
the Lozd that he dude biete Fe-
ſrael / he went not as he dyd twyle
Abekoꝛe to tett lothlaying / but feet
his face towarde the wyldernelie / and lykte
ophis eves ¢ loked vpon Atrael as he lape
with his trybes / and thetpirite of God came
pponhym. And he tone vphys parable and
layde: Balam the tonne of Beoꝛ bath Cayo/
the man whole eye is open hathe lapde: he
hath fapd which heareth the woꝛdes of God *
leech the viliong of the almyghtie / which
kalleth doune and his eyes are opened,

How goodly are the tentes of Jacob and
e

ens by the ryuers lyde / 0
ae the tentes which che K hath vitchen ane neue
as cppers trees vpon the water. n Wala declare
a


Balam, Numeri. Phinehes


thefelp B wan flowe out okhis bout a bisteed Walt
citpe of be many waters / and his kynge thalbe hrer
Aide which then Agag nd bys wongdome cbalbe eral-
ame of God. ked. God that baoughte him outak Egppt his
as ye haue in ſtrenght is as the trenght ok an vnpcoꝛne / a
the Plaltert. he chäll eate the naciös that arehis enemies
re. ug. b. @ break thett bones and perce them thozow
with his aro weg. He couched him lelke and
lape doune as a lyon and as alyonetie / who
chäll terre him op? bleſled is he that blelleth
che and curled is he that curleth ae
And Balac was w7oth with Dalam and
anote his handes together / ¢fayd onto him:
dent koꝛ the to cure myne enempes:andbe-
olde / thou halt blelled chem this thze times
Candnow gett the quychly vnto thy place. J
thoughte chat J wolde promote the vnta ho⸗
noure / but the L. od bath hept the backe krõ
Ano ch neger which wou on.
Inot thy medengers which thou fentett vn⸗
ume. rä. neome faving. At Balac wolde geue me his
haoule kult or Cpluct and gold J can not patie
the mouth of he Loꝛde to doo ethergoddoꝛ
bad ol myne awne mynde nohat the Loꝛde
ſapeth / ; muſt J tpeake , And now beholde /
J go bnto my people:come let me chewe the /
at this people chall do to thy folke in the
later dayes. And he began his parable and
fapde: Balam the konne ol Beo; bath layde /
eiche man that ddd en bath lad /
G atheareth che wordes ok
God hath the knowledge ot the molt hre €
we allet D
ſenhe p.
hub nothot/ J bebo him but not
ne. There all come a Karre of Ja
ple afcepter of Arrael / which all emyte x
coſtes of Moab and vndermyne all the chyl⸗
dee ol Seth. And Edont chalbe his pollellid /
and the poſlelllon of Heir chalbe their ene⸗
mes / and crael chall do mankully. And out
ol Jacob wall come he chat thall deſtroye ?
rem̃naunt ok the cptics, it
3 And he loned on Amaleck and began his
parable and layde: Amaleck is the kyalt ol 6
nacions but his latter ende tall perych ve⸗
terlp. Ind he loked on the Renites a tone his
parable and fade: dtrongeis thy dwellynge
place a put thy nett bpd a rocke / Peuerthe⸗
laterthou chat be a bumyng to Rain / ontilt
Attur take the pretoner: And he tone his pa-
rable ¢ fapb:dlas/toho Wall Tpue ‘whe God
12 75 7 2 fe
pit .
Jag. *ebevabebim elke hall perich at the lat.
E Chat is the And Balam role vn and went ¢ dwelt in his


Hole that ere bac and Balac alto went his wape.


be ponde ehe e people cõmitteth foꝛnieation wit da
klondeor Eu, Krad, ant Sede ile 9 ite
phiates. Bob commaundeth to byll the Mpadianites.


Che. xxd. Chapter.


MD lraeldwelt in Sittim / a the 2
people began tocommyptt whoze⸗
Dome the daughters ol Moab /
which called the people vnto ö fas
ckikpce of their goddes. And the people ate a
woꝛchtpped their goddeg / and Ilrael coupled
him lelke onto Baal Peoz. Chenthe Lore
was angrye with Ilrael / and lad vnto Mo⸗
les:takẽ all the hedes of the people / a hange
em vp onto the Lorde agent the⸗ forme / a. cn
at the wiach of the Lorde maxe tourne n
awape from Jrael. and Motes fayoe vnte & fe
the iudges of krael:goo and ge thole men B ecucion
fopned them ſẽ lues onto Baal Peoꝛ. before
And beholde / one of the clhpldzen ot Ferael BoP
came a bꝛoughte vnto his bzethzen / a Ma⸗
dianitich wyte euen in the lyghte of Moleg
Lin the kyght ofall p multitude of p chrldꝛẽ
Ne wepynge in the doꝛe
ol che tabernacle ok witnede, And when Pye
nehes the conne of Eleazar p fonne of ard
chr pꝛealt lawe it / he role vp out of the cam⸗
panpe andtoke a wepon in his hande / a wee
after the man ol Jtrael in to the hoꝛehoule /
and thzuſt them thoꝛow:both che man or Ft
rael and ber. Audra auen chorow the Hing
belpeokher. Andthe plage ceaten from the Su;
She ol Ilrael. And there dyed in d plage men
ehe Loyotpabe onto MBotes taping: ml
ind the Loꝛdtpake vnto faving:
inches the konte of Eleazar the fonne of c
aron the pꝛeaſt / hach toumed myne anger read
awaye trom the chyldꝛen of Ilrgel / becaute the news
e was gelous foz my take amonge chem / x :
hadnoß conlumed the chplozen of Ftvacl in
inpgeloutye noherkoꝛe tape:beholde J geue
vnto him mycouenaunte of peace /a he ball
haue it andhis teed ater him / euẽ the coue⸗
patito ptthe viens e8 office foz euer / becaule
he was gelous koꝛ his Godes lake and made
an corset fo je ch o Acrael. 39
‘Ths name ol) Alcaeutte which was empttẽ
wyth the Madianytych wyle / was Samvé
che fonne of Sale: (a loꝛde of a auncient
houle amöge the-<>imednites, And p name
of ß Maditaniliſh wyke / was Coꝛbi p daugh
ter ol ura heedouerthe people of an aun⸗
che becrenet to MPofes favinge:
nd the Node trale vnto 1
bere the Madtanites a (mpte them / koꝛ ther
haue troubled vou with their wyles with 5
which theyhaue beg led you / thoꝛow Peoꝛ
and thoꝛow cheir lyſter Coꝛbi the daughter
ofa loꝛde in Madian / which was llayne in
the dae ofthe plage koꝛ Peoꝛs lane.
Che cheld zw of Itraellare nombꝛed agayne when
thep chulde entre in to the lande ol Canaan.


Che. xxvi. Chapter. ee


Numeri. Moab, lxiij.
Matter d plage / the L d de ſpane were Helron / ol whom cometh the kynred of


onto Moles and vnto Eleazarthe che Helronites: and ol Bani cometh the
connec of daron the pꝛeſte laing: kynked ok the hamulttes. Chele are the nyn


The hynred ol'
Zabulon.


a


yelites: and of Zareh cometh the hynred ol come the hpnreds of the Ardites ¢ of 5 Maas
theFarebites “Ban te chplozen ol Phares mites. Chele are the cheldzen ewe ge


Ilrael


intheir kpnredes / and in nom̃bze. xb. thau⸗
8 lande and ſyre hundꝛed.
Che kynres o? Chele are the childzẽ of Dan in their kyn⸗
Wan. redes: Duham / ok whom cometh the kynred


ok the Suhamites. Chele are the kynredes
of Dan in their generacions. Andali $ kyn⸗
redt of § Soubamites were in nombꝛe. xi


5 ot 5
e chplozen of Aler in their krnrede
Abe. td or were genna/or whom cometh the krnred of


the ile orche gels g ar whom, cometh d
Hynved ol the Feluites:¢ ot Bꝛia cometh the
kynred of che Wzites . And the chyldzen of
Bata were Heber / or whom cometh the kyn⸗
red of the eberites: a of Malchiel came the
Rynred of the Malchielites. and the daugh⸗
ter of Acer was called Sarah Chele are che
2 kpnxedes of Alerinnombze. litt. choulande
pr purtb or fl, haddordic he chiloze of Mephthaltin there
er ephehalt. Kyntedes were: Jaheniel / of whom came the
Rinred of the Jahezielttes:a Gunt / ol whom
came the kynred or che Gunites: ¢ ola ezer /
came the hynred ok $ Fexerites: a ot Helem
the kynred of the Helemites. Chele are che
Hynredes of Mephthalt in th eir generaciös
in nombze.rib, thoufande and.titi. bundzed.
Chele are thenombzes of the chplozen of Ft=
ence deems potent, a thoulande
vil hundzed and. xxx.

Andthe Londe pane onto Moles taping:
vntothele p l de walbe deuyded to enherett /
accompng to the nombꝛe ot names: to many
thou ſhalt geue the moare enheritaunce and
to fewe the tette:to euer trybe hall $ enhert
tafice be geuẽ accoꝛdrngto ß nombze the rot
Hotwithſtädynge / the ſande walbe deurded
bp lott / aaccoꝛdyng to d names ok ö trybes
oktheir Fathers / they wallenherett: a acoz-
dynge to their lott thou thalt deurde their
land / both tothe many and tothe kewe.

Chele are che lummes ok d leuites in their

G uniedeg:ol Gerton/ came the kynred ol the
arte nombec G erlonites: and of C ahath came the kynred
of thedentes. cf the Cabathites: and 5 came the


hymen ofthe erarites. Chele are the kyn⸗
reat of Lewkthe Wome of e Libnites / the
nynred of the Pebzonites / the hynved of the
Mabelttes / che Kenred of the Autites / the
kynred of the Karahitz Bahath begate am⸗
ram / and à mrams wyte was called goche⸗
beds daughter of Leut / which was boꝛne
him in ¢ gypte. And che bare vnto Amram /
in ae wen een pened ui Clas
vnto Tard were bozne. 0

dern en


ofall the males krom a moneth
they were not nombꝛed amõge the chyl=
— ab Arnet betaule chere was no enheri⸗


Numteri.


tauncegenen them amonge the chyldꝛen ok


Alrael. Thete are che nombzes of the chyldzẽ


dk Ilrael which Motes ¢ Eleazar the prea
nombꝛed in the feldes ol Moab / kaſt by Foz:
dane nye to Jericho. And amonge thele there
was not a man of che nombze ok che chyidzẽ
ol Frael which Moles and Laren tolde in
che wydderneſde of Spinal.Foz the Lend lard
vnto thẽ / that they chulde dye in the wydder⸗
nelle and that there ſhulde not be lekte a ma
ok chem :caue Caleb the tonne of Fephune ¢
Jolua the tonne ot Hun.

e of the herytage of the daughters ol Ze⸗
Pakage . Toone 28522 vnto Moe
Wackenetcherer⸗

d d daughters of* Selaphead ß


lone of Beber z Contie of Silead 2
| HY 2 the Conne of ahn
anate/ of the kynredes ol Ma Zorus,


e lonne ol


natle the fonne of Joleph whole 1 hears
Mahela / Noha / Pagla / Welcha a & hirza)
came a trove bekoze Motes a Eleazar the
preatt ¢ before ce fost K allthe multrtude
in 8 doze of § tabernacle of witnelle faping:
dure father dped inthe wylbemetie/ an was
not amonge the companye of them that ge⸗
theredthem Celues together agent the 102d
in the congregacton of Cozay : But dyed in
155 atone tynne/ and had no fonnes noher⸗

oze (huibe the name of dure Fathers betakẽ
awaxe from amonge hrs kynred / becaulehe
had no lonne :? Geue vnto vs a polſleſſton
amonge the bꝛethiẽ ok oure lather. and Wo⸗
Ges bzoughte their caule befoze'the Loide.
Andthe Lorde ſpake onto Moles fayinges
Che daughters of Selaphead ſpeke ryghte:
thou halt geue chem a poſſellion to enheret
amöge their fathers bꝛethze / ¢ chalttourne
ge enheritaunce of their father onto them.

ind fpeakebnto $ chyldꝛẽ of Icrael ſaying:

t a mã dye ahauenofonne pe Hall tourne

is enheritaunce onto his daughter. Ikhe
haue no daughter / pe wall geue hrs enhert⸗
taunce vnto his bꝛethꝛen. Ihe haue no bꝛe⸗
chzen / ve call geue hys enhertkaunce onto
his tathers bꝛethzen. It he haue no fathers
bꝛethzẽ / ve hall geue his enheritaunce onto

im that ig nextẽ to him ot his hynred / x lett

im potletie it. Andthis chalbe onto the chil⸗


dren of Alrael an oꝛdinaũce / and a lawe / as C


the Loide hach commaunded Moles.

And the Lorde lade onto Moes get the
vp in to this mount Abarim / a beholde / che
lande which Jhaue geué onto the chyldzẽ or

crael. And whe thou haſt fene it / thou halt
e 5 ake thy people allo / as Baron
thy bꝛother was gethered vnto hrs people.
Foz pe were dilobedtent vnto my mouthein
sheDetect of zvinin the krrtk ofthe n
gaclon /


in Moab.


*


*


faving :geue the chyldꝛẽ or Ilrael
a chaige ¢ fave onto them / $ ther

tate heade to offer onto the olle⸗
tyng of my *bzead in che lacritpce ol twete
kaudure / in his due ceaſon. And faye vnto
che. his is the offeryng which ve ſhall offer
vnto $ Loꝛdẽ. ij ſambes ofa peare olde with


0


out lpot dave by dape to bea burnto
perpetuallp. One ſambe thou thalt oller in
che kent pale de other at euen / and therto
e tenth parte of an Epha of lloute koꝛ a
meatofirynge myngled with beaten ople / che
fourth parte ok an hin: which is adaply ofe⸗
fynge oꝛdened in the mount Sinat onto a
Sete lauoure in the facrifyce ol the Loꝛde.
And the dzrnnolkrrnge ok the fame: p fourth
parte ol an hin vnto one lambe / g poure the
dyn e in the holp place / to be good
derne vnto che Loide. And the other lambe
chou chalt offer at euen / with che meatoffe-
e z the dꝛynkofferynge after the maner


*


*
ity
And inthe kirlt dape ol poure monethes / e
thail offer a hurntoſferynge vntothe Loꝛde:
two pounge bullockes / and a ram / and. bij,
lambes of a pere olde wythout fpott / l. lij.
tenthdeales or floure fo2 a meateofferpnge
myngled with oyle vnto one bulloche / K. it.
tenthdeales of fioure fo; a meateofferpynge
myngled with opie onto one ram. Andeuer


6 moaxe /a tenthdeale of floure myngled wpth


oyle / ko a meateofferynge vnto one lambe.
Chat is a burntofterpng of a lwete lauoure
in the lacrilice ofthe L oꝛd. And their dꝛynu⸗C
es halbe halfe an hin of wyne vn⸗

to one bullocke / ard the ih pꝛde parte ol an
hin ot wyne vnto a ram the fourth parte
ok an hin vnto a lambe. This is the burntok⸗
Ferpnge of cuerp moneth thoꝛow out all the
monethes ofthe pere / gone he goote fo2 a
ight Sat the Loꝛd / which chanbe
offered with the daply burntolferynge a his
dernkolkerpnge.“ Andche ritt. dape of the, Grodt. h. c.
kürt moneth chalbe alleouer vnto 5 Lord. Leut. ra
algen ok the lame moneth whalbe went xv.
à keaſt / in whych. bit. daxes men mutt eate
vnleuended bꝛead. Che lirſt dare ſbalbe an
bole feat ty b 11 180 no 1 oe abs
rp oke therin. And pe tall offer a
burntofiryng vnto the Lozde. i. vounge bul⸗
locke / one ram / a. vi lambeg ol a pete olde
without ſpott / a their meatoltryng of floure
myngled waoxle. tit. tenihdeales vnto a bul⸗
locke / d. li. tẽchdeales vnto a ram / and euer⸗
moare one tenchdeale vnto a lambe / thoꝛow
out the. vit. lambes: a an he goote fora lyn⸗
ollerynge to make an attonement fo2 vou.

And pe chall offer thele / belpde d burntok⸗
ferpng in the moznenge ß ig altwaye offered,
And akter this maner pe Hall offer thoꝛow


fierpng out J. vil dapet / the kode ofthetacrifice or an


lwete fauoure vntothe Loꝛde Andit chalbe
done belpde the dayly burntollerynge & hys
dernkolteryng. And the leueth daye Man be
an holp kealt onto vou / co p ve hall do no la⸗
bozious wozhke therin. Andthe dape ok roure
kirſt krutd whe ve bꝛynge anewe meateoffr⸗
tong vnto 5 Loz in poure weng / halbe an
holp kealt vnto vou: fo 8 pe (hall do no laba⸗
vious woꝛke therin And pe chall offer a burnt
olkryng ol a lwete ſauoure vnto p Loꝛde. il.
voũge bullockes / a a ram / a. bi. lambes ot ac
pere olde a pece / w their meatoſterynges ol
Hloure myngled Worie. iit tethdeales vnto a
bullocke. it tẽthdeald ton ram / ¢eucrmoare
one tethdeale vnto a lambe thozow out 5. vt
lamb / A an he goote to make an attonemẽt
koꝛ vou. And this pe wall do belpdes p dayly
burntofkrynge / a his meateolrynge: a they
thalbe withoutl pot / w their dꝛynnoltryngs.
¶ What mutt bt offred cht. vii firſt dapes ok the lee
nenth mone. che. xxtx. Chapter.


a


Ceremonyes.


’ Mo the Eyalk dave oF p vñ. moneth
2 | aibe an hotvteatt onto pourrann
wheutrri.ce pe yall doo no Iabozpous worke
EMitherin.. It chalbe a dave of trõpet
blowyng vnto vou And ve call offer a burnt.
olterynge ola twete ſauoure vnto the L020;
one pounge bullocke ¢ one ram 4. vis. läbes
ofa pere olden pece that are pure. And their
meatoftypniges of foute mpgied u ople,
j.tenth deales vnto the bulloche / and. i on⸗
to che ram / a one tenth deale vnto one lambe
chozow the. bit lambeg. And an he goote foz
a lxnofryng to make an attonemẽt koꝛ vou /
beide the bumtollerynge ol che moneth and
his meatollerynge a belpde the daylpburnt⸗
ollerynge a his meatofferynge / a the dꝛynn⸗
olterynges ok the lame: acco dxuge vnto the
maner of thé Coza tauoure of lwetnelle in B
lacrityce of the Loꝛde. 5
*Anothe tenth dave of that Came ſeuenth
moneth (halbe an holy feat nto pou / a ve
V hail humble youre foules and wanne
maner woghe cherin. And ve Mall otter a
burntoſterynge vnto the Loꝛd of a ſwete fas
uoure:one bullocke / Fa ram /. vit. lambes
ol a pere olde a pece without kaute and their
+ meateofirynges ol floure mingled with opie
iu. tenthdea les to a bullocke / d it. to a ram a
all waye a tenth deale vnto a lambe / thoꝛow
i out the. bij. lambes. And one he goote fo2a
2 fyno e / belpde the ſrnneo me oF
Attonementandthe dayly burntolkerynge / a
„the meate and dꝛynkolkrynges that longe to
Leuit xi. f the lame. Andthe xb. dape of the. vit moneth
Walbeholpdape a pe Hall doo no laborious
woꝛcke therin / and ye (hall kepe a feat onto
che Loꝛd ok. vll. dapes lunge. And ve hall of-
ker a burn of a lwete ſauoure vnto
the Loꝛd. xitt.bulſockes.ii.rammes and. rilt
lambes which are perelynges a pure wyth
ople. ii. tenthdeales vnto eüery one of § riti.
bullockes. il benthdeales to ether of p rames
Gone tẽthdeale vnto eche ol ß. ritt. lambes.
Andonehe goote onto a lynotkerpnge / be⸗
foe che dayir bumtollrynge with bis meate
eubbzmncnofecrnges, Ra
C ain tyefeconde voting dune bullock,
nen vine poy lane — —.—
ote their meat es d DIVO!
pr arn r e
cog othenombze ot chem and after the
maler and ene Goote £02 a lynoſterynge /
belyde the daly burntofirynge ¢ his meate
and depnhoferpnges.and the thyꝛde dae. rt
bullockes tt. rammes and. rit, perelynge
lambes without pot: their meate a darnk⸗
offerpnges vnto the bullockes / rammes and
Lamibes akter the nombꝛe of them and accoꝛ⸗


* Leut vf and
xi. e.


nge to che maner. And anhegocte fo: 4 with
tanotemige beypeibebapipbumotange


Numeri.


bai meate and dꝛynkeolkrynges.
nd the fourth dape r. bulioches two
rammes and. xiitt, lambes perelynges pure /
and their meate and dꝛynckoterynges vnto
the bullockes / rammes ¢ lambes / accoꝛdyng
to the nombꝛe ol them and after the maner.
And an he goote koꝛ a lynneottrynge / belyde
the dayly bürntollerynge and his meate and
devnckotterynges. A id the Epite daye. ix. bul⸗
lockes two rammes and. xitit.lambes ok one
pere olda pecewichout lpot. Andtheir meate
and deynckotkerynges onto the bullockes /
rammes and lambes accozdynge to the
nombꝛe ol them and atter the maner. And
an he goote £07 a lynne oſterynge / belyde the
daply burntofferynge and bys meate and
dzönftokrrnges Andthe lyrte dape vit. bul⸗ D
lockes. it rameg and.xiltt. perelynge lambes
without (pot. And theirmieate a dꝛynckok⸗
ollerynges vnto the bullockes / rammes and
Jambes/accozbeng to the maner. And anbe
cote for a tynneolkerynge / belyde the dayiy
burnt e and bys meate and dꝛynck⸗
offerynges. And the keuenth dape. vit. bul⸗
lockes. ii rãmes and. ri. lambes that are ve⸗
relynges a pure. And their meate and dꝛynn⸗
offerynges onto the bullockes / rammes and
and lambes / accosdpnge to their nombze
and to the maner. And anhe dare toz a lyn⸗
offerpnge/ bel yde the da pix burntollerynge
and his meate ¢ dꝛynh 8,
ndthe eraht dape halbe che concluſion
ol p keaſte vnto vou / a ve Hall do no maner
labozious wozck therin. And ve ſball oller a
burnt ge OF a Nwcte fauoure vnto the
Londe: one bullocke / one ram and vit. pere⸗
iynge lambes without lpott. Ind che meate
Kdipnkolferynges vnto the bullocke / ram @
lambes / accoꝛdyngeto their nombzes ¢ ac⸗
coꝛdynge to the maner. And an he 1 for


dope 5
Thetethynges ve alldo vnto the Lo;

in youre Feattes: belpde youve bowes ¢ kre⸗
wyll offerynges/ fn une f
meato' es /d s and peace
offrpnges. Ind Motes tolve the chplbzen or
Frael/accospnge to all that the Loꝛde cõ⸗
maundedhim.


c Or bots then hey halbe ert ad ohen i.
¶ Che. xxx. Chapter.


5 ee 0 eth soc a
and brnde his nto the JLozbo7 Fine an e vom
eis loule (he hall not geo backe he


5.8.


gelle is is
7 001 ee eT


worde; but hall tulfylt all that pꝛo
ch mouth. en : ‘at


adian is Numeri, deſtroyed Irv.
Ikadamlell bowe a bawepmothe nom Marnede come ok ouunto warre/a let them


fat

. Boule and onmaryed. Feber fatherbeareher ofthe Wadtanites . Je chall fende onto tl
‘howe a bonde which Hebathmanebponber warre a thouland ot Jenene he OME
foute/¢ holde bis peace cherto then al her all the trpbes oF Ffrael Andthere were tank
vowes a bondes which We hath made vpon oute ok p thoulandé or Ilrael xis. thoutande
Bher loule ſhall ſtande in effecte. But g yr her kante, Ann age ok euery trybe a thou⸗
father kozbydherthe lame dape z heheareth kande. And Motes tent thema thoulande of
dt none of her vowes noz bondes whpch the euerp trybe W Phineas the fonne of Elea⸗
hath made vpon her loule malbe or balue / zar the preatte to ware / ¢ the holpe vellels

e Loꝛde Mall fogeue her / becaule her ta⸗ and the trompettes to bio we in his hande.
r koꝛbade her. AAndcher warredagentt the adtant⸗
Ik che had an J che vowed oz tes / as the Lo de comniaunded Moles / and
pronounced oughte out ok her lrppeg wher⸗ ewe all che males. And they ewe 5 hyrigt
with che bonde her foule/ and her hulbande ok Madian amonge other that were lane:
healde it s helde his peace there at the tame Eu / Nenem Hur / hur a Reba: kyue nung
daxe he hearde it: Chen her vowes and her of Madian. ändtheplewe Walaam p lonne
bondes teherwith che bounde her toule / chal ol Beo; with che lmerde. And the chyldzen ol
ftande in eltecte. But a peberbutbandetoz- Ilrael tone all the wemen of Madian pꝛe⸗
bade her the lame dare that the heardit then koners ¢ their chyidzẽ / and Ipopled all their
oa e bec bone twbich che had vpon catell /cheir fubstance and their goodeg. and

ev o none ellecte / a that allo which hepzo they burnt all their cities wherin they dwelt /

nounced wer kyppes wherwith ſhe bounde and all their caſtels with fyze, And they tonne

her loule / a che Loꝛde Malt koꝛgeue her. all the fpopleand all they could catche / both

08 Che vowe ol a wedowe and ok her that is ol men and bealtes. And they bꝛoughtethe

Dewozced/ g all that they haue bounde their captrues and ihat which they had talen anv

foules with all / thall ſtande in effecte the, allthe cpople onto Moles and Eleazar the

It che vowed inherhulbandes ua o: preattand onto the companve of the chyldaẽ


golue.yiij. c


* boundeber loule with an oth / a herhulband .of' crael /euẽ vnto the holte / in the Elves ol


hulbãde dilanulled them the tame dave that ol the holte 1 them.


L de thatt fozgeue her. alpue⸗ beholder there cauled the chyinzen ol umzu u
bees Lochen that noe to humble leute ee alas eum teetpace Peet


D byeake.Sut pe her hufband holde hrs peace there foloweda plage amonge the coͤgrega⸗ dle;
bühne dapebntb another en be daher Clon ofthe Lende Gem cheikehel der al setts W

Allherbowes ¢ bondes which ce had bpon men childzen and the wemen that haue lyen
Ker /becaute be Ano bis peace tyetame bape with men ſllechlye: But all the wemen chyl⸗


The Requett


at futrech not the trꝛe / ze Mall make goo


Qumert,


haue taken thefumme of the men of warre /
tobich were vnder cure hand/@ there lacked


aaa fpapnblenge water. nd all forth andfayde pnto Doresehyferuaunt &


ſozom the water. And wach youre clothes
the leuenth dae / and then ve are cleane. And
afterwarde come in to the holte.

e Lon fpake vnto Moes taping:
take the umme ok the pzare that was talk /
both of che wemen a of catell / thou 4 Elea⸗
zar the preatt and the aunctent heades of the
congregacton.and deupdeit in to two par⸗
tis / betwene them that tone the warre bys
them and went out to battell and allthe con⸗
Gregactd. Andtake a poꝛcton onto the 1070
ol che men of warre which wẽt oute to bat⸗
tell: one of tyur hundꝛed / ol the wemen and
ofthe oven and of the ales and of the wepe:
and pe wall take it of their halfe and geuẽ it
vnto Elea zar the pꝛeaſt / an heuecferynge
onto the Lozbde, And of the halle of the chel⸗
den of Flrael/take one ol ſpltpe / or the we⸗
men / ot the orẽ / of the ales and of the ſhepe ⸗
andof ali maner of beaſtes / and See them
tonto the leuites which warte bps the habi⸗
tacyon ok the Loꝛde.

And Moles and ckleazarthe prea drd as
the Loide commaunded Motes, And the
botye and the pꝛaxe which the men ol warre

ad caught wa. vi. hundzed thoufante and

thouland chepe: a. ixxiſ. choulande oxen

ixt. thoulende ales and. xxxil. thouland wee

men that had lxen byno man.

And che halke which was the parte ok thé

z went out to warre / was flit hundzedthoü⸗

ande and. xxx vii. thoulande and kyue butte

died Hepes Andthe Londes parte ol the cbe⸗

pe was. bi hundꝛed and. uv. And che oxen

were. rxxvi choulande / oi which he Loꝛdes

parte was. Ixxil. And the alles were xxx.

thoufandeand fue hundzed / of whreh the

‘PLozdes parte was. xi. Andthe wemen were

Ft. thou lande / 1 200 95 Londes parte

was. xrit. foules. And Moles gaue that

g fume trbich was the Lozoes Yeuectiereng

. vnto ¢leasarthe preatt:as the Loꝛde com⸗

4 maunded Moles. And the other halle ol the

chyivzen of Itrael which Motes feparated

2.9, from the men of twarte( thatis to wete / the

& which was halle hat pertapned onto the* cigregacton)

not atthe war, Wäg. int hadꝛed thoutandeand.rrrbit . thou-

* land and kruehundꝛed chepe: ¢.rrrbt. thou⸗

fande oxen:and. xxx. chouland ates and fyue

hundzed: G. bi. (houtande wemen. And Mo⸗
les toke of this halle that pertarned vnto
chyidꝛen of Ilrael:one ot cuery kyltie / bo
ofthe wemen and ok the catell / and gauet

vnto the Leuites which wayted pp the ha⸗


bitacion of the Loꝛde / as the L oꝛd cõmaun⸗


ded e Holes. And the officers of thoulandes of
che holte / the captapnes auer the thoufandes
and the captapnes ouer the hundꝛedes came


not one mé ofthe use haue therfoze bzought


what euerp man


eat betoje


CMa Ruden and Sad and to halte the trybc ok yar
nates/ ig pꝛomeled ide pollectton bepounde Jordan
ca ward: pt they byng there bꝛeihzen into the lande
ofpzomette,


he. xxxij. Chapter.


t Gad / had an exceadynge greate
ulditube ok catell. And whe hey
dawe che lande ot Jazer a the lande
Of Galaad p it was an aptẽ place £03 catell
they came a tpake vnto M ofes a Eleazar g
zeaſt a bnto the Lozdes ot
ſapinge. Che lande of Ataroth e Bib .
dana ermal ¢ Berbon g Elealeh ¢ Da
am a Hebo ¢ Beon / which contre N Lode
fmote befoze the congregaciõ ol Icrael: is a
lande to catel and we thy feruauntes haue
catel twherfoze larde they t we haue forive
grace in thy erahte /lett chis lande be geuen
onto thy feruatites to potlede /ebzpnge vs
not ouer Jordan,’

And Woles lard onto p childrẽ of Gad gol
Kuben wall poure bzethze goto warre a pe 8
tarpe bere? uaherfoze ditcozage pe the bertes
ok the chyldꝛen ot Ilrael toꝛ to go ouer in to
e

4 *.
from cau barne tote the landẽ Andthey 1
went vp euen bnto the rruer of col and
lawe the lande and dylcoꝛãged the hertes of
the chyſdꝛen ol i trael / z they Gulbenot goin
to 5 lande whych the Loꝛde hadgeuenthem.
ind the Loꝛde was woth the lame tyme c


and ware fapinge.* Mone ok the men «Aunt


that came out of Carpte rem twentye pere
olde and aboue / Hall le the lande 950%
ware vnto Abꝛaham / Itaac and Jacob
becaule they haue not contynuallp tolo wed
me: laue Caleb che tonne of Jeyhune 157


e chudzẽ ot Ruben g the chüdzen x


Of Ruben x Gad. ‘Puineri,


Srenelite/eFolua the tonne of Nun /coꝛther
haue kolowedme cötinuallp. And the Loꝛde
was angrie with krael / made the wandze
in the wyldernetſe rl. pere / vntyn allthe gee
neracpon that had done euell in the ſyghte
ofthe Loꝛde were conlumed.
ndbeholde / xe are ryſen vp in poure fas
thers ſteade / to p encreale at lynkull men / a
to augmẽte the kearſe wꝛath of the Code to
Ilraei warde. Foz yl ve tourne awaxe krom
alter him / he wyll yet agapn leaue F people
in ß te den wall pe dettrove all this
fothe And they went nere him and ſapde: we
wyll bylde ſhepekoldes here koꝛ oure ſhepe a
toz dure catell / and cptics Foz dure chyldꝛen:
But we oure lelues will go ready armed be⸗
D fone the chrldꝛen of Icrael / vntpll we haue
brought thẽ vnto their place. And oure chyl⸗
dien chall dwell in the fenced cyties / becaule
ol the inhabiters olthe lande. And we welt
not retourne onto oure houles / vntyll § chil⸗
dꝛen OF krael haue enhereted: euery ma hys
enheritãunce. Foꝛ we wyl not enheret
them on vonder lyde Joꝛdan koꝛwarde / bez
. criperptauince is failedto vs on
lit. . c. e Jordan cal e.
ware, And Holes Capde pntochenne ge pe welt
do this chynge / that ve wyll go alſharneſſed
betoze the L oꝛde to warre / and will go all oF
‘pou in harneſle ouer Joꝛdan beroreS Lord /
öntyll he haue cat oüthes enempes bekoꝛe
him) a untyll the lande be lubdued befoze the
Loꝛde / chen ve Mall retourne a be wythout
fynne agent che Loꝛde ¢ agent Jlrael / and
is lande (halbe youre pottetiion befoze the
e Lond. But yt pe wyll not do lo / beholde / pe
Senne agẽſt the Loꝛde:a be ture poure fynne
wyll kynde vou out. Wylde poure eyties lor
poure chyldꝛẽ a kouldes koꝛ youre thepe, Efe
be do that ye haue lponen. Andthe Chridzen
Of Gad and of Ruben kpake vnto Motes
ſapinge:ihy leruauntes wyll do as my loꝛde
comaundeth. Oure chyldꝛẽ oure wyues lub⸗
fice a all oute catell wall remapne here in
$ eyttes of Galaad. Burk we thy ſeruaũtes
Aube. ud. e. wil go all harnelledtoꝛ $ warre vnto battell
befoze the Loꝛde / as mp loꝛde bath lade.
And Motes cömaũded eleasar § preatt:
Fa Fotua the tonne of Nun and the aunctent
e Tad athe ‘oon ok; .
ſayde vnto them: e en K
Ruben wyll go wich you ouer Jordan all
pꝛeparedto
che lande is ſubdued vnto pou / geue thẽ the
Land of Salaad to potette/but a pt cher will
not go ouer with pou in harnelle / chen ther
cpallbauecheir pottedyons amonge vou in
the land of Canaan. And the chpidzé of Gad
Kuben antwered laringe: that which the


Lopbeljath ard onto ty Cecuadtes we wi


t bekoze PILopd:then when roch


lxvj.
do.“ We well goharnelled before che Loꝛde Jotue,rei.a
intothe lande of Canaan / x the polleſpon ol *

oure enheritaũce walbe on this lden oꝛdan.

And Moles gaue onto the chploren of
Gad andot Rubens onto halfe the trybe ol
Manatee the tonne ok Joleph / che kyngdome
of Sehon hynge of the Amozites / and the
kyngdome of Dg kynge of Balon / che land
that longed onto the cpties therok in p coftes
ofthe countre rounde aboute. Indthe chyl- i.
den ol Gad bylte Pibon / ataroth / Arder /
Atroth / Sophan / Jaeter / Fegabea / Beth⸗
nina and Betharan kencend cpties / a they
bylte koldes for the cheye. Andthe chyldꝛẽ of
Kuben belte Herbon, Eleale“ Rtriathaim /
Hebo / Baal / Aeon ¢ turned their names /
and Sibama allo:and gaue names onto the
cpties which they bylt.

And ther chplozen o€ Machir the tonne ol w Gene b..

Manatle wentto Salaad and tolle it a put
out the Amoꝛites p were therin. and Poleg
nec fireree oo Mag 0 $ ae - Max

alle / z he dwelt therm. And* Fabit p tonne zb.
of MPanate werand coke the fall townes 60
therotk / and called themthe totonero£ Fair,
And Hobah went and tone kenach wich the
totones longynge therto / a called it Pobah
alter his atone namie,
Che tourneys and departynges krö place to place
of Ilrael are nome. here can unde at pl
the Tanganltcs.

¶ Che. rxxiti. Chapter. 5
Zs) Dele are theiourneyes of the chil⸗
en ol IAlrael which wet out o p ay

rss land of Egypte 1255 their armies
onder Motes a Aarö and Doles
wꝛote their goping out by theiriournepes at
the cõmaundement ot the Loꝛde: euen thele
axe che iourneyes of their goenge out. Che
chylozé ok Alrael-departed from Mahemles * Exot 5 .
che. rb daye ol p tyꝛlt moneth / on p mozowe
alter. Palleouer / and wet out wyth an hye uE xodi. ri. b.
hande inche tyahte ok all eabpte / whple the
Egypcias burped all their kyꝛſtboꝛne which
che Loꝛd had tinptte amöge them. And vpd
ier ec allo the Loꝛde dyd execucion.

ind the chyldzen or Jirael remoued ro Ma⸗
bemles and pitched im Hocoth.

Andthepdeparted trom“ Horotg e pt.
chenthetvtentes tm ethan which is in chess redet.
Sige obshe ene „And they remoued

os Ktoutriedbnto the entryng OF Hi⸗Erodi ruhe
which is befoze Baall ephö / a pitched
bekoze Migdol. And they departed krom be⸗
koze hlroch “ went thozow the mydden ol, rod xh
the lee in tathe wydernelle / a wẽt. ll. dapes N
tourneyinthe wyidernelte oF eth /a pitched
th Darah. And ther remoued fod g arah ¢
€ wet vnto ; Elim where were. rij foũtayncs xœrodi. xu. d.
c. xx. paulmetrees cher richer gere 1

. An


te” Jos ther rẽmoued front clint ¢ lape tat
bythe redlee. And they remoued fr che red
lee k laye in ther wyldernele of Din. And
they tone their iourney out of 6 wylderneſle
ol Din / e let vp their tentd in Daphka And
they departed krõ Waphha / a lave in Alus.
And they remoued tvs Alus / J ape at* Raz
phedim / where was no water foz the people
Ctodzynke. And they departed krö Raphenint/

ro. xira and pptched in ther wyldernele of Spinal.
Andthey remdued from the delerte of St-
ume. rt. g. nat / lodged at the? graues of lust. And cher
departed kr the leyüͤlchꝛes or lult / and lave
a Hume rig. at T Hazeroth. And chepdeparted from Paze
roth / e pylched in Kuhma, And departed HS


#Ero.rbia.


Ero xvß a


Nithma and pytchedat Aimon Pares.And J


they departedkromimon Pares/¢ pitched
in Labna. And ther remoued from Ltbna / 4
pitchedat Ria. And ther iourneped from
PD Alla a pptched in Rehelatha, And they wet
£6 Mehelatha / a pptched Inmofit Syapher/


And they remoued from mounte Dapher 9


and lape in Harada. Andthey remoüed from
Harada and pitched in Makeheloth.

5 And peevremoued from Spakeheloth/ a
ape at & ahath / they departed HO Aden

E pitched at Charath.And they remouedkri
Charath / and pitched in Wichca. Andther
went from githca / and lodgedinhhalmona.
CD Sndthev departed from Pafmona / and lave
at Moteroth. And they departed from Mo⸗
ſeroth / z pytchedin Bane Jakan. Andther
renicued from BaneZakan / and laye ator
gadgad. And ther went From or gadgad/ &
bitched in Jathbatha. Andther remouedkrö
Jathbatha / and laxe at Abꝛond. And thepde
parted from Abzona / and iave at Ezeon gas
ume. xx. a bet. And they remoued kro €zeon gaber and
pitched in ther wyldernelle ot Hin / which is
Cades. And ther remoued krom Cades and
pitched inmount Boz tthe edge of che land
ok Edom. And Haron che preat went vp in
Nume xx. b. to mount Hoꝛ at the commaundemẽt ol the
Deut. xxx H. Loꝛde a dped there eur in the koꝛtlech vere⸗
akter the chindzen of Acael were come out ol
the lande of Egypte / and in the kt dave oF
the kykte moneth. And Aaron was an hüdzed
and. xxxliſ. pere olde when he dyed in mount
oz. and kenge ea the Canaanite whych
dwelt in the ouch ok the lande of Canaan /
hearde that the chyldꝛẽ of Ftracl were come.
And they departed from * moũt hon / and
ppichedin Salmona . Andthep depärted krö
Salmona / and pitched in Ehimon and ther
departed trom Phiman / a pytched in Oboth
Fa tied ema Wal ed
in Jehabavimtn the borders of Moab. And
ep departed krom! Jehabarim / a pytched


Nume ri. b.


a Hume. ric in ibon Gan.Andtyey remoued krom Di- f.


bon Gad / and iape in Amon Diblathama.


umeri.


And therremdued from Amon Diblacha⸗
ma / e pytched in d mountaynes of Avarim
beloze Habo. And they departed krõ § melt
tapnes ot Abarim / and pitched in the keldeg
of Moab fat by gordan npe to Fericho And
they pytched opo Joꝛdan / kram Bech Baiel⸗
moth onto the plapne or Abel ſatim in the
keldes ol Moab. 5 2 8
And the Loꝛde ſpale onto Motes in the
keld of Boab by Zozdannye vnto Zericho /
fapinge:fpeake vntothe chplozen of Alrgel a
fape vnto chem: when pe are come oũer Joꝛ⸗ G
dan in to the lande of Canaan/fe 6 pedzpue
out all the inbabiters of the lde befoze vou /


and deſtrope their“ chappelles and all their * Att


mages of Metall / and plucke de wne all


Cbald un
thetvaiters bpite onbpltes : And potted the gran


DRA


lande and dwell therin / kor haue gene pou tones


the land to enloye it. And pe ball deurde the
enheritaunce of the land by lot amõge poure
kynredes / and geue to the mo the moare en⸗
ſerztaunce / and to the fewer the lelle enhert⸗
taunce. And poure enheritaunce chalbe in d
trybes ol voure fathers, in the place where
cucry mans lott kalleth.

But and yt ye wyll not dꝛyue out the ine
habiters ot the lande befoze vou then thole


which ve let remayne of thé / halber thoznes a. chem
in voure eyes a dartes in poure ſydes / Mall youre cy


bere pou in the land wh


in ve Dwell. Moze⸗ that 6


ouer it will come ko padde chat 3 Wall do bn⸗ une


to vou as I thought to do vnto them.


Che Codes and borders of the land of pꝛomeſſe.
Ter ten are alygned to deupde the lande.


¶ Che. xxxiij Chapter.


Mothe WLozde fpakie onto Woles z
fapinge:commaunde the chyldzen
lof Zfrael andlape vnto then: whe
pe come in tothe land ok Canaan /
this is the lande p wall fall onto poure en⸗
herptaunce the lande of Canaß wich all her


rodde lle
and vnde


coſtes And“ poure louth inge be cel FD een


the wüdernelle ol Sina longe bz coſte of
Edom / ſo p youre Couth quarter chalbe HB
che cyde of the lalte cer call warde / and chall
feta copatte from the foutl vp to Acrabim /
and reache to Zinna. And it Hail go out on
the louth lde of Cades Barne / and go out
allo at Bazar Adar /a goa longeto à mon.
And hail tet a compatte from
therpuer of Egypt / a Hall go out at the lee.

And poure welt quarter call be ö greate
ſee / which coſte walbe voure welt colke.


And this ſhalbe youre noxh quarter: ve


{yall cõpaſſe from the great fee vnto mount
Boz. Andkrom mount Hoz / pe trail com⸗
age and go ynto emath / and the ende ot
the colte halbe at Zedada / and ? ote ach


Amon onto zs


Humtri.


teach out to Ziphꝛon and go out at Haza
enan. And this N nozth ,
And pe hail compatle voure eaſt quarter
fro Ha zar enan to Soepham .Andthe-cotte
wall go doune krom Sepham to Nibla on
the eatt tyne of Ain. And then delcende e go
out at che lyde of the fee of Cenereth ea
ward. Ind then go downe a loge vy oꝛdan /
Kleue at 5 kalte tee. And this wall be poure
Hide Well the coſtes therofroundeaboute,
And Moles commaunded the chrldzen or
Irrael taping: this is the lade which pe Mall
enherett by lotte / and which the Loꝛde com⸗
maunded to geue vnto. . trybes ¢ an halle:


pus n tk ko the trybe of the chyidzen of Nubẽ haue


receaued / in the houſholdes of their fathers /
andthe trybe of the chyldꝛen of Gad in their
fathers houboldeg e halke the trybe of dba
nale / haue receaued their enberitafice/ that
is to wete. ti trybes and an halte haue recea⸗
ued their enheritaunce on the other fyoe or

an by Jericho eaſtwarde / towarde the


e rylynge.
Andthe Loꝛde ſpake to Moles ſapinge:
® vetearetyenames ol the men / which Malt
deuyde vou the lande to enheret leazar the


ig, do beat /* Jolua the fonne ol Hun. And ve


. Walltake allo à londe of euerp trybe to de⸗
upde the lande / whole names are thete : In 6
trybe ot Juda / Caleb the tonne of Fephune,
Arn the trybe of the chylozen ol Simeon /
Semuel the lonne of Annud / 8 50 4 trybe
E min / Elidad the tonne of Cillon.
doe e trybe ofthe chyldꝛen of Dan / the


e Buckt che fonne ol Jaglt. And amõge vnto


the chploz€ of Joleph an the trybe of the chil:
den OF MPanade/thelozde Haniel the tonne
ol Ephod. And in the trybe of the chyldzen ol
-Sphzatm / the loꝛde Camuel the konne ol


5 tepbe

thalt/ che loꝛde Peda

TE Ann Chele are they

Seger n
che lande of Canaan,


e
ies of retuge oꝛ ictuarpes. e
lawe of manquelipng : oT
no man be — a e
Che. xxrv. Chapter.
Moro the node cpalie unto Motes
‘| the keldes ol Moab by Jordan
Njoucr againſt Jericho faping:com:
Reet ative 5 childzé of Acrael / 5 they
Leue onto the Leuttes ot the enberitatice of


lx vij


their pollen: cities to dwell in Ind ve Mhaladotue xi a


geue allo vnto the cytpes ot the Leuttes /
duburbes rounde abdute them. The epties
wpalbe 07 thé to dwell in / a the luburbeg koꝛ
their catell/ potedts all maner beattes of
theirs. And the luburbes o the cyties which
pe Mall geue vnta the Leuites / wall reach
front the wall of the cytie outwarde / a thou⸗
lande cubites rounde aboute: And pe Halt
meature without the cytie / and malte the vt⸗
moſt boꝛder ok ß ealterde:two thoulande cu⸗
bytes / and the vtmoſt boꝛder of p fouthtyoes
two thoulande cubites / And the vtmolt boz⸗
der of the weſteyde:two thoulande cubites e
che vtmoſt boꝛder of the noꝛthlide:twothou⸗
fande cubytes allo:andthe cytte ſyalbe in p
mypodes. And thele chal be the luburbeß ol
their cytieg.


Andamöge the erties which pe Mani geue, zou. r.


vnto the leuites ! chere hail be tyre cytyes
ol kraunches which ve wall geue to that in⸗
tent that he which kileth / mae five thyther
And to them ve chall adde. rij. cyties mo: lo
that all the cpties which ve chall geue p Le⸗
Uites halbe.rlottt with theirluburbes. And z
ol che cyties which pe Mall geue oute ol the
pollelſtong ot the chyrdzen of Irrael / ve hall
Geuemany out of thetr pole is that haue
moche and fete out of their pottettions that
haut lytle: lo that cuery trybe Hall geue of
his crtves vntothe Leuites / accoꝛdynge to
the enheritaunce which he enhereteth.
Andche Loz pate vnto Motes faving:


Cpeake onto the chyldzen ol Alracl and faye ite.
tober pe be come guer Jo; dan elle f.


e wall bylde cyties


which halbe pꝛeurleged townes Foz pou: 6 Che ryghte
he which Aeeth a ma vnwares mape fipe thi⸗ vſe of fan
ther. Andche cities halbe tolle from the ex⸗ ctuartes,


ecuter of bloude / g he which hylled dye not,
vntpllhe ſtande befoze the congregation 10
ludgemẽt And okthele. oi kre cpties which pe
Mall geue. iti. pe hall geue on this gee foꝛ⸗
dan and. iel. in the land ot Canaan. And chele
Gyre fre cyties Malbe toꝛ the chyidꝛen of "fe:
eel @ 5 Jo fet € 19 a b. dwelleth
ont ep which kyil any per⸗
perlone vnwares mare flee thither, foe
Ik any man ſimpte another with a wepon
ol peron that he dye / chen he is a murtherer /
and all de korit. Ache lmpte hym wich
th2owpnge ſtone tha he dye therwith / then
e (hall dpe: Foꝛhe is a murtherer and tale
e llarne therkoꝛe. It he lmyte him wyth ea.
handwepon of wodd that he dye therwyth / C
chenhe hall dye koꝛ he is a murtherer ¢ that
be flapne thertoze,
Che tultice of bloude chal tice the mur⸗
cherer as lone as he kindeth him: Ik he thzuſt


athim x orhate / o hourle athim with Taping beute xx. Ge
0


i. ii.


, Thedauhgters


ol warte that he dre o2 fmptebym with bys
hade of enuxe that he dye / he that cmote hun
Shall dye / ko: he is a mürtherer. The iullyce
ok blonde call dee hem as foone as he kyn⸗


deth hem. 5
But and vr he puſſhed hym by chaunce a
not of hate oꝛ cat at him with any maner of
thynge and not of lapinge of warte: oꝛcalt
any maner ok tone at him that he dye ther-
witz / and lawe him not: And he caſt it vvon
hrni and he dye / but was not hys enempe /
nether loughte him any harme: Then the cõ⸗
gregacian Wall iudge betwene the leer / and
the executer or bloude in toche cates. And
congregacion wall delpuer the ficer out ol
hande of the iudge of blonde / e Mall reſtoꝛe
hym agapne vnto che krauncheled cyte /


„Jolut xx b. A pnto che dethe of d he pꝛeaſte which was
anopnted with holp opie,

D But and kbe came without the bo wers

bl his preuticged citie whether he was lled

ypkthe 00 ok bloud kynde hym without d

boꝛders oF his Ere towne/ he chall flee} mur⸗

_ therey and be grltlede / be caule he chulde

haue binden in his fre towne vntll che deth

ol che hyẽ pꝛeaſte / and akter che dethe ofthe

bye pꝛeaſte / he hall retourne agarne vnto d

lande of his pollecion. And this thalbe an oꝛ⸗

Dinaunce a a la we vnto vou / amonge youre

chyldzen alter pou in all poure habptaclõs.

Wholoeuer Meith / chalbe dlapne at the

For one mouthe of witneges Foz one witnede Malt

art eng no Norge were ages: one perfoneto put him to

man to be cone deeth. Moꝛedüer ve Hail take none amends

demned. fo2 the lyte of d murtherer which is woꝛthe

todpe: Buche Matt be put to death , Alko ve

10 berge aE fart 1 8 V ig fled

toa fre cptie / that he wude come agapne ¢

Dwell in the lande bekoze the death onthe bre

preatte . Andlethat pe polute not the lande

which pe are t/£oz bloude dekpleth the lande

And the lade can none other wyle be clenced

dk the blonde that is chedtherin/ but br the

bloude of hym that chedit. Derple not ther⸗

foze the lande which ve inhabrte / and in the

myddes ol whpch J allo dwell amonge the

fplozen ol Itrael.


¶ An oꝛder foꝛ the marpage of the daughters of Ze

Taphead. One ok che trpbes map not marpe wyth a

. nocher di euery Au mutt tebe hen awpke of bys
awne trpbe.

¶ Che. xrxvi. Chapter.

Id the auncyencheades o€ § chil⸗

zen of Galaad the forne of Ma⸗

chir the lonne ol Manage ok the

unred of the chyldzen of poten

came forth andtpate before Motes andthe

prynces which were aunciẽt heades amöge

v dume yrvit che chploge ol Arael and layde. Che Lozde


Numtti.


whether he was lead Andhe chall brdethere


of selaphear,
commaunded my loꝛde to geue the lande to ;
enheret by lotte tothe cheldꝛen of Ilrael.

And then my loꝛde commaunded in the name

of the Loꝛde to geue the enberitatice or: Se⸗x Hum ani
laphead oure bꝛother onto hys daughters.

How when any of the fonnes of the fepbes

Of Arrael take thé to wrues / chen walltheir
enheritaunce be tanen fromthe enheritaũce

ok oure katherg and hall be put vnto the en⸗
herxtaunce of the trybe in which they are e

thalbe tahé trõ the lott o£ oure enheritañce.

And when the vere ol iubelpe cometh vnto

the chyidꝛẽ of crael / then ail their enheri⸗

taunce be put vnto the enheritaunce of the

trybe wherin they are / a Co Wall their en⸗
heritaunce be taken aware from the enberts

taunce of the trybe of oure fathers, 5

And Woles commaunded the chyldzen or

Ilrael at the mouth ok the Loꝛde naue large

krrbe of the chylozeno€ Joleph haue karde

well. Chis therkoze doeth the Loꝛde come
maunde } daughters ok Selaphead lapinge:

let chem be wpucs to whom they the lplte can
thynche bett/butin d kynred of the trybe ot

their father Hall they marxe / ö che enherr⸗

taunce ot the chridzen of Icrael roule not fd

trybe ta trybe. But that the chyldꝛen ok Il⸗

rael mave abrde / euery man in the enberts

taunce of the trybe of his fathers.aind cucry
daughter that podleueth anp enherptaunce
amonge the trybes of the chiſdꝛen of Icrael /
thalbe wpfe vnto one of p kynred of trybe
enter father / that the childzẽ of Alrael mage
eniope euery mG the enheritaunce ok his faz
ther / and that the enberitaunce go not front
one trybe to another: but that the trybes of
the chüͤdꝛẽ ol glrael / mape abrde euer man
in his atone enberptaunce.

And as the Loge commaunded Moles 7
euẽ lo drd the Daughters or Selaphead: Ma⸗
hela. Thirza/Magla / Milcha and oa / and
were marped vnto thelr fathers brothers
ſonnes / ol the kynred of the chyldꝛẽ of Ma⸗
nales the tonne of Joleph: and lo ther had
pe age in the trybe of the hynted
ok their father.

Chete are the cõmaundementes a lawes
which the L. ond commaunded thozot Mo⸗
tes / vnto the chyldzen ol Ftractin the feldes
ol Moab vpon Loꝛdan ne vnto Jericho.


¶ Che ende of the. it bone ot Motes,


on Deuteronomium.
¶ The fyꝛſte boke


ol Poles called Deuteronomum


Laves barne.


¶ Che. j. Chapter.


other lyde Joꝛdan in the wii⸗
Iderneſde a in the feldes by the
red lee / betwene Pharan and
= Ji Tophel/Laban / Pazeroth &
SDifahab xi dapes tourney trom Hoꝛeb vn⸗
to Cades barne by the wave that leadeth vn
to mot Seir. And it koꝛtuned p kyꝛſt aye
ok the. xi moneth inthe koꝛtieth pere ß Mo⸗
les Cyake vnto the chyldzen of Alrael ac -
coꝛdnge vnto all that the Lozde hadgeuen
him in cõmaundement vnto them after that
he had impttẽ Sehon § kynge or the Amo-
rites which dwelt in Hetbon / and Og kynge
ol Balan which dweltat Aſtaroth in Edꝛat.
On the other ſyde Joꝛdan in the lande ol
Moab / Moles begane to declare this lawe
a.gned anplaping: the Loꝛd oure God Cpake vnto vs in
5 laing: Ye haue dweitlonge ynough
: in this mount de parte therkoꝛe ¢ tale youre
fournep and go onto the hylles ol the A moꝛi⸗
tes and vnto all places nye there vnto: both
keldes / hylles and dales: and vnto the fouth
e bnto the fees lyde in the lande of Canaan /
and onto Libanon: euen vnto the greate ry⸗
uer Euphzates. Beholde / J haue ſett $ land
befoze pou:goo in therfoze a polielle the land
which the Loꝛde (ware vnto poure fathers
Abꝛaham / Itaac and Jacob / to geue onto
them and their leade after them,
And layde onto vou the fame cealon:q
am not able to beare vou my leite alone o?
che Loꝛde poure God hath multiplped you:
ſo 6 ve are this dave as the ſtarres otheauen
in nombꝛelthe Loꝛde Godot youre fathers
make vou a thoulande tymes lo many moo
as pe are / i bleſle you as he hach pꝛompled
e t. pong (lapde J J can? Im ſelte alone /
eave the conibꝛaunce / charge ¢ ſtryte pis
amonge vou: bꝛynge therfoze men of wil⸗
dome ¢ of vnderſkandynge sexpert / knowẽ
amõge youre trybes / thãt T mape mate thé
ruelãts ouer vou. And ve anlwered me and
layde: that which thou halt cpokẽ is good to
be done. And then F tone the heades of youre
trybes / men of wyldome a that were expert /
and made chem ruelars ouer vou: captapnes
ouerthoulandes a ouerhüdzedes ouerkpktle
a ouerten / a officers amonge poure trrbes.
And g charged voure gudges p lame tyme
capinge:heare youre bzethzen a ĩudge rygh⸗


reble wyldernelle as ve haue lene alonge by
e waye that leadeth onto the hylles or the
moꝛites / as the Loꝛde oure God comaun=
ded vs / and came to Cades barne. Indthere
Ilapd onto vou: Ve are come vnto the hylles
OF the Amoꝛites / which the Loꝛde oure God
doth geue vnto vs. Beholde the Loꝛde thy I
God hach tet the lande; bekoꝛe the / goo vp; Chatis ae
and conquere it as the Lorde God of thy ka- {bv commaune
chers lapith onto the: keare not / nether be dement.
dilcoꝛraged Andthen ve came vntomeeuery
one and apd: Let vs lende men bekoꝛe vs / to
learche vs out the land a to bꝛynge vs woꝛde
agapn / both what wave we Mali go vp by /
K bnto what cyties we chall come. And the
tavinge pleated me well and tone. ru men
ol poũ / or euerytrybe one And they departed
and went vp in tothe hye contrey and came
vnto the ryuer Elcoſl / and lerched it out / and
tobe of the krute of the lande in their handes
and bꝛought it doune onto vs and bought
bs worde agapne and lapdent is a good land
which the Loꝛde oure God doth geue vs.
Votwithſtandrnge pe woldenot canlente
to gogo vp / but were dyobedpent onto the che people
mouth ofthe Lode youre God emurniue veyng onthe
red in poure tente and layde: becaule (lye full Wolde nos
Londe *hateth bs /therfoze he path bought $9, pee
bs out ofthe lande ol See enten . be
into the handes of tye Antozites aud to de⸗ o hate x man
rope bs. Pow chall we goobp: Oure bze⸗Wwhe heputteih
zen haue diccosraged cure hertes tayinge: & Yim forth
irren arenen wil ane bert⸗ eth
che cyties are greate and walled euen bp to hun not of hin
heauẽ / a moꝛeduer we haue lene the lonnes grace. pla v b
ol the Enakintes there. and. xxxe be
And g ſapde onto port: dꝛeade not oz be
akraped of che: Che L. ode poute Mod which
gothe befoze you / he wall krghte koꝛ vou / ac⸗
coꝛdyng to all that he dyd onto vou in gypt
before poure eyes and in the wyldernelſe: ag
thou halt lene how that the Loꝛde thy God
bare the as a man chulde beare hys lonne /
thoꝛow out all the waye which ve haue gone
vntyll pe came onto this place. Ind pet foz
all this bange beleue the Loꝛde
poure Bod which gothe $ waye bekoꝛe vou /
to lerche pou out a place to pytche youre Exo xiſ
kentes n, in tyre by abt that ye myahee * Ero i. .
le what ware to go and ina couse by 210


lit.


They palle


„Hume pd And the Loꝛde heard the bovce of youre
Fwozd & was wroth a lware fayinge/*ehere

‘Mail not one ok thele men oF this krowarde

generacion fe 5 good lande which Aware

to geue vnto youre kathers / laue Caleb che

fonne of Jephune / he Hall leit / andto hem

wpll Fgeuc b land which he hath walked itt

etobis chyldzẽ / becaule he hath cötynuallx

kolowed 5 1.075. L phewpfe the Loꝛde was

angupe Wme fo2 poure takes fapinge: thou

allo halt not go in thither. But Fotua the

konne of Hun which andeth before the he

Mall gotn thither. 5oloe him therkozekoꝛhe

„ Hume riß. E Wall deurde  Yerptage bnto ade te be
Jolur e  ouerpoure chridze which pe larde. ſchulde be
a pꝛabe /a poure Connes which knowe nether

good noꝛ bad this dave / cher thall goointht⸗
ther «onto (hey wyll geue it /andther wall
eniope it. But as foz poututne backe take
poure iournexe into the weldernede:enen d
wape to the read lee. Chen pe ant wered and


fapde vnto me: we haue lynned agenſt the ch.
1 d5d we will go by a ruhte ace den to p


Gall B the Load dure God cömaunded vs. And
when ve had gyꝛde on euery ma his wepons
ok warre and were ready to goo by in 77

illes / d Loꝛd layde vnto me: ſaye vnto thẽ⸗

e that ven not vpe ß re krghte not / fo2 4

am not am ge pou: lett beplaged befoze
reenemies Ind whey cold yor pe wold


oul
eit er terrae fetta


Junge of ve é went prctumptuoudy vp intothe eta


Chen the Amozites which dwelt in thole
10 hylles / came out agent you and chaled you
We reais” as bces do and hewed you in sett cue bn.
wöeke gobbes to Bozma. Ind ve came agapne and wepte
wozde f. / here befoze the Loꝛde: but the Loꝛde wolde not
beleue we note heare youre vopce no: geue Pou audience.


aut aer be Ando be abode in Canesalonge ccaton,


wo Lolde,


that tpue i this
mot perlouſe


Jet


Je Chall bye meate of thé koꝛ money to eate /
and ve ſhall be water of them to money to


Btuteronomium.


drinke.sfo2 ö LozdthyGodbath bledled d in S


E geauntes dwelt therin in olde trme / a the .
Ammonites called thé Sasumtng. A people mimi
that was great / many & talle / as the ena-geaunts
Kims. Burthe L oꝛde detroped the betoze the rar
Ammonites /¢ hep cat ee out d cherdwelt ahn


ouer E


in Vun


Helbon / ahi lande. Go to and conquere and
ouoke hem to battell.


chozou Edom. Btuteronomium.
16


egynne to lende the keare and dꝛeade ol che
vpon all naetons that are vnder all poztes ol
hauen: lo that when theyheare tpeake ofthe
they hall tremible a quake to: fare of the.

Chen F Cenc medengers out ol the wider⸗
neste of che eaſte onto Sehon kynge of Hel⸗

gem. rie. bon / a woꝛdes ol peace capinge : Let me go
choꝛow thy lande. J will goal wapes alonge
F Hpehebve wave ¢ will necherturne vnto che
rightebandenoz tothe lekt. Sellmemeate
£oz money fo to eate / @ geue me danke for
monep fo todzynhe. J will go chozowe by
tote only las the chylozen ol Etat, dyd vnto
me whiche dwell in Setrandthe Moabites
vhyche dwell in ar) vntyll J be come ouer
Joꝛdan / in to the lande whiche the Loꝛde
dure God geueth vs.

But Sehon the kynge of elbon wolde
not let vs pate byhim / kor 5 Loꝛde tip God
hadhardened his Cpzite and made his herte
cough becauſe he wold delpuer him in to typ
handes as it is come to-patte this dape.

Andthe Lozde fayde nto me: beholde J

Diatthy Shane begonne to let Sehon a his lande“ bẽ⸗

muntmEnts foze the:go to a conquere /p thou mapſt pol⸗

Glellehis iande.a hen both Schon andall his

people came out agett vs bntobattell at Ja

Oyherwpte basa. Andthe L onde let him before vs / a we

imote hym and his fonnes a all bys people.

And we tone al his cities the fame cealon

and deſtroped all the cities with men / wemẽ

and chyldzen g let nothinge remarne / laue d

catell only we caught onto oure ſelueg ¢ the

Cpople of the cites which we tone / krõ Troer

pon the bzynke ok che rruer ok Arnon / and

che citie inthe rruer / vnto alaad there was

not one citye to ſtronge koꝛ vs. Che Love

ure God delpuered all vnto vs: only onto $

lande or the chplozen ol Ammon pe came not

noz onto all the colteok d riuer Jabock noz

vnto ß cities in dmolitaxnes / nod vnto what
focuerthe Loꝛde oure God koꝛbade vs.

A reherlall ok t. es that chaunted from the vpe
222 eg ene h lothe Jad
tucion of Jolue in Holes Reade,

© Che. il. Chapter.
en we turned a wẽt vp the ware
co Balan. And Og $ bing ot Ba
tan came out agenſt vs: bothe he ¢
N all his people to battel at Ediat.
And the Loꝛde larde onto me: keare him not
£077 haue deliueredhim g alhis people ahis
land in to thy bande thou thalt deale whim
as thou dealedtt w Dehon kynge okß Amo⸗
rites which dwelt at Helbon. And co F Lozde
oure God delpueredmto oure handes / Dg
altoche Ringe of Balan albis kolcke. And
we rmote him ontyll noughte was lekt him.

And we tobe all his cities
(fo? chere was not a citie wh


e tame ceacon
we tone not


Ixix.
krõ then) euen. it. ccoꝛe cities / al the tenis ol
Argob / the kyngdome of Og in Batan. All
thele cities were made ſtronge hve wales . oto bot,
gates ¢ barred / belpde vnwalled tovonesa faves and bye
Freate meanpe. And we vtterly deſtroyed thẽ lagen.
as we played with Spehon lunge of Pelbon
Dainging to nought als. cities Wen / wenne
and childzen. Butt all the catell a the ſpople
ok the cities we caughte kor oute lelues. ag
And thus wetoke § fame ceaton / p lande
out ok Phande of two kynges of ß Amozites
onthe other tyde Joꝛdan / krom the ryuer ol
Amon onto mol Hernion (which Herd ß
Sidons call Sirion / but the Amozites call
it Senpz hal p cities inß plapne a al Galand
Kall Balanvnto Dalecha & d dꝛai/ cities ol
the kyngdome ol Dg in Walan. Foꝛ. only Og
knge of Balan remapned of the remnaũt ol
p geaunteg: beholde / his yꝛõ bed is yet at Na
bal amonge the childzẽ ol A mmö ix. cuby⸗
tes longe d. if cubiteß bzode / ok ß cubtteg ol
a m. And when we had conquered this lade
the lame tynie / J gaue from Aroer which ig
vpon the riuer of Arnõ /K halke mofit Calad
Ethe cities therorbnto the Rubenites / a Ga
dites. and the reſt of Galaad a all Balan the
e of Og / J gaue vnto 6 halle trybe
of Wanalle: all the region of Argob with al /
Balan was called d lande of geauntes Jalr
P tonne ok Manadle tone al z regid ora tgob
bnto ö coltes of Gelurt a Maachatigcalled C
chem after bis owne name⸗Balan Dauoth . Chae in tie
Jar vnto this dape. and igauebalkechalaad made an
duo Wachir Andonto Rub a had gaue wee Jan.
rd Ealaad vnto the ryuer of Arnon d halke
the valey e the colte / eu onto the ryuer Ja⸗
bock which is the bo:derok the chpldzen of
Ammon / ano the keldes and Jordan with
che colte / krom Ceneroth euẽ vntothe fee in
the kelde which is p kalt lee vnder d ſpeinges . Some the
Of Pbalgah ealtwarde. Dplt ote. O
And comaunded you the tame tyme (ve tromuceety nes
Auben ¢@ad) taping che ore your Gd ges de
bath geuen pou this lande coentope it:ſe that tome wytt that
pve go hameſed bekoze youre bꝛethzen ö chil⸗ ube the mame
deen oF Alrael all pare men oF ware amöge or atowne,
PoU.F oure wiues only poure childze Epoure
catell (fo: J wote that pe haue moch catcll)
wall abpde in your cittes which z haue geuẽ
you / vntyl Loꝛde haue geuẽ relt bnto pour
beethzen as well as onto you A vntyll they
allo haue cõquered 8 lande which the Love
poure God hath geuen chem beponde J0z⸗
dan: and then returne agapne euer man
vnto his polletion which haue geuen vou.
And J warned Folua 8 tametpme tapig: 7
thvne eves haue ſene all that the Loꝛde poure
God hath done nto thele two hyuges / euen
fo the Loꝛde wyll do vnto all kynfdomes
whither thou goelt.Feare bent i) Pare
b. u


ue poure God he it is that fyahteth toꝛ vou.
And beloughte the Lozde the Came tyme
fayinge: O loꝛde God thou halt begonne
to ſbewe thy ſeruaunte thy greatnente a the
mightie hande / koꝛ chere is no God in heauẽ
no in erth that can do after thy woꝛkes a at⸗
ter thy power: let me go ouer and le the good
lande chat is beponde Joꝛdan / that goodly
hye contre and Libanß. But the Loꝛde was
angrie wich me koꝛ poure fakes a wolde not
eare me / but layed vnto me / be content / and
alte hencekoꝛth no moare vnto me ok this
Oumer xxuſt e matter.“ Get the bpinto the toppe of Phal⸗
Dent früh gay g Tete by ching eves welt (noch / Couth
and eaſte / and beholde it with thyne epes koꝛ
thou chalt not go ouerthis Jozdan. Moze⸗
ouer charge Jolua and courage him a boing
him. Foz he tall go duer befoze his people /
che Mall deurde the lande which thou Malt
febnto them. And lo we above in the balepe
ethpheoꝛ. 8
dan hen e OF. ae bptegtnt heede vnto the


lawe / that they chulde not take awape oz adde any
a e map not be woꝛchypped ioe pet
müde.


eli. C pipes ot refuge.
2 Ich fl chapter.
Ndnowherkenzcrael vnto the oꝛ⸗
dinaunces g lawes which J teache
vou /foz todo them chat pe mape
jpue ¢ go 15 Ru 5 ene
ich the L oꝛde God ol youre fathers ge⸗
bpb dh 2—5 5 hall putnothinge vnkothe
takeatunpe wozde which J comniaunde pou tether do
therkro r o ought therkrom / that ve mape kepe the com⸗
Judges thench mäundmetes o€ the Loꝛde poure God which
aht welſer dor Feommaundepou. Paine eres haus fene
zhen is chewed what the Lode pd vnto Baal Peoꝛ: Foz all
vom the kerxp the men that kolowed Baal eo; /the Loꝛde
turclas in Wen youre God hath deltroyed fs amonge vou.
ps ner Wut ve that claue onto che ode poure God
ae ateatpue euerp one of pou this dave 2ehol-
A pape ane mp beenden
, loche as che Hovde my e
Pla xvit · d. that ye chude do eur lo in the lande whether
ve go to pocledle it. :
epe them therfoze anddo them“ fo2 that
is youre wildome and onderftandynge inthe
fighte or che nacrons: which when they haue
herde all thece oꝛdpnaunces / wall faye: O
what a wyle and önderltondynge people is
thre greate nacron. Foz what nacp on is lo
28 greate thathach Goddes fonye onto hymas
the Lode dure God is nye onto vs in all
thinges / when we call onto him: Ye / E what
nacpon is to greate that hath ozdinaunces
and iawes fo ryghtecule / as all thys lawe
wenge fett befoze pou this dave.

Cake heve to thy telte therfore only a kepe
thy Coulediligentip / that thou kozget not the
hinges which thyneepes haue lene / e that
they departe not out of tyne harte / all the


Dtuteronomium.


andthr Connes lonnes. Che dave that z tove pour iy
befoze the Loꝛde youre God in Hozeb / when
he lapde vnto me / gether me the people toge⸗
ther / that J may make thé heave my woꝛdes
that they mape lerne to keare me as longe
as they lyue vpõ the erth and that they maxe
teache their chyldzen: pe came and fone allo
onder the hril and the hllburnt wich kire:
euen vnto the myddes of heauen and there atrogeins
was darchnede/clomdes and mpl. And the to thar
Lope Ipanke vnto vou out ot che Epze and pe ogden
herbe the vopce of che wosdes bur tawe no pemrn
vmage / ſaue herde a voyce only. 5
And he declared nto vou his couenaunt /
which he commaunded pou to do euen x. ver⸗
tes a wꝛote thE in two tables of tone. and d
L ozde cömaunded me p lame ceats toteache ©
pou oꝛdynaunces a lawes / to to do them in
che lande whecher pe go to pollelett.
Cake hede vnto poure lelues dyligently
as pertapnpnge ‘onto youre foules /foz ve
faweno maner of pmage the dave when the
Loꝛde fpake vnto pou in Hozeb out of d tire
iett pe marre youre lelues & make vou grauẽ
pmages after what loeuer linenelle it be:
whether after the likenes ol man oꝛ womã
oꝛ anp maner beaſt that is on che erth 02 ot
any maner feathered koule that fetch in
apie / oꝛ oł any maner woꝛmẽ that cre
on the cttl oz of any maner kych that is in
water beneth $ erth: Ye and — — Ipfte
vp thyne eves vnto heuen / when thou leylt
che lonne and the mone and che ſtarres and
what ſoeuer is contapned in heauẽ / nuldeſt
be delceenued and ſbuldeſt bowe thp lelke onto
them and lerue the thinges which the Loꝛde
thy Godhath dpſtributed vnto all nacyons
— aro bough
ozthe Lozdetoke vou and bzoughte vou 5, yt
ut ofthe” pron Eomnace of eatpte tobebn-tomurs
to him a people of enheritaũce / as it is come dera
to pale this dape. Foztyermoare/the L ode fe
wat angrpe zw me koz poure lakes F cware / fund
that A chulde not go ouer Jordan and that g. an
J quilvenot go nto that good lande / which Jessmnl
the Loꝛde thy God geueth d to enheritaũce.
Foꝛ I mut dye in this lande / a Hall not go
duer Joꝛdan. But pe Hall go ouer and con⸗
were that good lande. an)
jehene re lelues therkoꝛe / B
ve koꝛgett not che appoyntment ol the Loꝛde D
vourechod which he made with vou / a that ve corn
male you nograuen pmage ot what focuser pre,
ithe thatthe Lowe thy God hath karbidden t,t spel
the, Foz the Loꝛde thy Godisa‘contuminge a
fpze/anda geloule God. kpit.
k after thou halt gotten chydzen and 3-6 c
chptozeng chyldzen and hat dwelt lunge in d tate
lande / pe cal mare poure lelues h medpiile


3 2
daxpes ob thylpfe: but teach them thy fonnes Cea | \


boat can F.


4
Pieteptes
n doch ng grauen pages alter the linnene ol what lo
en ant Sueretbe ant all wage wenne tn ehe
nt? (+ Fyayte of che ame thy @ob/to prouokebim
lch gee J call heauen and eich to reo de vnto pou
prcautedetpis bape / that ve Mall choꝛtelp pertth fro of
nul luer the lande whether pe go ouer Joꝛdan to pol⸗
pany bun fede tt:pe thal not prologe youre ayes therin
“but ball Hoztly be dettroyen. Ind the Loe
thall hater vou amonge naciõs /a ve halbe
lefte ewe in nöbꝛe amoͤgeß people whether
the Loꝛde thal bzynge vou: and there pe Mat
lerue goddes which are the woꝛkes of mans
hande / woda ſtone which nether te noꝛ heare
nos eate noꝛ (mell. Meuerthelater ve tall
kene the Loꝛde poure God euen there / and
fhal Fpnde him pr thou (che him wall thyne
herte and with all thy loule. In thy trybu⸗


lacpon and when all thele thinges are come h.


bpon the / euen in the later da yes / thou ſhalt
turne vnto the Lozde thy God / and walt
herken vnto his bopce. Foz the Loꝛde thy
God is a pitietull Godthe wll not koꝛſake ß
nether deltroye p / noꝛ koꝛget $ apoyntemẽt
made wihy fathers which he lware onto thé,
Foz athe F pꝛape the of the dayes that are
pat which were befoze the / lence the dave z
God created man vpon the erth and from the
one lyde of heauen onto the other whether
anythinge bath bene lyke vnto thys greate
thinge oz whether any foche thige hach bene
herde as it is / P a naciõ hath heard y voxce ol
God ſpeakingẽ out ot fire as thou halt herde
and pet ipued? ether whether God allaped to
go and tante him a people From amonge na⸗
pong / thoꝛow teniptacions and ĩygnes and
wondꝛes a thozow warre ¢ with a myghtye
l. xxv d hande anda * (tretched out arme and wpth
myghtve terreble fyghtes / acoꝛdynge vnto
all chatthe Loꝛde poure God dyd vnto vou
in Egipte befoze youre eyes.

Unto the it was Mewen/Hthoumpabtert
knowe / how that the Lode he is God and x
inet. athere is none but he. Out ol heauen he
F made che heare his voce to nourter che / and
pon erth he che wed the his greate ke / and
chou heardeſt his woꝛdes out ol ß fpꝛe. And
becaule be loued thy fathers / therfore he
chole their feedatter them and bꝛoughte the
out with his pꝛelence and with his myghtve
c. power ok? Egipte:to thꝛuſt outnactos grea
ter a myghtiẽr then thou befoze p / to bꝛinge
the in ¢ to geue ß their lande to enheritaũce:

88 it is come to palle this dare.
Underſtande therkoꝛe this dave and turne
itto chrne herte / that the Loꝛde he is God in
heauen aboue and vpon the erth beneth there
Isto moo:kepe therfoze his oꝛdpnaunces g
his cõmaundmentes which J cömaunde the
this dape / chat it maye go wen with the a W
chr chrñdꝛen alter the a chat thou mayſt pꝛo⸗


SDtuteronomium.


longe thy daes byon Herth which the Loꝛde
thy God geueth the thylpke longe.
fn 200 ede lol. 5 on} a

Jordan towarde the lonne ryrynge / p ye pume.zerv.bs
hub lee thither which had hiptleninpneygh err set.
boure vnwares and hated hym not in tyme went. ix. a.


_ patk ¢therfoze ſhulde lee vnto one of d lame


cities a lyue: Besevin the wildernelle euẽ in
the plapne contre amonge the Rubenttes : &
Ramoth in Galaadamonge the Gaddites¢
Solan nBalan amonge the Manatites.

This is the lawe which Moles let before
the chplogen ot Ilrael / andthete are the wit:
heftes ozdinatices ¢ ſtatutes which Moles
tolde the chylozen oF Flrael after they came
out ok Egipte / on the other lyde Joꝛdan in d
balep betyde Beth Pheoz in the lande ol Se
on hinge or che Amozites which dwelt at
Helbon / wuõ Moles a the chyldꝛẽ of Alrael 8
lmote alter they were come out of cg ipte / dum. xxl. g.
Econquered his lande and the lande or Dey
hinge of Balan il. hynges or the Amoꝛites
onthe other fyde Joꝛdan towarde the fonne
rylpnge: from urg open the banche of the
rpuer Ar non / vnto Mount Spon which ig
called Hermõ andall the feldes on the other
ryde J ozdan eaſtwarde: euen vnto the tee in
the kelde vnder the lpꝛinges of Phalgah.
¶ Che. x. cummaundtmentes of the lawe. No Image
mape be made.

¶ Che. v. Chapter.
Id Moles called onto en lan ty
fayedbonto them: Heare Zfracl the
oꝛdynaunces and lawes which 3
Cpeke in thine eares this dave and
them and take hede that ve do te Che,
Lopde oure God made an appoyntmet with Erodt xi a u
bein Hozeb. Ihe Loꝛde made not this böde
with ouve fathers / but with vs: we are they /
which are all here a lyue this dave. Che
Loꝛde talned with vou; kace to face in chen. Fate to face
mount out of the Fyre And A Kode betwene cet
the Londe and vou che fame krme / to Hebe wane (om?
vou the ſapinge ofthe Loꝛde. Foꝛ pe were tape, wah to
akraped oF che kyꝛe and therfoze went not bp manyéet wog
intotbe mount andhefaped Jam che amen ie anne
thy Gon which beought p out of the lande ok be denped but
Caipte dhoule of bondage. Thou Malt haue that it was gov
therkoꝛe none other goddes in my pꝛelence.
Chou Malt make the no grauen Jmage
ok anpmaner lpnenelle p is in heauẽ abouc
oꝛ in erth benethe / oz in d water benethe the
exth . Chou chalt necher bowethplelke onto mages
thE no lerue them / ko; Iche L ode thy cod /
ama geloufesod/bilttinge the wyckedneſle
ofthe fathers bpon the chyldꝛen / euen in the
chrꝛde and fourth generaclon / amonge them
that hate me:and ſhewe mercye vpon thou⸗
landes amonge them that loue me and kepe
m commaundmentes. a
ou


Pꝛetep


Chou halt not take the name of d Loꝛde
Erod. ira. thy God in wapne:foz the L ode wil not holde
him giltlelle / chat taketh hie name in vayne.

rod. nb. Ape the Baboth dave that chou lanctt⸗ 1

ent he. . flett/as the Tower Karbe rammen

ded che. Sopre daves thou Malt jaboure ada
all p thou halt to do / but the leuẽth dave is &
Saboth ok the L oꝛde thy Sodithou walt do
no maner woꝛke / netherthou noꝛ thy lonne
noꝛ thy daughter no thyleruaunte noꝛ thy
mapde noꝛ chrne ore noz thyne alle noꝛ any
ok chr caten no the ſtraunger that is within
thy ebtpe / that thy ceruaunte and thy mayor
mape reſt as wei as thou. Andremembze
that thou waſt a feruaunte in the lande ol
Sere ence u ane ese
e gut thence
Vll tern ogretched out arme. Foz which caule the
pain 5 on commaunded the to kepe the
al ave. :

ronrt * Ponoure thy father and thy mother / as ic

Buthe.rvoke ehesLozDehp Goohaty commaunded Hesthac Ty rowepercn memorye cep muse wwrpte it on

debe. Won nian Auch che ane Which Seltene outes, And teachest

ma e go wel on / vnto their chriderne. 8
che öde the Sodgeueth the. 5 © Che. vi. Chapter.

Chou chalt not dee.

Chou ſhalt not bꝛeane wedlocke.

Chou chalt not ſteale. 8

chr chalt 1 kalle witnede
agent tpn oure, 52

5 Chen welt not lutte after thy nergh⸗

bouresinpfe:thou chalt not cauet ihynergh⸗
bourg houle / ledde / ſeruaunte / marde / ore /
alle 107 ought that is chrnerghboures.
Chele wordes thel onde fpakie 71 votes
multitude ind mount out o the kyꝛe / cloude
and darchnefle / with a loude voyce and added
nomoare therto/and wꝛote them in. il tables
ol fone and delruered them vnto me.

C. But as lone as pe. herde the voyce out of
the darcknelle and lawe the bell bürne with
tze / ve came vnto me all the heedes of poure
tribes and youre elders a pe lapde beholde /
ee

atx. t. is greatneſſe / a
oe fucot te kyꝛe and we haue tene this dare d th
Godmape talke with a man ard he pet ipue,
Ind now wherkoze wude we dye chat his
ate Epze chulde contume vs: Ar we chulde
fare che voyce ok the Lode oüre God any Celt
moare / we ſhulde dye. Foz what is any ſlech
that he chulde heare d vopce ot the lyuynge
D God tpeahynge out of the fyze as we haue
eee
e Loꝛde out
br allcherche Loꝛde oure God layeth vnto thers Abzaham / lac and gacob to geue
the / and we will heare it and doit.
And the Lomdehearde che vopce ol youre


Loꝛde poure God hath commiaunded pou /
that ve mae lrue andthat it mave go well
with pots and that ve mare pꝛolonge voure
paves in che land tobiche pe Mall pollele.


Wath ue


choum


the / a lande that fot
so Geared
onlpand ti


e lawe mutt be ernelllx pepntedinthete har⸗


ele ate the commaundementes / %
piopbinaunces and lawes which the


el /F Lande thy Godis Tode
Spat eppne ate oat bp conte and
al empohe. And chete wosbes htc 05
maunde the this dape / Walbe in thine herte ton type
w an thy chplozen/andtbat


and


trees which thou plantedeſt not / a whẽ thou
batt cate and arte ful: Chen beware lett chou
forget the Loꝛde which bꝛoughte the oute of
che lande of Egipte h houle ol bondage. But

klare the Lozoe thy Godand kerue hem / and
ote benelh. were by his 5 walcke not
.f. chap· after ſtraunge goddes or ede Goddes ok the
ted. nactons whiche are aboute vou. Foz ß Lose
route Toke God is a "geloule God among pou leſtß
rene ‘wath of the oꝛde thy God ware whote bps
reafoe this the and deſtrope the from the erth. ey

. YeWallnottempte the Loꝛde youre God
7 Hated. ag pe dydat? Mala. But te that ve kepe the


Tawes Stuteronomium.


Tens,
(pon on thé, Allo thou Malt inate no marla⸗

ges Wtheẽ / nethergeue the daughter onto his

konne noꝛ take hes daughter vnto thy tonne.

For they wyll make poure formes departe

fro nw and feruc ſtraunge Goddes / andthen

will the weath oF the Loꝛde ware whote vpõ

pou and deſtrore you ſpoztelp.

& But thus ve chall deale wich thein:ouer⸗
chꝛowetheir alters / bzeake doune their py⸗

lert cut dorme their groues and burne their

Pages with kpꝛe. FToꝛ thou art an holy na⸗

Gon onto the Lozdethy God the Loꝛde thy

Sodhath cholen the to be a ſeuerall peopic

vntd him elke of allnactons that are bponß

sith Gas not becaute of the nuultitude or gsops aw
zou aboucallnactons/6 the Lozde had luſt gooduelle r us


vnto vou and chole vou. Foz pe were kewelt awne truce


bach pout


jen thou ſhalt

faye onto thy lonne: we were bondmen vnto
bape in Egipte / but the Lone brought

out ol Egipte with a mightte hande. And

the Lose ſhewedlygnes and wondzes both
greate and euell vpon Egipte / 0 i

‘bpon all his houtholde / befoze oureepes d
broughte bs kromthence: to bꝛynge vs in and
eg lande which helwarẽ vnto oure
And therkoꝛe cõmaunded vs to do

All thele oꝛdinaunces ¢ foꝛ to keare d Loꝛde

‘oute God / lo oure welth alwayes and that

. he mygyt laue vs / as it is come to patte this
dentwardaxe. Mozeouer it chalbe “ righteoulnes
vane it Ft onto bs before p Node oure God be we tale


10 hede to kepe all thele commaundmentes as
been, eat commaundedbs,


b Wp tales CéChegtraclites mapmahe no counter point
.


en adhath b
Hense


nd when 5 L. God hath bought
dic teatbe lan ebe e deren
Greate a goodly cities which thou .
dedſt not / a Sauces a ok all maner goodes


wordes when petpake vnto me /a he tayde which chou kplledeſtnot / and wellen dygged


onto me: haue herde s vorce of che woꝛdes wh


not / a brnes ¢ olpue
ich thou dyggedeſt not / a ben Bias


Pharao and


ol alr nactons. But becaulke the L. ozde loued enunth hanes
Pou & becautehe wolde kepe che othe which worse.
he had twozne vnto poure fathers / therfoze
he bꝛought vou out ofegipte with a mighue
bande anddelluered pou out o€ the houle ol
bondage: euen from the bande ol Pharao /
be fore / hat the A.
nderſtalde therkoze / e Lozde thy
Godhe is God a Teme God / which kepeth
popntment and mercyunto the that lour him
and kepe his commaundmentes / euen tho⸗
Yowe outa thoulande genevacpons and re⸗
wardeth the that batehim™ betoze Nis kae . werosc Hise,
lothache baingech them tonoughte/and wil ce in pis preter
not dekerre p tyme vnto him that hateth hin ceo) le he lo⸗
but wyll rewatde him befoze is face. Meye ech on.
therfoze che commaundmentes / oꝛdinarm⸗
cet and lawes which J commaunde pou this
dape / chat ve dathem.
It ve Mall bethen vnto thele lawes ¢ that
oblerue and dothem / then Mall the Loꝛdethy
Soß hepe popntment with the andthe mercy
uhich he {ware onto thy fathers a wyll loue
the / bleſſe the and multiplie the:he will blelle
the krute of thy wõbe a the lrute of thy leide
ch coꝛne / thy wyne athyne ole / che krute ol
thyne oren ¢ p ockes okthy chepe in dlandr
Which helware vnto thy fathers togeuethe.


Thou ſhalt be blelfed aboue ai nactos there ©


ſhalbe nether man nos woman bnérutefull

amonge vou / noꝛ anything vnkrutekul and

gevoure catelt. Mopeouer che Lozde wll Gro. riß. bi
turne fromthe all maner inkirmytyes and

will put none or ß euell dyleaſes ot gipte Gxod ax. a.

(whiche thou kinowelt) vpon the / but wyll

lende them vpon them that hate the.

FChou chalt bꝛinge tonought all nacions

which the Loꝛde thy God delxuerethß / chrne

exe wall haue no pitie bponthé nether malt

chou lerue chetr Goddes / toz that Walbe thy

decave. FE chou Malt faye in thyne bere

thefenactis ave moo than J how can J catt

thẽ out! Feare n

07


Pre


DOpat hornets
tes are lone
Exodxxiij. d.


cherto/


5 Deuteronomum. f fovinge outbory x
124 70
1. Betti.


te be delkroped. chen bledethe 070 ko the good land which
e Loth Hod he hath geuen,


a mrghepe tempett


be by


peel wos hes CMotes putteth the Ilrgelites in remembsaunce


t to nou:


ne oF c
otk
at


858 00 ted Dociieptes that ehep hade the xl
720 cou thyn dere ub her coevemn eee wier e. :


bet that bp
dort thé ot
neawue
ſerenghe ¢ not
helped of God J
* Dt 0 2%


they call want
cheng that al
nothpng thi od


2225 797 7 1
eth fo
in all thrnges good lande / a


t e. viii. Chapter.
e
comimaunde the

tinepe for to do chem / that ve m


4,
Ae


winderttande therfoze n
s a man nourtereth bis


„


d Tawes Deuterodnomium.


i deſtrope them and be call ſub⸗
bur hem betete amb hou bakcakth


lxxij
voux CHEF tone the two tables q cae them Ero. xxx. bo
and bernge then’ but and brrngechem mee lde
bue 10 . N bude eus aud. Ful de
noughte quechelpas’ 9 Kode bath fared as atthe ran femme n bares g. r. nyghécs g. F.
tonoughte q netherate baead no wenne mercure


önto the.

i ‘Sypeakenot in thrne ert ‘akterthat the youre lynnes which ve had Ipnned indo:

i Tore he ood hath catkehers ost before ? wickedly in che krght 6 b Laden eRe

u favinge:toz mp nightedulnes the Lzdehath finge him. For g was äkraped of the wiach g

5. tme into ported hrs lande, Jar, fearinede wherwith the Lop was angrie w
butfoz the wichednetic of thete naerons the Poul euen for to haue deckroped vou. Bult the
Los doth cat thẽ out befoze p. It is not tog Loꝛde herde my petycpon at that tyme alto,
chriigbtedulnes lake a righthertthat thou Che Loꝛde was very angrye with Aaron
gock to podle their land: But partelp for} alto / eiten foz to haue deürorcdhim: But
tolchennetie of thele nactg / Lord ihr God made interce mori foz Taton altos lame tynie
doch calt thé out Lefoze the / partip to per: Andy coke pourefynne / the kalte whpch ve
fozme that whych the Lope thy Gon ware had made a burnt him tb Fyre a Maped hun
vnto thp fathers /A bꝛaham/ Ataac e Jacob. grounde him a good / euẽ onto fmal duk. And
8 Anderſtand thertoze that it is not Coz thy J caſt the duſt cheror in to che bzohe that del⸗

tighteoutnes kalte b the Kunde tr Goddoty Lende out oeche mounte Aiko ae Shaberah op namesct
geue the this gordlandto potlette it kor thou a at alab g at the fepulchas or lult ve ana. xl.
arta ſitenecked people. Remẽbꝛe forget gredthe Londe / pee and when the Loꝛde tent
not how thou pꝛouobedeſt e Lozde thy God pou from Cades Barne ſapinge: go bp eco:
S
Ne e 0 outh ofthe Lozde oute dßod
onto this place /pebaucrebelledagenttye gnetherbeleucobimnoz herkened vntohis


a en d. Node. Allo in Boze veangredthe Lozde popce. chus peau bene difobedtet onto d


ss to that the Loꝛde was wꝛoth with vou / euen L ozd / tence the daye that nne we pou,
to haue deſtroped pou / alter was gone And J kel betoze the Londe. xl dapes and Lerne to
bp fiito themount/to Fett che tables of Hone M. mightes whlche Nlape chere kor the K orde pape.
the tables ok appoyntment which the Loꝛde wa mynded to haute deſtroped vou. But
made with you. And J abode in che hyll. rl made intercemon onto the x oꝛde g layer. G xod. xx rng
daes an Flanightes Ghetherate bread nos I. dide God / deſtrope not thy people ethyne
p, deanhetwater.* Andthe Ronde delrueredme enheritaunce whrih thou bac deipuered
two tables of ſtone watt with the kpngerol choꝛow chr greatnede and whpch thou halt
Sod and in them was accozdenge to alt the bꝛought out or Egipte with a mighkie hand.
wozbeß whic 8 2 Remebzethr teruauntes Abzahs /Flaac g
mount out of the Epzeinthe dave when the Jacob a lone not bnto the ctoburneſſe ok this
people were gathered together. peple noz vnto their wickednedee g ſinne:leſt
And when the. rl. dapes g. . nyghtes were ihẽ lande whence thou unte the Capes
ended the Lozdegauetne the two tables OF Becaule the Lorde twas notable to bzynge
fone the tables ok theteſtament /andfapde chem in to the lande which be promered them
ri. d. Onto me. x upp / and get the doune quxckelx and becaule he hated thé / therkoꝛe he carred
krom hence / Foz thy people whych thou halt chem out todettrope them inthe wiſdemelle.
byoughte out of Egipte / haue marred them Mozeouer they are thy people and thyne ene
kelues. Cher are turned attonce out or the ßerptaunce / whrche thou bꝛoughteſt out
wape / whyche J commaundedthem / a haue with thy myghtxe power and wyth ihr frets
eee aie tete ched out arne.
the Lozve ſpake vnto mi e: 1 Pome
_ Speapie born tacit i. tifeneche people) C.Aseptuctenot imeot Whe Fournee of te 3,
terme alone that J mare deRrope chem and to geuehesdetoche kate,
put out the name of chem krompnderheauẽ / be. x. chapter.
and g will make of che a naciõ both greater NG lame ceatonp Lord Catde vnto
Sno thanther. mes hewe the cmotables of tone Erd. rr ga
And turned awaye and came doune kr irke vntothe tps a come vp vnto A
che hyll and the hyll burnt with kire) e had ß me in tothe mount emake the an
two tables ofthe appoyntmẽt inmr handes Arche pf were will werte th $ cabies /d
And when J lolted ¢fawe that pe had tynned woꝛdes ß were 15 kirſt tables which thou
agent che Horde youre God a had made vou bzazelt /a chou walt put che f arcke. Ind
acalfe of metal and had turned attonceout made anatche oklethi wood a hewed two
olthe ware whiche p Loßde had coͤmaunded bles ann te


ts
08
ene


Matt. rij. d.


Jolut rh.


to packe this
the koꝛelkynn


f ungerg poure
Chen tale feave


$ done
doch the for the Moped chrne eres


Senne of Goby
bath made d ag fet of m


gbtour vg EE


ll Sy


ace


meant
er ze go ter


pe / f ye loue the L onde poute Gon ¢ ferue
ich all erte and wich all poure
iaehenhe nl gene rape duke Bout g
ye rape
october


and Lawes


pgotuesin, ‘Which ave both greater emt


tate and fyll thy celke. But beware that
poure hertes de ceaue vou not that ve turne
Alpde and betue ſtraunge Soddes ¢ woꝛchrp
¢/@ the the wrath ot che Loꝛde ware whote
bpon pou a ſhutt vp the heauen that there be
no rapne and d voure lande veld not her krute
andthat ve perpty gutekly trom of the good
lande which the Lozde geueth vou.

C Put bp thertoꝛe thele my woꝛdes in youre
hertes and in youre koules / K hende the fo2 a
lygne onto youre handes / and let them be as
papers of remébzaunce betwene poure eres
and* teach them youre chüldꝛen: lo that thou
talte ot the when thou fyttett in thine boute
and when thou walkeſt by the wape / a when
thou lpeſt doune a when thou ryleſt vp pee a
wypte thé vpon the dozepoſtes ol thine houle
and vpd thy gates chat voure dapes map be
multiplped and the dapes ok poute chyldzen
vpon the erth whych the Londe cware vnto
poure katherg to geue them / as longe as the
Daves ok heauen lal vpon the erth. Foz yr ve

l kepe all thele cõmaundementes which
cOmaund vou / lo that pe do thẽ and loue ß
Loꝛde poure God and walke in alhis waves
g cleaue vnto him. Chen will the Loꝛde caſt
but all thete nactons q pe hall con te toe
er the pour
felucs.*Aipplaces where onptoles of voure
Fete ſhaltreade / halbe poures euẽ krõ $ wyl⸗
dernelle ¢ krõ Libanõ ¢ trõ d rxuer Cuphza-
tes / euẽ vnto the vttemolt fee all xoure co⸗
Ses be. There chall no man be able to ſtande
before poll: h Loꝛde youre God wall caſt the
keare a dꝛeade ol you bpd all landes whether
ve chall come / as he bath tayde vnto vou,
2 1 Beholde J (et before pouthts dave / a


dat. rr. pleqynge and a cutter bieaynge : pr that ve


herken vnto the comaundmentes of 5 Lozde
poure God which J cõmaunde pou this dae
Anda cure: pt ve wyll not herken bnto the
gommaundmentes of the Loꝛde youre God:


Bod geueth y

daelſcheun. Cake

all the commaundmentes

Ilett betoꝛe vou this dae.

Ta dolatrpe mua the J neigte de dropt ander tro


Deuteronomium.


7. 4.7 42
lkxxiij⸗
Chey mut cate no bloude. Chey muſt onelp do that
thyng whech God commaundeth.

¶ Che. rij. Chapter.
Pele are the oꝛdynaunces d laweg d
whypch ve Mall oblerue todointhe
Iſtande which § Loꝛde God of thy ka⸗
chers geueth z to polſeſſe it / as loge


as pe Ipuc Opa the exth * He that pe deltroßc . deut. vn.


all places where ß nacions which ve cõquere
ferue their Goddes / oon hye mountaynes a
on hye hilles a vnder euerp grene tree. Pucr
thꝛowe their alters andbzeake their pplers
e burne their there with five a hew downe
the ymages of their Goddes / and bꝛynge the
nanies of them to noughte out ofthat place.
de fo vnto the Loꝛde youre God

ut ye chall enguere the place which p Loꝛde
voure God hall haue cholen out or all youre
trybes to put bps name there and there to
Dwell, And“ thyther thou Malt come / and


chpther pe wall bynge poure buunttäcrp⸗ an ro.


köces and poure offerynges youre tithes and
heueolerynges of youre handes / youre vo⸗
wes and krewillofferynges a the kyꝛlt bone
ok youre oxen and ot voure chepe. And there
ve Mall eate before the l oꝛde pouredsod/and
ve hall retople in all p ve lape youre handeg
on / both ve and poure houcholdeg / becaule >
Lozochr Cod hath bleed the.
ben ech wall do after nothpnge that we do
good in hes awne eres. Foz pe are not bet
come to reſt noꝛ onto the enheritaũce whych
the Loꝛde voute God geueth pou, But ye
fall go ouer Jordan and dwell in the lande
which e L ode pourewodgeuctl vdu to en⸗
heret a he —＋ — vou ꝛeſt FH al poure ene.
mies rounde abouke g ve thaldwel in tafetie
Therkoꝛe when the Loꝛde poure God hath
tholen a place tomane his name dwellthere
thyther ve Mall bꝛynge all that J conima⸗
unde vou / youre burntlacrylices ¢ youre of:
keringes / youre thithes / a the heueolkeringes
ol pourebandes and all poure Godly vowes
ich ze vowe vnto the Loꝛde. And pe Malt
retople befoze the Loꝛde poure God / both ye
voure fonnes a voure daughters / poure ler⸗
uauntes and pouremapdes and the Leute
p is within youre gates * koꝛ he hath nether
parte noz enheritaunce with vou.


olkerynges in what loeuer place thou leplt:
but in the place whych the Loꝛde khall haue
cholen amonge one ol thy trybes / there thou
Walt oller chy burntolferpngeg e there thou
Malt do al thatz commatinde che. Mot wich⸗
ſtandynge chou mark hy and eate fleche in
All chycbtyes / what loeuerthyloule lulteth
alter / accosbyng tothe bleüynge of ß Mozne
thy God whyd he hath eh en the


bncleane


is dape / euery man what lemeth hym Heut xi. e.


. Oeut. x. l.
Cale hede that thou offer not ty burnt


00 blonde but poure te vponche eich ap water.

C Chou marſt not cate wythpn typ gates the

mpties:but © tyche ot thy cozne / ol chr wyne.¢ or thy ople/
eet at mee webe bedi mat bar hap dey ae
thepe nether any of typ bowe, 1

‘mas o öndden poweſt mo, ehp krewilotkeringen vo heucuk


them befoze the Loꝛde thy Cob / in the place
which the Love thy Godbath cholen both
thou thy lonne a thy daughter thy Ceruatite
Kchrmarde ache Leute bis within thy ga⸗
tes ä thou tale retorte bekoze the L oꝛde thy
Sod in all chat thou putteſt thyne hande to.
And“ be ware that thou kozlake not the Le⸗
site as longe as thou lyueſt vpon the erty,

FE oben p Londe thy Godhath enlarged
thy tolles as he hath prompted the) thou ſa ye
% voll cate flech / becaule thy toule longeth to
Late fleſb: then thou halt cate fleth, what lo
euer ihptoule luſteth. It the place which the
‘Logve thy Hod hath cholen to put hys name
there be to kerre Evo che / hen thou maptt kyll
ok thy oxen and ok thy chepe which the Loꝛde
hath geuen the as N haue commaunded the

thou mapſt eate inthine awne cytye what
ocuer thplouleiuterh. Heuerthe jater / asd
roo and the herte is eaten / euen to thou ſhalt
4. Dent. xp. beate it:the“ vncleane a p cleane indifferktiy
oat thar ther ou Walt cate, But be trong o thous cate
9 0 ey bloude. Foz the bloude / that is the like


Gctle. vj. d.


blonde 16 ty
dein tbat t 4 andthou map not cate p like with the lech:
uine avborrethoumatt not cate it : but muſt vowreit pps
berge w 1 55 bl ater oe 959 pet 995 1 5
p it mave go we eg chrwzen
suse agterehe whenchen data one which

Dis rpghte in che krghre ol the Loꝛde. f

4. Deut Fiiß b. * Biitthp olve hinges which thou halt 6
and. zul. b. thy bote thou malt take a go bnto place
which the ll oꝛde hath cholen / a thou chalt of
fer thy burntollrynges both fed and bloude
vpon the alter ofthe Loꝛde thy God / and the
bloude of thyne offerpnges thou chalt poure


out pon te alter ofthe Kode th od and Ch


Malt eate ö fleſh. ale hede eheare al thete
woꝛdes whpch J co maunde the p it maxe go
well with the a with thy chilozen alter p foz
euer, when thou dock that whych is good r
ryght in the lyghte of che Loꝛde thy God.
when che Loꝛde thy Godhath deſtroped
thenactis betoꝛe the / whether thou goet to
conquere them / a when thou halt conquered
them / anddweit in their landes: Bewarre 5
thou be not taken ina tare after thé / after
that they be deſtroped befoze the / a that thou
athe not atter their oddes layinge:how drd


thefenacpons lerue their Goddes / ß J mape
tut. xvij· edo lo lyhewyle: Map thou Malt not do o
onto the Lorde thy God; top ali abhompna⸗


aendern
feringes of thine handes but chou mult eate „her


les


fapde come to patte


is ag chyne awne ſoule bnto

cretly fapinge let vs go a lernte ſtraüge God⸗
des which thou halt not noten nor vet tur
kathers / ord Goddes / ok the people which are
rounde aboute $ / whether ther be npebnto
che oz farce of krom the / krom the one ende ot


the lande vnto the other. De n


not vnto him noz hernen onto him mo letnot
thine eve pitiehim no: haue cdpadionon bt/
noꝛ kepe him lecret / vut caule hi to be da

ine hande chalbe kirſt vpõ him to kel him:
athenthe handes ok all the people. And thou C
chalt tone hymwyth Cones that he dye / ve⸗
caule he hath gone aboute to thaut Sawape
Fed the Log thy God which brought the out
of Egipte $ boule of bondage. And al Acrael
all beate ¢feave and bal do no moare ane
foche wyckedneüe as thys is / amonge them.
Akthou tale heave tape of one of thy cities


moued $ enhabiters of their citie
ps go and lernte traunge Goddes whrch ve net


balken mowen. Chendehe a make Cerda
anibenquetepetegenty.geiebe trucan ge


305 ienofli e edge OF the werde. And getheralß Cpople


21
fal. Jue its Fit 10
and and burne with five both the cite and all the
abe lporlecherorenerp hütte proche nah


den ban K. te the epes kan any mis deech. 07
aboweal other thou art an holy people vnto the Loꝛde thy


ratte the God / and the Loꝛdẽ bath cholen the to be
woidether a teuerall people vnto him telte / or all i na⸗
buche gt, evans chatare bponthe erh.
mend bent, Je Mall eate no maner ofabbominacpor
wothel ode Chele are the beattes which ve wall eate of:
pal. xxvih. a oxen / chepe and gootes / hert / ro and bugle
wyldegoote / vnco ne / oꝛigẽ and Camelion.
Andali beatkes that cleaue the hotie ¢ Upcte
hit in to two clawes a chewe the cud / chẽ ve
chall eate. Neuertheletle / chete ve Hall not
eate ofthe that chewe cud ¢ ofthe d deurde
t cleaue the holle:che cameil / che hare a the
Foꝛthey chewe cud / but deurde not
hoffe:¢ therfoze are vncleane vnto pou: allo
chelwyne / to though he deurde the hoffe / vet
he cheweth not cud / and cherkoꝛe is bncleane
vnto vou: pe Hall not cate of the flew) ot thé
noꝛ touche the dead carkettes of them,
Chele ve Mall eate ot all that are inthe
waters: At that haue kynnes and fcales.and
whatloeuer hath not kinnes a lcales / ot that
pe map not eate / toꝛ p is bncleane pnto pou,
5 Ok all cleane brꝛdet ve Hal eate / but chele
are they ot which ve maye not eate:the egle /
Igoſhauke / the cozmerdt / the trion / p vultur
che kpte aher kynde / z all kynde ok rauens /
the Eſtrich the nyghterowe / the nuckou / che
kparouhaune ¢ all her kynde / p litle oule che
great oule / the backe the brtture the pye / 8
obe the heron the aap bys kunde / the
lapwynge ö twalowẽ. And al crepinge fou-
les are vncleane onto vou a mape not be eatẽ
olibut of all cleane foules pe mae wel cate,


. lanit. xi b.


Dtuteronomium.


lrxxiiij.
Ye Hall eate ot nothynge that dyeth alone: C


But thou mapſt geue ic vnto the ſtraunger
that is in ihycitie 6 he eate hit / oꝛmapſt tet


6 hitvnto ana nt oz thou art an holp people
ith onto the Loꝛde thy God. . Thou chalt not 8


* lethe a ud inhis mothers mylcke. Lone cron
Chou Hale tythe all d encreale ot thy teen ter

that cometh out ok the kelde vere by vere. And
thou ſhalt cate betoze the l oꝛde thy God in d
piace / whichhehalh cholen to male hisname
dwel there the tythe ot thy come / ol ch wene
andol thyne orie / and the kirũ boꝛne of thyne
Oren ot thy locke that thou mapſt leaine
to feare he Loꝛde thy God allwaxe.

* JE the wave be to longe koꝛ the / lo thou went. r
art not able to cavic hit / becaute the place is
to karre from the whych the Loꝛde thy God
hath cholento let his name there(fo2 6 Loꝛde
the@odhath bieded the then makeitinmo⸗
nepand take the money in thyne hande / a go
vnto the place which the Loꝛde thy God haͤth
cholen / ¢ beſtowe F money on what loeuer
thrkoule luſteth after:o£ oxen ſhepe wyne g
Good bepnke / and ok whatloeuer thy koule
delpreth / ¢ eate there befoze the Loꝛdethy
God and be merp-bothe thou andthynehoul
holde and the Leuite that is in thy cyt ve Sde 79
thou fozfake not the Leuite / foꝛ he hath peut
nether 1 noz enherttaunce with che. Loh.

* Hep ende okthꝛe pere / thou malt bꝛynge weul. xv c.
koꝛth all thetythes of thine encreale the lame
pere & lape hit bp within thine awne cytye/
andthe Leupte ch all come becaule he hath
nether parte noꝛ enheritaunce with the / and
the ſtraunger andthe katherlelle andthe we⸗
dowe which are wyth in thy cytye and Malt
vate and pil them lelues: that the Loꝛde thy
God mape blele p in all the wozkes ol thine
hand whych thou doeſt.
＋ eee of dettes in the ceuenth yere. Je
che Itraelites obey God they are pꝛomeled that they
Shall not fuffee pouertye. Bow and ater what maner
we ought to lende.

Che. xv. Chapter.
the ende ok leuen pere thou chalt
make a fre ere. And thys is the
N manerok the tre pere / wholbeuer le⸗
beth ought with his hande vntohrs
nepahboure / mape not acne agarne p which
he hach lentiothis neyghbaure 02 ol bis bꝛo⸗

er becaule it is called the Loꝛdes fre pere
pet ok a ckraunger thoumaptt call it home
agapne. But that which thou haſt with thy Ercle. iz
bzotherthrne hande chall remytt / a Bin any Eecle. n..
wyte / that there be no begger amonge vou.
Foz the Lozde wall bietie the lande which 8
10 de thy Godgeueth ß an enheritadce to
pollelle italo that chouherken vnto the vopce
Off Loꝛde thy God / to obterue ¢ do althele
cömaundmẽtes which comaunde pou thys
daperpe a then the Loꝛde h God W

e a


Diet 1 he hath pꝛomyledthe / and thou Walt
lende vnto many nacpons / and chalt bozowe
ol no man / and halt rargne ouer manx nas
cvons / but none ſpaſl ra pane ouerthe.
‘Sober one of thy bꝛethzen amonge vou is
waxed pooze in anp of chycyties wythin thy
lande which the Lorde thy eon geueth the / l
Sthoubardennot thine hert nor wertothine
hande fd thy pooze bꝛocher : But open tyne
hande vnto him a lende him tut ko bes
nede which be hath. And beware that there
9,91 pent of be not a popnte of * Belial in thine bert / that
Welmpere thou woldett lape. che feuenth vere / the vere
and thewpched of fredome is athande/¢ thertore it ereus e
couniccit of We to loke on chr pooze bꝛother and genet him
nought abe chen crpe onto the Loꝛde agent
che and it be lynne vnto the ut geue him e
let it not greue thyne hert to geue. Becaule
chat koꝛ that thinge / the Loꝛde thy God Mall
bietle the inalicht wozhes a in all chat thou
putteſt thyne hande to For the lande thal ne⸗
er be without pooze.tiaherfoze J cõmaunde
F lavinge:opé chyne hande onto thy bꝛother
that is neadyand pooze in thy lande.
C. Jechobzocher an Hebzue tell him telt to
oz an Hebzuelle he wall cerue the tyre pere
che leuenth pere thou Walt let him ga fre
the. Ind when thou lendell hem out fre front
che / chou Walt not let him go aware emptyer
but dhalt geue him ol thy thepes ok thy come
and ol chr wrne / and geue himoechat thers
with the dbu walk g kerle che. And
remembze that thou walt a keruaunte in the
lande of Egypte / and the Lone thy Godde⸗
ipuered the thence: wherfoze J commaunde
the thys thynge to daxe. *

But and pt he fape vnto c bet not go
awape ird the / becaule he toucth the a thyne
b. Che entent houle g is well at eabe wich the.“ Then kane
aebi uwe le Anule andnaple bis cave to thenooze chere
to caüte the to wich K let him be thy leruaunte to euer and
ebbogre bödage Onto thy mapde leruaſite thou lbalt do lpke⸗
brruno 2 wyle. And let it not greue thine eres to lett


dime hunde .bimgo out fromthe kose bach bene worth


tial.


dip abouble hired teruaunte to the in his lerutce
eat Saen Ante Laye thy God hal ese
Dar

A uc ot the in all that chou doeſt.

ve learer vnto

hym chen tye

Vertpe.


All the Firktbozne that come olthyne oren
Kokthr hepe chat are males / chou thaltha-
lowe bnto the Loꝛde thy od. Chou halt do
no lerupce wyth the kyꝛitbome ol 885


Deuteronomuum ‘


Dloude cherot / but poute it vvon d grounde e rar g
as water. Ape the cha


e Garter whptrontpreletheteatt of tabernacles. Ne
$a — 2 oꝛdeyned. cateth tt h


¶ Che. xi. chapter.
earn ternones) of Abyb / and A.
offer patieoucr bnto the Lorde thy ora. a
God Fa inthe monetg of Ab / B al ere
Lare dome ee praitbecterc oes albe
Thou

padeouerbnto the Lorde thy God / and chene rr d.
Koren inche place which $ Lozde walchole 2
to make hrs name dwell there. @ ou ſhalt f
eate no leuended bzead cherwich: but halt
rate therwith che bꝛead at tribulac von. bij.
ect For chou cameſt out or d lande
of Egipt in halte that thou mapttremebze >
Dave whẽ thou camieſt out of lade ol Egipte
all dapes ol thylite. And te that there be no
lates a althy Cortes. bape

e a eve rena: thynge o
thetede wopey thou hal cnc lirt dare


at euen / vntyll the moinynge.
. — pes 9 in any ol B


chr cities which the Lozdchr Sodgeueth the
But in che place which the Loꝛde thy God ⸗ Dru
Spal chote to mate bis ame nen n there r. und.
thou ſhalt offer. Palleouer at euen aboute $

oyng doune ot che tonne / euen in 5 cealon


ou cameſt out of Egipte Ind thou Halt

e
1 /e departe on Pmoz
gett the vnto thy tente. Siredayes thou
fait eate twetebzead / and the ſeuenth dave
is kor the people to come togetherto ß Loꝛde
thy God/that thou mapſt do no wake.
Chen reken the. pig. wenes a ne to rel
che. vil. wenes when the kucken in

e cone / and kepe che tealt ol weneg vnto

e Lone thy God / that thou geue a frewil⸗
offerpnge of chene bande onto che 8080 thy


within thy * gates / and the ſtraunger / the Fa- b. we fn

cherleur ö che wedowe fate amonge vou, datt he:

e place which Loide chrGFodhath choken zuriden
ame dwell there. And remẽbze kulen

at thou watt a ſeruaunte in Egipte / dthou mauncen hy

e and do — this tame g


l boten.


ind Lawes.


place which p Lo: de Hall chore:toz ü Loꝛde
thy God (ail blelle the in al chr krutes and
inalithe wozhes of thyne handes / g therfore
thait thou be glad. Chꝛe tymes in p pere thal
all youre males appeare befoze p Loꝛde thy
Godin the place which he wall chole: Inthe
Dfaſt offwete bꝛead / in the kealt of wees e
inthe fealt * of tabernacles. Andther wall
not appeare before p Loꝛde emptie: but eue⸗
ryman with the gréte of his hande / acco:ding
tothe blellenge ofthe Loꝛde thy God which
he hath geuen the.
Judges and offycers thou Malt make the
inallthpgates which the Loꝛde thy Godge⸗
ueth 6 thozow out thy crpbes:¢ let thé iudge
pprople righteoudy, p zeſt not the lawe noꝛ
Bnoweany perfone nethertakeany rewarde:
for gyttes biynde d wyle ¢ peruerte d woꝛd
ofthe ryghtcous, But in alithynge folowe
righteoutnetle/p thou mapſt lyue ã entopep
lande which the Lozde thy God geucththe.
Chou alt plante no groue of what lo⸗
euer trees it be /nye vnto the altare of the
Lorde thy God whych thou ſhalt make the.
Chou thal ſett the vp no pyler / whyche the
Ronde thy God hateth.
EMhepapne and punphement fo; Idolatrte. Che
doutefull| tence nud be referred buto thegreate


ges.


udges. he punylhement ofa reeller ꝙ piclumpe
inp a tame Stace of
a Bynge.,


che. rij. Chapter.
Hou Male offerontothe Loꝛdethy
God ne ore 3 e
Mlaanpdekozmpte, what ſoeuer =
8 kaueredneſle it be: tor that ig an ab⸗
pnacron vnto che Loꝛde thy God.

Ikthere be kounde amonge poutn any ol
che cpepes which 5 Londe thy Godgeueth ?
iW Man o woman that hath wrought wycked⸗
55 nelte in d cyghte or the Loꝛd thy God / p ther
baue gone beponde his badge nat fotbat
: paid eed * — trate —-
jem anne oz
tone 02 any thinge cdtapned in heauẽ which
kozbade / and it was tolde the and thou halt
erde of it:then thou Malt enguere diligẽtip.
ik it be true andthe thynge of a fuertpe
F foche aphominacib is wzought in Ftrael
chen thou chalt bernge torththat ma 07 that
woman whych haue connnptted that wened
betty im hethinge/*onto the gates and (halt fone them
pect not fe with tones andi ep Wall ope atthe mouth
alan, n OF 1.05.4 h witnettes call he chatis ‘worthy

fultmtner Bokdeach / dye: but at § mouth of one witne
anh not tun, he ball not dye. And ben l e wyt⸗
tinge chem hedies Mhalbe yd vpon him eo Epil him and
. r put abt unde che handes of all the people: co
Celtes & Waltthots put wickednedle awape kromthe.
re them


betwene bioud ¢ bloud / plee and plee / plage


* *


Deutteronomium.


Ia mater be toharde for the in iudgemkt be


lxxv.


plage in maters of trite within thy cities.
Chen aryle a get the vp onto d place which
che Loꝛde thy Godhath cholen / and go vnto
the pꝛeaſtes the Leuiteg /a vnto the judge »
halbe inthole dapes / a alke / and they Wait
Hewe the howto indge. Andle that thou do
accoꝛdynge to that whych they of that place
which p Loꝛde had cholen) ewe the / a leß
thou obfeructodoaccozding to all that they
enkoꝛme the. aA ccoꝛdynge tothe lawe wypch
they teache the a maner of iuidgemẽt whych 00
thepeelithe/ fe that ehoudo a p thou* botwe Jb.
not from that whych they Mewe the / nether i
to the ryght bande noꝛ tothe lefte. €
And chat mä p will do pretumptuoutiy,
fothathe will notherké onto the pꝛealt that
ſtandeth there to mintitre onto the Loꝛdthy
God 07 onto the iudge / ſballvye: aud to thou
Halt put awape euell from Atrael. Andall ß
people chall heave and Wall feave / a ſball do
nomoare pꝛelumptuoullp.
when thou art come onto ð lande whych
the Logde thy God geueththe and eniopettit
e dwelleſt therin : k thou Male Cave / J wyll
let a kynge ouer me: uiyne vnto all the naciog Wonges,
that are aboute me: Chen thou Maitmake .
him krnge ouer the / whõ the Loꝛde thy God
Mall chole. One ok thy bꝛethzen mut thou
make kynge ouer the / and maptt not fetta
fraunger duerß which is not of thy bꝛethzẽ
But in any wyle letthym not holde to many y
hoꝛlles / p he bꝛynge not the people agayne
to Egypte thoꝛow the multytude ol ho lles /
koꝛ a moche as 5 Loꝛd hath lapde vnto vou:
pe chal hence fozth go no moare agapne chat
wape. Alco he Mall not haue to mand tines
lett his bert turne awape / nether ſhallhe ges
ther him tyluer and goulde to moch.
And when he is lett vpon the leate ol hys
uyngedome / he hall wzytehym out thys le⸗
conde lawe in a bole takynge a copye ofthe
preattes the Leuiteg And it halbe with him
andhe Wall reade therin all dayes or his lyle
that he maye lerne to feare p Loꝛdehis Pod
koz to kepe all § wozdes of thys lawe athele
oꝛdinaunces / to to do chẽ:that his hertarvle
not aboue bis bzethzen and that he turne not
From the commaundment:etherto the righte
hand oꝛ to the lette / that both he a his chüldꝛẽ
mape pꝛolonge their dapes in his nungdome
in Atrael.
¶ Che Leuptes myght haue no poſceſcyons. Jdolaer
cate Aedde. | hender Ahe unn The
kale prophet mut beCiapne-e how he may be hnowk.
¶ Che. xbiij. Chapter.
de Preaſtes the Neuptes /all the
krrbe orMeuttchall haue no parte „gun vag e,
no? enheritaunce with Alrael. Che weut. v. bund
ZS Hofitrynges ok the L oꝛde and his en⸗ ö. band rich h
heritaunce they chall eate but chall haue no
l. li. enberitas


e OCS toe bꝛethꝛen: p Loe
he is heir enherrtaunce / as he hach tarde
bntochẽ. And this is the dutie ol the pꝛealtes
okthe people and of them that otter / whether
it be ore oꝛ hepe: Cher mull geue onto the
preatt / che thoulder and the two chekes a the
mawe / che Epatt krutes of the coꝛne / wyne a
oyle / a d ürſt ot the wepe wh mutt thot
geue him soz thell ode thy Sodhath cholen
him out ok all the trrbes to pie
Wnvpltre inthe name o€ che Lozde:bothe hem a


bps lonnes ko euer. Fe a Leuite come out


& ok any ob thy ertres oꝛ any place ot Irrael /
wherhe isatoroumec, @come tepth all the
iuſt orhis herte vntothe place which Loꝛde
bath chofenshe hall there mintitre ins name
okthe Lode his Hodas all bys bzethzen the
Leutz do which ſtande there befoze 9 Loꝛd.
And they call haue ipke pozcpons to eate /
belpde that whych cometh tohym o the pa⸗
trimonye of bys elders.

When thou art come in to the lande which
the Lozdethr Song the / le that thou
lerne not to do atter ß abominaciõs ok there
nacpons. Let ther not be kounde among vou

jat maketh bps tonne oz baughter to go

Or ürte ma, thozotw the kye / oꝛ that bleth* wichcratte / oꝛ
gpke. u Some gucholer oute or dapes oz that regardeth the
170 hoo lxẽg or Court / oꝛa locerar / oꝛ a charmar / oꝛ
chen ef Cat codceleth woch Cpzetcs/o7 a pzopheciat
Aue 22 thatkathedy the anupte ofthe deed. sfoz alt
derd that 6 © that do Cock thinges are abhominacton vnto
mre (prvtes in the Lozde: and becaule ok thele abhompna⸗
bp cht der cpons dhe ll onde ehr Bopdoech an chem out
are toutes der beko ze the/ be pure therfoze wyth the Lorde
varted. thp God. Foꝛthele nacrons which thou walt
conquere / herken onto cholers oute ok daxes

and pꝛophecrars. But the Loꝛde thy God

Chia is here vermtketh notthat tothe.

Prompledapree Che Lozde thy God wyll Herve by a Po.
acher of better phete amonge pou:euen ok thy bꝛethzen line
tpdpnges then pnto me: a vnto him ve chal herlẽ accoꝛding
ote to alls thou del xzedelt or che Lowe thy God
in Hozeb in the dave when the people were

gathered laxinge: Let meheare the voyce of

my Loꝛde Godno moare / noꝛ tethrs greate

® ire ant moare chat Adpenot, Tndthe Loz

fapde vnto meither haue well poner, J wil

raple che vp a pꝛophett fd among their bꝛe⸗
chien ipke onto the a wyll put my woꝛdes in

to his mouthe she challlpeake vnto the allß

Achall cömaunde him. And wholdeuer wyll

kot herken onto the worde wüpch he chall

Speake in my name / J wil regupze it ołhym.

Butthe pꝛophete which Mall pꝛetume to

fſpeake ought in my name whych Jcomma⸗

undednot kolpeake / and he that dpeaneth in

the name of ſtraunge Goddes / the tame pꝛo⸗

baue pall A ünche chat bye) the Kone

e chall N knowe that whrch the Loꝛde


Deuteronomium. Sanctu


ich not poken: nohen a pꝛophete fpeake ty
T thinge folate

not no come to pale N is chethrnge wyrch

the Lope bath not lpoken. But the Pꝛo⸗
phetebath onen it pꝛelumptuoul ip: be not
akerde therloꝛe of yin;


kraumcheled townes. Ehe punphement e
ben dere are. e 50


Che. xix. Chapter. #
eng Loid thy Goo hath deſtrored Deut, u.
the nacpons whole lanbe ? Lozde Sum am
Athrcbodgeueth the / a thou halt con⸗ Jolut. ar


yi


commaunde the this dape / chat thou loue
Lozd thyGod ¢ walkein bis wapes euer!
thou chalt adde ij. cities mo onto thole. li.
innocét bloude be notched in chr lande
the Lopethy Godgeueth the to engeret
co bloude come vpõ che. But and yr there be
any man that bateth hes nepghboure and
Japeth awapte kor bpm @ rifety agapntt him
ehmpteth him p he dye / alleetb onto anp of
thele cytpes. Chen let the elders or ther eytre
lende ¢ ketche him thence a delpuerhim in to
the handes of the iuſtice or bloude / z he hall
dye / Let chyne eye haue no pitie on him / a lo
thou halt put awape innocent bloude front
Irael / a happpe arte thou. Chou chalt noc
temoue thy nerghboures benen hoe te
Ge aer erde eee 400
ou en e lande 6
chr God geueth the to emore tt,


Site f


Btuteronomium,


One witnelle Hall not ryle agenſt a mã
in any maner treſpace oꝛ fynne/what loeuer
45 ſyme a man lynneth : · But at the mouthe ol
ebene de,
h. . b. 5 8
in Akan bnrighteous witnelle ryle vp ed
ed. c. g nũ toaccule him ot tretpace: then let boty
ere the men which ſtryue together ſtande before
che Loꝛde / beloze the preattes and the fudges
which Halbe in hole dapes /a let the tunges
ſupꝛe a good. And yr the witne l be koun⸗
de kalle and that he hath geuẽ kalle witnetle
agenſt hrs bꝛother chen chall ye do vnto him
as he had thought to do vnto his bꝛother / and
to thou chalt put euell away kromthe. And
other hall heare a feare and chan hencekoꝛth
compt no moꝛe any loch wickednelle amõge
vou. Ind let chyne epe haue no compattyon/
Gnd.trice but a life foꝛ lite / exe For eye / toth foz toth /
pute g. bande for hand. and Cote dar tote.
NF C Who ought to go to battell Che Lawe of Armes
amonge the Jraclites. The Tanaanptes mut


they kpl.
he. xx. Chapter. 5
Hen thou goeſt out to battel agẽſt
thyne encmpes / and ſeiſt hoztes a
a charettes a people mothen thou /
Abe notaterde ok the / ko the Loꝛde
ihr God is with the whiche bꝛeughte $ out
or the lande of Egipte. peu pratt come
nye vnto battell / jet the pꝛeaſt come koꝛth a
ſpeke vnto the people a tape vnto the: Peare
Ilrael / pe are come bnto battell agenſte
‘poure enempes / jet not poure hartes faynte/
hether feave no be amatednoz adzead ot thé
For ug thy@od goeth tb youtofiahte
toꝛ pou agette poureencmpes a to ſaue pou,
Ind ict the offycers ipeane vnto d people
vig Blapinge: Ak anp man haue bylt a newhoule
ide and haue not dedicate it / let him go andre⸗


le


pied Wet carrie cobis houte tet he dee in che bateell/


o de, f another dedicateit. And vr anpmanhaue


ee planted a bpnevarde @ haue not made it co⸗


maehen! et him go areturne agarne vnto bis


e youre ed he aye in che batell and anocher


de cate rhe make it come, Ind Ik any ms be betrauthed
pitnughebnto a wyle and haue not taken her / let him
wethe got returne agapne vnto his houle / let he


Nabele ne de in che battell and anotherkake her.


ane: And let the officers Cpeake further ontos
te the bee people and laye. It any ma feare a be fapnte
ut peo · herted / jet him go and returne vnto bis houle
let his bꝛothers hert be made fapnte as well
Cas his. And when the ottycers haue made an
ende of fpealipnge vnto the people ſlet them

make captapnes ot warre ouer them.
When thou comet npe onto a citte to light
agentt it / oltre thé peace. Ind yr they anlwe⸗
rethe agapne pealably / and open vntothe /
then let an the people that is kounde therm


4
Arch:
be tributaries vnto the and terue the. But a
vr they will make no peace with the / then
make warre agenſte the citie and belege it.

And when the Loꝛde thy God hach delpuered
it into chyne handes / anpte al males therol
with the egde of the Cwerde / ſaue the wes
menandthe chyidzen and the catell all that
is in the cptye and allthe tpople therok tate
vnto thy telke a cate the ſpoyle of thyne ene⸗
myes which the Lord thy Gon geuechthe.
Thus thou Maitdobnto al the cpties eer .
are a greate wape of fromthe and not of the
cities of thefenactons. 24
But in che cities ol there nacions which >
L onde thy God geueth the to enheret / thor .
Walt laue alpue nothinge b bzetheth.“ But ent.
chalt dectrope the with out redempcion both doß candle
Hethites / the Amozlteg / the cananites / ö er”
ſerezites / che Heuites a che gebuliteg / as
Lozdthr God hath cõömaunded the / p they
teach vou not to do akter al their abhomina⸗
ctong which they do vnto their gondes / e lo
Ahulde kenne agent che Loꝛde youre God.
Whẽ thou halt belegeda citie longe tyme
inmakinge warre agett it to take it deſtroye
not the trees therot / thou woldeſt chautt an
axe bnto the. Foz thou mapſt eate of the / and
therfoze deſtrop che not. Foz the trees ol the
feldes are no men / ache naht come agent
the to belege the. Heuertheſater thote trees
which thou kmowelk chat men eate not or che
thou mapſt deſtrope a cutte them doune and
make bofwerkes agent ö citie that maneth
warre with che / vntpll it be ouerthzowne.
CChe purgacion of hp that is kounde deede ia not


* pnowwen how be was flapne. Pow we ought to take ta


wyke her that is take in ware. Che ryght of the kyaſt
begotten. The punnechmenc of the fonne that is dye
ſobedpent to pps Father and mother.

Ahe ri. Chapter.


Fone be koũde Hate in lad which a
the Lozde thy God geueth the to
pode it / and lpeth in che keldeg: q
not kmowne who hath llayne hin:


Then let Cyne elders and thy iudges come
foꝛth emete onto the cyties that are rounde
aboute the dayne. And let the elders of that
Citic which is next vnto the Mayne man / ale
an bepfier that is not laboured W 1107 hat
dꝛawen inthe vocke / and let them bꝛinge her
foto a valere where is nether earinge nog
fowẽge / z dtrike orherheadthere in b baley,

Chen let the pꝛeaſtes the fonnes ok Leut 12
come fozth* fo the L onde thy Godhath cho⸗ el
len them tonuinittre e toblette inthe name ©
ol che Lorde etherfore at cheir mouthe Mall zz
all ſtrife ¢ plage be tryed. And allthe elders
ofthe citie that is nexte to p layne man Matt
waſhe their handes ouer the heylferthat is
beheaded inthe playne / ¢ chall ancwere and
ſaye:oure handes haue not chedthis bloude

BA. nether


Preceptes,


Y hegeuebim dowble of all that be hath. Foz
he is the tyꝛſt of his ſtrength / and to him bez
longech the ryght ok the kpꝛſtbomechyppe.
er Ptanp mä haue a fonnethat is ſtoburne
Kdikobedient / thathe will notherken onto
vopce of bys father a voce ol his mother c
they haue taught him nurtour / but he wolde
notherken vnto thẽ: Chen let his kathera bis
mother take him and bꝛinge hym out vnto ß
elderg of that citie and onto the gate of that
fame place / a Cape vnto $ elders of the citie.
gp This oure forneis ktobürne and drlobediet
and wyn not herken vnto oure bopce/he is a
rpoter and a bꝛoncharde. ehe een
of that citie tone him with ſtones vnto death
And thou ſhalt put euell awave fromthe / ¢
all Itrael tail heave a feare* It ama haue
cöõm̃ytted atretpace wozthy or deach a is put
to death fo2 it andhanged on tree: let not bys
bodyremayne all nyghte vpon the tree / but
„, burpehymthe lame daye. Foz“ the curte ol
Snlat. tj. c. Mod ig on him that is hanged. welle not thy
lande therkoze / whyche the Loꝛde thy God
geueth the to enheret.
C What thou onghtelk to do when thou kyndetk thy
neygbboures bea goyng a ccraye. A man chall nor
were wemens clothpng oz a womã manes clothyng.
To wear acote of woolle ¢ ok flare s allo fozbiddk.
Che punnꝑſhement or hem that acculeth a man vn⸗


Jou. vii. .


Deuteronomium.


tighteonllysofan aduowitrer allo of hym that rae


o attrape/thou thalt not wWozatwe B
y lelke ᷑rõ ChE: But Halt bꝛynge

ſchs home agapne onto the brother
€ thy bꝛother be nor nye vnto the oꝛ vethhou
nowe him not / then bꝛinge them vnto thine


oe


IC aman caic a tovte @ when he bach iy; n


{with her hate her and leye thamtefull thinges te ae


vnto her charge and binge vp aneuel name fiene


And he hateth ber:andio/be lapech chaine kuf rena
chynges vnto her charge fapinge 74 founbe trek
not thy daughter amarde. And per thele ar
the tokẽs of my daughters virginite. And let
them tpzede che veſture befoze the elders ol
che citie. Chen let the elders .


Lawes.
that man ¢ chaltyce him and mearce hym in
anhumdꝛed lpcles of lyluer and geue the vn⸗
tothe father ol the damlell / becaule he hach
‘by vp an euell name vpona mapde in
Flrael. And the chalbe his wyte / and he may
not put her awave all his dayes. But and yt
the thynge be ola tuertie that the damlell be
not kounde a virgen / let them bzynge her vn⸗
to the doze of her fathershoute'a let che men
of chat cptie ſtone her % ones to deach / be⸗
caule hebath wꝛolight kolpe in Ilrael / to
plave the whoze in her fathers hoũle. And lo
thou thalt put euell awaxe from the.

D It aman be founde lyinge with a womã /
that hath a wedded hulbande / then let thẽ dye
ether other ol thẽ: both the ma that lave with
the wyle and allo the wyle:lo thou tale put
awape euell kram Ittael.

Ik a mande be hãdkalted vnto an hutband /
and then a man kynde her in the towne ¢ ive
with her / then ve hall bꝛynge them both out
vnto the gates ot p fame cytie ¢ chan ſtone
thé witones to death: Che damlel becaule
the cryed not bepinge in the citie: and § mã /
decaule he hath humbledhys neyghbours
wyle / ethou Malt putaware cue krö the.

But vt᷑a md fynde a betrauthed damſell in
the lelde and fozce hera tye with her. hen

e man that laxe with ber wall dre alonc /e
vnto the damtell thou ſhalt do no pane sbe
caule there is in § damſell no caule of death

Fot as when a ma rpleth agencte his nergb⸗

boure and lepelh him / euẽ ko is this matter,
Foz he kounde her in the keldes a the betrau⸗
khed damlell cryed:but there was no man to

‘fuchoureber, Aka man fynde a mardethat

ig not betrauthed a take her a lye with her a

Ve kounde Then the man that lave with her

hall geue vnto the damtels father. J. Cycles
B ‘of fyluer.And the Hall behis wpfe/becaute
Au humble he hath* humbled her / a he mare not put het
Kahn de ware all bisdaves.

Ho man thall take his fathers wyle / no⸗
vnhylle his fathers couerynge.
SNE ee
shurche. Polluct e in the night. ir

¶ Che. xxiij. c hapter.


And


Beuteronomium,


3 7
Ir vi.
Egypt / x becaule theyhyꝛed agenſt the Ba⸗ urſtracton
Jaant § tonne of Beoꝛ 8 interpreter ok M es wherm 9. wil
kopotamia / to curle the. Meuerthelene the FRY
Loe thy God wolde not herken vnto Ba⸗
laam / but turned the curſe to a blelling onto
the / becaule the Lozde thy God loued the;
Chou Hate neuer therkoꝛeleke that which is
pꝛolperoule oꝛ good fo2 thE all thy dapes for
euer. Chou ſhalt not abhoꝛre an &donute /
koꝛ he is chy bꝛother: nether Male theu ab⸗
bone an Egypclan / becaute thou walta
ſtraũger in his lande. The chyidzen that are
begotten or them (all come in tothe cögre⸗
gacpon ot the Loꝛde in the. nil. generacion.
ohen thou goeſt out with tie hoſt agenſt
thrne enemies /e pe $d all wicheonene for
VLoꝛde is amonge vou. Ikthere beany man
that is vncleane by thereaton of vncſennelle
that chauncech him by npght / let him go out
ol the holt and not come in agapne vntyulhe
haue wallhedhim kelke with water bekoze 5
euen:a then whe the lonne is daune / let hyn
comie in tothe hot agarne Thou ſhalt haue
à place without ele whether theu Mate
reloꝛte to a thou halt haue a tharpe popnte gy
at the ende okthye wepon: a wh thou wplt b geloche po⸗
eale chplelfe drage therwith and tine and weiro mut be
couer chat which ig departed krö the. Foz the badde in tow +
WLozdehy God walneth in thrne holt co ordd ne ipenienae
te and to let thyne enempes before the. Let moch moare in
vne Hott be pure / that he le no vncleanc pticoand cows
thynge amonge ou and turne trom port, nn. Jochen,
Thou Malenotdelpuer bntohis matter 5 iter
keruaunt which is ecapedkrem hys maker enell⸗ mutt be
vntothe. Lethim dwell wehe euen amonge dwernctiplrene
vou in what placehe himkeike ipketh bet / in to what tpn 6
one o€ thy cyties where it is good loꝛhym / a pala Lite 85
vexe him not. 7 Chere halbe no whore of ß ch iepsrvcr ae
daughters ol Ffrael / no: whoreneper ok the no ope woe
fonnes of Ffrael. Chou chaltnether bꝛynge dome- aduowe
the'hyze ofan whoꝛe noꝛ p pꝛyce ofadogge eng en
in to che houle ofthe Lozdethy God / in no ce were bien
maner ot vowe / ko euen both ofthe are ab⸗ c. here be
hominacion vntothe Loꝛde thy God. now many thac
cr Thou Malthe no blurerbnto thy bro re o betcy
cher nether in money nog in kode/ no inany 5
manerthyng that is lent vpõ vlurye. into a
atraunger thou mapſt lende bps vlurpe / but
not vnto thy bꝛother / that the Loꝛd thy God
map biete fin all ſ thou letteſt thyne had to
in the land whether thou goeſt to cõquere it.
hen thdu hack bowed a vowe onto thes Sue. rr.


he M oꝛde ihy God / lethou be not llacke to pave cbecli v.a. Wa ⸗


te m occatpor
apc of Lade becauſe they met you not wyth bed
. wave oer Pecan Our OF


it. Hohe wyll fureiprequyze it of the/ and it ruch. bi. d.


waͤlbe fone onto the. J k thou chalt leue bo⸗


wynge it walbe no lynne onto the: but that
which 18 once gone out ok thy lyppes / thot
Mutt he pe anpdo /accozdpnge as thou halt
vowed bnto the Lozde thy God of a krewyll
which thou batt tpoken with 15. 4
en


b.


Pꝛeteptes,


when thou comelt in to thy nerahbours
vpneparde / thou mapſt cate grapes ch belte.
kuli at thyne awne piealure: but thou Malt.
put none in thy bagge. 8

When thou goelt in to thy bourgs
coꝛne / thou mapſt plucke § eaves wihrne
hande / but thou mayt not moue a lxcle vn⸗
tothynepghbours come,
CHenozcement is permptted. de that ts newly ma⸗
rped call not be compelled to go to e ree
nauntt of coꝛnt mut de let mn heruet fos thẽ port.


¶ Che. xxiiii. Chapter.

2 e e vee e ae d

. marped her e no fas
ebe k oure in hig epes/ becaute he batt
DRS pied Come vnclenede inher. chen
lethim wypte her a bylle of deuozcemẽt and
puticin herhade g tende her out ofbishoute
+4 Ewbe we is departed out or his houle che
go ano be another mans wple the leconde


* hatth. rij. a.


Jeremie. ij a


hutbonte hateher g weptebera letter otde⸗


uczcement ¢ put it in her bande a lende her
out of his houlc: oꝛ pt the leconde man dpe
which tone her to wyke / her lirt man which
fenther aware maye not take her agarneto
be hrs wolfe im as moche as che is dekpled.
Foz that is abbompnacton in the cyaht ol
1.0: b thou delple not the land with fynne/
which  Lozdehp God geueth $ to enheret.
*nohen ama taneth a newe wple he chall

not goa wanecrare palbe ſhalbe charged w
any bufpnede :but lhalbe fre at home one
B pere eretople with bys were which he hach
sae me meter taten oman Wallcake thenetet o7 the
20 lor ed ane bppermeickone to piedge to then be taketh


x peut. xx.b


dinnge ehe a mans lte to pledge. EI
e
eee Of el / a m
gene h leilechhim 2 theke walldpe. And thou Walt
5 9 put euell at N

e
40 dunt che, eilt

200 et that thou obferuedpligetiy to do accozbpng
o 70 v ert toh

beckackv lech to all that the pzeaſtes the Leuttes tall
e tearhe the sag commadacn¢hens Cove wall
dad eure met oblerue ta do Uemembze what the Lorde
suet LOLS chr Soddrdpnto Mirzem vy the ware/al⸗
tecomreltee to ter hat ve were come ut ol Egypte.
Weener Akthou lende the pz

dan u n cOute / thou dhalt not goin tohrs houle to
ite meant en kirche apledge but Malt dende without e d
Suter, tbarhe mg to who tou lendeſt/ Wal baynge the che
bedeute C pledge out at the nore. ng Korthermorepeit
furctce an to be a pore body / go not to flepe W bps pledge
albu mec but delpuer bpm the pledge agayne by b ¢
dhe deere olle go done get bim depe in bys atone
beate ae rapment and Diette the.

Aten. c. Andit, halbe rpghteoutnes onto 8,/beloꝛe
Sete J Loeb cen! Ken (halt not befraude
ees Bhelderbebet che zethꝛẽ oꝛ a ſtraunger


BDeuteronomium,


It anp man be kounde


er anp maner fo- th


ac is nedye and pooꝛe /


chat is in chx lande with in thy crties. Geue
him his hie the lame dave and let not the
konne go doune theron. Foꝛ he is nedre and
kherwith luſterneth bps Ike leg be erre
agentt the onto the Loz andit be lynne ons
tothe. Che fathers tall not vpe Foz che chrl⸗
dzen non the chplozen koz d fathers:but euerx


man hall bye Foz erneut wet


ynder not che ryght ot the ſtraſiger no:
or the kacherledee / no taße wedowes tapmet
to pledge. But remembze that chou walt a
feruaunte in te / and how the Lord thx
God delpuered che thence. woherkoze A com⸗
maunde the todo this thinge. R
When thou cutteſt donne thyne herueſte
in the kelde a halt koꝛgotte a ete in thekelde
thou halt not goagapne and fett it: But it


halbe fo2 che Graunger the katherlelle a the


wedowe / chat the Lond ihr God mape blete
the in allthe woꝛkes of thyne hande When
chou beateſt doune thpne olpue trees thou
ſhalt not make cleane ce alter the: but
it halbe £07} ſtraunger / che fatherle a the
wedowe And whe thou gethereſt tp vrner⸗
arde / thou halt not gether cleane after the:
but it chalbe fo the Gratiger/the katherleſſe
@ the wedowe. And vemebze that thou wat a
feruaunte inthe land or Egipte: wherkoꝛe
commaunde the to do this tinge,
e punnychment of offendars, Che lawe of rete
fs 15 to the brother that is deed . Meaſurts and
tes.
WOE Che rp. Chapter.
chere be ſtryle betwene men
fet chẽ come onto the lawe /K let
jurges tultifie the righteous ac
enine the tretpater. And ve b trel⸗
pater be worthp of trppes/ then let the lud⸗
ge caute to take himboune eto beate him be
ore his kace acco inge to his tretpace vnto 00 ay ‘ou
acertapne nombie l zppes he Mall geue none
bia not pale leck pthe Wulde exceade abeate arme fla
him aboue that w many tripes thy brother ral.
chuld appere vngoodiy before chene eren.

* Thou chalt nat motell d oxe that treadeth k
out che come. e
When bzethꝛen dwell together and one of
em dye and haue no childe / the wyle oF the
decd (hall not be geuen out vnto a ſtraũger:
but hir bꝛother in lawe Mall go in onto her a
take her ko wife g marie her. And the eldeſt oe
konne which che bearech / wall ſtande vp in gude ve
che name ok his bother which is * deed / that chyloeat


1
his name be not put out in Ilrael. brotber th)


a


sudan péthe man well not take bis lr. BRS eg


ſter in lawe / then let her go to p gate onto p
elders ¢ Cape: My bꝛother in lawe rekulech
to terre vn vnto bis bothers name in Ic:
raeiſhe will not marie me. Chen let p elders
ok his etpe cat onto hem ana comen n h


dim.


went


Lanes.
: 1 etre fopli not take her / then
et his lyſter in lawẽ go vnto him in the prez
kence o che ewers and loole his howe of his
tote a lpyt in his face a anlwere a fave. So
wall it be done onto that man that wyll not
Cbylde his bꝛothers houle. And his name that
be called in g crael / the vnchoedhoule.
AZkwhen men ſtrrue to geather / one wyth
ae soi miotber the woke okthe one runne to / koꝛ to
Pri wupi Tb her Hucbande out of the handes of hem 5
enoare ſhamelm̃pteth him and put forth hier hande d take
fta hen etbebbpm by the lecrettes: cut other hand / and lett
teen not 9 ne ere pptie her.
er Thon ſhalt not haue in thy bagge two


and


q


rate
. mane weaai/amtene otal cir toh)


he halt thou haue in thyne houle dyuerle mea⸗
fures /a greata a mall. But thou chalt haue
à pertect anda iuſt mealure: that chy daes
mare be lengthedinche jande which d ozo
thy God geueth the. soz all that do koche
thpnges a all that do vürpght areabhomp⸗
nacion onto the Loꝛde thy God. Remembze
what Amalech dyd onto ß bythe wave alter
_ thou camett out of Egypte he mett the by d
waxe andfmote p hpndmott of vou / all that
were puer laboured and dꝛagged by hynde /
whẽ thou walt kaynted a were / a he Feared
not God. Cherkoꝛe when the Lodechy God
hath geuen the reaſt from all thyne enempes
rounde aboute / in the lande which the Loꝛde
thy God geueth the to enheret and potiete:
e that thou put oute the name of Amalech
trom onder heauen / and koꝛget not.


Che hat
Seren waer
¶ Che. xrvt. Chapter.
en thou art come in to the lande
which the Loꝛde thy God geueth
e to enheret ahaſt entopedttand


thy Repe themtherkoze a dothem wich allthyne


e „ fournenthere topth a kewe folche andgrewe
te to de. there vnto a nacpon greate / migheie and kul
rare mp fa ot people. And the Egypcrans vexed vs and


Deuteronomium.


1 272
Irxxviij
troubledbs / z laded vs with cruel inane u
And we crped onto the Wozde God of dure (48 nee
fathers / ardthe Lo de hende oure vopce g lien ele
oled on oltre aduertyte /laboutt a oppzel⸗ ppi rhei
pon. Andthe Lozd bought bs out ofegept my father lekt
with a myghtie hande a a ktretched aut arne % fortohe zol.
¢ %b great tervebienetic and wich Cianes and {i become
Wonders. Anne hach brought os into ehys dene ih
placeandhath geuen vs this landeß flometh Sen h pn,
wyth mplhe a honxe. And nowe log / A haue C cute my
brought b kack krutes o€ che lande tote te aged
Boyde hath geuen me. Anovecit bekoze the meintermeig⸗
Loꝛde chy God / a woꝛchyp betoꝛe the Lorde te/ that ivia-
thy Hod and reiopſe over allthe good thyngz the couteey of
ich the Loꝛde thy God hath geuen onto ß chene fathers
andontothpneboute/bothe thou the Leute mupchnulthen
andthe ſtraunger that is amonge vou. gut,
hen thou halt made an ende oktythynge
all the tythes ol thyne encreale the thyzde.
pere / the pere of tythynge: andhaſt geuen it
vntothe Leute / the ſtraunger / the kather⸗
lelle and che wedowwe / and they haue eaten in
chygates and kylled themfelues, Chen ape
bekoze the Loꝛde thy God: aue brought >
halowed thynges out or nne houle / a haue
geuen them vnto the Leutte / the ſtraunger /
9 and the wedowe accoꝛdynge
to allchecommaundmentes whych thou cö⸗
maundeſt me: J haue not ouerkuppped thy
commaundementes / no loꝛgotten them. J
haue not eaten therot in my mournpnge nog
taken awape therok vnto any vnclennelle⸗
noꝛ fpente theror aboute any dead coꝛle: but
haue herkened vnto the vopce ofthe Lorde
my God / and haue done alter all thathe com
maunded me / lolte doune krö thy holphabi⸗
tacpon heauẽ / and bletlethy people Itrael g
the lande which thou halt geuen bal as thou
twareſt nto oure fathers) a land p floweth
wyth myltie and honxe.

Chis dave the Loꝛde thy God ath com⸗
maunded the to do thele opdinatices a lawes 5

tl

Beccanball chr toute. abou jade dert hy gate che
the Loꝛde thps dae tobe thy God and cove favde thar r
walkie nbis wapes to hepe hye ozbitatuns Loree Ne
ces his commaundementes and brstalves asad asm:
and toberhen unto hys vopce And the Lorde ny wityemne
bath fete the op thps dave / to be a leuerall de the to tapes
peoplepntobin asbebath pzompted hand ge caute hee
chat thou kepe his commaundementes / & to chon guitoen: .
make $ byeaboue all nacios which he hath tape) that the
made / in pꝛaple / in name and honoure sthat Horde Gute te,
toumapé: be anholr people önto che Land an. ch
thy God / as he hath karde. u.
Can aultave mutt be byldeb before they go aner Fore
dan The sine byl Gar N. The 5


den iu the belt
Che. xxvij. Chapter


ag the Loꝛd God ol thp fathershath pꝛome⸗
led the. nohẽ ve be come ouer Joꝛdan le that
ve fet vpthele ones whych N comaũde vou
this daye in mount bal / a plapſter thé with
pPrlaypſter. Andchere bylde onto the hn kene
rob. · xx. d. God / L an altare of Gones and fe chou lyktẽ
vp no pꝛon bpon chem: But thou chalt mane
che altate of d Los thy Godot rough tones
and offer burntol es theron onto the
Pope thy God. And thou Wale oller peace⸗
offrpnges and (alt cate there and reiople be
Bkoꝛe the Lomthr God. And thou Malt werte
ppon the tones all the mozdes ot thys lawe /
manpfettip and well. :
And Motes wyths veeattes the Weuttes
fpake vnko ali Icrael fapinge: take hede and
heare Jerael / th ps dave chou art become the
people ofthe Londe thy God. erk? therfore
nito the bopce of the Lorde thp God a dohig
cSmaundemétes ¢ his opdinaunces which J
cömaunde pou thys dave, And Moles chav
gene people the lame dae laring. Chele
l ande vpon mount isint to blelle
the people / when ye are come ower Fo2dan:
Symeon / Leul/ Juda, Atachar Joleph and
Ben zanun. And
Eballto curſe:Nuben / Bad / Aer / Sabulon /
Ban d Weybthalt. And 5 Leuites call be⸗
gynne d lave bat all the men ol Araceli with
d loude vopce.
& Curted be he ty
rot. xx. a. page op pmage of metall(an abbominacys
vnte che Lom / the woke of the handes of 6
4 craftetitan) and putteth it ina fecret place:
and all d people chall ancwere ¢ fave Amen,
C xobl. xxl. b. — *Curten bebe 6 curteth bys father o7 bys
mother / and all the people all ape Amen,
Curled be he 6 semoueth bis n 0
marche and all the people (hall fape Amen.
Curled be bethatmaketh p bipnde go out
2 okhis waye / a ali che people Wall Cape ame,
Hint. vxiiſ e Curled bebe that hyndeth the rraht of6
7 ſtraunger / katherlelle and wedowe / and all
the people hall lare Amen. :
curtenbe he that lpeth wyth bys fathers


e Hall andebpo mot


at maketh any. carued (h


Che promples of the ble vnto them that te.
gel the Phe hed dir — bees the
contrat pe.


lt kepe th
Lozde thy Godand walke in bys wapes.
Andall nacpög of the erth chall le p thou
arte called atter the name ol the Loꝛde / and
they halbe aferde or the. Andthe Londe Hall
make the plẽtuous in goodes / in the krute of
chr bodp / inthe trute or thy catell andinthe


urg krute or thy grounde / in the lande whych the


Loꝛde ware onto thy tathers to geue the.


che Londe Hall open vnto che his good daun


trealute / euen the heauen / to geue rayne vn
to chy lande in due cealon andto bleſte all che
laboures of thyne bine. And thou Malt lende
fntomanpnacios / put cpalt notnede tobo- 4g
rowe thy telfe.aind the Lord Hall fee the bes
foze and not bebpnde / a thou halt be aboue
e

ientes ok che Lozde thy Go
dich ZI comarmnetbe thts dake da ep and


g ibe woclde
ene a

vnto
pe lefts is to


ch
wayes before the / a ſhalt be dcatered amöge come doune benech alowe. De (hall lendethe G
ai hngnemesot e cavkette thou chalt not lende 2 e ſhalbe before
walbe meate onto all maner foules of the und chou bebpnde.

apꝛe and vnto the beatz of the erthe / andno ozcouevallehele curtes Call come bps


dai Ewige Tope wpllimstethetotdh the toon ebetrope: Deca
ors be deſtroxed: becaule thou herkenede
saquectersmeomaccomme tee not vnto the vopce ot el d


„ Mpꝛaclec
do lomelpme
ſtreangthen


chou halt grope atnone da}
Tie anne, Acton


thynge:a he ſhall putt a voce of eron nacpon.
cherten. Chou chalt plante a bynexarde / and Seam ume nete, un gilde haue boite 5
Walt not make it comen. chee ore halbe che to nought. :
flayne before thyne eyes / and chou can And the Loz wall bꝛynge a nacpon ops
Ne the froma karre / euen from the ende ok the
awaße eite before the Face / and Sali not be apne n n tes an ie peta tarpon
~ 0


Glellynges. Deuteronomium.


ole tonge thou Malt not vnderſtande: a vou good eto multyylxe vou: euẽ lo he tort
— on nacpon which chal not re⸗ retopfeouer vou / to deckrope pou eto brenge .
garde the perlon of the olde nor haue cOpat: vou to nought. And pe chaibe waſted from oF
ion on the polige. Andhe call eate  frute p land whethertheu gor toemorehit. And
okthy lande and the krute oe thpcatell ontill che Londe Wall (cater che amonge all nacids
hehaue deſtroped che: lothat he wall leaue fromthe one ende of che worde onto other
the nether coꝛne / wyne / nor ople / netherthe and there thou walt lerue ſtraunge goddes /
encreale oftypne orennoꝛ theflockes olchy whych nether thou noz thy fathers haue
chepe⸗bntpll he haue bꝛoughethe to nought, knowne: euen woddand fone. be
And he chall kepe the in / in all thy cities / vn⸗ And amonge thele nacpons thou Walt
tyll chy hre a ſtronge walles be come doune normal ceaton / and vet chalt haue no reſte
wherin thou truſtedect/ hozow all the lande. to the foleofthy foote. Kor the Lorde San

F Andhe chall belege the in all thy cvtves tho- geueche chere a tremblynge herte g Daryn

row but all chr lade which the Lozdihr od eres f lozowe ol mynde. Andthr lte Mall


a hath geuenthe.
oli Beg vit * alt eate the trute of thrne and nyghte ¢ walt haue no truſt in th lte.
Pe dun, dne tat g in the mompng thou alt laxe / wolde Cod
Sera. 4 daughters ixbpch the Lande thy God hach it werenraht And ae npgbe thou thalt tere
geuen the / inthat kraptenede ¢ Cege tober wolde Gad ie were momenge : £07 1975 of
with ehyne enempe Wall belege chelothatit thyneherte which thou thalt keare and 07 8
ue ee
nge delpcate am l
iyo evant wee a n ggayne with yppes / bythe wave which F
bofome/¢on theremnaunt pld2
which hebath pet lete / coꝛ keare of geupnge And there ve calbe folve onto Youre ene⸗
buten prelhemekdhe ew ohe ydzen / unes / koꝛ bondmen and bondwemen: and vet
which 2 oem clepe' Tom te no man wall bye vou.
lette hom yt 5
cher nene aan ee cceTpepeapleaee exhorted took eae


und Curles SDeuteronomium. Ixxr,
dul. ig. a. that ye ought to do. Pe ſtande here this daye thẽ out ol the lande ol Egypt. Andthey went |
euerp one of pou befoze 5 Loꝛde youre God: Fferucd ſtraunge goddes g twopthipped thes |
both the heades of voure ino /poute elders / goddet which they knewe not and which had
pouveofitcers z all che men ok Ilrael: poure geuẽ the nought. Andthertoze the wzath ol
chyldꝛẽ / voure wyues and the ſtraunger that dhe Loꝛde waxed whote pon: that lande ta
are in hne holte rom ß hewerok thy wodd bꝛynge sport ft all the curlesthat are wꝛittẽ
bnto b beater olthy water: 5 thou Wuldeſt in this bone. And the L onde calt them out ok
come onder the appoyntment of the Loꝛde their lande in angte / wꝛath and greate kur⸗
thy God / a bnder his othe which the Loꝛdthr voulnelee / and calt the in to a lraunge lade /
God makech with the this dave. Foz to male as it is come to pate this daye. Che lecrettes
che a people vnto himlelte e that he niape ofthe Loßde oute God Lare opened vnto 08 hg lu the
be onto che a God / as he hach larde nto the and oure chploz€ koz euer / that we do all the Lo whathope⸗
€ ashe bath —.— onto thy fathers Abꝛa⸗ woꝛdes ol this lawe. tp ca
lac an i ; 4
0 1 i e woꝛde of God isnot karre fe i other people.
v n, alp but dae seh Wie Mabel he and eee cee 5
here with pach mapebeton toekone dure che. xxr. Chapter.
God / and allo with him that is not here with e are come vpõ


a


vs this Dave. For pe knowe how we haue e whether it be the blellynge oz
Divelt in the lande of Egypte / and how we Althe cure which haue let bekoꝛe f
came thoꝛow the myddes ot d nacpi 8 ich che / pet yEthou turne vnto thyne |
we palled by. And ye haue lene their abhonu⸗ hertamongeall thenacpos whether d Wor
nacions and their vdolles:wod: ſtone / lrluer thychod hath thzulle the / a come agayne vn⸗
and goide which they had. tothe Lande thy God eherhie vnto his voce
Lek there be amonge vou mG oꝛ womã accopdpnge to all p A cõmaũdde the ihis da ve:
Rrxured oz trybe p turneth awaye in his hert both chou ethy chridzen wall thrne herte @
this dape fromthe L oꝛd dure God / to goo c all thy ſoule: hen the Loꝛde thy God wyll


kerue the goddes ok thete naciong: ẽ leſt chere turne th ite a haue cOpation po the

gane Sea ..... K....

atts totender 0 b n ti

ma ee at toe deen e S oom ofthis cute neden ele tnbys catered ee cyoush chou ara
tolett the lole of her Coote vpon the grounde ¶ Che. xxir hert


ſapinge. J wall haue peace. J will ther⸗ extreme Ker olheauen:euen from thence
jo f02? woncke after the Tufte or mne awne swpll the HLozde thy God gether theand rom
Wibatherte that the*dronche mar perph with the thence kett che and beynge the in tothe lande
re- wiplpe And fo the Lade will not bemer⸗ iobetg So atyers wotteden, thou thait ene

Ader e cptun vnto hm / but then the wrath of the topett. heal wbewe the kyndnelle and wenn yd.
aicrele Lon g his gelouſpe / cmoke agenſt chat mã / multiplpe the aboue thy fathers.* And thers,
Phil po, Call the curles that are wetten in this bone WLozethy God wsll citcumerle tyynehert e
frisGalipes ght vpon hem / and the Loꝛde do out bys the hert of thy feed kor to loue the Lozde thy

Melder. name krom vnderheauen / and leparate hem God with allthyne hert a all thy toule / that

ane onto euell out oF allthetrpbes of Irraelac⸗ thou mapſt put.“ And the Lozde thy God pu. ß. d
Ar be copdynge onto all the curfes ok appopnte⸗ will put all theke curtes spon tyne enemies

ein, ment that is wzitte in the boke ol ihis lawe. Eon them that hate the and perlecute the.

„ Sochat the generaclon to come ol youre But thou halt turne and herken vnto the
A that chplozenthat wall ryle vp alter vou and the voyce ofthe Loꝛde and do all his commaun⸗

gut Araunger that thali come from a ferre lade / dementes which Jcommaunde the this dave

Rutto fave then thep lethe plages ofthat jande / And the Lose thp God wyll mane the plen⸗
5 che dileales wherwith the Lond hath mptté tedus in all che woꝛkes of thyne hande ¢ in
: ſthow all the lande is burnt vp wyth bꝛem⸗ the krute ot thy bodye / in d krute ofthy catell 5
Acne etait / ¢ ö itis nether lowne noꝛ bea⸗ f krute ok thy lande a in ryches. Foz 5 Lord gere. try.

rech no any graſſe growech therin alter the wyll turne agayne und relopce ouerthe todo

ouerthꝛowing of Sodome/Gomor/Adama che good as he retopſed auer thy fathers: K
and Zeboim: which the Lo zd ouerthzewe in thoũ herken bnto the vopce or the Loꝛde thy


Mb pom ofthe apport:
fozfoftnede and kenderneck / Galbe greed 0 2
bo dale on che hulbande that ech in her 4 the Logde cömaunded en
bofome and onberfonne a onber daughter. Fay k 1 chyldzen
euẽ becaule of the atterbyꝛche / chat is come fs lot Acrael in the lande ot Moab
out krom betwene her legaes / a becaule of A ales each he made thE
her chyldzen which dhe hach bome / becaule in Bozeb. And Poles called
che wolde eate chem for neve ofall tyenges andfayoe ontotem: Yebauc ene enden,
lecretl / inche Graptenetic efege wherimitty TLozde byd befoze youre eves inthe latide ot
th l belege the inthr cpties. Egypt / onto Pharao ¢ onto albis teruadtb /
2 thou wilt ot be dpligent to do all che ( önto all his lande / and che greate ie
Wolde ok this latwe that are written inthis Cron which thyne epes haue lem and chole
boke/fo2 to keare chis gloztous and tearkull greatempzactes ¢ wonders: c pet che Loꝛde
name ofthe L onde chy Hod: the Lode wil hach not geuẽ pou an herte to perceaue not
pte boch the and thy (eed wich wonderfull eres to le noz cares to heare vnto this dare.
plages and with greate plages and of longe And J haue led pou. xl. pere in the Wel un
conkinuaunce / and with cuclifeheneties and dernelle: g youre clothes are not waxed olde
oklöge durauice Moareouer he well bꝛunge ops vou voz are thr ives waxed ode vpõ
bps the all the diceales or cgypt which thou thy fete. Ve haue eaten no bꝛead noꝛ dꝛoncke 8
‘watt afraped or / and ther Wall cleaue vnto wyne oz te
the. qherto all maner Ccheneties and el knowe/howe F he is the Lorde poure God.
maner plages which are not w inthe Andacche läct pe came vnto this place /


yl epo Schon the beng of Per bon and Dg kynge «guns bis wrach and angre. Sod / to kepe his commaundmentes ¢ oꝛdy⸗
dee dene br re Aalen came out usb pou onto battell/ #3: n rmaunces 25 ate werten in the Boke of
chalbe iefte kewe in nombze /wherebefoze and wellmote them and tote their jande and . 6 de pe eng of hts acion tno this lawe / pk thou turne vnto the Loꝛde thy
pe were as the! Cartes or heauen in mult. gauettanberitaunce dnto the Rubenites . lade: O hom fearte ts this greatwꝛath: God with all chrne hert and all thy toute.


tut. x. d malle

-becaufe thou woldeſt not herzen bnto and Cadttes a tothe halle tribe of MWanad

eee te gastric Kade God. Bepe therfoze d woꝛdes of this apporntmẽt
E *.


men Wall Cape:becaute hep lektechete. fe the commaundement which com-©
Andag che — — todo anddo them that ve mape bnderitande eat


ftament of the Lore God of their fathers maunde the thisdape / s not feparated kram“ Moni. r.
whichhe made with them / when he bought aher arte of lr Enke. ~


Pꝛeteptes


neadeſt to cape : who Wall go vp ko vs to
heauen / and ket it vs that we mape heare it
and do it Rether is it beponde z lee: chat chou
Wuldeſtlaxe: who Hall go ouc fee forse
fet it vs that tecmape heare it and do it. But
the wozde is very npe önto the: euen in thy
mouth and in chyne hert / chat thou doit.
Btholde J haue let befoze vou thrs dave
pie and godd / death and euell: in that J com:
maunde the this dave to loue the Lozbe thy
Soe to walken his waves a to kepe bys
cömaundementes / his oꝛdynaunces and his
laweg:that thou mayſt ipue a multiplye/ ¢
chat the Lozde thy God mare blede the in the
lande whether thou goeſt to potted it.
2, Put pkchrneherteturne awape lo that
chou wylt not heare: but alt goo 10 8
wozchipe ctraunge goddes and kerue che fl
Pronounce vnto pow chis dape / that ve tall
furely perych and that ve Wall not pꝛolonge
voure apes bps the land whether thou pal⸗
felt baer 40 man to go and Pete it.
v. Deut th. A call to reco de this dap onto vou heauẽ
ald. xh. ge ati eth / that J haute let befoze you Ike and
death / bieynge a curlynge: but chole lpte /
that thou a thy ſeed ma pe lxue / inthat thou
Ioucl $ Loꝛde thy God /herkenett onto his
vopce and cleaueſt vnto hem. foꝛ he is thx
ipke athe lengche of ch dapes / y chou mapſt
dwell pon the erch which the Loꝛde (ware
bntothy kathers:Abzaham / Acaac a Aacob
togeue them. 5
readye to dye oꝛdereth Joſue to rule
eee dead rb es a enen
wzptten and lapde in the tabernacle belpde the atche
Che Leuptts ave charged to reade hit to the people.
Che. rrt. Chapter.
Nd Moles went and cpake thele
wondes vnto all ſrael e fade vn⸗
Kto them. Jam auhüdzed g. fr. pere
ſchis bape / a can nomoare go out
a. Co go inand g in. Ato the L ode hath fap vnto me / thou
outers cor, Maltnotgoo duerthis Joan. Che Lande
kee ob ame- PoUre Göde well go oer before che andhe
nidive ¢ leader Wyll deſtroye thefenacpons befoze the / and
of the:as chait thou thalt conquere the. And Jolua be chall
faythof the | go dur befoze the / as the Lorde hath lapde.
kde. Anneve Tode hal gotnto cem ae he drd
Johan. f., to Dehang Og kynges of che Amozites g
vnto their landes which kinges he deſtroped
And iuhen the Loꝛde bath delpucredthem to
the / ſe chat ve do vnto them accordpnge vnto


all the commaundmentes whych J haue cö⸗ bought


Bmaunded vou. Plucke bp poure hartes and
be ſtronge / dꝛeade not noz be aferde of them:
EopthelLome thy Goo him elfe wil gow
the / a wil nether let the go noꝛ koꝛlake the.

And Moles called bnto Jolua and ſapde
, Jolu eh. bnto hym in the abte of all Itrael . Be
egi g.. Krunge a bolde / cor chou mult go with ches


BDeuteronomium.


eople untoche ande wh ych the I owehath
ozne vnto cher Fathers to geue them / and


thou chalt geueitthemto n heret. And the


Loꝛdehe d bekoze the and he Mail be
with the / and iwyll not let the go noꝛ koꝛlake
the / teare not therfoze noz be difcomfozted,
And Moles wzote chs lawe and delruered
it vnto d pꝛeaſtes the fonnes ol Leu which


bare the arcke or the teſtamẽt of the L ode unn


and vnto all the elders ok Itrael / and com⸗
maundedthem Cavinge, * At the ende ok. vi.


vere / in che tyme of the fre pere / in d Feat old. en


the tabernacles / when all Alrael is come to
apeare before the Lozde thy God / in d place
which he hath cholen : ſe that thou reade thys
lawe befoze all Ilrael in their cares Sether
the people er: boch men / wemen and
childzẽ ¢ the ſraungers that are in thy cities
that they mape heave leren feare the Loꝛde
poure God / a be diligẽt to kepe all § woꝛdes
ok this lawe / and thãt their chyldꝛen whych
unowe nothinge mape heare ¢ lerne to feare
5 Loꝛde poure God / as longe as ve lyue in &
lande whether ego ouer Jo, kope u.
And § Loꝛdẽ fapde vntõ Moes. Beholde
thy darẽs are come that thou mutt dye. Call
Jotua and come and ſtande in che tabernacle
OF wirnelle / that J mave geue hym a charge,
And Motes and Joluã went and Cove in che
tabernacle of wirnele. And p Koꝛde apeared
inthe tabernacle:euẽ in the ppler of deloude
And the piler oF che cloude Kode ouer d doze
ok the tabernacle. Andthe Loꝛde fapdebnto
Moles: beholde / thou mutt llexe wyth thy
fathers / and this people wyl goa whoꝛynge
alter ſtraunge Goddes of the lande whether
they go and wyll fozfaheme and bzeake the
appopntement which Ahaue made wich the
And then my wꝛath will ware whote agent
them / and will fofake them and wild


mpkace From the andther walbe confumed. aun


And when moch aduerkpte and tribulacyon E
is come bpon them / chen ther wyll fave : be⸗
caufeoure God is nor amonge vs thete try⸗ un.


bulactong ave come bpb us. But J wil hyde gf
my Face that Came tyme fo2 al the euels lake n
sobpch ther alt baue wrought/in chacthey owe 15


ure turned vnto ſtraunge Govdes.


dd
‘Mow therfore waite fonge/eteache ama
tt the den ober ab pute in their fe
es p chys fongemapebe my witne tee grau
ien OF Acrael Foz when F haue am
im to che lande wh ware


3 em ich e e
bonito heir fathers chat rumech woch meine c


mouth
onto the


andhonxe / then they wyll eate and kyllthem
lelues ¢ ware katt and turne vnto fraunge -
Soddes and lerue them and raxle on me aide
bzeaße my teſtament. Ind then when moch
Seien
= a wytnede


BE


J moles fonge
4 a wytnelle. It wall not be forgetten out ol p
mouthes of their leed:koꝛ J hnowe their ima
punaceon ui) they goo abouteeuen now
ekoze J haue bꝛoughte them in tothe lande
which Aware. und Moles wꝛote this fonge
the lam̃e cealon / and taughtit che chyldꝛen
ok Ilrael. And the Loꝛdgaue Joſua 5 tonne
of Nun a charge a ſarde: be bolde a ſtronge
£02 thou halt bꝛynge the chyldzen of Flrael
in to the lande which Jlware vnto them / a
J wyll be with the.
when Moles had made an ende of wyy⸗
tyng out of the woꝛdd of this la we ina bone
vnto the ende ok them / he commaunded the
Leuites which bare the arcke ot $ teſtamẽt
ofthe Loꝛde ſapinge: tane the bone ol this
lawe and put it by the ide ol the arcke or
teſtamẽt ol the L oꝛd poure God /¢ lettit be
there koꝛ a wytnetle onto the. J fo2 knowe
thy ſtuburnelle and thy ſtyke necke brholde
whyle Jam pet a ſyue wyth vou thys dape /
hauẽ bene vilobedient bnto p Loꝛde: and
how moch moare after mpdeath.

Geather onto me all the elders of youre
trybes / i voure officers / that J mare ſpeake
thele woꝛdes in their eates a call heauẽ and
erth to recoꝛde agenſt thé . Foꝛ Jam n tt
alter mydeath / they will vtterſp marre
ſelues and tune krom the wave which J cõ⸗
maunded vou / a trybulacion wyll come bps
von in $ later dapes / when pebaue wꝛought
wickednelle in the tyght ol the Loꝛde to pzor
ucke him with the woes ot poure handeg.
And Motes ſpalte inthe eares of all the cõ⸗
gregacton of I ſrael the woꝛdʒ of this ſonge /
önts the ende orthem.

e long ol Moles. he gothe vp vnto the t
Ane toler he muse pombe e
Che. xxxij. Chapter.
Care Oaheaue what z hall fpake
indhear Derth the woznes of my
fetid mouth. My doctryne dzoppe as
K 81 doeth the rayne / z my peach Lowe
e dechechedewe /asthe mptellmge vpon
on / do the herbes /e as the dꝛoppes bponthe grace.
Foz J wyll call on the name ofthe Lozte:
15 i the myght of oure God.

iber „Henan drocke and perfecte are hts deades)
Hike to men Los all his wapes are with dilcrecion God is
ela the fapthlull a without wickednelle / both righ⸗

z, And Cuous and iuſte is he. :
wh 1 that Che krowarde and ouerthwarte genera⸗
H chptozen ot cron bath marred them felues to him ward e
Ran wold not are not his ſonnes koz their deformities lane
ih heave Doeſt thou fo rewarde the Loꝛd: O fooltt
leder nacion and vnwyfe. Js not he thy father and
labore chyne owner: hach hẽ not made the a omer⸗
Miers pee he, ned che: Nemembꝛe the dapes that are pad:
unind esth ta contrdze the peres kromtrme to trme. Alke
buns to chr lather andhe went ſbewe the / chrelders


＋


5.


unte
s that


Deuttronomium.


lxxxi,

and they wyl tell the. when § moſt hygheclhe hig wytnel⸗

gauethe nartons an enveritatice) a dluded cor chm dog

the formes oF Adambe pucthe borders oF pace

nacions / faſt bythe multytude of the chyl⸗ b. Roch. ov

denon inch. i Lee ee
For the Lozdes parte is his kolke / and Ja ewe tec

cob is the poꝛcion or his enherptaunce. dee erat
He kounde him in a deterte land / in a vopde a pertcer contore

ground aa rozynge wyldernetle. Pe led hinrigere nente be

aboute ¢ gaue him vnderſtandinge / a neptelrneegealſumes

him as the apie of his exe. bel he
As an egle that ſtereih vp her nes and flo⸗ un which ace

tereth ouer her pounge / he Rretched oute his doe eden

wynges and toßte him vp eo bare him onhis eee hen

Ghoulders che Londe alone was his gude / netten

and there waz no ſtraunge God wilh hem. „„hat
He lett him vp vpon an hye lande / and he la an neve

ate che encreale ok the keldeß. And he gane he ha he

him honpe to lucke oute of the rocke / ¢ ople naue an ot bys

out ok the harde tone. ndith «butter of Kyne zaumene n

a mpicke of the chepe / watt or the lambes e. 8p tere

and kat ramnies and he 3905 with fat yd Wee el

nexes and with whete. And ok the bloude ifutyeo otoun.

Grapes thou dzonchett wene. Aendern

And g trael waxed fat and Hiyched, A houfef dam he wal.

walt kat, thrcke andlmothe. And he let od leb.

Goo that made him and delppled the rocke h

laued him. They an. eo peat with ſtraunge

Goddeg and with abhominacpons pꝛouolied

him. Chey offeren vnto felde deuels and not

to God / ¢ to Goddes which they knewe not

to newe Godt that came newiy vp which

their fathers keared not. Ok the roche that

begat the thou arte vnmndekul ¢ haft foz⸗

gott God that made the. And when the Lod

lawe it / he was angre becaule of p pꝛoud⸗

arg ok his fonnes and daughters.

End be Cayde:% wpll* hyde mp face krom one afore in
927 e wyll fe whactheir ende challbe. $02 therseno.
ther are a kroward generaciõ and chyldꝛẽ in
whom is no kayth. Chey haue angred ne w
chat which is no God / pꝛouoled me wych
Sauber te * andi agapne wyll angre Bom x. d

em wyth them whych are no people / nd
15 pe wyth 85 sore nacpon.
ndled in np wꝛath / and thall . ;
butne onto the botome okhell. Ind chall geremien e
conlume the erth wych her encreale / z fetta
five the botoms ofthe mountaynes . J wylt
heape mylcheues vpõ the a well ipende all
mne arowes at them. 5
Burne wyth hungre a cõlumed with heate
and with bitter peünence. I will allotende zer eme. v. b,
the teeth of bealtes vpon them and poplon oel ln
ferpentes . wichout forth / helweide chall
robbe them ok their chyldꝛen: and wythin in
the chamber / keare: both pounge men and


pounge wemen and the elungeg with p
men ol grayheadeg / Jhauẽ dekẽrmened to
Thater them choꝛdwout e


make


The blellynges


make aware the remembꝛaunce oF hE krom
amonge men, Were itnot that J kearedthe
raplyng of their enemyes lett their aduerla⸗
tics wolde be pꝛowde ¢ fape: oure hye bande
done all thele workes a not che Loꝛde.

Foꝛ it is a nacron that hath an vnhappre

fozcatt/ andhath no vnderctading in them.


wodde ther were wyle and vnderſtode this €.


wolde concydertheir later ende.

Powe it cometh P one Malt chace a thou⸗
fande / and two put ten thoulande ol chem
tofipahterercepte their rocke had lo lde thẽ /
and becaule the Loꝛde haddelpueredthen.

., Kozoure rocke is not as cheir rocke no
chough oure enempes be iudge. But their
Dpnes are of the bynes ol H odom / and ofthe


feld of Gomoꝛra. Theirgrapes are grapes th.


okgall / and their cluſters be bytter.

Their wyne is the popton ol dꝛagons / and
the cruel gal of alpes. Are not koch thynge
lapde in ſtoꝛe with nie / and lealed vp amõge

„ Hom.rh b. miperealüres: Mengeaunce is mne and

Hebe. y. k. wll rewarde: theirkete fhalldpoe / when
tyme cometh. Foz the tyme of their deſtruc⸗
chon is at hande / o the tyme that call come
vpon them maketh hate.

For the Loꝛde wyll do iuſtyce vnto bys
people /a haue compadion onhis leruauntz
Foz it halbe fene p their power Hall fayle/
Gatthe laſtthey chalbe pꝛeloned a fozfaken,

9 And it cbalbe tapd: where are their Goods
andtheir rocke wherin they truted⸗

Che fatt of whole lacrytpcet they ate and
dꝛanchethe wyne ok their dzynckeollringes ⸗
let them eyfeopandbeipe vol and be youre
pꝛoteccion.

Se now howe that z / Jamhe / and that
there is no God but J. can hpll and make
alyue / and what J hatie emyten that g can
heale: nether is there p can delyuer an man
oute ol myhande. :

For g wyll lycte vp myne hand toheauẽ /
and wri tape: Alus euer.

JET whett the edge ormytwerde mene


ade tale in hade to do luſtyee / J wyll Heme ch.


engeaunce on myne enempes and wyll re⸗
warde them that hate me.

J impli make mpne arowes dꝛonckẽ wich
ploude / andmylwerde (hall eate flech of the
bloude ofthe * flayne and ofthe captyue and
okthe barehead ofthe enempe.
plages of de Pzaple pehethen his people / kor he wyll
kwerde that auenge the bloude ok his ceruaunteg / a wplt
e e

mercpkull vnto the lande ok hi .
{icp Gall be A abotes went ¢ pate all che woes


k. Here rety⸗
tech he. 4ö.


Wee Hun, dndwhen
und brought in he and gotua the lonne ok Hun.
to bondage r oeh poten al there wordes vnto the


Hace eee ende toalgitael / then he darde bnto chem.


Dtuteronomium,


of this longe in the eares or the people both ehr


Sett voure hertes vnto all the woꝛd which bare / Ru
Fs teſtikye onto vou this dave: that be com⸗ there
maunde the onto poure chplozen/ to obferue due
anddo all the wondes ok this lawe. Fortt is sioapenine
not abapne woꝛde vnto vou: but it is youre g. e
Ipke / a thoꝛow this worde pe Wall pꝛolonge the worry
voure da pes in the lande whether vege ouer N he
Joꝛdan to conquere it. 5 Ar
‘uid the Lozotpakebonto aotes the elke ne e
fame dape faving:get the op in toth ys moũ⸗ tedymanp y
tapne Abarim onto mount Nebo / whichis mee
inthe lande of Moab ouer agentt Fericho, 7
‘And beholde the lande of Canaan whych J
geue dnto the chplozen of Fracl to pottette,
Anddpe inthe mount which thou goes vp /
and be geathered onto ty people: As Aaron
pbzotherdyed in modite Poz ä was gethe⸗
reduntohis people Kos pe tretpatedagapnt
me amoge the childzẽ of Alrael at? waters
of ſtrylte / at Cades in the wildernelle or Sin:
becaule pe fanctifien me not amonge 6 chil⸗
dren oF Alrael. Chou chalt le the land before
the / but hal not goo thyther onto the lande
which A geue ch of Ffracl,
C Motes dying bieteeh all the erpoes of Icrael.
he. kxxüi, Chapter.
Nis is the bleüyng wherwith Wo-
fes Gods man bleed the chyl⸗ nilhane abo
Ingen ok Itraell befoze bys death ace of
Staying: be Lord came fro Sinat i 2
@Mewedbisbeames from Sir vntothem /
Gapearedaiozioutly from mount haran /
andhe came withthoutandes of layntes and
in his ryaht bade a lawe oF Epze fo2 the. How
louedhe d people: All his taynt are in bps # Samp


pat cher


rend OF me ⸗
alles of the
Roumemae
reibecaute
uth warre he
toume =
Ade wan a
unt war
ye
Oles ſome
iatogeuse
+ Che chald.
lerpre » was
ud there.


@ pectect
Bata wy) rem chou es Re
Arpuedect at ? waters of trite. He p Cavetd fo ncoti |
4 bert oute
it appeae
Enso cante -


twozdes and kepte thy cettament They aug ige ere
Mhalleeache Facob thy tudtemétes Braet gechnnee co


tp a
Due


pf motes


that ryle agapntt thé and ol them that hate
themitherrple not agarne.

into Benz amin he larde. Che Lopes
derlynge chall dwell in laſetye by hem and
kepe him kelke in the hauen by hym contr⸗
nualiy¢ tall dwell betwene his weulders.


4 And bnto Z oleph he faye: bleſſed of the


Loꝛde is his lande wich the goodly krutes ol
heauen / with dewe and wyih ſpꝛvnges that
ive beneth: and with krutes of encreaſe ot
the lonne a with rype krute ok the monethes /
g with the toppes ok mountapnes that were
from the begynnynge and with the darntes
ok hylles that laſt euer ¢ wyth goodly krute
ofthe erth and of the Eulnette therol.

And § good wll of him 5 dwelleth in the


enth.. * buſhe Hall come vpon the head ok Loleph


and pon the toppe of the bead of heim that
was leparated from amonge hig bꝛethrẽ his
bewtie is as a fyꝛuboꝛne ore and his homeg
as the hoꝛnes ofan vnycoꝛne. And with the
he Mail puche the nacions to gether / euẽ one
tothe endes of the world. Q hele are d many
thoulandes of Ephꝛaim and the thoufandes
of Manatles.

And vnto Zabulonhe tarde: Neioyſe Fas
bulon in thy goyinge out / and thou Jlachar
in thytentes They chall call the people vnto
the hlt / and there they thail offer offerpnges
ofrpghteoutnes Foz they call lucke of the
sneer ol the lee and ot treature hꝛdin

e lande.

And onto Sad he lapde: blelled is the *ro-
fommaker Gad. Hedwelleth as a lion and
caught the arme and alto the toppe of the
head. He lawe hig begynnynge / that a parte
ok the* teacher * was hyd there and came
wyth the heaves ol the people / and executed
the ryghtroutr es of the Loꝛde and hys iud⸗
gementeg wych Z lraell.

And vnto Wan he fayde : Dan is a lxons
whelpe / he chall flowe from Balan.

And onto Hephthalt / he tarde: Hephthall
he cball haue abundäce of pleature a Hatbe
krlled with the blellynge of the Loꝛde a wall
haue his potiedions in the ſouthweſt.

And ol Aler he larde: Aler cgalbe bleded
with chyldzen: he thaibe acceptable vnto his
bzethzen and Mall dyppe his fote in ole Fe⸗
ron and bzate Mal hange on thy Momesand
thrne age ſhalbe as thy youth.

r Chere is none ſyke vnto the God ok
Ilrael: he that lyttech vpon heauen cwalbe
thpne beipe whole gloꝛpe ts in che cloudes /
chat is the dwellynge place ol God kromthe
begynnynge and krom vnder the armes ol?
chere aer e ano gl al

05 eideſtrope.
dwell in faffetye * alone. And the epes of Fas


5.5. Cob Mallioke bpona lande of come a wine
8


Deuteronomium.


Ixxxij.

» i

moareduer bys heauẽ (hall dꝛoppe Wdewe. vps this wordt
apppe art thou Braell / who is Iphe pneo To dwell oy
e:


people that art fated bythe owethybnn eite.


Milde and helper and rwerde ol thy gloꝛpe.
And thyne enempes wall hyde them felues
from the / and thou (halt walke vpon their
brehulles. 103555 :
Holes dpeth. Jtracll wepeth. Jocus luccedeth in
Wolts roume. N
CAChe. xrritiſ chapter.
d Woles wet From the keldes org
ooh bp inco mont eva which
ische toppe of Phalgah z is ouer
4 agapnt Jericho. And p Lod thee
wed Hym all the lande of Palaad euen vnto
Dan / g all Hephthalt ¢ 5 landot d phzaun
€ Manalee / and alt the land ol Zuda:euẽ vn⸗
to the btmoſt lee / ache fouth a che regton ol
6 plaxne of Jericho p eptie of paulmetrees
kuen önto Saar. And the Loꝛde larde vnto
m. Chis is che lande which Acwäre onto gene. 2. l.
bꝛaham / Flaac and Jacob lapinge:J wyll and. vv. h.
eue it vnto thyſeed . Fhaue chewedik § be-

10 ‘ene epes:but thou walt not goo duer


Spo Moles the leruaunte of the Loꝛde
15 the lande of Moab at the come
maundemẽt of the Lozd, And he burped hun
in a balep in the lãde of Poa betyoe Beth
Pheoꝛʒ:büt no man wyſt or his ſepulchze vn⸗
to this dare. and Molen was an hurdzed ar
and. xx. pere olde when he dped / and vet hes
eres were not drm noꝛ hrs chekes abated,
And the chyldzẽ of Flrael wepte koꝛ AF oles:
th the keldes ot Moͤab. xxx. dayes. And the
Daves ol wepyngẽ and mournpnge koꝛ Mo⸗
les were ended.

And golua the tonne of Mun was full or * Namers
the lpttite of wyldome: fo7 Molcs had put nh. .
his bande vpon him. And all the chyidzen ol
Atrael herkened pntohim adyd as the Lor
commaunded Moles. But there arole note
prophet lence in Jlrael ipne vnto Moleg /
whom the Loꝛde finewe face to face / in all
the myꝛacles and wonders which the Loꝛde
fent hym to do in the lande of ogypte / vn⸗
to Pharao and allhis ſeruauntes and vnto
allhis lande: and in all the mightye deades a
greate tereble thynges which Moles dydin
che tyght ol an Jfrael.


che ende of the lylth boke
be ee.


ae
1,


in


Jericho.
Theboke of Jolua


¶ The Loꝛde tourageth Jotue to muade the lande of
pꝛomeſle / and cõmaundelh him contynualty to reade
deuterongmpr.


Othe tyꝛſt Chapter.


.

N put ara
me Xe nyſter faping: Mp ofes mpter-
BES sauntisneco Gow therfore
DP ¢qoo fuer Jordan / bothe thou g allthis
people / vntothe lande the which J geue vn⸗
v Dbeut rt. c. tothe chplozé of Acrael. All the places that
thefooles of youre fete wall treade vpon⸗
haue g geuen vou /as J larde onto Mols:
krom the wyrdernes and this Libanon vnto
the great rtuer Euphzateß: and all the lande
ok the Hethites / euen vnto the great tee to⸗
warde the coving doune of the tonne / Halbe
goute 1 58 8 der 5 ma 17 ih
our. ih. b ko wythſtande the all the ol e.
erl. 0; a5 twas with Mores, fo ply be 5
V the le will nether leaue the / noꝛ koslane the.
Deut. rxxib * Beſtrong and bolde: £02 vntot hes people
10. Bend hate thou deuide the land which J lware vn

tocheir fathers to geue them.
boue all thing be ſtrong and Stwalche
telle / to oblerue a to do / accodyng to all the
lawes which Motes my feruaunt cõmaun⸗
Deut. v. 8. pedthe.“ Cournetherkrä nether to $ right
hand / noꝛ to the lekte chat thou mapſke haue
önderſtandynge in allchou takelt in bande
v cut xvil. d. et not the bowie ofthis lawe departe out oF
thymouthe: Eut reco de therin dave anight
C that thou mapſt be ctrcumſpect todo accozs
beng to allthat is wzitten therin. Kor then
Walt thou make thy wave pꝛolperoule / and
then thou thalthaue vnderſtädrng.Beholde.
J haue layde vnto che / be tronge and bolde:


nether cave /nogdzeade. Fo the Lose chr ther


God ig with the whether to euer thou goeſt.

Chen Forua comaunded the officers of §
peoplefapinge. Goo thozowe the myddes or
che hotte/and comaunde the people laringe /
prepare pou bitarles fo after thze daxeß ve
fhall patie ouer this Joꝛdan / to goo a eniode
the lande which the Lozd voure God geuelh
pou;te polletle it.

And onto che Rubenites / Gadites / and
halfe the trybe of Manadles Cpake Jolua
ſapinge: Nemember that which Moes the
feruatit ok the Lon cimaunded you faving,
the Loꝛd poure God athe geuen vou reat,
andhathe geuen pou this lande. Lett poure
wpues poure chyldzen / and poure catell tes

gp mapne in the lande which Moles gaue
on ches lyde Joꝛdan: But goo re beide


Jolua.


“youre bꝛethnen Irmpd / all that be men of

warre / andheipe chem ont rl the onde haue

geuen poure bzethzẽ reaſt / as he hathe pou /

and vntyll they alto haue optayned / lande

which the Loꝛde poure God geueth che. And

chen retourne vnto the lande of poure pollel⸗

Foon and eniope it / which lande Moles the
Loꝛdes ceruaũt gaue vou on this kpde Joꝛ⸗

dan towardethe konne rplpnge. And theß an-
ſwered Jolua faping: ail chat thon byodeſt Hews,
vs / we wll do / and whether loeuer chou Cen: eren fü
deſt vs / we wyll go. Accoꝛdyng as we obeyed
Motes in all thynges / co we well obexe the.

onlpe the Lorde chy God be wrth the as he

was with Moles. And wholdeuer dplobepe
chymouthe / and wyll not herken onto typ
woꝛdes in ail that thou cõmaundeſt hym / let

him dre: Oni xe be lrong a of good courage.


CJofua tendeth ſearthers oz ſppes beheben ed
were hrdde of Nahab and fo echäped the hade the
Leet. Bab ab beleueth and conkelleih the God ol


ſcrael.
he. ii. Chapter.


en golua the tonne ol Hun lent *
ut of Dettüntwo lppes lectecxe
lapinge:go a vewe the lande a allo


„ Mer
lodged chere. Andit was tolde the Benge of ara
erichotapinge::Sebolbe there came men in radeln
hyther to nyght / or the chplozen or erael to nate gout,
fppe oute the countrer. Andthe Ang of Fes

icho Cent onto Nahab Caving: bꝛynge koꝛth
the men 6 are come to the wh pch are entred
into thyne houte:fo2 ther be come to ſearche
out all the lande.

And the womantokethe two men ¢ herd
them. And card / in deade there came men ons
to me but q wot not whence ther were. And
aboute the tyme or the chutt of the gate
‘whch it was darcke / chey wet dute / whether
went J wotnot: but kolowe after them
qupcklpe and pe wall take them. And che B
bꝛought them vp byon che roole of f h


0


pmnmiediaclpe.
a depe , we came


See ebe eden e

5 1

d died bp ß water of F revo fee betoze pony eln
udn zou ame dur ore rp ö nber pox


„ ata
255


ge ouer


Jolud


+ . te
Jordan, lxxxiij
ptr tela den vp / and xxx ij.


Che. iij. Chapter.


dd Folua vote eripe: and they re-
6 ues krom Spettint/ and came to
Joꝛdan / bothe he and all the chyl⸗
dz of Itrael / and totourned there
befoze they went ouer. nd akter thze dayes
the officers went thozou oute the hoſte / and
commaunded the people lapinge: when ve le
the arcke of the teſtament of the Lozd poure
God / and the pꝛealtes that are Leuites bea⸗
ryng tt:thendeparte ve krom poure places a
Kkolowe alter it. So pet p there be a ſpace
betwene poy a it / aboute a twothoulande.
cubptes bp mealure. And come not nye onto
it / that ye maye owe the waye by which ve
mutt go: foꝛ pe haue not gone by it in tymes
palt. And Jotua lapde onto the people pu- Pumeelxihe
rife poure telues / ko: tomoꝛowe the Lozde iixegum. xvi.
Wall ewe wonders amonge pou, U. Jolue. vö. ce
Chen Jolua ſpake vnto 5 pꝛealtes taping
Cake vp the arcke of the teſtament / and go
before the people. And they tohie vp ß arche ro maguy⸗
ol the teſtament / and wet befoze the people. pe property
ndthe Loꝛd lard vnto Jolua: this daye u to amnuncd
wyll J begynne to magnilie the / in p tyght tt Forth exo
or ali Alrgel/ cha ehepmaye tote, how P fo ge hen
7a J was with Woles/ fowyll J be wyth n cm
the. And commaunde thou the preatkes that itis tayde asco
beare the ache of thecettamét / taping: whẽ ne. hen ud


BS feare entered alrtle into the water ok Jo- eng


danthen ſtande tlic in it.

Chen tpake Folua to the chyloze oF Pract
ſapinge: come hyther and heave the woꝛdeg
ol the Loꝛde youre God. And Jolua lapde.
pate ve Hall knowe that the liuyng God

amonge vou / and that he wyll wythout €
faplecatt oute befoze pou / the Cananites;
the Hethites / the Heuites / the Pherelites /
che Gergetites the Amozites and the Jebu⸗
lites. Beholde / the arcke of theappopntemét
ok the 107d ok all the worde wall go bekoze


to vou into Fozdan. And now take you twelue


we

parted. And che bounde the purple cooꝛde in
che wyndowe.

And cher departed and gotte them intothe
mountapnes / and there aboade the dares
vntrü the purtuars were returned. And the
purfuars fought thoꝛowe oute all che wave
and kounde them not. And the two men re⸗
turned and delcended krom the mountarne
and palled over / a came to Jocuathe tonne
ol Nun / and tolde him all that had chaunced
chem. And ther lade vnto Locus the Loꝛde
bathedelpuered into oure hands all the lade /
Eozall the inbabiters ol the contrer kante
ros keare of vs.


men of the chyldꝛen of Irael / ol euery trybe
a man. And as lone as the fooles ok the fete
ol the pꝛeaſtes that beare the arcke ol Je⸗
houahlthe Loꝛde of all the wozlde ) treade in
the water of Joꝛdan / the water ol Joꝛdan
chall deurde it tele: and the waters that cö⸗ Arten. but.
meth from aboue (hall ſtande ſtyll bpon an
heape. Ind when the people were departed
from their tentes to goo ouer Joꝛdan (* the
pꝛeaſtes bearyng the arcke ol d appopnte⸗
ment befoze the people) as lone as thep that
bare the arcke came onto Joꝛdan / a the fete
of the pꝛeaſtes that bare the arcke were dip⸗ o :
ped in the bzpm of the water Jo208 beping xGecti.cettite
Gull over all bes banckeß all the tyme of
Ia. bavuette:


tho.
1 from
ghouedpd ſtoppe and ſtode vpon an beape/
agreat wape krö Adam / acptie belpde Sate
chan, And the water that went downe vanic⸗
ched in tothe lee ol the wyldernes called the
fait (ee as lone as it was deupded· a the peo⸗
ple“ wẽtryght oueragapnſt Jericho. And d
preattes p barethe arcke of the appoyntes
ment or the Loꝛde ſtoode ſtyll bps die land /
vntill all d people were cleane ouer Joꝛdan.
C Cwelue Cones ave reared vp foz aremt bꝛaunce
that Jozdan was dzped-¢ it returneth agapne to hys
couric. Che. itij. chapter,
: das lone as the people were all
Gone ouer Zozdan / che Loꝛdlpake
Cjonto Jolua laringe. Cake pou
4 welut men out of the people / ol:
eucty trpbe aman. And cõmaunde pou the
fapinge: take poubence oute ob tye myddes
ok Jozdan euen oute ok the place where the
pane ſtoode in avedpnes / twelue ftones,
nd tale ve thé aware with vou a put tem
inthe place where pcu lodge atnyght. And
‘ofa called bntothe tweſue men which he
jad prepared o£ d chyldzẽ of Alrael / of euere
trybe a n / z lapde onto the*.get vou beko /e
the arclie ok the Loꝛde poure God eu into e
myddes of Jod / take vp euerr maa fone
HYG his Mouldev/accozdpng onto d nombze
ofthe trybes ofthe chyldzen ot Ilrgel that
this mape be malle amonge vou. And whe
poure chyldꝛen alke their fathers in tyme to
come N what meane ve wyeh thele
ſtones: then fave vntothẽ / how that a


Beri


Sp lalicd.b


aptutsrbia,


ol Fordandeupded at the pretence ok arche
26 of the appopntement of the Lozde:eue while
it wet ouer'Fozdant / the water ofFozdande-
upded. And thete Hones chalbe a memoꝛpall
vntothe chyldꝛen ok Ilrael ko euer.

And the chplozen of Jcrael dyd euenſo
as Joſua commaunded / and toke vp twelue
ftones oute of the myddes ol Joꝛdan / as the

h. tz · zvih. r Loꝛde ſarde vnto Jolua accozdynge to the
nombꝛe ok the trybes ol the chridꝛen of 3f-
rael / and carved them awaxe wih thé vñto
the place where they lodaed / and lared them
doune there. Andtherto olua let vptwelue
ſtones in the myddes of Joꝛdan in the place
where the fete. of the pꝛealtes whych bare
the arche ok the teſtament ſtoode .

95 Andthtre they be euẽ a nto this dape. Foz
u. Chetemae § preattes whych bare che arcke Aoode ind
abe ee uh o n ödes oF FozDAN /bnepltall was FerfAheD

Daye onto thps that che Lorde cõmaunded Jolua to laxe vn

pretene pape 6 kothe people / accoꝛdynge to all that Woles

Coche ine C charged Jolun. And the people hacted a wet

bender "outer. tober all the people were cleane ouer
BDOCTAM. then went ouerthearche ok che Morde / Fale

the thynges 4

were (0 done lo the preattes befozethe people. And ö chil

chat they wert dꝛen OF Ruben / and the cheldꝛen ol dad / and


Jolua.,


halle the trrbe of Manalles went bekoꝛe the not aug


Chplbye of Alrael armed, as Moes charged gn ns
een


them. upon a tourtythouland trymmed toz


*


Jericho


cute were circumcpled. But ali the people


warte went befozethe Londe nto battell Pei tg,

euen onto dhe toploefeloes of Fericho. Chat auf wenne veaten at narre Faun / olegißt
bape the Lobmagniepen oli in hel paht eon of mien ok warre p came out of Egipt
ofall Aargel,amdchen Feavenbpun /as then b. f aor ub Seri b hut toe Leerer e 1
feared Moles alldares ot his rte. bere w, e wolde not chewe them the land which che


Andthe Loꝛde (pakke vnto olua taping: wereripta
cõmaunde the wealtes that Seare the arcke
de wyrnelee to come vp oute of Jordan. And n
Zolua commaunded the preaites lapinge. Bp,
Alcende vp out of Jozdan. And when che
pꝛeaſtes that bare the arcke of § appopnte- be
ment of the Loꝛd were alcended oute of Joꝛ⸗
dan: as fone as the ſooles ot the pꝛeaſtes fete
were bꝛought to dꝛpe land / the water ol Joz⸗
dan retournedagayne vnto his place a went
duer all his banckes as he dpd before. And
the people came bp out of Fozdan the tenthe
daye oF the Fpztt moneth and pitched in Gals
gal euen inthe eatte boꝛders of Jericho,

„And b twelue tones whpch they tone out f
deo dan Folua picched in “algal. And he ard zen
fpake nto the chyldꝛen of Zlrael lapinge / che cast
whẽ voure chyldꝛẽ athe pou in tꝛme to come the cory.
fapinge: what meane thele tones / wewe weit
poure chyidzen and faye: Firs came cuer png,
this Gordan on dere land. Foz N Londe poure eng

God dꝛped vp the water ol pea before cauleth
Pou / vntyll ve were ouer / as the Lozd poure there tot
God drobntothe redlee which he dwed bp okey
befoze bs tpll we were ouer / F all p people dr en


todo


ok the woꝛlde maye knowe the hande ot the chem an


Lozde how mpghtye it is / and that ve might ner


feare the Loꝛdẽ poure God Foz euer. ig


¶ Che Cananites are afcarde. Che ſeconde cirtum⸗ Tap x.y


©)


rael /ontyil the
an


1.
fametyme the soz


the wyldernes by the wape alter they came
oute or Egrpte. Mow all peaplethatcame


25
1


dann


Sale
Hy)


bp mare thew


b ha
ofepbush


dure adut
dut J am 8 captayne of the hoſte of 8 1.0
Gan me ann gotta fell enhps face
tothe erth and drd reucrence/ andlarde vn⸗
to hym / what lapch my Lozde onto bys fers
ualint.And the captapne ofthe lo es holte
fade vnto Jolua: do thy woes of thy feate /
fo2 the place wheron thou ſtandelt is holr.
in dead e, u s it :
EM He walles of Jericho Lata taker.
¶ Che vi. Chapter.
Nd Jericho chuttin


fua:
Jericho a her kung a the men of warre. And


tee Of warre / a go rounde aboute it once: andlo
wache J, al pon no fyredapes . And feuen preattes
a Crantt, Wall beare Ceuen trompettes of * rammes
4 thebornes bekoze the arcke. And che leueneth

obtubelpe. dape / ve Mall compade the cytie leuen tymes


„ onlxthat cher


Pe call compact the cptie / all that bemen


FJotua,


ethepzcattes chall blowe with their trom⸗
pettes. And when there is a longe blaſte blo⸗
wen wyth the rammes home / atone as pe

eare § loũde ol the hoꝛne / lett all the people

tute a myghtie chowte. And then chall che
walles of the citie falle doune / and people
wall alcende vp / eueryman ſtreight beloꝛr


A


*


xi.


him. And Folua the Conne of Mun / called vn⸗
to the pꝛeãſtes and fapde vnto them: take bp
che arcke of the appoyntement / alett leuen


pean beare feuen trompettes of rammes


oꝛnes betoꝛe the arcke of the l.oꝛde. Andhe


fapde vnto the people / go a cõpaſſe the citie:
G lett the men ol armes go beloze the avche
ok the Loꝛde. And when Jolua had (poke vn⸗
tothe people / the ſeuẽ pꝛeaſteg that bare the
leuen trompettes ol rammes hoꝛnes betoze
the arcke ol che Loꝛd / went forth and ble we
with the homes and the arcke of the teſta⸗
ment of the Loꝛde folowed after them. And
fyemen ok armes wet before the prcattes p

ewe with the hoꝛnes / andthecdme peopic
came after the arcke: and as they went / they
blewe woche hoꝛnes. And Jolua cõmaundeb
the people lapinge / wwowte not noꝛ let youre
voyce be harde /ozanp worde proceade out
ol voure mouthes / vntyllche daxe J by dyou


chowte:andthen chowte.


And lo the arcke o€ the Loꝛde compalen

c cytie and went aboute it once: and then
ep returned into the holte and lodged there
And 187 role erly in che moꝛnyn / and the
ꝛeaſtes tone vp the arche of the Loꝛde / and
feuen pzeaſtes bare leuen trompettes ol
times hoꝛnes befoze the arcke ol the Loꝛde /
and as they went / blew with the hoꝛnes. And
the men ok armes went bekoꝛe chem / and the
comen people came alter the avciie ol the
Loꝛde: and as they went / theyblewe topily
che homes. Ind h feconde dave they cõpalrd
the cptte once / and returned agayne in tothe


holte / and lothey opp lire dapes longe.
And che leuench dape they role eilpe:euen
with the dawninge ol thedaye / a compaled


the cytte alter


veel


A
2


5 Came maner ſeuen tymes:
edche cylie leuẽ tymeg.


— 8 x as
Ind at the feuenty tyme / the preattes


blewe with che hoꝛnes / and Jofua fay onto
de Hath geuen


se people Spatte forthe Ker


l. iiij.


vous


Itritho.
Couche ertie. Butthe cptie chalbe excomu⸗
nicate / bothe it and aulthat is therin / vnto 6
Lorde: onlye Rabab the harlot Halt tyuc/
wotucge, othe the gall thats with her in theboute /
becaule the* ypone che melengers that we
lent. And in anywyle beware or the ercõmu⸗
nycate thynges / lealte ve make poure ſelues
excõmunicate. For vt vou take ol the excom⸗
municatethynad / to Hall pou make 5 holte
ol Alrael excßmunpcate and Mail trouble it.
Muto the ſyluer / golde / vellelles of bꝛalle
and yꝛon chalbe holy vntothe Loꝛde a wall
go in tohis trealurpe.

And the people cryed / and blewe wyth
hoꝛnes:koꝛ when the people hearde ö lounde
bebte it. ok the hoꝛnes cher owted a great wowte:
and the* walles tell downe / and the people
went vp into the cytye / euer man ſtreyght
bekoꝛe him / a tone the citie. And they vtteriy
deſtroped all b was in the cytie / bothe man ¢
woman / vounge and olde / oxe / pepe / a Ale /

with the edge ok che [werde.

Chen g olua ſayde vnto the two men that
went tofpre oute the contrexe: goo into the
harlottes houle / a bzynge oute thence / bothe
the woman ¢ all that pertapneth toher! ag

(ware to her. And the pounge men p were
pres went in and bꝛoughte oute Nahab / a
her kather / and mother / and all her bzethꝛen
and all that he had. And ther bꝛoughtout all
bee and put them without the holte
ol


el.

Another hum the cytye with kyꝛe / and
all that was therin Only che lpluer z golde
and the thynges ol bꝛalir and peron they put

ubebze tk. onto the trealure o€ the houle or the Leide.
and Jolua ne delten —.— 1 gher
ershoutholveandal that pertapned vn⸗
} sat bah inzrael / euen onto this
chine stttenre Dave becaule Mebpode p megengers which
Dis chpioze Feo Forua ent to ſpye oute Jericho.
the cide tothe” And Jotua curled at chat teme / taringe /
Povigett-wbich curled be the ran beroze the Kode rei
TPG Harke vp qnipbploety this cptve Jericho te that be
Wolhel ih. reg. lave the Foundacion wyth the“ death of bys
bic. We that eldelt konne / and w the death / or hys vollgeſt
which vo tbat ler bp the gates. andthe Kade was with
mt bone andes. un Hearne / gr
landes. ° :
ul; wih weden ſpped oute Acan is Roned becaute he toke ol


ahebꝛe. xi. f.
Joſuc. ij. c


poſterptye. the excdinunicate thynges.
¶ Che. vii. Chapter.
3 hut vet che chplozen of Alraentrel⸗
ſpaledin d excomuntcate thynges:


v olue. xxij.d fo2* dcan the lonne of Catmi / the


Vue tchokthetube of Fiba coke okcheercömn⸗


nicat thynges. And the wꝛath of che Loꝛde
waxed whote agape the chrwdzẽ of Arael.
Chen Jolua dent men from Jericho to ai


Jolua.


nne ol Sabot / the lonne ol Za⸗ by


A.
ich is b. el. a
peg — elpde Bethauen / on the ealttyde


ned onto goss ano tayae puto; Lett’ nat pce ang
all the people go vn / but tetas tt were a two borbeon,
02 thꝛe tholilande men goo vp and deſtrope qua Bi
and make not all the people to laboufe tert
thether / koꝛ they are but ewe. Wethau n
Ano there went vp thetheraboute a the the een
thouilande men / which fledde bekoꝛe the men weet 8
bea Andchemenot wi mote of chemopon doi
& chrztre and lyre men / and chaled them tacrye, ig
betoze the gates euen vnto Gabarim / and rij. 20h
{mote them in the govinge doune. And che 5 sae
hertes of § people were dilcauraged g meal 1
tedivke water, And golua rent hys clothes
and ken to the erch vpon hrs face bekoꝛe the Ey
avche of the l oꝛde vntyll the euẽ tyde / bothe —
etl elders ol Jerael / and put erty bps
eirheddes. 0
And Jolua ſapde / Ah / Loꝛde Jehouah / q
twherfoze att thou bzoughtthis people ouer 4
logdan to delpuer v into the handes of the
Amo :ites to deſtrope vs: woldtocßod wehad
aduentured and dwelt on the other lyde Fors
dan. Oh L ode whaothatt A Cave / wheñ Fs
raelturneth their backes befoze their ene⸗
mes: Mozeouer the Cananttcs/ and all the
enhabiters of the lande (hall here ot it / and
fhall come aboute bs anddeſkrope the name
ol vs oute ol the woꝛde, Indthen what wilt
thou do vnto thy myghtie name.
andthe Lond fapde onto g oſua / gett the
vp / wherkoze lpeſt thou thus bpd thp face?
Alraelhath lnned K allo tranlgrededmyne
Appopntment/which J commaünded them /
and haue talk ofthe ercdmuntcate thinges /
and haue ſtolen andypdde thé / and allo put
thé vnto theirawne tuffe: And therfore the
childꝛen of Foracl cannot ſtande befoze their
enempes Eher chall turne their backes be⸗
foze their enempes becaule ther be excõmu⸗
nicate. Nether will J be tb you any moare?-
excepte ve deſtrope the ercommunycate kr
amonge pou, 8
wp g lanctttpe the people ¢ bydd — 4
tofanctpfpe the felues agapnt the mozotve: 2.
koꝛ lo lapth the Loꝛde God ol Flvacl / the ex:
communicacion is amonge pou Icrael / and
therkoꝛe ve cannot ſtande betoꝛe youre ene⸗
myes / vntyll ye haue put the excommunica⸗ i
cion td amonge pou, Co moꝛowe moꝛmeng 8
pe hall come by pouretrybes. Ind the trybẽ
which p Loꝛde wall kynde gyltie/ all come
Ryntedes. And d hipnrede which the K. oꝛd
thail fynde gyltpe / chall come by houſboldes.
And the hoücholde whych the Lone Wall
Ende kautpe / wall come man by man And
heß is kounde in the excõmunicacion patbe


2
l. a a
che v burnt wich five / bothe he and all that per⸗
ec, tapneth onto hum / becaule he bath ttälgrel⸗
bnd bh couendto the Lozde/and becaule he
e aberdeen
ct And lo 3 o ebperiy in d moꝛnynge
Beate death and bꝛought Ilraell by their tribes vat the
ao che kyntedes ok Juda / and kolinde the krnred
ter.d.is ok the Zarehites giltie. Andhe bꝛought the
dened: hinted OF the Savebites by houcholderg / and
fle e abt was caught. And he brought bps
Anemheulbolde man bp man / and Acan the tonne
tape Dot Carmt /the tonne of Zabdi / the konne ot
me Sareh in the trybe of Juda was caught.
op afflic⸗


1 eum ride OF Juda was caught. Chen he bꝛought


And Joſua layde vnto Acan: mp tonne /
. Jlernt. Heu gioꝛpe to the Loꝛde God ol Ilraell /e
Hains. b geue him pꝛaile / a ſbewe me what thou halt
edcageut glo- done / and h yde it not from me. And Acan an⸗
kunden ie wered Fofua andlarde sofa truthe J haue
abe gon EMnedagapnt che Node God of Aae
andtrue, Io And lo haue I done. J Cawe amonge the
fe. lpople a goodſpe Babiloniſhe garment / and
aatterfomea two hundzed kicles oF liluer / and a: tonge of
nde oy Sale golde ol kyltpe licles werghte: and J coue⸗
Aide Eactoe ted them / and J tobe them. And beholde they
sipipheatége. Ipe hydde inthe erthe in my tente and the kyl⸗
üercher vnder.

And Jolua Cent metlengers
Hine vnto the tent. And beholde / it was hide
in hys tent / and the tyluer there vnder. And
they toke them out ok the myddeſt okhis tent
and bzought them onto Jolua and onto all
che chrldzen of Jlraell / and powred thé oute
bekoze the Loꝛde.

And Jolua toke Acan the tonne of Za⸗
teh / and the fyluet / and thegarment / and
the tonge of golde / and hys tonnes andhys
an a c be bab / an ai gal

and brought them vnto che baleye of


coz.
And Joſua
hatte troubledbs:


} wbelmed them wyth ones And chey calt


* marnech onto this dare. And log Loꝛde tur⸗


15 uu ol At. The kyng therof
Mentrouble is hanged. Jolua ketteth vp an altarcon whpch is
kronöltlom . the boke ol Deuteronompt. Wc blefeth the
0 people.


Che. vit. Chapter.
Nd the Lorde fayde vnto Fora:
ifeave not / ner dꝛeade: but take all
the men ot warre wich che / a vp
gett the to Ai. Beholde J haue ge⸗


6 edto kolowe after them And they folowed


Folia, lxxxv.


uen into chr hande / che king ok At / and hig
people / his citie a his lande. And thou Wait
do to Al e her kyng / as thou ddeſt onto” Je⸗ x Jotubt
rico andberhyng, Qeuerthelede the tpaple adh.
E catell therok / pe halt take onto voure iel⸗ 5
ues. But lape q watch onto the towone on d
backlyde therok.
And then Jolua arole and all the men ol
warre / to go bp bnto At. And Jolua chole
oute thyꝛtye thoulande men ok warre / and
lent them bynyght. And he commaunded
them kapinge: Se that ve iye awayte onto
the towne on the backelpde therol. Go not
very karre fromthe cptpe / and le that ye be
all readpe. And g and all the people that are
wyth me / wyll appꝛoche onto the cytye. lu. vg. u.
And when ther come out agarnſt vs / (ag at
the fyꝛſt tyme then will we flee bekoze them.
And they wyll come oute alter vs / ontyll we
haue plucked chem awape from the cytye.
Fon ther well Cave / ther flee befoze bg / ag at
che kek tyme: for we wll Ace bekozethem.
Chen Mal ve ryle op LG Iving awayte e de⸗
ſtrope the cytxe: Fo the Loꝛde poure Go
wyll delpuerit into poure handes. Ag lone
therfoze as pe haue taken the cytye / ie that
pe ſet it on tze, Accodengetothe comaunz


whych dement of the Loꝛde te that ye do / beholde /


haue charged vou.

And goſua tent them koꝛthe / and they wee
to Ie awapte and lape betwene Bethel and
At / on the weft Cyoe of Ii. But Jolua jodged
that nyght amonge the people, And he role
bp erlpe in the moznpnge and nombzed the
people and went vp /bothe he and the elderg
Of Atraell befoze the people / onto At. And all
the men ol warre that were with hym / went
vp and due nye / and came befoze the cptpe/
and pitched on the noꝛth lyde of At / a valeye
being betibene thé and au. Andhe toke vpon
& Epue thoulande men and put them to lye
& warte / betwene Bethel & At / on the welts
fyde oF the cytye and he put the people euen
all the holte / onthenoꝛthlpde ol the citte / and
che lxers awapte on the welt, And Jolua
ue nyoht into the myddes sf the


And when the nyng ot arlawe that they


che haſted and role by erive / then the people ol


the eytye went oute agaynſt Alraeni / to bat⸗

tell bothe the ng andallhys people / ata

tyme apornted euen befoze the plapne and
wyſt not that there were Ivers awapte on
the backlyde of the cytye.

And Joſua and Icraell were put to the
wondle bẽkoꝛe them / fleve to warde the wyl⸗
derneſſe. Andalche people of the towne cry⸗
after Jolua kpülther were dawen awaye
fromthe


0.


Jolua


fromthe citte: So that there was not a man
lealt in at / oꝛ in Bethel / that went not oute
alter gſraell. And they leatt the cytie opẽ and
folowedatter Jlraell.

Chen the Lande lapde onto Jolua ſtretche
out Fbouckelarg is inthine bande towarde
Ai / to I haue geũẽ d it. Ind Jolua ſtretched
out $-bouckelar s was in his häde/ towarde
S citi, And the lers awaite role quichive
Jute of thetr places / ¢ranne / atone as Jo-
ſua had tivetchen oute his hande / a they en⸗
tred 1 cytic / and toke it / a batted a lett
it on kire. And when d men ot At jonzed backe
e

1 hr ⸗ the ortie alcended vp to’ i
saint tide ace fo eg eryeetpie ware oz dat or
people that 2155 to h tee. turned

icke e fo 8

¢ And uben gous anballfirael cawe that
the ipers awapte had taken the citicandthat
thelmoke of it alcẽded. Chey tumedagarne
959 95 05 alt ol a — ec pl:

ed oute of che eytie agarnſt them. 0
were they in z nuddes oF Zkraell/chele being
onthe one fpde of them / and the reſte on the
other. And they layed vpon them / lo thatther
lett none ether remapne ozckape. And the
Ding ok al they tone a liue and bꝛought him
to Jocua. And whe Ilraell had made an ende
offlaping all the enhabiters ok At in Preldes
andin the wildernelle by which ther chaled
them / and when they were all fallen on the
Edge okthe lwerde / vntyl ther were waſtede
Chen all Itraelretumed onto Aland kmote
it with the edge ok thecwerde. And allthat
fellthat dave / both or men and wemẽ were
twelue thoulande / euen all the men ok Au.

Foz Fotua plucked not hs hand backe
agapne which he ſtretched duke with hboue⸗


facritice / and ollered peaceollringes. Andhe


wrokte there bpon the tones the* Deconde “abet
Woles whych he wzote in che pꝛe⸗ ‘ronan


lawe of
fence ofthe chyldꝛen of Araell. 4
„ Andali Ilraell and Weben cherok / and ©
theivofficers/¢ Judges Hove parte on this
lpde the arcke / and parte on that ſyde / petoꝛe
the pꝛeſtes:that were leuites which bare the
arcke ofthe apopntmét of the l aꝛde: as well
the halle nt they that were boꝛme amõge
ent-haltie on chem on the koꝛelronte ol the
ounte of Gari im / and halle or them on
kozekrõte of mount Eballꝛas Moles the fers
uaunt ol the Loꝛde commaunded / kpzit to
bled the people Jcraell. And after that
readd all the wozdes ol the lawe / bothe che
bleſſinge and curlynge / aerozding to all that
Is witten in the boke ok thelawe:fo 6 there
was not one worde or all that Mole coms
maunded / which Jolua reade not / befoze al
the congregacyon of Irraell / wyth wemen
and chyldzen / andthe ſtraungers that were
amonge them.
. The Gabaon)
4 Sele haber
Mo whenail the hinges that dwen a
on ches Cyoe Joꝛdan / in the hilles
beten alonge by all $ coftes
lof the great lee / euẽ vnto Libanon /
che Wees ende fun Cananites / 5
ereliteg / the 8 / and che Jebulptes
earde:thep gathered them lelues to gether
to lyght agapntt Jolua and Jlraell / wyth
one accoꝛdẽ.


2


obtapne peace of Jotun by ſot⸗
ter ercommuntcatte.


kelar vntril they had ötterlpe deſtroredall Ages,


the enhabitoures ol At.“ Only the catella
Deut ere thetpovle ofthe apne cite) el toe vnto
Jotu. rg. b. the Celues accopdyng vnto the wozde ot the
gf onde /webich be comaunden Fotua dD ge
fua fett t on tpꝛe and made it an heape Coz
euer anda wildernelee / euen vnto chis dare.
And the king or Athe hanged on tree / ontell
euen. And alone ag the fonne wat downe
v. Deut. xxl.b Jolla chmaunded ethey tobe the carkas
e
. Jolu. vi. d. Ok the gate of the

e king ae ok ſtones / that remaxneth brite

ihrs dare.
en Rotua bylt an altare onto the onde
met jiracit moũt E ball / as Molet the
ceruaũt᷑ ot the Lone cimaut mente mh
of Ilraell / accoꝛdyng as it is wertten in the
Doll. prut a, * Hoke of the lawe of Moles: an alcare of
be bach tnt rouge dane jouer which no Coole OF fers
dla was ite. And cher facrptyced thers burnt:


z. Hume xxxtd


nytt to


e
Ad
Amoꝛites


beponde go dan / *#


Gabaon


baon,


elderg gall p Enhabrtoureg of dure cantrey
ſpake to vs faping:take vitailes with vou eo
ſerue bytdeware / a go agarnſt them / z caye
vntothẽ we are voure leruaũtes. Howther⸗
foze male a couenãt of peace with vs. hrs
dure pꝛouilpũ of bꝛead / ve tobe with vs oute
ol oute houles whotte / dare we departed
to come vnto vou. And now behodd it is dꝛyed
bp ehozed. Andthele botellegor wyne which
we filled were newe: a te ther be rent. And
thele oure garmentes a thoeg are ware olde
Cbethe reason of the exceadyng lg Journexe
eve. „ And the men tobe of their bitaples / and
e. f counceled not with the mouthe of che Loꝛde.
Un rt And Jolua made peace with them a made
à coienant with them / to fae their lyues: 6
the Loꝛdes of the congregacyon ware bnto
the But chze dates alter ther had made peace
with thé / they hearde p they were nepboureg
vnto them / and that they dweite amonge thẽ
Foꝛ the chyldꝛẽ of Acrael tone their Journer
and came vnto their cities the thirde Bape:
their cities were Saba / Caphira / Beeroth
g hariath Jari. And the chilozen or Itraell
ue we them not / becaule the Loꝛdes ol the
congregacvon had twoꝛne vnto them bythe
Loge God ol Atraeil. And therkoꝛe al the
multitude mutmuredagapnit the Loꝛdes.
But all the Loꝛdes ſayde vnto ail the cõgre⸗
gacton: we haue lwoꝛne vnto thé by 6 Loꝛde
qi God ok Ilrael / a therfore we mave not hurte
. Wien But this we will do to them a lettehẽ
Itue; and fo ſhall no wꝛath be vpon vs be⸗
caule of the othe which we ware bnto them.
ie Loꝛdes fayde vnto the / d they chuld
reh llue: And they were made hewerg ol wodd
and dzawers of water vnto all the congre⸗
gacion /as the Loꝛdes lapde vnto them.
Chen Folia tent Foz them / a talked wyth
chem / and larde: wherkoꝛze haue ve begiled bs
and pet pe dwell amonge vs? and now there
foze curſted be vou / and there ſhall not ceale
to be ok ou / bond men and bewers of ond
a dꝛawers ol water vnto phowle or my God
And they ant wered Joſua ¢ ſapde:it was
tolde thy feruauntes how that the Lozbe thp
Sod had cõmaunded his ſeruaunt Motes to
geue pou all the lande / andto deſtroxe all the
Enhabitoures therok oute of youre kyght / c
therfoze we were exceadyng foze aftaped of
dure lxues becauſe of vou / a now beholde /
we are in thyne hande at it femeth good and
tin thrne eves to do vnto vs / lo do.
ndhe dealte as it is ſarde / wyth chem / a
ridde them oute of the handes of the childzen
ot Ilraell / that they flewe them not. And
Fofua made chem chat lame dave hewers of
{pond and dꝛawers of water vnto the con⸗
gregacpon a onto 5; aulter of on vnto this
Daye / in the place which God ſbulde cholẽ.


Jolua.


I ia
e x ON
Che Amosites are ouer come ok 3oſua H it rapueth


gones. Che lonne ſtandeth ſtyl and the dape is leang⸗
he. v. Uynges are hanged.


ehened.


and her kyng / euen to he had done to alt and v.a.
her king / and how the Enhabitoures of Ga⸗
baon had made peace wylh Ilraell a dydre⸗
mapne among them: then they keared exce⸗
dinglxe / loꝛ Gabaon was a great cytye / ag
any cptic of the kyngdome / a therto greater
then Al / and allhermen were myghtpe.
Wherkoze Adonizedec hing or erulalem
ſent vnto Hoham king ol Hebꝛon / and onto
Pharam kynge ok Jetimoth /e vntogaphia
king of Lachig / a vnto Dabir king of Eglon
ſaping. Come vp vnto me and beaipe me /p
we maylimpte Pabaon: fo: they halte made
peace topth Folua etic chplozen of Juaell. che pogo;
Thenthe.b.hrynges ok? Amozttes the hing ehe wage oec.
Of Jeruſalem / the kyng of Hebꝛon / the hig amoziesiwas
ol Ferimoth / the king of Lachis the kyng ol the hund erh)
Eglon geatheredthẽ telues to geather / bothe oncande fora
thepand all their bottes and wentvpandbe⸗ Aube horchen
ſeged Gabaon / and made warre agapnſt it. and two thous
But che men of Gabaon tent onto Forua lande charer⸗
vnto p holte to Galgal / layinge: with dꝛawe ts after Fores,
nor typ bandes fro chpkeruauntes pit ame Pu LOY
bp to bs koz all the kynges of the Amoꝛites
which dweill in the moũtapnes are geathered
to geather agapnſt vs.
And Joltia alcended from Galgall / both
be and all the people ol warre with him / and
allthe men of moghte / and the Node lapde
bnto Joſua / feare them not / ko q haue dely⸗
uered them into thyne hande / there hal not
aman ot them ſtande befoze the. And Jolus
came vnto thé todenlxe / and iourneped fron
Galgall all nyght. And the Lozde turmoy-
led them bekoꝛe Flraen and flewe of thema
great daughter at Gabaon / and chaled them
à longe the wave that gothe bp to Bethoꝛon
and ſiewe them tyli ther cam to Elana and


Wakeda. And as cher Kedde kram Jlraell / C


euen in the gopng doune to Bethoꝛon / ther
Loꝛde caſt downẽ great ſtones fromheauen
byon them. vntill they cam vnto la ka / chat
they dyed. And there were mo that dyed with
haple tones / chen the chyldzen of Ilraell
llewe wyth che [werde.

Chen cpake Jolua vnto the Loꝛde / p dare
when the Loꝛdẽ delxuered the Amozites be⸗
foze the chyldꝛen of Alraell / and he lade inh
light of all Ilraell: Sonne fande thou (till cccle. lug.
vpon / Sabaon / a thou Mone / in the valeye
or Salon. Ind the tonne abode / a tue mone
Tobe Felt / vntyll the people had ee


110 done whe oꝛ after tt / that the Loꝛde obeped the vopce


rin he ſhulde
ko Alraell. g
mrelhme, f geln vetutneDanball Alraellwpth


W him onto the hoſte to Galgall but che krue
Hinges lledde and hyd them (clues in a caue
at Makeda. And it was tolde Jolua laving /

e kpue kinges are kounde hd in a caue at
Malers And Jolua lapde / rowle great tos
nes onto the mouthe of the caue ¢ appoynte
men therto / lo: to kepe them. And e ve


ina mochess chephidthemkeluesſand iared grenekenen


J0ltebiſ Hingetherat alto/andotteripe dectrored


noughtremapne. Andhe drdtothe hinge of
abana /apbeD~oco thew yng of de cho.


Jolua.


Ehen guca went from Wanedaſandan


2 Itraell wrth bim onto Wibna / and kought


8
2
=
=
a
3
=
2
8
3
5
8.
2
E
8


toke it / andthe hinge therot and al ß townes
6 indimote them wyth

e edge oF the cwerde / a vtterlpe dectroped
all the loules that were therin / a let nought
remapne. And as Ade Hebꝛon / lohedrd
to Pabir and the kinge therot / and as he did
to Libna and her ynge.

And Fotua fmote all the hülle —
thefouthe contrers / and the valeves / and
kpꝛinges ot water / with all their kinges and
lett nought remapne / but vtterly deſtroxed
all that bꝛeathed / as the Loꝛde God ol J
taeli commaunded. And Jocua ſmote them
from Cadeg barne vnto Mah / and all the cõ⸗
trey of Golan / euen vnto Gabaon. Andall
thote henge and their lande / Jolua toke at
one tyme:becaule che Loꝛde Sodok Arraell


* fought for Jtraell. And then Forua returned


and all Atrael wrth hem / vnto the hotte to


5 acy ttt Sa ne naa re


God geueth in to chen wer st
And


ninge ol Madon / and to the hinge
ok Someron / and to the Kynge ol
claph. And vnto the hynges that are by
noꝛthe in the mountapnes / and planes / on
the louthelpde of Ceneroth / and in the lo we
countreps / and in the regions of Woz bpo the
fee / and vnto the Cananttes bothe by alte
and weſte:and vnto the A moꝛites / Hethites /
Pherelites / and Jebuſites in the mountar⸗
neß: and nto the Heustes onder Hermon in
the lande of Mazphah: which came oute and
all their hoſtes wyth them a multytude ok


folke euẽ as the fandes of the tee in nombze bi


vyth hoꝛſſes and charettes exceding manye.
And all thele R pnges mett to geather / and
came and pitchedto geather bpon the water
ol Merom / koꝛ to figbt with raell.

And the Loꝛde layde onto Jolua: be not
alrapede ok them: koꝛ to moꝛowe aboute this
tyme 4 wll delpuer them all llarne / bekoꝛe
all Alrael:æ thou chalthoughe theirhoztles /

3. Be bütne their charettes with fire. And Jolus
came ¢ all the inen of warre w him agaynſt
them / vnto the water ol Merom / codenlpe / a
kelle vpon them. Andthe Loꝛde delpuered the
into the handes ok 9 fraell:and they tmote thé
echated them / vnto great Sidon / a vnto d


cer Ha- whott waters / ¢ onto the valeye of Maz⸗


. phah Caltwarde : a lmote thé bnew ther had
none remaynyng ol them. And Jolua ferued
chemag the Loꝛde bande him / boughed their
ports and burnt theire charettes with kyꝛe.

Chen golua at that tyme turned backe a
toke Hazoz and ſmote her Uynge wrth the
werde. Foz Hazoz befoze tyme was the head
okallthole nungdomes, And ther (mote all

the toutes that were therin wth the edge ol
the twerde / vtterlpe deftroping the / thãt no
bzeathe was lettremapne. And burnt Hazoz
: ‘oie kyꝛe and all the cpties of thole Rynges /
C with all the kynges of them / Jolua tone and
fmote them wyth the edge ofthe l werde / and

. otterlpe deſtroxed them? as Moles the ler⸗

ja, uaunt ok the Lozde commaunded.

But Frachi burnt none oc the cyties that
ſtode ppon hilles / laue Hazoz onlxe that Jo⸗
Cua burnt: hut all the cpoyle of $ lapde cities
andthe catell / the chyldꝛen ol Alraeil caught
bnto them feiues: But the men onlpe ther
ſmote with the edge of the cwerde vntill ther
had deſtroped the / and had leakte no bꝛeathe

remarnynge. As the Loꝛde commaunded
nt t. Foluã / and euen co dyd Joſua . anompnyl=
no woꝛde of all that the Loꝛde com⸗

maunded Moſes.

And to Jolua tone all p lande ſche hrlles
and all che louthe contreve / and allthe lande
ol Solan / and lowe contre / ache parnes /


3
5 Ixrrbij.
ethe“ mountapne ok Itraen / with the lowe n which
coũtrex of the lame / erien krõ mounte Palangacob had
that gothe vp to Seir / vnto Baal Gad in 5 dwelled.
balepe of Libanon onder mounte Permon.
Indaällthe kynges of the lame / he tone and
Mote them / and llewe chem. 5
Jolua made warre longe tyme with thole „
Ringes: oz there was no citie p made peace 5
wyth the chyidzen ol Jraell / caue thole Pe⸗
thites that enhabited Pabaon-Al olherthey
tobe wyth battell tos it came of the Loꝛde to
harden their hartes / that they chuide come
agaynt Itraell in battell: euen to deſtrope
ChE vtterle / chat they chulde haue no merch /
ut to bzyng themtonought. As the Loꝛde
commaunded Moles. .
And that fame cealon / golua went a de⸗
ftropedthe* Enakites oute of Hmoritaynes/ Lone Jude
out ot Hebꝛon / Dabir / & nab / a oute of
all the mofitaynes ol Juda / a oute ot all the
hiountapnes of Ilraell. And Joſua dectroped
them pttterlpe wych their cities. So pthere
was not one Cnakite leakte in p lande ok the
chyldzen of Jrraell:onlyin Atal / Geth / and
Aldod / chere remapned okthem. t
And Foluatoke the hole lande accoꝛdyng
toallthat the Loꝛde fayde vnto Moles / and
gaue it a pottedyon pnto Icraell kuervmen
his parte in their trybes:and the lande rellen
krom ware.
€ What upnges Jotun and the chyldzen of Jlraelt
hr heren erb. 8


N


enn h Chapter,
te are the Rynges ok the lande?
hich the chpinzen of Jlraellmote
COquered their landes ons other
rde Fords elt warde / krö che ryuer
Arnon / onto ntounte Permon / z all ß piaine
eſtwarde: Sehon hong of the Amozites / p
dwelte in Belbon / z ruled krõ Aroer / whych
Ipeth on the bzpmn ol the ryuer or Anon / and
to the middell of the ryuer / and halke Galaad
vnto $ ryuer Jabock / ö boꝛder of the chyldꝛẽ
ol Ammon: And in che plapne vnto the lee of
Ceneroth eſtwarde and onto the lee in the
plapne called the tait fee Ed warde / ß wave
ko Beth / Jelpmoth and by fouthe onder the
tpunges ol phalgah.

And the cooltes of Og Uyng of .


2


The deuilyon


which was of che rẽnaunt of the Rapyattes
| dweltat Accharoth / ¢ Edzat: and rargned
in mount Hermon / a in Salecah / ⁊ thozow


to the boꝛders / ol the Ge⸗ 2
bunter anne, abaceantys and bal Porn Ljoansn onto te"whote waters CUE a A bay
allthe Sidones. J will caſt them oute krom “hers,


furiteg / and the Macatyites and halſke Ga;
laad / vnto the bowers or Sehon Aynge ol


Numer xi. c Helban. . Moles the leruaunt of the Loꝛde


and. g.


a, Wethell te a


andthe chyldzen of Ilraell (mote them / and
Moles the Ceruatit ot the Loꝛde / gaue their
landes a polleſion / vnto 5 Rubenites / Gad⸗

dite / and halle the tribe of Manalles.
Chele ave the Kynges of p coũtrer woch
Tolua andthe chplozen ol Acrael (mote on
thys tpde Jo: dan / weſtwarde / crõ Baal Sad
in che baleye of Libanon / euen vnto mount
Mala that gothe vp to Sew. And Zolua
Cgaue the lande onto the trpbes of Flraetl to
polleſſẽ / to euery man his parte: in the vpper
lande / anether lande, in plapnes /a kpꝛiuces
ok water / in the wildernelle / ¢ louthe cotter
che . Amozites ſthe Cananites/
the Pherelites the Beuites / 5 Jebulites.
Che hynge ok gericho: che Rynge of Bt


place famoule herpde Bethel: The Kynge ok Jerulalem:
buthofor prate, n ol Hebꝛon: Che Rynge of Jeri⸗


God Gene,
rxviß d.


15
e Rynde of Mage⸗
che Rynge ol Fas


¶ Che xiij. Chapter.
Pen Z olua was waren olde / and
firychenin peres / the Loz faye
onto him: thou art olde and ttrické
in peres / and there remapnech vet
excedynge moche lande to be potteticd: C hrs
is the lande that remarneth: all the coottes
of the Phtlictines:and all the Gelurites : FG
Hilus in caypte vntothe borders of Aua⸗
ron noꝛthwarde / which lande was counted
to pertapne vnto the cananites / euen to the
true I oideg of the Philiſtines: the Alatht⸗
tes / Aldadites /Atcalonites/@ethites/Aka-
ronites / with the Euites / kr the Couthe. All
che lande ol the Cananites / and Maara tat
pertapneth to the Sidons / euẽ vnto Aphen /
and to the boꝛde rs of the d moꝛites. And the


Fotua, |


lande ok che Giblites/and all Libanon to⸗
wardethe tonne rylpnge / from Baal Gad
vnder mount Hermon vntpll thou come to
ſemath / all ß engabitourd of 6 byl coũtre


betoze the chplozen of Ferael / ole that thou 5
inany wyle deupde it by lotte vnto the chyl
dꝛen ot Ilrael to enheret / as haue cõmaun⸗
dedthe. Now therfoze deurdẽ this land to ens
heret / onto the nyne trybes and the halle
tribe of Manaſſeg. Foz the other halle wrth
the Rubenites a the Gaddites haue recea⸗


ued their enherptaunce all readye whych: Hume
Moles gaue them be pounde Jordan Ele ura


warde: euen as Moles che lerüaunt oF the
Loꝛde gaue them: krom Aroer that lpech on
the bꝛym ol the ryuer Arnon: with the cytye
in the middes of the ryuer. And al the playne
of Mldba vnto Bibon e of
Seh / Kynge of F Amozites which raygned
in Hetbon / euẽ onto § borders of the chiidyé
of Ammon: and Galaad/and the landes

boꝛder vpon che Gelurites and the Ma

thites and all moat Hermon and all Satan
onto Balecah:eue all? kyngdomok Dg in
Balan which rargned in Mtharoth ¢ Cozat
which lame remapned pett ofthe Welk of the


*Raphaites . But Moles tmote them and 4 ny 10


deſtropedthem.


—
Heuertheleür the chylozen ol Artaell ex- OB
achat ra


pellednot the Geturitesnoz the

tes: But the Gelurites a the ai cf
dweit amonge the Ilraelites euen pnto this
dare. Only onto che tribe of Leui / he gaue


none enheritaunce: koꝛ the offerpng OF the «puns


Logde God of Fraell is their enheritaunce


pethe lande.


enheritaunce of the chydden oF Ruben in
their kyntedes / wyth the cytpes and villages
pertapnyng therto.

And Moes gaue vnto the trybe ol Gad /
ruen onto the chyldꝛen of Gad he gaue by

Dulpnredes. Ard their coves were Jazer a al
the cities of Salaad / andhalfe the lande ok
chyldzen of Ammon / vnto Aroer that lpeth
befoje Nabah: And from Welbon vnto Ra⸗
moth masphay/and Betonim: and ro Ma⸗

janatin vnto the bo: derg ol Dabir. And in
valeye they had Betharam Bethnimra /
SDocoth / and Saphon/theret of the kung:
dame ot Sehon Vong of Hetbon / and 20:5
and the coſtes that lye theron / euen vnto the
edge of the fee of Ceneroth / on the other [poe
Gordan Eu warde. Chis is the enherttaunce
DEthe chpldzen ol Gad in cheir kynredes / the
eptpes wich their bitlages,

And Moles gaue onto the halke trybe of
MPanatles. And the halke tribe of Manalles
had their parte by their kynredes. And cheir
tolles were from Mahanaim / euen all Baz


Caleb regupꝛeth the herptage that was pꝛomeled
hem / and hebzon was genen
oer een lee seas
= ele are the cont
ſchyldzen enhereted in the land of
Canaan / vnto whrch Eleazarthe
pꝛeaſte /a Jolua the fonne of Hun
and the aunctent heades of the trybes ot the
chpldzen of Icraeil / gaue them their enheri⸗
taunce by lotte / as the Loꝛde cõmaunded by
the hand or Moles to geue onto the nyne
ttpbes / and onto the halke tribe of Manaces
Fo: Moles had geuẽ enheritaunce bnto two
tribes and anhalfe on the other fyde Jordan
But bnto the Leuites he gaue none ẽnheri⸗
taunce amonge them. Foꝛ the childzen of Fo:
feph were two tribes / Manaſles ¢ ephzatm
And cherkoze they gaue no parte bnto $ Le⸗
ultes in the lande laue cyties to dwelle in e
che luburbes of the lame / toꝛ their beattes q
dane
zen ot J. n
deuyded the lande. 5


Jotua,


; xx vii
Andthe chyldzẽ ok Juda came vnto Jolun B
fn Galgall. and Caleb the tonne olg ephune
the Renerpte ſapde onto him: thou wotte lt
what the Loꝛde layde vnto Moles the man
ol God / aboute me and the in Caves Warne,
Fourtye pere olde was when Moles the x Minne. Fig. v
ſeruaunt ot the Lone fent me from Cadig
Barne to {pie oute the lande. Ind 3 bꝛought
bpm worde agapne euen as I thought in
mne herte. Heuerthelelle my bzethzen that
went vp wyth me dylcoutaged che hertes ol
the people. But 4 folowed d Loꝛde my God
euen vnto the ende. .
And Molestwareche lame cealon taping ¢
1b lande wheren thy fete haue troode aide r Quinext.0
chvne enheritaunce and ihr chpidzé Foz euer Went. Fu. c.
becaute thou bat Eau 22 7 mpchod JOM. un.
nuallre. now beholde the Loꝛde, :
hath kepte me luſtie dag he tayd)*this kourtie cle. win
and frue peareseuen fence the L oꝛde (pate
vnto Motes / whyle the chyldzen of Jiraell
wanderrd in che wylderneſle. And nc wle
J am thysdave fourethoze ¢fpue peres:and
pet am as ſtronge at thys tyme / ag 4 was
when Motes (ene me: lone how tag i was
then / lo Grong J am now / to warre and to do
all maner ot thynges.
How therfore geue me thys mountayne 7d
whych the Loꝛde at that tyme pꝛomeled / koꝛ
thou herdetk at that time he wihe Enanims vl themtos
were chere / ard how the cities were greate a le Jude. d.
walled. J truſt che Loꝛde wilbe with me / and
Wali drpue them oute ag the Lozde ſapde.
nd oſua bleſſed Caleb 8 fonne of Fephune
Kgaue him Hebzon to enheret. And Hebꝛõ xQetronisa
be came the enheritaunce of Caleb the kenne picper pi
Of Zephune the kenelite / vnto this dape:be⸗ oF ascpiye
caule he folowed the Loꝛde God of Airgell which heroze
perpetualire. And! name of Pebzon was Not gr
called in olde tyme/Martath arbe which was wn gan”
ahuge man amonge the Enakims. And the atter iheebꝛ.
lande cealed from warre. 1015 18
e Lotte of the chylozenof Juda and the namen both rong ¢
Tarent Priveroetve . 5 kante Rea
Cahe rb. Chapter. e
Md the Lotte ab the trvbe of the
chyldzen ol Juda in their kynre⸗“
des was the wyldernelle of Zyn
that ſtretcheth to the coſtes of Cdd
louthwarde and is the bemoott parte of the
louthe coltes. Andthetr ſouthroſtes were
krom the bꝛinck ok the lalt lee and krũ a certẽ
te of the lee that leaneth louthwarde.
ind it went out on the Couthe poe of the
goyng vp to Acrabim / and went a long to
Summa / and alcended vp on the Couthe (pre
OF Cades Barne / and went a long to esd
& went bp to Adar /a fette a cõpale to Rarca
went along to Asmon / ¢ it went orte to
che riuer ot Egypt z the ende ofthatcone


Thedeuiſpon


is the lee. And thele are their kouthe coltes.

And their eatte coſtes are the lalt lee euẽ
nto § edge ol Joꝛdan. And their bozoers in
the noꝛthe quarter were krõ another pornte
okthe lee where Joꝛdan endeth. And went vp
to Bethhagla and went a long by the noꝛth⸗
fyde of Betharabah and went ppto the fone
OF Bohen thefonne ol Ruben. And then wet
vp to Dabir krom the valeve ol Acoꝛ / and lo
noꝛthwarde / turnpng towarde Galgall that
ipeth befoze the goyng vp to Adonim / which
IS ok the fouthe kpde or the Nruer. And chen
went a longe to the water ol Enlemes / and


Jolua.


ol Juda in their kynredes.

a the cities oF the tribe of the chylozen
Of Juda in all quarters / towarde the coſtes
o Edom louthwarde / ware: Rab zel / Eder / æ


307 Padach
wyle called Pazoz:&man /


ended at the well of Rogell. Andthen went th


pp to the baleye of the tonne ol Dennõ euen
onto the fouthe Syne of the Aebulttes the en⸗
habitoures o 0
to the toppe ofthe hille that eth befoze the
baleve of Hennom welt warde e by che edge
ofthe balepe of Raphatm nozthwarde: And
then it dꝛaweth from the lande hille vntothe
fountayne of water called Hephthoah/ and
gothe ole at the cities ol mount Ephꝛon a
dꝛaweth to Balah / otherwyle called karia⸗
thiarim:and then it compaleth from Balah
weſtwarde / vnto €p2 / ether gothe alonge
onto the (pe of mounte Jarim ( ottherwyte
Called Chelalon on chenozthe fyoe eheroe,

And conieth downe to Bethlames and gothe
to Chanmah / and gothe oute on the eyde of
Aharon nozthwarde: and then diaweth to
Secfron and gothe a longe to moũte Balag /
ündgoeth oute at Jabnel and the ende of the
coſtes is the lee. And the welt bo wers are d
great te and the coltes that ive theron. And
thefe are the coftes ot the chyld en ol Juda
rounde aboute intheir kynredes.

And onto Caleb $ Conne ot Jephune was
there a parte geucnamonge the chplozen ol
Juda / byche mouthe ol the Lozdeto Folua/
cite the cytie of haviatharbe father ol Enact
whiche cptye is called Bebson . And Caleb
Drouc thence d thꝛe fonnes of Enack / Delai⸗
Ayman /e Khalmat / the Connes begotten ol
Enack. Andhe went vp thence / to che enha⸗
bitoures of Dabir / whole name in the olde
tyme was haviath tepher And Caleb fayde/
The that impteth kariach tepher a taketh it:
to bem wyll J geue Aclay my daughter to

Dimple . And Othinel / che tonne ol Rene / che
bꝛother ok Caleb toke it. And he gaue hem
Aclah his daughter to wyte. And az the wet
che mouedyym / to acke ok her father a kelde.
e uundercande And the* alpabted of her ale. And Caleb
“tosallat her ka fapde bntoher / what arletg che. And He
thers fete, and layde gyue me a bietyng:foz thou batt geuẽ
athest her ſelte me a touthwarde e dye jande geue me allo
tpꝛvnges ol water. Chẽ he gauẽ her i
ol water / bothe aboue and benethe
the enheritaunce ol the tribe OF tie chyidꝛen


Jud. t. d.


* Judit. i. c.


erulalem. And then went vn ga


with theire villages.

Fp ere
jasphah/ 4

and Egon eaten Labamam and gerd


Ant
£5 Akron oute tothetee/alt  ivety aboute
Aldod wyth their villages. Acdad wyth her
townes and btllages. A ah with her townes
and billages / euen vnto the rxuer of Egypte:
and the great lee t the coltes chat lpecherõ.

And in the mountapnes they had Damir
Zane bir And chen tes
nath / which is Dabir: Anab Eühemoh and
Anim: Sozen / Bolon / and Gilob:a leuen ci⸗
ties with their d


bi jepdin and Spacacab: Neb!
et 1155 / and Engadl. So pre crtres myth
ee

ld not caſt oute. HOherfoze the Fee
bultes wee amonge the chridꝛẽ ol Juda
bnto this dare.


Che Lotte oꝛ parte of Ephrata.


che. xvi. Chapter. —


erich.
goche pute krom Bethel to Lus / a runneth a
longe onto § bozders ok Arciataroth:a gothe
doꝛine weltwarde / euẽ to h cooſtes of Japh⸗
lethi / a vnto p cooſtes ol Bethhoꝛon the
Btger / elo to Gator, aß endes of their coottes
came to the ſee. And lo the chyldꝛẽ of goleph
MPanatles ¢ Ephꝛat tone their enheritaũce.
And p chploze of Ephzaim tokethety coo⸗
Stes by hiinvedes. And the cooſtes of their en⸗
bherptaunce Cattivarde were / Ataroth Adoz


euen onto Bethhoꝛon the vpper / a wet oute th


Cweſtwarde to Machmathah on the Noꝛth⸗
fide / a cõpaled Et warde vntb Chaanath Dt
0 / a paſt it on Eſtlide vnto Janoah / a wet
downe from . to Atarõth ¢ Maarath/
and mette at Jericho / a wẽt oute atFozdan,
And their bo ders went krõ Chaphuãh welte
warde vntoß ryuer tana, ¢ the endes were

D h lee. Chis is the enberitatice ofthe tribe or
chpldzé ol Ephꝛaim in their kyntedes / a the
bozdering cities of the chyldꝛẽ of Ephraim /
le amonge the enberitatice of the chyldꝛẽ ol
MPanalles:cué all the cities with their villa⸗
ges. Notwithſtanding ther dꝛaue not out the
Cananites 5 dwelte in Gatoz:but the Cana-
nites dwelt amonge the Ephꝛaites vnto this
dape / a pape tribute.


“‘ETbeLotteos porcyon of the alee terbe ofgpanate
feo. The Lanaaniies become trybutaries to thera-
elyteg. Manalſes ¢ Ephꝛaim require a greatter pore
cpon ok herptage.

Che. xvij. Chapter.


a Nothe trybe of Mana dees whych
was the Eldeſt tonne ol Joleyh res
ceaued a lotte. And Pachtt the El⸗


deſt Conne ol Manalles which was
the father of Galaadland a mã of warre) had
Galaad a Baſan. And the elk ok the childzen
ok Panatles receaued by ete fynvedes:
which were the chyldꝛen of Abiezer: p chlldzẽ
ol e chyldzen zlrieliche chridzen ol
Sichem the thpidzen ol Hephersthe chridzẽ
Of Demida. Chele are the male chywzen ok
Manalees the tonne ok Joleph in cheir kyn⸗


Ants e. tedes.* But Helaphead the tonne of Bepher


che lonne of Galaad/thefonne of Machit /g
Sonne of Manages / had no lonnes laue dau⸗
ahters. And thele are d names ok his daugh⸗
za uh ran dero Kards che e te
za: which came befoze Cleazar the pꝛeaſtẽ /a
bekoꝛe Folua the lonne ok Hun / andbefoze


Aeta che Kordes Caping:* the Lande cimaunded
™ Moles to geuẽ vs an enheritaunce amonge


dure bꝛethzen. Andhe gaue teat che mouth
dk the Loꝛde / an enherrtaunce anionge he


Aler to Machmathah p lpeth before Sichẽ
g went a longe on the ryght hand / euen vnto
che enbabiters of Enthaphuah / athe land ol
—.— belongedto Wanatles / wüpch
Chaphuah lave in 5 boꝛders betwene Ma⸗
nales andthe childꝛen of Ephzaim. Andthe
veoottes delcended vnto the ryuer Canal on
whole Couth lydeckphꝛaim Hath cities amõg
e cytves ot Manaſleg. Foꝛ the coottes ot
Manalles were on the noꝛchlyde ok the riuer
Gthe endes of thE was the lee:lo p the loulh
pextapnedto & phꝛaim / æthe noꝛthe to Ma⸗
nales / and the fee ig hys borer, Andthepe
Mette to geather in Aler noꝛthwarde / and in
Ilacar Etwarde. And Manalleg had in Fea:
car and in Aller / Bethlean / and her townes:
Behe enhabitoures of Bo: / with the townes
pertaynyng to the lame: the enhabitoures
ol Endo: with the townes ok the lame: the
enhabitoures of Chaanath with her townes
E enhabitoures of MPagevo with htownes
ol the lame / euẽ thze cõtleys vet the childꝛen
ol Manalles cou ide not ouer come thole ci⸗
tles: But the Cananites began toowell np
tame lande. euertheleſſe alone as ö childze
of Jlrgell were waxed ſtrong / they put the
Cananites to tribute / but expelled the not.
And childzẽ ok Joleph ſpane vnto z olua yw
taping: whyhaſt thou geuen vs but one lotte
c one voꝛcion to enheret / leing we be moche
Bede koꝛ as moche as the Loꝛde hath .
lelied vs lo:and Jollia antwered ſhẽ: yt ye be
moche people then gett vou vptothe wodde
contrepe / and 9 Per kor youve ſelues there 0
in che lande ol p Pherelites and or the! Ma⸗ v Gene. hene
altes / PE mounte Ephꝛaim be to narowe
02 vou, Chen the chiſdzen of Joleph Cayde
agapne the hill will not begotẽ ok vs: for alß
Cananites that Dwell in the lowe contreye
haue charettes of yzon / andlo haue they §
enhabite Bethrean a 5 townes of che lane
they allo that dwel in the valeye of Fezreel
And Folua antwered the houle of Joleyh /
Ephiam a Manalles faving :ve. be moche
people and haue great power and Mall not
therkoꝛe haue one lotte. But the hyll chalbe
poures / toꝛ it is a wodde contrepe ¢ pe fall
bꝛyng it to lacion / and tt chalbe poures euen
vnto che endes ol it / koꝛ ve chalbe able to catt
oute the Cananites fo2 all their pron charet⸗
tes / and koꝛ all they be lo ſtronge.
© Certen are fende to dende the lande to the other
wüentrybes. Che Lotte or the chr of Bengamin
m che


Thedeuplpor.
y * Gabervitj.chapter. —
a d the whole cangregacion ofthe
childꝛẽ of Icrael came together at
Dilch / and let vp d tabernacte of
wltnelle there (Eche lande was in
iecctd betoze them. But there remarned
amonge $ childzẽ of Flrack teuẽ tribes which
bad not their enheritaunce deupded out. And
Jolua ſapde onto p childzẽ of Alrael how log
are pe lollacke to go ¢ poſledſe d lande whrch
Lon God of poure fathers yath geuẽ pou?
Bing of euerp tribe thre mẽ b mape lende
them. ands they mare rpve a walkie thoꝛowe
che land a diltibute it by their enheritadcen
45 8 comme agapne tome. Weuideit into leuen
inge sb pout oyotep ta Tanbe

in d louthe /a F houle of Fo

to 35 cooſtes in the nahe. Delerpbe ve ß
lande therfoze into leuen partes /a bꝛyug
delcripcton tomehether / mape catte lot⸗
tes kor vou here bekoze the Loꝛde oure God.
Che Leuites haue no parte amonge vou Foz
the peat ipe of the Logve is their enheri⸗
taunce. And Gad / Ruben / ehaite the trrbe
ol Manadlcs haue recraued their enhertta⸗
unce beyonde Joꝛdan Et warde / which go:
kes the leruatint ol the Loꝛde gaue them.
And the men arole and went their toave,
Ind Joſua charhedthem 5 wet to delcribe d
lande laping hence a gothozewe the lande d
delcribe it / z come agapne to me hether: and


will catt lottes to pou bekoꝛe the L oꝛde in
ilch. And the men departed / 1walkedtho⸗
row the lande and delcribedit by cities into
feuen partes in a booke / c returned to Jotua
into p hoſte at ilch. And Joſua caſte lottes
foz them in lch bekoze 8 Kode and there
he deuidedthe lande onto the chylozen of Fe


Cracyi to eche their pozcton.and the lotte ob
trybe ok the chyldꝛen of Bentamin came vy
accopding to cher kinredes. And the cootes
ol their lotte came oute betwene the childzẽ
ok Juda and the childzen ol Joleph And their
nozth cooſtes were frd Jo dan and went bp
to che tyde of Jericho on d noꝛthtyde / a went
vy thozo we the mofitaynes weſtwarde / and
ther ended at the wylderneſſe ol Bethauen: e
went krõ thence to § louthlyde of Lug other
wyle called Bethel: and delcẽded to Ataroth
Adar vponche brite that lpeth on che touthe
ipde ok the nether Bechhoꝛon. And the welt
cooſte dꝛaweth a cõpaleth ſouthwarde / euen
from the hille chat lech befoze Bethhoꝛon /a
gothe oute at Bariathbaal which is Raria
Karim / a citie of the chndꝛen of Juda: a th
is the welt quarter: $ fouthe cootte gothe
from the edge ol Rartathiarim weſl warde / a
gothe oute ko the waterwelle / ol Heptzthoah
and cometh doune to the edge ol the hit that
Ixech befoze d vale re of the tonne ot ennon


Jolua.,


wyrch is in che baleve ol Raphaim noꝛth⸗ R
warde / and delcendeth thoꝛowe the balepe ol
Vennon onto the cyde of Febuli Couthwarre
and gothe downe tothe well of Uogen. and
compaleth front the noꝛch and gothe koꝛthe
to Enlames and tothe coottes that ive be⸗
koze the goyng vp vnto Adomim:and gothe
doune to the tonne of Bohan the fonne oF
Rubens and then gothe alonge towarde the


ipde of * the piarne / noytywarde; andgothe. Gru!
downe into the plarne:andgothea long to bg.


che kde ol Wethhagiah noꝛchwarde / and
endeth at the pornte of $ laltlee noꝛth there
krom / and at the ende of Fozdan louthe there
from . Chis is the louthe cooſte.

And Jordan is their eatte cooſte thys is
the enheritaunce ot the cheldꝛen of Benia⸗
min wyth their cooles rounde aboute and
by their kynredes. Andthele are che cytres
ok the trybes of the chyldꝛen ol Bentamun
in theive kynredes: Jericho / Bechhaglab /
and the baleye of Basis: Wetharabah /Fae
marim / and Bethel: Auim / Pharah / and
Ophꝛah: Chepar Smmonat / Ophnt / and
Gabat / twelue cytves wyth their villages.
Gabaon / Mameh, and Beroth: Mazphah
Caphairah / and Mora : Rekem /Jarephel
and Charelah / Sela / Eleph / and the cytre
Of the Febultes whychis Jerulalem / Gas
baath / 5 Bartath fourtene cytes with there
villages. Chis is the enberitaunce of the
chridꝛen ot Beniamin in thetr kinredes.
€ Chelottes oz partes of Z abulon/qlachar / Aler⸗
Veppipal Wan- and Jolus.

che


lx. Chapter.

ed the leconde lotte came out vnto

che tribe ofthe child zen ot Simes A

bp their kinredes. Andtherrenhe⸗

vitaunce telle in the myddes ot the
enberttatice of the childzẽ of Juda And their
enheritaunce was /Berlabe/ Sabe / a Mo⸗
ladah / Pazozſual / Palah / a à ʒem / Eitholad
Bethul e Hozmah Stzelag / Bethmarcaboch
€ Hasetlulah / Bethlebaoth / and Daruhen
thertene cities Wiheir villages. Zim Nemo
Ether / s Ilan / toute cittes Ww their villages:
Stherto all the billages ö Ie rounde about
chele cities / euẽ vnto Baldlath / Bec / Ma⸗
mach / louthwarde. his is the enheritaũce
of dhe trpbe of the childiẽ ol Simeõ in their
ninredes oute of the porcion ofthe chyldzen
ol Zuda / came the enberitaunce of p chyldzẽ
ol Simeon . Foz the parte of the chylozen ok
Juda was to moche foz them:andtherfoze ?
chplozen of Simeon had their enheritaunce
in che enberitaunce of them.

Andthe chrzde lotte came onto the chyl-
dꝛen ol Zabulon acco:dyng vnto their hyns
redes. Ind the coottes of cheire enhert⸗
taunce came to Dardd / and went vp 2 857


eiche lande.


drr Marialah / andtouched at Da⸗
baleth / a mette at the rxuerthat rech before
Jonneuen:andturnedkr arid eltwarde
towarde the lunne rylyng vnto the boꝛder ol
Chilloth in mounte Thabo: and then gothe
outeto Daberech and goche vp to Japhia:
and ftom thence gothe a longe eſtwarde to⸗
warde the ſunne rpceng / to Dethah / Peytzer
Ichah / and Ja zimt and gothe tox mor Mee
choar / a Neah. And cöpaleth it on the nozthe
ide and goeth to Nathan / and endeth in the

balepe ot Jephthahel. And gatach / Nahalol /
Semron Jedalah and Bethlehem twelue
cities with theirvyllages. Chys is che enhe⸗
nitaunce ol the Chplozé of Fabuls in their
kinredeg. Che layde cities wW occur c
Andthe fourthe lotte cA oute tothe childzẽ

ol glacar by their kynredes And their coſtes
were Jctraelah / Caluloth Dunem / Papha⸗
b sa Pour ype Harabich / Ailton /
and Abez: Mameth / Enganim / Enhadah / ¢
Bethphazez. And his cooltes mette at Chaz
boz Sahazimah a at Bethlames ¢ endeth


€


75


Jolua Santtuarypes kt,


anal and Bethlames: nynetene cytyes W
ir villages. Chis is the enheritaunce of 5
tbe or che childze of ephebaltby chet tine


redegchele cpties and their billageg.
th Lotte kelle to che trybe ne
e cheldꝛen of an bytheir kinredes. And
e coottes ot their enberttatice was ꝛaraah


Eſthaol / Flames / Saelabin / Aialon and
Kicheneb G CThemnathah and Aharon:
Eltheneh Gtbethorr and Vaalath: Jehud /
Banebarak and Gathermon / Meiericb and
Parcon woth the contrepe that ipeth bekoꝛe
Japho. Andthe cooſtes of the childꝛẽ ot Dan
went oute From bexonde the. soz the chyldẽ
ol Dan went vp and kought agaynſt Lelen
and toke it / andtmote it with the edge of the
twerde / and conqueredit / and dweſt therin
Ghei ne. Dan / alter the name of Wan
Chys is the enheritaunce ol the erybe ol
the chridzen of Ban in their wynreves:thece
cities with their villages. nohen they hav
made an ende ok deu pdyng the lande by her
Coates then the cheld ien of Araell gaue an
enheritaunce vnto Jorua the tonne of Nun
amonge them: at the mouthe ol the Loꝛde
ther gaue him the cytye which he alzed / eu
ich ſerah in mounte Ephꝛaim. And
he byte the citie and dwelt therin. Chele are
the enheritaunces ied Eleazar the preatk
And Forua the tonne oF un / and che aunclet
fathers ol the trybes ol the chyldzẽ of Irrael
deulded by lotte in Sofioh before the Loꝛde /
in the doze of the tabernacle of wytneſſe / and
to made an ende ol deupding the contreye.
Che C tres of refuge o: Sanctuarpes.
Che. xx. Chapter. i
pen the Loꝛde (pake vnto Joſua
Caping:comen with the chyldꝛen ol


1


perfon vnwares e unwyttenglre / mapellee
chether. Andthole cities lbalde poure rekuge
krom che auenger ok bloude. And the dear
hall flee vnto one of thole Cytyes and chall
ſtande in the entryng of the gate ol the citie
and thall chewe bys caule in the eaves of the


Elõ elders of the fapde cytie. And chexe Mal take


Hermah and Dazoz kedes / Edzat /
nd Enhazoz eren / Magdelel Mozem / Be:


him in to the cxtye vnto them / and chall geue
hima place that he mape dwell amonge thé,
And when the auẽger oF bloude koloweth 25

alter him ther thalinot deltuerthe ſlear into
his hande: becauſe he mote bys krende igno⸗
rantlye / and hated hym not bekoꝛetyme.

And he Hallowell in the larde cite öntyllhe
ſtande befoze the congregacyon in Judge⸗
ment / and vntell the death ok the hye pꝛealte
that chalbe in chole dapes. And then Mail che
llear returne and cone vnto 5 8


m. ij.


llcaell andtape: Appopnte oute a ume vzepe,
. e cities / ot whych A Cpake vnto Beute. ir b.
vou by Moles / that the lear that kylleth any Jolu. xl.


The deuplion.


and vntd his awne boule / and vntothe


cytve
C from whence he flenne , And they apoynted


Medes in Galile / in mount Nephthait/ and
Sicheminmount ephain/ e kaviatharbe
which is Hebꝛon / in the moũltaines of Juda
And on the other lyde Jordan ouer 11155
Jericho eltwarde cher gaue 159307 in d wel
e eee
+ ERamoth in Cralaad oute of Pere
a Golan in Balan out ot the tribe of Ma⸗


Prates. Cheie were che cities apornted toz


#Qumerts>.A gene bs cities to dwell in a the keides aboute bessani wochen wrt) bet Sout


all the child en of Ilraell / e to the tratigers
that Boiourned amöge the chat wholoeuer
Kylled anp perlon ignoätipe, S fame might
fice chether and chulde not die UE the hande of
the ausger of bloude / vntyll he ode befoze t
congregacron.

ties geuen to the Leuptes Nn rombze.svi6.
Tie ano pete den ol Kanaan ace file
relled· The i craelptes act at dect.


e. xxi. er.
5 Span wan heades
a ol the Leuites onto Eleazar the


th
geuenthem bpiott / out of the trybe or Juda ⸗
dut ok the tribe of Simeon / z out ol Fenibe


of Beniamin vii cities. And che reat oe che onto che bynvedes ok the other chridzen oF
childꝛenol Cal bach bp lotte out of bin- C. a iver en michele bu

redes ofthe tribe ot Ephzaim / out of d trrbe Q. o the chyldꝛen or Gerlon whpch
ok Ban / out ot the halte trige of Manalles


ten cities. Andthe chylozen of Gerton had bx
latte out ofthe kinredes of 6 tribe of Alacar
out ob the trybe ok er / out ok the trybe ok


Hephthalt g oute of the other halle eryve ot wrth


Manalfeg in Balan. ri. cities. And pH cyitoze
dk Merart by their kyntedes / had aut ok the
trybe ol Ruben / out ol the trrbe of ad / and


out ol che trybe of Jabufon / twelue cities. dw


Bund the childꝛẽ of Ftraen gaue by lotte nto
euer thele idles wtgebere Suburbes
ag the Lozde commaunded bp Woles.
And they gaue oute of the tribe or dchtwꝛẽ
ol Zuda / a out ok the trybe of the en ot
Simeon / chele cytyes byname: whych the
childꝛen of Aaron being ok the kinredes ol;
Cahathttes, and ok the childꝛen of Leut ob⸗
tapned top theirs was d Eva lotte And ther


Jolua, Bs


ue them Rartath Arbe of the father oF
Enack / which is Heb2o / in the hyll c trerc acta tiny
of Juda / wyth che Duburbes of che tame father ster |
younde aboutit. But the contrepe that pere Faun
karned to che cytye and thebpllages cherol J, nd,
they gaue to Cateb the lonne of Jephune / to
be his polleuxon. 2
And thus theygaue to bchrdven or Tard
che preatte the kraůcheled cxties of the llear /
Hebson with her Duburbes te Libna wech
et Duburbes änd Jathir wyth her Sous
urbes and Etimoa wrch her Hübuibes
and holon with her Suburbes / and Davie
wich ber Souburbes / and Ain with her Hu⸗
burbes / ard Jutah wih her Suburbes and
Bechlames with her Suburdes: mene cittes
out ot Hote two tribes, And out of the trybe
ol Benianun they gaue Gabaon wyth her,
Suburbes: Gaba wich her duburbes:ana
toth wych her Souburbes : Almon wyth her
SHubuvbeasfoure cities. All thele cities of d
chyldꝛen of Karon preattes were. xiij. cytyes
wich their Suburbes . Andthe kynredes oF
the chyldzen of Cahath that were Leutes:


a


chbozon wych ber Souburbes-foure crtren.


e cytpe of refuge koꝛ the fear / Golan
in . her Submnbe⸗ Beetkheray


btaite: lacar / Bityon wrth her Du⸗
burbes: D
Yarimoth woth her Soubuthes ; Engantm


wth her S
e
240 J
Sopthber Suburbes : Robhob wich her Sous
burbes:foure cities. And out of the trybe or
Hephchalt / che cyeve of refuge ok the dear /
Benes in Galle wyth ber Soubyrbes : Has
motidoz / wyth ber Souburbes : Carthan.
wyth ber Souburbes ꝛthze aner Sod
thatallthe crtyes ol the Gerfon' kee tee


pfthelande,


Accoꝛdyng to a


Aynredes were rij. wyth their Suburbes.
And onto the kynredes ol che chplozen ol
Merart / the rek ot he Leuvtes / they gaue
out of the trybe of Zabulon: Jecnam wyth
her Suburbes : Carthab wier Suburbes
Dana wyth her Souburbes/and Hahalal
Smith ber Spuburbes:foure cytves. And out
of the trybe of Aiubé/ they gaue 50302 with
her Suburbes: Jahelah with her Duburbes
Bedmoth with her Huburbes /a Maphaath
with her luburbes:koure cities. And out ol
tribe of Gad / ther gaue p fraũchiſed citie ot
fear / Nomoth in Galaad wher ſuburbes /
um tb her luburbes / Becbon w ber
urbes: ¢ Jaler Wher luburbes:koure ci⸗
ties in all / io g all the cttpes of the chyſdꝛẽ of
Merari in their kynredes / whych were the
ret ol the kynredes of the Leuites / were by
ett lot / twelue cities. Andal the cities that
e Leuites had in the polledpõ of the chiſdꝛẽ
oF krael were. xlpttij. with their Suburbes
And thele cytyes had eche their Suburbes
rounde aboute her thoꝛow out all the ſayde


cities. And the Lozde gaue onto Attaellall


che lande whych hel ware to geue bnto their
fathers. And they een dwelt therin
Andthe Loꝛde che em reſt rounde about

l that he lware vnto their faz
thers.’ Do ß there ſtode not ams ok alltheir
enempes befoze thé. But ; L oꝛde delpuered
all their enemies into their handeß. There
cRapednothing ol al the good thinges which
the Loꝛde had layde vnto the houle of Acrael
But all came to palle.


Buben / Gad and the hallſe tryde of Manalkes are


dende a gapne to their poſlellpons . Che beide an al⸗


tar fozamemozyalt,


anates and cayde vnto
begehen peel er Holes
tor cõmaunded vou / c


thefenauntof the Lo;
haue obefedmy boyce in al 6 A cömaunded


ou: pe haue not lette youve bꝛẽchꝛen of a ii
ceaſon vntothvs dave but haue kept the cõ⸗
maundement of p Loꝛd poure God. and now
che Loꝛde hath geuẽ vette onto poure bꝛethzẽ
as he pꝛomeled chem. noherkoꝛe returne and
go bnto youre tentes a vnto f lande of voure
podeſtion / which Moles the leruaunt of the
Lone gaue you on che other iyde Joan.
Kr But inany wple take exceding good
heade that ve do che cõmaundement ¢ awe
which Moles p eruaũt ol $ L ode charged
vou: whych is / chat ye loue the Londe youre
God / and walcke inhis waves and kepe hy
cömaundementes / a cleaue vntohim / a terue
dem woth alt youre berttes and all youre


Joſua.


7

tl.

 foules, And to goluaa bleted them and lent W
them awape. And they went vnto their tͤtes awlelted thers
-_ Gento the one halte of the trpbe of Mp chene
nales Moles gaue portedyoninsBatanany yee
onto the other halte tycrofgaue Fotua wyth pyc veturnpng
their b7eth2€ on this Ide J oꝛdan weltwarne to there poltclo
‘And allo when Jolla teri them awwaye vnto toute mehr
cher tentes and bleed them he farde bnto fe dr. 30 e
che / returne with moche rycheſle vnto poure dars viele the
tentes / e with ver moche catell with iyluer ada. Leut
goulde / bꝛalle / veron / and wyth rapment
aboue meakure /s deuide the lpople of youre.
enempes wyth poure r bzethzen.

Ind the chrldzenor Nuben the chydzen : ibar ure
of Gad and halle the trybe of Manalteg / re⸗ E ar homey
turned anddepatted from the dypiore ol l- meckere
rael out ot Siloh which is in p lande of Cas”
haat / to go vnto the contreye or Calgad / z
to the lande of their polſe bon / wherin (hey
were pollelied at the mouth el the Loꝛde by
the hande ol Moes. And when they rame
vnto the coſtes of Jordan that ive in lande
ol Canaan: there the cheldꝛen ol Ruben / che
chyldꝛen ol Gad andthe halke trybe of Ma⸗
nales / bylt an altare faſte by Jordana that
a great altare to le to. And when the chyidaẽ
o£ Ffracl hearde ſaye:beholde (he chyldꝛen ol
Vüben the chyldzen of Gad ¢ the halle trybe
ol Manaddes haue bylte an altare in the to-
relrounte ofthe land ol Cana in $ boꝛderg
ol Joꝛdan on the Cyoe of che chyldzen ol Ff
racil:thebole congregacyon ok the chyldzen
ol Jlrael gathered themto gether to Siloh /
oe pon them with batell. And the childyẽ
ol Alraeil Cent onto the chyldꝛen ol Ruben /

to the chplozen ol Gad and to the halke trybe

ol Manages into the lande o£ Galaad / Phi⸗

nehes the tonne of Eleazar the pꝛeaſte / and

wich hem ten loꝛdes or euery chele howle a

loꝛde thozowe out all the trybes of Atraen /

whrch heades ok thew fathers houcholdes

were oucr p thoulandtg of A lrael. Andthey

wet vnto the chyldꝛen ol Ruben / or Gad a to

the halle trybe or Hanalleg onto the land ot

Galaad and ſpake with thein laying. 8

Chus lave the hole congregacpon of the 78

Loꝛde: what trãſgrenion is his that ve haue

trantgreſled agapnſtche God ot Ilraell / ta

turne awaye this dave krom alter che Lode

andto byloe pou an altave Jostorebellethrs y arye gehe

dave agapnt P Lande / Za cher wicked deade yende of eo /

OF Peq to lpttell oz bs / wherok we are not kor the wpcren

cleanſeb vnto this dave, there was a plage Jdolfürpr done

tnehe congregacpon of the Horde Bucthac ar acer

ve alco ſbulde cure awape thys dave rom wylh agp

koloweng the Loꝛde: pe Hall vebelte to dape was an dolle

agarnt che Loꝛde / andto moꝛowhe tall be of thesaaty.

wwoth wech allchecongregaclon Not wich⸗ w ide in

fandyng beche lande of poure potiettyon be nhl n 29a
pl Wa

vncleanẽ / chen come ouer vnto the lande . Bebz⸗

mij. the


Underſkand /


Tht aulter of Fotua, Rubene Gad,


the 3t· the potetpon o the L od / where che Lomes the Londe is amonge vs becaule pe bane
aul wee ebermack moetiet ana be pote amõge not done thys tretpate agaynſt the Loꝛde.


Zouadyerh, Jolu ,


good hebe therfore onto por laulez ſchat pe bnto z Lande Andhe putdarcknelke berwene
Joie the Loge poure God.


Bi ö 8 vou and the Egppcpans and bꝛought the tee
oncipsdmittedys But rebell not agapn the K onde na: Andnomw pebaue rede che chriz or Atraen But and pt pe Gall go backe and cleaue ppon them and couered the. And voureeves
dome welpe 8gapuck bs to bupſde pou anpe other auler out oftyebanses of the Lowe. bntothereſtok thetenacpons that remapne haue lene what Tyaue done ind gppte. ana
wemen of the Taue the auilter or the Lozde dure God. yd And Phinehes the lone of Eleazar the wyth vou and ſhal make Martages wyth pe dwelt in the wilderne ge a long cealon.


MHoabites:but not can p lonne ol Zaren trelpale in the er⸗ Pzkalte ard the lozdes returned kr thechrl⸗ them / and ſhall go to them and the come to And J brought vou intoß lande or the Amoe


allo Springl cmunicate thin; wꝛath fell on all the dꝛen of Ruben and ot Gad oute of the lande abe Cure that the Loꝛde youre God wyll vices whech dwelt on the other (ede Jordan,

i neck (0 thathealone pe, of@Salaaponto thelandeot cenen tothe ‘Rocca outall jetenacions fvabefoze pos Arche Coughe witz powand9 gate shen

Zbalatrersand rilſhednot foz bis wyckedmelle⸗ cheldzen of Akrael and brought them worde. gz. But cher ſbelbe fnaresand trappes eure imo Youre zander und pe conqueten chen

ibo red e —Chenthechridzen or Ruben andok Gad, agapne. And the ancwere pleated the chyl- nrg vou / and tcourges oz poure ſxdes /¢ pickes contre. And I deltraxed chem in poure fpabt,

Peg, the and Balfe thetrpbe of Wanades antered dien o #iracl well/ an theypeapled en in youre eves /ontyll ve perpche from ofthps — Chen Balak the konne or Biphoz A

Speaites pposand lapde pnto the heades ower the tholi= and rd not entende to go agapne chemin goodlande whych theLozde youre Godhath ol Moab arole andwarredagaynit Irraell /

205 which shey landes ok Flraelsche mpahey God Fehouah - batelic,to vettrope the tande which the chpl- geuen pou, ; and kent ¢*callen Salam che ſonne oF Beoz ;
were plaged (oye Turowelh /andFeracl Mall knowe ik it be dzett of Ruben ¢Gad dwelt in. Andthe chpl⸗ Beholde g walkecis dave by the waxe kon ka cure you, But J wooldenotagre to sume rei.


dꝛen ok Ruben a the chyldzen of Gad ealled Btut. vxii a ·


that there died g z. le agaynſt the Loꝛde / D |
925 of teaneuiet un u ae eye aulter *e0/becaulte isa twitnete ber barg


ok thé foure a
twentpe thou⸗


ok all F wozlde: call pe to mynde in all poure


then petes and in all youre foules that noth


1 5 Loꝛde faue vs not thys daye. Dz
t


taüde dt that elles ik we haue bylt vs an auiter to turne twene vs / that the L oꝛde is God. Cral aur hath kapledol allthe goodthynges whech 8 And when ve went ouer Jordan /and came
begun. binn folowing the Loꝛde / 02 toattertheton @Zotua crhozteth the people that they Jopne not pete Won and Gob prometed you. ee ato anand 7 1 ma sof Sgro fous
uni. xxv. puꝛnt ofirynge ogmeatofirynges/02td them felues to the Pentples and that hey trug in Sed, to patie / and noth png hath kapledtherok. Ghte agaynk pou: the Amodzites / Pherelt⸗


peace offipnges theron: let the Loꝛde regux⸗
re it: And haue not rather done it koꝛ feare
ol this: leaſt in tyme to come your chyldꝛen
wulde Cape onto dures: what haue ye todo
Sopth the Loꝛde Godot Flract / lertüg that
Lozde hath made Jozdi a bozderbetwene
vs and vou ye childꝛẽ ol Ruben a ol Gad: ve


none but in God one iy wh pe had fulfplicd hys pꝛo⸗
meſes to them.
¶ Che. xxiij. Chapter.
Nd it came to pattea longe ceaton a
\3))| after: chat the Lozde had geuen
(rete vnto Ilrael from all their


as al goodthinges are come bpd vou / which
che Loꝛde pourẽ God pꝛomeled you: lo thall
the Loꝛde bzyng vpon pou all euell vntyll he
haue deſtroyed pou From of thys good lande /
whych the Loꝛde youre God bath geuen you
when pe haue tranfgretien the apoyntment
OF che Lozde youre God / whych he commas


that 18
rde dune beu en


haue no parte therfoze. in the Loꝛde: and lo enemxes rounde aboute / that Jo⸗ unded pou: and haue gone e lerued ſtraunge a lande in wyych ve dyd no labouite / a cytieg dende in to the
Sibel eue bee male — chyldẽ ceale (ua waren olde and was ſtrycken in perẽs. Gordes / and bowed poure lelues to them. pohych vou bylt not / and ye dwelt in chem. derte * Pou
" gromfcaringe the Lowe. nobertoze be fent forall Ferael/and kor their Chen that the wrath of Lorde ware whote Andvpnes and Dipuetrecs which ve piated driteuregrd
And therkoze we lapde: Let vs caule an elders / their heades / their Judges and otfy- vpon vou and ve hall peryche quicklxe / krõ not / and ye ate ol them. page and alto
aulter to be made / not for burntofirpnges/ cers / and layde vnto them: J am olde ¢ fry: of the good lande whych he hath geuen vou. And now keare the Londe and berue hymnped them har
noz lacrikpces / butit chalbe a wytnele be⸗ ken in peres. And ye haue lene all that the N in puvenete andtruthe: And put awayr hep torte teas
twenchs and pou and dure generacpons ac: Lozoyoure Sodhath done bnto all thele na⸗ See erie he ben 2e g6tepb nere Sl, Soddes why) poure fathers Cerucd anheben
ter vs / chat we ſhulde lerue the Loꝛde / wyth cyons before voure faces:Fo2 § L ode poure garbpeth. : ‘other fpde of che Houde land in Eaypt/¢ ferue ihr Weurräc.
burt ollerynges / lacrytyces and peaccoffe- God he koughte for vou. Beholde 4 haue ap⸗ the Loꝛde. But pt it leme euelſ nto LOUD sy ‘Fotusi.b.d
runges: and that poure chplozen chulde not popntedtheke nacyong chat kemarne / to beß Che xriiti. Chapter. u ches dapr D bang
faye to dures in tyme to come / ve haue no enßerptaunce of poure ktybes: euen from 5 the Gabdes ied. Jg
parte inthe Loꝛde.


And we thought if they chuld lo ſaye to vs
oꝛto dure Generacpons in txme to dome / that
we wolde fave agayne: Behalde the facpott
os the aulter wüjpch oure fathers made / ne⸗
ther koꝛ burntofivynges noꝛ tacryfpces / but


that it Guide be a Wytnelle betwene vs and


vou. God kozhydde p we ſhuld rebell agaynſt
the l oꝛde and that we chulde turne this dave
fr atterhim / and byflde an aulter £02 burnt⸗
offerpnges.oz lacrytpces / laue the altare of


the Lode / dure God that is betoꝛe hrs tas


„ Wernacle.

And when Phinehes the Preatte andthe
Loꝛdes of the congregacrõ and heades ouer
che thoulandes of Jorgell whych were wyth
him heardethe wozdes that the chyldzen ol
Kuben / the chyldꝛen of Gad and the chyldꝛẽ
ol Wanlalſes tpake/ they were well conte t.
And Phinehes the lonne okckleazarß pꝛeaſte


fayde onto the chyldzen of Ruben / or Gad athoutande:forth


“ andofdpanates-tpisbaze we perceaue that


qonan! and all the nacpos that J haue de⸗
roped / euen vnto che great See. And the
Loꝛde poure Godhe call expell and cat the
out bekoꝛe pou / and ve call conquere their
landes / as the Loꝛde youre God hath lade
vnto vou.

Be therfore ercedynge ſtronge that xe z


take hede to do al that is wꝛittẽ in the bone wen. un
Of the lawe of Moles / that ve bowe not a Jol. .


keößther from tothe rpght bande ozt9 th
i ro ve go not onto thele nacpors
wych vou:


remapne
mate mencyon oz fweake bythe names ol
eir Geddes: and that ve necherterue dem
noꝛ bowe voure felues vnto chem. But that
ve ſticke kalt onto the L oz youre God / as
ve haue done vnto thys dave. Do ſhall he c
Loꝛde caſt out befoze yougreat nacpons ¢
mpgbtye / as pe e how no man bath ſtende
befoze vou hitherto. One of vou Hall chate
0 che Loꝛde youre god be kigh⸗
teth toꝛ zou / as he hath 1


Topas. But z tone poure
tithe oiher lpdr ol che dag
hun into $ lande ol Cas
Bhs ecde / a gaue hem
nto Alaac Jacobs eau
au m̃oũt Seirto pottede
ahrs chrloꝛen went downe


Alent Hotes and Aaron. And
v bde / after the maner as J dyd
— Aran 0 . Z — alt
n. ruth. ode A bꝛought puure fatgers out o

And pe came önto che ſce:and che Egypciãg ha
B kolowed after poure fathers
and hoꝛlmẽ / vnto the redd ler.


e w. Stehe,


that ye nether 4 cover


But Folua Capde vnto the people / pe can
not leruẽ the Loꝛde:toꝛ he is anholye God a
cannot beare oure tranſgreuron
But when ve haue

ute


8


kozſaken the Loꝛde and


Corued ſtraunge Goddes / be wyll ture
Saber eye
eme. enmeled


¶ Judges.
¶ The boke ofthe.
Judges.


CæAkter Jolua was dead- Juda was conſtittite Tozda
auer the armpe when Jerulalem was brfegtb. Che
people that were nat deũroxed became tritutarxts.


Che lyst Chapter.


Jolua dytth,


anlwercd Jolua: nape /but we well ſerue


Jolua tarde onto the Colke / ve are
wytnelles brite poure felues /S ve haue cho⸗
fen vou the ll o de / to lerue bpm: ¢ they Capoe
penetics. Then put awape / cabde
he / the ſtraunge Goddes whych are amonge
vou /a bowe youre hertes vnto d Loꝛde God
Of Acraell. And the people ancwered Jocua:
the Loꝛde oure God we wyll ſerue and bys
vopce we wyll obeye. Ind lo Zolua made a
the people the fame dape / and
Sichen and lawes befoze chemin


ind Fofua wootte chete wo des in the


a


ter the death of Jory
cua the cyplozen of Ilraci al⸗
seed the Losde ſapinge: he


igyauntes E
olge be cate lalem / but the


Inbabtters of Dabir / whole name in olde
Geri nl aun tyme was catien Kariachlepher.
ok Fotua,


then & Horben
and Caleb ſapde vnto her: iShat men
apleth the? She larde onto hym:geue 1
‘Bleangestostpouban gene d Rant


Jud


ges.


watde g dyre land geuemeattotpypmnes of nantes the enbabptouces ofthe lande / and
water. And Caleb gaue her tpꝛyng boch ab⸗ djaue theim not out. 5
due g benethe. And thechyidrk okche Feniʒñe Hetherdrd Heppthalim dꝛpue out the


macs ovab of paulme trees / whith che cyplbze of Juda


into the twplvernede of Juda that Ipethin
the 2 pia ok Srad/anddweltamonge the
p. :


flew the Cananites that enyabitedSephath/


Ehn f. o. a vtterlpe deſtroped it /a called the name oF


the citiePozmah. And zuda tobe Kzah wihe
coſtes therok / and AfSalon pth the coſtes
therok / and Akaron wyth che cottes therol.
Bnd the Lozde was with Juda that he con⸗
quered the mountaynes / but they coulde not
dꝛpue out the enbabiters ol the valeyes / be-
caule they had charettes of pron. Andthey
gaue Hebꝛon vnto Caleb as Moles ſapde.
and he expelled thence the thze fonnes ol


Enack.

Andthe chplozen or Ben Farin dyd not
caſt out the Febulices that enhabtted Jeru⸗
ites dwell Wihechildzẽ

n Jerulalem / vnto .
in ipke maner the houle — 1
went bp to Bethel andthe Loꝛde wych the/
ferched out Bethel


hanites dwelt ttylle in Gascramong them.
HNecherdyd Sabulon expelle che enyabt-


toures of Betron nether p enhabptoures ot 5


Hahalol: But the Cananites dwelt amonge
chem and be came trybutaries.
G Nether dpd A ter cat out ? enhabytoures


Ache pier Henbabptoures ok Son ot ch.


Ahalab/Aczib/ Halbah / A phek / no ot RO


eoßle. .
And Zuda went a Simeon whinyether to ch


bob bucdjeatentes welt mung the Caz drd


enhabptoures of Sethfames/no; d enbabys
toures of Bethanath / but dwelle amogek z
Cananites the enhabitoures of p lande. Ne⸗
Uertheleſee the enbabptoures of Bethlameg
and of Bethanath be came trybutaryes vn⸗


o them.

Andthe Antozites hepte $ chebrt of Ban
in the mountaynes / and lotkered them not to
come downeto the valexes. And lo the amo⸗
rites wet to anddwelled in mount Peres in
Hailon and in Salabim. Heuerthelater the
hand ol Joleph waxed heupe bps them / lo z
they be came tributarxes. Andthe coftes of
$ Amozites was krö the goping bp to Acra⸗
bim / and fromthe rocke vpwarde.


Cbe Angel rebuneth the people becaute they had
made peace with the Cauamikeg. Adolatrers ace pine
niched / but pet leaue not their imuencyons, God len /
delh them iuͤdges to del puer them.


Nee
the angen of che Loz came v
neg algal 288225170 —
bꝛought zou out of te and
e brought vou vnto the lande
which F (ware onto poure fathers. And J
sone pra ie ue
made no couenat with the enbabptoures ol


‘this land / pe chuld haue bꝛoken doune their


aultares: But ve haue not obepea my voice /
why haue pe this done: whertoze Ahaue ive
newyple determyned 6 J wyl not cat them


out betoze vou: but thep dbalbe in the rydes gell


ol vou / and their Goddes walbe Mares vnto t


pou, And when the angell ofthe L. 9 wehsde d re ret


kpoken chele wo: des vnto all the chridzen ok a
Ittael che people cryed out and wepte. And 92 —
Called the name ofthe lade place / Bocim g
offered there bntothe Lose,


euer at!
Laren ena bad fent§ people atoape/ hate the


the chplozen of Alrael went euerre man into a
his enheritaunce to potlete the lande. Ind p
people Cerued the Loꝛde all the dapes of Jo⸗
Tua / and all the daes of the elders that out
Ipucd Jolua / and had lene all the great woze
Hes of the Lope that he dydto Brack. And
Jofua the lonne ok Hun the feruaunt of the
Loꝛde dped when he was an hundꝛed an ten
peres olde: whom ther burped inthe coſtes of
is enheritaunce: euenin Chamnath

in mountephꝛaim on the nopthfyoe ol d hell
Gaas. Ind euen co all that generacion were
put onto their Fathers / and there atofe ange


er generaexon after them wh
125 — ee
me, Ind


ray,


b. Fo Fostake
the Cozd Gop
ok their fae
thersis/todile
pyle e fortake
the worde of
Godinot to be


Othoniell


And then the chyldꝛen oF Zlrael de wyc⸗
kedlpe in the tyght ofthe Lo de / and lerued
Baalim / ab fo: toke the Loꝛde Godot their
fathers / which bꝛought them out or the land
ok Egypte / and kolowed ſtraunge Goddes /
euẽ ofthe Goddes ol the nacpons that were
round aboute them / and bowed them (clues
vnto ehem / and angred the Loꝛd. Ind ſo cher


Tene bis p20 S foptohe the Lord andlerued Baal eSttha-


mefes noꝛ to


roch. iherkoze the Lozde waxed angrye w


wwaicke 18 DUS Akrael / z delxueredthẽ into che handes afta:


commaunde⸗


menteß: bur to eners to Cpople chem and lolde chem into?


in his worde.
c. To lerue


rewyllron of


whofecner


the true Gods
the cecte of Ae


the blcllynge
was proineted:


Shit oure
Lorde. Gene.
kx. d. Gala. D
Wade
6


dothe⸗denpeth andd


bahay up whs them out ok the


thatisgcius


vmagpne ano / Wades ol their ennentyes rounde aboutechẽ /
ther ter ute ot ſo p they had na power any longer to ſtande
him tbe be bim befoze ther enempes . Wut pnto whatlo⸗

uh wonde. cuevepng they went / che hand or che Lore ch


was vpon them with euell lucke / euen as §


25 falls Aithee Loꝛde pꝛomeled them / and as he ware vnto


roch 10/to brut,


chem. Andthey were foze bered,


mifepned duke, Heuertpelellethe Londe rapled bp gudges
neg/ and to per Jr

rT elpuered them out ofthe bandes of
bade ie err pp bre eestor all pac er wen


noc harken onto their Judges: But went a


aaariadgrg r uh ewaltel kraungeSoddes andtomed eg


Sy aye heiß out ofthe toape which ther Fathers waltteD
worchy which in obepeng the comaundemetes of the lord /


them felues onto thé /" and turned quichive


motto
And whenthe Loprrapleothem bp Buds
ges / he was with the Judge / and delpurred
ache ge e te deen.
the dapes of the Judge: koz the Lo; ci
‘pater ouer their foꝛowinges which thy
had bythe realon of them that oppꝛelled
und ve red then: yet kor al that as lone as?
indge was deadthey turned and dyd wozte
then their fathers in kolowenge ſtraunge
ddes / and in lerurng thẽ / and cealed not
their inuenctons noz from their maly⸗
cpoute tapes, 8 bas
Wherkoze the Loꝛde was angrye with be
rael and fayoe : be caule thys people bathe
tranlgrelled myne appopntemient which
edmatided their fathers and haue not oberdẽ


tp vopce / chertoze hencekoꝛth J wil not cat vnto


out ant ms befoze thé or the nãexans which
Jolua leatt when he dped / and that to pꝛouẽ
frael thaough the whether ther well nepe
e tape of d Londto walke therin as ther
Fathers dyd oꝛ not. And lo the Lozde lealte
thofenacyons alone / and dꝛcue the not oute
pmmenpatipe /netherdelpucred them in to
the handes of Kolus. p
ns te lenkte amonge the Jleactites

boihe pubenko bere bah be hen l detpur⸗
eech Jtraci Aso bpllebpng Galen Senger byle
Acth the go hies. =


che. in. Chapter,


lerneng bl che generacyon of the cheldꝛen of
Icrael: which befoze knew nothing ol warre
he lette the true Loꝛdeg of the Philictines / x
all the Cananites the Didonites / che Heui⸗
tes that dwelt in mount Libanon:euen Fron.
mount Baal Hermon vnto Hemath. Chote


a
And then the chridzen of Alrael cryed onto
the Lozde. Andthe Lone ſtered chem vp a
lauer ¢ laued tzem: one Othoniel the lonne
ol Rene Calebs younger bother. Ind the


ſpꝛete of the Loꝛde canie vpon him. And he ae *
nd shane Bun


09 1 he onen out 6 foarre. 4


Thrch Ahud made hema dagger wech
ae cubpte length/ ¢ Bribe yt 5
vnder his cote bponbis right Ge
vied the pꝛelent onto egion the Benge of the
MPoabytes / which eglon was a very —


Ixxx.peres.

And akterhym came Samgarthe tonne
ok Anath / which llewe of che Phiuiſtines. vi.
hundꝛed men wyth an ore gode / and delyue⸗
red Ilrael alto.


0 Itrael is commptted into the handes of Jabm / be
cauſe thep were returned to J dolaerpe. Beboꝛa and
Barak delpuer them: Silarã is wplled of Jacl,


che. ij. Chapter.


othe chyldꝛen of gtrael beganne
agayne to do wyckẽdly in the lyght
of the Lord / when Ahud was dead.
And the Loꝛde ſoldethem into the
handes or Jabin Synge of Canaan / that


Judg


ts, f CCU,
raygned in Pazoꝛ / whole captapne of warre
was Dilara / which dwelt in Haroleth of f
gentrles. And the chyldzen ok Jkrael cryed
vnto che Loꝛde:loꝛ he had myne hundꝛed chaz
rettes of vꝛon. he oppꝛelled the chrldzen ol
Ilrael with power xx. percs. 8

And Deboꝛa a Pꝛophetple / the woke ol
Lapidoth iudged itraell the lame tyme / and
dwelt vnder the paulme tre ol Peboꝛa / be⸗
twene Ramath and Bethell / in mounte E⸗


ham. iid

And the chyldꝛen ol Ilrael came tober koꝛ
iudgement. And che lent and called Barak
the konne ot A binoam / out ol Bedes Peph⸗
thalim / and lade vnto hym. i

The Loꝛde God ol Jirael commaundeth
che / that thou go and dꝛawe to mounte hae
bor / and take wyth the ten thoulande men /
ol the chyldꝛen of Hephthalim e ok the chyi⸗
dꝛenok Zabulon. And J well bꝛynge onto
the ryuer thifon Sptfara / the Captayne ol
warre vnto Jabin, wyth bys charettes / and
his people / nid will delpuer them into thyne
handes. And Barak lapde vnto her / v tou
wylt go with me / J will go: But and vtheu
wylt not go wyth me / then g wyll not go.
And che ant wered / J wpll ſüerlpe go wyth
che / but then the pꝛaple hall not be chyne / in
the wave which chou sock / ko: p Lord Walt
delpuer Sitara into che handes ofa womã.
And che arole and went with Barak to Kes
des. And Barak called Zabulon and Meph-
thalim to Redes. And he went vp a koote
ba en thoulande men: and Beboꝛa went


rm. ;
But aber thekenite was remoued out Frage,

of Bin / wüpch was of the chplozen oF * Ho- Nüme rb.
bab the father in lawe of Holes / and pyt⸗
ched his tente vntillhe was come to d Ocke
ol Zaanaim / by kedes.

And then it was chewed vnto Silara
how that Sarak the ſonne ol A bingam was
gone vp to mount Thabo: And Sitara cal
ied Foz all his chavettes / euen. ix hundzed cha
rettes of yon / and foz all the people that he
had / krom aroleth of the gentyles vnto the
kruer of Rilon. Ehen lapde Deboꝛa onto
Barak vp koꝛthrs is the dape in whrch the
Lozde hath delyuered Stlara in to thyne
handes: £07 the Loꝛde is gone oute before C
che. Ind fo Barak wentdowne from mount
Chaboꝛ / and ten thoulande men after hem.

But the Loꝛde trounled Sifara and
all bps charettes andall bys hoſte wyth the
edge ok the l werde before Barak. And Si⸗
lara lyghted doune ot bys charett and lleda
kote. But Barak folowed after charettes
and after the holte / euen vnto Paroſeth ol
the gentyles. Ind all the hoſte of Silara fell
vpon the edge ol the lwerde / that there mae


Deboꝛa.


not a man leafte.
fate tothe tent of baie the wyke of Paber
the kenite ko their was peace betwene Ja⸗


bin che hynge or Haro; / and the hou tboldẽ ot


Paberthe kenite. ä 8
Ind Jacl went out agaynſt Sitara and
fayde vñtohrm: ture inmr Loꝛde / turne
into me ¢fearenst ; Andhe turned into her
into her tent: che coueredhym with a man⸗
tell. and he larde vntaher geuemealpttel
watertodzyncke / to: amthziſtre. And he
Dppened a bottell ormpite agaue him dꝛyne⸗
ke and couered him. Andhe larde onto her /
Ganve in che doe of thy tente / g yk anp man
come @ athe the / oz enquere ot the whether
chere be any man here ſlaxe nape.

Chen Jacl Pabers wyte toke:a naple
ofthe tente / and an hamer in her hand / a wet
foftipe vnto him andtmote $ naple thoꝛow
the ceples of his head in to the ground / as he
Gomberedbeying werr:Andlöhedyed.

And beholde as Barak kolowed alter St-
fara Jael came out agaynt him and larde
vnto him:come and J wyll chew the the ma
‘whi thou fekett, And when he came into her
tente: Beholde / Silara lave dead a $ naple


choꝛow his tẽplẽs. And fo Godbzought Fa- other


ben the kyng of Canaã into fubteccyon
pave befoze the chridzenor Alrael. And the
hande of the chylozen ot Ilräel pꝛocpered gz
was loze vpon Jaben the henge of Canaan /
vntyũ they had bꝛought him to naught.

ehe fonge and thanches geupng of Debota g a.
se afer he victorze. ‘de


he. v. Cha
pence arack che lonneok
the lame dare:


eme read
ren be zee


P 2
lle m Zirael . Hearekynges and herken
tenes l. des well fynge/and geue pꝛaple vnto
zeche elbe dhe Lozve God / ol Alrael.
Loꝛde when thoũ departedeſt out of Sete
and camett kr the keldes ol Edom / the erthe
trembled / and che heuen rarned / a 6 cloudes


opped waterithe s mealted be⸗
toe tie Loꝛde / euen mount Dinat befoze &
Loꝛde God of Acrael.


‘Byte
wens nor way Ipere in N loueth § marn⸗
act an bb tener ofthe lawe in Accel / d are willenge


‘Benge of Canaan at
che


oꝛdan / and whe tary
1D Aler ſate in the hauen


er; rb pei babe B they coue⸗
ted / hey carved not awaxe.
ebm heauẽ came battell:foz the ſterres


being in their courte / kought agarnſt Sita- ca
Ya. cherer ol Kilon caught chem awaxe: nach:


that atmetent ryuerthe ryuer Rilon.
Sy loule: treade thou the mrghtye vnder⸗
kote. Chen they malledthe hozdes legges / S


their m


Curle Meroꝛ bad the angell of the Loꝛd D


courſers lette pꝛaunſyng.


Curle Curve the Geel gaye therof be⸗


caulethep came not


2th to helpe p Lon /


tohelpe the Lom amoge the mpghtic.


Renyte /


lelled be Jael the wyke of Haber the
aar, dul tine womens bei aher


wenien blend be che in the tente.


He alked water / but che gaue himmylcke / pan


and bꝛought butter in a goovive bythe. She


caught a naple inher leatte hand / and a woz⸗ then


Ange bamer in her right / ard narled Sila-
ra and wounded his head and pearceda wet
thozowe his temples. Betwene her tete he
botwed him elt / telle downe and lave ſtile:
Betwene her tete he bowed hrmkelk a kelle.


And whether


he bowed him leite / thrtherhe


kelle bꝛaught to nought.


Choꝛou


che lenz
then


Tamm
me (8


de / that


Feyght:!
take a pit
but ther
fore be
£03 it (0


fed
fore


than Jit


Che. vt. Chapter.
remem Hd the chplozen of Flvael competed
ANZ) wyckednes in the lyght of d Loꝛde
Andthe Lozde delpuẽredthem into
E the bandes ofthe Madiamtes teuẽ
peres. And vhrithe bade ok? Madlamtes
{was foze bpon Icrael / the chpldzen oF Icrael
made thẽ dennes in § mountaynes¢ caues
Adtronge holdes Fo: whenzerael had towen
then came the Madianites the Amalechtites
Ather ol che Catt cötrere vpon thé a pitcher
their tentes agaynſt chem ¢ deſtroxed p en⸗


cxealeokche erthe euen vnto A rah / and ſette


no luſtynaunce in Ilrael / nether cepe / ore
oz ade / toꝛ they came wyth their cattell and
beg doch cue ag grechopers in multitude:
o p both ther and alto their camelles were
wilh out nonibze. And thep entrede p lade to
deſtrope it. And lo was “Crack excedrngly
impouereched by ß Madiamtes ¢crpeddne
Btothe L onde. And when the chrldꝛẽ 2 ot
cryed onto the Loꝛde becaule ofthe 3
nites che Loꝛde tent a pꝛophete nto them,
FElardbnto che: Chus lärth the Loz God ol
Ilrael: J kette vou rõ Egypt ebzought pow
gut ofthe boule ot bondage and A rydde vou
out ok hande of the Egypcians a out-of d
bands of all ß oppzetted you / caſt thé out be
Toze pou / a gaue pou their lands. And Zelaya
vnto pou / Jam 2 L ode youre God / öther⸗
koze keare not the Goddes of che Amozites
in whole lande you dwell. But pou haue not
obepen my vopce. Indthe Angell of p Loꝛde
cameg Cate onder an Deke in eyhꝛah / p pet
tayned onto Foas $ father of 6 Cleritt. And
his tonne Gẽdeon pꝛelled out whete out ol p
tates in a pꝛeſſe / toꝛ to flee Es ; Madianitꝭ
And ß angeil of the Lozd apeared onto him /
Cg larde:? Londis Wehe chou ma ol meabt /
And Gedeon anch Oh my Lozde/
pꝓlthe Loꝛde be with bs why is all this come
bponbs: pe e where be hrs mxꝛacles which
vine fathers tolde vs of and ſarde / the Loꝛd
bꝛought bs out of Egypte. But now $ Loꝛd


Judges


rev,


athe koꝛtakẽ vs / delpuered vs into d ba

de the Samanutz. Anbihe a legevo
him g lar: Go hence in this thympght e de⸗
Iruer Acraeloukok 5 hades of ? Madtanitk:
Beholde J haue lent the: Andhe antiwered
bm. Oh Loꝛd wher wihuld z fave Arael⸗
Seholde my kenred is 5 poozett in Manac⸗
les / a Lam $ leat in my fathers houle. But
then F Lod lardyntohim: J willbe wehe :a
thou thait tmypte 5 Madianttö as chey were


pee but one mä. And he antwered him / vez haue


bounde grace in thylpaht / then ewe mea
kxgne / f thou art ß i020 b tatheth w me De
parkenot hence until come agapn bnto 5 2
abzung myne olkryng / õ haue lett it betoꝛe p.

And he fayde J wyll tarpe vntyll thou
come agapne. And Gedeon went e made res
dre a hydde / and lwete kakes of an 57175 ol
llowse a put che liehe in a backet ¢ N bꝛolh
ina potte / a bꝛought it out vnto hym onder

Ocke a pꝛelented it. And § angell of God

apde vnto him: tate the fletye and the twete
Hakes g put the bps this roche / a po e out
che broth. And he dyd to. Ehen che angell ot e
Lord put forthe p ende oF the ſtaßte p was in
bis hande ¢ touched the fleche ¢ 5 kan. And
there arole bp kyre out of d rocke a cõlumed
Elleche and che nales. Ard the angell ofthe
Low banicbed out of his tyght And whe Ge⸗
deon perceaued 5 it was an Angeli / he card
Alas my N o:d Jehouah / that J haue (ene an
angel of ö Loꝛde kace to face. And § Loꝛde
larde vnto him peace be W $ ¢ feare not toz ©
chou halt not dye. Ttzen Gedeß made an aul
tave there ynto p Loꝛd g calleditꝰ Jehouah
Salom / which vnto this dape is pet in C chat is / be
phꝛach p Tanken vnto 5 father of p Ele⸗Toꝛd or peace.
Titꝭ. And p fame tthe Loꝛde ſapdevnte
hem / take an ore ak thy fathers gt another of
bij. vert olde / a deſtroxe p aultaer of Baal 2
belongeth onto thy kather / ¢ cutte doune the
groue p; is about it / ⁊ make an aultaer vnto
the Loz thp godppö ß toppe of this rocke a
kurneſche it. And take the leconde ove ¢ offer
bumtfacrifpce W  wond of ß groue which
chou chalt haue cut doune. Chen Gedeo take
ten men ot his ſeruaũtt ar dvd as 5 Loꝛd bad
hm. But becaule he durſt not da it by daye
koꝛ feare othis fathers houſholde and of the
men of the cytie / he dyd it by nyght.

When ß men of the citie were vp erlpe in
the momenge: Beholde p aultare of Baal
was bzoke/ ache graue p ſtode about it cut
doune. And p ſecõde ore offered vpõ p aulter
$ wag made. Andthep Capde one to another /
who hathe done this thyng / athey enquered
Kalked. Andit was tolde them that Gedeon
the tonne of Foas had done it. Chenthe men
Orthe ertie fapde nto Joas / bzynge outthy
ſonne z he ma ke dre becaule bebath broke b

“au


Gideon.


aulter of B aa / a cut doune 5 groũ? A was
about it. And Joas lapde onto all that Gove
byhim / will ve Evatt ton Ballon wil pe be
his dekenders he that Erpucty foz hem walt
dre this moꝛnynge. Ihe be a God let ent
firpue with hym that calt downe his auiter.
Andhe called Gedeon Jerobaal the tame ty⸗
me laping: let Baal ſtryue with him becaule
he hach bon en downe his aulter.

G. When all the Davianites the IAmale⸗
Hites and cher of checkact were geatheredte
geather a had gone and pitched inthe valere
ol Jerael the pete of the Lord entered into
to@edeon, And he blewe a trompette and


Judit. vib. a caſled x A bie zer to olow him / a Cent mecden⸗


gers chozou oute all Manaſtes ¢ called thé
vpto kolowe hym allo. Andhe tent metiens.
gers vnto Aler / Jabulon and HNephchalim /
whlch came allo co mete him.

And Gedeon lapde onto God: pk thou wilt
laue Itrael bymyhande as thou halt farde.
Behödde J wyll puta llece of wolle in che
chꝛealhyug place. Ind pk che dewe be on f
fleceonlpe / and dꝛye vps all the erthe berrde:
chen J Mall be Cure ß chou wylt laue ‘Braet
bymphande/as thou fayoett.and it came lo
to pal. Andhe role bp cripe onß moꝛowe⸗
and he thꝛuſt 6 llece to geacher and wzonge
Bete therouté kylled a boole of water.

nd Gedeon lade vnto God / be not angrre


1 d. wyth me / chat Alpeake once moare / let me
tise oue oni once agapne with the flece. et it


eave onlxe vpon the flece / a dew vponall
orate dump abvute. 40d God dyd ſo z fame
nygbt: lo z it was deve vpon the llece onixe /
g on all the grounde aboute / dewe.


Che toudpars that chulde go with Gedes to battel
tabpng thé vp water. Gedeon with. 16
barbie Pett ed theapapianites Dreband
eb arellapne.
a Cae. vii. Chapter.
yen Jerobaall otherwyſe called
Gedeon role erlpe ¢ all the people
chat were wich him! ¢ pitched be⸗
lde the wel of Hatad tothat the


Judges.


water / and wylttrye chem vnto the chere.
And of whom Fave vntothe thys wall ge
Sh the che came Halt go with the . And who:
loeuer I lape vnta tic this tall not go wich
che / chẽ tame Halt not go. And when he had
brought doune p people vnto $ water. Che
Loꝛdẽ card nto Gedeon. as many as lappe
the water with thety tonges / aß dogges do /
them put hy them felucs and lo do the that
Anele downe vpon their knees to depncke.
e of thé that put chere hades
to their mouthes and lapped were. ij. hun⸗
died men. And all the reninaũt of the people
kRneled doune vpõ their knees to derncke wa
ter. Andthe Loꝛde fapde vnto Gedeon wyth
che the huͤdzed men that lapped well J laue c
du / and delpuerthe Madianites into thyne
hande . And all p other people Hall go euer
man vnto his atone whome.

And they coke bytaties with them for the
kolke / a their trompettes. And he tent all he
ret — — estes tente and
kepte the thze hund ed wich him. Ind ß —
ol Mads was benethe him in a valere. And
the lame nyght the Lozd layde vnto him / vp
4 go donne vnto che hoſte / to; J haue delrue⸗
red it into thyne hande. But q ye thou feare
to 10 doune / chen go thou doune vnto 8 holt /
@ Pharah thy ladde/eherke what ther tape
and fo (hall chrne handes be ftrong / and then
thou chalt go doune onto the holte

Chen he went doune iw Pharab pis lade /
euen harde vnto the men of armeß that were
in the holte and the Madtantteg / che Ama⸗
lekites / and all they of the Catt / laxe a longe
inthe baleve/Ipke onto grethopers in muftt
tude and their camelles were without nom⸗
bꝛe / euen as the lande by the fee ſyde in mul⸗
titude. And whe Geded was come: Beholde⸗


ite ofthe Madianttes were in a valeye on bi


J noschtpde of d hell Bamozeh. And p Lozde
tayde vnto Gedeon / the people that are wich
che are to many foz me to geue the Madta⸗
nites into their hades /leſt Ilrael make their
bawnte to my dichonoure d faye’ oure awne
hande hathe laued s. How therkoze make a
pꝛoclamacion in che ares of the people and


v Vkuk. Er- b. Hape: pf art mä dzeade o7 be aferde/ let hem
4, acha. ig. g returne and get hym


Cone From mounte Gaz
laad. And there departed and returned of the
people. xrij. thoulande / and there abode ten
thoufande.

Ind ß Lon layde vnto Geded: the people
ave pet to man / bꝛyng them downe vntoche


euer mũ a trõpet inhis hand

Flacher alan geg chern anitapbe rech
ioke on me a do irkewyle and bebolde / whe
come toche Fyne of the hoe / cue as D0/


Grdeon.


fodo you. Ind when 2 bio we with a trompet
und all that are with me / blowe re wtrom⸗
pettes allo on euerprpde the hoſte and lape /
here be che Loyde and Sedeon. +
And fo Gedeon ¢ the che hundzed men 8
were W him / came onto the tyde of § holt in
the begynnyng ok the myddell watche / and
repled vp § watche men. Ind they blewe w
their tr pettes a bzake the pytchers 6 were
fneyertyant Juwel the cõpãnves blewe w
tröpettd ¢ brake p pitchers Khelde $ Apes
debeo blowe wp alt Anbeher eens
to blowe „And ther
ſwerde ol p Lond ¢ oF Gedeõ. Ind they Hove
fiille/ euery ma in his place rounde about ?
hoſte. Ind all § holte ranne e crped ¢@ fled.
And asthe thꝛe hundꝛech blewe with trom⸗
b / h Lord Cett euerpmanes werde bps
is neyghboure / thoꝛow out all d hoſte. And
hoſte ficed vntyi they came to Bethlitah /


to Fererath/¢ to g edge of Abelmeholah be⸗


erde £ And § men ok Irael geathered
together of d tribe ol He phthalim / of Aler ⸗
¢ ofall Manaſſes a folowedatter $ Wadi
nitz. Foz Gedeon had lent mellengers thoꝛou
out all moat Ephraim faring : come done
agaynt $ Madiarites ¢ take Exo the $ wa⸗
ters bothe of Bethbarath e allo of Fozdan,
Chen all ß men ol Ephꝛaim geatherẽd to ge-
cher a came doune a tone p waters bothe of
Bethbarath a allo of Joꝛdan. Andthey take
tio captarnes ofthe Wadtanites Deeb ¢
eb / a lew Dzeb vpon the roche Dzeb/and
Seb at the pꝛelle Seb and lolowed after Ma
Bfan.Andbzought the heades of Oꝛeb g Feb
to Gedeon on the otherfyoe Joꝛdan.

C|phzatin maketh inlurreccid 722 0 Gedes / but
is lune pacyped Che inhabiters dt Socoth refute to
geue Grdrons hisarmype breed. The towze Wha⸗
Auel is deſtroped. Gedeon 1m cORitutcrular over the
Jeraelites dehache. Irx.ſonnes. e dpeth.


Che vii. Chapter.
main fapoe vn⸗


bybatt thou ſerued vs
vs not when
wt tae


Judges.


reat
Salmona kynges of Madian. Ind ß Long corte of foudy
BF Socoth Caps: are the handes of Febath karg bo be
and Salitona now in ehpne hardes that we dend be come
whuldegpue breed ontoryy companye. And dune voc
Gedeon lapde / therfore when the Loꝛde hath cave thettocke
Delpuered Scbath and Zalmona in tomrne of Abiesce or,
Bade J well teare the feche of pou wich che anne, Serrow
thomnes of the wildernes ¢ with bꝛeers. And
he went thence to Phanuel / and fpake vnto
che lykewyte. And the men of Phanuel an⸗ C
Cwered him / as dyd the men of Socoth. And
he lad alto vnto the men ol Phanuel/whẽ
come agayne in peace/F wyll bꝛeake doune
this towze. Zebah @ Saimona were in Ar⸗
Kar g thetrhotes with them / vp a. xv thou⸗
land / which were all that were lefte of all d
hoſtes ok them ofthe cate. And they b were
lapne were a hundzed a twentye thoutande
men that dzewe ſwerdes.
And Gedeon went thoꝛowe thẽ pdwelle
in tabernacles on the eaſte (poe or HPobah a
Jebahah / a lmote the hoſte: ko the holte dyd
caſt no perrelles.ebah and Zalmona fledde
But he folowedattet them / and toke p two
Bong of che Madiamtes / Hebah and Sal⸗
na and dilcomkoꝛted all the hoſte.
And Gedeon the donne of Foas returned
frd battell / d tonne beping vet vp / a caught
à ladde of the men of Socoth / a enquered ol
him. And he wzote him ol the Loꝛdes ¢ El⸗
ders ol Socoth. lxxvij. men. Chenhe came
vnto the men of Socoth and lade: Beholde
Fat) / Jalmona wyth which ve calt me
$ tethe faptnge: are d handes or Zebah e
Fitna all redye in thyne bande / that we
uldgpue bꝛeed onto thy fapntye men. And
he toke the elders ofthe cytie / andthoꝛnes ok
the wylderneſee and bzeers / K all to tare the
therwith . And he bꝛake doune the towze ol
Phanuel and lle we the men of the cytie.
And then lapde onto Febsh and Fale
mona what maner men were they which ve
Cet at Chaboz: andthepantwered / 9 Ipke-
nelle ol the a the is all one / euen after the faz E
cpon ok che chyldaen ofa kyng. Andhe lapde /
ther were my beth7é euẽ mp mothers chrl⸗
dzen / a as teulye as the L ozde lyueth / yl he
ad laued their lyues J wolde not ſlehe pow,
ind he Cayo vnto Jether his clock tonne vp
@ flee thẽ: But the larde dzue nothis fwerde /
fo2 be fcared beraule be was vet poũg hen
Debah a Salmona ſapde. ple thou a kalle
bpd vs / oz as § mA is ſo is his ſtrẽght. And
Gedeon arote ¢ dlewe thẽ:a hetone aware f
Charnes g were on their camels neches.
Chen $ men ol Irael capde onto Gedeon
Naygne ouer vs / bothe thou / thy lonne ¢ hy
fonnes lone Foz thou batt delyuered vs out
ok ß hand ol p itt. And C ede fayd
vnto chẽ / wel not raigne ouer ee
al


Abimelech.
Mali my chyſdzen rapgne ouer you / but the
Loꝛde ſhall raigne ouer you,
Neuerthelater Gedeon lade vnto chem.
Jwolde delpꝛe a certapne requeſt of pout /
tutẽ that you wolde geue me euere man che
F earynges ok his pꝛape. Fo they had goulden
earpnges / becaule they were Fimacittes.
And cheylayd we wyll doit. And they tpzecd
à manteil and dd cad there into euerr man
p earynges ok his prave . Andthe weyght oF
che goulde earynges was a thoutand g feuẽ
hüdzedtpcles of goulve / belpdes bꝛouches
duches egarmentes ol tkarletthat were ol
hinges of Madian / a belpde the charnes
that were about theire camels neckes. And
Gedeß made an Ephodtherok / z put it inhis
cytie Ephꝛah. And all Flracl wet a whoꝛyng
alter hinthere / which thynge was the tuine
of Gercons houle. Chus werethe Madla⸗
nites bought lowe befoze the chpldzẽ ol It:
rael / lo p the lykte vp theirheedde no moare
Andthe contreye was in quvetnelee kourtre
peres in the dapes ol Gedeon.

And Jerobaäll the fonne of Joas wet and
dwelte in his awne boule. And Gedeon had
ixx. lonnes or hys bodye begotten / koꝛ he had
many wpyues. And his concubpne 6 dwelt in

ichem bare him a tonne allo / whole name

e called a bimelech. And Gedeon the tonne
ok oas oped, when he was ol a good age /
was burped in p burtall of Joas his facher /
euen in Ephꝛah that pertapned vnto the fas
ther ok the E zrites.

But ag lone as Gedeon was deed/ $ chrl⸗
dꝛen ol trael turned awaye a went a whos
ryng after Baal /a made Baal berpth theire
God / a thought not on the Loꝛde their God
which haddelpuered them out of the handes
ofall their en emres on euerp tyde. Hether
ſhewedthey mercy onthehoule ol Jerobaal /
othertople called Geded / accoynß to all the

AJ Goodnetfe which he bewedthenim.


C Abimelech is oꝛdeyned a kynge after he hed kplled
hin Irvith. bꝛethzen he him keike was akter Bplled ot a
woman when he beleged Thebes. Che parables ot
Joatham concerneng his bꝛather Abimelech.

Che. ix. Chapter. :
Or Abimelech the fore of Feros
Ets baal went to Sichem / onto bys
7 9 mothers bꝛethzẽ / a comuned with
kes wich anhes mothers fathers
Rymed la pinge: faxe I pꝛape vou /in 8 eares
ok all  enbabytoures of Sichem: whether
is better koꝛ yeu that all the fonnes ol Jero⸗
baal which are. ix. perlonnes raygne euer
vou / ether that one raigne ouer pou. And re⸗
member therto / that J am youre bones and
youre fete. Andbismothers baethz reher⸗
fede of him in the audiẽce ok all the Citesens
Of Sichem / all thele woꝛdes / z moued there


8.


Judg


hartes to kolowe Abimelech / in z they tayde


es. Joatham,
how he was their brother. And ther gaue
him. xx. peces of ſyluer out of the houle ot
Baal Berit wytt which Abimelech hrzed
Jehel andivght perfonnes which went with
him. And ther wet onto hrs fathers houle at
Ephzah / a leme all his bꝛethzen / the fonnes
of Zerobaal /eutn ix percones „with one . aye en
Hetwithlkandrnge ver Toatyam the reer,
poungeſt tonne of Ferobaal ecnaped / toꝛhe
hd hemlelke. And all the cytezens ol Sichẽ
ehered to geather wyth all the houle of
ello / a went and made Abimelech Aynge
kat a certen ocke that was by Sichem.
And when it was tolde Foatham / he wet
g ſtode in the toppe ol most Gartzim / and
lytte vp his bopce a called / e lapde onto thé:
Herne onto me you cytezens of Sichem / f
God mape herken vnto vou. Che trees went
toanopita Rynge ouer them / a lade vnto
the olyue tree / raygne ouer vs. But 6 ofpue
tree fayde bntothe:thuide J leaue my fate:
neſſe which both Gon ema pꝛaxleth inme /
and go to be promoted ou er the trees. Chen
fapde the trees to the kygge tree / come thous
be hyng ouer vs. and the kigge tree antwered
the / wuld g koztake mylwetnes ¢ my good
krute / and huld go to be promoted ouer the
trees. Chen lapde the trees vnto the vyne /
come thou and bed yng ouer vs. And ö vyne
antwered/thutd J leane my wyne that chea⸗
teth bothe God a man / ¢ go to be pꝛomoted
ouerthe trees Chen ſapde all thetrees unto un
ther Epzre buthe come thou and rargne ouer auh
vs. And the kyzre buche lade onto the trees: gost,
pk it be true that ye wyll anopnt me Aynge
duer vou / then come and relt vnder my tha-
dowe / a ve halle that a kyꝛe Mall come out
ok the kyꝛre buche and waſte the Cyper trees
ol Libanon.
Andeuẽ lo nom / yt pe haue done trulpe a C
vncozruptlpe to maße Abimelech krng And
pr pe haue dealte well wich Jerobaal d bys
houle / a haue dane vnto him accordyng to &
deleruyng ol his hade / koz as moche as mp
father fought koꝛ vou / ¢ aduẽtured bys lyfe /
And rydde pou out ok the handes of the Ma⸗
dianites. Ind pe are ryten vp agaynſt my fa
there houle this dare. And haue dayne bes
chyldzẽ / euen. lxx pertonnes? wich one done tian
and haue made Ibimelech the tonne ok bys
7 Bynge ouer the cytezens OF
Sichẽ / becaule he is youre bꝛother / r then
pe haue dealte purelxe and trulye with Ze-
robaal ¢ tb bishoute this dave: then retopte
ve in Abimelech / and let hm allo retopfe in
vou. But vt vou haue notdealt trulpe / then
Ipꝛape God a fyze mape come oute of Abt⸗
melech a cölume che cptesens ol Sichem a
che houle of Mello. And chere come a fe
out


Same
Pies


ab


imelech.
out of the cyte ens of Sichem / gout ol the
houte of ello a conlume Abimelech. and
Foatham ranne awape and lledde ¢ went to
Beer a dwelt there / Foz kegre of Abimelech
is brother. / When Abimelech had rapgned
chi ‘orient an hate betwene Abime-
lech ache cytezens ol Sichem Andthe cite⸗
zens of Sichem rayled vpon Abimelech / a
willhed that che wyckednes done to the. xx.
fonnes ol Jerobaal myght come on hym / æ
lapde ö bloude of thẽ onto Abimelech their
bꝛother which llewe thẽ / a vnto 6 other cite⸗
zens of Sichem which arded him tn the kyl⸗
ieng of his bꝛethzk. And d cptesens of Sichẽ
fet men to lape a wapte Coz hym in the toppe
ofthe mountarnes / whych men robbed all
chat came a longe the wãxe by them. And it
was tolde Abymelech. ;

And Gaal che Conne of Abed a his bꝛethzẽ
went g gatthemto Sichem And the men oF
Sichẽ: put their cofdence in hym. Ind ther
vet out into p keld a geathered in their gra ·
pes etroade thẽ / made merp: and wẽt into

the houle of their God e dyd eate a dꝛyncke
Scurled Abimelech. And Gaal the tonne ol
Abedlayde:what is Abimelech ! and what is
Sichẽ 76 we chulde lerue hym / is he not the
konne of Ferobaal: and Sebul is his officer?
lerue loche as come ef Hemoꝛ the father ol
Sichẽ / koꝛ what realon is it that we chulde
feruchim wold God this people were onder
my hande / then J wolde take Abimelech out
ofthe wave And one fapde vnto A bimelech⸗
make thyne hoſte greater a go out. And whe
Zebull § ruler of H cptie harde d woꝛdes ol
Gaal 5 konne of Abed/ he was wꝛoth ¢ tent
mellengers bntoabimelech pruelpelaping:
Beholde Gaal p fone of Abed ¢ his bꝛethz
be come to Sptché:¢ beholde they lett z citte
agapnt d. Now 12455
thou g all p people g is w ß alpen warte
in ß keld. And ryle eripe inthe momyng as
fonne as p lonne it vp a come vpõ the cptie.
And whe he ¢ 6 people ö is w him come out
agapnſt do to him whatthpne bat halbe
able. And Abimelech roate bp/eall ß people
b were with hem / by nrght. Andther!
a wapte tothe cptic in foure companxes. And
Saal the fonne of Abed wet out ¢ ſtode in ß
entryng of ö gate of ö cptie. And abimelech
role bp e the kolcke p were wych bpm / krom
lapinge awayte. And when Gaal ſawe the
people he faydto ebul: Beholde there come
people downe krõ } toppe ok ß moũtarnes.
And Febul fayde vnto himithe hadome of
bylles ceme men vnto d And Gaal ancwered
agapne e lapde: fe there come kolcke downe
bp the mpole of the lande a another cõpanxe
e by d charmats Ocke Then lad


D


os N
Zebul onto bpm: where is now thy mouthe


Judges.


by nyght / bothe of Dich


2 ae

_.. Levys
that fapde/what felowe is Abimelech / that
we Hhulde lerue hum. Chele are the people 5
thou lo delpptedeſt. Go out now a kelouchipẽ
kyght with thẽ. And Gaal went out bekoꝛe
$ cxtizens of Sichem / ¢ fought w abime⸗
lech. and Abimelech chaledhünthat helledd
befoze him a manx were ouer thzowen and
arne / euen vntyll ther came vnto the entes
ryng of the gate. and chen Abimelech wẽt
dwelt at Arumah Ind then Zebul thzuſt out
Saal this bꝛethꝛẽ / a wolde not futter them
todwelle in Sichem And onthe moꝛowe ß F
people et gut into 6 felve.And it was tolde

bimelech. Andhe tote his people a deuided
thé into thze cõpantes / a laxe awayte in the
keld. And whe he law P $ people were come
out of p eitie he rane vp the a ĩarde vpõ thE

And Abimelech a the cöpanpes ß were w
him / ranne ¢ ode in the entrynge of 5 gate
Of the cptic And ß two other cöpanpes tine
bpd all the people § were inthe keldes a flue
thẽ. And then Abimelech kought agavnſk the
chtie all b dape/atoke it a lewihe people ? a pe tawed
was therln / a deſtropedthe cptie and towed rate there to
kalt in the place. And when all the men ofthe maßeit baren
towꝛe of Sichẽ hearde that / hey entered in⸗ foz euer; for
to a ſtronge holde of the houle of their Pod Me maneththe


euerp man a bowgh ¢ tolowed a bimelech /
and put them into z holde / and let the holde
à fpꝛe bpd thẽ:lo that all the men of b towze
em were llayne / vpona thoulande
perlonnes what ol men a wemen to gether.

Chen went Abimelech to hebezs bele⸗
ged it / a toke it. But there was a ſtrög towꝛee
in thempodes ol the cite / athither ranne all
the men a wemen / a all ö cptezens of d cytie
€ chut it to them / and göttthem vp bpon the
toppe ok 5 towze. Chen came Abimelech vn
tothe towze a konght agapnſt it / a wẽt harde
vnto 6 enterpng ofthe gate / talet it onkyer.
But a woman caſt a pece ot a mylſtone vpõ
bys hedde d all to bꝛake hrs bꝛapne panne.

Chen Abimelech calledhaſtelpe onto the
rounge man that bare his harnes / and lapde
vnto him: dꝛawe thyl werde and flee me / that
men Cape not ot me /a womã llewe hym. And
his laddethzut him thozowe a he dred.

And when the men of Irrael lawe 5 Abi-
melech was deed / they departed / eueryman
vnto tis awne houle And thus all the wyc⸗
kednelle or A bimelech wbich hn dd ch 15


Thola/ Jair,


father mm depnge his xx. bethꝛẽ d therto al


wyckednelle ofthe men of Sichẽ / Soddyd
ung vpon their heedes: And vpon thé came
the curfie of qoatham the lonne ol Jerobaal.


CChola and Jam 1 e Icraelcynneth ¢


) kende Ilrael / one Chola / the tonne
Hol Phüah / the tonne ot Bodo / amã

Sof Ilakar / ‘which dwelt in Samir
mount ephzaim , Andhe iudged Zlraell
xxiij. pere /a then dyed ¢ was burped in Spas

hut, And akter him arole Jar a Galaadite/

which tudged Itrael. rxij. pere. And he had

v ute. heb Tx. lone that rode on xxx. Ade colt / a had
‘ xxx. cpties foꝛ the which are called p townes
of Jair bnto this daye / a are in d land ol Ga⸗

B laãd And Jair dyed / a was buryed in Ramon.


2. b. aAndche chyidzẽ of Flract wrought wyc⸗
nr is bednelk per abap inchel puto h land,


& ſexued Baalim a Aſtharoth / a the Goddes
dk Diria / ache Gordes of Sidon / p Goddes
ol Moab / the Goddes of the chidꝛen of Ams
mon / a the Goddes oF the Phtliſtines a koꝛ⸗
e
20 ifvaek / a co into
hand ache hier e into the bands of
the childzẽ or Ammon: which pyld s oppzet-
ledthe chyldꝛen ol Ffractin hole dapes. xptij
pere / all hat were on the other lyde Joꝛdẽ in
che lande ol the Amozites in Galaad. Mo⸗
reouer the chyldꝛẽ of Ammon wet ouer Joꝛ⸗
danto kyght agaynſt Juda / Beniamin / ã the
¢ poute of Ephzain:to p Flraei was loꝛe com:
ed. Chen the chplozen ol Jcrael cryed onto
the Loꝛde lapinge: we haue lynned agapntt
the: loꝛ we haue koꝛlaken owꝛe awne God /e
4097 lerued Baalim. And p Loꝛde lapde vn ·
ob chrldzẽ of Akraeldydnocthe 8 /
$ Amozites the chyldꝛẽ ol Ammõ /the Phili⸗
ſtines / che Sidonites / the amaleckitt / the
Maonitẽ / oppꝛelſe vou; Ind ye cryed to me /
and J delpuered vou out ok their hares, And
kor all that pe haue kozlaken me / and cerue
ſtraũge Goddes / wherkoꝛe J well helpe you
Dno mdare Butgo and crye bnto the Goddes
which ve haue cholen / and lett thé laue vou
inthe tynie of poure tribulacron.
But the chyldꝛen ol Ilrael fayde onto the
Lord we haue cynned: do thou vnto vs what⸗


and. lith. a.
And biß. g.
and. ih;


ſoeuer pleatethe / a delpuer vs onlye at thys J.


e. And they put awa 10 e a

Gander lone nd euch doe. nd

the mylerpe of Acraelgreued his toute.
Chen the chyldꝛẽ of Ammongeathered to


geacher a pitched in Galaad. And the childzẽ of Edd


Of Alrael geathered thé to geather a pytched
in QBexpbab. Sum § capargeot Lopes of
Galaad b —


Judges. 5 5


battell agarnſt the childs or Am⸗
mone — ſbalbẽ heed aout enhabi⸗


d.
Keen the lonne ofa Harlot delpuereth 3trael
fro the


jalaad begat Jephthah⸗
e
ey were come to age / tyzutt ou eph⸗
chah / a layde vnto him: chou ſhalt not ẽnhẽ⸗
ret in oure fathers boule / fo2 thou art the
onne ofa ſtraunge moma. Chen Jephthah
dde krõ bys bꝛechꝛẽ and dwelt in the lande
or Cob. Andthere geathered Idle people to
Jephthah / a went out w him. But it chaun⸗
ced in pꝛocelle of tyme / p the chyldꝛẽ or Ame
mon made warre agapntt Icraei / then ö el⸗
derg ol Galaad wee ¢ fett epththah out of ß
lde of Cob / layd vnto him come a be dure
captapne / & let vs fxgbt w d chldẽ of Ame
mon And Tephthab fapbe onto the elders oF 5
Galaad Syd not ye hate me ¢erpelleme out
ok my fathers houle? howhappeneth it then
5ᷣ vou come vnto me now in tyme of youre
tribulacpd? And 6 elderg of Salaad antwe⸗
red Jephthah. Cherkoze we turne agayne to
the nowe / chatthou go wos / a fightagapntt
p chyldꝛẽ ot amm / a be owze heed ouer all
$ enbabiters o€ alaah anny ab layd
it ye bypngeme
07 of A mmõ /


came to C adꝭ /c ſent mefiengers onto

eee we pꝛare p go auch
lande. But 6 Arng ok Edom wolde not agre
cherto. And in iphe maner they fent onto che


Ang ol Moab / but he wold not cöcent And
eng ol Moab / buch yn


Jephthah.
7 5 fo g lrael above Epi in Cades. And chen they
went a long thoꝛow the wylderneſle / a com⸗
pated the ane of dom / a 5 lande of Moab /
and came a long by the eaſt tyne of the lande
ol Moab / a pitched on the otherfpoe d ryuer
of Arnon / ¢ came not within the cooſtes oF
the Moabites: toꝛ Arnon was their vtmoſt
boꝛder. Andthen 3 trael tent meflengers vn⸗
Peo Sehon Lyng ofthe Amozites / 4 Benge
of Helbon / a larde vnto hym: Lett vs pate
thoꝛow thy lande vnto owꝛe awne contrepe.
But Sehon truſtednotztrael / to go thoꝛou
bys cooftes : but gathered all hys people to
eather & pytched in Jazah / a kought wyth
ſrael. But the Loꝛde God of Ilracl delpue⸗

red Sehon ¢ al his folcke into the hades ol
Ilrael. And log trael (mote them a conque⸗
Fed all the lande ol che Amozites / the enha⸗
biterg of the fave cõtreye. And they cõgue⸗
red allthe cooſtes ol the Amozites / rom Ar⸗
non vnto Jabok / a from the wyldernelle vn⸗
to Fozdan. So now ſeing the Loꝛde God al
Ilt̃ael hathe cat out § Amoꝛites befoze his
bur ui chuldeſt thou pollelle the tape? ape /
ut what people Camos thy God deyueth
but / p lande pollelle thou. But whatloeuer
nacpons the Loꝛde oure God expeileth / that
lande ought we to enioye. And therto art
1 701 —— 5 1 — ok 5) ties
unge of Moab? dyd he ſtryue wyth Al⸗
rael o fyght agaynſt ihẽ: all h whyle Itrael


Judges.


os weer ob
i. bi
Then Fephehab came to Mazphah onto his :

houle And lechis daughtcrcame out agaynſt

hem / wtymberelles a daunles which was

his onely childe: co p belpde her he had nether

konne noz daughter. And whenhe kawe her / 6

he rent his clothes a larde: Alas my daugh⸗
tex/thou batt mademe ſtoupe ¢ art one or. hat is nn
“thé that trouble me gor haue openedmpned me loans
mouth vnto the Loꝛde / a cannot go backe. fie.

And the larde vntohym mp father / vr chou; Chat 1s ba,
aue opened che mouth vnkothe K ond then v wen nd
do with me accoꝛdyng to that pꝛoceaded out 2

ol thy mouthe / koꝛ as moche as the K oꝛde

bathe aduenged the of thrne enempes ö chit

dꝛen or Ammon. And the larde vnto her faz

ther / do this moche koꝛ me:lett me alone two

monethes b J mape go downe tothe moun
tapnes ¢ bewaple my virgimite with my ke⸗

lowes, And he larde: go / and co he lent her

awape two monethes And che wet with her

cOpanyons a lamẽted her maydenheed vpõ

che moũtaynes. And after $ two monethes /

the turned agayne onto her father which dyd

wWher accoꝛdynge to hrs vowe which hehad

vowed / and to che nnewe no man And it be⸗

came an oꝛdxnaunce in Ilrael pere by pere /

that e ol A . pu go 18.

mente the daughter of% e Galaa⸗

dite / loure dapẽs in a ere.


battell of eye te 0
Ae e te


dwelt in Berbon a her townes / a in Aroer a Av


er townes / g in allthe cyties 5 bea lenge
the cooſtes of Arnon.tij. hundꝛed peres :
why dydiſt thou not recouer thẽ in all chat
ace /wherkoze ¥ haue not iynned agapnſt
e. But thou doeſt me wꝛonge / eo warre
agaynſt me. Che Loꝛde therkoze be iudge
this dave /petwene the childꝛẽ ol Icrael / ald
the chyldzẽ ol Ammon. How be it the R
of ß cheldzẽ of Ammon harke ned not vnto
woꝛdes ol ephthah which he lenthim.
Chen the ipꝛpte ofthe Loꝛde came
Jephthah and he pated ouer@alaad a Ma⸗
nalles /g came to Mazphah p Ipech in Ga⸗
lad /a fxd thence vnto g chyldꝛẽ of Ammon,
And Fephthab voweda howe vnto ß Loꝛde
alapde: Ik thou halt delyuer p chyidzen ol
Ammon into mphandes / then that thyng §
cometh out of the doꝛes of my houſe agarnſt
me / whẽ 4 come home in peace / krõ the chyl⸗
dꝛen of Ammon / halbe the Loꝛdes J will
oller it vp a burntofteryng. And lo Fephthab
wẽt vnto the chyldzen oF Ammon to Faye w
che. And ß Lob delpuered thẽ into his hands
And he (mote th from Iroer vnto Menith /
Er. cpties. Ind lo forth to p plapne of che by-
nepardes (a made an exc great ſlaugh⸗
ter. And thus che chplozen ol Ammon were
brought onder /betoze che chridzẽ of Irael.


*


n delxuered me not out or their b


then tape; Seiboleth. And ther larde Sib


—.— nh chered
Ad nok Eph zai gear
the Celues to gether / a went noꝛth⸗
warde and karde vnto Jephthah:
; a tioherfoze wenteſt thouto fight W
Chechyldzé of ammö / a drdelt not call bs to
go wihe: we will therfoze burne thinehoule
pp che, with cpze. And Jephthah layde vnto
chetg mp people were at great ftrpre wihe
child OMNES URE. Sd
And wi fl
lawethat ve delpucred me not J put ge 11 5
ple in myhandes a went vpon the chyldzen daunger anes
oFadmmon,dindthe Lorde delpuered the into i"? me tote
mpbandeg, uoberfoze then are pe come bpon S


8


mie to fpabt with me, 7
And z. geatheredto geather all 5 Job riß.


nge ß Ephzaites
e Wanallites. Mogreouer $ men ok Ga⸗
laadtoke 5 pattagy of Jo ban fd § Cphꝛat⸗
tes. And when thote ephzaites p were ekca⸗
pedſlarde lettus go ouer. chenthe men ot ©
Feleadlaerde ontothe: Ye ave Eplyzattes/ neee.
cher fayde nape. Then the other anlwered: wyng o2 teme
0: peſt ol water
n. ij. le th /


Samlon,


22015...


“Reh Neg. ib


5


leth a coulde not fo pronounce / wher vpon
the other tone thé a ewe thẽ at che padagy
or Fozdan. And there were ouerthzowenat p
tyme ok the Ephꝛaites. xlij. thoulande , And
when Jephthah had iudged Irrael. vi. pere

he ded / a was burped in one ok the cyties ol
Galaad. After this man iudged Irrael one
Abe zan of Bethlchem / and he had. xx. lonn
F. xxx. daughters / a ſent alto his. xxx daugh⸗
ters out, Ktoke xx. other in / koꝛ his lonnies.
And whe Abesan had iudged g rrael. bij. pere
he dyed / and was burped at Bethlehem.

And akterhim Elon a Zabulonite tudged
Auge ten pere / and he dyẽd a was burped in

talon / in the contrepe ot Sabulon.

And after him ab don the forme ok Pellel
a Pharathonite iudged Jlrael. Andhe had
fourtiefonnt/¢ thivtiencuetoes/p* rove on
bala Ranch tage

Athe Phar
vu. pere / he died / a was burted in harthon
$140 Ehen jen 6 mote ol mice
ing an rer eet e le

tae he Tat OF anten, 5 lacrikpet Sin
fons father.


panoaly 5
And the Angell ok 6 Lode apear b vn hig
wpke a lardbntoher-Behold / ho r art barrẽ


Abeariſt not: Wut thou ſwaltcöcee ue beate
afonne. Sooke beware / anpbranche na


bucleane thyng:koꝛ te / chou Halt ci
beare a ldnne. And therr mapt
rig come on bys eed: for ß ldd
abſtapner vnto God / enen kri .
bozth.And he chall begrnne to de


out ofthe handes ok the Phtlil t
Then b we went a tolde he 9
Le ping:a man of Gor came vn dor u / an ehe
facpon of him was iphe che factor ef an Hise
gell of God excrdynge tearkuif. Wu Falher
bim not whence he was / nether ode heme
Bhis name Andhetaxobntome h halde hour


v Gene. xvi. c. walt be with chyide enn beare a lorme / and


AWG


now depnche no wyne neg Krong? vgptiche/
nether kate any vncleare thyny:toz the lad
walbe an abſtapner to God enen tom bys
byich to che dape olhis neatß̃z.

Chen Manoah mate interteſ ion te the
L onde / and fayvesd pare the inp Loꝛdr lett
$ man of God which thou lend eſt come ce
moare vnto 6s a teache vs wh at toe ſhall do
vnto ß lad whẽ he is bonne Ande zodhearde
$ bovce of Manoah / z angel of od came


ges.


agapne onto the wyte as the fattin the feld:
Bit Manoaherbulbanve was not wher,
Chen ß wike made halte z rine z hewmen er
butbãd a ſapdeto him: Beholde p mã ape a⸗
red onto me 8 came 8 other dare vnto me.
And Mandah arote ¢ wẽt akterhrs wyre
and came to che ma and lardevntohrm art
thou the man 5 paket onto my wyte: And
he larde pee. Chen Manoah tarde mow whe
chr taping is come ta pate : what ſwalbe che
maner of the chylde / a what thall he dor And
the Angell of che Loꝛd Capone vnto Manoah:
chrwyke mut abſtaxne krö all that J Cape
vnto her: che mape tate ol nothyng z cometh
ofthe vyne tree / ner dꝛyncke wynẽ oz trong
dꝛyncke / noz cate any vncleane thynge: But
mut obferue allthat J badher Chen ſapde
Manoah onto the. Angell ot 5 Lord / graũte
bs to tarpe vntill we haue made redye a kydd
haue let it betoze 5. And d angel of b L ond
larde vnto Mandaßh: though thou make me
abyde / Jwyll not eate or thy meate. And mo⸗
reouer pt thou wylt prepare a burntottryng /
g chou mult offer onto p Lord. oꝛ Wanoaly
welt not z it was an angell or § Lobe. And
Manoah Cayd onto Patigell of 5 Lord:what
is thyname / ß whe thy lapig is come to pate”
oe Maye vo ö tome woschißpe: And the an⸗
gell of p Lozbe laphe bacobpm: why athett
Mouattermpnamesinhenitis marueloule.
And andeh toi be wameate of
keryngz / K offered zocke vnto 5 1.025. 2
Aud § Angelo dae / Mano ¢ his
wp lonpng vpõ soz whe p flame came bp
Hit ek F aut are / angell or ß Loꝛd alcẽded
open d fameo€ s aulkare and Manouh a
ys wpke lobe bps ¢ fell flat on their faces
vnto tie grolide: ut § angel ol ß Loops
nomoare apeare bite Wandah ahrs wylk.
ay then Manoah knew pit was an angel
geh Loꝛdẽ:g fade onto hit wyke: we Wall
ſuellpe dpe / becauſe we haue fene God. But
Gig topte kayde bitte hm: Ik? Loꝛde wolde
AIR pus / he wolde not haue keceaued a burnt:
oliting ¢ameatcotiring ok oure had mether
woſfe he haue chewedvs all thele thing moz
wolte haute tolde vs as he hath of thvnges to
zone. And che wyfe bare a tonne / and called
bis name Spainlon. And the land grewe / and
fhe Vazde bieted bine, And the cpzete ok the
Wojaeheganne Fpl tobe with the houle or
dats betmene Savaal and etthaol.
Lerche mir page Samton, he kplleth a Lyon. Be
propanndeth a kpdle. ge meide men. is wert


Samlon


hamnath of ß daughters of $ Phültaines.
And now geue her me to wpfe. Then his faz
ther and mother lapde vnto him / is there ne⸗
uer a womũ of the daughters ol thy bꝛethꝛẽ /
amonge ali my people: but that thou mutt
go i fette a wpfe of the vncircumepled Phi⸗
i and Sanilon Capo onto his father;
geue me this womã foz We plealeth me well
But his father and mother witt not that it
was the Loꝛdes doing / and that he lought
an occatpon of the philiſtines / which at that
Biemme rargned ouer shack, 5
Chen went Samlon and hys father and
his mother downe to Thamnath. And when
they came to the vyneyardes ol Chamnath:
bevoide a poung Lyon roꝛed vponhym. And
che lpꝛete ot ibe Loꝛde came vpon hym. And
hetare him / ag a man wolde rent a ydde /
and pet had nothing in his hande. Heuerthe⸗
laterhe tolde not his father E mother what
he had done. Andhe went downe and talned
with the woman / which ſemed well kauozed
inthe lyght ol Samfon,
And within a ſhoꝛte ſpace alter / as he wet
thither agayne to take ger to wpe / he tur
ned out of p wa pe / to ſeß carkate of § Lyd,
And beholde there was a Cwarme of bees in
the carkalle of the A von and honye. Ind he
toke ok the honbe in bys handes and went
eatyng / and came tohys father and mother
and gauethem allo. And they dyd eate. But
be tolde not them / that he had take the honye
out ol the cackalle of the L von.
c. And when is Esther was come onto the

woman. amon made there a keaſt / for lo
bicd the pounge men to do. And when her
frendes lawe him / chey bꝛought. xxx compa⸗
nxons to beare felowthippe . And Samion
fapde vnto them: J wpll put forthe a ryddle
vnto you. Ind yt pou can declare it within
vij. dapes of the Ecatt and fynde it out / J wyll
geue pou thyꝛtie chertes and thirtye chaũge


Of gatmentes: But ¢ vt vou cannot declare 5.


it me / then Hail pe geue me thirtye ſhertes a
thirtie chaunge of garmentes. And they ans
fwered him put koꝛth thy ryote and lett bs
heare it. And he lapde vnto them. Out ol
Later came meate: and out ok che ſtrong cam
kwetnelle. And they coulde not inthze dapes


Derpounde the role. And whe the leuẽch dare


was come they ſapde bnto Hamlons wyle.
Flatter with thyne hulbande / chathe maye
declare vs thy idle / 02 elles we wyll burne
the and thy fathers houle with tyꝛe / haue ve
called vs to maße vs beggers oꝛ not? Chen
Samlons wyke wepte vnto him and lade /
it cannot be but that thou hateſt me a loueſt
me not: foꝛ th ou hak put foꝛth a rydle vnto
the childzen of my folke and wylt not tell me
what it meaneth. And he lapde: Beholde /


Judges,


res
haue not tolde it my father noꝛ my mother
and chuulde J tellittne⸗ i
And che wepte vnto him. vij raves, while
the keaſte la ſted. And the ſeuẽth dayehe teive
her / becaule chelaxe to foze bpo him. And che
tolde it the chylozen ofber folhe. and § men
ofthe cptic fayte vnto him the leuenth dare
hefoze the lonne wet downe. nhat is tweter
then honpe / and what is ſtrõger then a L von.
Chen lapde he vnto the: Ik re hadnot* plo⸗


Chat ts / 3.
pe had not take


wed wich my caulke / ve had not kounde out the healpe of
my rpdie Chen the lpꝛite of the Loꝛc came my wrte as in


pa bym.Andhe wentdowneto Atkaion/e
lle we thyꝛtie men ok them / and ſpopled thẽ /
andgaue their garmentes onto them which
expounded the idle. And he was wꝛoth and
Wet bp to his fathers houle. But Samlons
wyfe was geuen to one or his companvons
that bare him compenpe,
CHamlon tpeth kyꝛebꝛädes to For tales) x letteth
them runne in to the coꝛne and burne it to be aul ged
ok them that tobe his wyke krom him. With the Jawe
done ol an Alle he kylleth a thoufand men. Hüte o


Agreat tothe in the J atot Gon geucth him water / o
katilt ye beschert 0


che xb Chapter.
t tt chaticen withina whple ak- A


Feet $ fonneiniawe of the C hamnite /
ecautevebadtahenbis wyle and geuẽ her
to one ok his cõpanpons. And p Philictines
came a burnt her and her father with fpꝛe.
And Samfon ſayde onto them: ſhulde xe


do lo. A wpfllurelpe beaduengedok Pou / Ker


te. F.


Ve cauſe


fell og


then J wyil ceale. And he lmote then iegge they kleed Che
& chrgbe with a mightpe pie ge. Andthen he Khald reden
wet ¢ dwelt in the cae ofthe roche Etam. Interp2. ore


Then the Philittines camebyp e ppecben men
agarnſt Juda and le ye in L ehi. Andthenien
Juda fardę. why are ve come 1 5
naj,


and fos


i
!
!
i


Samlon, .


And they antwered to bende Samkon are
we come / euen to do him as he hathe done to


Cos ,chenthze thouland men ol Juda went


downe to the caue of the rockecktam a lapde
to Samlon: wotteſt chau not that p Phill⸗
ftines ave rulers ouer vs? Wherkohe then
halt chou terued vs thus! And he anbwered
thẽ / as ther lerued me/fo haue I fered the.
And theplarde vntohim / we are come to
vynde the ¢ to delyuer ß intothe hanes ol
Philictmes. Und Samlon lapde onto then
were vntome / p ve chall not hurte me poure
felueg And they tapde we wellnot hurte 5
caue onlpe bynde ö and delpuer ß onto their
hende: But we wyllnok helle the. And fo
they bounde him with two newe comes and
bꝛought him vp From the rocke. And when
he come to Lebt / the Philickines thowted
agapnſt him. And the lpꝛete of ? Lord came
vpon hym / and the coꝛdes that were vpõ hys
armes became as flare that was burnt with
fire / and the bandes louled krõ of his handes
Andhe kounde a Faw bone ofa ratten Ade /
and put forth hys ande and caughtit / a lue
a thoulande men therwith.
And Samlonlarde: wyth the gawe of
an aſſe / haue J made heapes:wyth the Fawe


DR ofan atte haue J dayne athoutande men.


chat is, the Kamath Lebt.


ipktpng vp ol
the Jawe.


And wh he had ſekt tpeakyng he catt aware
the Jawe out ol is hände a called the place

Andhe was toze a thyꝛlt/ +
called on the Loꝛde andlarde. Chou Loꝛde
batt geuen this great victoꝛpe / thoꝛowe the
bande ok tho teruaunt. And now A mut dre
fo thꝛyſt and kalle into the handes ol the vn
cyrcumcyſed. But Godbzake agreattothe
that was in the Jawe and there came water
therout. And when hehaddꝛoncke his lpzete
came agapne / ahe was rekreuhed / wherkoze
thename therok was called the welle of the


beds. nkore caller on / wohpch is in Kehl vnto ches dave.


And heiudged Alrael in the dapes ol the Pye
lictines twentye veres.


geb r eherne ars ond Dee
thé vp in to the mountapne. Pe was decraued by Wa.
Inlal æ made bipnde he pullech downe the houlẽ vpon
the Bhiitines and dreth with them.

Che. xi.


japter,
ei Men went Samlon to ara / and


Altes / chat Samton was come this
cher. And thcp wee aboute and lapde awaite
fozhimalinpabtin the gate ofthe cptie/ but
were ſtyllall thenvabttaying - Carpe tyll d
moznyng 6 it bedape / a then lets kyllhim
And Samfontoke his reſt cplle midnpght /
and arole at midnzaht and tone the does ol
che gate of the citye / the twolyde pottes /@
rent them ot / bares and all / z put them Spo


Judges.


bis ſhoulders / and carped thE vp toche toppe
ok an hyll that pech before Mebꝛon.
And alter that he toucd a woman / ops the
ryuer of Soꝛek called Dalilah nto whom
came the Loꝛdes of the Philiſtines / a lade
vntoher: latter with hym a le wherin hes
great ſtrenght lpeth / and by what meane we
mape haue power duer hym / that we maxe
bynde him / to bꝛyng him vnder / and we wyll
geue euere ma a leuẽ hũdzed lpluerlynges.
And Dalilah lapde to Samfon. Oh ſtell
me beben thy great ſtrẽght lech / e vr thou
were boũde wherwith men might cöctrarne
the. And Samton larde vnto her. Ik men
bounde me with. vij. grene withthes b were
neuer dꝛped / J chuide be weake z as another
man. And then the Lozacs of the Philtſtines
Amend pe i che don B were pet grene
eneuerdꝛped / and the bounde him therwith.
Notwyth tandynge the had men lyinge in
wapte with her in the chãbze. And che karde
vnto him / che Philictines be vpon the Sant
lon. And he bꝛake the coꝛdes as a ſtrynge ort
towe bꝛeaketh / when hit kealech kire. And lo
his ctrenght was not knowen.
Coen thane Oey to Samlon: De thou g
halt mockedme andtolde me lyes. Now pet
tell me I pꝛaye 5 wherwich thou myghteſt
be bounde. Andhe fayde: Ff J were bounde
with newe ropes that neuer were occupyed
chen chulde I be weake / and as another ma,
And Daltlah toke new ropes a boundehym
cherwith / e lade vnto him / che Phililtines
be vponthe Samlon. Andthere were lpers
of wapte in che chamber / and he bꝛakethem
from ofbps armes / as ther had bene but a
thꝛede. And Dalilah Capo onto Damlon / hi⸗
cherto thou hat begyledme a tolde me lyes:
| prave the vettellẽ me wherwith men mare
bynne 5. And he fapde vnto her Akthou plat⸗
tedeſt the leuen lockes of myhẽed wych an
hearre lace and fattnedett the wych a naple.
And che Capde onto hym / the Phlliltines be
bps the Samlon. And he awaked out of his
llepe / a Plucked a went aware wihe narle


B


u B was in che plateyng a with $ bearre lace.
Shen tbe aye oreo Hit Bow cank thou Y


fap b thou lcueſt me / when thine bert is not
‘wh me:for thou batt mocked me this ti tym /
hak not kolde wherin thy great ſtrenght
lpeth. And as the lave po hymm wer word
cOtinually vexyng of him / his coule was en⸗
combꝛed euẽ onto the death. Andhetoldeher
all his herte / and larde vnto her: there neuer
came racer no: heres ops myne herd for ¥
haue bene an abſtarner to Sd euẽ krõ mip
mothers wombe. It 6 were cut
ol / my ſtrẽght wold go krõ me /a ‘ware
abe iyke allothermen. Ind when Dalilag
lawe B he had tolde her all his hert / erent

02


C.

And lo the deed which he llewe at

were moo then ther which he dee mbps 5
Ike and then bis brethzen and all che houte

ok his kather camedowne and toke hym vp /

and bꝛought hym and burpedhym betwene
nete Arbe ames each

r. i {

deep ere; Andhe iudged Alraell
Ok KHicah whole mother made him an J oll of


fplner t the poun
Wehl oe poung pzent of the nage or Leun of


¶ Che. xvij. Chapter.
Here was ams in meütcphzaim /
named Micah whycy tapde onto


2.


lace. And he came to mount
Weng abe icht e


mat.
nenn (to


ere and ra 0
„ eren rn ne Oe loatesy *


n. ii. che


1 eſynne ol sages, Gabaah. Li.


5 1 5
Andthe chyldꝛen of Ban let them vpthe But his maſter tarde vnto him / we wyll not marded e
me


Mitah. æ


Che chplort ot an nen Fmage, And Jonathan che lonne ol turne in to a ſtraunge cytye that are not ol zp, ber in
den 9°? : Berton tye tonne er enabes @yistonnes the chfzencé fret! we wel go h toe g.
3 . were the preattesonto p crrbe ab che Ban Sabaah. And he farde onto his adde J f07-newas in Lan,
che bij, Chapter: tes / vntell chen were caried awaxe out or the warde / A we wall come to one place 03 ocher via g. 15. Beg.
thole dapes there lande captiue. And they lett them vp the ker⸗ ¢ ihall lodge all night in Gabaah oꝛ in Ra⸗ i. a


7 9 in Ilrael. And in thole apes the


tepbe of Ban loughe ché an enhe⸗ nen Fmage which Micah made all d while mah. And ther went kozwarde ppon their


chat che houle ol God was in Silch. wn cher ae lad, 5752 ee ee ad
05 aa ig

6 alten bee ee e H ober Beniamin. And they turned thitherwarde to

fent to enerpe trpbe of Jcaella peace. go and lodge all nyght in Sabaah. And whe

Che ix. Chapter. thep came in / they lat thẽ doune ina ftreat

4 Geers thofe dapes / when of the citie / koꝛ there was no man toke them


there was no krng in Akraell chat in to lodge, But beholde there came an olde
a certẽ Leupte dwellyng on Flyde man from his woꝛke / out of the leldes at cue
mount E pi aim / tokẽ to wyleg which was allo ok mount e phꝛaim / and hut
concubpne out of Bethlehem Juda: vi a ſtranger in Gabaah ko che men ok p place
concubine plaped the whoze in hrs hole z were oF the childꝛen of Jemini. And when he
went awaye krö him / onto her kathers gore had lykte vp his eyes ard lawe a wapekaring
to Bethlehem Juda / a there cõtinued done mn in the ſtreates ok d citie he lapde: whether
monethes. And her hut band arole and went goeſt thou: Ind whence comet thou: And ß E
alter her / to lpeake frendelperoneober/ eto dther anlweredhyim we come krom Behlehẽ |
bung her home againe / a his ladd with hime kon towarde the lyde of mount Ephꝛaim: i
acouple of Ades. And Hebsoughtbimbnto from thence am J / and went to? Behlehem d che comen.
her kachers houle / a when the father of fdas Juda / and go nowto the houle ofthe Lorde. crancreanery |
molell fate him / he reiopled ol bis compng, But there is no man that receaueth me tothe youle ae
And his father in lawe the damalelles facher boukerand erg haue nrawe s prauerder ko SOD wich a
nept him that he aboade wich hümthzedares owze Ades /andbzead and wen kor me and dation of toe
and lo they ate and dꝛante and lodged there. chyhandmapde / ¢ thy ladd that are with thyezebzue wore — |
B® Che fourth dave chey arole eripe in the leruaunt / and lacke nothyng. Bet itive |
moꝛnpng / z the man ſtode bp to e ut Che aide man karde peace be wich che /att bou's of 0d
ehedamoteltes facher ade bnto his konne ir tatehou jackelt Walt thou pnde wich me. Spruch d.
lawe / cõtoꝛt thine harte W a moztell ol bꝛeed onlpe abyde not in the ſtreates all nyght / and
athen go poure wave. Andther late doune a he bꝛought him into bis houle / and gate kod⸗
did eatẽ anddzpnis boche of chem to geather. der vntohis Ades. Andthey walchedtheir
Chen lapde che damolelles father onto the fete / and dyd eate and dꝛynck. And as they
mango toy prapeche andtarresunpepts were makyngthetyberttes merbe“ che men are,
lettchrne hark bemerp How beit $ malkode ofthe citie which were wraged tet the Youre mn eyeates
bp todepart:buthis father in lawe cõpelled round about / and thzuſt at the doze / etpatie
bimtotustne againe ¢ to tavic all night there to the man of the houle / the ode man taping:
nd herole bp erlye d fpfth dave to departe. beng koꝛthe the man that came into thyne
Che fapde 8 damolelles kather cõtoꝛte tine houſẽ / that we mare knowe him.
herte:a co made hĩ tarye vntill atter middaye But the man of che houle went out to we
Andther did cate bothe of them to geather. and layde vnto them / Oh nape my bꝛethzen /
And then the man arole to departe wyth do not ko wickedipe leing ß this man is come
big concubine and his ladde. But bys facher into myne houle : do not this kolye. Beholde |
miawthe damolelles kather fayde önto him imp daughter a mapden and this mannes cö⸗
beholde the dape gothe falt atwapes dzaweth cubine them A will being out vnto vou / and
Ctowarde euẽ tary ali night: at theleatt ware humble thé ſand do with them what lemelh Pumbfezue
tarpe this daye here and let thrne hert be me⸗ you good:but vnto this nia do not this kolpe chin lone The
rpe. And to moꝛowe get vou erlxe bpd youre But the men woolde not herken to him. Ne⸗ no vb.
ware and getthe tochv tent. Neuerthelater uerthelelle the man toke hys concubine and
the ma wolde not tary / but arole a departed bꝛought her out vnto then / and they hadto
and came as ferre as Jebus / whych is Jeru⸗ do withher / s entreated her chamefullpe / al
kalem / hrs two alles laden and bys* con- the nyahteuen vntothe mozngng And when
tat cubpne and his add with him. And iohẽ they the daße beganne to lpꝛyng / they lett her go.
concubpre in were fat by gebus / the daxe was ſoꝛe ſpent And then came the woman inthe dawming qs
— — pounge man laxde vnto hys maſter / ok the dape and fell downe at the dooze ot the
rebut a comme I pꝛape the a let bs ture in into tas manneshoule where her U ode was there
citie orche Jebulites e lodge all night there. che e e e g 5 {


ice of the young ma p Leite / v turnedin
5 aoe eran rde DAC n dr 915 plage 5


8 before the Loꝛde.


: Te ante ee the maner ok $- called brite thé. Andthep turnedthetr faces/


i re hades a place wherin agayne.
eee e
tte annites,out of Saraab arde haet spent onto ais, euen onto a anime
lyxc hüdzedmen apoynted with inſkrumktes area n meren and Manne toe
genere ates wet Ce ae 3 oe e ol the lw

im in Juda. 05 e
e
32 backlpde o! rim. D wie oe at
t Ephiaim /ecameto the nacpon And the cyeye Lovet > balcve

fab elie e

men 0 And
en: wot pe not that name of Dan ctheir father whych was :
cher incl dne 3 . ee wae
e a grauẽ Image / ard an Image of metalle the name of the cytbe was che be⸗
How therfore contyoze tre haue to do. gynnenge. a


Gabaah.


ae Mbat ioal of fe
one content::
gener allp as


moznpng and opened the doꝛeg or the houte /
and went out to go his wage . and beholde /
hes concubine lave alonge befoze the doze ot
the houle / and her band pon the chiellholde.
And he layde vnto her: vp s let vs be going.
But dhe ancwered not. Chen he tone her vp
Spon an Ade and foe vp and gat him vnto
his awne home. And when he was come vnto
his houle / he toke a dꝛeüyng knyke / a caught
his cöcubine a deutded her thozou the bones
into twelue peces / a lent her into all quar⸗
erg ol Ilraell. And all that Cae it ſa rde:
there was no loche deade done oꝛ ſene fence
the chplozen ok Irael cam out of Egipt vnto
this daxe / conlpder the matter / geuẽ councel
and tape voure myndeg.

e batteltot all the Itraelptes agapnſt the trpbe
am kor the Leine wel ald. e

G he. xx. Chapter.

S hbenell the chüͤdzen of Flrach wee
dut:andthere geathereda congre⸗
Gacpon togeather* ag it had bene

=H: but one ma euẽrõ 14 to Berſeba
Gout ok the lande ol Galaad / vnto the lande


beneth in thys to Marphah and there ſtode kolke out or all


Chapter. b.


quarters ot all the trybes of Alraen / inthe
congregacpon of the people dt Gos / koure
wertes thoufande kote men that dꝛewe
erdes . And che chylozen of Bemamin
bearoe at the a OF Alrael were gone
0 Marphah.
bcchen lapde the chyldꝛen ok Jirgel / tell vs
how this wickcdnelle happenẽd. And the les
uite the womans hulbande that was llarne
anlwered and larde: J came into Gabaah 6
is in Bentamin with mp concubyne to lodge
all nyght. And che cyte eng ol Gabaah role
agapntt me / and fet che houle rounde about
bpon me by nyght / and thought to haue
dayne me: and caught my concubpne and
klozcedher / that hedped . And J tone my con⸗
cubpne and cutt her in peces and lent her
thozou out all the landes ok the enherytaũce
ol Firacl Foz theyhaue cõmitted abhomina⸗
cyòn and koliꝑ in Icraell. Bcholde pe are all
chyldꝛen ol Firacll. Setherkoꝛe and geue
Pourcaduyle inthe cate. 5

Chen all the people aroſe / as it had ben
one man ſaping: there ſhall not a man ot vs

o to his tent / necher turne in tohrs houle.
ind now this is it that we wil do to Gabaah
Band caſt lottes agapnct it. And we weil take
ten men of the hundꝛed thoꝛou out all the
trybes of Ilraeli / a an hundꝛed o€ the thou:
lande / and a thoulande out of the ten thous
tande to fett bitayle fo2 the people tomake
that they maye go agapnſt Sabah Benta⸗
min / accoꝛdyng to all the kolpe / p thephaue
wꝛought in Ikraeſl. And fo all themen ob c⸗


raell geachered to geather / vnto Gabaah / that


Judges.


Enptte to geather ag it had ben but one man.
And the trybeß of Flraetl cent men thoꝛou
all the trrbe ot Bemamin laping: what wic⸗
kednele is this that is happened amũge pow
Now therfoze deixuer vs the mẽ / thole wyt⸗
ked wꝛetches of Gabaah that we ma pe lex
them / and put aware euell ftom Itraell.
Heuerthelater the chyldzen ot Wentamin
wolde not herken onto the vopce oktheir bꝛe⸗
thzen the chridꝛen ok Ilraell: hut geathered
them ſelues to geather out ofthe cpties onto
Gabaah / to: come out in batayle agaynſt the
chridzen of Ilraell. And the chplozen of Bee
niamin were nombꝛed at that tyme / out of
cities. xxvi. thouſande mẽ that dꝛew cwerdes
belide the enbabiters ol Saban which were
nöbꝛed teuen bundzed cholen me And amõge
al thele kolke were feuẽ hundꝛed lelte handed
mien toby euerx one coulde fiyng ſtones at
an hear bꝛeadeth / x not myde and the childzẽ c
ol Ilraell betpee the chyldꝛen of Bemiamin /
were nombzed koure hundzedthouland men
chat dꝛewlwerdes / and all men of warte.
Andthe chplozen of Ilraell avote g went


vp to! Bethel / and acked of God / who ſhulde as un
begynne the battell age vnd the chpinzen of" veri,


Beniamin / and the L onde fayde Juda thalbe
gynne. Andthechpiozen of Firaelt ſtode vp
erlxe and beleged Gabaah. Ard the mẽ of Fle
. 5 battell agaynũ Bemamin /

put them lelues in araꝝe agapntt them /
to krght agarnſt Gabaah. And the 1 5
ol Bentamin came oute of Gabaah and de⸗
ſtroped in Itraell that daye. xxij. thoutande
men / and brought chem tothe erth.

And che folke of the chridzen ot Itraell
plucked vp their bertes / and went to agapne
amade battell in the fame place where ther
dyd the pst dave: but they wet kyꝛlt vp and
wept befoze the Loꝛde vnto euen / and acked
Kae ge een Berne

HTD 2€ of oure
bꝛethzen.
and when the chylozen of Zlraell were come


tothe chytozen of Benianũnß lec onde dave,


the chyldgen ol Seniamin went agaynſt
out ol Gabaah che feconde bape/#ue trope
to the exth of the chylden ok Ffraell once
agapne. xvtij. thoulande men gdje fwerdes
euerpe man of chem.

Chen the chplozen of Ilraell am all che
people went vp and cam onto Bethel / and
wepte and lat chere befoze p Lopde / g fatten
che lame dape onto euen / and offered burnt
offerpnges and peaceoflerynges before the


Lope. Andchey acked the Lozde:fo2 there «weit


was the arcke of the apoyntment of God / in


teeta

thote dapes. And*pbinehes ) forme of Elea thr
gat/the forme of Aaron wärtyng bponit at herz
ere aer karte wal ne gout an gum


Gabaah,


the Londe tarde go bp onto the B


ah. . „Jud


niamin owze beethzt /02 Wall we ceate? Ind
$ Loe lapde go ko to moꝛowe A willdelt⸗


„urcheminto rrimehendes dem lraellert


awarte ggainſtSabaah rote about

chitoze of lrael wẽt agaynſt p childꝛẽ

ol Beniamin 5ᷣ thirde tyme / a put che lelues
in arape agapnſt Sabaah as twyle betoꝛe.
Chen came the childꝛẽ ol Bentamin againſt
J people / tyll they were dꝛawẽ a great wave
from the citie, And thep beganne tofmyte ol
the people deedlas twylle befoze/by twobpe
wapes ol whych one gothe vp to Bethell €
$ other to Gabaah thoꝛow the kelde) bpona
thyꝛtye men of a lraell. Foꝛ the chyldzen ol
Beniamin thoughes the other had ben beatẽ
before them / as at che kyꝛſt tyme. But the
chyldꝛen oF Acraell lade / let bs flee ¢ plucke
the awaye krõ the cytve / vnto the bye waves.
Andthen all the men oF Ilrael role vp out

ok their Handing / z put them lelues in araye
at Baal chamar. And likewyle the layers in
wapte oF Ilraell came foꝛth out ofthetr pla⸗


ces / euen out ol the medowes ol Gabaah / |


came betoꝛe Gabaah : ten thoulande cholen
men out ok al gcrael / a chere was Core battel
But ß other wilt not p euyll was lo nyethẽ.
Andthe Loꝛde plaged Bemamin befoze Il⸗
rael / ſo that the childzen ol Ilraen deſtroxed
in Bentamun the lame dape. xrb. choulande ¢
ahundzedme /p deue lwerdes euerve one ol
F the. It temed che chüͤd ze of Bentamin / chat
the other had ben put to the wooꝛſſe. Foꝛ the
men ok Ffraci gaue Rone to Beniamin / be⸗
caule they truſted vnto the lapers in wapte
which theyhad lapde agarnſt Gabaah, And
the la pers in wapte hatted and ranne vpon
Sabah / and went ¢ Cmote al the citie with
the edge ofthe lwerde. Andthe apopntment


o the inẽ ol z kraell with the layers in wayte B


to runne vpon Bentamin wrth the (werde /
was when they chulde make the fnoke ryle
bp out ok 5 citic, And the men ok Itraelfleed
inthe batten And Bentamin began tolmrte
deed ol the childꝛẽ of Jerael / aboute a thirtye
parfonnes / toꝛ they luppoled that the other
had bent put tothe wooꝛde befoze them / as
in the kpꝛit battell. Chen began to arple out
ok the citie / a piller ol lmotze. and the Benia⸗
mites loked backe: and beholde the wa
ok the hole citie began to alcende vp to heuẽ
Whenthe men ok Flrach turned agapne /
the men ol Beniamin were abaſſhed:toꝛ they
law 6 euel appꝛochedthẽ. And they turned
befoze the men of Ilraell vnto the wave that
leadeth to the wildernedle /p other folowyng
@thé at the harde heles And belpde chat thep oF
e citie deſtropedthẽ in the mrodle ok them.
Andther cöpaled Beniamin about / a chaled
them to Menuah / a ouer ranne them bekoꝛe


ges.


Cij.
Sabaah on the eact tyde: a chere were apne
pb aud her ed Gall men of
myght. An @ fleed tothe wilder⸗ ;
nese warde g bnto the roche * of 8 hea dt Kemo
nettes. And 5 other flue by the ware old ret
OF thẽ / kxuethoulande mẽ / a ltrcked vnto the
vntill ther cam to Gadaam / a due two thous
lande moo oF the. So that all were Mayne
that lame dare ol Sentamm were xxb. thou⸗
lande men pdeue twerdes g all me oF might: Oeau the tree
onlpe. vi. hundꝛed men turned andfieed ko § be of Wemamt
wyldernele / onto the Rocke of pomgar- there elcaped
nettes and abode there tits. monethes. And but u hundter
chenthe men ok Ilrael turned backe agapne 5
vnto the chyldꝛen ol Bentamin / and iniote
them with the 2 OF the (werde in the cities
bothe man and beaſt and all that came to
bande / and mozeouer lett all the cytyes they
coulde come by / one fpze,


eue bis daughter vnto any ol ez
Antamin to wife, Ind the people cã
to Bethel a abode there till euẽ / betoꝛe God
€ likte bp their voyces a wept loꝛe a laide: O
Lorde God ok Flracil / wh pts this chaunced
in givaclithattyere fhulbebe this daye one
tribe lacking in Flrael?And on che moꝛow &
peple role vp be tyme a made there an altare
Kolkered burntofferpnges ¢ peaceofferinges
Andthe chyldzen 4790 aellalked / who are
they amonge all the trybes of Sfract d came
not with the congregacyõ onto p L oꝛde: oz
they had made a great othe concerning thé &
came not vpto F Lozdeto Mazphah taping
they wulde ſuerlpe dye. And pchild ze of Fl
raell had pptie on Bemamin their bꝛethzen /
andlapdeichere is one tribe cut of krõ Alraell
this dape: what thal we do vnto the rẽnaunt
okthẽ / koꝛ to gett the dende as moche as 8
we haue twoꝛne by the Loꝛde p we will not
geue thé of oure daughters to wyues Chen
chey ſayde / what are they olß tribes or Acrael
came not vp to Mazphah top Loꝛde. And
beholde cher came none ok d enhabitoures ot


ſtyng Jabes Galaad vntos cõgregaciõ And whe ß


peopie were bewed : beholde there were none
ok p enhabiters of Jabes Galaad there And
B congregacyon fent thether. rij. thoulande
men of ö ſtrongeſt or th a comaunded them
faping:go almpte denhabiters ol gabes Ga⸗
Kade geg od werde both wemẽ a childꝛẽ
And this is ö ve chal do vtterlie destroy alß Hume. xxx. e
males g alß wemẽ p haue ite by mẽ. Andthex
kounde amog denhabrters or Fabes@alaad
koure hudzeddamolelles virgin han den
no man


Elimelet x


no man by lying wyth anrmale. And they
brought them vnto the holt to Silo which
is in che lande ol Canaan,


€ And the hole congregacion ſent and cpane


with the childꝛen of Beniantin that were in
the Rocke of pomgarnettes and called peas
ceablye vnto thẽ / ABeniamin came agapne
at that tyme / and theygaue themthe wemen
which they had faucd a lyue of the wemen of
Gabes Galaad, But they lo tufplen them
not. And the people had com pallpon on Be⸗


@ What tee dad narmin beraliße? Sodhad made a gappe


led atrpbe
erat.


in thetrybes ok Jtraell. And thenthe elders
of the congregacyon lapde: what tall we do
tothe remnaunt ol them / to get them wines
ſeing al d wiues ol Bentamin are de 2
Andthept woe there mut be anenyeritatice
koꝛthem that be elcapea of Bentamimn that
atrybe benot dectroped out ok Feraell how
be it wemayenot geue them wpueß ol oure
daughters. Foz the chplozen ok Alraell bad


5, Chie cure made an adiuracton faping: curled be he?


properly was
dhe fame
that we


apie to Bemanun.
Zecchunche late behoe there teat


call ercommu, eripe in Siloh which is on the
nucacpon / as in aue 8e e pad the eat iyde of the


the Gal. i.a.


e that gothe krom Bethel to Sichem
wbt ftom Libanon. And they com⸗
maundeb the chyldzen of Benianun laping:


go and ipe in wapte in the vrnepardes. And th


; whẽ pe le chat the daughters ol Olloh come


out to daunce in a rowe / then come ye out ol
the ppnepardes and catche pon euerpems &
wyle of the daughters of Spitoh/¢ gett vou
vnto the lande or Bentamin. And pethetr
fathers oz bzethꝛen come onto vs to com-
plapne / we wyll faye vnto them / haue pytie
onthem /becaute we referucd not to eche
man his wyke in tyme of warre / and therto
becaule that ve gaue thẽ none in due tyme /


were to blame.

And the chyldzen ol Beniamin dyd euen
to: and tone them wyues acco;
nombꝛe of them of thenauncers which ther
caught. Andthenthey went and tetozned
vnto cheir e /e bylt there cytpes

it intgem. f
ae ti chyldꝛen ok Itrael departedthence
atthat tyme ¢ went euerp man to hes trrbe /
and tohis kynred / and went out kromthẽce
query mantobpsenveritaunce. In thole
dapes there was no kyng in Ilraell: but eue⸗
rpe man dꝛd what lemed hym̃ rraht.


nde ok the boke
weng ol 5


Ruth


to the that


The boke of Ruth


E Elimelec gothe topth his wyke and chyldzen in to
the lande ok udjoab, After his death bys wyke Hoem:
returneth a gapne in to her contrep / with her Ruth
der daughter in lawe.


Che trꝛſt. Chapter.


; STEN the tyme when the


*


udges tudged/ there felle a
darth in the ianbe.tlabertoze a
ſcerten man of Betzlehe Fuda
went Foz to ſoiourne in the cõ⸗
— trexe ot oab with his wyle
and two fonnes Che name of the man was
Elmelec / and hys wyle Noemi and the na⸗
meg ot his two fonnes were / Mahalon and
Chilion ¢ they were Ephzaites /out ol Beth⸗
lehe Juda. And when ther came into d lande
ok Moab / they contynued there. And Ele⸗
milec Noenties hulband dyed and che re⸗
mapned with her two lonnes which toke thé
wyues or che nacions of the Moabites: the
ones name Ozpzah and the others Ruth.
And when cher had dwelled there aboute a
ten pere / Mahalon a Chilton dyed allo euen
both two of them / to that the wyte was lekte
delolate or her two lonnes ¢ of herhulbande
erto Chen the code vp with her daughters 2
in lawe and returned From the contrey ol
Moab:foz che hadhearde faye / beyng in the
coũtreye of Moab: how that the Loꝛde had
vylpted bys people and geuenthem fore.
uBherfoze che departed out of ö place . A0
the was g her two daughters wich her. And
as they went by tze wa pe returnyng onto 6
lande ok Juda / Noemi ſapde vnto her two
daughters in lawe:go ¢ returne eche ol vou
vnto poure mothers houle: the Lone deale
as hyndlxe with vou / as ve haue dealt wet)
che deed a with me. Andthe Lorde geue vou


t you mape fpnde valk ether
pou otberbu .


Chen they cryed and wepte a faye vnt.
her we wyil go with the vntothy folke, But
Noemi fapde / turne agayne my daughters:
toꝛ what caule wolde you go w me? chynke
vou that ther be any moate chyldꝛen in my
bowelles / to be youre Saen an eum
agapne my daughters ¢ go:forZ am to olde
pape ek eum ach re haue hope

o pb A tone a mä this hegbt: ye and though
Ihad all readve bozne tonnes? wolde peta>
tpe after the evil they were of age? 02 wolde

e koꝛ them fo long refrapne From takers of
andes? Not fo mpdaughters:foz it gre⸗
ueth me moche loꝛ poure fakes /é the
of che Loꝛde is gone out agarnſt me.
Cherwith ther cryed


8


oer


8 0: „ 5
50 di rg ge er
Ruth aboade till byher chen che cayde:


le / th tyſterilaw is gone backe againe vnto charge


her people a onto her God: returũe thou at
terher But Ruch larde: entreate me not to
leaue the / and to returne krom after the / koꝛ
whether thou goeſt J will go/¢ where thou
dwelleſt chere J will dwelle:thy people are
my people / and thy God is my God. where
thou die / I will dye / andthere wilbe buried
adhiLeidedo* Che H ozde do fo and lo tome / except that
anlegt. death onlpedeparte the and me a ſondze.
te When He law that the wolde neades go w
bang a ber che lekte (peak xng pntoher. And lo they
‘saiga the he ⸗ went bothe to geather vntpll they came to
ae So 50h Berblehem, And when ther were come to
2892.1 Bethlehem / i was nopledtyozow all $ citie
707 dlktheand Che wemen lapde ig not this Hoent⸗
nir But che Capde vnto them / calle me not Moe
papripcalledenniscall me* Mara / o the all mightye
Tapas lle made meberpe bitter Lwent out Full s but
an, Londe hath bꝛougcht nie home emptie. nohx
Man bate Wulde pe ther 5
5 hath huͤbled me / 5 almightie bathe bꝛought
me vnto aducripte ! And che tyme when
Noemi wpth Ruch che Moabitelie her dau⸗
Ihter in lawe returned out ol che countrepe
Of Moab and came to Bethlehem / was in ß
begynnyng of barley harueſte.
Auth teateth cozue in the teldes ol Mos; ¢ Epnde
ken in hes lpghe. 0 2
che beronde Chapter.
Hd huenu hada Rynlmũ of her hul⸗
a a man of mpght/otthe kyn⸗
5 melec / named Booz. And
5 5 abiteſle ſapde vnto Ho⸗
iF emi/let me g elde and leale a geather
kares / alter wh toeuer J kynde grace in bys
leght. And che layde vnto her: go my daugh⸗
ter. nd the went and came and ealhe


sebaftertye baruett men /andbet chmee dap


was that parte of the felbe pertapned onto
Booz whych was ol the kynred ok Elimelec.
And beholde Wosz came from Bechlehem €
lapde vnto the harueſk men / che L oꝛde be
zwch pou Ind they anfwered him / che Loꝛde
blefle the. Then fapde Booz onto for poung
ter etna a Sa
8 amole is: Ind s pou
man that twas bete to ower fe the herue


Smenantwered ard tapdesit isthe Wonbitiß Whis


damolell that care wych Hoemi out ok the
countrey of Boah / and the fapde / let me
Apape $/ te


Ruth, J


ae me Hoem teingd Loꝛde thy


maydens Chene eyes are on a feweß halbe
repedꝛgo aftcrp mapdes thertoze / toꝛ haue
mat Seen when gener a g ae

* u en thou art a thai 0
nto the peflels and dꝛyncke of that 01


laddes haue draw. Chen dhe tell anheben Ertl


K bowed her lelke tod grounde a larde vnto
bim: how is itz J haue kounde gracem thine
eyes / to knowe me / leing Jam an alyaunt? C
And Booz antwered Flavor bate her: all
is tolde me p thou halt done vnta thymother
in lawe ſence death of thine hulbande / how
thou halt lette thy kather a thy mother / z the
lde where thou walt boꝛne / e art come bnto
à nacto which thou kneweſt not in tyme pat:
led. The Lorde quyte thy woꝛcke / and a kull
rewarde be geuẽ $ ok F Lozde God of Arrael
vnto whom thou art come / to truſt vnder his
winges. Chẽ che lade onto him / let me finde
kauoure in thy lighte myl oꝛde fo thou halt
cõkoztedme halt tpoken hartelpe onto thy
marde / whych vet cãnot be lyke pnt oneot
mapdes AB oo whẽ ß tyme ok rekecctd
2200 e eh 1 G eate
of pbze pe tp Loppe in the binagre.
And the lat doune bp che repers/abe 2 t


baker Date a e did eate og une b |


ſulfiled e lekte parte. And whe che was rylen
irn berge es laide to g boch feng
6 caves 6 remapne a doherno


a eae oF ou next k.
eut ot oure nne And Ruth ß Mo⸗
abite late he bad me alto 52 duld cotinews
Young men /ontill che had ended all
herueſt he bath Chẽ laide Noemi vnto Ruth
her daughterintaw / it is belt my daughter ?
thou go dut wyth his maydens / and that no
man mete the in anp other kelde. Ando che
lo agg al mapdens of Boos / to gather
vnto 5 ende of barley harueſt and ot whete


Boos. Chen ſarde
.


Atta belt wich er matber tata x bt rn


Bae eee


ra


efit
Ciij.


Ruth,


Men Noemi her mother in awrayd Coo, tabeth auth to wrte ok whom he begettery
vnto heranp daughter J wyll tene Obed.


e. iij. 3 :
reat for the/ebatthou maa bein . Ati 91 1255 che gate 64


¶ Thus endeth che bone
of Ruth,


ot


CThefvatt boke of


Samuel called the fpzſtbone
of the Eynges.
wackeren ee deren fe.
nah after pꝛaper made to Sod / bꝛingeth toꝛthdamuel
Ihe krꝛſt. Chapter. d


e
. sanae orhys howe. Chen larde Hann
a other phenẽ nah. And Phenẽnah had chil⸗ Lane buche the offerpnges due foz the kealt
die / but Hannah had none. And plarde man and allo his vowes: but Hannah wet not bp
went out ol his citte euerxe teſttull dare / to koꝛ che lapde vntoher hutbande: J will carve
pꝛape a to olter vntoß L oꝛd ok hoſtes: where vntillthe iadde be wened / e then will being
chetwo lonnes oF Cit ( Hophni e Phinehes) him / p he maye apeare betoꝛe 5 Lozd atherẽ
were ? Lozdes pꝛeſtes. Ind it tell on a dae abide Coz eucr.Andeikanah herhulbadlalde
as Elkanah had offered p he gaue to Phenẽ⸗ fo her do what lemith p beſt:tarpe vntil thou
hab his wile eto allberfonnes g daughters batt wened hem / onipe ? Lozde make good
ide Chalde PO2CIOS. But vnto Hanah he gaue a poꝛcid
farc. vnto wyth a heupe chere / koz he loüed her / neuer⸗
Wente thelege Loꝛde had made her barren and tone him tb her / when che had wened him /w
n cherto her enempe Phenentiah bexed her a thze bullockes a ang pha of floure a à bottel
good in caſting her ing teche how d Lon had ok wine / ¢ bꝛought him vnto p boule of the
made her barren. And to did the pere by pere

as okte as che wẽt pptothe boule or? Loz. ge. Ind ther ue bullockes a bought in

And to chaledher/ wherkoze al wepte add to Eli / z chen the tapde: Oh my Loꝛdtaß
Bente not Chen ſayde her hulband 2 i
tober: ‘why wepett thou Zand why won $ odeby ö here pꝛaping vnto p Loꝛd
eatett thou not a why is thyne herte lo trou⸗ ¢ ko this lade J prated/ 4h L. ond hach geuẽ


in to her
zwhat mydaugh⸗ lebem / athacthyne houle beirze the houle n
ter? et ene er all tae by es ‘of hares / whom qhamar bare bnto Zuda/"
mare fa her. ib Cape Genter 0 . — e eee
of batipe gaue he me an zchou i
Sede ee ae. And fo Booz toke Ruth / and che was hys
Then lapde hhe-mpoaugh tell
a Ghoukistocbow che matter wyl chaunce, ne bate cae
Foz man will not bein reat vntillhe haue Andthe wemenlarde vnto Noemi:biegen be
Epnyahen the matter thrs lame dape. the Loꝛde the whrch bathe not lelt the beth


bledamn not J better to che chen ten lonnes? me my defire which z alked ofbt:¢ cherkcze f
Chen Bi role vp after 6 theyhad eatẽ Aolkdeht z

Gdzonche in SOiloh Ind Elche prealkelate Loꝛde. And to ther pꝛapedthere vnto ß Lod,
be dale kromerkeldde pottes oF the teple che fong of Bannah.Cbhe offence of the lonnes of
SES Lome-And the was troubledinhertwe⸗ Sis eres redubed for the ynmeturable tfraunce
tes / e pꝛared vntoß Lo de g wepte coze / do. oF hrechren che


LSamuel, Che arck is i. Kynges, taken. Cv.


che. ij. Chapter. Butthe lade Samuel myniſtred bekoze Kater AndthysHalbeatpgnebntothe/s Wall — But Samuel keared / to chewe Eli the vi⸗
2d Hannah prayed a ſarde: myne the Loꝛde girded about with a lynen Ephod. 74 90925 come vpon thy two lonnes / Hophni ã Pht⸗ ion Chen El called Samuel c lade: Spaz
e nee fe aurdmamiltcrncatammainat enrwin'a| ptr as fa?
: 5 beg ple the.s tel kap 4 iat
jouth is wyde apen ouermine en⸗ when Hecamebp with her gulbande to oller gs dee chan do as it is in mene herte a in mymeyn⸗ thou hide it not krõ me. Che L ond do fo lo Futh 4.
hempes/fo2 J reiople in thpcaurng. Chere che offering of the larde teat And Cl bleed a tende. Ind J will bploebima ſure houte. Andhe koß / pr thou hide anything krom me / ok all 6
is none toholpe as p Lobe mo there is nqane Elkanah andhys wrt e e, Wall wabtic before mene anornted eos euer. hekade vntoß And Bemueltoldehinm euer :
ſaue chou. Nether is there any ſtrength Ivhe i/o tba And they that are lelte in thyne boule / wall whit ¢ hidd it not Ko him. And he anfwered: 2
vnto oure God. Calke not to moche pꝛoud⸗ E Ecrouch to him foꝛ à iptle pece ot ll ish L ond / let him do what lemeth him bett. 4
Iꝑetlet olde thinges depart out of youre mou⸗ 6 Senne UL ea cake of bred/eHalllape:put me And Samuel grewe / and che Lozde was
Dethen bon deko the K ode isa God of omled de g L pape the in one offpce oꝛ other among the with bim. and left none ol bis wondes unpar⸗
e soe Judgeth the choughtes. Che* boowes of the beers. 8 ecpatissa-preattes/b J mape tate a moꝛteli oł bred, kozmed Andall Icrael Evd Dan to Werlave
Pal ga. ütrong are broke and the weake are endued WORM" Catfer the Lorde hadlettetoapperebyopenvition Wilk 5 Damuel was truly made the Kozdes
with ſtrẽgth. They that were ull haue hired U anSulob fo? along ccalon: he pet caller Samuclehze. pꝛophete. And the Loꝛde apered agayne in
out thé felues koꝛbꝛeed / and ther that were tems /g chewelh hun what touloe be fall on Eli. Sich: £02 p Lord opened hym leite to Sa⸗
hongrye ceate co tobe: in ſo moche that the Che. iij. Chapter. muel in Stlob/thozow the woꝛde old L070,


baren hach vozne leuen / z She that had many BUS 1206 child Samuel minidtred onto x
chplozents waren tebie, e Ke ans e chewoneot Len of tuck osteistanens Clash enen bree
The Wozde kylleth and naneth a lyue / che Loꝛde was pꝛecious in thole he hem keikr elo.
d. Chat to / he bꝛyngeth doune tohell aketcheth vp agarne 2 bapes foꝛ there was none ope DHT O Whe. ij. Chapter.
corecteth and The Loꝛde maketh poꝛe / and maketh ryche And it chaũled at that tyme / p Eli lape in his Iod Samuel tpaße vnto an Joract H


punpcheth mn e baingeth towe and heueth bp onbpe.perep= And Ilrael went out agapnſt the


bis wrath a place / a his eyes began to waredimme b he
rer confozteth. Leth bythe pooze out of thedust / and jykteth srtow ta the coulde not le. Ind per ape OF God wet out Philiſtines to battell / a pitched be⸗
al xxxvh. Hp the begger krom the dong hill to letethem add whe the Samuel lapde him doune to llepe / in tẽ ! tine the*belpe ſtone. And p PHL: pep, eee oer
among p2inces/andto enberetttyem with twrth F thearcke of God inas.And Nes pitcyenin ApheR, And put ye felues in
Ceate of glozpe. Foz the pillers of the erth are mn Ineetipe, the Lorde called Samuel: ebetapoe/ here mabeagarndt Irael And im end of Hbattel


e Lozdes/ the hath let the rounde wozloe . am / and he ran vnto ett a ſapdehere am krael was put to the wooꝛde befoze ß Phili⸗
c. (Chote that pon toe Be wil epebfete orbs: tates — 5 grew and * fozehoucaltenettme. Ard kee called tines. e fies tue aracaveatong
we callfainetes but the wynnked Mall kepe lylence in darck⸗ toute boty with theLozde and allo with me, at che not go agarne eepe. Andhe went and bythe floes /about a fowze thoulandmen.
the bebzucs nelle. Foz in his atone myght hall no man in there cam aman of Sodbnto eli and lande him doune to llepe. And PLozde called And when the people were come into their
foufomabty be ſtronge. Che Lozdes aduerlaries thall fapdebnto bim:thus faith theho70e.9 apea⸗ B once againe:Samuel/and Samuel arole g ttes, elders ot Jrael fapde-twherfore bath
sree eet be mabe to feare hem ard oc oF beauen he red vnto che houle of thy Father / when thep went to Et a ſapde: am here thou drddeſt 5 Londe beatẽ bs this dape betoze Phir tti-
baue rear , all thunder opon chem. Che Loꝛde hail were in Egtpte in Pharaos boule. an 4 calle me. Andhe antivered:5 called not my nes: let vs ketcheß arcke of dapoyntmẽt ofp
pr6pt hertes to iudge the endes ol che wonde / and hall grue chole thy kather out ol all d trpbes of Frrai ſonne. Go aga vne a take th reſt:but it was Loꝛde / out of Sich vnto vs / iet it come
do good ta ult mpqht vnto his Rynge , anderalte the home fobentppreatte fo2 to offer vpon myne aul: per Samuel knew che Loꝛde a perß woe amöͤge vs g laue ds out of p handes of oure
factupce en £0 oF his anopnted. And Eikanah wentto Ka- fare ¢ toburneincente / ¢ to were an Ephod Of the Loꝛde was opened untohrm . andthe enempes.and b people tent to Sotiob/e fect z
aufe dene. d math cobpshoute andthe land pdmrmäkre betoꝛe me. And g gaue onto the houle of thy Lolde wetto g called Sammel Hehzidtyme, krö thence $ arcke of $ apopntinẽt oc h L075
ahl vnto the Loꝛde befoze Elk the preatte. father allthe 8 oF the cheldzen of Fle And he arole ¢ wet to cit a lade: amhere / ot hoſtes whych dwelleth betwene p Cheru⸗
in many other. But the konnes of El were vnthꝛyftye meil. nohertoꝛe kycke ye agapnit.my lacti⸗ koꝛthouhaſt calledme. Chen ell perceaued byns. And ther were tino amg of CH he,
Morde 8. Pe, cHplzen and knewe not the Lorde. Fozthe Feccandagayntt mpne offerpng which F co- the Lowhad called che add. And lardpnto phnt a Pbinehes W arcke of Fapopntmer
kullwütch n matter ok the pzeattes wrih the people was“ maunde in the tabernacle / and honozeũ thx bymi/go sige downe: g pEbe call the agarne ot God. And whe sarche of ß apopntmẽt or z
as moche in whentoeuer any man offeredanyotteringes chyldzen aboue me /andmake poure telucs chen tave/{peake on LToꝛde / ko thy leruant Lom cam into the hott / a Ftrael chowted a


l vn⸗ ladd came ſethe lleche was klatt ok the kürt krutes of all the offerpnges ol heareth. And Samuel wẽt a layed him dou⸗ myghtie chowte / lo erch ra %
See ebm anne deme pe de debe Seay rie thee ek oe ob neinhis place. And the Lo; compete Wpenche lla engere ny othe
deo wpched, bisbanbvand taut tne et nie 1 — eae ee omit ehout caleba before SoanmuclSoamuc abs tote nen cane 2 5 poe
caldzen / oꝛ potte. ute father, Faia eruit mrahtte Howl in hott ofthe 8
Keane deen ane mofo cen 0 adden ng a n Aunche engere neee

ep did onto all Atraellthat came to that be


ilch. Vee: a cherto before ther had offered Davey ‘
Bate coc era abo camanb (avbeco ‘ will perfogme to Eli /all PF bauetpokEcon- God was come into the holt ¢faide.woonta


the man that oſtered:geut llech to roſte koꝛ cermng hrs hole: Jwyll begymeit a ende ps / lor it was neuer fo betoze this. Wo onto
pꝛeaſte / loꝛ he wyll not haue ledden lleche al it. Foz haue tolde hem 5 Awwylltudgehys vs / who hall delyuer vs out of p hand or this

D the but rawe. And yr any ma larde vnto him Hoe boufe ko euer Fozthe wickednelle whychhe mightie God this is the God that fmote the
let the fatt be offeren accoꝛdyng to the daxe / in i knoweth how his lonnes are vngracioiuile / æ Egipctans w all maner of plages inthe wil⸗
ethen take as moche as thine herte delireth. Ikrael/and there N he was not wꝛoth therwith. Andtherkoze J derneſle. Be ſtrang a quite poureteiues cle 3
Che ladd wold and were him thou walt Chauefwozne pnto the houle ofckli / Ithe wic⸗ men / ve ßhilictine z hat ve be not feruatites C
itme now / oꝛ eis J will take it with violẽce. . Ming e Ssaik mnt epee) vnto the ebares / ag thep haue bene to vou. Judit riß a.
And che fynne of p poungme was very great Wracrikice noz offering while che wozld Wemen therfore ¢ fight. And the Phililtines


bekozethe Lade Kor thevoitpitenthe people : det}. And Samucllave cil che moznynge fought/andyeracl was put to the wo tte and
— — ee a then openedthe doꝛes of che boule of $1070, W .


Ot a nother the two fonnes oF Eli /Dophnt| *Piynehes

Sich wasche were decd Andthere kae nder geen

onus of Ces, 9 e bebe ant sti be fame
/e rrade. DALE, lotheg

rn rb. heed. And when the nian cam in / Elt tate pps


à Role by the wave lpde lol ng: kor his bert taydeꝛth


keared koꝛ the arcke ot God. And che man ca
in a Colbe it in the citie. And all the citte cried

hen Eli hearde the noyle of the cryeng /
he alked what d noyle of p rumoꝛ ment. And
che man haſted a cam in z tolde Cl, elt was
koure thoze a eighten vere olde dr bis cyght
faplenbimbbe could not le. Andthe ma care
vnto cli: amhe 6 cam out ot thearapeand
lied out ok che hoct thrs dare. Andhe kayde
how is it koꝛtuned / np lonne ; And ð mellen⸗


t Aeg. If. a.


od / B her


But the answered not no; —
we named ö childe Jchabod laxing:honoure
i departed er ad eat and eat
was take / and ber kather in law andherhul⸗
band were deed. And cherkoꝛe the tarde / ho⸗


dk God was taken.

¶ Dagon the God of 7 tepannd is cat dat bee
ne Tbe bil ed in thee

cart ea Edt Erhihener aten eite tur-

ceaue the arches


eb. chapter. :
a sure putas tone g; arcke ot
Debz. be ezer.


onto Acdod / bz
; cherer ada were it br
ngtthe pꝛeten nd wh they ol food were bp inß mon


behodde Wagon “lave grouelyng ops 6
ise forgot nethe arche ofthe Lope, Ano theptoke


erantwered.¢ capde: Ilrael ts dev betoze ? ima


ol
were derd / che bowed her lelteatrauclen/foz ch.
u eccyeberters


noure is gone fd Jlrael / becaule the areke


God ¢ catied tt FrO* 6 helpe ſtone / tretpal
it into we
0 departeth not from pou.


e vpõ Dagon oure God. Ind lochey lent
Geatheredall § L des oi SPbAICNeS ente


Bev eatens arcke of God of Alrael about.
nd whe cher had caried it aboüt / che hand of


ople,
en cher lent and kette all the Loꝛdes
ok che Philiſtines onto them de: lend
awape
it go home
it dle vs not


1 ;


che wit
Wurden. Che ebenen eee plagebatees cher
dad kene thearcke,


alle £026 preattes and the te
as nat al eo fee
OF the Lopes tell bs wherwith we pal tende
it home agatne. Cher antwered vk pou ſende
the arcke ofthe God ot Alrael home agapne
fine wee Roehl cere wld

offerpng: en pe Mal ole /
and ĩt thalbe knowen to vou / whyhrs hand


Chenlaxde they what halbe trefpace-
en uch ive Ganter boty?
demcpooes ana fue ener rere eren
tothendbze off Todes of? Phültdtines. Fo;
it was onemaner of plage was on vou all /


Kon poure Loꝛdes to. nShertoꝛe ye Mall mas


che Arcke is


dd euẽ Co:thep tonetwo kyne 5


8 5


voure lande / a Wall geue gloꝛpe vnto 5 God
ol Alrael:chat he mave take his hand from ot
poi / and krom of youre Goddes / and from of
poure lande. nherkoꝛe ſhulde ve hardẽ youre

Bhertes as che Egipcxas à Pharao hardened
chetr hertes / which koꝛ all that when he had
plapedbis pageauntes with the) were fapne
tolett the people go and depart.

Now therkoze make a new carte and take
two mealche kyne / on whole neck neuer cã
vocke. And tye the kyne in the carte / a bzung
the calues whome from them. Then take the
arcke ol the Loꝛde ¢ put it in the carte /a put
che uelles of golde whych ve rewarde hym
with koꝛ a trelpace offerpng)ina fozcer by $
ſpde therot and lend it aware a let it go. And
marke pr he go vp by the waye p leadeth vnto
bis awne cookte/to Betchtames / thẽ it is he ß
Ad vs this great euell. But and pr he do not /
hen it is not hys handchat Cote bs but it
was a chaũce that hapened vs And the men

t ue mylck
@tyed thẽ in the carte / and kept che calues at
home / a chey layde the arcke ofthe Loꝛd vpõ
the tarte a the koꝛcer with the mpce of golde
the images of their ares wich Emerodes.


Ind the kyne toke p ltrayght wape to Beth⸗ thal


kames / boch one wãpe / z as they wẽt / lowed /
turnyng nether toß hande ner to the le⸗
Akte. Andß Lobes of ß Philiſtines wet after
vntill they cã top borders ol Bethlames.
Andther ol Bethlames were repyng their
whete herueſt in the balepe . Andther itt vn
cheir eves a pied § arche. And reiopled wh
ther law it. ind the carte came into


gtoue
ok one geholua a Bethlamite / ard tove ſtyll


ere. Cher was there allo a great fone,
Indthey claue the wodde ok z carte ¢ offered
the kyne a burnt offeryng vnto the Loꝛde.
And che Leuites tone downe the arcke ot the
‘Lorde ¢ the foꝛcer g was therbye / wherin e
Juelles ot golde were a put the on the great
done. Andthe men of Bethlames taceptpee
burnt facrifice ¢ offered offertgy g fame dave
gp dnto the Lozde. and whe the Fue Loꝛdes of
PHUiines had kene it /thepretumedto
karon the lame daxe. Chele are He golden
artes with Emerodes which the Pyuttines
gaue to amendes fo7 a treſpace o 05 46
Loꝛde:foꝛ Acdod one: foꝛ S: one:foꝛ Aca⸗
lon one: foꝛ Geth one: for Aharon one. And
the golden myce were acco ding to the nõbꝛe
Ofall the cities of p Philiſtines thozow ß kiut
Tozathipes:both of walled townes ¢ of towe
nes vnwalled / euẽ vnto p great one / wherõ
they fet downe ß arcke ol ß Lozd: which fone
temapneth vnto this dave in p Felbe of Jeho⸗
ſua the Bethlamite And he plaged $ men of
Bethlames / becaule they had lene Farckest


i. Kynges, reſtoꝛed. Cbi.


and images like to youre nitcethat deſtroped 5 L ond. Ind he llue old people fiktie thouland


€ thre Choze a ten perlones. And p people la⸗
mented becaukeß Lord had dayne fogreat a
daughter otthẽ And me ot Bethlames tative
who is able to ſtande before $ Lob ſoholpa
God eto whom chalhe go krom ps: Andthey
kent meflengers to the enbabiters ok gariath
Jarim ſapiig: Chess biutines haue bꝛought
home agapne the Arche ofthe Loꝛde: come
downe and fett it vp to vou.
C Che arcke is brought tokartathtarim. Che people
wepe / ko: which Samucl maketh inter ceſſion tothe
Lozde, The Phllytines are lmytten.
Che. vij. Chapter.
the men ok Rartathiarim cz a A .
fet nb arcke off Lon brought d. egum. v. a
tt into the boule of Abinadab in
Gabaah ¢ tanctikred Cleazarhys
to warte vpon the arcke of the Lozde.
And whpleche arcke abode inkartachlarim /
the dayes multtplied / that it was twentye
peres/ all Iſrael lamented after the Loꝛde.
And Samuel (pake vnto al Atrael faving
pl ve become agayne bntop Lozd shalt youre :
hertes/then*put awaye the ftratige Goddes zotu.pritt.c.
frdamdg vou Aſtharoch / z prepare youre
Pale pbs pou ere nene LOL
out ol the handes o 2
liſtines. And then p chttozen oF glraeldnd put Oe thisye
awape-Baalim a Atavoth/eferued 5 L od haue Jud. . e.
onlpe. Chen lalde Samuel:geatheralztrael
to Spasphah/ P Amape pape to: youbnto g
Loꝛde And theygeatheredto gether to az⸗
phah / a dꝛem water ¢ powꝛed it nuit before ß
Loꝛde ¢ fated p Came dave efapde there: we
— Cynned agaynſt 5 Lozde. And Samuel
ed the caule ok 80 chtlozen of Icrael in
Mäzphah when F Phrlickimes heard /f che
chiloze ok Irrael were geathered to gether to
Sasphah /? Lozdes of the Phuittines went
bp agaphtt Acracl. and whe the chilose of Fle
Yael heard ß / they were atvayoe of p hiutt⸗
nes a lame to Samuel: craſe not to crye onto
che Lon oure God for vs / p he maye laue vs
Out oF the handes ol 5 Phtüiſtines. And Sa- ‘
muel toke afuchyng lambe ¢ offered it afl to ‘
Beather fora burnt offeryng ontop Lode /a Co crye er:
gerte onto § £070 For Ffrael:ap Kowhearbe male
im, Andas Samuel offered P burnt offe-nopte but to
ving / the Philtttines came to kxght agaynſt pꝛape affectue
Ilrael. But the l. oꝛd thundereda great thũ⸗ oulive ¢ wyth
derptamedape brd b hatumes Kammer- unde Eren
leoche b cher were beats before Jlrael. And u b. en
me ok ztrael idued out ol Mazphah a put:
Tuco pPhiltttines a due thE / vntiil they came wD
vnder Brthcar. And the Samuel tone a tone
g pitched it betwene az phah a Den / a cal
ledß name therok e the ſtone of heſpe / laping: 5 Gb :
thus karre bath § Kode holpe bs, Ando tye bed eitezer
Philiſtines were bꝛought vnder z they cam
: 0% nomoze


N


a


Ilrael requereth i. Samuel, a Ry


no moze into the cooſtes ot qcrael:toꝛ Shand

ol the Lozd was vpon the Philiſtines all che

eee
tal ea

to Ilrael / euẽ fd Acarõ to Geth / ws cooſtes

ol che lame / which {rack plucked out of the


bandes ol § Philickines. For cher was peace Me
S voice of


betwene Itrael a 5 Amozites. And amuel
fudged Jrraell all che dapes ol bys lle / and
went about pere bp vere / to Bethel Galgal
and Paz phah / and tudged I lrael in ali chole


places / came agapne to Ramath : Foz cher


was hig houle / and therebe iudged Flrach/e
there he bylt an auitare vnto the Loꝛde.


Deut. bi. d.


0 by wayrs. Now
therfoze*make vs a king to iudge bs / as all
othernactõs haue. But the thyng dilpleated
Samuel / whẽ they layde/geue vs a kynge


1 eg. xp. e.
Hle riß. e.
Act riß c.


VaAnd p Lo de ſayde onto Samuel / hea re the
bopce of p people in all pᷣ they lape vnto the,
Foꝛ they haue not caſt the awaye / but me: 6


Uy n bn pꝛaied ontop 1.05


ng.
leruauntes ¢ poung men and of poure altes /
anddohis wozke with the. Andhe chall tate
Itech oF youre chepe / a pe chalbe his ceruaũ-
tes. And when xe crye out at that tyme vpon
voure hing / which ve wall haue cholen vou /
the Lozbe will not heare you at that bape,
Heuerthelelle the people wolde notheare
0 amuel / putdid lape:nape not fo:
But ther halbe a kinge ouer vs / s we wilbe
lige al other naciõs. And oure kyng ch


was none goodlper then

the choulders vpwarde

people. And it chaced

‘Sauls father were lock. G ‘
Saul his tonne:take one at


J Muto not raigne ouer thé. And as ther haue


cuer done (fence bz
vntothis dave / d haue koztanen me g lerued

zolher Goddes) cue ſo do ther vnto the. Nom
cherkoze herkẽ onto theirs

teſtikle onto thé a thet the ddutte od king

5 ſhall rapgne ouerthé. and Samuel toive.

all ß wozdes OF F Loz onto ep alked

Ca krng othim K he lande this thalbep *outie

Dent xpß. d. ol A Leet ed dar de ame
. oure fonnese put the: atettes ¢mas

. edie borteme ottiee hepnant rane bete


his charet / a wil make him 1 te 5


eee aetna
eare his grou ö geacher i 3
‘tuelt/@ compe nirrumentes obtoarte aap.


parell foz hys charettes: Andhe wyll take


poure daughters a make the $dzeers of bis
oyntmentes a hys cookes ebakers. Andhe
Wall take 6 bet of poure feldes / g ot youre

vynepardes a ok poure oliue trees / a geue thé
to his lexua


antes. And he Mall take ß tenth ok


poure feed a oF poute vines geue it to bys
ſoꝛdes /a to his leruaũteg. And he hall take
che belt of roure menleruantes andmapoes


tthe out oe Egipt


to!
WG
la


ice howbeit yet


the m
27 ano tbe poung man


vs owe ware.
Sans a tank t


citie where the man oF 6:
was. And as they were going bp into p citie /
sh aim i a a aaa :


the feat ow thevforeget Pou bp to euennow
wamamnde thall pe Epnde him. Andther went op into the
3 dtie. Ind whe they were come into z middes
, | ofp citte:bebolbe/ Damuel came out-agattt
the/Eoz to go bp to the hill. But p Lozde had
tspingomoyon ene lee
sto mo- me J wi 4
man out of the lande ol Been min/ him tale
thou anopnte to be captaine ouer my people
Gfraell/ chat he maye laue my people out ol
che hand of the Philttines / ko; J haue loked
vpon my people / and their crpets come vnto
me. nohen Samuel aw Saul, p Loꝛde ans
cwered himile / this is thẽ ma who 7 ſpake to
bol. This lame ſball rapgne ouer my people
Chen went Saul to Samuel in middle
ofthe gate / a tarde: tell me J paves / where
about the ſeazs houle ta /and Samuel an⸗
Cwered Saul ¢ lapde: J am the ſear / goby
bekoze me vnto the hill / kor ve chall eate
metodape. And to mozow q will let the go
erlpe / a wyll tell the all chat is in thine bert)
andas fo2 thine alles that were lot this dave
* daves / care not koꝛ thé / koꝛ they are For
D And mozcoucr whote call p bewtikul thin⸗
ges ol Ilrael be? belõg they not to p /s vnto
All thy Fathers houle: But Haul antwerene
layde:am not J the tonne ofa Jeminite of q
ſmalleſt trybe of Atrael / and my kynred the
Leatt of all the kinredes of the trybe of Beni⸗
amin / wherkoꝛe then lpeakeſt thou foto me?
And Samuel toke Daul and his ladd ¢
brought chem into the parler and made them
lett in the cheleſt place amonge thẽ 6 were
Biden: were pon a thirtye percones.


Sal thepeopte there faucena mea Faden
ir kaute /. alked a
Byng.@odtenvetbe Byng Ipfe. 8


ße r Chapter.
e ee nene debe
* 5 . a te
Keres
a e ouer
bis Tiiberitaunce Anno whe thon att bee


17 ie aaa


/thy father bath lekt the care of ö Alles and
Tozoweth fo pou faying: what cha J do fog
mp lonne: Chen thou thalt go forth fr chẽce
@ walt come to $ ocke of: 107. And there
Shalt thou mete thze me going to Godco Be⸗
chelotie caryeng thee hiddes : k a nother ca⸗
rpeng thze loues of bneed: aß chꝛidcarpeng a
botell of wine. Ind ther will falute § eqene
che two loues of bzeed: which thou thalt re⸗
ceaue ok their handes. After that thou chalt
come to p bill of Gad / where the philidtines
kepe their watche. And when thou art come 8
thither to p citte / thou halt mete a cõpanxe
ol pꝛophetes compng doune fro p hill / with a

altera timbzell A pipe /a a harpe before

e ether prophelpeg. And the lpzite ofthe
Londe will come bpon the / a chou Malt pꝛo⸗


zung phetic the ge Malt be turned into another


the / a oF which
Bp the pouderandb might dern eee
ip the and bz
Saul. and Samuel laide: beholde / p which
left: put it befoze the ¢ cate / foꝛ J kept it
S02 the ol purpole / when J called the people.
Andlo Saul did eate with Samuel 5 vaye
And when thep were come downe fd yd
Bib ete! 0 rern au
5 Htoppe of ß houle:a theparole erlpe. And
about che of the dave Samuel called
Saulops $ toppeot the houle faying-vp 6
Fmape fend $ awape. Ind Saul arote. And
cher wẽt out at d dozes boch oF the / boch be a
Samuel. And when ther were come almolt


him another maner of hertte / a all chole
San
K the ci OF pꝛo⸗ neg. xi. b.
phettes mett him r p ſpꝛite ofGonca bys 7
bum a he pꝛopheltedamög the. And all that
knete zi bekode whẽcher faw she pꝛophelied
amig 6 korhettes chert “gees other:


Saul,


what is happened onto 5 conne of Eis: 48


€
eg. vir. d. Saul allo amonge the pꝛophetes: And one


— 7 fame place ant wered d layne? who is
their kather? And therol lpꝛang a pꝛouerbe:
What is Saul alſo amonge the prophets?
And whe he had made an ende of pꝛopheliẽg /
he ca to $ bill. Saules fathers bꝛotherlarde
nto him d his ladd: whether wee ve? Indhe
anlwered:to fene the alles / a when we law
Ghentayde Sas e eme der ae
Ehen larde Sau tell me
muͤel ſarde vnto vou: And Saul ancwered
Sunk dem ue Pd
of 6 ByngDome’
fone be bumnat aes that
people togeather btitop Loꝛde to Ma
fayde vnto the aar, of Arael:thus tarch
070 God of Flracl/F bꝛought pou out ot
Egipt / a delyuered vou dut ol che hand ofthe
Egipcids / a out ol band of all kingdomes
eee
awäpe poure 4
aduertptes a tribulacids. And xe haue fapoe


20 t d · pntoht/ male a king outer bs how cherko⸗


re ſtãde befoze ß L oꝛd e
re chouſandg. And whé Samuel had bzolight
Walzen cael übe nr enam was
caſight. tebe he had bꝛoun
nun by their kinredes / F kynrede of g

Was caught:and Saul the konne of Cis was
t. Andtheylought hi: buthe could not
thepathed 9 Londe further:

ide come thither And d Loꝛd


le deluer ederõ
EMheprople dely: 01788


trrame of Qabas)
renueth the k f


8 has ma
we wilbe thy tern: 8
nite larde herto will Amane a couenant w


. —


to wepe. Ind they tolde hum Fading:

indo Jbeg. ebenca elner God bps
Saut / whẽ he herve thole tidinges / a he was
excedpng angrpe. Ind toke a poue of ore d
hewed the in peces / a tent the thoꝛow out al
the coſtes okz lrael by d handes of mellengers
taping: wijoloeuer cometh not koꝛth alter C


“Saul a after Samuel / co hall his orenbe


ed. Chen the keare ok the Lozde fell ond a chern
Verte ee out as bed bene but one nene
mart, And whenchep were nöpzedin Berek desu


m
tribe of Bent⸗
nee Fern euch


we wyll come out vnto vou chat ve MALE do men hn
‘pith bs all pou, And on § mozoto thin
Saul put Ppeople in thze partes Andtber wor ag
ca in vpõ d hot in ßmomyng watche / a due a
e Ammonites vntill ß heat of 5 dape. And is am
ep 6 remaxned / ckattered: to p two of them am en
were not Ieft to geather Chen tayne p people >
to Samuel: what are ther p laid: wall Saut
ouer bg bing the p we mape flap the
But Saul fapde: there chall no man die this
dape ſtoꝛ to dare d Lobe hache taued Acrael.
Chen karde Samuel onto ö peopie:come
g letvsgoto Galgal/a renewe p kyngdome
there. Ind $ people wet to Salgal and made
Saul Ayng thete before che Loꝛde in Gals
bers Ind there they offered peace offerpnges
efoze the Loꝛde. And there Saul and all
the people retopledercedpnalye.
ESamucl being an innocent Judge! be
See ene ie peop’
bec aute they demaunded , .
and belewet! Ganen ch wee
e. . —
en fade Hammel onto aly track g
beholde J haue obeped youre bopce
in all that pe larde vnte me (a haue
sD made pou a Nynge And ſe poure
Krnge walk oze you. But I am olde a
headed: t behold my lonnd ate W yous
e walked befoze pou Fd mip chidehede
Into chis dare. Brhold er Agamen


1
(a


80


ul.


betoze ß Lorde g bekoze his anopnted/ whoce
ore haue J taken: oz whole Ade haue J take
whom haũe 3 done wꝛõg to? oꝛ open haue
Fpilled And of whole hand haue Frece:

any bzpbe / to blynde myne eyes therwith?¢
J will reſtoꝛe it you agapne.. And hey lade


chou haſt done vs no wꝛonge / noꝛ piliedvs


nether haſt thou taken sought of ane mãnes
hande. Chen lapde be to them: the Loꝛde is
witnege ynto vou / andhis anopnted is wyt⸗
nelle this nave / that ye haue fofioe nought in
myhandes. Ind they antwered: we are wi
neſſes. Then fapoe Samuel onto the people
Bitis the Lende chat made Moes g Z arö /


2 ge bought youre fathers out of Egipte.
f


Now therloꝛe ſtande it. / and iet me reaton
wyth vou befoze the L oꝛde ok al the ryght⸗
welnelles of the Loꝛde which he chewed both
pou and poure fathers. 2
Akter 5; Jacob was come into cee
fathers ctyed onto then oꝛde / a the Lozd fent
Moles ¢ Aaron / whych bꝛought poure fa⸗
chers out of Egipt / a made the dwell in tyrs
place. Qeuerthelaterther forgat the Loꝛde
thelt God. And he lolde them into the hande
ol Silara chefe captarne of q abin kynge ol
#a307/and into the handes of the phitttines
and into the handes of the Kynge of Moa /
which foughtagayntthem.ahen ther crred
vnto the Lorde and faye: we haue lynned /
becaule we haue kozcaßenthe Lorde haue
lerued Baalim and àdharoth. But now de⸗
Apuer vs out of the handes or dime enempes
Cand we will ferue the. And d Londelent Fee


jvobaal* Badan. g ephthah / and Samuel / c
bots peſpuered pou oute of the handes of youre


enemyes on euetyſpde / lo that ye dwelled W
out feate. and foꝛ aſlthat whe vou law that
Nahas the kyng ol p childꝛen ol Ammon cã /
againſt vou / ye layde vnto me: not to / a kyng
Mali raigne duer vs / whe pet 5 Lozde youre
God was youre Kprg How therloze bekolde
the Eynge whom pe haue cholen and whom
ve haue delired:ſe / the Loꝛde hath geuen pou
a ynge Ch that pe wolde keare the Loꝛde
‘eleruchim a heare his voyce a not ditobexe
the mouth of the Loꝛde: and that both pe and
the Beng that raygneth ouer pou moive fos
om the Lojte poure Cod Foꝛ ve ve Mall not
‘Herken vnto the bopce of the Lozde but chall
dilohepe 5 Loꝛdes mouth:then hall phande
the Loid be vpon pou ¢ on peure fathers.
Pow allo ſtande a le this Are thing which
the Loꝛde will do befoze volure eves ais it not


dDnom whetcherueſt. And pet fozall / will


call onto the Londe / and he Wail fende thun⸗
der andrayne. Wherbye perceaue a bnder⸗
ande: how that poure wyckedneg is great
which ve haue done in the lyght of the Loꝛde


in al king vou a Benge, And when Damuel B.


i. Kynges.


receaued 7


galled onto f L onde the Lomde ſent thunder
and ra pne the lame dape. Ind al the people
keated the Loꝛde and Samuel excedynglipe.


Chen lapde all ß peopie vnto damuei:pꝛaye


£02 thy feruantes vnto the L ode thy God / ß
we dye not:foz we haue ĩynned in gikyng vs
a hynge / belpde all ẽcynnes that euer we did.
a ee 0 4 E e
not. And thou u wyc⸗
kedneſſe yet de parte not krö the Lorde in any
cafe, But lerue hym wyth all poure herteg.
Hether curneve alter vayne thynacs wypch
cãnot delxuer vou / fo thep are but vanitics.
But the Lorde wyll not kozſaze his people /
becaule of bps great names fake :becaule
the Lozde hath begone to make vou hys


Lb


aaa


YW.


ve Gur Lhalyy


people. Mozecuer Ged fogbyode 5 J chulde Mery. Jr pice


aled the u öde


fynne agaynſt the Loꝛde in leuyng * iO mast gt.


foz vou and to theme vou the good and
wape. Onlye feare vou the Loꝛde and lerue
truly with all youre hertd: fo le he hath
one great thinges Foz you. But ¢ pt pe Mall
do wyckedlpe: then chan bothe ye and voure
Ayng therto perpihe. — 2
ies are lmytten off
e ee er onsets
ewed Fe Samael that he chu not rarüne.
Che. m. Chapter.
Aul was as a chylde of a pere olde /
when be begã to rargne. And whe
he had rapgned two peres duer z f=
ack rael / he chofe bem thze thouland
men out ot Itrael. & wo thouſand were with
Saul in Pachmas and mount Bethel / and


‘athoufande wyth Jonathas in Gabaahe⸗


mamin And p ret of p people be lent euer!
man to his awne houle. And onathas due
phililtnies in an holde theyhad ing abaah /
it came to the Philittines cares. And Saul
cauledthe trompet to be blowenthozot out
all the land lapifig: let the Ebꝛewes heare.
And all Ftrael beard ape how § Saul had
‘Deftroped an holde ofthe Philickimes / how
6 Ilrael cancke onto 5 Phſlictines. andall
“the people eryed after Saul to Galgal.
Then Phtlictines geathered the lelues
to geather to Evatt with Alrgel / chirtie thou⸗
land charettes ¢ Sire thoulande hozſe men


with other people lyne p * land by p leis fine ai. x. l.


in multitude s came bp¢ pitched in Mach⸗ B
mas eaſtwarde from Pethauen. And whẽ 8
men of Itrael Cato thé te lues in a ftrapte / $
8 the people were accombꝛed / they hidd th
lelues in caues / in pꝛeup holes / in tockes/
dennes a pittes. And the E bzues went ouer
Joꝛdan bnto the land of & ad e Galaad. But
‘Saul was pet in Galgal / and all p people


F koldwenhim were ackonped. Andhetatped. neg. r. u.


Leuen daxes / as Samuck*han appoynted.
ut Damuel camenot toGslgal/es people
od Thateres


Saul is reiett.


Che. xv. Chapter.

en fapde Samuel vnto Saul:
oꝛde kent me to anoynt d Kynge
ower his people Ilrael. Now therz
2 fore obeve thou the bovce of the
woꝛdes of the Loꝛde. Thus lapth the Loꝛde
okhoſtes: J haue called to remembzaunce ?
exo. rut. e. which amaleck did to IAlrael how they lave
in wayte koꝛ them in the wape/ as they came
out of Egypte . Pow therkoꝛe go a tmpte the
Amaleckites /a only deltrope ve all that per⸗
tapnech onto thẽ / a le thou haue no cõpaavõ
on thẽ. But dap bothe man a womã / infant
elucklyng / e oxe / chepe / camell &a e.
And Saul tolde te the people / ¢nombzed
them in Celaim two hundꝛed thoufand koote
men / e ten thouland inẽ or Juda And Saul
came vnto a cytie of 6 Amaleckitz /a kought

in a balere But Saul card vnto che Reni

go a depatte and gett ve doune fro among
Amaleckiites lette 4 deltrope vou with ther
fo2 ve themed metcy wyth Icrael when ther
came outof Egypt. and ß Kenites departed

fromamonge the Amaleckites.

And Saul flue the Amaleckites fd He-
ulla to Sur that lyeth befoze Eg ypt /  toke
Agag the Ayng vethe Amaleckites a lxue / a
btterive delkroped all the people wich F edge
ok the werde. But Saul a che people tpa⸗
reda gag / and ther lett ol the Wepe and of the


Chat is / the Oven and att thynges and the lambes a all


i. Samuel.


heen ok the trybes ok Itrael? Andthe Lorde
anoynted the Kynge duer Icrael. And then s
Loꝛd tent the on a tournee / z lapde vntoß /
lethat thou ptteripe deſtropethole kynners /
the Amaleckites Akraht agapnſt chem vn⸗
till ye haue vtterlpe beſtroyẽd the And wher⸗ E
foꝛe halt chou now not obe ed the vopce of &
oꝛde: But dydeſt turne tothe prave a halt
wꝛouight wickednelee in d lyghtof F Loz?
And Saul ſarde onto Samuel: J haue
obevedthe voyce ol the Loꝛde / and went the
wape which § Loꝛdlent me / x haue bꝛought
Agag the Eynge ofthe Jmaleckites. And


- bauebtterive dectroped 7 Amaleckitcs. And


the people toke of thecpoyle / chepe / oren /
the chekeſt ok the thynges which uld haue
bene deſtroyed / to offer onto p Lozd thy God
In Galgal Chen ſard Samuel:hath R Loꝛd
as great pleature in burnt lacrikpres a ofte-


rynges / as he hath that thou chuldeſt obeye .

his dopce Beholde / to obaye is betterihen aa

olteryng / and to geue heade is better then $ urs han
we


katt ot rammes. Foꝛ rebellpoulnege is as
lynne of witchcrafte / a ſtoburnelle is wit


Dauid is


wier come W me to the offe


Galgal. Andthen Samuel departed to Ka⸗
math. And Saul went home to his houle to
Gabaah Saul But Samuel came nomoa⸗
tetole Saul vntyll $ dape ok his deech. He⸗
uerthelee Damuel mourned ko: Saul /be⸗
cauſe the Loꝛde repented that he had made
him Ayng ouer Ilrael.
CDauſd is annopited Apng: and rectaueth the holy
gook. An cuell lpꝛete cometh vpon Saul which deo
parteth when Dauid plapety.
Che. rvi Chapter.
Hi J Ldthen the Lord tayve bnto Sa⸗
(SAV) mueß Howiöge wile thou mourne
(tor Soaul teping zhane cad hom
Sjatoave fro rapgnyng ouer Flrael?
i one with opntmét / and come: J will
lende che to lat p Bethlehemite / to Thaue
ſpicdnie a Kynge amonge hys ſonnes. But
Samuel antwered: how Mall J goo? Foz
Saul Hail heare it ¢ well hell me; Andehe
Loꝛdlarde: Take anbepter with the / e lape
thou goeſt to offerto d L070. And calle Flak
tothe olteryng / a J wont ew the what chou
Walt do And thou ſhalt anoynthim whom 3
faye onto che. And Samuel dyd as the Lord
bad hum. And when he came to Bethlehem /
mince Sek
‘ and tapde: Betoken 60 e
B peace: andhe ſarde pee / to am kame tact:
ine ker vnto the Loꝛde. Clenle poure ſelues and
Andhe purified


i. Aynges,


anoynted Tr.


Saul / a v an euell ſpꝛete Cent of 5 Lob / ve⸗ b. Chis cucit
Fedbim Chen lapde his leruaũtes onto him: Peete(as tome
“sBebolve/ an euell fp2ete Cent of God beßerh FP seems
the/lett oure Lorde therkoze cömaunde bps got ambiceen


leruauntes to ſeke a man that is a connyng on deleze of hoo


plaper tan harpe. And then when the eucit noure- where
Spyetefent of Godſcometh opon the ſchache wud be aur
ware playe wil bade a thou walt be cated Payne gona
Bnd Saul larde vntohis tevuadites:feke me n wen detye
aman chat can well plape/ and bzyng him to deo ae
me. Chen ankweredane oehps feruauntes a ain de gen
bande Sebolde Abauelene a konne ok Fat fees up
$ Bechlehemite / chat ran plave vpon initru- thynge because
mentes / and is an actyue felowe and a man be couloc nor
Of warre and prudent a well made / and the be un 10 1
Lobes wu bymt (wherbpon Hau tent wuhengerand
mellengerg onto Flat a lapde:ſende me Da⸗ vered wyh
uldchpronne which is with the chepe. And woodnelle⸗be.
lat toke an ade ladẽ with bꝛeed / anda flac⸗ net. rvufc.
of topic, G aurdde and len the br Wa- dun hu to be
uidhis tonne vnto Saul. and Dauid went bexed vecaute
to Saul a came bekoꝛe him / c he loued hym be dad foztane
herp well / co that he was made hys harnel⸗ ib Lozde and
‘bearer. And Haul fent oe hehe ten lett commande
‘Dawid remapne with me / koꝛ he hath kounde menteg,
fauourinmytrght. And when the tprete ok
God came hps Saul/ Baud tete anharpe
and plaxed with his hande / a lo Saul was
relrelhed anddidamend and the euelllpꝛete


departed from him.


bet veattesand that was good / and wolde not deſtrope the. people a obeyedtheir vorce. Büt now take cure
cattcllthatwee But all that was nought worth a faggve/ awape my tynne / a turne agapne wyth me / dirs


lat a his Connes/ & bad thé to the oleryng. e battell of the zo bil meg agapn te
And wh they were come / he loked on Ellab kal Bann ber ene 7 ema
Flardeß Kode anopatedis befoze him But Sche.roy.Chapter.
Lord faye bnto Spamucl:loke not on bis ePhiitines geatheredtheir hos,
facpornoz on the bi ok hig ature / Foz eto battell) ¢came to gether to


gore" chat thepdeltroreddtteripe. Chencamethe thatymape wozthipthe Code. Then Capde coos tam |
woꝛde ok the Loꝛde vnto . faping sit 8 a dende aretha 8 9 5 18 chere
axepenteth me aue made Saul hung. e:toꝛ thouhaſt caſt a pddynge OF ai 4 5 &
a. ante Gort ele ee eae erie aunt net parfo7- Hod, A therfore the Lope hath °catt awape dani F Fhaucrefuseohim. Becaule it is not aß ma Fey Koy; oroh in Juda and ppfched be⸗
pentaunceof med my commaundementes / wherkoꝛe Sa the allo / f thou Halt not be Rynge ouer JN 5 boing beh. Forman lonech on the out ward appe⸗ lwene Sococh and Azehab/inthe
God in one mel was euell apatde ecrped vnto ) Woz reel. And as Samuel turned to go awaße / ey ss to taunce but che Lorde beholdech the harte. ende or Bonum: And Saulandehe men ol
1p the chaun + ati urght, And Soamuctrote eripe (ko mete he caught the lappe of his coote/andit rent ae ache Cheng at calledabinadabe made hini come toa came and prtchedin Ockevale/¢ put
dende, And e Baul in § moznyng. Andit was tolde Ba- Chen Spamucltaydethe Lome bath rene § hen sue before Spaniel. Andhe fapdenetherbath $ them kelues in grape to kpaht agarnſt the
theatfeccon oe fuel that Saul wa come to Carmel and Wpngbome oe Feral fromthe this dape / and dier dae. Lopde cholen this. Chen at made Samah Pbilittines. Andthe wbilittines cove on un
mercp a of fae had let him bpa piller or teitiphe:. And was 5 Nutr. come / and he lãpde:nether pet hath 6 Loꝛde hyil on the one lde / a glrael ode on an hyll
Sherlp joue © furned and departed and gone to Galgall. cholen hem. Chen made Flat feuen of bys on ß other lye, ka baleve betwene the. And
Seien e And hen Samuel was come ta Saif fonnes come bekoze Samuel. And Sanuiel then came a mä ¢ trode in che myddes / out ol
Sotbe che terse Saul fappe bntohim: Wiettenbe thou inche tarde the Lowe hachcholen nene ofthete, 6 tetes ofthe Pommes named @oltath/of
ptuce attribute Lozde. J haue done the commauridement of Then ſarde Samuelto Icat: are here au Seth tyre cub pes a an baobzeneth longe (
tetodon at op the Lade And Samuel antwered: what thy chploz¢? and he capde: the youngeſt is yet had an helmet ofbzate bponbisheed / anda
nerbor ihrs che meanech then the bleatynae of the chepe tty behrnde Beholde he kepeth ) Mepe Chen boote ormarle about him. And d werghe of
che altern mene earcg / a the noyle ofthe xen which J Samuel fapde vnto Fat: lende s kette hem his coote or mapfe was kpue choulatmde Cp.
ar Angee and heare: And Haul tarde: they haue bꝛought 2 i fo2 we wyll not lytte downe / tyilhe be come les of bꝛalle. Andhe had hamege of bꝛalfe
of kurpes of re them krom the Amalechites . Foꝛ the people hither. And he kent a bzoughthem in Andhe bpd bis legges ea thiloe orbralle vpon bys
e une alo: gyavep the belt vrch Mbepe alm atthe oFen/ tag krone with gocdive eves and wellen, Moulbers.dnd b afte ofbistpere was ne
alt men £20 stotacrifyce vntothe K onde thy God. anothe uozedin taht, Andthen the Lande larde bp A weuers beame. Andhes Cpeareberd wered
fpraheof God. remnaumt we haue destroyed. Agag came vnto him delpcatelp. And agag scour. andanopnt him: foꝛ this is he. And Samuel bt.bundzedfphles of yzon. Ind ane bearzng
Gene vr a. But Samuel fade to Saul: ceate a let tapde:truly 8 bitternesie or deeth cometh on. toke che bozne wyth the opntment and an a ylde went betoze him. i
b.@obe lpttell me tenithe whatthe Loꝛde hach lapde tome And Samuel fayd-As ey Cwerdehath made anopnted him in the pꝛelens or his bzethzen. _ Andbe Code g called nto che holte of Fe
babe a to tech s rgb. Arwhe fade bntohym fare on, wem chilneletie fo Wall thy mother bechel⸗ And che kpuite ofthe Lorde came pon War Sale Cae te nt ae react 8 ve
nought bphim And Samuel faye when thou walk’ lytie delete amöge other wemen. Indio Samuel e yen. Sie Samuel ou Philtamee 25 1 10 rs pa 1955


flee, tnehmneawnetyahe/makthounot made ? hewed Agag in peaces befoze the 1 — . n —— — 1 :


Dauid agayntt


It ts the ma⸗
foe ebeptacue COED
ep Lac
monep/ o bo⸗ bal btyng w the
somurdaples aye eripe in the moꝛnyng

er therfore 18
Sau cOmaunt
ded ta redea⸗


i. Samuel.


he be able to kyaht with me ato beate me / done tothe manthat beateth him And Eliab
Hien wewellbe peureveruauties. But vt J “his eldest bꝛotherhearde when yetpake vn⸗
can ouet come hym and beate hym: then pe to ß men a was angrie with Dauid ¢ ſapde:
halbe owe leruauntes and lerue vs. And ß why cameſt thou ãwaxe / a with whom halt


Bohllüime tapde Jhaue defyed d hott of J- chou lelte thole kewe Mepe ing wildernelle⸗


frael this da xe geue me a man a lett vs fight A knowe thy pꝛrde and the malyce ok thyne
: 725 when Sa Kall Itrael hearde herte /g thou art come to ſe the battell. And
worzes ok 5 Phtirckine cher were dil⸗ Mautdantwered wat haus Z now done-is.
Zeh andgreatlip akraped Ind this Da⸗ thereany moare laue a wodẽ : And depar⸗
und wag the Tonne of an Ephꝛathite ot Beth⸗ ted krã by him into another krante / ¢ cpake
ie a named an en data sos fe 558 moo pes or ae the people ant wered
lonnes. And was an olde man in 0 a =
Saul amonge d people. Anothe chꝛe eldeſt And they p hearde the woꝛdes which Da⸗
fonnes o€ Fat wet o kolowed Saul to bat⸗ ud cane reherled
tell. nd the names ok his thꝛe formes p wet cauſed hym to be fett. And Pauid larde to
to battell / were: Eliab the eideſt / a the nert Saul: Lett nomannes hert faplebym be⸗
to him Abinadab / ache thzid Damah /e Ba caule ol him. chy ceruauit wyll go ¢
uid was ö poungelt And whe the thꝛe eldelt with this Phiniſtine. And Saul fapde to Ba
were gone alter Sau / wauld went andde⸗ uidagapne thor art not able to go vnto this
parted from Saul / to tene his fathers chepe tliſtine / to kyght with bym. Foꝛ thou art
at Bethlehem. And the Philittine cam koꝛth but a ladd / c he hathe bene a man of warre
euerymo:nyng and euenynge / a contynued oe vag chene 225 cares —
. 0 1 epthys
Jr. atta vnto Daum his ſonne:take Mepe/therecamea Lrõ elikewite a Beare
$02 1 this Epha of parched cone / and tone a pepe out ok the locke. And g wee
gthele ten ſoues / a runne to the hoſte / to chr out akterhim a emote him / and tote it out ot
bethzen. Ind carpe chele ten frewe cheles his mouthe. And when be arole agarntt me
vnto che captarne / and lobe how thy bꝛethzẽ im bythe bearde andlmote him a
fare / let ce men 8. And Saul due him. Foz bothea L von and alto a Beare
0
2098 n th iſtines. And Ba⸗ cyled Phiitine chalbe as one of thẽ / oz hrs
ec lette che rärlyng on the holte neee Lande ade


abe mozeouer / the
hepe with a keper /a tote and wet / as Flat Walid tp i —


had cSmaundenbim/andcame where p holt Ipuered me out ok the hades ok


mepishee Cape. And ß botte was goring duk in avape/ oute of ö hädes of § Peare be chan denruer


thits plede
ges.


t me alto dute A eo age pen
e felues in arape / the one en larde Saul aut

agapndt Pocher hen aul Puc panper be wich the. And Saul put brs rapmet ops

from him / vnto the handes of the keper or Mauid / and put an helmet ofbzatle ops bys

vellels / k ranne into che holte a came efalu- heede / and put a coote ot maple bpon hym / ¢

tedhys bꝛethzs. And as he talned wich them: grꝛde Waud w hrs awne lwerde pon his

Veholde there ſtode a ma inthemiddes So⸗ rapment Andhe allaxed toge /fozbe neuer

Hath the Phililtme byname/ofSeth/wbtch. prouedit. Chen tayoe Dawid bnto Saul

came outo€ the a raye of d Philittines/and can not go in thete / toꝛ haue not bene weed

{pate of che maner aboue reherled /? Dauld terto/and put chem of him a tobe bis ſtalle

bearde it. Andall $ men oFFlracl / wb cher inhishande a chote him Fpue lmothe ones

S e de bina foe euoarege
Ander 067 5 Bele

Degech nemme a come toit / euen to hande / S went tothe Pyilldine.

deuxle Fraclis he come Andtohym z bea⸗ as

tech hrin wyll che kyng geue great ryches

wyll geue hym bys daughter cherto: ve and

make wle Fre in Ffracl.

Eye che men that fone


@thowted inthe battell; Foz Ikrael ¢ the


befoze Saul würch


el were in ocke bath thy feruatit Layne. And this vncircum⸗ 6


Goliath 2


auid and


heed
the hoſte or the Philiſtines this dave vnto d


And s Philiſtine came a due nere to Da⸗
uid / with the mang bare a (Hilde beloze him.
And whe $ Philictine loked ¢ lawe Dauid:
he difpapned him / ko he was but a ladd / rou⸗
de and goodlxe to loke vpon. Andthe Phili⸗

F tine tapde vnto Wauid: ami a dogg / S chou
comeſt to me wyth a ſtatfe? Nhe curled Da⸗
Zuid in che name ok hig Gordes. And he lapde


to Dauid: come to me and 3 well geue thy | (s


al nto the kowles of the apꝛe / and to the
Res ofthe kelde. Chen lard Baud to the


i. Kynges.


Jonathas.


hande. And Saul faye to him: whole l

art thou / thou lad and Dauid moe
Conne of the feruaunt Arai § Bethlehemite.
Cape bande petwene Dawid 2 Fortathas. Saut gos


theaboute te fee Baud Dauid
the daughter of Saul. LEN eee


of


Pyiliſtine:thou comet to me with atwerde h.


à lpeare a a thilde: But I come to the in the
name of ye Loꝛde of boites/ the God ol the
holte of Atrael whom thou batt rapled vpon.


to his fat
bound the


Chis dave tail the Loꝛde delpuer the into math


mphande / A call (nipte the and take thyne
krom che / à J wyll geue the navratee of


Lowwles of the apze to the beattes of p erth /
and allche worde Wall knowe / chat there is
a Godin FZract And all this congregacyon
‘Shall knowe / that the Loꝛde laueth not with
the lwerde and (peare· Foz the battell is the
Londes /e he thal geue pou into dure hades.

And whe the Phililtene avofe a came and


m /a
ee


nid w.


due npe vnto Baud. Dauidhaſted a ranne J.


in arape eur agaynſt ) Philictine And Daz
utd put bis bande in his poke and toe out a


Klone andllangeit / and tmote the Philiſtine


In bis kozheed twatthe ſtone toncke intohrs Da


fozbeed/ abe kelle grouelyng to the erch. Ind
fo Dawid ouer came the Philittine wrih a
Ang aa ſtone / and smote the Philiſtine and
Que him. and becaule Dauid hadno fwerde
in his hande / he ranne ¢ ſtode pon the Phi⸗
Udine / e toke his l werde a dꝛue it out olhys
Wetheſ due him and cutte of bys heed ther⸗
with. And whe the Philiſtines ſawe 5 their
champion was deb cheplled. and z men ot
jfracl and of Juda arofe g chowted and ko⸗
owed after the Phiuiſtineg until hey came
to the valexe and onto the gates of Aharon.
And the Philistines felidowne decd by the
wape/ſeuen onto Seth a Anaron. Andthen
e
e es & robbed their kentes.

And Baud toke the beed of the Phiuũtne a


brought it to Jerufalem: this ar⸗
— bis ea But he put his ar⸗ fand


he Saul taw Waid go ft ft
bn nde ended Somer gen
Ad aber and ac, ſonne is this lad:
Anda bner ant wered / as 5 ſoule


ought bym befoze
the Philitine in his


utd bis ten thoufande. Chen was Saul
ercedpng wꝛoth gc p faving dilplealed ome
be fapo:thep haue alcrybed vnto aut ten
whouland / to me buta thouland / a what cd
he moze haue laue the fiyngdome: wherkoꝛe
Saul loned on fyoe of Dauin frog dape foꝛ⸗


Cri.


ty


ward Andit happened on $ mozow/thatehe @


Seucll tpꝛete Cent of Goo came vpon Saul /


a. The comen


fothat be propbetvenin the myddes of he end Gheeuel
oue. And Dawidplaped on § inckrumkt wipe or che
is hade as he was daplye wont. And Daul 50.0 which .
baba fpeare ints bende e hourde tenen dehnen
Vault dunn ne J walle. But vet ey


el (Lapel he)


auld auopded out oFbys pretence two ty-Fo2 Fr pte oF


mes. Kon Saul wasa fearde of Waid / be- God, f02 bps
tauſe the Coꝛd was with him / a was iber. lerupce: Ben⸗


e (as the


feo ftom Sau Andtyen daun put Dautd ihe) e


bim a made hem a captapne oncrathou-es


nell lpꝛelce da


Ahe went out and inbefoze the people. allo their ker⸗


And Dawid was wyle in all that he tone in ce te Goon
banne/and the Horde was ühim aoberkore z dei
whẽ Daullaw 6 be was fo excedyng wyle / ehen In
be was afraid ofbim, But ali gtrael g Juda the thyꝛd Co


loued Baud / becauſe he went ee out and in m.


e / theĩceccc.
a.


befoze the chen larde Haul to Pauid. Be- Luce,
doddempeldeſk daughter Berbers pfl e


geue che to wyle. Oni plape che ma a fight’.


out before the


che Lo20{ batelies Foz aut choughe mpne dean betes


rand rule the
4 Beauline/


bine be opobpm /tut the babe kor s Met


uttnes. And Dauid antwered Saul⸗
8 what


bo
pea


‘i
a watre g


Dad,


i.


~ @* what an F274 whatis mplife os the kpnred
b. Begum. irt deu — Ilrgel / 2 J chulde be tonne


Find
lemeth it to vou a lyght thrng to be kung th


in lawto the Beng: Howbeit when b tyme
was come p Merob pauls daughter Hula
haue bene geuẽ to Dauid / he was geuẽ vn⸗
to Adztel a Meholothite / to wre. How be
it Wichol au is daughter loued Baud.
And when it was chewed Sau: the thynge
plealedhim well. Andhe tapde: 3 well geue
5 that the maye be atnare tobym / to
zung the hande of the Phtligines ops hum.
And pout fayde to auld: thou chalt ths
dave be my fonne in lawagayne.dnd Saul
cOmaunded his feruatites/ to comen W Da⸗
wid lecretiye a fave: Beholde the kyng hach
a kauoure to the / and all hrs feruatites louẽ
che / be therkoꝛe the kynges tonne in lawe.
And Sauls feruaumte Cpatie thole wordt
eaves of Dauid. But Dauid anlwered:


fonne in lawe / when Jama pooꝛe man a of
malle reputacpon? and Sauls ſeruauntꝭ
tolde him agapne fapinge:of chrs maner an
Cweren Dauld. Chen kapde Saulchis wile
tape to Bauid:the hyng carẽth for no nother
dowzpe but ko an hädzed foꝛelnynnes ol che
obritttines / o be abucged of ö Kynges ene⸗
mies, for Daul thought to make auld
fall La handes ofthe Philittines. Chen
bis leruaũtes tolde Wauid thele wozdes / ait
plealed Dauid well to be 5 hynges tonne in


Glawe And thoztive alter Bauid grole ad hrs


men / a went / z Aue ofthe Philiſtines / two
hundꝛed men /e bought their kozelnvynnes
g latilt ved the R yng cherokto behis tonne in
lawe Andlo Saul gauehim Micholhys


„umz. c. daughter to wyke. And when Saul lawe g


18e. tha


onderſtode how thatthe 107d was with Da
ud / k that Bichobhis daughter loued hem /
he was the moare atrayed of Dauld and he
came autos enemype ko euer. And when S
Philiſtines went outto warte Aauid beha⸗
ned him felfe wylelper chen all P teruauntg
ol Saul: fo 6 his name was moche let bye,
aul commaundeth to cle Baud. ichen p.
se faucth bpm 2227 5 keate /s deccaueth die
father. Baul is alfo amonge the pꝛophetes.
¶ Che. xix. Chapter.
en Saul comuned wyth;
a8 bys lonne / a wich all bis ter⸗
hj urauntes chat ther uid ken as
Au“ But zonathas Sauls fonne
bad a great fauoureto Wauid / A tole Wa-
‘nidtaping: Saul my father gothe about to
flee the. Now therfoze take bene to thy telte,


Samuel,


And Jonathas tpakic the beſt of Baud
vnto Saulhis father e layde onto him: lett
not the kyng lynne age nt his leruaũt Da
ud / ko he bath not lynried aga ynſt che a his
wozkes areto the warde very good. Korhe


dyd put his lyfe ; in his hande a due the Pht⸗ chat n


Ultine / ache Lo de gau a great bpctorpe to daun


all Alrael. Andthon tawelt it / a thou retop⸗
kedelt / wherfoze then une chou kme
agarnit innocent bloune / c dee auid foz
nought: And Sautharkenes entoth e popce


or Fonathas and tware:as cru as f Conde


lpũech / he hall not de. hen Zonatkes cate
led Daum ¢ chewed him att tote wo des (c
bzoughthimto Saul and he was in hig pre
tens as in tymes pat. .
And the warrebeganagarne / and Wautd
wet out a kought wich the Jhilictines a due
a great daughter / a put them to lipght. And
eeuell (pzete of the Lom was bpon Saul
at he lat in his houle hauing a Jaueleng in
his bande / a Dauid played with hes hande.
And Saul entended to narle Dauid to the
walle with the J auelyng: But Dauid rydde
hymlelke out of Sauls pꝛelens ¢ he lmote
the Cpeare into the walle. But Dauid fed €
faucdbim (elf chat fame nyabt.chen Saul
fent meflengers bntowauids houte/to wat⸗
ehem ate dey bymin the moꝛnynge. But
ichol his wife tolde it him lay
aue not thy lelk this nyghte / to mozc dz How
art a deed man. And fo Michal lett D nud
doune thoꝛou a wyndow / J e we, and Hed
Klauedhim ſelk. Andthen che coke en ma⸗
ge a lapedit in p bed / d put a plum tufted
with goates hearre vnder the heed ot it / l co⸗
uered it with a cloche. and when Saul ent
meflengers to fetch Baud / ſhe lade that he
was lycke: Chen Saul len the medengers
tole Mauid laying : bꝛynge him to me bed a
all / chat he mare be dayne. And when z mets
fengers were come in: Beholde there lape an
mage in the bed / with a pyllow of gootes
earre vnder the beed of it. Then lard Saut
to Wichol: why haſtthou mocked me io / and
fent awaxe mene enemy that he is elcaped:
And Michol ancwered Saul: he ſayde on⸗
to mẽ / let me go / oꝛ elles J well Rll B. And
co Dauid fied and elcaped and went to Sas
muel to Ramath ¢ tolde him all that Saul
had done tobim.aAndhe/and Samuel went
and dwelt in Hatoth.
Andit was tolde Saul laping: Behode D
Dauidig at Maioth in Ramath then Saul
fent mellengers to fett Dauid And whe


ou :


prance 48
eric aD:


eae

t vnto the and thew tt the / the

elo vnto Jonathag. And in ipke
well tothe warde pleate my fac
wyll chew the and lende theawape/
mapé go in peace. And the Loꝛde


10


ey 1
fain cOpenpcot propbettes ee e
and Hammel ttandpng falt by the the Cprete pen
ol God kel spon the meflengers of Saul dn B
ther pꝛopheixed to. Ind when it was tolde warnen
Saul / he tent other mellengert / See *


be tymes kabrde in come lecret place a hrde
thy kelte. And J wyll go out ¢ Hande be my
father in the elde where thou art / a well co⸗
men wyth my father of the / and yt I can par⸗
ceaue dught 4 w ñ telle.

cs f Zhaue
foun


t, Beg xrpt.c. me / xcoꝛ he is thechylde ol deeth.
b. Reg xh. .


chap. c.


kounde kauoure in thyne eres lett me me go
Kle mp bzotger. And cherkozehe cometh not

g bntotye table ofthe Bong Chen was Sau
wich Fonathas g laxde vntohim: O


krowarde and rebellpous thynkelt thou J batt th


knowe nothow thou batt cholen d tonne of
vnto thine awne rebuke vntoß rebu⸗

e and chame ot thy mother. Fan as lunge as
che konne of lat ipucth vpon the erth chou
chalt not be ſtabyiyched / noꝛ vet thy kyng⸗
dome / whertoꝛe now lende and kett hem bute


his father


beth

D it was btterlpe determ̃yned ok bps father
to lle Dauld. And lo Jonathas arote fd 8
table in a. great anger a dyd eate no meate
the leconde dave of toe moneth koꝛ he was
cop toꝛ Daud / vecaule his father had done
him chame. On the next moꝛnyng Jonathas
went owt into the kelde / at che time apornted
with Dauid / and a lptle lad with him. Andhe
ſapde vnto the boxe aunne a tynde out myne
arowes which J wote. And as the bope ran /
G be Mote an arom beponde him. And whe the
lad was come to p place whether Fonothas
had thot the arow / Jonathas cryed atterhim
Flapde:che arow is beyonde d. Ano he cryed
Alter che lad halte / make (pede and fade not
HH And Jonathas lad geathered vp d arow
and came ko his maſter. But the lad wilt no⸗
thyng of che matter: Only Jonathas ¢ Da.
uid Wit it. Chen Fonathas gauc his wepãs
vntothe Lad ¢fapde onto him: go andcarxe
thẽ to the towne. And as lone as the lad was
gone / Dauid arote out ofa place chat was
dtowarde the fouth and fell on his kace to che
grounde a bowed hym telt the tymes. And
they kyled ether other and wepte to gether /
Dauid moare abundantipe. And Jona⸗


but
Abou in this chag faye to Wauid:go in peace which; we
cwome b


haue othe ol bs in the name of che

Lozdlaping:ehe 1020 be betwene the a me
and betwene thy fede amyne loꝛ euer. And
he roale a departed. Ind Lonathas went in⸗
tothe towne. ‘


EeWanin flecth tp to Pop te Ahimelech the preak,
getteth: Fee Ae
that with 8 cleane conueped lye. After be flyeth ta
yng Achs / and thore kapneth hm kelte to be mad.
8 Che. rxi chapter.
hen came Baud to Nod to Ihi⸗
ch the pꝛealt: Ind Ahtmelech
was attonied atis comyng ¢ lapde
ono him ohr cameckchonchpkelt
alone Ino man with the? And Bauid larde
to Abimelech che pꝛealt che kyng bath com
maunded me todo a certen thenge and larde


i. Samuel.


‘onto me / let no man knowe where aboute q
lende and what g haue cõmaunded the to dõ.
And therkoꝛe I haue appoynted my ſeruaũ⸗
tes to koche andloche places. Andnow what
it thou under thyne bande? geue me fpue
loues of bꝛed 07 what comech to bande.

And the pꝛeaſt ant wered Dauid and lage:
there is no comen bꝛed vnder myne hande
but there is halowed b2ed / t d goung men
had abſtained only from wemen And Baud G
ant wered the pꝛeaſt and layde vnto him: ol a
truthe wemen hath benelocked vp krom vs
about a thze dapes / when J cam out: and »


krom


Hs


duch bimcbecantety
Groped of Saul. Abit
che. xxij chapter.
And


bean de at were tanen noten


d Vauid departedthences etca⸗
ped / and came vnto che caue Sdol⸗
Cliani. sober bis beethze & all his faz
Athers houle hearde it / they wet thi⸗
tohrm. Andthere geathered vnto hym

all men chat were in combꝛaunce and in dett
e troubled in their hertes / and he be came a
capta ne ouer thé. Andthere were with him
vpon a Foure hundꝛed men. And Dau wee
thence to Mazphah in the lande ol Moab /
and lapde vnto the Ayngelot Moab: et mp
father and mother J pꝛaye che / haue their
abpornge with pou/tpll J knowe what Gop
wylldo Wme. and he lefte the wrth ö kyng
ol Moab / an chey dwelt W him all p whple
that Dawid kepte him lelfe in holdes. And §
prophet Gad lade vnto D auid: a bide not in
caſtelles / but departe a go to the land ol Ju⸗
da. Chen Batnddeparted and came into the
kozeſthhareth. And Haul hearde ok it: ko: Sg
uud was know ¢ allo the men p were wyth
him, Andas Saul fattin Gabaah vnder a
groue bps ahe bancke w bys ſpeare in hrs


36 bade a all bys men about him / he lade vnto


bis ſeruaũtꝭ p ſtode about him deareg pray
volt / you Conn cot z emint: will p fonne ot a lat
allo geue euerp one of vou feldda vineyardẽ /
make vou all captapnes ouer thoulandes
and ouer hundꝛedes: chat ve haue all conlpi⸗


een · red agapnſt me / co that there is none of pou
ar ae that? openeth mne eare / in to moche § mp


fonne hath made a bonde wyth the fonne ol
lat / nether iz there anpol vou that mour⸗
neth ko me oz ſheweth icin mpne eare:becau
femp lonne bath let vp my leruaũt to lve a⸗
wapteagainſt me / as it appeareth this daxe.
Thenantwered chen enen ot which
had che ouer lyght of the feruatites ol Saut
andlapde: J lam the forme of {lat / when he
cam to ob / co Ahimelech tye tonne of Ahi
tob / which afiied councell ok che Loꝛde foz
hum a gaue him vitarles / and the Cwerde ol
Soltach the Philiſtine alto. Then the ang
Cent to calle Ahimelech the peat the tonne
ol Ahitob / ¢ all his fathers houtethatis
tape / pzeattes that were in Hob. Andthen
Ccam ail tothe Byng. And Saul farde:heare
thou lonne of Abitob . And he farde: here J
amm Lom. Chen farde Saul to hum:
haue pe contpiredagaynſt me / thou and the
forme ok Flat / in io moche § thou bat geuen
him prtarle ¢ ac werde /a haltacked councell
ot God Coz him / chat he Wulde arpte agaynſt
me ale awapte as it is come to palle thys
dape. And Ahimelech anlwered the kung and
larde: who tg fo kapthkull among all chy ter
uauntes as Dauid etherto g Rynges tone
in law / and gothe at thy bꝛddyng and is had
inhonoure im thyne boule: haue this dare
begöne yt to ac ke coficell of Gd kor him:


he bor


God koꝛbyd that from me: let not the beng
put loche a thyng vnto his leruaunt ¢ on all
che houle of my father. oz thy leruaũt kno⸗
wetß nothing of allthis ether lede oꝛ moare.
But fo2 all that d kvng lade: thou halt
ſutelpe dre Ahimelech both thou and allthy
thy fathers houle. Chen tapde che kynge vn⸗
to his kote men that ſtode about him turne a
lep the pꝛeaſtes ok the Loꝛde both becaule
their bandts with Bauid / and becaule they
knewe when Dauid ſleed and hewed it not
tome. But the feruauntes ok ß kyng wolde
not moue their handes to runne vpon the
preattes of the Coꝛde. Chen lapde the unge
to Doeg:turne thou and impte the pꝛeaſtes.
And! Soeg the Edomite turned ¢ranne bps


dog kylleth lxxxv. i. Kynges. Preattes, Lxiij.
"ke


the pꝛeaſtes and fue that lame dave toute vt. Beg. vg.


fhoze and tue perlones that dyd weare eche
mana lynnen Ephod. and Nob the cptie ol d
1 he lmote with the edge ol d kwerde /

oth man and woman / chyidẽ and kucklyng /
with ore alle and eye. ‘

But vet one of the Connes of Ahimelech 8
fonne of Ahitob mamedAbtathar/etcaped a
flecd to Dauid and he wed Bauid how that
Saulhad arne the Loꝛdeg pꝛeaſtes. And
Daud lapde onto Abiathat: 4 wit itß Came
daye / b Woeg the Edomite which was there
wold tell tt Saul. And g am caule o€ $ deeth
of all S oules of thy fathers houle Abide w
me e keare notche that leketh chyloule / wall


ene mene / x w me chou chalt be in tauegard.


CDautd deluereth Reuah. Oe fleeth into the wyl⸗
dernes of 2 iph. he is comfoatedof Jonathas. d he
Ziphrens wolde haue betraped hin / but he küapelh.
Che xxiij. chapter.

Hen men tolde Wautd taping: Be⸗ A
old / che Philiſtines Fight agaynſt
etlan / a (pople the barnes. Chen
auido athed the Lodes adupte
fapinge: hall} goo and impte the Phililtt⸗
nes: Andthe Loide tapde vnto Bauld hen
emite the Philiſtines and laue Beilah Chen
ſarde Bauids me vnto himile we be arraped


is to here in Juda. nohat (hall we then be / when


we conte to Reilah / to $ hoſt ok the Phililti⸗


nes. Chen Vauidacked the Loꝛde agayne.


Bnd the Loꝛde antwered him and larde pp


andgoto Reilah / fo: g wyl delruer the hi⸗


liltmnes in to thyne barnes. tater:
Bnd fo Wauid andbis men went to Keilas
and fought with the hiliſtines / anddzaue
anne See catell um fine a eu daughter
ofthem, Indlo Dauidlauedß enhabtterg of
Beliah. And it chaũced whe Abtatharß lone
ok Khimelech fleedto Daumd to keilah that
an Ephod in his hande. 2
And it was tolde Saul / chat Dauid was
come to Beilah Chen tapde Saul: Sodhhath
belguenco en nme hend. Kordes oe


Saul agaynlt


aul
N erfoze to Abiathar d pꝛeaſt:
e


in that he ts come into a towne with

bares. And Saul callevalfthe people to
warre / toꝛ to go to Reilah to belege Bauid
This men. But Dauid had knowledge that
imagened mylchẽte agaynſt int

2
d. Chen faye Dauid / O 107d God
of Arai / thy leruaũt heareth that Saul is
about to come to eilah to deſtrore the cytie
kozmp lake: wyllche men of Keilah delpuer
me into his hand: oz wyll Saul come as the
ſeruaunt heareth fave? Lo:de God or Ilrael
tell thy leruaũt. And the Lozde lade: he wilt
come. Then lapde Baud: wyll d men of Ret⸗
Jal delpuerme and my men into the bande of
Sail: ch Lon lapde:ther will deliuer vou.
Chen Bauld a his men which were vpon
A. bi. hundꝛed / arole and departed out or Kei⸗
Jah a wet whether chauncedzaue them. And
en it was tole Saul / chat Dauid was
ficed from Retlah / he let d io iney alone. And
Dauld abode in the wyldemele in ſtrunge
holdes / a in a mountapne in the wylderneſſe
ol Ztph. Ind Saul Coughe him all bps lyke /
but Cod delpuered him not into his had. And
Dauidlaw § Saul was come out / to ſeke
hys lpke / whyle Dauid was inß wylderneſſe
ok Ziph in a thyckett. Ind Jonathas Sauls
Conne arote ¢ went to Dauid to the thycket /
trenghtedhim in God / a faydebnte bym:
teare not / loꝛ the hande ol Saul my father
all not tynde the / a thou halt be bing ouer
Ilrael and F mutt be next onto ß. And Daul
imp father therto knowech that it thalbe fo,


an 19 ft cone Aud ae geather


befozethe Lowe. And Dauid tarped ſtyllin
the thickett / andg onathas wẽt to his houle.
Chen came 5 Siphitesto Saul / to Ga-
baal faving: Pauidhydech hym lelke fat by
vs in ſtronge holdes that are ina thyckett in
the hyll ol Hachtlah on the ryght lde ol the
wylderneſle. Now therfozetys kynge / come
Downe with all the lult that thy Coute bath to
come. And oure parte thalbe to delpuer hym
into $ hades ofthe kyng. Chen ſarde Saul
Bleed are ye in the Loꝛde:toꝛ ve haue coms
pallpon onme. Go J pray pou and marke
moare dyirgẽtixe / z hnowe a ce his haunte /
were bys kote bath bene / 2 who bath tene
D himthere:koꝛ it is toldeme ß he is very ſotel.
Setherkoꝛe ¢ know allthe iourkyng places
where he lourketh / a come agayne tome w
the certentye / and wyll go with pou. And
then ykhe be inthe lãde / Nwyll hunt him out
with all the 0 5 Judd.
Ind ther arole ¢ wet to Ziph before Saul.
But auld and his men were in the welders
nelle ol Maon / in che wylde leide / on ð right
hand ofthe wyidernege.Foꝛ whẽ Saul was
gone witz his men toleke / it was tolde Da⸗


i, Samuel.
gates a


on the: and Ila 3
vm m maſter / koꝛhẽ is the Loꝛdes anoynted


ud. And cherfoze he went vnto a Rocke and
dtoelt in the wrloemelle of Maon. and whe
Saul hearde 8; he kolowed alter Bautd in⸗
tothe weldernene of Maon. And Saul and
his men wet on p one iyde ol $ mountapne /
and Dauid ¢ his men ons other. And Dauid
as a mã amated / made batt toget frõ Saul.
Foz Saul g his men had compaled Sauid z
his men rounde about / to take them.
Butthere cam a medenger to Saul tarig:
Hak thee come / toꝛ the Phiti are come
in F roue $ Id. tabefoze Daul returned fro
perlecutyng Bauid /a


liltnes AIndtberkoze $ place is called. Se rocie ren
en ICE rain.


ia Mahelecoth. Andthen Baud wet then
anddwelt in ſtrong hordes at Engadt.
EDanid Keith in to Engadiandthere hydeth him in
a caue. Sani cometh in thither to do pes eatcment
and Dawid cutteth of the boꝛder of pps mantel kor a
token / dut hurteth hym not. Dauidgothe out of the
caue after Saul und tpeaketh to him.
¶ Che. xxiitj. Chapter.
Saul was come agarne fd»
e Philiſtines / there were p tolde
im fapig : beholde / Dauid ig in p
wildernelſe orengadt gen Saul
tole the thouland cholen me out of all Ilra⸗


ella wetto fehe Dautd ehis me ing Rock. un.


where no thyng haunted but! wylde gootes.
Andhe cento flockes ol chepe by atwayes


2 in? un
lide where wag a caue And Saul wet in* to fern


couer his keate. And auld a hys men fata
loge by p td ol p caue. And d me ot Dauid
Lapde bnto hime 8 dape is come / or which k
Loꝛde ſayd vnto the: Beholde J wyll delpuer
chrne enempe into thyne hãd / thou chalt do
W him what it plealech the hẽ Bauld arole
Ecutt of a Iappe ot Sauls cote pꝛuelxe.
‘Andimmediatip Daurds herthmote him / be⸗
cauſe he had cutt of a lapp of Sauls cote.
Andbhe fayde onto his men: the Loꝛd kepe me 6
krõ doyng b thynge onto mymaſter p is the
Loꝛdes anopnted/to lave myne hande vpon
him eying he is the Loꝛdes anopneed And
fo Dauid hept or his teruauntes w woꝛdes /
and tutkred them not to govpon Saul.
And when Saul was vp out of the caue
g gone awape / Dauid aroſe and went out of
the caue and eryed after S aul layinge: My
Loꝛde kyng. And Saul loked behynde him.
And Dauid ſtouped to the eth a bowed hym
ſelk / a lapde to Saul: wherkoꝛegeueſt thou
an eave to mennes woꝛdes / that tape / Dauid
lekech the euell Behold this dare thine eres
haue ree pote S the Lozdbhad delpuered the
this dape into myne hand in the caue. hen
they bad kyll the / myne eye had compallxon
win not lape my hades


Ind moꝛeouer my father / le pet the lapp of
thy coo te in myhande. And in as nace


Dau


agapndt che dhe ap,


i


Dallid


J Hylled the not to / when J cutt of $ lapp ol
fhp coote / bnderſtande a ſẽ / p there is nethet
euellnoz rebellpoumelte in me / athat z haue
not lynned agaynſt che. And pet thou hütet
after my loule to take it. The Loꝛd be iudge
betwene the a me / ache Loꝛde aduenge me
okthe. But myne had be not bpd the. Accoꝛ⸗
dyng to the olde pꝛouerbe / wyckednelle chall
poe out of the wycked: But myne hand

not vpon the. After whom art thou come


ind and be Ipfte sp his bopce and wepte / and
lapde to Dautd:thou art ryghteouler then z /
fo2 thou haſt rewardedme with good / and |
haue rewarded the with euell. And thou hat
ſhe wed this dave how that thou haſt dealtlo⸗
uynglxye with me / koꝛ as moche as when the
Loꝛde had locked me in thyne handes / thou
ſiueſt me not. Foꝛ who thall finde his eneinie
and lett him departa good tape, noherkoze
the Loꝛde rewarde the with godd / foꝛ j thou
haſt done vnto me this daxe. And now FZ wot
well p thou halt be kyng / a ß the kyngdom
ol Alrael athe ſtablzühed in thyne hande.
Swere therfore vnto me by ß Wozd/p thou
walt not deſtroye my teade after me / achat
theu ſhalt not deſtraxe my name oute ol inx


orwenre fathers houte. And Dautd l ware vnto Da⸗
ame u ul / 4 Saul went home But Bauid and his
dug u men gat vp vnto an holde.

fe


ot
twhich we Samuel dpeth. Dauid kleeth in to the wyldernelle
Enel 10 of Dh
Hitent that tt kyed op the wyldome of Abigail. Naval dyeth aud
4 1 be 8 Abigail.
0. P.


Aran. He is angrpe with Habalf: but ws: 1557


Ahe rb. chapter.
Sa] then Bammel dyed / andalgr⸗


2 iraci geathered togeather @ lame:


ted hm eburvedhim in hs awne

houivstRamath.

Auris avofeand gat him to the wil⸗
dernelle of Sharan. And there was a man in
aon whore caceil was in Carmell / and ß
m was excedyng myghtve / a had chꝛe thous
land ſhene aa thoufand gootes. Andhe was
ceryng his ce pe in Carmell. The name ol
the man was Baba / a the name of his wyfe
was Abigail /and was a womã of good wil⸗
domand bewtikuil. But the man was chur⸗


uche and of chꝛemde condicions / and was a
Calebite And wher Dauldhearde in d wyl⸗


demete chat Nabal chare hrs chepe / he ent
Out ten or his yuunge men / ¢ fapoe vntothẽ:
ett vou vp to Carmel and go to Habal and


Bgrete him in n name, Andchus wyle fave


i. KAynges = Rabal, Lr


onto my krende: peace be tothe /peace be to
ehpne houle and peace be vn all that thou
halt. haue hearde Cape that thou haſt the-
revs Now thy cheperdes were wyth vs / and
we dpd HE nofppte / nether was there ought
myſſeng onto them all the wyple they were
in Carmel:acke thy laddes / a they well ew
the. noherkoze let thele young men kynde ka⸗
uoure in thyne eyes ( toꝛ we come in a good
cealon) a geue i pꝛays the whatloeuer coz


vee


uh.


meth to thyne hand onto thyleruauntes and * i. Reg xxt.· a.


to chyne ſonne Dauid.

And Dauids yoũgmen came a tolde Mac
bal all thole woꝛdes in the name ol Dauid a

en topped. And Habal antwered Bauids
Ceruatites ¢ ſapd: hat is Wauid? and what
is the lonne of Flat? chere is plentye ol ler⸗
uauntes now a dapes that bꝛeake a waye
euery mã wall maſter. A thulve take my
bꝛeed / my water a mp fete 5 Abaue kylled
fo my ſherers and geue it men which z wot
not whence they be?

And Dauids teruntites turned their waye C
and went agapne / and came and kolde hym
accoꝛdynge to all thote fayinges. Chen Was
uidfapde dito his men: gyꝛde euery man his
(werde aboutehym. And they gyꝛded euern
man hys werde on / and Baud therto gyꝛde
den neee

men / o hundꝛed
abode by the tuffe, 5

But one ok the laddes tolde Abigail Ma⸗
bals wyke laping: ſe Bauid tent mellengers
vnto oure matter out of p wyldernelle to la⸗
lute him / and he rayled on them. And pet the
men were very good vnto bs and dyd vs no
difpleatuve nether myled we any tyyng / as
long as we were conuerfant wb thé / whe we
were in the keldeg. But they were a wall ol
defence vnto vs bothe by nyght and allo by
dape / all the wyple we were w chem kepyng
ſbepe. Now take hede a le what thou halt to
do / oz it is concluded to do myſcheue vnto
dure matter and to all his houcholde And he
1 ſpeake to. inen
made haft and tobe two hundzed loues and
two botelles of wrne and kyue ſhepe readye
dꝛelled and kyue mealures of parched coꝛne /
and an hundzed bondelles of realyngs / and
two hundꝛed kraples of kygges / z faded them
on alles / and tayde vnto her younge men: go
bekoꝛe me / and le I come after pou / a toſde
herhulband Qaball nothyng therok. Andas
werode onher ale and was comyng downe
ma Gade of the hell / aut at hys men came
downe agaynſt her / and che met them.

And Daudlarde: invapne haue J kept
all that this Eelowe had in the widernelle: co
that nought was mylled that pertayned vn⸗
to him / to he hath qurtte me 5 euell faz
: p.. good.


Bauidſpareth


good. So and todo God vnto p enempes of
Dauid / as 4 wyll not leaue ofall that pers
tapne to hm / bythe dawnynge ot che dare /
w As who rape ought that piſleth agaynſt the walle,
notasmocheas phen Abigailfaw Dauid / the haſted and
eme pl do, paht ober ate and eil before Bauldonher
ehruge of the face/and bowedher lelk tothe grounde / and
malenpnde. kell at his fete and layde: Let this vnhappie
deade be counted myne / my l oꝛd / let thine
handmapde ſpeake in thyne audience / and
heare the wo: des ol thyhademarde. Let not
my Node regarde this vnthꝛiktpe man Ha⸗
bal/foz as hys name is /o ig be. * Habal is
# That ia toie hig name follxe is with hem. But I chyne
andmayde law not the younge men ol my
Logde which thou fendett.

And now my Loꝛde as ure as the 070
ipueth as thy toute lpueth / the Lorde bath
withholden the krõ compng to chede bloude
A krom aduengyng thy Cell with thyne awne
hand. Furthennoze J pꝛape Godthat thyne
enempes a they that entende to do my Loꝛde

a. Bleſtpng to euell / may be as Mabal. And now this biel⸗
reward oꝛpze/ lyng which thyne hãd mayde hath bꝛought /
manera he- leck tebe geuen onto che roung menthat fo-
bis. *8 tome my Losde. sfoageuc the krelpace of
chyne händmarde that che Loz mare make

my Loꝛde a fuer boule / becaule mp Loꝛde
kyahteth the batte ſles of the Lom / and there
coulde none euell be kounde in che in all thy

Ile. Ind pr anp man rpte to perlecute the &

cg meaning fo lente thy loule / vthe Loule ormy Loꝛde be
Tey gn and bounde in a bondell of ſpke 1 che Lozde. the
fhaibe de maler, God. And the loules of thy enempes be long
40 f ere mn hin thempdle oF a lynge. And mozeouer when
tondeit of cons the Loꝛde Mall haue done to my L oꝛd all the
Seeger base Food that he hach pꝛomiled the / 1 Wal haue
Apferaind ho lyfe made the ruler ouerztrael:then Mail it beno
oF hrs abueria grudge of contctence onto the o diltourage
du che oi ene of berte vnto my Loꝛde / that thou mendett
ment as 0 wier blgude caulelede and dydeckaduege thp leit.
foihactonge/ And mozeouerwhen the Loꝛde Hall haue
dag de, i dealt well Y mp Lozd/thenchprick on che ne
real hen N hbandmarde. Chen tarde Dauid to Abigail
tice che der  Dlefied bethe Lord God of Ffrael which tent
note where. the thlg da pe to mete me. Andbleden bethp
thee be commen, behaueoure / e bletted be thou whych halt
be Lhald. kept me this dave Ero compng to ſhede bloud
bib. ann ape f kram aduengpnamp kek wich mene atone
foute of thyne hand. Foz in very deade as ture as the Loꝛde
snemieshewill Sod ok Zfrael ipueth whych bath kept me
make to ger / backe kröhurtyng the / ercepte thou haddeſt
Ener se ee Hatten and met me / chere had not bene lekt
Hourclers weit Baba bp the dawnpng ofthe dave /a ppler
‘ongeo) mate a Agapnſt the wall. And lo Baud receauedot
dareestipnge Hecband that the broughthem, and lade to
enge her: go in peace tothine houle. Indleg haue
obeped thy voice a haue receauedß to grace.

And whe Abigail came to Habal: beholde /

he helde a keaſt in his houle ipke the telt ol a


i. Samuel.


Sauls lyi Saul purlurth


Aynge / and Pabals herte was mery within eed, e
bim and he was doncke a good. Wherkoze 8 — an ‘people
che tolde himnaught nether litle noꝛ moare / toWDautd: God hach clofedin thyne enempe
vntyll the moꝛow dave. But in p moznpng/ pnto thpne bade this bape How thertoze lett
when the wyne was gone out of Haball/ his mefipte him a felowſbippe wmp lpeare to
iwpfe elde bpm thete woes and bys berte # erth eus one ttroke and A well not fmyte
and ban n ben annye Be came as a tone; © bint $ fecdoe time But Baud larde to Abt-
and ppona ten daes after the Lozde mote kal deſtropehumnot kor who cantapebis had
Mabal that he dyed. And whe Wauid hearde on b Loyd anopnten ¢ be apltietteaind Dae
that Maball was deedche fayde: Bleſled he ß ud larde kurthermoze: ag fure as the Loꝛde
Logd that hath iudged the caule or my rebu⸗ Apueth/b Lozbe halicmptehym /o7 ys dave
he ofthe yande of Fan and hath kept bys shall come taodye / o7he thallnetceve into bat
Ceruatit from euell / and bath turned the wy⸗ tell chere periche but ) K oꝛde hepe me krõ
deep. Bud @abel agame Spon bps atone Javing mrnegam dpd Tones anopnten,
heed. And Dauld lent to comen wyth bie How thentakic a Eelowlhippe ß tpeare f 15
Fall to thyntent to take her to his wyle. And atis herd / z the crewle of water / let vs go.
twhen the feruauntes ol Dauid were come And Waurdtoke 5 lpeare ¢ § crewfe ol wa⸗
toabigatl to Carmel / they cpake onto her ter p were at Saulsheed / ther gack them
faying:Dauid tent vs vntothe / to take theto awape / a no m lam o wilt it oamoke. Fo
his topfe . And che arole and bowed her tele cher were all a llepe / becauſe the Loꝛde had
banennerde obenleümetos ne rie cay Clent a dber ope the, Chen Balle wet ouer
handmade to be a feruauntto*twathe the wanna to ß other ye ¢ tone on the toppe ol an hiſi
Fete of the leruauntes of my Lord. And Abi⸗ te 1 e a karre of( a great (pace beyng betwenethe)
Au wih and arole and gat her vp pon an fa ecrpedto che people eto a bnerthe tonne of
ge with kpue damolelles of bers p went at Her laing Ant wer elt thou not Abner: and
ber kete (and wet alter the melengers ol Pa⸗ Abner antwerde c lapde: nohatartthouthat
an wah *cepett tothe kyng: and Dauid ſayde to Ab⸗
a ng ner: art not thou a ma /g tho ts Ipke § in gc-
rael? But wherkoze halt chou not kept thy
Lozds kyng: For there came one oF F kolke
to deſkrop p kynge che Lod. It is not good
Lozdlpueth


CHaui| ech in his tent And Dawd taketh away
repre ernte 2 code at is been 5
freue chante.
Fterß came ß Siphites vnto Saul 4
to Gabaah fapinge: Bauld byoery
bee g dem oF hachilah cue
efoze p wyloernede. Chen Saul


1


e
face


t. Ind beholde / Saul lape depynge
a rounde backe a his ſpeare 1


holde p kynges lpeare / lett one ol the young
men come over ¢ kett it. Che Loꝛde rewarde


i. Aynges. Dauid.


Erb,


euerx me nes ryghtewernelle a fayth:loꝛ the
Loꝛde delyuered the into my hãde this daye /
but I wadde not lave myne had bp3 § Load
anopnted And as thy lyte was möͤche tet bye
97 time in myne epes:Cobe my lptelet byin
eves of the Loꝛd / that he delxuer me out of
altrpbulacton, And Saul fapde to Baud:
Bleed art thou my tonne Wauid / koꝛ thou
Schalt be a doer and alto able to bꝛyng to an- had. Chou
ende. And lo Dauid wet his wape / and Saul Hatt raygne z
curned to his place agayne. pratper,
Maud fleech to Achis eee Of Geth / which geueth
him  ihcleg to dwell in. he bplleth the hilt ines
875 Achis demaunded agapnd whom he had
roued he geueth him a lotell ank were and deckaueth
bpm pioperipe. 8
che. xxvij. Chapter. 1
Ben thought Dauld in lis hert. 4
ape perpthe one dave o2 other by
the hädg of Ffrael a here is no bec:
ter koꝛ me/then to fice into p lande
ol Be Philictines / 7 Saul ot very dilparze
to finde me / map ceate to tene me any moare
inall § cooſtes of Flrael fo: to i mape elca⸗
pe his hand. And Baliſdarole/ she a Core
hüdꝛed men p were Whym wet bnto Achis/
the lonne of Masch / kyng of Geth. And Ba
nid dwelt % Achis at Geth / boch be andhys
men / euerymũ w his houchoide / and Daud
his two wrucs:Ahinoam 8 Jezrahelite a
Abigail Nabais wyfe of Carmell And whk op,
it was tolde Haul that Dauid was fleed to
Geth he tought no moare toꝛhim. And Da⸗
ud lapde bnto Achts: k J baue koundgrace
inchrne eves ett me halie a place in tome
towne in the Feld / J mape dwell there. Foz
what wwulde thy leruaũt dwell ind heed citie
ol Hingdome wthe. Then Achis gaue him
Siteleg d fame dave Foz which caule Sike⸗
leg perta pnech onto the kynges of Juda vn⸗


per- to thig dave. Ind the tyme p Dauid dwelt in


the cötre pe of the Phlitſtines / was ar pere @ :
eure monether Ind auto ahismenwent ccrn
Granne ops the Gelurites / the Gerzites a 5 L foure mo,
Amalehites: which nactons were krö the be netbes 2 certk
grnnvng § cnhabpters ofthe kad asmen go u öde
to Dur and to forth to Egypte. And Wauid in that place do
tmot p ind a letnether ma ner tom alpue / cheded es eh
gtoke § wepe the oxen / the alles / camelſes / keit driagre⸗
Kcloches / a remouede came to Achis. And
Achis karde haue pe not benea roupng this 2
bape: And Pauld anlwered pes in the Couch
ol Juda / and in the Louth ol p Lezrahelites /
and tn the fouth of ö Renites. Ind Dauid la⸗
ued nether ma no; woman alpue to bꝛyng to
Geth/ oz keare lelte they qulde telle ont zẽ
ſaxing:ſo dyd Dauid ¢ lo is hys maner all $
while he dwelt in p cõtreye of 5 Philiſtines.
And Achis belened Daur fayinge:Bebath ,* Chet sto
mabebt telk to ttynke onto his people Ilra⸗caunted abho⸗
el / a therloꝛe he e tn bn minable.

p. ij. e


Samue


Che Philict mes moue warre agaynd Saul and
the Jergelites Saul requiveth countell of God but
hath no ancwere: and then (chee) alter an enchaune

ter / which rapleth him vp dl enay ‘of Samuel.

he. xxviij. Chapter,
edit chaucedmtholedares / f the
Sbunines geathered herr hock to
geather to warre / entendpnge to
ght with Alrael. Ind Achis fayoe.
aud: Be ſure / thou Halt goo out wW me
in d hoſt / and thy men allo. And Bauid lad
agayne tod chis:then thou Halt know / what
th leruaunt can do. Ind Achis fayde to Da⸗
akeper of his ud: Then J wyll make 5 * keper of mpheed
heed fo? keper £02 euer Samuel was then deed / a alcrael
Of bys bodp: had lamẽted hym a burped hym in Nämath
pois 10 01 ane cptte, And Haul had rat de we⸗
bob men P hab kpietes of prophelpe e Porce⸗
rars oute of che lande. Andthe Phillſtines
geathered to gether and came and pitched in
Sunam And Saul ¢ all Icrael geathered
to geather and pytched in Gelboe. And when
Saul law 5 hoſte ok 5 Philictines / he was
aftapen/and his hert was toe aſtonied. and
Saul acked councell of the Loꝛde: But the
v, Ot Uzi Lozde anlwered him not / nether by dꝛeame
ts nahen gu- no2 by bum / noꝛ pet by pꝛophetes.

ob wowee: Then larde Spaul bnta his leruadtes tene
wald mee me a woman 5 is maſtres a of cpꝛete of pꝛo⸗
wine geue phecye ß Tmape gotoher g acke ok her. Ind
Soul antwere his Ceruatitt lapde tobpm:te/ there iz a wre
cherte; tures Bhathalpzete ante e inher poteaia
red hinot to fc ät Endoz. Ind Saul chaunged his clothes a
die wyil in ai put on other rãyment / athen went hee two
Fim as be was men whim / athey came to ß wyke bynight.


wontsotoe7 And he ade pꝛapbelrebntomevpstptete auff


ehapng me him vp whomz chall name vnto
the, Andthe wyke layde vnto him: Beholde /
be ne that chou knoweſk what Haul bath done bow

~ Be Gute nie he bath deſkropd the wemen § had poßphe⸗
Saul. Lobe Ting lp2ett / f Spozcerars out of the läd.
Hume. xvid. Wherkoꝛe then! lapett thou a nett foz my

2 That 18- loule to kyll me: and Saul lwoze to her by
feaned on or che L onde fapinge:ds tueripas the Lomip.
bog mpght be lech chere Mall nobarme chatice ) kor this
bought to thyng. Chen lade the wre: whũ Mall J ket⸗
dreth. che vp vnto the: and he layde: B zunge me vp
Samuel. When the womä law Samuel He

erped wyth a lowde vopce a fpake to Saul
taping: wh phaſt thou mocked me? fo2 thou

art Saul. and kKyng lade vntoher / be not
afrapde: But what fept thou. Andthe wyfe

abe an Lilo» Tarde onto Hauke a Gopatcendyng bp
the Angell oF out of theerch Andhe fayde: what facton 15
Che ok⸗Andthe woms tapde there cometh op


we hie will
but fate


S$. Auſten in än olde ma wa mantel vpo him. And Daul Heuerth


the cupzd Coe perceaued z it was Damuel / ¢ ſtouped w
me of his wos. his face to the ground a bowed him kelk. And
ki ocstins Samuel Capde to Spaul-tohy hal thou vn
mety p it was Quécted me / to make me be bꝛought op: And
che deuell n § Saul ant wered: Z am Coze encombꝛed. Fo:


i. Samuel,


nether by prophets nether by dꝛeames. And
therkoꝛe J haue called the / to telime what

hal do. Chen fapd Samuel: wherkoꝛe doe

thou alze ot me: whrle 6 Loꝛd is gone frõ 6
Kis thyne enempe / Y Lozde welt do to che as
he larde by my hand. Fo the Loꝛde will rent
the kyngdom out of chine hand / a geue it thy
nepboure Dautd/ becaule thou oberdſt not
d bopce of the Loꝛd / no executedſt his fear⸗
te wꝛath po the malekites. Cherkoꝛe bath
the Loꝛd done this vnto p chis daxe. And mo⸗
reouer che Loꝛde wyll del puer Ffract wthe /
into ß hand of p Ph tliſtines. And to moꝛow
fhalt thou ethplonnes be wme / a ß Loꝛde
Gall geue the hoſte of {tract into the handes
ok ß Philitines . Chen Saul fell trepghe
wapelflatte onthe erch as long as he was / ¢
was loze a dꝛead of § wozdes Of Samuel.

And therto there was no ſtrength in him ⸗
for he had not eaten all the daye and x nat ,
befoze andthe woman cam vnto S aul and
law § he was [oze trowbled / and layde bnto
him. De / thine hand mapde hath obeyed thy
bopce a haue put my loule in my hande / and
haue harkened vnto thy woꝛdes which thou
fapdett vnto me. Nom therkoꝛe harken thou
allo onto the vopce of thine hand mad / a let
me Cett a mozfell of bꝛead bekoꝛe the / d eate e
gett che ſtrenght to go thx iournepe. But he
refuted it and karde J wyllnot cate. But his
teruaũtꝭ a che wile to geather deut Vay
S he hearde their voycẽ. And lo he arole fs ß

c lat him on a bedd. Che wom had a fat
calfein $ houte / ß Wehacted ¢ brlledit ! a
tohe flower ¢ kneed t / drdbake him cwete
cakes / a bꝛought thẽ bekoze Saul ¢ befoze
bis leruaütes And when ther hadeste ther
ſtode bp / and went awaye the fame neght.
E_Dauid goping with Bunge Abie to he N. agapntt
che bn E bp 1 Che xtr. Ch 5
L — Chapte.
be Philidtines geathered all their A

jokes to geather vnto Aphec: and
raed pitched by* .
is efrabel. Andß Loꝛdok ß Philiſtt
hes wet forthe by hũdꝛedes a byth
But Pauid q his niẽ came behinde w 4
Chen lard $ Lozd of 5 Philiſtind: what are
pounerebrues?andachistayd ontop Lande
Of p Philiſtind: Js not this Dauid p leruaũt
ol Saulthe kyng ot Flracl / which bath bene
‘shmedapes oꝛ peres /a haue foũde no fault
in him lence he fleed onto me onto this daxe.
eletle 5 L odd of SPilidines were
wꝛoth whim efayd onto him: Make this ke⸗
low returne / a lethim go agapne to his place
which thou bat appopnted him. For be wall
not go w bs to battel / ieſt he be an aduerta⸗
wee tobi the batten gan herd col be
r


appeareth,
5 Pbilidint make warre agarnſt me /a Hod kran ty,
is departed fro me gancweredmenomoare/ mae.


a fountayne in a uA


B better obtapnẽ § tauonie of his maſter / cheñ
bpd che herdes of dure men As this not Ba⸗

8th a. 9 60 wO ther fange m dadtes:* paul Aue
an bis thoufand/but Dauldbiseen tyoutande?
El riß. Chen Achis called Pauid a fapde vnto him:
As lure as the Loꝛd lyueth thou art honeſt /

git plealech me weil p thou ſhuldeſt accom⸗

panpe me in the hott /for haue koũde none:

tuell w ß fence thou cameſt to me vnto this

dape: Neuerthelelle the Loves ol the Phili⸗

C ſtines fauoure 5 not: wherkoꝛe returne a go

in peace /p thou dilpleale not the Loꝛdes ol

che Phililtines. And Dauid lapde agarne to

Achis nohy what haue J done? A what halt

chou koũdẽ in thy ſeruaũt as long as 3 haue

bene tthe vnto this dae: 6 J mape not go

agapnſt § enemies ot my Lord 6 hing.

D Achis anlwereda lapdeto Dauid: J wokt

well thou plealeſt me / as it were an Angell

oF God. Hotwithſtanding the Lozdes of the


iZepuges, Amaleck. Crvi.


E were whim / a theycamto 5 ryuer Belo
wherea part ot them abode. But Dauid and
Abo Ceca inctt kolowed: But two hũdꝛed
abode behinde bepng to werpe to go duerthe
rruer Belos Chen they foiide an Egypcian
inthe kelde / e bꝛoughthimto Daud a gaue
im bzed to cate g water to dꝛyncke / z Kaue
um a kewe kynge e. , clouſters of reatyngs,
nd whẽ be had eatẽ / his lpꝛetes cam agarne
to him : fo2 he had eatẽ no bꝛeadnoꝛ dꝛoncke
no water in che dapes ethzenpabtes. Chen
Dauid ſard onto bint:to who belongett thou
e whece art chou⸗ and b lad ant wezed⸗ amg
an ckgypcian and leruaũt to an Amalekite:
and me maſter let me behinde / becauteit is
thꝛe dapes a gone p J tell lecke: we came a
roupng vpon the Couth of Cerethys / a vpon
che ol Juda ¢ on the fourth ol Caleb. And we
burnt Sikeleg Wepze. And Wautd lapde to
bimecant thou bꝛynge me to this cOpany 2
And he fayde:Cwere onto me by God /p thou
wilt nether Kell me noz delpuer me into the
hädes of mymacter a J well bzyng the vnto
chem. And when he had bꝛought him: le / they
la pe fhateved all abzoabe bpo 6 erth eating
A dernckyng a tryumphyng ouer allß great
pray serie cariedawaye out of ande
56 ilictines / a out of the land ok Juda.
nd Pauld lade bps the ro d bebe. E
vntyll the euẽ on the mozoww:fo p there elca⸗
ped not à mã / laue foure hũdꝛed young men
which rodde awape bps cameles and fledde.
And Dauid recouered all ö the Amalenites


po bad carted awape, e his two wiueß loß ther


was no perfdn lacking tmall o great / conne
oꝛ daughter / oꝛ of uad ent they had
take awape / Dauid brought all agayne.
And Wauidtoke all the bepe / a ß oxen. Ind


ben cher dꝛaue the catell befoze/¢ fapoe: thys 18


ezrah

the Carmelite. And Baur was in a chzowde
ftrapte:fo2 the people entended to ſtonehym
becaute the bertes of all the people were bez

red ko tgeir fonnes andtheirdaughters.
But Dauid tone a good courage to himin
1g riß. b. 5 Lond bis Cod e*fapoto Abiathar d pꝛeſte
himelechs fonne:bzpng me § Ephod. And
Abiathar bꝛought the Ephodto Bauid. End
Dauſd arked $107 lapig: hall J folow ats
ter this cõpanße? a hall J ouer tape them 2
And he tarde to hymkolowe for thou ch alt

Couer take them ard recouer the pꝛape.

And he went and the trxe hund ed men


Dauldg pape. And then Bauid came tothe
two hũdꝛed mẽ p were to were fo2 to tolow
BDauid which they made to ab yde at $ ryuer
Beloz. And they camto mete Ward and the
People that were whym. and when Maud
canito 8 people / pe taluted them. Chen ane
twered all the wicked a the vnthꝛiktes or the
men 5 went  Dauid/¢ fayve: becaule they
went not with vs / thertoze Mall none of the
pꝛape that we haue recouered / be geuẽ onto
chẽ / laue to euer mã his wyle a his childzẽ:
which lett thé cary aware a be walking.

hen Lape Baud: pe hall not do col my
bꝛethze) 8 tbe Lore e vg / a hath
pielerued ps a delruered p copanye ö came
agayntt vs / into oute hand. Ko: who chulde
erken onto pou in this matter? But as his
parte is p goeth a kygbteth / co good Hall His men of ware.
parte be chat tariech by the ttuffe / they chall
part it a lxke. And lo tr that dape foꝛward:
was that made a law a a 1 pany

p. ij.


The law o


Saul kplleth


G anddureth to this dave. She Daum cam to
Zikeleg / he Cent ot his pꝛape vntothe elders

A Cat aa re. oF Fuda eto his krendʒlapig:ſe there a blel⸗
warde. kung Foz pou / or the fpovle ot penempes ol d

Lord. He Cent to thé ot Bethel to thé offoutly

Ramath:to thé of ether: to the of Aroer to

thé of Soephamoth:to the of Eſthamo:to the

ok Rachal:to (he ok the cpties of 6 Ferhames
klites: to the of ot p cyties of 6 enittt:to the
of Haramah:tothem of Bozalan:to them oF
Athach: to thé ol Heb76/¢to all places wher
Pauid a his men were wontto haunt.

Earhe battell be twixtß hilt and z krael. Saul
üpllleth him kelk⸗z his chplozé art clayne in p battell.

Che. rt, Chapter.

1 FN as s Philigin foughtagaynt
Ilrael /b me of Ftrael ficcdawape
from the Philickines / a fell downe
deed in mount Selboe. And ö Phi⸗
lowed after Saul a his lonnes / a

flew Jonathas / Abinadab and Melchiſus
Sails lonnd. Ind h battell wet fore agaynſt
Saul / in lo moche p Motcrs Wbowes had
For him / he was loze worded of d choters.
„„ Betekard Saul bntobis hamclberer⸗ dam
Ronee, pu tür werde ihrn methorowtherwith
e feſt thefe vncircũcpled come ihzuſt me trou⸗
ee make a mocking ſtocke or me. But his
harnelberer wolde not/ koꝛ he was loze a⸗
~ fraped. WherkozesDaulteze a Cwerde ¢ fell
bpon it. And when bys harnccbererlawthat
Saul was deed / he kel lykewyle vpon bps
fwerde a dped wich him. and to Daun dred
A his the lonnes a his harnelberer / a therto
C SLbis men / that lame daye to geather.
When the men ol Teal ß were of d other
rde z valepe / a they ofthe other lyde Zonda
heard the men of Alrael were put to flight /
that Saul a his fonnt were deed/ they left
the cytics/@ ranne awape / a the Philtaines
ü Para. rib cam ä dwelt inthẽ. On the moꝛow whe the
Philiſtines were come to tripe the p were
lapne / ther kounde Saul a bys thee fonnes
iping in mount Gelboe, Andthey cut orhys
heene ſtripped him out ok ins harnelle / tent
into the lad of ß Phtliſtines euery where / to
publethe in the houles ok their Gods atothe
people. Andtherhanged op his harnelle ind
gp boule ok Aſtharoth / but they hangedop bys
carhatie on the walles of Bethlan. when >
enbabiters ok Jabes inc alaad heardtherot /
what the Philiſtines had done tosdaul they
arofe as manpe as were men ot warre a wet
as Ste cennt nales eth
z a Harkates ochis ti fe eth⸗
err xxx aan g baougye the to abeg & burnt thethere
N and tone their bones ¢ burped them vnder a
Crer at Jabes / and fatted leuen dapes.
gehe ende of the kyꝛſt bone of Samuel /
which cher come p call e fret of ? Benges,


1 Mara. x. a.


ij. Samuel,


him lelk.
The ſeconde Boke


ol Samuel otherwyſe called the fez
conde bolic ok the Eynges.
¶ Dauid cõmaumdech to ſlee d meſſenger / that Capos
he had kylled Saul. Che Lamentac yon of Dauid fos
Saul and Jonachas.
©The Eve chapter.
ter the deeth of Saul, z
whe Dautd was returned tro
the daughter of the Amaleki⸗
[tes & had bene two dapes in
Zitzeleg: Beholde / there cam
d Jaman the thpzde bape out ol
the holte fro Saul t bis clothes rent a erth
bps his heed. And whẽ he came to Dauid / he
felt to p erth a drd obextaunce. Co whõ Das
uid lardt: whence comeſt thou? Ind ß other
anlweredhym: Out ol the hoſt of Alrael am
elcaped. And Dauid lapde to hym̃ agarne:
ow hath it chaunced: tell me. And he lapde:
e people Heed fro the batte. a of the
people ave ouerthzowen g deed: and Saul ¢
Jonathas his Conne are deed therto,
And Pain larde vnto tye poung mä that
olde him: how tnowet thou that Daul and
Jonathas his tonne be derd and the pounge
man thattolde him / fapde: J was by chatice
inmount @elbce And le / Saul leaned ops
bps fpeate / andthe charettes and hoꝛſemen
kolowed hym at the eles . And Saul loked
backe and calledme. And Jantweredehere
am J. And he larde vnto me: what art thou:
and z ſayde vnto hym: Jam an Amalekite.
And he lade vnto me: come onme a flee me:
Fos angupſbe is come bpd me and my lxle is
pet all in me. And 3 went on him at ſiue hem:
toꝛ i was lure thãt he coultenctipue/ after
that he was kalten. And Jtoke the crowne
that was vpõ his heed and the Bꝛalelet that
was on his arme and haue bꝛought them vn
tomy Loꝛde hyther.
Chen Wauid toke hyn clothes anda rent dm
were Lo dpd all che men that were with him. rng crud
nd theymourned / wepte stated vntill euẽ / bes b
foz Saul and Fonathas bys Conne (and for nent
the people ofthe Node /andéoztheboute terre
frael/ becaule they were oucrthzowe wyih Me sic
theCwerde. Horde / un
Chen ſapde Dauld onto the young ma p C een
broughtbimepdyngt, Whce att thou And, fn
herarde J am $ fone of an algaüt and ma- ö bar
lektte. And Dauld ſarde vnto him: Powisit
that thou watt not atraped to lape thyne had
onß K oꝛdes anoynted to deſtrope him: And
Pautd called one of his young men a ſaxde:
So to and rumne vpõ him. And he tote hym vb
She dyed. Chen lade Dauid pnta him: ih mente
bloude bpd thine awne heed o * byngea fn
mou


Yemountapnes ot Geiboe Spon poubence
ther dew noꝛ raygne / ner feldes whence hea⸗


ue offeringes com̃e. Foꝛ there the bildes orß


myghtie were caſt from them: the hide of
Saul / as though he had not bene anoynted
wyth opie. The boowe of Fonathas and the
fwerde of Saul turned neũer backe agayne
emptie / krom the bloud of the wounded and
from the fatte ofthe might ie warrrowzes.

Saul and Jonathas toucly and plealaüt
in their lyues / were in their deethes not bes
uided / men twiftter then Egles and ſtronger
then Lyons. Ve daughters of Irrael / wepe


ouer Saul / whych clothed pou in purple ¢ .


Out sl dexe garnientes of pleature / and boꝛdered youre
none apment with dnamentes ol goulbe. Pom
0. were § might ye darne in battell: Fonsthas
on the hie hilles was wounded to deeth. ooo

is me koꝛ the my bꝛother Fonathas : delecta⸗

ble tome watt thou excedyng. Chy loue to


me was tonderfull/pating d loue or wemẽ. beg


How were thy myghtie ouerchrowen / a how
were the wepons of warre koꝛlozen.
¶ Dauid is anoynted in Nebꝛon. Che battell ot the
feruauntes ol Baud and Icboleth.
¶ Che lecond Chapter.
ter thys Dauid alkedthe Lorde
taping: hall go vp intoany of 6


all 5 ge
ta agin Jelrah
0 / joam the Jelrahelite and Abigail
Nabals wyfe p Farmelite. And the mẽ that
were w him / did Dauid carve vp alto / euery
man wyth hys houle. And ther dweit in the
townes of Hebꝛon. And themen of Juda ca⸗
Bme and there anopnted Dauid kyng auer §
boule ot Juda When it was tolde Dauid
how the men of Jabes in Galaadhad burped
Saulche ſent mettengers vnto them a fapde
vnto them: bleſſed are pe vntothe Loꝛde / that
ve haue chewed foche kyndnelle vnto youre
Lone Saul / and haue burpedhym. wher⸗
Foze che Loꝛde thew pou mercye and truthe
againe. And will do you e
zpehaue done this thyng. And now iet youre


bandes lere the a plape pethe men /though ch


40


pb.


e⸗


of Bema⸗


That is / the
Fylde of the
trig oꝛ mighe
tyt.


Joab kylleth


A tg xx. g.


ü. aral. th. a.


ol Bẽniamin gẽathered thE lelues to gether
alter Abner on a piumpe ¢ ſtode ſtill onche
toppe ofan hill. Chen Abner called to Joab
and lapbe: (hall the [werde deucure without
ende: no welt thou notß bitternele is wont
to come in the later ende: how long call it
be / per thou bydde the people returũe krõ lo⸗
Towing their bzethzen? And Zoab antwered:


a8 kruclb as God ipuety /etyou hade o


laxde / then euen in the moꝛning had people


departed / eche from tolo wyng his brother.


Andtherwith ; Joab blew a trompet / and all
che people tone ſtyll a purlued after Jtrael
no moze no; fought nomoze. And Abner and
bis men walhedall that nyabt by the wylde
Toes / and went ouer Joꝛdan / a palt thoꝛow
all Bethhoꝛon and cam to Mabanain.
And Joab returned from after Abner and


geatherẽd all the people to gether. And there


lached of auto leruauntes nyntene per⸗
Cong q Alahel. But the leruaũtes of Dauid
bad apne ol Beniamin and ot Abnert men /
thzehundzed a thze fhoze men. And theptole
opal kahel and bur chem And and and d of
beta erin Bethlehem. And goab and bys
men wet all npabt/and cam in the dawnyng
to hebꝛon.


ij. Samuel,


Abner,
woe to Dauid / J fodo to him / and bꝛyng
the kyngdom from the houle of Daul /a leit
bpthe thꝛone ot Bauid ouer Icrael and ouer
Juda / euen from Dan to Betſabe. Andhe. 8
couſde geue l bner neuer a wooꝛde to ancwer
becaule he feared him.

And Abner fene mellengers to Dauid
fontbtnith /fapmg:tobote is thelandeZandbe
lapde therto:matke a bonde wyth me / and ſe /
me hand is with the to bing all Ffracl onto
the. and Dauid antwered weil fayoe/F welt
maße a bonde wych the. But onerhyng Jre⸗
9 of the / that thou le not my face / ercept

jou kyꝛſt bꝛyng ꝙ ichol Sauls daughter /
when thou comet to ſe me.

And Wauidfent meflengers to Icboteth
Sauls fonne ſaping: delxuer me my wyle
Michol whych J marped wyth an hunden
koꝛckynnes ofthe Phtittines And Icpoleth
lent and toke her fd her hucbande Phaltiet
che lonne of Lais. And her hulband went w
her / and cam wepyng behinde her / tyil they
ca to Bahurim Chen larde Abner onto him

o and retume. And he returned. Ind Abner
ban comunpcacion wich the elders of Alrael
ring: ye haue long gone about that S auid
foulve be k yng ouct pou. How then do it: oz
the Loꝛdehath fayde ol Bauld / vy che hand


: okmpleruaũt Waun / wilt ſaue my people


aeeramd cronger/and the boute of
Saul wared weakerg weaker. * And wae
utd had chtinz€ bogne him indjebz6:-his eldeſt
Conne was Anmon of Abinoam the Fesvahe=
lite:the leconde Cheleab of Abigailthe wyfe
of Habal the Carmelite the thyꝛded blalom
che konne of Maachah $ daughter of Khol⸗
mal the Ryng of Gedursthe fourth Aoont

e
anne ol Abitals

SDauids wife. Chete were bone toWautd in


Pebꝛon. Andas long as there wasbattell


kren⸗ awaxe tha


Ilrael / out of che handes ofthe Philiſtines
and out of the hand ok al their enempeg. And
Uke wooꝛdes


vnto Dauid: will vp

rael vntomx Love the:

make an appoyntment wyth th
mapa be beng ouer all that thyne hart delx⸗
reth. And lo Bauid lett Abner depart / and he
went in peace.

And te / the leruauntes of Wauide Joab
came from chaſyng robbers and bought a
great pꝛape wich them. But abner was not
with Dauid in Hebzon : foz be had tent hem
awape to depart in peace. Hebe Jab and alle
the holt that was with him were come / men
tolde Joab faving : Abner the lonne of Her
came tothe kyng / a he bath fent hem awape
1 — bene Joab mentee

kyng ¢ lade: what zou done: De,
Abner came onto $ why halt thou ent hem
ithe chulde ckaye qurte? Chou
myghtel know Abner the lone of Ser / that
he ca tollater wyth the / andto know thy cõ⸗
tertacyõ and behauoure / and to know all ?
thou doelt. And when J dab was come out


Iboſeth is


from § henge / he ſent mellengers alter àb⸗
ner / which bꝛought him agapne krõ the well
ol Sirah bnweting to Dauid. And whẽ ab⸗
net was come agapne to Hebꝛon / Joabtoke
him a ſvde in the gate / to lpeane myth hym
Bilefutiv / cherẽ mote hym vnder the Mort
rydbes 5 he dyed koꝛ the bloud of Hahei his
Fbꝛother. And when it akterwarde came to
Dauids eave / he tapde: J a my krngdom are
giltlede betoꝛe the L oꝛde fo? euer cõcerning
the bloude of a bner the lonne of Her. It fall


erkoze onß herd of Foab gon alhis fathers bi i
th they woldhaue bought*whete/¢ Smote hem dann haue bee
onder the thozt rpbbes and led gor they cam e e


houle: p the houle of Joab be neuer withoute
one oꝛ otherp hath rünnyng idues oz wout
lepers a goers on crouches / chat fall on 6
fwerde andthat lacke bꝛeed. And the caule
why Joab ¢ A biſat Muedbner was / ß Abner
bar laapne their bꝛother Alahel at Gabaũ in

attell. And Dauid tapre to Joab gto all the
people 8̊ were wyth him / rent poure clo 12


ſedchem / as well äs all other goodthynges
which the kyng did inthe light of the people.
Andall the people and all Itrael therto vn⸗
derſtode thatdaye hom 5 it was not p hinges
mynde / to fice Abner the tonne ol Her. And d
Bong faye vnto bys feruauntes know pe
not / how that there ig a Londe q that a great
fallen thys dape in Jcrael? And Jamthys


idyto t tge da pe tender / though J be anoynted kynge.


And thele men the fonnes ol Sarutah be *to
eod Foz me to rule: But che Loꝛde rewarde
doer of euell accoꝛdyng to his wtheonetie,
CBaanah eRechad (ley ↄcboſeth the tonne of Saul.
Che. iii. Chapter.


des karnted g all Acrael was trou⸗

bled. How this Sauls lonne had
tw men that were become captaynes ouer
che foudiars the one called Baanah ep other
Kechab / the tonnes of Remona Berochi⸗
te / and of the chyldꝛen or Beniamin: fo2 Be⸗
roth was renened to pertayne to Beniamin.
Andthete Berothttes Hed to Sethaim and


ij. Aynges, llaynt.


Tofournedthere vntir the tame tyme. And Jo⸗ 93
nathas Sauls fonne had a lonne that was
lame on bis feete:tpue pere olde was he whe
the tyoynges cam ol Saul & Jonathas out
ot᷑ Jelrahel. And his nource tone him vp and
fled awape. And as che made haſt to flee and
‘was amaled / ö chtide fell a becam halt a was
calleth Miphiboleth. And thele lonnes of
Memon the Berothite / Rechab and Baanah
went / a cam in the heat ol the daye tod houle
of Ilboleth / as he llept on abedat none. And
olde they cam into the houle as though


into theboute as he flept on his bed in his re⸗
ſtyng chamber / and lmote him and due hym
and beheded hym and toke hrs heed at gat the
awape thoꝛow the wylde keldes all neght.
And they broughtthe heed of Flboteth vnto
Pautd/toHebzon ard lapde to the fyng-be-
hold there the heed of Flboleth Sauls lonne
thine enempe / which fought thy loule. But
the Loꝛdhath aduenged my Loꝛd the henge
this dape / ol Daul and of his ſeede.

And Dautd anlwered Nechab and Baa⸗
nah bps brother / che lonnes of Remon the


Berothite and lavde onto thé: as furely as v1 ne rrvih b.
the Loꝛd lyueth whych bath delyuered my h. Meg 4.


Coute out of al aduertites:bim* that tolde me
ſowthat Saul was deed / chinkyng to haue
18 l me good tydynges / caught a llew

Ind theleg / to geue him a rewarde koꝛ his ty⸗
Binges bat Andhowmoch moze oughe
| fo todeale with weked men 5 haue dapne
11 e perlon in his awne boule vpõ
his bed. Now therkoze thynne pe that J wyll
not require his bioud of pourehandesa tane
vou from the erth : And Dautd commaunded
bis poung men / and they due them and cue
oktheire handes and their Fete a hanged the
bp by the pole in Hebꝛon. And ther tote the
heed ok Il boleth and burxedit in the lepul⸗
chꝛe ot Abner in Hebꝛon.


auld is pet a e annopnted Apng: and taker!
Se Arche keom Binn. he cate one the agu
the lame. he macieth mo wpues and getteth mo
chyldzen. he triketh the Philiſtmes.
¶ Che. v. Chapter. N
Hen cam all the trybes of Track A


to Dauid to Hebꝛõ andlapdile, we i Para. xi. a


c rethy bones and typ lleche. And
SAitherto in tyme paſt when Saul
kpng ouer vs / chou leddeſt Irraelin and
oute. And the Loꝛde hath lard to the: thou
halt fede my people Ilrael / and thou fale
be a captayne ouer Jttael. And fo all the
elders ot Aixael came tothe king to Hebꝛon.
And Ryng Dauid made a couenaunt wyth
them in Hebꝛon befoze the Lowe. And they
annoynted Dauid Byng ouer Ala 8 :
au


Cxviij.


: 2 — ge .
Dauid. ij. Samuel. eee ah,
auid was chyꝛtxe pere olde when he begã commaunded him and lmote the Philictineg
VVV In from Gabaah to Gezer.
Hebꝛon he rargned ouer Juda ſeuen perẽ € CMChearcke is brought forth ofthe toten
Suntec enen ge . fe bate! SOs
thivtie ethze deres ouer all Jlrael a Juda. Sven) rena


Edom / e rd thence in to Jcrulaiem. amid dauncery
Chen went thekyng andhys men to Jes beloꝛe it / is therfore deſppled or bes welke Michel


rulalem / vnto che Febulites the enbabiters ¶ Che. vi. Chapter.

* ol the u dt rt lard vnto Dauid: except After that / Waiud chole out allthe 3
thou take awaye the biynde a the lame chou 0 ſchete poung men in Itrael to the
walt not come in hyther / meanyng therby p coume of thpztpe th „e aroſe
Dauid ſpuld not haue come in thyther. Nes de went gait che tolne that were w
uerthelelle Pauid toke the holde ol Son / che mé ok Juda / to fettawaye p Arcs
which is in the cptie ot Dauid. Chen larde of God byon which is called the name ot the


Wautd the fame dave . wholoeuer wynneth
the walles andthe lame andthe blynd hated
GoderRande, of Baud foule*, Wherfoꝛe the biynd a the
wude lame hall not come into the houte. and Dae
Saptapne asi uld dwelt in the towze andcalledit che citie


bil. ald. of Wau, Ind 2 lg bylt roundabout ft


Loz ol hottes chat dwellych betwene ß ches
rubyns. And ther put the Arch of God bps
a new cart and bzoughe it out of the houle
of Abinadab p dwelt at Sabaah. And Oꝛah
and Ahio the fonnes of Abinadab dꝛaue the
new carte. And when they bꝛought ic out ol
£ boule ot Abinadab chat dwelt at Sabaah
with the Arch of God / Ahio went befoze the
arch. And Dauid and all the houle of Icrael
playde befoze the Loꝛde wyth all mañer in⸗
ſtrumente g of kpre woode / Wharpeg / plal⸗
teries timberelſes / fedyiles and iymbals.
And when they ch to Hachong thꝛelchyng
floure/Dyab put his handto the arch of God
andheld it / koi the oren ſtõbled. And the Lon
Was wrath wylh Dsah and God Cmote hym
inthe lame place foz bis fault / and there he
dyed by the arcke of God. And Daud was
difpleatenbecaute the Loꝛdhad rent Oꝛah.
And tte name okthe piace was called Peres
Drab until this dave And Dauid was then
akrated of the Lordand fapde : how thul the
Arck of the Lozd come tomy boule? Ando
Dauld wolde not beyng the Arch or the oz
with himinto the citie of Dauid. But catied
ik into the houle of Obed Cooma Gethite.
And the Arche oF the Londe contynued in the
houfe of Obed Edom che Gethite /thze mo⸗
nethes andthe Lop blettes Dbed Edom and
all hs houſbolde. And when it was tolde
HyngeWauidhow thatthe 1070 had betes
che boule of Obed Edom and all z pertayned
vnto him / berauſe ok the Arck of God / he wet c
and bꝛought the d rck ol Sad kromthe houle
of Obed Edom vnto the cptie ol Dauid with
gladneg. And euer whe they p bare d Arche
ok the Loꝛde had gone tyre pales / he offered
an oxe ard a katt ſhepe. And Dauid aumled
befoze the Loꝛd with all his myght ina lyn⸗
nẽ Ephod girde vnto him. And Bauſd and all
the houle of Ffraci bꝛought the arcke of the
Lope with Howtyng and tröpet blowyng.
And as the arcke orthe Loide cam into p


B


C Wautd perceaued that the l oꝛde had ſtablic⸗


But when the Phtlictines heardthat ther
had anoynted Baud yng ouer Alrael / cher
cz all bp to ſene Bauid. and as tone as Da⸗
uldheatdor it / he gat him to an holde. And ?
Philiſtines cam and lapd them a long in the
valepe of Raphaim. And Wauddalkedorthe
ond ſaping: wall g goto the Ppildines 26
wilt chou deliuer them into my handes: And

D the Lord fapde nto Nauid go ko: J wyllde⸗

Ipuerthe Philittines into thphandes. And

Some rende. WWautdcamto* Baal Phar nim a fmote the

to the piarne there ¢ fatd:theiLozd bath deuided mpne ene⸗

oF P herazun. mpes a Condze before me / as a man woold

deuide water. And cherkoꝛe he called § name

ok the lapd place / Baal Pharasim. And there

cher lett their Amages and Pauid a hig men

tohethem vp. andthe Philtſtines cam pet

agapne a lapd them in che baleye Naphaim.

Aud Wand atkenthe Loe he card gonot

But coupes hen ote 129050 100 9 5

em erö the Perettees. hen thou 4

Marel chene ok a thing going in the top⸗ citte ol Bauid/WécholSauis daughter lo⸗

e huey oun Wtae elon oerae
Lois gone outbefoze the / to fmyte 8 bo 2 , e

. —— f LOZ m nee, drome yah


2


God will haue ij. Kynges


bꝛought in che Arche ol che l. ond / and had let
it euen inbys place / euen in the tabemacle
gp that Baud gab prepared fo2 it: Pauidofte⸗
red burntofferpnges and peaceofferpnges
befoze the Loꝛde/and as fone as Bauid had
made an ende of offeryng. burntoferynges
and peaceoſterynges he bleſſed the people in
the name ol ß Loꝛd ochhoſtes /a gaue amõge
all the kolke / euen anionge the hole multi⸗
tude of Ffracl / as wel to the wemen as men
euerpe one a Cake of bzeede a pece of lleche
anda flacket of wyne. And tothe people de⸗
parted euery man to his boule, 5
Chen Dawid returned to lalute his hou⸗
ſholde. And Michol the daughter of Saul
came out againſt him and tayo: Db how glo⸗
tious was the kyng of Flrael to daye / which
ftripte him ſelt ta dape bekoꝛe the eves of the
mapdens of his ſeruauntes / as a lyght bꝛap⸗
ned felow is wont to tripe him leit. But Sa
ui layd againe to ichol/ q wil make ſpoꝛ⸗
te before the Loꝛd which chole me befoze thy
father ¢ befoꝛe allhis kynne / cõmaundyng
me to be rulerouer al his people Icrael. and
J wilbe pet moze bple then bo / awulbe mene
inmpneawne tyght:and chall £92 all that of
p very Came ma pdeleruauntes whych thou
eakeſt o / be had in honoure. But the tard
Michel daughterto Saul had no childe vn⸗
tothe dape of her deeth.
dauid ofa good entent/entẽdyng to bylde an
& celeb dener Ga Beppe red
the pꝛome ite of God mapt betullfplien,
Che. bi Chapter. .
ed in pꝛoceſle as the hing dwelt in


no houlle Lrir.
haue deſtrored all thrne enempes out of thy *
leght and haue made the a great name / line
vnto the name ok the great men of the wonde
And Jwpll appornta place for my people
Irracl / ard well piant it and they Mall conti⸗
new in one place and tall moue no moare /
nether call wyckyd people trouble th anx
mate as they did at che beginnyng / and fence
che tyme Acommaunded Judges to be over
my people Itrael / ⁊ 3 weil gene the ret io
all chyne enempes. And the Loꝛde teupth the
that he wyll bylde the an houchold.
e
larde to fathers / then f. Cor.
ler ppchy ſerde alter b whych thall proceadgepe teck.
out or chp bodpe/ K wpil tablpche his kyng⸗ ben fo tobe
dame une Mali bylne anboute Foz mpna-s h bop ihne
me / 4 J wyll ſtablpche the feate of his elbe „
dom Foz euer. wylbe his father a he chal ec aherne be
my ſanne:in fo moche § vt he lynne / J wyll C rapted. 50
butrebutebim wpth tochea rode as me be dada
rebutted th and twith .
dzen of men be plaged with. But my mercye ih. d.
will J not take awaye from him / as tone it
Eom Saul / whom J pur downe betoze the,
And thyne houle and thy kengdome tall ens
dure wichout ende after 5 / a thy feate ſhalbe
Lablpched koz euer, nd when Hathan had
tolde auto all thete wooꝛdes and all this vi⸗
ſon. Chen wet kKyng Dau d a let him downe
before the Lode and lapde: what am J L 0nd
Tehouab and what is my kynne / that thou
fouldet haue brought me chys karre forth?
And is this a mall thyng in thy tyght Loꝛde
lehouab/but § thou thuidettipeake alto of
jp fevuatity boute for a great white to come?
e
moare pnto the / fein
than the pꝛophet:behold / J dwell in anboute San en seams Schoch eet Seithou
ue fos wa per kanten accopding to chine an ain
atone hert batt thou done all thele greate another.
thyngito make the knowẽ vnto typ teruaũt. bert fon wyll
Wherkozethoit art great D Lozde Gad g %% in the Aces.
chere is none like / necher is there anp God land. ih d
laue thou accoꝛdyng to all g we baue head 5
with oure eareg. And what one people in the
erth is lle thy people z lrael / which c od wet
I dellueredto de his people / a to make hima
name ¢ to chewe the great ¢ ferryble thingy
inßerthe / pekoze thy people which chou rede⸗
medft to the aut ok Egipt / eus kr ß people Optrom ehe
Kkröcheir Gods Andthou halt osdepned thy Pearle wrth
people Ffracl to be chr people Foz euer. Ind ben Judges.
2 15 al karworchp lk 7477 id
0 0 ou Bal Of thy ſeruaũt ¢ o£ bi:
Now thertow fo fspe bntomplerusunt Sg, foulematse if good fo: eueredoas poubatt
Cape. And let thy name be great fo2 euer /
chat men maye lare / Loꝛdot Poſtes is che
God of Ilrael: and let the houle of chy ter⸗
uaunt Baud be ſtablylſhed betoze the.
Foz thou


ves zuadt Dauiy hus tapth che L onde ſhalt thou


to bea ruler oucemp people traci. and j
was with the in all that thou wentel to / ard


/


Sauid


Foꝛ thou. oꝛde ot Poſtes God ol Alraelhaſt
kolde in the eave of thr leruaunt taping:

Wyllbylde the anhoute. And therfore ha

ch leruaũt found in his harte to pꝛape thys
pꝛaper vnto d. Andnow Lod Fehoual thou
art the God / and thy woondes mult betrue:
fo? thou Hatt tolde thys goodnelle vnto thy
keruaunt. Andnow go to and blette the hou⸗
holde ol thy teruaunt / that it mape conty-


new koꝛ euer bekozethe. Foz thou Lord ge⸗ Ay


bouah batt Capne z of thy biedpng the hoüle
ok thy leruaunt chalbe biefled koꝛ euer.
Dau ouercometh the Philiſtimes and maketh
them to become trpbutaries. Be oꝛdeneth s appopne
teth hes ollycers.
Che. viij. Chapter.
ter that / Dauid bette the E hili⸗
ftines and lubdued them and tone
che bꝛrdell ot bondage out o€ their
bandes. Andhe bette 5 Moabites
a.€orscarednid “meatured them wych a lpne mahyng
Ale une Ope them re a long onthe erih chen meacing
maner of ma. the length ok two lynes to dey / athe length
Perle dutlerkrs of one fpne to raue a Ipue, Andlo becam the
asitiompde, Moabites Wauids leruauntes a papdtry⸗
Sade he ir bute. DaurDlmote alto Adadezer the fonne
keerg väntteng OF Rehobhynge ol Zobah as he wẽt to make
tue boune t0 he the ende ol his coottes at the rpuer Euphꝛa⸗
e wentpng ces. Ind Pauld toke a thoufand and keuen
ee ene
ote sve nelfand cote men and deſtropedall his charettes
he Anares relerupng one hundred oF chem. Chen came
wen: Blhe Soivians of Bamarcontocuccoure Ada.
sata Bau de zer kyng ol Sobah .AndDauid due of the
erte eng two and tmentye thoulandmen a put foud-
sopity Chulvepa- youreg in Sira Damalcon. And the Dries
Told ones became leruauntes to Wauid paves tribute
ede rDthus the Lodde laued Dauldin allchat
welten. he we to. Ind Dauid tote $ childes of goldz
were bpd p leruaũtes of Adade zer a bꝛought
tliẽ to Jerulalẽ. And therto out of Betah and
Beratchat cyties of Adadeserhe bꝛought ex⸗
cedyng great aboundance of batt.
C., ien Choi Ang of Hematy bad peard
: an Hauldhad dilcamkozted all the hotte of
dade zer / he lent Joꝛam his fonne vnto kung
Baud to lalute him with peace and to bietie
him becaule he had kought againſt Ldadezer
And beaten hym: fo2 Thor kept warre with
Adadezer wh ych tonne bꝛought betielles ok
tyluer / godde ¢ of bzatte wyth him. And them
allo kyng Dauid dyd dedicat onto the Loꝛde
with the kyluer andgolde that he conlecrated
of all nacions he tubpuen:of the St:
riens the Woabites the chyldꝛen of Am⸗
won the adden Amaletzites and ol
thefpopie of A dade zer lonne of Rehob Kyng
Dot Zobah. And Dauid made him a name ate
ter he returned tromthe laughter or che di⸗


ij. Samuel,


Miphiboleth,


riens in valexe ot Salt where he dew . vu
thoucand men. And he put kepers in Edom /

euẽ thoꝛow out all Edom put he foudgoures

and all dom becam bys feruauntes. And §

Loꝛde kept auld whatfoeuer he toke in

hand. And Daum rapgned auer all Ifrael

and executed ryght and Juſtice onto all bys
people Andr Joab p tonne of Saruiay was g. a hn
ouer the hott / and Feholaphat the fonne ol 9
lud was recozder. And Sadoch $ konne Sansa
ok Ahitob and Ahimelech the fonne of Abia⸗ Png oe
thar were the pꝛeaſtes and Saratah was 5 feier cute,


Scrypbe. Ind Banatah ß lonne ok Jehotada LA rr |


was ouer the Cerethites and the Pbeletht
and Dauids tonnes were chele rulares.


CDautd reſtozeth all the rides of
boleth the lonne or Jonathas.


che. ix. Chapter.
en lard Dauid: is chere vet any:
man eker heboult of Saul / 5
J maxe chewhym mercye koz Jo⸗
nathas fake: Andthere was of the
houtoid of Saulaferuaunthamed>ibay
which was called vnto Dauid. Andthe kong
fapd vnto him: art thou Sibah. Andhe fayoe:
thy leruauntis the mari. Chen tayo the hyng


perly

tes mony — —
fee mnie,
beg


which bd lame on 35


Ain Lodaber. chi
kett him out of p houle of


kather / and thou thalt eate meate on myne
arwne table all ape. And the other bowed
him kelk and tapd: what is thy ſeruaunt that
thou chuldelt bouchefate to loke vpon loche
a deed dogg as Jam. 8

Chen the kynge called vnto Stbah Sauls
poung ma taping onto hym: I geue ontothe
matters lonne al that pertapnedto Saul c
to all hrs kynne. Se therfoze that thou and
thy fonnes and thpferuauntes tyll the lande
ko him / and bꝛing in / chat thy matters lonne
mape haue kode to eate. Foz Miphiboleth
thp matters Conne chall eate meate all wave
pon mp table. for thys Sibal had fiftene
fonneg and twentpe teruauntes. Chen ſayd
Divab onto p kenge:al that me ae


elegges. out b.


Me if Dautd are tpitefull
Sagen of ge rene bre Tag


Dauid auengeth.
che. x. Chapter.
chis / chat d kyng
Ammon died / ¢ Ha⸗


nefle vnto Banon § tonne of Pahas as bys
father ſbewed hyndnette vnto me Andther
bpõ Dauid ſent to cõtoꝛt bym by the hand ot
bis leruaũtes ouerpdeeth of his father Now
when Dauids leruauntes were come in toß
land of the chyldzen of Ammon / the Loꝛdes
of the chyidzen of Ammon lad vnto

their L od: thynkett thou that Dani doche
Honoure thy father / becaule he bathe fent to


Lr.


lalẽ And whe § Siriens fay were

put top woꝛde betoꝛe Aae thes gehend

chẽto ins en bod fentabzoughe

iriẽs p were beyoũde Srpuer. And e

bolt of them came / and Hobah the captayne
OF the hot of Hadade zer befoze them.

And when it was ewed Wautd/he geg⸗ D
chered all Acrael and palled ouer Zoꝛdan and
cam to Helam: where the Sirians put
chem felues in arape agapnct Dauid and
fought wyth hym: hot be it the Sptviens fen
before ctael. And Dauid deſtroped leuen
bundzed charettes of the and kourtpe thou⸗
land hoꝛtemen / and fnote Sobah the cap⸗
tapne of hys holt that hetheredyed. And
when all the kpnges that were keruauntes
to Hadadezer Lato that ther were put tote
wosſle befoze Ilrael they made peace wWithẽ
Skerued them And lo the Syriens keared to
belpe the cheldzen of Ammon any moare.


comfoztthe? Pape he hath rather tent bys Che aduautrye of Dau:d with Wethlabe the wyle
r theceteand Homavwapiorounie TT


tofpye it out/euento ouerthzow it,
herkoꝛe Hanon toke Mautds leruaun⸗
tes and chaued of p one halle ot euerye man⸗
nes berd a cut of their garmẽteg euen in the
myxddle / euẽ harde by ß buttockes of thé and
ent thé awaye when tt was talde Baud he
ſent againſt thé (£02 they were mẽ ex *
a thamed)¢ fapd:tarye ata ericho vntill pour
beerdes be growl a then fetumne And when


B Schitd7€ of Ammon law 6 they ſtancke onto


Dauid ther fence htredß tones ol Pethꝛehoh
Lokß Biries of Sobah. xx. thouland fote me
Lol king Maacãh a thoufandmeé / z of Fttob
tweluechoutandmk. And whe Bauid hearde


Agapne /


VT pa
2
Ihe. ri. Chapter
Adie came to pale inz beginning 2.
Fane e Binge . Warllx. a
‘wat to go koꝛth to battell / that
Nauid tent Joab ¢ his leruaũtes


was Bethlabe § daughter of


5 che
Eltama wife to wszias d Pethite. And Daum


coure me. But yk p chyldꝛen of Anon bete


like am let vs tyght luſtelx foꝛ dure peo⸗


ple a koꝛ g cities o dure Sod Andß Loꝛddo onto her heule. And when the woman had
perceaued that the had conceaued / the fent
kolde Bautd / and lade: J am wrth 1


what lempth beſt in his eyes. Ind foꝛthwyth
Soab pꝛoceded a p peopſe 8 was wd him in to


tent mellengergs kett her / and che came vnts bat 16) ber
good koꝛp J will come e ſuccoures / qupte ß eee che was ſtrepght foures 02 moe


fz 1
ed FS her bnckeneſke returned cage uhu


is a token that
a wemen haue cd


auld,
be demaunded
people fared / 4
And Dauid aid
tsnaseepate
3
folowedhim:
Pinca
an palace orbowne coHtsBoure


wizias: Devil
hepin
. thpne


ethite dyed a
ons
procetie ot th
gers tapi


ing: when thou bat made an en


de ol 1


of ean beara tae her hulband was
che mourned kor hym / a ag lone as the
was ended / Dauid lent and. feet


„ annopnted e quer Itrael a
pore tout ct ebemesot Saul ang


e toꝛpe ofthe warre vntothe Eng gaue N thymaptters houle and thy matters
21 te 1. fume ahd faye vnto the:


soberfoze


ached pe ko nxe vnto


e citie


lde hourle b¢
aud Pete renn he nese io mote abt Mmosre. Wherkoze hack thou derpled the ch⸗


— melech lonne of * gerobeleth⸗
deondetherwi, man caſt a pece


did not a wo⸗
amipltone pon hem ed


fe called 3ero· alles / that he dyed in hebe:
e
thy feruauntaza ene und ant pie:


8 elfengers went
anne e had tent him with


.
againſt


wiues into thy holome / agaue the the houle
ol Ilrael and of quda / and wolde yt that had
bene to lxtle: haũe geuenthe twyle comoche


eee
thou
Inet toe deer arb bat taken his wyfe to


nen Aumon dekileth i, Aynges Thamar,


Thus layth the Loꝛde: beholde J wyll tere
vp euell agarnſt ỹ euen of thyne ãwne houle
¢ will take thy wiues betoꝛe ine eyes and
geue them vnto thy neyboure / wyych wall


sind flepe with thẽ in che lyght ok the lonne. And
ene eee ehe


befoze allAtrael and in the open ſonne lyghi.
D Chen lard Dauid vnto Nathan: J haue
fynnedagaynt the Loe. And Nathan lapd
agapne to Hauld:the Loꝛde hach put awape
thy lynne / thou ſhalt not dye. How be it be⸗
caule in doyng this deade thou bat geuen §
enempes of the Loꝛda caule to rapie /g chi
z is boꝛne the chall dye ſurelpe. And Nathan
arted vnto his houle. Ind 5 Loꝛde troke
Sabie that aiztas wife bare Dauid g it lic⸗
kened. and Dauid belought God oz Hoopes
fatten a went a lape all npght vpõ the erthe.
And the elders of his houte arole and wet to
him to take him vp Ero the erth. But he wold
not /nether yet eate meat with them.
And it hapened the ſeuenth dave that the
childe dyed. Butß teruaũtes ol Bauld durſt
not tell him chat the child was deed. Foꝛ they
fap:fe/ while the chride was pet alpue / we
fpake vnto him / andhe wolde no herkẽ vnto
dure voyce. ow moche moare then wyllhe
bere him lelk vt we tell hymchat the chyd is
ped 8255 1 —— — abe
eryng erby perceaut yy
was deed / and fapd vnto his ſeruauntes:is p
child deed. Andthey layd ye. Chen Dauid
arole from the erth and walſhed i anoynted
him lelk and chaunged bys apparell / a went
into thehouſe of the Loꝛde d pꝛaped / alter
cam to bys awne boule. à bade 6 they Mulve
ſet meat befoꝛe hym / and he dyd eate. Chen
tard hes feruauntes vntohrm: what is th.
Fthat thou halt done? Chou kaſtedeſt and we⸗
pelt toꝛ thy childe while it was a liue / and as
fone agit was deedtgou dyddeſt ryle vp and
dyddeſt cate meate. And he anlwered:whyle
the child was a lyue / J fated and wepte. Foz
baue merh one Aten whether Gon will
ue merexe on me that the child mage line.
But now Cepng it is deed / wherkoꝛe chuld
falt: can ꝗ bpng hym agayne any moare:
wall go to hun: but he wal not come agayne
to me. And Pauid comkozted Bethlabehrs


daS t- DEEC/@ wet in enter dees led tbe


bare a tonne whole hanie was called S
lomon / the ¶ ode loued him. And he ſent by


bene be, the band of Machen the. pzophete and called


che reſtokche people to gether / a come z bez
lege citie ¢ tale itneſt yt take it / $ victo⸗
rye be afcribed to me. And Hauidgeathered
all the people to gether / e wẽtto Ravah and


allawtedit g gatt it.*Andbe toke ? kynges i. Baralæx. b.


Croune krõ of his heed whych wayed an hun⸗
dꝛed wapaht of godde / a was tet w precpous
ones. And Dauid ware it on his heed. And
bebzought out the fpople of the citie in exce⸗
dung great aboundance And he bought out
+ people that was therin a lawed the @ dꝛew
harowen of pon vpon thé/andthzen tome oF
them with Cozenpng knrues oF pon/e thzuſt
fome into foznaces . And lo he ferued all he
cities of the chyldꝛẽ of Ammõ. Ind then Wa⸗
uida allthe people returned onto Ferulalẽ.
Amnon Dautds tonne dekpleth his fz a
one therfoze kplleth et A er ln
ware foꝛ t᷑tare ok bys father.
¶ Che. xu. Chapter.
dit chaunced that Ablalom Wa-
tuds ſonne had a Fayre liſter named
Thamar whö alter warde Amnon
another tonne ol Dauid loued.
nd this a mnõ was la vexed 5 he fell lycke
for ß leue ofhis liſterc hamar:toꝛit thought
pm harde to come by bys purpote of her /
eyng the was pet a virg vn. But amnõ had
a cOpanpan called Jonadab 8 fonne of Sas
mah the bother of Bguld; whych Fonadeb
was aberp tople man. Ind he Capo onto hym
how cometh it that thou beyng the üynges
konne art thus confumed euery moznpig?
map chou not tell itme: And Amnon atte
Cwered him: A lowe Chamar my brother Ab⸗
lalög lpſter. Chen capde Fonadab onto hum:
Ie on thy bedde and fapne thp lel lycke. And


s when thy father is come to le the / fave vnto


wear ne oha
zt my kyght / that J mave
le it and eate it ot her hande.

„ And Amnon lave vomne a made him tele zz
dicke. And when p Rynge was come to le him
Amn faydonto him : let Chamar my lylter
come ¢ make mea couple ok krytters in my
krght / p Imape cate of her hand. And aud
Cent home to chamar taping go to thy bg
ther amnẽõs houte ¢ dꝛeũe bom meage, WHE
Thamar came to her bother Anns houle
be lape. And che tone floure ¢ made patte c
made krptters in hya lyght a did bake the /e
tole a platter a puwꝛedthẽ out befoꝛehym.
And Anus wolde not cate / but cõmaunded


Our.


Ablalom kylleth ij. Samurl.


lardvntoher: come tye tb me mytyſter. And
che ancwered hm: na / my brother do not
koꝛceme / koꝛ tt ought not to belo inqtrael do


geg kuge. notchis kollh. Kos whither (all wo wee)


my chame: And thou thalt be as one of the

koles in Jirael. But ſpeake vnto the kynge a
he call not denpe me onto the.

How be it he wolde not herkẽ vnto her voy⸗


Cene rrrnta ce but was to ſtröge koꝛ here * koꝛced her z
Leut. fung. a. fave sh her. And then Anton hated herexce⸗


dinglpe:lo g chehate wherwith he bated her
was greater then p loue w whiche he befoze
Dloued her. And he tapdvnto her. op a awape.
Chen the fayne vntohym / chys great cruel⸗
nelle that thou putteſt me awayẽ palfpth the
other that thou dyddeſt vnto me. Heuerthe⸗
Tefle he wolde not heare ber but calledhrs
lad that wapted vpon him a ſayd:puther out
atthe doꝛes frome a bolt che doze akterher.
And che hada kirtell ot diuerte coloures vpõ
her: tor wloche were p knges daughters >
were virgines appareled / made trapte vnto
thé. Chen his letualit bzoughther oute at $
Edoꝛes & lockedthe dozes alter her. and Cha⸗
mar pit alches on her heed and rent hergaye
kyztellß was on her and put her hand on her
heed a lo went / k ag ſhe wet cryed. Chen Ab:
falom her bzother fad onto ber: hach And
thy bzother bene with the? Mow then be Hit
my lyſter: foꝛ beis thy brother. And let not
this thyng greue thinehert. And lo Chamar
remapned ditcõkoꝛted in her bꝛother Ablalõs
houte . And kyng Dauid heard ok all thele
thynges and was perp woch. And Abtalom
lad onto bes bꝛother Ammon nether good
ner badd. How be it Ablalom bated Amnon
becaulehe had forcedbys kplter Thamar.
And it happened two pere after p Abtalõ
hada ſhepecherpng in Baal Paso: belpdes d
tribe or Ephꝛaim / bad all che kynges Cons
nes ehe cam to the kyng a lapde:behold thy
Lleruaũt hathe a ſbepecheryng / let the kynge
Ebts feruatites come w thpteruaunte. Indß
faydonto Abtalom: h nave my lone
let vs not go euerpe one ol vs that we be not
chargeabiẽ vnto the. Ind Ablalom lape coze
bpd him: how be it he wolde not go / but blel⸗
ledhim. Chenlayd Ablalom:then let my bꝛo⸗
ther Anmon go wyth vs. And the Benge an⸗
Twered what nedeth it 6 he go wichthe. But
Ablalom made foche inſtance p he jet Am⸗
non go with hym / a all the kynges chyldzen.
Chen Abtlald cõmaunded his young men
laying: marke when Amnons hert is mery
with wyne / a when F bpd pou lmyte Amnon
then kill him: feare not / ko it is J 5 bid vou /
gf bebolbe therkoe 9551 0 the iutty bioudes,
Andthe young men of Ablalom lerued Ams
non euen as Ablalom cõmaunded thẽ. And
allthe krnges fonnes arole ¢ toke eche man


his Mule and led. Ind whee cheye were yet
in the wave / tidinges cam to Sautd thatab-
falom had dayne ail the kynges lonnes / lo p
none was lekt a lyue. Chen the kyng arole
and tare his garmentes and lare along on 5
erthꝛa all his ſeruauntes lode by with their
clothes rẽt. Chen Jonadab the fonne ot az
mah Dauids bꝛother antwered and layd: let
not my Lom Cuppole thattheye haue flayne
all che poung men the kynges tonnes / laue
Ammon only is de ed foꝛ that hath bene euer
in ablaloms mouth fence be koꝛced his litter
Chamar How therkoꝛe let not my ll oꝛde the
Rynge take d thing fo greuoullye to chyncke
chat all the kynges lonnes were deed / when
Ammon only is deed,

But Ablalomfied. And the young man §
kept the watche lyfte vphys eyes and loned
aboute. And beholde ther cam moche people
bp awape that was behynde hys backe a
longe by anhylles tyde. Chen tayd Jonadab
vnto the kynge:behold / p kynges fonnes are
come / and as thy leruaunt Capo / lo it is.
And as fone as he had iefte ĩpeakyng: be⸗
holde / the kynges fonnes came and lite vp
their vopces and wepte. And therto the nyng
and all bps leruauntes wept excedyngly.
But Ablalom elcaped and went to Cholniat
che lonne of Amihud kynge ol Gelur. And
the kynge mourned fo2 bys lonne contynual⸗
ly. And to Ablalom etcaped and went to
Selur / a was there the veres. And by that
tyme the kynge turned bps mynde from pur⸗
fupng Abfaiom. Foꝛ he had lett mournyng
Foz the deeth of Amnon,

Bp the wyldome of the woman of Chckoa Abla⸗
Jom is called. Khe comelpnelice Woucche ot Ablalö.
Ablalom ne ben cozne. Bis father byGeth him.


e itt}. 3

a oben Joab the lonne of Jaruiah a
perceaũed that the kynges bert
was turned agarne to Abl alom /
Ahe ſent to Chekoa / and fett thence
a tople woman / and la pd vnto her: kerne thy
feifeto be a mourner / and put on mournpyng
apparell. And anopnt not chp felfe 1 ople.
But be as a womã p had lõge tyme mourned
koꝛ the deeth of Come bodpe. And go to ping
Andlkpeake of this maner vnto hym. And lo

Joab taught her what We chuld laye.

And when the wple of Thekoa was come
to lpeake with the kynge / che fell on her face
to the grounde a dyd obeplaũce a laydhelpe
me O kynge . Andthe kynge fayd onto her
what apleth the; iche antwered. J am a we⸗
dow / and myne hul bande is deed. And chr
handmarde had two fonnes which kought to

ether im the Eelbes where was no man togo

etwene thẽ / a the one dlewe the other. And
beholde / che whole kinred arole agayntt thx
handmade


Amnon


my Londe in the pretence or the people: thy
baomapde thought:fueripz will tpeake vnto
the kynge / paraduenture the k

the requeſt of his handmapde. ng
Wall heave his handmapoe a delpuer her out


en lard p king


5 Cr)
— the with the in all this


as lure as thy toule


Chat is my it isn.
Rade
y be wan
0 ſpde but
: Sy an hanommaphe And the tumyng of my tale a And all the men of Atrael
P as . e mi 5
ut ud nother wape / chat made thx 4 3


thele woo des euen in the mouthe of thyne


feruaunt Joab.
And fo e thatmy Loꝛdẽ is wyle euẽ as an


7 5
4 0 is/prape


va


Cablalom mazeth incurreccpon agapne his fat
Baum is fapne tofleefozteaceofyune e


rple bp eripe in the moꝛninges d to
Gand byß wayes fine ß led top gate of p citie.


came to the kynge for Judgement / he called
bee bpm and Ward bc iobac city ate thu?
: ais d


cd the bpng as
An Gene. xu. d


Ablalom agaynſt 3


And when the other anlwered: thy teruaunt
is oklochea trybe of Ilrael. Then layd i bla⸗
lom pnto hymne / thx matter is good a rygh⸗
teous / a pet no man is deputed of the kynge
tohearethe. Chen IAblalom Cayo moꝛeouer:
Oh / that J were a iudge inp lande / g that al
men which haur pleyes a matter in the law /
thu come to me. Foꝛ I wolde do thé tuſtice.
And allo when any mã came nye to him to do
him obeylance / he put lozch bys hand a toke
him to him ¢ Bitten him. And an thrs maner
dd Ablalom to all Flracl that came to the
«Chat isons Rynge Foz Judgement / therwith * dtale the
dancer Bhertes ofthe menok Akael. And at Courtpe
toke atwaye  Peresend Ablalom Cayo ontothe kynge: let
their hertes⸗ me go J pave the to Hebzon/e pape mp vo⸗
wäne the thep we which J haue vowed / onto the Loꝛde: ko
did not how chr leruaumk bowed a powe when J was in
tember ther Selur in lande of Hirialaping:pk 5 fade
contented ta ſhall bꝛynge me agapne to z erülalẽ / J wyll
bim ¢ dꝛue on lerue the Loꝛde. And the kynge lavd go in
Div ſpde. peace. And lobe arole and went to ipebzon,
Chen Ablalom ſentſpies thoꝛow out all
tribes of a crael laping:as lone as pe heare
voyce ol the trõpet blowe / caxe:Ablalõ raig⸗
neih kyngein Hebzon And wAblalom wee
two hündꝛed men out ol Jerulalem ß were
C called. And they went with pure herttes and
wit nothing of the matter. and Ablalõ fent
allo foꝛ ahichophel the Gilonite Daulds co⸗
unſeller / and fett hym out or his citie Giloh /
when he lacrikied lacrikyces. And there was
wꝛought ſtrõge treaton. Andthe people dꝛue
to Abfalõ in great multitude. And there cam
a meſſenger to Dauid ¢ layd: the herttes old
men ol Itrael are to folow Abtalom. Chen
Cayd Dawid vnto all his leruaũts that were
with him at Jerulalẽ:vp a let vs llee / koꝛ we
Wall not elle efcape from Abcalom. Make
lpede to depart:leſtehe come lodẽlpe a cathe
vs ebzinge Come mylcheue vpon bs / E impte
the citie with the edge of the lwerde. And the
kynges leruauntes lapd to him: beholde thy
feruatites are redye to what to euermxLoꝛd
the kynge chall apopnte.
And che king a all his houcholde departed
Da fote. And he ſett behinde hym ten wines p
a Betwene wp were his a concubynes / to epe p houle. And
108 ¢ 1 lothe kynge a allthe people went outa kote
neg invthe 16 Gtarped karre From § boute/And all hrs let
this bificrarice: Uäütes wet bp bys de. And all the Ceretht-
sopucs had the tes k all the Phelethites /andall-} Pethites
honoure (as euen. vl. hundꝛedmen which were come a ko⸗
oer call t) oF ce com ech went before the krnge, Chen
honke / Concu⸗ lapd 5 kyng to Ethaithe Gethite / whertoze
bynes were as ſhuldeſt thou go with vs allo? Returne and
vnderlenges ¢ abide with the kynge / ko thou art a ſtraũger
eber are aye TALE remduedkromchine atone place. Chou
wert alfoie, cameſt but peſterdapeſand quldy vngupet
gerennate z lea the to daxe to go with vs: well go whether


ere am J / let him do wyth me what lemeth
5 wet MC Sadock th

e kynge fapde allo onto Spadock the
hoch thou art a Bear, Returne tpettoye"
ntothe citte in peace. And take poure two
lonnes with you:Abimaas thy fonne / Jo⸗
nathas the tonne of Dbiathar. And le J will
tarpe in the keldes ol the wyderneſle vntpll
chere come come wooꝛde krom you to be toſde
me. Ind fo Sadock and Abiathar caryed the
Arcke ol Godagaxne to Jerulalem / a they
taryed there. And Dauid went vp on mount
olyueta wepteag he went / a had his heed cox
uered a wẽt therto baretote. And all people
that was wyth him had eueryman bys heed
couered / and as they went wepte allo. And
one hal dene per e ten fs
them thathaue contpired wyth Ablalom.
Chen capde Dautd: D Loꝛde / turne the co⸗
2 OF Ahitbophel intokolichenes.


ne / x Jonathas Abiathars fonne / by whych
re (halt lende me all that ve e


Ipod iy
nn


ges Ahithophel. Crriij.


Pounge men to eate / and wyne to dꝛyncke / yl
anpe man kaynt in p wildernelle. Chen larde
the kynge: where is thy matters fonne? and
iba ſapd onto the kyng: beholde / he tarxeth
iat Jerulal᷑. Fo he tapde:chis dape Hall
the houle of Firael reſtoꝛe me the kungdome
ol my kather. Chen lapdd kynge to Siba:be⸗
porpe tine ave all Bpertapned vnto ipht⸗
ofetty. Ind Siba antwered:¥ beteche the 58
mape kynde grace in thy light my l oꝛd bing,
And when kynze Maud came to Bahu⸗
rim: beholde thence cam out a man of ß kin⸗
rede ok the houle of Saul named Semet x
fonne of Gera andhe cam outcuttpng. And
therto he cx ones at Dauid andat all the
ſeruaunteg af pag Dauid / all the people €
all the men ol warre goyng part onhis rats
hand / z part on his lefte Andthus fapde this
Semerashe curteo:come koꝛthe / come koꝛth
thou bloudeſheder and thou vnthziktie man.
Che Loꝛdhach bought bpan the all d bloude
ok the houle of Saul / in whole cteadethou
batt tapgned / and he bathe delpuered the
kvngdom̃ into the hand ok Abfald thy tonne
And thou art wiapped aboute w thyne atone
mylcheue becaule thou art a bloudecheder.
5 155 ifapd Abilat the tonne of Zaruiah
tito
my Logde the kynge: jet me go and take olg
Cheed or him. Andthe hing lade: what haue
to do with pou ye lonnes of Jarutah: let bent
curſle:toꝛ 5; Loꝛd hathe byddẽ him curſe Das
uid. Ind who dare vꝛelume to five wherfore


went / a thnew ſtones at him / a caſt duſt. Ind
6 henge ¢ all that were with hem cam we⸗
rpe/ and relrelched them lelues there.
And Ablaid and all the people ot the men
ol Iltael came to Jerulalem ¢ Ahithophel
with him. And as lone as he was come: u⸗
fat the Arachtte went vnta a blalom a laxde
vnca hun ⸗Godlaue the bynge/ Godlaue the xy
kyng And Ablalom fapde agapne to ular:
Ig this the kyndnelle chou owweck to chykrede⸗
Wh wenteſt chou not with him: And Hulat
fayd vnto Ablalam:mape not Co/but whom p
Logbe and this people and all themen of FE
rael chote / his wyll I be / and with him will Z,
dwell. and fozthermoze vnto whome wall
do lerurce but tuen to hs lone? And as 3
was leruaunt befoze wyth thy Father / euen
fo call 9 be with the. Chen tpake Ablalõ to
Ahithophell geue councell what is bett ko
vs to da. And Ahithophel lad onto Ablalom:
ger the in onto thy fathers*cocubines which auoue in she
bebathlettetokepe thehoule. Fo when b. d.
All Ftrael wall heare that thou hat made
thy kather to ſtincke then ball the handes of
all that are with the / be ſtronge. And lothey
ee
e. in n athers can⸗ tf
rs stn the lyght ofall Wael, Meer. .
Ind the councell of Ahithophel whiche he
counceled in thofe dapes / was as a man had
alked coũcell of God: euen lo was all the cos
uncell ot Atuthophel / both vnto Dauid and
allo vnto Ablalom.
« een ene councell dilslowed of Bulat
and fotat 5


e: why dothe this deed dogg curſe b.


ehe lo: And Dauid layde to Abitat/etg fenté


all his leruaũteg: behold my tonne whien cã
Sut ok myne awne bowelles feketh mp Ipfe;
How moche moze then maye ths fonne ol
Jemimi doit: Sufive hymtherkoze to curl
£025 Lord hach bidd him: hapfpe p Lon wit
Joke onmp wꝛetchedneſſe / a do me good foz
bis curtyng thps bape And thus as Pauly 2
his mẽ wet by d wape / Semei wet aldge ond
hilles tyde ouer agapntt him / a curled as he


jophel
bebe


ey be chaked in theirmyn⸗
re rabbedot her whelpes. p muer xv v
g. in. And


*/ lend.


ez · xv. g.


Bauid.


foz loche councell hath Thithophel geuen.
Chen Pauld aroke and all the people p were g
with him / e they were come ouer Joꝛdan be
char tt was dare / chatthere jacked not one of
gems was not come ouer Jordan. And whe
hithophel law that his coficell was not ko⸗
lowed he fadelledhrs Ade d arole and gate
bim honie to his awne houle and to his aw⸗


ne cxtre / and put bys houcbolde in oꝛder and
hanged


btathar
6 prcattes: of this e that maner dyd Ahitho⸗
phel a the elders or Jlrael coaicell Abfatom,
And thus a thus haue g codceled How ther⸗
koze tend qurcklxe a thew Baud laping:ta⸗
rye not aui npaht ind ledes of § wildernelte /
g
andal ople 5 are vm. Now Fos
nathas ¢ Ahiniaa: above by the weil a
dn woche be lene to come into $ cps
a wenche went and tolde them. And
they to go and chewed kynge Daud.
Hetierthelelle there was a lad ſaw chem
whiche tolde it to Ablalom. But they went
Dothe ofthe atnape quechive ¢ camtoama-
nes houle in Babu Hrd Ned a well in
his parde / into whiche ther wet downe. And
the wile toke a lpꝛed a coueriet on the topp
of the well a ſtrawed theron ſteaped d.

tobspe. And thrng was not pred. And
Ablaloms teruauntes came to the wife toß
houle s alked where one Ahimaaz a Jonas

thas were / p wife layd vnto the: chey be
ouer p ixteii bꝛoche ot water. Ind wi thep


had tought theme coulde not finde the / chen


they returned to Jerulalem. And as lone as
hep were departẽd / the other came out ot 6
well and went and tolde kyng Dauid a fad
vnto him: vp ¢ get pou gquxckix euer d water


brmlele and died / and was buryed in
che Shen e ofbps father,
en Dauid came to And
Ablalom patted cuer Fozdan / boch he andall
le me oF Acrael Whim. And Abfaiom made
ala captapne of the hoſte in ſtede ol oab
F .
a 1 i
daughter of Naab lyſter to 5 10


come to Mahanaim/
ab out ol Rabath
Ammon / and gp out
the Galaadite out ok
/ batens / g erthen
vellelles:and allo quiet baripfloure a —
enen ¢ vice hon / butter /
FD autd g all the
. Foz they


saree on an Out
15 10 anne


all he people came out bpbundzevesandby™


Ghoutandes And the kyng comaunded Foab
‘Abttat/and Holes


ane jentip

my ſonne Ablalom. And all the people heard

when the hinge gaueall captarneg cha

eee
le

was inthe woode of ephzaim, ag =


aulalom is


people of Acrael were putto ? torte betoꝛe
che leruaũtes of Dauid / a there was agreat
flaughter p dape / euen of twentpe thouland
men. And 5 felde was kought in dyuerle pla⸗
ce / all abꝛoade vpũ 5 erthe. And the woones
deubured moo people that dave than dydche
e riers Cores came
foze the feruauntes ol Dauid rydyng vpon a
Mule whych carxed him onder ö thyche bo⸗
weg ofa great Oche. And his herd caught in
One / a he was lette betwene heute erthe /
6 Mule b was vnder hym wenthis wape.
C And one ß (aw it tolde Joab laying:beholde /
law Abfalomhange in an cke: ¢ Joab:
pd nto himchat tolde him lo / ſawelt thou
bym + And why dydeſt not chou chere fmpte
him to the ground / chat J chuldhaue geuẽ 6
ten ficles of tyluer and ã foudpoures gpꝛdlẽ.
And ß man antwered Foab:though Jhad
a choutand licles of lyluer tolde in my hande
pet wolde J not ſtretehe out myne bande
agapntt the kynges tonne. Foz we hearde w
oute cares whe che kng charged the / Abtat
and €that / laying: ſpare me the lad btalom.
Mozeduer though F had teoparded me likes
done kalle therto/pet coulde or allß
matter haue bene hid fro ß henge: xe a thou
thy ſelke woldeſt be agapnt me. Chen laxd


isitis Joa b; I map not ſtand taryeng with the.
mea ‘ 2, mn bec be tobe cher 15


yt eares in hes
band a thꝛuſt thẽ into the hart of Ablalom /


tay
le e was ecaipurons bodpe of tree.
mega hum And ten ſeruauntes that bare goal


vepõs
turned almote àblalom and fluc him. Ehen
Joab blew a trompet / athe people returned
krö kolowyng Ffracl:foz Joab Cpared ß peos
ple. And they tobe ablalom a caſt him into a
eee
great heape o An
all Itraei Ged euerpe ma to his tent. And this
Ablalom pet in bys lpłe tyme /coke g reared
vp a ppler / whiche is pet in kynges dale. Foz
he lapde. 3 — —— nb thertoze
E to kepem̃y name in remẽ bꝛance do Ait. Ind
he called the piller alterhis awne name. And
it is called vntothis dave / A blaloms piller.
‘ee aden 1 .
me runne J pape re che kenge
erdinges bow that ö Lodehach fudged
gupte of the handes of all bys enemßes.
Joab tayo vnto him: thou art no mã ko beare
tyopnges to daye:thou thalt beare tydynges
anothertyme: but to dape thou walt beare
hone perauſe p kynges tonne is deed. Chen
card Joab to Chuti:ao a tell the kynge what
chou halt tene. Inde hui bowed him kek vn
tog oab a ranne. Chen card a himaaʒ d tonne
of ck agapne toJoab: come what conie
will let me rünne z pray the atterchuli. And
Joab card: wherkoꝛe chu delt thou runne my


ij. Aynges.


lonne: Foz and thou runne chou gettyſt no re⸗
warde: well come what will let me runne
And he fayd vnto him: runne Chen Ahimaaz
ranne by che playne and ouer ranne Chill.
And Dawid fat betwene the two gates. ¢

Andthe watcheman wet vp to ß roufie ouer
che gate vnto che walle / and lykte vp his eyes
and law: and heholde / there cam a man run⸗
nyng alone And the watchmã called a tolde
the kynge. Andthe kynge tapde: pk he come
alone / chere is tydynges in his mouthe. And
he cam and dꝛew nye. And the watcha law
another man runnpng and called bnto the
poꝛter ¢ lapd:beholde / chere cometh another
kunnyng alone. Andthe kynge ankwered⸗he
is allo a tydynges brnger. And ß watchmã
lapd:me thinketh the running of the koꝛmoſt
is iphe the runnyng of Abimaas the tonne ol
Sadock. And the kyng ſapdthe is a good mã
ecometh with good tydinges. Andahimaaz
called and tayd to the kynge:good tydynges /
and bowed him (elf to the erthe spo bys face
befoze the kyng and tapd:blelled be $ Loꝛde
thy God which hath * fut vp all ö men that


likte vptheir handes agaynſt my Loꝛde the Gent is-cut


e. Ind ß kynge fapD:ts the lad Ablalom 8

fafe? And Ahimaas antwered I law a great

a do / when the kinges leruaũt Foab ſent me

thy teruaunt. But I wotte not what it was.
nd the kyng layd:turne and ſtande here.

And he turned and ſtode.

And beholde Chult came and lard: tydin⸗
ges my L oꝛde the kynge / p Loꝛde hath qupt⸗
te the chys daye out of the handes of all that
role agaynſt che. And Sheng layne to Chull:
is d lad Ablalomlate: And hui ant wered
the enempes ol my Loꝛde the kynge and all
that ryle agapntt che / to hauen / be as chy lad
is. And the kynge was moued a went vpto a
chambꝛe ouer d gate a wept. And as he went
thus he layde : mp lonne Ablalom / my lonne /
my tonne my lonne Abralom / wold to c odzj
had dyed koꝛd Ablalom / my lonne / my fonne,


Hatt was tolde Joab ow that the a
kynge wepte and mourned koꝛàb⸗
alom. And the bictozpe was tur⸗
nedchat dave into mournyng vnto
all the people. Foz the people heard tape that
dape oto the Henge foz0twed For bys konne /
and the people went ſtealyng into the cytye /
28 people cofounned tele awape / when they
llee in battell. and the kyng hyd his kace and
cryed wyth a loude votre: nix lonne a blalom

Abralom my ſonne my tonne.

And Joab went into the houte to the kyng
and ſapd thou batt amen chys daye the ka⸗
ces ot all thy feruauntes / wypch thys dare

— 8 Qui, baue


llayne, Cxxiiij.


haue lauedthylpke / a the lues of typ tonnes
daughters a Hives ot chr wrues a cõcu⸗
bynes / in p thou loueſt thine enempes a ha⸗
teſt thy krẽdd. Chou halt declared this dae ?
thou cameſt nether koꝛ thy l oꝛd noꝛ ſeruaũ⸗
teg. Foꝛ this bape I do perceaue / yt Ablalon

„had ipued / z all wẽ dyed thys dape / p then it

Bhan pleated s weil, Now therfore vp ¢ come
but / a Cpeake kendelp onto thy keruaũtes /
Cwere by d Loꝛd except thou come out / there
will not carpe one ma Wß chrs nyght. Andß
wilbe wozu vnto the / then ail d euell p tei
onthe krom thyne pouthe onto thys houre.
Sate d kynge arole and ſatt downẽ in the
Gate. Andit was to dde onto all the people /
how the kynge fatt in the Gate. And chen all
the people cam befoze the kynge. But Brack
lled euery man tohts tent.

And all the people were at ſtryſfe thoꝛow
out all the trybes ol girael caying:the kyng
delpuered vs out ol hand of dure enempes.
And he deliuered vs out of the hand of ö Pht⸗
Ultines. And now he is fled out of p land toꝛ
Ablalom. Butà blalom whom we anoynted
ouer vs is deed in battell. How therkoꝛe why
are ve ſo il / that pe bꝛyng not the kynge

Cagapne. And kyng Bauid cent to Sadock ¢
Abiathar the preattes taping: (peake vnto >
eed Buns ¢ tapes up Nun pete 1
lak 6 chulde bzynge agapne p kynge to bys
houlẽ / leing 8 foche tidinges is come kr all


lrael vntoß kynge eut to hys houſe: ve are
imp bꝛechꝛen / mp bones amp lieche:whertoꝛe
chen chulde ve be the lalt that chulde come to


bing che kynge home agane: And tape to
Amala:art thounot my bone and my flethe?
And God do lo to me a fo therto: except thou
be captaine ofS Hoſt to me koꝛ euer in ß rou⸗
me of Joab. andhe bowed p herttes or all ß
Jute eg. a, men of Juda / aaa man wolde bow § hert rot
4. Bg l. b. one man log they lent wooꝛde to d krnge /
be chuld retürne wall hrs leruauntes. And


the kyng returned a came to Joꝛdã. And Ju⸗


da came to Galgal fo2 tu go ãgarndt d krnge

Beg rl. c. 70 conuepe him ouer Joꝛdã. And Semiet*
b. Beg xl Sonne of Gera the tonne ok Jenint whyche
Swag of Bahurim / hated a came w the mẽ ol

Juda agarnſt e Dauid a a thoutande

b. eg roi. men ol Beniamin dd him / and tba the fer=
uaunt ot the houle of Saul g his. rb. lonnes

and twent pe keruauntes with him. And they


ij. Samuel,


Jerulalem.


that the kynge chuld take it to herte. Foꝛ thy
feruaunedothe knowe how that J haue done
amylle. And therkoꝛe beholde J am the kyꝛſt
this dave ok all d houle ol Joleph 5 am come
co mete my Loꝛde che kynge. But Abilalthe
fonne ok Jaruiah ant wered a lapd call De⸗
met not dye koꝛ that caule: whych curted the
Londes anopnted: And the Benge Cayd:what
matter is betwene yous me pe Ones of Sate
ulah / b ve Ghul thisdaye be aduerlarpes vn⸗
tome? Chere chall no man dye this daye in
Ikrael: to I know that J am this daye bong
duer Ilrael. Andthe kong larde onto Se-
met:thou halt not dye / (ware vnto hyin.
And Miphiboleth the tonne of Saul ca- E
listete ner bade h delwden nether dꝛelled
his fete ner his beerde ner walthen his
clothes fro the tyme ß kynge departed / vntill
he came agapne in peace. And whenhe was
come to Ferutale towardeß kynge / the k
ſavd vntõ him: wherkoꝛe wẽnteſt not thou
me Wiphiboleth? And he card: my Loꝛde
kyngẽ / mx feruati¢ deceaued me. Foꝛ thy ler⸗
uãũt᷑ lad: I wolde haue mine Ale ladled to
ryde theron / toꝛ to go top kynge / becaule thy
teruaunt is lame. And he bath therto ciplaps
ned on thy ſeruaũt vnta nix oꝛdß king. But
my Lozd b krnge is as an Angel of Good0
therfore what ſemech belt in thyne eres. Foz
all my fathers houle were but deedmen vnto
my Lon the kynge: a pet drdeſt thou put me
amũõge thẽ p eate at thine awne table. hat
right therkoze haue J pet / to crye any moze
vñtoß kinge: Andß Ryng lad: it neadech the
not tofpeake any moare, foi J haue lapd: 6
hou &3iba hall deurde pland{betwene pou,
Miphibolech tayd onto ß kinge:pee let
him take all: coꝛ fo moche as my Loꝛdꝭ king
is come in peace vnto hys atone houle.
And Bertelat che Galaadite came hrs Ro⸗
gelim ¢ wet over Jod 1 ß kynge / to accõ⸗
Pantehim ouer Jod: whiche B erlelat was
à very aged mã / cuẽ koure fhoze peres olde /a
had proupded p kyng ot luſtenaũce while he
tape at Apabanatm:fozbe was ama ol verbe
reat cubſtaunce And d king faydonto Bere


wh ypte ouer Joꝛdan bekoꝛzethe Kynge. And lauerp nether hath


there wẽt ouer a Botte to carpe ouer p kyn⸗
ges houſbolde and to dohym plealure.
2 And Semet the tonne of Gera kel befoze
the kynge / as he was come over ue and
fapde vñto him et not my Lom wic⸗


kednelle vnto me / ner let himnot remẽ berthe chi


wickednele that thy feruaunt did when m


Seba agaynſt ij. Aynges. Dauid.


But lo here is thy te hama: let him

0 with my Loꝛde the N.

som come — c. rg / and do tohrm /
jam fall


And the kyng ant wered: G.
o with me. And A wyll do
t be cõtent with Andtherto whatloeuer
chou Halt require of me / chat tame wyll J.
do koꝛ the. And all the people went fog:
Sater Sareea
oke bps leaũe ot
Flake tent backe agagne onto his awne
place. And then the kyng wẽt to Galgal / and
Chamaam went with him. How all the men
ol Juda were at the bꝛyng nge ouer or the
Ryig / a but halte the men of Atrael.
wherkoꝛe all the men ol Arael came to ß
yng ¢ fapoe onto him: wh haue oure bꝛe⸗
thzen the men of Juda ſtolen the awape / and
haue brought the kyng a his houcbolde Kall
Daulds men with him ouer Jordan: And all
the men ol Juda antwered § men of Icrael:
£07 the kyng is nere ol kynne to vs: whertoꝛe
be pe angrre fo? that matter? chynke pe that
we rate of the kynges cot / oz that the yng
geueth vs anygyktes;: And ö men of Ilrael
anlweredthe inen of Juda ¢ lade: wẽ haue
ten partes in the kyng / haue therto moze
regt to Daiud then pe. Why then dyd pe de⸗
{pple vs / that owꝛe aduyle had not ben kyꝛſt
had in reſtozyng owze kynge agayne:; and p
woꝛdes of the men ol fuda were earcerthen
the woꝛdes ol the men ol Jlrael.


Seba the ſonne ok Bochzi reateth Ilrael a
Dauid. 3000 bplicth Au adi + 2
ol Seba is delyuered to Joab, Dauids veceaucrs are
nombzed.
¶ Che. xx. Chapter.
dthere happenedto be anvnthzi
i die kelownamed Seba the lonne
Hot Bochzt a ma of Gemini whych
; blewatrompet and fayo:twe haue
hopartein Dauid no: enberitaunce in the
conme ol Arat / O Ilrael / lett vs depart ther-
foze euerꝝ mã to his tent. And all Atrael wee
kom Bauſd ¢ folowed Seba che kanne ol
Bachm. ut themen ol Fuda claue fatk ons
tothe kyng / erg Jozdan to Jerulalem.
And wßen Dawid was come to his houle
bo gerutalem / be toke the ten wyues bys cõ⸗
cubpnesé he had lekt behynde hin to hepe 8
boute/¢ put thẽ in warde and inpntttred all
chynges onto them: but laxe no moare with
theni. And fo they were encloled vnto $ dare
orthe deeth ot the / a lyued a wydowes ite.
Chen ſayde the kyng to A mala: call me 8
men ot Juda togeather with in thꝛe dapes a
pꝛelent thy celke here. And a mala went to
Ackerer derte was apoptes
enz time ap
bim sebertoze f Benge larde to Abitatnow


rh,
wall Seba ß tonne aud, Lev
HELblaiom. Cake thou therfore tyy* Low,
etuatites ¢folowattertinulet ye gett pint 4.5%, TO
walled cpties ¢ elcape vs. Andthere wet out?
afterbim Joabs men and the gerethites a ß
Phelethitẽs ache men of mygßt. Andthey de
Rache out ol Jeruſalem to tolow after Se⸗
the Conne ot Bochꝛi. Ind when they were
come to the great ſtone in Gabaon / Amala
met thẽ. And Joab had his garment that he E
bad about him /g yade viſto him / chad gyꝛde
cher on a knrte iopned fact to his loynes/ in
loche a chethe p as he wet it Fell tome tymeg
out. And Zoab farde to A mala: are alley
in reſt and peace my bꝛocher And z oab tonne
Amala by the chynne with the ryght hande /
as though he wolde haue“ Kylled bpm. and Pon xxbßi
Amala kokenohede to the npffe that was
in Joabs hand with which Joab mmote bpm
in the Hhozt rybbes ¢ ſhed outhps bowelles
fob Ee celia ded but one ſtrocke /
And then Foab and Abilat his bother to-
lowed after Seba the tonne of Bochzi. aud
one of Joabs men; ſtode byhim fapd: what
ig he that he wolde be as Joab / a what is he
wold be puto auto in ſtede ol Joab: And
la laye walowyng in bloude in p Inia
ol the wape.and there was a man 5 law al
e
be ro . :
Caou of thetwaye into the leide cate acloty “BGG
bpon bpm. And as kone as he was tombeled
out ol h waye / all p people wẽt Bohn
to kolow after Seba p tonne ol Boch.
And he went thozow all thetrpbes or c= E
rael vnto Abel / Bethmaacah ¢ all Wavim,
And ß 1 geathered vnto him ¢ wet allo
after him And ther cam and beleged hym in
Abel Bethmaacah And they cat bya bäcke
agayné the cytie Andit twas beteged. An ß
people 5 was with Loab labozed bulelye to
duer chzowe tye waſle. Then eryed a wyle
woman out ok the cytic / heave heare / brd J
pꝛape pou Joab that he come hyther / that
maxe (peake whim. nhen Joab was come /
che woman ſarwart thou Joab: And Joab
antwered fang ante fayotobimbeares N
wo des ol thy de: And he layd: Jam
readpe toheare. And che ſapde:ithach hene a
comen ſapinge in the olde tyme / men mult „ uinderttanb
athe of Abel / and then go to and kynyſhe the whether it
woꝛrcke. Abel is one ofthe qupeteſt ¢ fayth⸗ wü teccaue
fullett cpties 8 avetn Fvacl . And chou got peng ia ler
abouttodettropeacptte that is aga mother Pago Bel
mtrael. noh deuowꝛeſt thou the enheri⸗ te. x. c.
taunce ok the Lowe. 5
And Jab ant wered and capd: God foꝛbid /
God forbid it me / chat Z tuto ether deuow⸗
re oꝛ deſtroxe it. eee
go, there


Bautd, if, Samuel,


ere is a man of mount Eptuaim / Seba p and iphibolech / a the kyue fonnes of Mi⸗
Sonne at Bochu by name / which hach pte sholehe naughece ol Saul which (he bare to
‘elChat is 15 OP hig hand agaynt beng Baud. Pelpuer Adzicl the fonne ot Werietat the Molathite /
breomeaduer. Vs hem only / and I wyll depart kr the citre. and delxuered the vnto the handes of theGa-
faves enempe And the woman tardẽ bhto Joab: Beholde / beonites which hanged the in the hin befoze
G his heed halbe chꝛo wen thoꝛom the walle to the Loꝛde. And they ten all teuen to geather
the. And then the woman went vnto all che in the kyꝛſt dayes ofberuch: euẽ in $ begyn⸗
echstis/ people in ber wrkdome. Andebepimote ol nrngok Parlerhemeſt. :
countelpng ih che heed ok Seba the tonne ol Sochzt/ecat _ AndResphah the daughter of Tiah tone
dopftipt. tt to Joab. Andhe blew a trompet / and they Sackclothe ¢ ſpꝛed it vnder her vpon the
Chatered from the extie euerp ma to his tent. Rocke / euẽ krõ ß begynnyng ot harueſt vn⸗
And Joab returned to Jeruſalẽ vnto $ king. tpl rayne dꝛopped vpõ thẽ ont ol heuen and
And Joab was ouer all d hoſte ot Itrael tutlered nether d birddes of the Apre to fall
And Bãnatah the Conne of Jehotadã was on them bydare noz beaſtes of the kelde by
ouerthe Cerethites a the Phelechttes and nyght. Ind when it was tolde Bauid what €
Aduram was ouer the trybute. And Jehola⸗ N daugh
un boue inthis phat ö tonne of Ahtlud was Recozder. Ser
They n: . ua was fcribe And Spadock ard Abiachar Spi
der.. were the ppeackes. And gta the Jairite was
u helm 30, Whetwple Dautds*preatt,
2 edeare peres. Che vengeaunce of the cynnes
ende on saa ubs lic are bane bat
Tant which Dawid had agapnt


r. And Pauid enqupred ol the Loꝛd.
a ame Love antweren: t t8 fo
Sauls lake a the houle ot bloude / becaule
he flue the Gabaonites. And the kyng called
the Sabaonites e lapde vnto thé. Now there
Gabaonites are not of the chyldꝛẽ of Icrael /
butaremnatit ofthe Ammozites/ ethechil- ines. And Bauld waxed
dꝛen ol Flrael Cware vnto the. And pet Saul of * Nob one of the fonnesof * Haraphah


6
Cougheto lex chẽ / toꝛ a zele chat he had tothe whole fpeare heed waped thre hadzed Cycles read
a new cmerde .
ought to haue Mayne Dauid. But Abilat


and wherwith Hail J content yous ve mape 2


chplozen ok traci a of Anda. wherkoze Dae ot Bzalle /g was gyꝛde wrth
Uid lad vnto them: what (hall J do ko pou? th


* blelle the enheritaũce of § 107d.

And the Gabaonttes ſarde vnto hym: we
haue no matter of liluer oꝛ of golde Saul
02 with his houle: nether hauẽ we anymã 6
we wolde Byll in Flracl.chenbe tayo: what
9g fave ve that A (alto fz pour Andther fayo

vnto the kynge:the man that conlumed and

imagened to bꝛynge vs to nought / hem we
ought to deſtrope / that nought or him conti⸗

new in anp ofthe coottes of Irrael / letleuen ol?

men ok his Connes be deltuer ed onto be / that G

we maxe hang thé vp vnto the Lozd / in Ga⸗ wag as great as a weuers cloth beame.

baal of aul s loꝛdes electe. And Dauid And chere was vet battell incdeth / where

ſapde: J well geue them vou. wag a ma of afize and had on euerp hand. vi

But the kyng had compativon on Miphi⸗ Sengers ana on ue fote vi. toes. xritij. in
boſeth the ſonnẽ or Jonathas / che lonne ol all. Ind was allo of § kynred ol Hataphah /

Saul / becauſe ofthe Loꝛdes othe that was and deryed Irael. Ind Jonathas the tonne

betwene thẽ: thacis to laxe betwene Dauld ol Samach the bꝛocher ot Daum ũiue hym.

and p lonne ok Saul. But he tone ¶ Thele foure were ot $ tonnes of Haraphah
the two fonnes of Resphab the ol in Seth and were our thꝛowen bp the hand

Ala which the bare vnto Saul / Arment ol Dauid and bythe bares of his 44 096


what is fa.
noure and fett


Hebe tines woh


ij. Aynges


Dauld. Lrvbi,


Dauid tor p delpuerau - renede chat J hadin his Conve, wi.


d Nuid ſpake the woꝛdes ofthis
longe onto the Lon / what tymẽ §

. . — out ofthe

ofthe handes of Saul, 3


, 7
che home


Mn lten,: Sat detendeth mesmpnebpe holde ¢ refuges


Hi nog: 10 cher O my Sauer / ſaue me from wzonge.


kuh ha u. I woyll pꝛapſe and calle onthe L oꝛde / and

i 408 wich baile faurofeommpne enen, $039:
ner fas DAUCS OF deeth haue clofen me aboute / and
ape pan 5 flodes of Belial haue feared me. che coz

Hes, As Daoe hell haue cõpaled me about / a the Mares
i a Sotto decth haue ouertake me. In my trrbula⸗
| tecatslt bps J Called tothe Lozd/¢ cryed co my God.
rer bps Andhe heard my vopce out ok his tẽple / and
auch bes my crpe entered into his cares, And the erch
jae hernetetmbievand quote and the Eoundactons of
un soj.a, heuẽ moued ¢ thobe /becaute he was angrie.

Smoke went vp out ot his noſtrelies / a.
cõlumyng Fpze out ot his mouth / that coles
were kendled or him. And he bowed heuẽ and
came downe and darcknelle vnder nethe his

Bete. Andbe rode ppon Cherub andflew: and
be eden rene topnges ofthe onde abon
de made darcknelle atabernacie roũde about
Hint ew water geachered to geather in chickt
cloudeg. Ok the brightnetle / that was betoꝛe
him / coles were lett on kyꝛe.

The Loꝛde thundzed From heuen / and the
moſt hye put out bps vopce. Ind he chotte
arowes andl katered them / and buried lygy⸗
tenyng and turmopled them. And $ bottome
ofthe kee appered / and the foundactons of 6
woꝛlde were ſene / bp the realon ot the rebus
nyng of the Loꝛde / and thozow che blaltyng
ol the bꝛeeth ol hs noſtrelles. He tent from
e mrgb⸗


ered me fd my mightie enem
chat hach me and weve to fru
forme, teben ther had compated me in the
dave of mytrybulacton / the Lorde ſtayedme
vp. Ind he bꝛought me out into rowmeth /
delyuered me / bẽcaule he delptedin me.

Che Lozde rewarded me acco:dyng to my
rrahtwy nelle /a — fa che puͤrenelle
of myhandes he dealt me. Foꝛ J hept
che wapes of the Lone, anddrdno wpcked⸗
hefle foꝛcakyng my God. But J had all bys
lawes in mx ſpght᷑ / a turned my face from
none ol his ozdinaunces.Sut was pure bi
to him ward / a kept my ſelk krõ wickednelle.


Andthe Londe dyd tome agayne / accoz- thy kynge,


deng to me ryahtewelnes / and akter my pus


vnder led,


hou ſbälc be holt and wyth the mi i

bncozrupt/thou Mai be cheb

pure thou ſpalt be pure/ ¢ wych the troward

thou halt be krowärd alto. And che people

tat areinaduertpte chou haltbelpe. And

Aae D Loe ae te ees wal

iain on 5 the Lorde wall

1155 pe runne thoꝛow

ole mea ge e of zul agen

bene Che WAVE ot ede sane

e Lop :

as goſde / a he a wide to all chattruſt anhin at
Whois a God laue the Loꝛde / and who

mxgytie laue oure God? Godis my trengtly


2
lpernge ouer a walle.


N. in warte / and rydopch the wape cleare before


me. Ind maketh mp kete as Cwytte as an
beer enblettech metal opon mehr old.
And teacheth my handes to kyght / that a
bowe ol batic is to weake foz mpnearmes,
And chouhaſt laued me wyth thy hylde /
and keppeſt me euer in meakenes Ind thou
adel: me fpace e een n /thae er fete?
betvopen tie aibtutneonatagagne tear
med not bi
— —
f 0 0 e
cointo riot axyte: but telvonermip tere mt
Andthou compaledeſt me about Wright
to battell /a mabett them that roate agapntt
me to ſtoupe vnder me. Chat s to
Andthou madeſt myne enempes to turne runne away e
their hackes ta me / and them that hated me / dee trom me.
and J deſtrored them. loked koz helpe:
But none came to ſaue them onto the Loꝛde
they cryed / but he heard them not.
And F wil beate chem as malle as the
but of the ertz / and wyll tampe chem as the
beste ol p ſtrete / a wyil pꝛeade the abꝛoade.
Ardthoude eme from che dyden⸗
cpon of mp people /a kepeſt me to be an heed
puernacpös tos $ people which ¥ nem not
became my


And che alpentes crouched vnto me / and

eee pee wape can Fer uhren
a

tremble fog Feaveincheie™ pefenced places, cis he
Che Loꝛde lyue / and bleſled be he His my byde chem del
and exaltedbe God $ ſtrength that nes: although
mne. It is God that aduengeth me / 4" ea pe
berngeth downe the people vnderme. And v rofeng vn
delpwerety me krom mene enemies / thou tif. t2 tbe name oe
tell me bp onbpe trom the tHatryteagapntt nner & me
me /anddelpucrelt me trom wicked men. wing to ß gat
And tpertove@ Well m the O Loꝛde mitt fo: toges
amonge the hethẽn / and? will ipnge vnto thy ne tbanckes e
name. Fochrgreat ¢ manpfolde faupng of aa ante veo
and tperopng mercye onto thpne gebt he
anointed / euk to w auid a his teeve a a plan re


Hautd,


C Che tak commnnicacyon of Dauid / and the de ⸗
ferapeion of the mpghtp men to bpm delongeng.
¶ Che. xxitj.Capter. Bod
Pele bewelak lainges of Dauſd.
Dauid the Conne ol Flat ſayde And
thera is lytte vponhye / d anorn⸗
b ted of the God of Jacob ¢ pleatant
Plalmiſt ok Icrael tapdꝛthe ipꝛete of ß Lozde
tpake in me / ahis wo des were on mp tong.


tye men z
ebeth the


ij, Samuel.


and bꝛought it to Dauid: Meuerthelete he


out ok the
atone: 5


vrtye: But not lyke to anye of the thze in
ae Of warre and Dauid made him ofbis
councell. Acahel & bꝛother of Foab was one
ol the thyꝛtye. Chen Elehanan the conne ol
Dodo ot Bethlehem: Semah che Harodite:
Glica the Harovite: Peles the Palkite: Fra
Bisa uni cn
Anathoth:Wobonar the Hulathite:
an Ahohite: Maharat the Hetophathite: Ze⸗
leb the tonne of Baanah an Netopyathtte:
Ithal p tonne of Ribat of abaah a cytie ot
$ chylozé of Beniamin:Banatah the Boars
chonite; Nedat: ok the rpucr of Saas: Abtal⸗
bon the Arbathtte: Afmaueth a Berhomite:


fabe a nombꝛethe people that mae now
che nombꝛe of them. And g oab tape onto ß
kynge: 4 bereche p the Loꝛde thy God mate
the people as many moo as they be: pe c an
hundꝛed tymes lo many mo / and that $ eyes
ol mp Loꝛde the kynge maye ſe them. But
how ig it that my Loꝛde the kyng bath a luſt
Unthis tnyng: Notwichckandeng the kynges
wordes pꝛeuapled agapnſt Joab ¢ agaynſt
all the captaynes ol the Hoſte.

Chen Joab and p captapnes of the holt
went out from the Keng / to bewe the people
ol Ilrael. Andthey pated ouer Joꝛdan ¢ pit⸗
ched in Droer on the ryght ipde ok the cyte p
pech in the myddes of the valeye ol Gad and
fo forth to Jasev.And then they went to Ga⸗
lad and to the nether land of Hodelt / a Erom
thence to Dang aan / and aboute to Sidon /
and came to the ſtronge towne of Cpꝛe / and
to all the cyties ofthe Beuttes and or the Ca
nanites / and then went out to the South ol

juds / euen to Berlabe. And lo whe thephad
ene abꝛoade thoꝛow out all the lande they
returned to Jerulalem meren at the ende ot
nyne monethes and twẽtye
96 Joabdelpuctetipp the rekenpne ol the nom
2€ OF the peo ‘othehynge. Andthere
were kound zn Flrael nyne hũdꝛed thouland
men ok myght p dꝛew lwerdes. And the men
ol Juda were tue hundꝛedthouland men.

And Dauids heart (mote hymatter that
hehad nombzed che people. And he lapde vn⸗
to the ebene Joan kenned excedyngip in 5
Iba done, And now Lozdtake awape the
krelpace ok thy ſeruaumt: ko: A haue done ko⸗
Iphhelp. And when Dauid was bp ina moz⸗
ning che woꝛde of the Loꝛde came vnto the
piophete Gad Wauids tear lapinge: go and


Ddapes. And then L onde the kyng tal


Apeltilente of ij. Kynges. iij. dayes. Cr


the Angel chat deſtroped d people: it is luk⸗
ficient: let thyne bande ceate And the Angeln
was at the chꝛenenge place of Areunah the
Jebultte-Chen gene Hauid vnto the Lon
whe he law the Angell that tmote § people /
and lapde: loo / it is I that haue lynned / and
Ichat haue done wyckedip. But thele chepe
what haue ther done; lett 4 pꝛape the thyne
hand be onme and on my fathers houle.
And Sad came the lame dave to Mauld a
lapde vnto him:go pe reare an aultare bn⸗
tothe Lord inthe chꝛeüyng llowze of Treu⸗
nah the Jebutite And Baud accoꝛdynge to
che laping of Gad went pas che Loꝛd com:
maunded. And when Areunah lobed and law
the kyng a his feruauntes compng towarde
him / he went out: and bowed bpm felfe tothe
kyng flat on his face tothe ground / k layde:
wherkore is my Loe che yng come to hrs
leruaunt⸗ And Waurdfapd : to bye thethꝛel⸗
Spngeflowze of the / koꝛ to make an auitare
cher he 1.0 that the plage maye ceafe trõ
el 8
nd Areunah tapde vnta the kyng: let my
e ke and offer what empty
him good in his eves: Beholde oxen fozfacre
kee and fleades and che other inckrumentes
OF the orẽ Foz wood And Areunah che hyngt
krende gaue allto the kynge / and layde mo⸗
reouer nto the kynge the Lowe: the Loꝛde
thy Godaccepethe. Butthe kyng kapde bn⸗
to Areunahmot la but J wyll bye it of the
at a p2pce/and wyll not facretpce onto
e Lozde del A eee oe (yall cot me nought
ind fo Wautd boughethe cyzetyng llowe /
andthe oren fo Epttye Cycles of lyiuer. And
Maud byle there an aultare ontothe Loꝛde
and offered burnt facrefyces and peace


DB


bij.


Elihaba a Salabonite: OF ß fonnes ol Ja
deko . Ba an ae: C d P
the e ol Sarat an Ararite: Hana den
the ſonne of Aalbat the fonne ofa Maacha⸗ ane sua
thite:€ltam the tonne of Abithopbel the St⸗ ann
lonite-Bezrat tbe d armelite: Phataiche Ar⸗
bite: gaalthe lonne of Nathan of Zobah .
Bani the Gadite⸗Selec an Amonite: Maba-

rata Berothite the artnet berer ok Joab the

Comme of Saruiah J ra the gethzite: Gareb p

den h the Hethitẽ in allthirtte and

feuen,

sid casted the prople to be nombꝛed /

S m thꝛe dapts

there Fe .

chemin


offerynges. And ko the Lorde was
agreed with the lande. And the
plage ceated from
Itrael.


sexe brated hips boke 5 Sue
feconb ofthe k


faye vnto Bauid / this ſayth the Loꝛde. Jot⸗
ker the thꝛethynges / chole which ol them |
ſhall do ko the.


Sede nel.

e le
te nipne bun fu
died.


H boch alrael and Juda. And forth;
the fapdto Joab the captayne oF


ok the Philiſtines and kett water out oF the
well ol Bethlehem z was in the gate / s tobe


bis Bock: go abzoade J pape the thoꝛow out


allche Erpbes of Aura feng rü Sento Be


his hand
vnto Jerulalẽ to haue deſtropedit
compafizon todo — —


the Byngesatter the rekenynge ol
ag pe: ee after the hebzues is

called. che fy2tt or the kynges.,

Cae omg bitag eber Dawid in His cee

sonata po enn eo
n Adontab ee
he teste Chapter,


hen Kyng Dauw was
waren elde ¢ (trphe in pereg
ough they couered hym w
Aſckechd / vethe caught no heate.
wherkoꝛehys leruaũtes ſard
Dontohim: let there be ae

de the kynge a young
wat: ph n anoco herdche hen, uwe
her lpe in thy befome / that my Loꝛde the
hong mape get heate. Ind lo thep fought for
a fapꝛe Damofeltthozow out all the cooktes
ol Flraet a kounde one Abifag a Sunamite


Brought herto $ kong. And the Damolell


ercedyng fapze/e cherpabed the kung a
imanntrea ObRMOOLDR knewe her not.
But d doniah the lonne of Hagith exalted

um kelk ſaying:J wylbe kynge. And he gatt
acharet and hozmen and tyltte men to
runne bekoze hym. Andhys kather rebuked


not at anpe tyme non tapde fo moche to
Amas toby doer thoulo. Andhe was therto
A gooblye man ehys mother bare hem next
after Abtalom. Andhe comuned wpth Joab
konne of Satuiah a W Abiathar d pzeatt.


Andt olpe Adomah But ⸗Dadock the
great ena lonne ol Jehotada / Ha⸗
than the pꝛophet / Demet and Net a the men
OF mrgbt which were wych Dauid kauered
B not Adontah and Adontah lacrekiced pepe g
Some readt. oxen and kat iynges atthe fone of Zoheletz
br Enrogell. which is falt bp the well or ogell/ebadalt
his bzechzenthe kynges fonnes Gall the men

or guda the kynges feruauntes But Naty
the pꝛophet a Banaiah and the mightie men

and Salomonbrs bꝛotherhe bad not.

Hoherupon Nathan ſpate onto Bethla⸗
bethe mother of Salomon taping haft thou
notheard how that A dontah che tonne of ha


git) Dat raigne bnweting onto ouremaller B.


auld: Now therkoꝛe come p mare geue
the beutel hen to laue thyne atone ipte
the Ipfe ol th Conne Salomon. Pence eget


ae
fpcth to bere A will come


And heholde whple che vet talned wi
wunde eden the prophet twas come. And trent
ther teide the kyng taping: here cometh a⸗ reprint ber
than the pꝛophete. And whenhe was come ppurdkri h
befoze the keng / he made unce vnto p brngten.
yng vpõ his kãce onto $ nde / Aa
Mp Lorde kyng / halt chou lapde / Adoniah
afl raygne atter me / a he tall fret vpõ mp
leate· Fo he is gone downe this dave ahath v
offered oren/fatipnges ¢ ſhepe aboundant⸗
ipe/andbath called all the kynges Connes a
the captaynes of the Polt / and Abiathar the
zeaſt. And te / ther eate and deyncke beloꝛe
Biman ſape. God laue kyng A dontah. But
me thy leruaunt and Sadock the prea and
Banaiah d conne ot Jehotada /a thy leruaũt
Salomon he hath not called. Js this thynge
done ol my Lorde the kyng a pet woldeſt not
ewe me typ leruaunt / who chulde lytt on d
feate ot my Loꝛde the beng akterhim:
Chen kung Waurd ant wered a lapde: call
me Bethlabẽ. And ſhe cam in ¢ tode before
bim. And 6 kyng lware laping. As ſure as 5
Loꝛde (that bath rydd my loule out of all ad⸗
uerkpte ) lyueth:euen as I fare vnto the by
che Loꝛde God of Firat tay : Salomon
hall raygne after me / and he chall lytt vpon
my feate fo7 me/fo wyll I do this dave.
ethlabe bowed on her face tothe erth and
kynge andtarde: 3
PDauid maye yue
beng Baud call me Sa- &


dalomon is


phet anornte him there / to be kyng ouer Ze
rael. And then blowe pe with a tröpet a la
God laue kyng Salemũ. And then come bp
alter him / a let him come and lytte spon my
ſeate. Foꝛ he haibe kyng in my ſteade. and
him I haue cõmaunded to be captayne ouer

fracl and Juda. And Banaiah the tonne o€

ſeholada ant weredthe kyng ¢ lapde / a mẽ /
Glo Ipꝛape Godthat the Loꝛde God or my
Loꝛde the kyng tape fo to. Andas the Loꝛde
bath bene wmp Loꝛde the kyng / euen lo /
pꝛape God he mave be / with Salomon and
b he make his ſeate gloꝛpouler then  teate
ol my Loꝛde kyng Bauid.

And Sadock the preak and Hathan the
prophet and Banaiah p lonne ot Jehotada a
che Cerethites and phelethites wẽtdowne / e
fett Salomon vpon kyng Dauids le q

Kleddhim to Sihon. And
tohe an hoꝛne of oyle out of the tabernacle €
anointed Salomõ. And they blewe a tröpet /
and all they tapd: God laue kyng Salonen,
And all the people cambpalterhim pppyng
wich pypes andretopiyng greative / lo p the
210 50 with the Counde ol them.

nd ã doniah and all the gettes that were

with him / heardit euen as they had made an
ende ok eatynge. And when Joab hearde the
founde ok the krompet / he lapde: howhappe⸗
neth it that there is toche a noptein 6 cptie?

And as he pet cpake / le / Jonathas the tonne

of Abiathar the peat came. And Adomah
ſarde: come fo2 thou art a luſtpe bloude and

Bengel good tyoynges. And Jonathas an⸗

kwered e kärdto Anoniab:wserelp oure Loz
rng Dauſd hach made Saloms kyng. And
Lyng Cent with him / Sadock 6 pꝛealt and
iche pꝛophet:and Banatah the lonne

el Achoiada a the Cerethites a the Phelethi⸗

68 /¢ ther haue let him bps ß kyngt Mule.

And Sadock the pꝛeaſt and Nathan $ Pꝛo⸗

phet haue anoynted hun kyng in@thon.and
us cher came bp agarne thep retopled chat
the cpttenyd founde agarne. And chat is the
hople that ve haue heard. And therto Salo⸗
mon Cytteth on the leate of the kyngdome.

Andmozeouer the nynges feruauntes went

into blete oure Lozde kyng aut taping:
thy Godmake the name of Salomd moare

Fauoure then thrne and hi keate moze glo⸗

rioule then thyne . Andthe kyng bowed hem
elk vpon the beed. And laſt of all thus lade


8


che kyng: bleded bethe Loꝛde God of Ilrael fed


which bath made one to Cpt on my feate this
daye /euen myne eyes feping it.

And allthe gettes that were W Adoniah
were akraped a role vp a went euery ma bys
wape. Ind Adoniah fearyng Satomi aroſe
Gwent a caught holde on che boznes of the
aultare. Andit was toe Salomon / how z


i Kyn


adock the Pꝛeaſt -


ges, Anoynted. Crxviij.


Poontab kor feare of kpng Salomon halhe


pe: Fegught handkaſt by the bores ofthe aulta⸗


refapmng:iettiyng Spalomontwerentomie geen


thisdape/that he well not flep his leruaunt ter e.
with the werde. and Salomon lapde: pthe
wylbe a chylde of vertue / there Mall not an
beavee of bim talltoß erth But a pr wicked:
neſſe chal be kound in hym / he ſhali dye £03 it.

And therupon kyng Salomö tent a ket him
downe From the aultare. And he came ae dyd
obextaunce vnto kyng Salomon. And Spaz
lomon lapde to him:ger the to thyne houle.


CWautd dpeth. Adontab regmmreth to haue Abilag
to his toncubpne / and therfore Salamd cömaundeth
toller hem. Abiathar is put from his W ꝛeſthode.
Semei and Joab are Cape.

che teconde Chapter. a


hen ß dapes ol Dauid were dꝛaw⸗
RANGA nenve/that he wuldedpe / he chars
Aged Salomon his lonne taping: 3
. . d of ali the
old neuerthelater be thou ſtrög a qupte
the felémanfullp.ainpte that chou hepe the zehn
Appopntment ok che Loꝛde thy God / J thou weut. ert.
walke in his wares ¢ kepe his commaunde⸗
mẽtes / oꝛdinaũces / late g and teſtymonies /
euen as it is witten in the uwe OF Motes:
chou map onderitanvall that thou ough⸗
teck to do / and all war thou Mulvet. menpit
with. Chatthe Lozemape make good bys
Prometle which behath pꝛompled me fapig:
pk thy chplozé Mall take hede to their waves /
that they walke bekoze me in truthe / wyth
all their hertes a with all their fowies *then ö. Meg. ix. b
thou chalt neuer be with out one lyttyng on
the beate ot Ittael. ran
„„Worconer thou wottett how Foab the. ne
konne of Saruiah bath leruedme / and what and ere.
hehath done to p two captapnes of the Boz
ſtes of Icrael: onto Abner the tonne of Her
and onto Amala the donne of gether howhe
Aue them ä ſhedthe bloude or warre intyme
ol peace and put the bloude of warte vpon
his gyꝛdle that was about his loynes and in
bis thoes that were on bis kete. Peale wyth 35
1 therkoze acroꝛdyng to thy wyldome and
# qrauein peat san deren
graue in peace. ew kyndn to z neg xix t.
che fonnes ok Bertelat the Galaadite / let“ anh
them be amg them that eate at thyne atone
table / becaufe they lo claue to me when Z
kom Ablalom chy bother. u . nen btb
And fe/thou batt wich / Demet p tonne h Meg;
ok era the Conne or Gemitti of Bahutem /
which curled me wyth a bytter curte what
tyme F wẽtto Mahanahim. But he came a⸗
gaynſt me to Joꝛdan ard I l ware to him by
the Lone ſapinge. J weil not lleythe wyth
the lwerde. But pardon thou him not. Chou
alt


Aoniah/Z


ver r. t


a. God do


Byngdom ſtablpũhedmyghtelp.
She chat A doniah the tonne ol ich
cameto Bethlabe the mother of Kaſomon
Andche tard: Betoßenech thy comig peace?
And he laxde:it betoneneth peace. Chen Cayo
he haue a matter to chewihe And che fapd:
lapẽ on. Andhe lapde: thou knoweſt that che
Eyngdome wag mne / ¢that all Atrael put
cheit eyes on me / p J chulde raygñe / how be
keche kungdom twas turnedawap a geuẽ to
mp bꝛocher / kortt was appopnted him ol the
Lozd: g now Aacke a peticid of $ / wherot de
nye me not. And the card vnto him: tell what
it is: Chen he layde: c peake J pꝛapthe / vnto
Salomon the kynglkoꝛ he well not tape the
nape) that Regence aoe the Sunanit⸗
te to wyle. And Bethlabe fapde-well/F wyn
g oz the vntothe kyng.
alomon to ſpeake vnto him koꝛ Adontah.
nd kiten h bp agaynſt her and bowed
hem kelke onto her / and Catt hvm downe on
hrs leate. Andthere was a Ceate fect for the
kynges mother / e* the lat on his right lde.
Chen che lapde: J mult delpꝛe a lpttell peti⸗
Cpon of the:laxe me not nave, And che kynge
ſapd vnto her; Ache on my mother: fo: well
not fave p nape. And che farde: let Abilag 5
Sunamite be geuen to Adontah thy brother
to wyle. and king alomõ anlwered a tard
onto his mother whn dock thouackea bie
the Hungmile fo2 Abontah but rather athe
ker hin $ kyngdome / eing he is myne elder
bꝛother:uen koꝛ him athe it a foꝛã biachar
the pꝛeaſt / a koꝛ Joab the fonne ol Zaruiah.
fos Chen Eynge Salomon (ware by the Loꝛde


foacswasa cus 53 elo therto pl Ado⸗


e


aue not poke this worde agapnt him


a0 ib t fapde. Self How therkoze as furely as the Loꝛdẽ ip:


Muth. i. c.


ueth which bath ſtablyched me and let me on
Ethe leate of Dauid my tather / a which bath
. ompten me / Ado⸗


th
ind tyerupon Bethlabe went ontobyng captayn


et eng ci mer th
ata
eokthe pot fed aw gry eee 4 14


pnagefené ania called Demet /
and larde to him: buylde the an houle in Je⸗
rulalem a dwell there a te tat chou go not
once thece anp whether. Foz be ure ok
tt / the dave thou goeſt out and palleſt ouer ?
rpuer of Cedzon /thou ſhalt dye fo2 it / ache
blond chalbe onthyne awneheed. And Hee
met ſarde onto ß Byng:itis wel layde:as my
Loꝛde $ kyng bath lad / ſo wyll his ſeruaũt
do. And Demet dwelt alem manps
dape. And it chaunced at the ende ol thꝛe yere
thãt two of the leruauntes of Demet ranne
e etanogs
ol & ind one: 2
be incgech. And Demet ſtode
ig Alle and gat him to Seth to
his feruauntes /and came and


Salomon,


was come agapne. And § Hong tent ¢ called

Demet a lapde onto him: Myo J not adlure
thebp the Lord a tenikped onto che taping:
be fure whẽ lo euer thou goeſt oute walkelt
abzoade anp whether thou halt dpe fo it?
And chou ant weredlt me /it is goodtyoinges
chat J haue hearde. why then haſt chou not
Kept the othe of the Loꝛde / and the cõmaun⸗
dement chat J commaunded the?

Andthen the kyng larde to Hemei: chou
remembꝛeſt all the wickeonetie which thyne
hert knoweth 5 thou dydeſtto Dauid mp fa
ther. Che Conde therfoze render agapne thy
wyckednee vponthyne awneheed: a k
Salomon be bleſled / the feate of Dauidbe


* ablpabedbefoze the Lope ko euer. Ind ß


kyng cömaunded Banaiah the tonne of Je⸗
hotada: which went out and imote him that
he dyed. Ain fo was the kyngdome lettled in
the hand of Salonion.


Salomon taketh Pharaos daughter to wyte. Che
de apereth to him and geueth him wyldome. The
— ol cdehtberlores ‘abo dulbeonen the 5.
uyng chkide: and Salomons lentence therin,
¶ Che thirde Chapter.
en Salomon dꝛew affinite with
Pharaonpng of Egypte / and tone
bbaraos daughter a bzought her
into the cptpe of Bauid vntyi he
bad made an ende orbywding his awne houle
Wabern ol the Lorde e the walles of Fez
lem rounde aboute. Only the people ta
creficed in aultares made on hylles /becaute
chere was no houle bylc onto the name of ß
Lom pntinchole dapes. And Salomô loued
che Lozde and walßted in the oꝛdinaunces ol
Pauidhis father / laue onlpe that he lacreti:
ced g ockered incente bps aultares in hylles.
Ard $ hyng wẽt to Gabaon / to offer there:
forb was a great offerynae piace. And there
Salomo offered a thouland bu
‘bpon that aultare. And in Gabaon the Loz
d to Salomon ina dꝛeame by nyght.
Sod lade: Alke what A Mall geue che.
and Salomon karde thou halt chewed bnto
thy feruatit Dauid my father great mercpe /
accoꝛdynge as he waltzed bekoze $ intruthe
Ge. ogee E playneſſe of herte wyih
che. Andthou hac kept kozhym this great
mercpe /g thou halt geuẽ him a fonne to fete


Snbis (eate:as it is come to patie thys dape. Ch.
adh Ard nom Lord / nyc od it is thou that halt


made thy feruaunt keng in ſteade of Bauid
ip father. And ama pong lad ¢ wott not
soem oa deere

0 opie ou 02
len / a people § 225 lo manpe 6 thep cãnot be


ank. c. tolde no nobꝛed foꝛ multptude.* Seue ther⸗


foze onto thy teruaunt an vnderſtandynge


hett to tudgẽ thy people ¢ ko decemne betwe⸗


i Nyngts.


ne
Lrriv.
ne good / and badd. 02 who is able to iudge
thistbptowargbticapenpie:

And it pleateo the Loz well /? Salomon
bad delpied this thong. Wherkoze Godlapde
bntobim:becaule thou halt athenthis thing
tha not acked long (pte / nether halt athena
ryches nozz Iput okchine enempes / but halt
atkedthenttcrecton to vnderctande egupte.
Se, J haue done accoꝛdyng to thp petycion:
and beholde / Z haue geuen che a wyle and an
vnderſtandyng hert / lo that there was none
Ekethe befoze / nether akter the Mall anve
arpte irke onto the. Andcherto J haue geuen
che 6 thou al kedſt not bothetpchette € ho⸗
noute; fo that there chalbe no kynge Ipke
che al ihr dapes. Ind pr thou wylt walke in c
my wayes / to kepe myne opdinatices a com⸗
mäũdemete as Dauidthy kacher dyd walke /
poet lengthen thy dapes allo. when Sas

monawone this was his dꝛeame. And he
came to Jerulalem a pꝛelented him felfe be⸗
fozethe Arche ofthe teſtament ok the Low /
offered burntofierynges S peaceoſleringz /
and made a feaſt to all bis feruauntes,

Chen came there two wemenß were har⸗
lottes onto the kyng d Hove bekoze him. And
8 one of the larde: Oh mp Lou ¢ this wo⸗
mandwell itt one boule, And J was delpue⸗
red oF a chylde wher in the fapoe houle. And
chethnde dapeacker 6 J was delpuered / che
was delpuered allo: we two beyinge to gea⸗
ther eno ſtrager iw va in § houle laue we
two alone. And this wyues chylde dyed in a
naht / ko the had. ouerfapde it. Andthen che


arole at mydnyaht atoke my tonne krommp * DF cnothe⸗


Erde uhele chene handmapde depts apne tren
10 ld . me 17 chen mme
om en J role vp in the moꝛnyn⸗
togeue mpcheldelliche de it was dreh. Buß
Bed moare dpligentlpe bpon it


ena bet to
in moznpng:Beholde,tt was not ny Fone a


Jdrdbeare. And § other woma fayde:
ttisnotto:6ut the lpuyng is my forme) and
chedeedthyne. And deebischy donne alle
Cavett ontrue/for che derd is thy konne / g the
ipupng mne. And thus they pleated before
Fung. Chen larde ß kengeche one layeth /
this that ig a lxue is my tonne / and the deed
Gthrne. And the other arch nave: But thy
Sonne is che derdand b ipue chploe is myne.
en tarde p Epng:bypng mea twerde, And
v bzoughta fierde before the kyng. And
e i

one balée tothe
one / and the other ko the other.


. a. By her bos

Chen kpakethe woman whore ther weilen are un⸗
wl was ene Feng ueber bonefgg rte de
perncd dene den ) ant tapoe: 9 beteche manage ant
themp Lone geueher thetpumage chrde / meer Au


and inno wyle ler it. And the other layne it. lg,
r. thalbe ow


Salomon,


Luce. vs c.


—


2. Cher
Ag nnd.


tet


Malbenetbermyne nos thyre/butpeupde it.
Chen § kong antwered ano fayoe:*geue her
the lyu yng chylde and llex it not / ko the is 6
mothertherok. And all Itrael hearde ok the
iudgement which the kyngebad fudged and
fearenthe knge: ko they lawe that the wil⸗
dom of God was in him to do iuſtice.


Dila / tcribes. Jeola⸗
phath the tonne ot Ahllud / the recoꝛder. And
Banatah the tonne ot Jeholada was ouer p
Hoſte. And Sadock and d biathar were the
pieaſtes. And 4 zariah the tonne of Nathan
Was oer 5 general recenuers. And Habud
the lonne ol Nathan was a wayter and the
kynges companton. And Abifar cceward ok
houthoive: And Adonirs tonne of A bda ouer
the trybute.

And Salomon had twelue generall re⸗
ceaueig ouer all Icrael which futlapnen the
Reng a his hou cholde:eche man hrs month
in a pert. nohole names are thele: che ſonne
or Dur inmeunt cphzalmithe tonne ol Des
karin Mahez in Salem in Bethtames / in
Clon a in Bethhanan:the lonne of Pele in
Aruboth /e to him pertayned Socoh and all

Bthe lande of Pepher: che Conne of Abinadab /
which had all the vegtons ol Boꝛ / and Ca⸗
pheth daughter ot Dalomd was his wife:
Baanah the lonne ol Ahilud had Chanach
Magedo and all Bethlan which is by Zar⸗

anal benethe Jezrahjel / a krom Bethlanto

bel Mehulah a onto bepound Jecmaam.

che ſonne of Gaber had Ramoth Galaad / €

his were the townes ot Jair p lonne of Mas

naſſe which iye in Galaad/ andhys was the

coſtes of àtgob in Balan / thze Choze great
cyties with walles and Barres ol Bꝛalle.

Ahinadab the tonne of Ado had Pahana⸗

im: Ahimaaz had Nephthalim / a he hadta⸗

ken Balemath the daughter of Salomon to

wpfe: Baanah the fonne ot Hulat had Aſer

was und Aloth:Fehoraphat § tonne ot Pharuah

rde had Ilachar a Semet the lonne ok Elah had


met wüich Sa Bentamin: Gaber the lonne of diz had the
iomd cauled to contrepe of Galaad andthe lande of Sehon


led: of it
pang i sn m BENG OF he Amozites ¢ of Do bi


of Ba⸗


, fan/and was alone receauer in the and And


derer h hahe ubs and glrael were manpe euẽ as 8 land


g. une be was of the lee in nombꝛe / eatyng / dynckyng and put
spe 5 of  Mahyng mere And dalomsrargrebouer.


Wahurim.


all Kyngdomeß from the ryuer choꝛol out all
. oneo eye borters


tij, Aynges.


— andthey bꝛought pꝛelentes aler⸗
ued Salomon all dapes of his ive.

And Salome fode was in one daye thir.
tie quarters of manchet lioure ¢ the fhoze
quarters of mele: ten tailed oren / a twentie
out ofthe paſtures ¢ an hundzed chepe and
gootes / belpdes herttes / buckes a bubalies
Klatt pultrłe. Foꝛ he ruled in all tye regions
on the other fyoe Euphꝛzates krõ Chaphlay
to Gaza /a alio ouer all § kvnges on p other
ſyde the larde Euphꝛates. And he had peace
with all his feruauntes on euerꝝ ide. And
Juda and Ilrael dwelt without keare / euere
man vnder his vyne a vnder his kygg tre fro
Dan to Berlabe /all $ da pes of Salomon.

And Salomo had fourtie thouland ſtalles 2

ol hozũeg Coz charettes / ⁊ twelue thouſand
hozlmen. And 5 toꝛlayde general receauers
made puruepaunce fo2 kyng Salomon and
foz all that came to kyng Salomons table /
eueryman his moneth / lo that there lacked
notheng. and as fon barlpe and ſtram for the
hoꝛũeg d beat, cher bꝛought vnto 6 places
wbere b officers were euerx mä in his office,


And Sodgaue Salon wildome n vn⸗ era


derſtandyng excedyng moche ¢ a large hert /
euẽ as g lande aiong bythe tee bancke lo ß
Salonions wyldonie exceadedthe wyldome
ok all the ol the Eaſt contrepe a all the wyl⸗
dome ol che Egrpctans. And he excelled all
men in wyldom̃e / boch Ethan the ꝛrahite / a
Hemã/Chalcol and Boꝛda ß ſonnes of Ma⸗
hol. And his name ſpꝛede ab ade among all
nacyõg on euerytpde and Salomon wiote
thze thouland pꝛouerbes Andbistongs were
1 8175 A kxue. And he diſputed of trees /
eus krõ the Cedar tre p groweth in Libanon
vnto the I lope ? fort eth out of the walle,
Andbe dilputed of beattes / koules / woꝛmes
and pikes nd there came of all nactons to
heare d wyldom of Salomo /a frõ all kyngz
ok the erth which had hearde ol his wyldonie.
‘ Cendeth Cedar tymber to the bylbj
Sheet | were haar rpc ly sing
(Che. v. Chapter.
d Hiram krnge of Cire ſent hys z
)) Ceruauntes onto Salomon / fo he
had hearde that they hadanopnted
him henge in the rowme of his ka⸗
Ser. And therto Hiram was euer a louer ol
Dauids. And Salomd fent agayne to hi⸗·
tam fayinge:thou knoweſt of Bauid my faz
ther/howbe coulde not bylde an houle bnto
2 ok che 4 yphioe 16 105 es
e had on euerr fpde / bntpll the Hozde
thé vnder his kote. But now the Lom me
Sodhath geuẽ me reſt on euerylide lo p ther
is nether 1 bat ange euell plage.
AnotherfozeZam tpotrato bene an boute


Hiram Salomon,


vnto the name of the Loꝛde my God / ag he
peomeled Dautd my father tar ĩg: th tomie
B which 4 weil put vpon thy ſeate Foz the / he
thail bplde anhoule vntomp name. Now
chen cõmaunde 6 they hewe me Cedar trees
in Libanon. Ind iet my ſeruauntes be with
thine / as wyll geueß hire of thy leruaũtz in
all foche ty yngẽ as thou ſhalt appoynte / foz
chou knowelt p there are not amog bs p can
firpll to hewe cymber lyke vnto p Sidones.
When Hiram hearde the woꝛdes ol Spaz
lomon he reiopied greatipe a ſapde: Bſelled
be the Loꝛde tees Daye which bath let Dauid
à wyfe lonne ouer this myghtie people . And
iva Cent agapne to Salomon fapinge: 3
haue accept the requeſt which thou lentelt
C tome foz/¢ wyn latittpe ali th luſt / concer⸗
neng tymbze of Cedar trerg a ore. My ler
uauntes Mall bꝛyng the fra Libanon tothe
lee. And J wyll conuepe thé bp Hhippe vntoß
place that thou ſhalt fende me woꝛde / a wyll
caule themto be dilchargedthere / that thou
maplt receaue th. And chou cbaltdo me this
pleaſure agapne / to myniſtre tode koꝛ myne
boule. And lo Hiram gaue Salomon Cedar
trees a kpare trees ag moche as he detyzed,
And Salomõ gaue Hiram twẽ tie thoutand
quarters of wheate to fede his houſholde 16
all / a twẽtye butts of pure ople Andlo moche
gaue Salomon to Bram pere by pere.


D., And the Londe gaue Salomon wifoome tt
as he pꝛomeſed hem. And there was peace


betwene Hiram and Salomon a they were
contedered to geather. And kyng Salomon
arepted a trybũte thoꝛou out ali Icrael. And


A trpbute was thirtie thouland men / which


1 fent to Libanon ten thouland a monethe
p courte / ſo that they were one moneth in
Libanon and two monethes at home.
And A doniram was ouerthe tribute. And
lomon hadthze rkoze ¢ ten thoulande B
are burdens / a thꝛetkoꝛe and ten thouland
ie hewedinthe mountapnes berrdes the
7. had / to ouer led woꝛcke / in numbze
chꝛe thouland a thze bundzed / which ruled
People that wꝛought in p woꝛcke. And at
commaundement of the kyng / thepbz
great Hones and that fre tones / andhewed
to lape in toundacion ofthe houte.
nd Salomons matong and the matons ot
Drs ae pypareD One nde
Andto: 2 mbꝛe
fone to byde the houle. 5


che ft
2 2 Memple poche and


0
ichplo2é of Jcrael were come out of
che lande of Egept / a z fourth pere


ii. Aynges.


Of the rargne of Salomon vpon I lrael / and


the teconde moneth called * Sit p he begane; „Chat s /
to bylde the temple vnto the Loꝛde. 1 the dane e
bouke which Salomon belt kor the Lowe / well thar
Maye,


‘was the (koze cubptes longe and twentye
bꝛoade a thirtie cubites hye. And the poꝛche
that was bekone p bodpe of the temple / was
twentie cubytes ionge alter the meature ol
the bꝛedeth of the houle / and ten bꝛoade / euẽ
at the verye ende orthehoule. And he made
vntothe houle windowes to open and Mutt,
And onder $ wales of the houle he made
galarves rounde about / bothe roũde aboute
che temple and allo the quere. Andro made
ſpdes rounde aboute. And the nethermoſt
Galery was. v. cubptes bꝛoade c the myddle
Galery.bt. And the theid. bij. cubptes bzoade,
For he made the walſes without wheron the
beames lape / euerthynner and thynner / ko
that they were not kaſtened in the walles of
chehoute. Andthe houte was bylt of tone
made perfecte all readye perit was bꝛought
thither / lo that there was nether hammer oꝛ
axe ether anp tole of pꝛon hearde inf houſe /
leit was in


nd the doꝛe of the mpddle galary wat in
che ende ok the haute on the ragte lrde. Ind
men went bp with 1 ſteares into
mxddle galarpe / and out of the myddie into
chirde Andro he brit the boule and kynilched
and roufite it with beames of Cedar tym⸗
ber made holow and iopned to geather. And
chen he bylt chambzeg oucvall the temple of
fpue cubptes height / and coupled the houle
to geather with beames of Cedar.
And che woorde ol the Loꝛde came to Sa
lomon faping:concernpnge the houle which
thou art in bpldyng / pkthou wylt walcke in
mine oꝛdinaunces and execute my lawes e
kepe all my cõmaundementes / to walcke in
them: then wyll J make good vnto the / my


promes* which J pꝛomeled Daud tp faz I negum pg.
cher. And J wylldwelle antöge che chpidzk Ero. Fru. b.


OF Itraei and will not foꝛlake my people Fle
racl. Andlotherkoꝛe Salomon bplt p hoüle
and kynpithed it and tpled the walles oF the


duaht Houle within with rybbes of Cedartre:euẽ


From the pauemẽt vntothe route dd he lyle
it within / and bo ded the Hlooze or the houle
with planckes of Fyre, :
Andbelplentwentie cubytes in the ende
okthe temple bothe flooze a walles with Ce⸗
dar / anddzeſled t within to be the quere and
place moſt holpe. And p tpzſt houle/ that is
to ſape / the bodxe ok $ temple / was kourtye ¢,
cubptes longe. Andthe Cedar ok the houte
within was kerued wich knoppes earauen
‘Dd Hloures/eall wag Cedar tymber / lo that
no ſtone was kene. Andche quere that was
within the t ple / he pꝛepared to det therethe
r. j. Arcke


Crxx.


Salomon.
Arche ofche appopntment other ode And
the quere was kwentye cubptes longe / and
twentie in bꝛedch a twentpe in herght. And
he lle it with pure golde / ¢ boꝛded the aul⸗
tare with Cedar.

And Salomon ſpledthe houle within ale
fo with pure golde. Ind he made golden bar⸗
tes runne a longe the quere / wůych he had
couered with goudde. Ind the whole houſe he
dner layde with gould he had ended it.
And the aultare that ð quere he over
lapde wich goulde allo.

And within p quere he made two* Cheru
byns of olpue tee / ten cubytes hre a pece/
andeuerp wynge cubptes longe:to that
krom the bttermof parte ol one wynge vn⸗
to the vttermoſt parte of the other were ten
Cubptes,

And the other Cherub was ten cubptes
he allo:ſo that bothe the Cherubes were ol
pep ne wen ben en a ca ol the
one

W other. Andhe put che Cherubes in d midd⸗

Erodl. xxub⸗ le ot f ynnerhoüle. And § Cherubes dret-
ched their wynges / lo that che one wynge
ol che one touched che one wall / and the one
wynge ol the other touched the nther walle,
And che other two wynges orthem touched
one another in the myddes of the houle. And
he duerlapde the Cherubes with goulde.

And all the wales ot the boule rounde
aboute / he eb with woꝛcke of Chee
tubes a paulme trees and grauen flowꝛes /
Raue Aude quere and without in the

emple.
ren Gouide hothe within in the quere a


ti, Aynges.


Ce bylopng of the houte of Salomon. Che hous
7 daughter. The forme of Ke
228 5 ian


fn


was ten cubytes / a lo was it of ch


nd che flooze or the houle he coue⸗ 4


allo without in the temple. And in the ente⸗ eygh


ryng ol p quere he made two doꝛes of olyue
tree with the vpper andtwolpde poſtes true
Cquate, And the two dozes of olpue tree / he
Graued wich grauyng ot Cherubl and Paul⸗
me trees and graued flowzes / couered thE
with goulde / andlapde goulde oucr the Che⸗
tubes and alta the Paulme trees .Andin kp:
ke maner vnto the dooze of the tẽple he made
poſtes of olyue tre. iin. quae / ¢ two doꝛes
ol kpꝛre tree / ¢ ether doꝛẽ with two koldynge
leues and graued theron Cherubes Pauf⸗
me trees and llowzes / and couered the with
goulde made plane bya ruler.

And then he bylte che per courte wyth
thꝛe rowes of hewed Hone and one owe oF


an apg Erdar wodd. ‘
rene the In the kourth pere of bys vayane was che
abe ebe —.—.— of the boute of che Londe larde /
Chatte Or, euẽ in 8 moneth ; Zit / in p. xi. pere in ᷣmo⸗
fober:0:(as for nech! Bul which is che. vii. moneth / it was
or woot) Parte Gull Epnpabed in all that pertapnedcherto /g
parte of Mone, Cactoned as it Guin be in all popntes: und lo

der. was he. vij. pere in brideng of it.


thze rowes of hewed ſtone and one rowe of
ol Cedar planckes. And lykewyre was it in
the vnner courte of the houle ol the Loꝛde €


oethe ponche oF § temple.” And kong ale . was,


mon ent a let one Hiram out of Cire / a we⸗
dowes lonme of the trybe of Mephtalim / bys
kather e OF tre. mhich h was a
crattes ma m bʒaſſe / full of wyldome vn⸗
derſta connpng to woꝛcke all maner
ot woꝛcke in bꝛalle. Andhe came to kynge
Salomon and wrought all bys twozcke Be
re cea eto
pecebpe/anda ol. xij. cubytegm
compalſe ether of them aboute. And he made
two heed peces of molten bꝛaſſe to let on the
toppes of the pyllerg ot Epue cubptt longe a
pece / w garlandes of bꝛayded woꝛcke a who
pes ol chapne wozche foꝛ the beed peces that
were on the pyllers. bij ko 6 one and. bij toꝛ
che ocher. And he made; ppilers / a Foz ether C
ofthe heed peces a garlande w two epo;

N 5 05


geben ues


ub mt oron the Hatt bozdes betwene the ledg


Salomon,


of pomegranetes to couer thẽ wich all. And
the heed peces that were on the toppep ol ¢

illers were wzought wlxlxes in Lp posche

e ſpace of toure cubites of chem. And d po⸗
megranetes aboue a benethe on the wꝛethen
chapnes that compaled the mrddle ol che
beep pecces were innombie two hundꝛed on
ether herd pece. Andhe tett vp the pyllers in
the poꝛche of the temple / and when he had let


go op thervghe plier / he called § name therok


achin / a when he had let tp che lekte ppller
called the name therot Boaz, And p top⸗
pes ot the pyllers were thus wzought w Ip-


lies g lo was thete woꝛkmanſhip tyneſched.
(een ner ol bꝛalſe / ten cubytes


wyde krõ bꝛym to bꝛym and rownde in com⸗
pale /a true cubites hye. And a ſtryng ot. xxx
cubites myght compale it about / and under


the bꝛym of it as it were apples compaſed


andembzated the fee of ten cubytes wyde in
two rowes caſt with it whe it watt calt. Ind
it Lode on twelue oren: of which thze loned
North thre weſt tyre South a thze Kalt / a
che lee on hye vpon chein and all cheirhen⸗
bene rere aner ougoelye

et cke / zm wꝛought ly⸗
ke the bꝛyni ot a cup with lo woes of Iplies.


ö 1 Wen Andi Contapned* twothouland* Bathes.
f sane’ aeneecubptes 10 ö i
Hal no cb, @ thre ype . And the woꝛckẽg of the botomes
unit quo: was on this maner that che tydes were ag it
man Ewere Bat bowes betwene che edges And


And he made ten botomes of bzatie / koure
& koure cubptes bꝛode a pece /


r quatptee Iporis / aren a Cherubes And ppõ che ledges


e 6s no
att


wthat were aboue a beneth the lyons a oxen /


was fopned pendant wozcke. Ind euerp bot:
tom had koure bꝛaſen wheles / whole axel⸗
trees were allo of bꝛaſle. And in 8 foure coz
ners were vndertetters vnder the lauatozpe
tat eche ouer agaynſt his felow.
And $ dcalckẽ of thelauatozpe was in th
middle of p bottome one cubit he / anda cus
byte e anhalt roũide / e it had knoppes there
on in b bare places which were toute ĩquare
not rounde. And bnder the lrdes were koure
he les and their axeltrees ioyned falt to the
bottome. And the hetght of eucry whele was
acubpte and an halke. Andche woꝛckman⸗
Ghipe of the wheles was Ipke 6 woꝛcke ot a
charet wiele. Ind the areitvees/$ nacelles,
Chokes and (hsttes were all moulten. And 5
koure puderfetters in the koure comers were
ok the berpe bottomes. 8
And under the ſtalcke of the lauatoꝛpe in
$ ihprnes of § bottome was there a rounde
fote ok halke a cubptbpe. And theron plapne
Places and lenges of the lelte. Andhe graued
inthe plapne ¢aifo on 5 lenges /cherubes/
Irons a paulmetvets / euerx where rounde


ih Fangs:


Hiram.
about. And on tyis manerhe made ztenbot⸗ f
toms caſt woche: all of one meatute a one
(ple. Chen he made ten lauers of bꝛalle con⸗
tarnenge kourtre Bathes a pece / andthey
were ol koure cubytꝭ a pece / koꝛ euer one ok
bottomes a fauct, andhe put ĩyue okthole
ottomes on the ryezt coꝛner of the temple /
and other kyue on
the rꝛght comer of
towarde the Hou. 8 25
And Hiram mage pottes / wouienes & ba⸗


Falexe/afouré bunnzen pomegranetes bya
0 torethes two rotnes on ether wethe / to


othe £o3 p dozes ol the quere / che place moll
bolpe and toz che does of thetempie allo.
? And fo wag ended alk the wozcke ? kynge
lon made Foz the Houle of the Lose.
SHalomd bzought in the ty


Erxxi.


nge, 5
ich Bald lig Cather ban dedtentchin ee rd bat


uer / goulde and other bellelles / a put the to
the trealure of the boute of the Loꝛde.
Che Arche is bome m to p temple,
Lahe ‘temple. Che Ten ts 3 i
1 Che. viii Chapter.
Geathertd the el
fi ders ck Zlrael/allche heedes of the
Marbes and auncient Lozdes ofthe

Achyldzen ol Ilrael onto him to Je⸗
rulalem / to bꝛenge bp the Arcke of the ap⸗
porntment ok che Loꝛde oute ol the cytie of
Baud which is Sion. And all § men of Fe
rael adembledonto kenge Salomon to che
keaſt 6 fallety in p moneth * Ethanim which
Ethe keuenth moneth. And when all ßelders Sep
el Alraer were come / the pꝛealtes one nale

G


r. ij.


Chat 160
tember.


Salomon. iij. Kynges, ECxxxij.
rargne pon thy lande that thou halt geüen agapntt ehe/andaet the kauoure in the keghe |
vnto th people to enheret. : „ of them p bole thé captpucthat they mape |

Ikthere chaunce darth in the land /petti- haue compatyon on them. Foꝛ they be thy
lerice/blattyng/o2 welherkngakcome /o2 8 people and tyyne enberitaunce which thun f
Erutes be deucured ok Graßpoppers ox ga- bzoughtelt out of Egypt /krö 6 * koꝛnace ok weut ii c.


Wherethe hoben
ok ß lawe was
Founde.ttij. t
gum. xu. b.

i. ura. xxxiij
c. d.


Chat is) with
bis power.


5 — l their enempes belege che in pꝛon. And let thyne eyes be open vnto the


the lad ain their atone eyties /o: whattoeuer
plage oꝛ lycknele chaunce: then heare thou
bptobeauc thydwelling place / all p pꝛarers
and lupplicacians 6 halbe made ot᷑ all men
chozow out all thep people Itrael / which
wall knowledge euer man the plage orhis
atone hert a ttretche koꝛth his had onto this.

haule / a be mercpkuli / and woꝛcke / and giue
euerymũã accoꝛdig to his wapes(eut as thou
oneip knoweſt eüerx mannes hert / koꝛ chou
knoweſt the hertes ok all the chldzẽ of a da)
8 9 engen feare the as longe as ther Ipue
bpd Ferch which thou gaueſt vnto their ka⸗
thers, And lykewyle pea ſtraunger ß is not
of thy people Ilrael come out ofa fatre con⸗
trex Foz thy nãmeg ſanelloꝝ they hall heare
ok thy great name ¢ of typ mygůtie handand
ſtretched out Arme) andthertoze yt he come
& pꝛapeat this place / heare thou vp toheauẽ
che dwellyng place and do accoꝛdynge to all
that the ſtraunger calleth to the foꝛ: that all
nacpons of the exth mape knowe thy name /
to keare the as do chy people Acrael / andthat
itmape be knowen that this houle which J
haue bylt is called after thy name.

Ind when they go out to battell agaynſt
their enemies whether ſoeuer thou chaltlend
them / a thall pꝛape vnto the Loꝛde towarde
the cytte which thou batt cholen and toward
the houle chat haue buplt koꝛ thy name:
heare thou heir pꝛapers and tupplicacions /
bp to beauci: /a iudge their caule.

tcp _ Dndfinalip when thep chall haue cynned
agayne the(fo2 there ts no manthat fynneth
nöt)a thou art angrye with them and haſt de
Ipuered thé to their enempes chat they be cas
ryed awaye pꝛyloners vnto the land of their
enemxes / whether ferre oꝛneare / yet yr they
turne agaxne bite their hertes in the lande
where they be in captiuite / and returne and
vꝛape vnto the inthe lande of thé that holde
thE captiue / lapinge: we haue ſynned a haue
done wyckedlpe a haue trecpaced / a lo turne
Agapne pnto the with all their hertes and all
their toules in p lãdol their enempes which
bolde chem captyue and pꝛape onto che / to⸗
warde the land which thou gaueſt onto their
katherg /a ta warde the cptie which chou hatt
cholen and houle which haue bylt koꝛ thp
name: then here thou theit pꝛaper kluppfica
cion bp toheauen chy dwellyng place / a iud⸗
getheir caules / and be mercykull onto thy
people chat haue lynned agaynt᷑ che / and n
to all their tretpace g they haue trelpaced


paper of thy leruaunt ¢ onto the pꝛaper of
thy people Arragel/ to herkẽ bnto chem /in all
that thep calle pnto che koz. Foz thou dpdelk
leperat ty co be tyne enberttaunce/aboue
all the nacpos ofthe erth as thou tappet bp
chehande of Moes thy teruaunt, whe thou
108800 or fathers oute of egy pte D

2 cual,

And when Salomonbadmadean ende ol
pꝛaping all chis prayer ¢ fupplicacion onto
the Lolde / he arole from beloze p aultare ol
che Lodde ¢ from knelyng on his knees and
fretchyng ochig handes öp to heauk ¢ ſtode
Gblecked all the congregacpon of Alrael with
a loude bopce taping: Siete be the Loꝛde z
bath geuen reſte onto bys people Ilrael ac:


Copdpnge toall thathe piomeled o p chere Beg. .


ig not one woꝛde efcaped of all the good pꝛo⸗
metres which he pꝛomeled by the had of Mo
les his teruaunt. Andthe Losde dure God be
with vs as he was wich oure fathers/ ¢foze
lake bs not nether leue bs / but chat he bowe
oure hertes vnto bpm /towalcke in allhys
wapes /a to hepe his cõmaundemẽ tes / oꝛdi⸗
naũces and cuſtomes which he cömaunded
dure fathers. And there my wowes which
baue pꝛaped bekoze the Loꝛde / benpe vnto
Lovde dure God dave andnrght / that he de⸗
fende the caute ofhps feruaunt and of bps
People Acrael euermoze/that allnacpong of
OF the eth mape knowe that the Loꝛde he is
Godandnone buthe, And prapt God that ©
poure hertes mape be founde with the Loꝛde
dure God (to walke in his ozdpnaurces and
tokebebis lawes as we do this bape.

And the kyng and all Ilrael with hum / of:


kered offerynges betoze the Lozde. And the 6. Para. bh


Peaccofferynges § Salomon offered onto ß
Londe were. rij chouland oren g anhũdycd
twentpthouland thepe : Indlo the kyng g
al the chylozen Dieta dedicatenthehoute
OF the Lozde.And che lame dape $ Fong Yas
lowed the myddle ok the courte z is betoze §
Houle of the Torde koschere he offered burnt:
offerpnges ¢ meateo es a the kat of p
peackollerpnges / becaute p bzaten auitare
that was befoze the L oꝛd / was tolptie to re⸗
ceaue the burntofirynges ¢meateofirynges
andthe kat of the peaceofferpnges,

And Salomon heide that tame tyme an
ve keaſt g all acrael wich him / a mightie cõ⸗
Gregactous/euen from the coftes of Pemath
bbnto cherruer of Egypte / before the L onde
aure God / leuẽ dapẽ ¢ vet leuen dapes / 1s

t. ii. rity.


Salomon,


Reg Ha


Fitij dave And § oii), davebe tent ß people
awäpe. Andthey bleed tye rng e went bu
S
Fauidbisleruaunt a to Jraer hug people,
to Salomon. Sa
je Lananites be


chat his delyꝛe a luſt was to make:
the Lopde appered onto him agapne / as he
appered to hymat Gabaon. Andthe Lorde.
fayd onto hym: Jhaueheardechr puapezan


imkerceſſions thou madeſt betoze me /a


halowed this houle which thouhacte bylt / to
euren de ko euer ¢ myneeres and
mpne hert Halbe there perpetuallye. And yk
thou wylt walcke befoze me 040 Dauid thy
father walcked /in purenelle agbert a plarn⸗
nelle / todo all F J haue coͤmaündedthe / and

alt zepe myne ozdpnaunces ¢ cuttomes:

ett Mabuthe $ leate of thy kyngdom


bpo of euer / as J pzonteted to Wautd
Bthr 4


her lapĩg: C hoũ thaltnot be without
one oz other bponthe leate ok Acrael.
„Kut pk reand poure childze chall turne
aware From after mie / z Mall noc kepe myne
bere: which A haue let bon dane tei
all go a terue othercßodde a bowe
tues bnto chene weile tral oue of


the lave which J haue geuen them. And this Apel


oute which J haue halowed koꝛ my name /
wyll put gũt ot my lrght. And Ilrael chal⸗
ea pꝛouerbe a a table vnto all naciõs. And


F ata ba ura
leremie. rpc! e alto be: at
d d. the Lon dealt onhis maner Wehis lande


4
with this houle: And it chalbe ant weredthẽ /
becaule they koꝛlone the Loꝛde their God
which bꝛought their fathers out of the lad ol
Thee enge be pan pen eme
haue ſtoupcdontohim eferuen themsther-


*_ fozebath ee Lande bzoughtvpö the all this


euell. Then ac the ende ok twentye veres in


i e
6. Warn. viß. which Salomon had bylt the twohouleg /g


igto wete / the houle ol che Lozd a the kung
palace:becaute tram the kyng ol Cirehãd
fuppoztenbym d Cedar / yꝛre d gouſde/ as
moche as he vetyred:therfoze Salomõ gaue
Hiram. xx. cꝑties in the lande of Galiie. And
whẽ Piram was come krõ Tire to le $ cittes
which Salomon hadgeuẽ him / they pleated
Chim not wherkozehe karde: what cpties are
thele which chou haſt geuẽ me my bꝛother⸗
She callenthert the land of Cabull vntochts
dare. Chis Hiram had lent f kyng vt. Crore


ii, Ayngts.


hüd ꝛed warght or gound Andthis is d umme
of Ff terbute / which rng Salomon rarled
ko bylde cthe houſe of the Loꝛde and his awne
houfe / and Melo ¢ the wales ofZerulalem /
and Hezer / and Magedo / and Sazer.

Foz Pharao kyng of Egypt went vp and
toke Gazer a burntit with kze / and llue the
Cananites g dwelt in the cytie /a gaue it fo
a pꝛelent onto hig daughter that was Salo⸗
mons wyfe. Ind Salomon bplt Ga zer and
BethPozon the nether and Baalath ¢ Cha⸗
mar in the wylderneſle p is inthe lande: z all
the ooze cities p Salomò had / a cyties toꝛ
his charettes / a cities foꝛ his hoꝛlemen gall
5 his luſt was to bylde in Jerufalẽ and Li⸗
banon and in all the land of his Ayngdome.

And all the people that were jette ofthe
Amozites / Gethites Pyerctites /Heuites ¢
Febutites / which were not ofthe chyldꝛen ol
Arael / che chyldiẽ of the layde nacyons that
were lekte in the lande / becaule the cheldzen
ol Ikrael were not able to deſtroye them / drd
Salomõ make trybutarpes onto this dape.
And ob the chyldzen of Frac ops Salomon
make no bondemen. But they were men ol
warre ¢ his feruauntes and his loꝛdes and
Captapnes æ rulars of his charettt ¢ of bys D
ene thele manpe loꝛd d ouerlawe
e woꝛcke had Salomon /fpuehindzed and
kktye / which ruled the people that wꝛought
in the woꝛcke.

And Pharaos daughter came vp oute o€
$ crtie ot Dauid vntothe boule which Sas
lomõ had bylt koꝛ her. And after that he bylt
10. And thzife a pere dyd Salomon offer
burntotkerynges and peaceofferynges vpon
the aultare which he had bylt vnto che l oꝛd /
to burneche katttheron: which aultare is be⸗
koꝛe the Loꝛde. 5

And when kyng Salomonhad made che
pate perfecte / he made wippes in AsionGa

er which is belyde Eloth / on the bꝛyncke ol
che redlee / in the lande ol Edom. And Hiram
fent by thippe allo of bys ceruauntes/ that
were fbipmenand expert in the tee / wyth >
feruauntes of Salomon. And they went to
Oyhir a let kromthence gould/ co ſumme
ol lich hundꝛedand. xxij. talentes / a bꝛoughe
itto Salomon. .
©The Auene of Saba cometh fromthe vttermoſt
Toſtes of the land to brave and fe the wyldom of Sar
lomon. The peripreuenucs and rentes of Salomon.


Bis tone / veſleiles of gould/Aharettes. Borlemen/
undadoundance of (place.


hk. x. Chapter.
Hdihe quene ok Baba heard olthe n
wyldome of Salomon cõcemung
the name ofthe L oꝛde and came to
= prouchim with rrdelles. And he
came tog erutalem % a mightie great multi
tube of Camelles that bare twetẽ odoures ee
goul


ese


And when che was come to Salomon / he
comuned with bymot all é was in herhert.
And Salonis expoũdedheral her quetttss/
chat there was not one chyng hdd krom the
kynge whych he expounded her not.
And when the quene of Saba hadſene all
alomons wil dome a the houle that he had


beat
henge


95 en reer


Kuen of in Bynges, Saba.


goulde exceadyng moch / a pꝛeciouſe ones, and twal


i ortelles,
And there Hove. ij. L ons on 1 ſteppes /
vl. on a lde. Cher was none lyke tene m anx
rng dome. And all kynge Salomons dꝛinc⸗
yng veſlelles were ol gould / s allthe vedel⸗
les of the houle of the wood or ibanon were
ol pure goulde. And as Foz ĩyluer it was no:


b. bheab⸗


Exxxiij.


Salomon.


unacion of the Moabites in 6 hilt
e ber J ruten onto e.
loch ee ob the childꝛẽ ol Am⸗
mon. And pkewile dyd he koꝛ all his outlan·
dyllhe wiues which burnt cenle and olfered
vnto their Gods. Chen was the Lomdangrye

- Grok ape @oboratecl whic apper unto
banc tune gaue a cha 2 8005


adad
ae of Saen and went to Pharan / a tone
5 0 ge 255 Fed fo
te bnto Pharao ken
Ee ttt him ee apoynted him vitat⸗
aue him landes.

Wan ata gat great fauouretn § fyahe
ol Pharao / lo that he gaue hymto wyke the
lyſter olhis awne wife / che lyſter of Chaha⸗
phnes the Quene. And p kyſter tome. 4d
nes bare hym Senubath hes konne. And
Chahaphnes wened him in Pharaos houle.
Andhe was in Pharaos houte amonge the
fonnes of Pharao , And when adad heard
fapetn Egipte ; Wauid was lapde to Mepe
with his fathers / andthat Joab the captayne
ol eee 0 5 1
let me departe / Amarego
rardeepe even tap yarao onto him: what
lackelt chou heare wyth me / p thou woldelt
go tothyne awne countreye? Indhe larde /


iij. Ay


ges maſco anddweit therin
went to Da anddwelt i

— wasn

fary to Acxgel all the daves of Salomon /w

an cull e aboꝛred Strack

8
teol Zar m
i Hanh age up dhe Saio-


feruaunt) likte vp his band agapnſt
ger mer heli ops
his hand agapnſt the kynge. Salomon byit me adicciay,


e Kynge. And herok cam it,


elo a mended bꝛoken places in the citie of
. kather. Ind this telowe Ferobos,
was an actiue man. And whe Salomon law
che pounge man / chat he wrought lo luſtelxe
in che woꝛke / he made hym ruler over all che


charges of the houte of Joceph. And it chal⸗


cedat ß cealon / as Jeroboam was gone out
ol Zerutalem / that the prophet Abra ß Sis
lonite mett him by the wave / hauyng anewe
mantell on him they two alonẽ in 5 kelde.
And Ahiah caught the new mãtell that was


on him g arent tt in twelue peces / a larde to a. chi py
5 8 the ten peces. Foz this kayth f aa 15


e Loꝛde God of Ilrael: behold / J wyll rent


kyngdome out pk the handes of Salomd uela
amisphigeuctentebeate ge, adh Pall pr ng


haue one / koꝛ my ſeruaunte Dauidg la
foz Jerufalem the citie which
out ok all ehe trybes


to Camos the God ok che Woabites,
Milcom the God ol the childꝛen old mmon /
g haue not walked in my wapes / to do that
plealech me / and myne oꝛdrnaunces and cu⸗
flomes / as dpb Dauid bys father.

How be it J wyll take none of the kyng⸗
done out ok his hd: but wyll make him ches
alte all bis lyte longe / floꝛ Dauid my ſeruaũ⸗
tes lake / which A chole: becaule he kept my
cömaundementes a opdinatices. But 4 wilt
take the kyngdome out of his tonnes hand ar
will geue vnto the ten trybes ol it: and wyll
geuehis konne one / that Dauid myleruaunt
maype haue a lyght allwape befoze me in Fes
rulalem / che citie whych Jhaue cholen m̃e /
to put myname there 1 take the / a
thou ſhalt raygne vpon all chatthy loule de⸗


kprethe s thalt be Benge ouer Arrael. And pf ys


thou thaitherkenbnto all that A comaunde

Waben nde Catto pe mere
imm / 1

banaunces 8 commaundementes as Dauid


nothing: how be it let me go. And God ſtered myſe


vp an other aduerfarr / one Razon the tonne
of Eliadã / wh

ok Zobah his mater. which Razon geathe:
redmen vnto him e be came captayne ouer
the companxe / when Baud due them. And


ch fled from Hadadezerkyng briefe


my
iel vntoche. Andtherw

— kli Feroboant
‘ twhertoze


Rehoboan,


waren
haue choten
each: becaute tHE eh
haue koꝛlanen me / and haue bowed fel: f. 40


edis.
ues vnto Aſtharoth the God of the > — i Gn


erfoze Jeroboã aroſe a lleed in to Egipte
be Sela kynge of Egipte and continued


there vntyll the deeth of Salomon, And the


tet of the Hctes ol Salomon andall thathe


9 did / a his wyldome are wꝛptten in the bone
— ot che Actes of Salomon. And che tyme that


Salomon rapgnedim Jeruralẽ ppon all FE
tael was kouttie pere. And then he lardhym
torett with his fathers / and was burped in
citie ot Dautd bys father / and Rehobo⸗ his
ſonne rapgned in hrs ckeade.
ayngdome {5 de aud Regoboham raßg /
Se e Ame
is ſtoned. Jeroboam maketh goulden calues.
Che. rij. Chapter.
6 Nd KRehoboam wet to Sichem:koꝛ
a all Ilrael were cometo Sichem to
mae him kenge. And when Jero⸗
boam the lonnẽ of Habat heard of
Eberng pet in Egipteikoꝛ be fled to Egipte
£07 feave of Salomon / a dwelt in Egipte.
And ther tent a called him and CoFeroboam
Kall che congregacio of Icrael camea ſpake
vnto Rehoboã faping:thy kather made dure
voucke greuoule / but now make thou the
greuoule ferupce of thy father and hys lobe
toucke whych he put bpan vs / Iyghter / a lo
we will terue the. And he lapde vnto the: de⸗
part pet Foz the pace ot


ii Kynges.


ti
$ 1


Jerobod. Cxr
Aduiſe that ode men Jaue him: and tpake to
chem after the councell of the Pounge men
Taping . Dp father made youre poucke geez
Be ae decade cri fet
mp father chattiten pou tb twhipyes,

Au chactite you with tcoppios, An och
Kenge herkened not vnto che people: £07 the
Stapingpeche 615 lade by Ah.

ech the Loꝛde lapde by
Dilonite onto Ferobos 5 tonne ohen

And when all Acrael taw that che Kynge
regarded them nor che people antwered the
Bynge a gayne taping : we haue no parte in
Dauid nos enveritaunce in $fonne ok Ala


if


20, to performe ib. neg. iti


l.
„Co poure tetes therkoze Hrael/anots le to l. Waratx. d.


thine awne houle Dauid. Andto glraelde⸗
parted onto cherrtentes. Pow be it ouer the
chpldzen of gtrael which dwelt in the citic ot
Juda did Kehobos rargne pill. Chen ing
Rehoboam kent Aouram the receauer of che
tribute Andall Arrael ſtoned him to deetth w
Hones. Bun kengers ehoboam made lpede ge
Aug bp tobis charet ¢ lleedto Jerutate, .
nd lo Acrael departed fro che houle of Wa⸗
uid vnto chis daye. And whe all Acrael hearb
chat Jeroboam was come agapne / they lent
and called hm onto the congregacyon and
made bem henge ouet Atrael: fo there Foto:
wed the houle ol Waurd / bur the trybe of


Juda only . And when Reboboam was co-;. aral. xt. a.
wit) meto Jeruralem he geacheredallthe toute *


ol Audã andthe trybe of Benianun an hun⸗

Pind ri brenden 5291 0 of 18

m urpoures / to rpabtat

the houlẽ ok Icrael and to bzpnge che ken.

gore agapne to Rehoboam the tonne of
lomon,

Chen came the twozde of the Loꝛde vnto
Semetah the man of God faping : fpeabe
nto Rehoboams$ tonne ol Spaiomon kynge f
ok Juda and vnto all the houle or Juda and
Beniamin / and the vemnatit o€ the people €
lape Thus larthe the Loꝛde: go not nog pet
Ae bare voure bꝛethzen the chyldꝛen of

lrael but veturne eucrp man to hrs houle /


bos chis doinge is of $ L 05d. Andthey obeyed
ring the worde of the Loꝛde and returned and de⸗


be rer. For wheremyp father cozrected you
wyth teaurges J wyll thaſtyle vou w ccoꝛ⸗
pions. And when Jeroboam: and al people
were come to Rehoboam the
ga
garn ape chie ꝛthe e
antweredthe people chutiptolpare tecte we


partedaccozdpnge to the wozde or the L oꝛde.
Chen Jeroboam̃ bylt Sichem in mount
Ephꝛaim / anddwelk cherin, Ind went krom
thence and byit Shanuel.
And Feroboam thought in bys hert: now
imightthe kyngdome returne to the houle ol
Said agarnè. Foz pk thys people call go
bp edo factifice in the houte of the Loꝛde at
ferutale then waltherrhertes turne againe
to their onde Rehoboam kynge of Juda.
And io thal cher gpl me and go a1
Rejoboa Eng oF Zubg. Where


BUNCE pe. a,
HENGE eccke riß d.


tobe councell and made two calues of golde Erod xh d.
and kapde


oboam.


Andtherkoꝛe che Loꝛde hath delpuered hym
bnto the L pon whiche hath rene him g flapne
Wachteln. abe nes doe
10 0 * 0
fonnes:fadie me en Ace. cher did. Ind he


tif, Bynges.


Or God whiche dilobeped z mouth of ß Lo.


eſt chou thy reife to be a nother? Jam
fentto the a cruci mettenger, 1 . > :
feroboam / thus tapthe the
cosa ected as J ex⸗
n g. comen people and
mane the prince ouer my people Atrael/and


Kthobod Trrrb.


wet a founde the bodpe caſt alonge inß wage
and the Ade and the ipon ſtandynge therbye.
And the Lyon had not eaten the carkattenoz
Shurt the Alle. And he tone vp che bodye or the
man al Sod a put it pon the Ae a bꝛoug
it agaxne /a came to the cytye of the old pꝛo⸗
pete to lament hem / and to burye him. Ind
he lapde his bodye in hrs atone graue / la⸗
atinbertand inẽted ouerhim / Oh my bꝛother. and when
. pe had burzedhym /hefpatie to bys fonnes bebpnde thy backe: therfore beholde J wyll
laring: when J am deed le that pe buryeme bꝛynge euel vpon the houte ol 155 loam C
inthe lepulchꝛe Ebene br of Godis bu⸗ and wll trphe kromJeroboam a fe 5
rred/andlage nip bones bpbis.sfoz S taping (eth agapnite che wall / and what loeuer is a. neg xv. d.
which he cryed at the brddyng ot the Lore in pzeton oz foztaken in Alrael / and wyll tas
agapntt the aultare in Bethel / and agapnct ne awape the remnaunt of the houle of Jez
all the houſes of hillaultares which are in? roboam / as men take awape a dong hyfle / i. Neg rbt. 4
cities of Samarie / chall come to paſſe. tyll it be confumen, And wholoeuer ok Je⸗ and xt.
How be it toꝛ all that / Har ebene turned roboams houle dye in the towne / hym Halt
not kröhrs wpched ware. but turned awaxe the dogges eate / and bpm chat drech in che
Leide, hall the Cowles ok the apze eate: foz.
che L onde bathe ſarde it / vp and gett the to D
chyne houle / and as lone as thy fore ente⸗
reth the etre che lad wall dye. Pow be
it all Acraeil call mourne hym and burpe
bm / koꝛ thys only ot all Jeroboam chall co⸗
me to the lepulchze / becaule in hym ig
kounde goodnefie towarde the Loꝛde God of
Ilrgel in the houle of Jeroboam.
Mozeeuer the Wosde wall ktere hym by
am dreh and Abiam luccedeth him. ahynge ouer Ilyael wh ych than dectroye the
houte of Feroboam in that dave. Ind what
Gabe. ritti chapter, is thatthatis now in hande: andthe Loe
that eyme Abtah p tonne ok Je- chall impte Ilrael as a rede that growech in
roboam fell fiche. And Jeroboam the water is Maken / and wyll wee Flract
nto bis wifebpa kelowchl⸗ out ok chis good lande which he gaue to their
pe & chaũge thyne apparell § thou kathers / ard wll Chatter thẽ bepounde Eu⸗
be not knowen to be the wyle or Jeroboam / phꝛates / becauĩe ther haue made chem gro⸗
And getche to Siloh . Foster is Ahlah the uesto angre the Losde. And he wyll ges
bean, Prophete whpch tolde merthat 3 cpulde de ue Alraell wp / becaute of che kenne of Fee
Pity mbc. BENGE auer this people. And take wychche roboam wherwyth he dyd fenne and made
ten ſoues and cractinelles and a cruſe of bos Geraci forme therto.
And geroboams wyte arote and departed


ne and go to him: toꝛ be weil tent che what

Wallcome okthe lad. And Jeroboams wle and went do Cherzah / and be that the was E
come to the tret olde of the doꝛe / p lad was

deed, And all Alrael burredhym and lamen⸗


tedbynt/accozdpng to the woozde of Soe
prepa be fake by thc barn ofbis leruaunt


drdret the yngdome aware trom the houle
of Dauid and gaueitthe: and thou halt not
bene as was my keruaunt Dauid / whyche
kepempconmnaundemetes and kolowed me
wrch all bys herte / to do that onive whyche
femeth ryght in mpne epes: but hatt done e
uellabouie all that were befoze che / and halt
gene and made the other Gods and images
ol metall / to pꝛouoße me / and batt cat me


970


b

Juda / and offered on che aultare.
Gro tobabeinBetheliwoterbmorhe tals
ues tyat be bad mabe.Andbe put in Bethelß
pꝛeaſtes of the hyllaultates / whych he had
made. And he offered opon the alter uhyche
nale ft ee bab em bee oF oe
viij. moneth / e had imag
awnehert: and made a lolempne featt vnto
the chiſdzẽ ol Irrael / and went vp to the aul⸗
tare to burne acrykpce.


ik from Juda. Chen ſapde he to his formes;
ine Ade. And ther ladied him ana de.
. alter 8


made oF the loweſt of the people pꝛeſtes of
the biltaultaves. Hebofoeucr woke jhe Filled
their hand / a they became preattes of hin
aultatg. Andthis dopng was lynne onto the
boule ol Jeroboam / euẽ to deſtrope it and to
put it awape from of the face ol the erthe.


CJeroboams wpfe atheth countell ofahiah the ꝛo⸗
Pheternbich prophelieth vnto hers decth of ber chide
¢ the detruccté of all the Reaulme. Jeroboam Opeth.
Sezak kyng of Egypt Abende boule of the Rode,


et as well as
neu ue with ache


che Lage and lapde:aultare / aultare / thus
wich the


fapthe:the Loꝛd. Bcholde a chyide wal be bint:

e
on the hallo :

.

4 e

Greer orem atte rly ni che onde came pnto the paophetes bought

him And he crred bnto che man ole
t came fr 5 uda favinge:thus fapth


aunt che
is bande
Sndbys


bych b
by ourbenotpuillit.in agapne toby
i en asa ou ot


cb to the to Ifo:
Seaner ac 2 Ahe nent ; did fo:the arofe and wentto Sptloh and came


to the houte of Ahrah. But Abiah coudenot
lee ko: his eyes were waxendymme forage,
And the Loꝛde layde vnto Ahiah:beholde /
che twpfe of Jeroboam cometh to queſtyon
wyth the about her fonne whych is lycne.
This wile and {bys ant were her. And
when che came / the keynedher felfe to be a
hother woman. But when Ahtah hearde the
Counde al her kete as the came to thedoze / he
larde : comẽ in thou wpte of Kerobbam /whp


ok the Lozde. ndche kyng ancwered a layde dz
bntothe man eltern um Ib
chr God a make ihtercetfion to me/ what mp
hand mape be reſtoꝛed me agarne And the
man ot God befoughe the L onde / a bis hande
came to him agapne as well as befoze .
Chen larde the krnge onto ß man of God:
come home wyth me and rerreche thy elke /a
J well geueth a tewaide But themanok pꝛoph
Bod antweredz kenge / yt thou worde gene


e
ere the 8

— — beugen backe agapne ftõ
dhe ware, ee


Aachen
dab hes fonne:


Abiam. Ala.


And Rehoboam the lonne of Salomon


§ tapgned in Juda and was. li. pere olde whe


e beganne to rapgne / and raigned . rvij pere
Hee a the citie whych the Loꝛde had
choten out or all chetrybes of Icrael to put
his name there. Pis mothers name was daa
mah and mmonite. And zuda wrought wic
kedneſſe in the lyght of thẽ Loꝛde and angred
him aboue all f their kathers dyd / with their
kynne which they lynned. Foz they allo made
the hill aulters ¢Jmages ¢ groues on euerx

e vnder euery grenẽ tre. And therto


Bab Slo rea Wer was a ſtues ol male childzẽ in ß lande
deth, whorcg. ( th ey did accoꝛdynge to all dabhominacids


ok fractions which p Lozde catt out beloꝛe ß


© chiſdzz or Ilrael. And che lyrte pete or Ronge


ij. Beg x. d.


Kehoboam̃ came Selack kenge of Egipte
vpto Zerutalem / ætoke awape the treature
okthehoule ofthe Loꝛde / and the treature ol
the kynges houle and all that was to be had.
And he tone aware p Milo of goulde r which
alomon made. zn whole ſteade kynge ne⸗
ſoboammade bꝛalen childes + put them in ß


ti, Ayngts.


Nadab.
all chat he dpd / are wꝛittẽn in the bone of che
dedes that were done in the dapes old kinges
ol Juda. And ther was warre betwene Abi
and Jeroboam. And abiam reſted wyth hrs
katherg ther burpedhim in d cptic of Da⸗
uid. Andala his tonne raygned in his ſteade.
Che. xx. pere ot Feroboam kyng of Ilraei
beganne Ala to raggne ouer quda / and ruled
in Jerutalẽ. xt perẽ. Andhis mothers name
was Maacah the daughter of Abetalom.
And Ala didthat teme right in the eres ol
Lorde/ une Baud his facher. Andhe made
the ſtues of males departe the lande / and put
àwaype all the gdoles d his fathers had made.


ty €
Andthertobe put downe Maacah hys*mo-
ther Ero berpnge rule /becaute ſh e had made S
dis n


an Idole in agroue. And Ala de ſtroped her


pole and burnt it by


kepinge ofthe captapnes ok the garde which A


waptedat the doze of the kynges houle. And
a8 ofte as the kynge went into the boule oF


the Loꝛde, ther of his garde bare thé / ¢ euer


6 en rb.


bꝛought them agapne into the garde chabꝛe.
5 ick ok the Actes of kynge Rehobo⸗
amand all he did / are wyytten in the boke ol
the Actes of the bynges of Zuda. And there
was watte betwene Rehoboam ¢ Fevobos
all their Ipues. And Rehoboam layde him to
rell with bys fathers / and was buryed wyth
his fathers in d citie ot Baud And his mo⸗
ers name was Paamah an ammonite.
ind a biam his tonne raygned in his Rome.


i rapgneth auer Juda-and rightwes
Kienle Adu . an
and Wanda. Jeholaphat ſuccedeih Ala. Nadablucces
ety Jerobodm. Baala kplleth Mada,

Che. rv. Ehapter.
He. xvii yere or kynge Jeroboam
e lonne of Habat / rapqned hinge
Abel ouer Juda ruled thre ere
8 Hin Jeruſalem. Pys mothers name
was Mäacah daughter or Abelalom. And
e walked in an d tynnes of his father whicy
bed pete enn his hert was notwhole


wich the Lozdhis God / as the hert ot Dauid


his kather. Peuerthelelle toꝛ Dauids take
did p Lozde his God geue him a lxght in Je⸗
rulalem / thathe lett op his tonne after hy /
to continewe Jerulalem Becaulethat Da⸗
ud did that which pleated § Lo de ¢ turned
kromnochyng thathe cõmaunded him all the
dayes ok his ipe / laue only in the matter of


B Wizias the Hethite, And there was warre bes


twene Rehoboam a Feroboant as longe as
be lxued. And ehe ret of e deades of abtam e


that was lefte in the trealure of chehoule of
the Loꝛde / and all the trealure of the kynges
houle and delpuered it vnto his feruauntes/
and lent them to Benhadad the tonne ol Ca⸗
bꝛemon the fonne of Heston Benge of Diris
that dwelt at Damalco / lapingẽ: there is a
bondebetwenethe and me as was betwene
chr kather andmyne. CTherkoze J lende the
bothe golde and {pluct foza gykte that thou
go anv bzeakethe appopntment betwene ?
and Baaſa kynge of gcrael / that he ma ve de⸗
parte frõ me. And Benhadad herkened onto
male wenne ee
ead agapntt the ol
fmote àhton / San / Abel called Bech Maa⸗
cah and all Ceneroth wrth all che lande of
kene And when Baala heard that / he
lekte buplainge of Ramah a dwelt in Cher⸗
zah. C hen kynge Ala made a pꝛoclamacyon
choꝛowout all Juda / that none chudd be er⸗
cuſed. Ind theptoke the (tones of Ramah ¢
the tymber wherwith Baala had buplt / and
Henge Sta ape Gabaahin Bema⸗
m


Andthe remnaũt ok allthe beades of Ala
and of all his might and ot all that he did / and
the cities whiche he bylt / are wꝛytten in the
chꝛonicles of the actes done in the dapes olß


Eynges of Juba. Beuerthelatet in hig olde ¢


e he was diſealed in his kete. Ind Ala lap⸗
de him to rel hrs e


ebsokie Gedeon. But ane
lers. Geuercher ur m


Gi


ien etz. e


ala. Eliah. tif. Kynge


with his fathers in the citie of Dauldhis fa-
cher. Ind Zehocophat hys tonne rargned in

is rowmẽ. And the ſonne ol z eroboã

eganne to rapgne ppon Ilrael the teconde
pere of Ala kenge of Juda / and rapgned byõ
Ilrael two pere. And he did euell in che tyght
OF the Loꝛde and walked in the waxe or hys
father z in his lynne wherwyth he made Fe
rael Conne. But Baala the fonne of Ahiah ol
the boule ol Jcacar conſpired againſt him /e
due him at Gebethon a citie of J Philidtines
koz Hadab g all IAtrael ape at feage betoꝛe
Gebethon. And it was the thirde pere of Ala
kynge of Juda when Baala ue him / and


the


unge of Juda be⸗
afato are ouer®


kehre ch.
be was


Srargned inbis teade. And as cone as he was houle


kynge / he flue all the houle of geroboam and
icfte him naught that bꝛethed / vntyll he had
put him cleane out / ‘onto the taping
o£ the Loꝛde which he kpake by his feruaunt
Ahiah ß Dilonite / toꝛ the Cinne ot Jeroboam
repays Spurs 3 14 kenne

and Foz bys ungeryng e angted
the Loꝛde Cod ol Itrael.

Che reſt of the deades of Hadab and al he
did are wzitten ind chzonicles de the hinges
ol Iltael. And there was warre betwene a ca
and Bala k vnge of Icrael all their daxes.

Jn che thirde ere of Ila kynge of Juda /
Baala the donne ol Abiah begane to raygne
duer all Alrgel in cherzah and continewed
xriiij. pere. And he dꝛd that whych dilplealed
225 Londe/ 41 1

oam and hes lynne wherw e made
eee

ſehn prop! i igapntt waata- of whom be is

ne lal frre
eee
kette and Amei choien.Z amet burnetb bpm leite and
bys boule, W oe Amt band taketh


exatedthẽ out of the duſt @ made
capita] ny people Icrael / and thou
batt walked in the wape of Jeroboam g halt
made mp peovie g iraeĩ teme / to angre mes
their fonne:therfoze J wll make cleane rid⸗
dance of Baala ¢ of allhishoute and well
make bis poute lige the houle of Feroboam
.- Plone ef Habat. And he 8 dpeth of Baala
dieth in the keldes / th che tote or
7 ( of the

. Nrw *
e reſt of the deades ol Baata / a what
She dd and his power / are wůttẽ in heben
Of the bittoztes ok the kynges of Aral. And
e ers ¢ was
burted in Kherdah. And Clab his komme rata
ned in hrs ſteade. And cherte Choro the


inthe citie / him thats


‘Lone n
oꝛde
Jehu
Hand


Lo;


5


aledin the wapr ok ge- 5


tor bys fynnes whych he tynned in do⸗
vnge wrckednelle in the kyght of the Loꝛde /
and fo: walkynge in the wa pe of Jeroboam
duc kn . ech be DpDariomane Ale
Ahe ret of the Actes of Savi and the
krealon thathe wzought/ are wepteen in che c
boke of the chzonicies of the kynges of FE
rael. Moꝛesuer that fame ceaton was Il⸗
kael deurded in twapne / £02 halte the people
kolowed chebni the tonne of Sineth / to ma⸗
Behrm enge. And the other baife kolowed
Amt. But che people that kolowed Amt /
ee

0 m
Anmirargned. 8 as


Che. rr


rrrbi.


‘Mhab.eliay, ij. Bynges.


Che xxt pere ol Ata kynge of Juda / be⸗
ganne Smt to rargne ouer J lrael ij. pere a
Be ruled. bi pere in Therzah. Andhe bought
the hill of Samaria of one Semar fo: two
hundzed talentes of tplucr/é bylein the hill /
and called the name of the citie whych he had
built Damaris alter the name of Semar 8
Lordẽ of p hill. And this Amrit wzought wic⸗
hepnelie in cheepes of the Loꝛde wortte then
all that were befoze him / and walked in all d
wapes of Jeroboam the lonne of Nabat / and
inhis Cynne wherwich he made gerael line /
toangve the Loꝛde God of Ilrael wyth their
vanpties. The reſt ofthe actes od mri mene
14157 his power that he vled / are wep!

the chꝛonicles ol ö kynges OF Ilrael. And
Amt lapde him to rect wyth his kathers / and
wat burped in Samaria / and Ahab his lon⸗
ne rargned in his ſteade.

Chet. xxxpiij. pere of Ala kynge of Juda /
beganne Ahab the tonne of Ami to rapgne
dier Acrael / and rapgned in Samaria. xxij.

Gere. And he dylplealedthe Loꝛde aboue all

B were befoze him. Foz it lemed him a lyght
thynge to walke in the lynne ot Jeroboam.

But toke Jezabel the daughter or Echbaal

iG. Reg · x. kynge ofthe Sidonites to wyke / and wẽt €
Oerued Baal and bowed vnto him. Andhe re⸗

redan aultare to Baal in the houle of Baal

whrch hehadmade in Samaria, And Ahab

made agroue / and pꝛocededkerther in ange⸗

ryng the Loꝛde God of Alrgel / then all the
kynges ol Irael that were bekoꝛehym.


the biooke. And it chaũced alter a while that
Sbꝛoote dꝛied vp / becaule ther kel no rapne
vpon the erth. Chen came the woꝛde ok the


Loꝛde vnto him lapinge: vp and gett the to duc. ß


Darephcha a citte of Didon / a dwell chere.
Beholde F haue cõmaunded a wxdowethere
to luſtayne the. And he arole ¢ went to Sa-
rephtha. And whe he came to che gate of the
citie / chere was a wedow there geatheryng


fiches. And he called to her ¢ fapoe : ket me Zadie.


Apꝛape the / alytie water in a dyche that
mape dzyncke. And as che went to kett it /
beckpedto her andlarde:bernge me g pꝛaxe
che a moꝛtell of bꝛeed in thine hande And che
antwezed:as lurelꝑ as the L onde thy Godli⸗
ueth ( J haue no bꝛeed / but euen an handtull
ol Mele in a pitcher / and a lyttie Syle in a
crulẽ. And ſe / J haue geathered a few ſtickes
foz to go and bake it Coz me and my lonne / ß
we mape eate it and then die.
And Eliah fayde onto her: keare not / but
el ag thou batt faye: but make me
erok a lyttle cake kit of all / and bꝛyng it
out to me: and alterwarde make koꝛ the and
thp fonne . sfo7 thus Capth che Loꝛde God of
Iltael: p pttcher of Melechal not be waſted
Rether chall chr ople crate be wyth out oyle /
bntyll che Lide haue tent rapne vpon che
erte. Ind che wẽt and dyd as Eitah bad. And
the andhe a her houle dꝛd cate a good fpace/
Sche pitcher of mele waſted not necher was
the ople crute without ople accoꝛdynge to &
worde of the Lozde whych he (patie choꝛow


Daves Biel of Bethel bylt Jericho. Eltah.


is

K anibicrcote im ame bs ect tonne tobe
i be lapde the koundacron / andhys poungeſt
lonne when he lett vp gates / agreinge vnto
the wooꝛde ol the Lozde whych he Cpake by

Jolua the Come of Nun.
Eliah is nouryſhed and kedde of Rauens / and after
g the woman of Harephtha: whole Childe he

rapleth to lyfe.


¶ Che. xvij. Chapter.


1j Beg. xi. c.)
jaune


Buens bꝛoughthym bed and lech euery moꝛ⸗
nung andeuerp euen ng / and he dꝛancke of


Ard alter chete ace happenedthat
an wyke of che houle fell icke.

nd bis lickneſſe was fo loꝛe / chat there was
no bsrath test in him. Chen tatde he vntocklt
ah what haue g todo wich the / O thou man
ol God: art thou come vntome / that my fyn-
ne ſhulde be chought on amy tonne layne:


h larde vñto her:geue me thy fonne,
her lappe and carp 1


tonne
entbe mete taper oel


bum ente

ipueth.

Bholw thatthou art god man /andthat de
5 .


C


auh Ahab. i zap


Celiah t tend to Ahab. Abbie
opbetes and faueth them. eker ne
joughe the people cepe bere loude. Glia all

Vaals Prophetes: and after obtapneth rayne,


chote pou an ore anpozetiebpm kpꝛlt (fo,
an call onthenteme dr nace
e unde. And they tone ß


catye And
then Fb wu


Wag it not tolde my loꝛde / whar J dyd / me.


en Jezabel
mou ce eee Lod mi


Eliah. Ahab,


ich. Beg. xvij. a. erthe / and put his face’


Joco. b. ö.


e: Andcher didto § thirnetyme, Ind che
. —.— e aulter / ache


tte.


and cate and dzrncke / ko; ther is a lounde ot
arten eta) tent pce ope
and todzuncke

amel darm Al voted felfe to &


fapde to bis Ceruaunt.go bp ¢ looke towarde
che lee. And he went bp and loked / and lalde:
here is nothing Andhe larde
tymes. And the teuenth tyme be apne:
de / there aritech a tyttle out of the lee /
Iyke the palme of a mannes bande, chenbe
fayde:go and faye to Ahab / put the hozties
the charet / and gett the downe that the rapne
ſtoppe ö not. And within a lytle while / heuẽ
weg backe wü cloubes and winde there
was a great rarne And ahab rode ¢ went to
Jezrahel. And the hand of the Loꝛde was on
Eliah /a he gyrrded vp his loynes ¢ rane bes
foze Abab / tri they came to Jerrahel.


Cliath gzeing from Jezabel is nouriſched or the Ane

1 if that he is teft a lone / and
F noi ue elma
sahel- Jehu and Cire


wi. Neg. b. d.


Jon. fi. c.


i


tree /edefived foz his loule /p he might
layde / zit is nam ynough D Loꝛdeſtake mx
ſoule / to q amnot better then nir fathers ,


per
die / e


iij. Aynges.


€lifeus,


Ind as he lage and tlepte vnder the Gt-
naper tree: beholde / there came an Angell c


ene hys knees e


Yi


lade: what doeſt thou berectiab?anobe an⸗


kwered: J was geloule fox the Loꝛde God ol e


Doles latze:becaule p childzẽ ok Acraelhaue
dalaken chene appopntment and haue cat
downe thyne aulters ¢flayne thy pꝛophetes
with p cwerde / a J oniyam lette / a they ſeke
my loule to haue ſt chend Loꝛde fapde vnto
bim: go and turne thy ware tothe wildernelle
ol Damaſco /a go amd annopnte Hazael to
be kynge of Sitia. And Jehu the fonne ot
Samttrarmopnte ts be ouer Ilrael.
And Elizeus the fonne of Saphat of Abel
Mehulah annornte to be Pꝛophete in thy
rowme. And who lo elcapeth d werde ol Has:
Zael / him chall Jehu llaye:a yt any ma ſcape
che fwerde of geh / hym Hall Eil ꝛeus Haye,
And therto z haue lette me leut thoulande in
Ilraeiot᷑ which neuer man bowed his knees
vnto : Baal noꝛ hited him with his mouthe.
Andhe departed thence and kounde Eli⸗


zeug the fone of Saphat plowenge wyth gen


twelue pocke ok oren bekoꝛe him / a he W the


2. ktwelue And ellah wet to him e catkhts ma: e
tell bpon bym . Andhe lette the oren Eranne grübel.

alter €liah a tardenetme J pꝛape the / Ryle n
inp father z mocher / z chen wo tolo es


ei. Ball the infétumentes of the oven and gaue tt tye


acsunazi.a yeopie/and they dydeate. Andthen he arole

and went after Eliah a myniſtredvntohim.

Che Fyre and ſeconde tyme that Samaris was be /
feged of Benhadad kyng of Sirta.

Che rr. Chapter.

b Benhadad kyng ot Siria gea⸗

chered au hrs holte to gether / and

[TEM knges with him wich hole

and charet: and went vp a bereged

Samaria a warred agaynſt it. Andhelent

meſlengers to Ahab konge of J trael intothe

cktxe . and ĩayde vnto hym: thus layth Ben⸗

hadad. Chy lxiuer and thygoulde is myne / a


the bett of thy wiues and the beſt or thy chu⸗ de


den be mene. Andß kynge of Acrael ancwe⸗
redandlarde mp Lozde kynge accoꝛdyng to
the ſaprng / J am thyne with all haue.
Andthemellengers came agapne to Ahab
and lapde: thus lapth Benhadad. J haue ther⸗
koze fent vntothe / fayinge :delpuer me then
thplpluer and thy goulde / and thy wines / a
hp chpldzen,D? ele J wyl lende my lerua⸗
untes onto the byto m̃oꝛow this tyme: a th
wall ſerche chyne houlẽ / z the boutes of thy
. which all vy all that au! glo⸗
rrous inthyne exes and bꝛynge it awape
with them. Then the hinge of Itrael tent koꝛ
che elders of the lande and layẽd:take hede 3
pꝛape you ¢ ſe / how thys felow goeth about
myſcheue. Foz he fent vnto me / toꝛ my wy⸗
nes and my chplozen / and iny tyluer and my
goulde: and F denped hym notheng ok it. Ind
All che elders of Flrael g allthe people ſarde:
herken not to him noꝛ conlent.
Wheruponhe fapde vnto the megengers
or Benhadad: telmp Lode the kynge / all
thathe fent koꝛ the kyꝛſt tyme / that win do:
but this requett J mae not do. And che mel⸗
fengers departed and brought hm woozde.
Shen Benhadad tent vnto hym and lapde:
thus do the Sods to me and lo therto / yr che
duſt ol Samaria be ynoughe £07 all p people
hat folow me chat euerp man mape haue
anhandkull. And the kynge of Pract anlwe⸗
redand ſarde tell hym let not hymchat puts
teth on his harnelle boſte hym lelte / as he 5
beter ande putteth it of *, And when Benhadad hearde
ed. bat erdnges /as he anid the kyrges wert
en dernckrng in the paulllrons he lärde bnto
bis leruauntes: put ye in aräpe And cher put
them lelues in arape agepnt the cytxe.

c. And beholde there came a Pꝛophet nto
Ahab kynge of Icrael / and capde tohim us
fapth the Lorne. Sepſt chou all this great
multitude : beh ode / J wyll delpuer them into


n


ae
fome


all Grae,
Acre


wires And Ahab lapde: who thal ioyne ba⸗
tarle-And he farde thou. Chen he nombꝛed
the men of the gouerners ok the chtres: and
they were two hundzedand.rrrij, and alter
them he nombzedall the people / and all the
spelojen ol Alrael were lauen thoufande.
nd ther went out at none when Benhadad
was a daynckyng ſtronge dꝛyncke in the pa⸗
urllrons wyth the. erriſ hynges chat holpe
bm. And the men ok the chꝛifes ot the chires
went out Ep2t, oes,


And Benhadad cent out / and they hewed
him faping:there came mẽ out ol vamarig.
And be lapde:pt they come out Foz peace / ta⸗

thE a lpue. And alto yr chey come foꝛ war⸗
re take them pet atpue. And when thole mẽ wD
vorthe chzͤles of the tizes were come out oF
the cite and ? Hot after the / che due euery
one orthem hrs man. Andthe Driens led /
and Atrael folowedakter them. And Benha⸗
badthe kynge of Siria lcaped on a hoꝛde 16
bis horlemen. Andche kynge of Itraei went
Out and (mote hoꝛdk and charett / and due a


er great daughter ofthe Dirians.


Then there came a S ꝛophete to the inge
ol Actael / and lapde to him: go tes lave
the man / be wyfe and take hede what thou
doekt:fo2 when the pere is about / the kynge
ol Spitia will come agaynct p agapne. Chen
lapde the leruauntes ofthe kynges of Diria
tohumithe Gods of dhilles are theire Pods /
andtherkoꝛe they hadthe better of bs. But
let bs kyght wyth them in the plapne / and fo;
what pe will swe thal haue the better of the,
ante doitane d uunges awape euery ma
out ok his place / a put duke int est totems,
And da thou nöbse Han hoſte like hock that
thou haft lotte/ebozte foz bose ¢ charet koꝛ
charet / a let vs eee A a
& wager we gett ö better or che. Andß hinge
berkened vnto their voyce and dyd euen lo.

And ag tone as the vere was aboute / Bẽ⸗
Hadad nöbzedß Sirteng ¢ went pptoâphen
ko warre with Irrael. Ind che chüdzen of Fe E
Yael were nombzed ¢ proupded of bitaple / ¢
went agaynſt . 7 pitched beloꝛe them
‘Tphe two iptiellockes ol kyddes: but the Ste
rians fylledthe countreye. Chen there came
aman of God a layde bitoß kynge ok Fract
chus tapth the Lorde, Becaute the Spiriens
dare b the x onde is but a God oF thebilles/¢
not Godot the valeys to:thetfoze wilt Felts
uerall chis great multitude into thine hande
chat ye marẽ knowe 5 Jam the Loꝛde. Ind
they pitched one ouer agayntt the other. vn.
daes / and the teuenth dave om baie

l. n


Ahab, Naboth,


Benhadad. Ind the childzen of Frael ue of the diriãs


an hundꝛed thoufand kote men in one dape.
And the ret fled to A phen into the crtie. And
there kell a walle vpõ xvij .choulande of the


that mere lette anowSenhapadfledanioent Parc fi


into the citie / krom chambꝛe to chambꝛe.


iij. Aynges.


es. Pesabel,
See. ripe Apab⸗


Che. xxi.
rec tte dere


Chen lade his feruauntes vnto hym:be⸗ |


holde / we haue heame fare that the kynges
ok the houle of Alrael are merciful kynges.
Leet vs put ſacke cloth about oure Lapnes a
topes about oureheedeg /a go out toß kynge
of Alraelthapplpe he wyll aue thy lpte and
ther gulrded lacke clothe aboute cheir loynd
put ropes aboute theixe heedes / a wẽt out
tothe kynge of Irrael a ſapde: thy leruaunt
Benhadad larth / pꝛape  letmeipue, Ard
Fhelapde is he peta Ipue? wüat he is my bzo⸗
ther. Indther tone 5 woozde koz good iuche
E haſtelp caught it out of his moütha layde:
bee thy bꝛother Benhadad. Then he larde go
and bzrnge him. And Benhadad came out to


of Damaria. And
fapinge-let me haue thp byneparde/to make
me agardẽ of perbes therot / becaule it lpeth
lone myhoute: and J weil geue the a bets
ter bynevarde fo? it: oʒ yt itplapte the 3 wilt -
eue the / the wosthe ok it in lxluer. Bit Nas


hrm / and che other tone him vp into the cha⸗ the


rett. And Benhadad tardeahe cytyes whych
my father tobe fro thy rather / J wyll reſtoꝛe
agapne. And thou halt make ſtreates fo, che
in Damatco/as my father drd in Syamarta,
anna wel make an apopntment wyth the
and tent che awaye. Ind ſo made an appoynt
ment topth hym and fenthym aware.

ſen a certen man ok the chylozen ok the
Fe rere
p man wold meinte him de layde / be⸗


And then Jezabell bys wyle
and lapde onto hym: why art
de / chat thou eateſt no me
vnto her / J tpake vnto Haboth the ts
ite “and lade bntobim:geueme chr opney-@
arde Foz Cpluer / oz eite Soourwpit/ 4 5
e another vrnexarde for it. And
A wpünocgeue che mpppnerarde.


caule thou halt not obe xed d vorce ol z Loꝛd: what


beholde / as lone as thou art departed fro me


1. Aeg vt; a. d Ipd Wall dare p. And as cone as he was de⸗


parted krõ him / a Lyd toũd him a due him.
Chen he koundea nother man a fatde to him:
ſnixte me J pꝛape 6 And the mã gaue hima

Prophete


re
e of Acrael knew him /
bes Abe layde vnto


Bango kehre s Cop people fox ts nd
Atvael wet to bis haute wap


Pang FF ayward


andheuxe / and entred into


wꝛote in . —
and ſett Hab


curſe both God and the k
carpe hem out and ſtone hrimto deeth.

bis citie / whyche

4

in Sictter which
oclamed faſten⸗


2.


6. pe
the Hojde:Inp place where doggesiapped
Seloue ol Maboth/thall dengen b eh
chr bloude allo. And Ahab lapdto Eliahthalt
ou found: me thyne enempe at anx tyme?
ndhe Cade vee / becaule thou art vtteriy
geuen to woꝛcke wickednelſe in the tyght ol
che Lozde. Beholde J will bꝛynge euribpon
the / and will make cleane riddance of the / 4


ij Ayn
che ge rahelite /


er“
kostrluer fo


ges. Ahab,


of Irrael Chen tarde


5
n


bande.
vis? Andhe fapoe onto
fo metabarene com
lehofapbat


pasa
Andther tayoe /a

te into che handes
phat layne: is th
Lopes’

ofhim:


will deſtroxe vntoã hab al bppietbagant t.


the walle / and y ought be pieloned oꝛ toꝛla⸗
ken in! Ae will make thine houle /ipke
che houle ol Feroboam the tonne of Habat /


Glee the hoüle of Baalaß tonne of Ahiab / bis


bbrthe angerpng toherwpth thou hack at
feoveromabegeracltynie oe
And therto agaynſt Jezabel came z wore


ade. OF the L oꝛde faving: d


apes toatl An eza⸗
$0 hell vnder the*walles of Mesayel Aube;
dyeth ol ã hab in the townẽ / him fhalivogges
Seate and he that dpeth in the kedes bim
b toules of the apze eate. g oꝛ there was none
at all he Ahab that was lo vtteriy geuẽ to
wooꝛcke wickednedle in the fyabt of S Loꝛde


aha


Erxxix.


onto


98 leruauntes nate pe not that:
0


at: wit ch.


Ramoty in wal


entrynge ofthe gate ol


ore Brom
ano Fevekiah


12


and that becaule Jezabei bys wyte picked z


hem kozwarde. And therfoze be dyd exc


abbompnablye/in folowyng Ivoles in ai


chrnges Une as drohe Ammozites which g
Lobe caſt out betozẽ che childꝛen ot Icraei.
Wpenabab be


zlerct thou how

koꝛe me: becauſe he ſo
lubmrttech hym ſelke befoze
bainge z cuell in his dapes but int
dapes / will beynge eueũ bpon dis boule,
CFoure hunhretl falle sozophetes bo councelt
and Jebotaphat ts warre HAamoth:onclp Dt.
San . pets apt

2


he xru Chapter.
Md they continued thze vere withs
out warre betwene Stria and Il⸗
el. And ß third pere Fey


wache 3


Une the m.
. A ene ot Cy


me /A wrülnat in
Connes


Epnge of Ard / came to the kenge - parvey,


haue the:
ue no thee
hole haue ns
ier


.


Pricheah,
interac cn ee geo 5


“Apeabem accomenge ‘onto the ene of the


cuenta Bomther.
Alben dip Pale, bes fathers) Obo nah hrung in
.. DH. of Sta beganne to
fonne of Canaanah Pal a e d Ern cen b


bad peace with


nd the ret of the deadeg ol Jehocaphat /
oa at e pled / and how he war⸗
inthe boke of the chionicleg
reninaunt ot


bntpll Jreturne in peace.
e
hach not fpr rde moꝛeo⸗ 012 ua nthe


e

ieder ge n dürre 2 leerer de

Shongeoe arcs went hr to tenor) tn Sa-
eden gett ee
on chyne awne „ Andche


2


charetes lonne of Ahab vnto
u


ed

taptagnes of the charet⸗
185 ot : 5 fay)
2822282 a e ra 5 3 ne
atest at ne eee ent ofthe
the ribbes ard 8 5

‘bite $ Depucr of his charett / tůrnẽ

bande orche hol / (oz Lan


Mah, ‘3 Cl.


e come downe.


the prayer of della. Dboe bnto him: Gt
and dpetz / ard Jehoramn bis maße hat ¢come


d then
5 heauen a conte
chere a


2555

zectoule

ebelled agaynſt lapde the Ingell 8
downe with him /


7
n there is no God in
e
o7e thus f. ou ſhalt no e ol Juda / de he had
come dotone kr the bepde on whych thou art do lame Che eff orth tes Of Dyosi
die. And elfab departed, ice ae mate c, pat
gp dnto him. And he Capoe onto thé:twbp are sche tis


thus come agapne? ano they! bis matelLBets tas


purtatedhers ße
ut iT them,
that moche @titus are eat inperes Ve


theLopdeliueth/eas typ toute
dae ne


to gien bene 8
eare a
kal. kelowibtp


captapne take awape typ matt
was come to him /beholde: he fatt on it too, holde
ofan beladnbcbecapeapne rde ontobpm: eben fapoe ena co


a tarre of / as they two ſtode bp Jordan.

And then Eliah tone hys matell ¢ wzapte
it together and lmote the water / and it deuu⸗
dedik lelke / parte the one ware and parte the
other / a ther two wet ouer on thedꝛpe lande.
And as lone as they were ouer / Eltah larde


to Glifeus athe what I tall do foz the ver
bekenne be falk atwape Eromehje, And Gltieus färbe:


mape da moare let mie I pray the / haue
bons th . ſetarde: chou batt acked an harde gp:
aioe tune 2 am tagen atoape fromtye tou (alt aue
Ape be t.


the


thy Cpzite*vowbie in
bar

thrnge. Heuerthelelle ve thou fe me when

Co:pEthoudo not / it all not be. And as ther


partes moate went walnynge and talkynge beholde / there


than ibe oer
Hake. pk hem a fonbze. nd Eliah went vp in the ker


ue the lame
ſppele.


came a charet of Eyze and hozlles of fpze and


whoꝛlewynde to heauen. And Elileus ſawe
and eried: S my father/D my tather / p cha⸗
ret ot Alrael and the hoꝛlemen therot / a law
hym no moare: and therfoze toke bes awne
clothes and rent them in two peces.
auen coke vp the mantell of Eltah
that fel from hym / and went backe agayne
and ſtode by Joꝛdans ſyde / and toke the mũ⸗
tell of Elia chat fell trom him / and Imote the
‘ab abere abe ao abenbe derber
ere she?
the waterit Deutded parte this wave a parte


ache and ooßed onthem and eutted them f rden
inche name orb L ode. And there came two ne,


ws

of Zfracl Juda and Sdom lacke water:

3
sab leet the Eploe ind aer caccetyeth bis fon


5
of:
bi


that wape / and Elileus wentouer. Anothe DS


chyldzen of the Prophetes of Jericho whycy
fatw him fro a farre / lapde: 5 Cpzpte of Eliah
Doth reſt on Elileus / and went agapnt hem
Kbowedto b erthe vntohim. Andther fapoe
vnto him / chere be amoge thy Ceruauntes
lutte men:let thé ego and leke thy ma⸗
applye the fpzite
ken him bpecatt him vpon dome mountayne
0 ae Andhe larde: ſende not.
euerchelelle pet thep lave vpon him / true
was a chamed / x fayde-fende and ther fent
Aktie ich Cought him the Daves and
npghtes / but founde hum not. Andthep
came agapne to hym
cho. Annbe Layoe'
D routhat re ſbulde not go.


beer


the Losdehathta⸗ wh


phetes of thy father g or the mother. And
1
Ipuerthé into the handes ohe Wbtkeß⸗


And they beyng vp erlp in the mo;
konne arofe a tone bps d water. And whe
the Moabitdlawe $ water a farve ot / as red
88 bloude / theylarde:it is bloud / the kynges
haue fought togeather a one ayne
HBowtherkoze ye Poabites gett zou to
Dbwople. And whe they came to 6 Polke of Fe
rael / Flracitt Cove vp a lapde on ß Moa⸗
biteg / Nthey Heed befoze che: And lotbeven⸗
(red p id a deſtroyed the Moabitt. Andther


1
W


emptie veddelles athat not a ewe. And
dſputt the Doze to the and to ‘op
potwze out into all thole bemtelies/


therore 8,


abnge vetd

575

0 f Celt the Ople

3. Ind lpue dug


turne in w
wonnenen eee.


cher a turned into the chambze g lave there,
Chen he layoe toSihe n his berate
berge Andhe called her / and che came


kae him. Andeliſeus la pde to him / ſape to


ouerchzew 5 cyties /a on euer good parcen her e: le
ol lande / caſt euerx man his tone ¢ duer cos a / Sher bat weve ies
ered it/and opte all? welles or water /@ wolvett thou be tpoken fo? tothe kyng o to


r nen at $ goodtrees And as jong ag $ lo- the captapne of che Botte? Ind the klapdel


eGhatis-7


nes cherok did remapne inß walles of Bꝛyc⸗ bined Bimongermpn’ atone people. hank gen iy


Re the dyngers went vpon kt and bette it.


And wh the kyng ol
sutra anid


Sayoe what


to bedone kosher⸗ And Eihezi bar z bine.
che hath no chive,
Deis oboe Ae een el yee Ae


t tobetd bint
feuebyanyed men 2 Wer he babe toa called her. Ind che came and ſtode at the


fo, doze


22 2


Uy,


0 fn peace. And whẽ he was departed krom f

im a furkonge of gro / Siheziche Ceruadt
Of Elifeusthe ma ofSop/tapn:te my mater
bath kepte of this > trien Naaman that be
wolde not receaue of his hande 6 he red.


ung As curelpas the aelonte what A, runne


Alter him and tate tomewhat.


Icrael,
an came with his bortes a his
1 at § doze of Eiiteus. Ehen
Eitfeus fent a meflenger taping: go a wache
che in Joꝛdan ſeuẽ tymes /andthy fet halk
been dad seaman ios pth wit
e 2

awaxpe / and ſarde: Beholde / A thought in my


felke / he wolde haur come oũt /a ſtand a call And


name of the L oꝛde his God / g put bis
baude onthe wae of the bifeate / and to take
aware $ lepzofpe. Ire not Abanah ¢ Phar⸗
phar/rxuers of Damatco/betterthenall the
waters of Acrael: 98


ndlo
went akter Daman. An ih Gala


um come akterhimichecame domne
oe werke gap him elne Wall well? ug. neg. iz. .
And he karde pee.


But mp matterbath fentmefapinge: ſe /
chere be two pounge men come to me out ol
ralmor the cyptoze ok 6 pzopheteg:geue
the prapethe/onetalzeoftpiuer ga caupſe
of good garmétes, Ind Naamé fapde :auen- G.
kuke and take two calentes of lyluer in two
bagges with two goodlpe garmentes / a de⸗
pucten them onto wo ofbis feruauntes, to
beare it befoze him. And be went in d datche
Etokeit of ther handes a beſtowed it in the
boule andlet the mengo/andthepdeparten,
Chen he went g tone betoze bes matter,
Euleus tapde to hym: whence cometh
Githest? And be tayde:thy feruaune went ng
whether Andhelarder wet not myne hert W
wor ed nn pine
teceaue lpluetek
luetrees / vin


Teile . Bon to Cwopnme fou the water,
* fr ael-tothat..4. wem
zer tae pe r ie. e


Ode. vi. Chapter.


tae


for
ther burneta


tthe ſtalle bpon tye
a hozattendpng,
grun
702


ge.
01 caringe: Beware thou
Lonot


aig) kg


tte. nde

ivia was me / bꝛynge thx tonne and lett vs cate hym to
15 dag nist tall eate mne emma f ge ,
eg. xx n fo we dzelled my tonne and drd cate him. A 0 They,


chat we
Pen tia
„ walhrng


tapings
And he tent thither hoꝛſe a
Sa e And cher came thts


ere was
bong auch ten hende


kapde: beholde

this moare Wait
we loke koz of the Lope,
ars ee excous piopherpeth plenteoutnes of bptalles amm
efte. Andhe ng to Samara. Che Sirians tune awape

them, Che Lorde p wol
ligeusis troden todeeth.
Chapt


g accopdyng to the de⸗ anhalt a meer

ileus fapde vnto thẽ not beleuethe warde ot
he. vil.
Ben


to moꝛow this tym
2 — thalbe Colne koz a Cycle,
‘to elles ot Barler foza nother in
Shae ary ub
1 den though te Lovbe ahmen


iz

Frain

them chall he fapoe:
empte tbem


em And when cher hal

125 em aware / and ther went to thetr ma⸗
ſter. And lo the Spoudvoures of Dita came

no moare into che lande of Icrael.
Alter this Benhadad Rug ot Stria gea⸗
thered all the Bolte / and wet z beleged Sa⸗
e 32 in Ha⸗
Cab wasa matia:toꝛ they eleged vntiſl andes
ge vecell heed was worth koure fhoze fpcles ol ſiluer /


died at tme’ And the kourch part aka Cab or doues bonge


I cles. And ag the kyng ot Acruel man there.
, weben beschert 7 de Lombeamanes Rototth t


noxele ok charettes a a n.
ol hoꝛũes ſandthe noyele ot a great Pot In
fomoche 6 cher lardẽ ane to anothersfe / che
Benge ot Icrael hach hyzedagaynt bs / che
kHynges of the Hethites z the np ol Egl⸗
pte / to come bpon vs. Ind ppon 6 they aroſe
fled in the darcke /a lekte their tentes / cheir
hoꝛſſes / their I des and the elde thephad pit⸗
Sud eucr as (twas, an ene doc cer n


ind when thele lepers came to the edge oF


the Hot / they went into tent and dyd eate a
dipnicke and carpedthence lyluer / gould and
rapment i a went a hid it: and cathe agapne
and entred in to another / and carped thence
allo / and went and hidd it. ~~
Chen they lapde one to another: it is not
wells we do / koꝛ this dape is a dae to bzyng
tydyngs. And yk weholde oute peace / tarve
till it be daye light / we challfinde a miccheue
Now therkoꝛe come / lett bs god and ten the
Bynges heriſholde. Ind to thep went ¢ called
“tothe pater of tye citie and kolde thé Caving:
we came to the pauplions of the
ſe / there was no man there / nether voce of
man /but hoꝛdes and Ades tyed / athe tentes
tuen as thex were. 5 8
Chenthe posters called o coide the kyn
houle within. Andthe kyng arole .
and larde to his leruaũtes: wyll he vou /
how the Sirlas haue ſerurd va. Cher kngte
that we are oppꝛelled with hungre / and ther
foe are gone out of their paurplions to hde
the lelues in the kelde taping: Cher will come
out ok the cytie/ and then we call catch them
a hyue and get into the cytie. And one of bys
ſeruaũtes antwered andlayde: Let men take
Tyue of the hoꝛles that remãpne and are lekte
in the cytie. Beholde theyare as good as all
che multitude that are lefte inche ertie: and
as good as ali the multptude of the cite that
are conlumed / and lett vs lend a le. And they
toke two charettes ol hoꝛles / and the kyngẽ
Cent alter the Holte of the Sirtens fayinge:
go andte And they kolowed after them euen
Dönto Joan: and ie / althe wape was kull of
clothes and vedelles which the Sirians had
caſt from them foz hatte.
And che mellengers returned and tolde the
— peed the people went oute a rob⸗
dche tentes ol the Dirtans. And loa bul⸗
Wel of flowze was lolde foꝛ a cycle / g. ij. bul:
chelles of of barley foza Cycle / accoꝛdyng to
the woꝛde of the L ode. Andthe kynge tett &
Loꝛde on whole hande he leaned / to hepe the
gate. And the people troade him in the gate /
that he dred / accozbyng tothe fapinge of che
man of God which he tapde / when the kynge
— — uri 1255
coꝛdynge to the woꝛde of che man ol
the byng laring two buchelles or barer fo


iii Fspnges,


chozam, Kxlil.


a licle a a buchen of barlep foz another ſhal⸗
be to moꝛow this tyme in the gates of Sa
marta. And the Koꝛde ancwerkdthe man of
God and larde:chough the Loꝛde made wyn⸗
dowes in heuen / vet wolde this not be Ind p
other lapde. Beholde / thou Male le it wh thing
eve /a ſhalt not eate thero. ænd fo it chaun⸗
ced: köz the people troade hym onder fete in
the gate / that he dred.

CSliteus élpeth onto the mite

devi. ges Jer Feu Beh a ented
Smet apace aa cae Sas
fueeeeth gehen. nowy


kanst la


fapig
clone Sieh ede enge e
e enge reſtozed a ded bo⸗
dre to Ipfe agapne that the woman whole
tonne he reupued/crped to the kynge foz her
Boule arm lande. Then fayoe wibesi: doy
Loꝛde henge this is the woman and this is
her lonne whpch Elizeus bꝛought tolpfeas
garnet che rng ated the woman / and
tolde bins. Ind lo the henge kent with her
one ok his chambꝛelapnes taping: vettoz¢ all
at pettaymeth cover withalrche kruteg of
e kelde / fence the daxe the lette the land / vn
to this trme. ; :
After that Euteus went to Wamatco /
Benhadad the kyng of Sirtabepngetyche,
And one tolve the kynge lapinge: he man
ol Godis come bither.chen tape the Hprige e
toasacl:*take a pꝛelent wpth the aridgoo ih eg fag .
agapnſt the man of God and arne the L onde
bphim whether Jchallrerauer of this my de
leale oz no. And Paszael went to mete hym
and tobe p2etentes wyth hm / euen of all
che good thpnges ol Damatco/ as moche ag
fourtpe Cameles coulde beate / and came @
pretented hym kelke befoze hym and layde:
thp Sonne Benhadad Rynge of Sita 100
= me tf the apinge: tally recover of thi
And Euteus lapde to n


Jehozam.
osfab. ee halt recouer hom be itthe Lome
eins BD hath Hewedme chat he Hail urelpdre. And
gout haue athe man of Boo beganne* toloke ernettipe/
kee edlen. in lomoche thathe was awemeb nde ma
* „ol God wepke. Ind Hazdel lapde: why we⸗
peth my Loꝛd: And he ancwered: fo: F know
that thou ſhalt do euell vnto the cyplozen of
Iltaei:their ſtronge cyties thou chalt lett on
kyꝛe / z their pounge men thou tale dep with
the fwerde ‘and chalt dallhe out the bꝛaxnes
ok their luckynge chyldꝛen / and all to teare

their wemen with chuide.

And Hazael lapde: what is thy ſeruaunt
which am but a dogge / that 4 chuide do thys
great thpng? And Elifeus fapde:foz ö Loꝛde
hath chewed me / that thou Walt be kynge ol
Dirid. And lo he departed from Eltleus and
came to his maſter / which fayd to him. nohat

, larde elites tothe; And he tarde he tolde
ang bes me chat thou shurided reccuer-Andon § mo⸗
wenie clothe to row he tone a rowgh a clothe and dypte it in
bras though be the water and lpꝛede it on his face / z he died /
foold therwith and bazael rapgnedin his fteade,
have cole pen, Che kplte pere of Fevozam fonne of Ahab
ok his keruent kyng ok z lrael /Febolaphat bepnge vet kyng
hen le: but dyd or Fuda/Fehozam the tonne of Jeholaphat /
in dende E kyng ol Juda / beganne to raygne. xxxij. pere
3 olde was he 3 to raygne / and


pave ehan herargned bih Pere in Zerufalem . Andhe


hearedok ß pro walked in the wape of the kynges of Irael ⸗
Daa kult ser as dyd the boule ok Ahab foꝛ the daughter ol


Guid re Ahab was his wyke / and he drd chat dilplea⸗
Salt it babe kedthe Kode Heuetthelater he Lom wolde
bene longe cn not deſtrope zuda becaule of Bauldhis ſer⸗
behadcagneds uaunt / as he pꝛomeledhym to geue hem a
therfore 20 0e tpabe tits chplogen all wape.
Honest ihne, And inis bares dom fell amape fxs vn⸗
hemight F der the hand h an aneiy a kyng
loner cor ok their awne. And Jehoꝛam went to Seir /
mobp b bugs g allhis charettes wih him. And he role by
Mite nyaht e lapde on the domites / which com⸗
pated him in / a the captarnes ok his charet a
the people fieed into their tentes. And lo the
Edomites utpte awape from vnderthe bande
of Juda bntothys dape. And then Lobnah
klipt awaxe to/ euenthat ſame tyme.

Che rett ol dedes ol Jehoꝛam and allhe
dpd / are wꝛittẽ in the chꝛonicles of ö krnges
ok Zuda. And Zehoꝛam reſted w bys Fathers
behead ich as fathers in the cytie of
Dauid. And Dhosiah bys tonne rargned in

1 ſteade. Che. rij. pere ol gehoꝛam tonne ol
Sachen pig tg dpd, beunme derne

ol Fehozant kyng of Auda beginne

& Cho a twentie ere dlde was Dhostah whe
be beganne to rarane / araygned one vere in
Jerufalem his mothersname was achaliah
daughter of Amri kynge of Ikrael. And he
walked in the waye of the houle ol Ahab: koꝛ


he was a tonne in law tothe boule of ahab.


ty, Aynges.


And Jehoꝛam the Conne of Ahab went éo
warre with Hazael kynge ok Spivta/ at Ra⸗
moth in Galãad / and the Sirians wounded
bim. wherkoze Benge Febozam went backe
agayne / to be healed in Jetrahel of § werd
which $ Dirtas hadgeue him at Le moth /
whẽ he Fought with Bazael kyng of Siria.
And Ohoꝛiah 5 tonne ot Ichoꝛam kynge ok

uda went downe to fe Jehoꝛam tonne of
bab in Jeꝛrahel becaute he was lycke.


u is made ot J crael / and kyllecl 0m

52 am ‘beset ae Desh Nee age and
therto cauteth Je zabell tobe ca Downe forth of a
wyndowe / whom dogges cate.

Che. ix. Chapter.

d Elileus the pꝛophete called vn
7) to one oF the chpiwer of the peophe-

eg / and laxde to him: grade bp ihr

whes a take this bore of oyle in
thyne had a get to Ramoth in Salaad. And
when thou comeſt thyther / thou walt there
fe Zehu the tonne ol Jeholaphat the fonne ot
Hamili / andgo to him /s malie hin arple vp
From amonge his bꝛethꝛen / and carye himto
a ſecret chambze. And take the bore of ople
and powꝛe it on his heed a tape / thus larch
the Loꝛde:ꝗ haue anoynted the to be kynge
ouet g ſrael. nd then open the doze a Alec /
tary not. And the feruadt ol che prophet get
him to Ramoth in Galaad / z when be came /
the captapnes of the Polke were lyttynge to
geather. And he lapde: J haue an errande to
the Sir captapne. And Jehu layde / vnto
which of all vs? And he lapd:to p D captax⸗
ne,. And he arole and went in tothe houle.

And the other powꝛed the ople on his heed
and layde to him / thus ſayth the Loꝛde God
ol Icrael:q haue anoynted to be kyng ouer
Ilrael § people of the Loꝛde / that thoũ ſlexe
J boutholdok Ahab thy maſter. Foz Aach
the Loꝛde) wyll aduenge the bioude of my
fernauntes the pꝛophetes / andthe bloude ol
all ö ſeruauntes of the Loꝛd / ok the hand of
Jezabellkoz § whole houle of Ahab chalbe
deſtroped) and Jwyll deſtrore onto Ahab
what pidheth agapnt p wall / and lo moche
as the pꝛeloned 02 that is koꝛlaken in crael /
Ewell make the houſe of Ahab phe ß houle
of Feroboam fonne of Habat / and ipke the
boule ol Saata the fonne of Ahiah. Andas
fo2 Jezabelthe dogges Mail eate herinthe
feld ok Jezrahel / e none ſhall burpe her. And
he opened the doꝛe and led.

And when Jehu was come out to the fers
uauntes of his Lozb/they lapde to him is aN
peace: Wherkoze came this mad kelow to $2
Andhe fapde to him pe know the perfon and
his cOmunicacyon, Andthey laxde: it is not c
fo. But tell vs a telowihippe And he ſarde /
thus andthus fpakebetometayinge cous


terme. And the watchman


u. Jehozam ij. Nynges.


labch che Loꝛde: Ahaue anornted the to be
kynge duer Irrael. Andthey haſted and tone
euerx man his mantell a put ander hym on
anhye bẽche at the toppe of ſteppes / a blew
a trompet and lade: Jehu is kynge. And to
Va the fonne of Jeholaphat the Conne ol

amet contpired agaynſt Jchoꝛam. Andgze=
024 had bene wapting at Ramoth Salaad /
and all Flracl with him̃ / koꝛ keare of Hazael


Ryng of Diria / and was returned to be hea⸗ ch


ied in Jezrahel / or ß woundes which the Di⸗
rians had geuen hem as he kought wih ipas
zael kynge ol Sirta.

Chen favde Jehu: Ik it be youre myndes /
chen let no mati elcapẽ out of the citie / to goo
and tell in gezrahel. And Fehu rode and wet

to Jezraheſ:toꝛ Jehoꝛam ape there / Oho⸗
stab kynge of Juda was come to Jehoꝛam.
And the watchmã that ode on the towze in
Fesvabel /Cpyen the company of Fehu as be
tame / and lapde: J ſe a cOpanpe. And Jeho⸗
ram lapde:tane an hoꝛiman t lende agaynſt
chem and let him atke N abe be peace.
nd there went one on hoꝛcbacke agaynſt
— lapde: thus fa kng: is it peace?
ind Jehu anſwered: what bak thou to do w
peace: turne a come after me. Ind d watch:
man tolde laping:the melenger came tothẽ
but he comety not agapne,
en he Cent out another on hoꝛcbacke /
which came to them a lapde / thus fapth che
Byng:is it peace? Ind Jehu ant wered / what
ball thou th do with pe ace: turne ¢ come ar
tolde lapinge:


ere is kalched Ohoziah.
owe in bys bande a ſmote


Loꝛde and J will quytebym in this 7
tape ee Lovee Heer neben


Exliiij
him in the plat of grounde accozdprige to the
wozde ofthe Lame Amd nhen Phon the
Ange of Juda lawe that he led the wapeto
the! garden houle. And Jehu kolowed ater’
him ¢ faye: impte him allo. Andthey tmote


bu inhis


pkt vp bps eres tothe wyndow a lapde / whe
8 ofmplide who: And there loned out to 2
two 02 thze loꝛdes that were chãberlapnes.
And he fayve :achzow her downe. Ind they
ee
on che hozles / and

troade her vnder fote,

Andthen when he was come in a hadeatẽ
a dꝛoncke / he fapde:goo a pplet q prave vou /
Ponder curiled creature/e burye her / koꝛ he
Ig a kynges baughter di whethep cameto
burpeber/they founde no moare of her / then
thefhulle ¢ the two fete a the two handes.
Andehepcame agapne a tolde hym. And he
fapde : it ig the woꝛde ot the Loꝛde which be
fpake bye band or his ſeruaũt eltab$ chet:
bite ſapig in Pteld ok Jezrahel hal dogges „
eateß lech of Fesabet/a F carkag of gezabel tl ren rt.
walbe donge bpd the erthe / in $ kelde de Jez⸗
rahel / zᷣmen hall not lape / this is Jesabet,


caulech the lxx. lonnes of Ahab to be .
2
ee ,

x er.
100 bad. ix. ſonnes in Samaria.

nd Fehn wꝛote letters / efent to

fees eue eden ta,

04 el / etothem that,
ourccd tp apabs cyploren pingeneie ate ibe pag

the coming of there letters to pow / xe haue sh (as it were)
vou youre matters ſonnes a pe haue w pous were in dende
chavettes g Hofes, gg (trog citie a hameſke. councelacaand
TCherkore chotethe beck, ebhim P molk pleasthiges pertzp⸗
leth pou ot poure matters lormes / g put binning tothe coe
on his fathers leate / a light koꝛ poure lo des men wealth:be
botote ann hep were excedingty afrapde/@ tame thep alfa
rde ke ewe Hinges were nok able to kande eu othe
bekoze him pot thall woe then Lande? Andb ehe chigen oo
gouernerok § kynges howle a ob the citie a were convents
OF the elders and the nources Cent to Fehuensfor them

lavinge: we are th leruaũtes a will do all z

thou thait brd bs we will make noma king:

but do thou what lemeth Wee e

en


Ohoziah.


Chen he wrote another letter tothe


V Al xe be inyne a wyll obere my vorce / then


take the heedes of poure matters fonnes and
come to ine to Jezrahel / by to moꝛow thes
kyme. And the Bynges tonne were. xx. per⸗
Bun ane ren OF the cytie which
nourpiſſhed the. And when the letter came to
them ther toke the kynges chyldꝛẽ and due
the in nonibze. xx. perlonnes / and put their
heedes in cophines and lent them to hem to
ſezrahel. And there cam a mellenger ¢ tolde
im Caving: they haue bꝛought the heedes ol
eee ſonnes. Andhe lapde: lett thẽ put
on two heapes in the enteryng ol gate /
tyll it be dape. i
Andin the mognpng he went out a Hove a
fapde to all the kolke / xe be righteoule:foꝛ le /
J conſpired agavnſt my matter and due him:
But who due thete : cöcpdze now how there
is nothyng ol the Loꝛdes wozde kalle to the
e
jab:£o2 the Lozdeha e
tohis leruaunt Eliah. And lo Zebu klue all 2


pe by
ane


ili J Aynges.


Jehu,


e
ether pꝛoclamed it. h Lent thozoty
gut all Ilrael. Ind all the feruatites of Baar
came that there was not a man left behinde
that came not. And when they were come in
to the temple ot Baal / the temple was full
krom one ende to another.

Chen he tapde to the kep er ot the vettrpe /
byynge forth garmentes 05 the ſeruauntes
ol Baal. andhe brought the out garmentes.
And Zehu went  Jevonadab konne of Ne⸗
hab into the houle or Baal: and lapde to che
feruauntes of Baal: fearche and joke that
there be none here wou ot the ſeruaunteg
ok the Loꝛd / but § ferustites ot Baal onipe.
Andcher went in/toofker facrefyce ¢ burnt:
offerynges. But Jehu appoynted him koure
Choze men tithout ¢ layde: Ik an of § men
which K wall bꝛeng vnto poure had’ elcape /
he that letteth hun go call dye oꝛ bpm.

dag lone as he gad made an ende of of-
feryng ol burntlacrekpce/he larde to themolf
the garde tothe Lozdes go in allepthẽ / iet
hone come out Andthey imote thé wi edge
dethelwerde. And ß garde a the Loꝛdes calt
them out / a went onto the crtie of the houle
ol Baal / aket out the Fmage out ol § houle
ol Baal a burnt it And chep brake $ mage
of Baal /g brake theboute of Baal / i made
a ſege ok it euer akter and lo Jchu deſtroped
Baäl out ot Acrael. But rom the lynnes ol
eroboam the konne ol Habat whych made
lrael kenne with the goulden calues in Be⸗
theland Dan, Jehu departed not.

Chenthe Lozde fapne to Jehu / becaule
thou halt luctelx done chat plealech me / and

alt done to the houle of Ahab all chat was


inmpne ert therfore Wall 'chy chridzen in il an.


q ij. Kynges.


id Athallah the mother of
2 gh gen de Ee Hebes ian


of Ohoziah ſtoke gehoas the tonne of Oho⸗
Ziah / and fale him trom among the kynges
fonnes that were tlarne / a hes nource wpty
him / out of a tlepynge chambꝛe / a hrddhym


krö A thallah / thache was not klarne. Andhe Th


was topth her / hyd in the houle or the Loꝛde
bl. pere. Ind Athaltah dyd raygne ouer ß Tad.

And the leuenth rere Jeholada Cent ¢ fet
the rulars ouer hundzedes % the captarntg
athem of the garde / a tone the into him into.
$ houle or the Loꝛde / and made a bonde with


them and toke an othe or chem in the houle b,


ok the Loꝛde / a themed thé the kynges tonne,


g pEany tolow her / let him dye w the bwerdẽ:
£02 6 pꝛeaſte lapde /ſbe may not theme in


& theboute of the Lope. And they lapde haves,


onher / e the wẽt the waye that the hoꝛles of
the konges went out a was klapne chere.
And Jehatada made abonde both betwene D

the Loide ethe kyng a betwene the people
andthe Loꝛde / that thep ſhuld be the Loses
people: allo betwene p henge the people.
en all the people of the land wet into the
boufe of Baat/adettroten his aultares / and
brake downe his Images iutely/atiueMas
than d pꝛeaſt of Baal befoze p aulter. Andß
pꝛeaſt fet watche men in $ houle of p L oꝛd /
Stoker rularg duerhundzedg ap capfapnes
the Gall ß people of $ land: Andthey
N the kong krom the houle of 5 Lope
went the wave ofthe gate of the garde ot


that P hyngcboute. Andhe Cathimactone on the


leate ot the hynges Andalſ che people ofthe
‘Loyve reiopled andthe cytye was in quiet,
And thep Clue Athallah with the lwerde in p
houle of the hynge.

ſehons makethproupfion Foz the re of the
Kapla ede en d ant,
055 ade,


Che. xij. Chapter. .

Choag was leuẽ pere olde when he a
twas made kyng. And he degãne to
§ AIlrargnethe Ceuenth vere of Jehu /
le rargned kourtye vere in Ferutas
lem Pis mothers name was Zebiaß Berta
be. Andhedrothat pleaten 5 Londe / as long
as Jehoiadã the P ꝛeaſt enkoꝛmed hym. But
they tone not awape the hillaulters / kor the
people fine g offered ty in the hillaulters.
And Zehoas lapde to the pꝛeaſt: all 5 [pyle
uerß is dedicat a brought to the houle o€ the


rl,


the fourth generacton ipt on the feate of FE
tacl. But Zebu carednot to walcke in p lw
S
boam which made zlrael fynne,


Londe in curraũt mone pe / that is to Cape the warhat is hatte
moneye that euery man*ts let at / with all $ atycle.a pece-

. monepe that euerpmänes pertgeuechhim toaticr ach sf
bypng into § houte ofthe Kand iet? peace tel. were.
take it to the enerpmé of bis aquapntatice/


alle!
into


aba


Gn hole dapes the Loꝛde beganne to cut
Iſrael Morte /foz Harael fue them in ali the
coottes of Icraei / from Joꝛdan Eaſt warde:
euen all che lande of Salaad / the Sadites /?
Rubenttes and the Mana ſlites / cromã roer
bponthe rxuer of Arnon / with Salaad and
Balan. c he reſt of the actes of Jehu / and all
be brd sabi potnze/are wzptté in p chzos
nicles ofthe kynges of Acrael. And when e.
hu was lapde torett whys fathers, they
tyedbim in Spamaria/¢ Tehoabas bis tonne
ralgned his dead. Indz tyme p ehulraig
ned poi trael in Damaria / was. xbiij pere


i qcatbatiah putteth todeet att kenges tonnen er-


e. the ſenne ok 8 6 is
eee ee oe


„Chapter.
be . chapt. A


ofS
runnynge ofthe people / che came top peopie
into the boufe of the Lond. Ind whe che law
che kyng ſtãde bya ppler(as che maner was)
S che kengerg a the trompettes by the kyng /
Fall che people of the lande reioylynge / and
the blowynge of the trompettes / We rent her
clothes & crped / trealon treaton And Jehoia⸗
da the pꝛeaſte cõmaunded the Captapnes of
the hundzedes ß hadthe rule of the hoſte / and
lapde to thẽ haue her out woithoue ß ranges /


let thE repape the bꝛolẽ places of ð tẽpit
in all places where ought is found decayed,
Heuerthelater the pꝛeaſtes hadnot mẽded
inthecemple cen pg 4eboas cae for
tthetemple Chen kyng Jehoas called Foz
Feboiada the preatt ¢ fo the other pzeattes %
Allo / a fayde to thé:whp repapꝛe ye not d b
ken places of the te ple? om thertoꝛe (e ye
receaue no moare money of youre aquapn⸗
taunce / but delxuer it to repapze the temple
withall. And the pꝛeadsconlented to receaue
— h wen babe en 5
ego tothe mendpnge or the temple.
Then Fehoiada the pꝛealt tone a cofer a
boꝛed an hoale in the lyd or it / a put it belyde
the aultare on the ryght lyde as a mã cometh
into the boule of the Loꝛde. And oe 5


Jehoaha


preaſtes
brought


AG. mex · xx.


houte ofthe Lone after they had tolde it.
And ehe; the moner by lommes into
{Bebandes ofthe morche men B had 8 ouers
Cifabtoß the boute of § WLozo:¢ tyep bzou
c out to $ carpenters ¢buploersp wzousht
bpon theboute of the Loꝛd / to malons and
hewers of ſtone / to bye tymbze ¢ fre lone /
torepatre thederayin ß houle of che Loꝛd /
Kall f that neaded repapzynge inthehoule:
e
e 10 les okblluer ch;
facet ett 97 anyother inctrümẽtes ol
12


de Juda. And his awneleruauntes arock and
wought trealon / a ciue gehoas in the houle
§ ware downe ko Sela. Jozabart
Soot e.
omer / intB be dped.
Andther buried him with bis kachers in the
ditte of Wauld. Anda ma ztah his forme raig⸗
ned in his ſteade. 8
CZeboahas the Conne oF Zebu ts delpuered mto the
andes of the Siriens) eth.Jeas his ſonne ratge
weihen Beate eilen. be sa
8 Ihe. piii chapter.
2 22 Frrih pere 3 of
. ines luda Jehoahaz
jouer teachin 0 t
nued dit rere Ind he wiought wichednelle
th the krght ofthe Lobe: koz he kolowed the
kenne of Jeroboã the konne 10 not eher h
made Ilrael (pnne/ a departed not ther fd:
Wherkozethe Lon was angry with Irrael /
audelruerrd hem into the bande of Bazacl


belt
eee


Ether wet on 2
Hans. And p chylozé of J
tentes as befoze tyme.


made Acraelcenne / but walked
chere rẽmarneda groue allo in


kynges ofFfraet,
if
220 ther


kene


es Snes
with his
fat vpon his feate And


boow a arowes. Andhe b.
garomes. Aude err one


u was made kynge ch.


ernsten ebenen


lee
koudiares ol d W


eres


Ichoahaz.


fos. che rere folowynge. And it chaunced as they
were burpenge a man / that ther typed the
ab. SDoudpares/e therfore cat tems into the
gariah, Cepulehze of Elileus. Ind as lone as the ma
came andtouched 6 bones of Elileus / he rez

ufued and ode vp on his fete.

And Pazael oppꝛeſledz fractal the dapes
of Jeboahas . Wut the Loe had metcpe on
ChE ¢ ppticd them ¢ turned tothe / becaute of
bis appopntmẽt made withSbzahai /Alaac ⁊
Jacob / a wolde not dettrope them ether calt
thé from himas pet. Ind when Bazael kyng
ol Ditia was derd / Sehadad hiß fonne raig-
ned inhis Hoar ambhen Foas the tonne of
Fehoabas wet agapne a toke out of the have
Of Benhadad tonne of Hazael / the cyepes
which he bad taken awape out of the handes
ol Jehoahaz bis father / w warre. And thze
typmes dyd Joas beate bpm and bꝛought the
cyties of qcrael agapne.

astah the png ok Zuba putteth to derth ß mane
oer orb Aalbertan aller 5 S gn;
Ang of Itrael taketh Amaztaß and robberh the ieple
of the Lozbe Joas dpeth and Jereboam his tonne fice
ceabeth in his rome: and after him tapgucth ae
chariah, Amasiah is bplied in Xachis) and Asariay
Fapgnethinbisteade,
¶ Che. rit. Chapter.

8 Pe leconde pere of Foas tonne of
3 BeOS 17700 rargned

4 mastab tonne of Jehoas ken:

OE Norzubache was. rb vere olde wh
be began and rargned. rrix. pere in geru⸗
tulalem Dis mother name was Zehoadan /
@ was ok g erulalem. And he dpe that plealed
the Lozde pet not ivke@autd bis rather: but
e

er tote they awapẽ the billaulters: But

* seopiefiucand ofteren agli 8 bilanteess,
Ind as Cone as the kyngdom was ſetteled in
bis hande / he liue bis letuauntes that kylled
the beng bis father. But the chplore of thote
murtherars be Clue not / as tis wilccẽ in the
bok of the lawe of Woles / wherethe Lon


okt


iiij. Mynges.


Cxl vi.
the Cootiites therfore type heit rykech. Le
Sloztoute-but tarpe at home. 1 5
det thou to pꝛouoe to mylcheue / hat thou
wuldeſt be ouertheowen g Juda with the.

But Imasiah wove not heare. And Co
Joas beng of Flracl wentöp / e he and ama
slab keng of Juda lawe ether other at Bethe
lames in Juda. And Zuda was put to the
wont befoze Alrael a thepflen euerpman to
bistéte.dndJoas Eng ot gtrael tone Imd⸗
diah eof Juda / tonne of Feboas tonne
ol Ohozlah ar Wethcames And then be wet
to gerutalem and bꝛakedowne ok the walle
of Jerulalem from the gate of Ephraim to ß
comet gate / koure hündzed cubptes , Andhe
toke all che goulde ¢ linter g al the venelles
that were tourde in the houle ofthe Lone /
And in the treature of the kynges houle / and
hottages therto: e then returned to Sama
nia agapne.
che keſt of z Actes of Foas which he dpd /
and his poze / a how he fought with Ama⸗
nab kynge of Juda / are wzitten in the chꝛo⸗
nicles of the hpnges of Alrael: ¢ Joas layne
bim to reſt wich his fathers and was burped
at Samatia amonge the kpnges of Ftrael:
@Jeroboa his fonneratgnedin his rome.
Amaziah the fonne o€ Fehoas hynge of
Juda. pued alter che deeth of Zoas konne of E
Zeboahaz kyng of acrael / tyttene pere. And
che remanaunt ok F deadeg of Amaziah / are
wultten in the chzonicles o€ p kynges of Ju
da. Andthepcontpired great ttealon agaynſt
him in Zerulalem / he fled to Lachts. Ind
N A1 there.
ind they bꝛought him onan hoꝛſe a he was i
buried at Ferubatem th his fathers in cptie ö Waraxrbia
oF Baud.“ And all the people of Juda tone
Azariah which was rl. pere olde / made
um kenge kozhrs father amaziah. Andhe r
it Allach and bꝛought it agapne te A with
Crp ed the kynge was la rde to rect wich
ig N
b Che. xv. pere ol Amastah ſonne of Fee


2 boas kynge or quda / was Ferobos fonne of


e battell / and calledthe name
euer after.


Joas made hynge ouer Itrael in Samaria /
and rapgned. kli. pere / and wzought wycked⸗
nelle in the ‘ght ofthe Loꝛde: for heturned
innotheng fro the lynne of Zerobos 5 done
of Nabat which made Irrael fynne. Pe re⸗
Moped p coltes oF Alraeĩ cd the enterynge of
Hemath onto the ee / inthe wydde feldes /ac⸗
cordyng to che worde ok the Land God of gl
rael which be tpanethoꝛowhts feruatit Tox
nah the tonne of Amithat p pꝛophete / which


was of Geth Opher Lor the Lözde hadlene &


bow that the affliccton of Ftrael was excea⸗
Deng brtter /in lomoche ß the pꝛelaned the
koꝛlanè were at an ende And there was no
EXE


Jeroboam. te Kynges. Azariah,
josham, layde that men chude put out p name or Il? ria / and clue him / and raygned inhes ſteade. —
Heim, racl HI vnder heauen. Andtherkoꝛe he holpe Che reſt ofthe deades ol Delum g the trea⸗
Manahem. thé by the had of Ferobos $ lonne ok Jans. ton / which he con tpired are wꝛittẽ in ß chꝛo⸗
Phaketah, Che reſt ok the deedes or Jeroboam / Kall nicles okche kyngd ot Alrael. Che ſame tyme
Phakeh, he drd / and his powze how he kought / zhow Manahemdeſtroped Thaphlah and allthat
Potea, hereſtozed Bamalco and Hemath to Juda were therin / and the colt es therok krõ Cher⸗D ps mother
in Akrael are witten in the boke of d chꝛo⸗ Jahlbecaule they opened not to him he lmo⸗ 4 bag
r owed) -qbeseieneteor tae henge in ae O 8h e teh
thers an e. xxxix.pere of ĩariah e ok gu⸗ did hi
the krnges of Firacl/e Sachartah his tonne daf vegane anaßemthe Tanne ofa to 0 dance weber mk
rapgned in his ſteade. 3 . 1 eae in ö 1 burnt!
8 „Andhedrdeuell in che kyghte ol
Azariah the kyng of Zuda become. „And U i
Sehen aan abi. Lerne Mag secobaan the Lozde/eturned not all bis daves fro the Che realt of the deades ot Fothamardall be
Tiuftendelh bum a toe Rpuigdom.aer 5552 fpnine of Feroboam § fonne of Mabat which dr / are wꝛittẽ in ß ehe ane
ath danahem-attcr Aanahem P hasch /afier made Itkäel Iynne. And Poul bynge ve AM- of Juda. Inthoſe dapegthe Ang
bakeiay Abet after Pbhakeh Folea after doo · ria came vp the land. And Manaßem gaue 7
err : e
Lb. 5 3 0 is Kyng . jana aulter. that ic chulde
—:. . ,,,, ,,,, With ee ent eee eee
ee, pce ano 6 hing ait ane ra aa bes eh
Loe 25) Sirtene pere elde as hewhehe ol ‘Giicarureabackeagarne’s a nc EAbas Byng of Juda contecvateth his tonne in fpꝛe: offerynges /g che urnges oumneacne es ae
was made kynge / Ahe raigned. i, pere inge there inthe lade. Kanlelhm ier fo lde the Monge of tracts dis mentor a the bumtoticinges of alt
rulalem ſhts mothers name was Jecheliah/ Che reſt okthe deades of Manahem a aii 5 Zu the Meade of aha; Fane — co. che people of thelande ¢ their mteatcofteinig’
ewas ok Jerulalem. Andhe dd z plealed 8 ge drd/ are wutten in the chꝛonicles of the Che ri.chapter dis lone. their deyncheoflrrnges / powze theron all
Lope in allthrnges as did hes kacher Ama⸗ kynges of {rack and whe Wanahem was : pere tye bloud of all mance offtinges. But § bas
ziah: laue thatther put not the byllaulters lapde to reſt witz bis fathers Phakeiah hrs
awape: fo: ö people offered a burned fat Hill . fonne rapgned ift bis eave.
inthebpliaulters. And the Lozde Cmote the The kpetiech pere of Asariay kyng of Ju⸗
yng / that he was a leper vnto d dave of his da / beganne Phaketah the tonne of Mana⸗
Bethe anddwelt inanhoule at ipbertpe / and hem to raigne ouer Irrael in &. and
Jotham the kynges tonne gouerned 5 houle cötinued two pere d wꝛought wrneblr in &
tudgedthe people ok the lande Che rest of krahte ofthe Lozd e lette nat ot fxs Hfyrnes
the deades of Asartah a all he did / are wirtẽ ol Ferobos tonne of Nabat which made Fe
in p chzonicles of 6 nge of Auda. Ind za raclfyane.AndPhakeh che konne ol Rome:
viah lapdebimtollepe whis fathers/ other liah a Losde ot his contptred agapnt hem
burped him W bis fathers in the cytie ol Da and Clue hem in the palapte of the Bpnges
f stone eaten his dteade. houle / with Argob and Ariah and kpktie men be wut. gez ol
In ß. xxxbiij. pere of i zariah Eyng or Ju- with him that were Salgadites:and whe be ing ok, fh fa
da / waß Sachattay the konne ofFerovoamt bad kplledhim / vaignedin bys rowme. Che 55 — red with his fathers in 6
made png bps cracl in Spamatta/eratg- belt of Pyakelab andallbedpoare watts in Ines , Wauid: & Hezekiah bys konne rapg⸗
Senertrie.n, neblpyrẽ monethes 4 dpd? dilpleaked the che chronicles oftehynges de Zarsen. ned in hrs rowme.
L. onde / as did his kathers / and turned notkrõ And che in. pere of Azartah yng of Juda f zg Cova kpnge of Jergelte taken. And he and
the lpnnes ol geroboamthe ſonne ok Mabat beganne Phatich che konne of Hontelfal to eis OF S fia seautmessonghecothe Adysians. alt bes
whichmade Firael Inne. Ind Heium the ralgne duer Ilrael in Samaria andconti= ewes „ @ TPO ;
konne ol Jabes contpirevagapnt him / and nued . xx. pere / and did euell in the fpabe ofthe


Seer ren

a » . 3 king of gu⸗

fmote him betoze the people / kylie him / Londe ſandturned not kromthe cpnnes olge⸗ da / Hoſea lonne of

Candrargnch inbis dende. : N robof konne of Habt § made Ffrael Ire. nne lach een Spamatis Gren Alge
Che relt ofthe deades or Fachariah are Inthe dayes ol Phakeh kong OF Ilrael / cam ping: chr : e contpnued, ix pere /e dyd h opt


witten in che chꝛonicles of the Bengt of Il⸗ Ceglath Phalatar byng of Aria! and tone
racl. bis is the laying that che Loꝛde lpane ion / Abel / Beth Macah Jancah Made“
ü. Reg . ret. tonto Jehu / laping: ch lord Hall tytton ? Dazaz Galaad / Salle and all the lande of
„kz. Reg. kak. fegte ok Irrael in che fourth generacion. And d Peach kme o cl enn
it came to to pate. 8 ind Hole the konne ol Elah confpyzed
Selumthe forme of Jabes beganne to trealon agarnct Phakeh the tonne of Rome
tapgne the. xxxix. pere of Iʒartah kynge ol liah and lmote him and clue him and raigned ry q
Juda / and he ravaneda moneth in Hama⸗ in bys eave (the. rr. vere of Zotham the arab zi
Tia. Foꝛ Manahem the tanne of Gadi came tonne of* Oziah. Che reſt ocz actes of Pd; ome wr! i Basi
ppfromarpersah andivée.to Spamariaand Keh/andallbe Dydvave ltten in the Rozies Gish i ‘ent garn FIND
Hnotespelumtbe konne or Jabeß in Sama ofthe enges or Acrael. : a. 6 i of Adra / to Samalcd. And thelant 8 ata be all tb. Beg xt
came eleged it
tif, thꝛe


rag,


ee gin betes
thechplbze of Brack ban


ch


G.


rng. Wpich Zerobos thut
krael aware fromthe Lozde and made thé
great (pnnie and fo the chptazé at J
vael walcked in all the ſynte ot Jeroboam
which he had fete vp and departed not ther⸗
from ſvntyll the Loꝛde had put a ſcael awape
gute ot hes lyght as he larde bp all bys ſer⸗
uauntes the pꝛophetes. And lo he tranclated
boch nie oF pets landto Attpzta / euenons
0 pe.
ndthe beng of Adv:ia brought fd Baz
Non a Ed a to Aua lcd Hemath
and from Spepharuatm/and put them in the
gate Spamatta in teade oF Wechrideen e
ok Icrael. Andther polfeled Samaria and
dwelt in the cttes therot. But at the begyn⸗
hynge of their dwellyng / chey feared not the
ye the Lozde tent lxons bpon


Hezekiah.


ij. K
@ a ſtretched out arme: bpm keare
bowe e to hi do lacrifice. And p oꝛdyna


cuſtomes iawe a comaundement which J
wrote toꝛ vou / lethat ye be diligent todo ko⸗


eucrmoze/¢ feare not any other goddes And B


che appoyntemẽt f A haue made with you / le
ve forget not / and that you keare none other
Soddes but the Loꝛde poure God ve Hall
feare / æ he hall delxuer pou out of Shandes
ol all voure enempes. How be it they hearde
not but dpdatter the olde maner. and euẽ £0
bypthete — eh A lerue ce.
pmages o: t lo ete chyldꝛen a their
hplozens chyldzen to. Euen ag drd their faz
thers / lo dothey onto this daye.

eschiab kynge of Judaputteth dotwne the braten
e dre de dolce, aum neh


Jerael to p Adpzas . Che blatphemp of Sennaher ib. E


Lrlviif.


§ hong of Adpzig.
latent Charthan e
5 Lachis to kynge


¶ Che. xvitj. Chapter.
je ee pere oF Dora fonne of ode bpeh
which is in
calledto
Eliakim


de.
che woe hen menten the kyng
of Aftyzia/ Che nacpons which thou
batt trantlated ¢ putin the cpties or Dama⸗
inne an jedore bath ene poe = ae
＋ 7e he pong bpon Ds
cem lone age ben bersutetoer ane § be/twhenbe beganne to raygne and rapgned
jemaner of the God of che lande. Sas She Gane 52 gen b b. 1
en oe Eps of pata commcurioey that pleateothe Loneinalltyenge whe to ch


bpalt Dauld his father. Be put awape 155


5 a
ue; all to bzake the bzafen: 0
vd dc cee ang ennai of 6dr fes made Kor onto thotcbapestie chr of
mmc! , ee fatedao nr ata et teat
ens) © aie Bon be dein acto mate ete ene react fo that afterbitacamenone lyke bit
8 amõge all ß Bynges ot Fu
them that wentbefoze
Loꝛde ¢ departed not
wytnelled to the / a folowed banpte a
= apne lebe to the bethenthat were
round aboute them / ol which the onde e


ard. ch
e908 Planets oven Bas


nynche pere of Holea
was let 5 and 8 pe Se
i imaurinenictes or and which 2
Ls 45 9 che onde ; the
a


and
85550


tai. the


Hesthiay, i, Aynges. Jflalah.


cht walles / that they chan cate their awne blab were come to Flalah: Jcalaß card to thẽ.
pate a dꝛynke their awne pine w vou. So challve Cape to youre maſter Chusſarth
And lo Rablakeh Kove and crped wyth a the Lordeibe not attarde of che woꝛdes thou £9
ꝛowde volce in the zewes langage / andtpake heardeſt / w which the vounge men of z nyng
Lapinge:heare the faving ofthe great kyng / bea r ꝛtahaue rayled on mt Foꝛz will lende
the kyng ol Aduia. Chus layth che kyngnet him a blaſt that he hall heare tydinges / oro
not he ze kiah begtle you / toꝛ he is not ableto returne to his awne lande: And A well ouer⸗
delpuer pou out ot myne had mether let hese thꝛow him w s dwerde / euẽ in hes awne lad.
e le
e Lode Wall furely N 0 eng of Iddvꝛia kyghting agayn
Geltnorbeneipucees into the handes ol the Lobnahitoz he had hearde how 6 be was de⸗


G king ok Adiria. Herken not onto Hezekiah / peti Lachis. Ind he harde tydinges ot


koꝛ thus lapth the beng ol Adiria. Therhakah kyng or blacke Mozes / how
Deale kyndelp with me / z come out to me. he was come du to kyght agapndthem. And
Andthen tate euery man ok his awne vrne / there vpon he departed a tent medengers vn
f ok his atone fygs tree / a dꝛyncke euer mã to Heze nah laying. Chus lave to Hezekiah
ofthe water ol his awne welle / tyu g come kyng of Zuda / iet not thy God carpe the out
and let vou to as good a lande as yoüres is: of the wãpe / in whõ thou lo truſteſt fapinge:
à lande of cone and wyne / a lande or bꝛeade Ferulalem chall not be delpuered inte $ had
4 byneyamdes / a lande ot olpue trees / oorle ofthe Apnge of Adpꝛia. Beholde chou halt C
Kok honp. And pe hall rue and not dye. And heard what the yngs ol A pia haue done
herkẽ not vnto Pezekiah lor he well begyle to all landes / howthey haue vtterlp deſtroied
vou / taping: the Lozde Mall delyuer vs. Fo: them. And how then chuldeſt thou elcape⸗
haue the Gods or the nacrons delpuered anr bathe thecßods ok the hethen delpueredthem
Sod hit lande / out ol the hãde ol the kyngok which myne auntetries haue deſtroped: as
Alivia? where are the Gods ol Hemath a or Gozan Paran / Nezeph / and the chyldzen ol
Arphad · where are p Gods ol Sepharuaim Eden which were in Chelalar; where is the
ok ana and Auah⸗ did dep deliuer Samaria kyng oF Mentath / the Rynge of Arphad/ che
out ol myne hadi: what Gonofanplaohath Byng of che cytie of Sepharuaim / and the
deliueredhis lad out or myne hãd / the Loꝛd yng ol Ana and the Ayng ot auah.
chuide delpuer Jerulalem out or npnehäd⸗ nshen He zeklah had receaued 8 letter ok
But the people helde their peace and an⸗ the hand of the medengers andhad redd itthe
twerednot him à wozde: toz the rng had cõ⸗ went into the houle of the Loꝛde and larde it
maũded laxig: ant were hi not. Chen Eliani abꝛoade betoꝛe p Lord. Andhezentah pꝛated


the ſtuard of


Ehe Angell oF t
Sauen


Lxlix.


gebe e tecentieth $ fpgneot bps herith


Che. xx. Chapter.

85 oute gtyme Hezekiah was licke
vntothe deeth. andthe Pbꝛophete . War errhe
Fatal Conne or Amoʒ came to him El. vi a
land lapde tohrm. Chus layth the


God ol Wauid thy father. haz
aper a lene toptrntes Gehe
(this dape the dapes thou
che houſe ot the Loꝛde. And


AGoputa tig in thy nole anda bytt in
‘ther notte bzynge the backe agarne
unn en ft.


2
20


mt


big.


to,


Manalleh. Amon
haue the rene in thy boule? And Weschiah
karde: all that is in mphoute haue thep tenes
there is nothynge amonge my trealure that
haue not chewed them. And Zlaiah fapde to
Hezenfahtheare the worde ol che N oꝛde. Be⸗
holde the dave ſhall come that all that is in
ehrnehoule ethat thy kathers haur larde bp
in ttoze bnto this dare halbe cated to Ba⸗
bilon/anothinge thalbe lektelarth 5 Loꝛde.
And or thy konne that pꝛoceaded out of the/
fobpch thou begatteſt / (all there be caryed
awape / a chalbe made chambzelapnes in che
palace of $ kyng of Babilon. And Hezentah
faye to Aaiah: welcome be the worde ol ?
Loꝛde which thou bak fpoken:fo that peace
and truthe be kept in my dapes. 5

Cheremnaũt ob the deades ot Pezentah a
all his power / and how he made a pole anda
Conduite and bꝛought the water into che cr⸗
tre ſare weiten in the boke or the chzontcles
Of the kynges ol Juda And Hezentah larde
pom totelt topth hrs fathers a Wanadeh

tonne rapgned in hes ſteade.

CMW pched GJanaleh reſtoreth agapne the Idolles €
after dyeth in whole Meade Ams his lonne tüccedeth /
which is bplled of his awne leruauntts: After hem

rapgneth kapchkull Joliah.

¶ he xxi Chapter,

Analſeh was twelue pere olde
when he beganne to rapgne and
birapgned kyktie and fine pere in Je⸗
Vrufalem hrs mothers name was
Paphsibay. Andhe did z dilpleaced p Londe /
euen after the abbominacions of thee en
1 che l oꝛde catt out befoze the childzẽ ol
Itrael.Andhe went and bulltthehillaulters
agapne/ whych Hezentiah bys father had de⸗
Aroped.andhe 1 e a to Baal and

„ Abeue. fte. Mabe groues ae dyd Ahab henge oF Sack
Andhe bowedhym kelke onto all the * Hote

okheuen a leruedthem. Andhe butit aulters

in the verphoule of the Loꝛde ol whych the

L oꝛde had fapde: in Jeruſalẽ wyll put mx

name. And he built aulters vnto all che Bolt

ok heuen / euen in two courtes ol the houle ol

the Loꝛde. And he offered his tonne in kyꝛe a

obterued dilmall dapes /¢ bled witchcrakte

and mapntened wozkers with lputes / a tel

Jers of koztunes: a wzought moche wpcked⸗


j. Reg · vi · b.


neile in che tyght or che Kode to angrehrm. a8


And he put an ymage of a groue that he
babe ue incheuerge temple ol whych


che Wozve had lardeto Baud eto Satoma 5


“is 9, bistonne/*inthishoule ¢ingerulale which
iments Spang chotenoutofallcrybeso¢#fvac tot
J putmpname kot euer. Nether wills make

che fete of Ilrael moue any moare out ofthe

lande which? gaue their fathers:fo that they

wilbe diligent ko do all haue commaunded

them / and all the law that my ſeruaunt Mo⸗

fes commaunded them. But ther herkened


iiij.Aynges.


Joſiah.
not: £02 Manalleh had ledd them out of the r
waxe / to do moare wickedlpe then did the he⸗
then people which the Loꝛde deſtroyed from
befoze the chyldzen of Ilrael.

And the Loꝛde tpatie by his ſeruaũtes the
Pꝛophetd fapinge:becaule Manaſſch kinge
ol Juda hath done Coche abhominaciõs / and

ath wzought wyckedlye aboue all that the

moꝛites which were befoze him did:¢ hath
made Juda tynne alto whis Fooles . Ther
koze thus lapch 5 Lorde Sodok g crael. Be- geremte aua
holde / J will bꝛinge foche euel vpõ Jerulalẽ C
Zuda / p che eares ok all that hearẽ it / chall
tyngle at it. And z will ſtretch ouer Jerulalẽ
thefquarynge lyne of Samaria ¢ the plo⸗
meth ol the boule of Ahab. And A wyil wype
out g erutalem / as a ma wolde wipe a diche /
and when he hathe wyped it turneth it vple⸗
downe. And though F leue a remnaũt of mi⸗
neenheritaunce pet J wyn delpuer the into
che händes ok the thathate the / other ſhalbe
robbedandlpopledor all their enempes:euẽ
becaule they haue done wyckedipe and haue
angredme / lence the tyme their fathers came
out ol Egipte vnto this dare.

Andtherto Manatleh chedd innocẽt bloud
exceadyng aboundãtlpe / in Co moche thathe
replenpaben geruſalem in all comers / belide
bis lynne wherwyth he made Juda tynne €
to do euell in the tyght of the Loꝛde.

Che reſt of the actes of Manalleh can
285 g his lynne that he lynned are w

nthe boke of the chꝛonicles ofthe binges ol
Juda. And Manalleh tapoe hym to llepe w
his fathers / and was burped in the garde ol
his awnehoule / euen in the gardẽ of Osa: €
Amon his Conne raygned in his ſteade.

Amon was. xrij. pere olde when he begane
to raygne / and he raygnedtwo pere in Jeru⸗
falem His mothers name was Meſalemeth
the daughter of Haru of Jathbah. And he did
that dilplealed the Loꝛdẽ as bis father Ma⸗
nate dpd. And he walked in all the ware ß
bps kather walked in / andlerued the Idoles
that hys father terued / a bowedhym tele to
them. Andhe fozloke the Loꝛde God ok hs
fathers ¢ walked not in the wape of} Loꝛde.

And the feruauntes ok Amon conlpired
apni hym / a llue him in hxs atone houle.
But the people ok che lande tlue all that cõ⸗
Cpired agaynt kenge Amon / amade Foray

is Conne krng in his rowme. Che reſt of &
actes ol Amon which he did are wittẽ in the
Chꝛoricle of Hinges of Juda. Sndthey hu⸗
ried hi inbistepulchzeinpgarden of Sa /
€ Joltahhis tonne rapgned in his ſteade.
¶ Atter gotiah heard of the hoke of the lawe that was
kounde in the lemple/ he fendeth to Divab the P ⸗
phetille kor councell.

5 che. xxij. chapter :
Foliay


ilij. Apnges,


=] Diiah was bij. pere olde when he


‘sot
e ah of Beecath. And he did
tin the lyght ol the Loꝛde / a walked in
all che waves of Baud hys kather /a bowed
nee tothe right hande oꝛ tothe lefte,
ind the. rbiij. pere of hes rapgne kynge
Joliah tent Saphan che konne of Azaliah
the tonne of Melulam the ſeribe to the houle
ofthe Lozde / ſayinge:ge to Heltziah the hre
pꝛeaſte / i let hym Cumme the ſpluer that is
bꝛought into the houle of the Loꝛde / whych


the kẽpers ok the doꝛes haue geathered or the th


dene dhe sevimentbacOauetbeouer rahe

ok the werkmen that haue the ou

et the houle of the Loꝛde / wyych hall geue
itto them that worte vpon the boute of the
Loꝛde / to repapꝛe the decaped places therot /
euen vnto carpenters and malons / and koꝛ
to bye tymbꝛe and fre fone to repapze the
houte. How be it let norekenpngebe made
worth chem of the monpe chat is deltuered in⸗
to their handes / but let them do it of their


ce.
ind Welhiialy the hye pꝛeſte tarde to Spas
phan mentite haut (One Heben of
the lawe in the temple of the L ode / and Hel⸗
Rah gaue the bone to Saphan / and he red


it. Anöthen Saphan the ſerrbe went to the rng.


kynge and bꝛought him wooꝛde agapne / and
fapde:thy leruaüntes powzed out the kyluer


that was founde in the temple / and haue de⸗


Iruered it vntoche woꝛkenirn chat haue the

ouerlyght of che houle of the Loꝛde Fur⸗

thermoze Saphanthe kcribe chewed ß kinge

fapinge:Delkiah the preatt bathe delruered

—.— one. And Saphan red it bekoze
e.

And che Nynge as lone as he had heard 5
woꝛdes of the bone of the lawe he rent
q and commaunded elbiad the pratt
benden denden spapban 6

2 the . jah / ali
kerpbe / and a fabiaba . — Of the Ayn⸗
ges / capinge: go pe and leke of the Loe for
gener ede eee

ol dunde.
Forteisa great wrath of che Lorde that is


ter hendled opon os that oure fathers haue not


herkened bnto the woꝛdes ot this boke / to do
in all popntes as it is wzitten therin.

Ind Belkiah the hre pꝛeſte and Ahinam /
Achoboz / Saphan / a ſahtah went onto Ol⸗
dab ö Pꝛophetille wyle ol Selum the tonne
ol che tonne of Harabam keper of
the robes / whyche Pꝛophetille dwelt in Je⸗
rulalem in che feconde warde and commu⸗
ned with her. And che larde to thẽahus kart


„
che Loꝛde God ok Flract . ell che man that
Cent pou to me:thus lapth the Loꝛde:heholde D
J will bꝛenge euell vpön this place and en &


ugh: dwellers therin: euen all the woꝛdes ok the


bote wyrch the Rynge ol Funda hath red / be⸗
caule they haue fozfake nie andhaue burnt
offerpnges onto other Gods / to angre me W 2
allthe* wozkes of their handes. Therkoꝛe is chatis wyth
mx wzath bendled agapnſt thys place / and their Images,
all net be quenched. 5
But tothe kynge of guda which lent vou
to enquire otthe x oꝛde ro Wall pe fave:thus
larth the Loꝛde God oF A crael / as touchrnge
che wondes whrch thou heardeſt. Becaule
ne bert drd melt and thou mekedeſt thy
kelke bekozeme the Lorde / wh thou heardeſt
baute abe ayn thys place and the en⸗
or the fame / how that it chuld be de⸗
Groped and made a curled:and tareſt thy clo⸗
ches and bed sa bekoze me: of ad alto
baue hearde tarth the Loꝛde. and thertoze fe,
Z wylla receane the onto thy fathers a wyll ameceaue the
ett the vnto thy graue in peace / thyne eyes vnto th fas
thait Cenone of tye eue which well bzbn⸗ thera tbat toe
e bpon thys place. Bnd they brought the gayi verb
50 ‘woozde agapne. swetes thatthy
( Joliah readeth Deut e before the people. de fathers are re⸗
putteth downe the Jdelles- after he had tylicd the ceaned too:
ites therol . he kepeth pallouer . We wes hplicd in whpch map be
lagedo / and bps tonne Jehoaas rnygneth in bis teas called che bolo⸗
derakler he was taken / hes lenne Jehoakim was made me ol Anaham


Aut vl. l.
Ohe. rriij chapter.
dd then the kenge lent and gea⸗

ſchered onto hym all the elders of
Juda and of Jerulalem. And the
Synge went bp into the houle ok
de / and all the men ol Juda and all
e enhabitoures oF Jerulalem wyth hym / a
che preattes and the Pꝛophetes and all the
people bothefmalleand greate. Andhe red
che cares of thé all the wozdes or the bone


bes ofthe couenaune / wyrch was kound in the


houle ofthe Lopde . And the hynge trove by
Spiller a made a couenatint before § Loꝛdẽ
that ther thuld walke after the Loꝛde / and
kepe hs commaundementes and hys wyr⸗
nedes andhrs oꝛdynaunces wyth all theire
hertes and all theire loules / and make good
the woꝛdes of the tarde apopntment 5 were
wꝛittẽ in the kozlapde bote. And all ö people
conlented to the apoyntment.

And the Rynge commaunded Pelttah the
bre preatte and che inkertoure preattes a he
keperg of che doꝛe / to bꝛynge out ol the tẽple
ofthe Lozde/all the vellelle that were made aboue. xvſ e.
foz Baal ¢ for the groue ¢ ko allthe Holte Chat iathe
of heauen. Andhe burntthem without Jeru⸗ menfarer of
kalem inthe feldes of Ceo zor s carten che al- Sea
thes oftheminto Bethel. Andhe pudemne B ther were
S* Camarites which d kynges ot ‘ue had cane toeth


a


Joliah.


Harke clothes fet to butte


ty,


inthe hilaulters in


ree


orfmobpesd’a+ the cytpes of Juda roundabout Ferulalent
krete adde an alto he at butnt tacitices nce sal
or burnt, o to the konne q tothe mone g toche planetes /
black manches ¢ to all the Polke otheauen. And he bꝛought
de Ja gema lo cut che grole krom che temple of the Lolde


dt
eaten


without gerulalem onto the bꝛone Cedꝛon /
c burnt it at the bꝛoke Cedꝛũõ a ſtampte it to


ouldze / a caſt the butte therof vpõ the gra⸗
cee lenor che people oe che countvepe . And he
of that bad bzalke downe the celles of d malehozes chat


im thin lie tye
me.


Ali (oF were in the boute of the Lobe / here d we⸗
men woue Iptle heules koꝛ the groue.


And he bꝛought all the prettes out of the
cities or Zuda / defiled the bilaulters where
e pzelles did burne facvitpce / euen krõ Gas
to Berlabe And he bꝛake downethe hil⸗
aulters of the Bates / that were in the ente⸗
rynge ot the gate of Jolua $ gouctnoure oF
che citie / whiche were on the lelte hande old


gate of the citie. Beuerthelelle th


e prettes of


illaultares myght not come at ß aulter


neve erlebe. Co
h twas a

fH

fal


v Some reatei
v hell or ollen ⸗


coꝛdynge to the woꝛde ol the Loꝛde that the


man of God had pꝛoclaymed / wü
had denounced the lame thynges.


ich opentpe


puges,


Chen d kynge ſapde: what meaneth voũ⸗
der graue ſtone that Ile. And the men of the
cptie tolde him / it is the feputchze oltheman
ok God / which came from Juda and openive
denounced the {elfe fame es that thou
halt dene to d aulterot Bethel. And he fapoe
let hm be: le thatno man moue bps bones.
And to his bones ſcaped wyth the bones ofa
Pꝛophete that came out of S>amaria,

Andtherto all the houtes of thehilaulters
ol the cities ot Samaria toh ech the kynges
ok zkrael hadmade to angre with alk Jonah
put out ol the wave a dyd to the in all poyn⸗
tes as he did in Bethel. And he lacrikycedall
the pzeattes or $ hilaulters that were there
euen vpon the aulterg / a burnt mennes bo⸗
nes vpon the / and returned to Jerulalem.

And the kynge cömaunded all the people c
taping: kepe p teat of patiouer ontop
poute God / as it is written in d bone of this"
couenant. oz there wat no padouer holden
Iphe that / kroni the dayes of the iudges that
iudged I crael / and thoꝛow out all the dapes
ok the kynges ol Itrael and ot Juda. And in
che. roi pere of Bynge Joliah was this pats
ſouer holden to the Loꝛde in Jerulalem.

Andtherto wozkers th prices /.


of ano tse people of Finde bob ge- spies
boabas the fonne of fattab ¢ anopntenbim g 3
Siete


Lordg, r.


na


Jehoacin,


he beganne to rapgne and tapgned thꝛe mos
nethes in Jerulalẽ. Hys mothers naime was
Hamital the daughter of Jeremiah of Lob⸗


nah. And he dyd that dylplkaledthe Lode / in


Sallthyngdas bis fathers had done. And Pha⸗
rao ecoh put him in bondes at Reblah ing


che Stec. lande ot Hemath in p txme olhys rapgne in
me that be g eruſalem / and put the lande to a trpbute ol
2. 0 8 an hundꝛed talentes ak tyluer and a talent of


galde. And Pharao Necoy made Eliakim 6
forme of Jo liah Henge in the rowme of Jo⸗
ſiah his father / and turned hys name to Fez
hoa kim / and tone Jehoahaʒ awape whyche
ichen he came to Egipte dyed there.

And Fehoakim gaue the Cyluer a the golde


toPhatao:how be it he taxedß lande / to geue h.


the monepe at the cõmaundement of Pharao


and ag euerꝝ man was let at / cohe required
the lyluer and the goulde of the people ol the
lade / to geue dharao Hecoh. Jehoakim was
rrb.pere olde when he beganne to raygne / a
he raygneda. xi pere in Jerulalem. ys mo⸗
ther was named Sebdah z daughter of Pha⸗
datah of Ramah, And he drdthat was euell
kauoured in the fpght ol the Loꝛde / lie in all
thynges as did his fathers,


oakim dyelh / and after him cuccendeth⸗ t
Saen —.— of the Velen Ahnen
peldeth him lealke to the kyng or Babilon. And in bps
fovsine cam Mathantah / which was called Zedeniah.

Ache. xxiiij. Chapter.
4 N his da pes came Qabuchodono⸗
er hinge of Babfan / Zehoakim
became his ferunätchze pere and
then turned and rebelled agaynſt
bim. Ind Loꝛde fent vpõ him men of warre
out of Caldep / out ot Siri / out of the Moa⸗
bites / and Eco the chydzen ot Amman: a lent
chem into Juda to deltropett / aco wenge to
the lapingẽ ol p Loꝛde which he arch
feruauntes the Pzophetes.Dnip at the byd⸗
dynge ol che Loꝛde happened tt lo to Juda / to.
put thẽ out or his lyght / koꝛ p Cerne ot Ma⸗
acoꝛdynge ta all he dyd: and fo2 the in⸗
nocent bloude thathe chedde and kylled ge⸗
rulalẽ with innocent bloude / which 6 Loꝛde

wolde not koꝛgeue.


* Che reſt ot che dedes ot Jehoakim and all


he dyd / are waytten in the chꝛonicles of the
bongs of Juda. And Jehoakim lapde hym to
llepe with his fathers / a Jehoacin his tonne
rapgned in his ſteade. Bůtß kinge of Egipte
came now tic moare out of bps lande :toꝛ the
Rynge of Babilon had taken krom the ryuer
ol Euphrates ali that pertapnedto ß kynge
ol Egipte. Jehoacin was. vi pere olde whe
he bẽgãne to rapgne / raygned in Jerutalẽ
chꝛe monethes His mothers name was Nes
bultha daughter ol Elnathan of Jerulalẽ.


buchodono za came to the cptye as hre ler⸗ c


uaũtes were pet a belegynge of it. And Je⸗ Heller. h. a.


hoacin the Bunge ok Zuda came out to the
kynge ol Babilon / wich bys mother / his ler⸗
uauntes bps Lodes ahys chamberlapnes.
Andthe Hong Of Babilon tone hym / in the
eyght pere of bys rapgne. ö

Andhe carped out thence all the trealur
ok the houle ok the Loꝛde / and the trealure ok
the kynges houle and bꝛake all the vellelles
ok golde wypche Salomon kynge of Irrael
ad made / in che temple of the Loꝛde / as the
Loꝛdhadlapde. And he carped awape all ge⸗
rulalem / and all the Loꝛdes and all che men
ol myghte / tothe nombze ok ten thoulande in
to captiuptye and all craftes men and Jop⸗
ners none remaynynge laue p pooze people
OF lande. And he carped awape gehoacin to
Babilon / a the hinges mother / a the kynges
wiues / z his chãbꝛelapnes /a the mygbtie of
p lande carped he awape fro Ferulale to Wa
bilon-Ind allß inẽ of actiuitẽ tothe nüb e ot
leuen thoulande / a craltelmen and io ners a
thouland all ſtronge ¢ apte koꝛ warre / did >
kyng of Babilon bzinge to Basis to dwell.
Herd 05 iene ol Babilõ made Mathanialh

erz

chaungedhis name g called him Zedentah.

Sede niah was ri. ere olde when he be⸗
gane to raygne a he rapgneda xt. pere in Je⸗
rulalẽ. Pts mothers name was Pamital the
daughter of Jeremiah ol L obnah. Ind he did
euellin the legt of the L oꝛde / in all poyntes
Ike to Fehoaktm. Foz thzoughe 5 wath ol
the Loꝛde it fo chaunced to Jerulalem a Ju⸗
da / vntyll he had caſt them out of bys ſyaht.
And the layde Fedekiah rebelled agaynſt the
Bynge ol Babilon.
|EWy the reveligng of Zedeklah is the towne ok Feo
rulalem befeaged of Qabuchodonose:. The towne x
the temple are bothe burnt. The fonnes of Zedentah
i Aedt eke after are his eyes put oute.
ms byought to Wabslon/ and after is Jehoaein
cralled.


Che. xxv. Chapter. ig
woherkoze


zolher konge inbis leade and J fem ben.


zedeklah. 2


eS Benge pth
power ko ulate and pitchedagapnſte
fotone and made engrnes agarnct it on euẽ⸗
xplyde. and the citte continued beleged vnto
the. ri. pere ol Apnge Zedekiah. And p nyn⸗
che dape ok the kourthẽ monethe of chat ere
chert was lo great hongre in d eitie /p there
wat no luſtinaũce foz che people ot d lande.
And therto the citie was bꝛoken vp: wher⸗
toꝛe all che men ot Armes fled bynyght / bya
wape thoꝛow a gate / betwene two walles
harde on the Kynges 8 caldepes
if aboute the cptpe,

5 eAnoche Enge wer Crapght towarde the
delerte. And d holte of the Ealdexes kolowed
alter hym / and tone him in the deverte ol Je⸗
richo / allhys arme bernge tcatered awã pe
from him And wbe thep bad taken bim ther
brought him to Habuchodonozoꝛ the khynge

Serhat ther of Pabilon to Reblah / where they realoned
BeprebeDch Dim with hyin. Ad ther Aue the Connies of Fedex
wih tase iad bekcie his eres and put out the eyes OF
caule he hat re Hedeklah / and kettered hym / and carped hym
belted onen fo Babilon.
bis ache Andthe leuẽthe dave ofthe Evecy monethe
which was ind nyn pere ot Rynge Ha⸗
buchodonozoz Ange ol Babllon / came Ma⸗
bularadan feruaunte of the Ernge of Babi⸗
n Some reade. fon ard chefe Marſpall /onto Ferutalem:¢
shefe of $ co hurnte the boule of the ove athe Uynges
beo.0me Chee hou te and allthe boules of Jerulalem /all
Fecaptayne, “Greate houles burnte he with kire And al $
holte of the Caldepes that were with p chele
Marcball:bzakedownethe walles of Jeru⸗
kalk rounde aboute. And the ett of p people
that were lefte in the citie / a them that were
fledto the Aynge of Babilon / a the rẽnaunt
ol the comen people / Nabularadan 5 chete
C Space carted awape / x lekte ot the pooze
ol the lande todzefte the vrnes andto tyll the
gu


ounde.
And the pillers of bꝛaſſe that were in the
55 50 of the Loꝛde andthe botomes / and the
alen fee that was in the houle of d Loꝛde
8 Bab Ad cariedthe bꝛalle of thé
to Babilö. And the lauers / choueiles “ dꝛel⸗
dome rende. Iynge knpues / ladelles / athe mymütrynge
Jatromentes bellelles ofbzatle cher carbedawape ands
er mulkbe. D firepänes /a batens that were ether of golde
8 o7 kpluer / chẽ tone p chefe Qartban aware
with the two prllers andthe fee of bzatie and
che bottomes whych Salomon had made in
the houle of the Loꝛd. Che bꝛalle of all thele
betlelles was wythout wayaht. Che herght
ol the one piller was xvii. cubites / and the
beentheron was bꝛatte and thꝛe cubites loge
with a wzethe z pomegranetz rounde about


Alden

Notiwitytandinge vet the rrroh. pere at- c
ter Jehoacin Bpng of Juda was carprd a pr fu
waßeſ the. rxuh. dape ol the twelueth nione⸗ p rhe pol
the / drd Euilmerodach al. 8. ol Babilon « dung
litte vp the been of Jehoacin Benge of Juda to zan
out of the prefone boute/andfpatic kendelee dn
tobpmiand let bps leate aboue the feate ot aal.
all the Bpnges that were with him in Babi⸗
lon / and chaligedhes pzelon garmẽtes. And
he did euer eate bzeade bekoꝛe him all poages
or his lyfe. And a continuall poꝛcyõ was al
kygnedhrm of the Aynge / daxe by dave as
Tonge as he lxued.
¶ Che ende ol the fourth boke of $ Kynges /

worde
e
che


Che keaſt boke.


Ca left reherſall of all the Senralogie of Adam
vnto the lonnes of Eau and Jacob.


uilah / Sabatha / Memah and Sabathaca.
Che lonnes of Remah: Saba and Dadan.
And Cusbegat emrod: which Memrod be⸗
ganne to ware myghtye bpon the erthe and
Mizramm begat Ludim /a namin / Laabim /
Sade Phetruſim and Chatuim : ot
ich came che Pbhrtitines a the Chaphthe⸗
sites. Ind Canaan / begat Fidon his eidelt
konne / A Heth/Zebull / amo / Gergelt / Be-
uiſdraht, Sint/Aruadi /Famari c Hema⸗
Btht. Che lonnes of Sem: Elam / Adur / ar⸗
phaclad / Lud / Aram uz Hul / Sether and
Moloch. And Arphactadbegat Salah and
dome begat Eber. And vnto Eber were
ome two fonnes : che name ok the one was
Phaleg / becauſe that in hrs dapes the lande
was deurded. and hys bzothers name was
Jentan. Jektan begat Eulmodah / Spaleph
Sasermoth and Zarah Baduram /asfal/and
pee — Abimael and Daba: Ophir /
euilah / and Jobab. All thele were the Cons
nes of Fektan.
Sens Arphactad / Salah: Eber Shaleg


Mau: Derug / ahoꝛ / Chareg; Abꝛũ other⸗
wile called heahamfG he fonffteg of A bꝛahã
Ilaac and Fimael. And thele are cheire ge⸗


neracpons the Eldeſt tonne of Ilmiael was
Sabafoth then Redar / Adbeel à Wabtam:
Walma Wumah / Wala, Hadar ¢ Chena:

atur / Hapois and Bedmah. Thele are the

ines of Fimacl, Che fonnes of Returah
Abzahag concubine:thebareSamram/Fek=
fan/Madan/AWadian / Jecbok and Suab.
Che tonnes ordenlan: Saba /a Dadan. Che
Gonnes or Mablan:Epßah / Epher Henoch /
Abia and Eldaah . Allthele are the fonnes
ol Beturah


Abzahs begar zlaac. che connes orgtaac


_ Claus @ Alrari. Nhe Cones of Elan: Erh?


eg OF Ezer: Balaan / Saauan and
Jakan, Che fonnes of Dilan: diz / a Aram,

Chele are the kynges that raygned in the
lande of Edom befoze any Benge rapgned
amonge the chyldꝛen of Ilrael: Bale p tonne
ol Bed andthe name of his cytie was Wee
nababach. And when Bale was deed / Jobab
che lonne ol Jareh or Boꝛtah rapgned in his
Rede. And after the dethe of Jobab / Pulam D
ol che lande of Chemari raydned in his row⸗
me / and alter the dethe of Hulam / Hadad / s
konne ol Badad which bete the Madianites
in p feldes ol Moaß / raxgneb in his rowme /
Athe name ol his citie wag Auith. Ind after
che dethe of Padad / Semlah of Marekal
rargned in his ſteade And After the dethe ok
Semiah Saul of Rohoboch spo Kuphꝛa⸗
tes raygned in bis place. And alter ebe
ol Saul Baal Hanan > konne of Achoboz
tapgned in his rowme. Andatter the dethe o£
Baal hanan /Hadadraygnedin big place / a
che name ok his citie was Phau /a his wiues
name was Mehetabeel z daughter of Ma⸗
tred the daughter of Metahab.

But after the deethe of Hadad / there were
dukes in roar de halbem usr
dube Tetheth duke Oholbama dune Elah /
dune Phinon / duke Aena: / dune Cheman /
dune Wabzar duke Pagdiel g dune Fram,
Chele were the dukes of Edom.

Fault. Genralogtect gra rut ju the father oe
auid.


¶ Che teconde Chapter.
ele be p lonnes of Atrael: Ruben :
imeon/Leut/Juda/Ffacar and Generrirgs
Sabulon:Dan/Joreyh Beniamin and. xxx.a.
Li Nephthali/Gad ¢ Ader. Che font
ok Juda: Er, Onan / and Selah. Chetethre
were bome him of the daughter ol Dua the
Cananitelle. But Er the elves fonne ol Juda
was euell in the ſyghtorthe Loꝛde / andther⸗
koꝛe he due him. And Thamar hes daughter⸗
inlawe bare him Phares and Sarah: fothat
all the fonnes ol Juda were kyũe.

Che fonnes of Pharez: Herron ¢ Hamul. . Othertvrce
Che forines ok Sarah Hamit Echan / Pe⸗ ahn 3.
man / chalchal and Dara: fiue in all. . Diheriwyle

Che fonnes of Carmés*Achar p o_o

trae!


npeles, . Jeh sbegat

Obed / Obed b . Feb ae
ah / a ꝛariah begat Beles Peles begat Elea
. bega Siam. Sllemef be⸗


Booz :and oot begat 2
at Flat. Ind Fear begat bys elvett fonne
ia 1a zb econde / a Samas
it 9 Cprte/¢ Dauid che te e
te / 5
whole (ptters were Baruiah o Abigall. Che
fonnes of Saruiah: were Abitat Joab 4 A a
hel / chze. Ind Abigafl Bare mata / 5 father
eee ee
alel
© saya woman an ſeroth whole fonnes are


thete:Jater/Spobab g Atdon. But Alubag Maachaß


died / 5 Calebtoke Ephꝛatha which bare him
Hur. And Hur begat unand au begat Be
zelerll. Andalterwarde Heston wet m tothe
daughter of Machir the father ol Galaad /
was rohen he coke her / chꝛel hove pere olde.
Aud ce bare him Segub. And Degubbe⸗
alt which had. xi. cytyes in che lande
bk Galaad. Andgeouercame the Gellurites
andthe Tramites / z tobe che cownes ol Fatt
from them / and Renath with p tones that
longed to che tame / euen the ckoꝛe townes.
All ehete were the tonnes of Machtr the ka⸗
ther of Galaad And atter the decth ol Hezrõ
® at caleb m Ephrata / Abia bes welk bare
bim A chur the father ol 2
And che Connes of Ferhamect p eweſt con⸗
ne ol Heston were / Nam the eldeſt and Bu⸗
na / Pam / O zem and Ahatah. And Jerha⸗
meel had vet a nother pte named Atarah
which was the mother or nam. And the
fonnes of Ram /d aed foe Feet
ere / Maaz / Fanci .
25 Ehe eid of Onam were / Samat and
lava «Che Contes of Spamat : Nadab ¢ Abi
. Ind the wyfe of Abifur was called Abie
al che bare hem Ahaban and Molid.
e forties of Madab: Saledand Appam.
But Saleddyed without chyldzen. Che lon⸗


gat Stlum. Selum begat Jecamiah. Fee


iche kourthe / Kadatthe Sd.


drr deen

100 ur.

6350 Ephah a concubrne of Calebs bare
decem A Gazez: and Haran begat Ga
zer Che lon ok Jahadal were Rege Jotbã
Selam / Phalet / Ephah and Saaph . And
another cocubpne ok Calebs bare
Chahanah Andche bare allo Saar


ite
Saen geen $ 100
the gloz e bout 0
Sauber OEE Faräites And ko were Benn
e kendzedes ol the werter that dwelt at pong ey,
ibes / che Cirathites / che Stmeathites andoerttante ite
Spuchathites which are 5 Renites that ca- een Le
ime of Hemath the father of Bech Rechab. 4
che Genealogie of Dantd inGebsons tnFerulale. benennt
Che. uj. Chapter. „ dwwelt cht
Pele ate ß lonnes ol Dauid which a ccof wit
were bomehrm in Debzonsthe el⸗ lng
delt amnon of Ahinoamt 5 Jelrae⸗ be Sum
liteſle. Che ſeconde Daniel by Abts (es fone st)


E elel. Che konne ol Je 8
fri at cian ao the fonne of Sean


fet was
‘eas al. And che fonnes of Fade f bꝛo⸗


cherok Samat were Jethur and Jonatnan. Pagich,


t ethur dpe without chüldꝛeñ. Che lon⸗
begcb daneben were ebaicth ano S134.
Chele were the lonnes of Jerhameel. ses
lan had no fonnes but oni pe daughters And
gag
named Jer
, e

t Rathan. .
zd Heben begat Dpblal, Dpdlal begat


in


Juda,


Elilama / Eliada / and liphelet:nyne in nũ⸗
bie. Chele are all the lonnes of Bauid / be⸗
lde the Connes of bys concubynes and Cha⸗
mar their lter. 5
Salontons lonne was Rehoboam /
vhole fonne was Abiah: and Bla was hys
Clonne/ and Jebolaphat bys tonne: whore
fonne was Fozam: and bys tonne was Oho⸗
ziah / and Foss was ſonne to hem. Andhrs
tonne was Amaziah / and hys fonne was


Azariah / and bys Conne was Fotham And bys


Abaz was hys konne / and Hesektab was
fonne to hym / and Manalleh was bys lon⸗
ne. And Amon was hys tonne / And Fotiah
was lonne to hym. And the fonnes of Jo⸗
liah were / the elden fonne Johanan the ſe⸗
conde Sehoakint / the thirdẽ Sedektah / and
the kourthe elum Che fonnes ol Jehoa⸗
kim were J ecomiah bys lonne / whole tonne
Dwas Sedehiah. 8
The Connes ol Jecomah the poꝛeloner
were Salathiel / Melchiram / Phadaiah /
5 dich rh Jecamiah: Polama and Hada⸗
fay. Che fonnes of Phadatah were Zo⸗
robabel and Semet. Che ſonnes of Joꝛo⸗
babel/ Mofolam / Pananiah ¢ Salumith
their lyſter / and Haͤcubah / Dhel / Bara⸗
chiah / Pafadial / Jolab Heled / kxue in
noumbze, Che fonnes ol Panantah: Phal⸗
tiah and Jelaiah / whole lonne was Raphi⸗
ah and bys lontie a rnan, and hs fonne was
Obdiah / and bys lonne Sechaniah. Che
fonne of Sechaniah was Semaiah. And
the fonnes ol Semaiah were Patus / Jegal
Bartah / Paariah Saphat and Hela / lire,
Andthe Connes of Naariah were Elioenat/
DPesehiah a Azricam thꝛe. And the tonnes
ol Elioenat were Hodatah / Eliatib / Phe «
leiah /d hub / Johanan / Balaiah and ana-
ni / ſeuen.
— Gencalogye ok the lonnes of Juda and Spe


Ache. tiij. Chapter.
e lonnes ol Juda: Phareʒ / Hez⸗
n / Carmt / Hur and Sobäll.
And Reaiah the lonne of Sobal
E SS ibegat Jahath. Ind Jahath begat
abimat and Laad whpch are che nynredes
of the Bareathites. And of thele came the ka⸗
ther of Etam Jezrael Jelema and Jede bas /
‘here fpſter called Jalelphunt: And Pha⸗
nut l kather of Gedoꝛ: And Elerthe tather ot
Hulah. Chele are the fonnes of Hur the el⸗
delt lonne of y zata father to Bethlehem.
And Atburthe father of Chekua had two
wyues: Palaah and Naarah. And Haarah
bare hen A hulam / Hepher / Chemant and
Hahactart. Chete were che lonnes of Naas
Brah. And che tonnes of Halaah were Zareth /


i. Chꝛonycles.


aioe and Ethnan. And Coz begat Anub 6
ebah and the kynredes ok Aharhel the
Come of Barum. And Jeabes was nobler
then hys bzethzen. Andhps mother called his
name Jeabes fapinge: becaule i bare hym
with loꝛowe. But z cabes calledonthe Gon
ok Ilrael / lapinge: It thou Male bleſle me /
and enlarge mycoſtes / and thalt let thyne
hande be wyth me / and wylt kepe me krom
euell uit bere me not. AndGodlent bmp
vie.

Calub the bꝛotzer ol Suah begat Ma⸗
hir / whyche was the father of Eton. And
Eſthon begat Beth Rapha and Phateh and
Chehenah the father ot the cytye of Mahas
hych are che men ol Rechah. Che tonnes c
ol Benag: Othmel and Saratahy. And the
Tonnes of Othniel were Hathath.

And Maonothn begat Ophꝛah. And Spa-
raiah begat Foab the father of them oc the
valepe of craftefmen, lo called becaute they
were craftefmen . And the lonnes ol Ca⸗
leb the konne of z ephoneh were Piru / Ela
and Haem. And the konne of Ela was Re⸗
nas. And the fonnes ok Jehaleleel were Ziph
and Siphah / and Chiria and Iarael. And
the Connes of Ezra: were Jether / Mered /
Epher / Jalon / Chabar / Mariam and Sa⸗
mat / and Jelbah the father of Elthanioa.
Andhys wyfe Jehudiah bare Jared the faz
ther of Gedoꝛ / and Heber the father ol Sos
coh / and Icuthiel the father or Sonoah .
And thele were the Cones ok Bethiah the
daughter ol Pharao whych Mered tooke. Dp
Che fonnes ok the wyle ol Hodia the Cytter
ol Nabhan the father ol Reilah were Pagar:
mi and Efthamoa the Maachathite The
fonnes ol Simon were Amnon and Rinah /
Benhanan and Chilon. And the Connes of
Jeti were 5 oheth and Benzoheth.

Che fonnes of Selah the konne of Juda


Al


272


Wy,


were Er the kather ol Lecah / and Laadah Gen.rervig.a,


the father of Marelah / andthe kynredes ol
che houtholdes of them that wrought byte
in the houle of Atbea, And Fokimand the
men of Cozebah / and Joas and Saraph /
whrch were inhabitedin Moab but retur⸗
hedto Lehem and to Debarim Aikim.
Chele were potters and dwelt amonge trees
andhedges and were in the Bynges wozcke
and dwelt euenthere.

Che fonneg ot Simeon: Namuel / Jas
mum / Jarib / Zozab and Saul / whole tan E
ne was Selum / andthe lonne of hym was
Mablam / and bys tonne was Palma.
And che tonne of Malma was Mamuel / and
bes tonne was Hächur / and the fonne of
hem was Semei. Semet had lprtene tons
nes and lere daughters. Bit bes ade


Ruben, iLheonpeles, | Lui. i Ltonpeles, Liiiij,


had not manpe chytnzent /nether were the
Bprivedes of the le to the chyldꝛen ot Juda
in multitude. Andther dwelt at Berlabe /
Moladah and at Hazar S ual / at Balaah /
Ezem / Cholad / Bathuel / Hozmah and at
kim, echte Bethmarcaboth / Pasar Sour
im / Bethberet and Saarim Chee were
their cytyes vnto the rapgne el Dauid. And
their byllages were Etam / Ain / Remon
Cochen and Alan / kyue townes and ali their
bpllages that were rounde aboute the larde
tres vnto Baal. Chis is the habitacpon of
chem and their genealegie,
And Wolobab / Jemlech / Jolah the lon⸗
ne ol Amatiah: and Joel and Jehu ? conne
gk Jolabiah the fonne ot Daraiah the con⸗
ne b Ariel: and €ltoenat / Jakobah / Ico⸗
batah: Alaiab /a diel / Atimiel and Sanatab:
Size the lonne ol Sephet the lonne ot Aion
che lonne of Idalah the tonne ol Jem the
fonne of Samatah. Thele are toche as ca⸗
me by name / heedes of thepre kynredes.
And che auncient houcholdes of them ſpꝛede
in htultitude,

And they went as karre as Gadoz / euen
vnto the eeſt (poe of the baleve / to ſeke pal⸗
ture fog their catell. And they kounde fat
pafture and good and a wyde lande bothe

jupet and krutelull: toꝛ they ot Pam dwelt
thete befoze , Andthele now a koze twzptten


by name went in P dapes of Hexchiah 12155
ethe


ok Juda / and fmote the tentes of chem
bal tacions that were tounde there / and de⸗
oped them ptterlye vntothys dare / z there
dweit in cheire rowmes: becaule there was
patture there kor their ſbepe. 8
Ind therto there went o€ the larde childzẽ
of Simeon true hundzed men: Phaalthtah
MNaaviah Raphiah and Oziel the fonnes ol
Fett beynge theirheedes:andcmote the rete
dk the Amalebites that were elcaped a ther
nee E
Che genealogpe ot Ruben and Gad and of the bale
ean: of Manateh,
Che. v. Chapter.
Che lonnes ol Ruben the eldeſt
fonne of Ilrael: toꝛhe was the cls


2a
Gene. xlr. a. elt. Büt becauſe he dekxled hys


fathers beed / bps byzthrpaht was


Sante frvl. f. genen ntothe fonnes ot Jolephthe Conne


of Ilrael / and to he is not rekened vnto the
byithe rpght . Kor vnto Juda whrch was
mightie amonge hrs dꝛeth⸗en / was geuẽ the
Palncipalttye befoze him. But 8 brithryght


was geuen Joleph. he ſonnes then of Ru⸗


ben ß eldeſt konne ol Ilrael / were Henoch /
alu / He zron and Carmi,
Che tonnes of Joel: Samalah / and bes


aC ips wade donne Gag / and hs kanne Hemel /andhrs


ft i jas bis naſſeh dwelt in the lande from Balan vnto Careb / and hys Conte air / and hys tonne
a a be ee eae eet ne vam Baal Hermon and Damir and pnto mount Elcanah /andbys tonne Aeg aer
top mme thy Hermon/andthep were manye. And thele tonne d ür / and Chahath was his konne / and
were the heedes ol the auncpent houcholdes Miel hs tonne and Oziah hrs tonne / and
okthem: Epher Jelt Eltei / Ariel / Jere⸗ Saul was hrs lonne.
miah / Hodaiah / Jehadiel / men ot greãt po⸗ Che fonnes of Cleanah:Amatat Abimoth
a. wer men ok naniẽ andheedes ot thẽ aunciẽt and elcanah. Che fonnes of Elcanah / So⸗
een n. hou tholdes or them. phat whole tonne was Pahath / and hys lon⸗
But when they had tranſgrelted agaynſt ne Eltab and Jerohamhys lonne / and ch.
the God ok thepz fathers and had gone a canal hs fonne/and Samuel the lonne of
whoꝛynge after the Gods ok the people or hem. And che Connes of Samuel the eldeſt
—— %%% eetmnes of eric pote! ambos
ercdop the fpzpte ol pnge ol e Connes of Merarii oli / andhys
een ee ene Allpꝛia and the kprarte of Chighath Phal- fonne L obn / and his tonne Semei / and hys
tell was moche in the lande of Salaab. neler Bpnge of Rapzia / and carved awape fonne Ozah and his lonne Samaa / and his
Andin g ayes of Baul they warted w the Nubemtes / the Gaddites and the hal⸗ konne Pagtah / andhys tonne Acala).
the Pagarites whych were ouerthzowen be ke trybe of Manaſch and bꝛought them ¶ Chele be chey which Dauld let for to ſin⸗
theirehandes. And they dwelt in their ten⸗ vnto Helah / Haboz Hata and to the Ry- ge in the houte of the Loꝛde / alter that the
tes thozow out all the eeſtlande of Galaad. uer Gozan / where they remapne vnto thrs Arcke had reſte And ther mrnpſtred befoze
ind the Chldꝛen ot Gad dwelt ouer bape. the dwellinge place of the tabernacle ol wit⸗
Aa Sele in che Tende of Satan /eucn che Seneaiogio€ the fonnesof Lent, Te EE o dle oe n denden
chere em Reet elo / Ache vi. chapter. And then che wapted an theivatiyces / ac⸗
and Haphat. And thete byethzen inthe aun⸗ efonnesot Leut: Serkan Ca- copdinge to the oder ok them. Chele are they
cperit houtboides of chem / were Wichgel / . . / .
olclam/ Seba /Jorat / Joacan / Sia / Cabachamram Azahar, Hebron ok Cahath : heman a tynger/whyeh was he
en ee e ee ene Che childgenoe Ama; emed oel we fonne ul Samuel. Che
ol Abihall d tonne ol Burt p tonne of Jeroah Jaron / Pol es and tram. Che ſonnes or tonne of Elcanah / the fonne of Feroham the
Galaad p tanne ot Michael p lonne ok geli⸗ Daron:Nadab Abthu/Cleagar e Ithamar. konne of Eliel:the tanne ok Choah / the lonne
lat b cone ot Jahado the lonne ol Bus. Ah Eleazar begat Pyinehes Phinehesbegat ok Suph/tye forme of elcanah / che konne ol
was pformne of Abdéel the Conne of Sun the Abituedbitue begat Bont BoktbegatDst gqpayath the fonne of Amatat /thetonne ok
eed of anauncpent houcholde amonge the Dai begat Sarahtab.Farablah begat Me⸗ Eicanal tie tonne of oel the tonne ora ca⸗
and chepdiweltin Satan andin Satanant baut  sctaiorh begae Smavad) Amaral ria §fonne of >ophontabye fonne ofa ha-
ber towries /¢ in all b Suburbes ot Saron / begat Abicob. Ahntob begat Fadoc. Sadoc hath / the lonne of Alkr / p korine of Abiala
kuen onto the ende of their bozders., begat Abimaas . Ahimaaz begat Azariah. che fonne of Cozeh:ehe tonne of aha / the
And they were all rekenedby kynreddes Jzarlab begat Fobanan. Jchanan begat fonne of Cabath:tye tonne ol Leur:the konne
inthe vayes of Fothambynge of Juda / and Hrarial which mynpiredintye templethat ok Arran.
inthe dapes ol g eroboam kynge of Firacl, Salomon burle in Jerutalem. Aud itz haheralayb ftode on his ryght
Che lonneg of Ruben ok Gadandor balfe z Asariah begat Amariah.Amariah begat hande / wüpch was the tonne of pavachiaby
trpbe ot Manalieh / euen of Frabtyngemen Abitob. Apitod vegat Sadoc. Sadoc begat che lonne of Samaa:the Conne of Michael
able to beare thpleand lwerde / and thott Delum Sdelum begat Heibiah. Heltah che konne ol Baalavah / the konne of Bel.
tovth bowe and taugheto make warte, we⸗ l ene: Sen chens, deln 3
b { 2 thefonne of Adatab:the fonneo ö
pH ed rat wen perro ale ud r JJ fonne ot Samad /theconne ok Semel che
[org stn rh gait lonne ot Fabath / tefonine of Gerlom / the 2
if


went : fon

exdd. vi.t. Che tonnes of Leninow arechere : er⸗ / Andcheire bꝛethꝛen the tonnes of Mera⸗
fom/Cabath and Merart. Andthele bete it tone onthe lekte hande: Ethan the konne
names ofthe connes of Gerfom:Lobniand ok Chult / the tonne ol Abdt / che konne ot

Semet. Ind ß fonnes of Cahath were Am⸗ Maloch the tonne of Patabiah the lonne

ram, Jzahar, Hebzon 4 Oziel. Che connes ol Amastah / the fonne of Helktah: the Cons

of Merari: oho and Hull. Chele arethe ne of Ama / the tonne ot Wont / the fonne

kynreddes of Leui concernynge their aun⸗ of Homer the lonne of Woholt / che tonne
Cent fathers. . ol Muli / the fonne of Mperart/the tonne ol

Che lonnes of Gerlom was L obm / a hrs Leul.

forrne Jahath / a his Conne Jamah / andhrs Cheire bꝛethꝛen the euitetz were apoyn⸗

scam wos one e

were carved awaye. / . ol the houle of God. Butdaron a his Connes
Snbehe ppv othele ; trrbe ot aw. S fonnes of Cabath:Aminadab and hs tonne durnt bps e

: f ve ach Si if, onthe


Fought to;
abbas am


Lent.


i Chꝛonpcles ,


on the aulter of incente / and were apopnted


vnto all that was to do in d place moſte holy
Sun an attonement fo7 Atrael in all


e


Jon. xxi. l.


nd onto the ſonnes of Cahath the rem⸗
nant of the kynne ol the trybe / were cytyeg
peuen out ok the halke trybe of Manadeh
bete / ten cptyes. And vnto the fonnes ol
Gerlom amonge ther; kynreddes were ges
uen out of the trpbe of qcacar and out of che
trrbe of Ader and out of the trpbe of Neph⸗
chall: and out of the trybe ol Manalleh in
Balan / chyꝛtene cytyes, And vnto the fons
Farben aach of uber
eir out ot the en,
and out ok the trybe of Gad / and out of the
tepbe of Sabulon/twelue cytpes.

And the chyldzen of Zlracigauethe Wee
ee is Pe ra
and that ott / ol of
chyldꝛen oF üg end ok the trpbe of Sr⸗


meon and out of the trybe ol the cheldꝛen OF


Bentamin:euen the fapoe cyties that are re


the cptves of theit . of S

eee
n. :

in mount Ephraim wyth her Buburbes /


e oir
Soubutbee! Aal wetb yer Souburbes /


Bemon wych her Souburbes 5
Ind out of the balfe tribe of Manalieh / aner
wych her Spuburbes/and Saalam with her
Suburbes amonge the kyndzedes ot L rẽ⸗
hant of the fennes of Cahatg.

And onto the fonnes of Gerfon were ger
uen out of the kxndzede of the halle trybe of
Manatiel: Solon in Baan wyth ber Sus
burbes and Tüharoth wrth her Hubur⸗
bes, And out of thetrpbe of Flacar / Redes
wyth her Souburbes / Daberath wyth her
Subinbes / Bamoth wyth ber Suburbes
and Anem wyth her Souburbes. And out of


Bozoꝛ inthe wildernefie wyth herluburbes

aera woth her luburbs Bademoch wich
der bes. Herbanh wich her tuburbes.
And out ol che trpbe of Gad Mamoth inwa-
iaad wyth her tuburbes / Mahanaim wyth
ber luburbes / P efebon wih her ſuburbẽs /
and Jezer wyth her fuburbes. Gr

e cgenealogye ot qcacar. Beniamm Depy

Soameh Epe nend Aller.


e. bi), Chapter.
sree He fonnvoe kater hela bush a
8 Jalub and Damron / keure. Che
Hlenmes ot EholasDst/ Repyaiad
Tiled ercbecesin jeanne
el which were bec! .
. mygyte amõge


Jadiael / thꝛe. Che tones ol Bale: zbon
lei / Jerimoth and nt true heedes


auncient heules and men ot myghte a were


in numbze rij. thoulande and. æxxiiij.
Che


geniamin.


Che lonnes of Bochoz: Zamirah / Joas /
Elie zer / Elioenat / Amrt / Ferimoth/Abiay/
Canathoth & Maniath. All thete are $ childzẽ
ol Pochoꝛ / a were rekened in their kindꝛedes
with the heedes of the auncyent houcholdes
ol themz were men ot power / twentie thous
lande a two hundꝛed. Che lonnes oF Jediael:
Balahan. he ſonnes of Balahũ: cu / Be⸗
niamin Ahud ¢ Canaanah / Hetham / Char⸗
lis and Ahilahar. All thele are the tonnes ot
Jediael and aunciẽt heedes a men ot myght
bij. thoulande and two hundꝛed that went
out to battell. And Suphim and Huphim
were the chilozé of Ar. And the Hulites were
the chyldꝛen of Sher. 5
The lonnes of Nephthali:Jahaziel / uni
Jezer and Selum / the chyldꝛẽ ol Balahah.
The foes o: Manaffeh: Azriel whych
Aramiah bps concubine bare: the bare allo
Machir the kacherok Galaad. and WMachir
gaue to Huphim a — gus wyues And d
name ok his titer was ghaacah. Andd name
ol another fonne was Salphahad. And Sal⸗
phahad had bauugchterg. Ard Maacuh 5 wife
or Machir bare n fonne and called his name
Pharez / a p nave ok his bꝛother was Fares
this Connes were calãanehem. Che lonnes
Dol wlam was Bedan. Thele are the tonnes
ol Galaadß ſonne ol Machirß tonne ol Ma
nalleh. And his lyſter Melcath bare Jechud /
Abieler a oholah. And ß tonnd ok Demida
were Ahatan / Dechem / Lenecht ¢ Antam.
Che konn or Ephꝛaim: Suthalah / whole
tonne was Bared / and Chahath hrs fonne / e
bisfonne Eladan / and Chahath his tonne: ¢
Sabad his tonne / and Suthelah his tonne
and Eler ¢ lead. Andß men ok Beth s were
boꝛne in p lande / due thé / becaule ther were
€come downe to take awape their catell. And
Ephzalm their kather mourned manp a dape
and his bꝛethꝛen came to comfozte him.
Andhe wẽt into his wyle which cõceaued
e bare hym a tonne and he called the name


ot it Batiah becaule it went euell wyth bys ©


houſholde. Andhys daughter was Sara
which built Bethoꝛon the nether and allothe
bpper/and Ozan arab. And Raphah was
bps lonne: whole lonne was Reteph / wyth
his bꝛother Chaleh / whole fonne was Tha⸗
zan and bps ſonne Laadam / and hys fonne
mihud / and his Conne Elilama / a his lonne
Hun and hys tonne Jolusn.
Andcheite pollellron and habitacion was
Bethel and che townes that longed therto /a
vnto the Eeſt of Macran.¢ on 8 welt ſyde ol
Fazer with the townes therok / and Sichem
with the totones ol the tame a Tdatah wytch
her kownes / and a longe by the bo ders or che
chyldꝛen of Manaſſeh / Bethlean wych her
tones / Chadnach wytßh her townes / Mas


I. Chꝛonycles,


gedo wyth her townez and Pod wyth her
townes. In thole dwelt the chydꝛen ok Fos
fg Oe Oe e e n i 1
Che Connes of Aler:Jomnah / Zetuah / Ic.
ua, Pariah a Derah their be chen
ol Bariah: eber and Melchiel whych was
the father ol Barſaith. And Heber begat Ja⸗
phiet/Spomer/ Potham a Sua their (pier,
The lonnes ok Japhlet: Philah / Banabal c
Alauath. Chete are the chridzen or Japhlet.
Che lonnes of Somer: Abi M ohagah / Ja⸗ 6
hubah ¢ Eram. And 5 Connes o€ his bꝛocher
Helem were Sophah Jenna“ Deies amal
Che lonnes ok Hophah. Suah / Harnepher /
Dual, Pari Zanuah B70 3/ Pod Sama
Silla / Zethzãn and Beera. Che lonnes ol
Jether Jephoneh Phalaph / zd rap Cont ot
Pla: d reh / Hanel EResia, And chele were
the chyldꝛen of a ter and heedes ol auncient
houles and pure felowes and men ok mighte
andtheheed Lozdes. And when they were
numbzed in arape to battell /chey were in
numbꝛe. xxvi. thoutande men.
CAnother Genealogve of the ſonnes or wWeniamin,
Che. büſ Chapter. 3
D enlamin begat Bale bys cloek
denne Albal the teconde / Aharah
iche chirde Mohah the kourthe and


22
alchẽ / zeuz / Sachiah acparma.
Chele are hrs lonnes beynge aucpẽt heedes.
And ofHulimbe begatahithobe Ciphaal
Che lonnd of Elphaal were Eber / Miſaam /
and Samad which built Ono / Lod / and the
totwnes longynge therto: a Barah ¢ Sania
which were auncient heedes amonge the ens
habiters of Atalon /a Ame out awaye
the enhabiters ol Seth And Haio / Selac /
Jerimoth Sabadiah / Arod / Edar / Michael
Jelpha / and Joha / the Connes ol Bartah:Sa⸗
badlah / Mofolam / Hezeki / Peber / Alamart
Jelliah / Jobab the fonnes ol Elphaal. And
Fahim Hecri / Sabdt / Eltanat / Helethai
Eliel / Adatah / Waratah/Famarech § font
OF Demei. And Jerphan Eber / Eitel / Abdon
Hecrt /Panan / Pananiah Ailan / Antho⸗
chiah / Aephdaiah d Phanuel ave che fonnes
ok Sekac. And Samlari / Soho nah Otho⸗
liah / Zerliah / Eliah a Fechzt are the lonnes
ol Jeroham. ‘Thele were aunctentheenesin C
“he


ii.


Lv.


. a * 15 1 5
Saul Dauid. i. Chꝛonptles (Ilbi,
ol the ſhewbꝛed / to pꝛepare agapnt all c: people. Ind they put his harnelte in p boule
bothes. Chele are ptyngers auncientheedes ofthete Gods. But hes Chuile they hangedim
amonge the Leuites deurded by zes: the houle ol Wagon,
tor thephad ta do hothe dape a night. here And when all they of Jabes in Galaad
were the aungtent amonge ß Leulteg intheir bearne all that the Pytlitines had done to™
generacions. Ind thete dwelt at Jerulalem. Saul /all z men of warre arole ¢ fetawave
eme rene And in Gadaon dwelt Jeuell the father che hodpe of Saul ¢ Shodyes of his onnes


ot the Leuites: emelah the tonne c en. of Sabaon whole wife was called ac


alub / p conne of Elricam / p ſlonne of Ha


of the fonnes of Merari. And Bacba⸗


COE the preakes-Leuptes/and of their offyces.
Che. ix. Chapter.


Edd. xi.a.


And his eldeſt ſonne was Abdon / then Zur
Cis / Baal Her and Hadab: Sedo / Ihio 5a
chariah and Pakeloth. And Makeloth be⸗
at Semad. And they allo dwelt wyth their
zethꝛen at Jeruſalem / euen harde bythem.


SAnpNerbegas Cis/a* Cis Saul And Saul
sigue DeGat JTeganathan, Welchtrua/Abinadab &
Elbaal. And the tonne of Jehonathan / was


Weribbaal ande wenibbaal begaticah /
Behe lonneg of Micah were / Phiton / Me⸗
lech andchaharea andã haz begat Jaarah.
And Taaral begat Hamath / a lmoth / Sami
And Sami degat Moꝛa. And Moza begat
Baana whole tonne was Raphaia / and hys
fonne was Elealah / and his fonne A zel. And
Azel had lice ſonnes whole names are thele:
Ezricam / Boch zu / Iſmael / Dariah / Obdiah
and Hanan. Chele are the Connes or Azel.
E_The battell of Saul agapnſt che Philiſtines: in
which he dreth ‘ae hys ſounes allo.


S thzowen and apne in Mounte
Selboe. End the Philiſtines folowen Saul


andhis fonnes and due Jehonathan / abina⸗ han


dab and SP cichifua the fonnes of Saul.

And the battell went loꝛe agapnſt Saul / in
lo moche that the ſhoters met him / a he was
wounded of the choters. Chen ſapde Saul
to his wepõ bearer dꝛaw thy lwerdea that


fare me thoꝛowe therwith / that thele vncircum⸗


ciled come not and dome ame. And his we⸗
pone bearer woolde not / but feared ercedyn⸗
Give. wherupon Saul caught atwerde g


felt it. And whẽ hie harnelbearer la we of
a aul was deed / he ken on a twerde allo $


Aub thus Saul andhysthze tonnes and


Callhrs houle dred together. And whe all the


men that dwelt in the balepes / lam how ther
ged andttat Haul and his Connes were deed
chey koztone their cyties & ranne awape / and
che Khültſtines canie and dwelt inthem.

ind on p moꝛom when p Philiſtines came
to ripe che deed bedyes / they kounde Saul
andhis Connes ouerthꝛowen in mounte Gel⸗
boe. And when they had ſtript hymtheptoke
des heed andes barnetie and lent them inte
the lande of the hiliſtines round aboute to
ſhew tydynges onto their Gods and to the


and bzought chem to Fabes and burped the
bones of them vnder an ocke in Jabeg / a fate
ted leuen dapes. x

And Co Saul oped for bis trelpace that he
trelpated agapnſt the Loꝛde / in that he kept
not the worde of the Koꝛde / and in that be at:
bed councell of a woman that woughe with
a lpꝛite (a alked not of 5 L ode And therfore
the Loꝛde hilled him & turned the kyngdome
vnto Bauid the lonne of Jelai.


hap
Hen all Icrael geathered thẽ tela


to@auiddnto Hebzon/ and ſarde: . neg. v. 4


Ile we be chp bones and thy Heme,
and moꝛeouerin tyme pat / euen
when Saul was kynge / chou leddeſt Alrael
out and in. And tge Loe thy Sodlapdeè vnto
the:thou walt kede me people Jlrael /a thou
Galt be captaxne ouer my people Frac.
And when all che elders of Arael were come
to the kynge to Hebꝛon / Sauid made a co⸗
uenant with thé there bekoꝛe the Loꝛde. and
they annopnted Dauid kynge ouer Jtrael
accoꝛdynge to the wooꝛde ol the Loꝛde bythe
Wok Samuel.


And Pauid and all Atrael went to Jeru⸗
falem whych is Jebus: koz there dwelt the
1 — biters of the lande. And

enhabiters ot Jebus tapde to Baud / thou
comeſt not here Heuerthelater Dauid wan⸗
ne the caftel ol Sion / whych is called p cytye
ol Dauid. Chen ſapde Wald: wholoeuer
Gmipte the Jebulites kpꝛſt / walbe the pꝛynci⸗
pall captapne e a loꝛde. And Joab the lonne

tutal went kpelt vp / and was therkoꝛe
6 chete captapne. And becaule Dauid dwelt
in che caſtel / chertoze it was called the eytye
of Pauid. And he built § ertie on eueryiyde
euen from Milo rounde aboute. But Foab
repared the reſt of the citie ᷣnd wauid pꝛol⸗
pered and wared great / and the L oꝛde or pas
ſtes was wyth hem.

Chele are che pincipall men orpowꝛeß g.


dlaue to Daud in bys kyngdome wyth all ö weg xriß. a


Ilrael to make bym kenge bpon Fhrael ace
coꝛdynge to the woꝛde of the Loꝛde. And this
is the numbꝛe of the myghepe men wyych
Pauid had: Flabaam the konne of Hacha⸗
mont the chefe ol. xxx. he litte vp bys Cpere
agaynſt the hundzed a ank ot n


Dawid,


e

and hot ich was one o c migh⸗

tpelt. He was wyth Dauid at Shale
where the Phrlrſtenes were geathered to

battell. And there was there a pariell ot
grounde full of barlexe / and the people fied
£02 feare of the Philiſtines. And cher ſtepte
koꝛch into the myddes oF the furlonge and fas
ued it and five the hiliſtineg. And the Loꝛde
gau a great victoꝛpe.

2 Andthe thze ok the. xx. cheke went to a
rocke to Dauid at the caue O delam. And the
Holte of che Phrleltines had pytched in the
balerof Raphaim. And Mauro waz in an
holne. And there becher nern ob the Philil⸗
tines at Bethlehẽ that ame tyme. And Da⸗
uid longeda lade? Oh that one wolde geue


enth. e. me oF the water of 6 well of Wethlehenichat


ig in the gate/foz to dincke. And p chie brake
thoꝛow the Hot ofthe Philiſtines and dꝛew
ok the water ok the well ok Bechlehemg was
in p gate / and tone it a bꝛought it to Sauid.
A Für aerd Waid wookve not dꝛvncke oF
it / but offeredit tothe Loꝛde / and tapde: God
kozbydit me / that chulde dochrs chynge / 6
5 chülde dzynche 8 bloude of thele men that
aue put their lpues in Jeopardpe (fo7 wyth
che Jeopamvpe ok their lues they bzought it)
— ee it. Thꝛs
e chee myghtvelk.
E, And bikar the brother ot Joab was capi⸗
tapne of the thze / and he ipite vp hys [pere


agaynſt. ich. hundzed and fue then / afdhada


name amonge the thze. And he was moche
moze nobler then any of the thꝛe / and was


theire captayne. But was not Iyne to an th


ol the thae in actes.
Banalah the tonne oF J eholada the tonne
ol a ſtronge man that had done great deades
was of Cabseel:he due two fronge ivons
of Moab / a went downe and liue a Lyon in
Appt in tyme of ſnowe. And he llue an Egip⸗
clan which was a man of a lize / euen kpue
cubytes longe and in his handhadalpeare
F lpke a weuets beame And the other went to
him with a walter and plucked d fpeare out
2 es cians hande / a Cluchym with bys
are.
tonne of geholada / and hadã name wyth the
thꝛem ett / and was the glorpoutett of
Sites: ut attaynednot vnto the thꝛe. And

Dau


de hym ok his lecret councell.
Oe belt men of warre ol
* ſe Holte: Ilahel the other ok Joab and


Elhanan the tonne okt Bodo out of Bethle⸗
hem. Samoth the Patozite Apeles the Pha⸗
lonite: Ira the tonne of Akes the Chehuite/
Abicler che Anathothite: Sobacai the Hu-
Cathite/Tatthe Ahobrte: Wabavat the Ne-
thophathite and Peledthe tonne of Baanah


oche thynges dyd Banatah the Sp:


i. Chꝛonytles.


the Hethophatite: Ithat the tonne ol Rebai
ol Gabaab that pertapneth to the chridzen
of Beniamin: Banatab the Pharathonite:
. ok the rruer ol Gags / and Abielthe
irbathite : Asmoth the Wabarumite/ Ela⸗

haba the Saaib Che bonnes ok Hal⸗ G
fem the Geꝛonite / Jonathan the tonne of
Sagah / an Baratſte: Ahiam the fonne ot
SHacarthe Hararite / Eliphal the tonne ot
Wz. Hepher the Mecharathite Ahlag the
Phalonite: Hesrothe Carmelite and Naas
rithe fonne orã zwai: Joel the brother of Na=
than: Mibahar the ſonneot Gari:Felec an
Ammonite and Naharat a Berothitẽ the bea⸗
rev of the Barnetle or Joab the fonne of Sar:
wien anna ete

e qj 0s
juts Adina the fonne of Sisa a KRubenite
and anheed amonge the Kubenites and. xxx
aboute hym: Pananthe fonne of Maacah
and Jocaphat a Mathanite: Ozeah an At
tharothite: Dama and Jatel che fonnes of
Pothan an Aroerite: Jedial the Conne ok
Sami and cha hys bꝛother & hozites:ęliel
3 Mahunũte. And Jeribat and Zoloiah the
Connes of Einaem and Jechmah & Moa⸗
bah Eliel and Obed and Jaliel of Mato⸗

ah.


€ What they wert that went wyth Dauid when he
Sten Bade e eben


Che xij Chapter.
soibete . — Da-


the tonne of Cis: and they were of
e men that focoured the battell / wepened
with boowes / and coulde handle ones / aro⸗
wes and bow as well wyth the lefte bande
a8 wyth the ryght / and were of Dauls bꝛe⸗
thꝛen /euen of the trybe of Beniamin. Che
chekeſt were ahie zer and Joas the Connes of
Samaah a Sobaonite/s Jazlela Pyalite/
the lonnes of A zmoth. Baracah and Zebu ol
nathoth. And Jlamatah a Gabaonite as
mightve as any of thyꝛtve i moare myghtre
to. And Jeremiah / Fehasiel/Fohanan a Fos
fabad of Gedoz. Elcuſat / Jerimoth Baaliah
amartah and Saphatiah: Paraphites
Elcanah / Jeliah /Asvact/Forser/ Foleboam
or Barehim. And Joelah and Zabadiah the
fonnes of Jerogam of Gedoz. 8
And or ß Sadites there ſeparated thé telus
vnto Dauid whe he kept anholde in the wil⸗
dernelle / mẽ of myghte a men apte fo2 warre
and coulde handle pine and Cpeate / whole
faces were lye the faces of L pons / and then
were therto as Sante ibe ‘one Fad
mountapnes: Ezer 4
conde / Eliab p chirde Malmannah d fourthe
Jeremiah the Fyéte / eee


i


775 3
udo Sticlag /whplebe pet hept aun
dl bemteiteciote for feare of Saul beben


ci. 5


ndeng
Ilrael ought to do: Che heedes of them were
kwo hundzed and all their bzethzen at their
well. ardof Sabulon that went out wrth
the Hoke and pꝛoceded in § araxe to battell
with all maner ar wepons ol warre / kyftye
thoulande that kepte in oder wyth one ac⸗
cozde. And of Hephthali a thoulande Capi⸗
tapnes /and with them with ſhylde & Cpeare,
xrłvij thoulande and ol Dan prepared to
battell / were. xxviij. thoutande and. vi hun⸗
dꝛed. And ok Tier that went out wihe Bolte
to make battell / tourtie thouſand. and of p 6
other kyde Jordan ol the Nubenites / Gad⸗
dices a or che halke trybe of Manalich wall


maner ok indrumentes ołwarre anhundꝛed


janadeh to Dauid whe
he went with che Philtctines agaynſt Saul


un tr. a to battel / hut holpe them not. oz Loꝛdes


ok hewyilittines coke councell and ſent him
awäpe ſapig:he will kallto his maſter Saul
tothe Jeopatbye of oure heedes. And as he
went to Sitzelag there fell to him of Manal⸗
fel: Ednah Fosabad Jediel / Michael / ol
Jozabad / Elihu and Salthai / heedes of the
thouſandd of Manaſleh and they holpe Da⸗
uidagapntt thofe rouers. Foz they were all
myghtie men and Capitapnes in warre And
there came one oꝛ other to Dauid daye by
dave to helpe him: vntyll it was a great oz
ſte / lyke the Botte of Goo,

And this is the numbꝛe ok cheheedes pꝛe⸗

redto batten / that came to Dauid to Pes

non / to turne } kyngdom ol Saul to him /
accoꝛdynge to the mouthe ofthe Loꝛde.

Che chyldꝛen of Juda that bare eee
Theave wete tyre thoufande and epght bun:
Nedtrymmer to warre. DE the chyldꝛen ot
Simeon / men of mightto warre / teuẽ thou⸗
lande and one hundzeb Andokthe cyplozé of
Leu were foure thouland and ire hundꝛed.
And Fehoiads was the cheke or the of Aaron
and witz hum the thoulande and leuen hun⸗
dꝛed. And Fadock a potig mã of great power
had his fathers houqpolde wyth Capitapnes
Erh and of § chyꝛdzẽ of Wetamin § bꝛethzẽ
Of Saul were the thoulande. And a great
parte oF hE dys pet Eolowe p houſe ot Saul.

And oF the chpluzen ol Ephzaim / were rr.
thouland aſtd eight hundꝛed / men ol mpabte
and named men in the houcboldes ot che ta


and twentie thouland.

Al thele bepnge men of warre able to 074
die the arape / canie tohebꝛon w pure herte /
to make Bauid Aynge vpon all Scrael. and
cherto all? tet of Alrael was of dne accozde
to male Dauid& pnge. Andtherethey were
with Dauidthze daes eatyng adzynchrng:
fog their bꝛechꝛen prepared foz them. Moꝛe⸗
ouer ther p were npe to the / as Alacar / Faz
bulon and Hephthali bꝛought bedde on HE
les Camels mules ¢ oxen / meatesfloure/
kigges/reatrngs / wyne / opie / oren / a chepe
aboüdätlpe. For there was myzthe in Alratl.
Che Arche fe lnought agapne frõ Rartath Jarini
to Jerulalem. Oradfeth.

5 CQ he. rij. Chapter.
Id Bauid counceled with the Ca⸗
M pitaynes ofthoutanns g hüdeedeg / A
Use) an pats eee aie
onto all 8 ci icxon oi iel:
Ik it leme pou good aal to be ot 1 Loi
dure God: Let bs take g lende onto the rem⸗
naunt ok oure bꝛethꝛẽ thozow out all the lad
ol Atrael / æ tothe preattes andi euites with
chẽ /in their cpties and luburbes 65 unge
them to geather to vs. And lett vs brnge
agapne the Arcke of the Loꝛde to bs: for we
regarded it not in the dapes ol Saul. Andall
che cengregacion was cortent foto do / toꝛ ?
ha emed good in $ exes ok all p people.
Dauldgeathered all Itraelto geacher
krõ. Dihoꝛ inegrp
che Arche of § Loz fro Rartath Jarim. And us.
Daum wee vp ¢ all gtraelto Waalay/and l
to Rariath Zarim 5; ĩs in Juda / to fet thence
che Arche of the Gon and Loꝛde g fytteth on
che Cherubes . sphere his name is called on
And they carved the Arche of Godin ane we
carte out or Shoute of Aminadab. And za C
c his bꝛocher dꝛaue che carte. 1


v.


t pnto Pemathtobeng zer datte De


Daud,


all Ilrael plaped bekoze God wrth all cheir
mit / with lyngynge / barpes / plaltertes/

tym̃bꝛelles and l And when ther

came on 5ᷣ thzeftpng llowꝛe of Chidon / Dsa

put koꝛth his bande koholde the arcke / fo2 6

oxen ſtombled. Andthe Lozde was wroth w

Oa and lmote him / becaule he put his hãde

tothe Arche. And there heaped befoze God.

And Wauid was dilpleated / becaule $ Lord

Dhad renta rent in Ga / and called the fade

Chat a/ the Place Pere: Oꝛa bnito this dape. And Da⸗
deuplron of sid was loakraped of God that dape / that he
aa fapde / how thal J bꝛynge the Arche of God
tohome to me. And lo Baud bꝛoughtnotche

Arche home to humto $ cptie of Baud: But


i.Chꝛonytles.


krapght krõ the peeve trees. And when thou
heareſt afounde go in $ toppes ol the peere⸗
trees / chen go out to battell:foz God well go
out befoze che to ſmyte the hoſte of the Phi⸗
üſtines. And Dauld dyd as Sodcömaunded
him. And ther tmote che hotte or chess hiliſtt⸗
nes all che waxe trõ Gabaon to Gazer. Ind
the tame ot Dauid went out into ali landes /
and the Loꝛde made all nacyons keare hm.
cc; ay Arche of the cones
Santa nde, ndnd ‘before it is de ⸗
ſpyled or his ‘cas ‘Michelt-thedaughter of Saul.


turned it in to the boule of Obed cdoma e


tte. And the Arche of God was with Obed

Sanni eule / ihemeneches. sub the

L. oꝛde bledenthe houle of Dbed Edom a all

that he had.

wodde ¢ worckemen to Dauid. Dae

ry Fear tp enen tte; de had taken dym wyues
de hach. g.victozpes of the Philtg mes.
Gaver Chapter.

0 fterthat Hiram kyng of Tire tent
ſmedlengers to Dauid and tynibze
lof Cedar trees wich malons a Car

Apenters / to buride byman houle.
‘herby Wauid perceaued that the Lorde
ad pꝛepared him to be kyng vpõ Jlrael / in
is kengdom was lifte vp onhpe / becaule al
vs people Icrael. And Mauid cone yet moo
Mi unten Abegat mo tonne daugh⸗
ters. Ind thele are the names ol his chudꝛen
which he had bo mehl at Jerulaſẽ: Damua /
SDobab/ athan a Salomon: Jebhar Eli⸗
Sten Ballade din be @ SAPHAD.

€lifama / Baltada and Eliphelet.
And whe it was hnowne among ther ht⸗
% iaines that Baud was anopnten yng vp
All Alraef / all che Phrlitines went vp tolene
Pauid.And Baud hearde ot à went oute
agarnſt thé. And the Phillttines came and
praunfed in the valepe of Raphaim. and
DauidathenGodtaping: Halt J go agaynſt
che Philickines ¢ wylt thou delpucr them in⸗
tompnehädes: Ind the Loe larde to hem:
o/ fo: Awyll del puer the into thyne hande.
And taben tyey were come as ferre gs Bal
€ Phatazim / Saul bett themthere. And D
din rede. ip appesBoDpathe de epinpne enempes
bitch er wich mpnebande as amd wolde deurde wa⸗
* ter. And therkoze they called che name of the
fapbe place Baal Pharazim. And ther lekte
their Gods there / which Dautdbadve to be

burnt with krze.

And the Philictines came agarne a ranne
abꝛoade inthe valeye. Chen Dauid acked
God: and God larde to bim go not after thẽ
* df
butturne atape krõ them / z came vpon thẽ


Arcke of God ought not to be carped but ot
the Leuites. Foz thé bath the Loꝛd choſento
beare the Arche of he Loꝛde and to minpſtre
tobim ko euer. Ind thertoze auld geatze⸗
red all Itrael togerulalẽ᷑ / to fetche the Arche
off Lid vnto ß place which he had oꝛdeyned
fo? it. And Dauid bought to geather $ chil⸗
dye of Aaron ¢ the Leuites. Of lonnes ot
Cabath: iel q chefe/and of bis beethze an
hundꝛed and. xx. And of the chyidzen ot Me⸗

rart: Alatah the cheke / and orhis bꝛechzen. ij.

hundꝛed and. rx. Ind of the fonnes of Gerton

Joel the chete / and ok his bꝛethzẽ an hundꝛed

and thirtie. Ind of the chxldꝛẽ of Eitzaphan:

SHemeiah che chele and ok hys bꝛechꝛen two

hundzed. And of the fonnes of Pebzon Ellel

the cheke and okhis bzethzé.inre and of the
fonnes ok Oztel / Aminadab the chete / EOF
hig bꝛethꝛen an hundꝛed and. xij.

And aud called toFadock and Abiathar zz
the pꝛeaſtes / a to the Leuttes, Miel / Alalah
Joel, Semetab €itel a Aminadad : efapde
bnto thé:pe are the pzincppallheedes of the
WLeuites / fanctefpe thertoze youre kelueg €
youre bꝛethzen / and bꝛynge the Arche of the
Loꝛd od of Flracl ontop places J haue pre
pared foꝛit. Foz becauſe pe were not there
atthe kyꝛſt tyme / the Lozde oure God made
à rent amonge vs foz 6 we lought hem not T
as the kadyon ought to be. Indthe preattes
and the Leuites fanctefien the ſelues / to kett
the Trcke of the Londe God ok Altai. Ind 5
chyldzẽ of the Leuttes bare $ Arche ot God
po thett houlders w ſtaues theron as Mo
tene ee worde of

e Lode.

And Dauid ſpake to the chete heedes ol
che Leuites /p cher chuldẽ anpopnte ol cheir
bꝛethꝛẽ to lynge Winſtrumẽ tes of mulpcke
plalteries harpes efymbales that founded/
andtofynge on bye with Jopfulnede. And g
Leuttes appopnted Hema the Conne of Joel:

a ee
5


I.


Ibphigg
And Warachiah andelcanah kepte p doze
off Arcke. Andsdacantah / Jehjolaphat / Na⸗
thanael/Amatat / Sachariah / Banatah and
Eliezer pꝛeaſtes were blowers wyth trom⸗


Dpettes betore the Arche of God. And Obed⸗


Edom andyahiay were kepers ofthe doze ot
the Arche,


And Dawid and the elders of Flrael ¢ the
Capitaynes ower thoufandes went to fet the
‘Arche of the appoyntement of the Loꝛde out
of the houte of Obed Edom wth gladnelle.
And when God had holpe the Leuttes that
bare the Arcke of the appopntement ofthe
Logde/they offered bij .oren and. vil. ames,
And Dautdhad on him an albe of bũe / eto
hadthe Leuttes that bare the Arche / and lo
had the lyngers / and Conaniah the ruler off
fonge ¢ ofthe fyngers . And Baud had mo⸗
reouer spon him an æphod of lxnen. Ind all
Aena Mary . ol the 1 5 5

un owyng of hoꝛnes /
& with trompettes and fymbaies that Couns
ded / and with plalteries and harpes.

Andas the Arche ol the appoyntemét ol z


Lozd cameintoche cytie ot Bauid / Michol
che daughter of Saul loked oute at a wyn⸗


dowe: a whẽ che law kyng Dauid daun
@plapeage, Hedewnienhiminberbeue. 8


„Elbiij.


couenaunt of God. .
90 ch 1 see aust ach pik
ekelyr to thanke the Lozve by Afaply & his 5 5.
bethze Aabake 6 L.070/ calle onbisname/ gen
make bys Actes hnowen amonge d people.
:. Spnge vnto him and playe vnto him: and
recozdeallhis wonderfull dedes Pꝛzayle his
hol name / and let the hertes of the chat leke
che Loꝛde reiople. Sete the Loꝛde and bps
frenghte:Sehebispretenceatiwape,
+ Remembze bys maruelles which he ayd7,
andhts wonders fand the iudgementes ofhis
moutheve ye ace ate is lena:
the chyldꝛen of Jacob are his cholen Heis
Logbde oure Gb: in al landes arehys iud⸗
gemẽtes. Thynke on his appoyntemeẽteuer /
Eon the worde he cömaunded to a thoufand
generacions. Ok his coucnaunt to Abꝛahã /
Jochls othe to Jlaac: which he let betoze Ja
cob koꝛ a decree / and to Flrael foꝛ an euerla⸗
Ange couenaüt / faymg:to the J wyll grue
che land of Canaan / to be $ poꝛcion ok poure
enheritaunce. nohẽ pou were almalle come
panpe in numbꝛe / euen but a lew / and therto
ſtraungers therin. And they went fro people
to people /a from one Kyngdome to anothek
nacion He tutfered no ma bodo thẽ wꝛongei c
But rebüked kyngdkoꝛ theirfakes.couche
not myne anopntede / noꝛ do my Pꝛophetes
anpharme.* Synge onto the Lozve all the Pal. eta.
erthe: a ſhew kr dave ta dape brs bictozies,
Cell amonge the hechen okhis gloꝛpe:and
amonge all nacpons of his wonerfull dean’.
For greate is the Lozde and to be pꝛaled
excedyngly:a terrpble is he aboue all Gods.
For aſithe Gods of the hethen are Jdoles: 9
But the Loꝛde made heauen.
Praple and hondure are in bys pꝛelence:
ſtrenght and gladnes are in hys place.
Allcribeto § Lod pe kynredes ok people /
Adcribe to che Lope Glozve and ctrengüt.
Geue honoure onto che Loꝛdes nale:
bꝛynge pꝛetentes and come bekoze hym / and
bowe tothe Loꝛde in holpapparell.
*Hil the erche keare him / he ſtablpched the. au tw erm,


b erthe thatit cannot moue: The heauen re⸗ zm atthe dwei


fopfe and the erthe be glade / and lett men lers inthe ert.
e the nacyons that the Lo de is a


Let


*
Dauid,
Vet the le thunder and his tulnetie/¢ lect

the keldes reiopte and all that is therin, -
Moꝛeouer let the trees ol the wood ringe
at che pꝛelence of the Lozde: koꝛ he cometh to

iudge che erthe. : 8
22 Chanke the L ode fo; he is goad / andhys
mercype lactech euer:and faye: aue vs o Gon
oure laupoure € geather vs to geather a de⸗
Ipuerbs from among the hethen / tothanke
thybolyname/¢ topzaple che with $ pꝛaple
that becometh the Bledenbe the Loꝛde God
‘othe „nt Am foꝛ dope 6 a a ae
‘ e* Amen / lo l .

anime e n pe rete qyevebetopetheatcBe of the
Loꝛdes coucnaunt/Afaph and bys bꝛethꝛẽ /
to mymqre bekoꝛe the Arche euermoꝛe Daye
bydape. And Obed Edom with his bꝛethꝛen
the Choze a exght / and Obed Edom ß tonne
of Aduthun g Dsah to be poꝛterg. And Za⸗
dock the preatte wich his bꝛethzẽ 6 pꝛeaſtes
ſet he befoze the tabernacle of the Lozde at
the hyllaulter of Gabaon / to offer burntolle⸗
tpnges vnto the Loꝛde vpon the burntoffe-
rynge aultaer perpetualipe at moznynge ¢
euenpnge / accozopnge to all that is wukten
in b iawe of the Loꝛde which he cõmaunded
Iltael. And wyth che Deman and Iduthun /
d other z were cholen a named by name / to
thankte the Loꝛde g bys mercpe lacteth euer.


And the layne Heman and Fouthun were wh


trompettes a foundpngefymbates/¢ inſtru⸗
mentes of the melodpe of God. And d fonnes
of Fouthun were poꝛzters. And then all the
people departed / euerx man to his houle:and
Sauid returned to lalute his houcholde.


j 2
8. fer. uſ.a.


n
than ſayde to Dauid: do all that is in thrne
herte/toz God is with the.

But the lame naht p wo de of God came
to Nathan laping: go andtell Dauid my ter=
uaunte / thus fapth the L oꝛde / thou (alt not
burlde me an houle todwell in. Foz J haue
dwelt in no houle fence J brought out ß chil⸗
dꝛen ok Icrael vnto this dape: But haue gone
from tent to tent a krom one tabernacle to a
nother. Nether in anye place whertoeuer F
haue walked thozow out all Ffrael/fpake
euer one woꝛde to anye of the iudges ol 3.
rael which J cõmaunded to fede my people /
laving: why bylde ye me not an houle of Ce⸗
dartree: How therfoze thus fave vnto my
ceruaũt Bauid:thus lapth ? Loz ol Hotes


i Chꝛonytles.


tobe the out ol the paſture frd after hepe /

thou ſhuldeſt be capitayne ouermypeople
Acrael. And J haue bene with the in all thou
tokeſt in hand / and haue weded out all thyne
enemxes out of thy lxaht / and haue made §
a name iphe che name of the greaten men of
people lee ars nd mee kane aer
pei male it kaſte / et
call dwell vnder it ¢ hal moue no ice.
Hether call the chplozé ol wickednee vere
chem ane moare as at che begynnynge/ and
lenle the tryme J commaunded tuages to be
ouer my people Icrael /a well bꝛynge onder
all thrne enempes (ko I tolde the ß the Lo
wold buploe the anhoule.)

But when the daxes be erfpiten / p thou
mult go after thy fathers /I wyll Cett vp thyc
lead attertte / which walbeẽ or thy fonnes a
wyll fettle his kyngdome. He chan buydme


an houle / and wyll fabipthe bys leate fo:


euer. J wylbe bys father and he halbe my
lonne / and J wpli not put my mercpe awaxe
From him as J dpd krom him that was befoze
the. But J wyll (ett him in myne houle and
m mr kyñgdom £07 euer / and his Ceate hal⸗
be lure ko euer.

when Nathanbadtoldeauidaccoping
to all thele wazdes / a to all this bifion/kyng
Maud wets fate him befoze p 107d efapo:
at am 4 O Lorde God ¢ what is mene
houcholde / that thou batt pꝛomoted me thus
kerre. And pet this lemed ixttel in thyne e xes
O ꝙod But that thou chuldect (peake of thy
leruauntes houte foz a great whyle to come:
had lokedvpon me as bpd a mã of hre de⸗
gree O Loꝛde God. What can Dauid delpꝛe
moare of the / wherin thou chuldeſt make thy
ceruaũt moare glozioule: Chou knowelt thy
leruaunt: nd Londe to thy leruaũtes fake/
euẽ accor


dauid.


3 A Chronptles: . Clix.
‘ne Houtartethebery God/andhat Cerethitesannehe Pheterbiee ö
Bann her ter eae a e er fonnes ol — ehem.
ieruaunte that tmape contpnue before tye erer he kannter nnd. won bath greate
koreuer. Foz what thou bleüeſt D Loge z 6 5
is bletled fo; euer. 90 N 14 5 2
ter thes it chaunced that Pa- ...
e Erngorthe cyploze of Anm Sra
died a his fone made kyng in his


were on the feruau
bought them to¥erufatem,


Dauid.


B to teght sand ther fenbefore yim. dna shen Tche people are punnplThed wyth pes


1
j. Reg. xi.a.


b. Reg. xh. g


gez · cri n Fatale 2 kter thal


i. Chꝛonytles. ae


Vaud canted them to be nombred: do that there dꝛed
ens Igr.thoutsnd men. 8


he. xxi. Chapter.
Hd Satan Love vp agaynſte Ff-


the chydꝛẽ of Ammon fatwe that ? On
were lied / cher ranne awape Ikewyle from
Abilat his bꝛother and gat them into p citie.
And Joab came to Jerulalem.

And whe d Siriens laweß they were put | (7
to che woꝛle of Ilrael / they fent mellengers 7
lett out the Sirtens that are beponde. the ‘Joab a the rulers of $ people / go
tpucriwith Sophach che Capitayne of che pe andnumbꝛe Arrael fxd Berlabe to Dan /
Dole Sripababezer betope toe, Which when anobzpngett tomethat J mare knowe the
it was tolde Dauid/he geathered all Ilrael. numbze of tye. And Joabäncwerediche Lom
and went ouer J oz dan / went e let vpõ thẽ. make the people an hundzed times lo manxe
And Dauid put him leite in araye agaynſte mo as ther be. But my L oꝛde A yng are ther
the Siriens / and they fougie with in Sut not all mp Lozde feruauntes? why then doch
the Siriens fleabefoze Arael / and Dauid my Londe require this thynge; why chulde
deltroped or the Siriens. vn thoulande cha⸗ my Lozdebea caule ot treſpace to Acrael:
rettes / and clue. xl. thoulande kote men / and Neuerthelater the bengt worn pieua pled
plied Sophach the Capttapne or the holte. agarnſt Joab. and Foab tone bps wave and
And when the leruauntes ol Hadade zerſaw wentthozow out all Icrael / and came to Je⸗
that thep were putto 6 woꝛle ot Ilrael / hey rulalein and gaue the numbze of the counte
made peace wih Dauid and leruͤedhim Ne: ol people onto Wautd.Andall Icrael were

er wolde the Sirians helpe the cheldzꝛẽ or in numbze a thouland thoulandẽ a anhun⸗


mon anpe mare.
e thꝛe mot vic toriouſe battelles of Dauld.
che G he r Chapter.

Md the pere kolowynge aboute the

tyme that kynges go out a warre

{| fare) oab carped out the armpe ol

the hölle and deſtroped the cõtrexe

Aylozen ol à mmon / and went ano be⸗

feged Na bah and deſtroped it: But Pauid
boade at Jerutale whple Joab tmote Rabah
+, And deſkroped it And Bäuldtoze g croune
ok their kynge ok his herd / and kounde therin
the watght of a talẽt of goulde / a there were
pꝛecioule ones in it / and it was tet on Das
uids herd Andhe brought out allo the tpotle
ofthe cytie which was ercedyng moche. And
he brought out the peoplethat were in it and
tamed them with lawes a harowes of yzon
CK with bꝛakes / and codeal Dauid wyth all
the cyties of the chidꝛẽ of ummon. Andthen
Dauld & all the people came agarneto 2 e⸗
it there arole warte at Sa⸗
zer with the Phil tines. At which tyme So⸗
bocat the Hulathite fue Saphat that was


ene. xiii.a Re child zẽ ol! Raphaim / a they were ſub⸗


ed. And there was battell agape wyth that


che Philictines / a Elhanan the tonne ol zatr
fue Lahemi the bꝛother of Goltath the Ge⸗
thite / whole fpeare was lyke the beame ofa
weuer. And there chaũced yet agayne warre
Dat Geth, where was a man ola lyse W. ritt
kyngers a toes. vi. on euer hande / and vi. on


dꝛed thoulande men p due lwerde: and Zu⸗
da was. ccc. xx. thoufard mẽ § dzuelwerde.
But the Leuites and Beniamin he counted
not among thẽ. Foꝛ the ynges deade lemed
abompnabie to Joab And the 07d was dits
pleated with this thynge /andfmote Ilrael.
Then fayde Dauid to God: J haue fynned
exceadynglx in doynge this thynge. Neuer⸗
thelede pet do awaye the wekednelle ol thy
en ane loꝛ I haue done aboue meature
olpchlpe.

And che Lope tpake nto Gad Waurds 33
fear ol bifpons laxinge: go and tell Dauid
faping. Chus larth the Coꝛde: J geucthe ?
choilẽ of thꝛe thynacs:chofe the one ok them /
that J maye do vnto the. And Gad came to
Dau g lapdontohim:Chus lapth 5 L070,
Chote the ether the peres famplhment / oz
thze monethes tobe confumied of thyne ad⸗
uerlaries the c werde of thine enemies ouer⸗
takynge the: 02 elle the cwerde ok the L onde
thze dapes and peſtilence in the lade / the an⸗
gell of the Loꝛde deſtropinge thoꝛow out all
5 coſtes ot Icrael. And now adupfe thy ſelle
Warterme 3 Wail bipnge agapne to hym
that fent me. And Dauld fade to Gad / J am
inan erceadynge ſtraite. But let me kal in
to che hand okthe L ond / koꝛ padynge great
is his merche / and lett me not kalle into the
handes ok men. 1

‘And the Loꝛde lent peſtilence vpon all Ic:
rael / ſo 6 there were guerthzowen ol Ilrael


euerp kote / a waß the tonne of Paraphah ¢ irre choulande men Andckod tent che angel!
brach teil Ane gchonatben the rae of to Jerulalem to deſtrope it. Andashe was
Samaa Dauids brother fuchym. hele about todettroye the Lorde behelde andgad
were boꝛne of Paraphah at Seth and were compatlion on the wzetcheonetie and faye
ouerchꝛowen bp the hande or Dauid and of tothe Angell that deſtroped it ideas


his leruauntes.


ef
now ceate thyne hand. And the Angell oF the
Lowe


place ofthe thedhenge flow;
uydde an aulter thertn onto
haue it fozagmoche money as it is wozthe/
that the plage mape ceale trõ p people. And
Dynan lapde to Bauid:take it to the / and let
my Loꝛde kyng do that ſemethe good in bys
eyes. De / A geue the oven fo2 a burntlacre⸗
kpce / a the thꝛelchenge ſleades fo2 wodde / a
wheate ko; meateoſleryng:J geueit all. But
beng Dauid fayde to O nan: not fo / but
wyll bye it ſoꝛ as moche monepe as it is
woꝛthe. J will not take which is thyne / koꝛ
8 Lord / ã offer burntollryngd without coſte.
And co Dauid gaue to Oznan fo? 5 place
lpcles of goulde. vi. hundꝛed hy waight. And
Dauid buylt there an aulter onto the Loꝛde
Goffcredburntofterpnges a peaceoſkringes
Acalledvnto the Loꝛdè a he hearde hym krõ
heauẽ in tyꝛe vpon the aulter of burntoſte⸗
rynge. Andthe Lode cõmaunded 5 Angel
to put vp his Iwerde agapne intoß thethe of
tt At that kme whe Bauldlaw / p the Loꝛd
had hrarde him in che thꝛelhenge fowze of
Oꝛnan d Jebulite⸗he vledto there Foꝛ
Stabernacle of 5 Loꝛd which Motes made
tithe wylderneſe / a the aulter or burntolle⸗
rynge were at that cealon in the hyll at Sa⸗
baon. and Dauid coulde not go before it to
leke God / becaule he was aferde olß iwerde
ok che Angell ok § Loꝛd. And Daum faye:
this is the boule of the Loꝛde God / and thys
ts the burntotkerynge auiter kor Irrael.
S Dquid willeth his Counc Salomon to bylde p teple
OF Pod: which thyng be him (elf was korbiddt to do.


che. xxij. Chapter.


And Wauin pzepared plette ot yzon fo; nap:
0 2 nap⸗
leg ko the dozes of the gates c cologne wall
Gaboundance of bzaffe without waighte / ¢
OF Cevartrecs without numbse.$3, the St:
dong and they of Cire bꝛought moche Cedar
00d to Wauid.Foz Bauid thus thought/
Salomon mr fonne is pounge g tender / and
che houle that is to be buple foz the Londe /
mut exceade ingreatnede / that it mape be
Spoken ol and prapled in ali landes. J wyll
therfoze make opdinaunce fo: it. And io Daz
uid pꝛeparedaboundaũce befoze his deethe.
And he called Salomö hys tonne g char⸗
gedhimto bude an boule koz h Loꝛde God


OF Akrael and Wauid fad to Salomö:emy ß nen vg o
bannt A badinmgnebeit tabu bean bon, U mn,


vnto p name ofthe Loꝛdeme God. But the
woꝛde oF the Loꝛd came to me lapinge:tholt
alt then moche bloude / and halt made many
les Chou ſhalt not builde an houlekoꝛ
myname / to thoubakMecdmoche bloude to
Ferthe in my keght. Beholde a lonne ſhalbe
boꝛne ß which thalbea ma ok reſte / ko: J will
geue him ret krom all bys


will lende ret a peace bpo Acrael This dapes. re
Badenden an ade Ahe e e
albe my lonne / a A wilbe his kather / a will
ſtabliche 5 feate of bis kyngdom vp glrael
foz euer Pow m er wthe /
N thou mayſte pꝛolpere a buplde b houle of
Loꝛde thy God / as he bath tapde of F. Ind
the Loꝛdgeuethe wyldome a bnderttaning/
emake the gouerner of Irrael / and to kepe
the lawe ofthe Loꝛdthr Bod. Foꝛ then thou
Salt pꝛolpere:Icthou thait be dyligente to
do the opdinaunces a la wes which the L.oꝛd
charged Moles Wiodelluertozkrael. Pluc⸗
ke vp thyse hert a be ſtrõge / dꝛend notnoz be
diſcouraged. Beholde in myne aduerlite J
haue prepared for the boule of the Loꝛde an
hüdzed thoulandtalentes of gould z a thous
tand thoulandtalẽtꝭ of cyluet᷑ / a as for bꝛaſſe
& pꝛon it cinot be nũbꝛed it is io moche. And
Ihaue pꝛepared timbꝛe ¢ fone / achou walt
pꝛourde moare therto. Moꝛeouerthou halt 2
wozkemen pnowe a malong & carpenters ta
woke in Gone atimbze g an maner of wire
mẽ fo2 whatloeuer woꝛke it be and orgould
fyluet/bzatte a pꝛon there is no numbꝛẽ. dap
therkoꝛe a let pit / E 5 Loz thalbe wthe.
And Dauid comaunded all the Loꝛdes ol
Ilrael / to helpe Salomõ his fonne lapinge /
Zs not 5 107d poure God w pou? a hach he
not geué pou reſt on euerp erde forhe hach
geuk d enhabitoures ob lad into minen


ehempes rounde ano,
About. Andhis name tales ae e males


ablabycye thitde,
tpfte/ Febova


muel
Abner ß conne of Her /g Loabę lonme ot Jar⸗
utah had dedicated. Ail p was dedicated was


„ onder F häd ol Selomith ¢ of bys bꝛethzen.


alle as well as
oktheir fathers / from gate to gate Andthe
Eelb lot fell to Belemelah. And ko H acaria
his konne a wile counceller / ther cat lottes/
and his lot came out towarde Heth umd
Obed Edoms lot ken to the South. And to


8 Some teade? wos tonnes kel the councell houles. Andro
thebouteof Ae Huphim and polah fell the welke woth he


Gate Sarecheth / where the wapeasendeth
bpward/> one tape beynge fat by § other.
In ß Ceſt hepte fyre Leuttes.in 5 North


onantal and bys

fonnt were

ers d

Crael on chis lide Joꝛdã weſtward / in all bu-
elles of ) Lozd d lerupce ot kyng. And
Jediah was the chetett among d Rynkedes a
fathers of the eb zonites. And inthe fourtic
pere ot d kyngdõ of Dauidthep were Coughe
foz.andthere were kounde ok thé men of ac⸗


tyuite at Jezer in Galaad. And hys brethzen


were in mẽ ol acttuite / wo thoufand ¢ leuẽ

hundꝛed aunciẽt heedes / which kyng Bauid

made rulers ouer the Rubenites / Saddites

the halle trpbe of Manalleh in all maters

pertaynyng to God e budleneues of p Ryng.

COt b prpncess rulars p myniſered vnto the ayng.
be xrvij Chapter.


—
png in all thrnge accoꝛdyng to ß cOpanyes
p came in 07 wet out moneth by moneth tho⸗
row E all p monethes of d pere. Andeuerx
chpanxe


iiij a daye / z in the South ih a daye / and in xxitij. ch


z Some reabe? euery councellboute two / ¢* inthe watch⸗


Choules ſon d bye wave weſtward koure: two
a houle. Thele are ß deurtpons ol ö por
terg amög the fonnes ok Kozeh o the lonnes
“pF Weratt. And ofthe Leuites Ahtah had
ouerlyght of d creature of the houle of cod /
and of the trealure ofthe dedicat thongs.
As cocempng § Connes of Laadan which
were Gerlonites: Laadan had auncient fa-
thers . Laadan the Gerfontte had Jehielt.
Ehe lonnes ok Fehielt:S ethan a Fock bis bzo
cher / which were duer ß trealureß ol p houle
of the Lozde. Amonge the Amramites Jza⸗
harites/Hebꝛomteg 2 O zielites was Sub⸗
uelthe tonne of Gerlon the tonne of Motes
a ruler ouer the treafure . And of his bethzẽ
che fonnes okckltezer / was Rahabiah whole
tonne was Je his tonne was Joꝛam /
eis lone Sechn ahrs tonne was Delo⸗


mith / which Delomith a hys bꝛethzen were


chouland. Che fptte capitayne ing fytte mo⸗
— — gin hrs

Che kxrt capttapne in

the fonne of Akes

Triiß. choufande.

itayne in p ſeuẽthe mo⸗

alonite / or the chyl⸗

dꝛen ot


I pauid.


deen ol Cphzaim:ein brah i Shtonptles,
alm: g in hes hotte. xriitf chou · ofcoficelt/a mã : :
nee en peaechitthetanc Herend mne
2 ened bun hae unn eee tam ae On the kong nn Andabitopbel was ofp
e in his hoſte rriiſ thouland. che kpngs coficell.And Hulal § Arachite was ß

nyntheCapitapne in pnenthe monethe was Bung; cOpanta.dnonerte a ce was
Abtezer an Anathothite of che fonnes ok Ze. Fehotada b fonne of Wanatah/ ¢ Abiathar
imingcaniin bis bote Feith ehoufanbe e ndß capitapne ot kings warre was cab
ta a chr Saal se e kcal Dauid was forbpdden tobuplde the tepler
Haha etophathite ofthe Farahites: peerhorteth Salomon e the people to perfarme it.
ene eee che. xrviij. Chapter.

'onethe⸗ Pharathonite of z
Hhecbpbet or cba i hisholke it. PONG ND Dauid geathered to geather
thoulande. Che tweluech Capprayne in the
twlueth monethe / was ithe Hetopha⸗


Dara. xbij.e


che lonne of a diel. and ouer the trealure or him lelfe to do my cõmaund
che keldes in the cpties vrllages ecattelles/ lawes /as it goety sae ae
was Jehonathan the tonne ok Oziah. And Andnow J fave onto pou before all qtrael
ouer the woꝛckmen inthe keldes p tylled the the cOgregacion okß 1 o; / a inthe audien⸗
ounde / was Ez ri p tonne ot Chelub. and ce of cure S od: Repe q lee fo2 all d cõmaũ⸗
ouerlight of the vine vardes had Demetah dementes of the Lond poure God / p pe maye
Aromen won ae e e trea⸗ eniope a good lande ¢ enheret youre chyldzẽ
‘Of wyne was Sabot the Saphonite. after you fos euer. And thou Salomon my


Andouer 5 olpuetrees à mulberptrees that lone: knome Goo thy tacher and Cerue him w dal vile


were in the balepes was Baal Hanan $ Ga with a pure herte and iuſt or toule Foz the C
ae ouer p treacure of ople was Foas V. oꝛde fercheth all hertes a *
indouertheoren g fedin Daron was De⸗ the Jmagynacpons of tzoughtes. It chou Tn
tarithe Saronite. And ouer the oren in the thaltfekebim he wylbe founde of che: But
balexes was Saphath tonne ok Adland f pkthou fotaßehim he wyll caſt the of foz
duer p camelles cabil pg naelite. And ouer euer.Cake hede now / koꝛ the Loꝛdhath cho⸗
che Ades was Johadtal the Merothite. And ten p ſto buplde anhoule ot thyfanctuarye.


duerß chepe was Jazis ß Hagarite. Illthele Be ſironge and do it.


were § rulers of g fubſlãce or krng Daind. And Bauidgaue Salomo his ti
Snbyeyonathszaulssbrochersiomme/amd paceme abe gs
v. ij. erto /


Uri


Dauid.


thertd / and ofthe ſtoze houles / vpper cham⸗
bꝛes / vnner parloures and of the houle ol the
mercieleate:and che example of all that was
in his mynde / bothe of the courtes or ßhoule


ofthe Loꝛde g of the trealure houles rounde the


aboute / koꝛ the treatures of § houle of Gop
and for the trealure of the dedycate gyttes /
and ok the companxes of the pꝛeaſtes a Le⸗
uites that wayted by courle / ¢ ok all wozke⸗
manſhype / that chiilde lerue Foz the houle of
the Loꝛde ¢ ko; all velelles that thule ferue
in the boule of the Loꝛd. And appoynted him
what wayghte of goulde chulde ferue for
thynges of gould thozou out all beficlies Foz
whatloeuer ble it lerued: and what rc dt
ok lpluer ſhulde Cuffpce koꝛ all maner of vel⸗
flee ok leluer / ko: whatloeuer purpoſe they
ſerued.

And the wayghte of the goulden candel⸗
ſtyckes and of their lampes ol goulde / the
wayghte koꝛ euerp candelſticke and koꝛ their
lampes. And foz the candelſtyckes of lyluer
by wayght / bothe koꝛ the candelſtycke ¢ allo
koꝛ her lampes accoꝛdynge to the offpce ol
euerp candeiſtycke. and p wayaht ot gould
koꝛ the tables of ſhew bꝛeede / table bytable:
and lykewyle lyluer Foz the tables of fyluer,
And Foz flechehokes / balens and dꝛynckyng
pottes ok pure gouide. Ind koz cuppes of
gould by wayghte / cuppe by cuppe. And foe
cuppes oklpluer bp wapght / cupß bycuppe.
And toꝛ the aulter of incente oF tryed goulde
by wayght. And the lymplptude ofthe feate
ok the Cherubes that tretched oute their
wynges and couered the Arche ol the coue⸗
naunt of the Loꝛde. An was geuen me by
wꝛrtynge ok the bande ol the Loꝛde / whych
made me vnderſtade all the woꝛckmãſhippe
ol the paterne. é

And Dauid lade to S atoms his tonne:
hardẽ thy felfe and be ſtrong anddo it / feare
not noꝛ lett thyne herte dylcourage the. Foꝛ
the Loꝛde God my God is wyth the / and
hall not leaue the noz kozlake the / vntyll
thou bat tynyũhed all the woꝛke that muſt
ſerue foz the boute of the Loꝛde. Beholde
the pꝛealtes and Leutes deupded in compas
nyes / koꝛ to do all maner ol lerutce that per⸗
fapneth to p houle of God / and belyde that /
thou halt wych the fo2 all maner of woꝛck⸗


manthippe / all that are wyllynge and wyſe


foz any maner ot cerupce. And che Loꝛdes a
all the people are at thy commaundemente
in all thynges.


Che offerynges of Dauid and of the pꝛyntes for p
by ‘of the temple. Dauid dpeth and Salomõ his
der pong me ale. e


¶ Che. xxir. Chapter.


i. Chꝛonycles.


rd Dauld the Brnge fayde vnto z
alllche cögregacid: Sodhath tpe-
cpalipe choten Salem my ſonne
which is vet pcunge and tender / s

oꝛcke is greate / koꝛ the houle is not foz

man / but fo2 che Loꝛde God. Moꝛeouer
haue prepared wyth all my myghte koꝛthe

houle of God: golde foꝛ thynges of goulde / a

kyluer ko: thyngd of tyluer / bꝛalte toꝛ thyngd

ol bꝛalle / pꝛon fo2 thynges of pon and woõd


koꝛ thynges of wood::¢ onpkes ones ett Zoom e
ſtones / and of other gave ſtones / and all ma⸗ anothery.eccs
ner of pꝛecioule ſtones / and of marble great ie Gone cairn
aboundance And pet becauce A haue llt to Butan.


the houle of my God: z haue ſeuerall goulde
and kyluer whych geue tothe houle of my
Godäboue all z halle pꝛepared fo2 the holy
houle:euẽ thre thoufand talentes of gouldẽ
ok Ophir / and ſeuen thoulande talentes of
Cpluet tryed: to fle the walles of the houle
with goulde where it becomethe / and wyth
fyluer where fplueris mete / and koꝛ all ma⸗
ner ot woꝛcke by the handes of Artykycers.
And let me le whois wyllyng allo / to yllhis
bande fo2 the Loꝛde this dave.

And the auncient loꝛves and the loꝛdes ok
the tipbes of Ilrael / and che Capitarnes ol
thoufandes and hundzedes g the loꝛdes ouer
the ſubſtance of the kynge / were wyllyng a
gaue oz the ſerupce ot ð houle of God / yue
thoufanve talentes of goulde and ten thou⸗
lande peces of goulde coynes / and ten thous
lande talentes offpluer, and. xviij.thouland
talentes ot bꝛaſſe/and an hundꝛed thoulande
talentes of yꝛon. And they that had pꝛecioule
ſtones gauc them for the trealure of houle
of the Loꝛde / vnto the hande ok Fehiel the
Gerlonite.

And the people reioyted that they were lo C
wyllynge: ko: wyth a pure herte they were
wolipnge vnto the Lozde. Andtherto Dauid
the Kyng retopled with great gladnelle. And
Dau bletlen the Lozn befoze allß congre⸗
gacpon andfapde: Bleſled art thou Lode

GodofFrael dure father / krũ euer and foz
euer. Chyne( D Lorde) is greatnete/ power
gloꝛpe / victoꝛpe and pꝛaple: fo2 all that is
in heauen and in erthe is thyne / and chyne
is the hyngnom(D Loꝛde and thou art lite
vp anheedaboue all.

„ Andrycheſte andhondure come of the /
thou rapgnett ouet all / and in thyne bande
is power and ſtrenghte / and in thyne bande
bie fa make greate and to geue ſtrenghte

all. 5
Andnow oure God / we hanke che / and
pꝛayle thygloꝛioute name Foꝛ what am:


anbtohat isin people that ine thuine db. e,
all


tapne ſtrenghte to be fo wyllynge? But
ig of the / and ofthat we receaued ot —


pauid,


hãde we haue geuẽ the. Foz we be but trad:
gers beloꝛe p ctenauntes / as were all oure
fathers. Dave daes on p erche is but a tha-
dowe / and there is none abpdynge. O Lozde
dure God all this hepe that we haue pꝛepa⸗
redto buylde the an houle koꝛ thy holy name /
cometh of thyne hande / and is an thrne.
J wote my Gor, that thou pꝛoueſt the herte
andhaſt pieature in plapnetie . Ind in play:
neſſe of myne herte J haue wylyngipe geuẽ
all this. And now Ile thy people wh ch are
here in glabneſde / to offer wyllyngly to p. O
Loꝛde Gon of A bꝛaham/ laat and of Acrael
uve fathers kepe this £02 euer in the yma⸗
ginac pom of the thoughtes of the herte ot thy
people /a prepare thetthertes vntothe. And
Egeue onto Salomon my lonne / a pure herte
to kepe thy cõmaundementes / chyteſtymo⸗
nyes and thyne oꝛdynaunces / and to do alle
to buylde the goule which J entended,
And Waid lapdeto ali the cogregacion:
Diede the Londe poure God. Andallthe con⸗


gregacpon bieticd the Loꝛde God of their ka⸗


chers / ¢ ſtowped a bowed the lelltes vnto d
Loꝛde ¢to the Runge. And then öfteren pke⸗
then Lord. And on d mözomäkter
the lapde dayẽ / they offered in burnt!
ges vnto the Loꝛde a thouland oxen / a thous
land rammes s a thoulande lambes Wihelr
dꝛrncheolkerynges. Ind ther Cue plentedul⸗
Fibethorouout all krael /a did cate g dꝛyncke
befoze the Loꝛde the lame dave with greate
gladneſſe. And ey made Salomon tonne
ol Dawid kyng p leconde tyme / a annopnted
bim onto tlie Loꝛde / to be ruler / and Jadock
to be $ pꝛeaſte. And lo Salomon tate on $
feate of the Loꝛde / and was kyng koꝛ Ballid
his father / a pꝛolpered / and all#trael obeped
him. And all the Loꝛdes and men ot power /
@ therto ali the tonnes of yng Dauid lub⸗
mitten chem felues onder Keng Salomon,
And the Loꝛd magnitred Salomon on hre /
in the ſyght of all Jlrael / and gaue hym lo
glonoules Byngdome as none of all p were
ſtynges belo re in Ilrael had.
G, Mow Mawiv che tonne of Fiat was h
duer all Icrael. And ð (pace
Irrael was kotirei.
A. xrxiij. pere


raigned ouer
tie pere:ſeuẽ pere inebꝛon
Jerulalem. Ind he dyed in a
good age: ode / rpche a glozioute: And Sa⸗
lomon his lonne raigned inhys ſteade Che
actes ol Dania the kyng bothe fpꝛſt a laſte /
are wiittẽ in the bokes ot Samuel 8 cear €
in the bole or Nathan the pꝛophete / z inche
boke of Gad che lear ot vilpons wyth allbis
kyngdom ¢ power z tymes 5 wẽt ouer hym
auer all Firacl/ a ouer all the zyngdomes

okthe erthe. 0
che ende of the yt boke of the Chꝛo⸗

nycles of the Kynges ol Juda.


The Chꝛonytles of


the Kynges ol Juda. The leconde
-bobe. Che txꝛſt Chaptre.

C Che offer png of Salomon in the pplaulter at Bae

baon- where be receaueth an ankwer of God what

wyldome hulde be geucu him / with the numbze or his
chavettes and hoꝛlleinen.

Che Evatt Chapter. 2

d Salomon thefonne

ol Dauid waxed ttioge in his A


ij. Chꝛonycles. Clxiij.


uyngdome / and the Loꝛde his ß. neg. ian


ms comuned with all Ftracl/
the capitapnes auer thourandꝰ a hundꝛedes /
the tudges and all other Loꝛdes d auncient
heedes thozowout all Ilrael. Andlo Salo⸗
mon g all the cögregacion Whim / wet to the
hilaulter ok @abaon:£o7 there was 5 taber⸗


nacle or the wytnelle ocdod / which Moles ecorirrrdi,
the ferusunte of the Loꝛde made in the wyl⸗ aud. rrrvß and
derneſſe. But the Arche of God had Wain ers


bzought krõ Bariath Jarim / in to p place he
badpzeparen therkoze. Foz he had pptched a
tente Foz it at Jerufalẽ. Moꝛeouer > beaten
aulter h Bezeleel ꝭ lonne oF ui /p tonne ol
Oꝛhad made / was at Gabaõ alio /betoꝛe p ta
bernacle of § Lord. Ind Salomö aß cögre⸗
Gacion wet to bylet it. And Salomon otkered
chere befoze the Loꝛde vpon the bꝛalen aul⸗
ter that was bp the tabernacle of wytneſle / a
thoufande burntkacrekrces. And the fame

ht Godappered onto Salomon e lapde
tohim al ke what 3 Wall geue the. And Sa
lomõ layne vnto ch odthou batt chewedgreat
mercye onto Dauid my father / a hak made


me kong in his ſteade. Indnow L 070 God / ih. neg ih. a.


lett thy pꝛomple vnto Dauid my father be
true. Foz thou halt made me Aynge duer a
people lyke the butt ot d erth in mültytude.
wherkoꝛe geue me wyldome andknowledge
how to bebaue my elke vnto this people: Foz
whois able to tungethis people ß islo great? C
Chen God ſapde to Salomon /becaule


ng chou haddeſt this in thyne herte / adpdeſt not


athe treature i rychelle / honoureathe lyues
of thpne enempes nether vet lange lyte: But
haſt acked wyldeme a knowledge / to iudge
my pepole /ouer which L haue made ß kyng:
wpldome e knowledge ſhalbe geuẽ the / 2
wyll geue p trealure / rychelle / a gloꝛzie allo /
b among the kynges bekoꝛe the 02 afterthe/
none was 02 fhalbelphe ö. Andlo Salomo
cam £5 p hilaulter 6 was at Gabad togge⸗
rutalẽ fro p tabemacle of witnette a raigned
at Jerulalem and Salons geathered chaz yz
rette a hoꝛlemẽ:? hehada theuland a koure
hůdꝛed charettes / a. rij. thouland hoꝛlemen /
W *
x. ij.


a Some rende.
opalt or Wra⸗


olde out thee toe and ten thou⸗

lande men to beare burdens and koure lkoꝛe
thoulande to hewe in the mountayne / a thꝛe
Choufande and tyre hundꝛed to ouer le them.
*And Salomö tent to Bird kyng of Tire
ſapĩig:As thou dydeſt dealẽ W Dauid my fa-
ther a dydeſt tendhim Cedar wodde / to bylde
him an houle to dwelle in / euen lo deale wich
me now: that may bylde an boule foz the
name off L oꝛd mycdod / to céfecrat it to him
to burne twete odoures & to lett Wewbꝛeed
bekoze him perpetuallpe /a fo2 burntlacrett⸗
ce moznpnge a euenynge / a onthe Saboth
dapes / a the kirſt daxe of euery new mone / a
ind lolempne felt of $ Loꝛd dure God / lo to
rõtynew euer in Ilrael. And p houle which J,
buylde is great:toꝛ great is dure Godaboue
all Gods: Do that who can be able to builde


him an honle: wü that heuẽ / netherheauen


aboue all heauẽs is able to receaue hi / what
am Athen thatZ chulde buyld him anboute?
nay / but to burne facrefice betoze him: lende
menow therfore a connpng mato worche in
goulde / liluer / bꝛaſſe / yꝛon / tcarlet / cremolyn
@ Zacincte coloure / & can ckylle to graue /
tobe tthe connyng men bare wie mn Juda
and Jerulalem / which Dauid my kathẽt dyd
prepare. And lend me allo Cedar trees / kirte
trees ¢* Ligue trees out of N ibanon. Foz
I wote well thy teruaũtes can kkille tohewe
tymbꝛe in Libanon. Andle / mymen chalbe
with thyne / p theymape prepare me tymbꝛe
vnough. Foꝛ ß houle which J bupive is great
Cawäderkul Andbeholde (J Cent koꝛ thpter-
nauntes the cutters ¢ hewers ol tymbꝛe. rx
thouland quarters ok beatẽ whete / x xx thou
tand quarters ol barlepe / c. xx. thouland ba⸗
thes of wyne a. xx. tgouicand bathes ot ole.
And hiram kyng of Cire ancwered in wꝛy⸗
tynge z kent to Salomon: becauſe § Loꝛde
loueth his people / cherkoze he hath niade the
Ryng ouer thé. And Hrram layde mozeorer:
Bietien be the Iod God ol Frael which hach
made bothebeang ¢ erthe / B bebath geuen


Pauid ß kyng a wple forme 5 hath dilcrectd
A vnderſtandynge / to buplde an houle fo2 the
Loꝛde /c another for his kyngdom. Andnow
Fhauekenta wyle ma ¢a ma of vnderkan⸗ D
dong called ira Abt/¢ ts the lonne of a woe
man of the daughters of Dan( how be it his
father was a Citic) g be can ckpile to woke
ingouldſlxluer / bꝛalle / pꝛon / ſtone / tymbꝛe /
Carlet / Jacinct / byte ¢ cremolin:agraue all
maner ot grauingẽ / a to kynde out all maner
fotle wozke p walbe let betoze hym Wehe
connyng men / a wrth the connyng mẽ ok me
Lord Bauidthy father. And now the whete /
barleye / ople¢ wyne which my Lozde hath
ſapde / let him lende his feruauntes. And we
wl cut wood oute of Libane / as moche as
thou chalt nede / a wyll bꝛynge it toß in hips
pes by ſee to porte apo: q thẽce thou mapſt
carye thé toqeruſaſẽ and Salomd numbꝛed
all the ſtraungerg that were in the lande ol
Itrael jafter the tyme his father Dauidhad
numbzedthẽ. And ther were kounde anhun⸗
deed d. lin. thoulande and fyre hundꝛed. Ind
he let. lx. thouland of the to beare burthẽs /
and. xxx. toufand to hew in p mountapne /
andthꝛe thoulande and tyre hundꝛedto cou⸗
rage and to let the people a woꝛcke.
The temple of the Loꝛde and the poꝛche are byldrt /
with other thynges ther to belongpug.
Ahe. in. Chapter.
ad Salomon begãne to buylde 6 J


houle of the Loꝛde at Jerulalẽ inn Bebe.


moũt Poztab/which was ſhewed

Dauid his father whe he pꝛepared

place in the thzettpng floure ol Oꝛnan the
Jebulite. And he began to butive the leconde
daye of the leconde monethe 5 Fourth vere ol
his rapgne. And this is d foundacton of Sa⸗
lomõ in buyldyng yᷣhoule ol od Che length
was the ckoꝛe cubptes.atter olde cubyt / ã
Ibzedeth. xx And p poꝛche at d ende was as
large as the houle bꝛedethe. xx. cubpteg:a the
height was an hundꝛed a. xx. cubyteg. And he


duerlaped it on p vnner irde W pure goulde.


Andthe great houle he lyled w yrtetree /
E ouerlapde it w goodgoudd / a grauedtherto
paulmetrees and cheynes. Andhe pauedthe
houle Wpꝛeciouſe ſtone goodlye. And it was
goulde of Pharuaim. And he ouerlarde the
houle:bothe beames, poltes wales a dozeg
‘ gould / graued Cherubes vpoß wales.

And he made ß houfe moot botpe/ whole
length was rr.cubitt lpke top bꝛeadech org
houle / a ß bꝛeadeth therol was allo. xx. cubitꝭ
And he ouerlayde it w ð beſt goudd / p dꝛue to
Slumme ok. bt hüdzed talentz. Andg waight
of ß naples of gould was therto fiktie lyclez.


Andhe duerlapde 5 opper chabzes wgould.
Andhe Hany in the boufe moott helps —


*Cherub( ok Image woꝛke /a ouerlaydethẽ
o


omon.


€


rr.cubptes longe. The one wynge was kyue
cubptes ¢ touched the walle or the houle / a
the other wynge was line wyle kyue cubptes
e touched p wynge of the other cherub. and
the one wynge of p other Cherub was kyue
cubptes/¢ touched the walle of the houle / ¢
$ ether wynge was kyue cubytes allo / and
raught to > wynge ofthe other Cherub. o
Sche wynges of che karde Cherubes raught
rr. cubitꝭ And they ſtode on their Fete a loßed


Dinwardr. And he made a toꝛe hangyng ol Ja⸗


cincte coloure / occarlet / cremolpne a bpde:
g cauſed Cherubes tobe bourdered theron.
Andhe made betoꝛe the houle two pyllers ol
xxxb. cubytꝭ longe. And 5 heed y was aboue
onthe toppe of one or thé was kpue cubytes.
And he made loche chapnes as was in che
quere /a put thé on § heedes ok 6 pyllers / a
made an hüdꝛed pomegranates z put thé on
; chepnes. And herered op p ppllers before
tẽple: one on the ryght hand a another on
lelte / a called ryght Jachin ¢ $ lette Boas
Che aulter of bale the tee / the vellelles to wallhe
with 'the candelctpcleg. 8c.
Che. iiij. Chapter.
dhe made an aulter ok bꝛalke. rr.
cubptes longe d. xx. cubptꝭ bꝛoade
and ken cubpte hre.“ Andhe cata
Abꝛalen ter often cubpto fro bꝛym
to bꝛm / ¢ rounde in cõpale a txue cubptes
bye:and a ipne ol xxx. cubptes myght haue
cõpaled it rounde aboute. And the facpon ol
oxen dyd compate it rounde aboute vnder it:
chat is to wete two rowes of oven calt when
it was caſte dyd cõpale that lee whych was
ten cubptt wyde / rounde aboute. Andit ſtode
allo vpon twelue oxen: ot whych the token
Hoꝛth / chꝛe Welt / the Southe a thze Eeſt /
and the ſee vpon them aboue an hye / and the


B binder partes or the inwarde. Andß chyckeſt


ot it was an handbzeede / a the bꝛyme iyne §
bꝛym ot a cuppe / W floures of iplpes . And
it receaued a helde the thoulande bathes.
Andhe mabe ten lauert: put fpue on the
ryght hand ¢ kyue on the lekte / to wach wich
all. Andin themthey Gault che Hehe ol the
burntofferpnges . But the lee was koz the
pꝛeaſtes to wahe in. And he made ten can⸗
delctyckes of goulde in their facyons / a put


chem Inthe teimple : tue on the right hande e the


krue on p lekte. Andhe made allo ten tables
and put them in the tem ple: kyue on p ryght
kde and kyue on the lelte. Ind he made an
hundꝛed balens of goulde. And he made the
courte of the yeeattes /andthe great courte
and dozes to it: and ouerlayde $ doꝛes ol the
W bzafe And he tet the fect e Ain
ofthe Celt ende / to warde the Southe. and
tram made poties chouelles and balens.

and Hiram kyneühedthe woꝛke he made


ij. Chꝛonytles.


lx


kor kynge Salomon vnto the tͤpie of Gon:
Che two pyliers with their fcalpes of two
heedes that were on the toppes of d prllers:
and the two wꝛethes to couer ö two kcalpes
ob the heedes that were on the toppes or the
ppllerg: and foure hũdzed pomegranates £02
che two wꝛethes / tio rowes or pomegrana⸗
tes £02 euerp wꝛethe / to couer 5 two lcalpes
ok the heedes that were on the pyllers. And
he made bottomeg / and lauers vpon the bot⸗
komes: and 6 lee with twelue open vnderit.
Andtherto pottes cchouelles fem) holes / 4 5
alltheir veltelles dyd Pyꝛam Abi make foz
kynge Salomon oz the houle of the L oꝛd /
of bepght bratie. In the plarne of Fora drd
£8 yng catt he / n the thiche erthe / betwene
SDococh a Jaredatha. And made ok all thele
bedelles fo myghtye greate aboundaunce /e
the weight ot bzatte coulde not be rekenede.

And Salomon made ali the veſlelles that
pertayned to the houle of God: the goulden
aulter and the tables wyth the thew bzeede
vpon the / the cadelſtickes with their lampes
to bure after the maner before the quere / c
that of pure goulde /andthe floures and the
lampes / and the tnofiers were goulde / athat
perlecte goulde: and the dꝛelynge kn pues /
balens / ipones and centers of pure goulde.
And che vnner does ol p place mooſt holpe /
and the doꝛes ofthe temple to / were goulde.
And lo was all the woꝛcke that Salomon
made koꝛ the houle of the Loꝛde knellhed.

And when the woꝛcke ? Salomon made
inthe houle of the K ode was kynelchedethen
Salomon bꝛought in the gyttes dedycat by
Dauid his fatyer, the lyluer and the goulde
andallthe Jewelles / and putthem amonge
cht trealure of the houle of God.
After the Hore houtes and the Arche were put in
temple / the Gloꝛye of theLozbe Fplled the temple.

¶ Che. v. Chapter.


rael / vnto Jerulalem: to bzrngethe Arche ot
the couenaunt of the Lorde oute of the cytie
or Darwid which is Zion. And ail the men ol
Ilrael related vnto the kyng in the keacte ol


Ceuentye monethe. And whe allthe elders z
oF Flrael were come / the Leuites tone bp ß
Arche. and ß pꝛeaſtes a the Lense bꝛought
awape the Arche a p tabernacle of witnelle /
and all the holy vellelles that were in the ta⸗
bernacle. And Enge Salomon and allthe
cũõgregacion of Ftrael that were allembled
bite him betoze che Arcke offered Hepe and
oxen / ſo manxe that they coulde not be tolde
oꝛ numbꝛed to multitude.
And the pꝛealtes bꝛoughe z Arche ofthe
F. il. appopnt⸗


Salomon, ij. Chꝛonytles.


appopnemét of the A onde vntd his place iu ot chr lornes be hall binde an houlekoz me
quert ofthe tẽple à place moſt holpe:enẽ vn⸗ name. And the Loꝛde hath made good bps
der the weng ok the Cherubes / d the . fayinge 5 he bath tpoken. Foꝛ J ardleinthe
bes ſtretched out cheir wynges ouer d place rowme of Dauid mp kather / z fate onßleate
of che Arche g couered p Arche a her daues of Alrael/as f Lozd pꝛomrled /a haue burt
Caboue onhye. Ind the dtaues ol che Arcke / an houte foz the name okthe Lon Sod ok A
were lo longe / pcher were lene alptie betoze rael. And therin J haue put § Arche wherin
che quere / but nor karre wrtheut. Andtzere the couenaüt of che L odmabe % the chploze
itvemaineth vntothis dare. Wazcguerthere ok Arrael/ s. And he ſtepte koꝛthe bekoꝛe the
was nochrng in the Arche laue d two tables auiter of the Loꝛd in the pretence ok all pc⸗
which Moles put therin at d oꝛe / when the gregaciã ofFfrael/¢ ftretchea out his hades /
„Loꝛdmade a ccuenaüũt wü childs ol Acrael/ now Salomon had made a Balen pulppt
alter they were come out ot Egypt. Ind whe ol kruecubrtes lunge a fpue cul bod /
the preattes were come out ok theboly place andthꝛe okheight / and had let it in 6 middes
(ko all $ pꝛeaſtes 5 were founde kanctptied ot che great courte / vpõ p he dtepte a üneled
the telues g drd not wapte by courte) But 5 downe ppö bis knees betozeall g cögregacid th
Leuites euerx one ot the that were vnder A= ok Flracl ¢ Hretchedoutbishadestobeauen i en od
faph/Heman and Iduthun / g amonge their Klarde: Lorde God of Alrael there is noch od c Akt 5
chplozen a bzethze were arapeb in bydde and Ipke the ether mheaut oz inerthe / which he:
Tange with Simbales/Plalteries 2 harpes pelt couenadt and Hewett mercye untothr
ſtandyng Cet krom the aufter / a with the an feruatites that walke bekoze the Wall their
hundzed and. xx. pꝛeaſtes blowyng tröpettes hertz. Which halt kepte with Dauidmp ka⸗
D And che trompette blowers a the lyngers lo ther chat thou premrledeſt him thou lardeſt
kame nehmung but one vopce in pzar⸗ it with thymouthe and han fullfilled it with a 1
Penge a thankyng che Loꝛd. And as the voice thyne hande / as it is to le this bape, people Fh e
ofthe trompettes Cymbals a indtrumentes Pow Lozde God ok Jlracl kepe wehy fers i Che. biſ chapter. a
Plam.ch.a ofmelodpearofe/*t as they wartend Lon, uate Baume father, b thou peomptenedt 5 b when dalanon had made an
ot Phe was good gh hes mercre lalteth him fapig:*thou walt not be without one cn f ende LEpravege) there came dows
euer / che houle ofthe Kozde was kelled wa ether in mplpaht 2 Mall kptte bpo the keate OH* ie kee fromheauen andcotumen
cloude: lo that the peeattes coulde notendure ol Iltael. Ot this cödicion vet / ethx chridzẽ g. PTA
tompnttter by the reaton ol the cloude. Foz wpn take heade to their wapes to walcke in che glozpe oF tye Londe kylled che
loape of f Londe had kplled p houle ol Pod. mpflawe / as thou halt walcked befoze me. e pet dcoulde not go in to phoule a he glorpe
Ehe wordes of Salomon do che peoples the prays ao JLozve Godot Ikrael tect thy laring be
demädg to God, he bl. Abapt tue which thou fatdes onto thrteruadt 28
oq l bay et. che londe ug. Bom bettin berpDene/cangon dene
beach post l how he fhe Lene mi on erche⸗Lebowe metherdeaué gene w
ba 5 1. — BY 35 an abaue alijcauesisable tocotapne io 1
landen non and paue buplean weer pee Hane rene


Le habptacyon-foztheanda placeto 01 0
fg do it: But turne to d pꝛaper oł thy Cerna
dwelle in koz euer. Indthe kenge turnedhis Ktohis luppcacioc ch Kon mpGod)cober-


face g bleded the hole coguegacion oe Zſrael n vnto J vopce a pꝛaper which thy ſeruaũt
belegt i eche lane G a8 at maketh befoze the. Chat thyne exes be opens
th bys mouthe to my kather bt / a duer p place


vtles.


captyuyte / and furne and pꝛape bh
ere they be . ape tpg;


Salomon.


cht Fyre conturte ih the vacvyepce, Che Loide
heb alen n anke d. N we


if. neg. vil u.


rumetes ol mul ycke of the Lozoe which


anhoule in / b my nanie m Dauid made to conkeſſe vnto 5 Loꝛde


cherchole J any manto bea ruler ouer my
people Icrael. But now z haue cholen Jer
kalemto haue mynamechere / a haue cholen
* deck aun —— kath
ert ber ö
> Fo , aulter in this houle: then heare thou fd hea⸗
15 , / tat


5 or Ff
thou rewarde d cuell a bephge bis ware ts noman buc that he Mall tynne) ethou be che baten au


the
fferpnges/ becaufe


uidmy kather:koꝛ as moche as it was in thy: his herd / a iuſtekpe che tighteous a geue h


neherte / to buplde an houle fozmp name /
thou dydeſt well that thou haddeſt it inthyne
bert. Hotwithſtãdyng thou walt not bupide
dbouke / but the tonne which wall Iaue dut


acco drnge to his rightwernee.
Lybkewple pf chr people steal be puttoß
wozle beloze their enempes / becaute thee


angrie with them and delyuer them ko ther burntofiryng:
Snempes/ ant they leadethr aburpe rpg — — eid
. ꝛ 1 np Salome ...
come to them agarne in § lande where cher ot leuen daper / andall Alrael wrth hym / an
Ev. kxceadynge


er faving:
2b. pee tbat Cal
5. Pars. vl. e.


koze pou,
bowe pout
chem vp by


t /


to be soe, . ry
ath. vi. c.
Danie. cher kortoke th
which bꝛought
ardcaught holde on otf
tothem a lerued them:euẽ
be onchem al this euell.


tles. 5
d alter. xx pere when Salomon 2
0 — fides of the Losde ¢ kw. ted
bis awneheuke he butte the cities
Achat Hiram gauehrm / put ofthe
ol Alrael in the. And Salomon wee
e to hemath Zobah and ſtrengthedit. And he
e butit Chadmoꝛ in the wildernelle and allche
id / tore cities which he burltin Hemath. And
Andlo he buplt Bethhozon the vpper 2 Bethhoran
oꝛde the nether / and made them troge cities with


es of Ho
to bun


te of pꝛeſtes
And Salomon putthe 1 va — 85


gl
erh rf. p:
Helbr. 5. Ph


z douerlarde it with pure goulde. And ther a
hort. and


ere lixe ſteppes tothe Ceate wa koteſtole of
goutbe kaſtened to ß leate:apomelles on eche
rde of ö lpttinge piace / a two pos ſtädinge
bythe pomelles. And rij. vons ove onß one
Cydee on the other vpon fire ſteppes / there


buttelars with ther apparel / a his parloure
out ot which he wẽt into the houte of 6 L070/
there was nomgare herte inher.


chette and wicdome. And all
e erthe fought & pꝛelence ol
eate the wyldome that God


owe ind valeres. And Salomöhadhozles
zought him out of Egipte a out ot all lad. 8
„Ard the rect of Packes of kyngeSpalomd ig Beg xl g.
rune an erste came
athan the e in the pꝛophelpe
ie ol Abiah the Silonte and in the Wide


Da. And kynge Balomongaue tos quene 6 Rehoboahis fonne rapgned in his ſteade.


Of Haba alſher delpze p tre alked abaue ? & ce foil boain and
the brought ontop hinge. And lo che tumedz des am. sprigs 353
wẽtawape to her atone lande w ber ſeruait ¶ Che x. Chapter.


And


tj. Meg. xi. a.


cel geue.


thys people ed wyth me
fepingesdiba oucke which
thy father dyd put von vs.


7


And the vounge men that were nurcedop.
Cwitchhymtalked with hym lapinge:tyus an⸗


twere the people that lpake to the fapinge, -
Chy father made oure poucke eupe: But
alae thou oure voucke lomewhat Ipabtcr.
Thus wple antwere them: mpirtle tynger


Reyobsant, onytles.


now Dautd fe to cine atone Houle. And
cherupon all Acrael get them to their tentes /
fo 5 Aehehoam rargned duerng moo ok the
chuͤdꝛen of Ilrael then dwelt in the cytxes of
Juda. Chen Benge Rehoboã lent to the Ha:
duram that was duerz tribute / a the chide
ol rael ſtoned him with ſtones that he died
But hynge Mehoboaw made {pene and gat
bpm op cobs cheret to fipeto gerulalem.
And Co Flracl departrd from the boule of
Dauid onto thes dave. a 8
CRebhotoam is forbidden to t agar jeroboa.
de 1 and oh a a prt at bp
them xrvith. lone and. ih Chore Daughters.
¶ Che. ri. Chapter.
Kehoboam was come to


chalbe heuper then mr fathers iopnes, ot mh


0. neg. he, where mpfather put a heule youre bpd pou


Twill pntimoare therto/ ¢ where mp father
Chattifen pou with whippes / A will cyattyce
vou with fcozpiong. 55

75 Jerobgamand all Irrael were
come 8 thůide da ye / as p kynge bade laxingr:
come agapne to me p thꝛide dare Che krnge
antwered thé cruelly / ko: kynge Kehoboam
lete the councel or the aged. mẽ / e antwered
che alter d aduile or the younge men laxing.
Imp kather made poure pouckegreuoule/


wiftaddetherto / à where my father chaltt⸗ eo
i ee pao need nbbe ombeynen bim pzeceso€ hr at


ed pou wpth whyppes J wyll chattyce vou
wich kcowions. And lo the kyngeherkened
not vnto the people /£o2 the turnrnge aware
was of God / chacß Loꝛde myaht make good

vs tapinge whrch he fpake bythe hand ol

pa 1 Dllonite to Jeroboam the lonne
of Habt.

D And when all Itrael Catv that the E ynge
wodde not heare them / che people anlwered
$ kynge / laringe: what parte haue we with
Dau oz enheritaunce w the tonne ol Wat?


iz det · x d. let euerx man or Jacl go to his tent. And


Beniamin were vnder hem. 4

And the pꝛeſtes a the Leuites that were
in all Foraet retozted tohym / out ok alltheir
coſtes. In to moche p the Leuites lelte their
Suburbes ¢ poſleipons and came to Juda
and Jerutalem: £02 Feroboam a bys ſonnes
ad caſt them oute from miniſtrynge vnto


aulters bothe to kelde deuelles and alfoto ß
calues which he had made. and akterthẽ cher
came ofall § trybes of I ſrael coche as cher
hertes moued them to ſekke the Loꝛde God ol
Alrael)to Jerulalem to offer onto the Lore
God of their fathers. And to they ſtrengthed
the kyngedome of Juda a made Rchoboant
the tome of Salomon mpahtpe chꝛe vere s
Tonge foz thze very ther walked in che wave
ol Pauid and Salomon.
And Rehobdemtoke hrm Apabatath che
8 daughter


lx vij.


ih. Beg. xith. k.


as his gen
B was


Oe.rottj. pere ol kynge Zeroboam


begand bia to rapgne duerguda / ij. neg. cv. a


che rargnedthze pere in Jerula
4 — — 2


fan


Ephꝛaim a lapde:hẽare me thot
bann ¢ all Israel. Becometh it nee


aunt, But Jeroboam the tonne of Hal
the leruaunt of Salomon the . Da
elicdagapntt the Loe. And there B
to hin letwde men and vnchwttes /
uapledagaynſt Rehoboam $ konne
loman: to? Rehobod was pounge and
tender hearted a not ftronge pnough koꝛ the.
And now pe chinke to pꝛeuaple agapnſt
kyngedome of p Loꝛde in yhande or pronnes
Of Baud / becaule pe be a great multitude ¢
haue with vou the goldẽ calues whych Jero⸗
boam made vou for Gods. Andhaue penot
calt out the prettes of the Loꝛd che lonnes ol
Hard /athe Leuites“g haue made pou pelt
nike che nacrons of other landes: euen who⸗
focuer cometh and filleth bis bande with an
Ore a leuẽ rammes / che lame is made pꝛelte
to them that are no Gods. 5
But


Abiah,


But with vs ish Loge dure God whome

C we haue not koꝛlaken / and the pꝛeſtes ok the
konnes of Aaron mpniſtringe onto $ Wozde/
ab Leuites in office burnpnge vntaß Loꝛde
euerpmoznynge g euery cus burnt offerin:
and kwete cete:¢ the bew bꝛeed put in 07d2€
po a pure table: the cAdlettyche or goulde
with the lampes of d lame / to be lyght euerx
eu. Foꝛ we kepe p watche ofthe Loꝛde oure
God:but ye haue kozlahenhem. Mozebuer
te / God is with vs in the toze warde / and bys
pꝛeſtes / and the roꝛynge trompettes to crye
alarumagapnt pou. Ye cyplozen of Icracl
frat Betas rd e seas fathers:
koꝛ it wyll not pzt .

But fo2 all chat Jerobbam ſent men pꝛx⸗
ueipe aboute to come behinde vpon thé:¢ lo
cher were wecken che lapets in warte
were b. the. And whe Juda turned and
fat the battell beh vnde ¢ befoze/ ther crxed
bonito che L ode / the prettes blew g tr
the age boi g chowte. Andag
men of Juda cbowted / Godlmote Ferobose
all Jcraelbetozea biah Juda. And ö child
ok Alrael led bekoze Juda /a the Loꝛde delp⸗
ueiedthẽ into d bandes of Juda. And Abial
hig people due a great laughter of the co
there were ftrpken Downe deed of Arael kiue
hüdzed thouland cholen me. And fo $ childꝛẽ
ob Ffracl were bꝛought vnder at that tyme /
the chilozen of Juda pꝛeuarled: becaule ther
leaned vnto ß Lod Gd ol their kathers And
Abiah folowed after Ferobod ¢ wanne cer⸗
tapne cities Frombim: Bethel with d towneg
belongynge therto / and Jelanah wyth the
townes that longedtherto / and epbzon with
her townes. And Jeroboam recouered not

Urengch agarne in the dapes of Abiah. And
at che lack the Lode plagedhim 5 he dred.

And Abtah menen a Ot

xiiij. wyues / and begat. rij. connes and. rot.
Daughters, Che reſt of che actes of Abiab a
bis wayes and his es are wzlttẽ in the
ftozpe of che Pꝛophete Ido. And whend blah
was larde tofiepe with bis fathers they bu⸗
ryed hem in the extye ot Bauid / and Ala hig
tonne raygned in his ſteade. In whole dares
Sinh re eet an
biah byctb after
Bi Che. xiti. c


maundement. Andhe put awaxe out of allß
cities of Juda / the hilaulters ¢ the pooles:fo2
the — — en, a


ij. Chꝛonycles.


R chele cytves a compale


Ala.


e built ſtrõge cities in Juda: becauſeß lande
ee ee 6 bees.
eee
aces ren we bane te
towzes / gates g batres / 2
fame 2 ts Foꝛ we haue fought tye Lozde.
ouve Gon: ¢ becauſe we haue lought him / he
bathe geue beret on Aud fyde. And lo ther

lt and pꝛolpered. And Ala hadan Armie
that bare ſpilde and lpeare / out ol Auda thꝛe
bawde thoufande/¢ out of Seniamin that

ave Milnes dꝛue bowes two hundred a. xxx
thoulande / and were all Cronge men,

And there came out agapnſt thé Sarah 5
Moꝛian worth an Hoſt ot ten hundzed thou⸗
lande / a che hundzed charettes and came as
ferve of Marela. And Ala went out to him
¢ they put m araxe to batten in the vale xe ol
Hephatah belpde Marela. And Ala cryed
hnto 8 Lozdehrs God and lapde· Loꝛde it is
all one wych the to helpe them that haue no
power / wyth lew oꝛ wyth manpe: helpe vs
D Loꝛde oure God / foz we truſt to the / e in
chyne name be come agaynſt thys multitude
Chouate the Lorde a dure God / let not man p>

euaple a
1 Aud ebene bnache nen before
Bla and guda / that they fled. Anda la and the
people that was with him / lol owed after the
ag ferve as Gerar. And biacke Moes were
ouerthzowen / that there bove none a Ipue ol
thẽ / but were deftroped ofthe Loꝛde ¢ of bis
Hotte. And thepcarped aware a myghtre
great pꝛare. And thep Cmote all the cptres
rounde aboute Serar.Foꝛß keare of Loꝛde
came vpon thẽ. And they robbed all the cities
koꝛ ther was exceadynge moche to be robbed
in them. Andtherto they tote the tentes ot
catell and carped awa ped plentye of thepe a
camelles / and returned to erutalem.

bp the montcion of thegBzophet Asariny
Fur hi derte the Zee bet tothe
Lorbe.Ge depriueth his mother of der Dompnpon.
on cone of pobcamecn 428,1
ot Go
tab the fonne of Dbed.andhe wet


rut


bi}
the Loꝛde God of Acrael and call ſekehrm
She walbe founbe ofthe ano in thofe daes
chere eee 100
But great vexacion vvon piped


gpholaphat.all landes. For one nacpon chall de


ea
nother / and one cytpe a nother: for God wyll
trowncethẽ with all aduerlpte. But plucke
pou vp poũre hertes ¢ let not youre handes
kante / toꝛ youre wozkes ſhalbe rewarded.
When Acaheardethole woꝛdes a che pꝛo⸗
phel xe of à ʒariah § tonne ot Obed the pꝛo⸗
phete / he tone courage a put awaye 8 abho⸗
minacions out ofall the lande of Juda d Be⸗
niamin / out of the cities whychhe wane in
mount Ephꝛaim / a renued the aulter of the
Loꝛde that was befoze the poꝛche of p Loꝛd.
And he geathered all Juda a Bemamin / and
the ſtraungers wyth them out of Eyhꝛaim /
Manateh and Simeon. Foz there fell maz
hy to hm out of Ftvael/ when theylaw that
CGodwas wyth hem. And ihey allembledat
Jerulalem che thipde monethe of the kyktene
pere ot the raygne of Ala. And they offered
onto the Loꝛde that lame tyme ot the cpople
whych they had bought. vij. hundꝛed oren a
vij tyoulande ſhepe.
And they made a couenaunt to eke the
Loꝛde God of their fathers/ wall their her


Gall their foules : lo that all that fonghe not
BLozde God of Icraci / chuld dpe foꝛ it / whe⸗
erhe were ſmalle oꝛ 1105 Rmũ oꝛ womã.


49 (weave:


hare nig And they * cware vnto


Lorde with a loude


hp beitvopce and chowtynge ¢ wyth trompetes and be


Yullpto sp boznes. And all Juda reiopledtn the othe /
rich“ £02 they had fworne wyth all their hertes /
a n, and lought hym with alltheir luct / a he was
bara, founde of them Andthe Lorde gaue che elt
es Oo as ſrounde aboute.
ger aud And therto kynge Ata put Maacah hys
Heis kernsemother out of auctozpte / pecaule the bad
fit Lade ntade an poole in a groue: a bꝛahe downe her
dall on the Poole g ſtampte it and burnett bp the broke
meal Lord Cedꝛon. But they put not che hylaulters out
amtnnandak Alrael: neuerchelecke che bert of Ala was
esau. Sputeall bis ite Andhe bought intophoute
"or onthe dedpcat gyttes which he hes fas
ther had dedicate / in goulde / lyluer and other
Jewelles. And there was no moare warre
vnto the. xxxv. xere of the rapgne of Ata,
Ala for fear of B aala king ot Ztraelmaketh a to-
denaunt with wenbadad png of 2 iris.
¶ Che rot. Chapter.
the. xxrvt. vere of the raygne of
ca came Baata Enge ot Alrael
e/a agarn Juda ꝶ buplt Ramah / to
Ache entent that he wolde let none ?
pertapned to Afa king ol haue padlage
in and out. nherupon Ala fet out fyluer
and goulde out of the treatures of the boule
ofthe Loꝛde and of the kynges houle / a lent
it to Benhadad kynge of Siria that dwelk
at Damaſco /a fapde Chere is a cõtederaciõ
betwene me andthe / lo was betwene mi
Father a thine / whertoꝛe J haue kent p leluer


Ala. Baala, „ Elnonpcles.


and goulde / that thou go and byeake thyne
apopntment with Baatà kynge ot Fraci/p
he mape departe from me. Aud Benhadad rs,
Graunted onto kenge Ala / a tent b capitayng
OFbis armie agapnſt p cpties OF Flac. And
cher bet Lion / San Abelmaim ¢ all § ſtoꝛe
cities eilt bandengen when acta bearde
chat / he lekt buidynge of Ramah and let his
woꝛcke ceale. And then Ala the kynge tone
all Juda ¢ carpedawaye¢ (tones ¢ tymbze of
Ramah wherwith Baala was a burldinge:
ehebuplecherwith Gabane Wazphah.

He that Came tyme Banani the tear / came
to Ala hing of Juda ¢ fade to him: be caule
thou truſtẽſt in d konge of Sitia / o truſteſt
not in che Lozde thy God / therkoꝛe is § holte
ol the kynge ol Sivia elcaped out ot thyne
hande. nere not § blacke miozes andthey ol
Libia a great hoſte wych exceadynge manx
charettes and bogfemen? And pet becaule
thou truttendelt inthe Loꝛde / he delpuered
thé intothrne handes. Foz p epes ofp Loꝛde
beholde alt the erthe / to ſtrength the hertes ol


K thö that are hoale with him Herein thou halt


done kolpchlp / and therkoꝛe krom hencekoꝛthe
thou chalt haue watre, Wyerupon Ata was zp
wꝛoth with che fear a put him in the conuer⸗
tyng houle / koꝛ he was dylplealed wyth hem

caute of that. Mozeouer Ala oppzeticd cer
tapne of the people the lame ceafon,

Che dedes ok Ala both Fyrtt and latt/ are
witten in the bone ofthe kynges of Juda €
ae che. xxrtx. pere others raygine Ala

ll fycke ok his Fete / and that bys dyleale er⸗
ceadid. And therto in his ſicknelle he ackedno
councell ok the Loꝛde / but of Phylpepons.
And ac the tat Ala fell onclepe wrth bys Fae
. and died when hehadrargned. r pere.

ind ther burped hym in hys awne lepuichze
wyych he had made in the cytye ol Baud /
and laxedh m in the bed whycb he had kplled
wyth lwete odoures of dyuerle kyndd / made
by pcratte of ö potecarpes. And ther byder⸗
ceabynge great coſte aboute buriẽ ge orhim.
0 ſuccradeth after Ala; whych canter!
eber tate tole renn bare bee
Sic So e
d Jeholaphat his tonne rapgned v
n hys ſtede ¢ was myghtyer th


r Ehotatter the dornges of Itrael. Therloꝛeß


Loꝛde ſtablꝑcthed p kyngdome in his hande
and all


Elx vii


andall Tuda bꝛought hym pꝛelentes / chat he
Bbecame e ryche s gloꝛvoule: Ard
hrs bert was coꝛãgedus in the wapes of the
Loꝛde / and he put downe vet moare of the
hilaulters and groues out of Juda.

And the thgide vere ol bys taygne he tent
okhis Lozdes : Benhail / Abdtah / Hachariah /
Nathanacle Michaah to teache inthe cities
of Juda: and wyth them / Demeiah / Hatga⸗
niãh / Habadiah / Alahel / Semiramoth / Je⸗
honathan / Adontah / Thobiah and chobodo⸗
niah Leuttes: a wyth thé Clifama a Jozam
pꝛeaſteg. And they taught inzuda a hadthe
boße old laww thé ¢ wet aboute thoꝛowout
all the cpties of Juda a taught the people.

Andthe feare of the Lorde tellbpon anz
kyngedomes ok the landes that were rounde
aboute Juda that cher burt not warre w

ſeholaphat. Andß Philiſtines bꝛought Je⸗
ofaphat giktes c kributeleluer. And therto
the Arabiens bꝛought hymol chepe / euen
thoulande a leuenhundzed rammes / a ceuen
choulandeg leuen hundꝛed he gottes. And lo
ſeholaphat pꝛolpered a grue bp onhre. And
e built in Juda / caſtels and ſtoze cities. And
behad great lubſtaũce in the cities of Juda /
ee beige naen ge oF ear .
g
kathers / or the capitaynes oue 0
ee eh the capptapne and wyth him


in

ok kpghtyngemen chze hundzed thoulande.
And nerte cobpm Jehohanan a capptavne a
Shhym two hundzen . xx. thoulande. And
byhis iyde Amaziah the tonne of Sechet wil⸗
lynge ontop Loꝛde / a with him two hundꝛed


oufande mightie men. And ok ö childꝛen ol
Denar abs was amã ot myght / and
had with him armed with bowes and ſhildes
twohundꝛed thoulande. And by bys lyde Je⸗
holabad wyth whome were an hũdꝛed a. xxx
choulande trimmed for warre c hele wapted
en Oe che inge
had put in ſrõge cities thoꝛowout all Juda.
afked councell of thefoure hundred
Suben bCpue apices ruyoeton-bedget wit
the chott or an Arrow.
2 reed
del at bes 7
Handgloppoute / æ iopned affiniterd


And Ahab clue Wepe ¢ oven plenteoulipe toꝛ
bm a kor the people that came with bynt/ ¢
entreated him to go bp vnto Namoth in Ga⸗
laad. Ind Ahab kynge of Ilrael fayde to Je⸗


ij Chꝛonycles. Jeholaphat,


track ache I pꝛapeß Abe woꝛdẽ of d Lone.
ano the — ok Ilrael geathered together yz
of thePzophetes foure hundzed men / d layde
F
to ſyght / oꝛ ceale: andt go:
Sascha it into p king hãde. And
ſcholaphat larde / is there vet here neuer a
ophete moze ok § Loꝛdes / that we myght
athe of bym? And the kynge of Itrael fapde
to Jeholaphat / there is yet one / to athe the
Loꝛde byhym: But q hate him / Foz he neuer
pꝛophelpeth me good / hut allwaye euell / one
Micheah the tonne ol Jemla. And Jehola⸗
phat lapde:let not the kynge faye co.

Chen d kynge of g lrael called one of bys
chabzelapnes g tapdẽ: fetche hether quychip
Micheah the tonne of Jemla. And the kinge
ol Flracl and geholaphãt kynge of Zuda fate
ether of thẽ on hys leate in their apparell / in
athzeſſhrnge flowꝛe belpde the gate ok Ha⸗
marta / call theBzophetes pꝛophelpinge be-
koze thẽ. And one Zedekiah the lonne of Cha⸗
nanah made hym hoꝛnes of pron and lapde /
thus lapth the Lose: wyth chele thou chalt
wynowe Diria vntyl thou halt bꝛought thé
to nought. and all the ophetes prophetyen
eu lo faxinge: ovp to Ramoch in Galaad
and pꝛolperẽ / Foz the Loꝛde thall delruerit
into the hande of the kynge.

And the mesenger that went to call Pi⸗
cheah / pate to him laying:beholde / p word,
ol the Pꝛophetes are plealaunt to the kynge
with one allent / let thy woꝛdes J pꝛapthe / be
Iphe one of their / a lpeake 6 which is pleas
faunt. And eue Cayde : as truly as the
Loꝛde lpueth / euẽ what my God layeth / that
will Alpeake. and when he was come to the
Uynge / che kynge larde tohrm: Micheah /
Gall we goto Ramoth in Galaad to kraht
02 thall J be invest? andhe antwered:* go ye”


e korthe l ame thatl beipuer it into wi 5
ies call ablure che g thou faye no⸗ rit


But b E unge fayde to him:how phe
thinge but truthe to me /in p name ol ß 1020.


ofaphat krnge of Jude wrlt thou go wych . $


Miert amots n Saar: Jure annere
him / wylbe as chou / andmy people chalbe


as chrne and we wyll be with che in ö warre. thus


But Jeholaphat larde vntothe kenge ot


qhab. ij. Chꝛonytles.


50


at. decegue him. Andß Loz tapde tobim / how:
Andhe ſapde: I will go out ¢ wylbe alpinge
tpirite in § mouths of all his pꝛophetes. And

Londfapde / chou tale deceaue him ¢ Walt

pꝛeuaple / go outa do euẽ ſo. And now behold
5 Lom hach put a lpinge ſpirite in d mouth
ofalithele thy pꝛophetes, ¢ pet ß L. oꝛde bath
H tpoke euell agapnſt 5. And Hedentah öcönne
of Chananah . wet to a {mote Micheah ops
pcheke / a tapde: by what wape wee p lpirite
of } Lozde fro me / to lpeane inthe: Ind hi⸗
cheab lapde: thou walt le ß pape when thou
ſhalt rüne trõ chãbꝛe to chambꝛe / to to hyde
thy kelle. Chen lapde p kinge of Ilrael / cane
ve Micheahadeuuerhim ko mo b gouerner
OF citie/¢ to Joas p bing’ tonne e caxe/thus
lapch p Epngẽ:put this telow in pꝛeion / and
kede him w bꝛeade a water oktribulacis / vn⸗
tyll J come agarne in peace. And Micheah
ſapd: pt thou come agapne in peace / tyẽ hath
noth Lozde (poke in me. And Hicheah Caive
moꝛeouer / 1 to pe people euerꝑ one of

u. And lop kynge of qirael a geholaphath
Junge ol Juda went bp toWamoth in Ga⸗
laad. Chen lapde p hinge of Ilraei to enen
phat:chaũge d a get p to battell/but lep thou

Gbaue thine awne appareil opö b. Ind ö king
oF Ilrael chaunged bun tec /a ther went to
battell. Butthe kynge ol Siria comaunded
che capptapnes of bps charetes layinge: le
b ve kxgt not agaynſt ſmall of great) laue
agapnt the kynge of Itrael onixe.

And whs the capitapnes oF h charet aw
Jeholaphat they had wẽthe had bene ß king
dez krael / 2 therfoze cõpaled aboute him / to
fighte. But Jeholaphat cryed out / a5 Loge
bolpe him Hod tpledchẽ awaye from him
Foz whe d capitapndot ß charetes perceaued
bit was not the hinge of lrael / they turned
backe agapne fro hem And a certé ma dꝛew
bis bowe iqnozafitlps cmote g hing of Icrael
betweneß Joyntes ok his habergyne. andhe
larde tothe charet mã / turne thine hand and

me out of phoſte / fo Jamhurte. And
che battell arole that dape. Bow beit § king
Of Ilrael contymied ſtandynge in his charet
agapnt the Sirtens vntyll euen. And about
the lonne goinge downe he dyed,
After lehnt nas eebabed bp the prophet Jee

ur he called agapne t le our

. bebe


eee
eo 7
Icurned tohrs houle fate efounde

toz erutalẽ. And Febu the lonne ol

Hanani the fear / wet out agaynſt
him & karde to kunge zcholaphat oughkelt
chou to helpe ß wycked / eto our the} hate ß
Losde.3n this verelpis § wrath of che ode
bpds euerthelater there are good thinges


kounde inß /in p thou halt put awaye
out ol g lande / c haſt pꝛepared thine herte to
fhe God And as genolaphat dwelt Ate vz
lalẽ he wẽt to agapne ¢ wet möge d people
kr Perlabe to monte Ephꝛat /s broughe tye
A hre ontop Lorde God of their fathers.

nd he fet Fudge ins lande thozowout all §
ſtrõge cities of Juda / citie bp citie / z laide to
Judges: take hede what ve do / lo ve be not *
Judges in the law of ma / but of God / whych
Is with pou in the woꝛdes of the law. noher⸗
Foze let che feave of the Loꝛde be with vou / a
tate hede anddo it, Foz there is no vntyaht⸗ C
wilneſſe in§ Loꝛd oure God oz regardinge £9
ol perlones / no takynge of rewardes


OF Acrael / ouier p cuſtomꝭ of p Loꝛda cautes
ol lryte. And then they returned agayne to
Jerulak. Andhe charged thé lapinge do euẽ
doinpfeare off Lord weruthe a puleherte.
And whatfoeuer come to vou ok youre bze⸗
th2t 5 dwell in their cities / betwene bioud a
bloude law / cõmaũdemẽt / oꝛdynaũceg a cu⸗
omes:fe that ve warne thẽ / p thep tre pace
not agate per let wꝛath comeopd pou
Gon poure bꝛeth / Chus doe pe Mali not ok⸗
kende. And le here Amartah Spzette which is
bred ouer pou in all matters of the Lobe /e
Sabadiah the tonne of Flmael a ruler in the
Houle ol Juda he is ouer all caules con cer⸗
hinge the kynge / with offpcers of p Leuiteg
befoze vou. Cake courage to you and go bps
it / andthe Loꝛde Malbe with the good.
CThe mer ueloule victoꝛpe that the Lo gaueZchor
Capbat kyng of Juda a; ge the Woabites / and the
chpldzen of Amm̃on / and them ol Steir.
sec ate deen pee a6
e Hchila2é oF Moab z
bk Airs ash the of p Am. A
monitragaynſt Jeholaphat to bat⸗
tell. And cher came ö tolde Tehola⸗
phat layinge: ther cometh a great multitude
Aga yntt p fro che other lyde p lee out ol Slrta
And be ther be in alalon c hamar whych ig
Engadt. And Jcholaphat fearedę let him leit
tofehe § Lofde /a pꝛotlapmed faſtynge thos
rowoute all Juda. And Fua geatheied them
lelueg to gether foꝛ to athe cottcell of} Loz,
And therto there came oute of all p cpties ot
Juda to ene p Lode. And geholaphat ſtode
inf cögregaciö of JudaaFerufale inphoule
Of Lom befoze bnew courte ¢ fapde:Lozte 5
God of oure fathers / art not thoucdod in bea
ue /g rargneſt not thou on ali Kingedomes
ol the hethen: And in thyne hand is power a
might / ö no mã can ſtande before 5. Art not
chou oure God which dyde tt caſt out § enha⸗
biters or this lande befoze thy peopleFtracl/
€ gaueſt it to the ceedotabꝛahã er 1 18
euer:


Clxix.


Ae. .d.
Moꝛeouer in Jerulalẽ did geholaphat tet are:
of peur Kor Spzettes aof p adctec beens Sent,


Jeholaphat.


theydweit therin and haue bullt ?
atemple therin onto thy name & larde.
euell cometh vpon vs as the twerde of iud⸗
Pestera oꝛhongre:then yt we ſtande
etoꝛe thys boule a before the (fo2 thy name
ts inthrshoule)a hall crye vnto che in oure
trybulacion/ thou chalt heaxe and helpe.

And now beholde / the childzen ot Ammon
Moab a mount Seir / by which thou wol⸗
def not let Alrael go / when they came out ol

te thut they departed kr thE a deſtroyed
che not and le / how they rewarde vs / to come
£02 to cat vs out ofthy pottedion which thou
batt pole dded vs wyth all. O oure God / wylt
thou not iudge them? for we hauenomyght
agapnt thys great companpe that cometh
agapnſt vs. ether wot we what to do: but
oure eves be vnto the.

And ag all Juda ſtode before the Lorde sb
their polige ones their wiues a thetr chilDze:
thelpirite ol che Code came bpd Fabattel
bonne ol Zachariah the tonne ol Banatah
tonne ok Jetel p türe or Mathantah a Leulte
ot p lonnd ol Alaph / euẽ as he was in mid
ok Fecögregactö. And he fayve:berke alkzudd

the enhabiters of gerulalẽ / and allo kynge
ſeholaphat. hut lapth the N oꝛde vnto you
enotaferde o2fapnte hearted by reafon of
Sthys great multitude . S02 the ware is not
A poures / but Gods. And to moꝛow ve Hall go
Downe to thé: le / chex come bp at Stz / and pe
Mall mete thé in p llaggz or p bꝛoße bekoꝛeß
wilderneſſe of Jeruel. Mozeouerit belõgeth
not to pou koꝛ to Fight inthis quarell:but ſte⸗
peforty a ſtande a beholde dhelpe off Loꝛde
which is w you: keare not / noꝛ let youre bert,
kaple you / O ve ol Juda and of Jerulal. Co
mozow go out tothẽ:koꝛ the Loꝛde is w you.
And ſeholaphat bowedhim elke with his
lace to pritie/ all Juda a the enhabiters of
ferulalẽ fell bekoze the Loide / to bowe thé
elt onto p Co:. Andß Leuttt ¢ the chyldꝛẽ

ol ö Cahathites & ok § Coꝛahitẽs ove vp / to
pꝛäple 5 Lozd Bon of Alraelwd a loude voyce
Eonhie Andkother role erlxeindmompnge
Get thE out onto ß wyldernelle of Chekua.
And as they wet out Jeholaphat ſtode a laid
heare me guda e ve enhabiters or Terulalẽ.
A Beleue ind Loꝛd poure cod / a lo Hall xe cõ⸗
tinue: a beleue his pꝛophetd a lo hal ye pꝛol
pere. Andhe gaue ß people coũcell / a let ß lin
gers ot p Kond athẽ ? pꝛapfedinholpappa⸗
Fell / to go out bekoze p armie a tolape:pꝛatte
5 Lond fozhis mercie laſteth euer. And what
tyme they begãne to laude ¢ pꝛapłe / then the
Loꝛde let layers awapte agapntt i childʒẽ ot
Ammon ¢ Goad ¢ moũte Seir / to deſtrope
che btteripe ö to wypethẽ out, And whe ther
had made an ende of the enhabiters ol Derr /
chen ther holpe to delkrore eche other.


ij. Chꝛonycles.


nd when ud tame to gha
wildern


ed. And Teholaphat a


his people wet to robbe awaie p ipople of the
€ kounde amöge thé aboũdaũce of goodes g
raym'te of pleacaüt Jewelles / a caught Fro
them moze then they coulde cary awape:coß
they were thze dapes in geatherynge of the
fpople/it was fo moche. Ind? fourthe dape
the allẽbled in d valepe of bietingefo; there
they blededß Lorde. And therfoze thep called
name ok layne place} valeve of blefipnge.
‘nto his dave. Ind fo all the men ok Juda ¢
Jerulalẽ returned ¢ Jehotaphatamoge the
thychett of thé / koꝛ to go agapne to Ferutale
Wgladneſſe:foꝛ the Lozde hadmade them to
reiopſe of their ennempes. And ther came to
Jerutalẽ w plalterpes a harpes a trõpetes /
euẽ onto che houle or the Loꝛde. And ß keare
ol God fell in the kyngedomes ok all landes /
when theyhadhearde thatthe Lozde fought
agaynſt the enempes ok Flracl. And co the
realme of Icholaphat wãs in träqinlite:foꝛ
his Godhad geuenhym reſt on euer Cyoe.
2 — eholaphat raygned bpd auda / and
a8.
Krapgned. xrb. pere ing erut
thers name was Alubä ß daughter of Stiht,
nd he walked in the wave of Ala his father
a bowednot therkrö / todo p was pleatatit in
the lyght of the L oꝛd. How be it they put not
downe the hiltaulters metherdpd the people
pet prepare their hertes onto thechod of their
fathers. Che rett of the actes of geholaphat
kyꝛlt and laſt are wꝛytten in the woꝛckes ol
Zehu the lonne of Hanami / whrch noted the
in the boke of the könges ok Alrael.

Bfter this Jehokaphat Hing ol Juda top:
ned him leite with Dhosiab kynge of Firaet/
whych was a wycked doar. Ind he coupled
him felfe with him / to make thippes to go to
Charlig. And ther made the yppes in Kl
en ropbetien enger er atte
relay? again bee
Tote oe lere ned dere

7! 201
ae bthev were not able to go to Charlis.


ee

Kariah Jehiel Zachariah

2 Bente. eichele were Flamm ot he
kapher hing of Kuda. and fete chene


olde whẽ he begane to ra
550 per g e S-


ö Icholaphat.


Shen.


themanpe great gittes in tyruer goulde and
other pꝛeciduſe things with tronge cities in
bern but p hyngedome he gaue ko Fehoz8/
becaule he was § eldelt. And whe Ichozam
was upp 5 Rigdome ot his father x letelde
he flue alt his other bꝛeth ie wp kwerde / a di⸗


igang tong diterle OF LordCoF Frael cherto⸗-Jche d was


xrrij. pere olde whẽ he begane to tapgne c he
raygned dit) pere inFerutale And he walled
inp wapes or the kings of Ffrael/ lie as dyd
Jboule of Ahab(koz a daughter oA hab was
his wife) a he wrought euell in p eyes ofthe
Loꝛde. How be it ß Loꝛde wolde not deſtroye


citie de wauid: bit not in tepuifchzedkß ig


, Chꝛonptles.


Lx.


EDhosiah rapgneth in $ rowme ok;
byng of zkrael kee Heel. Alp ch pte


_Phoute of Pauid / becaule ok the couenaſt?


he had made w Mautd/ a as he pꝛomeled to
giue a lyght to him a to his tones Foz euer.
In his däpes > Edomite deparked fro vnder
Pade ok Jude a made the a hig. And Jchoza
wet k oꝛth w his loꝛdd a all his chareet whim
& roale bynights lapde ond Edomitt. nohich
‘pater him im ep cavitapnes ofbis charect .
And loc dõ departed frõ vnder d hade ol Juda
Cvynto this daye . hat fame tyme allo did lob⸗
nah departe fro vnder his power / becauſe he
lelte p L onde God ok bis fäthers. Moꝛecuer
he made bitauiters in ß motayndor Juda / a
cauledthe enhabiters of Jerulalẽ to comitt


Protobed adulterpe / che thzult Juda out of ö wape.
lan ioſhnne. Andther came a wultinge to him krö Eliah


1255


the pꝛophete of this tenoure. Thus layth the
Lozd GodofDautd thy father: becaule thou
walkedeſt not in p wapes of Jeholaphat thy
father a in p wapes of Ala king of Juda / but
walkedſt in the wayes okß 48 010 ot Icrael a
batt made Judge the dwellers of Jerulal go
a whoꝛinge like to ß who unge of ß houle of
Ahab / a haſt therto llapne thy bꝛethꝛẽ p were
thy fathers houle / whych were better then
thou: Therloze beholde the Lorde will fmpte
the with a myghtie plage in thy kolle / in thy
chtldꝛẽ / in thy wiues and in thy goodes. And
thou ſhalt haue moche dyleale thoꝛow inkir⸗
mitie in thy bowelles / vntill thy bowelles fat
out by reaton okthr lycknele / dave by bape.
Andthe Lo de ſtered vp rab Zehozäß
ſpirtte ok ö Philictimde che Arabias 5 boꝛder
onpblacke moz. nohich came agaynſtzuda
Gall to tare ß lande / z caried awape all p lub⸗
ktaüce p was fofive ind kinathoute/a therto
bis lonnes a his wiues: loß there was neuer
afonne lekte him ſaue Jehoahaz his poũgeſt
lonne And after all 6 /the Loz mote him in
bis bowelles w an incurable diceale. And in
procetie ottyme / euẽ about ß ende ol two pere
his guttz ell out by reaton of his fickneſe:a


D


az lohe died of euell deales. Burchermadeht
natbnobonefpze ithe Bbhonefires ‘orbs earners,


d HOVE he begane to tapane be wag rrriipert


tute ne, olde g taignedinFerulale.otf pere.And*he
tadowwelt, walkednot pileacaũtip / acer burpedbinz


tam


E 10
Sent 8 is


made byng, Aepatiay
Chapter.


Che. xrij. Chap


ve,


and


might beouere
thiowe of Jehu.


a abe- (GN)


ij. Chꝛo


d ink teuẽth rere Jeholada tone
op) pert a made a bonde wich the capt
KC lcapnes of hundzedes Asaviah the
Slonne of eroham / aimaei ß tonne
of Ichand / a. b bonne o bed / Maa⸗
Gal) che lonne of Adatah and Eulaphat the
Conne ol Sechzt . And ther went aboute in
Juda and geathered the Leuites out ot ail
he cptyes oF Juda and the auncpent heedes
ok Ftrael-and they came to 3 erulalem. and
allche congregacyon made a bonde wyth the
Benge in the houle of God. And Fevoiada
fayde to them: beholde / the kynges fonne
mut rapgne ouer che cyplozen of Dauid / as
the Loꝛdẽ hach layde. 5
B  Chisisiteherforep pe hall do. che thirde
parte of vou pꝛeſtes & Leuites wyych cone
inthe Saboch dape, hall kepe the oozes da
nother thirde parte ſhalbe in the tings boule
da nother thyꝛde parte Malbe inthe gate of
the koundac pd / a all the people chalbe in the


* rod xxviʒ b courts of Phoule of § Loꝛde. and ther Hail


none come into the houte of 6 Loꝛde / laue 8
preltes athe Leuites p minittre. Cher chall
go in / loꝛ they are holy: o all the people Mall
hepe the watche ol the Lozde. And 5 Leuitz
thatl cOpafe p kynge rounde aboute / a euerx
mA bis we pd in his hade: a whatloeuer other
mu come into the houle of che l.ozde he Wall
dre Foz it:and they ſhalbe with the kynge / as
he cometh in and at he goeth out.


Andß Leuiteg ¢ ali Juda did in all thing
as Fehotada the prette commaunded / a tone
euerymã his men: bothe the that came in and


thé ? went out the faboth dare kor Jehotada
e pꝛeſte did let none or h cõpanies de parte.

nd Jehoiada the pꝛeſte delpuered to the ta⸗
pitapnes ot hũdzedes tpearcs a ſbildꝭ ¢ bou⸗
kelars 8 pertapned to kynge Dauid a were
in the houle ol God. Andhe let all the people

b euerx man his wepon in his hande / lrõ the


nytles.

apopnted to gouerne the hoſte / and cayde to
them: haue her out wythout the araxes and
wholoeu er koloweth her / let hm be clapne
witz the werde. Foz the prette lapde: tex her
not in the houle of che Lone. Ind ther


tothe entrxnge of the hoꝛlgate in the z
houle they ciue her tthere
And Jehotada made a bonde betwene him


and all the people and the ürnge / to be che in Kenan


Londes people. Ind all the people went to
the houle ol Baal and deſiroped it / a brake
bps aulterg and bps ymages / and fue Ma⸗
than the pꝛeſte ol Baal before the aulters.
And g ehotada put the offyces of the houte ot
the Loꝛde in the handes of the pꝛeſtes the
Leuttes, which Sauid had deurded in com⸗
panees fo2 the boule of the Londe / to offer
utntoficrynges onto the Loꝛde / as it is
wꝛrtten in the law of Motes / wpth reioy⸗
fynge and kyngrnge / as it was oꝛdepned bx
Bauid. And he let pozters vnto the gates of
the houle of the Loꝛde / that none that was
vncleane in any popnte chulde entre in.
Andhe tone che capitaynes or hundzetheg
and the nobles / and the gouernoures of the
people gall the kolke of che lande / a bꝛougbt
che kyng downe out of the houle ol p Loꝛde /
and thep went thozow the bye gate in the
kynges houle / andlet the kenge vpon the
e
e jopten/e the c in je
lite: but ther line Athallah wyth the werde.
uryngß Ipfe ot Jehotgda kepeth the lume⸗
ER der 20 ee Eh it not. Be bplicth


‘Zachariah the dete. Jehoas ts ulld of bys awe
Erlernte under pn cop gur Amaltah.


Cathe reli} Chapter.


right coger ok thehoule to p lelte coꝛner ok


the houle / alonge by the aulter and the houle
rounde about thekynge. Andther brought
out the kynges konne and put bpon bym che


crowne and the rte ymonxe / and made hym
erer hong any ehotabs g his wnegamnernted
Wel. Fug. d. hym andlapde: God laue the konge.


When Sthaliay hearde the nopte ok the


people runnynge a piaptpnge the kinge he


went amõge the people in tothe houle of the


Lope. And when che law the kenge tande 1.


at his ppler inthe enterynge / and the Loꝛdes
andtrompetes about the Bynge/ and all the
people of the lande retopfpnge a blowinge


cb (ape
650
du’ Sen. orabecaute he had done god in Irrael / and on
be n are God and on his houle. And alter the deeth ol
nbunderd Jeholada / came the Lopes of Juda a mabe
in x. petes. 5


Ithoas. Joas, . hn


Guagiah, and by the congregaciõ of Icrael / to


tabernacle ot wpinelie Fo: wicked Sebattay
Sher chrldꝛẽ had bꝛoken the boule of God / a
bad therto beſtowed all the dedicat gyttes of
the boule of the Loꝛde / aboute Baais,
Wherkoꝛe at the kynges cõmaundement /
cheymade a coler / and let it at the gate of the
houle ok the Loꝛde:and made poclamacpon
choꝛow Juda and q erulalem to bꝛynge in to
che Lone the tarãciõ of Moles the leruaũt


bark or od which he ret bpon Jlrael in the wyl⸗


Cdernede. Andche Londes and all the people
reiopled and bꝛought in and caſt in to the co⸗
ker vntill it was full. And whẽ thetyme came
that the chette chulde be bought in by the
bandes ol the Leuites at the apoyntment ol
che kynge whẽ ther law g there was moche
monepe: chen came the Eynges lerybe a one
apopnted bp the he pette / and powꝛed out
that was in the cofer/¢ then toke it a carped
it tohrs place agapne / a thus they dyd daye
by dape / and geathered moche monepe,

And the kynge and Jehotada gaue it to
wozchemé that wꝛougbt ppon the houle of
the Lozde/ andhyꝛed Malons a carpenters

Peoredzetle the houle of the Loꝛde / and Cooyd
theparttEpcersin yꝛon and bꝛale / to repapze
che houte ok the Loꝛde. And the woꝛckemen
wrought a the woꝛcke mended thoꝛow their
bandes: and they made the houle of God as
it uate tobe / and ſtrengthedit. And when
they had kynplchedit / ther brought the ret

of the monere tothe kynge and Zehotada /
Etherwpth were made veffels koz the houle
OF the Loide: euen vellels to mynyſtre with
all and to Cerue fo2 burntofferpnges as la⸗
delles and veſſels of goulde and lxiuer. And
cher offered burntofferynges in the houle of
che Lope contynuallpe all the dapes of Fes

Ebolada. And Fehoiads waxed olde and full or


‘Ox (98 eves anddped.dnjundsedandtbistye pere
Eocene nase when ge dped . And they burped


to him in the citte of Dauidamoͤge the kynges


beplaunce ts che kynge. And then he her⸗
ened vnto them. no lacheplere the houle
ok the Loꝛde wou of thetr katherg / and terued
groues and Iniages. And then came there
Wrath bpd zung ¢ Jerufalem / cor chys their
trefpaces faite. Mot wythſtandynge pet God
vent Pzophetes co ey CN
vnto the Loꝛde. And cher te it yed onto chem
But they wolve not heare.
Indthelpirtte of Sod came vpon Facha-
eee
p aboue the people a etotzem.
F cpus God: w che


Maunbemenseeor B-oraeste ba tetore bandzed


onytles. f


Ulxxi.


not pꝛolpere but as pe haue toꝛcant


P
thallbe Coptake PoutuDyenupd tbe caries Mat) #71604


agayntt him and ſtoned him wych ttones/at
che commaundement of che ynge:euen in p
e

ed not the kyndenes whit
Fehotada his katherhad denen hkk
bis konne. And whe he dred / he lapde: 6 Loꝛde
te andrequire a reconpnge.

And when the vere was out / the holt of z
Diriens came agaynſt hym: and they came
ko Juda and Jerulaſem and deſtroped allthe
Lopdes of the people ted amongethe people
and fent all the fpople of them vnto 5 kynge
to Wamafco. And though the armie or S tria ©
came wich a malle companye of men / pet p
Londe deliuereda verygreat hoſte into their
handes / becauſe they had fozfaken the Loꝛde
Sod or their fathers, Ind therto they terued
Feboas accoꝛdynge.

Ardas lone as they were departed From
hym / though they lelt hym in great dileales.
pet hys awne ſeruauntes coripiredagaynſt
him Foz the bloude of the chpldze of Aehonada
che pꝛeſte / a ſlue him on his been, And when
he was deed / they burpedbemin the cytye of
Hauld: but not in the fepuichzes of} hinges
Andehete are they g conlpired agapnſt hn
Sabad the lonne of Spamaath an immonite
and Fehofabad ß fonne ol Simrith a Moa⸗
bite. And hrs tonnes and the ſumme of the
tare that came tohim / and the foundactd ol
the houle ol God / are wꝛitten in the ſtoꝛie ol
$booke of knges And Amaztah hes lanne
raygned in his eave,

Amaztah ouercometh > Ebomptes And Joas byng
ol Zlcael over cometh and kptierh Amazing,
¶ Che. xxv. Chapter.
Maziah was. Tv. pere olde when ⁊


be begane to rargne / e he rapgned iz neg. ruh. a.
0⸗


kxix. pere in Zerulalem. Vys m.
Athers name was Jehotadan of ze⸗
rufalẽ. And he did that plealedthe L oꝛde:but
not with ß hoale hert. Andas lone ag he was
leteled in the kyngedome / he Clue the P ktlled
che Kyngehrs father. But he llue not their
chyldꝛeñ as it is werten in the law / euen in
che bohe of Hotes to whome the Lozve com⸗


maunded fapinge:*the fathers Hall not dye Peut reid.
Foz the childzens caules no; the chyldꝛen ko b. een


the kathers / but euer man call dye koꝛhys .
atwnefynne. And Amaziah geathered Judas
to gether a made Phones ouer thouland
Kouerhundzeds in Phoules ok their fachers
choꝛowout all Fuda and Beniamin. Andhe
numbzed them from twẽtpe pere ¢ aboue / :
kounde thé thze hundred thoukande luſtie me
able to go to battell / and that coulde handle
cprare and chylde. Andhe kpzed therto an
choukande krghtrnge men out of
rh. Mrael


’ * 22 * a 4 T 22
gziah. Ahaz. ij. Chꝛonpcles. Livi,
H yoatham, Foz bebad moche raten boche in che alex Che. xrbij. Chapter. im

: and allo in the plapne: and plowmen and by- Datham was. rb. pere ode when 4
nedꝛellers in the mountapnes and in Char⸗ e begãne tovapgnc/ and rapgned
mel / to he loued hulbandzye. i. pere in Ferulale. Pys mocherg

And Diab had an bot of kyghtynge men me was Jerulah 5 daughter of
chat went out to warre in the armpe ¢ were Zadoc. Indhe dydthat pleated Loꝛde in ali
tolde a numbzed bp Jeielthe cerpbe se Maa⸗ popntes as dpd bys father Dsiah: laue / that
liah an officer / vnder the bande ot Hananiah he came not to the temple ol the Loꝛde / and
one of  ipnges Lordes And 5 haale nübze chat the people byd pet corrupt chem leiues.
ol the unc pent heedes of the men ol mpght He bund the hte gate ofthe tẽple OF Lone /
were. j tnoulfande a txxe hundzed and vnder a on the walle Ophel he bupit moche. o⸗
che handes of thé was the armie of the hole reouer he built cptyes in the mountapnes o
thre hundzed a eus choufand / a fyue hũdꝛed Juda / and in the wood coũtre he built cattel:
chat made warre wyth mpage a crengyt to ies and toes. a
helpe the Ronge agapntbpsenempes. ind Indhe fought with the kynge or d chide


Amaziah. in Chꝛonpcles, 1
. 1/fo2 an hundzed talentes of tpluer. enempes: 8
om 2 Buecher comes wa onto nge . Gods of the Eames, 225 Joas kynge of
larde: kynge / let not the armpe of Atraelgo Ilrael came vp-¢theplatw ether other
wich che kor the Londe is not wich Arael ne. hee Amaziah kynge of Juda at Bethlameß
-thertb anp ot thehoule ole pꝛatm. Oz elles in Juda. And Juda was put to the wozle be-
yt thou neades welt / hen go z doit / zmaße kope Icrael /e Hed euerp mia to bystent. Ind
thp felte ſtronge to battell: athou chalt le /? Joas 415 ok Ilrael tone Imaziah kenge
God hall make fall before thine enempeß. OF Juda Horne of Fehoasp forme of* Dho- 4. ssi
ForGorhath powwertobelpertocatvoune zlah at — . — abzoucht hem to Zeru⸗aupthecker,
And ama ziah Caydeagayne top ma of God / kale / z tare the walle ol Jerulalẽ fro the ate we
what ſhall we do then / to the hundꝛed ta ok Ephzalm onto the corner gate koure hun⸗ S d
which J haue geuẽ vnto the hoſte of Jcrael: died cubptes läge. And he tone all the goulde ae
Anoeheman of God lapde the Loꝛde is able  fotucr gall he Juelles chat were Counde sergayes,
to geue the moche moare then that. the boule ol God wych Obed edom a the
Andthen Amaziah leuered the armie that trealure ok the krnges houle andhoſtages /


was come to bpm out of Ephzaim / to go
whome agapne. wherkoꝛe they were ercea⸗
dynge wiothe with Juda / z returned to their
atone whome in great angre. ?
And Amarial tobe herte a caryed out his
hott a wẽtto faltvale.* here he Clue of the


neg. al och of Sdeirten cyoularde. And other ten


oufande ö chpldzé of Juda tobe alpue and
ies thé vnto che toppe ofa rockeẽ caſt thé
Dotwne krõ ehetoppe of We roche that ehepal
zp to burt: bur h me of Parmie which Amastay
had turned backee wolde not let go with his
people to battell / ranne vpõ p cittes of Auda
from Samaria onto Bethhoꝛon ¢ Cue tyze
thoulande of them and wanne moche fpople,
Andit chaunced / alter that maztah was
come krom the claughter of d Edomitz / a had
broughtehe Gods of the chfidzen of Heir he
fet the vp to be his Gods / a bowed hym lelke
‘befoze thé a burned cenle onto thé. wherfoze
Lord was woth WAmasiah ¢ lent to him
u pꝛophete / a lapde to him: why tekeſt thous
Gods of p people which were not able to de⸗
puer theix awne people out of thyne hand?
e
pꝛophete:
Scie eeatee sterbe be 1 ose
pꝛophete c * Jam Cu
tak coficell todettropes becaule thou


my Pbilitinese


and returned to Samaria. N
And Ama ztah p conne of Jehoas hinge of
Juda ipuenatter che deethe of Joas Conne ot
Fehoahas kynge of Alrael xv.pere. Che reſt
of g actes oF A maziah Ey2tt a lat are wzittẽ
inthe boke of the kinges ok Juda and Icrael.
Ind after that tyme that Am̃aziah opdturne
awaype kromthe Loꝛde / they contpiredtreas
fonagapnt hym in Jerulalem: and the flea
fice gere an bea den bp eg
ue hym there :
hoꝛlles and buryedhym weh hes fathers in
the cytye of Juda.
derth of a. rt wohreß
— — — in
hrs rowme. eate. rol chapter
Wen all the people of Juda tone 2


i Dsiab which was. ol. pere ode / gab. aer rr


made bym kynge in the rowme ol
hrs kather Amaziah. And he buplt
Eloth and bought it agapne to Juda after
che kyng was lapde to relt with bis fathers,
Stxtene pere olde was Diab iwhẽ he began
to rapane / a he rargned. ij. vere in Ferulale,
Bis mothers name was Jecaliah of Jeruſa⸗
lem. Andhe drd that plealed the Löꝛde /in
all popntes as dpd bps facher Ema ziah. And
he fought God whyle ZJachariah the teacher
kole God ipuedrandas longe as he fought e
Loe God made hym protpere,
And he went to batten agapnt the Phi⸗
liſtines @ bzake downe the walles ol Geth /
@the walles of Jabneh aß walles of Aldod


and biuit cities aboute Acdod ¢ amonge the S


Hitines And Sod holpe himagaynt the
2 agapntt che Trabiens 5 dwelt
in Gurbaal /a agaynt the Meunites. And?
Ammonites gaue tribute to Dsiah/and brs
name ſpꝛede abzoade euen to Egipte: foi he
plaped the mã a exceaded. Mozeduer Oziah
uplt towꝛes in Jerulalem ouer the coꝛner
gate / a ouer the balepe gate / and ouer othet
coꝛnerg / and made the ſtronge. Andhe but

tawzer inf widernene swagenmantee


C Oziah pꝛourded che chozow oute all p hoſte
ſhildes /Cpeares / helmetes habergynnes / bo⸗


‘wes ¢ fipnges fo ſtoneg. Andhe made engy⸗


nes in Ferufalembp the cratte of artifpcers
to be oñ d towꝛes a comers /to Mote arowes
great ones wall. And bys name fpreade
fare abꝛoade / foꝛ he was wonderſipe holpe /
vntyll he was become myghtye.

And in his greatnetie hys hert arote / ß he
was marred: a tranſgreued agaynſt ) L oꝛde
his God, Foz he went in to the temple of the
Loꝛde toburne cente vpon the aulter ot in⸗
cenſe. But Alariah the pꝛeſte went in atter
him with foure Choze pꝛeſtes of che Loꝛde 5
were bolde men. And chey ſtepte to Sziah ß
kynge a ſayde to him:it pertapneth not tothe
Dia to burne cenle vnto the Loꝛde / but to
the pꝛeſles the childꝛen of Aaron that are cõ·
fecvate to to burne incente. Come out of the

Dlanctuarpe / for chou haſt tretpaccd / and it
.. Mhalbeno wozthepe to ö betozeß Loꝛde God
And Oziah was wzoth a had cende in hys
bands to oker and in his indignaciũ agapnſt


aeg. cha. the peſte / p lepꝛolpe ſpꝛãge in his foꝛcheed


befozethe pꝛeſtes in the houle of the Loꝛde /
euen belpde the incente aulter. And Atariay
the chele pꝛeſte wall the other pꝛeſtes lobed
bponbym:¢ beholdhe was a leper in his fo-
reheed / a they vexedhim thence. Andtherto
0 was —— cof 2 .

lagedhim. stab the kynge cõtynued
a lepꝛe pnto the dape of his deethe a dwelt in
an houle at lybertye: how be it / he was cat


ok Amnion / and pzeuapled agapnſt he. And
the chyldꝛẽ of Hmmd gaue Un the tame pere c
an hundzedtalẽtes of lyluer /a tẽ thoulande
quarters ot whete a ag moche barleye. So
moche allo did p childꝛẽ of 15 0 od bim
the feconde pere and the thaide too. And Joa⸗
tham became mightie / becaule hedireckted
bps ape befoze the Loꝛde hys God.

‘The reſt of p actes of Foatham sail bys D
warres and hes tapes are witten in the
boke of the kynges be leg Juda. Me was
xrb. pere olde hen he beganne to raygne / g
ravgned.rof.pere in Jerutalé. And whe Fore
Sar

urredhrm 7
bishin raygned in his tteane,
C Che wyckedneſſe of Abas hyng of Juba. After him
rargneth deze. sities N
Che. xxviij. Chapter.


pere in Ferulalem. And he dyd not
Sthat plealedthe L ozde / ag dydhys


e was kr. pere olde when bebe
ay ganne to raygne / and raygned. xvi uh. aeg xl. .


Baud: but walked in $ wapes of the
kynges of Itrael / and made therto Baais of
metall. And he offered cente in the valeye otß
childzen of Hennon / and burnt his chiidꝛẽ in


krꝛe after che abhominacpon of che nai
ald 1 4h eat outers 1
rael. Andhe offered burnt cen


out of the houte of the L ode. And Joatham whych


his lonne hadthe gouemaunce of the kyng
houle andludged the people of the lande.
Che reſt of the actes ol Oziah both kyꝛlt
and laſt / did Flatah the pꝛophete the tonne ol
Amas wate. And when Dstab was larde
reſt with bis fathers / they burped him Whis


fathers in ß felde of the buriall of the . caule


Foz they lapdethe is a leper. And Foatha his
fonneraygned in bys ſteade.

CFoath cometh the Ammorites.
eee


Ahaz. ij, Chꝛonytles.


Irratl tote pꝛytoners ok theire or Damalco which bette hime lard / abst
Wan wch nathan wpues / lkonnd the Gods of the Siriens healpe the / therkoꝛe
@ daughters/ a therto caryed awaye moche will Joker to the / chat they mape heipe me
dpople of chẽ / and bꝛought it to Samaria, allo. But they were his deſtruccion a the de⸗
Butthere was a pꝛophete ofthe Loses ſtruccion of all Alrael. And Aha’


z geathered

which went out to p Hockthat together the velels of the houle oF God and
enge ne layde to theke / becaule bꝛäte thẽ / z cut vp the Dozes of the houle of
9 L. o de God ok poure fathers was wꝛoth w the Lozde g made him aulters in all cozners.
Juda / he deliuered the into poure hand And ok Jerulalẽ.Andin all S cities of uda cytye
ze haue llapne the with cruelnedde preacheth by citiehe made hplaulters to bur ne incente
bp foheauen. And now pe purpole to kepe nto other Goos/Eangredp Lord Sodok his
vnder the chplozen of Juda and Jerulalem a fathers Che reſt or his actes a all his wapes
to maße them bondemen and bondwemen. bothe kirſt F laſt are wꝛittẽ in the boke ol the
what other thynge do pe (pe vnhapppe) then hinges ok Juda a Atrael. And whe haz was
Défende p Loꝛde voure God. But now heare layde corel whis kathers / cheve burpea hrm
me / a delpuerthe captyues agaync which ye in the cytye ok Jerulalem: but bought hym


wꝛath of the Lozde is bpon pou?


aim / as Afartahp ſonne of Johanan theng b bad not bene regarded of hys pꝛedecelloures.
See d fonne of dpetimeloti ſeheze⸗ Che. xxix. Chapter.
Riah 171 of Seium 0 3
b Hadalat Kode vp agapnſt them that c ig ; ol
smn aro smother a 1 5 pere in Jeruralẽ. And his mothers
ein the captiues hyther. Fos where :
Cae ecoie Lovbealltesnpe de enteoe Hachatiah. And he dyd that was right in the


foze the Loꝛdes a all the congregacpon.


by name / a tone che pꝛeloners ¢ clothed all


p citie of Paulmetrees kast by their
and then returned to Damaria agapne.
the Edomites came yet agayne a llue ok Ju⸗ & haue necher bummed céfenoz
Philiſtind inuaded p cities in d lowe caũtrey


che kame. a Gtmlo with her townes / adwelt chzowẽ wich th


vpõ him and belt
houle o che l oꝛde a out ok the kynges houle tominttreandbume olferynges to him.


Kynge Abas trerpace pet moare agarnſt the


ezekiah, Bez


re bꝛethꝛen: koꝛ the great not onto plepulchzes ofthe kinges OF Juda. Sanne
haue taken ok poure bzetha 2 theg And" Hesekitah his lone raignedinhis ſteade sen) Jchen⸗
And certapne of the heedes ok p chyldꝛen gpczehuab retto;eth vnto fhe teple or 5 Lone all the


ce rekiah begane torapgne whẽ he 1 2
was. xxb. pere olde / a rapgned. rxix ij. rt ci


name was Abiah the daughter of


o adde moze to dure tynnes a trelpace. Foz Cpght ofthe Lozde in all popntes as did Da⸗
nue teelpace it great all readye / a there is ud his father. Pe opened the dozes old houle
kearce wrath pb ape n de 2 2 rns 152 ne ra 2800 8 (cfr aeiel =

e be⸗ fj 5
ot armes leite the captyues a the fpoy! i presse Leute o
n ntedtherto to gether into ß eelkctrete: a che.
Andthere arole certapne apopntenth dee
enanedamõgethẽ / or ö cpople / araped 2 halow the boule ofthe Lon ok pout
See Dune rf vate thẽ to ate eto deinke fathers/ a bzinge out $ kylthineſſe out of the
eee euuneeuciaucpatpmnpepes orb Lorboute
ler
Lale pauametsees ext tt Bret Soda haue foꝛſakẽ him / and turned awape
e
indat that lame tyme kynge Abas Cent ned to thetr backen. An 3
ene ipa oer tobaue helpe.and chut vp ddoꝛes of Spozche a Guéche plapes


« Andthe ofiringy in ö holy place vnto $ God ok Fracl.
da ¢carped aware tome captpucs me ie fame Lonel gan
e ok Juda: andtoße Bethlames / Jerulale: ehe tha e c made
e ee
longynge therto a Khimna with ß townes ol poute cpes. eit ute ome

. For the Lorde brought Juda lowe / daughters a dure tines were carted awal
berni l shar Hane of jabs hh made capttue top fame caule. Nowhaue FZ in mx
Juda nazed a trantgreted agapnt p Lozde. hert to ſtrrke a couenaunt witze Lo rde God
And chighath palneler kynge ok Achr came of Ilrael b bis wiath map ceate. Nom ther-
him but pꝛeuapled not koꝛe my formes be not neclygent:koꝛ p Loꝛde
Dagapnſt him Fo Ahaz tone awape dut or ? ath cholen you to ſtande bekoꝛehim andkoꝛ


des houles /a gaue bntoche Chen d Leuites arole: Wahath plonne or c
finge of Bi too it alpen eee n H 4a bee e
N crart Ats the Conne ok Abdi adtarial che
Lo) de. Fon he offeredonto the Gods orthem konne ol Jehaleleel : ol —— ee


chiah,
s fonne of imma ¢ Eden p tonne of Foals
Cob s fonnes of Euzapgan / Simei ¢ Ferel:
Kokthe Connes of klaph / Zachariah a Ma⸗
thantah: a of the fonnes ot Heman / Febiel a
Hemei:¢ ol p font ok Jeduthun / Semalah
€ Driel And they geathered their bꝛethꝛe g
puri ped thẽ lelueg / a then wit at 6 cõmaũ⸗
demẽt ofthe kyng by the worde ok the L od /
£oz to clente the houle ol the Lone. And the
pꝛeaſtꝭ wẽt into p boule of 6 Loꝛde to clente
it / e brought out all the vnclennelie chat they
kounde in 5 tẽ ple of 6 Lo: in g courte ot
the houle ofthe Loꝛde. and the Leuites tone


Dita cariedit out in to the broke Cedʒõ. hey


begãne the fy dave of the kyꝛſt moneth to
purifpe/ a came che cight daye to the poꝛche
ol the Loꝛd: loß theyhãd purged the houle of
the Lozde in eight dapes andthe. roi. bape of
the kyꝛſt monech they made an ende.
Andthen they wee in to Hezetziah d kyng
g ſayde: we haue clenled all the houle ol the
Lord a the aulter of burntoßkeyngd wprhall
bis vedels aß Mewbꝛeede table with ail his
apparell:a therto all the veũels which kyng
Ahaz dyd cast a lyde when he raygned strat
grelled / them we haue repapꝛed aᷣlanctityed:
Ed de / they are befoze the aulterokthe Londe.


E Da Dew tay the kyng role erlpe a geathe⸗


redthe Lozdes of the cytye a went vp tothe
houfe ok the Love. Ind there were brought
leut oren / ſeuẽ rammes / leuẽ lambes a leut
kyddes ta be a fpaneofferpnge for the kyng⸗
dom / koꝛ the fanctuarpe d fon Juda. And he
cömaunded the preattes ö Connes ol Aaron
tooſſer them on the aulter of the Lozde.
Andehep line § ore: a 6 preatk receaued
Sbioude etpzynkitedit on ß aulter: and the
Cue the ranunes a lpꝛynkledthe bloude vp
the aulter:a they flue the lambes a ſpꝛinnled
P bioudvpö p aulter. And then theybꝛought
koꝛth the kyddes of 5 fynneollerpng bekoꝛe ß
png a cögregactõ which put their hades
vpon the. And the preattes fue the a offered
che bloude of thé vpõ the aulter / to make la⸗
Ftilkaccion fo2 all Ilracl:toꝛ the kynge layde:
Pthe burntockryng ¢ § kynneoffryng chulde
ferue foꝛ all Ilrael. And they tet the Leuites
inthe houle of the L oꝛd wiymbales / plalte⸗
nes a harpes accozdpng to § cõmaundemk⸗
OF Dawid i; of Gad the knges fear of viliũs
d ol Nathan che pꝛophete. Foz to was the cõ⸗
maundemẽ t of che Loꝛde thoꝛowthe bane or
his pꝛophetes. Andlo the Leuites ſtode with
che inſtrumentes ol Dauid / and the pꝛeaſtes
Wtrompettes And Hezekiah cõmaunded to
offer the butntoferpng vpon the auler. And
72 hanna egal | 5 ip 12
de beganne / a the trompettes with t
inſtrumenkeg of Bautd oF Alrael. And
all cõgregacion bowed chẽ telues / andthe:


ij. Chꝛonytles.


Cyngers lange / a the tröpettes blew/ z ctt⸗
nued untyll ö burntofferpng was kynelhed.
And whe theyhad made an ende ok p burnt⸗
offeryng / kyng a all 6 were Whim kneled
downe i bowed the felues a gaue pꝛayle €
thanckes. Ind Hezekiah the nung a f 1020,
bade § Leuttes topiaple 5 L 01d % ß woid
ol Dauid ¢ of Alaph 5 fear of bylions, And
the Leuites pꝛapled p they reiopfed agapne /
and the other ſtowped a bowed them lelues. G
And de zekiah antwerede fardmowß ‘ve
baue fylled youre hades to ß Loꝛd / go to and
beyng in § faorekpees a thannofferpngd in to
Soule of por din copregacta beoughe
in che facretpces ¢ thankofferpnges/ a ali p
were wyllyng brought burntockrynges and
$ nübre of ö burntofkrynges which} cögre⸗
gacion bꝛought in wag. rr. orẽ g an hũdꝛed
Himes ¢ twohüdzed lambes: g all for hurnt⸗
Offcynges to the Lord And belrde 5 they de⸗
dicated tire hüdꝛed ove the thouland chepe.
But the preates were to ew / a were not
able tofleve all § burntoßkepnges. 1; herkoze
their bꝛethzẽ the Leuites holpe them tpl the
Wworke was ended; a vntill the pꝛealtes were
lan ctikped. or the L euitz were purerherted
to lanctitte thé telues then the pꝛeaſtes And
therto p burntoßfrynges were manye w the
latte ol he peaccofierpnges a the diynckok⸗
kerynges 5 be longed tothe burntotterpngd.
And fo the terupce pertapnynge tothe houte
of Lo wet kozward. And Besehiah reioy⸗
led gall the people 5 Godhadmade ß kolcke
fo readpe for the thynge was lodenip done.
Cheschiay reuueth the eat ol patrouer,
¶ Che. xxx. a hapter.
id esektay lent to an atrael g
Judd: a therto wꝛote letters to &⸗
phꝛaim a d analleh / 5 they chulde
2 come to the houle or the Loꝛbe at
Zerulalem / to offer pallouer vnto the Lozde
God ol Akrael. And the kyng heide a councell
with his Lozdes and all the cõgregacyon at
Jerulalem to kepe the keaſt ofpateoucr ind
leconde moneth. Fos they coulde not kexe it
at p time: toꝛ there were not pꝛeaſtes owe
lanctitped / nether was § people geathered
togeather to Jerulalẽ. And p thyng piealed
the kyng ¢alithe cõgregacton And they de⸗
creed 6 it Mulde be pꝛoclaymed thorow out
all Icrael frõ Berlabe to Dan / p they ſhulde
come a holde p keaſt of patteoueronto$ Loꝛd
God ok Ilrgel at genilalem:koꝛ theyhad not
often done tt / ag it is wzite? how they ſhuld.
Andehe metfengers we with letters of ß
hand ofthe kyng a oF hts odes thoꝛou out!
all Alraeil and Juda / atthe comaundement
e
Othe Loꝛd od of Abzahã /
Ilaac and Icrael / and to wyl he turne to te
vo. remnaunt


Llxxiij


222


captyue / that they mape come agapne vnto
this lande: koꝛ the Loꝛde youre Godis Full ol
mercpe and compa dpd /a wyll not turne bys
face from vou / vt ve turne agayne tohim.
And the poltes went krom cytie to cytye
thozou oute the lande of Ephꝛaim and Ma⸗
nalich a euẽ onto Fabuls. But ther laughed
them to [kozne a moched the. Heuerthelege
pet druerle of Aller Manadeeh and of abu
Ion meakenedthe lelues @ came to Jerula⸗
lem. And cherto the bad of God was in Juda /
tomate thé of one accozbe to do the comaun-
dement obne 9 the capitapnes / whych
was accoꝛdyng to p woꝛde of the Loꝛd. And
lo there adembien to Jerutalẽ moch people
ga myghtie


featt of lwete bꝛrade in the leconde moneteh. 0


And they arole and put awape p auiters


Cz were in Jerutatem, And therto al the in⸗


cenle 5. A awape c caſt thé into d bꝛonke
Cedzon . And theyllue pateouer ö kourtene
bape of the lecond monech And the preattes
@ Leuites ſanctiſped the ſelues fo2 name /
A bꝛought in § burntofferpnges intoß houle
ol the Loꝛde. And they ſtode in their ſtadyng
after their maner accozdynge to the lawe oF
Moles p md of God. Andß pzeates Ipꝛynk⸗
ledthe bioude receauynge it of the handes ol
Leuites. And becauſe there were many in
the cigregacton p were not lanctikyed: and
therkoze dpd ) Leuites (ep palleouer fo all
£ were not cleane to lanctiłve thé top Loꝛd.
Chere was very moche people oute of E⸗
phꝛaim / Manalleh / Jla har and Zabulon g
were not cleane / and therfoze bpd cate palle⸗
quer otherwyte then weptynge ſpecptyeth


sue Besebsiah prayer oz the K tapd: 5 good $


Loꝛde be mercptuil to all i cett their hertes
to leke the God P is the Loꝛde God of their
fathers / though thep do it not accoꝛdynge to

® the dlennedle ofthe holy piace. And the Loꝛd
heard Pezeklah a healed the people. Ando
the chridzẽ of Akrael that were founde atze⸗
rutalem helde the featt ort wete bꝛeade leuẽ
dapes with great gladnelle / andthe Leuites
and the preattes pꝛapſed the Lorde dae by
Dave with lowde inſtrumentes.


e great congregacton / to holde the


kyng of Ju 1
to ß cõgrẽgaciꝭ a chouland oren a ſeuẽ thou
ſand ſhepe. and p Lozygaue to the cõgrega⸗
cron Coz beaucofirynges a thouland d ren g
ten thouland ſpepe. Andthe pꝛeaſtes fancti⸗
Eped them lelues / chat ther were znowe.

Andall the cõgregacton of Juda with the
preattes a Leuites / i all the congregacyon
that came out of itrael and the ſtraungers /
both that came out of the lande ol Acrael and
dweit in Juda / reiopled: a there was great
lope in Ferulalé Foz lence the tyme ol Sa:
lomon the fonne of Dauid kyng of Iraelit
happened not lo in Jerulalẽ. And the pꝛeaſtꝭ
ethe Leuites avole ¢ blelledthe people / and
their vopce was hearde / a thet paper went
vp bnto his holydwelleng piace heauen.

‘After hezekiah had called the people bute b
Sie ache Lare ge ache nite wh
he comaundeth to geue tytheg.

Sep derbe en
Sd whe ther had finetihed all this:
all Itrael that were founde in
es ol Juda / went oute and


bzal
peer bjake the bplaulters and
other aulters thoꝛow out all Juda a Ben⸗
lamin / Ephꝛaim and Manalieh / vntyll they
had made an ende of the. And afterwarde all
the chplozen of Irael returned enery man to
his polſeyon in their awne cpties.

„And pezektah let h pꝛeaſtes andthe Les
uites in their oꝛdie to wapte by courte / euerx
mã accozding to his office whither preatte of
Leuite:fob burntockringe 3
eto miniſtre a tothanke and to pꝛape in the
gates ol the lodge of the Loꝛd. Andche kyng
Gane a porcpor of bis ſubſtaunce toꝛ burnt.
pffrynges at mognpng ¢ euẽ / ¢ foz burntok⸗
ferpnges on Saboth dayes a new mones
Kocher tolempne kealt /accozdyng* ag it is
wa pte in the iawe of the Loꝛde. Andhe bade
people : dwelt in Jerulalẽ to geue 8 parte
ofthe pꝛeaſtes & Leuites / 6 they t be
mayntened in the lawe of the Loꝛde. And as
fone as the woꝛde came abꝛoade the chrldzen
ol Ilrael bzought aboundace of kpꝛſt krutes
ol cone / wyne ole a honpe / a of all maner
olkrutes of § feld: a the tythes or all maner
ok chengd brought cher in pleteoullp. And
chyſdzen ot Irrãel and Juda that dwelte in
cxties of Aida / they alto bꝛoughtin 8 cythes
otoren VVV


the mages a cut downe the a


n nt
*


9


tzcklah.


„.
ij.
which were dedicated to the Lozd their God /
and putthẽ on heapes. Inche thirde monet
— e heapes / o kyneũted
And whẽ Hezekiah and the Loꝛdes came
ela the heapes / they bleledthe Loꝛde and
bis people 3 frael. And hezetziah questioned
with the pꝛeaſtes athe Leuites concernyng
ear — Asaviah the chete pꝛeaſte of

e houle of Sadock antwered him and lapde
fente ther beganne to bꝛrngethe heaueole⸗
rynges into the boule of the Loe / we haue
eaten and had ynough / and pet lette aboun⸗
daunce fo? the Loꝛde hach bieged his people

Candtherok is this heape lecte And hezekiah
bade dede vp ß toe houles aboute bhoule
ofthe Loꝛde. And lo they dyd / and caryed in
the heaucolferynges and the tythes and the
dedpcat gpftes cuen ol kydelpte.

Ouer which Chonantah f Leuite hans rule
v Demet his bꝛother next tohi. and eyiel /
Alariah / Nahath / Acael/Jerimoth Jolabad /
Eliel, Jelmachiah / Mahath and Bananiah
were ouer fears oꝛderned bychonaniah and
Semei his bꝛother / at the appoyntement ol
Perna the kyng / and d laxiaſ the ruler ot

houle of God. And Choꝛe 5 Conne of qem⸗
ma the Leulte poster of theckeſt doze had the
ouerlpght or the krewyllotterynges of God /
to geuẽ heaueoſkrynges vnto the Loꝛde / and
Was oucrthpnges molt holp. And onder him
were Eden / Miniamin Jetua / Semeiah /
Antaviah and Sechentah in the cpties or the
prea of their kydelpte / to geue to their bꝛe⸗
then their poꝛcyong / as well tothe mall as
to the great. 8

ind to che males allo that were rekened
From thꝛe vere and aboue amonge all that
Duft into the boute ofthe Loꝛddape by dape /
to do ſeruxce and to wapte by courle. And to
che preattes that were rekened in the houl⸗
holdes of their fathers From twentie pere o
aboue / to wapte when their courles came.
Andto them that were rekened thoꝛow out
all cheir babes / wyues / tones and daugh⸗
ters thoꝛoro out all the on. oi to
che kydelptie of thé dyd men comitt their lan⸗
tikied gyltes. And therto amonge the chyidꝛẽ
ok Maton the pzeactes were men named bp
name in the feld of the luburbes of all their
cyties / cytie by cytie / £02 to geue poꝛcions to
all che males ot the pꝛeaſtes / and to all that
were rekened amonge the Leuttes.
ge ere
Juda / an at was good / ite
and truthe/befoze the Lozve his God. Andin
allthe woꝛckes; he beganne in the lerupce
ol the bout: ol bod / to lee his God atter the
lawe and commaundement / that dy he with
all his herte / and pꝛolpered. 5


nonpeles,


CHennabert-whic
wm ürpcken of the Aungeil.
if ell. .


ch Sul belesged :
1 d r u


fuccearet 2


¶ Che xrrij Chapter.
chele dead a truthe / Denna⸗


Alberto eng ofa dur came @ encven ‘ig. Reg xwtß·


jin to Auda a pytched agaynſt the
A fhrige cpties da a z diaw the
to him. And when Hezettah Caw $ Senna⸗
herib was come and that he was purpoledto
krght agaynſt Jerulaiẽ: hetoße councell W
his capitapnes ꝭ men ot might / to ſtoppe the
water of the fountapnes p were without che
cktie:a thex were content to helpe bpm. And
fo there geatheredmoche people to geather e
Copte all the welles ¢ the bzoke chat ranne
thozow the myddes of the lande / enten e-
the byngy of Amur chulde not kynde moche
water when ther came? Andbe wẽt to lute:
le a butit vp the walle where it was bꝛolẽ /
and made towꝛes aboue vpon / a pet another
wall without / and repapꝛed Melo the cytye B
ol Pauid / and made many dartes a childes.
And he lett Capitapnes of warre ouer the
people a geathered the to geather into ß large
Grete or the gate of the citte a (pale ientelye
to them / ſaxing. Plucke vy poure hertes and
be ſtrong: Be not akrayed o2 in anp wyle dit
couraged foꝛ dꝛeade of the Ryng of Auur / a


— pine iv tad Fe


is one greater wich vs then Whim with bi
is an arme of flech: But with vs is 5 Loꝛde
dure God £07 to helpe vs and to kyght oure
bataples. And ß people were well couraged
with the woꝛdes of Hezektah Kyng ok Fuda,
Akter 2 Sẽnaherib kyng ot Adue ſent of
his leruauntd to Jerulale(he hem ſelk pine
before Lachis a all his kyngdom % bim)on-
to Hezektah ung of Juda a vnto all Audaß
were at Ferutale tapia. hus lapth Sena-€


herib rng of Aur: where in do pe ktuct Hug. negertf


be p are be leged in Jerulalẽ: Hezeniah de⸗
Ceaucth vou / to deipuer pou to deeth / högre /
Kchzuſt farigeche Lob durechod all pode
vs out of the hade ofthe kyng of Aur. Is it
not that e zeziah p put dotwne bis brlaul⸗
ters a bis other aulters/ ¢ cõmaunded Juda
and gerulalem Capinge:befoze one aulter ve
wall bowe poure felues ¢ bpon 6 offer allo.
MBozeouerhaue pe nat hearde what J
mp fathers haue done vnto the people of all
landes: were the Gods of the people of other
landd able to ſaue their lanes out ot my had?
which ok all the Gods ol hole nacyons that

my fathers deltroyed was it / that coulde deix
uer his people out ofmpne hand / that youre
God Huld be able to deltuer vou auto myne
hande: nherkoꝛe now lett not Hezektah de⸗

ceaue vou ether perlwade pou of thes fa:
cvors/noz pet beleue hym. Foz as no won
amonge


‘Hoekiay,


amonge fo manpe nacrons a krngdomes
was able to rpdde hrs people out of mne
hade a the babes of my fathers: euẽ lo moche
elle chall poure God kepe you oute of mrne
hade. And pet moare dyd his leruaũtꝭ cpeake
agapnt che l. oꝛd God a agaynſt his ſeruaũt
esehiah Andthertohe wiote a lettertoratle
ong 070600 obFfeael ¢(pake therin fapig:
as the Gods of the nacyons of other landes


haue not delyuered their people out ot mpne 5


hande / no moare (hall the God of Hesehiah
delpuer brs people out of myne hands. And
chey eryed wrt) a lowde voyce in the tewes
ſpeache vnto § people of Ferulalem g were
on the wales / to keare them and to dylmaxe
them / chat they myght haue taken the crtye.
And they pake agapnſt the God ol Jerula⸗
lem / as agapnt the Gods of d nacvons ol ß
erth / which are the woꝛcke of d hades of men.
But Hezentah the hyng and the pꝛophete
‘Fatah tonne or Amos prayed concernyng e
chenge ¢ cryed vp toheauen And the Love
Sent an angell a detroped all the me of war⸗
re and the LToꝛdd a capitapnes ol the holte ol
che kyng ol Adue,'6 he turned his face with
thame towatde his atone lande. And whe he
was come in to the houſe ol his od / he was
there ouerthzowen dw the [werde euẽ by thé
that iſſued oute of bys bowelles. And tothe
Loꝛde faued Hezehtah ¢ the enbabyters at
Jerulalem out of the handes of Hennahe⸗
rib kynge of aqur ¢ ot all other / e marnte⸗
ned thẽ on all kydes In lo moche that manpe
bꝛouggt pꝛelentes onto the L onde to Fevula
lem and pꝛectouſe gyltes to 4 kung
ol Juda: lo that he was magnitied in d light
ok all nacrong From thence kozth.
F Inthole dapes Here blah was kpeke nto


. neg rr. a. the deeth and betought the Loꝛde: whych ane
bt habs im e denebbime wonder mye


räcle: But Besehiah dyd not accopding tothe
ipefor came gece wpa) opon denden
e ca

Juda and Jerutale. Not withtdopyng Peze⸗

tah mekenedhim telle ka p a ofbys
erte / bothe he and the enhabrters of Ferula
lem. he itoze the wꝛath of the Loꝛd fell not

bpon them in the apes of Hezektah.

And Hezekiah had exceãdrnge moche rps
cheffe ehonoure. And he geatheredbimtrea-
ſure of fpluct/qoulbe peectoute ftones/ ſpt⸗
ces / childes e of all maner pleatatt Juelles:
made ſtoꝛe houles koꝛ the krutes of come /
wyne ¢ opie: ¢ tables foz all maner of bea⸗

Gltes / and koldes koz ſhepe. And he made hym

tones becaute he had catell of hepe a xen

eat aboundance. Foz God had geuen hem

F
er oppedthe

of Gihon 2 tbe moet


ij Chzonptles.


fpne ot 6 cytie of auto. And Pe zekiah pros
cpered in allhis wozckes. But when the am⸗
balladoures of the Loꝛdes of Babyion were
tent to him to enqupꝛe of the wondꝛeß chaũ⸗
ced inche land / od lekte him: to tempte hym
6 all chat was in bis bert mraht be knowen.
Che reſt of the dedes of Hezekiah and his
goodnelle are wꝛittẽ in the bifpon of Flatah
the pꝛophete the fonne of Amo in $ boke of

kinges OF Fuda and Alrael. And thendese-
kiah lapde him torett with hys fathers / and
they burxed him in the hrelt kepulchze of the
fonnes of Dauid:and uda ¢ the enhabiters
ok Jerutalẽ Dyd him woꝛchippe at his deeth.
And anale his tonne raigned ĩ his eave.


C anatkeh is taken pꝛeſoner - andafter he cometh
oute hedettropeth the Jdales de dyeth⸗ and after him
ſucceadeth Amon. After Amd was piled of his awne
people Jotiah bis lonne rapgneth fo; him.
¶ Che. rxru. Chapter. 8
nah was. rij pere olde whe he A


was made king / a raigned Iv pere seg pri,


A pin Zerulalk. Indhe dpd wicheolpe
Sin the (yabt ofthe Loꝛd / Ipke vnto
tycabbominactong ok the bethen which the
Loꝛde caſt out befoze the chridꝛen ol 3 lraci.
Fo: be wet to ¢ buplt agapne thebplaulters
which Heꝛektah his father gad bone downe.
And he rered vp aulters onto Waals a made
Groucs ¢ bowed him lelke vnto allthe hott of
heauẽ and fernedthem.andbe buplt aulters
in the houle of the Loꝛde: Or which Loꝛde


bad lapde in Jerulalẽ ball myname be £02 g. nen. vj.


euer. Andhe made aulters vnto all the hoſte
okheauen in the two courtes of the houle ol
the Koꝛde. And he burnthis chyldꝛen in kyꝛe
inthe valey of thefonnes of Bennon Andhe
oblerued dylmalle dapes a occupped wytch⸗
cratte and toꝛlerꝝ / and mayntened woꝛkelg
with ſpirites & fears of foꝛtunes: ĩ wꝛotight
moche euel in the ſyght of d Lord / to angre
him with all.

And he put the kerued Image of an sales
which he had made / in the houle of God. O
which boute God layne to Bend andto Sa
lomon his donne in this houte here in Leru⸗
falé which z haue cholen out of all tůbes /
J well put my name koz euer / a no moare


bipngs feate cf qcrael fr of the land which g. geg. lg.
J haue ozdepned koꝛ poure fathers . Ik lo beis bf


cher halbe dypligent to doo all J haue come
maunded by Doles in all the la we oinaũ⸗
ces and maners. But Manageh made Juda
and the enhabiters of Jerufalem to erre and
to do woꝛte then the heathẽ which the Loꝛde
deſtroxed bekoꝛe the chrldꝛen of Atrael And
when the L ode cpane to Manadleh a to hrs
people / they attended not tohim. ;

Wherkoze the N oꝛde brought bron thent
the Capitapnes ofthe holte ofthe pre of


Chllon And when be was in
‘befoughtive Loꝛde his God / z humbled him
lelke exceadynglxe befozethe Godot bps ka⸗
thers a made intercenvon tohrm: a he was
entreated cf him and hearde bps pꝛaxer and


bꝛouqht him ugarne to Jeruſalem into bys Baals eu


Krngdö. And chen Manalieh knewe how z
the Lozde toas che very God.

Akter ? he vuple a wall without the cytye
ol Daud on p welt (poe of Sihon ind bone
lo toꝛth to fot gate g roũde abouteDpbel
o bꝛoughl it vp of pery a greatherght / a put
capitaxnes of warre in all the ſtronge cities
ol Jud. And he toke awape ſtraunge Gods
athe Zdole out of the houſe of God / a all the
aulters that he had buyle in the mount of the
boule ot con f in gerulalem / ¢ cat the out
ofthe cytie be made an aulter vntothe
Loꝛd ¢ facret pred theron peaceofierpnges ¢
chankollerpnges / a charged Juda to ferue
Lom Gob or brael. Neuerthelette f people
drd offer tty it iit che hriaulterg / how be it vn⸗
tothe Lozn: heir God onlpe.


ent hem and fue

atone houle. Andthe people of the

i B ied concpired agapnſt kenge

Amon. And tiiceto 8 people of the ive made
Follah his dona hyng in his rowme.


che aulters / cles


And euẽ


toss


Jerukalk. rt. rere
8 picaled the Londa
wapes oe aud bis tarherbowing


aa


powꝛed


4 hoabas, Gebronpeles, — ui.


im. and the Leuites ſtriptethe bea. Andthey


Jolla,


te bpon bs / becaule oure fathers kept not the
woꝛde ofthe Lozd / todo afterall E is wittẽ
in Heitz w che that pertapnedto the
ind Pelkit a
ea sng wentto Bolsa) a pꝛophetide wpee of Daye ok the pz moneth. And he
Selum 5 forme of Thekohach the tonne ok let the preattes in their offyces a apded 15
Dataray heper ofthe wardzope( which pros in eheterupce dethe houke of che Lord. and
phetille dwelt in gerulalẽ ind Cecve warde) he lapde to the Leuites chat taught tyozow
athey comuned ko Wher. And dhe lapde onto but all Irael and were kanctikped onto the
thé:thus lapth the Loꝛde God ok Fracl/ tell Lorde: put the holp arcke in thehoule which
pe ß man p tent zou to me. Euẽ thus laych? Salomon p come of Bauid Eyng of Alrael
Londe:le / will bzynge euell dps this place did bundde / re neade not to beare it dpõ poure
and ppon the enhabiters cherok / euen allthe Moulvers , Pech now ſerue the Lorde
curſles p are wzitten in the bone which they voure God ehis people Acrgel. And prepare
haue reade bekoze che kyng ok Juda becaule poure ſelues by poure aunctent houwpoldes
chephaue koꝛtakẽ me and haue ollered vntd Fcompanpesacco:dyng tothe wꝛytynge ol
other od to angre me Waſmaner wozckd Dawid Eynge ok gcrael / and the wipt png er
ok their hadz/ therko e is my wach let on Fyre Salomon his fonne And (tandem the holy
egapncckthbs place ¢ Wall not be quenched. place acco;dengto $ deuptions oF p aunciet
Andas ko che Rynge of Juda which tent houlhouldes of youre bꝛethzẽ the cheldzen ol
you to enquire of the Lode / lo chall pe care ol the people / and akter the deuplpon of the
F öntohim:thus favth the Loꝛd God ot Itrael auncient houcholdes of the Leuites A helt
cöcernyng the woꝛd which thou halt hearde pallouer / fanctifye ¢ prepare poure bzethzt
Becaule ch yne hert oyd melt and thou drdeſt that they map do accozdynge to the woꝛde of
mene thy leite bekoꝛe pod whẽ thou heardeſt the u ella hand of Motes. 5
is wozdes agapnt this place and agapn And Fotiah gaue tothe comen people in
e enhabiters therok: humbledeſt thy elke lambes ¢ upddes / ko pallecuerofferznges
befoze me / and tareſt thy clothes and wepect only / vnto all 6 were pꝛelent xxx. choulande
befoze me / haue Ahearde allo lapth ß L. od. bytale /a the chouland orẽ / euẽ ofthe Bengt
Beholde J wylltake P tothy fatherg a chou Cubtaunce. Andhis Loz gaue well
halt be putin thy graue in peace / and thyne


Alb Ebapter.

ND ottal heide the keaſt of patle: 2

lout onta the Lorde in Zerufale“ di.men.rsije
and ther Clue padeouer in the. xi ij. Ed. a.


es hall not le ali the mylcheue that J will
ine be this place ¢ bpd p enbabpters of


ih meg. tk. P fame.* And they beoughtthe Heng wore


agapne.chen the tpngetent ¢geathered to
geather all the eiders of Juda and Jerulalk.
Andthe hyng went op in to the hoüle of the
Lozde / g all the men of Zuda andthe enba-
biters ok Kerukale ¢ the Pꝛeaſtes a Keuites
Gall the people great and tmalle: & reade all
the woznes of the boke of the couenaũt that
{was founde ineyeboute ofthe Lorde. And S
Ayng ſtode athis fandynge a made a coue-
taunt befoze the Lozde to kolowe the 02d
andto kepe his comaundementes / his wrt⸗


ipnglye
both vntothe people g allo ontothe preattes 15
ehnto the Leuttes Helkiah / Jachariab ¢
Tehiel rulers of the houte ofGod/gaue vnto
the pꝛeaſts ko paſleouerotteryngꝭ two thous
land g lere hundzed lambes a hpddes e thꝛe
hũdꝛed oxen. Ind Conaniah wich Sem
and Qathancel his bzetyzen / and Hatabial
and Jateland Jotabad Loꝛdes of the 3
tes /qauebntothe Leuites fue thoulande
paſſeduer / Epuebundzed oren.
And fo the feruice went ke the
poate
-chpanies atthe Bpnges cõmaundemẽt.
d they fine pateourr: 46 preatkt Ipꝛinck⸗
led the bioude teceaupnge itofthe h


oꝛwarde: and the
nee ng been Ses


cin, kett awape the burntotkerynges / to geue the
Nea. vnto the conien people as thep were deuyded


Lac 1g a. kherg. Andallguda ¢


by aunciẽt houles / toꝛ to offer pnto Lord /
ipbe as it is w2ptten inthe boke of Moles.
cand lo drdthep w the oren to. Ind they dꝛel⸗
fed the paſſeouer with kyre as p maner was.
But the other halowed dedycat beaſtes they
lodde in pottes / caulderns a pannes ¢ deuy⸗
dedthẽ qupcklpe amöoge all ß comen people,
Andakterwarde they made readye for them
lelues ¢ koꝛ the pꝛealtes and fo thechyldzen
ol Aaron / which were bulied in offerpnge ol
burntofierpnges a the fatt vntyn nyght. Ind
therkoꝛe the Leuttes prepared toꝛ the lelues
and koꝛ the pꝛeaſtes the fonnes of Aaron.
And Li Congers the chyldꝛen of Alaph ove
intheir ſtandyng accozdyng to the comaun-
demẽt of Dauid and Haph/ Heman a Idu⸗
thun the kynges fear ok vilions: ¢ § pozters
wapted at euerp gate / and nught not departe
krom their lerupce: But their bꝛethꝛẽ the Le⸗
uttes prepared £02 chẽ. and ſo all the terupce
ol the Loꝛde went fozwarde the fayde daye /
inofferpng padeouer of burntofirynges ops
the aulter of the C oꝛde / accoꝛdyng to the cõ⸗
maundement of kynge Joliah.

And Co the chyldzeñ of Flrael 8 coulde be
kounde / offered palleouer the fame tyme and
kepte the leaſt of lwete bꝛedde leuen dayes.
And ther was no paticouer lpke top / hepte
in Itrael fr 8 tyme of Samuel} pꝛophete:
nether dyd anpe ol the kynges ol Ffrael holde
Coches patteoucr feaſt as dyd Jollah and the
pꝛeaſtes and Lewitt g all Juda / 4 asg moche
OFF coulde be had / etheenbabiters

Dol Jerutalꝭ. And this palleouer was hold in
the. xviij. pere of the raygne of Joliah.


neg. rij ; Alter all this / whẽ Zoliah had kiniihed the


tẽple / Hecho kyng ol Egypt came vp to fight
agapnt Carcamis vpon Cuphzates and Jo
liãh wet out agaynſt him. And the other ſent
mellengers to him / capinge: what haue Ito
do with the thou kyng ol Juda? J came not
agarnſt the nowe at chis kxme / büt agaynſt
an houſe with whom J haue warre / and God
bade me halte. Leauẽ of therfoze andmedle
not w God which is W me ſleaſte he deſtrope
the Heuerthelelle Joliah turned not his face
krũ him / but made hem reabye to kyght wyth
him / aherkened not vnto the woꝛdes ol He⸗
cho out of the mouthe of God. And when he
was come to kyght in the valexe ol agedo /
che thoters thotte agapnſt the yng Zoliah.
And p kyng fapde to his teruaunt:carie me
awape / to:] am Coze hurte. And his feruaũ⸗
tes had hini out of 6 charet and put him in a
nother /e bꝛought him to Jeruralẽ where he
Dyed a was buried in the fepuichze of his fa-
‘mourned £03


men a lyngynge wemen lpeane of
gulf to this dare /a made it an oꝛdinaunce
in Alraek g they be wꝛyttẽ in lamentacvons.
Che retk of § actes ot Foliah abys goooned
in kolowynge the weptpng of the lawe / a hys
deades f̃pꝛlt q laſt are wꝛxtten inthe bote oe
the kynges of Frac and Juda.

EAfter Joliah raigneth Jchoahas / after Jehoahaz
Jehoakim akter Jehoakim Jehoacin - after Jchoacin
‘Zedebiah/in whole tyme all the people were carped
awap toWabilon and were brought agapneß. xx. pere
akter/ bp kyng Cyrus. es

¶ Che. xrxvi. Chapter.


Hdche people of p lande tone Je⸗ I
4) boabas ö tonne of Joltah a mane i. neg. xxiß t


him kyng £02 his father ingerula⸗

lem. And I ehoahaʒ wag xxiij yere
olde whẽ he beganne to raigne / ahe raigned
thꝛe monethes in Jerulaſẽ. Foꝛ the kynge ol
Egypt put him downe at Ferutale a merced
che lande in an hũdzed talentes of tylucr a a
talent ok goulde. Andß kyng of Egypt made
Cliakim bis bother kyng vpözuda a Jeru⸗
falk / e turnedhis name onto Jehoakim / but


fehoahas hes bꝛother Mecho oke a carved,


im to Egypt. And Fchoakim was. xxv. pere
olde wise begãne to raigne /a era eda
xi. pere in Ferutalé be dpd 5 olfpleaten the
Lopde his God. Agaynſt him came Pabucho
donozoꝛ kynge oF Babilon a bounde hymin
Fetters to carpe him to Babilon. Cherto the
kyng Nabuchodonosoz caryedok the velleis
of the houſe ok the Lo2d to Babilon and put
them in his temple at Babilon. Che ret old
actes ol Fehoakim a his Abhominacpons/
and that was layde to his charge / are wꝛittẽ
inthe boke ol the Kynges of Atrael: and Fee
hoacinhys fone raigned in bys ſteade. Je⸗
hoacin was. viij. vere olde whẽ he begannẽ to
kaigne / ahe raigned thꝛe monethdaten dayes
in Jerutalẽ: a dyd 5 dplpleated § Lord. And
wh p vere was out / kyng Pabuchodonozoꝛ
lent and tet himto Babiſon with § goodive


bellels ofthe boule of d Lozd / amade Zede⸗ n Bere wother


kiah is“


bother kyng oer zuda a Jerulalẽ. is tabenko vn⸗


And Zedeßlab was. xi. pere olde when he epa mance


begane to raigne / a raigned a xt pere in Je⸗
rutalem. And he ovo that dilplealed the 407d
his God / a humbled not him lelfe bekozege⸗
remiah the pꝛophete at the mouth or d LoD,
And therto he rebelled agaynſt Nabuchodo-


of ſpeache of &
bith


110302 which had receaued on othe of hym by ©


God / a was to ſtyle necked a to harde herted
toturne vnto $ Loꝛd God ok gerael. Cherto
all rulers of d preattes with people trel⸗
paced a pace atter all maner of abhompna⸗
cpons ot the hethen a poluted the houte ol
Logde which he hadhalowed in Jerulalem.
And Loꝛde God of their Fathers lent to
R
. 7


Thereturne


fog he had compallpon on bys people and on
his dwellpnge place. Butthey mocked the
melerigers of God and defpifed their worde
ample dfen bis propy:tes/ontyli the wꝛath
ofthe Lozdfoavote aga pnſt bys people that
it was pat remeadie. And fo he bꝛought vpõ

them the kyng of Caldeye a clue their young
men with F c werde in their holy tẽple / a ne⸗
ther fpared pounge man noꝛ mayden nether
olve man / nether lo moche as hyms ſtowped
koꝛ age: But gaue all into his hande.

And all $ vedlels of § houle of God bothe
great and lmalle / a the trealures of § houle
Of God / the creatures of the kynge andhys

D Loꝛdehe carved to Babilon euery whit. and
they burntthe houle of Soda bzake downe
the walles of Zerulalem / and burnt all the
palaces therot with kyꝛe with all the goodly
ftooffe cherok / and marredit. And he carved
awaye them that had efcaped the l werde / to
Babilon / where they were ſeruaũtes to him
ats chylozen/pnttil the kyngdom ok Perlia
beganne to rule / to kullkyll the woꝛde of the
Loꝛde bythe mouthe of Jeremiah / vntyll e
jande had her plealure okher Sabothes: foz
as longe as che la pe delolate / che kepte Sas

both vntyll ſhe had kullkplled. xx. peres.
Andthe fyꝛſt vere of C pus kong ol Perlia


Zetente xv. c. to kyniſhe the wozde ol the Loꝛd bp § mouth
and. Eve. ok geremiah the Lope ſtered bp the lpirite


ofC yꝛus king ol Perlia / phe made a pꝛocla⸗
macton thozou outallhis kingdom / Atherto
ett it vp in weytynge / layinge: Chus layth
Cpꝛus kyng of Pertta / all the kyngdomes ol
the erthe bath the Loꝛd God of heauen geuẽ
me / which hath charged me to builoe him an
houle in Jerulalem that is in the land ol Zu⸗
da. Wherkoꝛe wholoeuer is amonge vou ol
all his people /? Lo his God be with him /
and let him go vp.


¶ Che ende of the ſecond boke ofthe Chꝛo⸗
nycles of the Rynges of Juda.


¶ The fyꝛſt boke of
Eldꝛas the P:ophete.


is lendeth at be people that was in cape
Ei en pert thee holpvetels: And come
maundech them to buploe agapne (he temple.


¶ Obe ĩyꝛſt Chapter.


App the ſpꝛete of Cyzus kynge
ok Perlia / phe cauled it be pꝛoclamedthoꝛcu
Gut all his emprpe/ ve and by wꝛrtinge alto /


i. Eldꝛas.


frd captiuitie,


tapig: Chus tapty Cyꝛus & kyng of Peiſis:
Che Loꝛde God of heauẽ bath geuen me all


che kyngdt


omnes in the lande! and hath com: eln. nuſ a.


maundẽd me to buride him an houle at Jeru
lalem in Juda. Hjococuernow among vou
is of his people / the Loꝛdehig God be wyth
him / z lethim go vp to Jerulalem in Juda /
@buploe thehoute ok the Loꝛde God of Ff
rael. He is the Godthat is at Jerulalem. Ind
wholdeuer remapneth pet in eny maner of
ol place where he is a ſtraunger et the men
ol his place helpe him with ſyluer a goulde /
with good a catell / belpdeß which they wyl⸗
lengipe oer / toꝛ phoule of God at Jerulaiẽ.
Chen gat vp § pzpncppall Fathers of Fu: C
da and BenJamin/e the pꝛeaſtes and Leui⸗
tes / a al thẽy whofe tpꝛete God had rayled
to go pp / and to buplde the houle of d Lorde
at Jerufalem And all ther that were aboute
them / urenghthed their hand with vettels ol
ſpluer and goide / with good a catell / andge⸗
wels / belyde that which they gaue of their
atone krewyll. And Apnge Cyrus bought
koꝛth of the vellels of tie hoult of the Loꝛde /
which Habuchodonoz oz had taken oute ol
Jerulalẽ /a put in the houle or his God. But D
Epzus the kyng of Perlia brought th? kozth
by Mithzidates the trealurer / snumbzed the
vnto Selbazarthe pꝛynce ot Juda. And this
is the numbꝛe of the:thiztie batens of gouĩd /
anda thouland balens of lyluer / anpne and
twentie knyues / thyꝛtie cuppes of goulde / a
of other lyluer cuppes koure hundied a ten⸗
and of other vedels a thoulande. Sothat all
$ beflels both of goulde a lyluer / were krue
thouland a foure hüdzed. Del ba zar brought
them all vp / wyth thé that came vp out of d
captiuite of Babilon vnto Jerulalem.
C CThe nombre of them that returned fcd captiuitie.
¶ Che feconde Chapter.
zi Bele are the chyldꝛen ol the land?
Habuch out ok che che eng ate
* ichodonozoz the kyng ok Ba⸗
1 bilon had caried aware vnto Babs
lon and came agapne vnto z erulalem and in


ol Glam / a choulande / two eds toute
And kyktpe:the chyidzen dach / npne hun
dꝛed / o krue z Fourtyestye ‘OF Spacat /


on


Band fiftye:the men of Anatly


returne ee,


ſeuẽ hũdned athꝛe lcoꝛe: che chyldꝛẽ of Ban /


bre hundred ¢ two and fourtpe:the chridꝛen the chridzen


ot Bebai / ſyre hundꝛed and th ye a twentpe,
che chrldꝛen of Algad / a thoulande coop 4
dyed and two a twentpe:the chyldzen or Ado⸗
nicam pre hundꝛed a (pre g kæxtpe: the chr


dꝛen o Beguat / two thouland andcpre and chi


kyktpe: the chyldzen ot Adin / koure hundꝛed e
koure and tyktre:che chylozen of Ater of He⸗
zehtah / erght and nynetpe: che chyidꝛẽ of Be
al / thze hundꝛed andthze and twentye: the
chyldꝛen of Joꝛath / an hundꝛed etwelue:the
cheldaen of Halum / two hundꝛed and chꝛe ¢
twentpe:the chridꝛen of Gebar / tyue andnx⸗
netpe: che chyldaen of Bethlehem / an hudzed
and thze a twentye:tge men of etopha fpre
an hundꝛed /
and epghtand twentye: the chyidꝛẽ of Atma
ueth / two a fourtpe:ihe chplozen of Rariath
Zarim / Cephitah and Beeroth leut hundzed
and thze and fourtye:the chyldꝛen of Ramah
and Gabaah ſyxe hũdꝛed and one atwentie:
the men ol Machmas / an hundzed and two
and twentpe:the men ol Bethel and Ai / cewo
hundꝛrd and thze and twentpe:the chridꝛẽ of
Hebo two and kyktpe:che chplozen of Mag⸗
bis / an hundred and pre and kyktpe: the

dꝛen oF the other Elam a thoulande / two huͤ⸗


— pr thi
the chtlozé of


rim chꝛe hundꝛed andtwentpes

Aram ere
0 ol Jericho / chze hũ⸗
dꝛedand kyue a fourtpe:the chpidzen oe.
4. nde / tyre hundyed e thittve.
ſe preattes. he chplozen ol Jedatah of
the houle ol gelua / nyne hundꝛed and the a
feuentpe:the chyldꝛen of Emer / a choutande
and two and littpe:the chyldzen ol Phachur /
kanegeshe cheien or Seti, afin

8 ꝛen oF Parim / a thou
and feuenten 55 We


e.
Che Leuites. Che chrldzen of Fetus and
Cadmiel of the chydzen ol Podaulah / foure
Aandleuentpe. Che fyngers the chridzen ol
Alaph / an hundzed and erght and twentye,
Che chyldꝛen of the dozekepers. Che chxidzẽ
ol Delum / the chyldꝛen of ter / che chridzen
ol Calmon / the chyldzẽ A kub / the chydzen
ol Hatita / and the chyidzen of Sobat: all to
Geathevan hundꝛed andnpne and tiurtpe.
Che Hethinims the thyldꝛen of Ziha / che
chyldꝛẽ ol Palupha / the chrldꝛẽ ot abaoth /
che chyldzen of C eros / the chyidꝛẽ of Sicha /
the chyldꝛen of Phadon the chyldzen of Les
banah the chyldꝛen sr pagabay the che
ol Acub/the chplozen of Bagab / che chridꝛẽ
of Damlai / the chyldzen of Banan/ the chvl
deen ol Gadel che chez ot Gahar / the cpl
Ven of Reatah the chyozen of Razin the
chplozen of Necuba / the chyldꝛen ol Galan /


i. Eldꝛas.


ile.


chploze ol Spitar
Chplozen of Reziah / the chylozé ol
genen Sota ee
che chylozen of Ho⸗
phereth che chridzen a hende / Cheah
dꝛen of Faalab/the chridzen of Darcon⸗ the
chylbzen of Pedell the chridzen of Sapha⸗
Gaby the chplozen of ateiit / che chpinzen ol
Pochereth of Zebaim / the chridꝛen of Amt.
Allthe MNethinims andthe chylozen ot Soae
Jomons feruauntes were all to geather/thze
ent vp alto / Cheimela
Parla; Cherub / Addon and .
could not ſhewe their fathers houtenoz their
fede / whether they were ol Akracl. Che chyl⸗
dꝛen of Walatab/the chyldꝰen ol Tobiah / the
chplozen of Hecoda (pre hundzed and two
Uktpe. And of the chylde of the pꝛeaſtes. Che
chplozen of pobatab the chplozen or Bano;
che chrldzen of Bersiiat / which tone one ol
e daughters of Berzilat the Galaadite to
wyle / and was counted amonge the fame
names: thele Coughte the regylter of their
byzth/and tounde none / therkoze were they
put krö the pꝛellhode. And Hathirtatha fapoe
—— ger lh a8 hare not ae of the
5 e vpa pꝛeaſt wit
cher dere [pe abe PERE
Che whole cõgregacton as one man / was
two and kourtpethoülande / the hundꝛed and
the Ccoze: belpdetheirteruaunteg and may⸗ *
dens / ol whom there were leuen thoulandẽ /
theebundzedandfeuen and thyztie And they
badtwohundzedlyngyng men and wemen /
leuen hundred and {pre and thpztpe hoꝛles /
twobundzed andfpue and fourtye Mule /
koure hundzed and kpue and thyꝛtie amels /
and tyre thouland / teuen hundꝛed andtwen⸗
tye Aües. And certapne of the chefe fathers,
whenther came tothe houke of the Lore at
Jerulalem ther offered wyllyngip onto the
houle of Gad / p it cyulde be lett in his place /
and gaue alter thetr abpipte vnto the treatu⸗
re of the woꝛcke / one and chꝛe fcoze thouland
drämes a kxue thoulande pounde of yluer /
andan hundred preattes garmentes. Bothe
pꝛeaſtes and the Leuites / and certapne oc ß
Be eu — — the pozters and
Tagen e css. ah
Tatter the foundactono ö
3 — k temple once renned they
1 And


lerbif,


Srodippoig.c,


Lemmas,


a
5. El viß. a
ih. Eſdz v. c.


B houle orthel ond was larde. Manpe allo
e
0 20 ethe
koũdacid of his boule was lavedbefoze their
eves / wepte wych a loude voce. Ind many
chouted with loye / lo chat che nople gaue a
great lounde / in lo moch the people coulde
not knowe the iopkull founde koꝛ the nopte


ol ok che wepynge amonge the people: koꝛ the


i


wyll onto the Lozde, 2
Upon the Eyed dave ol the leuẽth moneth


beganne they to offre burntlacrpfpces onto


the Loꝛde. But the koundacion of che temple

ofthe Loꝛde was not vet laped. Meuertheles

they gaue money onto the malons and car⸗

penters / and meate and dꝛyncke and ople vn

to them of Sidon and of Cire / to bꝛynge the

Cenze tymbze from Libanus by See onto
xatitheetwpte*Joppa/accozopnge tothe cõmaundemẽt ol
Jepha. Ebzus the kynge of Pertia.

C. gee leconde vere of their commpnge vn
to che houle al God at Jerutalẽ in d feconde
moneth / beganne Zozobabel the donne ol
Dalathiel / and Fetus the tonne of Joleder
€ the remnaunt dk their bꝛethꝛẽ the peeattes
und L euttes / and ali they that were come out
okthe captyuite vnto Jerutalem / a appoyn⸗
ted the Leuites krom twentpe pere olde and
aboue / to le that the woꝛcke of the houle ol
the Loꝛde went kozwarde And Felua ſtobe
‘with his Connes and bꝛethꝛen / and Cadmutet
with his lonnes / and the chyldzen ol Juda / to
kozther the woꝛckemen of the houle of God /
namely the chplozen of Penadad with their
chyldzen and their bꝛethzen the Leuttes.

Ind when the buplders lapde the kounda⸗
cion ofthe temple of the Lozde / the preattes
Kode intheirarape, with trompettes. And d
Leutes the cyplozen of Alaph with cymba⸗

t Pararvß. b. les / to peapte the L ode akterthe maner of
Dauid kynge of Itrael. And they fange to
geather / geüynge pꝛayle and thankes vnto
the Loꝛde / becaute he is gractous / and be⸗
caufebysmercp endureth ko euer bpon Ac⸗
rael. And all & people ſhouted loude in pꝛap⸗
inge the Loꝛde / becauſe the koundacron ot


people Houten with a loude crpe / ſo chat the


nopte was herde karre of,

t. The burloynge ofthe temple is hyndered / and let.
The. iii. Chapter. :
when the aduerlarpes of Juda a


and hyndered their deupce / as longe as Cy⸗
tug the Kynge of Perkia ipued / oneplt the
rapgne of Darius kyng of Perlia, But whe
Ahaluerus was kenge / in the begrnnynge
ok bys rargne wzotte they vnto hem a com
plapnte agaynſt them of Juda and Jeruſalẽ.

And in che tyme okarthaxerles, wrote Bi⸗
fellam / Withzidates / Cabeel andthe other
of their councell vnto Artharertes the kynge
of Perfia. But the ccriptüre of 5 letter was
wyytten in the Sprang ſpeach / and was in⸗
terpꝛetated in che langage of the Spꝛians.
Rehum the chaunceler / and Samlat p tery:
be / wzote thys letter agaynſt Jerulalem to
Age gehe 5 re A

We Rehum p * chaunceler/and Samlat
chelerpbe and other of che coulnceloH img her
ok Arphalath / ot Tarplat / of Perlis / ofS orient
vach/of Babilon / of Sulan / of Deha / and
of Eiam / and other ot the people / whomthe
greate and noble ã cenaphar bꝛoughte ouer /
and let in the cpties of Damaria ee
us schen e delete cc ep emtganhe
of ey lent heal.

onto kynge Artharertes, :

Thy leruauntes the men on this kde the
water and in Ceneeth. Be it knowne ane
8 g unge /


But they antwered vs with there wo;

and lade: nde are the leruauntes of the 000

olheauen and erth /a bupidethehoule 5 was
dedmanp veres a goo! which a greate in neg. vt.
ng OF Alraelburſded and fet bp. Andakter v Bara. a.


long Ui reg eil
n le
ute / and d. v.
er.
7


ent here in / l. 4
—-
How when n


ex 1 Aggeus and 2
A and Zacharpis ß
¶ Che. b. chapter.
De Prophetes / 4
charp the konne ot
nto the Lewes chat


Darius,


Hong Cras cömaundement / that the houte ſhetr diligence. And che Eiders of the Fewes


oF Godatzerulale Guide be buplded:a rende
vs the kyñges mynde concernyng the fame,


1b. Ede vi. . 4
lof the kpngztrealure boule / which

. lave at Babilon.æ So at Egbatha

untere wen in a cattell p ipeth in the land of ? Mee⸗


code ina col, des / there was koũde a hoe / a init wag chere bi


ker ( that was an acte wꝛytten alter this maner: In d kyꝛſt
dhe are , pere or hyng Czus commaunded the lame
dis(aroläße, Reng Cyrus co buploe p houle of Sonat Fe
and ther in toan tufale / in place where p Cacrificets made /
torptten koche c tolape the foundacion to beare the thoze
AmemaralLec. cubper height / thee Chore cubptes böedth /
thze wales of roughe tones / ¢one wall of
cymber/eperpences chalbe geuẽ ol ö fyng
joule, Andthe goulde and cyſuer vellell of p
bout OF God ( which Pabuchodonozoztoze
out of the tẽ ple at Z erutalẽ / ebzouahe vnto
Babilon) halbe keſtoꝛed agapne / that they
mare be brought onto the temple at Jerula⸗

Tent to their place into the houle of God.
Get pou farre krõ the therfoze/ thou Cha⸗
janat captapne beyonde d water / Schar⸗


is ãccoꝛdyng: fe that this be done with oute
faute/ehac cher mape offre lwete fauoures |


buypived a cher pꝛolpered thozow 6 pꝛophe⸗
rienge ot Aggeus the pꝛophet and Zachary
che lonne of Ado: then buxlded / a fet vpthe
woꝛcke / accoꝛdynge to the cõmaundemẽt ol


in ts ng Datiug.
‘And the chridie of Firael / che preattes/ f f. III

Leuttes / a the other chplozé ok the captpuite
elde the dedycacion of p houle of God wyth

ioye / a oltered at the dedycacion ol the boute
ol God / an hũdꝛed calues / two hũdzed lambẽ

kourehundꝛed goates:¢£02 the fpnofferpnge
fozall Itvael tweluehe goates / accoꝛdynge
tothe nombze of the trpbes of Acrael /a tet p

prea in thetr courtes/¢ 9 Leuites in their
Dfipces compnitter onto God which is at e⸗
rulalẽ as it is wꝛpttẽ inthe bone of Moles.

And the chplozen ol the captyuyte helde D
Palleouer vpö the kourtenth dave of the kyꝛlt
moneth:fo2 the pꝛeaſtes and Leultz had pu⸗
rikped thé lelues / lo that they were al cleane
asone 7. cue eben foe gut cont
2en of thecaptpuite/ a

the pꝛeaſtes / and fo2 them telues. And chyl-
dꝛen OF g trael which were come agayne out


cdras the
onne of Saraiah / the fonne ot à⸗


tonto the God ok heauẽ / a pꝛaye koꝛ p kyngt lariah / thelonne of Helkkah / p tonne of Se

weet koꝛ his mie -Thiscomaundement jun the tonne ofFadoc the forme of Abitob/

haue J geué And what mato euer he be that the lonne of Amariay/ the tonne of Aariah /

alteretl tete wordt / there hall a heame be che fone ot Marafoth / p tonne ot araiah /

take fro his houle / let vp /a he walbe hãged the lonne ol S / the fonne of Bonk / p lonne

theron / a his houle halbe pꝛyted koz p deade. of a bilua / che tonne ol Phinehes / che lonne

But the Godthat dwelleth in heauen de⸗ ok Elea zar / the lonne of Saron p chete preatk

C trope ali kynges 71 that put to their Chis Eldꝛas was a quiche ferpbe in $ lawe


hande to alter ¢ to


yeake downe the houle of Motes /: which $ Loꝛd God of Alrael dyd


of God at Jerulalem. & Darius haue com- geus. And ö kynge gaue him all he requp⸗ Ero. ra


maunded that this be dilygenttydone.
Chen ch


red / accondyng to $ bade of ö Lozde his God


athanat p captayne be ponde the vpon him Andthere went vp certapne ofthe


watet and Scharbuzanai with their coun: chploze of Alrael /g ofthe pꝛeaſtes and of the
—— had tent) drd Leuttes / br the lyngers / orthe posters 2 on


aethavectes,


of the Nethinims vnto Jerulalem / in the le⸗
uenth vere of Benge Attharerles. And they
came to Ferulalem in the tytth monech / that
ig the feuenth pere ol che kong. Foz ppontge
kpꝛſt dave of the yꝛſte moneth / deupled he to
go vp from Babilon: and on the keꝛũt pave of
che kykthe moneth came he to Jerüfalem / ac⸗
coꝛdenge to the good hande of God dpa him.
Foz Eldꝛas pꝛepared his hert to leke p lawe

Vol the L oꝛd and to do it / and do teach the pꝛe⸗
cept and iudgment in Alrael.

And this iß the copye of the letter / p kyng
Artharerles gaue onto Eldꝛas the pꝛeatt / ß
kcribe / which was a teacher in the woꝛdes oF
5 Lopde ¢ ok his ſtatutes ouer Icrael. winto
Eldꝛas the pꝛeaſt and lerybe in che lawe ol
God of heaue / peace and kalutacpon. I haue
cõmaunded that all they of the people or fl⸗
rael / and ofthe pꝛealles and Leuites in my
realme / whych ere mynded ok their atone
Good wyllto go bp to Jerulalẽ / that they go
with che /bepnge lent of the kynge and of the
feué Loꝛdes of the councell/ to vyſet Juda ¢
Zerulalem / accozdpnge to the lawe OF God /

which is in thy hand; And chat thou chuldeſt
take wich the /coluer and goulde / whrchche
Beng a ö loses of his councell geue oktheir
atone good will vnto § God of Frrael( whole
babptacion is at Jerufalem)and all ß Criuer
Egoulbe V thou canſt kynde in all the coũtre
ol Babilon: with it that the 7 pꝛeaſts
geue ot their awne good wy!
dk God at Zerulalem.

€ Cane thou the lame / a bye drupgently W
the lame money / calues / lambes / goates /a
meateokerynges g bꝛrnckeofferynges / to be
Offered ppõ the aultare oF the houle of youre
Sodat gerutalem. And lone what it lpketh
che and thy bꝛethꝛẽ to do wych the remnaunt
ofthe money / do atterß wyll of poure God.
And the dedels that are geuen the Foz the nu⸗
nyſtracpon in the houle ol thp God / chole de⸗
luer chou betoze God at Ferulalem.

And whatloeuer thynge moꝛe hail be ne⸗
defull Foz the houle of thy God / whych is ne.
cellarx fo the to fpende/let the fame be geuẽ
Out ok the Eyngd chamber. J kyng Arthaxer⸗
les haue comaunded all creatures beponde
‘the water that lone whatloeuer Eldzas the
pꝛeaſte and ſcrybe in the lawe of the Godot
heauen requpieth ot pou / chat pe kult pl che
fame dpligentipy Patpil an bundzed talentes
ol kluer vntpll an hundzed quarters of

a wheate / and kyll an hũdꝛed Barthes of wyne /
inv d. and epi an hüdꝛed· Batthes of oyle / and kalt
Prwithout mealure. nhatloeuer belongethto
che lawe of the God ok heauẽ ſlet the lame be
done with drlpgence fo2 the boute of $ God
of heauẽ / chat there come no wrath bpon the

~ Epnges realme andbis chyldzen.


| i. Eldꝛas,


lvnto the houſe th


3
5 Clxxix.
And knowen be it onto vou / chat ve ſhall
haue no auctoypte to requrꝛe taxpnge ¢ cuz
Home /a peariprentes opa any of p pꝛeaſts /
Leuites /fyngers / pozters /Methinims amp:
niſterg in 6 boule of this Goo. But thou El⸗
dꝛaglakter the wyldame of the God that is in
chyhande let thou iudges and arbyters / to
fudge all the people that is be yonde goꝛdan /
euen all loch as knowe the lawe of typ Gon:
andthem that hnowe it not / thole le that ye
teache. And whorocuer wyll not dripgentiy
Eulfpll the lawe or thy God / andthe Kpnges
lawe wan haue hie iüdgmetkoz ö deade whe⸗
ther it be vnto deach / oꝛ to be banyched / 02 to
be cõdemned in pee tobe put in pꝛelon.
*Pzapledbe 5 1070 God of oure aher sg Emig e.
which Co hath inkpired the kyngz bert to gar⸗ Ehe
nyt the houle of Gon at Fevutatem:¢ hath
enclynedhys mercy onto me in the pretence
okthe kyng / ahis councelers / and bekoꝛe all
the krnge hre eſtates. And was counkoꝛted
(accoꝛdpng to the hade of the Lozde my Bod
duerme) a lo geathered I the head of Itrael
to geather / thattheymyghte go vp with me.
CCbe nombe of them that returned to eruſalem
with Eldras.


a
p ih. Eloy. big. e.


e chploze
Ven ok Ithamar/ Daniel: ofthe c
Daud / Hatug: ol the chyldze of
Of the chylozen oF Pharos / Sachavy/e wyth
bun wetenombzeaanibundzed a kyktie men.
De che cheldze ol Pahath Moab ; Elioenai
the fonne of Zarahiah / and wyth hym two
gundzedmen. DE the chyidaen ol Zechaniah
$ Corne of Fabatiel and with hum thze hun⸗
ed men . De the chridzen of Adin Abed the
bonne of¥onadjan/and with him kyltie men.
Dé the chridꝛen of Elam / Aatah the donne
ol Athaltah / and with him reuentie men. DE
the chplnzen of Saphatis / Habadtah p tonne
ol Michael and with him fouretcoze men.
Or the chyldeẽ or Joab / Obadiah p lone
ol Febiel / and wrth hem two huudꝛed and 5
exahtene men. Of the chrldzt of Seionuth /
the lonne ol Forphiab/ and with him an hun
r eee of paper 3 e
e chridꝛenokl Webat / Zachary the
tonne of Beat / and with him epabt a cher.
tpe men. Okche chyldzẽ of Afgad / Jchanan /
che fonne of Bakatan/and with him an hun⸗
dedandten men. Ok the laſt chyidz of ado⸗
nicam andthele were their nantes : Ellphe⸗
e
. t OF Begut / that /
and Zabud and with chem leute men. And
345, Igeathered


The töplaynte, l. Ecdzas,


J geathered the to geather by the water that
denneth towarde a and there above we
Sthze dapes. And whe A lonrdamöge d people
and the pꝛeaſtes / founde no WLeuites there.
Chen kent Elieler / Ariel / Semeiah / Elna⸗
FJarib / Einathan / Nathan / Sacharx a
ofollam 8 rulers / and Joiarib and Eina⸗
than the teachers / a thofe lent q onto Edo d
chefett at Catphia / that ther Wulde teich vs
myniſters ko the houle of dure God / and
tolde thé what they chulde faye vntockdo and

to his bꝛethzen the Hethinimz at Calphia.
Andlaccoꝛdynge tothe good hande of oure
God vpon vs) thẽx bzoughte vs a wyle man
from amonge the chylozen of Mohon the
Conne of Leut the fonne of Itrael / euẽ Da⸗
rabta with bis lonnes and bꝛethꝛẽ / tene
And Halabia / and with him Fatah ol p chrl⸗
dꝛen OF Merari / with bis bꝛethzen and their
Tonnes / twentie. And of the Hethimms / whũ
D Pauid g che Prynces gaue to myniſter vnto
the Leuites / two hundzed and twentye / all

named byname.
en
agrnges / ua / cauled Ja: faltpnge to be proclame!

AA we mpabecbunible oure Celues befeze dure


Semabeth mE God / to lee or him a ryghte wape for vs @


Spon hanson, Bure chr ben and all ouve ſubftaunce. Ko?


Rene afup -3 twas athamentorequyze of the kyng / lou⸗
H


ers done öyers andhozimen / to helpe vs agaynſt the

lor cobio / enempe in the wape. Foz we hadlayde vnto

ther for fom che krnge K he hande of dure God ts po alt

Fron tafereor chem cone Cekebim ingoodnes/ andyys oye:

compng at bad lence and wrath vpan all them that fozlake

or to alen Ehim. Do we fatted/andloughte this at oure
Guat Fee Godfandhehearde ba.

forvpucapnge And J Coke outtwelue of the chele preae

‘of their fyrines) (tes / Spavabta and Halabia / and ten of their

as itts miptten bzethzen wyth them / and weped them there

aud. ert. the luer and gouibe and bellels fo2 P heute

Seda de, ber huge vnto the boute of dure God which

the kynge andthe Loꝛdes of bys councell a

zrnceß / and all Ilrael that were at hande /

jad geuẽ to the heüeotkeryng: a there wexed

Ithem vnder their hande krẽ hũdꝛed a tyltie

talentes ol cyluer / Gin lyluer betel an hun⸗

deed talentes / and in goulde an hundzed ta⸗

lentes / twentye cuppes ot goulde oF a thou⸗

lande dꝛãmes / and two coltiꝑ oꝛnamentes ot

good bꝛaſſe / as cleave as goulde / ¢fapde vn⸗

ko them: Je are bolp vntoche 11070 / therfore

are the bettels holp alto / and tots the lyluer

g goulde that is geuen ok a good well vnto ß

Loꝛde God ol youre fathers : match pe ther

fore and kepe it / tyl pe were it downe befoze

the chefe preattes and Leuites / and aunciẽt

fathers of Ilrael at Jeruſalem in the cheſtes

ok he houle of the Coꝛde. Chen toke d pꝛea⸗

tes and Leuttes that weyedlyluer a goulde

and veſell / to bꝛynge it to Jerulalem vnto d


heute of dure od. So we brake by / com
the water of Abaua on the twelneth dave of
the p2 moneth / eo go vnto Ferulalem: and
the hande ol oure God was vpon vs / and de⸗
lpuered vs from the hande of the enempes a
pꝛeuꝝ waytinges by the ware. Ind we came
to Jerulalem s abede there the daxes. But gs
on d fourth dave was the fpluer and goudde /
and befell weed in the houle of oure God
vnder the hande of Meremoth the tonne of
Mah the pꝛeaſt / and with him Eleazar the
fonne of Phinehes / and with them olabad
che lonne ol Jelua / and Hoadiah the conne
ot Benol 8 Leuites / acomyng tod nombꝛe
@ weyght ol euerx one. Ind thẽ weyght was
all wzptten vp at che lame trme.

And the chplozen of the captruite / whych
were come out of pꝛelon / offered burntotke⸗
rynges vnto the God of Ffracl: twelue bul⸗
lockes Foz all Acrael / lyxe e nynetpe rãmes /
leuen and leuentye lamibes / a tweſue goates
koꝛ a lpnoſterpnge, all toche burntofferynge
ok the Loꝛde. Andther delpuered the kynges
commypdyon vnto the kynges dftpcers F to
d capptapnes on this iyde d water. And ther
promoted the people and the boule of God.

ei th on the people that had turned
. maryOwRD fgets

¶ Che. ix. Chapter.
Hen allthis was perkourmed / the


che nacpons in the landes as touchyng their
abbomynacpons / namelp of the Cananites/
Hethites Pheretites Febulites Ammonts
tes, Moabites cappcpans/and Amozites, vanes
* For ther bauctaken the daughters oF the u ge
fame and their fonnes / and haue mprte theron sri
holp fede with thenacpons in the landeg and zee
the hand of the pꝛynces and rulers bath bene
Were eder 9 ente mp clothes
a

anbmp rapment fand plucte of the hearre d. ear 0
ol myheade and of my beerd / and late mour⸗
nyng. Andthere refozted onto me all foch as
feared the woꝛde ok the Loꝛde God of Flrack
becaule ofthe greate tranfarettyon . And
fate mournpnge bneplt the euenynge faces
kyce. And aboute the euenynge lacryfyce
role vp fromyheurnes and rẽte my clothes 16
and my rarment and fell open my knees /
ſpꝛed out my handes vnto the Loꝛd my God /
andlarde.

Sr God / A amachamed / and darre not
likte bp myne eyes vnto the mp@od:fo2 oure
wyckednelles are growne ouer oureheede / a
dure trefpaces arc waren greate vntoß hea⸗
uen. Senee § tyme of oure fathers haue we
bene in greate trefpace vnto this „


lems,


i. Eldꝛas.


becaule of oure wyckednelles haue we ard wyues of all the people ok the lande. Pow
dure krnges bene delpuered into the hãde ol there is hope vet in Jrrael N
che kynges of thenacpons/ into the l werde / thertoꝛe let vs make a couenaunt now with
into raptiupte /in to cporle / and into conkü⸗ oure God / chat we Wall put awaye all the
lion of face / as it is come to palle thys bape. wyues (and loch as are borne of | thempaccoꝛ⸗

C But now is there a lptie and todapne gra- dynge to the councell of the Lozde/¢ of them
cioulnes come fromthe Lode oure God / lo that feare the commaundemẽt of dure God /
that Come of vs are elcaped p he mape geue chat we mape do accozdpng to the lawe. Get
vs a naple in hys holy pate / that oure God the vp thertoꝛe / koꝛ the matter belongeth vn
mape lpghte dure eres arm geue vs a Iptle to the. e wl be wich the / be or good com⸗
Ipfe in oure bondage Foz we are bondmen / forte / and do it.

0 oe koꝛſakẽ 11 1 cs
ccand hath enclpned mercy vnto vs inthe rulers / pꝛeaſtes and l. euites / a of all Ftvacl,
leghte ofthe kynges ol Perlia/ p he wulde that cher chulde do acco;dyng to ch wende W
geue bs lle and promote the boule ol oure andcheytware. And celdzas ttode vp before
Sod / a to lett vp the delolacxon therot / a to the houle of God / and went in to the chãber
geue vs anhedge in Juda and Jeruſalem. of Johanan the tonne of Eltalib. And when

Andnow O dure God / what call we lape he cante thither / he ate no bed / nog dance
After this: fo2 we haue tozcanẽ ehr cömaun⸗ water: ko he mourned becaule of the tranc⸗
demẽtes which chou hat cõmaundedbythr gretlion of thé that had bene in captpuite,
leruauntes the Pzophetes and tapde: The And they cauled a pꝛoclamacion be made
lande vnto which vego to polleße it is an vn⸗ thozow out Juda and Jerulalem / nto all 8
cleane land thorom 8 kelchines ofthe people chriden which bad bene in captpupte / that
ol che landes in their abhominacpos wher⸗ they wulde geather the telues to geather on:
with ther haue made it full of vnciennes on to Actutalem:anp that wholoeuer came not
erp fpoe.* Cherfoze Hall pe not geue rou⸗ with in thze daves accozwynge to the deupce
re daughters onto their fonnes / and their ok the rulers and Eſders / alloys ſubnaunce
daughters Wall pe not take vnto pour connß qhulde be fozlett / and be put out fromthe cö⸗
and letze not their peace and welth koꝛ euer / gregacton of the captyue.
that ye mape be ſtronge / and eniope the good Chen allche men ot Juda and Ben qamin
in the lande / and that pe and youre chyldzen geathered them felues togeatherbnto Jeru⸗
mape haue p inheritaũce ot it toꝛ euermoze. falem inthze dapes / chat is on the twentie

Andakterall ches that is come vpon ds dave of the nyenth maneth:and all the people
(becaute of oure euell deades a greate tref- late in the trete betoze $ houte of God / and
pacehthou oure God hat fpared oure wyc⸗ trembled becaute of the matter / and forthe
kednelles andhalt geuen os a delyutraunce rapne. And etozas the pꝛeaſte ſtode bp / and
a8 it is come to palie this daye. Sapde vnto them: Ve haue tranſgreſſed / that


As foꝛbs / we haue turned backe / a haue ye haue taken ſtralunge wyues / to make che Deut. vg. a
let gothy commaundementes / to make con⸗ krekpace of Aurel pet more cöft now ther. ehe


tracte wihe people ok thele abhominacrong. kope onto the Loꝛde Godot youre fathers /

wilt chou then be wꝛoth at b / tyil we bebt- do hrs plealure / and leparate poure keines
terly conlumed / ſo that nothynge remapne / krom the people of the land / a krö the ftratige
and ten there be no delxueraunce: D Lorde wpues.chen antwevedall the cögregacion /
God ol Ikrael thou art righteous/foz we re⸗ and larde with a loude bopce: Iettit be done
mame pet elcaped / as it is this ape. Beholde as thou hack lade But $ people are many,
inthp pꝛelence are we in oure trelpace /fo git is a rainpe wether a they can not ſtande
becaue of it is there no ſtandyng befoze the. ee this a betel of one
Ebepcoplerepente them and turne /s put awape Dave oꝛ two / to we are manpthat haue olfen
t wens deo inthis cxanigce avon. Lett bs appopnte


berp greate cõgregacion ofmenand wemẽ / tutmedatwaye from bs fo2 this offence,
and Semen e che people wepte der tore. Chen were appornted 2 S tonne c
And Sechantay the tonne or Fehletone ars ok Ataheland Jabatta $ fonne of Chekuah
chyldꝛen of Clam/antwered/ andfapde onto ouerthis matter: Ind Wofoliam a Saba⸗
Eldraswe haue trelpaced agarntk $ Lod char the K euites holpe hem. Andthe chyldre
dure God / in that we haue taken ſtraunge ofthe rsa. 2 e

; . lj. pꝛealt/


Clxxx.


Chen role Ecdꝛas / and tobe an othe ol p ig. Emre. e. a.


lt / and the aumepent heades thoꝛowthe

houle of their fathers / galithat were now

rehearſed bx name / leparated them lelues / ¢

fate them downe on the tet bape or d

moneth to exam this matter. and ot d Ey2!

the kyꝛſte moneth ther: made an ende

b hadtaken ſtraunge wrues.

jamonge the chridzen of the pꝛealtes

there were men kounde z had tanẽ Rraunge


Jerulalem Lis


Sopues/namely amonge the chris of Fetus ff


Connie oF Joledec e oc his bzethz / WMaa⸗
an eltesee, Aab amd bnd Ard her


galle theirhandes there vp) chat cher woide


putawapecheirwrues andloz their tretpa-
ce olter ynge to geuea ramme for their trel⸗
pace. Ainonge the chplozen olckmer / Hanani
and Zabadlah. Amonge the chridzen of Ha⸗
vim / aaſiah / Eitah / Semeiah. Jehiel / and
Ollah. Amonge the chyidꝛen ok P hachur / ⸗
koenat/ Paaliah/Fmacl Hathanael/ Joca⸗
bed and cleacah. Amonge the Leuites / Jo⸗
ta) Sauen keene ane
al 5
$ irngers / Elialib. Amonges pozters Se-
eln bee the chplozen of Pha:
.Amonge is
g ene eliaby Vecchah / Pian,
Eleazar / Melchtah / and Banatah. Amonge
the chplozen of Elam / Mathantah / Jacha⸗
rp/Fehiel/Abdt Jerimoth d Ellah. Amöge
che chyldzen ot Zethua Eltoenat / Elianb /
Mathantah /Ferimoth Zabad and 4 74a.
Amonge che chyldzen ol Bebat / ehohanan /
Hanantah/Sabat andAthalat. Imonge the
chyldꝛen ar Beont / Mololam / Maluch / 4⸗
dalah / Jacub, Saal and Jertmoth.Amonge
Some renbe, the chyfdzẽ ol; Pabi Edna / Cala /
She captapne ol Banatah / Waal Machaniah Bezeleel /
goa. *Benusand Wanackeh Amonge the chudzen
ol Narum / E seu Atte / Be tah / See
melah / Simeon / amin! luch and
Samariah. Imonge loge ot alem /
Mathnat Matpathah / Zabed/ elet /
Jerenit/ Manadleh ¢ Seimet A möge p chyl
dae ot Bant / Madat / mri / uel / Baneah /
Cheluht Mamab / Maremoth /e=
Talib Watgantah / Hathanal / Jaalan
nt / Bemui Demian / Dalamiab / Mathan
Adatah / Machnadabal/ Salat / Sara / ala
e e a Be
fan 8 2
bo Tatel / Mathathtan / Zabed / Sabina / Je⸗
dai / Joel and Banaiah. BNehete had tanken


ſtraünge wrues. And amõge 8 ſame wyues prayer:


there were tome / chat had bo ne chridꝛen.
ende okthe kyꝛt bone.
rai —


ij. Eldꝛas.


Se


The letonde boke


e called thebo
— — 5 the boke


Cgechemiah buttelar to byuge Artaxerles pꝛapeth
te Bond faz the people.
—— Delcarethe altes oF gt z
ö x 26 © Der,
venta ö fonne of* alta,
Baka gionen meme ct: 4
9


w Panant one of mr bze- brug
chi came with certapne men of Juda Vanden,
Fare ge e uche Dec dedihesto,
uered a eſcaped From the captputte / a how

it went at Ferulale And ther ſapde vnto me:

Che remnãunt ot the captpupte are there in

che lande in greate milkoꝛtune and rebuke,


Che walles of Jerulalẽ ave broke downe / p. nn


andthe gates therok are bꝛent with Fyre.
ih K heawde thete wopdt Akatmedowne z

and wepte / and maurned two dapes / ¢ fatten

5 the God 3 fayo:

Lo; ofbeauen / thou eters :
rpble God thou that bepett couenaunt and er tren
metcy foschem that lone $ and obferue thy weng
commaundementes:iet thyne cares hearkẽ /
athpne eves be open / p thou mayeſt heare
H praper ol thy ſeruaũt / which pꝛaye now

efoze the dape and nyghte koz the chyidzen
ol Ffrael thy Ceruauntes / and knowledge ß
fynnes ot the cyplozen of Aral / whych we
haue committed agarnſ che.

Andg emp fathers houle haue fynnedal-
bo. Me haue bene coꝛtupte onto the / inthat c
we haue not kepte the cömaundemẽtes / ſta⸗
tutes a lawes / which thou commaũdedit thy
feruaunt Moles. Yet call to remembꝛaũce
8 comaundedſt thy leruaũt

kes andlardell: Pepe trancgrede“ then
wyil J ccater vou abꝛoade amonge p nacios.
But pt pe turne vntome / and kepemp come
maundementes and do thé: though ye were
cat out vnto the vttermoſt parte ol heauen
J geather you from thence /a wyll
ge pou Fromthence/euz vntothe places
haut chofen foz my name to dwell there

are tes e thy people wh v
thou halt delxueredthoꝛow thy great power
andmyghtie hande. O Lond / let thyne cares
herken do the pꝛayer of thy feruafit / and che
of thy leruauntes / whole delpꝛe is to
keare thy name / and let thy leruaũt pꝛocpere
this dape / a graunte him mercy in the cyaht
ol this man: ko J was the kynges butelar.

After Hehemiah had obtayned ler ters ot Arthaxer⸗
See ehen Jen Jin br eaters

Che ſeconde Chapter,


in the twentle vere that 4 ace |


agaynt.


QS moneth —— emiah.


eave ol kynge Arthaxertes / when


ee


the kynge / let hun geue mee letters to d capi⸗


tapnes beponde the water / they mape cons
uepe me ouer / till come into Juda: q letters
vnto Alaph the Lade ol the kynges wood /
he mape geue me wood koz beames to p gat
of the palace / which are harde on the houle &
harde on the wales of tye cptpe/ and koz the
houle that J chall entre in to. Ind the kynge
gaue me accoꝛdynge tos good hande of God
bpon me: And when J came to the captapnes
bepondethe water / J gauethemthe kynges
letters. And the kyñge Cent captaynes and
hoꝛlmen wych me.

But when Sanabalat the Hozonite and
CTobiah the cetuaũt of Ammonites hearde
Zit greued the eic come a mã
wich Coughte the welth ok the childzẽ of FL
rael. and when J came to Jeru tale / and had
bene there chꝛe daxes / J gat me vp in night
cealon, æ a fewe men wyth me: for à tolde no
man what God had geuẽ me in my hert to do
at geruſalem:and there was not one beaſt W
me / caue it that I rode spon, And rode by
nyghte vnto the ballep pozte befoze the Dꝛa⸗
gon well / and to the Dongepoꝛte / and conli⸗
deredthe wales of Jerulalẽ that were bꝛonẽ
downe / andthe portes therot contumed with
the kyꝛe. and? wẽt ouer vnto the wellpoꝛte /
andto the krũges condpte/and there was no
rowme for my beaſt that it coulde gobnder
me. Chen wẽte g on in the nyghte by dbꝛoke
ane ne ee oer deere

one agapne to the valleppozte.
.  Andthe rulers ane we not whither g wete
_ Dewobat Fdypd:For hither to had Inot toe p
Jewes g the pꝛeſtes the ceuncelersand the


Drulerg /s gother p labcured in p woꝛcke. and


Che nomlhe of them that buploed the wales.


Che. u. Chapter.
ed Ellalib the hie pret gat him vp
tb his bzethzenp pꝛeſtes / builded
E. e Shepegate. They reparedit /
Set vp the dozes of it:euen vnto che
tower Meah reparedchepit / namely vnto ß
*tower oF hanancel Nerte bntobimbutlded gere, rig.


J chemenok Jericho. And belpde him buplded Tach. riß. c.


Sachurthẽ tonne of Amrit. But p kychpoꝛte
dydthe chyldꝛen of Afanah buylde / they cox
uered rt / and let on the dozes lockesa barres
OF it. Pexte vnto him bupiocoMarimoth the
forme of uziah the lonne of Hakos. Nerte
vnto him buyiden Mololam the tonne of Ba
rachtah che tonne of Melelabeel Hexte vnto
hem burided Zadoc the lonne of Baana.
Kexte onto hym buylded they of Chekua.
But their greate men put not theipneckes
tothe lerupce ar nene *
Che Oidegate buploed Jehotadah p lone
ol Paleah / a Molola che tonne ol Betoriay
they couered it and let on the does lockes &
barres of tt. Nerte unto them bupided Maz
latiah of Gabaon / a Jadon of Merano / men
ol Gabaon a ot Maphah foz the feate or ß
captapne on thps kyde the water Nexte vnto
bpm buydded asftel che tonne of Harhaiah ß
goldlmpth. Nerte vnto hym ed hana⸗
hiah cher Apotecarys fonnee they repayzed edoomeveste
Ferulale onto Hbzode wall Hexte vntohem the tonne ar
buphed Raphatah the tonne of Hur/Hruler tzaracaim,
ofthe balfe quarter of Jerulalẽ. Nexte vnto c
buplded Zedatah the lonne of Haremaph
duer agapntt bes boule. Nexte vnto hym
buylded Hatus the tonne of Halavontah.
But Meichta the tonne of Havin / and Ha⸗
tub che tonne of Pahath Woab buylded
the other pere / and the tower belpde the koꝛ⸗
trace. Hexte onto bpm buplded Selunt
the tonne of Balobesthe 735 of the halfe


Jerulalem is


Some reade,
SBetybachards onthe dozes/ lockeg ctbarres therot. But the


quarter of Jerutalem / andhrs daughters.
Che ballep gate buplded Hann / ache ct:
telins okt Sanoah.chep bulſdedit / and let on
the dozes / lockes ¢ barres therot / a a thou⸗
fande cubytes on the wall onto the Donge⸗
porte, But the Wongepozte buploes Mel⸗
Schtah ö tonne or Rechab / the ruler ofp fourth
parte of the vyneyardes: he buyldedit / e let


wellgate builded d elum the lonne of Chol⸗

olah / p ruler ofp fourthparte ol Malphaßh

e bullded it / a coueredit / a let on the doꝛes /
loches/ & barres therol / a the wall vnta the
pole ot Siloah bythe kynges garden / vnto
che ſteppes that go dotone from the cytie ol
Dauld. After him builded Hehemiah d lonne


ij. Eldzas,


de Falaph the cyrte / p other peace After him
busen Glen the tonne of ‘Sarachan
oueragapnt hys chek . Alter hym bupided
Melchiah the golotmpthes konne / vntill the
boule oftyeMethinims/¢ ofthe merchadtes
dueragapnſt the coficell gaterg tothe parler
inthe co mer. And betwene the parlour ofthe
coꝛner vnto the Sphepegate buyloed e gold⸗
imythes and the merchauntes,


Shen
beer.


ol Acbon / the ruler ok thehalle quarter of E


Bethzur / vntyllthe other Cyoe oueragaynſt
the lepulchzes ol Bauid / z to the pole Afuta
and onto the boule ofthe myghtye.
Atter hym buploedthe Leuites / Rehum
che konne of Bant. Hexte onto hym burlded
E Palabtah the ruler ok the halke quarter at
eilah in his quarter. Atterhi huylded their
bzethꝛe / Bauai  Conne of Penadad/} ruler
of the halle quarter of Reilah. After hym
buploed zer the ſonne of Jolua the ruler of
Malphah the other pece hãrde ouer agaynſt
P harnelle coꝛner. à lter him buylded Baruch
che fonne of Sabai the other pece woꝛchyp⸗
fully @ coſtl / krõ the coꝛner vnto the do ꝛc ol
che houle ol Eltalib the hie pret. Alter hym
buylded Marimuth the lonne ol wuziah the
konne of Pacos the other pece Er the doze ol
b houle of Cliath euẽ as loge as 8 boule of
Elialib extéded.%fter him butivenp peeks >
# mé ofS contre. after sim buplded Bemanun
eHalub ouer agaynſt their houle. Akter the
Alariah che tonne of Maaltah the tonne ol
Anantah nexte onto byshoute. After hym
buyidedBenut the Conne of Henadad p other
pece fromthe boule of A lartah vnto the ture
nynge / and onto the coꝛner. 5
Atter him buploed Phalel p tonne ol wat
ower agapnſt the comer and the bye tower /
which itech out ouer trom the kynges houle /
belpdeß courte of the pꝛelor. Ater him Pa ⸗
datah the lonne ol Pharos (as koꝛ che Netht-
hums thepoweltin Dphel/ onto the mwater⸗
gate / towarde the cal where the tower lpeth
out) After hymbuyldedthey of Chekua the
other pece ouer agaynſt d greate tower / that


‘spon ernie let ur rom /@ bnito dhe mallop Oppel, i


pita never aaa aint
ule.
Alter the bun Sabor tbe tonne of Emer


But when Sanabalat / Aud ethe 5


Arabians /a Ammonites / Aldoditd hearde
6 che walles of Jerulalẽ were made vp / and
chat they had begonne to ſtoppe vp p gappes
they were very wꝛoth / a cõlpired al to gether
ta come a light agapnſt Jerutalę /a tomate
an hinderaũce thẽrin. $2 eles we made
our pzaper vnto oure God / a let watchmen
vpõ the wall dape a nxght ouer agape thé,
And Juda larde: che ſtrength ol the bearers
is to keble / a ther is to moch Dutt / we are not
able to bupide on the wall. And oure aduer⸗
farpes thought: cher Hall not howe nethee
fe tell we come in the mrodes amonge the / e
Clape thẽ / and the woꝛcke. But when
the Jewes g dweit berpde thẽ/ came out oral
che places where cher dwelt aboute vs, and
tolde vs as good ag ten tymes then let I the
people atter their kinreds wich their lwerdẽ⸗
Speates e bowes beneh in the lowe places @
behynde the wall / a loked / a gat me bp / and
faye vntothe chele men a rulerg / and to the
other people: be not ye akraied ol


pd dareaten oe which dugheta be feared cet g a8 ard. wl Ve regte re sry one of another? Am


kranke kor voure bzechzen/fonnes/daugh-"*
ö oed eueren o


hlded agayne. eh
dure enempes hearde p we had Botte wonde
okit / God bꝛoughte their coücel to noughte
and we turned all tothe wall / euerx
one vnto bis laboure And krõ that time fozth
it came to paſſe / dthe halle parte of the poge
men dydthe laboure/ athe other halte parte
heide the lpeares / hyldes / bowes and bꝛeſt⸗
plates: and the rulers ſtode bebpnde all the
poute of Juda / which buylded on the wall / a
re butthens / krom thole that laded them,
With one hande did they the woꝛke and with
the other helde ther their weapen. And euerx
one that buplocd/ hadhrs Cwerde guirde by
bys lde / and lo buploed they. And the trom⸗
petters ſtode belpde me.

And J lapde onto the pꝛyncipall men and
ruletg / and lo the other people the wozche i8
Greate a large / a we are ceparated vpon the
wall one karre from another. Lone in what
place now pe heave the nopte of p trõpet / re⸗
koste ye thither vnto vs; Sure od thal fight
40: bs /a we will be labouringe in d woche.
And the halke parte of he heide p cpeares krõ
mo minge lpꝛinge / till ß ſtarres came forth.
Anda tp lame tynie tapde I onto the people:
euerx one abyde with bps leruaunt at Jeru⸗
calem / chat in the night keaton we mape geue
attendaunce to the watch / and to laboute on
the dape tyme. As Foz me and my bꝛethꝛen / a
mpferuauntes / and the men of the watch be⸗
hende me / we put neuer of oure clothes / fo
moch as to wathe oure ſelues.
¶ Che people are vered with hongre.
bpddetd Wlurpe. He regupieth not
captapne.

che. v. Chapter.
iS d there arole a greate cõplaynte
N


bemiah Fore
je lung ofa


es people /a oF their winagapn tt

their bꝛethꝛen the Jewes. And ther

were tome 5 Capde: oure fonnes g

Daubbters are to man: / let vs take coꝛne foz

thé ¢ eate/p we mape ipue, Some lapde:let

bs let oure isnves /opnepardes andhoulesto

pledge / a take bp cogne in i darth. But lome

layde:let vs boꝛowe money of the kinges tri⸗

bute foꝛ oure landes ¢bpnepardes. Now are

dure bꝛethzeng bodpes as oure atone bodies

andtheir childzen as oure chyldꝛẽ. els ſhulde

= fubdue a N and daughters vnto

ſondage / and Come ok dure daughters are

Vue cube allreade / Land no ſtrength is there

in hate not in oure handes / k other men Mall haue oure
werwpth to landes and per yardes.

mame them. But 5 hearde their complaynte and

loch woꝛdes / le spl pleated me foze/ and I ad⸗

upted to n my mende / that J rebuned d coũ⸗

celers / and 0e rulerg / and fapde vnto them:


Gbrought a groate congregacid agapnſt the
and larde vnto them: we (after oute abitgte)


¥ 2 =

emiah.

baue bought oure bꝛehzẽ the Jewes / which

were loldẽ pnto the perthen. And wyll ye fell

‘poure bꝛethꝛen / mbo we haue boughte vnto

bs? Then helde chey their peace / and coulde
hothpnge to ant were.

And Flayde : It 1 not good that pe do.
Oughte pe not to walne in che keare of God /
becaule of the rebune of the Herthen dure
enempes: J andmpbzeth zs /g my teruaũtes
bauelentthem money and come: but as 02 ¢
vlurp let vs leaue it Chertoꝛe this fame dave
le that ve reſtoze them their landes agane /
their vpnepardeg / ople gardens andboutes/
and the hundꝛed parte of S money of d coꝛne /
wyneẽ and ople that ve haue wonne of them.
Chen ſapde ther: we wyll reſtoze thé agapne
and wyll requpze nothpnge of chem / and wil
do as thou halt kponen. Andz called d pꝛeũtz /
and toke an ooth of them / that they culde do
fo, And J oke my lappe / and fapre: God
ſhake out euery man after the fame mance
from bps houle and laboure / that mayntey⸗
neth not thps woꝛde:euen thus bebe haber
out / and vopde. And all the congregacvon
lade: amen / and pꝛapled the Loꝛde. And the
beben

Ind From the tyme forth that it was com⸗
mitted vnto me to be a captapne in the lande
ol Juda / namely from the twentyeth veare
vnto the two and thyꝛtpeth peare of kynge
Arthaxerles (that is twelue peare) g and mp
bꝛethꝛẽ lyued not of Coch luſtenaũcẽ as was
geuen to a captapne: fo the olde captapnes
that were befoze me / had bene chargeable D
vnto the people / and had taten of the bꝛed
and wyne / and koꝛtye lycles oF liluer:pee and
their ſeruauntes had oppꝛelled the people.
But lo dydnot J /andthat becaule ofpieare
ol God. Jlaboured alfo in the woꝛke bps the
wall / and boughte no lande. And allmy ſer⸗
uaũtes came thither to gether vnto ö woꝛke.
Mozeouer there were at mptable an buns
dꝛed and kyltye ol the Jewes a rulers / which
came vnto me / from amonge the Heythen /
that are aboute vs. And there was pꝛepared
me daxlpe an oxe / and tyre cholen thepe/ and
byꝛdes / and euer once in ten dapes a greate
ae of acepeite faye Donte ps
upnge ol a 2
greudous vnto the people. Chrncke bps me fee
my God onto the belt / accoꝛdynge to all that Z
Ahaue done oz thys people,
€ Che buployng is vet agapne hyndꝛed and let.

( Che. vi. Chapter.
FI NU whe Sanabalat / Cobiah and
| @etem the Arabtan / and che other a
or dure enempes hearde that J had
plded 5 wall, f there were no

Jappstherin (ho wbeit at the fame tyme

pad not hanged che dozes vpon the gates)
Soanabatat


Clxxxij.


Jerulalem is ij. tp


Sanabalat a Geter tent vnto mie / ta


“Afters rec come g let vs mete together; in the byllages


Somer


ade:
Leben. BEM eDeplame tp ende eben.


Chey thoughte to do me euell.
dinge J fentmetzngers vnto chem / lapinge:
Ihãuẽ a greate bulyns to do / J cannot come
downe. Che woꝛcke chulde ſtande ſtyll / ve F
were neclpgent / e came downe to you. Pow⸗
beitthey tent onto me as good as foure tym
alter lame manev.aind 4 gaue thefamean:
Cwere, Chen lent Sana hes leruaunt
Bynto me che kyrth tyme / wrth an open letter
in his hande / wherin was wzptten: it is tolde
the Herthen / a Gelem hath faye it 6 thou
Kb ewes thinke to rebel: koꝛ p which caule
thou buyloett the wall / a wyit be their kyng


in thete matters / and haſt oꝛdeyned the P ꝛo⸗


phetes to pꝛeach ol the at Jerutalem / and to
lapethe is kynge of Juda.

ANoww Mall this come to the kynges caves:
come now therkoꝛe / a let vs take our coũcell
together Neuertheles Alent vnto himtaping


chere is no loche thvngẽ done as thou ſa pit:


ou haſt kayned it out of thyne awne hert.
‘on ther were all mined to make vs akraped
Ethoughte:thep all wichdꝛawe their hand
420 5 wozke / 5 ther call not laboure How⸗
beit J trengthedmy hande the moze, And F
tame vnto the boule of Semaiah the fonne
ol Delatah che donne of Mehetabeel / and he
had chut him tele within / glaide: let vs come
together in to che boute of God / euẽ vnto che
myddes of the tẽple / a (butte the doꝛes ol the
teple:koꝛ they wyll come to Have the / yer cut
inp night will cher come to put the to death.
But fayd:thuldany loch ma as Tüxe: h
tg chãt / being as Jam chat wyll go intothe
tépie / to laue his like: will not go in.
Fo I perceaued / p Sodhad not tent him:
Yetlpake he pꝛophecie ppõ memeuerthelelle
¢ Sanabalat had hired him foz mo⸗
hep.chertoretoke be 6 moner / 6 thzoughe
teare a buld Cono/elinne:dthep might haue
an euel repozte of me / to blacpheme me. My
D Godthinke thou ops Cobiah ¢ Hanabelat
nder ‘nto thele their workes / a of the
Pꝛophet Noadiah ¢ of the other Pzophetes/
that wolde haue put me in feare.
Andthe wall was fynéthen onthe kiue and


HElavis come twentpedaye ok § moneth Ell / in two and
Jail wih part foltpe daes. And when all dure enempes


sft wit!
an


‘op. hearde therok / all the Heithen p were aboute dred


ned therto- tt vg / wert alraped / a their courage tayledthẽ:


w
3


rt fo they perceaued / chat thys wozke came of
* God. And ac the lame tyme were theremanp
ofthe chefe of Juda / whole letters wẽte vnto
Cobiah / a hd Kobiah onto thẽltoꝛ ther were
manp in Zuda that were woꝛne vnto bpm:
fo2be was che lonne in lawe of Sechaniay
$ fonne ok rah / and his tonne Kehohanan


gas. buylded agay


hadthe daughter ok Mololam the tonne of
‘Barachiab d they ſpake good ok hm before
me. and tolde hem mr woꝛdes) and Cobtag
lent letters / to put me in fare.
fs %
.
Che. vij. Chapter.


when we had buplticn p walz


hanged ons dozes / a the poꝛters


that J


the „ Soner


150


0 / frre hundzed
ol Rahath ed


Col Sachat

eus hundzed a the Choze: bcbildee or Bantt
Behn re fu 5 277 chyldven of
f zed K erghta twentpe:the

childꝛen ot algad / two thoulande / chꝛe —
and two € twentpe:the chiſdzen orãdo⸗
micam tyre hundred a teuen i the txoꝛe che
childzen ok Begoai / two thoulande / a leuen
and thze Choze:the childzen of A din / fixe hun⸗
dꝛedand kyue and Epttye : the chyldzẽ of Ater
of Bezentah / epghtandnpentye, i
Che chitozen of Batom / thꝛe hundꝛed and
elghte a twentpe:the childꝛen of Bezat / chze
hundꝛed and koure ¢ twentye: Se Pang


lawe is read.


of Hariph / an hundzed¢ twelue:the childꝛen
ok Gabaon / kiue a npentye:the men or Weth⸗
lehem a Nethophah / an hundzed and eyght a
fouve fhoze:the mẽ of Anathoth / an hundzed
gt eight and twẽtie:the men of Beth Almoth /


Dtwo and fort pe: the men of Kariath Jarim /


Cephirah ¢ Beeroth / leuen hundꝛed a thꝛe a
koꝛtpe: the men of Namah and Gaba / tyre
hundꝛed ¢ one a twentye:the men ol Mach⸗
mas / an hundꝛed and two and twentye: the
men ok Bethel and al / an hundꝛed and thze
and twentye: the men ok Hebo / an hundꝛed
andtwo and fyrtpe: the chplozen ok the other
Elam / a thoulande / two hundꝛed and foure a
lyltpe:the childꝛen of Parim / che hundꝛed a
twent pe che chyioꝛẽ of Jericho thꝛe hundzed
and Epue and Foztie:the childꝛen or Lodhadid
and Dno/feuen hundꝛed and one andtwẽtie:


che childzẽ or denaah / the thoulandde / nine
hundzed and thpztpe.

ie The prettes. Che chyldzen ol Jadaiah ol
the houle ol Jelua / nyne hundꝛed and thꝛe a


feuentpe:the chylozen ol Emer / athoutande
and two and kyftye: the chyldꝛen ol Pachur /
à thouſande / two hundzed and ſeuen and
loꝛtye: the chyldꝛen ol Harim / a thoulande
and keuentene. 5

Che Leuites. Che chyldzen ol Jelua ol
Cadmiel amonge the chpidꝛen of Boduah /


€foure andleuẽtpe. Ehe lyngers. Che chyldzẽ


ol dlaph / an hundꝛed and eyght and koztye.
Che posters: The chyldꝛen of Selum / the
chyldꝛen of Acer / che chyldꝛen of Talmon /
the chyldꝛen of Acub / the childꝛen of Hatita /
the chyldzen of Dobai / all together an hun⸗
died and eyxght and thyꝛtye.

Che elhiru nis. Che chyldꝛen of Ziha /
chyldꝛen ol Palupha / the chyldꝛen or Teba⸗
both / the chyldꝛen of Ceras / the cyplozen ol
Spia/ che chylozen of Phadon / the cyplozen
Of Lebanah the chyldꝛen of Hagaba) the
chplozen of Syalmat the chyldzen of Hanan
the chyldꝛen of Gidel the chyldꝛen of Gaher /
the chplozen of Raaia / the chyldzen ol Rac
iin / the chydꝛen ol Pecoda / the chyldꝛen ot
Selem / che chpiozen ok data / the chyldꝛen ol
Phaleah / the chylozen ol Belar / the childzẽ
Of Meunint che chyldzen of Hephulalim /
the chpinzen of Bachue the chywꝛen of Ha⸗
cupha / che chylbꝛen ok Harhur / the childzen
ol Bazlith / che ckildꝛen ot Mahida / ö child;
ol Harla / the chůdꝛen ol Bercos / the child
ol Dillera ihe childzen ot Chamah / dchildꝛẽ
ol Nestab the chyldzen of Hatipha.

Che childꝛen ol Salomons feruauntes:
Che chpldꝛen of Sotai the cy of So-
Phereth / the chylozen of Pherida / the childꝛẽ
eu Sy

0 el / ehe en atiah /
che chplozen ol ati / the chridien of Poche:


Nehemiah. 2


th ol Zabalm / the chrdꝛen ol mon. Alt
the Pechinims and the chridzen at Satomds
leruaũtẽ / were thꝛe hũdꝛed a two anynetye.

And thefe wente vp allo of Chel Mela / €
Theil Harta / Cheruß / Adon ac mer: but they
coulde not chewe ther fathers boule nog
their lede / whether they were of Ilrael. Che
chplozen of Balatah / the chyldzẽ or Cobiah
and the chyldꝛen of Necoda / lyre hundꝛed and
two and Foztpe. And of the prettes the chtlnzé
of Pabaiah: the chyldꝛen of Hacos/the chyl⸗
dꝛen ok Berlilat / whych coke one ot Hoaugh-
ters of Berltlat the Galaadite to wpke / and
was named akter theirname. Chele toughte
the regiſter of their generacion a when they
kounde it not / they were put krom the pꝛelt⸗
hode. Ind Hathirlatha tayde vnto them / that
they chulde not eate ok the moot holx / tyll
there came vp a Pꝛeaſt wyth the lyght and
perkectneſſe. 2

Che whole congregacion as one mã / was
two and koꝛtpe thoulande thꝛe hundꝛed / and
thee lkoꝛe:belyde their leruauntes and map:
des / ol whom chere were leuen thorfende/
the hund ed and leuen and thirtye. And they
hadtwo hundzed and leuen and koztpe lön⸗G
grnge men and wemen / leuen hundzed and
Core and thyztpe holes two himdzeb a kyue
and foꝛtre Mules foure hundꝛed and fone
and chpztye Camels: (pre thoulande / reuen
hundꝛed and twentpe ales.

And certapne of the aunc pent fathers ga⸗
ue vnto the woꝛcke. Hathirlaͤtha gaue tothe
trealure a thoufande dꝛames / fittie batens /
kyue hundzed and thyꝛtye pꝛeſtes garmen⸗
tes And tome ok the chece fathers gaue vnto
the trealure of the woꝛcke / twẽtie thoulande
dꝛammes / two thoufanre and cwo hund ed
pounde of lyluer. And the other people gaue
twentpe thoufande dꝛãmes / and two thous
lande pounde of ſyluer / a leuen ¢ thze froze
pꝛeſtes garmentes. And the pꝛeſtes and Lee
uites / che Poꝛters / the lyngers / and ß other
ol the people / andthedethinims / and all 3 l⸗
rael dwelt in their cytyes.

C ddyaa geathereth to gether the people and resdeth
to them the lawe. Ther bepe the Fatt oF tabernacles
or bothes. 927

che viij. Chapter.

Dw when the ſeuen moneth due D


nye / a the chyldꝛen ol g lrael were gj. Ex. ig. a.
thete cytleg / all the people gea⸗ ij. Ed. ire


itheren the telues together as one
man vpon the ſtrete bekoꝛe the watergate/
and fapdebnto Eldꝛas the ſcrybe / Hye chulde
fetch the boke or the lawe of Motes, whych


che Loꝛde commaundedto Irrael. * Ind El- Deut erte
dꝛas the pꝛealt brought che lawe bekoze the u Aeg ih


congregacion both of men and wemen / a ol
all chat coulde vnderſtande it / vpon the 1505
veo


Eldzas


bape ofthe feucnth moneth / a red cherin in ß

ftrete that is beloze the Watergate fromthe

moghynge vntyll the noone dave bekoꝛe men

and wemlena loch as coulde vnderſtande it: a

che eares ok allß people were melined vntoß

bote of che lawe. And cktdzas the kcribe ſtode
vpon anhype pulpit of wod / whych they had
made koꝛ the pꝛeachinge / e belpde hym ove

MBathathiah / Dema / Anantah / Wziah / Bel⸗

Riah /a Maaletah / on hys ryghte hand: and

on hys lekte hande fone Phadatah / Micael /

Melchlab / Halum Patebaranah / Hachary

and Mokolam.

And Eldzas opened the boke before all the
people / to: he Gove aboue all the people. And
wh he opened it all che people ſtode bp. And
Eldꝛas pꝛayled the Loꝛde the greate God.
Aicher hennes ep obo men / Amen /
swith cheir handes vp / a bowed the lelues /
wozchippedthe Loꝛde with their faces to the
grounde. And gelua / Waant, Derabtah/Ja⸗
mi / acuba / Sebathar / Hodalah / Maallah /
Celita /A ʒariah / Jozabed / Hana / Phalaiah /
Kthe Leuiteg /cauten p people to geue hede
vntoß lawe / z the people ſtode in their place.
And they red in the boke of the lawe of God
dittinctly a planelp / lo p men vnderſtode the
thinge that was red. And Hehemtah (whych
is Pathirtatha) e Eldꝛas the pꝛeſt a terpbe
andthe Leides 5 cauled the people to take
hede / lade vnto all the people: tps dave is
holy vnto the Loꝛd youre God: be not ve coꝛr
cherkoꝛe / a wepe not. Foꝛ all d people wepte

oben cep herb Soe morte ofthe lawe.

C. _ Therfoze fayde he bnto them: * go poure
wape / and eate the fat / edzpncke Nlwete /
lende parte vnto thé allo that haue not pꝛe⸗
pared che Celut:foz this dave is holy vnto our
‘Lopde/be not petorp therfore: koꝛ the tope ol
Ie dose ftrength. And the Leuttes

led alß people /a larde: holde youre peace
oz the da ye is holx / vere not ve youre lelues.

And all che people wẽte their wae to eate €

deincke / a to lende parte vnto ocher / ato ma⸗

ke greate myꝛth / becaule they had vnderſtãd
the woꝛdes that were declared vntothem.
And on the nexte daye were geathered to⸗
gether the chefe Fathers amonge all d people
and the pꝛeſtes and Leuites / vntoeldꝛas the
terybe / z he culde teach them the woꝛdes ol
the lawe. And ther founde written in lawe

Leut. riß. k. how p the Loꝛde had cõmaundedby Moles

that the childzẽ ok Ilrael chulde dwell in bo⸗

ches in the feat or che leuenth moneth. And

kothey cauled it be declared and pꝛoclamed

in all their cytyes /a at Jerulalem / fapinge:

ps vp onto the moũt ¢ fetch O lxue bratichyy
Pynebzaunches Myztbzaunches Paimes

bzaunches / a beaunches of thicke trees / to

make bothes as it is witten.


2


ij⸗Eldꝛas.


Andthe people went vp / monpſh 0 t
made them bothes/eucty one pon the rote ol
his houle / a in their courtes / a in the courtes
ol the houte of God / a inthe ſtrete by § Wa⸗
tergate e in 8 ſtrete by poꝛte Ephꝛaim. And
al che cõgregaciõ of the 6 were come agapne
Out ot the cãptyupte / made bothes / e dwelt
therin:toꝛ fence the tyme of Jolua the lonne
ot Nun onto chys dave / had notthe chyldꝛẽ of
Ilrael done lo / & ther was very greate glad⸗
nelle. And euer daye kr the foꝛdt daye onto
Seles bem theboke of $ lawe of God.
nd Ceuendapes belive thep the keaſt and on
the epabt dave the geatherynge together / ac⸗
cozdpnge vnto the maner.
¶ Cbe people repent ¢ forlabe their fx aunge wiues.
Elias recpteth the benxylptes of God and the lynnes
ok the people.


together wich tattmaee fack cio ten:.
Ol thes / and erth ops thẽ / a leparated and Saw
the fede oF Icrael krö all the traunge chyldꝛẽ
and ſtode ¢ knowleged their fpnnes / andthe
wyckednelles ok their fathers / a ſtode vp in
their place / a red in the bone of the lawe old
Loꝛde their God foure tymes on daxe / and
they knowleged / e worthippeds Loꝛde their
God koure tymes on the daxe. Indche Leut⸗
tes Gove on hye / name lx Jelua/ Want/Cad-
miel / DSabaniah / Bunt / Darebiah / Bani ¢
Chanam /a crped loude onto the Loꝛde their
God. Ind the Leuttes / Jelua cadmiel ani
fabniah Serebiah Hodiah Debaniah /
athahiab / lade: ſtande vp pꝛaxteß Loꝛde
youre God fo2 euer: let tzand be geuẽ onto
the name of thy glozpe/ whych excelleth all
thankelgeuinge a pꝛapte. Loꝛde / thou alone 5
halt made heauẽ / z the heauen of al heauẽs /
with all their hoolt/ che erch g alls is therin ⸗
the lee and all that is cherin: thou geuett life
vnto all / a the boot of heauen bowe the tel
vnto the. Chou art the Loꝛde God / that hat N
cholen Abza/abzoughtt hm out ot u im Gen. rd.
Chaloea/*¢ calledtt him aAbzaba ¢ foundelt Sago
his bert kapthkull befoze the * g madeſt a co⸗ me
uenaunt with him to geue vnto hes lede che
lande ol the Cananites Hethites Amozites/
bewege Gergetites / and halt
made good thy worde: to thou art righteous
and batt contyoered the myterx ok dure tas era
thers in Egipte / ahearde their cõplarnte by
the reed tee / and chewed tokens and wonders
vpon Pharao / g on all hys ſeruauntes / a on
all the people of bys lande: for thou knewelt
öther were pretumptuous g cruell agarnſt
chem / and lo madeſk thow* thea name as it ssomeretr
is this dape. And the reed lee drdeſt thou de⸗ eien.
urde in funder befoze: ee wẽt


rapeth,


thoꝛom the myddeg of the fee Deve oed: and
their perlecuters thewel chou into z depe
as a ſtone /in mightic waters / leddeſt the
on the Bape tyme in a cloudy prler / a onche
nyghte feafon in a ppler of fyꝛe / to ewe the
Ipgbte in tze wape that they wente.


& Chou cameſt vowne alto bpd moũt Si-


ile
faut


tn til. b.


gauge, 5


nai / ard ſpakeſt onto them from heauẽ / and
gaueſt them rigyte iudgmentes / true lawes
Good commaundementes and latutes / and
declaredſt onto them thy holp Saboth / and
commaundedſt them pꝛeceptes / oꝛdinaũces /
and lawes / by Holes thy teruaunt: and ga⸗
ueſt them bꝛed kromheauen when ther were
ongrye / and bꝛoughteſt koꝛth water koꝛ the
out of the rock when they were thyꝛſtye:and
pꝛompledſt them / chat they ſhulde go in / and
take pofledion of the lande / ouer whpch thou
haddelt lykte vp chyne hande koꝛ to geue the.

But oure fathers were proude and hard⸗
necked / lo that chey kolowed not the com⸗
maundementes and rekuled to heare / a were
not myndekull ok the wonders that thou dyd⸗
delt koꝛ them: but became obſtynate a heady
in lo moche that they turned backe to their
bondage in their dichobedyence. But thou
my God koꝛgaueſt / and walt gracious / nier⸗
cpull / pacpẽnt / and of greate goodnelle / and


Dlozlokeſt them not. And though cher made


taorpi.a, 4 moultẽ calfe (and Capde:Chps is thy God/


that bꝛoughte the out of the lande of Egipte)
and dyd greate blalphempes / pet koꝛtokeſt
thou them not in the wyldernes / accoꝛdynge
to thy greate mercy. * Andthe cloudy prler
departed not krom them onthe dave tyme to
leade them the waye / nether the ppler of kpꝛe
in the nyght lealon / to chewe them lyahte in
the wape that they wente.

And thou gaueſt them thy good fpzete to
enkoꝛme them / a wythheldelt not typ Man⸗
na krom their mouth / and gaueſt them wa⸗
ter when they were thpettye . Foꝛtye veares
Tonge madeſt thou pꝛoupipon foz them in d
wopfderneſle lo that they tacked nothynge:
their clothes wa xed not olde and their fete
fwelled not. And thou gaueſt them kynge⸗
domes and nacpons / and partedſt them acoz-
dynge to their poꝛcions / lo that they poſſelled


the lande of Schon kynge ok Helebon / and p


the lande ol Og the kunge of Balan. And
their chyidꝛen multiplpedſt thou as the ſtar⸗
res ol heauen / and bꝛoughteſt them in to the
lande wherof thou haddeſt tpoken onto their
fathers /that they chulde go in to it and haue
tt in poſlellyon.

And the childzen went in and potterted the
lande / and thou tubdudeſt bekoꝛe the che in⸗
habpters of the lande euen the Cananites /a
gaueſt them in to their hande /a their hinges
and the people of the lande / that thepmpgbe


Nehemiah,


99
Elrxxiiij.
do witz the what they wolde. Andther wane r 8
their ſtronge cyties / c a fat lande / and toke a Chis fat lade
Potledion ochoules ? were full or all manercanttthnern
goodes welle bogged out, prnerardes/op- that abolterh
legardens / and many krutekuil trees: atheywpth all good
ate & were kylled / a became kat / and lyued inthinges as it is
welth thozow thy greate goon Heuerthe⸗ Arad Fat bied
les cher weredilobedient a rebeiiedagarndt et Genes
che / and cact typ lawe behyndetheir backes
andtlewethr pꝛophetes (which exhoꝛted the
co earneſti / that they chulde cõuerte vntoß)
and dpd greate blatphemies, Cherfozegas
ueſt thou them ouer in to the bande ol their
enempes that vexedthem.
And in the tyme ok their trouble theycried
vntothe / and thou hardeſt them kromheauen
and thoꝛow thy greate mercy thou gaueſt
them'aufours /whpch helped them out ol 9 b. damen
bande of cheirenempeß. But whe ther came sts bere o.
toreſt / tyey turned back agapne to do enell captai choi
before the: therfoze lekteſt thou them in thetaued 5 peor!
hande of their enempes / lo that they had the fed ther borat
Dominion ouer them. Sothep cöuerted /arnd ares Jud. g.
cryed vntothe / and thou herde ſt them from:
heauen / and many tymes halt thou delluered
chem acozdynge to ihygreate merey / andte⸗
ſtytpedſt onto them / that ther chulde turne
agapne vnto thy lawe.
Aeneh narben thee weve e bun
herkened notbnto thy cimaunbemeteg / but 0
Sprned in thy lawes (whych a ma chulde do / Teulk. rot. a5
@liue inthem fe tuned tye thoulderamsse/ Jani,
awere ürffnecked e wolde not heare And Czech zy
manp veares dyddeſt thou kozbeare them / :
teſtikpedſt vnto them thoꝛow thy lpꝛete / eu
bythe offpce of thy pꝛophetes / and pet wolde
they not heare. Therkoze gaueſt thou the in
to p hande of p naciõs in the landes. But foz
thy great mercpes fake thou batt not vtterly
cölumed them nether foztaken the: Foz chou
art a gracious and mercytull God.

_*Qotw oure God / chou greate God / migh⸗ f. cw ib. aud
tie andteruble chou that nepeg couenaunt 8 e e
and mercp/regatdenotalyticall p trauaple ante.
chat hath happened vnto bs a dure kynges /
princes /pzeltes pꝛophetes fathers ¢ all 45
people / lence the tyme of the kynges of Al⸗
fur bnto this dape. Thou art rpatecus in al >
thou halt bꝛonghte vpon vs: koz thou halt
done righte as foz vſ / we haue bene bngod⸗

5 / e dure king pꝛynces/pꝛeaſtes efathers
haue not done after thylam mozregarded thy
cömaundemktes (a thpeamen erhortacyos
wherwith thou batt exhoztedthem / andhaue
not lerued the in their kyngdome / and in thy
greate goodes that thou gaueſt them and in
the large and plenteous lande whpch thou

nek chem and haue not conuerted front

ett wycked woꝛckes. Behalde / therkoꝛe
are we in bondage thys dave: pee euen in the

lande that


lande that thou gaueſt vnto oure fathers/to
eniope the krutes and goodes therok / beholde
there are we bondmen. And greate is the in
create of it onto the kynges/ whõ thou halt
Cet ouer vs becaule of dure fpnnes/andthep
haue dominton ouer oure dodyes and catell /
and we are in great trouble. And in all hrs
make we alure couenaunt / and wꝛite it / and
let oure pꝛynces / Leuites a pꝛeũtes ſealeit.
C Che names ok them that ſealed the conenaunt bee
twene God and the propie.

Per leales neren t

4 i 2 a
18) Hatchirlatha ß tonne of Hacha⸗
\iiah a Sedekiah / Savatab/Ata-


on / Baruch /APotolam/Abiak/IHiamin,

Waaliah/ Welgat aud Slmelehcte wer,
preltes Che Leuttes were: J etua the tonne
Of A zartah / Wenut amonge the chyidzen ol
n K Cadmiel. And cheir bꝛethze: De⸗
a Se nt Same

chur/Speree
biah/Sabaniah /Poviah/Bant Waninu.


The heades of the people weresPhares/Wac L.


bat Boab / clam/Sathua/Bant/Bont/

gad / Bebat / adoniah / Begaai / a din / Ater

Pezekiah / Alur / Hodiah/ Halum / Bezat /

Dattpy en eee Sager he Aa
lam / Helir / Melelabel / Badoc / Jaddua

Phalatta Hanan / Inaiah / Polea Pananis

Halub / Malohes Phaleha / Soben / Rehũ /
ſlebnah/Maaliag / Ahiah / Panan / Anan /
alluch / Harim and Baanah.


Celues with an ooth to walke in Gods lawe /
which was geuen by Motes the feruaunt ol
God / chat they wolde oblerue ¢ doacozdinge


Ott vß-a. bnto all che cOmaundementes tu


W
iu et
inthe lande / nethertotake their pit rae


b. Ed. xi. e. fo dure Connes.*And pe 6 people of f lande


bꝛoughte ware on the taboch / a al maner of


TLeul.xxb a. bytables to fell/p we wolde not tate it ofthe
Deut. pv.a. on the Caboth and on the holy dayes. And 6


we wolde let the ſeuenth peare be fre concer⸗
Cnynge all maner or charge.
And we decreed a ſtatute bps oure teiues


The touenaunte ij. Eldꝛas.


toßchewbꝛed / to
the daplie burnt:


thaue the tithesinal
tyes ol 5 chi
And the pret  Conne of Daron Mall with
the Leuites haue allo of thetithes of the Le⸗
uttes lo that the Leuites thall bꝛinge bpthe
tithes ot their tithes vnto the houle of dure
Godto the chet in the treacure houte. Koꝛ >
childꝛen ot Arrael a the childzen of Leut Malt
bzpnge vp the heueolterynges ok the coꝛne /
wyne and ople vnto the cheſtes. And there
germ felder ener 9 are the
ozters a kyngerg / that
we koꝛlake not the houte of oure God. N
Wbodwelled in Fern
un the cytyes ou ee hee norte
OAbe.rt. Chapter.


£7] Noche rulers ot the people dwelt a


: aod vearly $ thirde parte ofatycletothe Amariab,


iſtracion ind houle or oure God/namely


Bk Eldꝛas,


Maaliah the ſonne of Baruch / the tonne ol
Chal hole / che tonne of Hafaia / the fonne or
Adala/che tonne of Fotarih che tonne ol Za
chary / the tonne of Sllont. All the childꝛẽ ol
Shares that dwelt at Jerulalem / were koure
C. and eight and the fore valeaunt men.

Chele are the childꝛẽ al Ben Jamin: Sal
luthe tonne of Melullam / p fonne ok Joeb /
che konne ol Phadalah / the tonne ol Colatah
the fonne of Haltah / the tonne of Ithiel / the

B lonne ok Flatay.Andatter him A bat / Delat
nne bundzeth and eyght andtwentye. And
Joel che fonne of Sechuhadthe ouerlyght
of them: a Juda the tonne of Senuah büer
the leconde parte of the citie.

Ok the pꝛeſtes there dwelt: Jedaiah the
ſonne of Joiarib / Jachin. Saraiah 8 tonne
ol Helktab d tonne of Mololam / p conne of
Zadoc / the tonne ot Meratoth / the tonne ol
Ahitob / was prince in the houle of God: and
his bꝛethꝛen that perkourmed the woꝛke ind
A de whom there were. vill. C. and. xxij.

nd Adaiah the tonne of Jeroham /p conne
of Plalaliel/the Conne of Amast/$ Conne ol
Dachary the tonne of Phatur the lonne ol
Melchiah and hys bꝛethꝛen / chete amonge
the kathers: ol who there were two hundꝛeth


and two and koztie. Ind a malai the ſonne ok 4


Alarael the fone of Abatat 8 conne of Mo⸗
lolamoth / the fonne of Emer: and his bꝛechꝛẽ
were vaſiaunt men / or whom there were an
hundzeth ¢ cight a twentye. And their ouer⸗
fear was Sabbtel the fonne of Pagdolm.
Ol the Leuttes : Semetah the Conne ol


ton. hd Wpatub/ the Conne of Akerikam the anne of


fo; it was the kynges cõmaundement cont
cerninge them / that the lyngers thule deale
faithfully euer dape as acco: inge was.
And Pathatay the tonne ol Meletabel of

the childꝛen ol Zarah the lonne of Juda ner
te the kynge in all matters concernynge the
people and their vyllages / thoꝛow cute all
thetr regrons. Ind the childzen ok Juda that
were without in the townes of their lande /
dwelt tome at Rariath Arbe / and in the vyl⸗
lages therok / and at Bibon / and in the vylla
ges therof:and at Cabꝛeel / a in the vpllages
therof: ¢at Jelua / Moladah / Bethphalet /
Hazerſual / Berlabe and in their vpnages:a
at Spthelag and Moconah / and in their vyl⸗
lages: And at Enremon / Harah / Jerimuth /
Zonoah / Odollam and in their pyllages: t
Lachis and in the keldes therok: at Alenah /
and in the vyllages therof: and dwelt from
Berlabe onto the valley ol Hennom.

Che childzẽ of Ben Jamin ot Gaba dwelk
at Machmas Lia / Bethel and in their vpl⸗
lages. Andat Anathoth / Nob / ananiah Ha
305 / Ramah / Gethaim / Padid / Jebolm Ra
balath / L. od / Ono ¢ in the carpẽ ters valley.
And certapne ol the Leuites that hab poz:
ctong in Juda / dwelt in Ben Jamin.

Che pieſtes and Leuptes which cam with Zozoba
bell to Jerulatem are numbred :e the wall is deopcate.
Che. xi. Chapter.

Hele are the pꝛeltes and Leuites
that wente vp with Zoꝛobabel the


Halabiah the lone of Bont: and Sabathal N


and golabad of the chele ok the Leuxtes / in
the outwarde bufpnes of the boule of God.
And Mathaniah the tonne ol Micha / the
tonne of Sabdi/ the fonne of Alaph / whych
was the pꝛyncipall to begynne the thanker⸗
geuinge bnto prayer. And bakbuntah the le
conde amonge hys bzethzen/ and Abda the
konne of Sammua/the fonne of Galal / the
fonne of Jduchun. All the Leuptes in che ho
Ip cite weretwohundꝛeth and koure ¢ koure


ar. c. (coze. And the porters Acub and Calmon/


and their bꝛechzẽ that kepte the portes / were
an hundꝛeth and two and leuentpe. As fo
relydue of Ilrael / che pꝛeſtes and Leuites /
they were in al the cities ol Zuda / euer one
in his inheritaunce.

indthe Nethinims dwelt in Ophel: and


Ziha and Galpha belonged bnto che Hethi⸗ Joleph / vnder B.


mms. Che ouerlear ot the Leuites at Feru-
falem / was wifi the tonne of Baant /p tonne
of Halabiag the konne ol Mathantah / che
lonne ok Reichs.

DE the chitozen ol Blaph there were fyn-
gers aboute the bulpnes in $ houſe of God:


of old vnder Hbia Sechzt onder Minia⸗

min c Moadia Peltat/ onder Belgah saz

mua/ondet Semeiah Jehonathan / onder

Joiarib Mathnai vnder Jadatah duili onder

Selai Belat / vnder Amos 44% 400
3 l


Lev,


ij. Eldꝛas


chiah Halabiah onder Jadatah Hathanael.
B. Am inthe tyme of Elratib.Fotada / Acha⸗
nan g Jadua / were the chefe fathers amge
the Leiutes / and the pꝛeſtes wꝛytten vnder
Zrapgne of Darius the Perltan. Che chyl-
dꝛen of Leuiß pꝛincipall fathers were wꝛit⸗
ten in the Cronicles / vntyll che tyme ok J ona
than the tonne ol Eitalib. Andtyele were d
cheke amonge the Leuttes / Halabiah / Se⸗
re biah and Jelua the lonne of Cadmiel / and
their bꝛeth en ouer agaynſt them / to geue
pꝛayſt and thankes / acoꝛdynge as Dautd >
man 175 anne . ones sab tab)
agapné another. ania /Balbubtah/
Sbadtah / Mololam / Talmon aq bub were
poꝛters in the watch at 6 chzetholdes ol the
Gates. Chele were in the tyme ol Jotakim
che lonne of Jelua the lonne of goledec / and
in the tyme of Hehemiah the captayne and


ol the pꝛeſte the lerybe.
ino in che dedpcacyon of the wall at Je⸗
rulalem / were the Leuites Coughte out of al


their places / that they myghtẽ be bꝛoughte
to Jetutalern/to kepe the dedicacton a glad⸗
nelle with thankelgeuinges/ with lynginge
with pmbales / Pialteries and harpes. And
the chplozen of the lyngers geathered them
ſelues together krõ plapne countre aboute
Jerulalem / and from the vyllages ol Netho
bb aten from the houle ol Ga lgal/ a out
ok the kedes of Geba and almaueth: ko the
lyngers had buylded them vyllages aboute
Jerutalem. and the prettes and Leuites pus
kylped them lelues / and clenled the people /
the gates andthe wall.

And J cauled the princes of Juda to go bp
bpd d wall / a appopnted two greate queers
of thankelgeuynge / which wente on d righte
bande of the wail towarde tye Donggate / a
after them wente Holatah / and halte of the
princes of guda /g Alarta/ C Idꝛag / Mololã
Juda / Ben Jamin / Demeiah and Jeremy:
und certaynẽ of the prettes childzen with tro
pettes namely Zachary the tonne of Jona⸗
chan / che fonne of Semeiah the konne ol
Mathaniah / the tonne of Michatah / the
lonne of Secur / the lonne of A laph / and hys
bꝛethzen / Semeiah / Atarael/ Welalat, Ga
lalat/ Mani / Nathanael and Juda and Ha-
nant / with the mulicall inſtrum̃entes of Da
uidthe man of God,

And Eldzas the Scrybe bekoꝛe them / to⸗
warde the Welngate / a they wente vp ouer
agaynſt them vpon the ſteppes of the cytye
of Mauid at the goynge bp of the wall to
the houle of Baud / vnto the Watergate
Eaſtwarde.

Che other queer u ter n wẽt
oueragaynſt them / and 7 after the / and the
halte parte of, the people vpon the wall / o⸗


warde the Foꝛnacegate vpwarde / ontyn the
bꝛode wall / and tothe pozte of Epbzaim/¢
tothe Oldgate / and to the Fychgate / and to
the tower ol Pananeel / and to the tower ot
Meah / vntyll the Shepegate. Ind in p pre
longate Gove they ſtyll / and fo ſtode the two D
queers of thankelgeuynge of the houle of
Gd / and I andthe halte of the rulers wyth
me / andthe pꝛeſtes namely Eltakim / Maa
liah / Mintamin / Michatah / Elioenai, Za⸗
chary / Hananiah with tropettes / and Maa
liah / Semetah / Elearlar a2 / Ichohanan /
Melchiah/ Elam and Ser. And the lyngers
lange loude /a Jeſtahiah was the ouertecr,
And the fame dave were there greate fas
crifyces oftred / a they reiopſed: fo2 God had
geuẽ themgreate gladnelle fo that both the
wyues a chyldꝛen were ioytull / a the myꝛth
ol Zerulalem was heide karre of,
tthe fame tyme were there men appoyn
ted duer the trealure cheſtes ( wherin were
eueotlerynges / the kyꝛſtlynges and the ty⸗
es) that ther Mulde geather them out of §
feldes aboute the cyttes / to deſtribute them
vnto the pꝛeſtes and Leuites aco dinge top
lawe: fo: Juda was glad of the pꝛeſtes / and
Leuites / that they tone and wayted vpon d
ollyce of their God / and the olkyce of the pu⸗
rilpcaciõ. And the lyngers and poꝛters ſtode
alter the commaundement ol Dauud and ol


Salomon his Conne:*foz in the tyme ol Dal arri


uld and Alaph / were the chete fyngers foun
ded / and the fonges of pꝛaple and thankelge
upnge onto God. In the tyme of Sozobabel
and Hehemiah /opd all Flrael geuc pozcios
tonto the fingers and porters / eüuery dape his
poꝛcion / q they gaue thyngesbalowed vnto
the Leuites / ä the Leuites gaue ihynges z
were lanctitped / vnto the childzen of Haron,
Deuter onomye is read / and when they haue heard
it / they teparate trom them alt ũraungets gc.
Che. rij. Chapter. 2
Po what tyme as the boke ot Mo
es was red in § eares of p people
here was founde wꝛytten cherin /


that the Ammonites and Moa⸗ but. ni.


bites ſhulde neuer come in to the congrega⸗
cpon ok God / becauſe they mett not the chil⸗


den ol Ilrael wyth bꝛed and water! and gu. riß.


byzed Bãlaam agaynſt them / that he Huive
cutle them: neuertheles oure Gad turned
the curte in to a bleuynge. Now when thex
herde the Lawe / they leparated from Il⸗
taell euery one that bad myrte hym celle
therin. And befoꝛethys had the Pꝛeſt Citas
fib delpuered the chett of the houſe ol oure
God vnto hrs tynfman Cobiah:foꝛ he had
made hyma great cheſt / and there had ther
afoze tyme layed the meatofferpnges fran:
kencende / veel / and the tythes of come /

wyne and


Nehemiah.


wyne and ople(aco dinge to che cõmaunde⸗
ment geuen to the Keuptes / lyngers a poꝛ⸗

ters and the heueofterpnges of the pꝛeſtes.
But in alithys was not J at Jeruſalem:
koꝛ ind two a thirtieth vearẽ ol Artyaxerſes
kynge of Babiion came J vnto the kynge /
ercapne dapes optaxned I licence


e of God / and it greued me
ath all $ bedicis of ö boule
the chett/¢ cõmaunded the
And thither bꝛoughte J
s of the houle of Gd / the


geuen them / Fo? the which
es € lyngers were lled / euere
‘oz towozke. Chen repꝛoued
Ithe rulers / and tapde: why koꝛlake we the
But J geatheredthem to ges
their place. Chen bꝛought
ches ol coꝛne / wyne and ople
And J made trealures auer
zen Delemlah the pꝛelt / and
e
deuchetrhande Hanan the tonne
of Jacur ehe fonne of Mathaniah: koꝛ they
were cofitca fapthfull/and their oſtyce was


to diſtrybute onto their bꝛethzen. Chynche w


vpon me O inp God here in / and wype not
out mymercp / that J haue ſhewed on phoule
ol my God / and on the offpcers therol.

At the lame tyme fawe g tome tredynge
wyne pꝛelles on the Saboth and bꝛinginge
in clutters and alles laden wyth wynẽ gra⸗
pes / kxgges / and bainginge all maner of bur
theng onto Jerutalem / pon the Haboth
Dave . And rebuked the carnettip the fame
dape that they colde p vptayles. There dwelt
men of Cy2e alto therin / whych bꝛoughte

ch and all maser of ware / and tolde on the

aboch onto the chrldgen ol Juda and Je⸗
ruſalem. hen repꝛoued z the tulers in Ju⸗


da / and ſayde onto thé: what euell thynge ig


thes that de vo / bzeake the Daboth daye:
Dypd not bite fathers euen thus / and oure
Sod bꝛoughte all this plage bpon vs a vpõ
this eytye? id ge make the wꝛath moze pet

that ve bꝛeake the Saboth,


BEN a. Sande
parte Gada.

i they chuld
2 — ehe and


dave. Then remapnedthe
jatchauntes once oꝛ twyce
out Jerulale with al mas


ner ol wares Chen repꝛoued i them tore /a
lärde onto che: why tary ve ali night aboute
the wall I pe do it once agapne / J will lape
handes vpõ vou. From that tyme toꝛth came
thep no moze onthe Saboth. And J layne
vnto the Leultes whych were cleane / that
they chulde come and ke pe the gates / to ha⸗
lowe the Saboth dare Chenke vpon melo
my God)cdcernpnge this alto / and (pare me
acoꝛdynge to thy greate mercy. 8

And ac the fame tyme lawe 3 Fewes that
matted wyues ok Aldod / Anumõ a of Moab
and their chyldꝛen (patie halle in the tpeache
ol Aldod / and coulde not (peake in the Fes
wes language / but bythe tonge myghte a
man perceatie euery people. Andy repꝛoued
them / and cutled them / and fmote cettarne
nien of them / and pluckte them vp / andtoke
an ooth of them by God: Ye Hall not geue
voure daughters nto their lonneg / nether
dall ye take their daughters vnto poure Con
nes / oꝛ £02 youre ſelues. yd not Salomd
the kynge of Alrael lynne therin? and vet
amonge manp Peythen was there no kynge
lpke hem / and he was deare vnto hys God /
and God made him kynge ouer all Firact/e
pet neuertheles outlandych wemen cauled
bymto lpnne: Ind chall we then obere vnto
vou / to do all thrs great euell / andto trant⸗
Grefie gaunt ourẽ God / a marpe ſtraunge

e


1 Ad one ok the chyldzen ot Febotada the
konne of €liatth the bye pꝛeſt/ had made a cõ
tracte wyth Sanabalat the Pozonite: but
I chaced him fs me O myGod/thinke thou
bpon them that are quyte of the pꝛeſthode /
and haue defpledthe conenatit of the pzell⸗
bode and of the Leuites Chus clented 9 the
from all foch as were outlandich / and ap⸗
poppted the courtes of che preltes and eut⸗
tet / euery one to his ollyce / and to offte
the wodat tymes appornted / and
the kpꝛſt trutes Chynke thou
vpon me O my God)
toꝛ the belt.


che ende or the tecondeboke of erdoa /
erwyte called che boke ot
* Hehemiah.


Bags


ay „*


*


a


Theboke


The bokt of Ether


See
ch aropal Iwherunto 8
ae, camestay which cauſe che 1


che fyet Chapter.


Carlenã / Sethar Admatha / Tharlis / a
res / Marlana ¢ Mamucan / the ſeuen pains


ces olthe werclans / z Meedes which tawe
the kynges kace / and lat aboue in the kyng⸗
dome / Phat lawe ſhulde be execute vpo che
quene ta ftht/ becaule the dyd not acoꝛdinge
top woꝛde of the kinge by his chaberiapnes, >
Chen fayde Mamucan befoze the kynge a
the pꝛinces: che quene wialtht bath not onelx
done euell agapnt g kinge but allo agaynũt
all the princes @ all the people in all p; andes
ok kynge Ahaluerus foz this dede ofSquene
all come abꝛode vnto all wemen / lo ther
ſhall delpple their hutbandes befoze their
epes / and call tape: the kinge A haluerus co
maunded Maſtht the queneto come befoze
him / but the wolde not. And fo wall the pzin-
cedesin Perlta ¢ Media lave likewile onto
all d hinges princes / when they heare of chis
dede of the quene / thus thal there aryte del⸗
pptefulnes and wzath ynough. It it pleate
che kynge / let there goa commaundement
krom hin / and let it be wꝛytten acozdpnge to
che lawe of the Perlians ¢ Medians ( not
to be träcgrelled) p waltht come no moze be⸗
foze kynge Ahaluerus /a let p kynge genes
kingdonie onto another p is better then che.
And that this weptinge of 6 kinge which
ſhalbe made / be publylched thozo out all
his empyze (which is greate (that all wyues
mape holde their hurbades in honoure/ both
amonge greate and ſmal.
and the pꝛynces /


Chis plealed the hyn

andthe kynge dyd aco dinge to the woꝛde ol
Wamucan. Chen were there letters tent
fozth in to all the kynges landes / in to cuerp
lande acoꝛdinge to the wꝛytynge therot / and
to euerp people after their language / that
euerpma chulde be lo de in his awne houle.
And chys cauledhe be ſpoken after the lan⸗
guage of bys people.

nt cer ten goodly young da
piel pth

ie 1 Me ia
Sec — Ante che kyng thofe that wolde be.
trape hem.


h

e her. Chen ſayde the kynges fers
udunteg Net there be fapze pounge birgins
foughte koꝛ the Benge / and let the kyngẽ ap⸗
popnte ouertears in alt the landes of bis em⸗
prze / that they mape bꝛynge together alt
kapze vounge vyꝛgyns vnto the caſtell of
Suan tothe wemens burldinge onder the
hande of Hagei the kynges chamberlapne /
chat kepeth the Wemen / and let hem geue
them their apparell. And lotze which damen
Pleateth d kinge / iet her be quene in wali,


*


Ok Eſther.


ſteade. his pleated the konge / andhe dyd to.

Inthe caltellok Sulan there was a Fe-
we / whole name was Mardocheus / tonne
ol air / the lonne of Demet / p Conne of Cig
5 lonne of emu / which was cariedawaye
krom Jerulalem / whjan Jekoniah § kynge
ol Juda was ed awaye/ whom Pabucho-
dono zoꝛ the kynge of Babild caryed awaxe)
andhe noziched Hadalahlthat is Eüther hes
vncles daughter: koꝛ he had nether father
no; mother / and the was a fapꝛe and beuty⸗

B full damen. and when her tather and mo⸗
cher dped / arvocheus receaued her as hys
awne daughter. 5

Now when che nynges cömaundemẽt and
comifyon was publpcded / a many damlels
were bzoughte together onto the cattell ol
Suan vnder p hande ol Haget / Either was
také allo onto} kynges boufe bnderp hande
ol Hagetp neger ol the wem / athe damfell
pleated him ¢ tye kounde grace in his lighte
And he cauſed her oyntment to be geuen her /
and her gyltes / a gaue her. bij. notãble gẽtyl
wemen of the kynges houle / a arayed both
her a her gentyl wemẽ very rychelpe in the
houle of the wemen But Eſther che wed not
ber people noz her kynred: ko? Mardocheus
had charged her / p che chulde not tell it. And
Mardocheus waiked euerpdave befoze the
courte of the wemens buyldinge / he might
knowe how Eſther dpd / and what chuldẽ be
come of her.

And when the appornted tyme ok euery
damkelkcame that the chulde come to ß hinge
Ahaluerus / aller that che had bene twelue
monethes in the deckynge of the wemen (toꝛ
their deckynge mut haue lo moch tyme / na⸗
mielplixe moncthes wyth Balme a Myꝛre /
g lyre monethes w good lpyces / lo were the
wemẽ beutifped) then wente there one dãtell
vntoß kynge / a what fo euer Me requpꝛed / 5
mut be geuen her to go wyth her out of the
wemẽs buploinge onto 8 kyngz palace. And
when one came in the euenynge / p tame wet

cfd him on the mo ow into p ſcconde houle ol

wemen / vnderthe hande ok Dalagas p king

berlapne / which kepte the cöcubind. And

che mutt come vneo ß hinge nomoze / excepte

itpleaten the kenge / and that he cauled her
to be called bynaine.

How when che tyme came ok Ether the
daughter ok Siijail Mardocheus vncie(whõ
he had receaued as hys atone daughter)that
fhe chulde come tothe kynge / che delpꝛedno⸗
chinge but what Hagel the hinges chamber
lapne the keper or the wemen lapde.

And Ether founde fauoure in the fyghte
ok allthemthat lonedpponher. And Either
was taken ogg Aynge Ahaluerus in to che
boute ropal / in che tenth moneth whech is


Callen Cebeth / in the teuenth veare of bee
raigne.


ne.

And the kynge loued Ether aboue all the
wemen, and che kounde grace and merey in
his lyghte bekoꝛe all the virgyns: andhe tet:
che quenes croune vpon hir head / and made
her quence in ſteade of wacht. And the hinge
made a great feaſt onto all hys pꝛynces and
leruauntes ( tohych kealt was becaute of
Eſther) and let the landes be in qupetnes /
sa gad ropall gpftes,

nd whan the birgyns were geathered to
ae e tyme / ꝙardocheus lat in
hinges gate. Indas pet hadnot ſther ſhe⸗
wedherkynred and her people / acoꝛdinge as
Mardocheus had hoden her ko: Ether dyd
after the woꝛde of Mardocheus / line as whe
he was hertutoure. At the lame tyme whple
Mardocheus lat in the kynges gate / two ol
the kynges chamberlaynes Bagathan and
Chares which keyte the doꝛe / were wꝛoth / a
fought to lape their handes on Synge Abas
Cuerus:wherof Mordocheus gat knowled⸗
ge / and tolde it onto quene Ether / Esther
certykpedthe kynge therok in gardocheus
name. Ind when inquilpcton was made / it
was founde fo. And theb were both hanged
on tre: and it was wꝛytten in the Cronpcles
befoze the kynge.


Chaman the Macedonian’ after he was exalted / ob
tapned of the bpng that all the Jewes ſhulde be put to
deeth / becaute Mardocheus had not done hym woz⸗
cher / as other had.


Che. ij. Chapter.


my


I
1


‘wr .

that were inthe gate bowedtheir ümees / and
drd reuerẽce vnto Haman: toꝛ the nynge had
lo commaunded. But Mardocheus bowed
hotthe knee / and wochtpped hin not. Chen
che kynges ſeruauntes whych were in the
Hynges gate / larde vnto Mardocheus: why


trälgreckeſt thou the kynges cömaundemet⸗
And when they fpake this daylye vnto hym / B
che kolowed thé not / they tolde Haman / that
they mpghte le whether Mardocheus mar⸗
ters wolde endure: ko: he had tolde thẽ that
he was a Jewe. And whe Baman faiwe that
Mardochẽus bowed not the tinee vnto hym /
hoz woꝛchypped hym / he was full of indig⸗
nac pen e chought it to lpttel to iape handes
onely on Mardocheus: oz they had ſhewed
him p nactd ot Mardocheus / but he lought
to deſtroye all the Jewes the nacion of ar
docheus / that were in the whole empyze ol


Ahaluerus. !
Dati, An tze


Elrxxvij,


The boke


In the kyꝛlt moneth (that is the moneth

Hilan) in the twelueth veare ol kynge Aha⸗
tuerus hep cal bur is a lott) before a
mu / on what dape ¢ what moneth this chüld
be done: e it went oute the twelueth moneth
that is che monech Adar. And Haman lapde
bnto kingedhaluerus: here is a people lca
tered abzode and dilperled amoge al people
in all the lands ok chene empire /a their lawe
is cötrarp onto al people / a thex do not alter
the kynges lawes nether is it the hing, pꝛo⸗
ket to luke che after this maner. Ak it pleate
che kynge / let him wepte/ chat they mape be
deſtroped / ¢fo will J weye downe ten thou⸗
lande talentes of lyſuer / vnder the handes ol
the woꝛkmen / to be bꝛought into the binges
chamber. Chen toke the kpngebis ringe krõ
bps hande a gaueit onto Haman the tonne
of Amadatha the Agagite the Jewes enemte
And the kynge lapde önto Haman: Let the
ſyluer be geuen the / and that people allo / to
do with all what plealeth the.

Chen were the kynges kerybes called on
the thirtenth dave of the koꝛc moneth / and
there was wutten(aco dynge as Daman cõ
maunded) onto the kynges pꝛynces and to
the captlues euery where in the landes / and
tothe rulars of euerp people ind countrepes
on euer ede / acoꝛdynge tothe wꝛptynge of
euery nacxon / and alter their language in
the name ok kynge Aharuerus and tcaled
withthe kynges rynge. And the weyttinges
were lent by poſtes in to all the nynges lan⸗
des / to rote out / to kyll / and to deſtroye all
Jewes / both ponge and olde / chyldꝛen and
wemen in one dave (namely vpon the thyz⸗
tenth dave of the twelueth moneth / whych is
the moneth Adar)andto lpoyle their goodes.

Chys was the lumme ok the wꝛytinge /S
there thuide bea cömaundement geuen in
all landes to be publilched vnto alt people /
that they wulde be ready agapnt che lame
ave. Ind the pottes wente in allthe halte
acoꝛdynge to the kynges commaundement.
And in che catkell of Sulan was the com⸗
maundement deupled. Andthe kynge and
Daman late and dꝛancke. But the cytye ol
Sulan was dilquieted.

C Hardocheus geucth the guene knowledge ok the
— ol he rng . 0
Che. flil. Chapter.


ces / as karre as the kynges woꝛde and com⸗


maundement extended / there was greate la


trove befoze her) and gaue hema conmeun- gew.
dement vnto Mardocheus / that be myght o ihe


koz hex people.

ban Hathath came in / a tolde Cher
the wozdes of Pardocheus / CAber (pake
vnto Hathath / and cõmaunded hym to faye
vnto Wardocheug all the hynges ſeruaun⸗
tes / and the people in the tandes ofthe nung
howe / chat wholocuer cometh within dhe
courte vnto the kynge / whether it be man og
woman which is not calied / ihe cõmaunde⸗
ment is that the lame chan dye immedxatix /
excepte the kynge holde out the gouidẽ lccp⸗
ler vnto hm / that he mapeipue, As toꝛme /
J haue not bene calied to come in toß Binge
now this thirtie daes.

And when Azardocheus was certified ol
Ellhers woꝛd / Mardocheus bad faye agay
ne vnto Eſthei:thinke not to laue thine als
ne like / whvie thou art in d kinges houle be⸗


koze all Fewes:fo2 pt thouboloct thy peace g


at this tzme / then chall ß Lewes haue helpe
and belpuerannce cut ot another place / and
thou and thy fathers houte haibe deſtroyed.


And who knoweeh whether thou art come


to p Kyngdome,foz this tymes fake: Ether
bad / geue MPardocheus this ancwer: Gothou
chp wape then / a geather together allthe Je
weg 5 are tounde at Sulañ / and falt ve foꝛ
me / p ve eate not a dzinke not in the daxes⸗
nether dave noz nighte J and mpdalels will
fatt lpkewyle /a fo wyl J go in tothe henge
cõtrarytothe cõmaundemẽt: pk J pericbe /
perithe. jo Pardocheus wente his waye /
t dyd all that Eltherhad e 5


Ol Either,


TEAher entreth in to the kyng and v bim and é and e 15
Saure — Gam braethag fo: ar Web dan all an kauleda ga:


docheus.


Che. b. Chapter.

don the chirde dape put Ether

on her ropall apparell a ſtede ind

courte of the kyngʒ palace within

8 Aouer agaynſt the kynges boule,
And the Gynge late vpon hys ropal (eate in
the kynges palace ouer agaynſk the gate ol
the houle. and when the kynge lawe Eſther
the quene ſtandynge in ö courte / che founde
grace inhis tpahte. And the kynge helde out
the golden fcepter in bps bande kowarde

2 Eſther. Do Eſther ſtepte koꝛth e touched the
toppe of the ſcepter. Then lapde the kenge
vnto her: hat wilt thou quene Eſther? and
what cequypzett thou? alle euen the balfe ol
Hempyre/eit Mall be geuẽ che. Ether lade
Ikit pleale p kinge / let d hinge a Haman co
me this daye onto p banzet p J haue pꝛepa⸗
red Che kynge lapde:caule Hamanto make
haſte/ that he mape do as Ether bath larde.

Now when che kynge a Haman came to
banket p Eſtherhadpꝛepared / ß kyng apne
vnto Eũherat the bancket of wyne Eſther /
what is thy peticyõ: and it halbe geuenthe.
And what requpꝛeſt thou: It it be euenthe
halle of the emppꝛe / it halbe done.

C Chen antwered Ether andlapde: my pe⸗
ticion a delpꝛe is yt Ibaue founde grace in
che lyght of the kyngẽ / a yr it pleate p kinge
to geue me my peticion / and to kulkyll myre
queſt / then let che kynge a Haman come to
the bancker p 4 ali prepare £07 thẽ / and lo
will J do to moꝛow as the hinge hath lapde.

Chen went Haman koꝛth the Came daye
loplull and merp in his mynde. And when he
la we Mardocheus in the kynges gate / he
ſtode not vp and kneled bekoze hym̃ / he was
full of indignacion at Mardocheus Heuer⸗
theles he relrapned him lelke:and whẽ he ca⸗
me home / he tent / and called fozbis krendes /
and Zares bys wyle / z tolde the ot the gloꝛy
ok his riches /a the multitude okhis chuͤdꝛen
all to getherhow v kinge had pꝛomoted him
cogreatly / and how thãt he was takẽ aboue
the pꝛynces and feruatites of the kynge. Ha⸗

gp MG lapde mozeouer. Vce a Eſtherthe quene
letno man come with the kinge vntoß banc
het 6 ſhe had pꝛepared / excepte me /a tomo⸗
rom am 7 bidden vnto her allo with ö kinge
But in all thys am I not fatilépedas ionge
as Iſe Parvocheus the Jewe lyttinge at >
Rynges gate. & hen fapne Zares bys wyle d
all bys krendes onto hym: Let themmake a
galowes of fyttpe cubites hie / and tomoꝛow
fpeabe thou vnto the kinge /s Mardocheus
mape be hanged theron / yk thou cõmeſt me⸗
rely with the kenge vnto the banckct. Hams


E Che kyng turneth ouer the Chꝛonpeies a kyndetij
the kydelptie ot Mardochens. z then to the cõtuſyõ of
Hama cõmaldeth Mardocheus to be had in honbure.


¶ Che. bi. Chapter.
He lame night coude not $ kinge
lepe / and be cõmaunded to binge


ten / how Mardocheus had tolde / that the
kynges two chaberiapnes ( whych kepte the
thꝛelſholdd) Cought:to laye handes on kynge
Abaluerus And the kynge lapde: what woꝛ⸗
hippe a goodhaue we done to Mardocheus
therfoze? Chen lapde the kynges leruaütes B
that nuniſtred vnto him. Chere is nothynge
done foꝛhym And the kynge layde: B ho ig
in the courte? (fo2 Haman was gone in to ß
courte without betoze the hyngt houte / that
be myght fpeake onto the kynge to hange
Mardocheus on z tre / that he had pꝛepared
£7 him.) And p hinges ſeruaũtes tapde vnto
him beholde / haman frandcth in the courte,
Che kynge lapde:let him come in. And when
Haman came in / the kynge layde onto hym:
what Mall be done vnto the man / whomthe
kynge wolde fapne bꝛinge onto wozthyppe?
But Haman thought in bys hert: Myon
Ghulde the kynge els be glad to bꝛynge vnto
woꝛchyppe / bur me? And Haman layde vn⸗
to the kynge: Let the man onto whom the
kynge wolde be glad to do woꝛchyppe / be
bꝛoughte hyther / that he mape be araped
wyth the vopall garmentes whpch the kynge
vleth to weare: and the hoꝛſe that the kynge
rydeth bps / and that the crowne royal mape
be ſet vpon hrs been. And let this rayment
and hoꝛle be deliuered vnder thehande of one
of the kynges pꝛynces / that he mape arape
the man withalllwhõ the hinge wolde fayne
hououre)and carphym vpõ the hoꝛle thoꝛow
the ſtrete of the citie / a caule it to be pꝛocla⸗
medbefoze bim:thus hal it be done to euery
mã / whom the binge wolde layne honoure.
The kynge lapde: make haſte / andtake as
thou batt layde / the rapment and the horte:¢
do euen lo with Mardocheus the Jewe that
lytteth bekoꝛe 5 2 — gate / a let nothinge
faple of all that thou bat lpoken. Chen tone
Pamanthe rayment and the hoꝛle / a araped
him / and bꝛought hym on hoꝛibacke thoꝛow
the ſireate of the citie/ and pꝛoclamed bekoze
bpm: Euen thus chall it be done vnto cuery
man whom the kinge is dilpoled to honoure. 7.
And Mardocheus came agayne top kynges
gate / but Haman gat him home in all halte
mourninge with bare heade / andtolde Fares
his wyke ¢ all his krendes / euerpthyngethat
As. ilij. haͤdhap⸗


Llxxxvij.


Theboke


gad happened him Chen fapde his wie men
1 a —— him : Ik it be Mardo⸗
chẽus of the Lene of the Jeweß / bekoꝛe whom
thou halt begonne to fall / chou canſt do no⸗
thpnge onto hem / but hale fall bekazehrm.
Wh pie they were vet talkinge with him / ca⸗
me the kenges chamberlapnes / and cauled
Haman to make hate to come vnto the bãc⸗
ket that Either had prepared,


¶ Che quene biddeth the king and amd agapne and
2 for her fetfe and her people. St acculetq
— hel se ‘paged ache tend which he had

Prepared Fo; Mardocheus.


Ether on the lecondẽ dape at the
bancket of wyne: what is thy petieiõ quene
Eſther / that it maye be geuen the? And what
requpꝛeſt thou: Ye /athe euen halte or d em⸗
ppꝛe / à it Mall be done Eſtherthe quene an⸗
kwered and lade: t Fhaue founde grace in
thy lyghte ( O henge) vk it pleale the Benge
then graunte me mplyke at my delpꝛe a my
people fo2 my petictos lake:toꝛ we ate ſold i
€ mp people bothe to be deſtroted to be Gaine

B Fto periche. And wolde cod we were lolde to

Some reade. be bondmen and bondwemen / then wolde J

aichoughe theyoine mytöge / lo chude not the enempe be

bot rden pete lo hpe fache Kpnges harme Che bynge abat

ihe kpnges haruerug Cpake and fayde vnto quene Either:

Mie what is he that: Oz where is he that darre

pꝛelume in his mynde to do loch a thinge afs

ter that maner: Eſther lapde:tche enempe and
Caduerlarp is tzis wicked Haman,

As fo: ama he was exceadinglp akraied
befoze the Binge g the quene. Ind the kynge
avofe from the backet and krom the wyne in
bys dilplealure and wente into the palace
garden. And haman ſtode vp / and beloughte
quene Eſther Foz bys lpfe: ko he ſawe that
there was a nutchete pꝛepared koꝛ bpm ol
che kynge already.

And when the kynge came agayne out oF
che palace garden into the parler where they
Dhbapeaten Paman had layed bym bpon the
bed that Elther lat bpon. Chen lapoe d kinge
O /in my pre wyll he Force the quene allo belyde ; me in d
fences houle: As lone as that woꝛde wẽte out ofthe
bps türe unte Künges mouth cher ccuered amans face.
bew hin wor⸗ Ind Harbonah one of the chamberlapnes 5
thye of deeth. ſtode before the kynge / larde. Behodde / there
ſtandech a galowes in Hamans houle kyftie
becher ad Belt Bae) ＋ 7 foz .
ocheus / chat ſpatze good ko che kynge. Che

henge fayde:bange hym theron. So
hanged Haman on the galowes that he had
made for Wardocheus Then was the hyngy

wꝛath pacpkyed.


\


¶atter the deeth of haman is Mardocheus exalttd
— — ed


¶ Che. viij. Chapter.


a $
Bpnge:foz Ether tolde how that he belöged
vnto ber, And the kynge put ol bys kynger
rynge / which he had take from Haman / and
gaue it vnto Mardocheus. And Eſther ſet
Mardocheus ouer the houle ol Ham. And
Eſther ſpake pet moze befoze the nynge / and
fell downe at hys kete / a betought hym / that
be wolde put awape the wyckednes of Ha⸗
man the Agagite / and his device that he had
pmagined agapntt the Jewes. And the kyng
helde out the goulden kcepter onto Ether.
Chen role Eüher / z Code befoze the kynge / B
and lapde: pk it pleate the kynge / a PEF haue
kounde grace in bis light / a pit be couentte
koꝛ the kynge / a p it be accepted inhis light
then let it be wꝛytten / that the letters of the
deupce ol Hamanthe lonne of Hamadatha
the Agagite mare be called agapne: whych
letters he wꝛote / to deſtrope the Jewes in all
che kynges landes Fo how can Ce § euell
that ſhall happen vnto my people? a how cã
Iloke vpon the deſtruccion or my kynred⸗

Chen fapnethe kynge Ahaluerus vnto
quene Eſther / and to Mardocheus the Je⸗
we: Beholde haue geuen Ether the houle ¢
ol Haman / and him haue they hanged vpon
atre / becauſe he layed bande vpon the Je⸗
weg. Byte ve now therkoꝛe fo2 the Jewes ⸗
as it lykech vou in the kynges name / z feale
it with the nynges rynge (fo2 the wzrtinges
that were wꝛytten in the kynges name / and
lealed wych the kynges rynge / durſt no man
drlanulle.) Chen were the kynges ſcrybes
called at the lame tyme in the thirde moneth /
that is the moneth Siuan / on the thꝛe and
twentyeth dare. 5

Andit was witten as Mardocheus cõ⸗
maunded (onto the Jewes and to the pʒrn⸗
ces / tothe Debytyẽs and captapnes in the
landes from India vntyll Ethiopia /namciy
an hundzed and leuen and twentxe landes /
vnto euery one acoꝛdynge to the waxtynge
therok / vnto euery people after their tpeche /
andto the Jewes accoꝛdynge to their wzy-
tinge and language.

Andit was written in the kynge Ahalue⸗
Lug name / and lealed with the kinges ringe.
And by poſtes that rode vpon twytte yonge


they Mules / lent he the weptynges / wher in the


kpnge grauntedthe Jewes (in what cytpes
to euer they were) to geatherthem lelues to
gether / and to ſtande for cher te, fue


fof Either,


to linde to rote oute to ape and to deftrove all the
fir teit tere power al the people z lande that wolde trom
samsuet Of dle them with chpldzen andwemen andte
arte be, (Pople their good dps one dape in all b Iades
kate ft; bat OF Bpnge A haſuerus namely opon the thyꝛ⸗


wetipe/todee tenth dape o£ the twelueth moneth / which is


kaeiheit We eye moneth Adar.
ales, Cbelun meu the waptenge tas / how
letrnel pets chere was a cõmaundemẽt geuẽ in all land


fquucpoa of tobe publitives onto all p people / that thẽ


b cüuen. Aewes ſhuide be readp agapnſt that daye to


auenge them felues on their enemyes. Ind
the poſtes that rode vpon the Mules / made
haſte with all ede / accoꝛdyng to § kynges
woꝛde: and che commaundement was deuy⸗
ledin the caltell ot Sulan.

As fo2 Marbocheus he went oute krõ the
Kenge in ropa upparell of pelow a whyte /
and with a greate crowne of goulde / beynge

ment of Ipnné and purpie /

ulan reiopſed a wãs glad:

des there was come lyght a

ope d woꝛſhyppe. And in all

3 into what places loeuer

the hynges worde and commaundemẽt rea⸗

ched / there coax fope and myꝛth / pꝛolperite a

good dayes amonge the Jewes: infomoch

chat many ol che people in the lande became

ofthe Jewes beleke / koꝛ d keare ot d Jewes
came vᷣpon them.


Cat the cõmaunde ment of the kynge the Jewes put
their aduerfavics to deeth. Che Connes of Qaman are
banged, Che Jewes kepea fea daye in remembeaun
ce ok their delßuccaunce.


Che. ix. Chapter.


a H2 che twelueth moneth, that is
g | themonety Adar / pon the chpꝛ⸗
5 Cent) bape / which the king woꝛde

{ and cbmaundement had äppopn⸗
ted / chat it ſnulde be done / euen ops the lame
dave that the ene myes ſhulde haue deſtroyed
the Fewes dohaue oppzeledthem / it turned
contrarp wle / euen that the Jewes thule
lubdue their enempes. Chen geathered the
Jewes togecher in their cyties within all 6
landes of Rynge Ahaſuerus / to tape hande

on loch as woloe do them eueil / and no man
coulde wpchltand them: for the keare of
them was conte ouer all people. And allthe
rulers inthe landes / and pꝛyꝛices and Debi⸗
ktes / and officers of the kynge promoted the
Fewes: forthe feave of Mardochcus came
bpon them. Foꝛ Mardocheus was greate in
the kynges houte/ a the repozte ol hym was
hopfedin all ad / how he increaled a grewe.
Chus the J ewes ſmote all their enemies

B with a tore daughter) and lle we a deltroped /
and dyd after theix wyll vnto ſoch as were
their aduerkaries. And at the caſten of Sus


e
Elxxxix.
lan flewe the Jewes anddettroped kyue hun
dꝛeth men: a cſewe Pharlandatha Selphõ /
Alphatha / Phoꝛatha / A dalia / Aridatha/
Pharmaſtha / Aritat/ al ridai/WMaizatha / the
ten Connes of Haman the lonne of Hamada⸗
tha ß enemye of the Jewes: but on his good
they layedno handes. At the fame tyme wag
the kynge certykyrd ot the nombꝛe ok chole
that were {apne at ß cattell of Sulan. And «
the kynge layde vnto quene Elther ; The Fee
wes haue flapne ¢ deltroped fyue hundzeth
men at § cattell of Hulan /a the ten fonnes
ol Haman: What Halt they do in the other
landes of the kynge: kehat is thy peticpon/ /
that it maye be geuen the? what requpꝛeſt
chou moze to be done: Ether land: g it plea⸗
ſe the hynge / let him luffte the Zewes to mo⸗
row allo to do accoꝛdyng vnto this bepes cõ⸗
maundemꝛt / that they mare hange Hamas
ten connes spon the tre. Andthe kyng char⸗
ged to do lo / a the cõmaundemẽt was deuy⸗
led at Sulan / a Hamang ten lonneg were
hanged. And Saen o geathered the flues
together at Sulan / dpo the kourtenth dave
ol the moneth Adar / and ewe thꝛe hundꝛeth
men at Sulan / but on their goedes cher
laped nohandes. i

Ag foꝛ the other qewes inpupnges lãdes /
they came together / a *ſtode fo2 their lyues /

g gat reſt from their enempes: and liewe of — robe in
cheir enempes fpue a teuẽtße thouland / how che nert chaps
beitther laped no bandes on their goodes. fer beforeat the
Chis was done on the thirtenth nape of the yn" ·
moneth Adar /a on the fourtenth dape ofthe

lame moneth reſtedther / whych dave they

oꝛde yned to be a dave of falt yng a gladnelle

But the Jewes at Dutan were come toge⸗

ther both on the chyꝛtenth dae a on p kour⸗

tenth / a on the kylteneh da ye they reſted / and

the lame dat ozoepnen they tobe n dape ol

keaſtynge a gladnes. Therkoze che g ewes p

dwelt in the bellages and nwafledtowneg /

odeyned ihe kourtenth dave or the moneth

Adar / to be a daye oc keaſtyng and gladnes /

and one lent gyrtes onto another.

And Mardocheus wrote thele actes / and
fent the wꝛitingd onto all the ewes p were E
in al the landes ol kynge Ahaluerus / both
npe ¢ karre / that they chulde pearly receaue
ct holde the kourtenth ¢ kyktenth daye ol che
monet Adar ag the daves wherin § Fewes
cam to reſt fro their enemies / a as a moneth
wherin their parne was turned to iope / and
their loꝛowe into pꝛolperite:that ther chinde
oblerue che lame as dapes of wealth a glade
nes / and one to lende gyktes onto another / a
to diſtribute vntothe pooꝛe.

And the Jewes receaued it that they
had begonne to do / and that Mardocheus
wrote onto them. how char Baman d lenne
Had, ol Wa⸗


. OF Bamadatha allthe Jewes enentye / had de
uyledto deſtrope all che Jewes / a cated to
Catt Phur(that is Lot) foz to put them in
keare / a to bꝛynge chem to naughte: and how
Heſter wente and tpake to the Kynge / that
thozow letters his wyckeddeupcel which he
pmaginedagaynſt the Jewes) might be tur⸗
ned vpon his awne heede / andhow he a hrs
konnes were hanged on the tre. Foz ) which
caule they called this dave Phurim after the


„chlor name ok; Phur / accoꝛdpng to all the woꝛdes


hel. ih c.


ak this weptyna: and what thep thet kelues
had tene and what had happened vnto them.
Andthe Jewes cet it vp / and toe it pon
chem and thetr tede / a bps all loch as ioyned
them felues vnto them / that they wolde not
mpiie to obferue chele two dapes pearl / ac⸗
cozdynge as they were weptten andappopn⸗
ted / how that thele dapes are not to be foꝛgot


Gten / but to be kepte orchydders chydẽ am̃õ⸗


ge all kynredes in all landes a cyepes. They
are the dayes or Phurim / which are not to be
ouerflipte amonge the Jewes / a the memo⸗
rpall of them oughte not to perlite from
their lede. 5

And quene Helker the daughter of Abt⸗
hall a Mardocheus the Jewe wꝛote wyth
allauctozite/to contirme thts feconde wyy⸗
ting of Phurim / and lent the letters onto all
the Tewes in che hundzeth z leu a twentye
landes of the empyze of Ahaluerus / wyth
krendip and faythfuil woꝛdes / to conkirme
thefe dapes ol Phurim / in their tyme aps
popnted / acco dynge as 9H ardocheus the
Jewe and Heiter the guene had oꝛdeyned cö⸗
cernynge them:ipke as tue p pps their loule
and vpon their fede had ronfirmed the actes
or the* kaſtynges and ol hir cõpiaynte. And
Heſter cõmaunbed to ſtablich thete actes ol
this Phurim, and to wꝛyte them in a boke.
¶ Che glo: ie and noblener of atualuetus: and Autho
Tpte of Mardocheus.

Che. x. Chapter.


a the kynge Abatuerus taped tri
bute bpon the lande / and opon the
yx Tles of the lee. As Foz all? wozke


dk his power and auctozpte/ a the
greate woꝛchippe of Mardocheus / whych
the k̃ynge gaue him / beholde / it is wꝛyttẽ in
the Cronpcles of the kynges ol Media and
Perlia. Foz Mardocheus the Jewe was the
feconnenette bnto kenge Ahaluerus / and
Greate amõge the Jewes / a accepted amoge

the multitude of his bzethzen / as one
that leketh d welth of his people /
and fpeaketh the belt foz
all his fede,


che ende ok the bone ol
Eſther.


The bokt


Tht boke of Job.


¶ Job is plaged of Hod by the tole of dis goodes and
chpldꝛen ·


Nthe lãde of hus there x
was a man called ob: an in⸗


Dj. daughters. ys ſub⸗
ftaunce was. vij. M. che pe. ij. M. camels v.
E. vouc k of oren. v. C. che alles / and a very
Greate houcho de: lo that he was one of the
moſt pꝛincipall men amonge all them of the
eatt countre. And his lonnes went / a made
banckettes: one dape in one boule / another
da he in another / a (ent foz their. ih. Ipücis
to eate a dꝛincke wich them. So when they
had patted ouer d tyme ok their banckettyng
rounde aboute / Job lent koꝛ them / a clenled
them agayrne / and gat bp earlp / g offered koꝛ
eucty one a bzentofiezyng. Foz Jobthoughe
thus: peraduenture my lonnes haue done
tome offence/and haue bene vnthankfull to
God in their hertes. And thus dyd Job euerp a gg.
daye. ow vpõ atxme / when p Leruaũtes uaftes of Se
Of God" cam a ſtode befoze the Loꝛde / Da here burt,
de / not onelp angelles bp wohõ he o:dereth the courte ¢ worchesof he
woꝛrlde: but allo the godix z cholen / whom he continuallx carcth em
proupdeth foz. Joh U. a.


beam z ftode befoze the lade. Chpuck not that Sod cum en :


apeareth to the angetles and fometpme not / tor the good aurigelics 20
all waple ſe the face of Sod: Nether commeneth Sod ether wath ere


aungelles 02 with the deuell with bodely lptache but the hoip es


in the leriptures ſpeazeth many thynges vnto va acco:byngerooute


kealpnge / and vceth amaner of (peahpuge famplpar to vs, ,


tynge appearyng (prahpng enquerpng and anctoerpnge te Can und
to gungelles / which thynge ma one ix vleth / to chyntet that welhtr⸗
by mape che ralelpär percratie his meanpnge. Che conmygeoe the
aungelles here is no nother (png than to gene acrcuntes of te offe
ce intopued them: which thep geue kuowypng that Sod lepth wit
what tru they dyd it: and to gene thanckes/and warte for their te
ward. They cãme (capth Oꝛigen) honourpng in bung Ferrum
geupnge thanchrs. Of Sathan allo wepteth he
with goyng to / o cõmynge in · but he cam in thong!
wycked del pe to accule the rpghtwelle before Sed.


fpght of the good Sd / put be cgule bis cruetts most wpsbed owgd


tes cam into the lygbt or God. And thus cucu now a deres alen.
bt or Sed in iht het


meth the deupll wh them m to the
acculeth / yndeth kaute / vere th pertecutetz ¢ crounleth the godly
than can


He cam delher 3
ounces mat 3

e are tan as a cSmpng. Che deupit then is courted to hanes q
Path che obe or Sood Moe chat (he moe webe. an im drade in tte 2 —


thancam allo amonge them. Ind the Loꝛde

lapde onto Sachan: From comet

thou: Dathan anlwerrd the Loꝛde / a lad:

9005 Sone aboute the lande and walcked
20m it.

Then lapse the Loꝛde onto Sathan: halt
thor not co gde red mp leruaunt Job / how ß
he is an innocent and bertuous m: coch one
as feareth God / and extueth euch / and that
there is none lyne him in the lande? Satha
ant wered / and lapde vnto the Loꝛde: Dothe

lob keare ch od coz nought⸗ halt thou not pre
enhin, yi houle and äll his dubſtaun⸗
ce oncuer? fpse? hat thou not bleſled the
woꝛckes or hin handes: Fs not his polel⸗
fyon encres teu in the lande? But lape thyne
bande vpon him a lytle / touche once all that
he hathe / and ( holde) he hall cucte tye to
thy kace. Ano che Loꝛde layd onto Sathan:
Jo all that he hath / be in thy power: only
vpon hym iif le that thou lape not thpne
ee Chen went Sathan koꝛth from the
oꝛde.

c Now ppz a certapne dape whẽ his fonnes
and daughters were eatynge / anddꝛincking
wyne in their clock bzothers houle there
camie a mellenger vnto Job / laxde: i Phyle
the oren were a plowynge / a the daes going
in the patture belpdethemethe Habees cam
in violentip / and toke thé all awaye: ve ther
haue flapne thy teruaũtes with the lwearde /
and q only raime my wave / totell the.

nd wh pte he was pet fpeahynge/ there
came another / ond lapde: he Eyre of God is
fallen from heguen / it hath conlumed / and
bꝛent vp an thy ſwepe and ſeruauntes: and J
onip ranne nx wape / to tell the. an d meane
he was pet ſpeakynge / there
lapde: Che Caldees made
Hin vpon thy cantels / which
ratwape / pee and {apne thp
hel wege: and Fonlyam
che: Hhyle he was lpea

pet another / z lapde: ẽ hy

= <gbters were eatynz a dꝛync⸗
Heir clued bꝛothers houle /a
ne a mightie gre ite wynde
/a ſmote the. itt. coꝛners

fell vponthy chyldzen / lo

nd Jam gotien aware


be yp / and rente hes clothes
eli doine vpõ the graũde/
daxde: Naked came Z out o£

/ naked Hall z turne

che Loꝛde gaue / and the
awape now bleſed he 5

e. Jnallthele thenges dyd
ener murmured kolpchlya⸗


eng
Coneniy st
out ok the
of the hou


Job


a *
53
Lt.
EJovis plaged wooare bples) akterwarde isinockey


OF bis wpke Bis tryndes vicpte hum haue compalcton
on hem.


che. j. Chapter. 4


CThappened allo vps a tymie/tzat a: n ts
8 0 85 e chen ol on cam bere 155 6 de.
¢ ltode bekoze the Lone, Sathan aupnge ¢ der
1 came amöge them / a ſtode betoze ade d. len
him. And be Lozde layne onto Spathan: wüö all thmges
From whence commeſt thou: Sathan an⸗ are howchald
kwered and lapde: Jhaue gone aboute the therby learns
lande and waickentozoto tt, WE Hs shed
‘Then fapoe the Lozde ontospathan:batk tess ranchoue
thou not confpoered my leruaunt 3 ob / how of Hatha which
that he is an innocent and vertuous ma koch aware perg,
one as feareth God/andertuceh euell7 and b. vnde J e
that there is none Iphe him in the land: But J; betece have
thou mouedeſt me agaynſthyni / to puny“ went
bim:petis it in vapne / koꝛ he contynueth kill tent p we
in his godipnelle. Dathã ant wered $ Loꝛde / ee
and ſayde: Skynne koꝛ thynne? pee a man a
will geue all ß euerhe hath / ko: hid lde. But
lape thpne hande vpon him, touche him once
bpd the bone andllech / and (J holde) he Hall
curle the to thy face. Chen lapde the Lorde
vnto Sathan: lo / there halt thou him in ehr
power / but (pare his ipte, ¥
So went Hathan forth krom the Loꝛde /
and kmote Job with maruelous fore byles /
from the lole ot the kote vnto hys crowne: lo
thathe fat vpon the grounde in the aches /
on — of the trich or hys loꝛes wetha
pi 2
Chen Cayo his wykt vntohin: Waſte thou C
contynue in thy petectneg? curle cd and
dye. But Job faye vnto her: thou kpealleſt
Ike a folpch woman. Se ynge we haue re⸗
ceaued pꝛolperite at the bande of God, wl
foze ſhulde we not be content with aduerly⸗
te allo? In all thele thrnges / dyd not Job
kenne with his pes.
How when Jobs krendes herde of all the
fyouble / that happened onto hym there
thꝛe okthem / euer one krom hys awne
place: namelp / Eliphas the Chamanite /
Baldadthe Subite / and Sophar the Haa⸗
mathite. 0
Foꝛ they were agreed together to come /
to thetwe their compattyon vpon him / andto
contfozte hm. Spo when theplptte vp their
e beg a karre ot they knewe him not.
Then they cryed / and wepte: then euery
one ok them rente hys clothes and lpꝛynck⸗
led duſt bpon their heades in the apze. & hey
fatthemboune bybimatto bps che groge
St da pes and. vij nightes.Mether was were
enp of them that patie one toozde onto hm /
fo2 they ſawe that bys payne was bere


Greate,
che


The boke


¶ be wordes ok ob / wherin he detlareth that thys
pretent lpfe is mplecablesg that the areth of the ryab
tewes is toponte and foztunable

¶ Che. in. Chapter.


with he map re
ke auryuaee


dymme thoꝛow Darchneleotit Ker le 4
0 0 e ok it. Let it loke
Totnes of Har ko Ipht, bütlet it enone netherthe ring
Phempage and vp o che karze moꝛnyng: becaule it hut not
fertnngeorh 15 the 11 815 that bare me / ner bes thele
i o myne eyes.
peer Alas, wüpoped J not in the byyth 7 Why
ene tombe: be chere nden
0 . rs wombe: Why let they me vpon
ate de cit their knees: Why gaue they me kuck wyth
zpe to the ine their bꝛeltes: Chen chulde J now haue lyen
fiuence af the lil/ A Hulse haue flepte / a bene at reſt like
Hircesss totheas the kynges and loꝛdes of the erth / which
55 ubleth bupive chem felucs lpecpall places: Ag the
prvonpe thar g Pepnces 5 haue greate fubstaunce of gould/
ws, cegisteth and their houles kull of Cpluer. O that J vt⸗
we ae bone 5 19 5 1 oz were 170 : altre
ane out ot tyme chat is put alyde ether as
Pow aranernps ponge chrid en, which neuer ſawe the light
ists tannp eric eee e
ont (aswecö⸗ och re ouerlaboured be at
muß da un an re lt there are thole lett out fre / whych haue
enen benz dene in pielon, to that cher Beare nomore
now a bapes athe dope of the oppzell nie: Chere are
man eepenting Catt andgreate:the vonde man / and he that
bis nm outa is kre kroni his matter,
Wh 8 an, Loveréoze ts the lyght geuen to him that
subappp pour: 48 in mikerprandipke onto them / tat haue
ive , cote nots ear fy en neee re
et) come not: uit moare then Foz trea
sry deades haue lure which allo wolde be exceding glad /a re
derb uo Butch topce Pkcher Eounde their graue Chat Gould
wee. be tope top man whole wape is hd which
ba Thep that God kepeth backe from him. Foz my ſpghes
cee 115 ope! come befo2e J eate / a my roaringes fall out
ace wech af lhe klowyng water Fay § thyng b J keared⸗
Tgeir tpée / i is come vpon me: and the thynge that J wa
B. noch: chat akrapedok / is happened vnto me! Was not
51 a pees happy: Had Ino qupetnelle: Was J notin
Sacre inde tO? Ind now cometh loch myterr bpd me.


lob is reprehended of tmpacience and it e g Band:
3 ol ——
che. ij. chapter. 5


wee


uk.
Guldt krone
moare ryghtweſſe and han Gob but this is ease fete
te 4 posible
ontearys ts genen bn me bp rettlacyor, 8
ee Webolde their is no truck ze. Oe laboureth in coufirmpugethat
which he had before propounded. Che ſumme of the realonis Au
gales are not purer than Gov/ergo not men.
eee
8 re pete
Foꝛ none of thele Hall redeame them bremberth. 8


Che. v. Chapter.


Che ende ofafole. Che trabtwemes
Koide chatteneth — chen .
es


im THStctinbe lo that whe


Bk


ame me one els / vk thou che tyndẽ
p: pee loke aboute the / vpon eny
holpmen. Hs fo? the folpſh
Z dilpleacure kylleth him and
nger lapers ehe ignoꝛaunt. haue lene my
ſelt / when the kolich wag depe roted / that hys
betwtp was coacniydettroped / that his chyl-
den were twithout pꝛolperite or health: that
they were apie in the doze / and no man to
delpuer them: that his harueſt was eaten vp
ok the bungrye:that the weapened man had
fpopledtt and chat the thurſtie had dꝛoncke
bpbisryches. Seis notte eartp? bungeth
Forth traua pie nether cometh foz0 out ofp
grounde: bu te ig ms / that is boꝛne vnto my⸗
ter / lyke as che vyꝛde koꝛ to lle.

5 But noto wyn J Cpeake ofthe Lodde / and
talkie of Gobi ych doththynges ; that are
vnlearchea bie / andmarueles without nom⸗
bre: Which geuech rapne vpõ the earth / and
poureth waver spon all tyynges: which let⸗
tet vp them of lowe degre / and lendeth pꝛol⸗
perite / to thole chat arẽ in heuynelſe: Which
deſtropeth che veupces of the lotyll / lo that
ther are not able to perkoꝛmeß thinges that
ther take in hande: whych compaleth the
wyfe in their atone craktynelle / and ouer⸗
thꝛoweth the councell of the wycked? In lo⸗

C moch 5 they runne into darcknette by fapze

tahede eue / daye / a grope about them at the none dape /
Glu er kene CAB in the npaht.
And lo he delpuereth che pooze from the


Beholde / happye is the man / whom God
all punpſcpeth:therkuze ſdelpyle not thou ß cha
bieten 202 tenpnge of che Almpghtp. Kor though he
tote pere mate a world / he geueth a medicine agapne:
Jnnathe but though he pte / bys hande maketh whole
aan the myd agapne.
mn nan g, . He delpaciech the oute offyre troubleg
elo rs, 4p, 0 fin the kenench there can noharme touch
ot. the. In the myddeſt ol honger he laueth the


@ Fe de, kom death: td when ik is warte / kromthe


rae pa norte ey is
rds e thai! Vice the from the perlous tonge
pase Ale contmeth chou that
In deſtruecion a derth thou
halt not be aftaped ko the
But the caſtels in the
berate with the / and the


i) co» not nedeto :


oſterite chalbe ag the grate
h. chou chalt come to thy graue


Job


Lande ofthe fee. Chis is the caule / that my


eri
1
in a fayꝛe age /Iphe as the come ſheeutes are bealth/p thou
brought in top barne in due keakon. L /this Salt atterteade
is § matter/as we oute Celues baut proued e
by erperience.chertoze now that thou hea⸗ :
reſt it / take better hede to thy tele.
Job anfwereth / that his p apne is moare greuonte,
thea his taute et not withtading he deutcth therin
¶ Che. vi. Chapter.
Ob antwered / and larde: O ß my
Imitety were weyed/ a my punity- A
ment laped in the balaunces: foz
chen ſhulde it be heuper / then the
wozdes are fo lozduful. sx r dem-
Joe the arowes or the almpabtp are in npabere ates
me / whole indignacion hath dꝛoncke vp my dame mennes
lpꝛete / andthe terryble feares ol God kyght opiniowarethe
agarnd me. Doth the wrde alferoare wie GUM dis
he hach grate? Dz crveth the ore whenhe wah: alter
bath fonder pnough ? Chat which is vnlaue⸗ tome other /
rp / ſhalt it be eaten with oute lalte / oꝛ is ther theeare d teow
ant kalte in d whpte or anegge be chung tac mH) fs
that Come tyme J inpght not awaye werhaſ⸗ 15 the herles
are now my meate Foz very loꝛow. O that 3, of mens
myghbthaue my delyꝛe: G that God wolde while they ther
Gtaunte me the thpng chat lange fo Chatte ba c l
be woide beapnne a tmyte me: that he wolde ue and one
let his had go / a hew me downe. Then chulde heaichkullpuil⸗
haue lome cofozte:pee J wolde delpze him ted:asit 15 ard
inmy papne that he ddurde not (pave fo: J Pam aue
well not be agapnt ? wo des ot p hoi one. rande then
What power haue 2 to endure? Dz, what ta be the crole
is myne end / chat my foule myght be paciet? or mylerer and
Ja my drength the ttrength ok tones? Dy wretcoednes
iempfieche made of bjate? Faitnotto that Leth Le
ther is in me nobelpe:a* that mplubftatice ped hem. sor
is taken krom me. He that is in tribulacpon the Sapnẽtes
ought to be cõkozted of his neyghbour: but (Care thep) veo
chekegre ofthe Lords cleane aware, Mrne (cane TOT an
atone brethzen pale ouer by me as the wa⸗ of Son. Che
ter bꝛoße, that battely runneth thozow the tameroptuehat
vallepes. Butthep that keare the hoꝛe krolt / this teutencebe
the fnowe wal kall vpon them. sre ur
When theirtyme cometh / they walbe de- hat arhich bis
ſtropedand perpttpe:and when ther ae on bre l ba
. e / fear celp fapue
agaynſt him. Eliphas in the begynnyng of the Heth Chapter pad
lade / that the plage was came vpõ him ¢ had touched him. With thre
(fapt they) meateth he nowe. Beholde it not onely toucheth me / bur
woundeth me with Arrowes / and thoſe venounied with venoume /
hapelp with the gall of dꝛagõg / with which touchpng/ both my bloud
‘wareth woode / and all my ipꝛete is {upped vp. Moꝛeouer sod hathe
not onelx thꝛowẽ thele dartes vpon nie / uut allo his dꝛendekull feares /
that is / whatloeuer he bathe that is terrpble / layeth he on me.
‘be Chat mp lubſtaunce is taken fed me. Che hald interpz. hathe⸗
5 —— from me / and that / after Rab. Mol. che wpse
e of dylullynge mdging z trying of thynges. As though: he Hult
lape / ſo Coare is mp grete / ſpthe my helpe is taken from mne / that J am
not permptted to breathe lo longe / tyli J mape calt to remembꝛaunce


what is moſt acceptable to Sd. Some veabe J not all the ſtrengthy


of myne iufoꝛcemẽt gone from me.

c But the feare of the Lore c. As thoughe he lapd. But alas num
a dapes / ther is no feare of the Loꝛde leaftꝛand therfore it is no mare
uell yk charit ie allo which is toyned to the keare ot od / he nat in ale.


„The boke


tere / ter halbe remoũed out ot their place⸗
foꝛ Spathes that they gv in / are crokedꝛthey
halte after bapne thenges / and che ll peryſh.
Contyoze the pathes of Theman / ad wapes
or Saba. wherin ther haue put ther trult.
Contounded are they / chat put eny conkiden
ce inthem: F oꝛ when they camto optepne §
thonges g they lozed foz,thep were bꝛought
to conkulion.

Euen co are pe allo come vnto me:but now
that ye te mymplerp / ye are atrayed. yd J
del pꝛe vou / to come hyther? Oꝛ / to geue me
enp of poure ſubſtaunce: Co delxuer me fro
the enempes hande / oꝛ to ſaue me from the

ower ol the myghtie: Teach me and J weil


will lpeake in the trouble ibe fics 3
bytternetie of my mpnde will take. Amy
a let oꝛa whalfpth / chat thou kepeſt me fo in
prefon token 9 thynke: mydedd hall com:
forte me. A hall haue ſome refreftpnge by
talctzinge b my leit vpon my couche: Chen
troubleſt thou me wyth dꝛeames / a maßeſt
me ſoatraped thoꝛow biſiong ‘that my ſoule
wylcheth ratherto be ſtrangled / my bones
to be deed.

j can feno remedp / J thall Tete no moe: 3
Olpare me then for my dapes are butbayne
What is man that thou bat him in loch re⸗
putacion / and ſetteſt ſomoch byhim: Thou
takeſt diligent care koꝛhim / a fopenty dock

im


olde me tonge: and pe J do erre jthewe me thou trreh


i herkoꝛe blame pe then the woꝛdes / 5
are well andtruly iponen: which of pou can
repꝛoue them? Sauyng only that ve are lo⸗
tyll to check mens lapinges / and can fpeake
manx woꝛdes in the wynde. ye fall vpon the
latherlelle / a go about to ouerthzowe poure
atone krende. Wherkoze loke not only pon
me / but bpon poute lelues: whether A le /
02 no. Curne inte poure awne lelu( I pꝛape

vyouj be indifferent tudges / and cOtpoze mene
bngyltrneſee: whether there be enp vnrygh⸗
tuouthette in my tonge / oꝛ vayne woꝛdes in
my mouth.
go Ghetweth that thistpfe is but a battaxi le o war
are.


Che. bi. Chapter.


i ipke pdayes ol anhyꝛed feruaſite:
E Fos ipke as a bonde leruaunt de⸗
Cpreth the badowe / as anhyꝛelynge wolde
kayne haue an ende ol his woꝛcke: Euen lo
ha eg laboured whole monethes longelbut
invapne)andmanpa caretull nyght haue J
tolde. When laped me downe to depe /
ſayde: O whẽ hall q ryle: Agarne / longẽd
los e fo2 the nighe Thus am full or toꝛowe /
tpllit be darcke. My fete is clothed wrth
wozmes/Epithyrete and duſt: my ckrnne is
wythered / and crompled together: me dapes

B pate ouer moze tpedelꝑ / then a weeuer can
wreue but his webbe:andare gone / oꝛ Jam

à warre. O remembze/thatmp pte is but a
wynde / and that myne eve thall nomoze le e
plealures therol / pee a chat none other més
eve hall ſe me enx moꝛe. Foꝛpt᷑ thou fatten
thoneepes vpon me / J come to naughtipke
at a cloude is conſunmed a bantihed ã wape /
euen lo he that goeth done to hell / cometly
nomoze bp ner turneth agayne into gps
boute cher call his place knowe him eny

ze.

c Cherkoꝛeà wyll not have my mouth / but


S not the lyfe or man vpon earth
3 155 ber pid Are not bys dayes


why goek thou not kro me / nevicttetine
alone / fo longe tyll 4 fwalow downe mp
lpetle:3 haue offended, what call J do bns
to the / G thou pꝛeleruer ormen: nohy halt
thou made me to ſtande in thy waxe / z am o
heux a burden vnto mp lelk: Why doeſt thou
not foꝛgeue me my lynne: Wherkoze takeſt
thou not awaxe my wychednelle. Beholde /
now muſt J flepe in the dlilt: a pr thou tebe
me to mozowin d moꝛnyng / J walbe gone.

Jobis reprefyented and noted to haut deletutd
Fine a beepcion ot noc es
The. pin. Chapter.
Hen anlwercd Balad the Soubt:


Fee
je i am

thy forefathers: Hamel oat we are bat
ok peſter dape / and contydze not / that cure


smape § gra worth

No: but oꝛ euer it be Mot foꝛth / and oꝛ euer
it be gathered it withereth / bekoꝛe enx other
herbe. Euen lo goeth it with all them / that
forget God:and euen thus allo wan the ppo
crptes hope come tonaught. is confrderce
halbe deſtroped/ to he truſtech in a cprders


D


Ot


webbe. He leanech him bys his houle / but he
ſpall not ſtande he holdeth him fatt by it / et
Wall he not endure, Ott tyme a thynge doth
flozpch and menthynke that it mape abyde
s Donne Hynyngestt ſhuteth forth g bꝛaun⸗
ches inhis garden / it tak eth many rotes / in
fo moch that it is lyke an houle of ſtones.

But pt it be taken out ok his piace /euerx
ma denpeth it laping: J knowe the not. Lo /
chus 1s it w him / that retopleth in his atone
doynges:andas koz other / they growe oute
ok the earth.

Beholde / God wyll not caſt awaye a ver⸗
tuoug man / nether wyll he helpe the vngod⸗
iy. Chymouth tall he yn wWiaughynge / a
the lyppes wych gladnee. They that hate
the/fpalbe confounded, and the dwellynges
ol the vngodly Hall come to naught.
¶ Job declareth the benerpt es of God / s that mannes
‘spgbterorlues is uothynge.

¶ Che. ix. Chapter.
Ob anlwered/ a card: Is fo? that /
knowe it is fo of a treuth / that a
an 1 God / can —
: e iuſtikied Ihe wyll argue wil
bim he chal not be able to antwere him vn


Job. Crtij.


Ikmen wyfllpeane ok ſtrength / he is che

flvongett of alt:2£ men wptt fpeate org gory d fe t
tuoutnes/ who darre be my recoꝛde. Wr Ik 4 Job pretumeey,
will iuſtikyemyſeit / myawne mouth ati voror his awne
cödemmemetet 5 weil put fochmplelke or eee
a perfecte manybe pall prouc mea wpcken g kh ben
doer For that 3 ſbuide be an innocét my B- Kelle oavigit
ee it not / pee Imp leite am bd 5 5 0 *

ety or my ipfe. ed al

This onetheng wen J lapetedenropeth dhe waer
boch the rpghruous ¢ongodip . And thougy had lere bla,
he llape ſodem wyty the ſcouige / vet lau⸗ melee. Sod
Gheth he at the purrvasment ot the innocent. ober on the
AS for the warde he geueth it ouer in to the pra en b
power ob the wycked / loch as the ruiert be / onelyonp vite
wherok all land are tuu. 3s it not lo? where waldapperall⸗
is there enx / but he is loch oc? „e. Big abuerka

Wedares haue bene moze cwykte then a fiat hella
rumier:ther are gone fodenip, anayaue Lene aer, hat bad
no good thynge. Chepare paũed awape / as foche u crolle
the Mippes that be good vnder rape ald ag inrde on bpm!
the Degle chat halech to the pyaye, Uohen Juan t
am purpoled to forget mp complapninges wardip 3 upety
tochaungempcountenaunce / ¢ to cOfozte ped in wpc⸗
my feléthen am J akraped or an my wozttt/eedacke. Gus
bo J knowe / thou fsucuret not un eurkl andrer 70
doer J. A be thena wrckedone whphaue J h bes that he
laboüred in bapne ? Though} walſhed ny? therin was
elk with (howe water / z made myne handes not culpadle /
ewer Co clene/pet cube thou dpppeme mach e ie were
the mper and mine awne clothes chulde de⸗ rere, hemaner


_ Epleme.froz be that J mult geuc ant were vn or men che inde


a the wwortde/felfe aloni


tind (pache


ndr. g. ¢
een,


hot ler my ſpꝛete be in reſt / but kylleth me
with bytterne lle.


to / and with whom d goto ſawe / is not a mia gemẽt of God /
as J am. ether is there enp dayclman to re chaten
zoure both the partes /o2 tolape his hande wardierpobt⸗
Pettitte bs Kerhit legte rodawape fro was. nabicu ;
me / pee let him make me no moze afvayed ol le to ipue ver.
bim / and then call Z antiwere him topthout boeh aal
enp keare Foras longe as amin loch fear When
kulneſle Jcan make no antwerc: And why: amonge men 4
it greueth my loule to lxue. that vorbe ene
tende a do well
to all men / and pet are wrapped in many mylertes and wyetcheduen
often tyme ouer cruell. And herin lyeth the chefe of the cõtrauertx be
twprt Job and his aduercar pes) that Job defendeth hymn felfe nor to
ue delerued his punnichment by his outwarde lyupnge: where ag
abucrfarpes ar med onelp with manly and ficathlp wytt thought
Hod to be vurpahtwes pF be wolde fo greuontiypunnithe hen tae
Hanne bene an dutwarde cynner egapntt him. Job / bis contcyrns
ce bearynge hym wptneſle“ had ipued imnocentty and Areyghtip /
burt no man had alwwapte frared Gove woꝛthypped him oel ⸗
bis chptazen allo had he nourtred to the feare of God / and couldeot
na man be accused of wyckednes. pet wytnellech he mckly here (ag
all the godly do) that he was not vtterly with oute nne / ko other
wyle had bebene a lpar i. John. i. 3c we tape / we haue no ſynne / we
dect aue our le lues / and truet h is not in vs. Wherkoꝛe in the places
where he fapth chat he bathe not delerued his punnpchmẽtt/ and that
wude fame to hero him biamelelle tmowwe that he tpeab-th of ps
dutwarde maner of ipuinge / not of the inwarde tholightes aud de
ers ot the heart / wher in he was hdouted an ole er.


Che. r. chapter.
Cob is weerꝑ of his ipfe'e Cetreth ont his Fvagnitie
. eames Detpre the tpmeto repet. A deteriped
.


Neuer


7 4
272
a Ol Job. Extiij.
Fozthem to ſtomple ppö che honkes of rob⸗ em with dilceate wyllpe accepte the per⸗
bers are in wealth g pꝛocperite/ ther p ma fon ot᷑ Gd / a intreate to hem: Shall that aa, ueherfare
lictoullp medic agapnt God / dwell without helpe you / when he calleth pou to rekoning. ac. bee boch
care: pee Cod geueth all thinges rychely To pnke ve to begple him / as a man is begp⸗ are peouerbp⸗
with bys hade. debe e wan punpe your'e tepzoue you / be tt Pane oF
% Atueehe cacell/ethep Mall intourmetye: pedo tecretiy accepte anypertonne, Shall inen fen s
the kowieg of the ape /a they Mall telithe: he not make vou akraped / whenhe che weth Jeoparbp/ and
Speak tothe earch / a it wall Mewe ö: Oz hum lelke: Shall not bps terrible feare fall tare noe the
tothe fpdhes ofthe tee andthey wall certi⸗
fie the. Phat is he / but he knoweth that the


8 The boke :


a3 Euerthelecke mot will z put fost
w wordes: J wyll (pealic out ofp
veryheuynelte or mp loule/ a weit ö

fave bnto God: O do not cödemne g

me / but chewe me the caule/ wherfoze thou
iudgeſt me on this maner. Chinckeſt thou it
well done / to oppꝛelleme / tocaſt me oklbeing
a woꝛke of thy handes) and tomanterne che
councell of the vngodiy? Hak thou Hefty
eyes then / oꝛ Doct thou lokẽ as man Loketh?


Are thy dapes as the dapes of man / and thy
peares as mas peres: that thou makes loch
inquiſpcion foz my wickedneſſe / a learcheſt
Out my lynne⸗ where as notwithſtandynge)
thou knoweſt that J am no wycken perton /
and thatthere is no man able to delxuer me
out ok thyne hande. hy handes haue made
me /a faſthoned me alltogether roũde about /
wilt thou then deſtroye melodenip: O remẽ⸗
bze(J beleke the) how that thou made me
ok the moulde of the earth / and Walt bꝛynge
me to earth agapne. 8

Halk thou not milkedme / as itwere milck:
and turned me to cruddes lyke chele⸗ Chou
halt couered me wyth kk ynne and flew / and
ioyned me together wyth bones a lpnowes.
Chou haſt graũted me lpte / a done me good:

Candthe dilygent hede that thou tokeſt bpon
me /hath pꝛẽlerued my ſpꝛete. i
Though chou hydeſt chele thyngt in chine
hert pet am q lure / that thou remẽbꝛeſt thé
All. UBherfore dideſt thoukepe me / when F
lynned. and halt not clentea me kro myne of-
kence: FEF do wickedly / wo is me therkoꝛe:
ee berpabreous/petdarre J not lylt vpm
ade: lo kull am J ok conkulpon / ale myne
awne mylery.

Chou hunteſt me out (beynge in heurneſſe)
as it were a Lyon / and troubleſt me oute ol
mealure. Chou bꝛyngelt krech wytneſſes a⸗
gaynſt me / thy wꝛath increaleſt thou vpon
me / very many are ß plages 5 J am in. her
koꝛe haſt thoubꝛoughtme out ok mymothers

2 wombe? O that J had perplthed / ¢ z no exe
had lene me. Ikthey had carled me to mygra⸗
ue / as fone as J was bone / then chulde J be
nom / as though J had neuer bene.

Dhall not mp choꝛt pte come ſoone to an
ende: O holde the fro me / let me alone / that
mape cate my felt a lptle atoꝛe go th yther /
krom whence J mall not turne agayne. Pa⸗
mel / to that lande of darcknelle ¢ hadowe
okdeath: pee into that darck clowdy lande a
deadly chadowe / where as is no oꝛde / but ter
rible teare as in the darckneſſe.


Job ts onic l Sophar· God is ine


com̃pꝛehentꝑble. Beis mercytull to the repent auntt.
¶ Che. xi. Chapter.


Wyit thou kynde out God % thy tentag?
wilt thou attapne to the perkectnelle of the


almygbtre: He is hyer then heauen / what 5


wilt thou do: Deper then the hell / hot writ
thou then knowe hym? His length exceadeth
the lenght of the erth / K his breath p bzenth
ofthe lee. Chough he turne all thynges bp
lde downe / clolẽ them in / oꝛ thauſt them to
gether / who darre check hym therfoze?

For ttis he that knoweth the vanpte of
ment he fepth their wyckednelle allo / culde
he not then cõlidze it? A vapne bodpexalteth
hem eike / a the konne of man is lyke a wyld
alles foale Ik thou banded now a righthert /


und lyktedlt vp thrne handes towarde hym:


pk thou wolde t put awape the wyckedneſſe
which thou batt in hande / to that no vngod⸗
Ipnelle dwelt in chy houle: Then myghteſt
thou lykt vp thy face wrthout chame / then
ſhuldeſt thou be cure / z haue no nede to eare


Chen chuldelt thou forget thy milerp / and D


chyncke nomoze vpon it / chen bpon the wa⸗
ters that runne by. Chen chuld tl le be as
cleave as the noone dave / and ſpꝛynge foꝛth
as the moꝛnynge. Chen myghteſt thou haue
coumkoꝛth in the hope that thou halt: a lleye
qupeti / whe thou art buryed. Then chuldeſt
thou take thy reſt / and no man to make the
akrayed / pee many one chuld let moch by the,
As forthe eyes ot § vngodly / they thalbe cõ⸗
ſumed / and not elcape: their hope halbe my⸗
ſerx and ſoꝛow ok mynde.
job in che. ice Declare ny
oes eto es nes th the mpabe
¶ Che. xij. Chapter.
Job ancwered/ and fayde: Chen
no doute) pe are the men alone / a
ipfoome Wall perych wyth vou.
3 ut Ihaue vnderſtãdyng as well
A8 be / and am no elle then xe. Yee who kno⸗
weth not there thinges: Chus he that calleth
Spon God / and wh God heareth / is mocked
okhys boure: che godly and innocent
mG is laughed to come. Sodlpnetie is a lighe


delpyled in the hertes ot che rrche / 125


bolts 52. bande okthe L ode made all thele In whole


J cb. xx rij. a.


hande isthe loule of euery lyuyng thinge /
Cthe bꝛeth of all men. Haue not $ eaves plea⸗


rl. luxe in hearing / ache mouth in taſtinge the


thinge bit eatery? Amonge olde perfonnes
there is wyrdome / z amonge the aged is vn⸗
derſtandinge. Pee with Godis wyldome and
firength / le is he that bath councell and foꝛ⸗
knowlege. I fhe bzeakte downe a thing / who


Lu. r. j. d. can ſet it op agapne: Ihe ſhut a thing / who
* ‘Gee wyll open it: Beholdẽ / ykhe wülhelde 9 ra)


ters they dꝛpe vp: y khe let them go / theyde⸗


rope the earth. with hym is ſtrength and rpghi


wyldome:he knoweth bothe the dilceauer g
hem that iz dilceaued.
＋ Pecarvrthaimape p twple men / as it were
& ſpoyle /a baingeth the iudges out of their
wyttes. Be lowleth the gyꝛdle of kynges / c
Apꝛdeth their loynes with a bande. He ledeth
Däwapethe Pꝛeaſteg into captrupte / ¢ tur


loge. vie neth the mygheye vpkyde downe. He taketh
9 ug b. the verite Exo out of the mouth / a ditapopn⸗


lut. ta.


teth the aged ol their wyldome. He poureth
out confulpon spon Pꝛinces / a confoꝛtech
them that haue bene oppꝛelled. Loke what
Ivechbpsindarcanene / he declareth it opẽlp:
andthe very ſhadowe ok death bꝛingeth he to
Ipghé. He botheincreateth che people / a de⸗
ropeth them: He maketh thé to multiple /
s dnuech thé awape. He chatigeth the herte
ol che Princes a Kynges of the earth / a dita
poynteth thẽ:ſo that they go wandzinge out
or the wave, grope inthe darcke without
light / ltackering to ¢ kro iyke dꝛonckẽ men.
‘ob repꝛoueth his frendes witheir awne
si — Weser. eee
Che. ru. .

AD all this haue à ſene with myne
exe hearde with mne eare / a vn⸗
derſtandit. Lobe what pe knowe /

that lame do J knowe alto nether
am Jinkerioꝛ onto you. Meuerthelete A am
purpoledto take with the almyghtie / a my
delrze is to comen with God. As for you / yẽ
are woꝛckmaſters ok lpes / a vnpꝛokytable
Pbilictis all to gether. Vodde Gon pe kepte
voure tonge that ye myght be take toꝛ wyle
men. Chertoze heare mp woꝛdes / ¢ pondze
the ſentence of my lyppes. Wyll pe make
anlwere foz God wyth Ives / and mayntepne


5


Bipocritz/ they
uper they are


Aa kalleth awaye lyke a floure. He a

Ü pech as it were a ſbadowe /a neuer cõtinu⸗
eth in one tate, Chynkeſt thou it now well
done to open chyne eyes bya loche one / and
to bꝛynge me bekoꝛe the in udgemẽt: tebe
can make it cleane / that commeth of an vn⸗
cleane thinge: No body. Che dapeg ol man
are Hozte/ the nombye of his monethes are
knowne onlp vnto the. Chou batt apoynted
him his boũdeg / he can not go . 680

0


is mercye.


logement


Theboke, .


Go krom him / that he maye reſt a lptle: vn⸗
tyll his dape come / which he loketh koꝛ / lyke
asanbyzeipnge doth,
Ika tre be cut downe / there is Come hope
pet / chat it wrlllpzoute and mute Co2t the
Bbꝛaunches agayne: Foz though a rote be
wa xen olde a deed in che grounde / vet when
the ſtocke getteth the tent of water / it wyll
budde / a bange fozth bowes / lyke as whe it
was kpꝛſt planted. But as foꝛman / when he
ls deed / perylched a conlumed awape / what
becommeth ol him 7 Che floudes when ther
be dered vp / athe ryuers when ther be em⸗
ptie / are filledagayne thoꝛow the flowynge
waters of the tee: but when man llepeth / he
ryleth not agayne / vntill the heauen perich:
be chall not wate by ner ryle out orhis lepe
C O that thou woldelt kepe me / and hyde me
in ß hell /onepl thy wrath were ſtyllede a to
Appopnte me a tyme / wherin thou myghtelt
a¥Got rememe remembꝛe me. Mape a deed mã ipue a⸗
brech a mawhe gayne: All the dayes of this my pilgremage
be benlpeth am 3 lokyng / whẽ my chaũginge Mali come
bum. Jere. Fp. e Ak thou wofdeſt but call me / J Mulde obere
bender, bee d wozke of ehpne awne
andes.

WD Foꝛthou halt nombzed all my goynges /
vet be not thou to extreame vpõ my fynnes,
Chou hat ſealed vp myne ollencz / as it were
in a bagg: but be mercytull vnto my wyc⸗

* hednedle. Che mountapnes fall awape at 5
Jatt / the rockes are remoued out ok their pla
ce / the waters pearte thoꝛowthe verp tones
by iptle e lytle/ the kloudes walche a waxe ß

rauell ¢ rarth: Kuen lo deſtropeſt thou the

ope ol ma in lyke maner. Chou pꝛeuapleſt
agarnſt hum, lothat he pallech awape ou
chaungett his ettate / a putteſt him kr the.
Whether his chyldzẽ come to woꝛſhippe o7
no / he can not tell. And yk they bemẽ ok owe
degre / he nnoweth not. While he lpueth / his
Het mutt haue trauaple: 8 whyle the toule
is in him / he muſt be in loꝛowe.
Celphas reprebedeth g ob beraulehe alcribeth wyl⸗
dome f purenes to him kelke he delertbech the curleß
— ie the twpched/echenpng Job to be one of that
nombze.


kyꝛſt mati / that euer was boꝛne? Oz / walt B ./ s hrt
thou made befoze the hilles: halt thou herde
the lecrete coũcell of God / that all wyldome chenden
istolptie for che nba Bowel thou that a pan
we knowe not? What vnderſtandeſt th ou which procca,
but we can the tame: With vs are olde and ah koche al
aged men / pee loch as haue iyueb lõger then darm
thy forefathers. mann
Chynckeſt thou it atmall thynge of theluken n
conlolacions of God and are ther with the out the treu
a“ lpinge worde. ihr doth thyne herte
make the Co proude? why ſtandeſt thou fo Antenne
greatlp in the awne conceate: here vn⸗ tearm,
ko lone thyne eyes that thy minde is lo putt Bau mote ius
vp agaynſt Gon ¢ letteſt Coch woꝛdes go out expo dt. Sad
ok thy mouth? what is man? that he Guide can prt cofort
becieene what bath be tmbtch is Boze of a cen
woman) wherby be mpabe be notone to be chen teats
ryghtuous? Beholde ther is no truſt to hys ipter bis coms
fanctes:yee p berp** heauẽẽs are not cleane forthese auß
inbis kraht. How moch moze then an able Ser ie.
minable ard urle man which * dzyncketh Bene hr
wickedneſſe like water: J will tell the /heare facher of men
me: wyll Mewe the a thynge that J know: of granite vet
which wrle men haue tolde a bath no bene da ee
brd from ber katbersvnte whom ontp the c sumer,
lande was geuen / that no ſtraunger chulde me they to she
come amonge them. ite.


Che vngodiy delpapꝛeth all the dapes ok de Urderſte
bis Ipfe,@ the nobze oF a tbrauntes pereg ig nenn h.


vnknowne. à kearkull Counde is euer in hys dech he the aun
eareg / a when it is peace / pet feareth he de⸗ gelts,
ſtrucctö: He beleuett neuer to be delpuered deco una
out oedarcknecke che Hwearde is altwapebe- ehh dri
foze his eyes. hẽ he goeth koꝛth to get hys be cplicd wh
iputng / he thincketh planelr / that ö dave OF wpcicdnes: u
datchnede is at hande. Soꝛow and careful: ts a maner ck
nelle make him aftaped/¢ copatie bum rome geen
aboute/Ipke ag it were a kynge this Hook dmcbl brut
redy to ß battapll Foꝛ he hath ſtretched out nes ranch
his hande agaynſt God / Karmedhym ſelke to ve fpller
agapnt theadimpabtic. Pe runneth proudly ern
pon him and with a Hptnecke kighieth bess mer
agapnt hum: where as he couereth bys kact D
with katnelle / and matzeth his body wellty-
kynge. Cherkoze hall his dwelling be in de⸗
lolate cyties / and in houles which noma tne
habiteth / but are become heapes of ſtones.
He chall not be rich / nether call his ſub⸗
flaunce continue / ner encreale vpon earth.
e hall neuer come out ok darchnetle / the
lame ſhall drye vp his bꝛaunches / with the
blaſt or the mouth of God ſhall be be taken
awaye. e wyll nether applpe hym leite to
fapthfulnes ner treuth / to foze is he difceas
ued with vanite.
He Hail peryſh / aloꝛe his tyme be woꝛne
out / his hande tall not be grene. e wall
be pluckte ok as an vntrymelp grape fri che
vrne / a Wall let bis floure tan / as the =
0


ft


nge His e / lapth that he fufferet]
char bested,
wi. Chapter.
b am wered / and larde: I haue
mes herde loch thingd. Mi⸗
ble geuers of cõkoꝛtẽ are ve /
lozte of pou. Dhaunot ehr
vapne wo des come vet to an ende: Oz / halt
thou vet en moze to laye? I coude tpeake/
as pe do alic . Hut wolde God / that youre
foule were in my loules ſteade: then chulde
Iheape vp wozbes agaynſt vou / and hake
mpheade at you. I chulde cdfozte pou wrth
1 releale poure payne withthe
talhyng of my lyppes. But what Mall Ado:
Foꝛ all my word / my loꝛow well not cealle:
96 and though holde my tonge / vet will it not
departe fro te. And now that Jam kull ok
papne / and all that haue deſtroped whero
my wꝛyncles beare wytnelle)there and
bpa dylten pler to make me antwere wrt
Apes to my kace. Heis angrye at me / he bas
teth me / e gnalcheth vpon me with his teth.
u open Myne eneinyckouleth ops me Whrs eves,
fermouthes! Chey haue opened their mouthes wyde
5 to Spon me / and emptten me vpon the cheke de⸗
Heed mann ug Sone che felut thoꝛow


b handes / and my prayer
th / couer not my bioud / e


confumpeh atvaye/ and yet doth
a


Job,


Ar etiy,


Gabe riß Chapter.


ny brech kalen) mydapes are cho;
denen. Jam.


myne eve cõtinue in heupnelſe. O myne innocen⸗
5 e/and fet me by the:koho thal then fenen
beabictothzut mepandeskogether⸗ Chou yey ne
batt withholden their hertes krũ vnderſkan⸗ dep bis vioure
e / cherkoze Wall hep not be feet vp on crkrdkromthe
hre. He promplech bps krendes parte ok bys daß · Se. u
good but hig awtie chyidze pede it. he hach B.
made me as it were a bywoꝛde ol the comon
people. Jamhys getpnge tockeamonge
thé. My countenaunce is heup koꝛ very an⸗
ger / a the membꝛes of my body are bec ome
ipkea wbadow. Miertuous men therfoze chall
well contyoze this / & the innocent wall take c
parte agapnſt the vpocrite.
The ryghtcous wyl kepe his waye / a he
that hath cleane hãdes / wyll euer be ſtröger
K ſtronger. As ko: ou / tune vou / a get pou
hence fo29 can not ſe one wyle ma amoge
vou. Mydapes are paſt / mythoughtes are
panylſhed awape / whych haue vexedmyne
erte / chaunginge the nyght in to daye / and
light into darcknes. Though J tary neuer
ko moch / pet p graue is myhoule / and Jmuſtk
maße my bed in the darcke. I call coꝛrupcid
my kather / athe wozmes call J my mother ©
mpfpiter. What helpeth chen mp longe tas
rpenge. Oz who tpl Culfyll s chrnge/ that
mech koz: All that A haue / chali go downe
n to the pytt / and lye with me in the duſt.


The boke


C eatethe ſtrengch ot bis cknne! che fps
oo is/an bogne of death Hall eatehrs membzes. ail
joepble and his comkozte g hope Walbe roted out of bis


. Som edethe dwellenge“ perp fearklulneſte hall bringe
porn ace him CO the enge, Other men ben pelt

1 Drithe ail in his boule (which now is none of his) and
dwell: that is bꝛpmſtone ſhalbe ſcatered vpon his habita⸗


a con. Prs rotes chalbe dered op beneth and
him


aboue thall his harueſt be cutt downe. Bys
rem bꝛaunce mall perith from the earth /
his name chall not be pꝛapled in the ſtretes:
he thalbedzpuen from the Iyght into darck⸗
hele / and be caſt cleane out of the woꝛld He
wall nether haue chyldzen noz kynktolckes
amonge his people / no / ner eny poſterite in
hig countre: poung a olde thaibe aſtoniched
Scene ech then

the wycked / and t e place othimthat
knowech not God.


Cob recpteth his mplertes and fe paxnes
Eiordelkelge he generated rte. 2
¶ The. xix. Chapter.


vnto the chyldzen of myne awnẽ body Yes ontobin sens
berg deCerte kooleg decpple me Van gen ag
Gone from them, they tpeake euell bpon me. unge. S830


Allfoch a8 wereme molt famttters/abbyox- chr for,


re meg ther whom Flour beet; are unnebd walz pe


againſt nie. My bone hägeth to mycbynne / S5 man tes
imp lech is awaye / only there is lett me the __decomepo,
kurnne aboute my teth. Pane pyte bys me / rev depri.
haue ppte ppd me (O pe my trendes for the
bande of the Loꝛde hath touched me. Why
do pe perlecute me vc as Ged / ande are not vr che be
latilted ot mp feahe? bes rea os
Dehatmny wodes were wurten O that png heal
ther were put in a boke: wolde God ther which ace ret
weere grauẽ wan pron penne in leade 07 in faden w.
ktone. Fo: Jamture/ b mpredemeripucty dad dee
G that 'Z wal vpfe out of ) earth in p latternor as
dapenhar J al be cloched agapne tb ths duitecatnes
ckynne /a e Godin my llech. Yee J my leite fet.
Hall beholde him / not with other but wyth Se Arenot tee
thefefame eres. By reyes are confumned ie, mr
within me / when pe faye: nohy do not we cates be fate
perlecute him? we haue kounde an occafion fied ofamancs
agapnt him. But beware of the fwearde/fetheisa ba.
kon the Cwearde wrlbe auenged of wycked⸗ ar hh
nel and be lure / chat there is a ludgment. dd an t
partes Juthe
ar lapth / that the vnkapthfull the conetoule /
Sovipempetealipanea@ojcteenoe a gage
¶ Che. xx. Chapter. lone) to


Hen anlwered Sophar the Pas- 8g g
. — 1 the famed to fat ta
YF caufedo mythoughtes cöpellme, hne.
to antwere And wür- mp mynde zn h ue


is tolled here andthere J baue fulpetcntip tipsy


ough herde thy checking and rẽ pole / thertoꝛe am to mam ada


ie. He hath hedgedbp my path / I can not
get awaye he hach let darcknelle in my ga⸗
4 dae Paty creme uwe fro mo ed ana
fae Mobi Mora, falt the r crowne awape fro i head. He
am nderdan hath deltropedme on euerp lyde / and J am
1h bp the vndone: Myhope bath he taken awape fro
ccouner he di, me/as it were a tre plucte bp by ß rote. His
guitye that coe wꝛath is kindled agaynſt me / he taketh me /
to tl
chebeihenek⸗ AB though J were hig enemy,
nes of their His men oF warre came together / which
rpches for an made their waye ouer me / and beteged my
tl 8 elipnge rounde aboute. He bath put my
abu: Doe  bpetisen karte awape Ero me akoch as were
225 fome bn, ok myne acquauntance / are become ſtraũ⸗
rhande C gers bnto me. Myne awne kynckolkd haue
therbphis koꝛlaßẽ me / a mpkrẽdes haue put me out ot
ue m remsbzaunce. Che leruauntes a mapdẽs of
Che croune ot myne atone houle take me ko a ſtraũger/ a
olde men are Jam be conie as an aleaunt in their tyaht.
eit eheldes en J call vpon my ſeruaũt he geueth
their cheldes h. it feruatit h
konte öder meno antinere:no though J pzave him wrth
Aande the dig⸗ MY mouth. Myne awne wpte mape not a⸗
nitie hat came poe my bzeth / Jam kapnte ta fpeake kapze


J purpoled to make antwere after mpne vntt were) to
derſtandyng. Anowelt thou not this / names trate
Ipsthat Fcom the begrnnengeleues fence the unnd ue
creacton of man vpon earth) the prapte of 6
vngodly bath bene Hozte / and that the tope
ok ppoctites continued but the twyncklyn
ofan eye? Chough he bemagnifpea opto
heauen,fo that his hrade reacheth vnto the
cloudb: pet he perilcheth at ß iat ipke deũge:
In lomoch that they haue fene bym/
daxe: Where is he? He vanylcheth as a dꝛea⸗
me / to that he can no moze be tounde / a pal⸗
keth awaye as a bifyon in the nyght. So 5
the eve which fatve him befoze gettech now
no (yght othim / and his place thoteth him
nomoze. His chyldꝛen goa begynge / their
handes ruth hg bon koꝛow a heupneſle.
Frũ his youth his bones are full of vyce /
which chall lye downe wyth hym in p earth.
when wpckednefie is wete in his mouth /
he hydeth it vnder his tonge. C hat he fauou⸗
teth / that wyll he not kozlane / but kepeth it
clole in his thꝛote he meate 8 he eateth /
chalbe turned to the poylon ot en


Ok Job,


within his body. Che ryches that he deuou⸗
tet / chali he perbzeake agapne fo2 Go
C challdꝛawihẽout of his belp - gechall lucke
ute hal lace p ſerpẽtes heed / d adders tonge Hall Maye
delle 1 . — him:ſlo that he chall nomoꝛe fe the reuers a
24 Labtec bꝛokes Of bonpe butter: Butlaboure Wall
wellcurced⸗ he / a pet haue nothinge to eate. Greate tra⸗
sits (afferall yaple all he make top rycheg / but he Mall
nag eamz nat entope the And why? be hath opprelled
keck beachte pot, and not helped them houkes hach
gb before in he [popled / and not bayldedtgem. Pys beip
ble. . U. of coude neuerbe ktlled / thertoꝛe challhe petty
. in his coueteoulneſſe. He deuoured fogrede
2 lj / that he left nothyng behinde / therkoꝛe his
goodes Hall not pꝛolpere. Chough he had
plenteoutnete of euery thynge / yẽt was he
pooze and therkoze he is but a wꝛetch on

euern lde.

Foꝛ though § wickedhaue neuer komoch
to kill his beip/pet@od mall ſendehis wꝛath
vpon him / and cauſe bys battapil to raygne
ouer him: lo F phe lie the pron weapens / he

him: lo g pk he lie ih U
Wall be Hott with ö tele bowe. The arowe
hall be take foꝛth / and go out at his backe /
l Chat is pe anda gliſtering fwearde thoꝛow the gall ol
aher bye him him / ktẽare Matt come vpõ him o There Walt
fb pecetiles- no darcknes be able tohrde hi. And vnkind⸗
led Fpze hall conſume him / and lone what re
mapneth in bys houle / it wall be deſtroped.
Che heaven chall declare his wickednelle / a
the earth tall tate parte aga ynſt him Che
ſubſtaunce that he bath in his houle / halbe
taken awaye and perpch / in the dae ot the
Lordes wrath. Chis is the pozcpon that the
wicked ſhall haue ok God / and the heretage
that he ma ye iche foz of the Loꝛde.
¶ Job recpteth the pꝛolperitie of th: wycked ¢ after
delcrybeth theie lodayn ruyne and deſttuctyon.
Che. xxi. Chapter.
4 Ob antwered and lard: Oheare
| mp mopdt/@amende pourtelues.
Sutire me alptle / chat J mape
lpeake allo / and then laugh my
{070% to lceꝛne / yt pe wyll. Js it with a mã⸗
that J make this dilputacyon ? Which pl it
were lo chulde not my ſpꝛete be then in fore
trouble? Marck me well / be abalched / and
lape poure hande Spon poure mouth. Foz
wh J pondze ¢ cõlpdꝛe this am afraped/
and mp Lcd is Onptten with keare. Wher⸗
f̃oꝛe do wicked men lyue in health and pꝛol⸗
perite come to their olde age / and incteale
in ryches? Cheix chylders chyldꝛen lyue in
their light / e eheir generacyon befoze their
eves. heir Houtes are fake tr all feare foz
the rodd ol God doth not fmpte them. Their
bulloche gendecth / z that not oute of tyme:
their cowe calueth / and is not vnfrutekull.
hey lende koꝛth their chyldꝛẽ by lockes /
and their lonnes lede ? daunce. Chepbeare


grew,


With chemtabpettes and harpes / and haue B
inſtrumentes of muſpck at their plealure.
Chey ſpende their dapes in welthrnelle: but
lodẽ ip they go downe to hell. Tyeplaye vn⸗
to God: go krom vs / we delpꝛe not the now
lenge of thy wapes. What maner of Felowe,
is the Alimightie that we ſhud lerue him
What pꝛokyt chulde we haue / to lubmptte
dure lelues onto bpm ? Lo / there is vtterly
no goodne lee in the therfore will notz haue
to do with the councell or ? vngodlg. How
Oft ſhall the cBdle of the wicked be put outé
how oft cometh their dectruccion vpon thes
O what toꝛowe hall Godgeue th? koꝛ their
parte in his wꝛath: Fee they Wall be euẽ as
chalt befoze the wynde / and as duſt that the
ſtozme carieth awape. if 1
And though God laue their chylozé krom C
loch ſoꝛowe / pet wyll he fo rewarde the fel-
ues / that they cal know it Cheir awne de⸗
ſtruccion and milery fall they le with their
eyes / a dzincke of the Ecarfull wꝛath of the
Almighty Foꝛ what careth he / what be coz
me of his houſholde after bys death: whole
monethes pace awaye twylter then an a⸗
rowe. In as moch th? as God hath the hpelt
power of ali / who can teach him en know:
lege One dyeth now when he is mightpe a
at his bet / rich / x in pꝛolperite:euẽ wie hes F
*botwels are at g fatteſt /a bis bones fullof u After the
marb An ocherdvech tn Corowe aheurnelke Heke Some,
and neuer had good dapes. How Hepe they ade pappes.
both a lyke in the earth /a the wozmes coller
them. But J knowe what pe thyncke / pee a
what pe ymagin agaynſt me vnrightudulſy D
Foz ve ſape: where is the Pꝛynces palace?
where is the dwellynge ofthe vngodip: the
enp mã that goeth bythe wape, (yr ve will
not regarde their tokens a dedd) he call tell
vou / that the wicked is kepte vnto the dave
ok deſtruccvon / and that the vngodly halbe
brought fozth in the dape ol wach. Who
darre repꝛoue him foz his wa pes to his face⸗
who rewardeth him koꝛ the vngractoulnelle
that he doth Yet challhe be brought to hys
graue / and watch amonge the heape of the
deed. Chen ſhallhe be fapre to be buryed as
monge the tones by the bzokefpoe all men
muf kolowe hym / there are innumerable
gone beEoze hym. O how vayne is the com⸗
konte § ve mene me: ã re not youre antweres
cleane contrary to ryght and treuth?


Cœliphaʒ repꝛehendeth Job of vnmercpfulneſle,
¶ Che xrij. Chapter.
ID Eliphas the Chemanite gaue
nc were / a tayde: Gave a man be x
compared vnto odin tepfoome/
though be leme to him leit / koꝛ to
im: What pleature bath Goo in ß
Bb. ij. thou


The boke.


chou artrightuous? Oz what doth it pꝛolite
him / s thy wayes are perkect: 8 he atrayed
to repꝛoue the / a to leppe forth w the in to
iudgmentz Cometh not this foz p great wie⸗
nednelle /a £07 thyne vngracious debt which
Are innumerabic⸗Choũ hat take § pledge
krom thy bꝛethꝛẽ Coz nought a robbedß na⸗
Hed of their clothing: Co toch as were wees
ry/haſt thou geuẽ no water te duncke / thou
halt wichd:awẽ bꝛed frd $ hũgrye: Shulde
koch one then as vleth violẽce / wzonge a op⸗
pꝛellyon(deinge all thinge ok parciaſite / and
bauinge relpecte of perionnes) dwell in the
lande? Chou haſt Cent wyddowes awape
eniptie a oppꝛeledthe pooze tathertetic.
Cherkoꝛe art thou copated aboute wyth
ſnares on euer ſyde / a lodẽly vexed w feare
Dhuldeſ thou thẽ te no darckneſſe? Shul⸗
denot § water doude runne ouer the? How
becaule p & od is hyer then the heauẽs / a be⸗
cauſe thou leyſt z ihe ſtarres are lo hye / wilt
thou therkoꝛe tape: Cub / how ſhulde God
Hnowe! Doth bis dompnion reach beyonde
the cloudes: Tuch / the cloudes couerbymß
he mape not le / foz he dwelleth in heauen.
Cid eil chou wilt kepe p olve waye / that all
wicked men haue gone: both olde a vonge /
whole koundaciõ is avaninge water / which
lape vntocS od: go frd vs /¢ after this maner:
Tulh what wil the Aimightie do vnto vs:
wherc as he(not withſtandpng'kylleth their
houtes wal good. Which meanpnge ok the
vngodlp be karre frome. Foꝛ with io pe Malt
the godly / and with gladnece wall the inno⸗
cent le / that their increate (hall be hewen
Downe / and their poſteryte conlumed with


Job aflirme th that he bothe knoweth and keareth
power aud fentence of cheiudgers larlh that he hath
twathed in his rpghtineinetie,

¶ Che. xxuj. Chapter.


Ob ant wered a tapd: playing x

is pet this daye in bitterneg / a in
{ bade beupamonge my grenyngd.

O that a myght le him and kynde
haun: O Wat J myght come before his ſeate /
to pleate my caule befoze him / ¢to kpllmp
mouth wargumẽtes: Chat ZF might knows
what antwere he wolde geue me: a that
might vnder ſtande / whst he wolde faye vñ⸗
to me. Id yl he pleate agapnt me wilh bys


Greate power a ltrẽgth 07 will ge leane him


Celfe vtterly vpon me! Oh no / let him not do
fo w me. But lett hym geue me lyne power
to go top lawe / then am Alure to wynne my
matter foꝛ though; go betoꝛe / q tynde him
not: Jeg come beh pnde / I can get no knows
ledge orhim: kJ go on tye left lyde to põdꝛe
his woꝛckes / can not atterne onto them
Agapne pt J go on the right lyde / he hydeth
him lelfe / that I can not le him. But as fo2
my ware be kñoweth it: a tryeth me as the
Golde in the fyꝛe.

Heuertheles my fete kepe his path / bys
bye ſtrete haue 3 holden / and not gone oute
Of it. J haue not koa ken the cõmãundemẽt €
okhis lippes / but lotze what he charged me
with his mouth / that haue 3 chutt vy in mp
herte. It is he hi leite alone / who well turne


him bach? He doth as him liſteth / and bꝛyn⸗
geth to pate what he will. He rewardeth me
in to my bolome / a many other thynges mo
doth he / as he mae by his power. Ehrs 8 D
d caule / that F chincke at his pretence lop


chat is not their awne: a gatger the grapes
out OF his binparde / whõ thephaue oppꝛel⸗
fen by vydience. Chey are the caule that fo
imanpmen are naked and bare / hauynge no
clothes to couer them and kepe them from
colde: So that whenthe ſhowers in moũ⸗
tapnes haue rayned vpon them / athey be all
wett / they haue none other luccoure / but to
kepe them amonge the rockes.

They lpopie the luckinge Eatherletie chit
det and put the pooze in pefon: In lomoch
thatthep let thẽ go naked without clothing /
and pet the hung rie beare the ſheeues. Che
pooze are fayne to laboure in their oyle mil⸗


les / pee and to treade in their wyne pꝛelles /


& ret to luſtre thyꝛſt. Che whole cyte cryeth
nto the Loꝛde with lyghyng / the Coules of
$ dapne maße their complapnte: But God
deſtropeth them not koz all this / where ag
thep(not with tandpnge)are rebellious and
dilobediẽt enemyes: which leke not his light
and wape / ner turne agayne in to bps path.

qq Timely in the moznpngedo theparple /to
murthur the lymple and pooze / a in 6 nyght
they go a ftealpnge,

Che exe of the bngodly is phe the aduou⸗
terer /p wayteth fo2 the darcknele /a laxeth
thus in him ſelke: Euch / there hall no mar
le me / a co he diſgyleth his kace. In 6 npght
cealon they tearch the houles / and hyde the
lelues in the dave tyme / but will not knowe
$ light. For as fooneas the dape bꝛeaketh /
the ſhadowe of death cometh vpon thé / and
ther goin horrible darckneſle. Che bngodly
is very lwykt: O 5 his poꝛciũ allo vpd eth
were lwykter then p runnyng water / which


Ok Job.


„che. rrb.qhapter.
Ben ant wered Baldad the Suht⸗A
e 8 larde: Power a feare ps tb
im aboue /o maketh peace / tpt:
= tynge in his highnede / whole men
ok warte are innumerabie / and whole pane
arpleth ouer all. But how mape ama c pa⸗
red onto God/be tultitped: O / hom can he
be cleane that is bozne cfa womã: Behold /
the Moone chyneth nothing in cOparitonta
him / and ö dares are vncleane in his light.
How moch moze then ma, p is but coꝛrup⸗
ciõ:a p lonne of mã / which is but a woꝛme :


poly aed man can not 0
debeo des ages. uot helpe Sd / and pos


Che. xt. Chapter.

Ob ancwered/ lad: O how hel-
i pelt thou p weake7 what cõkoꝛte

geuelt thou vnto hym E hath no

ſtrength⸗ where is § councell p
thou ſbuldeſt geue him / which hath no wyl⸗
dome: Wilethou lo ſhewe thyne excellent
tyghtuouthes: Bekoꝛe whem halt thou po-
ken thole wozdes:? Hho made the bꝛeth to
come out of p mouth: Che giauntes woz⸗⸗·
thies 5 are dlapne /a ipe vnder the woꝛlde W
their cOp.nions: pee i all they which dwell


n beneth in the bell ate not bya tro hym / and


very dellrucciõ it leite can not be kepte out
ok his lyght. e ſtretcheth out p noꝛth ouer C
che emptie z hageth the earth op3 nothing.
He byndeth the water in his cloudes / p they
fall not downe together. He hoddeth back
bis ſloule / that ĩt can not be lene / a ipꝛedeth
bis cloudes betoze it.

He hach cõpaled the waters weertayne


Crtbi.


duffretz not p chipmä to beholde the fapze a boundes, vnt pl the dave a night come to an
pleafatit vꝛne ald. Sf thepltorStwisge: ende. Che verp ppllers of cheauẽ tremble a
hee which the y haue done) were dꝛawen to er pie chu ene 1 7050 P (ec with cameuse ety
7 72 m oper
er cen ame ma RE” dae meiner cb cant gi o Senne ka Mes.
dete Samuel toot Hal tanoe fat) out ofbarchnefir/tye cloude bath fo ccrn that their daynties were wozmes th becher garnulched thebeanés/¢ with his hade bath lerne ch te
Gall onrightuowtede wal be fare feo 1h TY b were cleane put out ofremébzatice/aveter- Ye wounded the rebellious ferpent. Chis is be d tan
dwellynge: He wall geue the an haruelt / Iphewé downe lpke an bnttutefulltre. Fo: now a bote umme okhis dopnges. But tere them vp
wbich in plenty a aboundatice all exceade thepmantepne the bare / make the pb they who ls able tuftictetipto rehearce his tooz- ae Wt apperety
the nut of the carth / and the golde ol Ophir can not beare / a onto wyddowes they do no kes lh can perceaue and bnderſtande p Of tees abe
18 0 Jun 00d. Chey plucke downe p mightis ir thondze ot his power. ore mibischae
ipkerpuer tones. Yee the Amightye bys good. Chey plu mightie v their 5 peers but Job
atone felfe ſhalbe thine harueſt / thebeape power /a when they them lelues are gotten « taketh his (pm
ok thy money. Then Malt thou haue thy de⸗ op ther are neuer without keare as ſõge as of the vnfaptbfull with ;


tye. en contxdꝛe him / J am atraped of
Cherloꝛe recõcile the vnto God / abe con⸗ 700 in buch ag bes bed, ge maketh mp


tent / lo mall au thinges pꝛocpere wp righe⸗ herte lolt:and leynge that he is Ainuightre /


Priest —— ol gob / the part litude of oure
Ipte inthea imightie / a lyft vp thy face onto 1


God Then Halt thou make thy pꝛayer vn⸗
to him / a he call heare the / a thou chalt ke⸗
pe thy pꝛomples Chen / oke what thou ta⸗
keſt in hand / he Mall make it to pꝛoſpere sd
the / and the Ipgbe hall ene in thy wapes.
Foꝛ who to humbleth hem felfe / hym ball
he let vp: and who lo loketh mekel / halbe
healed. Ir thou be innocet / he Mall faucthe:
andthozow the vngeltynelle of thrne hãdes
chalt thou be delxuered.


dapes;

other

ok their catell / and kepe the fame fo2 their
awne: that dꝛyue awaxe $ aſſe of the fathers
leſle bat take the wyddowes ore foꝛ a pled⸗
ge: that thꝛuſt the pooze oute of the ware /
and oppꝛelle the tymple of the woꝛlde tege⸗
ther Beholde / the wylde alles in the delerte
go by tymes / as their maner is / to ſpople:
Fee the very wyldernelle mynid reth foore
tor their R


cher lrue. And though ther myaht be kate /
pet they wyll not receaue it / kor heir eves
Toke bps cheir awne wapes . Chey are exal⸗
ted koꝛ alptie / but thoztly are they gone /
bꝛought to extreme pouerte / a tanẽ out of
che wape: pee a vtterlyplucte or / asp eares
ok coꝛne. Js it not fo? Noho wyll the repꝛo⸗
ue meas a lyar / faye thatmp woꝛdes are
nothynge wozth?

_Baldad pꝛoueth that no man is cleane z twit

Senne befoze Gal. ee


Q Che. xcbij. Chapter.


taken awape my power frome

the Almightpe that bath dered my pier

Mylippes wall tale of no hantte and my

tonge ſhall ſpeake no dylceate / whyle my

bzetbis in me / as longe as the winde that
God hath geuen me is in my noſtreis

God koꝛbidde / b F Hulde graunte poure

. B. iiij. cauſe


graben
g becaul is
20 Job pꝛoceaded & wente Forth Bracers loo
in his cõmunicacion / laping: As the ner vn⸗
ſtrulpas God lpueth ( which bath 3 him.


The boke


taule to be ryght. Bs fozme/ontpilmpne

ende come wyll neuer goo kromene inno⸗

6 cencp. My rpghtwes dealynge kepe J kaſt /

which F wyů not kozlane: my hert Hall not

ar kinder ſtad / repꝛouiẽ me ołmy dapes a? Cherkoꝛe myne
apd fpent. He enemp ſhalbe Eounde as the vngodix a he 8
meancth that taketh parte agapnſt me / ag d önrightudus
Feechathinch⸗ Ae ar hope har pypocrite /yough Hebaue,


fepence be fan, greate good / ard though God geue him rp⸗ greate


and that he ches after bis delpze: Doth God heare
Dal nat let the tance ung erer nto bim in his
kertre re; cone necedite ? Path he Coch pleakure and delpte
kpendpng ofhis in the A lmichtie / Phe dare alwaye call vps
Ipfe rpme/ m God: wyll tearh pou in the name of God:
sobich be C andthe thinge that z haue ol the Almightie/
had tpyed . will J not kepe krom pou. Beholde / ye (ave
mon innocktif in youre atone conceate / as though ve new
allthynges. Wherkoze then do pe go aboute
with loch vayne woꝛdes / lapinge: This is 8
poꝛcion that the wycked ali haue of Ged /
the heretage that Cyzauntes ſball recea⸗
ue of the Simightie. Ic he get many childꝛẽ /
they Hall perich with the lwearde / a his po⸗
ſterite Hall hauefcarcenette ot bꝛed. Lone
whů he leaueth behinde him / the call dye
be buried / and no man Wail haue pite of his
wyddowes. Chough he haue as moche mo⸗
hepas the bud ok che erth / a raymnẽt as rea⸗
dy as the clape / he mape well prepare it: but
the godly hail put it vpon hym / ethe inno⸗
Bekt call deale out ? money, Dis houle Hat
endure ag the moth / andas a boothe thatthe
watch mã maketh. when the rich ma dyeth /
he catieth nothynge with him: he is gone in
che twynckunge ok an ere. Deſtruccion ta⸗
eth holde opon him as a water floude / a 8
te pelt ſtealeth him awape inß night lealon.
A behement winde carieth him hence / a de⸗
parteth:a ſtozme plucketh him oute of hys
place It rutcheth in opon him /andfpareth
him nat / he mape not efcape from the power
therol Chen clappemen their hades at him /
vee a leaſt othi / whẽ ther lone bpd his place.
e that the wyldome of God is vnlear⸗
a


¶ Che. xbiij. Chapter.

a Bere are places where lluer is
molten / a where golde is tryed
ö where pron is Dpaged oute ol the
grounde / a Hones retolued to me⸗
tall. Che darcknes wall once come to an
ende / he can ſeke out p groũde of al things:
the ſtones / the darcke /a § hozrible chadow.
With the rpuct of water parteth be a funder
the ſtraunge people / 5 knoweth no good
nepghbourheade:foch as are rude vnmaner⸗

ly ¢ bopuſtours. Be bꝛngeth koode out of

erth / a that which is onder conlumeth he
kyꝛe. There is founde a place / whole tones
Bate cleane Saphir / z where z dlottes of


earth are golde. Chere is a waye alto p che
byddes knowe not / that no vulturs eye Hath
kene: wherin § pꝛoude a hye mynded walke
not / a where no pon cometh Chere putter
he his hande vpõ the ſtonyrockes / and ouer⸗
thzoweth the moũtaynes. Riuers klowe out
ok the tockes/ a lone what is plealaunt / his
epe lepthit. Out ofdzoppes bzyngeth he
kloudes together / the tinge that is
bd bꝛingeth be to lyght. ow cometh a mã
then by wyldome: here is the place men
kende vnderſtanding: Nerely no ma can tell
how woꝛthp a thynge che is / nether is the
kounde in the lande of the lunge Che depe
lapeth : che is not in me. Che leẽ lapxett⸗ he
is not with me. She can not be gotten koꝛ 6
moſt Fyne golde / nether mape d prpce of her
be bought with enp monere. Ho wedges ol
golde of Optir / no precious Omx ſtones /
no Saphiis maye be cõparrd vnto her. ao /
nether golde ner Chaiſtall / nether Swete o⸗
dours ner golden plate. Chere is nothing fo
worth / or lo excellent / as once to be named
nto her: foꝛ perfecte wyldome goeth karre
be vonde them all. Che Copas that cometh
out ot inde / maxe in no wyle be lickenrd vn⸗
toher: bee no maner ok apparell how pleas
ſaunt and tapꝛe ſoeuer it be.

From whece then cometh wyldome : and D
where is the place of onderftanopnge? She
is ppd From che eyes of all men / pee a krõ the
Foutes of Bapze . Oeſtruccion a death faye:
we haue herde tell of her woure cares. But
Godepth her ware / and knoweth her piace.
Fore beholdeth the endes ot the wozld and
loketh vpõ all that is vnder heauen. When
he weped the wyndes / a mealuredß waters:
when he let the rayne in oꝛdꝛe / and gaue the
mightie floudes a lawe: hen dydhe ce her /
chen declared he her / pꝛepared her ¢ Bnewe
her. And vnto man he layde: Behodde to kea ·
re the Loꝛde / is wyldome:g to fozfake euell.
is vnderſtandynge.

b c th of the protperitie of the tyme pat /
ile 2 ubs kerne of iniatye, le.
they fapdep Job fuffered acc dyng to his deleruyng.

Che .rxrix. Chapter. 3
OJ ob pꝛoceaded and went forth
inhis communpcacpon/ ſaxinge:
O that à were as J was in mo⸗
ethes by palt / and in che bayes
d pꝛelerued me: when bys lxgbt
ſhpned vpon my head: when J wente after
che lame light 2 thynynge ene thozome the
datck nelle. As it ſtode with me / when was
weithp s had prough : when God, ö
mphoute: whe the Simightie was with me: 3
when my houſbolde kolckes ſtode aboute
me: whẽ mp waxes ranne over with butter /
and when the ony rockes gaue 3
0


Ot J


ok orle when J wente choꝛow the citie vnto
the gate and whe they ferme a chapꝛe in the
rete: whe the poung men(asioonz ag hep
lawe me ſhyd them felues / a when the aged


arole and itode bp onto me: when the pꝛin⸗


ces lekt of their talhing / a laped their hande

to their mouth: when the myghty nepte ſtell

their vopce / and when their tonges cleuen to

the role of theirmouthes. B hen all they §

hearde me / called me happye: and when all

cher chat lawe me / wyled me good. Foz J
Cdelpuered the pooze when he crped / and the
fatherlede that wanted helpe. He that cbuld

haue bene loft / gaue me a good woꝛde / and

the wyddowes herte pꝛapledme. And why:

uch rpaht put Spon nie ryghtuouſnes / which co⸗
prince id — „uered me as a garmẽt / and equpte was my
Kg uk rome J was an ebe pntathe bimdeſanda
ngk me, foteto f lame was a father ontoß poze
im no mã and when J knew not cheir caule / J lought
sgmpay Suto it out diligently. J bꝛake the chafies of the
ary a the lpople out of


nuch belou⸗

Cherkoꝛe / Ichought verelp / that J chulde
haue dped in my neta that mpdapes ſhulde
haue bene as many as the londes of the lee.

B® for myrote was cpꝛed out bp $ water ſyde /
i the dew lave bpd my cone. Myne honour
encreaſed moze and moꝛe / and my bowe was
euer the ſtrongerin myhand danto me men
Gaue rare me they regarded a with ſxlence
cheptarped foꝛ my councell. It Ahad (poke /
the wolde haue it none other waves / my
woꝛdes were fo well taken amonge them,
Cher wapted for me / as the earth doth ko 6
bop platter Tapne: and gaped vpon me / as the grounde
Gower is une doch to receaue the v latter hower. hen
umd bolce J laughed / they knew well it was not ear⸗
bee adtech Hettsand this cet pmonp of mp countenatice
2 iudge, Pleated them nothing at all. hen J agreed
sdttofp-tnge, Dito their wape/F was the cheke / and lat as
a Rynge amonge his ferusuntes:D2a8 one
that comfozteth loche as be in beupnetic,
The greate difpplynge or men and curſſe of God
that Job cufrreth.
d he. xxx. Chapter.
At now they that are myne inkeri⸗
ours and pounger then haue me
in deryſpon: pee euen they / whole
E Mathers Jwoldhaue thougbelcoz⸗
ne to haue let with the dogges of mp catell.
Che power a ſtrẽgth ok their handes might
do me no good / and as koz their age it is (pee
and paſt awaye without any pꝛokpt. Foꝛ be⸗
tymiferpand honger / they wente aboute in
the wydderne lle ipke wꝛetches and beggers /
pluckyng vpherbes from amonge the bul⸗
ches / a the Z umpers rote was their meate.
And when they were dꝛyuen koꝛth / men cried
alter them / as it had bene alter a thele.


2

ob, Lrebij,
Cheirdwellynge was belrde koule bꝛones / B
pee in tge caues a denn :s of the earth. pon
the dꝛee heetg wente chepraboute crpinge / a
in che bꝛome hriles ther gathered thẽ to ge⸗
ther. They were tye cypinzen ot Eooies aye
lapnes / which are deedawape Ftd the word.
Now am their fonge / a am become their
ieaſting ſock:they abgozre me/they fle karre
kro me / a ſtapne my face with (petic. Foz the
Lopde hath opened his qupuerſhe bath byte
me / a put a biydie in mę mouth, upon my
right hande they role to gether agapnſt me /
ther haue hurke my kete / made a wape to de⸗
ſtrope me / my path haue they clene mar⸗
red. it was Cocaly toꝛ them to do me harme /
that they nedeo no man to helpe them. Cher
fell bpd me / as it had bene the bꝛeakyng in
ol waters / a came in by heapes to dettrope
me. Fearkulneſle is turnedagaynſt me.

Myne honoure vanpüheth awape moe
lwyftip then wynde / e mp pꝛolperite depar⸗
teth hẽce lpke as it were a cloude. Cherkoꝛe
is my mynde poured full of heupnelle / a the
dapes ok trouble haue tan holde vpon me.
My bones are pearled thoꝛ ow in the nyght
ſealon / a my lynewes tate no reſt. Wich all
their power haue they chaũged my garmtt /
e grzdedme therwith / as it were wa coate.
Jam euẽ as it were clape /a am become like
allhes and duſt. when z crye vntothe / thou
doeſt not heave me: a though J ſtande befoze
the / pet thou regardeſt me not. Chou art be⸗
come myne enempe / a wir brolcnt bande
thou takeſt part agapnſt me. Zn tymes pak
thou dpdeſt fet me bp onhye / as it were abo⸗
ue the wynde / but now halt chou geuẽ me a
verp foze fall. Sure am / p thou wyit dely⸗
uer me vnto death: where as a lodgynge ig
pꝛepared foz all men lyuynge. Now vle not
inẽ to do bpoléce vnto the, that are deſtroped D
all ready: but where hurte is done / there dle
they tohelpe. Dyd not z wepe in the tyme ol
trouble: Had notmy foule compatipon vp
che pooze: Yet neucrthelede where as J lo⸗
ked koꝛ good / euell happened vnto me: and
where as J wapted £03 Ipabe ‘there came
darcknede apy bowels fecth within me /a
take norett/foz the dapes of my trouble are
come bpon me. Mekelx slowly came i in /
vee a without anp ditpiealure: ſtode y in
the congregacyon / and cõmuned wich them.
But now. J am a companyon ot᷑dꝛagons / e
a felowe of Edtriches. My lane vpon me
is turned to black / and my bones ave bꝛent
with beate: my harpe is turnedto toꝛow / a
my pype to wepynge.
Job recpteth the innocencpe of his l. and
— pi bectucs. ete oF ee


Che. xxxj. Chapter.
n it J made


The boke


ar ade a couenaunt wity myn e
eyes / that J wodde not lone vpon
couenaftt with a damleil. Foz how greate a poꝛ⸗
Gis eves fis fv cid halZbaue of Gon krõ aboue?
Tipit ourese ¢ whacenberitaunce kröthe almpghtpe on
bert that com- Oper Ds Foz thebngodlye he that lopneth him
imeth bp the lelke to the copany of wyckeddoers chall not
meanes of the deltrucckon am plerp come pponhym: Doth
flame ont the not he de my wares @ tell all my gopnges,
epecas is Capac At I haue cleued vnto vanxte oꝛ t my tete
Wal. vie. Hale runne to dylceaue: letme be weped in
an euen balaunce / that God may le my ine
nocencp. It lo be that J haue withdzatone
my kote out of ryght waxe / army hert bath
kolowed mne ere lpght / pt F haue fapned
oz dektled my hades: D then it it reylon that
Itowe / and another eate / dee that my gene⸗
racion and poſterite be cleane roted out. FE
my here bath luſted after my neghboures

swpfie /o yt I haue larde wapte at his doze.
O then let mp wiffe be another mans harlot
0} ve ö. id

and let other lye with her. Koꝛ this iz a wic
kednelle ¢ fynne / that is woꝛthy to be pun⸗
B mihed / vee a Fpre that btterlp (ule conlu⸗
me /a rote out all mylubſtãce. Dy q euer
thinke fcogne to do right vnto my leruantes
e maxdẽs / whẽ they had enp mater aga pnſt

me. But leynge 5 God will (ptt in iudgmẽt

what ſhall z do: nd koꝛ lo moch as he will

nedes vylett me / wat ant were Hall J geue
bye that fach yoned me in my mothers
wombe / made he not him alco⸗were we not

both Wapen alpke mn ouve mothers bodies:

When the pooꝛe deſyꝛeh any thinge at me /
haue J dente it them: Paue J cauled he
wyddowe ſtaͤnde wa ptinge fozme in vayne:
Maue J eaten my pozepo alone / that the fae
therleſſe hath had no parte we: Foz mercy
C grewe vp with me romp pouch / a cõpamion
va Co regarde fro mp mothers wombe. aue J (ene any
dh denden of man pertth thozotw nakiesnede g wat pF clo-
990 dome hinge- Oranp poze man kor lack of tap=
che moni, to ment whole fides thancked me not /becaule
be gicious in he was warmed with the wolle ol my chepe⸗
poolperite : to pd z euer lpkte vp mybande to hurte
ob te wude the katherlele yee in the gate where’ kawe
tuplextare je · lip lelke to be in auctozite: then let myne ar⸗
ac. erb. .. Jr me kall Ero my ſbulder / a myne arme holes
ow them ebatue be bzoken krö the topntes, Foz J haut euer
the kohn dun fcared the bengeatice e puntiemet or God)
fhe bo wenge Ane w bet well g was not able to beare
ive mone to go his burthen, Haue put my truſt in golde?
done viecpe Oz haue J laydeto the kyneſt golde o€ all:
was rigen thou arte my confydence? Paue J reiopled
2 peter becaule my kubſtadce was great / a becaufe
be i my hande gat lo moche: Dydz euer greatly
vate b regarde the ryling ofthe koune? oꝛ had J
2 te Coune che gotag downe ok the moone ingreste re⸗
ear and Putacpan: Hath myhert medled pꝛruelx w
any dilceate: Dz / didi euer kyle myneawne


ar To make a


hande (that were a wyckednete wozthy to

be punpched / koꝛ then chulde g haue den ed

the God that is aboue. Hauẽ J euer reioy⸗

led at the hurte of myne enemp? D2 was %

euer glad / p anyharme happened vntohim⸗

Oh no. J neuer lutkced m mouth to do koche

à lłynne / as to wych hem euell. Yet they ol D

myne awne houcholde layc: who shall let vs

to haue oure belly full of bps fet: J haue

not luſtred a ſtraunger to lxe with cut / but
opened my does vnto him. Baue euer dene

any wicked dede where thoꝛow i thamed my

felfe befoze men:o7 any abhompnacpõ / that

FJ was badd 1175 20555 Hees had ae

anp greate mu e ot people:o2 PEF had

bene dplppte o£ the comple Otzen cpüld % ceyty sane
haue bene akraped. Thus haue J qupetſp ben when rye
{pent mylxte / a not gone out at the doze, — men
that J Had one twhypch wolvebeate me IL0/ their wee
this is mp caule. Let the almpabty geue me are thertog
antwere:e lethym that is my contrary par-agapnt bpm:
t / lue me with a lybell. Chen chall J tante it % te byze of
vpon my chulder / z es a garlande about my cent ane
head. J haue told the nöder of mygoinges / Aud tie toss
A delxuered them vntohrm as to a Pꝛynce wer nine unt
But pe rale be that my! lande crye agaynſt tau ue mf
me / oz that the fozowes therot make any cõ⸗ geben
plaprite:p£ 3 haue caté the krutes cherok bn⸗ rte.
payed foꝛ / pee yk? haue greued any ok plow rer xu dg
mentthen let chpltles growe in ſteade ol my ther du,
wheate / a thoꝛnes toꝛ mp barlpe. 5


¶ Here ende the woꝛdes ol Job.


Elin after the other had fj thew commute
een them 20 ige
nit a man tuple but the (pete ot le
Che. xrxij. Chapter.
Othetethze men wolde Hrpue no z
26. with Job, becaule he helde a.. s renn
lelle a rpghtuous man. But in hrs tecarle
Eliu the lonne of Barachell the of tye tradiats
Bulitte of the kinred ol Nam / was very loze of ide knn
bifpieaten ar Job/that he called bim tele tut nrg arge
befoze God. Ind with Jobs thze fryndes he Ein was that
was angry allo /Lecaute they had founde no Saad arndt
reafonable anlwere to ouercome hym. Pow is Spoken Due
taried Eliu tyll they had ended their cõmunt⸗ wer.
cacyon with Job / koꝛ why they were elder
thenhe. So when Eliu the fonne ol Para⸗
chelthe Bullite ſawe / p chele thꝛe men were
not able to make Job antwere / he was myl⸗
content: lo that he gaue ant were him elke / a
ſayde: Contydꝛing / that J am poũge / a ye be
men okage J was aftaped/ a durſt not thew
fozth mp mpnde/ ko: Ithought thus within
my leite: It becommeth ole men to tpeale /
She agedto teache wildome euerymã (no
doute) hath a mynde / but it is the incpiraciõ
ofthe Alminyty that geueth prderttanding, »
All mE are not wyle / nether doth euer an


Ok Job.


man bnderſtande the thinge that is lawkull.
Chertoꝛe wyll i (pcake aĩtolin lo farre as
ma pe be heateja wyll Hew you myne opp⸗
nxon. Foꝛ wien F had wapted tyl pe made
an ende of pouxe taikynge / and hearde poure
welcome, what argumẽtes ge made in pour
communpcacpon: pee when J had dylygẽtiy
pondꝛed what pe lapde J founde not one of
vou that made any good argument agaynſt
Job / oꝛ that dirrctipy coude make antwere
onto his woꝛdes:leſt ye chulde pꝛayle youre
lelues / to haue koũde out wyldome: becaule
it is God that hath caſt hym out / a noman.


D Neuerthelete / ſevnge he hath not {poke on:


to me /therfoꝛe wyll not J anſwere hym as
ve haue done ( koꝛ they were to abaſhed / that
they coude not make anfwere /noz (peake
one worde) but in lo moche as ye wyll not
Ipeake, ſtandynge ſtyll lyne dom men / and
makynge no antwere: J baue a gocdhope
toꝛ my parte to ſhappe him an ani were / and
to ſhe we himmymeanyng. Fo⸗ J am full ot
woꝛdes / a the ſpꝛete that is within me / coms
pelleth me. f
Beholde / am as the new wyne / which
hath no vente / and burſteth the newe bels
fels in ſunder. herkoꝛe well J tpeake / that
Imap haue a bente:F wil opẽ my lyppes /a
mate anſwere J will regarde no maner ol
perlonne / no ma will J (pare. oz yt A wold
go aboute to pleale mien knowe not how
Cone my maker wolde tale me aware.


Elia Hewerh wheringob olſendeth. With od may
we not ſtriue / nor curioudy learche on: his woꝛckes.
G Che. xxxiti. Chapter.
Herfoze heare my woꝛd ( O Job)
k berken vnto me all / that J welt


me / e the bꝛeth ol the aimyghtye barh geuen
me mp Ipfe.3 Ethou cant / then geue me an⸗
were: pꝛe pare thy felfe to ſtande befoze me
face to face. Sevolde bekoꝛe God am J euen
as thou / koꝛ q am fachyoned and made euen
of the fame moulde. Chertoꝛe / thou nedeſt
not be attayed of me nether nedeſt thou to
keare / that my aucteꝛpte thalbe to heup toꝛ
the Qow bat thou ſpotzen in myne arts /a
J haue herde the bopce of thy woꝛdes: J am
clene without any laute / J am innocent /
chere is no wickednes inm̃e. But lo he hath
ppkeda quarell agavnſt me / ætaketh me for
his enemp:-he hach put my fote in § ſtockes /
Kloketh narowiy vnto all my patches. Be⸗
holde / vnto thefe vnrealonable wozdes ol
then well J make antwere.


Crt bij
Shulde God be repꝛouedok man: nohy

doeſt thou then drpue agapnſt him / becaule

he geueth the no accõptes ut al his doinges?

Foꝛ when God dotz once cömaunde a thing —

there chulde no man be curpous / to learche

whether it be rygyt. In dꝛeames z vyſyõs oF

the nyght Ceafon wien nom einge cometh

bpd men / p they tall a üepe in their beddes

he rowudeth thé in the eares/he inkourmeth

chem / and ſheweth them playneip / that it is

he / which wichdꝛaweth man from curl / de⸗

Ixuereth bpm krom perde / kepeth bys loule

from deſtruccis / a his ſpke from the twearde.

He chaſteneth hym with lycknebe / and bꝛin⸗

geth bpm to his bed:be layeth loꝛe punyſhe⸗

ment vpon bys bones fo that hys ivée maye

aware with no bꝛed / a hig fonie abhozieth

to eate any dayntye meate:In lo moche that

bis body is cieane conlumed awape / andhis

bones appeare no moze. ys loule dꝛaweth

on to deſkruccpon /a hrs lyke to death. Dow „ ecyattsar

yl there be a*medenger(one amõge a thou⸗ inferucto: W

lande) fent foz to fpeatie onto man / and to the warde of

wewehym the ryght wa pe: then the Loꝛde Hod

is merepkul vnto hem / u tapctin he thatbe D

delpuered thathe fail not downe to deſtruc⸗

cvon / to Jam tuffpcpently recõcyied. Chan

hys flech which bath bene in mylerp a trou⸗

ble) halbe as it was in bps youth. Foꝛ pt he

Cubmptte byntfelfe vnto God / he is gracp⸗

dus / and cheweth hym bys countenaũce toys

full / and rewardeth man foꝛ his rightuouts

nes. Doche a relpecte bath he onto men.

Chertoꝛe let a man confete (and lape) 3 ot᷑

kended / but he hath chaſtened and reformed

me: J dyd vnrrghtuoully / neuerthelelie he

bath notrecompentedme therakter. Yee he

bath delpuered mp foule from deſtruecpon /

and my ye that it ſeith the lyght. Lo / thus

woꝛcketh God allwaye with man / that he

kepeth bps loule From perychynge / and let⸗

teth hym entope the lyght o the lyuynge.

Marcke wen ( O Job) and heare me: holde

the ſt yl / vntyil J haue fpoken. But yf thou

batt any thynge to laye /thenantwere me/

and (peatie/fo2 thy ant were plealeth me. FE

thou batt nothinge / then heare me / and hold

thy tonge / lo tall J teache the wyldome.


Ein prapteth th 0
femora 2 1 whych iudgeth


che. xrxiij. Chapter.


Liu pꝛoceading forth in his com⸗

— SS munpcacron / fapde: Beare my
woꝛdes (O pe wyle men herken

0 A onto me/pe that haue vnderſtan⸗
dynge Foꝛ lyke as the mouth tatteth p mea⸗
tes / lo the eare pꝛoueth and dylcernech the


wordes. As Foz the iudgement / let vs 9


Toke befoze in


dhe. rv. b.


Peo the people og to anꝑ m: fo the wycked⸗


Theboke,


out amige oure lelues / that we may knowe netie and lenne ok the peayle / he maketh an
what is reght And why: Job hath fapde: J ppocrpte to repgne ouer them. Fo: lo moch
am rpyghtudus / but Guddoth me wzonge J then as Jhaue begonne to talke of Gon / A
muſt neades be a tyer/ though my caulebe wyl not hendꝛe the. Je J haue gone a mpee,

right / andotolentiz I am plãged where as entourme meipt i hãuẽ dane wꝛonge / will
made no fawte: where is there loche one as leaue ot. Vylt thou not geue a reafonable
‘Joby poztcheth vp icoꝛnefulnes like water? anfwere? Art thou alraxed ok any thynge /
which goeth inthe cõ pany of wycked doers / ſeinge thou beganneſt kxꝛſt to tpea ke / a not
awalketh with ongodiy men: Koꝛhelapeth: J: foꝛ eis the men ol vnderſtandynge a wyl⸗
Chough a man be good / pet is he naughtbe⸗ dome / that haue herve me might lape: no hat
kose God. Cherkoꝛe herzen vnto me / ve that canſt thou fpeahe: Ls Foz Fob be hath nether
hae vnderſtandynge. {poken to the purpole noꝛ wilely O Eather/

Farre be it krom God / that he cw and med⸗ let Job be well tryed / becaule he bath tur⸗
le with wickedneſſe:and karre be it krom the ned hym leite to the wycked: peeaboue bps

almightye/ ö he chalde medie with vnrigh⸗ lynnes he bath blatphemed / which offence
tuoug dralynge: but he rewardeth the woꝛc⸗ he bath done euen befoze vs / in thathe ſtry⸗
kes ol man / and cauſeth euer man to finde ueth agaynſt God with his woꝛdes.
Acozdingeto his wapes. Foz ture itis that T gerber doch godlrnelle profet/o: vngodlpnes hurt
God condemneth no man wꝛongoully and 2, Bod but te man.

the iudgement of the Alimpahepe is not vn⸗ ¶ Che. xxxv. Chapter.
rightuous. Who ruleth ß earth in his ſtcade⸗ Liu fpake moze ouer / and lapde:
2; whom bath be lett to gouerne the whole

woꝛlde: To whom hath he geuen hys herte /

koꝛ to dꝛawe his ſpꝛete and bꝛeth vntohym?

All ſlech wall come together vnto naught / doeſt thon k hat thinge bat thou
all men chall turne agapne vnto earth, FE moꝛe excellẽt then J 5 ama ſynner? C here
thou now haue vnderſtandynge heare what koꝛe wpll J geue antwere vnto the and thy
Iſafe / a herkentothe voyce or mp woꝛdes. kryndes Joe vnto the heauen / a beholdeit:

Sh Aye he be made whole / that loueth no concydꝛe the cloudes / how they are hyerthen
ryght: ak thou were a very innocent man / thou. It thou lnneſt / what doeſt thou vnto 8
fhuited thou then be punpthen: gfoz he is hym : Ik thyne offences be many) how get⸗
euen the lame / that knoweth the rebellions teſt thou his kauoure: Jkthou be rightuous
kynges / z tapeth to Punces: Lingodiy men what geueſt thou bym: Dz what receaueth
ate pe. Pe hath none relpecte vnto the per⸗ he okthyhandes: OE loche an ongodly per⸗
Tonnes ok the loꝛd/x / a re gardeth not the rych konne as thou / a of the fonne of man that is
mope then poze, For they be allche wozche ryghtuous as thou pꝛetende ſt to be:there is
ok his bandes. In che twynchlinge ob an eye a grrate cry ¢coplaynte made by them that
Wall they be dapnc:g at mpontayt, when the are oppꝛelrd with violence / pee euery man
people a the tyzauntes rage / th.n wall they complapncth vpon the cruell arme of tyꝛaũ⸗

rpſh a be taken awape without bandes. tes Foz foche one neuer lapeth: Where is

nd whrebrs eyes lone vpon the wapes ok Sodthat made me? a that Ayneth vpon be / C
man andhe le pih all his gornges. chere is ß we myght pꝛaple hum in the night: Which
no darcknes oz thyche Padowe that can geueth vs moze önderſtanding then he doth
hide the wycked doers kr hym. Foz no man the braſtes of the earth / a teachech vs moze
ſhalbe Cuffred to go into iudgemẽt with od. then the koules of heauen.

Manpone / pee inniumeräable doth he pu Fk anp coche complapne / no man geueth
nyche / and ſetteth other in their ſteades. Foꝛ and were / a that becaule of the wyckednelle
he knoweth their euell a darcke woꝛckes / ok pꝛoudetyꝛauntes. But vt a man call vpõ
thevfoze that they be deſtroyed. Chey that God / doth not he heare hym:? Doth not the
were in the ſteade of Sears dealt lyke vn⸗ almpghtpe accepte bys crye? han iheu
godlymen Cherkoze turned ther back trap⸗ Cpeahett chen / chudde not he pardonthe / xt
keroud a vnkapthfullpfromhxm / a wolde thou open thy elke befoze hym / and put thy
not receauehis wapes. In to moch that they truſt in him: ¶ hen vleth he no vpoience in
haue cauted the vopce ofthe pooze to come his wꝛath / nether bath he plealure in curp⸗
vnto hym / a now he heareth the complapnte ous a depe inquyliciõs. Chertoꝛe hath Tob

ok locke ag are in necefite. It he delpuer and opened his mouth but in vayne / a kolxcwir
Krafte pardG, whe will iudge oz condemne? hath he made lo many worde.
But pthehrde awayebis cofitenatice/ who C clin Heweth wherfer Sud punpaheth aud core
wyllturne it aboute agayne/ whether it be recteth.

che. xxxvj. Chapter


iu pꝛoceaded toꝛth in his talhig
f elapde: Holde the Epi a lptie/a 4
bal weweche / what J haue pet
to (peaic on Goves behalfe. J
wyll open vnto the pet moze of myne vnder⸗
Gandynge/and pꝛoue mymaker righteous,
rue are my wozdes / a nolpe: a the snows
iedge wher with all g argue agapntt the / is
perkerte. Beholde, Sod calteth not awape ß
mightve,
Wales
S foz the vngodlp he pꝛelerneth thẽ not /
but helpeth the poze to Herne pe tur-
neth not his epes aware fro the righteous/
he letteth vp kynges in their trone / and cons
kirmeth them/fo that they allwaxe fptt ther
Bin. But ve they be layed inpzeton and chey⸗
nes oz bounde with the bondes of pouerte:
chen cheweth he them their wozckes z dedes
5 rale. wherintth they haue vted cruell
teWihpue ar hewith punityyngeand nurtringe ot
at ul. them / rowndeth theminthe ates mme
ibm in ihe chem to leaue of from their wyckednele / @
dar to rig to amende. Ff they now well take hede and
tof node be obedtent they tall were out their dapes
— 15 {er in Pꝛolperite and their yeares in pleature i
tale th: ta be lo t. But yk they wyll not obexe they hall
faules in go thoꝛow the (wearde / perith 07 euer they
auen that be aware. Ag fon loche as be fapned / diem
pre — biersand ppocrites / they heape by wꝛath foꝛ
She Celues:fo2 thep cal not ops hym though
they be his pretoners. Chus theirfoute pe-
rilcheth in toipchnelte / and their ipke with the
condemned. Che pooze delpuereth he out of
bis ſtraptenelie / a comfozteth loche as be in
hecettpte and trouble. Euen fo Hall he kepe
the ( pe thou wylt be content) krom the bots
bien ae pa
qupete / he ha table
with plenteoutnette. 5
¢ ANeuerthelede thou hat condemned the
iudgement ok the vngodir / pee euen foche a
ludgemẽt and lentence chalt thou ruft. Foz
chen wall not thy caule be titled with cruel⸗
tie / nos pacyfxeb with many gyttes. Hi
Sod o dened then that the glozpous ite of
che / Gall Coch mightp men ſhulde not be put
downe: Pꝛolöge not thou the tyme / tyll ther
come a npglyt foꝛ the / to Cet other people in
thy dteade. But bewarrethat thou turnenot
Alpde to wickednedie andlynne / which hither
tothou halt cholen moze then mekeneſſe.
Beholde/ Godis of a mrghtpe bye power:
a
tho repꝛoue is wape?
who will faye vnto hi: thou halt done wꝛog⸗
2. O confpdac how greate and excellent hig
woickes be whom all men loue and pꝛaple:
ver wondꝛe at hym / and vet they ſehym but


Job,


Lrcir;
alarre o£. Behodde / to greate is God / that ,
palleth oure knowledge / nether are wate
to come tothe experience of his peares. He
tutneth the water tolmall dꝛoppes / hedꝛy⸗
uech his cloudes together fo to rayne / lo 8
cher pouredomne and dꝛoppe pon men. e
can ſpꝛede out the cloudes (a couerynge of
bis tabernacle)andcaute bys ipghe to chyne
Spon them / a to couerthe botome of the lee.


ko he him lelke is mighty in power By thele thi


5 inges gouerneth he if
@ gett) temabounbaumcccttecate ng
kuknyng ofa bande be hrdeth the ipgbt / a at
e
des and to the catell. * on


clu ig ;
cheat 08089 char the wetoun of abs nter.


¶ be. xxxvij. chapter.
this mybert is aftonned /a mo⸗
ned out oF bis place. Beare then p
lounde ok his bopce /athe noyle 6
goeth out or his mouth. He gouer⸗
heth euerpthing vnder the heauẽ / a his light
reacheth onto the ende o€ the woꝛdde. a roa⸗
unge vorce tolowech him: For bis gionous
mately geueth foche a thondze clappe / that
(though a man heare it yet mape he not per⸗
ceaue it atterwatde. It geueth an hoꝛrybie
ſownde when God fendeth oute bys bovce:
Greate thingesdoth he / which we can not cõ⸗
Pochende nöhen be comaundeth the {nowe/
ic Falleth bpon the erh: Ag lone as he ge⸗
ueth the rapne a charge / immedratip § (hos
wers haue their ſtrength / and fall downe.
He tendeth keare vpon euery man / that ther ag
nught knowe their amne woꝛckes. Che bee⸗
tes crene into their dene / a ta ke their ret.
Out oF the fouth commeth the tempe it / and
codde out of the noꝛth. . 9 ;
Atthe“ bzelh of Gor/ehe krolt cõmeth / a* Che brech
the waters are (hed abzode. Che cloudes do or gon bere ar
thett labour in geuing moranece che clou⸗ nd wehen
des paure doune chert tapne . He dpltrybu⸗ wynd/ as isthe
teth allo on euerplpde /acopoinge as it pleas noith wende.
feth him to deale out his woꝛckes / that they


ath mape do whatloeuer he cõmaundeth them


thozow the whole woꝛde: whether it be to
punyl any lande / oꝛ to doo good bnto them /
chat tete hym. ; :
Herken onto this(D Job)tand l yl / and c
conlidze the wondꝛous woꝛckeg of God. Art
thou ok councell wyth God / when he
thele tzinges When he cauleth the lyght
come Fo2th of bps cloudes: Art thou ofbys
eouncell when he ſpꝛedeth out the clounes?
Halt thou the perkecte knowledge of hys
wonders? and how thy clothes are warme /
when the lande is ſipilthoꝛow the South
wende: Batt thou helped bym to fpzeave
out the heauen / which is to loke vpon / as it
were


The boke


were caſt of cleare metall: Teache vs what
we tall ſape onto hym; for we are vnmete
D becaute uf darcknes. Shall it be tolde hym
wratg fape? Shulda man ſpeake,oꝛ thulve
be fepe ir backe? Foz cucry man leyth not
the light / that he hepeth cieare in 6 cioudes /
which he clenfeth wuan he maketh d wynde
to blowe. Golde is bꝛought out of ? Poꝛth /
but the pꝛaple 2 bonoure of Gods feare cö⸗
meth from Godhym felfe. It is not we that
can kynde out the almyghtpe: fo2 in power /
equite / a vightcoufnedic, he is hrer than can
be erpzettes. Seinge then ? euery body kea⸗
reth hym / why tule not all wrie men alto

ftande in feare of hym.
The wond:es and maruelles that the Loꝛde hath

done Econ the begynnpnge.

O@Ahye.creuj.Chapter,
ae Ven (pate the Lon vnto Job out
ofthe ſtoꝛme / a Cayoe: what is he
that hydeth his mynde wich kolpſh
woes: Gyre op chy lopnes iphe
aman, toʒ 3 will qued von the / ſe thou geue
mea directe antwere. here wattthou,/ whe
g lapde the keundacpõg of death: Cell pias
help pf thou bat vnderſtanding. Who bath
meatured it, kᷣnc weſt thou? G / whohath
ſpꝛeade h lyne vrõ it? C here bpd ſtande the
prlers of it? Dz, who laxed pcoꝛner tones
¥nlge fapth not höhere walt thou,“ wö the moznig Rares
thar bea’ wee pa plebme fo gether and altthe cypiozen ot
earth but whe ©ootciopled frpumphantir- who Mut the
d. s godiy wt lee with doꝛes, whẽ it bꝛake koꝛth aga chyld
dome made thé out ohys mothers womb. ¢ When 4 made
be Ovib beb2 che cloudestobeacoucting fos it, cwadled
Phe aud Dit with eye darche? when J gaue it my com⸗
that he neared maundement / making dozes a bartes kor it /
uo exile mae ſapig: ither to thalt thou come but no fin3-
fron fo: then ther a bere Walt chou lape downet'y P2040
OF the ngs, dupe wanes Hack thougeuen eye ring
wich here are his charge (as ſoone ag thou watt bone | z
called toe coyle he wed che dave lying his place / p it might
denen Soc tate holde of che coznerg ar the earth / that
ke bar iber B. Dagodly might be chan our heli tones
was no man by  Weap shal thou curnediphe cla ge /a (ete
ar helped hyin / thé op agapne as the chatiging of a ganic,
wohen be miade Yee thou hak Cpoplen the bngoolp oF their
nnn of § proude.¢ amt
tellectnall ana thou euer into the grounte of the fee: o batt
fpicitualt nae thou walked in the lowe coznerg ok the depe⸗
tuces, Haue the gates of vecth bene opencd onto
the / oꝛ halt thou lene the doze of euerlaſtyng
ticafure? Batt thou allo perceaued bow
bꝛoade 5 earth is: Now pk thou halt know⸗
lenge ot all / then thew me where light dwel⸗
leth a where darcknes is: that tholi mapeſt
barge vs vnto their quarters, yk thou canſt
Stell We ware to theirboules.

Aneweſt thou (whe thou waſt hoꝛne) hom
olde thou ſbuldeſt bez Wentelt thou euer in


to the thꝛeaturies ofthe mowe / oz batt thou
Cone the lecrete places of the haple/ which y
baue prepared agapnt the tyme of trouble;
agapntt the tyme of batell and warte? L
what ware isthe irght parted / andthe peace
dealt outvpon the earth? ho deuydeth the
aboundaunce of waters into ryuert /o who
maketh a wape foz che Gozmp wether / that
it watereth a moyſtureth the dzpe and baren
grounde:to make the gratt growe in places
where no body dwelleth/ and in the wylder⸗
nes where no man remapneth? Who is the
father ol rayne? Oꝛ who bath begotten the
dꝛoppes oldewe? Dut of whole wobe came
the ple; Who hach gendꝛed the coldnes ot the
ape: that 6 waters are as harde as ſtones /
andlye congeied aboue the depe. Hatt thou
brought 5 bn kkarr together? Oꝛ art thou
able to bꝛene the circle otheauẽ: C anſt thou
bꝛynge forth the momynge ſtarre oꝛthe eue⸗
nynge ſtarre at conuement tyme / a cõuepe
thembomeagapne-%nowet thou § courte
ol heauen that thou mapett fet vp (he oꝛdy⸗
naunce therof vpõ the erth? Mozeouer / cat
chou iplt vp thy bopce to the cloudeg / P
mape powze downe a greate rapne opothe? ©
Cant thou thondze allo that they mae go
their wape / a be obedĩt vnto the/laping· Lo
here ave we. Who geueth line weldome oz
ſtedkaſt ondertt : who nombzeth the
cloudes in wyldome: who ſtylleth the vehe⸗
ment waters of the heauen: who turneth the
clottes to duſt / a then to be clottes agapne⸗:
Hunteſt thou the pꝛape fed the pS /o2 Fedele
thou his weipes lping in their dẽnes / lur⸗
king in their couches: who vꝛouideth mrate
kortgeraus / when his vounge ones crye vn⸗
to Gn / a lie aboute to want ol meate?
Ton ſpeaketh vnto Job ſhewynge hym by the ero
Apt a or hes worckes that hys xh wel ats ia va⸗


learchable. 8
The serie. Chapter.

owe thou the txme hen thea
ie Gores bꝛige koꝛth thempone
ge ß Henp rocker? Diep ſt
wa pte whe ye hyndis oie to
eneſt thou the mer ethi after
che p ciagendec/ that thou knoweſt the tanie
of their vearinge ? 02 when they le downe /
when iht y call their pounge ones / a when
they sre delnuered of their trauayle e payne?
How thelr pounge ones growe vp d wo ce
greate thoꝛom good fedpna? wh o letteih tie
wilde alle go fre / oz who lowieth ð bondes
ok the mulcento when J haue geuen the
wyldernes to be their houte / a the vntylled
lande to be their dwellyng place. C hat they
map geue no fozce fo the multytude of peo-
ple in the cities nether regarde the cryenge
ok the deruer: but leke their .


che mountaynes / and kolowe ß grene grate.
9 Wapll the vntcone be fo tame as todo s fer
upce/ozto abpae Epil bytyp crpbbe? Cant
thou bind Spock about him in thy koꝛowes /
to make hem piowe after the in the valleis:
Mayxeſt thou rut him becaulehe is frog)
oz commitee thy labour vnto hym? Maypeſt
thou beieue him / that he wll binge home
coꝛne / oꝛ to carꝝ any thinge vnto thebarne?


Ot Job, C.


Hen ſpake 5 Loꝛde vnto Fob out A N
ok ö ſtoꝛme / xlapde: Gyꝛde bp thy Job xxxviß· .
opnes lyke a man and tell me the
thinges that wyll atic the. wut

thou difanulle my tudgement: Oz wilt thou


ween vighteous? J then


Che Eſtrych whole kethers are fayzer than ch


the wynges of the ſparow hauke ) when he


bath laped bys egges vpon the grounde / he le that


bꝛedeth them in che duft / a koꝛgetteth them:
lo that they might be trodẽ with kete / oꝛ bꝛo⸗
Cken with Come wydde beaſt. So harde is he
vnto hes ponge ones as though they were
not hys / a laboureth in vayne without anp
keare. And that becauſe Godhath take wyl⸗
dome krom him / a hath not geuẽ hym vnder ·
andynge. hen his tyme is / he fipeth vp on
hpe / a careth nether koꝛ hoꝛle ner man.

Dak thou geuen the holde his ſtrength / oꝛ
lerned himto bowe downe his neck weare:
that he letteth him telle be dzpuen koꝛth lpke
a greſbopper where as the toute neyenge
that he maketh is fearkull: he bꝛeaketh che
grounde with the hoftes of his fete chearful⸗
Ip in his ſtrength / a runneth to mete $ har ⸗
neſtmen. He ſapeth alxde all feare / hys ſto⸗
mach isnot abated / netherſtarteth he a back

BP torany Cwerde. Though the qupuers rattle
bpd hem / though the ſpeare a hylde glyſtre:
pet ruſcheth he in kearlelx / and beateth bon
che grounde. Pe leareth not the noyle of the
trompettes but as Coone as he heareth the
chawmes blow / chuch la peth he) foꝛ he lmel⸗
leth the batell a favre ot / che noyle / the Cap⸗
faynes and the ſhoutinge.

Commeth it thozow thy wyldome / the
Gothauke lieth towarde the South? oth
the Seale mounte vp / and mate his nett on
hve at chy commaundement: He abydeth in
che ſtonp rockes / ¢ bpon the bye toppes ol
harde moũtaynes / where no man can come.
From thence mapebe beholde hys pꝛape / a
loke farre about with bis eyes. Bis vounge
ones are fed with bloude / a where any deed
body lech, chere is he immedpatly.

Mopecuer God tpake vnto Job g capde:
Canhe that ſtrrueth with the almpghtve / be
at reſt: Shulde not he which dicputeth with


ati put bis Sod / geue hym an antwere: Job ancwered
n Gel ane Lavingespebotbe/4 amroopie a


‘Aebispeace Perfonne/to ant were the / thertoꝛe wplt**F


4 to be dplt laye myhand ops my mouth, Once o2 twyle
nee tbe baue 3 fpoken but} wll tape nomoze,


dieß ergobbumbie elfe ont i
aa Sean Geck wengatbane ees


che xl. Chapter.


Wyltthou take thr patyme wich hym ag w
abpzde/o2 geue hem vntothymapdes / that
chr companxons maphew hym in peces / to
be partedamoge the marchaunt men: Canſt
thou kyll the net with his ckynne / oz the kych
pannper wich his heade: Darreſt thou laye
bande vpon him Ieis better koꝛ the to contp⸗
dee what harme might happen the there thoz
rom a not to touche hem. A whe thou thin⸗
keſt to haue ho de bpon him he Mall begple
the: Euery man alto that ſepth hym / tail go
backe. And whr⸗ there darte none be lo bold
as to rapſe hm vp.

CHE the tame Leupathan whe rot is mei n
eher — b ncponed ft

5 che xlj. Chapter.


Who


Jere l. b.


The boke of Job


Pots able to ſtande befoze me?
/ who hath geué me anp thing
koze hande / that J am bounde to
warde him agapne⸗allthinges
vnderheaus are mne. à feare himnot / whe⸗
ther he thꝛeatẽ oz ipeake fayze. ho lylteth
him vp a ſtripeth him out of his clothes / oꝛ
who taßeth hym bythe bytt of bys bꝛydle⸗
who openeth p doze of his kace ko he hath
Bhoꝛrible teche round aboute. Pis body is co⸗
uered with fcales as it were with wyldes /
lockte in / kepte / a well compacte together.
One is lo ioynedto anocher / y no apze can
come in: Yee one hangeth fo bpon another /
e ſtycketh lo to gether / ? they cã not be tune
dered. His nelinge is ipke a glyſtering tpꝛe /
g his eves lyke the moꝛnynge chyne. Dut ol
his mouth go toꝛches a tyꝛe bandes / out ot
his noſtrels ther goeth a imoke / ipke as out
ok an hote lething pot. His bzeth maketh 6
coales burne / the flamme goeth out or bps
mouth. In his necke remapneth ſtrength / a
befoze bys face fozowe is turned to glad⸗
nelle. Che membꝛes ok bys body are ioyned
fo ſtrapte one to another / and cleue lo faſt
to gether / that he can not be moued. 5
His hert is as herde as a ſtone / a as fat
ag the ſtithpe that the hammer man lmyteth


vnto the thinge thatz wyll arte the. haue
geuen diligent eare Dito the / a now F fe the
Wwrneepes therfore J geue mpne atone
felfe the blame / a take repentaũce in z duſt
and allhes.

How when the Loꝛde had tpoken thele
woꝛdes vnto Job he faye vnto Eliphas the
Chemanite: am dilplealed wich the ¢ thy.
two krendes to: pe haue not fpoken $ a
that is ryght bekoꝛe me / lxke as myterua
Job hath done Cherkoꝛe take. vij oxen 8. bij
rammes / and go to myleruaunt Job / offve
vp allo foꝛ poure ſeluẽs a bꝛ ge: andsgartn .
let my leruaũt Fob pꝛape fo2 vou. Him will
Jaccepte /a nat deale with you alter poure
kolychne lle: in that pe haue not Ipoken the
thinge which is ryght / ixne as mx leruaunt
Job hath done. .


So Eliphas the chemanite/ Balad ß
Suhite ¢ Sopharthe Haamathite wente

eit wape anddydaccozdyng as the Londe @
cOmaundedthe. Che Lozve allo accepted p
perſonne of Fob/andthe Loꝛde turned
bnto Job whé be prayed tog his krindes: Fee
Had ae gaue Job twyle as moche as he


bpon, when he goeth: the myghtieſt of all b


are akrayed / a the waues heuy. Ak he dꝛawe
out the lwearde / chere may nether ſpeare /
ner bꝛeſt plate / abpde hrm. He letteth as
moche by a ſtrawe as bp p20 andas moche
byarotten ſtocke as by metall. Be ſtarteth
not awape fo2 him that bendeth the bowe: a
88 foꝛ nge ſtones / he careth as moche for

D ſtubble as foe them. He counteth the haͤmer
no better then a ſtrawe / he laugheth hym
to fcozne that chaketh the Cpeare. e trea⸗
deth the golde in d myꝛe ipke the ſharpe pot
ſherdes. He maketh the depe to leethe and
boyle lxke a pot / and ſtereth the fee fogethet
Ike an oyntment. Che waye is lyght alter
him / the depe is his walkynge place. upon
erth is there no power Iphe vntohys / koꝛ he
is lo made that he keareth not Ita man will
concydze allhpethinges this lame is a king
ouer all the chyldzen of pꝛyde.


power outer all thinges / a p there
. Als nothought bpd onto the. Foz
who can kepe his atone councell lo fecrete /
but it halbe knowne: C hertoꝛe haue tpo⸗
ken vnwylelp / teynge thele thinges are fo
hye / a pale myne vnderſtandyng. S hernen
thou onto me allo / z let me lpeake ant were


.. dougg
ters. Che fyꝛſt called Baye: the tecond Por
uerte:the thyzde Al plenteoutnes, In all 6
lande were none fofive lo fapze / as j dough⸗
ters ol Job / a their father gaue them enhe⸗
e

ed Job xl veares/fo tha .
bis chlldze a hrs chridzes chit
dꝛen to the fourth genera⸗
cxon. And lo hedped /
beinge olde ¢ ola
perkecte


age.


is gods


2


¶ The Plalmts of


CG che fort Praime. ri
¶ Chole that foztake che countelles and tradycyons
OF the wycked and wholly geue them felues toknowe
the lawe ol Sod / and to ewe


Lin what But delpteth in the lawe of the Lowe /
ter we da of exercyleth hm lelte in his lawe / bothe da pe
pabaute/beit and n.


dackotptt in
kete of leg
mull is to ce
het with the /
tao
af

Bashers: Therkoꝛe  ongovly hall notbeabie*to
pin ave ſtande in the ĩudgement nether the Cynners
{Cottao ia in thecongregacpon or the ryghtuous.

pemit/3 op che Korde aloweth the wape of the
82 to rrghtuous / but d wape ofthe bngodly Halt


ande Anhen the Lozdetball come to the general tubgemetsit mear


| uot that the wecked fall not appeare inthe mbgement


atid,


st,


2


che. j. plalme.


CHhrp that briowe not God are moued agape t.

Fugen — wonderfull anregen om

in vapne: pet runneth their rage thozow the whole

Py e onix wape to health is to cõmit thpleife
0 Chi


Lahr dothe Heathen grudge? why z
‘do the people ymagyne bapne things? he Pio⸗
Che Bynges of the earth ſtande vp / and pheke.
the rulers are come together / agapnt the “4
Pozdeandagapnthps anoynted. Che Ene ·
„Let vs breake their bondes alunder / a me
caſt aware their pock from vs. 5
*Meuertheledebe that dwelleth in beg. kghe woos
uen / chall laugh chem to lcoꝛne : pee cuen phele.
the Lope hpms (elf chall haue them in dere” ay Fo tpeake
fyon, vntothe mn hes
Chen Hatt he v ſpeake vnto them inhre dre aan de
wach /a dere them tnbys tore dpipleature, tg f be
#Y¥ct haue J letmy B rnge vpon my bOI grog: the. Je.
Pit of Spon, Temp.pvig.a,
Ag kozme/ A will preache 5 lawe / wher⸗ God.
ok the Loꝛde hach larde onto me: Chou art; he byng
mplonne / this daye haue J begotten the. Chuſt.
Delpꝛe ot me/a I chall gene sche Hear b. rode oe
then koꝛ chyne enheritaunce / yee the botter: Bante a tite
molt partes of tye wo ide to thy polletion. don pda
Thou chalt rulechem with a *rovde oF is tapoe pésim,
ene peces lie an ear · Seel.
en


then d. i ay x ui. b.

Wewrtenowtherkoze / O pe Aynges /,

bewerned ꝛethatare {urges of the earth. ane Pree
cc Serue phete.


2 5 ae ee

j. Ol Daud,

5 Serue the Lopde with keare / and retople

dont ke th? bekoze hem with reuerence.

e
ae Frpe (& lo pe perpihe reaht ware.

Fides peach n Fo his wꝛath chalbe kindled Hhoztip-blet>

pope) by the led are all they that put their crud inbym,

fande that / which is fpanpeycd therby Ion bp the wpile of the Einges

bande een 8 para Segpous bo iow. ee ie 175

e 4 te

denne heel bebefoetssugec the tation inge Then ark ng

Se

aud dle hn arne pon en chatenpnge. ee


Che. ij Plaime,


Dad (peakpuge vnto the Lorde / wondzeth boch
Senke pide ee e


came agapnſt hym /s cõmptte ch hum lelke with greate

fafetpe vnto bis helpe / although his enempes were at

3 readp to ſerpne him: boch becaule noma ets can
hem / 8 becaute none can he partakers of bealtg

25 br but they that beleue iu hym and truſt
— 1


ume n Aa Pfalme ot Dauſd when he lledde
ge Sen thom the face of Ablalom.


Saunen ye are of tps tee ebb ote ne


che wunde of des krom the.ro.Abaptce uno the. FFs
an harpe. eibzatetheptomant/® Laye/ that
le me: a greate multptude are
cher / that ryleagapnſt me.
ieh, Yeemany one there be p fave or my foute:
ker Rab. k m. ther ig no helpe toi him in God. . Delah
wasn ſpgne But thou /D Lore art my detender /
coud oF tpéting mp woꝛchyppe / andthe litter vp of myhead.
Shoe mouped be F .
m ll. Selah,
5 eee
de fut me,
Jam not akraped to: thoutandes of the
people/that compact me rounde aboute.
meaningofthe Up Lozde/ and belpeme/ O my God:
verde vnto ko thou imiteſt al myne enempes bpon the
med new —.— bones / and? vbzeaket the teeth or the
that it cygnikle Delve bel onto the
bets etibpbletngebebpen one
© 1
theteeth of the be. tiij.Ptalme.
vugodlp / is) to 1d Leth tl
ize hen . Sade neee en
Hetye ? toithe De reproueth rhe madnes ot ‘the heades § rulergot᷑ qc


Plalliij iii. x. v:


ker hes interpzetacyon alta du boch the moat 8 f
beſt lerned of the Latenpttes beſt atowe / and thettoe
baue 2 folowed the fame the whole falter thoro;
erpiellpnge it bp this morte Abhaunter.Lotwithitans
denge dpuers Authoures do druerlip mterpzere it.
Some Cape that it lignytieth / Co the victour dy ones
comerecbme) to the bpcto:pes which mae thus agree
and concorde together pf thou take a Slalme to be a
Aprryngs an exhortacpon to put oure trut in God⸗
‘being lüre to obtapne the bpctorpe; And where fome
lutrepzete / vnta the ende / vnderſtande euen the fame:
kor therfore da we put ure truſt n god that we max
come to the ende of the vpctoꝛpe. Some tranflate the
tytle thus: vehement and of ten madeerboztacion in
tückrumentes of mulphe /a plalme to Daum / thatis /
as thep them (clues erpounte it: a Plalme reüclate
555 eee Dautd is in hebzue the datytt cale not
je

be Qeginoth tæguytpeth the tune or note of the ine
Grumentes wherafter the Blalmes before whych
itis prefpred were longe kor the were
at certett inarumentes / uut (0 that the c wete tune x
melod pe ok the mérumétes prepared the mynde moje
Perfectelp to perceaue the wo beg ot the bolpoptpe,


Eareme when J cal / O Godormy

ryghtuoulnes:tyou that cõkozteſt me

in me trouble: haue mercy spon me /
herken vnto me pꝛaper.

O ve fonnes of men / how longe wyll ve
blalpheme mrne honour? why haue pe loch
pleature in vanxte / and ſeke after ives?

ela


Meine es marcel gebenen.
ueloulip wyth bys laynte:a when J call vpõ


+ the Loꝛde / he heareth me.


Be angrye / but cynne not: comen wyth
voure awne hertes vpon poure beddes / and
remembꝛe voure lelues. Selah.
Olfre the facryfpce of rpabtuoumes /
put pour truſt in the Loꝛde. becher,
Therebe many that faye: who weupo bg ee ur
any good: Lorde lt bp vpon bs the irgbt v richte
okth countenaunce, irre
Chou retopteſt mrne herte / though their winde. e
encteace be greate both in come g wyne. ue
Cherloze wyll q lape me downe in peace / smpadiyis ko
and take my rett:fo2 thou Loe only fetter doe deva
me ina ſure dwellynge. j
Kare
chere.


Che v. Palme.


Rabe ye enn e an.


b indement⸗ oF tt
$49.40 (04109. Dauner goaben peace ano fatetpe ken ayore
vnto hem b che benerptt of the Lorde,


**Cothe Chaunterin®* Qeginot

8 Plalme oman 8

ar Chat ts here trandate / Co the Chaunter /is in
bye Lanmaseabstobich wrde aft

Sond, Grae Dain enen,


Ca the of A
St hay


athe karg chal.


tbatbe
wples: ¢ fu to du
—— gah,


Cothe Chaumter by * H /
à Plalme of Dauid. —
* trtie ot the Palme that goth next


Us Hehllotg lranprpech bylnterpe ta tae
288 on option beer ig.


f Dauid


Fare my woes (O Lode)conſydꝛe
: mp cailpnge, 8
O marke che voyce ol my petyepõ /
? pve, me BN! and mp God / koꝛ onto the well J
gere eig matte mp pꝛaper.
Acker Heare my popce aby tymes (O L orde)
deen. tpme £o2 atiꝝ in the moꝛnyng wyll J gett me vn⸗


. zan to the / yee and that with diligence,
q be


Foz thou art not the God that hath plea⸗
Sol in: at lure in wyckednelee / there may no bngodiy
hic) tyme al perſonne dwell with the. 5


ban ,, Doche as be crueil maye not lande in
eh both roche lage thou art an enem e vnto all wye⸗
fie tabernacle REDDOELS. 2


vd yet ee lowe bare am cea,
ozreth the bioude thun tkull.
1 * But as fo2 me / wil come into thyhoule /
euen vpon the multytude of thy mercy: and
in thy keare wll J woꝛchyppe towarde typ
holptemple.
Lede me( O yozd)in thy rightucutnette)
becaule of myne enemres / a make th ware
playne betoze me. 2
Foꝛ there is no kaithlulnelle in their mou·
thes: they dyllemble in their hertes: their
Gerne an opẽ lepulchze:with their tonges
iceaue,
€ Pumel them. O God)that they map pes
rych in their awne pmaginacions:catt chem
out becauſe of the multitude of their vngod⸗
Ipneſſe / koꝛ they rebell agapne the.
Agarne / iet all chem that put their truſt
in the / retoyfe: pee let them euer be geurnge
ok thankes becaule thou dekendeſt the that
. which loue thy name / mape be iorkull
e


For thou Lame geuelk thy bleginge onto
the ryghtuous: a with thy fauozable kynd⸗
nes thou dekendeſt him as with a werde.

¶ Che. vj. Plalme, Cs jay?
CChis M ſalme contapneth a feruent pꝛaper ofone
that ts oppꝛeſſed with grefe / and that great abhoꝛ⸗
rkth Beech earpng (eft the glory of Bod chulde be any
thingedarchened ther wilh / aud that alto glarpeth of
the belth rettozcd agape bnto hym.
„Toth chaunter*by Negpnoth vpon
ay 8 ig See a 1 — of auto.
* is as moche to m.
fathom both. Waben of tyke gt peibenabt a
enctane f, b Loz” rebube me notin thrne an⸗
1 Dee lebte. me not in thy heur
Feb Chat is alure.
1 Hauẽ mercy vpõ me (O Loꝛde) fo: am
bah F mand wege: ON o:dheale me / lo alli bones
are


vered.
Hecht ing My toule allo is in greate trouble / but
den. Some Loꝛde how longe:
dard ge. Curne the (e Lorde)a delpuce myloule:
teed (ig DY lane me fo2thpmercyes fake,
manencead, Foz f in death no man remembꝛeth the:
arth uri: / Db who wel geue the thankes in the hell⸗


Plal. b. vj. x. vij


322


Ct,


Jam weerx of groning:euerpnight wach x. tovignyfié
Im bedde / and water my couche with me, — nerd
teares ft

Bp colintenaunce is chaunged for beryno san peck!
inwarde greke / contume awape / z haue lo 12 wat
many enemypes;

Atoaye Frome all pewickeddoers forthe Auburn 05
Lose hath berde the bopce of myweppnge. inogerh w tran

Che Lozde hath hearde myne humbie pe-quyliptes peas
tycpon/the Loꝛde bath receaued my pꝛaper. tabienesis hath

„Aumene enemies thalbe contoundedand cece anger
Loose bexed pee ther chalbe turned backe aprt connor the
put to ſhame and that ryght toone. keripture hem
‘nto vs what Hod Hall appeare vnto them that chall feale hys mud
gement: but pt it (peake after oure maner / of Hod asthough it ſpa.
Be oF a mam in the Plal. g. c. Lohe after in the Slal. Errwit. 3.

el 25 . are Nach 1587 1 70 ane 8 180 .

Sede oma 4 55 im the heil that düpapꝛea pe
che. vij ptalme.

Che decpreth to be caued from the greate ¢ greuoule

perſecucpon of Saul. Be mencponeth hes awnein⸗

nocentcpe. be prapeth that he mape obtapne the kpnge

dome piomeled hem'to thintét that the people might

be gethered to S the mylchete or the wycked

expelled: l hen lapth he that the wycked Hall periche

wich their awne twerdey ¢ endeth rhe 32 lalme wih

the pꝛaple of Hod. 2

Sigaton of Dauid / which betang fos

the woꝛdes of Cus the lonne of Jennunt.
Aeade the Rozp in the. ij. of the Rynges. vi.
a*Sigaion as Come wyll/lignitpeth an exercple / that
is / apapnetuil and heuy temptacpan of Dauid Other
inter pfete itanignozaunce, becaule be anew not the
kaute that was lapde vnto him. Some Cape that it was
one of the ng rumentes / wherat ali the umes be⸗
fore which it is lett / were lunge. Some thincke that it
is a tertapne kpnde oF melod pe.
Chat is here called Cus /in the plate of the uynges
auoue reger led is called Semet, a
Lopemy God/in the do z truſt: aue
metromaü them that perleute me / x „ erpat e
delpuer me. Cus. At ter the

Lett he hanech op my foule Iphe a Ir / Betruesis oa

— teateit in peces/ tobple there is nonẽ to ie reg d
elpe. 2
O Loꝛde my God / yl J haue done any
foche thing / yk there be any vnrightuoulnes
inmphandes:

At baue rewarded eupll pnto them that
degltkrendie with me /o burte the that with carsp tute. i;
out anꝝ caute are myne enempes: ts vnßerſtande

Chen let myne enempe perlecute my an vtter de⸗
Soule/and take me:pe letbyym treane mrp ipte Saucers. en
downe in the carth/andiapempne honour in ps4 che in the
the duſt. Selah. 40. Bal. .

Stande op(D Lozde) in thy wzath pee B
bpthytelte ouer the furpous indygnacyon
ofmpne enempes:arple bp(For me) inthe vẽ⸗
geaunce that thou halt prompted,

That the congregacpö of the people map
889 855 the / koꝛ their fakes therkoꝛe lite

agapne,
N cc.ij. Che


Of Daud,

J C CheLowisiudse ouerthe people: auẽge
me then O Loꝛde) accoꝛdynge to mp rygh⸗
tuoutnes ¢ innocencye.

Oh let b wyckednẽs of the bngodly come
er Chet is era to an ende: but magntepne 8 lub chou righ⸗
mapas iohea tubus God / that tryeũ the very hertes and
on the though the reynes. ;

e y helpe cõmeth of God / which pꝛeler⸗
kurrs ob man. Ueto them that are true oc gerte.
4. Beg. ri b.
Wꝛouer.
it ready.
De hath prepared hm the weapens of
death / and ozdened pps arowes todeſtrope.
Beholde / he trauapleth wich melchete he
yee n vnhapprnelle / and bꝛought
onth a lye.

90 bath grauẽ anddigged vp a pytte / but

on . elle into the pytte that he
ath made.
gachattenpe 8s foꝛ hys vnhappynes Mall come vpon
cuplt tobich Denys atone head / bps wyckednes thall fall
dothvntoother
Ghatt fall bpon bpon hys awne pate,
han elfe. Eco Ag Lorme/F wyll geuethankes vnto the
kieliacixxvdi d Loꝛde fo2 his tpgbtuoutnes lake / and wyll
praple the name or the Loꝛde the mot brett,


n 0 ere ne

e pꝛaptt r „

Saute venpeyeeanbapbersinnre pis dad ine
thinges towarde manhynde/ which euerp where rrith
b. glorpe che weth his euerlacting power

*Cothe chaunters*bpon Githith/
e a Bralmeoeauty, 0
Foursh Plat. be Dithith after Come ſignykpeth as moche as forthe

topne pees. Uéter ome, concernpag the Getbites,
After other it is an inſtrument of mutphe,

a Lopbde oure gouernour:how wonder:
cr hepa is Oespel ‘world? how
urkred bp bps „ Rexcellẽt is typ gloꝛp aboue 8 heauẽs?
oll. dive, -,, Dutokthe mouth of the very babes and
PUL F. c. ducklynges thou halt oꝛdeyned prapte / be⸗

caule of thpne enempes/that thou myghteſt
deſtroye the enempe a the auenger.
oie, rel ht a ladon ig

che moon e i

thou batt made. wate
5 B. Db what is man / that thour*arefompny-
de bat is full of hum: echerthe fonne ol man that thou
that thou fo vylptelt hym⸗ ;


was a leo
in Thaiſt after
his relurrecciõthe


What xrbij n. Che kouleg ok the ayze/ he tyth of the le /


Plal. viij . ix.


and whatcseuer walcketh thoꝛow the wapes and ott:
of the lee. the coded

© Lozboute gouernoure dow wonper. ud ler
full is thy name in all che woꝛlde: bere bee,
rr eth esata ge terpeobtzpntd

e gett ches fo: a great * 6
e

01 e es.
nber es e. Sen eh ee kehr.
Be prayeth ob to pull vnder the wycked.
Co the chaunter vpon ;; Almuth Laben / 2*Lobe the
gz pg le, 8 Palme of Dauid. 2 sv pant they
e fome thincwe ignitieth acer, Plane
ane oF te eth ame been se
a! eth:

en lh 0; ſome other bull. Some e
pally if a fecret 07 vnderſkande
spon ot
therbp the rpghewelleswbich bp Fapth is the foune of
2
Ther tpil chehrode thinges de ered agapne in
mögeme tor Goothen Wall it apprare that the death
Of this worlde is glory. Ielix readeth the tytie thus:
vnto the victour q ouet᷑ camer of the death of a tole.
which pe mar well buderRande of the death or Folpth
Antychriſt ¢ of the rupne of his byngdome : howbelt
this tytle Quibe feame moze conuenicut foz the next
Pitney After the Pchues tsaditinerpratme
rom thps whereas the Latcnuſtes make this and the
next bothe one. 8
AWyll gee thankes onto the D Lofde l
In my whole herte / J wyll fpeake of

all thymerüelous wozckes,

Iwvllbeglad / and retopte in the / ee my
fonges red. make ot thy name / G thou
moot hyett,

Becaule thou halt dꝛyuẽ mene enemypes
per tied saad dylconkted / and perißed tsSptyesbone
atthy pretence, ;

ozthou bait mapnterned my regt adler ,
= 15 i lytteſt in che thꝛone that art . —

e true ludge.

Chouredubet the erthen / adettropelk serves uy a
cer anden putteſt out theirname ko⸗ buten ne
euer andeuer. beuge me,

Che encmpcs fwerds are come toan ende/ ene
thou batt cuerthzowen their *cyepes/thelt nb.
mentozpall is perpiyed with them, 2

But the Lozde endureth foꝛ euer / he hathd S as tie
pꝛepared his Ceate vnto iudgement. wpſt de requy

De gouctneth the world with reaheuout: teth er
2 pte. erh crue fubgement onto lhnen

‘opie, eth not ina.

Che Lorde is a defence for the pooꝛe / a cal blonde om
Defence in the tyme of trouble, aug bak,

Thertoze thep that know chp name, putff huge
‘heir teu tt th che kor thou ozde)neuce fay: Surg. .
leſt them / that lee the. esd beste

D prayle the Lorde which dwenleth in puri of te
Hun den ie perten pisdoinges. ende
And whr⸗ vibe maketh inquytpcpor £07 burung ace
their bloude and remembꝛeth them: he oz cy whecwitd
Getteth not the er complapnte of the poze, Pa

Baue mercr vpõ meld Loden ed ,


1k Baud,


yeaeind ſcriptrouble that Jam in amõge mynẽ enemers /
gureace vnde r thou 5 litteſt me vp krö the™* gates of death.
t dae C. That A mape Mew all thy praples wih
ebene am in thes * poztes ofthe daughter of St / and
fenarmntetopteintyptaupage veal,
whibfoowes Ag loz the Hepthe / they are funckẽ downe
baat that CO in the pptte that cher made unche fame nette
karg which which they ip ꝛed out prpucly/ is ther awne
notruf ax feete taken.
Tiere ig Chus § N ozw is knowne toerecute true
zu m ihrs tudgement / when the vngodip is tapped in
d ae D the worckes orhis awnehandes. Selah,
eforta- Che wycked muſt be turned vnto hell / ¢
WoFthe world: all the Heithen that forget God.
Kieaeonlpte But the pooze chall not all wave be out
Lud chat of temembzaunce/ the pacpent abpoinge of
bahn they loche as be in trouble wall not peryſb foz
ber dehegi⸗ euer.
weithoagh de. Nip Loꝛd / let no mã haue the vpper hand /

{ 55 . let the Hevthen be condemned bekoꝛe the.
ge hem as, D Lo7de feta fcolemackerouerthe / hat
alhen xt pla the Heithen ma pe knowe them lelues to be
FE md. but men. Sela.

Hi feilegates of death are the ud gemẽ tes of deeth / the councelics
ch hickede the cOgregacyos of Batban the doctrints of kallnes /
d i atiorver lcadeth to death.

<Dicportes o7 gates of the daughter of Sp. are the companies
(yegaodaud Faprhfulvin whpcl are recpteb the truthes ol Sod /
mal gat (eaderh to lyfe, 5 flxx vH A.
O Selah lobe the. ij. Pute. a
She. x. Plalme. N
CA praper agapnit Frowarde / malpcpouſe /s wycken
men which borhe with wyles and vp-tence opprelle
all that are poo zc and belpetelfc-whcrin allo their me
tolerable pride and vngodlpnes / with their ſtudpe and
delpze to hurte other are delcryded.
C Chere is no Cptlein the hehe w.
Hy arte thou gone lo farreot / O
Londe : wyit thou hyde thy leite in
tyme of trouble:
23 iWbylethe vngodly hath ß ouer
hande / the pooze muſt luſtre perfecucpon:

O that ther were taken in the pmagpna-
cron which they go aboute. 2

For Pongodiy maketh book or his atone

hertes delpꝛe the couctous bietteth him leit /
andblafphemeth the Loze.

Che vngodlp is Co pꝛoude and full ofin-

„ not: nether is God
e his eres.

His wapes are allwaye tilthre thy tudg-
mentes are farve out of his light / he detxech
allhis enempes. :

For he laxeth in bys herte: Cul / I wall

— ohen pte downe / ther al nobarme hap⸗
athe ven vnto me.
Sarda. Bigmouth is full ofcurtymg, tame abé-
ken fe: wpce fceate: vnderhys tige is; trauaple aoꝛow.
toms, moma De kptteth furkrng in the gardens that
aint Bemapepzpucty murttur the mnocent / bys
eyes are let vpon the pooze.
C Helpeth waptynge lecretip / as it were a


Plalme. x. x xi.


eee ay,


„He llurketh that he mare rauych the pooꝛe
— 10 in toy Dore save he hath gotten
0 2
Chen lm rteth he / then oppꝛelleth he and
caſteth downe the poze with his auctozite,
wefan e
2 ape if
8 face/ o thathewiineuer ete, e Pees che 55 55
Arple O Lozde God / lytt ppthrnehand / ptuce tignprye
and forget not the pooze. eth okte the kae
weben thuiop wicked blatphemewor penne
s lape inhis herte tum / he caretg not ko it: Gol as 1 the
Chys thou ſerſt / Foz thou conlyoze the Paal. xb. 5
mylerv and loꝛowe. A Bitte
Che pooze geueth him LelfFouer in to typ
hande / and cõmitteh him bntothe / koꝛ thou
art the helper of the krendleſſe. 8
Breake thou the arme off the vngodly and
malpcious ) fearch out § wickeonede which
he hath done / that he maxe periſh.
Che Lozde is kynge fo; euer / the heithen
15 Lah barbed vee Gt si
o7d/thous heave! pꝛous longyng (Lobe thé
of the pooze : ther; berte is luke / that thrne tune nets
kare herkeneth therto. betoe. b
ene iter fatherletie and pooze vnto their


t / that the vngodly be no moꝛe exalted
vpon earth.


e. rj. Palme.
che — che. Prat them that thant him
forth of alt the domynxon of Ilrael / lo that be founde
no place toabpde in. Be prapleth hys confpdence to avLoze the
regeoh ben, 14 iudge ment of God both — frte 0 80 1
the g. eue! burt fal
**Cothe chaunter / ol Dauid. a ‘
AN the Loꝛde put J mp truſt: how wynde Che wngod
pethen tape comp foule:thac che tute yt bine bent.
dle as a brzde pon youre pits: Thatisavoros
07i0,*the vngodiy haue bet their bowe / wed ipeache-up
a made ready their arowes in the guxuer / p which is (pgnie
pei prpuely tute at them / which are been een
rue of bert, nen
Chebery focibacts auc tyeycatt oowne/ Ban pat an
what can theryghtuous then do with allt V ready lud
But the Loꝛde is inbys holptemple / the 110% pa
Lähdes keate is inheauen: e confyoercth it Foye Ot
—
The Losdeleith bothe the vigheuous and ebene.
pngodlp but tooo detpeety in weckednes / in nn Dees
him his foule abhoꝛreth. b londrp places
upõ the vngodly he Hall repne Mares / as pe rede tae
kyꝛe / bꝛymſtone / ſtoꝛme andtempeſt: thys a fro the. rxij
rewarde hall thepbauetodzmcke, oo
Foz the Lozdis rygbtuous and he loueth ge cucps was (0
rpgbtuoulues:bis countenaunce beholdeth great) that at
the thinge that is iuſt. Plegth he was
fapne to fle out of the conttes of Acrael unto the abilities. Akter
Ipte maner do oure Saules daplppertecute p Ehr. fal. xxxuꝝ a
et Lobe in the resp. S lalme. e.
Cc. ij. ¶ Che


j. Ok Daud, Plal.


„cherrh Ptame. Fy nin
Che cöplapneth e ee
where decaped / that wplp ¢ gplefull flatterers rule
Alland prapeth tde Kade to bauc compadpen on the
aoe the aflictwhich they ceueltp vexessallo to belpe thé accor
ttle of the. tty bing to his wode which one lp can not deceaue/and to
fame. delpuer his From the kylthre companye of the wicked.
bsLabe the Ca Cothe Chaunter vpon v Sbeminith/
tptle of the. bi. a Palme of Dautö.
Blaine Elpe l. 0b, tor there is not ane talncte
4 Hau very kewe karthkul are chere
amongeche chylozen of men.
Every ma telleth ives to hs neyqhbour /
cher do but latter with their iyppes and dyl⸗
fembie in theirherte.
O that the Loꝛde wodde rote out all dr⸗
tceattull lyppes / and the tõge that ipeaneth


zoude thinges,
5 Which lape:oure tonge chuſde pꝛeuayle:
we are they ß oughtto ipeake / who is lozde
ouer vs:
*Howfor the troubles fake of the opppel⸗
ſed / and becaule of the complapnte of the
: poore/F well vp Capeth the Loꝛde) J welt
eu chatte) of helpe them / and let them at reſt.
deckt. Che wordes of F Loꝛde are pure woꝛdeg:
n — ag — 5 16 1 istepeD
um. and put de oh trmes —
Putter AU, Repe*the therkoze( D Londa pꝛelerue
Erra the wore vg from this generacyon fo; euer.
bes. And whr⸗ when vanpte a poplnes getteth
the ouerhande amonge the chyidꝛen of men /
all are full ot the vngodix. x
¶ Che. xitij Plalme.
CDauſd being in a ſeopardouſe cates in greaęperell
Doth earneſelp with petifulnes defpre@sodes helpt/ to-
win ath copes bs gl
. mate Coe bea
38 1 ate — agp pe and praple his pr


an Co the chaunter / a Plalme of Dauid.
Dwionge wylt thou forget me/ D
Code: to euer: how ionge wylt thou
itv avcc _O¥e°potvionge tal A (eke came
fonge cell in
bai. nate my faule: hom longe Wall J be lo bered in
dür n nye berte botolonge fhallmyne enempe
tigen rpumpbhe: 2
rache reh Condpdse / aheare me O L oꝛde my God:
e*Ipabtenmpne epeß / o that i deape not in


L ett myne enempe faye: I haue pꝛeuap⸗
t that whie led agapnſt bymtoz pe Pecan c
t tobe 7
ache to cc that krouble me top retopte att.
me vnwwptel? But my trutt is in thy mercy/ z my bere
in the hädes of is io pkull in thy laupnge health.
mpue enempes J wyll ſynge of the ll oꝛde / that dealech fo
Sethemee ther loulengig wich me. ;
fore do tore (Fee i wll praple the name ol the Loꝛd
. 15 ah kale bten mpneepes.
dar e
1 ouer come Of my 7 Re
th it . ae Pleapledyt ees N


b* Chat 18
how longe that
J takedclibera


77 2 9 as
xij.xiij.xiiij. Erb,
¶ Che. rit}. Palme.
Che bewayleth that all places are full of wycked and
open ſenners/ delcrpbeth their moſt corrupt pithy
auu ppolent condycpon: and further / he prophecpety
vengtaunte to them / and laluatpon to the innocent / as Lobe thetit
whom they oppꝛelle and deudure. beer thekcarch
Co the chaunter / ot Bauld. poe.


He kolych bodpes Cave intheir hertes: be che are

Tibbaml ieren no God gone aut of
Thepare copeupte/¢ become abho⸗ fe hit 8

mynable in their doinges / there is not one parca fs the


Doth good. wwaye of,
el e loked doune from heauẽ dpa? dec
the chplozen of men to fe péthere were ang faden i ¢ ace
that wolde vnderttande a eke after God. Sone me,

But they are all gone out of the waye / onsicounceies
they are all together become vnpꝛotxtable: bn urch.
there is none that dorth good / no not one. M

How can ther haue vnderſtandyng / that g
woꝛcke mylchete eatinge vp my people / as
it were bꝛed/ call not vpon the Loꝛde:

Chertoꝛe chall they be broughtin great
feare / loꝛ God ſtandeth by the⸗ generacyon ce cheg end
ol the rightuous. S16 0F the right

As £o2 pou/pe haue made a mocke at f tesercal co,
coũcell of the pooze/becaute he putteth bis fee 2
eben nf aes

othat the fauynge gtuen gad wdr
vnto Ilrael out oł Sion. 28

Db that the Lozd wolde Ddelpuer his peo- tes Lit
ple out of captpupte, N

Chen chulde⸗ Jacob retorle / and Alrael r amoci.sce,
ſhulde be t glãd. that tape bane
cõtemned / bialphemed¢ made herelpe the e
ſed / ard ryghtwes man: becauſt be fœtobe all pꝛoupſion fon him
but that only which he vnkayne dip beleued to haue of God / ta bys
ee Er jacob n free ner gag the tools Cocke nun

e jacol
ah ok. J 0; craelyas in the P lalme. xx. a t


ee cbe ru Etame.


18 plalme defcribeth what: tee 158
Saver eher, — U — Otte chert
of Hod mit baue.


ae
3


Gate


‘tpl apne


2
Of Baud
ech: che. rj. Palme,

‘bei dto be hes defender. de pꝛofelleth
a the taudur of the Capuctes:¢ that


latrers. Be loketh to haue t. 7
All topes Bd ped 0b Sb. *


fa
vnto the
Al mp belgre is vpon the; olaynctes that


un the are in the eartg / and vpon loche ipke,


1.4.5


die in But theg chat runne after another / Mall


eee o baue greate trouble.
e Their azinchofivinges of bloude wellnot


porprtics
oe me 7 offte nether make mene von ol their name


.
itr elpeth


in my mouth.


ur dmyhert reiopce / a my tũge
ie) allo (hail reſt in hope.
jou thalt not leaue my toule
galt thou ture thy la incte to


ewed me the wa pes ok lle:
ale make me full of tore % thy coun⸗
unce.
thy ryght hande there is pleature and
Tpaunbe thy .
at ce iope foz tuccmoze.
ta,


Plal.cbj,cbij,¢.rb¢ij


7 99 . f
Ltiiij.
thine eaves tome: a herkẽ vnto my wo: des. i
Shewe thymaruelous louing bindnete; E
Chou that ſaueſt thé which puttheir truſt in
the krom loche as reliſt thy right hande.
Sieve micas theapple of an ede beende ech dh
mebnderthe*thadowe of thy wenges, ot Hye ungen
From the bngodlys trouble me/tvo myne here cignitie ß
8 ag which compatte my Coule rounde elde une
aboute, Ae
uBbyel matepne thee arne welthpnetie oy, drag ur
wyth oppzeffyon / a theyr mouth {peatieth aavem laketie.
pꝛoude thynges. Itis aboowwed
Chev ive waytinge in our waye on euerp Peace a ie
Syde/turninge theirepes downe to the grond D. Free
Like as a iponpis grey of bys pray Kas neAwhich owe
it were a lyõs whelpe lurchyng in hig dene. ribet featetly
dp LLozde oprapopnte bpm and cacchem beten one
downs :delpuer mp foule wptl the kwerde her wunden ee
from the vngodliy. krpghteth foz
From the men of thy hand (o Loꝛde) frõ toe) decpllech
the men off the wonde“ wbpch bane theps Yer atone inte
5 ine thislitermbote belpes thou kpilelt ak bow
ptrealure. weth atte (pea
Chey haue chpidzen at theysdetyre/ and che in apatih.
a relle ofthepe fubttaunce toꝛ they rind.
abes,
But as toꝛ me /I wil beholde thy pꝛelence
in rightuoulnes:and when thy glory appeas
reth / A Wall be fatptepeo, 5
Che. xvitj. Palme. vun
CF prt he detcriberh the great ¢ teruent conkydece
which he had in pad ben theeuclles anes
aon 2 rhode ra 155 power of God and
keln une h 5 0 the: jt |
towarde all men. And after thelt / the great wpctoipe
Obtapn:d of his molt mygbtpenempt / that he coae
es of bps üpngdome were meruelonüp enlarged /
his power confp:med for euer: at the lat he endetly
the p lalme with praptes/s wa pophety of Chꝛiſt.


ey G*Co the chaunterot wauidterusunt of bob fete


prayer of Dauid.
ht O Lo: cõlidꝛe my cõ⸗
gerken vnto my pꝛaper / that
Nene 125 ot out can dc rd ß
; pce mg featence come ro thy pꝛe⸗
ed gence:g lone pon the thin i


22 that
on thou bal trped me in
foũde no wickednes in me:
rpoſed that my mouth huld


he woꝛdes ok thy lippes / J
co the woꝛkes or men: in the
rtherer.

u mp goinges inthy pathes:
pes lippe not.
heare me O godꝛencline


eof the tourt


the Lozde/ which lade vnto the Londe the P faime.


wopdes of this longe / on the dave in whyych
the Lorde deirueredhym krö the hand of all
his enempes / a fro the bad of Dall / k ard.


Wylllouethelo Lozde)my ſtrength. bebe calterty
TheLozd is my ſuccour / myrekuge / Hod the horue
mr Saurour mp God mi helper in o ehr ha he
ede samutzmpbuchiet/* 6 borne cfm estas
i pꝛoteccvon. enempes /S che
A wylpꝛapte the Loꝛde / call bps him / tapned health.
lo hall 4 be fate fro mpne enempes. at 2 00
„Cbelozewes of death cöpalledme / and d bade
the bzokes of ongodiynes made me akraped. which w thei
Che paxnes of belt came about me / the hornes tefente
{nates of death toke holde vpon me. them —
Yetinmperouble J called ops the Low iber arab NE
Gcomplagnen vnto my God. gerne.
So he hearde my voyce out ok hys holy Bal. xiii. 4.
temple / and mycõpiapnt ecame beloꝛe him / Bethetozos
Ccaiij pet wrd OF bexthy


Plal, xviij.


11 At the bꝛightnes ot his pretences cloudes
aut to beaches ¥erTioUed,/ whayle ones g coales of kpꝛe.
oare: fo chat Che Loꝛde alto thondꝛed out of heauẽ /
by 0 b. the berath gaue bis thoͤdze whayie ſtones
ot te and coales ob kyꝛe. 5
tüte bene, He kent duty arowes and fatten the /
eee  whelprongesor waret@tottetere a

W Codlesat ge;
the wie of the koundacpons ofthe rounde wozlde were di⸗
feeipture stl kcouered atthechrding( O Wozd)at the bla:
seo tae” Gonge andbzeth os thy dilplealures.
aan e He ent downe krö p hepgth to fetch me /
nacbon of das tohe me out ots“ greate waters,
ber ech He delpueredme kro my ſtrong enemyes /
ban Gene pea ä klo mp Foes which were to myghey fo? me.
Cherubim Cher pꝛeuẽted me in the tyme of mytrou⸗
Spchine gane ble / but the Loꝛde was my dekence.
ub tee He brought me fo2th allo into Ipberte:

kt upꝛde
and delpueredme / becaule he baba fauouy
sr i ii . eatin

jes here reve: —
fois decribed = Che Londe Mail rewarde me after my
‘the power mi rightuous dealynge / k accoding to the clen⸗
oh angabe Nee dem handes chall hetecompente me,
gow wire be Foz haue keptethe wapes ok ß L ode:
Seclarceh in te and haüe not behaued mylelte wickedly as
Pstesvofwhichgayntt my God.

Je enten, A haue an eye vnto all bps lawes / ¢ calk


Sao
en he
wolde moare h
epenips moate
erpreltelp decla
ke he power
unte men, cu, f be
ted thader /ig!
temmg gearel
guahes. gc. A8
MEro.riv whe
the latoe was


to Dauſdhys anopnted vee ¢ vnto hys ede


truſt inhfem. Ag Bat,
G03 whois Sid put the K oder Oz/ who wie e
hach anp ſtrenght / but oure Gods Ace ne.
eis Godthat ar dedme with frength / dar rl n
and made my Wave vncozrupte. ‘sport tbedpag
He hath made my fete iphe hertes fete / a ks. Accu. ig.
tet mebpon bre. HE chere
‘He teacheth mpnebandes to krghe / ma- ar we
eth myne armes to bꝛeake euen a bowe offome wee
ſtele. od bidat ong
Chou bat geuen me the defence ol thy ie heben
Health ep rpghehande vrholdeth me gchruclenete n
loupnge copteccyon makeihme greate. umeand nt
Chou halt made wrowme ꝛndugh under med dys poe
me £02 to go / that my fote ſteppes wude not eib


e. eig thundeey
J wpll folowe bpon myne enempes/ and kahteng
komen wyll not turne tyl they be dil⸗ a ‘an
comfozted.
I well fmpte ſyem they malt not be ables ind
to dkande but kall onder my kete. ‘with he hape
Thou haſtgyzdedme with Arength vnto Dauer dure
thebatell/thou had thzows chemal downe n bs we
onder meſthat role bp agaynt me, bach ee
Chou hak made mpne enempes to tour⸗ thesscripinre
he their backes vpõ me / thou halt dettropen me cuoneijuot
them thathateome, i tada|
Chey cried/but there was noneto belpeviontuatne
them: pee euen vnto the Lozde / but he herde tempest whicy
them not. Elan yrophiey


J wril beate them as tmal as the duſt doi
gabe in the winde z wrn cat them out ag gerate


the clape in che tretes,


theatpriderpet
‘Chou Mhaltdelpuerme fromthe krruln- ubs alen:


es ol the people / thou tale mate me the bur than u
Mheave ofthe Pahen. 0 tnvety


dont.


A people who J haue not knowne Mall gr ythe w-
ferue me.


0 dero / are lg
As loone as they heare ol me / they wan dd nende
obey me / but the Kraũge chyidzen pdm 2a ce


ble withme. pene


Delpueted bp
the hand ofged


Gteate prolpersee geueth he nto bys ee Sat


ai te eles
Ange / and ſheweth iougnge kyndneſfe bn Tee


koꝛ euermoze.


the pathes of his rd
Werden Satta ber ener


g be C


0 = te do it / dureth koꝛ c
deadela fi


Ale OF ty
arch Finne


Dauid
ee . G che. rr. Pralme.
ſeribeth the power af Sod / wondertully der


clar:d by the wozckmächtpe of the heauẽs. Pe ſheweth
the excelleutnes of the tatwe of God / delpzeth to be
faucd from ſpune / and wilbeth that whalloeuer he

. ether thyncketh in hert o tpeabcth w mouth / maße

Lobe the be good and acceptable ta
felt of the

ſurth ſolalm.


Sn.

a Cothe chaunter / a Plalme ot Dauid.
Hel verpheauens declare the glozy of
God / ad the very ürmament Heweeh
bis handye woꝛcke.


One dape tellech another / and one nyght h.


certikpeth another.
There is nether peach ner laguage / but
their bopces are herde amonge them.

Cheir ſounde is gone out in to al lan⸗
des / and their woꝛdes in to the endes ol the
woꝛlde.

In them hath he lett a tabernacle koꝛ the
Sünne / whpch comme th koꝛth as a bꝛyde⸗
grome out of his chambze / and reioplech as
à glaunte to runne his courte,
It goeth fozth Ero the one ende of the hea⸗
ueñ / and runneth aboute vnto the fame ende
uch elaine agapne / andthere maxe no manhyde hem
Ahe Lande is elle krom the heate therok.
hn wel b Che late of the Lozde is a pertecte
Geanignge lawe it quickeneth che ſoulſe.
purge mut Che teſtimonpokthe Loꝛde is true / and
lebole / nd For geueth wyldome euen vnto babes,
angie C, Che ſtätutes ofthe Wozde are right /a re⸗
aonb ch the lople the horte che comaundemet ok ß Lozde


-latof mn is purt and geu eth light onto the eyes.


tutfaone)s Che keare vf the Loꝛde is cleane / and en⸗
50 he tudgmentes ok the Loꝛd
bc en are true and rygötuous alltogether.

Moꝛe plealaunt are thep then golde / pee
then moch eyne golde: kweter then hon and
the bony combe.

Chele thy leruaunt kepeth / Foz keping
ol them there is greate rewarde.

D. Who can teil / how oft he offendeth? Dy
Clente thou me tro my fecrete fautes,

Repe thy ſeruaũt alto trã pꝛelumptuous
Cynnes lei they get the dominion ouerme:
co hall J be vndepled and innocent krõ the
Greate offence.

Yce the woꝛdes of my mouth and che mes
ditacton ok my berte chalbe acceptable vnto

the / O Loꝛde / myhelper and mp redemer.


Che. xx. Palme.


CApꝛaper wherin the people delmeth belth to k

— toaditticulte and . Kreer

allo a emcee ef health and victope geuen
rom aboue,


Co the chaunter / a Pralme of Dauid.
e Loꝛde heare the in the tyme ol
oubie the &* name of thet * God

ok Jacob dekende the.
Sende the helpe krõ the Sane


telote


Plal. rir xx. x xxj


tb.
tuarx and ſtrength the out ot ton. God or Jacob
Kemembre all toy oflerenges and acce- ae ons
ptetbpbzenttacrifyce, b. Delah. Sober pw,
Graunte he thy hertes delbze / and kulk pit te aocke / moge
all hy mrnde. „upes olipeyng
| We pu veiopte in chp health / ¢ triäphe of Jacod 02 rte
inthename of toe onde dure God:the Loz sean tye peonts
perkourme all thy peticions, OF the Lozdecag
Now knowe FZ / chat the Loꝛde helpeth his in El. Fluß
Shopntey/and wil Heare bm Eom bes pale 5 ug e
— myghtre is the heipe ot hys ryght Jacob ‘his
a AS pe real „
Some put their truſt in charettes / and neiis. yrv. b.
fomein bortes: but we well remembze the 148 after an
name of the Loꝛde dure God. fatgerbnte tye
Chey are bꝛought downe and falleri/but 75. Patria ⸗
we are rylen and ande vp right. ches or whom
Dare Aaide“ edbelve vs / O urnge / ab ehe abel
when we call pon the. people b 0
(che. xxi. plalme. > i Lott the
im. ij. a.
CA thanckelgeupnge which the people vled For the e
victotp and other dener ptes that Wauld aboundanl⸗
Ip reccaued.
i)
* Kothe chaunter / a Palme of Daud, Silbe
Ode how iorkullisthe bynge in top Gr? Fein
Langhe hen erceadpnge glad is he
of thy lauynge health?
Thou halt geuẽ him his hertes delpze / g
hall not put him fd p requeſt of his lippes. boone fi
Helab. . Pin by
Foꝛ thou hat pꝛeuẽted him with lyberall e lelpngt /
r bleürnges / and let a crowne of golde vpon fo: honoures /
big heade. alu Gene ri.
Heathen pte of the/and tpougauel him J he bine
alonge ſpte / euen foz euer and euer. the. 5e.
His honoure is greate in thy lauynge i
ealth/glozp and great woz thipe walt thou
Tape vpon him. 8
Foꝛthou Malt geue hum euerlatynge te⸗
Ipcite / and make him glad with the tope ol
thycountenaunce.
And why? becaule the kynge putteth his
truſt in the Loꝛde / andin the mercy old molt de hisisate
hieſt he halt not mylcarv. wa viuale thig
Let all thine enemyes fele thy hãd:let thy in the docrips
right hande kyndeout all them that hate the. tres to take
Thon fait makedhem tyke aFyze auen ap Hoehe
in tyme of thy wꝛath: the Loꝛde Hatt de⸗ vengeaunce
ſtrope them in his dylplealure / and the kyꝛe whych he ta⸗
Shall conlume them. hethonfinners
Their frute ſhalt thou rote oute of the N
earth / and their ſede from amonge the chyl⸗ wand tun.
dꝛen ol men.
F02 they intended mylchele agaynſt the / a
vmagyned ſoche deurces / as they were not
able to perfourme. 5
Chertoꝛe ſhalt thou put thẽ to flight / and
Cc. v. with


€


j. Ot Dauid


wych the ſtrynges thou chalt make ready
thyne arowes agapntt the faces or them.


Be thou exalted / Lode/ inthyne amne


ſtrength / lo wyll me lynge and pꝛayle thy


power. 3 1
¶ Che. xxij. Palme. >< -
Cwanid declareth very eupdentip in thys W kalme
that he was afpgure of Linit. 2 irſt he declareth
Chniſtes deiec tion z (math capmacps-s thentheere
alt acꝑon and dylatacpon of his kyng dome / euẽ to the
coaftes of the cacth ano ende or the woꝛlde / z all vn ⸗
der the Fpgure and chadow of him ſelke.
Ca Cothe Chaunter vpon * © Aicleth col
er Lore thethe dawnyng / a Plalme of Dauid.
Wrtle of the bag ieteth Ciguificth a derten ing rument of mutts
Sousth kal. mas tome wplva certe Byud OF melodpeDpuers Aue
thourez do druerllp expounde it.
cs Okt the dawning /this 45 lalme was made of oure
Sau pour Chi / vecaule it was not conuenpent to


bier be dim with oute a mpſticall warde he caller hehe


him the dawning / oz (as Come wil) the moznig ſtarre.
4 Y God/myp God: why halt thou kozla⸗
lake meꝛ the woꝛdes ol my cõplavnte
are favre ktomp health.
de Whattsty- D my God. J crpe in the dape tyrae / but
gnifpeaby cry. thou heareſt not: and in the night teaton allo
ing in the (cere take no reſt. ;
kene te che Yet DtvelieCE thou in the fanctuary / O thou
Plaieva WOeyppe of Ilrael.
Dute fathers hoped in the / they truſted
in the / and thou dyddeſt del puer them.
Che called vpon the / a were helped:they
put their truſt in the / a were nat contoũdeo.
But as foz me / am a woꝛme g no mã:
a very ſcoꝛne of me d h out caſt of h peopie.
Al they p fe me / laugh me to lcoꝛni: they
hute out thetr lippes/ ¢ hake their heades.
He truſted in God / let himpdelpucr hym:
let him helpe him yk he wyll haue him
But chou art he g tone me out of my mo
bang 19 8 5 : thou uche 5 en
anged vet bpon my mothers bꝛeſtes.
wmmeckbrint, 2 haue bene lett onto the euct lence
arcynderfand waß bozne thou art my God / euẽ kro my mo
the hendes / rue thers wombe.
inigpeper © _ D go not kromethen lo trouble is hatde
power wich at hande / and here is none tobelpe me.
are kattnede W e regte bulles are come about me / katt
the rpebes of axen clole me in on euery lyde.
Ader . Cher gape bponme wcheirmouthet /
¥ ¥ Mogape cya g it were a ramppnge and toarpnge lyon.
e their mou ⸗ att poured out Ipke water / al mp bond
ies wide evare out oftopnt:mpbertin the midde t of me
Sul b. 3% bade gs euen lyne meltynge ware,
1 125 1 — 5 dꝛped vp —
* mytage cleueth tomygoomes / a thou
dre beer bzought me in tothe Dut or deach.
the trrannre Foz dogglare come about me / p coũcell
er of the 2e, ol the wycked hath layed feage agaynſt me.
wes tomarde Shep pearled mp handes andmp fete 3
chrit Like dogmight haue tolde all my bones: as fo2 theni /


*


ges ark ther attheg ſtode ſtarynge andlokynge vpon me.


Plal rrij . rij


Chev haue partedmegermentes amäge men, ahn
them / and caf tottesbponmpbstture, * Lewuchip end

But be not thou fatre fro me / D Lode: banoutly fer.
thouartmpluccoure/bate the tobeipe me. feu u

Belpucr mp louie trom the twccarte my . toate
deariyng fr the power of the dog ge. E fal

SHaue me from the ons mouth / aheare be Sythe b.
me Fro amonge dhozmes ok then vntco mes. arge Me

„So wyllz declare thy name vnto mp bze-tenen wee

thzẽ / in them̃yddeũ ok the cõgregacion wyllor the Jes
J praple the. which s


D pravie the Lode pe 5 frate him: 5er eng me |


gnify him all pe (ene ot acob / and lett all de at,


fede ok Itrael keare him. gia
Foꝛ he hath not delpiled ner abhoꝛred the


congregacis


Gacpon/and pirtourme mp vowes in light haue mitt
ot allthemthat keare the, - tue
Che poze chall cate a be ſatickped: the p weit che
that ſeke after the Loe Mall paple hym: wes as oe
oure herte Malt ipue fo2 euer. Gentes "hg
An the endes of the worde wan remẽbze net wan
them lelues / and be turned vnto the L ond: iber teleue h
and all the een ok the eithen thal ceccane thepo
woꝛſbippe bekoꝛe him. bus ingen
$07 bkrngdom isthe Lojdes/ ahe wan g dir un,
be the gouuernoure of the Peithen. tp 208 it.
All loch as be ** fat vpon earth / halleate in cxce in aul
allo and woꝛchippe ! Autheythat ive in p ug aden
dult and rue lo hardi/ han tal downe be⸗ u Ball cone


koꝛehym. b wholecier
Che fede hall lerue hem / and preach of the
Loꝛde foꝛ euer.

Cher Hall come / and declare bys rrah-
tuoulnes: onto a people that Wall be bonne / 5c deer oer
whom the Loꝛde hath made. of ss Er
Abe. xrih Plaime, Aae
eke — eee, great gra- eig fa
cc of ataxthtuli and (ure cont pdence in God. A cautiot pi

4 Praime of Dauld. Tage their tt.
He Lois my chepherde / J can want a
Helen nel dure, ade
e fede na grene paſture / ade rater un
ledeth metoa frech „ water. e
He qulckeneth my loule / a bepngeth me regt cao of
koꝛth in the wave ot ryghtuoulnes koꝛ hys woicd is lend
names fake, fare. iva

Though J thuide walkenotw in ö valley
of §*thadoww of death pee 2 keare no fuel! be Sn
koꝛ thou art wyth me: thp ſtatte a thy ſhe pe⸗ e on
hole comfozte me. 2 sg opd Elle

Chou preparett ax table before me a⸗ c= Love the


gapnſt mene enempes thou anopntett my P&H FI


bead with oyle / and fylleſt my cuppe full.
Oh lett thy louynge kyndnes and mercy

kolowe me all the dapes or my lpfe / that Z|

maxe Dwell in houlẽ ofthe Loꝛde 1 =


J well pꝛapſe the inthe ‘*qveate congre⸗ Gerhart 4


jot


oy fe -

Daud,
idem Che. rriliſ. Plalme.
S. hen the Lorde had chewed onto Dauid that the
thzelchyng four of D:nan p Jebulpte / which was in
thehpie Pons was the place where he wolde haue a
temple buplded fo: bpm? Dauid monpl hed with the
fpagalar goodnes of Sod towarde che Icraelites
amungeſt who he bad cholen hym a dwellpng place
delcepbett to wyö the place of 523 doth veretp bee
longe / and which is the very nacton of Sod / amone
gelt whom ge vouchlaueth to dwell. Chen he erhore
feth them to the bupldpnge of the temple.

C Pralme of Bauid. *
DB Aw VE carth is the Loꝛdes / a all 6 therin
s: the compale ol the woꝛld / z ali that
dwen therin.


dal. xxiiij xx v.ærxvi.


Lehi,
thpnhe bpd me. e Lozve/ oz chy goodnette.
Dbhowfrendip etpabtuons hue 1200
therkoze will he teach lynners in the ware
Be ledeth che lymiple a right / a Coch ag be
er mebe the ie meth he his waves.
All the wapes ol the Lone are very mer⸗ C
cy and fapthtulnetic; vnto foch as ke pe hys baloneafter
eteltament and conuenaunt, fate faim,
For thynames tatie/D Lorne /be mercy: "22s Erda,
full ontomy tyne to: it is greate. ment isproper⸗
Whatlocuer he be that feareth p Loꝛde / ar dem ih
Be Gall Seine ben che wake tha be baker e
Bis ſoule Hall dwell at eate / al ‘anges oF
ohen 1 / and his Cede aise a
je Cecrete of the Lozde is amonge them zur, 14
denen „ ane wenehchem bis 1
ienaunt. ve
vnc eres are euer lonynge vnto helfer derte:
ene / for be wan plucke mr fete oute or n ae cb
ume the vnto me andhaue mercy bpon derung Hel
me / to J am delolate andi Abr .
Che loꝛowes of my berte / are greate / O
bꝛynge me out of my troubles,
Lone bponmpne aduerkpte à mptery / a


and foꝛgeue me all mylpnnes.


dle Open poure gates (O ve pꝛynces)lett the
be Ghat a/ elerlaſtynge dozes be opened / that $ Keng
fener of OF Glory mã pe come in.
Bor. Whois this hyng of glory? Fis the Loꝛd
of hooſtes he ig ß kyng of giozy.* Selah,
OChe.rrb.Pfalme.
A praper of Dauid oppꝛeſſed both twit
Sch ted + Be Wb a ee
From his Cpnnes to thewe him bis wapcs and to ryod
him krom the kur pe of his enempes. In the ende he
prapeth kor all the people.
2 EDF aud.
to the. O Loꝛde) I lytt vp my toule.
My Gor I truſt in the: Oh iett me
not be cõtunded / leſt myne enempes
eng triumphe ouer me.
ee e, 02a they chathope inthe wan not be
lep picae albanied: but loch as be fcoznefull delpy⸗
ty @od: that lers without a caule / they hall be put to ck.
3 kucpon.
esu, Sabewemethr wapes / O Lom / stach
pole me thy pathes. :
Tttamets the Lede me in thy trueth and lerne me / koꝛ
be of pre thou art the God of myhealth / and in the is
nz Fot my hope all the Dave Longe. :

% Calltoremembꝛaftce/ O Loe / woten⸗
der mercyes and thy louynge kyndneles /
which haue bene euer of olde.

Oh remẽbꝛe not the ĩynnes a oltenceg ol
my pouth / but accoꝛdynge vnto thx mercy


Contxdꝛe howmyne enempes are many /
amd beare a malſcioug hate agapnſt me.
O hepemp foule and delpuer meet me not
be cõtounded / ko: J haue put mp truſt in the.
Let innocency and ryghtuous dealynge
eee gael Geo cen
ael / out ot al
trouble, *
Che. xxbi. plalme.
de defcribeth to the ware; the good / what
endeueraunce he gaue to mnocencpe ¢ dow warely
be elchued the company ot che euell then prapeth be
te 5 dee unde that abpdeth ö wichedifpthe
to fee oute the sory of, a. b
Of Daud, 2
Biever mytudge / O fon / fo: walne 4 y the
innocentip: mp trug isin the Loꝛde / perk ¢ ecpnes
therfore Wall J not fall. rind int,
ramen me/D Lozd/and proue me: tre fond dae
out mp**repnes and my hert. cpons of the
Foz thy loupngtynonede is before myne leude / whycy
eres and J walke in chytrueth. tee bym ¢9 S00
#* fpénot amongebapne perfonnes / a5
haue no kellichipe with the dilceattull. cal. bi. b.
hate the congregacyon ofthe wycked / di Colyt a/
and J will not lt amonge the vngodiv. monge dayne
Aware me bandes with innocency /D Peecoues ure
Lone / and logo Ito thyne aulter. thevebeteunng
Chat I mãpe chewe p vopce of thy pꝛay⸗ x to bea cöpa⸗
feandtell ot allchr wonderous woꝛckeg. nok their vn
Lopde/9 lout F habitacion of thy haute / re bene


@the place where thy honduredwelleth. rebate
Oberon


Dauid.


2
j. Ol
C O deckrope not my loule with dlynners /
e. O this une ner my lyte with the bloudthurſtpe.
PPiallervy.a In whole handes is wyckednele / and
chlir ryght bande is full of gyftes.
But as £o2 me J wyll walcke innocent
d Tote in the y: O delpuer me / ãnd be mercikull vnto me.
Kar er ea, Bev fote karderh right: Awell parte
kerrpa dige c thel O Lozbe)in the congvegactons,
uU
Dae A C This plalme made Dautd vpon Come g. and
Bal. Fxrvi. b. Jeopardous perill-againk which he hertened him leit
Hlett not the not alptell with callpng to remebraunce the promes:
tote of pipde ok Sober therby perkusded him kelke chat de Hulde
ouertant me. haue thebictozpe /s after lyue peacelably inthe trade
Of godip ipupng.
Ot Nauid.
He Loꝛde is my lyght and my health:
a whom then thulde Jécave? the Love
Is the ſttength of mpipte / koꝛ whome
then ſbulde J be akraped⸗
Therfoze when the wycked / euen myne
enempes and my koes / came bpd me / to eate
bp ded 115 1 0 — 3
ugh an boot or men
pei (Se game pet hall mtmp ert be aftapen:
ken tabs a roch) ¢ though there role bp warre agaynſt me /
fo: Grength ¢ pet wyil J put my truſt in him.
Laule neun, Onethrnge haue à delpzed or § Lowe /


£2 af ine tobich J well requyzenamely / that Jmay


eic founda, dweil in che houke ab the Lo de al che daxes th.


cid of church. ol my lple / to beholde the faze beutie of the
Plal. T4. Loꝛde / and to vylet his temple,
be Chat is Foz in the tyme of trouble be hath hrd


vanqutdched

me in his tabernacle / pee in $ tecrete place
Ae Co de orhts dwwelleng bath be keyte and let me bp
bis face fro hi / vpon a rocke of tone.


is nac ta care And now hathhe vlpft vp my headaboue
bie hem, on mpne erempes P cOpatted me rotibe about,
and dot core wa re in his dwellynge /
to heare bym: the oblacyon of thäkelgeuyng: J wyll linge
Sudond cone and lpeake praples vnto the L öde.


nkto te he „ Herken bntompbopce/D Lorde / when


face fed hiteſto A ce vnto the: haue mercye vpon me and d.


betreuen ap pherttpeakety onto 8 mp face tet)
spend rd * my face ſeke
Sauanig n the, bee Conde thp face wrlü 9 kene.
Beare hun. O ™* hyde not thou thy face fro me / caſt
Vl. xxriß. u not thy Ceruaunt of in dilplealure.
ar Chou art my cuccoure / leaue me not / ne⸗
ound en tye ther foptake me, D Goomp faupoure,
lam eld. 0, Aon my kather andmy mother haue foꝛ⸗
W fake me but the Lozde hath taken me vp.
ke url Shewe wach bree OLoꝛde /a lede me
Todes lealure in the right path / becaule of myne enempes
wp Gd 2“  geipuermenct into the wples ofmpne
tpme when be äduerlärres“ fozthere are kalle wytneles
Guide healpe rylen vp agaynſt me / and they pmagyn my
e „Heuergege A beleue verelp to fe the
weilte Fiül Goobnetic oF § Lozbin 555 kde of Siping.
srFDp.Fac, | Davy thou PL o7ds lephuve/be ũrügẽ /


OCThe.rroii Blalme. e s.


yrbij xxviij. c rxir


1115 arge Ache comfozte / a warte
ous e Lozde.
8 ¶ Che. xrbiij. Plalme.
e prapeth the Lord nat to forſabe hun in his grrat
necelkptie he delpreth that he beyng innockt / be not ae
uenged with the wycked: and wilcheth that euen they
allo mape not haue Cache tndgement as thep haue dre
ferned-hen geueth he thañckes to God fo; the vice
torre and prapeth ker the people,
et Baud.
Ato the well g vcrxe / Omy ſkronge
Qfoctencesoynchenotcome otme iets
pEthou makes as though thou herdeſt as tow u
not / Abe come lyke them / that go downe in Ero. rund
to the dr pptte. bj snd
Heare tye vorce ot mp humble peticyon ange
when J crxe vnto the / z holde bp mghandes in che carry,
towarde chyholptemple. 2 1
O plucke me not awape amonge the vn⸗ V
Godiy ¢ wicked doers which fpeake frendip
tothenepahboure/but pmagyn mylchele
in their hertes.
aR ewarde them acco enge tothetrdedes
and wyc kednedle of their atone inuencions,
Recompenſe them alter the woꝛckes of
their bandes/pave the pthep haue delerued.
Foꝛ ther regarde not the wozckes of the
Londe / ner the cperacpon ot bis hades: ther⸗
foze thali he bꝛeahe the downe / a not buylde


embp,
eee ee
ce o um .
abe ‘Lone omy tengo anbmy side:
my bert hoped in him and z am beiped:ther-
3 1 ope / and A welt
nge pꝛaptes vntohim. .
Che Loꝛdis Lanta ol his people/ he
is ß detender ¢ Dauioüre okhis anopnted.
D beipe thy people geue thy blemna vn⸗
tothpne enberitaunce: kede them / z leit the
vp koz euer. .


Lore r tain, —
Soner albert — ok his goodnes
towarde the people of Icrgel.

La palme of Dauid.
Scribe vnto the L ode / O ye mightie /
8 the Loꝛde woꝛdhippe and
rength.

Geue the Loz the honoure ot his name
bowe poure felucs to the holy mageſty of
the Loꝛde.

Je ts the Lopde that comaundeth p wa⸗
ters: It isthe glozious God that maketh ?
thonder-it is the Loꝛde that ruleth the lee.

Che bopce ol p L ode is mightre in ope⸗
b voyce ofthe Loꝛd is a gloꝛious

orte.
5 rden, ö he ‘Ces

e trees:pee the Loꝛde bꝛeaketh the Ceners
or Libanus.


Demabeth


iSt aud. Plal rr. Errfi


He maketh them tolaybpelpae a calte:
Libanus ¢ Sirion tyke a ponge vnycozne.
Che vopce okthe Lozde deurdeth the fla-
C mes ok kpꝛerthe vopceokthe Loder haketh
Label be wyldemeſke pee the Loꝛde waketh the
kalk r ervi, wylderneſte of Canes. 9
keiten or Che vopce ok the Lowe moueth the hyn⸗
qeuplernespes and difcoucreth p thicke bulches: in his
ebe. kemple thall cucry man ſpeate of bys ho⸗
noure.
Che Loꝛde ſtilletg the water floude / a the
Londe remapneth a kynge kor euer.
Che Loꝛde chall geue power vnto hys
eople / the Loꝛde Mali geue his people the
Negpnge of peace.


moray L che. xxx. Palme.

Ce geueth thã ches for the obtayning of his health.
Be greatly pꝛapſeth the gosdnes of Hod) whych len ⸗
Beth not aduer lytie nto his people but fo: the beſt z
pꝛoteſteth / that he delpꝛeth not the lengtheumg of his
ipte Fo; anp other caule / then to reſtoate and fet forth)
the thiniges thar make for the glorit of Sod ¢ protect
ot the lapnctes.


CA Palme and longe of the dedrcacron ol

l a rye houter*, of Daud.

4 yl magmipe che / O wozde/Eoz
{ thou batt let me vp / g not lullred
l, Lobe Ero. up Foes totriumphe ouer me.
W. i O Lom God/F* crped vn⸗
to bere is it to
ant
‘taken for


in the moꝛnynge.
g £07 me / when J was in pꝛolperite / J
lapde: Tuch / J Malineuer fall moze,
And why? thou Loꝛde of thy goodnelle
hadeſt made my hyll lo ſtronge


But as fone ag thou turnedett thr face titude:


C kro me J was brought in keare.
Chen cryed onto the / O Lope / vee vn⸗
tothe Loꝛde made z my pꝛaper


que ayer,
What pꝛolpt is chere in me bloude / LEY thou art


go downe to coꝛrupcpon:
Baye
Oz challit declare thy fapthfulnedte:
D., Deare/D Lopde end haue mercy vpon
or me Loꝛde be thou myhelper.
ch ie And lo thou halt turned myheuynege in
ape p £0 tope:thou haſt pit ot my d tack cloth / a


the duſt geue thanckes vnto the? the


a 22
Levit,
F + 2 cloth in time ot
Che ſhewelh wher wich he dcrengthened hys Hope? nee pete
Wpat he delpicd ks what he complapned ok/ in what kädnes as pe le
cate he was and how he was mynded / when he ¢ his in Ether e u
werd be ſett rounde aboute in the wildernes BEapoe many other
ab ¢ fought a mean: to efespe . he pꝛapleth the places.
great goõdnes oF Sod / to ward all focheas feare him:

And mouety men to the feare and loue of God / which
cannot foꝛlaxe them that leane vnto him. : salty
as Loe the


* Cothe chaunter / a Palme ol Bauid. Cptle of che
the / O Loꝛde / is my truſt: let me ne⸗ Fourth Pal.
ueebeput to cökulpon butdeipuerme 1. ne n,
inchre' rightuoulneüe. Welden

Bowe downe thine eare tome / makehacte inte pile
to delpuer me be thou my ſtronge rocke and is bys good»
a houle ok defence / 6 chou mayeſt laue me. nes mercpe r

For thouart mp trig hoe e mycakel ch frpucerubere
be choümpgide /e lede me for thpnant false. eth os Kom

Dꝛawe me out ofthe nett that they haue thebondage sf
lated priuely to me, fo thou art mp ttvegeh, Satban and ty,

Intothy 15 comsde mip Spzetexthoui batt 2 beraltyace

Delpucred me O Tode thou Godot kreuth. vyngdom pit

Abate them that holde of vanities /a my xxrhd. ri b. ce.
truſt is in the Loꝛde.

Iwill be glad and reioyte in thy mercy;
kor chou haft colpdꝛedmptrouble / thou halt
unowne my ſoule in aduerlite.

Chou hak not delyuered me ouer in to ß
handes ol the enemye / but halt let my fete in
8 P

aue mercp bpon me / O Lord / ko: J am «

in trouble myne eye is cõlumed fo. berp hee 0

upnetle/pee my toule and my body.

My ipte is waren olde with heuynelle /
my peares wich mournynge.

My ſtrẽgth karlech me becaule of myne
adueripte and my bones are conupte.

Jam become a very repzofe amonge an
mene enempes / my neygbbours and they
or mpne atone acquauntaunce are akraped
ol me:they that te mie in the trete / conuepe
them lelues krome.

Jam cleane foꝛgottẽ ¢ out ot mynde / as a
decd man: J am be come Ike a broke veal,

Fo J haue herde p blacphemp ok ß mul: zy


:zeuerꝝ man abhozrech me: thephaue
gathered a councell together agaynſt nie / a
are purpoled totaße awapemplpte.
agen 00 is in the Loꝛde / and J tape:
art my God.
Pytyme ts in chr bande-delpuer mets
bande ot myne enempes / and kramthem
that perlecute me. 5
Shewe thy teruaũt the lraht ot thy coũ⸗
tenaunce / helpe me koꝛthy miercpes lane.
Let me not be cõtounded / O iL07d/f02F E
call bpon the: let the vngodip rather be put
to conkuſpon / and bꝛouqht vnto the hell.
Let the lpenge Iyppes be put to (plence/
whych cruelly / dildanekullp / ade lpytelullp /
Speake agapntt the rrahtudus. bow


jor Bau


oftonges,
Chankes be to the Lozde/for be bath che⸗
wed me maruelous greate Byndnede in a
ftronge cytie.
Fo when the loddane keare cam bpd me /
Itaxde: J am caſt oute ot chylyght.
G., Heueltheles chou herdelt mene humble
atone Exo pꝛaper / when J *cryea onto the,
rigdgineg. O loue the Lozoe(al ve his laynctes) fog
vi. b. che l onde pꝛelerueth the kapthtul / and pien⸗
teoullp rewardeth he the pꝛoude doer,
Be ſtioge therkoꝛe and take a good herte
1 eon /all ve that put voure truſt in the
ode.


Che. xxxij. tame. ¢-
Che cheweth that all aduer lpties come of ſynne / ¢
that he therfore is on boch rn bath his lunes forge
eee.
ear neſt acknowledgynge ol oure ollences/ z keru ent
Prayer.
ae" tell n inſtructyon ot Dauid.
Lelled are thep / whole vnryghtuour⸗
2 Brewis fogs and whole fnnes ae

couered.
Roma. ß. HBleſſedis the man / vnto who the Loꝛde
1 émeputet no fae /tm bot fpete chere is

nogple.

Foz while? helde my tonge / my bones cõ⸗
nb thoꝛow my daplpe complapx⸗
nynges.

And becaule thyhande was lo heuy por
me both dave and nygbt / m mopſture was
Ike the dzouth in Sommer. ** Selah.

Cherkoꝛe J conkeledmylpnne onto the /
iirdr Bal l and bpd not mpne burpghtuoutnede,
* Alapde:3 wyn knowledge myne offence,
g accule my leit onto the Lozde/ and lo thou
gut me the wyckednelle of my fpnne
elah.
Fos thes wall euerp fapnete make bys


9 {ok
jogteth and moueth men diligetiy to prapte iri
Sa le oe dull er es a
go be
Ciople in thewLozde/D ve ryshtuous/ 2
— W well the iui to be
ankkull.

Hape the L onde with bavpe:tynge pral⸗
mes vnto him with the lute and inſtrument
ol ten ürynges.

Dinge him a new fonge/vee tynge lullelp
vnto him / and with a good cozage.
Foꝛthe wozde OF the Lorde is true / a all
his woꝛckes are fapthkull.
elouech mercpand iudgmét / the earth v
is full of the goodnede of the Lozde.


0
15.0


Bythe woꝛde ofthe Loꝛde were the he


uens made / and all the Hooſtes ofthem
bret ofbis mou. N ee


eretage,
krom heauen /


vnto the in due lealon / therkoze Malt myght ol h.


Pua

cue thelenot Pveate'*toater floudes come npe him.
‘waters! pear Chou art my defence inthe trouble that
Bee e eee ei

ibe, Gen. vi About allo rut x .
aun we ee toll entoome the g thetne the the wage
ans wpll fae wherin thou chalt go:“ J weil fatenmpne

ne

e b. enen
the by nip pro ⸗ which haue no vnderſtandynge.
auielvsbetbe, UBbote mouthes thou mul howe withbet


Be not ve now ipke hoztes and mules /


oure herte reioyle in hm / be⸗
So wall dure herte reior athe


the pal.


b Band.


i BT
a the Lone petehety bys
reiß e Jungell of the et

i fond ber tenterounbeaboute ypméyat care ppt g


~ saute we hauehoped in his holpname.

Let typ mercptuli kyndneſte / O Loꝛde/

be bpon ds / like as we put oure truſt in the.
che. xxxiiij. Palme.

— e! . for
dis chofenin tyme ot neade: and moueth all men ta
eudruer chem kelues to innacencpe and godlpnes-
becaule foch as are indued therwith / are rpade foth
ot all parels ⁊ aboundãtiꝑ rewarded with al goodnes.


1 SFLD+ a Ot Bauid / when he fapned hymielt to be
madde befoze Abimelech: whych dzoue hem
awape / and he departed.

EE Wyll alwape geuethanckes vnto the
— hes pzapte Wall euer be in mp


p Coule chan make her boat in i030;

e chumble chauheare therot /a be glad.

O pꝛarte the Loꝛde wyth me / and let vs
jartetecmps magnylpe his name together.
wwith tbem I lought the Loꝛde / and he hearde me / yee
bande uch he delruered me out oF all mp feare.
dealers Cher that haue an epe puto hym / walbe
ml wonlde lightenẽd / a their Faces wal not be achamed.
aut B Chis poore man cryed vnto the Loꝛde / ¢
he hearde hym / pee and delpuered hem out ol


iui cuciles/ delxuereththem.
— Otalle andle how frendly the Lode is /
oamcyage of blelledis the man that truſtech inhym.
am belues do O keare the Lord / pe that be his Capntes;
2 amt ko they that feare hym / lache nothinge.
inmate. Ehe kerpche Gall wan and lure hun.
arte inche ger / but they which lekethe Lozd / chall wat
Far. . nomaner ot chenge / that is good.

¢ herber“ O pe cyplozen/ herne onto

/F wpliteach pou the keare of che Lope,

Iateibecens,,.OHOfo Iplteth tolpuc/and wolde fapne
tiyrmenera lee good dapes.


Butthe . face o€ the Loꝛde beho c
D chat do euell / to deſtrope 1


b ese ent out of che earth.


apeatsble i hentherzghtuous crpe / the Lomhea⸗

—8— fabs

Seen, Che Lonetsnve pntothem that are co

Hare eee e an
gil r, Seat ark: troubles of p rpabtuo

.. ont ee,

He hepeth all theivbones /lo chat not one

okthem is bꝛogen. 5 5

But myltoꝛtune Gall lape the vngodi /


Pla cevtiy erred, Ltviij.


they that hate the ryabtuous chalbe gvicpe,
Che Lose delpuereth the toutes of We
leruauntes / and all they that put their trult
hm / chall not offende,
che. xxxv. Plaime.
e dekpzech the Tozd to fight for hum agapnſt Saul
his adherẽ tes / to deliuer hmm ko th of their hares.
5 Ol Dauid. 4
% Crvuethou wyth them / D Loꝛde / p
Sim wyth me /frabtthou agayntt
the mthat krghtagarnſt me. .
Lave hande vpon the chelde ¢ lpeare / and ar What the
**fandebptobelpeme, Gamdpag rp o%.
Bꝛawe out thp Cwearde / and ſtoppe the Goal kr
waye agapnt them that perlecute me / lape pe chall kyude
vnto mp ſoule:q amthyheipe. 8 alter in f pla
Let chem be contounded a put to ſhame / me. vil a.
that leke alter my ſoule: let chem be turned
back and bꝛought to contulpõ / that ymagyn
mylchele koꝛ me,
Let them be as the duſt bekoꝛethe winde /
Andtheaungell of the Loꝛde tcateryng the.
Lettheir wape be darcke and per / a
the aungell ofthe Lozde to perfecute them.
For tber haue pꝛxuelp laped their nett to
deftrope me without a caule / ye and made a
Pptte koꝛ my loule / which neuer deterued.
Let à Coven deſtruccpen come vponhim
vnawarres /a the net that he hath la ped pʒr⸗
uelp catch hym eilte / chat he mape fall in to
hrs awnemylchete. .
But let my toute be iotul l in the oꝛde /
and retople in hys helpe,
All my bones thali faye: Loꝛde / wha ig
Ike onto ther which delpuerett the poze kr
thole g are to ſtronge koꝛhym / pee che pooꝛe
and the nedy krom bys robbers,
Falle wptnelles are rptenvp/ and laye to
my charge thitiges that Jknowe not.
Cheprewarde me eüͤell for good / to the
Greate dylcomkoꝛth of myloule. c
Heuertheleſſe when thep were feck a beep ches
put on a ack cloth:3 baibtea mp foule woch fat inthe torte
*fattpng/anomp paper turned into mpnedrrneans au
awne bolome. maner of cha⸗
Abehauedmpfelke as though it had bene tenpng of the
my krende oꝛ my bꝛother/ J wente heuelp / boden mant
as one that mourneth fo2 his mother. del dun. ie
But in myne aduerlite hey retopte / a Ga 41 eg. frig
therthem together: Pee the very lame come obi. xu t.


together agapnſt nie vnawarres / mak ynge zudieh. ß. e.


mowes at mne / and cealle n.

Wich the gredy and Ccozniefull vpocrites

theygnaſchedvpon me with their teeth.
Loꝛde / whan wilt thou loke vpon thys?
H teltoze my foule frown the wycked ras
moure of them/mpbdearlyng from the ipsa?
. Howyll J geue the chances inpareate
cõgregacid / prayle p amõge moch peopte:
O let (HE nos triũphe ouer me/ dare myne
inempeg


waste,

Daud,

enemypes koꝛ naught: D letthẽ not wyncke

1 ett eves /thathate me wethout a caule.

And why? their comening is not toꝛ peace /

but ther ymagyn kalle wozdes agapnſk che
outcaſtes or the lande. i

2 Cher gape ops me with their mouthes /

ſaping: there / there: we le it with oure eyes.

Chis thou leit / O Loꝛde:holde not the
tonge then / go not favre Fro me/D Lozde,

wake Loꝛde / a ſtande vp: auenge thou
mp caule / my God / amy Londe.

Judge me / O Loꝛde my God / accoꝛdyng
tothprpabtuoutnede / that they tryumphẽ
not duer me.

O let them not Cape in their hertes:there
there / lo wolde we haue it: O lett them not
ſape:we haue ouercomehrm.

Let them be put to conkulion a ſhame /
that refopte at my trouble: let chem be clo.
thed with reouke and dichonoure / chat boot
themeluesagayat me. .

Let them allo be glad andreiople/that fas
nouremp tightuous dealynge: pee iet them
fave alwape:bleded be the Lon / which hath
pleacure in the pꝛolperpte of bys leruaunt.

And as foʒ my tonge / it aide talkyng ot
thy ryahtuournes and of thypꝛarte / all the
bape longe.

The. xrxoi Plalme.
Che pꝛapleth the goodnes of Bod ercidinglp/in that
he Gutterh not vp his mercy from the vngodtp/ when
they haue greuouup offended hym. Be chewe th aivo-
that the cholen recraue his goodnes before ether / and
prapeth bpm maze largelp rvdpitrpyate bys benefp⸗
tes vnto them that kugwe hym: and todclpuer hym


from the vpolence of the wycard whole kal s rupne hom


be alfo prophecpeth.
es lobe the To the Chaunter / of Dauidthe leruaũt
title of the ih. okthe Loz0e.
V bert cheweth me the wickednele of
the vngodl / chat there is no feare ol
God bekoꝛe hys eyes.
Foꝛhe dydembleth bekoꝛe his kace / ſo lg
tyllhis abhompnable cynne be kounde out.
Che wozX of his mouch are vnrigtudul⸗
nes dilceate / he wil not be lerneato do good
an Weddeat, He ymagypneth myichele bpd his ar bed /
ter dbu cgethatle in no good waxe / ner refute S
fecrcies of the Hinge euell.
berteasin te Chr mercy/ O Lorde / reacheth onto the
ett. b. s heauen / athz faythfuinetie vnto the cloud.
Beiden. Chr ryghtuoutnete ſtandeth ivke the
che Uebe: iad
e greate depe.
Chou Lordpzelerueſt boch men a beeſt8.
B Bom preciousisthymercy/D God that
the chyldꝛẽ of men mape put their truſt vn⸗
be By welles der the chadowe of thy es?
Roudes’ are, Thepſbalbelatpekped with the pieteout⸗
eee ee
belpes /contoe' oftherpucr ok thy pi tes,
lecansig com Sfozbpeheis the de wen of lte / and in the


ꝓlal xxxvj.c xxx vij.


Ipaht / wall we le irght. fonesor
O pꝛede forth thploupng kyndnelk on:* the inns
to them that nome the andchr ryaytuout e hun
nelle bntothemthataretrue ofbert, equ state
O let not the a fote ok pꝛyde ouertake c: Vethen,
me / O let not the* hand ot the vngodix cal tof erde ad
me domne. — mn
Ais ko wyrged doers ther fall tber are frets de br
cast downe/ e are not able to ſtande. 95 Hever
Gabe rb. Palme. HES
leg the 2 80 8 the euclt Pulte grene the ft
good / he lapth:that vnto ſocht as feare God and ipue
Fpghtuoutlpalt thpnges Hall happen well and that
thep Gallia very dende be bappye: where as the vn.
godlp althoughe the ſeame to fich pche fo a tymẽ/ hall
at p lac be roced s wiped cleane out of the wage.
A Plalme of Dauid.


Ret not thy lelkat the vngodlz be not 3
Je enupcus agayntt the euell doers,
Foꝛ they wall toone be cut done
Ipke the grade / and be wythered euen as the
grene herbe. ar
s*Put thomthp eruainche Lowe /¢ beh tarboune
doinge good: co Halt thou dwell in the lande / Son n itis
6 verelp it thall fede the. larde. xorg
Delpte thou intge Loꝛde / ahe Mall geue
che ty bertet delpze.
Comumptte thy wape vntothe Lorre / cet
thy hope in hym / ahe thal bainge it to patie,
He Hhal make thyrightuoutnede as cleare
as plight / a thpiut dealing as p noone dape,
Holde the ii vll in the Lozde / g abyde pa ·
cxentiꝝ vponh m. but greue not thy telfe at
one that bath pꝛolperpte / and lyueth in abs
cv


pnacron,

Leaue of from wzath/tet go dilpleature / S

let notthy geloutp moue the allo to do eucll. beth
Foꝛ wyched doers ſpalbe roted oute butt erpouneca ter

thep that pacpentip abrde the Lozde/ wall tem Pl.

enberes the lande. re.


Perit.
te Hot


Ot aud. Plal. xxxviij,


teme g in the dares ok derth ther chan haut „y . Che axrbiij Palme.


gnough.
As ko § bngodly/they all perythe: and
2 when the enempes of the Loꝛde are in their
fcures / ther (hall conlume / pee euen as the
fmoke chalicher conlume awayve.
ent rede Che ongodiy* boꝛoweth and papeth not
— agapne but the rightuous is mercytul and


ipberall,
, Doc asbe Diets eben, pen pote


n a ther whom he curlech / chalbe

Che Lorne 07d2¢th a good mans goinge /
and hach plealure in his wave.

Though he kal he alt not be hurte / fog
the Loꝛdẽ vpholdeth him with his hande.

Ihaue bene vonge / and now am olde: pet
Cate J neuerthe rightuous foꝛlakt᷑ / ner his
ſede dell — 25 rad

aus is euer Jani
© ipoeely qétiy thertope thal bis eve be pledrd

Fle krom euell / and do the thynge that is
good / lo Halt thou dwell koz euer.

Lor the Lorde loueth chethrnge that is
Teahe be folaketh not his lapnctz / but they
Wäll be pꝛelerued for euermoꝛe: as fo che
fede of the vngodly / it thalbe roted out.

Fee the rrahtudus Mall potlede the land /
and dwell therin koꝛ euer.

Che mouth of the rightuous is erercifed
me and hrs tonge talneth of iud⸗


E
Che lawe okhis God is in his hert / ther⸗
§ Goze thall not bis foteſteppes ürde.
Che ongodly terth d ryghtudus / z goeth
aboute toũũape him.
But the Loꝛde wyll not leaue himinhys
panbes 8 / ner condempne hem when be is


ged.

Pope thou in the Lom /a hepehis wave.
be Hall fo pꝛomote the /? point aco
the lande by enherttaunce / ande / when the
bngovly hall periche.

Imy teife haue ſene the vngodly in great

wer /a flonchunge lylte a grene bape tree:

ut whẽ 4 wet by / io he was gone: tought
G him but he coude no where be founde,

Bepe innocencp / and take hede onto the
Shonge that te reght, toe bar wan bangen
ge ete trang rg /thep tall pe⸗

s Cor the cl er 2
. — an be ro⸗
* ebebelpe of te rpabtuouscommet of
3 e helpe of the ryg 0
Soe Lorbe be is their ürengthinthe re af

Che Lorde Hall ſtande by them / and laue
chemhe wall delpuer thé from che vngodlp ⸗
ibm. tem berate ber put theit trat


n ect,
Ctix.
CHansd taben toith akerurnt dpreater decperb to be
rode therot / Aeg bps 15 thet b fa
tobe chattencd. Be cöplapueth woderfully of the ine
tollerable volence of bis fpchencs/of the kapntnes of
—— e ecu ot
enempes: Ehen requyre e heal of doi 2 7
vnto whom be wholly — him elke. a* Lobe thé
C Cothe chaunter / cobzpnge to remem: tetle oF ebe tugs
bꝛaunce. ce Ve


be GinderfFante) thebencfpte of God in tothe her
kes ot the people / be cauſe he had delpuered hym from
Sad and reſtozed him to his health.
L ſome thynck that this whole plalm intrea⸗
teth of the (pchmes of the loule / that is / ot the lynnes /
anid was ercercpled. And they vnder tad
the tptte thus. @otypng to rememürauuce ¢ to know
dure corrupepon and Fraplnes/tabe awape bp Chꝛiſt /
to as manp as repent and beirue. a *
est me not to rebuke (Oh L ode in n
Pune challen me notin the note du ia
Got earn Gch at ita
e alt in me .
bande pzetteth me fore, on Kah ee
There ts no whole parte in my bodp / prey. bv dee
becaute of typditpieature:there is no reſt in {erpue dome
my bones / by reaton af my kynnes. res a ferute
Formp wycheonetlesare gone quer my dh and
heade ard are iyke a foze burthen / to heur was were tro
ee yet e
aun che and are coꝛrupte / 7 *
thozow my foipthnette, 1 ee
J am bought in to fo greate trouble and recptzb Prato
langer“ that J go mournpnge e sompta 5
— pon
‘op my lopnes are cleanedzped vp / and Steoule pape
there iano tohote parce mme bebe. fee te
Jam feble ¢ fore Cmpeten/F roare £07 the meanes of that
betpditquyetnes of myhert. kenn which
Loꝛde thou knoweſt all my delpꝛe / a my Paves ( faye
gronpnge is not bpd From the. ah chee.
Gy bert pantech my tere gth bath Eapled denn in ane
me / z the Ipgbt of mpne epesis gone kro me. ger and heup
My louers and krendes tande lohynge C difpieature?
dpa. nm Emimenare gone and tears


ae ,
Cher that tought atter my lyke and to do got qson uo?

ime eel tba ot pes emagiciteaee fbr

all the dape longe. Palme. vi. 84
As foz ne /I was lrke a deafe mã a herde

not: and as one that were dome / not ope⸗

nynge his mouth. as
Jam be come as a ma that heareth not:

and chat can make no reſictaunce wrth hys


mouth. 1
Sorin the / D Lorde / fm mytniſt / thou
ſhalt heare me / O Loꝛde my God.
y derte is chat mne enempes trum S


yhe not ouez me:toꝛ yt my tote llpppe / they


ret atlyagapnſt me.
Je ente fete mn eu
nelte is euer in mylrght. :

D for


j. Ol Bauid,
Foz g contede mr wyckednele / ard m
Senne greueth me.


andthey that hate me taithout a caule / are
many in nombze.


myne enempes lxue / a are mightte: kathe


Plal. xxxir. x. xl.


laweſt not mr teares. Coq ama frat.
eee n ee


Dh (pare me a iptte that 4 mape retrech


mx leite / betoꝛe g goohence / and be no moze


‘Chey 5 rewarde me eue for good / lpea⸗ lene.


ke kuell of me / becaule J kolowe the thenge
that good is.

Forlake me not O Loe my God) O go
not karre fro me,

Halte the tohelpe me / O Loꝛde my ſuc⸗
coure.


che. xxxix. Pralme,


Lohe th
tytle of the,
gralme,


buZouthun is the name ofa chaunter. l. Paralip.
rbidand xv. a Eimhi thyncketh that Dauid made
this iam and that it was wont to be fouge of that
kpnde of lyngars duer which Jduthun bare rule. So⸗
mie thenen it ko be a certen ſonge / after whole tyme
the Wlalme was lunge. 2
larde:Jwyn Kepe mp wares that J or⸗
2. Ifen in tonge. ee
And lo J Hut my mouth / whrle the
vngodlꝑ layed wapte ko me.
Ihelde my nenen was domme / J kepte
cylence / vee euen kromgood woꝛdes / but it
was paxne andgrele tome.
My gert was hote within me / and wh vle
twas thus mulxnge / the tyꝛe kyndled: io p
lpake with my tonge.
Loꝛde / let me knowe mne ende / and the
nombze ol my dapes: 8 I mape be certytyed
what J wante.
Beßold / thou had made my dayes a ſpane
mee is as tt were nothyng bes
fore the.
D how varne are all mẽ lung:, Selah.
syyo joie Yee cury ms wacbech as it werf a thadotn)
and difquicteth him lelk in bapne-hebeapeth
bp 1 7 and can not ten to whom he ga⸗
e


m.
And now Lorde
ho


: and open not my mouth /
Pag hou halt done tt. f
Ot this i
fpoken before
in the Wlalm.
5 tnaye/itke ag it were am
seamen Sei mdelandcontrdꝛe
my rde
mx callenge: che we not thy leite as though


o am
thy? *bande, health


Che. xl. Plaine,
e


Sead
v cothe cheunter a Pcelme ot Baul. P.
V ayted pactentiy for the Loꝛde /
ich enclxned hum felt —
andherde my callpnge.
He bꝛought me out of the hoꝛ⸗·
ble pptte / out or the mpze and clape:be fete
mp kete bpo the rocke / A oꝛded my goinges.
eutnatbancaripeupge onto 0s
Many men Leynge thps / chall teare the


Wozbe/and put their tral in him.

Blelled is the mG that ſetteth hys hope in
the Loꝛde / and turneth not vnto the pꝛoude /
and to loch as go aboute with Ives.

O Loꝛde my God / greate are thy won⸗
Derous woꝛckes whych thou halt done: and
inthy thought tomarde vs there mare none zz
be lpckened onto the.

I wolde declare chem / and tycate of thé:
bard rr to mane / chat they can not be ä

SHacrytyce and atkerrnge chou woldel n
not haue b but a body batt chou ozderned shou opened.
me: burntolterynges and lacritꝑce toꝛ Fyne vnderdanne n
thouhaſt ne — eee

Chen fayneF:10/' A begyn⸗
nip ofthe bok iat bung ore g
Wulde fulfyll thy wyn O mp God / and that
amd content to do: pee thy is within


tuouthes in m
tre


N
2 taken fc
me: my tynnes haue taken 8


Fnpnte) büro


7 we Toe Se
Ok Daud,
me / that J am not able to1obe vp: pee ther
ate mo in nõbꝛe then p heatres of my head /
and my hert bath fapled me.
O Lopde /let it be thy pleacure to deliuer
me / make haſte O Loꝛde)tohelpe me.
D Let them be achamed and cõtounded / chat
t. Sole fer leke after mp “Conte / to deſtrope it:letthemt
Meir Bat. fall backwarde and be put to conkulpon / ?
ut and wih me euell.
ad Let thé foone be bꝛought to thame / that
crye ouer me:there there.

But let ail hole thatleke the / be iopfull
and glad in the: a lett all Coch as delpte in thx
faupnge health fave allwape: the Loꝛde be
pꝛapſed. : 5

As for me / am poze i in inpterꝝ / but
the Loꝛde careth foz me.

Chou art my helper and redemer / mate
no longe tariynge / O my God.

Ache ru tame. “ry .
In this Praline alo ſpeabeth he of a dyfſrale / wher
in dohple he was holdẽ / ae eneinpes were greatlp tes
iopced-hoppnge that he Gutde be made awape with »
violence of his Dpicafe And in which allo his kryndes
‘had forfahe hun but Hod holpe him which allwapes
wolde pꝛeſe rue him: And therfore in the begynnyng /
one be pꝛougunteth hym happpe whpch perceaucth that
Lahe 1906 touneell of Hod concernpnge him.

he To the chaunter a Plalme of Dautd.
4 Leſledis he that cõlydpeth p * pooze:
the Lozde hall delxuerhim in the tyme

ok trouble.


The Lord tall retrech him whẽ he lpet
an whom lick pon bis bedd der thou make his bee
A ne tall bia ftchneti,

ui Ilapde: l ond be mercikul vnto me / heale
‘wip meatienes my Coute / to haue ĩynned agaynſt the.
unge lowe — Mpne enempes dpeake euel vpon me:
‘Seg hen Wal ne dre and hlsngme pericher
Though he came in tole / pet meanedhe
fallede in bis bert / heapynge mytcheke vpon
dim lelfe. 5
amt they et hate aie (ee EES Me
Gapnt me / and pmagyn euell agaynſt me.
8 Theyhaue geuen a wycked lentence vpõ
me: when be lpeth / he hall ple vp nomoꝛe.

Tee euen myne atone kampuer krende /

Cwhũ I truſted / which opd cate my bed / hath
llt vp his hele agayndt me. 8

But be thou mercitull onto me O L oꝛd)

rape thou me vp / and ſhall rewarde them.

By thisz knowe thou kauoureſt me / that

mx e Hail not kriumphe ouer me.

Chou haſt op) ole me becaufe of my ins

hocencpy and let me before thy face koꝛ euer.

O bleſed be the Loꝛde God of Fliael/ crõ

hence koꝛth and fos euer mope / ame / Amen,


Plal. li xlij. x. xliij.


Lev;
¶ The ſetonde trtatyle.
he vin. Plalme.
che chewelh how forowfutl be was - beraule he was
let krom the holp allemble and kealt of the Lord vp the
tölpirilpe ö his tonne Ablolom: and how he was dil⸗
Guyeted with the vopces of the wycked which blal⸗
Phemed the delpze of Godipnes wherunto he was
geuen / lo a papne and vnpzokptable thyng. 1
Co the chaunter / a monicpon ol $ tonnes au kane the
of Cozah. tytle or the
Fhe as thehertdetpzeth the water bzo. Al P ines
900 lo longeth my loule atter the / O
Mp toute ig a thurlte £02 God / ye eu fog
che ipuinge God: when chalz tome / and be⸗
holde the kace or God? :
Syteares are mp meate daye and night /
Subple it is bapipe lade onto me: where is
nome God:
.. Now when I thinche there vpõ / J poure
dut my bert bp mp telt fo wolde ka yne go
hence with the multitude / ¢ patte over with 5
them bnto the houle of God / in the vopce ol
parle andthanckelgeupnge / amonge loch
Wierer e full of
art thou Co full of heuynes (O m
loule)a why art thou lo bnquuete within mes
O put top truck in God/£027 will pet geue
him thakes kor the belpe ol his cotenaunce,

Dv God / my coule is vexed within mez
therkoze J remembze the lande of Joꝛdane /
aer ee maler the

pe callech another tp! e bopce c
ol thy whpſtles / all hy waues and water
lloudes are gone ouer me,

The Losre hath pꝛompled bys louynge
Bpndnesie daplve therfoze wil J pꝛaple hint
inthe night Ceafon/and mate nip pꝛaper vn
tothe Gon of myipfe.

J well fape bnto God my ſtonp rock: why
halt thou forgotté me? why go J thug heue⸗
ip whyle the enempe oppzeteth me? 2
wh yple mp bones are bolt / a whyle myne
enemxes caſt me in the tethe / da ue laxinge
vnto me: where is now thy Gon?

hr artthou fo heup Omploule)s why
art chou fo delguieted within me?

Oput thy truſt in God / log will vet thã⸗
ne hem ko; che belpe of his countenaunce / x
beraule he is my od.
ecoereiper erect 12 1 1 achtes

uerel colpires i
am that be image wortyety piaple Bins


a* Cue Centence bpon mec @or)andgy
elende mp caufe agayne thebnboly sxgomeread
people: Oh delxuerm̃e tro the dpleceat-deRevegemes
forthoucd Gan arm Grégtisihp bat
Oz thou(D Godhart my hy
thou ſhot me from the: noh ga chen fobe-
28d. j. wely/


ij. Ol Dauid. Plal xliij. c. xlv.


uely / whyle the enempe oppretieth me⸗

Oh lende out thy lyght and thy trueth / p
they maye leade me and bꝛrnge me vnto the
holy byl and to thydwellynge.

Chat J mape go in tothe aulter of God /

B euen bnto the God whych is my topes plea⸗
lure /a bpon the harpe to geue thankes vnto
the / O God / my God.

hy art thou to heuꝝ (O mp lou le) and

why artthou fo dicqupeted within me?

O put thy trult ir God / koz J wyll vet
geuehym thanckes Coz the helpe of bys coũ⸗
tenaunce / and becaule he is my God.
met he, lit, .
Whe caplapneth that Icrael th lo greuous pers
fequucyon fo: the honbure of God and poly lyuinges
lake / and that pet God is not pretent with che in my⸗
racles dopnge/as he in tymes pag was: And prapeth
dim to put forth his power / aud delpuer his from the
del Coche chaunter an inſtruccpon ot the

Lohe the
1 ech lonnes —
Hlalme.


bp lxke chepe /a
icatreſt vs amonge the Beithen.

C Chou ſelleſt thy people to naught / ata⸗
keſt no moneye koꝛ them.


Chou makeſt vs tobe rebuked of oure -


neyghbours / to be laughedto cone and had
in derilpon / or them p ave rounde about ds.
Chou hat made bs a berp bywoꝛde amõge


the Heithen / and that the ke their bath
i 255. he people thake the


My confutyon is daylie before me / z the
ſhame of my face couerech me.


Foꝛ the bopce of the fclaunnerer and blac⸗ thos —


phemer ko the enempe and auenger.

Allchie is come bps us, and pethaue we iir t
not Forgotten the ner begaued dure feluegterpeteso:da,
vnkapthkullp inthy couenaunt. 8

Sure herte is not turned backe / nether
dure ſteppes gone out oF thy wape. ferpétes da.

Foz thou halt e cmmittẽ bs in p piace of da- gous. By the
gons / couered vs the chadowe ok deeth. 2 Pe of

Zewehad kosgotte § name ok dure God / g uten
holde vp oure handes to eny ſtraunge God. ther

Shulde not cod tende it out: ko he no- amoge lber,
weth the very lecretes ok the bert, cba e

But for thp fate we are hpHled all § bape fue bun we
leine are counted as thepe apopnted to pets dhe,


a me callety he
Ap Lande / why ſlepe ſt thou: & wake, a the adore of
calt vs not of toi euer. n
Whetko re hrden thou thy face? wilt kal ben
thou cleane foꝛget dure myſery a oppꝛeſuõ⸗ lo be arch /
Foz oure Coule is bꝛought iowe euẽ vnto be put in al
the dult / a oure belpcleueth onto the grodd. {INGE to te
Arete o r heide bs and del uer vs £07 Kemer
thy mercy lake. ‘ongodly ! h
aa Continually the name of Godblatphemed ¢ all Gedlines des
ited f all mance ot iniurtes 2 wröges done to the kaudurers thecof,
Thertort (apth he. Thou hat couered vs with the hadowwot darch
that is, with che verpdarchnesof dreth. Elgi. b. e.
Fe Gov is (apd to hede his face wü he ſulkreth the good tobe perie
quutes ot the eueli / as it is Sapde of his awabpng. pal. ixxtih. g.
he. ri. Piaime,
che connes of Lozab praple Saloms fo: the bew⸗
tpeſeloquence / crength power and noblenes both or
anne nenen eee ate e
8 i a
. — nobpiptte 1 iat te


Co ß chaunter,opo®* Sofanim/anine egg,
amen off urs of Cozalya Cong of owe, e m
* bert is endpting ola good matter ue mit
M Aptakie of that / which J haue made EA
. the kynge: Mr tonge is the penne ol
a readp wzpter.
Chou arte the fapꝛeſt amonge the chyl⸗
dat of men full of grace are thylpppes there
es God brs 90 fon fuer,
pzde the with thy fwerd, ops thy thyghe
(D thou mightye)% woꝛchppe ¢ renowne.
Good lucke haue thou with thyne honou⸗
re/ ryde on with kreuth / mekene dle @ 1th:
tudoulnes: and chr right hand ali teach the
oe men mech ‘i 8
Pp *arowes are charpe the people ſhal⸗ cr che ares
befubduedbnto the / euen in the meddeſt a⸗ wen of God
monge the kynges enempes. ach


Ccepter ok thy kyngdom is a ryght ſcepter.
intquite:wherfoze God ( which is thy eon) herne


anognted the w le of glatnes Sang
. 5 ark


Thy feate DEorjendureth forener:the owns oe Paee


er. contcpencc is
- Choubatt loucdrightuoutneme/ ¢ hacen prt thaw ad


Of Baud. Plal rioi.riby, & rlviſ


Al chy garmẽtes are lyke myꝛre / Alors
6 Caſlia / wh thou cõmelt out of thine pues
rye palaces tn thy beutitull glory,

Sepngl daughters goin thy goodly ataye/
andbpon thy right hande ſtandeth the quene
in a veſture ol che moſt fynegoibe,

Herken(D da keel enclrne
thine eare: foꝛget thpne atone people / a thy


tangs ets

We i me.

HT. Cae PPO tat 1 én alt money of
shoe the CoPatdpesibp che helpe of God.

reckt h. Cothe chaunter / alonge ofthe chylozent

palm, ol Cozay bport>* almuth.

4 Nute troubles ¢aduertpte/ we haue
iat 85 —— dee, dure refuge / dure
. t andhelpe.
ne. Fherkoze well we not teare / though perth

kell / and though the hylles were carped in to
the mpodett ok the lee.

the waterg ok p lee raged a were
neuer fo troublous / and though the moun⸗
taynes ſhoke at thet vett ok pfame. Selah.

Foꝛ there is a floude / which with hys ry⸗
ueri reiopleth p cytie of Gd / the hol dwel⸗
lynge of the mot brett.

Sod is in § myddeſt of her / chertoꝛe call
che not be remoued:koꝛ Godheipeth her / and
that rraht carip.

Che Heithen are madd /


BS make möch 1 hrs tog


boxte / che earth melteth awape.
12 Loꝛde of Dotter is with vs the cod
ee e the ol Jacob is oure defence. * Selah.
O come hither / and beholde the woꝛckes
Of the Loꝛde / what deſtruccpons he bath
bꝛought bpon the earth. a
Be bath made warres to ceate in all the
wojlde: he hath bzoken the bowe he bath
e ſpeare in fonder / and bent the
charettet in the tze.


Be ſtl chen and conkeſte that à am God: K

J wyll be exalted amonge the Beithen / and

* . pe Sree

0 0 ui

ol Aacob is oure detence. Selah. Data” 00
„ che ri Prime.” 7 *
EDF the extellet gimieof Sad declared thozou the
wee worlde.DF the conuerl pon of zynges r people


nto; 5
Co the chaunter / a palme ot i
Pd a plalme of the chrddẽ ot


Clappe pourehandes together ( all pe
people) S ſynge vnto God tebe vop⸗

ce ok thanckelgeurnge.
For the Lozde the molt hell is to be teas
red a he itz the greate kyng vpon all p earth.
Be hail ubdue the people vnder vs / and


che Peithen vnder oute fete,


He choleth vs fo angeretage, the beutie
ot hacob thom helourd, W elah. e w

Godis gone yp witha merrnorte ache B. Plum
Loꝛde with the lo rende of the krompet.

D nn a i praples vnto God:
O lengẽ pꝛapies / tynge pꝛaples onto oure


e.

$07 Godis kyng ok all p earth / O nge
hnaptes vnto him with Aberdeen
Sodis kynge ouer the heithen / God (yt
teth in his holy feate. . 5
tobetzer ente he Che welle are gathered ehrt,
Her end bender in .
en
ache earth, mightre 19705 ae af th


OCChe.riviti Wraime.
EThe great glozie e keipeptie of the Ehurchs cone
Qregacponin that thep haue God ener pretent wyth
them-to be their defender: delcrpded bntes the fps
gure of Jerufalem,


. Conge of aPraime o€ d chyytoz ot Coʒah.


Beate is ß L ond ehvelie tobe pꝛayted /
pe of ouredsod) euen vpon his
ehe el of Soin ig uten fabze VIBE) „. ytbezim
wherotallche lande retopteth: vpon d nozth or Sin une
ſyde Ipeth the cytte ofthe great kynge. derttande the
Sodis well knowne in her palaces / He chureh:ssabs
tsthe dekence oftyetame, Se
Kor lo / aynges are gathered / and gone by zun rig.


ether. 2 2
Chey marueled / to te they
were aſtonted /a. e realkbunne 8
e,
on & Tho! a
n thalt bꝛeakẽ the thyppes of § cee /
thoꝛow thera wynde. „ deg.
Lrke as we haue herde / to fe we in d citie
des Loot Hotkes/in Herde of oure Pod. nde
6 e eee il Blame
13 7 n el 4
warte ko: thy — eo)


2 et
.. CGod)in the middeſt of thytemple
te Byte nu O God / accoꝛdyng need name logg
fue of 0 is 5 ers d wozlbes ende.>* thy ryght
2b eeu aan one aoe
S gormes ap daughters ofuda Be glad becaute of fudge
due in the vin amentes. 4
kee in ge Welke abcute Sion / go rounde aboute
© ewer and tell yev* komzes.
crüig. b. Marche wel her walles/ tet vp her hou⸗
dr Chat ia/ leg / chat it maxe be tolde them 5 come atter.
Qe web Foꝛ this God is aure S od fo? euer z euer /
reghewen. and he Hall alia xe be cure gde.
es Lobe the
bird S 82 een eee: gas
chelle⸗ *. le is
Gaatier 5 ere. .


2 chall haue Ae ed
ae Lobe the” nie chaunter / a PI okthe chüldzen tose


Nn of sige OF Cozab.
eme thes / all ye people: pondze it
well all ye that dwellvpon the earth.
Hype and lowe / ryche and pooze/one


nit wenge ol wyldome / and
mybert ſhall mule of vnderſtandynge.
A will enclyne myne cate to the parable/


and ewe 1 bpo thebarpe,
Robertoze tutbe


keare the euell dapes,
ofmy beles copaketh


Cher th pete truſt in their good
2 . — thes


a aer, gabe nam
ke agrement vnto him koꝛ

Spas colety mepetotroemethetroutes/

Fees ed en Co
ee e liue longe / and le not d graue.
all be lene / S Coch wyle men —

5 Wia penche tagetger an tell as te
. kolpch / and leue their goodes


ko other.
loge hat is in their houles / it conty-
nueth ſtill:thetr dwellyng places endure krõ
one generacrõ to another / and are called af-
ter their awne names vpon the earth.
Heuerthelelle man abydeth not in loch
honaur / but is compared vnto p bꝛute bea⸗
lles / and becõmeth irke vnta them.
Chis wae of their is bery tolychnelle /
e agen nch. ther Dela. prapte it wyth their
des Bie che geen me pepe neath all
gnawe bpon them / and the ryghtuous halt
Leere b had them in che moznpnge
eee
from pevdiere But God hall delpuermty coule fr 8 po-


meren. wer ot bell uhen he receauct hme. Dela.


Bal xlit. c. .


O be not chou feayen een one made ;


2 —
10
Wg nether wallhrs pompe


ig counted
dne


Cpeake good
Bucwhen koloweth his fathers genes
racpon / he wall neuer fe Ipght enx moze.
ee
0
—ůů —— theme


md 55 ce L tame.

ephectech that God well call all nacpons of
Senken the Solptil: And that h. will
requꝑꝛe the coufellpon ¢ piaplyng of his name /c not
ſacrikpce: and how greatip bew will ehe whieh
3 to be religpous aud hoi / and are in
deade nothyng leſle.


GA Blame ot starb.


goinge downe of the tame.
— apeareth § glozpougs beu⸗


‘Due God geneme / s not kepe ſplen⸗
certtere goech bekoze him a cõlumyng kxꝛe /
anbamigotictenpet rounde aboute hym.

Be call call theheauens fromabouc / ¢
the earth / that he maye iudge his people.

Gather my karnctes together vnto me
thole cet tetemove bythe couenafit then be
enpofferynge.

And Sheauts Hal declare bis. Hightuout:
hele to? God is tudge him lelke. a Selay,
mg ben my people: % une g an a Of N

Monge vou / el: am
God / euen thy God. 8 h

a tepzoue the not becaule of thy lacritice /

are allwape befoze me.

1 rereti sew out of thy houle /
ner gotes out ok thy ro

‘oz all the beaſteg h the felde are mne /
and thoulandes of catell pen

Iunowe all the foules vpon the moun⸗
ae ok the keld are


bed God parle and thanchelae-<, 4
we, ere thy bones wage bare
bra call vpon me in the tyme —
to wyll A hearethe / ö thou halt chanze me.

But onto the vngodir faveth God: oe


= boty anp


ur unde


joe Dawid;


doeſt thou preach my lawes / and takelt my
can ec mouth:
Where as thou batet to be refourmed/


Chou letteſt op mouth fpeake wicked⸗
nelle and thy tonge paynteth dilceate.

Chou lptteſt a (peakel agaynſt thy bꝛo⸗
R mothers

onne.

Chis thon doelt whple J holde my tonge:
and thynckeſt me to be euen loch oneas che
kelk:but 3 9e l repzcuethe / and let mp lelle


pnt
ae cane this / ve that ebe
3 and there be none tongs


180 ooftceth me thanches and pꝛaple / he
honoureth me: and this is the wape / wherby
J wyll hewe him § lauynge health of God.
4p rape e ip acknoteds


geth ch bis 2 nes he delzeth the holy aten pꝛapeth
a Lahe thefos the church / which ts the true Jerutater
dt oF the CFothe chaunter/a Plalnie of Daf ibe
cn the Pz0phet Nathan came vntohym / alter
5 compen . 4 gone into Bethlabe.
Aue mercy von me (O God atter thy
goodnes / z acco dyng onto thy greate
mercpes du awape mne offences.
e wach me well Fro my wickedneſle / and
fpmne of clenſe me fro my lynne.
ceburica Foz ꝗ knowledge my taute / a my tynne
IL. Ar, n 1505 achebauezt.
tty gaynſt the only / agarnſt the haueg tyne
late, ber ned / and done euellin typ frght: that thou
20 plope an mighteſt be iuſtitied in thy tapnges / a chul⸗
red f iopned delt ouer come whenthou art iudged.
Repth 5, Behode J was bame in wckednene / 6
Le dun ed in inne bath my mother conceaued me.


ares But lo, thou haſt a pleafurein d treuth; hs


Re in that and haſt hewed me ſecrete wyldonie.
ssaieth he here


O purge me with Jlope / and I thal be
datt othe oleate: a thou me“ and z thalbe whptce


f “OS chen owe. Oh let me heare ok oe ¢ glad⸗
e tye tee chat che bones which thou halt bone /
mm dag minen orie.


ume tbe face krõ mp fynnes/¢ put gute


ildedes.
Make mea cleanehert / O Cod / ¢ renue


— a ſpꝛete within me.


right
aoa C Fal me not awaye krom thy pretence / ¢


take not thy boly Cpzetefrom me.

aa sent D geuemtep comfozte pere ame
dure to the and ſtablich me with thy Fre

some ones en Atrach hat beds ntathe wic⸗


Ae in, Dellner me Exo bloude gtynede OSod/


| a ouelpthou that art the God of myhealth chat


Plal .li li. r. li


kd p lenners mape be conuerten vnto the.


Lt ij.

tonge mape pꝛapte thy rightuoumnele. Levi,
Spen mr ipppes) D Lorde / that my D fed once

mouth mape thewe thy parte. ene.
Foz vk thou haddeſt pleature in tarrikice /

— — but thou delpteſt not in


offeryng
‘ebelacatner OfGod is atroubleatpzete,
abzokenanda contrite hert / O Sod / walt z Se acpetices
thou not defppte. foce of rraht⸗
O be fauozable a c ale dne vnto Sion / wens is the
b the walles of Ferufalé mare be buploen, cetera
Foz then halt thou be pleated wyth che menge cof
*facritpce of rpabtucutede/ with Sburnt: the pert / the
offerpnges ¢ oblacpons:then (all they tape 8800 f fn Ce
bullockes bpon thrne aulter. .
Che. il. Palme. ne fpnners,
CBedelcepbeth the frowarde mynde and intent OF Pau 0b.
Sache ates that his ben Genent/ am the top ane
nes that the ryghtwes had therof.
Koche chaunter an croztacys ot Baud / freer al.
when Pocgthe enompte tame fo Saul /g eave done
Shetoed bpm laringe: Daum is come to the g. 80 thys @ptte
Houte of Ahimelech. ans eras
Ahr boattett thou thy telt / thou Cy-x%
raunt / that thou cant domplcbefe?
Where as the goodnelle of God en⸗
a vet daplie.
Chr tonge pmagineth wickednene / and
with Ipes it cutteth ithe a ſharpe rafoure,
de e en moze then
good / to Of lyes moze then ryghtuoul⸗
.
ou loue ane all woꝛdes p mare
dohurte. O thou kalle tonge, sta
Chertore Hall God cleane deſtroye the /
ſmyte the in peces / plucke out ob cen
Iynge/androte the out ol the lande of the ly


ugnge. Delah.
ah uin en wal te this,’ and krare / a B
laugh him to ſcoꝛne.
wees ig the ma that tone not God foz
rege) / but truſted onto § multitude of
Hauch ws mightiein his wickednelle.
As koꝛ me / am ipke a grene olpue tre in
che houle of God: my truſkt is in the tender
mercy ol God koꝛ euer and euer.
will alwaye geue thankes vnto the / toꝛ
bessere .
Foz thy it,
Gabe ii Palme. r
atall placesarefutl of the wic⸗ dx Lobe the
ene — ee mihe. E darch ge the
Co the chaunter vp v Mahalath / an in⸗ deen
firuccpon ot Dauid. 1 25 fonge oz
He folith bodres ae 1 hertes:
Tera is no ch
Coꝛrupte are then and become 125
hominable in their wyckednelles: there is
not one / chat doch gold.
da ij. oa


ij. Ok Dauid.
erco feet Sod loßed downe krom heauen vpon the
no Hodis at chedeen or men to le pe there were eny that
be duet tone wolde bnderdk ande zr lekke acter g.
inanpthpuge: But they are all? gone out ofthe wape /
but both to dothe p are al become bnpzofptable : there is
and fufer alt none that dach good no not one.
gener 25 Dotw can thepbaue bnderitandpng,/ that
od and are theworchers of wyckednes / eatynge bp
profet of dure my e and · * call not


epg hoon: | 1
reũße oure tele
0 ex are atraped / where no keare is: fo
4 be done the @od Utaketh the bones of chemchac belege
fernamntes ofthe:thou putteſt them to conkullon / koꝛ God
all men: And delpileth them.
ere poet el O0 that che faupngebealth were geuen bn
Sodipnes ) a, to Alrael out of Dion: Oh that the Loꝛde
put whych wölde delpuer his people out ok captiuite.
nomen Grave „, Chen wunde Jacob retorle / and Flraek
chen the blend chulde be ryght glad,
th pp and dücegtrull which thynct thep lebe Cod / # lebe the lelues
de Che meanpng herak all pe fynde in the S alm. riih. a.
en Ot this pe haue in Eat ixuij.c


Che litt. Plalme.

Ede Hyerveth 920 — Tober and
Was hearde / when he was brought in o great Jo
pardpe / vp the treacon of the Zephites: 6 how Sa
tobe veugeaunte of his enempes.

an Lobe de. Cothe chaunterin Heginoth / an inſtruc⸗

Eyptle of the cyon ol Dauid / when the Hephites came

ve n Ka bc seein
gett os.

Logg go. AE Civeme(D God)” kor thy names tae

hd Deere ech.
* AH ele wore
beet en reser tet 5 me /
rue Foz ſtraungers are rylen vp agaynſt me,
ahne name fe and che e which haue not God bekoze
eh nme bp cheir eyes eke acter mploule. d Oelah.
thpname? B ut lo / my helper: e p vp⸗

But lo/ Sod is my helper: it is he §
fygnifpas “ holdeth mp loule.

moche to be” De Wall reward euell vnto myne enemies:
and in thy treuth halt thou dettvope them.

ane good, Were wyllolferynge wil g geue che and

maguitpcence pꝛaple thy õ name & L oꝛde / bẽcaule it is fo

power / wyldã / comkoztable. N

eech ber⸗, $02 thou hat delpuercdme out oe an me

pounded in che trouble / to z mne eve fepth his delpze vpon

Pal. ü. mne enempes.

bh 1 tin ton gear

at he 1

ftrapte/througe mot wycked — men wiß

de tobe ker his cheafefrendes.

au Lebe the C0 the chaunter in Reginoth/anintruce

ol


Care my pꝛaper / O God / andhrde not
thy ſelk kro my peticyon,
Cake hede vnto me and heare me /
bow ppte dull mourne and complapne.
The enempe cryeth to / and the vngodip
commech on fo falt: foꝛ thep are mynded to


do me ſome mylchele / fo malrcroul are truſt is


Heare my prayer(D Goo) contyoze ? len.


Plal. liiij. x. lb


eden within me/aus blem
e.
ewe
ei e are come
bpon ba we and an boztpbie dice bath huet


dme.
And ſapde:O that J had wynges i
boue / Chat 3 meghe fominyer? abe


Leo / then wolde J get me awaye farre ot /
andremarne in the wrideznede. * Sela, c. Lane mete
wolde make batt to eſcape / from the W lane. . i.
ſtozmx wynde and tempeſt.
Deſtrope their tunges O L onde) and de
there 3 fe onteghtuoulnes eiyte
This goeth daye and nyght aboute the
nt . e — —
Wickednele is therin / dilceate and gyle ¢
G0 not out other ſtretes.
Ikit were myne enempe that reuyledme /
I coude beare it: oz vt onẽ g ought me euell
1 — ene wolde hyde my telle


But it is chou my companyon mygrde
mxne atone fampliet rende. 4
We hedlwete and lecrete cõmunicacton to⸗
gether in the houle ol God.

Lett death come battelp vpon them / and
lett chem goo downe quyck in to bell / oz
wyckeones is amonge them in their dwel⸗


ges.
As fo me, wyll call vnto Gov,
Lebe elbe. e
Gn the euenynge / moꝛnyng and at noone
bape tril z moutne and complapne: and he
Wag abe —
tis he that delxuereth my loule in peas
ce / trom thé that lave wapte fo2 me: to they
are manpagapnit me, N
Tee euẽ Gcdthat endureth foz euer / wall B
heare me ard bꝛynge them downe. Selah.
5 thee wyllnot tüme:and whp:thepfeare


5 Gaye


i Ot Baud


t
Plate


wen- che


e cheweth how he called on the helpe of the Lone /
when he was in ieopardy brforeA chis xing of Geth:
and How he accented the Wples and beotente of Sant
and A. enten, which had Ozpuen bpm inte that


perell
ae Lobe the: Co the chafiter/opon’*the domme ftock
gere dds. is dawue: which pech kerre of /¢ * Wichtam
Zune. al Dauid / when the PHyrtittines tone hem
in Geth.
be Abra. Elra thincheth that the dome Rocke dowur
was the begynnynge of afonge- after whole tune
this Plaime was fouze. Bimhi and other Cuppote
that Dauld called hum telfeyaddine Rochbowue which
ficwe karre 4 commptted hym ſelte wholß
vnto Sed and geupng none antwwere to his aduerla⸗
ryts fede tarte from bis arone uacps bute the Phi⸗
lußtines which were not oni ſtrañgers / but alla ene.
mes. Che ſtopy here ot is reade. i. Beg. xl.
ce Lobe be fte in the tytle or the. yvi. zo lalme.


2 EEmercyful vnto me (D God) foꝛ men
wyll treade me downe: ther are daxlx
kyghtynge and troublynge me.

Apne enempes treade me daylpe vnder
their kete / toꝛ tye pbe many) g pꝛoudip tighte


Engage, A will comforte my felfe in asodes wo7b/
asp lebe Nees w yl hope in God / and not feare: hat
tu ofthelawe candle ſh then do vnto me:
kana bech be Chery vexe me daply in my woꝛdeg: all ß
ann: her BER pags 5 cael edit
1 Chep holde a er / z hepe them Cele
weber ues clotethey marchemp Reppes pow they
ma pe catch my loule.
But in vapne / loꝛ it Hall efcape thẽ: and
‘why? thou(D God) iu thy dylpleature walt
caſt downe foche people.
Chou telleſt my üpttinges thou puttett
my teares in thy botell/¢ nombzeſt chem.

C wghendoeucr J call vponthe / mne ene⸗
mes are put to light: wherby i knowethat
thou art my God,

In Godes worde wrt J retopſe / in the
Loꝛdes woꝛde welt F comfozte me.

Fee in God do I truſt / a am not akrayed:
what can man than do vnto me:

ntoß (O God) wyll J pape my vowes /
vnto the wyll J geue thankes and pꝛayle.

Foz thou bak delpuered my foule from
death and my fete from kallynge / that 4
mape waltze befoze God in theipabe of che
Iupnge.


Che. ij Plalme.


Che ſheweth hom he cõmpfted hym felfe to the Lor /
PD eltaped ail icopardye, when he was in the caue and
bps doudpars with bpm and with what afeccpon he
. Baue chanckes pnto the Lord therfoze-with a delcr p⸗
bon ofthe malpee g pate ot bis enemxes coward


Dial lurlug lu,


** Gob Chaũter / r veltrope not r* ich⸗ ax Lobe the


tam of Bauid / when he ledde jtptle or the
once: / toben he krom Saul ag. b :
ur, alt nor bet roy pet ag
time ely Sopeaube igntietareete ee
Bibi that he trople with ode and kplled his tauaps
ars which moued him to deũ rope and kli Saul. E.
ra tpincvetz it to bea cert tune s mance of ĩpnging.
ct?᷑ Ot thisin the tytle of the. xv. P lalme.
Emercxtull onto me / O God / be mer⸗
Banned me koꝛ my louie truſteth in a
che vnder the ſbadowe ol thy wynges
Gaibe my refuge / vntyu wyckednelie be
duer paſt.
J call vnto Sodthe moſt hreſt / euen the
God that Hall helpe me vp agarne. .
He call lende from heauẽ / a laue me fro done the
the er e en that wolde walowe me Plal. 5. a.


. h.
wall God lle If 2
a cS nde / ko his mercy and S. echte 18
ige Wine fouleamongetye cruen tia. A, r
antige the childzẽ of men / whole *tethe
are fpeaves and arowes / and their tonge a
werbe fwerde.
Setvpthylelke / O God / aboue the hea⸗
uens / and thy gloꝛx aboue all the earth.

Cher haue layed a neet toꝛ my kete / and
preted do wne mp ſoule: chey haue dyggeda
prttbefoze me / and are fallen into it them
ep ebertisnany D6 here is rea

1 ready / O God / myhert (sred- ee estos
bpcorpineandacuepsapte, : , baue en

Awake O mp * glozy/ awaßze lite and fuse a. ent
barpe A my felfe well wate might earl. de pate
wyll geue thankes vnto the O Lorde) god: of alter
amoge the people / wll lynge praples vn⸗ iome / h Coute
tothe amonge the Heithen. of bym that,

Foꝛthe greatnes of thy mercy reachecyP*rietds
vnto the beauts/and the karthtuine lle onto
che cloudes.

Set bp chylelke / S God / aboue the hea⸗
uens / thy glory aboue allthe earth.


Che. bit Plalme. 1
Sal, tote tote euer be erbeereh ;
ete remote Gale ee = 27 the
To the chaunter>* Deſtroye not ſch⸗dommeſthat ve
n .
po amy 8 talme. e fast
A * N es n;

be Ok this “ade tyecot theming nett befoze. that Kut
ce Che lignyficacpon here oł / pe haue in the Cytle to iudge / O pe
e ree 8 x tonnes
* poure mpndes be vpon tpabtuoul: » ok menz
nelle in deve /ehen tudge the ehpnge that Dr gerte
trpabt/D pe lonnes of men, uiourice Fe m
But ve ymagin michele in poure hertes / dederhar which
and youre handes deale with wyekednede. is rinbtrorkepe
Che bngoaty are Frowarde /exen frame ze aker


din, their mothers mombe sasfoone as ther beide pres ß


Dd. v. bone spghsare:


ij. Ol Dauid,
boꝛne / they go a ſtrape and cpeake lpes.
Ther are as Curpous as the ſerpent / euen
Ike the deat A der that ſtoppeth her cares.
er Chat is), That dhe utve not heave the vorce of the
bring tonaughe charmer ſcharme he neuer dowrlelp.
the blaiphemp er Wzeake their teth (O God) in their
of them which mouthes / impte the chalt bones of the tpons
cal me aleguc whelpes in londer / O Loꝛde.
ar. nn gag Kathe mare fall nabe mne water
that runneth a pace: a that when they tote
their arowes / they may be bꝛonen.

Let them cuntume awape lyke a mavle / a
ipke the vntymelp krute of a womẽ / and iet
them not le the lunne.

D7 teuer pourethoznes be Harpe / S wach
Mali take thé awape qupcke / lyke a tozmp


wynde.

‘Therpabtuous thall reiople whe he lerth
thebengeaunce / and thall wach hrs tete in
the bloude of the vngodlv.

So that men Hail lape/verely there is a
por fo the patie cide
aGo fudged e

ef W — — te
jelpe agapnt ene mpes’.| L
e delernbech the pies of his ny
ak Tote the mpeg / and prophecieth their auengement.
tptle of the. uh a To the chaunter / deſtrope not / er gpich⸗
b. eil n tam uf Haudegen Hau fende to watch
the. bg. W fal, the houletochentent to Beyer,
te Che lignyfpcacpon hero is core befoze / n tl
Foiplal Che ſtorpe of this tptle thatt pe Fpude in tl
kyrt of the Apnges the. xix. Chapter.
a Elxuer me fro mpne enempes ( O mp
{Dewan dekende me krom them that
ryle vpagaynſt me.

O delpuer me kromthe wycked doers / a
faue me fromthe bloudthurſty men.

Foꝛ lo / they ive waytinge koꝛ my loule: ß

men are gathered together agapnſt
me / without any offence oꝛ tauie ol me / O
Loꝛde.

Chey runne / and pꝛepare them felues/
with out my faute : Arile / come thou helpe
me / and beholde.

5 Stand vp O Lozde God ok Hoſtes / thou
BF co bititefor God oF Icrael *to bylet all Hepthen:be not
to thats: as in mercpfull onto them that offende of malp⸗
eRe chpous wrckedneie. Selb...
e WLettyemgotoandfro/andtunneaboute
the cytye /boulynge lrke dogges.

Beholde / they Cpeake (agaynſt me) with
their mouth / lwerdes are vnder their lippes /
£03 who repꝛoueth them?

But thou(D Lorde) thalthaue them in
deriſiõ / thou Halt laugh al Heithẽ to ccoꝛne.

My ſtrength do J afcrybe vnto the / koꝛ
thou O God zart mp defender.

God cheweth me his goodnes plenteoul⸗


Ci, Sodletteth me le medelrze vpon mpne lad


„


lal lix. lx.


Slave them not / leſt my people konetit:
but fcatre them abꝛoade with thy power / a
put them downe / O Loꝛde mpdetence.
Foꝛ the ſynne of their mouth / toꝛ f woꝛdes
Teetbembetatensana aby elt pe
le taken: their preaching
is of curiynge and ipeg.
Conſume them in thy wꝛath / conlume
them that they maye periſh and knowe that
it is God / whych ruleth in Jacob and in all
the worde. Dela. 2 erkokethe
Letthemgotoand Fro/anbeunne about ©"
the cptpe houlenge ipkebogges.
Let them ranebere and there fo meate /
and grudge when they haue not vndugh.
As toi me / wp tynge of thy power / a
praple thy metcy bytymes in the momeng:


fozthou art mpdefence a refuge in the tyme
edu & rekuge in the tym


Tinto the (D my ſtrengch)wyll g linge /
fozthou(D Gerte, . —
cyfull God.


che lx. tame.
Ode 8 eee,
.
Le etoech alla he potuer undo erg ofthe rare . —
ternet thom noware fubbued the Goabptess {hr
Pbpli@ines: and hopcth bp the power of God to Pe
haus the viccorpe of the Amonptes. totes dear
„Cothechaunter / vpon the rote or twpt- Fe Mall fata
hefle/**aprchtamn of Tautb/ kor toteache: h Pica
when he fought agapntt*s pria of Melos” e. Tha
potanua /a Spꝛia of Soba: and when Joab parte e
turned backe enden rig houland dem- Je
m the valley of Salt. he
Sod / thou thathatt cal bs out ¢ called Zeta
atered vs abzoade / thou 5 halt 3.
bene lo loʒe diiplealedat vs / com⸗
fozte vs agapne.
Chou that haſt remoued the lande a deur⸗
dedtt heale the loꝛes therot / koz it chaketh. ox che din
Chou halt ſhewed thy people heup thin⸗ of wpnes tig
ges /thou halt geué ds aß dyrnckẽ of wrne / dee
that we llombze with all. ee
pds 1551 are e aue fo, forge — offome pox
e er mare calt it e n thecuppe
truethß. e Se * anger. Apart


Chat thy beloued myaht be delpuered / z; l g. 1
beipe thé mie thpryahehanbe /abeareme, ae

Sodhath (poke in his hic
thinge retopteth me) wrlldeurde iche /
 meate out the valley Banat

Salaad is mpne/ Manades (8 mene /


ouer Edom win
El 5 out my ſhoue / Phylyſtea chalbe


who will leade me into the ſtronge cite? c
ial


| mith feruet de


che. uñ


of and, Pal le le l


Who wyl bꝛrngeme inte Edo
Dhait not thou dert O Goo, chou that
batt ca vs out: thou God / that wenteſt not
out with oure holtes⸗ N
O be thou dure helpe inttouble / koꝛ vay⸗
ne is the helpe ol man. ;
Choꝛow God we thal do greate actes / koꝛ
it is he 6 hati treade downẽ oure enempes.
CChe.ip Blame. 5
Che defpreth to be deipue red from perell/t traight
Wapes / wyth a promes of thanckeſgeupnge boaſteth /
aqht Kove the that his detp-cis hearde. Be maketh pm leite g fegute
ha e ok hys zyngdome / which laleth
e Co p chaũter bps" eginoth / ot Dauid.
Eare my crxinge (O God) geue here
sheendeeoF the bntomp pꝛaper. 5
Aang brpug From the endes of the earth willz
kee farce cone call ntotge when my herte is in beoublẽ:
Sia be: hier e vp pon an pe bee.
Ff Foꝛ thou art myhope / a ſtrong tower koꝛ
creo come me agaynſt the enempe. 5
Slo the trie J top dwel in thy tabernacle foꝛ euer /
ea ubren (hal. mape be fafe vnder the couerpnge ol
Mateoppel, thb wynges. Selah.
baun ebote Foz thou / OLond/ halt herde mydelxzes /
lan cone thou halt geuen an heretage vnto tholẽ that
deen den- keare che name.
abe “He Chou Malt graunte the Henge a longe
wher we wold lyfe / that bis peãres may endure thoꝛow out
ph vs Beade all gencracyons.
tf, OF 25 That he maxe dwelt befoze God foz euer:
sar oe Spa DO let thy loupnge mercy and fapebfulnes
udwaso;pven prefetue hym. :


seo crpe


tal
Su
che. xi Palme.
dr / how Ce teacher Abe to Sod onelp/and not to men /
facrefocver 3 nether toanpof theit ſtringihes o: armyes: And de⸗
bout lawwed? (cr pbeth their krowardenes and vanptye / wpih the
pettopll J call v eugeaunte that abxdeit it from aboue.


teed aeg Co the caunter/foz** Iduthun /
foobtapne mp & Plaime of Dauid.


a J ſoule wapteth only bpon God / loꝛ

zugt HPL oeygncommerh mpbeipe

Ale of dhe ß. He only is my ſtrength / my talua⸗
fale Rain aes chall not great⸗
0

af the, How longe weil ve ymagyn myrchete

Phim, — AGapNE euctp man: pe Malbe Hayneatithe

Seo fell o be Cozte of pou:pee as a tottrynge wall Mall ve

kept be/andiphe a bzoken hedge.

deinen: Chen deupce is onip how to put him out /

dcn: B their deltte is in pes they geue good woꝛdes

ee e

cial,
bar an he, Heuerthelele mp raue abideth only ops
e en God / koꝛ he is mx Gd. :


Be op is my ltrẽgth / my ſaluacp / m

dekencertothat J Mall not fall. ane
JnGodis mp health np gioze/my might /

and in God is mp truſt.

DO put poure truſt in hym all ware (ve


people) poure out poure hertes betoꝛe hym / 1b une the
third Plata


toz Sd is dure hope. . Sclah.
Is foz men / chex are but vapne / men are C
dylceattull:ppon the werghtes they are all
together lyghter than vanpte it telt. :
O trult not in wzonge and robberx / geue
not poure le lues vnto vanpte: pt rpches ens
create fet not youre herte vpon them. 5
God fyake once a wozde / twyle haue 9
Be lame: chat power belongeth vn⸗
Chat thou Loꝛde art mercyfuſ / and that
thot rewardeſt euerr man accozdynge to
bis woꝛkeß.


es. Che iii) Platt
f Che. inti. me.
He chewweth how he gaue his mynde to the contem⸗
placpon of the goodner and power of God / and was
ther with wonderfully comkoꝛted / when he was abe
tent from the holp frat in the wudernes of Juda /
notigbe the pertecucpon of Saul: and how he lawe
Ip the ſpꝛete / uoth bis exaitac pon and the deſtruccion


the per ſon of bpm lelke.


Etxuij


A Plalme of Bauid / when he was in the eh mn buch


* wyldernes ot Juda.
God / thou art my Gon: early welt J A
Odkrehe.


OF yCoute theu ttcth tothe / my lech
lengeth after the in a baren and dꝛpe lande /
where no water is.

Chus do J loke kozthe in thy Sãctuarx /
that Jmyght beholde thy power and glozv.

For thy loupnge kyndnelle is better then
eee neee th

islonge a: (i) e / B

and lptt vp my bandes in thpname, 5

My Coute ts latiſtped euen as it were w
mary d tatneue when my mouth pꝛapleth
the with topfull lyppes.

In mybedde wen J remembꝛe the / and
when J wake mytalkinge halbe of the.

Foz thou halt bene my helper / and nder c
the hadowe ok thy wynges wyl J reiople.

My Coulebangeth opon the / thy ryght
hande vpholdeth me.

Chepleke after my ſoule / but in bayne /
foz they wall go vnder the earth.


fell to che tore
of quda.


hey thalt fan into the twerde / and bes vate meancep


poꝛcpon foꝛ koxes. 2 Saut
But the Eynge thal reio pte in God: all

thepthatfweare by him / halbe commended /

foz the mouth of pers thaibe ſtopped.


he. lxiiti Palme.
CA proper agapne betrapers- holt dipocprron he
delcribel ede de e %


>


le his holte


: wheri i aale ticatet!
Ebiwsencmpes;twherin he allo fig ureth Chꝛilt vnder 15 Wen


ij. Ol Dauid. Plal . lxiiij lx b.. lx vj.
au Lone the Co the chaunter / a Plalmeof Maud, Che rpuer of God is full of waters / chou
terteck the. fh. . are mp vopce / O God / in my com⸗ pꝛepareũt man his comme / thus thou pꝛoui⸗
Vl plarnte / pꝛelerue my ipte from feare deſk kon che earth,

er
nde me from the gatherpuge to gether che harde 1 —
ol Frowarde / krõ Pheape of wecked doers, Coft with the dꝛoppes or rarne / the
f e ene incre ace ot it.


0 with thy good /;

and cute with their venrmous worde lyxne e fame a
Che dwellynges of the wyldernes are fat this oF the can

allo / that they Wophe wählt andthe lptle .


with arowes. 5 thy *fotetteppes dꝛoppe fatnele.
a e
eicher ueegtenichete, s commu⸗ belles are plealaunt on euery iyde. nern n
nedamonge che lelues how ther maylape Che loldes are tullot chepe / the vallers
mares:tucbtaye ther) who wall de them ſtande lo thicke with coꝛne that ther laugh


pn wyckednes / a kepe it le- andlenge.


thane Oe a sic
ung Foz

falmp@ mone th all men to the a Lobe the
ate pt a


5 Ther I

ber ribet among them feues/euerg man nthe .
A 2

7 geen bled aeacinel aid aaa 4 —.
bunded.

F 2600 Feschen anne tonges wal mage them Coche chaunter / a Pralme of Pauid.


fee ofthe good Be toptuil in God; al pe landes linge
Arefebuced-bue fall in fo moch that who lo Cepty them / chall —— — ae ane


alwapte ludgig laugh them to fcozne,
well of Sode Andall men that leit / wan tape this maße his pꝛapte to be gloꝛpous.
3 Save onto cod: O how wondertun are
that be boet 2 cher wal perceaue, chat te Mane 55 e ae
„ ight e in the power e enem unded.
werden e eee ong O thatall the wonde wolve wozchypße
inbiswoite. Virus of herte / halbe gladtherol. che fenge of iges prapte thyname Seiad,
Bull. a. Cony 12 —_ come hither and bebolve the wozches
Ohe. Irb. Pfalme. C- o God / whlch is Co wonderfull in his doing
Che ſheweth t God wh ich pxtncipaliy property ami the ch of men.
Pe le te ce ge eee gr
Seale bee geuet)aboundarne, oath wer wenn thozouthe water on fate: ther⸗
thingespartepning do this like n oF heudly thing allo. fope wyll — —— mobi ‘ai 8
5 * nter / a Plalme and ſonge He ru leth with ys power foz euer
r he wee ze eres behewweche peopiethe teneastes ie
Plane : Hou / O God/art prapledinSpon/ a not be able to cxalte them ſeiues. “ Delah. 8
4 TT onto the is the vowe perkourined. O magnpfye oure God / pe people / make
Chou heäreſt the pꝛaper /therfoze the vopce ochis pꝛaple to be hearde.
commeth all le ach onto the. Which holdeth oure foule in like / and lul⸗
Oure mildedes pꝛeuaple agarnſt vs / Oh kreth not oure fete to lyppe.
be thou mererkull pnto oure fpnnes, $07 thou / O God halt pꝛoued bs / thou
Blelied is the ma whom thou choleſt and halt tryed vs ipke as ſyluer is trred. €
reckaueſt vntothe / thathe may dwell in thy Chou hat bꝛought vs into captpurte / a
courtethe chalbe latilkped wich the plealu⸗ taped trouble vpon dure iopneg.
res olthyhoule / euen of thyholptemple. Chou haſt luſtredmen to ryde ouer oure
Peat̃e os/accopding onto typ wonderfull heades / we wente thozow kyze ¢ water / but
Buightugulnedte / O S oure lãſuacpõ: thou chou haſt bꝛought vs out / and rekreched bs.
chat art the hope ok all the ends or the earth / Cherfoze wpil J go into thy houle wrth
andof the bꝛoade fee. brétofirynges/to pape the my bowes / which
Which in his treaty fetter tak § mon: 4 prompted with mp iyppes /a fpake wyth
tapnes and is gyꝛded aboute with power. in mouth / when J was in trouble.
Which ſtylletb che raginge of che lee / 7 J wyll offre onto the Eatt bꝛentlacritices
roarrnge of his waues / and the woodnes of 5 a will offre bul⸗
e people. 0 soates, .
* Sher that oct n he vttermott partes O comehither a herken /all pe that feare
Venen e ia paling 00/9 well tell vou / what he hath done foz
the moznpng a euenyng ſtarres to praple 5, mpfoule. f
C Chou viſiteſt the karth / thau waterelt it / I called vnto hym with my mouth / and
and makeſt it verr plenteous. gaũẽ hem paptes with mx tunge.


Ie zune de.
lg.


22 8 357 5
ij Ot Baud.
. z enclpnevnto wyckednede with my
herte ſthe Lozde wyll not heare me. 8
Cherfoze God hath hearde me / and conty-
dꝛedthe vopce ol my praper, a Ae
Praplenbe God / which bath not caſt out

my pꝛaper /ner turned his mercy kro me.


GaTbe.roi Pralme. :

he wyſheth the farour of Hod to the prople of J-

racl/to thpntent that therbp the hnowledge ¢ praple

pid godly goodues ma pe be ſpredde chez ow the hole
oelde.


uae Joke the Cothe chauntet / in Heginoth / a tak:
wot i. 0 me gene


ame fort

as 18 Od be mercpfull ontobs / blelle vs / s
2 Gdbewetcheiraht of hes countenaunce

ue pial.“ ppon bs. * Selah,

erer, Cpat we may know thy tape bps earth /

seiegemed, thy fäuyng healt amonge all Heithen.

Let che people prapte che / O God / yer let
all people pzapte the.

O ler the people refopte and be glad / that
thou iudgeſt the kolke ryghtu dull / and go⸗
uerneſt che nacyons vpon earth, „

Let the people pꝛaplethe / O God / let all
pedple prapte the.

God / euch oure awne God / geue vs hys
bledpnge / that the earth mape bꝛynge forty
her enckeale.

God bieſe vs / and let all the endes of the
woꝛlde keare hym.


moray "5 *
Che. bi Plalme.

Che Heweth the great goodness wonderfull power
which theLordercrcived toward his peoples the holp
citie Jerulale m an geupng them the vpctoꝛpe(as ſome
erpounte)of the Spriang, the Edomptes / 3 the Ame
‘Monptes; Fpguringe opentp therm the kpngdome or
Thu / vnto whom he lawe by the ſhete that the hole
walde hulde obeper wherftze he crvorteth all men to
geue praple vnto the Londe.


a „ Coge changer pri,
To aunter /a me and ſonge
ol Dauid. Pee


we
laine


Bap Ct Godarple / o hall his enempes be
ve,, Laren auoche that pate em tell
gate thetoe lee bekoze him. 8 8
ane, — Lpke ag p coe vanptheth / to chalt thou
Mtotme, dapue them awape: ¢ Ipke as ware melteth
ant. 2g. vat the frꝛe to challthe vngodix perp at the
gene
erpabtuous chalbe glad a teiopte
betoꝛe Sod / they halbe merx ¢ toptull.


Dial. Irvij x Irbiij


‘ a ae
| Leh,
loners out of captpupte in due leaton / but
letteth che renagates cotynue in fcarcenene;

O God / when thou wenteſt forty bekoꝛe
che people/ when thou wentelt thozow the
wyldernele. Selah. 5
Che earth Hoke and the heauẽs daopped
at the pretence of God in Sinai) at the pꝛe⸗
fence ot God which is the God ot Acrael. ce By thisgra
Thou D Godtendetka*gracpous rayne reas oes
bponthpne enherttaunce / and rekrelhelt it / cranptped the
when it is de. worde s golpel
Chat a beat, map divell eherin wich large |
mah the goodnetie halt prepared £03 theres ofc put
. 5 e me. cxlviij . b.
Che Lope Wall geue che woꝛde / with C
greate holtes of Euangelpſtes. :

Aynges with their armpes thal fle / and

ther ol the noulpolde hall deurde b lpople.

Iklo be that be ipeamonge the pales / the

doues fethers halve couered with lyluer / a
her wynges okthe colour of golde.

Loven the Almpabty letteth Rynges bps

Bearth it halbe cleave eué in the darcknes.
The bpli of Balan isGors hy / the hll ot
Balan is a plenteous hpll.
hr hoppe ve to / pe 5 greate hylles :- d. Chat ia
Ft pleateth God to dwell ppon ches hyn / mighty synged
ver the Lozve wyll abpde in it fo euer.
Che charettes of Godare many . tp.
mesa choulande the Lozee is amonge thé
in the holr Stnat.

Chou art gone vp anhye / thou haſt led

55 receaued tber
0 07 thyne enempes/ that
might diwell wich the Lowe God. re

Prapten be che Lozboapiy/euen the Gob
which belpeth da, a poureth bys benelptes
ce e that be Saupcur / cuen S lt

nen 39 cali
ebe Teen bam etcapedeaty. ig
The Godtgatimptech the enempesopon
the heades and bpon che hearie fcalpes:foche
as go on Epil in there wyckednes. 2
The Lozdhath farde tome wyl J binge
agapne from Balan / come welt Fibemge
agapne from the depe of the tee. 5
Chat thy fote may be dypped inthe bioud
10 ome br. e chrdogges map


Gt is wen fene / O Gd hot tho ren
dn thou my God and Bynge goeſt in the


Ohlrngebnto Sov/iynge praplesbnto Danckuarp.


his name: magnykpe hym that rydeth aboue

che heauens (whole name is the Loꝛde) and

reiople befoze hym. N

B. He tsalather of the tatheriene he is a

defender of wyddowes: euen God in his holy

babytacyon, :
Bets the Godtharmakeeh men to be of

one mende in houle / and byengeth the pe⸗


ku arr.
he lingers go betoꝛe / andthen the myn⸗

ſtrels amonge the mapdẽs Wihe tymbꝛeſg.

O geue thankes vnto God che Loꝛde inf
the congregacyon/ for che welles of Jcrael.
„Chere iptle Beniaminy, the Pꝛyntces oF
Juda / the Pꝛynces oF jon / and the
Bronces of Bephtha ly brare rwieamonge


f chr


7


i. Ol Dauid, —Prab lee,


Chy Godhath cõmytted ſtrength vnto ) Cher that late in the gate cpane agapnſt
fable the thinge / D God / that thou hat me a the deõckardes made longes bpon me.
wꝛoughtinvs. But lone ⁊ made mp prayer vnto the in
Foꝛ chr temples cake at Jerutalem Hall an acceptable tyme.
Aynges bzpnge pꝛelentes vito he. Heareme / O God / with thy greate mer⸗
& Bepzoue the beaſtes amonge the reedes, cy änd ure helpe.
the heape ofbulles with the calueß: thole ? Cane me out ok  myze / 5 J tyncke not:
dꝛyue £o2 money. : Oh let me be delpuered from them that hate
Dh (catre the people p delpte in batarle. me / and out of the deve waters. e. tt thts
Che Pynces Hall come out ok Egypte/ Lek the water floud dꝛowne me chat the table de ade
the Mora land Hall ſtretch out her hands depe lwalowe me not vp / andthat the pytte lnare de Chet
vnto God, ſhut not her mouth vpon me. 1
Dͥrknge vnto God / O pe kingdomes ots Heare me. O Lozd/fozthy tourna hyn: be ees
eave tong pꝛapſes ontop L:. Selah nelle is comfortable: turne the vnto me ac⸗ thew apfarse
Which ktytteth in the heauens ouer all kröõ cozoynge vnto thy greate merer. Defttuccid asit
che begynnpnge 1. o /be alitende out hrs rde not thy face fromthr feruaunt / tos g comet whe
boyce / dee and that a myghtre vorce. J amin trouble: O hatte the to helpe me. 3 ta aad
Alerpde ve che power onto God / his glo⸗ Wzawenyedntomploule/etaucit: Oh e Cie g.
ryis in ĩſrael / and his might in che cloudes. delxuer me becaule of myne enemes. bun paräphag
God is wonderkull in his Danctuarp / he is Chou knoweſt my repꝛote / my hame a 1010 thussket
the God of Aral he well geue reach and my dptyonour:mpneaduerfarpesare all in ps geg
power vnto his people. Blelled be God. thy kbght. uteri ß
che Irtr. Palme. . „Che rebuke beakerh me bette) andma- deere
Ca cöplapnte of thegrrat adüerlltpes ot wand eg: netz meheup- J lobe for fome to haue prtye pe tbat ther a
png the kpgurr of Lbzitts oF the kapnttes 2 Chr: ppon me / but chere is no man: a toꝛ fome to Ebel
2 Lobe the Bet epee 2 comtoꝛte me / but J tynde none. sateen
78 Wah apꝛophecpe of theencreate or the church topned Cher, Kaue me Gail to cate ard when Au n
e ee gegen e
1 em Co the chat on br dot 1
eee che wwe cb tht 4 them lelues with all an occatr on to tall and (Oa 00


Flv, Palme, Bere a rewarde öntothem. fe


cued, Foon
a 8 Let their blinded, le not: ir the pt
Slates paper atin poepemzembere aan 15 pec
no ground is /: J am come into depe waters / owe out thyne indignacxon vpon thẽ / ot.
. ee ee sia) bietehptoathilldppeaturetae boot ie
am weerx of crping / my thet 7 5
m togpe tact) efor ‘paptinge folonge tonne bebopde/¢noman 27 Mei
vpon me cod. : 5
Pabenchathate me without a caute) are . Lap they pertecute hem whom thou halt daten
mothen $ heartes of mpbead:thep that are Cmpten/and befpoe thy woundes they haue alleen
myne enempes a wolde deſtrope me gutlele geuen hemmoo. uerof 5
aremynbtye: J am fapne to pape the thingg Vet them fall from one wyckednelle to pn e. 40
that J neuer tone. another a not come into thy rightuoutnetie,
B. „ Sbotheu ame mytymplenene / and Leet thẽ be wyped out ol che boke ofthe ¢ x cute
eee a waren Wm faa
Let not thé that truſt in the / 1 ne andin heupnelle / ped ou
of Booſtes / be acpamed taz my caule et not let chr helpe dekende me / O God, ene


thotethat letze the / de confounden throw . Chats map praptethename of Sodmith har cen ,


me / O God ok Iltael. alonge / a magnikpe tt with thankelgeuing. iytr che dei


And why? for thy lake volute repꝛoke / This Hall please the Loꝛde better then or the imma F

cok face. abulloche that hach homes and hootes. cen

5 J am became Craunger ontomp bze⸗ . O confyorethisandbegiad(ve that be in ge neren

de Of thissea thzen / a an aleaũt onto mpmothers chyidzẽ. aduerſpte)ſeke acter God / and youre ſoult deccbz pe.

bat ngen er, For the sete ot thene boute hath enen wanlene. ; Ana

Pe. f d alb eaden mefanmthe tebubes oe che that tebu- Forte n ane Yeareth the pooze / ande- fa

ih. Reg · Fir. hed the / is Fallen ppon me. Eppieth not hys pieloners. weh w

C


J wepteandchattened mykelke with fa- Le heauen and earth prapte ham / the lee : wurf.


ftynge/and that was turned to myrepꝛoke. and all thatmoueth cher in. Danilo
J put onalack cloth / and therfore hep Foz God well faue Syon/ 4 buy che Puri“


ieſted vpon me. certres of Juda / that men max dwen daß


+ N
7 5 40 5 85 .
and haue them in pottefpon, Let them be confounved and perrch / tha!
Che ede ol hs teruãuntes ſpall inheret are agapnit my louie: iet them be couered
tt / z they iouc his name thall dwell therin, with an. a rden that tebe todo
CChe. hr. Plate, meeuell,
Che beceth beipere th emetcebisenempes) As fos me / J wyll pacpenti
sPLche the that the kapnctes pid Sefer ute . wape / and 8 p a t
af the. i. Cothe chaunter / ol Baud to bꝛynge My mouth wall tpeake of thy rrgheu⸗
Fame, 4 tovemembzaunce. outnede and taupng health e all the Daye an au che de
Ake the/D God/tadelouerme / s longe to J knowenoendetberoe, hr Pee
512 —— a mate me pen al Lone God) and g wyll melt cout
Bun. f. e en dae atte mp arte. dungeon. ieee inca
embeturned backwarde / and puttocons Chou / O Gen / hak lerned mur rb, Gel
kul pon / that wych my euxll. routh vy vntyll now/therfoze well lk 5 e
ergcoucemervere are ebe Wgaate ne nf c 6 8
A ale me not / od / in
But let all ttjole that tene the / be ioptull age /when Jam pel ct ad seed
Eglad in the: and let all roche as delpteinthy chewed thyne arme vnto chydders chridze /s
ae health / fape alwape: the Loꝛde be ee toe that are vet toꝛ to come.
. outhes/D God / is b
e een ff Sales
a F PRebnto the?
Chouattmphelpe / inp redemer andy OO what great troudles an *
„Sbm n tarpenge. haſt thou ewe me: n e e
2 me. .
‘ol ea jayne,
Seek bin cence be be Chu halt byougpe me cogteatyonoute/
Fat ei al pan sare
2
a Jie Aiea ped —— 995 wl a a pan ihr burg 0 vn⸗ 9
eee
eme. p ipppes wodde fapne kynge pꝛayles
Be thou my ſtronge holde (where vnto 2 nad
mape all wape fle) thou that batt 5. a manne
tobelpe me: lo thou art my houle ot detente My tonge talneth of thyreghtuoutnene
cn ne, O mp Gob/out othe ban 1
ofthe bmn out ofthe bande of Benigh- mecell. N
$03 thou / O Lode God / art the th ¶&he . lxxij plaime.
Z ds for tou attmpbope cucn toes ovou Lien ede genere
J baueleancd pon che euerlentce J was bomersacal aves the ovr of he brenne
bone. thou art he g toke me out of my ma- Salomon,
chers wabe/therfozeismomavteatimave . Of Balomon.
Cue the Rynge chr iudgemẽt / O God /
the multy⸗ EE che enges au bens
a taynes are yne
Chat he mape gouerne thy le accoz⸗ berttande the
beg tito g beten oppor : great mena
. Chat che⸗ mountapnes mape brynge ™lets’that re
eae am the tie bas Fpgbtuoutnelle spear een
De Chall bepstche Cymple folk by tbett ur, Her hoe
rege dekendethe cheidren of che pooze / ¢ tes. Heaime
puntty the tezongus doer, ee
Chou thait be feared ag long as zune
O God: my God / 2 one generacron


Be


ti Ol Dauid.


He ſhalt come downe lye the rapne in to
sae en, Kem dzoppesithat wa⸗


terthee

Inhys teme hall rrahtuouſnege flopch /
ver and abounbaunceot peace / lo lunge as
ao ae b endurety,

His dompnyon ſhalbe krom the one fee to
* eaters Grom the loud onto the wondes


kee t) . Cher that divell in the wrmdemes wan
Seale bien ban bug. bim / her enemes Mpa? lick


tothe ber⸗ the du
e of the he pate c fer Gof the es halt
groundeEla. binge pꝛelentes / the Bpnges ot and
Hig Saba wball ore gpftes.
All Apnges thalt bers. brm / and all
Heathen ſwall do hm
€ Foꝛ he Wall dener i the Phan when he
crpeth / änd the neadp that hath nobelpe,
e chalbe tauoꝛable toß Cimple a pooꝛe /
4. all eee che loules ok toche as be in


ot wen delpyuer their Coules krom extoꝛ⸗

abd e wall thetr bioud

ea cchat ts to

the bing: e maligne, and onto hym thalbe gee

Bete MO aon . the golde of Arabta: Pꝛaxer Haibe

Ei the poore/ made euer vntohym / and dapixe chan be be
Somes pꝛapled.

Chere chalbe an heape of coꝛne in the
karth bye vpõ the hülle his krute thal hake
ivke Libanus / and ſhalbe grene in the cpte/
Ike grate vpon the earth.
on name 2 bd euer / his me

all remapne buder the tunne amonge the
poſterttes / which (halbe bletted thoꝛow him /
and all the en wall prapte him.

Blelled be the Loꝛde God euen the God
bag est) only doth wöderous ching.

aue bethe name of his sah bse
euer / and altiandes be Tnkented
tr. Amen / amen.
here ende che papers ot Dauid
the tonne of Jette.


The thyꝛde Lreatple,
17 Sry e


D


Plal. lxxiij.


for ther 2 pavelt ot death / but
ſtande fat lyke a palace.

Cher come innompltoztune irke other
agg de plagedipke other mẽ.

And this is the caule that ther be fo putt
vp in perde and duerwhelmed with cruclee
andonepgbtuoutnede,

Cheit evestwell for tatnele / ther do euẽ
what ther ipt.


‘Cozrupte are the / and tyeake blarphe· S
mxes malpcpouſ / pꝛoude and pꝛetumptu⸗
dug ate their woꝛdeß.
Cher tretch forth their mouth onto the
heauen ¢ thet ei foge Boeth thozot § world.
‘TChertoze tal the people onto toe /s chere
out lucke thepno fmall auauntage.
Culh(Cape thep)how ſhuld God perceaue pp
itꝛis there: de intze moos hrelte imnocencyeny
Wo/theteare the vngodif / chele protpere to ce
in the wozlde / thele haue ryches in podeuxõ. Luhe.
‘ae then clenfe mp berte in bapne zn e he
(chought Ja wach mp hades in tnocecy: tayde Pune
W wuld J be chen punpthenday- vil
Ir / e be chaſtened every moznpnges €
Yee q had almoſt allo apne euen as they:
dut lo / chen huld en. condemnedthe ge⸗
neracpon ol thy chplog
wan Ihc obnberianbe this / but
was toharde kor me.
ba I wente into the Sanctuary of
God / and contyo zed the ende of the le men.
Namelx / how thou halt lett hein a xp⸗
a di 2 cal thẽ downe
eadlynges anddeſtrope
O how lodenly do they conlume / perxtz /
and come to a fearful ende:
Tee euẽ uke aga dꝛeame when ane awa⸗ ,
ket / ſo makeſt thou cheir d mage bo ba- weten
nych out of the cite. orgloryte
Thusmy hert wat greued / and it wente D
euen thoꝛow my repnes
So kolpch was J ano fgnezaunt/ a
W erg oe bethe / h
ama jus
boldettnie by my ryght .


Chou lesdel me with thy councen / and
alterwarde ee

me in hea⸗

N that à de⸗


50 / tofpeatic ot an —
che. lx Staune.


222


C Oe complapneth of She ae rer ad

Sbokchebiaphenge oF wpcked people

Sad and his halp endes un ater be bath ia —

— the —— the prpncppall thpnges of

woꝛrlde / to the Grengebettpnge z coufpzmpnge of

teow en ser

mage beaueng runder

wosthe punpchement.


An inſtruccpon of Atcaph.
Sod / wherkoꝛe doeſt thou cal bs fo
cleane awape ? why is thy**wzath fo


nose © thpnie bpon thy congregacyo, toh


were) DF chou halt purchaled Crom the begennenge: W


in dhe che trate of tyrne enherptaunce / whom thou
. hae redented,ewsen this hril of ton wherin
dar here n fig thou dwelleſt.
—— Creade vpon them with thy tete / and caſt
— them dowvne to the grounde / £o2 the enempe
e bad ee together in? Sanctuarp,
34. Chyne aduerfarics roare in thyhouſeg / a
B tet vp ther banners koꝛtokens.
enmap te: yeas glyſter aboue / like
as chole that hewe in the wodd.

They cut downe all the ſylrng woꝛcke of
che Sanctuary with belles and

They haue fet pre bpd ine 2 Sanctuarp /
ther haue dekyled the Lt place ot thr
e

ee they Cape in their e
them all to gether IT bane they brent vp
all the bouſes of God in the lande.

We fe dure tokens no moze / ther is not
one Pꝛophet moze / no not one that vnderſtã⸗
deth eny moꝛe.

O Sod / how longe challche aduerfarp do
this dyſbonoure: how longe ſhall the enemy
bialpheme thyname : koz euer?

hn withdzawelt thouthyne hand! why
ere the

olome ‘to conſume thyne enempes:

But Goo is my Rynge ot olde / che helpe
that is done vpon earth / he doth it hym fife.

Chou deuideſt the tee thozow th power /

brates the heades of the dꝛag ons in


chen iptet the headeg of Leutathan in


peceß / geueſt hym to be meate toꝛ the peo⸗
ple in che wyfdernelle.


Arpt eles arabe hen them


bevel vp mi
ken cure ta oo
1

Chou halt lett al the bo: ders of the earth /

thou batt made both Commer and wynter.
Rememb7e this / O Loꝛde / hom the ene

en the kolycb people blac⸗

pheme me.

O delxuer not 5 coule of thy turtle doue

dntoche beakes / and forget not the congre⸗


ij. Ol Dauid. Plal. lrxiiij. x. Ixx b.


hote agapnũ the wepe of chr d when increate


Ltr vij.
gacpon of the d pooꝛe foz euer. roy
Lokeppon the couenatit/fo2 the darctie #9 f. F..
houles ol the earth are full of toycheonente, 2
O let not d fymplego awape aſhamed:
fo2 diag pooꝛe a ned geue pꝛaxtes vnto thy


nam
Arzte) o God a mapntepne thyne atone
Saami the kolrchmen blats
Forget not the bopce of thrne enempes /
kor the pꝛelumpcron of them that hate the /
eth euer moze and moze.


Cche irre Palme.
COure faupout


wwarneth chat ne man be fo hardp ss to withdkande his

autem enden de ne nb.
outer mance

spte totem tpatdeleue men. een


Co the chaunter / r deſtrope not /
a Palme a longe of àſaph.
p Ok this ye haue in the S laime ſvij here it bapely
74
cue in hym / I
de when the Tode labil. e


Sto 5 O Sod/ wen we geue tha kes / 2
Vene the weu we geue thankes/@
tepng tyyname is fo npe, we wpll tell
ofthe ead niece worckes, 9
mape get a conuen me,
one 2 — en al 15 me
earth is weake a t is t
but beave bp her pplers pitas
e e
f/ not vp pour ;
ee a font 0 be he, i Pres
cake
ndcvoithaiyeneckes eT bee pers ewe tyre
Fos vꝛomòcpõ cometh nether fs the Catt pone, sand
ner Fro che welt / ner pet krõ d v wyidernelle. d.
And whp? God isthe Judge: he putteth ae yet 4.
downe one and letteth bp another, be South: uee
Foz in the bande of the Lode there’ is 4 ts Jewrye,
24597 babe Gronge wyne / a he poureth nag decide
ol
Hs koche dzegges therot/al the ongopty Se dn
Seed ae wall bzencke chem / and ache ee
altlic tp
Burg wyl talne of the God ol Jacob / 6 f. 5 a
cep ‘Pongodly wily breake/ leer
S the hoꝛnẽs ol § reahtudus dwalbe exalted.


Obe Irrbj Plalme.
etoeth that Jerufalem was matuelcudp and
ee me Boftbe Lodiand thecbpbiserceabing avn
bothexvol
aeg eme game the tptie
andfonge of Atapy. penis Dial


Site 1


Cee


W,


Ok Dauid.


4. Af Juda is God knowne / hrs name is
Ine in Arael,


Plal lxxvij x. lxxviij


mere clene gone?
Jah promtyte come bttetiytoan ende


At Balem is his tabernacle / and ko; euermoze?


is dwellynge in ron.
bl chere Dreabeto be che arowes or bowe


Path the Loz koꝛgottẽ to be gracpous⸗
Dy/bathhe Hutt op 2 c. urn;


the chyide, che werde / and the whole bat netke mn dplpicature: ab, ts


. * Selah,
Banga oe assur meen e mpgye then
the belies of robbers,


Aethe lac J came cothys pownte,thae 4 pamese


oughe:D why art thou fo folyih-the right
. chende canchaunge a


oune halbe robbedand llepe their Cherkoze wyll J remembze the worches
ann the 4 —. walbe able to do no ofthe Loꝛde / ard cali to mende thy wonders


with cheirhandes. ol olde tyme.
5 maven rebubet then o God ol Ja: wil (prake ot all thy woꝛckes / andme
cob / both the charettes and hozimen Wall talfipnge Walbe ol thydoinges.


kall ond


daten begebe coe k
Ip and beutentp


Bpecboth nse
de dach mar


when thou art angrye:
herde fed beaut / the erty tre hech a is nl.


Belles
re


ware / O God / is holr: who is fo
as Gov?


iepe. C
Chou art kearkul / to who may abrde in greate andi


Shen ert Scha bottwondets thou


hen thou letteſt thy iudgement be halt declared ihr power amonge the people.


Thou wrd thynee* arme had delpuered wD


ee wien God arpfeth to geue tudges thy people  euenthe Connes of Jacob g Jo- ce Meme ty
— tohelpe all them tharbe inaduer⸗ leph. Grengths por


Che waters farve the / O Gd / waters fig. 44


E e p pentbou panpaped: one man be man tawe the / o were alraped / the deapthes were


ig. Neg. xir.


ol the earth.


5 I che ruh Blalme.
Che tapth that he was grraued aboue meature forthe
mplerp of the holy people's with Cozoufle thought.
:!:! has confab ee eemenbraer
e n. be wonersand maruclles Dyed the Lorde bad
‘Plaime. done Fo: his people. ;
Kaa, „ Cothe cgaunter tor Aduthun


— aplalme ok fap).


e, Cryer vnto God wyth my vopce / vee
Jue Goderped J with my vorce / and
he hearde me.
In the tyme of mytrouble J fought the
Lorde / J helde pp mne handes onto h
Inthe npghe cealon / ko: my toule refuted all


te.
düngen toad nbeupnele cheughe bps
eo" ie was beres / then dyd F


Sofeble, that A coudenst(peake.
Ehen remẽmbꝛed g the cymes of olde /a
the peares that were pat.

5 K calledto remembzaunce my fonge in
the naht Acömuned with myne awne hert /
arid fought out my fpzete.

Wypll the Lope caſt out foz euer?
wi be be no moze intreatede


chelpabtenenges cone


that thou art redy to punpſbe mi


Chpthonder was hearde rounde aboute /
on the grounde /
was moued and thoke with all.


knowe tech


ople Ipne u flocke oF fat hn
7


aah
Che Hhewerd that it is the commaundement
and a (pecpall good thpngyperfectipto r-
actes and Deades of thell ode done to his people. Then
layth he / that alt thoughe thep were vnkapthkull⸗ pet
dyd be wonders in Szppte / and brought them from
thence / and thoughe thep pꝛouocked bpm to anger m
the rnede / gant them aboundantly hes vente
kptes. And after that / when thep tere deftcoped
‘which came forth of Egypte / ko their

woughbt he their fonnes(although tber folowed their
kathers vnkapthkulnes / z det wonders done
in the wuder des f their fathers) into the lande pros
melled / zdꝛoue out the mhabiters: zn which although
e often punyched them greuoulp/ when ac erst
ed and tempted hpim¢ at the lat in token of A send

feruent wratty bekpde their great daughter
allo the Arche to be taken From them in the tyme of
e he them — 2 ted
10 58 Sis ng

agapne at Jerulate. Jn

Rerbecketh hi —— Baud.


In inſtruccyon ot æcaph.
are mylawe / O my peopie / encly- 2
: 8 ——— DERE
2 wyll open my mouch in parables / ard
fpeake ot thrnges ol ode. 0


sae 5
ij Ok Danid,
Which we haue herde a knowne / a coche
as oure fathers haue tolde vs.
Chat we chulde not hyre them krom the
cheldzen of the generacpons to come: but to
Wewe the hondurokche Lozde/ hrs myght a
wonderfull woꝛckes that he bath done.
He made a couenaũt with Jacob / a gaue
Ilraela lawe, which he comm̃ zunded dure
forefathers to teache their chyldzen.
Chattheir poſterite myght Bowe it / and
che chrldzen which were pet vnbozne.
Co thintent that when they came vp / ther
myght ſhewe their chyldꝛen the lame.
That they allo mpghe put their truſt in
God / z not to Forget what he had done / but
to kepe bps comm̃aundementes.
And not to be as their forefathers /a**fro
arde and ouerth warte generacion / a gene⸗
rac pon that let not their herte a ryght, and
whole cpꝛete was not true towarde God.
ti — Dene dame bade 3 —
0 carpeg bonwes / turned
Fun gange them kelues backe in the tpme of batayll.


esol Cher kepte not che couenaunt of Gol / a


gechparen of wolde not walkie inhys lawe.


z ucuer⸗ Chey koꝛgat what he had done / and the


=a 6
3 won derkull wozckes that he had chewed fog


the Prophetes chem.
Ferrer Maruelous thynges ddhe in the lyght
wadecttdve the of dure fathers in the lande of Eg ypte / euen
kurden which in the kelde ol Foan.
aalenz as K J, Be deurded the lee allet them go thoꝛow
speeee Ole. it / j made the wat. 18 to Fandelpke a wall.
44.8.5... In the dape tyme he led thẽ with a cloude /
0 Caud g all the npayt thozow with a lyght of tpꝛe.
He cloaue the hard rockes in the wylorr⸗
nelle / a gaue them dzencke therot / as it had
bene out or the greate deapth.
ebꝛought waters out of p tony rocke /
lo that hey gullbed out ipke the rruers.
Yet fo; ali this they lynned agaynũt him /
S pfouoked the moot hpeſt in d wyfdernes.
Chev tempted Godin tgeir hertz / and re⸗
qupꝛed meate fo2 their luſt.
For they ſpane aganſt God lapde: pee
xy the ta, Pee God Hall prepare a d table ind wilder
tac Woroetimac Che den roche tbat
‘ortes Lo / he ſmote the ſtonx ror tthe wa⸗
pony “nce err Greames gufthed outand ehe trreames
14 Kotten LOWED with all: but how canbe geue bye g
Lern for the PZOUPDE fet Foz his people?
bates water When p Lozd hearde this he was woth:
aide came fo the fyze was kyndled in Jacob / and heup
Sen he OPpleature agarnd Teach,
Balrriß. üb. Becauite they beleued not in God / ¢ put
not thelr truſte inhys helpe.
Sohe commaunded the cloudes aboue /
opened che doꝛes olheauen.
He rtapneddowne Manna vpon them fog
to kate / and gaue them bꝛed from heauen.


Vlal, lxxviij.


Ctrviij
Chen ate ther angels e xkode / Foz he tent 25
them mate ynough. called the fode
‘De cauleatye Catt wynd to blowe pnder beige at
che heauẽ / z thozow bys powerhe bꝛought vie coche ode /
in the louth wynde. 2 but becante it
He made lech to rayne vpen thé as thicke came dounekrß
as 1 bechered ouics ithe as the lande abe nrg
ok the lee. face
De let it all amonge thett tentesrounde gris do her
aboute their habptacpons. faye bo tome
Do they ate and were fplted/Fozhe gaue li ddr al
them their awnedelyꝛe. dloubes been
Cher were not dylapoynted of their luſt. tere came from
But whple} meate was pet in their mou- 2 the sloue
thesstbebeup wzath of God came ppenthe i rde
dewe the welten oeche / fmote Downe He Seat
the choſen men of Ilrael. fe it cam from
But koꝛ all this they linned pet moꝛe / and the almpz htp.
beleuednothis wonderous wozckes. cen p
Chertoze their dapes were canlumed in gem big
vanpte / and fodentp their veares were gone. ¢ «rep the wel
When he llewe them / they lought hem / tbr tacinihe
turned them early onto God. a enden
Chey thoughethen chat god was tyeiratelhzueb p
fuccoure/ anothat the Gre God was their re⸗ noble s mighty
a 4 peynces : pies
Heuerthelele they dyd but flatter ine in inte palihoce
die routes and dptlembicd wyth yom inen moe
rtonges. nourcd in ihys
Foꝛ their herte was not whole with him / walde. pine
nether contynued they in his cournaunt, m. xxo.
But he was lomercpfull/ p he foxgaue
their myldedes / and deſtroped them not.
wels an wo wt Cue ine Boe
pe / an fire ole dyl⸗
pleature to eryſe. . ene
For he conlidered p they were but sxfleſh: 9 Tleg for
cuca wpndetyat pattet) aware / and com⸗ Hl w. m de
e eee
oft haue ther in
1 15 ee 5 hem inthe e.
many a tyme haue otto
hem in the deterte? ee Pree
hep ke / and tempted God / a
moueo the holy one in alrael.
Cher thought not of hig hand, in the dave
when he delpuered them krom the hande ok
the enempe.
Dow he had wꝛought bps myꝛacles in
Eaypte /a his wondꝛes intge lande ot Soan.
How he turned their waters in to bloude /
to thatther mpabt not dꝛyncke ok 6 rpueig.
How he tent iyce amoge them / to cate thé
vp fand krogges to deſtrope chem.
Wiens he gaue their krutes vnto the catyꝛ
pyller / a their iaboure onto the grechopper.
Hob he bett downe their vrnepardes w
e andtheir molberp trees wyth
How he ſmote their catel w hapfeſtones /
E.. and


ver. 2
ij. Ol Daud,
aͤnd their llockes with hote thonder boltes.
How he ſent vpon them the furpoutnedie
ok his wiath, anger and dylplealure: wyth
trouble and fallyng in okeuell angels,
When he made a wave to bys kearkull ins
drchat is / todignacpon / and {paved not v chert cou les trõ
put qutodtetb death / pee ſt gaue their * catell ouer to the
taome Fede nett vlence
e han tu, Ihen he cmote al ö fysttbomne in ęgvrt /
Epptevecau, the mooſt pꝛyncypall and myghtpeſt in the
Wo raum of dwellynges ol! Ham.
Espen F, But as forbisatone people he lead them
came twas the kozth Ivke ſhepe / and caried them inthe wyl⸗
tonne of ham. dernetke phe a locke.
Benela r. hie bꝛoughtthe outlately/ ö ther cbulde
not keare, and ouerwhelmed their enempes
wich the lee. 0
eber te He carped them i vnto the bo ders of his
melee bus Bünctuakp auen in cocyps pit / which he
Sanctuarp and purchaled with his ryghen unde.
bolr piace was e dyd caſt out the Heathen bekoze them⸗
called their lande to be oeupoedamcnge the
koꝛ an heritage / and made the trydes of Ji⸗
rael to dwell in their tentes.
Foꝛ all this ther tempted a dulplealed the
molt he God / and kepte not his couenaunt.
But turned their backes / and fell awape
Ike their koꝛekathers / cartynge alpde iyne
a boken boowe,
Andfo they greuedhym w their bye pla⸗
ces, and pꝛouoßed hym with their pmagts.
When Godhearde chis/ he was wꝛoth / a
koke loze dylpiealure at Jcael. N
So that he koꝛloke the Cabernacle in
Silo / euenhis habitacton wherm he dwelt
amonge men. j
Be delpuered their power into captxuite /
and their gloꝛy into the enempes hande.
6 He gaue his people ouer into the fwerde/
~ So2b¢ was tozoth with his berptage.
“* Chetpze contumed their pogemen /and
their mapdens were not geuen to mariage,
Their poꝛeſtes were llayne wd the dwerde /
and 5 were no wyddowes to make las
mentacpon.
masses) wen, Borde lade awabed as one out of
becuer home epe / and like a gyaunte retreſched w wyne.
Ja e n purchen enempes in the 1 — par⸗
/and putthemto a perpetual ame,
Se Berekukedthe tabernacle of Joleph / and
chole not thetrybe of Ephꝛaim.
Meuertheletie he chote the tribe ol Juda /
m Before Menen them hrll ok Sopon which he loud.
the tutte Andthere he buploedbis temple on hye /
ni laped the foundacion of it lyke the groũde /
chat it myght perpetually endure.
He chole Pauid allo his ſeruaunt / a tone
awa pe from the thepe koldes.


As he was folowinge the voweg greateß


vonge he tobe bim / ta he might kede zac


fal. lxxix.


copie and Ilrael his enberptaunce,
52550 paps 8
hert / and ruled them with all the dilygence of
bys power.


2
, Che. Ixrix. Palme.
OM pts done to geruſatẽ by
Antiochvs / delpzeth the deipe of Sadagapnũ hem.
Plalme of a ſaph.
Sod / the pres ieee into chene 3
JO benrageaebolerenmlehaueche b.
oa fyied / andmade Jerulalem an heape
of ſtones.
Che deed bodyes of thy leruauntes haue
cher geuen onto the foules ofthe apzeto be. St
Deuoured and the fleth of thy laynctes onto
the beaſtes of the lande. :
Che bloudhaue they chedlyke water on
euerx ide ol Jerulalem / and there was no
man to burpe them.
Me are become an ope Mame onto oure 5
enempes / a very (come and deryſpon vnto
them chat are rounde aboute vs.
Loꝛde / how longe wpit thou be angrye?
ſhall thy geloulp burne ipke kyꝛe koz euer?
Poure out thpne indignacid bpd the Beas
then that know the not / and vpon the ü yng⸗
domes that call not vpon thyname.
For therhaue deudured g acob / ¢ lapen *Jetemp.s.a,
twatte his dwellpnge piace. eed
D-*remembz¢ not oure olde kenne but ente wie ze
haue mercy vpon vs / and that ſoone / koz we fargeucey ihe
are come to greatemxtery. an punch
Peipe bs/D God dure taurour top the hure
Glozp ofthy name: O delpuer vs / koꝛgeue ashi €
vs dure lynnes koꝛ thynames lake. zech. Fig.
Wherkoꝛe Hall the Heathẽ fape:where is Ela. ru a
now their God: C
O let the vengeaunce or thy feruauntes
bloude that is Hed, be openly Hewen bpd the
Heathen in ourelyght.
O let the loꝛowtull cyghrnge ol the pꝛe⸗
foners come befoze the / and accoꝛdyng vnto bejngebat
the power ofthpne*arme preterue thote g C
are appoynted to dye.
And for the blalphemy wherwyth oure
neyghbours haue blafphemed the / rewarde
chem / O L oꝛd / leuẽ kolde into their bolome.
So we that be the people a ſhepe of thy
paſture hall geue the hanckes Foz euer /a
wyll all wape be ſbewynge forth thy pꝛarte
moze and moze.


Che. xxx. Plalme.


leo 51 bt bandes
Sears eee een


aed bet pret 5
Heuer the former benekitesot God vnder a borowed a Lokeinthe


of avpneparte conferred pacfent mie tytic ofthe.
.
Co the chaunter / vvon d: Solanum / der m ide tris
aplalme at Aleph. or b. f. pan


f aberpght hab. be


Thou hat bꝛought a vyneparde out of
r caſt out the Heathen z


Chou madeſt rowme foꝛ it / and cauſed it
totake rote lo that it Fplien che lande.

Chehylies were couered with $ Madowe

ol it / and lo were the ſtronge Cenze trees w
the bowes therok.

She kretched out her bꝛaunches vnto

the lee and her bowes vnto the water.

ilabp batt thou then bꝛozen downe her
heꝛge / that alt ther whpch go br / piucke ol
her grappes?

Che wploe boꝛe out ol the wodhath roced

it vp / aud tye beaſtes of the kee haue de⸗
Cuomedit.
Curne tze agapne / thou God or Hoſtes /
oe 7 or heauen / beholde and bptet
rde.

Marntepne it / that thyryght hande

planted / andthe 9
moche ok fozthp teife.

Foz why? it is bret with Eyre / and lyeth
abu here one, 15 0 let them peryſd at the rebuke of
Blabt fo au- i

mar, Letty *hanbbebpon the®+man of tp
Sraficength rygbt hande / and bpon the man whom thou
e made lo moche or ko tüpne atone lelfe.
, Ando will not we go back kromthe: Oh


Aha
Aud whpch let vs lyue / a we Mall call vponthyname.


iktr the mae Turne vs agapne/D Loꝛde God of Bor


de Peaking Ces chewe the Ipabe of thp countenaunce /


ler ptu⸗
wien en we walbe whole,
Sen een eee e
et erte

mencioneth bis benefites done ta ra enter
cpteth bebzpeRp what aduertptye they receaned foz
their fettpnge ipaht bp God-and how moche felyey⸗
corp n. hade pk thep had bene obrdient


Cothe Cbaunterovans* obig /


Plal err irrrielxrri, Hart,


Inge merely nto God which is dute
S make a chearkull nopſe vn⸗
tothe God of Jacob.

Tae the Plalme / bꝛynge hyther the tas
bret the merpharpe and lute.

Bowe vp the tröpettes in the new mone /
Spon dure folempne feaſt bape,

Lor this ig che ble in traci / and a lawe
ok the God ol Jacob. 5 8
nonoben became oto eps benen

0 earde
& ſtraunge language. eee


unge .
a rene
d ere di
from the pottes. tai


When thou calledſt vpon me in trouble / J
helped the / and hearde the / what tyme as the :
fozme fellopon the / J pꝛoued the alfoat = Omer b.
bene of pe. Seta, Ve dag.

eate / O mp people / foꝛꝗ ature the O N
Iltael / ve thou wylt herken 55 me: i

Chere Hal no ſtraunge God be inthe / ne⸗

ae thait toon awer cane ee God.

amthe Loꝛde thy God / which bought
the out of Slane cbt “Op Ep moat as
wrde / and call fpll it. hing of the he⸗

But my people wold not heare my voce / C vives: for
and Ilrael wolde not obeyme. that we

Dos gaue the bp ontothett atone bertes hel wil
lui sano ler them folowe cher atone yma: Wat etree,
Gphacpons, Jahn. puh. b.

O that my people wolde obepeme/fo vr
Gfeael wolde walkie in my wapes:

A thuidfoone put downe their enempes /
gturne mene hãd agapne their aduerlaries.
Che haters ok the Code chulde mylle Bes
rael / but their tyme Guide endure ko ence,

Be Muld keade the with che kynen wheate
gelte 0 an acer. them with honx out or

e ſtonp rocke. 5 -
Ache servi orate,
{ce monptTbeth princes ko endeuour Fy ſelues ta
Tygbtuoutnes: and accuſeth the moot of them of me
Antepte, be befecheth God that he well vouchtafe to
iudge the worlde bp Cheiſt puto whole inter ttaunce
de allo prophecpeth that all the gentpis fall tali.

A Plaime of Afaph,
Od ſtandeth in the congregacyd ofthe DT
Ges eames ard isa Gungeamonge the ar Engen hun
udges. ces / and rulars
fudge: are in the ſcri⸗
pture called


How ionge wyl pe geue twa
ment / and accepte the pẽrlonnes of the bn⸗ goddte as here


godir? Selah. and m Exod.
Dekende che pooye and atherlede / lethat reo.


ſoche as be in nede and neceũite haue right.


Delxuer the outcaſte a pooze / a laue him
. 18005
Keuertheletic / they will not be lerned an
bnbettanid mache onen fe Biecs
— the toumarrés ofthe Giga


Ee. iii. L haue


222


WwW,


en Chrilt tre


„he hoh
aboute the


Up
deipe mess c.


Edi. vß. a |


and Sy i
Which ſape: we wyll haue the houles of
C God in pole cyon. ~
O mp God make thé ſyke onto a whele /
and as the ſtublt befoꝛe the wynde.
Lyne as a fpꝛe that burneth op the wod /
Vas the flame $ conlumeth the moütarnes.
Perlecute them eus fo with thy tempel /
and make them afraped wich thy ſtoꝛme.
Make theirfaces athamed/ O Loe /
that they mapefekethy name.
Let thé be confounded a vexed euer moze
d moze-tet chem be put to tame ¢ pertth.
That they map know that thou art alone /
chat thy name is the Loꝛde fa that thou only
art the mooſt bpett ouer all the earth.
@ he Irrritii. wlalme.
Peg sate eens
Saane 5 feof he that e riety wore
Lehn e ed er ee
b well are cop "Din /
chere lang {Bou Lowe or holes vii


ges here lignpe
ke the congre⸗ Mr coule hath a detyze ¢ longinge


ee
ich g. e thoꝛow t of ety
ptelt lern wel noche polep are fille tot


water.

Chev go from ſtrength to ſtrength / and fo
r appeareth vntothem in —

ion. Ader

D Lozd Godot Botkes/heare my prayer: Plan.
herken D * Godol Jacob. co

Beholde O God dure defence; obeys d. co tore
the face of thyne anoynted. vpon the fact /

— one da pe in thy courte is better hen aue
athoutande.

Jbed rather beadoze keper in thehoute wens,
3223 tentes oF the in un. vid.

ngodip.

Foꝛ the L od God is a lyght and dekence /
the Loꝛde wyll geue grace and woꝛſh yppe /
and no good thinge wall he witholde from
them thatipue a godix pte.

O Loꝛde God ot Holes /bietked is the
man that putteth hrs truſt in the.

¶ Che. xxx Palme.
S
Abel wüh all ibpages albe full when it dere lane
Cothe chaunter / a Praime ofthe re
Connes of Coꝛah. Base
Oꝛde / thau baretta loue vnto thy land / 4
Live opoet bꝛynge agapne the capty⸗
upte ot zacob.

Chou drddeſt forgeue the offence of chp beldde the
people, ccucroett atheirkenncg * Selah pia. ..

Cbou tokeſt awape all thy dylplcalure /
anu turnedeſt the leite from thy wꝛathtul
indegnacron.

Cuine vs then / O God oure Saupour /
and let thene anger ceade from vs.

W pit thew be dylplealedat vs fo euer? cle .
wyitthou kretch out chr wzath krö one ge⸗ anne
neracpen to another? 3

2 bit thou not turne agapne and guyckẽ dende
vs / that thx people maye retopte in the:

J burn berben what the Lorde God wl |
faye kon be Wall Cpeate peace ontobys de ge
people and to bps ſapnctes / that ther turne ppp rye
not them ſelues vnto folpſbnes. oF debe

Fon hrs faluacpon is nye them that krare Bccum ene
brmeiochst glozp hall dwell in dure Lande. 222 Fe,

Sercp e truech are met together / rygh⸗ ne tw yess
tuoutnedeand peace hyde ech other. cpr gli


2


ij St Baud. Plal lrrbj ixrrvij æ lxrrviij Cc


Crueth thall pte out of the earth / and
rpahtuoulnelle wall lone Downe kr heauẽ.
And why-the Lande Hall chewe louynge
e her en⸗


creale.
Or farthes = *Ryghtuowlnetle Hall go before by
tee · — and prepare the wave fo? biscompnge. til


1
bie. Lebe ere bee, ;
* erin
Sly ences te nt
mens
Penh 125 r allo the power and goodnes
both vito hym and to other.
A pꝛapcr ot Dauid.
2. % Divedowne thrne eare/ O Loꝛde / and
heare me / koꝛà am comtoꝛties ¢ poze.
O kepe mp loule / koꝛ am holpanꝑ
g the leruaũt that putteth his trult


Be mercytun vnto me / O Loꝛde / ko: J
24 What toe call dapipbpon the,
ailorcrie ing. Comtoꝛte the foule of thy Ceruaunt / koꝛ
meh bb onto’ the. O Loꝛde / do J lytt p my loule.
tee m ro. Fos thou Loe art good and gracpous/
nde. Beg. and OF Greate mercp vnto all them that call
whe Blal. vpan the.
Pat eue cate Lopdeonto my pꝛaxer / a pot
dꝛe Ache ken a 10 ande
etyme ot mytrouble Ac. e
B to chou heareſt me. e

Amonge p Goddes there is none lyke vn⸗
tothe / O Loꝛde / there is not one that can do
as thou dceſt.

Au nacyons whom thou halt made / hall
come and woꝛchyppe betoꝛe the / O Loꝛde /
and Wall glozptpe thy name.

Foz thou art great / thou doeſt wonderous
eee ot 2992215

me in thy ware / O Lope,
Map walke in thy tructh: O let tani a
Ipte in fearynge thy name.

I thanke the, D Loꝛde my God / a wyn

pꝛaple thy name koꝛ euer.
uchntis ut, 07 great is thy mercy towarde me / thou
arme geb an toule from the ko nether⸗


Faden
& O Godche pꝛoude are rylen agaynſt me /
andthe congregacion ofeyempantne leketh
alter my Coulee ſet not p bekoſe thelre res.
fon aro nes ange knee et
ani onge ful great
Figoonneg anbenicty, 85
O turne the then vnto me / haue mercy
Spd me:geue thy ſtrength onto thy leruaũt /
and helpe the tonne oftypne handmade.
hewe fome token vpon me koꝛ good /?
cher which hate me / mape le it / and be acha⸗
aa Loꝛde haſt helped me /


me.
Che. xxxbij. Palme.


halbe moo aboundaũ tip ch. wed /


e prapteth the heuenly Jerulalem/ that is / ihe cde 4, Che gates
Gcegacpo uF the kapthkull But which he propheciseh of Siow igure
that very many Hall come of atinacpons, kie the congre·
4 Plalme and fonge of the formes of Coꝛah. feria 15
Er Foundactos are bp the holphylles: fore in the pla
Pian loueth che: gates of Sion meat.
moze then all d dwelunges oF Jacob.
ery creeltent thingesare fpokien oF tye genen
thou'*cptecé@od, Selah. the churche of
Iwrüthrnke bpon**abab a Babyls / God ag m the
ſo that they call know me. Plalmeriot.a |
YeethePbplitines alfo/and they ora vse”, toe oe
with the Bezpans. Lothere was ge bone. ü re wee
And of Ston rt thalbe reported / that he retopteth the cf
was boꝛne in her / eu the moot hped which tee of Hod.
bath bupided her. at Chat isiG-
Che L. onde thal caute it to be preachen a nale n is
wzptten amonge the people / that he was Ela. li.
9 ney eee. " é 17 — by
Cherkoꝛe the dweilinge of an yn: 11
daunlerg is inthe. FUNBENE oe


ring the kigure
che. Ixxrvij.Pralme. ol Khiic.
CA vehement complapnte wöe rin he complapneth
that he ts oppꝛeũcd / and cuicn all inoſt decd / 1 erat What thys
treame abuerfpte: ¢ chat as it ſemeth / as well of fomelignifieth is be
grtuoule ſpchneſe / as of perlecucpon of his enempes. Fore lapd in the
A Plaime andfonge of the lonnes of Co⸗ Ba OF the tif
rab to the chaunter Ppon“ WMahelath oz Pil. Some
> *afiliccpon / an infiruccpon ok :* Heman chynge dyleate
the Csrahrte. for
Lope Bodmy ſaupour / q crye dape a
$D arivtughebetoseehecoh lamm paperds ehren.
entre intotby pyetenceencipne thrne fo, geren
eare vnto mp callynge. ves that Be
Foz mpfoute is full of trouble / Emp lyfe man wypcy
dꝛaweth nye vnto hell. = ‘wis one oF the
Jam coũted as one oł thẽ that go downe Seas
bes the . am euen as à man 2 hath ru.
no ſtrength.
Fre am̃onge the deed / Ipbe vnto the that
ipe in the grãue / which be out ck remem⸗
bꝛaũce / and are cut awape from thy bande.
Chou halt layed me in the lowell pte / 5
inthe darc knelde and in the depe. D Lobe the
Chyne tndignacton lpeth harde bpon me / id Palma
c thou bereft me wal typ floudes. d. Delah
Chou halt put awaye myneacquantaũce
karre frome / and made me to be abbozred
ol them. J am ſo kaſt in pꝛelon / that J can
not get forth.
Myplraht favleth C02 berptrouble-Lomde
I calldaply vponthe / and ttretch out myne
handes onto the.
ao thou ſhewe wonders amonge the


Can the Phylpciõs rayle thé vp agapne /

that cher mape pꝛaxlethe⸗
Mare the iouyng kyndnes be chewed in
the graue / or th kaichtulne le in deltruccid⸗
Bay thy wonderous wozkes be ünowne
Ceti, in the


ij.


7


Ot Dauid. Plal. lxxxir.


Cin the darcke / oꝛ thy ryghtuoulnes in lande N vghtu dufnes and eguite is the habyta⸗


b. Ren. vg. t.


‘thet


Eulnes in the
* Foy whoishe a


bent u, C4007 @ Deron thall refopte a thp name,


kekoꝛe in the
fal. lexx . c.


where al thenges are forgotten: . Sonotthpleate/mercy ano trueth go beide
Untothe i ckye O Loꝛde / and earix cõ⸗ the face. ¥
meth my pꝛaper before the. Blelledis the people / O Londe / that can
Loi / why putteſt thou awaye my loule: reiople in the / a walketh in the lyght ok thy
Wherkozehrdeſt chou thy face cco mẽ: countenaunce.
is gone koꝛ very loꝛow ame- Cher delpte is inch name: all the dave E Cbattg c
terp / wfearkalnelle do J beare tho burthẽs. longe / andthoꝛow ehr tpghtuoutnede they tmn em
Thy wꝛathkull dyſplealure goeth ouer halbe exaſted. the plal irrt
me / the feare of the oppꝛelleth me. Foz thou art the gloꝛꝑ of their ſtrength / a
eh eat d dap'pe hing oe che kauoure chalt thou lytt vp oure
water / r cöpale me together on euere ye. hoꝛncs. : cotBp the
PMyloucrs a krind hac thou put aware Che Lozdeis oure dekence / and theo Keck
trome / a turned awape myne acquantaũce. Iv one of Icr ael is oure Ange. kun b
Scherk Brame 27-77" 4, tens andre: baut n dhe 8 “PS
ah 1 2 enctes/ a elt: pe dez
tly and udp decla
adele ae unden dene ens Oportonedhatismpgyty/¥ hawe eralteo one ope dn
the donne of Baud / betwirt God ind the hrt ae cholen out of the people. Ame thebolg
neuer be hroken and chat vnder the fpgure ot Dau IJhaue kounde Daͤuidmpferuaunt / with ot ihr gr.
S bps pojterpe. Jn he begpnnmngeotipe gtaime be mpo*hoipoplehauey ano pntch him. wee en
fed tomabe a couenaunt with bis lapnctes. AMHvbhand Hall holde hem kalt / and myne vy eve whens
5 arme fall ſtrengthen hym. Goale u kerl
In inſtruccvon of Ethanthe Ezrahyte. he enempe chall not ouercome hym / a 9 z delpuee
2 U Verse wameannaveokiheldung votze Conne ot weebedneür wal norhurte gel
Mur ok the Loꝛde / my mouth hem. tops Plalriub
wyll J euer be chewynge thy kapch⸗ J (hall ſmyte downe hys foes befoze hys ch. . l. 5
kulneſde from one generacpon to another. lac / and plage them that hate hym. i. Schuß.
Foz T haue lapde mech halbe fervp o: Mptwucthalto g my mercy thaibe with kr.
euer / tůp ta pthtulneſl: ſhait thou ſtablych in him / and in myname chan hes * hogne be te Chat wis
the heauens. : exalted, ott glaze
"3 bauemadea couenaunt wich my cho A wwpll et hys handeinthe lee / and hrs ren.
len Jhauelworne ontoWauid myleruaũt. ryqht bande intye noudes. Blühen
Thy lede wyil J ſtablpch ko euer / and let Be Mall call me: thou artmy kather / my cigs,


extotieth the goodues of Grp which he vouchta ⸗


an dete the Dpthy trone iron one generacron to anos God / andthe ſtrength ok me laſuacpon.
d famather. 4 Selah,


And F wyll malte hm my t᷑pꝛſt boꝛne /
O Lozdethe very heauens Hall pꝛapſe hyer theñ the Rynges of the earth. 2
thy wonderous woꝛches / pee and thy kayth⸗ Spmercywell J hepe corhim kor euer⸗ @
regacymn ofthe fapneies, moze / and my couẽnaunt Walt ſtande tal
möge che clo. dis / map witz hym.
be compared vnto the Loꝛde⸗ Bis lere wyll J make to endure foz euer /
Yee what is he amongethe godtes / that vee. trone as the daxes of heauen.
is ipke onto the Loꝛde: But pt bys chridzen fozlake my lawe / 8
Sod is greatly tu be feared inthe coũcell waltze not in my iudgementes.
Ofthetapntes a to be had in reuerence or all Ikther becake mene ezpnaunces / and
them that are aboute hym. kepe not mp commaundementes.
O Lopde God ot Hoſtes whois like vn⸗ 35 J wyii vplet their offences wyth the ge chen;
koche m power? typ tructh is roundeaboute todoe/andtyerrfenneswithfcourges, ra
e. Heuertheleſe / my louyng kyndnege wi ™
Chou ruleck the pꝛyde ok the tee / thou tile J not vtterly take trom ham / ner tullre mx
ie the waues theroF / when theparpte. trueth to kapie.
Chou bꝛeakeſt the pꝛoude / pne one hae Nr ceuenaunt wyng not brake /noz
is wounded, thou kcatereſt thyne enempes dpfanuilethe tyrnge that is gone out of mx
abꝛoade with thy mpabtpe arme. igpprs.
Cheheauẽs are thyne/tye earth is thyne: I haue cwoꝛne once bymyholinene / chat
thou haſt layedthe foundacion ofthe rounde J Wyil not faple Dauid.
woꝛlde / and all that therin ia. apps lede thall endure fo2 euer / and hy f
Chou haft made the noꝛth and the louth / feate allo ipke as the ſunne betoꝛe me.
Thou hat a myghbtye ſtrong is chr m . — oo
arme / isthy moone / e in beas
. Shame amabyess tpryaitbame un. SDH. ou b
1 5 5. Plaine.


rt er ee 8
lj Ot Dauid.

But now thou kozrakeſt a abhoeſt thrne⸗
anopnted / and art dil piealed at hem.

Chou valk turned backe the couenaunt
ok thx teruaunt / and caſt hys crowne to the
grounde. 8

Cyou bat ouerthowne all his hedges / a
bzoken downe his ſtronge holdes. i

Ail they that goo byfipople him / heis bez
come arebube vntohis nerghbours.

Chou ſetteſt vp the ryght have ok his ene⸗
3 makes allhrs aduerlarpes to re-
Chou batt taken awapethe ſkrength ol
bis are geuett him not biccozp in che
bateaple é


ple.

Thou halt put out his glozy/ and caſt his
Crone downe tothe grounde. ;

Tye dapes ok his pouth batt thou wo te⸗
ned z couered him with dichonoure. Selah.

.o: / how longe wylt thou hyde thy lelk⸗
Foz euer: hal th wath burne ipke kyꝛe:

Oremembꝛe how ſhoꝛte my time is / halt
thou made all men foznaught? what ma is
he that lyueth / and hall not fe death?

Mape a man del puer big atone foule krõ
the hande ok hen? Selah.


beg ve Loꝛde / where are thy olde ou yng kynd⸗


neſles / whych hou lwozelt vnto Dauid in wherin we


thy treuth⸗

Bemembze Loꝛde the rebuke that § mul⸗
titude of the people do vnto thy ſeruauntes /
and how J haue boꝛne it in my boſome.

her wyth thrne enempes blalpheme
che / and lclaunder the kotell eppes oF tyrne


anognted.
Chanckes be to the Loꝛde fozeucrmoze:
Amen: a men.
„The fourth trratylt.
a
th of the dantt
Sage e fovour of Sol that be wyll bouthe
Cafe to p:olper the thynges which he gor th abgute.
4 pꝛaper of: e


ok God.
Ode thou art oure refuge krõ one


— awape fodentplike
Anche momnng itte gent and grower


Plal.tx.c.txi.


dhe e cuenenget is cut downẽ and *
Fcp we conſume awaye in the dylples⸗
lure / and are akraped at thy weathfuil indi⸗


gnacpon.
Chou lette tt oure tmildedeß bekoꝛe the / ac
dure lecrete ſynnes in the lyght of thy coun⸗
tenauctce. 5
‘oz when thou att angrye / all oute daxes
ark gone / we bꝛynge cur peares to an ende /
as it were a tale that is tolde . N
Che dapes 10 dure age are. f rope pea- 8 Chebapes
res and ten:and though men be lo kronge Phe dre u
ther come to.ttij.Ccoze peates / pet is their oute tps;
ſtrength then but laboure ¢ loꝛawe:ſo ſoone
palleth it awape / and we are gone. a
But who regardeth p power ol thy wrath;
thy fearfull and terrybie difpleature?
O teach vs to nombze ouvedaves / that
we mapt applpe oure hertes bnto wyrdome.
Cutne the agarne O Loide) at the lal / S
and be gracious vnto chy leruauntes
O ſatiſtie vs with thy mercy / and ſoone:
fo hall we reiople and be glad all the dares
ol dure fe. 8 V 1
. Conifozte vs agapne / now alter the tyme
that thou had plaged vs / and foꝛ the peares.
haue fuffved aduerlpte.
Shewe thy fensauntes thy woꝛcke / and
theit chridzen tor gl. j
And che glozpous mtatetty of the Lone
oure God bẽ vpon vs: O pꝛolpere thou the
woꝛcke of oure handes vpon ds, O pꝛolpere
thou oure handy woꝛcke.
exci Praline, a...
Se ee ae peat matt enlist achte cure
18 / which wa lure fapth compte ih hun felfeto God. 2 5 aged
Abolo dwelleth onder the detence ot b decker ohe,
moſt bpett and abpocth vnder the tha-thecie be takers
dow ofthe Alimightre, ofthetcripture


Be walllare pncothe L. orde: S mpbove/ trey rat lb
and ind de holde / my God / in whom cuett imnencißs


wyll trust. of men as it
11. challdelpuer the from the“ tare dards beforein
ene ner /ano from te noprome fel: ans
ence. ng ; beBethatt
bie chal court the wnnge bys wpnges/ e the mire
that thou mapeſt be fafe vnder his Fethers: bis wpnges ze.
Aab. eh thaltbe wer wire e's e.
uckler. fende b
So that thou halt nat nede to be afeayrdpoecan ne
Seether
._ Fozthe pelislence that crepedy in darth B. dee ee
nelle / ner foz the lyckneſſe that deſtropeth in the nae
the noone dape. ture of a hene /
Athoulande Hall fall berrdethe, andten deere
thoulande at thy ryght hand / but it Hhalinot ers aefeacey
come nge the. „ad ſaueth her
Ce. d. Ver cherrus,


tty. Of Baud, Plal . reij,retij,erciitj,


thrne eres thalt thou behodde /
and fe therewarde of the vngodly.
Foꝛthou l ode art myhope / thouhaſtlet
thyne houle of dekence very bye.

‘There thalt no euen happen vntothe / ne⸗

Cther Hall eny plage come nye tyr dwellyng.
$02 be hall geue his angels charge ouer
the / to kepe the inall hp wapes,

Cher hall beare the in their handes / that
thou hurt not thy kote agapnita fone,

Chou ſhalt go vpon the L von and Adder /
the ponge Lyon and the Pꝛagon ſhalt thou
treade nder thy fete.

Becaule he hath lett his loue vpon me /
Gall delpuer him: q call defende him / koꝛ be
bath knowne myname.

When he calleth vpon me / F Hall heare
him: pee J am with him in his trouble wher
bone ‘oil delyuer hem / and bꝛinge hem to

ure.

With lunge lyke wyll J tatictye him / and
chewe him mp taluacxon.


che. ci, Palme.
C Che labboth dape is a mete and cõuenyent tyme to
praple the Lobe! becaute there is then Lealure to
1 . benefptes and to zeuehem than ches
et a
GA Plaime ok the Conge koꝛ ö ſaboth dave.
Cis a good thing to geue thanckes vn⸗
Jade ken rwe pꝛaples onto
chyname / O mot bret.
Co tell of thy loupnge kyndneſſe early in
. okthp ttueth in the night


pon an instrument often ſtrynges ops
the lute and with a fonge pantie Bape.”
Fo thou Lovo halt made me glad thozow
thy woꝛckes / and J wyll reioyle ouer d ope⸗
en bash sous chr wozck
oz / how glozious are thy woꝛckes /
thy thoughtes are very depe.
npn pie man wyll not knowe this /
aa vale 29 ch 1 sh ‘te
5 at the vngodlp are grene as the gra /
brpoarpie vay ¢ tbat all the wockes of topeheoneso foe
one that mp. ttf, to be deſtroped koꝛ euer.

Aruſteth God. But thou Loꝛde O moſthpelt / abydeſt

Boner. ff. a. wozlde without ende.

Ela rrrß. a Foz lo chyne enempes O Nod / io chyne
enempes Hail periſhe / and all the woꝛckerg
e

ut myhome e oe
be dn ony ofan>*esnicogne / a ſbalbe anoynted wyth
ture is lume ¢ kremorle.

tpmes AByne exe allo Hall ſe hys luſt of myne

Wed s prapled / nemyes / and myne care chall heare his de⸗

Prat 4 bm le of the wycked that rple vv agaynſt me.


2


tyme Cherpabtuous thall flozich lyne a palme
4d / as in ehe tres and growe ipkea Cedze of Libanus.
Phimgr§. Hoch as be planted in the houte of che


Londe / be frutekull / plenteous and grene.
Chat ther mape thewe / how trues Lo
my strength is and that there is no ontpgh-
tuoufnedie in him. e
che. rein. Plalme. Cv 5s
Chepzapleth the matedpe or Sod for the creacpon
R OF fearalls mighe ay
Be Lone is Henge / andhath put on
CT sicivusapparei/ the Loꝛde bath put
onbps apparell and gyꝛded him tele
W ſtrength:he bath made the rounde twozlde
lolure / that it cannot be moued.
From chat tyme koꝛth hath thy teate bene
ai ao Leek
e el) Londe che
1285 their nortel the floudes lykt vp their


vapne.
Bieden ische ma whom thou leek (O
Loꝛde) and teacheſt him in thy lawe.

Chat thou mapeſt geue hym pacience in €
tyme ok aduerl pte / vnt il 6 pytte be dygged
wegen een fant

‘02 the Loꝛde wyll not fayle his people /
nether wll be foztake bis inberitaunce.

And why iudgmẽt ſhalbe turned agaxne
vnto ryghtuoulnelee / and all loch as be true
3
Who rrlech bp with me agaynſt the wye⸗
Hen? who taketh my parte agarncttbe cuel


2277


my,


D


a


this teme
pracpon wasat
the water oF
Rtifesoftobich
nde. Huey
**.


8 3
b para xvt.c


Apfel xlviũ a
ercur ug.


doers Ik the Londe had not helpedme /
my loule had almoſt bene put to lxience.

when J lapde: my kote hath llypped / che
mercr. O Lozde)belbe me vp. 5
_ Bathe muititude of the loꝛoweg f J had
nine 5 thy comfoztes. baue rekreched
mp foule.


iByitthouhaue eny thynge to do wyth 6 ctaary.


ftoole of wickednelle / which pmagineth me⸗
cheke in the lawe⸗

‘They gather them together agarnſt che
toule of the ryghtuousand cõdemne the in⸗
8 tes oniss

ut the Le; mypretuge / my God!
ſcrength of my conkedence.
He Hail recompence thé thetr wyckednelle /
i deſtrope them in thetr awne malyce: pee
che Loꝛde oure God ſwall deſtroye them.


meri “3° che cb plalme.


aner hontacpon to tye earneſt praylyng of God.


Come let vs pꝛapte the Lozde/ lett vs
hertelp reiople in the ſtrength ol oure
faluacpon,
Lxt vs come before his prefence  thanc-
apres. ewe dure lelke glad in him
plahmes.
For the Lozdeis a g reate cod / aagreat
&pnge aboue all goddes.
In his hãde are all the comers of earth /
and the strength of the bpltesig big allo.

Che (eis bis/toꝛ he made ĩt / a his haves
prepared the due lande.

O come / let vs woꝛchppe a bowe downe
dure lelues: Lett vs kneie bekoꝛe the Lope
dure maker.

Foꝛ he is oure God:and we are the people
ol his patture, andthe hepectbys bandes.

Co dape pt ve wyll heare his bopce hardẽ
nat poute hertes ag when pe pꝛcuoked in
tyme of**temptacion in the wyldernes.

where voure kathers tẽpted me / pꝛoued
me / and ſawe my woꝛckes.

Xl. peares longe was J greued wyth p ge⸗
neracid / æ capd: hex euer ere in their hertz /
they verely haue not knowne my wapes.
Cherloꝛe J fapde vnto them in my wzath /
that ther ſwůlde not enter in to my ret.

¶ Che xcbi. Palme.

Che moueth all creatures to the praple of God. A
pꝛophecpe of the kyng dome of Chꝛiſt and or the in⸗
create therof.

SHonge vnto the Loꝛde a new ſonge /
Ode ente d Londeallß whole eartg.

Spnge vnto the Loꝛde / andpꝛap

bis name / be tellynge of his laluacpon krom
dape to dape. —

Declate his honoure amõge the heathẽ /
and his wonders amonge all people.

Foz the Lozvis great / and can not woz:


Ot Dauid. Plal. tv. xtbi.æ xtbij. Ttxxij⸗


thelr be pꝛapled:he is moze tobe kearedthen
aire royale goobe othe pech / h 8

* er seg:
be put Jools / bukitis the Lozdethat made S


thebeaucns, .
Chanck e and worthipe are bes
foze him / power a honoure are inhes Sans


Alcrpbe vntothe Loꝛde (O pe kpnredes
ofthe Heathen)atcribe vnto the Loꝛde woz⸗
wipe and ſtrengtg. ‘ ¥

Accrybe nto the Loꝛd the honoure ofbis.
name Drange prelentes/and come in tohrs


Owoꝛchipethe Loꝛde in d beute ok ho⸗
den. lett the whole earth ſtande in awe £
Cell it out amonge the Heathẽ that che
Loꝛde is kynge: and chat it is he which bath
made the rounde woꝛlde Co kaſt / that it can
not be moued / andhow chat he tall iudge
the people rightuoutip.

Let the heaueng reiopte / and let the earth
be gladꝛlet the lee make a nople / vee and all
that therinis.

Let the kelde be ioykun and all that is in
it / let all the trees of the wodd leape fo2 ioye.

Bekoꝛe the Loꝛde / toꝛ he commeth: koꝛ he
commeth to iudge the earth: pee wyih rygh⸗
tuoufnete tall he iudge the woꝛde / and the
people with bis krueth. :

.CChe rcvij Plalme.

— Fee of Chꝛilt / in whom God
Wonderkullp themed his power vnto the faltuacpon ol
his cholen and to the duerthꝛowing of their enempeg
And of. vapne lupe rt ies: vnto the knowledg ng or
‘whom heaito erborteth.

He Loꝛde is kynge / the earth mape be

ladtherok: pee the multptude ot the 2

Jles mape be glad therok.

Cldudes a darchnefie are rounde aboute
him / rightuoulnelle and iudgnẽt are the ha⸗
bitacyon of his tcate.

There goeth a Eye betoꝛehym / to burne
vp his enemyes on cuerplpde.

His lyghtenynges geue ne vnto the
woꝛde / the earth Cepth it and is afrayed.

Che billes melt line ware at the pretence
ofthe Loꝛde of the whole care

Che verpheauiens declare his ryghtuoul⸗
nes / and all the people fe his glory.

Confoundedbe ali they ? wozthipe yma⸗
ges and delpte in their Fools.woztipe him
all pe goddes. 2

Dion heareth of it a retopleth: vee ¢ all 8
the daughters of Juda are glad becaule of a Charis?
thpiudgmentes/D L ode. n

Tor thou L onde art the mot bpett ouer r.
all ß earth / tgou art exalted karre aboue all


.
or


iiij. Ot Bauid. Plal. xc viij.xcix.t,.ti.&.tij.


ene
n 5 3
Sela ok his laynctes / he Mall deli⸗
uerthem from the bande of the vngodlx.
Chere is cpꝛonge vp alyghe foz che rygh⸗
uous ada toptull glaoneti £02 loch aß be
What the td d. 75
abe, eloptetberfoetn the Lome vereud-
Sieur ts 2 thiches fora teméb zaunce
kappe in the ok his . eu-
Gun. Ixihu Chiff Palme.
8 Sober g l ben the palme
nert betoꝛe and in the. cx.


Plalme.
3 O Senge onto the Lowe a new fonge/
Omer bath done maruelous thynges,
5 With his awne ryahe bande ¢ wich
ag atria io" * bis holp arme hath he galten the bictozp.


called the arme Che I. ond hath declared his tauyng health /


oFGod-becaule g his reghtuoulnes Gath he openiy thewed

thatinbimare in the leght of the Heathen.
tend auh Be hach remembzedhis mercy andtrueth
ESaly¢ towarde the houle of Frac: * fo that all the
endes 500. woꝛlde fe the faupnge health of

oure Bod.

Shewe poure ſelues toptull onto g Loꝛd
Ban ge landes / enge eiople/ egeuethates,
Pꝛaple the L ode opon the harpe / fynge


tothe harpe wa plaime of thanckelgeuing.


With trompettes allo and chawmes : D
ſhewe poure le lues ioptull befoze the Loꝛd


e kynge.
1 Leih fee make a nople and all therin
is / ver the whole woꝛdde / zan powell therin.
Let the lloudes clappe their handes / and
let all the hylles be iopkull together:
00 15 5 the Loꝛde. ko he is come to iudge
e earth.
Yee wich ryghtuoulnes Mail he iudge $
wonlde / and the people with equite.


Ni
8

Soe. ee denctotesano oases done to Tüll.

e Lozde is kynge / be people neuer

* To vnpacient: he tptteth bpon the Che⸗

rubins / be the earth neuerfo vnquuiete.


Che Lodis greate in Sion / Ahe aboue
all people.
O let mengeue hikes onto thy great
and wonderkull ame / koz it is holy.
Che krnges power louech tüdgmet / chou
1 pꝛepareſt equpte / thou executeſt iudgment
fygiceee ö and rightuoutnes in acbb.
Zarb ze haue, O magnykpe che Lozde dure op / tall
in the Pim. downe befoze his *fote lole / foz he is holy.
Fih. ba. rr. Moes and Aaron amonge his pꝛeſtes /


dun e Damuel amöge loch as call pa his name:
ate S8 Sethtecallennpon pe Lone eho
merep leateoe „Pe lpake nto them out of the clouny py⸗
God / wher at ler ta ther kepte hes teſtimonpes / and the


lawe thathe gaue chem. be wodbe

‘Chouljectoes gem S Hane dun: Son rs, 5
thou forgauel the D Gon / and punpoyent gran gen
their awne muenctons. cmt
ramen Se
Hhipebim upon his hoi hell / for the
sae OR aE.

c Plalme.
CA mocyon to the prapte of Dod in ß holy ademble.
APlaime of pꝛapſe.
Be toptull in God (all pe landes) 2
tue the Loꝛde w gladnes / come
ze his pretence with tope.
Be pe lure /that the Loꝛde he is
God-Fe (8 he that bath made vs / and not we
— N but his people / a 6 wepe

O go poure wape into his gates then v
thanckelgeupnge and into his courtes with
pꝛapleſbe thancktull onto hm / and ĩpeake
good oc his name.

For the Lorde is gracrous / hys mercy is
eucriattynge/ andbis treuth endineth krom
Generacton to generacion.

Seeber geal cee the aftce of

e prom that be erequute ce ofa

lp and holy prince/that is to fape/ that he will bot
Pretanoconipean alto 3 manne


a od.
en A pfalme ct Baul.
3 Songe halbe of mercy h angment /
Milena ampel twee,
O let nie haue ondertandpnge in

che waye of Godlynene/ontpll the tyme that
thou come vnto mie: and lo Hall J walcke in
my houle wich an innocent herte.

J well takieno wicked thinge in hande / J
bate § fenne ot vnkapthkufnelle / it wallnotk
Le elpeebertetallbepacte frome) ones

ard frowarde herte parte fro me / 2. a
Au pl not bnowe a wicked perlonne. paged
Hho fo pzeuelpCclaundsetb bis neyghbou- WOE
102560 e e lo hath a pꝛoude ge the 285

ect an hre Gomacke / J mape not awape s wyllck⸗
wich hum. . Wee


Arne eves chal loke fo loch ag be fatty.) Mots
full tbe ande ibarcher mare dwenlwpih eee nie
peg eyo loledetha godir lye/ halbem


Chere chan no diceattun perfonne dwell
3 telleth ives hail not tas
m
J Mall toone deftrope an the vngodly oF
the lande / that all wicked doers mape be ros
ted out ol the crtie of the Loꝛde.
ven Yve. ¶ Che. cij Palme.
vehement bewaplyng ol
. in which cher wire aa ae ende
innumerable inurirs of the bo;derersand people chat
Dwele next vnto the m / at their returne t Saulen
kalen. came to repay the temple g cpte Of Bice


CA prarer


22 72 5 5
fi, Of Dauld.
=e A pꝛaper of the afiiyct / when he was us
woo / and powered oute hys complapnte be⸗
koze the Loꝛde. 2
Care mpa*praper/D Code / and lett
my crpenge come onto the.


aa True
r b a


Fpze bꝛande.

‘wane un, Myhert is imytten downe and wythered
tat tant np Ike grade, fo f 2 lo getto cate mp®* ben;
elk ot Foꝛ the bopce ol my gronynge / my bone
ys dla be and wyll Carte clue to my few. .

us woul: J am be comelphe a Peliveane in § wil⸗
kltabudelg⸗ dernes and ipke an bole in a broken wall.
het thetpee J wake and am euẽ agit were a ſparow
25 requpe lyttynge alone vpon the boule toppe.

2. tong yr ughme or at tome
longe tyey augh me to 7

2 8 kagtker engt me.

bet ins. J eàte aches with my bꝛed / and mẽgle my

Balm u. a. dꝛpncke with wepynge.

beer Sorte, Andchat becaule ofehpneindignacyon a

Aacheb als a wzath / fo2 thou hat taken me bp / and caſt

Tae we eh 8 Ihe a ſhadowe / and

„ edde fox dayes are gone

we mance, or am wytbered ire gra.

* 1. — . — tn eat
and thyremembzaunce thoz0 ge⸗
neracpong.

Aryle therkoꝛe z haue merey vpõ Dion /
koꝛ it is tyme to haue mercy vpoͤ her / pee the
tyme is come.

c And whre thy leruauntd haue a loue to her
cabtones bee er tones / a tt pitieth thẽ to te her in the Dutt,
wiguifpe the Che Heathẽ Malt feare thyname / O Loy /
fecharete ean all the kynges of the earth thy mateſty.

Gariseophiea Kor the Lozde hall buplde vp Dion / ano

a urched as (hall apeare in his glozp,

and Wenn a. d Heeurnech him bnto the praver ofthe

dan pe a8 tee poze dectitute / a delpyleth not there delpe.

encanta, Chis Walbe wzptten fop chole that come
tal heute rc. alter / that the people thypch ſhalbe bone /
de cod s mape pꝛapſe the Loꝛde. =

sintedtoloke. Fos he loketh Downe Frombis Danctua⸗

fiabariaena y out ofthe heauen doth the Lozde beholde


earth.
enden. Chat hemape beate the moumynges of


Laweth /d to it
nente be loch ag be in captiuite / and deliver the chyl⸗
eng.. . ren or death. :
der G tage Chat chen mape preach he name of the

in Sion; a his woꝛchipe atgeruſalẽ.
hen the people are gathered kogether⸗
Bothe kengdomes alloto kerue che Lore.
— Hehath brought downe my ſtrẽgth in my
ie iautne p, and ſhoztened mpdapes.

Yet wpll J tape: O my God / take me not
atwaye in them pddeſt of mene age: as forthe


tis gone / and the piace therof knoweth it


Ctrxiij
; ys
eats iber eur: thozow out all genera⸗
cpong, 5 ts 5
Chou Loꝛde in the begynnyng bat laped
the koundac yon of the earth / and the heauẽs
are the woꝛckes of thy handes.
„Ther hall persthe but thou walt endu⸗ be t
rether ot 5 1 nt doth a gam /
ndas a beſture ou chaunge them,
thep walbe chaunged. ei ic
net — 1 art the tame / z thy veares wall
Che chyloré okthy lerusunter chant ebty⸗
nue / their lede Wall pꝛolpere in thy tight,
che. cuil Palme.
Laber dre
dil kibulett onto them —— saree
Ok Dauid. .
Kale the Loz; O my toufe / and all
39 big within me prapte bps holy name.
Praple the Loꝛde O my loule / and
koꝛget not ali his ben: kytes.
IBhych kozgeuetg all thptynnes / a hea⸗
leth allthyne inktrmities.
Which lauet th lpfe krom deſtruceyon /
ae . the with mercy / and loupnge
vndneſle.
Wyrch catilkyeth thy delyꝛe wyth good
Mea mabeng the vonge and iultpas oF
gle,
Che Loꝛde erecuteth ryahtuoutnette ans
tudgiment / for all them that fuffre wꝛonge.
He Hewedhis wapes onto I oles / ahvs
woꝛckes onto the chyidꝛen of g rrael.
Che Loꝛd is full of compaſpon and mer⸗
cyon longe Cufferpag/.¢ of great goodnetie. Sit Che Lorde
‘Be twpll notalimape be chpopnge / necher Ona Cues
wll be Bepe his anger Foz euer. alteihnpg⸗
He hath not deaſt with vs after dure ſyn⸗ t: for be not
nes / ner rewarded vs accozding to oure wic⸗ n


*


kedneſſe. ut allo differ ⸗
For lobe bow bpe the beauen is in compa- e deep roe ne
tifon of the earth fogteate is his mercy allo amendemet of
towarde them that feare him. the ſynner / lo⸗
Lote how wyde the eaſt is trom ö welt / Hep 10
fofarrebath he etourefmnes Fromiyg, far den fae
Yee ithe as a father pitieth his awne chile C ponies
Kony,


wen fcuen Cots the Lozmercpful vnto th
that leare him. ‘ 1 10 delpy⸗
Fon be knoweth wherol we be made / herren we


remembꝛeth that we are but duſt. . pe
Chat a ma in his time is but as is gratte / cpence a tonge
and flozicheth as a ſloure of the felde. fuffcraunse bc.


Fot as loone as the wynde goeth ouerit /


no moꝛzc. .
ut the meropkul goodnege of the Loe
e apa es
art A
cheiders chplozen, ;


. Soch


tj. Ol Dauid.


deln. t. b.


Soch as kepe his couenaunt /a thincke
vpon his commaundementes to do them.

Che Lorde hath prepared bys leate in
heauen / and bis ie ruleth ouer all.

Sparte the Lozde pe angels oehis pe g
be myghtie in ſtrength / kulkrllyng his com⸗
maundement that men mape heare the box:
ce ok his woꝛdes.

O parle the Loꝛde all ve his Hoſtes. / ve
teruauntes ok his that do his plealure.
Olpeake good of the Loide all ve wozckes
okhis in euery place of his domimõ:pꝛaxle
thou the Lope / Om foule. „%

¶ Che. ciiij. Pralme,
bepꝛapfeth Bod for the creacpon ofall thenges 8
2 for bis gout goucrnanpee therok.


Maple the L ode O my loule: O Lord
P my God / thou art become exceadynge
gloꝛious / thou art clothed w matctty

¢


jonoure,

Chou deckeſt thy tell w ipght / as it were
with a garment / thou ſpꝛede ſt out ᷣ heauen
ipkea curtapne.

Chou voitet it aboue with waters / thou
makett the cloudes thy charet / a goeſt vpon
the wynges of the wynde.

Chou mak eſt thyne angels ſpꝛetes / and
chyminiſters flammes ol kpze.

Thou haſt laped the earth vpon her foum⸗
dacxon / that it neuer moueth at enptyme.

Chou couereſt it wyth the depe lpke as
wyth a garment / lo that the waters lande
abouetgebpites.

But at thy rebuke tech, attche vorce of


* thy thonder they are akraped.


a That
ta ha: geo-


Chen are the hylles lene alokte and the
valleys benech in their place which thou halt
appoynted ro them.)

Chou haft let them their boundes / which
they mare not palie / that they turne not as
gapne to couer the earth.

Chou cauleſt the welles to lpꝛynge op
amonge the vallers / a the waters to tunne
amonge the bplics.

That all beaſtes or the felde mape haue


cherten tyat the wide ades mave quench


thpꝛſte.

Aboue vpö the belles haue the koules or
the apze their habttacpon / and ſynge amõge
the bzaunches.

Chou watreſt the hylles from aboue / the


earth is kylled W the krutes of thy wozckes.


Chou bꝛyngeſt forth graſte fo the catell⸗
andgrene herbes foz the lerupce ol men.
Chou bꝛyngeſt fore out of} earth: wyne
to make glad the herte ol man / ople to maße
hym a chearfull countenaunce and bꝛedto
C ktrength mans herte.
Che trees ol the Loꝛd are full ol lappe /


Pal ciiiſ cb.


akk ibanus which he hach plated. we of

Cheremake tye bewestheirneges / and ues dg
the kyꝛre hylles are a dwellyng foꝛ p Force, grabedok en.

Chehllles area refuge to } wildeg oates /
and fo are the Bony rockes Foz the conpes.

Chou bak appopnted tye Doone to cer:
5 e the Sunne knoweth hes

zoinge downe.

Chou make darekneſte / that it maye be
night / wherin all the dea ſtes of the foꝛelt do


Yee and the ronge lpons which roare at:
ter their pꝛape / and leke theti meate at God.
But when the lunne arpleth / they get them
Ban tegether / give them downẽ in their

ennes.

Chen goeth man forth to his wozcke/and
totplibisiande vntyll the euenpnge.

O Loꝛd how manitolde are thp w o7kes/
right wylel yhalt chou made them all: xꝛ e e
earth is full of thy ryches.

Sots this greate ¢ wrde ſce alſo) where
in are thrnges ere pynge innumerabie / both
mall and greate beattes.

Chere go the chippes ouer / andthere is 7p


pfl. tt.


kige pe paket en ende me to 0 ;


take his paſtymetherin.

Cher wayte all bps the that thou mapelt **”
Gcue them meate in due lealon.

When thou geueſt it them / they gather
it: when thou openek thpne bande, they are
kylled with good.

But when thou hydeſt thy face / thepare
toꝛoułull: y thou takeſt awaye their bꝛeth /
they dre / s are turned agapne to their Dutt.

Agapne / when thou letteſt thy bꝛech goo
fozth, they are made / and fo thou renuct the
face of the earth.

Che glorious maieſtp of the Loꝛde endu⸗
reth fo2 euer / a the Loꝛdẽ * retopteth in hrs
wozckes. te Tost

Che earth trembleth at the loke of hint he fignificovy te
dott but touch eebsttesandtheptmoke, ae

I well fmgebntothe Lozde as longeas gray,
4 bern pꝛapſe my God whyle F haue


my bernge. :
Other my woꝛdeg myaht pleale him /foz
my topets m the Lode.
As ko tynners they thalbe cõſumed out
ok the earth / and the vngodly Mall come to
an ende: but pzapte thou the Loꝛde / O mx
Spute, Pꝛarle the euerlaſtynge.
che. cb. Pfalme.
eche moueth to praple Godin th- holy agembte at
the Arche of toptucs. and recpteth hisbenefitesdone
to the holp people.
weue e the Loe daf casi
call vpõ his name: tell the people i
mngesbepatybone. eon Vata
Diet Pour fonges be ofbimn-pzapte bitty


in 300


N = „
744 .
fj, Ol Bauid.
and let pouretalkynge be of all hes wonde⸗
rous worckes. :
Geue bys holp name a good reporte / lett
their hertes reiople that tebe the Loꝛde.
See the Lone / and hys ſtrengch / tee
his face euermoꝛze.
Remembze the maruelous wozckes that
5 wonders ¢ the iudgmentes
ol jouth,
6 — 014 See. leruaunt / ve
en OF Jacob his cholen. 8
Hess che Loꝛde dure God / whole punich⸗
mnentes are thozow out allthe worde.
He is awape mpndfull ofhps couenaũt /
rade. that he made to athoufand ge⸗


tcpons.
Pee the couenaunt chat he made WA bꝛa⸗
ham / and the ooch that he lware vnto Flaac.
Andapovnted the fame vnto ; Jacob for
alatwe/ and to Icael foz an euerlatynge
teſtament.
Dapenge vnto the well I geue the lande
of Canãan / the lot of roureherptage.
5 . When there was yet but a kewe of them /
andthe ſtraungers therrn. ‘i
What tymẽ as they went krõ one nacton
to anocher / From one Eengdome to another.
Apa. fir. Be luffred no man to hurte them but! re⸗
pꝛoued euen kynges fo; their lakes.
e anopnted / do my pꝛophe⸗
no harme.
achte Moxouer he* called to a darth opon the


bent. lde enten


pechatisall But he had ſent a man before them / euen


we 2 Aleph which was folve tobe a bonde fers


greafes fox00
Bes f cares «
fulnes of


Plal . cbt.


Leki
Cher lad brought Forth kroggetz / bee euẽ Ero dib. ö
in their kynges chambers, 5 8
*Delpake the wozde and their tame al vera vih .
maner of fipes atid Ipce in all theit quarters.
Hegaue them baple ſtones koz rapne / and:
flammies of Epze in their lande.
e mote their binepatdes a kyge trees / e
er fee 1 0 b hie th 1 ey iia
e d woe / athere were grethops di
bers andcatyzppllers innumetabie. 0
Chele ate vp all the gratic in their lande /
and deuoꝛed their krutes of the grounde. erortaths
* Helmote all the trl bome inthe land / Ero xt ar
euen the chele of all their lubſtaunce.
He bꝛought them fosth wyth ſyluer and S8
golde / there was not one leble perfonne a⸗
monge theirtrrbes.
Egvpte was glad of their departynge / lo:
ther were akraped ol them.
* Helped out a cloude to be a couetyng / Exo. rij. 5
and kyꝛe to geue lyght inthe night ceacon.
At them detpꝛe / chere cam quayles / a he Exo. xvi.c.
kylled them with the bꝛead ol heauen. Grog,
* Be opened the roche of ftone/and$ wa⸗ ume,
ters flowed out: lo that ryuers ranne in the
wylderneſſe.
Foz why?he remembzed his holy pꝛonieg
which he had made ditto Vbzaha his feruadt,
Thus he brought foꝛth bys people wyth
fope / and his cholen with gladnede.
And gaue thẽ the landes of the Heathen /
. He ep tobe the labours of the people in
fettyon,
Chat they myght kepe his ſtatuteg / and
oblerue his lawes. Pꝛapſe the euerlaſtyng.
che. cbt Pfalme. Cor .
¶ Che people of God / cparpled a boade foꝛ their of
keuces in dyuers gud ſtraung · contrepes /ex hort them
felues to piaple the goodnes of God / whych is euer
ready tox them that teak: bym: And do allo recyte the
fpnnesof their eiders and foxfathers:and agapne / he
benekptes ot Sod which he He wed them both in the
wyldernes and after in the lande of Canaan.
Pꝛayſe the euerlaſtynge.


S SGcue thanckes vntothe Londe / koꝛhe B
Mae andhys mercy endureth
0; 2 1
ho can expꝛeſee the noble actes ot the
Londe / oz ewe kozth all bis prayle?
Ble lied are thepthat allwaxe kepe iudg⸗


ig ment / and do ryghtudulnes.


der. Ke.
ders. od d
Bu Lypviges Me


*


Remembseos/ O Lojde / accopdyngeto an che nat
ekaucure B thou Beate tonto thy peopler arthur,
vrlet bs wyth thplaungehealch. nos erte
Chat we myght fe § pleature ofthy cho⸗ the how gore

fen / that we niyght reioyle in theglaonete chende
ofthe Beople/a gene thanches with Fehprie na ehe
umce. een ae
e haue lynned wrth oure fathers) we webe nter
aut Done ampile / we baus dealt wyckedlp. wür pieachte.

* Oure
ieren e


Mute laters regarded not thy wonders
in te / they kepte not thy greate gaod⸗
tele . nitobedtene
at the lee euen arche reed le.

Heuertheles / he helped the to hes names
take / that he myght make hys power to be


erebunedthe reedcee / and it wasdried i


dprlo he leddthẽ tyazow depe as ina wrl⸗
dernelle.


he cauedthem from tye band of the
— . krõ B hande of the


enemre.
1 Cxodl. *g koꝛ chole chat troubled them the wa⸗
5 ee ea one ot


em lelt.
. thee in his woe / otange
e .
W Puma obi ehep Forgas ox
nes and wolde not abrde his councell,
€ Aluſt cane vps chem iche weldernelr /
ſothat they tempted Godin che delerte.
Waere we. ae ene OE
rnough at their wylles.
Cher angred holes in ptentes / a Daron
the larncte ofthe Loꝛde.
So ß earth opened a walowed bp Bas
than /e couered ) congregacion of Abiram.
5 Coe fppe was bpraica mtbert company,
the flame bzent bp the vngodlp.
egg, b e n .
be chate, wyppedche molten mage.
3 € ey turned their? * story intothe
S Be. neh face cher hp


e.
ae Chev torgat Goo cen erte. or bps mercpes


Dhad done lo greatethynges


Wondercus worckes ing ade ct ham / awa


dre m the pla and keärkuli thinges in the keed lee.
ite oheLapdebe wolde haue dettropenthe/
1 wot eder haken bande bebe
inthat gappe:to turne awape his wꝛathtul

J cyon / leſt be ſulde deftrope them.
Feetpepthougbt (come ok that plealaat
lande / and gaue no credence vnto his woꝛde.
But murmured in thetr tentes / and her ⸗

bonito the bopce ot the Loꝛde.


Then pft he vp his hande agapnſt them /


to duerthzowe them in the w 8,
nat ote the nactis/


zouoned hym onto anger W
u en eben | abe plage wos
.. , Steate amonge them.

, Raven tone by hneheg g executed iuſti⸗
ce / and lo the plage ceated.
tuuteete/amigealipatenrccetine

ami
Shep angerkdhem allo at the water oe


Plal, tvij.


t es thas puny
ee Bote tun ted tor chen


Betaute they proudked bis tovete
totem lade says
Lozde commaunded them. be


dbippeo ther pmac


‘atone dei


inh w
Ltd dei cape,


es,
ether offven their eft .
te they offvedthertfonnt ¢ their daugh⸗


Bnd ched f tnnockt bloune orther tonnes
ste pages ale bee dne
‘Wwasnet ped wich bioure,


Chus were they ſtapned with ther atone
woncmes ian went a — wits ek

Cherkoze was the wrath of the l od kyn⸗
led c hrs people into moch 5 be ab:
hozenbis atone enheritäunce.

And gauc them ouer into the hade of the
Deathe/echepchatbaten them were lues


hei enempes oppꝛeled them / and
anden 8 =
e er ut

prouchenbim wennde dent dane
o were brought downe taz their wickednele
when be lawe their aduer

kete he herde their complapnte,
He thought bponbis couenaunt / and pps
tied them/accozopnge onto the multitune of


Yee bemadeatl thote that had lead
.
therbs Fromam —


ang i
pie tape: Ame / Um. Pꝛapte $ eu


e, ( The kyfch treatylt.
ehe cg, Brame, .
3


Seue thanckes onto the Loyd,
DO nn
Let a
bee eden ande ebend du


. che landes / ad 5
3 1 N
the eat tromdye Wed frome orth , g
fromtye** South, weren

Shep wert atrave inthe i tne saat
an bntrodẽ ware / p rodde no citte tobtoel in. een,


5. Ot Nauid. Plal. cbj. Pexrb,


of ate o thirſtpe / g their louſẽ caynted
Sothey>* crped vnto the Loꝛde in their
2 bear, kröu ble he Delpuered the fro thew dlltreüle.
gent er Deledebe Fox bothe rraht wape d they
uche pla. xv myght go to the cptie where theydwelt.
dend Exot. O that men wolde pꝛaple the goodneſee of
sad the Lowe andthe wonders that he Doth ko⸗
the chplozen of men,
‘Foz be Catitépenthe emptie foule/ a ned
the hongrie foule with good.
och as fat indarcknelle and in the tae
dowe okdeath / beynge kalt bounde in myle⸗
ry ande pꝛon.
Becaulethey were not obedtet to the cõ⸗


maundementes ol God / butipghtlp regar⸗


*


fe
piaime.cb «


reſt and tohe bꝛyngeth them onto en
where ther woſde be. 5 05 .
Othatmen wolde p;apfethe goodnes of D
the Lorde and the wondzes that he doth foz
the chrideen ol men. 5
gacgon ofthe people ann — ba inthe
ople / and loaue hym in the
keate of the eiders. 5 .
Which turneth the loudes into dye land /
and dueth bp the water ſpꝛynges.
Akrutekull jande maketh he bart / ko; the
wyckednelle ok them that dwell cherin. 2
Agarneſhe maketh p * wyildernes a tans er What the
ding water!s water fpzingtot a die groäde. anberneshere
Cherehe ſetteth the hongrye / that ther dee 16
mape burdde them a cptte to dwellin. wer mn Ela.
Chat they mape fore their grounde / piãte rv a
vrnerardes / to elde the krutes ofincteate. f, chat s be
Be sblellech the / fo P they multiple ex- mateih the to
are. andlüfkreth not their catell to de⸗ enceeates,
create.
When they are mpnithed a brought owe
Sab oppꝛeũxon / thoꝛowe eny plage of
ouble,
Though he fuffre them to be euell intreas
tedthozow tyꝛauntes / oz tect them twandze
out cf the wapein the wyldernelle.
Vethelpeth he the poze out of miterylat
ch lat and maketh bem an houcholde ipne


„ a llocke of hepe,


ſtruccpon.
Othat men wolde pꝛaple the goodneſle
the Loꝛde / and the waners that he doth koꝛ
the chridzen of men.


The rightuous will cöcydve this g reiopte /
d mouth of all wickednecle wall be topped,
Who lo is wyle / pondꝛeth thele thynges
well“ chan onderſtande the loupnge Bends
nelles oF the Loꝛde. Sprig ane
Che. cbiij Plaime.
weth ß he keruently delpꝛeth to
—.— g Ahem tf Near Me as
as ina Gadowe the nobplite of Cheues üpngdome.
& longe of a Palme of auto, 4
* Gov myherte is ready to lynge / and
to geue peapte, a plal. loi
Awake / O mpgloꝛr / awake lute a


harpe /i mymplelke willawatze right carly,


J well geuc chanckes vnto the / O 1070)


1 amonge the people J wyll lunge pꝛayles
Heathen,


5 ape / their loule meltethawape
uble.
Chey rele to and fro / they ſtacker whe a
dꝛoncken man / and are at their wyttes ende.
So thepcrye onto ? Lom in their trou⸗
ble Age deipuereth the out ok their dichrelle
He maketh the tome to ceatle lo that b
wales are ſtpll.
Chen are ther glad becaule they be at


vnto the amonge the Heal

Fos che greatnelle of thy mercyis higher
then thebeaueng and thy fapthtuinetie rea⸗
cheth vnto the cloudeg.

*Setbp thy lelfesD God. abouethehea⸗ 0
uens and thy gloyr aboue al the eartz. Bil. .be
Chat thy belouen mape be delpuered: aPtallee

be aunt +4 ihne en gheare me.
thynge reiopteth me. 1 0
I willdeupde Sichem / and meate out the
valley of Suchoth.
Galaadis myne Manadees is myne / C- 49 l. lr
phꝛaim is the ſtrength bene Suna te
ae


v. Ot Dauid,
5 mp captarne. 5
C. Moab is my wachpotte / ouer Edom will


4 bone oute my tue / Phili ſtea chall be


ol me. 8
Who will leade me in tothe ſtröge citte?
Who wyll bꝛynge me in to Edom? .
Shalt not thou doit ( O God) whych halt
call vs out: thou God / that wenteſt not forth
with oure Hotes? 5
O be thou our helpe in trouble / loꝛ vayne
is the helpe of man.
Chpoꝛom God we Hall do greate actes / ko:
it is he g hall treade downẽ oure enempes.
¶ Che. cix. Palme. 8
Cagayni woeg and other flatterers of Saul/ which
with their pes pꝛouoked hym agapn Daud: And
vnder the haͤdowe of them agapnd Zudasz all foche
asafter that maner trouble the Conucs of S od: Tyen
5 Bewapleth he his myler ie and pꝛapeth fo; helpe.
speeneatt Reco the chaunteta Praime of Bautd.
dolalmes Olde not thytõge / o Godot my pꝛaile.
2 Foꝛ the mouth of the vngoblx / pee
g themcuch ok  difceattuil is opened
bpd me / a ſprake agaynſt me w falle töges.
They cõpate me aboute w wo des of ha⸗
6040 fe agaynſtme without a caute.
Foꝛ p ĩoue that J had vntothẽ / they take
now mp cotvarp pate / but J geue mp lelle
vnto paper.
Chus they rewarde me euell Foz good / ¢
hatred £02 inpgocd tpt
Set an ongodly ma to be ruler ouer him /
let Satan ſtande at his rpght bande,
When lentence is geuẽ ops him / let him
be condempned / and let his pꝛaxer be turned


in to lynne.
Alen Jethis dayes be kewe / z his bichopzicke
ae Che wor let another take.
des which ind en Lethes chplozen be fatherlette / a his
Ree ‘wpfea wydowe.
me or duch. Let his chyldze be bagaboundes/ ¢ begg
mal Lp. rs 2
sug bony i it / as they that. be
285510 aie Letthe extoꝛcioner confume all that be
9 hath / an ſungers fpople bis laboure.
ders an pro, bath and ler Graungers tpoplebis tab
hecpes that Let there be no man to petpe / nerto haue
Foait in deade compalpon vpon his fatherlede chyldꝛen.
come to pale: Let his ende be deltrucc pon / a in 6 nexte
wen br ahg, Seneracton let his name becleane put out,
hones for his Let 6 wyckedneſſe ol hrs Fathers be had
cheldyen halbein remẽ bꝛaunce in the lyght of the Loꝛde / a
wagaboundes: let not ß lynne okhis mother be done awape.
aad foforthoF Let the alwape be bekoze the Lord / but as
fhe other acm Cor thememoziall of them telues / ett it pe⸗
the Ola. xl. c. rych From out ok the earth.
wutletallthoe Andthat becaule bys mynde was not to
betull ee. do good but perkecuted 5 poozehelplele 4
ve him 5 was vered attheberte / to fave hym.
€ Bis delpte was in rutlynge / and therfore
chäll it happen vnto hym: he loued not blel⸗
kenge / and that Wall be fare krom him.


Plal.tix· c. tx
He


toute,
mony ¶ Che. cx. Plalme.


7 .
clothedhym elke wich curlynge Ike
as with a rapment: pee it wente in to his bo⸗
wels iphe water/¢ Ike ople in to his bones.
Let it be vnto hymas the clocke that he
bath vpon hym / and as the gyꝛdle that he is
ded with all.


2 :
= Let it thus happen krom the Lozde vnto
myne enempes / i to thole that tpeabe euell
aganſt nip loule.
But deale thou with me / O Loꝛde God /
ãccoꝛdynge vnto thy name / koꝛ ſwete is thy
mercy. :
O deliuer me / to: F ambelptette a pooze/
and myherte is wounded within me,
Igo hence lyke the hhadowe that depar⸗
tech Famdreuẽ awape as the greſpoppers. u. pg
My knees are weake thozow* kaſtyng / here u onder,
my llech is dꝛied vp foz want ok fatnele. Gand al bedr.
Jam become a rebuße onto the they lone 4 l b
vpon me and take theirheades. fore mpi
Helpeme/D Loꝛde my God / oh laue me xxxv. c.
koꝛ thy mercpes lake.
Chat they mape knowe / how that this is
thy hande / and that thou halt done it.
Chough they curve / vet blede thou: and let
thé be confounded / that ryle vp agaynſt me /
but let thy teruaunt reiopte.
Lett mene aduerſarpes be clothed with
their ane came / as with a cloake.
As koꝛ me / wyllgeue thanckes vnto the
Lozdweth imp mouth / a pꝛapte hꝛmamũõge
the multitude. 2 95
Foz he ſtandech at the ryabt bande or p hende of te
pode / to faue hym fr loch as condempne 5 2
e e


Tue L oꝛde chall ſende the rodde ol toe eee che
vower cut ot Sion / be thou ruler euen inf dal io rule ¢
myddeſt amongethpne enempes. 2 —

‘zn the dare of chr power chall thy people Erbe .und

re the krewyll offryngd with an holy woꝛ⸗ he tert on bps
thipe thc dewe of thy byzth is of the wombe rightbavintee
ol the moznenge. ag gab ne
CheLozatware/e will not repẽt: chou art aisle bt
a pꝛeſt fo cucratterp oder of Welchikedec. is madehym e

Che Londevponthp ryght hande wall qual wey

Smpte euen kinges in the dape ok his wach fur see te
He thall be tudge amonge the eather ne
he ſhall kyll them with deed bodyes / a lmpte be Koch.
in fonder the heades ouer dtuerte countres.rri.0.
Be wall ozpncke of the bꝛoke in $ ware / a igen
shertore all be let bphis head. me at
e


Teadye t0 bel,


bra.
5. a.


Plal.cxi. . txv.


— — cobues of God
. of ate pape
ſed / which ate cupdent to forbs warckts —
done amonge the people of qccaell.
Pzaple the euerlaſtynge.
Wyllgeue thanckes onto the Loꝛde w
Ju whole Werte: fecretip amonge the
falthkull / z in the congregacyon.
Che woꝛckes of p Loz are great fought
out ok all thé that haue piealure therin.
His woꝛcke is worthy to be pꝛayled and
had in hondure / and his rpghtuoumerie en⸗
e ne
e metcphull and gracpous Lode
lo done hys maruelous woꝛckes / that ther
ought to be had in remembꝛaunce.
He geueth meate vnto them / that keare
him he is euer mpndfuil ok bps couenaunt.


B He ſheweth his people the power ok bys


gib r viſ d.
Dauer.


ite
li. b.


woickes that he mape geue them the; herx⸗
tage of the Heathen,

Che woꝛckes ok his hãdes are verpte and
iudgment / all his cõmaundemẽtes are true.

Chey ſtande fact ko euer andcuer / gare
done in trueth and equpte.
mt 2 Cent redempcpon vntohys people / he

commaunded his cõuenaunt for euer /
holx and reuerent is his name.

Che keare otthe Loꝛde is the begynning
ol wyl dome a good vnderſtandyng haue all
they that do therafter: the pzaple of it endu⸗
reth toꝛ a 9 80

Che. cxiſ. Plalme.
Che declareth ihe perpetuall pꝛocperite of thE which
Fearcand wauchyp Sod / and contrefet hys goodnes.
Pzaple the euerlaſtynge.


fail gnach wich is teeth a confume
aape / 5 f delpꝛe oF 8 bngedip Mall perpch.


- andthe lptie hylles Iyke ponge chepe.


Che. cri. Palme. Merri,


Re moteth to the prapſe wf Sod /becaul:hetepth
all thpngés/and ruie th and gouernety them after hu
wyli and pleaſure.

Praple the euerlaſtynge.
Maple the Loꝛde ( O ve ieruauntes) O
bie ae dethen ol the Ley 5

i be the name ofthe Lozde/

kromehis teme Eosth kor euer moze. 7
Che Lopes name is woꝛthp to be pꝛap⸗ Joan. h. a.
led / kromthe rylynge vp of the Sunne onto
1 abe aa h
5 is hre aboue all Heathen / ¢
his gioꝛp aboue the heauens. 6
„Who is ipke vnto the Lozde oure God / v That 18) ¢6
Chat hath his dwellynge lohpe / wyych hum⸗ ve keutefull 2
1 — elke / to beholde that is in heauen bee es,
nobich taketh wp the ſempie out of BLUE, odge, ees
and lpkteth the pooze out of the myꝛe. as ia the tpme
Chat he mape lett him amonge the pꝛyn⸗ ar her barencg
ces cuenamongethe pzpnces or his people, % fate.
iwhich maketh the bark womä b. o hope ü0 be holte g
houle / andto be a toptull mother of chyldzẽ. baute of her
Pꝛapſe the euerlaſtynge. C awone fo: thas
GThe.crtij Piaime, , muna /
Che briefly recpteth the greater and ehtake myra/ PPD neuer
les which the Lo;de bp For Jcrarl)when he be onghe bade “RIDES
them out of Egypt.
Ahen Alrael came oute of Egypte / a
the **houte ol Jacob frd amonge that 6
se, taunge people. Age
bab. i Wanckuar / Wann
5 offp:pnge ol
Che ſe q 12 Zatob O:FCeael,
ned bac dg before in the
1 A . lawe that / and fled / Joꝛdantur⸗ Jacob, glrael


bn. ruth. u.
Che niountagnes hipped une rammes / e ie
Phat apled the / O thou lee / § thou fey: Erodus- ¢ the
Delano thou Jordan /that thou tumenes™® iht
4 me thalt
dee mountapnes/that pethyppediphetorte
rammes: a pe Iptie hylles/ivne vonge Mhepe? i unge
Cbe earth trembled at the pꝛelence ol tie uc u
Losde/at the prekence of the God or Jacob. liege pene
*#1Dbpch turned the barde rocke into aof graf. le
Kandynge water / andthe fipnt ſtone into a c K harte the
Ipꝛyngrnge weil. 1 7 People of
dy Chis is expounded in the Plalmlrrg a. 1%
aalen Ieeueoonbecanbs to te geen eerily lar
ponge of the byl! Bion) when the Lo:d2 ca.nc downe to geue the
lawer. Erodi. rix. c. ĩ d. which aking (Cape they) was not onelp tene
in that hyll alone, but alto in all the bpltes npe vnto byt,
er Oꝛthe rock tur ned into water / pee r cade. Exo. rvij. 2 Num. xx.
Che. erb Plalme.
Se prapeth God For the glorpe of his names Cake to
forther bis people/to thyntẽt that it mape be eurdet
tp knowen that he alone is God / and the Jocks of the
Beathen but vapne thpnges. a
Ot vnto vs O ond / not vnto bs bit aenopae (s
vnto thy name geue the prapte / koz pere (pguitpen
. che louynge mercy a fapthkulnes. ir bis name is
WDpertoze Hallthe Heathen Cape: where hh e n
FE. is nu


as Name: fog


v. S


is nom their God:

As fo7 oure God /he is in heauen / he doth
whatloeuer it pleateth him.
api. iht. Cheir pmages are but cꝑuer and golde /
Sh fl.b. euen the wozcke ormens handes.
Havienrvs Chephaue mouthes / and ſpeake not: eves
Baruch. vi. haue ther / but they le not.

Cher haue eareg / cheare not:noles haue

ther butcher mei nk.


Thep haue handes and handle not / fete
hauether but thep can not goo / nether can
ther lpeake thoꝛow their thꝛote.

i CTheythat made thẽ / are lyke vnto them /
and fo ate all loch as put their truſt in chem.
But lett rack truſt in the Loꝛde / toꝛ he

ts their luccbure and defence,
Let the boule of avon put their truſt in
the Loꝛde/ ko he is their luccourea delence.
€ Chepchat keare the Londe / lett them put
their truſt in the Loꝛde / koz he is their luc⸗

be Cbatts / CUTE anddefence.

doth good to Che Lorde is mf Hof bs / and *biet-

vs /fauoreth Seth vs:he bleüeth p houle of Jlrael / he blel⸗

2 multtpiyeth feel the houle of Aaron,

sor 192 5 eehe bleleth all the that teare ö Loꝛde /

{rapes Gene. boch (mall and gveate,

ia, Fhe Lone encreale you mozeand moze:

ca Che dee d you / and youre chyldren. ;
prayle not the” Foz ve are the blelled ot the Lozde/which
derade bert made heauen andearch.

bptheded B, All che wholeheauez are the L oꝛdes / but

thole that ß earch hath he geuẽ vnto p chyidzẽ ofmen,

Dyed in ) toile el Che deed pꝛayle not the( S Lozde) nes

perce ume ther all thep that go Downe in tofplence,

b dlöche 32, Put we well praple ö Kop d this tyme

b. And che 3.

weg which the koch Foz euermore. Pape $ euerlaſteng.

Homapat due, a GChe.crdi, Plalme.

Altorthote chat Cn thanchefgeupng for the bealp of theLozbe where

Dpein their ms dp he efkaped whe be was conrpalled aboutewith the

fprctitess foche Bolte of Saul. We cecpteth the greate teopardp and

as beyng pet a ſtraꝑte wherin he then was: and prapleth the goodnes

Ipue / ave deed / of Sod/ up whole benerpte he was preferucd,

wo Cpnne Am well pleaced that che Lozde bath

mot., Jberde the vopce demp praper, :
‘Thathe hath enciyned his eare vnto
A ees callivon hym as longe

Il rue. 8

* Pal xp . a. Tete {raves ol death cõpaled me rounde

aboute / the papnes ot hell gat hode vpõme /
he Lowe J founde trouble and theupnelle. 8
ts not called Chen called I ops the name ok the Loz:
rpabtwes alos O JLozde:delpuermpfoule,

netptecautede Gractous is ß Londe / a **rightuoug/pee

tspactect Of bt dure Sodig mercpeull,

felfe in att 6 20

ages

Siakoecau, Broughtbotone and be belpeame,

fe be maketh = Cutneagapne then onto thy re O my

boch be oul top the Lopdbath geuẽ the thpdetpze,

Hom.thd2.whs , And why thou halt oelpuered mp foule


God hath made from dee


ee tea
aleate of mers fete from e —


inge.


Che Loꝛde pꝛelerueth the tymple / was


Dauid. Plal. cx vi. cxvij. cx viij.


Iwyn walcke bekoze the Loꝛde / in the cp ¢ eters. to
vrlande of the lxurnge. ‘Shetvetherigye
*g beleucd/ and thertoze auie Itpozen / ws wire
but J was foze troubitd. is ‘of bn

Tlapde in my hafte: Il menatetpers, re. ice.

What tewarde ſhallz geue ontop Lom / 4181 lbe lad
fo? all the bencfytes Phe bath done vito me? une

GJ well teceaue che cuppe offaluaceo/ Pech l
and call bpon the name of the Loꝛde. Elac.

I wyll pape my vowes in the pꝛelence of cini
aulbis people rightaeate in the rat a the „fenen e
Loi de ig the death of his ſaynctes. many cxpotide

D Lope J amthy feruaunt / Jamthy D tobeastice
feruaunt/and the tonne of thy handmarde/ aun berae
thoubatt broken my bonnes informer, at am Me

‘J wyl offre tof / the facrifpce of thachet-
ae, we cal vpn the name of 6

o7de.

J well pave my vowes vnto d Loꝛde in
ſycht ot all his people /in the courtes of the
Lõꝛdes houle / euen in the myddeſt orthe / O
Jerulalem. Pꝛaplethe euerlaſtynge.

Che. crvij. Palme.
e pꝛopheſieth that the benefpte ot l.

See e
Pꝛayte the Lozde all pe . Gentyleg /
PDiaine bim all pe people. ang
For his mercptull kyndnes is euer sre mnacraay
851 e vs andthe 57 ie —.—

onde en oz euer. apfe! 2
the euerlattynge, ia sin e hoe

Tbe.crbij plalme.

«a a e pe uber abe plum.
Uerlptpes, and promoted to the Apngdome of all J, 2b. d. Ther ⸗
racLgatte thanckes to God openip m the tabernacle: fore thalt the

In which he allo beareth the fpgureof Chi. ple gee
*Geue thanckes onto the Love / fo2 *
lil w. a.


Wen a his mercp endureth
er. 51
; maßen note ted chathismereren. 4 0
it et,
Let the houle of Aaron now cotette/ that
bis merep endureth fo2 euer.
er let thé nom that teare the Loꝛde cõ⸗
kellẽ / chat his mercy endureth koz euer.
J called opon the Loꝛde in trouble / a the
WYeve Lo; ompbeier/¥ optnot are
wber man dott ontonte, een nin
Che Lozde ig my helper / and J wait e
my delpie vpon myne enempes.
It is better to truſt inthe Loꝛde / then to
elbe tei the Lade
put enx conkydence in p: . en
Au Heathen compared me rounde about /
„ Lond well A deſtrope


Cher kepe mein on euer fide but in the
name of the Lode /A wrllbeftrope them.


55 Ol Dauid.


I tole. sHatth.


Cher came aboute meiphe bees / a were
as hote at the kxꝛe in the thoꝛnes / hut in the
name of the Lolde J wyll deltrope them,

They chzuſt atme chat J might tan / but
the Loꝛde was my helpe.

6. b. a
on and is become my laluacpon. i

Che voyce of tope and nipzthis in dwel⸗
seGicopen 5 Ipynges oF the ryghtuous / oz the rpabt bade
gauss F190 oF the Lo de hath gotten the victo ze.
ben the Cberrahr hände ofthe Lope bath Spree
baibetbegra / empnence, the ryght hande of the Lozdhath
ex ryguttwel+ gotten the bictozp,
usp came oF J topll not dye but irue / anddetlare the
anne Spen WOICHES OF the Lobe. :
fe gas ar Che Lords hath chattened g coꝛtecke ine /
tego people but he bath not geuen me ouer bnto death.
mage


ni Aang Open me the gates of ryghtuoulnes /


Gents # the that J maye Goo in there thoꝛow / and geue thy


dns lache thanckes vnto the hove,
macher) a C hig is the doze ak the L ode / the rygh⸗
unt wat be tuous chall entre inthozow it.
bs wpofye I thanche the / that thou halt herde me / z
g d. Boche art become me faluacpon,

übers ter Che fame** ſtone whych the buploers rez


Ae yet’ and Fuafed/ is become the heade ſtone inp cozner,


ee tee
ende. =e
Er dape matuelous in dure eyes.
neren Chis scher dape/ wich thel owe bath
ane of prea made / et vs reiople and be glad in it.
5 Helpe now D Loꝛde / D Loꝛde lende vs
full g gladde now pꝛolperite.
ages of — Dlelledbe he that commeth in the name ol
swhpch che Loꝛde / we wych vou good iucke / ve that
— be of the houſe of the Lozde.
kahn coe God is the f oꝛde / z hath che wed vs light:
tenapneth.oe O garnrch the Colempne featt wyth grene
ps bape alto bꝛaunches / cut vnto the hoꝛnes ok p aulter.
Tan dtn Chou art my cod and J wyll hacke the:
Shadows (Bow art my God/anby tpll praptethe,
edaye of tie D geue thanckes bro the L oꝛde / fozheis
Hynes gracious / and hys mertyendureth for euer.
Ohe crix Praime’? a's.
ches o falme declareth hom moche the fapnetes
Chjiſten fet by the lawes of So / and how greatly
ther ende uour the ſelües bute chem: m fo moche that
ex ſowe them to be tranſgreũed ¢ withſtanded of
‘the wycked: And how ther pape to be taught thé f rõ
Abone/e to be accuſtomed with che: g e as many
— z withRande them to be deſtroyed and


& Aleph. >
1. M Leled are chore that ar be vndekyled in
4% Cobe ye the tape: which walcke in the lawe ot
bin ide the Kode. 8
ht & Blelled are they chat hepe bys teſtymo⸗
op mies and leke him wich cheir whole herte.
:and to & which walcke in his wayes / a dono wyc⸗
se tee Cub bat geuer Geavte chaste cos
ex Chou hak geuen ¢ epe
er. chr commanndementes,


Plal, trix.


*Che Lodels my ltregth / and my longe / b


hrs was the Loꝛdes doynge / and it is Forget thy woꝛde


Eerxvij.

& D that mp wares were ſtablpthed to ke⸗ ‘

Pe ta : ſplhed to ke:

So ſhulde J not be confounded iwhyte:

haue relpecte onto all thy omen e

bee aer ellen
i e e iudgmentt

chyrrghtuoulnee. igs

R_ FZwpll kepe thy ſtatutes / O foꝛlane me

notbtterip, ‘6

, Beth. 2 F

z Where withall halla ponge man ciente

tee Euen by rulynge bpm ſelke after

a With my whole herte do z teke the / O let

me not go woge out ok thy cõmaundemẽtt.

2 Chywozdes haue 2 hyd within myherte /

that J Guide not l ynm̃e agapnet the.

2 Frege betas O Lope / D teach me

2 With mplyppes wyl I be teltpyng out all

the iudgmentes of thy mouth,

a Jbaue as greate delpte inthe wave of thy

tel pmonies/as in all maner of ryches.

a A wyll exercyſe my ſelte in thy comaund:

mẽtes / a haue relpecte vnto thy kotepathes.

E — 1 ee inchy ſtatutz / J will not


O do wen i in bat
5 o well vnto thy ei that J mae
Ixue and kepe thy woꝛdes. a ¢
Open thou mne epes/andfo chan I tpie
out wonderous thynges in thy late,

Jan a ſtraunger bpon earth / O hyde not
thy commaundementes frome,

4 Dp toute bzeaketh oute / £02 the very ker⸗
8 Aeg 12 Ahaue alwape onto thy iudg⸗
mente


. Chou rebubett the pꝛoude / curled are they

that departe from thy commaundementes.

3 D tutne tro me chame and rebuke / koꝛ 3
kepethyteſtimonpes. 5

3 “*Prpncesalfotye a peage agarnſt me / brpnceg
dutthrkerugüt is occuppedin thp ttatutes. grail eee
In thpteſtrmonies is my deipte / they are rules vethep
inpcouncelers. . rauch;
wee as. 1 Paleth. + wic
~ Bp foul cleauetyeoehe bag, O durfte 2 ae
thou me accozdpnge to thy woꝛde. outward
A nowledged mywapes / f thou herdeſt apperaunte of
me/ O teach me then thyſtatutes. a
nnn wwaye of thy MEmon ea €
commaundementes and fo wall Jtalcke OF with ttode bpm
thy wonderous woꝛckes. : 8 e (pabeagaput
= Dy loulemelteeh awape for very heur⸗ bem
nee O fee me vpaccoꝛding vnto thy worde

Cale fro me ß wa ye ok lpenge / ograunte

me thy lawe.

J Fbaue choten chen waye of treuth / thy fe Cet


fudgmentesbaueZiapenbefozeme. apo


ATaärcke onto chr tettymontes/ D L onde afterthe worde


Ft. ij. con⸗


v. Ot Dauid.


ok truelh / whi conkounde me not.


Plal.txix.


chess cOtapued. J wyll runne che waye oF thy cömaunde⸗
Eb SCTE wantes / wh tdon had romtofcdnwhente.


Dauid chat he 2
bath wale
beds not
mn fapned trae

clans. 2 bo, J


tutes / and J thall kepe it ont


He.. 4
En. Teach me C Nolde the wape ol thy ſta⸗


o the ende.


Odi geũe me onderſtãdynge / and J Hat


Tucyaagineo kepethylawe / pee A hall kepe it wyth mx


vp hun felke o: whole herte.


up anf mortal 1 Leade me in the path ol thy commaund⸗
mina een, mente othat is mpdecgze.


me (pa nik pca -
cyon Mieth . a


€nclyne mpne herte onto thy teltymo-


Peter thys nes and not to couetoulnes.


ace


piv Uwe


tt, Oturne awaye myne epes / leſt theybe⸗
holde vanite / a qurcken me in typ ware,


septs O Gablith tyy wozde in the leruaune / &


suapeof tenety J mape keare the,


Hilve cue I Caheawapes rebuke that J am atraped


1 c.
10 baut af. o. N. Beholde mpoelpte is in


ol / kor thy iudgmentes are ampable.


thy cõmaunde⸗


thee vndeena. miẽtes / O quyckẽ me in thy rpgituoutnese,


dong chen that 1 Gau.“
daun, Fs Letthploupnge mercy come vnto me / O


ip which io ig Lorde and thy faupnge health acco enge


noraut of Soo bnto thy woꝛde.


and of hin will That J mape geue anſwere vnto my blac⸗
3 ace ee pbemers for mp truſt is in thy woꝛde.
though it twee? O take not 15 woꝛde Of treuth vtterly out


ze neuer (o oł my mouth /


amp hope is inthy iudgmẽ t


well me@cuct 5 So hall J alwape hepe th lawe/vee fox


aud caught vet ener and euce,

pooldene neues And J wyll walcke at pb
felfe meth eee ie
oute the (pete y


erty / koz q feke


wyll Cpeake of thy tedimonies euen be⸗


Of Gon, that Fore kynges / and wyil not be achamed.


Sanna! Wp deſpte walbe in chp c
no fajeerstobich 7 toue,


Gmaundmétes/


fynnes freien Py handes allo well A lyft vp onto thy
outany delete commaundententes which J louẽ / a my tal:


upnges. Plal.


6b. Bain.


kynge walbe of the ſtatutes.
5
©, Ochpncke opontyp leruaunt as concer:


nynge thp worde / wherin thou halt cauled


me to putmy truſt.


1 Fon it is my co forte in my trouble /pee thy


woꝛde qupckeneth me.


1 Che pꝛoude haue me greatip in deril
bet bnchenot g fromtbpisice. ad


J remembre thpne eueria


png iudgmẽtz /


D Lopde/andamcoméozted.
19 Uher ane, koꝛ the vngodly / 8


Cozfake thy law
1 Chr datutes are my ton
ok my pyigremage.


ges in the houle


Ithyncke vpon thy name / OL ond / in the
high realen, nd Erpe pülme. 0


tis myne awne/ to k
mentes, oe 85805


eth.
Dn Chou ave buten,


G 28


‘i
O Tode / Jam


ether cõmaũd⸗


rpoled to kepe thy lawe.
ea make mypne humble petycpon in thy
pretence with my whole herte / O be mercy:
full vnto me accoꝛdrnge vnto thy worde.
N Jcallmpue atone wapes te remembꝛaũ.
ce / and turne my fete in to thy teſtimonies.
A Fmakebatte/and pꝛolonge not the time /
to kepe thy commaundementes.
N. Che c. racpons of the vngodlp haue
robben me / but J koꝛget not thy lawe.
n Atmponight lande Z vp / to geue thickes
bnto the/ foz che iudgmentes of thy rrah⸗
tuouſneſle


n Jama cempanvon of all them that feare

ihe / and kepe thycommaundementex.

fh Checarth / O Koꝛde is full or the met: . Pn⁰ꝭ
cp. O teach nie thy ſtatutes.


ch. 2
E D Lom wou ban deal krendir with the g
leruaunt / accozopnge vnto th worde.
O icarne me thy kyndnelle nourtoure z
nnowledge / ko: J beleue thy cõmaũdemẽtz.
v Beloe 3 was troubled / q went wꝛonge /
dut now J hepe thy wozde.
5 mes. good s krendip / O teach me ihr
atutes.

The pꝛoude ymagin tyes vpon me / bit g

kepe thy cemmaundemeẽtes with mp whole


erte.
8 Their herte is as tat as bꝛawne / but mp
delpte is in thy lawe.
Y It is good forme p; I haue bene in trou⸗
die / that J mape learne thy ſtatutes.
v Che lawe of thy monty is dearer vnto
me / then . 2 55 andfpluer,
„ Jod. e
hy hades hauẽ made me and tach yoned R
me / O geue mehere that maye z ele.
Jeatne thy commaundementes. Soba
» Chey 5 feare the wyll be glad when ther
feme;becaule J put my truſt in thp wore,
» Fknowe/D Lozde/ chat thy iudamentes
ave right/and that thou of verpkaichtulne lle
halt cauled me to be troubled.
» Oletthpmercyfull kyndnelle be my com⸗
kozte / accoꝛdynge to the pꝛemes that thou
bat made vnto thy ſeruaunt.
O let thy louyng mercies come vnto me /
that J mape Ipue / foꝛ thy iawe is my delpte.
Let the pꝛoude be cõtounded / which had⸗
le me Co kalũpe.
But let loch as feare the / and knowe thy
teſtymonies/ be turned vntome.
HO lett mphe herte be vndetpled in thy fac
tutes that J be not aeg
2 . — *
2 By foulelongeth forthe laurnge health /
2 abn evesogelo eee
> eres lõge fore 7
Diwhen welt thou comkozte me⸗ 40


b.


vallthae


HE Dauid,


> Foz am become like a botell in moe /
vet do not J koꝛget thy ſtatutes.

> Som manp are the dapes ofthpteruaiit?
— thou be auẽged ol myne aduer⸗


> Tue pꝛoudehaue dygged pyttes ko me /
which are not alter thylawe.

> Allchr commaundementes are true / they
perlecute me falllp / O be thou myhelpe.

> Cher haue almost made an ende ot me
vpõ ace but J koꝛcake not thy cõmaunde⸗


5 O qupckẽ me atter thy loupng kyndn /
e

G FD Lom / che wo de endureth tor euer in
heauen


Chr treuth allo remapneth ts one ge⸗
neracpon to another: thou balk ſaped 8 oũ⸗
dacpon ok the earth / and it abrdeth.
They contynue this dape accoynge to
thpne ozopnaunce / toꝛ all chynges ierue the,
At me dilpte were nat in thy lawe /
Guide perphhemmp trouble.
4 wyll neuer foꝛget thy commaunde ⸗
mentes / Foz with them thou quickeneſt me.
Jam chrne / Oh heipe me / lo tebe che
commaunbementes.
% he bngodip lave wapte foz me to de⸗
rope me, but J confpdz: thy teftimonpes,
é I Ce that ail thyray come to an ende / but
. is exceadynge bꝛoade.
Sem.

Aya Owhatlcuehaue F onto thy lawe: all
the dape longe is my talnynge of it.
n Chouthozom thy commaundement haſt
made me wyler then myne enemies, foz it is
euer by me.
I haue moze vnderſtandyng then an mp
teachers foꝛ thy teſtymonies are my ſtudie.


wa Yee Famwplerthen p aged) fa 4 Bepe thine hade


a. enen gun ul

I retrapne mp fete kr euer

that J maxe kepe thy woꝛdeg. .
A Icpynck not from thy iudgmentes / fog
thou teacher me.

<a O how ſwete are th wo des vnto mx
v Feemqethen hen vnto mymwvuch.
A Chozow thy cõmaundementes⁊ get vn⸗
derſtanding / therkoꝛe g hate all kalte wares,


2 Nun. 4
3. cchy wozdeis a:“ lanterne vntomy fete


cy wo fe bene, ne
called 3
unter ne and to kepe 5; iudgmẽtes of tuꝝ ryghtuoulnede.
opens A, amtroublep aboue meature qupcken

cher me / O Londe / accoꝛoynge vnto th worde.


J baue Core ¢ Am thiofattty purpotedy


Plal.cxix.


. oe
£* Mptoule is alwape in Ccrrvii
8 ploule is e in m e / pet ke which tolo
do not J forget thy lawe. hand 1 eee it: caugot
2 che bngod'p haue laped amate fog me, fi 10 AP
but petfwarue nor A fra typ comauindmstt. abr. Bein
2 Ch teſtemanpes haue J clapmed ag we yaueatto,
myneherptage fo: euer:and toh yp? they are p Ver.
Ne uch Gat 15 8
2 l ö ö

bes lbart, urn pntoche eme. See aun,
2 d Samech. reaöpe to offer
o J bateBonaodly durcbplawe dog ioue,® der


>. Thou art mydekence e / my truſt
tip woe. gchrid b truſtas pe haut in


win 4-5 =n Jousio.c obce
d me ve ed / nepereuiserpoun⸗
thecommaunnementes ok mp Sed. die mate a


> Dltablisyme accading vnto thy wozde / arne.
that J mape Ipue / q let me not be dilapoyn⸗

ted or my hope.

Holde thou me vp / and z hall be take:pee
Ichall euer be talgynge ok chp tatutes:

D_ Chou treadet downe all them p departe
krõ ch ſtatutt/ tos they ymagin but dicceate
> Chou puttet awaye all che vngodip of
the earch pte dolle / thertoze J loue thx tes
ſtymenfes.


> y Heth trembleth kor keare of the / and J
am atraped ot thy iudgmentes.


y Tin. rc -
20 J deale t thethinge ps laukull g right / N
Ogeue me not ouer onto mine cppedours.
dag thou luertpe fo2 thy feruaunte to do
good / p the pꝛoude do me no wzonge.
e
ealth / and fo2 the woꝛde

rightuoulneſfe. ea
z. O deale thehy ſeruaunt acco:dyng onto
thy loupnge mercy, a teach me ibo tatutcs,
3 a am th ſeruaũt / O graunte we vnder⸗

dung that J mape know thy tell imcmes.
y It ig tynie foꝛ the (O Norte) to e ve to
koꝛthey haue deſtroped thy lawe.
y Foz J loue thy commaundemẽtes aboue
Zolde and precious tone,
v. Cherkoꝛe holde J ſtrerght an thy com⸗
maundementes / and all falle waves vtter⸗


i jo7te, 55 5
rabhone d Phe.

D Chyteſlymonpes are wonderkull / ther
toꝛe doth my toule kepe them.


d When thy wozde goeth kosch / it geueth
ipght a vnderſtandynge, euen vnto babes.
„ cpẽ mymouih anddze we in my bꝛeth /
bop Adelpzethy cenimaundementes

D oke thou bpon me /a be mercifull/as
theu bfet to do vnto thote p loue thy name,
2 Oꝛdze my goinges after thy wozde that
no wyckednele raxane in me.

5 O delpyerme fof waögcaus dealinges


2% Wb4 23 Let the krewyll oſterynges ormy mouth ol men / a lo man kepe thy cõmaundemẽ tx.
‘mea ge lea the DLO seach me het 2  sobuteeBlaght ofthe ceuntenadce bres


GEA. the


v. Ol Baud,


thy leruaunt / and learne me thy liatutes.
2 Myne eyes guile out dw water / becaule
men kepe not thy lawe.
1 Jade. 17
S Byghtuous art hon / O L onde / and true
is thx tuogment,
Sener eee ne ance
a a
+ y zele hath euẽ confumenme/becaule
myne enempes haue koꝛgotten thy woꝛdes.
Chr woꝛde is tryedto the vttermoſt / and
chr leruaunte loueth it.
+ Jam tmall and ot no reputacron / vetdo
not A forget thy commaundementes.
1 Oy nnn noh! is an euerla ſt ynge
tyghtuoutnes / and th lawe is true.
+ Crouble and beupnete haue taken holde
po ray Ress i Dec fo OE CoRR
mentes.
1 Che rpghtuoutnes ok thy tettymonyes is
tuetlattpng / O graunte me vnderſtãdyng /
and J call ixue.
p Roph. 8
Tp tall with my whole herte / heare me / O
Lopde/¥ well kepethp dtatutes.
F. Fee euen vpon the doz cal / helpeme / and
Achall kepe chr teſtymomes.
tsi? Catlpinthe mognynge do 3 * crpe onto
che / lo tn thy wozde is my crutt, :
crping/pehaney> APpne eves preuente the night watches /
tthe, pralme that à mpght be occupied in the woꝛdes.
7 Beare my vopce / O Lone / accodynge
nto thy loupnge kyndnelle / auycken me ace
coꝛdynge as thou art wont.
F Chepozawenve that ok malpce perlecute
me / and are karre from thy lawe. —
Be thou nye at hande allo / O Loꝛde / koꝛ
thy 7 are kapthkull.
As concernynge thy teſtimonies I haue
knowne euer lens the begynnenge / thou
bat grounded them ey euet,
5 1 Ats.
. O cölpdꝛe myne aduertpte / z delpuer me /
koz J do not Forget th lawe.
Manteyn thou my caufe and dekendeme /
qupcken me accoꝛdynge vnto thy woꝛde.
Hegßith is karre From the vngodir / kother
rrgärde not thy ſtatutes. :
1 Greate is thy merce, O Loꝛde / qupcken
me as thou art wont.
+ GBany there are that trouble me / ¢ per⸗
feeute me/get bone twarue from thp te⸗


ſtimonpes. 5
Itgteueth me / when Ile / that the tranc⸗
Gredours kepenotthy lawe.
3. Conlpoze/D Lozde how J loue thy com⸗
maundementes/D quyechen me with the lo⸗
uynge kyndneſle.
eee
tudgmentes ok the ryghtuoutnetic ens


ll. ir.
z.


Plal, cxr.


dure fo2 euer moꝛe. J
wv Sit, >>-
w che princes pertecute me Wout caule /
but my herte in awe of thy wozdes.
PO feted ele y woꝛde / as one p ken ⸗
w a0 tes a baie anbabbore hen tut ai.
* 4
w * Seué tymes a dape daz pꝛaple the /be⸗ * Chatisor
coe
& Greate is the peace that they haue wht
Guctiplawe/atyepavenotctenbepare
xy Lopbe/¥ lobe foz thy faupnge health / ¢
do alter thy commaundementes.
v Myfoule kepeth thy teürmonpes / and
loueth them exceadingip.
w Akepe chy commaündementes and tellt⸗
monpes / toꝛ all my waves are befoze the,
my Chau. 2
Let my complaynte come befoze the / O
Loꝛde / geue me vnderſtandynge / actoꝛdrng
vnto thy woꝛde.
N Oh let mylupplicacpon come betoꝛe the /
delruermesccordenge tochr momes.
ry Wp lyppes hall (peake of thy pꝛapte /
fepnge thou bat taught me thy ſtatutes.
ny Yee mp tonge tall fenge of thy woꝛde /
£02 all thy commaundementes are rygbt.
A Lee thpne bande helpe me/foz J baue cho⸗
fen thy commaundementes,
n Tlonge for thy faupnge health / O Lord /
and in thy lawe is my deixte.
Y Oh let my loule Ipue and pꝛaxte the / that
thpiudgmentes mape helpe me,
Igo aſtrape / lyke a ſhepe W 5
lee chr ſeruaunt / foꝛ q do not forget thy c
maundementes. :
ea C Che. cxx. Peale.
CAnaffectuous compiapnte of the prophete / beynge
bypué oute of the lande e abpdpng amonge the wpched
that bp at typnges bp Frade amd den.
i Che Conge of the ſteares.
in erte. Batrloth Abs Ezra thyncketh itto be
212 2 gde ee e n
6 5 at haut enger pläne tert
a ed ee
in Wawiids doute / vpon the Reares which went kr the
the chamber where the men adempied / to the chame
ber Where the wemen commenty abode.
5 en I am in trouble / call vpon a uf
—.—— kale, o Lade 3
= from lxenge lxppes / a froma del
ckatkull tonge.
Whatrewarde hall begeuen oꝛ done vn
to theſthou kalle tonge.
Euen myghtye and Harpe arowes / wyth
bote burnpnge**coales. —
Wo is me chat mr banichmẽt endureth Co what ihr r
Böger bivell n  tabernacieg or Cozoutull. , te
Hp oule bath longedweit anti oe Bae


that be enempes bnto peace.
J laboured foz peace / hut when J ſpake
therot they uate them tobattapie,


ceri Plalme.
¶ he ſheweth that the god ly mut toke foꝛ their helpe
ol God onlyrs that he geueth it very readelg.

4 Che longe ok the ſteares.
enerles för (I, Lftbp mine epes onto che ehrnes /
jor Tc v en bene 2

My helpe commety euen from the
Lope which bath made heauen and earth.
De wyl not ſuftre thy kote to be moued /
4 and he that kepeth the dlepeth not.
e 2 Beholde he chat hepety zrael, doch nee
ther dombze noꝛ llepe.

Che Lozde him lelke is thy keper / ? Lord ·
is che dekence bpon chy ryghthande.

So that the kunne dal not burne the by
daße / nether the moone by nyght.

Che Loꝛde pꝛeſerueth the Ecom all euell /
ret itis the Code that kepeth thy toute,

Che Lozde pꝛeterueth thy goynge out a
thy commynge in / From this tyme koꝛth foz
euer moze.

che. crxiſ lalme.
A
and the dex es or the larnc tes / wychpng euer the kur ⸗
theraunce or it.
Che fonge ok the ſtrares
41 mq Was glad, when ther fapde onto me:
we wyn go in to the houle ol the Loꝛde.
Oure fete (hall ſtande in thy gates /
O gerulalem.
erulalem is buplded ag a cptye / that is
at vnpte init leike.

Foꝛ there the tribes go bp / euen the tribes
okthe Loꝛde: to teſtytpe vnto Ffracl/togeue
thanches vnto che name of the Loꝛde.

Jon there is the feate oF tudgement/ euen

che leate or the houte ol Baud.

O pꝛape fc} the peace of Jerutalẽ / cher
fhall pꝛolpere that loue the.

B. Peace be within thy walleg / s plenteoul⸗

nes within thy palaces.

Foz mp bꝛcthzen and compantons lakes /
J wyll wöch the pꝛolperite.

Pee becaule of the houte of the Lond oure
God / J wyll (eke to dothe good.

che. cxxiii Palme.
CThe godly cubdued to the wycked do affectucully
Bef pre; 1 them / koꝛ vnto bpm thep wholß


sommypt them felues.
Che longe of the ſteares. :
Neo the lptt J vp inne a*epes thou
thatdwellet inthe heauens.
Beholde cut as the eyes of leruaũ⸗


a
wt eens


hene im tes joke önto che handeg of tyeit matters: r


‘before in the as the eves ofa mayden vnto the handes OF
Plalursi.aes her mattectic / cuen to oure eyes warte vpon


a OF he Lede dure God/ Snell hebaue mere


bponbs. _ 3
Haue mercy vponbs / O Load / haue mier?
ty vpon vs / koꝛ we are ptteripdecppled.

Sure loule is fylied with the kcoznefull
repzote of che welthr / and wyth the delpite⸗
kulmelle of the pꝛoude. 8
dee ee

reio ep are e / Pa 3 as

———— lt h ae. „ thats


; don. be fh fit
Che ſonge ot the ſteares. Serpttcor be
the Lozde had not bene of oure fyoestF-Dialmes
J (not mare Itrael tape] FEehe Wore t
had not bene of oure ſyde / whẽ men role
vpagapnſt bs.
hep had lwalowed vs vp quycke/ when
they were fo wrath fully dylplealedat vs.
Fee the waters had dec wned vs / p ſtreame
hadgone ouer cure foule.
Ehe depe waters of the pꝛoude had gone
euen onto dure foule. :
But pꝛarled be the Lozd/whpch bath not
geuen vs oucr ko a pꝛape onto their teeth.
Oure ldule is eſcapes / euẽ as a byꝛde out
ofthe {nate of the kouler: the Mare is bꝛoken
and we are delpuered.
Oure helpe Candeth in the name of the
Lopde / which hath made heauen and earth.
¶ Che. cxrv. Plalme.
Ce churche o: congregatpon 1b in Cafetye when
the Lorde Defendeth it / and ihalbe pꝛolperuus when he
tauoꝛeth it / and purgeth the wycked thet oute. ?
Che longe of the ſteares. 5
Hep that put their truſt in the Loꝛde / ay
ate euen as the mount Son / which
P map not be remoued / but ſtandeih kalt
og euer.
Che helles Lande about Jerulalem / euẽ
fo ſtandech the L ode rounde about his peo⸗
ple / krom this tyme foꝛth koꝛ euermoze.
Chat the rodd of the vngodly come not ins
to the lot of the rrabtuous / elt p rygbtudus
put their bande vnto wyrkednelle.
Dowell/ O. Loꝛde / vnto thote z be good
and true ok herte.


heb sg.

As Foz foche as ture backe onto thetenptyed bp the
atone wrckednede ben orde Mall abe the Huron Ute
25 aad the cuplldoets: but peace be vpõ che rh. B fa


Faber Pame.. ,
Che delerybeth che giadnes of the people returning
Agapne from Wabplon/« vnder the kygure herof the
reiopłynge of the Thꝛiſten / whom the lanne of Sad
bath made fre from ide captiupte of (pane and derth.

a ae 509 40 e che

en the Lozbe tutneth agayne the
Verrat of Ben pen taut weben

ipke vnto them that dꝛeame.

Chen Hail oure mouth be kyiled wet

laughter / and dure tonge with iope. J

Chen bac dag pete bys Beathẽ:

the Lozve bath done Wit: fg ko 2


Pee the Lomehacpdone greate wynges
koꝛ bs all read / wherot we retoxle.
Sine ee 1 % Lone / as the
rpuer duth. :
Chevys lowe in teares pal reape in iope.
Be that now goeth inhis wave weppnge
Abeareth koꝛth goon fene/ thal come agapne
with tope/ebzinge bis ſheaues with ppm,
ce. erxpil Plalme.
Cp the onlptiberalpte ¢ gyft of Havis the houſe
and houcholde geuensthe: Cptpebefembeamcate mpnpe
üred / chylden ẽ thole toward and thypftpe dotapned.
v Ortbis pe Che longe ot the feares,
bang before 1 r ¥cept the Lorde bupive the boute) their
fo oe tre © QF taboutis butlot that buploe st,
Soe” Erteprthex ade hepe the cytpe the
wmaatchman wakety but in vapne.
Ibis but loſt labour that pe rife vp earip /
and take no reſt, but cate the bꝛedde of care⸗
kulnelle:toꝛ lobe to whom it plealeth him / he
geueth tt in depe,
1.0 /chyldzen and the krute of the wombe
are anherptage à gitt / p cõmeth of p Lozoe.
Lrke asthe arowes in the hande of the
gvaunt / euen fo are the ponge childzen.
Happy is the man / that hath his qupuer
a d — not ure h me.
ey Speake wi enempe, e gate,
5 Ore. crrviti Palme.


CH: that feareth Gad dall do well and fostunately
ac all ccalong.


Che tonge ok the ſteares.
2 $B enen eee feare 6 L oꝛde /


and walke inbps wapes.
Foz thou halt eate the laboures of
Gene awne handes: O well is the / happp
thou.

Chr whe Halbe as krutelull vyne bps
the walles of thyhoule. 80

Chr chridzen tyke the Olrue bꝛaunches

ae het ft, rounde aboute thy table.
led wit welch Lo / thus ſhali the man bea x bleged/ that
Spiotperpte. krareth the Lozde.

Che Loꝛde thal Co blede the out ot Si /
that thou chalt le Zerulalem in pꝛolperpte
all thy lpfe longe.

Yee chatchou cbalt e thychrlders chpte
dꝛen / and peace ppon Icrael.

Che. crrir Plalme.
Suiza eee ee euere
fe ena ige length perich when the gobi at


wen 20 en bane tee wage caput
le v Fou
Mia en
Tre / nan a tyme haue thep foushtae
gapntt me kromp pouty vp / but they haue
ee powers ploted ppm my backe /@
arp made longe tees.


ELOY ECL


rocke of the vngodly in peces.
Let tgem be confounded ¢ turned back⸗


i 5. 2 Sion: 1
ward / as manp as haus eupl will ata S10, penn ‘
Fieth the whole


churches cone


er
been


be, crxx Pfalme.
Can earneg paper of him that is eppretted with.


Chrictenu lg
Toke for the Loꝛd / myloule doth warte nitierh ihe a
E Em ort t nie oem.
Sp foule doth pacientipabrde f Lorde / uh e
from ehe one mompngetothe other. 20 5 88
Let Traci truſt inthe l ozde/ os with the dure an
Logse there is mercy a plẽteous redemprig, uns.
And he thal redeme J frael trõ al his fennes,
Je he. cxxxl. Pfalme.
Cdecheweib f be was not proude but meake ¢ lowix.
8 UA fonge — —
Jam not hye mynded / J haue no
proude lobes, a


che crrxi
Obe chewetß that the pz ee
Dome dureth ence vs that God is alltwaye prefent with
bis churche and congeegxcpon: @hps doth he under
the Se OF Daag of toe arche aoyopig in .
Che — ok the ſteares.
Oꝛde remẽ bꝛe Bauid ¢ al his trouble. 3
Bowhe (wore vntothe Loꝛde / and
‘boterda bowe bntothe almpabtye one
ok Jacob. I wyll not come within’ tabernas
cle of myhoule noꝛ clyme bp in my bedde.
A well not ſultre myne eyes to fepe / nog
myne epe Ipddes to fomber.
Untpyll F fynde out a place fo7 $ L ode /


nnn


b. Of aud.  Plal.errritj.e.crrrdf,


yotert/asin


Be Plaine, xvi


a
2. Or thys


ancient 15
oben Exod.
Arr.


Etxxx⸗


a Ba e eech H rate dt 5


e G gbe crrriſ Palme
he. cxxxij. 8
Eke prayleth the vnpte 9 byethzen,
Che longe of the ſteares
horn: bew good gfoptull & thynge tt
e how good a
is / bꝛethꝛẽ to Dwell to gether in vnitpe.
Itisipke the precyouss*opntement
ppon the heade / that tame downe vnto the
beerdeuen onto Aarons beerd / and wen te
downe to the ckyꝛtes ok his clothynge.
Lie the dewe ol Hermon / which ken bps
the hrllok Spon,
Foz there the Lone prompted hrs biets
lenge / and Ipfe foz cuermoze, y
Ache. cxxxiii. Palme.


i pee and that
Wacken ee e r
The fonge of the ſteares. 2
Eholve/D praple the Lozde/all ve tere
buntes orthe ome peethacbprighe
ſtande in the houſe of the Loꝛde. 5
O lplt vp poure handes in the⸗Danctua⸗
ry / and prapte the Loꝛde.
Che Loꝛde that made heauen and earth
Bletie the out of Dion.
Che. exxrb. Palme.
De moueth men to the praple of God and derlaretg
drs power by his worckes / us well bp thole whych
be cuccy where doeth as bp thole wherwirh he petu⸗
kartpaaunced Icrael.


Pꝛaple the euerlaſtynge.


kegte che Kode parle the Lobe.


Dreferuauntes ofthe Lozde,._- peu
Ye that Hande inthe boule of che FEF.


“Loz ini b courtes oF the boute of oure God.


O vyapte the Lozde/ kor the Lordigavaz
e renee pꝛarles onto bys name / koꝛ
2 by the Lovdebath chofen «* gacobs, g uae e
bngobim elk are ko b anne pattems, cba gf
Zorg moe that the Lowe sgreate /€ishemcbinthe
that oute L oꝛde is aboue all goddes. Bal. xith. d.
iobhatfocuer the Lozd pleateth that Doth xx · a ·
he in heauen and in carth / inthe lee / and in B
all deape places, 8
Be bꝛengech koꝛth the cloudes From the
endes 21 1 0 he turneth the lyghte⸗
nynges vntorarne / bꝛyngynge the w.
eee
Which (more the fvzttboone of Erodirsies
VYebath tent tones and wonders into the mdr Plaime
Kok the S thou lande of e
Sana ien Se
ich (mote druerſe nacpons / andllewe
chen ethe Amozptes, AIFS
inge othe Amozptes/ Og the sNumretsc.
Bunge of Balan / andaliche — ok eutero. f. a
anaan. :


* And gaue their anve foz anhentage / or zou: be
anheritage onto Ffraelbis people.
Chr name O Lozve/ endureth ko euer /


ey) thpmemozpall’ O Londe / from one


generac pon to another.
$02 the Loꝛde wyll auenge bis people / 6
be gracpous vnto hys leruaunteg.
dernden gobi begebe ai
ui L.crti
b golde / the wozcke o mens en nee


Chepbaue mourhes alpeakenat: eren 40-0.
haue they / but they le not. 0
Cher haue eares / and pet the heare not /
netheris there anp bꝛeth in ther mouthes.
Cher that makethem are lyne vnto the /
g lo are all they that put their trust inthem.
Pravle f Lord pe houle of Acrael/pꝛaptẽ
the Lozde pe houlẽ of Haron,
Praptethe L onde pehoule of Leut / ve?
Praplenbe the Loz out o Sion which
dwellech at Terulalem. » ure
che euerlaltynge. dns g-
che. crrof. i
e
which be after dpd in the reucngpugeorgicat,
eue thankes onto the Lorne) forbe.
DO bps nec endureth ©, way ig
Dgeuethankesonto rhe woo tari goo: .


des / lo his mercy endureth for ener,
Dthanke


v. Ol Dauid.


O thanke the Loe oF all
mercy endureth fo7 euer.

Which only doth greate wonderg / ko hes
mercy endureth £07 euer.

Which by his wyldome made the heauẽs /
koꝛ his mercy endureth koꝛ euer.

ich laped out the earth aboue the wa⸗

ters koꝛhis mercy endureth koꝛ euer.

Which hath made greate Ipahtes/fo2 hrs
mercy endureth fo2 euer.

4 28855 to rule the dape / ko hs mercy

euer.


A „
Che moone ¢ che ſtarres to gouerne the


Bunyght / to bis mercy endureth fo euer.
Erd. ri. e. id hich lmote Egypt W their kyꝛt boꝛne /
koz his mercy cndureth fo? euer. 5
And bꝛaught out Hiraci fro amonge thẽ /
koz his mercy endureih foz euer. :
With a mygbtve bande and ſtretched out
arme koꝛ his mercy endureth ko euer.
Which deupded che reed lee into partes /
koꝛ bis mercy endurech koꝛ euer.
and made Firacl to go thozow the myd⸗
bef off bis mercy endurety to euer.
2 Pharao and his hoolt / he ouer
thꝛewe them in the reed lee / to his mercy en⸗


ne, NODC IEDbE people thoro% the twyl
people thoꝛow the wyl⸗
2a. bsi zemedt toy bismetcy endurety for ener.
C. hych (mote greate Bynges / fo2 bys
golue. 5j. a. mercꝝ endureth foꝛ euer.
Tee / and due myghtye Nynges / toꝛ hrs
metcpendureth foz euer, 8
ume. zrlt. Sehon Byng ok the Zmoꝛptes / koꝛ his
o Beute. ih. a. mercy endureth Foz euer.
And Do the kyng of Balan / koꝛ his mer⸗
eth Foz euer.


Exo. xila.


Euen
uaunt / foꝛhis mercyendureth £02 euer.

Which remembzeth vs / when we are in
trouble / ko his mercy endureth £02 euer.

2 tl, c. d. nphich geueth fode vnto al lle lh / koꝛ his
mercy endureth foꝛ euer. 8

O geue thankes vnto ß God of heauẽ / toꝛ

his mẽrcy endureth ko euer.
e. cxxxbij Palme.
— aus saad 9 of 12 fonges) but
they perpetually bewapled the deſtrucciõ otgerutalt.
A gry Y the waters of Babyion we lat downe
$B srweapte uhen we remembsens> yon.
4 Ag oz ourebarpes/webanged them
bp bpon the trees / that are therin.

Chen they that led vs awaye captyue / re⸗
qupꝛedot᷑ vs a longe and melody in oure he⸗
upnes: ſynge vs one ok the fonges of Sion.

Bow hall we lnge the Lordes fonge in
a ſtraunge lande:

5 AA kozgerthe / O Jerulalẽ / iet my right


Plal crx bif x txxxix.
/forbis bande be koꝛgotten.


FEF donotremenibze the / let my tonge
cleũe to the rote of my mouth: pee yr at
kerre not Ferutalem in my myꝛth.
Remembze p chyldẽ or Edom/D Loz
in the dave ol Zerutalem / ho they lopde: 5
Dotwhie wit dome with it: cuẽ to 9 ground. e. Daughter
O daughter of Babylõ / thou thait come or Babpion ty
tomptert ibpfelkeree bappre thall be be, r n
that rewardech che as thou halt terued bs. » Waltl.
Bleded Gail he be/that taketh thy chyl; enz e
den and thꝛoweth the agapnſt the Hones,
he cxrrviij Plalme.
weden deere eee,
e —.— of a ynge. a


Baud,
iyi geue thankes vnto ö / O Los
Fors my whole berte euen befoze the
Soodes / will I fynge praples onto the,
A will wozth pppe towarde the holy tem:
ple/ a pzapte th name/becaute or thy icuig
kynoneſie a trueth / fo thou halt magnylped
thy woꝛde accoꝛding vnto thy greate name.
When FZ call vpon the / thou bearett me /a
ende welt my loule with moche ſtrength.
All the Aynges okthe earth wall pꝛapte
i Lene when ther heare the woꝛdes


ee ther call lynge inthe waves of the
Londe / that greate is the gloꝛvot the Loꝛde.

Fon though the Loꝛde be hye / vet bath he
relpecte onto the lowix:as fo2 the pꝛoude / he
beholdeth hym a karre of,

Though 2 walke inß mpdoek ok trouble /
pet halt chou rekreſh me: thou thalt Aretche
tozth thyne had vpõ the furyoulnes of myne
enempes /a thr r ght bade hall laue me.

Che Lozd chan make good foꝛ me / yce thy
mercp / O Loꝛde / endurech tez cuer: delpyle
ngt then the woꝛcke of thpne ane handes.

he. crix. Plalme.
cheweth chat all töunges are cuident g open vntdg
770 Pr pmabe aan that be tsenerp where / and ap toe the
Co the chaunter / a plalme of Wautd. 8
Loꝛde/ thou learcheſt me out / and
nnoweſt me.
5 ban Lar mp 5 wen
mne enge / thou andes my
1
zou oute my path a aboute m
bedd / a lppeſt out all my wapes. 8

Jo lo/ chere is not a woꝛde in mptonge.
bur thou O Lore tnowettit altegether.

Chou bak tachyoned me beypnoe and be⸗
koꝛe / and iaped thyne bande bpon me.

Soche knowledge is to wonderfull and
excellent £o2 me/¥ cannot attepne onto it.

wWhither Hail f go then from the ſpꝛetẽe: 8
05 / whrther hall go en,


z Yous

FEF dxme vp intoheauẽ᷑ / thou arc here:
pt I go downe to hell / thou art there allo.

Ik Itaze the wynges ot the momvnge /
@remapnein the vttermoſt parte of the lee:

Euen there allo tall thy hande leade me /
and chr ryght hande wall holde me.

‘Je J tape: peraduenture the darcknelle
fall couer me / then all my nyght be tur:
ned to dare.

Yee tze darckneſſe is no darckneſle wyth
the / but the nyght is as cleare as the dape /
date knelle and lyght are both alpze.

Foꝛ my reynes are thrne / thou halt coue⸗
red me in my mothers tombe,

J wyll geue thankes onto the / for J am
wonderouly made: maruelous are thywoꝛ⸗
neg. a thatmploule knoweth right well.

My bones are not byd krom the / though
deen. lecretelx / and ka cyyoned beneth in

e earth.

Thyne eyes le myne vnparkectnele / they
ſtande all wꝛyttẽ in thy bone: my dayes were
e e as petthere was not one
okchem.


Dp ow deare arethy councels vnto me O
God: O how greate is the fumme of them?
GE F tell the / they are mo in nombꝛe then
with. when a wake vp / Jam pꝛelent
Wrlcchounot Maye ß wycked Oh God)
o the bloudchpzltye myghte departe Ero me?
Foꝛther tpeake bright of the / thyyne ene⸗
mypes exalte them telues pꝛeſumptuoullp.
Z bate them / O Lode, chat hate the: and
Auen not awape wyth thole that ryle vp
e:


agg
Fee J hate them right tooꝛe / therkoꝛe are
they myne enempes.
me / O God / and leke the grounde ol
pꝛoue me / aexamen my thought.
SZeomertas Loße weil yr there be any wape al wyc⸗
ines kate nednen mme / S¥andleade me in the waxe
te orto kuerlaſtynge.
Gatwartrop She. xl Plalme.
ity Che delet to vedelpured rom the dplcrates g Ipes
ab Lote the oF Doeg/and his companpons. a
oF the. lj) . Co the chaunter / a Pralme of Dauid.
Pane Sey Clpuer me / O Loꝛde fro the euell
aK mẽ᷑ / Db pꝛelerue me fro the wyc⸗


b ned men. .
wich myſchele in their
hertes and Agen tik All the dare longe.
Chey charpen their Sipke a ferpẽt:
adders poilon is vnder their lippes. Selah,
Repe me / O Loꝛde / from the hande of
the vngodly: pꝛelerue me krom the wycked
men / which are purpoled to ouerthꝛowe mx


5. Che pꝛoude haue lapeda tnare for me / 4
pꝛed a net sbzoade wrth coardes / vet and


Plal. cxl. x txlj


let trappes in my ware. br Sdelah. br kot the
But mp laxinge ts vnto the Loꝛde: tholt Vteime ig a.
art mp God / heare the vopcẽ of my paper
Done. 2
O Lope God/thou ſtrẽgth of myhealth /


thou bat couered my heade in the daxe of


battaple. 25

Let notthe vngodiphaue hys detpꝛe / O
Lozo/lethim not hauẽ his purpole / leſt they
be to pꝛoude. Selah. 2

Let the mplchcte of their awne lippes fall
pon thebead of che / chat cOpate me about.

Let bote burnyng ** coales fall bpo thé/ caMoates: bet
Ice chem belt tntotie Fyze/ amo the ppt, epa
that chey neuer ryte vp agapne. Abefpral yy

Aman full of wozdes wall not profpere
vpon the earth: a malpeyous ¢ wycked pers
fon chalbe hunted awape / and deſtroped.

Sure g am chat the Loꝛde well auenge
Harb / and maynte pne the caule ol the

lelle. .

Che rpghtuous allo chan geue thankes
vnto thy name / and the tuft Hall contynue
inthpipght.


Gunig 49


CF pit he Rl 55 „ebene wu he mi
patie he were krendchpp ok the laynctes nette
ihe pꝛolperitie of the wyckedꝛand alter that / koꝛ wore
thpe auengement of his enempes ¢ for his delpuraũce.
A Plalme of Dau

De /F call bpõ thethaſte the vnto me /r

Lm conlider my bopce,twhenZ crre vn
e. ‘

Let my pꝛaper be fet forth in thy lyght as
che incenle / z let the lifting vp or myhandes
be an euenpnge lacryyce.

Set a watch / OL od betoze my mouth /
reẽ᷑ a watch at the Doze or my lpppes.

O let not mpne herte be enciyned to any
cuell thynge / to de mended ag the vngodlyo⸗
wicked men / let Jeate ok loche thynges as
picate them. A

Lettherightuous rather ſmite me krind⸗
Iy/arepzouc mesfo will J take tt/as though
he had poured oyle vpõ my head: it cal not
huttmpheade / yer J well pꝛaye vet Foz their
wyckedrielle. .

Their tudges ſtomble at the ſtone / pet
heare they my woꝛdes / chat they be topkull.

Oure bones ive tcatered befoze the pyt /
Ike as when one graueth and dyggeth op
the grounde. N

But myne eves loke vntothe / O Loꝛde
Cosi the is m trutt / Oh caſt not outmyp
foule.

Bepe me tromthe thare which theyhaus
layed fo2 me / and fro the trappes ot the wyc⸗
keddoers.

Letthe vngodly fall into their awne net⸗
tes together / vnt y A be gone by: be be


b. Of Daud,


Ede Hewett 155 cet; Palme,
ge o the:
leude frõ Sale Mie centre thought that oak
there haut bꝛne taken.
Che inſtruccpon of Dauid / a prayer when
he wag in the taue.
Crpe vnto the Loꝛde with my voyce /
a. Ot this pe I pet euen unto the Loꝛde do J make my
daue in $40 Cuppipcacpon,
Ev. Ero. rußd I poute dut my complapnte before hym /
L. l. Reg. v v. and chewe hym of mp trouble.

When mylpꝛete is in heupnelbe / koꝛ thou
noweſt mp path in wave whering walke
baue they pꝛeuelp laped a ſnare forme,

J lone vpon my right hande / ale / there is
no man that wyl know me.

J haue no place to le vnto / no mã caretth
foz mp ſoule. 5

Cherkoꝛe do I crye vnto the / O Lorde / a
75 ch n bope and my poꝛtion in the

ig lande of the lrurnge.
mange, her Contibze mp cöplapnte / oy am brought
the lande ot ie berylo we.
Ipupnge fignte S del puer me kro my perfecuters / koꝛ they
Schenke are to @ronge £02 me.
and Chen Binge my loule out ok pꝛelon / that 3
which pre ree mapr geũe thãnckes vnto thy name: whych
mapne in thrs thyngẽ pk thou wylt graunte me / then wall
ce 1 che rpghtuous refozte vnto my company.
a ne Che erlüſ F lalne,
e Ccchis talme ¢ the Palme next before are bothe
ok one tenour 2 made bötheor one thynge,
eA 4 Plalme of Dauid,
Hag. Care mp praper;D L ode / contyoze
Palms. ch. A. Hanne me koꝛ thy treuth a
ryghtuoulneſle lake.

And entre not into iudgement wyth thy
feruaunt / fo7 in thy traht wall no man ip⸗
uynge be iuſtylped.

For the enempe pertecuteth my loule / he
fmpteth my Tpée downe to the grounde / he
lapeth mein the darcknelle / as the deed men
ofthe worlde. .

Cherfoꝛe is my ſpꝛete vexed within me /
e mpherte within me is delolate.

B pet do g remembze $ tymes paſt / mute
ppon all ch wozckeg pee Jexercple my telt
in the woꝛckes of thyhandes.

J ſtretche koꝛth mpne handes vnto the /

my ldule crpeth vnto the out ok the thyrtye

E emed O nagen tha Coote forme
0 Lo;

kpꝛete waxeth kante: hyde not thy face fro

meet beipke onto them that go downe


m en e hearethyloupnge hyndnetle by

mi

ne Ene tn the Amme ier Sismytrut:
PULA Meme thou me the wape chat? Muide walke

een d dam onen enempes/

: vid tro mene

koz A refoste nto the.


Plal. cxlij. x. crliiij.


earheme tonothe toynge het ir
$ /fo2 thou art mx God let thy louing ipꝛete
leade me fozth vnto p lde ok ryghtudulnes.

Qupckẽ me / O Lord ton thy names fake,
and foꝛ thy ryahtuoulnede fake bꝛynge ux
ſoule out ok trouble.

And ot thy goodnefle lcater myne ene ⸗
mes abꝛoade / deſtrope all themthat bere
my loule, fo: J am thy feruaunt,

Che. crlui. Plalme.
Kren hen kene gene ee as ern
rt eo rt e
bis Sener au pronntes pyre to be a Sagen allo


made hie Byngdome to llozych with aboundaunce of


alj thenges.
nin 9°° Of Dauid.

K Letled be the Lomdemy refuge/ whych

Gracht mx handes to warrẽ / and mp
fyngers to kyght.
My hope andmp caltell my defence and a
my deixuerer / my wyide in 11 I truſt /
whych gouerneth the people p is vñder me.

* Lope what is man / that thou haſt ſoch. phunt. . 3
relpect bntoh m · Oꝛ the tonne ok man, that
ae eee

an is like a thinge o . e
pallech swape lyne a dhadowe. aj ab DD patis Gr

Bowe thy heauens/ O Loꝛde / 8. come srvFvedv> the
downe⸗ touche the mountaynes / that they Senmgrame
map imoke with all. fapd Seni
Sende forth the lxahtynyng ¢ (cater thẽ /
Chute out thpne*arowes,¢ confume them. be Srchen

Sende downe thynebande from aboue/arorwes s poe
Delpuerme/ stakeme out of the great wa- ee ag
ters from the bande of * ftraunge chridꝛen. ge ‘cp

Whole mouth talketh of vanpte / a their
ryght bande is a tight hande of kallede. 9.

‘That J mapipngeaneto
D Hod andlpnge pꝛaptes ontothe Spon a pe pf et
wee lute, 25 — dn

ou that geueſt vyctoꝛr zes a one ee
nnn Ceruaunt From the Mapes
pavell ofthe werde. me

Saue me / a delpuer me kromthe hande C
ol ltraunge chridzen whole mouth talketh
ol vanpte and their reght bande is a tyght
bande of kallede.

Chat oure ſonnes mape growe vp as the
ponge plantes a that oute daughtersmape
be as the polyched cozners of the temple.

Chat oure garners may be kull and pien⸗
teous with all maner of ſtoare: p oure thepe
mape bange forth thaulandes and hund eth
thoufandes in oure byllageg.

Chat oure oxẽ maybe drõge to laboure /
chat there be no mylchaũce / no decaxe / a no
complapnynge in dure ſtretes.

3 people Sat be lattes
speebletiea e people / (
the Loꝛde for their God. *
Che. cxiv. Palme.
Che


One generacpon hall pꝛapſe thy wok
vnto another / and declare thy power.

As foꝛ me 3 wylbe talkynge ot thy woꝛ ·
fhyp/thy gloꝛr / thy pꝛapte / and wonderous
worckcs. 1

Sothat men Hal tpeaße of the mygbt ol
thy marüelous actes / a tell of typ greatnes.

The memozallokthyne aboundat kynd⸗
nes thalbe ſhewed / a men Halt lynge of thy
righteouneſſe. 2

Che Lo:de is gracrous a mercytull / lõge
Cufferpnge/and of greate goonnetic.

Che Lozdeisioupng nto euerp man /a
hrs mercy is ouer allhys woꝛckeg.

Ail thy workes prapletye(D Lone / and
thy larnctes geuethanckes vnto the.


C. Cheychewethe gloꝛr or the = yngdome / x


talke of thy power.
That thy power chr glozy emyghtynelie
of toe Byngdome mpght be knowne onto
n


Thy kyngdome is aneuerlaſtyng Ayng⸗
pre che domyntõ endureth thoꝛow out
all ages.

Che Loꝛde vpholdeth all toche as ſulde
fall and lytteth vp all thole that be doune.

Che eres of all wapte vpon the / and thou
geueſt thenreheirmeate in due tealon.

D Chou openeſt thyne hande / and kylleſt all
thinges lpuynge wich plenteoulnele.

Che Loꝛdis righteous in all his wayes /
andhölx in all his woꝛckeg. :

Che Loꝛdis npe onto them that call bpõ
hem / ve all loch as call ppõ him fapthfullp.

He kulkylleth thedelpze ol them that feare
him heheareth their crie / andhelpeth them.

Che Loꝛde pꝛelerueth all them that loue
hym but fcaterech abzoade all the vngodly.

My mouth tall fpeake the pꝛaple ofthe
Londe and let all lech geue chazes bntobis
holp name foꝛ euer and euer. Pꝛaple
the euerlaſtynge.


che. eriwj. chapter.
. a: OO
that he here peculpariꝑ moucth From puttynge true
or confpdence in meu.
Praple the euerlaltynge.


ch
Biedeed is he thathath the Cod ol Jacob *
ko his helpe / and whole hope is in the Loꝛd Act. iin c. 5
bps Goo. voy 4


E 5 poca. x ij. b

Which made heauz g earth / p cee / a allß
therin is / which kepeth his pꝛomile koꝛ euer.

Which helpeth them to rpght that tuttre
wionge which kedel the hongrpe. %

Che Lozdelowlety men out of pꝛelon /
Logde geueth ght to the blynde.

Che Loꝛdẽ helpeth eve vp chat are tallen /
the Lorde loueth the ryghtuous.

Che L oꝛde careth Coz the ſtraungers / he
Defendeth the fatherlege and widdowe: as for
Wi ok the vngodlp / heturneth it vplꝛde

ne,


tone, : ~
Che Lopethy God / O Syon/iskynge
£o2 euermoꝛe /a thozow out aligeneracxõs.
Pꝛaple the euerlactynge. snip Fe
OGChe.ctivij. Palme.
e moticth alt men to the o/ ehyeatily
HOctann pe cptesyes tg oe
Prapte the euerlaſtynge.
Praples Lozde/forttigagoonthing
tofnge prapiestntooure God: pee a 1
topfuſtand plealauntthinge ig it to be
thanckkull.
Che Lo:de Hall bu lde vp Zeruſalem /æ
gatherto getherthe outcaſtes of tract,
He healeth the contryte inhere / andbyn ·
deth vp their woundes.
Hetelleth thenoumbze ofthe ſtarres / and
calleth them all by their names.
Greate is dure L ode / and greate is hys
porermee hys wyloome is inkenyte.
Che Loꝛde lettech vp the meke / and bꝛin⸗
Seth the vngodlx downe to the grounde. 8
O tynge vnto the l ode wich thanketge- B
uynge / lynge pꝛaples vpon the harpe vnto
dure God.
1 Which ety tye 22200 —
nepareth rayne kor the earch *andmaket
the Ta dog one OPO cheers 0b. rr
hich geueth Fodzeonto the catel / and
kedeth the ponge rauens that call bponhim.
Hehath no plealure in the ſtrength or an
honle / nether del pteth he in any mãs legges.
But the L oꝛdes delpte is in chem p keare
hem / and 5 00 inhis mercy.
Pꝛapſe the Loꝛde O Jerulalem /praple
thy ad O Sion. 3
For he makety falttyebarresof bates)


b. Ok Dauid. Vlal crlbiiſ trlir ec,


and bleſſeth the chyldꝛen within the.
De maketz peace in typ boꝛders / o lplleth
the with the flour of wheate. 5
He lendeth koch bys commaundement
vpon earth / his twozde runneth lwyltiy.
‘De geucth now lpze wolle / a ccatereth B
hozefrott ipke aches.
beten e, eragetd forth bps a * ple we mogtels/
nonocher ig HO 18 able to abpoe bis frott?
then Nolde Pe lendeth out his woꝛde s mealteth thẽ /
he bloweth Whigs wend / a the waters flowe.

He cheweth bys wozve vnto Jacob / bys
ftatutes ¢ozpnaunces onto Itrael.

He bath not dealte fo wyth all the Hea-
then / nether haue they knowledge of hes
lawes. Pꝛaple the euerlaſtynge.

Che. cribitt. Plalme.
de moneth all creatures to the praple of God / as
well heat ly as earth lps therin war nett the laync⸗
tes and godip to conkyder the great and maruelous
power / wyldome and goodnes of Hod.
pati 1. et bea ple
aplethe Lozde of heauen / pꝛa
2 Ob nchen
Praple hm all ve angels ot hrs /
praplebpm all bis hoot, 8
Hꝛapfehrm Sunne and Moone / pꝛa ple
bpm all pe ſtarrẽs and iyght.
Pꝛaplehym all pe heauens / and ve was
ters that be vnderche heauens.
Letthem pꝛaple the name ot the Loꝛde /
£02 be commaunded/and they were made,
He hath made them kaſt toz euer a euer /
bebe geurn them 8 lawe whrch challnot


th
onen.
Bia we Lene earch / pe whale;
bbes and all depes. iain 0
pie andharleinow and bapozs / wynde
gy
lountapnes ¢ al J
and all Cedaes.
Beaſteg and caten / wonnes and tedered
toules.


Aynges of the earth g all people / pꝛrn·
ces and all iudges of the woe.
Yonge men and mardens / ode men and
Srldze let them praple the name of p 070/
to; his name only isercellet/andbps pꝛapte
8 aboue heauen and earth. d
mide ere a thebome ofhis people an
SHerwed in the OPS larnctes wall praplebymy/ the chyldzen
Pal. rrxfr. bot Alrael euen the people that feructh hem.
Pꝛapfe the euerlaſtynge.
che. crux Palme.
Saucen daddeln trae to papte Bovvbecante
he not only had: ered chem from there bondages
Duaifo bat mabe fyemyctonees and chapters of
tde gentples and peathen. .
Parte the euerlaltynge.


nge vnto the Loꝛde a nem tonge / 2
He the congregacxõ of ſaynctes pꝛaple


um.
Let acrael reiopte in him that made him /

2 enn cheldzen of Sien be ioptull in
ir Ernge.

Let chem pꝛayſe his name in the daunte /
let them lynge pꝛaples vnto hem wyth tas
bzettes and harpes.

Fon the Lozde bath plealure in bys peo⸗
ene benennen

i
chem reiten their beddes. n

Let the pꝛaptes of Gon be in their mouth /
and Harpe lwerdes in their handes.

To be auenged ofthe Heathen / andtore⸗
buke the people.

Co byndetheir Rynges in chernes / and
theirnobles with lynckeg of pꝛon.
Chat ther map be auenged of them / as it
is wzittẽ Coch honour haue all his Capnetes,

Pꝛaple the euerlaſtynge.
Che. cl Plalme.
De moueth all men to payſe cod / and that mot afe
kectuoul p mot only with the vopce but allo wih all
Arndes of ind rumentts:b which he figntfiethgiade
Sa
OF Godswb cb we Galt hire mn be ifs to comer
Pꝛapte the euerlaſtynge.
Pzaptethe 1umernnbs Sanctus 20 gn
Denn che Framament oF be bet —
sravichim inbis noble actes, parle din fr Beem.
8 10 eig lar
zaplc hm in the ſounde of the trompet/ zn
paaplebpmbponthetuteand barpe. deren
en
pra. e pepe.

Pꝛaple him vponthe weltuned cymbals /
pꝛapſe him vpon the ioude cymbales,
® tine: bak bath herb part

Prarte the eueraltynge.


r


The prapte of topfoomie, We may not herct onto

the boluptuous prouocacion ¢ inticpnges of fpnuers.

Wyldome complayneth her to bedelppled ofall men /

and propheciech deſtrut cron vnto her rs.
Gabe kpilt chapter.


be prouerbes of Salo⸗


Saule know
bag o: mae
as,


aches ol the lame. Che
begpnnyng of wyrdome.


the bydes eves. Yee they them telues lepe Carne
warte one tor anuthere blond, one of thett o emen
wo lde flepe another. Chele are the wapes ot for thé whom
all Dds 5 ri. t one wolde rae god nes
up an pee.

wBpfoome crpeth without puteeth fogs Marte alt
berbopceinthe ſtretes. She calletg betoze then ther.
the congregacyd in the opẽ gates / a lbeweth
her wopdes thozow the cytyẽ / ſayinge: O pe ke vom and in
nnn pe foue cypinpthe mbes Hanites
nedezhot long well the tcopners betite in are bent anche
lcoznynge / and the vnwyle be enempes vnto a ;ouerdes is,
knowledge: O turne pou vnto my coꝛreccid: acer chewedin
10% J well expzette mymynde vnto vou / and ther. b.
Make pou vnderſtande mp woꝛdes. *Seing emp. ib. cr
then z J haue called / s pe refuted it: haue Jereme. v5. i
Atretched aut my hande/ e no man regarded
it / but all my counceitz haue ve delpyted / and
let my cozreccpõg at naught. Cherkoe wall v
Jallc lau in youre deltruccpo / and mocke
cu / when the thinge that ve keate commeth
bpon pou: euen when the thrngethatpe be
afraped o/ talleth in todenlx ipke a ftozme/
d pour myterp Iphe a tẽpeſt:pee whe trouble
GYeupnette conmeth spon you, hen Mail!
cher call opon me / put J welt not heaterthey
Wal tene me early but cher wal not finde me:
Andß becaule they hated ünowledg / arecea⸗
ued not the feare of} Lozd / but abho red my
councell /a delpiſed mycozrecciõ. Chertoꝛe
wall they cate $ frutes oltheir awne waye /
ehe kylled w ee a rech the hive
nig awape off unwrfe thal eye tha ö pꝛo·
ſpẽrite of koles halbe their amne doſtrucciõ.
But who lo harkeneth onto me chaldwel la⸗
kelg / a haue pnough wout anpkeare of euell.

g Tel


ouerbes Chapt. ij. x ij.


CM ycddme is to be embꝛaced s ſet by. Anaduoute·
vous woman is ta br elchued.


Spreacpons org elt £02 het as fo treature then fpalt cyous


10 louie / as pe bnderſtande the keare of d Lozb/ a fende the
maye percenie knowledge of God. Foz it is the Loꝛde 5
oc ltegente Seucth wproome/ dut ohrs mouth cometi
iz knawiedge apnderkanornge. He preters
ueth § welfare ok ö rightuous/ ¢ defendety
thé that walke innocẽtipcke kepeth them in
the right path / pꝛeleruett the waxe of his
fapnett. Then Hale thou vnderſtande righ-
tudulneſſe / iudgement ¢equite/ pee a euery
d path. FE wyldeme entie into thpne
erte / thy foule delrte n knowledge: then
Wall councell pꝛeliiue the /a vnderllanding
Wali kepe the. Chat thou mapeſt be dely⸗
uered fro the euell wape / a fd the man that
ſpeaketh krowarde thinges. From loche at
Laue b bye ſtrete / æ walcke in the wares of
Cdarckeneſſe:which reioyte in doinge eucll / a
be Wpoſe delpte in wickedthingk: * whole wares are
doaves ave toe crob d andtheir pathes kclaunderous.
wo there be- ha chou mapet be delpuered ako £0 the
ry lpfc pꝛoueth liraunge woman / a frõ her that is not thyne
to ut araber. a wn: which geueth Cwete woꝛdʒ / foꝛtaketh
the hulbandok her pouth / kozgetteth § coz
uenaunt ok er God. Fos her houle is en⸗
elpned onto death; a her paches vntohell.
pill they 6 goin vnto her / come not agapne/
nether take they holde of the wave of lyte.
Chat thou mayeſt walke in § good wave /a
kepe the pathes ok the rightubus. Foz the
Sela be u want Diwell im che ende the innoce-
fpanifpcacpon tes Gall remapne in t: but the bngodie thal-
berok i Hew. be voted out of the lande / and the wycked
€0 in the plal. Doers Malbe taken out ok it.


v5 .
The commaundementes of God muſt be vnigent⸗
regarded and oblerued.
¶ Che. itj. Chapter.
ay My fonne / foꝛget not my lawe /
hut le that thynẽ hert kepe my cõ⸗
aũdemẽtes. fo hey dul pꝛo⸗
Alonge ß tapes a veareg ot wipte /
ebunge ß peace. Letmeicy a fapthtuines
heuergo fro the: bynde he about (by necke /
@ wꝛyte them in the tables or thyne h erte.
Do halt thou kende fauoure ¢ good vnder⸗
gambynge in the ſyght of Cod a men. Put
chptruſt in the Loꝛde wall thyne herte / and
leane not vnto thyne awne vnderſtandyng.
In all thy wapes haue refpecte vnto hym /e
B he hallorrpethyacinges, Be not wee in


th ene awne conceate / but feare the Loꝛd/
departe krom euell:ſo all thy, nauell be het
whole / a thy bones ſtronge. fpgnpiped iy


outed Kom w thp Lublkatice/e % twee nr.
ed,


Epattipnges of alt thyne encreate:fo Hallthy i bye
barnes be kylled with plenteoulnelle / ethp
pꝛelles (hall flowe ouer wiwete wyne. Ip
tonne / dẽlppſe not 5 chaſtenpng ot p L ode /
nether fapnte tbe thou art rebutied or hum. d .,
„For whom the Lozde louech bimbe chatte- apacat 9
heth:¢ pet delpteth in him euẽ as a father in
his awne tonne. Well is him p kindeth wyl⸗
dome / a optexneth vnderſtandynge / fo2 the
getting of it is better then any marchaũdile
OE fpluer/ aß pꝛoket ol it is better then golde.
Wyldome is moze worth then pꝛecyous ſto⸗ C
nes / a all the thinges p thou canſt delpꝛe / are
not to be cõparedntoher. & pon her right
hande is lunge lle a vpõ her left hand ig its
ches a hongur. Her wapes are pleſsunt
wapes /a all her pathes are peaceable. She
is a tree of Ipfe to them that laxe holde pon
her and bleteed are they chat kepe her kalt.

With wyldome hath ö Loꝛd layed 5 (oft:
dacyon of the eaith / a thoꝛew vnderſtanding
bath he ſtablyihed the beaut . Choꝛow bps
wyldeme d deapthes breake vp / a ß cloudes
dꝛoppe downe of thedew. y lonne / let
not thelethinges departe krõ toyne eres / but
kepe my lawe a m coũceli:ſo ali it be te
vnto thy loule / a grace vnto thy mouth.
Chen Walt thou waite ſalelpin thy wape g
thp kote all not ſtomble. It thou le pelt
thou ſhalt not be afraped, but thait take thy
reſt a ſlepe lwetely. Thou nedeſt not to be
afraped of any ſodane keare / nether koꝛ the
vpolent rulſhynge in of the vngodip/ whenit
cometh, For the Loꝛde Waibe belege the /
and kepe thy fote that thou be not taken.
Aelule not todogood onto hem that chume d
haue it / ſo lõge as thyne handtsabie todo it.
Sape not vnto thynerghbour:go thy wave
S come agapne to moꝛow wyll J geue the:
where as thou halt now to geue hꝛm.
Intende nohurte onto thy nerghbour leing
he hopeth to dwell in reſt by the. Strꝛuẽ
not ligbtely with anpman, where as he hath
done the no hae. Folowe neta wycked
man / i choce none or his wapcs: oz p Lope
abhozteth the krowarde / but hys Ccrete is
amonge the rrahtuous. Che curſe ok the
Loꝛde is in the houte of the vngodip / but he
bleſſeth the dwellynges of the rightuous.
As fo2 the ſcoꝛnetuſi / he chan laugh them to
ſcoꝛne / but he call geue grace vnto p lowip.
Che wyſe ſhall haue bondur in poſſeſſiũ / but
ſhame is the pꝛomociũ that foles ſhall haue.
¶ Wycdome and her krutes and waxes ought te be


searched, 51
Che. mj. Chapter.


Ok Salomon, Chap, iiij. v. x. bj.


Eare / O pe chyddꝛen / the katherlx
choꝛtacr /a take goodhede chat
emape lerne wyldõme. ee i chal

geue You a Good rewarde / pt pe

wyll not forlanke m tae, Fos whe d my
felfe was my fathers deare tonne / a tender
Ip beloued of my mother / he taught me allo /
layinge: Let thyne herte receauẽ my woꝛdẽ /
kepe my commaundementes /¢ thou tait
Ipue, Setthe wyldome / gerche vnderſta⸗
dynge / koꝛget not the woꝛdes or miy mouth / a
wynke not krom them. Foꝛlake her not /
the hall pꝛelerue the doue her / and the thalt
Bhepethe. Che chete pornte of wyldome is /
thatthou be wyllynge to optepne wyldome /
and befoze allthy gooves to gett the vnder⸗
ſtandynge. Mane moch other a he hall
promote che: Yee pk thou embzace her / he
thall bꝛynge the onto honoure.
_ _ SHheMatimakethe a gracpous head / a
a2 That is garnpth the with a crowne of glory.
wud greta Beare mpfonne g receaue mr worbeg that
(abs after che peares ot thy lyle mape be manp. J will
uche. rh. a. chewe the / che waxe ol wyldome / a leade the
inthe ryght patches. Sothat prthougoeſt
therin, there call no ſtraptenellehynder the:
and when thou runneſt / thou ſhalt not fall.
C Cake fat holde of doctryne / let her notgo:
Bepe her / ko che is thy lte. Come not in
che path of che vngodip / and walke not inthe
waype ok the wycked. Elchue it / and go not
erim de parte alpde / s palle ouer byit.

‘02 ther can not ũepe / except they haue kirſt
done lome mylcheke nether take they any
reſt / except thephauekyſt done lomeharme.
Foꝛ ther cate the bꝛed or wyckenneffe / and
dꝛyncke the wyne ok robberr. Che path of
che rpahtuous thyneth as the tpabt / and is
euer bꝛighter and brighter vnto the parkecte

Ddape But the wape ofthe vngodlp is as the
bemptbertaht dareknes / wherin mẽ fall /oz they beawarre.
kum vnd: My lonne marche my woꝛdes / a encline
topeues cone Ne care pnto mp fapinges. Let che not
ADaiice nn twore de parte Fremthyne eres / kepe the euen in?
drain bp f left myddeſt of typne herte. Foz ther are lle

r ud. To vnto all thole ynde them /a health vnto
— racpd. KO fe that kynde th health
Set righr ali t9eit booyes. Bepethrnegerte with all
band is: ta ande dilygẽce / ko there vponhangeth lyte. Put
that to the wor A wãxe kromthe a krowarde mouth / and letß
ich lyppes of ſclaumder be fare fromthe, Let
wur god which f cl be karre fromthe, I.
amen Ee thpne eres bebolve chechynge chat is rraßt /
turue alpde o; f let thxne eve liddes tone ſtraxght beto ie p.
Some to thelert Pondꝛe the path of thy fete / to Hall ali thy


} bandeisvta take wa peg be cure. Curne not afpde nether to


weder b che beruht harm nerto plett / but with hoid
2 todo chat tp kote from euell.

which is Forbin Che warneth to eſchue z fee whordome He foꝛbrd⸗
V. As it is wit derb prodigatitye ¢ wackkull ſpendyng. De wylleth vs
tun in Deuter. to lyue of dure awne ladoures. en muß leue there


Erbin. b. 4 Jo- PUES
due rig. b. Che. d. Chapter.


er!
„Ltrxxiiij,
Oy Conne geue hede vnto my a
dome / a bowe thyne eare vnto
Nee, p pꝛudence:that thou mapeſt re⸗
garde good coũcell / aß thy lpppes
mape kepe nourtoure. Foꝛ the iyppes of
an harlot are a dꝛoppyng hony comde / aher
thꝛote is lolter then ople. But at p lak che
is as bytter as woꝛm wod / e as ſharpe as a
two edged werde. Her kete go downe vnto
death / aher ſteppes pearle thoꝛow vnto hell.
She regardeth noth path of lte / lo biked: z
kalt are her wayes that thou cit not know
them. Heare me therfoze(D my lonne ) and
departe not from the woꝛdes of my mouth.
Kepe thy wa ye karre krõ her / a come not nye
99 720 ok her hours. 77 1100 25 not
Athpne honour vnto another / a thy peares akg 1
tothe cruell. Chat other men be not filed tuunanee 0r
wich chr goones a chat chy laboures come
not in a ttratigeboute. Yee pthou mourne
not at the laſt when thou batt ſpẽt thy body
and goodes) a then faye: Alas / why hated F
nouttoure⸗whydyd myherte delpyle coꝛrec⸗
cpon: Wherfoze was not J obediẽt vnto p
vopce ol my teachers / a herkened not vnto
the that inkourmed me? Jam come almost
intoall mpffostunerinthe minded oF ß mul⸗ vr hut g /
tytude a congregaciß. „ Dꝛincke oF ö wa- holde the only
ter ok thyne awne well / a or h ryuers 5 rũne to thpne. awne
out ol thyne atone (pings. Let thy welles mete.
dowe out abzone that there map be ryucrs cher
of waterin the treten: but ier thembe ontymcon tect che
thrne awne / and not ſtraungerg with the. houte with yoo
Let thy wel be bieffed/ ¢ be glad with the our e not as
wyfe och vouth. Louynge is the hynde / datardre.
K trendy is the Noon let her bzeſtes alwape
latictye the /a holde the euer contẽt with her
doue. My tonne / why wylt thou haue pleaz
lure in an harlot / a embꝛace the bofome of
another woman: Foz curry mas tapes Job. rrrias
are open inthe fpght of the L onde / che pon. rruß. e.
dꝛeth all their goinges. The wyckedneſſes
of he vngodly chall catch hym lelte /a wyth
$ Mares of his awne tynnes hal he be trap:
ped. Becaule he wolde not be rekourmed /
he ſhall dye: and fo2 his greate kolychnelle he
halbe deſtroped.
CChe liouthfull ¢ lougyh is pꝛycked and ſtyꝛreb to
Worcke. The Cepimatthe is reproued.Aduoutrp ought
ta be tarnen ly auopded.
N röntgen i ertpe fo th
J bonne / yl thou be ſuertye koꝛ thy.
5 7 5 ſergbboure / thou batt tatenea®
ithpne hand with another man: pee
Athdu art bounde with thyne atone
oꝛdes / z taken with thyne awne fpeache,
Cherkoꝛe / my lonne / do thys dylcharge thy
lelt / oz thou art come into thy nepabbours
daunger. Goo thy wave then loone / a in⸗
Greate tyrnerghbournet not thine evesllepe
Gg. . ner


> ner 920 exe lpddes Comber,
che handeokthe kouler. Go tothe Emmet
(thou logatdſconłxdꝛe her waxes / z lerne to
bewple. Shehachnogrde / noteacher no
leder pet in the Sommer dhe pꝛourdeth her
meate/¢ gathereth her fode together in tze
ee ee
thpdepe? Fee lepean dpa letle/ unuber


apter bij, N
{50d ought to be feared and hondured: Bes come
Kpetktes


Maundementes ought tobe Rept; Wanton,
amd delprrs ought to be Gonned.


AIchhe bi chapter.
F lomie / hexe mp wozdes/ g lave
my commisundemetes by che. 1
ere my commaundemetes ¢ my


‘alytle/folbethyne handes to gether pet a lyt⸗ Si


le chou mapett depe.to thal pouerte come
bnto the ag one p trauaplech bythe wape / a
neceffite like a weapened ma. A oytiembling
perlon / a wycked man gocth Wa krowarde
mouth he wyncketh w his epes / he tokenet
Whis kete / he poyntery Whis kyngers he is
euer pmagenpnge mplchete a krowardnele
in his herte / acauletz dicco de. Cherkoꝛe (at
bis dectruccton come haſte ix ops him / lodẽlx
hall he be all to bzotken /a not be healed,
Chere be lire thinges which the lo de ya
teth / and the leuenth he vtterix abhoꝛrety: 2
pꝛoude loheſa dyſlemblyng tonge / handes ß
chede innockt bloude / an herte ß goeth about
wwreked rmagrnacpös tete that be lwylt
m rennenge to do mytchete a kalle wytneſſe
chenden ee, Sele her
coz ye. Mylonne / kepe
92 aes 1 not
okthr mother. 2 ptogether
in thrne herte / x bynde thẽ aboute chy neck.


Chat they map leãde the where thou goeſt /
pꝛeſertie the when thou art allepe / a b when
a awake / chou mapeſt talke ofthe Foz


e commaundement is a lanterne / and the
Aae a lpght: pee chaſtenyng a nourtoure is
the wave dklpte: that they max kepe the krõ
the euell woman / a kr the flatteryng tonge
oethe harlot p thoulut not alter her beutp
luz, pert) lett thou be take w her karꝛe
iokes. Anharlot will make a man to b.
his bꝛed / but a maried womã wyllhunt foe
precous Ip. Mape a man tate fpꝛe in
big bolome /g his cloches not be bret: Gz
ca one go vpõ hoate coales / his fete not be
burte? Euenko(wholoeuer goeth in toh
nergpbours wyte/¢ touchetg hercan not
bnagtltp, Men do notvtterly deſpite a thete /
chat Realeth to catiltpe his loule / when he is
hongry: but yr he map be gottẽ / he rettozeth
Sgapne feucntymes ag moche/o2 eis he ma⸗
Eth reco pente with all p goodothis houte,

But who fo cãmitteth aduoutry witha wo⸗
man / he is a toole / a bꝛingeth bis Ipte to de⸗
ſtrucc von. e getteth him kelke allo thame ¢
bithonour/tochas hal neuer be put out. Foꝛ
$ geloulp a wrath of z ma wil not be intrea⸗
ted no though thou wolvett ockre him greate
gittztomakẽ ame des, he w notreceaue thé,


enow to he nxght and darcke. And
holde theremett hem a woman in an har⸗ 8
lotces apparell aa ppiceatfull / wanton g an
vnſtedkalt womã: whole fete coude not abrde
tn the houle, now is the without / now in the
Aretes /a lurketh in euerp coꝛner che caught
the range man ſerdled hm / ¢ was not atbas
med / lapinge: J hãdde a boweto pape / a this C
dape J p tine it. Cherkoze came 3 forth
to mete e che 40 fee thykace / and
fo 1 5 7 wpe deckte bay
couerpnges ¢ clothes ot Egypte. .
bedhaue made tolmeil of pure / Aldes /
and Cynãmon. Come /lett vs lye toge⸗
ther / and take oure pieature tyll it be bape
ipaht.Fo2 the good man is not at home he is
Gone karre of. He hath taken the bagge of
monere with hum: who can tell when he cõ⸗
Herner en done
vm / and with her e
Ipppes he wanne hem.

Immedratiphe kolowedher / as tt were
an ore led to the laughter a iyne as it were
to the ſtockes where koſes are punpſhedſlo
longe tpll the had wounded bys luer with
ber dart. irke as pea byꝛde hall edto 6 mare /
not knowyng that the parell orhis lle lxeth
cher vpon. Heare menow therkoze, O mp
konne ſandmarcke the woꝛdes of my mouth.
Let not thyne herte wandꝛe in her wapes /
be notthou dyfceauedin her pathes. Foz
many one hath the wounded and cat downe /
pre many a ſtronge man hath the arne.
Herhoulesis the wave ontobell / where men
go downe into the chamberg ok death.


¶ Che prapte of the wyrdome or God.


che. biij. Chapter. ech


p. biiſir, .


abborte che. J can


Bed thinges“ 24 J haue a.


a peesi had
„Jhaue ſtrẽgth. it
Sep 00 ow me peices mane tut latoes.
Choꝛow me / Loꝛdes beare rule /a alliudges
ol Searth execute tudgemkt. Jam loupng


vntothole chat loue me /g they chat ene me wl


earlp / chall kynde me. Riches andhonoure
ar nich me / pee excellent goodes a tyghtu⸗
oulnes. My krute is better thengolde and
pꝛectous lion / ampne enereale moze wort
then kyne lyluer. J walke in che wape ol
tygbtuoulnes / a in the ſtrete of iudgement.
That 2 map tende pꝛolperite to thole ?
ahaplenc fe b louẽ me /¢ to encreate their „ Che
Lope him lelke had me in pollell pon in p be⸗
gynnynge ol his wapes / o euerhe beganne
bis worckes afozetyme. Ihaue bene oꝛde⸗
ned frd euerlaſting / a fro the begynnyng 02
euer che earch was made. When 2 was
ome / there were nether depthes noꝛ pring,
ol water. Beloꝛe the koundacrons ok the
moũtaynes were layed’ pee befoze all hylles
Dwas J bone. Che earth a allthat is bpor
the earth was not pet made / no not ß groũde

itkelk. gor when he madethe heauens /
was pretend: when he lett vp thedepthes im
order hanged the cloudes aboue: whẽ
he kaſtened ge lpꝛynges ok the depe: when
be hut the ter within certapne howndes /
che water dul not go ouer their marckes.


When he ls yes the foundacyGs ol the earth


ozowme apna, perk


Levee,
4 was with him / oꝛdꝛinge all chinges der ⸗
ding daplp a reioplyng all wape betoze hint,
g fo2 therounde compale of his worde /
‘Jmakert toptull:toꝛ my delpte is to be a+
möge thech dz ormen. CTherkoze yerke
vnto me / O ve chyldzẽ /foz bleuedare they?
kepe my wapes. O geue eare vnto nuts
toure /be wyte / z rekulẽ it not. Bleſled is
the man that heareth me / watching dayly at
my gates /a geuing attendaunce at 5 poſtes
ol mydoꝛes. Foz wholo kyndeth me /kyn⸗
det ipte / a hail obtapne kauour of § 102d.
But whoo offendeth agapnt me hurteth
bis awne loule. All theychat hate me / are
the louers ok death.
e. ix. Chapter.
Cuoycdome eae ali — her. The
property of a whore.
dome hath buploed her lelke an 7
5 houle /a hewen out „ teuẽ ppllers: a. ymany
Ache hath kylled her vitaples / poured the cer nom⸗
cut her wyne /a prepared her table bie for the vn⸗
She hath Cent tozth her mapdẽ sto crpe wpa cer ten.
Chpet place ok p citie oho to is ignoꝛaũt
lethymcome hither. Andtothe vnwiſe he
ſapde: O come on youre wape / eate my bꝛed / 6
e dzincke my wyne / which J haue poured
but foz vou. Foꝛlake ignodaũce / a pe Halt
Ixue: and fe that pe go inthe wape of vnder⸗
ſtandyng. Who lo repꝛoueth a ſcoꝛnetuli
ſonne / getteth hym telle dyſhonoure : and
be that rebuketh the vngodlp / tapnethbym bx Scomerult
fel€e, Bepzoue nota *fcomner/lelt be owe Hs mocking pee
Che euellwrllbut rebuße a wyle man (g he pave yymby
louethe. Geue a dylcrete man but an deal en
occalid /a he wylbe ß wiler/teache a rightu⸗ be futtels cx:
dus mana he wpllincreale. Che feare of c tetobucte
te N onde is the begpnnpnge of wploomte/& wyityare vere
che knowledge of holy thinges is vnderſtan⸗ dye to opftame
dynge. Foz thozow me thy dapes chalbe other z toopen
prologen/é the veares of thy Ipfe babe ma- s tell ta ae
cela ed be wyle chr woldome wall no enn o dee vn
chr leite good: but pe thou thinchelt lone te: And thole
therok / it walbe thyne awne harme. A fo- alto whrcbmas
Ipch reſtlelle woman / full of woꝛdes /a loch wum {be
one as bath noknowlenge/pttethin does 2 Sad and
okher houlebpon a ſtoole aboue in the erte / decpyie it and
to call Coch as go by, and walke ſtrepght in char repute 1¢
their wapes. ho toisignopaũt(lapch dhe) for folytynettec
let hym come hyther / and to the vnwple the l
fayeth:ftolien waters are cwete and p bred g..
chãt i pꝛeuelp eaten hach a good taſte.
But ther contyder notthat death is there /s
that her geſtes godowne to hell.
che n. ehen go ent, the thy
ju this 7
ba the ore man erhorteth by dyuers fentences
which he caliety Warabies / to folotwe vertues and
fle bptes: And Heweth alfo that profet cometh of
‘topldome/e what hyndꝛaltce proceadeth of foluhnelle. Home reads
Che Paraboles „ ble fapinges


The Pꝛauerbes Chapter. x. x xj.


Wyle tonne maketh agladkather /
. vndylcrete tonne is the he⸗


Loꝛdmanech along pte but g peareg ok the


upnede ok his mother. Creatures dyng


ſchat are weckedlp gotten / pofpte
no thynge /butrightuoutnede deliuereth
death. Che Loꝛde wll not let the Coule of
the rpabtucus fuffcebonger/but he putteth
the vngodipkrom hie delpze. An pdle hand
maketh pooꝛe / but a qupcke laborpng hand
taketh ryche. Who to gathereth in Bom ·
mer / is wpre:buthe 8 istiougp in haruelt /
biingeth him ſelke to conkulron. Louyng


fd Ch


weight plealeth him. iS here pzxde

lis / there is ſhame allo and contu ·
lron: but where as is lo wines /there is wl
dome. Che innocent deaipnge o€ the int
wall lede them / but the onfaptytuinede of 8
tefpplers ſhalbe their atone deftruccpon.
Biches helpe not in the dave of bengeatice/ = Pur fa
but rightuoufnette delpuereth krom death. Er lvl.
Cherrghtuoulnes of the innoct oꝛdꝛeth his
wave /but the ongodly all fall in bis atone
wechednede. Che ryghtuoulnetie of the
tu call delzuer them / but the vetppters
kerr 199 1 in n 5 — 7 be B

en an vngodir mandpeth bys 8
Sagen te contpneceotrpcbes al pert, 20M
Cherightuous Haibe deipucred out of trous
biesand p vngodlp tall come in his feade,
Thozow the mouth of the dyſſembler is bys
nepghboure deſtroped / but thoꝛow know ⸗
ledge hall the fut bedelpuered. ohen it


g Forth well wech therrghtudus / ihe cytye is


wycked⸗
ta ſpozte of it: neuertheleſſe


nothinge therto.

Ip ¢maketh bu

it is wyldome koꝛ a man tobewarre of foche,
The thinge that the bngodlpare atrayed

of chall come Spon chem but the tightuous

Shall hauetheir derpze. Che pngodip is ipke


a tepet that padleth ouer / a ts no moꝛe tene /
but che ughtuous remapneth Cure foz euer.
Das bynegeristo the tech and as moze is
vntothee yes, euen lo is a dougyſch perſonne
tothe that lende him ko th. Che leare ok $


merp:and when the vngodip perych / there is
gladnedſe. W henthe iuſt are in wealth /s
citie pꝛolpereth: but teben the vngodix haue
che rule / it decapeth. A kocle bzingett vp a
ſclaunder K. ke nexghbour / but a wyle mã
wyll kepe it tecrete, à dyllembipng per⸗
fon wylldylcouer pꝛeupttinges / but he that
Wok a Eapthfullberte/ weil kepe councell.

here no good counceũ is there the peo ·
ple deca pe: hutmhere as many are thatcan
neue councell there is wealth. He thatis
ſuertxe toꝛ a ſtraũger / hurteth him leite: but


he 6 medleth not with tlrertechyppe / is cure.


A gracpoug woma mantepneth bonetticjag
fo the mpabtye they mantepne ryches. L
He ßhath a gentle tpberall ſto mack is mers
cbfull but who fo hurteth his nergbhour / is
atpꝛaũt. he labour ofp bngadippꝛocpereth
not / but he that foweth rygbtuourncg/chali
receaue a ſute rewarde. Like es rightucul⸗
nes bzingeth lyt e: euẽ toto cleve onto eueil /
berngeth death. Che Loꝛde abhozretha ĩap·
nid hert / but he hath pleatuce in ange


are vndefiled. It wall nothelpe ß wicked /
chough ther lape all their handes togethers
but the ede of the ryghtuaus halbe pꝛeler⸗
ued. à fapze woma without dylcrete ma⸗
ners / is like a rĩg of gold in a l wines ĩnoute.
Che tut laboure fo2 peace and tranqupl⸗
Ipte / but the vngodly kor dylqupetnele.
Some man geueth out hys goodes / a is
the rycher / but the nygard chauing pnough)
wyll departe from noͤchynge / and pet is euer
Din pouertye. He that is ipberal ingeuyng /
hall haue plentp: ö he that waterech Walt
be watered allo him elk. 18h lo hoo:deth
vp his coꝛne / halbe curled amonge the peo⸗
ple: but bledynge thal lyght vpon his head
chat lelleth it. He 5 laboureth foz honeſty
kyndeth bys delpꝛe: but who ſo leketh alter
myrche le it mall happẽ vnto hym. He that
truſteth in his ryches hall haue a fall / but
the rightuous thal floꝛych as the grene leat,
ho lomakech drlqupetnes in his atone
houle, he call haue wynde koꝛ his heritage /
andthe koole thalbe teruaunt tothe wytẽ.
Che krute of the ryghtuous is as the tree ol
Ipfe/a wile man allo wynneth mens ſoules.
Ti petri. und t the ryghtuous be recõ penled ops earth /
how moch moze then the vngodlya diener?
¶ Che. rij. Chapter.
o lo loueth wyldome / wil be cõ⸗
ntto be rekourmed: but he that
teth to be repꝛoued / is a foole.
good man is acceptable onto ß
he wycked wyll he condempne,
A man can not endure in ongodlynele / but
the rote of the rightuous chall not be moued.
uro wur for A ſtedkaſt woman is a a crotone vnto her
guathonour f hulband: but che that behaueth her telfe vn⸗
1 chaps Honettlp g a co rupcpô in his bones. Che
tt.” choughtes of the rpabtuous are right putz
vmagnaciõ oF the vngodlꝑ are ditceattull,
Che talkynge of the vngodly is how they
tape lere wapte fo2 bloude / but the mouth
% of therightuous wilt deliuer the. Dzeuer
thou cant turne the aboute / p vngodiy chal⸗
be ouerthzowen : but the houfe of the regh⸗
uous call tande. à man chalbe comended
fozbps wyldonie / but a fole halbe delpiled.
A cympir man which laboureth ¢ woꝛketh /
s better then ane that is goꝛgyonz and wan⸗
teth bread. Srpghtuous in regardeth the
ipfe okhis catell / but che vngodiphaue cruel
bertes. Me that trilethhes land / call haue


er Salomon, Chap ri. ri


plẽtuouſneſſe of bꝛead: but he that koloweth


vdylnes is a very fools,

Che delyꝛe of the ongodly hunteth alter
mytcheke / but ö rote of che ryghtueus bzin=
geth Forth frute. Che wicked falleth intoß
{nate thozew p malyce ot his awne mouth /
but Pint hall eccape out of parell. Euerp
man (all eniope good acco dinge tothe in⸗


nocencꝝ ot his mouth / ĩ alter the woꝛnes of
bis handd chall he be rewarded. Loße what
Abrkoole taketh in häde“he tyrnfeth it well
done: but he that is wyle / wyil be coficelen,

A foclepttereth his wrath in all bhaſte but
& dilcrete man kozgeueth wzöge. A iuſt ma
wpn tell ptruech / ewe the thyngetyatis
right:buta falle witnelie dilceaueth. A claũ⸗
derous perlonne pꝛicketh like a lwerd / but a
wile mas töge is wholleme. A true mouth
is euer conttant; but a dyllemblynge tonge


Ctxxx vi.


ba Bp a ole tt
the Pꝛouerbes
ie pepncypally
vnderſtande
bin ebac it


€ kolowinge
his awne foie
celt dekendeth
infpbelptpe &

thevnnnowing
ol Sod fotru⸗
eth and hpghe
wpldome: and


isfoone hangen Chey e ymagym euelt nnen en


their mynde / wyll dylceaue: but the counce⸗
lers of peace chall haue tope folowing the,
Chere thalino mxlfoztune happen vnto the
tult / but the vngodlp lbalbe filled tb miferp.
Che L ode abhoꝛteth dylceattul lyppes /
but ther that laboure fo2 trueth pleate him.
Hep bath vnderſtandyng / can hyde bys wile
done: but an vndylcrete herte teeth out his
kolicpnelle. a diipgét hade hall beare rule /


nes herchen &
obepe to word
ol God as be⸗
fore in the. i.a.
1b. d. x. b. and
rng. a.


but ß pole fhalbebndertrpbute, Heupnele S


bifcozageth p herte or mã / but a good woꝛde
maketh it glad agarne. Che rightuous i8
Uberall pnto his nepghboure/ but h wape ort
$ chen mann dylceauethẽ kelues. Boys
kceattull man thail fynde no vauntage / but
he that is content with thathe hath / is moze
woꝛth then golde. Ind wape ok rightuoul⸗
nelle there is ipte / as Foz any other wape it is
the path vnto death.
¶ he. rij. chapter.
pte lonne well receaue hys fas
thers warnyng / but he 6 is rcbꝛ⸗
nekull / wyll not heare when he is
repꝛoued. à good mi thall entope
the krute ol hrs mouth / but he h bath a kro⸗
warde minde halbe [popled. Pe 6 kepeth
bis mouth / kepeth his pte: but who to lpea⸗
Heth vnaduiled / lindeth harme. Che llogard
wold lane haue / ci not get his delpꝛe:but
27 Coule of the dpligent ſballhaue plenty.
ryghtuous man abhoꝛreth pes / but ß vn⸗
godkp hameth both other a him lelk. Uigb⸗
kuoulmele nepeth the mnocent in the wape /
but bngodipnee call ouerthzowe Sfpnner,
Some men are ryche / though cher haue
hothinge:agapnefome men are pooze haute
greate ryches. with goodes euery mã deli⸗
Uereth his ah 8 1007¢ wyll not be repꝛo⸗
ofpri


ae Of this. pe
haue before in
the. ix. Chap b


The Pꝛouerbes


worde deſtropech hym felte:butbe g keareth
d comaundemét chal haue peace. The law
ig a well of lte vnto the wile / bit may hepe
him fro the inares ol death. Good vnderſtä⸗
dynge geueth kauour / put harde is the waxe
ok s delpplers. A wyle man doth all things
with dylcrecpon / but a koole wyl declare his
folp. An vngodly mellaũger bingethmy⸗
ſcheke / but a kaythtull embatptouris whol⸗
tome. He s thyntieth lcoꝛne to be rekour⸗
med / cõmeth to pouerte ¢ Wame: but who lo
receaueth coꝛreccyon / Wall come to honour,
D hen a delpꝛe ig bought co palle / it de⸗
Ipteth the foule:but kooles abhozre him that
elchueth euell. He that goeth in the com⸗
pany ot wyle men / halbe wyle: but who lo
Iga companyon of kooles / Halbe hurte.
Mylcheke koloweth vpon lynners / but the
ryghtuous call haue a good rewarde.
0 hich their chrlders chyldꝛen call haue in
polſeſtyõ / co the riches of the lynner is taped
bpfozthemt, Chere is plentuouſnelle ol
kode in the feldes of the pooze / a chalbe in⸗
ctealed out ok mealure. He that lpareth the
rodde /hateth bys lone: but who lo loueth
hym / holdeth hym euer in nurtoure Che
kygbtuous eateth / and is latickxed / but the
belp of the vngodlphath neuer pnough.
© The rij. Chapter.
FF) 1B pie womä vpholdeth her houle /
bub a kolpch wle plucketz itdow⸗
ne. who lo feateth the Loꝛde /
5 walketh in the right path:a regar⸗
deth not hym that abhoꝛreih the waves of 6
Losde. In the mouth ok the footy is the
ap the ort Doottinge of lopdſbpppe but che Ipppes of
acetpguptpea wyle wplbe warre okkoch. Where no** of
preachersvasin ate / there the crpbbe is emptpe:but where d
1. Eau. ir Kors laboure there is moch krute. A tapth⸗
ehechurths. all toptnede well not dpdembte/but,a faite
recoꝛde wyllmake a tye, A fcognetult bo⸗
bdpteheth wyldome / and kyndeth it not: but
knowledge is ealyto come by / vnto hem 5
wyll vnderſtande. Se b thou medle not
with a koole / a do ag though thou hade no
knowledge. Che wyldome of hym p bath
bnderitandig is / to tane hede vnto his waye /
but the kolpchneſle of Souwple dicceaueth.
Foles make but a ſpoꝛte of ĩpnne / but there
is kauozable loue amonge the rightuous.
Che herte okhym thathäth vnderſtandynge
wyu nether dytpare Foz any loꝛow / ner be to
pꝛelumptuous fo7 any coddane tope.
Che houles ol the bngodly walbe ouer-
den ar cho nel but § kabernackes ak § rpahtucus
dung tata Wall Loz. Chere isa wave which fome
b cupoeth nor men theme tobe rpabt/ but the ende therok
m the wape of leadeth vnto death. Che herte is toꝛowkull
Spaners.s ke. s euẽ in laughter / d the ende ok myꝛth is heux⸗


bree. rege, an bntarchnum perteme dhaibe ele


Chapter xiiij . xv.
welt


Ed this atone wapes / but a good man
bewarre ok coche. Anignozatit body bele-
uech all thynges / but who lo hath vnderſtã⸗
dyng / loketh weil to his goinges. J wyle
man keareth / and departẽ h trom euell / but a
koole goeth on pꝛelumptuduſle. In vnpacy⸗
d ae e is wa
adupled/ et wapes. Che ignoza
haue kolpchnes in pottctiys / beit the wyle are C
crowned with knowledge. Che euell chall
bowe them lelues befoze the good / a the vn⸗
Godly chall warte at che dozes ok the rygh⸗
tuous. Che pooze is hated euẽ or his awne
nepabboures buts rych bath many frend,
Who fo delppleth bys nepghbour, dotha
Mphie:but bieded is he that hãth pytye ol the
prore. They 5 ymagyn wyckedneg / wal
e dilapopnted: but thep that mule bpd good
thinges onto koche hall happen merck and
fapthfulnette, Diligẽt labour bzingeth ri⸗
ches / but where many bapne woꝛdes are /
truly there is ccarcenelle. Ryches are an
oznãment vnto the wyle / but the iguojatice
of kooles is very folpthnedic. 4 kapthkull
witnelledelpuereth loules / but a lpar dilcca⸗
ueth them. Ehe keare of the Loꝛde is a ſtrõge
holde / loꝛ vnto his he wyll be alure dekence.


Che keare of the Loꝛde is a well oklyte / to D


auopde the Mares ol deach. Che increates
paopenteof Scones is p Arnges honoure/
ut the decayẽ of the people is che conkulion
ok the Pꝛince. Pacyence is a token of wyl⸗
done / but wach a haſtye dytpleature is a
tokenol kolpchnee. A mery herte is the
Ipfe ok the body / but rancoure conſumeth
awape the bones. He that doch a pooꝛe mã
wꝛonge / blalphemeth his maker: but who fo
hath pytye of the pooze / Doth bonoure vnto
Ged. Che vngodly is atrayed ol euery pas
rell / but the tuous hath a good hope euẽ
in death. nopldome reſteth in > herte olhim
that hath vnderſtandynge / a he wyll teache
them that are vnlerned. Ryghtuoulnelle
ſetteth vp the people / but wyckedneſſe bzins
geth folk to deſtruccyon. A dylcrete ler⸗
uatitisa pleature vnto the Bynge/ but one
Bis not honeſt pꝛouoketh bim onto wꝛath.
OChe. rb Chapter.

Softe antwere putteth downe
dilpleaſute / but krowarde wo des
pꝛouoke vnto anger. J wyte töge
commendeth 1 kolyſu

mouth blabbeth out nothynge but folyths
nelle. Che eres ofthe Loꝛde lone on eue⸗
ry place / both vpon the good and badd.

A whollome tonge is a tree of lte / but
he that abuleth it / bath a bꝛoken mynde.
A foole delppleth bys fathers cozreccyon/
but he that taketh hede whanheis repꝛoued
ſhall haue erate — the


Ok Salomon.


B Inthe boule ok the rightuous are greate
ryches / bit in p increale ol 6 vngodlp there
is myloꝛdꝛe. A wyle mouth poureth oute
knowledge, but the herte of the kolpch doth
not lo. Che Code abhoꝛreth the lacrikyce
ok the vngodly / but the prayer oF the rygh⸗
tuous is acceptable onto him. Che wape
ok the vngodlp is an abhominacyon vnto z
Love; but wyofo koloweth rightuoutnes/
him he loueth. He that kozlaneth 6 right
Arete / halbe foze punpched: and who fo ha⸗
tech coꝛreccpon / kallech in to death. The
hell w ber payne is knowne vnto the Loꝛd /
how moch moze then the hertes ol men?

A lcoꝛnekull body loueth not one that rebu⸗
Heth hym nether wyll he come amonge the
wle. Amery herte maketh a chearfull
coũtenaũce / but an vnqupet mynde maketh
it heup. 4 wyle herte will (eke atter know⸗
ledge but the mouth of kooles medleth with
koolichnele. All the apes ok the pooze are
~ moferable / but a qupete herte is as a conti⸗
nuall feaſt. Better is a lytie wthe feare ot
the Loꝛde then greate trealure / £02 thepare
not without loꝛowe. Better is a melee of
potage tb louie / then a kat oxe weuell wyll.
An angrie man ſtereth vp ſtrike / but he g
is pacient ſtylleth dilcoꝛde. Che wape of
Legen is full of thoznes / put p ſtrete ol
rightuous is well clenſed. A wyle lonne
maketh a glad father / but an vndiicrete bo⸗
dr ſhameth his mother. A koole reiopteth
in koolich thynges / but a wyle man loneth
well to hys atone goinges. duinadupled
thoughtes thall come to naught / but where
as men are that cangeue councell, there is
ſtedkalinelle. O how topfull a thynge is it /
amantogeue a conucnientantwere? S
how plealaunt is a woꝛde (poke in due lea ·
fon. Che waye ol lte leadech onto heaut /
that a man Guide beware or hell beneth.

D Che Lozde wynbꝛeake downe 1 ol
d proude / put he hall make fat b bozders
Oethe widdore. Che Lozve abborreth the
gnraginactons of 6 wycked / but pure tro;
are pleafatitontobim. Che couetous m
roteth vy his awne houfe / but who lo hateth
rewardes call liue. A ughtuous mi mu-
leth in hys mynde how to do good / but the
mynde ofthe vngodly ymagpneth / howhe
mäpe doharme. Che Lozde is karre from
the vngodi / but he heareth p prayer of the
rpghtuous. A xne as the clearneũe ofthe
epẽs reiopleth 8 herte / lo doth a good name
kede the bones Che eare that harkenech
bnto whollome warnynge / and encipneth
cherto/ hall dwell amonge the ple. He

that rekulet to be refourmed/defppteth his
atwne ſoule:but he that tubmitteth him elke
ro conercpon / is wle.


inter


2 eFeate ofthe Lobe is the watt A


icpence oF wyldonie / lowipnes as hat is/no
goeth bekoze hondure. * man woll of ma can


Aare well purpote achinge ihrs rime (2 Soh


herte / but the ant were of the tonge cometh oute t


ol che Loz. Ama thinketh all bis waves or Gol.


tobe cleane / but it is the L020 p fachion
the myndes. Cömptte thy woꝛckes vntos
Lande / and loke what thou deuplelt / it Halt
pꝛolpere. Che Loꝛde doth all thynges foz
bis awne lake / rer ¢ when he kepeth the vn ·
Godly ko the dape ok wiath. Che Loz ab⸗
bopreth all pꝛelumptuous ¢ pꝛoude hertes /
there mape netherttrẽgth nev power elcape.
{ith louing mercy a EaithEulnette cynnes

be forgeuen and who lo keareth the Loꝛde
eſchueth euell. iE amis waves pleale
the Loꝛde / he maketh bys very enempes to
bebistrendes, Better is it to haue a iptie >
thrnge wiightudulnes, then greate rentes
wzögeoud gott. A mä deupleth aware
in his herte but it is § Lorde b ozdzeth bys
goings. Whenß pꝛophech is in p lippes of
the Keng ig mouth ſhall not go wzongein
tungmét, Ytrue mealure a a true balatice
are d Loꝛdes he maketh all wepghtes. It
ig a greate abhominacyõ when kynges are
wycked / koꝛ a kynges Ceate chulde be holden
bp Wrrghtuouknelle NRyghtuous lpppes
are plealaũt onto kynges / a they loue hym

P bpeaketh 5 trueth. The hynges dirplea⸗
fure is a meſſaũger of death but a wyle me
wyll pacikyehrm. Che cherefult counte
naunce of 5 hpng ts lyłe / a his louynge fa ·
uoure is as the cuenpngedewe, Co haue
wyldome in pollellton is better then golde /
to get vnderſtandyng / is moze woꝛth then
ſylurr. Che path of 6 ryghtuous elchueth
euell / a who lo loketh well tohis wapes hee
peth his awne loule. Pꝛelumptuouſnes
goeth befoze deſtrucciõ / aafter a pꝛoude ſto⸗
mahe there koloweth a fall. Better is it

to be olhumble mynde Wthe low / then to
deuyde the fpoples wihe pioude. He that
hädleth a matter wylelp / optepneth good:¢
bleged is he / S putteth his ttult in § Loꝛde.
ho ſo hath a wyle vnderſtãdyng / is called

to councell: but he p can tpeake fapze get ·
tech moꝛeryches vinderſtanding is a well c
of lyle vnto hem 5 bath it / as fo2 the chatte-
nyng ok kooles / it is but foolpanete Che
herte ok the wyle enfourmeth his mouth / a
amendeth the doctryne in his lyppes.

Fapꝛe woꝛdes are an hony combe / a refre⸗

hpnge of the mynde / a health of ö bones.
Fhere is awareß men thincke to be right /
but the ende therofieadeth vnto death. 4


awne mouth hath bzoughther therto. an
Gg. b. bngod⸗


Ctxxxvij.


ad
troublous Coule difquteteth her leite / oz her Ela. ü.


Pcl pd
fonnes haue no wydome, ¢ ali haue like
berrtage with che bzethz. yke asfpluer
is trped in the kyꝛe a goloe in p koꝛnace / euẽ
Lo doth ? Lone pꝛoue the hertes. A wicked
body holdeth moch of kalle lippe / a a diſem⸗
-bigng perfonne geueth care toa dilceatfull

2 mu. ruth d töge. ho lo laugheth p poze to Ceggne/

Zion. 1rd 4. blatphemeth bis maker: g hethet is gledol

s. rig. e. another mag burte hall not be bnpunithed,

.. Chylvers chyldzen are a woz hyppe onto
the older /@ the fathers are the bonoure of
chridꝛen. —Ancloquent (peach become
hotafoole/a dyuembixnge mouth allo bes
lemett not a prpnce. Liberalpte is a pre-

% cious ttone ontobiniehat ath tt / Eo, where
loeuerhe becömeth / he pꝛolpereth. 1500 o
couereth another mans offence / leketh loue:
but he 8 dilcioleth the faute / letteth krendes
at variãunce One repꝛoke only doth moze
good to him p hath vnderſtandynge / then an

- W.firppes vnto a foole. % ſebycious per⸗
tonne tcheth mylchele / but a cruell meüaũ⸗
ger hall be lent agapnſt him. It were bet⸗
terto come agapnſt a ſhe Bere robbed of her
whelpes / cheñ agapnſt a foole in his tooliſp⸗

v Roma. r. d. eg. ho fo rewardeth euell koꝛ good / the

4. Ber: g. plage Wall not departe krö his hole. He

dhe. P Lometh dylcoꝛde a ſtryfe / is Ipke one that
dyggech bp a water bꝛoke: but an open ene⸗
mye is line p waterb bꝛeaketh out a Fab

Cabzosde, Che Lopdbateth as well bom
tuſtikrech d ongodtyagbimp condempneth

Tumockt. What helpeth it to geue a foole
money in bis had / where as he hath no myn⸗
deto bre wyrdome? Pe iz a krende chat all
wape loueth / in aduertpte a mũ thal know
zh is his brother. obo lo pꝛampteth bp
8 Sd) e is tuertpe koz another / he is a foole.
„ Hethatiouery trpee/oeipteth in tynne: &
who lo letteth his doe tohxe / lekett alter a


2


ij.


nes. Che vngodip ta: Apo rig. a.


1
Heth giktd out ofS botome / to wꝛeſte p waves
of iuogment.


„ teploome chyneth in p face: rei · lc.


ol hem hach vnderſkandyng / put § epes of 4


fooles wandze thoꝛom out ali does. in vn⸗
difcrete ſonne is a grefe vnto his father / aan
beugnede vnto his mother d bare him. Co
punch the innockt / a to mite the pꝛynces p
geue true iudgmkt / are boch euel. Heis


wople a dilcrete/$ tempereth bys wo weg: g Ihe


he is a mã of vnderſtanding / p maketh moch
okhiß ſpꝛete. Pee a very foole when he hol⸗
deth his tonge) is counted wyle and to haue
vnderſtanding, when be chutteth his lippeg.
Che. rij. Chapter.


0 fo hath pleafure to ſowe dyl⸗ A


coꝛde / prketh a quarell in euer
thence. 4 koole hath no delpte in

lunderſt andinge / but onlyinthole

vnges wherin his herte reiopleth. where
vrgouxnes is, there is alloditdapne: and ſo
there koloweth fame anddicbonour Che
wozdes cta mang mouth are ipke dept wa⸗


tersyand the well or wyldome is Ihen Full ay abr

fireame. J tisnotgoodtos*regarde$ pers owe tauoure

fonne minkange. 5 to put backe Frigh⸗ to the pesion,
Et. A fooles lxppes are euer 8c.


teous in iudgn.


dꝛawling / a his mouth pꝛouoketh pnto bat.


tapll. afociesmeuth tis his ane deſtruc⸗
cion a his lypp. sare the (nate oꝛ his awne
foule. Che woꝛdes ok a ſclaũderer are berp
woundes / a go thozow ontop pnmoft partes
ol the body. 85 bn is Mouth full ¢dacke
in his labcure / is p bꝛother of him that is a
water. Che name ofthe Loide 1 al
caſtel / the rightuous fipeth vnto it ¢ ſbalbe


faued. But the rrch mans goodes are his C


Gronge holde ve he taketh them koꝛ an he
wall tounde aboute him. After pꝛrde cõ⸗
meth deſtrucciõ /a honour after lowipnes.
* Ge z geueth lentẽce ina matter beloꝛe he
heäre iris a foole/ ¢ woꝛthy to be cõtonded.
Agood ſtomacke djtucth awapea müg di⸗
leaſe / but whe the (pzeteis vexed / who mape
abide it: 4 Wyle hertc labouteth ko know:
ledge a a prudent care ſeteth vnderſtãding.
rane 1 asset
Kletteth bim amenge greatmen.
Che rightuous acculeth him tele firk of


„Ectſixikʒ


all vr his nergybour come he thal Fynde hi. D


Che lot pacifieth $ variaũce /t the
mightie a ſunder. Che vntte of bzethzenis
uronger then a catell / athey z boetoges
e


Of Salomon.


p halbe catictꝑed wyth the truce of bys
Seemann ofbis lippes
challhe be kyiied. Weaty andipte Gare in
power of the tonge / he that loueth it / wall
kniop the krute tgerok. ho fo fyndeth a
wyke lyndeth a good e / e receaueth an
whollome benetpte of § Toꝛd. Che pooꝛe
maketh fupplicacponandpzapeth mekelp /
but the roche geueth a rough ant were.
krendethat delpteth in loue doch ama moze
N icheth fatter vnto him then a

other,
ais ©The xir. Chapter.

Etteris the poze, p Ipueth godlp /
chen the er thatis but a
ebole. where no dilcrecpon is /
berech Coule is not well : ¢ who
fois lwykte on kate / döblech hactely. Foo⸗
uchnelle maketh a mã to go out of hts waxe /
and then is his herte vnpacient agaynſt the
Lore, Upches make manp krendes / but

che poze is foꝛlaken ot his awne krendes.
A kalle wptnede tall not remapne vnpunit⸗

Wed, ahe bipeakerh ipes Wall not elcape.
Che multitudehangett vpon greate men / a
euery man kaudurech him z geueth reward.
As for the pooze / he is hated amonge ali
bysbzethzen: peehys atone krendes koꝛlake
hum a he that geueth credẽce onto woꝛdes /
getteth nothrng. he bis wyfeloueth his
Awne foule:¢ who fo hach vnderſtandynge /
chall prolpere. 4 falfe wyrnele Mall not
remapne vnpunpſhed / the 5 ſpeatzeth lyeg
wal perpche. Delicate cate becömeth not
à toole/ moch moze vnlemelp is tt / a bonde
mä tohauethe rule of pꝛynces, A wplems
putteth ol dylplealure / ¢ it is his hon our to
let come fautes paſe. Che kynges dita.
uour is Ipkte p roarynge ofa Lyon / but hys
keedchpe is Iphe ß dewe vpõ ß grate, An
vndilcrete tonne is § heupnes ot his kather /
anda bzaulynge wple is ipke 8 topp of an
houle, where choꝛow tt is euer dꝛopppnge.
OF Houle a rpches mapeaman haue i herp:
tage of his eldert / but a dylcrete womais 6
Arkte ofthe Lord. Dlouchtulnes bzingeth

Aepe / an yoellCoule thalltutierbonger,

Who lo kepeth § cõmaundemẽt / zepeth his
atwnefoule-buthep regardeth nothis wape /
Wall dye. Pe 5 hath pitte ops p pooꝛe / ien⸗


ito good coũcell / a be cõtent
& thou mapeſt bewple here
are manp deu pres in a mans
zes bcoũcell of the Lom hall


Chap.


A hede: e pk thou repzoueſt one 5 hach vnder⸗ npenth hay


2 5 8 „ = id
De bd
rite, = Lcxxrbiij,
Hanne. It is a mang worthipe to do good / a D
better it ĩs to bea pooze man / then a deters
bier, Che keare off Loꝛde pꝛeleruethß lite /
eren plenteouſnes without d vilpta⸗
cy6 okanp plage. Adouehfull body chuteth
bs hande into hrs bolome / fo p he can nut
put it tohis mouth. Ik thou Muted arkccoꝛ * aur. U
betul perfonne/ bighozauiedhall take better 2; OF this
ſtandrng / he wll bes wyler. Heß hurteth ter. b
bps father 02 chuteth out bps mother / is a
Wamefulla an bnwozthp tonne. Mplonne /
heare nomoze the doctryne thatleateth the
awape from the woꝛdes of onderll andynge.
alle witnes laugheth tudgmét to ſcoz⸗
ne e d mouth of the pngodip eateth vpwic⸗
kedneg. Puri cpmentes are oꝛdenedloꝛthe
Scomnetull / and frppes fo2 fooles backes,
¶ Che. rr. Chapter.
HFtteisa voluptuous chynge / and
Pdr0chennes cauleth banner a
He, fodelpteth therin wal neuer be
A wyfe. Che king ought to be fea:
red ag the roarynge ofa lyon, who to pꝛouo⸗
keth hum onto anger / ollendeth agaynſthys
atwnefoule, Itis a mas honoure to kepe
him lelte krõ ckryfe / but they ß haue pieature
in bzauling / are cooles euerp one, A Gouthe
Full body will not go to plowe fo? cold / ther
foze hall be go abeggyng tn Hemmer / and
haue nothyng. ple councell in § herte ot
mais lene a water in 5 depe of p earth / but
he ß bath vnderſtandyng / bꝛyngeth it fozth,
aap there be p are called good doers, but
where Mall one kynde a true kapthkun ma?
Who fo ledeth a godlx and an innocent Ipfc/
bernd Ghalivis chplozé be whom he leaueth
ebpndebym. A kynge 5 iptteth in mage
ment / and lokech well aboute bpm / dꝛyueth 8
atwapeall euel. *iBbocanfape:mpberte at ne
SScleane Jam innocét krölenne: Kopfe! Pera. ug
twomaner of werghtes / oz two mance ok Geclevi . c.
mealures / boch there are abhominable vnto
the Loꝛde. qq chylde is hnowne by his cons
uerlacxon / whether hys woꝛckes be pure a
rraht. Ls kor the bearynac of the care a §
leaht of 6 exe / tze L oꝛd hath made thẽ boch.
Delpte not thou in lepe / leſt thou come
onto pouerte: but open thyne eyes / and thous
chalt haue bꝛed ynough. Itis naught / It €
is naughtilape men when ĩheyhaue it / but
when it is gone / they geue ita good woꝛde.
A mouth of vnderckadrng is moze worth
chen golde mant precious tones r cotiy
Jewels. Cake his garmẽtthat ig fuertpe
fo2s ſtraunger /a take a pledge of him toꝛ 5
vnkno wne mans lane. Euery ma lißeth ö
bꝛedthat is gotten with dilccote / but at the
lat his mouth chalbe fylled with grauen.
Choꝛow councen the thenges that ent
deuxle


deupte go kozwarde: a with difcrecion ought gyfte inthe bofome ſtylleth furfoutnetie, Sclaunder hall ceale. ho Lo delpteth to be.

warres to be taken in hande. Medle net Che ꝛud delptech min doynge the thenge ? ok a cleane herte and of gracious Iyppes

with bim chat bewꝛapeth Cecretes /andiga ig rygbt; but the wozckers or wychednelke yng ſbal be his vende, Chr eves okß L: dh the. Ap⸗
cclaunderer and dticeaueth with his lippes. abhofte the lame. Che manthat wadzeth pꝛelerue knowledge / but as toꝛꝭ woz of $ é 0
ho lo curteth bys kather and mother / hys out ok the ware of wyldome / wall remarne delpptefull/he byingeth th to naught. Che ran. r.
light chalbe put outin the mpodett ol darck⸗ in the cögregacton ofthe deed. e ß hach g 50 ogteccid eee x.


The Pꝛouerbes Fhapter.rxi. x rrij. Ter Salomon. Chap,


netie, e herytage that cometh to haſte⸗ plealure in banckettes/fhall be a pooze ma:* cu. u out / I myght be arne in the terete. 5
eat we bd dalinotbepyapleoatgente, yo tovelttetyintwmeanboelace dba Bin : mant crear adede ere rden he te .
pave not thou: J will recompence euell / not be rrche. Cheongodip Walbe geuen kallech p the Loꝛde is angie with all. Foo-
Dp putchr trult inthe Lorde /andbe Hall kor the rpabtuous/¢ the wicked kor tbeluck. Uchnes lticketh in herte of the lad / but the
dekendeche. Che Lodabhanechtwoma⸗ arts better todwellina wrwermedle then eat. we rod ol costecctondpueth it awape. Who fo
ner ot weyghtes / anda kalle balaunce is an with a chydinge and an angrye woman. Jn C doth a pooꝛe ma wꝛoge to increate his awne
tr euell thinge, Che L onde odzeth euer rns a wple mans Houle there is greate treature rrches⸗geuech(cömerup)vntothe reche / zat
goinges / to: what is he / that underſtandeth and plenteoutnede / but a tool ph body tpen- the lalt cometh topouerte him kelke. e ;
bigawnewapes: Feisatnarefozaman deth vp all, Wöo fo foloweth rypghtuouts dome botwe Downe tyne eave/aberké onto een
toblalpheme that which isholr and then to nelle emercy/Epndeth both ipte/ rrahtucul⸗ the womdes of wyldome / applpe thy mynde „ ee
Goaboute wich vowes. A wple nge de⸗ nede abonout. A wle man wrnneth che Into mpdoctrpnesfoz ttis à plelaunt chyng
ftropeth the vngodiy / a bꝛyngetb the whele cytie ok che mightie / ¢as koꝛthe dirẽgth that ve thou kepe it in thine herte / pꝛactple it in
ouerthe. The lanterne oftheLodisSbrety cher trud in he bzingech it dawne. 890 lo chr mouth:that thou mapeſt alwape put thy
ofman/egocty thasow al the warde par, Kepett his mouth andbis toge / chetame ke: fruttin the Lone, Haue not J amen the
se fiBofehebony. Werra faithtuincs pre peih ps konte from troubles. ethatis berp oft wb councell ¢learnpnger ? % might
ferue the kynge/ ¢ wich loutng kendnes bis proude a pzeCumpeuous is called accome⸗ Mengen reuth sthatthou ue the berite ty
feateisholoenbp. Che frengty ok ponge full mG/which in wzaty darre worcke mall. „ sp Mpgbielk antwere chem pape en thynge
men is chel wozſbype z a gra head / is an cloud. Che boluptuoumedie of the fouth: D i agagnt the? Se b thou robbe nok pooze th
bonourbntopageo, Wound o7yucawaye fuilishis atone death / fozhyshandes wyll becaute be is weabe/¢ oppzette not ptemple
euell / and lo do ftrppes the inwarde partes not labour. He coueteth ¢ defyretlys* all ax Aube iniudgment: foꝛ the Loꝛde him felfe wyll de
ofthe body. # dare longe / but the rrahtuous is altoape ‘ange force kende their caule / 4 do vrolence onto them
che. xxi chapter. 8 4 lati that haue vled opoience. Maze no frend:
ſhipe with an angrye wylkull mã /a kepe no
cOpany tb the kurtous: left thou learne hys
wa pes / a receaue hurte vnto thy loule. Be
notchoi one of thé 6 bynde theirhande ppon
promple andave ſuertpe fo dett:fo2 vt thou
halt nothing to pape / they thall takcawape rng
thr bed krom̃ vnderthe. Chou dbalt not re⸗ is fozow?
moue $ lande marcke / which thy foze elders
baue fett. Seyſtthou not / p they whych
be dplygent in their bulpnes ſtande befoze
urnges / a not amonge the fymple people:
Che. xi. Cha


me /e tenen beamöge n pio %
. ett | e ymaginet 93
dert Cbe nab unt Aitonobutte/#tbetelippes tate er erh
the haule ofthe vngodi / but? vngodipgoo wyckednelle challreape toꝛowe / i the rodde 4 pchouh n e. Choꝛow wyldome an boule Mais
on ſtyll atter their awne wickednele. ho o his plage wall deſtrope him. A louing 5 : : erbzake /€tetetholetwete be buplben /a wonderſtãdyngeit thaibe lett
fo ſtoppeth bis eare at § crienge of d pooze/ eve thaibe bleed cos be geuetho bps bach rene Wes. 4. chynge intothe cares ofa bp. Chozowatfcrecion ſhaft  chabersbe


be Mall erpehimlelte and noc be zerde. & pnto ß pooze. Catt outs *fcomefull ma/e m dhe. Aderprkethe welbome ctthy krlled wan cotly aplealaunt ryches, 1
pꝛeux rewarde paciketh dilplealure / and a Fothall rptegoout üöhrm / ker bavtatice g 8er Lei dae not the olde lde marke / R
ſelaunder . ä e


The Pꝛouerbes


ig better thenhe 6 is myahtie of treaty.


Foz wich dilcrecxon mult warresbetakein h


ade / z where ag are many 5 cangeue coſi⸗
e na ee
i pee ei
ane a by re mouth in the gate. He ß pmagy-
founde amide neth mycchele / maye welbe called an vngra⸗
e
ß. a and is Iynnie /a oꝛnetull is an a

Fare am to men. "*ZEthou be ouerlene z negligẽt
sete Separate mars
ade atwape tobe ae Denoeneslgetterin,
Ik thou wilt lape: knewe not of ĩt. 5
me bels, ken thoup he which made d hertes doth not
acamedb. cplydze it⸗ a dhe which regardeth thy loule /
lexch it not? Spball not he recdpence euerx
e
thou eatelt honpa thelwete cal 2
caule it is good a ſwete in thy mouth. cue
fo ſhall the knowledge of wyldome be vnto
yer Bp foot 00 thou 5 Lend 75 1

ind there is good hope / zee thy hope tha
not be in payne, Wave no pꝛeuy waite wic⸗
edly bpd p houle of p rightuous /a dilqutete
e e
but § one
beten bate! obly Pailin 00 wickednd. Reioyce not thou
ter he mance at B fall of chpne enempe, and lett not thpne
of tpcabpng of herte be glad whenhe tombieth. Let che
the ehzues gn Lozd( whe he fepth it) be angrie / a turne hys
this worlde is wꝛath krö hi vnto the rd. Let not thr wrath
Porkelip C a geloutpmoue tye/ to koclow the topckeD
ings ortygyt Dngodlp. And why? the wyckedhäth no-

wes and pecare ch nge to hope fo / A § candle of d vngodl

Wöſch hm che (paltbeputcut, ep fonne/ feare thou
fenton cama et etc Dal cOMe
Trane ehem lodenly / @ who hnowech p fall oF thé both?
Lot /whych Chele are allothe ſapenges ofthe wyle.
bibel m Je is noc good/tobaue refpecte oF anp pet-
tpmeto come, lönne in iudgmét. He 5 fapeth tod vngod⸗
receaue full & ly:thou art ryghtudug/hym dail che people
pectect we, cer cht 0 oe 17 hin. at
nes Feen they p rebube p vngodly halbe cömended /
beng to ung d a rpche blecpng chan come vpö the. Be
ben he ap, makelh bee tobe aueh
popnted before/& good antiwete, make sp thpwozche
them alfo be 6 is without / a lone well vnto z which thou

been dem back in S elde e then burlde typneboute,
them alla : D Be no falle witne de againttehy nerghbour /
be inityéped: g hurte hym not wih lyypes. Sape not:
that is made J wyll hadle him / euẽ as he hath dealte with
20g h. Bond. ime /@twplitewarde eucry ma accozdyngeto
vie. his dedes. J went byß elde of p ouch /
de Chat ts to thy 8 byne pardes of the koolich ma. And io /
fape/ ta ue au it was all couered wnettels /@ ode Full ol

denon them thlltleg /g d fone wall was bꝛok downe.
Sepang SE" his lawe / and cülpdered it well: N loked


repentaunce.


iouer. vid bpon it / tobe it Foz a warnyng. Pee lepe


Chapter. xxv,


on ſtpil a lytle / Aombꝛe a lxtle / kodde thrne
andes together yet a lytle to Hall pouerte
come vntõ the as one that trauayieth by the
ware / a neceũpte lyke a weapened man.
¶ Che. xxv. Chapter.
¶ Theſe allo arethe layinges of
Salomon, which the men of Ezemah
Arxrnge ol Juda gathered
together. connate”
is the honour of Godto kepe a 4 2
* thpnge kecrere but the Bpnges cessome crane
jonour fs to learch out a *thpneg, the woe: a
Chebeauen ts hve, the earth is enter
depe / a 6 kyngeg herte is: vnlearcheable. te” 8
Cake the dzotke krö p friuer / z there Mar- de bara
be a cleane vedell theror. dolomerese⸗
Take awaye bngodipnede fed the kynge / e warde m.
bis feate thalbe Gablidyed wd vightucures, beben
Put not forth chplelle in b pretence ot the Wenne
king. a preace not in top place of greate mié, in Brut. ut. f
Better is it ̊ it be Lapde vnto the: come bp 79.0.
hither / then thou to be fet downe in the pꝛe⸗ . e Beaute
lence of d pice whõ thou leylt with thene
eres. Br not haltie to goto the lawe
e pode at —
Pnepahbourput 5 to chame. Handie thy
matter wihp nergpbour hum felfc/a delto⸗ fat ek
uer not another mag fecrete : leſt when men hathe to do for
heare therot / it turne to thy diſhoncure / and d cim weh.
leſt thine euel name donot ceaſſe. 4 wozde
(pot in due lealon / is ipke apples of goide
ma fpluerdiche. Che coꝛreccion ot p wyle
s to an obediẽt eare / a goldẽ cheyne a a Je⸗
well or golde. L yke a the wynter coc le in
the harüeſt / co is a fapthfun mefaungerto
him that tent him / a rekrercheth his m ſters
mynde who to makech greate boaites ¢ €
geueth nothyng is Ipke cloudes and wynde
wout rayne. With pacitce mape a pꝛince
be pacikred a tha lolttõge maxe rygoꝛoul·
nes be bꝛokk. Ikthou fyndett honp / cate lo⸗
moch as is fufficiét foz thealeſt thou be cure
kull e perbzeake it out againe. Withdzaw
thy Foote fro thynerghbouis houle / iet he
2 auch alle up A hes hol 255 bal 2
1 e wytnet yn nepgh⸗ Pecteie ta
boure he ig a very 1 alwearde / and a lente
Warpe arowe. ? Che hope of § vngodlyin
tyme ok neade /ig lxke a rottẽ toth ga flippe-
rp foote. Mholo tyngeth a longe to a wyc⸗
Spee anden e ane been
pneger bpd chalke, ENE wrd germ.
enempe hger / feade him: yt he thyꝛtt / geue ran. 8
bundzincke kor ſo ſbalt thou heape coales ot
kyꝛe vp bis bead ache Londe hall rewarde D
the. Che Nozth wende dzrueth awape the
tapne / cuẽ fo doth an earneſt fober counte⸗
naunce a backbyters tõge. It is better to
pt in a coꝛner vnder $ rofe / then Wa bꝛau⸗
nge woman in a wrde houle. .
Fo


Sr Some,
Touerbes.
be


Sf Salomon, Mhap.rrvirrdi.


poꝛte out of a farre countre is Ike coulde
water to a thpeſtie loule. A ryghtuous mã
falipnge downe bekoꝛethe vngodix / is line a
troubled well ¢alpzpnge that is deſtroped.
Lyke as it is not goodto eate to moch hon /
euen fobe that wyll learch outhrethynges /
it wall be to heux foꝛ hym. He that can
not rule hym telfe / is Iphea cptpe whych is
bꝛoken downe / and hath no wales.
Ic he. xxvi. chapter.
Ike as fnowe is not mete in lom⸗
er / ner rarne inharueſt: euen to
is woꝛchipe vnſemelp koꝛ a foole.
E pke as the byꝛde a the Cwalowe
fipght and fle bere and there / lo the
curlethat is geuen in vapne / ſhali not lyght
vpon a man. Gntothe bole belongeth a
whyppe/to che Ale a brydle / and a rodde to
the kooles backe. Geue not ß koole an an⸗
ſwere after hys koolpchneſſe / leſt thou beco⸗
me lyke vnto him: hut make the foole an an⸗
cwere to his fcolptynelle / leſt he be wyle in
bis awne conceate. Heis lame ok his tete /
Pee dꝛoncken is he in vanpte / that cõmitteth
B enythyngeto a toole. Like as it is an vn⸗
ſemelx tipnge to haue legges a pet to halte /
euen lo is a parabiemthe fooles mouth.
He that lette ch a foole inhye dignite / that is
euẽ as yt a mã dpd caſt a piecious ſtone vpõ
che galous. L patableina fooles mouth
is Iphea thoꝛne that pꝛycketh a dꝛonckẽ
in the hande Aman ok experience dilcer ·
nety all thynges well / but wholo hyꝛeth a
foote / hyieth loch one as wyll take no hede.
Lxke as the dogg turneth agapne to hys
bompte / cuen foa koole begynneth bys fo-
lvchneſee agayne a frech. Ikchou tepeta
man that is wpfein his awnẽ cõceate / here
is moze hope in a ole then in hrm. Che
Gouth full lapeth: there is a leoparde in the
wape /g a lyon in the myddeſt of the ſtretes.
Uphe as the doze turneth aboute bpõ che
thꝛeſholde / euẽ lo doth the Mouthful welter
n et hym kelke in his bedd. Che llouthkull body
e. Mniſkethhys bande in tohrs bofome, andit
greuethhim to put it agapne to his mouth.
a* Chatts/ The lloga ede th vntz eth him lelke wyler / then
nanpandefoce r. bij men b tbꝛat lytt and teach. Who fo
uche. xr ui. d. Goeth by ¢ medleth with other mens ſtryle /
cher pn., he ts Ire one that takers a dogg bp peares.
den, Lp as one Wutert peadlp arowes and
da dome reade dartkes out ofa pꝛcuy place /euẽ Codoth a dit
tthe EE Lembler Wüis nexgbboute. Ind then larth
Sthit ee be: droit bak n tpozte. 1Phere no mond
aon. is / chere the t pꝛe goeth out: a where the bac⸗
. byter is taken awaye / there p ttrpfe ceateth.
*Coles ipndle heate / wood the fp2e:eue
o doth a bꝛauling felowe Here vp vartaũce.
Alclaunverers wordes are Ipke flatery /
D but ther pearie § inwarde partes or § body.


"Relig big.


, Ctrl,
Saenymous ipppes a a npchen bette aie
ipke a pottherde couered with kyluer dꝛolle.
An enempe duldembleth with bys lyppes /
and in the meane lealon he pmagineth mpl:
chele: but whe he ſpeaketh tapꝛe/beleue hin
not / fo there are ſeuen abhominacyons in
bis herte. B ho to kepeth euen wyll / lecret⸗
ip to do hurte / his maipce ſhalbe N ewed be ·
foze the whole congregacron. who dyg⸗ 2 Eccll. r. be
geth wpa pptt Wall fallcherm: and he that rell. roh.
A ftone/ thall ſtombie vpon ithym
lelfe. A dylſemblynge tonge hateth one 5
rebubeth hem / and a flatterynge mouth
woꝛcketh mylcheke. é
che. xxvij. Chapter. a
‘Ake not the boot ofto moꝛowe / koꝛ al
thou knoweſt not what mayehappẽ
4 odaye Lett another man pzapte
the/ and not thne awne mouth: pee other
kolckes lpppes a not thine,
Che ſtone is heur / a the lande weyghtye:
but a kooles wzath is heuper then they both.
Wꝛzath is a cruell thinge / ¢ kurioulnelfe
is a very tempeſt: pee who 18 able to abyde
enupe? An open rebuke is better then a
ſecrete loue. Fapthlull are the * woundes i)
ofalouer bt the res ofan enempe are ewe
Difceattull, | Hethacts full abborreey an B heran
bony combe: büͤt vnto hym that is hongrye /“ checheorr⸗
euer ſower thynge is Corte. Hethat okt bukes and re⸗
trmes fheteth / is ithe a byꝛde that foꝛlaketh ares 1
hernelk. Chebertets glad okg weite oont⸗ fag Nits,
ment a ſauburẽ / but a ſtomacke 6 can geue kerpuges. vc.
good councell / reiopleth a mag neyghboure.
Chrne awne frende a thy fathers krende
fethou foꝛlake not / but go not in to thy bꝛo⸗
thers houle in tyme of thy trouble.
ie vis a krende at hand then a bꝛother
eof,
My conne / be wyle / andthou chaltmaße me
a gladherte: fothat Achall make antwere
vnto my rebukers. A irpfeman leynge &
plage wyll hyde hun felfe/ag fo fooles they
Goon ſtill/ luder harme, Take his gar⸗ „ ouer. et
ment that is ſuertpe toꝛ a ſtraunger/ c take
a pledge of him ko the vnknowne mas lake.
He that is tohaſtpe to pꝛayle his neygh⸗ ¢
boure aboue meafure /thalbetaken as one
that geueth him an euell repoꝛte. A bꝛau⸗
lunge woman and the rote or the houle dꝛop⸗
pynge in a rarnve dape / maye wel be come
pared together. .
Be that refrayneth her vefrapheth the
wynde / and holdeth opie falt in his bande.
L ke as one pꝛon whetteth another / to doth
one man cofozte another. Who fo kepe
his kyge tre/ chan enioe the krutes therofs
be that wapteth vpon bys matter / hall
come to honoure. Lyke as in one water
there apeare dyuerte kaces / euen to druerle
men


The Pꝛouerbes


‘be Chat is / deſtru


men haue dpuerle hertes.


the bertes or omen can neuer be latiſtped


„ luer is
Trablerastneye depen in chemoude/g gotde in che kopnack 8


V bal. ci.b.


Pace. Though


en Croune for
bonour: abolle
daunce / as in p
Wlal. xv. c.


a
rea
wherot 16 for


fet
10
a


2


beBome tear
berbfurye and
bumeattrable


che bpm
becaute
rrche.


Cots a mia when he is openty prapten to his


with a peſtell in a moꝛter Ipke otemeel /

wyll not his foolptynete go trõ hym. Se
that thou know the nomb e ok thp catell chr
elke / z lone well to thy lockes. Foz ryches
abpde not alwape / a the ‘* crowrie endireth
not koꝛ euer. Che hey groweth / chegradſe


rs)


thou cbuldeſt bzap a foole


3


CEU ae deres e


lence peddeth eny mang bioue / dale
rennagate onto his graue / and no man thall
be able to ſuccoure him. i ho lo leadeth a
godly ¢ an innocent pte / Malbe fate: but he
Chat goeth krowarde waves, hall once haue


Stall, Hethat tylleth his land / ball haue hn
pléteoutnetie of bʒead: but he that 2 Erte


potinedie / wall haue pouerte
fapthfull ma is greatiꝑ tobe c
be that maketh to moch batte fo2 to be niche /
wal not be vngritie. Co haue refpecte of
Beto bo wrayer pee ova eee
e will Do wꝛõge kee euẽ koꝛ a pece OF bꝛead.
Becarionl


ough. 4


be tych all totoone/baty an


euell exe / and contpoerety not / that poui rte
wall come vpon hin. He that rebuketha
many chall moze fauourvat the alt /
th him. 18hö lo robbeth
ber and ſapech te 18 no

the lame is Iphe vnto a moztherer,
chat is ol a proude ſtomacke / lereth op
ke: but he that putteth bys trult · in the
Loꝛde / maibe well fedd. Me that truſteth
in his atone herte, is a coole but he that dea


br leth wrlelx / walbe tafe. He that geueth


ter then p ryche z goeth in krowarde wares,

e
2 men

ſhameth bis father. Tebotoincreateth bis.

recheg pre bauntage ¢ wpnnpnge / iet hem

gather them ta helpe the pooze wichall.

e that turneth awape bis eare


Wall haue mercp.

ts him chat ſtandeth alwaye inate:

‘a8 fez bym that hardeneth his beste /ye wall

kallm to mpichete, Lplie as a roargnge

lyon and an hongrpe beare / euẽ to is an on-
Godly pꝛynce ouer the pooze people.

Where the pꝛynce is wythout vnderſtan⸗

dongelchere is greate oppredions wꝛonge:

but er he be loch one as batety couetout⸗


vnto the pooze/fhali not wante: buthe that 2)


kurneth atwape bys eves from loch ag be in
hecetipte wall futfte greate pouerte hym
ſelke. when the vngodip are come vp men
are fapne to hdethem ſeiues: but whe they
perpty/the ryahtuous increale.


obip beareth rule,
ne abe ene prone mabe
keene be at Wit
oe aneh ketpathe bath. iwith


toole pourethj out his ſpꝛetes


but a wyle man kepeth it in till acterwa


together


bed but


The Pꝛouerbes


poste


N / the Lowe 2)
eres.  Cheteate Ade brome that kapth⸗


fullpturgeth the pooze/ wall contrnue Sure
foz euermoꝛe. Che rodde and copreccyon
——
When che bngodig comebp, wickeDnetie ine
crealeth:but the rĩghtuous thalt fe their fal.


beruf Gar there the people
vm Lame. Bepeth the lawe.


n


moze then


nun.


the better koꝛ modes
ante


ym, B.

Seth vp his feruaunt fro a chrid / all make

hem his maſter at length. In angry man

ftereth vp frye / and he that beareth euell

wrllmnhis mynde / doch moch euell. Akter
de commeth a fall but a lowelp ſpʒete
Aungerb greate wonchrppe. ibo fo ke.


Chespghtuousabhozreththe ongodip: but
son thot # be tm te ight aye the wee


jem.
«ai ss ofthe worde of Bod: and what we
Segoe to canine of god / with certen wonderfull
‘thinges that are in this worlde. 4


¶ Che. xxx. Chapter.
e 5
zaleh.
a De pz e OF a true tarthkull
2 — bexped / woõ
Sed had cdtoꝛted a noꝛpched. Hos
though J am $ leek ot a /a baue
mas pnderitandpnge (ko: J neuer lerned
chene get pau pnbcetanbpng % am
well infourmedin Sodiythrngz. Sho hath
clxymmed pp into heauen? Who bath come
downe tr théce? Mho hath hold the wynd
fat inis bande l


me vanxte and lxes:geue menether pourtte


ap. rxxrr.


noi ryches / only graunte me a necellary Ty
uynge. Lett pt A be totulſ/ 4 denpe the / and
faye: what friowe is the Loꝛde: And leſt J
beinge conſtrarnedthozow pouerte / kau ore
to ſtealynge / and toꝛt weate the name ot my
Gov. Accule not a ſeruaunt vnto his ma⸗
ſter / lelt he tpeake tuelloltte alto / and thou
behurte. Hethat bzingech pan euell re⸗
pozte vpon the generacion of hrs father and
mother / is not woꝛthpto be commended.
Che generacronchatthynke themlelues
cleane / all not be clenſed from their tpithy⸗
nelle. Chere are people thathaue a pzoude
loke / and call vn their eye ipddes. Chis peo⸗
pie tety are Cwerdes and with their chafe
ies they conlume and deusurk the ſimple
okthe earth andthe pooze from amöge men.
Chis ger eracyon ( whych isipke an hoꝛl⸗
leche hach two daughters: che one is called /
fetch hither / and che other bzyng hither.
Chere be thꝛe thinges that are neuer ta · C
tyllped / and the fourth fapeth neuer hoo. Che
hel / womans wombe/ and the earth bath
neuer water ynough. As foz kee / it taxeih
neuer / hoo. Who fo laugheihhrs father
tolcozne / and lettetuhis mothers commat-
dement at naught: the rauens pycke out his
e ol the


vonge Aegleg.

Chere be thze thyngestobpe koꝛ me / and
as For the kourth / it padleth mp knowledge.
Che wave al an Aegle inthe avze / the waye
ofaferpent ouer a ſtone / the waxe ok a ſyyp
inthe lee / andthe waxe ofa man with a poge
wornan. Socheis che wape allo of awyke
that bꝛeaketh wedlocke / which wipeth her
mouth like as when ſbe hath eaten / a laxeth.
As fozme/ i haue done no harme. Thoꝛow
thze thinges the earth is dylquieted / andthe
fourth map it not beare: Choꝛow a leruaunt
that beareth rule /thozot a foole that bath
greate riches / thoꝛow an pole houlmyte / and
thozow an handmarden chat is heyre to her
madres. Kerebe foure thinges inthe,
earth / the wh pch are very lytlie: but in wyl⸗
dome the x exceade the wyle. Che Emmettes
are but a weake people / pet gather theytheir
meate together in che harueſt. Che Conpes
are hut a feble folke / petmaketheptheir cou
ches amonge the rockes. Che grechoppers
baue not a g de / pet go they forth together by
heapes. Che tpyder labdureth with her bans
des e that inthe kynges palace.

„ Chere de thre thinges that go Cpfiy / but
e going Of the fourth ische godlpeſt ar al.

Lyon, which is Bing of beattes/ a geueth
dude conn me: cock ready to kight:à rime
anda Ayng that goeth kozth with bis people.
YEthou be fo ſolich to magnikie thy leite / o⸗
mdlelt with enn tochthenge n lage! ee

jal


ae


The Prouerbes


bantdcbpcti thymcuth. Who fo chyzni
wꝛath / bꝛingeth fozth ſtrple.


ax be toindge méty, of
— oust cents ly, che propertxe or an
Che xxxj. chapter.


CTpewordes of Aynge Lamuei/
and the Prophecre that hes mother
taught hem.


2 J Conne/ thou fonne of my bod y:
0 mydeare beloued fonne / geue her
ot cuer thy lubdaunce a mende


treme / which are the dellruc⸗
cron euen ol thynges. O Kamuel geue
Bynges no wyne ! geue Anges ¢ Princes
no ſtronge duncke:lelt they beynge dꝛonckẽ
forget the lawe ¢ regarde not the caule ol
the pooze / and of all loche as be in aduerlite.
Geue ſtronge dꝛincke vnto koche as are con⸗
dempned to deach / and wyne vnto ttole that
mourne: that they mae dꝛincke it / a forget
their mylery and aduetlytie. Bethou an ade
uocate / and ſtande in iudgementthy leite / to
Epeatie fo: all loch as bedomme a focouries,
With thy mouth oefende che thynge that is
lawkull and right / and the caule ofthe pooze
andhelpeleſſe.


leph.
A wgho co kyndeth an honett kapthtull wo⸗
— pose lps nn —


ehert oF her hulband mape fatelperutt
in eure 2 bebe no nede of fp oples,


She tell do hem good o not euen anthe
dapes ok her lte.


Daleth.
She occuppeth woll and flax / and labou·
reih giadie with ber handes.


e.
eobeisiphe a merchauntes thyppe/that
Dpinagery her bptaples trom ataute.


Mau.
She is vp inthenxght teaton / to pꝛouyde
mes fun her houcholde / and fobe kor ber
m


Sain,
confynzeth lande / a byeth it
—— te brane


n Sohegurnethberlomnes with rennt /o


köüragech herarmtz.


mylcke⸗maketh butter: he that rubbetg his v Andvethe perceaue that her boulw
nae maketh it Made un becher cauteth Ketan ger geet arri


4
4 laveth ber kyngers to the ſpyndle,
— —— ie


Carb.
openeth her bande to the
i eet oh berate


Lamed.
2 She kearetz not that the code of wynter
Wall burte her houle / 49 all her hougolve
Colkes are double clothed,


gem,
‘ mak felfefapre omamẽtes,
d *
dutbanp és moch tet by in pats.
PD a oe fede bs had fant,


amect.
e maketh cloth of cite a felleth it /
ace zee


in. 2
and henoure is her clothpnge/


Strength

‘inte nr e at re
openeth her mouth wyth wyldome

ee eee


Jade.
lokech well to $ warez of her houl ·
enge ene


er ani cal her biet
bahnte ele *


5.
S api sp dra
ches together 2 all.
w Zs for faugurefit isdptceattull /ebeutie


ia papne thinge:buta woman that keareth
the Loide be s worthy tobe pragten,


n Geue her ot — other handes / and
let her awne woꝛckes pꝛayle her in p gates.


¶ The ende of the
Pꝛouerbes of
. Salomon.


bone of
Seabee,


CThe boke ofthe


er / otherwyle called
ae F


that is in this woꝛlde is vanptie.
¶ Che kyꝛſt Chapter.
hefe are the woꝛdes of


pt Foz what eis bath a man / ol
Abrettes, far afl the laboure p betakcth vnder the Sane?
G woch .d. One generacton pateth atoaye another ö.
tl meth / but the earth abrocth ſtyll. Che Sone
arpleth theSpunne goeth downe / and retur⸗

neth to his place / that he mape there ryle vp

agayne Che winde goeth cowards South /

e letcheth his cõpalẽ aboute onto ? Nozth/

alo turneth in to him lelk agapne. All floudt

runne in to the ſee / a pet the lee is not kplled:

kor loke vnto what place the waters runne /

thence they come agapne. All Ebengesare fo

eon rpg. c harde / y no man can expꝛegethẽ. Che ere
Ecciiriti.b, is not latiltyed wiyght / eare is not fylled
Cece. Whearynge. Che chung b bath bene cometh
to paſſe agayne: a 8ᷣ thing 5 bath bene done /

Is done agayne / there is no new thyng vnder

the Sunne. 38 chere eny thinge wherok it

maye be ſapde: io / this is newe? Foꝛ it was

Tonge agoo in the tymes p; haue bene befoze

bs. (he thinge that is paſt / is out ofremem-

C pant: Euen fothe thynges that are koꝛ to
conte / hall no moze be thought bpd amonge

thé that come after. Amp lelke tze Pꝛeacher /

beynge Rynge of Firacl a J erutalẽ / applied

mypmpnoe to ſeke out a ſearch koꝛ the know ·

lenge ofall thynges p are done vnder heauẽ.

be Chet to och travaples labour bath godgeuk bnto
dt n. Some d ß childꝛẽ Of me / toerercylethẽ leiud therin.
tea thechile Chus J haue conſpdꝛed all the thynges §
den of Adam. come to pale vnder the Sunne / andlo they
Sex z art all but banpte a beracion of mynde. Che
crohed can not be mayde ſtrayght / a p faut

can not be nombꝛed. I cOmoned wyth myne
amneherte/ taping: lo J am come to a great

e date / a haue gottẽ moze wyldome / then all
theythat haue bene befoze me in Jerulalem


Chap


tt. F. ij. Ki


Tee myherte hadgreate experience of wyl⸗
dome ¢ knowledge / koꝛ there vnto J appuen
my mende: that J might knowe what were
wyrdome a bnderltẽ oing / what were errour
S folpcbnes. Aud g perceaued thatthis allo
was but a bexaciõ ot minde:foz where moch
wyldomeis tere is allogreate trauarie &
dilguietnes: and the moze knowledge a man
hath / the moꝛe is his care.

Caboundaunce of rycheſte / ot plealure 6 of bupl
denge are vapne thpuges.

Che i. chapter.


haue good dapeg. Butio/ p was

ö panxte allo: in lo moch 5 J layne
vnto laughter: thou art madd / and to myzths
what doelt thou⸗

So thought in myherte / to withdꝛawe
mp fie krõ wyne / to apple my mynde vnto
wyldome / a to cõpꝛehẽde kolſhnes vntill tre
tyme p (amageal! $ thinges which are vnder


, Hen lard 3 chus i myherte Num z
go to / J wyn tate mene eate and


„ § Sofine)¥ meght le what were best to; nen


to do lo longe as they lyue vnder heauen.

Imade goꝛgious fapze wosckes. Abupl- B
ded me houles / pläted bine xardes. % made
me oztchardes a gardens of plealure / a plas
tedtreesin thé or all maner frutes. J made
poles of water / to water p grene a krutetull
trees withall. J bought leruaũtꝭ a mapdẽs /
hade greatehouchode. As kor catch g
ſhepe Thad moze lubſtaüce ofthe / hen ald
ther 6 were betoꝛe me in Jerulalem FJ gas
chered cyluer and golde together / euẽ a trea⸗
fue ot kynges ano landes.

Apꝛourded me tyngers and wemé which
coude plape ot inſtrumentes / to make men
mypꝛth a paſtime. I gat me deinckyng cup ·
pes allo aglades. Dhoztlp Fwas greaterg
in moꝛe wopchupe then all mp predecetfours
in Zerulalẽ. Foꝛ wyldome remapned Wme:
Gloke whatloeuermpne eyes delped / J let
thẽ haue it: wherin Foeuer myherte delited
oz had eny pieature/Z Whelde itnot kromit.
Chus mp herte reio led in all HF dd / a this
Itoke £02 § poꝛcion of all mytraua pie. But
tohen Icölpdꝛed all $ wozckes? mphand:3
had wroughe/¢ all the labours 5 Jhadtak⸗
therin: lo / all wag but banpte ¢ beracpor ot
mynde / and nothinge of enp value vnder the
Sunne. Chen turned q me to confpdze wyc⸗
dome / errouxe a folpſhneſſe) to: what is he
amöge men /p might be compared to me the
yng in loch woꝛcks: a I fawe/p wyldo ne
exceſleth foouichneſle / as karre as lyght both
darc kneſſe. Kor a wple ma beareth hig epes C
aboute in his head / but p foole goeth in the getr.
darckneſie. J perceaued allo p they both ad pits 3
one ende. Then thought Jin mynunde J it n.
happen vntod foole as it doth vñto me / what

b. j. nedeth


Theboke tolaboute bap iin. atymetolpeake:


dome: Do cOfetied within my herte / p this «A tyme to loue / and a tyme to hate:
allo was but vanite Foz p wyle are euer ag Atme ol warre / and a tyme ot peace:


Fekthe Preacher, Lap, b. . bl. serif.
5 Agayne /I ſawe that all trauaple anddi · thou Hulvek pꝛomyle / and not paye. wle


lxgence ot laboure was hated ol euerx man. not thy mouth to caule thy flech fo2 tolrnne /
Chis is alſoa vayne thynge / and a vexacton that thou faye not betoꝛe the angellanx foo-


Iptleinvemébzatice as 8 tolich / z all sdaxes
lor to come ſpalbe koꝛgottẽ / pee the wyle ma
diet as well as $ foole. chus beganne to
be weery of my pte / in fo moch 6 Jcoude a⸗
wape wnothing p is done under Düne / koz
all was bitt bantte a beracid or mynde: Fee
was weery or al mylabour which Thad talẽ
önderthe Düne, becaule wude be fayneto
leaue thẽ vnto anothermã / pcõmeth alter me
£03 who knoweth / whether he halbe a wyle
Mm 07 & kole-And pet wal he be lord ofaltmy
labours which Wloch wyldomehaue tal
vonder the Dũne. Is not this a vayne thong?
So J turnedmẽ to rekrayne my mynde krõ
alltoch trauarle / as tobe onder the Stine;
£07 lo moch as a man ſpulde weer him ſelke
Wwyldome / Wonderſtãding a oppoztunite /
& vet be tayne to leaue his labours vnto ano
cher /? neuer wett Foz them. Chys is alloa
vapne thinge and a greate mylerr. Foꝛ what
getteth a man ok all $ labour ¢ trauaple of
his mende / p he taketh onder ß Dunne / but
heupnetle / to:owe a dilquietnes all g dapeg
ok his tye In fo moch that his herte can not
reſt in night Js not this allo avapne thing?
iS it not better then fog a mã to cate a deine
e / a his foule to be merp in his labour? Yee
Ilawe 5 this allo was a gyite of God: Foz
dohomape kate / dꝛincke / or beinge en thin
ko pale wythouthym: Ind whpehe geu
nto mG / what it pleateth him: whether tt be
wyldome / vnderſtanding / o gladneſle. But
bnto prynnerhegeueth weerynes z loꝛow /
hemape gather a heape together b thunge /
alterwarde thaibe geuẽ vnto him whom it
pleafeth od. Chis ts nom abapne thinge /
pee a very dilquietneſle a beractd ołmynde.
1 come their tyme and pale awape in
Ache th. Chapter.


That hath a mã els d doth any thing but
iweerpnesie a laboure: Foz as touching the
trauaple a caretulneſle which God hath ge ·
uen vnto men / Ale ß he hath geuẽ it thẽ / to be
exerciledin it. All this hathhe opened mar⸗
uelous goodlꝝ / to euerpthing his due tyme.
He hath plãted ignoꝛaũce allo in the hertes
ak men / d they chulde not kynde out $ groũd
ebe. Be per, he doth fd $ beginning
to ride. £0 3 perceaucd/ Bin thete thing, c
there is nothtnge better koz a man then to bẽ
merp a to do well ro longe as he lrueth. Foz
all F a man eateth a deincketh / pee what lo
euer a mã eniopeth ok all his labour / p fame
is agpfte of God. A cölpdered allo ? what
loeuer Goddoth it cotinueth koꝛeuer / aß no
thing eã be putvnto it noztalẽ fr it: a ß Goo
doch ie tothe inte / 5 men kwulde keare hym. ©
Che thinge ß hath bene / is now: a pthingeß
is ko to come bath bene afoze tyme / to God
reftozeth agapne the thinge that was paſt.
Mozeouer / ſawe vnder the lunne vngod⸗ Y
lpnelie in the ſteade ot fudgeméet/ a iniqupte
in ſteade ok ryghtuoulnel. Chen thought
Ain mymynde: God challſeparate the nigb⸗
tuous fro the vngodlx / a then halbe p tyme
andiudgeniẽt ofall councels a wozckeg.

I cõmened w mpne awnehertalloc

the child ze of men how Godbath cholenthe /

“a pet letteth thé apeare:as though they were
beattes:£o2 it happeneth vnto nien as it doth

vnto bea ſtes / : as the one dieth / lo dreth the

other: pee theyhaue both one manerok byꝛth /

fathat lin this )a man hath no pꝛeemynence

aboue à beat / but all are ſubdued vnto va⸗

nitie. Chey go all vnto one place / toꝛ as they

be al ok duſt co thai they all turne onto dult

agarne. iWhoiknotweth *the pete or man ac rer,
B goeth ppwame/ 2 p breth of the beet chat ze woah


Foethdowne into 5 earth; whertoze J per⸗ che pute oa


ceaue / p there is nothinge better toz a man / man goa vp


e chen to be topkull in his taboure/foz chat is warden


ge a tyme to dre.
is tyme to plite / a atpmeto plucke
bp the thynge / that is planted:
Atme tollape / and a tyme to make whole
2 Ityme tobzeakedowne / a a time to build vp.
3. A tome to wepe / anda tyme to laugh:
Atme to mourne / anda tyme to daunte:
A tyme to caſt awape ſtones / anda tyme to
Gather ſtones together:
„Atrmeto enbzace / ga tyme to rekrarne trõ
- enbzacynge:
Atme to wynne / anda tyme tolete:
Atme toſpare / anda tyme to ſpende:
85 ma in peces / a atyme to fore to⸗


There 1.


1 eathok abtes
his pobcpon. But who wyllbzinge him to g und
fethethingethat hall come alter him: en.
¶ Che mpleries ot the mnocent. Che fuperfiuous
faboutes of men. Che child that is pores wyle. ce.

Che. iii. Chapter.


man to
kende thé krö p violẽce of their oppꝛeloures.
Wherkoꝛe iudgedthole that ate deed / to be
mozehapppe then loch as be alpue:perhym
that is pet vnbome to be better at cafe then
they both /becaule he feith not che mpterable
wozckes that are done vnder the lunne.
Agayne


ol mynde. The foole foldety his hãdes to⸗
gether and eatery vp his awne lech. One
bande full (ſapeth he) is better wyth tet,
then both the handes tull with laboure and
trauaple. Moꝛouer / 3 turnedme / and be ·
bolde pet another vanyte vnderthe Donne.
Cyere is one man / no mo buthym lelte
alone haupnge nether chylde ner bꝛother:
vet is there no ende ok his carefull trauapie /
bs eres can not be latyctyed wyth ryches
(pet doth he not remembze him leite / a faye:)
Foz whome 3 do take loch trausple? Foz
whole pleature do J thus conlume awape
Cmpirte: Chis is alt a vapne and mylerabie
thong. Chertoze two are better then one /
koꝛ they mape well entoye the pꝛokpt ot their
laboure. Ik one okthem fall / hrs compa⸗
nion heipeth bimbp agapne: But wo is him
hat is alone to pt he tali / he bath not ano⸗
ther to helpe hun vp. Agapne / when two
Gepe together / they are warme. but how can

a body be warme alone? One maye be ouer ·
come / but two maye makereliſtaũce:a the
kolde cable is not lvghtly bꝛoken. A pooze
chyide beynge wyle is better then an olde
kynge/ that doteth / and can not bewarre in
Dtyme to come. Some one commeth out ol
Reto / a is made a kynge: q another whych
bome inthe kyngdome / commeth vnto po
uerte. And perceaued /p all men liuing
vnder the Sonne /go with the lecõde chile /
that commeth vp in the Meade ok the other.

As fo2 the people that haue bene before
him / and that come akterhim / they are innu⸗
merable:pet is not their fope thegreater tho⸗

k. 15; be is romhem. Chists allo a papne thrnge a
teiber to bear à bexacion ot mynde. When thou cõmelt
ir (ondertaw in to 8 boule of God / hepe thyfote** dꝛaw
ar warde) th pe / erthat thou mapeſtheare: that is better


bene tye then Bofterpnges of Fooles foz they nome


klinge. ot what euellcherdo.
beHome tees ¶ ꝗ moni beware of 5
pantie Sought vat een —
fra ale, be t he. b chapter.


Ahnocchrneherte Cpeake enpthynge

rachip befoze God. foi God is

K Hin heauen / and thou vpon earth /
thertoze let typ woꝛdes be tewe. For where

moch carefuinede is / there are many deea⸗

mes: and where manp woweg are there men

deute xti d Mã pe heare fooles. * Ff thou make a vowe
Wut. vi. c. vnto od) be not lacke to perfourme it. 48
ace rener pape .

chou p enp thinge pape it toꝛ bet.

ter it is that tyou make no dowe then that


lpchnelee is in the faute. Foz th God wilbe
angrpe at thy voyce / a dedkroye all § woꝛckd
ok chene handes. And why r where as are B
manp dꝛeames and manp woꝛdes / there are
allo dyuerle vanityes: but lone 5 thoufeare
God. Ik thou leyſt the pooꝛe to be oppꝛtl⸗
ſed and wzongeoully dealt wythall / lo that
equpte and the ryght ol the lawe is weatted
in the lande: maruell not thou at loch iudg ·
ment / koꝛ one greate man kepeth touch wich
another / and the myghtie helpe them felues
together. Che whole lande allo wyththe
feldes and all that is therin / is in ſubteccion
and bondage onto the kynge. He that louieth
moner / wyll neuer be latil ted with monep:
and who lo delpteth in ryches / chall haue no
pꝛokpt therok. 28 not thys allo a bapne
thenge? Where as moche rpches is / there
ate many allo that ĩpende them awaye.
And what pleatuve moze bath he that pole
lelleth them faupnge that he mape loke bps
them with hys eyes? A labouryng ma lle⸗C
peth Cwetelp / whether it be lytle oꝛ moch?
he eateth: but the aboundaunce of the ryche
wyll not luffce hym to lep e.

Jet is there a Coze plage which J haue
fene onder the ſunne namely) riches kepte to
the hurte ol him that hath them in poſſedton.

Foz oft tymes they peri with bis greate
mylery a trouble: and ykhe haue achpine/ it
getteth nothynge. Nyke as he came naked Jh 4d. . 1
dut okhis mothers wöbe / lo goeth hethither Tino. vi. v
. carpeth nothinge awape whym
oF all bps laboure. Chis is a mylerable
plage / p he chall go awape euẽ as he came.
what helpeth it hym then / that he hath la
bozed in the wynde: All the dapes of bys
ipfe allo mut he eate in the darcke / wrth @
greate cavefulnede lycknele and loꝛow.
Chertoꝛe me thincke it a better and a fayrer
thynge / a man to eale anddzyncke / and to be
rekreched of all bps laboure / that he tanech
vnder the Dunne all the dapes of hys lyle
which God geueth hym / koz this is his poz⸗
cyon. Foꝛ vnto whom loeuer God geueth
riches / goodes and power / he geueth ithym
to eniope it / to take it koꝛ bys poꝛcion / and to
be rekreched of bys laboure: this is now the
gytte ot God. sez hethrncketh not moche
how longe he call lrue / tor ſo moch as Go
kelleth his herte with gladnelle.


e mplerye of the ryche and couetaus. Che dit
— — rma: Rierte


¶ Che. vi. chapter,
Hh. i.


ayere


The boke


*
xi


ere is petaplage under Sane/
it is a general thynge amonge
nen: when God geueth a many:
hes / goodes e honoure / lo that he
wanketh nothynge or allthathys herte can
delpꝛe:and pet God geueth hym not leue to
entope the lame / but another man ſpendeth
chem. Chis is a vapne thynge aa mylera⸗
ö ble plage. Ita man begett an hundzedchil.
daẽ / and ipue many peates / lothat his daxes
avemany in nomibze / and pet can not entoxe
his good / nether be buried as foꝛ him lape /
chat an bntrmelp brth is betterthen he.
Lorhecömeth to naught / egocth his wave
C into darcknes and his name is forgotten,
oꝛouer / he leyth nots Donne / a noweth
ge no reſt nether here ner there: Yee though
he lyued two choulaude peares / vet hath he
nogood lle. Come not all to one place: all
the labourep a man taketh / is foz him leite /
and pet hs detpꝛe is neuer kylled atter hys
mynde Foz what hath the wyle mooze then
D the koole: nohat helpeth it the pooꝛe / that he
knoweth to walcke bekoze the lyuyng? che
lyght ol the eyes is better / then that p loule
hulde lo departe awaye. Powbeit this is
allo a vayne thynge and a dplqupetnefie of
mynde. What is moze excellent then ma2
vet can he not in the lawe get the bictozp ol
ol him that is myghtier thenhe: A vapne
thynge is it to calt oute many woꝛdes / but
what hath a man els?
¶ Chat wich palleth oure ſerengthes s wittes ought
we not to (che after,
¶ Che. vij. chapter.
= go? who knoweth what is good
b diman puenge / th the Daves of
7 2 ie vayne Ipfe / which is buta hae
owe: Oz, ho wil tell a man /


Melzer. he Wall happen akterhim under § Döne⸗?
ant. l. a.


„ good name is moze woꝛth then a pꝛe ·
clous ovntmẽt / and the dape of death is bet⸗
ter then the dape ol byꝛth. It is bettertogo
in to an houſe ot mournyng then in to a bac⸗
gzetyng houſe. Foꝛthere is the ende ok all


men / ¢ he that is iu puge / taneth it tohert. b


It is better to be ſoꝛy then to laugh / koꝛ whe
the countenaunce is heup / the herte is toy.
full. Che herte ok the wyle is in the mour⸗
nyng houle / but the herte of $ tolicd is in the
houle ol myꝛth. It is better to geue eare
tothe chaſtenynge of a wyle man / then to
hearethe fonge of fooles.Foꝛthe laughyng
ok kolcs is Ipke the crackyng ol tho mes vn⸗
der a pot. And that is but a bapne thynge,
Who lo doeth wꝛonge / maketh a wyfe
man to goo oute of hts witte /a deſtroyeth a
gentle herte. Che ende ok a thrnge is better
chenthe begynnpng. Che pactẽt or pꝛete


it better then the xe mynded. Be notha⸗


Chapt. vj. x.vij.


llelx angrie in thympnde / ko wzath reſteth
inthe buͤlome oka koole. Sape not thou:
WVhat is the cauſe that the dayes ofthe ode
tyme were better / then they that be now: foꝛ
that were no wyle queſtion. Wyldeme is
better then ryches / yee moch moze woꝛth
then the exelxght. Foz wyldome dekendeth
ag well a smonepe/ and the excellent know⸗
ledge and wyldome geueth lpke vnto hem 6
hath it in poũellton. Coniydze the woꝛcke of
Sod / how that no man can make the thynge
ſtraight / which he maketh croked, due well
the trme ok profperpte / and remembze the
tyme of mylkoꝛtune:foꝛchod maketh the one
bythe other / ſoß a mã can tynde nothyng els,

Chele. ij thinges allo haue J cõcydꝛed in
the tyme ofbanpte:that p iuſtm̃an pericheth
fo2 his ryghtubuſnes fake, and the vngodiy
lpueth in his wyckednelle. Cherkaze be thou
nether to rightuous ner ouer wyle / thatthou
perich not: be nether to vnrightuous allo ner
to foolych / leſt thou dye befoze thy tyme. It
is good Foz the to take holde of this / and not
to let that go out thyhande Foz z he teareth
God ſhall ẽlcape themall.

Wyldome geu 0 it ‘moze e oe —
wyle / chen ten myghtie men o€ p citie: *fo2 M. nne
there is not one iuſt bpon earch / ydoth good / sa
and lenneth not Cake not hede onto cuery Hom’,
‘wo7de that is Cpoken lett thouheare thy ler⸗
usunt curfe the: £07 thpne atone herte kno⸗
weth / that thou thy felfe alfo had oft trmes
ſpoken euell by other men. All thete thynges
haue F pꝛoued becauſe of wyldome: koꝛ
thought to be wyle / but he went farther Fro
me then the was befoze/ pee a lo depethat J
might not reach vntoher. J appliedmy myn
de allo vnto knowledge / a to letze oute ſcien·
ce / wyldome and vnderſtandyng: to knowe
the kooltſynelle of the vngodip / a the erroure
ol dotynge fooles. And J kounde / chat a wo⸗
manis bpttererthendeath ; koz che is a verx
angle / her herte is a nett / and herhandes arẽ
cheynes. Who fo plealeth God Mall elcape
from her / but the lynner wyll be taken with

er


Beholdelapech the Least ioe
dilpgently fearched oute and pꝛoued / that
myght come by knowledge: wuych as pet i
feke / and kynde it not. Amonge a thoutande
men J haue founde one / but not one woman
amonge all. L o/ thys onelp haue 4 founde/
that God made man iut and night / but they
5 wean fotelepeg tebere ag 2 pd

jomeant andynge / to geue an⸗
kwere thervnto.


€ Thebynges commaundement ought to be obeped
Slates pone ok the chefe! — abe the ſonne.


che. vii. Chapter.
.


tynue in no euell thynge: koꝛ whattoeuer it
pleateth him / p doeth be. Like as whẽ a king
geueth a charge / hys commaundement is
inyghtie:ẽEuen lo who mape fave vnto hym:
what doeſt thou? Who lo kepeth the com⸗
maundemẽt / call kele no harme: but a w
mans herte dilcerneth tyme and maner: Fo
e
gment/ sts the jae mal
B m̃ẽ kull ok cavefuines and toꝛowe. And whp?
aman knoweth not what is fo2 to come / toꝛ
who wyll tellhym⸗! Mether is there eny man
that hath power ouer che ſpzete / to kepe ſtill
the lpꝛete ner to haue eny power in d tyme
okdeath: it is not he allo that can make an
ende of ß battayll / nether mape vngodiynes
delyuer himthat medleth with all. 9
Allthele thynges haue J confpoered / and
applyed my mynde vnto euery woꝛcke that
is vnder the Sonne:how one ma bath loꝛd ·
Sipe bpon another to his awne harme. Foz
Ihaue oft ſene § vngodly bꝛought to their
Graues / and fallen downe krom the bye and
lozious place: info moch that they were
forgotten in the crtie / where they were had
in lohye and greate reputacyon. This is al
foabapnethpnge. Becauſe now that euell
woꝛckẽs are not haſtely punyched / the herte
ok man geueth hymlelke ouer vnto wycked⸗
neſſe. But though an euell perlonne offende
an bundzed tymes and haue a longe ipfe:pet
am I lure that it hall go well wth thé that
keare God / becaute they haue hym before
cheir eres Agapne / as fo? f ongodip/tt Hall.
not be well wych hem /nether thatthe pꝛo⸗
loge bts daxes: but euen as a chadowe / fo
hall be be that keareth not God.
eee earth: There
be iult men vnto whomit happeneth / as
though thep bad the wozckes of the vngod⸗
Ir: Agapne / there be vngodlp / wich whom it
Goeth as though they had the woꝛckes of the
— oe beads 15
. Cl ꝛe F commende g e / bez
cauſẽ a man hath no better thynge onder ß
Somme / then to este anddozpncke / and to be
merx. for that (bai he haue of his laboure all
che dapes ol his lpke/ which Godgeucth him
vnder ß Sonne. hen Jappltedmympnde
Dto learne wyldome and to knowe the tra:
ple thatis in the woꝛlde (and that of ſoch
rachion / 8 Alluckred not myne eyes to depe
nether dapẽ ner npayt) Jvnderſtode ok all ß
woꝛckes of Sod / chat tt is not impoluble koꝛ


ap. biij c ir, Lerlitis, |
a man to attayne vnto the woꝛckes that are

done onder the Bonne: a though he beſtowe

his laboure to ſeke them out / pet canhe not

reach vnto thẽ: pee though a wyle ma wolde

vndertake to knowe them / et myght he not

kynde them.


C man wotteth not / bythe ryghtwelnes of bys
atone wonckes whether he be worthie ok loue or hate.
A ma ought to ipue merelp with his wyke. A pꝛaple o
wpldome. i
Che ir. chapter. 2
oral thete thong’ purpoled A in
nn ox fone
adus @ wele pee e theira* wozc- finde /r.
es allo are in the hande ok Sobre
therels noman chat knowech ethers loue 5 Some
02 hate ol the thynge that he hath betoze him. readc: and man
Ithappeneth vnto one as vnto another: It buowech nee
Socth woch the ryghtuousas wyth the bn. ter the bauer
Godlp-with che good and cleane as wichthe uh halber
vncleane: with himthat offereth as with him fore him. The
chat offerety note ipke as it goeth wyth b ber⸗kentkce dpgni⸗
tuts logoeth it allo with the fpnner: As itktech as mache)
bappeneth ntothe pertured fo bappeneth weh ms Mies
italfopntobimprs akratedto be Foz kwoꝛne God ioue dr
Amonge alithynges that come to patie un- bate anp man:
der the Donne / this is a mylerx / that it hap⸗ U nderltande /
bene öntoan alene Kois the caute alko hne TaN
6 the bertes of men are full of wyckednele / atone worckes.
and madd koolpcbnelte is in theirhertes as
Jonge as they ipue / vntyll they dye.
„And why: As longe as aman Ipueth / he
is caveles:foza quick dogg (tape thep) is bet S
ter then a deedipon:fo2 they thatb elpupyng/
knowe that they Wall dye: but they that be
deed / nnowe chekere ere ther
ent moe Foꝛ their memoꝛiallis foꝛgotten /
fo b ther be nether loued / hated ner enuped:
netherhauethep enpmoze parte in d word /
in all chat is done onder p Sonne, Gothou
thy wape then / eate thy bied wrth tope / and
derncke thy wyne wyth gladneſſe / fo2 thy
woꝛckes pleate God. “Let be garmetes be
aware whpte/ alee chybead watnone opt, cla
ment ste thy felfe tolpuefopéutty wich thy and fiche
wyle whom thou loueſt / all the dayes Of thy but honey e
Ipte/which is but bapne/ 5 Godhath geuen mmerie ara ⸗
che onder the Sonne /all the dapes of thy ba bed.
mite for that is thy pozcion in this lpte / or all
thy laboure and trauayle that thou takeſt
vnderthe Donne. whatloeuer thou taßeſt
in hande to do / that do with all thy power:
foz amige the derd / where as thou goeſt vn
toſthere is nether woꝛcke / councel / now
ledge ner wyldome.
Sog turnedme onto other thynges vn ·
der the Dorne / and Jlawe chat in runyng /
tthelpeth not to be lwytt: in battayli / it bets
peth not to be ſtronge: to kedynge / ithelpech
hot to be wrletorxches / it helpech not t be
5 Bh. ij. ſuttell


The boke


ſuttell: to be had n fauoure / it helpeth not to
pe connynge: but that all ipeth in tyme and
koꝛtune. Foꝛa man knowech not hys cymes
but lyke as the che are taken wrth the an⸗
gle / and as the byꝛdes are catched worth the
thave:€uento are men take in che perlous
trme / when it commeth openly vpon them.
2 Chis wyldome haue I tene alfo vnderthe
Sonne / and me thought it a greate h;
‘There was a itle citie / and a feweme wi
init: lo there came a greate ynge and befe=
edit / a made greate bulwarckes agarnſt
t. And tn the cytie there was founde a pooze
man(buthe was wle) which wyrh bys wyl⸗
dome delpuered the cytye: vet was there no
body / that had eny relpecte onto loch a ſym·
ple man. Chen lapde : wyldome is better
ftrengty.Qeuertheles / a lymple mans
pldome is delpited / andhis woꝛdes are not
herde. L wyle mas councell that is folomed
in kylence / is karre aboue the crpenge of a
a een
andere · then harnelſe: but one vnthꝛ vlt alone
‘GOI deſtropeth moch good,
CCbedpffernunce betwprta fole and a wyſe man.
Fortunate and happre is that reaulme which hath a
wyple peynce.
Che. x. Chapter.
J ed fives p coruppe fwete opnt-


ment and make it to ftynche / are
LJ glomtbynge moze wozth chen the


incypall Cprete be
not negligẽt chen


on bores a pꝛinces goinge vp their Fete
$Pemtsr000apirwere eruaumtes.* Butve > dragech
*" bp a prt / call fall therin him feige: a whofe
bzeaketh downe § hedge / a lerpẽt Mall byte
e
che dibeweth w e

burethertott. N


When an pzon is blont / and the popnt not
harpened/tt mutt be whettagarne / a that
wich mpghe: Euen lo doth wyrdome folowe
then ate at Congas wines

out 3
Che wordes outa tiple més mouth ——
ae
b 3 nnenge ok his talkynge
is koolichnes and alt wo de of big mouth


Chap. x. c.


is great madnile 2 foole is co full o t woꝛd /
that a man can not tell what ende he weit
make: who well then warne bpm to make a
canclulꝑõ: he laboute ofthe toolt hh ig gre ·
udus onto the / whple ther knowe not how
to go in to the cxtie.
obe vnto the O chou realme a lande) D
whole kynge is buta chylde / a whole pꝛn⸗
ces ate earip at theix banckettes. But well
is the. O thou realme and lande whole king
is come ol nobles/ and whole prynces cate
in due feafon/ fo? ftrcngth and net foꝛ luſt.
Choꝛom douthfulncſſe ) balckt falldowne /
and thoꝛow pole handes it rapnety in at the
houle. Meate maketh men to laugh / a wine
maketh chemmerp: bnt vnto money are all
thrnges obedient. wich the kyng no euell in
thythought / and ſpeake no hurtẽ of $ ryche
in thy pꝛeuꝝchambꝛe:foꝛ a byꝛde of theapꝛe
hall betrape thy vopce / and with her ketheis
wall the bewape thywones.
C Hychelle ought to be dice ribute vnto the neady.
Che. xi. Chapter.
Ende v thy vrtaples ouer the wa⸗
erg / z lo walt thou kynde the alter a h
many peareg. Seue it awape a- dittribute hy
monde fener o erght tor thou Scene n
knoweck not what mpfery Mall come vpon pon wich
carth. Ihe 5 cloudes are kuli / they poure regardpngone
but rarne spon the earth. And when the tre # uot another,
fatieth whether it be to warde the South oz aur
Hoꝛthſin what place Cocuer it fall) there it cerien gantz
Apeth. He that regardeth the wynde / Mall not fo; an vncerie,
lowe:andhe 5 hath refpecte onto p cloudes /
Mallnot reape. Mow ipke as thou knoweſt cy Chet
not che tape of the twynde ner bot § bones Shr mnie
are Eplled ina mothers wombe : Cue lo thou ought iverale,
knoweſt not the woꝛcktg of God /tehycbisiptogeue. —
the woꝛckemaſter ok all.
Ceale not thou therfoze with thy handes c
to lowe thy ſede / whether it be in che moz⸗
nynge oꝛ in the euenynge: foꝛ thon knowelt
not whether this oz that hall pꝛolpere / and
pl they both take / it is the better. Che lyght
is lwete / ard a plealaunt chnge is it Foz the
pes to loke vpon the Dunne. Ita man lxue
man peares and be glad in them all/ let him
remembꝛe the Daves of darcknelle whych
ſhall be many: a when they come / all thyngd
Mali be butvanpte. Be gisdthen (O thou D
Feuern ere routh / and let thyne herte
e merpin thy vonge da pes: tolo we ß wayes
okthene awneherte / a the luſt of thyne eyes:
but be thou ture / that God Hall bꝛynge the
in to iudgment foz allthete thynges,


. the
Seen en we to conſyder and re⸗


che rij capter.


Stehe preacher.


a witawape difplesture out of thine
hert / a remoue euell krõ thy boop:
fo2 chyldehode a youth is but ba-

Anpte. uemembze top makerin typ
pout / oꝛ euer the dayes ol aduerlitie come /
€0z the peares dꝛawe npe/ when thou Malt
lape:q haue no plealure in them befoze the
lunnẽ / the lygtt / the moone and ſtarres be
darckened / and o the cloudes turne agapne
alter the rayne: when the kepers of the houle
chall tremble (a when the fronge men chall
botwe them ſelues: when the mpllers ſtande
ſtyll / becauſe they be fo kewe / a when plight
of the wyndowes call ware dymme: when
the doꝛes in the ſtretes ſhalbe chutt / a when
che vopte ofthe mplier walbe layed downe:
when men hall rte vp at the vopce ol the
byꝛde / and when all the daughters of muliße
Walbe bꝛought lowe: when men Hall keare
inhye places / and be aftaped in the ſtretes:
when the Almonde tree thaibe delpyled / the
greſhopper boꝛne out / and when greate po⸗
uerte thail bꝛeake in: when man goeth to his
longe home / and che mourners go aboute p
ftret(.D2 euer p lyluer lace be takẽ awaye/
02 f golden bande be bꝛokẽ: Dz the pot be


pry, et i 77 U.
broßenat the well a the whele bpon checr⸗ —
terne. Oꝛ dul be turned agapne vnto carth
froin whence it came / oz the ſpꝛete returne
vnto Gd / whych gaue it. Allis but banpte
llaith p Preacher ſall is but plapne banite.

Che fame Pꝛeacher was not wyſe alone /
but taught p people hnowiedge ailoche ga ·
ue good hede fought out the ground Andlet 5
forth many parables His düigence was to
fyndeout acceptable wozdes rpabetcriptite
re / and the woꝛdes of teneth, Foz the wozdes
ok the wyle are like pꝛyckes and napies that
‘Joo thoꝛom / wherwyth men are ke pte toge
ther:foz they are geuẽ of one hepherde ones
EF. Cherkoꝛebe warre my fonne)that aboue
thele thou make the not many and innume⸗
table boke / noz take dpuerle doctrynes in
hande / to weerp thy boop wilhall.

Let vs heare the cſclulxon ofal thinges:
Feare God and kepehrs czmaundemẽtes /

Foꝛ that toucheth all men: Foꝛ God

wall tudge all wozckes and
fecrece thynges / ht.
ther thepbe good
oz euell.


¶ The ende of theboke of the Pꝛra⸗
ther / other wyle talled
Ettleſiaſtes.


Salomons


Omeintomp garden D mp litter!
my Spoule:'s haue gathered my
Wire with mylpyc. J wyll eate


Icke,
0 Hils


Depnche abe merp /
O pe beloued. 5


The vovce af the hm oh.

As A way adepe / myhert wakrnge 3
bearoe the vokce ot my beloued / when be
unoched. 3

Oh ts the ciao,

Open tome (lapde he) O my ſyſter mx
doue inv doue, mp beripnge: toꝛ my heade ts
ul of dewe / and the lockes ormyhearre ate
tuu ot che nxght dioppes.

i che vopce ot he fpoutere.

FLbaue put of my cote / how can Z do it on
agapne: 3 haue wached my fete / how tall
Lieſe ne:

Che voyce ötöchurthtpcabing org.

But when my loue put in hit hand at the
pole, mp herte was moued towarde bpm: fo
tpat I u ode vp to ope vnto my beloued. My
andes dopped with Mrzre / a the Myrre
tanne downe my tingers vponthe lock. He ·
uerthelelle when J had opened vnto my be⸗
loued, he was departed andgone bps wape.

How lpke as atoꝛe tyme when he fpake/
my herte coude not ionger rekrayne:Euen fo
now J fought hym / büt J coude not fynde
him: q cryed bp hm / neuerthelede he gaue
me no ant were.

Che Chuccise comp epnedls ol her
perfecuters

So the watchmen that wente about the
eitie founde me / lmote me /a wounded me:
Yecthepthat kepte the walleg / tone awape
me gaiment frome,

Ci he (pon kielpea tess coher copay;

J charge pouthrrfoze; O ye daughters of
Jeruſalem pe ve tynde my beloued / that pe
tellhymhow that J am lyck fo loue.

ht vover ofthe Sypnagoge.

Who is thy loue aboue other louers / O
thou kapꝛeſt amonge wemen· Dz what can
thy loue do / moze then other louers / p thou
shatgce os 6

Oihe Chnzchr awer ame or .

As foꝛmyloue / he is whpte and redde co⸗
loured / a ſyngular perfonne amonge many
Ghoutandes:bis heade is the moſt tine golde /
ace okhis eren un e e
asthe euenynge: His epes are as the eyes o
doues bp the water bꝛoßes wachen d mylk /
and temarnpnge in a plenteous place: ys

D thehes are ipkea garden beady where in the
Apotecaries plate almaner oklwete thing’:
His lyppcs dꝛoppe as the floures ot ? moſt


principal Deze his hard are ful ok gone
rpnges a precious ſtones. His bodpis as the
pute ruerp / decte ouer wich Saphtres: is
legges are asthe pplers ol Marbell let vps
lokettes of golde: His face is as Libanus/
and as the bewtpe dt the Cedꝛe trees: ys
thꝛote is fete / pee he is altogeter louelx.
Soche one is my loue / O ye daughters ot
Jerulalem /ſoche one is myioue.

V Che bopce af the Synagoge fpeakinge

tothe Cimeche,

Whither is th loue gone then (O thou

Depot tat ema cheopm ate:
Che. vj. Chapter.
6 2 ce of the Churche.
eis gone downe into hisgar⸗
onto the Cwete (mellyng bed⸗
eg that he map retrech bint lelfe
lin the garden 8 gather flaures.
My loueismpne/and J am his / which fe L
deth amonge the irres. :
Ohi to the Ghurche.

Chou art pleafaunt (O my loue) euen as
loue lpneſſe it ſeit / thou art fapze as qeruſa⸗
lem / glonous as an armpe ołmen / Wiheit
banners. (Curne awape thyne epes kro me /
koz ther make me to pꝛoude. Thy bea
lockes are lyke a flocke ok goates vpon
mount ot Salad. Ch tet are Ipke a flock B
ol chepe that be clxpped / which go out ok the
waſhynge place: where euerp one beareth
two ting and not one vnkrutetull amge
granatebepoes tba ac Pty deo
gtanate, et
in. Chere are thꝛe ſcoꝛe Duenes /foure tcoꝛe
concubines) ¢ponge wemen without nom ·
ze, But one is my doue / my derlinge. She
is the onely belourd ofher mother / and peare ©
vnto her that bare her. Whenthe dau
fawe her / they lade / e was blelled: ee the
Duenes g concubrnes pꝛaptedher.

che bopce of the Sruggege.
What is the this / that pepeth out as the
e
funne/glozious as an arme of m
their baners.
hit tothe Synagoge.
Z wente downe into the notte garden / to
far e
ive the:
eee 2
Che vopce of the Spnagoge.. .

Chen the charettes of the Prince of m
people made me lodenlpatraped.

¶ che bopce of the Churche calipnge

agayne the Srnagege. :

Tune agarne / tume egarne / O theit
Sulamite ture aga ne / ture rgaxne. S
we may loke vpon the. 5 (che


D


Ballet.


c Chapter,

ch Deng es.

Hat pleacure haue pe moꝛe in the
Dulamite | than when che daun;


fet amonge emen of warre:
8 a co fac Churche.
Dhow pieatauntare thy treadynges v
thy chues / chou pices daughter⸗Thythiges
ate Ipke a fapꝛe iewel / which is wzought be
acönpng worke mater⸗Thp nauellig like a
roũd goblet / which is neuer without deinke:
Chr wombe is iphean hepe of wheate Lett
aboute with iplles: hy two betes are like
twotwynnes of poũge roes Chyneckisas
Bit were a tower ok yuery-thpne eres are irke
the water poles. in Helebon / beĩyde d pozte
ok Bathzabbim thy nole is like che tower oF
Libanus/ which loketh toward Damalcus:
Chat head that ſtandeth vpon the is iphe
Carmel: the hearre ck thy heade is lyke the
Sipnges purple folden vp in plates,
D how fapꝛe ¢ louelp art thou / my dear⸗
lunge / in plealures: hy ature is ine a
date tree / and thy breftes irke the grapes.
C vite peak gige of tne Trott.
Ilapde: J well clemme bp into the date
tree/andtakie holde of his bꝛaunches.
Tor rn cate Heute.
Cypbꝛeſtes alſo halbe as the vpue gra⸗
pes / the lmell of typnotteels Iphe the rell
okapples f thythzote Ike the bette wyne.
Chis halbe pure ¢ cleave foi mp loue hys
lippes and teth halt haue their plealure.
Chere wyllg tume me onto my loue / z he
wall turne hym vnto me. a
GEE ousehelprakiag to Cozi,
O come on my loue / jet bs go forth into
Daheledde / and tase dure loaginge in thebyl-
isges. In the momeng wyll we tple bptp⸗
meg andgo le the bpneparde: pit be tyz0ge
koꝛth / vk the grapes be growne / a yl the põ·
8 be thot out. There wyl J geue the
im bzettes: there Wall the APandzagozas
geue their fnell belpde oure does: there /
ny loue / haue J kepte onto the all maner ot
krutes / both nẽ w and olde.
Che. vun .


che (peanprige


olfended / f Itoke the / and bꝛought the into
my mothers houle: p thou myghteſt teache
me / and that J might geue the dʒinke of tpt.
ced wyne ¢ of the lwẽte fappe or my pom⸗
granateg. Bis left hand pet vrder my head
and his rraht emb; me.

F boxce okays,


What! the
wyldernes / and leaneth vpon her loue:
Ihe vopte of 5 cpoute vetor 6 {pow

Jamthe camethat waked the vpamöge 8
the apple trees where thy mother bare the /
where thy mother bꝛought the in to d world.

GcbeChurche (peagpiawe rod wai,

O letme as a leale vpon thrne hert /
as a leale vpon thynearme:fozioucis migh=
te as the death / and gelouty as the hell. Per
coaleg are ol tpꝛe / anda very flamme of the
Londe:ſo that man waters are not able to
quẽche loue / nether maxe ß ſreames dzo ne
it.Yee ꝑta ma wolde geue all the good orbis ©
houle to; loue he ſulde countẽ it nothinge,

capadhe:


5 n


When dure leis toe oure pounge tts
ſter whole bꝛeſtes are not yet growne / what
ſhall we oh.


Cad : 6 21 4

YE the bea wall / we wall buydde a tyluer
bolwercke ther bpon : pe the be a Wewer we
ſhail fatten her with b
pe cgurch eu rreit eg Lis

Ik Abe a wall / a my bz ihe towzes /
when am J ag one that hath kounde faucure
in his lyght.
tes magn, Plus i.

Salomo had parde a Da-
mon (this vyneparde delyucredbe onto the
kepers: that cucrp one fozthe frute cheror
Qhulve ert him a thouland peces ot txluer.

u name nt Kerk,

But my bynepard/ O Salomon / geueth
the a thouland / and two hundzeth to che hee
pers ok the frute. Thou that dwellelt in the
Jardeng / O let me heave typ vopce / that mx
companyons mape herkenko the lame.
Cut cr oy yale na h auf,

O get ihe awaxe / mx loue as a roc ng

a hert vnto the lwete
ellenge meun⸗
taynes,


The ende of the


allet of Ballettes ol Salomon /
5 calledin Latyne
Canticum Canticozunt,


LKerlut},


— < e V foes. N a Saha e


Jy 2 volle rate Syke “bay ser 4 —
ee ae:


E — 10. bee, 4225
—— ae 9
eo


1 *


The Maphet
Englylh.


Abacuc.
Sophbne


Irrulalem x. Juda, MlClay,


CTheboke of the
pꝛophete Eſay.


ed detieth that the anger of God shall come
pring ie totais ok their (pnnes,


(che tet chapter.


he pro} olelay the
tha past ee


$
chem. Shoughprhode but poute hade pet
turne I myne epes krom vou. And though pe Sach vnde
maße manp pꝛapers / pet heare J nothyng at Pat. br ban
all/*foz boute bande are full ofbloune, — EeDtes
{Bath pou / make vou cleane / put awaxe
voure eueli thoughtes out ol my ſyght / ceale
from dopnge ok euell and violence. Lerne to
do ryght / applpe poure felues to equyte / de⸗
lxuet the oppzetien / helpe the katherlelle to
ad ryght / let ? wydowes complapnte come
koꝛẽ pou. Now go tollapeth the Loꝛde we
wyll tale together. Js itnot fo? Though


; voure lvnnes be as reãd as Icarlet / wal they


ſcham / Aha z / and Jchezeßtah
Sls ynges of are D


fen O earth for aketh:


m the cu. =
thant es ease |


U
guoin the. 8. J hauc non ched a brought bp chrldꝛen / and groweth


atthe Lto0y they are fall awayelro me. in ore knoweth
ce a c un ür bis matters tall; but l
toijesFretd. Tell Bowerh nothynge / my people hath no
Bonderiianving Alas fo: this Cyntull people /
bother whbch ave experte in blalphempes / a kro.
tuple called a; ward ceneracion vnnaturall cyploze They
tah). . haue foziakenthe L oꝛde / they baue pꝛouo⸗


. From the is beryheup. From the fole ofp kote vnto ß
foulese. That head / chere is no whole parte in all youre
Linth: whole bodp:but all are woundes botches / fo7¢8 &
Fae tie Exppes which cannether be helped bounde
Hogoodnes, bp, molikxed / ner ealed with eng opntment,

C, Youre aude lpeth waſte / voure cyties are
ee Chat iu / bꝛent vp / xoure enempes deuoure poure lad
cette people, and pe rite ft be kapne to ſtande / and loke vpõ
Smthe Plat. it: and it is delolate / as it were with enemies
n tnabaticll. Mozeouer⸗ the daughter ol
za che mae Dis leck alone enge in a binerard
ter of the fert Irn 8 würchoufe
ptureis-fome belegedcptic. And ercepte p Lon of Hottes
veto cat and had lett bs & kewalpue we ſhuwe haue bene
raked jernes 08 SOODOMIG/AND Ipke bnito Gomorra,
bythe name of ee ve che woꝛde of ß Lozd ve tyꝛauntes
baude a ok S obomtaand herhen vnto the lee of
5 8505 eople of Gomozta.
Menon be ws jou people of rt. he
se Olle


tyme of watre/ Iphea rpgbeu


not be whpter then (howe 2 And though they
were like purple thal they not be like white
wolle: J it not fo? It ve beloupng and obec
drent / ve tall entope the bet chynge that
in the lande. But pe pe be obſtinate
Frebellpous / ve chalbe deuoured wyth the
lwerde:koz thus the Loꝛde hath pꝛompled wW
his awne mouth. §
Howhappeneth it then that d ryahtuoug gecco eine
cptie(whych was kull of equpte ) is be come tiuccmton;ct
bnfapth full as an whoꝛe:rightuoulnd dwelt W 4 5
init/butnow murthut. 2 chp Soplueris Emer ee
turned to role / and thy wyne mixte w wa ue ihe henentp
ter. Chy pꝛynces are traptours and compa⸗ warde of Son⸗
npons or cheues. Tperloue gpltesaltoge- enen
ther ard Foloww rewardes. As ko the father bert fur yo
les they belpebim not tohrs ryghte / nether netoutneatanes
wyll they lett che wydowes cautes come be⸗ whych th enge
foze them. Cherkoꝛe tpeaßeth the Lozd God wir vird in
OF Hokesh myghtx one of Ilrael:Ah J mutt Ee
kalt me ol myne enempes / and a beige me Konten.
ppon them. And thertoze Hall J lare nphäd moche moe
vpon the / and burne out thy dꝛolle krom the now / be pe luer.
kyneſt and pureſt / and put oute all the lead /
and fet thy 1 — agapne asthep were font-
tyme / and thy Denatourg as they were from
the begynnynge. Chen ſhalt thou be called p
dus cptpe / the karchtull ertre. But
Sion ſhalbe redemed with egupte / and her
captyuite with ryghtuouſneſle. soz the tral
Greffours and bngodly / and loch as are be
come vnkapthkull bntothe 1o70/ muſt alto⸗
gether be vtterly deſtroped.
And excepte pe be achamedok 5 oke trees
wherin pe haue ſo delpted / and ol the gare
dẽs that pe haue cholen: pe balbe as an one
whole leaues are fallen awape a as a garde
thathath no mopſtnelle. Ind as koꝛ the glo·
ry of thete thynges / it Halbe turned to deye
krawe / and he that made themto a parke.
And they hall both butne together / lothat
noman Walbe able to quench them.


Ot the cõmynge an dee th of Chi: and or the cate
ipnge of the esthen.


Chapter,
che. ij. Chapter 20 S


Fecutale/eFuna. The Prophecy


our thisis the woꝛde ß was
pened onto Elayẽ the fonne of A+
th 05 / vpon Juda a Jerulalem. It
bp which 19 co. wyll be allo**in pꝛocele oftymes
55 0 That che heul where the houle ok the Loꝛde
ach de cb. 16 buploeD/ Mall be the chefe amonge piles
mpage’s from and exaltedaboue all iptie billes. And allche
théce vnto the Heathen thal pꝛeace vnto him / athe multp⸗
dens oF eptth. cude oF people all go pntohim / peakynge
srrbid.c, mathus one to another-op lett pa gokothe hell
Jere. ij d. and Or the Lorde / z to § houle of the God ol Ja.
iu mang other cob:that he mape chewe vs his waye a that
fs we mare walcke in his pathes. Foz  *lawe
bite cut 56d shall come out of Spton/a the wosdeat God
the Lave onetp 00 eld mae gent —.— amoge
fo; the comaie the eathen / and Mall retoꝛme the mul
hes pooch
1 ney etpeart / to maße /tpctes a
Berroa pain, terak Kro 6 tyme Forth thal ot one people
ges 3 thicket, Ipkt vp weape agapnt another / nether hall
e Sparc ee bie
e that g crpe(D houle of Jacob) vp /
tor whele one Walcke liche lrak of tye Kode. Butthou
tehament, art lcatred abzode wych thy people l O houle
sre deher Gee pape 25 beponde hee
all weake therg / whether it be in Sozcerers (thd pe
6k. Potehereß Jaueas the Slices o2 in calkers Of
greatinnigcens Hee de bess babes . ——
cpe of che that lone as poure lande was kull of lpluer
dwell in p citie golde / andno ende ol poure trealure:loloone
or God'thatis/ ag poure land was full of ſtröge hoꝛſes a no
be Ch
6 gene ende OF pourecharettes Ammedläkie was ie
of thekapth lab wich e l 8 1 f of tere ae
swbpeh thpnce HAD{/ which ve youre aue facion
beth tt uot p, poure kyngers haue made There uneleth p
yer ei Heir nde dog n were kö
tells robzie thou cai not bꝛinge hima wape Ero thẽce.
cbtencion ? C And therkoze get the Coone in to lome rock /
rife, Bat T hydethe in the groũde krõ § kyght oc ß kear⸗
abs iber sho kultige dg eo be glory oF bis Magetkie:
net ocrupactös Which calteth Downe the high iokes OF pꝛe⸗
and ‘onfantye en 1 5850 0 * brpngety ie Vi
craftes / wher · pzyde of man / a he only hal exaltedin
featenoronclp Dave .ffoz the>* dave of the Loꝛde of Hoſtes
the felues but Hall Go ouccall papoe g prelmpepon/ bps
e eee
them: whpd J 2
ehe br dale De trees oF Libanus / and upon all the ones
„ Mentessfpth
fpcless (atwes*
Dorn bern Accapdyng to the councel of S. Waul whpch Cayth.Let
itn that tole Geleno moare/but let him rather laboure i his hades
fome good thing / d he miape haue to geuebnto him) neadeth. Eph. ie
e eg
Tes fpgureaof Lit. Bela .. Bulk who maye ddr che Saye of
bps commpng.sc. ‘
ce Cedar trees are very byghe trees in Libanus are thepipgher
ede kde ner neee e
F gt arog ma splat ine


places.


and vpõ all ſtronge walles vpon all hippes
ok the lee / and vpon euery thinge that is gio⸗
rioug and pleacaunt to lone vpon.

And it wall bꝛynge downe the pꝛyde ol
man / laxe mang prefumiptuoutnede full
lowe / and the Loꝛde ſhall only haue the vic ·
toꝛp in that daye But the Idols Hall vtter⸗
ipbe roted out. Men chall crepe in eo holes
ok ſtone / and into caues ofthe earth from
the lyght of the kearkull iudge / and trom the
gloꝛp of his mageſty: what tyme as he Hail
make him vp to cake the earth. Chen then /
fhall ma cat awape his goddes of lyluer and
golde which he neuertheles had made to ho-
noure che) vnto Moles and Backes :that he
mapes better crepe into the caues e rocket ⸗
and into the cliffes ok hard ſtones From the
{pat of the tearkul iudge a krõ the glozx ot
his Mageſtr.

e prophecieth that at the commpng of Chꝛid all
an 15 power Hall be put — —

Che. ii. Ch


e anom anger op what dach he
ele euen to thal thesLovde of
Poles take awape fromzerutalẽ
ud, all pottellions ¢ power all eat and
důncke / the captapne a the foudpare/ p iud⸗
ge a the pꝛophete the wyle a the aged man
the wozthipfull of kytie peare olde / a the bos
noable:the Senatours/ and men of vnder⸗
Ganding:the matters of crattes a ozatours,
And A Hall geue vou chyldꝛen to be poure
pꝛynces(lapeth the Loꝛdſa babes hall haue
the rule of pou. One ſhall euer be doyng vio⸗
lence and wꝛonge to another. Che bopẽ halt
pꝛelume agaynſt the eder andthe bple pers
lone agapnſt 9 honozable. Ye one call take
a frende of his awne kynred by the bolome /
anbtape:s*thoubat clotypng thou pale Ve « cya 4;
ourehead/ fo2 thoumapelt kepe bs krö chys ou arte tate
kall and parell. ter apparreue
Chen chall he ſweare and Cave: can not: rrcher chen
elpe vou. Mozeouer / there is nether meate we delve rn
er clotypnge in mphoute/ make menoru. mg
ler ok the people. Foz Jerulalem and Juda rr. Alle curles
muſt decape / becaule that both their wozd which there
e councels are agarnſt the Londe / ther pro: pbete bere


tee
ty Woesk


woke the pꝛelence of bys mageſtyvnto an- fugit nthe
ger. Che chaunginge oktherrcountenannce searuecyonst
bewꝛapeth the/ veẽ they declare their awne yerutalems
lvnnes them lelues as the Sodomites / and

hyde them not. Vo be onto their foules / koꝛ

they halbe heuely rewarded. Chen chal they

lape: O happie are the godly / foz they mave

entope the krutes ok their ſtudies. But wobe

to the vngodlya vnrxghtuous fo chey wal ·

he rewarded after their woꝛckes. O my peo⸗
ple/*rpbaudes oppzede the / z wemen haue ur dem rete


rule ofthe. 3 ae


“ely the fone


Jerulalem.


e nateth oe. O mur people/thpleadersdeceauethe/ e
fouotoatnes offreade out the wap oF thy koteſteppes. Che
peeftes ¢ pele L. opp ig herẽ to comen oF the matter / a ſtan⸗
tes, S220 dech to geue judgment wet the people
See e che Lopbe fall come foythto teafon tpt)
farherledlermd tye Denatourg ¢ pꝛynces ofhis people / and
all that are de / hall lape thus vnto them: It is pe that haue
aprate OF tO. burnt vp rap bpneparde che robbery oF the


soumfa:th of 5

ibe dis ooze is in poure houle. Wherfore do pe op ·
Saen pelle my people / and matte the faces ok the
poarilees then innocentes thus wall the Sud of Holes re ·
Suede, Urte them.


. 5
Moꝛcouer thus lapeth ? Lorde: einge
Sang ile 8 daughters ol Sid are be come fo pꝛoude /
tobe ſpiritual: and come in with ſtretchedout neckes / and
Judd calle? with bapne wanton eyes: leynge they come
och an they in krgpppnge Conpcelp with their kete⸗Kher⸗
Fequece theie foze hail che Lozde* Mane theheades ok g
righte (a8 D daughters of Sion / a make their bewtpe
thepeallit) bare in § bape. In that dape Mall the Loꝛde
mone Demet tat A ape p gor toulnes okcheirapparell /
855 et wor, Klpanges /chepnes partlettes and colares“
deo God: and bzacelettꝭ a hooueg / ö gpodly floured wyde
donot o eme g bꝛoderd layment bꝛulches ¢ headbandẽg /
forks t0 in eynges and gariandes/holydape clothes a
Henkels bales cvelues apps, Glades gtmockt/
Opel -p is: bonettes and taches.
fopeppiana And in ſteade or good{meh there ralbe
euch Gate Co ſtynck amonge them. And koꝛ their gyꝛdles
thet tberlamt there halbe lowle bandes Andkozwelllett
Haut bank Hearre here chalbe batonetic In theabe of a
r mar- ſtomacher /a fach cloth / ¢ fo their bewty
undpie is wytherpdnelke a lonneburnyng. Their houl⸗
ther/ that rene bandes and their myghtye men chan perych
Beetp them | wich the werde inbatell.
‘Whether ther be chpldsé chꝛiltentd / of mariages made / o men come
bo the table of the Londe : whet her the kyck be vplpted o the deed bu⸗
pedsther is euer ſome what vequyred. Furt her moare thep are not
dür ly actuled to be couetouſe / but allo to be wemen / that is / clemy⸗
Rates womAlp:becante Hep nioaſt Eplehely ¢ pdelp cpende ¢ wake h /
wich thepaaue ſtrapen th (uggeling/piolkce/ ¢ mac nanghtic Facios,
ea To ſhaue the header of wemen is to make the confounded and
eee
i rt ny) 70
Halt ake the: Wenger Eston by which vnde rſtande⸗ the wemk
of zur pe) confounded z athamed / b:pug thé to ertreme aduerſptie g
pouertpe# even to nought. Jolephus maketh eae Jere
lalem which was the chefe cpiie therof/was ones fo: ed that a
cri womã ot thecptic ate her atone chpld. Allbe it / ſome vnderſtand
ad here allo by p daugiviers of Sr / che townes / vpllages / ¢ caſtelles
‘af fon: as it dothe in Deade or ten Cpguifyein the Scripturts.
Che. iii. Chapter.
ont of men by. wem delpye to haue one ma.
styme ſhala their gate mourne
a complapne / ethey hall (ptt as
folate folck bps 5 carth. Chen
li feug wpues tate holde of one


des cSplapue-
dert ule not o ·


dea s call pee mat
ade wpth the and cler
Doel may be €
1
grisrs of fen eal te


OkElay.


2.
U.
wall tpꝛinge therol. Chen Matt the remnaũt in the Sales
in Sion z the renmaumt at Jeruſalem be was indgemee
calledholg:namelp all loch a3 ave wzpttena · kran, fe
mongethe lpupng at Jerulalem: what tyme: aycuep Gas
ag the Lode hail wach awape the defolacid tes haicte de⸗
okthe daughters of io / a pourge 5 bioude Ktoprdand ro
out Fro Zerulale w the wynde of histone z ma gone
bee. Hozebuervpö all cheowellynges of the Biber
hell ol Dion and vpon their whole congre⸗ watz mourne/
gacion / hall the Loꝛd pꝛouyde a cloude and pr the peopte
{moke bpdaye / andtyetoynpnge of a lam: Pe wat chem.
mnpnge Epze by night: ko all ther glozy chal⸗ b hen hot
be pielerued. And Jerulalé thall bea taber⸗ vn. weues eco
nacle toꝛ a Madowe becaule ołhete ind dape Ade meaning
tyme / a place and refuge where a man mape w. nenten
kepe him fog wether and rapne. Wee 1700
their haulbädes, but ther Hall come foche atharcenes of men p the?
fhal be (eat for euerp ſcueth woma one ma Soche a laughter Walther
Leip few me that remapnees 5 wemẽ chall be brought in io capttuitie.
tp thas Maunche vnderſtandr Lis,
2
I nue parde⸗ m eRe
. and ol tonnes esha eee


rg Dw well then /F well fpnge my
beloued krende a fonge of his vy
neparde. My beloued krende hach


Ja bpneparde in a very krutekull
plenteous grounde. This he hedged / chys he
walledrounde aboute / ¢ pläted it goodly
grapf. In d myddeſt of it buplded he a towꝛe /
and made a: wyne pzenetheum Andakter⸗ end
warde tohen beloked P ir chuüde bzenge him Dara hdetn 8.
grapes / it bꝛought foꝛth thoꝛnes. J che we quepnes my⸗
row now mp caule C ve Cptplens of Jeru⸗ marac of the
falem a whole Juda: Judge z pꝛape pou be: worde of od
tite mea mpbinepard. What moe could in he butch.
baue bene done kon it / that J haue not done:
Wherkoꝛe then hath it geuen thoꝛnes / where
Zloked to haue hadgrapes oF it?
Well Z Hail teil vou how7 will de with 3
my bineparde: J will take the behedge fr it / u By the
that it mape perych / a bꝛeake downe ß wall / hedge e waltts
thatit mape betroden hiderkote 2wrillape gate an
it watte/p tt Wall netherbe ewitteonog cut debe, wür
but beate thognes and bꝛeares. J wyll allo wich tbe people
kozbyd the cloudes / that they chall not rapne of God( wich
bpon t. Js fozthe brnepade ofthe Lon oem called or che
Holkesitisthe houte of Accel whole Ju- Tenge.
dahis fapze plantynge. Skthele he ioked Fo? pagen aboute z
equyte / but le there is wꝛoge:foꝛrightuoul⸗betended.
neſſe / lo / It is but myterp.
Vo be bnto pou 6 iopne one houte to ans ·
ther / a bꝛunge one lande lo nygh onto ance
ther tyll xe can get nomoꝛe grounde. P yn
pedtoell bpd the earth alone? Che Lose of c
Holtes rotndech me thus in mpne care:that
not many greater aà moꝛe goꝛgious houfes
befo watte) § noma chaldwell in che 2 and
ten akers of bynes thal geue but a Duarte)
and. xxx. buſhels of fede hall geue but thꝛe.
Vo be onto them that ryle vp eariy to
ble chem lelues in dꝛonckennies / and pet at
44 ij. nraht


Jerulalem.
nyght are moze luperklitous wyth wpne.
chole companpes ave harpes .
bzettes and pypes / and wyne. But they res
garde not the woꝛcke ot the Loꝛde / and con⸗
poze not the operacion of bis handes. Cher⸗

Dloze commeth my folk allo in captpuite / be⸗
caule they haue no vnderſtandynge. Cheir
Glozp cpalbe myrte wyth hunger / and their
Pspde Halbe marred kozthyꝛte. Cherkoze
gapeth hell / and openeth her mouth marue⸗
tous wyde: that pꝛrde / booſtynge and wyc⸗
dome / with loch as retople therin / mapedel⸗
cende in to it.

Chus tall man haue a fall / he halbe
brought iowe/¢ ö hygh lobes of the pꝛoude
layde downe. But the Loꝛde of hoſtes that
holy God: calbe exalted ¢ vntouched / when
he hall declare bys equpte and ryghtuoul⸗
nelle after this maner: Chen Mall p lambes
eate their apopnted koder / z thal fede plen⸗
teoullp inthe moũtaynes. udo be vnto vayne
perlones / chat dꝛa we wyckednes vnto the /
us it were with a code: a lynne / as it were
Wa cart rope. Which vle to lpeane an thrs
maner:let him make haſte now / and go koz
with bys woꝛcke that we maye ſe it. Lett
councell ot the hol one ot {traci come / and
dꝛawe nye / that we maye ino we it

Go be vnto them that call eue good / a
good euell: which make darcknelle pght /a
ipaht darcknelle / that make lower lwete /
and lwete lower. Wo be vnto them that are
wyſe in their atone lyght / and thyncke them


The


lelues to haue vnderſtandynge. ioo be vnto en


them / that are connynge men to fuppe oute
wypne and experte to lett vp donchennede,
Chele geue lentence wyth the ongodlp fo
e 1825 condempne the tut caule ol


Prophecy


Their arowes are Mhatpe / and their botves
bent. Their bozle holes are lpke flynt / and
their cartwheles like a ſtoꝛmp winde. Cheir
ckye is as it were ol a lyon / and the roarpng
of thé lyke lyons whelpes. They Mall roaze/
and hantch vp the pꝛaxe / and no ma Mali re.
couer it oꝛ get it from the. In that daxe they
Qalbe fo tearce vpon them, as the ſee. And
ve we loke vnto the lande / beholde it halbe
all darckneſſe and loꝛowe. It we lobe to hea⸗
uch: beholde / it halbe darck wrth carefull
delperacvon.


CEtay Cave he plore ofthe nen and was fent to
prophecpethe delolacpon of Jurpe.
¶ Che. vj. Chapter,


H che lame peare that Rynge D-¥
sal oped J lawe a“ the Loide (pt-ax Chats! ,
ing bpd anbygh ¢ glozious feate, he
bis trapne rplica § palace Krb pyre n
abouc flakes the Deraphins / wherok cucry full weilcrpoe
one had ſyr wynges. woth twapne ech co- undeitin there
ueredhys face ſwyth twapne his fete / and wordus Boche
wuichtwapne bro he fipe. Chey cryed alto ech Sa unte
one to other on tis maner: holpholy holx / is carve. bys gio:
S Loz of Hoſtes. Che whole wand is fuli of r c30hu. ie
bes glory. Yeethe geaſtes and dozechehes B
Moued at their cryenge / andthe houle was ve Che ane
full oftmoke, Then J tayde: Owols me. fleht,
F02 Fas atonphyed that J whych ama dete vn
man of vncleane lyppes / and divell amonge ges ‘although
people that bath vncleane lippes alfo)thuid Sbeyare tndce
te tbe Lipng andjLozde of Hotes wich ine bodega,
Chenfletwe one of che Soeraphiins bnto cau iba Oy
me / haurnge a hote cole in his ane wech the fat ce
hehad taken from the aulter with the ton: we una,
ges / and touched my mouth / and lapde: lo / :
chrs hath thouchedthrmouth / and thine vn⸗ teteanget ere
tightuouſnes is taken awape / andthy lynne ure and beide


koꝛgeuen. Atter this 3 herde the bopce ol the d ein.


wen wptbbvae Wall not one of chem put of the gyꝛdle from
we it agapnz: his lopnes /ner lowle their lache oF bis ſbue


Lorde takipnge aduptement on ches man: rn e n
home thail J lende / — — oure euthue
mellaunger: Chen J layde:here am / lende
hne. am Cohe larde: go / and tell thys people:

ve ſballheare in dede / but ye thall not br ia
deritde/ pe thall planelp te, a noc perceaue, Berg.
Harden the harte of thts people / Hoppe their Luc. b b.
eares / e chut their eyes / that thep fe not wyth Actu. cri c.
cheir eres heare not wyth their cares / an- Jenn 5
derſtande not with theirhertes / and couerte noms.
ae 4 4 2

Then ſpake J: L oꝛde how longe! he an⸗

Cwered:ontpll the cptyes be vtterip wythout
tngabptours/andthe houles wpthout men /
tpl the lande be allo detolate / a lxe vnbuyl·
ded. For the Lozde Hall take the men tar⸗
teawape/ lo that the lande chal lye waſte.
Heuertheles che tenthe parte call remay⸗
ne therin / fo? it (halt conuerte and apr


Ahaz,


«


Obet tees binge Forth their krutes/ lo walt
che hol v lede haue krue.


Che Speians moue battell sgapuck Jerusalem.
Hee ipaltbearea chelde.


Che. vij. Chapter.


f J bappened in the tyme ol Ahaz
4 che lonne of Joatham / wypch was
aan che lonne of Datab pnge of Fu-
Iararrvih. a A dazthat“ Mazin the kyng oe Birta“
and Shakey the tonne ot Romeſiah / Beng
ol Iltael: went vp toward Jerulslemto be⸗
lege it / but wanne itnot. How when the
houte of Sauid (that is Aha z) berde woꝛde
therok / that Sia and Ephzaim were con.
kederate togetherthisherte quaked pee and
the hertes alto of his people lpke as a tre in
the felve that is moucd with the wynde.
Chen lapde God vnto Elapgo mete has
(thou and tip tonne Spear Jatub) at § head
ol the ouer pole / inthe kote path by the ful-
lers grounde / and tape bntobpm take hede
both lelte and be dipl put keare not nether
be kayntharted / to thele two tales: that 18.
£02 thete two kmonenge kpꝛe bꝛandes the
wzath and furtoutnes of Na zin the Sivian
and Nomelies Conne:becaufe that the krnge
of Siria Ephzaim a Romeltes tonne haue
wickcblpconcpired agarnſt the / caring we
wyll Goo downe into Juda ſvexe them and
bꝛynge them vnder vs / and let a kyngethere /
euen the Conne of Cabeel For tus lapeth >
Loꝛde Gootherto /Ft chall not fo goo koꝛth /
nether come fo ta patie : fo2 the head cptpe ot
the Siriangis Damafcus but the head ol
Damafcus is Razin. Ind after fue a thꝛe⸗
fcoze peare/ Halle ph:atm be nomoꝛe a peo⸗
ple. Ind the chele extie ol Ephzaim is So
maria butche head ok Damaria is Rome⸗
lieg lonne. And pr pe beleue not / there wall
nopꝛomple be kepte with vou. —
Moꝛeouer / God lpake onto Thas lapig:
requpꝛe a tonen ofthe Loꝛde thy God / whee
ther it be towarde the depth beneth oz to ·
warde che heyght aboue. Then larde Ahaz:
J wyll requpꝛe none / nether wyll J tempte
the Lozde The Lord anlwered: Chenheare
to / ye ot p Houfe of Dauid:Fs it not ynough
foꝛpou / that pe be greuaus onto men / but pe
C mut greze my Södallo: And therfoze the
Lorde hall geue vcu a token of hym kelke:
Behodde /a virgin call conceaue and beare
a8 Chattaà Connie nd (hall call his name. Emanuel.
450 with vs. Butter and honp Wall he eate / thathe mape
knotoe che euell/ ano chole the good. But o7
euer & chyde come to knowledge / to
the euellandchole the good e he landelthat
thou erk foatrayde Foz) ſhalbe defolate ol
both her kynges.


Ok clay.


fail. Zndlpkewyle as the Ceredyntesand Che Lordealfo Wall lende a tyme pont b. Chatis /


27.


ili.


the / vpon the people / and pon the caters win gu a
houte (loch as neuer came ſencethe teme P nge ATG
Ephꝛaum departed krom Juda) thozowe the geuher. The
Uynge of the Altrians soz atthetame tyne Baue as welt
be thall the Loꝛd whiſtle koꝛ the Fites that are or Nacho
aboutetie water of Egppr and on the Bees Lene
inthe SMivians lande Thele Mall come (and was of tyes
fhall Ipghe all in thebalepes / inthe vawteß tirpans Eav


Land:
ok tone / opon all grene thrnges / and in all dae. = 87


comers. 1
‘At the lame tyme wallthe Lod Mane Blühen
drthehearre ok the head and the kete and the pecaule ther be
beerd cleane eee he wall dib many
papethem withall beps r water name⸗ dipts
ie, wnbche nene of the Irans. Acthe et eg
lame tyme pail aman ipue with a cowe / a madicia abot
two ſhepk. hen becauĩe of the abounbatice dance of sees ¢
pfmplch, he (all mate butter and eate it, Yorke. J
So chat cucty one which remapneth in the ape bel 1 le
fande, challeate butter andhony. Lethe la- lh Quis.
me tyme all vpnevardes (though there bea deabun /
thoufante vpnes in one / and were ode koz tabe cleane a6
thoulande fyiuerlpages) Malbe turned to wg. bat i /
bears andthozmes. L pne as they Mail come the nabies and
in to the lande wyth arowes and bowes /f0 rutars.Aadb
(hall all ö lende be come bzears andthomes. w= beat org
And es for all bplies that now are betwen fete ¢ haba
downe, thou Mate not come vpon them / £02 the coments
keate of bꝛesrs and thoes , But the catell ree what
chall be dꝛyuen thyther / and the Hhepe Mall üer cant
kede there. o. manly in it.


a 34
The delpueraunce of the lande by Emanuel. Che ur that Hal
Rone of offencciat which many Shall Gamble, Dekane e


i ij i hpnge of
Doan de aie


Ozecuer the Loꝛdlapde onto me: other avoue
Catze the a greate leat and wapte named.
mit / es men do witha penne that a
he lpede hym to robbe / and halte
bin tofpople. And immediatly J called onto
me faythfull wytneſles deztab the pꝛeſt / and
Sachariah the konne of Parachtah. After
that went J vnto the Pꝛophetille that now
had conccaued a bozne a lonne. Chen lapde
the Lorde to me geue him thys name: Nia ⸗
herlchalalhalchbas(thatis:a fpedie robber:
An haſtie Cpopler).sfoz why / oꝛ cucethe chply
wall haue knowledge to faxe: Abt and am-
chat is kather and mother) hall che rpches
of Damatcus and the kubſtaunce of Sac
marta be taken aware / thoꝛowthe kynge ol
the Adirtans. i on. 1B
The Lozde tpake allo onto me! Capinge: a. pe calleth
fo2fomoch asthe people rekuleth the CP the npagnd of
a*rennpnae water or Dilo and put their de Dano, which


elchue ite in Ra zin and Romeltes lone. Wehold frgureth the


the Lope thall brynge mpahtve and greate 9 f ert

floudes of water vpon the namelp the kyng veanmg water

of PAMiriag with all his power ehich Hail of Sie: which
14. if. poure


Zu The Pꝛophety

Hamer Doute outbis furdoutnestpon euerp man, oer Zozbane into thetanded f
Tb ws and renne oueralltheir banckes. And tall at the kyꝛtt in iptle — —— ae 8 ok
incabe # lowly U2eaketnbbpon Juda /increacpng in power / fozeveren.. 8 burthe of the
ofpect. Hal. the gett him be peyzore. Be walltenallo Heuertheles the people that haue dwelt Hed
F . . Asfo2 ey
Spee seehel wynges/D Emanuell. Gotogethervepeo- tiemetbatdtwellinehelande of the Hhadowe Per due
meth Dato tye ple and gather pou herben to all peokkarre ofdeaty / pon them fall the Ipghe Gene, reo the ae


poore ¢ lowlp, cauntrees. Pulte vou / z gather pou: mus Shale chou multyplye the people /and not bal etre


Gc.Geraigneth re vou and gather pou / take youre coũcell increate the iope allo: Che i Aiden der
di bine pate fogetyer: rer youre councell come to o were me
Seilotsa pring nontght:go in hande wyrhall vet chall itnot and as men that haue gotten the vyctoꝛp / bepe it. Act rb
‘at the fote A zanuel: 5 ob be jen ther deale the ſpople b. Tops pork
it the protpere Excepte emanuck:( pis Sobſbe W when thi fpople. Foz thou fait
age lot 8 Gor the Loz chattiveo me gtoke mere bpeabethe** pocke ofthe peoples burthen: Meee oe
bah an a phane/e earned me Aaping onto me:thaty che Gad of bys Gouder and the todd Of hes koche
nualip water, Hande not walche inp nape oftyys people, oppzetioure/as inthe di dape at Danian, B fe
ut tpipngeth Be Capde mozouer:rounde v none or chem / Wopeouer all temeravioug andfevicious.. bib ad
serten houces Yohofoewet faye: ponder people are bounde potver (pee where there ts but a cote Epley ee bate
spent tone togetver Meuerthelesteare themnot necher with blonde ſhslbe hunt and ebe theke. Aen
eakrapdeob the, but lanctpkpethe Todor Foz bntobs achylde thalbebogne / and tito dude dune


vs a konne chalbe geuen. Mponhrs choulder t Sedan


Wall the kyngdome ire, and he halbe called tame —


with his awne name: C he wonderou:
flor 1
ofan 1. of councell/$ mygbtie Go/tyeenetlating f.
father the pernce of peace he hall matze no F ment thous
ende toencreate the zrnadome and peace) unten
and thal {yt bpon the leate of Bau and in undd ance
bps krngdom to let bp the fame, to ſtablich toouretpans/
5 1 ant tpahtuoutnette rome er
. ‘07 euermoze.. Chis Hal the ge⸗
§ if woe ee Lo as fozme/@ Scheide louly ofthe Lozve of Poſtes doe pe 2 al felts
by UDI pps nnn zd hath geuẽ me: we are atone a Che Londe lent a woꝛde in to Jacob / che me hid. f.
Boeing’ 3 ondze in Hfracl /foz the Lone ot olkes fameiscome into Ilrael. And che people Zana Cie
if Su dma Werte apes paces eae ea eA UoL Sa € ea
:alhe maria / can
inc eh eon councell atthe lothelapers /wptches/ char es/ONSPB n Che nebenbei, thebotteat SE
tsa tpage tc, MELB and confurers /ehen make them thes ten downe, but we well buphoe it wyth har ihrer
fcepben by an antwere Is therea peopleenpwhere thar der tones. Che Wolberptymbse is boten BME
Fuge tha batp —.— . at bys God: whether it but we hall fettit op agapne wyth cere, sa fehr
. ethe dead / oꝛthe lyuynge. It Meuerthel .
eee. fhpman tant iyaht/ lett bpmtfoke pen che = the en ange ogame tes fo one chet spe be]
, ASST ee ara
ie Ache donot this/ pon the before / a the whititines b. of he
Andau g ag he ſtombleth andrullrethhunger. And ehe andl 5 a cee
eri n sutra am ‘eval tis en orev Levetba eee
tiie od „Chen lozech not ceade but pee yys hande Mall be iret: er theoudee
Jerutate. and be vpwarde n downe warde to earth / abe. ched oute Epil
We eie dernen betaerß When thee cg Sen meter o ee
bug hel o © rounde aboutehym a peloude ok erroure. they lenke the Mau tr
del Amon i ev che the Loꝛde ot Poſtes. Chertoze the greuous bad
be ok Foch abuertite alive notetcape, one 11 0 uche anden ne nene e
4 ‘aple / bꝛaunche andtwigge in one dape. f
sBpthebead/ ts ndert. hom at
bbe Canctifyed¢ Come hat toure andbonozable menge bpiße te] rer
betnacen Who Heller the Prophet that preacheth Iyes. Foz all ten figure sud
pee vex they wörch enfourme the people that ther Stam tom
be in a tpghte cate / loch be Deleeques. cyanate
tyueredds,
u y thedapeat i u
id S e e
eee
Pepopteortheocuslneethandbelspewee n hee.


Jerulalem.


: 2 2777
Ok Elay. itty,
Soch as men thencke alto to be perfecteae maria? A8 wo lay: J were able to wenne
monge thele / are but catt aware, the Apngdome ok the Idolaters and their
Chertoꝛe ſhall the Loꝛde haue nopleatus goddes but not Jerulaſem and Samaria,
re in their ponge men / nether fauoure their Dhall Jnot bo önto Jerulalem and their
fatherlefieand wydowes. foꝛ they are all to· pmages / as A dyd onto Samaria and thei
Bgether ppocrites and wycked / and all their ymages?
mouthes ſpeake folp. Afterall this hall not Wherkoze the Loꝛde ſayeth: As ſoone as
che Loꝛdes wrath ceaffe but pet hys hande Thaue perkourmedmx whole wocke vpon ( go wpe
Halbe dtretched oute Epil. Fozthe ung od⸗ the hell of Spon and Jeruſalem / then tpl doch orten tye
Ip burne / as a kpꝛe in the bipers and thors Jallo⸗ vplet the nobſe and oute Kynge oF niere fo: to ta
nes: And as it were oute or a fyze in aod Alliria/ with his wyldome and perde. Kor he 0
maredde buch lo altendeth zlmoße or their ftandeththus inbrs awne conceate :ebys hg.
perde. do J thozo vthe power ef myne awne hade
Foꝛ this caute Chall the wrath ok $ Loꝛde and thoꝛow my wyldome: Koꝛ Jam wpfe /
of Holtes kal vpon the lande / andths people amhe that remoue the landes of the people /
chalbe conlumed / as it were wyth kyze / no FYrobbe their princes: a(lthe one of the woz⸗
man ſhal (pare his bꝛother. It a mã do tume dh pes) Adꝛyue them krom their bye leateg. S
hym to the ryght bande / he chall kamiche / o: My hande hath kounde out the Hoſtes ol the
tabecatern tothe lefte hände koste /be Wall not haue people as ik were a nell. Andlpke as eages/
the fiebe of pnough. Euerp ma chall!w eateß leb orhis that were lapde here and there / are gathered
pisatonearme/ awne arme: Manaſſes hall eate Ephꝛaim / together: So do z gather all countrees. And
d 10e ge and hahn Manades arptber both (hall thereisnoman/that dare be vom as to
Met hn ng: CAteT UDA. Ikrerallcpis Wall nor the . ades touch a kecher / chat darre open his mouth /
fipude:¢ rove toatl ceatie but pet Hall his bande be frets once whilper. ;
beth bis Bente ched out ſeyll. But doth the ave booſt it Celte / agaynſt
mb. 5 me 5 0 aint bm that bermety therwith Jor ve . —
225 zegtneth the opprefours ot 17 make eny krackynge / agaynſt hym tus
Seel ohe Forde th garn Sena. lechit? Chat were euen ire / 45 ff che rod
che. r. Chapter. drdexalte it lelke agaynſt hm that bearetg
a 0 beontopouchat make onryah- it ozas though the Gaff chülde magnify ert
tuous tates and deuple thynges/ leite / as who kape it were no wodd.herfoze E
which be to harde foꝛ to kepe: wher tall the Loꝛde of Hoſtes lende hym pouerte
thoꝛcwthe pooze are oppꝛeſſed / on in his rpches and burne vp his power / as it


euerplxbe / and the innocentes ot my people were with a kyꝛe. are ipahe of Ilrael


dem are lhermithe robbed ok iudament: b wrd. Mhalbechatfpzeandbis Sanctuary aibe
BPlal.b, dowes mape be poure prape / and p pe mape the flamme / and it whalkindle / and burne vf
robbe ? katherlelle. What well ve do inteme his tho mes and bꝛeers in one dape pee all
ofthe vicptacion and deſtruccxon / chat hall giozy ochis woddes and feldes Walbe contus
come krom karre? Co whome wyll pe renne med with body and coule. As for hym leite /
koꝛhelpe: oꝛto whom will ye geue youre ho he chalbe as one chated awape. Che trees al⸗
noure / that he mape kepe it? chat ve come fo okhis kelde halbe ok loch anombze / that
Bnotamôge the pzeioneres / o: Ie amongethe a chride mare tell them.
deed⸗ After all this hall not che wrath ofthe Aer that dape wall the remnaunt ot Zl
Loꝛde ceaũe / but pet hall his hande be ſtret⸗ rael / and ſoch as are efcaped out of the houte
ched out ſtyll. OF Jacob / lenke no moze comforte at him that
100 be allo vnto Adur/whych is a tak or ſmote them but call comfozte them lelues
my wiach in whole hande 18 the rodor my with fapehfulnede and treuthin the Lorde!
punpchment. Fo J call tende hm amonge the holy one or Itrael. Che remuaunt / yee ＋
thofe ppocrptich people / amonge the people and the Poſterpte of Jacob Mall conuerte
Phaue veferuenmpdiffauoure Mall J tend onto God che mpghty one. Foz though thy
bim: phe may vtterip robbe the {pople the/e people (c Icraei ) be as the lande ot the lee /
treade thé do wne lyne the myꝛe in the Crete. pet hall but the remnaunt of them only cos
Howbelk his meaning is not lo nether thin uerte bnto hem Perkecte is the judgment of
Ket his hert ofthys kalchyö. But he ymagr- him that floweth in ryghtuoulnelle / a thers
Cneth oni / how he max ouerthꝛowa dellrope kope the Loe of Hoſtes call pcrkectiy tui.
dn Calm and moch people / lor de lapeth are not mp prpn: kril the chynge / chat he bath determined in 6
Lharchamas ces ali ynges Js not? Calno as ealpe myddeſt of the whole wonde Cherfore thus
aie cytes? to wynne / ag Chardamis? 28 t harder ko Caper the Love Godot Holes: Chou my
which ade by conguere Antiochia then Arphad: Oz is it peopleſchat dwelled in Dis / ne nut afrared


be „ ede wren: amtes hen da, for fe rect au 40 c


‘be Dz palage:
Gnvdersanre,
of Zonda.


lande aga} e mount Sion / g agaynſt
thebyit ot ferufalem Wuttertye Los pup


6 tenth
worde of .
ching not with
barnede/ wpif
zedeſtrope au/
a. che.
.
of Reb
the let 8 Sans


ped

Chen Halt the gentples enquere afters saute
＋

Gayo iP Bal


of Hotes thall take awaxe the pꝛoude from togeth


thence / wich feare. He hall hem downe the
Pꝛoude / and fell the hie mynded. Che thoꝛnes
OF the wod hal be voted out with pꝛon / and
Libanus call haue a mightpe fall.


¶ Che. ri. Chapter.
ter thys there mall come a rodd
forth ok the Rynrede ol Zede/anda
blonome out okhis rote Chelpꝛete
ob the Lozde all ixght vpũ it: che
krete of wyldome and nderkkandynge: the
Gpzete ot counceli / and ſtzength: the lpꝛete
of knowledge / and ok the feare of God: and
wall makehimkeruent inthe keare of God.
Fo he Hall not geuetentence / alter the
thyng that hall be bꝛought belope his eyes /
necherrepzoue a matter at 5 kat hearyng:
but wyth tpabtuoutnette aii he iudge the
Pooze and with holpnes chall he refourme
che lpmple ok the wonlde.
l ente the woꝛdde ve wyth the
mouth.
mouth hall he a
chat nelle halbe the


ips eus p lame rapnes. Chen
aber ant, toe
bet. thea


kepe


the Ph.
chem
Che


Che L onde alto ball cleue the tunges ot
che cgrpcrans lee ¢ with a myghtie wynde
Wall he lyst bp his hande ouct Hilus / thal
impte bis teuen treames and make men go
ouer depe tod. And thus wali he make a
wape fozbis peoples g remapneth krõ ß am
rians / Ike as it happenedto the z craelites /
v hat timethep departed out of pad oleegipt
Che fonge ot the Church for the obtapnpnge of the
vic tonie and oucrcompng of the worlde.
C be. rij. chapter,
Ds hen thou halt aye:® R/
tbäke the tos thou watt dilplea⸗ 3
Kabedatme /bucthou halt rekrapned is OF the Sone
chr wrath, aval mercy pon me. upoureare the
Bebolde/ Sod tomy health /in wh Ktrult / woideot Gov’
Gamnctatrappe Ko the Lorde Sedlsmpze Sul?
frengtyvemp praple/bealfo walbe myre⸗ eames of
Fuge.Chertore vo tope thall pedaawewatet han here
Out of D u welles ofthe Spautoure / g then wits tremling
wall pe cae. Let vs geuẽ thanckes onto
Lords call ops his name / zbeclareh
tels amonge the people /
hꝛaũce / to his name is
ſeg vnto 5 Lom / foz he
ag it is znowwne in all


te / ant


ae


Babylon /
ware
thep) is calle
ofthe bpge ¢ the Lon


ei crding dum wpe]
pinous bugle of f.


ape / they Wall ctande in teare /

fe and loꝛow ſhall come vpon thẽ /
all haue parne / as a toma that
h with chylde. One mall euer be
N motbet ani chet faces hall


feandow mar / che lyn
telpage bow pet
thep — 5

duble.
loch tre 6 okty


n wedgeor Ophtr. Mozeouer

abe the heauen / chat thee

ue out other place, .

ail it go wyth Babylon in the

Lopve of Qoltes in the dape ol

indyanacrö. And Babylon wal⸗

ited oꝛ chaled doo / and ag a flock

2 chepherde. Euerp inan thal turne

ne people / a flee echone in tohys

ne. ho lo is foũde alone / calbe

5 And who fo gather together
dale oped wyth the kroerde. Their
ari be dayne before their eves! their
Ned / and their wyues rauyien,


Elay.


b.
aue no pptye ppon wemen with childe / and 8
chen faces (hall not lpare the chplozé, And See. vir is
Babylon (that glozy of Aingdomes a bew ·
tre ol the Calnees hondur) chalbe detroped /
euẽ as God deſtroped Sodome ¢ Gomorra,
It wall neuer be moze inhabpted / nether ha wythe dwei
thal there be any moꝛe dwellynge there / krõ ea 1 5
genevacpon to genetacpon. Wien burg ih
Che Arabpans ſbali make no mo tentes 35 :ophete me⸗
there / nether hal the hephardes make thetr ane that it that
koldestbere an moze but wild wbeacke at Ue dd.
Lee there /a the houtes chalbe full or greate mne dei
Huleg. Eltriches challdwelthere / and Apes as a wüldrrurgt
Wall daunſe there che lptle Dules lballcrpe as after inthe
in the palaces / one after another / and Da- Txrvi c. Bel
Gons chalbe in che pleataunt parlours. and bench del!
a8 fo: Babylons tyme it is at hand / and her chern.
daes ma ye not be ſonge ablenk:
C ethe people from captptptic, he
5 the aan ge God and Mieten of
their enempes. E he prpde of Wabplon,
Che. xuij. Chapter.
ere che Lord wylbe mercpfull ote
to Jacob /and well take bp Braet U
Ulegarne, andleteh in their Arne
ih lande. Straungers tall cleaue
vnto them / and get them to the houle of Ja⸗ 4, By the dat
cob. Chey thall take the people / and cary thé ts vnderkande
home with thé. And the houle ok trael wall Deep bp
baue them in polledron ko feruauntes and eben 6
mapdesin the lande ofthe Lozde.chep Hall
take thole pzyloners / whole captyues ther ye soppiega
hadbene afoze: and rule thofe that had op“ vuchedouctor.
pꝛelled thé. udhen the Loꝛd now thall binge a his childse 6
che to reſt / from p trauapfe feare / a hade dee er
bödage P thou watt lade with all ehen walt appreſen⸗ but
thou ble thys mockage vponthe Runge of ato-kpnges g
Babrlon / andtape: Pow happeneth teebat p:ynees but.
the oppzcfiou leaueth of Is the golden tri⸗ e
bute couse to an ende Doüiteles the L onde oe che wape-
ath broken the ** Bat or the vngodip ! and chen was mye
the kcepter of the loꝛdliy. Whych when he is tery s wapimg
wꝛoth furpterh 6 people wdurable ſtroßes euden 8p the


auth and inhis wonders he peviecisteth chem and neter he


tameth thé contynualtp, And therkoze the mes:s uptigge
whole dune is now at reſt and qupetneſſe / kress ccdses?
andmen fynge koz iope. thet 775 an

Yee euen the sfpzve trees and Cedses Of koche he,
Libanus teiople at thy fall / fapinge: Now 4
that thou art lapdedowne / there come nemo hat igs
bpto deſtrope bs. Heil allo trembleth at eur they shat
thycommpnge /all myghtye men and Pzyn- bein hell wi
ces or the karth / Heppe koꝛth before the. An Pletal
Aynges of the earth tande bpkrö their lea⸗ i esmcehyebee
tes / they mtay all(one after another) “ynde ther. Jeisky⸗
and kpeaße vnta the. Arc thou wound alto gueaclp tore
ag toe? art chou become iphe pnto bs: ur to the Bie
pompeand thy perde is gone Downe to hell TE pete oF
Mothes halve jade oder the, @ wore pavucedotoe
chalbe chr coucrenge. ab, How fate


Habylon/Moab, The Prophecy


deGecompar How arcthou fallen ttõ heauẽ (vd Lu⸗
et baluche, citer thou kapze momngngechridehac thou
Donoto: to the Sete a fall euẽ to the grounde / thou not
Fallpng of iu. witſt andyng ) dydeſt fubdue the people: And
ciker the mor» pet thou thoughtelt in thyne herte: J wyll
meh eres cle vp into dg linac m ime
Daboue the ſtarres of God / F wyll (yt vpon
ieee ce the glorious mount toward the North J
munynge / bes wyll clyme vp aboue the cloudes / and wilbe
cauſe itappea lpke the higheſt of all. pet darre J lape / that
racic Gh. chou shale be brought Downe to the deye oF
menhang we bell. Chey that le the / wall narotwlp lone
Vo ſoche thing vpon the / and thinke in them lelues / layen⸗
ought to baue ge: Ig this the man, chat bꝛought all landes
bappencd vnto in keare / and made che kingdomes akrapde:
ad nss the J this he char made the wonde in a maner
mompng aer. öl 575 thecties to 15 grounde /
ter whpch no which let nat his pꝛiloners go home:
man can dane Powhappeneth it that the kynges of all
en che people ipe/eucry one at home in his atone
wan (0 muh Beeten 8a une Bann att cat outot
tye thor . thpgraueithe a wilde beaunch:lthe as dead
dedropedd © mens rapment that are thot tyozow with the
sere, argo cats fate
sn relays Onder fete zart not buried with them Euen
me to auer e becautetyatthou batt waſted thy lande / and
tyowenacids/ deſtroped thy people. Foꝛ the generacion of
hed Feceaiie? the wicked Halbe without hon dur / toy euer.
fe thou bons There Wal awape be fought tade trope their
ghtett. Soch achtidzen //fo2 their kathers wickednes: they
ipne thpnge ts call not come bp agapne to pollelle p lande /
theretn ga @fpil the wozlde full of caftels and townes.


grout again” J will ande bp agapnd them Capeth the


n fru. Le ofyottes)and toot out thename gg.


neracionot Babplon(fapeth the Lode j and
F will geue it to the Otters / and will make
water poddelg ok it. And 7 will lwepe them
out with the befome of deſtruccton / fapeth
the Losde of Hoſtes. The Londe of Poſtes
bath Cmozne an othe lapinge: It chall come
to pate ag q haue determpned: a chalbe kul⸗
kelled as Ahaue deupled. The Maprias thal
be deſtroped in my lande / a bpon my moun⸗
tapnes wyll Itreade them vnder fore, her
thozow his pock ch all come from pou / a hys
burthen chalbe cake krom poure toulvers,
hrs deupce bath God taken thozow the
whole wozide/ and thus is hes hände (ret.
ched out ouer all people. Foꝛ vk the Lozve of
Hoſtes determen a thynge / who wyll dpa.
mulleite And pk he ſtretch toꝛth bys hande /
G who wyll holde it in agayne?

The lamepearethat Aynge Thaz dred /
God thꝛeatened bye lay on thys maner: Ne⸗
iople noe thou whole Palettpna) as though
therod of him z beateth the were brot: ko
out of the cerpentes rote / there wall rare a
Kockatrice / 6 krute cpalbe a tyzie woime.
But the poze wall fede ofthe bes thnges /


andeve fymple thal dwell in fafetye, che
rotes wyll J deſtroye with honger / a it hail
Gaye the remnaũt. Mourne pe poztes / wepe
pe extpes /a Eeatethou(D whole Balettina)
koz there ſhall come krõ the Hoꝛth a lmohe /
whole power no man map abyde. ho thait
then maynterne the mellages of the Gentx⸗
les: But the Lozde ſtabiycheth Spon / es
vooꝛe otmꝝ people chal put their truſt · in hi.
Ca prophecye agaynt goab,
Che.


Ab. Chapter.
ig its the geur burtgen bps Po. 4
ab:ã x ot Moab was deſtroped (as
me thought) in the nyght feafon:
Che walles ot Moab peryched in
che naht / z banyſhed awaße: Cher were to
Baith ¢ Dibon ing bye places top to wene:
WMoab drd mourne from Hebo to Wed:
All cheirheades were colled / and all their B
beardes hauen. In their ſtretes were they 230 tymes
Sepded aboute with fact cloth In ail § top: er ae
pes of therrhoules and ttretes was therend- urge comme
thenge/but mournpnge a weppnge. Iete- theyceds cps
bon and Eleale cryed / that their bopce was ve the bearde:
gan Che wozthpes alfo.oet deetextanry
Boab biented and crped fog sexy Corot of page en,
their myndes: 10 is myherte for Moabs bin cue awape
fake. Cher fled pnto the cyte of Soar, whych C their herr
lpkea tapze feutcfullbultock cher went . e
bpto Lubith/ wepinge. Che wape towarde ned anne
Hozonaim was Cull of jamentacpon Foz the ge haue ben
hurt. che waters of Mimvim were dꝛped pp / Jerez. uo .
the gratle was wythzede § herbes dettropen/ Lut oF chen
W there was be: Narcecant
lyde In ipke maner the thynge that was left
them ok their tubſtaunce / they carped it be
water to Araby, & he crie wet ouer $ whole
lande ol . Eglaim vnto Beer / was
chere nothinge but mournpnge. Che waters
okt Dimon were full of bloude / fo? the ene⸗
mye had fent thither a bonde of men / which
as a lpon lape a wapte tox the remnaunt of
che lande '¢ fo7 them that were efcaped,
Che deſtruccpon of gab.
Che. roi. chapter.
Hen kent the Lopes of the lande a Z
man of warre kromthe rocke that
abb towarne.the dekerte bn, ee
= tothe bpllof the daughter O ron dame of Zicart
(oz.as fo; the’ r daughters of Moab / they
were as it hadbene a trembiyng byrde / chat u Char s/
18 put out olherneſt / bythe ker of Zrnon) ——
inbich medaunger lade: gather pour coun-
cell come together / couer bs wyth poure .. chat /
wadowe o in ß as the nrghtdoch: reftedbe ve?
bypde the chaten/¢ beware notthem that are ee
hender $pertecuten Paabitesdwelamöge fahrten.
Pou / be dure opẽ refuge agaynũ᷑ the deftrop« 5
ertkoz the abuertary oppzetteth be, 8 robder de chat ints
vndoeth vs /s chetrꝛaunte dyrueth vs out of rhe mot gree
oure


ut note the Lord lapeth thus: In thze vea ·
behel . — ol Moab with their pope
(which is greate)be mpnpihen /ipke as the
burthen of an hyzed leruaunte. And as foꝛ b


remnaunt of chem / ther Walbe lele then a


Cra end an th.
Ca pꝛophecpe agapnſt D
gen mn chr,
i Disis thebeuy burth en bps Ra:
malcus: Beholde Damatcus thal
be nomoꝛe a cytpe / but an heape
Jocbꝛoken ſtones. Che cytpes ol
Aroer Hatbe waſte: the catell ball lxethere /
s noman Hail frape them awape. Ephꝛaim
hall no moꝛe be ſtrãge /a Damatcus hall
no moze den Ayngdome. And as kor the glo⸗
unt des Spzians it chalbe as
he chyldꝛẽ of Ilrael / ſayeth the
bbe bexPpoore/ aps fates
oz e very pooie/ a Its
ane CBslbapp? to thé /as whe one hea-
reth in hal elt / which cutteth his hand full


a


© betoibelande of five wrppes
bych is or thystyde the floune of
thiopta : which lendeth her mel⸗
fage cuer thefee in ſyyppes ok re
des vpõ the water: and layeth: goo loone /a
do poure mefage onto a draunge and harde
kolke:to a fearkull people /a toa people that
Is kurtherthen thiß: to a delperate and pyl⸗
led kolke, whole lande is deuꝛded frd vs wich
ryuert ok water. Ve all ye that ſyt in the cõ⸗
pate of the woꝛld / and dwell vpon the earth:
when the token chalbe geuen vpon the moũ⸗
tapnes / then loke vp: and when the hoꝛne
bloweth / then herken to, ko thus hath the
Lozde ſapde vnto me. J lapde me downe /
and pondzed the matter in my houle / at the
Hoone dape wh it was ote: And ehere Fell
à mydynge thower/ipke a dew / as it haype⸗
neth in Harueſt. But the krutes were not
vet type cut of / and the grapes were but
kounge and grene. Chen one tmote 5


Egypte.
DU ad anhoke vee he hewed downe
allo the bowes and the bꝛaüches / ¢ dyd calt
¢ thẽ awaxe. and thus they were layde waſte /
fo2 the foules of the mountapnes / a koꝛ the
beaſtegok the catty together. So that the
koules fat ther vpon /a the beattes of peartg
wintered there Chen wall there be a pꝛelent
bꝛought vnto the Lode of Hoſtes: euẽ that
harde kolke that fearful kolke gthatkurther
is then thys: that delperate and pplled folke
(whole lande isdeupded kr vs wyth floudes
of water) vnto the place of the name of the
Loꝛde of Hoſtes:euẽ onto the hyll of Spon,
nophecpeth Rplt agaync Egypt.
isis Che. fix. Chapter.


a
a To ride vpõ
alwpft cloude 8
10/0 vilet and


Full. ro of. roi lee Walbe dzawen out / Hilus Wall fencke
cubptes hyabe ãwape / a be dꝛõcke vp. Che ryuerg allo chal ·

tro the grand: be dꝛawen out / the welles al decreace and
Jon pit B dave awape. Nede a ruſh Mali faple /p gratle
Tout lee be» BB Che waters fpde or bpd the rpucrs backe
path / the to / Pee and whatloeuer is lowẽ by the waters /
teep cläspeth calbe wythered / deſtroped , and bꝛought to
not adath/ nauctt.che krhers Wall moutne all loch
deer gr up ye ag caltangles tn the water / Wall cöplaxne/
fcavcenete and a they that lpꝛede their nettes in the water /
want of water albe fapnt harted. och as laboure vpon
ds theortulacts flax a Iplck / hall come to pouerte / a they al⸗
bpb. Hie lo chat werue fine wozches. All che ppundeß
io here called by dyuertz names / Come tyme the lee / lome tyme ryuers /
fometpme wells /ſome tyme poundes. bc. Ac that loude cuneth. vn.
fond p wapeg / z it is called the er / not only be caule the hebꝛues call al
congregac pas of waters the lee generalip: but allo becauce it was ot
old Lpme à konttät opmid after the Sstozpes/that it hath his oꝛigynal
begpnnpng From the Otean cer. pe mape alfo vnderſtand by the wpe

nes oF Hilüs / that it ouerſouwed not the lande / countrarpe to the olde
accoltamed maner therok. Some had euer haue this to be figuratety

applped. As therebe cevten waters ofthe Solpell whpch the boty
gooſt geueth-foare ther allo the troublaus waters of Egypt / chat is
Of worldly doctrine. Cher fore when the word of God is ones hearde /
thole waters Dzpe vp: For the holy gooſt repzehendeth the worlde of
kenne“ openeth z declareth the worckes of darcknes In thelt war

ters do rebe z ruche growe that is / vayne a trylſyng woĩc zes / tach as
are the worckes of hipocrptes / which after the autward ſhewez apes
‘Faunce leame grene i kreche / but are within vapne z nought worth.


The Pꝛophety


of €gypte/all the pollpepe ok their Moates
and drches ſhall come to naught.

Tee the vndrlcrete Pꝛinces of Joan / the
coũcell of the wile Senatoures of Pharao /
wall turne to koolpchneſle: Chole that darre
boaſt ¢fape of Pharaos behalte: am come
of wyle people / Jam come ok the olde regal
Pꝛogenp. But where are now thy wife men:
Let them tell the ¢ chewe the / what p Loꝛde
ol Hotteshath také in hand agapnſt Egipt.
Fooles are thole Punces ok dan /a pꝛoude
are the Pꝛynces of Noph: pee they dylceaue
Egypte with the nobnite ok their ſtocke Foꝛ


the Lozde hath made Egypte daoncken with


the lpꝛete of erroure / ather Hall bie it in all
matters: euen ixłe as a dꝛonckẽ man goeth
lpewynge aboute. Foz Egypte chall lache
good councell lo that thep wall not knowe
what to do / nether begynnynge noꝛ ende / ne⸗
ther vpon the lande ner water. & hen all d
Egpcxãs be iphe vnto wemen / alrarde and
attonped/at p ipttyng vp of the hesd / which
the Loꝛde of Dottes thallipét vp euer them,
Che land ot zuoa allo hall make the Egyp⸗
cpang afrapde / who fo doth but fpeake bpon
it Ghali put them in teare: And that becauſe
ol the coũcell / which p Loꝛde of Hottes hath
deupled agapnſt them. Chen tall the kyue
cptyes of Egypte lpeake wrth the Canany-
tes tunge a kweare by the Loꝛde of Hoſtes/
AHeltopols ſhalbe one orthem. At the fame
tyme chal the Lozde of holtes haue an aul ·
ter in the middeſt ok the lande of Egypt / wich
this trtle therb p: xinto the L oꝛde. E his tale
bea token oꝛteſtymonpe vnto the L oꝛde of
Poſtes in the lande of e when ther S
wall crye vnto him / becaule of thole that op
pꝛelee them: tʒat he ſhall tende them a Caps
tapne and a Saupouretodelpuer them.

Moꝛeouer / Egypte chalbe bought onto
the Lorde, a the €gypcyas allo thall hnowe
che Londe at the lame tyme: they Mall do him
reuerẽce with peaceoffringes/@ with meat ·
oft: nges:thep Hall pꝛomple him offtinges:
zee and papehym alto c hus the Loꝛde Hall
fmpte Egypte and heale it agapne:¢ fo halt
ther turnt to the Lorde/ K he alto Mall haue
metcp pon thẽ / a laue thẽ. Chen hall there
bea comen wape out of Egypt in to Taxza.
Che A apꝛians call come into Egypte / che
Egypcids into Auyzia. c he Egypcpans alto
@ the Allpzang chall both haue one Godes
lerupce. Chen ſhall Ictael wich bonoure be
che the de to Egppte ¢ Acht. Andthe Lowe
7 A them la pits
is my people of the Egvpcyans / ã dur is the
wont of my handes / but Acrael is mpne en ·
beritaunce.
CAgarutt Egypte and Sthiopia.

Che xx. Chapter.
Egypte


Ethiopia,


* andthatis tet


Exppt.€thiopia Bums Pes
Arabia.
eulatent.z5abplor. sia


ok the Ady;


oughtit to
baus trite


perfecuters to
tects Sop . and Ara.
Cagapuß Wabplon Idumes
He che. y. chapter.
Ghee) o¢ then
ts ppofptable
boy it.


ar Bpthe wal
te sober in Frown


cave of ther; 1 5
55 diſtroxe. ap Elam / belege it
en ate un Sub er
ramp2/twhertb the repnes of mp bac ul a
itegevcited une ages caine vpd me / as vpõ a womã in her
dero Vͤ» ee
deren pu, & when J lobed vp⸗ 3
ele Sapte jee pao /¥ eeébleb fo Feate,Che™*Darcks
bead ent che nelle nave me fearéullinmy mende. 8
wage bel,  Yeetoone make readp § table (fapbe this
e a f. peu ee
uous tdce Cäptapnes / tate vou
Aue place Lag te thpwaye/


Arble to be


upon
dche

aptynge

pte my watche
e there one ry.
ant wered ard


x Di Clay,


to Aldod / where Sargo the Ling


mountapnes.

J fawe the Clamptes take the qupuers
to carte a to hoꝛle / a p the walles were bare
kro harneſe. Ch goodly balleys were full ol
charettes / thehoꝛĩe men made them foone to
belege the gates. & hen was the couerynge
ok guda put krom thence / and then was fene


fe the rpftes in the walles of the cite of Da⸗
uy wherok there ſbalbe man. Ve thall ga-
ther together the waters of the lower pole
and tel thehoules of Jerulalem / ¢ bꝛeake
offome okthem to kepethe wales. And ye
call make a pyt betwirte the two walles ol
the water of p olde pole / anothinge regarde


vij.


what he the lege of the tymbꝛe houle. Chere hall ve c


Tyzus. The Pꝛophety


kruchepeſcheveate eolktpmeste / adorncke bope nerbzought vp daughter. As fooneas 5
7 bn b. wpne let vs cate a dyyncke / to moꝛow we Egypte perceaueth it / He wylbe as Cozyas
aim rb.  Mallope, Newertheletie when the Tode of Fits ixcelke. Socuer⸗ theke / mourne pe ax Som teu
oſtes hearde oft / he lard pee / yk this wic⸗ that Dwell in the Fles, Js not that the glozi⸗ dem to Char-
ednes ot yours ſpalbe remitted / xe muſt dye ous cite / which bath bene of lõge antiquite? dus Be (pea
for it.ChishatysLoxr@orothotkes (poke. whole natinesdwelipnge favre of comenve M0 Ho the
Thus kareth the Lozve God of Pockes Hero greatly? uapovath deutled loch chingror gn
Goin to the trealurpe onto Sobnathe go⸗ b pon Tirus the crowne of all cytyes / whole the march.
uernoure /a ſape vnto hym: ip hat haſt thou marchatites ¢Captapnes were the hygheſt tes of the Jes
here to do: a krom whence comeſt thou⸗that e principal ot the woꝛdde : Euen the Loꝛd off corp nate get
thoubatmanetheagrauchere? Kö he had Bottesbath deuptenit/f he map putdorwtie dh den
caufena coflycombe of fone tobe made foz all pöpe /a mynpch all the glow or d world. cpus is bce
hym ſelke e a place to lpe into be hewẽ out Go thoꝛow thy lande (O chou daughter of troyed.
oka rock. Beholde / che Loꝛde thall catkthe che tee as men go ouer the water /andthere
out by pyolence/he wl deck the ol another is not a gydle moze.
fathyon/¢ put bpon the a ſtraunge cloth. Chus the L oꝛde that remoueth the kyng · ¢
He hall carpe the intaa farre countee/ipke domes / a hach taken in hande agayntt that
Fa ball wich bis hädes. Chere Halt thou dye / mygbeye Canaan to rote it out: bath itret⸗
chere hall the pompe of thy charettes haue ched out hys hande ouer the bee / andle rde:
am ende thou orllerne of the boute of the From hence forth Hale thoumane nomoze dune
Lopbesd well huttcthe out oftyene ofyce, myzth(D thou daughter oF Sfdor:fo2 thou ganoecy nue
Gputthe kromthpne ettate. pale be put downe ok the Cethens. Stande ce,
Alter this writ J call myſeruaunt elias bp therfoze/ and go where the enemve wyll
kim / the tonne of Helktah /g arape him with cary the, where thou chalt alto haueno ret.
chpcote / and grꝛde hem with thygrrdie / and Beholdeſkoz thyne entampie/ Che Chaldees
bey thebey f. wyllgeuc che power incobys bande. de were fgches bes em mars was lpke
istigniticd ane Walbe a Father ok the cptetyns ol Jerufale / them / Alfur buploed them :he let vp bys car


tozites potuer d OF the hynved oF Juda: J well alto lape the else palaces /a broke them downe e.
asinapor. 1g. bee of Bauids joute bpd his Moulders/ And therkoꝛe mournel pe ſoyppes ortye tre
Gus ‘she-sce 2 pe be open no man Wall wut and pe heda ko poure power calbe thzowne Downe.

eee theme net twpll Eattenbim to


Alter that / Wall the irr. peares ol Cpꝛus
@ Ahaple in the place of Smoot hrghe kapth⸗ (euéaptonge gather Spe ipfe was ) be
Euinette/ehe thalbeopo theglozpous trone fozgotté.Andatter.trr. peares / it hallbap-
okhis fathers houle Cher all bangebpon pen to ctrus as with an harlot that plapeth
hum all the glozpot bis kathers houle / orthe pon alute. Cake thy lute (ape men to her)
chpldzẽ g chplders chpldzs /all apparelitmall andgo aboutethe cptpe/ thou art pet an vn ·
great all inctrumentes ofmeaturet mus knowne wenche maße paltrme wrthdy⸗
tze. Chis hall come to pale (lapeth 5 Loꝛd uerle balettes / wherbythou mapelt come in
or Poltes)wbenthe naple that iskactenedto to acquantaũce. Thus wall it happen alter
che place okthehrgheſt tapthfulnede/tyalbe lx. peares. che Loꝛde chan vptet the cytre
plucktof. And when the werght that han- ol Cpzus / and it wall come agarne to her
geth vps it wall fall be broke /a hewen in marchaundyle / and tall occuppe wyth all
peces. Fo the Lod hem kelke hath kapde it. the Apngdomes that bein the worde. But
CA pꝛopbecpe agapn® nus / und apzomes to re- All her occuppinge and wynnynge chalbe
Goare itagapne, 5 halowed vnto the Londe. Foꝛthen Mall thep
¶ Che. xxtiji Chapter. lape bp nothyng bey ynde them noꝛ vpõ hea·
EA A beup burthen bpon Cyꝛus. bei ‘but the marchaundple of Citus wall
Mourne pe Hipp, ot Charlis/ foz belonge vnto the cptelyns of the Loꝛde / to $
ſchels thzowẽ downe ko ß groũde / keadyng and lultenenge of the hungrpe / and
crn ee eee . — to the clothinge of the aged.
krom 0 ofthe
themarchaütes of Sidon / a they that occue — — et mane
ppedthe lee (ot whom thou watt full fom- che. xxiiij. Chapter. anpiette
tyme) are ata poynte. Foz by ſee were ther F holde the Lozve chall wate and often 6
Be e
THO comen marc ket o ce Of the carth del re be it
alone, eso pera Ce ai Cheearthdetolate/ a fcatee be it 5
er ofthe 4 1 Chen tall the; Pꝛeaſt be as the people / the demen offyret.
Zhadneucr traueled with chpine/that F had wages ſemiaũt / d danket — 2
neuer home ane / that A bad nether noypched the keller ite the byer / he that lendeth . Ban ta the


abzoabe the tnbabptoures therof. pyuceorother -


Juda, Skela. vll.


ale bntohim F bozoweth bps plury/ Moone ache Sunne halbe albamed whe
5 Yee mplerably the Lorde of Hotes Hall rule them at Jeru.
chall the wozive be waſted a clene deſtroped. falembpon the mount Sion / befoze ¢ with
For the Loꝛde hath lo determed in himſelke.
Che carth waibe heupe a derare: Che face
of earth call perich a kal awape / p pꝛoudt
people ofthe wozlde call come to naught.
For the nene conupte of her elawechnz
0; chephaue offended: is
% we che nenn amadethe weueriä. Ges to pall mean tO WEN oelwern mot
in Some bo f yngg tettamet ofnone efiecte.andtherfoze olde councels truly ¢ fedeatty Thou ma⸗ pure thpnges?
e felt oftotwnes eapes of fone: Gof bead clés uetorensd
F twyesfoze cep Mal: tve8/bz0ke wallesrbe palaces of the tofc- macs euler
r . ther eis
tie wer MADE Herp kew. Che lwetewyne Hallmoume/the wall neuer be buploedagapne.CHertore the ve aoey often
dane e grapes halbe weake/eall p haue beneme- berprude eoplennuttmagnpeye rare. nnr lb
r oftabyet» cprpesoFthe cruel Heathen ment Here the meet
Enn , . Memes Ty
tte m eur full (pall ceatie/@ the pleadure of lutes (hail forthe neadlun Enis BELTS wether aso, J dl
bates. De paue an ende there an no moze wrnebe S cee dat le
ar iio bocca ne dene ente be env gen um ca a
— wynde/ that catteth downe the boattyng oF heenple wat
ome in. the bngodip: thou kepeſt men from heate ware raunde ae
2 tw chere be lykt bpa crye the la dowe ol the clowded/ thous cuttelt ofvoute ber.
cathe, Inthe trectes Wallchere be lpkt bp cepoauntes be hell
inges becaute of wyne / all meg chere all vanpſb the bzaunches oftyzat 5 {6 meant the
r the Lozdot Hottes Wall once & reise,
tne iacyon tall emagne une cues, and the 7 — ll e Spohn is
1 wyth wattnetie, Fozit
214 wall ape bu fat a well fede beattes /offwete a moſt pure church Ehre
C fall happen ontoall landes Sto al people) fat ¢ 1 Al che ed
wep Hi fhalibe take aware!

e che oly: thonges Wpon $b by
eee dee dea
the Intwe. os ter rapes / whẽ the wyne gatheryng is out. all our enemp⸗
113, atv, fer gabe Gentyles are coucred, Hs kor death he Mall de. wp thevae

peyote tame (chat remapne) Dalle AD ferry cotumeit «Che Lord God Mall wype ef couermng
their bapce/sbealad/ ¢ Chall magnptpethe . more -
Seren the e one fromthe a uche Teed kulid of his people tyozot the whole ale arg sone
che name oftye Lope Godot Arge (tee te —— Aorthe ohen ele acd fae ft 12 —
nere ande idee fonges fungete wagt ame tyme chall it be tapde: lo / this ma. ih. All ins
deere wee thevighnious tra all the eres fe Sem hene put cure truſt / and o Dave ru /
ofthe worde. Cherkoꝛe J mutt Cpcake: D 2558 debug Chels che ode that ne peng
mene unkrutekulnelte/ O mp pouerte. olg Te Ler ea ion b ile gere fe pats
rca sul offprmners /b ECD of bis peat 0; te band of the Loꝛde cealeth uered al mens
ppurpoft anomalper, Snntyertore( D thou Pe Jen put Bob dalbe chelhen why wee
chat dwelleſt bpd the earthſchere is at hande Aan a e ‘pte as the tram trong dec 8


chene ep Hal nt n cherer nd bnder tete ina döge hell. Korhe Wall ſtrerch pis oe merge


ae duthishandes bps him / ipkeas afwynitter ka Cheices .

Ber. ou dhe up ath malte pocottmmme A ot fe pot Oe of

e Sarees saz sa =
i .

P me 29 at cane an bose botwe them cal chem downe / s kelithem to

tall. Che catth hall fackeripheadzoncken the groünde in todult.

man / a be Zank awaye ipke à tent. Per myl. Cn tonge of the delyuraunce ofthe people.

dedes hall ive to heup bps her / tgat he mut Che. rroſ. Chapter

kall / and netter ryle vp agapne. At the ame fF

tyme thail ce Loz mutire together chehpe

ben epee

bponthecarth. t f

7 i albe chut in one that the good people maye go in / whpch la. b
. mmmetableDaeS. YE Dou rec) Ano 85h ha


&


Juda.
krete or beis che doar g halt the matter in hade: „
u lee u de ko peace us the enc that men pe
enter Job Fer £03 in the, Hope ſtyll inthe Lozoe/foz inthe
Logde God is eucriakynge ty, Foz
iwhp/itishe/b brpngety lowe the hre mpn-

ded ertelyns / J catteth downe the pꝛoude cp:

be calteth them tothe grounde / pee euẽ

thto the myꝛe / that they mape be troden vn⸗
Bder the fete of the cympfe / a with the ſteppes

ok the pooze, Chou (Lozde) conkpdzeſt the

path of che rightuous / whether it be ryght /
whether the wape of the rightuous be ryght.

‘ erkoze l. onde) we haue a retpecte onto x


be Che wapert
ok the mdge⸗
me tes of God /


The Pꝛophety


the that dwel vpon earth. He wyll dyfcouer
the bloude that che bath laa wall
neuer hde hem that the bath murthered.
.
uche Toe pa
ode Bs /
great / unge- bende Ga. ar y the
tet Leuiathan 5 inupnepbie ter- werde oF che
pent:euenb? Leutathan that cro- £9? pte,
are eee eee
men
bmepate of Buca che aehepelt e


oF A
tichei@ Bayne,


toutes allelt
batt


jayne
—— et


* Moto tape no


a ~ ofthe Loꝛde Wall bꝛeake in to the lande on
euerpixde / lye a tempeſt of haple / § bea⸗
reth downe fironge hoddes and lte an hoz⸗
rible / myghtye and ouer flowynge water,
And d pꝛoude crowne of ddꝛonckẽ Ephꝛae ·
mites, chal be troden vnder kote. Andas for
the kapdynge lloure / the gloꝛx of his pompe/
which is bps the toppe of the plenteous val⸗
lepat wal happen onto him / as to an bnty-

Bmeir krute betoze the harueſt come. Whych
as loone ag it isſene /is by a by deuoured/o⸗
euer it con: e well in a mans hande.

v Jopfull Bnd then wall the Loꝛde of Hotes bea
erotwne a glu. ve fopfull crowne / and a glozious garlande
a at onto che reminaumnt of bys people enam
Erp trdipheAotwly be (palbeatpzete of tupgement ard
pouour g ser Onto them that dypue awape the enempes
e

4 utthey go twzonge by pn
bree bn: Hep Fall ¢ (Racker Decaute of Grogenzincke.
pos merey Pee eus che peſtes and pꝛophetes the lelues
unte in go amiiffe they are dDzonchen wich wyne /

n eee an rere EME
erred 2/ 3
Foꝛ all tables ave fo kull ok vompte and kyl⸗

Cthpnes chat no place is cleane. What is he
nem tearamoge them / that can teach inſtructe 02 en⸗
meranhore Mg Eourtie che chien / which are weenedkrõ
tet ben luck a7 tenen kromthe becks okenvother
ve caute to faſhion Tommaunde that mape becd-
der ade bis maundes/bys that ma pt be bydden / foꝛbydd

ta en ee tee ae 3

te back / .
de waere al — with Me
bpeattes. For it pyngelippes a ya frau gue
dot nk. Dito this people to whom he fpakie afoze of
be. Che fame chis maner: C bis wal bꝛynge telt xt onere·
pidertande by re lh the weerp / pee thts Halt bꝛengereſt.
ple world? But they had no wpll toheare. And therfore
kate a eK onde Pal anfioere thett Cubbournes
bbewace. (Cömaunde that map be cömaundrd ur
and by the h mape be bpddẽ / koꝛbyd that ma ye be foꝛbyd

S ere ern

7 herealptie the! e

toy bere Fopehy fal back ward be bzofed latedgtalte.

dur fekt D Wherfore heave the worde of the Lorde / ve

dpfereing edemockers that rule the Kordes people / which

TE

Tuch /

woe dat 1 Nahe nue oye vane

detgat map be lt / p though there bꝛeake out eny fore

dame aft pall toe come bponbs. Foꝛ with dilceate
aut do dre abt wyll we efcape / and wichnymblenes wel

e

‘be the Lor 0; ob: Behoide /F wyitiays

8. ebe fo SHON e great Kone /a comiy* comer Gone

Heated efor fuse foundacpor:§ tooo putteth bys

tre. trult inhim tall not be conkounded Urgh⸗

Le Tdi is cai CUOUTES ‘wyll A fet bpagayneinpbalaunce/

woacomey goandtuDgmient in the weightes. Che tempeſt


Ol Elay.


ix.
ofbaple ſhalltake awape pourtefuge) J pe ne, vecante be
haue to difceauc withall: § ourriowpage beens bere und
waters Wall byeake downe poure ktronge ler serene
holdes okdilimulacion. Chus the appoynt⸗ goa and men.
ment p pe haue made Woeath / chalbe done Cg.
awape: andthe coppcien that pe made wyih the genen an
hell / Wall not ſtande when ö great dellruc⸗ . e
clon goeth thozow / it hall all to treade vou. g iopnech them
It thal take pou qupte awape before it. For to gether. Ge
it hall go Ec2th earip in the moꝛnenge / and pe oh
contpnue only thatdape a that night. And p
very keare onlpchall teach you / whe ve beate
it. Foz the bende ſhall be io narow thats mã
can not ive bpd it: and p coueryng to mall /
that a ma maxe not wynde him elke therin.
Forthe Lozd that ſteppe fopth ashe drddpö 4,
the modt* Perazim and wall tate on as he fh ed.
dd vpon the dale of Gabaon:that he mape x 5. Reg. v. d.
bapnge forth his deupce / his ſtraunge dc zolue. . b.c.
upce:and fulfpli his woꝛcke / his wonderkull
wozche. zn therfoze make no mochd ati, jae
that poure captiuite increate not:fozy haue wasche that er
herve the Loꝛde of Holes (ape /that there cedech manned
fhall come a toden deſtruccion ¢ plage vpon perceucraunce
the whole earth. Cake hede / and heare my d being
voce / pondꝛe andmetche mp woꝛdes well.
Goeth not the houlbande man euer in due
featon earneſtipto hys lande ⸗he moweth ¢
pioweth his grounde to owe, And when he G
hath made it plane /he loweth it 1b fetches
oz compn. He loweth the wheate and Bar⸗
ipe in their place / Milium and Au pe allo
intheir place, And that he mape doit ipght /
his God teacheth him and ſbewech him. oz
be treadeth not p fetches out with a warne
nether bꝛingeth he the cart here a there ouer
the compn / but he thzelleth the tytches oute
with a flaple / and the compn with a rod As
kozthe wheate hegryndeth it to make bed
therok / zn as moch as he can not bꝛinge it to
palle with treadynge out. Fo nether ) bꝛo⸗
kynge 6 the cart wheles ma ne / ner his beat,
can grynde it. Chrs and loch lpke thenges
come ofthe Loꝛde of Bottes whpch is mars
uelous in coũcel /a great in rightuoulneſle.
che teſtructpon of gerulalem. Agarut the com
maundementes or men.
ce ri, Chapter.
be bntothe O Ariel / thou citie
hat auld wäne. Cale vet lome I
pearz / aletlome keaſtes pet pate
Jouer:then Hall ariell be beſeged /
lo that che hal be heux and ſoꝛoufull/ ¢ that
be vnto me euen as a ſpon. Foz g wyll lape
lege to the rounde aboute / ¢ kepe the in w
towers / a graue vp dyhes agaynſt the. And
thou ſhalt be bꝛought lowe / and tpeake out
ofthe earth / and typ worde cha gohumbix
out of d grounde. Thyvopce Mali come cut
ok the earth / lxke the bopce of a witch athe
BB talkynge


Steael, The


: talkynge chan groane out oF the mpꝛe. Foꝛ
se dsbaibely-the mulcptude of chrne enempes „ ſhalbe
be mealeout : be mealdut. , Andche nombze of Cpꝛafl⸗
Bre ale ces thalbe as the butt thatthe wynde auth
knabte tobe atwape lodenip. Chou Halt be opliten or the
Aöbredas mes L onde ol Hoſtes with thondze / earthquake /
been u the 2 DUH A greate crack /%b the whpzte wpnd/
An we tempe tand with the flame ola contuming
sanntes Halbe fyze. But nom the multytude of all the peo⸗
Ecc. As who ple / that went out agapnſt Ariel: the whole
woc Cape:the holke the arange holdes / and fege:ts Ipbea
mod ur nne deame which appearech in thenpabt, Xt is

C ke as when an hungrpe man dzeameth p
bets eatyng / and when he awaketh/ he hath
Poumamomé nothing.lpkeas when a thrdtpe mandzea⸗
L thar duale nen tbache s dopneßrnge a whenheawa⸗
Se oucccome de keth bets kart, F his loule brpacpent.
the Torde as ? So is the multytude ok all people 5 mu ·
duct is taken a+ ſtre them leiues agaynſt the hyll of Sion.
pave Sty he But pe chalbe at poure wyttes ende/pe chal
beppensd onto be abatben:pe (hall ackre /a rele to ¢ fro.
Srunageciv: “Ye walbe azoncken/ but not ol wyne. e
Pet hall ie not (hall kal / but not thoꝛow dzonchenes: Foz ß
belo then but L oꝛde cal geue you an hard llepng ipꝛete /
Hebe cherche @ Yolbe downe pour eres nameif pour 9;0-
Gaiebe ode, phetes g beades which whuldele / them wall
ted and pus 7p He couer. And allvilions thalbebnto vou / a8
ayhedof® tze woꝛdd that ſtande in a lealed lettre / whe
wehr al image One oftreth i¢¢oama that tstemen/a fapeth:
dole fortenrs rede be this lettre Chen he antwereth ca ⸗
treble fox! 4
OF thethonder/ Not redeit / koꝛ it is Mutt. But ylit be geuen
swhich no man to oneß is not lerned / or fapde vnto him: rede
fan when th. this lettre: Chen lapeth ge: J can not reade.
een hne hn, Cberkgze thus kapechthe Lo de: Fo; fo
beth all there moch ag this people dꝛaweth nye me Wtheir
ics ua dude hee erben reed
euenzed Heil arte rome a theFeate which cher owe bn⸗
end ne eren Gallo tpescants e
s with the fiae tern 1
dende denen people amaruclous/terible/agreate tying
. (Mammetpedis:)3 welldedrope te wproome
Oftheiv wyle/ ache vnderſtandynge ok their
e
ts i 1
eite Defovetbe Loe wüithreherte thee run,
iu that pe Galt cels inthedarcknes /a lape: who lepth vs / oꝛ
2980 fe fete who knoweth os? whych rmagynacyon of
wodka BOUTS g eur as tobe thepotters claye taketh
tute of conicest: Aduplement / as though} worde myght faye
HOLOF the top. tothe twozckmatter:make me not / oꝛ as the
aie 175 an erthen veſell fapeth ofthe potter: he vn
hall tuceege derſtandeth not. r* De pe not that it is hard
treame thp:@cand the wyne ok recrea 2 e not tate
of, Be halite ge fallaspe ge pech engen the ae
Eufponsfeare/hateann: perfecucpaut of all men: not Foz dronchen es or
Gronge drpnckerwhpch pe Galt want. Some expound thysfentence
of them that be donckea in bypoceptyes drüpmulacpon: and of thent
Arge tiene 10 de per oF theft kan toorches,
aide 13 U
(ascher: feht) gabe l mis een ee


Prophecy


at. Feld geh are lygnykzed be Ch
deen tuto bates he one e ioe
Sehen en e eden dur ne
jet ct 5 2
ue
cong church tt
Cabichesunocetand bp Chatmell tga entetuts weitere ae
byſthat Ltbanus ſhalbe turned in tochar-
mel / a that Charmel chalbe taken as a won?
Chen Hail dear men onderttanve the wot
of the boke / and the eyes ofthe biynde thalt
fe without any cloude oz darckneg. Che op-
pꝛeſed Hall holde a mery feaſt in the Loꝛde /
dure e i wall retopfe in 8 holx
one ok Jcrael. 5
Chen tall the furpous people ceatte/and 8
che mockers halbe put awape / and allthey Ph pd
thatdowzonge walbe pluckedout lache as nen ng
laboureto beam men onto kenne: chat di- hat cute ui
lceaue hym / which repzoueth er them in the baueright.
gate & loch as turne good perlonnes to ba- Buch. ß.
nite Andtherkoze the Lordleuẽ the detender ©
of Abzaham) ta peth thus vnto the houle ol
Jacob: Now thali not Jacob be achamed /
nor his face cũtounded / wh he leyth amõge
bis chyidꝛen whom my handes haue made)
loch as halow my name amonge them: that
they maye fancttfpe the boty one or Jacob /
and feave the God of Arael: and that they
whrch a foze tyme were ok an erroneous
Spzete/haue now vnderſtandynge / and that
loch as before cou lde not Cpeake / are nuw
lerned in my lawe.
CA curGeagayné them that foꝛlane the counce ll o
Heth cheted of te den arc their
ol gerücalem wente in to Egypte.


¶ Che. xxx. & hapter.
Hbetothole thepnkipnge dypiozé A
(Capeth ? Lozde)which lenk coti-
cell/ but not atme: whych takes
webbe in hande / but not after me
swpll:that thepmape heape one fynne spon
another Chergoo downe into Egypteland
athe me no councell) to feke heipe at the
power ot Pharao / and comfozte in the Mac
dowe okthe Egrpclans. But Pharaos heipe
thalbe pour contulpon / and the comkoꝛte in
the Egypclans ſhadowe ſhalbe youre awne
thame. Youre rulers haue bene at Zoan/ @
voure meflaungers came vnto Hanes. But
pe hall allbe achamed orthe people bmape
not helpe vou which Hall not bꝛynge pou
1 comkoꝛte / but came a c 6.
‘ure beatteshaue bozneburthens bp
thetrbackes towarde the South / thoꝛowe
the wa pe that is uli of parel and trouble /
becaule o€ the pon t lpones / of the Cocka⸗
ttice and chutynge dꝛagon. Yee the Mu ⸗
les bare poute lubſtaunce / and the Camels
brought poure treaturebpon their croked
backeg / vnto a peoples can not hegipe oe
03


le


2


ules that tpil the grounde challeate


good fonder / which is purged with d kanne. 4


cometh fovenly.
And youre deſtruccpon calbe tyke


foone as he heareth the voyce of thy crre he delpe or men.


wpll helpe che. Che Londe geueth you we
RU jevokanuetipee he mate of eon be.


1 Ohe berdee But thyne inſtrücter flpeth not fare krom


durch § pF chyne eyes lone nta thpne inctructer/


7 wonde / that
e e ah al cates harten to hes won
a


elekte.
eonon pt pedeteopethe fpluer wo
kes of poure Ipoles / and ca awaxe the go


ble is ind night
1— pti df den wan me


e pype /
ieee


feller
he ſteppect
BB. j. forth


920


aner a

tt
ies felbe wall bꝛinge thoznes g thill eis
euerr houle is boluptuoutnes: and in


fe the prophes Walbe take prpfoners, He hall go Foz keare And the rewarde of ryahtusutnede
then before to bis ſtronge holdes / ard hes Pꝛinces (all peace / and hir rute re t and qupetneſfe fos
Tel tere He from bis badge Chishaty the Korde po. euer. And mp people gaistivellin the one
toforfake goo» nen / whole lyght burneth in Sion / and his nes of peace in my tabermacle and pleature
tes) erpounde Epzein Picrilalem. N where there is ynoughin chern all, And whe
tt thus. Mot by dure Fdoles not by our Aregth „not vp manes helpe the haple falleth / pt Melk callin the wodde @
(tobi ait map eel the Cwerdeof man) nere tpretuallence inthe cptie. O how happy thal pe be / when
pe (which 15 figuified bp Acur)perpch but bythe power of Kody fafelp tow feded
the innpipbe cwerde that cinot helene: wieh which theaungelidero Fe Mal kakelp towe youre kede bekpde all wa⸗
Algrrv.thonlandeta onenpadt. Ela. Frxvi. g. tersand dzpue thyther the tete of youre ort
2 re eee, caren
je condpr por od rulers: .
Sy cin te tae tal gouerne Aachen bun tyaterbekonee m. Abet
aA latter the rule ol rightuoutnes / ¶ Che. xxxiij. Chapter.
6 punces thall rule acozding to
balatice of equite. He thalbe onto alt not thou be robbed allo: and
men as a defence org wynde / ag a refuge Jontothethat lapeſt watte / as wyo
fo2 § tempett / ipke as arxuer ot water in a ren (ape there chulde no waite be
thuritie place / a) (hadotwe ofa greate rock for the: Wo onto the whych doeſt hutte / euẽ
ma die ande Che eves of p feinge bal not fo ſhalt ihou be hurt allo. Ind as thou lapel
. kareg or them p heare / Mall waite / ſo tall wart be layne foꝛ the allo.


bby


faithfulnette be in hir tyme: po w. an
ef . power 5.
full woꝛzes ee euẽ there as he chuldegeue wyldome / knowledge Tae


Sentences the pooze ,Sutthelpberallpet rtrealüre. Behodde e


erloꝛe wobe vntothel d zobben⸗


„ eb
ath va, atigre ot abot
out / the met pe e
— dtretes are walte! chere walketg
Sete ees ate MDH een er,
are
Ser le petolae arch isin beupnes iba:
Feng nus takerhtt but tor afporte /thatitisber
syingpng fort) ime downe: Saxon ig like a wyldernes: Ba-
E eee e eee
ndtherkope yd.
abt te Secu wil J gett bp now wplgarple,>* Ye call
tig but thet conceaue ſtubble /g beave ftrawe/ac* poute
thought arg tyrete ball be p fre, ttmape cOfume pou:
den bete people tpalbe bunt like lyme /@ astho;+
none fect. nes burne p are hewen ok / a cat in the kpꝛe.
Wperupon Nobo herken to / pe that are karre of how z
thepate cout ng wichthem / ¢contpozemp glory / ve that
ger bug be at bade. che ttnnersat Spionatea brayoe
ch krass. à lodane fearfulneſle ys come vpon the vpo⸗
ccrptes. IW hat is he amonge bs ( fave they) ß
cepeur ſpie/ will dell bp eat conlumpnge trꝛe: whych
tes, Chatis’ of vs mape abyde that euerlaſtynge heate⸗
e
treuth: Be 0;
ae berp anddilcrate he that epech bis bande thathe
frre that cha touch no rewarde: wich ſtoppeth his rares /
aevouteror-t thathe heare nocnuncellagerndt the inno-
Pere cane cent=tobich ho der botone bis eres chat he
‘yall fende out le none euel. He it is / that ball dwell on hye
de sungell to whole lauergarde ſhalbe in p true rocke/to
Grito pon. him chalbe geuen the rygüt true nate and
Depucke . rs eyes walk the kpnge inhes
gloꝛp:and in the wyde woꝛlde / and his herte
{hall delpte in the keare ol God. What Halt
then become ok ö lezyber of the Senatoure
what of him that teacheth chyldꝛen? Chere
Pate lomdutevelenguate gem
to haue lo da e
not be vnderſtãde:nether lo ſtraũg a ſpeacht
but it hall be perceaued.

‘Chere hall Ston be fene / the headertye
ok oure lolempne keaſtes. Chere Hall chyne
eves le Jerulalemthat glotous babptacid:
the tabernacle f neuer hhallremoue / whole
naples ſhal neuer be taken out woꝛlde with⸗
out ende / whole coardes euerychone tail
neuer cozrupte: fon the glozious Mageler
ofthe Loꝛde hall there be pꝛelent amonge
bs. Inthat place / where fapze bzoade rruers
etreames are /all nether Galeprowe / ner
great ſhippe fayle. Foz the Loꝛd halbe oure
capte pne / the Land Halbe dure lawe geuer
Che Loꝛde thalbe oure kynge / a hebim lelk
walbe dure Sauyoure. Ehere are the co ·
ardes (0 larde abꝛode / p ther ca not be bet.
tet: Che matt fet bp of loch a kaſbron / ß no
5 . theron: but there

dealed area 72
after the pray, There lieh nomä that fateth:

am ſpck / but all euel is taken a ware from

e people / that dwell there.


Elay, tis


ee eee
lode of that ag tranũa /
Wbtecg Een 7 — OF Lyk.
he. xxriij. Chapter. 7
TH Ome pe Heithenano beare /tabe
ede ve people. Perken thou earth
all b ip therin ahou rounde com-
dale and all that groweth there
pon ko the Lozde ts angrye with all peo-
pie / a his dilpiealur is kindled agapnſt allß
multytude of them / to cure them / z to lleye
them. So 6 theft dapne halbe cat out and
their bodpes Epncke: § euen the err hilles
walbe wet weh d bloude orthem. Alk ß dar
res orheauen thalbe conlumed / ¢ p heauen
hall folde together Iphe a roll / a all theſtar
res therot Mall fall /Iphe as the leaues fall B
kromthe opnes a kygetrees. ozmykwearde
(latech be) thatbe bathed in eau / a cal im⸗
mediatip come downe vpõ Jdumea / vpõ ß
people which Jhaue curtedtoz my bẽgedce.
Andp Lodes twearde halbe Cull of blows
de and be ruſtpe wych the fatnete a bloude
Serbe oF beers. forte oneal
poneys Foꝛ the Lozde cha
Kyla greate offringe in Bolra / i in the lane
de or Foumes . Chere chall the ainpcoznes
fall wich the Dulles / (thatis with the gra⸗
untes) and thepz lande chalbe walhed wyth
bloude / a their grounde coztupte wrth kat⸗
nelle. ainto the alfoo@ Spvony thal come the
dape ofthe vengeaunce of God / and the ye⸗
ate when thyne atone iudgmentes walbe
vecompented. Chr floudes walbe turned to
pytch / and thpne earth to bꝛymſtome / and
ther with thall the lande bekendled / lothat
ft hall not be quenched dape ner nyght: But
fmoke euermoze / and lo fozth to lye waſte.
And no man chall go thoꝛow thy lande foz
euer: But Pellicanes Stokes / great Ou ·
les and Ravens ſhall haue it in pollelſron /
and dwell therin⸗

For God thall tpꝛede aut the Tyne of delo⸗
lacpon bpon it and were it with the ſtones
ofemptpnes When kinges are called pon /
there walbe none / and all pzpnces thalbeas
wape. Chonnes ſhall growe in their pala

ces / netteis and thiſtleß in their ſtronge hol ⸗
des / that the dꝛagons mape haue their pleas

Sure therin / and that they mare be a courte

koz Eſtriches. Chere wall kraunge bifures,

and monſtrudus beaſtes mete one another /

ether. There


=


rere
5 of
Rs BBA, belts


gt the


e lelt out / there chal not one ner focheipke)
faple for whathi mouth cãmaundech / that
kame doth bys lpꝛete gather togetherlo tule
kplleth.) Upon whomkoeuer the lot kaileth /
02 C0 tohom bedealeth ie with the Ipne: thole
thailpofette the ent krom .
cyon to generacpon / a dwell therin.

2 CHé the ken and Bengbome of Loris.

ay the de ⸗ Che. xxiv. Chapter.

Certs weplbere f Wit then deterte e wyddernes thal

e reiopte / che watte grounde halbe

dhe bead iad and flozpth as the iplip. She

whpch were halt flozvch pleatauntiy/ and be
without gra, to} ecuetbe geupng ofthanckes moze
oil che wethe ¢ino7e.ff02 the glozp of Libanus the betty
argoeds vee, O€ channel e Sard walbe geus her. Chee
tuouteliuing- Wall knowe thehonourok the Lozde / andthe

Punt cu ze magettie ok oure God. And cherkoze dregthẽ

35 a vorotosd the meake hanes, f com oste the keble knees

Fie conte, Hape bnto them that are ok a Fearful

nes b vuktuteherte: Be of good chere / z keare not Behold

fulnesofthe poure Godcometh / to tane vengeaũce / a to
wrlde thes. B tewarde / God cometh his awne keite /a wyl
ue yp thps delruer you. Chen dali the eyes of 6 bipnd

Ieape toundet+ belpghtened/@ p eaves of chedeake opened,

wrünng herr, Then hal the lameman®*leape ag anhert

Fiiuecrsquyce @tHedome mang tunge Hall geuethanches

aeset the ipies In the twploernetie alto there hail welles

te mit. zv kpivnge / and Hloudesof water inthe delert.


Brae 0a) Alapßs tonne
Zh
And Rablakey


lett pzyn
Epp tut in


lpke
fhngeeaf rye Ehe bebe grounde Hall tue torpuers/and 8


fpoute that g che thurtpe to lpꝛinges of water. nohere as
commty L dꝛagös dwelt afoze there Mall growe fiwete
boppyng vpon floutes andgrene rulſhes. here ſbalbe fote
the moutap* pathes and comen üretes / this halbe called
beberel reh, the holg tape, Bo pncleane perton tail
Geh be thai G0 thozoww it tothe Loꝛde bim teilte hall go
belthe dealehea with them that wape / and theignoꝛaũt hall
36.3 Be s not erte There walbe no Ipon/andno raup⸗
Zane. D Copngebealt call cometbern non he there
fet tygue of but nen thall go there fre and tate. Ind the
the commpnge redemedok f Loꝛde Mall conuerte / and come
e
ofthe rk. aka
cal be amonge them. And as foz all fozowe
eats a, reel pen derbe.
dome ol Sod in the kayth IL Mpankpnve was beafe to beare the hra ·
e
ath hd ‘with bisconmpnges = ee


. — faehfulis here cated the bol were


Che. rrroſ. Chapter.
n er Bennaßerib⸗ in the tyme


‘2 the Hit}. peare of Byng Heze⸗
ah eame Spennahentb wore st
the Lapztans downe /totape fege
lontoall the cyties of Juda.


chis cowarde Jerulalem , agapnũ


4
sig Beg rviꝭ i


5j. Paralip. &
pela ap and eh


Chen larde eitakim / Sobna aX


to Rablakey: Spe ake to bs thy teruauntes
(we paapeteiin te Sotvianslanguage,tee
we vnderſtande it well: And peak not to bs


e lent


Aflivians geueth you
ByngeLetnot eek


5 de⸗
kende vs / allnse gent derchg chem


Bynge Besehiah wech agreuous Hotte / wheat


whichlethümbeihe condpte ofthe ouerpole


the wale
c


Syght the Goddes ofthe Gentifes nepe
tech, mas lanbe/fe9 che power of the Bing
math ¢ tepbab? tere és the Gun of Sr.
Phatuaim? And who was able to dekende
Samaria out otcmphãde⸗ Oz which of all
Gordes ofthe landes / hath delruered their
coũtre out of my power / tloß the 107d chuld
e
e

ed the that
e elktahs lonne
the Pꝛelident / Dobna the Scrrbe / a Joah
Alaphs ſonne the Secretarr / vnto He tent⸗
ah with rente clothes / a tolde hm the wo dd
ol Rablakeh.


fsthe God or He- the landes that ther hau


Elay. 8 rij.


bifcéaue the an whomthouhopett / lapelt;
Jerulaltẽ hail not be geuẽ e of
the Bpng of Aapzia Fo: thou knowed well
how the Rrnges of Auris haue bandied all

th e lubuerted / andho
pelbthouto efcape? Were the people atthe
Gentyles(whomp progenptouts coqtered)
delpuered atany tyme thozotn theit goddes?
Asnamely/ Sozan Paran / Reseph/ ¢.the
ehplozen of Eden / which dwell at Thalallar.
Where ts the Ernge of Hemab, ache Kynge
ok Arphad / othe pug a checrtye Hephar ⸗
uaim, Ena and dus: Hot when Pezenis h
hadreceauedthe lettre or the menaungers /
and read it / he went pp into the houle ofthe
Lorde. ¢ opened che letter bekoze the L onde.
And Hezektah prayed befoze p L od on this
manet: S Hofe of Hottes / thou Ged oF Hee
rael which dwelleſt vpon Cherubyn Chou


e art the Sod that onlp is God ofall Ayng⸗


Domes of the woꝛld / ko thou oni hac creas
tedheaue ¢ earth Enclpne thyne care Loꝛde
@ conkrdne/ open thrne eves / O Loꝛde / le,
Epödze all p wordes of Spennaberid Avi
bath tent hrs embaluge to biatpyeme the 2
kpurnge God. Fe is true / O Loꝛde / that
the Arnges of Styria baue conquered all
Ayngdomes e landes /s calt their goddes in
the fe, Potwythütandrnge thole were no
Goddes / but the woꝛckes or mens handes /
OF wod oz one /thertoze haue they deſtroyed
them Welpuer vsthen / O Lond dure God /
kröthe bandes ol Bennaherib /g an yng ·
Domes oF the carth mape ünowe / that thou
onlpartthe Lowe. Chen Ela the fonne of
‘Amos Cent onto Mesehiab/ layinge: Chus
Capth ? Loꝛde God oF Frack:uhere ag

batt made chp prayer dato me / as touch


well. Dennahertb / thys is che antwere that th


Andtherkoze tyke bp chp prayer koithe rem⸗
naunt / that petarelett, Sotheleruauntes
ol Synge Hesekiay canie to Elap.
And Etap gaur them this anlwere: Saxe
B thus onto youre logde:thus lapeth the Loz:
Be not afraped of the wozdes that thou halt
hearde wherwitt the Renge of the Aarztäs
leruaumtes haue blalphenied me. Beholde /
A wpllcaule e wpnde go ouer hm / as tone
88 he heareth it he all go agarne into hys
countre there well J dettrope him with the
eee e
e the Enge of Attys! ge
Lodnah / fo: he had underſtande / 6 he was
departed From Nachts. 02 chere came a ru ·
Lagen e n ee
come fo; 3
And when the engen, atta hearde


as Fos waters of defence /
them bp wrth the fete of myne


e that he tent othermetiatigers to Ayng Hee ba


sehial with this cõmaundemẽt: Save thus
bo hezekiah Beng oF Kuda l et not chy God


‘ 7 *
Bezekiah.
capes of ones Forthetrinhabttours wal ·
eiphe lame men bzought in teare ¢ cont
founded. They halbe ipke thearate a grene
herbe in the felne tyke the har vvonhoule
koppes /g wichereth a koꝛe it be growne vp.
‘J knowe thy wapes ) thygoin ge forth and
ehycompnehome/vee ¢thymadnette agapnt
Fme. Cherkoze thp furtournede agarnd me /
dr Ok chin pe and typ payoc is come befoze me: A wülput
bane in Af. beg ringe inchr nole / and a bzidle byt in the
Beg. Fü. l. chawes ol che / a turne the aboute euen the
kame wape thou cameſt J will geue $ allo
this tonel Dieschiah thts peare Hatt thou


eate that is kept in ſtoare a the next peare ato


loch as groweth ot him kelk / a in the thyzde
peate pe thal Cote ¢ reape / ver pe chan plate
brnepardeg / z entove the krutes therok.
Andtoch of the houle ol Zuda as areelca⸗
ped hall come together / and the remnaunt
call take rote beneth e bung koꝛth krutea⸗
boue. Foꝛ the elcaped wall go out of Jeru⸗
falem / ache remaunte fd the mount Spo.
And this tall the gelouty or the Wozde of
hoſtes bzinge to pate. Cherkoꝛe thus lateth
the Londe / concerpngethe kynge of p Al
by + He thall not come in tothe cytie /
and chall chote no aro we in to it / there ball
no ſhilde hurte it nether call ther graue g.
boute it. Che lame wape that he cames call
be retourne / ¢ not come at this cptie, / laleth
N And J will kepe and laue the cx⸗
(Cateth be) to mne atone / and foz my ler.
tuaunte Baurds lane.
ug, genres . Chus the angel went forth / and gewe
e of the Tüpnans hote / an cixxrb choucande.
ehe. ind whenmen acote op eatty( at ſerwte⸗
B. hach. ih e lem : Beholde/ all tape Cull of peed
Do Hennahertb ß Rpng ok P Ady.


pp / ödwelt at Miniue.Atterwarde it chaun⸗
led / as he pꝛaxed in the temple of Petray bys
[alle denen eSaraser hisawne
ſonnes llewe him with cherwearde / and fied
in tothe lande of Ararat. And car hadon his
Sonne rexgned atterhim. :


HG. Reg. Pr. 2
ier


etl £02 maüũdet
Seeed
The Bal. . C02 ou
But tor thou Hest


bat apleature A praped onto the L onde / andlarde

inp trusts ed Lopbe)tbaty baue woalched before §
oe en kene in. kreuth anda tenfatherte/ ¢hauedone
Gpertecterigh Che chynge that it pleataunt tothe. And He-
deen. Ne kläh wepte fore, Chen ſarde God vnto


he Prophecy


Clap: o 8 ipeake vnto h; e Lone
God of Baud thy father. lendeth the thes
wozde: J haue herde thy pzaper and contye
died th teares: beholde J wyll put kyltene
peares mo pntothp lpke and delpuer the and
the eytie allo / krom the bande of the ang of
Adliria/ to: J welt dekende the citie and take *
the this tobe of che Lond that he wyil doit ⸗
as he bath (poben:Sehoive /Fwpil returne
the thadotwe of Ajax dial / now is laped out
swpth che Sunne and beynge itten degrees
back warde. Bothe Sunne turned ten de.
greetz backward / p which he was delcended


e.


GCA chanckeſgeupnge / which Pezekiah
Arnge ol Juda wiote/ when he had
dene fpche/¢ was recouered.
bey thought J wude haue gone to $ g. C
tes or heu in mp belt age / and haue wanted v. epotis)y
the relpdue of my peares. fhoughey Guin
‘ZF Cpake within my elke: wall neuer vi⸗ bane gone to
betihe Lope Govinehisipte:5 wan neuer be vrch n
ſemanamonge thedwellers ok the worde.
Myne age is kolden bp together / andta ·
ken a wape tto me / lpke a fhepherdes cotage: node nau.
1 We bee of/ipheas atecucr cutter Soon) gate,
I . Ditehe.
J was pet takynge my rett he he · 3


.
Chen chatred F iphe a lwalowe / and iphe bap
a crane / and mourned as a doue.


tan —


Loe llaydẽ J vyolence is done onto me / be hy other er /
thou kuertxe koꝛ me. N graye

What Hall 2 {peabe os fave thathe may bead trite ie
thisno?£3 may ipue outall my peares/ vee fading
inthe bytternelle of mp lyle⸗ ¢ gveme : where

Gierely(Lozde)men mutt Ipue in bptter- the come tral,
neffe/@ all mylife mult patie ouertherin: B elfe
Gor ehouvaptete me vp, and toaet me. But crane so fe
{0/9 wylbe well contẽt with this oe i

euer- the


ine


121555
2 thy back.
nne ioe “for bell prartetp notthe / Death doch
40 ee b cheyg dodo einto d graue / pꝛayle
2 noe ep bah uche re Peete alg
‘the with their acknowledge che / lyke as J dothpsbare.
Sas. ul aber teen) hes chpiozen of thy karth⸗
kehr ng, Delgucros(o Lowdeyandwe wp finge
“oe at pꝛaples in thyhoute/allp Daves of dure like.
this Gaton for And Clap lapde:take a plaptter of fygar/
the tettong out g Tape it bpon the lose / fo Mall it be whole,
J ges- Then ard Beem c what agreacthing
wrllbe eas in this that call go bp in to the houle ot


red wpch ihrs the Lozde,


chr iudgemétsAnd the wyched wyll impute mp death to the ouere
chrowpng of Joolatepe/ N tothe püttpug downe of the beaten ferpet.
es They that go downe into the grate praple not thptrueth / that is
bope not Fo? the trueth of thy worldly pometes which thou halt pro
meted onto fach as walche dudeFpledip in thp lawe Peuterd. FrviG.
cänot reiapce of their health when all hope of recouerpnge is
But pr chan grant a mä bis tpfe-pFanp ma recouer bis kicknes
Sipur: be thal chnowwird ge thy goobnes-eue as J now geue thackes
Suto the? far the beneFpte of mp health which thou halt reſtoꝛed me,
¶ Che. xxrix Chapter.
Cbelrbiahis reproucd of Elaß becnule he che wed his
trrature vnto the Emballadoures of Wabyton.
Tthe lame tyme erodach Ba⸗
3 4 adam / Baladams kanne yng or
vi Reg · ret. Babylon) tent lettres a pꝛelentes
to Hezekiab. Foz he onderttove
chat he had bene lick / a was recouered
agapne. And Hezekiah was glad therot and
ſhewed thé the cõmodyt yes of his trealure /
ok lyluer / ol gold / ol lppces a rootes ot pꝛe·
cxous opies all that was inhys cubbordeg
Bgtrealure houles. chere was not one ching
in hezektahs houle / z lo thozow out alihs
Ayngdome but he let them leit.
Chen came Clay the Pꝛophete to Aung
Ezeklah / z lande ontop: What baue the
men lapde / a kro whence came ther vnto the?
kiah anfwered:thep came out ofa farre
Countre vntome / out of Babplõ. cap ſapd:


what haue ther loked vpon inthyne houte? bi


Hezektah antwered: All ß is in myne boule
haue they ſene: and there is nothinge in my
treafure / but J cheweditthem.

Chen ſaydẽ Clay nto Hezekiah : wunder ·
cande the woꝛde of the 02d ol Hoſtes: Be⸗
holde the tyme wyll come / that every thynge
which is in thyne houte / and al that thy pꝛo·
genptoures haue lapde bp in foare unto
this dape/ chalbe cariedto Babylon / andno

* hinge lett betypnde.Coys Capeth the Londe.
Ter d parte ot thy fonnes/that Hall come ot
dhe / awhõ thou thalt get / Walbe cartedhẽce /
S become gelded chamberlarnez in theBing
ol Babplons courte: Chen tape Heꝛekiah


to tap: ow God pꝛolperehys ane coun:
cell / which thou batt toidme. He layde moze
douer: So thatthere be peace and kapthkul⸗
nelie in my tyme,
The cmpng of S. John Baptitt. reparat
of the pl flier — peed ata 8
a e 90 sue iane
ere mp people/be o i 8
ob eve Cape youre Gad chr werbe er,
forte Ferutatem andcellyersthat ryupte- why
ese An * *het trauapleis at an ende / that bured. rr.
ber offence is parponen/ that che bath recea- Fed. wert
yep alder bm bane N 17
nnes. A vopce crpeth⸗Pꝛepare
wape fo the Lobe in the toploemetie mae pelt e
Arerght the path koꝛ oure God in the delerte. glotpe or rhe
Let all ballepes be cralted / gcuerpmoun- Lowwetbe xgp
tapne andbylt be leped lowe What fot cro⸗ Gebe hen.
bed / let it be made ftrerght / @lett che rough bor che gotpet
places be made plapne keldes. oz the glo- wher bp we
Ly of the Lone thal apeare / ¢ all fet hall unde vecome
witty eb, ehe mouth oF ee Lope bath eden
Che lame bopcefpake: Now ceve. And hs onnecune,
fapde: what thal R cree? Chen Cpake tt:that tes merptes.
all fleth is gratte / ann thate* all the bewtye Gbisslory Gat
thetof fp as the floure ofthe telde üohenthe al men
graſſe is withered / the lloure falleth awape. well the Zerwes
Kuen Co is che people as gratie/ when the en the Peter
breath of the opde bloweth pponthem. Ge- nem
nerthelene whether the gralle wycher /o che w ue br dor
flouve kade aware Pet p wonde of oute God C in eee
endureth koz euer. Moꝛeouer the vopce cried he gtorpe of
thus: „Go vp bntothe pill D Siompthou te ne nen
bingen goon tyopnges/ pet vp thp bopce fe altbebew⸗
wich power! O thou preacher Jerufatern, cyetucroris os
Lylt it op without keare / a fave ontop cities the foure.e c.
ok Juda: Beholde poure God / beholde the that is altthe
F
ie wich bis arme. Behold) ung;
beigen bis ticatute ots hum ast ien vr
woꝛckdgo betoꝛe him. He Chall Fede his Hock al the rigbtu⸗
Ihe an herdman He Hall gather the läbes UMC tberoF,
together with bis anne / ecavte chemin ype 20 nur: oF
—.— hall kyndly intreate thole that 92 ie
. ger then the
who hath hoden the waters in 2 Jour of thekel⸗
opobat) meanutcoeaus with bis ene, dun e.
and bath comprehended allthe earth of the outnesis hotpe
‘worlbe in thze kyngers : nebo bath weyed the res / zei. oro
mountapnesandhpites 2 IS hohath refour- 2
edhe mende oF fhe Loz: Da who is ofthis de yor and
councell co teach him t wha bath be ated sappy bude.
councell/tomate hem vnderckande / andto tive the chure
lerne him the tape of tudgmẽt: to teach him che ofthe faith,
fcience : and to enſtructe him in the wape of do dernde
vnderdtandynge. B eee e
enge. Beholde all people are in tyopnges) that
mperrlon orb pm asabzopyeto atonet wii grace
bull /a ave counted as tye lett thing chat the and health ar
balaunce wekrth. Behar theies aren aka


az . v. compas


Ptcaell,


thatisnowol comparplon ok hm / as the hadowe oF
5975 d e Comme beame, Kibannais not luffperent to
sha dune gy, npſtre Eyre for bis offringe, gall the bea.
lies therot are not pnough to one lacrpkyce.
agnodyng dure en epee,
as n. ee dapne 5
E Co whöm ther will ve like God: oi what
kimplitude wyil ve let vp vnto hem: Spall
the caruer make hem a carued mage: and
thal che golanpth couer bpm with gold oꝛ
caſt hym tn to a fourme of fpluer plates?
Mozeouer Hail the ymage maker (that the
poozeman whychis dycpoled / mape haue
tomie thrnge to let vp allo) ceke out ¢ chole a
tree / that eres an catue therout an
zmage / that mourth not: Know pe not this:
Hearde ve neuer ol it⸗ Path it not bene pꝛea⸗


The Prophecy


rapleth vp the tutte From the eolche
Sunne / and calleth 9
caſteth downe the people / and cubdueth the
che kynges bekozehim: that he mape thzowe
them alſ to the grounde wptt his fwearde/ a
ccatre chem ipke dtuble wich hes bowe: He
koloweth vpö the / 5 goeth Catelpbim felte 7a
Cometh in no kote path this kete. sho hath
geben, Sundern ft

gynneng⸗ Kuen Athe Lozd / which am
the kp and with the falk.


ched vnto vou lence the beginnyng: Haue ye bi


not bene enkourmed ok this / lence the koun⸗


dacpon ol the earth was lapde: Chat he yt d


teth vpon the circle of the woꝛdde / and that
all the inhabytours of the woꝛlde are in cõ·
pavifon ochun but as greſpopperg: Chat he
lpꝛedeth out the heauẽs as a coueryng / that
he ſtretcheth them out / as a tent to dwell in:
Thathe byyngeth P2pncestono thyng / and
the tudges ok; earth to duſt: lo that they be
not planted no fowen agapne / nether their
ſtockerotedagarne in d earth? Koꝛas loone
as he blowethvpon them / they wither a fade
awape ivke the ſtrawe in a whyzle wynde.

Co whom now wil ye lpken me /a whom
Wall A be Ike capeth the holr one? Lt op
poure epes on hye / and conlydꝛe. Who hath
rade tholethynges/ whych come out bylo
Greate heapes: and he can call them all by
cheir names. Foꝛ there is nothynge hyd vnto


ch ther

— cher go /

CHE the goodness mercy of God toward $s peoples
Che. xi. Chapter. tre


they Hall not be wi


€


to kepe the with this DOF myne.
Behold /all hep that retytt aleo £3
me: andthine aduerfaries
roped ¢ bought to naught. So

that who lo leketh after the / wall not
them. chp dettropers thall perpch / lo call
cher that bndertabe to make batell agaynſt
che. Lor A thy Loꝛde ¢ God / will ſtrengthen
errobt bande. Kuen J that fave vntothe:
eare not. J will helpe the Be not a krarde
aa 115 queen heey delpyled —

raell £02’ e

and the hol one ofghracttoytce anger, fat fan


‘eo wpl mate sea teaorng cart g 20 br p.


anew flaple/é thou mapeſt je grynd ces that beta
themounta nes and wan wee to Smears
poulder. Chou halt kanne them g the wynd fun eme mare
dpall carpe chem awape /¢ the whyzitwpnde Jprrpare net
Shall ccater them. But thou war kerken e .

che e in praptinge oe Desf bolp oe


Gn


belles 3 other:


Heal,


Thuers. 5 ce. map le s marche) perceaue wich their bert,
rg m Scene tat tbe ane of the Loꝛde ma-
Ader lage Bech ebere hinges / ¢ that $bolp one of 36

rael bzingeth them to pate, Stande at pour

F caute(tapeth the Love)e börnge forth your

me tat where ſtroungeſt grounde/codcelech the Aynge ol
blk uyder- Jacob. Lettie goodt come Copty the felurs
Heat wye ce we vs the chenden that ave pat: / what
che vnde rade they be:let them declare thé vnto bs chat we
erroutes mape take themto herte / a knowe the berat-
the Lr ter. Ether / let them ewe vs chynges for to
bebe le come, tell os that Palbe done beratter:fo
fcutefall sand (all we knowe / that they be goddes. Shew


Vt) dallnewlomthing / ether good oz bad: Co will we both


ai e grace of Enowiedgethe tame“ tellit out.
Kenneth Sebold pegoddes ate Of naught/ pour
water of veri makynge is or naugbt /butabbomypnacpon
te, Where allhath chofen pou. Peuertheles J haue wa ·
astullof @ Red bp one from the Boꝛch / She wall come.
Abacho nad AND another From the Galt which Mall call
¢ of dpnchpng OpONImpname/¢ cpallcome to the Pzinces/
exrouces: thee aß the Potter to his clape/ a as the Potter
rebel the der treadeth downe ß myze. Who toldeg afore?
ande th ches Do wpil we contede @ fape/that he (8 tigh-
bith gonlpwp(CUOUS, But there is none that lueweth or de.
Tee nee e lese“ we fet

gol reth poure woꝛdes. ol 20
Jork nberb GuaLite the of Dion ¢Ferutalem tobe cus
eh wier geliſtes. But whe J cofpoze:there is not one
by they maße amöge the that prophecpeth meter when A
dach p.ufet doe alhe hym) ß ant wereth one woꝛde. Lo / wiẽ⸗
e at hy

itefull Watt eptake in bande:p aretbey /ai
war nacken their . —
‘thus tabeny 33 je Comm} ol Lhzittar yi me.
Ba, San cbe. i ch


elo cal tg.


‘bpm my ſpꝛete/ that he map ſhewe koꝛth iud·


gement a equxte amonge the Gentyles. He


Hall not be an outerper / ner ange mended
perlon. Pra vopce thall not be hearde in the
ſtretes. J bꝛoded rede wall he not bzeake /a
@ thefmokpng far Mall he not quench: but
kapthkullp ¢ truly Mall be geue iudgement.
He ſhall nether be ouerlene ner halte / that
he maype reſtoꝛe rpghtuoutnes onto p earth:
and the Gent ples alfo call Repe his lawes,
Forthus lapeth Sodche Lord bnto himleuẽ
be that? mane heauks a lpzedthem abzꝛode

C let forth the earth with her increte: whych
geueth bꝛeath vnto the people that is in it / ẽ
Coder that dwell therin) J the Loꝛde haue
cealledthe in rightuouſneſſe / a ledthe by the
bande Cherfoze wyll J allo de fende the / and
geue the fo2 a couenaunt of the people / a to
de p lygut of 5 Sentries. Chat thou mapeſt
open the epes of che bipnde / iet out the pꝛito ·


Olæelay.


xiiij.
7
ners fe them that fytin darcknecke /out of the
dongeon houte, J my leite / whole name is 5
che Lozde / whech geue my power to none
other / nether myne Honoureto the Goddes:
fhew row thele newe tydynges / and tell vou
them oꝛthex come / co olde thenges allo are
come to patie, :
Synge therfore vnto the Lozde /a new
fonge of thanckes geuynge / blowe ourhrs
pꝛaple vnto the ende ok tze world. Cher that
be vpon the ſee / g all that is therin / pꝛaple
bim the Fles ather p dwell in chem. Let the
wyldernẽs with her cities lylt vp her voyce /
the townes allo that be in Cedar. Let them
be glad that ipt vpõ rockes of ſtone / a let the
.
al / emagnyl
bimamonge the Gentyles. Che Lozde hail
come forth ag a gyaunte /g take a tomackhe
tobpmipkeasa fret man of warre. e al
toare and cre / and ouercome his enem pes.
Ihaue longe holden my peaceſcapeth the
Lopoe)ihulneZ therfoze be ttyit /a kepe ly.
lence Foz euer: wyll crxe lxe a traueiynge
won / and once wll J deſtrope / a deuoure,
J wyl make watte boch mountapne a hrll/
Gdzpe vp euerpgrene thynge that groweth
theron. J wyll doe vp the floudes of water /
ard duncke bp the rruers. J wyll bzinge the
blende in to a ſtrete / that they knowe note
lede thé in toa fore path / thatthey are igno⸗
raunt in. J ch all make darckeneſſe light bee
kope then andthe thinge that is crokẽd to be
t. Chele thinges wyll z do / a not foꝛ⸗
get thẽ. And therkoze let them conuerte / abe
atbamed earneſti / ? hope in Jdoles / z faye
bo kacbroned pmages:yeare ure godes.
Heare, O pe deat men / and ſharpẽ poure
lightes tolelch ve blynde.) But who is bun ·
der ten mp Ccruaunt : O; fodeat / ag mp a. gpetams
mellaungerg / whom J lentvnto the? Foz gers. we mene
who is lo bünde as my people / a they phaue bete the hende
che ule of the: ahep are Iphe/as pethbuvn⸗ n oer
deräoden moch Beprrſ notiyeng:07 pf one ect Chee
peroe tell Autmere pee bedient. Che L od hunde baus ta
e mereptul vnco che £62 his rightuoutiette ugde theother /
lake / cht his worde myght be magnylped gout thep were
prapled, Butitisamplcyeuous L wycked an cha a
ple. Cheit pounge men belöge all tothe seth meyegoo
e / and walbe hut into pꝛelon houles. ſpell. Boche
Cher cbalbe carpedawaxe captyue / and no tber beat alltp
man wal lewfe the. pep calbe froden pr ute dhe well.
der kote/ ano ma thall labouretobzinge the ven zu.
agapne. But who is he amũõge vou hat po-
dieth this in his mende / that conlxdꝛeth it / g
taketz it koꝛ a e in tyme to come:
Who: Jacob to be trodden under
fote and Icrnel to de ſpopled: yd not the
Lopde? Nöwhaue we fenned agarnſt hyn /
thauebadnobelpte to walcke mbis ware /


Ilraell.
nether bene obedxent vnto his lawe. Cher⸗


foze bath he poured bpon vs bys wꝛathkull
dplplealure / Eronge batell which maketh
vs haue todo on cuctylyDe/ vet wyll we not
vnderſtande: Pe burneth vs vp / vet lyncketh
itnot in to oute hertes. 1

Tod prometeth to fende his Kyrie which Hall dee
ſpuer bys people. Be forgeuety Cpnnes For bys atone


foi J wyll dekende the. haue cal-
ledthe bynam̃e / thou art myne ãwne. idhẽ
ou wenteſt in che water / J was by the / 6
e ſtrög loud, chuld not pluck the awape,
When thou wälckeſt in the kpe / itchall not
burne the / andthe fame wall not kindle vpõ
the. Foꝛ am the Loꝛd thy God / the holpone
OF Alrael chr Sauyour.4 gaue Egypte to
thb delpueraunce / the Wozpans ¢ the Da ·
bees fo2 the: pecaule thou walt deare in my
light / a becaule I tet by the / and louedthe. J
pplled all men fos che del puered bp al peor
5 foz thy lake / that thou chuldeſt not feare /
V {024 was wych the. J wyllbzenge th lede
fromthe Catt / and gather the together from
the 9609 well fave tothe Qoꝛth / let go.
Andto § South / kepe not backe: but bzing
me my konnes kr karre / and my daughters
From the endes of the wozdde: Qamely / all
chole chat be called aftermpname:f oz them
baue J created / talſhroned / and made fog
mne honcure.
Bunge Copth that people / whether they
yee epes oz be blynde / deake oꝛ haue cares,
Unacvons Mall come in one / and be gathe⸗
red in one people. But which amongẽ pons
dergoddes chall declare ſochethynges / f tell
bs what is to come: Let them hinge their
wytneſles / to wall they be kre: to then men
call heare it / z lape / it istruth.
eld Leer )euen
avert
ſento the inte
cer


Irdꝛẽ / that amhe / bekoze whom there was
neuer any God / and that there ſhalbe none
frets teen Kae eee een
nabe whole/a teach pouthatthere aio


The Pr


lende to Babplon/ebzpnge all the ſtrögelt
of them trom thence: Pamelp / the Chalnees
that boot chem of thet hyppes: uenZ the
Loꝛde poure bole one which haue made Ic⸗
rael / and am poute Benge. Mozeouer / thus
fapeth the L oꝛdeleuẽ he chat maneth a wave
in the lee /s a footpath in the myghtye wa-
ters: which bꝛyngeth koꝛth the charettes a
hoꝛles / the botte a the power / that they mar
kall a llepe a neuer ryſe / and be ertincte like
as towe is quenched.

Yeremembze not thynges ol olde / and re ·
garde nothinge thatis pat. e Chertore bes, 4 Thyerfoe
howe /J Wallmakeanew thynge / ¢ Moztip oar J Sat
wall it appeare: ve tall well knowe it J ryingesce. be
told it pou ate / butꝗ wil tel it you agaynt᷑. meaneth that
well make ſtretes inthe delerte arpucrs de well fortate
Of water in ehe welocrnes.*Cye wride bea. bier her an,
ſtes call woꝛchyppe meiche dzagon/and the DD de pr,
Eüryche Foz 4 wall geue water in the wyl⸗


ple /r
: tic offences
dernelke / and ſtreames in the delerte: that F 90 N rr


thoubaddelt anbniut towarde me h A ura der
nel. „Chou gauelt me not chr rouge mbc. frrv.à
beattes Foz burntoct ryngz nether dydelt ho⸗ r rüte,
noureme with thy lacrpfices. Chou bough⸗ b= he wie
telt meno degrelpice sbebpmonep /nether dare hat
pourcdel the fatt of typ factifices bponme, Oe" —
Dowbeit I haue not bene chargeable onto Under thenae
the in es / nether greudus in incente, meot eheleben
* But hou hack lade me with chp fpnnes/ Hes rden
and werttedmewych tene bngadlenes, HAS tebe
here as J vet am euen he onlp/ that rr wyide /rude
koz mpne awnẽ felkes lake do awape thrne 2 beadig cone
Offences / a koget thy fprnes:fothat J wyll dernen gon
heucrthpnckebpon chem. put me now errr te
in vemembzaunce)fo? we wyſl reaton toge ·
ther) a thew what ee 228 85


eno raunge Godamonge pou. Andthes Pers the
recoꝛde mult pe beareme pourtelues (apt 3.


the Loꝛde)that J am God. And euen he am
Atromthe begennnng / ethere is nonẽ that
eee e

Ghus fapeth the Londtheboipone of gc.
rael poure redemer: Foꝛ vourelake J wyll


uer fet greatly bp them / ner greatly 2 greued me
3 kerth ab . genet wns ane


thou not onto memeber


2


engerer ur mihi kacrikices “tnt dpoet ont latplkpe ęueria


atone fuperficions.3 compelled the not to wo; me with
. — een ee nb inges vue
Jbolesakter toe maner of the Beathen cömaunded that they chulde
Aut br offced onto other goddes unt pute me/of whole gpét thou ter
geurdes them s cetera None of all thele thinges profyted me: mas
much as thou lekteſt of the thinges which 3 cheklp regupꝛed / rigbtu⸗
aulnts kap ch and iudgement. Bat rxch. Then halt moch more
ofinded me topth thp lynnes then that thon canũ plapte me wich all
thelecevemonpess which i nat them that de them / ner bi
them mto my kaucuxe /in telle than thep bempbeloued
fayth. „ Ho maner of Jboles ner the pkpces of oxen / hept / o
pg ner the merptes of thp twozckes/ hom precpous 0; goodly f&
ter they be / do put awape inne: But J Imp elke alone by mp once
Apmercps grace do pardon them / oo all thole that beleue that 3 lo do
e donotones remember them to thintent to punpihe them: Fee and
krelg krgeue them Bom. in. d. J am not bounde vnto the / that bate
often fallen from thy farth which J onelpregarde. „Or elles
ge me in remembü ace reaton the matter w me! g Hew meſwhe⸗
ther thou haue alwapes moze provoked me bute anget/oz J haue ‘bene
dürrmoch fauo able vnto thez¢ whether J haue euer bene readper tt
kngeue /then thoutoamende. Chow cant ſurelp neuer bepnge any
thpnge fo: kde / wher by thou mayer ‘iuttpfpe thy caute agapnft me.
don hak not choten me/but J haut choten the. J made thy father
Adam. Gene l. d. which trepght wapestranigredled the cOmaunde+
ment, Sene 1h, a b And Ababa coulde not be iudtpFpedy bis workesy
but Sp his kapth. Bom. il a. As ne nother ma can-whole whole tpi is
fall of lynne euen from their chyldehade / peceuen he that lpucth but
‘Adape Jacob was preferred before Sian mot for his merites d deler·
upn jes hut by cleccpoy. Sen rrb Rom ir. b. hp rular g das come
Stabe) Inter pretoures Woles and Aaron-were not founde without
offerice before me! but {pred agapnſt me. Numer. xte. Therfote not
twithouta cauſe plled J chp Yrpnces and Welte of the Soanctuas
whlch Shulde offer both For them Celnes and for the people. Betz. bi.
In no man ipupng Wat be indpfped in mp fight. Pal. clit, And the
Aungels are not — N hy ona poe bok
are this ürtte neched ? Kut dpe 2 pine cone
1 of Jacob after the flech which be out of kynde
concernpng the lee / co that they thalbe a cure the a
where as on the other fpde:the trucand leafull Connes of Jacob halbe
thebledpng of all nacpous thorowd hit / n whõ all econ thalbe
Bieted. Ge ue. xi. a. aud Gan. 1 . c. Gouchfafe) good reader /
borrsde the tert with all: lo walt thou per ceaue to which parte of the
bext rutrę parte or the note belongetg.
@ abe xllitj. Chapter.
¶ Chyitt pꝛome ſeth to del puer his churche / which be
2 bath Seam UT b buelpng before pmages rc.
onkuted.


O heare now / O Jacob my ter.
uaſit / a Ilrael whom haue cho⸗


Ok Elay.


rb.


its he / that euer was lyke me / which am krom Sule lapestes
tinge? Let im wewe hes name, and il the wal
do wherethoꝛow he may be llkened vnto me. ouer are there
Lethim tell pou fozth planelpthinges / that of the Landes,
are paſt ¢ fozto come: pee ¢ 5 without ang People’ ye cue
keake or Koppe. Forhauc not N euer taide rache.
rouhrtherto / a warned you? Ye can beate
me recoꝛde poure ſeiues. Is there any God
. . fhulde not
Wherkoze all caruerg of Idoles are but
varne / a their labour lok. Cheymuſt beare
recoꝛde them lelues /that(fepng thep cannes
cher ſe ner vnderſtande) they walbe conkoũ⸗
ded. ho hulde now make a God / o kalbid
an Idole / chat is pꝛołytable £o7 nothynge?
Bcholde / all the flows yppe of the mutt be
brought to conkulpon. Let all the woꝛkma ·
fers ol them come a Hande together From
amonge men:ther muſt be abaſbedand con ·
kounded one with another. Che tmith taketh
yꝛon and temper eth it wich boate coales/
Fath ponety ic nu hammers J maketh te w ete! the ce
allehe Grengty of his armes: pee lometpme foto uclp the
beis farnt fo7 bery hunger andlotburſtpe“ woppete pern
Phe hach no moze power. Che carpẽter(oz teth oute the
zmage caruet) taketh meat oF the tymbze: d danitic of yma
Epzedetl Forth bys tone she marketh it wech pr ren tber
fome coloure:he plapneth it / he ruleth it / and oure tupertiye
ſquareth it /a maketh it after the ymage ok a cvon / concer /
man andaccopdpng to the bewtye ol aman: ays pale e
that it mape ſtande inthe temple. ges / pt moe
Wozeoucr /hegoeth cute tohewe downe c ide mn
Cedie trees: He berngeth home Eimes and peracid of the
Ohes / and other tymbze ofthe wod. Dz cis Ietes. ues
the Korte trees which be plantea hem keik A semen tee
loch aa the rarne hach finelled whch wod mn our tome
ferueth kor men to burne. OF this he taketh can inno were
and warmeth hymkelke withallehe maketh a ve pertuadcoto
kpꝛeokit to bake bꝛed. And afterwarde ma. become Ehr
Beth a God there of to honoureit:g an Foote ur ft bone
to knele befoze it. One pece he burneth in p ¢ knele before
kyꝛe / wich another he roſteth flety p he mape pmages. Their
eate roſte bys belp full: wych the thyde he amtwere ah,
warmech pm kek alavech aha am wen 76 We oe
warmed haue bene at the kpre.Andokthe Sooyeuioetn
relpdue he maketh hema God and an Adele no condicysd0


rruers fozhymicife. He kneleth betoꝛe it / he woz- any thing that


cpppeth te he pzapeth onto it/¢ lapeth deit⸗ open a
uer me /fozthouart my God. as dae ds
Pet men nether conlidꝛe ner vnderſtande / Ehe Curcken


One becaule their eyes are ſtopped / that they can : Saracenes al


Boche Well lap: Jam the l. meg. Another wil call


IR lentence is vnder the name ol Jacob. Che thyme ſhalde·


there before in fcrpbe wyth bps hande vnto the Loꝛde and
ale, Leue tym elke brderthe name of Prat.

e. Morcoucr/thus hath che Lorde tpoken.

Beuen the Krnge of grraei / and his auenger/

the Lozdeot Poſtes J am § fpr ache iat/

and without me is there no God. soz what


br One
dak.


hot fe:and their hertes that hep cannot per: mock ether
ceautechey ponnzenotinthetembes, ay . e
cher haue necher nowiedge ner bnderttan⸗ (aye beg end
dong to thyncke chus: haue bꝛent one pece trueth tt ts)
inthe kyꝛe: J haue baked bred with the coles ought we toler
theveot/% haue rotten lech with all g eaten tet ue an
iethall Z now ofcherelrdue make anabho- PA ae
Inpnacyon/¢ Fall downe befoze a rottẽ pece therta/ ner tar

ol Wod? de awwaze / urg


The delpuerauuce
e keppng ok dult / and toll
er ko cwarue e ok duft / a ichnelle
ute platin of erte hach turned the a kede : fotbat none
earnottiyto aa or chem can haue a tre contcience tothyncke:
de bp f whpch ma pe not I erred,
Geimale 28 Contyarethis( D Tacob ¢ Trach fo thou
Scie men acme Deal irae
8 eme. iel / Corget me not.
Santana 38 Coy the odences 79 bepuctyem atpaye


The Pꝛophety


Loe a ber⸗ Irke the cloudes and th fpnnes as the miſt. th


ter trade ¢ coe Curnepagapne onto me / z J will deltuer ß.
amg rſenthat, Be glad ve beanés whomche Loydebath
dor dutoe wih made / et al chat is here beneth bps g earth /
oure efapte be be fopfull Reiople ve moũtapnes a woddes /
anofienceether with all the trees that are in zou: ka; 9 L070
fo Jets 08°? eyall vepemte Facob and Merwe his glozy pS
tonepethé tra lrael. Kor thus tapth 5 Loꝛde thy redemer /
thefapth ot kuen he chat kachtoned the krom thy mothers
Thu: And ge, wombe: Jam ? Loꝛde / which do alithinges
ue the ben, my kelke alone. J onlpbaue fpzed oute the
dale tbe kalt, heaueng and A ontp baue lapde the foundas
deedor Pluttei pon OF the earth, Adeſtrope the tokeng of
wohich fa: Incee toitches/ gmake the Both lapers go wzöge.
. theit Ag fo2 the wyle / A turne them backwarde / z
mbues-s C+ make their connpnge kolpchnelle.

But I let vp che purpole of my leruaun⸗
. 49 58 ents of 25 1 e
+ Chats gers. Alapeto Jerulalẽ: turne agapne: And
dend cher tothe lech Aa dere bun agapne:
eaheelrhe reo and Zl tepapze ere Decapen places. fapeto
ple. che ground: be die. And J dzbe vp thy water
lloudeg. Alaye to C pꝛus:thou art myne herd ·
man: to that he tall fulfill all thinges atter
my will. Pape to Jerulalem: be thou bupl⸗

ded / a to che temple:be thou Fatt grounded.
C Che delpurance ot the peaple bp Lyrus . Che ce

myng of E 5 an callpug of the @entples,


his anopnted/ whom he ledeth op

ſerigh bande: the people mape

kal downe betoze him: A wil lomte

pedo ther kings: p they wal open ö gates
eboze chytace / a not to (hut their dozes. 4
fi go betoze the / z make 8 crozedütrerght
GJ hall bꝛeaße the bꝛalen doꝛes / a burt the
pion barres. 3 ſhal geue the thehyd trealure
Ethe thinge th ych is fecretiy kepte: g thou
mateft knowe / that J § Gov ok Alrael haue
called the by thy name: athat for Jacobme
feruauntes lake / and for Flraclmyp chocen.
For Icalledthe bythe name / a oꝛdened the
02 euer thou kneweſt me: Euen J the Loꝛd /
beloꝛe whom there is none other: Foz with⸗
but me there is no God. J haue pꝛepared the
oz euer thou kneweſt m̃e: that it naht be
mowne fromthe rycynge of the funne to the
gornge downe of che lame /s all is nothing
foithoutme. Foz g am the Lone / a there is
Els none. It is I that createdthe lygbt and
darcknes / A make peace a trouble: pee euen


br the


the people: haue they enp vnderſtandynge /
that let vp the ſtockes of their Idols /e

vnto a God / f can nat helpe them Lett men
dꝛawenpe / let them come hyther / and alue
Coficell one at another /a ſhe we forth: hat
is he / chat todde this betoꝛe:oꝛ who lpake of
it / euer fence the begynnynge : aue not 3 8
Loꝛde done it: wrthout whom there is 85


cee


vnto me / and all tunges thal weare byme /
fayinge: Gierely in the Lone is mp reg ·
tudumes and ſtrength. Co hym hall men
come. but allthep z thpnche fcozne of hym /
thalbe cõkounded. And the whole lede or Ee
rael ſpalbe iuſtikxed / a pꝛayledin p Loꝛde.


latrp is repcurd. t
cet, ren seems


2
che. lvl. Chapter.

A Cuercheles * Bell chan fall / and

2 Nabo ſwalbe bzoken. whole pma-

ay Bells ga. ges are a burthen foz the beates


N 3 catell/ to ouerlade them / and to


apes.


Herken onto me / O houſe ol Jacob / and
Ball pe that remarne vet oF Bhouspotne Of Fle
racl: whom A haue ome Ero poure mothers
brs goin wombe /g bought vou bp from pour birth,
to them ſelues / tyll ye weere growen: J J whych Mall beare
to take good pou vnto youre laſt age: q haue made you /
gl u renten, A. well alto nospch pou, beare vou and laue
un.. vou. hom wyll pe mate me iPke in fach
cube mraneth 02 page /h A mape br lpke him: Ve fooleg
Arge Cyrus (no doute) wyll take out ſyluer a golde oute
which Guide of poure purtes/@ wepett /andbpreagold-
cep mith tomake a Goo okit/ me mare uncle
downe ¢worthippeit. Vet mut he be taken
bree a, on mens woulders a bozne / a let in his pla⸗
Aae thecethathe mare tande anok moue. Alas 6
7 ee men Gulbe cee bntobiny which deute
(ie fulxpil anlwere: and delpuereth not the ma e calleth
Laune du vpon him / krom his trouble.


ora Cont pore this weil / and be athamed,*Go


bone
tsi


_ Fervour
oi


sat plptped /and kulkelleth all my pleature.
Purge. be call a“ bpide out of the Galt /andalltyat
fyech Cropftiptabe in hãde / out of karre cofitrees/as foone
sitofthe eat apy cömaunde/ Abzyngeithither:as feone
dea ts out oe ag I thyncke to deuple a thynge/ doit.
Seales ze, eaceme/D pe Bare ofanbye ftomack/
ela, dun u keö rpgbtuoucnelle / wall bunge
al ig, Cogth my ryghtüdulnelle. It is not karre / z


we 2
vj.
myheaith Hail not tarpe löge awape wil
Jape health in Di / & geue Ftrael mp giozy,
che worde of the Londe agapnſt wWabylon,
¶ Che. roi} Chapter. :


0 ag lor 5 O daughter thou bir⸗
20 Babylon) a Chou alt tye in
due thou walt dit vpõ p groũde / 4 ar Cotyt tt


ot in a trone (O thou maxden ok theduct us to
Shame) Chou thaleno moze be called reder fe Long
$ plealaũt. Chou Malt bang forth d br quer⸗ reip arayca x
ne a grinde meele/put downe thy ſtomacher decked: io type
make bare thy knees a Malt wade thozotp without Pope
water ruers. hy Mame halbe diccouered / fevettace 955
andthr paeurties cpalbe fene . Ko: 2 well gre ast cars
auenge ine of the / and no man (rail lett me: ona. 5. che
lapeth cure redemer / which is called 5 Word Wzopherebere
ok Hoſtes the holy one of Jcrael. Se e te
Sve tipi holde thy tunge/g get the into satya onbee
fome darcke coꝛner / O daughter Chaldea / thefpgure ota
koꝛ thou ſhalt nomoze be called lady ol ing: proude quene:
domes J was fowzoth with my people p Adula
puniched mene enberitaunce g gaue them bent
to thy power Neuertheles thou ſbewedeſt youghe vp /
thẽ no merey / but euen the very aged men ok attcr fell into
the oivett thou oppzelle rpght fore wpth thycrtreame por
pock/@thou thoughtettehus . 3 thalbelanp terre mp ne
fo2 euer. And belrde all  / thoũ halt not re⸗ atze vnder⸗
garded thele things nether caſt / what chulde gandeth bythe


/ come akter. Peare now therfoze / thou wpll- querue /o2 (as


Eull/ bl pttelt Co carelene/a kpeanelt chus in fore Feane)
thine perte J am alone / ¢ out mets there pos vil ela
none: J Hall neuerbe wydowe / ner delolate tex condrerö.
agarne. And pet both thelethingz wall come
to the vpõ one dapein the twyncklpng of an
epe:Qamelp wyodowhead / and deloſacpon.
Chev Hall mightely fall vpö the for pmul⸗ C
titude of thy witches / ko the greatebeape
ok thy cöturers Foz thou halt comfosted thy
lelle in thy dpfceatfuines / and halt fayte:
Homan kepth me. Chyne awne wyldome ¢
connynge hath dilceauedthe. Inthat thou
halt fapde: J amalene /a without me there
is none. Chẽerloʒe Hall trouble come bpop /
g thou Wait not knowe / from whẽce it Halt
arple. Myſchele thal fa vpõ p / which thou
Walt not be able to put ol. 4 lodane wpterr a
hall come vpõ the / oꝛ euer thou be awarre.

Now goto thpconiurers/ and to themul⸗
titude or thy witches (whom thou halt bene
acquanted withall fromthy youth ) pk they
mape helpe the / or ſtrengthen the. Thou halt
hitherto had many councels of them / ſo let
che heauengalers a the beholders of ſtarres
come on nowanddelpuer the pee a lett them
ſhewe / when tzele new thynges than come
Hon the. Beholde cher halbe lyke ſtrawe /
which vk it be kyndled with kyꝛe / no mã mape
rydde it koꝛ the bez emence of the flame: End
gE it geueth no fynders to warme a man

mer cleave rege ot br. cut lo tee

0


Ilrael. The


be pnto the whom thou haſt ble a occupp⸗
de krom thy routh. Euerp one wall che we §
be eee waxe / vet (halfnone of them
e 2

8 oerplie of the Fetes ts reproued The Lorde.
Aud be wah wor bath cholen va / and

which eon reih vs kor his atone lage.

¶ Che xivuj Chapter.
ate this, O thou houle of Jacob:
that are called be the naine ol
DNV Piaicrael/eavecomeoutofone Rocke
were äub⸗ E W Juda: which Cweare bp § name
buvnefrowar OF the L oꝛde / z beare witnelle bylde God ol
Atti, Aalto 2 — G0 obey eg
Called Fre men ol the holy cytic/ as they that
viele. w alone ta 7 — in fos of Hraell / whole
be Some rea, name is the Lozoe oholtes.
de; Beholde 4 Che thinges 6 Achewed vou euer tence
bane purpfprothe beg pnnpnge : au I not bzought them
thebue not as ö

fpluec:4 baue to Pade imme dtatip as thep came out or mx
choten the out mouth / ¢ declared them? And ther are come?
oe ß fournette Howbeit z knewe that thou art obſtynate /
e Ich chrnech hach an pon bepne, and z
Ae hn, Aw (OY DzoWwe ts ol bzate Meucrtheles J aue
apne aoe la, euer fence p begynnung lh wed the or thing
be haue donekoz to come / anddeclal cd them vnto the / oꝛ
thys :for we euer they came to pale: that thou ſhudeſt
Ppp olle not Capecmpne Fool hath bone t mpcarued
fred teulp3 wü 02 kalt rage hath wewedit. Beare and con-
aot geue mp Lpder all thele thinges whether it was ꝛe s
Slope to V pꝛophecped them: But as fog me / 3 tolde the
anpother, de befozeat the begynnynge / new ard lecrete
echt. 66-10 things that thou kneweſt notof: and lome
it chu J 000 done now not ol olde tyme / wherol thou ne ⸗
not Cufiee the uer herdeſt / befoze they were bzought to
pa aah 5 Ms paſſe:that thou canſt not ſaye: J knewe ol
bp ehem. Wozeuer there be lame wher oF thou
parpfied eye cs halt nether berdener knomne/ nether haue


golde adler isthep bene opened vnto thine eares alozeume l


kund Kom 0 knew that thou woldeſt malicyoully
lh dttmmar Offenide / therfoze haue J calico the a trani⸗
ner of drome is grelloure / euen from thy mothers wombe ,
cleanied/there Peuertheles koꝛ my names Cake /g haue
chulde nothing withdzawen my wath / a oz myne honours
theke ake K haue ouerkene the/ tochat J haue not
pels eyaths 5 Beholde 1 —
Guid baue beet not foꝛ monepe. haue cholen the
ne laued 60 he un b Fyre ok powerte/ And that only Foz myne
Sade Ben atone faßte / fon F geue myne honouretonone
them the four other / that thou chumdeſt not defppre me.
nelle of afflicet Herken bnto me D Jacob / a Flrael whom
Fee © fr amatbe lad. r zander nde
and the att, isthe founda.
227 bontage neben céthe rarth / z my right ande fpanneth
Egvpte / kromouer the heauens. Ag foone as I calied them
wipch J aftecthep were there. Gather you all together a
warde delpues herken: Phich of ponder goddes decla⸗
b i
abe J, ed this that the Loꝛde wyll do by the kynge
ne fo; myne ol Sabyld( whomehe louieth ¢fauoureth)
wonelan, and br s Caldecs his arme: Amp telt alane


Pꝛophety


haue tole vou ths bekoze. Pee 2 Mall call chat s, ovety
bim and beinge him Forth a geue him p70- fa mpg atone
kperous tournepe Come npe andheare this: ar mg kee
baue J tpoken eny thynge darcktp fence tye geatpines z tg
e athpage beg enneth / .
uDbertoze the Lowe God with bis pete in wet,
bath rene me amathus tatery tae Lops Sed o grant
thine auenger / the holp one of z ftaell: 3 am were none at
che Lozdthp God / whych teach f profitable aul. 0 den
thinges s leade d the ware at thou pul- hahe
det go YEtbou wilt now regarde my cõma / bane poluteb⸗
undement / thr weith nes ſyalbe as the wa. defpicais Liste
ter ſtreame: a thprightuoutnes as § weucs Phemcbnkre-
Glotognge in che fer. chp fede thalbelpseas MP3 bate
thetandetn thetee / athe frute of thy bod, sone pech
Ipke thegrauel ſtones therok: Chy name fo hare made ß
Wallnot be roted out / noꝛ deſtropẽd beroze trrcth cr che
me. Ye wal goawapr from Babrlon /anb e fn.
eleape the Caincestwithamerpboyce CIS d tele
Walbe fpokẽ of declared abꝛode / a go Forth früm Chig⸗
nto the ende ol the woꝛlde: lo that it halbe vapacsontrues
karde Cye Lozde hach defended bis ferutatite F% #6 we
Jacob that ther Cutfeed no thurtte / when eh en
theptrauepled inthe wilderneſſe. Be claue p tye gio:portye
40 l 0 pent 3 be gufthed cit, beg pane
‘ozthe vngodle / they haue no peace mide
faterbebe Lade. . Saareny
not geue vnto another people o; nacyon. The health of the w. Ad
all come ok the Je wes. Joh. g. ¢ tom rene other. Che glen ips
255 ar health Ghat thẽ whole worlde receaue oe uo uriher thea
Cheilt / by the ꝛeachengt ot the Apoſtles. c.
¶ Che. xlix. Chapter.
Capit — eee nacps be they ne ·
ner fo karre of. a
Zen Iles bergen ontome/ a tage u. ope: es
bede de people fx6 fare: Che 1070 puppe ub
acy called me kro mybpꝛth / and veto. wp rie
1 made mencpon of mpnamte kromy
mothers tombe: ve he hath made my mou bebe han
nnr onicethe Madowe of MF pe?
bps bande bath he defended me / a hro me in (werde hats
bis qu puer / as a good atome andſa pre vnto ke hath ren
me: Chou art my leruaunt z fraell, 3 wylbe me the (pete
Yonoureoin the. Then anlweide 3 c celle een
lere mp labcure /3 tall tpende my üer gib aba np net
in bapne Heuertheles J will commptte my de
caule and my wocke onto the Loꝛomp Gon, cena
And now lapeth the L. ozd / euen he f relic. Somber ,


wer eher r


5 77 plete ge nd bis ler- tes of the chee
mape bunge Facobagapne ten which
ontobimhotbeit Ffrael witinot be gathe-te mes 1


red vnto himagayne. In whoſe frght J am them 19 re.


grenteſbich altois me Lom, mp Godan i rene
my Grength. Lett it be but a lmallthynge / zwpektd tobe
that thou art my leruaũt / tolett vp d kore woute ercule
reddes of Jacob / a to teftoze the delltuccion crete cp the
of Ffracil : pt makethenotaltothe kor bre en,
ok the Sentiles) ß thoumapett bempbealth p racypnge of
bnto the ende ofthe tmoztoe, kde warde 46
Mopeouer cap Tc.


27 Dol
weite fag
Ade Aber a wifes


fa awape.“ Chen the
feces fabsinge forth onto the /
Greltherd.a- this place isto narom
ae afew mape haue rowme.
dae


fa z ei hobach


Getareicrea ann ehertoze tus


s are repꝛoued / and allo called.
Che. l. Chapter. ;
Dus laieth the Loꝛde: here is p
byll of pours * mothers deuorce⸗ 1
ment / that J Cent vntoher ozwho as rod was
5 is the blurer (to who J lolde pou: not the ene
AHevolde / fo; poure awne offences ave pe Me The he
tolde: and becaule of pouretranigredion / is Jewes (whych
youre mother kozlaken. Foz why wolde no io vudeetande


je, man receaue me / when I came-and when J bp mathe. and


was one: ys


koꝛſabe called / nau man gaue me ant were. Was mb pouch) as bh


bande clene fmptéoF/ pit mightnothelpe: o Upteb ¢ fon
had J not power to delpuer⸗ io / ata wozde J, due thee

e dine vp lee / got water loud J make dae B une, ote
lande: lo p £07 wat of water /p kich korruppe ahn n ws
and die or chuzſt. As fo: heauen/ I clothe it the caule wür
put a lack vponit. thep were lolde

ath geuẽ mea wel lerned tothe vturer x
kon the which are krou⸗ grea pb o

Gentyles |
ean


4 tonpans⸗
G5 rn
Loꝛde God helpech me/s Bomar is.
ot be conkounded. J haue a
fipne ſtone / lo: J am 5
o confulpon. Myne


chere be enx that wyl reaton with

come here koꝛth to me. 12 9 75
eth by me / what she Bb -
10 / they walbe all ye


that Beholde / wil ſtreth out myne bande to the


Atumber.
thep Galt uot Sentiles and fett bp my token to the
See eee ep tal printer

fot te nt bes Tandcarrechr deut


e i
ters vntothe vpon vpon him / let


Jerulalem. The Propheep


amholdehem by his God. Buttakehede/ aimoztalimd che chiloe of mS which goeth
‘ tapes 2 755 481 aware as doeth ö loure: And fozgettelk the
dens baue lelues tb flame: ye walcke in p gliltrynge Londe that made the that ſpꝛed aut the hea⸗
amn debe. oc youre tune kyꝛe/ and in the flame that pe uens and lerde the foundacpon of the earch.
ea u Faure hauehendlep. Chis cometh onto poufro y But tyowart euer akrapde Cop the teabt or
offences} wes hande namely that ve Gall fepe in fozowe. thyne oppzedoure / which is ready todobar-
wong. en ccd mut therfopefutier che erm eben me.tBbere isthe wrath ofthe opprelioure?

gyng. Aer it cometh of poure atone deferupug that 3 fo layt my had It cOmeth on kalt, it maketh hate to apeare: E
nenen e ee l. chapter Aecpaüno pertty that ie wude not be able
e
1 een t the the make the lee to be tplt/andto rage: whole


th andiope was there / thanckelgeuing
Petje erg. haa bn! Lomb


e. lj. Chapter,
BP von pp / take thy Erengty.
nto the: put on chyne boneſt rape
nent O Ferulalem / thou cptye ot
8 be holp one. Foz from thes tyme
oath / chere Hallnobnctrcumepledner vn


Art not thou he that bat woundedthat
pꝛoude luciler / a hewẽ the dragon in peces?


ok the


Ok Clay, hij,


itt. : ne /anddetppten ofall which per
ans aught. moſt ſympie / an
on 5 1 om e bath good erpertence of loꝛowes a infitmyp-
Tone) ne people stieg anieb wage) tes te @aileehen yim fotemiple @obile?
eee Sum Ono e
been mer Arllblalppemerelabethche be ot Pein
e e bd e knowe my inkirmite/ and beareth oute papne: Vet we
Coe ET neemt kale win peache chat bare, tal ubgebim/as hough be were plageo a
what kü, name /I my Celée will (peache in that bape. a ited bec aun i
ad ech Beholde/ here am J. O how bewtikull are 5 cal domneg bop ante dene /g
bude m eech. re /p batngeth 5 mel. dyng) wall be wounded foz
ren ee .
S e ee
ade Bing. Dp matcomne Ma 4 reach of bpm: euery one** curnet) bpsatone wape. Put G 2
Be au cd tall bie vent oben b Lape bonner He de arne parnonet all wal og n
d is — e agapne to Dion lynnes. He Mal be papned a wee e been
ee Geran arte eres
iche toveropce togetberstoz the nr tol com otopen bis mouth, bertes une
S er gerulslem. Che bekape the wearer / and not op Kot
ee
it al
ee e weve
Sg gyence@tousp noBriceane ener ou pans al go bp i oan gage
mac ee eed amonge loch. And be cleane/pepbeare ? gretlion of mp people. ney aha dh 11 7
e ut wen wit) the conte Mpned/ SBIECTUCE pant pe
Reinet acne ate OE erer eg meer baer ree
Bean dernden ot ye Lovue Mall go Uerer beneenpDifceatiuinedeinbés mouth, | WHERE
Wey, ene Teta arf Lone ong: i
Sahat isto all he be magnytped jeraltedand twit) in le lüge
See e b multitude thal de eee ge
e Abit) cauaple@
Base nought pe namen erento mballehemulepeuneot. 1avoute of is oule/Gallbe obtayne great
koche e ne no man: Euen Co Mall the’ ches. Bp rpghtuous leruaunt hall wets
2 rache Gétples Toke bnto him the Erg
derne. Chey ſhut their mouthes befoze hum. Foꝛ they that


Hale


5


N if i wund/be coardes/andmake Eat thp takes : foto
Sen nene Epe beide wallhene Wee mc.
we lobe ppon hum / there walbe no far nede: wrens 2
fe fallJauenolug bn him he welbeche erden wenn the eg. wen’


Boeael. The


not koꝛ thou chalt not be eõkoundẽd: e not
athamed/foz thou ſhalt not come to contu⸗
Spon. ce thou thait forget the ſhame of the
pouth / z walt notremembze the dichonoure
ot thy wedowhead.ffoz hep made the Walbe
thy Lorde a hülband whore name is f Lord
OFbotkes) ¢thyneaucger walbe eu theholx
one of Jcräel / Lozde of the whole wolle.
Forthe Losde thall call the / being as adelo
late ſoꝛowtul woman / ag a poũge wyle ß

bath bꝛoken ber wedlocke: la peth thy Sed.
A Hiptle whple haue Jkozlanenthe / but W
greate mercpkulnes hall I take the vp vnto
: me. hen J was angrp / I hedde my face fd
r the loꝛa liste te -thozow euerlaſting
: goodnes Chall J pardon the /Capeth p Loꝛde
an ~ Cthpneaueger.*Annthis mutt be onto me as
Seneſi ix. A che water of Noe: to aslphe J haue fwozne
i that J wyll not bzinge the water of Moe enx
moze bpon the woride fo haue J fwome 8
J wil neuer be angry with the mevrepzoue
the: Che mountapnesthall remoue andthe
- billes thal fall downe:but my louyng kynd⸗
. . Melle Chall not moue / a ß bonde or mp peace
chall not kall do wne From the / lapeth p Lo
chvmercikull louer.Beholde thou poze / ver⸗
ed / delpiled:A will make thy walles of pꝛe⸗
cpous ſtones /i thy fondacpõ ot Saphires/
ue © thy wyndowes of Chztttal chy gates of kyne
0 =» leave tone / toy boꝛderg of pleataunt ſto·
D nes. Chy childze Chall all be taught of God /
„ Jobn. f. d. & Awyll geuethẽ plenteouſnes of peace. In
30h. vre. rightuouthes chalt thou be grounded / a be
karte krõ oppredipon:fo2 the whych thou ne ·
deſt not be alraped / nether ko hynderaunce /
koz it Chall not came nye the. Beholde / ö ale
aunt 5 was karre Erb the Chall dwell w the: g
he that was lometyme a ſtraunger vntothe /
khalbe topned with the ndeholde /Z make the
Smpth that bloweth the coales in the kyꝛe / a
... bemabeth a weape afterhis handy wozcke.
makeallothe walter to deſtroye: but all
the weapẽs that are made agaynſt the / hall
not pꝛolpere And as kor all tunges /p thall
kelilte the in iudgemzt / thou chalt ouercome
thẽ / a condemne thé. his is the heritage ol
e Lozbes leruauntes /a the ryahtucuthes
at theychall haue ok me / aayeththe Loꝛde.
Cn contolacpons comforth to tl . Che trut
aun profet of he one oF ‘ae e

¶ Che. in. Chapter.
me to che waters all pe / j be
churſty / e pe that haue no money.
Come /bye /that ye mape haue to
ria leate.come bye® * wyne a mylck /
of geb well edo
aud bee DO BE

latylfpeth you not.

iopceth p bert / But herken rather onto me / z pe chall eate ol


ie


Prophecy


the bett/¢ poure foute chall haue her Lee inthe itp,
thebe Wall haue her p.


the
2
Ghali growe. spate trees / 5 pre tre in q be abarat u.
ſteade of bꝛeres. Andthys Wall be done to
pꝛapleokthe Loꝛde and for an euerlaſtyng
token / that hallnot be tanen awaye.
Anerhoßtacyon to iudgement ituoufine:
Sie . the ech. Auen
She phe rdes that dcuoure their flock.


Che. j. Chapter.


doth ths / a the mas childe whych kepeth the
lame. Hep taketh hede / thathe pnbalbtnenot
$ Sabboch(chat is) he that hepety him (elk:
thathe dono euel. Then walnot the ſtraum⸗
ger which cleaueth to the Loꝛde / lape: Alas
‘the Loꝛde hath chut me cleane out from his
people Nether Wall the gelded man ape: io /
Fam adne tre Lorthus lapeth the onde / 18
fir vnto the geben bkepeth my Sabboth:
Namely: that holdech greatly ofthe thrnge
that pleateth me / and kepeth my couenaunt:
Auntothem wyn Z geue in my houchold and
within mip wales /a 7


che cr, wh


Ilrael.


then yk they had bene called forines e daugh ·
ters. will geue them an eueraſting name /
€ tyat hall not perech. Zgapne he Capeth on-

A datt tothe raungers that are pecholer to Hicke
Werren to 6 Kodo feeue him, to lone hig name:
the chefe Pre / Chat they halbe no bonde mẽ. and allther /
ich kepethe lelues chat they vnhalowe
b/s which not che Habbath mamelp that ther kuk


beg dhe Per. ip couenaunt: Chem well ¥ bypnge tomy


holy mountapne / emake the topkul in my

15 werde de houte prager helf kunnt oftanges Glas
bod, Cele crykices Mhalbe accepted vpon mpne aulter.
foz my houſe ſhalbe an boule of prayer koꝛ


ihc,

the dikicacpon being able to je

Kere rare they / x lie noꝛtinge: they are chamelele

furrhe glory of dogges / F be neuer fatilkyed. Che Heperdes

91 we z allo miete maner haue noonderttandinge/

fhcicatone pri, Dut euerx mã curnethhis atone wape euerx

nat. profet and one after his awne couetoulnes with al his

pleettire, Eher power. Comeſſape they) I will fetch wynie /

wen eut bie fo Hall we kel dure felut chat wemape be

Haplante ber dzonkk. Inddoto mozow/ ite aste daxe /veẽ

dure! oxpuenin andmoch moze.

totle profounde i deape ficape of ignoraunce of 35 lneſſe ol leche⸗

ee eee
and t

bel beet a — Cconrge quer the whole locke of Lijit,


Che. vil Chapter.
sey Jewes are rebuked to their mur pe done to


his hert / Good godly people are ta ·
„ henawape / a no man cölpdzeth it.
ab the righteous is cõuayed awa


Juin h meane fearon the righteoiss .
S it in


chozow d wicked: thathe bim leit myght be

in relt Ave quietly vpon his bed / a lrut alter

his awne pleature. Come hither thertoze ve

aShath. r. d. chatmers childꝛen / pe lonnes ol the
tier a g whoze: W herin take ve youre plea ·

ſure: pd whom gape ve with pour mouth /

ebicare out pour tonge: Are yr not childzen

ok adudutry / and a fede of delimulacyon: Ye

Brake youre pleature vnderß ones / under al

grene trees / f childe beynge llapne in p valle


28/4 8 halbewithd obe


ftonp rockeg by ß riuer: Fee eu thelelhal be
chp parte. Foz there thou batt poured meat a
Dengolkräges vnta che. Dpulde Jouerce
that: Chor: bak made thy bed vpõ hye moti


tarnes / thou wenteſt vp chither / a there haſt E


thou dapne lacriliceg. Behynde the doꝛes a
Pots, ab Houleltbpchr emen back.


Ok Elay.


re led him atid


abuoue th


2
Shen thou haddeſt dpkebueredthpkelkto
another then me / when thou wentelt downe
e made thy bed wyder that is) when thou di⸗
delt carue the certarne of ponder dols Klo
uedeſt their couches where thou laweſt the


hes a l de me / and am
angie wh b lt ¢ Eolowetly
be wave of his atone hert But yr q map te
F
20 0 0
Hematieth topkull/ achat weretozr for bin,
Fmakethe krutes orthankergeupng J gene
Peace onto them that are farre of / and to the
jatare nye fave the Lod / chat make bint
whole. But the wicked are iyke the ragynge
lee that can not rel / whole water fortieth
with che myꝛe a grauel. Euen lo the wycked
haue no peace fateth my God.
Cbe Londecup the mouth of the Pꝛophete) reds
Ueth the People ar their Fattynges-which were ful


Elop. xlvitz .d


pocrilpe. a,
che. ih. Chapter.
No therfore crpe now, ag laude a8 4
chou cantt. Leaue not ok / ipkt bp * Czech. llt

thy okie 75 a eng c ewe ere. v s
mp people their offences /a houle

ol Jacob thei cyrns. Fos they leke me dalxe

awyl knowe mip wages / euch as tt werea

CC. iij. peopit


The


Ilratl.
people that dd ryght / andhadnot kozlaben
the Gatutes ofthet God. They argue with
me concernynge rpabt iudgement and wyll
pleate at the lawe wich their God. Wherkoze
kalt wellaye they) and thou left it not? we


put dure iyues to ſtraxteneſte / and thou re ·


gardeſt it not?

as Abrs ta. Beholde“ when ver*Eatt/ youre tuft re⸗
semapneth pet mapneth fell: foz ve dono letie vrolence to
amöge ) Teil- pouredetters:lo/pe kalt to Arpte a debate a
{een fos ec ko lune hm with poure elt that dpeoketh
ahr darf ito pou. Pefalfnotlas tome teme Pro
dub: Bpopce mpaht beheardeadoue. Ehrnehe ve
page fed vice this kalt pleateth me / that a man curd chal⸗
Swill we pet nee tenhym telt tox a daye / 8 to wapthe his head


per

the Je.

Thee aher euer
tohe it For arack


layea yO Ei privedes, C

thalt be called the maker bp or hedges /a che

buploer agarne of the wape ol? Sabbath.
ce PE thou turne thy Fete frdthe far


bath fothat thou donot the thrnge


atone wyll ner Cpeake thyne awne woꝛdes.


Che chalt chou haue typ plealure inß Loz
which wal carpe d hre aboue p earth / and


Piopheſyp
kede the ww the heretage ok Jatob tchykather: ao be
£03 $ Lozd{ atone mouth hath fo prompled. g


0 gas-
« de ta mpghti to lane / and readpe tobeare b:
— a


Acve lx. chapter. fii


bie
dada Lares bate ts tao 6


Wontened Pit cannot helpe ner ne s trptnge
cher is his care fo Hopped that it chingesmbicy
mape not heare. But poure myl· are of no value


maket
75 of tye res


offende/¢ knowledg
Ip traigvetie ¢ didembie agapn thete Deabes


kallawape ft oure God: dfynge pꝛelump⸗ ace the ds


tuous a traptoꝛous C108 /a caſting of robberpbre


hoch kalle matters in ourebertes. And therfore is cance c
pleatetb tp elke inmy gol drehen Galt —
thou be called onto the pleacaũt / holx / a glo⸗
ropus Dabbath ofthe Lorde / where thou
thalt be in honoure: lo that thou do not after
thine awne pmaginacion / nether {eke thine


equyte gone afyde/eriavtuoutnes fanbeth dete hend.


fare of:treuth is kalle downe in z ürete / aß Burde raider


thinge that is plapne and open / mare not be robbes bear
chewed. Fer dtreuth is ialde in pzelon /a hep the par wur
tefrarneth hi leit fd cuell muſt be fpopled. ce eg
hen the Lo7be fame chie ttotipleated feat bee nt


bpm foze/ pthere was no where enpequite. bst cherte


e lawe allo / that there was noms / which eau rech on
9 1 there was no oe


erulalem,


hab pitie tyerof as was greued at it. Indhe
helde àwne power / and cleued to
: tuoutnes .* He put rightuoul⸗

him Foz a brett plate / fetp helmet

faith bpo his head. Be put on wrath in

of clothing /etohe geloulp about him


. foz a cloake: (icke as whe a man goeth fozth


wꝛochkullp to tecũpence bys enemyes/ to

be auẽged of his aduerlarieg. Manielp/ that

hempgbt recompence g rewarde the Tlädes

dwherthoꝛow the name of the Loꝛd mpghe be

feared? From the rilynge of the Dunne and

bes magetty / vnto the goinge downe of the
me


Foꝛ he Wall come as a violent water
utreame / which the wende ol che Lone hath
moued. But onto Dy there Hal come are
demer / a vntotgem in Jacob that turne from
wickednelle / laletyß Loꝛd. J will make this
chuenaunt with chem (Carey ? L. ode). My
kpꝛete p is come vponthe / a ß woꝛdes which

haue put in thy mouth / wall neuer go out
okchymoath / nor out b mouth okche childers


om this tyme koꝛth ko euermoze.
eren ar rbb.


C ce. ix. Chapter.


Che. light / a king
to the brightnes Plpzyngeth loꝛch ppon che.
Liktopthineepes /a lone rounde aboutethe:
Illchele gather them lelues / ¢ come tothe,
Sonnes hall come onto p from karre / and
rs wal gather them felucs to the on

e. When thou leit this thou ſbalt
rceadinglp / and thrne hert albe


when the ſtrength of
ecken


as Cwpfte


re
chetr binde vpß woüdedhertes /


Ok Clay,


Bingen wall do the lerupce. Foz when J ditt
angrie /I impte the: a when it plealeth me /
pardon the. chp gates Wall ſtäde open tylt
both dape and niht / and neuer be chut: that
the bootte of the Gentiles maye come / and
that their binges mape be bꝛought vnto the.
Foz euerp people 2 Eyngdome chat lerueth
not the / chall perithe / and be diſtrored w the


kwerde. Che glozp of libanus tall come bie ate trguptycd


tothe: Chee; Krore trees / Boxes ¢ Cedꝛes f
together / to garnich p place ol my Sanctu ·


the / haue vexed the a all thepthat delpuled g
the (hall fall downe atthp fote. Chou Walt


ve called the citte of the Lon / the holy SVO apiopned wna
oF traell. Becaule chou hal bene fozlaken the church ee


ano hated /fothat noman went ehozotn the: ee
Topfiul tyozow outal poſterities. Chou

ſucke the myick of the Gentiles and hinges
bzeltes Hal kede che. Andthou Halt knowe
that Iche Lozde amthr Saupoure and de⸗
kender / the mighty one of Jacob. Fo bꝛaſſe /
wil J geue the golde and fo; zonfpluer: fo
wod bꝛaſle / and fo? ones von. A will make
peace thy ruler /a ryatuoutnes thpne offy-
cer,asiolences robbery wall neuer beherde
ol in thy lande / nether harme and dettruccyd
with in typ bozders . Chywalles chalbe cals


cept


—


Wörner e ona oben chen bt nee


talbe reuse


b Wall Poztie
bernge thes thengẽ to palle in hrs tyme,


EHeprophecyeth that Chin hatte annopntek / and
Gent to preache,
che. lxj. chapter.


„He fprete of the Loe Sodte W
ime / tos the L onde hath anoynted
me / g ſent me / to preach goedty⸗

=o Sheng Ab di

Imrahe preachy
delpueraunce to ? and open 5 pres
fon to chem that are boũde: 6 A might decla⸗
re d acceptable veare of $ Lolde / i chedape
of the vengeaunte of oure God: 6 Impghe

CCH, comfozte


arb, o J wil gogttperve place oftmp ete, rote isthe
Mozouer chole Hall come tnelyngbuto sco As wha


Ruch ff c


Ilratl. The Pꝛophety


comfozte all them that are in heupnel riage fo wall God marx bim telle onto the
fonnes. Andas a bꝛrdegrome is glad of hes


e
in nant harrow ra Af
Devwtpinthe Geade of ache / topkul oyntnent byrde / to Mall God retoyle ouerthe.


gg f02 figbinge / pleatatitcapment ko an beuy twill fet watchmẽ vpö thy walles(D Je
mpnde: Chatiher mrghebe calledexcellent tufatem) which Malinether ceate dare noz
intyghtuoutedesa plating of the Lo dla: mightto preach the Lowe. Ind re allo ſball c
bimto reiopce in. not ke pe hem clole / noz leaue to cpeake of
hep Mall bupwe the longe rough wel- him / vntiil Jerulalem be feet vp /a made the
dernes / g let vy the oldẽ deferte Chey tall pꝛaple ofthe wonlde che Lozdhathtworne
ropapze d walte piace / f loch as haue bene byhis right hande a by his dronge atme /p
vopde tyorow out man generacyös Stra- frö hẽce koch he wyn hot geue thy come to
ungers wall @ande ¢ fede pour catel/ e the be meate fozthyne enempes ner thy vyne


Bleauntes ſbalbe vour piowmen ereapers. (wherin thou batt laboured)to be dzinke fo,
But pe Haibenamed’ prettes ot ihe L ond / P Aratigers. But they shane gatheredin


amen wall call pou che Ceruauntes of dure come (Hail cate it / geue thanches tothe
God. Ve wall entoxe the goodeg ol the Gen- Lozde: g they that haue bome inthe byne/
tiles g trtumphe in their lubſtaũce For vour mall daincke it in F court ol my Säctuarx.
Cgreate repꝛote g wame / all they haue ore Sptande back and depatte a funder / pe p D
chat ve mape baue parte wich them. Foz they ſtäde vnder P gate: make rowme ve people /
wal haue double potledion in thetvlande/ 2 repapzethe lürete/ g take awape the ones
eurrlattinge tope halbe with them. Foz F 6 JJC
pꝛoc in the endes ol che world:
(chough it were offted irie) Wall mate their *teli the daughter SDiö: le / ihr faluacton cõ· Da
meth / beholde he bringeth bis trealure with Wattd. fru.
bim / abis torches go befoze bim. Kor thep
whd $ Loddelluereth / Walde calted$ holy
people: q as loꝛ the / thou haltbe named the


Loꝛde / whpch ioue ryght and bate robbery


greatixe occupied / and not the koꝛlanen.


He lone. CA prophecy ot the cammyng of Chrilt.
e.


. che. xh. chapter.
F Hrons fake therfore well
15 b-Xiginot oie my Aden
take J wylt not ceade-ontrll their
L rigbtucufnes beeake foyth as the
Wnpnge night / a chetrhealch as a burning
kampe Then Hallthe Gentpies le thrrugh⸗ wewe me enybelpe A felldowne/ anoman
tuoutnes¢ all binges thy glory. Chou walt belde me enten me bymrne atone
be named with a new name / wbich d mouth, arme and mp feruetnetie duſternedme. And
ofthe Lozde thal wewe. Chou Walt bea’ chus haue J troven downe the people inme
crowne in the hande ol the Lozde / and a glo⸗ wꝛath / and bathed them in my dicplealure:
B Vous garlande in the hande of thy Gad. rg In lo moch p Ahaur whedtheir bloude von
aaccdationny thts tyme forth thou thait neuer be called 8 che earth.
pleatuce bec foptanen/@ thy lande hall nomoze be called A twyll declare the goodnede ok? Node“
. $ widdernede. Butthou chalt be called He- ye and the parle ofthe Lorde fo2 all that
ede chu e POaDab/ethplanve W Weula:for the Lade Hebatl) geuen ba (torte great good that
gout of the Loueth che / F ihr lande Walbeinbabited.and he bach done fozZtvacil : whych he hath
de. ipke as apdge mS taketh a daughter to ma⸗ uenthem ol hrs awne b
to the


promeffe to
ie


their laupoure. In their troubles he kozlone
chem not / but the angel that went loꝛth krõ


Chis pretence delpucreothem: Ok very ioue a


that he had onto them / redemed he
ath boꝛne them / and caried them
vp euer / lence the woꝛzlde begäne. But alter
cherpiouoked hymto wzath and bered. bys
Holy mynde ſhe was their enempe/ s fought
agapnt them him Celt. Pet remembzed he d
olde tyme of Poles a bys people: Howbe
bꝛought them fromthe water ok the lee / as a
thepherde both wych bys Mepe: how he had
geuenhys holy tpzete amonge them how be
had led Malers by the rigyt bande wyth bys
Glofous dre how be had deurded the wa⸗
ker befoze heut wherby he gat hem telle an
euerlattyins ane how he leb the in depe /
as an hozi. din the plapne / pthey chulde
not font e lpꝛete ofthe Lone led thẽ /
as a tame het goeth in the kelde.
Thug (im) wod)hakt thou led thy people /
to matze thy ite a glorrous name with all.
Loe botonue then krom heauen /a beholde


spans? the dwwellpise place ofthy fanctuacy A thy


Glory. Pov isit/b thy gelouty/ thy trégth/
themulticiic or thy mercyes the lounge
Byndnedie/ wyll not be entveaten ot vs. ct
art thou our father: Ko; Abzaham knowerb
bs not / nether is Ilrael acquapnted with bs.
But thou Lorde art our tather a redemer /c
ch name is euerlactyng O Lone wherkoze

thou ledbs out ot thy ware r wherfore

& thou harbened ourhertes / chat we keare
chenot: We at one wyth vs agayne / £07 thy
feruatites lalie that are of the generacrõ oF
thpne heretafge. hr people hath had but lit ·
le of thy Spanctuary in podlellron / for dure
thempes haue take it in: and we are become
euen as we were from che begynnenge: but
thou art not their Loꝛde / ko they haue not
calledvpon thyname.


che prophete (under the perlon ok the re bee
Rom va hig or ¢ bannychment. anes rights
e Ipc n cloth teled with the floures of a doo /


Sache. Ititi. Chapter.
That thou woldeſt cleue p heauen
in onder / s come downe: that the
nountaynes mpght melte awave
Hat chypꝛelence/ivbe as at anhote
kyꝛe:athat the malpcrous mpght bogie / us
the water both vpon the kyꝛe: herby thy


les Ok Elay.
to themultptnde of pps lournig ondneteg.


Foihe lapde: Cycle no doute wylbe me peor
ple anno Wzynkyng chrionzẽ and lo he was


begpnnynge of the wondde there was none
4 — O God) that hearde oꝛ percea ·


ued/* nether hath anx eye fene lead Bom 4. Kort h. l.


Dott Foz them / chat put their trust in ty
Chou helpett hymthat doth rraht wrth

chetekulneſle / a them that thyncke vt on ihr

wapes. But io / chou art angtre / £07 we ok⸗


ende / a haue bene euer in kenne / andthere Nome b.
is not one whole, We are all as an vnclene Wal. ria.


chinge /K all dure vightuoutnedes are as the
clothes ſtapned with the floures of a woma:
we fall euerpchone as § leafe/ fo oure len
neg cary vs awape Iphe the wynde. Chere ts ¢
no man that calleth vpon thy name / that
ſtandeth vp to tale holde by the. Cherfore
hydeſt thou thy face rom vs / and conlumeſt
bt / be caule of oure lynnetz.

But nom O L onde thou kather ok oures:


we are the clape/ a thou art oure potter / a „oma. fr.
we all ave che wojcke okthy andes. Be not ec, 170


tofozedplpleaten(D Lorde) a kepe not our
offertces to longe in thy remembꝛzaunce but
contpoze 5 we all are thy people. Che cytpes
ok thy Spanctuarp ive wake, Svs 1s awrl⸗
dernelle and Jerulalem a defect, Dure holy
houle which is oure bewty / where oure fa-
erg peapled the /18 bꝛent bp: per all oure
imodities a plealures are watted aware.
Nople chou not be intreated (L onde) Foz att
this: voilt thou holve thy peace / and courge
bs ko loze?
4 iid fetpeptye of Jerulalem / and thecallpnge of


name mygh⸗ be nowne amdgethyne ene p.


mpeg /G chur che Gentples myght treble be.
fore the chu thou mightelt come downe w
chywonbercus ttrafige wozckes then ihuld


the hrile melt at thy pretence. foꝛ lence the


De


The renewynge he
of the worde. The
bolome agarne. Moꝛeouer thus lapeth
Lozde: Ine as when one wolde gather holx
grapes / men ſave vnto hum: bꝛeake it not ot
foz it is holp:euẽ fo wii F do alſo fo; my fers
uaũtes fakes! g ile not dellrope the all.
But F wil takeè a tede out of Jacob / a out of
luda one / to tate pottettion of myhrll. Mr
ofen wall pottede tele thinges /a my ſer·
uauntes (halt dwell there. Sparon chalbe a
wepekolde / a the valler or Acho; wall geue
the ſtallynge fo the caten or my people / B
zee fae ofanen te kee ge
4e. jen 0zde/and toꝛgotten m
Aeremk. vi. 4. Hoty hyil. ye haue fet by an aue snot
tune / and geuen rych osinchofferpnges onto
trealure. &herkoze well A nombze vou with
the lwerde / chat ve wal be deſtroped all tos
gether. oz when A called /no man gaue me


‘au @od ta con, Anltwefe: when J (pake/ve berkenednot ont


to me / but did wickednes befoze myne eves,
4 55 anbcbotetvecipnge cher piteltomendt.“


Cherkoze thus tapeth che Lorde God: Be.
b holde / my feruauntes Chall eate, but pe al


em aul
sig a danger Beto mp ename al —


she goed e gee daimcke / but pe (hall fufive thurſte. Beholde /
woth ehr bis de my leruauntes Mall be merx / but pe thal be
n t ere conkounded.Beholde“ mypleruauntes ait
nete raping etope to, verp qupetnetic ofberte ; But re
fopll baue a Wall ctype Cozfozow ok tert / and compla
as pleature C07 beracton of mynde. J oure name Wal not
72165 good. be lwozne byamonge my cholen / oz Go
n geren ee öde nee
nether be child e. Who fo reiopſe
ner olde man. Vpon earth / hall retople in true God: And
€ 3 eb whololwearetg vpon earth / hall lweare in
Aber Chat yo the true God.sf02 the olde enmngte thalbe Fore
man bedelptep Ratten and taken awaye oute of mplyght.
90 120 1135 : 0 He
6 0 K og the olde / cher cball neuer
ere uae nee ae
i i euermoꝛe reiopie / to
he Urgent dae e e
Pp Aue erg m elt wall make a topeull
“fapth and boty müller bc Lia tte my peuple dint
wönches /s that m people undthe
{oue uot thys bopce OF wepynge and waplyng wall not be
Beten at herde in her krom̃ thẽce koꝛth. r* Chere hall
furncbe them neuer be chylde ner ode man / that haue not
ues olde pe their full dapes. But whe the chylde come
gh: And p ty
placpde delyꝛe age do e /
oF ithe Ipfe to he halbe curled. They Malt buplde houles /
some-ohech and dwell in them:they Wall plante di
they anowe pie ys
+ tighe well thay urdes / and eate the frute of them. Cher Halt
be moch better not buplde / and another pottette : thep Wall
Home rend: not plante / and another eate: But the lyte ol
Rethalve con mp people chalbe lyne a tre / and lo Wall the
0 aahpe pe woche ptheirhandes.
cht en un My chofen chal ipue longe / they wal not
deth peare of laboure in vapne / nerbegett % trouble : lo⸗


phecy


cher art thebpe bleden lede or chen onde / ad ex. ce. C.


their krutes with chem. And it cha lbe / that 07 Biophetemen


i the
cuce ther cal Wall anttocre yer. HOWE at tyonat ge


thepare pet but thincking how to lpeane
balheenechem Ehe weit anvpeianbe nee
hal Fede together land the lton thal eate hape great age, yet


kehethe bullock.“ Bol earth halbe the er- r be


pentes meate. Chere cball no man hurte ner ipued weng,


faye another / in all myholph ill / lapeth the co dau herd
Loꝛde. 2 be the
2 er

es Che wolfe and the lambe Chall fede together. be. The mea
te that met wpckeds crucli men (hall at the compng of Lyng

wee with the goodand pealable: And thatthe Gentples (which for
their beatlp lpupng’ are often fignpfyed vnder the name of beattes)
ſhalbe at vuptye with the fapthfutvand the one lpue toupngly wprh
theother without rp. Che very Came Capmg haue pe before inthe


ria and
E But earth thatbe the ſerpentes mente that tswyth eat!
rp counters chen ug anor drt het hd


¶ Che. lxvi. Chapter.
Hod dwwelleth not in temples made by mannes
bande He decppleth tacrpfyces done withdut mercy
€ fant God comforteth them that are troubled fog
his lane. Amonge the Chꝛitten / che Bab both is con ⸗


the Lorde: Heauen is d
lete / a 5 earch is my kote Hole, a Where
+ nabere Wallnom $ youre Garde Mal nave ve
Zehat ve wpll buploe vnto me: And as who Give
Where Wail be che place / 6 J will dwell in: cape: tayerto
As £07 thele thing / my hande hath made tyẽ mae ye wea
all/ a cher are all created Lareth the WLozde, templet mie
VAhich of thE shal chen tegarde⸗Euen hm neh te
that is of alowiy troubledipꝛete / a andeth swhote wor
inawe of mp wozdes. Foz who fo flapeth an ee"
ore ko me/doth me lo greate dichonoure sag J fired the
be krlleche man He that hylietha Weve fon gente t
koꝛ me / choketh a dogge. He p bꝛungeth me cercen maner
meat oſſrynges / oreth wynes bloude: ü ho B indem
domalethme a memorial ob incence pra- eren
feth the tinge that is bnright. Yet tate they 200 f ran am
doch wapesinbande an dete louie delkkech place oy yourt
in theteabominacyons. ferupcerto thie
Therfoze wil J allo haue pleature in lau- tent? ye Guide
ghenge chem to cogne andche hinge that gerte ost,
cher keare / will J bzinge vpon thẽ. For when Seigtes. wut
called no ma gaue ancwere: when J lpake now willy bre
5 e dedweckednele a end
fore mrne epes / and chole at :
delpleale me. Beare tie tobe ot eb ee, eset —
E kcare the thinge which be lpeaketh. Foute tome p whole
bꝛethzen chat hate vou / and caſt you qut Foz warde forone
meg Din ae e e gh
e mape fe 7
nei: and pet thep cbalbe confounded si 4 seme
Foras toucheng the crtie and $ temple/© wache.
Theatre che vopce of the Loꝛde / that wyll re pers m ter
warde /avecompence bis enempes irke as f uten!
aur dee bemgeth fox) bunt n ses .
parne of the byꝛth and att: ouly woche
gupſhb of the trauarle. Who euer pene ce ved with facie


Tht cae Sigal
Alb.
2 lawe foch thynges 7 doth the grounde beare
kuh ue in one dape: oz are the people boꝛne all at
es 7 wopty once Jas Spon beareth her tonnes: Foꝛ
Kuh win) chung falfehiche Lozoe: Am Abe chat make
te. Ehe la, orherte beare / and beare not my lelk? am
e
yestonse) “ano be glad woth ber /alivethattoucher,
dre 3p 25e topf weh Yer Lal pethamourned fos
un, her. Foz ve Wal cucke cdfozte out other bze-
gee before es and be fatitfted. Ye tyaltatte/andhaue
denen pin dellteinthe plentcoutnctic of ber power do:
chte. Lerechus lapeth the Londe sbebolde / Awrulett
e ernie et
85 0 means Then thalt pe fucke / ye all be bomebpon
ees aun ev des and be coptuul bpon ber knees. Foz
spenthall thepiphe ada chylde is comforted of his mother /
rome 3 fo tall J comkozte pou “andre Walbe com-
Sronech cocyeodeed in Ferugem. And when pe le thys
Suacbrtyte voute Yette Mall retopke /andpoure bones
baden — ae that te bane ofthe Lope be
fr gpephttowone unonde bps feruauntes alen.
dann ber keignacpon amonge bysenempcs . Fo be.
auttwardly to holde / che L onde Wall come with kpze / ¢ bys


kn godtp. chavet (hall be lyſte a whrel wynde / that he


mape recopence his pengeance in his wꝛath
aun namen weibehe kane ol Eyre,
For the Lozde Hail tudge all fie wyth the
Exzeand wythbis werde and there halbe a
Greate nombzeflapne ofthe Lope . Soch
ashane made themtelues holy and cleaneitt
che gatdens / g thole that haue eaten wrne
flech / myce / ano other abbompnacpons/ wal
betaken awaye together / Capeth the Lorde.
Fo J wylcome to gather all people a töges
gtopth heir wo hes andimaginacpons: thete
Gall come / and te my glozp.canto them that


Ok Elay.


Ageue a token / and lende cértayne of tent
(that be delpuered)amõge thecentiles n to
Celxcia / kryca and Lidya ( wycremen can


ty handle bowetz) in to Jtalpe allo and Gꝛelle


lande.


xxij.


6 ;
Ehe Fes karre ot / lat haue not herde e Tat


there (halbe a


{peale ot me / and haue not lene mp glozp / perpetual kealt
thal pieach my pꝛaple amonge the Gentiles a aperpetuatt
and thal biynge all youre bgcthzen foz an of teates Give


krynge bnto p Loꝛde / out of ail people. ops
hozles / charrettes and hoꝛle lytters / vnon


halt not atjere
liepe their 50d
voth alter the


Mules and cartes to Jerulalem mp Yow mauer of tye
Hpll( Capeth the Loꝛde) ine as the chvidzen Jewes ner mud


ok Ffract bꝛynge the offrypnge in cleane vel ·


ſels / tothe houle of Lope.


be dißerete b e
tirene bape e.
e: but he


Andy wal cake outcertarne of them duniepentt⸗
kor to be pꝛeaſtes and leuptes / lapeth the tyuuall save
Londe. Foz ivhe as the newüheauen and che voth ee
newearch whych J wyll mate / Malbe fatt W e


ſtablpcbed byme:(lapeth the Lozd) So thal


nes. Chen tal


poute fede and youre name contynuce™ and chey attoayes


there chalbe a new Moone koꝛ the
other / and a new Sabbath fog
the other / and al flet Mat
come to 7 be


(kapeth
van
Go kosch
and ioke bpott
the catyons ak them
that haue tranbgreiled
agaynt me. Fon theyz


wozmes ſhall noti
nether wal wet N


free be que.
ched / zal lieh wall abho re them.


¶ The ende ofthe boke of


the Prophete
lap,


be tn the taple⸗
that io away ⸗
es Ghall they
paple God ut
Piteexenueth/
Ag wel it adurr
fptte ag in pros
evite Chey
al nether re⸗
ne vnto Jboles
ner anpkrenu
res but Wall
worhyppe the
Lorde onlp.
o wyatt fied
here vudctit.d
the Chyylten.


fhe RockofFerempe/andin what tyme he pro
deere ryan chore area oui eetate tye ote
ceofa propheterbecaute he is poungeand vnekpert.
Weis taught of theLordis becometh bolde. Bod opce
e
ql fon ande. Jerempe (8
. e Jewes / with ·
ont keare.


pi and tell thé all chat J geue the in cbimaund⸗ mog


Gabe frat chapter.


ele are the Sermons
ol geremp the konne of Hei⸗
hiah the Prete / one oF them
| : 6 that dweit at Inathoth inthe
ia) ame n een weh
CS Lopde han tri polen wet
gerne h bug 0. a ioe, the konne of de
er erke mon Kenge ol Juda /
SP Kbenger KpNGDome:and ko durpnge bnto tyetyme OF
me pe haue n Jehoakim the tonne ol Jollah kynge of Ju⸗
the fourth of da / and ontill the. j. peares ol edeklah the
eng Conne of Jona kenge of Juda were polis
N at *
0 che ende or when FeruCalem was take/ eue tn the pitch
the bone a in Moneth. Che woꝛde ok d Loꝛde Cpake thus
rf th. G
the lecõd ofthe bnto me: Betoze J kalchionedthe tn thymo⸗
Zhronptles“ chers wombe / J dpd knowe the; And oz euer
sep B thou wat home, I Canctitied the /and o2-
chapter to the dened the/to he a Pzophete vnto the people.
ende allo. rH Chen lade J: Oh Londe God/F amt vnme⸗
nophecfed ae te / koꝛ J àm vet but pounge. And the Loꝛde
12 a
boule, Fl peas antweredme thus: Spape not co / Jam to
we
beg cacetie Ponger Chow Malt gooto alt that A Malt
ed the. ge. Chat fende the vnto / a whatcoeuer J comaunde
4/7 dedpeate d the / that walt thou lpeake. Pẽ not akraped
400 beer ug oF there faces ken A wwplbe wich the /to Delp
e a ee be Lome Mtethe oute
to be a Bro-
e
„ a mozouer onto me. I put mp too;
Goi 300-3 tn coy mouth /and bis dapedor|fetthe ouet
Pute bpmops che people a Kyngdomes: that thou mapelt
the father bath rote out / bꝛeake of / de ſtrope /s make watte:
Kancitied.¢ co and chat thou mapett buploebp and plante
dhe. e. Sftecthis/the Lopvetpane onto me taping:
Gervemy / what Ceptt chou? Ind F Cavde: I Ce
Stoabpng rodde. Chen apne the Lo d: thou


art tene 222
cellarx chan: 8
to the vnder⸗ JARS G fi
Aaubing of the | AR
Propheten to
to hnowe the


15
hyther warde. the Kalten


andes.
And therfore r gymde bp thy lornes / arrle /


5 irt bp the
ment. Feare them not Jwyn not haue the comaundemie
to be atraped of them. Foꝛ beholde / thrs bape of the Lane/
bogimate d aftrige kencedtowne / an chin by 5 poe
ppler / anda wall of ſteie agapnũ the beth
lande/agayntt the nynges and mightte

of Juda / agavnſt the pzettes and

e Ther Chall tyah


ache. rl. are of bps fe


Icõmaũdedme thus: Go thy wave,
pictpe in the caves of Jeruialem /a
tape: bus lapeththe Arte-
membꝛe the fo7 the kyndneiſe ot thy youth,
and becaule of thy ſtedtalt loue:in that thou
kolowdeſt me thozow the wyldernelſe / in an
vntylled lande. Chou Itraei waſt halowed
vnto the Loꝛde / and fo was his lyꝛlt kruteg.
any deuoured Ilrael /offended:m pl
Fogtune-feli bpon them / lapech the Loꝛde.
are thertoze the woꝛde or che Loꝛde / O
chou houle of Jacob / andallche genevacton
e OF Ffracl. C hus let the L oꝛ
onto pou.

What hnfaythfulnetiefounde youre fas:
thers in me / that ihex wente fo Tuns
fro me /falltnge to iightnelle / and bernge to
bapne? Chey thought not in their hertes:
Where haue we lett the Tozd / chat bꝛought
vs oute of the lande ol Egypte / that led vs
thoꝛow the wyldernelle | choꝛow a deterte g
rough land /thozow adzpe anda deedly lade /
pee a lande that no man had gone choꝛowe
and wherin no man had anes


| grace


Ol


had bzought pou intoa pleacade welbutlded
lande / chat pe meght entoye the frutes and
al the cömodpties ofthe fame: pe went korth
and dekrledmr lande / a bꝛought mrne bere:
tage toabhominacron.

Che poꝛeſteg them lelues Tape not once:
where ig the Loꝛde⸗ Cheythat haue p lawe
intheirhãdes / hnowe me not Che chepher⸗
des okende agapni me. Che pꝛophetes do
ferupce onto Baal / ¢folowe loch thenges
as Hall bzinge them no pꝛolpt.

C. Wherkoꝛe Jam conkranpeditapeth the
‘Lozde)tomatie my complaynte bpon rou/
ppon youre childzẽ. Go in to the les of Ce-
chim / and lone well lende vnto Cedar / take
Diligent hede: andle / whether ſoch thynges
bedone there / wecherthe Gentiles the lelues
deale lo Faldy and vntrulp with their god /
whych vet are no goddes in dede) But my
people hath geuen duer theirhre —
foza thinge that mape not helpe them.

Be aſtonilbed O pe heauẽs) be afrapde/
Gabathed at Coch athinge / lapeth 6 Lorde,

For my people bath done two euels. Chey
baue fozfaten me the well ok the water ol
lte / and digged them pyttes / pee byle a bꝛo⸗
ken pyttes / chat holde no water. J8 Jlrael a
bonde leruaũt / os one or the houcholde Wh
is he then lolpoled⸗ hy do they roare and
crbe then vpon hm / as a yon? Chey haue
made his lande waſte / his cptles are lo bꝛẽt
Fecha chere is no man dwellinge in them.
„Jeethe chplozen of+ * Hoph and Taphnes

„ Dhauedefpledthy necn. 5
aor) and." Cometh not this onto the becaufe thou
Sri d gehe halt ko laken the K onde by Sodſ euer fence
tecptyes of E · he ledthe by the wape? And what halt thou
pte / wher in ow to do in the ſtrete of Egypte: to dꝛyncke


I. . Qebiewes foute water ? Ether / what ma elt chou in.


bse. ape to Afivia> Co dpncke wackr oe the

Fine kdude⸗hyne atone wickednelle thal vepzo-

uethe / a thy turnynge awaye thall copemne

© ghesthat chou mapet knowe a vnderſtande /

how euell andhurtkull a thrnge it is / dthou

att koꝛcaken the Loꝛde thx God / ¢ not tea-
fedhim / lapeth che Loꝛde God of Hoſteg.

Jhaue euer bꝛonẽ thy rock ok olde /a burs

thy bondes: pet laieſt chou / A wil nomoꝛe

¢/but(iphe an harlot) thou tines about


pon all hic hilles /a amonge al grene trees

were as 3 planted 6 out of noble grapes a

Food rotes. Howart thou turnedthen in tos
biteee/onerutetull/ a ſtraunge grape: era

£0 ſoꝛs : that though thou wache the

5 , Ghittus g maße thy ceicto ſaucure W.
“grea to wache tl ee an ka of Bozith- vet in


i 5 i wyth thy wrcked ·
e, ae eee eee
. Sape not nord am not vnclene / and
bane not folowen the adde. Lokebport


12 77


eremy. xxiij.
ne awne wapes in the woddes / valleys
and denne: co Malt thou knowe, what thon
balkdone Thou artighea Swplt Dꝛomeda⸗
ry/ that goeth ealeiy his waye: andthy wis
tonnes is lyke a wylde Alle / tbat vlech the
wyddemeſſe / and that motleth and bloweth
pte will. oho can tame thera they that
feke the; thallnot fayle/buttpnde Hin thine
atone vnclennes Chou kepelt thy kote Front
nakednes and thythzote from thpztte / and
Chynchet thus in thy lelke:tuch: J will take
no ſoꝛowe / 2 will loue the ſtraunge goddes /
and hange bpon them. ‘i
Lyke as achete that is taken with § deve
commeth to Mame / euen lo is the houle ol
Ilrael come to conkullonithe comen people /
their hinges and rulers / their pꝛeſtes a p202
phetes, Nor theplape to a (tock thou art MY zam. e.
father/andto a tone:thou batt begotten nie geren pre.
Pee ther haue turned their back bponme /6 Zach. vö.
not their kace. But in the tyme of their trou ·
ble when they lare:ſtande vp / and helpe vs /
FJ Mal anlwere the: Where are nowthygod⸗
dig / that thou halt made p: byd them ftande
vp / a helpe the in the tynie or nede? Foz lone
how manp cities thou halt (O Juda) lo ma⸗
nr goddes halt thou allo.
Wbherfoze then will ye goo tola we wylh
me ſeringe ve all are lynnerg agaynſt nie /


laxeth the L ode: Itis but loſt laboure / that


Aimpte youre chyldꝛen / fo2 they receaue

not mycozteccpon. J cure atone kwearde de⸗

Sropeth poure propyetes phe a deuourrng
Ixon JE ve be the people ofthe Lozde / then

herben onto his woꝛde: am Ithen become a
plderneſle vnto the people ok Itrael: o7a

lade that hath no light: Wherfoze ſayeth my

people then: we art fallen ok / and we wyll

come no moꝛe onto the⸗Doth a mapden koz⸗

get herrapment / o a barde her ſtomacher!

And doth my people koꝛget nie fo lõge : why

booſteſt thou thy wapes fo hylie to optayne G
kauoure therthozowe) when thou halt vet

ſtayned them with blatphemies?

+. Upon thy wynges is kounde the bloude weute. 2th.
ol pooze and innocent people / and that not Jeremp. vo at
incomers a holes oni / but opẽly in al theſe Ex cch · xx.d.
places. Yet dare chou tape: J am gpltledle:

Cub / his wꝛath can not come ppon me. Be⸗

holde J welt reafon wyth the becaule thou

darreſt lap: J haue not oſfended. O how euel

wil it be kor the / to abyde it: when it call be
unowne / how oft thou halt gone bacward⸗

Foꝛ thou chalt be contoũded / as wel ol egy.

pte / as ok che Allirtang: pee thou thaltgothy

wave kromchem / and impte thyne handed

together vpon thy head. Becaule the L070

Wall bzynge that confyoence and hope of
thine to naught / and thou ſbalt not pꝛolpere

with al. :


God


Piracl,


At calletb vnto vepentalice his
Cet pag ee ane for cher ‘whoedome
Bang Be FOO pulp Dette
ae. retürne of Itrae l vnto So
cont their offence.
che i Chapter.
Omenip / when a man putteth a-
pe his wile / and che goeth krom
/e marieth with another / then
e eae e h
moze after ?: Fant
enen He, chen depicb am inlet: But as fo; the /
swodes/valeyes a thou haſt plaped the harlot with many to
kes a mma⸗ yerg / pet turne agapne to me /laleth 6 Lond.
af otherplaces Likt bp thine eyes on eucty(yde /S lobe / pt
be n Prad hau bentdetzled. Con halt wayted fo
e bag forcanen them in the dtretes / and as a murtherer in
mechp butvad/ wildernelle. Chow thy whozdome a cha ·
Mur leds, menu blarphemies tstyelandeDerpled.
mince of be, Chig is che caule /that the rapne ¢eues
tied we. Bnynge dewhath ceaced. Chou hat gotté the
men-wherfore an wohozes kochend / and canli not be acpa·
thou act wore med. Els woldeſ thou faye onto me: O mp
shy vedeu rather thou art he thathatt becugheme bp/
repente g foe f led me kromp routh: iW pit chou then put
thinke the care me awaye / and catt me ol toꝛ euer⸗ Oz wilt
neälpe J well et org withdzaw thy lelke cleane Ero me? He⸗
cant dr e, nertheles hau fpeatelt Cory women / but
gapne, thou art euer doinge wozle and worte.
c Che Lord lapd allo onto mein the tyme
gere. l. a eln the henge: Patt thou ſene what
gered 2 qinkyng Jcrael bath done? how the
10 meg xb. vrunne vp bpon all the bplles/andamoge alt
thich trees / andthere plaped the harlot hack
thou kene allol when che had done all thps)
how 7 fapde vntoher: that the wulde turne
Agapne vnto me / pet be is not returned?


Juda 2 onfapthfull (piter of hers alto lawe


is: Mamely/that alter A had well lene the
. — atthe bunch png harlot Jlrael /
e era by or de ·
ement.
ue erailchts ex ontayehEull ftter Juda
was not aſhamed / but went backe a played
Burka den ear wba abe, Led.
dome ed the 5
bat Tia eid dere with ones
D (toches,
Sr pcucrtpeletie her ontaithtull fitter Juda
dsnotturnedbdntome againe wichher whole.
berte/ but faynely / lapeth the L ode. And
the Lorde Capoe vnta me. Che bacdder Ff
racilismozerygbtubus / then the vnka
full Juda: atherfoze go pꝛechetheſe woꝛd


towarde thenozth / and laye: Chou ten: |


kpnge Jtraell / turne agayne ( tapeth the

Loꝛde) and J wyll not türne my face front
ou / ko: J am mereptull / ſaieth the Loꝛde / a

5 will not al waye beare dilpleacure⸗

che but on this condicion / that thou


phecy. Hamelp / that thou
hald bntapthtlr fozfaken the L oide thy
God / z halt made typ telt part taker of ſtraũ⸗
ge God’ under all grene trees / but halt had e


no wyil to heare mx bopce / ſapeth the Lord. Ezechiel. f..


4c pe thzinkyng chrldze / turne agarne De fi. a.
taverbthe Tones wyll be marped wyth
pou. Fo: A well take one out of the cptye /h
two out ofone generacpõ rom amg pou/
and bzynge vou out of D ron: and will geue
vou herdmẽ after myne atone mynde / which
wall fede vou wyth lernynge and wyldome.
Moꝛeouer / when pe be inctealed and multi⸗
plped in the lande / chen (rapettz the Lozde)
there hall no moze boolt be made of farche
ofthe Lo Ceſtamẽt:Moman Halithinke
vpon it / nether wall any man make mencid
okit: Foz kromthence kopth it all nether be
bylpted / ner honoured with gyktes.

Chen Hail Jeruſalem be called the L onde
feate / and all Heathen thalbe gathered onto
it / £02 the name of the Loꝛdeg fake / whych
chalbe let vp at Ferutalem, And fromthat = — +
teme koꝛth / hey Hall Folow nomoze $ yma-
grnacpon ol their awne frowarde herte.

Chen thole that be of the houle of Juda / F
wall go vnto the youre of Jcrael:a they wall
come together out of p Mozth into the lame
lande that Ibauegeue pour fathers.3 haue
thewed: rages toke the vp being but a
chidde / a gaue the a pleatatit lande tos thrne
heretage pee æagoodle bed ole Heathé:
how z cOmaunded the / Pthou Huldett* call egat rise
me fatheroniy/and not tc chꝛyncke frome,

Butlyke ag a womũ Fapleth her louer / co
are pe vntapthtull vnto me (O pe houle of
Jlrdel)lapeth the l. ozd. And therkoze d vopce
OF the chyldzé or Flracl was herde on eucry
kde / wepinge and walinge: to they haue de⸗
fpled thelr wave / and kojgotten God ther:
Lope.

Ope thrinkpnge childzen/curme agax ne
(ſaynge: lo / we axe thrne / fo2 thou art the
Lozde oure God:) And fo ball J heale route
bacturnengeg. Chehllles fall/andalt $ bie
pꝛrde ofthe mountapnes / but the health ot
Alraell ſtandeth only bpd God dure Lope,
dun bath — 7 — ees

oure from oure pouth vp: pee their Gepe
andbullockes/thetefonnes and ters.
So do we allo dlepe in oute contul yon and
Dame couereth va: to: we and oure fathers
kr oure youth bp onto this dare haue fens
ned agapnſt the Loꝛde oure God / and haue
not obepedthe boyce of the Lozd dure God.
Che true repentaunce o returnpiige to God. be
ephoteth tothe eir cumciſpon ot the herte. The de⸗
ruc cron ot Jewry is red / la the malxte ot
their hertes.


che. iin. chapter.
be, li. Chapt Odd


14


Ok Jerempe,


xxiiij.


place Aihe as the watch men inthe tee. Foꝛ E


. thephaue pꝛouoned me to wꝛath / lapeth the


wape the koꝛel kenne of pourchertes / all ye
ot Juda and all tye indwellers of Jerulalẽ:
thãt my indignacpũ bꝛeake not out une fyꝛe
gro kre fothatno man mape quench it /
ecaule oF the wyckednes ot youre vmagy⸗
Bnacpons. 2
asc mot: Peach in Juda and Jerulalem / crie out
‘ gemebedocel- and Ipealie:blowe the tröpettes in the lande
21 fegnpe crie that euery man mape heare / andlape:
lame n Sather pou together / and we wil gomte
delete Krongecitleg. Bet vpche tohenin Sron/
sgreuous la- pede you / andmalke no tarienge: fo; J will
mentacion as binge a greate plage and a greate deſtruc⸗


bhenamanto: cron from the nozth Ko; che tpopler ofthe


fapecincear® Gentle is broken bp krom his piace ae a No


bwaronevoop pon out oF his denne that he mape male the
senteth hrs lande walte / aud deltrope the cpties/ lo that
Coty -teateth no man mape dwelltherin. W herkope gyide
in ch. Poure lelues about tb Lack cloth r Mourne
Frilg.c. Aug and wepe Fo? the keartull wꝛath of § Loe
then atta 5 ball not be withdꝛawen from vou.
huredeo oF E At the kametyme (lapeththe Lo de) the
Kuen, bert ot che lunge and ofthe pups an be
be Bone gone / the pꝛeſtes chalbe aſtoniched / and the
the depe pꝛophetes ſhalbe loze alraied. Chen tayde J:
Cometh O Loꝛd God / haſt thou then dilceaued this
1 60 he people and Jerukalemdapenge: e hal haue


5 peace/a now the kwearde goeth ozowtheir
Seer pues Chen dhallttbelarderothe people g
bangpcet of mp to Ferulalé: © * there cõmeth a warme wynd


wopleace. fromthe noꝛth thozowehe ware ol mp peo


Cher vnder⸗

i le / but nether to kanne / ner to clenſe.

5 n 5 * lter that wall there come vnto me a
of€yppt; Aug ſtronge wynde / a then will J allo geue fen-
Fadi of cenice bpon chem ffo7 io be commeth dotwne

ae ich he ne ag a cloude/andbls charrettes are iphe
leave bys peor & tomy wynde: his hoꝛlmẽ are lwiſter then
de yen thepthe Aegie. io vnto bs / koꝛ we are deftroped,
fame forth OF O Jerulalem / wach thyne herte krom wyc ·
hend ebnen that chou make bebelpeD How

9 peru, ee hee thy noplame thoughtes remapne

. ri. a
Lantech“, Foz a boyce ft Dan and from the hill ol
N d pözaim ſpeaketh out, and telletl ofa de⸗
a ac. eruccion, Beholde the Heathen geue Feru-
g Bs tonne kalem warnynge / and preach onto her /that
'y- wmerfande her deltropers are chmpnge from karre coũ⸗


+
BP NEG we trees ghey cell the cyties oF Juda the fame


ERR alto ther Mall geuc chem warneng in euer


Lope,

Thy wa pes and thy thoughtes / haue
bꝛought the vnts thys / thys is thyne atone
wyckedne lle a dylobedyence that hath pol⸗
Sete thpne herte: Ah my bel / ah my bel /
(halt thou crre) how is my hert to loze:my
here panteth within nie / can not be ſtyl /
£o2F haue herdep erpengẽ or the tröpettes /
and peales of warre.

Cher crye murthur pon murthur / the
whole lande hall perp. Fumediatiy my
tentes were de ſtroyed / and mphanginges / in
the twinckunge ok an ere. How longe ſhall
Ilethe tolẽs of warre / and heare the nople
ok the trompettes.

Heuertheles this Hall come vpon them Ff
becaule my people is become foolpch / and Sah
hath bterlpno buderſkandpnge. Chepatethe Baruch ..
chplozen of koolichneg / and wythout enporte
crecid. Co do euell they haue wytt ynough:
but to do wel / ther haue no wyldome. Ihaue
loked vpon the earth / and le / it is waſte and
vopde. J loned towarde heauen / and it had


Wyne.

Ibehelde the mountapnes / andthey trẽ⸗
bleed / and allthe helles wire in a feare. J lo-
hedaboute me / and there was no body / and
all the byꝛdes of the ayze were awaye J mar⸗
fied well / and the plowed kelde was become
waſte: per alltheir cities were bꝛoln Downe
at the pꝛelence o€ the Loꝛde / and indrgna·
cion of bps wzath.

Foꝛ chu hath the L oꝛde ſayde: che whole
lande Walbe delolate / pet tpl J not chen os
haue done. Andtherkoze lett the earth mour⸗
ne / and lett the heauen be Cozy aboue: foz
the thinge that J haue purpoled and talen
vpon me to do / wall not repente me / ano
wyll not go from it. Che whole lande thai
fle / ko the noyle of the hoꝛlmen and bowmẽ:
they wall runne in to dennes in to woddes /
and clynime vp the ſtonp rockhes. All the
Pig chalbe vorde / andno mandwellinge

jerpn.

What wylt thou now do / thou beinge de⸗
Groped-so7 tboughthousclotheltchpfelke 1 geren. 5
Ccarlet / and decke ſt the wyth gold: though
thou papntett thy face wyih colours / vet
walt thou trym thy (elf in vayne.

For thole that hytherto haue bene thy
greate fauourers / call abhoꝛre the / andgo
aboute to faye the. Foꝛime thynche) J heare
a nople / Iphe as it were of a woman traue⸗
ipnge / oꝛ one labozynge or her kpꝛſt chylde:
Euẽn the voce ok the daughter S yon / that
calteth out her armes / and lowneth / fay.
enge: ah wo is me how foze vexed a karnte
is myherte / ko them that are Oe


Ilrael.


aude lobig;
of Bod ie bys
‘approuyng and
alowynge / as it
iu lade in Bee
816.8


bawherkae
alpon. sc. Un.
der 5 name ol
thele ve altes is!
Cgnpfped the
evra OMB ae
bplon,


€


nge is there no rrahtwes o fapthfull mau
Sante fragt the people, on therulars Fup
whole Cane the ande Wuldelpare the cptye: wherfore
Zemp is de ropedof the Aurtians.


Che. v. Chapter.

Ohe thozow Jerulalem / beholde

land fe: Dee chozowe her ſtretes

allo wythin / vk pe can kynde one

ima that doch equall andrygbt) o:
that laboureth to be faytyéull: and A wail
Spare himi(Capeth d Lozde Kos though they
canſape: 5 Lozd liveth / vet do ther lweare to
dilceaue: where as thoul D ILozde)**lobet
only vpon kapth and treuth.

Chou hat icourged them / but they tone
no repentaunce:thou halt cozrecte them foz
amendemét, but ihex refuled thx cozreccid.
Chey made their faces harder then a ſtone /
and wolde nok amende. 2

Cherkoze q thought in my lelke: perad ·
uenture theyare fo limple a kolich / that they
vnderſtande nothynge ok the Loꝛdes waye /
and iudgmentes ot cure God. Cherkoꝛe will
Jg nto their heades and ru lers and talne
wich them: pk they knowe the wape of the
Loꝛde / andthe iudgmẽtes of oure God. But
thete( in lyne maner h haue bzoken the vock /
and burſte the bandes in fonder.


v ypberfozea lyon out ofthe wodd wall bende


burte them/ a a wolfe in the euenynge tall
deſtrope the. Che cat of the mountapne tall
Ie luruyng by their cpties / to teare in peces
all the hat come therout. Kor their offences
are many / and their departynge aware is
Greate. Shuld J then foz althis haue mercy
vpon the? Thy chyldren haue foztahen me/
andCwozne by them that are no goddeg. And
albeit they were bounde to me in marpage /
pet they kei to aduoutrie / and haunted har⸗
lottes houles.

In the delpꝛe ol onclenly luſt they are be.
come phe the ſtonedhoꝛle euerpmés nepeth
at hisnepghbours wyke: Shulde J not coꝛ⸗
recke this / layeth the Loꝛde.

Shulde F not be auẽged ol euery people /
that is iphe vntothis: Clymme vpbpõ their
walles beate themdowne / but deltrore thé


CuALbat gr not vtterly er cut of thelt bꝛaũches / becaule


mans awape the


‘wopched people
of their cptye.


they are not the Lomdes. Foz bnfaythtully
hath the houle of Flrael and Juda koztanen
me / lapeth the Loꝛde. They haue denped the
Loꝛde / a tapde:it is nothe. Cuch / there wall
no miffoztune come vpon vs / we chall le ne⸗


The Pꝛophety


; turne to ye / and make the people to be
wod / that it ape contume them.

10% wyll bapnge a people vpon you era
karte / G houle of Itraeill fapeth the Lorde)
a mpghtre people / an olde people / a people
whole fpeach thou knoweſt not / nether vn⸗
derſtädeſt what they tape. Cheir arowes are
lodane death pee ther them lelues be bery
giaũtes. Chis people ball eate vp thy frute
@thp meate / re ther wall deudure chp long
e thy daughters / ch cbepe ¢ chr bullockes.

They wall cate vp thy grapes e kyges,
Is tos thy ſtronge and well kenled cytres /
wherin thou dydeſt tru tt they ſhalldeſtrope
them with the fwearde. Meucrtheles J will
sur ere ane Doty He Lape

2 oze do e Loꝛde
oure God all this vnto vs:

Chen antwere tyẽ:becaute / that lyke ag
ve haue toztanẽ me / s ſerued ſtraüge godde
in poure awone lande / euen fo wall ye ferue
other goddes allo in a draunge land. Peach
this onto the houle of Jacob / and crie it out
in Juda (and faye thus: Heare this (thou fo-
lich ö ondifcrete people) pe haue eres / but
pe le not:eares haue pe / bůt ye heate not.

Keare ve not me/Caveth the Lowe? Are
pe not aſhamed / to one me in p face: which
the lee with $ lande / lo that it can not
palle his boundes: Foz though it rage / pet
can it do nothynge / and though the waues
therot do fweil/pet maxe they not go ouer,

But this people hach atalve and an obit


departed a gane a
in elbe e


cer vl. b.
John. .d


ds Ok them


ol James, b.
Chap. b


ther fwearde nerhüger. As kor the warnrng 5


of d Pꝛophetes / chep take it but koꝛ wynde /
vee there i none ok thele ßwhych woll teil
dhe / § Coche thynges Mall bappe vntothem.

therfore thus kapeth the Lorde Sod of


Dpoſtes-becaule ye lpeake och wondes / be.


bold; che wozdes z are in tr mouch wen the


people / as chele be?
chynges are done in .

Che Prophetes teach faltelp and the
preattesfolowe them / and my people hach
pleafure therin. what wel come theror at


ape


C Che Cynnes For which Jeruſalem is aprt. Mu-
kircücpled eaves . Couctdufneg. Dilceate. Che Lord
reiecte th the facrifpces of the Jewes. Che chmynge
of the Babplonians is pꝛophe cĩed agapne.


¶ Che. vj. Chapter.


Ome out ol Jerulalem / ve ſtrõge
childꝛen of Ben amin: blowe vy
che trompettes ve Cecuptes / lett
wp a token vnto Bethcarem! koz


à plage and a great mylery pepeth out krom


the North.

J wil licken the daughter Svõ toa fayze
and tende woman / and ta her tall come the
theppbherders with their flockes . Their ten⸗

v Gone vende: tes wall they pitch rounde aboute her / and

fapisplacesoy euety one (all fene* the b are vnder his had.

boepakte. Malte batell agapntt here cha ther faye)
B Aryle lett vs go bp / while it is pet daxe.

Alas / the daye Goeth awape / a the nyght
wadowes kalldowne:Arile, lett vs go vp by
nyght / and deſtrope her ſtronge holdes for
thus hach the Lozde of hoottes commaüded.

Pew downe her trees / and tettop bul⸗
wozhes agapnſt Terulaieim. his is the cite
that mut be puriſhed / ko inheris all maly-
cioulnes. L ple as a condpte aboundeth in
water / euen lothis cytye aboundeth in wyc⸗
hednes . Robbery and önrpghtuoulnelle vs
herde in her / coꝛow 4 woundeß are euer there
in mp fight Amende the O Jeruſalem lek
J withdꝛawe myherte krom the / and malle

Ccbedelolate:a thy lande allo / Pnomandwel

au By hein it . Kor thus Capeth the Lorde ok hooſtes:
preachpnge of 2. Chẽ relpdue ot Icrael chalbe gathered / as
the warde all the remnaunt ol grapes.
Ah coten te „ aditothecfoze curne tiymne bande agape
9 ft alcheu⸗ in to the bathet lune 2 grapegatherer. But
thendbe Onto whö tall A lpeahe who wall J warne
ofthen bebut that he mape take hede : Chelr eares are lo
berpfew. * pncixcuncyled / chat they mape not heare.
Beholde / the take the worde of God but
koꝛ a cone /a haue no luft therto. And ther⸗
br Chat is Eze b A am co full ofthyne tndygnacyd D
4 cannot but L ozde) chat mape ture no longer. Shede
. out thy wath vpon the chyldzen bare with
te tp woe Olf / ard bpon al ponge men, Yeetheman
agayut them. mutt betalen pꝛeloner wyth the wyle / and
the aged with the crepel heir houles wyth
their landes and wines thall be turned vnto
fraunger .
pon the inhabitatours of this lande / lateth
the Loꝛde. Foz ktom the leeſt vnto the molt⸗
chey hange allppon couetoulnes: ¢ from 8
prophet onto the pꝛeſt / they go all aboute w
kalcheed and lpes.

2 And belpde that / theyheale the hurt ol
mypeople wich twete woꝛdes / ſapeng: peace
peace / when there is no peace atall. Cher
‘fore they muſt be achamed / ko ther haue cõ -


Ok Jeremy,


ers / when J ſtretchout myne hande J


xxv.


mitted abbominacyon, But how wulde they
beathamed / when they knowe nothing / ne⸗
ther of Wame ner good nurtour And ther
foze they ſhall fall amöge the Mayne, and in
the houre when J Mall vpfet them ther wal
be brought domme layer) the Lorde.

Thus lapeth the Lorde: goin to the
Areates / conkpdze à male inguplprponko:
the olde wape: and pe it be the good andright
wave / then gothervn ! that ye mapekpnde
relt kor poure coules. But they ape: we wil
not walcke therpn / and J wyll ett watch
men ouer pou / and therkoze take hede vnta c
the borce of the trompett. But theplape we
wpllnottakehede. Pearetherkoze pe Get
tples / and thou congvegacpon (att tnowe/
what J haue deupled kor them. Peare thou
earth alto: beholde / J wyll caule a plage
come vpon this people / euẽ the krute of their
atone ymagynacpong. 5

Foꝛ they haue not bene obedient onto my
ome nto mylawe / but 1 80 bei.
erfoze bzinge ve me incenle krõ Saba /
g lwete imellpng Calamus krö karre coun- e
trees? Youve bumntofferynges dilpleale me / vpe.
and J reiople not in youre facrikyceg.

ndtherkoze thus lapeth the Loꝛde : be
holde J wyll make thts people fall / a there
hall fall rom amöge them the kather with
the chplozen/ one nepghboure Walt perych
with another.

ozcouer thus layeth d Loꝛde: Behold;
there all come a people krom the Mozth/ a
agreate people (hallarpte from the endes of
# carth with bowwes a with dartes wal they
be weapened:Ftis a rough & kearce people/
an bnmercpkull people: their vopce roareth
ipke ö lee / they ryde bps holes well apoyn-
ted to the batell agayntt the / O daughter
Dion. Then chall thys crye be herde: Dure
armes are feble /heupnes a loꝛowe ig come
vpon ds as vpon a woman trauelinge wilh
chilve Qo man go forth into the Feld no ma
come bps thebye trete: Eos the l wearde and
keare ofthe enempe halbe on euerplpde.

Wherfore / gyme a lack cloth aboute the &

( Dthou doughter of my people) Cpavniile

thp (elé atthes mourne a wepe bptterly/ # Amos biG

as bponthy onipbeloued lone: For the de-

Grover (yall Coveniy fall vpon vs. Che haue

let £02 a pꝛouer of my hard people to Cche

dut andto trye their wapes. Foz ther are all

bnfaptofull and fallen awape / thephange

vpon kylthre lucre / they ave cleane bꝛaſſe a

pon / fo: thephurte and deſtropeeuerrman.

Che beilous are bet in the kyze / the leandis

conſumed / the melter meiteth in vayne/ £02

the euell is not talẽ awave krom the. Cher ·

foze Mall they be callednaughty tyluer / be⸗

caule the Loꝛde hath caſt them out.
D Ceres


Ilrael.


@Jeremype is commaunded to ſhewe write thepeople
the warde of God / whych trucketh in the oürwarde
« Kerupce of the tompieithat healpeth nothynge. The
euelies that thall bappe to the Jewes fo: the deſppling
ars enge wel tat tae herber
él
bis Wade Gepbeth *
Ahe. bij. Chapter.
Hele are the woꝛdes p God fpake
onto Jeremy: Stande vnder the
Gates ofthe Loꝛdes houle/ g crye
out thele wozdes there / wa loude
dorce / and lape: Heare the woꝛde of the Loꝛd
all pe ot Juda that go in at thys doze / to ho⸗
houve the Lozd¢ . Thus lapeth the Loꝛde or
Doſtes che God ol Fraeil . Amende youre
wapes and poure councels / and J wyil lett
vou dwell in thys place. Cruſt not in falle
Ipenge woꝛdes / ſapenge: here is the temple
ofthe Lozde/ here is the temple of the Loꝛd /
here ts che tem ple ofthe Lozde.
Foz pk ve well amende roure wapes and
wEro.reg.c, coumcelg / PE pe will iudge ryght betwyrte a
Sacha. big, e man and bys neghboure : yt pe wyll not op⸗
ene pꝛeſle the Rraunger, the fatherles a the w
0b. fh dope: pf ye wyll not Mede innockt bloude in
Chis place: pe pe wpll not cleue to raunge
goddes to poure awne deſtruccld: then wel
let pou dwell in this place / pee in p lande p
gaue afoze tyme vnto pour fathers koꝛ euer.
But take hede / pee truſt in councels / § be⸗
Gple vou & do You no good. Foz whẽ pe haue
Hollen murchured / committed aduoutrie/¢
Fa Spain sb etd offved onto Baal /fo-
wynge ſtraunge a vnknowone goddes: CThẽ
come pe /a ttande befoze me in thys boule,
(which bath my name geuen onto it a rape:
Cuſb / we are ablolued qupte / though we
haue done all theſe abhonunacpons.
hat- thinke po thrs houſe ß beareth
vElaſe. bib. my name / ys a denne ok theues? And thele
things are not done pꝛiuelx / but befoꝛe my-
neepes tapeth the Loꝛde. Go to my place in
0b. f. b. Dilch / wherunto J gauempnameatoze
„Wach rl. h. tyme /a lone wel what J dyd to d lame place
Aemprrrche ko: the wyckednes ok mp people ok lraell.
Jererztbl g., And now, though re haue dane altbere ded,
Ted b. villapeth the Lob) a J my ſelkrole vp euer bp
tymesto warne vou a to comen wyth pou /
vet wolde ve not heave me: J called / ye wolde
not ancwere. Andtherfoze euen as J haue
done onto Dilch / lo wyll z do tothis houle /
my name is geuẽ vntolã that ye put poure
truſt in) ve vnto the place g J haue geuen to
vou and pour fathers. And J thal thzuſt vou
D out ofmylyaht/as I haue catt wut all poure
yng. bꝛethzen the whole fede of * Ephzaim,
ee it  Therkoze thou Malt not pꝛape fo2 thys
atom, rae people / thou thaitnether geue thankies moz
matte. tH. yd pra per to the: thou Maltmake no inter⸗
ug · xl. cat g · cẽlllũ to me Fog ChE ko inno wile wil Jheare


e vnder⸗
# nbeth the. x.
Hof
Sparel


The Prop


the. Devt ey what they do in pcrtyes
or Juda /a without Ferufalem? Che chyldze
Gather llickes / the fathers kindle the fpꝛe / e
mothers kneade z dowghe / to bake cakes toꝛ
the quene ol heauen.

Cher poure outdzinkofiving, onto tradge
goddes / to pꝛouoke me vnto wath: How be
it ther burte not meſlayeth the Loꝛd but ra ·
therconkounde / acbame them lelues.

Andtherkoze thus lateth p Loꝛde Godbe⸗
holde / my wach and m indignacion chalbe
voured out bp this place bpd men a catell
vponß trees inf kelde a all rute of p lande /
Git all bume ta / f noma mape quench it. E

Chus lapeth the Loꝛdot᷑ Hotes the God
olg lrael: Vceheape vp pour burntolkringes
wich poure lacrikpces / eate the lleche. But
wheẽ J bꝛought poure fathers out of 7
J take no wozde vntothẽ of burnto!

Elacrifyces: but this J commaunded them /
lapingetherken g obe de my vorce / a J Male
be youre q;od and pe Wall be my people: lo
ve walche in all ß tapes / which J haue cis
maunded vou / that ye maye pꝛolpere.

But they were not obediẽt / they inclyned
notthe pz eaves there vnto / but went after
theivatone pmaginacyds ¢ after the mociõs
ol their awne wicked herte / a loturned
lelues awaye/¢ conuerted not vnto me. And
this haue they done / krö the tyme that youre
katherg came out of Egypte / onto this dare.

Heuertheles / J Cent vntochemmpfer⸗ g

uauntes all the pzophetes: J role bp carly a
lent them woꝛde / vet wolde thepnot herken /
ner oltre me their eart / but were obſt pnate @
woꝛle then their tatherg. Ind thou ſhalt now
lpeake all thete woz0 onto the / but they Hal
not heare p thou Malt crxe vpõ the, but cher
wal not antwere ß. Cherkoze thalt thou tape
vntothẽ:this is the people / that nether beas
reth the vopce ol the Lozde their God / ner
receaueth his cozreccpon. Fapthtulnes and
treuth is cleane roted out of their mouth.

Wherkoze cut ok thyne hearre /d calt a- G
wape / take vp a cõplavnte in the whole lãde 8
foz the Londe Hal caſt awape / a fcatres peos
ple / p he is dicpleaſed withall. Foz the chyl⸗
dꝛen ol Juda haue done euell in mylygbt /
laleth the Lozd.chephaue let vp ther abho⸗
fro ra e

aue defpled yt. aue allo buploedating 15
aulter at?! Copheth / which is in d valley ofa alen —


che chilozé of Hennom: f cheymüght burne vans slip ds


theft lonnes anddaughters / würch J neuer bare ud.


nes or Jerula ·


commaunded them / nether came it euer in jem were carl


me thought tnd therfore bude e Dapesed e where sta 7


ſhall come (lapeth the Lozde) that it Mhalliatcers


no moze be called Copheth /o the balley der cbr - ;


of the chridzen of Bennom / but the ballen e eds
OF the darne / for in Copheth / ther po


ce peepige


OF Jerempe.


of 1 811 Yf
i leis haue no row folowe ais kpithpe luce: and frottithe pꝛo· :
f F hall phet vnto the pret / they deale all wth lyes.


Piracl,


. vp ol che toules ot the ayꝛe wilde Neuertheles / they heaſe b hurte ok mypro⸗
7. en eib b / nomen aum eee peace 4 cone
. e vopce ok myꝛtt el jo peac 5 wll gather
0 gane ofthe püenef Guba Aena 5 n tyynat gerne ckeye
— the bopce of the bypbegrome gor the 2 l wic arnocban not aſbamcd, yee they 5 ey
nde Wali knowe ot no chame. : 9155
berni ges 3 Witte dem ceade / Foz eye ta — wjetpaue o€ pete viieneyon 2 e281


, the partes ot
the y chall fall amõge the decd bodyes / laieth Jm pbutc ge,
che deßruccpon of the Jewes.Chc Lorde moueth -
people to e vp their lynnts.
5


‘Hope, 0 oa 19 15
Need se cHobuer J will Father them inllopeth 1
Srckesrana pec dura. De Propderes che wWozdeyfothinteyeve Mall not be one gta Fe
¶ Che. viij. Chapter. pe vponthe vyne / nether one tyge vpon the in the syle
© thelame tyme faieth the Lowe krge tre andche leaues walbe Pucte of.’ ges one
the bones or the hinges of Juda; Chen will g caule them to departe and, 3
ones ol his princes} bones ob lape: why pꝛolonge we the tyme : Let vs ga-


Tupthel care

Fed he them to

4 the re al⸗
fofampe
hed the
ered


der
§


iur. ib. e.

5 ned genera

tolpue:wherecoeuer they 95 ery 8

enhalten Chus therin. Mozouer,“ J wyll lende Cockatry: vs wütet

arenen dn cumctiert9 farre not be charmed)¢ they Wall byte pourfapery

awape / that they neuer conuerte:

chen is thys people and Jerulalem gone fo

cnrre backe / chat ther türne not agapne.

euch. er. Chep are euer the longer the moze obũ na ⸗ 0
eo . me ove contyheretbut there inher:

n dat pete good wo derthere (challche Loꝛde lape) wyth their pmages⸗ ce

is no man that taketh repentaunce fozhys Fooly Mtraunge kacbpons: Che harueſ u ge mh

fynne/ that wpllfomoch as faye :twherfoze ps gone / the Hommer bach an ende and ron aaadre

haue J done thys: But euery mant as Coone we are not helped. J am loꝛe vexed / becauſe rnp oF 1 nee

ag he is turned backe) runneth forth lil une al the hurte of my people: ambeupanda- nae daly

Ca wilde hozle ina battapi. Che Stone üg, bached Foz theretsnomoze Cryacle at OA een parter.0.6,


: p it can pe ſbalbr dayne
weth hes apopntedtyme che Furtledoue / 5 lad andthere va no Phrlpcxen / tha * np
2 — athe Crane contpozethetpme ot heale the hurte or my people. eee 5


lle eople wil not newe complapute ¢ bewarleng of the Prophete/ for des
1 — ofthe Londe. Sem arre pete ug ede eee 12 it Oe
om batte pe fave thẽ: we are wyle / wehaue r lan 157
2 Ar. fe Lochate sees
Pech leben pene dethe lerr· Noho wil geue mip head water eren.
besiterteth forth lies:therkoꝛe ſhall the wi ough/ and a well of teares for B
be confounded they halbe akraied and talẽ· ne eyes: I mape wepe night
707lo / they haue caſt out che worde ok che anddaye / foꝛ the laughter of mp
* ‘Lome: what wyldome can chen be amonge people om GodthatThada cotage fome
them? Wherkoꝛe / J wyll geue cheir wyues where spare pace 4 — regi eon
: 0 mp people / m:
. sen ee Ade anda ſhzynckynge lozte e hey
2 Fos tromthe tower onto thehrett / ther Denethetetunges cores ute


Ilrael,
Ipeg- Is kor the trueth / ther mape nothynge
awape with all inthe world Foz ther go tro
one wickedneg to another / a holde nothinge
oF me / lareth the Loꝛde.

Zeremp. rü. b. Pee ane nul hepe himſelke trõ another /

attr. f anbno man map tatelyecult hys awne bother:
ieh. di. a. koz one bꝛother vndermpneth another / a one
neyghboure beg pleth another. Vet one dyl⸗
lembieth with another / a they deale wyth no

trueth. Cherhaue pꝛactiled their tunges to

Ipe/@ taken greate vapnes to do mylchele.

Cher haue let their Gole in the midde ſt of di ⸗

(ceate / and ko very dpilembipnge kalſbede

they will not know me / layeth the Lozde.

c. Chertozethus ſapeth the Loꝛde ot Boo-

pox shig.a tep:bebolve/F will melte them / d trye them /
„uh. Lor what ſbulde J els do to my peoplezbeir
tunges ate Iphe charpe aroweg / to Ipeane

8 dylceate. with their mouth they fpeake peas
ctably to theirneighboure / but pꝛeuelp they

lave wapte fos by. Syulde J not punpcb

thent foz thele thynges / lapeth the Lo zd: Dz

chulde q not be auenged of any loche people

as this: Mponthe mountaynes wyll J take

bp alamentacton and ſoꝛowłull crpe/anda
mournynge byon the fapze playnes ot the

wyldernes: Namely / how they are lo bꝛente

vp / that no man goeth there anp mooꝛe: y ee

Aman wall not heare one beaſt crye there.

. Byzdes and cateil are alt gone krö théce,
patra J wpll make Ferufalem alto an beape.of
fh. e. Hanes and a denne of benpmous wozmes,

And Awrll make Septic of guda lo walte

that noman thalldwell therin. Phat man is

lo wyſe / as to vnderſtande this: Ozto whom
bath the Lopde lponẽ by mouth / chat be map

Ole. xiiß. d. ewe this / and ape: C thou lande / way pee
rbcheſt thou lo: Mherkoze art thou lo bent
vpralpke a wyldernedhe / that no man goeth

thosowe Yee the Lode hm felfe tolde the

fame vnto them / that toꝛloke bys lawe / and

hepte nat the thinge that he gaue thé Incas
Maundement nether liued theratter:but ko⸗
Deute. eri b. lowed the wyckednes ol their atone hertes /
Jolus. cube. and lerued raũge goddes / as their Fathers

taught them. . 8

E, Cherfoze / thus lapeth the Lorde or Po⸗

ces · che God ol Alrael: Beholde / J weil kede

0 thps people with wozmwod / and geue them
Weut. rrrü. c. ga ll to daincke. 4 wyll Ccatrethe altoamoge
Jeet rig. t. the Hrathen / whom nether they ner their ta
thershaue knowne: a I will dende a ctwearde
Bund a /to Live
zunge them to naught, Wozeouct / chi
fapetl the Lozde of Poſtes lone that ve call
fozmoutnpng wrues / a ſende toꝛ wyle we
men:that ther come ſhoztip / s linge a mout-
Se em a

ou 4 oure 8
mae guche out or water. 5


ontrit J Pit


The Pꝛophety


For there is a lamentable nopce hearde of g

ron: O how are we Coloze deckroyed: O
how are we lo pyteoully confounded? We
mutt fozlake oure atone naturall countre /
we ate (hot out of oure atone lodgynges.
Yet heare the woꝛde of the Loe ( c ve we⸗
men and let poure eares regarde the woꝛdes
ok hrs mouth: p ve may lerne youre daugh⸗
ters to moume / d that euctp one maß teach
hernerghbourecle / to make lamentacyon.
Mamelp thus: Death is ciymmyng vp in at
oure wyndowes / he is come in to dure hou⸗
les / ta deſtroye the chylde befoze the doe / @
. But el bon meg, cn faveth th

u ou planely / thus e
Loide: he decd bodies of men (allive bps &
the graunde / as the donge vpon the kelde / 6
as theheye alter the mower / and ther Malbe
no man to take them vp. Mozeouer / chus
fayeth the Loꝛde: Let not the wyle man re⸗
lople inbys wyldome / ner the Aronge man as AT hat
inhes Grengey/ nether the rych man in hys toy as well he
ryches: But who lo wyll etope / let him re⸗Jcwes as che
foptein chi / P he onderttandeth/ ¢ ünoweth Sentvles; tor
meifor Fam hL ond which do mercy /equy- fer as ihr .
teandtpghtuoutnes vpon the earth. Cher: ther, Che ge⸗
foze done pleature in Coch thynges/lapech wes are del
the Lopde, Beholde/the tyme cometh Cavett z. well u tye
the Lozde)thaty well optet «tall tye whofe g hehe
fozeChynne is oneitcumcpled. Che Egrpcr⸗ though tip
ang / the Jewes/ the Edomptes the Zumo, rc
nites / che Moabites / and the chauen g- % dene
Dianices that dive tn che wide mmer $7 all are che de
che Gentyles are vncircücyled in the lle ch / recencoamés


but allthe boule of Jirgel are vncircumcy - .


led in the herte.


oa argen of e 7 5 to be feas
tel 0 ahenes ind
Sei. Bruel . ee


¶ Che. x. Chapter.
‘Care the woꝛde of the Loꝛde / chat L
he lpeaketh onto $/D thou boule
Glracl: Chus lapeth the Loꝛdt:
e call not lerne alter the maner
oF the Beathen/ ave wall not be atrapeatog cl wb
the tokens of heauen: fo2 the Peathen are
e.
hothpnge, anpte,
Eberbewe downe atree in che ‘ocd with enn u
bandes of the wozche man / and fach yon it dd
the axe: they couer it ouer with golde oy lxl⸗
uer / they fatten it with nayles and he mer /
moue not. It fantethas U xf ag f pal.
me tree it eä nether tpeake ner go/ but mut, a
be bonne. Be not pe atrapedot ioch / fo⸗ cher ige nch.
chdonether goodner cuel. But there fs none Jbl 5 .
Ike bnto thẽ / O L onde /a greate is name
OF thy power nho wolde not feare the? Oz
what King ok $ Gẽtries wold e nat obepe $2,


Foz am̃õge allthẽ wyle men ol the Sen⸗ x


tees


4


Flea


ell.


tiles / a in all their kingdomes / there ts none
that maye be lickened onto the. Cher are all
together omerned and onwrle. Al their cos
nenge is but vanpte:namelp / wod / luer
which is bꝛought out of Charlis / and beat


mabe mi . from Ophir / a worcke


s made with d hande ok the craltelman a
che caſter / clothed with pelo w lplck a lcar⸗
let: euen lo is the woꝛcke of their wyle men
alltogether. But tye Lode is a true God/a
ipuynge cod / and an euerlaſtynge keng. It
he be wꝛoth / the carth taketh : all the Gen ·
tplesmaye not abyde his indignacion.


kull are mylcourges onto me: Foz Aconl·
dee this Cozow bp my felt / emule lüflre it.
My tabernacle is deſtroped / a all my coar⸗
des are bzokien. My chlldaẽ are gone kro me
Scan no where be konde. Howhaue J none
tolpꝛede out my tente / 07 to lett vp myhan⸗
ginges.Foꝛ the herdmen haue done kolichlx /
that they haue not tought} Lord. TCherkoze
haue ther dealt vnwpkelpweth their catell/
and all are ccatred ab iode. Beholde / ö nople
is harde at hande / and greate fedicyon out oF
che nozth: to make the cyties of Juda a wyl
derneſee / anda dwellinge place koꝛ Pꝛagõs.
Now J knowe ( H Loꝛde) p it is not in m
power to oꝛdze hys awne wapes / 02 to rule
brs awne ſteppes and goynges. Chertoꝛe
chatten thou vs / O Lozde/but with fauoure
and not in thy weath / beynge vs not vtterly


Hk Jeremy.


xx bij.
tonaugßt. Poure out thyne indignacrõ ra·
ther vpon the Gentiles that knowe the not /
and ppon the people $ call not on thy name:
And that becaule they haue conſumed / de


t uoutrd and deſtroped Jacob / and haue roted


dut hrs gor.


CA curſſe ofthe that obey not the worde of Soddes
piomeſte. he people of Juda folowynge the ſteppes
ok their fathers / woꝛchpppeth ſtraunge codes. Ehe
Lorde lape th that he wyll not heare the gewes / z for ⸗
dydde th alto Jeremy to pꝛape For them.
che. xi. Chapter.


ts is another Sermon which ß 9
Lozde commaunded Feremp Foz
to pꝛeach / laping: eave ð woꝛdẽ
ofthe couenaunt / and lpeane vn⸗
to all Inda / and to all them that dwellat ge-
rulalẽ. And laye thou vnto the: chus layeth
the Lozd God of Arael:Curledbe eucry one
that is not obedyent onto the woꝛdes ok this
couenaunt: which J cöma ended onto youre
fathers / what tymeẽ as J brought them out aa Egppt was
oeckgppte / rom then zou fonace / laping: vn kanne
Be obedyent bute uy boyce / edo according kor the greate
to all that J cõmaunbe porto Mal pe he mpangurche / gre⸗
peopleſand A welk be poure Gad, and wen e e
hepe mip p2omple Aut haue tome onto derte) w of
poure Fathers: Samelp / Hat | wolde geue hep there tuts
them a lande whych tlowelh with inplck and kreb. 1). Meg.
bony / as ve le / it is come copatte vnto thps ue
dapẽ. Then anlwered J / and lapne. Amen.
It is euen Co Loꝛde / aß thou lapelt.
Cheng Lozve lapde vnlo me ugapne:pꝛe⸗
che this in d cities ol Jude a rounde aboute
Jerulalem / a lave: Meare the wo des of this
conuenaũt / ö ve maye nepethem. Foꝛ q haue
diligently exozted youre kathers / euer lence
thetpme pF bꝛought them out ol the Lande
ol Egipte / onto this dape. J gaue them war⸗
nynge by tymes / fapenge : herken vnto my
vopce: Meuertheles / they wolde not obeye
me / nos enclyne their eaves vnto mie / but fos
lowed the wycked vmagrnarvons of theyz
awnehertes. And therkoze haue J accuſed
them as tranfgvetouts of all the woꝛdes of
this conuenaunt / that A gaue them to kepe /
whych thep(not wyth vnderſtandinge) haue
not kepte. .
Andthe Loꝛde fapde vnto me: It is ode
out / that whole Alraell and all thele cititens
ol Jerulalem are gone bacne. hey haue
turned them felues to the blatphempes of
their kozkathers / whych had no luſt tobeare
my woꝛde. Euen lyne wyle haue thele allo


8 folowed ſtraunge goddes / and woꝛſhypped


chem Che houle of Flracil and Juda haue

bꝛonẽ my couenaunt / whych J made wyth
their kathers. C

Cherkoꝛe thus taveth the Loꝛde: Behold /

5 D. ij. I wyll


Ilratl.
ende a ph

Lebe en eee e

stir meta fe ea

ok Terulalem go/andcallopon their goddes


chepavenot able to helpe them in tyme of
cheirtrouble. Foz as manp cyties ag thou
halt / O Juda /o many Goddes halt thou
Allo: and one how many ſtretes chere be in
the (O Ferulalem)ſo many ſbame tuli aul⸗
ters haue pe let vp / to offre pon them vnto
Baal. But pꝛaye not thou fozthys people /
brd nether pꝛaxle ner prayer foz chem / fo3
though ther crye vnto me intheir trouble /
A6 n e then bel aof oy da tt chou f
e ou beloued / eft thou fo
Sears. rs hametullgteate blatphenpes in mpboutez
+ goge tworthp » CUE as though thatbolp fe mpgheabfolue
pedmanpgair Che/Cpectally when thou halt made thpboott
ues Zootec-¢ OF hp wyckednes. Che Love called the a
189653975 grene olxue tre / a tape one / a trutetull one /
pet thonghe u govdly one: but now thatthere is a cötrary
thep to baue re re poꝛte of the abꝛode / he wyll burne the vp /
deaed there ard deſtrope thy bꝛauncheg. Foz the Loꝛde
ann ok hoottes that planted the bath deupced a
of herr oultoc Plage £07 $(D thou harte of Ikrael ¢ Juda)
hess fcthtp ta, C02 f euelſ that ve haue done o pꝛouoße him
trificearmhich to wzath / in that ve dyd ferupcebnto Baal,
art here called. HIS (D Loꝛde haute J lerned of the / and
dai und. „ onderdäde le / fox thou halt bewedmeltheir
vmaginactös. But Aas a mene lambe)was
raried awape to be fapne:not knowinge / ß
cher had deulled koch a councell agaynſt me
Fish wood on fapenge: we wll deltrope bys meate wp!
ue pita odd / a dꝛyue him out ok the d lande ol
urd. Some er. Ixulng⸗ that his name cha neuer be thought
pounde herby Spon, Cherkoze J wyll beleche the now(
the modde oF? Loz olhooſtes) chou rightuous tudge/ thors
pated nied that trpett the repnes and the hertes: lett me
bd deupten fo le the auenged of them / ko / nto the haue 3
w appe thepro cOmitted mp caule. Che Lozd therfore pale
Th m ea bis thus oF citespns of Anothoth / chat fought
ka tbe tollape meſtapenge: Peach not bnto bs in
dr har the che tame of the Lozde ) 07 els thou Male dre
{and of the tp, OF oure handes Thug Ataxehrpake the Lord
ting Cguitieth of hooltes: Beholde / J will bilet pou, Youre
to thewed n ponge men tall perp wyth the fwearde /
EGEUG6 pour lonnes a pour daughters (hall btteriep
dpe or honger / fo that none hall remapne,
Fon bpö ß cytespng of Anathoth wil being
Aplage/ the veare ol their vilitacton.


Che Prophetemarueteth greatly at the .

tpe of Aa tupched attbougos be ‘ented pia

rpghtnous. Che Jewes are fortaken of the Lorde.

‘We (ycaketh agapnd Curates and preachers that fer

dan dene Jeon abe
r.

tegablebandbered ee seers hae


che ij. chapter.


1


vnto whom they made their oblactons: but 18


The Prophety


Monde / nt art moze rigbtubug /
ccenthat A wude delpute with 8:
euertheles lettme take wich


dernes a delerte. Chey haue laped it watke: alm Thel
and now that ie is watte/ttfpaberhbnto me tlre


b other /s thele
... doũ et geeuceacd
Thus ſapeth the Lozdebpon all myne D
euell neghbours / that lape hande onmpne
heretage which J haue geuen my people of


Itrael Behomde /F wil plucke themnamely 1


Feael)out orcheir ſande / eput out d boute. ’
: ob Aud


in


e derth


ol Juda krõ amongety?, Ind when J haue
voted them out / J wylbe at one wych them
agapne and will haue mercy vpon them: a
bꝛrnge thẽ agapne/ euerg man to hys awne
heritage / and in tohis land. Ind pk theylna⸗
melp thab trouble my people) wyil lerne the
waxes of them / to fweare by my name: che
Loide lpueth(lyke as they lerned my people
tofweare by Baal) then Wall they be rene ·
ned amonge my people. But pr they will not
obexe / then wyll J rote out the lame folke/
and deſtrope them /fapeth the Loꝛde.


che deAruccpon at the Je wes is pꝛetpgured / aud
their fparptpnge awode. Wyp IAlrael wasreceaued
to be the peopleot Gods whp they were korlaten.

5 ¶ Che. xiij. Chapter.


Prepared a put about the / a gett the vp / and
Qobnto Euphzates / a hyde itin a hole of the
rock. So went J/andhpdde it / as the Loꝛde
commaunded mẽ. And it happened longe a:
terthig / that the Lora pate ontome: dp / a
theto Guphzates/ a tet the bꝛeche krom
ce / which Acõmaundedthe to hyde there.
Chen went's coup) rates /e dygged vpe
koke the breche krom the place where J had
hd it: a heholde / the bꝛeche wag coꝛrupt / lo
that it wag pꝛolytable toꝛ nothinge.
Chen tu pde the Loꝛde onto me: Chus


Blapeth the Lord: uen Co wyll A conupte ?


Papde ol Juda / a the hye mynde of Jerulalẽ.
This people is a wycked people / they wyll
not heave my woꝛde / they kolowe the wicked


benz , ymagpnacyos of their awneherte / a hange
e ppon mraunge Goddes / them haue they tere


Deut
vii d.


ued ¢ worippppen:¢ thertoze they walbe as
this bꝛeche / that feructh ko nothynge. Foz
as ſtraplelpus a bꝛeche lpeth bpona mans
lopnes / lu ſirutely dyd J bynde d whole houle
c. ok Alrael / & che whole boule of Juda onto
me / layeth the Loꝛde:that they mpght be my
people: that they myght haue a glozyous
name: p they myght be inhonoure: but ther
wolde not obeyẽ me. Cherkoꝛe lave thys rd ·
le before them /a tape: Thus ſapeththe Lo

+ Sodok Alrael:Euery pot chalbe piled with
wyne. Ind they thal tape:thinckeſt thou we
Hnowe not /thateuery pot thalbe kylled W
wyne: hen Malt thou faye onto the: Thus
kapeth the Lode: Beholde / Mall fplt all 9
tubabptours of this lande with dꝛonckẽnes

the Rynges that cyt vpon Bauids ttole/ the
Pꝛeſtes and Pꝛophetes / with all that dwell


Of Jeremy.


xxviij.


at Jerulalem. Ind a wyn thute them one
agapnſt another / vee the fathers againſt the
lonnes / lapeth the Loꝛde. 8
J wyll not pardon the J wyll not (pare ¢
them. nerhaue pytye vp thenubut deſtroye
thẽ. Be obediẽt / geue eare / take no dyldapne
at it / ko it is the Loe hym tele that pear
het. Bonoure the lo ꝛde voure God herein /
oz he take hys lyght krom vou / and oꝛ euer
poure kete ſtombie in darckneſle at the hyll:
lett when pe lobe Foz the lyght / he turne it in
tothe ſpadowe ¢ darcknelle ol death. But yl
ve wyll not heare me / that geue pou lecrete
warnyng / will mourne kro my whole here
kor pourẽ kubburnede. Pyteoudy wyll J Zeremp. exe
wepe/ ¢ the teares (yall gulche out or mrne Thien. n.


exes. Foz the Loꝛdes floche tall be caren


awape capt vue. Cell the kynge and the ru⸗
lers: Humble poure lelues / lett vou downe
lowe / koꝛthe crowne of poure glozy dal fall
krom pour head. Che cities towarde pfoutl
Walbe wut bp / and no man call open them.
AU Juda Hail be caried awape captyuc / co
that none all remapne.

Lyft vp poure eyes / a beholde them / that 7
come krom the Mozth: Lyne a fat floche tat
75 —.— 1 whõ det hire 115

v mone / when they come bpd the? Foz thou 17755
balktaughtchemthpfelke/ andmade them Etap. . 0.
maſters ouer p. Shal not fozowe come bps Glu xxra.
ab eco wur trauapling with childe:

nd pE thou woldeſt fave thé ithrneherte:
Wherkoze come thele thingesbpomercuen
fozthe multitude of thy bialphempes / wall
des partes and chp fete be difcourred,

0; iphie as che man ol Inde mare chaunge
hes Chynne /a the cat ofthe mountapne her
tpottes:lo mape pe that be exercyled in euel /
do good. Cherkoze will Z Ccatve vou / lyne as
the ſtobble b is taken awape with the louth
wynde. Chis thal be youre porcpon / andthe
pozcpon of pour meature/ wher with ve tal
be rewarded ok me / lapeth the Loꝛde:becau⸗
ke pe haue forgotten me / and put poure trult
indifceattull thing’. Cherkoze wwallg turne
chp clothes ouer thy bead / anddifcoucr thy Ole · . b.
thrabes/ p thy pꝛeuities maye be tene / thy
adudutrr / thy deedlymalice / thy beaſtlineiſe
andthr chametull whozdome . For vpon the
keldes and hylles z haue fene thyabhomina⸗
cions. o be vntothe .O Jerułalem) when
wilt thou euerbe clen led eny moze?
Ot the derth that chulde come in Jewwe. The
buen of the people alupng me rey of the Lorde. The
vnkapthfull people are not hearde. Ok prayers fae
einge / of falte pꝛophetes that Ceduce the people.


¶ Che. rij. Chapter.
be wozde of the Loꝛd chewed vn⸗ 4
to geremp / concernynge the derth
ok the krutes. Juda chall mourne /
mẽ wwalnotgo moch moze thozow
D ij. his gates:


The derth
in Jewꝛpe.
bis gategzithe lande wal benomoze had inte⸗
putacion /a d crie of Jerutalem thal bꝛeale
out. Che loꝛdeg hall tende their ſeruauntes
to letch water / a when they come to the wel ·
les they thall tynde no water / but chal carpe
theit bedels home emptye . Cher Wall be
athamed and conkounded / a wall couer their
headeg, For the grounde Walbe duedvp / bes
caule there commeih no rapne vpon it: Che
plowmen alto halbe athamed/ ¢ Hal couer
thew; heades. Che Wende thall fozlake the
pose kawne / d be bzingeth Eozth in che kelde
ecaule there Halbenograte. Che wrlde
Ales cal Gande in the Molle / and dꝛawe in
Fst tne hada Dꝛagons / their eves
all taple Coz want of gralle.

Doutles cure awne wickednelte re warde
Ae Wp wilt vs: But L ode do thou acco dinge to chyna⸗
Sraungee. ac. nne ebougd oure trantgredpons andkennes
Ss who faye, VE MAND. Foz thou art the comfozte a helpe
Thou behae OF Alrael in the tyme or trouble. noh wilt
uett thy leit vn thou be at a ſtraunger inthe Lande / and as
Nee one that goeth ouer the kelde / a commeth in
8 fay man: Olly to remapne fo? a night? Habp wilt thou
50 thou kette malte thy lelt a cowarde / and as it were a gy⸗
Fut aunte that yet mape not helpe: Foz thou
2 155 art ours G L. ode and we beare thy name /

beirn (therkose ka lahe bs not.
ur Home ren Chen ſpake the Lozde/ concernynge this
de/vut thou / people that haue plealute fogo fonymbiy
mudden in be Becher fete/ and leauenot of / andtherkoze
ihr nan, a uitplcate the Wozbe:tn fo moch (chat be weil
belles on / o vs. nowbsingeagapne to temebzaunce altheir
. myldedes / and punpch all their fpnnes, Yee
euen thus larde the Lode onto me: Chou


Walt not pꝛape todo this people good. Foz P


though they kalt / J well not heare ther
pralers.andthough thep ollre burnt 5
Slacrikices/ſpet wyil not J accepte thẽ. foi
J will dectrope them with Ftwearde / honger
and pettilence. Chen antwerde J: O Lolde
God / the pꝛophetes (ape vnto them Cuch / ye
Wal le no fwearde/ and no honger thal come
vpon pou / but the Loꝛd Hall geue vou con ·
tinuallvett in this place.

Andthe Lorne lapde vnto me: Che pꝛo⸗
phetes pꝛeach ives onto them in my name. 4
baue not lpoken wyth them lun ene 4
chem enp chaige / nether dyd ende thé: ee
they pꝛeach onto pou kalle vitlös / charming
bantte / a difceattuinede of their a wnehert.
Cherkoze thus laieth che Lorde: Foz thole
prophetes that preach in my name (whom
Ineuertheles haue not ſent) and that faye:
Cuth! there chall nether batel ner honger be
in this lande: i pth lwearde and with hoger
Wall thofe pꝛophetes perpch / andthe people
to whom they haue preached ſhalbe caſt out
ol Jerulalem / dye of honger / and be lane
Seth che lwearde ( and there walbe no man


The P


zophety


their ſonnes and their daughters. Foz thus


wyll J poure their wyckednes vpon them.


Chis ſhalt thou fave alco vnto them: Mrne
eves (hall wepe without ceadynge dape and
hight, Foz my people thalbe deltroxed wyth
great harme / and (hall perych wyth a great
al dude PEF go in tothe kelde / io / it lpeth
all kuli of dapne men: It g come in to the cy
tre / lo / chey be all kanieched of honger.

Pee their pꝛophetes alls and pꝛẽtes Hat
be led in to an vnknowne lande.

Mak thou then btterle fosfaken Juda?
(fayde J) Dot thou lo abhozre Spon? Dz
batt thou to plaged vs / that we canbebeas
lednomoze: We loked kor peace / and there
commeth no good: Foz thetyme ofbealty 8
loſhere is nochynge but trouble. We know⸗
lege (O Lozbde ) all oure myldedes / and che
Epnneg of oure fathers / that we haue ofen ⸗
ded che. Be not dylpiealed / O Loꝛde) fog
thy names lake / kojgett not thy loupnge
kyndnes: Remembze the trone of thrne ho⸗
noure / bꝛeake not the coueuaunt / thãt thou
halt made wyth vs. Are there enpamonge
the goddes of the Gentiles / that lende rayne
oz geue che Mowers ot heauen:? Wok not
thou it D Lone oure God / in whom we


truſt: Yee Loꝛde / thou dott all thele thinges.


Who chan then haue pyte bpon the / O
Terulalem: Who hall be lozy foz the? Dz
who thal make intercellig / to optepne peace
fo2 the: ſepng thou goett frome /andeurnett
backwarde /fayeth the Loꝛde: Chertoze g
will ſretch out myne hãdagayntt the / to dẽ⸗
rope the / z J wll not be intreated 25055
ſcatre the ab ode wrth d ee

00


E


Soft, b. and


ach. Fee


to burpe them) both they aud theirwrues / il J N


ael,


ofthe lande: J wyll watte mp people and
deſtrope them / £07 they baue had no luſt to
turne krom their awne wapes. J wyll make
their wyddowes mo in nöbze / then d andes
or the kee. Mpon the mothers of their chri⸗
den / call bzynge a deſtraper in the noone
dape. Bodenlp and vnawarkes wal I lende
a keare bpon their cyties. She p bath bozne
bij chyidzen / böallhaue none / her herte wal
be full of toꝛowe. 5

Che Dunne Hail lr bk in the cleare
dape / wien (be Walbe cOfounded and karnte
ko berpbeupneſle. As ko thote p remapne/

‘well delpuer them vnto the twearde OF

ete enempes (apth the L orde. O mother /
alag chat euer thou dydelt beare me / an ene⸗


c ive and hated of the whole ande: Though perith th


Ineuer lente ner receaued ppon vlurp / yet
all men Speake euell vpon me. Ind the Loꝛd
antweredme: Lede not J $ then vnto goody
Come not ¥ to the / whẽ tou art in trouble:


Ebelpe che / when thrne enempe opppelerg 3


che ? Both one pron hurte another / oꝛ one
metall that commeth Crom the Hoꝛth / ano,
ther: As Foz poure rpches a trealure FZ welt

chem out into a pꝛape / not toꝛ eng mo⸗
ner / büt becaule of all our cynng / ye haue
done in all poure coaſtes And z will bzinge
vou with poure enempes in to a lande chat
ve bial ay 85 tHe thats 1 8
m acpon urne pou bp.

0 Lopelfarde Athen) thou knoweſd all
whinges thevéoze remembze me (a vyletme⸗
delpuer me kro my perlecuters: Neceaue not
mp caule in one ‘wrath / pet thou kno⸗
wel / fozthy kane Jure rebune. When
‘Zhan found thy wozdes/ Jate them vp gre⸗
deiprther haue made mp herte foptull 2 Flad
$02 J call vpon chr name / O Londe God oF

oftes. Jdwell not amöge che fcomners nee

er is my delpte therin but Jowell only in
feave of thy hand / co chou hat fpiten me
with bytterneß. Shall mp beupnes endure
koꝛcuer: Ave my plages then fo greate that
cher mape neuer be beaten: tile thou be as
8 water / chat kalleth / and can not continue?
upon thele wo7des / thus Capoe the l omde
vntome: Ik thou teplt turne agarne A Mall
Cetthe in my lerupce:and yéthou wylk take
out the thynge that is precious krom $ vile /
chou halt be euen as mne ane mouth.
hep Hall converte onto the but turne not
thou onto thé: fo tall Ymake thea trae
wall of (rele agayntt this people. hey Wat


aynſt the but they wall not pre. nit


uaßple. Foz Imp felfe will be Wihe to helpe
the and delpuer the / capeth the Loꝛde. Ind 4
wyll rydd the out ot the handeg of the wre⸗
ned / and delpuer the out oF the hande ol Ci⸗


Ok Jeremy.


rit,
e prophecpech the mplerpe ol the Jetoeg. hehe

—— 1 5 ok Jboles 3 the contépt

ok Gods lade / i the caule of thew mplerie. Be pros

phecteth the captinptic of Babpion s their Delpues

alice fes thence agapne. he caltyng or d Gentes,


Che. ro. Chapter.

W reouerſihus flardethelodbn⸗
tome Chou att ane sto wyle/ a

8 ner beget chyldꝛen in thys place.
6 for of the chplozcn that are bone
in this place / or their mothers P haue bone

them / and ok theilt fathers that haue begotté
eee balk
Chey cal dye an hozrible om ir
mourne kor them / ner burpe them burt ther Jerenp fig.
wall pe as donge ops the earth. Chev Malt
070% the fweavde and honger / and

their bodpes wall be meate For the koules of Piat, rng

capre) andbecttes ofthe earth. Agapne / Je rem. 5

thus ka peth the Loꝛde: Go not vnto thé / that

come together / ko to mourne and wepe: Foz

haue cake mp peace tr this peoplellateth
the Lowe) pee my kauoure g mx mercp. and

in this lande hall ther dre / olde and ronge 1

@ Wall not be burped moman Mall bewepe

them / no man wall clyppe oꝛ Waue him lelk


kozthem.

Chere MHalnot one vilet another to mour⸗
ne with thé Foz their deed / oz to cökozte the,
One tall not oltre another the cuppe of cos
folacyon/to forget their heupnes kor father
g mother. Chou Malt not go into their feat
houle / to lt downe / moch lee to cate oF
dyincke with the Kor thus kapeth the Lorde
ok Hoſtes the God or Argell d Peholde A a he mas
wal take awabe out of this place / the bovce ner of the ra
ok mpꝛth an) giadnelle the voce ak the bzp- phetes comely
degrome and ok the barde der s chat in youre ao ande:
daes / that ve maye le it. 422 to 8

How when thou Hewett thrs people alls comfort the

thele wordes and theplaye bntothe: UBher: fapthfulvasgze
fozehath the Lo de deupled ali thps greate ttt 2 Bee
plage £02 vs Oi what iz d offence atyane/ tee anbasit is
chat we haue done agaynſt the Lozde oure yreo che wpole
God? Chen make thou them this anl were: ccripture thee
Becaule youre fathers haue kozlaken me rew .
(Capeth d Londe)s haue cleued onto tratige ©

'oddes whom ther haue honoured ¢ twozs
fhyppebs-but me haue they koꝛſaken / A haue
not keptemy lawe. And ve w youre ſbame ·
full blalphempes / haue erceaded the wyc⸗
kednes ok youre fathers. Koz euerp one or
vou folowetl the krowarde a euell pmagy-
nacton of his awne herte / and is not obedikt


ome,

Cherkoze wyll J cat pou oute of this
land in to a lande that ve and poure fathers peut. rxig. ¢
uünow not:and there chall ye lerue ſtraunge Jeremrxx ihn
goddes nave andnpabt /chere welt thetwe

Pou no kau dure. Sebold therkozellspeth the


DD v. Lope)


Fteael, The Prophecy xxx. 5


Tome) thedartgarecume /tyatitdalino- wwiloewaes/ina talt a bnoccupted lande. G


Ok Frei, ion :


dem thee


moze be taper: Che Lo, tebpch
beugt wed anes ot tlt at of the
lande of Eg ypte:but / t tal belapde / $1070


i bzougbe the b raell
irueth that brough adam aa Alraell by the


from the Hozth / and ‘where
Thadtcatventyem, oz J wel byvnge them
Aga pne in to che lande / that 1 gaue vnto
their fathers,

Beholdef Capeth the Lozde ) J will ende


fhersarevn, Out many >*Epihersto abe them eater p


beritande the


will J lende out many hunters to hunte thé


banda 15 out /krom all mountapnes and b piles g out


Tone deus Of 6 caues of Cones. Foz mene eves
2.


bee rulars.


all their wapes / and chey can not be hd fro
m face / Adele wycked dar be


fl
At fouce fone kepte clove out of myipghte But kirſt w.
Sea ee nd enen pet amet bree


thew Aynges


Pheries and Cynnes / wherwyth {bev baue


tahen-satene, DeEpled my lande:Mamely/ wich cher
0 teme fome


ol
the people w


beng Idols and abbominacions,whertwith


the cheateotthephaue kylledmene heretage. O ILoz0e/


5 my Grength, mp power / and retuge in tyme
Inf week teouble.<cbe Gentples hell come bntoß


ul Zedektah


was allt
of the Neptun


hunted oute


kromthe endes ok the wonlde / and faye: wes
fathers haue cleued onto pes / their
‘Joolsare but vapne ¢onpzotitable Bow cn


of thote dhe am eae ther bis dera tobi are not


hunters the
TChaldecs. ith,


able to be goddeg Ano therfoze J wyll once
them mpbano mre eder

a
tnotoe that myname ische Lorde. fe


jolbe Lorde


bleten isthe man bate stan —


che l onde / and whole hope is the Lodeh
lelte. oz be halbeag a tre/ that is planted ln la
water (poe: whichlpzedeth out § rote
onto morſtneũe / whom the beate can not
harme / when it comnieth / but bis leaues are
ß And though there growe but iptle
becaule of dꝛouth / pet is he not care
Cull but he neuer ieaueth of to bzynge koꝛth
krute. Amionge all tyynges lyuing ma bath
the molt dilcẽatkull and vntercheable derte.
Who Hail then knowe it? Euen J the
learch out the grounde ofthe herte / @
irre the rernes / and re warde euery man
accozdinge to bps wapes / and acoꝛdynge to
the krute ofbis councels.
Che drlceatkull maketh ane / but bꝛyn ·
dunner. no ponge: He commeth by rechet /
not tyghtuoudy, Ing middeſt of his lite
mut he leaue them bebinde him / and at the
Jatt be kounde a very Coole, But thou (O
Loꝛde) whole trone is mot glozioug/ercels
lent and ok moſt antrauute / wörch dwelleſt
in the place ot oure holy rel: Chou att che
comkozte of Icraell. All they that fozfake.
che / cwalbe confounded: all they that departe
from the / walbe wzptten in earth / toi they
haue fosfahen the Loꝛde the ver condgte of
the waters of lie.
Healeme/D L ond / and J ſhall be whole:
laue thou me / and J Walbe laued / ko thou


i
5
8
8
=
E.
=
=
8
.
=
8
8
3
3
8
3
—
3
=
5
E
8
2
a.


atee ube _ ohen J kale in hande to rote out/ tobe: 23°


ſmmedine lp / repẽte or the good/thatade⸗
dero
Speakenot therfoze vnto whole Juda /


agapnſt pou.


ll ware / take bpon pou the thinge that is
sob /anb bo ryght. But they Cape: No moe


devas pe huue
i. Beg. xv. b.


Cherloze let euery man turne krom bys


Dutile of the Jewwes. Lucier he thote art my pꝛapte. Beholde / thele men tape onto


conkpdener in mang thote bleed that me: M here is the woꝛde of the Loꝛde: Lett ie
come, whereas A neuertheles lebynge io
flock in thrwapes haue compelled none by
Brolence Sora ncucrbetyaebeny miss beety/ c
this knowed thou well, Mr wozdes alle
were right beFoze the. Be not now
bntome/D L. oide / to thou art he in


oF Jbopeſ when J am in parell. Let my


: chridzẽ cuters be chfounned/but not me: let chem be


ofoeuet trauapleth therbp/ Walbe
a Se ereyanbwoagge chere, With an
Catt wynde will Alcatrechem / betoze their
wahrer Pa oitee tat i 12 gael
roe be at, Face.
t me
Lache be Jettes agapne:jeremmpis Faber Agape
er Dis is another commmusicacton/


‘


Jerem: · xi. d.


f od had th Jeremy /Kaying:
65 rvteanogooowneinto§ Pot.

„nad Aters houle andchere Mall F eae 1
that ze knowe not. Foz ye haue mynpütred moze of mymynde. ow rh — Sah
krreto my indignacyon / whpch chall burne Potters n wee. 0 5 —

96 Cuermoze . Thus ſapeth the Loꝛde: Curted = 5 1 poure 1 atl — e
Sekten donne e e bades: do he beganne a new / am
Jeruſalem: ve hall beare no allo n but


dynge to his
cher becken / acco dynge wana


burthen the me: Mape not
gucot yout bouts hug un 8e. g cae et A Pate both e fe an


wall dono iaboure therin / but halowe the oro poure far -
soatboty entf e abb nn m dende e


the lwearde in the kelde. Lett the norle be
herde out of their houles / whend murtherer
commeth fonentp vponthem: Fortheyhaue
diggeda pit totabe me / and layed ares koz
mpkete. Yet Londe / chou tnowelt all their
councell /p they haue deuyſed / to* dare me.
And therkoze tosgeue the not their wycked⸗
nes / and let not their lynne be put out or thx


deere. xl. &


kyght: but lett them be iudged beroꝛe the as


the gyltre: Chrs Halt thou do onto them in

the tyme of thy indrgnacxon.

dener e een d gous
he. xix. Chapter.


m erthen pytcher / and bzinge forth


et) betel ĩemnocde made shoe a ee


In Copheth Hail ther be buried / tor th. :
thallauenonc oherplace, cps e ie
nto tits placcallolateth the Looe / ard co a cen rt
them that dwell therin: pee J wyll do to thys 4
‘citte as bnto Copheth( Foz § houleg of Je.
tufalem ¢ thehouleg of the kynges or Juda
aredefplen/iphe as Copeth)becaute ofall S
joutes/in whole parlers theydyd facrpfyce
onto all the hood of heauen / a poured out
deincke es onto Grag


*
o Jeremy: Go thy waye / a bye the Ho


the Denatours and chele pꝛeaſteg in to the
alley ok the chridzẽ ot ennom which lier
beloze the poste that is made of bꝛyck / and
wewe them there the wozdes / chat J wall
tell the / and la pe thus onto them: Heare the
worde ol the Loꝛde/ye kynges of Juda aud
lh. Re. yxlic pe optetpns of qerulalem: Thus lapeth the
Jertm. vl. c. Tode of Hoſtes the Godot Frael:Behoid/


at $ cates ok allthatheare it / ball glowe.


e place / eee


nd that becaule cher haue toztanen me /g -e


vonhalowes this place / and haue ofſred init
vnto ſtraunge goddes: whome nether they /
Bcheir kathers / nerthe krngeg of Juda haue
unowne. hex haue ſplled this place alco WW
the bloude of innocentes / koꝛ they haue fect
bp an aulter onto Baal / to burne their chil⸗
dien koꝛ a burntoſterynge vnto Baal / which
Inether cõmaunded / ner charged them / ne⸗
cher thought once there vpon.

Bcholde therkoꝛe / the time cõmethllateth
ae Of Cor § Loꝛd) g this 1 wall nomoꝛe be called.
— x ee eth ner p valley of p childzẽ of ene
the nom but the valley of daughter. Foy in thys
place will A dare the Sena tours of Juda &
iet E Fell thE downe wihelwearde
the lyght ok their enempes / a ol them that
lenk their ipues. And theyz deed carcaleg
wylg geue to be meate foz the koules ok the
Capie, beeſtes of the lende. And Awylmane
this cptie lo decolgte and delpylẽdchat who
ſogoeth ther by / call be abathed-angteat

eg e
fb, ethẽ allo with the fled) ortherr
wrd. conn g heit Daughters. Yee cuexpone Hall
cate bp another inthe belegynge and ſtrape
neſle / wherwith theivenempes(s tebe their
Ipues) ball hepe them in. Ind the pytcher
Malt thou beake in the tyght or the nien / p
Walbe wyth the / and caye vntothem: hus
fapeth the Lorde of Hottes: Cuen Co pill F
dettrope thrs peopleand cyte ;asa}Potter


es agate, eben tans}
Geremp onto bpm: Che WL o7de thal call the iyrowsott
nomoze Pha thur(chatiserceltent a inctea- govlinets. «be: 4
Cynge)but Magoz( 6 is feavfull a afraped) Pigniteot pes
euer where. Fo thus fayeth the Kode de. Luna!
holde J wyllmake che akraped / the thy lele / Fo; be taught
and all that fauoure the: which Mall perych not ¢ repourd
with Wee een be- a
ope 5

area ane ben onder the eee
power of the hong of Babyion / which wall B not the
carie lome vnto Babylon pꝛeloners / g Mave greater man
kome wühthe wende. Weieduer au che e deen
Subltaunce ob this lande afltheirwrecpoüs thats aryate

 sbitobe


the treafure of the Aynges of Juda: wpll 2 roche tuell
geue in toß handes of thety enempes whi
wpalllporlechem / and carte them nto Ba- immer dutps
bilon But as o: 5 Phathur)ehou Wale ciencip tohed
be caried vnto Babtlon wich all thine bouts for tye belpeot
holde /a to Babilon Mhait thou come / where God. Ati ne
thou Malt dpe and be burpedsthoug al che (renek
faurouters (to whom thou halt preached lyes Ppchoppes to
O Loꝛde / thou make: me weake / but thou pertecute the
rekrechel me/emakett me ſtronge agarne. a of
All the dare Longe am J delppled A laughed the preaching
tofcozneof euerꝝ man: becaule haue nom o¢ the true
preached conkancyes


and gorgeous wozches/all coſtiyneſe /a 14 not duclf
Fetten


Juda,

5 ached löge sgarntt maltcteus pr,

cs ebe wedchemefdelkracclun Fance whic)
ccale chey caſt the woꝛde of the Loꝛde in my
Tteeth / and take me cuerte the weit.

_ Wabertoze /Z thought trom dente fozth /
not tofpeate of him / ner to pieach enpmoze
inhrs name. But the wonde of the Looe

3 thas aberp bumpnge Fore amp ict andin
mp bones / which wheF wolde halle ſtopped /
mightnot. Ker whp/ J herde lo manp dert.
ns andblatphemies / pee euen of mpne
atone companions / and of loch as were con:


l Jerempe,


raellbehoſde / J will turne backe the wea⸗


rx.


pens / that ve haue in youre handes / wher⸗
with pe kyght agaynſt the kynge of Baby:
lon g the Caddees / which belege vou rounde
aboute § walles /a J will beynge the togc+
ther into the myddeſt of this cytie / and J my
lelke will fight agapnſt vou / wean outſtret⸗
ched hande / s with a mightie arme / ingreat
dilpiealure andterrible wzath:¢ wyll impte
them / that dwell in this citie: pee both men a
catell chan dye of the peſtilence.
And akterthis(cayeth the Loꝛde) A Mall W


uerlaunte with me: which wente aboute / to delpuer Jedekiah the nge of Juda, a hrs


mate me akraped / capinge:byon him / let vs beruaũtes / his pe


go bpon him / to feare him / andmakehrm
holde his tange: ? we mare ouer come him /
and be auenged orchim.
But the Loꝛde ſtode byme / lyke a mygh ·
tie giaunte:therkoze my perlecuterg Fell /a
couide do nothing hep Mall be foze cOfoas
ded / fo; ther hauẽ done vnwyſelp / they thal
baue an euerlaſtynge Mame And not /
Lope ot Hoſtes / thou rpghtuous lercher
which knoweſt prepnes g che bery herteg:
let me pen en breathes com⸗
mxtte my caule.
Synge vnto the Loꝛde / and pꝛayle hym /
gp forbe bach deltueren the foule of the opp,
hit toled / krom the bande of the biolent.**Curfed
peped e bett dare tuberin mn was bome:bnhappye
ing of tl
wo


*
i?
su


be the dape wwhertn mp mother byought me
i aah oa
er iges, to 3
pat gore afonne, Lett ſthappen vñ ·
dato be tahen tothat man / as to the cpties which the Lo
Sahne of uened bpiyoe oovwne eme bebaobearde 10g,
dee dene ar the wiched rumoure OF che becaufe be dewẽ
Mthe confemame not / as ſone as q cam out oł my mothers
atthe trerltre wombe / a becaute mp mother was not my


Hoan CPley Graue her kelkeſchat D bath might not baue


Apen uhr on come out but remarned pH inber. Wher⸗
nee koze cam J forth Alben wombe : Co
cornforty id. haue experience of laboure and loꝛow? and
to leade my rte wyth ame?
Chepropbhecpeth that Z edebiah Mall be taken / and
echte burned.


; GAbe xrt. chapter.
2 2 Bele are the woznes p the Lowe
yt {pate vntog eremy what time as
Uynge Bedentah Cent onto hem
2 Paſburche tonne of Melchiah / a
Sophontah the tonne of Maallah preatte/
faving: u cke councell at the Loꝛd (we prape
dhe hol dure behalke / ko: Nabuchovonoto? §
kpnge of Babylon betegeth vs ptthe 075
(peraduenture) will deale to pth bs accoz⸗
Dyrige tohis maruelous power /s take hem


warten othe Yeremp. Peil Sedebiad this:
anfmere Chus lapeth the Loe God oF qc ·
5 5


iel loch as are eſcaped
inthe cyte from the peitence, we arde /a
hongerjin to che power ol Pabuchodonoloz
kynge or Babplon: pee into che handes of
their enempes / in to the hades of thole that
kolowe ppon their lues / which call ſmirte
thé with $ iwearde: ther wall not prtie the /
they call not fpare them / they Malt haue no
mercy vpon them. :
And onto this peopletyou thait tare: Chus c
fayeth the lord: beholde / Flapebetoze pou Wente. rer. e.
the wape of ipfe anddeeth. ih lo abydeth Jere rrrvui .
inthis cptte/ hall perich: ether th d ewearde / Lere. FFI. a.
with honger / oꝛ wich petilence.3But who ſo


ete goelh out to holde on the Chaldeeg parte / S


belege it / he wall taue his lyte / and * hall a ch wais
. ko apzay. $02 A haue lett seme male 105
mpface agarnb his cyte Capeth) ® Lore) Haiticape ut
to plage it / and to da it no gocd. It muſt be ger: J m al
Geuen in tothe hande ol the kynge ol Baby. one n pig rhac
don, and be bzent with Fyre. rsa
And vnto the boute of the kynge ol Juda heey.
fave thus; Peare the wozde ol the Losbelch wis conte’ that’
thou poute Of Dauid) Fo thus Cateth gb Lozd: prefer
Minictre rpghtuoutnes / and that Fone, de: be bato bua ac
iruer the oppredted from ppolent power :o: 22 FPN?
euer my terrpble wath bzeake oute lpke a peculd vtter⸗
fyze / and burne fo/thatnoman mape quéch ir panetott x
it becaule ofthe wyckednes or poute pria- ft bana
grnactons : Peholde (fapeth the Loꝛde) J 1 Frit
will come pd pou f Dwell inthe valleres he Toner
Medea mene ae
at 7 0 = it cue
tte! 0500 wilder yourtayet) the oe twnetbapeay
becaule of the wicheones of pour imienciös, 0 2
and will krndle Coch a Epze in voure wod / as
hall conſume all / that is aboute vou.


de erhozteth the Kynge uk Zudn fo tub gnment and
ſerulatem is brought into cape
iene rot cn the fm OF Jotun
sopbecrel
ge rr gtapter.
Hus Cape the Lozde alto: Goo
'owne intotheboute of the Beng
Of Juda / and Cpeake there thele
PEED wordes/and ape: Beate § won
ofthe Lorde thou kyng of Juda thas uh 5


Juda,


teruauntes and thx people that go in a out
atthis gate. Chus the Loz commaundeth:


~Repe equpte and ryghtuoulſneſſe / delpuer-


the oppzelicd fromtye power of the violent:
do not ner oppꝛeſe the ſtraunger / che
kathere le nerthe wpodotw/ and wede no in⸗
nocent bloude in this place.
And pe ve hepe thele thinges kapthtullp /
then Wail there come in at the doze of thys
boule kynges / to ſyt vpõ wauids leate:they
wall be —.— ir end and ryde vpon
er g


B


Feta bee e be obeweat onto
5 Bu nto
Hhetecomenannnemétes, Ilweare by mpne


Ct 0
awne lelfe(fapeth che 102d)this boule call
be waſte. Koz tzus hath the Loꝛd ponẽ bpd
the kynges bape of Juda: Chou art p head /
a8 Galaad ig in! hat writ thou
If in Libanus: What
lape of tt / yr I make the not fo waſte (e th
exties alto) that no man ſballdwell therm:
10 dhe Jah hen daun thy pal che
oz the / to hew downe thy ſpecrall Cedze
trees / andto cat them in the tpꝛe.
And all the people that go by this cytie /
cel. — e 0 Wwhertore baty
Fei onde done nto ches noble cptye?
r u. Chen hall it be antwered:* becauſe they
nun. Meg fit. phaue bꝛokẽ the couenaunt of the L020 ther
Pata. b üdgod/ g haue woz lipped g kerued draunge
— bn, goddes Mourne not duet the deed / z be not
ee ttande pere wo £02 them / but betozp fo hem that depar⸗
ur Aci all the teth awape: koꝛhe commeth not agapne / and
fonnes of Jolle Feeth his natpuecountre nomoze. Foz thus
age beeeleCapeth the WLozbe/ as touchpnge «* Selunt
Tad bieter he Tanne ot Foclah nge of Juda / whych
V greate ta, rapgned afterbis father/ and i carped oute
mee dredoute ol this place: He chall neuer come hyther
of gerutalem- agayne lo he Wall dre in the place /wher-
Ten a bra he in eb capttue/ and al Cethis lande
ele we, Dnomoze. Wo wofth him / that buploeth bys
re buried with houle with vnrightuoulnes / and his parlers
out the honcür with the good p he Hath gotten by biolence:
858. Fenn gt. which neuer recompenletb bis nepabbours
Foa Fee Jralaboute/ner papeth bim his hee. Bethrne⸗
wap chpucee Heth in him lelfe: 3 wpll bupte me a w
i th inhim le b.
to be (pecyaly houle / z goygeous parlerg: He cauleth win
figuificd be Seno wes to be hewen therin / and the lplpnges
uh echt, and geadtes mageth be of Cedze / and papn-
te / s there heteth them with Zenober. Chinckeſt thou to
Dott. eg. raigne / now 5 chou pꝛouokeſt me to wrath
woher Giant wich the Cedze trees:
which came in. .
was pꝛolpere well as longe as he dealt  equite
bre dee Haan gh moulnele Pee iaben be belpeo he
kae de perchhe aD Pood COEBEIEEPGDE Hen pd
peredhe well.
Te d. Prall, Arb whence came this but ontybecaute
srrota.who- he had me bekoze his eyes / lapeth the Loꝛde.


ib uteri: Meuertheles/as ko tyre eres o che bert /


The Pꝛophety


inche engl feate ot aud: chou and hr. cher tone Spon cowsetoutnette/to hede imo. Jepp


Drdnot thy tather eate and duncke / and Obe tpeaheth agi


cent bioude / ta do wꝛonge and bicience, And AUlobrougeety
- therfore thustaperd tbe Lome agapnd Ze. & 2Mrl
boaint the fonne.of Joliah kynge at Juda: her 6 0 ne
Cher Wall not mourne fo7 him (as theppfe rrub c. a.
to do) alas baother / alas Cpter:Mether Mall telat bis vay
thep Cape bntobym: Alagcbs / alas fos that ed, Jh u
noble pryyce But as an Ae Malthe be bu. famed tothe
ried / coptupte and be calt without the gates ebe mate
ol Jerulalemm. teaped buen
Clymme vp the hyl of Libanus(D thou 1
daughter S{on)IpEtiop thy bopce bon e- ae
fan /crve krom ail partes:fo2 all hp iouers ¢ there had e
are deſtroped. gaue the warnpnge/whple chpldie Maye
chou walk pet in profperpte.. But thou fay. vetoed
delten wen notheare And ches aner bal 7e, accurs,
thou bled trom thy vouth / that thou woldeſt uv. Beg. d
neuer heare my bopce. Alithhewm' chalbe au
dꝛpuen wyth the wynde / and ihr derlrnges; wien
halbe carped atoape into captputte: Chen urg gude zn
Walt thou de brought to thame ¢ cötulpon, my ccame ions
becaule of all thy wichedn{:thou ß dwelleſt te here m an
vpon Libanus /a makeſt thy nett inthe Ce ⸗ worden A
die trees. O how greate tall thy mourning man Munde


be, when che fozowes come pon the /aß a (et gr


650
ae
„Alte,
wylk Jeb


degree 404 pe

SAgapn fate 5 jot 5

e
jetes that

thename: Sob. Shen ee fale LOE,

7 che rriſ. Chapter. i


480


pee


Aütrore/ s tcatve mp flocke / lapech
Ache Lowe. Iherkaze/ thpsts the

eS comaundement ok the Loꝛde God
ok Alraelt / vntothe Hepherdes that kede my
people: Ve (catve and thzuſt out myflocke/ s
lone not bps them. Cherkoꝛe now well Jvy⸗
let the wickednes of poure pmaginacpons/
fapeth the Lope: And well gather together


. thes remnaunt ok my flocke / from all anes
rannad that I had dꝛpuen them vnto /e will bꝛinge
tes 7 becnule
ave but
nome
Ten tap


them agayne to their paltures /bebepmape
growe and increaſe. J wyll lett wepherdes
Alocuerthem / which chall kede chem. Cher


bad Gn. F. e. f Mall no moꝛe keare and dꝛede / ko; there wall


Liter.


none ot them be loft / lapeth the Loꝛde. Bez


Bgolde the tyme cometh/Capeth the L. onde / 6
„ Awpilrarke op the rpghtuous bzaunche of


Dauid / which Hall beaverule/and dilculſe


erat. matters iw wyrdomte/ 3 chan lett bpequpte


Frightuoutnes agayne in the earth.


deute rrxiia In his tyme Hall Juda be aued and Jr


ts
Sereepoiee


tacll call dwell without feave. Ind thy is
che name that they Mall call hym: euen the
Loge oure ryghtuous maker. Ind therloze


e beholde /the keine chmeth lapech p Lowe /


that it Wall no moe be lapde: the Loꝛde Iv:
ueth / which bꝛought the chyldꝛen ol Acraell
out o the lande of Egypte But the Lowlxy⸗
ueth / which brought koꝛth / and led the fede ol
the boule of Ftracil/out ofthe Hoꝛth lande /
and From all countrees where J had ſcatred
them / a they chall dwell in their awne lande


agapne.

My herte bꝛeaketh in my body becaule
Of the kalle pꝛophetes / almy bones hake:
am become ipkea dꝛoncken man(that by
realon of wyne can take no reſt) fo2 bery
feave of the Loꝛde / and ot bys holy woꝛdes:
Becaule p lad is full ot apuouterers / where
thozo it is deſtroyed and moumeth / a che
pleataunt paſtures of the delerte are dꝛyed
bp. Yee the wave that men take / is wycked /
Atheir gouernaunce is nothing iyke 5 holy


Cwoßde of the Lozve. Foz the pꝛophetes g che


pꝛeſtes them telues are poluted vpocrytes /
und their wyckednes haue J founde in my
houle / layeth p Lo de. uphertoze / their wape
wall be dppperp in the darcknee / where in
they mape flacher and fall Foz J will being
a plage bpon them / euen the peace ok theit
amen che Bort the Loꝛd. Jhauetene koly
amonge the
they preached to: Baal / a dilceauedmy peo ·
ple ok Ilrael. .

I haue ſene allo amonge the Pꝛopheteg
ok Jeruſalem koule aduouterp / a pꝛelump·
menbptbeianoefattpnge tem cep

m e
ran not returne From their wickedneß. Ill


Ok Jeremy.


O be onto thechephewes / that de⸗


Pophetes of Samaria that ta


thele wyth their cytelyns are vnto me / ag
Sodom / a as the inhabitours ol Gomoꝛre.


xxxij.


*


Cherkoze thus lapeth the Lord oF Poſteg ere. r. d


concernynge the pꝛophetes : Geholde/ J will
kedethem with woꝛmwod / and male them
dꝛvncke the water of gall Foꝛ krom the pꝛo⸗
phetes ol Jerulalem is the cycknes of ypo⸗
crilpe come in to all the lande.


anoeyertoze the Lopeor hagen geueih ze 4g
vou this warnpig⸗ Heare not the wozdes ok z. piheh


the pꝛophetes / that pꝛeach vnto vou / a dil
ceaue vou :koꝛ they Cpeate the meanynge of
their awne herte / and not oute ol the mouth


ok the Loꝛde. Cher Cave vnto them / that de Jeremy. eta
Sppte me: he Loꝛde hath aßen Tuc / ORHAN lc,


ve thall pꝛolpere ryght well, And onto all
thé / that walcke after the lud of theirawne
herte they lape: Cu / there Mall no mickoꝛ⸗
tune happen vou. Foz who hath lyttẽ in the
councell of the Loꝛde / chat he bath herde and
vnderſtande / what he is aboute todo? tho
bath marched his deupce / and herde tt? Be⸗
olde / the ſtoꝛmywether ofthe Lozde( that
8 his indignacton) Wall go kosch / and chall
kalldowne ops the head ok the vngodip. And
P wrath of che l oꝛd Mall not turne agapne/
öntpll be perkourme and fulfull p thoughee
ok his herte. And in the latter dapes pe Hall
kndwe his meanynge.


Ihbaue not cent there pꝛopheteg( lapeth &


che Loꝛde and pet they ranne. J haue not


Spoken to them / and pet they preached But gere. rl. b.


p they had contynued in my councell and
perbemp tooadesithey hadturnedmp people

omtheir euell wapeg and wycked ymagy-
nacpong. Am Athen God that lerth but the
thynge / which is nye at hande / and not that
(8 karre ok? kapeth the Loꝛde. Mape eny
man hyde bpm lelt lo / that J call not ſe him?
fayeth the Lope . Do hot A kullkpil heauen
and earch⸗ capeth the Lozde. Jhaue heide
well ynough / what the pꝛophetes fave / that
preach Ives in my name / laringe: Ibaue
dieanied /A haue dreamed. How longe wyll
this continue in the pꝛophetes hertes to tell
lpeg and topzeach f crattpe lotplte of their
awne herte? whole purpole is (wyth the
dzeames p euery one tell hto make my peo⸗
ple forget myname / as their fore fathers
dd when Baal came vp. The pꝛophet that
hath a dꝛeame / let himtell it and he that vn⸗
58 my wozde / lett bem chewe it

.

Foz what bath challe and wheate to do to


Leeres


gecher⸗ lapeth the Lorde, Js not my tose me name le


ine a tyꝛe / fapeth the Lozoe / andipke an
hammer / that bꝛeaketh che harde fone?
Cherkoze thus laxeth the Lozde: beholde /
ops 6 prophetes/ ** pfteale my worde

ely fromeucty man. Beholde / pere am
Alapeth


that ſhe we in

mp name, ano⸗

ther thpnge

which J haue

not commad⸗
„


*


Jehoakim. The Propheey Jehoakim, Ok Jeremy. xrriij


Illapeth the Lozde)agapnt the prophetes/
chat take vpon their tünges to tpeane: Che
‘Lope hath larde it. Beholde / here am
(Cavett the Lozde)agaynt thole pꝛophetes /
that dare prophecy ives / anddplceaue my
people withtheir banities / and mrzacles /
whom J neuerlent / ner commaunded che.
Cher Hall do thys people greate harme /
fayeth the Loꝛde.

Iethis people ether eny prophet oz pꝛelt
athe the/and lape: what is the * burthen ol


te bat ts- the Loꝛde: Chou Wait faye vnto thẽ: What
the propbecp ? burthen⸗ Chertoze wyll A caſt vou fro me
buy words OF Gaperb the MLozde)becaute pe youre felues
#19. a. Abat B Area burthe. And 6 prof


chat blech this termeſche burthẽ of d Loꝛde⸗
him wyll J biet / and his houle allo.

But thus Wail ve tape / euerp oneto ano⸗
ther: What antwere hach the Lozde geuen⸗
07 / what is the Loꝛdes commaundement?

© Audas kor the burthen oe che Lo de / re Hall
Epeakenomoze of it: kor euerx mans stone
worde is hig burthen / becaule ve haue alte.
redthe woꝛdes of the lyu vng God the Loꝛd
ok Hoſtes oure God.

Thus chall euery man faye to the Po.
phetes: what antwere hath che Lozde geuk:
che: Oz / what laxeth h L onde: And not once
to name the burthen of the Lozde. Cherkoze
thus Caveth p Lo de: or fo moch as ze haue
olen thys terme ( the burthen ok the Loꝛde)
where as J not withſtanding lent onto vou /
0 koꝛbade vou to lpeane of} Lozdß burthẽ.

Beholde therkoze / J wyll repute vou as a
burthen /a will catt you out of my pꝛelence:
pee and the cytie allo / that J gaue pou and
poure fathers:¢ will bꝛynge pou to an euer⸗
laſt ynge conkulpon / and in to loch a chame /
as all neuer be koꝛgotten.

Che. xxliij. Chapter.
he vplyon of the. h. pannpers of kygges. Che
Fp vylpon cyguikpeth that parte of the people Guia
betsought agape iM captiuptye. Mbelecondesthat
‘edchtah and the reaſt of the people Guide be Ore


roped.
e Lozd ſbewedme a vrlion: Be⸗
olde / there ſtode two maundes ol
gges befoze the Cemple of the
07d / after that Habuchodonolo⸗


uh. eg. ritg d BENG OF Babilon had led awaxe captyuege⸗


chomah d tonne of Jehoakim kyng of Juda /
the mightie men alto of Juda / Wthe woꝛck
maſtets /a conuynge men of Jerulalem / vn.
to Babilon. In the one maunde were v.
goodepges / euen ipke as thole that be Ep2tt
kype. In p other mative were very naughtie
kbges / whych might not be eaten / they were
do euell. Chen ſarde the Loꝛd vnto me: what
Kept thou Jeremy: J lapde: kyges / wherot
loine be very good / and tome fo euel / that no
manimaye cate them.


et / pꝛeſt oꝛ people wh


Chen came the woꝛde of the Loꝛde vnto 5


me / alter this maner: Thus lapeth 5 Loꝛde
the God of Itraell: pe as thou knowel p
Good Fyges / fo hall J knowe the men led
awape / whom J haue lent out ok thys place
in to the lande ofthe Caldees / foꝛ their pꝛo⸗
kyte: and I wyll let myne eves bpon them for
the bet / to: J wil bzonge them agayne in to
this lande: woll buplde them op / and not
bꝛeane them downe: J will piste them / and
not rote them out. And J wyll geue them an
herte / to Bowe / how that Jamthe Lozde.
Eper chalbe my people /and J well be their
God / toꝛ they chan returne vnto me w their
e


ole herte.

And ipne as thou knowelt the naughtye
kiges / wyych mae not be eaten / they are fo
euell:Euen to wyll A(lapeth the Lolde) lett
Fevehial the Hynge ok Juda / pe c all his
pꝛinces / a the retpouc of Jerulalem chat re·
mayne ouer in this landẽ / a them allo that
dwell in Egypt e) to be berede plaged in all


Fipngnomes @ landeg. And wil make then


to bea repꝛołe / a comen by woyde a lau⸗
ghinge ſtocke and thame / in all the places /

where J Mall fcatve them. J well tende the

twearde ſhonger a peſtilencẽ amonge them /

vntill 3 haue cleane conlumed them oute of

po 57 / that J gaue ontothem and their
zathers.


(Jerempe mophecpeth that they wall be m capty⸗
Uptpe.lxx. peares- vecaufe they contemned and dyt⸗
ppled the wonde of God. Peccheweth that atter. Ir.
| ine the Wabplonians chulde be deſtroyed. Che de⸗
euccpon of all nacpons is pꝛophected he moueth the
Preattes ot the natpons to waplyng.
¶ Che. xxv. Chapter.
Sermon that was geuẽ onto Je⸗
rem / vpon all the people of Juda: A
n g fourth peare of Jehoaim
= lonne of Joliah kyngẽ of Juda /
was / in the fpett peare of Mabuchooonoloz
kynge of Babiton, nohich lermon / Jeremy
the pꝛophet made onto ali the people of Jus
da / and to all the inhabitours oFFerufalem/
on this maner.

From the. xitj. peare ol oltah the tonne ot
ol Amon hynge ok Juda / onto this pꝛelent
dapelthat is euen. Frith. peare )the worde ol
the Loꝛdehath bene cõmyptted vnto me. And
fo J haue lpoken to vou / J haue rylen vp
earl / J haue geuẽ pou warnyng in teafon/


erp but ve wolde not heare me. Though Loꝛde


hath Cent his teruauntes / all the pzopbetes
nto pou in feafon: Yet wolde ye not obere /
pe wolde notenclynẽ youre cares to heare.

He larde:turne agapne euerp man Front ;
bis euell wape / a from pour wicked ymagt⸗
nacions / and to thall ve dwell oz euer in che
lande / that the Loꝛde pꝛomeled vou ¢ bee


foztfathers:And go not after ſtraũge goddẽ /
keiue themnot / wozchtpe them not / a ange
e
then not ou. pe
wolde not heate me (Lapeth the Loꝛde) but
haue dekyed me with the woꝛckes ol voure
/ to poure atone greate harme.

IWherkoze thus lapeth #1070 of Hostess,

Becaule / ve haue not herkened onto my


out, Hee.
eee welche art Capel) de wia cape cpou onto then: isis chech .


chat dwell in the Porth / Caveth the
Boyde / and will prepayse Nabuchodonoloz
che kynge of Babylon my leruaunt / a will
bunge them bpon this lande / a bpd all that
Dwell cherin / d spon all the people that are
aboute chem / z will vtter ip rote them oute.
will make of them ler. amoc-


that
all that is w.
kenpbekg pepe tevo alf people:tof ey


inchts boke / which Je⸗


Co wall be Cubdued vnto duerle nacyons
22 kinges / tos will vecompente ty /


3 tochäirdedes g worckes oftheir
ann 2285 ch th


eee
chtles ot


gar
I Bye:
2 2 baten che remmaunt ott) ＋


Chema / Bu a the Mauch Jumaelttes: all
the kynges oF Arabr / and generaup all the
kynges thatdwell in the delerte aul d Kyu
of Fame all the Benges of Elam / all the
kyüges oF che Meedes alikynges towarde
d Mozth whether ther be favve or nye euer?
one with bys nepghbours: Pee and allthe
hyn chat ale byon the whole earth.
Che beng 5 n teres pe / cbal dꝛincke
jem allo.


maundemient ot the L oꝛde of Holtes the God


of Itrael: Wencke ¢ be dꝛoncken / lpewe ¢ 9


fail / chat ye neuer ryle: andthat thozow the
twearde / whych J wil lende amonge vou.
But ve they wyül notreceaue the cuppe ol


che hande / a dyrnne it / then cell tem Chu Jure nk e
Doth he de ot Hockes chzeack pouxdzinte gel.


it pe al/and that Woztly.stoz 10/7 beginne
to plage the cytpe / Wat my name ts geüẽ vn⸗
touipenbe pe then that J wyll leaue you one
punpihed? Ye Mall not o quyte.soz why /
Call koa Cocarde bpon all the nbabpeours
ol the earth Lapetl the Load of hoottes,
Cherkoze teil them all thele woꝛdes / and


Cave onto them: Che Loꝛde (hall crye from oel llc.
aboue / and lett bys bopce be herde Eom bys Amos. la


holpbabptacton, uaptlh a greate nopte Mail
be crpe kromhis courte regal. He Mall geue
agreate vopce (ipke the grape gatherers ) @
the Coftde therot thalbcherde vnto the endes
OF che wonlde. For the Lord hatha fudgmet
to geue upon all people and wyllpolde bys
‘courte ol iuſtice wyth all lech and punyche
the öndodlr laleth the Londe.


oa thus Eapeth ) L de of Voges: Be⸗
Date ente plage atl goo from ante rd


people to another / and a greate ſtoꝛmy wa ·
ter hal arpie krom all the endet ol the earth.
And che Came dape thall the Lozde him lelle
dape thẽ / com one ende of the earth to ano ·
ther. here chall no mone be made fozeny
olthem / none gathered vp / none buried: but
{halllpe as dunge vpon the grounde.

Mournel O ve ſbepherdes )g crresfpzinble
poure lelues with alſhes / O ve rammes olß
locke: koꝛthe tynie of poure laughter is tui⸗
killed / and ve thall kal ine betlels connyn-
gly made foz pleature,


Che ſhepherdes thal haue no tape to lle / Bale


andthe rames of the locke (ball not elcape.
Chen tall the chepherdes crye hoꝛriblp / and
the rammeg ok the flocke call mourne: oz
the Loꝛde chan confume thetr patture / and
cheir belt keldes (hall tye deed becaule of the

omible wꝛath ofthe Loꝛde. Cher Mall fo

he their koldes lpke as a Iron: For their


onites: dandes chalbe wate / becaule of the wrath


ofthedettroper/andbecaute of bys feartutl
cron. ee Lem


ih


Plrael, The Prophecy


Cierennye moueth thepeopletoamendement. Geis preach agapnit this boule andagaynt thys
taken ot etesand i
Abbes ent: 5e debe eo a eerie Sinn an, Cotte all 6 worden that pe baucherne ber-
Gwoerethythathe ban preached only the wordy of Son font amende Paure wares, and poure adup.
Wye culars andthe people delyuer Jeremperagapne ſementes /and be obedient onto the vopce ot
the wplles of the grees ¢ Wrophetcs: after the ex* the Loꝛde youre God: lo hall the Loꝛde re
prot aes be Warpe gar ee pan pente. o€the plage / r he had deurled agaynt
leached. Wind the Wropdete u bpliedar zehoakimy Pou. Aotw ar fo me: I am in poure handes /
do with me as pe thenche expedlent ¢ good,
But thrs wall ve ünowe: pk pe put me to
death / xe wall make youre ſeſues / this cytpe
and all the ingabitours therok / gyltie of in.
. . €
vou / tofpeake all mat.

= 5 eaves, 0 on

en tulersand the people bns
tothe prettesand pꝛophetes: his ms mare
not be condemned to death / to he bath pꝛea⸗
ched vnto bs in che name ol the Londe dure
dere God Che c ders allo ot the lande d ade vy /

wesrpanitceat allche people : Micheah
7 te / whlch twas a prophet under
Ezentah byng of Juda / cpake to ali $people
or Juda: Ehüs la peth the ode of Holes: ¢
Sion bebe bia ithe a lelde / gerulalem
Walbe an heape of tones /and che bpll of the
Lopes houle walbe turned to an hye won,
Duo ezektab the yng of Juda g the people
eee tene en anne

ade / amade

fene pꝛaper bntohim. Fo the which caule allo $


kante ts he mt en


che. xxvj. Cdaprer.


nr
srube page's werhed ware hn A mare alda: reyente of
determed to bzynge


1 .
gebn ut une, or their wycked inuen·


wa ann Tuners Mot obepe me / to walcke in my lawes / wh. cy
bds. en, Pr mb Setuauntes the prophetes / wd


bib, l . Fut bnto pon rtl pnge bptymely/ and itefiten. Lorde repented of the plage, 6 he hadden wyll A blet woth the wearde / wych hon-

Drnge: eee bem fap Tosca chem S bene hen serorta h geen rn e

re 9 etotbesboute /as Foo onto tMhametulloede agaynſt oute foules? Cherc med them inhys bandes /lapech the Lozde.

ob /@ well make tbiscytietobeabboz- waz a prophete alto/that preached ali in : And therfore kolawe not poure Pzophetes /

pert lende aber at eatth. Andthe Same of the L. onde / called wi nah the lonne gs 1 D of bpeanies/ Char.

Prealtes Che prophetes all § people herde doe Demeiah of Cartathtarmm this mä peas . mers and wptehes/whych Cape onto vou: pe

che e. ele wunde / inthe houle of eee : . cer peach bon lers lo of Mabylon, Foz

welche DHE neden out alt werder How when Fehoakim che a Ach trün en beam dige h et pou

2 the n onde tommäunded hem to pzeach eltate and pznces had herde Hes : out / and deſtrope pou, But the people that

o all the people then $ prettes/ the po- kynge went aboutto llape him. 18 je a, geg. . put their neckes onder the pock of the png

ee ee eas arash temas of Babylon ano eruetpm/ehote g wulle

ee wire ents Rr cues — oat acento
mand tis cote albe formate 5 $ fonne of Acyabor] arb ename I bones , Alithete enges tote Sewell the f

ud gen aich 6c Bima i Co epypte bch ont dene oute the, aeonae of Guna /and fapbe: UE POUT neces

aboute gereme the people were gathered of egrpt e brought him bnto kyng Feboas : vnder che zock of the Synge of Wabplon /

: i erenve tn the voute of ye che kim that dewe him with thefnearne g cal : Cerue hym ¢ bys people / chat ve mapelpue,

e ‘eric stare wae 3

20 en. vo g into the houle of the Lo, pat | elwearde ſongel 3

ee, Genet, Heese pice Het ni


che prettes and the vn
B gcoaitthe people cele nasses chens need: Rear er eg: iger


dF Me monthyto dye / karbe bath nenne to the rng
Preachen agapnſt ge OF jude:
Sa db Mirae patie, ee
rename Yeremp onto therutertamy Lat Fale pret. NON eRe
to all the people: che Logde bath fentmeto che æxbij. chapter.


wid


ach


: fron. nl hall Cerue hym, andhps lone / ans


Aynges wall lerue hym.

Moxeouer / that people and N me
tohych wyll not ferue Mabuchodonotoz/and
that wyl not put their neckes onder $ vock
ok the Ange of Babylon: thelame people


ar Fra, ge bat we
ee at ou:
i fever Bmnge al Babrlon (o; cher pꝛeache vou


Hethet hauen tent the apeth the Loz: J.


e
my name: that ut
Pou cut / and that vemight perrch woth vour


wees or the Kordes poute hand hoster tote ver
be brought hyther agayne kram Babrion dds that were
Foz they pꝛopbecye ipes vnto vou. Beate the aye? aum.
not / but cerue the Apnge ok Babplon / that" geanu


pe mape lyue. i Bhertoe well ye make chys
cytye to be deſtroped: v But pe they be true
Prophetes in very dede / and pethe woꝛde ol


ue Wut pf


the Lozdebe commptte onto them / then jet iger ur dnn vg


phetts. i ce.


thé pꝛape the L. od of holtes /p the remnaũt Warche. Che
ok the oꝛnamẽtes ( whych ale in the houle of true do zophe⸗
the Loꝛde / a remayne pet in the houle ol the tes aud (orb as
Bonge of Juda andat Ferutalemn)be not ca. {ane to ner
vied to Babylon allo. Kos thus bath the ard motvgnce the

ok hooſtes Cpoken concernynge the pplers / vengeace that
the lauer / the leate and the reipdue ok the oz: Gov thieate +
namentes that pet remarne in thys cptye /a Supi
wörch Habuchodanolo che kynge or Ba⸗ aeg chere
bilon toke not / when he caryed awape Je⸗ an ther teane to
chontah the tonne ot Jehoanim kynge of tyes b preache
Juda / wyth all the power of Juda and Je- no nolherthm⸗
dulalem / from eratalem rito Babylon / fed


captpue.
ee thus bath the Loꝛde pkhooſtes che
God oF Acraell (poken/ as touchynge the re⸗
fyoue of the oꝛnamẽtes of the Lobes houle
okthe kynge ol qudaes houle / and ol Jeru⸗
falem: Cher walbe carped onto Babylon /
andthere thep Hall remapne / vntyll J bylet
them lapeth the Lorde Chen wpll J bypnge
them hyther agayne. Ind chrs was done
lame peare: kuen in the begynnynge of
e reigne ol Zedekiah henge ol Juda.
Che falle Prophecy of Hananiah the ete,
crepe tee arte ponbecr of Bonen)
lle / bp the example of the other prophetes. he being
lulpired of the Lode reprouelh Banantab/ ꝛophecy⸗
inge bys death.
: Che. rroli, Chapter.
ut in the the Courth peare of the
* Hrapgne of Sedektah kynge of Fue
becher GPoneth / Iebap-
SM pened / that Panamahthe tonne or
Adlur the prophet of Gabaon/ſpane to me in
the boute of the Lo de / in the pretence ol the
pꝛeltes and of all the people /¢ larde. Thus
iapeth the Loꝛde ol hooſtes the God ol Fl-
raell: J haue bꝛoken the pock ofthe hinge of
Babilon / and akter two peare will J bzpnge
agapne in to this place / all the oꝛnamentes
okthe Loꝛdes houle / that Habuchodonoſo:
kynge ol Babylon carpedawape from thys
place vnto Babilq. ee I wil bringe agayne
lechoniad the lonne ol Jehoalkim che hong
of Juda himlelk / wyth all Jabber eue ol Ju⸗
CSc Cet eke Ade
fa place / careth the Lord ko Awyl bzeatie
Ee ij. che rock


krutelelle


764


. tt} i
Be


B the voc of the king or Babylon.
Chen the prophet Jeremy gaue anlwere
bnto che pꝛophete Hananiah / bekoze the pꝛe⸗
ep gvetoze al the people that were pꝛelent


Inthe boule of the Lobe. Indß pꝛophet Je⸗


tenip taxde:àmen / che 107 do P/agraunte
the thinge / which tyou batt prophecied:that
he mage bypnge agagne all the oznamentes
ofthe Lozdes houle / and reſtoꝛe all the pꝛe ·
foners from Babilon in to the place. Heuer⸗
theleg / hernen thou allo / what J wil fape 6
thou a all d people mape heare: Che pꝛophe⸗
tes p were betoꝛe vs in times pat / wh h
Propbecied of warre / oꝛ trouble / oz pettilece
kchet or peace vpon manp naclong ¢ greate
kingdom / were pꝛoued by this ( vt God had
Conde ty in very dede when the chynge came
to pale / which that pꝛophet tolde before.
Ind tal che prophet tobe dcharne


C. Panani
. rvitt. & rom the et Jeremyes neck /a brake it
Bake ae Danae / a ae


oplempantheare: Chus hath the Loꝛde
oben: Euen fo wyll J byeake the yock ol
abuchodonoco; hinge ot Babiton, fd che
neck of all nactous pee ¢ p withinthis two
peare. And to the prophet Jeremy wẽte bys
tape . How alter that Hananiay $ prophet
bad taken the chapne trom p prophet gere
mies neck / and broken it: Che worde of the
Lozde came bntoß prophet Jeremplalẽge:


Go / and tell Banantahtheſe wozdes: Thus I.


go faveth the Losd Chou hal brot che chaine


ert. xxty.


OF wod / but in Reade or wodthou Hale make
chapnes of zon. Foz thus lateththe Lord of
hooſtes the God of Arrael: J wyll put a pock
ol yʒon vpon the neck of all thys people / 2
theymaye ferue Sabuchoponatog the 1210
ol Babijon/ pee 8 Co hal they do. mph 1
geue him the bealtes inf kelde. Chen

pꝛophet Jeremy onto ? prophet Hananiah.
Heare me(J pꝛape 5) Hananiab: Che Lod
bath not lent the but chou bzingeſt this peo⸗
ple in toa faite belete. And therkoze thus
kaleth the Loꝛde:beholde / J will lende p out
ok the lande / a within a peare thou walt dye
becaufethou batt falfely (pokenagapnt $
Loꝛde. So Hanantah the prophet dped the
fame peare in the leuenth Moneth.


th che deltrütt the u
55 g en
t


che. xrix Chapter.
is is the Copie ok lettre / that
levemy the prophet tent from Fe>
rutalem onto the prefoners : the
Denatours / pꝛeſtes / pꝛophetes /


‘The Prophecy


andalithepeople/ whom Nabuchcdonofo;
had led vnto Babpion: after that tyme that
feng Jechoniah / and his Quene / bis cham⸗
bꝛelapnes the princes of Juda a Jeruſalem
the wozckmaſters of Jerulalem were de⸗
parted ihrther. Wyych lettre Elalah the
tonne of Saphan and Gamariab the tonne
of Helkiahi dy beare / whom Zedekiah the
kinge of Juda lent onto Babylon to Mabus
chodonolẽꝛ the kyng of Babplon:thele were z
the woꝛdes ol Jerenũes leitre:

Thus hath the Lore of hoottes the Gon
Of Alraei (poke vnto all the preConers / that
were led krõ Ferulalé onto Babiton: buxide
pou houles to dwell therin: plante pou gar⸗
dens / that ye may eniope the kruetes thẽrol:
take pou wpues / to beare pou fonnes and
daughters: pꝛouyde pues koz pourfonnes/
andi bufbondes ko; poure daughters / that
ther mae getfonnes and daughters a that
. multpplpe there. Laboure not to be

ewe but lee after peace and pꝛolperite of @
the itte“ wherin ve be prefoners, ¢ pꝛare
vnto God fo? it. Foz in the peace therot / wal
pour peace be. Foꝛ thus laveth the Loꝛde of
hoſtes the God of Icrael: Let not thole pꝛo⸗
bhetes and kothta pers that be amonge you
dilceaue vou: g beleue not youre atone dzeg⸗ ne woche,
meg. Fos wür / they preach pou Ives in p föch puter


my
name and J haue not fent hem, lareth the thmmgcs un


0708.
But thuslateth the Loꝛde: hen pe haue tous of dy
fulfilied. rr ears at Ballon 3 elan 3
voubome / ¢ ol mene atone goobnes well arter tbe a
Carte pou hither agapne onto this place. Fo me to abr
‘FZ hnowe what J haue deupted ko pou fateth In Ey eS
— Loꝛde. fan utes Uf to geue ant ch be
eace / g not e( eue pou al
kel pemigbtoauebope nne Pe alkoses ane
crxe bnto me / ze cpal go g call bpon me / g J were thep i
Gai heare pou. Ye wall tene me a fynde nie / „ dest
Felde se tebe me your tohole bert 8c
| toil be fond of pou Cateth § 07d) wil be- echt 1
ſpuer vou out of prefon/ a gather pou toge⸗ true Prop!
cher agarne out or al piacꝭ where ing hauedt the uud
keatred pouſcaleth the Lorde: e wyll Brynge doit
pou agapne to the lame piace, From whence ey perterute
Icauled vou to be caried awape captyrue. ‘wy the kale
But where as pe tape / that .* God hath sie
tapfed pou bp prophetes at Babilon bus 4
bach the Lorde (poken(concern
that lytteth in the Hole of Baud / and all the iber
people that dwell in this citie/ youre bꝛethzẽ did they bean
that are not gone wyth vou in to captrurte) zue , Pr,
Chus(z tape) peanelh the Lord of hootkes: „bete tre
Beholde/ J wyll fendea Cwearde / honger s moches ug
peltilencebpont them and wyll make them to Carne ut
like nitpmely fpges that mape not be eaten dete gebe,
107 — aa i pertecute chem with teu


rden Fong en. , een.


ther were dele Be


1% 5
ut .


inge pense


sare


falfely ofthe Love,


* Whe retourne ofthe people féom wsabplon. Son


_ Cop the kyng of Ba thathemape apt
them betoze poure epes. Andal g pretoners
of Zuda that are in Babylon / wall take bys
them thys eme okeuzngt, ala How
God do vnto the / as he dd vnto Zedeklah
and Ahab / whom the Bynge of Babylon
roſted in dye / becaule ther lnned thames
fulle in Ilraeli. - g

$02 ther haue not onelp deklledtheir negh⸗
bouts wpueg / but allo pzeachedlieng 070,
inmpname / whych g haue not commaun⸗
dedthem. This Jteſtikie /s adure/ lateththe
10d. Butas fo3 Spemetah the Nevelamite
thou thalt(peake bntobpm-arbus taieth the
Lord of boottes the God of Feracl: Becaule

g thou batt lealed lettres pnderehpname/ vn.
to all the people thatis at Ferutalem / and
to Sophomiah the tonne of Maalach b pzelt
pee and lent them to all the prettes: where in
thou wzptett thus vntohim. Che Koꝛde hath
opened the to be pelt in ſteade of Fehotava

„Aeg a che pꝛelt / that thou ſwuldeſt be the chete in
tparalsrid.a phe houle of the L onde aboue all prophetes)
and pzeacherz / andthat chou mpghtett put
them in pꝛelon / ozin the Roches. Howhap⸗
peneth it chen / chat thou batt not rep zoued
ol Anathoth / neuer leaue
praphecreng. And betyde allthre/ he
bath fent bs wozde vnto Babrlon andtolde
bs planelp / that oure captrupte all lunge
endure: that we chulde buploe vs boules o
dwell therin / andto plante ba gardens chat
we eniopeche krutes therof. hpch
lettre 1 — n


‘onto


em Dele


5 den abet
boꝛethus che Lopre doth certytre you


h To andbenocätraped g


chattenpng ſeweth that the people in leutull.
eo caenenoweetheenepes oF eels
che. xxx. Chapter.
Pele ate the wo des thats Loves
bbewed onto La / Cayenge:
Thus laieth the L ode dod of ls
p= raell : werte vp dpligentipaltt!
‘wopdes / that J haue fpoken untothe ing
boke . Fo: lo 1 Soe tome commety tapety the
Loꝛdeſchat J will bzynge agayne the pieſo⸗
hers of my people of Arael and Juda /fatech
the Loꝛde: 40) J wyll reltoze chem vnto
che lande / chat gaue ko their fathers / and
they thall haue it in pollellyon.
gane / chele woꝛdes Cpake the Loꝛde /
concernynge Ilrael and Juda: Thus laxech
Lom heare a terrible crye/feave a dil
tetneſke Foz what els doth this lignp lie /
t le- Hamelp / b all dronge men impte /
euerp manhys hände bpon hrs lopnes ag d
woman in che payne ok hertrauarle. tho
euerlawe a man ace Fer tity pide are gecemp gid :
queretherafter, ale. Y ec all their faces are
maruelous pale.
Blas for this dave whych is cod ꝛedekull/
thatnone mape be ipckened onto it:and alas
fo2 the tyme of Jacobs trouble / from the
which be dpa pet be deluered Kozin that yy
dape fapeth the Loꝛde/ J well tale his pock
Eom of thy neck / a bzeahe thy bondeg. Cher
Wall nomoze ferue ſkraunge Goddes under
hm / but they Mall do (rupee vnto Pod
thei Lozde/@to aud chery yng whom, an . lug
J topli capte by onto them. And as £07 the/ ezech rr
D mp leruaunt Jacob / leare ni 1 700 10 Jeremę. Flotg
. Foz /
l belpe the allo from karre /¢ thr tede


is


Jote.t.d.Grd.
Frtlld. a. Mae


manhewethe. 1
e Forgotten the / and
en An ae


*


Lye captiuyte
ot Ilratli.
cgrenothinge


mazeſt chou mone ko thy harme: Amy leit
haue ppte of thy ſoꝛowe / but koz
t — glennes / J haue done
Andtherkoze all chey that deuoure che /
Walbe deuoured/and all chine enempes thal
beiedtn to captiulte. AN they chat make! the
wake aibe watken them kelues: and all
thole that robbe the / wyn J makealfotobe
robbed. F029 will geue 6 chrhealthagarne
and make thy woundes whole / lapech the
Lozde: becaufe they reupled che / as one calt
. eee d, Lane bee 3

. xxlij. a. 0 fap oꝛde: Bevo
nt nh Meret gacobs tentes agayne / anode
lende his dwelling: place. Che cptpe talbe
buplded in her olde eſtate / k the boules wall
haue their ryght foundacpon. Ind out ofthe
loge 0 thankelgeuynge / andthe bopce of


Iwill multipive them / and they ſbal not
mymiche: J cwall endue them wyth honoure /
andno man wall fubdue them. Eger chrl⸗
dꝛen ſbalbe as a toze tyme / and their congre⸗
gacion (hall contynue in my light. And all
thole that bexe them / will oplict,

A captapne alto cal come of them / and
a pence (hall fpzpnge out fromthe mydoelt
okthem him will A chalenge to my leit / and
Zum bie. be Wallcomentome, Kos what tshe that
wle geuech auer his hert to come bntome⸗kaleth
geremp. it b. Ihe Lorde. Ye chalbe mp people allo / and
Erliä. l. if. k. eke poure Gor. Beholde / on the other
Seve rxih.e. 1 lyde ſhall the wꝛath or the Loꝛde bꝛeane out
txvd. 88 a ddomy water / as a myghtre wüpzle

nl. wall fali vpon the heades ofthe


Wich. b. a.


Che terrrbie dylplealure ofthe Loꝛde thai


i eee the lern eigene alu

a e ol erte /

2 705 heat Patten latterbapes velball omverdance”

smn ba pee seal ee ee rl
e

Ae. they walbe my people. l


Obe prophetpeth that tür people of Itraei halbe ree
‘Poxdagrynebnte their Healt . Co be turned
Spee ft of God. ether Ti
10 prophrcped. All the topched Hall dye in their wyc⸗
‘Rebnes, Che new Teſtament and cauenaunte is Poe
Lok. Hurelenns are taugheaus macuct ofthe
Tode. Mure kynnes Wall fo ve vemyptted sthstthep
e e
if Se nge agapne of
eeutaler, iplopngeagapne


“ Gebers chapter.


ben,


: grace to come in to theirrelt, Euẽ
n a Ae ene me
om karre / a laxe: I loue the wyth an euer⸗
iatingetoue /thevtorene' lpyede mymerep rcd at.
before che. J wyll repapre the agayne(D
chou daughter oe zecraell) that thou maxeſt
be fat ardlure. Chou wait tate thy tabzets
8 RaD mety tpemy tyatteae
junce. : ;
Chou (halt plante bynes: vpon
the hylles of Sama / ud c eg
therers ail plante / and lynge.
And when it ts tyme che watch men ops Elrre. g. a.
the mount ok Ephzaim Wall crye: Arite / ett
vs go vp vnto Dion to dure Lo e God / fo?
thus lapeth the Lone: Neiopte with gladnẽ 3
becaule of Jacob / crre bnto the head of the
Gentiles: Peake out / cenge / and lape: Che
Londe ſhall delpuer his people / the remnaũt
ok 3 Craell/ andmake them whole. Beholde /
J wyll bzynge them agapne krom out of the
noꝛth lande / and gather them from the endes
ol che woꝛlde / wyth the blinde and lame that
are amonge them / wyth the wemen that be
Greate wrth chyidr / and loch as be alto deip-
uered: a the company of them that come ac
gapne / wall be greate.
Chepdeparted kromhence in heupnes /
but woth tope wyll J bꝛunge them hyther a⸗
gapne. A will lede them by the rpuers of was
e e
$ vll be Fea} er z
e
7 070 Bens
tiles preach inthe les that iperarce ol / a
lapethe that hach fcatreb trail al gather
him togethez agapne and Wall kepe hymas
& Wepherde doth hs locke. Foz the Loꝛde
Uredeme Jacob a rrdhhim from the hande
okthevpolent. And ther chal come / andre⸗
foyce vpon the hyllok Spon / and chall haue
Plenteoutnes of goones / whpch the Londe
Wall geuc thé: Hameir whente wyne / ole /
ce


ponge Mhepe a calueg. And ehety contepen
babe epe their ci


ag a well watred garden / lor

homoze be hongrpe. aie

Chen thal the maxde reloyce in the daticeC
pee both vonge and olde folkes. For g welt
turne their fozo into gladneſle / and writ
comforte them and make them toptuñ / euen
from their hertes. ell poure plenteouth,
bponthe bertes of che preftes / andmy peos
dhe Lone latiltped wgoodthynges / lapeth


Chus fapeth the Lope :* Che vopte of
eupnes / epyngeandiamentacpon e e.
Wee *


Trraell,


1


0 95 ie Bie kX woman tall compalle a man.
: 855 € gon of ilrael: It will come cherto/ hat whe.


ar
ae


Foz her childzen / and wolde not be com̃toꝛted
becaule they were a waye
But now lapeth the Loe: leaue or ron


wepynge and crpenge / wychodde tyene eres


from teares / toi thplaboure Halbe rewar⸗
bed/fapeth the Kode. And ther wan come
agayne out of the lande ol their enempes:
Fee cuen thy potterite Mall haue conkoläcid
inches (lapeih the Lorde ) that chpchriden


7 dall come agapne into theit awne lande.


Mozouer J herve Ephzaym chat was
led aware aan ebe onthrs mas
nere Lorde, thouhaſt coꝛtecte me / athy
chaſtenynge haue J receaued / as an one
tamedcalée.Conuette thou me / and walbe
conuerted / kot thou are my Lozde Gov: Yee
as loone as thou turneſt me / J Wall rekgur⸗
temp felEand when J vnderktande / Wail
3 oxtmpee bponmpthpähe. mars me
ee
ok gree vor eare th if
fee ane) @ipon ehys cdplayite/ 9 ehougbe thus


*


fat when 0° bp ny felt i nor Ebb am mp oeate fonne?


,
, J8 he not the childe / woch whom J haue had
1 at myꝛth andpattyme? Foz fence the tyme


eons tovepene that J kirſt commened wil him / J haue him


fa 8 1 verpherte
S l euer in remẽbꝛaunce:therkoꝛe mp very ber


1B te Ip 1
ubm ct dipueth me vnto him / gladi and iouipng kene 1
wall the et 2 Un ccalle / but all


5 sw Jhaue mercy opon him lateth h L010.
aue ype 0 ry he watchmen / pꝛoupde teachers fo2 the
wer commély lett thine herte vpon the ryght un 45 thou
Sep en chu del walk /andtutne agaphe (c hon
acl /bp the daughrer OF Frac ture agapne to thelect⸗
mplptude of tpes of thyne. Pow longe weit thougoae
adi tear ⸗ rape; O chou Winking daughter; soz 5
Ginsbe: We Poze wel worte anew thphge Hon earths


Foz thus lapeth the Lozde of hoottes the


epeople or R haue bꝛoughe Juda out of capeititte there
deen hopes Haller inthe lande and in bps


aher fortns cpties: he L onde / which is the fayze bꝛyde⸗


theit (pone grome of ryghtuoulneſhe / make the rute tul


HL. ESovdalvet > thou holy hell: Ard there thal Dwell Zu⸗
E Pana hercytves / the tepherdes and


the hutbandemen: Foz 2 Mall fede the hongrye
ita ae ete a ate be, bere
Barter obe+ tlg J came agapne to myptelt/¢ muled/tthe
adbene waked out okatwete flepe,
Beholne((atech the Lozd)the daes come /


“Ryden fone chat J Will Cote ebe boule of Fteaetl and the


u
Syn oF Mall conte therto chat lune as Ahaue gone


Cbenchallit woh benden fae
chers baue cate atomergrape/s Kehle


‘


st Jett.


rerbj,


teeth ave tett onegde:tor kuerp dhe challde


koz bis awne mifocene / lo that who lo eateth
Soweracape buster) el un we


that 1 topl inatiea new cou


of Hananeel / onto p gate o
ien bekoze her vnto the hyll toppe ol


Beholde the daxes come et Lon)


gaue
3 the di Be ome
and ſtarres to tyne 96 d Uhleh mos


e
el onde Maite enia f
e. te ok then oz tg l


the oan
fram cence nan Or ae oe 6 heta⸗ g. a taste
Ga Zach. rug b,


teb/and wall come abbute Saath and the
whole bailey ok the deed karcales / and ofthe
albes / x all Ceremoth vnto the bꝛoke of Ces


dꝛom and rom thence vnto
oxtgate towatde the Eat / tobi


e comer of the
ere as the


anctuaryof the Lozde alto dall be 00


ind when it is now bupmded / a fet vp ol th


kalchpon it chall neuer be bꝛonen / no call


diye (6 catt m to prelobu.bectule 5
Czerempr is cack in fo pre e 225


that e ide be taken of the 3
92.7 Seraph Jeremp Tanten


ulde came agapne ko theilt atvne polkellpon «
1 5 wrens 2 is ſe ruaſites / z bets thee


Co keare Hodis Godes gytt / to thputst that ipnniet
maxe be clehued. eee


che xh. *
Scheele cute


Et lj.


dement of the Lo de / is dpgupkped“ that da
me. e ipeyel At the pec
pote ate


Hele worneslpane the Loneon- prnepardeg halve polellrd agayne in thys


sebekial, The Pꝛophety *


Seen e e whee — badden eupben
e of en bai e
Aas che. voit). vearẽ of Nabuchos woke Damned ftmm ctpeeeh eng
Donotoz/whattpme ag the eng ol Babtilos the Lo de laing: C Lide God / Ft is thou
Hoſte laped feageonto gen alem. urges that halt made hjeauen and earth wyth the
gane e ee

j d je etoba e.
daes honte where rah ekg 2 heen tbe wie r.


ha cauled hem tobe laped / becaute he Bad gednes ofthe Eathers intothe botome oF the SOFA |


mophecledoß this maner: Chus lapeth the chplozen that come alter them.
Leret ernie Lo de: Heholde J will delpuer thys cptie in Chou ark the greate and mygbtie God,
4 W Ferne the haves ofthe krnge of Babilon / which urine 00155 Tone oF 1 5 rae


Wall takeit Astor Sedektah the hynge of in councell/andinfinpte in thought: hene


luda he waunot be abletoctcape the Tal- eres lone ppon all the wapes of mens chi. gong. ga


dees but lurelp he wal come in ta the hades dien / to rewarde euerp one alter bis wape/
ofthe kynge of Sabilon: which chall cpeane and accopdynge to the Erutes of bys inuen⸗
with him mouth to mouth / and one of them cyons: Gehen due . —


grebe knen and gon g


LS pꝛouoke me vnts


wiath.
re Mngt of Feracl/andihe
PO ipa: rd


bekoze me euer From ther yout) vp what 3


e they els bone but pꝛouolſed me wyth
dee wascheg the atone hä des fcapeth the
de. e ;
h, what hath this cytie bene elg / vut a
pꝛouohinge of my wrath / euer ſence) dape
chat J bupiocd it onto this houter nherin
pratt out of nip lygbt / becaule of ? great
nalphempes ok the cheldzen ok Ilrael and
Juda / which ther haue done to pzouoke me:

ether / their kynges / their pꝛynceg / their

Breattes tye Baophetes) whole Juda / c
all the cytelyns of Jerulalem.

When J ttove vp earlt / and taught them


wpallloke another inthe face. And Hedenlah wonders in che lande of Egpptlag we le this b. v. harr . ther turned their backes
pot


thalbe carled onto Babilon / andthere Hall dape bponthe people of Jiraell and bpon
he be / vntyn the tyme that g biet him fatecy thole men: to mane thy mnftegre, ul 18
Che Loꝛd But yéthoutakel inbade to kight come to palle this dave: Chou halt broughe
agayntt 5 Calvecs thou halt not pꝛolpere. thy people of girael out of the id of 7
c Ind geremp ſarde: chus hach che Lorde wyth tokens with wondzes / wich a mightie
_  Beoken Acre ne dene l Home hande / wyth a ſtretched oute arme and wpth
ol Selum thyne wincles konne thall come greate terryblenes: and halt ien them
vnto the and requpze the to redeme ß lande / hrs lande / Ipke as thou hadde pꝛompled
ee stare) gitar gekusaan

e
Leulti. xyb, b did to bpe it out. ah — ——


Qu FFD Ay 00 ip — 172 0 fonne came
; courte of Spzeton (accoꝛdynge to
HUtHUGM dhe twopde oche Lozde) and lapde acorn:
Bye mylandſ J pꝛaxethepchat ipeth in Anae
thoth in the coittve or Ben Jamin: fo2 byhe⸗
retage thou halt right to lo wle it out fo2 thy
kelke / therkoze redeme it. Cheng perceaued /
that this was the cömaundement off Low /
and lo J lowsed the lande krom Hananeel of
6 ato were
e:euen leuen Cycles
eee ch
cau allo to make nie a wz

ppg Rate
e F monep opi .
c SoF tobe the eupdece wich the copie when
St twas overly lealed and red ouer) 4 J gaue
cheeupdencebnto Baruch the lonne of He⸗
riah g tonne of Maallah in the xght or as
naneel my cover / e in ß prefence.of the wyt⸗
aal de geren tat wee hei che
a erby in the

courte of the pꝛelon. ie

Acharged Baruch alto betoze thé / cavig:

Che Loꝛde of Poſtes the God or gerael cd.
maundeth the / to take this lealed eupdence
‘with p copte / to lapeit in an erthen betel)

chat it mape ionge contynue,

. ol Pottes the God ok Yes

raellhach determed / chat houleg / teldeg and


onpe.
ow when they came therin / andpotter-
edit / ther Eolowed not thy pce a walk.
kednot in thy lawe: but all that thou com-
maundedeſt them to do / that haue they not
ha therfoze come all thele plages bpd
m.
Veholde / there are bullwoꝛckes made
now agapntt the cytie / to take it:and it ſbal⸗
be wonne ol the Caldees that belege it / wich
Cwearde/ wyth honger and death / and lone
what thou halt iponen / that lame chal come
bpontyem,
0,


ozo /all cyongeg ave pretent onto here:


Yet fayettthoubntome(@ Loꝛde Godhand
cOmaundett me / that J Wall Io we a pece ot
lande vnto my felfe/¢ take witnelles thertos
and yet inthe meane lealon the cytie is delys
ueredintothe power ol the Caldees.
en e wöde or the Loꝛde onto
me ſaping: Beholde / J am the Loꝛd God ol
alllleche / is there eny thynge then to harde
fe si ee
all delpuer thys cptye in to the
power dt the Caldees / and in to the


be Maburyononotostbe Henge ol Varl ony Sete ge


thep call take it in: Fo the Camees Mall
conie i and wpnne thys cptpe / andtetetpze
bppontk / and burnett: wyth the gorgeous
houles / in whole parlers they haue made la⸗
e


tome / and not cher kaces. Chey wolde not
heare / to be rekourmed and coꝛrecte. hey
baue fete their Goddes in the houle / that iß
halowed vnto my name / codekplett. cher
haue buylded bye places to Baal in the bal-
lep of the childꝛen ot Hennom to vowe their
konnes and daughters vnto Moloch: which
Ineuer commaunded chem nether came it
euer in my thought Ito make Juda kynne
koch abhominacpon.

ozeourt thus hathe the Lorde God ol
Glrael (pons / concernynge this eptie / which
8 eae lelues cOfettc) halbe delpuered
co the bande of che yng of Babilon / whe

it is wonne with che lwearde / wyth honger
and with piſtilence. Beholde / J wyll gather
them together from all andes / wherin J
bau ateed ollen tn ie are
full and greate difpleaturesand wyll beinge
thE agapne onto this place where ther all
ee albe my peopie / and

wpibe their God.

Ang weil geue chem one herte and ane
wape that they mape keare me all the dapes
ortheir lte / that they and their chyidꝛen al.
ter chemmape pꝛokpere. And Awolllett vp
an euerlatynge couenaunt with them Pa-
melpithat 2 will neuer crate to both good,
8 at J wyll put my keare in cheirhertes /

they chall not runne awape from me.
fe e
000, topf iin
topetanoe wyth mp whole herte / and with


all mp loule.

For thus tapeth the Lord Iphe as haue
brought all this great plage vponthes peo⸗
pie:fo will J allobzynge ppon them all the
good / chat J haue pꝛompled them. Ind men
Gall haue their pottedpons in this lande
zIpherok, now / that it chall nether. be

b people nerok catell / but be deli⸗


2


HE Jeremy.


rei,


Uudbed in to the Hatines of the Caldees: Yee
land thalbe bought fo2 money / a euidences
made ther vpon andlealed befoze wytneſſes
in ß countre ot Benz amin /a rounde aboute
ferulalemun the cities of Juda / in p cptied
that are vpon the mountapnes / and in them
that ipe beneth / ver a in the cities that are in
P delerte soz J wyll bꝛynge their pꝛeloners
bitheragapne / lapeth the Lozde.
C Che piophele ia monpſhed ot the Lord / to pꝛaye tot
the delpuer aunce of the people which the L de pros
meſeth. God foꝛgeuelh (pues aud dothe gracpouly
to the pcople/ fo bis atone renowone. Ok the byrth of
TChꝛiſt. he uyugdome of Chuiſt in the churche chall
neuer be ended. ou
Ache xrxiij Chapter, :
Dreoucrtye woꝛde ol the Loꝛde 4
camebntegerempan this maner / Jer emp. xx. d.
Abwhen he was pet bounde in the 5rd a.
Rez courte of the preton: Thus favety
the Logde / which kulkyuleth the thynge that
be lpealeth the Lozde whych pertourmeth
che thynge that he taneth in hande: euen he /
whole name 185 Lozd:thou hal*crped onto . Erod. rilh. b.
me/eF haue heide p haue ſhewed greate a weg vel.
bre thing / wh pch were vnknowẽ vnto you.
Chus(Z tape) lpate the ode Gad oll
rael/concernyng the houles ob this cytie / a
the houles ok the ynges of Juda: that they
fhalbe bzokenthozowe the oz dynaunce and
u eapens / when the Caldees come to belege
themsand they walbe killed with p decdhar⸗
cates of men / wh J well llaye in my wath
a dilplealure: when J turne my face kr this
cptie / becaule of all her wicnednes. Behold;
(Capeth § L 0/3 wutheale their woundes
and make them whole: wyll open them the
treglure of peace andtreuth.

And wil returnethe captyuite of zu⸗
da and Nraeil:and will et them vp agapne /
as they were aloe. Frõ all myldedes wher⸗
in ther haue offended agaynſt me) A wyll
clenfe thé: And all their biatphempes which
they haue done agapntt me, whẽ thepregars
dedme not / will Foggeue them.

And this wall get ine a name / a pꝛayle a
bonoure/amonge all peopie of tye earth /
whpch cal heare all the good, that J welt:
ſhewe vnto them: pee they Mall be akraped
and aſtonnyed at ail the good dedes and bes
nekptes / that J wyll do foꝛ them. Mozeguer
thug lapeth the Loꝛde In this place / thers
ol ye faye p it (hall be a wylderneſe / wher⸗
in nether people ner catell wal dwell in lille
maner in che cytyes of guda and wythout
Ferulalem( which alto halbe ko vopde / that
nether people ner catell thail dwell there)
Shal d vopce or gladnelle be herde agapne /
the vopce of the Berdegrome and ok the
bade / the bovce of chem chat Mall kynge?

Pꝛayle § Hose of Hoſtes / konhe is 01
€€o, and


zedekiah.


and hs merer endureth for euer) and the
popce of them that Mall oller vpgyltz inthe
boule ofthe Lofde. Foz 3 will reſtoze ß cape
Siupte of this lande / as it was afoze / tapeth
the lo de Chus tayeth the Loꝛde of Poltes
It Mail conte pet therto / that in this lande⸗
which is vopdẽ from men and catell / and in
all che cyties of the lande / there (hall be tete
bp ſhepherdes cotages:in the cyties bpd the
fountaynes sand tn the cyties that lye vpon
the plapne / and inthe deterte,
nthe lande of Bengamin / in the keldes
ol Jerulalem / and in the cyties of Juda thal
the hee be nombꝛedagarne / vndẽr p hande
OF hum, that tellech them tapeth the Loꝛde.
C Beholde / che tyme cömeth tapeth the Lord


Zeremk. xi. that 4 will perkourme 6 good thynge / which


Ghaue pꝛomefed onto che houle of Alracll d
to the houle ol Juda. In thole dayes and at
b tame tyme /A wyll bunge koꝛth onto Da ⸗
ud / the bꝛaunche o€ rogheuoulnes / and he
Wall do egupte a ryghtüoulneſle in ß lande.
Inthole dapes tall Juda be helped / and ze⸗
culalem Mail dwell tafe / and he that Walt
call her is euen God our ryghtuous maker.
Foz thus the Lozne prometeth: Dautd hall
neuer want one /tolytoponthe Mole ofthe
houle of Alraell:netherchall the pzeſtes and
Leuptes want one to offre allwave befoze
me burnt eg to kyndle the meatok⸗
kerynges) and to prepare the lacritpces.
And the woꝛde ol the Loꝛde cam onto Je.
remy atterthis maner: Thus lapeth 6 1070:
Maye the couenaunt which J haue made
with daxe and nyght bebzoken that ther e
chulde not be dave andnyght in due leakon?
Chen mape my couenaunt allo be bꝛonen /
which Amade with Dauid my leruaunte / a
fo he not ta haue à lonne to repgne in bps
Crone. Oo hall allo the prettes d Leuites


eie neuer kaple / but lerue me. Ko ivkeasthe


Aarres of heauen maxenot be nombzed ne.
ther the lande or the cee meglured: Co wyll 4
multipipe the fede of Bauld mp ſeruaunt / a
ok the Leuttes my mypnitters. :

Moꝛeouer / the wo de of the Love came
to Jeremę / latẽg:Cuncpdꝛeſt thou not what
this people ſpeaneth⸗ C wo kynreddes (Tape
thep)badthe Horde cholen / and thole lame
twohath he caſt awape. goꝛ lo karre is my
people come / p they haue no hope to come to
gether enx mode / z tobe one people agayne,


Therkoze thus laieth the Lozde: FEF haue


made no couenaunt with dape anduygut / &
geuenno tatute nto heauẽ andearththen
pl} alto caſt awaye the ede of auto my
feruaunt: lo that wyll talie no pꝛynce out
ok hys fede / to rule che poſlerite of abꝛahã /
Glaac ¢ Jacob. Büt pet J wil turne agayne
chelrcaptiute / z be merciful onto them.


ꝛophety


treatencth ti eytpe ard
ee gen ee aeg üg of wae
plan. He rebutieth them that bzougbt locke of their
Pa es we ke pardoned to goat

ir e.

Gave. rests. chapter.
ele are the wordes whych the
e
mit uchodonoloz
{ Hof Babpion / anvall hrs Hotes
(out ofall the kyngdomes that were under
his power) a all his people / fought agaynſt
erulalem and all the cyties therok. Thus
peth the Loꝛde God of traeil: Goo / and
Cpeake to Zedentah the kyng ol Zuda / a tell
him: Che Loꝛde lendeth the this woꝛde : Be⸗
holde / J will delyuer this cytie in to 8 bade
ok the e ot Babylon. he Mali burne it/
175 Salt . nae
e led awape pꝛeloner / a
power. chou Halt loke the kynge of Babt⸗
ion inthe face and he chall (peake with the
mouth to mouth / and then walt thou goo to
Babtion Fetheate ß worde of the Lodde / G
Zedekiah thou Kyng of Juda: Thus lapeth
the Loꝛd vnto the: Chou chalt not be llayne
e
fal e hynges/ thy pz 4
tours / were baẽte:lo walt thou be bẽt allo /
Gin the mournxng they Mall tape: oh 1070,
For thus baue determined / taxethß Los.
Chen Cpake Jeremy the prophet all thele
wozdes onto Sedeklah kynge of Juda in
erulalẽ: what tyme as the hyng of Baby ·
ns hooſte bereged Jerutalem / and the reme
haunt of the cyties:Mamely/ A achis ¢ Aze⸗
cah / thych vet remapned ofthe ſtronge bee
e
ele are the wo des Loz fpa
vnto Feremy the prophet/ when Hedentah
was agreed with allthe people at Jerulalẽ /
that there ſhulde be pꝛoclamed a ipbette:to
that euer mã chulde let his letuaſſt a hand ·
mapde go fre / Pebzue atid Hebsucte / a no
Jewe to holde hes bꝛother as a donde man.
Now as thephad cölented / euẽ fo they were
obedient / z let them go fre. But akterwarde
they repented / a tote agapne the leruaũtes
and hande mapdens / whom they had lett go
kre / and lo made them bonde agayne.-

Foz the which caule the woꝛde ol $ L ond c
came vnto Jeremp From the Loꝛde him leit /
lapinge: hüs lapeth the Loꝛde God of Al
raell:“ I made a couenaunt with youre’


ther / when J bzoughe them out or Egppte / Deutero.re.¢
(ther chude nomoze be bondmen) taping: ö Er. es


hen ſeuen veares are out / euery mũ Halt
let his bought teruaunte an Hebzue go lre /
vt he haue ſerued him tyre pe
fathers obexed me not and he


to me. is lo vou / ve were now


ate a? Ol


abs 7 Bpprpgbtbefope me /in that pe pꝛoclamed /
enerb manta lecbysnepghbouregofre/sin,


that made a couenaunt betoze me / in the
téple that beareth myname: But pet ve haue
turned vourlelues agarne / and blalpnemed
my name: Authrs P euery man bath tequy-
redhys feruatit a handmapdẽ agapne/ whd
ve had let go quyte andkre /a eompelled them

Derne pou agaxne / a to be youre bone me,

D Sno theréoze chug lapeth the Wopoerve baue
hot obeped me/ euerx man to pꝛoclame fre ·
dome vito his bꝛothe rg nerghboure: wher-
£03¢/4. wyll call vou onto a feegome /lapech
the Lojde:cuen onto the lwearde / to the pe⸗
ert nie e wyll make vou to be
Plagedtnallthe Kipri ies ol the earth.

Fer thole men 6 haue bzoke my couenaunt /
not kepte the woides of the appoyntemẽt /
which they made befoze me: wh theyhewed

ene. v. b. the calfe in twola when there wente thoꝛow
5 twohaltes therol: he Prtices ol Juda /
e y ynceg of gerulalem / the gelded men /
e Pꝛectes call $ people of § lande / which
wente tho zow the two lydes of the calle.
Chole men wyll 4 geue in tothe power ol
their enemper a im koche handes oF thé that
kolowe vpontheer Lues. ;
And their derd bodpeschalbe meate fog z
fouies of the arze) minbeattes of the elde.
8 Foz Sedehiny thes nge OF Juda and hrs
zpnces/F wylldeixuer the in koche power
ol their enemxes / and of them tiyat delpze to
Semi, Aae hem aidim to she bane of tie Senge
Mien er, OF Sabplons holte wörchnowig depar⸗
departed from ted fon pon: But thoꝛow my connnaunde⸗
den to go a. metllapeth the Nod ſthey tall come agapne
donn the G- beloze thys cytre / they call yght agaynſt
Aebehrp den e wenne it / and burnett. Mozeouer J wil
, lapethe cytyes of Juda ſo waſte / p no man
Saia calld well teri.
ag inden obedpente ok zechabite
Jerulaiem. Suren pe pn Nentibe gene Gent
maundemt it of Jonadab / the father of the Hechabl⸗
tes. Be threateneth punpthmet onto the rebelſgous
Jewes Hepromeleth proiperite vnto the Rechavicesy
dos their ovedpence buto their Fathers
Che. xx xv. Chapter.


konne oe


tes / that igaboue the clolet of Mal
konne of Selum / whpch ig the cheate ofthe
treat dito befoye dye fonnes othe e
oethe Rechabites/¥ (et pottes full ot wine
. cher abe ante Cent 23 n
But ther fayde:wedzpnclic no wyne /
koi Jonadab the forne of Rerhab a
ther kommaunded og /fapinge: ve and
Contes (hall neuer dgynche wyne / bupſde no
Youites cowe no fepe, plante nobpnes / et
Pe Chall Warie no vpfepärdesibuf fo; all Pour
tyme pe Mall dweil in tentes / that pe mare
Ipue löge in the lade wherin pe be Hradgers,
Chus haue we obe pedt chene
ol Jonadab p lonne ok Nechab dure kather /
mäll thathe bath chargenos7¢ fo we deine
no wyne all oure Ipue longe: we / noi oure
Yopurs /oure Comes And ative baughters.
Hether buplde we anp houte todwel therin /
we haue allo amoge vs nether. vyne yardes /
ner cone lande to Cowes but we dwel in ten ⸗
tes / we obe pe / and do acco dynge vnto all /
that gonadab oure father commauninen bs.
utnowthat Nabuchodonofo; § hinge
ol Babilon came vp in to the lande / we fade,
come / iett vs go to i e


4


kolowe me..
Che chien ot Jonadab Rachabs tonne,
bane kent eee fc s
dement / g he gaue them / but thys people ig
not obediẽt pntome. And therkoze chitskatech
She Loꝛde of hooſtes the Gon of Akraell: Bes.
holde / A wyllbzinge vpon Fuse ö vpd euery
ane that dwelleth in Jerufalem / al trouble


 havedeupleragapinte them. Kar F haue ys ner. le.


oben onto the / hüt ther wolde not foloines


bayecaslenonito them / newerepeles E


Arbil,


gert. yl .


PHrael,
wolde geue Meno antwere. Jeremp a
fpake onto thehouſbolde of the Rechabitt:
Cpus Capeth the Loꝛde of Poſtes the God
ol Brack: Kor fo moch as ve haue obered d
comaundement of Jonadab poure father/s
hepte all bys pꝛeceptes s done accodenge
Into ali that be bath byonen pow: Cherkoze
us lapeth che Lorde of Holtes / che God ol
ſtcrael: Jonadab the konne ol Rechab hall
not kaple / but haue one out ok his ſtocke / to
ſtande al ware betoze me.
EwWaruch wapteth(as Jerempendpteth) the bone ol
the ute e p e Itrael be is leut wpth the
dont outa the peopie/s Feabetg itucfore them Sil. Be
ss.called before the culats/g ceadeth fe bel obe thé Alto.
The rutärs che we nto the Kynge the wordes ok the
bone, Jebudé taketh the voheng veadcth alytell oF tt
Gatter cattery stm thefpre. Chere is another weite /
atthe rommaundement of theLozves
cberrrrol Chapter.

a Mebe fourth peare oF Jehoakim ?
tonne of Joliah Nynge ol Juda /
came the worde ok che Londe vnto

eremp / ſaringe: Cane a boke/ v

Jeremy rr 4. Wipe therin all the wozdes / that A haue ſpo⸗

ken tothe / to Ilrael / to Juda andtoallthe

opie from the tome that beganne fozto

cake vnto the(in the tapgne of Zotiah) vn

tothps dave. Chat when the houte of Juda

dente oer eration cue ee

ay pera urne / eue⸗

Leramg. cih arp man fromyis bebe wave evar mane
Congeue thete offences and fynnes,

„Tbendrd Jeremp call Baruch che konne

zurn wet 400 gen thzote inthe bote at ?

mouth of Kerem /all) wodes of the Lord

which he hadlponen vntohrm. And Jeremr

commaunded Baruch / laving : Jam in pꝛe·

ton ko that Amape not come in to the boule

Bol, the Loꝛde ꝛtherkoꝛe gothou thyther / and

reade the boke / that thou halt wöpten atmp


mouth: Mameir / che wozdes of the Lo de c by


rede them in the Lozdes houte vpon the ta ⸗

styng dape:that the people / whole Juda / a
> all they chat come out of the cptyes/ maxe
beate Peraduenture they well piaremeke⸗
ip bekoze the face of the Londe / a turne eue⸗
tpone kromhis wycked wal


cSmaundedtiym read yng the wondes of the

Lozde out of the boke in the Lozbes houle.

Andthis was done in ß kylch yeare of Fehoas

kim the Cone of Joltah Bunge of Juda in

the ix. moneth when it was cOmaunded/that

all the people of Zerulale ſbulde kalt betoze

the Loꝛde / z they allo that were come front
T thechtres of Juda vnto Jeruralem.

c chenred Baruch the wopdes of Feremp


June 1g. 8.


The Prophecpe s


zdeklah.


Que oithẽ boke wiching houle OF the Lose Jeremr. wu
dut at che treaturp of Gamariah the lonne
of Saphanthe Serpde which is belive the
hyer lofte ofthe new doze of ö Lordeg houle:
that allthe people myght heare. Now when
Micheah the Conne of Gamattah the lonne
of Daphan had hearde all the woes of the
Loꝛde out or the bone / he wente dowone to?
Aynges palace in to che es chambꝛe /
foz there all the Pꝛynceß fet: Eltlama


‘Cake another bone / and
kozlapde lermons: that


Jede
Ba „Wall d Princes. And Micheah
tolde thé all che wozdes/ p he bearde Baruch
eve out of the bone before tye people.
Chen all the Princes tent Zeudé p tonne D
of Hathanlah / the konne of Selamiah / the
forme of Chuty vnto Baruch / lat Take
in chyne hande the bone / wherout chou halt
red bekoze all the people and come. Do Ba-
ruch the konne or Heriah token? bokeinbis
— came onto the. And they tapde vito


fifo
kim the henge o
eneracpon fpt vpon the thꝛone of Da-
De Haberl dut / that the
aur xh e


ym: Ort downe / g rede the boke p we mar
are allo. Do Baruch red / that ther mpghe
cate, Pow when ther had hearde all the
word they were abached one bpd another
Bene Dnto Baruch: we wyll certptpe the
e oF all thete wo des. And they exampx⸗
ned Baruch / caxing:tell be / hoo drdet thou
wꝛrte all chete wo des out or hes mouth?
‘Then Baruch antweredthem: He pake an e
5 — wofdes bnto me ww hes mouth / and J
zone was Whim a wzote them in the bolẽ.
Chen larde p Pꝛinces vnto Baruch: Go
thy wape / hive the with J cher wein
man knowe where ve be. Ind ther went in
tothe Rpnge tothe courte But they hepte &
rence ca! i
ole the By 0;
Cent! pubic fetes


kim che hyn
were added b.
chen bekoze.


edehiah luctedeth Conontah. Re ſende th vnto
—. to pꝛape fo? her eren en gene the laͤd
of BenJamu is kauen. He is beaten-¢ putin pieſon.
deu 6000 ge rirdtſ hatt
==F i Coehtab ? tonne of ollag / which
4 was made kynge chozow abu
Ge opontofoz ynge ok Babylon)
PE==Areignedin the jande of Zuda ain
fkeade of Cononiah the tonne of Fehoatsint.
But nether he / ner bps leruauntes ner the


people in the land wold obe pet wondes ok Bal


1 05d / which betpakie by Prophet Feremy.
Heuerthelelle Zedeklah ning dent Jehucal
Plone of Selemiah ¢Sophoniab dlonne
ok Maaliah the Pꝛeſt toß Prophet Feremy/
laping: O pape chou vntoß Lo cure God
£02 vs. Now Jerempwalked fre amonge the
peopie at b tyme ) ¢ was not put in pꝛelon
> as pet. Pharaos hoſte allo was come out
Egypte: whych when che Catoces chat bele⸗
Lon — perceaued / ther departed
ence,
Chen came the wore of the Hose vnto
Bgerempthe Prophet) Capinge: chus tapeth
ye Lodde God oF Hieact/eyys antwert Walt


enpee/
ca ppd the herch / ontell e
bote was all ace en evo gene
Fetno man was abathed therot / oz rente
bis dothes:mether the Kenge bym elke ner
bis teruauntes /chough eder hearde allchele

— — Einathã / Dalaiag a
Ga h betought the kynge / p he wolde
not burne the boße: ne the
Ange wolde not heare them but cmaun-
ben Jerahmeel che Conne ok Amalech / Da⸗
r tonne ot Eirtel o Soclamial ? ome


OF Jerempt.


3 1
RUIN,
pe geue to the kynge ok Fuds / hat lent vou
vnto me fo coũceit Beholde Pharaos yor
ſte whych is come koꝛth to helpe vou Wall
returne to Egypte in tohis awne lande: but
the Caddees (hall come agapne/ and kyght
agapnſt thys cytye / wynne it and ſett tyze e
vpö it Foz thus laech the Lob. deltegue font ace o
not youre atone myndes / thinchyng on this tapinge : The
maner:tuth / the Caldees go no w their waxe Ly alders. ge.
krombs: o / they hall not go their ware.
For though pe bad apne the whole hotte ol
the Caldees / that belege vou / andeuerp one
ofthe Mayne lape in hiß tente / pet dulce they ve ont rr.
ſtande vp / and fet pre vpon thrg epte. Mow ade to tbe
whenthe Botte ofthe Cadees was broken doe pater ih:
vp krom Ferulalem/foz keare of the Eayp- > 90 . 0 ha
chang avinpe eren wencoue of Beruiale Pndeg oer
towarde § lande of Ben Jamin / vito do cet vp eyeoenphion
tapne bur ynes there amoge the people. And okcerten
when he came under WenJamyns poꝛte/ landes,
chere was.a poster called Jeriah tye Conne feld pat fg
of Helemiah the konne of Hananialy, which hoch. . tes
fell opon him / ole hüm lapingichr monde veadesto tepara
is to tunne to the Caldecs.chen kapde Jere⸗ e ( vnderitdor
mp:Jtis not lo J gonot to the caldees. He: ute he Walt
uertheles Jeriah wolde not beleue hyim (but the wyddect of
bzought Jeremp bounve befoze the Wances. the peoptesthat
nherkoze the Pzinces were angrre with Je- w, to tymtetta
rem / caulyng him to be beatẽ a to be Lape dhe ag
in pretotrin the boule of Tonathas § keribe. ae pls ple.
Foz he was the rular ol g ep 610 A hey ehpnche
Jeremy put in to the dongeon de / lo thut he wolde
ape there a longe tyme. Ehen Sedeniah the fen Head fr
neng fent fozbim/@calledbprt/eathed hn aufen. ebe
jupetip in bis awnehoulfe Taping thinkett 25

ous this bufpnes that now is in hande) cö⸗
meth of the Lozbe: Zeremp anftoered: yee 2
itdoth:a thou(fapoe he) halt be delpuered in
tothe kynge ot Babplons power.

Mozeouer Jeremy fapde vnto kyng Ze⸗

dehialy: nobathaue J offended agapntk the /
agapnſtthpleruaätes ozagayntt thys peo,


$ ple/Spehaue cauled me to be put in preton?


where are pour pꝛophetes which haue pzo⸗
phecpenonto vou / lade thatthe hynge. of

pls chulde not come agapntt pou ¢ this

lande: And Serie heave 2 my deb

the hynge let my pꝛaper be accepte be

the / a lende me nomoze into the boute of Fo fte oie
nathas the Socrybe/ 63 de not there. Ehen cenes whycbe
Bedekiah the kyng commaundedto put Je- was in the 67
temp in the fore entrpe of che welon ga baplp d gh dn
tobe gend him cake of bed gels nodighte Ege ste, bape


ok meate/ontyll all the bꝛed in d cpte was e*ea> of the.ttd.mor,


ten vp. Chus Jerempe rema ned in the koze neth dae,
entre of the pꝛelon. after in che ld
Bp the mocpon of the rulers Jeremy fo putin to 8s g. Me id
dongeon. Ar the requeſt oF Abedmelech the Chaum⸗
berlapne)lihe ding cömalderd Jeremy tobe fought
eer Lp ar ia Sheet) the Benge
mrabt cle . :
Gaye


senekiah, —


ipbatiah the tonne of Pathan /

odoliah d lonne ol Ppathur/Fu-

the Conne of Selemiah / and

alburß tonne of Meichiah per-

ceauedthe twozdes / that Jeremphad (poke

vnto all the people / namely on thps maner.
Zenter Thus fapety the Lord nos foremapneth int
Bh chi cptte tail perich / echer wich p brearde
with honger oz with the peſtilence: But who

fo falleth onto p Cadees cbalelcape/ win

ee Wil ku anner, bis foule foz a pꝛaꝝ /a wall ue. fog
bps. foate 2 ®thus Capeth the Loꝛdẽ. Chys cyte no doute )
Sohne before HU be DelpuereD into the pomer orange
in the. ri. of Babid/ebeatto tal winett.cyenlapoe
Ahmwterce p pꝛrnces onto p binge: Sv2/twe belech pou
let this man be put to death / Foz thus he dil⸗
cozageth the handes ol Sloudpers that be in

cis cptte/ ¢ the bandes of all F people / whe

be tpeaketh loch woꝛdes onto the. Coys ma

bevely labouvethnot fo peace of the people

but milchete. Zedentah the binge arcwered

¢ layde: o / he tã in vourhandes /coꝛ 5 kynge
Bmaredenpe vou no chrnge. Chen tone they

levemy / and caſt hym in tothe dongeon of

eichiah b lonne ol Hamelech / chat dwelt

in the foze entre of the pꝛeron. And they lett

downe Jeremy w coardes in to a dongeon/

where there was no water / but myꝛe. Do

ſeremp Stack kalt in che myze. How when

ſbedmielech the Moꝛtan beyng a chamber ⸗

lapne inthe hing’ courte / vnderſtode / other

had caſt Jeremp in to the dongeon: he went

out of the hinges houle / a tpake to d kinge /

which thé lat onder g pooꝛte ot Ben Jamin)

thele woꝛdes: Opp lo de the kinge / where as
Cthete men medle wyth Jeremp the prophet /

they do him wꝛonge: Ramel / ns ther haue

put bim in pꝛelon / there to dre of honger / co

there is no moze bꝛed in the cytye. hen the

inge commaunded Abedmelech ? Montan

and lapde: Cake from hence. xxx. men whom

thou wilt / a dzawe vp Jereme prophet out

ofthe dongeon / betoze be dye. Do Abeome

lech tone themen Whim / a went to the houle

ol a malech / a there onder an almerx he gate

olde ragges a wozne cloutes / and lett them

downe bys coarde / in to pdonged to Jeremr.

And Abedmelech the Woztan faye onto

the pꝛophe. Jeremy: put thele ragges and

cloutes under thyne arme holes / betwyxte
them and the coardes: ¢ Jeremydrdlo. So

DP thep dꝛewe op Feremy wyth coardes ¢ tone

him out of d dongeon / a he remarned in the

foze entrye of the pꝛelon. Chen Zedentah

the kynge tent a cauled Jeremp the prophet

be called vnto him / into the ttirde entrre /

gere. fxrbke. was by the houte of the Lord Andthe hinge
fapde onto Jeremp:J will athe ptome what

but hde nothinge frome, Chen Jeremx an⸗


The Prophecy


twerde Jedekiaß “yea be plagne onto the /
thou wilt caute me tutte death: pt J geue
councel / thou wilt not folowe me. So the
kinge cwoꝛe an ooth lecretiy onto Jeremy /
fapenge:Astrulp as the Loꝛde Ipueth / that
made vs thele loule / J wil not Nave the / ner
geue the in to the handes ol them that teke
äkter thylpke.


Ehen tapde Jerempe vnto Jedentah⸗ E


Thus lateth the Lozve of hooſtes the Godek


Ilrael: It cate be / that thou wilt go koꝛth vn
tothe .


laue thy ipke / and this cptie Mall not be bzẽt Zert. bi


pee boch thou and thphoutpolde Wall efcape
with pourelpucs . But yk thou wyit not go
koꝛth to the hynge of Babylons pzinces / chẽ
hail this crtie be delpuered in tothe handes
ok the Caldees which wall let Epze pon it / a
chou chalt not be able to elcapethem And
ede kiah lapde vnto Jeremp:7 am atrapde
koꝛthe Jewes that are fle onto $ Caldees /
le in dernden r bande oocherto hene
me in derilton.


But Zeremp ancwerde: No / ther hal not R


betrape che: Oherken vnto the bopce ofthe
Loꝛd (F beſeche the) which Alpeakevntoß /
Co halt thou be well / and laue thy lyke. But
pr thou wilt not go forth / $ Loꝛd bath tolde
me thps planelp: Beholde / all the wemen z
are lett in the kynge ok Judaes houte / wall
go out to che king of Babilons pzinces.Foz
cher thinke / that thou art dilceaued: a that
the men in whom thou dydeſt put thy truſt
haue gotten the vnder / a lett thy fete kalt in
myꝛe ſand gone their wape krom the. Cher
koze all tuy wyues wyth their chyldzen chall
fle vnto the Caines) ¢ thou Walt not elcape
cheirhandes / but halt be the kynge of Ba ·
bilons pꝛeloner / a thys cytie Mall be bꝛent.
Chen lapde Zedentah onto Jerempe: lone g
ray sania tg
not dye But pe the princes perceaue/

haue talked with ß /a eanebatothe lage


„ + Dipeake, what lapde the hinge to the-bpoe


it not krom vs / a we wil not eto death.
Cell vs ( we pꝛaye d what ade e bagger
che: De thou geue thé thys ancwere: Jbaue
humbly be fought the hinge / that he wil lett
me ye no moze in Fehonathashoute/b Jove
not there? Chen came all the pꝛynces bnto
Jeremy / andacked hem and he tolde them
alterthe maneras the kinge badhym. Chen
ther helde their peace / foz they perreaued
talline ure ak
re
Sener. th FeruCalemn, —
jeru' . Z.
Gpeth. Be is taben of thẽ Chaldees. Bys ſonnes ar?


Mayne. Bis eyes are thuſt duke. Jeremy is praupdeds


for. Abedmelech is del


red kr
ache contybence het rd captpupte / becauſe


‘path i God.
Gabe


6


zedekiah.


Gk Je
SA
wae NU “ippeareot5e:

kiah Lyng of Juda in the tenth


Moneth / came Nabuchodonolo⸗


rng of Babylon and all his Holte / and
beteged Jerulalk. Andinß . ri. peate ot Sede.
Biah küche fourth Moneth the ir. dapẽ of ß


oneth / he bꝛakte in toche cytie). Chen all
pꝛynces of d Ayng ol Baby / came in / a
fatepedowne bnderthe pozte: Reregel / Da⸗
reiter / Damegarnabo / Darlachim / Rabſa ·
e
pꝛvuceg o png o n. à
n cl · a when ebe liah the nynge or Juda with hys
lawe them / chep fled / and departed
out of the cytte bynigtthozow the n ynges
garde / and thozow the porte that betwene
chetwo walles / and lo they towarde
Bthewrldernelle. 2
Butthe Caldees Potte folowedtatte at,
ter them /andtohe Zedektah in the lelde ol
Scene enge zelonerto Habu
of02 the henge OF abiid bnto Meb⸗
lath that lpeth in the land of Hemath where
be gaue iudment vpon him. So the kyng ol
Babtion cauledche cyplojen of Jede tial a
Gil the nobles or Juda be Mayne / before bys
kace at Beblath. And made Zedentahs eyes
to be put out / a bounde him with chapnes / a
Cſenehimto Babylon.
. Mozeouerſ the Caldees byét vp Hinges
Wr. palace wich the otberbouteg of the peopfe /
And bzahe downe the walles of Jerutalem.
Bs fos the vemmaunt of the people that were
inthe crtie and loch as were come tohelpe
\twhatfoener was lest of p comé fozte)
abi the cheke captapne carped the
to Babplon. But Nabuzaradan the cheke
captapne let the ratcall people (a tholethat
had nothyngeſbwell ſt yl in the lande of Ju ⸗
da / and gatie them vine pardes ¢ coꝛne feldes
at the lame tyme Habuͤchodonolo alto the
henge of Wabplon gaue Habuzaradan the
chefecaptayne a charge / concernynge gere.
mx / ſapinge: cane and cherich him / and make
moch of him: le thou dohym no harme / but
intreate him after his awne delrꝛe.
So Habuzaradan che cheke captayne/
Habulalban the cheke chamberlapne / Nev-
gallare zer the treacurer and all the kyng oF
Babylons lozves cent tor erempſa canted


iur. riha him be let out of the kope entrre ok p pyelon /


and committed him bnto@onoliab the fonne
MEAHIEE the lonne or Daphä: Phe wuldca⸗
J riebimbome/¢ lo hedwelt amöge ö people.


Leet Qow whple Keremplapc yet boumdetn the


foze entric of the pꝛelon /? woꝛde of 5 Lorde
came bntobim/Capinge:@o0.andtell Abed:


meiechthe SDozian: C hus lareth the Loe


remy.


ol Hotes the God of Atraell: Beholde / he
cruell and tharpe plage that J haue deutſed
fog this cptie will A brpnge bport them / that
thou thalt fe it: but wylfdelpuer b ( faveth
the Wosde) and thou Malt not come in the
hädes of thole men whom thou fearett. Ko:
doutles J well faue 5 lathat thou ſpalt not
perich with the lwearde: but thy lpke Walbe
kaued / a that becaule thou batt vut thy trust
in me / lapeth the Loge


C Jerempe hath (peencetogs whether he wylt. He
1 255 cose praple Death. etd at ke
jemviouce whom Bodotiay rats th. Jol 10
pons sb nest * n 15


2
Jeremp. kli a
Jolue Fut. d.


eat h wer caryed from Jeruſalem e
Juda vnto Babplon. Che chere Captarne
Called to: Jeremp / and lapde vnto him: he
Loꝛde thy Godlpake mightely befoze of the
myplerp bpd thrs place: ow the Hozde hath
lent it / ene had pꝛompled:
Fox pe haue fpnnedagapntt the Wozde / and
aut not bene obedret vnto bps vopce / cher
c cometh this plage vpon pou. Beholde /
J lowle the boundes from thy handes ches
dape: pk thou wilt now go with me vnto a»
bpion / vp then: oz J will fe tothe / a pꝛouyde 25
foꝛthe: But vr thoũ wyit not go wyth nite to Sene. rig. b
Sele ee beh ecptln Cobi. i. b.
elde is at thy wyll / Joke wher thou thin-
neck conuentét @ good 03 the to abrde / chere ui meg xv.
dwell. FE thou cant not he content to dwell
alone / then remapne with Godoltah ö lone
ol Ahicam / che tonne of Haphan: whom the
Aynge of Babylon hath made gouernoure
ouer the cyties of Juda / anddwell with him
amonge the people / 07 remapne where fo-
euerit pleateth tie . Spo the chete Captayne , be
gauehinibiserpentes with avewarde / and ze e. rtr e.
let him go. ben wente Jeremponto Gado⸗
nah the tonne of Ayiham to Mazphah / and
Divelt there with him amoͤge the people that
were lelt in the lande. C
Now when the captaynes of the Holte ot
Abs whych tb their kelowes were ſcatred
abꝛode on euery fyde in the lande) vnderſtode
the heng of Babilon had made Godoltah /
tonne of Ahicam gouernoure in ö land /a
B mi / wyte a chyldẽ / yee qe the pooꝛemen in
p landelthat were not led captrue to Bab ·
fon) Guid be vnder his lurildtccld: her cam
to Godoliah vnto Mazphah: Hamelp 10
mael $ fonne: oprah aor fh fide
nathaß ö Connes of Careah / are fone


Ilrael,
ol Chanhotneth / the fonnes of Ophat d ses
topyathite/gelaniah p tonne ot Maachatt /
with their companions. And Godoltah the
tonne of Ahicam / the fonne of Saphan /
cwoze onto them and their lelowes on ihrs
maner: Be not akraped to lerue the Calder /
sig. den xb. t. dwell in the lande. and do the Bpnge ol Bas
bpion lerupce / lo ipal pe piocpere. Beholde /

Jowell at Mazppah to be an offycer in the

Caldees behalte / i to ſatiſtpe loch as come

to vs. Chertoꝛe gather you wyne / cozne and
ople / and kepe them in poure ware boules/
dwell in poure cpties g pe haue in keping.

2 Jes allche Jewes allo? dwelt in

Vonder the Ammonites in Idume and in all
„ubenthepherde /that p Ryng

Non had made@odoltal the tonne oF


J bodyes of


at all


Fao Werken e BY De
the Jewwes which relozte bntothe / meght be


clatted / andthe remnaunt in Juda periche⸗
Chen lapde Godoltah p tonne of Abicam to
Johanan the tonne of Careah: Chou chalt
not do it / toꝛther are but lie / that men faye
ol Almael.

Adnet bplleth Sodoltah gytekullp 4e many ot
Sb ben Jab ene eren cr


Chapter.
a herne eb . i
LG Beg xxb. aniay dye lonne of Eliſamalone


ok the kynges bloude)came wyth

them that were greateſt aboute the kyng / a
ten men p were two me with him: vnto Go-
doltah the tonne o€ Ahicamto Mazphah / a
ate there together. Ind Flmacl the tonne ol
ſathaniah dorch chote ten men that were


The P2


Ohe, kounde there waptinge
vpon him. ts Be tas
Che nerte dare atterchlehe pad darne
Godoliah (ehe matter was pet bnsnotone):
there came certapne men kram d iehem fro
Siloh ¢ Damaria / tothe nombze ok. xx.
dohpch had bauen heir beerdes rent their
clothes / o were all heure / bangeng meatet⸗
kringes and incente in their bandes co oltre
it intheboute of the Loꝛde. And Jamael the
fonne of Pathaniab wet kozth of Mazphah
wepynge / to mete them . Now thenbe met
them /he fayoe:@o poure wape to Godoliay


oad the lonne or Ahicam And whe ther rame in


middeſt vr p citie / Aimael the ſonne ol as
nah ( Wihẽ that were lwoꝛnẽ vnto hym)

ewe them / euen at the myddeſt of the ppt.
Amonge chele. ixxx men there were ten chat
fayde brito Aamaell: Oh dape bs not, fos be
haue pet a gteate trealure in che lelde of
Wwheate / parler orle ebony. ce ſpared

em / and dewe them not with their biechꝛs

ow the ppt wherin Amal drd catt p deed
bK it bh iy ia canted bi
ok Godoltah) had enge Ala cauled to be ig. nr
made / loꝛ benteer Paal b kynge eta rel
and the fame ppt drd ama el fru wich apne
men. As loꝛthe remnaunt ot the people / the
kynges daughters andall the people were c
pet let at Ga bpon whom Nabulas
radan the chete Captapne had made Godos
tiah d fonne of Shicam goucrnoure: Jomael
che tonne of Hathantah carped them awaye
preConers towarde $ Immoniteß. But whe
Johanan the konne of Careah and all ther
‘wb 4 e the che krnges

00 vm /herde ok all the wyckedrreg
Faun thefonne of Hathantab bad bone: Wert
6005 toke their companions / a went out koz
to kpaht wrth Ilmaell che fonne ol Hatha ⸗
nah /s kounde him by the waters of Rabint
in Gabaon. Now when all the people / wyd
Ilmael led captrue / cawe Johanan plone
df Careab s all the other Captapnes of the
Holte / they were glad. Wo all the people 2
fmacl bad carred a waße from Maꝛphaß /
were bzought agarne.
And when they returned / ther came to J
hanan the fonne of Careah Butzemael
fonme of Pathantab led rd Fohanan wet ®.


2
iwoꝛne to him / arte vp / and lmote Gono- w


Hab the forme ol Abicam the fonne of Da.
phan with chet wearde / and ewe him / whõ
the kyng ol Babylon had made gouernoute
pk che lande Iumael alto ewe all the Jewes
that were with d odolah at Mazphah / zal


e


Peacl,


downe at Geruth Caniaani/ which lieth be⸗

lpde Bechlehẽ that cher might go into Egt⸗

pte ko: keare ofthe Calderg oF whome ther

were atrayed / beraule that Ilmael the lonne

of Mathaniahhadllapne Sodoliah Ahikams

lonne / whom the kung of Babilon had made
gouernoure in the lande.

Captap nes acke councell of Jerempe what

Ae moupheld tbe raids.

e people not te go into Egypte.
he. rith. Chapter.

Oallche rulerg / and Aohanan the

pfonne

us people

krom d leeſt vnto the molt ¢ fapoe

nto Jerempthe prophet: O heare dure per


fermi ticfon/¢hac thou mapets pape For bad


‘Lode thy@od/and kor the remnaunt wher
Of there be very Few let of many / as thou
detlt bs sthacthe Lorde /thy God may Hew
vs a wape to go in / a telkbs, what we Mhulde
do. Chen Jeremp the Pꝛophete tapde onto
the: baue herde pou, Beholde / A will rare
vnto God youre Loꝛde / as pehaue regurzed
me:and lone what anfiwere the Loz genet)
vou / 11 cevtifpe you therol / and kepeno
thing back krö ou. Ind ther kapde onto Je.
remp: Che Lopde of treuth and katthkulnes
be oure recoꝛde / that we will doal / that the
48 Lopde thy God commaundeth vs / whether
it be good oz euell. uve wyllherken vnto the
vopce ok dure Loz God to whom we lende
the chat we mape pꝛolpere / when we haue
folowed the vopce ofthe Londe dure God.
And after ten dapes came the wode of ?
Popdonto Jeremp. Chen calledhe Johanan
the fone of Rareah / F allthe captapnes of
the people that were with him: pee and al the
people From the leeſt tothe mol / and lapde
nto then: Chus laleth the Lozd God ol Ac.
rael vnto whi ve lent me / to lape koꝛth vdur
prayers 5515 him: JE ve will dwell in thes
fande /i wal buploe pou bp/andnotbeake
vou downe: I tall plante pou / and not rote
ou out. fo: J am pacikped / as 1 ano
e trouble that J haue done to vou. Feare
not the king of Babilon / ol whom pe ſtande
in awe: (0 be not atraped of hym / fapeth the
L onde: ko; J will be with vou / to helpe rou⸗
@ delpuer vou from hes hände. J win pardon


glia


vou / J will haue mercy dpon you fand b
vou ãgayne in to voure awne lande.
€ eles pf pe purpote not to dwell
in this lande / ner to folowe the vorce of the
Lope poure God: but wyll faye thus (we
wyll not dwell here / but go into nnd
ere we thal nethertewarre eave rove
fbatel ner Cuffve höger chere wil wedwel,
iWherkoꝛeheare now the wowe or? Lade
O peremnaunt of Juda. Chus lapeth the


Ok Jeremy.


lj.
Love ofboottes the God of Flrack: Fe pe be
wholp purpoled to go in to Egypte / andto
be there as ftraungers ; the lwearde that ve
keare / hall ouer take you in Cgpptezandthe
bonger wher of ve be here a frayed. Wal häge
vpon vou in to Egypte/ and there ve wall
dre. Foz all ther / that ok lett purpole vnder⸗
take to go in to Cgppte / chere tocate them
lelues of their mplerp/ chan perv with the
twearde / wyth honger and peſtplence: not
one ok them chali remapne / there challnon⸗
efcape the plage/p J wll baynge vponthe,

Foz thus fateth the Lozde or hoottes the
GodvoFFrachi: phe ag my wzath andindp-
gnacpon ig come vpon the thhabytatours
ok Jerulale/ fo hal my dylplealure go Forth
vpon pou allo / vr ve go into Egypte: Fos
there ye walbe reupled / abbozted / hꝛought
to tame and conkutid and as for this place /
pe chalneuerſe itmoze. Che Wozde forbpo-
deth vou ( Y pe remnaũt ot Zudap z ve Malt
not go in to Egypte.

And kozget not? JAhaue warned vou ear ⸗
neſtip this dare els Wal ye begtle pour relud.
Fot pe fent me onto the Wozde poure God
and fapde: O pꝛapethou the Ln oute God
koz bs and lone what antwere d Londe dure
God geueth the / chat bꝛinge vs agarne and
we ſbaldotherakter. Q ow haue J thetwed/
and declared onto you the vopce of the Lord
poure God / £o2 the whych caule he hath kent
me to you. Ik ye wyl not kolowe it / be ſure g
pe thal perpthe with the lwearde with hon⸗
ger epettilence:eué inthe lame place / where
voure luſt was to go / and dwell.


Jobanan carpeth the remnaunt, of the people in to
Egyptecontrary to the mypnde of Jerenipe. Jeremp
prophecpeth the dectruccron ol Egppte.


che. pif, Chapter.
J 0m when Jeremphadended ail ?
o den oF the L onde Godbntothe en
people (fo their fakes to whom
8 Godhad lent him) zartah ß tonne
ok Olalah / a Johanan the ſonne ol Rareah
Wall the pꝛoude perfonnes /lapde vnto Je⸗
remy: Thou ipett/ the Loꝛde oure Godhath
not lent $ to lpeane vnto bs / that we (hulde
not go in to Egipte / anddwell there: But B


nung Baruch the konne of Merial prouoketh the


agapntt ba / that he myaght baynge vs in to 6
captyupte ofthe Caldees: that ther myght
flape vs / and carye vs awaye pꝛelonerz bit
to Babylon. 8
Do Johanan the tonne of Rareab and
all the captapnes of che bootte / and all the
people kolowed not the commaundement ok
the Lose: Namely / todwell in the lande of
Juda: But Johanan the fonne ol Bareah /
Ff and all


Ilral. Egypt.


and all the captarnesok thebootte / carved
awape all the remnaunt in Zuda/ that were
come together agayne kromthe Hepthen(a-
monge whom they had bene lcatredhtodwel
in che lande of Juda: Men / wemen / childꝛẽ /
the kynges daughters all thole that Nabu⸗
zaradan the chete captayne had lett Go ·
doltah the lonne ol Ahikam. Chey carped
Cawaye alto the prophet Jeremp/ Baruch the
fonne of Periab / a fo came in to c gypte:toz
ther were not obedpẽt / onto the comaunde-
ment ok God. Chuis came they to chaphnis.
Andin Thaphnis the worde ofthe Lozd
happened onto Jeremp / laping: Cale great
ftoneg in thyne Hande / and hyde them in >
bꝛpck wall / vnder the doze ol Pharaos Houle
in Chaphnis /that all the men of Juda mape
be / and laye onto them Thus latethß Loꝛde
ee eee
call fo: Nabuchodonotoz the
Jeremy lvl. e kynge of Babilon mpleruaunt / ¢ well fett
hig leate bpon thete tones that J haue hrd /
Obe wall lpzede his tente ouerthem.
Andwhen he commeth / he dali (myte the
lande ol Egypte with daughter / w pꝛelon⸗
ment / and with the cwearde. He wall let ke
pon the temples of the G gypctans goddes /
and burne them vp / ¢ take them lelues pꝛe⸗
Coners, Mozeouerhe all arapehimlelt w
the lande of Egipte / line as a thepherde put⸗
teth on bys cote / and tall departe hys ware
from thence in peace She ppiers allo ofthe
temple of the Sunnethatts in Egypte:cpall
he bieake in peces / and burne the tempels
ofthe Egipctans goddes.
Che repioueth the people foz thelr aan ai


Jere. xli.c.


that let ight by the chzeatenpng of the Lord / are char
Rened, hcdehruccys of Egppte ¢ the Jewes therin /


ts prophecyed. N
© The rij. Chapter. :
Hit is the woꝛde that was chewed
to Jeremy concerninge allthe Je⸗
a wes / whych dwelt in Egypte: at
Magdal / at Chaphnis/ at Mem⸗
phis / a in the lande ol Patures. Chus lateth
the Loꝛde ol pone the God ok Firacil: pe
haue ſene allß mylery that J haũe brought
bpon Jerulſalem / and vpon all the cytyes ot
Juda: lo that this dave they are deſolate / and
no man dwelling therin: andthat becaule of
che great blacphempes / which they commit⸗
ted / to proucke me vnto anger: In that they
wente backe ito do lacrylpce/ and woꝛchype
vnto ſtraũge e aee ther / ner
ve / ner pour kathers haue knowne. How be
it / Ilent onto them my leruaũtes all the pꝛo⸗
phetes: J role bp earl / ſent vnto them / a
Laue them warninge: O do nofoch abhomt⸗
rable thinges / and thinges that J hate. But
ther wolde not kolowe nerherken / to turne


krom their wyckednes / and to do nomoꝛe la ·


Jere. xxv. a.
SRR.


The Pꝛophetye


Crifice vnto ſtraunge goddes.

Wherkoze myne indygnacpon and wꝛath

was kyndled and ft bꝛente bp the ertres or
Juda / the keides with the itretes of Jerulalẽ
to chat thep were made waſte and delolate⸗
as it is come to patie this dare Howtherkoze
thus lateth the Loꝛde ol hooſtes the Godot
Teraell: How happeneth it / p ye do lo greate
kuell vnto poure atone loules / thus to de⸗
ſcroye the men and wemen childꝛen and ba ·
bes of Juda: lo that none ot vou is lekt / be-
caute pe pꝛouoße me vnto wꝛath wyth che
workes of pour awne handeg: when pe offre
onto ſtraunge goddes in the lande of Egipte
where as ve be gone to dwell: Chat ve might
vtterlyperiche / andthat ve mpghebe reupied
and thamefully intreated or all nacpons,
Oz haue ve now forgotten the wyckednes
of pour fozefathers / the wyckednes of the
uynges of Juda a their wyues the wycked⸗
neg that pe poure lelues and pour wrues
haue done in dhe lande ol inthe cptve
and in the lande of Jerulaem:

Vet are pe not lozp this daxe / pe Feare not
nether walke pe in my lawe andin my com⸗ ¢
maundementes / that J haue geuẽ onto vou
and poure kozefatherg.

Cbertoꝛe thus lapeth the Lozde of hoo⸗
ſtes che God ok Alraeil: J am tedfattip ad-
upfed anddetermed / to pünych vou / andto
rote out all Juda. Ag fon the remmaunt ok ngs . b
Juda that purpoũy wente in tockgipte there
do ealethemoktheir mylerp: J wyi take thé gere. rice.
andthep tall ail bedeſtroped. Inthe. and. riß. a.
of Egypte wall they perpih bepnge confuse
med with thefwearde and with honger Foz
from the leelt vnto the molt / they wall pe-
rich with the lwearde a with hoger. Moze⸗
ouerthey halbe reupled / abhozrẽd / hamed⸗
and confounded . Foz J will vptet them that
Dwell in €gipte/asZ baue vplited Zerufa-


Temsnith ep endende, wich banner an ich sree:


pettilence: >othatnone ol the remnaunt ol

Juda / which are gone to dwell in Egipt hal

be left to come agapne in to ß or Zuda

all though ther thenke to come thrther a

gane / a todwell there. Foꝛnone Hall come

agapne / but loch as are fied atwaye.
Chen all the men which knewe that their

wyues had offred vnto ſtraunge goddes / and

agreate Coste of wpucs that ode there / vee

and alli people that dwelt there in Egypte

inthe cytie ol Patures / anlwerde Jeremy?

and lapde: As fo the woꝛdes that chouhalt

fpoken vnto bs in the name of the L oꝛd / we

will in no wyle heare them: but whatloeuer

Goeth out of dure awnẽ mouth that wyll we

dor will do factifice and oltre oblactons 3 te b.

vnto the Quene of heauẽ: lyke as we a our i

Fozefathers) oure a ynges and oure roe


Em


¢ keldes ol Jerulalẽ Foz then had we
plenteoutnede ob bptales / then were wein
zolperite / andno in cam pp vs.
But lens we lett /to offce / andto dolscrt⸗


pntotheMuene ol heauen / we haue had th


i kyce

U echs· Lu gcatteneg ofall chingeg and perich with tye
twearde a honger. L alt of all when we we:
men dedkkacrikpcr and offred onto the Muene
okheauẽ / drd we make her cakes and poure
vnto berdzpnchoffrenges/todo her ſerupte /
with zut eure houlbandes welles:
Chen kapde Jeremp onto allthe people /
to the men / to the wemen a to all the koche /
which had geuen him that ancwerer Didnot


Jamrrrache Loge remetnbzethe kacritpces that ve


ure kozekathers poure hynges and rulers
thall the peopleſhaue inthe crties
Juda /in the ſtreres a land of ahne
in his minder


7
Beg. wid.


dente ere Bt Fe And all che remnaft of Juda / chat are gotte


pli,


into he / there to dwell / wall knowe
whofe Wozdes halbe kounde true ꝛtheirs o
mypne. Fake this ko a token / chat J well vi.
fet pou in this place /fayeth the Loe and
at ve mape knowe / how that Jwythout
doute) will perfourme my purpole bpd pou
topunyh er es / faye the Loꝛde/
Iwplldelpuer Pharao Dophzea Uynge ol
Egypt in tothe handes olhis enempes that
kek atterhis lpke:euen as Jgaue Sedebial dun. eg rena.
the kynge dt zuda in ko the handes of Qabu- Jerk
chodono oz Beng ot Babyld/ which Coughs
afterbisipée,
C Baruch is réprotted dk Jerempe.
¶ Che. xlv. Chapter.
biped 3 1 a 0
e prophetefpake vnto Baruc
Ahe tonne ok Merial / after chat he gore rb

had witten thele Hermons into
Abokeat the mouth of Jeremy Ind fourth
peaxe of gehoalum the tonne of Jolſah kyng


da.
Chus capeth the Londe God ot Ziraell
vntothe / O Baruch In lo moch as thou
jou walt wertynge


l wondeg kolowynge pieached he to

he Egppcrans concempng the Holl ot Pha
rao Necho kyng ol Egypte, when he was in
e e
* e

of Babylon ewe him / In the fourth veare


‘of ol Tehoabim the fonne of Zoliay kynge of


da. ; a
A make vey buick amd h de / e goo
Fost to Fight:¥ eharnede poure horkes / & fet


/ pourefelues Hyon them Fe let por falettes


car hehre aware fo? f


. N.
bal rin ta. che lade ol
Ader eden fee en l


kat on / pe beynge koꝛth cpeares / pe fcouré
poure cweardes / a put on dour bꝛeſt plates.
But alas how häppeneth it hae I le v
—— be kechekren :
ze ate pour mne: Fee th
por 49.5, Sota


er
eee eee
e Loꝛde wyll det 4 + Moab ſh albe aſbamed ok Chat
mu ate lab: F ft be aneh em irgel was achamed ok Bethel / wherin he
Dthe countre. Baldnecke is come vpon A ah / her truſt. Less
Alcalon wyth her ocher vallers chall kepe iberfoze do pethnchethus we ate mighs
sae om ane 0 0 f eso ene
Le otal —＋ Swweatoeoe § Lo n ume agape tn c fen pongemen thal be dle ne lapethß king /
beeth / reſte / and leaue ok. But how canik whole name ts the I. onde of Holſeg. Che des
junded/ whe 5 dead nee bergallget d e
. i j e alon ant 9
oun eee at the Caceres! anne e wis he mabe perpueecbnto te banden liche cust — ec cont? Ail ernepabbours tall mourhetoz yer,
tbaccttes me Chfes: pe MBoztans /pewLibeans with poure people of ehenosth, — — Che woyre of theLodeagepndehe Bordptess and all cher bat now ber nameſchall faye:
0 Sestyeou of Ware Dene over tate te eee ee denen eee aden thas baKen? EDOM
it daye be vnto the L. }00- the ebol N 5
u coacbe mapes thacvetete people Sleranbfa/ Bpaao "ere Godot yteaclagayntt een daughterzibon/comeDotone eh
their ug venge him of hisenempes.chelwearde thal and Egypte / pee boch thetrgoddes and ther? andkt in pouerte. For he chat deltropetty
Tape pur Dououte te thatbe Catyttyen apache tn thety kinges: euen Phavac/-and all themthat put a, Moab / hal come vp tothe allo / and bꝛealle
555 wpckeb, Dloude:** Koche Lode God of boottes Mall thet crt ini, chaten besoce tot tito pene fb, Pon ny eet B
le e elbe endes. Gol e. ang, Into te pote of Babu — n 1 e e eee
0 8 abilon / and in to er ouncell (halbe taken vpon Helebon. nl 5

sEtoes:agh —— e arhledern unter Amate duc oom Conelbaltpeplapelletbsrotet em oute / is happened: O / Moab is confoundedand

ah he toe wel halbe e go tofurgery/ - dc age, b c an fore tre / ape thepmapebe nomoveamonge 5 nombze outcome,


9 fortbpwounre wall nor be topped. Che th. bkthe Senkples per chat cher maze nome oline and erpe / ten gtout at Arnon⸗
ol


e Lopde. ‘ Z
thete fa jen thalheare ol thy ame / a the lande. MButbenotthoua krated O my teruatt mi bethought vpö: Thus che lwearde hal per- chat Moab is dettroped. Andmplery Wall
dee tbe eee e ange eee 752 babe erd bopce tall crye rom Wozona- coune e the Piaene epa ben


Aer: rhein man qhall ſtomble pon another / how then wil heipethe krom karre and thy fede From 8 im: iith greate wa dtynge o deltruccxon / is Polon e Jaba sah wpõ Mephaath a Dll
nee e eee Saeed cages
k the Loꝛde. ele axe the wo, 0; je agapne and be in reſt: is crye /
of the len Aer e noman halbe jim harme. Fears chou nott . pecs ves atthe going op onto Luith chere wal Pechmacn and Catioty b 0 en
1 Yoram ithe: ar tpl coat na Ae o. aim, der bel bp Scr a EPIC aner Os
fe be rath outtyovowebelandy cle bite ol svamonge bom delete. fe ome eee bereuen Pourlpues e Home of Moab Mall be ſmytten
a is rat caufettbe poclamenat aBagbal eBephpS Serelchee weü noe conturme fe / but ibe: men and bel ke bntotheheech inche iwploemes, botwne/aberarmebzoken fateth the Lozde,
recalfifo thee and Chaphnis/e faye: Stande tpl make  chatten the and copteche the: pee and chat W 2. m- Fo» becaute thou hat tuted in chr range MPaheherdzonken / for hemagnprycdyer
kehr. her, here dre For theCwnearde Mall conlume the dilcrecyon: nether wyñ q tpare the as one B * bobdes ecreature,tyou Walebetaieo*cha- feltaboue the Lambe tyatmenmape heulte
fore as buttoc, runde aboute. werk fautiefte, . 2 1 ang eee Os with his pretes and ce wan Goo fhapetetagneototcome: sD We (ale Bea
‘cCperonneot te Lodeagnpnt che we pines, S ce, Che belegt wall eomeppon en cties/ tou not iaughbima to tome whebers tang zum ob.
che. xioſ. Chapter. Fal bade iv none Halleicape. Che ballers Malbec de. amongetheucs -Vesbectule of the wordes
are the woweg /p the Lande A 4 the ltroped a ö keldes wall belayed wate: like andrer 48255 fee 5 IT
rng the Sollten, bedr deck he Won Wed u bn n apoab that tbe et leauethe cyties, /adtoell tn tochies of dane /e
wnt the Whilrtines / betoze soa dr Make a token onto Mr 9 4
that Pharao fmote che cptie of B= beter tots ber aware fpedelp : lor her cptyes balbe become line dowues / chat make their neltes
rn nnn
* Sach, ugs iner Curled be Ye that dorhchewoscke oe „ As Moabs pryde we haue herde 1.6
bench rer, od negligenti / and curled be he that ke⸗ e sn gun tee Cs € ats
i UbeoDenBe OE TEN te err eee oe onbectu arene
5 tbat ee e bhathecuer bene ryche and carleſſe rioulnes mare nether vpholde her w ſtregth
e any Sea re fal
d Boar „Obe was neuer .
Sab ep au eine an ieder (that. oz Moabs fabe:alamentacyd ſnalbe made
cst ect chine orca oe Seat ener etme nes e n en nee  e
, Sor ec ene 6% 8 ene ah


Prophery


e the Lone. Chus
an ag be


t Tre wodeokche Lorde agayntt the Simmonptes?


agrape: 8
taken awapekromche
the whole lande of Moab. ‘esc
Chere chal be no lwete wine in the pzette/
the kreader hall haue no ctomacke to cape /
pee there ſbalbe none to crie vnto him: which
à koze tyme were herde krö helebon to Eleale
and Jahaꝛ / which lected vp their voyce From
Soar onto Bozonaim / that bullock of thze
Halten,
5 Woreouer g well inake Wosd ckaft
(Cateth che Loꝛdẽ] front the offrynges g cen-
Longe that the bath made onto her goddes in
hpe places. evboxe rp bert mica fo)
Moab / Iphe a crowde pf Benge an beup
ange: and koz the mens fake of the bzpche:
toallmpberte mourneth allo / euẽ as a pype
pri aren yg for cher walbe
Aüheades ſpallbe ſpauen / and al beerdeg
clypped of: all bandes bounde / and al lopnes
PERE ür pes u fuck ch Bend / gere
jute toppes and Rretes ok Moab / there
Apalbe mournng: Foz J wylbzeake Moab
ithean bnpzokttabie beltelt fatech the Lozd.
O bow kearkull is


agapuſt Idumea / Damafcus / Ccbar and Clam,
che. xltx. chapter.


allo ol Hemm Meth


he? Ohowmourneth dateth th


we: O howdoth Moab hange downe her
head / and is achamed: Thus thal Moa be


Alaughinge ſtocke / and had in deriddon of all Gath


them that be rounde aboute her.

Went For thusfayeth the Loge: Beholde/ che

Jeremp. flix. ö enempe Wal come Üpenge as an Aegle and
ſpꝛede his wynges vpon Moab. ball
ciymme quer the wales / wynnethe ſtröge
holdes. Chen ß rnighty més hertes in Hoab

geeempstcn. wih e he Bete ot a oman an


ld
ind Moab thalbe made lo delolate


k. xrpſ. e


5 tate.
eurer. Fo g wyllbsmnaea vate ofbitytacyott


pon Doab/fareth tye Lope. Chey that


are abe to le / hall tande vnder $ Mado veel


of Hetebon. Kozthere wall go afpze out of
on / and a flame from Ston / and wall
Furne dy that pꝛoude people ot Moab / both


befoze and behende.
Wo be bnto the ( O Moab)koꝛ thou peo⸗
of Chamos thalt peryth:Y ce thp tonne
. peusbe 0


Fetat ih tat weng bre 0


‘


ue.
out ol


that be aboute the: lo that pe thall be lcatred
elieryman krom another / and noman call
er them together agapne chat be fico,
But alter that / J will bzyngethe ammonx⸗
tes allo out of captpuiteagapne.

. Upon the Edomptes bath the U ozde of Sint *
hooktes tpoten onchrs mance: Ja there no res errr,
moze wyldome in Chemã: Is therenomoze
good councell amongebys people: Fs their
wyldome then turned clene to naught: ett
pou hence / turne youre backes / crepe downe
in toche depe / Dye c is OF Dedan.

Lo: 4 will binge dettruccis bpd Elau /
pe and the dave of hys vilitacion. Je ß grape
gatherers came vpon the wulde thep note
ſeaue tome grapes? JE the nyght tol
came vpon the / wulde thep not take io moch
as they thought were ynough⸗

But FZ will make Elau bare /anddifco- C
uer his lecretes / fothat he thall not be able
tohrde chem Bis ede halbe walted a
ig bzethꝛen and his neghbours / and
himlelk hall not be lett behynde.


Chou Malt leaucthp tacyeriette chylngen Pierer


behervethe and weil hepe chem and ch O's ee us
wydowes chall taße their comkozth in me.

Foz thus hath the Lorde ſpoken: Beholde /

they that mẽ thought were vnmete todzinke

ok the cuppe / hauẽ dꝛonken with the kyꝛlt: a
tyrnnelk chouthen tobe fre? g


gabylon. ety


No / noithou chalt necher be qupte no; tre
but chou mut dꝛyncke allo: Ko why / Jha⸗
ue lwome by my kelteltapeth the 1.070) that
Boztah chalbecome a wpidernege / an open
came /a laughinge ſtocke and curlynge: a
ber cptics ſbalbe a contynuall delerte.

2 Foz am perfectly intourmed ol § Lo /

chac he bath lent a meſſage all ready onto p
Heathen. Gather vou together / and go forth

1 agapnt them: make pou ready to che bat ·
guna | taple / far lo: J weil make the but Small as
3 monge the Heathen / a letie regaroedamoge
men.
chy bee ſtomacz a the pꝛpde of thyherte
paue eaued the /becaute chou wylt dwell
the holes ok tony rockes / a haue the bre
mountapnes in polleupon. Heuertheles
hough thy neſt were as bye as the Negies/

pet wyil i cat the downe / ſapeth the Loꝛde.

ozeouer Idumea Mali be a wylderneſſe:

lo goeth by it / halbe abached / a won ·

dee at all her milerable plagt. Like as So-

dome / Gomo: / and the cpties that lave there
aboute / were turned pp kyde downe ( fayeth

che Loꝛde) lo Mati no body dwell in dumiea /

and no man tall haue his habttaclon there.
Beholde/lpne as the L yon cõmeth vp from

the plealaunt medowes of Jo dane vnto the

ne patures of Etham / co wyll 1 But

de ch fn ird malte bin umme agaend bet . But
man do wh ig thes pong man that J wyll derne
Pnebuaceaab theutozioho ig Ipke unte me: what ishe 5
Auralder thei pli ſtryue wich me? what ſhepherde mare
Erhö- Conde in mr banidese 5
dream Cherkoꝛe heave the councell ol the Lozde/
andes, that he hach taken bpon eg: d his puts
pole / chat he hath deupled pon the cptelen
denne olokerg en earn Cngee

eces / loke 20

15 that make it waſte / athem kelues


erempe,


concume the palace ot Venhadad.
As Coz Cedar andthe kyngdom of Ha zo /
whom Mabuchodonoz07 the bpng e de a, Etap rl.
byion cmote downe / the Lope bath lpoken
thus vpon them: xᷣryle / and get pou vp bnto
Cedar / and deſtrope the people towarde the
eaſte. Cheir tentes a there lockes Wail they
take awape / pee their hangenges and their
befell. Cheir Camels allo Mail they carpe
awape wyth them. Chey Mall come aboute
them on euery lyde with a kearfull crye.
Fle / get vou loone awape / crepe into ca⸗
ues / that ye may dwell there: O pee inhabi⸗
tours of Hazoz fapeth the Loꝛde: toꝛ Nabu ·
chodonoloꝛ p kinge of Babilon hath holden
a councell concernynge pou / and concluded
his deupte agapnſt vou. Aryle / and gett vou
vp agaynſt ponder rych and carelelſe people
laieth the Loꝛde) whych haue nether gates.
ner doze barres / a that dwell not together.
Cheir Camels chalbe ſtollen / a the dꝛoues
ol their catell dꝛruen aware.
zeouer / thele that be Haut wil J (ca
tre to warde al the wyndes / and bzinge them
to deſtruccron: pee and that thozow thers
atone fampliers / ſapeth the Loe. azz
allo hail be a dwellynge foꝛ Pꝛagons / and
an euerlaſtynge wyldernelle: lo that no body
wall dwel there / and no man ai haue there
his habytacion. 6
Chele are the woꝛdes / that the Loꝛd ſpake
to a ebm ever 5 a,
in the begynnpnge of therepgne of Zede⸗
kiah kynge of Juda. Thus laleth the Loz, n
ok hooſtes: Beholde / J wyll en beeake the gaod howemen
bowe of Elam / a take ãwape their ſtrength: in battell: aud


s a vpon Clam 4 wyl bzinge the koure windes therfor tber


krom the koure quarters of heauen / and wel done Bropbe s *
(catve them agapnſt the fame koure wyndes. Geter
And there call be no people / but Come oF in meant. chat;
Elam chall fle onto them. thep Wulde ve
J J wil caute Glam tobe afrayed of there oucrctme tm
enenipes/andof them that Cele their pues: enen pte
and wyll bzinge vpon them the indignacion tered atronve
ok me wzath /fapety the Lozde And J wyll vnte the foure
perfecute them with che cwearde £0 lange til arch oF the
Ibaue bought them to naughe. J wei Cece" oan
Amy ſtole in lam, wylldeſtroße both the (as ſomethiez)
hing andthe princes from thence / lapeth the Alexaunderthe
Logde. But in procetie of tyme / J wil bringe great conques.-
Klam outof captrurtre agapne / later the Eich wan


f net bylony
Lee oes ops waste eee.
Che. l. Chapter.
be wondes that the Lozde (pake
onto the pꝛophet Jeremp / concer⸗ A
BYjneng Babrion, aridthe lande of 5 Ctep-rtG.a
SB Calees:preach amöge ß Sẽtileg zr


Mal lett youre vorce be hearde! mane a token:


FFAG. erxe


abylon.

8 Von. . inthe ſtretes / and

allher men of warre halbe roted out in that

dahe / lapechthe Loꝛde. Beholde/ Alpeake

tonto che ( Dithou pzoude ) lapeth the Lorde

God of Holtes:fo7 chy dave Mal come euen

chetrme of thy bilitacton. And pꝛoude that

Aomdle g tali /a na man chall helpe himbp.

Taleban alt cpties wich fpze/ andit

colume all that is rounde aboute hym.

Cbus lapeth the L onde of Hotes: Che

chplozen ol Arael g Juda fufice violence to-

gether. Allthey thathaue thẽ in captrutte⸗

Bepe them kalk / and will not let them go but

cheir auenger a redemer is mpghtte/ whole

name is the Loꝛde of Hoſtes: he Hall man⸗

tepne their caute he wal makeß lde cake /

and iudge them chat dwell therm / one wyth

another. Chelwearde ball come ppon the

Caldees, capech the Lozde / vpon chem that

dwell in Babylon / vponthetr pꝛynces / and

bponthetr wyle men: Che lwearde ops their

kothlapers / as £07 thole ( they call become

fooles.) Che Cwearde vp ö their woꝛthves / lo

chat they chall ſtande in keare: Che lwearde

bpon their boztmen and charettes a vpd all

comẽ people that dwell nder the lo ther

ve Whpch Mall ali become birke wemẽ: Che twearde

ae M tye pon their trealure / to thatit wall be ſtollen

meet el Awo fer «ripe fweatde bpon thett waters o

+ hep walbe dzied op: foꝛ the lande woꝛchyp⸗

peth ymages/ a delpteth in ctraunge wodꝛe⸗

kulichrnges. Cherkoze hall wyldẽ beeſtes /

Apes / and Ettriches dwell therin: for there

wall neuer man dwell there / nether Hal enp

mũ haue his habitacion there foz euermoze.

Lyle as God deſtroped Hodome and Go-

.mozte / with the cities that laxe there about

lapeth the Lond. Do Hall no mä dwell there

allo / nether (hall eny man haue there his has

bitacpon. Beholde there cal come a people

tro the Hoꝛth / with a greate bounde of men /

and many Nynges call ſtande vp krom the

Gendes ofthe earth: They beare bowes ¢ buc ·
lers / cruell are they ¢ bnmercrkull.

Cheir vopce roareth iphe the ragyng ſee /
they ryde vpon hoꝛles a come weapened to
ipgbt agapntt che: O Babplon. Is foone ag
che kyng of Babylon heareth tell of the / his

hall ware keable: Soꝛowe and he⸗


zende lde brought 5
and their pmages Wall ſtande in feave fo L pong haue dplperled them Spek the Keng
out ofthe 17 78 dene one : peur 8 tc beens esi) 1057 a gees sie
‘whch (hall make her lan Habu 0 e Fed.
Chall dwelicherin:nether hath bzoled eiche bones. en a. Beg. rv
eth the Loꝛde ofhottes
kr
debe tep2de ,
Amen be tbe
come


halibebzoken, 5 .
bath bene alot locke / my


oꝛdynge to
Chere is


Jeremp. l. g


ln. xivija.


upnes wall come vpon him / as a womũ tra⸗ C


CTT
ri comme om me.
Shremy. spac hoes of Juwane onto the guene patkuves
of Ethan / lo wyll J depue the forth / emake

them tunne agaynſt her. But whom Hall F

25. un. chole out / a opdencto loch a cheng⸗ To tho
is He me /oꝛ who twill ſtryue th me7o7 what

wepherde maye de agaynſt mer Cherkore

heave the councell that the Londe bath geut

vpon Babylon) and the deupce thathebath


er / pon her / agarnſt her roũde aboute: che agaynſt Babylon: &.
iT reive bectelte her foaaciée (pal fall ae 6 Beulen pro ren
6 her walles call come downe / koz itſbalbe a
1 the bengeaunce ol the Loꝛde. Yeebengeatice her las the bath delerued:and accozornge as
Kennt zuin.  maibetaken ofyer/andas Hebathnone /fo eher dor denten ber agayne: fog
Jabel. (h . Mall che be dealt withall. Cher thal rote out dhe hath lett vp her telke agaynt che Loꝛde
the lower from Babrion / ahrmt handleth agayntt cheboly one or Alrael. Cyertore thal


ot J


tremyt.
taken vpon the lande ok the Calves. c he
leeſt amonge the people Hall teare them in
peces / and tone what plealaunt thinge ter
haue:they ball lave it walte. Che nople at
the wynnenge of Babplon wall moue the
earth / andthe crye halbe herde amonge the
Gentyles,
Chow Babplon chulde be duerthyo wen. Jeremy gee
het hes bobe! to Saraiah. a
Che. ij. Chapter.
Bus hath Poze lapde:beholde / F
45 wyll raple vp a perlous wyndr zeremę. xv. u
1 gapnſt Babylon g her cytezens / 3
chat beave euei willagaynt me. 3
wpll fende allo m to Babplon fännerg /a as euen as
kanne ber out / a to deſtrope her lande: £02 in men kanne cose
the dave of her trouble they ſhalbe about her ne when it ts
on euery irde: Mozeouer/ the Lozde hath ihre ched.
lapde vnto the bowe men /a tothe b clymme
ouer the walles in brett plates: Be hall not
Spare her pige men / kill downe al herhooſt.
Thus the layne Hall kall downe in the läde
of the Caldees / z the wounded in the ſtretes
25 £02 Frael and uda/ they Hat not be oz. Jeremp. b.
faken of their God / or the Lorde of Hottes/
of Nholpone of Jerael. na though ther haue
killed all their lade Full ortynne. Flyer awave Gar. xvid.
from Babilon / euery man laue his lle. Let
no mũ holde his tunge to her wyckednes / ko
the tyme ofthe Loꝛdes vengeaũce is come /
fe be thall rewarde her agapne Babylon zeremy. xv. c.
ath bene in the L oꝛdẽ bande a goldẽ cuppe / 5
that maketh ail landes dzoncken. Ok her
wyne haue all people dꝛoncken /therfoze „
are tber out ofthelt wykes. Buttodem pis Seer A:
‘Babylon kallen and detroped. Moume for u.,
ber / bynge platters koꝛher woundes vt the 2
mape pevaduenture be healed agapne. me
wolde haue made Babyld wholel tape they)
but the is not recouered. Cherkoꝛe wyll we
let her alone /a go euerp man in to his atone
countre. Foz her ſudgmet is come in to hea · B
uen / and is gone bp to the cloudes. And thers
foze come on / we wyll (ete Sion} woꝛcke
ob the Lowe oure God. Judge.
Male tharpe the arowes / and kyll the ih. geg Flac.
qupuerg: foꝛ the Lozde thal raple bp the
kpꝛete ok the nge ofthe Meedes whych
bat allveadpa decpze to deſtroxe Babrlon.
his chalbe thebengeaunce ok the Losdeß /
andthe bengeaunce of bis temple.
Set bp tokens opon the wales oF Ba⸗
bylön / maße votre watch ſtronge / let poure
watch men in araye / yee holde peupe wat⸗
ches: a pet koꝛ al that wall the L od go foꝛth
with the deupce / which he hath taken vpon
them that dwell in Babrlon.
O thou that dwelleſt by the greate wa⸗
ters / O thou that haſt to greate treature æ
ryches / ihyne ende is sa Mer 4
ok thy


Babylon. The Prophecy


Anus. ul e. pech winninges. Che Lod oFooteshaty leauepbatell/¢ hepe chem felues in ltronge
Jere rh. Tone bebe cbacbe it ours when? boldes their danaeh fapled them / ther
zeremp. eb the with men irke grechoppers in nombze/ whalde like wemen. Their dwenenge places
which with a corage Hall crie Alara Alarũ chal be bꝛent vp / their bartes ſhalbe bzoken
agaynſt the. Yeeeuenthe Loꝛde ofhoottes/ One putleuaunt wal mete another / ve one
E woth his power made the earth / wyth bys poſte thal come by another / to bꝛinge z kyng
wyldome pꝛepared the rounde woꝛde / and ok Babilon tydinges: p bis cytie is taken mn
with his diccrecpon cped out the heauens. on euerp irde / p ko des occuprea / che fen
pi. cxrxb. b. As loone ag he letteth his vopce be herde / the brent vp / and the Coudpers Coze aftayed,
waters in d apze warce fearce: e dꝛaweh Foz thus la peth che Loꝛde ok hooſtes the
bpehe cloudes krom the endes or the rarth. Godot Alraelnthe daughter of Babilon hach
He turneth the lyahtenynges to rayne / he vene in bertyme like a a thꝛelchinge fooze
Cap. ill,. Dzinageth b wöndes out oetheir fecrete places but thoztly hal herharueſt come. Habucho⸗
wacuchdite By the realon ar wyldame (all men are be. donolosthe Binge of Babriö bath devoured
come fooles. Contounded be an the caters ¢ deſtroerd me / he hath made me an emptye
of pmagesfoz the thinge that cher make is befell. He fwalowedme bylphe a dꝛagon / 7
but diceate / and hath no bzeath. Napne is it kylled bps belp wmp delpcates: he hach calt
and wozthpto belaughed at: and in the tyme me out / bebath tanen my kubſtance awaxe
ol bilitacpon it wall perych. athe thinge that was left me hath he carved
Heuertheles / p poꝛcyon ol Jacob is none vnto Babtion / ſapeth the daughters dwel⸗
pee b made al thynges / whole name leth in Spyon: pee and mpbloudealto onto
is che Lope ol holes / he is the rodde ol his the Caldees / lapeth Jerutalem. Cherkoze
enberptaunce, Choubzeatett mr weapens thus faveth the Lozde: Beholde
ol warre / and pet chozow the A hauelcätred lende the caule, a auenge the:
che nacions e yngdomes: Chozowthe haue vp her ſee edzpe paler
ome an heape


aue Coated the hepherde and his foc
bond man and his catell the pzynces


chat deckropeſt all landes. 3 welt
mrhande ouer the and catt the downe


zedekiah.
e earch with all
e
‘Like ab Babylon bathb


HJemp, ss
is therin / wat reiopce delt ok Euphrates andfavereuen thus wall
rovers me Babllon (ynche/e be chruſt downe with the
pee buchen of trouble tat wi bange pon
hertlo that tye walueuer come vpagarne.
Thus karre are the pꝛeachinges of Jeremp.


es:oure ka- were left in Jett
becaule the Jehoabimis


nene, pet wald fende


A pyteouscrye
bpion and a greate
the Calders whenthe
and when he dubne
pꝛonde boaſtyng


cheterulers
they


tol)
ial


fer I come
fee aa one that be wzpt-~

ten
tape charge: ubhen thou court dato Be
bylon /fethat thou readeallthele 070e8/
faye: LLojde thou art determfötorote
place / lo that nether pei seria:


it the


abplon /and Raue Spatatal


che iii, Chapter.
ae was, ln gear obe


Je rerrxxtt· .
h aueg . xv. at


bim.
The krng of Babplo alto cauled Zedelt.
bg lonnes to be Mayne befoze his läce/ pee
@ put all the princes ot Juda to death at Re ·
th. Moꝛeduerd e put out the exes ot 5e- €

‘péhfab/cauuted hm tobe botine 1b cheyhes /
to be carted pnto Babploix: and lett him ixe
in ppelen tyllhe dyed.

Pow the tenth dave ok the tylth Moneth
in the ix pere of Habuchodcnolo: kynge
of Babiton/Nabufatadan the hefe captal⸗
nie and the nynge of Babylons feruauntes
came onto Jeruſalem/ a bzent vp che hole
of the Loꝛde. He bꝛent vpallo p hynges pas
lace / all the houles Jean hege gel ge


prbekial Jerulalem. „he Br


e Calces that were with the cheke ap⸗
tapne / bꝛake downe allthe walles or gerü⸗ w
lalem rounde aboute.


As koche cher people and Coch folie as
n et was left in the cptie / which alto were kal⸗
lentothe Aynge ol Babylon / ver and what
people as pet temapned: Sabusarapan the
ete Captapne carped them awape pꝛelo⸗
ers. But᷑ the pooze belt te 5


lers that were in the houle of the Loꝛde
kreche eate and e aer chr 0 —


metall ok them vnto Babylon. Ther tone
awape allo the caumzons thouels, let bor


andthe rope that w


rotij.cubpteshpe
th. neg. vo. etn as cubptes /and an foutefyne


erg thycke and rounde: How vpon the rope
were bzalen knappes / g euerx imoppe was
kpue cubpteshpe:a vponthe noppes were


whopes fand pomgranates rounde aboute ite


n w boty lers
er thes maner were e pyl

. — wyth the pomgranates / wherol
fete en nber


et ba
te 55 8


ophttye

thas a captabne of the ſoulderg / and teu

men that were the pamper pat
ere founde in che Soepheracap-


aer bien te Acker Mee


with ix. ne ofthe cnt bate a


unt che ang
ol Babplon ae 2 to be put to deal
epi lande of Hemath. And


rye cae


An the
we $ ee Ache


Fo, toes poetoners,
pretoners /s foure ch thoutande ¢ tyre


bude.
the.rrrbff. yeare after ien
2 safes 122


regen


dorch ae ee

oihis le bf
bevpen,

me at


¶ The ende of the boke ol
the Pꝛophete


Perey,


Juda.


= kanns


eee


Eider bite chat cuted al land
n She — ote in the nyght / co chat p


kesreß rumme downe ber chekes kozamonge
. O e all — go heb brholdeandle /


pol per n der bert fost geucto yer
enp comkoꝛte: ve her abhozre
1
ici taken wine nene che was
e
pura mon
then ben e 11 nore! Ss a tbeptbat pete
fecutedher / toke her / and lo che dwel
monge her enempeg.
che dreates ot Sonmoinme / becaule no


Bman commeth mozeto the folempne feattes
Aber gute arevellate her nber wake che lalt wich bis


mentacion / her mardens are carekum / and


ppeher lelke tun er heute, 8


Tee ee


ut herto chame:becaule ? Lozd hach
et


1 8 . f
. are le —— captiue befoze their


.


21 — of So
a e
chat t vnde no paſture Ache hey
befoze their enempe wine ther suc
. ower.


l Jerempe. 5.


e pretious


euer tiaze g ae chel⸗

Boe comein a All cher 6 hadher
jonout/netpyte Dectoitverbate keneher

er foe fesbetbandisa amen


ecufalent ae &
fate 0 15. 6510 grebe we eendbpeb not


what wolde kolowe: 2 therfoze is her fallfo,
greate/andthere ig no mato coforteber .D
ene top ewe enemie
path the vpperhand .


e.
alan dn pucbishande to all 0 all Ce 9
that the bad,


fer the Beathenne arne
whom thoulneuertheles halt
13 thpcongregacyo,


ay
4 All her people tebe thet bed‘ beurnes!
und loze whatpzecrous thynge cuery man
bath that geueth he tor meate / to laue hre
An ben Loꝛde/ and fe/ how oyle 3
become.


ere be enx loꝛow ile vnto myne / wher⸗
Lozdehath troubled ne in d dare


wi
* off Lea west, 5
. : A


to my bones and chatened me:he bath layed
me wyde


8 ebe de me chzowen me


open:
C 2 Jmuſt euer


be mount


e of mytrangredron 8 tomeat
ben ra e


v l bee

men / that were in me. Pe hath proc

ta adaughir abet m been
trodẽ down e e

aun wee nene ek .


pe / Arne pes quitve *


awape “bute e the comforter that ſwulde


cken me / is karre fro me. Dp chplozers
— fy woyctbeenemic bad
ee Bae


ion catteth outher handeg and
py
e el
kuchen alben rudus won /
niche n of them.


* eaecont bi buen en zbggg


fli,


5 The Lamentacpons,


uda.

Juda. .... Th O take
Simannnemtt: yene all ve people andcontiaze my beupness
deut chat W warden and mp younge ment are led
45? fapinge and d wãpe into captruttre.


adupte. ioph,
called for mplouers (but they begyled
fre fox mp Balles A
-perphhed:cucn wyyle they fought foz meate /
fofaue their lrues. .


Res
Gy Conlydze(D Lo7de)how A am troubled /
my wombe is dyrgupeted / mp herte turneth
aboutin me / and J am full of beupnes. chẽ
kwegrde hurteth me without / and within J
am Ire vnto death. ;


n.
Chey heave my mourn; but there is
We dak tpl comtogte race ait nne ene:
Mayes haue hearde of my trouble / a are glad
ae ener
e en 0

tatbe ipue onto mes N


Thau.
n From the Hall come all their anuertytye:
wou thal plucke themawape euen as thou
halt plucheo me/becaute of all my wycked⸗
neg. Foz 79 Cozow is verygreate / and mx


herte ia heux.
0 Gaye §.chapter,


leph.
a8 how hatt the Loe darcke
ned the daughter of Sronco done
Ciuhrs ware As fo7 the bonoure
Vok Jirgel / he halh cattentt downe
ee 66 ee
was angrre: e


Beth.
2, Che Node hach calt down
aegacob chan anpfanbmalh hoe
laces oF the daughter Juda hath hebzonen
sea ape we
: 3 er Pyinces
ke nee een


Eimel.
olhis ind
oa 1 0 00 bzobe all the e er ehe auß
avengenet dae bis tyghE bande from the enempe: pee
tote krumm dhe d Mame of Tze is hpndlen in Jacob /g bath
durngdome of conſumed bp all rounde about.
‘the Jewes and Daleth.
470 aa Bebath bent ys bowelphean enempe/
. e bath Fattenedbis raue bade as an apucr-
Ary: and euerpthynge that was pleafaunt
#20 ont bee with 11 He hathpou⸗
red out hys weath Iphea fre⸗
bernacle of the ien, 22


Arkgch / power
nobpictte s toes In the w.


ip he I adde tsbecome kene n I bete a
ee ead cat ac hach


place per an his trongebolbes bath hede
froped/¢ kylled Hare. of Juda wrth
moch lo: ow and heuynelle.


Mau.

1 Her tabernacle t tthich was lyne a garden
ol pleafure)bath he deſtrored: her hye lolẽp ·
Fe 98 417 Kaori ee

atl brought patle that the hre foz
lempne feattes and Spabbathes in Sto /ave
cleane foꝛgottẽ. In his heupdilpleaſure bath
he made the kynge a pꝛeltes to be delpyled.


Sain,
Che Loꝛde hath koꝛlanẽ his awne aulter /
AND is woth with his awne Sanctuary). ¢

ath geuen the walles ol their towzes in to

ol the enempe. Their enem ves made C
à nopfe in che houle of the Lodde / as it had vgs ar,
dene ma lolempne teak dare. bd ad
eth.

N. Che Lope thought to break Dotone the le, Fete
walles ol the daughter Dion / vr he fpzed out of ei
bin neee ewe not in bis hand kite bad Soe genus
delrored chem. Khertoze moutne the tut toncarap ye

Per cal grove 15 x
v Her portes are caltẽ downe to are
der barres are bꝛokeng 1 Somer: gange l.


entpies.
Gentples eee ente one, te f.


my


oF Zerufalembange dawne thelt beades ko nent tothe
‘Rosa; „

abe souls bn

> pn eres begynne to larle me thoꝛowe 7 pe,


I Juda,


Beg vil. J


kale
weppng / my bodp is dicgquieted / my leuer i
pate brunch kart 7 othe etre Sega
ol my people / ſeynge the chyldzen and babes le thee wt
denden ah oF the cate, 2285
v Kuen whencher wake to thefe mothers: ei dus
where is meate and dꝛyncke: fo whyle ther
lo lapde / they fell downe in the tretes of the é
cptpe/ipheas they had bene wounded / and
bunte webt en wochen bofome,
xa What wall g tape orthe / O thou raugyee
ter Jerufalemſto whom wal gelenke. |
r en ec tbe ta ey bute 5
ts linea ma ete mbomazepeaie ie? .
bv prophetes haue iohed out bayne any
doit eoenges to; te erbane not ene
che of thy wickenneffe / to kepe the from caps
krutte hüt haue duerladen ef aste ve |


Faltyed dcatred the ab ode.
Sai


v Ail thep chat go by the /clappe their hanes
at the: billynge and waggynge their heades
vpon the daughter Jerulalem/ and lape: is
this the cytie that men call to fayꝛe / wherin
che whole lande i be


vAllchene enemres gape ops che whilpe⸗
kynge and bytynge their teth / laying:let vs
deudure / koꝛ che tyme that we lobed Foz / is
come: we haue kounde and ene it.


e.
gp Che Loꝛde hath kulkplledthe thynge / that
e was purpoled to do:and perkourmed that
e had deupled longe a go:e hath deſtroped /
and not cpared. Pe hath cauled thyne aduer⸗
Savy to triumphẽ ouer the / a let vp the hoꝛne


olthyne enempe. ax: .
Lerthene bert - rpe bntothe Lande / O
a ge gener of the bengbter Sen ech.


pe
Roa ere res runne Downe Ihe a rxuer dave a nights
6 -f ef Hot / ler nog e 0. e.
oun” Stande vp and make thy paver in p firſt
watch of henpadt / poure oute thyne herte
Irke water befoze the Kozde: Ipkt vp thrne
handes / koz the lyues of thy vonge cheldzen /
that dye ar hang {ie fretes,


6 old / O Loꝛde / and contydze/ why halt
. even me vp fo cleane, hall toe.

n eate their awne krute euen chyl⸗

dren ofa tpanne longe: Shall the prettes a
anctuary


yophetes be layne thus in the Spi
st


Sin,
ijegrounne weedoo marae
flagne wrth helme whom thou in the
dape of thy wiathtull indignacyon batt put
to death: pee euẽ chou halt put thé to death /
and nof fpave them.


Chau, .
neyghbours pare rounde about me,
3 to a feat dape: lo
Zunthe dape ol the Lordes wrath none elca⸗
eee
bad bzoughtbp and noꝛylched / hach mene
ge
gegen
} l b
8 De done me koch) and led me:
Into darckneſte / but not into lxght.
Fi Keep eurnce bs anne 7%
teuer bon me.


—


Ok Jeremy,


xlviij.


Beth. te
3 Sy fled a my Chynne hath be made vide /
anmdmpbones hach he bsuled. —
2 Behath bupided rounde aboute me / z clo⸗ , Sl fo
led me in with gal and trauaple. cancukulnes as
a He hath let me in darcknelle / as they that in the Palme
be deed fo? euer kee. hep
Gpmel. Sage e
5 Bebath to pedged me im / £9] caninot gettuaſe z Hunde
out / and hath la ved heuy lynckes vpon me. haue comkorted
4 Though J crye and call pite dul / vet hea» medpd emit
reth he not my pꝛaper. ank
He bath ſtopped vp mp waves wych koure ted inp lo ow,
ſuared ſtoneg / a made my pathes croned. es a0 pF one
Bal thulbe geue bit
8 aleth. .
He lapeth wapte formelphea Bere / dag itt meates p,
aſpon in ahole. gere bebe
Ahehath marred mywapes / Abꝛoken me cyac prophecre
mages Seal une made ORE n g
Ahe ent e / and made me
it were amatch to tutte at. pen


or whom Dae
— 2
al
n che arowes ot his qupuer hath he cot / 29110 Delp


euen into my repnes,
n Jam laughed to leo ne ofatime people / 9 in Fr
thepmake Conges vpon me all Pdape longe.

N hehath Eplicd me with bytternelte / ges

nen me wozmwod to dꝛrncke.


Mau.
he bath tmptten myteth in peces /a rolled G
me in the dul.


ut,

PHehath put my loule out of reſt / J forget
all goodthynges.

Ithought in my lelke: J am bndone / there
is no hope foz me in the Lozde,


aln.
39 — pet mymyferya mr troub
the woꝛmwod and the gall. e /
Pee thou ſbaltremembze thé / koꝛmy Coule
melteth awape in me.
Juwhrie Acölpwethere thngeg in mi hert /
A get a hope agapne.


N Namely / hal the mercyes ofthe Loꝛd are

not cleane gone / and that bis louyng kynd⸗

nelle ceaſlech not.

n His faptbtulnes is greate / and renurth it
felte as the moutnynge.

n Che Loꝛde is mp poꝛcpon / lapeth my lou /

le / thertoꝛe wyll hope in him.


Ceth.
v O how goodis the 107d vnto them / that
put their trůſt inhim / and to the koule that
leketh alter him:
v Dhow good tit with ſtylnele to wate ¢
den e w/ eg
2 0 oza man / e the
dock vpon him krom his youth vp.


; Joo, }
_ >» ekpteethatone /he holdeth him tan / and
dweileth


Juda.
dwelleth quyetly by him cẽlke.
2, Delapetb bis face opon the earth vlper⸗
e)there happento be enp hope.
» Heokieth his cheketothelmpter / he welt
be ee e


v Fopthe Lende vllnottostakeforeuer,
» But thoughhe do caſt or / vet accoꝛdynge
to g multitude orhis mercpes) he receaueth
ret not plage ca outthe chp

.
pence mens berte,


— pretoners of th
0 e pꝛeloners ok the ear

vnderhys fete, -

é Co moue the iudgement ol man before
e moſthygheſt.

1 Co condemne a man in bys caule: Che
onde hath no plealure in toche thynges.


Mem.
nese usiee 1 tbat EBbe chen hat aveththere dun
al ale t coat menen done without the Loꝛdes cos
Gobo mt call. Hut of the mouth of the moot Byghert
‘Doouckings Goeth not euelt and good?
bellen eh 1a Wherfoze then murmureth the lyuynge
1000 ari 22 eee at hrs awne kynne.

un.

be meal «3 Act br lone well bpon dure awne woapes/
2 neadefull, ¢ and remembꝛe oure lelues / s turne agayne
wperout he Cucto the Lozde.
Thing wren eg2 Let bs laß op dine gerte with dure han
beonipdo wh, EB vnto che Loßde that is inheauen.
cheontpisthor 2 e haue bene opdemblers/ and haue of:


toulp wife and kended / wylt thou therfore not be intreatent
bl spamech
ther in Anny © THOUGAE coucredbs in chy tozath/e per


10. b. Lometh lecuted vs / thou haſt dapne bs wythout any
ther any plage kauoure, :
macltie. lc. > Choubattbyd thy leltk in a cloude / that
‘ dure paper ſbulde not gothoꝛow.
> Choubatt made bs outcattes / and to be
delpyled 1 Heathen,
n.


y All oure enempes gape sponds,
v. Neare and tate is come vpon vs / pee dete
byte and dellruccpon.

Fy Whole rivers of water guche out ot myne
eres / tos the greate butte of my people.


e.

e eyes runne / and can not ceaſſe / loꝛ
chere ig noteſt.
22 Loꝛde / when wylt thou lone downe
2. Hecke byeabet) mr here becaute ot

ol

W
x Mrne enempes hunted meout tarper
Ike a bpzde / pee and that 2 J
¥ Cher haue put downe my tite intoa pitte,


The lamentatyons


and lareda ſtone vpon me.
+ Chey poured water bpon my head / then
thought now am J vndone.


Soph.
P Acalled vponthr name / O Lode / out of
thedepe pte. 5
Chou haſt herde my voyce / andbatk note
turnedatoaye thine eaves me krghinge &


rpenge.
F Chou halt enclyned thy lelk vntome / we?


catia bpon che pate eee.


4 Chou O Lo eſhalt inayntened the cau- ix


Ce ol mytoule / and halt redemed my lile.
O Loꝛde / thou batt fene my blatphemers
take thou my caule vpon the.

1 Thou halt well confyozed how they goa ·
bout to do me harme / and that al their coun⸗
cels are agarnſt me.


in.
w. Chou — wont
eee eee
w Chelippes ofmpne enemves andchen
—— . take agarnſt me / all the
e
mi
nochinge Unt ne. ee


iu. ‘
ry Mewarde them O Lone) accoynge to
the wozhes oetheir handeg.
n Geue chem the thynge / that their awne
bette is atraped ol: eu en thy curle.
n Perbecute them D Lozoe) with tyrne in
dygnacpon / and rote them out from vnder
che heauen.
sone Chapter,


lit to Coze chaungedsand the ſtones
ofthe Sanctuary thus kcatred in
the comer ot * :


Che chyldzen of Yvon that were al ware
inhonoure / aclothed with the molt pꝛecious
Golde? how are they now becomme ipke the
en beticls whych bemade wyth the pot>


* Gpmel,
Che Lamves geue their
nelle: iyke the Eſtriches. 3


Daleth.
tonges of the luckeng chymdzen
eee
Che vonge chyldzen athe bzed / but there i
noman / that geueth it them. ks


an Dotw 86 goide become fo
Oma


Juda,


Cher that were wonte to kappe deticatly/
Pee aide Freak eesker debe!


bauugbtppin purple, mae now moch of 3 Hb


donge.


Mau.
5 5 Chelynne of the daughter ok my people
nt. xlr e. isbecome greater then the wyckednelle of
2 Sodome / that ſodenix was dettroped/ Enot
taken with andes.


ain,

evabitepners(o7 Mazarces) tw
ph atte ſnowe 07 ne chen 5 —
fret read as the Coꝛall / their beutte iphethe
Daphrꝛe.


pues n But now their kaces are very black: In

pw lo moch / that thou chuldelt not knowe ba
inthe freates.Chetrfhyane cleuethto their
bones / i is withered / and become Ivhea
dope ſtock.


Ceth.
w Cher that bedarne wich che lwearde / are
bappter then loch as dye of honger / and pee
kde. e brug fan pe tutes ofthe


’ 0b.
Mut p Che temen( which ot nature are pitt eful)
ene baue Conde chete atone chtlozé töchel hades
a that they might be their meate / in p milera⸗
“ble deſtruccion of p daughter or my people.


Caph.
je Londe ha emed
eee
bp dplpleature . He hath krndleda kyze in


by
Siro,
% Nether eh anges ofc earth Hebe
rthe ner af
tababttouts of} wozlde / wolde haue beleued


chat 6 enenue ¢ aduerlarp ſhulde haue come
in at che gates or the eptiẽ ol ierulalem.


cr iich neweeeneles in come to pate to
eHetymnes.o€ her propbetes geh tbe wee.
kednes of her Pzettes that haue hed inno⸗
centes bloude within her.


un.

‘i i So that thete biynde men wente fom-

lyng in che treates / ¢ ſtapned themlelues

wich bloude / whych els wolde touche no
bloudy cloth.

_  HSamech,

> But they cryed vnto euery man: fice the

ftapnyng/atwape/get vouhéce) touchit not.

Tee (iarde they) ve mutt be bent / pemutt

5 Dipelamage ente a byde no lögerhere.


y. Che countenaunce of the Lowe bath bas
4 5 bon


Ol Jeremy.


a ae
gerthen tenes lit :
Sewekes nd pre ee b


he.
erkoye vet ourcepes faple vs / whyle
we lone foz bayne belpe sfepnge we be cuer
‘wapting vpon a people / pcan do bs no good. 2


Sane, .
x Chey lape co havpe waite forbs / that we
can not go tate pong Qreates: Coz dur ende
160 3 daes are tultrlied / oure ende


Roph.
Bac eee, art Cwptte then the

jegles ol the apze/ chey kolowed vpon bs
ouerthe mountapnes / and laped wapte fo;


vs inthe wildernelle


Res,

e very beth of dure mouth ꝛeuen the
3 Taser halben in eet
ſynnes ol wh we lape: Under his Mavowe '
we halbe pꝛelerued On e che Verthen.


n.

Andthoul O daughter Edom) that well:

Fam tendee ug be üben

koꝛ the cuppe thal come onto the allo whic

whan thou foppett of thou ſhalt be dꝛonckẽ.
l.


Thau.
n Chelinne is wel puniched( O chou daugh
ter Sion) he Hall not ſulkre the to be carxed
awape eny moꝛe. But thy wyckednelle( O
daughter Edom) chall he bylet / and koz thy
Cynnes ſake / he hall lede the in to captiulte.


fn och bat confumedthe foundacios K


are as the wydowes .de are fapne todꝛinne
dure awne water to: money / and oure awne
wodmuſt we bye wyth moͤnepe. Pure nec⸗
are vnder perlecucyon / we are weer / and
hauenoreſt.
A foje tyme we pelded oure lelues to the rg

Egppcians / and nom tothe Adirvans/onely

we might haue bzed ynough. Oure fa-


. errte |
Saat


Ilrael,
Ren vonge
Lopes ate hanged vp ops trees, Che eiderg
tet no mozevnder the gates /ano theponge
men vle no moze plaxeng of Mulphe. Che
lope ol oure herte is gone / oute merx quere
ts turned into mournpnge. Che garlande of
ute bean is kalen: lag / chat euer we lyn⸗
ned lo loze.

Thertoze oure herte is full of heupnete/.
and dure eres drmme: becaule of the byll ot
Spon that is dellroped. In lo moch / that

D loxes runne pon it. But thou / O Loꝛde /
remarneſt foz euermoze /¢ thy leate woꝛid
wythout ende: wherfoze wilt thou ſt yl fog
get vs / and fozcake vs folonge? O Loꝛde /
tume thou bg onto the / z lo ball we be ture

ned. Renue our dapes as in olde tymes /
to thou halt


not


ende of the Lamentacpons
ae secre .


sai ah


» Che tyme wherin Sserbielprophecyer/e tm what
ba b nnen d office, Che vplpon of the foure
beakes. Ahe vylpon of the wheles. MChevptpun of
the thrane and of the Image abone the throne.


3 ¶ be fyzt Chapter,

a Tchaunled in the. xxx
bien wr 0 eee
Lee Hebel putes
zemyReriesoe 9 obere wherethe beute


.


eit legges were kkrerght / buttheirke⸗ uenaepun .
te were ide duenne en thepgip- en


ftered/astehad bene fapze kccuted metall. bat


wunder their wenges vpon all che koure coz-
ners thephadmeng handes, Eheir faces g
their wynges were towarde the foure coz
ners pet were the wynges to / that one euer
touched another, ohen they wente / they
turnedthem not aboutetbut echone wente
bann
on
faces were Iphe the face ol a man / and the
face ofa L pon: But vpon the left (poe /they
had the face of an oe / andthe face of an dee
Ble. Their kacesalloand their wynges were
lpped out aboue:lothat two winges of one
touched euertwo wenges of of another /
wrth the other they couered their bodx. Eue·
ro one whente wente / it wente ſtreyght toz⸗
e
notabout in cherz g.
be fatyyon and countenaunce of the


e fa *
beattes wasipheboate coales of fyze/euen


though burnpnge crellettes had bene
amoge the bealtes andthe Fyre gaue a gips
Are and out of che fyzetbere wente ipgbte⸗
henge, whenthe beates wente tozwarde
and backwarde / one wolde haue thought
It had irgbtened. Pow when J had well con
libered ice u law a woꝛcke of hes
leg bps the earth with foure faces allo Ine
Weben ie of the tubel
e Fatbpon and woꝛcke of the wheles
was lpke the fee. Che koure wheles were
torned and madelto lone vpö as it had bene
one tobele in another. iothen one wente foz-
warde / they wente all koure / and turned thé
not about intgeir going. Chey were large /
Greate andhoꝛrybie to lone bpon. Cheir bo⸗
Dyes were full of eves round about them all
koure. nohen the beattes wente / che wheles


wente allo with them And whe the bealteg © ö
Ipft . —. krõ the . 1 poi
Sed /


les were lylt vp ao. 2


ryaht cpde ot thele koure/their c


Wrther ſoeuer the at
pete wente / chytber wente thep auto, ade


God


manplolde
the wheles were telt vp / and lolowedthem: rler eder


foz the Cprete ak Ipte was in the wheles,


When the bealkes went forth Kode lll og ge wal TP.
th 1 5 hee 7
ade Urn land were ert ore’


Ipét them felues bp fromthe earth:
‘bbeesalfo mente eve
vpe koꝛ the bzeth of ite was inthe whe


sacpons? bat)


. erenba


. Seethiel. ache 3 ie
greate waters / as it had bene the vopce of clolcdboke: ing wichout / füllt
greate God and a tulhhynge wier . — :


leate / as it had hene che.. chapter. 5
mene Soap eap the teats bee atone gustan icons econ
ipke a nan J bebelde hem / and he was lpze .
à cleare lyghjt / as it had bene all of fyꝛe with piglet 5 1 ne
irra bt whe ioked p6 Din bnbet zen oF Frac], oF opened my mouth / 2


0 Boke onto ente / an tapbe
te ons metbougiebe irr ae. Sree omne ofmay/ cope dal


* e cate /and thy Dates thalbe Fld wit) be irae;
x — ina


bal. cxix.
bobe/¢ tt was tn mp mouth weer then bo⸗ ot s.


Wewe them che wozdes that J commaunde sercinte,tice
eople that ha
e


tunnaga elt Fozebeades : 0 that thy fare
beuge ia barca San
1 ou ma
e abe fel garen olthem / for ther are a


thrne berte: and go to the pꝛelonerg
Sanees abe onto!


ebp. Ind J Hearne the
eee


Keel bleded glozpoteye L onde out of


sibut ot che mo!


ober were by chem whychtulthpnge and noble
thoy all bee ede ec aer „ow wbenthelppeteraneme pp / adla⸗


* ' anbeup anda,

Berker boutuolde, Dpe cay mouth and cate fromm etme che 2
lobynge vy / bebode / chere comlostedmer e ö
lee


Jerulalem, Bl
* Chen lade : Oh L. oꝛde God. Beholde /
my ldule was pet neuer ſtarned: ko fromy
pouth by onto this houre. Jdid neuer eate oF


eachers) fn c ammonge them feuen dapes / beingẽ be⸗ adeedcatcate / 07 oftyat which was dapne
24 2 ok wylde brates / nether cam there euer ene
nd when the leuen dayes were expired / vncleane flech in my mouth.

the Lo wlarde onto me: Chou ſonne of many Wherontohe antwered me / and lapde:
eh ae eden Well chin J wyllgraunte § totake comes
ipete OF track teren kalte good hede ko the donge / ide the dongẽ ofa man and to trale

ein woldeg / and geue them warnynge at my cö⸗ the b7ed oucr with all / bekoꝛe them.
maundemtent, And he fayde ptome: Behalde thou tonne


* @ GE A fave unto the / concernynge the — e be b. d. ok nian / wyllmyniche all the pꝛouilpon ol
ee San Ba ben an et he —— 9 5 ee ene eie ber ball Bae n
‘ 5 · u. a hzed / and eate it with tcarcene le. But a
Bone g eae Hid then Ff water / they Mall haue avery Iptle meaſure


cherot / to dꝛyncke. And whentherhaue no»

miozebzedner water s one wall be dettroped

wyth another / and amply awaye fo their
wychkednelle. ‘


Che pddleogthe hearees / by whiddis fparitfoed
thedefeuccyon of the people. Che cates of the an,
ger of God towarde the people. The Lojde dilcloleth
the rydole or the hearres.


munth ) spate 8
non he r Camebngooip man dpe inbysa


1 Che. . chapter
tuounedte/ and do the chynge art ene pi been bunbgeth be bapes mute I. Chou konne of man take the
‘wyll lave a domblgnge block 53 thou beace nad ben of the boute of ‘lsyerta tbarpe 5

nnn geur bus fpescie gee eect ete Mur cate p74 thaucthegeatte


of thy head and beerd: Chen take


sning:pee dpe Wall be in bys atonefpnne/ tho u Hill nd ey lad e
enen arbre etme of Be Picoales ache walght / edeupoe the hearre


wal
lothatthe vertue / which he drd bekoze / hall b


not be thought vpon: 5 i
angst een. bps blonde welt 3 „ Adape (3 faye) fo7 a 83 1 i 1
Neevthelede/véthouerbortetehervas- kern les uct lapebpon the .Gbertore e other thixne parte in peces with a knpte
tuous thathetennenot/@ fotverpabeucus takin orns 1 — ibe tae 8 kor che thirde parte that remarneth/ cat
Donot fynne:then chal be Ipue /beraute e insert robin abend arme / itinthe wynde / a then chewe ö bare knee
bath receaued thp wamynge/ ald thou bate w Bede F Wen pech Petattevioavoetatieatpete of Che tame)
Fer ban n canes ba bee a
e vnto me: to ant curtety of it/and ca the myddeſt oF the
Ae e noone HUB on eee lee aa
sHowwhenZhanryren op, and gone foxth beanee Wescott bate Bboute or Feraell  Dozouer / tyus fave the
intothe felve:aBehoibe the go poche Le. cate. sptiiumt an mut c Lopoe So ghtz fame ts gerulalem. Alert
8 ftobe here tphean 9 ato ature beihewa⸗ 1 — heriachempddeſt ofthe Heathen enacions:
@tevoF Cobar, tyevayes patton reigns tatave vounde aboute ber but the bath de


les them kelues / ebzokenmy commaunde⸗


mp éete/e fapde ,

dec ee acer ous Bebe) daniel ion Gattyaue — — —

fi abe iat ete Gall chapnes . — tings haunces/anot walcked in mplatwes. Ther-

eee age
Mmane thy leu 5 — 7

i pO Goierrraen te

poumotne, enutoz itt an obürnate Din thaltthou dernckt dayip tom the bee be Heuser ueLoneeo. per


«ed Win al teeta
judgmen

of the Heathen / e twyll ale ok loch a

kaſhion / as Ineuer dyd bekoze / and as Ane

ner will do krom that tyme kozteh / andthar

becaute ofallthyneabjominacpons sort


Butwhen


Ezechiel.


‘the fathers cha be kane toeate chelt awur Bent: ie


Syptcompiungmentes mozethenthe@entt= or


5 i 2
J A
konnes /a 5 fonné their awne Fathers, Hoch Cree u
gcourte ane inche / ache whole re 5 gen rl lt
naumnt well Itcatrein to ali the wynde.
iWhertoze as trulpas Z ipuc (taveth the
Loid God)ieyng chou bait delptiedmp⸗Dan⸗
ctuarp/with all maner ofabhominacpons &
Wall thy hametuil offences:so2 this caule
will J alto deſtrope the. Myne exe wall not
ouer de che nether wil J tpare che. 1
One thirde parte wichinthe /chan dye of
the peſtilence and okhonger: Another thirde
parte (yall. be llapne downe rounde aboute
che / with § hwearde: Che other thirde parte
P remapneth / will z ccatre abzoade towarde
all the wyndes / ard dzawe out the Twearde
alter them. Thus J well perkourme mp in.
dignacton ¢ let nix wrath agapntt then / and
kale mytelke. Sothat whe J haue kullkplled
mne anger agaynſt thẽ / ther call ho we
tigt J am the Lozve / which with a keruent
geloncy haue ſpoken it. Mozeouer A wplt
malte the matte and abhozred / Vesoze all the
Peathenthatdwell aboute che/ein the right
ofall them / that go bp the:fo that whe J pus
nich the in np twzath in myne anger / z with
$ plage of mo whote dilpleacure: thou Male
bea verpabhominacton / hame /a galyng a
wondꝛpnge ftoche/antonge the Heath that
Ive aboute the Cue the Loge haue tpoke
it / and it — 19 75 5 vate Le —
amonge themthe perloug da onger / Czech ae
which babe but deach: Yee chertoze Matta c auh lle
wutethem becaule J wyll deitrope vou. J
will encrealehunger / a mynich all the pꝛo⸗
uilpon ok bꝛed amonge vou.
Plages and mpfer wy z lende vou / pee
@ wylde beattes alto to vettroye vou. Peſtt⸗
lence and bloudſhedynge Wall come vpon
vou / andthe fwearde wil A bꝛinge ouer vou.
Euen Athe L oꝛde / haue la pde it.


me, apinge: Chou tonne of man
une chr kace tothe mountarnes
lof Ffracl / that thou mapeſt pro- Geck xxl.
phecie vnto chem / A laye: eave the woe
ok the Lope God / O ve mountapnes of Fes
rael: Fhus bath che L ode God (poke to the
mountapnes(htllesvalleys and dales.
Beholde / Jwyll bzynge a lwearde ouer
pou / a deſtrope pourehye places: J will cat
Downe youre aulters/ebzcate downe youre
teples. Youre layne men wyll g laye before
pourt goddeg / and the deed carcales of the
chrnden or Brae iwwyll J cact betoze their
Gj. vmages /


. Jerulalem. The ier N Jerulalem Ol Ezethiel. lif,


" Bil handes chalbe let downe / and all ina vytron to Jerutatemt/intoche enerye ol
¢ avoute bout aultees / and dwellenge knees lhalbe weake as the wakerdhepchall che anner poste biped) towatde 5 nan: 4. bebt
‘ Gpzde the felucs with lach cloth / tearẽ Yall there dove anymage, with whonihe 5 hach sion was wat
: Fall pd them Cpeir kaces chalbe contoun⸗ all hinges in his power / was very wioth. and ahn un
. = ded/*e theivbeavesbalve:thetrfpluer wal And begoldeſche glory of the S beiin hey cnt
eee rund “i Ipetnthe ttretes /etyerv golde walbe delpy ewas un the fame place: cue as J badsene enc we cals


SESE LT eee Seeeeea oe ne
i sf 8 ey not latylt᷑pe their hõgrx cou · mpneepes towal noꝛth / and bel +7
eds Apne He Leo methereplityervempepe belpes tervb; betpoetye poste noychwatde there was An halber


“ee n
thé mp treatury (halve detiten:to2 Seheues gate: when J lolked / veholde/ chere was an warde wall ¢
with ish alan tp pouch bérmptveatury


the waves and tecompence the allthrab · : 5 0 wyched abhom porte and n
boch thea 5 toze/ wyll bringe the mot cruell tpꝛaun⸗ in / & lone what wycked abbompnacyon;
3 — I. 7 sate
4 gether/ and ſtam
with thy fet


Jowe another / z one rumoure wall come at the houte of Atrael:a in the myddeſt ol themthrues oe hig

wih gong tevanotpergen tal hey ene vivonsin tanegayaniay te onne oF Barben Pe

the ne vp/ d whic) was vapne at their Prophetes.Che lawe chalbe euerp one of the had a cenloure in his hade / che the popbe
beat ande, wall theongodlywarentoa tat. Yer ; Gonefromtjepretes) @toproome fromthe and outo€the incente/there went a lone“ z here caller
* ngen aher that nauer eme unde bps cb Ewers. Che Rynge Malimourne/ the Brin- as ithad bene a cloude. chen Caydebe neotde ymage of
Fils iy trouble that Pall come ofthetethynges, enen d ces halbe clotheo wych beupnedie / and the mie: Chou konne of m/ pan thou kene what a elan

lb dane des ofthe people in the lande all tren the Spenatoures or che houle of Arrael do E (4

emi noe rrp beeen ‘ e kor keare. J wyll do bnto thé alter their Cecretip/euery one in his chamöze⸗ Ko they uonedthe Lord

toter why Crouble 1 atone wapes / b accowynge to their amne fare: Cuſb /? Lorde level) ps not thes de to vengeatice)

1 2 ſetes wöll J fudge tgem:to lerne thẽ kegarderh not the world Andbe fapoe bnto bey they ar

* £02 to knowe / that q am the L ode. me:Curne the pet agapne / and thou ſhalt fe kleid dach co,


- th
CAnapyperaunce of the imilitude oF GOrSsechiel wpth that ye bꝛought me to thedoze or che ih moot how
ri rc he eee ve dauer porte ofthe 1 pes oute totvavbe noch. gene
Itrael and buat be


Dols.
atte
chat it hallipedefolate and bopde / From


1 loch aß appear

i ipl mabe the lande walle: S age ait ne And beholde / there lat women, mama f

7 G happened / hat in 5 firteveare thou lene this / thou fonne orman: Turned” py That ts

Gi the Fifth dare of the tyrte moneth aboute / athou Malt le pet greater abhomparter ere

I lat in mp houle /s the Loꝛdes ol nacpons. ndlohe bꝛought me into tl et which
andbi 5 Ahe councell of Juda with me:and F na

5 felt euen there at the porte ofthe Lon fapret tonne?

fone ecole hep pel : ene aun a5 g und n ams pe: fore enteye athe aulter here were krue ande wilt tap

Foatarear hang, ete Emme Che cues b : bt a Ipchnemteof fp2e krö rs lopnes downe fiventy mien that tumnentheix backen bpon gad to aner


8 1 i eeate/e there wozcbepvedthelonne. fo, we
che. bij. Chapter. wee por * Bid maruelouscleäre.Tbis fimilieude niet the enge acheter, hy Fable the twee
beatrapen/ 2 lockes or mphead / s the ſpꝛete lylt me vp thou konne of man Chynteth the houle ocz ird cel


Gli. ompna⸗ boddetolempne


The P


both  mpzthy ompnactis here? Shuſde they (pil the lande
32 ˙ fh peomneodoleor
mebntoanger t Yee a purpoleip tocaſt vp
1 Debye dun theit noles pon me: Cherkoꝛe wyll J allo
ee ay aie e ed Ne.
lo that myne exe call not ouerte them / ne⸗
ee
(fo bewapie crye in mpne cate e borce / ret we
a 55 notheake them.
eln
i 5
worse wire, e


ther obtayned ned Kbep


that are vnmar cbed are laxne. A cõpiayn⸗


them agapne. te or the Bioppete fo; the degruccpon ot the people.


Gro. el.e.


aulter:koꝛ the glozp oF the L ode was gone


ume. re, awape from the Cherub /a was come downe
15. Reg · viß. b. to the the holde of the houle / ehe called the


Herze. For he had fayde vnto the; When ve haue de⸗


Gta, rete,
Elech. vga m
* on 4


man that had the lynen rapment bpd him /
8 unde rde bann n och Tyee Lethe
Loꝛde ſapde vnto him: Gothy wape thoꝛo w
che cpte of Zerulalem / ¢ let tyys marcke n
Chau vps che koꝛeheades ofthe / 5 mourne
Kare fozp fo? all the abbompnacyons / that
be done therin. And to d other / he ſapde that


C Ampghtheare: Go pe atterhymthozow the
hte / dape / ouerle none / pate none: Kyll


R


a deſtroxe both olde men z ponge/ mardẽs /
chrldꝛen / and wrues.

But as fog thole/ 5 haue this marche n
Chau vpon them: ſe that ve touch them not /
ebegpnneat my Däctuary. Chen ＋
Gane at the elders, which were in the te ple /


kyled che tẽple / a krlledche courte with the
lapne / then go poure wape koꝛth. Sothep
wentt out / a lewe downe thozow the cyte.

Now when they had done the laughter / and
J vet etcaped: q fell downe vpon my face /
Ackped / lapinge: O L onde weit thou then
deſtrore all the relydue of Atrael/inthyſoꝛe
dylplealutt that thou halt poured pon Je.
rülalem⸗ Chen karde be onto me: Che wyc⸗
Heonede of the houle of Itrael a Juda is bes


& x greate:ſo thatthe lande is full or bloude /
0b. er“ athe cyte full of bnfapthfulnette : Kerther
Seal Feil. . he epth be not.crhertoze wyll g bps chem /


lape: uch the Lord regardeth not $ earth /


e eve Mall not ouerle thé / nether wyll
ebe bat wyll — j


20 hetyt


ele vpõ their heades. Ind beholde / the
man g had the lynen rarmẽt ops him / ache
wzrters vnckhozne by his Cyne: tolde all the
matter how it happened / a tapde: L ozde / aß
thou hat conmaundedme / lo haue J done.


C Or the man that tone whore burnyng coles oute
ot the mydie of the wheles ¢ of the Che rub toe
ben of theburnyng of Jerutalem. A reberfall of the
villd oF the wholes e chere, OF the Therubnis.
Gaye s.chapter,
Od as J joked / beholde in the kir⸗


mameét g was abcue the Cheru⸗ Ezech. r p


/: byns there appearedstpmplitude
2 Lok a ſtole ot ir pon them:
Chen layne he that lat therin /to hym that
hadthe lynen rayment vpon him : Crepe in
betwenethe wheles that are vnder the Che⸗
rubrns / and take thyne hande full of hoate
coaleg out from betwene the Cherubrns /
cal them ouer d erte. Andhe crepte in / that
Impgbtſe.


Mow the Cherubyns leode vpon the right
lde of the houle / when the man wente in /e
the cloude kplledche ynnermer
the glozy of the Loꝛde remoued kr the Che ·
rubpng / and came pponthe thzeſbolde ok the:
houle:fothat che téple was full of cloudes/
andthe courte was full of the wyne of the
Loꝛdes glozp.y ce a the ſounde oF the Che
rubyns wynges was hearde into the fore
coutte / Iphe ag it had bene the vopce or the
almrghere God / when he [peazeih. Now
when he had bydden the man that twasclo-.
thed in lynen / to go and take the hoate cone:
les krom the mxddect oe the wheles / wyrch
were vnder the Cherubyns:he wente a node
belpde the wheleg. Chen g one Cherubreas
ched koꝛth his hande krom vnder the Cheru⸗
byns / vntothe fyze that was betwene the
Cherubpns/ and toke cherok / a gaue it pn
to bym that had on theipnen rarm̃ent in his
hande: wich toke it / a went out AND NDT
the wynges of the Cherubyns / there appea⸗
kenne bei: eee eme

our turns
euerx cherub chere todea whele. And we
wheles were(toloke vpon hafter the fathion
of the precpous one of Charlis: vet (onto
the Cyght) were they fatbponeds lrne / as ve
one whele had bene in another. 2

When wente konth / cher wente all E
toure together not turnyng aboute intheln
goinge: But where the fpstt wente / tyrches
wente they after allo / to that ther tured
not aboute in thetrgoing. heir
dres / their backes / their handes a wynges/
reeandthe wheles alto / were al full of exes
rounde aboute them all koure And Ahearde
brm call the wheles / Salgallthat is ja roũde
boule. Euerx one ol them had foure kacer ao


Iratl,


ute. But gparavja,


hole DO- edu


e one face was the Face of a Chetub/
feconde of a man / the thpzde of a lyon
the fourth ok an Aegle / they were lxkted vp
aboue Chis is the beat; that J taweat the
water of Cobar. Now then the Cherubpns
wente / the wheles wente with them / a whe
e cherubyns choke their wenges to llt
elmeg ppwarde /d wheles remayned
notbehende but were Witem alto Shozt⸗
ie / whẽ they ſtode / tele ſtode allo: and whe
ther were lplt vp / the wheles were lykt bp
allo with them / tos the Cpzete of lyfe was in
the wheles.
Chen the glory ofthe Loꝛde was lylt vp


fla krum the thꝛeſbolde of the temple a remar⸗


hedopo the Cherubrns: Andthe Cherubing
Aachted with thet winges irt the felues
bp from the earth: lo that J lawe when they
went / and the wheles wych them. Andther
ſtode at the eat Cyne ok che porte that is in
Leden ofthe Lorde, Spo the glozy of the

ewas vpon them. Chys is tye beat
that J lawe vnderthe God of Alrael / pythe
water of Cobar. and J perceayed/ p ic was
the Cherubyns. Euer one had koure kaces /
and euerp one koure wynges / ä vnder their
wynges as it were mens handes. How the
kygure of their faces was eur 01 had ſene
them by the water of Cobar / and fo was the
Countenaunce of them: Euery one in bps
goinge wente drapght kozwarde. 8


Who Aer that bebucrd the people of gteact,

Agapne thete he: e e ide how they

Halve dycparpled abzoade, Che renupnge of the dert

commeih of Sod /otherwple can we not walcke in

tömaundementes. de threateneth them that leane

mito their awone councelles.
che. x, Chapter.

Ozeouer / the ſpꝛete of the Loꝛde

* lttmevp/ a bzoughtme vnto the
Caſt poꝛte of the Loꝛdes houle.

And beholde / there were. xxb men


under the doze amonge whom lawe Jaa⸗


zaniah the tonne of Azur / and Phelttay the
konne of Bananiah / ö rulers ok the people.
Men tarde the Lode onto me: Chou tonne
dr mar: theſe men magen mylchete / and a
Sopched coũcel take thep in this cite / laping:
fen there is no deftruccyon at hande / let

upfdehoules, this Jerikalẽ ts the caul⸗
ony awe be the flety, Cherfoze Walt thou


aL n ole ley d


eth fysetc ore ge Son te ee
bnto me: Speake thus tae the Lander


V Onthis manerhaue pe lpokent S pe boule


ok Actael) and F knowe the ymagpngcrons
ok poute herteß. Many one haue ve mitts
thüred in this cyte and killedthe ſtretes kull
okche lapne. Chertoze / thus lapeth then ond


Gf Esechicl


God: Che lapne men that vehaut faved on
the grounde in ches cptte/ate che lech / and


this cpte ia the cdüldzon But g well bange eh. rh
vou out ok it pe haue draw ouigtbe werte e


euen lo wyll g allo bꝛynge a lwearde ouer
vou / laxetb the Loꝛde God. J wylldꝛyue vou
but ot thys cyte and delyuer you into youre
enemxes hande / and wyll condemne you. Je
(hall Deflayne in all the coattes of Arael/
wyll be auenged ol vou: to lerne vou ko to
unowe / chat Zam the L ode. Chis cpte Hat
not be poure cauldꝛon / neither wall ve bethe
flechtherim but inthe coaſtes of Flrael wyll
J punych vou / that ye mare knowe / that 3


AM che Logdexin whore commaundementes Leut big si
pe haue not walched/ner Kepte bis latveg: entre.


but haue done alter the cuſtomes of 5 Peas
then/thativevoundeaboute you,
How 14005 cached /Pyeltiay Hlonne ol c
Bananiab Syed. hen kel F downe spd my
face and crped with aloydebopce:D Lozde
God / wyit thou then vtterlyde trove all the
remnaunt in Icrael: And lo che worde of the
Lone came to me on thigmaner: thou lonne
ol man: thy bꝛethꝛen / thy kynktolke / andthe
whole houle of Juda / which dwell at Jeru ·
Calé / ſaye: Chep be gone fare tra the Lon /
but the lande is geuẽ vs in pollelpon. Cher⸗
foze tell them / thus layeth the Loꝛde God:
wynl fende pou karre ok amonge the Genty⸗
les and lcatre vou amonge the nac vos /a 4
wyll halowe you but a iptie / in the landes
where pe hall come. Cell them alto / chus
ſapeth the Loꝛde God: wyll gather vou as
ant out of the nacyons/ and biynge vou
com the countrees where pe be tcatred / and
wyllgeue vou the lande of Ilraelagarne: @
chbther hall pe come. And as fo all impe⸗
Dpmentes / and all poure abhompnacrons: 2
toplitakethem awape.


plante ã newe tpzete within youre bo wels.
That Kony herte Wyll Fake out ok youre
body / ageue you a Helchr herte h ve mae


thalie fn my commaundententes anden, edel
ractadie bork,


mpne opdpnaunces/FdO 2 cb But lone
be my people / and J voure God. But lone
ped hertes are dplpoleb'to folowe their
abhompnacpons ¢ wpcked lrurnges: thofe
mens dedes wll J bavnge vpon their
heades / lapeth the Lozde won, After thes
roche Cherubyns let bp chett wynges /¢
the wheles wente with them / and the glory


okthe Londe was dponthem. e


ofthe Lozde wente vp krom the myddeſt
dete dereb en te mount oft cleto
inarbe thecal. Sucthe bp help r cl
ina dicti (which came by the lpꝛete of God
it bꝛou e e
the pretonets Chen f bition 6 F bab keit
GG. v. danyched


Aud wpli genre you one hett /n g wi Cech erb


Juda. Ty


e Propherpe


frome, Sog Cpake vnto then, und ũrowed them in the landes ther


the pꝛeloners allthe wozdes ofthe Loꝛde / Mall knowe / that am 5 Log, But /A will


which he had ſbe wed me.


CC heparadle ce the vedrls of the captyuptye, Che


leaue a tptle nomb e of the fro the cwearde /
— —
imnacpons amonge the Heathe / where they


ehe parable vp whi of :
Lnge eben igaifcearorbersecaersbes come:that ebepmape know / oto that ant


‘bp the dpRrelle or honger and thyrd is ipguptped.


¶ Che. xij. Chapter.


Bom Fb,


ne ot man


forth by fayre bape irgyt / that they mape le. water with beu;
Fes wur mer n walt —. from kulneſſe therot
thy place to another place: pt peraduẽture totcheonedie oft


the Loꝛde.
Wozouere the wo7de of the Lojde came .


me / ſa pinge: c hou lenne ot man / a kearkull tremblynge Wait thou este thy

ten Dene 2 the myddeſt ot a bed / with caretuinelſe a Cozowe Malt thou
krowarde houſbolde: wyrch haue dzpnche thy water. And vnto the people ol
eres to le / and pet te not: eares haue theyto the lande / peake thou onchts maner: Thus
beare / @ pet heate they not / tor thepare an laxeththe Loꝛde God / to them that dwell in
obſtinate houſbolde. Chertoze( O thou con- gerulalem/
make thygere redy to llit / and go kate youre bꝛed wlozowe / a dyncke voure


a 1 He word of the Lozdecame onto vnto me ſaxingẽ: Chou tonne or man: wych


to the lande of Jcrael: ye tail


elle: lande
bs e E
chat dwell therin. And the


they wyll contidze, that they be an vnobe⸗ cyttes that now be well occupped / wall be
dpent houtholde. Chr gere that thou halt voyde / and the lande defolate: that ve maxe
made redr to fipt wythall / halt thou beare undw / how that J am the Lowe.


out by fapze dape lyght / that ther maye le:


Yet came the woꝛde ofthe Lo de ontome Y


andehouthp leit halt go koꝛch allo at euen agayne/favinge:hou Conne of mG / what


*


intheir leaht / as a man doth when he flit⸗ maner ol byworde
en ee lande of Acrael / cavinge: Euch / tepnge chat


ſe /o beate thozowit the lame thung E thou the dare are lolacke in commenge / all the
tokelt vp in their light. As oz thytelt / thou vilxons are ofnone effecte: Cel them thers
Walt go kozth in the darcke. Prde thylace ß foze / thus la eth) 07d God: J wel make


thou le not the earth / ko J haue made the a p bywoꝛde to ceãdle / lo that it


Wewtolẽ bnto the boule of Brac How as be comenippledin Flracl.


tl Gmaunded me fo Aded he gere
Sen mabe op buy dene at hade chat euer thpnge which bath bent


4 A bad made redrebꝛought


(
At euen I bꝛake downe an hole thozow ehe pꝛophecyed / albe tuikylled. Chere hall no
wal with myhande: a when it was darrke / pilpon be in vapne / nether enp pꝛophecre


Itoke the gere bpd my whoulderg / and bare kapie amonge the chp!


them out in their light.


A


And inthe moznynge / came thewozdeok Ithe Lozde (peake / it wal be perfourmed/


the Lozde pntome, lapinge; Chou tonne of and not be fackeincommpnge.


man / yt aise b trowarde hou tole athe
ayes what doch ehouthere? Chen houtholve)wyll Zocuple lome thynge / and

oꝛde God: his pus bzynge it to pate / lapeth the L oꝛd God. And
ele rulerg at Fer the wozde ofthe Loꝛde cam vnto me taping:
alem /a all the houle ol Acrael/ that dwell Beholde / thou donne of man: C


the / and
teſltbe Thus taper
niſhment toucheth eh


beboute ok


amonge them ell them J am poure thew Ffrael ſapein this maner: Cuch as koꝛ the
4 ionemipteas denden e ‘pal it hap⸗ Allenche he bath lene / it wyll be mans


ven onto pours


Wall
captpupte.ch


eltthatisam


alto / andgo into daxe oz it come to patte:¥s it tarre of pet / $


unge vou, thenge thathe propbecpeth . Cherfoze faye


: Hatt lade his woulders inthedarche/aget ‘onto chem: pus kapeth the Lose God: al
shim atoape.e tall bzeake domne $ wall / my wozdes dall nomoze be dlacke: Loke
bo carpe tut therthozow: He wall couer what J lpeake / p tame tall come to pade/


his face / that he le not the ground


e withhis lapeth the Loꝛde.


Depes. Hy irne wyl ¥ tpꝛede out vpon him / debt g fale pꝛoppetes)
n . aa ere ae te
ertes. >


xa


Aan in che lande of the Caldees: wüpch he h.
wall not ſe / a pet thall he dre there. 48 fo2 at

helpers / a all his Hoſtes / chat be about
bim / J wyll lcatre thé towarde all the wyn
des / a dꝛawe out a wearde after them. So
when J haue lcatredthem amöge the Bea le


Che. riiſ. chapter.

He woꝛde of che Loꝛde came vnto z
t me / lapinge: E hou tonne of man.
Speake prophecie agapnt choc
= prophets /that pꝛeachin aa


J Fieael,


@fape thou bnto them that pꝛophecye out oF
their awne hertes: Beare g wopde old 1070/
thus lapeth ? Loꝛde God: Po be bntothole
kollſh piophetes / p folowe their awne fprete
and ipeake where ther ſe nothing. D Ft
Deng el thp prophetes are lpke the tores bpon
iin bee ger, © debe lebe Korthey ſtande noten Fgappes
shersotmenes ether maße they an edge fo the houle ot
Kad nds doch Icrael / z men might abde § parel in d daye
theirvorbele dk d Loz. Ka pne chinges thep fe/etel ſpes /
bet ich comapntenc bert peach ynges wih al. Che
deren keene Lo7de(Cape her hath poke tt han in verp
och od and ine dede the Losdbathnot lent them. Mayne vi ·
Cane tere lrans haue pe ene / andlpolen kalle pꝛophe·
kannn, ches / when pe lape:the Londe hath tponen it
awapes

feat ce Gos where ABZ neuer fapde te,
| .yptocke 5 lente abo des be the Lope Gab: 6e
unte , caule poure woꝛdeg be bapne / d pe fehe out
a thep ini Ipes:Beholve Z wil bps vou / lapeth p Loꝛd.
Seb. Se the Ppne bandes al come bya che propyetes
denn bete Bloke out bapne thinges / z preach lies they
daß ye under chal not he in the coucell or my people / ter
dad babe wnttẽ in p boke ok $ houle ok Icrael / nether
dene i kaßth. hall thep come in the lande ok zlrael that pe
bre. bib. MAKE nnowe howw that Fam the Lo d Goo,
S605 . Zino ehat for thrscaulerther baue digceauen
my people /andtolve thé of peace / where no
peace was. One letteth bp a wal / andthey
|. Matto. v. e. datvbe it wlowwſe clape. Chertoze tellthem
which dawhe it with bntempered moꝛter /p
kcal fal oz there bal come agreat wower
ol rapne / greate Cones wall kalbpontt / and

a lobe tozmeo al byealie it /
los ſto ĩme ot wynde thal bꝛea hie it / lo that
wal come dawne. Sphal it not then be lalde
0 Yous where is now the moꝛter / that ye
dawbedlt with all: Therkoze thus layech the
Pode God: well bzeake out in my wꝛolh
Full dffpleatuve witha ſto mp wynde / lochat
Herre ae debe
ower of ta ale font inmpwzathy/
to deſtrope withall.


As kor the wall /that ye haue dawbed with
1 wil bzeake it downe /
mabe it eauen e grounde: co thatthe

ther of Malremouc/ Ait wal fal
pee s pe Youre lelues chal perpch inß middelt
cherol co lerne pou ko: tobnowe / that J am
che Lond. Thug wyil A perkouzme mp wrath
pon thys wall / and pon them that haue
batobed it well vntemperedmozter/ athen
wl Aare onto pou: che wallis gone / and
ee apd een
* oeglrae pa. othe
tte of YeruCatem n tobe out bpCions oF
peace Foz them / where as no peace is / fapeth
e
man) kettthy ol
ques pꝛophecpe out of their


a


Atonebert(:e lpeake thou prophecteagaint
‘ and iaxe: Thus laxethtbe Lord Gon:
*


Bk Czethiel.


i eda
Uy,
o be vnto vou / that Cole pplowes under
all arme holes / and bolſters nder ß headeg
both of ponge and oide / to catch fouics wyth
all. Foz whan ve haue gotten the toutes oF l. be.
mo people in poure capkrute / ve pionigte apicy aie
them lle / and dychonoure me comp people /
ko; an hand full ofbarly / and koꝛ a pece oF
bred: whan ve bp the kaules ol them chat
dbe not / and pꝛom̃es ipte to them / that lyue
not: chus ve dyllemble with my people/that
beleueth rouripes.

Whertoꝛe thus lapeth the Loꝛde God: Wes
holde /A will Slip bout ene / whee
wyth ve catch the Coules in Ayengesché welt
F take from poure armes / and let the totes
go / that ye catch in iyenge. Youre bolſterg
allo ill Iteare in peces / a delyuer my peo ·
ple out of poure hand lothartheywwallcome
no moꝛe in poure handes to be tpopled / and
ve Mati hnowe / that Jam the I ode. Seeing
chat wich poure ies pe diccomkoztetheherte
okthe rightuous whom A haue not ditcom⸗
kozted: Agarne: For lo noch as pe coꝛage Ote lll.
the hande of the wyckhed / lothathe maye not
turne kromhis wicked wape / and lyue:ther⸗
Eoze (hall ve type out nonloze banpte / ner
pꝛophecye youre awne gellingeg: fo: J wyl
delyuer my people out or poure hande /that
ve maxe hnowe / how that J am the Loꝛde.


CM je Lorde denyeth his worde to ö people for thelv
knnes lahe. Che dplpplers or the worde doth the
Torde Cometpine deccaue by falle prophetes. A come
korth oF them that ficdde vnto Wabpion.
¶ Che. xiiij. Chapter.


vurpo⸗


Jerufalem, The
~ purpofing to go tilt ſtombling inbigatwne
Michele, commeth toa Pꝛophet / ko to

alte councell atme thozow himꝛonto man

well J the Loꝛde geue antwere / vy mine

Cawne telle. J wyll et my face agaynſt that

man / a will male him to be an example for

other / pee d a comen bywoꝛde: and wyll rote

ih. Beg. 25h. bb bm Out or mo people/ chache map knowe /
30h. he. bowwthat J arnthe Lorde. And yk that B20.
phete be dylceaued / when hetelleth hema
wonde:then Athe Loꝛde myleikhaue dylcea⸗
6 uedthat Pꝛophet / s wyll ſtretch koꝛth myne
bande vpon him / to rote him out of my peo:

pie or Akraei:and they both walbe punpche

Dkoꝛtheit wyckednelle. Jccoꝛdyng to p cynn.
okhymthat alketh/ all the lynne of p Pꝛo·


¢ 00 · ß. d. Di
Jere. u.a.


ropherpe


be comfojten/as touching all the plat
See oa vpon Jerufalem.
Cher comfozte powt/ toben pe le their
ee
act 2
bene fosgaynt ſerulalem / as J dd / taxeth
che Loꝛde God.


Sihetrete apts that Jerutalem Walbebyente


Ahe ro. Chapter.
He worde ofthe Lozde came bnto.


me e


ber haue lo


loze oftended / la e Lozde God.
bene beni eu to fpeahe


Achargeittogothozow the lande: ko that. J toto ide re
tape downe man abeatt init / ¢ péthelethze


le wod OF the vpur tree is cal iu


aye te
bd pe one and thete batt hou offred vp bntotye / tobe


n that aren greate:thou halt gotten a maruelous
Suu pleafatit beutie / thy bꝛeſtes are come vp / chy
60 ea ote arte ig goodly growen / where as thou
Shunts, Ab“ wal nahen and bare atoze,
ir the Now whan J wente by the / a loked y
dealer B che: beholde, thp tyme was come / rer euẽ the
Jelcpd meine to vowe the. Chet lpꝛed J my clothes
Ant erer duet to couerthpDélvonetties pee made
rere thermos an ote onto tye / and marped my Cele wyth
Lt e vple the lapeth the Loꝛde God) and ſo thou beca ·
saan ba Smet mene awne. Chen wathedg the weth
Al r ye water (and pourgcochy bloudesromeye, 3
pape of their anopnted the with ole / I gave the chaunge
Wb. ind moFrapmentes /¥maoe the hues of Carus
Timer e tether : Fgvshed d aboute w white lylcke /
or cb clothed the with kerchues / J deckedthe w
inprptumene COMP appareil / I put rynges vpon thyken⸗
upauplon, gers: a chayne aboute thy necke / cpanges
Ae both tete Hon thy koze heade / eare rynges bpö thyne


athertescares / andlet a butikullcrownebpon chyne che land


Smee end. CHUS wad ehou deckte with lylüerg
grrupng chelr golde / a thy rapmẽt was ol kyne white lyine /
sone Aceghtt; Of nedle woꝛke ¢ Of dyuerſe colours.
d 58 Chou dideſt eate nothynge but lymnels /
Taran op bonn g opiemarnelons goodly watt thou
mere Che ¢ beutiłuſ / pee euẽ a very Suenẽ watt
denen lo moch / that thy⸗ beuty was pong ol
ety bis aged onge the Bevthen (toy thou walt excenẽt
de net oe in mp beukp/irpch L put ppon P faperh ehe
mothersiatter Loꝛde God. But thouhalt put conkidẽce in
bund match atone beuty/¢ plapeothe harlot / when
une: which thou haddeſt gotten che à name. Chou halt
Aae wh committe whozdome / wrth all that werke
2210 . by the / bat kulfled their delpzes:pee thou
ait doch a deckte thyne aulters ther with / where bps.
frets Seelehour mpaieett Eulfpllehyne who dome / of
Aukelptres in loch a kachion / as neuer was done / ner Mal-
appt be. The goodly oꝛnamentes a qe wels which
Sallen CA gque the ol myne awne golde and lyluer /


lee ouer⸗ Bat thou tallen and made the mens pmages


Welti, *9ELOE/E commptted woa dome wethall.
tells uplery, THY garmentes of druerke colours halt


piety.
- W/etwere veo thou tahentandvechte them therinith:nt
ein. pune aly ble gtconteletitpou tecbetopetben.eBp


the de ene


Ie
geri irg meace which 2 gaue the as tymnels/ople s
Ser ale. Gonp:(co kedeche withachcharhalt chou tect


Cher was no bekoze them / ko: alwete tauoure. ches


han butonetp came allo to pade / fayeth che Loꝛde God:
Fan eee Thon halt ta Gaeta fonnese daugh
> cers whom thou haddeſk begotten onto me:


Wot bis merethett meate. Js this but a mall whozdome


er be of ehtne(tHinckett ehou)that thou derem


Kaen chrldzen am geuelt them auer tobe bent


er pee bnto then: And pet in afl thesbhmpnacions
dee fg and toboztomte thou batt not remembed 6


bal také thy garmẽtes ol druerle colouis


eben


medol

played

which mi

rracpon fd
Aldecs / and
pet thy luſt not latilc o e Fcite
cumcyple ſäpeth the Loꝛde God)
ſeynge chou doeſt allthete thinges / thou pres
cyoug whoze: burldpnge typ ttewes at the
head of euerp ttrete/ @ thy bzodell houtes
all places: Chou batt not bene as an other
whoꝛe / that maketh booſte ol her wynn
but as a wiket bꝛeaketh wedlocke / tats
other in ſteadẽ or her hulbonde. Spftes arẽ


Cherfoze peat)
O thou batiot:


dome wpch all thy louers /andweth allthe
Jools of thy abbompnacyons in thebloude
DFtHy chyldzen/ whom chou halt geuenthés
Beholde therkoze / J well gather togecz er all
thy louerg onto whom thou batt Ly
leite comen: pee and allthem whom thou fas
udureſt / and euerꝑ one that thou hatelt: and
wyll dilcouer thy Hamme beloe the / chat ther.
all mape le thykrichrnes. *

Mozeouer / will tudge z as a bzeaker ot
wedlocke anda murthiner / and recompẽce
the thine awne bloude in wꝛath and gelou⸗
c J wil geue the ouer in to their power / pe
hal bꝛeane downe the ſtewes / and


ner and


eh,


wape then he
ename


0


bzodell houtes: they tall Grype the out
o thy clothes / all thy fapze & beutprull Je⸗
Lene, erb wels Mall ehep take kram che, ata letehe tye
f. 88% ru b naeh ebave:pee thep wal vainge the come
5 people bponthe / which hall Hone / a Mave
tte downe wrth theirtweardes. Cher wall
burne vp th houles / and punych the in the
Crght of many wemen. chug well J make
thy whoꝛdome ta cealle / lo that thou ſhalt
geue out no mo rewardes. 5
Shulde J make my wꝛathto be till, cake
ni geloulp kromthe / be content /a nomoze
to be dylplested⸗leing thou remembzeſt not
the dapes of thy pouch / but halt pꝛouoked
meto wzath in allchele thynges? Beholde
chertoze / J well baingethyne awne wapes
bpd thynebeade/fapett the Loge Bod.yow
be it /I neuer dyd onto the / accoꝛdyng to the
wyckedneſle ¢ all chr abbompnacpons..6es
holde / all they that vle comen pꝛouerbes /
Shall ble this pꝛouerbe alloagayntt d: coch
& mother / loch a daughter.

Chou art euenthymotherg awne daugh⸗
ter / that hath cat or hirhoulband o hir chtl-
deen: Yee thou art the lyſter of thy tyſters /

which koztoke their hulbandes ¢ cheir chpl-
den. Youre mother ia a Cethrte / and youre

Father an Amospte. Chyne elden lpſter is
Samaria / the andher daughtersthacdwell
pon thy lelt hande.


Jeru en


eeh via


Butthyrögeſ liter that dwelleth on thy
Tyght hande / is Dodoma ¢ her daughters,
Yethalk thou not walked atter their wapes /
7 abbompnacpons; but in


all thy waxes thou batt bene moze cozrupte
Benes fen iu ede u Capt Lape
God: Sonoma thy kicker w her daughters /
bath not done focuclt/ as thou ¢ thy daugb⸗
ters. Beholde / the lynnes ol thy fptter So⸗
doma were thele Pꝛpde / fulnetic ok meate /
aboundaunce a Jdilnelle:thele tyynges had
Wee hir daughters. Belpdes that / they rea⸗
ched not theit hande to the pooze a ned / but
were yꝛoude / and dyd abhompnable eg
befoze datt Herſir bach Hamer tobe
Gemerlr. ? Ihad bene it. Hether bath Damatia done
Zert. ih. Falk ok chp Cynnes pee chou haft exceaded
Barz ofa seeed des
0 jompna:
houbat done / thou halt madethplpters


Sorts tor Ceivcapepuyte mametythe
ue sonoma aberdaugotees:ebe capt
Urte of Damarta andherdaught

“Bagge them agapne/fo went Falco bzynge


erg: J will ches towar!


he Prophecye


her daughters w thylelkand the daughters /
walbe brought agaxne to youre olde eſtate.
When thou wald in thy pꝛrde / a befoze thy
wyckedneſle came to ipght : thou woldeſt not
heare tpeake of thy fyter Sodoma / vntyll
che tente 2 che Oris with all their tow-
nes /a the Pbplpiipnes with all thative rota
aboute them / bꝛoughethe to dame a conku⸗
leon: that thou mpabtett beare thrne awne
kbichynes a abhonunacrõ / ſa veth the Lode.
Fot thus lapeth the Loꝛde God: J Hulde
(bp rrght) deale with the / as thou halt done.
Chou haſt del pyled the both / bioken the
couenaunte. Meuerthelede) J wrllremébze
the couenaunt that I made wth the in che
routh / in Co moch 5 ik chalbe an eueriating
couenaunt: fo that thou alfo remembze the
wapes / a be achamed of the :then walt thou
rectaue of me chy eder a poõger lyſterg / whõ
Fj well make thy daughters / and that belrde
thy couenaunt. and to J wyll venue my co-
Sarg ange edge weed
am the 8

bpoñ it / be achamed / andexcule thine awne
conkul pon nomoze: when J haue kozgeuen
peel 1552 God.


fee
png 2
OF the parabie.


Sie warde of the Lozde came vnto
Ame / cayinge: Chou konne of man:
ut koch a darcke kreakrnganda
Pe eas parable onto che boule of Acraei /
Giape: Chus lapeth the Lowe God: Chere te
came a great Aegle with greate wynges ange great
pee with mpghtve longe wynges / and ful OF wpnges is tnd
kethers of dyuerle coldures / pon the mot deckende
3 11 — —— a can pat ah e
tree / a brake of the toppe o 7 4
cargebitinto he lanbeot Cansan avert ine
acpte of marchatites, He tobe alfoa bꝛaũch
ofthe lande / a plted it ina trutetull groũd /
he bꝛoughtit vnto greate waters / g let it as
a wyllre tree herby. Chen drdit growe /@
haga greate bynettocke / but lowe byte
esthus there came of it a vyne / andi
zought kosch blollomes / alpꝛed cut bzaun⸗
ches. But chere was another Legle / agreat
one) whrchhadgreate wynges ¢ many fe
e
an 2
water bys krutes: He⸗


agarnothr captiniteamongethé:thatthou betyoe gi


G take thyne awne confultondps the /
and he a cbamed of all that thou batt done / 6
ep to comforte them, Thus thy fptters (names


Te) addnas ber daughters: Damaria and


fone)
bene profperesthali not bis totes


Jaulalem, OF Czethitl.


Mf which the UPC e
une: bp the bp will A plante it: that it mape bzynge fozth
1

U


oute his frute be bꝛokẽ᷑ ot / hys grene bꝛaũ⸗
ches withere a fade awape: pec dhout ether
ſcrõg arme oꝛ many people / chal it be pluc ·
hed pp byß rotes. Beholde / tt was planted:
Wall it pꝛolperetherkoze. Shall it not be
dered vp and wythered / pee euen in the wu ·
tinge out ok hig biollomes / as (oone ag the
zp talk wynde bloweth⸗ N

Mo eouer / p woꝛde ot Loꝛd cam vnto
me faping: Speak to that tre warde bout
holde:hno we pe not / what tyele thenges do
lygnytye: Teil them: Beholde, the Benge ol


Babylon came to Jerulalem / and tone the F


Ange andhys Pzynces / and ledoe them to
Babylon.

He tole of the aynges ene / and made a

rouenaunt wyth hym / and toke an othe ol

hym: Che Pꝛynces of the iande tote he with

bpm allo, that the lande myghtbe holden in

Cubleccpd / and not to rebelle/but Repe the

couenaunt / and kulkyll it. But he fell krom

hem / a lent hys Embadytours into Egypt

chat he myght haue holes and moche peo⸗

ple. Shuive that pꝛolpere? Shuldehe be

hepte Cafe that doth ſochthinges: Oz chuld

he elcape that bꝛea nech bis couenaunt: 8

trulp as J Ipuc lapeth the Lore God: He

Echalldpe at Babpion , in che piace where the

Ayng dwelleth that made him King: whole

othe he hath delppled / and whole couenaũt

he hath broken Hether Hail Pharao wyth

bes greate holt ang multptude of peopie /

mapntepne hum in the warre: when they caſt

vp dpchesandict op bulmozhes conettrope

moch people. Foz ſeing hehach delppledthe

othe / and bꝛonen the couenaunt (where as

he ret gaue hrs bande thervpon) and done

16 all there thy ges / he ſhal not elcape.

eas e Losde .

pas 4 lpue/ A wyll bꝛynge myne othe

chat he hath delpiled / anom couenallt that

he hath bꝛonen / vpon hre swne head. J

wyll cad mpnetaboute him / and catch hym

ine parne.Co Babylon will J carpe hin /

there wn J punnvth bym / becaule of the

Greate offence that be made me. As koꝛ thole

that fle krõ hym out ok the hoot they walbe

Aayne with the lwearde. Che relydue ſalbe

ee Ccatredtowarde allthe wyndes : and pe Mall

betap tes knowe chat J the Lorde hauelpokentt.

baicheonders Chus lapeth the Lore God: wyfl allo

Aube ourciae tante bra bꝛaunche from anhye Cedze tree /

Zan bys bye . wyllket iels tate the bppermolt twygge /

be of sung har Pet és but tendge and plante iebponan

byll: amel / vpon the hye hyll or Std


twygges / and geue frute / and be a greate


5 Cedꝛe tree:fo that all maner of koules mape


lbt,
And all the trees of the teme can knowe
that J ehe Loꝛde haue brought downe the
hpe thee / and lett the lowe tree bp: that F
haue dzped vpthe grene tree / and made the
drretres to lozpcp: Kuen J the Lozde that
Spake it / haue allo brought ic to palle. 8
Che Herorth that euerp man wall veacebis atone
pune. Co bpm that amendethy is Cauacpon promes
fcb. sDeeth is propbecped to the rpgherwele/ wöreh
turneth backe From the ryght wape,-

Che. rbitſ, Chapter.

De wozde oF the Lo de came vnto

me / on this maner: what meane
re by his comen pꝛouerbe / chat z
<9 ve icin the läd of zcrael / taping:
Che fathershaue eaten fouregrapes/ a the
chbldzensteth are let on edge: Astulpas 3
leue / lareth the Lope cod / ye ſall vir this
Dpwozdenomoze in Jlrael.

ebolde/ail foutes are mrne. I vne as 5 ag
father is mne / to is the tonne mpne allo.
Che louie that lpnne th / walldre. Ataman
be godly / s do § thynge that is equal and
ryght / he eatethnot dpa tue hylles he lytteth
not hys eyes bp to the Jools of Jtrael⸗he de⸗
Fpleth not his nerghbourg wykẽ she medleth
with no menſtrudus woman he greueth no
bodythe geueth his detter his piedge agapne
he taketh none other mans good bp vpolen⸗
cethe parteth his mete with thehonarpe: be
clotheth the naked he lendeth nothynge bpd
blurp.he taketh nothynge ouer: he wpthdza⸗
weth his bande krom doinge wꝛongethe häd⸗
leth katthkully betwirte man a man: he wale
het in my commaundementes / and kepeth
my lawes /a perkourmeth them fapthfullp:)
This ig a vightuous ma / he Mall furelpipue
fapeth the Loꝛde God. 8 .

It he now gett a lonne / chat is amutthu⸗
rer /a (heder of bloude: vk he do one of there
thinges though he do not ah he cateth vpon
the hilles he dekpleth his neghbours wykeꝛhe
greueth the pooze ¢nedp:he robbeth v ipop⸗
leth:he geucch not ö detter his pledge agayne
he lülteth vp his exes onto Jdolg/ ¢ medietty
with abhominabie thinges : he lendech bpd
vlurp /a taketh moze duct. Shall thrs man
lpue: He thal not liue. Sepnge he bath done
all thele abbompnacyons /be Mail dye bys
Warze mat ny fore alta / that

pethts man get a tonne alro/

bach all hs fathers tonnes ihpchhe hach Loe l.
done: and keareth nether doth Coch phe: Ha- Ssech 351.8.
mely/be eateth not pon themofitaynes:be

Iytteth not byseves vp tothe Idols of Sle

räclthe detplech not his neghbours wyle r he

vexeth no man: he kepeth no mans e:

he nether tpopleth mer robbeth eny man : he

dealeth bis meate with the hungrye: he cloe

cheth the naked: he oppretteth not the pooze:

he receaueth no 1 —

e


Iltael,


he kepeth mylawes / a walcketh in my co-
maundementes: Chys man ſhal not dpe in
bps fathers lynne / but Wall Irue wythout
' kaple. 48 ko: bis father:becaute be oppzetted
and ſpopled hys bꝛother / and dyd wyckedly
e
not hye tonne beare bys fathers tynne?
bein rae tone equite N
bight bath hepte all my comaundement
1 — them: therkoze ‘bal he lpue in dede.
Che lame ſoule that lynneth / cal dre. Che
_fonne Hail not bearethe kathers offence / ne⸗
ther thal the father beare the fonnes offence.
Cherpghteoutnes ofthe 1 thalibe
Hp him / g $ wicheones off wicked walbe
hpon him keit allo. But pr the ongodly wyll
av Shall not kürne a waxe kr all his lynnes that he hath
iad 15 eld saree npr ped
“a the thynge that juail ani 8
0 doutles he cal ipue / a not de. As foz al
gabe aineps doll 1 t dhe. A foz all hig
e e enen de dme eee
och likes cl L 2
Lettplye ? God hath done he Wal rue Kor haue J enpplea⸗
fo cossenet f, dure in che death of a fener apeth § Lorde
ter call agapue God: but ratherthathe conuerte / andipuce
dio forgeuce F Agapne: pl the ryghtuoug turne a ware
nta aud pu⸗ krom his epgytuoutnes / and do intqutte / ac⸗
avd cher covdpng to all the abominacpons / that the
areata wpcled man noth: (all Yelpue? dil d rah.
the keune/ but tuoumnes Phe hach done cal not be thought
not the punich⸗ vpon:but in the kawte that he hath offended
wichall and in the lynne that he hath done /
ete ene ee. fonne that bebar
peares pufgch⸗ be challdre.
ent (ascher And pet ve laye: uch / the wave ol $ Lo
beat) fat we ig noe adikertt. Feste thertoge ve pute of
AupdE IM PUTA Icrael: 18 not iny wave ryght : Oz / are not
for fo when youve wapestatyer wiched: Whena tyah-
See wall AnD MEDC) pty nee
thys be not to Cuot and me 8
mock with god he muſt dretherln: pee koche vnrrgotuoul⸗
Gola wt ot hes hace bath dame mu he de. dene:
halle mocha when che wychenmanturneth aware rom
a o woth seqal aoe Oa
do (as they at the e I
Bg Chinn tna aie
membzeth him fe
duch rü, che ongoptones ebatbe hathbled / he wall
fo 6 he nether lyue / and not dye.
geucmetomor And yet lapeth the houle ok Jergel: cuch /
ere ware dee Pee bete e
fore g bet not wapes purpaht/ S pe boule oF Aergell Are
once thynche not poure wayes rather vnequall: Bs foz
on imp un me / J wyll iudge euery man / acco:dynge to
Surelp be bAtD his Wa pes / O pehoulg of Alrael, faeth the
membaunce, 1 Ode 50d. her koze be conuerted / a turne
And he wyll pou cleane krö all pour wyckednedle /fo chall
not tbincke on chere no lynne do pou harme. Caſt awape
brd one ard ers pou all poure öngodlpneſke that ve haue
ber OFFI? af done: mal zou new hertes g a new pete.


The Pꝛophetye


herkrute, alte; bz0kE off 5
her krůte / her ſtronge . ther i


Whertoge will pe de / O pe houſe of Ilrael: fremewp ths
leynge J haue no piealute inp death of him me
that opety /fapeth the Lord God. Curne YOU geren man te
then / and ve tall lpue. bardö far !
and after hange him vp. For he myght cape: Sp. J forgaue von youre
thekt but not pour hangpnge which is due vito pour theft. So
pardon wolde thep be lothe to haue that fpz@ ymagpned tt, 35.
Apnge which is büt a man be moare fapth Full than to deale (0 with
12 Pielonerb / whö he forgeucth: ow thutde God then which tour


euenlꝑ father / which iseuen goodnes it lelfe / haue Cocheatorteiy |


fapnedrand buperfect forgeuenes/ that. uld after punch Wuther
GF wyll J now (peake no moare / leſt pe chulde bapipe Cmell/that thys


.


folucpon were pmagpned to ppche mennes puriies / thorow Baie
pente / Pirige grotes / Crentalies /peare myndes / moneth menden zc
Betaute that althoughe God can ¢ mape t᷑ aꝛgeue the ſynne / pet mu
foch thynges obtapne the forgenenes of the punichmet due the rund:
Dt 5 Preltes benekpces were not Cufficiet foz the to lye oty wih
out to ch ppltagesoz pet that the poze people coulde b any other mes /
ne be mpiched from that thynge / wyerwytg they / tetr wpues / hex
boucholde and cheldxen chulde tpue,
he. xtr. chapter.
Che captynytye of Jchoahaz ¢ oF Fchoacin tslige
outipeprotestpe of etyeoefeeusem tat i
out the prot
pane ‘he mplerpe therof that is pretent,
Fey Mit mourne thou Foz the princes ol
traci, fare: Neberfozelape che
E NN mother chat Iponede amonge the
ZaNivons , enozithenber vonge ones
amidge the tons whelpes? One ol her whel⸗
pes the bꝛought vp / andit became a lyon sit
ſerned tolpople / and todeuoure folke. Che
Heathen herde ol hym / and toke him in thelr
einen bꝛought him in chapnes onto the
lande o .
Now when the damme ſawe that all her
hope and cõloꝛth was awape / che toke ano ·
ther olher wheipes / and made a lyon olhim:
which wente amonge the lyons / ¢ became a
learce lyon: lerned to ſpopie and to deuoure
kolcke:he deſtroped their palaces / and made
therz cytreß wate. In fo moch that the
whole lande and euerp chynge therin / were
korg. con very bopce of bys
roaringe.
Chen came the Heathen together on eue⸗
ry lpde oute ofall countrees agapnt hem /
läpedtheir nettes koz him / and toße hem
their pptte. Do they bounde him with ab-
nes / and bꝛought himto the kynge ok Bab
lon: which put him in pꝛelon / thãt his bopce
wulde nomoze be herde vpon the mountax⸗
nes of J lrael. Is foz thy mother / che is lxne
abpnein thy bloude / planted by the water


Cpve:her frutes and bzaunches are growers
out ol manp waters / ber ſtalzes were fo
ſkröge z me might haue made anes therot
fo2 officers: the grew lo hie in her ſtalbes.


Sowhanmentawe that che excended | 1


hevath s multytude of her braunches / che
was roted out in dicpleature and caſtdowne
to thegrounde. Chee aſt wynde dꝛyedvp


Ol Eztthiel.


Ilrael,
wythered and bꝛent in the tyꝛe. But now the
2 is pianted in che wyldernelee / in a dwe and
pe grounde. And there is a lpꝛe gone
out ok her ttalches / which bath brent vp her
bꝛaunches andher frute:fo that ſbe hach no
mo ſtronge ſtalckes /tobe ſtaues foz offy
cerg. This is a pptcous a mylerable tinge,
Che Lorde denieth that he ropltantwere the when
Shen payerfor the offence of vnkindnes which he here
obiesteth. He piomeleth that his people chel returne
from captpnptye. Wp the wodd that ſhulde be bent
s lignitied the burnengt of Jerulalem.
¶ Che. xx. Chapter.
Hthe . roi. peare the. r. dape ol the
moneth / it happened / that cer⸗
tapne ol the elders of Ilrael came
Bil onto me) kozto athe cdumcell at 5
Lozde/e lac them downe by me. Chen came
che wode of the Lozde vntomeon this ma ·
ner: Conne ol man: fpcate onto the cl
berg ok Acrael /a ſape vnto thé: Chus lapeth
$ 107d Gon:Are pe comebpthertoathe eny
Chynge atmesds truly as A Irue(laveth the
Lobe) J wyll geue pou no antwere, Wpit
thou not repzouc them ( thou ſonne of man)
wilt thou not reproue thé 2 Shewthẽ p abs


brd t. b.
5 Thus larth the Lose God: In the dave whe
| beth eter bp mpne bande vpon
e Fede or the houle of Jacob / a ſbewed my
felfe onto them in the jande of Eg ppte: Yee
when J lylte vymyne bande ouer them / and
lapde: q am the Loꝛde youre God / euen in ß
dape that yet gymyne hande ouer them / to
Dapnge ien nieve lande or a gypte / into a
Hande thist's! Gad pꝛoupded fo them / whych
Howeth vith mplehe & hon / isa plealaũt
lande amine all other: Chen fayde A onto
them: uit u waye euery man the abhomp⸗
nacpong ih he hath beEoze hym / and dekyie
clues with the qdoleg ol Egypte /

oꝛde poure God.
vebelledagaynſt ine / and wold


ute
15 eto caf aware ruerpman the
{ 5 eyes / and to fozlane


5 Dine. bh.


Idoles ar Egppte. Chen J made me to
nip ün⁰gnacpõ ouerthüm / and to ſa·
kickye nip sazath bpon them: yer euen in the
he lande of Egpptr. But J wold

nat do it / vo my names lane: that it chulde


whom fie yhmelt /a amdge whom F (hewed

mz felfe virco them / that J torre biyngethẽ
vu ot the lande ofegppte No w when had

carped ien nut ofthe lande o? gyntẽ / and

xx. xi. Deoughe chens into the wyldernelfe: J gaue
5 ld. v. temp cunumundementes alhewedtte
<b. mp laws: ch wholo kepelh call lyue in
ha chem A guue them allo mpholpdapes! tobe
derbe. à tohe bet iofrte me @ thẽ / a the tbyto know /
. xxxů. c that I am tye Lode/which haloweth them.


not be bntzulinued betoze theheathẽ / amüge


lui,


And pet the houle of Itrael rebelled agapnſt
mein the wildernelle / ther wold not waſche
in mp commaundementes / they haue cat
awape mp lawes (which whole kepeth duly
lpue inthen) andmy Sabboth daes haue
thy gveatiy onbatowen, 5

Chen J made me to poure out iy indyg⸗
nacyon vpõ them / a to conſume them in the
wyldernelle. Yet J wolde not do it / lo: my
names Catse:let it chuld be dychonoured be⸗
foze the Heathen, rom the which J hadca⸗
rpedthemawape. Butz Cwoze vnto them in
the wyddernelſe / that J wolde not binge thé
in to the lande / which J gaue them: a lande
that floweth with mricke and hon / and is a
plealure of all landes:and that brcaule they
rekuſedmy lawes / and walcked not in mx
commaundementes / but had vnhalowed me
Sabbathes / ko their herte was gone atter
thew pooles.Heuerthelede myne epe (pared
Chem / lo that J woldenotbtterty ape the /
and conlumethem inthe wyldernes. Moꝛe⸗
ouer / J layde vnto their ſonnes in the wyl⸗
dernelle:walche not in the ſtatutes of youre
kozefathers / hepe not their oꝛdpnaunces ¢


ume big tis
Sec


Grech xvih h


hompnacpons of their kozekatherg / a tell the: dekyle not pourtelues with their podles / Foz


Jamche Lozde poure Gov, But twalche in Ero, zvtexrxt

inp ſtatutes / kepe my lawes e do them ha⸗

lowe my Spabbathes:fo2 they are a ton bes ume. rv. u.

twixte me a vou / tgat ve niape now how 6
ann the Lorde, Motwpthſkandynge / ther
lonnes rebelled agaynt nie allo: they walc⸗ F

hednotinmp (tatutes ther hepte notmp tas S :

weg to ful pl che (which be $ doth Mall ipue Momap.à.

Enchemnetherbalowen they my Spabboth

dapeg. Chen J made me agapne to poure

out my indygũacion ouer them / a to latilkie

my wach por them in the wyldernelle. Ne.

uerthelelle J wythdzewe mp hande koz my

hames fabe / leſb it thuidebe vnhalowed ae

möge theleathẽ / bekoꝛe whd Ahad bought

them kozth. J pit vp mpne bande ouerthem

allo in the wywerne lle / chat J wolde lcatre

them amonge the Heathen / ſtrowe them

amonge the nacpong: becaute they had not

kepte my lawes / but calt alldem commaũ⸗

dementes / bnhalowed my Habbathes / and

Ipfe vp their eyes totheit fathers Jdoles.

esa 7 Wees ai bap ge woe

mẽtes not good / a la weg thoꝛow the which

they chulde nor ipue/ g J bübalowed them in SFI
heir atone gyktesewhe f appoynted foz my

Lelke all their kyzſtboꝛneſto malte them delo⸗
late:that they now /how that Jam


the Lorre, a
Therkoze (O thou lonne of man) tell the


boulfe ok Alrael, thug lapeth the Lose God: E
Belpde allchrs / voure Eozefathers haue vet
blalphemed me moze / and greatly offended
agapnſt me: Foꝛ atter 3 had bꝛought them in
BD tothe


Jerulalem.
Anon. .

8 tothe lande / that g pꝛomyled to geue theni/
when they lawe euerphvebpll a an  thicke

trees:thep made there theit oltryngs / a pꝛo⸗

uocked me with their oblacrons ;mahynge

Cwete fauoures there / and poured cut their
deinckolttinges. Chen Jacked chem: what

haue ve to do Wall / that pe go thyther? and

therkoꝛe is it called the bee place onto thys

dape. Wherkoze/ Ipeane vnto 9 hcule ot gl.

racl: Chus lapeth the Lose God: ve are tuẽ

as vnclene ag poure forefathers / a cõmtte

whoꝛdome allo with their abhompnacions.

rem. rtr. 4 In all pv oure pooled, where onto pe bꝛunge
ute. rh. d. h Tour oblacrög / ato whole honoure ve bürne
pin v. Foure chpidzen: pe defple voure lelues / euen
den vnto this dare: how darre pe then come / and
4% g. 5 . Alle any queliton at me: O pehoutholde of


SparagrbigaPtaeleAs krulras A iptie(rapeth che Lobe th


God) ve get no ancwere of me: @ as fo? the
thynge that ve go aboule / it Mall not come
to palle / whete ag ye Capes we will he as che
Peathen / a do as other people in the lande /
wod and ſtone wyll we wozchpppe.
F. As truly as I lxue / ſaveth the Loꝛd God /
mi teilte wyll rule pou wyth a myghtye
ande / with a ſtretched out arnie / a with lu ·
dignaciõ poured out ouer vou:⁊ will bꝛinge
POU olit othe nacpons and landes / wherin
ve are Ccatrenrand gather pou tegeiher with
amygbtpe hande with a ſtretched out arne
S with indignacpon pouredout bpon pours
wyll bꝛynge vcu in to the wyldernelle ol ige
people /a there J wyll realon with vou face
toface. Line as J punpihed poure kozela ·
thers in the wyldernelle / lo wplt J puneſh
vou allo tapeth ) L ode God. 55 binge
vou bnder myluricdtcct / enderthe bonde
okthe couenaũt. Che tozlaners allo andthe
tranfgregours will I take krõ amonge vou /
@ bꝛynge them out of the lande of youre ha ·
Dyptacpo:as for the lande of Brack / they Mal
not come init: that they maxe knowe / how
that J am the Loꝛde.
Cn. f. crrr. b, Go now then (lapeth the Loꝛde God) ve
Egeth rida Houle or Ilraelſcact awape /a deſtrope eue⸗
ty man his Fooles:then hall peheare me / a
nomoze blalphemempholpnanie with pour
ofttinges and Idoles. But byõ np holp hill /
euen öpon the pe byl! or Jrael Hail alithe
Houle of Ilrael and allthät ts in the land
Dutero. xh. a worth pppet me: and in the lame place wyl
nips, Fauoure the / and there wylt I requyze pout
heaueolkrpngeg / and the kyꝛikunneg or pour
oblacpons / with all poureholy chines.
Iwill accepte poure twete fauonve/ whe
I bunge you fromthe nactons / and gather
ane out ol the landes / wherin ye be
Gleatred that Y mape be alowed in you be»
kozethe Heathen / and that ye mape knowe /
chät Jam the Lone / whych baue bought


The P


a reh
grene ttecs bg
the


thedeReuccpon of che chployenof Ammon. After
laughter oF other / at it lott the Lorde prea
deeth vnto Mabuchedonoty; hym elke.


¶ Che. xxj. chapter.
| He toozde oF the Loꝛdcame to me 3
ſaringe: chou ſonne of man / let


: alent,
a —


Ibe dil⸗ if


Clcoured that it maxe be bright, O / the de⸗

nat ne rea · ſtropẽge ſtat ot mp ſonne / Hal being do wne
e ner dl al woode „Pe bach pu hrs kwearde to the
beer digbtinge / p goodholde maye be taken of it.
. btb epeaafeoe This (wearde is thatpencd a dyght / chat it
if tonne and mape be geuẽ in to p hande ol p mandaper.
en, Ce Crie(D thou forme of man ghowie tor
deer bis wearde Mal lmpte mp people /a all the


the teybe he apnedotone to the grounde thozowthys
ome Di! Hwcarde, Smpte thou pon thy th page / ko
' Sat Gate Fypperfoze Huldnots plage a daf of ludgm
b wod Dcome: Pzophecp thou fonne oF ma / E lmpte
te: Shaut Chine andes together: make p fwearde two
thetrpbeoF quedged / pee make it thre edged / p manllapers
Mdeßrte all Cwearde / that lwearde ol the greate augh⸗
ter / which that fmpte them / euẽ in their pꝛe⸗
upchambzes:to make chem abached a kaynt
at the hertes / and in all gates to make fome
ok them Fall. O how bright and ſharpe is it /
how welldight a mete fo2 p laughter. Gett
the tolome place alone / ether vpon the right
band oz on the lette / whither fo euer thy face
turneth. J wil lmyte mp hãdes together allo
g latiltiẽ my wꝛothtull indignacpon: Euen
Athe Loꝛde haue fayde it.
Che woꝛde ok the Loꝛde came pet vnto
me sgapne fapenge: Chou tonne of man/


ede eu nder tmyPael-twbich wity mp people foal


* maße the cto fetes / that the kwearde of §


the face toivarde Jerulale Speake a


agarnſt the Sictuary /o piophe
ce agapnũ the lande of Alrael / fave to the
lande of Icracl:ꝙ hus ſapeth the Lode God:
Beholde/ J wyl bpon the / a well dꝛawe mp
lwearde out oF p Meath / a rote out of d both
therightuous athewyched. d einge then g
J wyll rote out of the both the rpghtuous €
wicked/therfoze han my lwearde go out of
bis death agapnſt an Fleth kr the noꝛth to;
the fouthithatall fied mar nom / how ß
Ithe Lozoe haue dzawen myſwearde out or
the ſheath / a it ſnall not be put in agerne.
Mourne therkoꝛe. O thou ſonne ot man
S thplopnes crack wichall/ pee mourne bit ⸗
teriy tos them t And pF chey ape / whertoꝛe


mourneſt thou⸗ Then tell themsfoz the tidin⸗


get that cõmeth / at the which al hertes hat
melt ſallhandes halbe letten downe all tos
maches Hall kapnte / c all knees al ware


kebble. Beholde / it commeth ¢ chalbe fulfpls


led / lapeth the Loꝛde God. i
Agarne/ the woꝛde of the Loꝛde came
bntome/fapinge:chou lonne or man / 12
phecye / and ſpeake: Thus ſapeth the L onde
God:fpeahe/$ twearde is ſharpened a well
tcoured. Dharpened is it to eee


ee


N


kynge of Babyion maye come. Both thele
ſtretes chall go out of one lande. He Mall let
bimbpa place / at the heade of ö Arete Malt
he chole hym out a cozner. Mane $ a ſtrete /
6 thetwearde mape come to warde abath
Solche Ammonites/ @ tothe kronge crtre oF
— Foꝛ the kynge ol Babylon Hatt
ande in the turnynge of the waye / at the
head of the two ſtretes: to aſke councell at
the lothelayers / caltinge the lottes wrth his


pra,
ute pvih b.
35


fy arowes to ache councel at the Adols / ande


loke in the lyuer. But the lothelapenge that


be maye let men of warre / to fmpte it wyeh a
greate nople / to crye out A larum to lett ba ·
kellrammes agapnit the gates / to graue bp
dyches / ato make bulwozkes,
Heuertheles / as koz p othelapenge / they
wal holde it but foz vanite / euen as though
a teſt were tode them: vee a theyihem lelud
vemembzethetr wyckednelee / co ß uta
Fiber mut betagen L wöne. Cherkone ſateth
che Loꝛd God: for lo moch as ve voure lelud
chewe pour offence / and haue opened poure


pucks


potas)


ve chalbe taken by violence.
O thou ſhamekull wicked gyde of Firact


e


Ok Ezechiel.


popnte to the ryght ſyde bpon Ferulalem / p thi


lui
Lorde Godstake a waye the nrzre / and put
okthe crowne / and lo ig it awape: the hum ⸗
ble is exalted / and the vꝛoude bꝛought lowe.
Punych / puniſh pee puny them wen /
deltrope them: and that wan not be kulkpuled
vntil he come / to whom the judgment belõ⸗
geth / and to whomg haue geue it. And thou
O fonne ot man) pꝛophecr / v tpeake:chus
118 the Lobe God to the chiſdꝛen or Am ⸗zereſug. lik. (
mo / a to their blalphemp / lpeake thou: Che Sech. ri. as
Cwearde / che lwearde / is dꝛa wen koꝛth alves none
dp to the laughter / and coured that it gl⸗
Greth(becaute thou batt loned the out vanp⸗
ties / and pꝛophecied jres) that it mape come
bponthynecke / Irke as vpon the other bn⸗
godlx / which be ayne: whole daye came /
whantheir wickednelle was full,

Though it were yut by agayne in to the
theath / vet wyll J punt the / in the lande
where thou watt noꝛiched a boꝛne / and pou⸗


re my indignacion vpon the and wyll blowe


vpon the in the kyꝛe ok my wzath / and delp⸗
uer the vnto crueſi people / whpch are ierned
to deſtrope. Chou chalt tede the fyze and thy
bloude fhall be ſhed in the lande / that thou
mayeſt be put out okremembꝛaunce. Euen
Ithe Loꝛde hauetpoben it.
Ache woꝛde of the Lond agapng Jerutalem fo mae
laughter /s denping due honour pnto thelr fathers
€ methers/ 2 7 Wwpchedneſleg. Oe the wtched doc⸗
trine of che kalle ayes ¢ priBeo/s of their vn⸗
{acpable couetoutnes, Mypannye of rulars. Che
withednes ok the people.
Che. rij. Chapter,

zebuer / the woꝛde ofthe Loꝛde
N came vnto me /e ſayde thou lonne gy
RAYA Mok ma /wplechou not repzour this
toa bloudthuritpe cite? Shewthem
theivabbompnacyons/and tell them: Thus
Cipeth the Lozde od: O thou cite /p Wed⸗
dee bioude in che myddelt 7250 thytyme
mape comealfo:¢ mabelt § Jooles to dekle
the withall. Thou halt made thy telle gpity/
inthe bloudethat thou halt chedrand dekpled

d in PJ doles / which thou halt made. Thou
Hatt called thy dapeß todzawe nve/ ¢ made zg
J tyme of chp peares to come. Cherkoze will
Na the to be cõkounded amoge the Hea=

en / p to be delpyled in all the landes) whe⸗

ther they be nye oz karre kromthe they wall
laugh the to icome / thou that halt goctẽ tbe
fo foule a name / gart full of mplchefe. Be⸗ Peute. vc
holde / p rulerg of Alrael haue brought eue . xv.
ry man his power / to (hed bloude im the. In


EF eae) Serta at ae
pour : pee moch! aue they oppz e
2 pe poute felucejauemadernencton theroe thepbered the wyddowe and the Fatheriette,


-Choubatdoetpiten my HDanctuarr / and vn⸗ 15
yalotoea mp abbath. Wurherersarechere Pate.


. whole daye is come: euen the t yme thãt wic ⸗ in the / that chede bloud / ¢ eate vpon the byte
vednel ‘ball paue an ende: Ohus lateth the les / and in the they ble vnha


"Opa. gn


Jerutalem,


C. Inthe haue ther dprcouered their kathers


Tha 15


came / in the haue they vercd wemẽ in their
ſicknele. Cuerpman hath dealte ametul-
Ip with his nepabbours wyke /a abhompna ·
bir dekrled his daughter in awe. In 6 hath
euer ma Fozced his awne lyſter / cuc bis tas
thers daughter: pee gyltes haue bene tecea⸗
lied in the / to ſbede bioude. Chou haſt taken
vlurp and encreace / thou bat oppꝛelled thy
neyghbours by extoꝛciõ / and forgotten me /
to labeththe 1070 God. Beholde / J haue fmpt>


wete / in token ten myhandes vpon thy couctoutnette / 6


or gerate wo⸗ thou batt bled / and vpon the bloude whych

Suines. bath bene ted in the. Is thy berte able to en ·
dure lt oz map thyhades defende thé lelues /
inthe tyme that J wall bꝛynge vpon the⸗


qo Cuen the Lozdihat (peake it/wyll byt


lch (ü. d.
Sopho. 1h.
Ezecz xihb.


ie allo co paſle.4 wyllccatre the amonge the
Heathen /a Crow the aboute in the landes /
F wull caule thy kylchrnelle to ceade out ol
the: pee and J wyll haue the in polleupon in
the lyght ol the Heathen / that thou mayest
node / that J am the Loꝛde.


Andthe wozde ol p Loꝛd came vnto me / f


lapinge: Chou fonne ol ma / che houte of Al⸗
rael is turned todzolte. All ther that wulde
be bꝛaſſe / tynne / pꝛon / a lende / are in 17
become dzofte.cherfoze / thus lapeth 5 L 02d
God: Foz lo moche as ye all are turned in to
dolle / beholde: J wyllbꝛynge you together
onto Jerulalem /ipke as toluer / balle / vic /
tynnẽ and leade are put together in the for
nace / andthe kyꝛe blowẽ there onder to melt
then: Euen lo wyll J gather you / put vou in
E together / and melt zou in my wꝛalh ¢ indig⸗
nacyon, J wylbzynge vou together / and
kyndle 8 fpze of my cruen dylpleacure nder
vou / that ye maye be meltedtherin.
ke as che kylueris melted in the fyꝛe /
fo thal ve allo be melted therin: that pe may
knowe 11 that J the Lode haue poured
my wzatb por pou.

Andthe woꝛde olthe Loꝛd came vnto me /
lapinge: Chou fonne ol man / tell her: Thou
art an vnclene lande / whych is not ra yned

Kppo in the dave ok the cruen tezath.thp20-
phetes that are in the / are lwoꝛne together
to deuoure ſoules /Ipke as a roaryngẽ L põ /
P lpueth byhrs pray. Chey receaue ryches
und good / and make many widdowes inthe,
‘Thy pꝛeſtes bꝛeake my la we / and dekyle my
SActuarp.c hep put no difference belwene

2B hole abnhoipe / nether diccerne betwene
the cleane a bncleane: ther turne theirexes
Kro my ſabbath; / J am vnhalowed amoge
the. Chy rulers in the are Iphe raupſbynge
wolues / to ched bloude / and to deſtroxe fou.
les koꝛ their awne couetous lucre. Hs foꝛ
lie rophetes therdawbe nytt bntempe-
red clare / ther febanytpes / and propbecre


The Pꝛophetye


Ives onto thẽ/lapeng:the L oꝛde God ſapeth
to / where as the L ond hach not lpoken. Che
people in the lande vlelh wycked extoꝛcxon
K robbery Cher bere 5 pooze a nedye s op-
predic the ſtraunger agapnſt ryght. And J
Coughe in the lande foza man / that wolde
make bp the hedge / and fect hym lelk in the
gappe befoze me in the landes behalte / that
thulde not vtterlx deſtrope it: but J coulde
ſpnde none. Cherkoꝛe wyn J poure out my
cruell dylplealure spon them / and burne
them in the kpꝛe ok ny wiath : their atone
‘waves will J recompence bpon their heades
lareth the Loꝛde God.
CHF the fompcat jat ts to lape / ot the Joolat
— e
¢ . fol im
thatthe foznpcacpon of Jerulale isthe kuipper. Che
meernvepen ce gelle epee psi
tree ot both the whores is kounde oute. Their Oeo


üruccpon. 1

¶ he. xxiij. Chapter,
fess He wozde of the Lope came vnto
me/fapinge: Chou tonne ol man / B
Olchere were two wemen that had
Done mother: Chele whẽ they were
vonge)beganne toplaye the harlottes in k. eech. ey 4:
gypte. Chere were theirbzettes bꝛoled / and etch. ra.
the pappes ok their maydenhead deſtroped.
Che eidell of them was called: Oholah and
her pongeſt lyterb * Oholibah. Chele two se *
were mne andbare fonnes anddaughrers. p der zn
Cheirnames were Samaria / a that was belonging in,
Mbolah:s Jerulalem/ that was Oholibah: tome.
As ko: Oholah ſbe bega ne to go a whozing / be That w


when A badtakenbertome, ohe was cece nber cin


on krie oponberlouers the Atrians, which Zölzer ae
had to do with her:euẽ the pꝛynceg a loꝛdes / as in my Sar
that were dechite in coſtlparape: fapze pige — Sole |


men / lulty ryders of hozles.

Thus thoꝛow her who dome / che cleued
vnto all the vonge men of Adprpa: Yee whe
was madde vponthem / and dekpled herlelk
with all their Fools. Nether cealled the rom
the koꝛntcacyon / that the bled wyth the Egy⸗
Fond dp bet br ber lave wher / chey

oled the bzelkes of her maydenhead / and
poured their tozdome bpon her. Bhertoꝛe /
‘J velpueredberin to handeg ofberiouers/
euenthe Raiviang whom the lo loued. Cheſe
dilcouered her chame / tone her lonnes and
Daughters / and llewe her with the lwearde:
An t᷑uel name gat che ot an people / and they


punyſhed her.

Ber kyſter Pholibah ſawe this / a deſtroyed
her felfe W inoꝛdynate loue / moze then che /
c exceaded her kyſter in who dome the loued
$ Adiirtang which allo laye wher namelp /
deb trail greate lordes that were clos
thed maner of goꝛgtous apparell / ali
iuGy hozlmen and farze ronge 955


Jerulalem,


Samaria. Chen J ſawe / chat they both weredefpled a
Clxke. But the increaled ſtyil in whoꝛdome:
£02 when the ſawe men paynted bpon the
wall / the vinages ok the Cha dees let koꝛth
wyth krech colours/% fapze gyꝛdles about
them / and goodly bonettes vpon their hea⸗
des / lolpng all lente Pꝛences (after the mac
ner ofthe Babylonyagand Caldees in theit
awne lande / where they be bone) ymmedp ·
atlx / as foone as che la we them / che bzent in
loue bon them / z ſent mellaungers tozthé
in tothe lande ok the Cadees.

Notw when the Babrlontäg came to her /
they lave with her / a det pled her with their
whoꝛdome / and fo was che polluted wyth
them. um ꝛohen her luſt was abated krom
them / her inhoꝛdome and Haine was dylco⸗
ered ( Feawwsthen my herte toylone her / iple
asmyhette was gone krom her Kpſter allo.
Heuer hene te Me bled her whoꝛdome euer
jonger fire moze Evemembzed the dapes ol
her poi ii / uherin ſhe had pla ved the harlot
in the lun nt Egxpte:ſhe bent in lult ops
thẽ / white tieth was iphe the lech of Alles /
gtheir iene iphe p Cede ol hoses. Thug thou
Hatt remzwulhe Glthpnctic of thyrouth mbé


4 thy loue rg hyeled thy pappes/ a marredthy
bre! 0 ae
Tbertmec Dholibay)thus lapeth p .d


God. J w y raple vp thy louers ( wyth wh


a


F chou halt tacilepen thy tut agapntt the / und
8 gatherth em together roundeubout the: na⸗
Inelp/ehe ub Elonxans (G all ihe Caloces:


Pecod/<sriyvaand Coa / with all the Aupzt⸗
ans.allvon(eandfayze louets:pzinces and
loꝛdeg / lung tes ' gentlemen / which be all
Goodhozlnenserhele all corne vpon the 1b
Holes /haxvettes/¢agveate multytude of
people: wich albebarnededabout the on
euerp lot / with brettplates/ weldes a hel ·
metteg. I wyn punpſh the be koꝛe them / pee
they them lelues att punyts 8 / accoꝛding
to their awne iudgemẽt. J wyll put mp ge⸗
loulp vpõ the / co that they Matt deale cruel⸗
if Ip with the. hey Mall cut ot thy nofe and
thyne cates / and the remnaiit call fall tho ⸗
Low the Lwearde. hey Hall cary aware the
Connes andvaughters/atheretyoue chalbe
byentin the kyꝛe. hep tall ſtrype che out
OF thy clothes / and carry thy colkip Jewels
Aware with them.

Thus wyll J make an ende ol thy Filthy.
heflee whozbome/ which thou haſt bꝛought
out ok the lande of Egppte lothat thou Walt

turne thyne eyes nomoꝛe alter thẽ / acalt thy
mynde nomoze bpd Egvpt. Foꝛthus ſapeth
Ebbe Losdetheholde/ J topll del puer into the
handes of chem / whom thou hateſt: pee euẽ
into the hendes of ChE / wich whom thou balk
Eulépiten thy lult / whrch wall deale cruelle


Ol Ezethütl


liz,

with p: An thrläboure chalttheytahe with
them / and leaue the naked a bare / o thus ihe
Mame ok thy krithr whozdome chall come to
Ipght. Allthele tyenges hall. happen onto
the becaute of thy whoꝛdome / twhych thou
halt bledamonge the Gentiles wich whole
Adoles thou batt derpledchp telk. Thou halt
walckedin the ware of thy (pier / thertoꝛe
wyll g geue the her cuppe in thy bande,

Thus la peth the Lorde God: Chou Malt
dꝛynche ol thy Cyiters cuppe / how depe and
karre fo tue it be tothe botome. Choi Malt
be laughed to lcozne / ahad as greatly mbes
ryl on / as is pollible. Chou thaitbe full of
dionckennes @ lozowe / to the cuppe ol thx
lyſter Samatia is a cuppe ofdettruccyon €
walkinge: the lame ſbalt thou deyncke / and
Cuppe it out euen to the dzegges / pee thou
ſbalt eate vp the baoken peces ok it / and fo
teare thyne awne bꝛeſtes: Foz euen g haue
Spoken tt / laveth che Lone God.

Cherkoze thus taveth the L ode od: For gf
fo moch as thou haſt ko gottẽ nie / x calt me
ukpde / lo beare now thyne awne kylthynelle
@ whozdome. Che Lord lade moꝛeouer vn⸗
tome: chou lonne of man wylt thou not re⸗
pꝛoue Oholah ¢ Oholibay? Sohewe chem
their abhompnacpong:namelp / they haue
robe their wedlockke /c carned their haves
with bioude: pee eu with their pdoles haue
they cömptted aduoutrp /a offved then thei.
atone chylbꝛẽ to be ncubureo) tuys they had
bogne vnto me. Yee andthis haue ther done
vnto me allo they haue dektleb my Sctua⸗
ryinthat lame daye /a haue vnhalowed my
Habboth, soz when thephad layne their
chyldzẽ foꝛtheir Adoles / they came che lame
dave intomp Sanctuarpto delple it. Lo,
this haue they done in my houle. Belyde all
this / thou halt fentthy medatigers kazmen
out ol karre countrees: @ when they came /
thou halt bathed/erymmiedand fet Co2th thy od yx. be
lelk of the belt ka cpron: thou fatter’ vpon a =
Goodly bed / aa table ſpʒed befoze the: wher
vpõ thouhaſt let mpne incenle ¢mpne ople.

Chen was there greate cheare wu her /a
the men were lent kr karre colſtreeg ouer
the delert / onto thele they gaue bꝛacelettes
vpontheir handes a let clozvous crotwnes
Hpi their headeg then thought Imo doute /
thele will ble their harlatryallo with onder
olde whoze. And they wẽte — Se rico
acomett harlot: Kuen fo wentethey allo to
Oholab a Ohollbah thole kylchy wemen.

O pe all chat lone vertu a ryghtuoulnes / Leut zr.
iudgethẽ / punyſh them: agaduoutrers and Ezech di
murtherers ought to be iudged e punpibed.

Foꝛ they are breakers of wedlocke / and the
bloude is in their handes. 1Wherkoze thus
ſapeth be Nrestemul⸗

DOM, — tetune


UG Meg. xxl n.
Ezech vl. c.


Ferutalem, The P


of people bpon them /a make them

be lcatred a lpopled:thele Mall Hone them /

and goze them with their (weardes. Cher

all dave their lonnes and daughters and
ne bp theirhoules with Fyre.

Chua wyll J dedropeal loch kylthrnes
out ache landꝛ chat all wemen may learne /
not to do alter pour vnclennelle. And ſother
fhall lave poure fplthynetie bpd youre awne
felines /g pe albe punptyen kor the fynnes/
chat ve haue cõmytted wyth poure Fools 6
re Mall howe that J am the Lande.


He protieth the fring of JecuCatem bp aparable of
Tet tte, The parabie ofsechiels wyle being
Werd neh bearteerponmnety.


z ſcaxing: thou fonne of mi / werte
bp che name of this dave / pee euẽ the houre
Seth. 20h. a. pf this ppelent dape: when Jer of Bas
Epech rab. bylon fet hym telkagapnſt Jerufale. Shew
thatobſtinate houſpolde a parable etpeake
vnto the- Thus lapeththe Lozde Hod Getß
a pott / let it on / o poure water in tot: put al
the peces together in it / all the good peces:
che lone ¢ the ſpoulder /go ttt with 6 belt
bones. Cane one ot p belt cbepe / g an heape
of boneswithall: let it boyle well / and let the
V bones feth well ther.
aut 9 With that fapde the Loꝛde God on thys
ſbacuc. J. a. maner: Mo be bnto the bloudy crtre of the
pott / wher ops the ruſtynelle hangeth / als
not pet keoured awape. Cane dut the peces
that are in it / one atter another: there neade
not lottes be caſt thertoꝛe / fo7 the bioube ts
vet in it. Mpon a piapne dꝛye fone bath he
poured it / and not bpon the grounde / thatit
might be couered  dult. And therkoze haue
Iletten her poure het bloude bpd a plapne
dahe ſtonp roche becaule it Wunde not be
brd / s 5 Imygbt bꝛynge mp wꝛothtull in ⸗
dygnacyon and vengeaunce vponher.
€ “ woberfoze / thus layeth $ Loꝛde God: &
wo he vnto that bioudthuͤrſtpe cpte / lo wh
Fersen angehen; tye tees
jones together / u f Epp
the Peper that $ bones
mape befuckte out. Mopeouer / tetthe pot
emptye bpd the coales /p it maxe be warme
Athe metall hote: thatthe tyith @ ruttynette
mape be confumed. But it wyilnot go oF
gp there ts Comoch of itiche ruftynede mud be
dient out. Chr fplthynetiets abhomrnable /
£029 wolde haue clenfed the / but thou wol⸗
deft not be clenled. Chou cant not be pour⸗
Ged krõ thyne vnclenneſde / tyll J haue pou.
Fediny wꝛochtull indignacro vpon the. Euẽ


ophetye


| che Lone haue to deupled: Yee it is come


cherto alredy/ that J will do it. J wyll not go


backe / 3 will not (pare, Z wil not be intrea.
ted: but accoꝛding tothe wapes a ymagina · E
cyons / thou chalt be punyied /tayeth the
Lozde God. And the woꝛde ol p Lorde came
vnto me laing: Chou ſonne ok mã / beholbe
J well take awape? the pleaſure of thpne «Chet bh
tres Wa plage: ret wait thou nethermour⸗ werte.
ne / ner wẽpe / ner water thy chet therkdꝛe:
chou mapeſt mourne by thp (elf alone / but

vle no deadly lamentacpon. Holde onthy bo ·

net / and put on thp ſues. pon thy tete co-
uer not chy face / 8 eate no mourneis bed.
SHoFpakebnto the people bytrmes in the
mozn nge / and at euen nip wyte oped: then
vpon the next mozoww / J dydag J was com
maunded. And ß peopſe ſapde vnto me: wilt
thou nottelibs what that kignitletg / wypch
chou doeſte A ancwered them / che wo7de ol 4
the Loꝛde came vnto me / fapinge: Cell the
houle ot Zlrael / chus ſapeth the Loꝛde God:
beholde / J will culpende my tanctuarpieuẽ
theglozy of your power / b plealure of yous
eyes / and the thinge that ve loue:poure fons

nes ard daughters whom pe haue let / wall

Fall thoꝛow che fwerde.

Like as J haue done / lo Mall ve do allo:
Je call not hyde poure faces / ve wall cate
ho mourners bzed:youre bonnettes hall ve
haue pon poure hẽades /s Hucs bpd pour
fete. Ve ſhall nether mourne net wepe / but
in poure ſynnes pe Malbe ſozowlull / a one
repẽte with another. Thus Ezechiel is pour
weweole. fo; lobe as hehath bone/fa(whe S
this commeth) pe wall do allo: that e maxe
lerne to nnowe that J am the Loꝛde God.
But beholde / O thou fonne ol man: In the
dave when z take krom them their põwer /
their iope a honoure / the luſt of their
the burthen of their bodyts: namelx /
fonnes and daughters: Chen Wall there one
elcape / acome onto the / kozto bew the. In
that dare fall thp mouth be opened to him /
which i elcaped / chat thou mapelt tpeake/

& benomoze domme: Yee and thou walt be
their ſbewtokẽ / chat ther mage knowe / how
that J am the Lozde.


cas oft
2 en tter e
abe Heir. Agena Foumes, Ageynd fw pili@ines.


¶ Che. xxb. Chapter. ert. xiga.
, Bewwosde ofthe Lande anne pe

me, ſaping: c hou fonne of mã ler

chr face agarnt ? Ammonptes

8 2 prophecye vpõ chẽ /s la xe bnto ?
Ammonytes:-heare g woꝛd of g Lowe God.
hus lapeth? Loꝛde God: Foz lo moche ag
thou tpeate due mr Soanctuary.d 0h


Ok Ezechiel.


tro it be now tulpended: and ouer d lande
ok Ilrael / I trow it be now defolate:pee and
ouẽr the houle of Juda / J trow they be now
led awaye p2eloners:Sebolve /I wylldelr⸗
uer the to p people or the eat / p they mape
ie rat

and houles in the. Chep thall cate thy

e. rute dzynche opty mplcie.as or e

dab. bach Jwpllmane okit a tall Foz camels /a

of Ammon a ſhepekolde: and ve wall knowe /
arc an the Loꝛde.

Foz thus tapeth ? Lom god: In comoch
as thou be e e m c
ftamped with eh prert / pee reloptedin thyne

erte duet zh ande OF Alrael topth delppte:


ae, parol.
pote)


8 U

ol Moab tweapenlelle / g taken awape their
ſcrengch:their cpties a cheke coates of their
lande / which ave the pleslureg or the coun.
treads nawelp, Wethtetimoth Baalmeon
and Caria Houmatbete wit open vnto the
ol the eaſt / F they mae kall byon the amm
Cnltes an wollgeuet them in pollelron fo
that the Anunonites atl no moze be had in
remembrance a the Heathen. Cuen
thus well Y puny Moab allo / that ther

tape knowe / how that N am the Lone.
bb. ozeouer / thus fapeth the Loꝛde God:
ire Veccute shat Edom hath auengede cated

.
4 ign
b.. hande pots

„ beat out


lr.
e prophecyethy that E ibe Gtier thrower /
Lenker gegeben chedetkeuteen of Sentai


Che wonderyng and aſtonychmeut of tyẽ mar chaũ /
tet / ka the delolãcxon of Cyꝛus⸗


che. xxvj. &hapter.


c happened / that in che. xi. peare /


Ache fps dare or the Moneeth / the


(| wozue of the Lozd came onto me /
Gloße. Fl. a.


ſapinge: chou tonne of man / be.
caule that Cyꝛe hath (poker vyon Jerula ·


Tend ha / nom trot ben ue n
07


ple be bꝛoken / ¢ ſhe turned vnto me /
haue deſtropenmpbelp full; Yee therkose
lapeth the Loꝛde Go: Meholdẽ D Cyꝛe / FJ


ſeremp⸗
Wzechiel


wyll vpon the / wyll bꝛynge a greate mui⸗


finowe how that J amthe I. ode.

For thus lapeththe Loꝛde God: Behol⸗
de / J wyll bꝛynge hyther Mabuchoponotoz
(which is the Aynge of wabylon / aa yng
of Bpnges) From the oꝛth ops Cyꝛe / with
hozles / charettes / hoꝛlmen / a with a greate
multytude ol people. Chy daughters p are
in the lande / Ballhe fave with che lwearde:
butagapnt the / he all make bulwoꝛckes
g graue bp dyches aboute the / a lit vp bys
Wolde agäynſt the. Pys Uynges G batelrä⸗
mes tall he prepare £02 thy wanes /a with
bps weapes bzeane bowne thy towzes. Che


mur /


l.


Zul.
Ard.


Tyzus. The Pr


murthered in the. All Bynges oF b cer thal


ophetye


dbes inthe. The Peres / L. piang 4 Lpbiss


come downe from their (eates regal: ther were in thyne hooſt / a helped the to
ball lape awaype their roabes / g pütokchelr thefe hangedyp their Does nene


coftly clothinge:) er wich trembiynge wall

Woche be gehe her all er ppb gr:
ther chalbe atra pedat thy Coden kali / and
de abaſſhed at the.

Chev tall mourne foz the / and tape vnto
the:D thou noble cite / Sp had bene fo great·
Ip occupped of olde / thou that halt bene the
Brongett bpon the lee Wihpne inhabptours
ol whom all men ſtode in keare: How arte
thou now lo ptteriy detropen? Mow at the
tyme ol chr fall the inhabytourg of 9 Jes /
pee and the Pies chem lelues / wall lande in
keare at thyne ende. Foz thus lapeth ? Lo


Cren.i.a.


te: onto a people that
and let ibetnatanbe


Cate prophete
Abende
daunkpnge or mar chauntes therto.


5 a thy bégenae

‘wechatterztas Of the Ales of * eli

fp, atter the a

Thald. CTyꝛe were t
wplelt,


$ chele tet toꝛth thy bewty. hey of Arnad
were w thyne hoot roũde about thy walles/
and were thp watchmen vpon thy totwze8/
thele baged op their chuldeg round about thy
walles amade b maruelous goodly.Char:
Cig occupied with $ in al maner ot wares /
in Muer; 26 /tynne a lead / a made the mar
ket anhalt, Cubal ¢ Melech were
thpmarchatites; which bꝛought tve men /a
oꝛnamentes of metall to: thy occuppenge.
Cher of p houle of Chogatma bꝛought vn⸗


totheat eorthrmarte / hole / hoꝛünẽ

MIDs Cher el eben get Un orden

chafites:a many other Fes that occupied W
twethers/el bones ¢


a einer den
wyne a whrte woll: becaule thy occupyeng
many, Ban

vnto thy


imavhettes ion rede made / with Calla g ng art n


Calamus accozdpng tosty


i


and occupied wi G nen ppm :
oe palow fylcke gnediewoscke (perp preci.
ug, a theceoze pachee d bounbe cogerner ds —
roapes) Yee and in Cedze wodde /at Ferme
ok thrmarcketteg. Che loyppe of

were the chefe of thy occuppenge,
cuenim@benpenoftpe lee, Senne
ners were euer d onto te f


: beate the in to the mpddett ol elke lochat


thy wares) thy marchatotes hprpcheg,
marpnerg thy chlpmaſters / 1 pe
pei an eho sap

are


s
—


Ok Ezethiel.


chrymen. All whirrymen / and all maryners
bpon the ſee/ chall leape out of their boates
and ſet thé lelues vponthe lande. Chey tall
llt vp their voce becaule of the and male
alamentavle crpe. Chey thal caſt duſt ppon
chelr heades /a lpe dopont in the ales Cher
Wall hauc them flues / andput lacke cloth
bpon thew foz thy fake,

They hah mourne fog the wyth hertkull
cow ano heuy lamentacpon/vee their chit
Wen alto call wepe for the. Alas, what citie

r Hath fo bene deſtroyed in the ſee / as Cyꝛeis:
© gopenthp wares g marchaundies came krö
P tees / thou gaueſt all people vnough. Che


Hynges ol the earth hak thou made reche / wrde


thoꝛow the multytude Of thy wares and oc⸗
ruplenge: Putthou art now caſt downe in
to che depe of d tee / all thy reloꝛte ot people
28 periched wyth the All cher that dwell in B
les are abalſwed at the / andall their kyngs
areaftapen/ yee their kaces haue chaunged
coloure. che marchauntes ot the nacyoͤns
wondze at the. In that thou art lo cleane
bꝛought to naugßt / a commeſt nomoze vp.


vpnge cf My
rte ts male aber


i b loke vpon the. AN ther


à pioude hert and haſt tarde: J ama o/
baue my teate in the myddeſt or the lee luke a
God: wßere ag thou art buta mũ anotcꝰod /
@ Pet ſladeſt in tyne awne cůceate /p chou
art God: Webolve/thou chrncheſt chylelle
_oplerthen Waniel that there is no lecretes
hyd fro the. Wyththr wyldome a thx under ·
ſandpng / thou halt gottẽ the greate weltit-
nelle / and gathered treafure of tyler and
golde. With thy greate wyldome and occu
E thou increaledche power / z be ·
caulẽ of thy great ryches / thy hert is pꝛonde.
B,, Chertore thus lapeth the Lowe God:ffoz
lo moch as thou batt ipé vpthrne herte/ as
though thou were F od: heholde / J will bzing
enem es vpon the / euen the tyꝛaüntes of the
DHeathe-thete Haldzawwe out their Tweardes
pon thy beuty and wyldome / and challde⸗
krle thy glory. Cher Hall catt che dawne to
che pytte / lo that thou chaltdye "
delt of the fee / as they that be la pre. Lette
ve thou wylt fave then ( bekoze the that lia pe
che J am God where as thou art hut a man
hat and Rot God / in the handes of thé that dae
othe, Dye ſhalt thou / euen as the vnctrcum⸗
ckled in the handet or the enem esto Ame


lef,


felte haue cpozente tayech the L onde God,
Mozeouct / the woꝛde of the Loꝛde came
bnto me /lapenge: Chou tonne oma make
alamentabie complapnte ouer the henge ol
Cpꝛe / andtell hym: Chus ſapeththe Love
God: Chou art a leale ot a lyckneſſe / uli ot
wyldome ¢ excellent beuty. Thou halt bene
in p plealaunt garden of God: thou art decte
‘with al maner ok precious Hones: with Rus
by / Topas Chꝛittal / Jacpncte / Onyx / Jats
pes / Daphrz / Dniaragde / Carbuncle /
and golde. Chr bewer and the holes that be
in the were let loꝛth in thedapẽ or thy creas
cron. Chou art a fayze cherub / Aretehed
out ko; to couer.
Jhaue fete the bron the holy mount of
God / chere batt thou bene / e walker amöge
the kapze glpſterrnge tones, Fromm che teme
Of thy creacpon thou halt bene ryght excei⸗
lent / tr wyckednelle was founde in the.
Becaule ok thy greate marchaunoyle / thy Pg.
hert is kull of wyckednelle / andthou haſt ok⸗
kended. Chertoꝛẽ wyll J caſt p fré the mofic
ol God ( O thou coucrpnge Cherub ) and de
ſtzopethe amöge d glpittering tones, Chr e
bert wag pꝛoudeimthekapzebentp/athozuw
thy beutp thou halt deſtropedthy wyldome.
9 will caſt § downe to the grounde / a p in B
ght OF kyngt. Chou halt detpled thy Dauc
tuary / with the great wyckednelle or thyvn ·
ryghtuous occuppenge. 3 wil bꝛynge a tye
From the middelk of the / co concume che: and
wil make the to alſhes /in 55 lyght of all the
at haue bene ac
quaynted % the amonge the Heathé. halbe
abalſbed até :Ceing thouartfoctenebzoughe
tonaughe/andcommett no moze bp,

Andthe worde of the Loꝛde came vnto
me/fapeng: Chou ſonne of man / let toy tace gf
agapnt Spoon, Prophecpe bpon it“ and
fpeahe.chus ſapeth the Loꝛde God: Behol⸗
de o Sidon / J wyll vpon the / a gett me ho. eet 18. &
noute in theꝛthat it mare be nowne / hom 5 Zach. s
Jamthe Lond / when I punvch her / a get me

onoure in her. Foz J wil lende peſtiſence a
loud cheddynge in ko her ſtreates / Co that
thofe which be dayne wpth thelwerde / chall
Ipe rounde aboute in the mrddeſt or her and
they hail knowe / that J amthe Ldzde. Dhe
wal nomoze bea pztcking thome / s an burs
bꝛeer onto the boule of Irraell / nervn⸗
to them that ipe rounde aboute her and hate
her: and cher thal knowe /e A amthe L ode.
Thus lapeththe Lorde God: tohan nage
thertheboutholve of Alrael together
from the nactons amoge whom eve N
tered: then bro lanctikled in th e
Coght ofthe Gentples) ¢ ther wan dwell
banda etn bur bade ane
chall dwell rin „
. plante


The Pꝛophetye


plantebpnepatdes:pee fafely thal they dwel
therein whẽ J haue punpſbed all thote/that
delpyle them rounde aboute: and then (alt
cher knowe / J am the L ode theix God,
Che prophecprth agapn Pharao. Be mophecretd

the deloldc po of Egppte and the fpa rplynge abroade
oF the Ggppepas.@he Lozde promeleth that ht will
retoare Egypte agapne ak ter. xl. pearcs, Egypte ir
the reward of Apug Habuchodonczor fo the labour
which be tone agaynit Cyrus,

. Caherrir.chapter.
the. x veare bpon the. xij. daye
yok the. x. moneth / the woꝛde of the

Elape. xix. a. oꝛde came vnto me / lapinge: O
x. d. 5 thou lonne of man / let now thy
Spechte err. tace Arnd Phatao the enge of Egypte)
sreipeery. Provoecveagapnitbim eagayntt ) whole
ahr pro, lande of Egypte: Speake, i ten hem / thun
pertpe oF dia, lapeth the Loe God: beholde / O Pharao
e , thou Aung or Egypt / J wyll vpon the / thou
Dauince of tone Great dꝛagon /b lpelt in the waters thou
berg are. Cher b lapeſt:the water is myne. J haue made it
docs he nung mp lelke. J wyl put an bone in thy chawes /
eule oe ¢ bange ail the kych in thy waters vpon thy
Seeaute of she: tales alter $F win dam f out of thy wa⸗
aboundalice of terg / pee g ali d Cpt) ot thy waters p hange
water that ave DPO thyckales. I wil caſt q out bps the dꝛye
in@gyptrroder lande with 6 kych or thy waters / lo that thou
80 ü. Jeemle Wale pe ppö the feld. Khou thalt notbe gaz
calud à cues thered ner take bp: but (alt be meate foꝛ 5
becaulkok her beaſtes of the kelde / and fo the foules ol the
auntpageof apze:that all they whych dwel in Egypte /
bottled tape knowe / that Jam the Lorde: becaute
toned, Houbatt bene a fat of rede to the houle of
B Alrgel. hen they tobe holde of the +b their
ta. eg. xviß d hand thou bꝛakeſt & prpchelt dhe on euerx
Ginpesrea. kpde: e vt ther leaned vponthe/ thou bꝛalkeſt
ra xxxvta. & hurteſt the reynes or their backes. Cher⸗
foze thus tayeth the Loꝛde God:behelde /
wyll bꝛynge alwearde vpon the / a rete out
ol the both man and beatt. Fee the lande ol
Egppte ſhalbe delolate a wate / s they Hal
knowe / that J am the Loꝛde: Becaule he
lade. p water is myne / J my lelthaue made
it. Beholde thertoꝛe / J well vpon the / a ops
¢ thy waters: J wyll make the lande otckgipt
watte g deldlate/krõ the towze of Spenes
onto $ bozders of the Moztans land: iop in
xl. veares there ſhaltno fote of man walcke
chere / nether kote of catel go there / nether
chall it be inhabpted. J wyll malie the lande
ok Egypt to bedeẽlolate / amöge other walte
countrees / and her cytyes to lye bopde. xl.
peares / amonge other vopde cptpes: And F
wyll ſcatre the Egypcians amõge the Hea⸗
then and nacpong,

Agarne / thus fapeth the Lorde God: mhẽ
the. kl peares are expyꝛed / J will gather the
Cappcpans together agapne / out or the na-
cpons / amonge whom thep were ſcatred /a
toll bzunge d pretoners of Egypt agarne


Fere tivi. t.


into the lande of Pathures their awne na ·
tpue cpũtre / that they maye be there a low-
iptmall hyngoome: pee they ſwalbe p cmal⸗
let amonge other kyngdomes / len they ex.
alte thẽ leiues aboue the Heathẽ: oz A will
fomonyty them that they (hal no moe rule
the hheathen. They hall no moze be an hope
vnto p boute ot Icrael / nether pꝛouoke thé
any moze to wyckednelſe to caule thé turne
backe / a to folowe them: they (hall unowe
that Jamthe Lozde God.

In the. xvij. peare / the tyꝛſt dave of the D
kyiſt moneth / came the woꝛde of the Loꝛde
bntome /fapinge: Chou fonne ot man /a ·
buchodonofoz the kynge ol Babylon hach
made his oot / with great trauaie and tae
boure to come bekoze & pe: that euerꝝ head
mape be balde / a euerp thoulder bare. Pet
bath Cvꝛe geuen neiherhym ner hys book
any rewarde /foz the greate trauaxle that he
hath taken there. Chertoze thus lapeth the
Lope God: beholde J will geue the lande of
Egypte vnto Mabuchodonoloz the Ayng ol
Babylon / that he mape take awape aliher
lubſtaunce / robbe her robberres / iporle
her Ipoples / to pape his hooſt their wages
withall. J will geue him the lande of egypt
£03 bys laboure / that he tone fo2 me before


gopẽ thy mouth agarne ‘thent: that


aloes pote


Cap pte,


are deſtroyed. Lt that tyme / wan their met=
faungers go kozth fro me in hpppes / to
make 6 carelee Mo:pas afrayed/ and ſo⸗
rowe chall come vpon them in the dave of
Egipte lo doubtles it wal come.
Chus lapeth the Loꝛde God: J wyll
C make an ende ol the people ol Egypte tho⸗
zow the hande of Habuchodonoloz Henge


of Babrion. He and hs people wyth hym /


pte and the cruelltyꝛauntes of the Heathen
Salbe bzought to dectrope the lande. Chey


bal drawe outtheir Cweardes vpdegupte


Lkxlche lande Eulof dane men. A willdzpe
bp their floudes of water / ¢ felt the lade in to
che handes or wicked people che iande and
alis therin wil z dellrope thoꝛow the ene ⸗
mes. Euen Ithe Lo haue fardeit.
D Andthus lapeth the Looe God: A wyll


uch. rig. a. deſtrope the Idols / and bzynge the pages


pitta op ar.
‘pm. ola Hoyh to an ende. Chere Hall nonioze


bea prince of Egipte / anda kearkulnes wet.
lende in to the Egipcis lande As foꝛ Pa⸗
tes) A wil make it delolate and kindle a


+ betcha a eppein®* oan, Alermgawifl f pani) ¢


Erie. Atthe lame tyme caule che }
e*hozne ok Fhoule sete aioe koꝛth / debate fe


they may know / how that the Woꝛde.


Ccpeosgructron of Egypteand of 66
—— ron ot Saypteand of bys ertkes b


¶ Che. xx. chapter.


them / wall tall
with them thozow thelwearde.

Thus lareth the Loꝛde: Che mayntey ·
ners of the lande or Egypte Mall fall/ the
pꝛrde ol her power Mall come downe: euen
vntoß tower of Sopencs chall they be arne
downe wrth the twearde/layeth the Loe
Sod:amonge other delolate countrees ther
thaibe made delolate / g amüge other wate
cytpes they thaibe walted. And they Halk
knowe / that J am the Loꝛde / when g hyde
a trie in &grpte/and when all derbe


e
‘el the of Althelub⸗
ti 1 wyll z deſtrope / and
lea fpzein 8
en Walde in greate beupnette / alexan
© pzig ſwalbe roted out, and Hoph tail haue
daplpe toꝛowe. Che beſt men of Helpopolis
6 Bubatto halbe napne with the fwearde/.
andcaried awape captxue. It Caphnis the
dave cbalbe darche / when Abꝛeake there the
ttepter ok che lande of Egipte / and whenthe
pompe ot her power chaſlhaue an ende. A
cloud (hal couerher / a her daughters chalbe
led awaye in to captrupte. Thus wyll J pu-
nych Egipte / that they mape knowe / how p
Nam the Love,

Gtbappenedin the ri.veare /opon the fee.
trenthdaye of the kyiſt Moneth / p the Loꝛde
worde came onto me lapẽge:Beholde chou
ſonne of man / J wil bzeake d arme ot Pha
tao kyng of €gipte:¢ lott (hal not be boũde
bp tobebeated/ nether Mail eny playſtre be
laped vpon ft/fo2 to eate it /oꝛ to make it fo
ftronge / as to holde a lwearde . Cherloze/
thus kapeth the Lozde God: Beholde / J wyl
bpon Pharao 8 hinge of Egipte / and bute
his ſtronge armelpetts it but a bꝛoken one)
@ will cmipte thelwearde out of his bande.

As koꝛ the Egipcpang, J wil ſcatre them
amonge the Peathen / a trowe thẽ in plans
des aboute Agapne Jwvll ckrengch p arme
ok $ king of Babilõ /¢ geue him mplweard


ln gts hade but A wilbseane Pharaos arme


lo chat he (hall holdeit betoꝛe him prteoul·
H/ like a wounded man. =
5ee q will Kabylith the kynge ot Baby-


Of Ezechiel.


lxij.


Ions arme / a the armes of Pharao that fal
downe: that it mape be nnowne / that J am
the Lozd / which geue the kinge of Babilon
mp ſwearde in his hãde / that he mave dꝛawe
it out vpon the lande of Egypte: a that whe
Jlcatve the Egypcrans amonge the Gent⸗
les / and ſtrowe them in the landes aboute /
thepmaye knowe / that A am the Loꝛde.
Cn comparpſon ot the protperitic of c harao with
the profperitic of the Adpnans. de pophecietha lphe
dellruccpon bute chem bathe.
Che. xh. Chapter.
Il Ozeotier it happenedinß. xi. ea
te 6 Hirt dare of Schird poner) S
at che wozde ofthe Low came
nto mefayeg:a hou tonne of md :
{peake bntoPharao the Keng of Egrpte /a czech erte
to al hrs people: hom art thou pte in thy xxx. xxxd.
greatnele⸗Webolde dur was lylie a Cedze
kre vponthe mount ot Lpbanus wich kapze
bzaunches:lothickeſthat he gaue thadowes
& Mot out berphye. is toppe reached vnto
the cloudeg. che waters made hym great /
the depe tet him vp anhre. Rounde aboute
Protes of hym räne there loudeg of water / B
he lent out hes lytie rruers vnto al the trees
Off kelde. Cherkoꝛe was he hper then all the
trees of the kelde / e thozow the multitude of
waters that he (ent from hym / he optayned
many longe bzaunches Al touleg ok p apze
made thelr neſtes in his bzaliches vnderhis
bowes géozed al thele beattes of p telde and
vnder his fhadow dweit al people. Fapzt @
beutifull was he in bys greatenelle and in
the lengch of bys beaunches / koꝛ hys rote
fone belpde greate waters / no Cedꝛe tre
mygbt bde hem. Inthe plealaunt garden
ol God / there was no Fyꝛre tre like his bꝛaũ
ches / the platine trees were not line d boweg
ok hyni. Allthe trees in the garden of God
might not be cõpared vnto him in his beuty
fofayze and goodly had J made hem w
the multitude or his bzaunches: In to moc!
bal the trees in the pleafatic gatdẽ of God /
hadenupe at hin. Eherkoze chus lapeth?
Lone God: ko lo moch as he hath lylt vp D
bimfelffobpe/ a Uretchedhys toppe in to
cloudes / a feinge hrs hert ia pꝛoude inhyñ
ar dem te delpuerbimingo d andes „hn ba
or demighelelt amonge 5 Heathen, why) uncyarenotor.
ſhal rote him out. Acozding tohrs wycked
net will J caſthim awape / d enempes (hall
deſtrope him / and the myghty men of the
Heathen Hallo lcatrehym /p bis beafiches
chal lye vpon Iter etd e inal ballexs:
his bowes thalbe bꝛonẽdowne toß grouͤde
thoꝛow out the lande. Chen all the people
ob the läde hal go from bis chadowe / 705 e
fake him. Ihen he tg kallen / al the toules or
P arze walt vpon bim / aal w. wae


havao,


of che felve hall go aboute amõge his bꝛa

chessfo that kroni hence fozth / no tre inf wa⸗
ter hall attarne to hys hrabnedqe / no reach
bis koppe bnto che cloudes, nether Mall en
tre ol the water lade lohpe / as he huch done.
Foꝛ onto death Mal thep all be delpurred vn⸗
der the eattg / go downe to the graue / rue


othermen.

F chozouer / chus Cayeth the Lam Pode n
F goeth downe to the graue /
Awyll caule a lamentacronto be made /
wplfcouer the depe vpon hum / J wyl taki
bis noudes / andthe greate waters alle re ·
kralgned. Ichall caule Libanus to befo-
roukull 0 his Cale / and all the trees ot the


, kelde hall be Imptten. 7 well make d Bea⸗


Ed. r xb e. hen quake at the founde ot bis Eall / when J


G bitacrons kor they


Grech xxix.
rr. xl.


Sorts Swill Cpzede my netouer d /namelp /a greate ¢@


call hem downe to bell with the that delcen⸗
de in to the prtte. Ill che trees of Eden / with
all 5 choten and beſt trees of Libanus / veẽ
alithepthat are plantedvpon the water /
wall mourne with him allo in d lower ha⸗
in godowne tohell w
bim / onto the that be dapne % the (wearde /
which dwelt akoze vnder the wadome of bys
arme amonge the Heathen. Cowhum Walt
thou be lpcliened / that ark ro glozyous and
greate / amonge the trees ot Eden? Yet art
thou cat downe onder the earth (amöge the
trees ol Eden) where thou mut ipe anionge
vncixcumcpled / with them that be (layne dd
thefwearde.cucn thus is it with Pharao a
all his people fapeth the Loꝛde Goo,

e ete is cõmaunded to bewa barao
Seeger Eee krophecpetg acteotacrren
hall come onto Egypt oat the Ayng of Wavpls.

Che. xxxij. Chapter.


3 e e bear e gil Dave of


the. xij. oneth / the woꝛde or the

Looꝛd cam vnto me / ſaying: Chou

Mi onne of man / take vpa lamenta·

cion bpon Pharao the kyng of Egypte / and
lapevnto hum Chou art reputedas a K pon
ol the Heathen / and as a whaltiſb in the tee.
Faehre Cape

ubleſt the waters with thy kete / s lla pe

{ntheivfloudes.chustapeth 8 Loz God.


multitude of people: thele thal dixue the in
tom varne to; J will cat tye bpon d land /


Aler the le vpon the kelde / thar all d koules their


fee be aaze mare tpt opbtbe st oeh cl
the beaſtes of the kelde ynough ofthe. &i
fleth wyll z call pb tiebplies/a 111 6 tale


; ic  topbogbnetl ben Plame


. achat
Vel he


wyth the aboundaunce of thy bloude euẽ to
che mountapnes /a the ballexes (hall be full
ofthe. When thou art put out / J wyll couer
A beauẽ /a make his ſtarres drmm. weit
ſpꝛede a cloude ouer § Dunne / a Moone


Che P


poppetye he. ige henne
beaucn well put bint oust the / and bꝛynge
darckneſle bpen thy lande / laxeth the Loide
God.F well trouble the hertes of many peo⸗
ple / when J bꝛynge thy deſtruccyon amoge
the Peathẽ ¢ countreetz / whõ thou knowẽlt
Lengede hope he tbat tt
unges io atraped thozo! r
he arte thal ſtãde vp / woe i hake my fweary
ar their faces. Spodenly thall thep be aton⸗
Mn puttete / atche daxe ot
all.

Lon thus lapech the Lowe God: the kyng
of Babplons fwearde all come vpon the
with the Cweardes of the wosthyes tell 2
fmpte downe thy people. All cher that be
mpgbtve amonge the Gentyles Aball atte
che pꝛoude pompe of Egppte / and bzynge
downe all her people. Ail the catellalfo of
Egypte wpllg dedrope / chat cher Hall come
nomoze bpon the waterssfo that nether mas
fotenerbeatesclawe / wall tere them enx
moꝛze. hen well F make their waters cleas
re / and caute their floudes to rũne like ole /
lapeth the Loꝛde God: when J make $ lande
ol Egypte delolate / and when the countre W
all that is therin / walbe lapde waſte: ¢ whe
Almpte all chem which dwell int / harther
lave knowe/that J amthe Lose. Chis ß
the mournynge / chat the daughters of
Heathen wall maße: J ee a loꝛdw and lame · D
tacpon wall theptake vp vpon Egypte and
all her people /ſapetht God.

nthe. xi peare / the. x. dape of the Meus
neth / came the woꝛde ol the L oꝛde vnto me /
lapinge: Chou tonne or man. Cake bpalae
Mentacpon bpon the people of Egypte / and
caltthem downe/ yee a the mrghipe people


benetb: and with them that go downe in to p
graue. Downe ( how kapꝛe fo euer thou be)
and lape the with the vncircumciled.
thofe chat bedapne withthe [wearde / wall
thepive. Che twearde is geuen alredy/
Gail be dꝛawe fosth and alt bis people.
mipghtte wozthpes and his helpers / that
gone downe and ipe with ch cumciſed


Aflur is there allo with his cai and
graues rounde aboute /

lapne i fel all with the lwearde / whole gra ·
ues ipe bel} ebim inthe abe pytte.Bisco-
meng ate burtedrounde aboute bys graue:
all together wounded and dayne wre the
Cwoearde / which mé aloꝛe tyme bꝛoughẽ tere
re in to the lande of the iyuynge.


theres Clam alto withali hig peopleye geeemr stot |
ga bauben Dasitbs


their graues roũde aboute: wyych a
wounded and da ene with the a


tty. rine:
ofthe eather alto/ eu wopth the char dwelf SOY,


Peael,


urg. b, and punces allo / which with th


gone downe bncircunciled onder the earth /
whpch neuertheles fomtyme brought keare
into the lande of the lxuynge koꝛthe whych
thepbeavetheit came / with the other that
be gone downe to the graue.

5 Cheir burpal is geuen them and al their
people / amonge them that be fapne. Their
graueg are roundeaboute al them / which be
bncircũciled / a wyth thé thatbe dlapne tho⸗
row the lweard: koz leyng that in tymes paſt
ther made the lande ofthe lpupngeatrayco/

ſeymuſt now beare their awne chame / w

that go downe to the pytte / a ye amõg
them / chat bedlapne.

Chere is Melech allo and Cubal / a they
people / a their graues roũde aboute. Chele
al are amöge the vncirencyled / a thẽ that be
apne with the lwearde / becaule afoze tyme
cher made the lande of p lpuyng alraped.

Shulde not they then lye allo amonge §
wofthpes / and vncircuncpled Gpauntes?
which twpth their weapens are gone downe
cohell: whole lweardes are layed onder their
heades / whole wickednelle is vpon their bo⸗
wee 1 yard 910 200 1 5 bane:

ought feave into of inge?
Pecamdgeeoncirctcifen Halethou be de.
ftroped/ and flepe with them / that peryſhed
thoꝛow the fwearde. .

G Chere is the lande of Edom sb her hinges

ſtrengeh


erde. are kaped bychem that were lane with the


Swearde / pee amonge the vnctreuncyled/ a
them which are gone downe in to the pytte.
Moꝛeouer / there be all che pꝛynces o€ the
thozth wrth all the Sidon pan / which are
gone do wne to thetlarne.

With their keare a Hrength they are come
toconfulton / and lye there vncircuncyled/
amonge thole that be dayne tb the twearde:
and beare thetra wne ame) with themthat
be gone downe to § pptte Now whan Pha⸗
rab fepth this / he wal be comkoꝛted ouer alt
bea people / chat is dayne with the Cwearde:

oth Pharao and all bys hooſt / lapeth the
Loꝛde God. Foꝛ J haue geuen my keare in ß
lande ol the ĩpuyng. But Pharac and alhys
people hal lpe amonge the vncircunciled a
amonge them that be dapne with itwearde
lapeth the Loꝛde God.


e letteth out the office of a curate that preacheth
the Golpell. be trengthencth chem that dpſrarteck
holdeneth the with thepzomesof meecp. 2s the fare
mer rpohtwelnes helpech not the ryahtwes / yk he
prnebom tte agapne to lynne:to the done bee

oe are not imputed to ß wpcked that amdeth. Che.
woꝛde Of the Lo;dagayntt > remnaunt of the people.
Agapnſt the mockers of the woꝛdes of the Prophete.


che. xxrij. chapter.


Oe esechicl,


N pe.


a tweardevpon a lande yl the people or the
lande take a man of their countre / a let him


to be their watchman: d fame man (what he u. meg ar


fepth the fwearde come vpon the lande) hal
blowe the trompet / a warne the people.

Aka man nop heare the nople ofthe trõ⸗
pet and will not be warned / and the lwearde
come and take him awaye: hys bloude fall
be vponhis awne head: ko he herde the told
okthetrompet / a wolde not tate hebe / thers
toꝛẽ his bloude be vpon hym. But yl he win
receaue warninge / he hal taue bysivte.
Agapne / v the watch ma le the lweard come
and ſhewe it not with thetrompet / lothat
people is not warned: veche Crocarde come
then / and take eny man krom amonge them:
the lame Wall be taken awape in hes awne
Cynne/ but hys bloude wyll 4 vequyze ok the
watchmang hande.


And now (O thou fonne orman) Ahaue Gee sgt


madethea watchman onto the boule of Al
raell:chat where as thou heareſt eny thynge
out ol my mouth / thou mapeſt warne them
onmypbehalke. t Alape vnto ö wicked thou
wyclied / thou Malt lurely dyeꝛe thot geueſt
pnt not warnynge / that he mare bewarre
okhys vngodly wave: then chan the wycked
dye in hys awne lynne / bit hys bloude wyll
Jrequpze ot thy hande. Meuertheles vethou
warne the wycked of hys waye / to turne era
it / where as he pet will not be turned kromit
then challhe dye becaule of bps Fyne / but
thou haſt delpueredthyloule.

Cherkoze ! O chou tonne ol man) fpeake 0
vntothe houle ol Brack Ye lapethus: Dure
offences and lynnes lye vpon bs / and we be
coꝛrupte in them: how chulde we then be re ·
dozedontolpte- Cell them: As truly as fips
ue / ſapeth the L oꝛde God / A haue no pleã·


Cure inthe death of the wicked / but moch ra- gyech. riß e.


therthat the wicked turne kromhys wape &
Hue. Curne vou / turne vou front pour vn⸗
godly wayes / O pe ot the houle ot Alraell.
Oh / whertoze well ve dre:


Chou Fonne ok man / teu the chyldꝛen ot chech.tvih d.


thppeople: Che ryghtuoulnd of d rightuous
Sali not laue hym / whan loruer he turnetg
awape bnkaithkullp⸗Agayne / 5 wickednelle
ok ß wicked chal not hurt him / whan loruer
he conuerteth krom his vngodlpnelle.
Ind the rrahtuoulneſſe ob the ryghtudus
ſhall not laue bps Ipte / whanloeuer he tyne
neth. Ik J Cape vnto the ryghtuous / that he
chall kurelp lxue / and lo he kruſt to his atone


rpabtroutnetic / and do kynne: then tall bys


be nomoze thought vpon /
rpohtudulnelle be n ne thousy™ open /


Ilratl,


but in the wyekednege that he bath done he
D call dre. Agarne/ vt A Cape onto d wycked.
Flap. b. b. thou Halt lurely dpe:a fo he turne from his
Jerkrulha ſpnneg /a do the thinge that is latefulland
roght: In lo moch that the lame wickedman
jeueth the pledge agayne / reſtoꝛeth that he
Fab aten aioape bp robbery twalcact) ind
cOmaundementes of Ipfe/ a doth no wzige:
a dom the hen Mall he curelpipue/a not dpe. Yee the
Hopprttere s lynnes that he hath done / * hall neuer be
moegen thought bpb Fer incomoch as he both now
kert/ loge bee the thinge that is lawkull andryght/ he walt
kale ng rbiß. Ixue. And pet the childzen ol thy people fave:
Ebarter. Fuſb / che ware or the Loꝛde is not ryaht /
where as thetr awne wave is rather vntight.
auch, ugbtuous turneth kr his righ-
tuoutnede/¢ docth § thinge that is wycked /
be ſballbre therkoze But pe wyckedturne
0 8.6 from bis wrchednelke doing the chinge that
Sing-, ca tatoeull right be halipuecvertoze,y et
felape:the wape of the L oꝛde is not equall.
O pe houle ok Alrael / A well iudge euerx

one ol youatterbis wapes. :
inthe. rij. peare/ the. d. daye of the. x. mo.
neth ol dure captrupte / it happened / z one
which was fled out of Jerulalem/came vnto
me / and larde: the cipe is bettroped. Now
the bande ol the l oꝛde had bene bpon methe
cuenyng afoze this mal which was efcaped)
came bntome / a had onened my mouth / vn⸗
tyll the moꝛneng that he came to me: vee he
opened my mouth / lo that J was nomoze
domme, Ehen came the worde o€ che Loꝛde
vntome/ d larde: hou fonne of man / chele
Sdiost us bauen lande or Ikrael/ſave:
wah was but one man / abe had the lande


in polleupon:now are we many / a the lande


. WGeuenbs to pogedle allo. Andtherfoze tell
Fthem: Thus lapeth the Lopde In the bioude
Leut. rg. d. eee n


The Pꝛophetyt


connẽ or man che chyldzẽ or thy people that
talcke of the / bythe walles a inthe dozes of
their boutes / ca pinge one to another: ome /
let vg heare / what woꝛde is gone koꝛth From
the Lemar pps seds sean Sane 1 8e
maner of a greate people: b p.
Cyt downe befozethe/ and heare chr wo: des /
but ther do not theratter:fozin their mouth
they ewe them lelues / as though theywe ·
re keruent / but their herte goeth after cher
atone couetous lucre Andass a baler g bath
a lwete tune / and is plealaunt to lynge / lo
ſhalt thou be vnto thẽ: thy wozdes thal ched
heare / but they wil not do cheracter han
this commeth to palle los lo / t cõmeth inde-
de) thẽ cal they knowe / that there hath bene
a prophet amonge them. :
eee Wyhoppes and curates that befpetethe
Gock of Li Z Ceake their atone,
eee
00 re t. ol
forte, de piomeleth the true epherde Chyitt / and
wich hem peace.


pꝛophecr
crael/ pat
Thus lateth che I oꝛde God vo be bnto the Jere rl
Mepherdes of Jirael/ chat fede them te luer. ria
Sobulde noe the ſhepheides kede p lockes:
Y chauc eaten vp che kate / ye haue clos

ched pou with the wol: the belt tedde haue xe
lapne / but the llocke haue ye not noziched.
Che weake haue ve not holden bp / che licke

aue ve not healed: the bꝛonen

ounde together / che out cattes haue pe not
brought agapne: J loft haue pe not tought /


but churllchipandrrueliy haue pe ruledchẽ . err. u.


Chus are they tcatred here and w.
out a thepherpe:pee al thebeattepor —


Deutero 1h. c. Adoles / and haue ſhed bloude: wall pe deuoure them / a thepgo attrape,
baue the lande in poſlepon⸗ Bp Wepe goa ‘pon an mod B-
e leane vpon youre cweardes / ye woꝛcke tapnes and ppon euery bye bell. J ee they be
abompnacyos/eucry one detklech hrs negh, kcatred abzode in all felbes/and chere is no
bout wpke a hall ve then potiede the nde: man / chat ca tothe / or ſeketh acter th.
bn ds trnetp DAVE thou thele wo des vnto them: Thus Ghettonew ve eee hence wen
20 eee ofthe Lord. Thus lapeth the Loge God: 48
0 J
Beth uhren he Aa pe Wehe weard⸗ atlo euer ta ppö the reißen Wee af toe wate ates
umetet) any feld well f geue pnto F beeſtes to be deuou⸗ ofthe felbe hau png no Mhepyerde: and feing
ijous. Hunte tedsthote that de inron edennes, thacmy ſheperdes take no of f
FiG.D.ee challdye of the peſtplence. Foz 3 twopll make epe / but fede them lelues oni / and noemx
che lande lodelolate and watte/¢ the pompe Geperbertoze heave the woweſol che Lode
olher Hrength chan come toan ende. Che O ke cpepherdes: hus laxeth $ L od God:
12 ate bude. fo watte that EE
kraüaplecherbr. and requpzemy 1
Gpechoepo.c, : Chen Wail ther lerne to ünowe / that J make em Ceatle From kedynge ok my ſhepe:
amthel ode when J make the lande walke per ede th 81
andderolate / becaute of alltheir abi e e lr


ron / chat ther haue wyoughe. Andtheu


lompna- moze: Fo: ey of


e penot Rect.


{ rael. Stir.


D them akter this, soz thus lapeth the Lozde
N, Sod: Beholde / J wil loke to my chepe my
e, (elf elehe the. Lie as a ſbepperde amonge

the klocke leketh alter p cepe that are ſca⸗

tered abꝛoade / cuen lo wyll A ſeke atter my

chepe / a gather them together out ol all pla ·

ces / where theyhaue bene kcatred in d clou-

dr and darcke dave. J wel bꝛyngethem out
trom an people / and gather them together
out ok al landes. J wil bzyng them in tothe
awne lande and fede them vyon the moun-

tapnes of a lrael / bythe rut rs / and in all ꝰ

places of the countre. I will kede thé in right

good paſtures spon ) hie moũtapnes ot: f=

Tael al there koldes be. Chere ſhal they lie

ina good kolde a in a fat paſture hallehep

lede: tus bpon § mountapnes ok lracll.

J weil fede my chepe mpleik / andbzynge
them to their reit / layeth the Loꝛde God.
Soch as be lok / well J ſcke: Coch as goae
frave wil ¥ bꝛinge agã vne:coch ag be woli⸗

„ tber bprloch as be weake / will
maße ffröge: loch as be fat a well lying /
thofe will 3 pꝛeſerue and fede them with the
thinge that is jaufull. And as fo you mp
Echepe)lapeth the Loꝛde God: J wil put a dit ·
ference amonge the wepe / amonge the we⸗
there and che goates, was it not pnough


; £02 vou / to eate vp the good paſture / but pe


muſt treade downe the relydue ol poure pas
fur with pour fete allo: nas it not pnough
toꝛ pou to dꝛincke cleave water / but ve mült
trouble the relidue allo with youre fete:
hug mp ſhepe mutt be fapne to eate the
thynge/that ye haue troden downe w route
fete a todzickeit / that ve wroure fete haue
defiled. Cherloze thus lapeth ? Loꝛd God
onto them: Bcholde / J wyll ſeuer the tate
Ghepe from the leane: £02 lo moch as pe haue
hot the weake chepe vpontheſpdes o woul⸗
ders /and runne ppon them with poure hoz.
nes / fo longe tyll pe haue vtterlp icatred thé
abzode. J wyll belpe my Mepe / lo that they
fhall nonioze be fpopled :pee 3 wyll dyſcerne
one ſhepe from another. J wyll apie vp vn⸗


* tothem one only cpepherde: euen my fers


F uaunt*Dauid he hall fedethem / a he Hat


nere be their cbephede. Ache Lozde well becher:


de ig, God / and my ferudunt Baud all be there
fiat esas bine enen che Lorde bane fpokentt,

kaut he was MPozcouct / J wpllmake a couenaunt of
dun for of the peace with them / a dꝛpue al euel beaſtes out


4 E cdu fothatthep mare Dwell fately


ter in the wylderneſſe / and dene inthe woddes.


xv. t Good fortune a profperite wil I geue them /


and onto all that be rounde aboute my hyll.
A pꝛolperous chower a rapne weil g lende
them in due leaſon / that the trees in che wod ·
demape bring Eozth their krutes / f grofde
ber increale. They chalbe fate in heit and /


Ol Esechiel,


fee

lxliij.
a ball knowe/ that J amthe L oꝛde / E
e ge Ent ae the
dute of the handes or thole / chat heide
in lubieccpon. : Deve eet

They ſhal no moze be tpopled of the Hen
then ner deuoured vb the beattes of lande:
but fafely Wall thepdwell /andnoms mall
frapethem.3 J will tet op an excellent plante
Foz themfo they hall tuffrenomoze hun
ger in p lande / necher beare the repꝛole oD
Heathen enpy moze. Chus tall they onders
fande“? Athe Loz0 thety God am Wthem /
9 ald 1 Gib Feu ar peo.

eAapeth the Lore Goo. Ve men are my pra re. d. b.
flocke / pe are the hepe or my badurr dz e
am poure God / layeth the Lozve Ged.
che deſtrncexon that ſhatl tome an the hyll Heir /
thatts/ on the Zumeans / vecaule thep troubied the
people ol the Londe.

Che. xrrb. Chapter.

Ozeouer, the wo de ofthe Lode.
came vnto me / ſapig: c hon tonne B
gol man / turne thy face rowarbe >
mount Sei pꝛophecr vpon it /
g lape vnto it: chus ſayeth tye Wozve Co
Beholdel c thou mount Seir)z wynvpon
the J well reach out myne hande ouer ihe /
ver watte and delolate wyllg make d. Chr
epties wyll J bꝛeake downe / ä thou halt ixe
vopde: ß thou mayſt unowe, how g Jams
Londe. Fo ſo moch as thou beareũ an olde 2
enempte agaynſt the chridzen of Jerael / and
with a criicl bade halt mace them afvayed/
what tyme as they were troubled and pus
niſhed ko their fynne: Cherkoze en ag truly v
as Ilxue / lapeth the Loꝛde God / A wi pe · ag Ashefore
pate the vnto bloude / yee bloude hel ulate ther r rg.
bps the: ſeing thou lapeſt warte to bioude/ Ter. .
thevfoze (yall bioude perlecute p. Chus wil
dene the mount Seirderolate a walte /

ange to pale / that there wall no man goo
thbther / ner come from thence. Ops moun⸗
tapnes wyll J kyll wyth his Mayne men zthy
bplles/dalesé balers thall tye full of thẽ/
bare apne with the lwearde. A wylmake
che a perpetuall wydemelle / ochatno man
Wall dwell in thy cpties: ß ve mape knowe /
how that Jam the Lozde,

And becaule thou batt fayd:what/*both c
thefenacyons andboth thele ides muſt be b bat in eg
mne / a J will haue the in potiedion/where R
a8 $ 07d was chere. Kherkoze, chus lapeth Io
the Loꝛde God: As truly ag 4 ipue / welt
handle the accozdynge to thywzath a
iouly /pkeas thou batt dealt cruelly wibẽ:
chat Jmape be hnowen amonge them / hom
Fane puniched the. Yee and that thou alco
mapeſt be cure / ß Lodhaue herde alt che
delpytefull woꝛdẽs / which thou hak pokes
agapnt the mountaynes /,


Ilrael,


af tch. xxö. c.


The


Jo / they are made waſte / a geuen vs to dẽ⸗
Dudoute. Thus wych poure mouthes pe haue
mapde poure boo agapnct me / pee and
inuuſtypiped youre pzoüde wordes agaynt
me / whych 2 baue herde altogether. Where
nto / chus lapeth the Lorde God: when the
whole wozlde is in wealth / then wil J make
the waſte. And line as thou. O moũt erz)
walt glad / becaule the heretage of d houle
of Itraell was deſtroped: euen lo wyll J do
vnkothe allo / 5 thou ö whole Edom chaſi be
beltvoped dienen am the Londe.

promefeth delpueraunce from the Gentiles vn.
to Jtkgeit. Che venpkpt eo done vnto the Jewes are
tobe afceibed to the mer epo God / not vuto they: bee
Cerny eenueth our hertes p we map walce
de in his commaundementes.

Ache xxxoj Chapter.

; ousfonnie of man / pꝛophecie bps
J moſſtarnes of Jeraet / e lpeale:

e besrethe wozde de the Loꝛde O
. remountarnes of Itrael: Chus

kapech the Loꝛde God: Becaule poure enes

mpe hath tapde vpon vou: ha / the hye euer
laſtynge places are now become ours ; pꝛo⸗
phecptherkoze / and lpealte thus lapeth the
ng onder 18 be waſted and troden

otone on euerp ride / a become a pollenpon
onto  vefpouc ofthe Gentiles, wh rch haue
brought yu in tomens mouthes a vnto an
euell name amonge the people: cherfoze/
heave the worde of the 07d God / O pe moũ
tapnes of Ilrael: Chus lapcth 9 Loide God
onto the mountarnes a hüͤles / vallers and

E dales top vopde wildernelles a delolatcr-

tyes / whych are Ipopled / and had in derilpon

oneuerp ide / amonge the relpdue ol? Deas
B then: ee euenthus lapeth the Loꝛde God:

In the kyꝛe of mygeloulphaue J taken a dex

üpce / agapnſt the relydue of the Gentiles / a

agapntt all dom: wüych haue taken in my


one. ur. a. ſunbevntothem lelues £078 polleg which


alto reiopled trom their whole hert wa dyl ·
pitekul Aomacke / to waſte it / a to lpopleit.
Prophecy therkoꝛe vpon the lande of F-
raell / peane onto p monntapnes andhilles/
to balleys e dates /thus la peth f Lon God
Behodde / this haue z deurled in mygelouly
@ terrible wꝛath: gor co moch as ve haue lute
feed repꝛoke ol? Heathé therfore thuslateth
the Lozde God: J haue fwozne / that § Gen ·
tples which lye aboute vou / thal beare pour
confutyon them Celucs . Anda s ko pou(D
moſſta pnes of Acrael pe thal Mute out your
. baafiches/ a biynge tozch youre rute to my
people of xlrael/ toit is hard br / chat it wil
Ccome. Beholde / J come onto you / and br
ko vou will J turne me / that ye maye be tpl:
led and lowen.


F ui lende you moch peopte which wal ·
beser f grace cps habe


Pꝛophecye


8 erepax⸗
redagarne topl cane u d moch peo⸗
ple and cateiũ/ which hall increate ¢bzynge
krute J wil reſtoze pou allo to pour old ettate
Gthewe vou moze kindnes then euer pe had
bekoze:wherby ve cwalknowe / that Jam the
Lobe. J ee people wyll I lende onto vou
my kolke of Icraell) whych chan haue the in
polleſſton / a thou ſbalt be their inheritaunce
lo that thou Halt nomoze be wythout them.
Agayne thus lapeth the Lode God: so; lo
moch ag ther fave vnto you: ihou art an eater
vpokmen / a a water of chr people therfore
thou thalt eate no mo men / nether deſtrope
thy people env moze / fayeth the Loꝛde God. 7
And J will not lutkre the / fo to heare thyne
atone confulton amonge the Gentiles krom
henkloꝛth. Chou halt not beare the repꝛole
ok thenacions / ner cat out thyne awne peo
ple enpmoze /fapeth the Loꝛde Cod.

Moeouer / the woꝛde of the Loꝛde
vnto me / laxeng: O thou tonne ot man /
phoule of Icraeldweit ops their awne gr
cher deklled them Celucs tb their awne wates
Armagrnacrons: to that in my tyght therz
ware was ipke the vnclennelle of a men
ftruous woman. 1Wherkoze J poured my
wꝛothfull dylplealure bpon them / becauſe
ok the bloude that theyhad ſhed in che lande /
K becaule ok their Jdolg / wherwith the yhad
dekyled them lelues. Alcatredthẽ alſo amõg
the Heathen / lo p they where ſtrowed about
in the landes. Accozding to their waxeg and
ane pale awne inuencyons / to drd J pus @
het them.

Now when thep were gone vnto the Bea ·
then / a come in amonge them theps* dyſhe⸗ as Conte
houred mp bolpname: fo that it was Cape note ch name:
ol then dre thele the people ot God / a mut of the Lois
go out ol their awne lade: Chen (pared Z my to 800 04


Pole nameſubich the hauke of lrge havnt: J name arse:


honoured amonge the Sentyles / to whom ſapthenll


ther came. Therfore tell § houle ot Flraell: when we hen f


Thus lapeth che Loz God: J do not this £oz anappaciuntt
pourfanes ( S houte of Acrdeic) but Eos my gehn
bolpnames fake / whpch pe dychoncureb a- 7p
monge the Heathen, when ve came to them. ip wnt
Cherkoze will halowe my greate name a- fue. A.
gayne / wypch amonge the Gentiles is tuell
Chobe of:fo2 ve vourẽ ſeluchaue dichenoured
it amonge them. And ß Gentiles Hal knowe
that J am the Loꝛde / whan Fambonoured -
in pou befoze thetrepes / dapech d Lom God.

s foꝛ vou / J wyll take you from amõge
the Heathen / and gather vou together out ot
all conntrees and bꝛynge peu agapne into
pour awne lande ben tpl J poure cleare
water vp vou / ¢ re ſhalbe diene: pee tr all 5
yout-onclennette and krö al rour bois cba Et: 15
4 dlenle ou. à newherte allo will 1005 e

pou


nh;
kectpon.


peu / and a new ſpzete will & put into you:
8 F As loz that ſtonpherte / J will tante it out of
Ni. ad. youre body / and geue pou a fleſbix herte.

8 will geue nip tpzete amonge vou / and cau!
mm commaundem'tes / to
Bepe mplaweg and to fulfilthem.

And lo pe iyall dwell in the lande / that ¥
gaue to poure fozekathers / and pe halbemp
people / a 4 wilbe poure God. J well helpe
pou out of all poure onclennede, J welt call
Foz the coꝛne / a will inereale it / a will let pow
haue nohonger. J wyll multiple the feutes
OF the trees d the increale of p lelde Foz you /
Cothat ye tall beare no moe repzote ołh ·
ger amoge the Heathẽ. chen hall ve remẽ
ze pour atone wicked wapes /¢ poure ima⸗
grnacpong / which were not good: fothatye
Fall take ifpleafure at pour atone felues/
bpreaton of youre fynnes g abbominacyos.
But A wyll not do thts to; youre fakes
dclapeth the Lo Won)be pe fure ot it. Cher⸗

koze / O ve houle of Fact) be acbamed ot

Pourtpniis.MPozeoucr/thus lapeth p L

Sod: what t pute as J Hall clenle pou tro all

roure ollen ioc / then will Amate the cytyes

ka be gecuhpenagapne/ a wyll repapze the
places S bebecaed. Che delolate lande tat

e buxiden agarne/ which atoze tyme lape

wake in ee light or all ché chat wente by.
Chen wait he lapde:this waſte lande is be⸗
come lpb cv ndẽ or pleature / g the voydz /
: 8 e A downe cptpes/ arenow

led a


ollen te/aubiolivottingete,


10 Uthe Loꝛde God: wyll
onde God: et
once ber: mene oF bout or rac
1 eben A Chall increatechem as a
locke ok nen L ple ag the holy flocke g the


fockke of Jerucalem arein che hyekalempne

keaſtes: In iat allo the wylde waſted cyties

be kpiied wich lockes or nien: and they Wall
** note thi unthe Lozde.

: COt pont fhe e . eib apapne ofthe people’

5 Seren i 1 hne ge oben

Gen people aiuicland ebeonipeueriattpng epberde


cherok. Bee
he. xxxvij, Chapter.
2 He ande ok he Lozve came vpon
d me / a caryedme out in d ſpꝛete ot
ih sLogbe and let me downe in a
N V plapne tedde / p tape Eull of bones /
Abe ledme round about by them: beholde /
che bones eh laye vpõ the lelde / were very
many diutirelougdzpe allo. Chen layne he
vntd me: hon lonne or man: thinkelt thou
thele bone g mare lyue agapne:Jantwered.


Sf Esechiel,


van aa b.
G Lope Gon /thoii Enoweſt. And he fapde
onto me: Pzophecy thots bps thele bones /

Speake vnto them: J ebzpe boneß / hcare the

woꝛde of the Loꝛde. ch¹ fapeth the worde sg

God vnto thele bones: Weholde / J wyll put

bxth into pou / that ve may ipuc:F will geue

bow lynowes / o mate tletgrolo bps vou /

d couer vou ouer with Chines ko geur por Sele. bib.
Heth / that ve map lxue / and tre / that %

bar ee por pod / ag he had el.

SoFpropyevy e Had clmaunded 5
me. Ind ag J was paophecvinge / chere came es
Unople and a greate uur pon / i cht ih box
nes ranne euery one to. another. om tober
Ahad loked / beholde hep hav fynowes / aun
flet grewe vpon them abone they were
couered wich Cyntie/buc there wag no bel
in thẽ. Chen layde he vntome: chou fone
ol man / pꝛophecye thou eawarde the wyußhe:
wophecy/a tpeabe to 5 wend: arhus tied) ,
che L ode God doing chousapze)écomehe
koure wyndes and blowe pon hele tluyne / C
chat ther may be relloꝛcuto pte. do pro-
phecied ashe han cotamanden mister came
Pzeth into the / a thepteceauedlyte / tore
vpvpõ their kete / a marlielous greate lozte.

Moꝛeduer / he lade virco me: U hou lonne
ok man / thele bones are the whole houle of
Alrael. Beholde / theylare: Gute bones are
dꝛyed vp / oure hope is gůne / we are clene cut
nE.aberfore prophecye dhon / a fpeake bnto eee. rh. o
thf:thus lapeth the Lozde God: Beholde J w
will opẽ pouregraueg( O my people) a tale
vou out of youre ſepulcres /a binge vou in
to the lande of Alrgel agayne. Do Matt e
Wow that J am the Lord / when J ope pour
graues /a bzinge you out ofthe. Gp lpꝛete
Allo wyll F put in vort / pe thallipue:z wil
let vou agarne in voure awne lande / and pe
Mall kno we) Jam the Lorde/ which haue
layde it / g kultillcd it in dede.

Che woꝛde ofthe Loꝛde came vnto me /
lapinge: thoufonne of man / tante a ttyche a

worte bpon it: danto Juda ato the chridꝛe oF
Alrael hig companpong. Chen take another

iticke /a waitebpon it: danto Joleph 5 tock

ol Ephraim / g to all che houcholde of Ilrael

bis companvõs. Andtba tante boththele to⸗ *
gether in thyne hande / lo wal there be one E
ſipeße therot. Ho w yr the childꝛẽ of thy peo⸗

ple ſays vnto the: wylt thou not chewe vs /
whatthou meanelt bythele: Chen geue thé

this ancwere:thug ſapeth ß Lose Sodrbe ·

holde J will take the och or Joleph / which 5
ig in the hande ol Ephꝛaim ¢ OF the tribes of Otee (p.
Ilrael his keloweg / will put the to s (tock

OF Juda /a make thé one ſtoche / a they Malt

be one inmyhande And ß two ltyckes where
bponthoutwzptett/ chalt thou haue in thyne
hand / that they max le / a alt lape onto thé:

= N. Chus


Gogand =:
Mago


.


F

Chuslapeth the Lorde God beholde
wyplltake awape the chplozen ot Alrael kr
aniongethe Heathẽ / vito wh they be gone /
yl gather them together on euer iyde /
bzinge them agayne into their atone lde:

pee F 14 people orchem in the
kande pon che mountapnes of Flac / and
thepelt Pallhauebur one kung. Ther wall

no mozebe two peoples from hẽcetoꝛth / ne
ther be deurded in to two kyngdomes ther
Wall allo defile the lelues nonioze with their
abhompnacpös / Jdoles / a all their wicked⸗
doinges. J willhelpe them out ok all thelr
dweliyng places / wherin ther haue lynned:
and 117 a 1 — ow that ther halbe my

ple / Itheir God.

Pe aan feruaunt chalbe their king / a


„.


Eyck. xxritſ d they all hall haue one Mepherde oni. Cher
Job. b. b. bal welche nmplatoes/ mp comaunde-


mötes call ther both kepe and kulkil. They
Mall well in p lande / that J gauevnto Ja-
cob myſeruaut / where as poure kathers al⸗
kohaue dwelt. Yee kus in the tame lade Hall
they their chyldꝛen /a their chüͤders chlldzen
dwell foz euermoꝛe:and my feruatit Dauid
Halbe their euerlaling prince. Moeouer
J wyll make a bonde of peace wyth them /
_ -bobtch walbe onto them an cuerlallyngeco⸗
uknaunt. J munen ler amber
them / my Sanctuary wyll J let amöge th
foz cuermoze. Wr dwellynge chalbe wrth
chem / vee 3 twit be chelr God / and ther wall
bemp people. thus the Heathen alfo Hatt
tnotne that'd the Lozde am the holy mater
ok Attgel: wü my Säctuarp Halbeamdge
them Foz euermoze.


CHepropheepeth that Sog and CBagog cyan come
Shenae ted hoſte ine the lande oF promes.
Their entent he reberceth that the cömyng of Sog
wos before pꝛophecied of thepzophetes. Che deũruc⸗
cron of hem. Se
: che xrxviij. chapter.
ed the wozde or che Lode came
vntome / ſapinge: chou tonne of
m


weapened of the beſt fathd: a great people/
that handle altogether fpeares/th ploes/and
gq Svttes:the perkes Pozrans a with them
the Lybiang / which all beare cyſdes a hel⸗
metteß: Somer and all his hootes:the boule
ol Chogoꝛma out of che noꝛth quarters / and


‘Bllbiaboottes pee a moch people withthe, or the keide


Pꝛophetye


Sehertoze prepare the tet thy tele in araxe
itp all thy people 125 ate come vito the
by heapes / and be thou theirdelence. Liter
many dapes thou ſhalt be vrlited / and in the


latter peaves thou Wait come in to p lande


that hach bene deſtroped with the tweame⸗
now is replenpched agagne with druerce
people bpi the moũtapnes or Irael / which
baue lunge ipen walte. Pee they be bought c
out of the nacrxons/ a dwell all fate. Chou
Malt come vp like a tom wecher / o couer
the lande / and as it were a darcke cloude:
: uta — 8 d agreate mul ·
e of people e.

Pep oreoue) thus lapeth the Lozde God:
At the lame tyme Hall many thinges come
into chr mynde / lo that thou Malt pmagen
mylcheke / a tape: I will bp to vonder plarne
lande / leing they lpt at eale / and dwell lola ·
feip(£oz they dwell all without any walles /

ephaue nether harres nor does to lpople 2

m to robbe thé / to lave bande vpon their
Cowell inbabpted wydderneſles:agapnſt that
people / that is gathered together fro amoge
the Peathen / whych haue gotten cate ll ad
good / anddwell in the myddeſt ol the lande.
Then ſhall Saba / and Bedan / and the mar ·
chaiites of Charlis wyth all their wozthies/
fapepnto the: Art thou come to robbe: pak
thou gathered thy people together / becauſe
thou wylt ipople: to tate tplũer andgolde:to
carꝝ awape catell and good: and to haue a
Greate pꝛape:

Cherkoze / O thou tonne of man / thou @
halt pꝛophecye / and lape vnto Gog: hus
lapeth $ Lozde God; In chat dape thou walt
nnowe /g my people of Akraeldwellech late:
And chalt come from thy place out ot p noꝛch
partes: thou a moch people withthe why)
tpdebpon hoꝛſes / wherok there is a greate
multrtude ¢ an innumerable foste. J ee thou
Malt come bpon my people of Icraell / as a
cloude to couer che lande is wal come to ,
palle in the latter dapes:J wyll bzinge g ter oy


10
bp into my lande that the Peäthen mape e oo
knotwe me when Z getmebonoure Hpi the ug F


D Gog /befoze their eyes.
bus fayeth the Loꝛde God: Chou art f
he / or whom J hauefpoken acoze tyme / by
my leruafites 6 pꝛophetes of Jirael / which
pꝛophecptd in thole dapes a peares / that %
Wulde biynge the vpon them. At the taniẽ
tyme / when Gog commeth vp in to the land
ok Alraellca peth the Lorde God bal mpins
dednacron go kozth in my wꝛath. Foz in my
clouty and hote dylpleature F haue deux⸗
kms fg eee bsp pad 15 —
b teme. The berry tithes.
in che fee the foutes ol the are / the anes
/ and all the men that are a


Ok Ezethiel.


the carth / tall tremble fo7 Feare ot me.

G Che hilies allo halbe turned vp ſyd dow⸗
ne / che ſtapzes of ſtone thal fall and all wal⸗
les yal lyncke to the grounde. J will cal foꝛ
alwearde bpon thé in all my mounta ynes /
lapeth the Loe God: lo that euery mans
cwearde Hal be vpon another. Myth peſty⸗
dence and blonde will A punyth hem tomy


Chus will abe


genge agapne from captpuptye is pipmeled.
Ache. xkxix. er.
Vertoze D thou Conne of mũ / pꝛo·
‘ohecpeagapnt Gog / and lpeake:
Aus Capeth the Loide God: Be⸗
Nyoſde / O Hog: thou cheke pꝛince at
4


thy tee
out ol thyrpalchande chou wyth allthyne
ople that is wWthe / mult
mtapnes of Atraell. Chen
vonto the foules a wylde bea⸗
the telle / to be deuoured: there muſt
chou lye hpon che kelde. Foz euen Athe Loꝛde
haue (poker it / lapeth the Loꝛde God.
Into Magog, andamonge thole that tye
Lo careleſſe in the gleg: will lende a kyꝛe /
they Hat lingtw / that J amthe Lozde. J will
make allo the name of my Yolpnette to be
Bowne amonge my people of Ffrael: andy
willnotietempholy name be eucil Cpoken of
enymoze:but the very Heathẽ allo thal kno ·
wel that q aut the Loꝛde / the holx one of Al⸗
sacl. Beholde / it commeth / 2 halbe kulkilſed
indede lapeth the Lord God. his is $ dave
wherot J haue (poken:chey that dweilin §
cyties OF fractal go koꝛth a fet kyꝛeby
the weapeng / a burne them: ſbyldes a tpere
peates il bevetaenpuge beta totbat
8 thal ehen be burnpnge therot/ cothat
Crhep hall ei bzinge noltiches krom p; telde /
nether haue nede Cohew downe enp out ol
the wodhr: oz they chal haue weapẽs pnow
to burne. hep ball robbe thole that rob⸗
pedthem /awrpople thole that tpoyledthem
fapeth the Lande God.
Atkche tame tyme well F geue onto Sog /
place to be buriedin / in Acrael:euẽ the val⸗
kerhwhere thoꝛow men go krom the eaſt toß
lee warde. C hole that trauaple therby / Hall


*


lrbj.
abhoꝛre it. here Hall Gog and all hys peo⸗
ple be butted: and it Maibe called the valley
ok Speople of Gog, Seucnmonethesionge
Qaleye boule of Ftrael be burienge of them
that ther mape clenle the lde. Yee at peo⸗
ple ol the lande Mall burye them. W it (all
be a gloztous dape / when g gett me chat ho⸗
houre/fapeth the Loꝛde God. Cher (all z. „
dene men allo to be deed buriers / euer going
thozow the lande / z appoynte them certapne
places to bury thole in / whych vemayne bpd
the kelde /p the lande mapẽ be clenled. From
ende to ende thall thep fete / andthat vi. mo⸗
nethes longe. Pom thote that go thoꝛowthe
land / where they le a mas bone they tal let
5 a tokẽ by it / till the deedburierz hauebu ·

edit allo / in d valleyokthe people of og,


Andthe name of the citie chalbe called. Ha- hat @/ mul
monah: Chus wal they mate the land clene. terude.


Andthou lonne of man: thus ſayeththe
Loꝛde God: Speake onto all the toules «
euery byꝛde / vee and to allthe wylde beattes
ok the teide: heape pou together and come /
gather you rounde aboute vpon my llaugh ·
ter / that J haue layne koꝛ vou:euen a greate
daughter spon the mountaynes of Arrnell:
cate lech / and dzinche bloune.Ye ſhal eate 6


fleth of the wozthies aud dzynche the bloude Apoca xtr


ok the pꝛynces ok the lande: or the wethers /
ol the lambes / ol the goates / and ol the oven
chat be al llapne at Baſan. Cate the fat your
belpkunl/ and dꝛyncke bloud / tyll ye be dꝛon⸗
ken of the daughter / whych J haur dayne
vnto pou Fill pou at mytable/wich hoses a
ſtronge hozlmen: with captaynes and al mẽ
ol ware lapeth the Lorde dod,

Iwill bringe mpglozpalloamongethe
Gentyles / that an the Heathen mape le my
iudgement / that J haue kepte / and myhand
whpch J baue laped vpon them: that p hou⸗
le ot gcraeu mare knowe / howthat Jam d
Loꝛde theyꝛ God / from that dape forth.
And the Heathen Hail knowe / that where
ag the hoüle of Alraell were led in to capty⸗
uite: it was koꝛ ther wickednes take / becau⸗
lethey oltended me.

For the whych caule Ahrd my face kram
them / and delpuered them in to the handes ol
their enemyes / that they myght an be Mayne
with the fwearde.Accozdinge to their vnclẽ
nelle and vnkaithkul dealinges / lo haue Jen
treated them /andhyd mpface trom them. (
Cherkoꝛe thus layeth the Lorde God: ow
will J bꝛynge agayne the captiues ol Jacob
and haue mercy bpon the whole houle ok l ·
raell / a be gelous for mpholpnames lake.
Alltheir conkuliõ andoffence that ther haue
done agaynſt me / (all be taken awaxe: and
fotately hall they dwellin 2 5 200 f
5 woman ball maketp ane a ed


4. .


The


enth. xxrvi o the boule or Arael fayeth the Lorde God,


temple.


The Pꝛopherye


aue bought them agayne from amonge cubptes / a the heygth ofthedoze xiij.cubptz.
3 baut gatbereblhg toge · Che edge befoze the chambres was one cu ·
ther out of thetr enemypes aides) ¢ am pꝛax. byte bꝛade bpon boch the lrdes /¢ the cham⸗
led in them bekoze many Heathenaahen hal byes lix cubites wyde of ertber lide. He mea⸗
they knowe / that Jam d Lorde their God / lured the daze fromthe rpgge ol one chübze
which lutkred them̃ to be led in to captrupte to another / whole wyonele was. xxv. cuby-
amonge the Heathẽ / but naw haue brought tes / and one doze ſtode agapnſt another. e
them agapne in to their awne lande / and not made pilergallo. x. cubitcs he / roũde about
left one or them vonder. the courte doze Betoze > inward parte vnto

After that well J hrde my face nomoze the foze entre of the xnnermer deze / were L.
from them / but wil poure out my tpꝛete vpõ cubptes Che chabers a their pilers within /


dowes: Do hadthe koze entries allo / whole
Che rettoaringe of the cptye m of the temple that wyndowes wente rounde about within. And
‘was to came ts dhewed bnto the Piophete. bpon the prlers there ſtodedate trees,
¶ Che xl. Chapter. Eben brought he me in to the foze courte /
the xrb. xeaxe ot oute captxux · where ag were chambꝛes a paued wozches/
tre / in the beginning ok the peare / made in the foze courte rounde al xxx.
5 Ache. v dape otihe moneththatis ? chambzes bpon one paued woꝛcke. How the
wii. reare / aiter that the cite was paued woꝛcke was a longe belide the dozes /
ünplen Dotwnesthe lame dape came the hand ap was the lower paued wozche. Atterthts /
or the Lozde vpon me / acaried me koꝛth: he miealured the bzedth kr the lower doe /
into the lande ar Acrael bꝛought he me in the onto the ynnermer courte of the outtyoe /
vylpong of God: let me dewne bpõ a mar⸗ which had an. C.cubytes bponthe eat a the d
uelous hye moũtape / whervpon there was noꝛth parte. And the doꝛe in the bttermok
abuplopnge (as it had bene or acite)toward courte towarde the noꝛth / mealured he after
che north. the length ebzenth: his the chambzeg allo
Chither he carled me / and beholde / there on ether lide / with his pylers ¢ foze entries:
was a m / whole limtlitude was like bʒaſſe / which had euen the mealure of the kr doꝛe.
which had a thꝛede ot flay in his hande / and his hergih was kytr cubrtes / bꝛedth rv
ametterodde alto. Be lode in e doe / z lapde cubptes: his wyndowes a pozches wich bys
vnto me:marcke well with typne eves her date tres / had euen Iyne mealure as $ doze


ken to wich thyne eares / A kacten it in thine towarde the cat: there were. bij. eppes ko


doe / whych conteyned


ert / whatloeuer J Mall che we the / to to ? go vpppd / a their poꝛche befoze them. How
tent that they myght be chewed the thers the doze of d vnnermer court ode fret
foze artthou bꝛoughthither. And whatloe⸗ ourragapne the doze / that was toward


uerthou leyſt thou walt certytye the houle noꝛth ealt. Frõ one doze to another / he mea⸗
ol Ilrael therok. e H
Weholde / chere was a wall on the outlive jat hebꝛoughtme taz couthlide /


rounde aboutethe houle the meterodde tat where there ode a Dozetowarde the fouths
he had in hishand / wag ſix cubyte z long o a whole pilers and poꝛcheshe ache poche
lpanne. Sohe meatured the bzedth or the had the Evatt meature/a wyth thei porches
burlding / which wag a meterodde / and the thephad wyndowes rounde a boute / lrne che
bevgeh allo a meterodde. Chen came hevnto sire wpndowes.chebevath was. i cubites /
the kalt doze e wente vpthe Mares/e men- che bycdth.rrb.%b Meppes to go bpbpon his
luredthe pottes ol z doe: wherob euerr one poꝛche ſtode betoꝛe him / with bis prler and
was a meterodde thicke Euerr chäbze was pate lres on eicher ide. Endthe doze of the
ameterodde longe ¢ bode: betwene the chli nnermer courte ode towarde the louth /s
bers were Fpue cubptes. Che polte of d doze he mealured krom one doze toanotder an. C.
within the poꝛche / was one meterodde. He cubiteg. Do he bzought me in toß vnnermer
mealured alto the pozche ok the vnnermer courte / charow 5 doze or $ touth kde which
a meterodde. Chen * meaſured / and it had the mealurt afoze

mealuredhethe entrpe ofthe doze / that con⸗ lapde. In lyke maner / his chambzes / plerz /
terntd eght cubytes and his pplers two cu⸗ and foze entries had euẽ the fore ſarde mea
bytes: and this entrye ſtode inwarde ture alin Aaa dab sc) W
Chechambers ol che doze caltwarde were aboute wyndoweg ok. U. cub tes heraht/ @
thze on euery lrde: a lyke bꝛode and longe. xxb. cubptes bꝛode Che pozches roũd about
Che prlers allo that Hove ot both thetydes/ were. xxo. cubptes longe / and. b. cubytes
were of one mealure. Alter this / he mealu · bzode and his poꝛch reached onto the btter-


dhe wydenelle of che doze / which was. r. mok n 225


rounde about vnto the doze / had ide wen-


The temple.


trees / ard. bil. ctenpes to go vp bpon,

E, Be bꝛougheme allo in toß ynmoſt courte
Hpon the ealt ide / and meatured the doze /
accoꝛdxng top mealure atoꝛe layd. His chã⸗
erg pplers / and porches had euen the fame
mealuke / as $ tpact had:a with his porches
he had wyndowes rofine aboute. Ehe heigth
Wag. l cubytes / the bꝛedth. xb. cubptes: is


ches reached öntothe bttermott courte:


pꝛlers allo had date trees on eyther lyde /
F. bi teppestogo bp bpö. Andhe brought
me to the noꝛth doze / and mealuredit / which
allo had § foze ſapdmealure. His chäbzes /
pplers and porches had wyndöwes rounde
Aboute: whole hergth was. Lcubptes /g the
Beedtg. Ip. Hys pplerg ſtode towarde p vt-
temoſt courte / ¢bpon them both were date
trees / and. vii. ſeppes to go vy bpon. There
fode a chambze allo / whole intraunce was
at the doze pists / and chere the burntofie-
rynges were walched.
In the doze poꝛche / there ſtode on ether
Flpde two tables kor the flaugheynge:to lleye
the bzencotferpnges / fynneofierpnges and
trelpaceolirynges therbpon. And on the out
Cyde as men go foꝛth to the noꝛth doze / there
Kode two cables . Foure tablt (ode on ether
Ide of thedoze/p is. vii tables / wherbpon
ther dauighted. Foure tables were orhewen
Hone fo: the burntofferpnges/of a cubyte e
a — Tonge and bꝛode / and one cubpte hve:
wherbpon were laped the vellels and oꝛna⸗
mentes wh ych were pled to the burnt and
Hapne offerynges/ whẽ theywere Naughted,
And within there were pokes koure kyngers
byode / fattened rounde aboute / to hange
fief) pon /andbpon the tables was la pedß
ge ſleſh. On the outlpde of the ynner=
mier doze were the lyngers chambersin the
inwarde conte belpde the Mozth doze. ouer
agapntt h South. Chere ſtode one allo / be⸗
lde the cait doꝛe nozthwarde.
And he ta poe onto me: Chis chambze on


nail the Hou pbe helongeth to the prettes / 6
g. 5. t. kepe ihr hub ptac von: and thps towarde the


bpon ſteppes went men vp to it by s walles
allo were pplers / on ether lde one.


Ol Ezechiel.


er bij,
¶ Cheẽ ditpoc cyon ond deuper of bu e
che burg 6dr tg h bd


Che. rij. Chapter.


FENG ‘Seer thishebzought me to p tẽple /

amealuredthe pockes: wüpch were at
ol both ö tydes. bj. cubptes thicke /
Laccoꝛdyngeto the wyneneſſe ok the
tabernacle. he bzebch of the voze wag. r.
cubrtes and the wales or the doze on either
lde fpue cubytes. He mealuxed the length
therot / which conteyned. xl. cubpteg / andthe
baedth. rr. hen wente he in / audmealured
the doze pottes / whych were two cubptes
thicke: but § doꝛeit lelfe was tyre cubptes/
athe bꝛedth ofthe doze was. oi .cubptes. He
mealure 5 length and bzedth therot / whypch
were euerp onẽ. xx.cubptes / befoze 5 tẽple.
And he lapde unto me: thys is the holpelt
ok all. Demealured allo the wall or phoule /
whch was {pre cubytes. Che chambꝛeg 5
ſtode rode aboute p houle / were euery one
koure cubptes wpde / one ltode harde bpon
another / wherokthere were. revit} Andthere
ftove pottes beneth by the walies rounde
aboute the houle / to heare thé vp: but in the
wall of $ houte thep were nottattened: The


rde chambꝛes were chehyerthe wyder / and


had ſteppes thoꝛow them rounde aboute the
houle. EChus was it wyder aboue / that from
the loweſt men might goto p hye a dd
chambers. Alawe allothat the houle was 2j
very hye rounde aboute. Che koundacxon o€
the lyde chambꝛeg was a meteroddel that is
tyre cubptes)bzone. Che thichnetic of lyde
wall without / conte ep tpue cubptes/ a lo


dyd ß outwall o€ the chabzes in the houle.


Betwene the chanibers / was the wyde⸗


nes xx. cubytes roũde about the houte, Che


chambꝛe dozes ſtode ouer agaynſt the out
wall / che one doze was towarde the noꝛth / x
other to warde the South: a the thycinede
ok ß outwall was. b. cubytes rounde aboute
Now the bupldynge that was feparated tos
wardeche welt was irr. cubrtes wrde: the
wall ofthe bupidyng was. b. clibytes thicke
rounde aboure / x the length koure fcoze cue
bytes ¢ ten. ohe mealured p houle which
krwrns iche wel ere the leparated
buyldyng with the wall were an. C. cubptes
longe allo. he wydnelſe bekoze the houle a
oF it that was ſeparated towarde the wat
was an. C. cubytes.

And he mealuredthe length ok the buvl-g
dpnge bekore and behynde wyth the chabers
bpon both the lydes:aͤnd it conteynedan, .
cubites. The ynnermer temple the porch of
the fore courte the fide pottes / thele ther had
Cyde wyndowes /andpplers rounde aboute
ouer agaynſt the polkes / krom the grounde

Fj, opto /


vp tothe wyndowes : The wpndotors them
felues were [pled ouer with bognes.and thus
was it aboue the doe / nta che ynmoſt hou⸗
ke / and without allo? Peethe whole wall on
eusty cpde both within and without was lx ·
led ouüer wgreate horde. Chere were Che⸗
Drulins and date trees made allo / lo that one


Thetemple f The


date tree Hone euer bewirte two Cherubins: g.


Hne Cherub had two kaces / p face ota man
lokynge alpde towarde the date tre / anda
iron face on d other lde. Thus wag itma⸗
derounde aboute in al the houle: Yee p Che-
subing a date trees were made krö the groũd
bpaboue the doze / a lo ſtode they allo vpon
the wall ofthe temple,

Che bypoltes of the temple were koure
tquared / and the fathion of the Hanctuat
pee tuen as it apparedvnto nit a toꝛe in
billion. Che table was ol wodde / the cubx⸗
tes hre andtwo cubptes longe:hys coꝛners /

e length and the walles were ol wodde.

ndhe kapde vnto me: his is the table / that
hal ſtande befoze the Lozde. Chetemple d
the holpeſt of alhadether of themttodozes
Geuerpdoze had two lytle twychectes which
were foldenin one bpon another / on cuery
tyne two, And vpon the dozes of the temple
there were made Cherubing a date trees / ly
kt as vponthe wales: aa greate thicke bal.
fic of wodde was beloze on the out ſyde of d
poꝛche. Upon both the lydes oF the wales ol
the poꝛche / there were made deye windowes
g date trees / hauynge beames and balkes /
Ipke as the houle had. ’
Ot the chambyes of the temple koꝛ the reakes/¢
the holp thinges. 9 8
che. xlij. chapter.
Hen carpedhe me out into d koꝛe
court towarde $ noꝛth / a bꝛougbt


agapnt the backeburldeng north
warde / which had the length or an. C.cubp-
tes whole doze turned towardthe nozth. he
wypdeneſle cötepned. . cubttes:ouer again
che. xx. cubites of the ynnermer courte / and
agapnct the paued wozke that wat in f foze
court. Belpde all thele thꝛe there ſtode py⸗
erg / one oucvagapntt another: And bekoze
this chambꝛe there was a walk ung place of
=e wyde / a within was awaye or one


cubite dwyde / a theit dozes to warde ß nozth.
Chus the heit chambꝛes were allwape na⸗
rower then the loweſt and myddelmoſt ok ß
buliding: ko they bare chambze vpon cham
bꝛe / and ſtode thze together one vpõ another
not hauynge pilers lpße the toꝛe court:ther⸗
koze were they tmaller then thole beneth and
eee ee from the grounde
e. ere
8 Che wall without that Hove by tye cham ·


Pꝛophetye


dꝛes kowarde tye vttemolt courte vpon che

foze (ye ofthe chambzes / was L. cubytes

longeikoꝛ the length of the vttemoſt chãbꝛes

in the foze courte was L. cubites alto: but 6

length therok bekoze the temple was an C.

cubites. Chele chambꝛes had under them an

intraũce ot the eat eyd / wherby ama might

o in to them out of the koze courte / thoꝛow

the thicke wal ol the koze courte toward the

ealt / right ouer agarnſt the leparated buple

dinge. Bekoꝛethe ame buylopnge vpon thys

kde there were chambers allo bers had
awaye vnto thé / jpke as the chambers on 6
noztl kde of the lame length a wydenelle.

Cheir intraunce / kaſh on and dozeg were
allo ot the lame maner.) ee eueniphe as all
other chamber dozes were / lo were thote
ok the louth ld. And befoze the wape toward
the lingersſteppes on the eat Fide / chere ſto⸗
de a doꝛe togo in at. Chen fade he vnto me:
Che chambers toward the nozth a the louth
whych ſtande befoze the backe buploynge:
thole be holy habitacyons / wheryn the pea
lies that do lerupce betoze the Loꝛde / mut
eate the moſt holy offeringes: and there mutt
they iape the mot holy offerpnges : meatok⸗
keringes /lynne offtinges ¢ trekpaceoſterpn⸗
ges / kor it is anholp place. hen the pzeltes
come therin / they Hal not go out in to p foꝛe
courte: but leyenge they be holy) they tall
ſeauethe clothes of thetr miniltracyon / and
put on other garmẽtes / when ther haue enx
thynge to do with the people.

Now when he hadmealured al the vnner⸗ Pp

met houſe / he bꝛought me forth thoꝛow the
eall poꝛte / and mealuredthe fame rounde a⸗
boute. He meaſured the eaſt lyde tb themes
tezodde / whych rounde aboute conteyned v.
C. meteroddes. And the noꝛth lyde mealured
he / which conteyned rounde aboute euen lo
moch. Che other two krdes allo towardethe
louth and the weſt( which be mealured) cons
tepnedether or them b. E. meteroddes. Do
he mealured all the foure kydes where there
wente a wall rounde aboute b. C. meterod-
des longe / a as bꝛode allo wh rch leparated e
holy from the vnholp.
e ſeych the glozy of Pod goyng in to the Temple /
from whence it had before departed. Be mentpotieth
the Jdolatrpe ofthe chilbyen oF Ffeaclt for whieh
they we re conſumed ¢ bronght to uo want. de is come
maunded to call idem agapne to repentaunct.

Ahe. lt. Chapter.

O he bꝛoughtme to $ doze / p tur⸗
ch towarde the eat. Beholde/
chen came the glozpotthe Godot l
B 2: Ffraell from out of the eaſt / whole
vopce was like a greate nople of waters /@


/
the earth was ipghtench with bys gt 705 yee · xi


t to lone pon was lyne the kyzdt ch
eben A wente m wbatteime eee


The


temple, Ok Ezethiel. xb


crtie ſbulde haue bene detroped:andiphe p the botome therok rolde aboute one cubytes
bptyon that Flame by the water of Cobar. hrs keppes Lode towarde the Cate And he


Chen kell J b pon my face but the gloꝛp old. fayd vntome: Chou lonne of mia / thus fat
Saher Lozde came in to the houie thoꝛow the Cal the Loꝛde God: thele are the anes


doze. Do a wynde tone mebp/andbzoughe lawes of the aulter / inthe dave when it is


me into the pnnermercourte: ¢ beholde / the made to oltre burntolryngeg / a to lpꝛͤckle Srecbirliig.c.


houfe was full oktheglozvorthe Loꝛde. bloude ther vpon. Cothe preltes tothe Lee


B, Iherde one ſpeahyng onto me out ot the uites that be of the fede of Dadach / z treade


Apota. xxi.c


Zach. f. a.


gp Hd Cutomes therok.


hoũlẽ / and there tobe one byme / that larde betoꝛe me to do me lerupce / lapeth the Loz


en bt. lbtabnto me: O thou lonne of man / chis rowme Bod.uanto thele geuethou a voge bullocke /


is my leate / a the place of my fotetteppes: Foz afpynofferyngers take the bioude of hym
where as I wylldwell amonge the chyldzen anatpzenchic his kourehoꝛnes withall and
ol Alrael fo euermoze:ſo that the houle of che koure cozners ok the aulter .


Ilrael cpallnomo ze dellle my holy name:ne⸗ with Pledge that goeth rounde aboutehere neut roi k,


ther ther / ner their king / choz ow their whoꝛ⸗ wyth Malt thou clente it / and reconcyle it.
dome thozow theirhre places / a thoꝛowthe Chou thalt take the bullock alto othe Cyn: gf
deed Vooves oF thelr Apnges: whych haue ollringe /s burne him in afeuerall place w⸗
buplded their thzecholdes in maner harde out the Sanctuarp.
vpon my thzeſwoldes / e their poſtes almoſt Che nexte dape / take a gootbuck wyth⸗
at mp poſtes: lo that there is but a bare wall out blemi(p fora lynoſtryng to reconcyie §
vbetwyxte me and them. aulter withalleiphe as it was reconcyied w
Chus haue they dekrled my holy name the bullocke. Mow when thou hat made ie
with their abbominacyons / that they haue cleane / then offce apongebullocke without
comptted. therfore ꝗ haue deſtrox ö chem biempch / z a ramme out ofthe flocke wyth-


in my wꝛath: But now they Wall put awape out bienuch allo: Olle thé before the Lord / Teultl. xi t.


their whoꝛdome and the derd bodxes ob their and let the pelt caſt falttheroyon and geue


e thE Foz euermoze. Cherkoze O thou Seuen dapes chalt thou bꝛinge / euery dave
fonne ol man) chewe thou the houcholde or a gootbuck. a ponge bullocke edge
Ilrael a temple / that they mape beathamed ofthe locke ( both wythout blempih) (all
OF their wickednelle / and mealure théfelucs they olkre. Seuen dapes challthey recöcvle c
an example therat. and clenle the aulter / z oltre vpon it. nohen

And when they be a ſhamed of all their thete dapes are expired / then pon the. vill.
woꝛckes / chen bewe chem the tourme and daye andlo kojth / the pettes thal offre their
fafppon of the temple:the commynge m / the burntotkringes ¢ healtholrynges bponthe
goynge oute all che maner and delcripcion aulter: lo wyll J be mercpeull vnto vou /
therof/vee all the vles and oꝛdynaunces ok layeth the Loꝛde God.

17/2 ther mape kepe a LUI all the FAIS G ce ceweth what tore or the templets chutte. de is
cömaunded to vpbzapde the people with their offence,
Chis isthe delcripcpon ok the houle: Ab⸗ Chevncivcuncpled in bert g in the fſech. Who are to
oue bps themositrounde aboute all 5 70s. de reguceg. hech wech aher temple/andwhoto
ners c walbe f hoipett oral. Bebodde that mreerd to he boty Pact a al hel ol
S Geer tte scene eet
u ulter( after the e
true cubrte: whych is a fpanne longer then koche ure do orb bun.
another cubpte) bys botome in the myddeſt
was a cubyte longe andwyde / and the ledge


can out of m put dhe on 0 De them fo bntothe 1ozde fon aburntofferpng, Leuttigh b.


bzode po foure comers:the couerpnge of loßzed aboute me/beholde/ Wr
Laulter mas. ritt. cubptes lange and baode plied chebouteseme . — fap lid


Thetemple, The Proph


beholde / v take diligent hede to an p 4 will
faye vuto the / concernyng all the oꝛoynaun ·
cep ol the Loꝛde ¢ all bis iawes:pondze wel
with chene herte the cOmypng in or the houle
the goinge toꝛth oF the Danctuarp: a tell
that obftpnate houſbolde of Zfrael: Chus
lapeth tye Loꝛue God: O houte of Itraci /e
haue now done nougy withall youre abbo-


mrnacpons / levnge chat ve haue bought in


tomy Sanctuary ſtraungerg /hauynge vn⸗
circuncpied hertes and flew, where thoꝛow
my Sanctuary is detiied / when pe ole me
bzebſiat/ and bloude.

Chus with all poure abhompnacrons ve
haue bzoken my couenaunt / and not nepte
the hoipozbinauces of mp Sanctuary: but
let kepers of my Sanctuary euẽ atter pour
Stone Mpnde.Cyertorethus lapeth 5 Lozne

codec all tye itraũgert that well amoͤge
the chrldzen of Alraei / no draunger (whole
porte o lech is not cercumcpled) tall come
within my Sanctuary: No nerthe Leuites
that ve gene backe fro me / andhaue dpiceas
uedthe people of Ilrael with all erroures /
polnge alter their pooles:therfoze Mall they
eae their awne wyckedneg. Spbuivetyep
be let a oꝛdened tompnyttre under the doꝛes
ot the houle of my Sanctuary: And to do
leru pet in the houle: to dave burntollringes
Glacrityces oz the people: to ſtande betoze
Delgtoteme them bernge the kerurcethat
tber dothẽ / is beloze their Fooles/ o caule g
houte ok {tact to ſtombie thozow the wyc·
kednes: oz the which caule N haue pluckte
th. ez · l. out myne hande ouer them (fapeth h Loꝛde)
ſothat now theymult beare their awne ini ·
quyte / and not to come nre me / to lerue me
with their pꝛeſthode / in mp Sanctuary / a
moot holpect of all: that they mape beare

their awne ante g abhompnacrös / wht
they haue done. hulde J vle the to be voz ·
terg ofthe houle / and to all the lerupce that
Grech. zlib d. ig done therin⸗ But the Pzetkesthe Leurtes
bbb. Connes ol Dadoch ) that kepte the holy ozs
dynaũces ol my Sanctuary / when the chtls
deen ok Alrael were gone krome: wall come
to me / to do me leruxce / to lande deloꝛe me /
andto offre me the fat andthe bloude / laxeth

the Hozde Goo.

e, Chey mal go into my sanctuary / and
Vereade bekoꝛe my table / to do me ferutce/and
to warte vpon mpne oꝛdynaũces. Mow whe
they gotn at 6 does of the ynnermer court:
ther Dall put on lynen clothes / lo 6 no wol ·
irne come bpon them: whyle they do terupce
vnder the doꝛeg of the vnnermer courte / and
within. Chey challhaue fapze tynen bonet⸗


teshpon thett heades / and lynẽ bꝛeches bps byt


thetr loynes / whych in thetr laboure the
Wall not put aboutthem: and when bre


etye


koꝛth tothe people in to the outward courte /
they (hall put of p clothes / wherin chey haue
mynpitred/andiape them in the habytacron
of the Sanctuary / and put on other appa⸗
we cher bnbalowe the people wyth there


tyes,
Cher chall not haue theirheades / ner no⸗
rych che bute ok their hearre /butrounde Leuttletrt.
their heades only. Allehe Petes that go ind. ra.
tothe pnmoc court caldryncke no wrne. n.
Chey tall mary no wyoow ether one that Heu
is put tom her hulband:but a maybe of the 8
lede of the boule of Icrael / oꝛ a wrddowe /
bath had a pꝛeſt befoze,
Chey Hall wewe my people the dyllerẽce
betwene the holy and vnholp / betwixte the
lene and vnclene. At any dico wearile / they
Wall dyccerne it / and geüe ſentence alter mx
fudgementes. My kolempne keaſtes/ mpgs
lawes and ozdynaũces tall they kepe / and
halowe mpspabbathes.chep wall come at
no deen perlone / to defple thé keiueslexcepte
tebe father oꝛmother / lonne oz ter
bꝛother 02 ſylter p hath had yet no nde)
in loch ther mae be dekpled.
And when he is clented / there hal be ree
kened vnto him. vi. da yes: and yt he go in to
5 Sanctuatꝝ agapne to doferupce he halt
bunge alpnotrpnge tapeth the Loꝛde God.
Cher hallhaue an heretage / yer J mylelke Deute.rvits,
wilbe theft heretagetels hall ze geue he no Faeries
Pollefyonin Ziracit/foz Nam their podec⸗ :
ton. Ege meatoffcynge/fpnnoftepng: a trel⸗
paceofiryng wall cher eate / and euer dedy⸗
kate thing mz cragelwpalbe theirs. Che fick.
Ipnges of all che fivit truteg / and all tre wil ·
Offcpnges thall be the pzeſtes.
e wal geue vnto the prett alto the firt>


lynges of youre dowe / that God ma xe pꝛo⸗


ich Cperethe relpdue. But no deed carron wal


nett eate / ner och as is deuoured of welde eros. rd.
ettes / koules or catell, Talib


C Oute ot all the lande of are there ſcparate
peta abath er 4 uit is geuen tothe Dit ⸗
des and to the temple/ che ſeconde to the Lruptes/ihe
e
— eur keutts. f c.


Ser bebauten tebe bp gent
Fre cal put alrde one parte foz a


amelprrd: oddes lõge /
and. r. H. bꝛode. his Halbe holy / as wrde
as it is tounde ab oute. Ot thrs parte chere
thal belonge bnto che Sanctuatr. v. E me ·
teroddet in all the foute coꝛners / and. j cu⸗
tes wyde rounde aboute to the ſuburbeg.
And tremithts mealute namely of. xb.
metereboes ae e binde d ae


che


27 u 5 Bo


wherinſhe Spanctuarpand ho-
ne 7 —

. e relydue OF that grounde all
be the prettes / which do lerupce in § Ban ·
Ctuary of the Lozde / andgooin befoze the
Lone to ſeruehm / that they mape haue
romme to dwell in.

B. As for the Sanctuary, it wan Gande for
it lelt:a to the Leuites 5 ſerue in the houle /
chere chalbe geuen xx babptacpons / of the
Lp. MG. length a. x. O bzedth: pe Hhall geue
allo bnto the cytie a pollellpon or d. Mame⸗
tevoddes bꝛode /g. xxb. M. longe / belpde the
parte ot the Sanctuary: that all be ko: §

uch. xlviß d. whole houſe of Alraell. pon both the lpdes
OF $ Sanctuarys parte / by che citie / there

CHaibe geuẽ vntoß pꝛynce / whatloeuer
auer agaynſt the cytie / as fare as rea
weſtwarde and ealtwarde: whych ſbalbe as
Tonge as one parte / £6 p weũ onto feat,

Chis Halve his atone lande in a ttael / ß
my pʒinces be no moe chargeable onto my
people. And doch as remapneth vet ouer

§ / albe geuẽ to $ Houle ok Alrael
acco:dynge to their trybes. Chus tapẽ ih the
Loꝛde God: O ve pꝛynces / pe haue now op-
pꝛeſſed and deſtroped ynoughmow leaue ok /

1Epbah ts ahandle now accozdpng to the thinge / that is
mane or dyte equal and laulul: and thzult out my people
0 7 ch Gnom oe, lapech the Land Sd. Ye shalhaue
ametture or a true weyght / a true! Ephah / and a true
moyhe thingy. O Bath. Ehe Ephah a ß Bath ſhalbe a like.

2 One Bath challcöterne $ tenth parte ol an

eech lo wall one Ephah do their mea⸗
255. mint u lle hall be after the Pomer, Dne Spcle
ine. That nia keth.xr. Geras. .
slicks mae AND... Peles make a pounde. Chis is the
ieapounde. heaneofirpnge/ that ve Wall geue to be hea⸗
Poneof peg urdmemelr Derbi harte ofan Erhah aut
nömbers was sk an Homer of wheate andthe. roi. part ol
wont to haue ot an Ephah / out of an Homer of barly. Che
bis proper na- ople ſball be mealured with the Bath: euen
meslonee the tent parte ok one Bath out ol ab C oz.
Cen Bathes make one Homer: ko one
metare borg Homer kpfleth ten Bates And one lambe
ent. omtwo hundzeth chepe out of the palture
of Icrael / to: a meatofivinge/ burntoffertng,

and healtholkrynge / to reconcyle the / lapeth

the Loꝛde God. All the people of the lande

Malt geue thys heaueotterynge wrth a fre
will. Agavne it Malibe the pꝛynces parte to
offve bürntofferynges / meatofferpnges and
dꝛynckofrynges vntothe L. onde / in the ho·
ir daes new Moones / Sabbathes / and in
all thebpe keaſtes or the boule ok Accael. che

§ cpnoficynge meatotrynge /byentofterynge
andhealtho e call hegeue / to recon·
cple $ boule of Arael Thus fapeth $ Lone
God: Che kirſt daye of the kyꝛſt moneth thou
whalt take a vonge bullocke wrthout ble⸗


emple. Of ésechicl,


0. xx. SDicles/erro Chen


lt.
moch / and clenke the Sänttuary. Dothe
pꝛeſte Mall take of the bloude of the lynok⸗
krynge/ andfpzenchie it vpon the pottes ot
the houle / and vpon the foure cozners of the
aulter / with the dozepoltes or the ynnermer
courte. And thus ſbait thou do alſo § ſeuẽth
dape of the monethlkoꝛ loch as haue lynned
ol ignoꝛaunce / oz beyng dilceaued) to recõ⸗
cxle the houle withall. Gpon the. rit, dave
ok ß kyꝛlt moneth ve hall kepe after. Ses
uen da pes call thẽ feat contynue / wherin
there hal no lower ner leuẽ ned bꝛed be eaté,
pon the lame dave Mat the pꝛynce geue
Foz him lelke and all the people of the lande /
a bullocke fo2 a ſynoffrynge. Ind in ß keaſt
ok the leuen daes he Mall olkre euerydaye a
bullocke a a ram / that are without biemiſ /
foza burntolirynge vntothe Loꝛde: and an
he gaote daylpe koa tynofterynge. Foz the
Meatofirynges/he Mal geue euer an Ephah
toa bullockẽ / an Ephah to a ram / Kan Hin
ok ole to an Ephah. Upon the. xv. daye of ß
Ceuéth moneth / he tall hepe the ſeuẽ dapes
holy oneafter another / euẽ as the other feué
Dapes: withthe lynolrynge / burntolfryng /
meatolirynge / and with the opie,
Che facrifices of the Babboth ¢ of the new mos


neg. Chororw which dofes they mu go in / oß come
out o the temple z e.


Ihe. ru chapter,
eh h Lr gad geg


Meal, Mali be Mutthe.o4.wozcke
A Adapes:but in the Habboth and in
da ye ol the newe Moone / it halbe opened.
wall the pꝛynce come onder the daze
poꝛche / and ſtande ſtynl wythout by che doze
chene. So ß prettes Mall olfre vp his bums
andhealthofkeryngd Andhe Hall wozchype
fit § dozepoſte /a go his wa ye forth agapne:
but the doze Mall nomoze be ſhut tyit the
eu guet

On the lame maner chan $ people of the
lande alto do their wozſhipe befoze ? Lo:d /
twpthout thys doze bpon the Sabbathes g


0


Of the ynnermer courte towarde § B


new Mooneg. Chisis now the burntolle⸗ a


rynge / chat the prpnice thall byynge bnto ß
Lope vps the Dabboth tyre lambes wilh⸗
out blenipch / anda ram without blempch /
and an Ephah koꝛ a meatoſtrynge / with the
ram. As kor the läbes he mabe geue as ma⸗
ny meatofirynges tothem/ as he wyll / g an
Pin ok orie to an Ephah. Inthe dape di

new moneth / it hai be a ponge bullocke

out blemych fire lambes e a ram allo wich⸗
out blemich. With the bullocke he hal geue
an Ephab / and wyth the ram an als


fo Foz a mieatotferyng: but tothe läbes what
bemapecome by. And euer an Hin ot opleto C
ee


Thetemple / und thet
uylyon ok the landes.


The


go under che doze poꝛche / and euen therede⸗
parte fozth agapne. But when the people of
che lande rome befoze the Loꝛde in the bye
ſolempne featt / as manyas come in by the
Mozty doze to do wozchyppe / Mali goo oute
agapne at the South doze And the yz come
mat the South dope / wall go forth agayne
at the North doze. Chere Wail none go oute
at the doze where he came in / but tall goo
forth rrght ouer onthe other ide / a h poince
wall go in and out amonge them.
D  Gponthe ſolempne and hye keaſte dapes /
this walbe the meatofferinge: an Epha to
à bullock and an Epha to a ram / and to the
lambes:as many as he wil / but euer an Hin
ol ole to an Epha. Now when the pꝛynce
bꝛyngeth a burnt 03 an heaitholle⸗
ryngẽ wyth a kre wll onto the Loꝛde / the
kalt doze chalbe opened onto him / p he mape
do with bys burnt and healtholterpnges / as
he doth bpon che Sabboth / and when he
Hoech kozth / che doze (hall be chutt alter hem
agarne. Pe Maldapliebsynge vnto 5 Londe
alambe ofa peate olde without blempch £02
a burnt offringe: this hall he do euery moz·
nynge. And kor ameatofieringebe Hai geue
the üürte parte or an Epha a the thyzde parte
ofan Hiho ople(compnate wich che cakes)
euerp mournpnge. J eethis halbe a dapipe
meatofferinge vñto the Loꝛde / koz an euer ·
laſtinge oꝛdinaunce: q thus wal the lambe /
che meatofferynge and ople be geuen euery
mioꝛnynge / koꝛ a daplle burntotferinge.
Mozecuer / thus ſaprth the Loꝛde God:
Ir the pʒynce geue a gylte onto eny of bys
lonnes / then thailit be hys Connes heretage
verpetual / p he mape pottette it. But ache


—
Nut rb. b. ſwpll geue one ot his leruauntes Come or his
e eager ta beso ete ata


returne agapne vnto 9 pꝛyncerkoꝛhys


fl. Beg, vrt. a. heretage halbe his Connes oni. Che prince


6. Reg leb.


allo ball take none ok the peoples enberp-
taunce / ner put the from their poche d: but
to his awne lonnes chall he geue his pollel
ſpon / that my people be not fcatved abꝛode /
but that euery man maye haue his awne.
Andhe bzoüght me thoꝛom the intraunce
at the lpde oF the doze tothe babptacpon ol
$ Sanctuary/that beiongeth to p pettes
ath ſtode to warde thenozth/a behofde / chere
was a place vpon the Wek tyde/ then lade
hebnto me: Chts is p place where d pꝛeſtes
hall dightthe tretpace and trnotkrynges / ¢
batie the meatofferinges:that they nede not
Beare them in to the outiwarde courte / and
Gloto onhalowe the people. Sohe brought
me into the vttemoſt courte / rounde aboute
all che koure comers. Beholde / in euery coꝛ·
ner of the fore courte / chere was pet a lytie
courte, Yee in all the toure coꝛners of the


Propherpe


courte there was made a lytle courte of. xl.
cubptes ſonge / and. rtr. cubites bꝛode: thele
foure iptie courtes were of one iphe mealu ·
re /e there wẽta rygge wal rounde aboute
them all koure / vnder the wyych there were
harthes made rounde aboute. Chen layd he
vnto me: C his is the kechin / where the my ·
hitters of the houle hal dyght the lapne of-
kerynges ol the people.
che vpcpon of the waters that come out of᷑ che te,
ple. Che conges df the lande of pꝛomes/ and the dy⸗
uplpon theror by tr

Che. noi Chapter.
fer thes be brought me agarne z
M pekoꝛe che doze ok $ houle: and be⸗
holde / there guched out waters krũ
= Londer the poſtes of the houle eaſt⸗
wardel koꝛ the houle Rone towarde the eat)
chat ranne downe vpon the rxght lde ol che
houle / which Iveth to the aulter fouth ward.
Chen carted he me out to the noꝛth doze / and
bzought me fozth there rounde aboute bythe
bttem̃oſt doze that turneth eaſt warde. Be⸗


bolde there came foxth. che bb n *


right lide. Now whã the man 5 had p mete
rodde in his hande wente vnto the eaſt doe /
he mealured a M. cubites / a the he bought
me thozow the water / euen to  ancies:fobe
mealuredyet athoutand / a bꝛought me thos
row $ water agapne vntoß knees: petmea· 15
ſuredhe a thoulande / a bzought me thoꝛow
the water onto the loines. Atter this he meas
lureda thoulande agapne / then was it loch
arpuer / chat J myaht not wade thozowit:
Che water was lo depe/that it was nedetul
to haue lwimmed / ko it might not be waded
ouer. And he lapdevnto me: halt chou lene
this / O thou fonne or man: and wyth that /
he bzought me to ß rruer banck agapne,
How tohen J came there there Lode mae
ny trees vpon ether lyde or the ryuer bãcke.
Chen layde he onto me: This water that flo ·
weth oute to warde * the Eaſt / and run


dotwne in to the playne teide / commeth a e ome teh


the lee: and from the lee it rüneth out / ama ·
keth the waters whole. y ee all that lyue and
moue / where onto this ryuer commeth / hal
recouer. And where thys water commeths
chere thalbe moch kych. Koꝛ all 6 c. to
this water / hal beluttpand whole. By
er hall the kylcpers ſtande from,

onto en eglaim / a there fpzede oute
nettes: toꝛ there ſhalbe greate heaps or tych /
Ipke ag in the mapne tee. As fo; bps clave
ppttes / they hall not be whole / to why / it
walbe occuprde korlalt.

By this rruer ppon both the txdeg ol che ¢
choze / cherechal growe al maner of fruteful
trees / whole leaues chall not fall ok / nether
wall their krute perxch: but euer be rype at


‘qquioatesot Tae,


Rast
„ Atonehoutholve a cofitre/ o cher Mall haue
tia . : connor gitar,


their monethes/foz their water rüineth out
oktheir Sanctuary. Hys frute is good to
kate / and bys leaf pzofitable Foz mebpcyne.
Thus lapeth the Loꝛde God: Letthis bethe
Boꝛder / wherin ye Mall deupde § lande onto
the. xij tribes of Alrael / with the lxne. Parte


Umdpllerentip onto one as vnto another ok


Fun. the which lande q c woꝛe onto youre katherg /


thatit chulde kali to poure enheritaunce.
Chxs is the boꝛder ok the lande vpon the
noꝛthlide / krom the mapne lee / as men go to
Jadada:mamelp ematg, Berotha / Saba ·
kim: krom the bozderg or Damalcus a He-
math vnto Pasar Cichon / a that lyeth von
coaſtes of Hauerd. Chus d bozders krõ
ee forth / balbe Pazar Euan / che boꝛder
oF Damalcus the North and the bo ders OF
Pemath:thatis the Nozth parte.

Che eat (poe thall pe mealure from as
ueran and Damatcus/fromBaleadand the
lande of Icrael by gomane and lo fozth/ krõ
the lee coat, that Ipeth eaſtwarde: and this
ts the eaſt parte.

Che ſouthipde is / krom Chamar forth to


Sal dds, the waters of ttrpte onto Cades/the rpucty


tothe mapne lee: andthatis the louth part.

Che wet parte:namelx the greate lee krõ
the bo dert therok / tyll a mã come onto He ·
math: this is the welt parte,

Chis lande ſhal pe parte amöõge vou / ac⸗
coding to the tribes of Alrael /a deuide it to
be anheretage foꝛ vou / foz the ttraungers

t dwell amonge ou /a begette chyldzen.

‘oz pe Mall take the amonge the chplozen of
1/iphe as though ther were of poure


heretage th pouamdge the


Lok in what tribe the tratigerdiwelleth/
in the lame tribe hall ve geue hym his here ·
tage / laveth the Loꝛde God,


e lottes of the. bh. tribes. partes of
Shattonor the bate U Ghz repeat tbe 2
uites / oe the cytie / of the Nzince / are rehearced.

Z| Hele are § names of the terbes z
SP ive vponthe nosthtpoe/ by p ware
— ol Hetlon / tyll thou cõmeſt vnto
Ahemath a Hazar Enam / the boz.
ders of Damalcus towarde the north belive
DPemath:Dan hal hauehis porctd kromthe
kaſt quarter onto the wet. cpo the bozdets
aok Dan krõ the eaſt poe vntothe welt (all
‘Adder haue his pozcron aponthe bozders of
ae — he a e fait
ephevali haue his pozcpon.

Upon the bozders or Hephthall kromthe
eaſt quarter vnto che weſt / thal Manaſſes
haue bis pozcion Wipon the borders of Ma⸗
nalles from the eat lde vnto the wel / Matt


Of Ezethiel.


xk,
Ephiaim haue his poꝛcpon. Mpon the boz⸗
ders ok Ephꝛaim from the eaſt parte vnto ß
welt / hall Ruben hauehis poꝛcyon. Mpon
the boꝛders of Ruben krom the eal quarter
vnto the welt ſball Juda haue his poꝛcyon:
pon the bozders of Fuda krö the eaſt parte
vnto the welt / ye thall let alpde one pozcton
ok. xxb. M. meteroddes longe and bꝛode (like
ag another pozcyon kromthe eaſt kyde vnto
the welt) wherin the Sanctuary wall Kade.


As fo the poꝛcpon / that pe chall Cepavate eech. rid. 4.


out koꝛ che Loꝛde / it halbe. xxb. M. longe /
and. x. H. bꝛode. nhich leparated holy poꝛ⸗
cyon Mail belonge vntothele: namelptothe
pꝛeſtes /towarde the nozth. xb. M. and to⸗
warde the weſk. p. O. bꝛode / towarde p eat
. M. bꝛode allo / toward the louth. xxb. A
longewherin the Sanctuary ofthe Lose
Wall ſtande. Yee this fame place chalbe the xg


pꝛeſtes /p are ot dchildzẽ of Spadoch / z haue Gßech. lig. U.
hepte my holp oꝛdynaunce: which wẽte not avi c.


aſtrape in the erroute of the chyldzen oF Zl
rael / ipne as the Leuites ate gone aſtrape:e
this ſeparated pece 6 they haue ol the lande
ſhalbe the mot holy hardevpon the borders
ofthe Leuites. And nexte onto the pꝛeſtes /
hall the Leuites haue. xxv. M. longe / and.
.bzode. Chys chalbe on euerplede. xb.
Ülonge / and T. Q. bꝛode. Ok this poꝛcron
they Hail fell nothinge / ner makeany pers
mutacpo therot / leſt the cheke of p lande Falk
vnto other / Foz it is alowed vnto p Lorde.
Che other. v. M. after the bꝛedth ; lweth
bythe. xb. M. chalbe comensit hail belsge
tothe cyte andtothe fuburbes fo2 habpta⸗
pons / j the cite wall ſtande in the myddeſt
therot. Let this be the mealure: towarde the
north parte. v, C. f li. M. towarde d foutly
parte. b. C. A. ij. M. towarde the cat parte /
b. C. and. iii. M. to warde the weſt part. v. C.
and ii .
Che luburbes harde vpon the eytpe / ch.


alt
ye haue towarde the nozth. L. g. . C. towarde


the louth. L. and. i. C. towarde the eaſt. L. 4
two. C. towarde the weſt allo. L. and two. C.
Astor the relpdue ol the length / that lpeth
hardebpon the leparated holy grounde: nas
mei. x. thoutande towarde the eat / and. v.
PW towarde the welt / nexte vntoß holy poꝛ⸗
cion: it and the increale therot Mall forte fog
theit meate / that labourẽ in the cytye. hey
that laboure fos the welth ob the tytxe / ball
manteyne this allo / out ol what tribe loeuer
they be in Itrael. 5
All that is Ceparaten of the. xxb. M. loge
and. xxb. M. bꝛode on the koure partes / that
ſhall pe put alrde foꝛ the leparated poꝛcyon
ofthe Sanctuary /¢ forte pottettys o€ the @
cite. Che relydur vpon both the lydes or the
Danctuarp and pollellpon ofthe jo nome


Rabuchodonoloz


umert spe
Bolus. ih. il pe Maninpteribute bnto the tribes ok glrael /


belongeto the pꝛince / bekozeche place ol the
xb. M. onto the eaſtende /a befozethe place
ok the. Erb. A). weſtwarde / vnto the boꝛders
OF the eptpe:this ſbalbe the princes poꝛcion.
Chis ſbalbe the holy place / and the houle of
the Sanctuary Wall ſtande in the myddeſt.
Moꝛeouer krom the Leuites and the cyt yes
poſſeſſion that ive in the middeſt ol the pains
ces parteilone what remapneth betwirte §
bozder of Juda ¢ the boꝛder oF Benz amin /

it chalbe che Pꝛinces.

loin oF the other trybes.

Fromthe eat parte onto the welk / han
Bentamin haue his poꝛcion. Mpon the boz-
Derg of B.
welt / hall Srmeonhaue his porcts pon
the borders of Spymeon fromthe eaſt parte
vnto the welt hal J zakar haue hys poꝛcpõ.
Upon thebozders ok Fsahar krö the cat fide
vnto p weſt / hal Sabulon haue his poꝛcid.
® wpon che boders of Sabulon fro che eatt
parte bnto the welt hall @adhaue his poz-
Clon.wapon the bozderg of Gad fouthwarde/
thecoattes ſhall reach rõ Thamar forth vn⸗
to the waters of ſtryte to Cades / and to the
floude/euen onto the mayne lee. :
Thisis che lande with bis poꝛciõs which


lapeth the Lode God. Thus wyde tall the
cite reach: bpõ che noꝛth parte. v. C. a. ij.
mealures. Che poꝛtes ofthe eite / wall haue
the names ol d tribes of Itrael. Chze poztes
okthenorthlide: one Nuben / another Juda /
the thyꝛde Leui.

Upon the eaſt lide. v. C. 4. lilj. Ag. mealu⸗

res / wyth thze poztes:the one Joleph / ano.

cher Wen zamin the thrde San. upon the
douthlpde. b. C. G flil. M. mealureg / wyth
the thze poztes : the one Spmeon / another
Ialar / thechpꝛde Sabulon. And pon che
welt lide. p. C. &. ftij. M. mealures with thee
Poztes allo / the one Gad / another Aller / the
thrzde Peyhthalt. Chus chall it haue. roti,

M. mealures rounde about And from
4 that tyme Forth / the name

ol the cyte (haibe:
the Loꝛde is


che ende oethe wrophecye ort
Ezechiel.
in a. 2


pꝛoue but ten dapes with


The Propherpe


¶ The boke of the


Drophete Daniel,

EMhe Pꝛopbete cheweth the captinite of gehoakim
Apnge of Zuda. Ot the founes that were in captpuye
tyecthe upnge commaundeth to chute which of them
Huld be taught the lerneyngs language of the Chal⸗
dees. They are alowed the hpnges fedyng. Daniel abs
Repneth from the meate of the Hpnge of Babplon.
Che (cienceand m@ruccpon of thete heiden.


jamin from the eat ſyde vntos


‘Unto theres yng appoynteda certapne 2
pozcion of bigatwne meate / ¢ of thewyne /
which he dzanche himlelt / lo to noꝛpch the
the peare:p atterwarde they mygbt ftan
beloze the hynge, Amonge thefenow were
cotta pne of the childzé of Fuda:namely Da⸗
niel/Anantas/WDilael andAsarias, wnto
chele p chete chamberlapne gaue other na ·
mes a called Pantel / Balthalar: I nantas /
Srdzach: Milael Milach: and Alartag/
Abednago. But Dantel was at a pont w
bim kelk / p he wolde not be dekpled thoꝛow >


hinges meate / ner ? wyne which he daocke. Gene. ful.
er.


Jayne let he Wudedeilehemiel, Do God zustehen


And thys he delrzedok the chete


gaue Daniel fauoure and grace betoꝛe the E
ele chambectapne thacietapoebneat —
am akrapedot mp loꝛde the kynge / whych

ach appoynted you youre meate a dincke:
leſt he ippe voure faces to be wozke Ipapnge
chen z other tpzingaloes of poure age / ¢fo
ve hall makeme lole my head onto d king.
Chen Daniel anlwered Meladar/whoin

§ chete chamberlayne had let ouer Baniel /
Anantas / Micael and 8 farde: G

feruauntes,

icebs baue potage tocate/@ water o base,
he:thenlokebpon oure faces /s theits that


keate of the kynges meate And ag thou leit /
ſodeale


Kaduchodonoloꝛ.


z


lodeale with thy leruaũtes. So he conten ·
tedto them inthis matter / a pꝛoued them. x.
dapes, And after the ten dapes / ther faces
were better lpkinge ¢ fatter / then all d yog
Epaingatecss wmbich ate ok the hinges meate.
‘Chus gh elallat tone awape their meate
and pie snd gaue them potage therkoꝛe.
Sodgautr vow thete foure (pzingatoes con ·
hypnge ann ſernyng in all (crtpture and wets
dome: but pnto Waniel ſpecpallp /Hegaue
vnderſtandinge of all options and dꝛeames.
Now when the tyme wag expyꝛed / that the
kynge had appopnted to bꝛinge intheſe pag
keen bean unto hym: the chete chamber⸗
lapne brought them bekoze Kabuchodono⸗
los / and the kong communed wyth thé. But
amonge them all were founde none koch as
Pantel / Ananiag / Witack / and Alarias,
Cherkone ſtode they before Siyng / which in
all wyldomeg matters Wehe enen b
he enquercdof thé kounde thé tentymesbet-
ter / then all the lothlayerg a charniers / that
were in al hys reaime. And Daniel abode
ſtyll / vnto the tyꝛſt yeare of kynge Cyꝛus.
che deame of Mabuchodonofo;. He calleth vn⸗
to dym lothlapers / and requypreth of them both the
dꝛeame and the interpꝛetacpon therof. Chey aulwere
that they can uot ſheweit. Che hpnge commaundeth
all the wpfe men of Bauplan to be Aapne.Dantel ree
Gupieth tpme to folute the quettyon. Che Lozde oper
nech the myſterp vnto Daniel. Daniel is bꝛought vn,
to the byng n Heweth him bis deames the inte rpre⸗
tacron therof. Ot the enerlattpnge nyngdome of
Lou. Che tone Lozi. Daniel is exalted ¢ promos
ted of the hynge.
¶ Che. ij. Chapter.
A the Ceconde peare ofthe raigne
k Habuchodonoloz / had Habu⸗
hodonoloꝛ a dꝛeame / where tho-
Sa tow his ſpꝛete was vexed/ and hig
Lepe bate from him. Chen the hynge com
maunded to call together al the lochlapers/
charmerg / witches ¢ Caldees / ko; to Mewe
che kyng his dꝛeame. Do they came / a ſtode
befoze the kynge. And the kynge lade vnto
them. J haue dzeameda dzeame /a mylpꝛete
was Co troubledtherw /p 4 haue clene fog
* Gotten /whacz dreamed. Gpon this the Cal.
dees ank wered the kynge in the Spzians


dorhe Ipeach: D hing / Pod laue thy ipte Foz euer.


Shew thy leruaũtes the dꝛeame a we hall
pewe the / what it meaneth. Che nyng gaue
Caldees their antwere / a larde: It is gone
ne kro me: Vt ye wyll not make me vnderſtande


a vibe che dreame with the interpꝛetacpon therot /


ve Hail dye /a youre boutes Mhalbe pꝛyted.
But yk ve ten me the dꝛeame a the meanyng
therol / de hall haue of me giftes / rewardes
Ba greate honoure:onfp/chew methe dꝛeame
andthelygnykycacyon oF it. They antwered
agapne / and layde: the kynge mut chewe


dis kernauntes che dꝛeame / and o tall we


Ok Daniel.


i 4
„ NS
declare what it meaneth. Then the yng an⸗
lwrred / laxinge: I perceauc ot a trueth / that
ve do but pꝛolonge the tyme toꝛ lo moch as
ve lep the thinge is gone frome, Qherkoze
Pe wyflnotten meß dzeame / re Mall al haue
one iudgemẽt. But ve kapne a dyſſemble 16
vayne woꝛdes / which ye Cpeake betoꝛe me /
to put ot pᷣtyme. Chertoꝛe tell me $ dꝛeame /
glo wall J unowe / yt ve can Hew me/ what
Itmeaneth. Wpon hig /) Caldees gaue ane
twere befoze the kyng / and lapde:there is no
man vpõ earth /p can tell the thynge / which
the kynge ſpeaketh of: ver there is nether
fipnge / pꝛynce ner L onde / chat euer alked
loch hinges at a lothlaper / charmer oꝛcal⸗
deer: koꝛit is a verpharde matter / p the lung
requpꝛeth. ether is there any / that can cer⸗
trkpe the kynge therok / excepte the goddes:
wholedwelling is not aniõge the creatures.
Foꝛ the which caule the ung was wꝛol)
swith greate indignacion / and coͤmaunded to
deſtrope all the wyle men at Babylon: athe
pꝛoclamaciõ wente foꝛth / that the wyle men
chulde be dayne, hep fought alto to llape
Daniel with his cõpanpons. Chen Daniel
enquered Artoch the hinges ſtewarde / or ihe
ludgement and lentẽce / that was gone font
alredyt o kyll loch as were wyle at Babplo,
He anlwered and fave onto Artoch beinge
then the kynges debpte: nohyhath the kynge
pꝛoclamed fo cruella ſentence? Do Atiocy
kolde Daniel the matter. wapon this / wente
Daniel bp / and del pzedthe kynge / that he
myght haue leyſoure / to Mew the kynge the
interpetacié: a then came he home agapne
@ Mhetwed the thinge vnto Anantas/ Milael
¢ Alarias his compantés : p they chulde be⸗
leche ß God of heauẽ 1755 in this lecret /
that Daniel ck hig Eelowes with other loch
as were wile in Babylõ / periſhed not. Then
was the myſterr Metved bnto Mantel in a
vylpon by night. Ind Daniel pꝛayled p God
ok heauẽ. antel allo cried loude /e fapde:
O that thename ol God myght be pꝛapled
tox euer and euer / koꝛ wyldome e ſtrength
are hys awne: he chaungeth the tymes and
ageß he putteth downe Byngt he Cetteth pp w


enges hegeuerg weidome bntoche wore Pur rg.
Konderſtandinge to thole chat onderſtande / ab. xrrg u
he openeth the depe lecreteshe knoweth the Jeremy xrviie
thinge that Ipeth in darcknelie / fo the light Wantel ug. c.


dwelleth with him. J thancke the, @ prapte Job. xxxö.
the(® thou God of mp fathers) p thou harks?
Tentme wyldome ¢ lttength /a halt ſbewed
baker c en eme ee
atk opened the Bynges matter vnte wt.
upon this went Daniel ir-onto Arioch /
whom the kynge had orderiedtodeſtroxe the
wile at Babylon:he ment vnto him / z lade:
deltrope not loch us are wyle in Babrlon /


 Pabuepedonotor.


N Gt erde
Lac. xx u.


-


The


chewe the kynge the interpzesacpon en
Artoch bꝛought Daniel in coche ſipng in all
the halte / and layd vnto him: J haue kounde
a mam amonge the pꝛeloners of Juda / that


call chewe we kynge the interbꝛeracron.


Chen antwered the nynge / g lapde bnto Wa
niel/ whole name was Walthatar: Art thou
he / that cant ſhewe me the dꝛeame which 'F
auc fene/ a the interpꝛettt pon theroł· Ba
niel an wered the tipng tohis kate, dlapdr:
As koꝛ this Cecvete / koi the whych che kruge
maketh mquilpcion: tig nether the wyle /
the loꝛcerer / the charmer nerbdeuell con ⸗
rer / ihat can certptpe the nynge of it: Only
God in heauen can open lecretes / ahe it is /
that ſweweth the unge Habuchodonoloz /
what ig Foz to come in the latter daes.
Chr dꝛeame /a that which thou hut cene
finthyne head opon thy bed is this: O kyng /
thou dydeſt caſt in thy mynde / what ſbulde
comeberafter: So he that is the opener ot
myſterpes / telleth the / what is koꝛto come.
As koz me / this lecrete is not ſuewedme / loꝛ
enywyldome 5 J baue/mozethen eny other
lvuyng: but only õ Fmpght ewe the uyng
the interpꝛetacron / a that he myght hnowe
Amen an ol his awneherte. Thou khyng

weſt / and beholde: there Rode befoze the a
Greate Image / whole kygure was maruc-
tous greateandbis vylage grymme. Che
Image head was of kyne golde / hrs bꝛeſt a
ürmes ob lpluer / bys body s lopnes were ol
copper / his leggr were ol yꝛũ / his fete were
parte of yon / and parte ok earth.

Chis thou la weſt / yu the tyme that (with
out enyhandes) there was hewen ofa ſtone
which fmote the Image vpon the fete / that
were both of pron and earth / and bzake thé
to poulder: then was the yꝛon / the earth / the
copper / the lyluer and golde bꝛoken altoge-
ther in peces: and be came lykethe challẽ ol
cone / that the wynde bloweth awape from
the Comet floozes / that ther can no moꝛe be
kounde. But d Cone that (mote they mage /
became a greate mountapne/ which kulk ri.
leth the whole earth: his ts h dꝛeame. and
now wyll we ſhewe befoze the hynge / what
it meaneth.

O lunge / thou art a kynge of hynges:

Foꝛ the God of heauẽ hath geuẽ the a kyng ·
dome / ryches / Urength and mateſtp: a bath
delpuered the all thynges / that are amonge

$ chyldzẽ of men:the beattes o the kelde /e
the koules vnder the heauẽ / and geuẽ the do⸗
runxom muer them all. Chou art that golden
bead. Alter Phere chall aryle another king⸗
dome / which that he letle then thyne. Ohe
thysde kyngdome tyathe like copper / z baut
dom xnacton in an faves, Che fourth kyng⸗


Prophecy


butbzpngeme in onto d kynge / and ben t Wall be as
lo ſballit beate downe and deſtrope.


urded Krugdome, whpch neuercheles chan
haue Come of the pon groũde mixte with it


e Hubuchodonglar and


5 2 Idzen.
ſtröge as pꝛon.Foꝛ tyke as: che ech <r Abuchoddnoloz the kynge cauled
pron bꝛoleth and bꝛeaketh all thynges: J ee 3 aN 8 a goldẽ Image to be made / which
euen as yꝛon beateth eucrp tyynge downe / 1 5 EN wong lr. cubptes hye / and lyre cu⸗

i : ter the yptes thyche . qhishemave to be
here as thou ſaweſt the fete and toes / 3 Some let vp in the leide of * Puta inthe lande of
parte of earth and parte of pꝛon: that is ade.


thefile Babylon g lent oute to gather tegether the
mere be Duties / lo zheß and nobles / the iudges andol⸗


Wehn ficers /p ne hyteg a ſbꝛeues / with all the ru⸗
8 bon

e
Bi


zor lers orthe kame that thepmight cometothe


iqupties dedicaciun nx the Image which Pabuchodo
T hap. noloꝛ the hinge had let vp. So the dußes /
ace lozdeg dunn ableg / te tudges and officers /
fe debpteg und lo zeues with al che rulersofthe
lande gache reuthem together / and came vn
tothe deupeatynge of the Fmage / that Na-

. buchodonvtoz the tpngebanterbp.

Now when ther ſtode befoze heJmage/
which Nabuchodonofoz fee bp / pbedelcrled
out with al his might: G ve people / kynred·
des and tunges / to peu beit fapde:that when
ve heare the noyleok the trompettes / which
halbe blowen / with the harpes / bawmes /
Plalteries /Sopmpbhonies andall maner of
Mulick: ve fatidotwoneand wozthipe ö gol ·
den Image / chat Habuchodonoloꝛ the kyng
bath let pp. holo then kalleth not dow ne
G boweth hintelé / walleuen 5 lame haure
be caſt in tu anhote burnynge ouen. Ther ·
foze / when all the kolche herde the noyle ot d
trompetteg that were blowen / with the hare
pes / ſhaunneß / Plalteries / D pmphontes a
all kynde or e lody: then and people / urn ⸗
reddes and nat yons kel downe / and bowed
chem leluen onto the golden Fmage / p Naz
buchodonoloꝛ the kynge had let vp.

How were there cevtapne men ok the Cat

B dees / that wente ruen thenandaccuted he
Zewes / ann ſuyde onto the kynge Nabucho⸗
g/ God laue thy tyfe Foz euer.

ipngebalk geuen a conniañ⸗

nien when they bearenople

harpes / ſhammes / plats

pes and allthe other melo⸗

wie and bowe them lelueg


koꝛ lo moch as thou halt lene the vꝛonmixte
with the claxe. 5

Che toes of the fete that were parte ol 95
pon and parte of clave / lygnitpeth: that it *
thatbe a hyngbome parteip ſtrong and part 1
elyweane And where as thou ſaweſt prow a fe
myrte wyth clave: they Mall mpngle chem
lelueg with the lede ol (pple people/ a pet
not contynue one with another / ute a yon 0
wyll not be toulbered with a porſherde. 4

Inthe dapes or there yng.) chan thecod gra,
ok heauen let vp an euerlalkeng krngdome
which all not perich / a his kengdone wal
not be geuenouer to another people:pee the
fame Wall bzeake a deſtrope all thele urng⸗
domes / but it Hall endure foz euer.

And where as thou laweſt / that wythout
enyhandes there was cut out of the mounte
a ſtone / which bꝛake the pꝛon / the copper / B
earth / the lyluer and golde in peces: by that
hath the greate God cbewedthe kyng / what
well conie after this. Chis is a true dꝛeame /
and the interpzetacyon of it is ſure.

Chen the hynge Habuchodonoloꝛ felt
downe vpon his face / and bowed him telt vn
to Daniel and cõmaunded thatthey wulde
offre meatoftrynges and twete odoures vn⸗
to hꝛm. Che kynge ancwered Dantel/ and
lapde: pee of a treuth youre God is a Go
aboue all goddes / a Lolde aboue all hngt
and an opener of lecretes:leynge thou can
dilcouer this myſterte. Do the kynge made
Daniela greatẽ man / andgaue hym mane
and greate gyttes.

He made hym ruler ok all che countrees
ok Babylon / and iozde ok all the nobles / that
were at Babrlon. How daniel intreated the
knge for Oppach / Wilach and Abedna⸗
0 / to that he made them rulers ouer all the
Offyces in the lande ort Babylon: But Da⸗
niel hym lelke remayned ſtrů in che courte
bythe hynge.


¶ Che kynge ſetteth vy a goulden zige / which he
cSmaundeth to be pA ee lee
Rictuage ste actuled / becauſe thep Yippie $ hinges
cõmaundement. Che: A. ibe tyne
commaunded to two;! the zmage . Chrprefute
todo it and are put in to a bürnynge ouen Bp belefe

in Sod they ave delpue red from thefyre. Pabuche ⸗
donoſer confelleth the power ol Hod after styght

of thesmyzacle.. Zee

Cd be. ij. c bapter.


Hebei


ſet ouerti
namelp /


Habu⸗


Ok Haniel.


lx if,
fach and a bednago / tpll not be ferue IK
goddeg :no: Lowe poure leluet to the golden
Image / that J haue tet vp: well / be redpher⸗
alter / when pe heare eye nople or the trom⸗
pettes ‘blowe wyth the harpes ſwawmes /
plalteries / Iymphontes and all b othermes
lodpes:that pe fall downe / G woꝛchyppe the
Image which J haue made But vr pe woz-
Myppe it not / ye hal be caſt immediatly in
to an hote hurnyng ouen. Ler le / what dod
is there 2 that mape delyuer you oute or my
andes: Dpdzach / Milach and Abednago
antweved the kynge / z larde: O Habucho⸗
donoloz / we vug ht not to conlente vnto p in
this matter / to wh yroure God whé we fers
ue / is able to hepebs frd the ote burnynge
duẽ (O kynge)and can right wel delpuer bs
out ok thphändeg And though he wpinot/
vet ſhalt thou knowe( O byng) that we will
not lerue thy goddeg / ner do reuerence tu the ¢
Image / which thou halt let vp. hen was
Nabuchodonoloz Cull of indignacvon / fo p
 countenatice of bistace chatiges vpõ St-
dꝛach / Milach / and Abemago. aherfozrehe
charged and commaunded / that the ouen
ſhulde be made feuen tymes hoter / then it
was wonte to bese Cpake onto the ſtrongelt
woꝛthies that were in his holte to to binde
Soidzach / Milach and abednago / a to cat
them in to che hote burnynge ouen.

Sothele men were bounde in their cotes
holen / ſhueg wyth their other garmentes / a
caſt in to the hote burnynge ouen:koꝛ p thie
Ges commaundemtent twas lo ſtrate / and the
ouen was ercedinge hote. Ag forthe men &
put in Sydzach Myſach ¢ Abednago / the
käme OF F pre deſtzoped the. andthele thze exp, rlih. a.
m pdꝛach / Milach a A bednago kelldow⸗
ne in the hote bur ama one / beinge fate
boftde. Then ablichodonolo P hyngmar⸗
ueled / and Code bp in all hatſtihe lpale vnto
bps councell and lapde: dpd not ye caſt tljele
ihze men bounde in to the kyꝛe: hey anlwe⸗
rd / and lapde onto the kynge: Yee O hinge,
Ye anlwered and lade: io fog all that / yet do
4 fe koure mengoynge tote inthe middeſt
Hehe Fyze and nothinge conupte: and the
fourth is lyke an angel to lone vpon. pon Act. r. 8.


Hume. xbt.g.


this went Habuchodonolo z vnto the mouth Pant. . b.


ok the hote bunnpnge guennhe Ipake allo /g
lapde: b Sppozach/ Wrlach a Abednago⸗
ve leruguintes ok the hee @od:go koꝛth / and
come hüither. Andlo Srdrach / Oplach / €
Abednago wẽte out of 5 kyꝛe. Chen öduletz
londes andnobles / and the hynges counceil
c me together to le thele men / bppon who the
kyꝛe had no maner of powerin theft bod geg:
In fomoch that the berphearve of theirhend
{nas not burnke / a their clothes oncbtiaged:
Yee there was no ſmel ot tyre felt vr ben


Habuthodonoldꝛ.


Chen lpake Habuchodonotoz / and tayd:
Blelled be the God ok Sidzach Milach ¢
Abednago which hath fent bys angelt / a de
fended bis leruaũtes / that put their trad in
blm:that haue altered § krnges cömaunde⸗
ment: and teoperde their bodies thervpon ra
ther then ther wolde lerur oꝛ woꝛſhype enr
other God / excepte their awne God only.
Cherkoze J wyll and commaunde that au
people. hynredes and tunges / which lpeake
any blacphempagapnſt p Gon of Sldꝛach /
ilach and abebnago/ wall dye / and their
houles thaibe papted: Becaule / there is no
God that maye taue / as this. So the kynge
“promoted Sidꝛach / Milach / and Abedna⸗
Go, in the lande or Babplon.


EMabuchodonolo: dzeameth agayne. Dantel inter ⸗
pete th it. Oabuchodonolo: w put out of his reaime /
and eateth with begſtes. de conkelleth the power ol
Bod and in vettojed nto his kyngdomes
Chr. (lt. Chapter.


Wa buchodonofoz Mrnge bnto an
E copie / nynreddes and tunges p
biel! apd b whole cartg: peace be


multiplyed amõge pou} thought
ft good to chewe the tokens and maruelous
wozches / that the bye od hath wrought
bpon me. D how greate arehis toheng/ and
how nighticare bps wonders? His kyng⸗
dome is an euerlaſtynge kyngdonie / and hig
power ladteth koz euer and euer.

J Nabuchodonoloz beyng at relt in myne
houte / and flozttyynge in my palace / ſawe a
daeame / whych made me afraped: and the
thoughtes that J had vpon my bed / with the
bplpons ofmpne head / troublcbme. Chen
ſent z out a comullion / ballther which were
ol wyldome at Babylon chulde be brought
betoꝛe me / to tell me the interpꝛetacxon of
the dꝛeame. Do there came the loythlapers /
charmers Caldees and conturers of deuels:
to whom F tolde the dꝛeame / but what il be

tokened / they coulde not chewe me: tyll at
laſt / there came one Daniellotherwyle cal-
led Balthalar / accoꝛdyng to the name ol my
Bod) which hath d lpzete of the holy godd /
in hum: to whom F tolde the dꝛeame / laping:
O Balthalar thou price ol Southeſapers:
96 Foz lo moch as Aknowe / thatthou hat the
lpꝛote ot the holy Goddes andno fecrete is
hyd from the: tell me therfoze / what the vp⸗
fpon of my dꝛeame (that Z haue tene) mave
fpgnitye I lawe a vylyon in my head vyon
mp bed: and beholde / there ſtode a tre vpon
the grounde / whych was very hye / greate
and myghtve: the hergth reached vnto the
heauen / andthe bꝛedth extended to all the
endes ok the earth his leaues were fapze/ he
had verymoch frute / lo that euerꝝ man had
vnougqh to eate therin.


The


Propherpe


Che beattes oftije teidhad Hadores vn⸗
der lt / and the koules of the apꝛe dwelt in the
bowes therok. hotl / all creatures fed ot


ie Alawe inmphesba bifyon bpon mpben; amn en
2 ehe.


uen / a cryed myghtelx / laving. ew do wne
$ tre / bꝛeake of his biaunches /{hake of hig
leaues / and ſcatre his rute abꝛode: that all
che beeſtes mape get them atoape kr under
bim / and the foules from his bꝛaũcheg. Ne ⸗
uercheles ſeaue the grounde of his tote elt
in the earth and hynde him bpon the playne
elde / with cheynes of pzon and ſtrie. iw yth
the dem of heauen thali he be wet / Ahe call
haue his parte inthe herbes of the grounde
with other wylde beaſtes. 0
Chat mans herte of his call be tanẽ £5
bim anda beattes herte (all be geug hum /
Spl keuẽ veares be come and gone bpd hynt,

Chis erande ok watcher. ig a cõmaund⸗
ment grounded and lought out in the coun-
cell of him / that is moſt holy:to learne men
fo2 to nderttande that p hveſt hath power
duer the hyngpomes of men /a geueth the 7
to whom it ipheth hym / a byngech che very
oute caſtes ol men duer them, bps is the
deeame that J Kung Mabuchodonoloz haue
bene. Thertoze ) Walthatar / tell thou me
what it fygnikpeth:toꝛ lo moch as all wyle
men of mp kyngdome are not able to bee
me what it meaneth. But thou canſt do it /
fogdtprete ot the holy Goddes is in the.

Chen Daniell whole name was Baitha
far)beloe his peace by the lpace or an houre
andhys thoughtes troubled hem. Do the
kynge (pale / z layde: O Balthalar / lect ne ·
ther the dꝛeame ner the interpꝛetaeyon ther⸗ D
of leare the. Balthalar anfwered/faping:D
my Lopde / this dꝛcame happento thpne ene⸗
mpes / a the interpꝛetacyon to thyne abuer⸗
ſatpeg. Af foꝛ p tre that thou la meſt wohich
was lo great a mpghtpe / whole berth vere
ched vnko the heauẽ / andhys bzedth into an
the word: whole leues were Fayre / a Hur
moch: under the which che beattes of d lee
had their habitacyon / andopon rohoſe bzall⸗
ches the foules ol the apzenyn tpt.

Eucn thou( hyngearcthe tre/qreate €
ftronge. Thy areatnette increaxety / eters
cheth onto theheauẽ lo doch thy powerto &
endes of the earth. But where as ihe henge
Cate a watcher euen an holy angel / p canie
downe kromheauen / andfapde : het downe
che tre / and dettroye it pet leaue the ground
of the rote in the cart: and bende hym vpon
the playne keldwith chepnes of yzon a tele:
He wall be wet with the dew ot heaut / and
his parte thall be with p beettes of the feld / ©
tell feué peares be come and gone vpõ hein:
his ch krngehis the int een Be


.


gablichodondloz.
=


uen: pee ſeuen yeates Wall come /a govpon
the / tri tgou knowe / p the hreſt hath vower
the kyngdomes of men / a geueth them


vpon
Hane to whom he ip Moꝛzeouer / where as it was


fapde / that the vote of the tree tule be lett
pil in the grounde : it betoneneth / that th
krngdome (halt remapne whole vntothe / al⸗
ter thou batt lernedto know / that the power
berate from beauien perfor sD ung
be contẽt with mp coũcell / that thou mapelt
lowſe thylpnnes wyth ryahtuoulneſſe / and

. tome Se acronis to rene ee

* unge long b peace.
Ali there thinges touche the Ange Habu ⸗
chodonoloꝛ.

So atter.xij.monethes / the kyng walked
bp downe in the palace ofthe kyngdome ol
Babylon / and lapde: Chis is the greate cyte
ol Babplo/ which my telt (wich mp power
Klkrengthſhaue made a hynges courte / oꝛß
honour of np mageſtpe. hie theſe woꝛdes
were vet in the Benges mouth / there fella
vopce From heauen / lapinge: b kyng Nabus
chedonoloꝛ / ta p be tt pont: hy kyngdome
Wall departe from the / thou halt be caſt out
ol mens companpthydwellyng Waibe with
the beatirs of § kelde lothar thou alt cate
graſſe liſie vis an ope / till leuẽ vearesbe c
E gone onertheꝛeuen vntyllthou imowelt / ß
che hyelt bat) power ops the kyngdomes OF
men / andthat he maygeue them / onto whõ
it plealeth hy. Che bery fame houre was
this matter fulfilled spor Habuchodonoloz:
lo that he was caſt oute of meng company)
and ate nradde like an axe. Bis body was wet
with the de we ol heauẽ / til his hearres were
as greate as d egles kethers / a his nales line
byzdes clatoeg. :

hen thistyme was patt/F Habucho⸗
Donofoz lite vp myne eyes vnto eauen / and
myne bnbrrgandnge was reſtozedvnto me
agapne. Ghengaue Atbanckes onto thebp-
Ghet.G magmukped and pꝛapled him that l⸗
seetls fox cuctinoze/ whole power endureth
alwapr) andhis kyngdome from one genera·
cyon to another: in comparifon ot whom all


lde, Sand che the beet


puted as nothinge.
Ge fiannvety accnbinge to bis wilt amBge
the powers of heauen a amüge the inbaby-


-# Plilerers .atourg of be encth and ehere tsnone ? maye


relpſte hyg hande / 07 faye: what doeſt thou⸗


Atthe tame kyme was mpne vnderſtandynge


und. geuen me agarn / and a was reltozed tothe


(he wrptyng Wantel is called- which readeth it / and
tut crpieketß it allo Walthakar beinge llapue / Darius
luecedeth in his rowme.


, Che. b. chapter,


therout.

Sother bꝛought the golden vellell / that
was taken out of the temple ofthe Lozdes
e wah eue g the kynge and his
lozdes with his quene ¢ concubpnes dzöche
Out or them. Chey dꝛoncke wyne / and pꝛay⸗
led theit Poles or golde / puer / copper / do /
wodde and (tone, F

Jn the very lame houre there appeared 1B
fingers / as ithad bene ot a mans hande wet⸗
tynge / right duer agaynſt the candelſtycke
vponthe playne wall in the kynges palace:
gthelpnge lawe the palme ok the bande that
wote. Then chaunged the kyng bis counte⸗


naunce / andhis thoughtes troubled ppm / lo Zeremp. i a.


that the topntes of bps body ſwoke / and bys
iinecs Imote one agapnſt § other. Whertoꝛe


the Benge cryed myghtely / that ther ſpulde Dautel gn


bzngehymthe charmers / Caldees and con-
furers okdeuels. The kung tpahe allo to the
wyſe men ot Babylon / and lade: who lo cñã
rede this wꝛytinge / and Mew methe plapne
meanyng therok walbe clothed with purple /
haue a cheyne of golde aboute hig necke / and
rule the thyꝛde part of my kyngdome.
wponthis/came allthe krnges wyre mẽ:
but theycoulde nether veade the wziting / ner
ewe the king what it lignitied. Then was
the kynge lozẽ akraped in lo moch / p his co-
loure chaunged / and hy loꝛdes were loꝛe ve⸗
red. Wo bprealon ol thys matter / that had
happened to the hinge k his lozdes / Pquene
pay ch 88 Di
fpake vnto the kynge /fayinge: D kung!
Gootauc hetyteforeucrsA-etnats hee


Chen was Daniel brought before the
Benge. Ho the hynge fpake onto Wantel/¢
ſapde: art chou that Daniel / one of the pze-
fonets of Gude whom mp father the Benge

‘FewsyeF baue hearderpeane

Cprece of theboly
goddes/expertence and vnderltandyng / and
chat chere bath bene gteate wetoame und
Pins Mowhaue there bene brought me / wyle
ecOnpnge charmers / to reade this wepting/
and to (heweme the meanpnge therok: But
cheproulde not tell me) what this matter H+

Inpfied. Chen hearde J lape / that thou canſt

expounde darcke thrnges / and declare harde

doutes. Well than / vk thou cant readeths
wirtynge and (etme the meanpnge ther

OF:thou chalt be clothed with purple / haue a

chepne ot golde aboute thy necke / ¢ rule the

chꝛde parte ol my kyngdome.
Daniel antwered / i larde betoze Shing:
EAs for thy rewardes hepe the tothe leit oz


A , . geue thy rpch apitesto another: ret not the ·


Batra,


9 „
Daniel. f. e bonator dbp fate 10


1


leſſe /A wyll rede the wzitinge vnto the king /
and thetwe him the interpꝛetacyon therok.

unge / God the hyeſt gaue onto Mabucho-
te ot a kynge / w

o7tippe a Honour: fo that al people / zyn⸗
redes g bunges ſtode in a we @ feave or him /
by veaton ok the hre ettate / that he had lent
hm. Foz why / he ewe whomhe wolde:he
Cmote whom it pleated him. Agayne: whom
he wolde / he fet bp: and whom be iptt be put


Dantet. fh. 8. downe. But becaule hig hert was ko pioude /


and his tomack let fo kalt onto welkiuͤnede: in


he was depoted krom his kynglx trone / a his


mageſty was taken kromhym. De was Hot Ps,


out krom amonge men. his herte was ine a


Khealten erke and örsdwenenge was wrth


the wylde alles: be tag kapne ko cate grade fa


Eke an oxe / and hys boby was wet wi


dew of the bequenstyll he knew) chat p Wee fou


had power bpon the kingdomes of men / and
letteth ouer them / whom he lpſd. f

And chou his tonne ld Balthasar) fo all
cis, halt not lubmtted thrne herte though


7


o that the velels of his
before the:that chou/¢ the lodes meth ihre


yt: que an concbnes might nc


e
ſerout: Andhalt pꝛapled che Jdoles okkpl⸗
e eee and


Kone: Aß ko the God i e 9
fone; fon te God hr das enten aan.


ech and all thy waves: thou halt


not loaued him. 6
Chertoze is the palme ok thys bande tent
bpther from hyni / to token vp this wyrtinge.
Andthis is the kcripture / witten vp:
Mane / Shetel / Phares Now the tnterpze-
tacpon of goth urn is thrs: Mane / Gon
bath nombꝛedthe nyngdome / and bought it
ro an ende: Chetel chou art weped in the bas
Eugen patceieeb fim
a ded bi t 10
1 0c
Daniel wyth purple / tohange a —
Feen
cla i
betheraterot the these parte of his beng:


dome. Che derr famenpayt was 0 Wet ur unn


che kinge of the Caldees dayne / and Da


outof Medea tobe in the kyngdome / beinge dan. ka.


ii gear of age.


Daniel is made ruler auer the londes. 4
nac pon ot an acte a aga Daniel be 2
of the ac probe ‘Of Dantel is necuſed vnto the kyuge
as atran(grefour, He is put into a denne of Lyons
the commaundement of the kynge. Oe is delpuered by
fapth i Sod. Daniels accutacs ace put onto thelye
ons tebe tozen in fonder. Darms by the pro

or a decree/maguptpsth the Oed of Daniel,


che. vi. Chapter.
F © picated Darius to ſet ouer hrs
i Kesey ipngdome an. C.and. xx. 2
wr cudebeimaubien .


Im
Prpnces(of whom Daniel was one) that the
londes myght geueaccomptes vnto them /a

nditeated.


Das.


larde thus vnto him: king Partus God faue
chb erke ko euer. All the greate eftates oF the
vealme:as ) Pꝛynces Dukes, Denatcurs
and Judges / are determedto put outa come
maundement of the kynge / a to make ature
ſtatute:nameip / g who lo delpꝛeth any peti ·
evo / ether ol any god oz ma (within this rxr.
da pes excepte it be only of the / O king: the
Same perfon may be caſt into the tyds denne.
Wherkoꝛe / O kyng / conkyꝛme thou this ſta·
tute / and make a weptinge : that the thynge
pchthe Medes and Pertes haue oꝛdened
be not altered ner bꝛolben. 2
So Darius made the wyptinge / and cõ⸗
Chirmedit Now when Daniel bnderſtode that
the wzrtinge was made / he wente in to hrs
oule:and the wpndowes of hig hal to warde
ſerulalem ſtode opẽ. Chere kneled hedowne
ponbis kuees / the tymes adape there he
made his peticpon / and pꝛarled his God / line
as his maner was to do a foze tyme.

Chen thele men made learche / Efounde
Daniel mauynge bys pet epon / a pꝛapinge
onto hig God. Sothey came to the kynge /
ſpake befoze him concernyng bys commaũ⸗
dement / laping: O kyng halt thou not lub ·
ſcribedthe ſtatute / p within. xxx. daxes who
Corequyzeth big petycyon of anpgood o7 ma
but only ofthp telt / O hynge : he walbe calt
in to the denne ok the Ipons: Che kynge an ·
ſwered /a la pde: per / it is true. It mut be as
a lawe of the Medes and Perles / that mare
not be bꝛoken.

, Chen antwered they / and larde vnto the
Rynge: Daniel one of the pꝛeloners ok Juda
D kyng / regardeth nether p ner thy ſtatute /
chat thou halt made / vut maketh bps petycid
thꝛe tymes a dae. when the Kyngehcarde
chele woꝛdes / he was loꝛe greued / and wolde
haue excuted Banicl / todẽlpuer hem / g put
rie ne the Sunne wet downe /
to the intent that he myghtſaue him.
CFhete men perceaupng the kyngd mynde /
fapne vnto hun: knowe this ( D tyngethat
the lawe of the Medes endyPerles is / chat d
commaundement a ſtatute which the Keng


dnn pagar tab amaye not be altered. C hein the kyng


them bꝛynge Dantel/and ther caſt hem
in to the L pons denne. :


‘Ghebynge alto page onto Bartel and I


fapde:thy God / whom thou alwape leruelt /
Eeuen be Wall dekende the. And there was
geber a ſtone / and laped vpon the hole of
che dene: this the hynge lea led with his atone
ryng / a wyth the lygnet of bys pꝛinces: that
the kynges commaundement concernynge
Daniel / culde not be bꝛoken.
So the kynge wente into his palace a
bepte hym lober all nyght / lo that there was
notable cpꝛed befoze hy / nether coulde be


Ok Daniel.


lrvtiif

take any depe. But bytymes inthe moꝛning

atthe bzeake ok the dape / the kynge arele /

sane in all bate vnto the denne of the
pons.

Now ashe came tive onto the denne / he
cried with a pyteous voyce vnto Panitlipec
the kynge ſpahe / and larde vnto Daniel: O
Daniel / thou leruaunt ol the tpuynge God /
is not thy Sodewhom thou al wape ferueſt)
able to delpuer the from the Ivons 7 Paniel
Layne vnto the kynge: O Bynge / God laue


thplife foz euer. My Sodhath kent his aun⸗ Panel lh. e.;
gell / which hath thucthe lyons moutheg / lo Act rue.
chat they might not hurte me. Koꝛ why: mine Judi run. e.


vngyltpneſle is founde out bekoze bpm and zenten


as tos the / O hynge/F neuer ollended the.
Chen was the kynge exceading glad / and
cSmaunded to take Mantel out of the denne.
So Paniel was bought out o the denne /
ano mater ok hurte was founde vpon hym
Foz he put his truſt in bys God. And as koz
chole men whych had acculed Daniel / the
png cõmaunded to bꝛynge the / g to caſt thé


in the Lyons denne: them / their chplozen and peger. g. b.
their wpues. Do the K von had the maſtry Dauet. ug.


ok them / and bzake all their bones a londer /
oz euer theycame at the grounde.


Akter this / wrote kyng Warlug onto all punti. ff


people knreddes / and tunges / chat dwelt in G
all läd :peace be multiplied w you: My cõ ·
maundeinẽt is / in al mydominvon a hyng ·
dome / chat men keare a ſtande in awe ol Ba
niels God. 4

Foz he is the Ipupnge God / whych aby ·


deth euershis kyngdome wall not kaple / anid Sani iff,


his power is eucriattpnge ! Ze is he tbat de. vp c.
Ipuereth / and laueth he doch wonders and
marueldus worcheg in heauẽ and in earth:
be hach pꝛelerued S


reygne of Darius and Cirus of Perlia.


ſpake / and lapde: I ſawe in my vylxon
nyght / and beholdeithe foure wyndes te
eaurcn ſtroue bpon the fee / and toure great
ee came bp from the ler one oniphe
another, :

Che kirſt was as a lyon / and pet had he
Tegles wynges. Jlawe / that hes wynges
were plucte from him / and he taken aware
krom the earth: that he Hone bpon bys lete

4 BBY. asa


uche Mme ewatterts gi Wente
of!


) Daniel krom the powwer car. h.
ok the pons. Chis Daniel prolpered tireje mh .


Balthasar


at a man / and that there was geen him a
mans herte.
Beholde / ß ceconde beat was icke a beer /
sO rou.ppvii.c and ſtode vpů che one lide. Amonge his teeth
nd inhys mouth he had. lj greate longe teeth; a
it was larde vnto him: Arile / eate vp / moch
flelb. Chen 4 loked/ and beholde / there was
another lp vnto a leoparde:thys had wyn ·
ges as a koule / euen koure vpon the backe.
Chrs beak hadkoureheades andthere was
Dani vi b power geuen him. Alter this I lawe in a bt:
10 b
ried, fon bynyght/ and beholde / the fourth beat
T. hach was grymme and hozrible / and maruelous
Aronge. 3thad great pꝛonteeth/ it deuoured
and deſcroped / e ampedthe relpdue under
his fete. It was karre vnlyle the other bea ·
ſtes that were bekozeit:koꝛ ithad ten hoꝛnes /
Apota.xiß · a. wherol J tone goodhede.
220.4. And beholde / there came vy amõge them /
Canother le bose / vetoze whom there were
thze ofthe fps bones pluckte awaye. Be ·
holde / this hozne had eyes lyne a man / and a
mouth Cpeakpnge pꝛelumptuous thynges.
J locked yl the leates were prepared / and
tylt g olde aged fat hym downe. His clothing
Apocalip.tes was as whpte as Mowe Land the hearresck
Dances bes bead line the pure woll. ys trone was
Irne the pape flame / and hys wheles as the
burnenge Eye. Chere dꝛewe Forth a kyyie
ſtreame /a went out krom hym. à thoutanve
Apotaltp v. b. somes a choufande lerued hum. x. M. tymes
tenthoulande ſtode befoze him. Che iunge-
ment was let / and the bones opened. Chen
D toke g hedethere vnxo / becaule ok the voce
5 ofthe pꝛoude woꝛdes / which p hozne ſpane.
Wat. rrud, J behelde /t yl the beacte was dayne / and
a. Opshnopbetvopr/gruencucttobebynt
ra e lyse. )

g Foz the power of tye other beattes allo
it was taken awaye / but their Ipues were
prolonged koꝛ a tyme and tealon. I tawe ina
vplpon by nyght / and beholde / there came

chat. rig. c. one in thecloudes ot heauen lpke the konne
Act. i. b. oka man / which wente onto the olde aged /
Apoca. a. befoze whom they bꝛought him: Chengaue
he hym power digniteregall/that all peo-

Ppuip. gen. ple / trybes and tunges Hulbe ferue him. ig
300.7 “ powerts an euerlalkinge vower, which that
5 neuer be put downe: a bis Kengdome endu⸗
Daniel. xi. t. keth vncozrupte. My herte was dered, ¢ J
Daniel had a troubled ſpꝛete within me /a

the biltons of my head made me aftapen:tylt


Weutergalr.d. J. Fal me vnto one of tem that trode br o 4


finotwe the trueth / concernyng all thete chin.
j ges. Spohetolde me / a made me onderftande
the interpꝛetacyon of theke thinges.

E. Chele foure greate beattcs / are foure
kynges whch shall are out ok the earth.
Chele Hall tabein Eyngdome of Slayntes
OF the mol hrelt /and potent it ſtru moze e


The Pꝛophetye


moze toi a longeteacon. Atterthis J requy⸗
red diligentip to hnowe the trueth / concer-
nyng } fourth beatt which was fo karre vn ·
iphe the other beactes ¢ fo hozrible: whole
teeth were of pꝛon and hys naples of bzatte:

ich deuoured and deſtroped / a Hampedthe
reipdue onder bps fete.
unowe the treuth / as touchinge the ten hoz rob. e
nes that he had vpon his head / g this other
whych came vp alterwarde / bekoꝛe whole
lace there tell downe thze: whych ho ne had
epes and a mouth that pale pꝛelumptudus
thinges / and loked wyth a grymmer bylage
then his kelowes. J behelde /a § tame home
made battapll agapnſt the tapntes / pee and
gat the byctozy of thenubntrll the tyme that
che olde aged came that the
geuẽ to che cheleſt layntes:
that the larntes had the kyngdome in poffer⸗
benz debe me this ant were: Chat fourth
beak ſhalbe the fourth kingdome bps earth:
it chalbe moze then all other kyngdomes/ it
Mali deubure / treade downe / and deſtrope all
= —. a hinges buten

Che ten hoꝛnes / are es / that Zach l. t.
aryle out ok p kyngdome / after whom there *
Wall ſtande bpanother / whych ſbalbe grea·
ter then the kyſt. He hall Cubdue thze ryn⸗ G
ges /g wall fpeahe woꝛdes agaynſt thebpett
Of all:he Maldettrope the fayntes or the molt
byett / and chyncke / that he maye chaunge
tymes and lawes. Cher cal be geuen onder
bes polver/ontelta tyme / two temen /s halt Pt,


à tyme,
But the tudgement halbe kepte /fothat

ks power Halbe talẽ from him fo7 he hat

be dell roped / and perpch at the lat. 48 f026

kyugdonie/ power and all mpahe that is vn ·

der che heauen:it chalbe geuen to theholx

people of the moot hye / whole Kengpone , 0

igeuerlattnge/vec all powers wan keme g Ba rigs

obepe hym. Ehus karre extende the words,

Heuertheles / Daniel was lo bexedin mx

thoughtes that my countenaũce ch 7

but the wo des J hepte ſtplinmyherte. Lu. ge.


Ga veron ofa Erpfe betwene a rameg an begeate.
e eee
cpens. Ok ihe Gamelelle bynge Antichrite
Che. viij Chapter.
Ahe thpzde peare of the rargne a
ol kenge Pallhazar / there apea·
py teda ars vnto me Waniel/atter
that Ahan lene the kalt. 3 Catwe in metz
abptyon(a when g lawe it, Jwas at Sulis
in the chete cyte / whych iveth in the ande of
Elam) and in the vꝛlpon / me thought J was
by the ryuer ot wat.
Chen g loked vp / and ,
8 ere


eruſalem.
there


delpzed allo toApocatizig.e,


0. t. a.


ode befoze the ryuer / a rãme / which

had hoznes: and thele hoꝛnes were bye / but
one was hyer then another a the hpeſt came
pp laſt. I tawe that this ramme pulhed with
hes hoꝛñes /agapnt the welt / agaynſt the
noꝛth / and agãptict the louth: la that no bea·
ftes mrgbt fande before bym / ner detende
them from bys power: but he drdas hemlx·
Bled /a waredgreativ. I tobe hede bntothis/
e then came there an he goate from the welt

. duer the whole earth / and touched not the


grounde.

Chisgoate had a maruelous goodlyhoꝛne
betwirte bis eves and came vnto the rãme /
that had the two hoꝛnes (whom 4 had fene
afoze by the rruer lyde) and ranne fearcely
bpd hem with his müght. Alawehrmdzawe
hyebntothe ramme / beinge very learce b}

em: pee he gaue him loch a ſtroke / that he

Cbꝛakehis two hornes: ether had therame
fo moch ſtrength as to dtande befoze hym:
but he catt him downe / trodde him vnder bis
tete: no man wag able to delyuer the rime
out okhis power.

Che goate waxed exceadinge greate / and
whẽ he was at the ſtrögeſt / his greate home
was bꝛoken allo. Chen grewe there other
koure loch luke in the ſteade / towarde the. uin
wyndes of the heauen. Y ee out ok one of the
leeſt of thele hoꝛnes / there came vp yet ano ·
ther hoꝛne / which waxed maruelous greate:
towarde the louth / to warde the ealt / and to
warde the kapze piealaunt lande. Jcgrewe
bptothe boot orheauen / wherot ir dd calt
fomedowwne tothe grounde / z ok the ſtarreg
allo and trode them̃ vnder fete,

Fee it grewe vp ontothe pꝛynce of the
hooſt / krom whom the dapie olferynge was
taten / a the place of his Sanctuary calten
downe. Anda cevtapne lealon was geuẽ vn ·
tott / agaynſt the daplyeolkerynge (becaule
ol wyckcönelejthat it myght caſt downe the
veryte to the grounde / and lo to pꝛolpere in
all thingeg / that is wente aboutr.


11 upon this g herde one ol p fayntes lpea ·


nge / which laynte layde onto one that al ·
Redthis queſtyon: Pow longe Mall this vy
ſpon of the daylye factéfice ¢ ofthe waſtyng
-abbompnacion endure:that the Sanctuary
and the power ſhall lobe troden vnder fote?
And he ant wered him: Unto the euenynge a
the moꝛnynge / euen twothoutande and ehꝛe


Ne wall the Sanctuary


clenledagapne. .
How when J Dantel had ene this vt /
and lought fo the vnderſtandynge ot it:be⸗
holde / there ſtode befoze me a chenge Iphe
gq dtitoa man.AndZ berdes mans boyce in the
rpuer of uslat / which cryed / z fapde:D Gas
biel make this ma vnderſtande the billon.


Hk Daniel,


lxxv,


So he came / and ſtode by me. But J was
akraped at hys commmynge / and kell downe
vpon my face.

Chen lapde he onto me: O thou tonne ol
man, marcke well / lo in the laſt tyme Walt
ches vylpon be kulkylled. Now aß he was
lpeakinge vnto me / J waren kaynte/ co that
flush dotone tothe grounde. Buchetoke

olde bpon me /s fet me vpagapne / Caving:

Dentn eee.

I 1 etyme apporn .
ted it hatbe kulkylied. .

Che ramme whych thor lawelt with the
two hoznes /is the kynge ot the Medes and
Perles: but the goate is the Rynge or Gele
lande: the greate hozne that ſtode betwirte
bis eres thabis the pancppall kynge. But
where as it bzake/and foure other role vy in
the ſteade: it lignilieth / that out orthis peo ·
ple Wall ttande vp koure kyngdomes / but
not lo myghtye as it.

After thele kyngdomes (whple vngodly⸗
nelle is a growingẽ) there wall aryte a hyng
ok an vnchamekalk Eace/ which walbe wyle
indarche (peahynges,

He ſbalbe mygytpe and tronge / but not
in his awne ſtregth. He Wall dettvope aboue
meature/and ali that he goeth aboute thall
pꝛoſpere:he Mall fave the ſtronge and holy
people. And thoꝛowhis craktynes / lalſhed
call pꝛolpere in his hande his herte halbe
pꝛoude / and many one ſhalſhe put todeath
inhis welkhynege He (al (tide vpagapult
tye Pꝛynce ot Pꝛynces but he waibe de ·
roped without hände And this option that g. Mach. le.
is Dewed pntothe /ig as ture as the euening h. cela. f. l.
athemomyng. Chertoze waite thou vp this
light / ko it wylbe longe oꝛ it come to palfe. Etal,vig.0,

Upon this was J Wantel very faynte / lo
that J lape ficke certaynevapes but when
‘grote ops wente aboute the ynges bulp⸗
neſſe / and naruelcd atthe bptyonneuerthes
ictieno man knewe of il.


. Daniel detyreth to haue that performed of aod
whch bebanpomelaconceenpnge the retourne ol
the people from their bannyſhement in Wabplon. 21
true coutellion. Panlels prayer ia hearde. Galniel the
Aungel expoundeth vnto hym the vptpou of their.
weaktg. Che anopntpnge of Chriſt, dhe be kee
agapne of Jerulalem vnder Hehemiah. The death or
AYN. Che cad ynge out of the wycked Jewes.


che. ix. Chapter.

the Epalt peave ot Joalelun the.
tonne ok Ahatuccus / which wags
yok the lede of the g F Dunleb bog
made kynge nuceel):

Caldeeg: pee euẽ᷑ in the firſt yer

gne / J Hantel delyred ut ip

nombe out of the bones / wie rut the i;


Itrulalem. The
rulalem chulde lpe waſte. rr. yeare: and
turned me vnto Sodß L onde / toz to pꝛaye i
make mrne intercetipon / with kaltyng lack
cloth a aſhes / pꝛaped befoze the Loꝛde my
God / and knowledged / lapinge:

O Loꝛde / thou greate and fearful God /
thou that bepelt couenaunt and mercy with
chem / which loue the / anddothr commaun⸗

Warned, dementes: me haue lynned / we haue olten⸗
ded / we haue bene dylobedent a gone back:
Pee we haue departed from all thx pꝛeceptes
änd tudgementes.

5 e woldenener folowe thy leruauntes
che Pꝛophetes / 5 Cpake in tyyname to oure
kynges and pzynceg / to oure fozefathers /g
to all the people ol the lande. O L oz / rig ⸗
tuoutnede belongeth vnto the / onto vs pers
tapnech nothynge but open ſhame: as it is
come to palle thysdape vnto euer man ol
luda / and to them that dwell at Jerulale n:
ee vnto all tcrael / whether they be karre oz
Ape:tbhozow outall andes: wherin thou halt
ſcrowedthem / becaule ok the offences p they

had done agaynſt the.
Yee O Lone / vntovs / to oure kynges g
princes /to oute fozefathers:euen to vs al /


Eren. id.


that haue offended the/belogeth open Mame,’


But onto the / O Loꝛde dure God / pertay-
Cneth mercy and koꝛgeuenelle. As koꝛ vs / we
are gone backe fro him / and haue not obey⸗
edthe vopce of the Loꝛde oure God/to wale
in hes lawes / whych he taped bekoze vs by
J. Wetrl. l. d. his leruauntes the Pꝛophetes:pee all Jirael
Tucha. vi b. haute tranſgreſſed / and gone backe from thy
yt that they hauẽ not herckened vnto

pbopce,
herkoze the curle a othe / that is waft:
Deute. xrvj. ten in the lawot Motes the feruatic ot God
r. ih. (agaynſt whom we haue offended)is poured
FFL ppon vs Midge hath perkourmed bis woz.
des / which he lake agaynſt vs / and agaynſt
ouxe iudges that tudged vs: to bzinge vpon
bs loch a greate plage / as neuer was onder
heauen /ipke as it is now come to palſe in
Jerulaleni. Ve all this plage / as it is wyyt⸗
ken in the lawe of Moles / is come vpon vs.
Yet made we not oure paper bekoꝛe d Loꝛd
dure God / that we might turneagapne Eom
oure wyckedneſle and to be lemned in thy bes
ryte. Cherfoꝛe hath the Loꝛde made halte / to
byinge this plage vpon bs: for the Lozd oute
x God is ryahtuous /in all his workes which
Co why / we wolde not hercken vnto

igs opce.

a And now/ O Loꝛde oure God / thou
weaned, that wyth a mpaheve bande hat bought
0 25 47 thppeople dul ol Egypte / to get thytelke a

5 tame, which remapneth this dape: we haue
‘fynned/D Kordes done wyckedip agaynſt
all chr rightudulnes: vet iet thy wzotheult


plul evta.


WALUC He,


sropyerpe awape ( beleche the) 5
krornthr cyte Jerulalemthp bölphell. and
whrzko: cure kynnes lake / and foz the wyc⸗
kednelle of dure kozekathers is Jerulalema
thy people abhoꝛred / ot al thẽthat are aboute
bs. Mow therfore /D oure God / heare the
pꝛaver of thy ſeruaunt / and his interceuyon.
O let notthy face chyne ouer thy Sanctuas
rp / chat iveth tate, €

O my God / enciyne thyne eare / and her⸗
ken (at the ieeſt toꝛ thynẽ awne fake) open
chene eyes beholde how we be delolated, yer
and the etre allo / whych is called atter ih
name: tos we do not calt oure pꝛapers betozẽ
the in oure awne rightuoutnes noꝛbut onip
in hr greate merces. O Loꝛde / heare: G
koꝛgeue Lone: O Loꝛde confpoze/tarpe not
ouer longe:but foz thyne awne fake doit. G
my odor thy cyteandehy people is called
alter thy name.

8 J was pet cpeakynge at my pꝛapers /
knowledg enge myne awne lynnes / andthe
fynnes ok my people / manynge fompnein-
bahnen cer beds as i
oly ol mp God: yee whyle J was ae
Pet (eating tnjup paper bebolne the ma dmg. df
Sabnen whom F had kene afoze in the bitis) q
the offerynge tyme in the cuenynge. He ine Ff
kourmed me / and Cpake vnto me: O Wanted
lapde he, J am now come to make the vnder⸗
ftande it: Foz a8 foone as thou begannelt 1
tomahethe praper / it was lo drupfed and dal Erd


kame ſleinge to me / and touched me aboute


Foꝛ thou art a man greatly belou ed.
Whertoze /pondze the matter well / that
thou maxeſt ſerne, to onderttande the orlp⸗ gere lden tay
on. Lxr. wekes are determed auer thy peo vg. peare sl
ple (and ouer the holpcptpe:that the wicked⸗Leuitt em
nelle maye be conlumed that the lynne may Mbertore ge
haue an ende / that the offence mape be reco. r. oe.
cpled / and to bzinge in euerlaſtinge ryahtu⸗ reareß.
oulueſſe / to fulfpll the vylyons and the s ꝛo⸗
phetes and to anopnte the moot holy one. 5
Uinderſtande thys then / and marche it well:
that from the tyme it halbe concluded / co LM
andrepapze Jerulalem agapne onto Chꝛiſt
(02 the anopnten) pꝛynce:chere Malbe leuen
weles. Chen tall the ſtretes and walles
be bupldedagapne irg. wenes / but id hard
troublous tyme, Atter thele. inj. wenes /
hall Chzift be dayne, and ther cal haue no
pleature in hym. Chen hall there come a
people wyth the Pꝛince / and deſtrope the ci⸗


Af wet!


te and the Hanctuarp:ahrs ende Mail come


as the water floud. But the defolacpon tall
contynue tylt the ende of the batten.

He ſhallmake a dcronge bonde withma⸗
ny. toꝛ the ſpace of a weke: a when the weke
ts halt gone/he all put downe the —


therfoze am J come to chrwe the. And whr⸗ 5 1 awaxre/ahrd them felues,


4 tl Eb.


The Anges of perlt. Ok
, and meatoftrynge. And in the temple there
Matsrith.r15 Malbe an abhompnable cb eis y one
eig. b. haue deſtroped all, And it is concluded / that
chys watteng call contynue vnto the ende.


CCpere appear eth vnto Daniela mä clothed in tps
— seda ek he is aa 4
e. r.


ak:
a rb
Now when he had lponen there worded
vntome / J kack downe myhead to ß grolide
andhelde mp tunge. Behoſde / there touched
benen one very iphe vntoa man. Chen
opened J my mouth / a lade vnto him / that
fone beloze me: O my Loꝛde / my topntes
are lowled in the viſton / and there is nomoꝛe
within me: How map mp Lozdes
teruaunt then talne wich my Loꝛde: leinge


there is no ſtrẽgth inme / lo z J cannot kane


ar) a matter / vee a true matter /
butitis peta longe tyme vnto it. He bnder⸗
Kode the matter well / o perceaued what the

bylyon was. At the came trme / J Daniel
mourned Foz the pace oF thze wekẽs / lo that

‘Abana ful cacate boca fo flew ¢ wene

ere camenone wythin my mouth: No /

drd not ones anoynte my tele) tpl the whole

Wagen dhe r the vit monech,

on the. xxiitj Dave ok the kirſt moneth /

15 was by the greate floude / called Cigrig: 3

bunt, vg. u. pkt vp myne eres / and loked: and beholde /n
Aude. lle. man clothed in Ipnen / whofe lopnes were
Svzded vp with Epne golde of Araby: his bo-
by was Ike the Chꝛilolite ſtone / his kace to
Joke bpon) was Iphelpahtenynge/ hrs eyes
ag the flame ok Fpze/yys armes geete were
Ike fapzeglyſtering metall / büik h bopce ol
bis wozdes was like p vopce ok a multitude.
J Daniel alone tawe this vilion / the men
hat were with me /law it not: but a greate
kearkulneſſe fenlpponthem /fo that they fied
was left there
my belt alone /a fae this greate bylpon/ſo


ac


Fife me: 5er om nomoze ftrengt


in me: pee J lot my coloure clene/ J
walted aware / and my ftrength was gone.
Yet herde I the bopce of his woꝛdes and as
fone as herde it / layntne lle came vpõ me /
1 kelldowne Flat to the grounde bpon my
face, And beholde / an hande touched me/
which let me vp vpon my knees a bpon the
palmes or myhandes / ſayinge vnto me: W
Daniel / thou well beloued man: tale good
eve of the woꝛdes / that FZ Mall faye bnto ß /
ſtde right vp / ko vnto the am now lent.

And when hehad tayde thele woꝛdes /

© gone bptrembieng. eben favdebe ontome:
keare not Daniel:fo2 why Cence p Fivit daye
chat thou let thyne herte to vnderſtande / and
dpdelt chaſten thy lelte betoꝛe thy God: hy
woꝛdes haue bene herde And J had come
onto the / when thou begůneſt to lpeane had
Ene nd. not 5 peince oucrthe kyngdome of p Perles
, fh. a. withlt ande me. xxi, Daves. But lo Michael
one of the chete pʒinces / came to heſpe me⸗

hem haue z left by che . Wan Pertia /g am

came to cheme che what chall happen onto

thy people in the latter daxes: Fo it wyibe

‘Tonge pet oꝛ the vylron be fulfptted, :


ned together / and the kynges da


my bꝛeth aps this there touched me agay⸗
ne / one moch iykẽ a man / and conkoꝛted me /
lapitge: O thou man fo well beloued / eave Dantelitfits
not: be contẽt / take a good bette vnto the /e
e ſtrõge. Do when he had lpolen vnto me /
recoüered a fayde: Speake on my Lord /
02 thou hat rekreched me. Chen layde he:
knoweſt thou wherkoze J am come onto d:
how wil q goagatheto fight W the prince of
5 Perles. 8 Coone as 2 go ko: th / lo / p pꝛince
ok Srekelande Mall come, Meuertheles /
wyll wewe tgetlhe thingze / that is kalt noted
in the lttypture of trueth. And as ko; alt
vonder matters / chere is none that helpeth
me in them / but Michael you rep ince,
ophecp of the hpnges of Joc tlie, DE the hinge
someon See. DE the fet 93 Prd 0¹ te
honbe thegof/and of the battell with the kpugde: e of
Hitrin, DE the Fewes that Aye vuto the Bpuge of
Sgyptervhom Antiochus the kynge of Sirla revs
fecutett.whpch tygureth vnto vs Antichit, Che
prpde ot Antiochus. .
he. y. Chapter.
Hd in the kpaſt veare of Dartus ol a
Medea / J Kove byhym / to com-
fogte hym / eto ſtrength hum / and
ow will J chewe the the trueth.
Beholbe there Mall tande vp pet ate
in Perlta / but the kourth ſhalbe karte licher
thenther all. Ind when he isin che chekelt
power ol his tiches / he wal pꝛouoke euery
man agapnſt h veainie of Szenkelande. Then
Chall there arpte yet a myghtye hinge / that
Wald 2 11 adolf ashes ln Ai do what
im liſt. And as foone vngdome co 2
meth bert 5 58s to entf.
warde the koure wyndes of the heauen hers, Wa
that come alter hym / chal not haue loch po · e
wer a dompnvon ag he: but hys kungdone
Halbe Ccatved / pee euen amonge other then
thole. And the hyng of ö touth thalbe migh⸗
tper / then bys other pꝛinces. Agaynſt hein
there wall one make himleik ſtronge / Wal -
rule his domynxon wilh greate power.
Butatter certayne veares thev halbe top.
ughter ok the
louth Hall come to the kynge of the Noꝛth /
for to maße frendchyp / but the Mall not op⸗
tapne the power of that arme / nether ahnt
the be able to endure thozow his myahti but
che / and loch as bought her (vee and hechat
: BI li. “begat


The Rynges The


of Perlia, oe 8
i begather / a cõkoztedher foz bys teme) Mair
be delpuered vp. Out of the bꝛaũches of her
rote / there ſhall one ſtande vp in his Header
which with power ol armes Hall go thoꝛow
the trynges lande ol the noꝛth / a handle hym
Accopding tohts ſtrength. As top their Jools
@ princes, with their cotip Jewels of golde
Klpluer/he wall cary them awape captpues
into Egppte /a he hall preuapleagapntt ?
kyng ol the noꝛth certapne peares, And the
ae come into d kynges realme of 6 cout /
e walbe kayne to tune aga ne in to hys
_ Stone lande. M herkoze his ſonnes walbe dil⸗
plealed / and challgather together a myghty
Greate hoot of people: and one of them Mall
come? a go thozow like a waterflowed:then
Wall hereturne/egofozth with oefvinge ¢

boattpnge onto his awne lande.

Chenthe kyng ofthe Couty Halbe angry /
and Hall come forth to kight agapnſt d Ring
ol p noꝛth:pee he hall bunge a gteate mui⸗
tytude ol people togecher / da greate heape
walbe geué in to his hande:thele chall he ca ·

Crpawape with greate pryde / lo, lo moche as
he hath caſt downe fo many choulandes / ne⸗
uertheles be chall not pꝛeuapie. For the hing
ob the noꝛth Mali gather(ok pnewpa greater
heape ok people then akoꝛe / a come koꝛth cat
tera certayne tyme a veares) with a mighty
hootte a exceadyngegreate good.

Atthe tame tyme there hall many ſtande
bpagapnt the ge ok thefouth)fothat 6
wicked cheldzen of thy people allo wall ex⸗
alte themlelues (to fuſtill the vylpon)e then
Kall. othe kyng ofthe nozth hall come to
lave lege / atotanethe ctronge fenfed cities:
And the power ok them ob the lou th ſhall not
enen bpm / athe bet men or the
People thal not be to ſttöge / as to reliſt him.

hosztelp, when he commeth, he tall hädle
him as he llt / z no maß Walbe to hardy ag to
ſtande agayntt him. He Wal. ade in d plea⸗
faunt cofitre /which thozow him thalbe de⸗
Aroped. He Mall fet his face wall his power
to optapne his kingdome / and to be tpheit,


Fee that hallhedo/ and geue hym vnto the


daughters amöge wemen / to dettrope hym.
But he ſhall kaple / necher hall he optayne
bis purpofe. Akterthys Wall he let hrs face
onto the Iles / ¢ take many ot chẽ. A pꝛince


Wall ſtoppe him / to do hym a ame / belyde


the conkukpon that els chan come vnto him.
Debus half he tourne agarne to hes atone
ande / ſtomble /a tan /s be nomoꝛze founde:


lohe that came vpõ him a dydhem vxolẽce /


wall ſtande in his place / a haue a pleafaunt
kyngdome:and alter kew daes he halbe de ·


Axoped / athat nether in wach / ner in bat⸗
nes Feade there Walt arple a vyle
t on / not holden worthy oF a kenges begs


daplpe olleryng


Prophecpe


nytre: ihrs wall come in craftelp /andop
tapne the ürngdome wyth fapze wozdes: he
hail fraht aga vnc the armes ol 6 myghtye
(and deſtrorẽ themjpee andagarnd d peince

of the couenaunt.

So atter that he hath taken truce wyth
him / he bal handle dylceattullp:that he mar
get bp /e duercome him with a mall Hocke:

d lo with craktyne lle to get him tothe fatter
place of the lande / and to deale otherwyle /
then ether his fathers oz graundfathers drd.
Fos he ball deſtroye the thing that they had
robbed ¢ lpopled / pee i alitheir fubRaunce:
Pmagenynge thoughtes agaynt the ſtrong E
Holde /a that fo2 a tyme. is power ¢ herte
chalbe ſterred vp wa greate arme lt
the hinge of the fouth: where thoꝛow d king
okthe Louth halbe moued then vnto battell /
with a greate a myghtye boot allo. Heuer
thelette / he wall not beable to Rae) fozthey
wall confpyzeagapnt him. Vee ther g eate
ot his meate / hall hurte hin: lo f his holt
hall fall/¢ many be arne downe.

Chele two kynges thalbe mynded to do


mylcheke and talkẽ ol dplceate at one table: 6. cha...


but thep that not pofpere:fo; wh / the ende
hall not conie yet) onto the tyme apopnted,
Chen Hal he go home agaxne into his awne
lande with great good & let his hertagapntt
the holp couenaunt / he (haibe bulpagaynt
tt /e then returne home. At 8 tynteappopn-
fout:so0 all ade ee ee ene puny
auth: So chall it happen otherwile then
6 ferit/vet ones agayne. And whp/6 hu ppeg vr n
or Kpthim Mat come vpon him / chat he map
be ſmytten a turne agapne:that he maptake
indighacyon agayntt the couenaunt of ho⸗
Ipnelle/ to medie agapnſt it.) ec he thal ture
nehim / a dꝛawe ſoch vnto him / as leaue the
bolp couenaunt. 1
+ He hall fet mpabey men to bnhalowe che
Sanctuary ok rength/ to put downe the
/ ato fet vp the abhompna⸗
ble decolacpon. And roch as bzcalke che coue⸗
haunt chall he flattre wyth fayze wozdeg.
But thepeople p wyn know their God/ cha
haue the ouethande and pꝛolpere. Chote al ·
lo that haue vnderſtanding amonge the fee
ple (hall enfourme the mültrtude: and oz a
longe ſeaton / they chalbe perfecuted wyth
Cmearde / with ye with captiuite and


Stakynge aware of their goodes. Now


they kali / they thalbe fett vp wa lxtie helpe:
butmany wall cleuebnto them karnediy.
ye tome of thore whych haue vndertfan⸗
drnge Wall be perfecuted allo: 5 they mape
be tryed / purtkped and clenked / tyllthe tyme
be out: foꝛ there is pet another tyme appoyns
ted. Che kung wall do what hin ipt / he al
exalte and magniexe him eite 24


5 ana ..


dune.


Gk Baniel⸗


chat is God. Yee he Hall tpeane maruelous

theng, agapnt the God ok all goddes / wher⸗

nahe Wall peolpere / foionge tpl che wiath

1 fo} ea ae — ab

one . not e God ol .

37+ thets but his luſt {hall bebpon wetter

be @al not care q enp God / foz he wal mas

nike humlelke aboue all. In his place hal

be woꝛchrpe the myghtpe Fools sand ß God

whom his fathers knewe not / hall he ho⸗

noure with golde and leluer / with precpous
Gones and plealaunt Jeweils.

G., Chrs hall he do, lekynge helpe andluc ·

conte at mrghtie Fools ¢ ſtraunge God.

Soch as will veceaue him / and take him toi

Sodſhe hall geue them greate wozthype a

power: pee and make them loꝛdes or d mul⸗

txtude / a geue thé the land wyth rewarnes,

Aren latter tyme ſhall the kynge of p louth

rꝑue with him: and the hynge of the noꝛth

in ipbemaner call come aga pnſt him wyth

charettes /hoꝛſmen and with a greate nauy

of (hippes. He Mall come in to the landes

deſtrope andgothozow:he wall entre alto in

aueh 1 lande. Many ae

cals. rt. and Countrees Mall decape / excepte Edom,

N 2 Moab a the beet or the chlidzen of Ammon /

which Mall efcape kromhis hande. He Mall

ſtretch koꝛth his bates vpon the countreeg /

g the lande of Egypte chan not elcape hym.

Fos chozow his gornge in / he wall haue do ·

hunton ouer the treatures of ſyluer a golde /

. dane 985 dee of are

la and Ethiopia. Meuerthelete the tyo}

mute. aut fte Sack athe nozty Wal teouble pitts

fozthe whych caufe he Mall goo fozth to de⸗

ſtrope a curſe a greate multitude. Chetẽtes

ok his palace thalt be pptch betwyrte $ two

fees/opon the bpll ofthe noble Spanctuary/


w lr Ecko he Chall come to the ende ok it / a then thal


no man helpe him.
ophecpeth the relurre⸗ of thedeed. Che
Samer of 5 of Danie, 2 a
¶ Che. xij. Chapter.
ae; Pectyme wyñ come allo / that the
great pꝛince Michael / which Ra-
Hideth on thy people ide / chall arpſe
vp / loꝛ there chan come a tpme ol


n rig u. tvouble/Coch ag neuer was/fens chere beat


netto be eny people / onto that fame tyme.

Chen ſpall thy people be delpuered / pee all
Jeb h. e. thofe § be kound witten in the boke. Manx
Ln. 5p. e. Ob ch chat liepe in che duſt oF che carth / call
awake:lome to the euerlactynge iple / Come
to perpetuall ame and repꝛofe. Che wyle
(Coch as haue taught other) hall glyſter / as
the ſhynnynge ot heauẽ: and thole that haue
inſtructe § multitude vnto godlpnelle / wal ·
be ag the ſtarres worde without ende.
Andthou D Daniel / wut vp there woz


vi

L leale che bone till lat tyme. gyany wait
go aboute here and there / then Mal know⸗
ledge increale. 03 Daniel loked / and bes
holde / there ove ocher two: one pon thes
thoze of § water the other bps yonder kde. ¢
And one of thé lapde vnto him / whych was
clothed in Iynen / and ſtode aboue vpon the
waters of the floude: Bow longe ſhall it
to the ende okthele wonderous woꝛckes?

Ehen herde A the man with the Ipnen clos
ches / which ſtode aboue vpon the Waters ock
the floube: when he helde vp bys ryght and apo. ric rh. e.
lekt hande vnto heauen / and tware by yum
which lpueth Foz euerithat it wall tarp fora
tyme / two tymes a hall a tyme: ¢ when the
powerol the holy peaple is clene teatred a⸗
bzode /thé ball atthetethpnges be fulkriled.

FJ herde it well / but J vnderſtode it not.
Chen fapde J: O my loꝛde / what ſhallhap⸗ D
pen after that? Be anfwered: Go thy wave
Daniel / tos thele wo: des thal be cloled vp a
lealed / ell the lat tyme: a many ſhalbe pu-
ritied / clented a tried. But the vngodip Malt
Ipue wichedlp/ and thole wickedlas manporf

e as they be) pal haue no vnderſtandinge. Mat th v.

8 £07 Coch as haue vnderſtandynge / the
wal regarde it. And from $ tyme fozth that
daplte offering thalbe put downe ¢ the ab⸗
hominable dekolacton fect vp / there walbe a
thoutande two hundzeth Kxc.dapes. O well
ts him that watteth / a cometh to the thous
lande lil. C. a xxxb. dapeg. Go thou thy wape
now / til iche ended tane thy ret / and öyde in
the lot / tin the dapes haue an ende.


ende ol ec
v Agb
„ 2 205


¶ The boke of the


pProphete Dias,


CChe tyme wherin Dieas prophecyed. Dieashy

tabing an harlat to his wyte / lignitieth the Jootatrpe

al che people. Che deſt ruccõ of the okſpying of Jehů /

and ot the Jcraelptes / is prophecped.

0 Che. Urck. Charter.

bisisthe woe ol the.
los / that came onto SfeAR
che onne pr Beerpin g nape
ok Pleas Joathal JM
Ga Jezekiah hynges of udn: &

— Am che tymte ok Zeroliog the
tone ol Foas kynge ot Alrgeil.

Fpꝛſt / when the Loꝛde pale onto.
he karde vnto him: Gothy wape / tau auhte⸗
lott to thy tite; and get chyldzen by her: ting
the lande hach committed greate who wont

BR. 0. — agapilt


Apota x. i


Ilrael. The P


ae That ta) cd agaynſt the Loꝛde. Sohe wente / and toe
Summacionibee Homer d Daughter ol Deblalm:wpich
dome 6 448d conceaucd/and bought kot fone . And
andgudatpuide p L. oꝛd lapde vnto him: calĩ his name ⸗ gel
Worte be cone rael/ ko: wyll Mostly auenge the bloude ol
fumed. i danger v pon the houle of Jehu / and wyll
kraſte lr tans Linge the Rpngdome ofthe houce or Akraet
ges: becgule at to an ende Chen wyll J beate the bowe of
ide greate dell⸗Jlrael in the valle of Jelrael.
munen pet agayne / andbarca
eae davightet.dndbefapoebneobym: Callber
Were n. Hamme *Lozubamab(that is) not optapning
C Mercy) Foz J wyll haue no prte bps d houle
e Chat ii / tbe OF Alrael / bůt loꝛget them / a put thẽ cleane
tende de od. out o remembzaünce. Neuerthelede J well
ae 28. haue mercyvpon the boule of Juda / wp
uno mere. ſaue che / euen thoꝛow the Logde their God.
But 3 ln not delxuer them thoꝛowe enx
bowe / cwearde / bateil / hoꝛtes oꝛ hoꝛlmen.
Now when (he had weaned Lozuhamah /
B the conceaued agayne / a bare a tonne. hen
ew Chat in mot lapd he: call his name. Lo amp. Foꝛ why:
mypeople pe are not my people /therfoze wyl not J be
pours. And though the nombze ok the chlldzẽ
ok glrael be as the lande ol the fee / wyych cã
neiher be mealutednertolde: pet in the place
where it is fayde onto thé / pe be not my peo⸗
ple:euõthere wal it be thus vepozten ol thé:
they be the chridaẽ of the lruyng God. Chen
Wall the chyldꝛẽ or Juda and the chyldzen ol
Ilrael begathered together agarne / s chole
thé ſelues one head / and then departe out ot
the lande: ko greate halbe $ dape ok Itrael.
Che people is called vnta repentaunce.
be. . Chapter.


e came in

HEtal.t.2, ko the worde: pee F Mall lape her w aſte / and
mate ber ithe a wilderneſſe / and Cave her foz

* thystte.F Maihaueno pite allo vpd her chil

iy bzen/Foztheybethe childzen of toꝛnicacyan.
\¢ heir mother hach bꝛonk her wedlocke /

af. d ba and the that bare thẽ / is come to conkulpon.
ga Fo chelard: J wyll go alter my louerg / that

8 geue me my water and my bꝛed / my woll a

flav / my orie and my dꝛyncke. But J wel

hedge her tape with choznes / and ſtoppe it /
chat the ſhall not kynde her koteſteppes: and
though ſhe runne alter her louers / vet Halt
She not getthem:the Mall leke them / but not
Epnde chem. Chen chall the ſape: well, J will
go furne agapne to my łyꝛſt houlbande /foz
atthat tyme was J betterat eale / then now


Leuittxb. c.


ne this wolde the not knowe / where as 3
vet gaue her coꝛne / wyne / orle / lyluer and
golde which the bath hanged vpon Baal.
Wherkoze now wilt J go tante my coꝛne a
wyne agarne in their Seaton / and ketagarne
my wolland my Gar / whych J gaue ber / to
couer her chame. And now wyll Z dyfcouer
tesa noman @allotpuerperou oft
uers / and no man chan deixuerher out of mp,
bandes. Woꝛecuer J wil take awape al her e ech. rund
mich / ber holpdapeß / her netomoones / her
Sabbathes and all her folempne keaſteg: F
will delbrope her ben pardes andkrge trees / Jerenprij a
though che kayeth lo / here are myrewardrs /
that my lovers haue geué me J wen make Deut i
ita wodde/andthe welde teeäes thait eate te ale
i bps wyll punt her allo foz the dapes ol
Baal / wherin che cenledhim / vechyng hum
wich ber carnges ¢ cheynes when the kolo⸗ Judt. z. bad
wed her louers / koꝛgat me / la peth $1020, ;
Udhertoze beholde J wyllcall bevagapne
byinge her in to a wildernes / a fpeake krend
Ir onto hertthere wil FJ geiie herher vynpar⸗
des agapne/ yee andthe valley or a choꝛ allo
to ſhewe her hope and comkozte. Chen tall
che lynge there ag in the tyme ok her youth /
Glphe as in the bape when the came out off 0
lande of Egipte. Chen( fapeth the Lo de he 00
walltarepnto me: Hmeboufbande / ¢ pal Trano,
call me nomoꝛe Baal:foꝛ F wil take awape
thofe names ol Baall fromber mouth / vee
che Hall neuer remembze they names eny :
more. Chen well J make a couenaunt wyth Leut rrvua
them with the wylde beaſtes / wyth the fou-
Les of the ape / a with euerpthpnge that cre⸗
peth pon the earth. 2
A8 log bowe / cwerde and baten J will de⸗ Slap. a
ftrope lech out ok the lande s will make thé
todepe lakelp. æhus wyll 2 marp the nto eech vel
myne atone leit koꝛ euermoe: pee euẽ to mx
ſelke wyll J mary the / in ryghtuoulnelſe / in
equpte in loupnge kyndneſhe and mercy. In
fayth allo wilſ J mary z vnto my lelt / a thou
walt hnowe the Loꝛd At the lame tyme wil
Ichewe my leite krendiy and gractous vnto
thebeauens / capeth the Lozde: g thebeauts
e
07 phe and ople / ¢ they Mati helpe
Jelrael. J well Cowe them bpon earth / ko: a
ſede to myne awne teilte / a will haue merce
bponber/thatwas withoutmercp, Indto nag,
thé which were not my people / J wyll faye: l. Pet.
ee nd he call ſape: thou
¶ Or the loue of Sod towarde the people.
Che. iij. chapter. 8
Hen lapde the Lozde to me: Go pet
chr ware a bowe anaducuteroug
woman) whom thy neghboure lo; ech ·
Vueth / as the Loꝛd doch the che


4


acl.


of Alraell: how be it they haue relpecte to

A flraunge goͤddes / a loue the wyne Hannes.
xn iste g +0 F Gat her foz.rd.(pluctipnges/ a Foran
ta, Monier a anhalk of barlpe / S carde onto her:

9 Chou Hale byde with me a loge leaton / but
le that thou plapeſt not the harlot / and lone

thou medle with none other man / andthen

5 1 mie mip fel€e koꝛ the.
u


: 8 f chridze ok Hlvael hall (ptagttat
f See wwhple without henge and prence / without f
1 offerpnge and auiter / wythout pꝛeſt andre


uelacpon. Butafterwarde tall the chyldꝛẽ
0 ol Iltael conuerte / and leke the CLoꝛde their
eyrch rx id GoD / and Baud theft kynge;ein the latter
dapes they Hall wozchippe the L. oꝛde / o his

Toupnge Ryndnelle.


laynte agayng 5 peoples 5 pees ot qtxael .
me ¶ Che. iiij. c 5 sie


and, and why? Chere is no kalth ·
kulneſſe / there is no miercpe / there is no
Bnowlenge of Godin the lande: buttwea ·
ryng /lpenge nanllaughter / chelt a aduou ·
tiyhaue gottẽ the ouerhande / z one bloud·
Gvltinede koloweth another. Cherkoze Hall
che lande be ina milerable cale /a alitheys
Dwell therin / wall mourne. The beaſtes in


the lelde / che foules in the apꝛe / a the kyſbes


in the lee hall dye. yet is there none /p wyll
chalten noꝛ repꝛoue another. Che preattes
h ych Muive refourme other men / are bee

come le the people.
Cherkoze ſtombleſt thou inthe dave time
€ the prophet Ww the in d nyght. J will being
ch. lh c. thy mother to lplence / and why: my people


.


4, Whomome / wyne anddzonckennelie take
pmages che herte aware. App peopleattic coficell at
beleue in their Coches their ftalfe muſt tell them. Foz
an whozith mynde hath dilcenued chem lo

that ther cõmptte fomycacyd agapnſt their


Oltas,


.
eg —

„lx bij,
God. They make läcriktces ops the bremen
tapnes /a burne theit incenle ope the hilles /
pee amonge the ones / groues ¢ b were:
there are goon wadowes: Cherkoze youre
daughters are become harlottes / and poure
ſpoutes haue bꝛokẽ their wedlocke / J wyll
not puny) vour daughters fo2 beinge defy:
led/g poute bypdes 5 became whozesiteing
fathers thetelueshaue medied whatlotte 5, Ji ind
offered with vnthziktes:butthe people that ph zaum / for p
wyl not vnderſtande mut be punpſhed. moac parte m

Though thou Acne art dilpoledto plage aueh
thebarlot/vet thutpett nos tho haue offen: lers. fla
ded / O Juda:thou tuldeſt not haue runne lr vih. b. ve
to Galgala / nerhaue gone bp toBethaues/ reade in the. 1
ner haue lwoꝛne / p Loꝛde lyueth. For Braet of the Apnges
is gone backe Uke a wäton cowe, Thel onde feldes tolo
therkoze wal make her tede as paves Gort) zeroboa / whee
aſtraxe. And where as Ephꝛaimis become re monty Juda
partater of Adols/ wel / lethi go. heir dꝛõc⸗ and Benimm
tienes path put ehr bache/ @ baoughe them goatee Sel
towbozdettc, Kheirrulers loue rewardes/ reweraresomne
byynge (fave they) to their awne thane . A tp called atcact
winde Mal take holde oktheir kethers /a they mn the Sꝛophe


walbe conkounded in their offvinges, 58


Agapnet the pieſtes s rulars of qleael. Che hel
2 pelted mulhug enn Gl. r Zub,
Che. b. Ehapter.
Si Pe pꝛeſtes:heare this take hede /
O thou bout olde of Alrael geue A
eare/ O thou kynglp houle: fo:
his puntchment wplt come vpon
volt / p are become a ſnare vnto g pʒphah /
da ſpꝛed net nto dmount ok Thabo, hey
Bpll facrifpces bpheapes to begyle p peo ·


pie therwith:thertoze wyll J punch chi all, wundergande


A now ephzattn well pnougy /a Ilraellig to Poles,
ſiot hyd kro me: o: Cphzaim is become an
harlot:e Jlrael isdefiled. hey are not myn⸗
ded to turne onto their cod / kor theyhaue an 1s
whozich bert / loß they can not know ß 40 0.

But the papde ok Acrael win be rewarded
him inhis kace pee boch lrael & Ephzaun gy, vb b.
(hall fall fo their wickednele and Zuda th 8
them allo. Chev (all come with their ſhepe geremp. h. l.
¢ bullochtes to letze the Lor but they hall Bene he.
not kende him / koꝛ he is gone fed th. By koz Eech. xiih a.
the Loꝛde / theyhaue refuted him / a bꝛought C
bp baſtarde chplozen:a moneth thertoze Wat
dewoure thé Wihelr poꝛctong. lowe w the
fhawmesat Gaben / d wihe kröpet in az
mah crpe out at Bethauẽ ops the völpne ok
Ben qamin. In b tyme ofthe plage wan g
phꝛalm be laped watte / herkoze dpd kaith⸗
kully warne the trybes of Alrgel. Vel ave the
pꝛires of Juda become Iphe che) zremoueß
lädemarcktes / therfoze wpll J poure out m
wrath oponthé phe mater. A phꝛaim iß vp⸗
preted / and can haur noryght or che tate:
Foz whyr they tolo we the doctrpen ol i

2 Eber,


Ilrael.


D Therfoze wil ꝗ be onto C phꝛaim as a moth /
(to the houle of Juda as a caterppller.
fG.aeg.rvt.b. when Ephzaim fawe bis lyrknelſe and


Brute. roh. b guna higopleate: Ephzaim wente bnto vl:
ur / and lent onto kynge Jareb: pet coulde


not he helpe vou / ner eale you of youre pap»
ne. Jamonto Ephzainyas a Ion / and as d
Ipons whelpe to the hotle orquda. Euen J /
J wyll (pople them / and go mp wape. J will
Lahe thẽ with mie / a no nian Wall relcüe che.
Iwyligo / and returne to my place / truther
waxe la pnt / and leke me.
All fecys cauleth a man to retourne to Bod.
“Speeoues of the Pretes, n
Che. voi. Chapter.


ayes (hall he quycken bs / in
thyadedape he ball raple vs vp / loß we Mall
ag WUE ibis fight. Chen wall wehaue pnders
5 . og Sepa a to know
ze the Lozde. He Gall go oz e e
a 54 51 ol the dape / a come vnto vs as the eue
he alfuct e trou and moznynge rarne vpon che earth.
fue 95 7 O Ephzainr what ſball J do vnto the: O
ut he
won penle vs loueisiphe amoznyng cloude, a iphe adew
Sante vp 0 that goech carly awape.cherfoze hauey cut
founducs, Che dom ne the Pꝛophetes / ¢ let them be Mayne
third dape / chat £02 my woꝛdes lake: io that thy punychment
8 571 15g Wall come tolrght. Foz J haue plealure in
nee Iduyng hyndnetieandnotin offtinge:pee in
N the knowledge of Ged/moze thenin burnt ⸗
lactifice. But euẽ lil as Adam dyd co haue
ther broken my couenaunt / and let me at
naught. Galaad is a cite of wicked doers ol
malpcvous people ann bloudchedders. Che
mult ytude of the Pꝛeſtes is phe an heape of
theues / murtherers a Dlouvthurttp:fo2 they
haue wꝛougbt abhompnacyon. oꝛrpble
thinges haue J lene in the houſe of Jrrael /
there plapeth Ephꝛaim the harlot / a Flraci
is dekpled: but Juda Mal haue an hartieſt koꝛ
hyrmmlelke / when J returne the captyuite ol
mi people.
‘CADE the vyces.and wantonnes of the pecple,
: ¶ Che. bij. Chapter.


whole / then the ongracpoutnedle
Of Ephzaim and the wicltednes ol
, Samaria cometh to ipahe: then
go ther aboute with ives. At home/ehepbe
theues: and without they fall ta robbynge.
Cher contpnrenotineheivhertes (hat z re⸗
membre all there wicked ie. hey go about
wich cheir atone innencpons but Alethem
wellrnough. Chex malt the unge and the


Juda how Kail I intreate the: ſeing voure


Peng ondertane to maße Frrael


The Prophecpe


pivnces/ to hauẽ pleature in their wycked⸗
nes ales. Allthete burne inaduoutry / ag 6
it were an ouenthat the baker heateth /whe
he hath lette kneadynge / tyl the dowe be le⸗
uended. Euen lo goeth it this dave with oure
fipnges and pꝛinces / for ther begynne to be
woode dꝛoncken thoꝛow wyne: they vle fa ·
myltarite with loch ag dylceaue them. Cher
with the xmagynacpõ ol cheirherte are Iphe
an ouen,thett nepe ig all the nyght ipke the
llepe ofa baker / in the mo; is he as hote
as the flame of tyꝛe: thepare al together as
bote as an ouen.

Cher haue deuoured their awne iudges / ¢
all thetr kynges are fallen:petis there none
ol them that calleth bpd me. Cherkoꝛe mult
Ephꝛaim be nuxte amõge p Heathẽ. Ephꝛa ·
inis become lpke a cake / that no man tut:
heth: ſtraũgers haue deuouredhis ſetẽgth /


: pet he regardeth it not: he waxeth full of


grapheartes / pet well be not knowe tte the

ade OF Alrael is caſt downe betoze their dug

act / vet wyllther not turne to d Loꝛde their

God ner leke yim fo; all this.

Ephraim is iphe a doue / that is begyled /

andhach no herte. How calithey bpon the ug. nun. roi
Egypcrans / now go they to the Atfirians:
but whple they be goynge here and there /
Wall ſpzede my net oer them / ¢dzawe th
downe ag the koules ofthe are: accoꝛding
as they haue bene warned / lo well J puniſh e
chem io be snito them tog ther baue fozta- Se
Ben me. Chepmutk be delkrored / £07 ther g. wets,
baue let me at naught. J am he that haue re ch ach. zun
demed them / and petthepoidcmble with me. tat. rr.
Thercall notvpö me with cheirhertes / but Seck. rt
ipehoulpnge vpon their beddes. where as
they come together / it is but toꝛ meate and
dꝛynche / and me wyll they not obepe. Jhaue
taught them / and dekended their arme vet
do ther pmaginmplchete agapnit me. cher
turne them lelueg but not right / a are be⸗
come as a bꝛonẽ bowe. Cheir pzynces Male
bellapne with the fwearde / for the malpce


ok their tůges / loch blalphem res haue they


lerned in the landeok Egppte.
Che deſeruecpon of Juda and Itrael / becauſe of
their Idolatrie.

che. bij. Chapter.
jet t honnc tothe mouth /e blowe:
get the rwyftly las an Neagle) onto


bzohE mycouenaũt/ a trantgret-

(ed my lawe. Aſraei can faye bntome: thou

art my God. we knowe the: but he bath re⸗ :
fuled the thinge that is good / therkoze Gall gg. eg
the enempfolowe bpon rm. Cher haue og .
dened kynges / but not thoꝛow me:thephaue :
made painces/and J mut not hnotwe of it.

DE their fyluer and golde haue they made


the houle of 5 L onde: tos thepgaue rute x rb.


Iratl.


them Amages / to bꝛynge them lelueg to des
Arucciõ ch calk / O Samarta/ walbetakẽ
awape ko: my wzochkull indygnaciõ is gone
forty agarnſk the. How longe wyll it be / oz
Biber canbe clentced⸗Foꝛ the calke came from
Ilrael / the woꝛcke man made it / therkoꝛe can
. Chat tu be no God/ but euen to a tprders weube
hn brnege- (all $ calfe of Spamaria be turned cher
nea HE lelũes haue towne wynde / therkoꝛe (hall theyreape
sovaynes reg dome. ;
Seen wall, Cheirlede thal beare no come there Mat rio
Peruano meelbe made ofthe increate: chough ther
great trouble reape yet Wal ſtraungerg deuoure it vp. Fl
aadgeopardye. rae} (pail perp th / the Gentiles all intreate
alone wy ag a Foule vettell. Spence they wet op to
19 moch sche Adlpꝛiang / the pare become ite a wploe
Gaye amonge p .
Betyues / as coatle in the delerte. 5
kant in raf: Ephzalm geueth rewardes to getlouerg /
hee la (cle the therkoze are theyleatred amoͤge the Heathẽ /


be weerp of ß burthen or nynges ¢ pzynces.
€phzaimbath made many auſters todo wic⸗
kednes / cherkoze ſballthe aulters turne to
hes lynne. chough A thewe themmp lawe
neuer lo moch / they counte it but traunge
doctryne. Where as ther do kacrerrce / olle
Drpngethelled and eatinge it: the Loꝛde wyn
haue no plealure therin but wyll remeinbze
their wyckednes / and purely their lynnes.
rack tuinethagayne into Egipt / theyhaue
gotten hymthat made them / they buylde
churches /a Juda maketh many ſtronge cy.
tes:therfoze tol J lende a ſpꝛe into their cy.
tyes / and it Mall conſume their places.
¶ Ot the hunger ¢ captyuxtye or Icraell.
Abe. ix. Chapter.


thatthevin the
. Forthe bꝛedthat they haue loche luck vnto /
ee yy Hall not come into the houte ok the Lozbe.


Che nettles ſball ouergrowe their pen
el .
bernacles. Be pe ſuer (O Brack the lyme ot


SEtdere woll J gather the vp. Cher wall Coone ey


lxxtr.
vllitacion is come / che da pes of tecompen⸗
ſpnge are athande . As ko the Pꝛophete / ye
holde hym koz a koole:and him that is rych in
che lyete / co: a mad man: lo greate is poure
wichednes and malrce. Ephzaimhath made
him lelka watchman of my God / a Pꝛophet
bis become a ſnare :o do hurte ineuery ſtre·
te /g abhominacpon in the houle ok his God.
Chev be gone to karre / G haue deſtroyed the
felucs /Iphe as they dyd aloze tyme at Ga⸗
bad. Therkozetgeirwyckednes Walbe remẽ⸗
bed / and their tynnes puniſhed.
‘FJ Conde Ffracl phe grapes in the wylder⸗
nes / a law their fathers as thetyztt tyges in
the toppe of the kyge tre. But they are gone C
to Baal peo; / g rine awape Fro me to that Jeremprxtlaa
Wamekuli a doll /a are be come as abhomina Nume. xxo. a.
Pie as their louers. Eppꝛalm eth phe a , Ther ce.
brzde to Malthetr glory alto In to moch / P methionaughe
ep cal netherbegette / conceaue ner beare
chlidzen. And though they bunge bp enp / vet
willj make the chudleiſe amoge me. Ver wo
thalicome to them / when 2 de patte tvs thé,
Ephꝛatmlas nie thynche) is planted in wel⸗
thenelle/ lyne as Cpzus/ but now mul te
bzrnge her awne chtloze konthto p müllaper.
D Lopde thou chalk geue che: hat halt 2
thou geue them geue ihem an vnkrute uli ole. 4h. d.
Wombe anddꝛye bzeſtes. All their wycked·
nelle is done at Galgall / there do J abhozre
them. Foz the vngracioulnes of their awne
inuenctons / J welt dꝛyue them oute ok my
houte. J wyl louethemnomoze / fo: all their
peynces are vnkapthtull. Ephzaimis hewen
downe their rote is ozved by / fo p they chat
bꝛynge nomoꝛe frute: pee and though they
bainge Forth eny / vet wyll J dave euenthe
beſt belcued krute of their body. My Goo
hall cat the awave/ fozthepbauenot bene


Gene. rviG.8,


2 obedient onto hym / therfore Shalt they gos


aftrape amonge the Beather,

Agapun Flraet and his Jdolleg.
! Che. x. Chapter,
e

th bzought tort) vnpꝛokptable
krute: pee che moze krutẽ he had / ent
2 Imo aufters he made: p mozt good
dd tatheir lad / Hmoze krkdſblye Hewenthey
bers iche laden i beeen bn
foze wilt they be deſtroped. Che Lozde chan
bꝛeake downethetrz mages he waldeſtroye
they; aulters. hen tail thep faye: we haue
no kynge / ko why: we haut not keared the
Loꝛde. And what wall then the kynge do to
vs: Chey comen together / and lweare bape
ne othes: chey be confederate together thers
fore groweth their punpchment / as the we⸗
des in the fozowes ol the lande.

Chey that dwell in Samaria haue woz⸗


wipe the calfe ot Setbauen:thertoze tal yy
the peo


Ilratl. U
Samaͤria. 5 8 T e :
the people mourne ouerthem / pee and the
prettes allo / that in their welthynele reiop
kedwiththem:and whp? it wall padde awap
Ecom them. It Walbe brought tothe Aaetia/
koꝛ a prefentonto king Javed.ephzaim tal
receaue Cull punpihmient: Ilraei Haibe con-
founded kor his awne pmagpnacpons/ Spa-
maria with bis king Hall vanyt awaye/as
e lcomme in the water Che hye places ol
ven where Itrael do lynne / wall be cat
Dowhe: chyltles a thoꝛnes all growe vpon
their auit ers. Chen Hall thep faye to § moũ⸗
Ctapneg: cpuer vs / a tothe hylles: tall bpd vs.
O Atrdel / chou halt tynned as Gabaa dd
aloꝛetyme / where they remapned:(hulde not
the batell then come vpon the wycked chyl⸗
dien / as well as bps the Gabaonites: A will
chaſten them / euen atter myne awne dẽlpꝛe /
$ people walbe gathered together ouer chẽ /
when J punpth thé Coz theirgreate wicked⸗
neſſe. Ephraim was onto me / as a cow that
is vled ro go to plowe / therkoꝛe J loued him /
kel vponbis kapze neck. J dzouecphzaim /
DD Juda plowed/ a Jacob plaped the butbande
man: thatthepmpghe cowe vnto rightuoul⸗
nes / and reape the frutes of weldoinge:that
thepmpght ploweby their krech lande / and
Cehethe Londe / ty he came / z lerned them
ryghtuoulnes.
achat u- Butnowabtheyhaue plowed thé wicked⸗
Chephaucgee nette / therkoze hall ther reape lynne / a cate
nen thi Gelute ehe kruke of bes. Delng thou putter typ co
foallp wuchs kdence inthrne atone apes andieanett to
* the multptude of thy wothres: there Wall
growe a fedicpon amõge thy people. Allthe
Aröge cities chalbe laxed watte / euẽ as Spats
mana was destroyed ib his kamillerg / tho⸗
row bpm Chat was auenged of Arbelllin the
dape ok batell/ where the mother periſbed W
her chyldꝛen. Euen lo all it go with voul O
Bethel) becaule of your malpcpous wiched
nes. L pke as the moꝛnynge orth atwape/to
Chall the unge of {traci padde.
* CAgapne the vnkyndnes of Itracl.
¶ Che. xi. Chapter.
B Hen Plracl was pounge / J loued
him: called hym my fonne out ol
the lande of cgppt. But the moze
ther were called / $ moze theywẽt
backe/oftting vntozdols / and cencingama⸗
Ero. rrrülb. Alg. J lerned Ephzaim togo / L barethem in
timegrive, mne armes / but they regarded not me / that
iin eg xvit. wolde haue helped them. led them weoar⸗
des ok irendchype / a wyth bandes — . —
was euen he / that la red the pock vpon thei
neckes. J gaue them their Coder my leit / that
gp ther ulve not go agayne into Egypte. And
isAur their kynge: Foz they wolde not
ture vnto me. Cherkoꝛe Wall cwearde bes
gynne in their cpties / the Hoare p they haue


Judi. pleas


Hat. xu c.


ag
Ero. li b. vi. b.
Alat. v..


Prophecpye


ia pevop/ walbe dettroyed and eaten: and
that becaule of their awne ymagrnacpons.
My peonle hath no luſt to tume vnto me
their pꝛophetes lave the voc
they eale them not ot their burth
What greate thunges haue Ageuenthe /
D €pbhzatm: hom tapthfully haue 4 deten⸗ C
bed the / O Actael⸗ haue A dealt wich the as
wyth a dama : oz haue I intreated ihe lyne
pbotm: Ho / m hert is otherwiſe minded.
ior cute eben epbyaun ine
0 n ni
tes opel poner a a euer
jam at holy one in the mydde
OF the / though J came not within the cyte,
Che Loꝛde roareth like a lxon / that they d
mape kolowe him: per as a lyon roareth he/ß
cher maye be akraped lyke the chyſdzen olthe
Cee:p they may be fcatred awaxe tro
as men ccarre byꝛdes:g fraxedawape( as do·
tues vle to be)krom the Bt yzians lande: and
becaule J wolde haue them tarp at home /
lapeth p Lozde. But Ephꝛaim goeth aboute
88 8 mana ie boule Of d cee
ety. Dniy Juda holde with God,
with the true holy thinges. .
Cagapna the vapne trut of the people.
„Che. xij. Chapter.
O CAN sim hepetd cheapee/and bolo-
wech afterpeatt wyndethe is euer
NY ieaphlincceatpuge ipesanodedteuccyon.
Acheyv be confederate with che Dl-
{yas thetvople is caried into e. Che
Lozde bat) a courte to holde with Juda / and
will punplh Jacob: After thetr awne wares
Gaccosdpng to thetr awne inuencyos / thi
hevecdpente them. He tone his bꝛother
Hele /tmben be was pet in hismother wöbe Saen
anid in bis Grengtobje ween oped ones ™F™
ſtroue with the abe. 5
lo that he pꝛayde and delyzed hym. Be konde
him at Bethel / a there he talked with vs.
Yee the Lozde God ok hooſtes / euen the
Londe him ſeile remembꝛedhym: Chen tur
ne to thy God / kepe mercy and equpte / and
hope ſt ll in thy God. But the marchauut
hath a kalle weyght in bys bande / he hath a
pleature to occupicertozctd thin L.
keth thus Cul Jamtrche /A haue good
pnough: In almpwoꝛzes wal not onetawte
be founde / that haue offended, Vet am
the Loꝛde thy God / euen as when 4 bz
the out ok the lande of Egypte / and fet the in
thytentes / a as inthe bye feat dapes.
Ihaue ſpoken thoꝛow che pꝛophetes / and
wewed dyuerte ifions/ and declared my tele
bythe miniſtracyon of the pꝛophetes. But
at @alaad is theabbompnacpon / they are


kallen to panpte. At Salgall thepbauefiane


oxen: and as many heapes of ones an ther
bad in


1 delt
auen, Diugene bebe oethe tne op


alt i
1 Sener,


Ok Olas,


II.
Fins intheir lande koꝛowes / co many aulters
they made. Jacob fled in to the land ol
Diria / and trael Cerued toꝛ a wyke / and toꝛ
Awyte he hepte chepe.
Bya prophet the Lope brought


‘CHE the abbomypnacyons of J frat .
Che. xiſj.


5 8

FE come a to in to glvacl Be is gone
backe to Paal“ therfore mutt he

xe. And nowthey fynne moze and
moze:ot their tluer / they make them moltẽ

Images ip ke the adois of the H and
ret all is no 8 woicke of che crag.
kelman Mot with tandpng ther preach ok d
lame: who lo wyll pate the calues /offteth to

B men. Cherkoze ther halve as the moznynge

cloude / and as the dewthat early paticth a.
wape / a icke as duſt that the wynde taketh
aware from the flop / and as lmotze p goeth
ut or the chymney.

Jamthe node erde brought?
Out ok the lande of Egypt: that thou chüldeſt
knowe no God but me onelx / e 5 thou cul⸗

no Sauioure but only me.


Crosea


‘Peaterayign he re
v ough leren dene unteren we.
Pesci ete ef Spe olhein ang en
asa Leoparde in the wae tothe a 8.
J will come vpon them as u the beer / that is
Crobbedorher welpes“ 2 N mel brate that
ſtubburne herte or theirs. There woll A de⸗
uoure them as a lyon: peethe wylde beattes:

ſhall teare them.

O Fracl thou doet but deſtroythy felt,
Inmẽ onlp is thy helpe here ave thy hyn:
ge s now / ihat chulde helpe the in al thy cy:
ties y et and thyiudges / ot whom thou lay.
delt: geue me a kyngẽ and pꝛynces: well / 4
gauẽ the a kyng in my wꝛath / and in my ott
pleafure gane ore him kromthe agarne.
Che wickedneũe ol Ephꝛaim is bounde to-
gether / s his Lynne Ipeth hyd. cherfoze Halt
fozowes come pon him / as vpon a woman
$ trauayleth . In vndilerete fonne ts he:koz
be contyozeth not /thathe cpulde not haue
bene able to haue euduredinthetyme ok bis


leit,
Loꝛde) call come downe from the wylder⸗
nelle / and dye vp his condptes / and dꝛencke
bp his wellesthe hall cporle the trealure of
al plealaumt veſſels. .
ko Damaris cher chalbe made toate!
wü: iber ave bifobedtet onto their Gov. ii eg. tv h.
They Hall perich with d twearde / cheir chil
dꝛen walbe llapne / an d their wemen great
with chylde ſha be rypte op,
Che deccruccyon of Famacias
Che. ruh. Ghaßter.
„ rael /turtie che now önto the 1.
Tozdechr God / ko: thou halt take Zere. zug. .
ya Greate kallthozowe thy wicked Gzech. rvtb. e
Anneke, Case there wordt wich pou f) eg rue
toben pe kurne o che 0h g faye bnrobümm: l fer. e
O fopgeue bg all dure Cynnes / receauc vñ a, Chuttz /
rene en ce ee the haplinges /
ſockes ot dure ipppes onto the. Adut walbe and thanckrl⸗
nomoze dure helper nether wil we rydevpö geuenges.
boples enpmoze. Ag 07 the woꝛckes of oure >
handes / we wll nomoze call po them: Foz
it is thou that art oure God / thou ſbeweſt
euer mercy vnto the fatherlede,
Ol vi ther wolde do thig) Achulde heale
their fozes:pee with all mx herte wolde J lo⸗
Uethem: lo that my wzath ſhulde cleañe be
turned awape from them. Fer z wold be vn
e che dewe / and he chulde growe
as the lplte / and his xote Mule bzeake oute
as Tpbanus. His bꝛaunches chülde lpꝛede
olut ab zode / and be ag tayze as the olpuẽ tre / C
and lmell as Libanug. Ehepchatdwel bn-
der his wadowe / Wulde come agapne / and
growe vp as the comme / a flo ich as vyne:
eiten, r eee
O €pbzaim what haue J todo W Fools
eny moze: J well gractouliphearebimt/ and
lebe him kofth⸗ g wyll be ontotheas agrene xy
Fynetre /ops me chalt thou kynde thyirute
ih lo iſ wele, ball onderitande this : g he
chat is right enſtructe welt tt, oz
the waxeß ol the Io de are ryghtuous / loch
ag be Godipwen walcke in chem: as kozthẽ
wicked / ther well ctombletherin.


e ende ol che pꝛophecxe of
* Oleas.


* F e


byꝛth / had not J derendedhim from the gra.
— del 2 from 7


3 and delpuered .
: D, Odesth A wyllbechpdeath⸗ch hel, wit
erk.“ hene eee ee
fsb, en 0 a
a thzen/the Ealt wendeleuẽ the wende ot the


Bicael, The
The boke of Joell


he Prophete. '
i tl tl
See toppers tatyng uy debe
sommpng at bande. 5
Gabe trat chapter.


ä bisis the woꝛde of the
ea] 8009 bar ade debi
kf Conne of Whatuel : i

Ave elders:pddz¢.this weil / all
Ss] ve that dwell inthe lande: pe
the euer chere happened loch a

tyme of chat Weng in voute dares oz in d dapes of youre
Prophecpe-hpe kathers Cell youre chploze ot it / g let chem
ke t 285 ſhewe it onto their chyidzen / lo they to cer ·
Phet chaten belle achlerre hat hang are Car
dech nertbefore terppller Bath lekte that hath} grechopper


THE” which ru, eaten vp what the grechopper lelte / Le N


gane hon dip ehe loculte eaten bp:e what the locutte hat
There 1 jekte tüahach the bialtyng contumed.ttda-
Wkebp pedzöckardes / a wepe:mourne all ye
wyneluppers / becaule of pour twete wyne /
£02 it hal be taken awape kr youre mouth.
Yecampghtve and an innumetable people

Wall come vp into my läde:thele haue tet

Ikethe teeth ot I pons / chattbones ipke
Iponettes. Chey chall make my vyneparde
lte / they Mall Arber the barckes of my
trees / ſtrype the bare / cat the aware /

and make the bꝛaunches whpte,

Mabe chy mone as a byzgin doth 5 avr.
beth herkelk with lack / becaute or her bipde
beengte ama meate a dynckollryng cbal⸗

e cate awave fromthe houle or che Loꝛde:
andthe pꝛeſtes the' Lozdes miniſters Mall
mourne. Che kelde halbe waſted / the lande
wwalbe ina impferable cate: top $ come Male
be deltroped/ che rwete wyne Mall come to

Cconkuſton /e the opie vtterly delolate. che
pboul bande men athe wyne
. lokeppteoully ¢ make lamentacpon / fo the
zwheate/ wyne a barelp / becaule 8 barnett
vpon the kelde isto clene deckroyed. che gra ·
pegatherers Wall make greate mone / when
pbincpardg ligetrees be Co ptterly walked.


er all the pomgarnettes palmtrees / aple- Path


trees) a the other trees of the kelde Mall wy⸗
ther awape. Chus the merp cheare of dchů⸗
dien ol men / wall come to conkulpon.
Erde vou / a make pour mone / O pe pre-
Lr ware ener len de er
voure wave in and gepe in la re
officers of my God: fo7 che meat @dzinchots
kerynge Wall be taken awaye from ß houle
ol poure Hod. Pꝛoclame a kaſtynge / call the


Waffe gather che elders F alithe in⸗
Jokge ha e lanbe webe in topboniecd


the Lozbde pour God / a crre vntothe Lone:


‘gardeners hall th.


Pꝛophetye


alas las to thisdaye, Ind whpr the daye
e
be taken awape before dure epes the myꝛth
allo g tope krom the houle of dure God: Che
Cede Hall perich in the grounde / the garners


» thalipe watte/$ flozes chalbe bꝛonẽ dewne /


koꝛ the coꝛne walbe deſtroxed. O what aly-
gb ynge make the catell: che bullockes ave
very euell ihynge / becaule they haue no
paſture: and the Mepe are kamelſheda ape,

O Lojde/tothe wyll F crpe: Foz the te
bath cöſumed the goodiy pattures of $ wyl⸗
dernelle / and the flame hath beng vp all the
trees ol the felde. Ve the wylde beeſtes crye
allo vnto the: ko the water rruers are dyed
vp / andthe kyꝛe hath cölumed the paſtutes
of the wydernetle. 4
be prop!


meth/ dis harde at bande : a darcne daye /a
28 92558 T ftoze

ave /iphe as the moznyng Cpredeth out
pon che hplles Ramelp / a great a mightve
people: loch as paue not bene feng begin
nenge / nether Wal be after thé Foz euennoꝛe.
Beloze hum Mal be a conlumynge kyꝛe / and
behrnde him a burning lame C he land that
be as a garden of pleature befoze him /but
bebpndebim tall it be a very watte wylder⸗
heile / and there is no man / that call efcape
bim. Cher are to lone pon phe barded oz
les /a runne Iphe bozte men. Chey lhpppe
oppponthe hyiles / as it were the founde of
charetteg: as the flame of kyze p conſumeth
85. rel. as amyghtie people rede to


Che folke palbe atrayed of hym / all ta
ces ſhall be as blackeas a pot. Chete hall
runne ſpke giauntes / a leape ouer $ walies
iphe nien of warre. Euery man in his going
Gall hepe his arape / and not goo oute of his
Chere Hat not one dꝛyüe another / but
eche Hall kepe hys awne ware. Cher tall
bzeake in at the wyndowes / o not beburte:
Chey wall comein tothe cytie / a mne ops


deppen been br bose
Joel. Ii. e.
dens halbe moued: She Dunne e Soone rule


ces allyppe in at § wyndowes iphe a thele
Che earth Pal quake before hem peeg bear


wallbedarckened / athe tarves tall wyth⸗
dꝛawe their hyne. Che Lose Hall hewe
bis bopce betoze bys hoſte / fozbys botte is
greate / ſtronge a myahtie to kulkpll his com

bis W


Dit. u. e


erulalem,
J Tous feartul dape oF the Lozde: And whõ ĩs
able to abpde it. , ‘

Now therkoze tayeth the Lozde: Curne
Pou onto me with all poure hertes wyth ka⸗
unge / wepyng andmournpnge / rente pour
am hertes /a not youre clothes. Curae you onto


Apo. bl, c.


pialerroia iiercytull / longe ſufferpng a ok greate com⸗

Jans. h.. pallꝑon: red to pardone wickednes. Then

(no doute he allo tall curne/e koꝛgeue: and

alter his chattenpnge be all let voure in⸗

2 Create remapne / foꝛ meate a dzinkofringes

gal ie. onto the Lozde poure God: Blowe gut wich

f @ thetvompet in Spor peoclame a faltinge /

N call the congregacrö /a gather the people to

gether: warne l chende wcnn gather the
elderg / bzinge the chridꝛẽ & luckiyngẽ to ge-
ther. Let the bꝛrdgrome go fozth of bys chã
be, g the borde out or her clolet. Lethe pꝛe⸗
ſtes lerne the Loꝛde betwirte ß poꝛch athe

aulter / wepinge ¢ faping:be kauourable / Y

Loꝛde / be faunorabie bnto thy people: let

not thyne heretage be bꝛought to roch cOtu-

lion / let the Heachen be loꝛdes thetot loher

Plulltxtr. v Lope thulde theylape amonge the Heathen:
where is now their God ·

E. Chen Mall che Lozde be gelous ouer bys
lande / a fpare his people:pee the C onde thal
anſwere / a faye vnto his people: Beholde /e
will lende you cozne / wyne / a ople/fo that pe
Wall haue plentpok them: 4 J well homoze
geue ows ouer to be arepzofeamoge § Pea⸗

hen. Agapne/ as for hrm ot f Hoꝛth / that
da rue him karre From you: a ute him dut in
to adzpe and waſte lande / his Face towarde
the eat lee / andhys bender partes towarde
the vtmoſt tee. Che ſtyncke of hym wall go
v / andhis (pithy coꝛrupcion Mall Fall vpon


Feare not( O lande) but be glad and reloyle /
Foz the Loꝛde wyll do greate thinges. Be not
pe atraped nether ( pe beattes of the kelde)


hall beare their krute:the lygetreeg z vyne⸗
pardes wall geue their increaſfe.

F. Beglad chen (O yechplozen of Sponya
reiopſè inthe Lode youre God / tos he hath
geut vou a teacher ot ryghtuouſmnes :e he it

1 48 p chal lende pou downe chuwerg okrapne /

et ne, catty ano late ithe kiräkmonethero that the

dub garners Malbe full of comne/andehe pꝛelles

* plenteous in wyne and ople. And as koꝛ the
peares p the greſſhopper / locuſte / biattinge
g caterbpller( my Greate hook / which J cent
amonge vou) haue eaten vp / J thall reſtoꝛe
them ko you agayne: lo that ve Mall haue

pnough to rate / and be ſatyſtped: and pꝛayle

e name ok che Loꝛde pouve God / that lo
maruelouſtphachdealte with vou.
And my people fal neuer be confounded


Dt Jol.


the Lozve youre God / koꝛ he is gracyous


bymteik / becaufehebath dealte to pzoudty, .


koꝛ the paſtures halbe grene / and thetrees


„ rr.
any moße. e Mall Well fnotwe / chat J *
inthe middeſt ok Akrael / and that J am pour
Godepee a b there ts none other / amy people
ſhall no moze be bꝛought to conkucpon. :
zer eh wil po outmptpzett ops Kare
All flech:and pour konnes a pout daughters tene / s did O4
wall piophecp: pour olde men all Weame niet and others
dꝛeames / x poure poge men Mall fe biſios Chis probe,
pee in thotedayes Im poure out mp Cpzete J Ee aut als
bpon kerttauntes andmardens. J will ewe ö. Att.
wonders ineauen aboue/e tohesinbearth
beneth: bloude and pe / and the bapouve of
lmokk. che tune Halbe turned in todarcn⸗
ande Prioone 1 Adee 17.
Fnotabledape ok? Lozde come And 5 tyme e.
hall come:Srohofoeuev caltety on the name Bane
oF § Losde/Malbe Caued.4'o2 opon themotic
Spon tat Jerulalem , there chalbe a tatuae
cyon / Ipke ag the Lozde hath pꝛompled:pee
andamonge the other renmaunt / whom the.
Lope hall call.
the tudgement of.
9790 the La it of Sod agapnet the enemped
che ti Chapter. .
De take hede: in thole dayes g at
8 tame tyme / whẽ Iturne agarne z
ecaptrupte ok Zuda ¢Ferutale:
Mali gather allpeople together /
bange them in tye ballcy oF daa
chere win J realon with the: becaute ofmy
people a heretage of Ziracl: who theyhaue
katredaboute in thenacpons / f parted my
lande pee theyhaue caſt lotces foz my peos
ple/ che yonge men haue ther lern $ border
houleſ g kolde the Banmeis ko ⸗ wynẽ / b they 8 .
iiighebaue todꝛincke. Chou cirus ¢ Spi00 ese. childs
Andall pe borders of the PHilpitynes i what rrbU.Fr ous
haue ve todo wie: pi pedekpe me: well / mas ld.
Pere wyllnedeg dekpe mie / Mall vecBpence
eue bpon vourehead /a b right Woꝛtip:
2 vebaue talen awape my kylüer g golde /
inp kapiesgoodlp Jewels) 6 bꝛought the in
bo bouregodes ghoüfes. Che chylozen allo of
Juda and Jeruralem haue pe Colne onto the
renes chat pe might beingethem karre kin
the bowders of their awne countrees, ere. rd
JSebo}oe where e wel raplethem out Audi. el
OF the place / where ve haue lolde them a wil
rewarde vou euen pon poure head. Youre
lonnes a poure daughters wil d ell hozom
che handes ofthe chyldzẽ of Juda / alo they
wall gewe thé fozth to tell / onto the of Sa
ba /a people of a karre cofitve:to? the Loꝛde
bymeelE bath Capoett.crie out thete thinges
amange § Gentiles pzoclame warre / wal ee
bp the gisuntes Act them ae „Jet the e
Come bp all the luctp warrpours of the Ma-
ke vou tweardes or poute plowſbares / and


Cpeaves of poure tpcles a cyches. Let p wege
ke man ape: J amckronge Mulire pol / and
E come


Aeyatnte many cons


come / all ye heathen rounde aboute: gather

vou together there Mall the Lorde lape all

thy gpauntes to the grounde. Let the people
avple/e Get br tothe bailey of Jotaphatstoz
there well Jlrt / a iudgeall Oeathe rounde
aboute. Lave to pout ipthes / to the harueſt
te rhpe:come / get you do wne: z wynepꝛelle
13 kuil / ve the wynepꝛelles runne our, Foz

theit wickednelle is waren greate.

Inthe valley appoynted / chere chalbe ma⸗

ny / manp people: koꝛ the dave of the Lode is
Dupe inthe bailey appoynted. Che ſunne and
moone Palbe darchkened / the Garves Gall
withdzawe their light. Che Lozde ſhal roare
out ol Yvon / a cope out of Jerulalem / that
the heauẽs a the earth Mall quake withall.
geremrxv. b. Butß Lozde Halbe a dekence onto his awne
prople/ a a reiuge koꝛ the chyldzẽ of Arael.
Chus Hall ve knowe/ 5 Athe Lose youre

. Godwellopon my holy mount of Spon,
Chen chall Jerulalem be holp / a there walt
no ſtraügers go thozowher anp moze. Chen


Joel. il. b.


wall the mountapnes dzoppelwete wyne /s


the hylles wall flowe with mylene. All the
rpuerg of Juda Mall haue water ynough / 4
out ol the Loꝛdes houle there thall flowe a

lpꝛynge / to water the bꝛoße of Sitim: but

Egypte halbe laped wate / ¢ Cdom talbe
e


olate:becaule they haue dealte co cruelly


with the chrldzen of Juda / and ſhed innocent
bloude in thetr lande. Agapne / Juda chalbe
inhabyted fo2 euermope / Jerulalem krom
generacpon to generacpon : ko J wyll not
leaue their bloude vnauenged. And ß Lozde
wall dwell in Sion.

Che ende of the pꝛophecy ot Joel.


¶ The boke ofthe
Prophet Amos.
EToetrmeot te prophecye of Amos. The wozde


the Tode ggf Asa /agapnck Cye sagayne
Edom / agayne ehe =


Othe fyrtt chapter.
Helearethe lermös


Amos which was one ol
be ee Fee
. Aeg rh. a.

Ae


the Conte of


aly f
beloꝛe peat 955


quake, And he fapd: Che Loꝛd


Je auen be pub ot eden
fo § the paſtures of p chepherd 2
Zabemam gebt pene Suda toll not pate bpm becautebe bat


mnelbzyed oy. Chus fayeth the 07d: fog che


5 SOD ICCD iataartoe
not tpare her: beraule they haue thoched
Galaad % pzon llales: But 3 wil kende a kyze
in to d houle of Hazael / the tame Wall cons
ſume the palaces of Benadab. Thus well J
bꝛeake the barreg of Damafcus / Grote out
the inhabiter krö the kelde ol Auen / a hym e
holdeth d lcepter / out of the plealunt houle:
top the peo


that were thewen onto,


Upd. li/in 5 tyme ot
loth krnge of Zuda / &
n chetemeotgeroboam
00 crael / two yeare


ſhalbe dpuẽ out of fayze Si⸗
na, lareth? Lond. Thus lapeth the Lozde:
$02 thze and koute wyckednelles of Ga:a/ J
will not (pare heribecaule ther make ß pre: Zachar i.
lonerg pet moze captrue / a haue dʒiuẽ the in
to the lande of Edom. Thertoze wil tende a
kpꝛe in to the walles of Gaza / which Wal de⸗
uoure herhoules. J wil rote outthem powel
at Aldod a hym P holveth the fcepter of At⸗
calon / a ſtretch dut myne bande duer Acca ·
ron / that the remnaunt of the Phyuſt ynes
hal perich lapeth the Loꝛde. C

Thus lapeth che Loꝛde: Foz thee @ koure 0e. la
wickednelles ok the citie of Eire / Jwyll not
Spare her: hecaule theyhaue increaled § ca⸗

ite of the Edonutes “ a haue not rement ul. neg. v.a.
zed the bꝛotherly couenaunt. Chertoꝛe will
A tende a Fyze in tothe walles of Cire /p wal
conlumeher palaces. Thus lapeth 5 Loꝛde: Abd
Foꝛthre and koure wickednelfes of Edom 3
wil er che de perlecutedh
brother with the lwerde / deſtroyed hrs mo⸗
thers wambe / bare hatred very longe / andlo
nepte indignacton alwape by him. 2
will I lende a tpꝛe in to cheman / which cal
Dewoure the palaces of Botta, „

Thus lapeth the L oꝛde: Foz thze ¢ foure S
wickedneges of the childzẽ of Ammon J wil zerem. lte t
nos (pave thé: becautetber rppte bpthe wesen
mengreate w chyloe in Galaad/tomake the
bozders of their landes S wyder. Cherkoꝛe %
wil kyndle a kpze in the walles of Rabbath/
ler conſumeher palsces: wa great crre /
uche dape of batel in tẽ pelt a in the daye ob
S

e s his prin fal e.
Cuagaynd Moab / Juda / and Aka. be oe
Stave


this kauen


tatgnbpert
chen from
boure.


e go the
Bol N yj


deth the Lowe. |
the Lord: for Chacon four wpchennen ch * ‘


Catt alkde the lawe of the Lozde / a nor hepte
e


Jrael.


dener brit Connie and the Eather go tothebatiot dbp:


Al ter vrg cloehonoure mp hol name / thep** Ipe belyde e⸗


znedes bedllceaued wyth chelpes / that their
‘forefathers kolowed. Cherkoze well A tende
a Eyre in to quda / which Hall contuine che

C Palaces of Jexulalem. 5
Cbus lapeth the Loꝛde: Cor the a toure
wickednedes orate 9 wil not lpare him:
becaule he hath the ryghtuous koꝛ mo ·
ner / andthe pogze to yucs . Cher tteade
Spon pooꝛe niens heades / in the dul of the
bes earth / a crote the waves ol the mene. Che


fo Uerp aulter vpon clothes taken to pledge / a


bab ae J, in the houle oktheir goddes they denke the
ee de ene ofthe oppzetten, Yet nettvopen4| the


‘me Amozpte befoze thé chat was as hye as the


Cedze trees / and as ſtronge ag the ones mot⸗


with Having J deſtroyed hig krüike tro aboue
¢ bis rote from onder, 5
Agarne: J broughe pou out of the lande


OF Egypte / and led pou xl. peares thozowthe
wildernele / that ve might haue the Amoꝛy⸗
tes lande in pollellon. J rapled by pꝛophe.
tes amonge poure chyidzen / and ablternerg
amõge youre ponge men. Is it not to / O ve
D chitdzen of Acrael/capeth the Loꝛde? But ve
gaue the abſterners wyne ko dꝛynke / yee pe
cOmaundedthe prophetes/Capeng: Pꝛophe⸗
cynot. Beholde / will crache pou in londer /
like as a wapne cralcheth / is kull ot thea:
ueslo that p cwilte Wall not efcape/ nether
the ſtrange he able to do enpthinge:no / the
glaunte thal not laue hig atone like. Che ar⸗
cher wall not abyde / a the fwylte of kote wal
nat eſcape. he hoꝛtman tal not laue bys
Ike / a he that is as manly of ſtomack as a
glaunte / wall in that dape be tayne to runne
his wape naned / layeththe Lope,


e repꝛoueth che boule ok trarlot wychedurn.


che. iij. chapter,
Care / what the Lob ſpeaketh vn⸗


mel / yntu allthe tryſieg / uon 4
E ꝛouſht out uf d si pbe/ lud: vou
Only hauey accepten kom at the generac
o- Cong of the rurthychertoꝛe wil { pileepate in
all pour wisiennettes pape tinaine mathe
together vice pte thep be agreed amonge thE
lelues Booth a lyon toare in the wonde / ex⸗
cepte he hunt a pꝛay: O crieth alpos whel-


B pe out ot his nenne / exceptehe haue gotten


komthuunge goth u byꝛde kult ina mare hyõ
che earth wheve no foulevis? c aketh a man
hig tnar op tronithe grounde / afoze he tate
chefomisijac? Crpethep out Harum wyth)
the trompet in the citpe / and the people not
akrapeu: mumeth there enp plage in a cite
without it he Loꝛdes doynge: How doth 5
ope Goong maner or chynge / but he tel:


Sk Amos.


eo
lxxxij
leth bys lecrete before vnto hys leruauntes
che pꝛophetes. When a lyon rogreth / who
wyll not be atrayed: Sepenge then that the
Loꝛde Godhymieik cpeaueth / who wyll NOE vo; verrat
pꝛophecr??: E Prophelye
Preach in the palaces at Alyod /andinc
the palaces of the lande of €gipee) and layer:
gather pou together vponthe mountaynes
of Samarya / lo (hall pe le greate mureher
and vpolent oppzeſſpon amonge chem for
hr / che pregarde not thethyng char is right
lapeth the Loꝛde: they gather together e+
nell gotten goodes / and lape vp robbery in
theirhoules.
Thertoze thus fayech the Loꝛde God:
his lande ſpalbe troubled ¢belegedrotive
aboute / thy ſtrength ſbalbe plucte kromthe /
g chr palaces robbed huis lapeth the L075
uke as anhymeman taketh two legges oa
pece ok ancare out ok the long mouth: Cue
Fo the chplozen of ftvaell (chat dwell in Sda⸗
maria/baupnge their couches inthe roꝛner /
¢ their beta Wamalcus) thalbe piucte
alt aye. Pesre/ tz benre recoꝛde inthe houle
ob elt pethihe Lozde Hop oe volte) 4. meg. b,
hen z beg ynne co bpler ö toycheonels vv.
len mel wen ple be intens at e.
thes: sifoslo that the hene vr aue; Wale
be boten of /¢ fall tach
As Cog the wynterhoule k ſonnner honre /
F mpl fripte them bownesanintye boutes ol
Juerp / pee c many other houtes (hal prrich⸗
C be deſtroyed / lupeth the Mogae,


men wenge / and „arzöpthece
azz ve eat tape to berate g
PENS dehncke. rpch a rulars


h Croogneby hisholt: ofthe worte,


nee gare ue, walk come hpon por / that win xh


ve Mhalbetitcopipon tpeares/ E pour polte⸗
nile carieh amaye in Fkſhers panyers, Fe
shat get pou ont at § gappes one attr ano ·
cher and in Arman mall pede cattatwape)
Caveth che Lozi,

Yecameco wether £2 to tonghermgua: ole
cloulnes/ and haue incceated pourtynnesat e
nnn in the Peewee
Moznpage / and youre Epehes neo the hire 5 (d.
Daye. Pe made a chanhollerpnge of leuen / ye“
bzomitedtrewillolkeryngeg / unn bꝛoclamen
chem. doch lult ha pe) & peesitaren ok Ge
well laperh che l ode ob. Cherko ze haue
gruen vou pole teeth in all youre cilles / and
tcatnetle of been in all pave places: pet wyl
ve not tume unto me / lapech the Loh. io ie
chere were but thꝛr monethen puto the har⸗
uelt / A wythelde the rayne Fron pote: pee

LV. ij. Laynrn


se al as xe dan 5 6 7
eee, ö 1 — wn Amos, e il.
ae ee , 2 o beto ö provide 2 ſhatts bought to tote! 26
Dee che VV “jucoie och as thinks dente g *


Egypt:
Poure poge men haue z llarnẽ wehe ſwe⸗
8 ee


made the ſtrnckynge fauoure oF vc
e die sirading ip pene
mnie /Caveth the L pid. Bor
J. pet.. ö of pou baue ouch . auetdyyewe


abet po gere the darckngſte / he
kreadech bps the hre places ofthe
Tone Gob otvotes abr e.
a ite ot the captyupte ot ziract,
eee ee
Care thys wonde / O ve houle or
cr ael / wür: J mut make thys
Pi mone Foz vou: Che byzayn Brack
Zoi (hall kali / a neuer rete bp agapne:
ie (halbe catt bowne bps her awwne grofive/
@ no man thall belpe ber bp. Log thustapety
the Loꝛde Gods here ag [
1 cyte/ there Walbe lett tcarce a hun ·


dzeth therin: a where there dwelt an E. there
Sali fcavceten ge lett fo7 6 ure ot ine
Heusttheleſle thus kapetht — tito §
‘houle of rack: Speke atter me / and ve (hall
V lpue/buttehe not after Weehel.Come not at
Sagal and go not to Berfaba :fo7 Galgal
pensioner e Bethel wal
fe ee
He joute of Jolepd be bzent
with kyze andconfuined/ g lett there be none
to quench Bethe. :

e tute the lawe to wozminod/ and calt
downe ryghtuoutnes vnto the grounde. Che
Lopde maketh the. vil. Narres andthe Dzy-

Cons he turneththe nyght into dape and of


tg irh — Hedayehemakethdarchnetle De calleththe


waters ofthe lee / o poureth them out vpon
the playne grounde: che Lozde is bys name.
He rapleth oeltruccys vyon the myghty peo⸗

vie / e brngeth donne the ktronge holde dut


earth che we
Londe:


not he are thy plapes of mulick:


thepabbozve him Foz lo moch then as


as pe Ops,
pelle the pooze/¢ robbe him ohiß ban


poure wyckednedegand pour toute lynnes
knowe them right well. Enempes are ve


the reg htuous/ pe take re wardeg / pe ob.
pelle the poze in tudgmemént.< nes
pes poe agen aa


wyle muſt now be kayne to holde
fo wycked a tyme ts it.

Speke after the thynge that is good / a not
euellſlo Wall ye lu: pee the L onde God oF
hottes wall be with pou /accozdpng to pour
atone delpze. Hate the euell /eloue the good:
let bprightagapne in the pozte:a(nodoute)


che Lande God of bottes shall be meveyeull Beete


nto the remnaunt of Jolepp. Je no (caxeth
che Lande God / che God or höckes chere pal
be moutnpnge in all tt / pee ther call


canoe bel knnen nee a
nyo 5 ale


Hi cote amonge vou; e
0 be d. eng Cie ok che
ze wolde ye haue it: As toꝛ 8
bape ore Lone w (halbe darcke and not
cleare: Je
alyon/anda Beer meteth with him: oꝛ whe
he commeth into the houle / and leaneth his
bande vpon the wall / a lerpent byteth hem.
Shall not the dave of che Loꝛde be darcke /


and not cleare: tall it not be cloudy / andno
dweſtn W. dornein


wet Wee e
J will not accepte it. And though ve offte


mie bat runges and mestofd pnges / pet


haue Jo plealure cherm. Ag oz pdure fat


Kolle whit not lone ppon 8
rpnges/ J well Aut


mae with that nople ore Cong
equpte flowe as the water / and


Alrael, gaue pe me tcrikpces


8 and
ofe.r1.peares longè in the welberiefie et
ee
jo mages of poute Adolt / pee Fe
arte of your gob empha ente which Mea rue 1


ye made to wozchyppe ihem. Therkoze wyll
J caule pou be carped awape beponde Da.
Imatcug / lapeth the Loꝛde / whole name is a
erates cesot seat puyugtnplesaees,

Che. vj. Chapter. Owe


pheas when aman tunheth kr g


but 6 COA ag
nelle as a mpgbtye freame ce of


olbe che telues £02 Heben ofthe


~ swozloe/ a rule theboute of Alraell / euenas


5 e ee pie
get pouto Hemath the greatecptye/ c logo
downe to Gath of § Phuittines:be they bets
ter at cate then thele kingdomes / oꝛ the boz+
der oktheir lande wyderthen pours? Ve are
taken out fo2 the euel dape / euen pe ß lytt in
the tole ol wylkulneſle: Pe that pe po hed⸗
des ol Fuerp/ a ble youre wantonnelle vpon
vour cduches: pe that ate the beſt lambes ol
the floche/ a the katteſt calues ofthe dꝛoaue:
pe that lynge tothe lute / and in plapenge ol
inctruméres compare pour telues onto Da·
uid: pe that dꝛinke wyne out of goblettes / a
anoynte pouze lelues with the belt ople/but
noman is ſoꝛp foz Jolephs hurtel, Cherkoꝛe
now thal ve be the kirſt of them / that yal be
iedawaye cautpue / andthe luſtychere ol the


Celta wal come to an ende.


Spe Horne Gov hath wanne euen bp
himfele(Capect che Lode God of hoolteg)


Ans. vil. a. hate the pꝛyot or Jacob / and abhoꝛre )


8
palaces:andg wyll geue ouer the cite h


al that is therin:io that though there remar⸗


neten men in one houle / the y Mall dpe, Vo
thelr nerte kyulkolckes and the beed butters
wal taltethem / and cary awape their bones /
andfape buto hym / that is in the vnnermer
houſe: i there pet enymo bythe: And he hat
anlweze: they are ali gone / holde thy tunge


(ſall he faye ) foz thep wolde not rememb ze


the name of che Loꝛde.
Behodde / the Loꝛde is mynded compte
uſeg / lo I they Mall decape: ¢ &
Iptie houſen / that they Mall cleue a funder,
e Whozleg / oz plowe woxen
vockes of tone: Non why / pe
ue iudgmẽt in to bytternelle
tuonſnelſe in to woꝛm wod⸗
le in bapne thinges: ve ß
me oplapnedhoꝛneg in oure
onl cake hede / O ve houle ol
e Nod God ok hooſtes. J wil


ann od ſhewed me loch ate

beholde / there ltode one that
isvelthoppers /euen when &

as ſhutpnge forth / after ß

c hig ſhepe. Now whe theyyn

derkole tn d ppalthe grene chinges in the
ende e Node Sod be niercyrtiif /


A beleche a pho chulde eis helpe vp Lacob


wal not be. Agapne, the Loꝛde Hewenme
thrs vylron: beholde / the Loide God called
the kyꝛeto punpib wythall / and it deuoured
the greatdepe: pee it conlumeda parte allre


dp. Then lapde J. O Loßde God / holde thrne ~


bande : koꝛ who thulbe els helpe vp Jacob
that is bꝛought lo lowe: Sothe Lozde was
mercprulltherin / andthe L oꝛde God larde:
well it challnot be. ‘ :
Mozvouer he chewed methys bilyõ: be⸗


holde / che Loꝛde ftode vpon a platteved wall / Some call (0
and amatons ; trowel in his jande. Andtheaiene.


Lord ſapde vnto me: a mos / what leit thou⸗
Fanlwered:a malons trowell chen lardeß
Lobe: beholde / wyll lape the trowell az
monge mp people of Alraell / ¢ wyllnontoze
ouer lee thẽ: but the hyehylchapeis or glaac
muſt be laped wake and the churches or $l
raell made delolate: and as foꝛ the houle of
Jeroboam /I wyll ſtande vp L ih 1
the (werde. Mponthrs tent

pꝛeſt to Bethel vnto Feroboam the lunge of
Ilrael/lapenge: Amos inaketh the houle ol
Ilrael to rebeſagaynſt the / the lande can not
Awwvape with hys woꝛdeg. Jo; Amos lapech,
Jeroboam ſball dye with the werde / and Ji⸗
Taell wall be ledawape captpue out ok they;
atone lande. And Amattah lapde onto Amos
ett the hence thou that cant ſe to well)
lle in to the lande of Juda: gett the there thy
kpuynge / and pꝛophecy there: and prophecy
nomoze at Bethel / fo ie is the bynges cha⸗


pellanothetyngescourte, tones a


Amogantwered/andtapoeto, Amaliah: 3


As For me i amnether prophet/ nev wn Za l. .
a


tes lonne: but a keper ot catell. Mow
was bzeahinge downe molbertes / goynge
alter the cateil / the Loꝛde tone me / Capne
vntome: Go thy waye / and pꝛophecy outa
my people ok Alrgell. Andtherfoze / heave
02d oF the Loꝛd: Chou taiell:
prophecy not agapnſt Irraell / and Ipeane
nothinge agapntt the boule of Alaac. iher⸗
koze thus fapeth the Lorde : chp wife chalbe
dekyled in the cytye / thy roles d daughters
thal be dayne with the lwearde / athy lande
ſbalbemealured out with thelyne. Chou thy
kelk ſbalt ove in an vnclene lande / a Jeraell
ſbalbe dyruen out of his awne countre.
g che. bit. Chapter.
Sandee wal Kab e rn oboe pet
ret cl
determpned agaput Arraell. 833
he Loꝛde God thewed me thys bi · N
on and heholoe / there was a
maunde twith Commer rute. and
e lapde : mos / wlꝛat lett thou:


oy


—
Aufwered za maunde wh fommer kute.


Li. Chen


denn oe neg. ga /


Ilrael. Thep
Chen lardeche Löꝛde tinto me: the ende cos
meth vpon my cher darecbalk h bug

.Suithatdaye wall § si 5


raph


brech
e n
che


5


geremp. vv. b.
theepes ofthe Loyde are byon the regime 5 Lap
kemor ken out oftheeatth: He n,
uerchelks / J wilt hot oterippettrope dhoule
ol Jacob / ca peth the Loꝛde.

Jolle, this N piomple though J fylte the
hoüle ot amonge all nacpons (ine ag
cher bre to kytte in a ixus) vet wall not the
kmalleſt de wich ſtone fall bpon the earth:
But all the wicked doers ot my people / that
faye: Cur theplage (snot fonye/to ome
e ssf

Atthattrme agapne ö
babe ar nud chats fallen done 2 :
and gedge bp his gappes: and loke what ts *
bꝛofien /I chal repapie it: Yee F Hail buxi·
delt agayne / as it was a foze tyme / p then
Mave pollelle the remnaunt of Edom / vee õ
all koch people ag call bpon my name Wihẽ /
Sayeth the Lozde/toh yc) noth there chynges.

Behodde / u ek 1075) 8
that che piowman thal ouer tate d molwer el?
and the treader of grappes / lm char Covi
fede. Che mountapnes ball dzoppe dwete
wyne / and the hilles (hall be fruteful / and
will turne the captyupte of mp people or Ff-
raell:cher hal repapie the watte cytpes / and
haue them in pollellon: they thal plante byn⸗
vardes / and dꝛinke the wine therof: they Hak
Make gardens / ¢ eniove the krutes ot hem.

And J wil plante ehéopon theirawne

Irdunde / lo that J tpl neuer rote
them out agapne frã their


Cob f. a.


Chꝛeatenynges agay Tract. Oo man can
13 8. ston ° 8
Spawwethe Lozde ſtandyng vpon
che aulter / andhe tapde:tmpte the
doze cheke / thatthe volles ma ve
tyale withall Kor their cauetoul⸗
Kelle Halt fall opon all theivbeades / gthetv
pottertte Halve dayne wyth 5 cwerde. Chey
all not fle awaye / chere atl not one of the
Elcape / ner be delyueren. Chough they were lande which J haue
burped in the heil / my hande Wal fetch chem geuẽ the calech
sofalceepie a, rom thence: though they clymme vp to hea⸗ the Loꝛde


59.5 uen / alt the dotwhe + e 5 the God. ae:
= . Qecopie onan ¶ che ende oe the prophecy of Amos,


a


„ Amontc.


*


eit .


pane ls
¶ The boke of the

ber oy,
cagsrng eben) the true thartber badi riches


was thewedontodboy:chus
AF bach che Lowe God (poker
pon dom: We haue herde
ofthe Lozde that there is an
— Jembatage Cent amorige the
Heathẽ : ip let bs arple / and tygůt agapnſt
them. Beholde / J win make the (mallamoge
the Peathen / lo that thou thait be vtteriy de ⸗
zenp xlr c. IP led. Che pryde ob thpne herte hath llt the
bp/thou that dwellelk inthe Aronge holdes
ol ſtone / a halt made the an hye leate: Chou
Aus ir. d. vet inthpnebert:robo hall cattme downe
Anale. h. b. ko the grounde- Butchough thou wentelt op
as hype as p Aegle /a mapdelt thy nek aboue
Bamonge theſtarres:pet wolde A plucke the
downẽ krom thence. Pt the theües and rob ⸗
bers cante to the bynyght / thou taminge thy
reſt: chulde they not ſtẽale / tyll they had p+
nough: YE the grape gatherers came vpon
the / wolde they not leaue the fome grapes?
Vnt how Hall they rype lau / and kene out

his trealures:
Pee the men that were frome vnto the
wall dzpue p out ok 5 borders ok thyne awne
lande. & hey thatbe now at one w the / call
dilceaue the) A oduercome the: Euen they that
eate thy bed / Gall betrape the / oꝛ euer thou
perceaue it. Shall not Jat the fame tyme
C dettrope the wyle men of Edom /e thote that
FATE. baue bndertanding/fr6 the mount of eln,
„ Chygvauntes(D Cheman) thalbe atraped /
£02 thoꝛow § daughter ther Malbe all ouer⸗
thzowne bpon themount of Elau. Shame
chall come vpon the / koꝛ che malpce p thou
ſhewedeſt to thy bꝛother Jacob: pee koz euer⸗


Eyech. xrviſi b
ond. rv. a.


, rogce, Mose walt thou perpih /g that becaute ofthe


Jane. fr. c. tyme / when thou dydeſt let thy Celfe agaynſt
m / euen when the enempes carped awape
is hooſt / and when the aleaũtes came in ut
is poꝛtes / andcaſt lottes bpon Jerulalem /
and thou thy lelt walt as one of them.

Pp Chou Malt nomoze le the daye ok thy bꝛo⸗
cher / thou walt nomoꝛe beholde the tyme ol
his captiuite: thou ſbalt nomoze retopte ouer
the chplozen ol Juda / in the dave ok thetrde-
ftruccpon thou Walt trrumphe nomoꝛe in
b teme of their trouble. Chou walt no moꝛe
come in at the gates ofmy people / in d tyme
oktheir decape: chou chalt not le thetrm
inthe dape okthter tall.

e,, Chou waltlende autnomäagarnckthelr
holt / in the daye of ther aducttyte: nether
walt tou ſtande waxtrnge ang moze at the


Bk Abdy.


err,


Comers of § Aretes to minthut koch as are
Hed/07 to taße them pꝛeloners that remapne
inthe dare of thetvtrouble.si07 wedave or 8 lee
Hope lg garde pop F hesch sine assent
thou halt done / co halt tholi be dealte with.”

All / pee thou Malt be rewarded euẽ vp thyne :
head; Foz iphe wyle as pe haue dꝛonchẽ bps
thipne hol yhylt/fo wall all Beathen dzyncke
Contynualtpsyee derncke wall ther ¢ twas
lowe vp / co chat ye Malbe/as though ve had
neuer bene 4

But vpon the mount pon there Wald _

remnaunt efcape :thete (albe hol / andthe A,
houle ot Jacob tall potlete euen thole / that ='
hadthẽ le lues aloe in poſſedpõ. Moꝛeouer /
the houle ot Jacob Malbe atyze / the houle
ol Zotepl a flames J Houle of gau chalbe zerem ru. e
the krawe: which they Hall kyndle and con⸗
lume / lo that nothynge thalbe ett or dhoule

OF lau / ko the Lozde himlelk hach Capde it.

They of the South Mall haue the mount or r

Elau in pofledion-andioke what lpeth vpon

the grounde / that cwan the Phiſtſtmes haue:

the plapne felves bal Cphzaim g Samarta
polledſe:and the moũtaynes ol Galaad Mail

Ben amin haue. Andehyshook walbe the

dheldzen of Bracks pzeloners Now what o g alnanxe⸗
Ipeth krom⸗ Canaan onto !! Fareptah / g atter thewerr..
in“ Sepharad/ that Malbe under ihe dub⸗ ba bac 10
teccyon of Jerulalem: and the cytyes ol the France.
fouth thaltenvetettt.erhusthep'ehatetcape e
vpon the hyll of Sy5/thall gouptopuripy
the moſit of Elau / and the Kyngdome halbe

the Loꝛdes.


Gabe ende of the bone of the
Prophecy of Aboy,


¶ The boke of the
Bꝛophete Jonas.


. is wh he was (cite to pieache
EDE Moat of 3 dete the ry ined


dylodedpence ⸗ 4
5 che tritt chapter.
de wozde of the Loꝛde
Tſcame bnto Janas plone.
Veokamithat / caping:a ty. * Unter fie
and get ihe to Hine zee en
egteate cpte:8 pꝛea⸗ tis (ds dome
e ¢ nto thet, co ad e
heir wyckednes 16 comenjtiee fonte
ae Sop befoze me and Young that wer fare’
made bpm ready tole onto“ charlig fo the a e ger


pyefence oftye Lobe and gathptitotone to fits §


ach. J


Hers
plery Joppa: where he kounde a ſbyppe ready 10 te


do go bnto Charlis. So he papde his kare /a Ee ta abe


wente abo de /that hemyahe go wyth them

onto g harte / rom the pretence of b K ce. Jopp be

Saeed ee Tales
. e od


soaps pha
Niniut.
here wai fo- the fee / and there was a myghtye tempel in
aa lee ſothac the lippe was in teoperdr ol
ther remap - golnge in peces Chen che maryners were a
. to yppe, eeecat
apchtlon, 90 e cbrppe /

1 into the lee /to lyghten it of them. But Jo*
nas gatt hem onder the batches / wherẽ he

B labed him downeandlombzed.

„ Soothe matter ofthe chpppe came tohim
audlapde vnto hem: why dombereſt thou
Mp / call pon thp God: pt God(happely) wit
thonke bpon vs / that we perpienot ,
they Cayne one to another: come / lett vs cat
Lottes: that we mape linowe / lo whole caus
Ce weare thus troubled. And co thep cat lot ·
tes / and the lot tell vpon Jonas.

C Chen lapde ther vnto him:tel vs / oz whole
caule are we thus troubled? what is chrne
occupacpon: whence commett thou? what
countre man art chou / and of what nacpon?
Heanhweredthem: Jam an Ebzeue / and
Scare the Loꝛde God ol heauen / vohych mad
both the kee and ozpe lande. chen were the
men exceadingly atraped /a lapde vnto hem:
why dideſt thou fo? ( foz they knewe / that he
swag led krom the pretence of che Loꝛde / be
caule he had tolde them) and lapde mozeo ·
ner bntohrm: what Hall we do vntothe⸗
that the fee maye ceatte krom troublinge be⸗
(£03 the fee wꝛought and was troublous ) he
an wered them: Cake me / and calt me in

* Peothetee to malt fe lett pou ve in rect: fo3

wote / itis ko mp fake thatthis great tẽ pe
is come vpon von.
Mewertheletie eye men attaped with row.
wynge / to bꝛinge the hyppe to lande: but it

wolbe not be becaute the fee wꝛoughel / s

was lo troubloug agapntt them. therfore

thepcrpedonto the Lozde / a faye: O Lorde
let ba not perit ko this mans death / nether
lape thou innocent bloude onto our charge:


0m. bh. .


Deuce


foz thou / O L oꝛde / hat done / euen as tor
pleatuve was. ‘ pices


Socher tone gonas / and cat hym in to
the lee / and the lee lekte rag
keared the Loꝛde exceadingiy doyng tacritt.
ces amakinge vowes onto the Lede.

a. 4 Coalarsedofarobate. The purer of 30.


che. . chapter.


prayed oni


unge. Ind the me.


iS perych not. And when God ſawe th


The Pꝛophety


‘aboute: pee al che waues and roules ot wa
ter went duerme /g thought that pad bene
cat awape dut or che lyaht: but d well ret
agapne loke towarde thrholytemple.

Che waters compaledme / euen tothe bes
ry toule: the depe lape aboute me / s the we-
des were wꝛapte adoutemyne h ead. J went
downe to the botome at the helles / and was
barred in wyth earth koꝛ euer. But thou / O ¢
Loꝛde my God / batt bꝛought vp my lyte a ·
gane out ot coꝛrupcron. When my ſoule


And fainted within me I thought vpö the Lord:


@ mp paver came in vnto the / euen in tothe,
falbecmple.abeptpathane ofbapne bany- D
tles / will koꝛlake his mercy. But J well do
the lacrykpce wyth the vopce — 8
uynge / and wil pave that N haue vowed oz
why? faluacion cõmeth of the L070. Ind the
SLozdfpake onto the fpch / and it ca out Jo


nas agapne ppon the dzye lande.


fendagapne to Minine lade
Schere ere SOE


che. ii. chapter.


whic a
to Miniue‘ateh
Miniue wag a greate cyte bnto God / name ·
ip / of th ze dayes tourney.

And Jonas wente to / and entred in tothe
eptie: eüen a dapes iournep is crped/ lapẽge:
Chere are vet xl. paves andthen wal Hiniue
be ouerthzowen. Andthe people of Miniue  - 70
beleued Hod / and pꝛoclamed faltynge / and :
araped them feluegin* lack cloth / as well che 55
the greate as the fmall of them. Ind the ty page
Dinges came onto $ hinge of Mintue/ which torre ner!
arole out of hig teate/ e dd his apparell ot / great rtpalel
patna lack cloth / and fate hemdowne a
alches. .

And it was cryed and commaunded in C ;
Mintue/by ye auctopite of tye hing andiyys fach Fi.
foxes Capenge: ſe that netherman ax belt / 8
ore oꝛ chepe kaſte ought at all: and that ther
nether kede nerdzinke water: but put on lack
cloth both man and beet / and erye mightelp
vnto God: pee le that curry man turnefrom
bps euell toape / and from the wyckednelee /
that he bath in hande.
ho can teil: cod mape turne / a repens
teen ceate ombis tearce mach ca ive |. 5

0 Hogs Ell. tri .
kes how they turned from their wicked was

es he repented on the euell / whych he larde


* Fewonedoonto them, and drd it not.


Cena tp reproued of Sod.


—
hertore


this mylapinge
in mr countre⸗


that hemrgbt dye / and fgpoe: Bt isbetter toe
sue todye/thentolpue : And Godfayde vnto
lorias: Art thou fo angtie to p wylde vyne:
nd he ſarde: pee veryangrie am J euen vn
p to the deeth. Andthe Lozde so eh
compaction vpon a wilde vyne / wheron thou
beſtowdedk no laboure /nermapdeſt it grow:
uhych ſpꝛange vp in one nygůt a perpibed
ienother And chulde not Jthen haue coms
Adee Mimiue that greate cptie/wher-
there are aboue an. C. f. xx. choutand pers
Sonnes / that knowe not their ryght hand tro
the lekte / belpdes moch catell?


che ende of the Prophecye or gonas.


¶ The boke of the
: 45 S eat of thete


* Covet yst chapter.
Wis 1s cheibade of the


9.50
an bY


OF eerie,
Sl et,


Loꝛde God hym lelke be wyrnelle amo
Jou / euẽ the hone FcG his bolptemple..


7


Elaxx ots


oe / l in to an whozeshpze Mall ther be
turned agapne. noherkoze I wyll mourne a
mate lamentaciõ / bare ¢naken wyllz go:
mut mourne line ß dꝛagös / z tale foz0w as
Eſtriches: kor their woũde is pat remedy:
whpritis come in to Juda / a hath tou ⸗ 8
ched ß porte or my people at Jetulale alre- v meg llc.
dp. Wepe not / lelt they at Geth perceaueit.
Thou at Betaphza/ welter thy telt inthe
dul Kalſbes. Thou ö dwelleſt at Sephir/
pit the hence with thame Che poude halt
Of nomope Foz berpLozowe: and why: her
nepabboure al take krö her what he bath,
Che rebellpous cptie honeth / P it Mali not
be to euellibut koz all 5 /the plage Hal come 1g, urg. bt
Fed the Loꝛde / euẽ in tothe porte of gerula·
lem. Che greate nople of the charettes wall
keare thé / chat dwell at Lachis / whych is an
occalpon of ß (ynne o£ p daughter of Sion /
ko in the came vp ß wyckedneſles ol Jrael.
Pee the Cen ther courlers into h lad or Geth.
Che houles of lpes wyll dylceaue p kings
ok Flracl.Andas for the(D thouthat dwel⸗
leſt at Mozaſla) J call bꝛyng a polleatoner
vponthe / the plage ol glrael chal reach vn.
to Odolla. Maße the balde /a ſbaue the/ be.
caule ol thy tender chyldzẽ: Make ö cleane
balde as an Beale / fo ther Walbe carved
awape captpue from the,
CChreatnynges agapnſt the Con full people.


ake it by byolence / they robbe men ol
oes 855


us they oppꝛelle a ma to his houle /a
nan Foz his heretage. Therkoꝛe thus

Cayeth che Low: Beholde agaynt thishouts
Molde haute Adeupled a plage / wherout ze
II. b. Halt


challnot plucke pour neckr:) e hal nomoze

Go lo proudly koꝛ it will be aperious tyme,
Inthatdape Hall thys terme be vled / and a

moutnpnge chalbe made ouer pou on thys

maner: We be vtterlpdelolate / che poꝛcyõ of

% mp peopiets tranlated. than well he parte

vnto bs the lande / p he hach taken From vs:

a Prue * chalbe nomã 5 —

Vum. xxxißj.e ohn e congregacpon

ee Lozde. Tuch holde poure tunge (faye ther.)
It ſballnot fall vpon this people / we chall

Not come Coto conkulpon / lapeth the houle
ol Jacob. Is the Cyzete of the Lond lo cleane
abbape : or is helo myndede Creuth it is / my

© woznes are krendiy onto the that ue right:
but mp people doth the contrarp/ therkoze
mut I take parte at an them: koz ther

U both cote and cloke front the

myle.

Ve haue turned poure felues to kyght / the
weinen ol my people haue ye (ot out front
thelr good houles / and tanẽ awape mpercel-
Tent gpites from their chyldzen. ap / get zou
hence / koshere hall pe haue novel.

Becaule ot their Idolatrye they are coꝛ⸗
rupte /a Wall milerabip perich. Je J were a
Aeſhlp kelowe /g a preacher of Ipes a tolde
th that cher myght tye bebbynge a bolling /

3p tbedponchen: G that were a Pꝛophete for

this people. But J will gather the in dede / O
Jacob /a dzruethe remnatit of Jtrael all toz
gether.A Waltcary them one with another /
88 a locke in the kolde / and ag the catell in
their ſtalles / that they may be dylquyeted ol
other men. who lo beeaketh the gappe / he
wall go befoze, Chey thal breathe ppß pozte /
go in a out atit. Cheir hynge Wall gobe⸗
foze chem and the Lozoe ſbalbe vpon the
head of them.

C Agapuſt the tranny of piinces / kalle prophetes.
che. ih, Chapter.
care, O ve heades ok the houle of

acob / a pe leders of the houle of
pj aevaet:<>putbe noc ve kom what


Pecael,


Jeremp. v. a.
M lal. lxxxij.


Imaginacros ther


b.


kobpte vpon / chen they preach that all chal⸗
be well but ka man put not come chend in


The Pro


phey
ail at ware a.


Cherkoꝛe voure vyrpon thalbe turned to
night / a voure pꝛophecpenge to darcknelle.
Che Sunne pan go downe over tyole pꝛo⸗
phetes / the dave thalbe darcke vnto them.
Chen tall the vilxon leert be achamed / and
the tothlapers confounded: pec ther cwalbe
kapne / all the packe of them / to ſtoppe their
mouthes / ko they haue not Gods wonde. 48
koꝛme/ I am full of ſtrength / z of the lpꝛete
ol the Loꝛde / kull or iudgmẽt a boldneſle :to
ſhewe the houle ofFacob their wyckednelle /

S the houle of Frack theit lynne.

O heare this ye ru lers of the boule ol Ja x
cob / a pe iudges of the houſe ol Alrael: xẽ b
e
a ethyng that is ſtreight:
bp Dion with bioude / Jerulalẽ W


dopnge
toponge O petudges ve geue fentence for grees


gyktes: O pe pꝛeaſtes / ve teach koꝛ lucre: G

ze rophetes/ ve prophecy to mony. Yet zeranp. oll
wll they be taken as tholẽ that holde vpon

God and lape: Js not the Loꝛde amonge bs:
Cuſh / there can no milkoztune happen bs,

Cherkoze wall Spon(foz youre fakes) be

plowed lyke a kelde:Aerulalem Wal become

àn hea pe of ſtones / and the hyll of the tẽple

hall be turned to an hye wodde.

CME the callynge of the Sentyles / and conuer yon


or dhe Jewes.
J ¶ che liij. Chapter.


||ooure waive rettopoyerthen enp kel


mountapnes oz bplies: Yee Speos
ple Wall peafe vnto it /e the multitude of

Gétiles Wallhaſte the thither / larẽg: Come /
let os go bp tothe hyll ofthe Loꝛde / eto the
houle dk 5 God of Jacob: that he ma pe teach

bs his ware /a that we maxe walcke in hes

pathes. $07 the lawe (hal come out of is /
Gthewozde ok God krom Jerukalem / ü wall tmn r
geue ſentence amonge the multytude of the
e
tees to ok their cweardes ther all make 5
Plowthares /atythes ocherr ipeares. Gun.

One people Hall not lytt vp atweardea- 6

gaynſt another / pee they tal nomoze jeame
to! 2 la euery man thalllyt onder hes
bineparde a onder his kygetre / and no man

to rape him rohen che mouth old Lon
okhoſtes bath ſpoken it. Chertoze / where as

all che people haue walcked euery man in
the name orhts awne God we wyll walcke
5 poe —— At

e lame tyme / e Lone / a

cher vn the lame e the outcaſtes /a ie 505


haue chattened: ¢ wyll geue pie!


e


ach. o.


f emrah 6


Chet. trptiz d Bande falt andgeue fade tn the


A0...


, lb,


Dres we bat Zaren 0


uaple: and now O chou daughter Bion be
ſoiß / let it greue the as awyte labozyng
chyide: to now mut thou get the out or the
cptie and dwell vpon the plapne leide: Yee
vnto Babyld Malt thou go, chere ſbaltthou
bedelpyered and chere the Lom hall lowte
the krom the hande or chrne enembes.

How alto ate there many her, ß
iscurted/twe (hall fe ouretutt bpd her. But
thephnotne not the thoughtes ofthe Loꝛde
che


pnderitande not

er themcogether as the Mecurs inthe

e -chevtoreget the ße, thou daugh:
ter Sion and th,olthe out the come : 00
wyñl make chy home £2001 / and thy clawes
Rehe eee ae ee
ple their goon
tothe Londe / and chett Cubsassnce buto the
ruler ofthe whole worde.
eof pager of JeruCalent,


bis councell /that mal fork


cheas; lxxxb ,
ae miniepeude of people) A8 ceded de che

e e end ge n ie
boop. Fer b retkoure orgacob elbe amage Sent
the Hentiles ano the mutrtude of people⸗

as the iron amonge the becttes or the wobd /

and ag the Lpons whelpe amäge a locke of
Wepe-whlchewhen be goetg thozowe) treas

deth downe / teareth in peces / c chert is nd

man that can helpe, Chne hand walbe ly


w vppponthrne enempes fand all chene aduer


katles MAU PEED. ... 4
Che tyme dall come alto / ſapeth LoD
that J wpll take thyne hoꝛtes from the / and
Beeck dee,
e 0 and ouer dente. Föth
che dran ge ubes All tulecyevateen twp gmt 80,
rote oute ol thyne hande / there ſhall no nig
copthlapinges be within the. Chyne Idols
ache han wel nen, bone pelt on.
at thou Calc nomoze bowe thy felfe vn⸗
tothe wogches ofthpne atnehandes Chy
tous wyll J pluche bp by therotes / and
zeake dowwne F cpties. hug willz be auẽ⸗
ged allo / vpd all § Heath ? wyllnothearet
; ienkgeiiutines
rt ate
“Ecvebicyaper,.
eee
me a €
hecethebpnes beavechybopce, O al lg a
Eaabeare the puniſymẽt of the Lord /


Pemountaynes /g pe mightie Coundactds of


goynge hach bene from the begennyng/and

from cab chen top cen

plageth them kor a feafon / vntyll the tyme

that chelwhich call 287 bomeitden

wall the reinnaunt ok hrs bzethzen be con.

uerted vnto the chyldꝛen iche eren ae
e Loꝛde / and inthe victoꝛ of che name of

the Tae Soneannwoen they be cuces

panne 1 — onto the karthelt

ol a
Wachen wauchere be peace fothatthe Bf


i lirian mape come in to dure lande / a
dpa deem ourehoutes, We wall bprnge bp-beuen far


urceſſarpe.


herdes pernces bpon thẽ:chele
Wall tubouethelanoraise —
Sen
. Thu
Abgang e commer tein dare land
og tte bi tote ttt outs Bose


meane wörie be .


, lou
Andthe remade of Zacab wal be amöge


the earth: lo the 107d wl tepꝛour his peo⸗
le / a reacon w Acrael: O my people/ what
jane 4 done dtp $07 wherin haue Jhurte
thesgtuemeantwere Becaule A breugheg er od. sith
fromthe lande of ggypte / and delpueredche
out ol 6 Houle or bondage: Becaufe A made rz
oles / Laron and Mirtam to lede che: Me Hume yr
e
Soar! jayne ume. xx.
Aken wee that Bataan § 1 ok Be: Frih Fr NxxN
oz gaue him, tram Sethi nto @algal) 2
10 mape know ide iu ſbnß kyndneſfes othe


thetwerpe) often


hyn
Gob:


5 * +
Niniue.
N oxtic oF the Lorde a that ihr name imape be
„ iughtuoulnege. Peare (S ye trybes) who
Heuityig.g, Wolde elg geue you loch warnpnge? bud
Deut. rpc. Whocbeditpleatcn/foz vnrightuous good
ute. in the houles of the wycked / and becaule the
Lee ub. meaturehis mynpihed⸗ D7 chulde J tuſtikie
the falle balaunces and ö bagge dt dicceat⸗
full weyghtes / amonge thole that be full ol
Dryches önrygtſtuoulp gokten: where che cite.
lens deale wich falſhede/ peak ſtes c haue
dilceatlull tunges in their mouthes?
Cherfoze J wyn takeinhanve to pn
che / and to matze che delolate / becaure of thy
nnes Chou chalt eate / z nothaue ynough:
pee thou thalt bzinge thytelte down. Thou
_ Galt lle / but not elcape: and tholetunetheu
woldeſt laue / wyll J delyuer tothe erde,
torrie Thou Male Cowe but not reape: thou Malt
ents KeOO ppecle out oltues but ople (halt thou not ha⸗
uur / to anoynte thy felfe wythall: thou ſhalt
treade out lwete muſt / but chalt h ynche no
16. Reg. xvi.e. wyne. Ve hepe the oꝛdrnaunceg ol Amer ¥ @
all the cuſtomes of 5 houle ol Ahab: ve ko⸗
lowe their plealures / therfoze wyll J mate
the waſte / and caule thy inhabyters tobe ab
hoꝛred / O my people: a chus Mais thou bene
re thyne awne Mame,
CA complaynt of the lytell nöbꝛe of the ryahtuoule
Agaynſt che trueth ought we not to holde with oure
geeateſt teyndes.
che. bij Chapter.
Oisme: Jam become as one / that
goeth a gleanynge in the haruelt.
Chere are no mo grapes to eate /
pet wolde J tarne wall my herte)
haue okthe beſt trute, Chere is not a godiy
man vpon earth there is not one rygheuous
amögeé mk. A hep laboure alto ten bioud /
tg labour eg cucey nis Dunketh bis brothertodeath pet
0 40 dhe in cheplape thepdowwelltmben they do cucll.ds
wapte for bleu the pꝛynce wyll co lapeth the tudge: chat he
dens to mane mape dohima pleafure agapne. he greate
Parnes {ues man Cpeateth whathis herte delpzeth a the
sable by rine Deaversalow bim,ecbe bet ofthe isbutas in
Atnpngesimur hilt le / r the matt ryghbtuous ok theis but aß
chers) t viole- a bꝛeer inthehedge. But when the baxe of
ke. rouer .. u thy preachers cometh / p thou ſhalt be bily.
ted:then (hall they be wacted awaye. Let no
ing beleue his krende / ner put bys conkydẽce
Bina pzynce. Bepe the porte ofthy mouth tro
her p lpeth in chybolome:koz the fonne Halt
put his kather to dychonoure / the daughter
br By darck⸗ Pall ple agapntt hermother/ the daughter
nene pur rtaö n lawe agayntt her motherin lato: ¢a mag
rhe fates and foes ſbalhe cut they or his atone houtpoine,


infesesortbis Devertheledeg willioke bp pnte 5 10 / 1S
‘ourlde und ez wyll pacpentip abpde God my laupoure: 13)


Pay derbe, muy God challheare me. O thors enempe of
v cyng of the co. myne / retoyce not at my kall/foꝛ I Mall get


ce Jol vue vp agane:a though A tt in barchnede/


The b


ropheepe


pet ige Losers my lpght. J wyl beare che
punilbmẽt ot the Loe (toĩ wh / J haue of:
kended hum tyl he lptt in udgmẽt von mx
cauſe / ele y g haue right. e well bꝛing mẽ
koztgtoß night /A Maite his ughtuoutnede.
Shethat is mneenemp thal lone oponc


{t/@ be cokounded/ which nowlaleth. uohere ih. nen. .


§8 thy Lorde God Myne eves Mall beholde
her / when the Walbe trodẽ downe / asß claye
inthe ſtretes. Chetyme wyll come / chat thy amos. rt
gappes thalbemade vp / a the lawe wan go
alzone:¢at p tyme ſhall ther come vnto p⸗
Fr aur onto the ſtronge cytieg / a kram the
dtronge cyties onto the rpucr: krõ the one lee
tof other / krd the one modtayne to p other,

‘Mot wpthſtandynge the land nil be was
ted / becalile ot them that dwell therin / and


koꝛ the krutes of their awne J maginãcyõs.


Cherkoze Fede thy people with ther rode / cy xoddeherr
the llocke of thyne heretage which dwell de⸗ tpanityeth vo,
folate in the wodde: that ther maye be teddenimone gor


Spon the mount of cha men Satan ee e


isadas atoze tyme. Maruelous thynagt wil
J ewe them ipke as whenthepcame oute
of Egypte. his Hall che Heathen fe and be


Shamed fozall their power / lo b they ball de Seen f


ape their hande vpon their mouth 1 Arm par


ftoppetheir eares.chepe*tpall lecke d dult eech,


Iphe a ſerpẽt / as the woꝛmes ol g earth / J alle hübie
ckthe lan God / ¢ they Wal fe ken ten dur
OF the Lozde oure God / they bal feare the. 6

Whereis there doch a pda thous? that on ays gro
patvoneſt wyckednes / and ko:geueſt the ot⸗ 0 obidient


fences of the remnaunt tee dan (any ier 4
nd why: Phete)Mattthe
Hysdelite tstobauecdpattion:ye tall eunne Oeacbene an
agapne / and be merepkull to bsthe Mall pus though ber.
Downe oure wyckednelſſes / and caſt all oure berare had 1. .
lynnes in to the botome ok § cee. Thou Male vaelingreuaus :


He kepeth not his wrath oz cuer.


kepethptruſt with Jacob / a thy mercy kozubeccron
Abꝛaham / Ipke as thou halt fwogne onto
oure fathers longe agoo.


che ende ofthe pꝛophecpe ot
och i Wache cp o


¶ The boke of the


Prophet Pahum.
CHF the deſtruct yon ol Niniue and ot the delyue⸗
raunce of I krdel. 3
Se che den burthé
bis is the heuy burch
| ne arch abu ot
ehe opp werte ashe tame
benen isa gelous0b/spentts
8 3) Gs da taherotbengeaunce: pee
SE SHataher of bengeaunce is the
Lend / and wr0thEull. Che Loz taketh ben⸗
ao Beaune


Ft. vir. cenep ye leauted noms fauflel


holes. Chey Marbe akrapede wougbe ab.


e
Pinte; t.

geaunce ol his enempes and reſeruẽth ope:

mata,  plealute £07 his aduertactes. Che Lord fut

Sr kene eald ach nn n ac eb e

ye bint,

Che Lozde Goeth forth in tempelt o komp

wether /the cloupes are the Dull or hys kete.

Shenhe repꝛoueth che tee / he dzieth it vp / a

B turneth all the floudes to dꝛye lande. Balan

ts delolate / Charmel a the pleature ok l ba

nus watteth a wa xe che moũtgpnes trem

dle fozhim the helles contume. At the loghe

OF hum /p earth quaheth:pee B whole world /

! and all that dwelltherin. Pho mape endure

vn, h. bekoze his wꝛach: Oz who is able toabrde

an ub. ahlg gryme dilplealure: Bis anger taketh on

2. cb. Ube Epze and the harde roches burt inkun⸗
Lage. . der etoꝛe him. wee:

Full gractousistheLozde/anda ſtronge
holde in the tyme of trouble / he knoweth we:
chat put their truſt inbim: when thefloude
renneth ouer / anddeltropeth the place / and

€ when the darchnetie koloweth ſyil vpon his
enempes. nohat do pe Fmagin thenagarnſt

2 Loz onthismaners(Cut/ whe bebath
once made an ende / there Wall come nomo⸗·
re trouble.) For ipke ag g thonnes that fticke
together / and as the dꝛxe ſtrawe / lo hall the
dponchardes be conſumed together / euẽ whe
ther be kull. chere come oute ofthe toch as
Amagin mercheke / z geue vngracious cofts
cellagaynſt the Loꝛdt. 0
Therfoze thus tapeth the Lozde: Lett the
be ag well prepared / peeg ag manꝝ as ther


D


can / pet ſhalicher bebewen downe / g pate her


awape. Annas foz the / wylvexe p but not
btterip deſtrope the. Indnow wyll J brake
his rode krö chy backe / burſt th bondes
in fonder. But the Loꝛde hatt geuen a coms
ade  Mautidemtent concernpngedherd there Pan
Ke ooo. e tal § prepare tg
- Thygraue
che / andthou thait be confounded, —


‘EHedetcriveth the victorpe or the Laldees agarug
we te vet be pa agapnt


B Hahlün. 5


come nomoze fede ol thy name. Che carued


men of warre are in purple. His cha
rettes are as pe / when he maketh him fozs
wardehlsarchergare well deckte g timed
charettes rolle bpo p ſtreteg / welter sg
che hre waxes. Chey ae to lone vpõ ine
crellettes ok kz g golmpktlp/ as P ipghte⸗
nynge. hẽ he doth but warne hig giates /
they fall in their arape / a battelp thep cipm-
me bp the wales: pee the engins or p waͤrre
ate pꝛepared all ready. he water poztes
wall be opened / and the kynges palace chall
fall. Che quene her lelke wall be ledawaye
kaptrue / and her gentilwemen chalmaurne cc 9
ag the doues / and grone wythin their bers Coby, riil. be
tes. Miniue ts iphe a pole full of water / put Bud ö..
then chall ther be fapne to fle, Stand / lade /
(cal ther ctpe)and there Malt rot one turne
backe. Awape Wihe liuer / awape with che
weben here is no ende ot trealure, Cbere
abe a multptude of all maner coftlp dꝛna⸗
mentes. Chus mutt the be ſpopled / einptied
Selene ſtriped out that ther herted mape be
meltedawaye / their knees tremble/alltheir
lopntbe wenhe a their faces blacke aga pot
Where ig now the dweliyng others /
@ the patture ol Irons whelpes⸗ where the D
ipon ¢ the iponetie went Wihe whelpes / ano
ma krapedchk awape? But the lyon tpopled
pnough fo2 bis ponge ones / a deuoured fog
bis lt. he killed his de neg w bis pꝛaye / ö
bis dwelleng place with Phe hadrauplched.
Beholde / J wyllvpd 906 tareth the Losd ol
holteg / will let Fpze bpd thycharettes / chat
fhall fmoke with all) ethe twerde Chall.
deuoure the pdge lyös. J wyll make an ende
ob chy fpoplyng frd out of} earth /e p voce
or thy mellaungers hall nomoꝛe be herde.


Che fallof Nintue,
gehe ti ahn,


ann
chrnge / the note or the wheles / the crrenge
eee
There thehoꝛle men get vp Wnakedlwerds /


th E glyſteringe tpeares: chere lpeth amuity+


e son he rr
Perkourme tip promples :fo2 2elial halt


come nomoꝛe in the / he tsbtterly roted out. greate


Che ſcaterer Hall come vp agapnſt the /a
Taye ſege to the cattell Lone thou wel tothe
e

2p of Jacob /Ipae as the


tude llayne / and a greate heape of deed bo⸗

des: chere is no ende ok deed coartes / yee

men kali vpon their bodyes: And that fo2 the

and manptolde whozdome /o pkapze

and beutpfullharlot:whichis a maſtreſſe of
witcheralt / pee ¢ felleth the people choꝛow

her whoome / and the nacpons thoꝛow her

8
Elopelds.a.
Ezech. vi u.


Pract,
he prngdomes. A wyn cal drzte bps the / to
mk the be — hes Ga galpnge ſtocke:
Fesall thepthat lone vpuntße / Mall ſtarte
backe / a lape:Hintue is heſt roped. E
Who wyn haue pptte wpa the: where all
Alene one to ronkozte the: Art thou better
hen the greate cite of Alexandzia⸗ that lave
in the waters / and had the waters rounde
ahboute it whlch lvag ſirögip fencer awalled


swith the lee: Ethtorna and Egypte were her


Geenigth/@ tharerceading great aboue mea:
ture, Apherca g ‘Lobia wercherheipetg, pet
was ſbedzpuen aware /g bought into cap;
trupte her vonge chyidze were tmitté downe
At the head oF euerr Atete / the loctes were
rad ko the molt aunchent men inher/ Kall
ber myghtpe men were bounde in chapnes,
Euen Co halt thou alto be dꝛonchen / a hde
thy tele, a fene lome helpe agapnſt ihrne ene⸗
MY, Di thy ſtronge cyepes Halbeiphe kyge
trees with ripe tiges: which whea man has
Heth /thep'that fail in to } mouth of h eater,
Beliolde/thy people within p ave but we⸗
men:the posts of thy lande chalbe opened on
tochrneenempes / and the tze Mall deuoure
chr bares. Diawe water now agayntk thou
5 bebereged make bp thp ttronge holdes) go
vlt fra. r Into the clave eépze the mozter / matze dür
kerl. Dalcherpetthe tyre thal cölume the / cwerde
a 3 Wall dettrope the/pee ag tye iocuſte doch / o
Hhaliiteate 5p. Jt all kal beuclpopd ö ag
the loculter / vet right heuelx wall tt fall dpd
che / eus as 5 grelhoppers. Thymarchalſtes
hauebenenöbzedwche ftarres or heaus but
now thal they lpzede abzode as the locuctes /
Andie their wape Thy loꝛdeg are an thegre⸗
Worpers / thy captapnes as the mulkptlide
OF grethoppers. which when they be colde / re
mayne in the hedges but when the Hunne
$3 oh ther lle awape / ano mn can tefl where
ther are become che ſbepherdes are n dlepe
(0 kynge or Aur) chy worthpeg ere laped
Downes thy people is kcatred ab ode bps the
mountapnes / and no mä gathereth hemto-
gether agayne. Thy wounde can noc hehyn /
th pfage is lo toe. Ai cher that heave
this okthe/ pant clappe cheirhun⸗
des ouer the. oe what is he /
to whom thou halt not
alwape hene doyng
hunte.


che ende or the viopher
hints 5 a" cp


ay 2


The Proper


¶ The boke of the
prophet Abacuk.

e

Abs is theheup burthé »

which che Poppe e BDAC Cort rn.


— Aplapne onto the /
wꝛonge /a thou wilt not helpe: Why letteſt
thou me le weerynelle a laboure : Cpꝛanny
€ bpolence are befoze me / power quergoety


i is ta Wanless
right: ko the lawe is toarne in peces / a there
84 no ryght tudgment go forth . And why: 7B
5 1 he eue let bythen d rrghtuous:
this is the caule / that wꝛonge iudginẽt pꝛo⸗ Rote


cedeth. Beholde amongethe Heathen / and act rt.
Ioke well wondye atit/ and beabaghen:toyy
wyll doa thyng in your tyme / which though

it be 40 iu Anale pe —

0210/9 wyll raſe vy alder A
uttte rand Cinpéte people: whych Wall go as Deut
wyde as p lande is / to take pote id or oõwel⸗
ling places / p be not their atone, a grymme
and bopſteours people is it thete Malltitin
tudgment a puntthe heir bores avelwpe- €
ter then the cattes ofthe niountapne / ¢ be- Lorig.
te lozerthen ß woluesin p euenyng. chery
hoꝛlmen come by greate heapeg from fare /
they fle haltelpto deuour as the Jegle. hey
come ali tofpoyle: out ot them commeth an
eat wynde / whych blowelh and gathereth
their captyues / pe ag the lande. They Mall
mocke the hinges / and laughe the pꝛinces to
lcozne. hep chal not tet b eny ſtronge hol⸗

1. 570 fhallapeozdpnaunce agapnitt it / 4

andtakie t ben wall they cate abe CO , if |

rage bnto them / to go fozth a todomoze e ee 1

ue l/s ſo alcrybe that power onto their God. 5
But thou O Loꝛde my God my holy one

thou art from the begynnge / chertoze wall

we not dye. O Lopde /thouhatk oꝛdened thẽ

foza punpſhment / andtett them to repꝛoue

the mpahtve . Chyne eyes are clene / thou x, 4

maypet: notte cuel/thoucanttnotbeboneg |

thynge thatiswpched, deherfoze then DOL eren.
Ott Tobit pon thebngodlp / and holdeſt th ye talgepulit

tunge / hen the wpcked deuoureth the man

that is better the hym Cele? Chou makes niẽ

asthe lilhe in p les / and line as the epi

beeſtes that haue no gde, cher takehpa

with their angle / they catch it in cheir net / a

gather it in their yarne: wherot they reioyce

and are glad. Cherfoze oltre they vntothe rz 1 Seat

net and do factitice bnto their varne:becau⸗ ar

fe that thoꝛowe it their poꝛcyõ is become ĩo a:

tat, and ther meate lo e a


malte.


lutxrd


ehe. exlig ia


Stole
Mori €


J yecael,


cher calt out their niet Agayns/eneucd dens
eee
ion .
A
che. . Chapter.
Stode vpon my watch / a letme
vpon my bulwozcke / to lone ete
what he iwolde faye bnto me /and
4 what ancwere i chulde geue him
that tepzoucth me. But the Loꝛde ant wered
me / and lade : noꝛpte che vyipon planelp
bponthy tables / that who co commieth by /
Maye rede it: to the bifton is et karre or to
atme / but at the laſt it wal come to patie)
A not faple. And though he tary / pet wayte
thou toꝛ him / koꝛ in verpdede he wyll come /
Knot be llacke. Beholde / who fo wyll not be⸗
leue / his ſoule Hall not pꝛolpere: but > iuſt


45 Wall ixue by his kapth. L phe as 8 wyre dil⸗


ceauech the dꝛonckarde / euch fo the pꝛoude
Wall faple g not endure. He openeth his de.
che wyde vp ag the hell / S is ag bntaclable
as deafh. All Heathen gathereth he to hym /
o beapeth vnto him ali people.

But chall not all thele taße bpa pꝛouer·
Deagaynt him / a moche him Wa bywozde /
Alae:ipobntohim that heapech vp other
mens goodes: Powlonge will he lade hm
ſelle wich chicke clape: P how Sopenty wilt
they ſtande vn / that Mall byte / aawahe/ p
Walteare 5 nr peces: ver thou Hait be their
pꝛape. Sdeiugechau hack tpopledmanrhea⸗
then / therkoꝛe hall che renmaunt of the peo⸗
pie tpople the:becauſe of mens bloude / and
aud en wrong done tis tie lande / in the citie
and onto allthemthatdwell therm.

0 bnto him (chat couetoullp gathereth
euell gocten goodes in to hin houle: that he
maye et bis nettanbye / to ercape from the


power of nultostune. Chou bah deupte he


ame of thyne awne houle / kon thou halt
flaprie to moch people / and halt wilkulpor⸗
kended:lo that the very ſtones of ß wall ball
crpe out ok it / and the tymbꝛe thãt lech be-
twixte the toyntes ok the buplopng challan⸗
were, o onto him / p bupideth ehe towne
Wyloude a mapnteneth the cytte wyth vn⸗
kightuoulnes. Shall not the Look hoſkes
bzünge this to Fame Goat dende ofthe

* People Hal be bent with aqueste Fy7e 48 2
the thinge wherbponthe people haue wee⸗

* Sedthemfelues/Mhall be lock? Foz the earth
Halbe full of nno wiedge of the Loses ho⸗
houte/iphe ag the watersthat couer the lee.
0 biito him thatgeueth his nerghboure


Dpzncke / co gethem tooth bull Mrplealure


jisdzonche athe mapete his pꝛe·
Sea eee ame ale tou be


Filled in tteane of honouve Zzinke thot als
to / ty chou ſomb e wich an toy the cupße dhe


Ot Abatut


at ler bij. .
ok the Lomeg night hade (all rl ‘
abouite/and (hamefulltpewing in iteade of
bone bani Haenel n ee
1 . And Zune,
che wide beattes yal mate she atvapencbe:
caule ok mens bloud /g fog the wzonge done

in the lande in the cxtie / and onto all loch ag


nopacbeive then fl Paingedo, tna
Phat helpe age do / u
8 WonediDpthevapne
cat Image / wherin becaule the crattelman
puctech 50 ttuſt cherkoze inaketh he dame
Jools: 10 önto him / that lapeth to a pece
OF wob:arple / to a domme ſtoneiſtande bp.
Los what inüttuceron mape toch one gene?
Beholdetelslaed duer with gold g lluer ste 444
and there is no bzeth in it. But the Loꝛde in
his holptemple is he / whom al the woꝛide
ſulde keare. ‘


Cn prayer of the proppee Abacue for th init,
OChe.tif.chapter, ee


metcy. God comme
potpenetromeben


Mead ann Juda.


camelt foxth to belpe thy people / to belpe
thrne anopnted. Chou lmoteſt downe phead
whehoule ok p ongodty /edifcoucrenes
toundaciõs /eué vnto pnecheochim. Seiad.
ou curleſt his lepters / the Captay>
ne of his men of ware: which come as a ſtoꝛ⸗
my wind to fcatve me abꝛoge /s are glad whe
they mare eat bps pooze tecretip. chou ma
Rett awape koꝛth une hoꝛtes in theler / euen
in the mudde ol great waters. whẽ J heare
thys / my body is vexed / my lyppes tremble
ab bopce therok / mybones coꝛruppe am
akrayedwhere J ſtande. O that J might reit
in the dape ob trouble / chat J myght go vp
vnto our people / which are aivedy preparer,
Foz the tyge trees Mal not be grene / a the
bynes (hal beare no krute. Che laboure ok 5
oſpue chalbe but loſt / the lande thall being
no cone: the ſbepe talbe taken out ok pol ·
de / and there ſpalbe no catel in the ſtalles.
But as Coz me / q wyl be glad in the Loꝛde /


Heat . poiti.b, Arnd will reiopce in Goo my Spaurouze.che


.


Deut. f.
Jere. v


5 t
bas peat per by all thynges in


Loꝛde God is my ſtrength / he wal make my
kete as che fete or hertes: a he which geueth
che byctoꝛy / hal bꝛyng me to my hre places
Cpnginge pon my plalmes.


‘Gane ende ot the prophecy of Abacuc.


¶ The boke of the


ete Hophonp.
FD eet


of their Joolatrye.
Ice kyꝛſt Chapter. „


{bis is the woꝛde of
ithe Loꝛde / which cam yn


& ſriah the tonne of Peze⸗
niab in § tyme of Foriay
e ok Amon kyn ladet Wyll ga
e lande (lapech the

Loꝛde) I wyll gather vp man a an a
ather bp the foules in the apze andthe kych
the fee(co the greate decave or the wicked)
and wyil btterly deſtroye the men out ok the
Blande / ſapeth the Loꝛde. J wyll ſtretch oute
myne hande vpon Juda / and bpõ all Coch as
dwell at Jerufalem chus wyll J rote oute
the remnant of Waal kronithis place / a the
nanies ofthe Remuring and preltes: pee a
fochagbpon theirhoute toppes wozchype €
bowe them Celues nto the holte orheauen:
whichlweare bythe Loꝛde / a by their Mal⸗
chomallo: which ſtarte a backe trö § L d /

s nether tene alter L 0d / ner regarde him.


The


Fophe)
Be Uyſlat the pretence otehe L oꝛd God/
forthe ape ofthe Loꝛde is at harde: pee che


bis Lopbe hach prepared a Clapneoficrpng, and


called hs geſtes therto. Andthus wall it
happen in the dave ofthe Loꝛdes a flarnok⸗


keryng:wyll vylet the pꝛynces / the kinges as. aeg. rbb


chyldzen / and all Coch as wrere ſtraunge clo⸗ qere fr. l.
thynge. In the fame dape allo wyll J vylet
all thole / that treade our the chꝛecbolde fo
pꝛoudlp / which kyll their Loꝛdes houle with c
krobberpand fa lieve. A tð fame time(ſapeth
the Lozde) there Walbe herde a greate crye
fromthe kytppozte and an howlynge krö the
other poꝛte / anda greate murthur from the
hylles. Bowie pechat dwell in the mplt/ koz
allthe marchatit people are gone / a all ther
that were laden with lyluer / are roted out.

At the lame tyme wyll J kene thoꝛow Je
rulalem wyth lanternes / ¢bytet them that E oe
continue in cheix dzegges, anofapetn ther: zerrprhhe
hertes: Cuch / the Lozde wyll do nether good ‘
heveuell. Cheir goodes chalbe ſpoyled / and
their houles layed waſte: they wall buploe
houles / and not dwel in them: they hal plan
te vynxardes / but not deinke the wyne / cher⸗
ok. Fop the greate dave ofthe Loꝛde is at S
hande it is herde by / a commeth on a pace.
Moꝛrible is the tydinges or the Loꝛdes daxe
then thal the giaunte crie out: koꝛ chat dare
I a dape ok wzath / a dave of trouble eheuy-
nelle / a dape ol vtter deſtruccton a mplety/a
darcke a glomynge dare / a cloudy a foznp
dape / adape of p nople or trõpettes ¢ ba w⸗
mes againſt che ſtronge cittega hie tonges.
I wil bingethe people in to loch vexaceon /
chat they thal go gboute tte blinde men / be⸗
caute they haue ſynned agaynſt the Loꝛde.


Chelr blonde lbalbe mevas the put /a cher; eb. ditt
bodies as the myze. ether their Cpluer ner —


their golde ſhalbe able todelyuered chemin 5
wrothful pave ofthe Loꝛde / hut the whole sony lb
lande halbe cõſumedthoꝛow the kyze of his
geloulp: for he Mall foone make clene ryd⸗
daunce ok al them chat dwel in the lande.
¶ he moueth to returne to Sod / pꝛophecyinge vnto
the one deſt ruccpon / x to the other delpue raunte.
Che. ij. Chapter.


tyne be palled awaye as the tu ft;
02 the kearkul wꝛath ofthe Loꝛde come po
vou / pee oꝛthe daye or the Loꝛdes foze Dple
plealure come bpon vou. Helie the Lozdall
dee melie harted bpon earth / ye that woꝛcke
alter his tudgment:feke rpghtuoutnetie /fes
ke lowlxnelle: p ve maye be defendedin the 1
wzothkull pape ofthe Tome ger Gaza (hal dur rum h
be deſtroped / Arcalon Wal be taped watte 2 ona
Cher hat cat out acdodat thenoone 50


)


| Jrulalemt,


and Accaron ſhalbe pluente op by the rotes.

5 Wo vnto you 5 dwell bpon the fee colt

ve murtherous people:the worde ol z 107d

wal come ppon you , O Canaanthou lande

OF che Philiſtpnes J wil dectrope the / lothat

there ſhal no man dwell in the enx moꝛe: and

as toꝛ the lee coaſt/ it ſhall behyꝛdmens co⸗

tages a chepe koldes: pee ft halbe a poꝛcpon

fozfosh as remapne of the houleol Juda to

fede ther vp. In the houles of Accalon hal

nf they rect towarde nyght: koꝛthe L oꝛde they

zol. Sodchalopletthe /¢ turne aware theirca⸗

Keslethen. ptpuite.4 Baue verde cyederpyte of Moab,

ech rb. Athe blalphenues ok the cyilozen of Ammon

: Chow they haue chamekullp intreated my

people /a magnified them felucs within the

boꝛders of their lande. Cherkoze as truly as

Ilpueſ(ſapeth the Lo7d ok hoſtes the Godot

a6 % Bee!) Moab hatbe as Sodome /a Ammõ

dene dhe a8 Somo na: euen bte thomne Heoges/*talt

+ places where pptkes anda perpetuall wyldernes. Chere

latte. — Cpdue or mpkolche chall kpople the the rem-

naunt ok my people tall haue them in pots

feftion, Chis Mall happẽ onto them for their

pꝛpde / becaule they haue dealte ſo wame⸗

fully with the Lorde ok hoſtes people) o maz

Gnified thé lelueg aboue the. Che oz thal

begryme ope the/a bettrope all$ goddes in

the lande. And all 5 Jles ok 5 Heathé wall

„„ wonſhippe him /euerp man in his place.

Je Wonäs alfo Hail perth Wm Cwerde:

pee he Mall Eretch out hys hande duer the

north / and dettrope Alux. Is for Mintue he

wall mate it delolate/ date and wacte he

flockes ¢ all d beaſtes of the people tall lye

ind middeſt of it, pelltcanes a ſtozckes all

abyde in the vpper poſtes of it / koules Matt

lynge in the wyndowes /e rauens Mall pte

i bpd the balches /fozthe bodes of Cedze Hat

a eg. Fine Be rpuen Downe THIF is the proude and cae

Eh Flöhe. reledte cytie / that Cape in her herte: am

Ful. and there is eis none. O how ig che made co

waſte / that the beeſtes lye therin? woha lo

goech by / mocketh her / and poynteth at her
wyth his kynger.

Cagarnct the gouerners af Jerulatem. Ok the cal

e e Amit tothe relpdue

ol ach.


: , Chapter,

a] Site üben krithre a
Vp tuell ctie: which will not heare
AY,


2
ner be rekonrmed. Her truſt is not


inthe L oꝛde / nether well eboine with the


en cbber taj Berto her God Her rulers totehin herareas
deer hengepe, gar rnge lrons her tudges ave as wolnes

- Sbecante in the euenyng / which leauenothpng bes
Haraltdedayebpnine chem tpl the moꝛowe Her pꝛophetes

Ke wurted tor ate lyght pertonnes and vnkapthkull me: her
Sev. pfeſkesbnhalowe the Sanctuary and do

: wꝛonge vnderthe pretence ol the lawe. But


Bt Sophony ;


7 „
rxxix.
the tut L öde that doch no bnright / was a.
mongethe /euerp mompng ſbewpng the his
laws clearlp /a ceaſſed not. But § vngodiy
wyll not lerne to be alchamed. Cherkoje wil
Irote oute thys people / and deltrove their
towes:pee and make their ſtretes lo vopde /
that no man (yall goo therin. Cheircytpes
Walde bꝛolken downe / lo that no body Mall
belelt / ner dwellthere eny moze, 6

I lapde onto them: O keare me / and be cõ⸗
teñt to be rekourmed. That their dwellynge
wulde not be deſtroped / and that there chul⸗
de happen onto them none ok thele thinges /
wherwith J thal vylet thé. But neuertheles
they ſtandẽ vp earlp/to folowe the kilthvnes
ok they; atone pnaginacpous . Chertoze ve
Mall wapte vpon mte(Capeth the Lorde vntil
thetyme that ſtãde vp: fo J am determed /
to gather p people a to bꝛinge dkyngdomes
together that Amape poure oute mene an⸗

er / ye all my wꝛothkull dilpleature bpo the.

‘oz all the wonve ſpalbe conlumed with the un e
Fore of ny gelouty. And then wl A clente ) Eee
Ipppes oF the people / J chey mayẽ euerych⸗
one call bpon the name of the Loßde / alerue
bim with one Mulder. Hoch as J baue fub-
dued / and my chyldzẽ allo whom F haue lca
tred abzode / Mail bꝛynge me pꝛelentes bez
vonde the waters ol Ethiopia.

In that tyme Malt thou nomoze be cone
kounded / becaule ok allthy vmagynacyon //
wherthozow thou haddeſt offended me: Foz Jerem. lb,

wyll take awape the pꝛoude booſters of

ine honoure From the / fo ß thou caltno⸗ C
moze tryumphe becaute of mpboly hyll. In
$ alco wil Satan al puoi fymple peo
ple / which chal trull in the name off Lozde,

Che remnaunt ok Flraell tail do no wyc⸗
kedns / ner ſpeake lpes:nether ſbalthere enx
dilceatkull thige be founde in theirmouthes.
For they ſbal be ked / andtane their reſt / and
no man ſhal malie them afvaped. Geue thů⸗
kes O daughter Spon / be iopful O Itrael:
reiopce and be glad krõ chy whole herte / D
daughter Jerulalem /koz the Loꝛdhath take
a wãpe thy punychement / and turned backe


chine enempes he hynge of Jlraell / euen


the Loꝛdhuntelk i with the lo that thou ne
deft nomoꝛe to feare enpmplfoztune,
Inthat tyme it hall be tayed to Jerula⸗ sy
lem: keare not / and to Ston lett notthyne
handes be llacke / koꝛ the Lome thy God is
e / it is he that hath power to laue: he
hath a lpeciall plealute in 8 / a maruelous
loue towarde the: pee he relopleth ouer the
with gladneſſe. Hoch as haue bene inheup⸗
nelle / will J gather together / a take oute of
thy cõgregacpon: as foꝛ the lhame a repꝛołe
that hath bene laped vpõ the / it (halve karre
from the. And io / in that tyme 0 l
al


sileatl che
‘Lemple, 5
aich. all thole that bers the: J wylhelpe che lame /
and gather vpthe calt awape pee J wyll get
them paple and bonoure in all landeß /
where they haue bene put to ſbame. At the
Lame tyme wyll J bzgnge vou in / and at the
kame tyme topll f gacher pou. J willget you
a name g a good repoꝛte amonge ali people
ofthe earth / when J turnt backe youre cape
tpupte befoze poure exes / capeth the Lope,
¶ Che ende ol the prophecy
ot Sophonx.


*


¶ The boke of the
ete A


— chunt Mogens, a, erbore
tacpon tobuplde the templeagapne.
¶ Che tye Chapter,


2 A neti che krlt dape ot the mo.
7 net came the woe ot the
e
8 aN geus)onto>ozobabel g tonne
Tema hu. vo Safachiel the prince ot Juda /a to Jelua
tbhekonne of Zoledech the bye pret /faying;
‘Chus (peaketh theto2d or holles / lapety:
Chis people doth faye: Che tyme is not vet
come to buploe vp the Lozoes houle, Chen
Spake the Londe bythe Pzophete Aggeus /
- fayde:Ye pourlelues can finde tyme codwel
in Cpledboutes /¢ Mall this houte tye wat?
B Confydze now youre ane wapes in voure
bertes (ſapeth the Loꝛde of hottes) re fowe
moch / but ye bainge lptle in: ve eate / but ye
f haue not ynough:pedzinche / but ve are not
keuttlxrbrb. klledpe decke poure lelues / but ve are not
led. vb. warme: and he that earneth eny wage / put ·
te un b. teth it in a bꝛon en purle.

bag . b. Thus lapeth the Lorde or hooſtez: conti
dre voure awne wa reg in youre hertes / get
rou vn to the moũtapne / ketch wod / a bude
€ 10 33 it 15 be 8 on:
may ewe myne hondure /
fhpeth the Noꝛde. e lolled for moch / a lo it
ii meg bit. 18 rome to litle:a though pe bꝛinge it home /
vet do J blowe it awayẽ. Ind whp lo / tapetih
che Loꝛde of hottes ? Euen becaute that my
boufeipeth Cowatte/ a ve renne euery man
4. rot. lh v. Ditto his atone Houle. therfore the heauen
bic, t kozbydden togeue you eny dew / and the
v. Conn. vi. c. earth is foꝛbydden to geue you encreate. 3
haue called fo a dꝛouth / bath bpd the lande
peut. xxniß. d a bpon the mountaynes / vpon come / vpon
wyne , a bpd orle / bponeuery thynge p the
grounde bzingeth forth opon men and pon

catell / vee and bpon all handrladourc.


Dani. v. c. pt. a. %


ert. xxh a


The Y


rophecp


Mow whenFozobabel the konne of Sac
lathiel /a Jeſua p tonne of Joledech the bre
pret with the remnaltt of the people/ herve
the vorce of the Loꝛde their God / and the
Wondes of the Pꝛophete dagcusiphe as the
Loꝛde their God had lent him) the people dd
keate the Loꝛde. Chen Aggeus the Lozdes
Angell larde inthe Lozdesmiedage vnto che a, ce u


peopte:J am with pou/lapeth ? Love. Dorp ide t


the Lozde'* wakedvp the ſpꝛete ol Soꝛoba-a mant when
belthe Prince of Jud anche dete de ge. eon
dus the fotine of Joledech 6 pre pelt /g the beiten g,
ame andi Lapel one peuple: 8 they ecttatane v.

me oute e houle ok the Led im Ywithe
ohotes their God. beute ce Ken


beholp allo: The prettesanfwerede dard:
So.cheviane nn gg


dun. fir b.


Aae
15. 5. cl. defpled w a deed carcate,


touch enx olthele:
walltt allo be vnclene? Che Pzetes gaue
anlwere a lade: pee / it halbe vnclene. Chen

ankwered and larde:enen Cots ths
people ¢ this nacvon betoze me / ſapeth the
Loꝛde: g fo are ali p woꝛckes of theit handẽ /
pee and all that they olfte / is vncleane.

And now pape vou)contidze kromthis
dape koꝛth / and how ĩt hath gone with pou
Afoze:03 euer there was laped one ſtone byß
another in the temple ofthe Loꝛde:that whẽ
zecameto a coꝛnẽ heape of xx. buſheis / there
were ſcarce ten:andthat when ve came to ß
wyne pzetie koꝛ to powze out. L. pottes of
wpne / there were lcarce. xr Foꝛ Almote you
with beate/biatting a haple ſtunes in althe
labours of poure hãdeg:pet was there none


‘of vou / that wolde turne vnto nie /laxeththe


Logde.Contyoze then from thys dape toꝛtij


D and afore) namelp/ from 15 xxiiij daxe of


zich. vih b.


the. ir. moneth / onto thedare that $ kounda ⸗
cpõ oF the Loꝛdes temple was lapedzmarck
it well / is not the (eve pet inthe bane? haue
not the bynes the kigetrees / the pogranates
Golpuc tices bene pet ountrutekullebut From
this daye toꝛth / J Wall male thé to protpere,
Mozeouer the. xxiiij.dape of the moneth
Came the worde ok the Loꝛde vnto Aggeus
agayne / lupinge: Speane to Jezobabel the
yptice OF Judd / and lape: will Make both
auen au earth / and ouetthzowe the leate
OF the kynmchomeg / pee ¢ deſtrope ß mighty
Byngdome ofthe Heathe.F will ouerthzowe
the chavettes / and thole that lyt bpon then /
fo that loch hoꝛle and man fhall tall downe /
euery man iozow his nepgh bours [werde.
Andas kor che / O Bozobabelllapeth § L075


ok hoſteg ) ihn Conne ol Salathiel my ter-


uaunt: will take the (ſapeth the Loꝛde) at
the Canie tyime / a make the as a leale / koꝛ F
baue choten the / lapeth the l oꝛde or hoolkcs.


Gabe ende of the Pꝛophecre
ol aͤggeus.


¶ The boke of the


8 Pꝛophete Zacharr.
U. nd
3

aud the

2 che telt Chapter,
N theeyghtmoneth ol
eden of kyng Da⸗
J tius/ came p wode ok Loꝛde
eee


eo vachias / the konne ol Addo / ? ol


N ophete / laringe:the Loꝛde
bene loze dylpiealed at poure kozeka·
chers. Andlape thou onto the: ehus laxelh the


Ol zach


aye, «he
Logde of hoſten. Cuthe vou onto me (Capeth ere. xxx.
che Lopde of holteß) a J well tuene me vnto Wala. i. l.
rouſlapeth 5 Loꝛde of hjoſtes. Be not ye line 10
voure forefathers bro whom the Wrophe. St wh
tes crieda toze tyme faping: Cbus fapeth 9 W . Ert
Loghe God ofhottes:Curne you from youre e r a
euell wapes /a rom youre wyched yMAgD> Coby.rij.d.
nacpong. Butthey wolde notheare / nerves

garde me / lapeth the Lozd. iw hat is now be⸗ Czech txt b
come ok youre fopekathers and the Paophe: ere rita.
tes: are they pet ttpll aipue: But dydnot mp rr.


woꝛdes a ſtaluteg (which g 15 nde bo ag,


myleruauntes the Pꝛophetes) touch poure
kozekatherg: Mpö this / chey gaue antwere o
larde upue as the Loꝛde ot hoſtes deuyled to
do bnto vs / accozdyng to oure sine waͤpeg
e rmagrnactös /e do hach he dealte W vg,
Mpon the. tiff, dapeok the. Ij. moneth.
which is themoneth Hebat / in the leconde
PEALE OF Marius / caine the woꝛde of} Lozde
onto Facharpthe konne of Baraching / the
ſonne ok Addo the Pꝛophete / lapingerz la we
bynyght and lo / chere lat one bpon à reade


hoꝛte / a ſtode ſlyll amonge the M pꝛte trees /


chat were hene th bps the grounde a behynde
him were there veave /Cyeckich / and wöpte


holes Chen tayde 4: inp L. jd / what ave C


hele? And the aungell thar calched with me /
fayve vntome: J Wyll ewe the what thete


be. und 5 man (hat ttode amögethe pte
trees / antweren ann lapde:chete are thep/


whom the Lozde hath lent to go thozow the
wozlde. Ind they andweren the aügell of the
ogde that (cove anüge the Wpzte trees / a
lapde:noe haue gone Hhoz0w che wozlbe:and
beholde all the wozivenivellat eale / and are
careleſſe.
Thenche Lordeg angel gaue antwere /
inden b 72 75 0 pee 15 longe
wylt thou be bumtercpkull tog erulalem and :
cothecpryes or gude with whom thou halt Jr ur Feb
bene dylpleplen nor thrle. Nx peares. Soi. Eds ta.
the Loꝛde gaue aloupuge and a conkoztable
antwere dato the ainysell chat talcken wyth
me. Andtheaungell that cömoned with me/
fayde vnto ine: rye chou / and lpeane: Thus
lapeth the Loge df hotes:y amexceadynge
geious ouer Jerulaſemanb pon / and toe
dylpleated ac the cavelete Heatherkoz where
as J was but a lptle angrye/ they dydtheir
bet that | mpaht vettrope chem. Chertoze & acha. bil
chug sayeth the Lode: wyllturne mea -
gayhe in niercp tawarde Jerukalem / lothat
mp houte:Malbe buridep init / capech the
Lorde okhoſteg: per and the plonnmet ſpalbe
Taped der. Zewutaten taped the Loꝛde


jottes, . °
Erie alto / a tpeake:thus lapeth the Loꝛde
e Laat en
a e
garne / 0 4 4. and


o gecutalern and
auß bara Ol zathary.
fee
javed the Foundacys of this houle / hys che j Chapter.


e e Oꝛzeouer Iturnedme / iyttyng vp


. ab ve mape bnowe
ow that .
alt bi. b. Yow that p Conde ok hoſtes bath fent me vn⸗ imyne epes/eloked:@ beholde there
came. iiij. charettes out trom be⸗


Ok gerulalem a
manipbytyons,


to vou. Foz he that hath bene delpyled a tpt
teaton ull elope mbenveenete ries


Che renewynge of Jerutalem and Juda.
ö eupauyncevesaizayne/atobeb
11 e epesal
recht. aM RES ſcbehnioe amen io ammeaturevine
Are Fill. h inbesbalde. Chen fapde A whe
E chergoeckchau⸗ Andhe larde vnto
me: To mealuxe Jerutalẽ 2 4 mae fe how
‘tonge a how bzode it is. And beholde / the an ·
gellthat talked wme / went his waye fort),
Chen went there out another angel to mete
dim / a lard vnto him: Runne {peate tothis
voge mä / a lape: Jetulalẽ (all be inhabited
„ wythout enpwal/ ko the verpmultytude ot
Bpeople a catel / P hal be therin. Pre Amplelk
(Caveth the Loꝛde) will be onto her a wall oF
fyze roũde aboute /s wilbe honduredinher.
Oget pou koꝛth / O fle rom the lande ol
awsBy the. ld. 8 Horch cavech the Kode pe whom J hau
Wyndes is vn / (cated in to **Eoure windes vnder heauẽ /
derſtande the lapeth the Lozde Sauethy lelfe / O pyva:
whele warde / thou chat dweileck with the daughter of Ba
eil g. b. Pplon / kozchus Capeth che L onde vebockes:
xxtlũ c.
a nölth a glorious power bath he Cent me aut


to the Heathẽ / which (popledpourtor who lo


toucheth vou / bal touche baple okhis atone
C eye. Beholde / will Ipfe bp mpne hand ouer
them: lo that they Matl be Cpoplen of thole /


which afoze lerued them: a ve Hall nowe /


6 Aan that the Loꝛde okhoſteg hath Cent me.
of dion:


cxxix.a.
® peallbemppeopie cchus well A wellen. d


“mmpodett of the / a chou walt know / chat the
~.” Lope ok hoſtes hath tent me onto the. Che
ode ſpallhaue Juda in potlekpors kozhys


parte in the holy grounde / and (al ake a the Lowe onto Sozobabel/tapenge:Mether:-


“yafalem pet agapne Let all flechhe


wa Be glad / j reiopce / Ov daughter or Side
the people an for lo / q am come todwell in the myddeſt ot
ithe lame the lapeth the Lobe. It p lame tpme there
j Hall many Heathen cleue to the Lond / and


vylron of the golden candeltt e
euer ey
Che. iiij. Chapter.


And J fade: J haue loked / ¢ beholde:a cans


deikiche al olgolde /w a boll bpd it ahi vi.


lampes therim / a bpd euerp lampe bij. ſtaln


And i oipue trees therby/one vps che rigge


Cyne of d bol / a the other byonthe lelt lrde.


Sog anlwered/e lpane to the angel g tal⸗


hed with me / lapenge: O my loꝛde what are
thele : Che angel that talked with me ante
.

e be:; jaye: Ho / my loꝛde. 2
fhoerey/@tante onto me: Chi is the wozdo0F


5
was in het wyngeg (o they had wyngeß 9


weight in Sozobabels bande. Ehe. bij. eyes .


are the Lomdes whych go thozow the whole
worde. chen antwered J lapde onto him:
Whatare thete i. olpue trees pon the right
Klelt ipde of the candelſttcke J dpa ne moze.
duer / a ſapde onto him : what be there ij. oliue
Daüches which thozo ötwog oldẽ pppes)
emptpe the lelues in to the golde: he antwe⸗
redine a ſapd:khnoweſt thou not / what thele
e

t
bekoꝛe the ruler or the whole earth,


at
ant wered. J te a fipege
ge /a. x. cubytes bꝛode.


b

fothat Houte of che thefe,
tothe houle ok him / that kallelp Cweareth
bpmpname: a cha remapne in bis houle /e
cunlumeit / with the tynibze a ones ther ·
ok. chen the angel that talked with me / wẽt


 foith/sfayne oneomestife vpthrne eyes and


ſe / what this is orth koꝛth. Ind z lapde:
ahn kalt genden amen
golnge out. Pe lapde mozeouer: Suen thus


are they(thardwelfvpon the whole earth) to m


ioke ppon. And beholde / there twas lylt bp a
talent of leade:a lo / a woman lat in the myd⸗
deſt ol the mealure. Ind he lapde: this is bn⸗
godlynefie. Do he caſt her in to ß myddeſt of


the mealure / andthꝛewe the lompe of leade ry


bpintoan whole,
Chen ive I vpmrne eyes /a towed: g be-
olde / there came out. ij, wemen / athe wynde


Ipke the tpnges of a ſtorneſa ther Ipe op &


Zalswprte tho belles / wypch hriles Zach. lu.
alte Inthe (pple chalet were veabe Spon tia,


hozle/ in the fecod charet were blacke hole /
in che thyde charet were twhpte hoꝛle /in the
Fourth charet were holes or dyuerke colours
e bkronge. Then cpake J/and lapde vnto the
Angell that talcked with me:D Loꝛde / what
are thele: Che angell ancwered / lard onto
me: Chete ate 5. iii. windr of z heaue wht
be come fozeh to ade befoze § ruler of all
earth Chat with the blache hole wẽte into
whelande or che north / the wörte kolowed
them / and the dpekled holes wente forth to
ward $fouth. chefehortes were very lirög /
4 wenke out: and Coughtto go and take their
tourney ouerthe whole earth. Andbe kapde:
get pou hence / ago thoꝛow the worde. Do
cher wente thozow out z worde Chencned
bponme / and lpake onto me / lapinge:be⸗
olde / chele that go towarde the noꝛth / Malt
Pll my wzath in the nozth countre.
And the worde of ? Lozde came onto me ¢
Caving:Cate ok the pzeloners that are come
from Babrlon:nameip) Heldat / Cobiah and
data: and come thou che lame dape / and go
to the houle of Zofia the fonne of Do⸗
phonp. Chentakegodde ard lyluer / z make
crownes therok / andlet them bpon the head
ol Jelua the tonne ot Joledeh / che hye pelt /
and tpeakevntohym: Thus kapeth 5 Lode
okhoſtes: Beholde the man whole name ts


Zach.il v.


e Val xp.


R *
imerxa.
b. b. bi. vd.

dh. ex.


: en be⸗ 5 2
: . 0 thozow an hook of men ner thozow treaty,
F bib ere ee the Lose « maden ear cbebeaut.cren
e x bare beide art thou/thou mu moun dena bergen ernte meer. ate neger tang twltynt
ECHfthetaweandhyecttateotcwitondectyeri, arne! before Sozobabel-thou mut ne mar cher winchele beate d mealure⸗Andhelerde Sf mertpe. The


gure os Felina the prette. A pꝛophecpe at Chꝛiſt.
: Gabeiis. chapter.


lothat men thal crie vnto


en. And he wal bzinge v lt ſtone
de euen. And he wal bz j nuch
good lucke. 2 25


chẽ an houle. which when it is
mealure albeter there cab place. =


. people ne TE ane the vbcuacye oF the


Che. bij Chapter.
an. Itbap⸗


re not there the wozdes / whrch the Lorde
fake 11 brs 0 ‘when


Zacha. vſb c.
exob. v9. c.
and pooze no 5
let no man pmagen euelagapnſt bis bother
inhis hert.Heuertheles ther woldenot take
hede / but turned their backes / and dopped
their cares thac ther chulde notheare: yee
they made theirhertes as an Adamant gone
6. Wet. .d. lest they Muldebeare chelate and woꝛdes /
whichthe Londe ofhoottes bent in hs bole
{ppete bythe pꝛophetes atozetyme.
iwherkoze the Wozde o Hoottes was be⸗
Drpwzoth at then. And cus taff come co nat
le / that Ipke as he Spake and they wowenot
heare: een cothey cryed/ and J wolde not
heare (lapeth the L onde of hoottes but ca.


tb
1 teredthemamonge all Gentiles whom they
bn


ewe not. Thus the ande wag made lo de⸗ Fuen


folate / $ there traualedno maninitnether
folate 8 dacht pleataunt lame was bi.
terlx layed wate.

le vnto Jerulalee of
orate e
alting ofthe entiles.
che l.


th

1

ue

fuve thus fapeth the Lozde of hooſtes : wyl
turne me agayne bnto Ston / z wil dtwell in


err God / in treuth and
epustapcd the


ſidue of this people nomoze as a koꝛe tyme /
Capetl the Loꝛde of hooſtes / but they halbe
a lede ol peace. Che vynparde Hall geue her
krute / ß grounde foal geucber 4 wal e
heauens thal geue theit dew:a J Mall caule
the remnaunt of this people / to haue al theſe
in pollellyö. Audit Mat come to pale / b iphe C
as pe were a curle amonge the Heathen (D
pe houle ot Juda a pe houte of Acrael) ut lo
wil Zdelpuer pou / that pe walbe a bleapng:
kearẽ not / but fet pour handes be ſtronge.

For thus lapeth the Loide or hoottes : ty
ke as J deupledto punpſb pou / what tyme
as poure fathers prouoked me onto wꝛath /
Capeth the Loꝛde ok hooſtes / and tparebnot.
fo am I determed now in thele dayes /
foz to do well onto the houle of Juda chen
lalem / cherkoꝛe keare ye not. Now thethins
ges that ve Gall do / ate thele: Speake
euery man the treuth onto bys neghboute/ eybe. e
—.— . oe . and magen. Zach. 55.0

pour Portes / none of pou ꝓmagn / e⸗
uel in his hert agapntt his neghboure / and
loue no kalle othẽs: £07 all chele are ? thyn-
ges chat A hate / kapeth the Lose. And the
wopde ofthe Loꝛde of hoottes / came vnto
me /lapenge thus lapech the Lorde of hoo.
ſtes: Che kaſt ofthe fourch moneth / the kalk
okthe kpkth / the kalt of the feuenth / and the
kalt o⸗ te tench wan be fope nde


ch dempl


Ol Jerulalem and
e.
and pꝛolperous hye fraſtes vnto the houle
oF Juda: Only loue the treuth a peace.
2 Thus lapech the Lose of hooſtes: Chere
wall vet come people/ andthe inhabrters ol
go, manrchttestandthepthatdwel in one atre
b. atball goto another, tapenge: aap tet vs g/
a pꝛae befoze the Loide / let vs leke § Lozd
oF bookes / wil go with vou: ee moch peo⸗
ple a mightie Heathen Mall come ¢ leke the
Loꝛd of hooſtes at Jeruſalem / ¢ to pꝛaye be
koze the Lond. Thus lapeth the L oꝛd of hose
ſtes Inthat tyme thal ten menlout ok alma⸗
ner of languages of the Gentples) take one
Jewe by che hemme ok his garment / a laye:
we will go with vou / to we haue herde / that
Sod is amonge pou.
Che conuerfionof the Sentples. Che comminge
of; it einge on an Alte.


Che. ix Chapter.


Straungers (hal dwel at Acdod / a as foz
ze chattu/ the the pepde of  Pytlittines, J Wall rote it out.
Kerker of C heir blonde wyll ¥ take awa pe fd their
wel Jools / mouth and their abhominacpos Ed among


 Whlchtbey we their teeth. Khus they Mal be left to our cod


i wöte locate pee they Walbe ag a pꝛynce in Juda /ꝰ Acca
ron like as Jebulp. And to wyll J compate
mp boute rounde about Wmy men of warre
Goinge to and fro: that no oppzeloure come
bpon them eny moze. Foz that haue Z lene
now with myne eyes.

Reiovce thou greatly / O daughter Sold

be glad / O daughter Jerulalem. Foz lo / thx

king commeth onto the / euen the ryahtuous

8 Saupoure: Lowly a lmple ts he be rx⸗

beth vpon an ace / a bpon the koale ot an alte

wil rote out the charrettes from Ephraim

Athe bozle trom Jerulalem / the batel bowes

Cchal be deſtroped. He Wal geue ß doctryneot

ace vnto p Peathen / a his daminxon Mal-

be kr the one fee to the other / a fd the lou ⸗
des to the endes of the woꝛlde.

Chou allo thoꝛow the bloude ok thy coue⸗

naunt: halt let thx prefoners out ol the pitte


Ol ʒathary.


wherin is no water. Curne vou nowtothe
ſcrongeholde / ve p be in pꝛelon / a longe doe
tobe delpuered: And this dape z bꝛönge the
wozde / J will rewarde the double agarne
Foz Juda naue I bent out as a bowe ko me
and Ephꝛaimhaue Akrlled. Thy ſonnes (O
Sion) will J rale vp agaynt the Giehes/ a
male the as a gtauntes 1wearde ie Loge
God ſbalbe ſene aboue them / and his dartes
wall go forth as the lightenynge. Ehe Loꝛde
God Hali blowe the krompet / ¢ Mail come
koꝛth as a ſtoꝛme out ot the touth. 5
Che Lowe okhooſteg thal dekende them / 2. 5
they hall contume and deuoure and tubdue Geb
them with dynge tones, Ther Wall dzynche *
Frage / as it were thoꝛow wyne. Cher chalbe
Epllenithe 5 balens g ag 5, ones of pauls
ter. Che Lopdtheit Gon Halociyuce themin
Soave as p flock of his people: fo § ftones
OFbIs Sanctuary ſhalbe tet vp in his lande.
D how pꝛolperous a goodlp a thinge Has
ber Che come hal make p vonge nen chea /
reful/ethe new wyne the mapdens.
Che people is moned to requipre the doctryne of
brs thot the Lord, he Lebe nomen) to —
comkqpth the poule of Ilrael.
¶ che x. Chapter.
Uare the Lozde then by tymes to 8
Wilacue vou 5 latter rapne/ lo als wane thi ft
Monde mabe cloudes/ a geue you dave ind 1 25
arne phough ko all the tntveace June >.
Ok the kelde: Foz vapne is p antwere of Zvolg. *
Che lothlapers ſe ives ) a tel but vaprie dea
mes: comkoꝛth that they geue / s nothunge
wozth.Chertoze gothepattrape line afloche
ol chepe / d ate troubled / becaulethephaue
ho thepherde Wp wiothkundelpleskureis
moued ache weyberdes e J wyllprter che Sierra ae
goates. Fos the Loꝛde of hootkes will gract⸗
oudly viſet his locke / che houle of Juda / and
holde thẽ as a goodly fapze hozte in p batell. 8
Out of Zuda fall come the helmet the nale Saule. d.
the batelbowe / a alithe princes together. Bene lis. ir. u
‘They ſbalbe as the giauntes / which in dba ·
tell treade downe the mpze vpon the ſtretes.
Chey ſball kraht / koꝛ the L. ode halbe wyth
them los the hozumen chalbe conkounded.
J will comfoste che houle ol Juda / and C
preferue the houle ot Joleph. J wyll curne
them allo / co: pitie the:¢ they (ail be lyke
ag they were / when J had not caſt them ol.
Foz iche L onde am their God / and wylhea⸗
te them. Ephzaim chalbe as agraunt / and
their herte ſhalbe cherekull as thozow wyne:
pee their chyldzen challleit / and be glad / a
their herte (hal reiopce inthe Code. J welt
blowe koz them agather them together / koꝛ
I wyl redeme them. hey hall increace as
chey increaled afore. J will lowe thé amõge
the people / that they may thyncue vpon me
.li. in karre


Jerulalem. The Prophep sf eeualem, Ol zachary. till.


in karte countrees:thep wwalllxue withtheir at otchemp and tole the. xrr. tyluers pens / grope all toch peopie as come agayntt ge: thorotw the frie / nnd wil cience them as thet. Berta.


chridzẽ / a turne agapne. J wyil bꝛyng them and calt them tõ the potter in the houle of ruſalem. Moꝛeouer / vpon thehoule of Ba. Cyluct is clentedipee a trye the Iphieas golde Siren n
agapne allo kromche lande of Egypte / and Lose chen bake mp otper Baral n E uid ¢ bponthecpteüns or Ferutale/twyll 2 isteped.Chers Mall cher call vps myname Sena
gather the out ol Airia. J wyll carpe hein melp wo) that J myght iowle the bother. S 4 Poure out che fete of grace. and pꝛaper (to fod beta anette Yopll tape is mp

Dioche lande of Calaad a to Libanus ¢ they headbetwprte Guds andj racl.and $7070 ent that ther Wall joke bree ther haue people Andther Hall laße: Loꝛde / my Goo,


n qagetianyrige ofthe cbiikebsinber the gure
bekennt begotten donne: ver c Nek He ebnen fen e
Be toy for hom / ag men are tory foe heir he. fili] Chapter
Art bee ee oe: et Home cö⸗
Chen Mali there be ageedté mournpng ‘ .
Gevutatent /Tphe as the ben pat
„ Bdremnonin the Felve of Haggadon. Ad P
ine lande Wall bewaple euery Kynred b 55 a ,
~ felues: he tipnecd of d hohle of Baut thE weme 5
kelues alone / o their wpues bp them kelufß: halt ae cyte ſwall ga awaye into capty⸗


wall wante nothynge. Pe wall goo bpon fard onto me: Cake to b alcoꝶ ſtate ofa too. 0
the lee ok trouble / a imytẽ the ſee waues: lo lich chepherde ko lo J will rapfe vp a hep .
E all the depe loudes ſhalbe dzpedop. Che herde in the lande / which Mall not leke after
Lueg, proudebootting of Baur habe cad downe / the thrnges that be lol ner care tos loch as
eth. xtr. g che ſcepter ot Egypte Mall be tale aware. goattrape-be wall notheale the wounded / 0
Awyll comfozte them in the Lord / that they be Mall not noꝛych thethynge that is whole: .
Maye walcke inhis name / lapeth the 1070, bare eee P lech Li Coch as be kat / a
be reruccyd of the tepie. Che cart of the kapth⸗ 0 peces.
iscdmpttedtoAhzCroprhetacher.a greuous O Idols Hhepherde / Pleaueth $ locke.
e D as Che Cwerde Hall come bpd bys 2 vpũ


Che. x. Chapter. eye. His arme ſhalbe cleane Che kinred of p Houle of Pathan the telues urte / a. [ |

2 e ens thet 1 err Walbetojebipnves alone / a their wyues by them laura carped dut og the cpte: After chat Malt the
ſche krie mare contume thy Cedze C. Ot the bearuecron andbuploinge agape of ge Brnred of h Houte of Lett che Celues alorſe“ Lozdego 02th to tiabtagapnt thore Wea⸗

4 trees. Howie ve Arzre trees £03 ruatem, : x thei wrueg byehetclues: Che hynred OF the as inen ble to krßht in d dape ok batte.
rn hehe Cedze is kallẽ / rec all & pꝛoude che. xl. Chapter. „ ſdhehoule of Demeithe feiues alone their Chen wan bm fete kände ps the mol olye
are walted aware. Bowle (O ve one trees Beheur burthen which the Loe . es bp chem kelues gn lite maner / alice nete chat Heth ops che ka (ioe of Jerulalk.

ok Baalan) fog che myghtre ſcronge wodis bath deupled oz Firaclt. C bus 3 „other genergcpög / euerpchone bythe tees And ttottt olpuete Waltciene intwoſealt⸗
cut downe. Men mape heave the cepherdes lapeth the Loꝛde / which ſpꝛed the Ec. rl. e. aui , dAloneſand their wpuesbpthem kelues. warde ¢ wellwarde /fo cha there Hulbes
mourne / koꝛ their glozy is deſtroxed. Men ſheauens abzode / lapde the kounda· c. 2. Flv. b. EME the well or gente and trueth Cbzid. DE the Freate vallepig the hale mont Mailremoue?
mape heare the iyons whelpes reare fo; the cpon orche earth and geueth ma the bꝛeath See. g. b. gleane xpboanince of Joolnceyers of falte prophetes, kowarde the nozth / athe other towarde the
pode OF Joꝛdane is waſted awaxe. ok pte: Beholde / J wyil make Ferutaiem a Geche. xih. Chapter. ſouth. And pe Hall fe onto the valley or my


hat tyme Mall p houle ot Da- hylleg / kor che valley of the billes Hall reach

ſulhündthe cpteling ok Jerulalem onto A cal. y ce fle Mall pe/Ipheas ve fled £07 Amon ta

Haw an open well / to wath of che earthquahe in the dayes ol Oliah Hinge

ume and önclennelle. And then ok Zuda. And the Loꝛdr my God hall come

ch che . ve of holtes) J wyll dettrope gall fayntes with him. Jn that dape wall tt

the nameg at les out of the lande to chat not be iygbt / but colde d kroſt. This Mall be’

thepchall nontoze be put in remembzaunce. that lpecpall dave Which is Unownie onto ß

Astor ihe tulle pꝛophetes alto a the one Lord: nether dave nernyght / but aboute

tlene ſpꝛete / halltakethe out or d lande: the euenpnge tymeit Malbe ipght. nthat, arcrpaes

So that yt wsiy oF hE prophecve and moze / tyme wwalrchere d waters of pre nine Cea 1200

és th. b. bis awne kniher and mother that begathym / krom Yerufatcmn:the hare parte o€ them to of el.

not 2 delpuer them. ali the hozles of the people with bipndnefie, „ Spall fave tuto him: chou Male dye / ko thou warde the ealt lee / a the other halk towarde v» Towarde
Imyptelk kedde d daughter chepe (a pooꝛe Anothepsences of Juda tall faye in their fpeakett ipes vnder the name ok the Lozde: the vttermoſt lee / a Mall contynue both lo- the eatt lee ang
floche verely)a tone onto me two ſtaueguhe hertes: Che tnbabpters of Jerulalem Mall F ao bee bys Aine father and mother that begat mier a wynter and the l. oꝛde hm ſelk halbe .
one J called iouynge mekenelſe / che other J geue meconfolacyon in the Lozde of holtes a m / wall wounde him / whẽ he be london kynge ouer all the earth. , Wall the word
called wo / o lo z kepte the chepe. Che hep. their God. In that tyme wyll à make p pꝛin⸗ . ndthen hall thole pꝛophetes be confoun= At s tyme wal chere be one Lowe only / ouer.
berds deſtroped J in onemoneth/foz3 might ces ol Juda lyze an hote burnpnge ouen wW Ded/euerp one ok bis oylion when bepzophes andhys name (halve bur one. Men thaligog

M.. xxh. . not d wape with the / nether had theß en de⸗ wodd / and lpkea crellet of kyꝛe amongethe Abb c. ppeth: nether call ther weere fackclothes aboute the whole earch ag bpon.a elves td
Inte in me. Chen lapde J: well kede vou no. ſtrawe: lo that they thall cocume all the peo- auby.t.0, any moze / to dylceaue men with all. Buthe Gibeato Remimon/¢ krö the Louth tozeru⸗
moꝛe / the thynge that dpeth / jet it dye: a that ple rsunde aboute them both bpon Ae wall be küpne to faxe: am no Pꝛophete: J lalem She ſpalbe let vp / a inhabitedin her
wyll periche / ler it pericd/ let che remnaũt bande andthe left . Jerulalem alte walbe nan buthanve man / kor fo am taught by place:frd Ben Famyns pozte/onto d place


Chuslapeth the Loge my God: Kedethe cuppe offurket) onto all che people that are
Mepe ol the laughter / whych walbe dayne rounde aboute her: ee Juda hym keike allo
ok thole that pollelſe them: pet theytake it koꝛ albe inthe lege agaynſt Jerulalem. At the
no lynne / but they that lellthem / caye: Che lametyme well J make Zerulalem anheux
ozo be thancked /i am rich: te their awne (tone toꝛ all people / lo ę all Coch as litt it vp /
ſhepherdes (pare them not. Chertoze wyll J chalbe toarne a rente / z all the people of the
nomoze (pare thole that dwell in the lande earth salbe gathered together agapnſt it.
(lapeth the Loꝛde) but io / Jwyll delpuerthe n 5 dape / lapeth the Loꝛde / Jwill mate 2

Bpeoplefeuerp mg into his nerghbours had / ailboztes abalthed / a thole that ryde vvon
and in to the hande or his kyng: p they maye them / to be out of their wyttes. J wyll open
impte the lande / and out oftheir haͤdes wal mne eyes vpon the houte of Juda / ¢ Cmpte


kate / euery one the lech of his neyghboure. habptedagayne: nãmelx in the lame place Eco pouth vp. And yk it be lapde bn. ol the kyꝛlt poꝛte / and pnto the coꝛner porte.

tol 5 brake . — 7 & 1 kohlmehomw camethele woc then in thyne and kremthe tower ok Hananeel/ onto the

/ Impahtdiranulſche couenaunt / which Che Wozde thall pꝛelerue the tentes of 1 Cannes? He ſhall ankwere Thus am 4 wol: nyngeswene preties.crhere thallmen dwel /
miade with all people. And toit was bzo⸗ Juda like ag a toe tyme:ſo that the gelte. Huswle. de in the Houle ofmpne gione krendes, and here halbe no moze curlinge / but Je.
ken in that dare. che houle ol Dani and the glozy of che citee Fg Aryle gp innulwearde ppömp wepherde/ rulglem Wallbe fately inbabyten. hrs

Chen the pooze tymple chepe that had a Cyns ol Jerulalẽ halbe but iptie regarded 1 amopon th ince of m people / laxeth? Malbe the plage / wherwith the Lozdewplt
Cyetpectesntome/hnewe therby / that it was in comparifon or the glozx of Juda. Jn that uod ok i impte the wepherde / and empte all people/ thathaue cought agapntt
the worde ofthe L.o7d. Ind J karde onto the: dave wallche Lorde dekende the cytetyns ok Feta. the thepe knie Cealsed ab zope / ardlo wrll gerulakem⸗Damelpſtheir flew chan cofume,


2 turne np lande eo che lrele ones. Andit awape/chough they ſtande pon cheir Fete:

d. Miles atte (taper he Loge) that their eres atbe cozrupt in their holes ſand

„ Dim all che lane two pg 3 yalbe roted ct / thelrtunge challconlume in their moulh.
but the copene parte Mall rezayne oot In that dape wall ö Lozde maße a greae

‘Sim che came, ch zd parte wall J Bagge. Kenpcion amonge chen / Cocgat anem al


yr ve thrncke it good / bern bythermp pꝛx⸗ Ferulalem:fothat the weaker then amöge
ceip no / then leaue. So cher wayed bone them ſhalbe as Mautd.andthe boule of Da
xxx. luer pens / p value that J was pꝛyied ud chalbe Iphe as Gods boule / and as the
at. andihe Loꝛde fayde onto me:caſt it vnto “Angell ot the Loꝛde betoze them.
K potter(a goodly pace for me to be valued che fame tyme wen Ago aboute to dee


N Ilratl.


take another by the hande / giape his baocs
bpd the babes of his nepahboure, Juda Wall
kyghbt allo agapnſt Jerulalem / a the goodes
ol all che Heathen Halbe gathered together
rounde aboute:golde and tyluer anda very
great multitude of clothes. and lo Hail this.
plage go oder bozfes /mules /caniels/adles /
Aren ne oe * the e
vonder plage was. Euerꝝ one g remaps
pep eben of aus people buch cam agarnſt
fetulatem / fall go bp yeatly/ to woachrpe
kyngelcuen the Loe ot hoktes) a tokepe
the teatt or tabitnacles. And lone what gr⸗
heracpon vpon each goeth not bp to Jeru⸗
ſalem / toꝛ ta Sooztbpppe the kyngeleuẽn the
Loꝛde of boites) ops the tame wall come no
kapne. It the npnreg of Egypte go hot bp /g
come not ic hall not rapne pon thé nether.


his chalbe che plage wherwich § .
Seiten e ne


kepe che tedtt oktab¢rnacies:vee this walbe
e
att 0 M gonot vp to kepe p feat
ok tal cles. >

At that tyme. wall che ryoyng geer or the
hozles be boip ontothe Lozde / the kettels
inthe Lozdeshoute thali be iphie the balens
befoze the aulter: pee all the kettels in Jeru
faicm and Juda / walbe holy onto the Lon
ol hoſtes:and all be dig ollerynges /
wall come take of th. cel beo a.
in. And atthat tyme there thal be no mo Ca ·


hanitesintheboute or the Lo de.


Scene. xh. c.
Aoma. ir. b.


e ende of the pꝛophecpe
an pried datas rt


¶ The boke of the
Prophet Patachy.
eee Chapters
sie heup burthe / wh


pt andthe tynne plage


The Prophecy


mul conte / chat the L oꝛde bath bꝛought
the lande ok Ilrael to great bonoure Shuld


not a lonne honoure his tather/ a a ſetuaunt


bus mater? It be now a father/ where is

mPHe bonoufc⸗ k J be the Lozde where am

te pa the Lorde of bodes, 8

. Mdtwto vou prettes/p delpple nir name.

nd ye pe tapesteherin haue we delprikothr . ong
name In tyre / that ve-*ofie pnckene bse for wears
Hpotimpne aulter And pt ye wylltape:wher iodo anp
lil haue we offered any onctene thinge vnto be eit
the? inthis that pe fapertheauleer oF onder Sehe
mende dende ye off pier doe bah e


2


rums of


J „eneetpis


The t
. Unipne Feates audit wal cleue fatto:
And pe wall dune agent


ent vnto you? that mycoue ⸗


Haunt which J made W Leut / myght Bande
dapeth the Lolde of hoſtes.
Imade a couenaunt ot ile a peacewrth
bimthys Jgaue bpm/that he mrght lande
thatve of m̃e: and lo he bpd Feave me / and bad
4g We Name tnreuerence. Che lawe oltrueth
. was inthis mouth / and there was no wicked
pincartac, ue fr Founde imbie ppeg. He walked with
MACE mein peace and equpte / andded turne nia-
pone aware from their Cynnes . Los the
pieſtes lippes Mulde be Cure knowledge / 8
men mage lekethe law at bis mouth / ko be
18a medaunger ofthe Lozde or holte. But
as foꝛ you / yẽ are gone clent out of wape /
and haue cauſed $ imultytude to be offended
at che lawe: pe haue bzoken the couenaunt
/Lapety the Low okhoſtes. Cherkoꝛe
‘gril J alto make you to be defpifen / and to
ok no reputacpon amonge all the people:
Decaute pe haue hot kepte mp wapes/ but
bene parciall in the lawe.
A, Halte went all one kather⸗ Bath not one
en l. (Gad madebs: wüpdoth euer one of bs then
uch bb. bogen eme ee fo 1. 1—
nienaunt of oure kathers: Now
Gi Offendev: peethe abbompnacponts done in
v. elle. a.
Leal. yl. i.


aeg eee e eee
4 e
God. But the Lowe mall deſtrope che mä ?
doth this pee boch the maſterandthe Ccolar)
out of the tabernacle of Jacob / bpm 8
vp meat bntothe Loꝛde of
holten. Now hae ve brought it to tyrs
agarne / chat che aulter of the Loꝛde
couered with eeares wepynge and mour⸗
nynge : cothat J wyll nomoze regarde the
meatofferpng / nether well J receaue 07 ace
cepte enpthpnge at Trae ano pepe
fapeswherfoze? Euẽ 2 99 as the
Lozde made a couen aunt hetwixte the ¢ 5
3p wife of thy youth / thou batt delpiledhet: et
is che thyne awne cõpanyon a maried wyle.
Sodpdnot' the one / a pethad he an 95


J berpze, cellent tpzece. ighat dy then the one?


ECiyeatenynges:
cersof the people.
Che. ij. Chapter. ;
Ndnow(D pe pꝛeſtes) this com ·
‘fii Maunbermenttoucheth you: yr re
wel not heare it / ner regarde it / to
geue pgloꝛx vnto my name / laieth


the Lope dehockes I wyli lende a cure vpd went y
reu /a wyl curſe youre bledynges: pee ate 4
them wyll J vf ve do not takebede. Behold /
Fur fede / and caũ donge
n poure taces: cuen the donge ot Pau fos
lempne


= tees mb tobe fonghe
. A ote nell co Pute Cppete/@ tettnoman del


tet: paompled ot God. Cherfoze


pple $ wirft «six pouth. Ak thou hateſt her
put ber awapr / fapeth the Loz God ol Al
Fadl and geut hr & clothinge fo che lcoꝛne /
Cayetd the Lo, de or hottes . Loke well then
- topouretpzete / and delpplehernot. Ye
greue the Woꝛde with youre woꝛdes / and pet
ſape: wherwich all haue we greuedhym⸗
ntbis / p ve ſaye: all that do eüell are good
tight OF God atid Coch pleate him. Oz

els is the God that puntHeth?


ſtrauge aware


Ok Malachy,


denger of che Lande
Sehe dre oF the Lowe ieee ie


C che. ij Chapter.


pee euen
whom ve longe koꝛ.

Beholde he cõmeth / ſayeth the Loꝛdeot
hoſtes. But who mape abyde the dave ol his
commyng: who chalbe able to endure / whẽ
he appeareth; for he is lpnea goldimpthes
Erze /a lyke watthers lope. pe Hall ſyt hym
downe to trye andto clente § tyuer /he chall
pourge the chyidzen ot Leut /a puritie them
Ipke ag gold ¢ fpluer: that they mape being,
meatofferpnges vnto ) Loꝛde in rightuoul⸗
nes. Chen Wall the offerynge of guda ¢ 9
rulalem be acceptable vnto the Loꝛde / lyne
as krom the begynnynge and in the peares /
atoze tymie. 4 woll come a punich por / and
Imi Cele will be a twyt wytnes agaynt the
witches / agaynſt the adudutererg / aͤgaynſt
kalle lwearers: per and agarnſt thole/ that
wrongeoudy kepe backe the byzelynges
dewtr: whych bere the wyddowes a the ka⸗
therlelle / a oppzetie the ſtraunger / and keate
not mel ſapeth the Lojde of Poſtes. Foꝛ J
am the 1 eve? chaunge nor /r ve. D chr. dente rel
dien egacoby til not leaue oke are gene iy eg. bn,
ompne odinaũces /g lens $ tyme 5
ol pour koꝛtathers haue ve not hepte them.

Cure younow onto me o J wntturne 44
me onto ron Capeth the Kadegt holes: pe Zs
ſaye: iw herin Hal we tune? Shulde a man
ple kalchede and difceate with God as ye ve
kallbede and dylceate wyth me: Vet ye taxe
vherin vle we difceate wyth the? In Cithes
andheaue offeringes . Chertoze are pe curs deut. rr.
led with penurx / becaulẽ ye dilembie with aas ea.
me / all the forte of zou.

Binge every & ithe in to my barne / that
there mape be meat in myne houle: and pꝛo⸗·
ue me withall (lapeth the Loꝛde ofhoottes )

PEF will not open the wyndowes or heauen
vnto you / and poure you outa bieding with
plenteoulnelle. V ee q thal repꝛoue the cõlu⸗
mer foz poure ſa kes to that he chal not eate
bythe krute of youre grounde / nether thal §
vrnparde be baren in the kelde / tapeth the
Loꝛde of hooſtes: In ſo moch that all people
wall lape / that pe be bleſeed / co ve ſhall be a
plealaũtlande / ca peth the Lone of haoſtes.

Je Speake harde woꝛdes agaynſt me /
lapeth the Loꝛde. Ind vet pe faye : what
haue we fpokenagayntt the ye haue laped.

It is but loſt ſaboure / to ſerue God!

What pꝛollthaue we for hepynge hys com: 9
maundementes /and ko: walnynge bb .


cher which d 4
vpꝛkoz theytempte God/andpet elcape. multtplte as the fat calues .Ye tall treade
But theythat keare God / laye thus one downe the bngodly: foz they Malbe Ipke the
to another: the Lozde contydereth and hea⸗ alſhes vnderthe foles of youre fete / in the
reth it. Yee it is betoꝛe hym a memoꝛpall dape that J chall make / fapeth the Loꝛde of
bone / wipten to; loch as leare the Loꝛde / 4 hobſtes.
vemembzehis name. Undinthe darethnt g Rememhee che lawe ot gpoles my fer. den 5.
wyll make (lapeth the Loꝛde ok hottes) ther uaunt / whych J commytted onto bym in
Waälbemyne atone pocexon and J well fas Deb toz all Arai / Auteade run Ela n anz
ubure them /Ipheag a man fauoureth bys. dinaunceg. Beholde J will lende vou Elias b. *
awne tonne / chat doth him lerupce. Curne the prophet: bekoze the commynge ot; dave
ee, “antettemaaeunte eoek
prte the ous ngodiy: be⸗ .
kwirte günther lerueth God / andhem hae chlddzen ache berkesorthechrms %


bokes called Apo .
sgt a aera


e comen rand,


Wu rpiß. a. lerueth bim not. to their kathers / J come not
Foz marck / che dare commeth that chall and impte the earth with

burne as an ou: and all the pꝛoude / pee and curtynge.

all loch as do wickedneſſe / Walbe ſtraw: and

the dape thatis foztocome/ Wal burethem che ende okthe prophecy ot ꝙpalachr:
ppllapeth 5 L onde or hooſtes) lo that it was and conkequentix of all the
leaue them nether rote ner bzaunch. e.
*


Machabees.


Je Fyatt boke ok tye MBachabecs,
She bone a the Machabecs,


To the Reader,


N contpderacpon that the bowesbefore are founde in the he.
e ee der wer wan werden genf eee
4 ipha o be Leave Mot openip gin comen /

asit were in ſecret and aparte) ate nether kounde inthe Pebzuenoz in the doddeth . . i 2
at ſchawem which ronges ter auc nee Longe Dene maten ie dente Sica onnc ibe Rooyen eee tpagDuigun war prog Dp the
were bapplp che bone of Dapience) tuber vpon it were now very -hardeto Tobin Fern en dre Ser bw bother “sonae, Wozouerthe postets g00z¢ epers
erde them: and that altothep ate not receauen nd; takertas teand Vacherin. HON bp Booze @ p Mügktip co p none wet


¶ Th | thera i aal,
Thethyzde boke seeparcocsstoem eres oto; wervyaye
wenn .


: ‘vepapze d

votouye CALI / as well of the Pebzucsas of t e Churche / as D. 5

a Plo earat these seu adpor,ehtibepuap te betecbe ¼ ˙—
mape knowe oF which bones witnes
S. Hierome tpea


Ought Cobe nter an OFtabich ot Ko the tere
e vt 01 L
ange ofthe boke of L bith (which IB Aporapbr arch „ig the auto


be Fyre chapter.
MV Jollas helde the


ea of Caller in Jeruſalem


byllages and pourc mize org pars as


out ok his ſtandrnge ¢ferupce:foz their bꝛe⸗
thꝛenlthe Leuites ſpꝛepared foz them. Thus
were allthrngd perkourmed / that beionged
to the oller pnge of the Loꝛde. Inthatdaye
ther helde che Paſſeduer / z olfred thankolte⸗
rpnges belyde the lacrilyce ot the Loꝛde / ace
cogdpng top cõmaundemẽt of nyng Zonas.

So d chyldꝛẽ of Alrael which were then
pꝛelent helde an bonozable Padeouer /a the
keaſt ol lwete bꝛead. vij.dares lõge. Yee ſoch
à Paſleouer was not kepre in Jitaci / trõ the
tyme ofthe Pꝛophet Samuci, Andalt the
Hiyngs of Flraet helde not loch an Caſter / as
this which byng Jolias helde / aß prettes, ö
Leuiteg / the Fewes a all Alrael/ ot allthẽ ß
were at Zerulalẽ. And in p Tui. pere ofp rat
gne ol Jolas was this Paleouerhept. und
‘Wa parfecte herte dydkyng g ollas oꝛoꝛe all


a.


Hpnge Dauidthe Bynge of Alrael hath o2- bys wozches before p Lorde a Stypngcs b
dened / a accodynge as Spalomonhis lonne were wzptee or him in times patt/cocerning
5 1 ert fe 9 5755 6 1 0 10 Labi ry auen —
‘ oferupce in the temple /accowynge tothe L ode befoze all people) a p Coughtnotthe 7
1 tr, 0. e. T. chennörch * 5 oping aaidribucyo ofthe pancipalimen  iojbe oF Bach YSteeral yee l. Pr re
1 Fete anthougtze he cpane the worde ok which ate appopnted out ofthe tribes to do actes of ivha Follas Pharao p yng ofe-
Li certen/openedby the Nꝛophetes 8 fetutce fos thecy ages bo raub) — 000
a leouct/apzepare 2 bout biech , Euphꝛates /a J ollas wet tomete him Che
rile hens Allie, on nch aboaccompngetotye commaundemene of Centtheayng dr egypte btw Jost
ser if ‘tote re ene nent oat ered rope ely
n . ‘op people h wasfou as gaue. xxx Jam not tent ofthe Lone to tyaht agayn
teatteth not in the lawes of the Ipuynge God: but in mennes ſenerons / iudgynge of thoutande of wepe lambes / kyddes /a goa⸗ dhe / ko: my warre is hpd Cuphzates,gothou


all Chenges sccopoenge to tyem/and leanyng toan oncerten pmagynac Firn ß ,


(of his kyngip ltberalite)gaue vnto the peos Jolas wolde not turne agapne vpõ his cha ·


e
g. c. e 5
S b ende 1 rs thac arc oncertentofelobe meceare melts fos he Patron beg auer l deten uno te waycot be papacy


ue two. M. herkenednot vnto the woꝛde ofthe pꝛophet /


ie bs and tealtenge bs in them / and ta e cure ancre there / as . ſhepe /a anhundꝛeth oren. Mozeouer / Je⸗ which he tolde him out ol the mouth of God/


„ F oute Cbzttten farch contpttety ‘not in doutefull fyinges butin plagne @ moo


wre


And whenthete thynges were brought to
patle/the Pꝛeſtes etheLeuptes ſtode good⸗
Ipin their oꝛdze / andhad the vnleuened bꝛed
thozowout the trybeg. Ind after the oꝛdꝛing
ok the pꝛynci pall men in the trpbes/thep of-
fered onto che Loꝛde in the lyght of the peo-
ple accoꝛdeng as it is witten in the bone ol
Woles /a kotheproſtedthe Eaſter lambe as
accomynge was. As fo the thanckeoſſringt
and the other / they dight them in kettels and
pottes /a fet them befoze the people w good
wyll and afterwarde befoze them lelues / a
the pꝛeltes Foz the pꝛealles olredthe Fatt)


7 ontas ¢ Spemetas/e Nathanael bzetyz¢) but pprcheda battapl agaynt him in > felo

et an rng petuatyon taken and contyanedbptncalible bear, 6 baletissrgcbclanmdolabangave thoes of Wagebeknvs hinter peacock
= Dpngecottcultrionge g help wn nean lernte alte tote Pattcouct, fpuethoufande wepe and Jonas Then lardde the hpnge bntahrsler⸗

5 Shuencyons contcary onto bem we mape ipue to fpucbundzeth bullockes. uatites:Carpme awape out ok the battayll /


ko; A am foze wounded. And immiedtatly bis
feruauntes toke him awape out of the front
ok the batta pl. Chen lat he vp ops ö feconde
chatett / canie to J erulalem / oped / and was
burped in his fathers ſepulcre. Ind in all Je
weythey mourned for Jolias / pee the rulers
allo with their wyues made lamentacyõ Foz
him vnto this pave: Andthys was donẽ euer
ſtyll in Ilrael.

Chele thynges are wzytten in the bone
ofthe ftozpes of the kynges ol Juda / name⸗
Ib allthe actes a mozches of kynge Joliag /
bis Byngly power ¢ matelty, bis önderſtan⸗

Laa. ij. dyng


The ij bole


ſtädingin tbelawe otczod / g what he dpd / ee
ching which are not us eite in the bole of;
king sok A trael e Auda. Andß peopletoke Jez
E chonias the fonne of Jonas and made
Brnge inũ eade ol Joũds bis father, whe he
Was pxxuj. veare cide. and he rng duer
Arael eyze monetheg. And the kyng ol Egr⸗
pte pnthim downe / that he ihuld not taigne
in Jerulalem/ and rapled bp a taxe ot the
people: / an. & dalentes of txluer a
Ine talent ol golde. Che kynge ol Egypt al
do made Joachimhis bpother ‘Synge oF Juda
S og thé of the krnges couns
Sell % the Beng him leite and Zaraceles his
bzotherſhe tobe the /a carted thé aware pe
oe into Egypt; A rue a twẽtie peare old
Soachinitnpe
lade or Juda and cee
foze the Lobe. Ater this / Gabuchodonoloz
the kpng of Babylon came vp / bounde him
with bandes ol pon / a caried him vnto Ba⸗
bild Habuchadonoroz allo tone all $ vedlels
that were halo wed in the temple of ? Lozd /
and all the Jewels / and caried eye vñto Ba-
bylon / a bzdught thé in to his atutie tẽple at
Babilon. Of his vnclenneß eongoolincs it
ig wittẽ in ß bote of} actes ol the kynges.
And Foachim his lonne raigned in his teas.
1 de: He was made hunge bepnge roth. veare
olde /e but thze m
in erut ibekoze ö
alter a peare/ Malu


bro row oute
27 oe" fapcth


rt. peare old nd be ralgne
Spbe deere ing kräht of ? L/,


nether


nhe was made ung in? h


Teate. J.


cOpatte of their holptẽple / a ſparedno bed /
ner oide / nether marden ner
ponge man: but cher were all delxueredinto
the power of the kynges of p Caldees (a all
the holp bettels of the Loꝛde andthe kynges
treatures tone they / z caried thé vnto abr
Lon. 48 for theboute of the Lope / ther bree
tt/@Bzabedowne the wales of Nerulate / ſet
b
Sand b201 cmeonay ‘
3 5 400 lane wihe twerde /
ſepca abilon.
hus became thex pietoners d ponde me
of the Benge of Babilen / tyll they tere dell⸗
uered g rargned foz them felues/* when the -
ones ofthe Londe were ed whech


phet Feremp/andtplithe ande had her tect:
namelp/all thetyme that it lape wayeſt: had
it reſt and qupetnes. rxvii.ptares.
U 0 tu.

eee eee

ter pave there letters ſende to Artaxerſes / which
accule the Jetres to bupldynge of the cptie: and foig
the bugldpng dypué of vntpil be. g peate OF Darius,

Che. ij. Chapter.


l por r a
$e


had pz. the mo
prophet! the oh init A
cepa che kynge ot Perlians
. ‘weptynge to be enge uz
whole realme/ſaxinge: Chus
kynge of Perfians Che Loꝛde or
Irael chat hre Loꝛde hath made me hynge
OF the lande aw commaunded me to bupide


K cared not fo the worden b were spoke vn bim an houfe at Zerulalé in Jewer. Ak chere


tobimbp tbe paopbee Feten at § mouth of
$ WLozde.aind where ad he had made an othe
bum e Habuchodonoloz / he mantwore
him felfe,


ces ok the Lozde God ol Ilrael. Che rulers
allo a heades ofthe people of the Loꝛde dyd
moch euell / a became vngodly/ moze then $
PDeathen /b. dekpledin al maner ot ab⸗


bp Pdefpled b holy céple org and


Lofde at IE. And the God of thett fa
thers meGaungers vnto thẽ to tur ·
ne them! Gto call he agarrie Rb their
Spnnes:fo2 be wolde lapne haue ſpared thé
G fo2 bis hoi tabernacies fake. Neuertheies/
ther badbis metaungers indetiGion: ¢ioke
what Hod fpake onto the by his pꝛophetes
they made but a tpoꝛte of it. & bidder on fo
Aonge teil 5 Loꝛde wat woth this people
fo2 theirbngodipnes / andtpli be caulcdthe


. © of h Caſdeet to come vp / which leid ‘yng
helt ronge men wehe lwerde / re euẽ in p


kel tr hym haupnge a tyineck h.
babert, J dle an gsa ormmnads.fplnec rich apes ote)


chy now of poure people / the L ozde be w


him / z go bp wich him to Jerulalem. nd all
tber chat dwell tounde aboute 8 place /thalt
elpe them / whether it be with golde / wyth
cc eber ares ate youghe
Aena che houfe of the Loꝛdẽ at
Chen $ pungpallmen out oe tbe trrbes
hen 6 pain pal 4 erbt


orllages of Juda and Beng, ode
bpsloorbepeppetes aloo tek ruled
the Lozbe had moued)togo vp / ato 1 5
the houle ofthe Loꝛde at Yerufaiem. And
hepthat were aboute them / beipcdthẽ wich
all maner of golde / andkrluer / and catelfal-
lo g with many Irberali gytteg / and chig dyd
buen Advofe pnb toas red thet
to.igng Cprtis allo bꝛougbt fozth the bel.
lelg and d mamentes that were halowed bn-
to the Kode (whpch Pabupononotog the
e ot Babilon had cariedawaye frog e.
eee eee Siok


tre try,
prompted them bete mouth of the pie FFE


dien dä.


OkEldꝛas.


and ymage and delpuered them to Mithꝛt ·

datus bis trealurer / A by bpm they were de⸗

Ipueredto Salmanalar $ debpte in Jewry.

And this was che nombze of thẽ: C wo thou⸗

Lande gl. illi. C.fyluet boules. xx. ſpluer

lens. xxx. baſens of golde ij. M. a. iti. C. vel

fels oc Cpluct/anda thoulande belpde. All ß

vellels or golde and ſpluerawere. h. M. viij. E

and. x. Cheſe were nombzed vnto Salma-

nalar /d them that were come agapne with

pm to Jeruſalẽ out ofthe captpuyte of Ba⸗
batons Pow in the tyme of Ange Artarer-
feg the Beng of Perla there men: Balemus
€ datug / Sabellius /Rathim? /Bal-
themus / Demenius the Scribe / z other that
dweltin Samaria a inother places onder
dompnyo therot / wzote a letter vnto Aynge

Arta xerles wherin ther complapned vnto

the Synge of them in Jewꝛy and zerulalem.

Che letter was made after this mance:

C. Or / thy teruaũtes Nathimus the tory
witer Sabellius the Scribe / e other iud⸗
ges ok the courte in Celolpꝛia a Phenpces.
Be it knowne a manpkeſt to oure Londe the
Arnge / pthe Jewes which are come bp from
vol vnto vs tnto the rebelpousa wicked ci⸗
die ſbegynne to buploe it agapne / aß walles
aboutẽ it / a to ſet vp che temple of the new.
Now ve this cytye à che walles therok be let
vpagapne / they call not only retule to geue
trybütes and taxeg / but allo rebel vtkerly
agapnt the Aynge. And Foz lomoch as they
take this in bande now aboute the tẽple / we
chought it realon / to thynke no lcoꝛne okit /
but to chewe it onto oure Loꝛde the Kyng /e
to certytpe him therof: to thintent that p it
pleate the Aynge / hemap caule it be fought
inthe bones of olde: ethou that fynde loche
warnynge wipttẽ / a thalt vnderſtande / that
thts cytiẽ hach all wave bene rebeliyous and
dilobedtẽt / that it hach ſubdued Aynges and
cptxes / and that the Lewes which dwell ther
in haue euer benea rebellpous / obſtynate /
vnkapthkull /a kyghtyng people / koꝛ $ which
caule this cytye is waſted. wherkoze now
we certyl pe dure Lodethe Rynge / p vl this
Cytpe be buyldede occupped agapne / and the
walles therok let vp a new / thou cant haue
no pallage into Celolpꝛia and Phenices.

Chen wrote the Rrngeto Rathtmus the
orp werter / to Balthemus to Sabelliuß
the Scribe / a to the other officers a dwellers
in Spꝛia and Phenpces / afterthys maner:

* baue red the epiſtle which thou lenteſt vn
do me / a haue commaundedto maße dtüiget
learch a haue founde? 6 the cptpe bath euer
tefpiten Kpnges / that the fame people are
dylobedient / and haue cauled moch warre /
chat myahty kynges haue raygned in Jeru⸗

lalem / which allo haue rapled vp taxes ol


Syria and Phenices. wijerkoze I haue cõ⸗
maunded thole people / that they call not
buploe the cptpe / that they male no moze irt
it / andthat they pꝛoceade no ſoꝛther with the


* buplopnge :fo2f0 moche as it myglt be the


caule of warre / dylpleacure vnto Upnges.
Low when Rathymus and Habellius
the Serybe / a the rulers in the lande had red
the wꝛitinge ol yng Artarertes/ they gatt
them together / a came in all the hafte to Je⸗
rulalem 4b an book oF bozimen/ a w moche
people of kote / a fo2bad thé to buplde. And to
thep left of from buplopnge of the temple;
vnto the fecond peare of hynge Darius.
¶ Darius maketh afeat. Che. ij. ſlentences of the. ij
vounge MemoF which the Fprtt is declared.
¶ Che. iij. chapter.
Inge Darius made a great featk a
vnto his leruauntes, vito all bps
ourte / ã to all h oticers oF Medea
¢ Perlia / vee ta alithe debytes a
rulers chat were vnder him / krom India vn⸗
to Echtopta an hundzeth k. rij. countreg.
Do when ther had eaten a dzoncken being
latyltxed / and were gone home agayne. Da⸗
rius the Keng wẽte into his chamb⸗e / layed
hem downe to depe /a fo awaken,
Chen the the ponge men / that kepte the
Uynges perlonne / and watchedhis body / cö⸗
moned amonge them ſelues / a pale one to
another: et euerx one of vs faye Come thing / 5
¢lohe whole lentence is wyler andmoze ex⸗
Cellent then the other / vntohym hail Ringe
Darius gene greate gyttes / and clothe hym
opty purple. He Mall geue hym veſfels ol
golde to deynche in clothes of golde a coue⸗
rynges:he hall make him a coſtely charet a
a bzpdle of golde / he Wall geue hym a bonet
ol whyte lylte / a a cheyne of golde aboute
bys neck: pee he halbe the leconde and pin⸗
cipall nexte vnto Aynge Darius / and that
becaule of bys wyldome / and chalbe called
the apnges kyncman.

So every one wrote his meaning / lealed
it / a laped it onder the Kynges pelowe / and
larde: when the kyng arpleth / we wyllgeue
heim dure wallinges: and loke whole wo de C
the Eynge andhys chefe Loꝛdes iudgeto be
the mooſt wylelp cpokẽ / the tame Mall haue
the vyctoꝛy. One wꝛote: P yne ig a ſtronge
chynge. Che lecond wrote: Che Kyng is (tro:

er Che thyꝛd wꝛote women haue pet moꝛe

Egth / but aboue all thinges p trueth bea⸗
rechawape 5 bictory. Now when the Aynge
was ryſen vp / they tone their wxytinges and
delpuered them vnto hym and lohe red thé,
Chen ſent he koꝛth to call al his chele loꝛdes /
All the debytes and rulers of the contrees ol
Medes and Pertia. Ind when they were let
‘Downe in the councell / the waptinges were

Aas. ij. red


The. iij.boke


red bekoꝛe them. Indhe commaunded to call
koꝛ the vounge men / chat theymygyt declare
thers meanpnges thé lelues by mouth. spo
when they were Cent koz / acanie in the hing
ſapde vnto them: ewe vs and make bs to
Ae what the thynges are that pe


‘Cea begenne te fet thlch bad pen
she daengi of ngen ona


bis tonge.
Che derlarsgfs of che 0. lag
men / pꝛopoundi d in
lat / ih at ts that ve —
thingesrts mote com
letters to all che rulers onder bpm):
upde Z orobadet to the bupldpuge ok;
¶ Che. iti. & haptex 5
en the econdel which had lade /
a the Bynge was Kronger) be⸗
GY) [gane to fpeake faping:D pemen
Aare notthey the ſtrongeſt and mo
excellent that conquere the lande @ ae ſee
Fallthat is in the Cee a in the earth: Bowis
the Aynge loꝛde ot all hele thynges / ahath
domyn ys ok them all: and lobe what he cont:
maꝛldeth / it ia done. Ikhe lende hismen kozth
a wartare / they go ¢ bꝛeake downe hylles /
wales a towzes. hey ate dapne / and llape
- (other men) them lelue /a oucrpatenoethe
ynges woꝛde Ik ther get the vyctozy they
-dringe p Bing al Btpople tke wite Bother
ater cera eta
grounde: when the ether bz
“trpbute vnto the Kynge. And yr the 111
alone do but cömaunde to kxil / they kpiket
he cõmaunde to kozgeue they koꝛgeue: pe he
commaunde to mite / thevimpte: pébe byd
dꝛrue aware thepdzpue awaye: prhe com ·
maunde to buyſde / ther buyide: yr he com⸗
made to bꝛeake downe / therbꝛeake downe:


ther kather / ner moth


pt he cõmaunde to plante they plante. Che
comen people a the ruleis ate obediẽt vnto
hem. And the &png in dmeane lealon litteth
him downe / eateth / s drenneth /s taketh his
reſt then kepe ther watch rounde about §

Bing / a not one of the darte get him out ol x
ware to do his atone bulpneg / but mutt be
obediẽt vnto the N png at a woꝛde. Judge ve
now / O pe men hom dhulde not he go karre
aboue / vnto who men are thus ohediẽt; And
‘WHE be bap name this ended tage be
thirdwhole name was Soꝛobabel which had
{poken of wemeng of trueth / begne to lare
alter this maner: O pe mẽ / tis not p greate
Ayng / it is not the multitude of men / nether
fst wyne 6 excellech:uehols it chen p bath
che logdthippe our them: aue not wemen
bogne $ Apng / a all che people p rule thote
ings? aue not weme bone the / abꝛoughe

e bp / f plante the Hynes / wherout syne
cömeth⸗ Ther make garmentes ko all men /
thepgeue honour vnto all men / a Wout we⸗
men cd not men lpue. Akther gather golde a
fiver a all pꝛecious things / ale a fayze well
kauouted pom / they leãue all together / c
turne theivepes oniy vnto p e gape


vpon her / haue moze defyze onto her / chen
vnto p ſyiuer a golde / o an maner ol pꝛeci⸗
dus ching. Umm leaueth bis kacherg baöught c

ne natural coũtre /


N a ral
¢ cleaueth onto eto ee apt


is lle with the woman / remem,

er aer ner wpm ga a

then re mulk nedes ünowe /? wemẽ haue &
ouer pou. ¶ Doch it greue pou


dompnron
“Ams taketh his twerde / a goeth his wapeto


tee tepyalg, acer hegen
er alyd/ a go .
eee
2 iy foue. man
urch bps wpke bette then eher g mother:
pee manx one there be / that rẽne out or their
wpttes /s become bondmen koz cheir wyues
lanes : nanp one alto haue perbched /a

bene lane / ahaue linned becaule ol wemẽ.


And now beleue me J Enowe a Uynge


which is greate in his poder / and all landes
ſtande in awe of hym / and no man darre laxe
bande vpõ him. pet dyd Ale, that 5
daughter of $ greate Nynge Bartatüg) the
Aynges cöcubkne / lat beſpde $ Benge bpors
the rygbt hande /s tone ot his crownẽ krõ bis
head / a let ityponhex awnehead / ¢ fmote.
the Runge with her let bande. Wozzouer f D
Aynge loted vpöͤher with ope mouth: pt he
laughed vpõ him he laughed allo but ve che
toke anpoylpleature wich hem / the Krnge
was fa pne to latter her / a to geue her good
$0208 / tyil he bad gotté ber l ucur sge ne.
de men / are not wemen then ce


4


OfEldꝛas.


Greate is the earch / a he is the heauen that
: see cumssen Sing sss
loked olle pon another, Sohe beganne to


ſpeake of) trueth: D ve men are not meme
kkronger ! & rate is the earth / he is the hea⸗
uen / wpit is the courte ofthe lunne/ he cõ⸗
paleth the heauen rounde aboute / Fetcheth
bis courle agarne tohis awne place in one
dape. 28 he not excellent that doth thys: Per
greate top truech / a ltrogerthen all thinges.
All the earth calleth po the trueth / the bear
wen pꝛaplcth it all woz kes ha ke and trem⸗
bie at it / a with it is no vnrighteous thynge,
gene 18 bnvightuous: 5 King is onvightu-
Cus: WOME are vnrightuous: all chyldze or
men are vnrightecus / pee all there wozches
are vnrightedus / a there is no trueth in thẽ /
Inthei vnrightuoulnes allo thal they be de⸗
ſroped a perych. Is Foz the trueth / it endu⸗
reth / xis aul ware ſtronge: it lyuetn a cõque⸗
rech £07 euermoꝛe woꝛlde without ende.

Che trueth accepteth no perlonnes / it
putter no diffeiẽce betwirte riche 02 pooze/

etwyrte the mpahtve oꝛ (ymple / but doth
right onto euer man whether they be euell
05 good / a all men are louyngty dealt with
all inthe wozhes ok it. In the iudgemẽt ok it
there is no vnrighteous thinge / but xẽgth /
Arngdom ¢ power a matetty Foz euermoze,
Bletledbe the God ol truech.

And with chat he held dis tonge/ and all
the people cried a lapde: Great is the trueth /
Gaboue all. hen ſarde the k ng onto him:
Alke what thou wylt / moze then is apporn⸗
ted inthe witinge / az tall geue it the / lo⸗
thou art founde wyler then thy companxõs:
thou chalt lyt next mne / andbe n kyntman.
Eben larde he vntothe Bpnge : Nemembze
the pꝛompte a vowe / which thou hall bowed
@ promiten(in the dape when thou cameſt to
the Rpngdome)to buylde vp Jerulalem / and
to lende agapne all the veckels A Tewels that
were taken awape out of q erufalem: which
Cyrus ſeparated / when he offredtn Babylõ /
g wolde lende them agapne. Andthy mynde
was ta buydde bp the temple / which the Edo⸗
mytes bꝛent / when Jerulalẽ was deſtrored

Fy che Chaloces. C hig only D Benge) s f
shinge that J rrgupꝛe / cups is the maietty/
which J delpze aalhe ofthe : that thou per⸗
kourmẽ the vowe / which thou 1 thyne atone


mouth hat made onto the Uynge orheauen.


Then Datiusthe henge dode vp / a by


led him / a wzote n letter vnto althe debpres


and ſhzeues to all the Lopes ¢nobles/that
they chulde conue pe hym konth s allthé that
wolde go vp with hym. He weote a letter al⸗
fopntoall che ohzeues that were in Ceiolr⸗
tia a Phenices /e onto L pbanus / that they
whuld dꝛawe cedze trees From Libanus vnto


ui).
Jerutalem / to bupide ß citte wotthtall. Moꝛe⸗
duerhe wrote onto allthe Jewes that were
gone out of his reaime into a cw y becaule

ok the kredome / that no oltycer / no ruler / noꝛ
Shꝛeue / chuld come to their doꝛes: d that zl
their lande which they had ccnquered; fuld
be kre a not tributary: Ind that the Edomit
cpulde geucouerthe cytyeg & vpllegcg ot
Jewes which thephsdtake in: per and that
they ſhulde pearipgeue xx. talentes tothe
buplbinge of thetemple/ vntyll the tyme 5 it
were krürched:ato the dayiphalon yng ek?
bzentoſtringeg (as it is commaunded)ten ta⸗
lentes pearly allo: And that all they whpch
come frõ Babylon to buyſde the cytie / Huld
baue kre ipbettye/ they and their chyldꝛen /a
all the Pꝛeaſtes. pain

He wrote the greatnelſe alfo/ ¢ cömaun⸗ ß
ded that the Holy garment ſbulde be geuen
them / wherin they mynyſtred: e wꝛote that
commaundementis wulde be geuen to the
Leuttes / vntill the dave / that the noule were
kynyſched a Jeruſalem buplded vpꝛand cou +
maunded that all ihey that watched the cite /
Wulde haue their pozcyons e wages.

He gane ouer allo all the veſlels p C v
had leßarated ted Babplon:g allthat ¢yzus
had geuk in cömaundemẽt / h lane chargeo

e alto / p it buſde be done a lent vnto Fetus

alem. How when this vonge man was gone
koꝛth / le turned bys face towarde Jerulatẽ /
d pꝛapled the Rynge okheauẽ / a la pde: Sti
cometh the victozp / of the cömeih wyldome
-@ clearne lle /a 9 am thy fertiatit. Bleted art
thou which halt geuen me weldome: ) will
Ipꝛapſe / G L ond / thou Good of ourefatheis.

And lotze tohe the letters and wente vnto
Babylon: And when he came there / he tolde
this vnto all his bꝛethꝛẽ that were at Baby⸗
lon / a they pꝛapled the God of their katheis /
chat he had geuẽ them relremyng o lpberte
to go vp / a to buyide Jerulalem ¢ ð temple
(hich ip chere called after the name of the
Loꝛde) and they retopled with inſtrumentes
and gladne lle leuen dapes longe.


C Chey that returne togerucale arenembꝛed. Cher
begynne to Lape the f oundacpõ of the temple / but are
lett by the meanes ol enempes ze Cots the bupldynge
depuen of by ihe ſnace of iwo peares. 1
Che. v. Chapter.
Fter thys were the pzincipall men 1
zok all the bpllages holen in the
trybes a hyn redes / that they huld
$ go vp with their wyues echpla2?/
with their ſeruauntes ¢ mapdens / with all
their catell and ſubſtaunce. And Werius the
Aynge ſent wich thẽ a thoulande boꝛimẽ / to
conugye them fafelp onto Aerutalẽ: a ther
bꝛethꝛẽ were glad playég bpd inſtrumẽtes /
elengynge. Andchele are ihe names of the
Ada. iii. men


The.tif boke


men / which wente bp out ok z vyulagirg / ac⸗
copdyng top trrbes. Ol the Pꝛeltes / plonne
ol pymehes / konne of Aard:Fetusp ſonne
ok Zoledec/Zoachim the lonne of Zoꝛobabel
the konne of Spalathtel(of the krntedotf a-
UID, out oF the kynred of Phares / or the tribe
OF Juda) wüpch (pake wonderfull thynges
vnder Darius the Benge of Perlia / in the
ſeconde peare or his rargne in the fy2t mo·
neth of Kilan.


Cgele allo are they of Rewꝛr / which came
bpfandturnedagarne onto Zerulalem / out
ck the captrurte that Habuchodonoloꝛ the
Wenge oF Babylon had bꝛought vnto Ba ·
brian. andeuery man fought bys poꝛcxon
ayapne in gcwꝛꝛ / bis cite thcpthat came w
Dozobabel¢ with Fetus / Sthemias / Da⸗
Satas / Raclatas / Eumeus, Emmantus /
Dy ardocheus / Weellerus/ Mechpla / Ro-
cho / Ollozꝰ/ Emontas one of their princes,

And the nombze ol thẽ pech totheir
krnredeg a rulers were. Che chtldꝛ ot Pha⸗
res / two thoulande / an hundꝛeih g ixxij. Che
chyidzen ak Ares. 10. M. an. C. and iv). Che
chudzen ol emo / an. E. xlij. In the lonnes
ol gelus and goa bes / a. . iij. C. and two.
B qhe tonnes of Bentu. J. A. ff. E. and. xx.
Che lonnes of Choꝛoba. ij. C. g. b. Che fons
nes or Banica an. C. and. rotij. C he Cones
ol Kebech. iii. C. S the Che fonnes of Ar⸗
chad. uitj. C. g. xxbij. Che lonnes ot Cham
xrxviſ. Che lonnes ol S oꝛoar. j. M. a. Kvij.
Che tonnes ok Adinu. itil. C. and Iri. Che
ſonnes of Adarectis an. E. and. bij. Che lon⸗
nes of Ciaſo and Belas an. C. and. dij. Che
Connes of Asozec.ttij.C.¢ xxix. C he tonnes
ol Jedarbone / an. C. and. xxrij. C he lonneg
of Hanantas an. C. and. xxx. Che ſonnes ot
Aloni. xc. he ſonnes ok Martar ij. C. and
ri. Che tonnes o&Sabar?. xcv. C he lonnes
ol Hepholcmon an. C. and. xxiij. C he fonnes
ol Nepopas. v. Che ſonnes of Pechanatus
an. C. and. lvitſ, Che fonnes ol, Sebethanus
an. C. and. xxxij. Che Connes of Erearpatros
(which is called alfo Enohadieg ¢ Modlas)
liij. C. a. xxtij, Otł them of Gramos a Gabea
an. C. and. xxj. Dé them of Belleion a cor
Ge Ixv. Ot them of Baſtarus / an. C. f. xxij.
Ol them of Kechenobes. v. Ot the tonnes
ol Liptis / there were an. C. f. Iv. Ot ö connes
ol Labonnus. iij. C. and. bij. Déthe fonnes
OF Hichem. ij. C. and Ixx. Okthe tonnes of
Suadon and c lmon. ij. C. and. xxbiiſ. Ot
$ fonnes of Ericus. il. M. an. C. f. xlb. Che
Sonnes of Anaag. uit. C. a. ixx.

Che Pꝛeſtes: he ſonnes ot Jeddus: Che
fonnes of €uthersthe lonnes of EiJalib. ii.
Et end. ri Chefonnes of Emerug. l. &.
and. t te fonnes of acuriug. ij. C. a. ivij.
Che lonnes ol Catta. ij. C. and. xxbij. Che


Leuptes: Che comes of Fetus in Caduhel
and anus and Serebiãs / and Edeas / le⸗
uentpe and foure.

Che whole nombze of there trö. riſ peares
was. iij. M. ij. C. and. lxij. DE the ĩonnes /
daughters and wpues / p whole fumme was
S. ui . C. &. rij Che lonnes ol $ Pꝛelles
that pꝛaxled God in the temple: Che ſonnes
ok Aaph / of whome there were an. C. and
xrviij. Butthe doze kepers were: Che chxi⸗
dꝛen ol Elmenus: the chyidzen ok Aker: the
chrldꝛen of Amon: the chylozen of Acubas
Serke nel en ol Cobi: an hundʒed and
xxxix.

Che Pꝛeſtes that cerued in the temple:
Che tones ok Spel / the tonnes of Gatpha/
the lonnes of Cobloch / the tones of Caria /
che lonnes of Dub / the lonnes of Helu the
fonnes of La bana / the fonnes of a tmacha /
che fonnes ot Acub / the lonnes ol xitha / the
ſonnes ol Cetha / the fonnes of Aggab / the
Connes ol Oba / che tonnes of Anant / che
Connes of Canna / che fonnes of Geddu / the
lonnes ol An / the fonnes ol Nadin / thefon-
hes of Delanon / the fonnes ot Nechoba / che
lonnes ok Caleba the lonnes of Goza / the
Connes of Oʒul / the lonnes of Sinona/ 02
fonnes of Atra / che lonnes of Daltem wy e
fonnes of Allana / the tonnes of Manet the
Connes of Haliſin / the Connes or A ccula the
Connes ol Agitta / the fonnes of A zui
fonnes ol Fauon / the Connes ol Phalaion /
che fonnesof Meeda' the lonnes ol Sula /
the fonnes of Cared / the fonnes ol Barcug /

e connes of area / the tonnes of Coeũ /


a lonnes of Palit / the Connes oe Agila /


e lonnes ot Pedon: Salomon his fonnes/
che lonnes ok Atophot / che lonnes ot baste
e

e fon abel / the a.

ab connes of


alt


Chele kolowynge are thep / went op fd S


Chelmellat chelarſa (whole were
Carmela ¢ Careih)s might not thewe foth
their ertres a kynteddes how they were of
Ilrgel: Che Connes of Daldrus /b fonnes of
Tuben, che tones: ok Nechodatcus, De the
Pꝛeſtes that executed the office of che Pꝛell ·
bode / a were not oñde: he lonnesol Sbia/
the fonnes ol Achilos tbe fonnes of Addin /
which maried one ofthe daughters of Phar:


gelen /


al. ede i a.


OfEldꝛas,


gelen /a were named arter him. Che writing
ofthelame krnred was fought in the regi⸗
ev of their generaciõ / but it was not forbes
Stperkoze were ther koꝛbyddẽ to execute the
office oi the pꝛelthode. into the lapde the
mias a Adharas, they ſbulde haue no poz-
ckonin the Sanctuary tpli there role vp an
hre Pꝛeſt/ p were inthe plapne
leatnes, gell belxde fer.
chere were. rif. W. ill. C
0 rethere ok leruauntes q max ·

dens. pi. Ng. il. C. a rer}. Ok lyngyng men
Alengeng women chere were il. C. and, 1b.
baude, er F rxb. Camels. Deuẽ thou⸗
128 e e —
lb. Krue. M. s. xxrb. alles.

e, Cheir heades allo @ the rulers in the try


bes when ther came to Jerufalem/a wolde thankes


buplde ¢ fet vp the temple ot God agarne in
bis place they qaue(atter their abllitpe/ vn
oftpespantuar si eee

M. ol golde /
.thoufanne oklpiuer / and an hundech Pꝛe·
Les garmiétes And lo dwelt tte Pꝛeſtes and
the Leuptes andthe people that wente out
to Jerulalem ¢ inthe countre there about /
che lyngers alto and the poztes/ euer one
ol Flvael in his awne lande.

So whenthe leuench moneth came / and
when the childzen of Alrael were euery man
at bis burrnes/theycame alt wone conten
in to che ccurte which was bekoze the Catt
bore, dagen e de of 0°
leder a bis bzethzen the Prettes /a > oz0ba-
bel the tonne of Dalachlei a bps bzethzen/
Setting bpanaufter to offre bzentCacrtti
bpölt/as itis write in the lawe of Motes,

There came people allo of othercoũtrees /
Ache Peathẽ out of all land co let bp p aul ·
ter in bis place /g ofred Cacettices and bꝛent·
offtinges nto the Lozde in che momynge.
Andlothepheine the featt of tabernacies / as
tels commaunded in the iawe. And dapely
ollredcher as accozdpng was / and made the
45 ay appoynted / the es allo of
the Spabbathes ¢ or the new ones / a all

holy feaſtes. Ind all they g bowed offringes
vnto the Loꝛde / beganne at the new Moone
okthe. vll. moneth ko ollre onto God / forthe
téple ok the Lozde was not pet buplded. nd
cher gaue vntothe Malons ¢ Carpenters /
monep meate /a dꝛrnze with chearfulnette.
Fxunto them of Spoon alto a cyze they gaue
cares that they thuld carry Cc dy trees trõ
Libanus to betattes and beames / and that
they Hhuloe make thyppes in the hauen ol
Jobpe/accoꝛdpng as it was appopnted and
oe by C ps Ange of the perſians.
ind in che lecondẽ peate they came in⸗
tothe temple ol God at Jerulalem. Anthe


b.
Kecond moneth begãne Zoꝛobabel the for
of: Pe / & Jetua the fonne of Notte
Ethetr brethren the Pꝛeſtes ¢ Lenites/and
all ther that were come vnto Jerufaiem out
ol the captrurte of Babylon / and laped the
toundacid of the temple / in the new Poone
OF the leconde moneth in the feconve peare g

er were come into Jewzp and Jerulalem.

ind ther appopnted the Leurtes(chat were
aboue.rr.peare olde) vnto the erupce of the
Logde:fo Fetus and his tonnes and his bꝛe⸗
chzen all the Leuptes diode to gether / and

. Lane and ozdynaunce in the

oule ofthe Londe.

And the Pꝛeltes ttode/ and had their gar⸗
mentes a trompettes / and the Leuptes / the
fonnes ok Alaph had Cymbals / geuynge
and pꝛaples vnto the L oꝛde / accoꝛ⸗
beng as Dauld the Rynge ot J lrael had oꝛ⸗
depned. Andthe Cong that they dd lynge vn


tothe Lond/ was afterthis maner:*D finge pra errxv a


vnto the Lozde/foz be is gracrous / and hrs
goodnes bpon Ffrael endureth Foz euer. and
all the people biew out wich trompettes / a
Conge with loude vopce / pꝛaytyng the Loꝛde
to gether in the rearyng vy of p boule ofthe ©


Lolde.Chere came allo krom amonge the“ Sl. ;..


Pꝛeſtes and Leuites the rulers and elders,
accoꝛdynge to the trybes and kynredes (loch
as had lene the houle afoze) to the bupiding
ol this temple with greate crye and greate
mournynge, manp allo with trompettes g
Greate ioye: In fo moch / that the trompettes
myght not wen be hearde ko the weppnge a
moürnynge. Foꝛ the commen people biewe


tices goodly vpon thetrompettes.
2 „Chen camethe enemves ok the trrbes of a1, Geh.


Juda and Benz amin / to knowe what that
krompettynge and nople of chawmes myght
be. And they perceaued that it was wep
which were come agayne out of captpupte/
and wolde buyplde the temple vpa new bnta
tye Lozde Godot q crael So they wente to
Zozobabel and geſua / and tothe iulers of
the bpllages / and lapde bntothem: Shall
we burlde with pou allo: Foz we ipke wyle
haue hearde poure Lozde/ and we walkie ate
ker the fame mance /‘from the dapes ol ils
bazareth the ting of Aria / which bꝛought
vs hyther. Chen Zoꝛobabel and Jelua and
the Rulers ol the bpllages of Alrael lade
bnto thẽ:· It ig not mete / chat ve huld bupide
the temple ok oure God wrth vs: we dure
lelues atone wyll buplde vnto the oꝛd / line
as Cpzus the Benge ot the Perilans hath
commaunded bs.

But che Heathen in the lande layed them
lelues agaynſt thole that were in Jewzp /
helde bp the buylopnge krõ thé/ layed wapte
vpö them pꝛeuel Roppedfocheas brought

Aaa. v. any


The, ij. boke


any thinge to them/fozbad them to buride ¢
vndered thole that made thé palſage / p the
dynge chulde not be finpthed:@ this con⸗
tynueb io longe as Runge ¢ us lyued:a fo
ther put ofthe buplopnge foz the lpace ol.
peates / vntyl the rapgne ot Uynge Darius.
Aggeus and 2 acharppzophecye. U. 3
— E with out ne 2 —
rgb vi. Chapter.
a Ot wpthiandpnge in the ſecond
eave ot Srapgne of E arius / ag⸗
Zeus a Zachary the tonne ot a ddo
Bpophecped dpo chem in Jewryg
Zerulalem in the name ot the God ate
Then Zozobabel che Conne of Salathiel a
Jeclua p Conne ot q oledec ſtode vp / s bigane
to na houle of the Lod at J erufacny/
when the Ppopbheres ofthe Lozdheiped the,
At the lame tyme came Spylenncs p onder
Shꝛeue in Srꝛia a Pheniceg / w the land⸗
Todes abps companyos/¢ lapde vnto thé:
iho hath bddẽ a comaunded pou toburide
the houle / to make the role g all other thing
agayne: and who are the wozcke men / that
buploe them: Heuerthelege the elders of the
Jewes had loche grace of the Wozde/p they
wolde not be let(thcugh they were prouckeo
cherto)but buplded an Mill /pnepl the cpmep
Rynge Marius were certytzed therok / a an
antwere receaued from hym. Che letter that
thele men ſent vnto kyng Barius / was at:
terthis maner.
Soplennes the onder Sbhzeue in Ong
aphenpces / a the landlozdes with their coffe
npons/ which are headrulers in 122
ſenpceg / lende their lalutaexon ‘onto Ba⸗
kg the Ange. We certplpe oure Lose
the Aynge / chat we came intothe lande ol
Jewzz / a went to Jeruſalẽ:where we koũde
thé buplopnge the Freatehoͤule of God a the
tẽ ple /with greate cottely fre ſtone and with
goodiptrmöze fo: the walles: pee they male
greate haste with b wozke / a helpe one ano⸗
cher / and it goeth kosch pꝛolperoully in their
handes / a with greate deirgence a woꝛſhyp
% ig itmade- Chen atten we § elders who had
cdmaunded thẽ to make vp the houle andthe
buployng/ and this we dyd to the intent that
we myght certytye the pertectip / a waite vn⸗
tothe / che names of thole 6 were the tulers
ok h woche. Sothey gave vs this anlwere:
we are the feruauntes ok the Lozde/ whych
made heauẽ and earth as fo2 this houlẽ it
bath bene buylded a fet vp aloꝛe tyme by the
greate a myghtye hong ok Itrael. But whe


dure fathers pꝛouok ed God vnto wrath / a
kynned agaynſt the God ok Itrael / he gaue
thé ouer into the power of Habuchodonolo⸗
Aynge ot Babylon the Bung otthe caldees /


which beahedowne the heule / a bꝛẽtit / and
caried awaye the people pꝛeloners vnto Wa
bplon. , Heuercheles / in the Eye peare that
Arnge Cyzusrapgnedat Babylon / Ciug


ij the Aynge wꝛote a cõmaur ded to buplde vp


this houlle agayne: a all the oꝛnamẽtes that
Mabuchodonofoz catied awape krõ Jerulalẽ
bnto Babyiõ / a a ppꝛopiated onto his awne
temple;thelebzought C yꝛus koꝛth agaxne /
€ delpuered thẽ to Joꝛobabel ¢ to Salma ⸗
hafar the vnder Shzeue / cõmaunding them


p theycbudde bzinge thole lame oꝛmamẽtes


eto Zerulalem in tothe temple and to
begyrne thetpme koꝛth to bude thetẽ⸗


. Ev. t.


Waere want place. hen Sal⸗ c


mana lar iapedthe koundacrö of the Loides
houle at Zerulalem / ¢ euer fence haue ther
bupided / a pet iz it not ended. And Wiertede
O Aynge / xt thou thinckeſt it good / let it
fought in the L pbꝛarpes erolles of Senge
Cpꝛus:pt᷑ it be Lounde then / thatit is done
the councell a confent ok Rynge c yʒus / and
vroure lozdethe U yng be fo mynded / et him
werte bntovstherok.


A Chencömaundednyng Darius / to lenke bend. vias
inthe Lybzatreg: andlo at Egbathanis in a b · Ee.


lxtie eytye in Medea there was tounde foche
a wzutrnge: In the Fy2tt peare ok therapgne
ok Exzus / the lame Byng C yꝛug tömaunded
that che houle of the Loꝛde at 3 wuld
be bupwded agapne(and odoutes to be made


0 zedeth. xl. cubpteß / a
Uf, Cquare with tyre herrẽ Hones / with a loft
Ain of che fame cduntte / yee wa new
elt / a the expenſes therot to be geuen df the
zus. Andthe oꝛnamentes


. 4
halle ddepnedthem to elpe chole that be
come out ok captrupte:tyll che houle of the
Lope befinyMrd:and out ofthe trybute

taringe thatispearipraylo vp in Syn a
Phenices / dylygẽtiy togcuethem atertarne
umme tothe offergnge ofthe Lozde:andthe
lame to be delpuered onto Zozobabel the ots
kyter:thathe cherwithallmapo derne oxen /
raͤnmes, lambes / a cone / calt / wyne a oyle
and that contrnuallp euctp peare: after the
expences which che Belles that be at Zeru⸗
fale / hewto be made daplyꝛthis Halbe geuẽ
vntothẽ wiczout delape that ther mare mrs


Rp


faceplpces daplpe to the pelt God / to che
Rynge and fo2 his leruauntes and to prape
kor their lyues. Lett it be pꝛociamed alfoon
ence rde that whoforucr breabety ozde⸗
iprleth this commalundement ok the kynge /
thalbe baged bpd agalow made othigawne
Goodjand all his goodes Matbe ſealoned vn⸗
to p Eng. Che Lozdetherfoze(whole name
4 17 We e on deſtrope all

e kynges a le ndertane by
violence to hynder che fame / oꝛ to deale on-
curteoudy with the boute of the Lowat ge.
duet eule Darius the kyng haue opdeyned/
‘ chrnges walbe done wythalldy-

ce


pte ts Fpnityed and dedpcate: and the Fea
— ee
Che. bi}. r.
ben Srlennes che vnderthzeue
in Celolpzia / and Phenices ¢ the
Mother Landlozdes wich their come
ö wpanrons/oberedchethynges that
kynge Darius had oꝛdened / were dplygent
in the holy woꝛckes / and were felowheipers
wyth che olde rulers of the qewes. And lo d
woncke ofthe Sanctuary wente fozth and


prolpered when Aggeus and Zacharp pie Oy


phecped. And ther perkourmed all thynges
Chop the commaundement ok the Loꝛde
God ok Frac, a after the deupce of Cyꝛus /
artis) and Irtarerſes hynges of Petlia.
thus wag dure houle kynpwwed vnto
che . xxi. dave ol the moneth Adder in che. vt.
peare of hynge Darius. And the chylozen of
eraelthe pzeltes andthe Leultes / and the
‘otherthat were come out of captitpte / and
loch as were iornedyntothem / drd accoz⸗
benge asics wirtten inthe bone of Motes,
ndin the dedycãcton ofthe temple: they of:
Frey an hundꝛedoxen / an hundned ammes.
‘iH himdzed jambes / and. rij. gates toz
kynnes ofall the people of Aſtael / after
Calas ger un tad tapeoineberectie
a ata the pꝛeſtly
garmentes / after the trybes / outer all the
woche oF the Lome God of Fracitaccoz-
dynge to che boke of Moles / andthe poz-
tete byalithe dozes. 2
Andthe chploz of Icraell with thore that


were come out of captyirpte)helde the patie


duerthe. riiti dape ofthe Fyatt moneth / whe
the prettes and the Leuites were lanctikted.
Cher that came out of captputte / were not

all lanctitied toy but h Leuttes were
all fanctikyed together. Allg enderkabe
cum out of captruite / fplied p eatter ſabe /
fon thett bꝛethzen kon the pretteg a koꝛthem

gp felues. Indthechyldnen oF Trat
out ok captrupte and eſcaped from ali the
abhominacpons ofthe Heathen / loughtthe


Of eldzas,


7
v.
Loꝛde / A kebte the feat or unleuenedbzedd
bi dapes Ionge eatyng 2 drinckeng a were
mery befoze the Loꝛde: that the Loꝛde had
turned the deupce of the kynge ot a ſſyꝛia /e
comforted their handes to the woꝛckes of d
Loꝛde God of Flraet,


ECGSirras cantety the people to alſemble and come to
and t. 8
bee ed


Soe-viti chapeet, 1
datterhunn / when Attaxerles ß
kernge of the Perllans raigned /
there wente vnto hym Eldzas the
fone ok Saratag tye fonne of A⸗
Zarlas che fonne of Pelchtah / the lonne oF
Sailum the tonne of Sadoc / the tonne ol
Achitob/theConne of Amartas / the Conne ol
Hsariag the lonne of Boccus / che tonne of
Abilu the tonne of fehmneas / the Conne of
Eleazar che fonne of Aaron the Fyett pꝛeſt.
Chis €fdza8 wente bp from Babylon) foz
he had good onverttandpnge in the lawe ol
Motes chat was geuẽ ofthe Loꝛde Pod ol
Tenne n e taught a done indede.) And the
unge fauoured him /a dydhim greate woz⸗
pe a honoure / alter an his delxꝛes Chere
went bp with him allo certapne of che chyl⸗
dye . pꝛeſtes / or the Leuttes /
ok the kyngers/ pozte rs and myniſters or the
W Fleer 8 11
bij. peare of the raygne ot Kenge
Artäxerles / in che banonetye hakte we
bif.peare of the rapgne / ther went from Ba⸗
brlon inthe new moone of the. v. monech / ¢
came thebye tape to Jerulalemafter bys
commaundemkt / irke as the Lade had pꝛo⸗
Cheven their tournep or inthete efozas gat
Greate thittuccyon that he chuld leaue none
ok the thynges behynde / which are in dlawe
Ecommaundemétes of God. Andhe taught
whole Jcracl all rpghtuoumes ¢iudgment,
Chen came the Secretaries ot kyng Are
taxerles / and deipuered the wzytynges (that
were come From Artaxeries the kung) to et
drag the pꝛeſte and reder of the lawe of the
Lozdè: Ind thps is the coppe ot the letter.
Synge Artaxertes tendeth his gretynge vn⸗
to Eldꝛas the pꝛeſt and reder ok the lawe ol
the Lozde: S t frendthipe a good wyll J haue
opdepnedand charged / yr chere be eny or the B
Fewes) of the pꝛeltes and Leuites in mp
tealme / which defpzech and is content to go
wyth the vnto Jerulalẽ / that he maye doit,
Cherkoꝛe yt eny be minded to beare the com⸗
panp let them come together / and goo wyth
the (ipke as J am content à my. dif. krendes
my councelers:) to le what they do at Jeru⸗
lalem a in Jewzr / a hepethe thinges accoz-
ding as thou halt in § lawe ol 5 Loꝛde: and
to bꝛynge


Thi. ij, bolt


to bynge thegyttes vnto God the Lorde of
Alrael/ chat z my krendes haue pꝛomyled
to gerulalem / all the ſyluer a golde that is
in the countre of Babylon / vnto the Lohd to
Jerusalem / with the thinge that is geuen koꝛ
che peopie in the Loꝛdes tẽple at Ferulale:
Tee that § lame Cyluer g golde mape be ga.
cy. red and oxen / rammes / Wepe and goales
F other that be longeto there thynges:¢ that
thex mape offer lacrytpces onto the Loꝛde /
vpon the aulter oktheir Loꝛde / whych is at
Aerulalem. 1
And whattoeuer thou ¢ thy bꝛethnen win
do wyth theleluer g golde / that do after thy
hipnoe / and akterthe comaundement ol the
Logde thy God: a lyne wyſe with all the hol
beticis / hat are geuẽ the toꝛ the ſezupce ot
poule of the Lozne thy God: a other chynges
wbatlocueris necetiary fo2 the tothe mozke
okthetẽ ple that chalbe geuẽ the OF ö ugeg
trealure:g lohe what thou with thy bzethꝛe
wilt do with the golde and cyluer / that do at-
ter the wyll of the Loꝛde. And z kynge Ar.
taxerles haue commaundedthe hepers of 6
trealuresin Spꝛia and Phentces / what⸗
loeuer Eldꝛas the pelt and reder ok § lawe
ok the Loꝛde doth wepte / it halbe geuẽ him:
tyll an. C. talentes of ſyluer / and of golde in
we maner: DE coꝛne alto an.. meaſures /
and tyll an hundꝛeth veſſels of wyne / a other
plenteous geben without nombze. Let
all thynges be done aftez the lawe or hyelt
God that the wrath ol God aryle not in the
reaulme of the bing and ok his konnes. J co
maunde pou allo / that pe requxuere no tare
ner trpbute of p pꝛeſtes / Leuptes/ſvngers /
and myntſters ol the temple ner ok the wate
ters:and z no man haue auctozpte to medle
C enpthynge agapnſt them. As foz the O el ·
dag) let thou tudges a arbytrerg in ß whole
lande of Spꝛta and Phenices/atterehe wyl⸗
dome of God: a learne all loch as are igno⸗
raunt in the Lawe of Godthy Lozve / G lett
allthẽ that ollende agaynſtthelawe / be pu⸗
nyſbed: whether it be wyth death / W payne /
to be cõdemned in money / o to be bantched.
Chen lade Ecdzas 5 wepter.* Bleſſed be


eld. vn. . dhe God ok cure fathers / that hach geuen do


*. Ed. via Irael to go by with me.


good a mynde and wyll in to the berte ot the
uynge / to magnikpe his houle that is at ge⸗
rülalem / and hath made meto be accepted in
the lxght ol the kung / ot his councell / or his
krendes ¢ ol bys noble. and lo J was ſted
falt in mympnde / accoꝛdynge as the Loꝛde
my God helpedme / and A cate nien ol
nd thete are the
Heades( after their kynredr a houles of their
kathers that wente vp with me from Bapy⸗
Ion / out ot the kyngdome of Artaxerles
v lonnes ol hares / Gerton fonnes


of Hiemarith / Amerug. O kthe tonnes ol
Vaud / Accus / che lone of Cecilia.

Ok the lonnes ot Phares/Fachary: with
hum there tuned age pne an hundꝛed and
tyltie men. Ok the Connes orthe captapne ot
Moabilon, Saraei/and with him. ij. C. and
JVimen Ok p fonnes of Jachnes / Jechontas
Zecholx / and with hym ij. E. and. nun. Ot
che lonnes of Salamaalias / Gotholie / and
Ex. wich him. Ok p lonneg of aphacia. Sa⸗
tas Mihelt / a with hym. xxx. Ok tonnes
ol Job /Abdiag Jeheſt / and with hy. j. C.
rij. men. DE the tonnes ot ania/ Dalimoth
the fonne of Jolaphia / and with hyman. C. a
E. men. Of the tones ol Beer/Fachart Bez
‘Bet and with him. ij. C. and. vii. men. DE the
lonnes of Elead / Johannes Ezechan / a with
bpm. C. g. r. men. Ok ß lonnes of Adonicam
thofe that were the laſt / andthele are their
names: Cliphalam the tonne ok Gebel and
Semelas / and with him. irx men. All thele
called I together by d wather Chia / where
we pitched oure tentes thꝛe dayes / and there
I muſtered them.

As koꝛ the Cones ok the pꝛeltes and Le-
uites /g kounde none there. Chen lent J vn⸗
to Eledar / and Eccelom / and Malman / a
Malobam /and Enaathan /a Sames / and

fostbimathan/ Eunagan / Sacharr / Wo⸗

ollamumſchele were the leders a men dk crs
perpence) and g ſent them woꝛde / that 975
Ahuide come bnto Loddeus whych wag by
place of the trealurꝝ /a commaunded them
that they culd lpeake onto Loddeus and to
his bꝛethꝛen a to thole that were in the trea⸗
lurx / to lende vs loch men / as might execute
the pꝛeſtes offpce in the houle of the Loꝛde
oure God, and wyth the myghtve hande ol
oure Lozde God / they brought vnto vs men
ol good experience / from ange the fonnes
Of Moollus / theſonne of Leut / the lonne ol
Ilrael/Debebetam athe lonnes ebys bꝛe⸗
ihꝛen a bin and Anin / of whom there were
xbiſj. From amonge the chplozen ok p lonnes
ok Cananeus / a iheit lonnes were. x. men.
And ol them that lerued inthe tempie / whõ
‘aud had ogdepned/¢ the pryncppall men
that mpnittred foꝛ the wozche vnto the Le-
ultes in the temple . ij. C. and. xx. men / whole
names are al tonened vp in wzrtynge.

Chencommaunded Ja fattynge onto ß
vonge men befoze the Loꝛde / that J myght
defyze ol him a pꝛolperous iourneꝝ a a good
waye £02 bs pee Foz bs toꝛ oure chyldzẽ and
02 § catell / becaule of d lapenges awapte /
and J durſt not requyze of the konge men of
hole ¢ ot tote / to conuepe vs (ately agaynſt
oute enenwpes / to we had lade bntoß hing,
that the power of the Loꝛde oure God thuid
be with them / that lene him with h


Okeldzas,


herte. Andtherkoꝛe we betouggt woo oure


Londe cameltly becaute of thetethinges/a immedlatip J rente my holpgarmenteg / and {Glos t


he was mercykull vnto vs / and hearde oure
pꝛaper. And leparated from amonge $ ru ·
lers ok che people / a from the Pꝛeſtes of the
temple. ru mene a Spebeta ¢ Afania/e ten
men oF het bzethzẽ with them And Jweied
chemthe golde a che kyluer g all che Pzeltiy
oznamentes ofthe boule ok oure God / which
Laing, abis coticelt/¢ bis Princesa whole
Alrael had geuk. And when J had weped it /
Faue thé an. C. l. it talẽtes in ipluer / ö. C. ta·
lentes of fpluer pellellan. C. talẽtes of gold/
Kol Golde bettell eue trmeg twentpe / ¢ vel
Gels ök other metall (pee of good metal) ti.
eEniptteringe as the golde / k karde onto the: e
Allo are holy onto the Lo: /a che vedels are
holx / ¢ the golde and the ipiuer is pꝛompled
bntothe 11.0706 Gon of oure fathers. Be dilt-
gent now a hepe it, vntyll the tyme that ve
delpuer it to the rulers of the people / to the
Pꝛecſtes to the Leuiteg / a to the princtpall.
men ofthe cities or Irael in Ferulatem / a
in the chambze of the houle of dure God.
So b Prelles a 5 Leuites which recea-
ued ol me the golde / the kuluer and the velell /
bꝛought it to g erufaic into the temple ofthe
Loꝛde. And krom Chia we bal vp the. xij.
dave ok the Ep2tt moneth / tell we came to Fe-
rulalk. And when the thrꝛde dape was pat /
the wexed golde a Cpluer was delyuered in b


houle og the Lozde § fourth dape / vnto Ma⸗ tél


kimoch the lonne ok Jo; the Pzette/and with
him was Eleazar the fonne ol Phineas / and
ChE were J olabdiis the lonne of Jernet /
dias & p ſenne of Banus /a Calin d
the Leuptes to the nombze a tothe wayght:
andthe wapahe ofthem was wzilten bp the
fame tyme. As kor thole that were come out
ok captpupte they offved Cacrikpre vnto the:
Loide the God ok Acrael:eut᷑. rij. oren fo2 all
cael Ixxxo) vammes Ixil. hepe.rH.goatt

2 fynne.rij, krne tos a thankoftrynge / all
tothe facrifice of the Kode. And $ Apnges
cůmpupõ delpuered they vnto the lic wardes


anddebptes of the Arnge and to che vnder⸗ their


U In Celofyrta and Phenices.

ele thynges were done / the
tulers came vntome / and lad: che genera
cxon ot Acrael the Pꝛinces / che Pꝛeſtes and
Leuites the ſtraunge people a indwellers
okthe land / haue not put awaye their oncle-
nele / kromthe Cananites Pethites / Phere⸗
kltes / ko the Moabites Egypcpis / 4 Edo⸗


specs $s bond eda be as —
mengled it Geyer e daughters ot
chem / ache holy lede is myrte with che out⸗


landych Heathen / a lens the begynnenge of
wen tape haue the rulers a Haben bene
parteta ers ot their wyckedneue.


hij,
As done as 2 had heawde thelethynges / F


pulled out he heave of my heades mybeerd /
lat me downe lozouful aheup. So all they
chat were moued thozow the wozde od God
al Icrael / came vnto me: a Flat Epil ull or
beupnetie until the euenyng lacrikice Chen
Rove J by fro fatting haupng rente clothes
and the holpgarmeét, tineled downe bpo my
knees / helde out mphandes onto the Lozoe/


J Glayde.D Lozde/¥ am confounded a acha⸗


med bekoze thy Face / ko oure lynnes are be⸗
come manꝝ vpon oureheades /@ oure wyc⸗
kednelles are exalted onto p heauẽ: fozteng
d txme of oure fathers we are in greate line
vnto this dape. And fo: the fynnes of vs and
dure fathers / we wolte bꝛethꝛen a Woure
Pꝛeſtes haue bene delpuered ontop Eynges
oe che earth / intoß lwerde / z in to captiutte/
A becamea kpople with conkulton a ame
vntothis dape. Ind now O Logde God / hom
Greate is the mercp that we haue gottẽ of ß⸗
in p thou bat lelt ba a rote a a name in the
place oł thy Sanctuary / to dylcouer oure
Tpght in the houle ofthe Loꝛde dure Gon / c
geutẽ vs meate at all tymes ot our miniſtra·
cion. And when we were in captyupte / we
were not koꝛſanẽ ol the Lozde oure God:but
e made the kynges of Perlla gracious and
audourable onto vs / ſo that they gaue va vil ⸗
taples ameate / pee a leaue to buploe bp the
e of dure Loꝛde Pod agapne / torepapꝛe
che waſted places of Sion / andto dwell in
Jewry and Jerulalem. Ind now D Loꝛde /
‘what thall we fave / hauyng all thete things, G

in polleupon: Fo we hauẽ bꝛokenthy come
ned esch thou gaueſt vnto be
bythe handes of thy keruautes d pꝛophetes /
lapinge: Che lande that pe go pte / z that is
geuen pou koꝛ anheritage to haue in potels
kron / is defpled with the onclennes a kplchy⸗
nes ol theldeathen / a with their abhomina⸗
cionhaue they poluted it all together. Cher⸗
foze hall ve not fopne poure daughters onto
their fotines / ner marp youre lonnes vnto
daughters : Moꝛouer / ve wall neuer
ſenetomaße peace wihẽ / p re mape increas
fe g eate 5 belt in the lande /a p ye mape de⸗
uyde the inheritaũce ol the lande vnto youre
ko euermoze. As fox the thinge that

hot bappeneth bnto vg / it commeth all fo2
dure wicked wok a greate tines / vet halt
thou geuen bs foche g rote / that we are come
into our awne läd a we are co wicked

we haue bꝛok thy tatutes a cõmaunde⸗
mẽtes agane / a mengled oure Celues w the
vnclẽnes of foutlinith Peathẽ. O Lord / art
thou angrpe wos: wylt chou rote vs cleane
Out? p oure rote ¢ name remavne nomoꝛe:
Lo od ol Alraelthou art 8


The. iij boke


endureth pet vnto chis pꝛelentdaye. Ind be⸗
holde / now are we befoze the in oure lynnes /
nom can we not ſtande betoꝛe the in them.
at. Er. K And when Eldꝛas with this prayer had
knowledged the lynne / weping / a lyẽge llatt
vpon che grounde before tze tẽple / there ga ·
thered vnto hym from Jerulalem a greate
multytude or men ¢ wemen / ol ponge men a
mapdẽs, toꝛthere was a very great wept
e mournynge inthe congregacpon. So
Jechontas the lone ot Jehelt one ok the chů ·
den of crael cried / he lãyd onto Eldꝛas: we
haue fynned agaynſt the Loꝛde / becaute we
haue maried oütlandych wemen of the Hea⸗
chen. Horw art thou oucrall Ilrael. We will
ſweare an othe therfoze bute the Loꝛde / that
we (hall put awape all oure wyues / whi
we haue takẽ of the Heathe / Weheir chlidzẽ:
Uke as it is appoynted g by oure foze eſderg.
Stande vpthen / open thou it / and declare it
plarnelpvnto bs /accozding to the lawe ol ß
Loꝛde:foꝛ the matter belongeth ontothe / z
we wyll helpe the / quicte thy leite malp. So
Eldꝛas axole / and tone an othe or the rulers
OF the Pꝛeſtes /g of the Leuites /a of Alraei /
to do alter there thinges:and they tware,
CAfter Eldzas pad rende the lawe / the people put
adape thetr Rrafige wpuestand then returnetheuce
ry man merely vnko his awne dwellynge.
Che. ir. Chapter.
Hen Eldasttove vp Ho the courte
ob the tẽple without / ¢ went in to
the chamber or Jonathas p lonne
DoF Halabus /a remapned there / a
de no meate mozdzonhe dayne / koꝛ mul
tptude ofthe wyckednes ofthe people. And
there was made a pꝛoclamacyõ in all ew
Gat Ferutalé /fo7 all Coch as were gathered
at Jerulaſẽ out of captyupte / 5 wholdeuer
cane nottoJerulalk within two oz ih daes
(accozdpng to the iudgemẽt ok § olde loꝛdes
ol counceiſ hig goodes wulde be taken krom
kim / a be excluded from the congregacyd ol
S captpupte And inthzedapes were all they
oF the tribe of Juda a BenFanun gathered
together at Jerulalem / the Ax. daye of the. ix
moneth. End ö whole multitude lat trẽblung
inthecourte of thetfple, toit was winter.
Ho €ldzas arole vp / a lapde vnto them: pe
haue done onrightuoully in that ye haue ta⸗
ken outlandyche wyues to martage / a lo to
increale p tynnes ot Pract. Andnow ow ·
ledge the tame / a geue prapte vnto che Loꝛde
God of dure fathers (a perfourme his wyll /
departynge krö the Heathen of the lande / 4
From the öutlandych wpues. Chen cryed the
whole multptude with loude bopce/ a lapde:
lyke as thou hat ſpoken / lo wyñl we do: but
£0260 moch as the people are manp / andthe
wynterhere / we may not ſtande withoutthe


houle:agapne / this woꝛcke is not a thynge /
that can be kynyſbed ina daye oꝛ two / to we
be manpßhaue fynnedin there thinges:Dz-
dꝛene thertoꝛe / p the rulers of the multitude
Fall they that dwell with vs / z as many as
haue outlandyſb wyues / the Pꝛeſtes allo 4
iudges of euerp place map ſtande in d tyme
appornted / tpl they lowte vp the wzath or
the Lozde in his bulynes.

Chen Jonathas 8 ronne of zelt /a Dats
at and Checam re ceaued the charge ol thys
matter / Boꝛozamus / ¢ Letus/¢ Saba⸗
theus helped chemtherto. Akterthts /all 455
ſtode vp g were come out of captpupte, And
Eldꝛas the Pꝛeſt chole vnto him the pꝛincy ·
pall men krö amonge the Fathers accozdpng
totheir names / a inp new mone ofthe tenth c
monech they fatt together / to examen thys
matter. And tothe matter was a determyng
(cOcerning the men p had outlandich wyues)
bntyll s new mone ok the kyꝛlt moneth. And
olthe Pꝛeſtes p had mixte them lelues wil
outlandyſh twp wes / there were kounde: Ok
fonnes of Jelu the tonne of Joſedec and hys
bꝛethzẽ / Mazeas / Eleazar / Jonibus a Jod-
deus / which offred them Celues to put awaye
their wyues /e to ollre a rime koꝛ their igno ·
ratice. And of 5 connes or Semmert/Mal⸗
eas / z Elles /a Jeclech A zariag. Dep connes
of olera / Limiolias / Hitmaen/ Hathanea /
Julſio / Jeddus / a Callag. And ol che Lewitt
Jolabdüg / Demels / a colnis Caletas/fa⸗
cteas / Colnas /a Ellonag. Ot che fyngers ol
the Sanctuary / Eltarib / Zackarus. Dé che
posters Dallumus a Colbanes. And oF Fle
rael / ok the chyldꝛẽ of Foꝛo / Oni / ¢ Wemiag/
€ Geddtas /a Melchtas / Michelus / Elea ·
Zarus / Jemmebias /and Bannag. And or che
chyidzen of golaman / Chantas / Zachari /
Jeizrelus / Joddius / Erimoth e Elias. And
ok the lonnes of Jathoim / Eltadag / Liala⸗


mus /g Sochias /Lavimothy/ Sabois g Ce- S


bedias. And ol che lonnes of Zebes / Johan⸗
nes / a maniasSabdias a Emmmeus. Andor
the lonnes ol Bannus Olammus / Malu⸗
chus / Jeddus/Jalub Alabus 8 Jerimoch.
And ot 8 Connes of Addin / Maatus / a Moo⸗
Sia8/4 Caleus / Raanag / Maaluas / Ma⸗
thathtas / Belel / Bannus and Manalles.
Sele nene ide benen,
/ Dameas / Dimon / BenZamin⸗
Malchus ¢ Darvas. And ok the lonnes ok
Alom / Carianeus / Mathathtas / Pannus /
Eliphalach / Manalies Semet. Ot g fon-
nes ol Bannus/ Jeremy’ Woodtas/ Abzs⸗
mas / Johel / Banẽas / Peliaas, Jona / Mari⸗
moch / Eltaub / Mathaneus / Eütalis / Ozias
Dielus / Semedfus Fambꝛis a goceph. Ot
the fonnes of Mobeus / Adelus / Mathachtas
SDabanus/Secheaa/ Sevim eeu aber
n


Of eld


to maviage/ the pei
Lg elkes a Leuptes (s al thee ?

ete OF Atrael / dwelt at Jerufale ¢ thozow⸗
'oneth /a the chriz ak Altael were in their
dwellinges. And che whole multitude came
together bpo the flooze at p Ealk poe ot the
holp poste of the tẽpie. And they tpake bnto
Ed as the hre Pꝛeſt & reader / chat he wolde
byinge the iaweot Moles, which was geuk
ok the Loꝛde Godot Ilrael. So Eldzag the
hve Beek bꝛought the lawe bnto the whole
multitude / to n ¢ woma/gtoall Petes /p
they maiht heare p lawe/ in 6 new mone of
uh moneth And he reö ind floze p18 betoze
bolp poꝛte of 6 tẽple / trõ momyng ears
Ip onto ö euenyng / bekoꝛe men a wemẽ. And


they applyed their mynde all onto p lawe.


And Eldzas the Pꝛelt g reader ofthe lawe


F toe bp bps a lcattoide of wodd / which was


made therfoze: a vpon his ryght harde there
ftode by him Mathathias, Damus / anant⸗
ag / Azatias ui:ias / Ozechtas / a Ballamꝰ:
pon his lette hand ſtode faldeus / Milael /
Malachtas/ A bulchas / Dabus / Mabadias
d Sacharp. Chen toke Etozas P bone befoze
the whole multitude / fo2 he was the pʒrnci⸗
pali / a had in mooſt honour ok them ali. Ind
when he had red out the lawe/ they ſtode all
ſrayght bpon theirtete. So Efozas pꝛapled
the Loꝛde the mooſt hye God / che Dimpghty


a za,
eeneas. Hee bad take uclandptp wen


wr The. ij, boke of
Eldꝛas.


bitf,


The yrople is reproued Fos tbeir onehanchéutnes
cam konde another prople vr thele wyll not be
med.


che Fe Chapter.
5 ip


Sod ok Hokkes And aliche people anlwered: egy


Amen:and helde vptheirhandes / kel downe
fat bpon the earth ¢ prapledche ozo, And


Jeſus/Beneas / Sarebiag/Fadvimus/Ac- ch


cubus / Sabbatheus Caliches / Azarias /
Joradus/ Anantas / Philtas the Leuiteg
Ape their hdd vpwarde / z bowed their faces
to p grounde / a pꝛayled ? Lo hole were
cher which taught p lawẽ of p Lozd/¢ red B .
lawe of the Lom in the congregacpö: a eue⸗
ry man fet thole befoze p vnderſtode $ lame.
Chen tpake Atharates onto Eldzas thehye
Pieſt a reder / a to the Leuites p taught the
miltytude / ſaying: Chis dape is holy vnto ß
Loꝛde: gall they that had hearve the lawe /
wepte So Eldzas fayde: Departe poure
waye then / a eate the bet / a dꝛinke the fiwe-
telt / a lende gylteg vnto the ß haue nothing:
Coz. this dave is holy vnto the Loꝛde / a be not
ie Chen wente they their wape euery⸗
e / ate a dꝛoncke / a were merr / z lene re
wardes vnto thé that had nothing / that they
allo myght ente % gladnete kozchey were
ercedinglꝝ veioplen/thozow the woꝛdes that
were red vnto them in the lawe: Andlo ther
were all gathered together at Jerulalem to
holde the kent / accoꝛdyng tothe couenaũt ol
the Loꝛde God of Alrael.
¶ Che ende ol che thrꝛde bote ol Eldꝛas.


Hanes be the pꝛeſt: J gaue pou lyght in a Ero. rij. d.
ppler of fyze / andigreate wonders haue 3
done amonge vou:pet haue ye koꝛgottẽ ni /
fapth the Loꝛde.
Chus Capth the almyghty Loꝛde: J gaue
Pou quaples to cate / d tentes foz your fuc-
court: Neuertheles pe murmured / and alcri⸗
bed not the bictozy ok youre enempes vnto
my name: pee thys dame dape do ve vet murs
moute. here are p beneiptes / that ped


xSoaplen rut e nynges / and gaue pou Manna to eate.*Ye th


ume. xx. b.


The.iiij, boke


done fo; yous when ye were hongrye intye
wöldernes / dyd pe not crye vnto nie:; ohr
halt thou bzoüght vs into chys wyldernes
to hyll vs: It had bene better toz v / ta haue
lerued the Egypciãs, then to dye in this wil⸗
dernelle. Chen had A pptye bpd youre. mour⸗


ate angels foode, hen ve were thpꝛltye /
dydnot Ahewe dhardſtone / a cauled water


Ctollowetherout For che ate J couered


gate v.


* Elate. ld


Por with the leaues oF d trees. J good pleas
faunt kat land gaue ? vou: J caſt out the Ca⸗
nanites / the Pherelpteg and Philpſtines be⸗


koze pou.* hat can J do moze ko: vou / Mal


lapeth the Loꝛde?
Cbhus lapth the Aimpghepe Loꝛde: hen
pe were in the wyldernes / in the water ok the


Amoꝛptes./beinge a theꝛtt / a blalphempnge


mypname / gaue vou not tpꝛe ko pour bats
phempes / but cat a tree intothe water / and
made the ryuerlwete. what Hall J do vnto
the / O Jacob: Chou quda woldeſt not obeye
me. J topll tune meto another people / and
nto thole well 4 geue my name / that ther
ave hepe my ſkatutes. Seing pe haue koz⸗
faken me, wyll fozcake vou alto. When ve
del pe me to be gracpous onto vou / chall
haue no mercy vpon you. When pe call bpd
me / J welt not heave pow. soz ve haue dely⸗
led poure handes with bloude / and youre fete
are kwykt to cõmyt mandlaughter. Fe haue


not koꝛłanẽ melin a maner) but youre awne
ſelues / cayth the Loꝛde.

Thus lapth the aimyghtye W oꝛde : haue
not prayed pou / as a father his connes / aß a
mother her daughters / e as a noꝛſſe her xõge
babes / that ye wolde Sanden eZ hula


be youre God that ve woſd be mychplozen/


Wath. xxud and A chulde be poure atone father? * A gas


1 Glale. l. d. 5
Irvi. a


thercd pou together / as an henne gathereth
her ebe eng vnder her wynges. But now


what Hall J do vnto pon? F Mali caſt von
Pout kromp face? Then pe offre onto meg


hall turne mykace from vou: koꝛ pourefos
lempne kealt dapes / voure newmooneg / and
poure circumcytyõs haue 2 forſaken. J tent
vnto pou my ſeruaũtes the Pꝛophetes / whõ
1417 taken and lane / and tome their bo⸗

eg in peces / whole bloude J well requpze
ok youre handes lapeth the Loꝛde.

Thus lapeth che Almpghty Lode: youre
houle mut be defolate. J wypll cat von out
as the wynde doth the ckrawe:poure chyldzen
‘Tall not be krutekult / tos therhaue deſppled
my commaundement / and done the thinge
that is euen bekozeme. Youre houles wyll
Igeue bnto a peoplethat hall come / a they
that neuer herde me thal beleue in me:a ther
unto whom J neuer ſhewed tanen challdo
thethinge that J cõmaunde the, hey haue


lene no Pꝛophetes / vet ball they cau chelr
tynnes to remembzaunce and knowledge
them. J repoꝛte me vnto the grace / 6.3 wil
do koꝛh people which is to come / whole chil
dien reiople ingladnes: ¢ though therhaue
not ſene me tepth bodelp eyes / bet in Ipꝛete
ey beleue the thinge that J tape. And now
bꝛocher / beholde what greate woꝛchyppe / a
fethe people that cometh from the eatt, vn⸗
to whom J wyllgeue the dukedom of Abza⸗
ham /Sfaacand Jacob / ol Dleas / Amos / æ
Micheas / ot Joe / Abd / Jonas Naum / d
Abacuc/ ot Sophonp /Aggeus/Sachary/e
lacht which is called alto an angell (oz
meflenger)o€ the Lozde,
cl e en ndeth kaute with her awne chile
ese he e, calted, Ob a
wee deren mae
A e 4 bz
is people out of bõdage / gaue
them my cõmaundementeß bymp
D lteruauntes the Pzophetes / whoni
thou woldeſt not heare / but del piſed my col
ſels. The mother that bare them / lapeth onto
ences iad a ve chrldzen / toꝛ J am
a wyddowe and fozlaken: J bꝛought vou vp
with gladnefie/but with lo ow and heurnes
haue Flot vou: to pe haue lynned befoze the
Loꝛdẽ youre God / and done the thynge that
is euell betoꝛehim. But what hail J nowdo
vnto you: q am a wyddotw and fozfaken: go
voure wape / O my chyldꝛen / and alnem
OF the Loꝛde. As Foz mie / O father / J call b
the koꝛ a wytnelle ower the mother of thete
chridzen / which wolde not kepe my coue ·


naunt:that thou bꝛynge them to coukulyon /


undtheir mother to a tpople / that che beare
no moꝛe. Let their names be ſcatredabꝛoade
amonge the Heathen / let them be put out or
the earth /fo2 they haue thought lcome of
my couenaunt.

100 be vnto the ĩ dur / thou that hrdeſt the
vnryghtuous bythe. Chou wycked people /
remembze what Add vnto Sodome a So⸗
moꝛre / whole lande i turned to pitch and al⸗
thes . Euen to allo weil do vnto all them /
that heare me not / lapeth p aumrghty Loꝛd.
‘hus lapeth the 102d onto Eldzag: Cellm
people/thatZ wyll geuethemtbeRingdome
ok gerulalem / which J wolde haue gene vn
to Firael.cheitgtozp allo wyll A tãtze vnta
me /a geue them the euerlaltynge taberna⸗
cles / which J had pꝛepared fo2 thote.

Che tree dk lyte chalbe bntolhema twete
Amellynge oyntement: ther chall necher ia⸗
boure noꝛ be weery. Go pe youre waxe / and
ve ſhall receaue it. Pꝛape toꝛ poure ſeiues a
kew dapes / p ther mare dwell cherin. How
is the Exngdome prepared koꝛ Up ord
watche. Cake heauen andearth to witnene /


Ok Eldꝛas. ix.


haue bꝛoken the euel in peces / zcrea⸗
ted the good / kor Alpue lapth the Loꝛde.
Mother embsace thy chyldzen / and bꝛynge
them bpwyth gladnele: make their fete as
ss Lan. Aba cholen the / faveth
206.

Andchole that be deed wyll J rapte op
agapne from their places and biynge them
out ot the graucs / to: A haue knowne my
name in Ilrael.Heare not thou mother ol 8
chyldꝛen / koꝛ q haue cholen the / tapeth the
Loꝛde. And Foz thybelpe J that lende the my
Ceruauntes Clapand Jetemp / after whole
coũcell q haue lanctyfped a prepared fo? the
xij. trees with dyuerle krutes / and as manx
welles / lowynge with mylck and honp / and


the Loꝛde. Memẽ⸗
Achall bꝛynge the


pou toꝛ euermoꝛe. Fle the thadowe ok thys
woꝛlde / receaue the iopkulnes ok youre gio⸗
xy. J tebtvive my laupoure openiy: O rez
ceaute the gyttthat is geuen vou / e be glad /
Geupnge thanches vnto hym / that bath cal ⸗
led pou tothe heaueniy Ryngdome.
Arple vp /g dtande kalt ibeholde the nom E
bre ok thate that be lealed in the keaſt of the
Loꝛde / which are departed from the chadow
ok the woꝛdde / and haue receaued glozpous
garmentes of che Lozde. Cate thynombe
D Sponjand hut vp thy purptped / which
haue fulkplled the lawe of the Loꝛde. Che
nombze of thy chylozen whom thou longe⸗
deſt koz /in fulkillediheſeche the power ofthe
Lope / that thy people which haue bene cal ·
led kromche beg ynnynge / mape be halowed.
J Eldꝛas ſawe vpon the mount Sion a
Greate people / whom Jcoude not nombꝛe /
andthepall praplen the Loꝛde wyth ſonges
ok thankelgeurnge, Andnthe meddeſt of
them there was a ponge man ofan bye ſta⸗
ture / moꝛe excellent then all they / and spon
euerx one or their heades he let a crowne / ¢


was euer higher and hrgher / whych J mare


üeled atgreatip. og athed the angelt / and
larde: Srz / what are iheler Deanlwered a
lapde onto me: Chele be they that haue put
ob the moꝛtall dlothingeand put on the im⸗
maoꝛtall / andhaue telt pfped and knowiedged
the name of God. Now are they crowned / a
receaue the rewarde.

Then faye A onto the angel what yong
perfonne is it / that crowneth them / and ge
ueth them the palines in their handes: So
he antwered a ſayde vnto meigt is the tonne
OF God / whom they haue knowledged in the
woꝛlde Chen vegane z greatly to chmende
them / that code fo typ fo2 the name of che
Loꝛde. And fo the angel lapde vnto me: Go
thy waye / and tell ny people / what maner
ok thynges andhow 1125 wonderg of the
Loꝛde thy God / thou halt lene.


Che wonderons worches which Wob dpd kor the
Nd tr n: Eldeas tmarueleth py aes ats
reich the Wabplonpans to haue rule ouer his people /
which vet are lynners allo.


Che. ij. Chapter.


the thyztye veare of the fall of
checrtpe J was at Babplon/ and a
areteoubled spo mp bed and my
ESS thoughtes came vp ouer my here:
ko; I fawe the delolacyonol Sion / and the
fone wealth ot them that dweit at Baz
lon: and mpſfpzete was loze moued / lo ?
J beganne to lpeane fearful wo des to the
Sot er r larde: O Londe Loꝛde / chou
tpaket at the aati, chou plas
tedſt che earth (andthat 15 scat


The.tij.boke


and gaueſt commaundement ontothe veo⸗
ple / and a body vnto Adam / whych was a
creature oF thy handes / and batt bzethed in
hum the bzeth ok lpke: and tobe lpued before
the / a thou leddeſt hym into Paradile / which
garden of plealure thy ryahthande had pla.
ted / o; euer the earth was made. And onto
hymthou gaueſt commaundement to loue
thy wave / which he tranſgreded / and imme⸗
dpatly thou appoyntedeſt death in hym / and
im hys generachons. Othym came nacions /
trybeg / people and kynredes out of nombze.
Andeuery people walkedatter their atone
wyll / and dyd nyce thynges befoze the: and
bd 155 thy commaundementes / they delpy⸗
fen them,

But in procede oftyme thou bꝛoughteſt
the water floune / vpon thole that dwelt in ß
woꝛlde and deſtropedſt them. And lpke as
the death was in Adam / lo was the water
floude alto inthele.Heuerthelelle one of thé
thoulettettnamelp oe with his houſhold /
ok whome came ail ryghteous men Andit
happened that when they that dwelt bpon
the cavth / beganne to multppipe / and had

otten many childzẽ / and were a greate peo⸗
deten, beganne to be moze vngodiy ther

e fy ett,

How when they alllyued to wycnedly be⸗
koꝛe the / thou dydeſt chole the a man front
alnonge them / whole name was Abꝛaham.
Mym thou louedeſt / and vnto hym onlythou
wewdeſt thy wyll / and madeſt an eucrla⸗
ſtenge couenaunt wyth hem / pꝛomplinge
hem that thou woldeſt neuer ko lane bys
krde. And vntohym thou gaueſt Flaac/ vnto
saa thougaueſt Jacob and Cfau.

8 koꝛ Jacob thou dydeſt chole him / and put
bache lau. And lo Jacob became a greate
multytude.

And it happened that when thou leddelt

Chis teve out of Egypte / thou bꝛoughteſt the
op to the mounte Sport / bowynge downe
theheauens / lettynge kalt the earth / mo⸗
uynge the grounde / ̃akpnge the depthes to
ſhalke / and troublynge the wonde: And thy
glozywente thoꝛow koure poztes of fyꝛe / a
earth quanes/ and wyndes/ and colde that
thou mpgbtet geue the lawe vnto the lede
ol Jacob / and dylrgence vntothe generacps

on ok Atrael.

i 5 5 W eo thé
at wycked hert / d thylawe mpghtbzpnge
koꝛth krute in them. Fo the kpſt Adam bare

a wyckedhert / tranigreſled / and was ouer⸗
come. a lo be all thep that are boꝛne okhym.
Thus remapned weakines with the lawe in
che herte of p people / wyth p wyclledneſſe ol
che bote: fo that che good departed awaye /
and the euell above Epil, Sothe tymes pal ·


ledawape / a the veares were brought to an
ende. Chen dydelt thou raple d vy a feruatic
called Bauid / whoin thou commaundedlt to
buylde a cite vnto thy name / and to ore vp
incenſe and lacryfpce vnto the therin. Thus
was done now many yeares. Chen the inba-
byters ob the cyte koꝛlone the / a in ali thing
drd euen as Adam and an hes generacpons
had done: £02 they allo hada wycked herte.

Andlo thou gaueſt thy cpte ouer into the
handet ofthyne enempes. a re they of Babi⸗
lon then better and mozerpghteous thenthy
people / that they ait thertoze haue the do ·
mpnyon of ron⸗ Fo; when J came there / a
lawe their ongodlpnes / and ro greate wyc⸗
kednelle / that it coulde not be nombꝛed: pee
when myloule fawe to manx euell doers (in
xxr veare my herte fa yd me /loꝛz faves
how thou fuffret them in coch vngodipneg /
¢ Cpavet the wycked doers: but thyne awne
people halt thou roted out / a pꝛeleruedthrne
enempes / and thys halt thou not ſbewed me.

can not perceaue hou thys happeneth.
Do they of Babylon then better / then thex
ol pon: Oꝛ is there any other people/ that
knoweth the / ſauynge the people olg crael?
D7 what generacton hath fo beleued thy co⸗
uenauntes / as Jacob: nd pet their rewarde
appeareth not / a their labour hath no krute.
Foz q haue gone here and there thoꝛow the
Heathen /a le that the be rych a wealthy /
ethynche not vpon thy commaundemétes,
Wehe thou therfoze dure wpchednetie now
in the balaunce / ¢ theirs alto that dwell in
the woꝛlde / a lo Mail a bed be nowhere
kounde but in Ilrael. Dz where is there a
people bpon earth / 5 hath not lynned befoze
the: Oz what people hath lo kepte thy com ·
maundementes: Chou Chait fynde / that It⸗
tael by name bath kepte thp pzeceptes/ but
not the other people and Heathen. :
CC Che Aungell re pꝛoueth Clras-hecdule he femed
to enter into the profounde wdgementes of Sod.

¶ Che. iii. chapter.


me ananlwere / a fapde: Chy here

sbath ta len to moch vpon it in thrs
woflde ‘and thou thynckett tocompzehende
the waye ol the hyeſt. Chen layde Hy ce my
Londe. And he ancwered me / and lapde: 1
aim fent to chewe the thꝛe wapes / and to let
forth thze tymplptiides / befoze the: wherol
pr thou canſt declare me one / J wyll che we
the allothe wave / that thou delpzeſt to le:
and z thal hewe the from whence the wyc⸗
hed herte commeth . And I lapde: Tell on
my Loꝛde. Chen ſapde he bnto me: Gothe
wave / weye me the weyght of the kyꝛe / oꝛ
mealure me the blaſt of the winde / oz came

ag


Hd theaungellthat was cent onto z
me (whole name was Uziel) gaue


YOkeldꝛas.


agapne the dape that is palt. Chen antwee
red J and fayoe: nshat man bozne is able to
dothat: Why requyzet thou loch of me:
Andhe fapde vnto me: Ac I ſpulde athe the /
how depe dwellynges are in the ee? Oꝛ how
Greate water ſpungz ave ps the firmamẽt!
D7 how great water ſpꝛynges are in the bez
gennynge ok the depe: Dz which are che out
Joing dot Baradple: Peraduẽturethou wol⸗
delt faye onto me: J neuer wente downe
vet in tothe depe noz hell /nether dyd J euer
Alximme bp in to heauen Neuerthelelle now
haue I atten the but only of fyꝛe and wynde
and ob the dape / where thozow chou haſt tra⸗
uapled / and from the which thou cant not
be leparated: and pet canſt thou geue me no
antwere ol them.

He larde moꝛeouer vnto me: Chyne awne
chruges / aloch as are growne vp with the⸗
cant thou not knowe: how chulde thy oedelt
then be able to compꝛehende the wa xe of the
Hpek / and now outwardly in the cozvupte
wozlde / to vnderſtande the corupcyd that is
euydẽt in my tight: hen capde J onto hem:
It were better that we were not at all / then
that we ſhulde ſyue in wyckednelde / a tolul⸗

96 kre / and not to hnow wherkoꝛe. He anfwered
me / and ſayde: J wente in a wod/ e the trees
toke loch a deupce and fapd: Come let vs go /
and kyght agaynſt the lee / that it maxe de⸗
parte àwape befoze vg / and that we mare
make bs vet moze woddes.

Che floudes of the tee allo in tyke maner
toke this deuyce / and larde: Come / let bs go
vy / and kyght agaynſt the trees of the wodd /
that we mãye make oure lande the wyder.
Che thought and deupce ok the wodd wag
but vapne and nothenge wosth/ kor che kyze
came and conſumed the wodd: Che thought
ol the flounes ol the lee came Iphe wyle to
ae alſo / koꝛ the ſande ſtode bp and ſtop⸗
pedthem.

Ikthou were iudge now betwyrte chete
two whom woldeſt thou iuſtytpe / oz whom
woldeſt thou condenme: J ant wered a lad:
Wierelpitisafolph thought that they both
haue deupled. For the graunde is geuen vn⸗

do the wodd / and the lee allohath his place to
beate bps floudeg. Chen ant wered he me / ¢
lade: Chou haſt geuen a right iudgement /
why tudgeſt thou not thy keike allo⸗ For Ipke
as the grounde is geuen vnto the wod / and
che tee to his floudẽs:euen lo they that dwell
bpon earth / may vnderſtande nochynge / but
chat which is vpon earth: andhe that dwel⸗
lech aboue the heauẽg / maponip onderdiade
the things thatare aboue the heauẽs. Chen
anfwered J/ and fayd:9 belecheß / O Loꝛd /
let me baue vnderſtandynge: fo2 it was not
mpmpmbecobe curyous ofthebee tonnes)


but of loch ag we daylp medie with all / na⸗
melp, wherkoze that Alraelis blalphemed of
the Heathẽ ako: what caule ö people (whõ
“thou euer halt loued is geuẽ ouer / to be pu⸗
nyched of ungodlxnacros:a why the lawe or
dure fathers is bought to naught / aß wꝛit⸗
ten couenaũtes come to none effecte:/ ¢ we
palle awaxe out of the woꝛlde as p grechop⸗
pers & oure life is a bevy keare / a we are not
woꝛthy to optapne mercp. what wyll he do
then vnto his name / which is canned bpoouer
vs DE thete chinges haue J athed queſtpö.
n red he me/e lapde: Che moze €
thou Cearchett/eyemoze thou ſhalt maruel /
£07 the worde hatteth fatt to pale awape /
can not compꝛehende the thynges / that are
pꝛomiled Foz the tightuous in tyme to come /
kos thys woꝛlde is full of onrpghtuoumnes
ese e the thonges nner
ut as concernynge the thynges whero
thou ackeſtme / J wyllteirthe. Ehe euell is
lowne but the deſtruccpon therok isnot et
come. V the euell now that is lowne / be not
turned vplpde downe / a yr the place where ß
euell is lowne /patte not awape / then can
hot the thinge come p ig lowne with good.
Fon the coꝛne of euell lede bath bene fone
inthe hert of man fromthe begynnynge / and
how moch ongodlynes hath he brought vp
onto thys tyne and how moch thallbe vee
bzinge koꝛth / vntyll he come into the barne⸗
Pondze now bpthplelke / when p coꝛne ol
euell fede is cutt downe how greate a barne
wall it fyll:J antwered and lapde: how and
thé thal thele thinges come to page? woher⸗
kope ave oure peares few e eueil: àndhe an⸗
Cweredme/fapinge: Halte not thou to moch
po che Hyett/Eozthy haltpnes to be abouẽ
him is but vayne / chou maket to moch a do.
Dydnot the Coutes allo of Hryghtuousathe
quettyon of thete thynges in their holynes /


fapinge:* ow longe Mall g hope of this fas Ka pota dt. b.


w pon ohen cometh the krute ok my barne /
and mp rewarde⸗ Ind bpon this Jeremiel 5
Archangell gaue them anlwere / and lapde:
Euen when the nombze ok the ledes is kplled
in vou: koꝛ he hath wevedthe woꝛlde in p ba ·
launce: inmealure ¢ nombze hach he mea⸗
ſuredthe tyme / andmoueth it not / vntyn the
fame meature br fulkplled. Chen antweren
J and lapde: O Loꝛde L ode / now are we
all Eull ol lynne / and koz oute lane peraduẽ ·
ture it is not that the barne of the ryghtu .
ous hall not be filled / becaule of the fynnes
ok them that dwell bpon the earth.

Sobe ancwered me / a Cayo. Goth wave w
cos wonid with chride / and alke of her wh
che hath kulkplled her ir. monethes / vt her
chilveben mape kepeß bpzth anptonger with
in her. Chen karde J. Londe / that can the

Bbb. ). not.


The. iii


not. Andhe tapde bnto me: In heil the recrete
places of foules are iphe the pꝛeur chamber
ofa woman Foꝛ lyke as a womanthat trae
uaplech / mazeth bate, when the tyme a ne⸗
celſpte ol the byith is athande: Euen to doth
fhe hate todelpuct it that is cõmytted vnto
er. Lone what thou delpꝛelt to le / it halbe
ewed the From the begynnynge. Chen ane
kwered z dame haue founde fauoure
inthylyght/and vr it be potibie/ and t I be
mete therfoze che we me then / whetherthere
be moꝛe to come then is patk , 02 moze pat
chen is koz to come. iB hat 1g pat / J knowe:
but what is koꝛ to come /A nnowẽ not.
And he fapoe onto me: Stande vy bpon
the ryght ede / on expounde the lymp⸗
Iptude vnto the. So J ſtode / and beholde / an
whote burn eng ouẽ wente ouer betoꝛe mesg
it happened p when the lame was gone by /
thefmoke had che vpper bande: Atterthes
there went ouer befoze me a waterpclouse /
Klent downe moch rapne wa Hommere whe


the ſtozmp rayne was pat the dꝛoppes re⸗


mayned ſtyil. C hen lapde he vntome: ipke as
che rayne is moze then the dꝛoppes / and as


the kyze exceadech che mone / eus ſo the mea⸗


Cure of the thynges that are patt / hath the


vpperhande. Chen wente the dꝛoppes a the


Smoke aboue: and J prayed and lapde: M ap


A lpuelthenkeſt thou oneph that tyme? O


what ſhallhappẽ in thole dapes: he ancwe⸗
redme / and lapde: 48 fo2 the tokens wherot
thou athett me /I mape telithe of them in a


signe” parte: pt s touchyng *thpipfe/Fmap not


here the / koꝛ J am noolent cherkoꝛe:·
MClozag andthe Aungeil commen togelher.
' © Che. v. Chapter. 2


atwell vpon earth / halbe tan in a
gleate nombꝛe / and the waye ol the trueth
albe hyd / and the lande chalbe baren from
. iniqupte Mall haue the vpperhad /
phe as thou bak lene now / a ag thou halt
earde longe agoo. Ind the lande that thou
ert now to haue rule / walt thou thoztlp ce
alte. But yt God graute che to pie chou
walt te after the thözd tröpet / that the funne
Shall foventy ch pne agapne in the npabe, and
the moone thzetymtes in thedaye and blonde:
Wall dꝛoppe out of wodd / the fone Mail
euehis bopce/4 f people chalbe bnqu pete:
cuenhe thatlrule / whom they hope not 6
well vpon earth / a the Foules chall t / and
(the Sonompt pth cer Wall cat out bys fit /
andmahee a noplé in the nyght which many
Mall not hnowe / but they chan all heare the
vopcetherok.
Chere walbe a conlulxõ allo in many plae.


„ euerthelelie/ as concernpnge the
a Nel tohens/mavnets:iBebole’ the f
XN aves thal come ee


boke


ces / and the Fyre ſbalbe okt tent agapne / and
the wylde beates hall go chrir wape / and
menſirucus wemen hall beare monſters / a
ſalt waters chalbe 1 inthetwete: one
krende (hall fight agapntt another: then Hal
all wyt and vnderſtandynge bebpo.and put
alpde into their ſecrete places / and chalbe
Sought of many / and pet not be founde: chen


wall bnryahtuoulnes and voluptuoumes


haue the vpperhande vpon earth. One lande
allo ſhall athe another / and ſaxe: Is rygh ·
teoulnes gone thoꝛow the: andit wan tape:
No, At the lame tyme chall men hope / but
nothynge optapne: they walt Jaboure / but
their wapes dhallnot pꝛolpere.

Co Heme the toche tonens J haue leue /
and vr thou wilt pꝛaxe agayne / and wepe as
now / and fat ic uen dapes/ thou Malt heare


pet greater thinges. Chen 3 awalied / anda


keattulnes wente thozow all my body / and
mymynde was feble and caretuii / lo that J
almoſt io wned withall So the aungel that
was come totale withme / helde me / come
koztedme/ and letme vp vponmp fete,

And mthe (econde nyght it happened / 8
Salathtel the Captayne of the people came
onto meſtapinge: Where batt thou bene: @
why is thycoũtenaunce lo heup: Anowelk
thou not/ chat Icrael is commrrted vnto p /
in the lande of their captyupte: mp then / a
kate / and koꝛlake vs not / as the rde
that leaueth bys flocke in the bi of wyc⸗
ked wolues Fhen lardeg vnto hym: Go thy
waye fro me / and come not nye me: and he
Pane it and as 3 ſayde/ lo wẽte he his waxe

me. And log atte ſeuen dapes / mour ·
nynge andwepinge / lyke as wiel the aun⸗
ell commaunded me. And after ſeuen dapes
it happened / that the thoughtes of myherte
were herp greuous vnto me agayne / and my
ſoule teckauedthe cpzete ot vuderſtandrnge /
and q beganne to tale with the moot hielt
agapne / and lapde: C Lode Loꝛde/ot eue⸗
tp wodd ok the earth a oF all the trees therot /
thou hat cholen the one onely byneparne: @
ok all landes of the whole sori foot K
cholen the one pyt:andof all floutes ofthe
gtounde thouhal cholen the onelplye: and
of all the depthes oF: the lee thou halt kylled
the one ryuer: and of all bupdedcrtyes chou
halt halowed So pon onto thy elke: and ot all
the foules that are created / chou halt named
che ane doue: a of all the catell that are made
thot haſt pꝛoupdedthe one chepe: and amõge
all the multytudes ot folckes thou batt got
ten the one neonle and vnto this people wd
thou louedeſt / thou gaueſt a lawe / that is
pꝛoued ot all.

And now/ c) Lozde / wh halt thou geuẽ


this one people ou er vnto many?ebpon 4


Ok Eldꝛas.


dne rote thou halt pꝛepared other / and wyy creature bare it? euen ta might tt nom a
halt thou kcatred thy one oniypeople amöge heave them that be pꝛelent / at once. rye]
manp-twhichtreade them downe / pee which fapdt onto me: dine pchridebed of a moms
haue euer withſtande tür pꝛomples / a neuer alape onto her: Ik thou bꝛyngen Eozth chyl⸗
beleued thy cournauntes? Andthough chou dzcty, wör doeſt thou it not to gether/ but one
wereſt'enempe onto thy people / pet chudeſt akte r another: Pꝛape ber therfoze / to bꝛinge

ou pun m with tone awnehandes. koꝛth ten chyldzen at Once. And J ſapde: he
b whens badtpoue there wordes (5 an. can nok / put mutt dott one alter another,
gell b cämekomethe naht akore / was ſent Chen lade he vnto me: Euen lo haue g
vnto me /a lapde nto me: Heare me / herne bebew. chyldebed vnto the earth / loꝛthole g
tothe thinge Sue a4 call tell § moze. be Cowen vps it by pꝛoceũe of tyme, Foz ithe
And A fapoe: Speak on my Lopde. Chen as a ponge chylde map not bꝛynge koꝛth the
lapd he vnto mie: chou art toe bered a trou⸗ thynges that belonge to the aged / euen lo
bled kor Ilrgels fake. Louek thou people haue Jozdenedthe woꝛlde which J made.
berker thenbim 9 made the And Flarde d And J alned andlapde: Beyng thou halt
Lopde but ol verygrele ¢ compadponhaue now geliẽ me a wape /A wylllpeane befoze
Spoken. Foz mp rernes parne me eiern theikoz dure mother of whom thou haſt tolde
oure / becaule i wold haue experiẽce ofthe me / ls yet vonge / a now Me dꝛaweth nye vn⸗
wape ofthe mol byett/ ato lee aut parto to age He ankweredme/ g lade: ache g wo⸗
bis udgemet Andße larde pneo me: 5 thou man that beareth chribze /a te Mallten 8.
maypeſt not. Ind Ttapde:wherkdze Loꝛde? Sape bntoher : wherfoꝛe are not they wijõ
were onto wag z bonne then: Oz why wag ſhou halt nt w bzought lozch)ipne thole that
notmy mothers chpldebed then my graue: were befoze the / but lente of ttature? And
Sohad A notlenethe mylerp a trouble ok Me Maliantwere the: Chepthat be bonne in
Jacob / a p trauax le ot my people oł Ffrael. che pouth of ltr gth / are of one fachvon:and
And he lapd vnto me- Nombze me things they date bone in the tyme ol age (when the
chat are not pet come: gather me together p chpidebed fapleth) are other wyle. Conlydꝛe
dꝛoppes / p are ſcatred abꝛode: make me the now thy eit / ow that ve are lelie of ſtature /
floures greneagapne/p are wythered open thenthole that were betoze you / alo atether
me the thinge that is cloled: and bꝛinge me that come after vou / leſle then pe / as ö crra·
forth the wyndes / that are hut bp Shewe tures which now begynne to be olde / a haue
me the vmage of a vorce / athen tall Foes patted duer the trength of youth. C hen layd
Glare the dthing / P thou laboureſtto no we. J. onde J beleche the / yr ¥ haue founde fas
And J lapde S Londe Lowe who mape cure in thy lyght / chewe thy leruaunt / by
Rape whom doek thou Hylecthp creature?
v 7 2 am vn⸗ | jungell int
twitechow map then fpeakeokhetechingy Waste toes tiene) Svs and geuetd hen
wherok thou al elt me: Chen lapde he onto Che. vj. Chapter.
me:like ag thou canſt do none of chete ting, Nove lad onto me: Inthe begin ⸗ v
that A haue fpoken ot / euẽ fo canſt thou nok nyng when the ground was made:
fynde out my iudgement / oz in the ende the efoze the woꝛlde ſtode / oꝛ euer the
loue that I haue pꝛompled vato my people. wyndes biew befoze it thondꝛed e
And J fapde: Beholde O Lon pet art thou irgbtened / o euer the foundacpons of Pa⸗
hyebnto kgemthat haue noende: and what rerpfe were laped / betoꝛe che kappe floures
walther do p haue benebefoze me (oz we were bene / o euer dmoueable powers were
at ‘be noww)ozthep chat Wal come atter vs: ablpAhed/betoze the imumerable multk⸗
dhe Capde vnto me: will Iychenmyp tude tude ok angels were gathered together / og
gement onto arynge. Ayhe as there is no euer the hyahnelles of the apꝛe were lyted
llackneſle ak p jaſt /euẽ lo is there no twytt⸗ by / aloze p mealures ot the fpzmamẽt were
netle of the fpct. Bog antwered and larde: named / o euer the chymners in Dion were
couldeſt thou not mae thole (5 haue bene hote / and or the pzelente peares were fought
made / a that be now a that are kor to come) out / z o: euer the inuenciong ofthe that now
in one that thou myghteſt ewe chyiudge⸗ Lynne / were put alpde / beroze they were lea

Dmeneche loonere Chen anrweredhe me / and led that now gatherfapth for a treaſure: then

lapde: he creature mape nothalle aboue d drd 3 conkydꝛe a pondꝛe an thele thinges /
maker / nether maye the woꝛlde holde the at they all were madethoꝛow me / z thoꝛow no⸗
once / that thatbe created. 5 ne other: by me allo they be ended / ¢ by none
Anda apd: Howhalk thou larde then vn⸗ other. Chen anc(wered J afapde: which (halt
to thy leruaunte that thou lpupnge maler be the vartynge alunder of the tymes? Dz
halt made the creature lyuyng at once / a the when halbe the ende Bebe and the bes

iY, = genneng


4


B


The.iiij bokt.


gvnnenge ol itthat toloweth; Andhe lade cyon ſwalbe oucecome:and the trueth which


vnto mr From Abzaham onto Jlage / when bath b.


gacob and Cſau were bogne orhym / Jacobs


longe without krute / halbe des
ned And it happened when be talked with


bande heide fpztt the hele of Elau: ko: lau “me, chat lolled demurelx vpon him / before


is the ende or this worde / and Jacob is the
beg ynnynge ot it that kolowech. The hande
ok ma betwixte the hele and the hand. Other
aueſtron(Elbzas)alke thou not.

J antwered then / and larde: O Node
10nd / pr haue foũde kauoure in thy light /
A veieche the / ſhewe thy leruaune the ende
de thytoneng / wherot thou chewdeſt me part
the ialt nyght. Hohe anlwered and fayoe
vnto me: Stande vp bpd thy kete / and heare
the pertecte vorce and lounde. There wall
comea greace moc pon / but the place where
thou fandet call not be moued. And ther-
kope when thou heareſt the woꝛdes / be not
alraped: ko of the ende Wall the woꝛde and
foundacpon ol the earth be vnderſtande. and
whys the worde therot trembleth and qua ⸗
heth / lo it nnoweth / that it mutt be chaun⸗
geb at the ende. Andit happened / that when
IJ had hearde it J Cove vp vpon my tete / and
hertzened: a beholde there was a voyce that
lpake / a the Counde of it was lpke the lounde
ol many waters / and it fapde, Beholde / the
dapes come that wyll begynne to dꝛawe
nype / and to bplet them that dwell bpd earth /
and will beg ynne tomate inqu yliciõ of thẽ /
what they be that haue hurte equpte w vn
rightudulnes / and when the lowe eſtate of
Spon chalbe kulkylled:and when the word /
that hall vanych a waye / halbe ouerlealed /
then wyll J do theſe tokens,

Che bones calbe opened bekoze the kir⸗
manient/ and they Hail te all together / athe

chbldꝛẽ ok a vere olne hall lpeane with their
bopces:the wemen with ch vide ſhall bꝛynge
koꝛth vntymely chplozen ok thze oꝛ koure mo⸗
hethes olde / and they Mall ipue/ebe rapled
vprc lodenlp e uu une places appeare
as the vnlowone / tull Qoze boutes that foe
denlp be kounde eniptpe andthe tröpet hall
geue a ſounde / which when euery man hea⸗
keth / chey Hhalbe haſtelp aftaped. At ptyme
ſhall krendes fight one agaynſt another lyke
enempes / and the earth tall ſtande in keare
with them,
The lpꝛynges of the welles call ſtande
cyl / and in chze houres they ſhall not renne.
hol deuer remayneth krõ all thele thinges


that J haue tolde the / Wall elcape and lem


caluacpon / and the ende of poure worde.

And the men that are receaued / Mall le it /
they that haue not tated death krom their
byꝛth: and the hert or the indwellers halbe
chaũged / and turned into another meanyng:
fo cuell halbe put out / and dylceate chalbe
quẽched. As foz larth / it chan lo ich / coꝛrup⸗


whom ſtode / and thele woꝛdes fayde he vn
te me: am come to thewe the / the tyme of &
nyght oz to come,

Ethou wylt pape yet moze / a falt ſeuen
dapes agapnẽ / Jchall tell the moze thinges /
greater then bekoze:kozthy voyte is hearde
betoze the D pelt: ko: whrthe Wightrehath
kene the rightcous dealynge be bath kene al⸗ c
Co thy chattpte / whych chou batt had euer
fence thy vouth: and therfoze bath he fent me
to Chet pall chete thynges / and to laxe vnto
the: Be of good comfozte/ and feare not / and
hatte not wyth the tymes that are palt to
thrncke vaynethynges / and make not halle
okche latter tymes.

And it happened after thys, that J wepte
agapne / and fattedfeuen dayes in Ine ma⸗
ner / p J mpahe Eulepll the thre wekeß / which
he toldẽ me. In the eyght npabe was my hert
vexed withiñ me agapne / and J beganne to
ſpeake befoze the pret: Coz mp ſpꝛete was
greatly fet on fpze/ andy loule was in dx ⸗

relle / and Jtapde: D Lorde / thou Cpakett
vnto thy creature fromthe begynnyngeeuẽ
thefpztt daye) and lapdeſt: Let beauen and
earth be maͤde / a thy woꝛde was a pertette
woꝛcke. And then was there the ſpꝛete / and
the darckneſſes were vet on euerylyde / alx⸗
lence:there was no mans bopce as vet from
the. Chen commaundeſt thou a fapzeipabt
to come koꝛth out of thptreatures / that ihr
woꝛcke myght appeare and be ſene.

Upon 97 — dape thou mapdeſt the
ſpꝛete ok the lyꝛmamẽt / and commaundelt
it to parte alunder / ¢tomakea deurixon
betwirte the waters / p the one parte mpght
remapne aboue / and the other beneth. ion
the thyꝛde dave thou bꝛoughteſt to pale / 6
the waters were gathered in the leuẽth part
ofthe earth: Sire partes halt thoudzpenbp/
and kepte them / to thyntent that men m
foe and occuppe bulbandzpe bl 8
Coone as thy worde wente forth / the woꝛcke
was made Noz immedpatlr there wasgrrat
innumerable frute/andmany dyuerte pleas
ſures and delpꝛes of temptacpon floutes of
chaungeable coloure ¢ (mell/ and this was
done thethyꝛde dape.

Upon the fourth dave thou comaundedſt


thatthe Sunne ſhulde geueth bps tyne / a
the moone her Ipqht:the dtarres dydeũ thou
feet in oꝛdꝛe / and gaueſt them a charge:to do
ſerupce euẽ vnto man / p was foto be made.
wponthe kykt bape thou lapdeſt onto the lc ·
uenth parte (where the waters weregathe⸗
ted) b ther chuldbꝛinge forth druerle bea /


—


koules and kylbes. And ro tt eame to page / che ſtrate path betwixte them bath / o ira
chat the domme water and wrthout foule / that there couide but one man go oat, 2
oughtkorth irurnge bealles atthe com. Pk this cyte now were geuen to an here /
maundement of God/ that all people myght z heneuer wete thozoww the pare long wape /
pꝛapſe thy wonderous woꝛckes. Chen dydeſt how wold be receaue his enheritaunce: and
thou pꝛelerue two loules /p one thou caledſt J lapde: t iso L ode. & hen fapse he:Euen
Cnochandtheocher Leuathan, and bydeſt 10 15 Fleael altoa poscpö. And whreloz their
Separate the one krö the other ko the teueth lakes haue J made the wozide:g when Add
Parte(namelp/where the water was gathe⸗ trankgreded my atukes / then was 6 hinge
ted togethernurght not holde themboche. iudged that was done. Chen were g entratis
mito Enoch thou gaueſt one parte / which ces ot the worde made narow / full of ſoꝛow
was dzpedppthethr de dape / that he Muide and trauaple: hey are but tew z euen / full
wel inche lame parte wherin are a chou · ok parels and laboure. Foz the entraunces
lande billes. But bnto Leutathan thou gas ok the fore wozine were wyde and lure / and
uek the leuenth parte namelp the mopt/¢ wee ee krute.
bat hepte hem to deuoure what chou wilt/ 1 Ikcher now whych are entred into thys
wwhan. Upon the lürte dape thou gaueſtcö⸗ wozlde / mape not compzehende thele trace
maundement onto the earth / that befozethe and vapne thinges / moch lede mape they cõ⸗
lechulde bainge Fozth beattes/ catell/gall 5 pꝛehende and vndertande the lecrete things:
Crepe /a(belyoes this) Adam allo who chou ibhpdilquieteſt thou thy cele then / leynge
made Lozde of alithy creatures: Okhm chou art buta conuptible man? And what
come we all /g the people allo / whom thou woldeſt chou hnowe/ where as tyou art but
alt ne pe ar 9 Pee e thou not receaued in
e o thyne herte the e thatis
mygbt ſbewe / howthat the wonde is made butt! det ned ld e
bos dure fahes.48 tor the other people which en tarde J: O Lorde Loꝛde / thou halt


allo come of Adam thou halt lapd that they oꝛdened inthy jawe / p the ryghteous chulde 5


are nothinge but be Ike a lpetle / ahaſt ly inheret theſe thynges butt
kened the abundaũce ol chem vnto a dꝛoppe full and ungut Mage perpibe Lenne
(that lalleth) krom the role of the houſe. Yete therightuous Chall Cufive ttrapte things /
Andnow / O Lopde/the Heathen whych andhope ko; wyde : for they that haue lyued
pauecuer bene reputed as nothynge / haue ongodly and Cuffed dtrapte thynges / wall

e ae

om thou batt cal · ndhe e unto me: Chere ia no iudge
ledthe Fp2tt bozne thy oni begotten /a thy aboue Gen d none that bath tnbeita
keruent loucr)aregeueinto thelrhandesand dynge abouethe Peck. soz there bemany
power. YFihe wozlde now be made fozoure that perych / becaule they delpylethe lawe ok
fakes Why haue we noc the inheritaunce in Godthatis let befoze them. Foz God hath
podenpon with the wozide? Pow lange wall geu ttrapte commaundement do loche as


endure⸗ come that they tnowe what theydo / how
Ache Angel HewethStoras many thinges to come. they chulde Iyue:and ve they ki
— Che. vij. Chapter. wude noebepumpthed. e


bit happenedatterb J hadlpone euerchelellethey were not obedient one


Sane ontomereapetoras/ebeare p wöndes Sch tena kuck. ie e
that Jam come to tell b. And J fapd:fpeake vorne neee n


fEldꝛas, *


10
Us


The, iii boke


thepthat remapne / hal be mery in foureya-
dzed peares. eS

‘ater thele tame peares wall my fone
Chꝛiſt dre / and all men thathauelpte! a the
woꝛide ſhaibe turned in to the olde Iplẽce. bij


dapes / lxne as in the fore iudgmẽtes / lo that ha


ho mé call remapne. And after leuẽ dapes /
He woꝛlde that yet awaleth not / talbe raps
ed pp / and Wall dye coztupte, Andthe earth
thal veltoze thofe that haue depte inher / and
lo ſhal the duſt choſe that dwell in ſlience a
the lecrete places thalldelpuct thole that be
€ cOmitted vnto them. Andthe mot byek call
be openty declared ops the leate ol udamtt /
Kulimplerp tal bantth awape / a longe ſuk⸗
krpnge ſbalbe gathered togecher. But the
iudgment ſhall cõtynue / the treuth all re
mapne /a tapth (hall ware ſtrõge / woꝛcke
{hail folowe, ache rewarde tail be hewed /
the rrghtuoulnelies (all watch / and the vn ·


ryghtuoulne all beare no rule. :
Cabana stan rape ft top
; e Spodomites/ ¢ Woles Foz the fathers ?


* -Spmedinthe wyldernes / g he d came alter
bim fo2 Alrael /in p tyme of achas and Sda⸗
muel :e Zaid koꝛ the deſtruccion / and Da ·

lomon koꝛ them that came in to the Sfctua-
ry / and Deltas koꝛ thole that receaued rapne /
and Foz the deed / that he mraht krue : a ze ·
chias kap the people in the tyme of Denna⸗
cherib g druerle other iniphe maner / which
haue praped ko: manp.

ue lo now leynge ß cozrupte is growne
bp / and wyckednes inckealed / and the rygh⸗
tu ous haue prayed for 5 vngodl / wherkoze
Shall it not be lo now allo⸗
He ant weredme / and larde: This pꝛelent
woꝛlde is not p ende / there remapneth moch
honoure m it cherkoꝛe haue they pꝛaped foz
the weake But thedape of dome thalbe the
ende of this tyme / and the begynnyng of the
immoꝛtalite to to come /wherin all coꝛrup·
cion vaniſbeth / ul boluptuoutnes is lowled
all mytbeleue teken awape / ryahtuoutnes
growne and the berptetpzonge b. Chen
ſpall noman be able to faue him that is de⸗
Aro ped ner to oppꝛeſſe hum p hath gottẽ the
biceoꝛp. J anfwered then / a fayd: & his is my
‘Ep2tt a laſttavinge: 5 it had bene better / not
to haue geuen the earth onto Adam: oz elg


euerlaſtyngehope / where as we ute felucs
are cucll ¢ vapne: a 5 there are layed op tog
vs dwellinges of health s kredome / where as
wehaue ipued euell: and that the woꝛchippe
ok the pelt is hepte to delende them / whych
ue led a pacyent lpte / where as we haue
walcked in z mot wicked apes of all: and
chat there halbe cheweda paradyle / whole
krute endureth Coz euer / wherin is kredome
and medierne / where as we wall not go tne
koꝛ we haue walcked in vnplealaũt places:
Indthat the kaces ot them which haue ab · D
ſtepned / Hal ch yne aboue the ſtarres / where
as dure faces chalbe black and darcke: Foz
whyle we lyued and drd vnryghtuouſip / we
contxdered not / that we chuld lultre thẽrkoꝛe
akterdeath⸗

Chenandwered he me / and lapde: Chis is
the confyderacyon a thought of the battayl
which man hath vpon earth: p yt he be cuer ·
come /he (hall ſuftre as chou batt laxde. But
pr he gett the bictozp / he chall receaue the
thynge that Jtaye. Foꝛ this is the lyte/wher
of Moles ſpake vnto the peopie / whyle he
Ipued/faping: C hole the ite /g thou mapelt
lpue. Mewertheles they beleuedhim not ne
ther the Pꝛophetes alter hom o ner me
which haue ſpoken vntothem/thatheu nes

wide not reach vnto them to their dellruc⸗
cpon lyne as tove is foꝛto come auer thole /
thathaue luffted them leluet to be enkour⸗
3 Lh aia a tapde unone I onde

an 8
that the Hyelt is mercyiull / inthat he bath
mercy vponthem / whych are not pet in the
woꝛlde / and vpon thole allo that watcke in
hit lawe and that he is paciẽt and ionge fut
kerynge towarde thole thathaue fynnedin
their woꝛckt: and that he is tpberalt togeue
where as it requpzeth:andthathe is olgteat
mercp / toꝛhe multiplteth his louynge kynd⸗
neties towarde thole that are pꝛelent / a that
‘ave paſt / and to them which are fo tocome,
Foꝛ yt he multtplpe not his mercies /p woꝛld
wall net be made irurnge / wyth thole that
dwell e geuech alto / £02 pt he gaue
nome ae en baue
euere be


it wat genen him / to kepe him that he healed


Hig now in this packet time to lxue in heup⸗
s, Kalter death to lol foz purichment :
0 5 15 what halt thou done: soz though
iwas chou that fynned / thou art not fatten
Alone / but we all that come ot che. Foꝛ what


1 Hor vohat protyt is kt £oz


def bt ls if pnto vs / yl here be pꝛaͤmplen vs
an ;


Htyme where as we medle with


trove che
ſhulde be here fe
smnuleytudeio or Heed ‘

E. prayeth Sod. 4 ane
ecke rd S en.
che bith chapter.


hes : g öthere is pꝛompled bn an


molt Hyeſt made thys wozlde koz

man, but the wozlve to come Foz

ew. J wll tell thea tempittude /
Eldzas. A when thou athe peach / it wall
faye vnto the / that it geueth moch moulde /
where ok rarchen vellelg are made / but ltle

ob it that golo cõmeth ok. Euen lo is it with
the woꝛeſie archrs worde. Chere be many
cteated butt w Hall be pꝛelerued. Chen an
ſwered J and apd: Then lwalowe vp 6 witt
(chou louie) und oeuoure the vnderſtanding /
toꝛ thou art agreed tohernẽ a to geue eare /
and wyllynge to pꝛophecye:koꝛ thou haſt no
longer l pack geuen the but only to lyue. O


Loide / wylr chou not gene thy ſeruaũt leu; /


that we mau xe pꝛape befoze the / a that thou
mapeſt geur teve vnto cure herte / a buyde
dure vnderſtundynge / that there maye come
krute of itsand that euery one which is coꝛ⸗
rupte / and heareth the ſtate a place ol a mũ /
mapelpuc?

Foz thou art alone / a we allare one woꝛck⸗
nianſhppe ol thyhandes / lyne as thou 55
ſapde sand Ixlze as the body is kachioned n.
in the chyldetbed / and thou geueſt the mem⸗
bieß / and thy creature is pꝛelerued in fpze a
water. g. . monethes doth thy worte fuffre
thy creature / which ts fachioned in her: but
the thyng that pꝛeieruethand it that is pꝛe ·
lerued / hai both be kepte together: a when
tyme is / the chyluetoed delxuereth the thing /
that is kept and growne inher.

Foꝛ thou halt commaunded the bꝛeſtes to
geuemylch sito the krute / that the thynge
which is created and fathioned;maye be no
riſbid foꝛ u tyme: and then thou hylpole ſt a
oꝛdzeſt it with thy mere / bꝛingelt it by with
chyryghiuculneg, nurtureſt it in thy law / a
Lefourmett it with thy vnderſtandyng / moꝛ⸗
tpylielt it an tyy creature / and makeſt it ip-

Bunge asithy woꝛcke. Seynge then? thou
deſtroyelt hin / which with fo great labours
is creates unn kaſyyoned thoꝛowa ty com⸗
maundernent / thou coudettipghtip oꝛdene /
allo / that the thvnge whych is made / myght
be Pest
Andthis lpeakenowol al men ingenc-
rall / as thai imowelt: but ok thy people / ko:

whoſe lane am loꝛp:and of thy inheritaun⸗
ce: Foz whule caule mourne:anb ot q craei /
fos whom enn woklull: and foꝛ Jacob / foꝛ
„ whole atic“) tungreued:therkoze begynne
to pꝛaye het the / fo my felfeand toꝛ taẽ
ko: Fle th c ot vs euen oF vs / that dwell
bpon ea but z haue herde the wyftnes
ol ß fudge ich is to come: therfoꝛe heare
my vopce onderſtande my woꝛdes / and

J Mall (pectic befozethe.
~ Ghisisehehegpnnpnge ol the wozdes ot


Heros. tii,


me ANobeantwered me / lapinge: Che ¢lozas/ befoze he wasieceaucd: O Kode /


thou 5 dwelleſt in euerlaltyngnelle / whole
epes are pkt op in ihe apze / whole Aolc 1s
exceadyng hye / whoie glo⸗ ya maretty mape
not be complehenoed, Pekoze whöthehollig
okheauen tanze wyti ercinblynge / rhote
kepynge is turned in wynde and kyꝛe / n hole
worde is true / whole tuͤlckynge ts Hedin
whole connnaundement 1a lronge / whole
ogdinaunce is Feaclull/whole lone dieth vp
the depthes / whole wꝛath matiety the motte
tapnes to melt awa pe /a whole trueth bea.
reth wytnes: O heare che pꝛayer o€ thy fers
uaunt / and marck with thyne eures the pes
ticion of thy creature. 8 2
Fo whyle J lpue / J wyll Cpeake / and ſo
Tonge as J haue vnderſtandynge / will an⸗
lwere. O lohe not vpon the fynnes of thy
peopie / which ſerue in the cructh. Haue no
refpecte vnto the wicked Guoics of the Hea ·
then / but to the delyꝛe or thole that lie pe thy
teftimonics with Cozowes C hinche not spo
thole that haue waihes fapneoty before the /
hut vponthem / which ww yl haue knowne
thp leare.

Lett it not be thy wyll to dellrope them /
which haue had heaſtiymanerg / bu: to lone
bpd chem that haue clearlptaught thy lame
Tanke thou no mmgnacponntthem / whypeh
ate worle then heaſtes: ut loule chem / that
ullwape put their trult in thy ryghtuoul⸗
nes and glozp:Eo2 we and oure Fathers haue
ullthe lame ocknes and dyleate / but because
2 Connes chow halt be called mercy
ull,
For pkthou halt mercyvpö vs / thou tale
be called meveptielt / whereas we haue ne
worches of rpahheugulneg: fo? 5 rightuous ¢
whych haue la rd dp map good wozches
together / hall vat oF heivnenes receauere⸗
warde. Kor tohat is man / that thou ſhuldeſt
take dilpleature at him: Dz what is the coꝛ
ruptpble moztallgeneracion / 5 thou thul⸗
delt be lo roughe towardehim?

Foꝛ 064 tru ed) there ig no man amege
them that be hoꝛne / ul he hath dealt wyr⸗
Kedlp:anvamonge the kapthtullthere is no⸗
ne which bath nat done auptfe. Kor in ih ys
(O Loe) thy eyahtrouties and thy gov
nes Matbe peaplet und declared / vr thou he
mere ptull rite them / lohych are not rych in
Sood wochen. 5

Ehen anfiveredhe me and lapde: Edome
ſthiuges halt thor Cpohen a right / and accos«
dung buco chp woes ib hall br. A 10 pl
not berelycdtynn ie wnzches oF h / wiych


haue lynned brroꝛe beath / befoze the fudge
ment befoꝛe deſtruccton / but J yl veinple
ouer the mozche thought of 6 ryghtn ous,
Ff wyl ceméhze alto the pylaremages) holy

Wbb. v. mähpng


The, tif, boke


Mabynge andtherewarde. L yke as haue
Spoken now. lo Hall it come to pate Fox as
the houlbande man foweth moih tere vpon
che grounde / and plantety manp trees and
ret alwaxe the turnge that is fone oz plũ ·


ted is not all kepte late /nether doth it al ta⸗·


ke rote: Euen (ois it of them that are fone
ee wall not al be pꝛelerued.


Las as the h

mang lede pericheth / pt it receaue not
rarne in duefeaton o: łthere come to moch
rapne vpon it: Euen la perpcpeth man allo /
wich is created with tyyhades / and is ipke
vnto tyrne awne pmage and to thy lelke / toꝛ
whole take thou hall made all thynges / and
lyckened bym onto d houlbande mans fede.
C
people / and haue mercy bpon tyyne atone
r ee eee crea ·
ju


Chen antwered heme a larde: Chrnges
gp prelentare Coz the prefent/eehpngs co come
koploch as be to come.ffoz thou wantelt vet
moch / leynge thou ma pet lone my creature
aboue me: J haue oft times dꝛawne nye bn:


vnto him / which pꝛepared ite ko chem. And
therfozeis my iudgmẽt now at hand. Chete
thynges hauẽ Fnoc chewed onto all mẽ / but
ot aga e bntothe / andto loch as be


} chetrme drugentir
lte tube thou feptt thatone parte
fF the tokens come to patie which
Mae att ce err lan met enn
chat it is the very


tothe / but neuer to che vnrpgötudu. In this bath a begennyng


allo thou art maruelous befozethe Pell /
in p thou bat humbledthptelke / as it becõ⸗
meth the / and haſt not regarded thyne atone
lelte / p thou att had in loch honoure amõge
Hrpghtuous. Cherfoze thall great wzechid⸗
hes and myterr come spon them, that in the


latter tymẽ (hail dwell in $ woꝛlde / kor they vr


aue walcked in greate pzpde.
5 But vnderſtand thou £02 thy lelte / s tene


out glozp Foz loch as be like the to vnto pou.


is paradpte opened / the tre of ſxte is plãted /
the tyme to come is pꝛepared / plenteoumies
made readp:a cytie is buploed toꝛ vou / and a
tet is prepared / pee perfecte goodnes and
wyldome. Che rote of euell ts marcked krom
pou the weakines and moth is ud kr vou /
in to hell fipech corrupcrd in forgetfuines,
Sozowes are vanpched awaxe / gin d ende
is chewed thetrealure of immoztalpte And
therkoze athe thouno moꝛe quettiog/cocer-
nynge the multitude ol them that peryche.
oz they haue taken lybertte / delppfed the
deres ok his lawe / z roꝛtalẽ
is wayes.

Moꝛouer / they haue troden downe bys
rpghtucus/¢ rde ncheirbent that there
ts no God pee and that lx / to cher
dee. For lpne es che thynge that haue fpo-
ken ol /s made ready fo? you:euc lo is dirt
and payne prepared koꝛthem. Foz it was not
hs will that ma ſhulde come to naught: but
they which be created haue dekyled § name

ok him that made them / and are bnthacklull


ende,
manxtelt:Euen to che tym
haue plapne beginn


.
hall be
sate

within mp bog
ders / to: J haue halowed me kromtte world,
Chen Wall they bein carekulnelle / whych
nos haue abuledme wapes: and theyg hauẽ
caſt them oute delpptekullp / wal dwel in


8.

705 Coch asin their lye haue reteauedbe⸗
nefptes and haue not ünowne hn cer 2
that haue abhozred my lawe / whrle ther
had vet kredome / and whẽ thephad pet open
towme of amendement and conu /¢@
vnderſtode not / but defppledit: 6 fame mult
knowe it alter death in payne . Andtherfoze
Saen carefull / how che vngodle
walbe puniſhed/ a how the ryghtuous Male
de laued and whole the wo de is / o Coz hd 6.
che worde and when itis Chen
and ſayde: J haue talcked beroꝛe andnow
ſpeake / and wyl ſpeake alto beratter / that
there be many mod ot them whych I
then (halbe laued / ikke as ö floude is greas
ter then thedꝛoppes.

Andhe ant wered me / tapinge Ake ag the
kelde is tot allo the ede: as the loures be⸗
fo are the colours allo: ſoch as the woꝛckmũ


is fochis alen f woscbr and as f boutban
man is


1 47


a


bpokert/swhich are Cone or put therin. 25
3 ne aueh not happened lo fo: we that


G Eld


man is him telfe / co is bighoutbzandzre al.
fo / loꝛ it was the tyme of che worde. And
en A prepared toꝛthẽ f are now / oꝛ euer
chewörlde was made / where in they lbulde
dwell then was there no mũ that egen
me. Now when euerr one was / and the nia
ker alto in the wozide which is now pꝛepa⸗
red / che moneth that cealeth not / and the
lawe which is vülearcheable / their manerg
wete cozrupte. Do J contpozed the woꝛlde⸗
and beholde / chere was parell / becaule ol
thoughtes p were come in to it. and z faw/
and fparedthem greatly / andhaue kepte me
a wyneberp of the grapes / and a plante fd
amonge many generacpons. Let the multi
derne /anb etetipgeapeano werber De
And lettmygrape an
kepte:euẽ mr plante: to: with greate labcu ·
re haue made it vp.

Heuertheles vr thou wilt take bys the vet
leũẽ dapes mol but chou chat not tag in tye)
goochr waye then into che kelde ol floures /
where no houle is buylded / and eate onely
Of che floures of geld / taſte not fleth / dunc⸗
ke no wyne / buteate flouves onelp. Pꝛape
onto the Hvet contynuallp / ſo well F come /
and talke with the.

So J went my waye and came in to the
telbe which is called Ardath like as he come
maunded me) athere J lat amoge p loures /
and ate ol the herbes of the K mate
ofthe lame fatickxed me. ellen daes
tat vpon the grate / emypherte was vexed
within me lyne as afoze: and A opened mx
mouth / a begäne to talke before the Pieſt /
and tape. O L. / thou P thewettehpleife
vnto vs / thou halt declared and opened thy
felfe vnto oure fathers in the wyldernes / in
a place where no man dwelleth / ina baren

e / when they came out ol egypt / z thou
ett / layinge: Heare me D Itrael / and
marke my woꝛzdes thou ſede ol Jacob. Be.
holde / J lawe my lawe in vou / and it wall
dinge krute in vou / a pe Walbehonouredin
it oz euer. Foꝛoure fathers wolchireceaued
law / kepte it not / and oblerued not thy oꝛ⸗
dinaunces and watutes / and the krute of thy
lawe was not declared ko; it myght not /foz
why: it was thine. Foz they that receaued tt/


petiſhed / becaule they kepte not the thynge


at was lownc in them. :
5 Itig a cuſtome when the grounde recea-
ueth lede /o2 6 lee a chtyp / oꝛ a bedell meate
and dzincke / thatwh it perpcheth or is bzo.
ken wherin a thyng is lowne oz wherin ene
thinge is put: ehe thinges allo perilbe gare


ue recenucv the lawe / perich in kynne / and
art berte duhich alto rece auedthe awe: not


28, ritif,
withſtandynge the lawe peryſheth not / but
remapneth in his laboure.
And when J conkydezed theke thynges in
myherte after this maner/ J loch aboute
me with myne eyes / and vpon the ryght tyde
Atawea woman / which mournedloze / made
Gteatelamentacion / and wepte wych loude
bopcciher clothes were rent inpeces / and the
had alſhes bpon herheadẽ.
Chen let Am choughees go h J was in/

g turned me onto her / a lapde: wherkoze wes
pelt thoue why art thou lo lo: @ ditcomfoze
ted: Ind che layde onto me: Dr / lett me be⸗
waple my celie a tahe pet moze toꝛwe:f07
am foze vexed in my mynde / ¢ bzought berp
lowe. And FZ fapde nto her: what apleth the?
Oz tho hach done eny thinge to the: tel me.
She larde⸗z haue bene onfrutefull and ba ⸗
ken / and haue had an houlband thirtie peard.
Andthele xxx peares J donothinge els dare
K neght and allhoures / but make my paver
to the Ppeſt. Akter thirtte peares Godherde
me thyhandmarden / loned vpõ my myterr /
confpdzed my trouble / and gaue me a tonne /
and J was glad of him / co was myhoulband
allo q; all my neygbbours / a we gaue greate

jonoure vnto the Mightie. And J nope

im with great trauaple. So whe he grewe
vp / and came to the tyime/chat he wurd haue
a wyle/ Amade a keaſt.

Cedbias g the woman that appearcth vnto him co⸗
men together.
che x. chapter.


howne / and dped: then ouerthzew
8 Swe all the lightes / allmy neygh⸗
bours rote bp to comfogte me. chen tone
my reſt vnto the leconde dape at nyght: and
when they had all reked / that they myght cõ·
fozte me reſted alto / and role vp by night /
and lied / and am come hither in to this felbe/
as thou leiſt: a am purpoled not to come in
the cytie / but to remayne here / andnether to
eate ner dꝛyncke / but contynually to mour⸗
ne and to kalt / vntvllg dre.

Chen let J mp meditacpons a thoughtes
fall) that J was in and ĩpake to her in di
plealure: Thou koolych woman / lerſt thou
not oure heupnes and mournurng / and what
happeneth vnto bs: how Sion dure mother
ig al wofull and loꝛr / and how the is cleane
bꝛought downe and in mylerreteynge we be
all now in heupnes and make oure mone
(koz we be aliforoufull .) Hs kor the heui
nes that thou talielt / it is but fo2 one tonne.


ut Demaunde the earth / and the Wall tell che /


b it is che which oughtebyrearon) to mour⸗
ne / koꝛ the fall of fo many that growe vvon


8 : fos


Foz krom the e al men are bome
oc ter / g other Wall comes and beholde / they
wake aumiol all in to deſtruccion / a man
or them chalve roted out.

Who ſpulde then (by reafon ) make moze
mournenge / chen He, that hath lott ſogreat
amultyrude: and not thou / whych art zy
but tos one. Butpt thou woldeſt faye vnto
me: My mournynge is notipke the maur⸗
nyng o€ she earth toz g haue lok the frute ot
mx boop, which A bare with beuynes: but ß
earth is accozdpnge toß maner or the earth /
@ the pzelent muitytude goeth agarne in
to her / ag it is come to pate: Chen fave 3
vnto the: ipke as thou bat bone wth tra-
uaple a loꝛowe / euẽ fo the earth allo ero the
beg vnn ynge geueth her krute vnto man/ oz
him chat madẽ her. Andtherkoze n itholde thy
lozowe and heupnes by thy leite / and lone
what happenety onto the / de are it trongip.
$02 VE thou iudgeſt the marck e ende ol God
to be rrghtuous and good / and receaueſt his
Councen in tyme / thau chalt be commended

rin. Go thx ware then in to the cyte to
bourbande.

ind che fapde vneo me: that wyn J not do /

well not go in to the cytie / but beare wyll
dre. Ho J commened moze with her / and
de: Bo not o / but be counce led /a kolowe
me:tozhow many kalles hath Sion: Be ot
good comfozte becaule of the Cozowe of Fez
rulalem. Foz thou lepſt that our Sanctuas
ry is laxed wale / oure aulter bonn / oure
temple dellroped / oure plapenge of ind ru⸗
mentes g lng nge layed downe / the than-
nac rd ande che tene oute ae da⸗
Hithed awape/ che Ipght of oure candeiltpck
18 quenched / che axche of the coucnaunt 18
taken ftom bs / all oure holy thyngesare de
kxled / and the name that is called vpon ouer
vs /ig dichonoured: oure chplozen are put to
ame / oure prettes are bent / oure Leuſtes
are caried aware in to captpupte / oure bits
ging are dekpled / and oure wyues raupched /
dure ryghtudus men tpoyled / and oure chile
drendeſtroped oute ponge men are bꝛounht
in bondage / and oure ſronge wozthtes are
become weake: and Dion! whych teale is
the greateſt of all) is lowfeo vp from her
worthippe:to; ce is delſuered in top hades
dk chem that hate bs. 8
And therkoze hake ot thy greatheuynes /
and put awape the multitude of Cozowes : p
the Myghtie mape be mercylull onto the /
anbthatthe pet mare geue the rect from
chplaboure waplesAndithappencd/
that when with ber her face
dpd crne nude chat 2 — .
vorher / and muled what it myght be. and
mediatiy the catt oute a greate bopce / very


The.rtij.boke,


keartull/ lo that the earth wok at the nopfe
ofthe woman: and 4 loked / and beholde / the
‘wom appeared vnto me ncmoze:but there
was a cptie buxlded ga place was ſbewed g
from the grounde and koundacion.

Chen was Jatraped / crped wyth loud
vorce / and tarde: where is ciel che angen /
which came to me ar che kyzdt: Foz he bath
cauled me to come in manp cõcpveracpons ¢
bye thoughtes / and myne ende is turned to
corrupclon, and mr pꝛaper to rebune. And
as J was ſpeakrnge theie woꝛdes / he came
vntome s jokrd bpon me / and J lap ag one
chat had bene deed/andmpne ondertanding -
was altered /a be toke me by therxght hade /
and comfozten me /g let me vp spon my kete /
andlapde bnto me: what apiech che and wh
te ehrne bnderftadyng bered? ethe underſtä⸗
dinge of thpherte / z whertoze art thou ſoꝛpt
And J Cayo: Becaule thou hat kolaken me:
and A haue done Acco bing bnto thy woꝛdeg /
J wente in tothe felve/and chere haue z tene
cheng ? Jam notable toerpzetie.e lade
onto me: Sotande bp andbe manip ; and 1
thall geue che exoztacpon.


Chen cards: Speane on to me my L ond /


fozlake mie not /let I dye in varne: fo2'
haue tene that J knewe not / @ herde that
do not knowe Oz Hall mpbnderftandpnge
be dilceaued / and my mynde? But now de
leche che that thou wpit thewe thpteruaunt
ol this wöder He ancwered me then alapde:
beate me / and A wall enfourme che / stellche
wwherkozetgou ärtakraped / fo 8 Brett bath
opened manpfecrete tyrnges önto the.

He hath lene that thy wape is ryght / and
that thou takett fozowe contynualip fo2 the
people / andmakelt greate lamentacpon fo2
Solon: andtgerkoze bnderftande the vlan
which thou fawett a irtle wyrle agooateer
Gismaner: Chou fawelt a woman mour-
ninge and thou batt comfoztedher: Heuer ·
theles now feptt thou the Ipkenes of che wos
mannomoze/butthou SSoughtes tere wag
a eptie buploed:andipke as the toldẽ the of &
fall of her konne to isthis the antwere:abe
woman whé thou fawelt is Dion: ¢ where
as we tolve the that he hath bene thyztye
Er Fee nett * Led Ithole are tie,

Yeates / wherin there was no olferynge

Burg Salons bu 5

ut alter. xxx peares Salomꝭ buylded

K offted/and then date the baré a fone,

toh Coldethe/that the nozythed
a
Jeruſalẽ. And


ou art Corp inehpmrpnde, efulirel krõ chr
Karbe sano hath he chewed the her
clearnelle and the fapanes of her a

Andtherfoze F bad the remapne
where no houle is buploed.fo2F knew that
the Hiek wolde thew chis vino che / therkoze
J contmaunded the to goo in to the keide /
tute place ete tbe Beet eee
in ce where the ye
prep chall be no mans tubing 48
therfoze keare not / and let not thpne herte be
akraed / but go thy waye in / and ſe the glo:
nous and fapze bupldynge / and howgreate
it is /andhow a thou thynckeſt it alter
che meaſure of thyne epes, ¢ then (yale thou

eave as moch as thine cates mape compꝛe⸗
bebe Foz thou art bleſled aboue many other /
and art called with the pelt / as p few But
tomoꝛow atnyght thou halt remapne here /
Klo chall the Hyeſt ewe the bilpons okhpe
chenges / whpch he wyll do vnto them that
Dinell bpon earth in p iaſt dars. Dog ſlepte
the lame night lee as he cõmaunded me.


Ii. Chapter.
en lawe J a dꝛeame:and beholde /
ere cam by trõ the ſee an Aegle /
which had. rij. wong o thꝛe head:
5
rs wenges oucr all the earth

ares ottycapreuneoes them and lo they
wert put togetheragarne. And I behelde /
out ok hig lech rs there grew other lytle con⸗
teary fethers the heades relled / che head in 6
middelt was greater then the other / vet re⸗

ſtedit with the relpdue.
Moꝛouer I lawe / chat the Legle flew wW
his wynges and rargnedvpö earth / g ouer
All thE that dwell vpon the earth: and J tawe
that all thynges bnder heauen were lub ⸗
lecte vnto him / ano mã ſpake agaynſt him /
no not one creature spon earth. Flawe allo
chat the Aegle ſtode vp vpon hes clawes /a
a lounde with bis fethers / and a bopce
e after thys maner: watch not all tor
gether dlepe euerꝝ man inhis awne place /a
watch koz a tyme / but let the heades be pꝛe⸗
kerued atthe lat Heuerthejes J lawe / that
the vopce wente not oute or hys heades / but
from myddeſt of his body. Ind Jnombꝛed
contrarp fetherg / a beholde / there were


9 Iloked / a beholde vpon
the ryght ide there arole one fether ) a ralg⸗
ned onerall the earth. And it happened / that
when tt raigned / the ende of it came / and che
1 Reben g ep re So d nexte
Png ſtode bp / Erargned /a had a grrate
tyme:and it happenet / that when it raigned /


techn,


che ende od it came allo / lyne as the kralk / lo
that it appeased nomoze.

Chen came there a vopce vntoit / a tapde:
Deare thou shat kepte in the earth lo loge /
chis I Cave onto the /befoze thou begynnect
to appeare nomoze: Chere ſhall none alter
a

ird / a raign other atoze/ @ appeared
nomoze allo. Do went it wall Srefidue one
alter another Lop euerp one raigned / a then
appeared nomoze. q hen lohed /o betolde /
ee.

et bp bpi e myght rule
alfoce fame ofthetulen but with ele


thepappcarednomoge: of thé were
Set bp cular ns Saka a
beholde F. h kethers appeared nomoꝛe / eh


two wynges : a there was nomoze bpon the
Aegles body / but two heades p reſted / a Cire
ketherg. Then lane J allo / p the tyre lethers
were parted in two dremapned vader head /
6 was vpö the right lydc / ko p foure conti⸗
hued inthetr plane do lobed /¢ behode/ @
chey g were under  wenges, thought to let
opthẽ telues, a tohaue the rule. Chen was
there one let vp / but ſhoztlp it appeared no·
nioze g the feconde was loaner awaye then
V fit. And J behelde / ala / the two thought
Allo bythem lelues to raigne:a when che plo
chought / beholde / there watien one of head
C were at ret / nanielp / it that was in y myd⸗
delt / ko ß was the greater ot the two heads,
And then J ſawe / that che two heades were
kolled with him /a the head was turned with
them that were by him / egen
vnderwynges / that wolde haue ral e
But this head put h whole earth in keare /
6 bare rule in it / ouer all chore dwelt spa
earth wamoch taboure / a hehadthe gouer⸗
naunce ok the wozloe / ouerallche foules 6
haue bene, Atter this J loked / z beholde/ che
head that was in the middeſt / lodenlpappea⸗
rednamaze/ ive as b wynges:then came ?
two heabes / which ruled bps earth / a ouer
thote dweit cherin. And J behelde / e o/ the
bead opon the ryght kyde / deuotired it that B
was ppõ the left de. Andg herde a voyce /
which fapoe vnto me: loke befoze the / a cons
tydze the thpng that chon leiſt. Chen law /
K beholde /as it were a lyon 5 roarech / ren⸗
nynge haltelp out of the won / g he kent out
a mis voce vnto the Legle / @ lapde: Heare
thou Awylltalke with the/e F pelt thall
faye onto che: Jg it not chou § halt the bictos
ry of the koure beattes /whd A made to raig⸗
ne vpon earth and in mp woſlde / ethatthe ~
ende ol their tymes might come thoꝛow the?
Andthe fourth came / and ouerwanne all
the beatles that were patt / and had power
ouer the worde with gtrate bearkulneg / and
auer


The, ij. boke
nuerche whole cpalle ofthe earth withthe one alter another. Foz che ceconde Mall bee
moſt wicked labore /g lo longe tymedwelt gynne to rapgne / and hall haue moe tyme
he ppon che earth with dilceate /¢ che earth hen the other / a this do the xi. wynges lig ·
thou iüdgednot with ttueth. Foz thou uptpe / which thou fae As fo the vopceß
troubled the mene / chou hat hurte che ſpake / z f thou lawen go out kro che heades
peaceable ¢ gubete (tou hack leued Ipers“ but not krö the body, it Betohenety that al.
and deſtropedthe ebe ok them that ter the tyme ok that Ayngdome chere Hall
bzought fozth rute / and haſt cat downe the aryle greate ryurnges / Ait Hall dtande in
walles of loch as dyd theno harme. Chertoꝛe Ftd et meuercheles it . pet
te thrwiongedus dealpng and blalphempe kall / but thalbe ket in tohis bee en
e,, oft ORE tat
f 00 0
pioude tymes / and beholde / they are en⸗ inhm there Wall avple epght aynge


17 they called


And
the greate head


one ol


fam


come / that there Wall ryte vp a kyng · mete to knowe the fecrete of the Breſt.


bone open earth / ait walbe keared aboueal Cherkoꝛe write all thele thingcs that won


che kyngdomes that were befoze it. In t fene ina boke / and bye thẽm / and teach
menden bal . Berber unt Weben pepe epolepees bea


OkEldꝛas.


Enoweck maye cöpzehende and kepe there le⸗ to kyght agaynſt hym / were Coze akraped / @
PD creres. But wapte thouhere thylfelke pet le. pet dürlt ther kraht. Heuertheles when he
wen daxes moo / that it mape be chewed the / fawethe feartnene a byolence of che people /
whatloeuer it pleatety the Ppeſt to declare he nether iytt vp his hande ner helde iwerde /
vnto the / and wichthat he went his ware. ner eny weapẽ: but onelxeAs J Cae) he fent
„And whe all the people perceaued / p the dut ok his mouth as it had bene a blak offps
ſeuen dapes were pack / z I not come agapne re / and důůt of his lyppes the wynde of § fla
into d cptie / thepgathered them alltogether me: and out of his ronge he cat out Cparkes
krõ the leak onto the molt / z came vnto me / and ſtozmes andthey were all myrte toge ·
andlarde: what haue we offended the? and ther:the bial of fp2e /the wynde ofp lame /
whateuell haue we done agagnche / sthou and the greate trope, and fell wyth a rude
foplahelt vs /a lytteſt here inthis piace: o: bpon 8 people / which was pꝛepared to fight
ol all people thou onſy art left vs as a grape and bent then vp euerychone: lo that of the
ol the vrne / and as a candell in a darcke pla- innumerable multitude there was nothinge
ce. andas an hauẽ a ſbyppe pꝛelerued trom ene but onelx duſt and lmoke. when J law
S tẽ pelt. Haue we not eis aduerſite ynough / 01 ‘wag aktaxed.
but thou inuſt koꝛlake vs: Pere it not bet. Alterwarde lawe z the tame man come 5
ter toꝛ bs / that we had bene bꝛẽt wich Sion: downe fromthe mounkapne / and calipng vn
Foz weareno better then ther p dredthere: to him another peaceable people: and there
andthey wepte wyth loude vopce. Chen an⸗ came moch people vntohlm:come were glad
Sure gthe glarde: Be ok good cökozte D Lome were loꝛr / tome or them were bounde /
fraet 7a be not heux thou houle ok Jacob: lo that they were caried a bꝛought koꝛth.
ache pet hath pou in reniebzadce /a che. Cpenwas A tyckthozowgreate keare
Mvghtie hath not koꝛgotten you in tempta· Jawaned / and lapde: thou batt ſhewedth /
con. As fo me /A hauẽ᷑ not toꝛlalẽ vou / ne⸗ teruaunt all thy woͤders krõ the begynnyng /
theram Joeparteo krom pou: but am come a haſt counted me worthy/ thou myghtell
into thus place to pꝛape / becaute of the my⸗ receaue my pꝛayer:chewe me now pet the in⸗
ſerpok Icrael/ that J mrgbt lene mercy for § terpꝛetacion of this dꝛeame. Foꝛ thus J cõ·
lowe eltate of poute Sanctuary. Andnow epdze in my vnderſtandeng: oo onto them ß
go voure wape home euerp mã / after theſe Matt be lekt in thole dapes:a moch moze, wo
Daves well J come vnto vou. Bothe people onto thẽ that are not let behynde: foꝛ ther z
went their wa pe in to the cytte/lyke as J cõ⸗ were not lelt / were inheupnes.
maunded them: but Aremarned ſtyll inthe Now onderſtande J the thynges that are
felve teuen dapes as the sage badme:and laped vp in the latter dapes which wall haps
Jate onelp ok the floures of the keide / a had 75 vnto them / andto thofe that are not left
inp meate ot the herbes in thole dapes. eh vnde. Chertoꝛe are they come in to great
5 parelles / and manpnecedlittes / ipte as there
¶ Che. xiij. Chapter. dieames declare. Jet is itealler / p he which
9 Cuffieth hurte come in thele / then to palle a:
Md ithappenedatters ſeuẽ dapes / waye as acloude out ol che worde / and now
chat I dꝛeamed a dꝛeame by night. tole the thynges p Wall happẽ in the lat.
And behodde there arolea wynde - Chen anlwered he me / and lade: Che in⸗
Akromthe lee / that it moued ali the terpꝛetacyon or the tyght Mall A chewe tye /
Aondes therof. And J jokted / and beholde / che and J wyfk open vntothe the thynge p thou
mi was fridge a increaled with the cloudes Halt requpzed. Foz thou hack polen of them
okheauk:a when he turned his contenaunce chat are leit behynde / and thy is the inter⸗
to concrder all the thinges trembled ß were pꝛetacyon. Hethat taketh awape the parell
ſene vnder him: and when the vopce went out in that tyme / hach kepte himſelke Cheythat
orhis mouth / all they bꝛent that herde hem / be kallen in to harme / are Coch as haue woz·
ipke ag che earth whenit kelech the kpze. tes g kapth bntothe Molt att bre Bnowe
Alter chele J lawe / a hepolde / there was this therfoze that they which be left behyn⸗
gathered together a multttude of men out of de / axe moꝛe ble chen they chat be deen,
hombze fromthe koure windes ok the heauẽ 0 Chin gen ehe „Where
to kxghte agayntt the man / that came oute as thou laweſt a man commynge vp from
krom che fer. And g loked / and beholde / he the depe ofthe fee / the lame is he wham God
aued him kelke a greate mountapne / and the Hpeſt hath zepte a greatelealoꝶ which
bpbhpon it. ButF wolde haue ſene the by his awne elfe mall del puer his creature /
border oꝛ place / wheroutthe hyll was gra · he Mall owꝛethẽ that are let bebynde. Ind
uen / and I coude not. v here as thou laweſt / p oute of hys mouth
Alawe after there / d allther which came chere came ablat of wynde / ke a *
0


0


xbj.


€ Sone Ate cheth


4242
The ij
ow chat he lytt vp nether cwerde nog wea⸗
ae 3 — in ok hem deſtroxed
whole multttude / came to kpght agaynſt
nit che daxes come / whan
at are vpon earth /
ina traũce of mynde (hall he come bps thẽ /
Edwell in F earth. And one Wall ondertake
to frabtagapntt another / one cite agaynt
anocher / one place agayntt another / oe peo
pie agapnſt another / ¢ one tealme agapnt
another. When this commeth to palle / then
wall che token come / that A Memedtye be.
foz¢:¢ then Mall my fonne be de whõ
thou taweſt ciymme vp as aman. And when
all p people beatebisbopce euerp man Mall
in their a wne lande leauẽ the battaril p 0
haue one againſt another / a an tnnyn e
multptude thalbe gathered as ther
that be wyllinge to come g eo duercome him
by kyghtinge. But he Mai ſtande vpon the
toppe ol the mount Dion Meucrtheletic
Sion chall e theiwed / beinge
prepared a bupided toz all men Ike as chou
kaweſt thehin grau tozth without anphan⸗
deg. But my tonne thal rebuke the people ß
are come fo their wyckednes / with the tem ·
pelt / and for 1 — 1 — —
their papnes wherwith they cbalbe punpte
hed / are ſpckened vnto the flamme: and with
but anp laboure / Wallhe deſtropethem / euen
bythe lawe / which is copared onto the kyꝛe.
where as thou laweſt / chat he gathe⸗
red another peaceable people vnto hi: thole
are the ten tribes, were carted awaye
pꝛeloners out of their atone lande / in tyme
dk Dieas the Kynge / whom Salmanatar
the kynge of a dart tobe pꝛeloner /a carved


them duer the water / and lo came ther into


another lande.
Butthergaue them this councen /p they
chuſde leaue chemultitudeorthe Heathen / ã
to go koꝛth into a farther countre / where ne⸗
uer mann ynde dwelt: that they myght there
hepe their ttatutes/ which ther neuer kepte
in their awne lande. Andlo they entredin at


Jo the narow patlages ofthe water of Euphza ·


tes and Gon Wewed tolles Coz ther / a heide
Ap the floude tyll ther were pated quer: fo2


apne;
thou Pmul-


le that be with him / but in the
02 thote tha 8801


mere
feat oe


veebeup and w


nto the.
Cather gent fot into the telde /
praple ethanties:
eaute De governed
cal
intyme / and there J latt thꝛe dares.
eth vnto e dyns in the buch ſheweth


CGobappeai
ti
bem bebt do. va


the


ele woꝛdes walt thou de


ei >
And now J fave onto the / ut thou ſae
5 that chou


Ton the
and the rms
oꝛthe tyme is beupned into twelue partes /
ten partes ot it are gone all read / and
.
Chertoze prepare onze typ beute and


copies comfoateforb of them 5


rekourme

as be introubie: andtell now of che deſtruc⸗
cron: let go ftom the moꝛtall thoughtes: caſt
awape the burthẽs of man: put of che weake
nature: ape by in fone places p thoughtes
chat are nioſtheux *


Ok Eldꝛas.


Art kb chere trmes:koꝛ foch eue a wycked ·
neſte as thou hat now lene happẽ/ Wal they
do pekmoch wozgee. Fos the weaker that the
woꝛide and the tyme is / che moze wall ſynne
@ thickened incréafe,in thé that dwell bps
leingeisbarat panne, Forno babs 8
a Foz now bate
vil pon to come / that thou halt fene,


Chen antwered J s ſapde: Beholde Lom / was


2 will go as chou halt commaunded me / and
retourme the people which are pꝛelent. But
ther g wall he bone alterwarde / who wyll
expoꝛte oꝛ rebuke them? Chus the worde is
bet in darcnneg / a ther tnatdwell therin / are
without lyght: fo tu lawe is kyndled / bes
caule no man nnoweth the thynges that are
done ok the / oz p chalbe done. FEF haue foũde
grace befoze the /ſende p holß goof in tome /
and J call wzpte all that hathj bene done in
che wozlve fens the begynnpnge which was
wyrtten inthy lawe / that men maye kynde
$ path and that ther which wyll lxue in the
latter dapes mape lpue.
Andhe antwered me / fapig: Go thy waye /
gather thy people together / a laye onto thẽ /
they leke the not koz. xi. dayes but lone
gather the manr bore trees / i take dd
che Bares Wabzta / Selemia / Cchanus a
Altall/thele tyue / which are ready to wꝛyte
Cwpltly / and comehither / and J fall Ipghe
a candle of vnderſtãding in chine hert which
pal not be put out / txliche thynges be pers
kourmed which thou thalt begynne to write.
And then ſhalt chou declare fome thenges
, Openly vnto the perfecte /a lome things malt
thou thew ſecretlyvnto § wyle. Co moꝛow
this alt thou begynne to wepte.
en wenteF foꝛth(ãs he cOmativedme)
and gathered all the people together / a lard:
eate thele woꝛdes O Ilrael: Pure fathers
—.— begynnenge were ſtraunges in E ·
gvpte / krom whence they were delpuered /a
receaued the lawe of lte / whych they ke pte
not / which pe allo haue tratgretten atter thé,
A hen was this lande and the lande of Sion
patted amonge vou by lott to pole e. But
fathers eve pour felucs alto haue done
: eg / g haue not hepte $ wayes
which the h pelt cõmaunded you. Ind foꝛ co
moch as he is a rightuous tudge be tone fd
intrme the tuenge g he hadgeuen pou,
nd noware pe here a poure bꝛethꝛẽ amõge
vou. C herfoꝛe yt to be p ye wyliſubdue pour
atone vnderſtandynge / and refourme poure
. call be hepte alpue/a after death
e
2


vnemercp. Foz after death Mail


come / whẽ we ſhall lyue agapne:


And then call the names of therightuous be
mantfe& / and p names of the vngodly with
hete woꝛckes wall be declared. LTet no man


7


Checfoze come now ynto me / ner ache eng J
Quettion atme cheſe. xi daycs,

DoF tohe the true men (as he comauns |
dedmeländ we tyente in tothe Eelde / and re.
mapned there. Che next dave a vopre calleo
mefaping-Eldꝛas, open thy mouth / adzyne
ke 5 Igeue the. Chen opened J my mouth /
@ behold/he reached me a Full cuppe / which
kulla water / but the colour of it was
Ihe kpze. And J toke ita dꝛancke. And when
J baddzonché it my hert had vnderdtdyng /
Ewyldome grewe tnmp bzelt:foz mp lpꝛete
was kepte in remembꝛaunce / and my mouth
was opened a ſhut nomoze. he hyeſt gaue
vnderſtandyng vnto the kyue men / that they
wꝛote the he thynges ol the npght, whych
theponderttode not. But in § nygbt theyate
bzed:as forme / J Cpake in the dave / 4 helde
not mr tonge by npght. In. xl. dapes / they
wꝛote two hundꝛed and koure bones. .

Andithappened when the. xl. dapes were
fulfylied that the Hyeſt ſpake / laing: The
Ete that thou halt wyyttẽ / peane open / g
the wozthy and vnwoꝛthy mape rede it. But
kepe the. ix lat p thou mapeſt (ew it one ·
I to loch as be wyle amonge thy people Foz
in them isthe! ok vnderſkandyng the
fountapne of w ie / and the ſtreaine ol
unowledge. Ind J dyd lo.
ci myſhmet that euell people that haue / wh
1 Ecdras teen one m. wd

be. rv. Chapter.

holde / cpeake thou in the cares
BMA of mp people § wo,desvF pꝛophe.
4 ate wb will pat inthy mouth /

SAM aveth the Lo de:and cauſe thé to
be wyttẽ ina letter / ko it is the trueth. Feaie
not the pmaginactons agaynſt the / ett not
the vnkapthlulnes ofthem trouble the / that
ſpeake agapnſt the. Foz all the vntapthkull
ge
a onde J weu bꝛynge plages opi
tye woꝛlde / the [werde honger / death a de⸗
Eruccpon, to} wyckednes bath the vpper had
in all the eartt / and their ſhame kuli wozkes
are kulkylled.

Therfozelapech the Lozde: J welt holde
my tonge nomoze bnto their wyckednege /
which they do lo bngodly:nether wplt F tues
kee the in the chynges chat ther deale wyth
all fo wichedip. Bcholde/the innocent bloud
ofthe troubledcryeth vnto me, and d loules
ok the ryghtuous complapne cõtynuallp: 6
therfoze( Capeth § Lomi will lurelp auẽge /
andreceaue onto me allthe innocent bloude
krom amonge them.

Beholdẽ / my people / is led as a flock of
Wepe to be lane /J wyl not fuffre thẽ now
to dwell in Egypte / but well bzynge thé out


a e a ſiretehẽd out arme /
wich amightie hand ¢ .


The ——


Deetervauntes uns lie Lone ——


two oꝛ thee afoze that the parnes come bpd
erben Fak


a.
85
3
nl
8s


8
75 e „Jett him f.
une


as an whore enupety an
pee vi te) when che


Pgh
5 Wutt


ace when he cometh chat detendech / whrch
dall make inquli pon
earth. And therkoze be not ye line therumto/
nerto the wozcheg therok: fo: oz euer it be
longe/iniqutte ſbalbę taken awaye out of 5
za, en eue all taygncamonge


lynnerlaxe, that he bath not
Shantel 1 aaa eos
head which capeth bekoze the Lo Godand


de knowech all $ toozches or ien / their
. cyos/ theivehoughtes becher e
Los he ſpake but the wozde: ett the earth be
Tacit nas Jets Word wart be made /
Eft was made In his worde were $ ſtarres


22


e chylde 6 to the made
ote


bi
Ws goes buena et Bevo e / the


. —


e ae
4
85 ae


eh chen fo yall. Gov
ie Pate eee
22 a feoetoe pole alice
ce
confent onto
tesa ius ga ae
e butpt the places there halbe a place / 15


leade vou forth / a d
ff


Stal
weir goon


balance th daxes

enen but A wpll beipurr

Pape — — 8

pal —
Who ſo h. ech


a carats
kme we ene
inetesbe
e
is bedged ior heros
coucted wich — noma:
ee


ean 2 a
, ma


earth vpon Tpzeden
ee


(The boke ol


Tobiah.


ge baden prpfoner / korcaketh not the


e
5
e eiter Aeneabeet der aur
Agapne.


che tort chapter.


dapes of Balmanatar hyng of the A iti /
neüertheies beynge in captiuite/he fozfoke


not the ave of trueth: In lo moch ? what ⸗ mai
keen mypabe get he parted it daplie with


ephtalt / p. othe T
behaue dim kelke chridechlpin Bis ines.
And when all the other wente to che golden
be of


clone deoaicitrede
2975 ‘J opp tod servo vnto


b;
g conuertes. Chefe and loch lyne h
Sante — en


was pet
. bene nme z. coke oute of


kon it 8 ther all ate of ß


bim . uber be nebe/eante bee
bel todo what
So wente


chenenge ie oa ep fapea


8 :


4


Ol Tobiah.


bench
bene of nm fos onthe taney bene ihne
Fe bp oboe pd :

80


tt ok people ok
due ore 5 12


the naked / and bunter the 8882 and amel *


at bilfgentip.
ore laben oennabert: the kynge came


inge cal
agarne and fled out of Jew zr whatkyme 10
ec at


re God puniched hum Foz bis bia!


vie 5 ew many o 7.
. But whẽ was
. nge / he cõmaunded to fave him /
— —.— All his 1 Heuertheles
Cobiah with his tonne a with bys wyte fled
bis wape /o was hd pd Ly for there were
many that loud him „But alter. ib. dares d
kynge was dayne ol his awne ſonnes. Chen
came Cobiab pegayne cobishjoute/ Gall bes
pes reſtozed onto him


Inden ge
lem
e Of Hod. Vys


D
Fade ſerpe r ente en d s,
came fattynge to the deed coarle/ tone him @
e


FFF
bythe pꝛophetã mos: youre hye tea
betuuncato fozowearabeupaes

ButwhE ? Dunne was downe / he went

te wape zbürredhym. Chen alis nerah· B
ate ce oun bt tapenade 68 no ge/
lens it was cõmaunded to faethe becaule
ok this matter / a halt fcarce efcaped $ daun⸗
Bruce cata dee


les Ci
the kynge / toke the d dane /


xine ornate at jt.


happened vpon a daye / that he had bu⸗ C
red ge en Ser :


The


1


dem dome ——— Ft whee e —


was a te} eyes
the fwalowwesnett,/ fo
0 —— 90


was biunde. had
e e a 8


alen
——


15 laboure pf her ha
it. And it happeneb that che to
wt jome,
rea beta joutbande itcrve ibe
mme bel 77 —.— oze it agarne
to che awners: laukull foꝛ bg / to
I el the elt. Chen
andlarde: Mow ie che tyme’
copenip/ thy alimes bee


‘Movi athe be Daughter
e ab es ares ft fecuannte.
ind allo the ini 2
ae deze


h. chapter
E a with
makehis


nes a

full 5 bene
nether remẽbze my myldedes/netherß in

edt of my elders: op e bene beece:
dient bntothpcomaundemétes cherkoze are
we 11 bm onto lug to
death / in to e vnto all fennel

Hann Ane


pare gral nne uit fame tyme
to thy cOmaundemétes /
nether haue we walcked innocently betoꝛe


the. And n. atu Home /oeale wich me accors
denge to thy wyll / e comaunde my to
de receaued in peace / toꝛ moze were

lame tyme it happened / chat Dara


The rep che maxdẽ Foz her kaute / he an ·
wem her 5 rh fe
t tonne ner dot.


mye bpd eatih /
fap


ER els tae atze Kune from ot
theearty.chou bowel Lozde/ 2 4 neuer
at Aba nepte


ner
Seat . Heuertheles an houtband baue
Ln. ny mi eatany et
ow peradukturr echer ebene
woꝛthp or them / oz cls were hep vnmete Foz
me / Coz tou happlphact
ther houlband. Foz whp? eu
athe pones ef rua.


‘of yorthe

the gol zungell of the Loewas
kent tohel ole prapers
ign och ob came


sn erase
Che. it. Chapter.
fs


Bt Tobiah.


ce cpedyener of Codiah to hys father /


5 See Sungei toys tthe
" in his tout


Capde onto him: My lonneſheare
Del them in
afoundacton. God ta⸗


as When
Beth rene loule / bene thou mp body
holde daxes


mother in honoure all
tobat and how at 05
cheinherwom
25 88 acne / barn
eigene pn /teG at ene trate e thou
content vnto lune


b b. Chapter,
ben Cobtah his kather“
5 dhbtardlahe, allcheechen bata


befype
thoughtail thedapes 9575


and leſt thou let lpppe tote


wave fromthe. Be mercpfull at
Sap ou hat moch / geue plen⸗
pe thou ha Wir aL} dpligence“
Glably to geue ot that iptie. K. opto gather


Soreace comkozte is allmes befoze the bre
God onto allthemthatdolt.
My konne kepe che well kromall whozs
and (beipde thy wyte) fe that no kaute
bennotone ok the. Let neuer pyde haue rule
ae in thy wonde / koz in perdz


nde
toe wage, tbatlenct) uno che chu ofthe
Medes? He anfwered:F knowe it well / and


Topoforuce water
e e oe


S e 1 .
wol
e


alfo pone that nel
A babe! .
Scene wees Murine 172


mebphr


8 ‘peut andgeuehymbps bandwzptynge


eB otonne benot afcapedteuci itis we
poore Ipfe-but greate good thal
150 * 1 departe krom


1 Medea? And when thou
Ann che dengel Chall papethe thyhrze.
And the Aungell Capde vnto hym: J als

leade thy lonne / abzinge bim to the agarne.
Chen Cobiah a antweredbem:telme A pave
dot what hour / oz of what trybe art thou⸗
Che Jungell Raphael fapoe vnto hym:al⸗
ek thou alter the hynred ot anhyꝛelyng / oꝛ
lekeſt thou a gyde koꝛ thy fonne to go wrth
bm? But that ann or artet carefull /
am à zartas the tonne of greate Hanantag.
And Cobiah anfwered: thouart come of a
greate kynred. but J pꝛape the / be not dyl·
Re the krnred.
W l. 2 lb


leader ately /and bernge pent gel:
Then antioe


e, iets
thet Ieft oF krõ wepynge / helde hertonge.


0 lab is delpuercd from ti bp tl
Ak pi tenses From tbefebe bp tbe
rate ehe cheber 8
4D Cobiah wente onhys ware / a
dogg kolowed him / and the tyꝛlt
wave they abode by che water or
gts. Chen wet he gut to wath
5 / beholde / there came koꝛth an hoꝛ⸗
rpble Ft todeuburehym. Or whome Co⸗
bial was atraped / cried wyth a loude boy⸗
cel lapenge: l ode he cömeth bpon me, And
the Aungeil fayoe vnto hym: anke him byß
shekie bläde / anddzawhym to che. And he dyd

o/ and dzew him bpé the lande. Ind terre

ot nvbetbe dene 0 it

5 ſarde the Jungell nto hym: Cake
* Outthe bowels of this ch / z as for dherke /

che gall and the leuer / kepe them bpthe. Foz
thelẽ thynges are neceflary and good fo2 mes
dicpne.Cobtah dro lo / and roſtedthe kych /
and they tone bpm with thé in their tourney:
che relpdue thep lalted / as moch as was tuts
kpctent foz them / tyil they came to Mages.
Chen Coblah alkedthe Jungell / g layd vn ·
to him: pape the bꝛether ĩ zariab / tel me /
wher to are thele thynges good of the lych /
that thou batt bydden me kepe:

„Che dungelia ered him and ſarde: ge
chou lapelt a pece of the hert vpon d coales /
wt e Cherok derueth awaxe all maner

wo


Aga
e


uqpzetes whether lebe from man oz
m / co b kr thence Forth § fame Mall
rome namore bntochk che gailis goodtoia-


dornte tn üreke § epeswttball heres


The boke


chere is en blemiſh in them / lo ball they be
whole.


And Cobtah tapde ontobym: where welt
thou ? Sorin Aungell antwerey©
and la pd: ere is a nye hyntma of thine) one
Raguelibyname, whpch hach a daughter
called Hara/a hath nether tonne ner daugh⸗
ter but her. Au hys good belõgeth onto the /
and thou mutt marx hys daughter: and ther-
foze delpꝛe her oc her kater / ebe tall geue

er the to wyle. Chen anlwered Cobiah and
de: dg 4 onderkkäde / che hath bene maried
vnto ſeuen hourbzdes / and the x all are deeds
and haue herde faye / that the deuell dewe


fix) Auel rannte m:
e
jal .
chat receaue 0 okloch a fathton; that


€ fd their hert /
6 adele eke meg
were an horte ß


derſtan ae


bape;

but vnto pꝛaper

W chene
0 te


code night ha
pany of the holx pätriarkes. ee
frat chonconeeeeye th OF @od/fo
whole maren dane pou, Afterthe
thirde night take p maydẽ in ß feate of Gop;
a@moze £02 the defpze oF chriz then foz fr
3 5
mapeſt optapne the bledynge in 15
blah and the Bungelt come to’
See
lapnet 3

Che. vij. Chapter.
a7 Sar eee they in to Naguen / A

‘which receaued thé topfullp. And
when Naguell loked e
he aden m lieren D
iphe fs Chis pofige mä pntompkrlkerg tonne.
And whe he had (poke this he fapde: mbence
be pe good e ttpbe
of Nephthalt /ont of p captputte of Hinte.
Chen lapde Raguel ono them: know ve my
bother cobiah: S hey farde:pee / we knowe
hem well. And when he had Cpoken moch
good of him / che Tungell Capp onto Maguel:
Cobial of whor thou al hett / is thys vo
mans father. Chen Raguef bowed him e
Downe / and wepte/ tone him aboute d 1


re


thou mpfonne/toz thou arte tye tonne of a
— . — man. And anna his wife and
ara his daughter wepte allo.

Low when they had talned together / R a⸗
quel bad keula wecher / and to matze a feat,
And when he pꝛaped chem go cytt do wne to
drnner / Cobiah ſa pd: will nether cate ner
dzpnche here thes dape / except thou krꝛdt


. Gvadite me mp peticig /g prom eme to geue
* me hpdaughter Sara. he Raguelherde


e was a koꝛ he knewe / what
H
" Maunceontabymaitomivhemance,


man noanlwere the aungell tarde

vnto hm: Feare not to geue him thy daugh>:

ker / Foz vnto thys man that feareth God /

delongech thy daughter to wyle / chertoꝛe
mxghẽ none ocher haueher.

en ſard Naguelsy doute not / but God

C accepted mp pꝛapers and teares in his

0 Jtruſt he cauled pou to come onto

me foz the tame intẽt, that this daughter of

mxnemyght be maried in her awne knred /

accoꝛdynge to the lawe of Moles. and now

dowte thou not / but wyll geue her vnto p:

Sohetone the right hande ok hig daughter /

- BND Aue her into che right hand ol Coblaß /

Llardetche God of Abzaham / the God of

aac


OF the mariage. And then made they merp/ &
God. A inna hys
Ale brite hym / and bad her pꝛepare another
Aber and chptherhe brought Hara hrs
ter / and the wepte. Chen layde he vn⸗
ko her: Beo good cheare mp daugbter / che
Lozde ok heauen geue the tope / o the bes
* tepnetfe that thou halt .
je sungell byndeth the deuell. Tobtaherxbortet
ae ee 7 — thee. —— a
Shep lee together. y
Che. viij. chapter.
wean marines bee
5 m. 2
32 e thought Cobtah bps the wo⸗
ok the aungell and tone out ol
his bagge a pece ok the ſeuer of the lich / and
daredit vpõ the hote coales. Do the aungelt
Raphael tohieholde cé thedenei / Alent him
eee de eee
ſehpercgypte. e Cobiah onto the
virgin aläpde ug Sara / let vs maße oute
paper bnto God to dave / tomoꝛow / ¢ ouer-
mioꝛow:foꝛ theſe thze nightes will we recon⸗


cle dure felues with God: a whan the third th


bolenightts palt / we Wall iopne together in


Of Tobiah,


an bplrd hm /s tapde: Sch blegingebaue


che deute of mariage. Foz we are the cyte
deen oF holp men a we mare not come toge⸗
ther as the Peathen / that hnowe not God.
Chen Kove they op both together / and be. 2

fought Godeamettip/thathe wodd preterue
them. And Cobtah tapde: & Wozde Gon of
cure fathers! pꝛapfed be thou of heauen and
earth /ofthe fee / welles / a Noudes / and or all


he creatures that be therin. Chou madelt


An oF the moulde of the earth / a gaueſthim
Cua fozan helper. And now L ozde thou
knoweſt g itis not becaule of voluptuoul⸗·
nes / chat I take this tyſter of myne to wylt /
but onty fo the loue of chyidzen in who thy


name be bledled top euer. And Dara lapde:
Andwyrle he ſtode co in doute / agaue che h.


aue niere ppon ve ( Lone haue mercy
pon vs / Flet bs both come whole g lounde
toagoodage,. 7
, And aboute the cock crowe / thappened / C
chat Raguel called bis teruaunteg / and they
wente with hem to make a graut. Foꝛhe
lapde:it is chauneed onto hym peraduẽture/
as it drd ontothe other leur men / that wente
invntoher. How when they had made the
graue / Naguel came agapne to hys wylẽ /
Klapde vnto hertlende one or thrmapdes / o
lone pt be be deed / chat J mape burve hzm
atoze it be lyght bape. So ſhe lentamarden
tole which whe che came into the chamber /
he kounde them whole ¢ founde. /lepyng to
gether. Ando the came agayne /g bought


4 Goodepdiniges Then Laguel and Annahrs sy


topte pꝛapfedthe Loꝛde / and tapde : Pꝛapied


zrting be chou G Lozde God of Acracl/ oz ft is not


happened vnto be as we thought. For thou
val 17. mercifully with ba / putawaye
rom bache enempe that perlecuted vs / and
BBE 00 alen onto pondestia beloued.
D Lopd/caule the ko magnylpe $ mtoze per⸗
fectlp ato olkce ß the lacrptice ol thy pꝛaple /
Koktheirhealth that all people map inowee /
that thou onlpart Godin alithe earth.
Andimmedtacip Raguel cmaundedhys
Ceruauntes/ to fell the grauc/thacthephan
made. with earth / akoꝛe lt was Ipaht:¢ bade
his wyke prepare a featt/ a to maße readyẽ
allthinges that were necesiary fo2 meate / to
loch as wete by che waye. e cauledtwo kat
krne allo and foure wethers to be lapne /
andmeates to 12 8 5 Foz alibisnepahe
boures ¢ krendes. And Raguel charged Co⸗
blah to remapne with hym two weſteg. Ag
koz ällche goodthat he had / he gaue Cobiah
the one half ok it / amade this weyteng/that
thehalke which remapned / tulbefall onto
Cobiah after their death.
Aungell gorth to Sabelug⸗ at tbe delrreor
ahh ba lrrech ne letter / and reteduet
menen
che. ix. Chapter. 5
: ccc b. Chen


Thebo


Hen Cobiah called onto hym the
Aungen who he thought to haue
pj bene aman and fapne vnto hym.

Piotherä zartes / A pꝛaye theher-
ben ontomp wozdee: Ft I cbulde geue my
lelfe to be thy leruaunt / J chall not delerue
che pꝛourdence. Heuerthelelle ¥ beleche the
that chou wylttake che beaſtes the feruati-
tet / a go vnto Gabe lug in Rages the cpte ol
Medes / a delpuer him his handwꝛrtynge /
feceaue the money ol him / and pꝛa xe heim to

96 come to mpmartäge. Foz thou knotvet thy
lelt/ that my kather telleth the daxes: and yt
G tary one dave to long / hewylbe fozp in his
mynde. Now leilt thou how earneſtiy Ka-
quel hach requrzed me / lo that J cannot
tape himnar.

Chen toke Raphael koure of Raguels ter
11 ne e be 15
geg the cpte of the es: en
founde Gabelug he gauehimbys bandtwzts
tyng/@receauedall the money, He toldehem
allo ot Cobiah the Conne of Tobi / how all
thinges had happened / acauled him to come

C with hym tothe mariage How whẽ he came
into the houle of Naguel / he koũde Cobia
lyttynge at the table: he leape vp / and they
kpüed one another / acabelꝰ wepte / a pray:
led God / a fapde:the bleuynge of the God of

Ilrael haue thou / foꝛ thou art the lonne ol a
right berteous a fult man / z ot one that lea ·

Preth God / a geueth greate almeg. And bleſ⸗
linge haue thy wyle/ a voure elders that ve
mape te poure chbldzen apourchploers chyl⸗

dien / onto the thpꝛde a fourth generacyan /s
chat voure tede map be bleled of the God ot
Glrael which reignech wo withoutende.
And when they all had ard amen / they wẽt
tothe keaſt / but with the feare ol the Lone
beide they the feat or the marpage,

obtah and hys wyfe are fade fo: the tarpaunce
settee 1 l fendeth agayne Coviah with


dis wyke.
he r chapter.

Dw whyle ponge Cobiah made

Ronge tarpenge / byrealon of the

arpage / hrs father was full of

Beare aheutnes/andthoughtswbhat
hulde bethe caule / chat mp lonne tarreth fo
Tonge? Oz why chulde he be keyte fo longe
there: Peraduenture Gabelus is derd / and
no man wyn geue hymthe money. Chus be ⸗
gannehe ta be very fozowfull, he aa nna his
topfe with him / and begãne to wepe both to⸗
gether / becaule their konne was not come
agapne vnto the atthe dape appoynted As
for his mother / ſbe we pte with dilcomtoꝛta⸗

B ble teareg (a lapde: iW ois me / mytenne: n
what ayled vs to ſende p awaye into a ſtraũ⸗
ge ccũtre / thou light ol dure eyes / thou fate


of oure age / thou comkoꝛte ot oure lite thou
hepe kun generacpon: Dernge ali the
thinges that we haue are enim / we would
not haue lent the awape fronys.
Chen Coblay comtozted ber andlarde:
olde thx tonge / a be not dylcomkoꝛted / oure
ſonne is whole and founde: the man that we
lent him withall/ s kaichtun vnough. Heuer
chelelle he myaht in no wyle be comtozten:
but daylpe went out / io ned aboute / a wente
about alt the Uretes/wherby the thought be
wulde come agapne:that( ve it were pomble)
the mpgbt fe hym commpnge alarreok.
But Maguel ayde nto his tonne in awe:
SG tarp bere sandy wall lende a medaunges
vnto chr father Cobiah / to cell hum chat thou
art in good health. Cobiah larde vntohrurg
am u gerte Leas e
euery daye / a * .
Sone Raguel prayed Coblah wrth
manp woꝛdes / a wold in no wyle heare him
he delpuered Sara vntohim 4 f halte part
Of all his good in leruaũtes g handmaydẽs /
in ſhepe / in Cameis / a in üyne / a moch mo-
ney / a lo lent hem awaye kronihymdd peace
andiope / and lade: Che holy aungell of the
Loꝛde be wyth pou in youre pournex / and
biinge pou koꝛth late a lounde / that ve mare
kynde all thinges in good cale with youre el.
ders / z that mene exes may le poure chr
afozeJove. Do the elderg embꝛaced their
daughter / upuled her a let her go/erhoztinge
her tohonoure her kather a mother in lawe /
to loue herhuſbande / to rule well her bout.
E 11 A in good ode / andto
ew her kelke kautelelle.
inge Tobiah len fe 81 ide en
hia move tape arne ihe aungete
‘Che Meame of his mother tonpng after ger ſonne de
is r0pfulty recedued of his fathers mother. Sata coe
meth. vß. dapes after.
Che vj. chapter.
S ther now were goinge home
warde agapne / vpon the. j. daxe a
they canie to Charra / which lreth
in the halk wave towarde Mintue.
And che Aungell layde: Bꝛother Cobtah /
thou knoweſt how thou batt left thy father:
therfoze yk it pieale the / we two well gobe⸗
foze/ a let the houcholde with thy wyle a the
catell come cott a fayaly atter bs. And when
Cobiah was content that ther culde go be⸗
toze / Raphael larde vntohrm: Cake of the.
Gail ok the kich with the /foz it halbe ne
ty. Do Cobiah toke or the gall / a they went
their wape. But Anna the mother of Cobtah
lat dayly by the waye ſyde vponthet of
anhyl / trõ whence the mrabt fe karre about
her. Ind whyle che was wartynge there for
bis cõmynge / che loked atarte ok / and anone
the perccaucdberfonne comenge/eeannes


Hf Tobiah, xxij.


caping: Behodd / thy ſonne occãlpon of gladneſle to her kather and mo⸗


tone her hulband⸗
commeth. Ind Raphael lapde vnto Cobtah: ther:hedeliucren me / that J was not deuou⸗


Zs Coons as thou comet into the boule ims red ok the fich/he bath made che to te Flight
medratly worſhyppe the Loꝛde thy God / and olheauen / ee we ail haue receaued greate
geue thänes vntohim:then go to thy kather / good ok him. Bow wuld we wozthip delerue
@hplle hem / tre his eyes ouer with the khele chinges vnto hym: But J pꝛape the my
Nocthekylh / that thoubat brought with kather / that thou wpitdelpꝛe hym / Pk happly
e. Fon be lure / that his eyes Hall ctrapght he wpil boutlale / to tale with him the halte
ware be opened / a thy father wallte d light ot al that we haue bꝛought. 2
ofbeauen/ a thallretopleat the light otthe. Sothe kather and the konne called hum /


Eben the dogge chat had bene wyth them in tote hem alrde /g beganne to pave hym /f


their tourner / ranne bekoꝛe / and canie as a he wolde be contẽt to take in good worth / the
mellenger / and wagged wyth hrs taple foz halt parte ot all that he had bzoughe. Chen
9 1 lapde he lecretiy vnto them: Pꝛaple the God

Sothe blpnde tather arole / and beganne ok heauen / a geuethanckes vntohym bekoze


to it ne / and ſtombled wich his keate /s gaue all men Ipupng / ko hehath ſhewed his mer⸗⸗
aleruaũt his bande / rãne to mete his lonne / mobs, gib 15 U


receaued hym / and kylled hym/ he and hrs lecrete / but to Hew ¢topzaple the woꝛckes
wyke / and beganne to wepẽ koꝛ iope. ol God / it is an honozable thynge. Pꝛaxer is
Now when they had woꝛchipped a thanc · good with fattynge / andto geue almes is
ned God ihey lat downe. Chen tone Cobiah better / then to hoo de op treaturesof gode.
ol che kyches gall / and anoynted hrs kathers Foꝛ almes delpuereth from death /clentety
eyes: and tarpedhalk an houre / and then ber kxnne / a cauleth to kynde euerlaſlynge lte.
ganne the blemilh to go out ok his eyes / ine But they that do lynne a oneyabtuoutnes/
as it had bene the whte ckynne ot an egge: are the enempes of their awne foules,

which Cobtah tone and dꝛew krů tus eres / i herkoꝛe I tell ou the trueth / and wyn
and immediatiy he receauedhis fight. hyde nothynge from pou, When thou pꝛax⸗


2. Chenthey prapleo God he and his wyfe / dest with keares / and burpoett the deed / and


andall ther 5 new brm. Ind Cobtah lapd: letteſt thy dyner / andhpddect the deed in th
O Logde Gov of Atrael / J geue the pꝛapſe houle vpen thedavetpme "CDSE CHONG
andthanckes /fozthoubat chaſtened me / a telt butye them in 0105. 408 be oltred thy
made me whole. nd lo / now do J te my ton · praperbefoze the Loꝛde. And becaule thou
ne Fobiah. Atterſeuen dares came Sara watt accept and belouedol God / it was ne⸗
his konnes wyfe allo whole and lounde with cellarp / that tentacpon ſuldetrpethe. And
r houſholdr and catel / wich camelg and nod bath the Lozde lent me to healethe / and
moch monepe or hys wrues / a with the mo⸗ to delpuer Dara thytonnes wyte krom the
ner that he hab receauedor Sabelus:and he euell (pete. Fo Jam Raphact an Aungel /
tolde his kather and his mother all che bene ⸗ one of the teüen that ſtande befoze God.


kxteg / wyych God had done koꝛ bpm / bythe ohen they hearde thys/ they were loze
man chat ĩed hym. Achiozalfoand Nabath alraped / and trembled / 5 fell downe vpon 7D


Cobiah lyſter lonnes came and were glad their laces vntothe grounde. Then faye the
K reiopfed with hum / by realon ok all good Aungell: peace be w you / leare not, Where
that God had che wed vnto him. Ind to kor ß as J haue bene wythgou / it is the wyll or
fpace of fcuen dayes they made merr / and God / geue papleandthanches vnto hym.
were right toytun euerpchone. You thought that J dydeate and dzyncke
: . with vou / but J vle meaty that is inulſible /
— eee . d anddzinche that cn not be lene of men.
ide unge alte che goodes hat heRougbe W bem, eee
Ache. xij. Chapter. thanckfull onto God / d ten out an his won⸗
hen grobiah called his ſonne vnto derous woꝛches.
Abrm / & larde: hat mar we geue And when he had cponen thele woꝛdes / he
yj this holy man / that wente Wehe? was taken awaye out of their night / co that
A Cobiah ant wered his father / and they law him nomoze. Chen tell they downe


ſapde father / what re warde hall we geue lat bpd their taces bythe tpace of thꝛe hou ·
bym?D7 what thinge can delerue his bene ⸗ res / and pꝛapled God: and whe they role vp /
kteg: He hath bene mygrde / and brought theptolde all his wonderous wozckes.
8 S e e g u h e e aeg
Gabelus / he cauledme to get my e C gruetb chanches
dioue d euell pete fro her / he bath bene an chen Chapter. ee
} *


}


enbetopthoutrornget beater ou coc
mate g banged our agapne/an ther is


+ + Conkyoze chen how he bath dealth W pou,
pꝛariẽ him with teare Amwede am mal
Eye the euerlaſtyng Kyng in poure woꝛnes.

pain Pape him euẽ in the lande of my caps
krurte / tor he hath wewed his maleſtie vn⸗
toa lintull people. Curne pou thertoꝛe O ve
tennerg / and do rightuoutnes betoze God / g
be pe ſure / that he wyll ſbew his mercy po
You, As toꝛ me a my Coute / we wyll retople
in God. O pꝛayle the L oꝛd all ve his chofen/
holde the dapes of gladnelle / a be thankkull
vnto him. O Jerutalẽ thou citie of God / the
Lone hath punidhed the koꝛ the woꝛckes ol
chrne awne handes. O pꝛapte the Loꝛde in
thy good thinges / s geue thakes to the euer ·
laltynge God) that he mar bupide vphis ta ·
bernacle agapne in the / that he mave call a.
gapne vnto the / all toch as be in captyupte /
@ that thou mapeſt haue tope ko: euermoze.
With a kapze lyght Halt thou chyne / and all
che endes of the wozld thal honoure the Che
fore fhall come vnto p krö tarre / they Mail
boynge grkten a woz th pp the Londe in the /

FE thp lande Malt cher haute ko: a Säctuarp /
fo2 they (hail call vpõ the greate name in p.
Curted thall thep be that delprle the / and
all that blalpheme the/thalbe condempned:
but blelled ali they be that buylde the bp.
As loꝛ the thou Malt retopte in thy chyldꝛẽ /
foz they all chalbe bletien / ¢ gathered toge⸗
ther onto the Loꝛde. Blelledare they all that
loue the /e be glad of thy peace. Pꝛaple thou
the Loꝛde / O mp loule / forthe Loꝛde dure
God hath delpuered his citie J erulalem fd
all her troubles. J well counte my lelke hap⸗
pre / ve fede vémapne to le the clearnes of
TJerulalem x


Che gates of Ferufatem chalbe buplded
with Saphrꝛes Smaragde / a all the com⸗
pale okher wales with piectous tones. 211
her ſtretes ſhalbe paued with whyte marble
Cone /andinalther ſtretes call Allelupa be
lunge Pꝛayled be the Loꝛde / which bath ex
alted her / that his ayngdome maze be pon


And co Cobtah


‘obiah pꝛophecyeth the de ſtructyon of le.
Scene ML e Ba- Aer he Weite
his kather and mother.

¶ Che. rij. chapter.
Md alter that Cobiah had gettenB
bis ligyt agapne / he ljued. xu. pea⸗
5 res / a lawe his chylders chplozen,
Z How whẽ he was an. C. g. ij. care
olde / he Dyed: a was buried honozabipm t ·
nue. gos whenhe was Cire g kyktre peares
ol age / he lott the light or hs eyes / o when
he was thze tcoze peare olde be gat his light
agapne. Che reſidueokhis lite ledhẽ in iope /
and increaled well in the keare of God / s dee
erie this death

u e houre o e called bone
tobpm his tonne Cobtab/@ feud poge lvin · S
galdes bis fonnes chplozen / and ka rde vnto
them: tze deſtruccpd of Himue is at hand /
£02 the wozde ol the Loꝛde can not faple/and
oure bꝛethzẽ that are fcatred out of the lande
ol Fltacl/Mall come br bach bent And
the whole lande of it that bath bene watte/
Ghalbe killed: and the houle ok God that was
bꝛent in it / halbe bupldedagapne / s all ſoch
as keare God Hall returne thpthersthe Peas
then alto Mall fozfate their Idols /g come to
Kenan albegtan heen wee
oi albe glad okher / and wo;
the Loꝛde God of Nrael. ere

/beave pourefas¢


Bndeherfozemyp
faythtuines/ tebe:


alen s wpl robo tbe tea tat pate
vll / and do the at pi. :
bm. Commaunde poure ‘chat cher do
tight /geue almes / be myndetul of God / and
euer to bethanktull vnto hym in trueth and
witz all their power. Beare me therkoze mp
chbldꝛen / abpoe not here: but inwhat daxe
locuer ve haue burped poure mother belpde
nie / get vou fxd hence Foz F le / that the wyc⸗
oe hall bzingeit to dedruccpors
After the death or his mother/qoblah de>
partedawape from Miniue / with bis wyle g
chplozen/¢ with bis chplvers chitogé g came S
agaphe tops fatherand mother in lawe/ g
kounde thé whole ¢ in a good age /e tone the
cate of them. Andhe cloled their eyes /a was
hepꝛe onto all Raguels goodes ( lawe the
kpkch generacpon ¢ chploers chrwzen. And
e
N e
him. And all bis potterite cdtinued in a good
pte / a holx conuerlacyon: ſo that thep were
loued and accepted bothe of God and men /
and ok all the people ofthe lande. 5


Che ende of the bote of Cobiag,


\


*


„


Ok Judith,. 1


( The boke ok


Judith.
che bupldynge of Egbathanis, Che vpcterp of
zs melſengers
— —


© Che pit Chapter. K
: IN: Nphaxat the Kynge o
AN; 4 Medes fubpuedmany peo⸗
bvlebntohrs dompnpon / and
O buylded a noble d ronge cite /
which he called Egbathanis.
Che walles of it made he of
uve tquared / ſeuentpe cubytes
hre /g. xxx.cubites bꝛode. Pemade towzes
therebpon of an hundꝛeth cubytes hye. But
vpõ che coure coꝛnerg eueryllde was twetre
kote bꝛode. He made the poztes in heygth /
Ike as the towꝛeg. hrs Uynge trutted
his mighty hoſt / a in bis glozious charettes.
So in the twelkth peare ol hys rapgne it
happened / that Pabuchodonolozthe Apnge
OE the AGpzians( which rapgned in the great
cyte of Piniue) fought aga pnſt Irphaxat /a
ouercame him in the greate felde called Na ·
ente Euphiates and Cigris a Jada⸗
in ß keld ol Exiotch the yng of § likes,
Chen was the Myngdome of Habucho⸗
donolop exalted / ¢ hes herte was lylt vp.
he lent vnto all them that dwelt in Celicla /
in Damalcus /in Libanus / i vnto the Hen ⸗
chen that dwelt in Carmel and Cedar / and to
loch as dwelt in Galle in the greate kelde ol
Eldzelon / to all thé that were in Samarta /
and bepondethe wateror Joꝛdarie vnto Fes
rulalem and the whole lande ok Jeg onto $
mountarnes of & 4 Unto all thece drd
Pabuchodonoloz the Kynge of the Aupziäs
Pfenremetaungers, Burthepall wyth one
conlent wolde not agree vnto hym / andlent
the menaungers agapne emptpe / and put
them aware wythout honoure. Chen Na-
buchodonoloꝛ the Kynge toke indignacyon
at all chole landeg / and ware by bys trone a
bybys Arngdome / chat he wolde be auen ·
ged ok all hole countreys.


B


a


che kyꝛit monech/it was deupled in

S SL the courte ok Nabuchodonofoz the
Bunge oF the Aüpꝛians / that he woſde de⸗
kende hym leite. Sohe called vnto hym all
$ elberg/al his Captapnes / a men of ware /
Schewed them hrs lecrete councell/ p tolde


che. ij. Chapter.
a che. kit. veare ol nge Habu⸗
B


chem / that bys purpole was / to bꝛynge the
whole earth onder bis dompnpon. Now w
cher were all contẽt wyth this fayinge/ Nae
buchodonoloz the Benge called Holofemes
the cheke Captapne of hig warres and lande
onto hrmchothr wave forth agapnſt all che
Bingdomes ok the wet / alpecialipagapnſt
tholethat haue delprled mr comaundemée, 9
Chou ſhalk tpaveno realme / all ctronge ces
tyes ſhalt thou bzinge in Cubiecctd vnto me.
Chen Pololernes called together all the
Captaynes a rulers ot all the power in Attys
ta / and muſt red the toudyers vntothehoſte
(iphe as the Ryng commaunded hympname·
ip / an hundꝛeth and twentye thoutand kigh⸗
tynge men vpon kote / and twelue thouland
archers vpon horlebacke. All his oꝛdynaũce
ſent he bekoze with an innumerablemultt⸗ €
tude of camels / to that the hoot was well
Pr0Uyded koꝛ with oxen / a imall catell/ a that
without nobze. e cauled come to be prepas
red out ok all S bia ko his hoſt. Moch gold
E liluer alto tone he out of 9 Kyngeshoute,
Sohetoke hig tournepe / he g all hig hoolt /
witi charettes / hoꝛſmien / aarchers:orl whõ
there were fo many / that they couered the
grounde ofthe lande / lpke the grechoppers.
And whenhe was gone pat ee boꝛders ot
the Anares came towarde the greate
Mountapnes of Ange / which ve po che lelt
lde ol Celicta:a fo he went vp in to all their
caſtels /a wanne cuerp ſtronge holde. Ag Foz 0
che weithpe citie of Melothus / he baahett
downe / ecpopled all the chridzen of Tharlig
and the Zumaelptes / which lape towarde the
wildernes / and vponthe South {poe ol the
lande of Chelon. He wente ouer Cuphzates
allo / and came into Melopotamta/a brake
downe all the bye cyties that were there / rj
the bꝛoke ol Mambze tylla man come to ß
lee: a he tone the bo ders in from Cellcia vn⸗
ko the coattes ol Japhet towardthe South,
80 carvedawape all che Madlanptes / and
opled all their goodes: g wholoeuel wyth⸗
ſtode hym / he lle w them with the twerde. de>
ter this he went downe into the kelde of a>
malcus in the tyme ok haruelt / a bꝛẽt vp all
the coꝛne ¢ allche trees / a cauſed the bynes
to be cut downe. Ind p feave or hyni fell bpd


Boe allchemthat dwelt in therarth.


‘ch become wyllengt .
Sepa aud reacted bun W
Ache ii). Chapter. .
HD the Uynges aud Pernces ot all
cptyes a ſandes lenk their Embak⸗
lptoures:namelp/ they of Sprtae
Melopotamia / Spꝛia vobal / a
Xybia/ a Celicia/ which came co Holoker⸗
nes / fapde: Let thy wrath cealle to warde
vs At is better foz vs to lerue .
a


Peete vntothe / then chat we thuive dye / €

ellarne / g receaue greater hurte. Alloure
extpeß and pollellpotis / all mounta nes and
bikes / al keldes / greate a ſmal cateil / cbepe /
sQoates /Yorles /and camels / all oure goodes
J iota be in thy power / vnder 1855

cvon beit all together. We oure le

fo g dure chrldzen wyibe thyne awne /come
vnto bg a peaceable Loꝛde / and ble oure ler⸗
urceßt chr pleature,

8 Eben came Poloernes downe from the

„ mountapnes with hozlimen a greate power /

and conqueredall fronge fentedcptyes / and


all that dwelt in the lande. And out ofall cy⸗
tyes he tone ſtrog men / e loch as were mete


Fo the warre / to helpe him. There came loch
a leare allo bpd thole countrees / that the ine
dwellerg of all the cities / che Wzinces a Nu⸗
Acts / and the people together / wente Forth to
mete hym as he came / d receaued him hono⸗
rablp with garlandes ¢ toꝛches / with daun
beende ec
c Heuerthelelle though they drd thys / vet
might ther not wage bis rpgozous woman:
but he dellroped theivcytpes/@ hewed downe
their woddeg. Fo MNabuchodonoloz d Kung
had comaundedh m / chat he dutde rote out
all the Goddes of the lande: tothe intent that
be only myght be called and taken £02 God /
OF thenacpons h hich Holokernes with bys
power bzought vnderhym. So went he thos
row Spria Sobat/andthozow all Appa-
mia / a all ch deer came to the Adu ·
mean / in the lande ol Gabaa and Septo-
volp / a toke their cytres / and remapned ther
kxrdapeg / wherin he cauled al ß whole mul
itude of his Hott to be gathered together.
Türe en
ey kad and pre.
be. li Chapter. 2
pen fe chplozen ok Irael that
welt in ews phearde thys / they
— — peta. spate
; came Coch tremblinge alfoe keare
ppon che / that thepfozowed he chulde do on ·


to the cxtie ot gerulalem a the temple ofthe i


Lorde / as he han done to other cpties a their
temples. Hocheg kene imba ‘noms


rounde aboute vnto Jericho / tokẽ in a occu⸗ Ada


pred all the toppes of the moũtapnes / made
fattthetownes wyth wales / and pzeps red
coꝛne Foz them agaynſt the battaril.

„ ,, Eliachimatto dt wrote vnto an the


that dweit towarde Ecdzelon ( whpch ieh


ouer agapnſt the greate kelde by Bothaym)
K bnito all thole bp whom men mypght .
pallage vnto them thatthey Guide tane in
che wayes of the mofitapnes/ wherby there
my be anx ware and patage to Jeruta


Th


Habuchodonokoz with aure lxues and to bẽ lem


es g!


oF God aga rng bolofernes. 992


eb


that ther chulde holde dyixgent w
where any ratte waye was betwirt g
tapnes. And the chridzen of rack dds z
Euachim the {ett o€ tye Loꝛde had come
maunded them. dnd all the people cryed care
neſtix / a humbled their toules with kaſtingg


G prakers, cher a they) wrues Che Peles


aes befoze the templeot the Londe / ö cos
anhearrle


vnto them / layinge: Be pe lure / p the Loꝛde
Baade kauen rte ince ease
fakin fatynges epzavers inthe
ofthe Lozd, Remembze Molesthe feruatit
OF the Loꝛde / which ouerthzew the Amale-
chites that truſtedin thetrmpabt a power /
intheir hooſt / in their chyldes / in their char ·
rettes a hoꝛlmẽ)not wich weapẽs / but
boly prayers urn Co thal all the en
Of Ikrael be / vt ve contynue inthis woꝛke /
that ye haue begonne. oupon tis efor
clon they Sr e tape the ore
In Comoch that thepwhich offred bꝛent lacrt
fices onto the Loꝛde / olkred the offtinges bn
to $ Lozd/bepnge araped in hearrte clothes ©
andbadatihes vpon their heades Andthep
all betought od from their whole bert / chat
he wolde vylet his people of Frac,


ſevstnioze
hand come


\


*


krueth before the concesnpng this people
at dwell in che moũtarnes and there Malt
no le go out ot my mouth,
Ths people is ofthe Aurel en ol the
Bades chepdwelt kak in Melopotamis-
£02 they wold not kolowe the goddes ol their
Eathers that were in the lande of the Chal⸗
dees / g lo Eopfohe they the cuſtomes of their
koze Athers tohpeb hapmany godves and
woꝛchtpped one God / that madẽ heauẽ and
earth: which allo cõmaunded them that cher
ſhulde go from thence / and dwell at Haran.
No whẽ there came a dearth into ß whole
lande / cher wente downe to Egypte / e there
Gez mlpplicd logen / welche ‘whtel
ep mulepplicdfo greatly /that their poo!
mygbt not be nombzed. And when the liyng
OF Egypte oppꝛelled them / o cg
in bupidenge ofhys cytres weh manznge
ok clape and bꝛyck / they cried vnto God heir
ene dene pi e lande or
ich dpuerle plages.
Now when the Eynge ol Egypte let them
Cgo heir waxe / a the plage ceatied/¢ then fo-
lowed after thé, to tane thé / a to bꝛynge the
agapne into hys lerupce / whyle they were
Axenge awape the God or heauẽ opened the
fee / lo ß the waters ſtode kalt vpon both the
erdes ag a wall / a thele went thoꝛow che bo⸗
tome of the feenzve Lee x h oe To
when an innumerable people ofthe Egipci⸗
arts kolowed vpö thé they were fo ouerwhel⸗
med w che waters / that there remayned not
one / totell them that came alter / how it hap⸗


VB pened. Do when this people was pated tho⸗


row the reed lee / they came in to the wylder⸗
nes ol the mount S ynat / where neuer man
myghtdwell akoze / a where the lonne or m
had neuer vetted. here were the bytter wa
ters made lwete koz chem / that they myght
denke /. xl. peares hadthey meate fd hea·
urn. Whereldeuerther wete( without bowe
L arowe / without bubier oz t werd their God
tught Foz thẽ / a cauled thẽ to haue the vice
toe Pee no man was able to hurte this peo⸗

le fence ptt ners to/that thep departed vn⸗

Eully tr the wo;


dchelr Son. Butas oft as they wozchypped
other belpde their God/ 10 put
to be cpoyled / to be dayne, a to be put to cõ⸗
kuſpõ. Meuertheleg as oftas they were lo
kor departynge fromthe wozchtppe ot
God / the fame God of as 1 them
power e ſtrẽgth to with ade thetr en .
Moꝛeouerthey dew the hyng of the Cac
Enamtes/Zebulites Pherelitz / Hethite / Eut⸗
tes a Amôzſtes / ali d mightye in Pelebon /
dene ter rmevne nce tpg er
as they lynnednat in ol
God / it wente well with them Foz their Goo


ping ot the Loꝛde ta}


LF


2 2 .
udith,
hateth vnrigthuoulnelle. Foz in tymes patt
when ther went out of the waye/ which Gon
bad geuen thé Watcher chulde toathe init /
ther were deſtroped Indpuctte bataples of
manpnacpong:g many ot them were carxed
awape prefoners vnto a llraunge counkre.
But now lately ther haue turnẽd thé Celues
agayne dito the Lozdthetr God / z are come
together agapne out of the tountreeg where
chep were kcatredabzode and thus haue they
coqueredthele mountaynes ( dwell therin:
and as fosFerutalem where their Sanctus ·
ryig / they haue it agayne in po lellpon.

ae 10 ie mp ie 1 55 2 90
cid / pthis people haue done wycked⸗
eke in the Hight ot their God / then tet vs qu
bpagaynſſt the / ſoꝛdouteles their God wall
delpüer che into thybandes / d kubdue then
onto thy power. But pr this people haue noi:
dilpleated their God / we Mall not be able ts:
wich ſtande them / fo? their God Wall defend:
thẽ / e lo Hall we be a chame to all the world
Now when Achioz had ſponen out thele
wofdeg / all the Princes ol Wolofcrnes were
wꝛoth / ö thought to Mave him /a lapde one to
another: what i he this / which darre lay / ß
the chyldꝛẽ of Alrael are able to wythſtande
Pabuchodonoloz the Wynge andhys hoot?
tobere ag ther are an bnwepened people /
out ſtregth oz onderſtäding of 5 feates
of warre⸗ Chat Achtoztherkoze mar knowe
that hehath dylceaued vs / we well go vpin
tothe mountäpnes a whenche mpghtpmen
ofthé are taken / he allo halbe ttychte wihe
werde / all people map hnow / that Nabu
chodonoloz is the God ok the earth / and that
there is none other without hym.


If ted into the handes ofthe Jewer
Segeln pen edc eu cle
Jetueg. Che praper of the people. Achtoꝛis comforted
Of the Jewes.

¶ Che. bi. Chapter.
O whe they had lelt of tpeabing /
olofernes tobe loꝛe indygnacid /
Capoe vnto Achtoz. Foz do moch

ou halt pꝛophecpedunto vs/
dapinge: that the people ot Ikraell chalbede⸗
kended or their God / wyli chewe the / that
there ta no God but Nabuch odonoloz. Yee

en we Have thema as one man / thou al-
fo halt peryw with them thoꝛow the kwerde
oF the Atyzians / and all Alrael thatbe de⸗
Groped wyth the / and chen walt thou tele
that Nabuchodonolo; is the Lorde of the
whole earth. Chen wall the Cwerde of my
unpahthode go thozotw thy lpdes / and chow
walk kalldowne ſtyckte amdge the worded
ok Alrael / a chaltnot come to thy eite agay·
ne / but be btterip deſtroyed with thé. But ve
thou thinckelt thy pꝛoyhecyto be true / 851


xxiiij.


|


afraped?Chinkett thou that my wo7
N nee tobe Sent one pond


mapeſt tnow/d thou Halt fele chere thing! dw


with them / beholde / krõ this houre fozth will
Sere rpc one ponder people / that when
che puni eck hlwerdlwhichcher haue
woithely deterued ) kalleth bpon them / chou
mes be punpayen with them.

8 0 Holofernes cũmaundedhys teruaũ .
tes do tale Achtoz / abo carp hm vnto Be.

Kate enen gta hen Feber

: Seruafites tone hym / 12200


e myddeſt of the people / and alzed
in what ier matter tons 3
Chableft m bounde.


Srmeon e Charmim ( which is allo called
Sothoniel) were the principal rulerg at the
kame tyme. Now when Achioz ſtode in the
muddeſt of the Denatoures / z betoꝛe thẽ all
e tolde them / what antwere he gaue polos
es to the thinge thathe alkedhim / and
bow Polofernes people wolde haue llapne
um tos to lapinge / ¢ how Holokernes bpm
te was wꝛoth / a conimmaundedhym fo2 the
tame caule to be delpuered onto the Alraeli⸗
tes: that when he ouercame the chyldꝛen of
traci he mraht commaunde Achioz allo to
e put to death wyth dyuerke tozmẽtes / bee


caule he larde the God ol heauẽ is cheirde⸗ d


Fender. und when Achtoz had plapneip tolde
out allthele thingeg / all $ people kendowne
bpon thelr laces / pꝛaplynge the L. oꝛde / and

red out their pzapers together vnto the

de, with a general complaynte and wes
pynge ! a ca pde: O L oꝛde God or heauen and
Search / beholde their pꝛvde /d lone bps oure
dewirnes and col pdye how te ftandeth with


a make it to he knowne / thou bu


iy
Sopfakett not thote/whtch holde them fat
the /g bow that thou bꝛyngeſt them jowe /
pictame oF chem felues/ emake thelr boat

cher awne dtrͤgth. Ho when the weping
Da prayer ofthe people which they had made
Hhetwholedaye longe)was ended chey com ⸗
Enzten Achtoz / caxinge: he God of oure fae
chers whole power a treaty chou hack pay.
ted call Corewarde the / chacchou walt rae
ther de their deltruccpon. shen che Loꝛde


The bokt


dock chou then chaägechr coloure: whp arte


pure God chen wangeue bis keruagteschis
Uberte / God be alto with the amonge vs: fo
Fea eat 5. hon wehte mares


How when Olas had ended the coficen
he tone him into his houle / and made a great
kupper / called the elders to it / and to they re⸗
krelched them lelues after the taſtynge. and
alterwarde was all the people called toges
fengetncpecongreuacyon ano befoughe f
0 egacpon, t
God ol Acrael to helpe.


CwWethultats beteged of hotofernes..

e
e ler.

People wild lere an ionen e


¶ Che. vij. Chapter.

5 cy

2 jot / to go bp agapn
Bechulta. There nere an. Cans

fi weg tive dente tb bande boztmen,
fo e thou 0; /
belpde the preparing of thé that were woͤne:
g came to them on cuerp ide out of che coũ·
trees and epties pepe oe eee t
noth lelues vntothe battaplagapn
e
0 u 7
from the place which is called Belma / onto

Chelmion that lpeth towarde Ecdꝛelon.
Now whenthe chyldzen of Ffrael tawe to
greate a multptude of the Ap aias / ther tel
downe flat bps the grounde / tra wedaches
pon theirbeapes/ sprayed with one accozd/
that the God of Alrael wolde chew his mercy
vpon his people. And fo theptoketheir wea⸗
peng / a lat betwixte the mountapnes in the
hatow place /a kepte the wape bape a night.
But whrle Polokernes was goinge aboute /
be kounde che water lprenge / which tothe
outh Cyde was conueped into the cyte bx a
condyte: ches commaunded he to be dyzecte
another wape / a to cut their condyte in lun ·
der Chere were welles allo not karre krom
the wales whych ther bled tecretly / moze

fog pleature then ko neceũpte.
Chen wente the Ammonptes a


e gos
bytes onto me n tape: cht c


Ilrael truſt nether in Cpeare noz arowe /
haue taken in /a kepe che mounta nes 8
hylles. hat thou mayest ouercome the ther
foz¢ without the urrnynge of any baltarũ /
Sete men to kepe the weiles that they dꝛawe
no water out of them: lo chaltthou delkrope
thé withiout kwerde / oz at the leaſt they wall
belo keble / that they mutt be u to geue
duer the cptpe/ which thepthenche notable
tobe wonne /fozfo moche as it ſpeth in the
mountapnes hefe woꝛdes pleated Holos
kernes well and all his men ob warte/ am gf


5
:
„


B
&


And when this watch had endured twen


tre dapes p Ciſternes and all that had wa ·
ter / kapled them that dwelt in the cite of Be


thulfa / lo that in p whole cite they had not
Dine ynough ko one daye / Eo; the people
had water geuen them daylte in a mealure.
Chen came the men and wemen / ponge per
lonnes and childzẽ all onto Sltas and tapd
all wich one bopce: God be tudge betwyrte


ds andthe ko chou bak dealteüell with vs:


thou woldeſt not tpeake peaceably wyth
che kynge of § Aleztans / thertoe hath God
lolde vs in thetr handes / and there is noman
tohelpe vs where as we are biought downe
befoze their epes in thirſt a greate deſtruc ·
cyon. Cherkoꝛe gather now together allthe
people that be in the cite / that we maxe all
velde dure flues willyngly onto the people
Of Holokernes: fo better it is ? we be caps
tyule and pꝛapte the Loꝛde with ourelyues /
tyento bellapne and periche / andto be lau⸗


ghedto ſcoꝛne and ſhamed ok euerymanwhẽ


we le oure wyues and chyldꝛen dye befoze
dure eves. e tante heauen g earth this dape
to recozde / and the God of oure ‘fathers
(which punpthery vs acoꝛdynge to the de⸗
keruyng of oure lynnes and geue you wat.
nyng / that ve geue vp the cyte now in to the
power of Holofernes hook / that oure ende
mape be thozte w the l werde / which els wal
endure ſonge Foz wäte ol water ¢ ko thir,
nen they had tpoken out thele woꝛdes
chere was a greate wepyng and howlynge
in tde whole congregacion / and that or eue⸗
ry man / and they creydan whole houte loge
vnto God wyth one voyce /farege : we haue
fynned wyth oure kathers / we haue done
ampfle/ we haue dealt wyckedly. Chou that
art gracious / haue mercy vpon vs punylb
sure bnrighteoulnd w thpne awne tcourge /


f geue not thofe oer that knowledge the/


vnto a people whych knoweth the not lelt
they fape amonge the Heythen: where is
their God⸗ .

And when they were fo weery wyth this
crpenge and weppnge / thattheyhelde their
tunges / Olpas Kove vp with watrye eyes /
and layde: O take goon hertes onto you /
(deare bꝛethꝛen and be ok good cheare / and
let vs wayte pet thele fyue dayes koz mer ·
cy ok the Loꝛd:peraduenture he hall cut a⸗


waxe his indignaciõ / a geueglozy bnto his


name. But pr he helpe vs not whe chele fue
daes are patt / we (hal do as ye haue larde.
T Okt vertuonte woman Jubielwhpch repzoneth
aitit clentes becaute thep tempted the Lozde . She
moueth thems to encorage e berten} people and
e Lenempeg ar f Jewes.


Ol Judith. xxix


D let an hũbꝛeth mz at euery wellroũde


5
dit happened whenthele wozdes 1
came tothe eares of Judith a wens
dowe / whyeh was thedaughterot
were As eravi/ § Conne of Foor /d fonne
of Joleph the lone of Ollah / the tonne of
Ellt / the tonne ol Jammoz / the tonne ree
deon/the tonne ol Maphoint / the Conne of A=
chitob / the tonne ol Melchta / the Conne of
Cuam the tonne ol Hathania / the lonne ol
Dalachiel che lonne of Simeon / che konne
Of Ruben. And herhourbad was calledgha⸗
halles / which dyedin the dayes ol the bavive
barueſt. Foz whple he was byndynge the
theues together in p elde / beate came bps
his head / and he dyed at Bethulta his cyte /e
there was he buried bellde his fathers. Bow 5
was Judith his defolate wyddowe thre bears
and fpr monetheg. Ind in the hper partes o
er boule che made her felfe a pꝛeuy chãbꝛe /
here Me dwelt / beynge cloled in wyth her
mardeng. She ware a tmock ar hearre / and
fatten. all tye dapes ot her Ipfe/ ercepte the
Sabbathes / a newe mones ¢ the Colempne
Daves that the people of Jcrael kepte. She
wag a berp kappe a beutitull perfonne. Her
houcbande alto had left her greate ryches / a
plenteous houſholde / greate vnmoueable
polleſlions c many catell. Chis Judith was
& woman ot a very good repoꝛte wrth euerx
one / koz the feared the Loz0e greatly / and
275 was no body that tpaße an euell woꝛde
Läwhen this Judith herve / how Olras
had pꝛompled che people / that after the
dape he wolde geue bp the cyte vnto
the Aapuans / be Cent koꝛ che elders Chan
bil and Charmyn / and when ther came to
her / ſbetayde: what thynge ig this / wherꝛn
Olpas hach cölented / wat yr God helpe not
wythyn kyue dapes / be tpl gee ouer the
cite to ß Adyzians? hat are ve / p pe tẽpte
the Logbe Chis deuice optayneth nomercy
of cod / but prouoketh.bim vnto wꝛath and
ditpleature, pl ve fet mercy of p Loꝛdes
time a appomnte him a dave after youre wil?
Heuertheles fozlo moch as the Lozde is C
pacpent Aett vs rather amende pure lelues
pourpnge out teares / and belechyng him or
der n ede ence agaman/nes
er wyl he be pꝛouoked bnto wzath as the
childꝛen of men. And therkoꝛe let vs hertelx
kall do wne betoꝛe him / and lerue him witha
mehe ſpꝛete / and wych wepynge eyes ſaye
vnto the L onde / that he deale with vs acoz⸗
dynge to his awne wyll andmercy:thatiphe.
as dure hert is now vered / a bought lowe
thoꝛow the payne or them / it maye lo be cõ⸗
fosten thoꝛow his grace: in lo moch as we fos.
lowe not the fynnes of oure fathers) which
kozloke their Gov / ic d ther e,


The boke


des: koꝛ che which tyne they periſbed with
thetwerde/ were fpopled e bꝛoughtto chame
Of all herz enempes . As ko bs / we knowe
none other Goo but anelphim / toꝛ whole co⸗
kozte let vs tary wyth mekeneſle. He thall
requpze a make inquiciciõ toꝛ dure bloude :
rom 5 beracyons of dure enempesthe (hall
bunge votwne all the Perthen / that ryle vp


agapnd vs / and put them to dichonoure / e⸗ gal


We bectorecarebyetben cernge ve are i
ze
Jo bonozable and elders in the peopfe of God⸗
vnto whom all the people haue relpecte ¢
Hpon whom the ipke ofthe people ſtandeth/
lptt op their bertes with youre eroztacyon/
ther map cali to remembꝛaũce how oure
thers allo in tymes pat were tempted /
ey meghgt be pꝛoued / pkther wosthypped
1 Ga ryghe. Chey ought to remẽ be /
how oure father Sbzabam bẽynge tempted /
and tryedthozow many trpbulacyous/ was
kunde a louer and krende of Hod.
e
ep hat plea „ j
manytroubies were foũde Hedfatt in faith
Agapne / hep that receaued not their tenta⸗
cpons with the keare of God / but put thé tel-
ues koch with vnpacyency and murmuring
agapntt God perpced of the deſtroper / and
were Mayne of fe And therfore chulde
not we vndertake to be auenged / tor thing
that is dane vnto vs: but to condpdze / chat all
ele punpchmentes are karre letle then oure
tonnes a myldedes. Beleuynge alto / p thys
cozteccpon commeth onto bs (as to the fer,
uauntes o£ God) for amendment / andnot
koꝛ oure deſtruccron.
Chen larde Ocpas a the elders vnto Zu ·
Cdyth:all that thou tpeaket / is true / and no
man can repzoue thy woꝛdes. Pave thou
koꝛ bs now therfoze nto God / koz thou art
anholp woman / kearelt God. Ind Judpth
lapde vnto them: Sernge ve knowẽ / mp
woꝛdes are of God / then pꝛoue my coũcell a
deupce / yr it be ol God:¢ beleche God / p he
will bꝛynge my eouncell to good ende.
Chushaue J deupſed: Ye Hail ſtande this
naht befoze the pozte / and J well go forth
Lolth Abzamrmardẽ saxe ve therkoꝛe bus
tochad / that he well gratpoutipremembre
bis people of Acraei wythyn tyue dapes / as
ehaue lade. As ko the toenge hata go in
Ade wyth all / al ke ye no que lt os okit / tyll
popen it onto pou mplelf:do pe nothyng eis
b pꝛape vntothe Loꝛde youre God kor me.
Chin Styas the pꝛynce of the people or Fu:
da ſapde vnto her: Go thy waye in peace the
Love be wyth the / that we maxe be auen.
ber ol oure enempes. And lo they wente krõ
agapne. 5


Sowas leg


Che prayer of Judith kor the victoyre
Che. ix Chapter.

w when ther were gone ther: a
way / Judith wẽte in to hir oꝛato·
rp / put on an hearrye ſmock / dtro⸗

ed aches vpon hir head fel dow ·
ne bekoꝛe the L od / z cryed vnto him / lapẽge
O Loz God of my father Spmeon, which
elt him a twerde koꝛ a dekence agaynſt p
enempes / that bled vrolence ¢ wpiltulnes
andthat rauyſbed d vr⸗ gn a put her to dil
honey Thou 7 gauelt cherz wrules into a
pꝛaye / and theit daughters in to captyuite /
and all their pꝛaxe £07 a ſpople vnto thp ter
uauntes / whych bare a zele onto the / bel
me wyddow / O Lozd mp Gd /Z beleche the
Foz thou batt done all thynges be.

unnpnge / and lone what chou bat taken

hande and deupled / it came 77 .
Foz all thy wayes are pꝛepared/ e, thy 8
inẽtes are done in chpeuerlaſtyng fo? know
e. O lone now vpon the armpes of § Ate
Cyptig / lyke as it wag thy pleacuse lomtyme
tolohe ppon the hooſt or the Egypckes / wie
they bernge cher un /pertecuted thy ter-
uatftes / a put their truſt in their charrettes
hozfmen/ and in the multitude ortherz men
Of ware. But chou lokedeſt bps thett holt
caſtyng a thyck darcknes bekoze them: and
when they came in to the depe / the waters
ouertobelmen them,

Cuenlo Loꝛde lett it go with thete / that 8
trult in g power and mu ltitude of their inẽ
of ware / in they charettes arowes a fpeas
res / and knowe not / that thou onelx att dure
God / whych deſtropeſt warres from the be⸗
gynnpnge / and that thou artthe Loꝛde. G
500 op chpne r Ipke — unn om

legyninpnge / am pol
power to naught / caute ther myght to fall
in chr wꝛath. Eher make therz boat /g cher
wyll önhalowe and dekple thy Sanctuary/
andto waptt the tabernacle or che name and
tocalt dowwne $ bozne ok thyne Crear 4
theyzfwerde. Bzynge to pale G Lon
the pꝛrde ol the enempe ma ve be cut downe
with bpsatwne cweme that he mare be take
with the fnare of his eyes in me and p thou
mayetttuptebym wrth Siyppes ofmpiour,
O geue me a 7
delpple him and bis ſkrength /s that A mape


deltropehrm.
che tal dunge thy name an euerla⸗

fipnge remembaunce / vx d bande ola wo.
man ouerthzowe him. Foz thy power ( O
Lod) ttandeth not in $ power or inẽ nether
bal gere wen nenrrt b ülrength or hoz

g here was neuer pꝛoude pertonne that
plealedthe/ but in the Pꝛaperokche humble
and mene hathtyr aaa


een g ope, u
jm mouth /¢ Ga i


lte che founde Ollas andthe elvers o.
Bel


kat mende / that J mare 1


deupce im mx
Ea
and vnderſtande / P thou art God / and that

there is none other but thou.


Judith decketh per tite to go to poloferneg. ahe


. W ee
dmban che hab iel occrpege bn
Aothe Loꝛde de role bp rom the


tete Lone an callentzer marde⸗
went downe into her houle /laped ß hearrie
Loth from her / put ol the garmentes ot hir
ode / walhed her body! anornted
ſelk w precious things of lwete lauoure /
zopded ald platedher hearre ; fet an hooue
‘pon hir heade / and put on koche apparell
belongeth unto gladnecke / kluppers vpon
tete / armelettes / cpages/earynges / eyn⸗
rynges / and deckte herlelk with all hir
elt atape, ‘

Che Lope gaue her allo a ſpeciall beus
tye and kap meuͤe(koꝛ ali this deckinge ot bir
telt was not done fo2 eny voluptedulne le
and plealure of the kleſ / but ofa right dil
ctecion and vertue / thevfoze dyd the Loꝛde
increale hir bewtre )fo 6 che was exceadin⸗
ge ampable and welfauoured in al mens
eyes. She gaue hir made allo a bottell of
Wyne / a vot with ople/pottage / cake bꝛed a

chele / and wente hir waye. 2
Now whan the came to the porte of the


k the
they fame


at her bewty /n. eles alled no

ccna cub progr
ure 1 grace;

geben power pertourme all che deuyce ol


tbe/ and that mape
Ve ob che holy + 8. Andall ther p
were there Layne w one bopce-fo beit / lo be
A. Judith made bir prayer nto the Lone / s
wentte out at the poste, che a hir mapde.
ee at ale
Hchedape / the lpres of g Adiviansmet W
st/andtohie ber ka penge: whence commeſt
O whither oel thou? Sheankwe⸗
ted zam a daughter ot? Bebzues,
ed them / co: J
he geué vnto vou to


LED


piace, where ſbe had ipen klat beto⸗ bert.


e er he ne. aga
sbecaulethey and ola turetye / that oure God is


udith. xx.
thought ces ne to velde the kelites bnto pol /

Kerle dale J beugte br nt eiten
thts maner J wpil go bekoze the pivtice Poe


wordes lolemes anteil bint all their lecretes


wyll bewhem hom he maße cone by them /
gn toprine thet /fo chat ndt one man ot his
book can perth. Sey ve
d. enen thetetuen badberde der wor »
des K contigeren hir kappe face / they were
altonnpevf tos they wondzed at hit ecellent
betdeye g favo untoper-K hau Balt fauen thy
Uke b kending dle this deute / v thou wol⸗
deft come Downe Co gurt 1020/4 be thou ſute /
chat whan thou comelt bnto him he call in⸗
kreate the Well e thou Male pleatebini at
. o theph; her in to Holo fernes
Pauplion/ and tolde him ot her. Pow when
dhe tame in bekozehim / imintedtatip he was
Ouerconié fake wich her ue ee le fayd
bis Cernauntes:toYo Wolde vet pple the peo⸗
e of the Fewes / chat halte fo fapze weme?
Stzuiſde we not by reafon fight agaihtt the
2 thefe? Do whe Judith fawe Wolofernes
lytting inacanapy/p was wean of pure
2 1 golde { Somavagde and prectous
ones the foked fat vpõ him / ¢ felldowne
bpd Searth. And Polokernes leruadtes tone
Heropagapne/at thetetozdes contadoement,
‘Choloternes cequyreth of Juda the cauce of her co”
2 0 i ee i
en card oloternes onto her: Be.
=, Nee Ne eee cee
! beit / loz heuer hurte man / that
Su olde ferue Mabuchodonoloz the
Kynge. As cha dene ls iir pre
poled me. J chufde not haue litt vba (pearces
Gapnt the. Buttell me now what 1a p caule
E thou art departed fromthe / and wherloꝛe
art thou come vnto vs.
Ln
ftande the wozdes of chy handmapden: fos
Fetbou tile do alter 5 wozdes other band
marden the 1 ne bzrnge thy matter
toa pꝛoſperous ellecte. As truly ag Mabu⸗
chodoriofo; a lozde of the lande lueth / K ag
trulx as bys power Walen Ich is in the
to the punpchment of all men oot
all men (hall not onely be fubdued nto
orate the / but ali the becttes allo of $ Feib,
‘oz all people (peahe of thy pzudent acty⸗
ürte / and it hath euer bene reposted how
thou onely art good and mpahtye in all hrs
mat „ 18 commended
+ Chechonge is tracttett alco / chat Achlo⸗ B
cpaße / and it is wel hnowne / hat thou cö⸗
Eto do bhto hint Foz this 10 50


db. j.


J b
ee
ze attaped oF

er kultre — aio and £02

1 . 3 ae wee


. Moꝛouer ther are
al ligen catell / that chen muspeDemncbetye
bloude of chem: and are chere to fpende


all Lie holy oꝛnamentes of their Fodewhich wi


bee 1 une Ei n nen he Weid


no
c 15 it is is lame ete / at the


oom nedes be dettr roped 5 iwhych when
Athr handmarden perceaued / Aüed Er

Ken gde Lend ban Cent 15 eee,
to ade woc pe che eur fur 155 bend
mapdẽ wosſhipe G
the / anovopbanoctapoen all 905 forth


89 85 Pn Lalit onto God ¢ he


5 Sng bo oben are eh N


cone ae 4


8
8
a
3855
S
3
8
8


dent ch as
„ Hela co chem be hath lent me to bell
hele wodes plealedizolokernes and all


his lerununtes which matuelen atthe wel: Wwulde te


ha ofhet / and larde one to another: there


in the courte o ele
2285 . in allthe lande.


Cpolokernes commaundeth that Judith bt hae
kregted. sabedelpeth ann e 5
ceaton to präpe and obtapneth tt. ts tent!
canon a sheet) age wt
fet -and the commeth.Bolofernes is daonchen.


che. rij. chapter.


pat


„The. hoke


lt commaunded to geue me / J Mae
wise pare a i eat off a5 pe ip


55 guete ber Wal we do bntothe: And Ju⸗
Lee
thy . marden a hot fpende ali ches


pe . 5 5


commaunded Holokernes
s Chamberlapnes / chat the dpülde go out


‘om Pin Ne God thole


Amn dlo inche nyght leacon Me cee Forth


belyde Bite the vallep or Bethulla / and wal


he wolde protpere her wave /


ene üeraunce OF his people. 1 — tem ⸗


chat and remapned —.— t / Celt be tant
n fb ba speed iat
onthe fou eit bap!
ojofernes made a co pee — ‘bee 8


raauntes / lande unte jobpscha

„ berlapne: Go thy wape / and councell ove

Hebzueſſe /that the maybe wyllyng to cons

lent to kepe company with me. Foz it were a

thame onto all the Adyztans / tate
o laugh a mantotcomne /g we were

come krom bym onmedled with all.

Chen wente wagao onto Judith /a lard:


Nofernes Let not the good daughter be atraped / to


come in to mp Loꝛde / that che mape be hoe a‘


Pleature / chat hall J thrncke well done /
as longe as I ipue,
ae — e herlelk wyth


e nern rb
andlptt downe / and be mery/ koz chou halt
fauoure betoze me. € ia


kounde


ntapoe
dith: rz / A topll bye ye mynde is
merper to daye / th er it was in all mx
lyfe, “anbibetoke anbate anbbzanke bekoze
je anges


e de in hrs ite.


3 Judith
77 er amne


fbueebecpambervojes awer


en e prea th handma


ommaunded Judith her marde to
Za abe doꝛe / ,
Jubith Code chu eberd / man
F ers to,


/s tayo: Stteng Puh 5 fay
/c haue relpecte vnto the wozches
os; pliers gost ak


inybandes in¢hisboute that thou mspit
22


A dzewit out Chen tone we
coe ok his heade / and


Londe
ree wich hat / we e .
bponche erz and ote of his heade. o.
88 re androſled
N
Lande 1


(Capoe , maui on onfapeh!


‘wall ates
Bote © ay on st ubpeh bath thewed


inFrael. 200 eeu lolernes / wh


power
aner ae callenthe elderg
nnd chep came all to mete her,


: een
und greate / rounge a olde /
\ — i e 25 theatiorobe


Tygbted candeis / and gathered about


\ bee


:O p.
rdelppled 2 foꝛſahen if
N 1


Ok Judith.


heh


Poloterites out okthe walt /anv he wend


Dsias the chete ruler of. .
el / lade vnto her: Bietey


a hre God / aboue all
pled wemen vp


8
uen ard earth which haih gyded
to wounde and Co (nipteot the bead


conlide·
and croubl e


— . isan cheir reden, 8


Len. ball § people apbe-dimen .
Achtoz allo was called / J he came.
teyoe laben ppm: @be ede ele


eehatitfo18/6 peer ar
ig vrelimipeucits perde


tobe
bane ga —
deb kg state So alter
Downe befoze her / and pꝛapted ber /faplnge:


Blelled art thou or chy Bont at *
nacles oedacobstoralite people


mercpAvbich ol thy name / wall praple the Donor —


yor be
1 5 nto theboUte oF Arat. pee in
Da lame nraht bath he arne the


korg people,
dd duc at de ode forth che Deane ot dr feu.
L eat 4 5


betaule of the.

i
Se cena Air satan
wri, Cave


7


aiid lapde: one woman ofthe Jewes / hath
Beoughe all@abucyovencons people :


me. for lo / Poloternes lpeth bpon the gro


ebe h hape
. N people: Bꝛe⸗


3 che heare me Sotychbp thishea-
| ebpon.oute ioalles /andinhen 7
ha, Sunne arpleth / tate cuery man

his weapen / and kali out bpolentip: not as
though ve wolde go belpde thẽ / but to renne
bps chem / woiolence. hen the lpyes in 6
tentes le this / they call of neceſite be com>


elled to le bacward / and to raple vp theyr
dupa to 5 battapll. So when they ca⸗


ptapnes conie in to Holokernes pau piion /


und kynde d deed body wrapped in che bloud /


feartulnes (hall fal) opon thé: and when pe
verceaue that they fie /folowe them without
all care / ko: God hall delyuer them vnto
pou / to be deſtropeb. 8
Chen Ach voz ſeynge the power ol God
whlchhe had wewed onto the people of Zl
rael / kell of from his Heathentth beleke / and
put hys truſt in God / and let bpm (ele be cir⸗
cumciled: and fo was he nonibzed among §
people ot Icrael/he and all bis polterite ons
to thys dape. 8 5
2 Howas loone as it was daye / they lickt
bp Holofernes head vpon the wales and
cuietpmantoke his weapẽ / and lo they wẽte
out wyth an ho zible erve. bea the (pres
lofernes kent.
e tente / came


a


and hath no head. —

Ihn 5 chekeoethe Atyztans hook herd
chat they rente they clothes / and there Felt
an intollerable feare and trembiynge

ob thevz mendes were loze a 5
nd there was an exceadyng greate cvpe in


the twholehook,...
te cantor ag pans pepo


after them.JCeact bscomueth rpche. vpt
the 5 fas unh 8er Jogi eae pe


ache fu. coapte


w when an thehoot herde what 2
Volokernes was headed / theyr
mende and councell kel Front thes
shea iad Coch a feare Herre bees
they vndertole to dekende the Celuesbyfipeg .
awape: one tpake not to another / but han⸗
ged downe their hendeg / jekt an behynd the/
E made halte to efcape from § Hebjues:foz
cher herde / that they were haltung to come.
alter with their wes peng / and lo they lledby
the wapes of the feldes / and thozow all the
kote pathes ol the dales. ee
And when d aise ok Irraell lawe that
che plled they tolo wed vpõ them / and wente
downe Witröpettesblowrg andmahynga
greate crpeatter the. As to the Adpriang /
dane dun debe kept not them ſelues
together / but feo thelr wage Meuerthelelle
g childꝛen olg lrael tell vpon them with one
cOpany and oꝛdꝛe and dilcõteted as many as
they might gett. And Ocias tent mefaun-
gers a all the cittes and countrees ot


Giraeil. ee
o all the regtõs andenerpcitietene zt
g
came
bttemon parte of dete bees and ö it J


DO Judith. ‘eo


€ Hod when the came out onto them /
beganne allto pꝛapte her wyth-one voyce /
fapinge:thou wozqhippe of the cyte oF Fert
ſalem thou tope ot Icrael / thou bonoute of
oure chou batt done / and thy
berte is comkozted / becaute thou halt loueb
klenipnes a chaſtpte /a halt knowen no man
but chyne awne hülbande: therkoze bath che
3 Lond comkoꝛted the / and blelled
chou be for euer. And all people lapde:
Hache deren te people of .
: dapes coulde the people oF !
22323 elo ch 4
ceuans. But all that belonged onto Bolo⸗
kerneg /a had bene hes Cpecpaltp (whether it
were of gold / ok liluer / pꝛecpous tones clo⸗
chinge and ail oꝛnatentes) ther gaue it onto
Judith. And all? people reiopted/both we⸗
men mardẽs / and vonge people / with pipes
andharpes.


CMe loiige of sudith for thevyctarge. Alter the
vietoipe obtapned/the people commeth to Jerulalem /
to wortbpppe and prapte Bod.


: vpon the tabꝛettes / linge vnto the
od bpon the crmbales. O tinge
vnto hym a new fonge ol thankergeuyng / de


to haue bzent vp my lande / and


Lbimibut Judith the daughter of Merart W
bet fapze bewehe hath vifcomfpted him / and
zought him to naught. oz ſhe lapedawaxe
her wrddowes garment/¢ put on che appa-
rell ot; inthe reit ok the chyl⸗
den 1. Ohe face / and
Bounde bp her hearre in an booue/tobegpie


ok thpſk, Che tones ok the daughters
pearted them thozow / llapne ché as fligi·
krue chplozen:thep perpasedin che battapll /
kor the very keare of the Loꝛde my God.
vs lynge a longe or thankelgeuphge vnto ß
Loꝛde / a new fonge of pzayle wyll we fynge
vnto oure God. Loꝛde / Lozde / thou artea
great meren tye in power / whom noma
oy — ome. Al thy creatures culde fer
ue the: ko thou lpakeſt but the word / z they
were madesthou lentelt thy lpꝛyte / and thee
were created / a no man can wilhſtande thy
vopce. Che mountapnes (hall moue ks the
koundacpös with ) waters / the fonyrocked
Shall melt befoze the lyne ware. But ther z
leare the:thalbe greate withe in all thinges.
Wo bnto the people that ryle vpagayndt mx
generacron/ oz the Almpaghtye Lozve wyl
auenge hem lelke of them / and in the dave ol
tudgement well he vplet them. Fozhe thall
geue kyꝛe a wozmes in to their lech / cher
may burne and kele it to euetmoꝛe.
Akterthis it happened / chat after the vice D
tozy all the people came to Jerulalẽ to geue
pꝛaple a thanckes vnto the L ode. Ind wi
cher were purptred / they offven all their bꝛẽt
facvifices and their prompted okringes And
Judith offred all Polokernes wegpens / and
all the Jewels thats people had geut her /
the cänappthat Whe coke ktö his bed / r bane
ged them vp onto fhe Hows che people mas
fopfull/as the ole tg: and this tope by reafors
Poet , EO Benth endurtdthze
de caesar nene
eal \s
tacponat Behle avigbebonoyablp take
in all che lade of Ffracl. wintober bertueals
fo was chattite topned/ co that atterherhul⸗


yé bande Manaſles dped he neuer knew ian


all the dares orherlpte Upon hre tolẽpne
daes Me wente out with greate worchippe.
She dweltin her houlbandeshoule anhun⸗
dꝛeth a flue veare / a lett her handmapdẽ fre)
Edred /a was burped belpdeherhulbande in
Bethulia, And afiche people mournen tog
berleuen dapes. So long as che lpued / chere
was none that troubled crael / a many peas
gneve obec att was gottẽ

Thevape wherin this victory! 7
was folemplpholdẽ i rekened ol the 5

in the nombꝛe of che holy daxes / a itis

pet grratiy holden ol che Jewes
euer lenee / vnto
this dape.


- Ebeendeotipe bone
ES a,


i


xviij.
haue C


The reale ok the boke
¶ The rraſteol the „


9
. inthe


CMe rame at Hardochtur.
Pic Hacbapter 3 Latrne.
f “pent


jon with 8
04 e. In the ſeconde peave ofthe
tal ae ease Artaxerles in the kyꝛſt dave


th
Spe bandes endeten we
kes / a great nonemche leine 8 be we
reste 19955 to txght on


mibeye vigheeous people. Achelame
es darchnes ¢ berp bncleare /


ck egurte alwape and gentylnes / to gouerne
Lewho⸗


5 ungdome thu
— . Geofattnes:


\gratiten it / they were put to death.

tethe kong cauteotobe putin § dros /

an euẽrlaſt enge remembꝛaunce /

and . — wꝛote bp the kame mat⸗

eee that Mer
do lerupce in the nae ant

fog ches ——— besibe ——


rewarde.

the 4. §ͤwprch was holden in greate
, ee
ple/becaute ef the two chamberlapnes that
e were put to death.

! 5 Ebene the 2 8 of Artarerſes eng


igdompnpon, hen 2 w
duer man people/¢ had fuboued cache .
earth vnto my dom pnyon / my mynde was
not with crue ſtye ¢ wꝛonge to exalte my ſeit
bythe realon ol my power: but purpoled w


thofe chat be vnder mp

lato etthern Ben donne bin rind ie
to bzunge mpi pngpome onto tranquypllite/,
fermen oz
eee Bot meray eae


ttueth /
oft bene chewed and p30+
senicppallandnere,


fas
Now Wardocheus bad a tutes and lawes ägapnd all other people, c
dꝛeame / he awoke / e muted ttedfatiyin bys a
herte, e naa d and ko he delpꝛed
ko knowe all — bys mende was
cherupon
Se


bane aitioape Despyte the pꝛoclamed come

maundementes ok Rynges: and

this eallelk were nag eobetultreo thactoep

det e — — — ate
une c


Cherkope haue

ed we commaunded / thatall they hat arẽ ap
jopnted in w. and che wed vnto pou by
Fran a eee


pancypal
t N net ap be
25 Ipetedoyues.andchytozen bed deſtrored


Ot cpg —


and roted oute with ede ok their ene⸗
e andthat there ale
Mercy ſbewed / and no man ſpared. And

ci a alben done the, a daye ofthe moneth

(called Adar) of this peare / that ehe af
el oe euer bene veb
maye in one dave wyth vpolence bet ct
konne mtochehel to che intentthat
See mape haue —
and tranqu

pon allthe


2 But Mawocheus thought vf
wochen anonoble actes ol the: Line, am and
~ made bis: Prayer onco ann
Loꝛde / chou baleaunt ant


man thate
Bos a any


Wolde not fett
— 2 pe n been 5
0


Sunita none but onelp the mip
aue I done in no pʒrde ne


. O Lopde thou God e king /
pes tA ot fos they pine


ange per of Either toy the delpue vaunce or het


Ache. ri chapter.

dace Either alto beynge inß bats
tayll of death / ape fei che
Lorde laprdawape her glozvous tym
pparell/ g put on che garmentez


imp father /
25 ou 5 cet brd ‘amionicall people (0


= ouve ay hehe ok thelt koze elders)


we 1 ban thou geuen vs in to the
handes of oure enempes / becaule we woꝛ⸗
base goddes. Lozde thou art rygů⸗
tuous Heuertheles it latickiet chene b

we are in bytter and heup captiuſte and op⸗
foes atndge thé/ but tyoli hat layed cheir
ndes bponthe handes of their goddes: lo

e to tafe aware / the thing

taba thy mouth batt ozdened g ops.
uten chene inherptaunce /to


bande anbbetpe wiebes
folate women e l
thou knoweſt all


wy *
and Wort pppe of the burrgptuous / ¢ that


Ihate and abhozre the ve 88052 vncitcum⸗
2 then,


b.


The reaſte ok the boke


Che. xv. chapter.
2 Nd vpon the thyzde dave te happe⸗
5 ned / that Beſter lared aware the
mournynge garmentes / a put on
ber glonoüs apparell / and deckte
kelke goodlelatter 6 wwe had called gpon
God / which is the beholder and Saufoure
Of all thynges)tone two mapdes Wher:bpon
che one the eanedher lelke as one that was
tender: the other kolowedher / and bare the
trapneot her deſture. Che ſhyne ol herbew·
tye made ber face role coloured. Che lymily⸗
tude of her Face was chearkun and anable /
but her herte was lozoukull for great feare.
de wente inthozow all the does / ove
ekoze the kynge Che kenge tate oponthe
trone ok bis kyngdome / and was foie n
his goodiparape / all of gold / a let with pꝛe⸗
cous tones) and he was verpterrpble. He
llt vp bis face / that ch one in the clearnes/
and loned grpmip vpon her. Chen fell the
Quene downe / was pale and kaynt / leaned
wanne wahr the heade of the made that

e


with her.

B. Heuertheles God turned p kyngd mende,
chathe was gentle / tat he leape oute or hrs
Seate foz feate / and gat her in hig armes / and
held her vp ty che came to her lelfe agarne.
He gaue her louynge woꝛdes allo / and lapde
vnto her: Heger / what is the matter: / Jam
thpbꝛother / be of goodcheare / thou ſhaſt not
dpe:toz dure commaundement koucheth the

* comons not the Come nye. Ind with that he
helde vp his golden wande / and lapde topo
herneck / and D ee K ſarde:
cathe with me. Chen ſa yd be: ſawethel O
Lone) ag an Angell ot God / õ myhert was
troubled koꝛ teare of thy maieſtp a clearnetie
Jo: excellent and wonderfull art thou (O
Loꝛde)and thy face is full ot ampte. But ag
the was thus ipeakynge vnto him / che fell
downe agagne Foz fapnenes or the whych
cauſe the king was afrayed, and all his ters
uauntes uted ber. .


and with Iveng


¶ he Copte of the letters or Acthexertes/ werbe
Wee ehh he fprtt ſendtorth. i
¶ Che. rv. Chapter.
i Hegreate Hing artarerkes which z
rapqneth trõ andia vnto Ethiopia
Youer an hundzeth g. xvij. landes
Alendeth onto the Pzintes ¢ rulers
Ok the fame landes / loche as laue bym/hys
Frendly falutacyon. C here be manp that foz
the londzpe krendchpppes a benekptes which
ate bpuetiip done vnto them op chelr wo;
byppe / be euer che moze pꝛoude a hyempn
ded / a vnderta ne not only to hurte oure ſůb⸗
tectes(foz pifteous bene fxtes mape they not
Suffve / and begynne to pmagen tome thinge
agapnt thote chat do them good / ¢ take not
oni all onthankfulnes aware from men)
but in pꝛrde d prelumpcpon(as thepthatbe
bnmpndetull s onthankefull fo7 the good
dedes) they go about to elcape the ſudgemẽt
ol God / that leyth all thinges/ which(iudge⸗
methhatech ¢ pimpüpeth al wpchedneg. Fe
bappeneth oft alla that ther which be tet
offpce by the hrer power / a onto whom the
bufpnes g cautes of the ſublectes are cOmit-
ted to de handled / waxe proude; a dekple thé
felues woth cheddynge of innocent bioude /
which bzyngeth chem to intolerable hurte.
dhich alto with kalle a dylceatfull woꝛdes
tales / dilceaue and betrape
the innocent goodnes ol Pzinces,. .

How is it vrofptable and good that we 75
take hede / make ſearch theratter / and cortt.
der / not only what hath happened vnto bs oe
olde : but the Hamekull / vnhonelt / and noy⸗
fome thynges / that the debites haue now tas
ken in bande befoze dure exeg: and therby to
be warre in tyme to come / ß we mape make
the Uyngdome aurete and peaceabſe fo; all
nien / and that we myght fome tyme dzawe ie
to a chage:and as ti the thynge that now
is ppetentbefoze oure eves / to wichſtande it /
and to put it downe / after the moot krendix
maner.

Phat tyme now as Aman the ſonne ol
Bmavathu the Macedonpan (a ſtraunger
verelp of the Perlians bloude / a farre front
oure goodnes) was come in amõge vs as an
aleaunt, and had optapned the krendyrppe
that we beare towarde all people / lo that he
as called oure father / and hadin Ye ho·
noure of eueryman / as the next and pꝛrnct⸗
eee

e ndert
not onelx to robbe bg of the zyngdome / but
ok oure lyte. 8

With manprodde dilceate allo hath he des c
ſpꝛed to dellrope Mardocheus oure helper
and pꝛeteruer / which bath dome vs good in
all tbinger and tnnockt Beger tbetphe par.


The bol


taker of oure kingdome / with all her people.
Foꝛ his mynde was (when he had taken thé
dute of the wave / and robbed bs of them) by
hig meanes to trandate the hyrgpome of
erfians vnto theme Macedonia. But we
5 the Jewes (whych were acculed
the wicked / that they myght be dectroped)
are noeuelldoerg but ple reafonable a right
lawes : and that they be the chyldꝛen ok the
mot Hpelpuynge Gov/by whom the kyng⸗
dome oF os and oure pꝛogenitours hath bene
well oꝛdzed hitherto tohertoze/as fo? $ let
tert and comimaundementes / that were put
koꝛth by Aman the fonne of Amadathu pe
‘Wall do well / vt ve holde them of none effect:
oz he that lett them op and


5 inueneen them 25
rd d ec nc dar alen


red / and God which bach all hinges
in his power) bath rewarded bpm alkerhes
delerupnge. :


And ppon this ve Hall prope web :
e


Dthe copy oF thys letter in all places / i
Aewes maye frely and without hinderaunce
holde them lelurs after their awne ſtatutes /
and that they ma pe be helped / andthatvpon
F. xi dave of} xi. moneth Adar / they maxe
be auenged ol them / whych in the tyme of
their angupth and troubie / wolde haue op:
pielled them soz the Godthat gouerneth all
thynges / hath turned to tope the daye / wher
Inthe cholen people ſhulde haue periched.

Moꝛzeouer /amdge $ hye Colempne dapes
that pe haue pe call holde thys dape allo w
all gladnelle: chat now and in tyme to come /
this da pe mape be a remembꝛauũce togood /
fozail loch as loue the pꝛolperite of the Per⸗
lians: but a remembzaunce.ofdettruccton to
whole that be fedicpons hnto vg.

All exties and landes that do notthis / hal
hozrpbip perpch and be deſtroped wyth the
werde and kyꝛe / and Wall not onelp be
nomoꝛe inhabited of men / but
be abhozred allo ołthe
wylde beattes
#foules,


expe ende of the reatt ol the bone
: ok Elther.


(The boke ol


wyldome.


Adem we ough te geben G0 he nhs
. oly


and who be thole that fynde hom.


cod.


We ought to fipe From backbityng ¢ murmuring.acs


A .


ä
Gabe tit chapter.

— =~ et

N 9 Sett youre affection


and the fame that vpholdeth all thynges
bath knowledge allo of the bopce. won
Therfoze he that Cpeaketh vnrightuous
thpnges can not bebyoo/nethermape be el
quifycton Halbe made forthe thoughtes or
the vngodly / and the repozte of bps worde
all come onto God / fo that his wickednes
walbe puniched. Foz Seare of geloulphea⸗
reth all thynges / and the noyle ok the grud⸗
ginges Hall not be hrod. Cherkoze bewarre
of murmurynge / which is nothynge woꝛth /
@tefrapne poure tonge from lefaunder Foz
here ig no worde to darck and lecrete / that
it wall 700 foznaught: and the mouth thae

lpeaketh ives/Mapeth the loule. m
eng


apeth¢tudgment of tepzofe ano bp? in,


a


The boke


febenot pour awne death in the errou · fraude theryghtuous / @whp-be is not oy
—— —ͤ—e— feiues tho- dure pꝛolet / pee he is cieane cotraty to dure
rom che woꝛckes ot youre awne handes Foz doing. He checketh vs fo; offending agaynſt
God hath not made death / nether bath he the law afclaundzcth bs as tranſgrellourg
piealute in the deſtruccpon ot the Ipupnge. or all nurtour. Pe maketh bis book tohaue
Foz he criatedali ihynges / chat they myaht p knowledge of God / re he calleth him lelke
baus tyeit bepnge : pee all the peopie ot che Gods lonne. He is the bewzaper ol oure


Fcpe yma,
cher counte


rded.
och thynges do che vngodi ymagin /
aeg thelr atone wechednes wet
irnded ihem. As ko the myſlerles of God /
vnderſtande them not: they nether hope
oulnede ner regarde
* on banc. fos
erte. Ag Cozoure body/ttthaibe God created man tobe roped / ves al ·
perpattbes oat ane quencheo/an out oute ter the ymage of his awne lycknelle made he
Wall vanpch as che tolt apze. ure le ball hum. Meuerthelede thoꝛow enupe of p deuell
patleawape aß che trace ot a claude / a come came death in to tte woꝛde / and they holde
tonaughtasthempithatis drruen awaxe ot his lde / do as he doth.
wyth the beames or? Bonne / a put downe C che conteruacyon and aqurante of the rrüdtwen
Weheheatetherot. Pure name allo walbe The rewarde ofthe kerthkul.
fozgotten by Iptie and ixtie / and no ma Malt ¶ Che. ale 2
haue oure wozches in remembzaunce. ut the toules of the ate
Fon oure tyme is a bery wadow 5 palleth in the bande of God / ethe parne
awape / d alter oure ende there is no retur⸗ yoldeach chan not touch them. In
nyng / tos it is Fatt ſealed / ſo ꝑ no mũ cometh 5 8 kyght or d vnwyle ther appeãte
agayne.Come on thertoze / let vp emope the do de / their ende is taken fo2 very defttucs
plealures p ther are / e lett vs loone ple the cyon. Che ware of the ous is fudged
> creature lphe as in vouth. nde well kyll oure to be btterdettruccpor, but they are in reſt.
elues with good wyne and oyntment / there And though ther Cufire payne befoze men /
wall no floure ot the tyme go by vs. noe will vet is their hope full of immoztalpte. Cher
crowne ourfelues wych roles aloꝛe they be are puniched but in feo her berrdl te
woythered Chere all be no karꝛe medowe / eile in many thrnges Mall ther be well tee
but oure luſt wall goo thoꝛow it. Lett euerx warded. Foꝛ God pꝛoueth them / and
one ot you he pattaker ofoureboluptuoul- them mete koz him kelke: per as the golde in
nes. Let vs leaue ſome tonẽ ot our pleature foznace doth he trye thé / a receauẽth chẽ as
in euer place / los that is oure poʒexon / eis a bzentofferynge / and when the tyme com⸗
get we nothynge: Lett vs oppꝛedke the pooze meth they chalbe ioned ppon.


N 5
Tpahtuous / let bs not ſpare che wyddowner Che ryghtuous wall cbyne an ß fparkes


jj t regarde the heades ß ate thatrenne thoꝛow the rede buche. Cheychal

e
e auc n

Teale netbeBewony.cbertDycletes be. Kber 2 puecyetrtcucinbem/ bann


tt ſtandeth not oniyin che


haue giftes apeace. But the bngodlp Ihaibe
puntſhed acozding tothett atone pmagina⸗
Liens kor theyhaue delppredthe rightous /
o kozlaken the Lope, 2
ho lo delppleth wyldome a nurtour /
Fibre e fo2 the hope of loch /
is but vapne / their labours vnkrutetull /
and their wozkes bnpzofitable. heir wy-
ue are vndilcrete / and their chtldzen moſt
onl p.Chetr creature is cu lelled is
Tather z baren onderpled/ Hath not
knowne thefyntull bevd:the Wal haue feute
B ei e eder
“4 „ oll
hho onrighteoutnede / her pmagined wicked
-thingesagapn tt God. For bntobim wall be⸗
Leun p Cpeciall géttok faith / and the moſt
a le pozcion in p temple oF 12 che
Daloztoug is the frute of goodlahdure „& the
Tote ol wyrdome call neuer fade awape.
As boi § chilozé oraduoutrers / hey chall coz
me to an ende / a the lede ofan vnrighteoug
e
pet thal they ben rega
Shell age ſbalbe without honoure. YE
pebalely they haue nohope / nether
betpoliẽ to in p pave of knowiedg
oz Hozrpble is the death and ende of the
‘Dnvighteous, od
EME the hattegencvacpor of 1 kull and ot
ther: A aes i l ae of.
the condemnacpon / or the vnkalth full.
che. iii. Chapter. =
ow fapeeisachake generacion
vertu? Che memoztall therok
9 is immoztail / loꝛ it is Bnowne v
good men. i hen tt is pꝛelent / mẽ
take ex ple there at: and yr it go a wape ret
thepdetpze it. It is all wave crowned a hol⸗
den in honour / a wpnneth d reward of the
vndetyled battapll. But 8 multitude of vn⸗
: 72 chlidꝛẽ is vnpꝛokttable / and p thyngz
ate plated w whoꝛdome / Wal take nodepe
Tote /net tape enp fatt foundacion. Chough
— 2 grene in . biafiches fo; tome vet
thep be (hate % the winde koꝛthey fade
not tat /athozow the vehemẽ ce ol h wynde
cher calbe roted out. Foz § bnpartecte hꝛa ·
unches thalbe bꝛokẽ / their krute halbe on⸗
pꝛolita bie a lower to cate pee mete tod no
thyng and why? all d chilozen z are bome
ofthe wicked /muufhbegte recoꝛde of p wic⸗
Redhefie aqapnit their fathers a mothers/
when ther be alned But chough the righ-
frousbe duertanen w death / vet chall he


* Ageis an hongpable thinge-nenertheles
oktyme / ner


.
Df KEN
$n the viultitude of yeares:but a mans wylr
Donic is the grape hearre / and an vndelrled
Ike is the bide age, He plealed God / a was
Belouesoehim:fo that whereas he pueda:
monge fynners / betrantlacen him Yee tos
denly was he take awaye / to the intent that
wirkednelle lpulde not alterhis bnderttan⸗
dynge / that pyocrptpe qpulde not begyle
bis foule .Fo7 Pcraktpe be wikchpng ok res
mate good thynges darck che bnſtedfat⸗
nelle allo a wickednes of voluptuousdelpꝛe
turne alpdethe vnderſtandinge of the lymm⸗
ple: Chough be was Coone deed / vet Euifil-
ledhe moch kyme. Foꝛ his loule pleaten God
therkozehaſted he totake him awape from
Amonge the wycked . Chis the peoplete /
Kbnderſtande it not: they lave not bp loche
thynges in their hertes bow that the to»
Tpnge kauouze a mercy of Godis vponhys
. ¢ that he bath relpecte vnto bed
ölen.
ou therighteous chat is deed / condem
nech che vngodlp which are Ipupnge: e the C
pouth that is loone brought to an ende / the
longe lyke ol the vnrightedus.Foꝛ they te >
ende of the wple/ but they vnderſtande not
what Godhach deupled ko him / a wherfoze
the Loꝛde bath taken him a wape. And whr⸗
they le him a delppte him / therkoze call God
allo laugh them to Ccozne: So that they
them Felues Mall dye here alter ( but wi⸗
thouthonout ) pee in chame amög ö deed fog
euermoze. Foz without enp vopce hall he
burl thore § be pult vp / a remoue thé kr d
koundaciong /fo they walbe layed waſte
nto the hrelt. Chery tall mourne / and
their memozpall Hall perpche. Sothey
beyng afraped hall remẽ hne thei tonne
their atone wyckedneſſe Wall bewꝛape the.


Ec he conttantnes ofS ryghtwes before their pers
fequuters. Che hope of the wnfapthfutt is vndurable
| vapne. Ehe blellednes and eatunatent s of h layn⸗


ctes ¢ gobly. 4
¶ Che. b. Chapter.


Hen tall the righteous ſtande in

greate dedtaſtnelle agaynſt ſoch

18 haue dealt extreamelp woth

a them / a tanena wape their ine

ours. When they ſe it / they ſwalbe bexed
with horrible feare and Wall wonder at the
haſtpneſle ok the lodane health: gronynge
Foz very did zele of mynde / a Mal lave with ⸗
in them lelues / hauynge inwarde fozotve/
and mournyng £07 very anguych ol mynde):
Chele are they / whom we ſomtyme had

in derilpõ /a telted vpon. Ve fooles thought
their lpte berymadnelle / atheir ende tobe wW
out honoure. But Io/ how they are counted
amonge the chudꝛen ol od / a their poꝛrion


” is amöge


5 aimee 1


2 are pi
kene wadom att 4


e the
che apze chozowthe


light wynde
8 at or abating bein;


o tonen


e
. — Sea een lawe ok tf


an arowe is thott at a marck / it parteth the


a a e en, wl


ere


/lothata man cannivt know where |
it wente thozow. Euen lo we in tyke maner


eyed punch
Londe ouer all / Wall . * no
2. /nether bal Tess —
ee eto be bath made


as foone at we were bo me / beganne imme.

dzawe to oure ende / a haue ſewed
bose derne dure conſumed in oure.
aw ae en
€: that haue ſynned
oh ge pelt heel cong
is lpne a dpe thyſtell duſthtijat
Popa Aae 9207 tome
comme

vBtpeueane


ka ſtraunger
t ittherpabtuous ipue
panes ante


cj
tha ehepreceaucagioriug ipngpome and


the g to
dull crowne of the Lordeß handeikoz
E/ and
Bae ande I cower 19 Bs —


Wich his awne arme
Se thalitake:


ae seabye
che e anreden
ee ement in
ſteade ol an le chplde


hen dan — go out off
tighten na ep one bls bowe n
8555 cloudes to the place apoynted: ee


che ha
thick — te lee .


2
5s and ch


zunge
eh


coin pt


aks


joutnes

moet . ep chat are

andere, Wer pre ns

Einen d m 50 En
Wyldome is thong

vemembzatice w hah Samed . —


Ik poure delpte be then in *.


anbatopte 1 ofthe peo⸗
le, O receauẽ nourtoure 1 68
Beo des dir held pn go bod.


C Weldome — 1 tobe preferred before all thinges. taughe me
af


vii. Chapter.

elle allo ama moztall man /

e as all other / and am come ol
lebe earth generacion ok hym that is
Elwas fy2tt made / a in kabren ce 2
tombe was ane be llech: 810 the
tyme of tenmonethes was I bꝛought toge-
Re aie thozetn the fede ebnen 1


apf A
bom lese enn €


fell pen Beart which s my nature(crping
andteeppnge at the 118 oe 3


was geuen ee Caley (J recente ok wel ⸗


F fi toaee- 3 Fee reeie pberthen amonge thep


by byngdomes ¢ roy teatee/anbounteD
en een oh. koz


——


ban.
¢ C


dae emer 7 10 ledech


k w vldome.


we pecall aoe


Ley,
vnto wyldome / z keacheth to vle wyſdome a
Teese a shaban ut wees


rfandpng:
knowledge of all oure woꝛckes. aon


As geuen me the true fcpence ol thelechyngest


to chat Bnowebow the woꝛlde was made /
Sthe poͤwerg of z elemẽtes: the /


evesithe na:
tuzes@ Epiones ok beaſtes:the dre che em


zo we
— a toalt a other
clennes. ff

God / on a — 125 pated nge bee 125
clearnes ol 1 God. Cherfoze can


is nobndetplenthynge come vnto her kor weis


2 bergbinenor . 2 Sueclatonge yt / 2 one


bins e e EO Of God / and


N ok his goodneſſe. Ando; lo moch &
ber age detak derlei be rene a a
he che herlelke in


luer wo beuepett ben the Dunne,


moze Ipghe then the ſtarres aul the peti
not to be e ee $ 155
commeth nyabt. But wyckedneſſe can n

euer come wyldome / pet Deookymones wate


jozowe not be with her.


¶ Che eſectes ot wyldome.
che. vii. Chapter.


HY come reacheth trom one ende to

another mightelr / a louinglx doth

iber an indeed o, IJyaũe ioued

ind laboured fo? her euen kro

e
och Tou

ban e


0 Lala bee bei⸗ dhe is the W


oke


St wyldome. krriſj.


5 F lenme ethinges ate pleatauntonto the, toperpetuall mortbippe,
ie b ly emptied Ilarde after this maner: 25 1 and be ppelerued tyozoto wyrdome. sDhederpueredtherightuous people and 79
nech allchonges? qhoutwple aye baer. Ga irrer ot denn toaueare umb. 1 Cpe deltueratice of che rrabtwes sdmeth thronnbe an d cen elne ato
thing bee ya nba dyer 98 che. r. chapter. ot God /a ſtode by him in wonders d tokens
Jia mul lone oereue @ rpgbeuoutnes /let Aerzen (eyou that hat made alls Arden en made the foe or ch. ee kr warde abthetz abe un
Burn laboute toy unde o be at great )eoonges with chpsopde/e der robo wo mae 6 tates of Oe eer Cnty amaterious ave bse
Dectues. and wr the teachety iber a medmanchepowihr wridome g ove abe büro bis tener , khn cr wae a wenge MNCOTHE /@ eh.


pꝛidence / ryubtucuſnes 8 ffrength / why) he Wulde haue donn von ouer the creature
are loch thynges as men can haue nothinge which thou halt maderthat he Muine ode ?
B moze profteable ircheir like Jkamandelpie worde Acco ding to equyte ¢ righteoucnes
moch knowledge / che can teil the thynges ? execute iudgement wyth a true bert) geue
are patie dylcerne thinges oz to come: de me wrldome which ts euer about thy beate:
unoweth che loteltyes ot wozdes / a can ex⸗ g put me not out fromamonge thy. chyldꝛẽ:
pounde darcke lentences. She canten ok ko Ich leruaunt @fonng of thy handmay ·
tokens @ wonderousthynges / oz euer they den / am a feble perfonne/of a (hozte tyme /
come to patle andthe endes ot al tymes and 6 to pounge tothe onderttandpnge of tudge⸗
ages. Do J purpoled atter thrs maner: J ment e the lawes. Andthough a man be nes
Wpll take her bnto my companp / and comen uerlo parkecte amonge the childzen of men /


Be him out ofthe moudde of d earth / a gaue of ftarres in the nyght lealon. She pꝛought
5 82 Don. chẽ thoꝛow the reed lee / a rarxed thé thozow

tuous wente awape in hys wach krom Pgreate water. Ohe drowned their enemies

wyldome / the bꝛotherhead pervithen in che lee /a brought them out or) depe. So
choꝛow the wrath or murthur. Agapne / whe the rightuous tone the kporles DE the ongod⸗
the water dettropenthe whole worde / wyl⸗ 15% Prarkedthr holr name O Lozde/ and
dome pꝛelerued z sous thoꝛow a pooze magrikyedthy bicto tous hand with one ac⸗
tre / wherol che was gouemerherkelke. Wa- code. Fo; wyrdome opencth the mouth ol ß
teouct when wyckednes hadgotten the bp- 0 —. 1 0 0 bof babes, to ene
d ene knee te tr were puft bp kene, Wegeeate power and meecpof. od. eat


Loumgip with ber mo deute Methalgeue me pet pr ihr wifoome be not with bym,be chal⸗ ide we knewe the pahtnaus pe, be. . Chapter.

gon b eld (peabe comtogtably but me Pe cringe regarded. Püliheußa chulen Login e e ae 5 e openthete worches in bene

, eee, eee
el one amöge co ol 3 2 not

imeng ¢ Lo des of tyecouncell hough 5 commaunded me tobuploe a Ipthat perpthea / what tyme asthe fyze fell linbablten/¢ piechen their tentes in


Dotone bpon the.b.cpties: L pke ag petthrs the watteneterte, Chey code the
sp daye the ontrutefull ; walke/and imokeng enempes a pacers iver —
land ne e ties hẽ they were thirſtie / tiey called vpõ
pee che vnrppe and vntimeip trutes pgrowe the / and water was geuen thé out of rock /
bpon the trẽes. ¢ Stheirthirſt dakened out ok 5 harde tone,
Bnd foz a coke ofa remembꝛaunce ofthe Foz by the chynges / where thoꝛow their ene⸗
bnfaythfull toule chere Gandetha peter OF mpes were punpiched / were they helped in
ab gc as regarded not wrldome/ cheirnede Jos bntothe enemies thou gauctt
not only this hurtẽ / that they unewe nut mans bloude in ſteade of lyuyng water And
thenges whych were good / but allo left as they had lcarcenelle in the rebuke
beyrnde thẽ onto men / a memogtall of their n the chridzen were llarne / thou gauelt
kodluchnes: tochat in Sthynges wherin they ne een 8 water bnloked
2 e 2 at w.
koch as take hede vnto wytdome / dhe wal des tanie/bot tou wolbed Orpen anne


„pen thervabtu
D
ome of godiy were and ed tho
geen 8e de §made ratty ot God. Cheſe Wen a ua
rpche in his labourt / i bꝛought to pace father / a pʒoued the: but vnto the other thou
thethinges that he wente aboute. In the dic. halt bene a boyſterous kynge / iaped hard to
Ceattuint of loch as defrauded him the ſtode their charge / a cademned the. tabetber thep


Chou halt
be ponge / pet tall g haue Marve vnderäg⸗ te ple bpö che hald mount / f an aulter in the
beuge, w chag & be maruelousingOahe cttie wherin thou dwelleſt a lyckneſke 2
okgreate nien / o the Faces of Pnces wall holy tabernacle whych. thou batt pꝛepared
wonder at me. ohen J holde my tonge / they fd the begynnyng / z thy wyldome with the /
Wall byde mplealure: when J kpeake / they which uno weth thy woschz: which alfo was
Wall locke vponme: g p Atace moch / they 1 8 / when thoumardeßt ? wozlde / knewe
chall lape their handes bpon their mouth. what was acceptable in thy leght, and ryghe
Wopeduer/bpthe meanes of her 2 wall obs inthp commaundemente 8. G tende her out
tapne immoztalpte / u leaue behrnde mean ok the boly heauens and from the trone of
euctlatynge memozpall/amonge them that thy matetty / that we ma pe be with me / a la⸗

come alter mme. J thal fet the people in oꝛdze / boure wich me: that Amape hnowe what
Othe nacpons Walbe ubdued onto me. Doz. Vacceptable in thy Fight .sfo7 we anowerh
rpbletyzauntes chalbe atraped when they A bnderbandethallthrnges : g the wall lede
do butheare or meramonge the mulkptude J mefoberly in me worhes / and pretence me
chalbe counted good /e mpabtve in batapfl. in ber power. Do thallmy workes be acce⸗
iwhe Jcome hame/ A Mal finde rede wher: ptable /andthen wall Agonerethr people
for her cSpanybath no bitternes / eherfele- righteoutly/ebewozthy torytinmy fathers:
typ hath no tedpoulneſſe / but myꝛch etope. leate. Fos what man is he / chat mare knowe
C ‘Now when J rontpdered thele thynges by che rouncell of God? Oz who cantypnke
m lelle / and ponderedcche in m berte/ how what the win of Godis Kozthe thoughtes
chat to be toynedvnta wyrdome is immozta- ot moztall men are milerabie / ¢:oure toy
lite /andgreate pleaturetohaueberfrend- cabesacebutbncertayne, And wür amt. c
Ahippe-how that in the worches of her hädes tail ¢ cozeuptible bodz is heuy onto f foule
are infinite rpches:how that / who io kepery and the carthp manty6 hepech done p vn⸗
company with her halbe wle: and thathe _ derita z muleth spon many thynges.


lynners. She wente downe with him in to Kynge they thought kcoꝛne/ as of an abiecte.
the donge on and kayled him not in the bad: ee ee nen prorat tp hen
tyll che had bought bm che fcepter of the chey were thürſtie: hüt euẽ Iphe as $ thoughe
kealme / a power Aga pnſk thole that oppzel+ tes of p koolich were / lo was allo cdetr wic
tedhem. As ko chemthat Had accuter 1155 kednes Where as certaxne me nomithozaw
She declared the to be Ivers / sbzoughebyr eee
‘ N ‘ = eS ‘ ee beatte;


dilceauers. She
orp eatte hati come toh can We bifcerne that tapll a gaue him the bictozy/thathe myaht pat. Aut whe they perceaued i their punith-
eee e
bes af * 5
sane Greve wrtk / and bade eee „erte een dee toepbiivemoch otbpm/ of beth Feen;


5 fore: 5
But when J grew to mere vnderſlding / grounde of the thenges Fare dane in beauce -
Icame to an nder pied bodp. Neuertheles Oh Lowe /mho can haue knowledge of the”
when x perreaued that I couide not kexe my vnderſtandyng and meanyng excepte thon
leite cha le / excepte od gaue it melandthar geue de 0 2
was appopnte of wyldome allo / to knowe aboue- that the mares ol them hate
whoteguetitmas)y ſtepte vnto che Lozve/ ponesrthmapeberefourmed: meme


beattes/thou ſendedſt amukptude W
beaſtes bpd them korn bengeance: that they
might know / that ione where withalla man
tynneth, vy ‘ame allo Matt he be puneced.
Foz onto to alimpabtybande/ tpat made d
wozide of naught / it was not vnpolubie /

to lende amoge them an heape of Beeres / oꝛ
woode Iyons / ozctuen beadtes ora hraunge
kynde / loch as are vnknowne / o lpoute trae
or cat out a imokynge bzeth/ o Mote boris
e ght
able nahen dena abe Yee
allo eirhonpble trght. ec
.
arne wit winde / bepnge pexlecuted ol

go ther amne ae aon
ae dee toute 1 2 med anthenges

jou halt 0702
miar nge right. Foz thou halt


ai
Ipbeag the (mall thing bebe balatice were
Sots p wozlde befoze p: pet asadzoppe oF
moznünge dew / that faltety downe bpon the
karth. Thou bat mercy pon all / toꝛ thou
att Botner ofall ehenges;and manet the as
ough thou laweſt not the Cynnes ol men
beau ther chulde amende. Foz thou loue
alld thinges that are / a batelt none ol them
whom thou halt made netherdideſt thou oz⸗
begne of maheenpebinge/ oF euell wi.

_  Powmpgbeeny thinges endure / vtit were
not thy will? Dz how coulde eny thynge be
pꝛelerued / excepte it were called of F: But
thou tpareſt all / coꝛ all are thyne / Lande /

ou loueroł loules.


„Ebemercpe of God to warde ceuners/ h wayhes t


God art burepꝛouabie God geuelh leylure to repẽt vs
Ke ry, Chapter,
70 bow gracious ‘and Ciocte is
112 nere m allthinges: Cherkoze
neck thou thẽ meaturably g
gowꝛöge / a warneſt thé cõcerning
$ chings bert they offende: thou fpeakett
tothe DLozd) acroztett thẽto 92.4810
wychednes /a to put their trult in the. As ko⸗
tote olde inhabiters oft uch lande thou
108 85h not aue wo


elne
bie mich en louieſt aboue allagher d
might . ß childꝛen of God.


4


The boke


dlptie. Motthat thou wat pnable to cubdue
el vngodiy ontothe ryghteous inbattaplle
02 wyth cruel} beakes / oz wyth one rough
wozde to delkrepe them together: But the.
mynde was to dꝛyue them out by lytle a litie
geuynge chem tyme a piace to amende : nd⸗
wyng weil that it was an vnrighteous na·
cyon a wicked or nature a that their thought
myght neuer be altered. Foz it was a curted
lede from the begynninge / s feared no man.
Vet bak thou pardoned their (ynnes . Foz
who wyll wen e e done
that? Dz who wyll Gande dgapne thyiudg ·
ment? Dube came befoze thy face
an auengerok dntighteous men? Dz who
will blame the / the People peri / wom
thou halt made? oz there is none other
but thou / that caret foꝛ albthenges: chen
ma peſt declare how that thy tudgmẽt is not
might. There darre nether kynge / ner ty⸗
e in thy light egupyy ace pees ol them
jou halt delt


ſedelkroped.
70 omochthen aß thouattrrabtcous

they ſelkthou oz dzeſt all Werbach apes

¢ punted even him that hath nocdeferue


tobe puntthed, a takeſt durch peer 57 9 0


Gant aleaunt in ide lande of tox power. 0;
thy power (s the beginn oerabteoutren:
becaufe thou art 1070 of all thinges thers
fare ax thou seen ge an When men
thinke d not to be ora Fall dlrength / ihou de⸗
claret thy power: K bofdip deiruereſt thou
tbem ouer $ knowe p not. But thou Losdot
e wetſ / gaser geen,


thou Lt atone chpldzen / onto whoſe fae
cherst woe ¢ made couenatitt or
good promnies?S0 wbercas tou Doce r
chaltẽ vg / thou puniſheſt our encmigafuerte
bead arid ese 7 Smepunihe tne thu
@ whẽ we our felues
8
. . where as men haue ! 15


6


w. 2, the

longe in Fear, ot ete) v abebes beats ‘
(which eu their enemies defpifed)fos godd
krürnge as eh rien of no e


o aunce. . e now


brthobelcomes and rebukes / the


me tobe kante
. 3


B there wa
~ Sehomatore they wolde not knowe:therkoꝛe with


came the ende ee vpö chem.


ted bad monie ot


0
goddeg: . te fnowne,
ee — may 1 5 ies IL fon


03 hg beutyot tye crea
ore 2


th
5 are and. ‘abmall
etait fe cal 4 ‘he uren


a
¢ . 45 0 par 1
4 ‘ou arabe toy noting kits


11 e


fo ol
1 a ede
15


ae
ae


Bett
Alem a vib parsley e tele
malo baits

tbe catte ‘Clon ponte): -.


Then ma
911 je wall/a maketh it
5 ts 1


4 pep


‘Berard must of ts
copes nt 1


7 @
tote / 8 nite je fe
51 ch gene elt


gouiticelFat it he

Hot e bntg ia a

ee unb app eet
brmchatts tycRe:forivte be pia


ante whedper


: Wee ont to ban cabo


baue 4.
df Setar rma e e :
40


e of 50


a Rock/ chae
lars iene 1 a bear
a) ay craltelman ume

uch hies denen ne heben n-


E.
Mn gerte thoubad weden ware che,
and a ure path in che mpodelt of


ann vb
belpe in an eee amin wen


ots: to che lee without oan elle,
‘oe een mente aes ſeuerchelee,


ie chulde not bi


trap thing on hevngeny be ,
poe a
— ae ye wall


men bath kounde
aa 9 come thowipto


talk ae kolben pemane an pmage
(in all J hatte) of bis deed fonne: a lo b.


ae ante conn
the craftetma: e ignoꝛaũt allo age
: eralontymnrn mans Foz vo ed Ae Bs
2 Hime wove abe e el his con}
to make the pmage of the belt kachron.
tee woke com

ple was dyceaued / in ch
kolie mnow fo n
F. ee

mas! / wen menledherkote

e ter alto ta
Kockes ä ought to whatloeuer l.

re Tater fozb
cat cher knowledge,


inberree eri n the greate warreg of
kalledther eat ro der ce


peace. cher due
aun 27 ste ogdpotaceptice earth him
25 i 126 0 rd


The boke


vm his loule to wo ꝛckhe / a bzethedin
Ife


Ok wyldome.


Wewedſt 12296 enempes /b tis chou / wylch


. ebhethokletz. hep chin Deliuerelt krö ali cell. 2 fo then whe they
riage / myloꝛdze of aduoutrye a vnc A 47 — pn 8 were bytten tb greMoppers and les / they
Fatty 0. . bus mennet, 5 6 men Hue euer begets Salute beter r been un be Cdk

mages te!  caufe/the begynnpos zur. 74 f bpeuelimeanes. Bowhe that of Butnether theceeth of ro ven ·

uc eter wre So ple befiels eymages/kno- mous wozmes oue! beam rae rte

cher art mad tober che be neren toe yp et to afeneaboue al ocr. ince maser bethem she pe i

celeste . 2 res of che people ochathode re they punt e che

fete kewaretbemkeme .ffo7 in fomocd ag thett 5 ae 1

LN er foule exceadynge pꝛoude nto letttyer-Chuide fall in ta lo depe fozgettull⸗

: though dep mar kol. foatoee 5dr ache Boots of be yarn nelle gather mppotnoe bet elpe.

mle teip/vetteptinckete Mal not burte to begonnes; erelpghtto It was neither herbe ner plaptterthat ves

Chertove commety a greate plage bpor fe el mevearestobeare/nop. Bone the ko health but thy wore @ 11070)
Chemie that So deem Cher bac an ls See oben ee cb beaet dope en dea en
T kete cher are to dame tog, Forman Hat-the power of ipfe and death
e eee 0 N d foriavarnbecoarbarbburaberomentpyete? Weve bnco Deatbes bank (arbre
z oz thett Cinearinge tathionea em, beg canmale op apne. But ma cho sow wy

Tepee 0 at cynne / and Ine pntohem: fo2 fepnge be is butmoytalt: atone foule, Lido eed

ee offence of the bngooly, brnmeike / isbut move be mabe vat agave tte mae

Che ope of he fp eth yaynge ee mercy OF wich bnepghtuous bandes. Pebimelfeis call agapne the Coule cat

one 2 8 cape bettethen hep whombe wor bt rs Sts option, fo)

twas Repte eat thou oute Goo) art e a 8 Yertney a0 e bears nyweo pte eng ofc an: wa
dennen can any cruc/@ in mick: otch err mo milecablestoy cOparc things taunge waters/ bales b rapnce weve ber
atte e a tage 4 ae Fe e ward oe, m Jol d ung won He cane

Serie eae geet fo Sumas aeemueemee ears

1 5 ner al 1 1071
— ee 595 enn p2spte aw sey cles errands ed
a
e had bene menden n e kitchen eee
unge or men haue kounde out thozow their eucil Walde ke 8 acdc dh were eee

ence Aebat ot deren en a6 he pap the punichment of God. Andfome tpmebze

king of the ppctute( an bnpyorytable ta. tn water neuer CRE

fed Remedy coloussy bhefabtucusnacion ofthe 2

whole Hight entprett the gnoyadtesotbar be ou batt ked thine atone;

n derne puro ee the bat pie wang te g Cent tbe bad ready ers
fuse bach and enen aon ae ane lebe
ecthelede what fous tod, bint fa hem th Rege wine ung lend,

es are weh ordeatg Guew 4 Gratige: quavies ryches a fwetnetie vnto thy chilbzé/thou
roe oar mate bw, aa eo becher meate : rage tne aD Be mae Ltachsteuerr ma

e e ee e e

A e e K pte a
SOE ee Ee cant oe etece one where ie pe as e e the
* necedarp. e were urn ynge in al pati
Patek of nen Oe Oe we brougbe ü e chere 2.7 sabe fae a boat
+ meate. ret regth mighe

———— ten Me be ercute — ee en tbo be nonſbed Foz the cx n we

raabedh a sco oecbe tame are chen bop la amy n en Corongiu ae ad

ud eee ee Seen d nt . Pr ne
7 le

tenienbenget) cure ett agar. pom thet ep vere — ae create sat tree

8 ſctädyng endured e noꝛſe of al ‘

shot besa eal bene neste is 2 . ee en he were putea teate d gen tar bannctr tor a

a fs ox bt mec ene Pravteaton ace ned be efourmed Gas Long wb fou eu mabe

könen bm tomate bag cg. 40 a token offaluacyon eoremembze § Tee tin orn tute athe gomkug

fee ten ft e tion tahoe!
ealenby the

Ebi tite is moze bile chen clave: fo2fomocd Hitters be betty

ashe not bis atone maker / tat butbeche/Drautour oral. Din cho the. thes fn —— ps


The boke


etpye/ ap foone att was waren
„FFF


gr ch yp

2 ehope oF the vnthäkkun Gail
F and perpthe
as water / chat is not necellarx.


- CMe tudgementes of God vpon the Egrperans.
che. roi. Chapter.


—
Reate are thy iudgmẽtes D070)
ie eben Sp ap
reherfoze men do erre / y wyilnot be
rekourmed worth thy wuldome. Foz
dose pebplein abt, eher to haue thy
wich bund ieccyont / they were bodldẽ
Saen
ut
euerla And wi


viſtons made :
fe ee
ares bp nan fo eee


Lunge ofthe ferpentes.Jn fo moch that with
Heembling they . — theylawe
not d ayze/ wüich no man yet mape elcape.


Jositis anheuptgenge/ wbena mans who


C. ee 5
‘atone cõccience beareth recozde of bis wyc⸗
‘Rednes & condépneth him. Ard why: abered
hd wounded confctence / taketh euer cruell


fhinges in bide Feartulnes is nochyng eis, badgeu


but a declarynge that a man ſekeih heipe ¢
Defence / to a
how moch lege § hope is within / 5 moe ig
the vncertẽtpe of the matter foz the whpch
bets punpſhed. But thepthat came in the
intabtpnvaht: clepte $ lepe § fell pon the
kid pnder s from aboue:fomepme were they
alta ped thoꝛow the feare of the wonders /s


foz bym felt. Ind loke righteou:


lõtyme ther were lo weake p theylwowned
wilhall :f07 an haſtye a ſodane feartulnes
came bpon them. deter warde / yt enx ol thẽ
had fallen / he was kepte and Mutt in pꝛelon
but without chapnes. But yt enydwelt in a
vyllage / yr he had bene an herd oꝛ hulband⸗
mabe ſuſtred intollerable necedite: koꝛ they
were all boüde wone chayne ol darcknele.

Whether it were a blatynge wynde / oz a
were longe ol § byzdes amonge the chycke


. bzaunches of the trees / 07 the behemence ok


Mie rüninge water / oꝛ greate nople of the
Hipnge downe of tones /o the pla enge d


dhe mda beaties whore eng not / oz


che miqhtie nople of roaringe beattes / oꝛtze
fotonoe antwereth agaynẽ in the hremoũ⸗
tapnes: it made thé twowne lo berp keare.
J all the earth thined wWeleare light / a no
m was hindered in his labour. Onelp bpd
them chere kella beup nygbt / an ymage of
darcknelle that was to come vpon them. ee
er neonate oe Celues the mot heuy a
optible darc 2
Alrgelltes hab in Egryt
e maren ed l Seren
all the fpr bornẽ of . Che (pune of the people
in the rnes. Aar on Rove betwyrt the ixue s the
ee
Cuerthelcs th tanctes hada very
ate light (and p enemies herde
ete bopce / but they lawe not the
ebnet Jar becaute they
fuffvednot z tame thinges/ehey ma
thesand thep that were bered afoze( becaule
hey were not hurte now)thanchedthe/ and
befought the(D Gor)that there myghtbe a
difference. Therkoze had they abutnpng pr
ler of krze to ede thé in the bn knowne wa pe


omifen g thou gaueſk them Sunne koz a tre gytt


without eny hurt. Reatonit was chat cher


B


ihe ag thouba


vnto brite: 6 theiut chulde teceaue good
euell in line maner / linginge pꝛaptes bnto!


a


PR


Ol wyldomt.


* father of all men. Agayne / there was herde


an vnconuenient võpce ofthe enemies / a a
ppteous crie Foz chilozen ß were be wapled.
Che matter and the ſeruaũt were punpcbed
mlxhe maner. Foz they all together hadin⸗
numerable that dyed one deat ).

Nether were p lyuunge ſutticient to bury

deed / koꝛ in § twincklnge or an exe 6 no
ft nacion of thé was deſkroyed. As oit as
Sod helped thé afoze/ pet wolde itnot make
chem belewe:but in the deltruccton ok ß firtt
bozne they knowleged / that it was the peo-
ple of God. Foz whpleallthynges were till,
EwhE che nyght was in the myddeſt of her
courte thy Aümpghtie wozde ( O Lom)lea⸗
pte downe from beauen out of thp rapall
trong / as a tough man ok watre / in chemyd⸗
delt ofthe lande that was deſtroped: and the
warpe perfourmed their fzatte com⸗
maundement / dandyng a fpllyng all thing,
with death: per it Lode vpon the earth a rea ·
ched vnto the heauen. Chen the ſyghtok the
euclt dzeames veredthem fodenlp / and fear.
fulnede came vpon them vnawarres.

Chen lape there one here / another ther /
halt deed galt qupch / and chewed the caule
Ofbis death. Foz the villons that veredthem /
cewed themthete thengd a koze: lo that they
were not ignoraũt / wherkoze they peryſhed.

Che tentacpon ot death touched the
teous allo and amonge the multitude in che
wyldernelte there was infurreccton / but thy
wlath eudured not longe. Foꝛ the fautiede
man wente in al the halt / and tote the bat
tapll opon him / bꝛought koꝛth the weapen ot

myniſtracpon: euen pꝛaper and the cen.

of reconctunge: lett him lelk agaynſt
the waath / and lo bꝛought the milerp to an
ende declaringe therbp,that he was thpter-
uaunt. Foꝛ he ouercame not the multitude
with bodely power /ner W wea pkt ot might:
but with the wo: de he ſubdued him that be-


Ted him / puttinge the in remembꝛaunce ot


che othe g couenãunt made vnto the fathers,
‘07 when the deed were Fallen Downe by hea⸗
one ppon another / he ſtodein the myd⸗
belt /pactfien the wzath/ and parted F ware
vnto che Ixurng. And hp: in bys longe gar⸗
ment was all che beu tr / a in $ foure rowes
Of the (tones wan the glozy. of the fathers
grauen / and thymaieſty was weptten in the
crowne of hig head. xantotbhele tte deſtroper
gauenlace / and was afraped of them: to it
was onlp a tentacton wozthp ol wach.


„Che mate that was gehen at the detpre
Cid eng Che clementes tre not — tbe
wrllok 4 lots che welt of mat. ;


Che. xx. Chapter,


gers into be


>

Pea |S For thebrigoniy, § wiath came B:

V)\opon them twithout mercy onto f
bende. Foz he Knew befoze what
icbude happen onto them how that
(when cherhad conlented to leit them go / ¢.
had lent them out wich greate dilpakce) they
wolde repente / and kolowe vpon them. Foz
when they were yet mournyng a makynge
lamentacion by che graues or the deen, they
deuyled another Coolpiynes:Co that they per⸗
lecuted them in their llenge / whom thep had
catt out afoze with pꝛaxer. Woꝛthyneceny⸗
te allo bꝛought them vnto this ende / to they
bad cleane koꝛgotten the thynges that hap⸗
pened vnto chem afore . But the thynge that
was wantynge ok their punychment / was
requylpte Coco be kulkylled bpon them with
Cozmentes : 6 thy people might haue a mar
ue lous pallage thozow / a that thele might
kynde a ftraunge death!

Chen was euerp cteature katbroned
agapne of new accogdpnge tothe wyll or 23
theixmaher/obepeng thp comaundementes
that thy chptdzen myght be kept without
burte go the cloude ouerchadowed theirtẽ⸗
kes / e the dꝛpe earth appeared / where afore
was water: ſo that in the reed tee there was
a ent without impedpment / and the great
depe be came a grene kelde: where thozow all


che people wente p were defended with top


bande / feinge thy wonderous ¢ maruclous
worhes For as the holes fo were they ted /
Kleapte ipke lambes / pꝛayling the. CL oꝛd)
which haddelt deliuered them. Ind whrether
were pet mpndefull of the thyngz / that hap⸗
pened wh plechep dwelt in the lande: how e
Arounde brought koꝛth fives in ſteade orca ·
tell, a how thẽ rpuer lerauled wyth d mule
titude of frogges in ſteade of tylchez.

But at the lak they tawe a new creacpon
ofbpanes that eymeas thep wete dllceaued ©
with Wit and derpꝛed delpcate meates. Foz
when they werelpeakinge ok their appetite /
the quaples came vp brite che from the lee /
and punchementes came bpon the fynnets
not tofthout the cohens whpcy came to pale
aloze by the vehemence of the ſtreames: ko
ther aukred wozthelp acozoynge to therz
wickedneles ther dealt fo abhominabix ¢
churlichlp with ſtraungers. Home receauen
nobnknowne gettes/fome brought} Grads
 Hondagethatdydchemaood. Be
de all thete thynges chere were kome / chat
not only receauedno ſtraungers with cheir


Neeber reef: wylles / but perlecuted thote alto / and ova
f the ett it.
so 9 Jopctans / and che great iope ol


them moch euell chat veceauedthem gladip.
Cherkoze were they punvthen with dipnd⸗
nelle /Ipkeasthep that were couered with
codane darknecke at § does of the righteous
loß euerx one lought z entraũce of his doꝛe.

Eee. ij. Chus


pme is not the lech of them that wente gels them /
55 and pet all nethermeltedther the fe, meltech
ir melody: whrch mape lightelp. Bnalleypngesbatt i dante
F


wyldome.


Sadie fo pad Che dz was not detpyied the?
turned into a babe e Falte eee
ewamme in the water / wente now bpon the “pattepou
Deve grounde. Che fyze hach powerin war ben
erte ‘atone vertue and the wa ·
ter ko gat his atone kinde to quẽch. Agarne / ©The eme ofthe bohe ol wyrdom


Che babe ok · Fetus the lonne a
lach / which is called in latyne


Eccleliaſticus.


* 2 we


3 Leben


e
enen tevin!


332 —
ae


k opeach vnto his bol


my graund fathers efushadg
e e atl
be purpofcbalio to team


: inthe. Tro
und con Tb dera e


od
ch were willenge tajearne and to fe wee . —


neger h *


25 2 ht it oo andnece PoE a yer und eule co ite
F & eee hat J had tyme, Flaboured and
‘ . betto ne tia bone ande berge tonto bahnte
i —.— F
' ~ pipetbe . erg and ir
: to che lawe ofthe.
1 —
„ 2 2


e


3


Cs plrome proceadeth and cömeth or
of the feare at God. e twetnes is a eat to come


dr wydome.
„Ce, err, Chapter.
W commeth
bene
ibis befoze
ib nombzed
i edꝛoppes
— — i pes

hed 1800 h alured the he thea⸗
en / the bz 1
thee Who hath Mech h grounde
Gordes wyldome / whych bach bene bee


fozeall thinges? noycdome bath bene before
all eyynges/ and the onderftandynge ol pꝛu⸗
dence trom euerlattynge. ( Gods worde tn g


Ae
la ave the entrad .
Sus beg unto Whoa 1

bene declared bath kno wne


bert Garb pee fe
— gchewed: i who cS fe
entraunce of fu


crotwne Che feave of
210 am ince bet eu 1 1
r Co Feareth the Loꝛde / it
Wall go wel eth pvc at / inthe
Dave sthpsbeath e
egen joue of 00 ts honozable Wyrdome:


cholen wemen / and
rrahteous and karthtull. Che keare of the


„Jelus Sprach, Erxxbi


rpaht Gods teru .
Kurth nd uuſine eher ngen Werne


a
*


e ys vnd
Babbage lun ho
Is abbozeed of lyrmers ee re ie
‘Logddzpuett out iynne / ko be that is wilh⸗
be made ryghteous / and


can not be made
topliéull bolones is bis atone deltrucciö.
Pacpent man wyll futfre pnto the tyme / ¢


bad hatibebaue F rewarde ok iope. A good


tes cher ok. Be not obſtinate and vnkatth⸗


ede

.
0 an

thy lou tle to biWbonoueanb(o@obplteoucr nner


je
8


= chplouleto
and was Full Fett andbe pacpent:b
Inthe modyers tombe: vt algo mre —.— is en
nd walbe knowne ol the


che woꝛdes of vnderſtandynge / an
Wrpncke not awaye / when hou attentye 2
fa, pone 200 6 / 19 5 26


Ettleliaſtitus.


The boke of


to hm and tuffre /ehatehplpfemapeen- bhonouredof the chyldzen / and loke what a
wore * a auieseeb Serpent vn⸗ mother commaundeth ber chyldꝛen to do/ he
to the / receaue it:lutkre in heupnele / abe pa willhaue it zepte. ho fo honoureth bis ka⸗
cient in thy trouble. Foz lyke as golde 8 pl · ther / bys tynnes ſhali be koꝛgeuen him: and
uer aretrped inthe kpꝛe / euen lo are accepta- he that bonoureth hys mother isiphe one b
bie men in the foznace ok aduertyte. Beleue gathereth treature together. oho lohenou⸗
in God / che Mall helpe the: oꝛdie thy wape keth his tather/ hall haue tove ol his awne
a ryght / and put thy truſt inhim. Polde falt cheidzen: and when he maketh bis pꝛarer, be

his keare / and growe therin. O pe hat keare Wall be herde e that honoureth his kather /
31 on/ tade ture holde or his mercv:thzine- ſhall haue a jonge lte: andhe that is obe·
zie not awape kr hum / that pe fall not. O pe dient koꝛ the Loꝛdes take / hys mother Wall
that keare the Loꝛde / beieuẽe hem / and voure haue tope ok him.
rewarde call not be emptie. O ve 2 kcare? He that keareth the Lode / honoureth his
Loꝛde put poure truſt in him / a mercy wall father and mother / and doth them lerupxce /
come onto pou fo; plealure. O pe that keare as it were vnto the Loꝛde him keik. Hondure
he Lope tet youre loue vpon him / a roure thy lather in dede / in wode / and in all paci ·
bertes thalbe ipghtencd. ence / that thou mapett haue his bleüynge:
2 Conſpdꝛe the ove generacions of men O oz the bleding of the father buyldeth vpche
pe chyldzen and march them well: was there houles of the childzen / but the mothers cur⸗
euer enx one contounded / that put his truſt te roteth out the foundacpons . Retoplenot
in ß Lode: no ho euer continued in his feare when chy fatheris repꝛoued / toz it is nohe ·
and was fozlaken:? Oz whom dyd he euer naure vnto the but a ame. Foz the woz-
delpple / that called favthfully vpon him? thipe ok a mas father is his awne woꝛchipe /
Fo: Godts gracious and mercptull / be loꝛ⸗ and where the kather is without hondure / it
geueth lynnes in the tyme of trouble / and is is the dichoneſty of the lonne. My lonne /
Adekender Foz all them that lene hymin the mae moch ol the kather in his age / a greue
truech. Wo be vnto him 6 hatha duble hert / him not as longe as he liueth. Ind yr his vn ·
wycked lyppes and euell occupied handeg / r derſtanding faple / haue pactence with him /
to the lynner ? goeth two maner of wapes. and delpplẽ hym not in thy ſtrength. Foz the
10 be onto them that are loole of herte / ene that thou thewet onto thy father/
which put not thetrtruct in God / atherkoze Wall not be foxgotten:¢ when thou thetelfe
ſwalltthey not be defended or him. Wo be vn⸗ iwantett / it haul be rewarded the ( ¢ fos thy
to them chat haue loſt pacirnce / kaztaken 8 mothers offence thou chalt be recompenled
: rpabtwapes/and are tuned back in to kro ⸗ with good / vee it hall be founded koz the in
Wärde wapeg. Phat well cher do / when the ryghtuoulnes ) a in the bape of trouble thou
Loꝛde wall beg ynne to vylet them? Qhalt be remembzed: thp tonnes alto wall
€, Ther that feare the L onde wyll not mir: melt a wape / icke as} pie in $fayze warme
tut his wozde:and they that loue him / will, tether.
hL d ern ect ne ern Ü tr Oneneneeen: „18
e LO; r
pleataunt vntohrm: ethepthatlouchym/ curledot God. Ap tonne perfourme thy


fortabeth bis father tant came c


Mall kultyn his lawe Chery? seate § Tode wozhes wiouenge mekenetle / to chalt thou


Pyll prepare their hertes /and humble their
lader nds lnb. Chev 5 feare the Loꝛde
kepe his conunaundementes /a wyll be pa.
Cent tell cher ſehrm felt / laringe: betterit
ts foz 8 to fall intothe handes or the Loꝛde /

en into the handes or men oz bis mercy is
as gerate as hymtelte.


Co oure father and mother ought we to geue double
honour 0d tbe bietpng be
—: POUR (OEECHE out
Che. iij. Chapter.
e
4 ofthe og
) there .
Heare me youre father (O mp
deare chyldzen ) a do there akter / that xe may
be late. Foz the Loꝛde well haue the father


be loued aboue other men. he greater thou
art / the moze humble thy leiklin all ehpnges)
thou thalt kynde kauour in the fight of
Bod. Foꝛgreate power belongeth onelx vn ·
to God / a he is honoured of the lowiy.
Speke not out the thunges that are aboue
thy capacrte / and learch not che grounde ol
loch thynges as are to mightye foz the: but
lot what God hath c the / thrnne
dponthat all wae / and be not curpous in
many ot hys woꝛkes. Foz it is not nedelull
tox the to te wthyne eyes the pate
lecrete. Make not thou tomochlearch in lu ·
perfluous chynges / a be not curfousin mas
ny ok hrs wozckes: fo many es ate
chewed vnto the already / which be 2
capacite ot men. Che niediynge w loch bath
begrledmanra m / and tangled cyt wit


FJelus/the lonne


in b How he that 1)
race Ps
An harde herte thalitapze euctiat p lat
Can bert that goeth two wapes / hal not pꝛo·
g be that is krowamde ok here / will euer
e
es / only er wi

beape one fynne hy another. he councell
che pꝛoude hath no health / toz the plante


of!
offynne Wall be rotedout in them. Che hert by


of hii 6 bath vnderſtandyng Mall perceaue
bre a good care wyll gladly her⸗
Ken bnto wyldomk. In bert chat is wyle and
bath vnderltädrng / will abttayne fro lynnt /
And increake in $ woꝛckes of rightuoulnes.
Water quencheth burnynge epze / ame


bum that ts thanckkullthe chincketh ops him
agapnt the tyme to come:lochat whẽ he als
let / he wall kynde a Gronge ore 8
Calmes muß be done with all mtohenes. Che fu.
pe ot wyldeme and her frute. A mdge ought to. be.
saevephe, Anerbortacpon tac ſchue eueli a to do good,
5 he. iii Chapter.
F tonne defraude not ihe poze ot
isalmes / andeutne not awaye
e
a ye loule /
del ße not the pooze in his nec ren


ablch him bange the rygüt wave bys
tobi imuakebima glaoman:Wewe bunt,
Fecretes, and heape ppon bpm the treatures.
of knowledge /onderitandyng e rpgütucuf⸗
nes. But pe he go wonge / the Wall foztang


6 e ptt .
ecancpleth (nes. Goobth tetpecteunte: bis gun. eee


ee chute,
r tate moch dethtyme / elchue
che 5 Pane eueli/ a fo ark weer
tofape Ftrueth. $07 there is a chatte bꝛin⸗
geth kenne / and chere is a tame that bzyn
woßſbippe and tauour. Accepte no pers
on alter thyneamne wil / that thou be not
conkoundedtothrne awne decare. Be not
albamed of tür nerabbour inhis aduerlite /
C kepe nor back th coficell when it mape do
od / netherhyde thy wyldome in her beuty.
ozinthe tonge is wyldome unowne / lo ig
bupertandyng/knowleoge Klernynge in 9
talhynge of the wyle and tedfattnede in the
woꝛckꝭ ok rygbtuouſnes. In no wyſe Cprake
99929 $ wope oktreuth / but be awamed
$ ives of typne awne ignozaſce. Shame
not to cOfelie thyne erroure / lubmptte not
chr lelte onto euery man becaule of Cyne,


es Withſtande not the face of tyempabtic, and


lw


Itryue not agayntt the ſtreame. But for the
trueth ſtryuẽ thou vnto death / and God chall
906 bon the agarndt thine enempeg. Be not
battve in th p tonge mether lack eneghigent
inthr wozches. Be notas alpon inthpne
awne boute dettrorig typ houcholde kolckz /
ga

out ceaue,
and wut when thou ſhuldeſt geue, 0


CJnryches mape we not put any confpoence, Ehe


‘bengeaunce of God ought to be trared/ and
—— N N


che. v. Chopter.


teme or be.


Folowe not the jut


leffpng of God. hey


fecuauntes or brcaule of mptmozkes:fosdouties God hal:
eboly. one sand thep tatloue her / are bes. ene
18 5 1


Erilellaltitus.


mes but what euenhath happened me?

og the Allmpgbtyeisa pacpent rewarder.

Becaule th tonne is forge

foze withcütkeare / netherheape one kenne
er. Andlaxe not tuch /


as he
vega osha te


mnners,


ve bengegun
üroteg ud nec n chere
ier gende of puri
me anne neee ek 0 97 50


err ot into
be path abou 12 ie ate
tatinthe pape re ie .
chr onderitandpnge / by the .
S ae 9 tuoute
nes abe genic tobeate e woꝛde of Ged /
an nde it / and ma he a true
5 .


„The boke of


getteſſ a trende / pꝛoue him triſt / 25
PP bi Pad ergeueh merkbar. $02


/ be not cher⸗ 1


in che bape ol nede he c

a lure trende wil be vnto tze euen agthyne

atone kalte J dpa buht dcn thyhou ·

wolde tolke wicht and ad⸗
/ye ts the fan 1

Sel 1 e trod en om ihne enemies


*. Deere krendes·
A lapthfull krende is a fivonge defence:
1 ure. ac


krende
e roe tenes:
gael 1801 fg tn alberne be alo,
se weten den be
dome tyll 5


agen ou


e bil 20 bataurbe
owe


euell wilt no


buche


tedenuredand e Chat:
Aatappe tye nell and greate alpke.
Sie the propertye of afynner to deeuell tonged.


AO ute be e of che Pay 4 tobe
te n


che. vj. Chapter.


Enotthr nevabbours enempe

che *
| thal be the hepze oF
— e .


laue wier
ye fo tyou bela
Belang wk bach


an pace chem tat be at
a pane


remapne in ber. winto fo
it were a to jone ecatt er frome
eee


ais! eate(mmponne)receaue mn DOLE
rekule ell. Put thx


not my counc
e foc nga

neck? bowe downechr & Goulet
ard be Nee


beare her pacientip
. omens ber wih ehr ubele 7
ebepeber ra le de pep

Ibe cbetwed the: and


bade oma bri a iE
kunde red inber / and that en


8 See


eh — 1
dhe


ume ac chyneg
1112 en elne Manet
Ete jptLeour OF
Ferro, eve e ae


ther / theprettes Fe.
Sues


to mpléozt
op fone /fowenoeuell th
rowes 1


earth
em the


bn pne herte
tome wats pasty attnoe be ants
anche engeatince ofthe el ok d on
Godty is a berp tyꝛe a wozme. cee hes sao
top 5 oz ebe gue good / ner thy fa


The boke ok
1 Rp il


ECcclefiattious,


1790 chelrgraue. i
‘ 1 aeauayicint the man that hach dere


Tig e
aliger/ tozchou ſerche
cant not tell what wyll come of it. ee rae aves ae ets


woꝛdes

inhis cktieand he chat is temeras

Sie an pat ame ib ddr r, tt
be abbonr d. Pee

e eee

Ice x. chapter. .

tO ple fudge will osd3¢ rs peopl

aman d

face bee we

— gg ot

daunter/and e — 1 1 —

then dn de dropeth bis

fnauctozpte

——


Jelus / the fonne


Sod and when his time is che wall let a pꝛo⸗
ketable ruler vpon it. In the hande of God ig
the power of man / a vpon the Scribts hail
he lave his bonoure , Memembze no wzonge
ok thy nerghboure / a medle thou withno vn⸗
rightuous wozckes. Pride is hatefull before
God and man and all wickednes of tye Hea-
then is to be abhoned. Becaule of bnryah-
tuous dealyng / wꝛõge / blalphemies and dy.
uerle dilteate / a tealme Wail be trandates
krom one provie to another. 2 8
. Chere is nothyng wozle then a couetous
man. Why art thou pꝛoude / O thouearth
Salles? Chere is nota moze wickedthinge /
then to loue monepe. And why loch one hath
pad eo 10. vet is he but kyichye donge
wlebelpucth. :

And though the phitician chewe his helpe
neuer lo longe / vet in conclülton it goeih at.
ter this maner / to dave a hynge / tomozowe
deed. oz when A man dreth / he ts the heyze
ok lecpentes beaſtes a woꝛmes. Che begyn⸗
nynge of mans perde / is to fall awape from
Sod⸗ and whp-hishertis gone rom his ma⸗
het / toy pzpoe is the oꝛygenall ot all tynne.
Who ſotaketh holde therok chalbe kyüͤed w
curt nges and ac the lat it (ail ouerthzow
him. Chertoꝛe hath the Loꝛd bzought the co⸗
gregacions of che wyckedtodichonoure / a
deſtroped chem vnto che ende.

God Hath de uroped the feates of pꝛoude
‘paynces/and lett vp the mele in their Reade,


Sod hath wythered the rotes of the pꝛoude


Beathen / a planted the lowly amonge them.
Sod hath ouerthꝛo wne the laͤdes one Beas:
chen / and deſtroped them out of the grounde.
He hath cauled ihem to wyther aware / he
bath brought them to naught / and made the
memo all of them to ceaffe from oute of the
earth (od hath deltropenp name ol p pꝛoude /
and lelt che name of the humble of mynde.)
Pꝛrde was not made kozman / nether wꝛoth⸗
kulnes £07 mens chyldzẽ. Che fede ol mẽ that
keareth God / halbe bꝛoughtto honoure:but
che Cede which tranfgretteth the commaund-
mentes of the Lorde chalbe thamed. He that
Sprüleramöge bꝛethze / is holds inhonoure
amonge che / a he regardeth Coch as feare the
Lord, Che gloꝛpot᷑ the ryche / or p henozable


dandol the pooze is N ak God.


Delpriengt thoii the tut voce mũ / and
lenot ö rych yngodly. Greate is the

luddße o migptie inhonqur , pet is there none
greater / then he p feareth Sete e hee fev:
uatit that is dilcrete Wall the Fredo ferupce,
Pe that is wyre a well nurtoured / wyll not
e whenhe is rekounned / e an ignozatit


- body ball not come to honour. Be not pꝛou ·


de ta do thy woꝛcke / e dicpare not in p tyme
okcduerlkte. Better is he dhat labouteth /e


Ol Spꝛach, xl.


hath plenteoutnes of all chtngꝭ / then he that
& gorgeous s wanteth bed. E
p lonne/kepe thy touie tnmehenes /
geue herher due honoure. 10 ho hai iucdtikie
Him thattinnety agapntt hum kelk uoho wil
Gonouve him 6 dithonourcty bisawnelyte?
Che poope is honoured foz bis fapthtulnes a
trueth / but the ryche is had in teputacton bee
calile oF bis goodes, Pe that oꝛdzeth him fel
honeltlp in pouerte / hot moch moze thal he
behaue hum keikhoneltlp in rpches⸗ and who
bo ozdecth him leike vnhoneſt ip in yeh’ how
moch moze hall he be haue bymieite nho⸗
neſtly in pouerte.
Tie prapte of humilytle. 2lkter the out warde aps
peraunce OUghE we not to möge. Ok hesdy and rathe
Modgement » The rpche is nok wpthout offence. All
thiüges come of God. Allmen are not to be hzought
m to thyne houte.

Che x. Chapter.

He wyldome of hem p is bꝛought

lowe hall lytt vp his head / a Wall B

make hym toſptt amonge greate

men. Commende not a man in bys
Deint ve / nether delppfe a man in hys viter
appetaunce. Che Bee is but a lmallbeact
ammdòge che kouleg / pet is her krute exceading
twee. Be not ponide of thy rarmet /s exalte
not thpfelke in the dare of thy bonoure:so2 ß
wosclies of the pest oel rare wonderfull:
Pee Slozious) Cecrete and ontinowne are hes
worcheg. Manptyzaunteg haue bene tapne
kolpedomne pon the earth /g thebnirchix
bach wozne tye crowne. Many mightte men
haue bene bzoughtlewe / and the bonozable
haue bene delpueredin to other mens hͤͤdes.
Condemne no man / before thou haue tryed
out the matter: and when thou hal made ens
quilpcion / then rekourme vightuoudp.Gene
no ſentẽ ce betoꝛe thou halt herde the caute/
but kroſt let men tell outtheirtaples.

SStrpue not ko a matter that toucheth
nech lelle and ſtande not in the iudgment
of kennerg. My fone /medle not wich many
makters: ¢ pr thou wylt be ryche thou Male
not get it: and though thou rennett thy tape
afozevet alt thou not efcape. Chere is fox
me man that labouveth / e the moze be wee
neth hum kelke > lee hath. Agapne / ſome
Manis douthfull/bath nede or helpewäteth
frengey and hach greate pouerte andcpons
Ehe loketh ppon hum to good / letteth him vp
Koni his owe ettate / and lkteth op his bead:
othat many men maruellat him / and geue

onoure bite Gop,
- Pzofperite and aduercpte ſipke and death /
pouerte and ryches come all of the Loꝛde. C
w yldome, nurtoure and knowledge of the
we ate with @God‘loue a the waves of good
are wich him. Erroure @ davchnes are inate
For lnneigzand they that exalte Shem th 177


Ettleli aſtitus.


in euell / waxe ode in euell.) Che gyf ot
So remapneth for the vightcous / ardhrs
good wyll wall geue protperpte to: euer.
Home man is uchbpipuyngenpgardiy/ ¢
that is the pozcpon ot bes rewarde / in that
he lapeth:now demie Zotten reit / andnom
wyll A eate anddzinge of mpgoodes my felt
alone. And pet he coniydꝛeth not / chat b tyme
dꝛaweth np / J he muſt leaue al b. San
vnto other men / and dye him felt. Stande
chou kalt in thy couenaunt / andexerexle thy
She cee er eme.
Page. eno ne
netz / but putthp trust in God / and byde in


e is but an ealpthinge in? Wall


rlche /a
batter


Che aduerlite


tora man
E. Bunge not euerr man in to cyineboute/
fo pdilceattull lapeth warte byucttiy. Like
83 a partrych ina maunde / lo ys che bert of
che pioude: and lpke as alppe 7 that loketh
vpon the fal olhis neghbour. Foz be turneth
Good vnto euell / andiclaundzeth the cholen.
Mk one Cparch vs madea greate tpze / aan
vngodir man lareth wate fo7 bloüde. Be⸗
ware of the dilceatkull / koꝛ he vmagyneth
wicked thingeg / to bzinge the in to a perpe⸗
tuall ſhame. It thou taker an aleaũt onto p
he chall deſtrope the in vnquietnes / a dzrue
the from thine awne waves.
ECAnto whs we oughe to do good. Enempes ought
tobe elchued.


The boke of


penfe bengeatice vnto them and kepe them
to p daye of wꝛath. Geue thou vnto $ good /
and receaue not the tynner do well bnto him
chat is lowip / but geue not to the ongodip.
Let not the bꝛed be geuenhim / that he benot
then chr lelke therin. Foz to walt
thou receaue twyte as moch euell inallche
Goodthat thou dock bnto hrm⸗And wyre
E hateih lynnerg / and ſhal rewarde ven
geaunce to the vngodir.

In pꝛolperite /a krynd Hal not be knowne /
and in aduercpte an enemte (yall not behrd. S
Foz when a man is in wealth / it greueth bis
enemies: but in heurnes and troüble a man
knowe bys krynde. Cru neuer thene
enemp / fo2 Iphe as an yon ruſteth cod
bis wpckednes. And though be make mo


ogether / ko there
of charmek/ that anch ate. ete
prtpe of d charmer / that is pig ete
pent / oz oF all Coch as come npe the beattest
fois it with bim 6 kepety copany wet
a wycked man / andlappeth him kelfe in hrs
fpnnes. Foa Ceafon woll he byde with the /
but vt thou ſtomble / he tarieth not. An ene ·
my is cwete in his lippes / he can make many c
wozdes ¢ cpeake many good thinges: Fee —
can wepe wyth bys eves) but in his herte he
pmagineth / how to thꝛow the in top pytte:
Art he mape kynde opoztuntte / he will not be
latictyed with bloude Ik aduertite come bys
$ thou walt kpnde himthere firſt ¢ though
he pꝛetende to do the helpe / ret hall he vnder
myne the. He all Hake his head / and clape
his hüdes over the to berygladnes e whitle
hemaneth many wozdes / be wan drigurle
his countenaunce. 3


‘Che companies of the provide and of the ryche are


tobe ctchuied, The Lous of Bod. Aphe do cSpanp with
their tyke.


che. xiij. Chapter.


100 oppzetied a wꝛongeouſl dealt with:
all / fitreth ccarcenelle ) and geueth kayꝛe
woes. It thou be for bys pꝛolpt he vleth
wut plchou haue notheng he tall fosfake
meg ieee batt enpthyng or thyne
atone he Wall be a goodfeloww wih p:pee he
Gal make d a barema/ a not be Cozy ko the,
ean nede of the / he hall dekraude §:¢
ech a pzeuy mocke) wall he puttheinan
dope /e geue the allgood wordes / and lape:
wantelt thou? Chus Hall he ame >
e
e to tcoꝛne.Atterwarde /whe ren at
/


Deventer acta
quettton P of thy tecect


es. Che vnmercltu


2


nt. bl. e. trong, 0.


che rych al the pooꝛe. Ata rych mG tall
e bene ee bar ubm.
ooze falleth bys rendes toꝛſake hem. Fea
bn
Ben ute bim. vi oꝛdes / and yet


But vt a pooze man go wꝛonge / he is
® nptoen:gecthougo ye beate pft t an
te haue no place. Ihen the ryche man tpea⸗
Heth / euerp body holdeth bis tonge: and lone
What be fapech cher peayte tt onto the clow-
dep. ut re the poze man praze/ cher Cape


Ok Sprach.


What kelowe is this? and ykhe do amylſe /
they (hal deſtroye him. Nyches are good vn ⸗
to him that hath no tynne in hs contcience/
and pouerte ts a wyckedthing in che mouth
ob the vngodip. Chehert ok man chaungeth
his countenaunce / whether it be in good oꝛ
oe ae brd en operate iga token
ofago oz an harde thrnge
to kno we the thought. =
coffe .
See.


he. xiiij. Chapter.
B eged is the man / that bath not
fl


AAlcctence of ſynne. Pappie is he that
no heurnes in his ee bod od


dave / i lett not the poꝛcyon of the gooddape
ouerpas the. Dhalt thou not leauẽ thy trae
uaples and labour vnto other men? In the
deuxdinge of the heretage geue and tane / a
lanctikxe thy toule noche thou rightuouf⸗


nes befoze thy death foz in che bell there ras
no meate to tende. Alflen tba Tecoma Seta,
ie leafe in Z8tabt.


Ike gratle / and lyke a flozy!
à grene tre. Dome growe / tome are caſt
Downe : euen lo ig the generacyon of flew
and bloude:one cõmeth to an ende / another
is bome. 5 ;

Fit an


gl


alten with $ worde of bis mouth / en an


and is not picked wylh the con⸗ Jacob. dh. a.


Cecletiatieus, | Theboke of, Jielus / the tonne Stk Spar rl


cꝑon ot erroure and they that leare God wil
laue none iochGodmademankrö the begin went. eon Geb / o; toh PPh os Deu.
Hegele beraten bande of his councell. E gaue them inſtruccpon / andthe lawe weckte tit
aue hum grate 8 beape of people / co: 1
—.. Hemadehpman euerlactyng couensunt
cheheauen, chem anche wen th


chdelkrech 11 te 1115 vpõ espe be a eeu eb He bath
on chall he thin 02 eu
che ernennt God which Confyoes fee water and kyze befoze the / reach out thine e
nee See Aerea goovenbeucicioke specu seb n ben en gen i mare
7 i
eras one that be e un titten . 0 ae us then ee
of Godisgreate and mightic in power / and — —— re eee
e bined ; r e 1


donne up an todo bngootp nacher

be geuen eee ves olenne.
ae Smee — terre
1


Se 10 2 , Tat Qauipeatoane; and rewarde citcey ma
ees xb. Chapter. nu 60 d thpne herte: J wyll por his ha bes hebeth delerued nd hal
0 1 bi turne: thé together into the nethermoſt par ⸗
ood oꝛdye krom the be- tes ol ac n e ae Sat Pell tee ausge
*. be Cunidered pentibe aty geuen the wape of tygheuouts
macher all ce netz hem, and ea bath neg. A. 1 e
ke. Peau dal etceeaue bpm inhere ionen 9 aistetts @ tone


ie be bpbolven
Dyed of ipte ard inderttandyng chan the fede o bemang/ ate
vcbeale Nevegeucbimtewerceetwele ne be ie rae en en, dan te boch bing
che be conſkant in her / be chenges chen
ote ee bey eg walt . kylled 25580 e lopth all maner 4


of
aie faves 11 r gocde. W earth / and


ber he call not come to contutrö. Ohe tha grega 4. elruynge betes th be coucren the grun cron * ry 1 5 .
il 5 g de emt all halbe turned gto eat) nes anstetgemety 60 =
thew: agapne. 5 ve Ae poꝛrxon that e e
fi 8 7 of the tno
che. rij. Chapte
Od (hope man oF the "patty / and


es unde
e bpm bnto catty ihe ev
8 d olcheberd Manch
0 5s made


f ce
1 —.— Sees / aD D7 125
otCemely

. si 7 | my e made i ap
tall dame bythe idem of 0b an tbat e bo ghlepu. Tee us 2 Hoja e e ete 2 55
Se ina faripeuti h 6070 f . —.— 3 55 ſkruccpon and ynderſkan⸗ ane at ete ne bn cami 2
vn. pet thallit karte. Oz whut is .

‘thinge that Hod bateth. — 9 Aeg tall male Baer arb ner nen 7 + Revftanupng and ; then wedbenge Maude
e . — 2 5 2 er 1


vngodlx. Bod prigremsge. .
5 Ble g aan derbi ent be da name f afl are but tarth ga ony, ere


Cceleliatticns:


chebties of man. Ayapnet Sab ought


‘ Sena tee ea ee perp a


Gene. lo.


5. Met. he


ype ste 4.


p.
vue.


f Eno nde wo thou ge


rag 90 2apern ‘wecontpnuattys * .
che. xviij Chapter.


Gad onen
eth a victo


ol & mas dapes be almolk an

it is moch. :
B, Urke as chedzoppes ofvapne are bnta 9

lee / and as agraueil tone is in compariton
ol h lande: co are thele few peares to p daxes
euerlaſtynge. Cherkoze is the Loꝛde pactent
with them / and pourety out his mercy upon
them. He lawe and perceaued the thoughtes
and mag inacrons ok their herte / that iher
were euellicherkozeheapedhe vp his merey⸗
full goodnes bpon them / K chewed them the


wape ofrpghtuoutnes. Che merey ß aman


bath reacheth tobisnepghboure:but mere
of Sobisbpon ele. Be cbattenetbe
teacheth a nourtoureth pee euen aga de
berde turneth agapne hes flock / lo doth be
all them that receaue chattenyng/ nurtoure
and dockrpne. Merciful is he onto thé that
ſtande in ate of bis tudgmentes, 8

My tonne / when thou doeſt good / make


welt peak no difcotozcable wozdes. Opal
notihe dew coisle $ beate: Kue fo 18 a wore
better then a pkt. Is not a frendliy woꝛde a
cob hone gelt but a gractous ma geueth
em both, A foole chall cata man in the
teeth a that rdughlp/ aa gvtt of b nrgarde
putter ousede eves -Settherpsbtuouthes
efoze thou come to tudgment.. Lerne be⸗
foze thou tpeake /and goo to phitich of euier
Chou be fick:eramen and iudge thy felke bes
fozeehetudgment come / and fo halt chou
kynde grace in thetpabt of God. Humble
thy felte afore thou be Cyck / and in tyme oF
thy bifeate hewe thy conuertacvon. Let not
‘opsayeatioaye anh Ganbe roe in keare
be vefourmedbnte death fo2 che rewarde ol
Gov endureth tozeucr, Betoze hou peeves


The boke ok


foule/¢ benocas one thattemp·
Prepare chytoule/¢ fate eu


OMA,
ij. b. *


ou fallin to pouerte / andhaue n e
eee baue nöthrng


Wyne aud who dome beptige men to pottertpe, In
& mapa panne . Che dyſferaſſce
OF the wyldome of Bod e man. herb thou
bnotoe what is in a man. Correcexon mutt be vie
without anger.


che. xir. chapter.


Labourynge man that is geuen A
vnto dꝛonckeneg / wal not be riche;
he that maketh not moch ol ria
ges) thal fall bp litie and iitie.
Brne and wemen make wyte men renna ·
gates / a put men of understanding to repꝛo⸗
fea he that accompanieth aduoukerers Wal
become a wicked an. Mothes ¢ wozmes
wall haue him to heretage/yee he thal be tet
bptoagreatererample / ¢ bis Coule walbe
roted out of the nombze. He that is battpe to
eue credẽce is light minded / a doch agapnſt
ſimbelt. Who lo retoxteth in wickednes / bal
be puntthed:be that hateth to be retourmed /
his itfe chalbe choztened: and he that abhoꝛ ·
ned, eat ofenoet een Ops sane
He that ot agarnt
fouie/fhall repent it: and he that relorteth in
wickednes / calbe punpched.
Achearte nota wicked and churuch worde zz;
twile and thou ſbalt not behindered. =
plecretes nether to krendẽ ner foo, ve


80
to thou batt offended / tell it notout . Fos be
and march che⸗


Wall herken vnto the and! and
when he kendeth opoztuntte / he hall uche


Jelus the fonrie


the It thou haſt herde a wore agaynt ey
dergl banme tert bebeed tein thesandbe
ture / thou chalthaue no harme therby. fole
trauapleth with a wozde / lpne as a woman
that is papned with bearing of chylde . Lpke
aß an arow chot in a dogges chyghe / tols a
woꝛde ina koles herte. Tell hy krende bys
faute ſleſt he be ignoꝛaunt / and rape JTgaue
not done it / oꝛ yl he haue done it / tyat he do it
nomoze. Repzoue thy nepghbollre / that he
kepehis tonge: a che haue ſpoken / that he
Clare it nomoze.


Cell thy nepabboure bis faute / tos oft ty.
anor


made / a geue not credence


ball. 20 euerp wazde. A man Faltety komme with


.


tonge / but not with hes woll. Foz what

he / p hach not offendedin hys tonge: eue
thy nepghbour warning / bekoze thou thꝛea⸗
ten him / and geue place vnto the lawe of the
Loꝛde. Che feare of Sodis all wyldome / ¢


Feber ede man Repeth 6 lawe.


oz the doctryne ol wyckednelke / it is no
wyldome / and the pꝛudenee of Cynners is no
good ondertandpng:itis but wpchednede a
abbompnacts a à blatpyeming of wyldome.
Alpmple man of (malt onderſtandpng that
keareth God / is better then one p bath moch
Dwypldoine / and trancgrelleth che lawe of che
Ppeſt. A cratty tottell man ran be wyle / but
he is vnrightedus / and with gyttes he wꝛa⸗
ſteth the open a manpfect lawe. à wycken
man can behaue hym lelkehumbly and can
doune with bis head / and pet is he but a drl⸗
ceauer wythin. Hehrdeth bys Face and dyc⸗
guyleth it: becauſe he chulde not be know:
ne /he pzeuenteth the.
ind though he be fo weake that he can
do the no harme / pet whẽ he may kynde opoꝛ⸗
tunpte/he hall do tomie euell. L man mare
be hnowne bphrs kace/a one that bath one
derſtandyng / may be perceaued by the loke
OF his countenaũce. A mang garmet/laughe
ter / and goynge / declare what he is.
corteccpon and repentaunce. DE the gert of
5 Nie, Beit ee;


TAA b

o> Seis moch 80 e etore:
e
a 7 0} albe pꝛe⸗
Leruedkrom hurt adelkrucctonl Like as whe
Agedded man thozow defyze ¢ lutt dekpleth
Amapdẽ / euẽ Co is it with him that vl eth vio⸗
ence ¢ bnrightuoumneg in the lawe: c
Food a thinge ie tt / a man chat is repꝛoed /
_ totem openie hys repentaunceteoz lo walt
Rou etcape weltul eng:


7 ‘ey
Hk Syzath.
Some man epeth tilenck / and is kolindt
wyle: but he that is not achamed what he
lapeth / is hatetull. Some manholdeth bys
konge / becauſe he hach not $ vnderſtanding
ol the language: and fome man kepeth ly⸗


2


j


xli


lence maptenge a conuenteht tym. A wyke Etienne
man well holde bys tonge cyl he Cropoztus Stell xxrh in.


nitte / but a wanton and vndilcrete body thal
regarde notyme. He z vleih many woꝛdes /
Wall hurte his awne koule:a hethat taketh
dat Hyon hym onvightuouty/ chalbe
ated. Some man hath oft cymes pꝛolperi ·
tem wicked thünges a garne/ komme ma gee
teth moch / and hath harnie and lolle. There
is lome gilt that is nothinge worth: Agayne
there iz Come gitt / whole rẽ warde is double.
Some mä getteth a kal oz beyng to pꝛoude
ald lome commeth to woꝛch vpe krom lowe
eſtate. Some mũ btech moch foza litle pꝛice
and muſt pape fo it leuen kolde. site
Awyfe man wyth. bys wordes matiety 6
um ſelk to be loued / but 0
albe poured out. Che gilt ofthe vnwyle
Wall do the no good / foꝛ bys eyes are teuen


kauours of Cooles ec. vi. .


kolde. Wethall geue ſptle / and lape he gaue cu. right
115 rtl. ruiſ. ti


mochthe opene! outh a cryeth out / aß
i were one that crieth out wyne. To daye he
lendeth / to moꝛow he alketh it agayne / and
loch a man is tobe hated. Che foole lapeth:
Fhaue no frende / Ahaue no thanhe koz all
inp good dedes : pee euen they thaceate mp
bzed/fpeake no good orme. G how okt / and
okhow many hall he be laughed to tcoꝛne ?
He taketh a moze perlous fall by loch 25
then ykhe kell vpon the groundescuen fo cha
the falles of wicked men come haſtelp. In &
mouth ol hym that is vntaught / are many
vnconuenpent and vnmete wozdes. A wyle
ſentence ſhall not be alowed at the mouth ol
the kole / loꝛ he ſpeaketh it not in due fealon.
Some man kynneth not / becaule he hath c
not wherwithall and inbys reſt he Malbc
ſtynged. Some man there is that deſtropeth
bys atone loule wyth Mame / and koz an bn
pte bodyes Cake deſtroyeth he it / and wyth
acceptynge of perlones challhe vndoo hym
felfe. Dome ma pꝛomeleth his krende a gylt
ko bery chame / and getteth an enempe of
‘bpm ro: naught. A ive is a wycked Mame in
a man / vet hall it be euer in the mouth of
the vnwyle. Y thele is better / ehen a man
that is accuſtomed to ipe / but they bothe
Wall hauedeſtruccpon toheretage The con⸗
dyctons of lyers are vnhoneſt / a their hame
is euerwyththem. 3


A rwpteman Man p nge bin Cettetobo: Set


derſkandynge Mall be Corby aiiiotige greate
eee aepbes aba ay
‘bys heape of coꝛne erg c regt .

boule


bow norire With his wosdes andhe that hath vn⸗ Manict.g.g.
Bauer. £6.06


tuoumeg / Halbe exalted / a he that pieatety
great me / call eccape moch euell.Kewarde
Agyltes blinde the eres of the wyle / male

bhundöme / pe can not tell men their kautes
1pldome P ig hd /s treafure p is hobzded
bp what piokpt is in them both? Better is
he that kepeth hrs ignozaunce lecrete / then
Aman that hrdeth bys wyldome.


GH tbe repentaunce of Inne. We map not heape
inne a ria gde baue den ene abe
endeoftpnnets, Sethe koole and or the wele man.
Hb hem that curgech the deuell,


che. xxj. Chapter.


a
gel. v.a va tonne ve thou batt rynned / do it
et a lnomogesbutpsape tog eyptozetyn=
ines / that they mave be koꝛgeuen
che file from nne / euen as krom
a kerpent: toꝛ vt thou commeſt to nye her /
we wyllbyte the. The teeth therok are as the
teeth of a ir / to llepe p foutes of men. Che
wyckednes of man is as a charpe two edged
werde / whych maketh loch woundes that
they can not behealed.

Stryke and wzongeous dealynge Wall
waſte awapes mas goodes / a tho ow pꝛyde
à rpche houte walbe bought to naughte to
the kyches ofthe pꝛoude thalbe roted oute.
Che prayer ol the pooze goeth oute of the
mouth / and contmeth onto the eares / and
bys vengeaunce (oz defence) (hall come / and
that haſtely. Who lo hateth to be rekourmed
Iisa token of an vngodly perlonne:but be
gat keareth @od/twrllvemembze hymn felfe,

mygbtye man ts knowne a katre of bp his
tonge / but he that bath vnderſtanding / per ·
ceaũeththat he chall haue a fall.

who fo bupldeth bys boule wyth other
mens colt/isiphe one that gatherech ſtones
in wynter. The congregacys of the bngodlx
18 Ilie dubble gathered together / thett ende
tga flammeolkkpze. Che ware of the ongod⸗
iy is Lett wyth tones / but in their ende is
hell darcknes / and papnes. Pe that kepeth
the law / wyll holde kack d onder ig cher:


dome. Hethat is not wyre / wil not betaught
in good: but the vnwyle man abounde

woyckednelle: and where bytternes is there
1s no vnderſtandyng. Che knowledge ol the


andhis councell is lyne a fountayneot lyłe.


he can kepeno wyldome. when aman ok
Cbnderſtandnge heareth a wyle worde he
* Shall cömende it / and make moch ol it. But
; Bes boueveaonly merase the Sail bare
noplenture cherin / but cattit behynde bys
back. Che talckynge of a foolets lpke an
heux burthẽ bythe wãxe:but toheare a were


ok / and the pad ol God is wyl⸗ A daugh


Wyle {hall flowe Iphe water z renneth ouer / wyldome euer onpleala
Che hert ok a fooleis lynes broke betel) chat


man ktpeaße / it is apleatute. here a doute
is in che cõgregacton / it is acked at § mouth
ofthe wle / cher Mal pondze his wozdss in
their hertes. L ke as aboute 5 is deltroped /
euen to is wyldome vnto a foole: As koꝛ the
knowledge of che onwple / it is but darck
woꝛdes. Boctrynets onto bm that hach no
önderſkandynge / euen as letters aboute bys
Saat e e bone eier
p his vopce ty
but a wyle man Wall carte laugh ſecretip.


Lemypn benen vt eser arne ea


Litec ih mans tote 1 pods ps nepgh-
bourshoule / but one that bath experience/


wal be achamedat the pertonne ol che migb.


tie. A foole wyll pepe in at the wendow in to
Tang pont atis well nourtured / wyll
ande without. A koolich man ſtandeth her⸗
pens, atthe bore but ethat is wrte w
arnted,
elpppes of thebnwwyle wylbe tellynge
koolich thynges / but the woꝛdes of Coch as
haue vnd e / Walde weped in p ba⸗
jaunce. Che gert of fooles is in theirmouth /
but the mouth ot the wle ls in thetr herte.
Desa eren prey accu
of othermen thal befple his atone Coule/¢be


hated ofeucry man; (but he that hepet hys Leut r


tonge ¢ ig dilẽrete / al come to hanoure.)


of thelouthtull. Oe the fo
creme mame, pear
＋
treo a ble autos merh talked with alt. Jnite


8 wonges do breabe ps amptie.
e che ye Chapter.
Slouchtun body is moulded of a
tone of clate:he that toucheth him
J mutt wath hes handes agarne. 1


Sept on onne te ade ele
OF tHe käther. A fooltt daughter Halbe ipcle
regarded. J wyle daughter ts an heretage
e tate

ter 2 18 falt (ante / bptonouredy


Both beefather eerbutbane:®


inbatis che matter
lamentac pon is made ko hem /


Jelus the lonne Ol Spr


' Fpabe fapleth hem euen lo let men niournt
* a wantech vnderctandeng.
Mah but irtie wepyng becaule of P deed: |
uy bos he is come to ret / but the Ike of the kole
ete is woe chen d deeth. Seuen daes do men
: moutne fozbym that is deed / but the lamen⸗
tacpon ouer the vnwyle a vngodlp wuld en⸗
dure all the dapes or their lyce.
Calke not moch with a foole / and go not
C wich hymthat hath no vnderſtandynge. Be⸗
Marve ot him Ack tt turne che to trauayle / a
thou ſhalt not be defiled wich his tynne. Wes
ee krom him / and thou thale kynde reſt /a
iapatisarper ten eabes debe
euper 8
a coole be called els but leadeꝛ Sande /
dero roba Galtipe of yꝛõ is eaſſer to beare chen an vn.
i tople/folyth and ongodlyrian. Vine as the 0 ;
2 band ok wodd bounde together in the fours Peave me(D ve chien) 3 will geue voir
dacion of the houſe cannot be iowled/euẽ ſo a doctryne / how ve ſhalloꝛ die voure montht
is it Wthe hert p is Gablyhedin d thought who lo hepech it, wal not perpch thozo wh
of councell. Che thought of the wyte / all Abkehr, zo zow wycked wozckeg
Aeta pee Wali 8 Foz the ſynner , he wall be tanen in bys
* he as a fapze plapſtred wall in a wyn⸗ atone banpteihe that is pꝛoudk g curled / chal rob rk. l.
tye et an Cope 4 f beben with lwearpng / ton in ie che
e and ſtoʒme:euẽ Cols a Foie; / koꝛ in it there are many fal
altaped in bys pmagpnacpont he keareth at ſes Let noth nampng of Bod bec! romana seb
euerp ching / can not endure. He P nippeth in chr mouth: foz ipke ag a ferudunttohydy
amans eve /bzrngeth koꝛchteates:a he that is okt punyched cã not be without tome foze/
pꝛycketh) bert / bꝛrngeth koꝛth d meanyng euen lo whattoeuer he be that lweareth and
and thought. Who lo caſteth a ſtone at the nameth God / Mal not be cleanepourgedtrd
byꝛdes /craxeth them awape:q he g biatphes kpnne. A man that vlech moche Cweatinge/
mieth his trende/bzeaketh che krendchrpper Malbe kylled wych wickiednes / and che plage
though thou dzeweſt a cwerde at thy krende / Wall neuer go from bps houfe. Je he begyle
vet delpapꝛe not koꝛ thou mapeſt come a⸗ his bꝛother / hys kaute chalbe vpon him: pehe
gamnetorhp trenbe. Ik he (prake fowerly/ fnowledge not hrs lynne / he maketh a dub⸗
re not / ko: ve mape be agreed together ble ollence /a yt he cweare in payne / be tall
agayne: excepte it be that thou blatpyeme not be kounde ryghteous/foz his houle tal
hm / dyldapne hym / open hys lecretes and be fullofplages, i
wounde hrmtratozoullp: to; all cochthinges Che woꝛdes oF z twearer in death ¢
thalldzpuc awaye a trende. (God graũte that it be not kounde in phoule Leut uh k.
E Be kapthtull onto ch nerghbour in bys or Jacob.) Butcher 5 fave God / elchue all
e Neate faa tefopte w bym alto fochandipe not weitepnge in Cynne. tate nt
bis protpertte. Abyoe tedfakontobymin thr mouth ko vnhoneſt and filthy talfenge / ephet. bits
che tyme ok his trouble / that tbou mapelt he fozinitis d wozde oblynne. Nemembze hr
bepze withbpmin his heretage Lpne as the father and ehr mother / when thou art kek
vapour a tmoke goeth out at the duẽ bekoze amonge greate men: lek God forget che in
e kxꝛe / euen ſo euell woꝛdes / rebußes and therrlighe / z lelt thou doting in thy cuſtoime
egtenynges go befoze bloudcheddynge. Subie refarbe (9 topepnet i mau 078
Benotathamedtodetende thy krende as ko: ne / and lo curte thedaye of thy natruite. Che
me. J wyll not hyve my face kro him / though man chat is accuſtomed wich the wozdes oF
4. wholoeuer hearech blalphemp wyllneuer berekourmed ail thé
tt) Wall bewarre ar hem. ho chall ler 4 dapes ot his pte. Co Cyhne tile is tomoch /
watch betoze my mouth / z a cure ſeale vvon but the the de beingeth wrath ¢ dettruccys,
tp ipupes ce g Fall ott) them / that 3 ee d ft.
4 y 2 . a burnynge ue Ti owed
Ser ft se bce tpl . bp fomebing:eut 125 pnchalk manhach nd ;
Kare nee. ee Foce ae Leden tyvevltbe tate tpntcn a tre. 5
anette ee De 5 Albzedis Owete to an whozemenger / he
c cheaxiſ. chapter. „eee ere:
4


pon me a gue me not ouer inte an
nchamefact and obkynate mynde.


8


fall therin.) Let notthymouth be acuſtomed Ecclivrrogats


a


Sloysrip.c. cht


Exon. xx. c.


„


6
i


ee atwete odoure haue I geuers


pare ol the belt.


6


1


Lal. 8


ates t
eto as


tm
ale


a agreat waterbꝛoße out ofthe riue:. J am
asthe rruer Boi /and at a water condyte
am I come out of the garden ol plealure. 3
card: J wyll water the garden or my yonte
pläntes / and kril the krute oe mybeith. Do
my waterbzohe became exceadinge greate /
andme ryuer appzoched untothe fee 4074
make doctrine to be bnto al men as light as
che karze moꝛnynge / and J Wall maße it to
be euer the cleater J wyll Pearle thozow all
the lower partes ofthe earth / well one
bponal Coch as be a depe / and lighten all thé
Chat put their trut in the Losde. J wall
pet poure out doctryne ine as pꝛophecp/a
Teaue it vntotoch as kene after wyldome⸗
and their generarpons tall neuer kale /
onto the hol euerlaltyng wofide. Beholde /
how that J haue nat iaboured toz my kelke
onelx / but Foz all the that eke atterdereuth,
Ot tive thinges whych pleate Sd / of thre which
e hateth. Ot w. hinges that be not tobe fulpect/and

When hiehe fe ache maler aba enen.
0 5 ede

z. ere are / 8 my ſpz

2 . ͤwhlch be alto alowed
Mbekoze Hod and men: Che pnpte of
Abꝛethen / che loue of nepghbours/
and mar and wpfe that agree wel together.
Chꝛe thynges there be which my tolle ha⸗
eth / and Jötterlxabhone the lyke of them:
poze man that is pꝛoude. Arpch manthat
ge lyar/anbanoloe body that doteth / and


thou halt gachered nochrnge in chy
what wyit chou kynde then in thyne

age: O how plealaum a thruge ts it / when
Gray headed me are dprerete /a wü zeders
Gigeuc good coficel?D how comely athing
is wyldome vnto aged men? yee vnderllan⸗
dyng and councell is a glozpous thing. Che
crore of olde men is to haue moch experi
2 Spgs mh br
Ax. cl aue iud ·

Pged in in Werte tobe a the kech wen
5 Cell ore) neo nacn with Ptonge aman


9


0305890) hen to lſepe houle w
a wicked wple. Che wyckednele ora womg
challgeth her face / che wall motfell her cofts
tenaunce as it were a Beer / a a tach Mat
We ſhewe icamage the neghbours Perhul⸗
bande is biought to ame amoͤge bis negn⸗
bours and whe he heareth it / it maketh hum
tolpghe. All wyckednes is but lptle 5 te


wyentednes ol a woman / the poꝛc von o


bngodly Wail fall bpon her.
Lyle as to clymme bp afandy ware is 35,


tothe fete of the aged / euen co is a wple full Geli ril. l.
ol wo des to a ſtyll quteteman. Lone not to l. Beg rt. a.
narowir pon the bewepe oF a woman / Tele and. Ain.


thou be pꝛouokedin delpze toward her. che
wꝛath of a woman ts dichonoure and greate
contulpon. Aa wont get che maſtrie / then
is che contrary to her houcbande, 4 wpcked
wyle maketh a loꝛp berte J an heu countes


naumce ga derb wourrde. Sep wong came g


che begynnyng of tynne / and thoꝛowher we
all are deed Geue thy water no pallage / no
not a lytle nether geue a wiched woma her
well Bethe walcke hot after chy hande / the
hall conkounde the in the fpght of thy ene⸗
mies. Cut her of then from thx nech / thatthe
do not alwaye abute the.
Che praple of a good woman. Of the feare oe the
thpnges¢ of the fourth. Eu the Jelouze sdeonchert
woman. DF etwo thipriges that calle loo wee oF ths
thyrde which mouelh thrath. Jig harde to Kun
märchaunt without dylceate / c a tauctner without
eme din könge, Chee rb. Chapter.
Fito. Happ


be rych oz pooze/ he mape haue euer a merx
Ne Abet bend 0 tne
ethynges that my herte fea m
facets amare of the fourth. Creaton ins
{pele /afebectous people @ noptome ogee?
alithele areheuperthen thedeath, But whe
one is gelous ouet bys wle it beyngeth
payne and lozowe onto the herte sand a wo⸗
mid chat tellech out all cyynges / is a fcourge
ok the tonge. i hen one bath an euell wyle /
ktis euen as when anbniphe pate of oxen


obacpõ oe
e


ire haue many one A
Fa YAM offended : andhe chat fehety ko be
7 Uriche / turneth bis eves alrde. Line
aa narie inthe wal dicketh kalt
betwerte two tones / euen fo fpnne
fiche betwixte d byer a the feller. Zehe hold
him not dfipgentiy in the keare ot the Loꝛde /
bis houle call foone beouerthzowen. Lyhe

ag when one fprteth / the kylthrnes remar. 45
neth in the fpuc:po/remapneth there tome


ch vnto loch / wal neuer ynde relt / zneuer
fafely. Che Kroke of therod man
pet pedders/ but the rote

cain tuber ebene


muſt dꝛawe t 125 he chat getteth her / vncleane hinge in the thought of man. Che gapien.ig.2;
getteth a lcoꝛpid. A d2Gché wom̃i is a great Quen pꝛoueth the potters vel ll / co doch tẽp⸗ le Str. An
Zudleum. ut, plage / ko; we can not couerherawnechame tacpd oftrouble tryerpabtuous men, Cue 5
5 che whozdome of a woman maxe be tre ofthe elde is bnowe bp bys dub tofg g „al,
uno wen in the pape of her eyes and epe⸗ ought of müs bert knowne bp bts word.
Ipddes. J lh daugyter be not hamefak/ PzayienomBercepte chou haue herde bim
holde her Graptly / let che abule her lelte koz a man is hnowenbphis woes Jethou
nowouermoch irherte. Bewarre ofall ? folowelt rpabtuoutnes thou Malt get her /


tho £03 one / then loch ati
diſhoneſty o ber eyes / a maruell not yt te L putherupon the asa kapze garment.


mare not


Ectllxlß. b.


0
Genelis v. d. * candelſtick / ao is the bewtie of6 kacẽ vpd


doagarnſtche. Lykens one that goeth by
ayes ih a0 thal che ope her ede


dipnckeok euerr nexte water? be mare c


get. By euery henge Wall the fyt ber downe /
Kopenher eben euerparowe. 4
Jousnge wyle reiopketh her houtbande g ke⸗
deth his bones wich ber wyrdame. à womã
Of Few woꝛde it a gylte of God / A to al well
mutured mane Mmapenothrng be copared,
C Anhonen anymaneriy woman is agvee
aboue other gyltes / a there is no weight to
be compared / onto a mynde that can rule tt
elke. L pke as che Sunne when tt aviferh is
an oznamentin the hre heauen or 5 Loide⸗
foisa vertuous wyke the bewtye of all 2
tute. Like as the cleare ipaht is bps d bos


anhoneſt body. Lrne as the golden pplers
are bponche fochettes of crluer / foare the
fayzelegges bpona woman that bath a co
kant mende. etuall are ? toundacpõs
chat be layed pon a whole ſtonpe roche / ſo
arethe commaundementes of God vpon an
pence be tino chinges thacareucmpbert,
eto mybert /

Wend hure fg entpleatae come bpon


me. i hen an experte man ot warrefuffrety b


kcarlenes and pouerte. Bhen men ok vnder⸗
ſtandenge and wrldomeatenot fest by: And
eee 85el doch ach de Lane bat)
totynne. 1ho lo doth loch the Lozde bath
pbiepared him onto the twerde, There be two


thou ſbalt dwell wich her / ¢ the thal detende
the Foz euer in Pape ‘Hnotwlenge chou
alt kynde ttedfa . Che byzdes reloꝛte
bntothetvipbe/ to doth the tructh turne vn⸗
to themthat be occupied withall. Che Iron
wapteth ko the pzape:fodothe lynnes lurke
d wozchers of wichednes. Che talking
ol him 5 Feaveth God / is nothynge ee
Donte sag fo: a Foole / he chaungeth as che
Moone It thou be amonge the ondifcrete/
hepe thy wozde toa conuentent tyme / but
amonge Coch as be wyte / cpeake on bardelp,
Che talhyng of kooleß is al een men U
their (pozée1s boluptuoutnerte and mitnur⸗
toute. Moch Swearing maketh the hearre to
3 Aague wyth loch / ſoppeth
Che trp te ot } pꝛoude is bioudthedding/
Ktheit blakphemenge is heur toheate. ho
kodilcouereth recketes / leleth bis eredence


@ Fpndeth no krende after his tw Tonetipeik N
Tages with


krynde / z bynde thy tele in ne

him: but pechouberozapett bis lecretz cho
chat not ger him aga pre: or ipheasé man
igthatdetropety bysenempe/fo ia he alfo 6
ealeth r inte Feenbthipe of neraß⸗


oure.

Ake as one that letteth a bymde gooute

ott an aberdeen,
Fothoit/ petzougene ouer chykrinde thou

cant not de ot a Tira

come bphim/tozbe .


vponhym.


EC wWe ought hot to delpye vengeallce / but to forgeue
che offence. Ok the v
Lrstherb he vpces ok the tonge / and of the dalle


8 /and vngodlybath them boch 5 fa
U as ko,


/ and no mã wal be abl
Fallbyo chem as a yon


fearon


Fetus /the ſoune Ok Spꝛath. xlvij
War ixech wich a vr zin and kegheth. Geue ted. L eaue thou or tirſt ofatbecaute of nur
not ouer chy mende in eo heurnes / and bere toure / leſt chou behe whom no man mave
notchptelkinthine awne cauncell, Che tove Catittpe / whych maye turne to thy decape.
Scheartulnes ok the hert is the lle at man when thou kptteſt amsge many men / teach
and a mans gladnes is the prolonging othis not thine bande out kirk of all. O how well
daes. L oue thine awne foule/andcomfogte contentis a wife ma wich a litle wyner lo p
thine hert:as foz fozow and heuynes / dꝛyue in depe thou thalt not beſekecherot / ner kele
it karre trom the / fos heurnes hach dayne enpparne A twete wholfome fepe thal loch
Ok the correccyon of ch pldren. Or the commodr⸗ manya man, ard bzingeth ne proklk. Zee d one haue /g kelenomwardegrete. Pe rpleth
tre debe. serene teint ni a fojowFull tpfe. % anger Horten the dares of P Ufescaretuines opbytymes inthe mognynge/andis wellat
and fozow bꝛinge age befoꝛethe tyme. unto eale in him Cele, But anvnlactable eater fle:
a merphert cuery thynge hath a good tatty peth vnquxetix / and hath ache and payne ol
that he cateth. ; Peep! te 910 ape ab eaten
* CWeonght togeucdplpgérit hede to denen e. DE ftoraci tab 0 A Pe eal tot thy
Srzeh nun wi bent a fe, i e Sp konne heare me / anddetpple mie not:
Lederdr bee (overusde e ge date gen aten
. pwoshes be AND qupcke x6 ;
che. xxxi. Chapter, bo ball there no tychnesvappen 92 che. Raniah
Mauarle ¢carcfulnes fog vyches 1800 lo islibevall in dealing out his meate / puer. r a.
taketh awape che llepe / a maketh man men Mall biedebpmand pꝛapte bynt
che liech to conlume . ohen one with their lyppes:andthe tame is a fure tone
peth and taketh care he waketh ok hs loue and karthtuines. But he that is
eto x. A. 1 I
Actor. . bp / line asgreate licknes bzraneth the vnkapthtull in meate / the whole cytye hall
Tobi. lig. b. 4 ſirpe Cghe rych hath greate labour in gache ⸗ complapne ofbym:andthatisa fureerpee’
ring his riches together / a then w the plea⸗ rlence of his inßidelpte ¢ wecheones, Be not
ture of big riches he takech his relt andis re⸗ thou a wine bybber / lo: wync hach dettroyen
kreſhed. But hold laboureth a pꝛolperech man a man. Che tyze proucth e h.
not / he is poo ze: a though he leaue ol / vet is euen to doth wyne pꝛoue the hertes of the
e a begger. He 5 loueth rpches / cpali not be pꝛoude / when cher be dꝛoncken.
d : 8 CEifted:a who lo koloweth cozrupcion / cha apne fopbelpdzonchen / gupckeneih the 1
che. Ehe ungchip delppleth che good dede or Porte wübe harde and a wanton chploe wil baue pnough cherok Man one are come in ite or man. It thou dzinchettttmeatuvably/:
his luertpe/ the vnthanckkult eignozaunt be wylfull. Althou bzongevp chr tonne dell. : temekkoztune bythe rcaton or game /@ thou Malt be temperate what ite isit / 2
kaun dor ura soameman diane wi e eng ur of faltpage win gen ge ote mabe kram che Beapaenge to imate mee
4 1 e with him 2 0
pant for bps neyabboure:and when play kek thon wee dd 115 jar aut ag be cootplh tall theron.


font t 1 im. nes. t with him / le 0
ehath lot bishonetty-he hal koztanehim. nes. Laugh no 1 b him, eee


Spucctuhpppe hach deſtroxedmanp arpche hym alto / and le thy teth be lett on edge at
man /a remoued chem as the waues in p lee. the lack. . ‘
Mightie peoplehath dypuen aware and  Geuehimno iyberte in bis voyth/< ercu⸗ 26
cauled the to wandzein traungecountrees, fe not his kol. Wow downe bps feck whple Sccllese
‘Anbongodly ms crantgredpng che cOmaunds pe bun rde it on the krdes whple he
ment ofthe Logue / chal tall in to an euell is pet but a chplbe Aett be ware dubpurne /
Lduerticbipe: ö though he kozcehimkelktoget ageueno moze fozce of the, elo halt thou
out / yet chall he fall into tudgmẽt belpe thy Deen
a. nepghbouroutatter thy power /o bewarte / be diliget cherin/lett it be tochr ame. Pet
celt xxx t. thatthouthptelfe kall not in och dett. Che amm s pose Dewnae bole 9 hes pe en
ee Fe gee a
eal ocouces i
and e e cane Pe votebobpaboucatutreatute, qbercis on ee


pid eh oe reacheeanbot
wage e gt ot abouie a Counte bodp/ andnotope 1 2 ache el ae,

D. Betteris it tohaue a pode lyuynge ina no rpches abouea 5 ; . F 0 e

Cal errvieb. 5 delpeate aboue the ioye of the bert. Death is better thou be made a riiler / perde not
ee Ce eee Veis pech mochg chene then tyeecpentate/ op cGtonual nes . What hing tap kelecherin / butbe thou as one A


e . be od thpnges that are put in a clock f ofthe people. Cahebtiygent cave Mente gh.
wee dene de route ee . oz them / and oke well therto: and
e 2 ere jegraue, Rekoga,
Prk Sie tbe Lee ag bar od doth the offerpnge bnto an q · C .
hough onebe lodged / and haue meate and Doll? soz he can nether cate tatke/nertinell, .
Wrenn, Semaentansaneart ot
0 e t. orden m a 2 1
dus Goche ware thou Rraunger/andpece with hes kes / z groneth ion a geaded at


18 le


nder
a wylde and


b
the be OF tH
fobeieucty ee


takech hede to
becher rue


of
Zeeb
janis in soe bar I


of thepotter 60
tobeconufubiece eater,


hall no euell onto wose
Wallno euell hebe a
yd Wall Delp”


Lo;
mä hat


bys

‘thoughees uc aboutipke P axel tre. L Phe

— de een eee

kettech pponhim tog tt wrih. a Ccomnefull

eee
Z e

e he erddome ot tbe Lare bach (0

chem a ſunder / and lo


Asam


irh
tbat tp
time


. Geue not thy Conne ¢


Jelus / the forme


koz chat belongeth onto hym andbecdmety.


well. Ik he be not obedient / bynde hrs

butdo not to moch vned him in anx wy⸗

te / a without diccrecton do nothing. Ff dou

haue a (tapthtul)teruaũt / let him he vnto p

as törne awne toule / to; in bicude bac cheu

er en ben bawde ot ling

as thy ſelte / ko thou batt neve ol him as

of oe Ilchou intreateſt himeuell/a ke

pet him harde / a makeſt hym to be pꝛoude /

and to renne awape trom the / thou canſt not
tell what ware thou walt lebe him.


che. xxxitiſ. chapter.


wle people begile them telues Yi
pth barne g diccẽattull hone / ¢


coles truſt in daeames. noho lo res
Agardeth dzeames / is ipke him
eee eren e beer an
50 e appea
ol daeames. Petore the face is che iychnes of
alace. ho can be cienled of the vncieane:
D3 what treuth can be fpoken of a ipar?
Spothlayinge / witcyeratt / tozcery gdzea-
mynge is but banpte:ipheas when a wom


uchout Ives;

dome ts fufftctét toa kayth full mouth.

Auftemg 6 is well inftvucte/ önderdäderh

moch:aheß bath gooderpertence/cantalhe

nee e that hath no experit̃ce / uno ·

eth lytle: g he f cal moch wic
kebmes,


ran


2 whois

Foz theepes of the Loꝛde haue

(Mat eue bm. Deis thee

pꝛoteccion/ a t26ge: e: de⸗

ce kor thebeate / a rekuge to: $ bote none
Ja luccoze to tomb ling / atid an helpe
£02 Fall denied Boat Lelrgh⸗
ne th the eres de geueth health Ipte e bler⸗
He that geuelh an offering of bnriah⸗


Ol Spyꝛach. rlbtif,


N komen pie offerpna i refuled: andthe


ſcomekull dealnges ok the vnryghtuous
pleafe not God. od hath no delpte in the of
ferpnges of the vngodlz / nether mape kynne
be reconevled in the multitude of oblacrös.
who fo bꝛyngeth an oſterynge oute of the
goodes oF the pooze / doth euen as one p hyl-
leth the fonne bekoze the fathers eyes.
Che bꝛed ok the nedekull is the ple of the 8
pooꝛeihe that dekraudeth him therot / is ama
ol blonde üho lo vobbeth hys neygöboure
ol his lyuĩg / doch as greate fynneas though
he flew him to death. He chat detraudeth che weute rrill e.
labozer of bis hre / is a blonde weder. tape Sell 5h. e.
one bupldeth and another bzealiech downe /
what pꝛolpt haue they then but iaboute?
When one pꝛapeth a another curleth / whole Hume, xir. b.
vopce wyll the Loꝛdheare: Hethat wacheth
im lelke becaule ok a decd body / and then
toucheth the decd agarne “what doth bes . ouer reh
wachynge: Sois it wich a man that fatteth il. Petr. h. b.


that koꝛ his tynnes / and doth them agayne: who


wyll heave his prayer? D2 what doth his fae
ftyngebeipe him:


Gets welt done to prayzvand to bo lacryfpcr. he
aper o the katherlelle / aud or the wyddo we; and ol
pm that humbleth hym telke.


Chou (alt not appeare emptye be ⸗
Goze the Loꝛde / koz all loch is done becaute
olthe commaundement. Che offeryng of che
ryghtuous maketh the aulter fat/eatwete
kiel te tt bekoze the Preſt. Che offerpnge of
the ryahtuous ig acceptable onto God / and
Wall neuer be kozgotten. Geue Sodhysho⸗
noure with a chearkull exe / a kepe not backe
the kpaltlrnges okthrhandes. In all thy gts
tes ew a merp countenaunce / and halowe
chr tythes vnto God wyth gladnes. Geue
vnto Sod / accoynge as he hach enspchene
protpered the: and loke what thyne hande 1s
able / that geus with a cheavtull eye: forthe
Lobe recompenſech / and geueth the teuen
tymes as moche agarne. 6
Geue no onrightuons giktes /fo2 Coch will
he not receaue. Bewarrẽ of wzongeouis of
kringes kor the l. ode is a ryghtuoug iudge:
g regarded) no mas perfonne: He accepteth
notihe perfonne ol the .


Ettleliaſtitus,


che prayer fled. he delppleth not
delpze ol s


cbplarn.
1500


Zement. Andthe Lozde wyl not be llack in
commyng / ner tary longer tyil be haue lmpt·
ken in fonder che beckes of che vnmerexkult /
and auenged hm keik of the Heachem tebe
baue take awape 5 multptude of the ctucit/
and broken ‘Ye cepter ofthe onrpghtuous:
tyll be geue everyman after bis wozches/¢
rewarde them as thephaue deferucd: Cpll be
haue delpuered big people /mapntencd their
caule / a betopied chemin hes mercy. Ohom


kapze achynge is mercy in the tyme ok an⸗ deth


pe trouble: It is lige a cloude of rayne
Hetcommetd inthe tyme of adꝛouth.

EH pine to Bodin the perlon of; all fapthfullmens
‘with the r he woman.


ipue io care led: and let them perp that do
ihr people burte. Ompte in londerche head
of the Pꝛynces⸗ that be oure enempes / and
tape: here is none other but we.

>. Gatherall the trybes of Jacob together
agapne that they mape hnotre / how 5 there
ts none other God but onipchou/ that cher
save bew thy wonncrous wozches/andbe


Exbeget. 0


unge
ihe


pee oF yp ret. A yu
Spon with chr onipeakable vertues d thyt-Parale.rg,


people with thyglory.@eur witnes vnto che ,
e ere oy
nynge / a raple bp the p70} 1 —
bene dhe wed in chr name. Mewarde the chat
twapte ko che / Wat thy Pꝛophetes mage de
kounde kapthtull. O Lozde heare the pzaper
ok chr feruatites accowyngetothe blechen
of Aaron ouerthy people that all thep
dwell bpon the earth maze nge e thou ume vn
See 1 Oe eternall God/ whichis kro
Che belp deuoureth al meates / ret is one
meate better chen another. Lehe as c
tatteth benplon/fodoth an Pert ot DNDCEOE eng l,
dynge march kalle wozdes. J krowarde hert .
geueth beupnes / but a man ok experte ce itt.
hymppagarne. Che woman receaueth
man vet is one da better then
reioptechher
better. It


eu
/
e be lo-


ee
turne in / where he may adde in the nxgyt.


des vnto deach / when a
8 —

mpcvon: From whence: nonge eeccl. vil
dp / to couer J earth with kallede a dikcegte⸗ a:
ere fs fome compannyo whch in protpee
tte telopteth with his frende:but in e
di trouble / he taketh parte agaynſt bym.
There is ome 1 e ne mourneth with
bis frende top the bet
cömeth herabeth h.


J. thou wyit ole bim / ko he wyll cots
cell fozbim Cele, Lett he ca the lot vp the
dernde be erer
ai eaga bn
audlbe what wall be come athe.

Acke no councell at him / p lulpeckech he
foz an enempe, a byde thy councell krõ loch
ag hate the. Acke no councell ata woman
röcernyng the thinges 5 we longeth koz mer
at a kearfull ¢ fapncherted body / in matters
of warre: oꝛ at a marchaunt / how dearehe
wyll cheape thy wares towarde hig: oz at a
byer / ol tellynge: Oz at anenupous man / ol
thanckecgeu rng: Ozat the bnmercytull / of


*


ck
louyng Ryndnes: Ozat g Gouthfull of worc⸗
rat


‘Benge: an hrzelenge wohych bath no
houte/ ot profyt 07 wealth . (An pdle bodr
wolde not gladly heare cpeake of moch la⸗
boure.) Cake no koch kolckes to coficeit/ but
be diligẽt to tene coücell ata vertuous man
that keareth God / loch one as thou knoweck
tobe a keper of thecOmaundemétes/ which
bath a mynde alter tyrne atone mrnde / and
is Cosy £oz the when thou ſtombleſt.


PE Spꝛath. klix


glotony, commech at the iatt to an nnen
durable beate. Chozow glotony haue man
one periden:but he tar dpeteth him leit tes
peratir / vꝛolongeth his lte.

lepen. In cytknes ought we to praye/t ſynde
25 ten ue aleth W ‘ye bewee
prnge of thedecd,Sadnes, W ploome. 2etiFpcets oF
erattctmens


Andholde thy councell kalt inchrne bert:


kor chere is noma moze fapthtull ko kepeit:


then thou thplelk. Koza mas mynde is om


tyme moze dylpoled to tell oute / then leuen


watchmen that ſyt aboue in an bye place lo⸗ the cart!


Rynge aboute the Andaboue all this pꝛaye
> the Breit / be wylllede chy ware tn fapty-
Fulnes a trueth. Betoze all thy woꝛcktacke
coficell kirſt:a 07 ce hou bos ee ee,
be well aduplen, Chere be foure thong
declare a chaunged herte / wherout there
dpꝛyngeth euell ö good / death lrfe/anda
miaſter kult onge that bableth moch. Home
m is apte ¢ well indtructe in many things /
g betvctyvnpꝛokitable vnto him felfe, So0-
me man chere is / p can geue wyte and pate
dent councell / pet is be hated d cötrnüeth
à begger:toꝛ h grace is not geut him of God /


to be accepted. An other is robbed ofall wets health


dome / ret is he wyle vntohim kel / a d krute

of bnderhadpng is fapthkullinhis mouth.

. A wyle man maketh his people wyle / a

® mrutes o£ his wyldome kaple not. V wpfe

Sieh plenteoutly bleded of God:¢ all they
febim) thall fpcakegood of bym. che lle
bf man ſtandeth in the nombze ofthedayes/
but the haves of Ffrael are innumerable. B
wyle man tall öpterne tarthrulnes a cre -


rue
Boiten


Dence amonge his people/ebis name ſhal. 07


be perpetual. My tonne / pioue thy foute in
thyipte: a pk thou te enpeuelltheng / geue it
bieter aum oz all thrnges are not profits.
le Foz all mẽ/nether hath euer loule pleas
Sure in euerychynge Be not gredyin euern
id katie be not to battye bps all meates,
Lallxxrt. h. Fozerredie ot meates bꝛrngeih Cychnes/and


get it not / ko: there is no turnynge agapne.
Egg Chow


3 a 0 , 2 922
, Cieletiatticus,
ou ale ob but butte
fete emen ehe ee kane aug
3
entf e. Coane mbis rea acomfortetye tecagame


bun leur rebis kpzete is Departed fr


te.


2 let
t to an ende.


i ee he


tutneth ß whele aboute with his fete / he i.
diligent a caretull in all Dora 90
bouve ¢ wozche iswythout nombze. He ka⸗
wtonech the clave wych his arme / and wrth
his fete he tẽpereth it. His herte ym: rae

- Hotobemapemane tepleacaune; aud is dil
Gencels to clente the duen. All thele hope in
cheir hädes /a euerp one thyncketh to be co
hyng in bis woꝛke. without thele maye not
the cyties be manterned / inhabited ner occu
pled:pet come they not hye in che congrega⸗
cyon: they vnderſtande not the couenaunt of
$ laweꝛthey can not declare equyte ¢ ludg⸗
ment: they can not kynde out 5 darck fente-
Pierson 7 them wall 4] creature ok the
wojlde be mantepned: their pꝛaxer concer⸗
neth ohely the wo cke ¢ laboure of cönyng.


CAwyle man. Che worches of Mod. nto the


good/gond thenges aber ut onto theeuell tuen


900d khynges are euelt


¶ Che. xxxix. Chapter. 5
that applyeth bis mynde ta bn


ety
the


dome. He teheth oute the myſterte ok lectete
fapinged/¢ exercyſeth hem ĩelte therin con ·
nen a — — 7 — —
5s appeate 6 f pzrnce.
into a Gratige coũtre / a trauapleth tho,
ftiloke what good 07 euell is amonge men/
e pꝛouech it oleketh it out. Pe purpoleth in
vs herte / to reſoꝛte earip vnto the Loꝛde B 8


bꝛenge kozth krute / as the role that is pläted
by the bzokes of che telde / a geue ye a lwete
dell as LAbanus. Flotich as the roregardẽ /
fyngea Conge of pꝛapte. O geue thackes bn⸗
to God ouer all bys wozcheg. Seue glory 1
honoure vntothe Lozde / chew hrs praple
poure Iyppes. Yee euẽ with ß Conge ot youre
ipppes/ wpth barpes g plapenge / and in ge
upnge thanches bnto bpm lape afterthps Gele. n
manier: l the wozches ofthe Londe are ers
ceadynge good/eallbys commaundemẽtes
aremeteandconuententinducteaton, a
Amã nede not to lape: what is Salle de
chat ko ac tyme conuentent thi
fought. it his cõmaundement ß water was
as a wall /g at the woꝛde olbhis mouth $ wa
ters (ode All. In hes commaundement is
euer thynge acceptable and reconepied / 7
his health can not be mrniched. Che wozcht
of all flech are befoze him / a there is nothing
hd krõ his eyes He leyth krõ euerlat to
cuerlatyng / and chere is nothing to woͤder⸗
full oz hre nto hm. A man nedẽ not to ſaxe
then what is this / oꝛ chat⸗For he hach made
al thynges to do good önto ma. Yys bi
all renne ouer asthe ſtreame / and moy⸗
ftuve the earth lyke a foune of water phe


as be makech the water koz dzouth / fo wall


bis wath Call bpon the Heathen.


Halbe sete.


IJelus / cht lonne


Vis wapes are plapne and ryghtonto the


begpni
Ap. All
—— —.— —— An
Pron andlalt / m. mel
6 wyne / orie ¢ clothinge. All cele
ave created Foz the belt tothe karthtull: But
tothe vngodlp call ali thete chinges be tur⸗
ned to che hure andharmie. Chere becpꝛetes
that are created to bengeaunce / a in their
oꝛouſnes haue they kaſtened chetr toz>
Ind tyme ol d ende they wall poure
outtbele ſtrength /a pacptye 6 wzath of him
that made them Sy7¢ /hapie Oger & death:


Che teeth of wylvenoptome beattes / che
ſcoꝛpions Cerpentes / a the bwerde are creas
e
che vngodir. Ther e 4
maundementes:and when nede is / cher wal
be ready vpon earth:and when their houre
is come / they Mall not ouerpalle the coms
Wager beben ana odcgꝛage vn ·

erkoze haue agoode⸗

Annen de deo dane
put thele thynges and to ſeaue
the behynde me. Allthe wozkes ofthe Lorde
are 800d / a he geueth euerp vne in due ſea⸗
ton / a whan nede is Co that a man nede not
to tape: thys is wozle then that. Foz in due
feafon they are all plealaunt and good: And
thertoze pzapte the Lozbe wyth wuole bert
mouth /egeuethankesonte his name.


any mpter pes light tua manes iyfe. All td
fe awer unt afprme ¢ 1 semaynety,
DE thebletpnge ok the rightuous / and px roßat rue
orthe keare of Sod.
Che xl. Chapter.


“Greate trauaple is created foꝛ all

a 3 all mene
ſcheldze kö thedare f ther go out
oktheir ‘wom!


mothers /

eee
ot

eave ofthe bet cone mebdtacions or.

ginge anddelpze /ehedaye ol death krom the

Karen dak ern open tbe ca

krom him that is goꝛg vou avaved a 1


wee.
reth a crowne / bntyil hem that is buthome⸗


land cemplp clothed. Chere is nothruge /
but wꝛath / zele / kearkulnes / ongupetnes /a
Kare of death/ rygozous anger and itrpke.
And in the nygbt when one Mhulbe reſt and
Gepe vpon bis bedd / che deve chaungeth h

dae ert mtbe bees eles

red / inthe
inthe dape ol laboure. 5


— Spꝛach. I.


and is dicqupted ĩn the bicyon v
okhis hert / as one that renneth out ofa bat⸗
tapll:and in the tyme of health he awaketh /
and marueleth that the keare was nothynge.
Si happen vnto all fed / boty


och
man and beſt: but leuen kolde to the ongons


IE. Mozeouer drath / bloudchedding / rike ¢


es werde / oppzellon / honger dellruccvon and


punechement: thete thynges are all created g ll.
aga⸗ cheengodtp“forihelrtages came sinister
epetoudcalco Auges oF the catty walls iia.
cusneto earch agarne:g al waters ebagaine
intothe fee, All bapbes and oneyghteoutnes
Walbe put awape / but faythfulnes q truetij
Wal endure for euer. Che kubſtaüce 6 goods
ok the vngodiy Malbe dyedyp and fpnche as
wape as a water floude / a they wall make a
e

N 2 dug retop L
openeth his häde /fo Wall the ales c
be taynte / when their goodes vanych a con ·
fume awape. Che chplozen oF the vngodlp grelle
wall not obtayne many bzaunches:and
bcleane rates che the bye che wo Walbero-
ted out befoze the gras by the water lyde a
vpon the ryuer banckes.

Srendipnes ¢ lpberalpte in the incteace
and blettynge of God / is Iyke a paradple and
garden of plealure: loch mercy allo a Bunde 7
eudurech bos euer Co labour tobe content, Imo. vl b.
Wehat a man bath is akwete pleataunt llke: e hp. f.,
Schat is to kynde a treature aboue all trea.
kures. Co beget childyen and to repayze the
citie maketh a perpetuall name: but anho⸗
het woman is moze worth then they both.
1Wpne a mynſtrelkperetople the hert / but ß
joue ok weldome is aboue them bot). 3

unge a harpyng make a cwete noyle /

but a krendlp conge goeth bexonde thé boch.
Chyne exe detyzeth kauoure and bewtte but
a grene lede tyme rather then ther both. H
krende and tõ pon comteogetberat opoz
tunxte / hut aboue them both is a 1155 ic
agrecth with ber houlbande. One bꝛother
helpeth another in the tyme of trouble / but
Allmes fall delpuer moze then ther both.
amelie uct fatten Gye cer iber dun
councell is moꝛe pleataunt then they both
Cempozallſubctaunce and ctrength lot op
e mende: but che leare ok che Lorde moze
then ther both. Che keare of che Loꝛde wan⸗
teth nothyng / and nedeth no helpe. Che teas
re ok che Lope is ag a pleałaunt garden of
Ulellenge / andn. obewtykullas it is.
Wp tonne sede not a beggers like / ko better
it were to de thẽ to begg. Who lo loneth to


rs anocher mans table / tauech no thought koz


bigatone eho topp holde hes lle /

kozhe hinilelt with other mens meat.

But a wyte and wel nuttoures man wrll
Sag. bewarre


Ettlellaltitus.


bewarte therok. Beggenge is twete in che
mouth of the vnchameract / but in hrs beir
chere vurneth a kyze.

EDF the vemembsaunice of breth. Pteth is not to be

teated. & curde vpon them that fozlake the lawe ot

Hod. Wood names fame. Anervortacps to geue hede

rc ought to be
che. ri. Chapter.

N Death / how bytter is the remem⸗

bꝛaũce ol the / to a mũ that leketh

Arelt and cökorte in bys Cubhaunce

Wand rrches / vnto the man 6 bath

geto bexehim / and that hath peolpe⸗


n
rite i fall thynges / ee vnto hym that vet is wh


able to receauẽ meate: O death / how accep ·
ble and good is thrtudgmene onto the nede.
tull / and vnto him whole ſtrength taplech /a
that is now in hys laſt age / and that in all
thynges is Cull of care and learkulnes: vnto
him allo that is indiſpapꝛe ./ a hath no hope
ner pacpence: Be not thou akraped ok death:
remembꝛe them that haue bene befoze the: a
that come alter the: this is the tudgment of
F Lom oueral flety And wür woldeſt thou
beagapntt this pleacure ofthe Prelk⸗ nabe-
ther it be ten / anhundzeth / 02 a thoulande
kae. alketh not how loge one bath
pued.

Che chylozen of the vngodlpare abbomy-

Vnabie cypiozen/and lo are they that hepe co
pany with the vngodiy. Che inheretaunce
ol vngodly chyldzen Mall come to naught /
and their potterpte chall haue perpetuall
Thame ¢ conkucton. Che chpldzẽ complapne
ol an vngodly kather:and why: fozbps fake
thepare rebuned and delppled. wo be vnto

poul 0 ye vngodly) which baue kazſaken the
ſawe of 6 Hyett God: pk ve be bozne / ye wall
be bonne to curtyng / pt ve de / the curle that
be youre pozcyon.

All that is of d earth Chall turne to earth
agapne:ſo gothe bngodly allo out of d curſe
in to deſtruccron. Che Cozow of men is in
their body: but the name of the vngodlr chall
Oecli. rt. be put out / toꝛ 10nd wozch Labou⸗
te to get the a goodname / koꝛthat wall con⸗
tynuẽ curer by the / chen a thoulandegreate
trealures of golde. A good ipke bath a nõbꝛe

ol dapes /but a good name endureth euer.

y chrldꝛen / kepe wyldome in peace: foz

wyldome that ts hyd and a treature chat is
not lene / what pꝛokpt is in thẽ both? A man
that hydeth bis kolichnes / is better tnen a mg

P hydetb bis wyldome. Cherkoze be ye tur⸗

ned at my words: foꝛ it is not good / in all
thinges d alwaye to be achamed. Crue faith
mut pꝛoue and meature it.

Be achamed of whoꝛdome befoze father
and mother: Be a ſhamed ok lelynge before
the prynce s men ot aucto ite: DE lnne/ be


Gene. vg.


Gceli. xlic.


otellxl· d.


Selb,


The boke of |


fore the iudge a ruler: Ot offence / betoꝛethe

cogeegacion @ people: DFonrightuoumes/

befoz¢a companyon a frende: Of thelt / ve⸗

fore the nepabbouts.as £076 tructh ot SO soma,

andbis couenaunt/be not a chamed iherok.
Beathamed to ire wyth thyne elbotocs

bponthe bꝛed: Be achaniedto loke vpõ

lottes: Be aſbamed to turne awape thy face

frd thy krende: Be achamed to take ¢ not to

geue: Be achamed allo to loke vpõ anothers

mans wyle / and to make many trrürnge

woꝛdes with her mayden / oꝛ to lande byher

bedipde. Be aſhamedto bpb zapde thy krẽde:

en thou geuett enpthynge / catt hem not

in the teth withall.

Usecretes mape not be opened. lave of Sod

sation deepal eno

all thenges /

8 Che. fh Chapter.


heart not a thynge twyte / and
B


att herde in fecrete. Be ame

5 kaſt and well manered in dede / o
wall euerymũ fauoure the. Ok thele things
be not thou acbamed / a accepte no perlonnẽ
tooffende. Namely / ok thele es be not
5 Ol the la we sce — fad a
naunt / ot tudgment: to bꝛynge
kromhis vngodlynes vnto rpghtuouthes &
to ma ke him a good man: to deale faithfully
Sh thyncpgbboure ¢ cOpanponsto diltribute
che heretage vnto the krendes: tobe dilygent
Sen benden engere mod op ie sto

＋ V ixtie:
deale truly wyth te poꝛall goodes in beuge
and felignge:tobzpnge vpchrldzen wyth di⸗
Ipgice:to cozrecke an eucil feruatit: to Bepe
that thine is kr an euell wyte: to fetta lock
where many handes are: what thou delpues
reſt and genett out to be nepte / to tell it / and
to wepe it: to wꝛpte vp all the out geuynge g
receaupnge: toenfourme the vnlerned atone
wyle: DE the aged /p are iudged ot the ponge
PEchou be drligent in thele thynges/ truly
oe walt be lerned and wyle and accepted
ok al men. 8
Che daughter maketh § father to watch.

kecretip:and the carekulnes that he bath 40
her / tan eth aware his llepe:pee in $ pouth /
Tet he Guide ouergrowe bym: And when
the bath an houlbande lett the wulde beha⸗
ted: leſt the chulde be ed og rauyſhed in
her birginpte / o; gott with chxlde in her fae
chers houle: Oil when che commeth tothe
at we 294.9 be cos:

ue bnfrutefull. Je chr daughter . :
ton/kepeber ttrately / Tet the caule tyne een min.
enemies to laugh d to come /a p whole citie
to geue g an euell repoꝛte / Alo thou be fay-
ne cobeateehy Mame or euer man /annbe


. made nothpng:
dat. zxxb. a. He bat debe oodes ol ett


Jelus the towne


ends Conkounded before allthe people. B


not euerr bodyes bewtre / a haue not moch


deals dwellynge amongewemen. Foz lyne as the


wozme g moth commeth oute of clothyngẽ

8

an euell man /

Wa krendlix wyte g putteth one to Hames
rebuße. J will remẽmbzethe woꝛckes of the
Loꝛde / and declare the thyng 6 haue tene.
In the woꝛdes of the Loꝛde are his woꝛches
The Dunne ouerlobech allthengt with his
Wrne/ Tall his wozches are full ofp clears
nes therok, Hath not the Loꝛde bzought to
pale / chat his faynctes thuld tell out all his
wonderous woꝛckes / which che A lmigheye
Lozde hath ctablpſbed: Allchynges endure
in his glozp. He tenech out the grounde of
depe a the bert / a he knoweth all thetr yma⸗
ginac pon a wyldome For 6 Loꝛde nnoweth

e deten eee
8 pa
@ Coz to come /a dyicloleth thynges 8 are ſe ·


ign. krete. Mothoughemapeefcape bpm /nether


% mape enꝝ woꝛde be hyd trom hym., He ha
_. Gabnplhed the hre ercellent wozchesot hes
2 ¢/¢ he is from euerlaſtyng to euer⸗
laltynge. canto him mape nothrng be added
er can he be myniched / he hach no nede

alto ofenycouncell. O how amiable are all
bis wozckt /a ag a tparte to icke ppõ: hey
Ixue all / and endure koz euer: æ when loeuer
nede is they are all obedient vnto him. Chey
axe all dubble / one agarnſt anocher: he
that hath fawte oz blemiypch.


zone:
and who mare be fi ed with his
on mabe cenit 5 tred with bis glozr /


e che cregers ae


f a
daun era.


chaungenge. 5


batty . —


Ok Sprach,

: „ r d din ces!
e teen ie 8
and Glogous tyne This is te clearneso€
the „ee berwotitusll apparel ofbedue,
the apparelt that the Loꝛde lyghteneih in


Chorowe bps
commaundementthe trealüres ave opened /
andthe cloudes fle as the foulcs. In hys poz
wer bath be ſtrengthened the cloupes / and
bioken the haxle tones, i

Che mountaynes melt at b fight ot him /
the wynde bloweth accozdynge to hrs writ:
Che lounde or his thonder beatech $ earth /
and lo doth the ſtozme ok the noꝛthithe whyr⸗
le wynde allo lyghteth downe as a kethered


ich koule / caſteth oute and Ipzedeth the inow


abzode: g ag the grechoppeis 6 dedtrope all /
fo tallech it dowñe Che eye mavucleth at 6
betntpe otthewhetenetetyerot) and 6 erte
18 aktaped at the rayne ot it. He poureth out
the Fro pon earth Apke falt and wü keis
krolen / it is as arpeass priche ot a chiitle.
hohen the coulde Nozthwwpnde bloweth/ ¢
harde eee of chern done.
oge⸗
thet of water! and ponele wat Pa
the moti


wureth taynes/
eth the wyldernedes: g lone what
ls grene ſhe putteth it out line ye. Ehe me⸗
bycine ot alltbeleis / when a tioude cõmech
genet and when a dew commeth bpon the
eate ſit ſhalbe rekrechedagapne. g
Anhis wozde he ſiilleth the wynde. anhis
councellbesecteth the depe / and the Loꝛde)
kee plantedit. Chepthat faple ouer the
e / tel of bis parels and harmes: and when
we heare it with our eateß / wemaruell hee
2 2
kylbes. Choꝛow hm are all es lett in
Good o7d7¢ and perkourmed / z in hrs wo de
all 8 endure,


Alpeake moch / butz can noklufſictent er
aAttapne onto tt/foz be ij felte onetpts the x
rkeccron of all wowes. we Mulde prayle
Lopdatter al oure us eo be are
all bis woꝛckes. Che Lozdisto be keared
Bee berp greatets be /andmatuclousishps wum gtbla.
power. Pzaple the Lozd/ and magnitpe him
as moch as ye mae / pet dochhe karre karre
erceade all parle. magnitichim with all
Winne,


Seth rine


115


„ Sent. vg. d.


. vs.


28. Heuertheles theteare louyng men


Ettleſlaſtitüs

eino were able fufficientiyco pꝛarte him.

5 o hath lene him / chat he myght tell bse

2
at

e

2 ee


eo prapleofcerten holy menMerach/Qoe/abene
faag/and Jacob.


¶ Che. xliiiſ. Chapter.

2 Et vs cömende the noble famous
men /andthe genevacyon of oure
Coveelbers ¢ fathers. Manx moze
gloviougactes bath f Loddone /

andthemed hrs greate power euer tens the
beginning. Che noble famous men raigned
inchelrkengdomes andbare excellent rule.
Intheir wymdome and onderſtandynge ther
tolo wed the councell ſbewed in the pꝛophe⸗
cles. Cher led the tolcke thozow the councell
and wyldome of the Socrpbes of the people,
Wyle Centences ave Counde in their inſtruc⸗
el Hungen Coughtthetwetenes and melody
OFMPuticts /and brought Forth che pleataunt
Conges in {cripture.chep were ryche allo / a
coulde comfozte a pacifye thote that dwelt

ch them. all there were very noble andho⸗
hozable men in their generactong / and were
zwelrepozted ok inthelrtymes. Ehete haue


lelt a name behinde them / lo that their pꝛay⸗
fee ee ewe tee


ſe (hall alwape be cpo of.

weretome / whole remembꝛaunce is gone,
They came tonaught a pericbed / as though
ber bannuerbene omer otber ee
dzen allo wich them. ste


tuoutnetie Hail neuer be fozgotté but
e
an holy good heretage: te
kalt in the couenaunt . Foz their fakes hall
their chyldzẽ a lede cotynue tos euer / I cheir
naple chall neuet be put downe. Chetr bo
es are buried in peace / buttheir name ly⸗
nech fo euermoze. Che people can ĩpeale
oftheir wyſdome / and the Lot i lo
talhe of their pꝛapte. Enoch walken tyabt &
acceptably betoze the L onde: therfoze was
he tranſlated fozan example of amendemẽt
koche generacrong. Noe was a ſtedtaſt and
tyghtuous man: in g tyme of wꝛath he be-
came a reconcriyng. hertope was he lett a
gemmatit onto the earth / whe d loud
In eueviattyng couenaunt was made w.
bim / that al lech chu de peryche nomoze W
(che water. Abzaham was a greate father of
man people / in gior waß chere none ine


5


¢ came.
th gebbe gelen ebe pute Jm bn


The boke of


vnto hem He nete the lawe orthe pelt /
same .
couenaunt in his fleth / a when be was tem⸗
nted / he was fofive fapthrul. herkoze fwoze
God vnto him wan oche / g he wolde biede/
all people inhis lede that he wold multiplie
eincreate him as the duſt or the earth / and
ko exalte his cede as the ſtarres: pee and that
bis lede chulde haue the podedpon a inhere⸗
taunce of the lande From lee to lee / and kram
the ryuer vnto che boꝛders of the lande.

With Jlaac dyd he ſtabluch p fame coue⸗
naunt /foz Bbzaba bis fathers fake. Vee that 8
Gracpousbledyngeandbealty of ail men / 9 Senesr.a,
Coucnauntdydbe tablyt with Gfaac/ and
made it to reit vpon the head of bim ot be ‘
knewhym / in that he prolpered hym Cowell Gene erg
and rychelp / and gaue him an herẽtage / and rr
ſunde red ys poꝛe von by it lelke / and patted
It amöge the twelue tribes. Mercrtull men
bꝛought he out ot him / which loũde lauoure
bekozẽ all lech.


ache prayle of Moltg Karon / and Bhinehen
abe xiv. Chapter.
Oles beloued of God a m / whole Y ’
membzaunce is in Pre praple: Grote
em that the Lone made ide im g Abs,
laynctes / and magni⸗ q


lorvotthe
eine 1 —— bm binn andtiapenupe achim the weiteren.
ders. He made bym greate in the Irgöte of 755 Hamely they thac werk ofathan/and dt.
pnges/gaue hm commaundement befoze * rama krde / andthe kurrous cogregacyon of
Ps people, s hewedbym bis glozvous po- es Chore. Chis the Londe awe) ett dilplealed
er. He Rablywenhym inpthfaptbfulnes@ ? bum andingis wiochkull tndignacton were
mekenes/and chole him out ok all men. Kar Ong f , thevcontumen.d greate wanderdrd he bpd
heberde his vopce / and led him in the darcke M ug g. hein and confumed chem wich thekrie. Be⸗
cloude / and there he gaue hüm the cOmaund- Erden this he made Aaron veemoze honoza⸗
mentes pee the lawokleea weldome Bic an glonious. ie gaue anberetage/
bette e fe fates bpm tpecalivbse en —
rael bis lawes. Tag. ftenaunce( fo? p enge e og oeeang
ofthe Lozde)tbis gaue he onto him andbys
e
Foz the
1 elfe ts his pozcpon and enherltaunce. n
F Che churde noble g exceſlent man
e oF ciegzer


dani


a


w

. } haat . ts
Aha. ye bude teach Jacob the katutes and tettt>
montes/ ¢ to enfourme Ftrael in his lawe.


arape /

lothed Ar pere e garment ok bos
naure. Be put pertecke fope bpon bm / and
Srzdedchem wyeh drengch Pedeckte hym
wwyth krde clothes / andã kunpcle / wyth an
buerbodr cote allo a a grzdle. Round about
made he hem belies of golde / z that man: S
when he went in / the loünde myghtbe herde /
that ther mraht make a note in the Dan⸗
ckuarꝝ / and geue the people warnynge. Che
Oly gatment was wzought a bzoderd wych


etherewas a woꝛcke / wherin
fons caltencbioubcan geen


. — 2
Spon p came a 5 gene


Cherkoze chere ove bpcertapne agayn 10


k Spꝛach,


lf,


lea che tonne of
om atteane of


krael might
Bot grate,


the Lozde herde bim wyth
ones. Chey hnote the epthenith
People mightely / e in fallyngedowne they
llth abuertarieg/Co Chat the Dea en
. Lr hed ele di
a jem / ko he
lowed bponthe myghtie inen ol chem. 8
in che teme of Sores alco he and Calebw
che fonne of Fephune/ dyd a good wozche/
which Kode agaynſt the enempes / wrihelde
the people from fynne / 6 Ariled the wicked
murmuring. And ok lyre hüdpeth choulande
people of tote / they two were pꝛelerued /
when cher were bzonghtin to the heretage /
hamelp/a lande that floweth with myicke @
bony. he enen ch allo bnto Ca⸗
leb which vemapned with hein onto bigage: ,
fotbathetwenteopits tothe hre places of 6 2. rl
lande / and hig fede cõqueredthe tame fozan
heretagesthat all the chlloz or gcrael might
le / how gooda thenge it is to be obediẽt ons
tothe n öde. And the ludges oz rulergleuery
one akter hys name) whole hert wente not a
whos ynge / ner departed fromthe Loꝛde / and
F Coptake not the Loꝛd önkapthkuikp / whole
remébzaunce bath a good repozte: J eetheir
bones floztth oute of thetr place / a their na ·
me Mall neuer be chaunged.
Samuel the pꝛophet beloued of 5 Lone / C
oꝛderned a kyng / and ano ynted the pꝛynces
ouer che people. In the lawe of the Loꝛdru⸗
ledhe / and tudged the congregacion / andthe
Lofde had reſpecte bntog acob ehe pꝛophet


e+ was kounde biligentin bis fapehinines : pee


un his farthkulnes was the fapthfutnes ok
vildon ünowne. He called vpon the Loses
Ogg. tii, mightte /


Cceleliatticies,
mxghtre / when b enempes preated
oneucty tpde/ what epmie as he offen pluc-
Heng labes. and ß Lozdthödzed fed heauẽ /
E marde his bopce to be herde witha greate
noxke. He diccomkpted the pꝛynces ol Eyꝛe /
all the rulers ol the Philiſtines. Bekozehys
Jatt ende he made pꝛoteſtacron in the
okthe Loꝛde / andhis anoented / that he toe
nether ſubſtaunceẽ ner good of enx man / no
not fo moch as a chue:andnoman mrgbt ac
cule hem. Alter this he tolde / chat hes ende
was at hande/ and chewed the kyng alto bis
ende and death:akröthe earth lykt hebphes
popce in ? pꝛophecpe / s the bngodiy people
wuͤlde perpche.


che praple ot Hathan / Danid / and Balomon.
Gabe rivi.chapter,


2 sftevtoarde in d tyme ol kyng Was
U. eg rtl. . called


ne Tü


jathan: Foz lxke as the fat is ta ·

hen aware from the olkerynge/ co

was Baud cholen out ok the chyloze of Ic

rael. He tone bis paſtyme wytb the lyons ¢

with Ryddes / and with beares lyne as wor

meg rtl. f. lambes. Slewhe not a gpaunte when he
was pet but ponge / and tobe awape the re⸗

bune from his people: what tyme as he to⸗

he the tone in his hande / and imote downe

pꝛoude Goltath wich the dynge? Kozhecal⸗

led bpon che hpelt Lorde / whleh gaue hem

Arength in bis rygbt bande / fo that he ouer⸗

chzew the mygh unte in the battavil /

aque, cous basale bin to mode

f. bitt. bh „Thus by worchrpe
udn, oncallpyincesy und mebehem teh
ood repoꝛte in the pꝛayte ofthe Loꝛde/that

e chuld weere a crowne or gloꝛx. os he de

ul, nig · ba. tropedehe enempes on euerpepde / roted out
billdtines bys aduerlatpes / bake their

ogne in lunder / ke as it is bzoken per this


dape In allhis wozches he pꝛapled 5 Preſt v


and Folpeſt / and atcrpben the honoure bnto
Aperaprbts, JEM. ipkg bis hole bert Dpobe parte aud

Ioue him that made him. Pe let kyngerg allo
bekoze the aulter / and in their tune he made
ſwete tonges. He oꝛdepned to kepe the holr
dayes wozthiptully/ and that che colempne
keäaſteschoꝛow the whole veare chulde be ho
hozably holden / wich praylyng che name ot
the Loꝛde / and wyth bps i e bytymes
in the moznpng inthe Sanctuary,
¢ Che Lozde tone awavebistynnes/ and
exaltedhis hose fo2 euer. Be gauebym the
couenaunt ofthe kyngpome/and thetrone
ol worthipe in Aral. After bym there role
bp the wylefonne called Dalomon / and loz
bes fake bedzouc the enem pes awaye karre
Sk. hts Salomo ralgned with peace in bis
txme ( Fo2 God gaue him rel trom hs ene.


. Regum ri


eg. llc.


Theboktok


um inies on eüerpſpde / 5 hemyght burlde gem


an boute in his name / and prepare the Sa⸗
Ctuary koz euerjlike as he was well indruc-
te in hes pouth ¢ kplled wich wyldome and
onderſtanding / as it were Wa watersloude,
He couered and kplled the whole lande wyth
Fymilitudes a wyle pzudent tentenees.
name wente abzode in the Jes / be ·
caule ofhis peacehe was beloued. Alles
marurled at his fonges / pꝛouerbes / Iymlx-
tudes / and at his peace / a at the name ofthe
Loꝛde God / whych is called the od oF Al.
kael. He gathered golde as tynne/ and he had g ag.
as moch kxluer as leade. Pe was mouedin 3
vnozopnate loue towarde wemen / and was
ouercome in atteccvon. He ſtapned his ho ·
houre and workbippe/ pee bis potterpte den . gala
led he allo / inbzynapnge the wzatl of the .
bps tore to bis ongoome tas dees.
s tope: fo 0

and Ephzalm be came an vntarcheull“ aan tb. ex. u.
vnconſkät kingdome. Heuertheleg God koz⸗ 620
folie not hys mercy /nether was ge otterip v mig vl.
—4¹ becaute tte c he hulde

aue hym no poſterpte.

AB top the lede g came vpõ him / which he E
loued / he bought it not vtterly to naught /
but gaue pet a temnaunt onto Jacob /and a
rote vnto auld out ot hem. Thus reſted
Salomon wich bys fathers sand out or bys
Sede he leſt bebpnde hyma bery koolpcbnes
ofthe people / doch one as had no vnderſtä⸗
dynge:nameix / Mobo which turned aware. 7 *
1 — bps counicell / ¢ Feroboa h Ren a.

e lone of Nabat/whych cauled Nraell to
lynne / and he wed Eph alm the wã pe ol vn.
godlynes: In to moch that their tynnes and
myldedes had the bpperhande tokoze that
at the laſt they were dꝛyuen out ok the lande
koz the lame: ee he lought out and bꝛought
vp all wyckednes ty the vengeaunce came


pon them,
Coy Ante of ah er Gla,
8 8 Che. riot) Chapter.


*


feminnont
ith th.


ook to be ipke-bym? One that
e eet
: Be calk downe Arnges and de- is. nes roll
Atrored them andthe honozable from thelr
legte. Upon the mounte Srna he herde bid


otb


Bezekiah made bys:
Cwakerinto fe/drgged chozow the ftonp rock
in. ria with ꝛon /a made by a well by § water ide
n hes tyme came Spennaberpb vp / and
t Rablakeh lpit bp bes bande aga ynſt
eee che been wo gteate ge en

biet their hertes andhädes, tothat

Cozowed ipke & woman trauaplynge Dep
Pete a di ear deni
SS mercphull/andiife op chelr handes before
benen ande Loꝛdeherde them out ok
eauen / anddelpueredthem by the bande of


bt the twelue pꝛophetes


9 S .
appopneen if ture is rach, li
people agapne / and
to take aware all abjompnacpans ot Sone
godly . Pedrꝛectedhys hert onto the Loꝛde/
andmthe teme ofthe vngodlphe fettop the
wonchrpe of Bod agapne . Ail hengeg (ers
cepte Sauid / Pezefiah and Joliah) comite
ted topchednes:foz euen the kynges of Juda
allo fosfoke the lawe ot God Foz cher gaue
chelt borne onto other / chelrhondur z woz⸗
wipe allo to an traunge people.
„ Cherkope was the clecte eptie ot ß Hanc⸗
fuarp baent with krze and the rettes theroklh. neger
Hape defolate a wattes fog they intreated ge⸗
rempeuel which neuertheles waga pꝛophet
mehere krom his mothers wombe / thathe *
myght rote out / bꝛeake ot /a dellrope: that yzere ta
be 1115 buplde bp / e plante agapne, Eze⸗
Chieli fatve tijegiozvot the Lo de ina vylõ
whych was cbewed ech bpon the charett os
che Cherubyns. Fozhe thought vpon ö ence
myes inthe rayne / to do good vnto doch as
had berwelte pappe ne the bon
ozyt) from out o
their place: tos they gaue comfozte a confo-
lacpon onto Jacob / adelpuered chem kapth⸗ aa a
fully. ow Mal we pzapte cpobabely which agp.
was as a rpnge in the rrghthande⸗ lenz he,
$0 was Leni afco the Conne of goledecckk
Hhete menin their truies burided the houle / agg. le.
Fett bp the Sanctuary of 6 Lo d agapne / th v. a.
whpch was pzepared fo an euerlaſtynge
wofchpe. And Hehempab is an wave to be /. Erd vil n.
cümiended which fet bp oz bs h wales chat Stop. vita.
were bꝛoken downe/ made the poztes @ bars
res agarne, and buplded oure houles of the
new. But bpon earth is there no man creas gene v. c.
tedleze Enoch ko he was taken vp krom 5 Prei. lin v.
earthy, And Foreph/ whpch was loꝛde of bys dts


@ piethzen ethe bphoſderor hes peoples bys


bones were couered ¢ hepte. Sveti
E
allthe be
was created: e
EMF Simon the conne of Oniah.
Che. l. Chapter.


monthe tonne or Onxab thehye v
terete nett netic
anne e ede
. e
ple allo was founded otbpmn/SooubIe bugs


„ bing a 6 byewalles of pte pie. Inbignapes


keeading ful as the fee.


che welles of water owed out / and were er


Be tone care fo2 bys


% People/ e delxueredtheni krö deltruccys, He


6 ina
baer emen


; ogether . temembzat
Salve sb eee A mbzaunce


and
the plavenge of Aputgce rf wre he nes


kepte
not be beteged . He dwelt in


ertie s made ft ctrange / it tutte

onoure and

wozchype amonge hs people

latged the trale ott e ae

courte . Pe geuech keahr as the mou: ⸗

nynge arte in the myddeſt of the clones /
Gan. andaz


x Baruch the Pꝛophete. li
eight rape, vee ers youth bp tought after on / bp the water ol, Bedy. Wößch
bowed downe mpne eave and keceaued an ehe wepte / kaltes / a pꝛaxed
„Ikodde me moch wyrdome and pzolpef, belt the Loden. 8
; ; Hedgteatlyinber. Cherfoze wilhF alcribe ? . Chep made a colleccyon allo ot money /
nem / haue tokened vp thelemfozma- - 100 onto him / that geueth me wyldome: according fo euerr mans power /andfentie
rldome anden Ham aduplen to docheralter. J well be Söhnen Jener wel.
Tuche to cleue onto the thinge bed chtöh the tonne of Halon preft/with bother
alt J not be confounded, Mploulehath pieſtes: and to all the people wyrch were W
wꝛeſtled with her / and J haue dene dyligent bimat Jeruſake what trme as thy had gott
tobe chen was pi let vpmyne handes the omamentes ofthe temple e Lope
1 angrelthen was mp lovleipabtenedthozow (chat wweretatien awape out ofth temple )
Lozde tenethbymn., : wildome n Iknowieged mykoollchneß. 4 that eyep mighebꝛenge temagapne into
arment or honoure / Che psaper of Jelus the tonne ot Sirach. : OpzedmpCoule afterher / We a I were one lande of Fuda/ the . dape of the moneth Si⸗
5 ve when he wet he. il. Chapter. 7 bert td che beginning / x g Coane her in cen · ban:namtelp/tiluer bevels (which Hebecht⸗
* ng chankethe D Loꝛde s Bynge/e nelle. Indtherkoze Hall not be kozlaken. ah ß lonne fofiah kynge of Juda had made]
" ofthe Spanctuary: whenbe toketbe poser. mp Ca 12 3 psd OT ionbentabe sector elle ee
ong aut at 5 Preites Band / he hymn keit Love aues nem tonge wherwerb A weil pape lade “ and alche people /andled hem ca⸗
: . O come bntomepebnietnen / dwell p. tea eegembnto abpton;
theboute of wildomer nawe not voux And they tapde: Beholde e haue lent vou 5
Felues trom ber bukkalke a comenokthee moner /to bye pou burnt offerpnges and in⸗ Vet. 0. l
thinges/toz poute foulesare verp ehrte. J cenck wrthall: make pois vnleuened bed icio
Opencdmpmouth „andſpake - H come and Focke foztynne ppon the aulterok the 1 b bm.
bye wyrdome without money bowe downe durk God. And pꝛape for che Heotperete of


me neck vnder her pock /andyouvefoulé Mabuchodonofoz hynge of Bal von / and of


Mreceaue wyrdome. She ishareathan Aalthatarhis Conne: thae chet dapes maye

anbiscontenctsbe kunde, ehh fein beb pon earch as che dapes of beauen: hat

5 Pourecres bow thatg bane ba butte 7 Pod allo ma re geue vs rength /anviighté

3 pre op 3 oure and pethaue foundemoch telk. Des oure eves: that we mave ipucionver the de⸗
Stotynge/ me on that 2 . ceaue wyldome / and pe ſhal haut plenteoul Fence ot epepsobse pon d. Walcher


nes ok krluer and goddein podechon. Lete andbönder the proteccyon of Valthalar he
_ ml voure nipnde reio ais mercy aio be not konmeithat wemave longe do chem terupce/
i ‘ying / and rom 5 Achamed oc his pra pte. ofne bis woyne by and kynde fauouré in theirkpgiſt Pave fog
epmes and he Mal geue you your rewarde Hallo onto the L070 oure Gd / oz we haue
indue kme. : fpnnedagayntt the Lorde ouve @od/andone
; 0 to toys dape is not hrs wzath tuned pet as
Gap ende of tye boke of fus the wape from bs; Andfe that pe rede thys bone
€ OF Spach /twhich is (tech webaue tent onto pautobe reheavs
called in Latpne ee cedinthe Cemple of the Lozde )bponthebye
cleltaſticus. daes / a at tyme contenlent.
1 fenen e
— 5 tu ot con uc. f. b.
N ine ¶ The boke of the neee S
Fahlteun bus llt Foy my prayer Sntoatquna, andto eucty one that dwelleth
15 ft from Pꝛophete Baruch, at Jerulale: ou Benges bzinces ee,
% 3 , Pophetes and to oure fathers. noe haute tps
12 ¢ Suiten unt be rden the eap ned betoze the 1107 oure God / we hauen
f : fy 1 uenotherke⸗
eee deen. e e nedbito the boyce of the L onde oure God / to
1 — ! walke in che commaundementes $ he gaue
bs, Dens the dape 6 be brought dure fozes
f Out ofthe lande ok egipte bnto chys
abe pzefentdaye / we haue bene euer a mytbe⸗
leuynge and an vnkaichtull people vnto the
karre ber a an benen ele tate une
fonnes / erz / and chr cke / that we chude
7 fiom the bet . eber, .
echere are come vpon hs great
ail chem char dweſt ac plagess 8
2


Eatestoveare. Chen walther parte mein? Olerne then where difcrecyon i 5.4.
5 name oF tbete capeguite /etbincke bpon mp bertisfgtoheve ondeviranoinge beilagen
wales Daten Chen baltderturnehemtromcherk mareüunowe allo krö whence camech age
l Stari berde backes / and trom their bngodiynes: life sanecettary ixurngeſ the light ok p cpes c curtf v.
Feen,
Soa ec
2 2 1 ere are
e e
a. 1 g 5 f Chev thathad thetrpadyme w the toutes of
Saas — e gee, (aotae teagan Mut ate
egg he. chapter. eae, AnDdtwellmaneanoiyer covenaunt ty da ener Whats worth hen
panei 15 Osche which caute the Lozdoure „nd. weer wül bete 00/6 the Gelbe coulbenaty ing herostestopatestes
ad) Se Feet de eee
2 e be 4 ir ſteade? Y onge men
7515 D ale ett th e prayer begoune een eee en
Guds Andkoch piages hach b lod brought phetes fapenge. Fare e e dee ene ono der derbe Spee Pee eee
beo s ase came to pak nber beg ee eee ene e
k ie as ets fuleillea in Gecutalé, ach inge 3 ien De cscaerar eames erer ap ram chem Jehachnot /etight Cavre ts
Aten, b. ag iets wittenin the latve of Beleg: thara 0 demeter hid fefcom them. Jebachnot beneherdeokinthe


man chulde cate 8 lech orbis awne fonne/ a
$ fleth of his awne daughter. Mozeouer / he
hath velpueren them in to che handes ofall


bik hed cn

kynges / chat are rounde aboute vs (to be e cities ot Fu

founded delolate) ¢ fcatred them abꝛode in wy out.

all landes a nacrons. Chus are we bought allo take from and &

be nech and nor aboue /fo2 we haue fynned b; é
inſt the Loꝛde our God / g not bene obe

diet vnto his volce. Cherkozeß Loꝛdour God

Wsrightuous. a we % our fathers( as reafon

ig ate bꝛought to open Mame / as it is to ſe

thysdave . And as for thele plages that are

cone bpon vs allreadp/ the Londe haddeur⸗


ledthem loz vs: et wolde we not prapebnto ges gange now vpon vs. O Loꝛde Lord
thee aut — . heen penn e e L e of dener en Wen
. 1 name now at e 2
16; he l denn vlags to come bps bs : dene edo det b Loyoe aut Boo) nue dee, her pe ben oe
tcc nende bs: wopcy toe etfobee ree cat Cot, Cs 3. en dee ee ed Wa gun
3 ae hates / to gintẽt g w.
hot dane / ner barkenedbntobis borce kozto ag. cal bps thy name/ a pzaple ee out aug. wiener pede itn a
Sp em gag the Lord / Bae epee ae bel cloudes ho hach gone ouer the lee to kinde
. a ekozethe. her,

And um D Lande Godot Braet / thou aachnde werber page oel. auler DRE! Loma nahe

that halt brought thy people out ot ß lande thou balk intreated : „ ptlulte / where as chou hat kcatred ug / tobe waves of w e / netheris there enx p can

of Egypte woth a miahtre bande / wyth to- e MUG an abbominactd /curte/andtpnne:ipke agit Che out her pathes. But he that woteth al

fens onde witer mente power end upngemerce hathbappenedionto ourefathersalto/becau chenges Enoweth ber / g he bath tounde her Sena.
outtretehed arme: and bat gotten thplelk bpthpleru j deo aden winednele sdepartyng hehe aut withbis foze knowledge. his lame fshe Jo":

.  goubmet conmaunde bpm nere ere ang ppb eer atte Deng Seta
it “pondze them wel thine caves p thou and fpllentt with all maner ok fouie:

done wyckedlr / we haue behaued dure felut mx e mapeſt lerne wildome. But how th tes. endeth 1
eigen ane rpghteoutnettes. ene thal multitude teGtracl/Sthouateintdpneencmipeslanbe: g weh nad regem ob gc

thy wrath from bs we beteche $)foz we are tudu art waren olde ina Kraunge countre / keare. Che Rares hepe their watch age⸗


buta kew ett amonge the Herthen / where with 5 det pled with che deed. hr art ehou become ue their iyght / pee and that gladly eben he


The Propherye/
calleththem theptave:here we be. Ind ie auedoknty wyddowes leaurngeme. alone?
chearkuines they hewelpghtontobymtbat boch detolate and chiſdledde. But alas what
Stat erwpig. amade them. This is dure Gov / ¢ ere cha
Beute gel anone ocheröe compared bntohm: Jig
that hath kounde out all wyldome / and
oha, feu her a gaceb bis Fecua ato
John l.. Bis beloued. Atterwarde drd he Hhewe
elk vpon earth / adwelt amonge men.


tooxthipe


BS 5
Be oF pat
anbiettactownere ——.— at


bpon
if


ache Chave W berdg a bau cute a good ove ot
ttt. er. / Shave euer a ol
E Pig ts the boke ofthe commautt pe ate ely ae gle
bnd of aner g te bane pe come bponme From the holp one / becaule
endureth toz euer. Allcher B hepe ol che mercy that ve wal hauẽ of oure euer ·
it / Hall come to ipfe: but toch as laſtenge Saupeure. D
fozlake ĩt / hall come to death. Curne the D with mournpnge and wepynge droz let
Jacob / take holde of ittwalke bythis ware vou go frome but with tope and perpetuall


pff. b.


thozow his brightnede and (ene, Seue not
thyne honoure co another / and thy wozcptpe
toa ſtraunge people. el / bow happre
are we / fepng that God hach chewed bs loch
thrnges as are pleataunt vntohrm⸗ Be ol
Good cheare thou people of God / O thou
Atoncient Jtrael. Mow are ve lolde among e
the Heathen / howbeit not For vaure btterde⸗
ftruccfon:but becaute ve pꝛouoked God the
Lozde to wzath a dilpleature / cherkoze were
pe delpuered vnto poure enemres:koß e drt
plealed the euerlatting God that made vou /
offcringebntodeuels ¢ not to God. Ve haue
forgotten him that bought vou vp / a voure
B mule haue pe greued / G Jer ulalem.
Whan che lawe thatß with or God wag


gladnede call g Lozde b. 15 95 5
bnto me. Lpke as the ne} ours OF Bion
fatwe poute captpuite fd God. Kue Comal
they alto fe toztlp youre health in God
thbich wall come on vou w greate honoure
and cuerlattynge wozchippe. a
O mp chplozen /Cufve paclenti b waach
that Mail come vpon pou. Foz the enempe
ith perlecuted the / but toztiy thou tale te
Deltruccyon/ andthalt treade vpon bes
bases derben an bane gone de
wayes / tos they are ed awaxe as a flocke 2
is lcatred ab zode wich the enempes. But be
OF good comtozte ! Dmiy chridren) and ere E
bonito the Lorde: Con be thatied pou awaye/
halb pou pet invemembzaunce :andiphe as


commynge vpon pou: the fapde : Herken


O Ffehaue bene mpndedtolwaruc krom POUre amg.


pethat dwell aboute Bron /foz Godhaty Hod ko Hal penom endeuoure poure felues


Foz heth
ku mpꝛch / and in 6
h righ⸗ dyth bartes and jockes /e


graue: Cuentothe prette


be fpopted with robbers.


oft
fo


bzought me in to greate beupnede.antd why x. tymes moꝛe / to tune agayne / and to ſene : ‘i
Ilethe captpurte ol my people oeme kanne bymr.so7 be that hach broughechete plages ‘
anpdaughters / whpch che eucrlainge God pon Pau / chall bzinge vou eueriattyng tore
fopllbzpnge ppon chem. With tore pro J agapyne with poure health. cakeagoodhert
nozich them / but now mutt J leaue thé with vnto the / S erulalem:toꝛbe which gaue ß Zac. b
wepenge and loꝛow. that name / echozteth the to todo.
Let no man refopce ouer me wrddowe and Ehe wycked doers that now put the to
kozlaken which forthe kynneg ormpchüdze trouble call perth and loch as haue retor⸗
am delolate of cucry man. Foz whe / cherde Cedatthy tall / walbe punpſbed. Che cytyes
parted from the lawe ok God:thepwoldenot whom thy e den terue / and that haue cae
ane meer fn the red awape thy fonnt halbe cozrecte. For tye
‘wave ol hrs commaundementes:¢ a8 fog kee as they benow glad ok thr decare ſochal
pathes ofthe treuth g godiineüe/herbadno cher mouimeintheltawnedeckruccron.
Cfuſt togointhem. tope other mulertude cdalbe taken awape
O pedwellers aboute Spomcome / and Htbelrcheare thalbe turnedto fozowe . Foz
let bs cal toremembraunce the captpupte / A fyze wall fall bpon them from the euerla⸗
Denk. rbih e. 6 the eucrlattynge Godhath bought von God. longe toendure: and it Halbe in ·
Jeresb.c. mele on ae hag ly pout habtted of deueis for a greate fearon,
ape i ie fe fe
ceaspeonle sofa rage language WO Serene be g ovo We chee
Chele haue carted aware the deare belo⸗ ¶ che. v. chapter,


peaceabl
pe te in Ba Aa goddes


O e ·


Stele. v. a


Ihe deed men. 3

tred onto them ! their pꝛe

it: pee the prettes wrues take ther
vntothe lenke


vpon cheirbeadestroaringe and crreng op:
their goddes / as men do at the keaſt / when
Ebnels deed.
bepettes alto take awave garmktes
ofthe ymages / o decke their wyues ¢ chyl⸗
dien withall. Mhecher tebe good oz euei &
enyman do onto them / they are not able to
recompence it they can nether let bppakrng
ner puthim downk. an line manerther mare
nether geue ryches / ner rewarde euell.
ee Jaman maße a vowe bnto chem and
bbc bine tot pre it. Th ex ci
nok reſtozea bipnde ma to t / ner bel ·
peenpmanathisnede.
merepto ah
thevies Chelr
Klyluer / are
behewen ok
the, thal bec
be taken foz
them goddes?
ſhiped chem not / he


that maxe no
gp cometo rden


>
(pee very ame
oo nin


preſtes
kelues with th


pore cher geue nothinge ty


them kelues.
man / to be a


acc he ag be there

jone andall t an ther geue
cheir cpyne aud light / are ob ent / anddomẽ
good: eye ligheenynge rpms
cleare: che wynde bio weth in eucry countre
and tohan God commaundeth the coudes to


at goroundeaboute the tuholewozine (werde
as whan kent domne


they are bidden: epze ig
kromaboue and commaunded, te burnety bp
billes and woddes But as C02 Chole goddes/
cher are not line one of thete hinges ether
in beutp ner Krength Wbertöpe men ume


not thynke / ner la er 1
— i Ce ee e niudgment /


mape it then,
re goddes⸗Tarventefs a golimythes ma⸗
ethem Metherbe they eny other thinge / but
euen whatthe worte men mpli mate of thé.
Fee the goldimiches them kelues that make
chem / are of no longe contrnuaunce: ow
chudde chen the thinges that are made o chẽ /
be gondes? Gagne therfore are the thenges


ner do men good. Kozdo moch now as pe are
ture thatther be no goddes then keare them
not: Kon they cd nether lpeabecuell ner 1
of knges cher can thewe notokẽs inhea ·
uen koz 12 en / nether Myre as p Düne
ner geue ligt as § mone: yee the vntealo⸗
nable bes ercgetote soil gh.
get them onder the role / zdo ih a ee ma


The tonge ok the ul chylden.


Ibty,


pd st spate renee ofc onto thp teruauntes/4 60 the wog: Seve.


hes chat they be e keare them chbpe the Yet to thy names lake
net Kopien asa 4 (we beleche
— phe . man the geue vs not bp Foz euer /bzeake not thy


to are couenaunt/é tatic not awape thy merc
Se brechenden place 6 ODE: en Hae Laioucemoyeonevahe ter
- eg ome in an dꝛchardẽ / chat euern uaunt Acaacs lake / and ko thy holy Atraels 5
922 Apt arb did ‘apa derd body fake:to whomthou hat fpohen e paomeren ne ne
ugedarche. g un wed thatthou wolbelt multtpfethett kede as the weten
epote gunbes ot pends /TplueraningoiveJ8P farreg at beau / g as thetanve p Ivcthopa ß
Senate ame e meren kerne a abe hepte ibe: is
Fable, Ger herbe og feder dere nel wo evaute oe oute ente
them Celues wall be 2 lb / becaule of oure ſynnes:
Ache, e deat So thathoto we baucner her pzynce dune /
Bielled ig the godly man chat hatt no yas
en be calbe karre


. che ende ot e Baruch
Ach ge vixen .
or the Bebjue,


pn;
¶ The fonge of the
Hheechylozett which were put in to

eee
inthe ii. chap. ot Panic,
walked in the
flamme, pꝛap-
eb, in
4


1
areal
abet neat


i elkpbeih D Lope Godot:

ethou / D Lozde oure ka teach lg. b.
chert tos thou art prapte @bonouretorthp/ n
B Foz euermoze. Bleilẽd ptalixxil. e.

e che halp name of thy glory / fo tts woz,

the to be praylen/a magnik red in an world,

done chẽ Hs in delrue Bieſked be thou in thehoiptemple ofthpgia-

— into the handes ol ourcenempes/ ¥p/fozaboucall thyngethou art to be prays

amöge bngonly e twiched abbom mnacyons/ fed/ per a moze then worthy to be magny-

@toan bnrightuous beng pec the molt kro. Fied fo7 euer. Biefied be thou inthe trone or

tate bpd eave Anbnoto te meye not ope chr Bengpome/ fo7 about all thou art woz⸗

gute mouthes, we ale be come a came and ii bs wen roben or 0 w

. magnt⸗


magnitled £07 euct. Bleũtd be thou that ioe
‘Rell thazo w the depe / z fpetett ppon theahes
kubins: ko thou art worthy to de pyaplen/ a
Aboue aleo be magnittpen kot euer Bieürd
ve thou tithe krmament offeaué, fo2 chou
art praple ind honoure wozthy Foz cuet,
Hall ve wozchies of 6 Loz:tpeake good
1 8 ofthe n varie brm / nökethem fog


Hype angels otche l ode ſpeane good of
E Love nns him / Ger him bp fo; euer.
% . Ppeheauens Speake good of che Lobe:
Psaple him and lethim vp to euer. :
all ve waters that be abou the firma
ment / cpeane good of the Loꝛde:pꝛayte him /
and let him bp koz euer. :
Hall pe powers of S Lozde / tpeane good
ol F Lozd/praple bim / a lethim bp Coz euer.
tuerra „ Ove Sunne ¢ Moone /fpeake good of
$ WLozde:pzapte him /a fet him vp Coz euer.
PlaLcreeoia O pe ſtarres of heauẽ / cpeake good of che
Loe parle him / andlett him vp to euer.
O ye cbowerg a dew / lpeake good or the
10 red bim / and fet him vp Foz euer.
O all pe wrndes of God Speake good of
the Lopde:pzapte him / let him vp foz euer.
O pe trie ahrate/ſpeake good of Lon:
a. eee Tor euet.
„See winter tunen.
Loꝛde:pꝛapte him / a let him vp ko euer.
O pedewes a frokes/tpeate good of the
2. Portio and e penn bploz euer.
5 pe Croft and colde / fpeake good of the
Loꝛde: pꝛaptehim / and fete him op Foz euer.


2 pe ple and fnotwe / cpeane good or the
Lopre:


sprayle him / and fete him vp koꝛ euer.

O ve nyahtes and dayes: peane good of
the Lorde:pꝛapte him / a let him vp oz euer.
O pe lightanddarchnede /Cpeate good of


he lange of the, ü ch


th. —


Lope-p P
lett Airael Cpeake good of the Lozde:
bug ben, hte foz euer.
D ve pieſtes of che Loe / cpeane good
ond pꝛarte him a let him bpfoz euer.
D pe feruauntes of the Loꝛde / ipeake err ng
＋ ee Lopderpagtepinn / and fect hem eri


a Aota q

O pelpyrteg and Soules ot b vigbtidousy 7
ses ee

O pe holp and humble men offert/ tea:
Reve good ofthe Lone: pyaxie pe bpm / and
fet him vp fo euer. »

D Anantag/Atarias and@prtacl/fpeate
pe good of the Lond. pꝛapſe ye acdc
Dp Foz euer obich hat delkuered os kröche ze em
hell / kepte vs from the bande ok death / ryod
Pe ae

m 0 8

ethanckhes therfore vnto che Lozbe : Foz UA
eis kynde harted / a bis mercy endureth fo2
euer. H all deuoute men / ſpea e good or the
33
vm / andgeue bpm thanckes/ Coz his mercy
endureth wozdde without ende.


The ſtoꝛy ot Su⸗


the Loder bzarle him / a lethim vpkoz euer. ,


O pelpahtenynges andcloudes  (peake

l heiden W hen meren
plozeuer.

OD lete the earth ſpeane good of p Lo e:

pee let it pʒayle him / and fet him vy koz euer.


O pe moũtarnes and hylies / cpeane good


: Sethe 4 08e bare in and esha vp of


uer. —
Hal regrene thynges vponche earth⸗
Gdate good of che Loyde w arte bim / s fee
him bp ko euer. 2 8
Opewelles / cpeake good of the L onde
pꝛaple him / and ret him vp foz euer.
W pe ſees and llolides / cpeake good of the
Lope: pꝛayſe him / and fet him bp fox euer.
Dye toalles and all chat ipue inche wa
ters (peatie good of the Lozde: praplehym/
and let him ppfoz euer.
Dail pe koules of g ape cheane good ot
fle Londemparte him / o ſet him by ko euer.


Now when the people came agapne at.
ter noone / Sutanna went into her boul
dez oicharbe to walhe Che elders leyng

this / that tye wet inda rie / d walcked hep


5


Rheltoive of Sulaunna,


burnedfoziuteover/ pec theß were mntolt


Out of their wittes / call downe thetr exes /
that ther cwuldnot le heauẽ / ner remembꝛe⸗
7 God ig a rygbtuous iudge. Foꝛther were
och woũded ww the loue or her / nether durſt
one ſheweanother his greke. nd koz came /
they durtt not tell herchetr ioꝛdrnate lult /
Pat wolde larne haue had to do wyth her.
et theylaped warte koꝛ her earneſtiy front
dave todape / that ther myght (at the let)
haue a kyght ok her. And the one layde to the
other: dp lett bs goohome / koꝛ it is drner
tyme. Sothey went their wape from her.
Whenthep returned agapne / they came
together / enqueryng out matter betwirte
Wacker Che arne Sepa n
ed luſt. appo a
when theymight take Dulanna alone.
Ichappened allo p cherlpred oute a con ·
ueniẽt tyme, when the went forth to wathe
(as her maner was) a no body with her / but
two mardẽs / a thought to wath her leite in
the garden / koꝛ it was an hote ſealon: And
there was not one perlon chere / excepte che
two elderg / had hyd thé flues / to beholde
her. Do che fapde tober mapdens: go ket me
ople and lope / a Mut the oꝛcharde doze / that
cee me. And they drd as che bad
em / and (ut the oꝛcharde doe / g went out
em ſelues at a backe doꝛe / to fet the thing
the had cömaunded but Soutanna knewẽ
not / p the elders tape there bpd within Mow
when the mapdens were gone koꝛth / 6 two
elders gat them vpꝛa ranne bpd her / ta ping:
now the oꝛcharde dozes are ſhut / that no ma
can le bs: we haue a luſt vnto the / therfore
confent vnto vs / and iye wech vs.

D Akthou wylt not / we ſhall bꝛynge ateſti⸗
montallagaynt the: that there was a ponge
kelowe with the / and that thou halt tent a+
waype thy mapdés krö the toꝛ the caule.
SDulanna ſyghed / and lapde: Alas. J am in
trouble on euerptpoe. Though kolow pour
mxnde / it wyl be mydeath:and ve F content
not vnto vou I can not efcape poure hãdes.

ell / it is better Coz me / to Fall into youre

bande with

Inthefyay


to Sozchardedoze/
and fmote it open. Qow whe the leruattes
or che houle bee Kane ozcharde


F ſe what


Sche matter was. Do whenthe emders tole
chem the feruauntes were greatig acbamed /
£03 wp / there was neuer loch a repoꝛte mac
fetes orb on 3

e 4
two elderz came aico / full of mptcpeuous


wii.


pmagtnactög agapngt Sufanng / tobꝛvnge
her vnto death /d Cpake thus before the peo ⸗
ie: Dende fo; ulanna the daughter of
elchias /Foachisns wyle. And immedtatiy


they lent koz her. Somecame ther father
g mocher / her chbldze a all ber kpnrede⸗
Sulanna was a tender perkon ates
lous kapꝛe of face. Chertoꝛe the wycked me
COmaundedtotake ofthe clotyes kröhertace
(foz the was couered)§ at p leeſt / iher mane
Co be latick ved in her beutie, chen her erẽdẽ /
vee a all they 6 une we her / begane to wepe⸗
Chele two e ders Rode bp in the myddelt
okthe people / g laped their handes vpon che
heade al eau He) wepte / and loned
bptowardeheauen /kozherherte hada lure xeuttl erich
truſt in the Loꝛde. And the elders larde: A8
we were walckynge in the oꝛcharde alone /
this woman came in wythher two maydẽs:
whom the Cent awa ye from her / and ſparred
the oꝛcharde doꝛeg. noith that / a vonge kelom
(which there was hyd)canie vnto her / g laye
with her. As £07 vg / we ſtode in a coꝛner ot ß
oscharde. Ind wie we lawe this wickednes /I
we Hine to her:a perceaued / ptheyhadmed⸗
led together. But we coulde not hoſde hym /
kozhe was ſtronger then we: thus he opened
Auch gat him awape. How thé we had
kane this wom / we athed her / what ponge
kelowe thys was: but the wolde not tell ps.
Chis is che matter / we be witnelles of the
lame. Che conten Coste beleued them / as
thole U were the elders a iudges ot the peo⸗
le /a to they condemned her kodeath. Sue
nna crped out w a loude vopce / a lapde: D
enerlattyng God, thou lercher of lecretes / deutig. e
thou ß knoweſt allthrnges atoꝛetheycome
to patte:thot woteſt / Scher haue bone kalle
wytnes agarnſt me:¢ behoſde / J muſt dye /
where as I neuer dyd enp loch chynges / as
thele men haue malictoudpimiẽted agapnt
me. Ind the Lozde herde her bopce. Foꝛ whe
che was led Forth todeath / the Londe tapled
bp the lpꝛete of a ponge chrlde / whoſe name
was Dantel“ which cryed wa loudeboyce: gy
Zam cleane Ed this bloude. Chen all pe-. neg.!
ple turned them towarde him / a lapde: hat actu.
meane thele wordes P thoubalt Mpohez Wa- of
niel ope in the myddeſk or the a fad dre ve
Coch tooles / O ve chridzen of Jrael / chat ye
can not dilcerne: Yehaue herẽ condemned a
daughter of Ilrael vnto deach / and ũnowe
not the trueth wherkaꝛe: o lt oniudgment
Ae ther haue Spoken kalle wrenelie


Wherkoze che people turned agayne in all
the halte. Andthe elders (that is / the pꝛynci⸗
pall heades) larde onto him: come ſytdowne
hete amonge vs / and ewe bs this matte;
keyng God hath seu eas ler


b. ned. ag an eder. Ind Wahiel tapde vñto che: Put


Erd. exis


thele two alpde one kram another / and then
Wall A beave thẽ. rohen they were put ature
der one krom another / he called one ot them /
andlapde vnto h ym: O thou olde canckerde
carle / chathaſt vledthx 2 le the ie


pie ſedthe innocent / @letten the gyltre go
e where as pet the Loꝛd lapeth: Che inno·


a
Det. Fd. cone g vightuous fe chou age nat. Weltha /


pr thou hat lene her / tell me vnder what tre


kaweſk thou themetaliyng together He an⸗ 5


Twered wunder a Molberp tree and Daniel
kapde:berp well now thou ipeſt euen vpon
chyne head. Lo the ntedatiger of the Lobe
bats receaued che lentence of hym / to cut the
ntwo. Chen put he him alzde / a called foz
the other / e Cane onto hym : O thou fede of
Eanaan / but not ot Juda: Fapꝛenede hath
dylceaued the / glut Subuerted thyne
herte Chus dealte ye afoze with the daugh⸗
ters of Arael / and therekoz teare) contented
vnto pon: but the daughter of Juda wolde
not abpoe poure wyckednede. How tell me
chan onder what tree dydel chou take the /
ſpeakynge together? He ankwered: inder a
omgranate tree. Then tarde Waniclonto
um Gery wel not tou leptt allo euẽ v
thrne head. Che mellaunger or the Lo
Kandeth wayting with che werde to cut the
in two / and to lave vou both.
with chat / all the whole multitude gaue
a greate woute / and pꝛapled God /
delpuereth thé that put their trult in


„ alwa
iu. a. bim. Amdcher came poche two elders ( wyõ


Dantel had conupcte wibeir awnemouth:
that they hadgeuen kalle witnelle) a deulte


Woute. rin b. with cheni eus linewrle ag they wolde haue


Piouer. .A. done wich their nepght


bourelle: pee they dyd
accoꝛdynge to the ia we ot goes /a put thẽ
todeath. Thus the innocent bloude was fas
Wöchen elch zone nne gin
7 agen
er huchande and all che kynvede:that there
was no dichoneſte kounde inher. From
that dape fozth was Daniel had
W
the kyght ot
people.
che ende ofthe lo:
N en
e ＋ a.


not who is this/p eateth op the!


pch - copdpngeas thou batt fa


The Koy of Bel,


The ſtoꝛy of Bell /


dot; e. xi.
nee aa
the Latrn.


pete was at Pabrlon an z
mage / called Sel sand there


¥3) @ tyre greate pottes of wyne.
SSS pm dyn the konge wozthip

ym felt /a wende dapiveto hon ourbpm:but
Daniel woschyppedhis awne God. Andthe
fiyng lapdvnto him: why doſt not thou woz⸗
Weppe Bel⸗ He ancwered g lapde: Becaule


J ware not wozchyppe thynges 6 be made Deuteréig.c

wih landes, but the pupnge Goo wörch ere

maße heauen a earth / and bath power ppon weuce vit,
fapde vnto htm: thinckeſt gar .


all flech. Che by
pope Bell is a ixuynge God: Oz ſeiſt
au not how moch he eatech and derncketh
ener dape: Dantel impied / z larde: O Kyng
dilceaue not chr lelk this is but made of clare
within / e of metall without / nether cateth
„ bench Andres ny K calldtt
0
bis prettes/e Ade neo ache en)
fe
ve hall dye: but pt pe can vertptvetue that


Beleateth them / chen Daniel Wall dpe / Cozxent.sptigers


Sue (poke bi b agaynſt Sel. And

aniel lapde onto ai de abe 15 4
Che Pꝛelles o
Bel were. xx. belpde their wyues a chploze.
Andthe kyuge wente with Daniel in tonche
temple of Bel. Do Beis pꝛeſtes larde: L/
we wyll go out / a let thou the meate there
O kynge)a poure in the wyne:then Hutt &
doze kalt / and leale it with thyne awne figs
net: and to moꝛow when thou commeſt in / ve
chou kyndeſt not / chat Bel bath eaten vp all /
we wyll kufkre death: oz els Bantel / p bath
Iped vpon va. Che pzeſtes thought thẽ ſeltes
ture pnough / fo: onder the altate they had
made a pꝛeuꝝ intraunce / there wente ther
in euer / and ate vp what there was.

So when they were gone fozth / the
tet meates befoze Bel. Daniel badcos
maunded bps feruauntes to bzynge adhes
and trete he lylted thozow out ail che tẽpie /
that the hynge mygbt ie. Chen wente
out sand ſparred the doze / ſcalyng it myth


kynges cygnet / and lo de parted. In the nighe
came the pꝛeſtes with their . ——
dꝛenlas ther were wonte to do) and ate and
dꝛoncke bp all Anthe moꝛnyng be tymes at
che bꝛeake of the dape / the kynge arole / and
Daniel w him. And the krng ard: Lene


ren gs
dhe de we the / anddelyuered Bel into Daniel


cal


3


Ann of the Dragon,


atetheleales whole petetze anlwered: Yee
O byna/they be whole. as lone as he
bad opened the noze the Byng ioked onto the
dultare / gerxed with aloude vopce: Greate
ert thou O Bel and wich the is nodilceate.
Chen laughed Daniel /andhelde the kung
that he chulde not go in / and tarde: Beholdẽ
e pauemẽt/marcke well / whole foteley-
pes arethele: Che ung larde: Ale the tote
eee ee
§ erfore the kynge wasangrye / @
? we pretes widget mne amc en


and they ſwewed him the peux dozes / where


they came in / a ate vp loch es as were
bs B aultare.Foz l dale che k.


power / which deſtropedhim a his temple.
Andin that lame place there was a great
Nagõ / which thepot Babylon woꝛchypped.
And $ hyng lapde onto Daniel: lapect thou /
that this is but a God of metall alfocto / be
lpueth he eateth a duncketh:ſo p thou canſt
notlape / that he is no lxuynge cod / therkoze
woꝛchipe him. Dantel tapdẽ onto the yng:


nude. Jwbll wozſbipethe Lose my God / he ls


krue Ipupnge Gad: as oz thys/ he is not the
Sodok lte. But geueme leaue( O krng) a
9 Halloettrove thisdzago without twearde
02 Gal. Che kynge lade. J geucthe leaue.
Chen Waniel toke pitch / katte and hearrre
Tompes eee put inde ener
lompes thetof: e

mouth. lo thedyagon batt ln fonder: and
Daniel Cayde: lo / there is he whom ve toz+


Qipped.twhen thep of Babylon herde that
E hep of Sabylonh we 0


cher tone greate indignacian / a gath
together agaynſt the kynge / larinze: Che
Ange is become a Jewe allo / he dee
ſtroped Bel / be hath Gapne the diagon / and
put the preltes to death. Do they came to ß
kung /g lapde let vs haue Daniel / oꝛ els we
Binden n nchen

Now wien the kyng lawe / chat they rut.


dafl ble. hen in fofoze bpon him / chat neceflite con


Ararnedhim he delruered Mantel vnto the:
which caſt him in to the lxons denne / where
he was lere dapes. In the denne there were
keuen lone and theyhad geuen them euer
Dave two bodyes andtwo wepe: which then


were not geuẽ them / Ether mynht deuoure bi


Chere was in Jewry Pꝛophete called
Sabin, wich bd gbr pegel
bzed ina depe platter / and was goynge in to
che kelde/ koz to b. itto g mowers. But
the Angel of the Loz layne onto Abacuch:
o karp the meate that thou balk into Ba⸗

on / onto Daniel / whych is in the Irons
denne. And Abacuch tape: Lose / I neuer


tawe Bab plan: gas tor che denne / Aünowe


*


bpthetoppe / and bare him by ß hearre ol s

Vabelt vpe denne ar wynde let him in
rio bpd che denne. And Abacuch cried,

fapinge:D Daniel thou ſeruaunt ot God,


baue. take $ breakiefat that Gobhath fentth den the


the, And Mantel fapde: O God / halt thou
EHoupbebporime=tnel thou neuer faplett
en tat loue the. So Daniel arole and
ate: andthe Angel of the Lorde fete Abas
tuch in his atone place agapne immediatiy.
Upon the feuenth dape / the krnge wente c
to bewepe Daniel: and when he came tothe
denne / he loked in:andbeholde / Daniel fat
inthe m rddeſt ol che Lyons. Chen cried the
kyng with a loude bopce / laing: Greate at,


tyou/ O K onde Sopot Panel: che meme gent &


bpm out ob the denne. A8 Foz thote that were


the caule of his deftruccpon / he dyd caſt thé wani. vi


into the denne / and they were deudured in a
moment befoze his face, 80

Alter this / wzote the kynge onto git peo⸗
ple / kyntedes and tungeß that diwelt in all
countrees lapenge: peace be multppiped ib
vou. r comaufdement (final the domt⸗
non of my realmeichat men keare and fade


inawe of Dantels Hod taz bets the lpülng z e e


God / whych endureth elter: bs hyngdome'


abpoety bncozrupte / and bis power is euer une l e

laſtynge It is he that can delpuer and laue: cal. h Bs

hedoth wöders and maruclous woꝛckes in lee. ru. o
beauen g in earth / oz he hach fancy Want c


Daniel from the power ol
e Lrons.


echte ende ofthe Stove ot bei.


owe Almightie, God
Fot oure kathers Abzaham /
Ilaac g Jacob / a oF ö tyahi
wege ſeade of the: which bal
By Made beaué and earth / w
Dall g oznament therok wh
ened the lee by the woꝛde ol
maundemẽt: which halt chutte vp the
andbatt Cealedit fo; thy teavtull ¢ laudablt
name / which all men feate/and tremble be.
Core he far oF oe Seer | Sa Coe OE nS g
ol chr thzeatnynge the which is impoztable
to tbnnerg. But the mercy 100 pꝛomes ig
greate and vnlearchable: fo7 thou arte the
Lone God moſt hyghe / aboue all the earth /
longetufrynge / and excrdynge mercyſie /
repenta lt to d malrce or men. chou Lo
Hh. li. alter


3


tenot.chentve Angen ok ö. Losde toke him reh. by l


h yal bone ....
them whple be was vet alpuc. Do Alexdder pmivg.
rapgned rij. peare/ ethendyed; hel
Akter bys death kel the krngdome vnto
bis pꝛinces / they optaxned it ẽuerꝝ one in
his rowme / & cauled thẽ Celues to be crow
ned as kingesꝛand fo dyd their childyen alter
them manz veares g moch wyckedneſee in
aun ee n 3 2
rote / noble Antiochus the tonne t ach.
of Auttochug ning which padbenca rler ga


at Bome)e he ralgned nthe C. xxxvij. dear
nebel Gen benen
fequiting goodne o ad. Fhaue linn
Ko haue finned/etnow mpnetniquitie, wee!
Hibetzie the by prayer: Word forgeue mes their counceil /fapenge: Lett vs go emake a
ongetie me @elitope merit toi tpn tt counaunt with che Heathen / fare rounde
quitpes / nether do thou alwapte remembꝛe sboutebs:foz fence we departed kromthem
mpne cuelles to punpch them / but taue me we haue had moch loꝛow. Sothys deupce
(which ambnworthyatterthygreatmercy: Pleated chem well and certayne of d people
and J wil peaple the cuctiattingly/ coke bponthé fo7 to go vntaß kynge / wh
allthe dayes or my lpte koꝛ gaue themlypcence to do atter the odinaumce
the vertue ot heuen pap, of the Heathen. Chenlet they bpan ope lcole
che / o bnto che (at Jerulalem ot the lawes of the Heathens
elögeth glo⸗ Etwerenomoze circuncpſed: but Cosfoke the
rie / wozide Holy Testamente /a tornedthem leiues to S
with oute ende. Heathen / a were cleane Colne to do myichete
Amen. o


hyngdome / he wente aboute to op-
boke of


he fayze beutye of wemen was chaunged:
the bꝛpdegrome andthe ugpoe tobe them to
Mournpnges the lande ano rhole that dwelt


Alterchy goodies batt pzomered tepertaun⸗
ce ps che kempupon ok kynnes:and thou that
arte che God of che ryahtwes Hak not put
kepentaunce to the rygbtwes / Abꝛaham
Itaac / and Jacob / onto chem that =
not lynned agaynſtthe: Wut becaute A haue
kynned aboue the nombze or che landes of &
cee / and that mpne iniquittegare multiplied
gam humbled with many bades of y20n/ +
Mee
e 7 aue Done euel beko
fiche gabhominactas ¢multppl


S Ae brouste tocontutton,
DV Attertwo pearesthe hyng tenthys chete
. Geh. b.. trealurer vnto p cpties of Juda / which came
to Jerulalem with a great multitude of peo⸗
bal anwenden he the onto them
ut all was dicceate:toꝛ wha they hadgeuẽ
hem credence / he kel foventy vpon the cytye /
Elmote it coe / and deſtroyed moch people of
(Hach. vb. b. Ilraell. And when he had kpopledthe cptpe )
. age, DElet pre ontt/ caltynge downeboutes and
(ah. lk. walles on euerp fyde.crbe wemen and theps


catel. Chen buylded they the caſtelot Dauid
with a great andthiche wall / a wichmightie
tow zes / and made it a Ezonge holde koꝛ thẽ.
Belpre all this they lett wyeked people and
vngodly men to kepe it / ſtoared it with wea ·
peng and bytales:gathered the goodes of Fez
rulalem / and layed them vp there: thus bes
came it a theupch caſtell.

And thys was done to tape waite ſoꝛthe
people that went in to the Sanctuary / and
€o2 the cruel deſtruccyon of Frac. chus

ep hedinnocent bloude on euerpfpde of §

anctuarp/anddefpled it: In lo moch that
the citelyns were kayne to dẽparte / and the
citye became an habitacpon of ſtraungers /
bepnge delolate of her awne fede / ko her
awne natpues were kayne to leaue her. Her
Sanctuary was clene waſted / her holx days
Cogn were tnrnedin to mouinynge / her Sabbas
Aus. dig. b. thes were had in derilpon / and herhonoure
brought to naugbt. Lone how great her glo
ty was a tore / lo greate was her conkulpon /
and her tope turned into loꝛow.
Antiochus allo the binge Cent out a come
million vnto allhys kyngdome / that all the
people chulde be one. Chen theylekt euerp
inan hrs lawe / and all the Heathen agreed
tothe cõmaundement ok kynge Antiochus:
Yeemany of the Icraelites contentedthere
önto / offcringe nto Idols / and dekpunge §
Sabbath. Bothe kynge Antpochus kent
18 mellaungers wyth bys commifpon vnto
erulalem / to all the cptyes ot quda: that
they chulde kolowe the laweg or the Heathẽ /
and fozbad ether burntoſlerynge meatotke⸗
ringe oꝛ peaceoſteringe to be made in ß tem⸗
ple of God / a that there chude no Sabbath
nerhye keaſt dape be hepte:but cormmauded /
thatthe Sanctuary and the holp people of
Ilraell chulde be dekyled.
Hecommaunded allo that there chulde be
fete vp other altares temples a Fools; ta of=
kre vp twynes fet a other vnclẽne beaſtes:
chat men wude leaue heir chrld yen vncir ·


tapne $ landẽ of te allo / that he (
baue the dominpon oktwo realmes. wipon
chis entred he into Egypte wa ſtronge book
with charrettes / elephantes / bo; and &
Greate nombze of chtppes /andbeganne to
warre agavnſt Ptolomy the kyngẽ ole gy⸗
. But Ptolomiy was akraped orhym / and
ed: and man of bps people were wounded
to death. Thus Antiochus wane manpſtrö⸗
ge cities / and tone awape greate good dut ot

che lande ol Egypte.
And atter that Introchus had imptten
Egypt / he turned agaynẽ in the Exltij.peare
/e came bp to Ferus


x) The fyatt 4.


After the deeth of Alexander the Eynge af Maree


donla / Antiochus taketh the yngdome. Wang of the
cheldzen of $fvael make couenaint wich ehe Sentp⸗
des Antiochus tubduech Bgpptes Jerutalem vnte bys
ompnpon. Jerulalem bemgeburnt maketh lawes ol
berawneandforbpodech to kepe Sodes lawes. Ane
gde pen e che aulter ol God.
¶ he tyr chapter.
ter that Alexãder the
conne of Philyppe / kynge of
Wacedonta wente forth ok p
ende of Ceteim ) adlewe as
le hyngeotthepertpans ¢


faut,


rth:going thoꝛowto ß endes of the woꝛlde

gettrng many Cpoples ok the people: Into
moch / p the woꝛlde ſtode in greate awe ot
bim / a therfore was he pꝛoude in his herte.
Now wha he hadgathereda mightye ſtrõge
boot / tubdued d landes a people Heber: his
princes / co 6 they became trybutaryes onto
himhe kel lich. And when be perceaued that
be mutt nedes bye he called for bys noble
eltatd which had bene bꝛought vp with him


golden
ok the temple / and bake Downe all. He tone
allo the lyluer a golde / the precious Jewels
and the lecrete treaames that he toünde.
And when he had taken awape an together /
cauted a greate murthur of men / and lo ful⸗
killed his malicious pꝛrde / he departedinto
awne lande.

Thus there arole greate elle and
miert in al the lande of Acrgel. Che princes ©
g che elders ot the people mourned / von
ge men andthe mardens were 1 hoe


Ok the Mathabers.


therin / was mowed: foz allche boule of Jaz by


childꝛentoke they captiue / a leda wape their thi


„lt.
cuncpfed,to dekplethelr toules with all thas.
ner ot vnclenneüe e abhominactons: 6 they
mrgyt co Forget the lawe / a chaunge an the
olp Opdinaunces of Gov:« that wholdeuer
wolde not do accozdinge tothe commaunde⸗
ment of hing Antiochus / wude ture death
Inwkemaner commaunded he thozow out
all his realme / and lett rulers ouer the peo⸗
ple / loꝛto compell them to do thele thinges /
commaundinge the cyties of Juda to do la⸗
critice vnto Idols. F

Chen wente the people vnto the heathen
byheapes, fopfoke che lawe ol the Loꝛde / a
cömitted moch euel in the lande: pee and chaz
ced outthe fecrete Ilraelites / which hadhrd
em elues in cozners and preur places.
Che xb. dape ofthe moneth Calleu / in the
Cxlo. peare / ſett kynge Antiochus an abho⸗
minable Idol or delolacton vpon the altare
ol Gad, and they buplded altares thoꝛow
out all the cytpes of Juda on euerp lyde /
befoze the dozes ol the houles / and in the
Aretes: where they bzent incente / and dyd la⸗ Jere xtuit.
crpkyce. And as foꝛ the bones of the lawe of
Sod / they bꝛent them in the kyꝛe and rent
them in peces. i hat lo euer he was that
had a boße ofthe teſtament of the Lord fon
by hem / pee wholdeuerendeuored hmlelk
to kepe the lawe ot the Lozde / the kynges
commaundement was / that ther Wulde put
bymtodeath. And thoꝛowhys auctoꝛite they
executedthele thinges euerp moneth / bp
the people of Atraell that were kounde
the eytyes. G

Che lpue andtwentye dave ok the moneth d egaeh vt. la
what tynie as they dyd kacrikice vpon the ale
tare which ſtode in the ſteade of the altare ot
che Loꝛde J accomynge to che commaunde⸗
ment ok kenge Antpochus / they put cer⸗
tapne wemen to death / whpch had cauled
tuelr chuld en to be circctled: Mot onlpthat/
but theyhanged vp the chyldzen by the nec⸗
kes thozow out alltheirhoules / and ũewe e
3 9 8 16

ere there manp of the people ot ge ⸗

raell rhych determed in them felues / that
cher wolde not eate vncleane thonges: but
chole rather to ſullre death / then to be dekiled
Woncleanemeates. So becaulechey wolde
not bzeake the bleſſed la we of God / they we
recruellpllapne. And this great tyꝛannpina
crealed very toꝛe vpon the people of ictaell.


Che mournyng ok cMathathiah and his fonnes fol
the dettruscyon: che hen e rekuſe tod
lacrpkice vnd Jooles. Che zele of Hiathathiah ko
lawe of Hod. Thepare layne a wpl tot keighe
Agapne beraule oF che Sabbath ape. Wathachtah ope
mige commaundeth His fonnes to Mpche bp the worde
Of Bod after the erampte of the kat ers,
Che. j. Chapter.


0b. 1. In


The lyꝛſt boke


f a O chotedayes there dyd lande vp
b s fonne ol Sr⸗
F


loatig)érom Terulalem / edwelt

bpon the mount of Modin / a hadb. lonnes:
900 called Goddis: Symon / called chalt:
udas / ocher wile called IHachabeus:Clea-
zer / other wyle called Tbaron: and Jona⸗
thas / whole lurname was Apphus.chele
lawe the euell / that was done amonge the
eople of Juda g Jerufale. And Pathathtah
den Wöls me / alas 5 euer I was boꝛne⸗/
ko le this milerp ok my people /a the prteous
deſtrucctö ol p holy cite. a thus to ſpt lo eil /
it being delpuered in to h hades or Senet,
er Sanctuary is come in tothe power ok
vaungers her temple is / as it were amanß
bath loft his good name. Her precious oꝛna·
mientes are carped awayẽ captyue / her ole


men are llayne inthe ltrettes / a her voge me wü kepeß couenafit / let himkolowe me. o gaga. geen


are kallen thoꝛow ß cwearde ofthe enempes.

What people is ĩt / that hach not Come pol⸗
ſellgon in her kingdome: Oz who hath not
Gotten Come ok her lpoples⸗ All her glozy is
tahenawape. dhe was a Quene / a now the
is become an bandmapde . Beholde oure
Sanctuary / dure bewtpe a hondure is wa⸗


ned awape / decpled by the Gentiles, what the baolt / whych was at Jerulalẽ in the cy: S


belpeth tt bs the to lpue: Ind Mathath rah
rente his clothes / he a his Connes/@ put lack
cloth spon them / amourned very ſoze.
Chen came themen thither whych were
Cent ol hyng Antiochus / to compell Coch as
were fled in to the cytie ol Modyn / ko to do
laczilice a to burne incenfe vnto Fools /a to
foꝛtake the lawe of God. So / many ok the
people of Ilraell concented a enclyned onto
thé / hut Mathathyah a his ſonneg remap⸗


ned ſtedkact. hen kpake the commigvoners maundement /to delle the Sabbath dape. Jolutc.’


ol kyng Antiochus / and lapde onto Matha ·
thiah: Thou atta noble man / ok hre reputa ·
cyon andgreate in this citpe/baupnge fayze
chlldzen and bzethzen. Come thou cherkoze
kirlt / and kulklll the bynges cõmaundement /
Ipke as all the Heathen haue done / pee a the
men of Juda / and loch as remapne at Jeru⸗
kalem:ſo chalt thou and thy childzen be in the
hynges fauoure / and envyched wyth golde /
kyluet a greate re wardes.
Mathathtah ancwered / and ſpake with a
loude bovce: Though all nacpons obere the
kyng Untiochus / and fal awaye euery man
fed kepyng the lawe of their fathers:though
thep cölente to his commaundementes / pet
wyl a mylonnes and my bꝛethzen / not kall
Fro the lawe ok oure fathers. God koꝛbyd we
chulde : that were not good fo? vs / that we
Guide fozlake the lawe and oꝛdynaunces of
God / and to agre vnto the commaundement
ok kynge Antiothus. Therkoꝛe we wel do no


crete /nether bzeake che katuteß of
. 80 . And when he
hadlpoken there wo des / chere came one OF


“the Jewes / whych open ly in che kraht oral


dpd kacrikpce vnto the Fools vpon che aulter
in the cptie of Modyn / aco dyng to the Ben-
a OE a peda e wethys / itgreued
athathpah ta
bom at the herte /fothatbys rapnes woke c
withall / and pe ‘wzath kindled foz beryzele
ol the lawe. Myth that 15 ue athpppe
forth / and kylled the Few beide the aulter:
Pee and llewe the kinges commiſloner that
cöpelled him to do lacrpkpce / a dellropedthe


aulter at the fame tymestoch a zele had he vn Hume. wle .


to p lawe of cod / like as Phpnebes dyd vn ·
60 Han tonne ot Dalomi. And Matha⸗
thiah cried with a loude vopce thozow the ct
tie / la n holo is teruent in the lawe / a


he and hys tonnes fled in tothe mountarnes
Klekall that euer ther had inthe cite. Ma ⸗
ty other godly men alto departed into p wil⸗
dernelle wyth their chyldzẽ their wyues and
their catel / a remayned there toz the trranx
increaced lo ſoʒe vpon them.

How when the kynges feruauntes/ and


tie of Dauid herde / F certarne mẽ had bꝛo⸗
nen the kynges commaundement and were
gone their wave to the wyldernelle in to le⸗
crete places / and that there were many de ·
parted alter them ther tolowed 1 — them
to kygbt agaynt them in the Sabbath dare
g lade: ns yll ve pet rebell? Get you hence a
do the commaundement of Ryng Antiochus
and pe Hal lyue. hey antweted: nde wil not
go koꝛth / nether wyll we do the kynges com⸗


Chen begine ther to kygbt agaynct thẽ ne⸗
Uerthelelle they gaue them none other ane
ſwere / nether catt they one ſtone atthem nez
made kaſt their preuy places / but — 15 e
will dye al in oure innocener / heauẽ a earth
wall teſtikte with vs that ve put vs to beat
wrongeoully.chusthepfoughtagaynt th

bponthe Sabboth a llewe both men ecas


tell! cheir mpues g their childzẽ / tothe nome ⸗
be joutande pei


‘ople,
when Machäthtah and hys krẽdes herde
is / they mouined ko them right coe / and ©
lade one to another: It co be chat we alldo
as our bꝛethꝛẽ haue done / fight not ko; our
lpues a £07 dure lawes agapnt $ Heathen:
then chall they the Coner rote vs out ol the
earth. So they concluded amonge them fele
ues at the lametime / ſayenge: Mhatloeuer
he be that commeth to make battayll ry
vs vpon the Sabbath dave / we wyll

agapnſt him / z not dye al /as our bzethzen B


Ok the Mathabees, It


were murthured fo hanougp. upon toys
came the Synagoge of the Jewes onto the:
ſtronge men of Flrael/ all loch as were ker⸗


uent in the lawẽ. And all they chat were led Sd


koꝛ perlecucpon / came to helpe them / and to
ſtande by them: In lo moch that they gathe
red anhooſt of men / and de we the wycked
Doers in their geloucz / and the vngodly men
in their wath. Some ofthe wicked led vn ·
tothe heathen / and elcaped.

Thus Mathathiah d his krendes wente
aboute / and deſtropedthe aulters / and cir⸗
cumcpled the chyldꝛen / that hadnot yet re⸗
Ceaucd circumciſiõ: as many as they founde
within the coſtes of Ilrael:æ folowed migh⸗
ely vpon the chyldien ol pꝛyde / a this acte
pꝛol pered in their handes: In to moch / that
they kepte the lawe agaynſt the power of d
Gentiles and the kinges / and gaue not ouer
their dompnpon vnto wycked doers,

1 After thys when the tyme dyewe on lat /
that Mathathtah chulde dye / he lade vnto
bis Connes: Now is pꝛpde and perfecucpon
increaſed / now is the tyme of deſtruccpon g
wzathkull dylplealure:wherfoꝛe( O my lon⸗
nes) be pe feruent in the lawe / and ieoparde
vour lues foz the Ceſtamẽt ok the fathers:
call to remembzaunce what actes oure fae
chers dyd in their tyme / fo hall ve receaue
Greate honoure and an euerlaſtinge name.

Nemenrbze Abꝛaham / was not he founde
farthkull in tentacpon, and it was reckened


Sine. a pnto him forvightuoutnes? Joleph in tyme


ol hys trouble kepte the com̃maundement /
and was made a Lozde ol Egypt. Phinehes
oure father was fo keruent £02 the honoure
ok God / that he optapned the couenaunt of
an euerlaſtynge pꝛeſthode. Jolue koꝛ tulkil ·
dinge the woꝛde of God / was made the cap⸗
tapne of Atrael. Caleb bare recoꝛde befoze
the congregacid / and receaued an heretage.
Dauidãlſo inhys mercykull kyndnelſe / op⸗
tapned the trone of an euerlaſtynge kyng⸗
dome. Eliah beinge gelous and feruent in >
lawe / was taken bp in toheauẽ. Panantas /
Alarias and Milael remapned ſkedkaſt in
kapth / and were deltuered out ol thetyze.
ipke maner Daniel beynge vngvitre / was


kaued krom the mouth of the Lyons.


Andthus ve mare conlpdꝛe thoꝛow out
Wallages fence the wonde beganne that who


Pirie, loeuer put their truſt in God / were not ouer


come. Feare not pe then the woꝛdes ol an vn⸗
godly man, koꝛhys glozpis but donge and
wozmes to dape is he fet vp / and tomoꝛow
is he gone: foꝛ he is turned into earth / and
bys niemoꝛvall is come to naught. werkoze
O my ſonnes take good hertes onto vou / a
Quyte youre feluesipke men in the lawe:foꝛ
e de do the thynges that are commaunded


pou in the lawe ok the L ode youre God /
wall optapne greate honoure therin, be
And beholde / know that poure brother
PINON is a man OF wyldome: ſe 5 pegeue
eave orto hym alwape / he halbe a father
bnto pou. As for Judas Machabeug / he
bath euer bene myghtye and ftronge fro bps
youth op:let him be poure captapne / @ oꝛdꝛe
thebattapll ok people:thus Wall ve bzinge
vnto pou all thole that fauoure the lawe / e
le that ve auenge the wzonge of youre peor
ple/andrecompence the Heathen agayne /
applpe youre felues whole to the commats
dement ofthelawe. So he gaue them hys
bledynge/ and was laped bybys fathers: c
died in the C. &. lot. veare at Modin / where
bys lonnes burted him in hys läthers lepul⸗
Bald all Aran made greate lamentac von
Judas is made ruler ouer the . leth
Appolontus u Heron the ud n an n
ence OF Judas towarde Pod. Judas determynetb
to kyght agaput L plias / whom Antiochus und made
taptapne ouer his Jad, Ehe nager abſteyners.
che. ij. Chapter.


55


tobe bp Judas Wachabeus 1


his fathers ſteade /a all bis hꝛe·
5 chr helped him: and dpd all they d,


ole phtis cap:
0 l 0 ,


hathelde tb bps father / g fought anti.


wich cherefulnetfe Foz Ffracl.SooFudag gat
bis people greathonoure: He put ona belt
plate as a giaunte /g araped hym lelle with
his harneſke and dekended the bote withhys
lwearde. In his actes he was iyne a Lon /
and as a pos whelpe roaringe at his pave,

e was an enempe to the wycked / a hunted
them out: and bent vp thole that vexed bys
people: Do that bys enempes fled fo? keare
behrm / and all the wozchers of bngodlpnes
were put to trouble: loch jucke and pꝛolpe·
xxte was in his hande. This greueddpuerle
kyngs / but Jacob was greatipretopled tho⸗
row bps actes / and he gatt hymlelk a greate
name fo euer. i

He wente thoꝛow the eytyes of guda / des
fropenge the bngodlp out or then / turnyng
awape the wꝛath trom Irraeil / and recea⸗


In uxnge loch as were oppielled: and the kame


okhüm wente vnto che bttemoſt parte of the
earth. chen Ippollonius (a pꝛynce of Sr⸗
tla) gathered a myghtye greate hook or the
Heathé ¢ out of Samarta / to kyght agarnſt
Itraell. iwhych when Judas perceaued / he
wente koꝛth to mete hym / kought wyth hym:
Cewe him / anda great multitude with bim /
che remnaũtelled/ he tobe their lubſtaũce
Judas allo tone Appollomug awne twear-
a fo pew 5 all 5 lpke longe. 4

eron another pꝛynce of Spt.
rid) herde fave / that Judas had gathered bn-


tohymthe congregacyon and church or che B


Bbh. b.  fayeptult


Espthfull be karde J woot The fy,
5
0
vm / as manp as haue delpyled the kenges


ut boke


wherlope he was heu in his ininde / and . agach. vu


thought to go into Pertides / to to take trie
butes ot the lande / z lo to gather moch mos
hepe, Do he lett L yctas (a noble man of the
fpnges bloude) to duerle the Ernges bulp⸗


wabtye nelles / from the water Euphꝛates vnto the


th

hoot ofthe vngodle / to ſtande by hym and
to be auenged ok the chyldzen or Icrael. And
whenther came npe onto Bethozon/ Judas
wente forth agaynt the with a mall com⸗
np. And wie bys people tawe loch a great
oot betoꝛe them / they layde vnto Judas:
ow are we ablelbeinge fo kewe) to keghe
agarntt Co greate a multitude and co 8
leinge we be lo were / and haue fatten all


thrs dave?
Out as fayde: It is a fmalt matter


{Be0F19-% fo many to be ouercome iw kewe: pee there


18 no dytkerence tothe God okheauen / to de⸗
ipuer bya greate multytude oꝛ by a mall


g. Waraxxnb companp:toꝛ the victoꝛx ofthe battell dan⸗


deth notin the multytude ol the book / but

Che trength cometh krom heauẽ. Beholde /
they come agaynſt vs wyth a pꝛetumptu⸗
ou and pꝛoude multptude / to deſtrope bs /
oure wyueg and oure chyldzen / and to robbe
bs. But we wyll fight koꝛ dure Ipucs / a fo;
dure lawes / and the Lozde hym elke chall
deltropethem bekoze dure kace: therkoꝛe be
not pe atraped ot them.


borders of Egypte: a to hepe well his lonne
Antiochus / tri he came agarne.
Scpeouerſhe gaue him halk or his holt
and Elephãtes / commytted vnto hym euerx
thynge of bys mende / concernenge thole
whych dwelt in Juda and Jerutalem: that
he cbulde lende out an arnipe agayntt thẽ /


e: ko deſtrope and to rote out the power of A-


rael andthe remnaunt ol Jerutalem: to put
out their memoztall from that place / to let
üraũgers fo2 to inbabyt all their quarters /
and to parte their lande amonge them. Thus


the hynge tokethe other parte of the hoolt / zol ern
anboepatted from Antioch (a cyte oF bps re· iw. rr aniß.


alme) ouer the water ol Euphzates / in the
bundzeth and. rlbij. yeare / and went thoꝛow
the 15 A

tonne of Woztminus/MPicanoz and Soꝛglas


wehe


A8 loone as he had ionen thele wo des / p


e leapte lodenippponthẽ. Thus was De⸗
benden an jie Hook to klight / and
Judas kolowed pon chem beponde Betho⸗
Ton vnto the . — de a0 fe agp
llapne eigbt hundꝛeth men o
ferypue fed nie che lande ofthe Phylpſtp⸗


nes. Chen all the Peathe on euerplpde were Pa


akraped ko: Judas and hys beethzen :fotbat
the rumoure of hym came vnto the kynges
eats To ue Gentples coulde tell of the
of Fut
D done hynge Antiochus yearde thete
tydynges / he was angry in his mindeswher-
foze he Cente toꝛth and gathered an hooſt ol
bys whole realme very wronge armpes: and
opened hys tveaturp / andgaue hys book a
peares wagyes in hande / commaundpnge
chem to be ready at all tymes. i
Heuerthelelle when he tawe / that there
was not mone ye hough inhys trealuries /
and that thoꝛow the difcoꝛde and perlecucy⸗
on / whych he made in landelto put downe
the lawes thathad bene ok olde tßmes) bys
cutomes try!
nyſbed: he feared that he was notable foz
tobearethe coftes and charges any longer /
nozto haue lochgyktes to geue lo liberally
as he drdakoꝛe / mozethen the kynges that
were befoze hem.


tes ok the lande were mys Y


Pi ode ‘alpen betoye
ADalpha was the place where cher ea


pflag chote into hem Ptofomy che l Bm at


ume vl. 4


zoüghetge Pꝛeſtes ozmamẽtes the kirſtün⸗

ae
eir dayes

petoꝛe God / and crped wyth a loude pope


towarde heauen / ſapinge: hat chall we do


Gwrth chele⸗ and wgriher wall we carpthem 5.


awape⸗Foꝛthe Sanctuarp is trode downe
and befyled/ typ peſtes ave come to heux·
nelle and dychonoure:and beholde / the Bea:
chen are come together foztodettrope bs.
Chou knowelt war ur land ymagen
agapntt vs. Bow map we fande befoze the/
-€xceptethou(D God) be oure helpe:

Shey blewe out the trompete alto wth
a loude vopce. chen Judas ödened captap⸗
nes ouer the people: duerthoulandes / ouer
hundꝛedeg / ouer kyktye / and ouer ten. But
AS Foz loch as buxided themhoules / marped
wrues plantedthem oynepardes and thote
that were kearkulihe commaunded thé eue⸗


e, eee accoꝛdynge to the lawe.


o the hook remoued / and vptched vyõ the
fouthtyde of Emmaug.

And Judas lapde: Anme youre Celues / be
ftronge(D my en) make pou ready
agaynſt tomoꝛowinthe moꝛnynge / that ve
mape fyght wyth thele people / whych are
agreed together to deftrope bs g ou re lanc·
tuarꝑ. Better is it foz vg to dye in batta pn /
ie fe be sid arg ar oute fanctuarp

1 „ Heuerthelelle / as
—— N


Cpuvasgoeth aga U ;
buff tbe te d rope gte be mlt.


rodenip. Now ß men
kepte the caltell were the conuepers ot
Chen arole 1 aad 8


thought
ok him
e
men one /


rope thts Wott betoze oure
face this daye:Andail § Heathẽ Mal know /
that itis @on bpm eite / which delpuereth o
ane pan Infeop eget 0

en the Heathen lykt bp their eyes: and.

when they tawe that they were comme?
agapnt chem / they went ont of their tentes
into the battapil: and they that were wyth
den ch aner the trompettes So ther
uckled together / and the Heathen were dil
comkpted and lied ouer the plapne kelde:but
che bynmott or them were gapne. Fozthey
folowed ppon them onto z faremoth / and in
tothe keldes of Idumea towarde Prot and
panna Cothat there were dayne ol them
pon a thze thoutande men. udas tur⸗
nedagarne wyth bis Woſte / fapde nto che
people: Be not gredy of the lpoples / we hae
ue pet a battapli to frahe: ko: Gorgias and
bis holt are here by bs in the mountapnes /
but ſtande pe fa agaynſt oure enempes /o
Woehe ben mare be fately take the


As Judas was ſpeaning thete woꝛdes /
there apeared one parte ot them pon cher
mount. But whan Soꝛgvas ſa we that they
oc his partpe were fled / and the tentes bꝛent
bp(foz by che tmokethey might vnderſtande
what was done)they perceaurnge this / we⸗
re berpfozeatvaped:and when thep late alfa
that Judas andbys hoot were in the keide
readp eo riche batapll/thep fled euerpchon⸗
N Heathen, tofportethe
0 ned agapne to cpople
tentes / where they gate moch golde and tl
ues precious ctones / purple a great riches,
Chus cher went home and longe a Plaime
ofthanketgeutnige and pravted God inhea ·
uen:toꝛ he is gracpoug / and hys mercy en ⸗


dureth kor euer: Andlo Ilraeli had a greate cn. cba.
Vll. e. riß s


victoꝛp in that dae.

Nowa the Heathen that elcapeb / came
and tolde L plpas euery thynge as it haps
pened. Whertoze Lplpas was foze afrayes
and greued in his mynde/becaute Acraelhad
not gotten loch mylkoztune as he ‘pone

*


6. Wach. a.


The tp


olg
weäpen


e A
together, and wente vp bnto m̃ount ron.
Now whan ther ſa we the Sanctuary laied


andgladnelle.
waſte / aulterdefplen/thedozes bꝛẽt vp / B ps pn


ſhzubbes growinge in the courtes / line ag in


fthoke


g. ichn


ice (ace
urntok⸗


nig


Li
anderes deere


Dall thehooſt gathered tem keptein


bupddedthervpthe


ountapnes/pee a B che pes mount Spor! pe wales and
deset ere baoken Dotone:@be? rente towzes . $ Gentiles


chelr clothes made great lamentacion, caſt


come and treade it do wne / as they drda toe. .
alches vpon their heades / kel downe lt to Cherkoze Judas kearmen a warte ait et


the grounde / made a greate nopte wyth the —— and madeit ſtronge / fo; codefende


ba spi onan ceeerer
en enced

t. Mt thote which were in the catkel
Haaser ctentea the soanctuaey, Sohe


e SHAnctuary/ and bare out tze delpled
piel toan oncleane place, pay
moch as the aulter of burntofferynges was

bnhalowed / he toke aduplement / what he


ethlura: that the people myght haue a re
cevtapne mento kuge agaynſt the Edomptes.

. ubas samme the Beatben at
chole pyeltes p were bndeefied / och as hab S eth Ob
plealure in the lawe ol God: and thepclen- becaule ie ay


bone te

Simon

joweth the eytxe or phon /
ew ir,


Ok the Machabees


beg ine to Maye and to pertecute certapne of


geh. rb. t. thẽ people. Then Judas fought agapnſt the
n. . ch


ol Elau in Idumea / d agãxnſt thole
Which were at Ara pathane of they dwelt


(GDF rounde aboute the Arachtes) where he em


andi popled a greate multytude ol them. He
thought allo vpon the malpce and vnkarth ·
fuines of chldꝛẽ ot Bean / how they were
alnare a ſtoppe vnto che people/a bowthey
laped warte koꝛtheminthehre wape:wher⸗
kozehe ſhut them bp in to towers / and came
onto them / condemned them / and bꝛent bp
their towꝛes / with all chat were inthem.
After warde wente he agarnſt the chri ·
dꝛen of Ammon / wherok he kounde a mygh ·
tye power ¢ a greate mult peune of people /
Sepecimotyy theit captapne. Bo heſtroke
many battapis with chem / whpch were dp-
{roped betoze hem. Ind when he had dayne
them / he wanne Gazer the cytxe / wyth the
townes belonginge iherto / and lo turned as
ne in to e wap. Che heathen allo in Ga
gathered the together / agaynſt the Il
raelites that were in their quarters to ape
them: but theplled toß cattell of Bacheman.
and tent letters vnto Judas and his bꝛethꝛẽ
layinge: Che Heathen are gatheredagaynſt
B bs on euer fyde / to deftrope v / a now they
make them koꝛ to come / and lape lege tothe
cattell/ wherunto we are ficd / and Eimothy
is the captapne of their holt: come therkoꝛe /
and delpuer bs out of their handes: fo there
{8 agreate multytude ok vs syne all ready.
Vee and oure bꝛethzen that were at Cubin /
are llapne a deſtroped (well nye a thoulande
men) and their wyues / their chyldꝛen and
their goodes haue the enempes led awape


captrue.

Whyle thele letters were vet a readynge /
beholde there came other melatigers krom
Galile / with renteclothes: which kolde euen
the tame trdynges / and layde / that they of
Ptolomaus/of Tyzus and of Sidon were
Gatheredagapnt chem / and that all Galilee
was kplled wpth enem res to dectroxe Pract
When Judas and the people herde this cher
came togetherla greate congregacyon)todẽ
upſe / what they might do koꝛ their bꝛethꝛen /
that were in trouble ¢ befeged of their ene:
mes And Judas larde nto Simo his bzo⸗
ther: chole the out certapnemen / and go dell
uerthr bzethen in Faltiee: As kozme and my
brother Tonathas / we wyll goin to Salaa·


2
iy,
to Simon he gaue thꝛe theutante men ez
to go into Galtice but à udas tym telie had
evght thoufante in E aſaadithim. 0

Ehen wente S mon in to Ealiler / and
Grobe dtuerle batein with be Heath: wd
hedilcomkpted and folowed vpon them vn.
to the pozte oF Ptoloinals „ Andthere were
Aapne of the Heathen allmock tj thoutande
men. So be coke $ Cpovies ofthein and ca ⸗
rledawape the Firaelites/that were in Gas
Ulee and Arbatiswyth their wpues / their
childꝛen and all that ther had / and bought
them in to Jew⸗ with greate planned u⸗
das Machabeus allo and his bꝛotherzona⸗
thas / wente ouer Joꝛdane / and trauapled. ij
bares fournep in the wyldernelle: Where the

ebrithees met them / and receaued them los
urnglt / and tolde the euerpthynge chat had
happened vnto their bzethzen in Galaadi⸗
thim / and how that man of them were be⸗
legedin Barala / Botoz / Alimis / Cacphoꝛ/
Wageth and Carnaimlallthele are tronge
‘walled and myghtie greate cyties) and that
they were kepte in other cytzes of Galaad
allo: g to mozow they are apopntedto bꝛige
their Holt onto thele cyties / io tale them
to wynne them in one dape.

So Judas and his holt turned in all the
hatte in the wyldernede ro warde Boloz / and
wanne the cylie ewe all che males with
Cwearde/tobe allcheir goodes / and lett fre
vpon the cytte. And in the nyght they tonne
thelr tourne pe kromthence / and came to the
caſtell. nd by tymes inthe moꝛnynge when
ther lobed vp / beholde / there was an innu⸗
merable people bearynge laders and other
inſtrumẽ tes ok warre / to take (he caltelland
to ouercome them.

when Judas ſawe that the battayn bee
ganne fand that the nopte theror wente vp a
range in to the heauen / and chat there was
Cogteatea ctype in the cptie: e lard onto his
holt: krght this daye ko poure bzethꝛen. Ind
focame bebpnde their enempet in thze com⸗
panyes / and blewe vp the trompettes / and
crped in their pꝛaper to God.

But as focne as Cimothis hoſt perceas
uedß Machabeus was there / they fies trons
bi and the otber llewe them downe ryght

2e:fo that there were Billed or hemp fame
dape/ almolt epaht choulande men. Chen de
parted Judas vnto Malpha / layed lege vn⸗
to it and wanne / lewe all the males init /


dithim. Hohe lekt Jolephus p tonne ot Sa- Cpopledit and let tyꝛe vpon it. From thence


charx / and Alarias to be Captapnes ofthe wente he and tone Ealbon / Magech Bolo⸗ 2
eople and to kepe the remnaunt of ß Po and ere aa ai
Jewꝛy/ and commaundedthem / tapinge: rer Gathered Cimothy another -.,

Cake the ouerlyght ofthys people / and le ? Bolte / which pitcheo their tentes before Na 4


cS. pemakeno warte agapntt theBeathen/ons


H Exilehe tyme that we come agapne, And bne
5 e


3


12 beponde the water. Judas lent to pre
holte / s ther brought bim worde agarne /


fapinge/


Che e


ft a commaunde⸗
e

and Aca

ol ewe

fi ople of Fs

at miſerx


sores


devin tbe igueorou ra ana

tly comment

h 41 cher were a. * 8 al Peathen where fo euer their fame ber

nam tubdued / andmpghenok withitave Jue berde pon / ache people came vnto the bed ·
das. Chen Judas gatheredall che Iraelſtes dec dene e
e ee e

counvent abel Teate oot) ¢02¢ocome'tt Per he wemech Bia 5 diene

. betyde izes torte wales


ande rate ano fe cptie / and laye andtowzeg rounde aboute it pe bꝛent them


tn thett wape. Foz ther c


irren But ehep olde not lett hein, in to the lande of Juda.


e Judas commaunded a pꝛocla ·
. tase chozow oute ce ale,


tie OF Blinas Fox
fa


if Eleazar,


Che. bj. Chapter.
BINS


Dw when kynge Antyochus tra⸗
Tewes n ect tas ge
ouer Zo; to $ play 188 e
Ke bee Berben Ind Judas bees aon a noble ¢ plenteous citteintyiuer c.
thole koꝛwarde that cam behyñde / and gaue gold / a that there was in it a very riche tẽ.
the people good eroztacpon ali the wape ple: where as were clothes /cote
thoꝛop / tyll they were come in to che lande dor lddes ok golde / whpch Alexander the tonne
ot Juda. Chus they wente vpunto ß mount ol Pyilippe kyng of Macedonia had lett be-
Sion / where ther often w mech ¢ chance hende hin. dert e he mete about v= 9
: et
a“
25


.


fof the Machabees, leit,


che cyte ato MPople tr but betas not able. ‘ngovly men or Arrael ſopned them elle
$03 the cpreting wete warned otit / a ae alfojand went onto the kung lapinge: Bump
‘bim.andlobe feds departen aveathe- longe wyn it be / of thou punpſh and auẽge
urneck a came agapne into Babpion. Bo- oure bzethzen? We haue euer dene mynded
, teduerthere came one which brought hy to do thy father lerupce / to walkke inhis ſta⸗
le, Ledpngeg in Pertyde that hishoolkes which elites and to obeve bis commaundementeg:
n, weke in che lande of Juda / were dapuen as Feuer oure people fel ftom bs / @ where⸗
ware and how that Lilias went 10 ch fir koeuer they founde any OF bs / the yllewe thes
wa Greate power g was dezuen aware OF afdd ther haue not only medled wyth bs/ but
che Jewes how that they had wonne the vic⸗ wyth all dure countrres: and be olde / thys
tozy/¢ gotten great? goones dut or the hoo ⸗ dape are ther belegynge the cattell at Jeo
Aes 6 perpcbed hom ther had bzoke downe rulalem / and haue made vp the ſtröge holde
cheabhompnacton, whith he tet by bpon the en Bethlura: and yr thot doe ſt not pꝛeuente . Wach. lug.
gc. . altare at Perutalenvand kenced the Danc / them rpgbe foene / they well do moze then
tuary with bye walles une as it waß akoze: thele / and thou Walk not be able to ouer⸗
vee and Bethlura his cite alls. comethem.
B Hott chaunced/thatwhen the hing hav ohen the ynge herde Hie | be was very z
herde thele wo des ye was akrapen and gre⸗ angrye / and called all ps fretived 7 the cap⸗ f. Wach. ill
ned betp coße, Wperkozche lapedhimdowne taynes or hys kate men and ok all hrs bozle :
pon his bed / and fell licke £02 very lozowe: men together. He hyꝛed men of watre allo
and all becaute it had not happened as he out ok other reaimes and oute orthe Nes ol
ban eser bas nc men anne che ler which came vnto hym. And the nom ⸗
2 bys grele was euer moze andmope /o ß bie of bys Hott wag an hündzeth thoufanne
bun e tut nedesdre. Cherkoze he lent kote men andtwenthe thoulande hozlmen /
— Sop bistrenides/ ¢fapoe onto the: the dee s 6. xrriſ Elephätes well exerelledto battapll i. Mach. lll g.
penchomene eyes dos che bere foxowand ebete came thozow Foumes vnto Bethlu-eviée
Täcponokherte b Fhaue Foz when Fc ka / and beleged it alongeteaton / and made
debe mp meinde Pgreate aduerllee Kam druerke incrumenteg of watre agayntt le.
come Hrito/¢ the floudes or beupnelie whicy But the Yewes came o bent them /
Jam come in / where as aloze tyine I was lo and foughe Irie me en departed Judas
merp / and Lo greatly fet by(by realon ot my krom eat Zerutfalem / and remoued
Owe) Agar ne / concdekinge the euell p J che holt toward Beth zacaran ouer agapuſk
aue done at Jexuralem krö whence J tone the kynges armpe,
allthe ryches or gelde g eluer D werenit, So the bynge arole betoze the dape / and
andlent to fetch aws ve the iibabrtours oe bꝛoughe the power ol his Hott in to wave
Thelen ane emen Aunowe / to Wethzacaran, where the hoſtes made thé,
hefetroubles are come pp mie koche lame tothe battayll / blowpnge the trompettes.
caule. And beholde / J muſt dre with greate And to pꝛouoke the Eiephantes koꝛ to fight /
ſoꝛow in a ſtraũge Chen calledge tos cher ſpewed them the lappe of reed grapes
one Philippe a trende or his / whom be madẽ and molbertes.Anddeupded thecklephantes
ruler or al higrealme /a gaue bim p crotme / amonge the Holter lo p by euery clephance
his roabe g his rng that he Wulde take his there ftode a. M. men wel harneten/ Ghel⸗
fonne Antiochus vnto hy /e brnge hem mectes of Hele byon their heades ke onto
Lehr bp tpl be mpaherapane bpmtelf. So the euery one of the Clephantes allo / were oꝛde
it Kuynge Antlochus openehere / en the. crür. ned v. C. hoꝛmen ol the belt / which wapted
Speare. When L plias imreine chat tr kenge ol the ng a whete to euerhe
si l boas deed he odened Anelochus hs tonne Wente and departed not krom him. Eueiy
Arch d. whom he had broughtop) to rapgne in hes Elephant was couered with a röge tower
fathers eade)a caled hem €upato;. Pom df w90/ where bpon were rrrih, baleaunte -
cher that were inche cattell (ar Jerufalem) men wis weapens tokpgbt /s within it was
Bepte in che Jewes romdabour the Hancz a man ok vnde to rule chebeett,
buarp le fought euer Uellto dochem barme / As foztheremnisUnt Of che nommen / he
$03 the ſtrengthenenge ol the Heathen, lettthem vpn both the {des in two partes
[ ne unas thought to deſtrope che wich crompettes/to prouohe tie Poste / and
and called all the people together, that they kolkere vp loch as were llowe in the arme.
Inpabelave lege onto them, d came And when the lunne hone vpö their ſhüldes
together pe Ci.peare/ a beleged hem / ol golde and (tele the mountapnes gifttered
lapinge Cozth their Mdrnaunce and inftrus agapneatthem/ and were as bzrabeas the
mentis ak wärke. Cher cettapne okehe char Lredkettes of fpre ache kena’ hook allo was
wre beleged wente fozthionco whom tome deuf deb / one parte bps 3


prt boke


it

krapedat the nople of their boot / when
muitptude wente koꝛth / a when
mote together / cor g boot was both great
@ mighty. Judas allo ebis book entred into
the battayll/¢ fet.of,C.men of the es
armpe. Mow wh Clealar thefonne of Dau-
ta dpe one of the Elephantes deckte 1
Bpnges badge / and was a moze goodly beet
thentheother:be thought thebpnge Wuld be
bponbynt/eieoparde him lelk todelpuerbis
people anne get him a perpetuall name.

wWherfoze he ranne with a cozage onto g


Clephante in the myddect or the Hook Amys prayer


tynge them dotone ol both the kpdes /H dewe
manpaboute him. do wente he to the ele⸗
phantes kete / Agar hm vnderhem a gewe
binn then Fell the Elephant downe bpd bim
there he dped. Judas allo ¢ bis men leing &
power of the byng ache meghtrevrolkce o
gh! boot neparten ird them. and the binges
Narnipe wente by agaynſt the towarde Jeru⸗
falemye pitched their tẽtes in Jewzr belvde
mount Sion. Mozeouer Ly
truce with chem that were in Pethlura.
sSGachtigon · But tobe ther came out of 6 ertelbecaule
hach rb. hep hanna bptales within /@ the Lande la
Fig. d. vntplledpthe bung tole Bethlura / a tet men
, tohepett/ a turned hes hoot tothe place of
the Sanctuarp / s laped lege to ita greate
swbple. Where he made al mance opdgnatice:
handbowes / Ese dartes / rackettes co caſt
ftones /icoꝛppösto Mute arowes /a lunges.
Che Jewes allo made opdynaunce aga bnd
chelrs / and fought a longe keaton.

But inthe chte there were no pytaxles/
forte was the ceuenth veave or the warres⸗
kthole Heachẽ that remarued in Jewzphad
eaten op all their ſtoare. And in the Hanc⸗
tuary were tew men lekte / tor dhunger came
fobpon thé / chat they were lcateredabzoade
euery man to his arne place.

Do when plas heatde that Philippe

b. Muth t. b (hom Antiochus che Benge whele be was
pet lpuynge / had oꝛdened to bꝛrnge vp An.
ttochus bis konne / that he mraht ben
was come agarne out ak; ja @ Medes
wich the hinges hoot /ethoughttooptapne

Gide bengnome: de gathin tothe in all
che hate / oto the captapnes ol) boot /and
lavde:we decreale daplp/ e oure dptales are
but lmall-Agarne / the pase b we lare fege
vnto / is verx ſtrong / tt were oure parte to
fe koꝛ the realme. Letosagre with there men
andtate truce wichthem / and with all thetr
people / and graunte them to Ipue altertheir
Jawe / as thepdydatoze. Foz they be greued
Gooalltyere ching agapnt bs/becaute we


fpptenthetriaine, Sow che pris ane


ep wers content /g fent o tye £0
.
— epcame out of tye cael’ ane


pate the othe


dedto deſtroxe


7
Blende J udashyllety


8 oe


91


9
a


5 ane


and vngodie
was Dicimus chat wolde bene made
bre pret: Chere men ac e
Feten the kynge lapinge:
Heth en haue layne chr krendes anddepuk
vs out of oure awne lande. noherkoze ende
now lome man(to whom chou geueſt credẽ
ce) that he maxe go and le all the deltruccy/
which he hach done onto vs K tothe bynge
lande / and let him be pumithed with all
krendet and kauo


and urerg.
Khenhe nung chofe Bachtdes a frende
of his ttc toas arus of Greate power ind
realme


the (beponde the greate water) and
fapthEull onto the kynge: and lent hem to ſe
the deſtruccxon ſudas had done. Ind as
ko that wicked Aieimus / he made him hre
pret / and commaunded hym to be auenged
ofthe chrlbꝛen oF Acraell. Do ther ſtode bp?
3 3
pf Juda lendynge medaungerg to J.
his bzeth2é/¢ Speabyng ontothe Wpeacea⸗
ble wordes: but onder bifceate.
das a bis people beleued not thelrlaxing fos
fame ßcherwere come Wa greate Holt.
cterthls came the keriber together vnto
Alcinuus 4 Bachioes truſtynge che belt vn⸗
tothe.dn ige le wurd deem
ol them fay! . pret fs coe
ofthe (ede ot Sars / how can he diccraue —


Hk the Mathabets.


lb.


‘Sis they alte thz lounge wodes/ atwozs people wente forth tocglutebim beaceabip


bntothem/¢layoeswe wil do vou no harme /
nether pour krendes:g ther beleucd ie. But
PAHS the very lame dape tobe theplx. men of them
Kllewe them according tof wozdes that are
witten: They haue cat thefieth of thy lanc ·
C tes / ched their bloude rounde about Jeru⸗
talem / g there was noman that wolde burx
them. So there came a greate teare a dꝛedẽ
amonge che people / lapenge: there is nether
treuth noz ryghteoulnele in them oz ther
haue bꝛoken the appopntement ¢ othe that
they made. And Bachides remouedhis hoolt
from Jerulalem / and pytched hes tente at
Bethecha: where he lent koꝛth / a tone ma ·
ny of chem that had foztaken hem: He llewe
man of the people allo / and cad theminto
agreate pptt. Chen commpttenbe the lande
brite Alctmus / and lett men of warre wyth
bymto helpe him /a Bachideg hymlelk wen ·
ke vnto the enge. Andthus Tlcimus deken⸗
dedhis hye pretthove / andall loch as vexed
Itraell / reloztedontohrm: Inlo moch that
they optapnedthe lande of Juda / s dyd moch
kuell vnto che Araelltes.

How when Judas kawe all che mylchele
that Alcimus ano his companphaddonelpee
moze then the Heathen them lelues ) vnto
the Itraelites: He wente fo ch rounde about
althe bowerg of Lewie / and punpſbed tho⸗
de vntarthkull rẽnagates / co chat ther came
no moze out in to che contre, Do then Al
cimus fawe / that Judas and his people had
gotten the vpperhande / and that he was not
ableto abrde them: he wente agapne to the
kynge / andlapde all the worl of chem that
he coulde. Then the kyng lent Micanoz one
ot his chefe pꝛynces( wüpch bare euellwell

pein 2 1 betete pen / that he
bu lde tte rope the people,
d. Do Micanoz came to Jerulalemwrtha
preate boot / and tent onto Judas and bys
ech zen topth krendly wozdeß but under di⸗
fceate) capenge: there (hall be no warre be⸗
twixte me and vou: J will come wyth a fe
men / to le how pe do wich krendchlpe wupon
thrs he came onto Judas / and they laluted
one another peaccably-but the enempes we⸗
re appornted totake Judas by violence Me
uertheles it was toldẽ Judas that he came
vnto hi but onder dilceate: whertoꝛe he gat
him aware krom him / a wolde fe his face no⸗
moze. Ihen Picanoꝛ perceaued that bys
councel was be wzaped/ he went out to fight
agapnſt audas / belrde Capharfalama:
where there were llayne of Nicanoꝛs hootk/
d. M. men: the relpdue fle vnto the caſtell
ol Baud.

Alter thys came Nicanoz vp bnto mount

Sion: and iche pre kes wrth che lores ofthe


g to ſhewe him the burnt lacritices that wee
re offered Coz the king. But he laughed them
tofcogne mocked them dellled thelb ollerin
ges /a Cpake dildanedlx / dee and twoze in his
wzoth Aavenge: It Judas andhys hoot beg
not deuluered nod into mphandes / as Cone v. ant elke
as euer Jrome agayne(@ fapze well) J (hat
sre 8 big We Ge chat / e
a great anger. Chen the pꝛeſtes cam g. gatat td,
in / and Gove beloze the aulter ok the temple, 0 if
wepinge a ſapenge: f oꝛ Co moch as thou (D
Lopde)hatt chofen this houle / wat thyname gruen
might be called pon cherin / that it wulde 00.
be an houle of pꝛaper and petycyon vnto thy
people: Be abengedoe this man a lis hooſt /
Aletthem be dayne with 6 lweard remem⸗
bie the blaſphem pes of ihem / a luce them
not to continue eny longer.
When Micanoz was gone from Jerula⸗
lem he pitched his tente at Bethoꝛon / thes
re an hooſt met him out of Sopra. Awd Ju⸗
das came to Adarla with iiſ. . mẽ / a niade
— ae geg hun 8 ee 10
ſellaungerg o ena i
biatpyementhe / the angell wanne toꝛth / and ae
Qewe an Cixxxv. choulande orthem: Euen lo and. pd
deütrope thou this hooſt befoze bs to dape g ll. rep rx.
other people mape knowe / howthat he bath
blatphemed thy Sanctuarp:¢ punyl him /
accoꝛdinge to his malicpouſneſle.
And fo the hooltes ſtroke the kelde / the
.
comfited/ and hehymlel ,
was frist layne inthe hattapll. hn ApH Wach. end
canozs men of warre ſawe that he was hyls
led / thep cat awape their weapens and ſled:
but the Jewes kolowed vpon them an whole
daes tourney, from Ada zer vnto Gazara/
blowynge with the trompettes / amabynge
tokens atterthé . Sothe Fewes came fortis
ofall the townes there aboute / ¢ blewe out
chelrboznes bpon chem and turned agaynſt
them: Chus were they al tlarne / and not one
oF EoenthcyCoketbettub tad
entheptobethelvlubitatice Foz apzay
and Crrote oF Hicanozs heade and hes ryghe
awed he helde bplo proudly ) and
zougbt it with them / and hanged it vp a le ·
re Jerulalem. i herloze the people were ex
ceadingip retopled and palled ouerthatdaie
in great gladnelle. And Judas oꝛdened / that
the lame dape namely the xiij. pave ol the
moneth Adar) chulde be hepte inmrzth eue.
xy veare. hus the lande ol Juda was in ret
a litie whple.
Judas contpdering tde power a goodly bolliepr of
the romeynes maketh peace with the. Nhe relc᷑ypt
e bit 00 Jewes.
e. pi. Chapter.
gt Judas


with hoalm
boot
dened
him)


4. Wach (a. f fendethem Good tucrtyes and pledge be⸗


Proce allchrs pow they had taken frombim
Banda / Media and L pbiachis bet landes) ¢
Jowtheb e tohynge Eumenus. Agapne/
owther perceaupng that the Gꝛekeg were
cömpnge to vere cyemstent agarnct then a
captapne of an hoolt / which gaue them bat⸗
Capit) dewe many of them / led awape their
wfues and childzen captpue / cpopledthem /
tote potledtion of thetr lande delttoped theilt
krongeholdes andtubdued chem to be their
bonde men onto this bape: Mozeouer / how
that ag ko: other —.— 5 & Fles / whych
komtrme wichſkode chem the pdeltroped the /
A bought them vnder their dominpon: But
helped euertheir atone krendes e thote that
were conkederate with them / and conquered
kyngdomes boch karre a nye: that who to
auer herde of their renowne / was akraped ol
Chem:£o2 whö they wolde helpe to their ‘Binge
domes thore raignen: g beaded dg not thé
toraigne cherputhim downe:andhow they
were come ko greate pzeenunence: hauynge
no hinge amonge them / nether eny man cio⸗
ched in purple / to be magnifien there thoꝛow
but had ordened them lelues a perlament /
where in there tat tt, C. and xx. Ssenatours
bare p06 councel toniipatch euer Sbuty-
Helle ofthe people / a to nepe good oꝛdpe: And
how that euerp peare they cholea Mapꝛe / to
haue the gouernaunck ofall chelr lande: to


’


CAfter the death of Micanoz Demetrius fendeth bis
ar mie agapnſk Judas. Judas io! Clapne . Jonathas is
put in the tende or hys mother. Che Rife betwene
Jonathase wWachides. Alcimusis taken with thepat
thee apcth.wWachioes retourneth agapne vnto dhing,
. —.— Feed 2 by the ————

n ouercome. truce ot Jace
weihen th apache, i


uche.


am
seb


ealx. Chapter.
koennten ene soem


a


2 2
I
Fille. kurher do tende Bachrdes ¢ Alcx·


je


mus e into gewzr / achole that were
indhenigye eh boot hehe soo
cher wende forth by che wave that ledeth vn⸗
to Salgala / and pytched their tentes betoze


Melaloth which is in Arbellig /o wanne
St zack people in beeen
ofthe lt. eare / ther brought their boot to
Jeruſalem /a role by a cameto Berea / with
5 50 0


when they lawe the multytude ob the other
army that it was lo greate they were foze a+
kraped /a many conũexed them lelues out of
the hoot / In lo moch that chereabode no mo
of them but bit), C. men. When Judas lawe
chat ig hoot fapled him and tharthemuſt ne⸗
des kight:it bꝛane his hert / that he had no ty
me ren ond Sen the mã
was in extreme trouble. Heuerthelelle he
larde vnto them / chat remapned withbym:
p / let vs go agaynſt oureenempes / perad⸗
uenture we chal be able to fight wyth them.
Butthey wolde haue ſtopped him / tayenge:
we (hal not be ableſtherkoze let bs now faue
ourelpues / and turne agapne to our bꝛethzẽ
and then well we fight lethem / to we
avebere but kewe. Ind Judas larde: God
B foꝛbyd / that we chulde fle From them. Wher⸗
foze vt oure tyme be come / lett vs dye mane
fully foz oure bꝛethzen / and let vs nor Rayne
our honoure. hen the hood remoued out ol
the tentes / a todeagapnt them. Che boztné
were deuyded in two partes: the nynge ca ·
thers a the arche ns wente befoze the höolt /
all che mightpe men were Eozmett Inthe kel⸗
de. Bachides humtelk was in the right weng
okthe bactell and thehooſt dzewenxein two
tes / and blewethe trompettes . hey ol
ſudas lde ble we the trompettes allo / a che
karth hohe at the nople or the hooſtes / and
tye trokea felbe kromche mojowtilnpgbt.
when Judag lawe that Bachides hook
was ſtrongeſt of thevighttpoe / he tone wich
hem allche hard men / and beakethe ryght
wynge ol their ozdze / and tolowed vpõ them
bntothe mount A 70t.

How when ch ch were ok che lelte
wynge / lawe that the right five was dircom⸗
Eten / they peztecuted Judas and them that
were wich hm. Chen was there atoze bat.
tapll / toꝛ many were dapne and wounded ol
both the partyes / Judas allo bymfelf was
Bplied/and theremnafithed. 0 Jonathas
Gnd Srmon tone Judas their bꝛoͤther / and


HE the Mathabets,


Irby,


‘buried bim inhis fathers lepulcre in the cy-
tieot Dorin . And all the people ok Feacit
made great lamentaciontozhim / andmour⸗
nedlonge / lapenge: Alas that thys woꝛthy
Qulve be dayne; which delxuered the people
OF Alrael. As oz other thinges pertepninge
tothe battayls of Judas / the noble actes 5
he did ¢ of his woꝛthrnelle: they are not wꝛit⸗
ten to they were very many.


C
And akterthe death of Judas / wycked me Joceph. cap. 0
came bp in al the coaſtes ot Alrael / andtherelib. 50. Antig.


arole ail loch ag woꝛke ongodipnedte . In
thofe dayes was there a greate dearth in the
lande / and all the countte gaue ouer thé tel
ues g cheirg Onto Bachrdes. Do Bachrdes
chole wicked men / and made them loꝛdes in
che lande. Chele fought out and made tearch
kon Judas krendes / and brought them onto
Bachides: which auenged him telt vpõ them
with greate delpite. And there came Co great
trouble in Acrae n / as was not feng thetyme
that no prophet was tene there.

Chen came all Judas frendes together /
Klaxde vnto Jonathas: fo; lo moch as thy
brother Judas is deed / there is none ivke
bimto go koꝛth agaynſt our enemiẽ / garnſt
Bachldes / and loch as are aduerlartes vnto
dure people. ohe rkoꝛe thys dape we chole
che to him / to be oure pꝛynce and captapne
to onze dure battell, And Jonathas toke the
gouernaunce vpon hym at the lame tyme /
and tuled in ſteade of hys brother Judag.
when Bachydes gatt knowlege therot / he
Sought lozto der bym: But Fonathas and
Srmonhis bzother / perceaupnge that / lied
into b wiloernetie of Thecus ‘pth alptheir
companx / and pytched their tentes by d wa⸗
ter pole of Alphar.

Which when Bachydes vnderltode / he
came ouer Toꝛdane wrth all hys hooſt bpon
the Sabbath dare. How had Jonathas tent
bis bꝛother Ahon (a captayne of the people)
to pape bis krendes the Mabuchites) p ther
wolde lende them their oꝛoyngunce / tor thes
had moch. Bothe chyldzen of Jambzy came
out of Madaba /and tone hon and al
he had / and wente their wape wrchal chen D
came wonde vnto Jonath mon
hs bꝛother / that the chyldꝛen of Janibzz
made a greate maryage / and bzoughethe
bude from Madaba with greate pompe:fos
the was daughter to one or the nobleſt pzin⸗
ces ol Canaan . Wherkoꝛe they remembꝛed
the bloude of Jhon their bꝛother / and wente
vp / and hid them lelues vnderthe ſadowe ol
the mauntapne.

Sother litt vp their eyes / and lok ed and
behodde / cheze was moch a do / and greate re⸗
Soares ean came tony 10 ee

endes a hys bꝛethzen met nite

Att. l. | pangs


The


panys / inctrument es of mulick / and man
weapens. yen donathas and therthat we⸗
ve with him / role out orcheir lourkyng pla ·
ces agapnt them / andtlewe manp of them.
As koſche remnaunt / they lled in the to mot
tapnes / and they tobe all ther ſubſtaunce.
‘Cus themariage was turned to mo:ning /
and the nople of theirmelody into lamenta⸗
cpon. And fo when they had auenged the
bloude of ther; bꝛother / they turned agapne
onto Foynane, 8
Vachides he arynge thrs / came vnto the
very bomegot Forpane with aveate power
vpon the Sabbath dare. And Jonathas
fade to his companꝝ ett vs get vp / a fyght
Eagapnſt oure enempes: koz it ſtandech not
wych vg to dape / as in tymes patt: Beholde
dur enemfes are in oure waxe / the water oF
Jozdane vpon the one fpde okvs / wyth ban.
bes / kennes a woddes oF the otherlyde / lo z
there is no place koz vs to departe onto.


9. Pars. v. n. Mherkoze crie now vnto heauen / p ve mape
ach. ug b he delpuered krom the power of youre ene ·


mpes, Spo they ſtrone the batell. Ind Jong
thas Gretchen out his hande tolmyte Bacht
des but he fled bacwarde. Chen Jonathas &
ther B were wyth bpm leapte in ko Joꝛdane /
Klwpmmed ouer Jozdane vntohpm / athere
were Mayne ol Bachides ede that dave / a
thoulande men.

Cherkoze Bachines withhis hooſt turned
agan to Jerufalem / a buplte opthe caſtels
tröge holdes that were in Jewzy / Jericho
maus / Bethoꝛon / Betheil / Cham̃nata /
Pharag Fopo / wyth hre walies wyth pozs
tes a Wlockeg:g let men to kepethem that
thep might vietheirmalicevpon Ilraell. Pe
walled öp Bethlurab / Gazarah a che caſtell
at Jerulalem allo /A pꝛoupdedthem id men
@ bitales: he toke allo g cheteſt mens lonnd
in the countre Fo pledge / a put them inthe
caſtellat Jerulalem to be hepte.

Akter warde in the c. lif, peave in the le
conde moneth / icimus cömaunded / that the
walles of the vnmoſt Sanctuary chulde be
deſtroped / a the buyldinges of the pꝛophetes
allo. Ind when he beganne to deſtroye them
the thinges p he wente about / were hyndered
foz he was lmptten wa palley / a hys mouth
ut / to that he coulde nomoꝛe Speake ner cõ
maunde enp of his boute concerning his bu-
kpneſle. hus dyed Acimus in great myſerp
at che lame tyme. And whẽ Bachides la we
3 Alcymus was deed /heturnedagapneto

kinge / a lo the lande was in reſt ij. peares.
Chen all the vngodly men helde a councell /
fayenge: Beholde Aonathas ehis company
feasting Samer) tal

unge es hither / @ he Mal ta⸗
kee them al in one night.


fyꝛlt bole


Sother wente and gaue Bachides chys
coũcel / which aroſe to come wa great hooſt /
glent letters priuely to his adherẽtes which
wert in Jewz / to take Jonatgas a thole 6
were wplh bem: but cep myght not / koꝛ the
otherbadgotten znowiece ofthep: deupre.
And Jonathas tote L.. men of the countre /
which were the ryngleadert of thema few
chem. Then Jonathas ¢ Symon with their
cOpany departed onto the crtre Bethbellen
which ipeth in the wyldernelke / and reparzed
che decave therof/ a imade it ſtronge. when
Bachrdes knewe ches / he gathered allhys
hoolt / a ſent woꝛde to them that were ok Je⸗
wzy. Chẽ came he s laped lege to Bethbeden
s fought agaynt it a longe teaton / a made
indrumentes of warre. Mow Jonathas lek⸗ gs
te his brother S ymõ in the cytie / and wente
koch himtelk in to the countre⸗ 4
a certayne nombze/andflewe Odares 8
bꝛethzen andthe childzẽ ol Phaleron in their
tentes:fothathe beganne to be llronge / and
to increace in power.

As fo: Symone his company / they wee
out of che cyepe / and bꝛent op the indtrumen
tes of ware / and fought agaynſt Bachides /
anddplcomkptedhym. And Bachpdes was
foze vexed / becaule bys councell and traua⸗
le was in bayne. wherkoꝛe he was wzoth at
wicked men that gaue hym councelto cos
me in to their lande and flew many of them.
Chen purpoledhe wyth bys company to go
awape in to his awne countre: wherok when
Jonathas had knowlege he tent embatys
tours onto hym / ko to make peace with him

athat he ſhuſde deliuer bpm his pelonerg a⸗
gapne. Co the 155 Bachydes contented
Iladly / a dyd acoꝛdinge tohis delpꝛe: per and
made an othe / thathe wulde neuerdohrm
harme allthe dapes orhys like. Dohe reſto⸗
red vntohrmallthe pꝛelonners that hehad
taken out or the lande of Juda / and then ur
ned and wente bys wape in to hys atone lan⸗
de / nether pꝛoceded he enp further to come
vnto the boꝛderg of Juda. Thus Ilrgell had
moꝛe warre. Ind Jonathas dwelt at Mache
mas / and beganne there to gouerne ß peor
ae deſtroped the vng odiy men out oe
el


E wemeirins detyrerd eo haue peace with Fonathass


Ale vander moneth warre agapne Demetrius. Dre
metrma is llapne. Che trendchrpe of io tolomeus o


Alexander.
che. x. Chapter.
the c lx. peate came Alersderg


8 conne of noble Anvoch tobe geh e


Ptolomats whole citprens recra

is tied bim a therebe raigned. Whẽ
Demetrpus herde cherok / he gathered an
exctadynge greate book / and = ay


Gentietters bntoZonathas WW lounge woz-


% vrapted bemgrestip.Fozbelapde:we h


beg,

wü pad make peace wih hm / bekoꝛe he
bynde hem fell with Alexander agapnſt vs:
els he thal remembꝛe the eueli that we haue
dome agapntt bym/bis bzotger a his people,
And lo he gaue Jonathas leue togather an


boot / to make weapent / andto be confedes we


Sate with him / g commaunded the pledges 6
were in the caſtel / to be delxuered vnto him.

Chen came Jonathas to Jerulalem/and
wed the letters inthe audxenẽce of all the peo⸗
ple / and or them that were in the caſtell. and
therfoze were they foze atraped / becaule
ther herde/that the kynge had geuẽ him Ips
cence to gather an hooſt. Chus were $ pled ·
ges delpucred vnto Jonathas / which teſto⸗


96 ted thé totheir elderß. Lonathas allo dwelt


at Jetuſalem / gbeganne to buplde vp and
totepayze the cite:cmaundyng the woick
men / to wallit / and the mount 15 on round
aboute wyth fre ſtone / to be a e holde /
And ko they dpd. As fon the Peathe chat were
inche catels which Bachides had made vp /
ther fled: to that euerx man lekt the place /
wente into his awne coũtre. Dnip at Beth ⸗
cura remaxned certayne ok p Jewes / which
had koztalie the lawe ¢ commaundementes
Of Hod / ko Bethlura was theirrekuge.
Now when kynge Alexander herde of the
zompſes that Demetrius had made vnto
jonathas and when it was tolde hym ol
attels g noble actes / whych he and his bye.
chꝛen had done / and ok the greate trauaples
that ther had taken:helapde: where (hall we
kynde Coch a man: wel / we well make hym
dure krende / a be cdfederate with him. aps
chis he wzote a lettre vnto hym / 1255
wozdes: henge Serene lenny s b702
therJonathas, We haue herde of the/ chat
thou art a baleaunt man / and mete to be
dure krẽde: wherkoꝛe this dape we oꝛdene the
to bethe hye Pꝛeſt or thr people / and to be
called the Aynges krende. (pon thys / he
tente hym a purple cle eig a crowne of
golde)that thou mayer contioze what is for
dure pꝛocrt / Kepe krendch ype to warde bs.
Fiete d ok the. C. Ir. peare
Cops che folempne feat dave of the taberna ·
Ges /Jonathas put che holy rapment vpon
bim. Ehen gatheredhe an boot / s made ma⸗
nyweapẽs. which when Demetrius herde /
he was maruelous lor /g larde:d las / what
haue we done / that Alexander bath pꝛeuen·
ted ve in gettynge the krendchyppe of the Je⸗
wes / koꝛ his atone defence? Vet welt J write


Lcupnglt vntoth⸗mallo / pee & prompte thé
Yemardes / chat they maye be of
( Tap tyne derben tate bate Nette


St the Mathabets.


Ap bümto fight. Mapertore Demettius wosdeg ng Demetrius lerdelſh


ento the people of the Jewes. nohere as pe
haue kepte pour couenalit toward bg /g co ⸗
trnued in our trendlbppe/not enclyning to
dune enemres we were giad / when we herde
therok. 1Wherkoze remaxne pile be tapth⸗
kullto bg: ¢ we hall well recipente vou tod
the thinges/é ye haue done on oute partye:
call veicate yoy of many charges / and
Zeue pois rewardes. And bs, dylcharge
Pou ¢ all $ Fetes kromtribukeß/Jtoigeug
vou the cuſtomes ok lala teleate pou ct &
Chowne taxes of the therde parte of fede / and
halk ot g trute of trees / which is myne awne
dewty. Theleg leaue tox vou / from this ape
foꝛch: ſothat they Mall not be taken of the
lande of Juda ner o€ the thze cities which are
Added thervnto out of Samaria a Galle /
from this daye kozth Eo? euernioze. Fern 1
allo with all thinges belonging thekto / chall
be holy a kre/ pee che tythes a kributes (halt
pertayne vnto it. As to⸗ ie power ok the cae
Hell whichis at Jerulale/ J vemptte ¢ geue
tonto thebve pꝛelt / g be stiave let in tt Coche
men / as he Mall cholẽ to kepẽ it. J Erelp deli⸗
uer all the Fetwes that are pzelonersthoꝛow
F
. ing anx trrbute / rec eu
ol chetr catell. l
All Plolepne feaſtes/ Wabbathes / new⸗
mones / the dapes appopnted, the the dayes
bekoꝛe and after the tealt thaibe fre to an d


the alba inmprealme:ſo that in themno man


al haue power to do enp thing /o7 to mous
fe e
fe . xx. o ok the
Jewes he witten vp in the hinges holt / and
haue their wages paved / as all otber men
ok ware ofthe kynges wulde haue: dnd of
them chalbe ozdened certapne 7 to kepe the
knges trong holdes: pee andlome of them
Walbe let ouer the bynges butpnede/ 2 they
mape apthfully deale wyth the Came, che
Jewes alto Hhalhaue princes of theirawne /
and walcke in their awne laweg / as 6 king
Gath commaunded in the lande ol Juda.
Andthe the crtpes that are fallen bnto
Jewꝛre kromthe countre of Samaria and
Gaillee: cbalbe taken asgewzr / and be vn⸗
der one: nether be fubiecte to any ftraun
Lozde but tothe hpe pelt As fo2 Ptolomats
and the lande perteynynge therto / J geue ie
vnto the Sanctuary at Jerulalem / tothe
hecetary expẽces of the holy thinges Woze
duer J well geue euerp peate. rb. thoutand e
Sxycles ok lluer out ot the hynges cheker
(whpch pertagneth onto me) tothe wozcke
ok che temple: pee and lone what remaynetn
(which thepthat had oure matters inhande
intrmes pak / haue not 54 fame 4
ex


. .
.


ltt, 4


.. Ot. vb. b.


The byitt boke


they geue trite chem alto. And berpdes all

thys /the.b. M. Cycles whrch ther tone
early of tye rentes ofthe Soanctuary/ all
clonge vnto the prettes thacdoferutce.

Atem / wholgelier ther be chache sto 5
tem̃ ple at Jerulalem oz within the liberties
cherot / where as they are fallen in tog Ryne
¥ 0 daunger Foz enz maner ok bucpnes / cher

all be pardoned / and all the goodes that
ther haue in mpreainte / Hallie re. Lor the
buplopnge allo ¢ repag zunge of the woꝛke
ok che Spanctuarp / erpentes walbe geuen
out ot che kynges Checker: Yee and kor the
makinge of the walles rounde aboute Jeru⸗
talem / Foz the bꝛeauynge downe of the olde /
and foz the kettynge op of the Mronge hots
des in Jewzy / Wal p coſtes @ charges be ge⸗
uen out or the ninges Checker.

But when Jonathas andthe peopleher⸗
de thele wozdes they gaue no credence vnto
them nether receaued chem: foz ther remẽ·
bꝛed the greate wyckednelle that he had done
vnto Ilrael / and how loze he had vered thé.
IB helkoze thepagreed onto Alexander / fog
he wag a prince that had dealte frendly wyth
chem / and io ther foe bybimallwaxe. (bE

unge Alexander a greate hooſt / ¢


thered nn
bug. cay. P bys arme agapnit Demetrrus.


Ho the two kynges Croke battaylt toge ·


cher / but Deme ats boot Rct/aus Ju


der kolowed after and fell ops them. A mighs
tye Coze lelde was it / continupng til the S õ⸗
ne wente downe / and Demetrius was arne
the lame dare.

F And Alexander fente embagitours onto
Ptolomyp the kynge of Egypte vw thele woꝛ⸗
des / Capenge: Lor ſo moch as g am come a-
gane tomp realme / and am let in the trone
of mp pꝛogenttourg / and haue gotten 6 dos
minxõ / ouer comed Demetrius / conquered
the lande / and ſeryken a kelde wyth bpm / lo
chat we haue dilcomkrted both hym andhrs
hoolt / and iyt in the trone of bys kyngdome:
Let bs now make krendchtpe together / geue
methr daughter to write: lo call A be thy
konne in lawe / Sean ied the rewardes⸗


maner ok kyngeg (8 to de cen wꝛote nunge
Alexander onte Jonathas / that he Muive
33
ee
Gulbeanb(pinee an foune tauoure in thete


foght. and there came cogetheragaynt org


perlen certapne wicked men a vngracroug
pe es of Alraell / mabpnge complagné
tes ofbpm/but the binge regarded them not
As koꝛ Jonathas the binge contmaundedto
take of hys garmentes / and to clothe hem in
purple: and lo they dd. Chen the knge aps
popntedbym tolyit byhem and lapde onto
brs pꝛrnces: Go wpe hem in to the mide
of the cytre / and make a pꝛoclamacion / that
no man complapne agapntt him of en mats
ter / andtyat noman trouble bim £o7 enx ma
nerok caute.

So it happened that when hrs accufers
lawe the wozcype whech was pꝛoclamed
okhim / a that he was clothedin purple:theg
flea euerychone. And the Rynge made moch
ol hem / wzote hym amonge hrs cheke kren⸗
des / made hema duke / and parta ner of bis
domenron. Thus Jonathas wente agapne


to Jerulalem wrth Deace anh glaicte Inuit t


the C. Ixv. peare came Demettius the tonne
ol Demettrus fom Creta in to hs fathers
lande: wheror when Alexander


etell he 0
was Devory ‘anbectouncbontentoos mee ;


che. And Wemetrpus chole Appolionpus
(which had the gouernaunce ok Celolpꝛra)
to be hs captapne,

Hobe gathered a greate hook and came
vnto Jamnta / and fende woꝛde vnto Zona ·
thas the bye pelt / lareng: Barreſt thou the
Sande vs thy lelk alone: Ag foz me, J ambut
e ee
pꝛouedſt thy garni bs men
tapnes. Now therfore vk thou trüll elt in


thence atone ſtrengch / come downe to vs in


tothe plarne telde / and there lett vs pꝛoue
dure ſtrength together: thou Malt kende / B
A baue valeaunt men of warre with me: and
walt knowe whom J am / and the other that


andher greate dianpte. tol e kynge Bande bp:
value, wane ae


gaueantwere / fa
dbbherin thou art comeagapne to the lande ot
toy pꝛogenptours / and lett in the trone of
thelvhingoome. Is now wyll J kulkrn thy
wꝛptynge: but mete me at Ptolomais/s we
mape fe one another / andthat J mare mary
my daughter vnto the accoꝛdynge tochpde⸗
ve. d Ptolomp wẽte out of Egipte wrth
bis daughter cleopatra /e came vnto to ·
lomais in 6 C. irt. peare: where bynge Ale ·
xander methim / andhe gaue Alexander bys
daughter Cleopatra / a marped them at Pto-
domiars wrth greate woꝛchvpe / ae as the


de bymp.

Whlchlape / that youre kote is notable to
ande befoze oure tace / toꝛ thy fathers haue
bene twyle chaced in to their awne lande.
And nom / how wylt thou be ableto abrde co
greate an hoot of bozimenandfotemen in
che elde / where as is nether roche / lone ner
place to lle vnto?

neben Fonathas herde the woꝛdes ok
Appollontus / he was moued inhes mende:
wherkoze he chole. x. thoulande men and wẽ·
te out ok gerulalem / and Symon hrs bꝛo⸗
ther mer hymfoz tohelnehym: Indther pete
chedtheir tentes at Jopp / but i rent


Ok the an


drm koꝛth / kor Joppa was an hole of Tp⸗
vollonius. Chen Jonachas laped ſege toit /
und they that were in the cytie/ foz berp kea⸗
re let hum in: and fo Jonathas wine Joppa.
Appollonius hearynge ofthys / toße thꝛe
thoufandbozte men / witha greate Poſtol
kote / z wet as though he woldgo to A Zotus /
and came immedtat ip in to the plapnekelde:
decaule he had co man hozlmmen / ¢ put bys
truſt inthem. Do Fonathas folowedopon
him to A Zotus / and chere they ſtroke p bat ·
kapll. Qowhad Appollontus teste cer,
Candbozimen behinde thé pꝛyuelpin p tẽtes.
And when Fonathas knew that koch wayte
was laped behynde them / they went rounde
aboutethe enempes holt / and (ot dartes at
45 207 from the moznyng tod euenyng.
oz Jonathas people / they hepte their
oꝛdze as he had commaundedthem / and the
enempes hozles were euer labourynge.

J. chen bought Spmon forth his bote / g
ſet them agapnt the kote men. Foꝛ the hozt⸗
men were wery allready So he dilcomkp⸗
tedthem / and they led. Andthey that were
ſcatred inthe kelde / gat them to Tr otus / and
came in to the temple of Dagon their ol /
chat they myght there ſaue their lues. But
Jonathas letttyꝛe vpon Azotus and all the
Cities rounde aboute it / tone theirgoodes /


auh rl. d. and bzent bpthe templeol Wagon wrth all


them that were fled in toit.

Thus were Hayne and bzent well nye. vit
choulande men. Do Jonathas remoued che
hoſte From thence / añd bꝛought chem to Al
calon: where the men of the citie came loꝛth /
and met hym with greate woꝛchyppe. Alter
this wente Jonathas and hys holte agapne
to Jerulalem / wyth Nieren Cubttaunce of
Good. Ind when keng Alexanderherde thele
chynges / he thought to do Jonathas moze
woꝛchppe / and lent him a colar ok golde / as
che ble is to be geuen vnto loch as are of the
Rynges nexte bloude. He gaue hym alfothe
cytiẽ of Accaron with the landes belonging
therto in pottettion,

ECMChebplencponbetwirte Ptolomese Alersunder
bis fonne in lawe. Che decth of Ateraunder. Deme⸗
e ga te
Salla bun luer tear agapne. a 5 moueth
C rs. Demet tdeiy⸗
nered bp the Cuccour of Jonathas. After his delpues
vance hebzeaketh his couengunt that he had mabe,
Ce. xi. Chapter.
EM the kynge of Egypte gathered


an hoſte Ipkeche fandecharlrech ch.


Oopon the lee thoze)andmany whip.

peg:g wetaboute thozolw dilceate
tooptayne the kyngdome of Alexander / and
ko topne it vnto his awne realme. pon this
be toke his tournee into Dꝛzia / and was


achabees, Whiff


letten in tothe cytyes / a men came koꝛth to
mete him: tos byng Alexander had cõmaun⸗
ded them lo to do / becaule he was his lather
inlawe. Now when Ptolomp entred in to
eny crtie he leftemen ot ware to kepe it / a
this he dyd thozowe out all the cyties. And
whenhe came to Azotus / they ſbewed hym
the temple of Wagon and Azotus that was
bzent bp / with the other thinges which were
deſtroxed / che deed bodyes ca ſt abzode / athe
graues that they had made by d wape cyde /
top loch as were dane in the kelde: and tolde
che kynge that Jonathas had done all there
chenges / tothe intent they mrgbt gett hym
euell wyll. But the kung tapde not a wozde
therto. And Jonathas met ihe kynge wyth
great honoure at Joppa / where they ſaluted
one another / a tone their reſt. So when Jo⸗
nathas had gone with the kyng / onto § wa⸗
ter that was called Cleutherns,/ he tinned
agane to Jerulalem. Now Ptolomy had
gotten the dominton ol the cyties vnto Sez
leucta vpon the fee coatt/ ymagpninge wic⸗
hedcouncels agaynſt Alexander / tent em
battitours onto Ae deu gte b 0 dane
let os make a bonde betwyxce os /a Wall F
geue the my daughter that Alexander hath /
and thou cbalt rapgne in thy fathers kyng⸗
dome. J repente that 3 gaue Alexander my
daughter /foz he goeih aboute to lep me.
And thus he lclaundꝛed Alexander / becaule
be 472 badhis realme.

Thus he tone his daughter From him / ga ·
uehervnto Wemetrius / and kozkone Alexã⸗
der lothat his malyce was openiy knowen.
AndPtolomy cam to Antioche / where be let
two crowneß bp his awne head: ö crowne
ol Egypte and of Alia. In themeane ſealon
was kynge Alexander in Cilicta /foz they
dweit in thole places / had rebelled agapn it
gym. But when le xander herde ok chys / he
came to warte agaynſt him. Do Beng Pto⸗
lomp bzought fozth his hott a met him wyth
ampgbtye power / and chaled hym awa be.
Chenlled Alexander in to Araby / there to be
dekended / a Ryngetolomys honoure increa·
led. And Zabdiel the Arabtan cmote of Ale.

echpzde dave a ge Ptolomy
hem felfe: andthey whomhe had tett in the
ſtrongeboldes / were apne of thote were
within the cytpes. And Demetrius rapgned,
inthe bundzeth and leuen and cyxtpe peare.
At the lame tyme gathered Nonathas

em that were in Jewꝛy to tape lege onto
the caftell which was at Jerulälem / and lo
they made man inſtrumentes ol warre a-
gapntt it. Chen wentethere certayne vngod
dune nen Wem — 7
to emetriug / and tolde hym
ple) onto kyng D Ai. chat


D


The fprxltboke


Hatzonsthabekrgedthe cabel. Do wehe


beide it he was angrie / e Ammeblatip came
onto Ptolomaig /g wzote onto Jonathas /g
he chulde notlaxe 115 to 8 caſtel / butcome
Kcpeake with hym in an the hate. Heuer⸗
thelete when Jonathas herdethis he comatt-
ded to belege it. Hechole alto certa pne ofthe
elderg a pfeſtes ot g raell / a put him telt in
the paveli/@ tobe wich hini golde / lluer / clo⸗
thing a dluerle pꝛelentes: ¢ wente to Ptolo
mats onto the kinge / s koũde him gracious,
And though certapne vngodlyme orhrs
atone people made cöplapntes vpon him / pet
the kynge intreated him / Ine as bys pꝛede·
cellours had done befoze: ¢ promoted hym in
the light of all his krendes / conkirmed him in
the hoe paeſthode with all the woꝛchipe 6 he
had atoze / a made bim his cheke ktende. Jo ·
nathas allo delpzed the henge that be wolde
malte Jewꝛpkre with the thze head cyties ol
Samaria ¢ the landes pertarnynge therto:
bpon this drd Jonathas promitebim thꝛe C.
talentes. nohere bnto the henge conlented / a
gaue Jonathas weptinge tthe fame / con⸗
teynpiige thele wozdes, Bynge Bemettryus
kendeth gretinge vnto his brother Jonathas
Kto the people ofthe Je wes. ie lende you
Hevea copy of the lettre whych we drdwzte
nto oure elder Laſthenug / concerning vou
nee dene eg 6
em el e onto
Laſthenus his elder forthe chte $
Ouve krendes the people ofthe Jewes kepe
nto bs / E for the louynge kyndnelle whych
they beare toward vs: we are determedto do
them good. Wherkoze we oꝛdene al the coa⸗
kes ok Jeurpe wyth. iti. cptyes / Lyda and
Kamatha ( whych are added önto LJewzpkrä
Spamatia)e all che landes pertaninge there
onto / to be krelp feparaten koꝛ loch as do Caz
crptice in Jerulalem: both concernynge the
papnidtes whpch the hyng toke yearly afoze
J oh he krutes allo of the eartha trees.
Is Coz other tithes & tributes that belonged
vnto bs / we dilcharge them therok krom this
tyme kozth. In ipke maner we graunte vnto
themal the cuſtomes of Cait ¢ crowne taxes
which were beoughe onto bs And this kre⸗
dome wall ther haue firme a fenfatt/ krom
Chis tyme kozth ko eurevmoze . Cherkoze e 6
females Copp of thefe our letters / z detfucy
t onto Jonachas: f it mae be keptebpon p
err 1 ene
en Dem e kynge
ſawe that his fande was ret chaten tes
Caunce was made hym : he fent awaye all
his hooſt everyman ko hys awne place /ex ·
cepte an armpe ok ftraungers / whom he
brought from the Hes of the Heathen / wher


GFE 5c s. Loze al bis fathers hook bad euel wijat him.


ow was there one criphon( that had bene
‘Of Aleranders parte atoze ) whych when he
lawe that all the boot murmured agaynſt
emetriusthe wente to Emalcuel the Aras
lan ( that bꝛought vp antrochus the fonne
ok Alexander) a ape fore vponhim / todeliuer
him this pig Antiochus: that he might ray⸗
gne in his fathers ſteade. He tolde hm allo
tohat greate eucil Demetrius had done / and
how his men of warte loued him not: lo re ·
mapned there a jonge ſeacon.

And Lonathas tent onto hinge Demetri
us / to dꝛpue them out whych were in the cas
ſtel at Jeruſalem a in the other retugyes Foz
ther dpd Flracllgreate harme. Do Wemec
titus Cent woꝛde onto Jonathas /ſapenge: 3
wil not only do thele thinges Foz the and thy
people / but at tyme conueniẽt J will do both
the a thy people greate woꝛchype. But now
chouſbalt do me a pleature ve thou wiltlend
memento helpe me: foꝛ all myne armpe is

ene frome. So Fonathas tent hym. ij. M.
onge men bnto Antpoche / andthey came
vnto the hinge / wherkoze the kynge was ve ⸗
rr glad at their cõmynge. But they that we ⸗
re ofthe citieleuen an. Cxx. thoufande men
gathered them together / a wolde haue days
nethe hynge which fed in to hrs courte:and
the citelyn kepte the ltretes or the citie / and
beganne to kygbt.

Chen the kynge called koꝛ the gewes hele
pe / which came vnto hym altogether/ ewes
te abꝛode thoꝛow the cptre / a ewe the lame
dape an C. M. men: let yꝛe bps the citie / gat
manptporles in that dape / a 3
hinge. Do when the cytelyns fame that the

ewes had gotten their wil of the cytpe / and
they them lelues dilpoyntedok their pre

ep made their Cupplicacton onto the hinge
fayenge/ Gzaunte vs peace /andlett the Je.
‘wes ceatle from troublingebs andthe cpties
Gbpon thps ther caſt awape their weapens.
‘Thus they made peace / and the Jewes gate
greate wozchlpe in the tyaht oF the kynge /
in the fight ok all that were in hrs realme / e
were Cpoben of thoꝛow out the hyngdome:
and lo they came agayne to Jerulalem with
Greate goodes,


Sothe king Demetrius lat the ron: d


ol his kingdomẽ / and had peace in his lande.
Neuertheles he dyuembeled in all that euer
hetpake a with dꝛewe him telt krom Jona⸗
chas / nether rewarded him acco dyng to the
benefptes whych he had done foꝛhem / but
Croubledbimberp foze. After this came cry


phon agapne with vonge Antiochus / which


rapgneda was crowned kynge Chen there


gathered vnto him al the men ot warre / y


Demetrius had put awaye : thele fought a-
gapnſt Demetrius / woch led Stun


backe. Soo Crtphontoke the clephanfeg /g
wanne Antiode And yong Antiochus wio⸗
te onto Jonathas / capenge: J conkrzme
inthppzeltode / az maße the ruler of lin coũ⸗
trees / g thou mapelt be a krende ok kunges.
Upon this he tent himgolden vellels tobe
terued in g gaue him leue todzinke in golde
to be clothed in purple / andto were a colar
ol golde / He made bys bꝛother Srmon allo
pie krom the cooſtes of Cyʒus vnto 8
orders ol Egypte. Then Jonathas tone brs
tourney / a wente thozow the cityes beyonde
the water (ok Josdane) ¢ all the men or wars
£ of pra Gathered chem vine hem fozto
belpe hm. Do he came trite Accalon / and
they of the cxtre receaued hem Honozably: ¢
kom thence wente he vnto Gaza / but they
wolde not lett him in: wherkoze he laxed lege
vnto it burnynge vy gabe at, e tye plas
tes that were aboute the cytie.

DB Andthe cptetins of Gara lubntpttdchem
felues vnto Jonathas / whych made peace w
the / but tokkẽ of their fonnes topleage / lent
chemto Jerulalem / and wente thoꝛow the
cbuntre onto Pamaſcus. Now when Jong
chas herde that Demetrius pꝛynces were
come in to Cades ( which is in Galilee) with
agreathooſt purpoling to put Demetrius
out from mediynge in the realme: he came
agaynſt them / and lette Spmon hig bother
inthe lande: whych canie co Bethlurã / and
lapedlege to it a longe leaton / and dilcomkt ·
ted ChE Do ther del pzedto haue peace with
him / which he graunted them / a akterwarde
put thẽ out fro thence / toke p cite / a let men
tokepe it. and Jonathas this hook came
to ꝭ water of Genetar / a bytymes in z moz⸗
uy Sat thé to the plagne keide ok A307,

beholde / the hoottes of thewcathen
met thẽ in the kelde /a layed watch fo2 thé in
the mountapnes: lo ? when Jonathas came
agarnſt che / the other( which were lapedto
role out of thetr places / a kought /a
thepthat were of Jonathas (poe / fled euer
man: g there was not one oF thẽ lekt / ercepte
ag the tonne of Abtalomus / and
ſudas the tonne of Calpht the captapne of
e hooſt. hen Jonathas rente his clothes /
Laped earth vpõ his head / made bys pꝛaper /
turned agayne to the in p kedde: where they
Fought together / and he put them to klraht.
Now when his atone men 8 were fled/faw
chls:thex turned agayne vntohim / a helped
him to kolowe pon all theirenempes vnto
cheirtentes at Cades. Do there were dlayne
ofthe Heathen the lame dape. ij. M. men / a
Gonathas turned agayne to Jerucalem.
‘@onathas fendeth Embatlitoures to Rome a to the
leer Sparta to renue theix cauenaunt ot rend
. Jonath as put teth to the Pꝛmces of Dee
MMetrms. Trip don taketh Jonathas bp deceate.


athabtes,


chus and Antipater the fone of Jalon / and
kent them onto the Romarnes / toꝛto renue
the olde bonde of trendſopp and loue wyth
them. ne commaunded them allo to come
vnto ou / to lalute vou / and to delpuer you
dure jettres / concernyng the renouacyon o
dure bꝛotherhode. And now ve chan do right
well / to geue vs an ant were there vnto.
And this is the copy of the wꝛytynge / C
which Arius the hynge of Sparta ſent vn.
to Ontas: Artus kyng of ö Sparciansien-
deth gretynge vnto Onias the hye pꝛeſt. It
is tonde in wꝛrtynge / that An afl
b.


The fy


and geweg are brethze /andcome out of che
Gencracyd of Abzahd. Ind now ko lo moch
as this is comme to dure knowledg / ve Waldo
well / to waite onto vs of youre paolperitre.
As for bs / wehaue werte ouve monde vnto
vou: Sure catell and goodes are vourg / and
Pours ours. Chele thynges haue we com ·
maunded to be chewed onto vou.
when Jonathas herdeſchat Demettius
pꝛrnces Were come forth to krght agapntt
bpm with a greater hoot then afore / be wet
krom Jerulaſem /a met them in the lande of
Hemäth / tos he gauethẽ not pace to come
into his awne cofitre. Andhe lentlpres vn⸗
ko their tentes / whych came agapne ¢ tolde
fica they weve appopntepta came 038
Him in thenyghtCeaton,nabertoze when the
kunne was gone downe/Aonathascõmaun⸗
ded his men to watch all the nyaht / a to be
ready tb . foz to kygbt: ¢ fet, watch
Dmentounde aboute / Bü when the
aduerkaries hetde that Fonathas was rea.
dr with his men to the battapll / cher keared /
E were akraped in their hertes / and kyndled
kyꝛes in theirtentes / bzale vp / and gat the
awape. Meuertheles Jonathas andhis com»


any unew it not tyli the mozneng / koz ther N


we the kpꝛes burnynge.

Chen Jonathas iolowed vpon them / but
he myght not oucrtate them / Coz ther were
gone ouerthe water Eleutherug. Do Jona⸗
thas departed vnto the Arabiis( which were
called Jabadei)llew them / z toke their goo⸗
des He pꝛoceded further allo / and came vn⸗
to Damatcug/e wente thoꝛow all that cof
tre. But Sims his brother tone his tourney
and came to Alcalon ¢ to the nexte ctronge

zoldes departynge onto Joppa / and wanne

Foꝛ he herde that they wold ſtande of De
mete 17 partpe: wherkoze be tent men ol
warre th the cyte / to eye it. Alter this came
Jonathas home agapne / a calledthe elderg
9 5 together: and deupled with thẽ
kozto bupide vp the ctröge holdes in Jewzr /
and the walles of gerulalem / to let op an
bye wall betwixt the cattell and the cite / koꝛ
ko leparate it from the cite / that it myght be
lone 146 that men chulde nether bye nog
ell init.

Upon this they came together ko to buil⸗
de vp the cities ko moch ag the wall vponß
broke or ß ne che ep Capherhetab) was
kallen dowone they repapzed it. And Symon
fet ppadladah in Hephelah / e made it ſtrõg
kettyng poztes g lockes vpon it. Now when

Eryphon purpoledto rapgne in Arpa / to be


imgacherte. crowned / a to Mave the kynge Anttochus: he
oer, cap lr. was akraped ß Jonathas wolde not kullre


im but kight againſt hüm. whertoꝛehe wẽ ·
about 3 kill him.


Ak boke


Sohe departed / a came vnto Bethlan.


wente Zonathag forth agapnſt himto
the battayll with tourtre thouſande choten
men / a came vnto Bethan allo. But when
Criphon fawe that Jonathas came wyth


to greate an Hoſte to deſtroxe hem / be was


akraped: and therloꝛe he receauedhim hono·
rabip cõmended him onto all his frendes / @
gauẽ hm rewardeg / and commaunded bys
men Of ware to be as obedient vnto hin as
tohym keike.

And layne vnto Jonathas: why halt thou
cauled thes people to take Coch trauaple /
fepng there is no warre betwyxte vs: Cher⸗
koze tende them home agayne / a chole cers
tapne men to wapte vpd the / a come thou w
me to ptolomaig: fo2 I wyll geue it / with
d other edge holdes (mer oF warre a theit
ollicers: As foz me /I muſt departe / thys is


leued him / and dyd as he larde / vuttynge a
wave his holt which wente in tothe land or
of Juda. He kepte but. ij. M. by him wher.
of he lent. j. M. into Galilee / and one. M.
wente with him lelte.

Now asloone as Jonathas entred in ta
tolomats / the: kparred the gates
ofthe ertte / and tone him / and llewe alichẽ
with the lwerde / p came in with him. Chen
tent Criphon an Hott of ote men and hol ⸗
men in to Galtlee andin to the great playne
kelde / to dedrope all Jonathas cõpany. Bu
when they knew that Jonathas was takes
Kall ter darne that wäptedbpon him: they
tobe councell together / acame foith reade
to $ battapll. Do when ther which kolowed
vpon the / ca we that it was matter ol lxre /
they turned backe . As tor the other /
thep wente in to the ol Juda peaceal /
and bewapled Jonathas / a them that were
with hem eyght loꝛe. Ind Jlrael made great
lamentacpon. Chen all tie peathen p were
rounde aboute them /fought to deſtrope thé
Foꝛ ther larde mow haue they no captapne
noz eny man to helpe them. gertoꝛẽ let hs
ouercome them / and rote out their name fd
amonge men.


CAfter-Jonathas was taken Symen is chofen caps


apne / ot whom Criphon his child e money
bench dnn ere andbis
chpldz en. Che ai of Jonathas. Cryp .
ane Pal — r
truce wit . Simon za. Be fo
— — tower or Sion. He maketh bis lone John
01 a 8
W gabe ri chapter.
eu toe Spud herde that crt:
SE phon gathereda greate Hole / to
come in to the lande of guda / and
dead FE todefttove ttre fate g the people
was in greate fearfulnede .


fun caule of mp comp raonatbee be.


Ht the Mathabees. xx.


dp to Jerutalem / and gathered 6 people ĩo· hoztmen to come that lame night. Peuerthe
ether / and gaue them exoztacyon, tapinge: lelle it was a verygreate cnowe ko that he
eee ae fam came not in Salaadithim. and when he dꝛe⸗
nethzen a mx Fathers houle haus rite ko: we nye Balchama / he tlewe Jonathas and
Chelate ethe Spanctuary/@ what maner his lonnes there / and then turned ko togod


{Ajavitcebortroubles we haue fene: thozoiwe occalpon home in to his awne lande.


wherot / allmy bꝛethzẽ are flapne oz Jtrdeis Chen tent Symon for to kec his brothers
ſake / and J am lettalone. And now ſett not deed coarle / and buried it in Monit his ka⸗
me Cpare myne awne lpte in eny maner of thers cytie. So all Acrael bewayled hym W
trouble / to: I am no better then inx bzethꝛẽ: greate lamentacron / and mourned £02 hynt
but wyll auenge my people etheSpanctuae very longe and Demon made vpon the (es
xx / oure chyldzen and oure wyues :o all the pulcre ot his father and hys bꝛeth ze a bupls
Heachen are gathered together / todeltrope denge hre to lone vnta gk kre Kolle behende
vs ol very malpce. 6 befoze:and let vp leu ppierz / one agapntt
It thete woznes the hertes ol the people another kor his father /hys mother a koure
were kyndled together / lo that cheß crped w bꝛethꝛen ) a let greate piters rounde aboute /
a loude vopce / lãxinge: Chou ſhalt be oure with armes vpon them fo2 a perpetuall me⸗
cCaptapne in ſteade of Judas and Jonathas moꝛp / and carued chippes belpde the armes:
thb bzethꝛẽ / oꝛdze thou ouure batte / a what that they might be lene of men laplynge in
Loeuer thou conmaundelt vs, we chall doit. the lee. Tuts lepulcre whtchhe made at Mo⸗

o be gathered all p men of warre making U pet onto thisaaye,

ake to kynich all che wales of Ferufatem/


ap lent he Jonathas the donne ot Ablalomus terout ¢
wich a tech botte onto Joppa / which dꝛoue Him lelfhpng of lia / and dyd moch euell in
thé out 6 were in the caſtell / and rema pned the lande. Spmon allo bupſte bp the cattels
ere him̃ tele. Criphon alto remoued krom in Jewzy / mak nge them ſtronge wyth bye
Ptolomais with a greate armpe to come in towzes / greate walles / poꝛtes and lockes /
ko the — — Jonathas wüym lared vp bptales inthe ſtrange holdes. And
in warde. Ind Simon pyrehedhis tentes at Srmon chole certapne men / and tent them
Addus befoze the plapne kelde. tohpnge Memetrius:to delpze him / that he
But when Eriphon knewe that Symon wolde dilcharge the land Erom all bondage /
Hove vp in ſteade ol hys brother Jonathas/ koꝛ Criphon had popled it very foze. Where
Ee thathe wolde warre aga pnſt hm: helene vpon Demetrius the hynge antweredhym /
mielkaungers onto him / laping: hohere as we and wꝛote vnto him after this maner.
haue kepte Jonathas thy biother / it is ko: Demetrius the kynge Cendeth gretynge
money that he is awynge inthe kynges ac⸗ vnto Spmon the hye pret his krende / weet
compte ſconcernynge the butpnede p he had the elvers a people ofthe Jeweg. Che golde
in hande. Wherkoze lende nowan. Cetalẽtes crowne and pꝛectous one that ve lent onto
ol lyluer and hys two fonnes foz ſuertye / vs haue we receauedrand are ready to make
that when he is letten forth be Wail not Goze a ſtedkalt peace with vou / yce atoiwepte vn
lake vg: and we chall lende him agayne. Pe⸗ to oure offpcers/foz to releaſe vou / concer⸗
nerthelelle Sopmon knewe / that he optiems nynge the thynges wherin we made pou kre⸗
bled in his woꝛdes: pet commaunded he the e the appoyntment that we make with vou /
monep a chyldꝛento be delpuered vnto hym: Walbe kpzme and ſtable. Che ſtronge holdes
leſt he uld be che greater enemye agaynſt which pe haue buploen/ Pal be youre awne.
che people or gerael / a tae: becaule he tent As foz enpouer'fyght oz fatvte commptted
him not the monepandthe childzen / therkoꝛe onto this dave / we koꝛgeue it / a the crowne
is Jonathas eed, tare 6 pe ought bs allo. Ind where as was
. Do Spmon bent him the chyldzẽ and an eny othertrpbute in Jerulalẽ / it Hat now be
hunddꝛeth talẽtes / but he dillembled / a wolde no krybute: and lone who are mete amonge
not let Fonathas go. A fterwarde came Cris vou to be in oure courte lec them be wꝛyttẽ
phon in to the lande / to deltrope it / and went pp / chat there maye be peace betwyrte bs.
rounde aboute by the waye that ledeth vn⸗ Chuß the vock orthe eathen was tanen
to Adoz. But where loeuer they wente chr⸗ from Irraen / in the hund eth and keuentye
cher wente Sopmon and his hoſte allo Pow peare. And the people of the Tewes beganne


they that were in the caſtell / ſent mellaun⸗ ko wypte in their lettres a actes on this ma· i With. fils


gers vnto Criphon / p he chuide make hate ner. In z Epatt yeare ot S ymon z hye pꝛelt /
ko come by the wyldernelle / and to lende thẽ and pꝛynce ofthe Jewes.
brtales: Ind Criphon made readr alibys In choſe dares went rm vnto 4


a8 CHphon went koch to walne w 7
which he made ſtröge rounde aboute. Chen ß vonge kyng Antiochus, hetlew vum trap. Forepbes cal,
hand vaigned in hig ſteade / cromned Fe! rene


andbetegedit rounde aboute, he lẽtt
bp osdinaunce of warre. And wanne a towze
Wyrch he tone. Hother that gatt in tothe
cotwseleapte in che cptpe / whrch was in
greate keare: In do moch that the people of
e e
kenne Symon to be at one wrih che:
enge.
— bs not alter oure wickednes /
but be gracious vnto bt / and we ball do £
leturck. Chen So ymon toz very pte / wolde


t nomoze agapntt them but put the out. f


OF che cptie and cauled che houles(wherin §


Images were to be clenled:andlo entred the hn agri


Tpeve wych Plalmes of pzaple ada
Aden danch se ne ede
all abhampnacpons out ofthe creie / be tect
loch mien in it as kepte the la w of God / and
made the cytie 2 1 ae buyiden a dwel ·
Tonge place on elke.

ow when they in the caltell at Jerula·


alan 50 the great enemy ol Atrael was

And Symon odenedehat the lamedape
ſhuld be hepte euer veare in gladnele / and
made ſtrůge che bril of the temple that was


belpde the caſt eli / where he dwelt hem lelte h


wich his cpany. Symon allo perceaurn

eer is tonne was a myahtte mant
J

and cauled him todwellat Gaza.


Demetrius is ovierconte of Avlaces ymon being


tayne there ts greatequeeenes fn gtvael. the Spi
.


pp wich the Momanes 6 wich the


E beng
and denarted


Mito krght agapnſt jon. Now
when Arlaces che ng of Betta € rata
herve 5 Demetrius was entred within bis
bozderß: be fent one of his prynces to take
bymatpue / etobzyngebym vnto hym. Do
he wente and ewe Demetrius bolte /toke
bem celle / brought hemto Arlaces / which


bim captaxne ok all the holtes / l


oft boke


bepte hem inwarde. And all the lande of
— wat in telt / lo longe as Srmon liued


the trees gaue their trute and enerẽace. Che 1B
elders fatt all in tudgement / a toke chetrde⸗
pce koꝛ the wealth dt che lande: the vonge
men put on woꝛchype and harnede vponthẽ.
Be proupded bptalles bos the cytres / and
made goodly ctronge holdes of them: co char
che fame of hrs wozchlpe was tpoken or bn⸗
to che ende or the worde. For he made peace
thozom out che
ol myꝛth and toe.
Euerv mG tat onder his byne ¢ kyge tren
and there was no man to frape the Awape.
There was none ing lande to fyghtagayne


ance
oly bedtels Gelen


min krend⸗
aich uh gude ar ad made
athashis bethzen,
re red betoze the con ·
Zregacxon at Jerutal
—.— Che Senatous and ci &
e and
telyns ol Sparta lende greting onto Simũ
$ great peit Wehe endes / pzectes / ad other
people ofthe ewes their bꝛethzen: when
poure embatptours g were lent vnto dure
people / certitxed bs ot youre woꝛchippe / ho·
noure a polperous wealth: we were glad
atthe compng/¢ baue wette the eavande
which theptpake betoze p coficell St 8 peoe
Plenamele that faumentus 8 fonne An-
kiochus / and Intipater d tonne of Fafon the
Jewes embaaltouts are come vnto bs / koꝛ to
denue g olde krendchtpe with bs. Upon this
FW


and Ira ent ente
J and 3 en was kg


Mh


em, 2 %
tbecoopotepeletes eat ri =!


„ f the n


gatande cbulde be wyyttẽ in the lpecxall bos
kes ol the people / ko a perpetuall memoꝛy
vnto the Sparcians:pee and that we ſpulde
— — Symi pareat


ſchts dyd Sovmon lende Numentus

onto Rome / with a golden ſhlde ot a thou ·

laund pounde weight to cõtirme the krend ·

Mippe with them: which when the Romay-

nes vnderſtode / they tarde: what thanckes
hall we recompence agapne onto S>pmon
Ebis chyldz: For be bath Habliqedbis bze-
th2en/@ ouercome the enempes of Jirgel.
Wherkoze they graunted him to be tre. And
all this wrote the Jeweg in tables of latyn /
and naled it vnto the pplers bpd che mounte
Sion. Che copy of the wzptpnge is this:

Che. rviij da pe of the moneth Elul in d
Elxxij. veare in che thirde peare of Spmon
the he pꝛelt / in the greate congregachon ol
the prettes rulers of the peopie / and elders
OF} coltre at Acarame / were thele woꝛdes
openlp declared:

e. Foꝛ lo moch as there was moch warre in
oure land / therkoze Symon 8 fonne of Ma
tathtah come of the chyldꝛen of Jareb) and
bis bꝛethzen / put them telues in parell / and
relpſted the enemres ok their people: 6 their
Sanctuary and lawe might be manteyned /
und dyd their people greate woꝛſhipe. Jona ·
nathãs in lyne maner / akter that he had go:
uernedhis people and bene theirhye pelle:
dred / and lpeth buried belpde his elders.

Alter $ wolde their enempes haue troddẽ
their holx thinges vnder kote / deltroyed their
Lände and btterly walſted their Sanctua⸗
ry. Chen Symon withſtode theni / a fought
Foz his people ſtpent moch of bis awne mo-
bee euere wages mabe range pies

gau age e
of Juda / wich Bechlurah that lyeth spon $
bozders of Je wzylwhere the ozdpnaunce of
thelr enempes lave tomtyme ) and tet Jewes
there koꝛ to kepe it.


X


I behauoure / and faythtulnede tobpch he
Kepte vnto them / andhowhetoughe byait
wares the wealth or his people / becaule he
drdallthrs / therkoze they chole bym to be
their pꝛynce andhye pzeſt. Ind in his tyme
ther pꝛolpered wel by him lo that the Bea ·
chen were take out ol cheix land: a they allo


achabees, lxri.


which were in the cytie ol Dauidat Jeruſa
jeminthe catteltapete hep wet outs defpe
ledallthrnges that were aboute the Sane
ccuarp /anddpo greate harme bnto clenips
hes)and Spnion put me or the Jewes init;
fo; the defence ot the lande and che cytie / ¢
fet op the wailes of Aerulalem.

And kynge Weniettius contirmenhim in G
his he pretthooe / made him his krende / and
dydhim greate woꝛſpipe. Foz heherdethat
the nomapns called the Jewes their krendd /
Jouerg and bꝛethꝛen: how honoꝛably they ie
ceaued Simons embadptours howtheße⸗
wet and pꝛeſtes conlentedthat he bulde be
chelr pꝛynce andbpe pꝛeſt perpecualty (tyil
God rapled vp the true pꝛophet) and that he
Guid be their captapne / to care foz § Dan⸗
ctuarp/and to tett officers vponthe wozches
therok / ouer the land / ouer the weapkg / ouer
che houſes ol defence / to make pꝛouillon foz
the holy thynges / and to be obe xed ok euer
man / ali the wzrtynges ok the lande to be
made in his name: that he ſbulde be clothen
in purple and golde / a that it wbulde be lau⸗
dull oz none ot people noz pꝛeſtes to bꝛea ·
ne enn of thele tynges / to wpthtande bys
wondes / ner to call enycongregacpon in the
lande without him: g be chüldẽ be clothedin
purple / a weare a colar oł gold: and pt there
were eny which dilobeyeds bake is O7dE
naunce / that he ſbulde be punttyen,

So all the people cofentedto alowe Sie
mon / and to do Acco dynge to chele woꝛdeg.
Srmonalſohtm lelke tone it vpon hym / e
was contente to be hype pꝛeſt / the captayne
and pꝛynce okthe Lewes and pꝛeſtes / and to
gouernethem all. And they commaunded to
make this wyytvnge in tables of latyn / and
faſten it vnto the compalle ol the Sanctun⸗
ry in an open place: and to lape vp a copy ot
the tame in the trealurx / chat Symon ä hrs
polterite might haue it.


CaAnttocbus maketh a couenaumt ok krendchiy with
Mpmonand Criphon i perlegunted. The Momap⸗
e gags upuges and nacpons in the de
Fence of the Jewes. Antiochus rekuſpnge the helpe
that Spmon dent hun hreabeth his couenaunt,
Che. rv. Chapter.

zouer / u yng Antiochus z tonne
Hof Demetrius lente lettres from #
the Pies ol the lee / vnto Srmon
: the hye pꝛelt and pꝛynce ol p Ze ·
wes / and to ali the people / conteynyng thete
wozdes: Antiochus the kynge lendeth gre⸗
tynge vnto Srmonthehre pꝛele and to the
people of p Jewes. Foꝛ lo moch as certapne
wwecked men haue gotten the Kyngdome of
dure pꝛogenptours / A am purpoled to cha⸗
lenge the realme agapne / and to reſtoꝛe it to
the ode eftate,

wher⸗


4 fypltboke


ya eg ele.
dot 9 9 5
— se to 71


tapn / onto rmon , tozt. 720 65
temple Ye witbeibefvorne Zopba 6 Ge (with che
— cattell thats at wol. be while 415
eat of my realme / whole bozderg
che Cirritij.peare news done
in to his kathers 0 800
came er vnto bint l.


2 Soon an bar uc he fled

pech by the Cee type:te feat ep: reis
.
2 0 taken
Anti. and f artes uv e.
0 . wpe bate . E edel Akrgbt agarng


tano;
mean mefeato


Fnth me gumentuglg am Shen
b fach. lll. db t im) From the cytye fant boa ev ta
cee thb ene =a a © —.— sae een


3


Sata /chepdrd to
Se pest oa
we were cot rag & Heuertheles e
ewe thougheit 1 it
Odeo we uynges and pꝛouin⸗ ip vnto b krng / a tolde him
cles / to do themno harme / no: to take parte cher be hen kde ace b. a


countrees ne⸗ that he .
5 Annen ememe tyne


om thelr ¢
vnto Somion the bre pret bathe pu
hpth them accoidynge to thetr awne lawe.

Che lame wozdes woe the Romapnes .
allo bnto Demetrius the kyng / to Attalus /
Araba / artaces g to ali regions: as Same


Seen ee
sees peptone Aab
bet · John billeth Lee {pe aa his life.


cl
: pen came Zon op from Gass €
4 Kole ander le ren
ge ben peor


i eee fonnes wi
merpandpabovanchen elf Pt ehe
vp with hn
tobe thei
boule / a


done ami
enen montis bike ep Fa


ochiß clock Connes/Fudas ¢ Jhon / glapde
vnto them: J andmy ꝛen & my Fathers
houle / haue euer krom om Sean vp vnto
this dave / koughten agaynſt the enempes
Arrae /a God gaue en foꝛtune to delp-
üer Ilrael oft


0 . xx.
ee
ente fo;
debeus and reſtedat Movin. 3


2


er people was alraped to goo ouer the wa ·
Semen eme our Rid 15 lelte: and
the men leynge this /kolo we

Chen Fhon bergen eotemen in
oꝛdze / the one vehi other/fo2 their enemies
omen we when


men ol
ev agapne paceably in


ter ol D p-

n his minde /

conguete the lande /pmages
agen Emon g his tonnen /


re


tyelanbe ty
fame, he fe
totate Jhon: ani


otherthynges concern
otis paths in noble actes ( when nhe
behauedhim lelfe mantully)o€ the buplding
ok walles whych he made / and other ol hes
dedes:Cbep are wzptten in the cronycleg oF
brs bes pre thode kromthe tyme fo2th chat he
was made bye pret atter his father.


che ende ok thetyrtte bone
ok the Machabees.


„ ew


45 = „ ~ 8 ey eee de
The. ij, bone Ok the Mathabees, xxitj.
‘ e dtoned the captarne co death / hewidthem in ol chem allo but it was contumed thozowe prayed Salomon allo / and thetyze canes. Bird s
e letonde bo peces wat mere wych bym )tmote of chert che bah chat wrned rom che aulter. 250 dawnekrom peauen and confumeds burn
‘ a heaped and chzewe chem out in all thenges, sobenthis matter wag knowen / l was tolde offcringe. And Woles Capoe:becaute che line
ofthe Pachabers. Godbe pꝛapted / whpch hath delyucred che the hynge of Pertia / chat in the place where: offeringe was not eaten therfore itis cons
pa bun ees toatl CE sina wicked in to oute handes. thepzeltes / which were led awape / had yrd fumed. In lpte maner Salomon kepte the
erbaute neo gene lesben deb fine. um bereen we now are purpoten to kepe ß kee / chere apeared water in tteabe of kpre /a dedpcacion(ozbalowinge)cightbayes. „c
chu ae ene wih pyouein be pre. Ehe paper pintikpcnckanotcbetkpiedpaatbe nr dare 1 that Hehemias a his companp had puritied In the Annotacyos J waltynges ol Je. e gsoine vende;
BE Nehemiah, ok the moneth Calleu / we chought necedlas 5 the tacrikpces withall. Chen the hynge con · rem̃z/ were thele thinges put allo: K hom he Hehemtas. *
rp to certilpe poutherof: that pe alto meabe (poerwnge g ponderpnge che matteropligét- made a irbzarr(e bowge gathered out of all
hhepe the tabernacies featt date / g che dare Ip/made him a temple to pꝛoue the 1425 counttees the bokes of the pꝛophetes / oF
of the fpie7 wyrch was geuen os when He that was done. And when he kounde it lo in Dauid / che epittles or the henges/and ofthe
ic bemuah offren/atter that he had tet bp Rtem⸗ 5 ; Dede / he gaue the pꝛeſtes many gpftesedys pretentes.cuen foFudas allo lune what he
ple and che aulter. Foz what tyme as oure . uerbe kewardes: pee he tone chem urth hrs kerned brerperrece of matve/ O loch thinges
fathers were led awã pe onto Perlis / E pꝛe. atone hand / and gaue chem. nd Hehemas as hath happened onto vs / he gatheredthem
des wörch then fought 6 bonoure ot God} called he fame place Mepbthar/ which is as all kogether / and lo we haue them bybs Ar
tote the the pꝛpuelk krom che aulter / and r our totktebt to haue the lame / ſende tome
beditina valley) where as wag a depe dire call it Hepht. ody to ketch thembnto pou, where as we
pptia therin ther nepte tt becaute the place qos Zecerp bp the tabernnctetbeateckeyann f Thon ate aboute to celebzabe the puren.
was bnbnotwen to eucrpman. Now after she aultare tu the bell epesb.bobes of gaton cone" chon / we haue wiltten bnto you, Cperkore
manp peares when it pleated God / $ 2 ‘Sapried in ou. pe (hall do well / pepe kepethe lame dares.
mah chu be kent feote Urige of Perla : che. l. chapter. ſddehopeallo/that he ode whichdeipuered
he bene che cheiders chridzen of thote predles wut dug 0 is kounde alloin che witinges bis people /andgauethem al the berctage/
(which haohrd d pre ko che it, Anda chere e eee
Lolde bs / they tounde no kpze / but thicne wa ig pfu maundeo them which were caricd proméfenthem in che lawehchal coztiphaue
Chen cömaundedhe che to dzawe lt vp / bP Gig awapetotake fpze /asitistapde mercy vpon vs / and gather vs together trom
ebingett him / and x offrynges wythall, > bb Arie. Be commaundedthem allo wat cher vnder the heauen in to his holy place: koꝛhe
How whe the Caccifices were laped on 507. cpuſde not kozget che la we and commaunde⸗ bath ſaued vs from greate parels / and hath
"> vzed/ che pret Hehenuh commaunded to een mentes of the Londe / and that ther chulde glenfedthe place.
cpunckle theme the wad Wihe water he not erre in their mendes / when theyke IZma⸗ As concernynge Judas Machabeus and
this was done / the eyme come ß the Dun⸗ ges ok lpluer and golde with their a namen - bisbzetyzen/the urifpeacron of the greate
ne hone / which aloꝛe was hyd in § clouve: des. Chele andlo other ihrnges commatl⸗ temple thededicacton of che aulter / yee ¢ OF
there was a greatetpze krndied. In lo moch ededhe them /s exbogtenthem/thatthey Muls the warres chat cöcerne noble Antiochus ¢
that ewcrp man marucled. Mow all b prettes is denot lett the latwe of God gout of ther: Eupator hes konne oe the Wynpnges f cam (each. va.
See a eect nih toe Ute 2 ver toyptten alfo/bot the propbetiatibe 330
Jon i J . Foz though the
: 20 nates prapentire/and the other gave comimaundement of God)charged them) to were but fetwe / pet defended cher the whole
And Hehemlas prayer was atterthis mas takte the tabernaciea the arche wich theme iande/ozoueawape theenempesbott / reco
ner: D Tome God maker of all thpnges/ hee wente forth bnto che mountapne where ueredagapne the temple /that was polen
thou kearkull o Gronge / chou tyahtuous 8 Bent, zrriiha Moles clymmed vp /s Cae the heretage of of thozowe out all the worde delpueredthe
mercpull / thou that att onely a gracpous God, nd whe zeremprame there / he founde citie/ dorngetheir belt that the lawe ofthe
Bente onety tpbeeall/oneip Cutt/ bmi an open caue/wherin be lapen$ tabernacle/ L ond which wan putdotone/might wiegen
Seuerladynge thouthatnelpucrett Werach b arcke a the aulter oftncente/¢fotopped traquilpte bereltozed aga ne onto Lond /
fed all trouble / thou that halt ben che kn che bole Chere came certarne mentogether 2 was ko merctkun bnto them. As touch
chers and halowedchemmreceauf fe allo toloweng him / to march the place/but Jalonalco eigen, mebauconber ane cb
kerynge forthe whole people ol Bthey coulde not kynde it. Which when Fere. pendloudetobzingein to, one boke / F thingg
facut ee pert a a EE eres pwecanuerpe De MUD ote DRS
‘ i multitude of the bo
together mla ate under es meg Geb Gather his people together 4e. anbYotsbardest duide be forehemt ‘node
gaye) receaue thé vnto mercy. chen thal medle with Coztesandactes(¢ that becaule
u God chew them thele thynges / athe mater of lo diuerte matters haue onder talen lo to
9 89 OF Lende Chall appeate athe cloude alto/ compzebende che storyes:that doch as are dt.
i u. ſihe agit was ewedbite Woces: 8 ipheas Cpotentoreade/mpabtvaucpleaturcandpas
when Salomon detpzeds the place myght Armecberin: e that cheptobich are diiygent
be lanetitped / ait was Mewed him. in loch hinges / nrght the better thine bps
ozhe beyngea wyle man, pandledhono. che pee andthat wholoeuer read thẽ / might
rabiy and wylelr bnto Godin the haue pꝛollt cherbr.
. Balotoinge of tye temple when tt was Fintls Heuerthelelle we oure lelues that haue
Wed. Andirkeas . medled wich this matter fos the Moztenpnge E
che Lodde the tyꝛe came downe tromgeauẽ / of ft /hauctakennotmaliaboure/butgreat
60 I eee peburae obergnge ;Cuen fo. big: mat her i in fe che?


c % dom wi ning
the pꝛeuxe it des whet wasdone there was krmied h
eithemn

€ 4


The lerond boke


as ther make a feat / walde fayne do
e to we allo (fo; ma«
ny mens labes)are bery well contẽt to take
the laboure whereas we mae ſpoztip coms
kae wle thenges that other men haue


ip wzptten. 8
Noz he  buplveth an heule anew / muſt
Proupde Foz many thinges to p whole bupls
dpnge: but be that papnteth it atterwarde/
Sebety but only what is comiꝝ / mete a con ·
urnient to garnych it withall. Euen ſodo we
allo in lxkẽ maner. And why: He that begin:
meth to wapte'a ſtoꝛy toꝛ the txt / muſt with
e


er the matter toge ·
cher / lethrs wozdes in oꝛdze / and diligentix


ſeke out of euery parte: But he p atterwarde


wyll potent / bleth few wozdes / and tou⸗
cheth not the matter at the largieſt. Let thrs


ve lutkicient fora Pꝛologe / now will we be.


gynne to chewe the matter: koꝛ it is but a lo ·
Juibthinge tomate a lenge ge and to


be thozte in the ttozy it leit.

S ges
ofthe Sentyles. Apmon vitereth what treatureis
in the temple. Be liodo zus is ſent to tabe.che awape. de
Ws Rypchenof Gods healed at che prayer of Duras,


debe. i. chapter.


D datermeasthe holp cyte was in⸗
N yy; babpten in all peace c wealth /s
y WHE the lawes were pet bery well
A hepte. (Noz fo was it odened br
Ontas the he pelt ¢ other godie men / that
; were enempes to wickednelle / It came ther-
gj. Mach. i. c. tu/that euen the binges a princes thé leiues
dyd the place greate woꝛchtppe / a garniched
the temple with greate gyttes: In ko moch p
eleucus kynge ok A ũa ot his awne rẽtes
bare all the coli es belongyng to the ſerupce
ofthe offtinges. Chen Symon ok the trpbe
of BenFamin/aruler of the temple / labou⸗
redto woꝛcke Come mycchele in the cite but
the hpe pret refttenbim..
Heuerthelelſe when he myght not ouer⸗
f. Wach. ig b. come Ontas / he gat him to A ppolonius the
: Tonne of cberta( which then was chefe lozde
in Celolpꝛia and Phenices)¢ tolde him / that
the trealurꝝ in Jeruſalem was kull ot innu⸗
merable monep/andhow that the comons
Fgoodes (wich belonged not vnto the offerin-
N Ar . exceadinge greate alfo:yee a how


6j. Mach. ii a.


were pollpble/ that all thele myght come
vnderthe kynges power. .

*, How when Appolontus had bewedthe
kynge ol the mone pe) as it was toſde hym:
the king called toꝛ Hellodozug his tewarde/
@ Cent bim with a camaundemene / to bzinge
bim $ tame moner. Immediatip Heliodozus


* tobe brs iourner / baut nder a coloure / as


he wolde go thoꝛo wd elolꝑʒia ag he.

Wee utes
kynges piealute. Do when

came to Jetulalem / ¢ was loupngiy pal


uedobthe bye pelt into p cete:be tolde what
monepe / and


was determed concernpnge the
ſpewed the caute of his cõmeng:he akedal⸗
lo / yk it were fo in dede. Chen p he pꝛeſt tolde
him / chat there was loch morie y la pd vp fo;
che vpholdrnge of weddowes and kather jede
chrldden ¢ bow that a certarne of it belon⸗
ged vnto P pzcanus Cobias a noble man: ¢
chat ok all the monexe (which that wycked
Srmon had bewzaped) there were. ij hun⸗
dꝛeth talentes or lyiuer / and. i. bundzeth of
golde: pee a that it were vnpoſſible fo2 thole
mene mean nge to be dylceaued / p had la xed
bp their money in the place and tẽ ple ( which
ts had in wozchrpe thozow the whole woz!)
koi the magntenaunce and hondure of the
lame. herbnto Peltodonus anlwered / that
the henge had conaunded him in any wle /
to bzinge hrm in the monexe.

Soac che dare appopnted / Bellodozus


entred in to the temple to ode thys ther, c


But there was no kmall feare thozowout $
whole cytpe. Che Pꝛeſtes tell downe befoze
the aulter in their veſtymentes / and called


vnto heauen vpon hm / wörch had made a


lawe concernynge ſtulle geuen to kepe / that
they chulde be lately pꝛelerued / fo2 Coch as
commptte them onto epynge. Chen who lo
bad lobed the bye pelt in the kace / it wolde
haue greuedhis herte: Foꝛ his countenaũce
and the chaunginge of his coloure / declared
the inwarde lo owe othys mynde. Che man
was all in heurnelſe / andhys body in keare:
wherby they that loked vpõ him / mygbt per.
ceaue the gree othys herte. Che other peo⸗
ple alto came out of their houles by heapes
onto the comõ pꝛaper / becaule the place was
fed pled ux to 1 — 0 pean inci
came togetherthozow e
clothes aboute thelr betes,

Che virgyns allo that were hepte in / rjne


to Dnias/fome to $ walles / other come lo. D


ked out of the wynddwes: pee thep all helde
optheirhandes towatdeheauẽ / and pꝛaped.
Amplerable chinge was it / to oke vpon the
comen people) athe bye pꝛeſt beinge in loch
trouble. But they befoughtalmpghty God
chat the goodes which were commptted onto
them / mirgbt be kepte whole / £07 hole

haddelpuerrdthem önto their nepynge. Re ⸗
Uertheles the thynge that Hellodozus was
determed to do / that perkourmed he in the
fame place he bpm felfe perfonally beings
about the treaturx wyth bts men of warte.
Butthelprete ofalmpahty God Hewedbhins


kelte opente/Co f allther which pꝛecumedts
obere


obere Heltodozus / fen ehozow the power ol
God into a greate fearkulnelle ; dzede. Foꝛ
gear. e. there apearcb onto thé anbozle/ with a ter ·
Wel _ sible man fitting vpon him / deckte in good-
Ip arape / andthebozfetmote at Beliodo aus
with his foꝛe fete. Now he that tat vpon the
bote hadharnelle of golde spon him.
ozeouer there appeared. ij. faxe abeu ·
tyfull pog men in goonly arape / which Code
bphum keourgedhrmok boty the des and
gaue hym many üripes without craüynge.
Wich that tell Peltodozus ſodenip vnto the
grounde. Sothep toke him pp (beinge com⸗
Ieh. v. c. Paled abcute with greate darctinelie) ¢ bare
hym out vpon a beare, & hus hethat came
with lo manx runnerg and men ok warre in
to the tayde treatury was boꝛne out / where
as no man myght belpe bpm: s (othe power
of Sodwas manpteſ and nnowne. Be lape
fill domme allo by the power of God / deſti⸗


Lord / that he had ſhewed his power bps his
place and tẽ ple / which a lytle atoꝛe was kull
ok keare a trouble:and that thozow the reue·
lacpon of the almyghtye Loꝛde it was kelled
with tope and gladnelle.

Chen cevtayne of Heltodoz? krẽdes prayed
Ontas / that in all haſte he wolde call bpon
God / to graũte him his tpfe/ which was ge⸗
uynge vp the gooſt. Spothe hye pꝛeſt conty-
dered the matter / and le the hinge Mulo lu⸗
ſpecte that the Jewes had done Heitodozus
rome cuell:he offred an healtholferynge foz
him. How when thehye Pꝛeſt had opteyned
his peticton / the lame vonge men in d lame
clothinge appeared a rode betpde Heliodo⸗
10. rus / layinge: Chancke Ontas the hre prett/
oh. c. for toꝛ his lane hath 5 Loꝛde graunted i chr
Ipfe:therfoze ſeing 6 God hath lcourged the /
geut him pꝛayſe c thanckes / a ſbewe euer
man his myght a power. And whentherhad
Spoken thele woꝛdes they appearednomoze,

Do Peliodozus offered vnto God / made
greate bowes vnto him / which had graũted
him his lple / thãcked Onias / toke his hooſt /
@ wente agapne to the kynge. Cben teſtikted
he vnto euerp man ok the greate woꝛckes ol
God / b he had lene with his eves. And when
the kynge alked Heltodoꝛus who were mete


ſayde: vt thou haſt any enemy oꝛ aduerlar
vnto typ realme / lende himthyther / andthou
Walt haue hym punyſbed / yk he elcape with
his lyle: to in that place no doute) there is a
kpecpall power a wozcking of God Foꝛhe ß
dinelicth in heauẽ / vpepteth a dekendeth that
place and al chat come to do itharme he pu-
nycheth e plagech the. This is now the mat⸗
ter concernyng Heliodoꝛus / a the heping ol
the treaturp at Jeruſalem.


tute ok all hope and ite. And ther pꝛapled ? tyzann


to be (ent yet once agarne to Jeruſalem / he


¶ Che. iiij. chapter. .
bis Simonnorw(oF whd we dane
atoze) beinge a bewꝛapcrot᷑ d moe A
ney ¢ of his awnenaturall contre / vga. f. a.
=< reposted the wort of Ontas: ag
though ye habmoued Peliodozus sntoth(s/

d as choughhe had bene a bꝛiger by of euel.
hus was he not achamed to callhym an
enempe of the realme / that was lo kapthtull
an ouerfeer a defender oF 8 elte e ol his peo
ple: pee a ſoteruent in the lawe ol God. But
vhẽ the malice ol Sym increaledlo karre /
that thozow his krendes there were certarne
a oe
e pat ome chor ple
how that Appolontus(namely § cheke loide
inCelocpꝛia and Phenices) was ali tet vpon
r /and Symons malpce increated 2
lame: He gat hym tothe hinge / not as an acs
culer ofthe cpteting / but as one that byhim
lelk intended the comon wealth oF the whole
multitude. For he fae it was not polubſe to
Ipue in peace / nether Symon to leaue ot fd
his foly nee except 5 khynge dyd lone ther⸗
to. But alter the deeth of Seleucüs / when B
Anttochus which is called che noble tones
kingdome: Jalon the brother ol Onias la ·
boured to bẽ he pret: oꝛ he came onto the
kynge / and pꝛomitedhyin chze hundzeth a. ix
talentes oklyluer / a ol the other rentes. xxx.
talentes Betives thishe prompledhym per
an. C. d&. L. yt he myght haue the lcole of the
chyidzen / that he myght call them of geru⸗
falem Antlochtang. Which when thebynge
hadgraunted / a he had gottẽ the luperiozite /
he begäne immediatip to dꝛawehis kyntmen
tothe cuſtome ofthe heathen / put downe d
thynges that the Zeweg had let vp of loue /
by Lohn the father of Cupolemius whych
was fent embaüptoure onto Nome / fo2 to
make the bonde of krendchyppe and loue. ve
put downe all the Jewes ¢ l. pberties of the
Jewes / and let vp the wycked ſtatutes. Pe
durt make a fyahtynge ſcole vnderthe ca⸗
dell / and let arze voge men to lerne the maz
ners of whozes and biodels. 4
This was now the ien 7 11
thenpch a ſtraunge conuẽrlacrõ / bꝛought in
thozdwthe f abnherde wycked⸗
nelie of Jalon / which chulde not be called a
Pꝛeſt / bt an vngodip perlonne. An lo moch
that the pꝛeltes were now nomoꝛe occuppde
about the leruxce of the aulter/butdelprlen
the temple regarded not the ockrynges: pee
gaue cheir dylpgence to lerne to Fyght / ta
dune de m gedeihen ,
one: no unge bythe hone f
5 Biba, tbers /


Tht letond bole


thers / put liner the glo zy ofthe Grekes belt
ot all:toꝛthe which che r troue perlouly/ ¢
were gredp to kolowe their Ratutes pee thelr
zult was in all thinges to be ipue th / which
atoze were their enemres adeſtropers. Pow
be it to do wycheolpagaynt b law ot God /
Wall not elcape vnpunpched: but of thys we
wall tpeake here after, 8


D. Ib hattme ag the“ Diympiades fpostes


e Kpete were were played at Cyꝛus (the


knge hum kelke


kik.
ret. beinge pꝛelentehthis vngracpdus Jason Cent


Le
Go Mach. lig. d


mpled vnto ß nynge / he dydn


wicked men / bearyng from them or Jerula⸗
dem (whych now were called Antiochrans)
l. C.dzachmas of cyluer £07 an oller ynge to
Hercules. Chele had they that caryed them /
delpzed under loch a fatbion / as though ther
wulde not haue bene oftred / but beſtowed to
other bles, Heuertheleg he that Cent them /
tent them to the intent that they chulde be
offred onto Hercules. But becaule of thole
that were pꝛelent / they were geuen as to the
makpnige ot forppes, And Appolonius the
konne or Netteus was lent in to Egypte / be⸗
caule ol the noble men of Aynge Peolomy
Pbilometoz Now when Antiochus percea-
ued F he was put out from medipngein the
realme / he lought his awne pꝛolyt/departed
from thence / came to Joppa / a then to zeru⸗
lalem: wherehe washonozably receaued ot
Jalon the cite / a was bꝛought in W toꝛche
ipght and with greate pꝛayle: and to he tuts
neh hig bolt onto Phenices.

Atter ii peare Jaton ent Menelaus the
fozefayne Srmons bꝛother / to beate ß mo⸗
heponto Fung / ato bzinge him and were of
other necedary matters, But he (when he
was pꝛapled ok the Hinge kozmagnpkring of
bis power) turned z pꝛeſthode vnto him felt /
lapinge vp. 1. C. talentes of lyiuer koꝛ 3a ·
ron. Do whe be hadgotten comaundemetes
krö the kyngeſhe came hauinge nothinge 6
bechmeth a pꝛeſt / but beavinge d ftomack ol
Acruell trzaunt / æ h wath of a wylde bzute
beeſt. Chen Jalon (which had dycegued hig
atone other) leinge that he him lelke was
beg ylep ald / was kapne to lie into the lande
ab dhe ammonttes /e Wenelaus gat the do⸗
mynxon. But as fo2 the money oe Leg
when SHoftratus the ruler of

bed it othim Foz Soſtratus was 5 man

at gathered the cultomes: whertoze ther
wete both called befoze the king. Chus was
Menelaris put out of the prethove/ a Lyli.
machus his bꝛother came in his teade. Soe
1 made lode ofthe Cypziis.
appened in themeane leaton / ß the
Charlians ¢ Malloctas made inturteccid/
becauſe they were geuen koz a pꝛelent vnto
unge Antiöchus concubrne. Ehen came 5


Sa


e cattell re- @ lome caſt athes ppon L lim


hinge in an che ha le / to tpl chemagarne / z
to pacykye the matter / leauing andꝛonicus
5 — to be his debyte / as one mete therfoze,

ow Menelaus luppoling 5 he had gotten
A ryght conuentent tyme / tole certapñe vel
leis of golde out ofthe tempie / a gaue them
to Andzonicus koꝛ a pꝛelent:a tome he colde


at Cpꝛus andin the cytpes therbx


Which when Snias knewe ofa tuertre /
he repꝛoued him: but he kepte him ina San ·
tuarp belpde Daphnis / that lxeth by antio·
che. herkoze Menelaus gat hym to An⸗
dzontcus / 4 1175 bpm that he wolde faye
Onias. Do whe he came to Onlas / he coũ
celed him crattelyto come out of the Sanc⸗
tuary / geuynge him his bande with an othe
(how be it he fufpecte him) and then he dew
Ontas / without anp regarde of vightuouls
nelle. Foꝛ the which caule not only p Jewes /
but othernacrons allo tobe ſndrgnac yon /æ
were diſplealed Foz the vnrightudus death ol
b e tbe fiynge was come agapne

en 0

from Cilicia / the ewes and certarne of the
Sꝛehes wente vñtohim / complapninge fog
the bneightuous death of Ontas. Jeeantio⸗
chus bt keit was Cozy inhis mynde £02 Dnt-
as / lothat it pitied hum / a be wepte / remem⸗
bunge his fobernedic ¢ manerip behauoure.
Wherkoꝛe he was lo kyndled in his mynde /
he comaunded Indzontcus to be tryped out
ol his purple clothinge / a loto be led thoꝛow
out all the cite: pee a the vngracyous man to
be dayne in the Came place / where he compt-
ted hes wycliednes vpon Onias. Chus the
Loꝛde re wardedhim his punychment / as he
had deterued. Pow when Lplimachus had
done man wicked dedes in the tẽ pie thoꝛow
the coũcell or Menelaus / a the vopce came
abzode:the muftptude gathered them toge⸗
cher aan Liliachus / to he had carzed
out now moch golde. 7

So when the people arole / and were full
ol dylpleacure / Lylimachus . —
vnthꝛittes to detende him: a certayne tyꝛaũte
beinge their captayne / which was growers
boty 1 age 1 Ain 7
ple bnderftode the purpole of L ydim
tome gat ſtones fome good cb


chere were many of thé wounded tome being
flayne/ealithe other chaced awape. But as
koꝛche wycked chutchrobber hxm elk / they
kylled hm belrde P tiealury. Ot thele mat⸗
ters therkoze there was kepte a courte asi!
gapnſt Menelaus. How when the kenge
Tame to C pʒus / ther made a complante vn⸗
to bin ol Henelaus / cancernyng this bulp⸗
nelle / and the embadytourg were thre, But
Mene la? wet 8 5


Ok the Mathabers,


moch monte vrbewolde pecluadß king.
Do ptolomp wee to che erg into a courtẽ/
phere as he was lett to coole him) & bog
um out ol that mende. In fo moch that he dts
{charged Menelaus trom the acculacpons /
chat not withſtandynge was caule of al my
cchele r andthole poze men / whych ve ther
hadtolde therz caule / rec befoze the Der
this they bude haue bene fudged innocẽt /
them he condemned to death.
Thus were they foone punpthed / wyych
kolowedvpon the matter foz pextye / tos the
people / and ko: the holp betel. Wherkoze
they ol Cyzus toke indygnacpon / and bu ⸗
ted chem honozabiy. ko thoꝛow the
couctoutnette of them that were in power /
Menelaus remapned ſtyll in authoꝛrte /
increatpnge in malyce / to the burte of the


cytelyns.

EME the cygnes and tonens ferie in Jerutalem. Ot
tde ende and offence ot Jacon. Che puclute of Antios
Ghusagapnt the Jewes, Ege ſpoplinge of the temple.


che. b. Chapter.


Wc the tame tre Antrochtis made
pinteadytogoagapne in to &gy⸗

pte. Chen were there lene at Jee
tuſalem / xl. days longe / hozſmen


N tunnyngeto and froin the arze / whych had


tapment of golde / andlpeares. Chere were
fenealid whole hooſtes ol men weapened / a
hoꝛles runnynge in an oꝛdze / bow they came
together / how theyhelde koyth they: wildes /


how the harnelled men dzew out their wear d


des / and ſhott their dartes.

Che ſhyne ol the golden weapens was
kene / and of all maner of armure. IWherkoze
eueryman prayed / that thole ton ens myght
tumeto good. Now when there was gone
Topth a falce rumour / as though Introchus
bad bene deed: Jalontoße a. . men / and
came łodeniy bpon the cytye. che cytetyns
ranne vnto che wales / at the lat was the ti⸗
tretanen / Menelaus fled in to the caſtell.


erb.
las an open enempoc his alone natural eoũ⸗

— ron oF he optelpns) he was dꝛruen in to

4 3 5 1

bus he that aloje but nian oiit ottheiz
awne natpue land / periſped kromhome him
leleche wẽt to bara ENS there
tohaue gotten fuccoure by reaton of nynre⸗
de. Andhe thatafoze badcattenmany one
out vnburxed / was tho wen dut hem elk /
no man mournenge foz hem / ner puctynge

im inbis grauenochat he nethez entopen g

urtall of a üraunger/nether was he parta⸗
ker ok his kathers lepulcre.

Horw when this was doſte the kynge lul⸗ E
pecte, che gewes wolde haue tall krom
bym: kot he came in a greate dyrplea·
fuve out of Egypte / and tolie the cptie by bio


lence. Be commiaunded bra mk of ware al⸗ geh. ll


lol that cher ſhulde hl a not cpare / but dave
downe loch as wichſtode then / 07 clymmed
vp bpon the houles.

Thus was chere a greate daughter of
ponge men / olor men / emen / chyldzen and
birgines In. ij paves were there llayne xxx.
kebetoe) ouraribe put in p ah no
elle Colne. Vet was he not content wich this /
but durſt go in to che moſt holytemple( apes
nelaus that traßtoute tothe lawes andtohis

ne nagurall countre/Depg bis oe) and

bis wicked handes tohe the bolp bettel/
cher tenche ga es gcrties had genien thy.
ther fo7 the garnptbinge ¢ Honour al ae Nas
ceathem tokcbe snes s bnwoßthel ) a


omadd was Anttochus / chat he conty-
derednor / how chat God was a lrtle wioth we
foz che lynnes ot chem that dwelt in the citie /
koz the which loch confucyd came vpon that
place. Ind why: pt it had not happenedthem
ko haue bene lapped inmanp lpnnes / thys
Antiochus(as loone as he had come) had lo


deny bene punyſbed / and Hote out Foz hys Judit. b. 0


pretumpcpon / ipne as Helpodozus wa


As ko: Jalon he cparev not his awne ct treat


telyns inthe laughter / nether continered he
sobat greate euell tt were / to dectrore p pꝛo⸗
ſperttẽ of bys atone nyntmen: but dyd as one
that han gorten tye syctozy of bps enemxes /
and not ofhys krendes. Koz allthys gatt he


Uma) tite, notte hipertozpte / butat the lact receaued


conkucvon kor bps malpee and fledagapne
ixke a vagabunde in to the lande of the Im⸗
mi .


jonptes.
Frnalip/toꝛ a rewarde of his wichennetie/
he was acculed before Aretha the Bynge ol
che Trabians: in fo moch thathe was fayne
tofletcom cptpe tocptte / bernge del ppted o
euery man as a kortaker of the ia wes / and


nmnabhomunable perlonne. Indat the lalt


. es not.
people koche places fake but che place
g be ebe, abe and herbe i
ce become partaker of the peoples trouble/.
bus alcerwarde hall te enfope the wealthor
them. And phe as tt is now loꝛlaken in the
topath ot Alimpghty c Ian bei the ihr
fe egos econcplen/ tt ail be fet bp thbye
ozhippeagarne,
e hadtanen uch and
bil. E. talentes out ofthe temple / he gar him
to Antioche in all the hatte thinching inis
kee lin abo take men tale öpon 9
1b land / anbto go pponthe fee loch anhrs
Ae
people: jal .
. A. Phi


„
d Seleucus the n ke ko robbe then. Mach ald
e e gen. ant


9 lacey x
| Cheteconbeboke pita
maners inoze cruclichebimfelé $ cõmaundmẽẽt ſo ſtill / a wolde not defende i When
225 inneren ne. the lelux. Howz beteche all thole which rea blatiy
cus and Menelaus / whych weremozegres de this bote / cher refute it not Eos thete tall
uous toß eitelins then other. How ashewas ol aduerllte: g tudge 9 thinges g are happe⸗
us let in malice agaynũt $ Jewes / he lent ned) koz no deſtruccrd but koza chattenpng:
. faken pronce/Wrrii .es ofoure people. And whreiwſe God Cutiretiy
maũding him toflape ali thole were ol per · nottinners loge to folow their awne mende /
lebe be totell eee dend pen. but worthlp punttheth the it isa tone of his ¢ F
WHE he cam now coFerulalé de fa ca 5 greateloupng krndnes Foz this grace haue 55 u lb q p:that wh 4 Gardedthe parnes. 8
ce) A kepte hi ſtiſvntulg Dabboch dape. Ind we of God moze then other people/ f he tut . „ Hom when he was deed allo / they vexed
chenhe cömaddedhis mi to tane the to their kreth not vs lunge to kynne bnpunlihed ipke I 2 the fourth with cozmétes in ipke maner. aud
weapks (kor d Jewes nepte holpdape)a kohe other nacrons / cat when p dave ok iudment . when he was now at his death / be favne: 34.20
flew al the b were gone kozihto Poveplave/ cõmeth / he mape punich ché in the fulnes ok i better that webernge put to death or man
rününg here ¢ there thozow ß citie bis me chetr kynnes. I we ferme /he coꝛrecketh vs / Hokhis death tos an example / not oniyx baue oure hope and trut in God / for be hal
weapened /a murthureda great nöbze. But but he neuer withdꝛaweth his mercy krõ vs: C Sntovongemen/ but önko all the people / to rapſe bs bp agapne, 28 koß the / thou wat
Gunns achabe? nh ch was the tench led g though be punich waducrtpte, vet doch he ö be tedfat and manip, bauenoretuctecctontotvee:
ito Provloenetle obig ürethere wOIScds neuer Coptake bis people. But lett this 6 we q CMe punichmet of pod trethzene of their mother. And when thepbad fpoken to the tyt /
Panpamdgeswoiloebeates e Pponß mon- haue pole now % few worde be fo7 aware x : che bi chapter. thertozmented hum, Khenioked he onto the
kaynes / dwellyngethere / and eatinge gralle / ning a exhoztacid off Bathe. How will we * C happened allo g there were bij. Make g tapoebouiat bower menge
lett chep chuld be partakers ok d kpithpne ce. conie top declaryng of dmatter Eleazar one 2th ze with their mother) take) tos thou artamoztall man alco thpteit / to
E_The Fewes are compelled te leaue ibe jaw oe Gov. ok the pꝛncipall Scribes / an aged ma a ofa 8 do what thou wilt / but thinke not / that God
Eee . weltauozed coũtenaũce / was coctraynedto 1 J bath fopfaken dure generacron. Abyoe the /
baden be green ce Sli Ee a e eee oe Poe, COO a eli ete te great
Che. bl. Chapter, . i of God, how he well punpl the ahr
N tent b king a lpue w Game) offven him elk willingly to ß ‘ lede. Akter hym they bzoughe 6 tprte,
e/fortocopel miarte dome. Pow whebefatssbemutt neds beinge a rentcar eee
4 bifceaued(D fing) to; this we fuffre koꝛ our
owne lakes / becaule we haue offended oure
tepfe 4 bec Hod eo therkoze maruelousthenges are Wee
iuptter: 5 medr. wedppon vs. But thynke nor thou / whych
arim / ag t 2 taked in hande to drpucagapntt God / that


i ous wycked lebte oF > bis hea⸗ thou thalt efcape vnpunpched. 3
— al 4 * peoples biete mi ‘Thisercellene mether wostbycobe wen!


oluptuoutnes / bibbinge ¢bol* Lepozted of/and hab in remembzance
ang ok g Heath og ribnag F hatten loge. ok ele ofBtactiicelikeas ng com. et feuen enncsppeinoncda e, an ed
- ther bee nec aura wa maunded' ka fo he might be delpueredtrom 3 ciently becaute of the hope that Gehan
inthat was not jaufull. Che aultevalfo was death: ko Foz bolde frendihipe off mi cher made /andfo(whple there was enpbzeath in in God vee he eroztedcyery one ok them in
full of vnlaukul ching, which Platwefogbyns dhe wed him this hyndnes. But he beganeto ‘ bim)to be trged in the caudzon / In the which efpecvall / and that boldip and fedtatiy 1b
dethto ape ops it. Che Spabbothes were not cottonebts kee Mantle noble whenhe bad bene longe parkrte wefoome / wahynge bp ber wrupſh
Hepte/B other Colépne feattes ok F lade were ede dent anes Sue cS grou ay 5 bem co thought with amanty tomacke / and fapde
hotvegarded.ccobe piapne / chere durſt noma be had bene ofanbonelt a good couertac + onto chem J can not tell how ve came in mx
bea knowne h be wag ä rwe. In p dare ot per g bow . Gb cad re a soombe/foz ¥ nether gaue vou breth ner tou
Shing’, byzth they were cöpelled parfogce to ces a laweg ci by God ße zehe : beben ohn aeisnotd b topnenp mébges
offvere tobe F teact ot Bach? was kepte they —Gauc the thisanlwere/efapde:y ethady ra· ar of pout bodies together bur che maker ol 8
werf cötrapnedto were garlädes of pupe / her kird be ialedin ipgraue Kit becom. . ch. feruauntes wonde / which fathioned § bpzth ofman / c
¢fo togoaboute for Shonoure of Bachus. eet not npc age Fae perten to begäne alchinges. Euen be alto ofbis awne
B® -gpojouerthozot f codice of Ptolomp / didedle/wherbymany vag perfonnesmniahe 1 in merer wal geue pou breath and like agapne
there went outa cümaundmet in Fnerte ci. chincke s Cleazar being irrr.peareotbe aer verrtpon / p lch the itheas pe now regarde not dure atwne leluß
tpes or p Heathẽ / 5 they cpuld intreate Ze⸗ were now gone toa ttratige lite: loco duer his heade / a bim / vkhe wolde eate rox bis lawes fake,
wes in line mance: namelx / to cöpell the for mne ypocrity(foz alytle . bwrnes Heth / oz he were parnedinche other Mow choughe Antvochus that me had
tonofacrttyce after $ lawes of p wetiles:¢ lite) ther mighe be dilcea 5 ee ee defpitedbim/therfoze he lett hergowyth her
N J ours / an anne ozte

Anbweredboldle/ and fapde: A well nocdoft. repzours/andbeganne co erozt the vonge
Andlo washe tonnented l che kirk g fonne which pet was lelt)not o. „Won
when but cwoze vnto him wan ooth / P he chude

make hrmarich ¢ weithyman( ehe wolde

fopfabe $ jawes of bis fathers per and phe

ll rate bs bp. ten ruc Bat wien euer were necella⸗

wen in d relurreccton ex euti Welke. ry to him. But when p yoge ma wolde not
Alter bm, was the these had in bery- bemouedſtoz an ehetethinges / he called his E
don and when be wastequpycd/ be Putt out eee
ele.


0


15


ae. c. cee only


*


The domebee


lle. And tobe he had erhozted ber wych mas
ny worden / e e 7
ſpeake vnto her tonne. 8 22
vnto hymd the cruell ane
Fema pan th abot ne O mp
wr nerd mnt retitled bapze g ix. t.
ees to tack
wage to thisage.
pombe e
. aal that is therin / and ci
dꝛe / chat Gon made them and mans
cyon ok n. ser atone Ps
Wh bel death ty tyke ion Spon
us che brethten baue done chat ama euccpon of the eytre { obec) toas shortly
betten. inthe ame mer r Ixke to be taped Leh heare the bopce
byeth; ofthe bioude that 0 2.
Opus etwas cpeakynge thele woz- bzethemott beathes of yonge
ee e
oy not ol e ohrs name and to punch
7 utthelawe Now when Wa e eee


commaäundement / b
fon gaue bs by Moles. As foz the


al e punpebedepabeeautiptos che perde
Ao menge ag me hrech en bauen
Yofive my toule and my body koz the la wet
oF our ee ets call ng vpon God / that he
mie Mercptul vnto our people: pee
une and pu e


the beynge n
waß moze cruellöpon len then vpon al che
aer nd on that he was lo


4
vndekpled / e
Saen tomes, as che mother
ut to death allo. Le e ough
olken / concernynge dhe otrmges /anb ers «
treme cruelneſle.
nord . together by 1 Micanoy ts tent


cents once ewes:
fetta era ame their ene męes to
thelpoples puto ebe kathertes and
ise


yndledin anger ven


men / p.
4 br in ten fos onctalence: 8
were ofalimpghty God /e


chrs multrtude together / he
18. eeu eke che Jewes 00 or te
rH a tpt saa o e Tae e
wel helene bern or ar lan the totones. an emo kan ug
And though God be angrye wetbbsaly- them toke the mo ane ees
conte elde e retoꝛma · e e ad But fpe-
cyon)pee ipal he be at onẽ agapne wrth hrs cyallx he made Loch chales by {se
Sevuauntes. But AD chametull and Tae Coat Des taninicte Ses en of
unden e . ben Ppt fai eat mans
alt not y. er — 1 rte:
‘ inde apne tomtom be w. Polomyt ized 2
2.
Ipte: but thoꝛow the tudgment of aod) thou noꝛ atrocigl a pecrallkrende ofbps) al


benen wt: put che ct. M. harnet⸗
keh men / to rote out the whole generacron
ol the Lewes bete to noid ina one.
e

0

— eee —— 1


pecone


was to come
dum that were n wert . — x
were there fomeot tem


er and
ene


ne


21 V5


dab lolde then oz Hul hve them:
be wolde t takes / vet


his men together namelpaboute b.. M. ex⸗
oꝛzting them not to agree vntotheir Wachen
nether to be afrated Foz 6 multitude of their
aduerfaries cõminge agavnſt them vnrigh⸗
222804 8 to aniy/contideringetbe m
ke that they hid done to the holp place
wichent caulẽ / hom ther had and
oppꝛelled the crtie / veea detropedthe lawes
ofthe fathers , "Tortie (Cayhe be) truſt in
cheir weapens and boldnelle / but oure con-
Nn. kidence is in the allmyghty Loꝛde / whych


fae Arete them unte ok an exe mae both de⸗ pete


Arope them that come. agaynttbs / and all
woꝛlde.


e ue God a ee 1915 ta ·
be sone chere pert Llxxxv.
1 e

adin Babild again pangs

ot dapat e Wacedonxas 5 cametobelpe
we ch \ntcategbowteey being but only
vi. H. dewean C. f Fr. W. chozowthehelpe


20 euen them krom heauen / wherbr ot
Fs 0 many benetites.


! cher alto hadreceaued many be
Choꝛowthele woꝛdet the men. fone good
. verteg onto them / ready to pye ko the lawe
5 the coltre. Hohe kett bpon euerr company
2 à captaine /one 8 = emt)


ofephe Fonathas: geurngs ech ore rg. . 5.


U — Be autem eto alao teabe he bole
if boke ontothem/andtogeue them a token of
1 dar. tig. v the helpe ol God.
TChenbehintelebeinge captapne ind tore
front ofthe battayll/ bucked wpth Hicanoz
nd


af der a feable. chur ehem
ep front tho ofethat came cobpethemt
Fotorseb bp pon chem oneuceplyde , 19 0
the tyme came vpon them /thep return
it was the Sabbat
wednomoꝛe vpon
weapens d cpoples g kel
cd ant bore
4 ceed Nate
Wismercy. Alter c soa


becher.


*


F Qumeseet.o,

Eutegser.e, ked the (poples tothe ficke / tothe

b. 8e e
eee.
ne / and they all had made a generall prayer:
thepbefougheth


a Ay


phil L oꝛde tobe at


Hl the Mathabees,


107) /
eroztenthemaltotocaltovemebzauti-


Irrbij.


Lenden ben wanne hpeand dtronge ho
des / aud D :
an —— pozcion vntop fiche to $ tatheries:


ed tbepbabplppentippatyewa theis wearers


togethez/thepiayed them all in conuentente
places / the vemnaunt off tpoples bꝛought
Jerulalem. Ci Cheptietoe Pbplarcbea
aher ee cy


Godhad made.


Anttochus willing tolpople Werſepolis is brpucrt .
fi mnt abe i acgthe :
Sebpete de. Che kayned repentaunce or Antiochus


Capers.
e lame tyme came Anti.
pe arcane aetna,


fis e came

us 1 — 17 60 to obbehele⸗
ple andtofubdue the citie / the people ranne

grea ep ena)


athe and with chame.
nd to alter vipat fi 170 happkned / that
e wyth dpfhonoure,


Zutlahus came aga
But when he came to Egbathana / 3 —
know at ed vnto N


de come to Jerulalem / and make tt
ofthe Jewes But the Loe Gov of Fl
raell / that keyth all thynges / (mote hym
—— whych no man


5 f
kk v. Fo


Jos as locne as hehadtponen thete woz
Boos there came vpon hym anbogrible payne
ok hps bowles / anda koze grefe or the char
mes. Andthat was but right: kor he had iar
kyꝛed othermens bowels wyth druerle and
ftraunge tozmentes / how beit he woldein
no tuple ceatte from his malpce. Yee he was
pet the pꝛouder and moꝛe malyctousagatnt
the Jewes: But whple he was commaun-
nech tomake hatte in chematter / it happe ·
ned


Jat he keldowne violentip rom the cha⸗


ret / to that it bꝛoled hrs body / and dydhym
sreate payne,

And io he that thought be mpght com-
maunde the floudes of the keello proude was
be beponde the ae of mã) and to weyr
the he mountapnes in a payze ot tcoales /
was now bꝛought downeto the grounde / a
carled ppon an ho ptter ſnnowiegynge the
manpleſte power ol God pon hymn: fothat
the wiened body of bys was Ful of wozmes /
roh ch in bys papne tell qupck out of bys
fled): In Co moch chat hs hoot was greued
with the lmell and ſtynche orhym. hus he
thatalytiea fozethoughthe myght reach to
the tarres of heauen /hym mygbt no man
now abpoe ner beare / tor the behemence ol

Cſtynche.

Cherkoze he beynge bꝛought krom bys
‘Greate porde / beganne toꝛ to come top know
lege ol hym (elf: Foz the punyſpment vor wor
warned hym / and hys payne increated euer
moze and moze. And when he hym lelk might
not abyde bps awne tynche / he capde thete
woꝛdes. It is reacon to be obedient vnto God

and chat a man detpꝛe not to be lyke vnto
bm. Thys wyckhed pezronne pꝛayed allo bn⸗
tothe Loꝛde/ or whom he ſhu ide haue optat-
ned no mercy. And as koꝛ the cytte that he ca.
me vnto ro haſtelx / to bꝛrnge it downe tothe
Qrounde/andtomake it a graue to deedmẽ:
dow he delpzech to delyuer it kre.
Andas touchinge the Jewes / whom he had
ꝛudged not woch to be burped / but wolde
haue catt thé out kozto be deuouted off fouls,
# wilde beattes/Capenge/that he wolde haue


deſtropedboth olde and ponge: Now he pꝛo⸗ tiert


mpleth / to make them ipne the cytelyns of
Atheng. Ind where as he had kpopled the ho⸗
Ip temple afoze / now he maketh pꝛom ple to
gurnilb it with greate giltes / to increale the
holy oznamentes and ol hys awne rentes to
beare the coſtes / and charges belonginge to
the offeringes:pee andthac be wolde allo be⸗
come a Je we hm elk / to gothoꝛow eucrp
place ofthe wo de / and to pꝛeach the power
Dofchod. :


But when hys paynes wolde not cealle /
Kos the ryahteous ſudgmẽt of God was cos
me vpon byni)out of a verx det are he wꝛo·


Theletonde boke


te onto the Jeweg a lettre of intertenlon / cd.
tepninge thele woꝛdes: he kynge and pin ⸗
ce Antiochus wrſbeth onto the bertuous cis
telpns ol the Jewes / moch health and good
pꝛolperite.

[eye and poure chilozen fare well / and
yt all thinges go atter youre mynde: we ge⸗
ue gteate thankes. In my licknelle allo do
Gremembze vou loupnglp: koz ag J came
out of Perlxa / and was taken wyth toe dps
leale: thought it necellarp to care to $ co·
men wealth. Hether delpare J in my leit /
but hauea goodhope to elcape this ticknes,

But contyoerpnge that my fatheriedan
hoolt fometpme inthe hper places / and the-
wed who ſchulde rargne after hym / that ( pe
there happened any cötrouerk / oꝛ enp barde
thyng were declare d)ther in the lande might
Knowe their cheke lozde / that there wulde be E
no inſurteccion:agayne / when J pondze be
my CelE / how that all the mpghtve men and
neghbours rounde aboute / are laxenge wa ·
te / and lone but fo opoztunpte to doharme:
Tanten oꝛdened that my fonne Antpochus

all vapgne after me / whom Jolt commens
bedtomany of vou / when J was in the byes
nyngdomes and haue wzytten onto hm as
it koloweth heratter Cherkoꝛe 4
Erequyze vou / toremembze the benelzteg
that J haue done vnto vou generalip and in
elpecpall. G oꝛ 3 hope that he thal be of ober
K loupnge behauoure/¢ pebefolowe myde⸗
upce/he Hall be indyfterent vnto you.

Thais that murthuxrer and blalphemare ot
God was fore fmyptten: a Ipke as he had in⸗
treated other men / tohe dyed a mylerable
death in a ſtraunge countre vpon a moun
kapne And hie bodpdrd whürppelthat went
woyth hym) carp aware: whych kearynge the
lonne of Intpochus / wenke in to Egypte to
Ptolompphilometoz.


Judas chſachabeus taketh the eptie s the temple de

Lime to ſhewe . ok Eupata The Jewes

fepabtagapnt the Jdumeans: Timotheus inũade th

Zempe⸗with whom Judas 7opreth battell. M. men

Bpsate tatheayicta the belpeok the Je wesecrimelb
apne, ;


Ccbe. x. Chapter.


j
jSchabeus now andhys kompanp
b 2 — the helpe of the Len 5


wanne the temple and the cptye
jagapne,/ deſtroped the aulters aud


chapels g the Heathen had buplded thore w eranspe


che ftretes:clenfed the temple / made another
aulter of bzpche ſtone / a alter. ij. peates thep
ofkeredlackſkpces /let foꝛch theincente / the
Ipghtes a ſhewe bred. hen that was done /
{ep felt 3 1 bn
be tthe Lon erm co

— eateceg nasmeoece, 2 —


Wane viß.


Ol the
chem went nin ufd nen tec ane


th mercr / and not to come in che
bades of thole aleauntes and blalphemous
m


en.

How vpon the lame daye that z traun⸗
gers poluled che temple / ithappenedthat on
the very Came dape it was cienſed agapne:


ag.t, namelp f the. rril. dape ofthe moneth called


79 Calleu.chey kepte. diu. da pes in gladnelle /
lee as in) eat ol the tabernacles: remem
bypnge that not longe afoze / chey heide the
feat of the tabernacles opon the mountap⸗
hic8 and indennes Ipke beaſtes. And to che
lame token they bare grene bowes / bꝛaun⸗


ches and palmes befoze him that hadgeuen ew
chem good foztuneto clende his piace. They th


Agreed allo together / and niade a ſtatute /
ruerr peare thole dapes ſhulde be lolempiß
kepte of all the people of the Jewes.

Bow Antiochus then ( that was called


athabees.

them / andtokrant where mol neve
ot they that were with Drmon bern⸗
ge led wrth courtounene / were intreated
£03 money / thozow certapne of tote that
lape inß towꝛeg:toke. ix „P. Wachmag /e
let Come of them efcape . But when it was
tolde Machabeus what had happened he
called the captaynes of the people together /
acculpngethole perlonnes /g thephad Tolde
che bꝛeth en kor money / and lett their ene⸗
mes go. So he llewe thole traptourg / and
Cmmediatiy wente inhande wyth the. ij. to⸗
wers And whe cher hadodzed chem relues
manly with their weapens and bandes they
* . 0 caſteis moo then twentye


ou

Now cimotheus whom the gewes pants
ouctcome afoze / gathered a multytude of
15 05 an holte alto ot


che noble) dped / it is fuffictentiptope. How fr


will we Cpeatic of Hicanoz che donne of that
wicked Sntiochug /how it happened wyth
Him:and Co with few woꝛdes to compꝛehen⸗
de the aduerlpte that chaunied in p warres.
agen he had take in the kyngdome / he made
one N fas which had bene captapne ol e
holt in Phenices and Sirta) ruler ouerthe
matters ok therealme. Foz Ptolomy that


was called Macron / beynge a ruler fo2 the la


lewes(andlpectallt / to tpt in iudament Coz
Och weonge as was done bnto them) bnder
tone to deale peaceably wyth them . for the
uch caule he was acculed of the krendes
before Eupatoz: and when he was dulpecte
to bea traytoure(becaute he had let ypꝛes
that Philometoz had connnptted onto bm:
and hecaufe he departed from noble ntto⸗
hus that he was come onto )be popfoned
him fetfe / and dped.
ow when Gorgias was gouernoure of
che tame places ſhe kon ſtraungers and vn
dertoke of tymes to warre the Jewes.
Mozeouer tye Foumeans that helde § ltrõ⸗
boloes receaued thole chat were dꝛyuen
om gerulalem / and toe in hande to ware
allo, Buttheythat were wit achabeus
abe and piaped vnto the Lorde / chat
be wolde be theiv helper: and io they fell in to
Gronge holdes of the Jdumeans / and
wanne manp places by ftrength: Doch as
came agaynſt them they llew / and kylledno
Teſlelor alltonether) chen twent ye thoutane
de. Heuertheledle tome / no lelle then nyne


thoutande / were fledin totwo ſtronge to⸗ M.


waes hau nnge an maner of oz dynaunce to
. — rH — ing Symon

EE ti Jo-

P tephus/ Hachaus and tote chat were wpth

them which were berx man wente to bele ·


er wente on

ben ther came

pes ther pꝛepared them kelues
Wir mie nth at Bb

indbyepm e momnynge at $ bene

fie ofthe dape/ both the boottes buckledto⸗

gecher. Che one parte had the WLozne Foz

thet refuge / whpch is the geuer of prope.

rrte / Krength and opctozy. Che other had

amanir ſtomack / whrch is a captapne of


Che batta pl notobeprige greate, there lg.


levi


a0 U, 0.
ac. vih .


Jete. xußj. u


reg, vs


apeared vnto che enempes from beauen, b. „ Mac ilö.
men bps honcbacks toyeh berdeis ol golde /d. He


ledunge the gewes / and two of them hau
Machabeus bettotrte tyem/ehat hepte hint
Cafe on euerptyde wth they? weapeng /
Wot dartes and lightenynges vpon che ene
mpeg: where thozow they were confounden
with bipnonede Elo cose atvaped / chat ther
kelldowne. Chere were llapne r kote men
twentie choufande and épue bundzeth/ and
tyre purer boatnen ds 02 Timotheus
um elke he fen onto Gazar abery ſtronge
olde toberin Cereas was captarne, But
achabeus andhis companp taped lege to
2244 wet wythin truſt
ey that were in truſtynge
tothe ctrength of the place /curled and ban⸗
tar web e
lunge odes. Feuerchele
Ak. . ppon


Theletonde boke


pponthe kylth dare in 8 mompnge. xx. ung
men ok Machabeus company /bepnge/ let
on ke in their myndes becaule ol the blal ·
phemp:came mankufip onto the wall and
with bolde ſtomackes cher and their other
companpons clrmmedbpoponthe towzes,
ondertanynge to let lee bponthe voztes E
to burne chore blalphemous perkonnd quics
ne Cwo daes were thep detkroring the cas
ſtell whpch when they kounde Timotheus
(Chat was ckepke in tog comer ther kplled
dim / ewe ckereas his bother in phe ma-
nerwich Appollopyanes , ohen this was
dane / cher lunge Plalmes / myth ppoples &
thanchetgeupnges onto the Lorde / toh
hadhone Cogteate thynges ko; Nrael / and
geuen them the victo yr.


ewes /thynchpnge to wynne &

¢ stan habytacton koche eas

etemple wolde he haue to be an

boute ebenes dle other goddes hou ·
kes orthe heath are /a toleliche pꝛeſtes ol.
Epce euer peare: Mot conkrderpng d power
ol God / but was wylde in Urs mende / tru⸗
e inthe multitude of Cote men / in thou ·


ci
Singers ee orho unte) in hig err iephantes.


6. Bs. r. e


V., Hohe came into Jewzr athento Beth ⸗
Cute (a caſtell of dekence linge in a narow
ace. b. furlonges from Aerufalenp a wäne
How when Wachabeus and his cöpanx
unewe that the llronge holdes were taken“
cher kel tothetr prayer wich wepynge and
teares bekozethe Lözde: and all the people
elgught him / that he wolde


ich helpe ot Al


men / but with the mot cruen bete / ver
to runne chozow walles of ꝛon.

Thus ther wente on wiliyngiy baupnge
an heiper kromheauen / and tye Lozve mer. C
cytull onto them. Chey fell myghtely vpon

eir enempes iphe lyõs / bꝛought downe. 1.

tote men. roi. C. oꝛlmen / put all d other
toflpabt;many ot them bepinge wounded /
and Come gatawape naked. yee Lylias him
keike was karne to fle Mamefully/ and to to
efcape Meuertheleſſe the ma was not wytg
out bnderſtandynge / but contydered by hem
elle that his power was myniched and pon⸗
dzedhow ine beynge defended br the
aht God / were not able to be


fene


Lequyzed me to Eulpll che thynges concets
e cheir earande. Crherfoze loke what
t be graunted / A certikxed 6 kyng ther⸗
Of: ¢ whatloeuer paß conuenient. LAgreed
therto Aye nom wpllbe karchtull ing mat⸗
= 9 eee ph eae aes
0 pou good. Hs concernynge other ehyngt
Hoon ie coecoeapane bee
to youve metlaungers / and to thote whom F
Cent onto zou / to comen with pou or p lame /
fave pe well / In che hundꝛech d. xlvti j peare /
P. xith. dare or? moneth Ftotcozinthius.
How the kynges lettre contepned thele
woꝛdes Apnge Antlochus ſendeth
vnto his brother Litas. Foz Co moch as oure
father is now deed / oure wyll is that ther
which are in oure realme / ipue without ene
infurreccvon / and euerp man to be drligent
inhis awne matters, We vnderſtande alto /


Das thatthe Tewes wolde not confent to oure ta


er / Foz tu be bat g ee ane cuſtome of

e Gentples / but ttpsty to kepe their awne

loi the which caule they requpze o

vs allo / to fett chem remapne dll be their
atonelawes,


bern ace mtmbetoithacthispeople®


ſhalbe in rel: we haue concluded and deter⸗
6
at theymarelxue acco; 0
cuttome of their fore Fathers. Thou ſbalt do
vs a pleature therfore / t chou tende onto


R they ave :


delpze waste come downe to youre people / bꝛethꝛen / let


which are with vs.


opthe


epee ke loierte weihen ine geue the fpr


che. rij. Chapter.
2 benmpele coucnauntes werema⸗
e e
’ eft ground.
But qimotheus/ pp


i wah en erome and Bemophon


Hicanoz the captarne of Cypers,
e
ce. Cher o
allo dyd euen loch a amici — cher
pꝛaped the Jewes that dwelt amongethem /
to go with their wyues and chyldꝛen in to ß
drppes which they had prepared and drd
wßihthem / as though they bad ought thẽ no
five ang
3001 020
Lertebe ol peace / chepcoſented ther ·


and lo theydeparted tothetr tentes.
Sues wente allo bnto a cytxe / whych ng
bery kalte hepte with bꝛydges / lenked round
aboute wyth walles / and dyuerte kyndes of
people dwellyngetherin / called Calpin.
Cher that were within it / put loch trult
inthe lüregth of the walles / a in their toare C
ol bptales that they were the llacker in their
doynges / curtynge and reuplynge Judas W
blätphempes / and tpeaß ‘och woꝛdes
88 it becommeth nat. But Machabeus cal⸗
Ipngebpon the greate Pzynceokthe wonde
e
cal e
walles fa


ol ericho / in the tyme of Tolue) tell Fate, vier


mantully bpon the walles / cone the cyte
(thozow thebelpe of the Loꝛde made an thy :
ceadynge greate Maughter: In lo moch that
a laßt ortwo fourlonges bꝛode whych tape
ao to flowe twpth ee bloude of
Chen departed they from thence, bij. C. a
L. kurlonges /and came to Caraca vnto the
Jewes that are called Tubianet. But as
toꝛ cimotheꝰ / they coulde not get him there:
fo; (not one matter dycpacched Ihe was bee
parted krom thence / and had lelte certayne
mien


The tecoride boke


Rrotigeboibe. SutDolitheus
which were Captapnes wych


ip FF of kote, ). M.

. C een möwikige ocz
das cammynge / he Cent the women / chrldzen
and the other baggage onto acattell called
Carnion. (Fos it couſde not be wöne / a was
harde to come vnto / the wapes of the tame
places were lo narow and whe Judas coms
pany came Fatt in lyghe / the enempes were
impiten with keare / choꝛo w the pretence of
Hod which lerch all thenges: In lo moch g
they flepnge one here / another there / were


Judith. elk. rather diccomlited ofthety atone people / and
L. Reg riß. e. wounded 16 ſtrokes of their awnelweardz.
. Fra. 0 Audas allo wag verp earneſt in kolowynge


bpontyem punich enge thole vngodly / and
dewe xxr P. men of them. Cimotheus allo
himſeille tell in to the handes ol Wotitheus
and Dollpater / whom he betought many
e o with his Ike: becaute
15 manp ot the Jeweß fathers o bzethzẽ
pꝛelon which ( vl they put hym to deach)
myggdt be difapopnted. Spo whẽ be had pꝛo⸗
tmplea fapthtulipto delpuer thé agapne acs
copdpng to the condicpon made they let him
go without harme / ko the health ofthe 2.
thzen, Ind when Judas had arne. xxv.
he wente from Carnion,
How alter 5 he had chaledawape efapne
Ehis enemypes / he remoued the holte towarde
Ephzon a ſtronge optte / wherin dwelt many
bruerſe people of che hheathen / a the ſtronge
ponge men kepte the walles / detendyng the
myghbtelp. In chis cptie was moch oꝛdinaũ⸗·
ce / ard prouption of dartes. But when Jue
das and hrs company had called vpon AI-
mighty God ( which do bys power bꝛeaketh
the lrength ol the enempes) ther wanne the
eptte and llewe. rv. M. ol them / that were
Within. From thence wente ther to che cyexe
of the Perthtans / whrch Ipeth. vi. C. fur
ges trom Jerulalem. But whe > Ferw
which were in the cytie teſtitped/thhat᷑ p cite.
kus dealte loupnglp with them / vee and in
treated them kyndip in the tyme of their ad⸗
uerlite / Judas and hig company gaue ther
thanckes delpzynge them to be krendly Bill
brite chem: and Co thep came to Ferufalem
the hre featt of the wenes beynge at hande.
Ind after the teak they went forth agaynſt
che gouernoure or Jdumea
16. O. men of fote 8. ft. C. hoꝛimen. i hich
when ther met together / it chauntena ewe


ok the Jewes to be llayne. Ind Policheus E
one ol che Bachenozs a mightr hom toke
holde of Goꝛglas / and wolde haue take him
gucke. But anhoʒimũ ot & hꝛacia teil vpd
bim / and lmote at his arme / ſo that S oꝛgias
elcaped ¢ fled in co Mozela. When ther now
p were of Gozgtas ĩyde / had toughtẽ ionge
@ were wearp:Zudas called vpon the Loꝛde
that he wolde be their helper a captapne of
the kelde: and with that / he beganne wyth a
manly bopce to take vp a ſange of pꝛapſe / æ
a ctpe: In lo moch that he made the enemies
dear soo cee ace
0 gather
Pda apes cxtie ot OQdolla. and when
the leuenth dave came vpd them / they clen⸗
tedthem kelues las 6 cuſtome was a kepte
the Soabboth in che fame place. And vpong
dave fol e / gudag g his company cam
to take vp the bodies of thé that were dla ne /
and to buvy thé in the fathers graues. Gow
vnder the cotes of certapne Fewes whych
badet ute be dee, Jewels that they
badtakẽ out of the temple a krom the Idols wente. og. t
OF che Jamniters:which tyrnge is tozbyddẽ Jon.
e gewes by the lawe. Chen ẽuery ma law
that this was the caule / whertoze they were


Oa;
fo eueryman gaue thanckes vntoß &

L onde tor bis yghtuõus iubgment / wh
ya opened the thenge that was bpd. chee

fell downe alfobnto their pavers / and be
ought cod / the tawte which was made /

might be put out ol remembzaũce. Belrdes

chat / Judas exoꝛted the people carne dip / to

Riepe the lelues krom loch tynne:loꝛ to moch

as the ta we befoze their eyes / p thele men
were llapne foz the tame offence. Hohe ga⸗
thered of eucrp one a certayne /in lo moch &

bebz together two thoufande dꝛach⸗

mag of fpluer which he fent onto Jerulalk / » zubge vpe
that there myght a tacrikyce be offred koꝛ the thispiacewye
meſdede,In the which place be vrd well and paß n

e had Come confyderacpon a pon- n i fo the


e / to
that


hole whych were 3
myghebeforgenen. sprout bps mt
tuiaenengte Seer
am deed momoare doche anf
e
2 is hol ye
Pat yet enn achat ib meet eure,


a8 tts before (nfficietlp proneb by the atitboritye ot Seren MUP -


Nolege oF thete bones called Apacbupha.


Ot the


‘ 85 Phe cBinttige of Gupte: in to Febwiye. he decth


enelaus. Machabeus goyng tofeyght ag pn


ymoueth bis ſoudiat᷑s unto praper.ge kiltetty’


Fitrehoutande mien in the tentes of antiochas. ha-


docus ehe becraper of the Jewes is tanen. Antioehus;
_ : betoxe


‘Setapneth tridihip with the Jewes.
Carpe sith Chapter,


Fez / Llras the
matters with bins
uynge an. C. and. x. M. men of kote. b. M.


4 mch. ll. oDOZCMEN . Fri}, Elephantes “ and. ll. C. cae


kettes. Menelaus alco topned him tele wyth
them but wyth greate dylceate) and Cpake:
fayze to the Bunge / not toꝛ enygood ot the
countre/ but becaule he thought tohaue be-
ne made ſome greate man ok auctoite. But
the hinge of hinges moued Antiochus myn ·
de agarnſt chps vngodly perfonne / and Ly:
fas infourntyo che kynge / that thys Mene
laus was the caule of ali myicheie: co that
the kynge commaunded to tate him / andlas
the maner ol them is) to put hym vntodeath
in che lame place. :

Chere was alto in the tame place a tower
ol. L. cubptes hye/heapped with alches: but
abdut it was lo made / that men mygbt lone
downe on euer ide. here in tothe 0 be
commaunded that chamekull perlon ko be
cat amonge the alches / as one that was
cauſe ot ai bngractoufnette, And reaton it
was / that p onthzift chulde dye 3


g Band not to be burxed: koꝛ he had done mi
ichs. g. e myſchete onto the guter ol God ( whore tyre


ehm felkaldobude debe roreb de bt /R


Wherkoꝛehe abcrybed the power of all
enges Mito God the maker of the wozdde /


achabers, |


ons.

, lxrr.

joatyngelps people to fyahé mantulty,

(vee euen onto neath) co the jawes / the tem

Bethe cptve thete atone natpue countre /

andto dekende the ppteleng and let bis holt
Modrn. Ye gaue them allo chat

were wyth hym / a onen or the vpctorp of


„ Gov/ehotynge out eye manivett yonge nien / . aachs bil. e.


wente bynyahe in tothe kynges paul
ewe oFtbe boot rt). Wanen / 3 the ava,
chen Wake worth tholethat tatt pon x


m.
Chuß when theyhad brought a g
— a remoerartae the tay heit
unges went porpers
lx wych them / they departed n bea


Fr de aac, e.


when the kynge perceaued the
manlpnede ok the acne ementenbone
tothe tahe the Kronige places by crate / and
temouch ges hoon onto Betytura/ whycy
—4 a 8 ol defence of the Fes
5 re chaced awaye /h
and bef nua e
judas kent vnto them that were in
tt / lot 15 ies as were necelſary. Inthe
Jewes hoot allothere was one Nhodocus /
whych tolde the enempes their lecreteg: but
they loughthim out / and when they had got⸗
ten hm ther put hemin pieton. Akter ches
dpb the Kenge comen wrth chem that were
5 Has r 55 ae Swpth chem / depar⸗
Oke a battayl wyth Judas / whi,

5
en he vnderſtode / that Ph plip⸗

pel wh hebad left tobe ouerceer of es bie
Cnekesat Anttoche)begäne to rebelagainſt
hem / he was aſtonnped in hrs mynde:lothat
he yelded hym felé to the Jewes / and made
the 5 Othe / todo whatloeuer thepthoughe


rygh

„Now when he was teconcyled wyth
them be ofkred made moch ok iche temple /
aue greate gyltes vntoit / enbꝛaced Ma⸗
chabeus /mabpnge hym captapne and go⸗
uernour krõ Ptolomays onto the Gerrenes.

Neuerthelede when he came to Ptolo⸗
maps / the people ot the cptye were not cons
tent wyth that bonde of krendhype: Foz they
were akraped / that he wolde bꝛeane the co-
uenaunt. Chen wente Lylpag vp in to the
leate /and enkourmedthe people / chewedthẽ
che caule whpland pacikredthem. Hohe cas
me agapne to Antroche. hrs is now the
matter concernynge the hynges iourney/ e
his returne.
wp the mocpon of the Londe / Demetrius ſendeth
Hicanor to hpll che Jewes, Nicanot maße th a com⸗
Fact wihe Je wes / which he pet b:eaketh through the
mocpon of the bynge. Micartor cömaundeth Masiate
betaben. The bolbnes of Marin.
Che. xi. Chapter.


ter thze peates was Judas in-


ourmed / how that Demetrius che atral


conne ok Deleucus was come vp
with a greate power and ſpyppes /
thozow the hauen of Cripolis /to take cers
tapne commodpous places and countrees
agaynt Intiochus e his captapne L yltas.
ow Alcimus( which hadbenehre Prelt/
wylluliy derpledh pm telt / in the tyme ol the
myxtyngeſteing / z by no meanes bs coulde
bebelped /nerbaucany moze intraunce to
the aultare:be came to kynge Demetrius in
the hundzeth and one a lte veare / pꝛelen.
tenge vnto hima crowne of golde / a palme
Gan olpue tree: which as menthought )be⸗
longed koche tempfe / kthat dape be heide his
tonge. But whe he had gott opoztunxte fos
bis madneſle / Demetrius called hem to cof:
cell / and acked hym / what thinges 02 coun⸗
cels the Jewes jeaned vnto: Pe anlwered:
ant snes Sbachabeus ) mamneme
tapne is Judas Machabe
warres / ma ke inſurreccpons / and wyll not
let 90 1 a 9298 ter den be
o A bepnge depzxued or my.
noure(Z meane thebpe pzelthode) am come


Theletonde boke


the fodane commyng of the
ped,


Heuerthelen Micanoz heartnge the man⸗
Ipnes of them that were with Judas / a che
bolbe ſtomackes that ther had to kyght for
their naturall countre durſt not pꝛoue the
matter wyth bloudcbeddynge. wyerkoze he
fent Potiaonius Cheodocius ¢ Mathias
beloze / togeue and to take peace, Do when
thephadtanen longe aduptement there vpö/
andthe captapne chewed it vntoche muite⸗
tude: they were agreed in one minde / to haue
peace. Indcher appopnteda dape to tt bps
tyefe matters queetipamonge them lelues /
90 Holes allo were bzought and let koth.

euertheleſfe Judas commaunded certarne
men ol armes to wapte in conuentent plas
ces / lelt there Guide Codenty atyfe anx euell
thoꝛow the enempes And lo they commoned
wegn oplebe above at Jerutalem/ w>

icanoz/ whple!
ee er
awape the peo} ve
ther. Pe loued Judas euer wi hert / and
kauoured him He pꝛaped him allo to tanke a
wpke / and to bzynge koꝛth chrozen. Hohe


er:partly becaute I was kapthlull onto D/ invert /andthey leda comen
8 parti beau Ilought ce a the loue g


zokptok ö cpteling. Ind wür: all oute peor
ple hepa ye wichemnete or them / are not
alptle troubled. Wherkoze J beleche the O
Hynge)contpoze all thele thynges dilpgent-
ip / and then make lome prouttyon Los the
Janne and the people /accozopnge to ß ynd.


betwyrte theni / andhow ther were a⸗
Sith came to Demetrius / S tolde


Chen the by


nelle that thou hat ockred bnto chem. Laß ag row


longe as Judas hath the bpperhͤde / it is not
pollible that men can iyue in peace.


whenhe hadtpoken thele wozdeg / other.


wycked
pet ar een


trendes allo hau pnge euclt well at Judas, wh


fett the kynge Demetrius on Eye agapne
bim. Which immediatly lent Nicanoz (ru ·
ler ofthe Elephantes ) a captapne / in LS
wꝛprcõmaundynge him / to take Judas him
leite alpue / but to dave themthat were with
him / and to make Alctmus hre pꝛeſte of the


mple.

5 Chenche Beathen whrch lled oute ol ge⸗
ee e.

Bes / thynckrng.
geben be their welkate. How when the
Fewes herde ot icanozs commynge / and
the gatheryng together ofthe Heathen:thep
teen thé kelues with earth / a belought
re wom / which made themhys people / euer
dekendedhis awne pozcion with euydent to ·
nens / thathe wolde pꝛelerue them ſtrll. Do
at the commaundemét ol the captayne / ther
remoued krom thence / and came to a towne
called Wettafan.. And Symon Judas bꝛo⸗
er kel in bande with Mécanoz/but thoꝛow


henge be fought me tee pid
ehe 5
2 tanding when
Machabeus lawe that M ani
be churlych ontobpm / and that he intreaten
himmoze rughly then be was wonte he per⸗
e
fore!
me bit el gon fan SOHC


doch. vg le


fo,
th. lh. t.
35 — 0


§


fe euer da
bnderrled wh ych lately was clenced. Mow. 9
was there acculed vnto Micanoz/ one Nazis lüge kelues
an Abderman ok Jerufafem /a louer of the
e
rte that he bare ontothe eo Pitano had deupled w. i
ple was called a father ofthe Jewes. ays to Soeren Jaca, and e *
man ofttymes/ when the Jewes were myn⸗ che bictozy. But Machabeus had euera kalt
Dedto nepe the felues vndekpled, defended 8 conkpdence and a parkecte hope in God that
delpuered them / beinge content tedfattiy to he wofde hel pe him / and exhoztedhis people /
cpende his body and his lyte toz bis peopie. not to be afrapedat the cömynge of the Pea⸗
G So Nicanoz wrllenge ta declare d hate, chen: bitt alwaye to rememboe che heipe that
chat he bare to the Jewes cent tue hundzeth had bene ſhewed önto chem from heauen /
men to take hem kozhethought / ze he gat vee and to be lurenow allo / that almyghtye
bim-be cpulde beingethe ſewesingreatde⸗ God wode geue themthevyctosy.wetpake
cape. Holm when the people begöne ko ruche vnto them out ok the late and piophetes /
mat hes houle /eobseate the dozes/¢tolee putting thé in remembzalice ol ß battapig /
krze on itthebeingenom talen / wolde haue thattheyhab trpchenatoze/andmade them
dekended himkelt with bis wearde:cholpnge to be ora good coꝛage.
rather to dyemankullp then to relde hymteik Do when their hartes were plucte bp he
tothole wicked doerg : beraute okhis noble cewed them allo the dylceatkulneſſe of the
Koche he hadratherhaue bene put to etre⸗ Beathen/andbot they wolde hepe no coues
me cruclte Motwithftandyng whattymeas nauntnaz othe, Thug he weapened the noe
be miücboches ttroke ko halte / z dmuttttu- with the armoure of thylde and peare / but
de kein byoletly betwirte the does heräne with wholtome wozdes anderhoztacpös. he
bololytotie wales cad pimleltoowne man. Wewed them a dzeame allo / wherthozow
fully amonge the heape of the / which gaue made thé al glad / which was this he thought
bone place to bis tall tothak he kel vvon dis that be fave Ontaß (whych had bene hre
bely. Peuerthelelle whple chere was pet pelt / a pertuous and loupnge inan / cad and
beüth wythin hom / he was kyndled in bys ok honeſt conuerlacyon/ well lpoben /a one
mynde / and whple hys bloude guſched out that had bene exercpled in Godlynes krom a
rrceadinglol fozhe was very foze wounded) chylde)holbyng by his handesto warde hea⸗
he ranne thoꝛo w thempodett ofthe people, nen / and pꝛapenge foz his people. Itter this
und gathrm tothe toppe of arocke. Ho ſwhẽ chere apeareb bnto hym anothermu / wüpch c
hes bloude was now gone he tone outhys was Aged/ponozabie and gloztoug. and
Stone bowels with bochhis handes e thzew niaglapde: This is a louer of the bꝛethzen /
chem vpon che people: callynge vpon $107 and or the people ol Araell. Chis is he that
oklyle a ſpꝛete / to rewarde him this agaynẽ / pꝛapeth moch ko che people / and koꝛ all che
und lohe dyed. : Holy cytle:Zeremp the pꝛophete of dod.
Slang gocth sboute to come wpongudas onthe ought aiko? Jeremphelde outhys
—.— — oy le he ewe vr b handẽ / and gauehrm (namely onto Judas)
neth their hertes. Che prayer of Machabe ng. After kresgeig gene Ran 0 Wender


the holte ol 5 —
Semen ober nö es hee = oid bot che enempes ofthe fe


dis tonge to be geuen vnto fowls,


The letond boke. xt.


And ſo they were well comkoꝛted thoꝛow
the woꝛdes of Judas / and toke cozage vnto
them / lo thatthe ponge men were determed
in theirmyndes to kyaht / and to byde ſtxür
at it: an io moch that in the thpnges thy
ther tobe in hande /thewbolonetic che wen
ſame/becaule the holy cytie and the temple
were in pareli: to the which ther Coke moze
cave tien fo2 their wrues /chridzen / bꝛethzẽ
and hnctolckes. Agapne / ther that were
in the ertre / were molt carefull oz thole
which were to Fpght. Now when they were
all in a hope that the iudgment of 5 matter
was at hand andthe enempes daewnge / the
hott beynge let inarape thecklephantes and
hozimen everyone ſtandynge in bys place:

chabeus conkpdered the commpng ol d
miiltptude / the ogdpnaunce or druerlẽ wea-
D pens / the crucincdes ol the beettes /a helde
Hpbis handes to warde heauẽ / callyng ops
the Lozde that doth wonders, which geueth
g. Pararüg e hot the bictozv alter the multptude of weas
Zudiccdy.b peng and power of the hott (but tothemthat
Pleatehym ) accosdpnge tobys atone wyll.
Cherfoze in his praperhe lap thele word.
ene abe n et eee RONG FSU
rexroth. f, eo *
Cache da, andin hebotte of Soennabertb dewed
18a. bi. b. anbundzeth and tyue and koure lcoze thou-
fand: lende now alto thy good angell betoze
bB(D Lozde of heauens iin the fearfulnede
and dzede or thy mpghtye arme that cher
which come agapnt thy boly people to blac⸗
pheme th / mape beaftayed . And lo he made
An ende of his wozdeg. Chen Micanoz a they
Fwere with pau /tpetwe pe wlth Wwawmeß
und longes but Judas g his company wee

pꝛayer and callinge vpon God.

Lorch their bandes they timote/ but wrth,
their hertes they prapedontothe Loꝛde / and
llew no lelle then xxxb. M. men: For thoꝛow
$ pꝛelentheipe of God they were glortouur
comtoꝛted.


Now when they left of / s were fumenge
agama ee vnderſtode that £1-
canò hm leite was Gapne wyth the other.
Chen cher gaue a greate whoute and a ctpe/
pꝛarkenge dhe Dimighty Lord with a loude
bopce. And Judas ( which was euer read to E
Opende his Body and rte for bis citecyng cd.


maunded to fmpte of Hicanoꝛs head / wych


bps arme a hande / a to be brought to a cru ·
kalem. ohen he came there / he calledall the
people / and the prees at the aulter wyil
that were in the can ell and ſewed ih
icanozs head / and his wyckedhade / whic
he had pꝛeiumptuoullyholden op agapntt
temple of God. He cauled the tongẽ allo ort
9 y Micanog tobe cut iniptie peces/
Sto be caſt to the foules / and the crucll mas
hande to be hanged vp betoze the temple.
So cuerp man gaue thanckes vnto the
Feen e be he / that bath kepte
face
is Foz Necanozshead / he hanged it vy
vpon the bye caſtell foz an eurdent ¢ plane
tokẽ ofthe belpe ol God. And lo they agreed
all together / to nepe that bape holx / namelr
the. xſij.daxe olthe moneth Adar / which in
the Sopzians language is called the nexte
dave befoze Mardochẽus daye. Chus was
Micanoz laapne /a from that tyme koꝛth
the Jeweß had the cytie in pollel ·
ton: And here wl J now
maße an ende.


che ende of the ſeconde bone
of the Machabees.


* K *


—
$


The newe
Teſtament ok
: nuts lroud Fels Ct
f pte Annotacions
"Seas ee beetle
olche


newiz ano


ciel
cog ep
M. D. XX XVII.


: Golpell of


huge ok his mot
Ke en Che bee ern


che tet chapter. +


bys is the boke of the
F pes pl
r Plone of &* Dani / zlonne
Nato of Abzabam,
22 Qa Abzaham begat Fane:
Ce 5) Flac begat Jacob:
eqat Tudas and his bꝛechzen:
as begat Phareg ¢ Saram ot Chamar.
aoe ee
eg 3
. Kaminadab:


ch 8
e hynge begat Dalomon / orher
that was the wyke ot w:
Salomon begat Roboam:
Boboam begat a bia.
Abia begat Ala:
Ila begat Jolaphat:
braphat bega Zozam:
lozamt begat Ollas:
s begat Joatham:
tham begat Achas:


2


S. Mathew,


ontas begat Salachleit
cal che bebe Seeebaben
ozobabel begat Abiud:

biud begat Eltachtm:
Arab begat d 202:
303 begat Sadoc:
Fr egat Achin:

in begat Eliud:


@ ber bene en
Eleatar det e
Matthan ſegat Jacob: 8
Jacob begat Fotepy che huchande or att /
or whom dozen that Jelus / that is cal⸗ hes
leo? chr. E ae
as ere e
on are kom- dus ute ios


Che brit
wle When 2


be hus:
ofthe Loꝛde a
fapinge:Jote;
totake nto
is conceaued


krom Menken. ws
All this was don
fhoken ok ß Lop
e
20 a
name s* ¢manuel,
cron / God wyth bs
And


a
Ge Lb zit is cat
led Emanuel in


4 became one

zother heb fe
baer kun fore
ne/ not becgüte
che bad any ate


Che tyme and place or Cbziges bath. Che topte feranutivcrante


men offce their pretentes. f hit Apeth in to @gppter
volge chin ater ia arb wie Gülle ü.


l. Chapter.
zen geln was bo me age
un Fury,
kürnge.


none he


eens e
des


E ples but
eyes of god
isgreate
pꝛẽciouſe.
Ga To gouerne
is/to oder and
rule the people
bp lernpng andhpm,
example. Act. and
erk unde Udhen


The Gotpell


Archelgus dyd raygne in gewzy / n the row
me of hes father Berode ſhe was alrarde to
the go chi et. Sot wich wean e mnchen
hace of Gob i a baeanie Ue el 8
into the parties of Galle / and wetit z dwel
ing citiecalled Qasaveth /to Cultyll ? which
was (poken bp the Pꝛophetes he walbe eal⸗
leda“ Hazarite. Er r egg.
leine pꝛeach ng and offpce ok: 0
Tres
che. Chgpter. . a
obe Daves John the saptplt Pure,
ched in the wyldernes Lune. j. 2


98 pp
Pen *


n- (as toe cal the)


‘Tapte bugors-of res |


is the o kutes.
ecberbe
euerer
Aycahe tir nd
thers belprs:


Fyre. E.
i t0°F0206
‘Font


os chers comet thou tome? Fetus antw
ubs derahun weet be snow, 2h;

-tebecdmeth bs ta fulkrndraulrtghtew eines. can gbr /
Then he tuſtredhym. And Fetus as ſone he aulncs u
twas baptifed came ſtrerght out of 6 water eee
And lo / heauẽ was open over him: and Tohn 1 1 .
la we the ſpirtte ol odd ‘Tyke a doue ‘
Alpaht op hen. And loo / there came a vopce ore
kröhes b pe
fonnein whom is my delrte. T chu oe


Prt. vlc.


F When Felushadbearde
talkẽ / he departed into Galen


“ie
Reet verte altes
a rect


>, Matheln,


. And Yetus went aboute alt Galle / tea⸗
incheirkrnagoges e pfrachenge the


and
bear;


obtapned ¢ gee
ten 2
thet,


at opencth the vnderſtand
ts FpFth Chapter fpecyally is:
hake and


che. v. Chapter.
7 dagen * bp
7 nountapne / a when he was
AY Zatet his bitcipies came toö pm / and
be openedhys mouth / and taught


una.


=


05


A Chinke not that J am come todeſtroye


let
F the lawe / oz 5 Pꝛophetes: no Jam not come
2. to deltrope


wy,


123 The Golpell 5 d ben ve prape/bablenictmocge/és aheplabour notnetheveponne. And rer o


; + oft b fi c. e net eauen / toꝛ it is Goddes teate: noꝛ : : 8 loꝛ the :
Chodettrovechen/biitto fuukrllthe. Fortrue: nétgerdybeauct/tor . Shethenno:toz thepthinckethat cher Halbe ali chat J Cave onto you / that eue

unge. h tapobnto pou fen Yeuen and ext vet pained ; Bearoe foztbeicmociebabiongestake, Be inallyysrovelte wasnotatiiee Oe ung

: __ epibe/ one iott o2 one tytle of che lawe Wall bz gre 4 : Ne Oe Forvouretather oneokthele. Wherkoze vé God Co clothe the

oR what ns as Hot ſcape / tyli all be tulp. „ Bupng if 8 i nowethwherofvehauencarebefozeveat: gvalle/ which is to daye inthe kelde / ato mo⸗

Manege ihölocuer“ bzeaßeth one oF there lett ete eed : Be oeh. Aker hs maner derfore pape pe. rowwe thalbe cacte into the kournace/ chall he


‘eotuamndemetcs, commaundmentes / and teacheth men ko / he O dure father which arte in heuen / halo⸗ not moche moze dothe lame vnto vou / O pe


attach


we which chr e fulkplled ag wellin erth as itis Cperkoze take no thought tapinge: what bel ore
aue eee eee ae Mal wecken wat tba we bate 09% oie ie


See en Walbe calleoche leech in ye irngdomeoehe. Feen en es benen deere of
. ‘ eee weet oblerueth andtea⸗ wild .


9 e chet) /the fame thalkg called greate in the
Abenden Angbote oF heuen. = 0
e eee e 5
0 oer rue tewelnes exceade the r. ewe of 1 : puer eupll. Foz ther know. at ve haue ne; ely dor
Sea i e nenen ene cannot ene sts ti ore, i ome 5 all. Foz th eth that pe haue nende of all ehete nen ine
che kyngdome ol heuen. 8 . a euer.
e oe 3
£0 do well yee OF the o 3 Chylt. 3 i
wong) toe bao whholoeuer kylleth / hall be in daũger ok iud⸗ i
Seat ae tae acca ,
Galyd,b, a y Sertber : Ar, de forbiddeth foolpch ti
Dok tudgement, ubotoeucr favety ontoyps b aepcag en, a he ar fat tos the ppocrites are for they diteigure their zander tot iubgementtitce iis Otongzan
nnn ß è pp, ¾̃—ʃũc⅛; faces) D chepupgytbetene oe menbow tyey ]³ ] eee tn ceatane


that Urea toon bell. But who Cocuct lapeth thou kole / halbe Bietle them that courſſe ou. Do good to thé nes / rene of ate airly gf F
f i ‘and lu, rewarde. But thou / when thou kaſtet / an⸗ wadge not / pebenocindged, so) ell.
e e, Gee B pe benotiudgen, Lor caretu


Fei in danger of bell ke. paid Pape forthem ee er vou e e 8 ve iudge fo all ve be tunged, A
5 4 weal; 1 0 ve be trudged,
4 e re elt hat thy chüldzen of pure father that is inheauen, oz v. 230 Aye the bote appere not vnto men howe 8
80, a wochen hach dug usa nt te lee chens jemand hes nete axyceon the eel ¢ eee dern u onto chp father hee ee en
ee ME hay aa DY Eater wc) Fepehin feceete/thallte- Agape. Whe fePtethou amoote inehpbzo«
10 e e ae aro nde beothet/ 2 eee Ke Cpr gen he . ab 3 d eatin beame thatis in
tuepe: ‘ N N 1 treat
size dee wh dena quichge/ ublicans een Co? Ano yf yebe erden the Genen enk emoultescomupee/¢. kee auer new en une m
i eet enn wh ples thou arte in che way wichhim, leit? Poure brethzen onive:twharfynguler thynge anne. where theues bꝛeake through a weale. But oute of tyyne eye / a beholda beanie is in thy
uc paybe eee sousertapoclpucr.the tothe zudge / and the - dove? Wonot the Publicans pe wle de : Geather ve trealuresto gecher in heuk where nieatoneepe Y pocrpte/tppt cut eule dea:
hefhal ue Mons tune delyuer the to che mynplter and then call therfoze be perkecte/euen as voure fas hether rut noz moulthes cozrupte / a where tmeoute ofthpne atone epee then fate tvors
thou be cat unt döner chen fapontop: ther whlch is in heauen / is pertecte. cheuks nether bzeake p noz vet ſteale. Fos fe cleariy to plucke oute 8 moote out of chy
thou walt not come out thence pete chou Seen lbb rd e 7 where foeuer youre trealure is / there wplt bzotherseve,
len ee 7 1S ice nee bCUaDE OLihe:tbop UE ymneeye mDber Meter ete og IPO NOLES yn ho
. vl. . * . e roure pea efore lwyne / 1. e
e oes SSE Ean oucinreouaataroy on, Mewtnemocuans acs a ca
¢ i 2 Epe t and all torent pou, .

athcamit an. Opels . gr pott OF pt ak 8 e e ces 2 aie arbi atbegruen vu, e
ay ' sabe 20 A 9 ne een er og be dae e Wpertoze pk the lrgbt B is inche / be derck⸗ 1 apres Aechalbe opened vnto tbe woe by
goure father which 18 in eau: wehe koeuer wog dener nesthew great in that vercknes. kau n tohotoeuet-atheth receaucth “ahh sume wet


therfore thous geueck chene aires thou tale ea me AE na. ek Do man can ferue two matters. For thatteheeptinnedy and cobim that

notmakea ttopet to beine befoze the as atts ache be wpartpate Bone eloue Josefs LeWalbe opener scheren nene pon W
tert the ppocrites doth the fynagogesé ind rea vs syne wen Vhe Hall leane to the one a delpite 57 ebenen b abhenbim pie wand e
5 ne , Aree Ska

le 1 a 3 0 1 @ 2 then

weed the alm let not dhe an op B ve thattnoineke/ ate eupll gn geucto pouty ehpinzen goose 4

Sade ez ot eae me sme ll tho pet for poure bony /what ve (hall put on. gvétes hom moche mooze Mati poure father

%% L110 taearkenones nee oe

note ou pe, nae Coutes ofthe ayer:koꝛ they lowe na / ne? Chertoze whattoeuer ye wolde that men Lawe and

asthe ppocrytes ar sds ene coma e rene nor pet cavy into the barnes: ard -Mulddotopou/euenfodo pe to them. Chys Propbetes,

e, ene ee Re

. : 50 i toe moe Kea +fo2 wyde fs

werely Tlape onto pon / ther baue theirre⸗ Tec Wörch ot vou (though he Coke thought the gate / and bꝛoade backen

Wande. But une thou paayerjenteetntothy eee cdcerkoze (couTde put oe cubit bnto s (tas 355


b¥chamber/a thuttiyp dope to che / pape to snake of:
in ſecr
n w And when


ture: Ind why care ye then loꝛ raymẽt! Con⸗ in therat. But ttrayte is $ gate / and naro ll
ace eg chene ow bey grote, is che ware which lead 4
. ili. erbe


The Golpell


Ccherbechat kyndeit. L Beware ok b falle


Bom. xuih . d. the lande: and aboundaunce of rapne delcen⸗
ded / and the fluddes came / and the wyndes
blewe and beet vpon that houle / and it tel /
and great was the Fall oF it. E

And it came to palte / chat when Fetus had

endedthete lapinges / p people were aſton⸗

hyped at hs doctryne. soz he taught them as
one hauinge power / and not as the fcrpbes,


CA HU clenterh ehe leper/healeth the


ther in lato plleth the
. deuels out of che pollelled in to the Cw


dhe. bij Chapter.
Pen he was come downe fromthe


and the wynde / derueth >


wozchippedhim fapinge: Malter
chou wylt thou cant make me clene. Ind
elus put koꝛih his hand a touched himlar⸗
nge: will / be thou clene/eimmedtatiy bys
leppotpe was clented. And Fetus lapde nto

im: fe thou tell no man / but go a hewetby
lee tothe pꝛeſte / a 7 — § gytte that Mo⸗


wytnes to chem.

18 was entred into Ce
naumther came vnto hym a certay
turis / and belought hem Cayinge: Maſter /
John. fg. my leruaunt lveth rene at hom̃e of the pal⸗


cpe / and is greuoulip papned. Ind Felus
‘fapoonto hrm: J well come and heal hem.
Che Centurion and wered andlarde: rz
am not wosthr 6 thou ſuldeſt come onder
myprole / but ſpeãne the woꝛde oniy a myter⸗
uaunt halbe healed. Foz Aalto mip ſelte am
a man Cubtect to the authozvtye oF another /
andhaue foudpers under me / and J laxe to
one go / and he goeth / and to another come ¢
he cometh: and to mpleruaunt / dothrs / ahe
doeth it. hen Telus hearde that / he marue⸗
ledand lard to thé that tolowedhrm: werelr
5 fave vnto vou / Ahaue not kounde lo great


HED, Mathew.


came out d ure inmerer / and not in oltrynge. Foz Jam Mercle ann
kearee ſo not come to call the ryghtewes / but thẽ fool Cacrifice
ners to repentaunce. E
Chen came p Diccyples ot qohn to him
faying-whydo we a the Pharileg kaſte olte:
but thy Dikeiples kaſte not? And zelus ta
vnto thé:can che weddynge chyldjẽ moꝛne
longe as the bipdegrome is with
tynie wyll come when the bꝛyoͤgrome tat
taken kromthem a then hati they kacke. 0
man peceth an olde garment with a peceol
newe ddooche Forchen taketh he awape the ugre not.
pece agapne fromthe garment / a the rent ig


apth:no / not in Gen fap chertoye wnß


vou that many Mat come fro the elt ¢ welt
and (hall reſt wich Abꝛaham / Alaac a Jacob
in the kyngdome of heauen and the chyſdzen
of the nyngdome chalbe catt out in to viter


made greater ether do men put new wyne

into olde veſlels Foz then ö vedels. bꝛeane / e

che wyne runneth oute / a the vettels perpm,

what Wut cher powze new wyne into new vegeis
andto are botie fated together.


barchnes: there Malbe weprnge and gnats neg.


yng of teth Chen Fetus lapde onto s* cé-
turion / go thy wave / andas thou beleueſt fo
be it vnto the. And bys ſeruaunt was healed
ths elke houre. 8.


Hihple he thus Cyake vnto the / beholde
cher came a certapne ruler / and woꝛchipped
him taping: my daughter is eie nowdeceg⸗
led / but come a lap thy had on her ¢ te Halt
lpue. And Fetus arole and tolowed him with


And then Fetus. went to Peters houlte / acht. le,
lawe his wyites mother linge ſycke ok a ke⸗Lüc. ug. l.
i uer / touched her! A the teuer lekthir:


and che arole / and min yſtred vntothem.
When the euen was come / ther bꝛought
bntobpmmany chat were podlelled wich de⸗
uyls. Andhe catt outs ſpziteg with a woꝛde /
Eee tpcke / to fulkpll that
ich was tpoken by Elavas the Prophet c.


Dilciples


his dilciples. And beholde a woman whych
was dicealed with an vaue of bloude. rij. vc
res came behinde him k touched theheme ol
his veſture. Foz che lapd in her elke: yea may
touche but euen bys velture only / J chalbe
ſale. hen Fetus toutned hym aboute/ a be⸗
helde her taping: Daughter be or good com⸗
kozte / th o fapty hach made § fate, And the
was made whole euen that fame houre.

And whe Fetus came intoß rulers houle / MbIch Ceteeth
and lawe F minttrels a) people raginge / 5
helarde vnto chem: get vou hence / E02 the ceaueth che he⸗
mapde is not deed / but Ciepeth. And they lau⸗ vptage euer in.
qhed him to lcozne. As fone as} people were linge. Galant.
put koꝛth / he went in a tolte her by the hande / .
andthe marde arole. And thys was nopled
thꝛough out all that lande.

And as Jelus departedthence / two blynde
men kolowed hem crpinge and lapinge: O
babe was ce! ane their vs. And

b come home / che blinde came to awo blynd⸗
him. Ind Fetus layde onto them: Beleue ye are cutee


arty whether is ealperto faye / thy ynneg
koigeuenthe / oꝛto lape:arple and walke:
Chat de mae tnowe thatthe canne of man
hath power to koꝛgeue lynnes in erth / then
faye he onto the (pche oF che pallpe:
tale vp thy bed / and gohometothyneboute,
Andhe arofe a departedtohrs awne Houle,
And when the people tawe it / hey maruer⸗


Dian eee ene er hrs let him,


that J am able todo this: And they layde vn⸗


led andgloꝛykyed Good which had geuẽ luche
erkomen. R to hm: pe L oꝛd. Chen touched he their eyes /


5 5
Anda Jeluis pated koꝛch krõ thence he laringe: accoꝛdynge to poure kapth be it on


lawe a man Lt a receauyng ot cuſtome / na⸗ to pou. Andtheit exes were opened. And yee


med Mathew / and tarde to hym tolowe me. dus charged themlapinge Sethat no man


rebußed the wendes andthe lee / and ther ko⸗


and ler oherhem? & .
And was come tothe othercyde / in
aida ehedem


nnowe ok it. But they as Cone as they were
departed / pꝛeedabzoade his name thꝛough


As ther went out / beholde / chey bo
to him a dome man polle led of a deupil.
as bone as 8 deupll was caſt out / the domme Domine,
ſpake. Ind the people mevucplen/fapinge: it N
was neuer lo ſene in Ilrael. But the ohari⸗

pdethe caſteth düte deupls,
oltge chele deuz.


Andhe arole ¢ tolowed hym. Andit came to
patie as he fat at meate in the hour beholde
many Publpcans and tynners came and fate
downe allo with Jelus and hrs Dirciples.

ghenche Phariles tawe chat / they lad
zwhyeatech poure matter


bene hae fapde vnto them: he whole
headenot the Phiticys/butthey p arellene.


by over
8 /by 8 power cheke newts


Cpctines and det the
people. But when he fawe the people /he had


compalllon on the, becaule they were pyned whs


awape / and tratkered abzoabe / euen as hexe
e no Hephern,


zan Yentapdebetobisnitciples, the vs her⸗
bead ale meh uct üs queate/ but the labourers areteawe.
Lobeared twopn em herkae pape the Lode oF the haruel/to
site reth lende koꝛthe labourers mntobisharuett,
. Ayn Cendeth ont hes. rh. Apoglen to preach in ze·
‘eptanes. John jp
eee


2 reac


Sito heale al maner of Cichenettes/@


all maner dpieales.
Che Apolt⸗ e names ok che. rij. Apottiesare there,
les are ſent. Che ee.
dem his Ueother.Fammes b Conne of Zebede
and John hig bzother. Philip ¢ Bartſemew.


Chomas andAMathew thePublican, James


., fonne of Diphe / and Lebbeus other wpte

falled Caddeus. Sims of Cane / and Judas
carioth / which allo betraped him.

Chele. rij. dyd Fetus lend / a commaunded


8
he tyre
8. . Leer mal geue onto one or thele litle ones to


bewrelöebud


Piophet twallreceaue a Prophetes rewarbe
And he that receaueth a ryghteduis man in

the lame ok arrahteous man / hall tereaue
te warde ol righteous m. And wholo⸗


niche / a cuppeol code water only in the
ame ola duet ecard voll ot a ĩrueth / he
wall notlole his re warde —


Gjohn Wat g Cendeth bes nfepbles ute h
w i 1755 chem e ace ebabeld che ane
ty


led commaundpnge
bis. rij dilciples / that he departed
Shence / to teache and to pꝛeache in
E


i 8.
E* doyen Johh beynge in pꝛelon hearde
the woes ol Chzitt / he Cent two ok his dilci


t the nene ; ples andfapoc vnto him. Arte thou he ß wall


come: oz Mall we lone koꝛ another Jelus an⸗
(werd and lade vnto them. Go and chewe
lohn what ye haue hearde a lene. Che blynd
e / the halt go / the lepers are clenledithe deet
heate / the dee ryle agapne / and the glad ty⸗
Be dinges is preached to the pooze , And happy
a is he that is not olkendedby me. 5
at : Andus they departed / Jelus begane to


Mathew. vi.


and dꝛynckynge / and they fave / beholde a geupng⸗ ut pe
Glutton anborynche ol wone / Anda krende nenne
publicang andlpnners. Heuerthelater hero
ee pploonic is uſtikped ok her cheidzen. es wproone)
chen beganhe to vpbzapd p cpties /inisintitped uc.
which mot or hrs myꝛacles were done / be⸗ 281g.
raulethepmendednot. 120 be to the Chozg⸗ rod recone


lin. oo be to p Bethlaida:koꝛ pt ö mpꝛacleg ue gis docerine


which were ſhewed in pou / had bene done in and his worde


Cpꝛe and Sidon / they had repented longe a⸗ mo truthe and
Sone inachclach m adches. Heuertheled A wetoame’ ot
faye to pou:it all be ealier koꝛ Cpꝛe ck Di⸗ trarp parte do
don at the daye oliudgement / then koꝛ vou. uot fo reteaue
Andehou Capernaum / which art ikt bpon⸗ le.
toheuen / chalt be bꝛought downeto hell Foꝛ
yethe mpzacies which haue bene done in d /
had bene hewed in Sodom : thephadremap⸗
nedto thys dae . Meucethelette J Cave onto
pou: it Malbe ealter oꝛ the land oF Sodom in

the dave ot tudgement / then koꝛ the.

W At thattyme Telus anlwered and lapde:
dener the ofather Loꝛd ok heuẽ and erth /

ecaule thou halt hidthele thynges fromthe .
wyle and pꝛudent / and halt opened the vnto Che wple
babes: euẽ᷑ lo father / lor lo it pleaſedihe, Auunewe not,
thynges are geuẽ vnto me of my kather. And
nom knoweth p tonne but thpfather:nether
nnoweth eny mi the father / laue the lonne /
and he to whome the conne wyll open him.


|


m Cavinge:@o not into the way leave 5 ſpeake onto the people of zehn. Co ſe what / Come onto me ail ve that“ laboure a are
B dene ate dent Pe our into e DUE lade and A will eale pont. Cale my poche an Dwve thatine
tan vnter ye not. But go rather to the tot dhatisto fe Rr rede taken wyth the wunde: other pou g lerne okme / ko: J ammehe @ deute bonbeneche⸗
shepe of § boute of Ilrael Go and pꝛeache / 500 what went pe cut foto le: A man clothed in herterc pe Wall kynde tet onto paure foul
faying:$ the hyngdome ok heauẽ is at hande 5 wauetkfoofte raymẽt: Beholde cher ö weare Cooke Foz my pockeis cab /a my burdẽ ig light. I. that nnowied⸗
deale the lycke / clenfe the iepers / rayle the fer winde elo are in kyngdhoules But what wet be oitciples pluckep ences of comme he excuterlyge then tyne
deed / caſte oute the deuyls. rely ye haue re⸗ 14 . them bealeth the dried hande helpeth the potleedp nese are pou
Vcccaued / krelp geue agapne Pollete not golde fparowes. AND moze then a Pꝛophete. Fos thrsts he OF woiencdeshauetobens/and Heweth doch lo his lo ⸗
auchn, ono; luce nei: bade n poute adele therfoze hall knowledge me Bwhomitis wrytte Beholde lende mp mel: \ al
der ok walk. per lerip towardes pour tozney: nether two befoze me, hum willy knowledge allo betoze Conese, Lenger before thy kace / whych chall prepare
Cotes/ nether thoes / noz peta ſtalle. Jo the m kather which is in heuẽ. But whorgeuer > chr wave betoꝛe the. K : f
woꝛckman is worthytobaue his meate. In talldenve me befozemen/bym wyñ Falco T Werelp F Lape onto pou / amidge the chil
to whatloeuer citie oz towne ve hallcome/ denve befoze my father which is in heurn. Denkt. deen ol wemen arole there not a gretter then
engupꝛe who is worthy init / a chere abrde Chinne not / p Jam come to lende peace 1 aa woiey len ice rend be that
tell pe gothence. And when pe came in taan intotheerth. J came not to lend peace / duta tanbica ppm 8 bene anche Hyngbome of heucn ts gretter
boute/falucethe came. Ind pr the houte be Cwearde. Fos Jam come to fetaman tba Almen klkeloß cvote then he. Krom the tyme o John Baptiſt hr⸗
Worth / poure peace Wall conte ppon it. But rraunceagapni hrs facher / and p daughter Past eee of heuer annere.
pe it be not wozthp/poure peace Malltetoure agaynſt her mother / and ß daughterinawe * e ae en Lon with vpolence Be tape ones e e and er
neto ou agapne, agapntther mecheriniawe: Anda mannes Pluck it pnto them. Foz all the Pzophetes ¢ Pauldbrd we be was an hongred cher
And whotoeuer wal not receaue vou / no: Foors chalbe they or bis awne houſpolde. the lawe pꝛophelped vnto the tyme ok John. allo which were with him : How he entred in
will heave voure pꝛeachinge: whẽ ve departe Pe that bis kather / o mother moze And allo pt ve wyll receaue it / thys is Hee to the houle of God / z ate the halowed loues
oute of p houle oꝛ chat eytie / cant or p ducte then me / is not mete toꝛ me. Ind he p iouech 5 llas which ſhuld come. He that hath caves to whych were not lawkull koꝛ hym to eate ne⸗
ol route tete cruly9 faye bnto pou: ic chal: bis fonne/ozdaughtermozethenme / ishot . bearelethim heare, ; ther oz the which weretwith hem but only
be kalter ko the dor Sodoma EGontoza mete toꝛ me. And he B taketh not hys crolſe eie a pa , But her bnto wan girken this genera- ſos s prettes.Drbhaue pe not rend inshawe⸗
‘ inthe dave of tudgement/tyen for that ertte. koloweth me / s not metefoz me. He that Late as fo apo clen- Atis Iphe bnto ch plozen which ept in hold ide preattes in the temple bꝛeakethe
Sobepe amd: Beholde 2 lende vou torthasmepeamd: * ga hegte cal leg ite ee coco Kerb. the market and call vnto their kelowes / and Saboth dare / and pet are blamlene : But
e v , , , ,
Wyle as ler- and innocent as doues. Beware of men / toꝛ P teckaneth peu /receaugth me: ehegeperie. e,vedecdaunted: webauemoumedbnto pou are temple, Holertoze pepe bad welt what thys Merle and
e .
4 Jali (coutge vou in 4 e name o “ te ere PE png i ice pe! ue cõdem 8
Doues, waldtourge raum th e Bp evs ieh engt are one oF man camecatsnge forme oF Tom ue of bora.
0 5 im


e
hende deen bp and thepathed bpm /


0 aprtte on
aalen
*


‘gpavclttisas ey
sons

g Fetus that / be
thence / z moche people kolowed hum /


andhe healed the all /a charged thé that they
HD not make hum


Die. xiit. a. ob


nich
zie


K
oughe tohrm / one polledled

Wa deupll which was both biynde I dome:
andhe healedhym / in fomoch that he whrch
was blynde a domme / boch lpane and fame.
And allthe people were amated / a larde: 7s
not this that tonne ot Wauſd: But when the
Pvarileshearde chat / cher tard: Chis telow
dekueth P deuyls ho nocheꝛ wyle out but by
the helpe of Belzebub che chete of d deupls.
But Fetus knewe their thoughtes ¢ lade
to them. Euerr kyngdome deulded with mt
elke / calbe bought to naught⸗Hether Malt
eny cytye of houtholde deüpded agapnt it
Celle / contynue. Do pf Datan caſt out Sa⸗
tan / chen he is beupded agapntt hymkelke.
‘Doty ſhal chen his kyngdome endure? Aifo
Bebe elne of Beizebub cat outdeuris:

WP inhole helpe do poure chyldzen cal them
out? cherfoze they halbe youre tudgd. But
PET cat out che deurls bpthe tpzpte o God:
chen is the ome ol God come on you?
Ether how cana man enter into a ſtronge
tannes houſe /a a take awaye hes


* MarcttG.c.
pines


oodeg:ercepte he Evatt bynde the ſtröge ma,
as ue anten opie his fox Hechte t
ken dane eye wa Me/Bagagn me Andhechat gathe-
open tmaniten Leth not i me / lcattereth abzove . Wherkoze
5575 of ebot J Fave vnto vou / all maner of lynne ¢**blat:


6 wworoee phere Walbe fo geuẽ vnto men: but z bial⸗


e
o e trae
cermog a


termoſ
their powers
*
Deuellz ing


Sod. Mut
4. Sn


Chatte,


koch es. Ind Bar
e en 1*
baue Wir


. Chen ancwered certayne of § Scribe zuce. li.
2% poauiles tapings ade eng Ward


1 ¢ faye
ee senna beg


ho neracion areal’


ate
0


henhe goeth beware raed on
to him leuen other fpzetes wostle then hem


- * 4
Of S. Mathew. bij.
chen. Foz wholoeuer both mp fathers wyll wozde of God / andanene wyeh iove recea⸗ tame tiguitictl)
which ig in heauen / the lame is my bother / uechit / pet hath he no rotes in him kelke / and chin wech,
ſptter and mother. & 2 — dureth but ateaton: kozas lone as dure lung
me 8 ulacpon oꝛ perſecucion arxiech becaulc rain 0
e parable of i 4 5 algning in vs.
5 eee ol che woꝛde / by a byhe kalleth. Hethat was und in Whome
5 kowne amonge thoznes/ishe that heareth 5 we vaygue a
Che. xi. Chapter. wosde oF Banrbut the cave oF this onde / «epee MDA
He fame dape went Fetus out oes the dilaytkulnes of ryches choke the woꝛde / a
: houle / and lat by the fee (poe / and and lo is he made vnkrutekull. He whpchis
ia EE moch people relozted vnto hym/ lo lowne in the goodgrourde ts he chat henreth
5 2 gretlp s he went /a lat ina ſhippe / the wo de and vnderſt andeth it: whych allo
and all the people ſtode onthe ſyboze. Andhe bereth krute and bꝛyngeth kozth / lome an
wake mand thynges tothe in Cpmilpeudes/ yundzed kolde / lone lertre folde / and tome
Arig: Behelde the tower wee tozth to ſowe. chirtpe kode. 1
And ag he foweb come fel by § wapes Ide / Another lymilitude put he forth onto he
Sthe kowles came a deuduredit vp. Seme lapinge: Fehe byngdome okheauen is Iphe
ell ops ony grolde where it had normoche onto a ma which (owed good led in his teid.
erh and andtie it Cpzonge vp becaule ithad But whell nien !* Clepe there camehps foo d cHCVioClepe
nodepth cicrth:and twhentye ſunne was vp Cowwedtarcs amonge the wheate / 4m wench ys amen an
it caughthcet,and koꝛ lacke or rotynge wyd⸗ wape. UBbert the blade was (pꝛonge vp allume chat
dedawape. Dome fell amonge tho mes / 4 had bꝛought forth krute / then appered the ta⸗ men haue ae
$ thomnestprongebpandchookenit. Parte res allo. Then came the eruauntes ko the od  whpeh
fell in good ground, and brought koꝛch good houchodder / and layde vntohin: SDpꝛ fowe- 00 vy de
Frutesfome anhundzed fold/ Come tprtte fola dect not thou good teed in thy clotte rc whe: Tepes v plone
Conte thirtte folde. noholoeuerhath eares to ce then hath it tares: He lapoe to the sthe en- ties of thpd
Bheare let him eare. uloüs mg hath done this Then the leruaüteg worlte,
And the ditciples came and tayde to hym: taydesntohiniwylt thou then that we go a
Why lpeakeſt thou to the in parables? He wedethem oute: But he lapd / nap / et whit
r ant wered andlayde onto them / it is geuen pe go aboute to wede out ö tares / ve pluche
. vnto pou to knome the fecretes of the Beng: ppp allo with thenrthe wheate by p vattess
: dome ot heuen / hut to them it is notgeuen, let bothe growe to gether tyll harueſt come /
Kine 1% Foz wholocuerhath to him Mall be geué: and in kyme orharueck/ A wyll tape to the rez
nee andhe chan haue aboundance But wholo⸗ pers / gather ye fyꝛũ the fares / and bynde the
E euerhath not krambim ſalbe tanen awape in ſheueg to be bent: hut gather the wheete
full, euen that he hath. Aherfoze ſpeane J to thé inte my barne. a>
N Wb in kpnilitudt:foꝛ though they de / they le not: er parable he put foꝛth onto them
ce ote Shearinge thepheare nottnethervnderltäde (Tapnge:Che yngdome ol eau? ts iphe vn⸗harcl had.
t Sd ft them is kulkylled the Pꝛophecye ol toagrayne ok muſtard led / whicha manta⸗
ae Elalas/ which prophetpefapth-with p cares keth and toweth in his telde / which is p leeſt
thee Halt heave and ſhall not vnderſtande / and ok all leedes. Lut when it is growne / itis >
need with 6 exe ve chall 5 not perceaue. greateſt amonge verbes / and it is a tree: lo ß
5 bert Foz thts peoples berte weredgrotie/and che bꝛyddes of the avercomeandbploe in the
Hbprdency 5 chelr eares are dull of herynge Ftheir eyes bzaunches ort.
not re, haue they clofediett they chuld le wich their Another lymplitude lade he to them. he .
l. eres and heare with their eares and chulde kyngdome okheauẽ is Ipke onto leuẽ which
vnderſtãde with their hertes / a chuldtourne a womantaheth and bydeth in. ij. peckes ol
that Imight heale them. - 2 ofnteele tpl all be jeuended. N
c But bieleed are poure eyes / koꝛ they ſe: a Allchele thinges ſpake Tels onto p peo: charct. lih e.
Fpoure eares koꝛ they heare.Mereiꝝ i taxe vn ple by fymilitudes / a with oute limilitudeg
ce vou / p many pꝛophetes / and pertart men fpahe he nothynge tothe / to fulkyil p which
baue deteꝛedto techolechrnges which vele, was fpohenby the Propet faving:* wp rh
haue not ſene thee to heare thore thpnges open my mouth in kymilitud / a welt lpeane
which ve heare / a haue not herde thé Bare koꝛth thynges which haue bene keptelecrete
. - petherfozre the fpniititude off lower. ho⸗ krom the begynnynge or che woslne, L
1 Toeucr heareth the woꝛde ok chen kyngdom . Ihen fent Fetus the people awape ) ¢
Bord enen it not / cher cometh 8 euyll came home. And hys dpfeppics caine onto
golpell br man ¢ catcheth awaxe 6 whrch was downe hym / lapinge declare unt vs the tymilitude
rl Get nbs bert. And this {she tobich was kowne of the baren or ie leine Khenendtwered he Cares are
fees oF a byche wapelrde. But he that was luwne in gfardtothem. Be that crweththe good ſeederpoundeh.
in thethe ſtonygrounde / is he whych heareth the is the tonne ol m. And che ede is 50 id


ofthe perics/and of the nette.


The Golpell


Andthe chplozen of tye kyngdome / they are

85888 Andche tares are the chrſdꝛen

ofthe wycked. And the enempe that loweth

chem / is the deurll. Thebaruct is che ende

ofthe wozlde And the repers be the Angels,

Foz euenas the tares are gathered e bent

e

. t, wozlde. Che fone ol man Wal t

ada This Angels / and they thall gather outok his

Ryngdome all thynges that offende, andthe

which do intquite / and ſhall raſt them into a

kurnes of kyꝛe. Chere Malbe waylinge and

natheng ok ceth.*ahen challthe ſucke men

ine as bayght as the fonne in the kyngdom

ok their father, noholoeuer hath eares to hen
reſlechim heare. .

Agapnethe kyngdom of heauen is lyne
vnto trealure hydde in the lelde / the whych a
man kyndeth and hydeth: and ko tove cherol
Goeth Klelleth all B he hath / a byeth b kelde.

Agayne the kyngdome okheaut ig ipheto
a marchadlt that teketh good pearles / which
we he had founde one precious pearle / wet
and colde all that he had / and bought it.
Agayne the kyngdom of heauz is Ihe on:
toancet cat in to che ſee / b geathereth ot alt
kyndes of kpahes: which when it is kull / men
dzawe to lande / ¢ ſytte a geather $ good in
Go veſſels / & cat the badawape Bale Wall it
be at the ende ok p wozde. The Angels alt
come oute o teuer the bad from the good /
Wall cat thẽ into a kurnes of kxꝛe:there (al
be warlinge andgnauhinge of tech.
Jelus lade onto chem. Lunderſtade ve all
chelethynges: Cher larde: pe Lozde. Chen
cen afe lapde he onto them: herkoe eucry™* Scri⸗
dee anon be whpch is taught vnto che kyngedome oF
Was belhalbanbecuents pe an Bouſholder“ whch bypn-
the offpce of geth Cozth / out okhis trealure / thinges bothe
mterpietyng a new and olde. E. 3
anfweryng vn And it came to pate whe Fetus had fynits
ode nieces Wed tee Cinutitunes/b he de partedthence/
fae Led came in to his awne countre / z taught the
ol herode at. in theircynagoges / in lo moche z they were
zunge theScri attonped and lapde: whence cometh all thys
ben, ae wyldome e power ntobim” Fs not this the
Ebert. tote. Carpenters tonne? J not his mother called
Mary: and bps bzethzen be called James ¢
Joes and Simon and Judas? and are not
ie ſoſters all here with bs? nohence hath be
allthele thynges. Ind they were offended by
bm. Chen Fetus larde tothem /a Pꝛophete
lg not wythouthonoure / laue in bys atone
countre / and anionge hrs atone kynne. And
he did not many mpzacles there/foz there vn⸗
deletes take


ovis taben dad headed. ort Sedery kyue thous
a eee
5 Nhe. ruh. Chapter.


Worten. fih.


0


15


fo


esa
larde to


but enen ee l
e gobets that remapned. ri. batkets

nd thep that ate / were innombze about, b. bes as fern
M. mien / belydewemen and chyldꝛen.


I. to geue hic


= 1
And ft ‘wave Jelus made his diſct⸗ us ·
ples enter into a hippe / and to goo ouer be⸗J5nn. u. b.


kope im /whillbesent § people awape. and Wer.


Sate toa menen ade oe
a. mi 2
And whe e. uche comte/be was thete ime
gene ean aer .
Thel
Sop ittoas a cotearp winde Ind in Tausch wee t


HIS. Matthews,


‘ait td. WALEYE or che npabe Yetuscam one the


whenbis ditdples


ale” {0 dame bpm walchpnge on the fee /thep were
A kur the troubied / taping t tg Come fpzite / and cxpeb
2 1 wate out Foz fear. Ann ſtrergh


t imapeTetustyahe
Eta e 0 ee
5.


and
10 a te be nat atraped.
ig thes. hon


Peter ant werd hum / and lardanatter / yt
be he / bꝛdme to come onto the on z wa
ter. And he fad / come. Ind when Peter was
come doune out ofthe Mippe / he walcned on
che water / to go to Fetus, But when he ſaw
amrghbty wynde he was alraped. ind as he
ne to lyncke / he crped fapinge: matter.
me. And tumediatly Fetus ſtretched
Toeth bis hand x caught hün / a Cayo to him:
@D thou of iptelltapch wherkoze diddeſt thou
bout; And attone as ther were come into the
ſpippe the wynde cealed. Chen they ß were
inthe ſhyppe / came and woꝛchypped hym /
ping: ok a truthe thou arte ß tonne of God.
And when they were come ouer / they went
into the lande of ena zareth. Arnd when the
D men ok place had knowledge or him they
ale fed 15 0 0010 eps .
and brought bntohlm all that were lycke / a
belought hin / that they pat touche the
Hemme of bis vetture only, And as many as
touched it were made fate,
cke ereufeth his die ples / z rebubeth the lery⸗
oe derne teangeedpnge 8555 Hid
Ocment thorow their awne tradicions. Che thpnge
chat goech into the mouth dekpiech not the man. Fe
drlyue eeth the wom of Canane es daughter / healeth
dhemuttilude/ with. vue laue 5 a tewe lptie Epes
tedeth. u. A. men / velpde wemen and cheldꝛen /


che. xb. Chapter. I
rulalem —41


which are nothyng


god
bij.
Andbhe called the people vnto hint /a laß
to them heare andorderttande. Chat whych
Sie nae en / delpleth not the man:
Dutehat whic eommeth out of the mouth /
delpleth che man. —_
; 2 — camebis diſriples / and tapde vnta
bim: Percegueſt thou not / hom thatthe Pha
ale are offendeainveaving this taping? Ge, Deigertaut
anttoctep and (spde:** all plates whtch my dae
eaugip Father bath not pianted thaibe pluc derſtande thys
leDbp by the rotes. L er tye alone / they be ß of the jovavia
Dipnoe leaners of tye bipnde. Leihe bnnde he el
lead the bignde/both wan Eajtinto 5 deche. n helge
Chen ah were deter Gfavd coblmdecta and Gralmus
re onto bs thts parable saben fayde Fetus: bnberckand ik
ate ve pet without onderttivinge? perceane oe menneskra⸗
penot 5 whatlocuer goeth in at § mouth / donn,
delcendeth doune into che bel / ais catt oute
into the baught? But chore thynges whpch
pꝛocede out OF the mouth / come krö the bert/
and they deFple the man. Foz out of the herte
corte eülllthoughtes, murder, break ng ok
wedlocne whordom / theelte ale witnelbe⸗
tenge / blatphempe. Chele are the thynges
which defple aman. Put to eate wyth ön⸗
walſhen hände dekrierh not a man. E
. And eius went thence / a departed into
the cottes or Tpze and Spdon. and beholde
A woman which was a Cananite cam out ol
the Came coottes/e crped onto bpm tapinge:
haue mercy on me Lorde thou tonne of Joa
nid mpdaughteris pptcoutly vexed wyth a
deupll. Ind he gaue her neuer a mode to an⸗
lwer Chen cam to him his dilciples / and be⸗
kought him fapinge:fende her awaye/toz the
kolbweth vs cryinge. Pe anlwered / a layde:
am not ſent / but onto the loolt chepe of the
oufie eme the cam ¢woztrppen
binr/faythgematterbelpe me. We antwered
F Capdesit 18 not good / to tante the chplozens
Beedde / and to cat it to b * nogges . She an⸗
fioered gfapoe:teuthe Lorde/ newievehetede eren
dong e eate OF the cromes, which Fall fra i, the dog
thetvmatters table. chen Fetus antwered g geo becatte-of


» Capdedntober.D wom greate is thy kapth / thew poolatey,


beit toche / euen as thou delpꝛeſt. And her
beuge ug made tpole auen atcharkame
joute,

Then Fetus went awape from thence / a
1. che lee of Galle / went pin E
toamodtapne a lat doumechere. And moche
people came puto him /hauinge with them /
halt / blynde / domnie / ma pned / and other ma
ny-and catt chemdoune at Jeſus fte. Andhe
Heated them / in lo moch that the people wõ
dꝛedſto fethe the dome Ipeohe / the maymed
soholethebalttogo/a thebiphne to le. and
ther alozttventhe Hod a Arael.

fefus called his ditcipies tohum /¢


ther gie
5 faye: ſaue compattyon on the people be⸗


saute


olpell


che gr.

en loues /a the kydhes / a gaue tgankeg
and bꝛake them / and gaue to his dileiples / a
che ditcyples gaur them to the people. And
ther drd all eate and were lulkpred. Andther
tobe vp of the broken meate that was lekte
‘ij. bathettes full And pet they that ate were
lh. H. men / belpde wemen and chpidzẽ. And
he lent awape the people / and tohe chyppe a
came into the parties of Magdala.
Che pharices wet afohenSeCus toarnety ‘bys
bifciptes ok arttes doctrine. The conkellpon of

ee 5 a of heauen. The kapthrull mut

re the crolle after Lit.

¶ he. xbi. Ch


duces / a drdteinpte him

F

ſbeuen. He antwered afapoe vnto
them. At euen pe lape / we tall haue Cape


a
Kare. vg. b
John. vl. d.
Tube. xi. g.


ked his dilciples ſapinge: whõ do men faves
the konne of man am:? Cher ſapde / tome
axe that thou arte John Baptiſt / ome He⸗
Ipas / lome Jeremias /oꝛ one ot d pꝛophetes.
Be larde onto thes but whom tape ve that J pu vnd
am: Simon Peter antweredg fapoer* Thon Tüte: r..
arte Chai? tonne ak thelpuynge od. And ps upon y
elus ant wered a fapdeto hym⸗ happy arte rock thar w
thou Simons fonne of Jonas / fo; lecche a rs cot pat
bloudhath not opencd onto that / hut my la tre dong
ther which is inheut. And Z faye allo vntoß· robpcy ti
B thou arte Peter:a x ppon this roche J wil beümmde an
bylde my congregaciõ. And the gates of hell be oe mete
Wallnok preuapleagapntt tt. and A wil ge fe 20
ue vnto the / the keyes of the hyngnd orheuẽ:
28 thou bynde
A bounde inheuẽ:g


* phate and pas
% nerd sue eter


wedder and that becaule the Chvetsreed:and th


inthe moꝛnyng pe lape / to dave calbe koule
wedder and that becaule the ck pe is cloudy
Freed. O pe ypocrites/ve can dlicerne g fats
pon of the Shye:¢ can ve not dilcerne the lig⸗
nes ol the tymes : Che krowarde nacton ad
uoutrous leketh a lxgne / a chere wall no no⸗
er lygne be geuẽ onto the but $ franc ol
„Pꝛophet omas. Do lekte he the & departed
And when his dilctples were come to the
other lyde of the water / they had koꝛgottẽ to
tage bieed wich thẽ. Chen Fetus lapde onto
awLeiets Come chem: Cake hede a beware of the* leuẽ of p
epme enen n kes act Saduces. And they thought
al euell tence in OE Celuestapig-becaute webaue bought
vc here fome no bzeed ws. hen Zelus vnderſtode that /
kate a a good he Capo nto them.@ Pe of l faith / why
fence/as Sar pe poure mpnbes cumbzed becaule pe haue
pie 2 bought no breed ? Woyenot yet perceaue,/


Jona. ha


nether remember thole. b. loues when there
were. p. M. men / a hom many barzettz tone
pe bp: Nether the. vi, loues whe there were

W. a how many bathettes tone pe op?
‘Moby perceaue pe not then / that J take not
vntko vou of bed / when F tayde / beware ol
the leuẽ of the Phariles d oF the Saduces?
Chen vnderſtode they / how that he bad not
thé beware of the leu of breed: but or $ do⸗
q Meine of the Phariles and of the Daduces.
SHavvigc Ehen Fetus*cam into the coottes of the
Tut tx. b..


Atte which is called ecareaphiippi/ he al Ch


all beremarde
deves.*aserely I Cape onto pou/fome ther be a.
amonge them


ol man come in his kengdome. tours.


‘ er be of Lhzitte vpon


‘of bps, Fleet
rene chene eb
other /
bought thẽ bp into an h


fapde Hom Fe


sep
bere


3


.
here ſtande / whych challme / z wich oy
not taſte ol deeth / tyll they aue the fone ut ot


int. e
2


Ok S.


here is good beynge ko vs e thou wylt / let
vs make here. in. tabernacles /one to the /
one foꝛ Moles a one fo? Helias. Hy he
J vet ſpake / beholde a bꝛightcloude chadowed


“gens > tHE. And beholde there came a bopce out of


ded, Chat cloude favinge-this is my deate fonne/

and in whom A delpte hearebim, And when the
dicctples hearde that / they felt on their Faces
and were Coozeattayed. and Jelus came q
touchedthem / and layde: aryle and be not a⸗
kraped. And when they looked vp / cher law
no man / taue Fetus only,

And ag they came doune trom the moun⸗
tayne / Jelus charged them laying: te that pe
ewe che bifiontono man / vntyil the tonne
ol man be ryſen agayne from deeth. E And
bis difciples athen ofhim/tapig* iby then
faye $ Scribes / Deltas fy2tt come?

efus antwered/e layde vnto them: Hellas
all kpyſt come / and rettoze all thyngeg. And
Ilape bnto pou that Hellas is come alredy /
F
ont uer they luſted. In ly
“wat bauenden 175 ott shea
e dilciples perceaued z he Spake onto
OF John Baptiſt. And when they were come
tothe people ther came to hym a certayne
man / and kneled doune to him /a lard: Ma⸗
ſterhaue mercy on my lonne koꝛ he ig luna⸗
tiche:¢ is Coze vexed. And okttymd he kalleth


e into che Eyre / and oft into the water.“ And
„e bought Hym to thydilcyples / f they coulde


not heale him Jelus anlwered ¢ lad: O ge⸗
neracion fapthies ¢ crohed: how longe Malt
denon pou:-how longe hall I cute pou?
ung him hyther to me. And Fetus rebuked
the deuyn / a he cam out ol him̃. And b childe
was healed euen that lame houre. E.
Chen came 5 difciples to Fetus ſecretip /
Doe lapde: nohy couldnotwe calt him out: Je⸗
dus lapd vntothẽ: Becaule of your bnbelete,
d. Foz J Cave berely vnto pou: * pt ve had lach
As a grapne of mutterd feed/ pe ſbulde Cave
vnto this mountapne/ remoue hence to pons
der placeabe chuld vemoue nether chuld enx
oor be vnpoſible koꝛ you to do. How be it
Arnde goeth not out / but by praper and
fattinge. Ls they patied the tyme in Galle /
beben fayde vntothẽ: che tonne ol man that
betraped into the handes of men / and they
Shall keit bin the thyzde dave pal he rpte
agape. And they fozowedgreatly.
Fund when they were come to Capernaũ /
thepchat were wont to geather polle moner /
ante Peter a ſard: Doth your matter pape
tite? He tapde pe. And whe he was come
ineo che houte Jelus Cpake kpzſt to bynt/
Taping: What thinkeſt chou Simon? of whs
do 92 OF the erth take trybute oꝛ polle
sronpe? cheir chpiozen / oy ol ſtraungers:


lathe;


Peter fayde onto him: of Hraungers, cher
Wente vnto himagayne: Chen are d chi
deen fre. Newerthelette: lett we chuld offende
chẽ:go to 1 ſee / a caſt in thyne angle / a tale
the kylſhe ! kyꝛct cometh op:¢ whe thou halt
opened his mouth / thou ſhalt fynde a pece ol
twentie pence: p take a pape foz me ¢ the. K
ce teatheth bis dite ples to be humble z harmeles:
toanopde occatpons of euell/ and one to foꝛgeue ands
thers offence. f
Che. xvii. Chapter. .
3 He lame tyme the dilcyples came a
onto Jelus lapinge: who is the dhhar y. e. b
reateſt in the kyngdom of ewe? Lune. ire
eus called a chylde onto him / a
the mibdes of them / alapde:Mete⸗

iy I tape onto you: except ve tourne / a be⸗ Sgr. r b
come as chyldzen / pe cannot enter in to the Lune yvih.
kyngdö of heuen. MWgoloeuer therfore hüble
bim elke as this chride / che fame is the grea:
telt in the kingdõ or heut. And wholoeuer re
ceaueth Cuchea chyn in my name / reccaueth
me. But twhofoeneroffende one of chele I- line ij. u.
telons which beleue in me:it were better fo
bhimthat a mplttone were hanged aboute his
necke / z that he were dꝛouned in p depthe ol
che lee. wo be vnto che woꝛlde becaute ok of-
fentes. pow be it / tt cinot be auopded but p
offentes walbe geuẽ. Meuerthelelle wo be to
the man / br whom the offence cometh,

Wherkose pech hande oz thy kote offende.
the cut himok ¢ cat him krom the. Jt is bet! Cut him ol.
ter renee enter into lyke halt oz maymed / atisiserpotts
rather then chou chuldeſt hauingetwo hädes den in Wat. bee
03 two kete / be caſt into euerlaſting kyꝛe. And
pr alto thrne eye offende the pluche hye oute
Kcaſte hrt krö the. It is better fo2 } to enter
into lle with one exe / thenhauing two eyes
to be caſt into hell ke. Se; ye delpyle not
one of thele Iptelones . Foꝛ laye vnto vou /
chat in heuẽ their angels alwaxes beholdthe
face ol mp father which is in heuk. Eye aß
lonne ol man is come to laue that which is
lof. Dow thinke pe: ata man haue an hun⸗
dꝛed chepe / a one of them be gone aſtray doth
he not leue nyntr a nyne inthe mountayns / :
€G0 Gfehe that one which is gone aſtrape?
‘*gtitbappe thathe fyndbim / perelp Arape zune. w. 8
‘bio routhe retopteth moze of p ſhepe / then c
OF} nyntx a nyne which wet not atray. Eu
fo it is not the wyll of pouze father in heuen /
that one of thefe Iptelons chulde peryſſhe.

* Mozeouer pk thy bzother trealpce a uber
pirndeche, Ee ¢ tellbim his kaute betwene aun rue,
bim and the alone. Iche heare the / thou halt Gecle .
wone thy brother: But pl ve heare the not /
then take pet wi one oz two ping mouth Jacobi.v.s.
oktwoozthze wicnelles /all hinges maye ber; Kann riß. a,
Tabigubed che heare not the / dell it bnto g debe e
congregacion. Ac he heare not 5 cögrega⸗

sion,


be wobatfoertican Werelp z Cape bnto you /e whatkdeuer
trade wt. 2e bende on eth walbe boden peu And
kbener ye don, whacloeuer pe lowte on erth/ Walde lewied
dempne by my in heuen. Agapne lape onto vou / p yt two
worde in erthe / ol vou Mall agre in erthe vpon enp maner
{be tameis con ey pnge whatloeuerther wall deterer te Wal
nen, And habe geulen thé of mr father which is an heus.
ve alowebp y o: where two 02 thac are gatheredtogether
wonde Herth in my name / there ami in che myddes ol thẽ.
walowed in he. Then came Peter to hym / a lade: mater
un. hopweokte Mall g kozgeue my bꝛocher / yr he
ſynne agaynſt me / lẽuẽ cymes? 1 us lade
vntohtm: J fave not onto p feu tymes: but

poleuenty cymes feugeymes, E. T. Cherkoze is
6 krngdom ok heuẽ ipkened ont a certayne
yng / which wolde tale a countes ok his ker⸗
srauntes, and when he had begone to reckẽ /


tenthouland talentes:whom becaute he hab
nought to pape / his matter cõmaunded hym
tobe lolde / K his wpte / e his chyldzẽ / @ all 6
he had / a payment to be made. The teruaunt
kell doune a befought him lapig: Dir / geue


fo:


pant 9 all he wolde not but wet d caſt
um into patton tet he chulde pape the det.
he his other kelows fawe what was done /
they were berp Cozy / and came and tolde onto
their Loꝛde all that had happened. Chen hig
Londcalled him and lapd vntohim. S euplt
leruaunt J torgaue the all that det / betaule
bod pꝛapdeſt me: was it nat mete alto that
ors chuldeſt haue had compaſhon on thyke⸗
low / euẽ as I had pptie on tc: And his joꝛde
bee
ald pape all that was due to hym.
Baye. Soripke beladenen
ar hd
5 185 eache one tohis brother their tretpates, E
hne geuech ancwere concernzuge mar tage and
N teacheth not to be caretniknoz tal ueworlolpryches.


Che. xix. Chapter.


bad kyntiched cholẽ ta je gat
ita Kane ae nc ee


hen came bnto him thepbarire temp⸗
tinge him / xlaping ko him: Is ic lawtull toꝛ
Aman ko put aware bis wre kon all maney


War. x. 4


The Golpell


gion tale him as anhechen mz g asa pube ntcauted? pe anfwetedand tard into then


one was bzouahtontohim-wbich oughthim,. ig puozied/o


werte
fo paulercedt pecemtrnenith porn bee le


Edit came to page / when Jets
pale an en nynge. Foꝛhe bad greate pottedions,


Icooſtes or Jewer bevonde 0258,
and moche people tolo wed hem / a he healed
thenr thete. rae


Baue pe not rede hows he · which made mã Gene id
atthe begynninge / made thẽ man a woman
und ſayd: koꝛ this thinge / call a mã leue Sun 5
cher mother ¢ cleue unte bys wyke g cher Pane

twapne halbe one klelche. herkoꝛe now —
are they not twayne / but one kleuhe Let not
ini therkoꝛe puta lunder / x ey bath 0
dcouppled together. Then karde therm.


n. gp tbat hall we bayse: Fetus erde pntochem


uhr brd Motes comaundeto genes testo bloße me in d generäcton Mall pt Ccoutged/andtobe crucifyen and the thirde
See en anton em 5 sa tse te cps dape he wallryle agapne. 5 :
arbnes of poure bertes lukered pau to: frael And wholoetucr fozfaketh houtes /o: . Chen came to him d mother ok Sebedes


hethit / oꝛ lyſterg / ocherkather / oꝛ mother / oꝛ
wyke / oꝛ chyidzẽ / oꝛ lad / ko my names lake
$ tame afl receaue an hüdꝛed kolde / a wall


aàwape poute wyles: But kr the beginning


it was ot fo. Alapechertope onto peu hoe edelpzpng a certapne thynge ok him. Andhe


lapde vntöher: what wilt thou haue: She


Focuer puted) aware bis topte ( creept it be ~gnbevet euerlattpngelvte. E Wanpthak are faydebntobim: Graunte that thele mpewo
S e e kate walbe lake the late mpalbefpztte, fonnes maplrtiiheone duch rrahthande g
Ag pu cömpt aduoutt z.. Schis teacher vpatpmittude tyne Goodie deter VEOtHer on thetptte Handin chien dome.


Chen lapde his dilctpies to him: xethe ma⸗
ter be lo betwene man a wyte / then is it not
good to marx. He lapde nto thẽ:all men can
not awape with thatlaying tauether to whi
it is geuen. Cher are chatte / which were lo


pc ac ke. Are pe able to dzinche ok the cuppe
aper ut g dhadeh be baptiled with
aptpme / that J cbalbe baptiled with They
antwered to him / that we ave, Indhe fayoe
vnto thẽ: Ve thallldgincke o my cup e ſbal⸗
be baptiled with the baptyme chat J halbe
paptiled with. But to lyt on my right bande
4 on my ipkt had / is not mpne to gene: but to
thE for whom it is pꝛepared of mp father. K.


onto an houſholder / which went
f lout erly in the moznpng to hper ja
E bourers into his ppnepard. Andhe
agreed with p labourers ko? a peny a dape /
Kent che into his vine xarde. And he wet out
about thirde houre / Flawe other ſtadrng
‘poell in the market place / a lapd onto the / go
ve allo into myvrneparde: a whatloeuer 13
ryght / will geue vou. And they went their
ware. Agaynẽ he went out about the ſyrte g
nynthe houre / and dd lrkewyple. Andhe wet the. It all not be lo amöge vou. But who⸗
out aboute p eleuẽth houre d kounde other loeuer wyll begreate amöge vou / jet him be
„ (ctandrnge dell / a ſayde vnto thẽ: Why Hane Eee d ruten wholoeuer wilbe chele /
„ pehere allche dave dell? hep larde onto
him: becaule no manhath hyꝛed bs. Pe faye
tochẽ:go ye allo into my vyneparde / a what⸗


ned at the two bꝛethzẽ: Wut Fetus called thé.


ok the gentyls haue dominacion ouer them.
Andchey 5 are great / evercple power ouer


purbesbanoes on them he departed thence,
And beholde one tame / a layde vntohym:
good mater / what good thynge wall /?
Imaype haueetemall lyte; elapd onto him:
why calieſt thou mygoodꝛthere is none good
but one / a p (8 God. But yk thou wilt entre


ol man came / notto be miniſtred vnto / but to
miniſter / and to geue his lpke koꝛtheredemp⸗


doeuer is ryght / that hall pe receaue. cion ot manv. K
feo tote coe the ad en med bene JJ thebp- Annas hepdeparte fed fericho moche
0 en o: f denen Peas neparoetapoeontobis tewarncallplabous people olowedcim anobehonerwablen apaecie
1101 spared / un te Eat — — pin ters / and geue thẽ their hyer / begynninge at denien lyttynge rb Nd bt rah ,
dane c ne e ath bronze ‘ — helatte tell thou come to pte Andther hearde Fetus packe by/crped lapinge: Chou
date derne hum eker de Enn een enen.
«ian rd unto bum Aneu ait th came a receaued euery mã a peng. Chen cam And the people rebuke them/becaute they


thenges tommy pout / what lacke Jyet: parent
And Jelus tarde pnto him* pr chou wylt be Tue rb
rlecte / go a len that thou halt / and geue it and. rz. a °°


Tulde holde thelr peace. But thepcrped the
moare tayinge:haue mercy on vs thou Lo
ich artethe tonne of Dauid Then Fetus


Bthe kpꝛtt / luppolyng that they tuld receaue
moare / a they lyewyle receaued euery man
à peny. And when ther had receauedit / they wh


both pooze/and chau Male haue treature tr Dagayntt 5. gocdman ok theboufe Kode fil calledthe / Harde what wyil pe
ué/ecamne a Folowe me Weber wunge fapinge: ehetelatebaur ojoughe butane. tbat’ hd dato pou Kheptarbeto bine
nm ye mouts fai ei he sb 3 opened. J


which haue boꝛn the burthẽ a beet of d daye.
rend


ge e denne onto his bitefplesieseres u cn, He anttocredto one other ¢ Hee krht.


AF fav bnto rouatts garde toza tpehe man ah
deprmevencospe hoagoo otbeue aim more et
ster 9 fapebnto pon testo ha, caste meee 2
garching duenne b unc then d ane


mfspng: 4
d. wꝛonge: dyddeſt thou not agre W In folowed him.
eae tp nne e ee ee


e fora Deny: Cake that which is thy duutx / cepa eh
„and goth wave J will geue bnothisiatt/ag di os the temple-curteth che fpge trerand cetmbeth -
maoche as to the. Js it not lawkull ko: meta a ehr baku onen Cymilieude of the thoo tonnes


A xpche ma to enter into $ f SOF God. cate b Oe dogs melpſtech wilh mpne atone: Jg chene dmothen ede as were ent
eee ei ef bern goo Salzes chen, chr, hen


chyldiẽ with her connes / woꝛchlpppng him Warcl . s


Jelus anlwered a layde: Ye wot not what z 8


And whẽ the ten hearde this / they dilday⸗ mar. z.
vnto him g fapde: Ve nowe chat the lodeg Lune. ritt.


et him be youre ſeruaunt / euẽ as! § Conne par. g.


lee ai
fusbadcompadtion on them/etouched thers War rege i


2 e Goſpell 5 oust of . Lathew, i Git totaal to
8 72 a = 5 is meruelous in dure eyes. Cherkoꝛe laxe J Fore chetk chou ? J8 it lawkufl to
Shen ther dꝛewe nye onto Jeru⸗ (T And when he was come in to § tẽple / the z put eis un ente pou te hyngponic of Sch ebe aß bes pte nts deta ag ef ehen pe


* 4

Warcti xl. a. lalem / d were come to Bethpha⸗
Lutze. ix ge / vnto moũte Olxuete:then bent
ustwo 1 dikciples / taping
8 top towne b lpeth ouer agapnſt
vou / x anõne ve Wall Ende an ade bounde /
her colte with her lole the a bzinge thé onto
me. Ind yk eny ma fave ought onto vou / lare
ve h the Loꝛde hath neade of to: a 15
wape he will let the go. All this was done to
Elale rij. d kulkpli p which was pon by the prophete/
Zach, ir. 6. lapig: Tell pe d daughter of Sion-*belolve
dae er thb kynge cometh vnto the / mene ¢ tyttinge

Tube. rk. yg an alle ga colte / Cole of aniatte bled fi
: e poche. Che dicciples wet a dyd as Fetus
cOmaunded thẽ / a bꝛought the ade a ß colte /
E put on the thetrclothes / a lett him theron,
Andmanp ok peoplecpzeed their garmetes
in ß ware Other cut doune bꝛaunches krõ
Bz ties / z dlrawed the in d wave, Moꝛeouer
the people p wet before / zthepallo ß came
alter / crped caping: Polanna to the lonne of
45 Hotannarn Baud. Blelled be he that cometh in the na⸗
Gebjue Bosiay. mie OF the Lozde /r olanna inthe pet E
na, that 10 to I And whe he was come to Jeru kale /all the
tape. A piapethe citie was moued tapig: who ts this? Indthe


krom pou and chalde geuen tothe Gentpls, ceauedehelr wyckednes /a lapde: toby tẽpte
which Matt beinge fozth the krutes ok it. And pe me pe ppocrites: Let mele s trybute mo⸗ Ob petive ta
wholdeucr Mail fall on this tone, he chalbe ner Another toßehm a penp.andbetapoe zuck ichen fut


bꝛoken / but on wholoeuer it Hall fall vpon / sntothe-whole is this mice € luperlcrip⸗tht the Jewweg


ir will grynde him to powder. And when the cid? Chepfapdvnto him: Celars. Chen lapde call atpcle:aud
cheke Pꝛeſtes and Phariles hearde thele ly⸗ he vnto the: cheue therkozeto Celar /f which fetmorth x peer
miplptudes/ they perceauedthathe Spake of is Cefarg:andgeue vnto God / chat which is "e's.
them.* And thep went about to ape handes Goddes. E uohen they hearde that / theymar

on him / but the keared the people / becaule ueled and lett hün / and went their wave, ‘

cher tooke him ag a Pꝛophet. T Ce came to him

cc)
Saen Stent ene eee

Of the Soaduces cdcernpng h relurreccisvandaniioce a man dye halrpnge no chyldzen / chatthe bo

reth theScrive vnto his quüeckion. thermaryhis wyfe / and reyle vy feed vnto

¶ Che. xxij. Chapter. bys bꝛother. Ther were with vs leuẽ bꝛethꝛẽ

Pd zelus ankwered and lpake vn the kpzſte marted a decealed without plue

to them agarne / in lymylptudes / f lefte his wyte vnto his bꝛother. Lyne wyle
lapinge. E Che kyngdome ok heuẽ the leconde andthe thirde onto the leuenth.

Ils lplie vnto a certapne thynge/ ‘Latte of au the woman dped alco. Now in ß

marped his konne / a lent torch his ler⸗ relurreccyon whole wyle Mall che be of the
uauntes / to call thé that were bydto ß wed⸗ keuen : Foz an hadher. Fetus antwered and
dynge / and they wolde not come. Agapnehe fapne bntothemkpe are deceauedand vnder⸗War. rich
Cent Forth other ſeruaũtes capinge Cellthe tandenot the leriptures / noz vet the power

which are bydden: beholde Jhaue prepared ok cod. For in che relurreccyon they nether

my dynner myne oren inp katiynges are mary noꝛ are marped: but are as the Angels


Seuebelthe, people lapde this is Fetus p Prophet of Na x hylicn/aall thynges are redp / come vnto the in heauen.
Zareth acptte ol Galile And Jelus wẽt in to mariage. But they made ipght ok it / z went g touchyng the relurreccion of the deed:
the tẽ ple ot God / z catt out aſl thé p toulde a a cit wapes:one to his ferme place / another haue pe not redde what is fapoe vnto pou ol dt,
bought in d tẽ pie / a ouerth sew the tables of about his marchaundile / che remnaunttone Sod / which favtl:* Jam Abzahams God / a Cron dt
4 $ mony chatigers/ $ 4 OF the B colde ¢ be feruauntes ¢ intreated thé bngodlpand Jlaacs God / andthe God ol Jacob: God is
Bierevg.c, Vous /o dapds tothe; itis wpttẽ ; myhoule * ewe thé. when the kyng hearde z / he was not the God of the deed: but ok the lyupnge.
evens chalbe called ß houle of pꝛayer. But e haue 1 wꝛoth / ö lend Forth his warrpers ¢ deſtrored And whenthe people hearde that / theywere
madeit a denne of theues And blynde a the thole murtherers / and bꝛent vp their cytie. aſtonped at his doctryne.
halt came tohim in d tẽple / a hehealed the. Chen lapde he tohis leruauntes: the wed⸗ . hen the Phariles hadhearde / how B D
When the cheke Pꝛeſtes a Scribes fawe bpnge was prepared. But ther which were he had put the Saduces to lyience / they dze⸗
5 marueplles 6 he dyd / e the choldꝛẽ crvinge bppddẽ were not woꝛthr. Goo petherfoze out we to gether / zone o them which wag a do⸗ vn unt pit gy
Inthe tẽ ple a capinge: Potanna top tonne of 20 Into the hye wayes / and as many as ve kynde ctour oklawe / ackedhim a queſtion töptinge make thyne ene
Dauld / they dildapned / a tayo onto him:hea⸗ byd the tothe mariage Che leruauntes wet him laping: Matter which is the cheke co⸗ ale hen
rect chou what thete faye Fetus lade onto ‘ duk into the hre wares Kgatgeredto gether maundemétin the iawe Fetus fapde tohim: Monet note
bl viß. a. CE pee: haue pe neuer redde / or the mouth ol N E as many as thepcouldekynde / voth good and Loue the Lordthychod with all thpneherte / when the ene,
babes and ſuchelpnges thou batte oꝛderned bad / and the weddynge was kurniihed wyth with all thy loule / and wyth all thy mynde. mpes of Chilt
praple-Andbe lekte th / z went out ok d citie a geſtes. Chenthe kynge came in ta vylet the Thie is the kyꝛſt andthe chete commaunde⸗- igen che dl
onto Bethante /a hadhis abrdinge there. E tee this Feſtes atpredthere amg which had not on dement Andtherſs another lpne onto chu. no tmore ipeon
In ß mo:nynge as he returned intoß citte edngegar-&* * weddynge garment /a layde vnto bpm: Louie thyne nepboure as thy lelte ee Hele che right hann /
bie wy thys Agape he hungred K kpreda r page tree 2 pen krende foto Foztuned tt 6 thou cametinhy- two connnaundementes hange all the lawe bur tpguptyetty
rende rache in the wave / a came to it / z founde nothinge bh. id. ther halt not on a weddynge garmẽt? and and the Pꝛophetes. ne halbe
dee huge theron/but leues oni / and faye toit neuer „ Shetwas eué rpechlece Cyentapne krng ro. wehpilche chances were gathered tome tone ae
5 e krute growe an $ hence kozwardt. And anon EE bis miniſters tante ¢ bpnde him hand ä tote“ ther/Telugathedthem taping: what thynke corpugto the
though ther che page tree widderedawaxe. And whe his igh 1 atid caſte him into vtter darcknes / there thal pe of hilt: Whole lonne is he: They layde maner ut ö bea
baden ar C dilciples fate p / they marueled lapig. How 2 : be wepenge a gnalchrnge ofteth.fozmany onto him / the fonne ol Wauld. Pe fapde nto rd.
Porence  ,., Fontetsthe Epgge tvee weddered awape. Je⸗ care called and teawe becholen. K. them:bown chen doeh wauwin Cpatte cala wee
OF polene vr dus antwered / a card vnto che werelp J fave ant. E. Chen wet the Phariles atoße cockrenn brm Lorde lavinge : Che Lozde ſapdeto my surptt io nnen


Aocsipet aener bnto pon pe pe (hall haue tatth and Walinot oe tpeommagit tangle hem in bys wordes. NLorde / pt on myrpaht hande bn epſi 9 mate rors eymesviely


thelede they dout pe ſhall not only doß which z haue done i ep lent dntohinetheir difctples wyth thpne enempes thy kote Hole Jr Pain tall oucenderor ets
Dadnots krüte to p kygge tree but allo vt ye chall laye vnto me / which chal delpuerhimp krute attymes lun ff. l. Herodes ſeruauntes Capyinge:* Water / we him Lozd:how is he then his tonne: Ind no⸗ 145 ee
Bechatite SOP this maütarne take thy telfe aware / G cat cOuentent.Fefus Cayointo the: drdreneuer „ * Rowe P chou artttue/ akeacheleche wape nie coulde antwere hymagapne one warde: benpage with
te nen thplelke into ß lee / it chalbe done. And what⸗ reade in ö kcrinturk: he ſtone which per byl, ee OF Godtruip/nether careſt foz enyman / koꝛ netherdurſte eny from that dave koꝛth / arke yy kater i


they chuld ore koẽuer ve Mall athe in pꝛayer ( vr ve beleue) 5 thou cõfrdꝛelt not mend eſtate. Ten vs ther⸗ him any moo queſtions. Heaven,
3


E.
ir be der red pe (hall receaue it. Baij. Uchꝛiſte
; 28 : ismer⸗


The Golpell


C Thude crpeth wo oirer tge een Seribes and


ppacrites/s prophecieth the deckruccion of Jerutalk.


poe though


ye Ipuc thane
Gotpeil (phe z


crites which tych mpnt/anpte/¢ cõmyn / and
keauethe wai matters ofthe la we vn⸗
done: iudgemẽt / mercy / a lapth. Chele ought
re to haue done / anot to haue lekt the other
vndone. Ye dlynde gydet which ſtrapne out a
gnat and twalowe a cammell.
obe topou Scribes ¢ Phariles vpo⸗
crites / which make clene the otter ſyde of the
cuppe / a of the platter: but wythin they ate
full of bꝛybery a excede. Chou biynde Pha⸗
rile / clente tyꝛſt d vnnelpde of p cup a plat⸗
ter / that d outelyde of the mape be clene allo.
Bo be to pou Scribes ¢ Phariles ypo⸗
crites / loꝛ ve are ſyne vnto paynted tombes
which appere beautifull outwarde: but are
within full of deed bones ¢ of all kylthrnes.
So are ye /foz out ward ve appere righteous
vnto men / whẽ within / xe are kull of ypocri⸗
lpe and iniquite.
Wo be onto rou Scudes a Pharires po 5
crites:pe bylde the tombes ol thepꝛophetes /
g garniche the fepulchzes ok d roghteous ¢
lape: yk we had bene in the dapes of oure la⸗
thers / we wolde not haue bene parteners W
thé in the bloude ol the Pꝛophetes. Spo then
pe be wytneſſes vnto poure lelues / 6 veare
the chyldꝛen of thé which kylled the ꝛophe⸗
tes. Fulfill ve like wyle the meadure ol poure
fathers. ye lerpẽtes a generaciõ of *bipers/ 1 ken
bow thutlo vetcape che dampnackan ak bell? m Sorry
I l oherkoꝛe / beholde F fende vnto you pꝛo 5
phetes / wyle men ¢ lcribes / ol them pe Mall
kl a crucikye: and ok thé pe thall (courge in
eee p 8 oud 21 9770 to
eytie / that vpon pou mape come al
Seen oute ther as He gener


. frõ the bloude ok ryghteous Abel! onto that


do bai
eople/


2a Fone fwegreth bp the aultre / Lwegreth bpit/
bre bet Card bp allchat there onts . And wholoener


koche very (weareth by the temple / fw eareth bp it a b.
wordes of E⸗ him that dwellech therin, And he ß Cwearel


heauen kwerech by the Ceate of God a by
eron.


him that lytteth th


Wobe ko por Speribes g Pharites ypo⸗


bloude ol Sachartas 6 fonne of Barachias /
‘whi pe llewe ne the teple a the aultre.
werely J lave onto vou / all thete thynges
chall loghtopon this generacion. Ferulale/
Fevutale which krlieſt Paophetes /a tones
them which are lent tothe: how often wolde
Jbaue gathered thy chplozen . as
the henne gathereth her chyekẽs ; vnder he


tyll that ve lape: bleed is he that cometh
the name ofthe Loꝛde. E


Stofthe teple Ternberg the
le pe not al chete thynges? Gere u


er 3
wynges but ye wolde not: Behodde youre ha pon dan
bitacion belbelertepntopoupeldiete fo Alber


faye to you / ve tall not fe me hence fog enn ue 4
aure berte ue


Ok Sn


vou: ther Mall not be here lekte one ſtone bps
anather / that Mall not be cat doune.
ue rtr g · And ag he lat bpd the mot Oltuete / yrs
dilriples came onto him lecretiy laxig. eil
vs when thete chynges ſbalbe:a what lygne
Halbe ol thy cõmyng ¢ o€ ende ofp word:


ere v. b


come in my name tapinge:q am Chꝛiſt: and
Wall deceaue man. Je pan 5 ok wart /
gol the kame ok warres: but le that ye be not
troubled. Foz allthele chrnges mut come to
paſle / but the ende is not pet Foz nacid Malt
ryle agaynſt nacõ and realme agaynſt ree
alme: and ther thalbe peſtilente / hoͤnger and
erthgua kes in all quarters. Au thele arethe
beg ynnynge ol loꝛowes.
Chen ſhailthey put vou to trouble / a Malt
All you: pe ſhalbe bated of au nacions foz
mpnames fake, And then dail many be of=
fended / x hall betraye one another / ¢ fall
hate one p other. And manp kalle pꝛophetes
hall arpſe / and tail deceaue many and bee
caule iniquite hall haue the vpperhand / d
loue of many ſhall abate. But he that endu⸗
Breth to P ende / he tame chalbe fake. Andthis
glad al he; ofthe kyngdome ſhalbe pꝛea⸗
ched in all the worde / kor a wytnes vnto all
nacpons: and then chall the ende come
oben vetherkoze malle § abhonunaciõ
that betotienety delolacion poke or by Da⸗
niel the Prophet {tare in the holp place: let
* pimthat redech it vnderſtande it. Chen lett
them which be in Jurr / ke into p mofitay-
nes. Ind let him which is on p hole toppe /
not come downe to fet eny thynge out ol bys
houle. ether let him which is mn z kelde / re⸗
turne backe to fetche his clothes. io halbe
in ote Daves 29 Ee chatace with pen €
to thẽ that geucluche But pꝛaye that youre
Wnthe woine flight be net in d winter, nether on § Sa⸗
teiseuplt tra, Doch dape.ffoz then thalbe great tribulacis /
von ſuche as was not from the beginning of the
MeSaboth be wozlde to this tyme / noꝛ Maibe. Ye ¢ except
Fane holt bapes chuldbe thoztencd / there wude


0 bape pthep © ng Eicipe be thuenebut forthe chofens Gas


no far He / chole Daves thalbe tho;
Aas exp Nenpman fave bnto you: lo /
and tu that here is Chzitt /o2 there is chat: beleue it not


ier e g bal fale ane etal
iba pꝛophetes/a great miracles ¢won
125 nes. In lo moche chat pt it were pollible / the


Ee: ee perle electe thuip be deceaned.cahelene /


ue tolde vou before. mherkoꝛe pether tall
onto you: beholde he is in the delertgo
ot foꝛih: beholde he is in the fecret places /


gp een batons not for as the lightninge cometh out
Kiten.


Weben into $ weck: fo wall
e böfftynge OF p funne of ma be. Fo: where
ſoeuer a deed harlaas is / euẽ thpther will the


And Fetus ant wered a lard vnto the: tane
hede p no man deceaue pou Foꝛ many Hall th


athew.


that dave and houre knoweth no ma / no not
the angels okheauen / but my father only.
Asp teme ot Noe wag / fo lphewyle han
the compnge of the konne of man be Korag Senor, vii
inthe dapes befoze the Floud: thepopd ente 6 Tul ball
dꝛrncke / mary / A were maried / euẽ onto the
dave that Hoe entred into ß chippe / a knew
of nothingeſtyll che loud came and tone the
all awape. Soo (hail allo the compnge of the
lonne ot ma be. Chen two Haibein z leldes /
the one ſbalbe recraued / and the other ſhalbe
refuled two thalbe gryndinge at the myll §
one ſhalbe receaueb / a the other Matbe reku⸗
led.“ wake therfore / becaule pe imowe not
whathoure poure matter will come Okthis
be lure / p p the good mã of the houleknewe
what houre the theke wolde come: he wolde
ſueri watche / and not ulkte his houſe tobe
bꝛoken vppe. Cherkoꝛe be ve allo redy/ fo in
the houre ve thynne he wolde not: wyllche
fonne ok man come. Ikthere be any fapthkull
ſeruaũta wple whom his matter hath made
ruler ouer his houſholde to geue thé meate
in leacon conuentent:happpis that ſeruaũt
whöõ his matter(when be cometh) Mail finde
ko doynge. merely J lave vnto pou / he tatt
make him ruler outer all bys goodes . Gute
pEthat euyll ſeruaunt thall fapein his herte /
my matter wylldeferbis commyng / and be⸗
gynne to lmpte his kelowes / ve and to eate e
todꝛyncke with the dꝛoncken: p feruauntes
matter wyll come in a ape when he loneth
not koꝛ hym / a in an houre p he is not ware
ol and wyll deurde him / andgeue him his re
warde with ppocrites. Ind there ſhalbe we⸗
vinge and gnachynge or teth.
che ten plegns. Che talentes delpuered to the few
a
e. xxv. er.
Bali. Chen


athe, xi o


| TheGopell 8
hen 6 kyngdö ok beaut Mal? z wẽt andhrdthy talent in the erth: beholde / Che Spngdolenennornteth Ehren Egepeatiße or man walbe betrayep It had bene good fog


oe a al :
a ucbekpng⸗ be iikened onto ten virgins / which thoubatt thyne awne. His matter antwered Sat are aud toe upper of te Jen, Ar 2 ma pr he had neuer bene bone. chen gu⸗


home gf beucn POH ntonetheirlampes / a went to mete and larde puto him hon eurll leruaumt and teh at allen care, eho eerie das which betraped hym antwered Klardnig
e pee — — a
date e. ed dane bat ope one n iche. tout oughtettebertozeco haute had mymo⸗ — r Ä
beraten pet But the wple konte ole wich the intheik wel- neptothe chaungers / athen at myromenge F . .
1 a Fels with their ſampes alto . Dhin the brd whulde J haue receaued mpne atone wyth F iniſched al chele lapinges / he ard dy. And hetolſe the cup / a thanned / and gaue ar ie :
thictyee UCD evomietarpeD/all elombzed ö llepte. Alideue vauntage «Cave therfore the talent frohpnt/ onto his dilcipieg E. e hnowe ß it them / e incke ok it euer one. Fos:
gerne tuptye at mrduxgbt / chere was a cr pe made behold / arb seu fr onto bin tnbich batten talents. etrha. lp alter two vapes Malbeetter/ethe this is my bloude of thenew teſtament / chat
dip as lun vie the bꝛydgrome cometh / go out an dpa Foz vnto euery mä that hath thalbe geuk / erco bing ma ſhalbedenuered to be crucitped. Malbe ſhedde foz many, fo? the remyllpon ol
un Wylampes Then all thole virgins arole / afid pꝛepared ee eee e Chen agembled to gender the chele pꝛeſtes a lennes. J Cape vnto vou: wyl not dzyncke :
about ole on, their lͤpes. And the kolpühe fapoeto d wyfle: that hath nat / Malbetaken awaye / euẽ t at eat lh thelerpbes and the ẽ ders ofthe people tothe hence fozth oF thys krutẽ ol the pyne tree / ;
g g ar dae bre erden ina een ebe wen f ebeacoueh ae mee seus ar poumnuptatesumngome )
out. But ß wel evel t 90 e a counlell/ 2 al vou in my fathe ome, N
eli ben le lececherbe not mough ko D8 bu: bur god se of tet oe pluttelte and kli him But theplapde / not And whencher hadlarde grace thepwet
cave thee Brachertothem that tell ¢by tos pour felues, ( Then the lone OF ma cometh in his alo rye bell fr on F holp daye /lelt en vpꝛoure arpte amoͤge out into mounte oliuete, Chen lapde Zetus
ave lh. Ind wwhpll hep wenckopeſche bryogrome —tie/ealithe oly angels sg onen enen ee the people. . Donto them:allye (palbe oflended bp me tps acy ni;
u came: they that wereredy / wet in with him hefpebpon the feate of his glozte/andbeFoze ibis an When“ Jelus wag in Bethanp / in ßhoule night. Foꝛit is wzltte J will hnpte ö wepe


fee 929915 tothe weddyng / a 5 gate was chut vp Akter bin Hhaibe gathered all nacyos,Andhe Mall arm cn.
pnoughic. No⸗wardes came allo che other virgins faving: leperate the one krom another / ag a he 4 woman / which had an alabaſter boxe of pꝛe⸗ abzoade.But alter z amrplenagapne, Awil
te here > thetr Malter malter / open to vs. But he antwe- de deupdeth the hepe from the gootes . cious oyntinẽt / and powꝛed it on his heed / as go befoze vou intochallle. Peter anbwered / æ


der indeed wor red @ larde bereir | faye onto you: J hnowe be ſpall kecihe Mepe onhis rpaht hande ard he late at ß bourde. ishen his dilctples lawe fayde vntohvw:though all mé (hue be of

for the feiues, not POU , watche cherkoꝛe: for ve nowe ne⸗ the gotes on the Ipete. Then Hall the hynge chat / they had indignacion tayinge: what ne⸗ fended bythe / vet wolde J neuer be offended,

andeherfore re ther the daye nog pet the houre / when dlonne fapeto them onhys rygbte bande: Come pe ded chys watt? hrs orntment myght haue Jelus tapde vnto him: merely A faye onto p /

shaped none ok man chall come. E bleden chyldzen or my Father / inheret ve the bene well lolde / ageuen tothe poze. nohen tat this famenightbefoze the coche crowe /

bab dulg delt, E. Lpkewple as acerkerne ms redptotane kyngdome prepared kor you Crom the beg Jelus bnderttode that / he larde onto chem. chou halt denpe me chpie Peter larde bntod

keln. bete his tozneptoa itraüge cotitve/calleahis fer- eee ongred / ibytrouble pep wom? Shebath wrought him! FEY chuide dye with B pet oer 137115

vat righ, Mäuntes F delpuered ko the his goodes. And and e gaue me meate Achzuſted / a ve gaue à good woꝛcke ops me Foz ve hal haue poze . denye Line wyle alto lapde al d dite pleg. Jobi.

Tue. rh. e. onto one he gaue. b. talentes / to another. ij. medzuncke. J was herbdurlelle / ¢ p lodged folche alwayes with you: but me Mal ye not ſelüd wyth them into a place

Tale. h, ü, to another onestocucty ma agterbis abilite/ me. J was naked a de clothed me was liche haue all wares. And in that che cacted thys which is called Gechlemane / x lapde bnto p

Ware ib. d ant eat wape neparteD. dg bender eve bilited me. I was in pꝛelon and pe came orntmẽt on my bode / che drdit to burxe me dplepples / (yt pehere wöpll J go and pꝛaye
receaued the kyue talentes / wet a beſtowed untome, Chen hall the rrabteous ancwere py with all. wierely I faye vnto vou / where ſoe⸗ yonder. And he tone whym Peter a che two


them and wanne other kyue talentes. Lyne⸗ him taping: mater / whẽ fawe we the an hon
wyle hep receauedtwo garnedother two. gred/andfeenthe * 07 athurt andgaue the all che worde there wall allo cps that che g to be inañ agonye Chen lapde Fetus vnto
But he that receaued that one / went a dyg⸗ dzinke? when lawe we the berbourlede/ and *
ged a yyt in d erth / and hydhis matters mo- lodgedthe: oz naked and clothedthe? o7 whe
Hep. Akter a longe Caton the Loꝛde ok chole lawe we the lycke oz in pꝛelon and came vn⸗ corioth went vnto the chele pꝛeſtes / a lapde: alxtell aparte / and fell flat on hyg ace / and
ſeruaũtes came and rekened with thé. Then tothe: Ind the kyng tall antwere and faye eil. b. what will ye geue me /a will delpuer him pravedtayinge:D my father pet poacpble/
came he that had receaued kyue talentes/@ onto thẽ:verely J faye vnto vou an ag ria Onto pou? And they apopnted vnto him thyz-
brought other kyue talentes lapinge mater as pe haue done it onto one ol the leet oe ty peces of lyluer. And krõ b tyme he lought not as J wilt / but as thou wilt. And he came War. Till
thou delpuctent onto me krue kalentes be⸗ thetemebꝛethzen pehaue dane it to me, oportunite to betrarehrm. onto che dice ples and kounde chematlepe /
holde Jhauegapned with the true talentes Chen Mall the Hynge fave bnto them that Huesigh, — Che kpꝛſt dave of lwete breed Hoitciples and fapbeto¥e
moo. Then his matter lapde vnto hym: well Malbeon the lycte hand: departe from me ve 18282
ood kerualft andkapthtull Chou halt bene courked into euerlaltynge pre: wulch fs pre chou that we prepare for che to eate the pa- pe kal not into temptaciö. Che tpzite is wil⸗
pthkull in iytel/J wil make the ruler ouer pared koꝛ the deuyll a his angels. Fon J was


byGnter te moche; entre in into thy matters ape. Al⸗ an hũgred / and ye gaue me no meãte. Itchur⸗ 8. to loche a mã / a tape tohim / p matter Capety Be wẽt awaye once moare g pꝛaped / fay⸗
loge agg mo, 10 He thar teceaued twotalentes came and fed pe gaue menod ente f washerbours - ‘ my trme is at hande/ J will hepe myne efter tinge: mp nn G ene cuppe cinoe pate
che to Cape as lapde mater thou delpueredſt onto me two delle / and pe lodged me not. J was naked / and at thy houle with my ditcyples. And the dil⸗ awape krom me / bit that Foz fate
Lon bed lentes:beholde / Ihaue wone twoother ta⸗ ve clothed me not. J was lycke ¢ in pꝛelon / ciples dydas Jelus had apoynted them / and will gaga Lösche enen ere eue
ome prepared ſentes with them. Andhis maker tarde vnto and pe pilrtedme not. , made redpthe eſterlambe. allepe againe or cheirexes were heuy And

for 9 9 fan, well goodtecuadc andfarcheun aan — qhen tall thep alfoantwerebimn taping? Ful. —“Snohenthe cue was camenelatedouned be leiteche g wür agayne/apraven f ihr *

bal bene karthruh neten T wellmake maler (when fate wethe an bungred oa Mize 5 v undaschepppegteſhe lend Gerold d tymefayingeebetamewornes . chen came ae fete

ruler ouer moche / goo in into thy matters 33CF˙ nin byl ba — fave bite vou / p one ol you Hhallbetrapeme, betohys oplctples a ſapde bnto thi 2 Salepe ane reſt.

iore. in pꝛelon / dyd not mxnicter vntothe: Chen And ther were ercedinge loꝛowlul/ a begäne hence forthe take youre reeſt Cane hede the Khis e an gg

C Chen he which had receaued the one ta⸗ ſhall he antwere them ¢ laye: merely Ffave euerx one of thé to laye vntohim:is it J ma⸗ houre is at hande / a h lonne of ma thalbe be⸗ up whych is

lent came and lapde: malter / A concydered onto vou in as moche as ve dydit not to one fter? He ant wereda Capoe-he ß deppethhys frapedintoShandes of fynners.ARple let boden aner

what thou walt an harde man / whych repel ot the leeſt of thele / ve dyd itnot tome. and J bande wb me ins die b fame Mallbetraye begoinge:beholve/yeis athande e all be- — edt 0 be

where thou lowedſt not / a gathereſt where 0 cent. F cd i Cme*che lonne ofmagocth as it is tozptten traye me ih he vet ike:lo / Zudas one ok! re mödben

thou ſtrawedlt not / a was therkoꝛe akrarde / rrghteous into lle etemall, ecbe : ol him: but wo be top mã / by wha the lonne the. rij. came / a wyth i


The Goſpell


je ed 5 with lweardes a ſtauet / lent krom che chele
ste eelderg old people. Andhe 5 betrayed:
meter forthe dnn Had geue a tollen, tapinge wholdeukr?
dont acter un üpche/ Came fs he lage bandes onbint, ane
fpnes thenco Forth Wallhe came to Fetus, etapoe/baple
fall coflepynge Matter: ehpaed hint, And Jetus lapde vnto
ar this üg. hym:krende / wherkoze arte thou cane chen
_ came they a laped handen Fetus ¢ tone him.

And beholde / one ofthe which were woch

gelug / ſtretched dute his hande and dꝛue his
earde / aſtroke a leruaſit of the hre pꝛelte /

Klmote ok bys eave. Chen (ape Fetus vnto

bim:put Op thy fwearde into hrs theathe.

Gere, ea, kop all that lephand on Hlwearde Call pe⸗
Zahn ig ö. ilch with cwearbe. Ether ehinkedt thou g
J cannot now pape to mp father Khe Matt

geue me moo then. rij. Leglons ok angels?
‘But how chen chulde ß lcripturs be kultilled⸗


Sar rf t.
oa
ob xbig. b.
: F


And fapde to him: J charge che ind name olß

endet ‘Chou tell vs / whether thou

be Chick dlonne ot God. Jelus larde tohim:

thou hatte fapd. Meuerthelete F Caye vnto

vou“ hereakter chall pe Ce the tonne of man

fpttinge on the right hande of power / and co⸗

me in the cloudes of the che.

Klar rig. Chen hre pꝛeſte ret his clothes lapinge:

Tue rü. k. he ath Ulalphemed: what nede we of env

© moo twitnettes? Behold now pe haue hearde

his blafphemp: what thynne de! Cher an⸗

dwered and kapde he is wozthpto dre. Then

font they in hys lace and buffeted hym topth

kilteg. And other lmote him with ö palme ol

theirhandes on the face / capinge:teli vs thou
Chꝛitt / who ts he that mote the?

PeterCate without in the palace And a da

tel came to hym lapinge: Chou allo watte

wyth Jelus ol Balle: buthe denped bekoze


Mar. viliß. g.
Laibe. xx · g.


all laping J wodtnot what thou fart.
Been was goone out into che pooꝛche /
another wenche lawe hem / e fayde vnto the
that were there. his kelowe was allo wpth
Jelus of Nazareth. And agapnehe denred
with an othe that he knew the man. Andak⸗
tera while came vnto hym they that ſtode by
andlarde onto peter kuerlb thou arte euen h
one sé them kozthp cpeache bewzapeh the. rr erg.
Chen begãne he to courte ¢ to (weare /S he Jöhn. Folge.
knc we notthe m. And immediatly the cocke 1
krewe. And Peter remembzed the wozdes ol
Jelu which karde vnto him: bekoze the cocke
krowe / thou Malt dense me thzple: and went
out at the dozes and wepte bitterly.
chin ie belpuered onto B ilate. Judas hägeth him
Ache ee Tees rg *
fs buried, Watchmen bepe the graue.
¶ Che. xxbij. Chapter.
Hen the moznpnge was come / all A
the chefe pꝛelles and the elders ol War xb. a.
' people helde a cofifaple agaynſt Mubersij.t,
Jelus / to put hym to deeth / and
bꝛought him bounde and deliueredhim onto
Ponclus Pplate the debite.
Chen when Judas whych betraped hym /
fawe thathe was condẽ pned / he repẽted him
lelte / and bꝛought agapne the. xxx. plates ot
kyluer to the chefe Pieũtes a eiders layinge:
Ahaue lpnned betrapinge the innocẽt blond.
And they lapde: what is that to vs: De thou
to p. nd he cat doune Hfpluer plates in tẽ
ple z departed / and went d hounge him elke.
Andche chele pꝛeſtes tone d ſplucr plates
g tapdiit is not iawtull toꝛ to put thẽ into 6
trealure / becaule itis $ pipce ot bloud, And
they tone counlell / a bougijt i ché a potters
kelde to bury dratigers in. Wherloze 6 felde
is called the kelde of blond / vntyil this daye.
Chen was kulkylled / which was tpoken by
Jerempthepdꝛophet Capingere theptoke. xxx
Tpluer plates / the pꝛiſe othym s was valued
who hey bousty orb childzẽ oF Sfracl/ethey
gaue thé Coz & potters tele / as elope aps
pornted me. Fetus ope before Poebite:t 9 7
debiteathenhim kapinge: arte thous hing OF Par. rb. a.
the Jueg: Jelus fapd vntohrm Thou lapeſt. Lu. lf a.
And whe he was acculed of the chele pꝛeſtes zahn cih
elders / he ancwered nothrnge. Chen ſard
Pilate vnto hym:heareſt thou not how mas
ny thinges they lave agaynſt the; and he an⸗
kwetebſümte neuer a woꝛde: in to moche &
the debite marueplled greatipe.
At that keel / the debite was wonte to de⸗
luer vnto the people a pꝛelon er / whom they
wolde delper. He hadthen a notable pꝛeloner
called Barrabas. And when they were gade⸗ ne
red together Pilate lad onto the zanbether hn id
wil pe gi geue loge onto vou artabag oꝛ
Jeſus which is called Chill! Fo⸗ ben, =


Ol S.


well / that koꝛ enute thephad delruered hein
ihen he was let doune togeue iudgemẽt

his wyfe lent tohym ems 970 you no⸗
thinge to do woth p tute ma. Foꝛ J haue fuk

fered many thynges thys dape in a dꝛeame
abouthym. But p cheke pꝛeſtes a the elders

had periuaded d people that they chulde athe
VBarrabas / and ſhulde deſtroye Jelus. Then

6 debite anlwered a layde vnto the: whether

ok the twayne will ve p J let loolle vnto you?

And they layd / Barrabas. Pilate ſapde onto

the what challg do then wich Fetus which is

called Chziſt: hey all ſapde to him: let hym

be crucikxed. Then Capde ö debite: what cull
bath he done; And they . fapinge:

let him be crucpfped. Whẽ Pilate lawe that

he pꝛeuapled nothinge but p moare bulines

was made / he toe water ¢ walled bps hã⸗

des before p people fapinge:¥ am innocẽt ol

wstudge d+ Pbloudok thys*iuite perton /a p ve Mall fe,
pave to Chen anlweredall} people ¢fapd:his bloud
bie be on bs / g on oure chploze Chen ler he Bar⸗
rabas loole vnto them / and ccourged Jelus /

and delpuered pnt to be crucpkyed.

Chenß loudeourg of ß debite toke Fetus
vnto the comen hall / a gathered onto him al
the companp. Andthey ſtrippedhim and put
onhim a purpill robe / and platted a croune
ol thoꝛnes and put vpon his heed / a a rede in
his ryght hande: a bowen their knees befoze
bym and mockedhym / laying:hayle kyng of
the Fewes:and (pitted ops hym / and tone the
redeandfnote hym onthe heed,

2 And when they had mockedhim / they tohe
che robe ot bpm agayne / and puchys awne
rapment on him / a ſeedhim awaye to crucikx
him. And as they came out / they koũde a mã
ol Cpꝛen / named Simon: hym they cöpelled
to beare his croſſe. And when they came vnto
the place / called Golgotha ((hat is to tape /a
place ot deed mens ſculles) they gaue him be
negerto duncke mẽgled with gall, And whe
he had taſted therot / he wolde not dꝛyncke.

When they han crucikxedhim / they parted

bis garmentes /a dydcaſt lottes: to fulkoll 6
art. d. tas Cpoken bythe Prophet.“ Ther deupded
ib. c. mpgarmẽtes amonge the: a vpõ mp detture
dyd call lottes. And they late a watchedhem

there and they let vp ouer hys heed the caule


: ok hys deeth wꝛyttẽ Chig is Fetus the kynge

b. c. Col. Indthere were two theueg

Ea " ed topth hym / one on the ryght hande

Eand another on the lykte.

Ree 3 Chep ö packed by /reuyled him joagmnge
thetrheeddes a Cavinge:thou p deſtropeſt the
téple of God a byfdet it in thꝛe dayes / laue
chplelle TE thou be the tonne ok Pod / come
doline krö p crotle L tkewyte allo Hive Wer
mockinge him with the Scrybes and elders
fave: He lauedother / hem kelte he cannot


athe,


faue.FEve bes kynge ok zlrgelnethymnon
rome doune kroni the croſie / a we wil beieue
him. He truſted in God / let hym deluer hym
now / pe he will halle him: kor he lapde / J aut
the lonne ol God. Chat fame allo che theues
which were crucikledw him / cat in his tethe

From the lyrte houre was there berckneg
ouer all b iande vnto the nynth houre. And
about 5 nynth houre Fetus crped ub aloure,
vopce/ lapinge: El Ci lama atbathant q hat Gy r 5b e.
is ko lapẽ: my cod / my God, why halt thou 9p tal xi. d,
foꝛlaen me: Some ok thé that ſtode there /
when they herde that / cayde: hig mia calleth
foz Helias. Ind ſtreyght wave one of thé va
he a tone a ſpongea Eplledtt kull ol veneger /

& put it on a rede /andgaue hymtodꝛenche.

Otherlayde / let be: let bs le whether Belag

will come delpuerhim. Jeſus crpedagapne

with a loude vopce and pelded vp the goolt. aher. 8b. 5.
And beholde che“ vaple ofthe temple dd rute veil.

rent in twayne trõ the toppe to the bottome / 8

and the erth dyd quale / z the tones dyd rent

and graues dpd oben: and the bodies or many

lainetes which klept / arole a came aut or the

graues after his relurrecclon / a came into ß

holy citie /a appered vnto many. nohẽ ö C- war. vc.

turlon a they that were with him watchinge Lune. xxij. g

‘Fetus, fae 5 erth quake and thole thinges

which happened they keared greatly / layige ·

Oka lurete this was the lonne of God.

And many wems were there /beholdinge War. rund.
him a karre ok / which kolowed Fetus krõ Gel⸗ Lune. pig. ge
lle / myniſtrynge vntohym Amonge whych
was Mary Magdalen /a arp ö mother ok
Games e Joleg and the mother of ebedes qs
childzẽ. ; iohẽ z euẽ was come there came a gh r. ud.
riche mG ol Aramathia namedgoleph / which Lune. rah. g.
man allo was Fetus dylcyple. He went to Jug.
Pilate a beggedthe body of Jelug. Then Pi⸗
late commaundedthe bodye to be delpuercd.

And Joleph coke the body / and wꝛappedit in
à clene lynnen cloth / and put it in hys newe
tombe / which he had hewen out / euen inthe .
roche / a rolled a greate fone ta p doꝛe o£ ple. War. y de
pulcre and departed And there was Mary
Magdalene ache other Mary lyetinge ouer
agavnſte 8 ſepulcre. Che nerte dave 5 folo⸗
wed ß dave of pzeparinge ) Saboth p hye
pꝛeſtes ¢ Pharileg gat thẽ felues to Pilates
kayd: Sp / we remẽ bꝛce p this deceauer lapde
twhpil he was pet alpue. kterthꝛe dapes J
wypfl arpfeagapne.comaunde therkoze ß the
lepulcre be made ture vntill ötchrzddape lee
paraduẽ ture his dilctpleg come a ſteaſe hym
awape a fave onto the people / he is rylen krõ
pdeeth / a the late erroure be woꝛlle hen the
kpꝛt. P plate ſapde vnto them. Cake watche
men: Ge andmahe it as ſure as pe can. And
they went and made che fepulcre Cure wyth
watche men / and lea led the ſtone. & Gai
he


Abe relurreccys ot pyetts

55 foubiers 9281 wasn ae Fu ‘was
Aolten out of hs graue. bse appcareth to bps dite
ciples / and tenderly them faith to pꝛeach s to baptele.


¶ Che. xxviij chapter. .
He Sabboth dape at euen why
dauneth che mozowe akter the tab⸗
och / Marr Magdalene ep other
y Marp camvtote che lepulcte.
Ind beholde ther was a greate erth quake.
Foz che angell o€ che Loꝛde delcended krõ he⸗
uen and came & rowiled backe the tone fd
che doꝛe / and fate vpon it. Vys countenadice
was lpke lpghtnynge / a hrs rapment whyte
ag Inowe. And koz feare of hym the hepers
were aſtunnped / and became as deed men.
War. rv. *Theangellantwered a favre tothe wee
Hue riß. a. men / Feave ve not. Jknowe p petche Zetus
which was-cructtied:ets not here: he ts ry⸗
ken aß he karde. Come / and le the place where
e Londe was put: and go qulckip a teuhis
Boifciples thatheis rylen krom dech, And bee
holde / he wil go befoze vou into Galile there
ve Mall le him. Lo Ahaue tolde vou. E
I. Andthey departed quichip from the e+
pulcre with keare a greate Jope:g dyd runne
ko bꝛynge hrs dyrcyples wozde, And as ther


a
See
John. r.. 1


War. pi. b.


went to tell his dilciples:beholde Jeſus met
che lapinge: All haple. And cher canie Kheld |"


bim by 6 fete a wozchipped him. Chen lapde
Jelus vnto the: be not atrarde. Go a teume


ac kehrte Behe goto Gane, K there tail: |


hierher ge that they fe me. uo he they were gone:bebolde / Cos
cher bee Cine of the kepers camesito e elle z Mewen
inmesaa mn Bo. bntophye prettes/all dthinges 6 were hap⸗
vg f. ened. And they gaddered the to geder wrih
5 eiderg /a toke coütelt/ gaue large moner
into $ foudiers lapinge: Dave that hys du⸗
ciples came by nyght / and Hole hem awape
whill pe klept. And pethys come to the rulers
eares / we will peale him / a laue you harme⸗
les. And they tohe the money and dyd as ther
were taught. And thys lapinge is nopled
amongethe Jewes onto this dape. E
. Chen che. ri. dilciples wee awape into
Galle / into a mountapne where Jelus had
appopnted thẽ. And whẽ they lawe him / they
*wozthpppenhym.But ſome ok thé douted.
And Fetus came and Cpake onto thé ſaxinge
All power ts geuen vnto me inheuen / andin
erth. Go therfoze and teache all naclös bap⸗
tilynge thẽ in che name of the kather / andthe
donne / and the holy goolt: Ceachynge thé to
oblerue all thinges / what loeuer Jcömaun⸗
ded vou And io / am wich pou all ware / eu
vntru the ende or the woꝛlde. E


here endeth the wotpert of
were Bache.


War. xvt. d.


The Golpell i


O. Parke.
a . Che vaptyme of
Grane ange bude e
Deter Andrew / James à Ahon. heit heateth the mi
wyth the vncleane lpreteelpeth Peters mother in
lator. and clenſeth the leper.


¶ Che fpr Chapter. + a
De begynnpnge ok the
Gospel oF Felu Chris canne
5 bat | of God / as it is witten in che
N brophetes)/ - peholde A lende l. da.
Mn
which Hal prepare thy wave
before the. che bopce ofa crxer in the wilder⸗ e
nes:*prepare pe the waxe ofthe Lozbe/ma- afl
he his pathes ltrerght. John dyd baptyle in
the wyfdernes / pieache the baptime ot re⸗
pentaunce £02 the remedion ob fynnes. And
all that lande of Jurie a ther ol Jerulalem /
went out vnto hym / and were all baptiled of
him in A wasclubed durch their kynnes
John was clothed wrth camilles herr! e
Wa gerdpllokackpn abouchrs lopnes. And
he did eate⸗locuſtd a wilde hon / a pꝛeached r
lapinge: a tronget then J cometh atterme/ 1s Wet g
whole (hoo latchet J an hot worthy to fous
pe doune a umole. haue baptiled pou with
water: but he hall baptile you w öholp got
And it came to palſe in thole dapes / p Fe:
cus ca krõ Hazareth / a citie of Galtie:¢ was
baptiled of Lohn in Jordan. And alone as he fe


was come out of d water: John lawe heauẽ oe oat 0


open / a che holy gooſt delcendinge bon him of Lh:pt/
ben done. Andcher came abopce krg beau we +
eChouarte my derefonnetn tobom Adefpte. alen
—— 5 5 tee auler
dernes: a he l. bet
dapes /a was tẽpted of pata ſa was W wilde Kn a
beettes. Andthe argeig maredbnto bpm, che
Biter John was tale / Lelus 1


Ok. S. M


Ale / pꝛeachinge ö Golpellok 6 kyngdome or
God / s laping: p tyme is come / aß Kingdome
ol God is at hande / repẽt a belenep Golpell.

As he waled by the lee of Gallle / he lawe
Simon ¢ Andzew his bꝛother / caſtinge net⸗
teg into the tee foz they were kelſbers . And
Jelus lapde vnto them kolowe me / A welt
make vou fylchers of men. And ſtrarght
waype / they foꝛloke their nettes and tolowed
hem. And when hehadgone a iptell further
thence / he fawe James che lonne of ebede⸗
and John bys bother / euen ag they were in
the ch yppe mendinge their nettes. And ano⸗
ne he called them. And ther leelt their father


FJebede in the chyppe with 5 ſeruaũ⸗


tes and went their wave atterhim.
epentredintoCapernatt:a ſtrexght


„ Einape on § Babochraper ye entred inco the


„. bn Net what thing is this


Fynagoge a taught. And they merueled at his
dearnynge. Foz he taughe them as one p had

power wyth him / and not as the Scubes.
And there was in their Spnagoge a man
ered w an vnclene lpirite / b crped tavinge:
let be / what haue we to do with the thou Je⸗
Sus of Nazareth: Arte thou come to dekrope
vs: J hnotwe the what thou arte / euen that
holy of God. And Jelus tebukedhimlaxinige
holde thy peace and come out of him. And the
vnclene ſpirite tare him / a cried with a loude
vorce / and came out ot hem. And ther were
all amated/ in to moche that they demaunded
one of another amage emt felues ſapinge:
hat newe doctrinẽ is


Rt 68 C: stop hecömaumdechcge Coule Cpiites


dend now


f ar with poteer/and they obepe him. And imme⸗
mn rrrvi. dlatiph vs fame fpzeedabzoade thꝛough oute


rs vet liebe regton bozveringe on Galle.


hen will
zen be older


ase


And Forth with / alone as they were come
out ol the en ag 4 they entred into the
houte of Sopmon and Andzew / with James
and J ohn. And Hrmong mother in iawe lar
lvckẽ of a feuer. And anone they tolde him ol
her. And he came andtone her by the bande
and lylte her vp:and the keuer koꝛloke hyꝛ by
and by:and che mynyſtredvntothem. Andat
euen when ß fonne was doune / ther bꝛought
tohymall that were dylealed / and them that
were pollelled with deupls. And all the cytre


Dgaddꝛed to gedder at the doꝛe / andhe healed


kr. lg.


116.06


many that were Cyche of druers deteates,

And he caſt out manpdeupls/ a lulkred not

v deuxis to ſpeake / becaule they knewe him.
Andinß moznynge very erlp/Jelus arole


and went out into a folttary place / and there


pꝛaped. And Syms andthey that were with
vm kolowed alter hym. And when they had
ounde hint / they fapde onto him: al men lenke
forthe. Andhe layd onto them: let vs gointo
che next tounes that Fmave pꝛeache there
allo: foꝛ truly I cam out fo2 that purpoſe.


aͤrkkte, fb.
nnhe preached their so nagöge through
. e 1555 1 rae 85

And cher came a leper to him / betechinge ae ar
bim, ano aneleduoune neo hen, @ tapnees da
him: pk thou wilt / thou caneſt make me clene 5
And Fetus had cöpallion on him /a put fort
big hůde / touched him /a fapde to him: J will /
be thou clene. And allone as he had polen /
ummedtatipß lepꝛol departed fro him / a Cent
him awape forty with & larde vntohim: Se
thoulape nothpngeto anyman: but get the
hence / a chewe thp telfe tothe Pꝛeſte / aoſſer
kor thyclenkynge / thole tbingewhych holes
cõmaunded / lo a teſtimoniall onto the, But
helallone as he was departed) begäne to tell
manp thinges / andto publycbe the dede in co
moche B Fetus coulde no moe openly entre
into the citie / but was without in detert pla⸗
ceg. Ind they came to him trõ euery quarter.
C de healeth the man ok the palſpe / calleth Leut the
cutomer/eateth with open lynnerg / and exculeth hrs


dplcpples. 1
¶ Che. ij. Chapter.
Etera Kemet Aue 8 mne x
Capernaũ agarne / a it was nop⸗ pat. ir g.
led he was ina houle. And anone Wie
manp gadered to geder / in lomoche
Bnow therewaß no roume ko receauethe / no
not lo moche as about the doe. And he pꝛea⸗
che f worde vnto oF ndthere came vnto
him 5. bꝛought one ficke of 6 pallle boꝛne ol
kowermẽ, And becaule theycoulde not come
nye vnto hym koꝛ pʒeale / they vncouered the
role of che houle wherehe was. And when
they had bꝛonen it open / they let doune the
beed wherin the lycke ol thepallye lave.
when Fetus lawe their kapth / he ſapde to
the fiche ok the pallpe / lone thy lynnes are z une pb
koꝛgeuen the. 8 5
And ther were certapne ol d Socribes lyt⸗V
eynge there / and realonynge in their hertes:
how doech chys kelowe to biatpyeme? who
Can foꝛgeue tynneg / but God only: Andie
mediatip when gelus perceaued in his lpꝛete
that they lo realoned in them lelues / he layde
vnto them: why thynke yefoche thynges in
poure hertes: Whether ts it eacper to tape to
the lycke of the palfye / thylynnes are koz⸗
geuenthe:oꝛ to lape / arpte take vp thy becd/ qyat ir ar
and walke: That pe maye knowe that che Lune. vs
Conne of man hath power in erth to koꝛgeue
lynnes / he fpake onto the lycke of che paltic:
A ape vnto the / aryle and tante vpthy beed /
and get the henle into thine atone houle. And
by and by he aroke / tone bp the beed / and weet
foꝛth bekoze them all: in Comoche that they
were all amaled and glopitped Gon layinge:
we neuer cawe it on this kallpon.
And he went agayne vnto the tee / and alls
people retopted vnto him / o he auh ag


The Gaipell


And as Jelus pated by / be lawe Leuy we
tonne of d lpher fot at the recepte oF cuſtome
‘patie, _ ¢favdebntobpm:folotwe me, And he arole g
Tag.. and Eolowedbim.*anpit came to pate as Zelus
v. f. late at meate in his houle / many publicans
C atpnners fate at meate alco wich Fetus and
18 dilcinles Kor there were manpp kolowed
im. And whe the Scribes a Ph irlles lawe
him eate ww publicans ¢ kpnners ther larde
bnto his dilclples how ig it / that he eateth a
dzincketh with publicans efynners? nohen
elus hearde that/petapne onto them. Che
ole haue no ned of the Philycid / but che
lpcne. Acame notto call the ryahtwrle / but
the lynmers to repentaunce.

And the dilciples of John a che Pharices
dpd kaſte: a therkoze came a tarde vnto hem.
ihr do the dpleppies ol Jahn goethe Sha⸗
nile fatte / and thy dilctples fat not. und Je⸗
tus capde vnto thẽ:can the childꝛen ol a wed⸗
dinge kaſte / whils the bzydgrome is with thé
As longe as ther haue che bꝛydgrome wytg

them / they cannot kaſte. But che dapes woll
‘na chen ball come when the bepdgrome calbe tahen erg
o anoma urapet c

ono )
Burt onto an olde garment (40; then taketh be


ak. br. b.
Tüte. vf.


they Hall

notes an awaype the newe pece kr the olde / ¢ lots che

ble a geet oeh vene waz In pte wite noms porwzety ne

fecucyon or (HF we wine ino olbe bedeels fon pébedo/ brciwe

aim (aie from wyne bzeakech ö vedels/@ the topne runner

them then cal gut / ö the vedels are marred But new wine
they fate shat rte be potwged into net peel,

ibe ANNE. Andie cyaunCea that he wwentthorow the

their perlecu⸗ cogne keldes on the Spabboth dape o bis dil⸗

cyons trouble ciples as they went in their ware beganeto

Hall begpnes pllicke the eaves of come, And the Phariles

kapde pntohrm:beholde / whr do they on the

abboth dapes z which is not laukull: And

e Capde to thẽthaue ve neuer rede what Da⸗

uiddyd / when he had nede / a was anhongred

bothe he ¢thep chat were with him: Pow be


went into the haute or God in che dapes of Jlcartoch whpch


Abiathar the hve zelt / and did eate the ha⸗
Towed loues / whych is not lawkull to eate /
but koz the Pzettes onlp:a gaue allo to them
which were with hym: Ind he larde tothem
the Sabboth was made koꝛ man / a not man

| fog the Haboth iW herkozethe tonne otman
is L ode euen of the Daboth dave.


4
2 dl ande cbocetg
J Se bolt vances auh wege whrch


he gaue S pmon / to name Peter. Ind
aed’ me


accule him. And he tapde onto thems wh rch

had ß wyddzedhande:arrle Kade ing midtug

Andhe beds on F kabel dar itlautulltono

à good dede on s Cabboth dapes /o an euxll:

to laue Ipée 07 Bpll? But thephelde their pea⸗

ce. andhe looked rod abouke onthe angerrx

mournpnge onthe bipndnes of theithertes/
fapde tothe ms,/*ttretch koꝛth thine bande, er rb.
nde Gretchenit oute. And bys bande was ile ble

reſkozed / euen as whole ag the other. K

And the Phariles deparked / and tre xaht

wape gaddzed a countell with the 5 belöged

to Herode / agapndt hime theymight dedkrope

him. And Jeluig auopded with his dirctples to

the lee. Anda greate multitude kolowed hym

from Galile ¢ krõ gurſe / and from Ferutale;

@ AG g dumea / g krom beponde Fordane/* ¢ eg.

they that dwelled about Cyꝛe and na due vb.


Greate multitude: whych whe they had erde Santas i


what thinges he drd / came vnto bpm.

And he cömaunded his dilciples / ba Wipe
pe chuld wapte on him / becaulẽ of d people /
kette cher culd thiounge hom. Ko he had
healed man / in lomoche that ther pꝛealed
vpon him / ko to touche hym as many as had
plages. And whé d vnclerie tpzites lawe him
they fell doune bekoze hym / k cryed ſapinge:
thou arte the Come of God. Andhe traptly
chargedthem thatthey chuldnot btter hem. :

Andhe went vp into a mountapne / a cal⸗ Math. ra.
iedbntohem whom he wolde / and ther came Tune
vnto um. And he ondepnedthe riß that ther
Aula be with him / a that he myght lende te
to pꝛeache: and that ther mraht haue power c
tobeale kynneſles /a to caſt out deupls. ae

fonnie of Zebede a John / James
bzocher / a gaue the Bönarge mer, 40
{8 to lape / che lonnes of choünder. And An⸗
dꝛew / and Philip / ¢ Bartiemew / S Mathew
4 Chomas / 2 James the tonne of Aiphere
Caddeus / and Symon of Cane and Judas
kame allo betraredhym.

And they came bnto houle / and the people
alſembled togeder agayne / co greatly 6 7
e

en at lon jit
wer ment outtovotnebinn ore ous Regn
hebadbenebetpoe him elke. Ardd <>
which came fxd Jerulalẽ / larde:he hach el⸗
zebub / and by the power of the chefe deurll
caſteth out deuyls. And he called chem vnto
him / and lade vntothem in knnlitudes.

How can Satandzrue S
a realme be deulded agapntte tt leite b real
me cannot endure. D2 yr a houle be deulded
agapnite it felfe that houte cannot cötinue:

Sopk Satan make iE


infutreccpor a
him felle and be deuded e canna e 5
due is at an ende. No man can — 7


„f n


Atotige mans houle / and take awaye bys
goodes / excepte he Ep bynde 6 ſtronge ma
@then pole his houle. Nerelp J faye vnto
+ pou/ all fynnes Malbe tozgeuen önto mens
childzẽ a Diafphemp whertoith they blatphe⸗
nucphe me. But he ? blalphemeth the holy gooſt /
wall neuer haue fozgeueneg but te in daun⸗
er of eternall danacpo: berauſe ther capde /
ſehad an vnclene pete. Chen came his mo⸗
ther a his bꝛethiẽ / a ſtode wyth out / and lent
vnto him and called him. And the people fate
aboute hum / and lapde vntohim: beholde thy
mothers thy bzethzẽ lente ko; p without and
heantweredthe fapinge : who is mp mother
Gp breth26? And he ſoked rounde about on
his dilciples whych late in compatic about
him / a layde:behold mp mother a my bꝛethꝛẽ
Foz wholdeuer doech the well of God / he is
my bꝛother / my lyſter and mother.


Dachempttery
Tendo e, and he made onto te: he that hath eaes


Come fyrtpe tolde / and Conte an hundꝛed kol⸗
gab ehrte ko heare let hemheare. E

e Goſpell) And when he was alone / they that were
whpeh is aboute him with the rij. ackedhim off timilt
0 etude, Andie karde bnito chem Ko outsit
ur deu Co nome; mutter oethe kingdome OF
Hedumes God. But vnto them 5 are with out / wall alt
nd A thinges be done in limilitudes: p whe ther fe
tbe, 2a cher hallte/anotditceme: 2 tohe thepheate
c ag chev Mal Yeate not bnderitade:teteatany
of tyme cher chulde tourne / a chetr fynn Chula
che be koꝛgeuen thẽ. And he tapde onto them: per
of resue ve not this dimilitude : how then chuld

mits oF be nteritande alt otyertymplytunes.
ut: Che tower coweth the wore. Andther &
chem that are bp the waves lyde / where the woꝛde ts for
eithoutss wen / are ther to whom alſone as ther haue


*


dalched the waues


aͤrcke, ä
herde it / Sata comelh immiediatly / a taieel ts onto toche
awape ö wozde p was towen in theirhertes. ale urid
Andllkewylether that are lowen on eye tbo. hei mare w
nye grounde / are they: which when they haue tes chen in the
hearde d wo de / atonce recegue it with glad⸗ ryghteoutnes
nes / vet haue no rotes in the leluies / klo en⸗ or Kha nent
dure but a cyme: kanone as trouble d perle u pgtaſ
Cucionaryteth kos che wo des falle they fall a, chat they
immediativ. And they that are Cowell amöge here is euen s
the thoꝛnes / are loche as heare 5 woide: e theouicure ¢ dave
care of this worde a che dic tunes of rp. ougn eher
ches and che lücken or otherthunges / entre in debe
Kchooche the wozde / z it is made vnkrutkun vies :whych *
And thole that weare lowed in good guotine, tense aod
ave thepthatheave the wordeandreceauert (error (ot
Kbzenge Forth krute/ come thivty kolde lome rep when they
lyrtx kolde / lome an hundꝛed kolbe. le heb all Cote

Andhe Capde vnto che: is the cädle lyghted notdcterne c
tobe put onder a buccpell or onver che table tt dete h
Fnot rather tobe put ona candctitich? Foz be ekt.
there is nothynge lo pꝛeup / that call not be
opened ether co lecreet / but thut it (Dall co⸗
me abꝛoade. Jkenp man haue caves toheare
lethym heave. Andhe tapde onto them: tale
hede what ve heare. Wych what mealure ve
mete / with the 2100 chalit 75 dene 21
pousgapne. And onto pou that heare/ Mall N done in Wat.
moꝛe be geué.ffoz *onto hünchat bat Mall. ‘aie
ft be geuen: a Frombimthathath not / halbe
taken awape / euen thathe bath,

And he lapdeslo is the kyngdome of God /
euẽ ag pla ma chuld lowe leede in pgrounde
and ſhulde llepye a ryle vpnyght a dave: and
the leede huld lpzinge and growe vy / he not
ware ffoꝛ the erth bzingech koꝛth krute offer
kelke:tirſt the blade / then the eaves / akterthat
Cull come in the eares. And allone as p krute
is bzounhe kozth / anone he thꝛouſteth in the
kpkell / caule the herueſt is come.

And he Capde: where onto (hall we lynen


d the kyngdomc of God: oz with what cöpari⸗


fon Wall we cöpare it: It is iphea grapne oF
muſtardleed / 115 75 when it is lowen in the
erth / is the leet of all Ceenes that be in perth:
but akterthatit is Cowen / it groweth vp / and
ig greateſt of all verbes: and bereth greate
bꝛaunches / co that d kowles of the ayꝛe maxe
dwell vnder the chadowe okit.

And with many loche lumilitudes be prea
ched the wozbe onto thé /afteras thepmyghe
bearett.And without limilitudelpakehe nor
chynge vnto them. But when ther were a
parte / he expounded all thynges tohrs opt
cyples. And the fame dave when euen was
come / he lapde vnto them: let vs palſe ouer
onto the otherkrde. And they lette the people
and tone hym euẽ as he was in the ſhip. Ind
ther were allo with him other chippes.

Andther deus great Ctozmie of wynde / a

o ß chip / lo that it was
Full, Ind


The Solpell


full and he was in the treme a llepe ona pe⸗
lowe. And they awone hym / a larde fom
MHatter/carett thou not p we perplche⸗ and
he role vp / rebubea d wynde / a lapde vnto
the lee: peace a be Htyll.Ands wynde alared
Kthertoloweda greate came. Andhe farde
vnto them: why are ve fo kearkull: How is it
that pe haue no fapth: And they kearederce⸗
1115 elapde one to another: what kelowe
is chis: Foꝛ booth wynde and les oberhym.
delpuereth the polleticd from the vncleane lprete /
e fron me ee an rapleth the
captapnes doughter.
Che. b. Chapter. E

GA [Md they cam ouẽr to the othertpoe
of the fee into the countre of $ Ga⸗
derenites. And when he was come
out of g ſhippe / chere met him out
ofthe graues a man podleſeed or an vncleane
ſpꝛite / which had his abydinge amõge d gra⸗
ues. ànd no man coulde bynde him;o not w
cheynes / becaule p whe he was oktẽ bounde
with Fetters a chepnes / he pluckedß chapnes
u lundze / a baake the ketters in peces Nether
roulde enym tame him And alwaves bothe
niche oda pe he cryed in the mountaynes and
in the graues / and bet him telle with tones.
wohen he hadipped Fetus a karre ol he rane
0 d wozſhipped him / and eryed with a loude
Ferro in opce A Tarde wat haue Nobo with the Fe
geul $ dew ho, lils the Conne ol the moock hpeſt od: F rez
noure that per quypze the in the name of God ö thou toꝛmẽt
tapneth onto me not Foz he had tayd onto him: come out ol
GSodsout Corde eye man thou koule poke. Andhe ated bim:
tapneth bd 0 what is ty name and he anlwered fappna;
ms bowinge mip name 18 Legion / koꝛ we are many. And
ihe nee mar lie pꝛapd him inttantiy/ 6 he wolde not ende

Wing oer then awaype out of the countte.

And ther was there nye pntoß moũtayns
agreate heerd of lwyne kedinge / a all the de⸗
tuple becought him fapinge: lende bs in to §

erde of lwine / chat we maye enter into the,
danone Felus gaue them leaue. And the
ünclene fpzit wet out a entred in to ß lwyne.
Ind the heerd ſtarteled / a ran hedling in toß
lee. hey were about. . M. twyne / and they
were dꝛouned in $ lee. Andthe lwyne heerdd
lleed a tolde it in the citie and in the countre.
And they came out koꝛ to le what had happe⸗
nedꝛand came to Jelus / a lawe him that was
hered with the kende and had the Legi (yt,
both cloched e in his rrahe mynde / and were
Akräped. And ther that la we te tolde the how
i had hapened to hymthat was polleſſed tb
che deurſkand allo ofthe twyne. Andther
See eng in i be wolde departe
ee
. spl /pzapenbimbpe
mypght be him. Botwbeit Fetus wolde not
Gufive him / but fade vnto hit: go home in to


Enke. biß. e.“
Wat. viß. d.


thrne akone houte ¢ to thy krendes / a chewe
them what greatthinges? Kode bath dane
fonto che / a how he had cöpallton on the. And
be Vand beganne to publyahe in the 0
t cities, what greate things Jetus had done
vnto him / and all men dydmeruerle.

And when Fetus was come ouer agayne
by chyppe vntõ che other ſyde / — an d
panera tobi 6 dg ob he lee“ Pte

cholde / ther came one ok the rulers of the Late.
Synagoge / whole name was Zatrus: a whe
he lawe him / he tell doune at his kete / and be⸗
kought hym greatly tapinge: my daughter
Heth at poynk of deeth / J wolde thou woldelt
come a laxe hel on her / that che mpage
be late e liue. And he wet with him / a moche
people tber bag cee enn him.
nd ther was a certen a/ whych was

dilealed of an piue ol bloude ril eres / z had
Cuffred many thinges of many philpcions /a
had ſpent all p che had / a feltenone amende⸗
mẽt at all / but wered worte a wore when
the had herve of Jelus che came into ß pzea⸗
ce behinde him / ã touchedhis garmẽt Foz che
thougbt: pr J mare but touche his clothes 3
Mail be whole. And ſtreyght wave her koun⸗
tapne ot bioude was dꝛyedpp / and the kelt in
her body / that che was healed ol the plage.

And z elus immediatly telt in him teilte / S
vertue that went out ol him / a tournedhim
round aboute in § pꝛeace /a ſarde: who tous
chedmy clothes? Andbys dilcipk fayde vnto
him: lepſt thou the people thzut the/ and pet
Afkelt who did touche me? And he lobed roan
about / £02 to fe her that had done that thinge
Che woman feared ¢ trembied( fo? the new
what was done wyth in her) e ecame and
fell doune befoze hym / tolde hym thetruth
ok euer thinge. Ind he tarde to her: Daugh⸗
ter thy kapth hach made the whoale: go
peace / and be whole of thy plage. 2

nshyll he pet tpake / cher came krõ the ru Matix.
ler ol the Bpnagoges houle / certapne which Tune. dig |
fapd:thy daughter is deed: wür dilealelt thou
the Matter eny further? Alone as Fetus
hearde that woꝛde lpoken / he Capde vito the
ruler ofthe Synagoge: be not akraped / onix
beleue. Ind betuttredno man to folowevint 1
moate thé Peter ¢ James ¢ John 5 brother 2
of James. And he camebntotheboute of d Sete 4
muler of che Brnagoge / z fates wödzingk: unte
Athem that wepte ¢ wapled greatiy/ a went i
in ¢lapoe onto thé:whp make be syle bogs


where ch
marden by che hande/ a fapde vntohrz: az
bitha / cumt: whrch is be interpy pata


ge


HES, Marche.


mapdẽ I tape vnto $ / arple. And teepabt
arole and went on her kete. Foz che
was ok dage oktwelue peres. And ther were
aſtonied at ĩt out of mealureAndhe charged
thé ftraptely that no man ſhuld knowe oF it /
and tommauunded to geue her meate.
ttt len lag poſtles to them that were
ba ‘Sean . — When. ber and
tkelches. And of ehe walkpngeon the lee.

2. -CTbe.bt.Chapter, + .
dhe departedthence/e cam into
bis awne countre / this dblcpples
Folowedbim. And when Saboty
daye-was come / he beganne to tea

in the lynagoge. And many Fhearde him
ere altonped/a larde: from whence hath he
chelethrnges: Aurea bare this 5 ig
pez danse Jene es bare wrought
his handes: Fs not this 6 carpenter Ma

Are eyes konne *the bother or James & Joleng

. fg of Juda 4 Simon: g ärenok bis (peers here

e with vs: And they were offended byhim. And

Capde vntothem:a Pꝛophet is not de⸗


fac Space fake John / 2 boundebim e cat him iftto pre


1 for evobias tab tobich was biEbrothee


7
Iiyij.
Philippes wike Fozhe had marpedher Jobs cries mende
karde vnto Herode:Ft is not lawkul koi b to mae Plaply


Haue thy brothers wike. Perodlas lard walten l n rb


koꝛ him / and wolde haue kylled hem / but che or a wallpnge
coulde not. Foz Herode keared John / unowig tate to caterhe
Hhewas atu man a an voip: egaue yy lee wall whe
teuetence sand when he hearde hym / he dꝛd eber are we
manpthinges / a hearde him glad.
But when a conuenpent dave was conte:
Herode on his byꝛth dape made a lupper to
lozdes / captayns ¢ cheke eſtates of Galile.
And the daughter of che tapde Herodias cam
in a daunled / a pleated Herode a them p late
at bourde allo Chen the nynge lapde pfitoß
mapdetacke of me what thou wilt /s J will
geue itd Andhe lware vnto hy / whatloeuer
chou ſhalt acke ol me / J will geue it $ / euen
vnto the one halle or mp kyngdome. And che
went Forth a fapde to her mother: what hart
athe’ chetapde: John Baptittes heed.
nd the ca in ftrepght waye wyth halte onto
the kynge / and allied ſapinge: J wille thou
geue me by and by in a charger the Heed ol
john Baptitt. And the henge was loꝛy: how
eit Foz hrs othes lane and koꝛ their fates:
whych kate at lupper allo / he wolde not put
her belide her purpole And immedlatlpp nig
kent the hangman a cõmaunded hys heed to
be bꝛought in. And he went a beheededhym
in the pꝛelon and bꝛought hig heed in a char⸗
ger / a gaue it to the maden and the mayden
Jaue tt to her mother. And whE his difciples
hearde of ne and tone by his body /


and
Ind the Apottles gaddered them lelues to
Jether to Jelus / a taſdhim all thyngz / booth
what they had done a whattheyhad taught.
Andhe lapde onto them*come aparte into P. at. 2th. be
wyldernes / and reſt a whyle. Foz there were lune. r. e.
manpcommers and Here Aa n
lealure o moche as ta eate. Andhe went by
cpp out of b wave into a deterte place. But
the peoplelppedthem when thep departed a
many kne we him / z vine akote thither out ol
eee eee eee
„And Fe out e fae, N
moche people /a had copattta on the / becaule wath rde
ey were like chepe which had no chepherde
ind he beganne to teache the many thinges,
And whẽ the dave was now karre tpent /
his difciptes came vntohimlapinge:this is a chat. rg. bo
delert place / a now the dape is karre patled/ unn. .
let che denarte / they mape go into h colitrey ohn. vl..
round about a into 8 tound / a bye thé bꝛeed:
fo2 they barre nothinge to eate Pe ancwered
and fayd vnto them:geue pe the to cate. And
they larde vnto hym: hall we go and bye. i.
Epenxworth ok bꝛeed / geue thE tocate. De
fapne vnto thẽ: how many loues haue ve / o
@ foie. And ine ther had terched / chep tarde
C krxue and


The Golpell


dandtwo kytpes. Indhe cömaunded them
tomate the all fit doune by cöpames spond
grene graſſe. Andthey late doune here arowe
Ktherẽ arowe / br hundꝛedd A by kykties. And
hetoke the. v. loues a che two kylches / ¢ lo⸗
e wleſtd/ hat Hed vp to heauen *and bieded and bꝛake the
Gihegaue than ſoueg / a gaue them to his diciples to put be⸗
bes. Foze theni:g the two kilhes he deuided amõg
them all. And ther all drdeate / a were latik⸗
fed. And ther toke vptwelue balkettes Full
ot the gobettes and os the kylches. And ther
that ate were about kzue thouland men.
And dtreyggt wave he cauled his ditciples
Fto go intothe brppe a to go oucr the water
„, bekoze onto Bethlayda, wh pll ye tent aware
Seater the people.“ Andatione as hr fabfenethem
wild. awape , he departed into a moda ne to pray
. And when euẽ was come the thyppe was
in the middes ok the lee / a he alone on lande
andhe lawe thé ndnd ure the
wynde was coͤtrarr vnto the. And aboute the
de Cbefbusth fourth quarter oF the mght he came onto
quarter is the hem malbinge ops tye ſee / and wolde haue
dio, watehe as patted by the. they lawe him walk ynge
in Wat. Fug. ed pö the kee ther fupporedithad bene a tpzite
kcrped oute ko they all lawe him / and were
atraped. And anone he talkie with the v lard
Gbnto them: be of goodchere / it t8 J / be not
Sith. xllh. d. Alraped. Andhe went vp onto them into the
Mippe a the wynde cealed / ¢ they were loꝛe
amaled in the felues beponde mealure / and
maruepled. Foz they remembꝛednot ok the
ioues /becaule theirhertes were blinded,
Andther came ouer / a went into p lande
of Benes weth/a dꝛue vp into the hauẽ. and
atone as they were cone out of the chyppe /
ſtreygbt they nnewe hi /a rane forty though
out all the reg von rounde about / o began to
carp about in beddes all that were tycke / to
e place where they hearde tell that he was.
And whither loeuer he entredinta tounes ct
ties / oz billages / they layne their ſycke in the
ſtreates / a pravenhim 6 they might touche ⸗
andit were but the edge okhis betture . And
as many as touched him / were tale. K


Wat xiiß. c.


vpõ thé to obferuc / as d walchinge of cuppẽg
cruſes / and ol baten vettels and or tables.

Chen afkedbimthe Pharites 2 Scribes z
‘why walke not thy difciples accozvng tothe
tradicions ofthe elders / but cate bꝛeed wyth
vnwellhen bandes? De anlwered a lard vnto
chem: well popbeticd efatas of vou ypocti= 5,
bez as lt is tozpttens* Chis people honozeth Sait
me with their lpyppeg / but their herte is karre
frd me: In varne they wozchip me, teaching
doctrines which are nothinge but ß comauns
dementes ok men. Foꝛ pe late the comaunde:
ment of God aparte / a obferue g tradtciors
ol men / as the wellhinge ol crules a ol cup ⸗
pes /a manx other Cuche lykethrnges pe do.

And he Cayde unto the well / pe cat atyoes
cömaundemẽt of God, to mapntapne poure
awnetradicißs. Fos Doles Capde:honoure —
chpkathet stp mother: g wh ofoeucr curkeh Chr wi,
father oꝛ mother / let hymdye £02 it. But ve Exod. rd.
dape:a ma ſhall tape to father oz mother Coz Leun erb.
ban whpch 18:6 thou delpzelt of me to helpe Bra.
the with i geuẽ God. And lo ve lullre him no
moꝛe to do ought Foz his father 02 his mother
mahynge the woꝛde ot Godot none ellecte /
though youre awne tradtcids whych ve ha⸗
ue ode pned. And manploche thinges do pe.

And he called all the people bnto him / and
fave vnto the herken onto me / euer one of g 5
vou e bnderttande. Chere is nothinge wyth Watz. v .
out a mi that can dekrie hym whe it entreth
into him: but tholethrngz which proctde out
ol him / are thole whych defple p man. Ak ene
man haue eares to heare / iet him hearẽ. And
when he came to houle awaye krõ d people /
bis difciples acned him o€ $ Cymitlitude, and
he fapne onto them: are ve lo without / vnder⸗
ſtandinge? Do pe not yet perceaue / d what
tocuer thynge from wythout / entreth in to a
man / it cãnot dekyle him / vecaule it entreth
not into bis hert but into p bellxragoeth out
intoß dꝛaught that purgech out al meateg?

And he lapde: ? 1.4 5th wih tube co⸗
meth oute ol a mãn. Foz ttõ with in / euẽ out
ol the herte of mẽ pꝛoceade eupll thoughtes /
adudutry / foꝛnicaciõ / murther / theelt / coue⸗
toulnes / wickednes becepte / vnclennes /a a
wicked eye blalphemt / pirde kolpcbnes:all
chele cupli chinges come (cd Win / ¢ delle a
ma. Andtrom thence he role a weet intothe auth. w.


ich borders ok Cyꝛe & Ordon: g entred into an


except they walche / they eate not. andmanx
* piberdpingesther be which ther haus taken


boute/a a wolde ß no man chuldhaue knowẽ.
But he coulde not be hrd. Foz a certarne wo
man whole daughter hada toule lpzite heard
of him a came d tellathrs kete. che woman
was a Grete oute of S pꝛophenicia / and he
belought bim that he woſde caſt out ß deuyll
oute ok her daughter. And Fetus tape vnto
her:let the child zen kyzlt be feed. F ey itis not
mete to take 6 chelbzens bꝛeed / and 5 eae


l. c.


ah rde.
3


Sith st.


kee gt
Mati


Of. S. M


Bt onto whelpes. Sheantwered etapoorito
him: euẽ fo Maſter / neuerthelelle/ } whel⸗
pes allo eate vnder the table or 6 chyldzeng
Crom And he lapde vntoher:koꝛ this laxinge
go thy wave / the deupll is gone out of thy
daughter. And when dhe was come home to
er houle / che koundethe deuyll Departed, ¢
er daughter lyinge on the beed.
＋ And he departed agayne krö p coſtes of
Cyĩe and Spoons came vnto the lee ot Ga
Ile thoꝛow the myddes ot the coltes of the. x.
opties. And they bꝛought vnto hym one that
Was dete ¢ ſtanibzed in bys tpeche / 4 pꝛayde
im to put his hande vpon him. Andhe tone
im a fide trom the people /a ee Fingers
in his caves a dyd (pvt ¢ touched his tounge
Kloked vp to heauk gebb bed lard onto
him: Ephatha / chat is to tape / be opened. And
ftrepaht waye hys eaves were opened / the
ſtringe ot his tounge was looled / and he lpa⸗
ke plapne. and he comaunded them that they
ſhulde tell no man. But the moꝛe he koꝛbad
them / lo moche the moare a greate deale ther
Laue it: and Peda b tele
attonped/Cavinge:* Pehath done all thrnges
well / and hath made booth the dete to heart
and the domme tolpeane. K


le of the leuen loues. jaritesathe
bites Gheteuen of the peer 3


Bricctor)
4. hasan


ache,
inhis tprece g cärdrwhp doth this geitdtacts
call Werelp J Cape onto pou / ther
Mall no figne be geuen bnto thys genevacts:
Andhe lelte them and went into the Hyp a⸗
gapne / and departed ouer che water.
Andtherhad forgotten to tate bzeed with
é/ nether had thepin p Wyp wyth thẽ moze
en one loole. Ind he charged them layinge re
HCTake hede / a beware of the leuk of Phas Mat roads
Elles / a ofthe leue of Herode. Ind thepreato Lane h. 3
nedamoͤge them felues layinge: we haue no
bꝛeed. And when Felus knewẽ that / he lapde
vnto the: whytale ve thought becaule ve ha
ue no bꝛead: perceaue ve not pet / nether vn⸗
derſtande: auc pe youre bertes pet biynded
Haue ve eyes and le not: a haue pe rares and
eave not? Do pe not remembze: When
yake.b.loucs amòge. v. h. ow inany bat
kettes ull of bꝛonẽ meate tone peop? hey
fapde vnto him / twelue. When J bzake. 0.
amonge iich. . How many bathectes of the
leuinges of bꝛonen meate toke ve vy; hey
larde / euen. Andhe lapde onto them how ig
e ee not??

T. Indhe came to Bethlapda and they g
broughta blinde ma vnto him, ö delpꝛedhim
totouche him. Andhe caught pbiinve by che
hande / and leade him out of che toune / a kpat
in his eves g put hys handes vpon hym / and
athed hym whetherhe law ougbt. And he
lokked vp and fapde: Ale chemen: ko Ale the 4-4
wallte / as they were trees. Alter thathe put
his handes agayne bpon his eyes / and made
him lee. Andhe was reſtozed to his light / and
fale euery mũ cleriy. And he lent him home
tohys houle layinge: nether go into the tous
ne / noꝛ tell it to en in the toune. E

And Fetus wet out a hys dilciples into 8
tounes that longe to the citie called celarea


0
to


a 15
ter tote him a lrde / and


Mak. xl. bs
und. xd.


Cal. tale


Golpels the fame call tau
it pꝛolet amã vibe Huid
g lole his awne ſoule:oꝛe


Cbetranckigurgcton Chetunattche is hecled. Che
Se we ou be the greateſt. Ditencesare


m.
ih wee came doune krom the hyll / he


it they chulde tell no man nd they dept

tplithefonne ofan wes fomnepthozow Galle be wolde not p eny
hepkepte man huldhaue knowe it. For he taught his

unded one dilcpples / glapde vnto the: che tonne ot ma Patric.
krö deeth agarne Walde deilucred ineo Hhandes of m/ cher ute
packed hym tapinge: Mall krllhrmg after p he is kylled he wall
crybes / that Belxas arpte agapne the thrddaye But ther wiſte ,
Ctoered e layde onto not what p fapinge meat / a were afrapedto


charged them / tha
what they had sene
re rplen krom deeth agapne. Ande
that fapinge with them / an
ok another / what ö rylt
ſhuldmeane: Andthe
whythen Saye the S


zyten ol hom.

And he came to his dicclples ¢ lawe moche
people aboute them. and the Sacrpbes drl⸗
putpnge with chem. And ſtrepght was
en they behelde hymi / were al
bm / s lalutedhrm. And he faye


Ol S. M


teaueth me. And wholoener receaueth nie /
receaueth not me / but him that ſent me. K
John anlweredbhim Capinge: + Maſter /
#F wetatwe one cattinge oute deupisinthyna>
me / which koloweth not va a we koꝛbade him
becauie he koloweth vs not. But Jelus lard
koꝛbid him not. Foꝛ ther is no man that call
do a mpꝛacle in my name / that can ipghtel
fpeake eupll ok me. iWholoeuer ts not Agal
vou / is on poure parte. Ind wholoeuer Malt
geue vou a cuppe of water to dꝛynne koꝛ my
names lake / becaule ve belonge to Chzpite/
betelp i Cape onto pou / he Mall not loole hig
sobattocnee *yewarde. And wholoeuer tall offende one
doonefor chute OF thete Iptelons, that beleucinme, ie were
ine halbe better kor hym / that ampiſtone were hanged
rnded with aboute bys necke / and that he were calt into
nd dach be OE fee, Iherkoꝛe yr thy hande otlende the /
denden bo. cut hymok. Ftis better kor the/ to entre ins
Sto lyke maymed/ then hauynge two handes
go into bell / into Epze that neuer thalbe guẽ⸗
ched / where their woꝛme dyeth not / and the
kbzeneuer goeth oute. Lykewyle vkche fote
offende the / cut bpm ok. Foꝛ it is better for
the to go halt into Ipfe / then haupnge two
fete to be caſt into hell / into kyꝛe that neuer
Malbe quenched: where their wozme dveth
not / and the fyꝛe neuer goeth oute. Euen ſo
pkthrne epe offendes / plucke him oute. It ig
better £02 the to go into the kyngedoniẽ ol
God wyth one eyẽ / then hauynge two eves
to be caſt into hell fyꝛe: where their woꝛme
dpeth not / a the yꝛe neuer goeth oute. K
bb erün⸗ „, CHEE man therfore albe faited w
kenne, Fre, And eucrytaceifpce walbe featoned
bos worde lalt. Dalt is good. But yr the faltbe vnlaue
xy / what tall pe faite hermit: Sorthat ye
haue faltin youre felues:¢ haue peace amõ⸗
ge youre Celues/one with another.


bg SA] Md he role from thence and went
rtr. a. al into the cooſtes of Furie thzough
che region that is beponde Joꝛdan

4 andthe people relozted vnto hym

A krerche:and ashe was wont / he taught the


Fie agarne. And the Pharples cameandathed -


e
o put awape to pꝛoue him.
rat ri. a. And he ant wered and da yd onto them: what
fare. DyD Maclkes byd poudo⸗Andther Capde Wo⸗
Les fuſtred to pte a teſtimonpall of deuoꝛ⸗
ſement / and to put her awaye And gelus an


wae: Sweredand layd onto them: Fozthe hardnes


ol poure hertes he wrote thys precept onto

a5. b. and voll. But at the tpꝛſt creacton Goo made thé
2 man and woman. And fo thes thonges
g. Sake Mall man leue his father and mother a


a 3 a
arcke, xix.
bybebphys wife and thertwapne thatbeone i
flecche. So then art they now not twayne
but one fete, qherfore what God hath
coupled / let not man ſeparat.

Im in the houle his dylcpples acled hym
agapne of that matter. And he lapde vnto the:
Bholoeuer putteth awape his wyke a ma-
rpeth another / bꝛeaketh wedlocke to her⸗


cher came one runnynge and kmeled ko him / dpgeh re v
Gathenhymgood Maſter / what chan do / Lune xv. d.


gelus and wered a ſayde: Wade fapebnto
pou / ther is no man that foꝛlakẽ
bꝛethꝛen / oz lyſters / oꝛ father/ 02 mother / oꝛ
wyke / other chyldꝛen / o landes ko my lane
ij and the


l.


The Gotpell HES, Marche, k.
iy wolde not fufive thatenyman carpen a bel: And mozcouerbe tene bnto the another tet?
fro Gemystaitnotiteonpboute Gabe pen, brennenden
5 e. And dul. e. o them / eis it not wit: my houle ed / and bent him agapne alltoreupled and
eee eee Good comfogte: rpke be caltety th be a calle éheboute of paver onto all nacion?
But pe haue made ita den ol theucs,
Andthe Scribes and hye pieſtes hearde
it and lought howe to deſtroye him. Foz they
; * feared hym / becaule all the people marueled
(8 doctrine. And when euẽ was come he
wahrt. b. wẽt out okß cite. And in ß moꝛning as they
patted by / they ſawe the Epage tree dꝛxed vp


. tee drpeth
e eee ene.
0 Uher ch Thera.


bpthe rotes. And Peter remembꝛed / a layne
onto him: maſter / beholde / pkigge tree which
thou curledeſt / is widdꝛed awape. Ind gelus
ant wered a fapde onto thé: haue cdfpdens in
God. T Gerely J fave bnto vou /p wholo⸗
euer call fave onto thys mountapne: take
awaye thy leite / z caſt thy tele into the fee a
all not wauer in his herte / but hall beleue
thole thinges whych he lapeth thall come to


oute oF thebpneparde, What challthen the
Lorde of the vineparde doꝛ He will come and
deſtrope the tenaũtes / z let out the bine yarde
to other. Haue pe not redde thys lerypture:


Che ſtone whych the bylders dyd relule / is Pal erb
mabe the chele ſtoone in p cozner: thys was Wehr,


done of the Loꝛde / and is meruelous in oure
eves, And they went about to tale hym / but
they keared the people. Foz they perceaued
chat he lpale thattymilituveagayntt them.


D paſſe / whal toeuer he lapeth / chalbe done to 0
U And ve te fae F Wann ane ien p ei eb Wach. rg.
ovo? Chel and bunge hem. And vt enpman la farbe. pe del pze whe ve prape / beleue z ye chalhau it onto him certayne oH ha ach. uh. |
C a dope at — andi calbe done bite pou. an when ve nes with Herodes leruantes / to ane hum in Lune xx .de.
Mande prape ere pebauc aneh his woꝛdd· And alone as they were come they :
agapntte enpma:p youre father allo which lad vnto hym: matter we hnowe that thou B
n is in heuẽ / maye koꝛgeue you voure trelpalz arte true / a catelt koꝛ no ma: ko thou conty- |
‘pecan that 5 foal rank of ane Ne er Blace wbercino waves met ere rd nen gra AndtheycameagaynetoFerutale.*and derelknotHocave of me/but ceachert p waße
in the baptime that J chalbe baptiled Anddiuers ofthe tyat ſtode there / Cayo onto Wahre. as he walked in dtẽple / ther came to himthe ok Gon trulp. J ft laufull to pape tribute to
in? And they rapde vnto bym: chat we can, them: what do ve loolpnge the coolte: And zohn. ru. bye Ppꝛeſtes / 5 Scribes /a F elders lad Cefar o not- Dught weto gene o ought
eluß kapde Into chem: pe Wall deynche ol ther tard vnto chem euen as Fetus had com⸗ vnto him: by what auctonte doeſt thou chele we not to geue Pe bnderſtode chelr fimula-
§ e csp that H daltozpncke of ap baut tic maundenthe Andthey let them go. And ther thinges? a who gaue ß thys auctoꝛite / to do ctor a lapde vnta chem: iw hy tempte ve mer
led wych che baptyme that Achalbe bapeſced bought the coolte to Jelug land catke their 1 elus ant wered a layde vnto Binge me a pen / y J mape le it. And wey
in: but to ſyt on myrpaht hande and on my garnietron him: a he fate ypõ him And mant 25 J willalfoathe of pouacertayne thinge brought. And he karde onto them: Whole 8
iplte hande is not myne do geue / but to them fpzeve theirgarnientes in wape Other cut g antwere ye me / and z will tel vou br what tors mage and luperlerypcpon? And they
koꝛ whom it is prepared, doune bꝛaunches of the trees / a Krawed thé é auctoꝛite J dothelethynages. Che baptime faydontohim / celars.aAndzelus antwered
And when the. . hearde that ther bega to inthe wape And ther that went betore AND donn . Okmen o, OF John / was it kromheuen oz Kok men⸗! and tarde pntochem: Cher geue to Celar on rh b.
Wach. r. bifoapne at James anh de ohen ene thep that folowed/cryed faping:* Horanna: tein wary Sa ecm. en ther couse ince urs that tohych belongeth to Cefar: and to God go ath hte
led them vnko him / and kapde to them: pe kno blelled be he that cometh in the name of the te. ſapinge: vf we Mall tape kö heuen he well that which pertepneth to chod. Andthey mer Cay
we ß ther which femetobeare rule amonge Lozde. Bleed be the kingdome that cometh lape / wih then dyd ve not beleue hyme but r uelled at hin. 8
the gentyis / ragne as loꝛdes ouer the. And in the name of himehatis Lozde ok oure fa we chall kaye / or men: then keare we people Chen came p Saduces unto hym / which
they that be greate amonge chem exercple ther Pauid Bolanna in the pelt. Foꝛ all men counted John / chat he was a be⸗ lape ther ia ng vefureccyon, And they acked 1
auctozite ouerthe. So wall it not be amdge Andthe Lande entred into Jerulalẽ a into die bszophete.Andcheranbwered e lardönto bemifapinge:*Matter/ Motes wroote onto aneh
Pou / but wholdetier ok vou wribe greate the teple. And whe he had loned round about Getusre cannot tell. Ind Fetus antwered/ ps vr enp mans hotherdpe K leue bys wöke went nb .
amöge vou / halbe youre miniſter. And who vponallthenges and now the cue erde was And fapd bntothem:mether will J ken you by beh vnde him and leue no chyldzemthat then J


loeuer wilbe cheke / halbe ſeruaunt vnto all. come / he went out onto Bethang / wyth che t auctoꝛite J do there thinges. bys brother chuld take bys wyle and reple
heke/ w 5 hang / wych th what auctonte A dothele thinges. F. en eee


Foz euen the tonne or mã came not to bemp⸗ twelue. Ind on che mozowe when they were d = N

__ nidtvedontocbuteominttter/ andtogeuehis come out kro Bethany he bungred / @tpien a 3 Sd e bed h ea he baun ene, Pethzemandehe Evatt ebnen wre and whe
Gipte koꝛ the redempeion or manx. vel pgge tree a karre of hauinge leues / wee p . Aigte ME te ghoceites mutt be elkewwed/ offeing of pore wedowe he dped leeke no teen behynde hym. And the te
Math. re, And tiher came co Hierlco. And as he wet to le whether he mraht kpnde en chinge ther tooke m Mats Bry Che. rh. Chapter. conde tohe hps and dpedmether leekt enp teed
Aube. blitg. oute oe picrico with bis dilciples cagreat on. But when he came therto / he founde no xt. 2 ad hebegannetotpeake vntothk Andchethvwelphe wyle. Andteuenhadher
* nombze of people: Barthimeus the tonne ol thinge but leues:koꝛ the tyme of kygges was bed rd 70 limilitudes. A cettarnemd and leekt no feed behynde them. Laſt ot all
cchimeus which was binde / late by the hve not pet. And gelus antwered and larde toit. * E 1 ted a vyneparde / a cõpaled it han the wyle dyed allo. In the relurreccvon then
wapes ide beggynge. And when he hearde neuer man eatetrute of the here alter whyil 5.2. e a oddeyned a wyne pꝛeſſe / a whẽ they Mall ryte ãgapne: whole wyke Malt


bylta 512 it. And let it out tohyye vnto he be or them? Foꝛ leuen had her to wple.

5 dutbadmẽ / a wẽt into a ſtraũge coũtre. And Fetus ant wered and lapde vnto them: Ire ve
Whe che tyme was come he kent toß tenaütes not therk oze deceaued and vnderſtande not
u keruaũt / p he myght receaue or the tenaüte che leryptures nether the power ol God? ¢
oF herute of che bpneyarde. Andthercaught Lor whenther chall ryle agarne nomdeeth
pm 8 bet hint / and tent him agarne emptpe. R
7 . . nge


that it was Jellis ol Ha zareth he began to b woꝛde ſtandith. Andhis dilciples hearde it
erpe and tolape: Fetus the lonne or Bauid / And cher came to Jerutalem. And gelus
haue merey on me. And manprebunedhem / wentinto the templẽ / a beganne to catt out
that he ſhuld holde hys peace. But he cryed the lellers and byers in the temple / a ouer⸗
the mooꝛe a greate deale / chou donne ot Ba⸗ thzewe che tables of the money chaungers
ud haue mercy on me. And Jets ove deri / andthe Roles of chem that colde .


Che Gopell


the angels which ave inhegus. As touchrng
the derd / that they Mall ryle agarne:haue xe
not vende in the boke of Moles / howe in the
bulche God lpake vnto hym laringe: Jam
the God ol Abzaham and God ol Ataac/ and
the God of Jacob: He is notthe Podok the


bee deen e. Peare ther⸗
0 aca 5 ea
aeuesrione e id her gane snc of the Socepbes that


hadhearde them ditputpnge to geder / a pers
ceaued that he had ancwered them well / and
alked hymn: tolyych is the fyatte of all the cõ⸗
e et
ite of all the cõmaundementes is.

dab erg. Alraelek he Kode @od/is one Lowe. And
weutvia, dhou chaltlouetze Loꝛde the God wrth alt
thphert / and wych all thy loule / and wth all
thy mynde / and wyth all thy ſtrength. chops
Leut. rir. h, (the krete comaundment, And he keconde
Bathcrgd. 18 llt bnto thys: Chou chalt loue thy negh
Momä. rid. c. bour as thy ſelke. her is none other com⸗

Gala v.. maundmenk greater then there,

Andthe Socrpbe lapde vntohim: wen ma⸗
ter / thou hact lapde the truthe / that ther is
one God¢ that ther is none but he. And to lo⸗
ue him with all the herte / with all mende
Kwith all the loule / 4 wyth all d ltrength: a
to loue a mans nerghbour as hym lelke / s a
greater thinge then all burnt ockeringes ¢ fa

un Thou art crikiceg. And whe Fetus awe p he anlwered
hot karre from dilcretlp/ he lade vnto him: ar Chou arte not
the hyngbonte karre krom the hingdome of God. And no ma
Shen hug here alter that pur elle hrmenpquenion.
„ wledge od And Jelus anlwered andlapd / teachinge
knowledge ofs
iwo k lar: . in the tẽple:how lave the Scrpbes v Chzpſt
i 2291 50 Pd Loire ter 102 7 ewe
intpyzed with the holpgoolt/ lapde⸗Khe Log
fue Mamet? lade to my Loꝛde / irt en mp trabt bande


rd. iß. b.


Ng mae


fa
cat moacein chen all dep which bate cafte


into chetreaturp, Foꝛtheyal dyd cat in ol them that g eue ſoucke in


their tupertiupte: but the de her poüerte vnd
cat in all g We had / euen all her lluinge. E
Che ende ot the woplde, The daye and the hoi
SFinttowens esate oe vege ee
Gabe. ki Chapter. + ,
ö 5 fe L
lof hys dylcyples capde onto bpm: Baerga;
Malter / le what tones / and what Lee
Bbylopnges ate bere. And Fetus an⸗
eredand karde bnto him Depſt chou thele
greate byldinges:? Chere ſhall not be leette
one (tone vpon a nother / that tall not be
Chrowendoune, Ind as he tate on mounte
Olxuete / ouer agapyne the temple / Peter / a
James and John / and Andzewackedyrmle⸗
Aetlp: tell vs when hall thele thinges be~
And what is the fpane when all thele thing
walbe kulkylled: And Zelus andwered them /
and began to lape:; ta Laie
ceaue you. Foz many dail come in my name er
lapinge:g am hilt / a hal deceaue many.
When pe chall heare of warre and txdin⸗
ges ot warre / be ye not troubled . soz koche
thinges mul nedes be. But the ende is not
pet. Foꝛ ther hall nacyon aryle agaynſte nas
on and kyngdome agavntte Kyngdome.
ind ther ſhalbe erth quakes in all quarters /
and tampchment and kroubleg. Cheie are the s
begynnynge of tozowes.“ But take pe hede Zahn tl
to poute leſues. Foꝛ ther Mall bꝛinge vou vp
to che countels and into the cynagoges and
ve ſhalbe beaten: ze and ſbalbe bought bes
foze rulers and hynges fo2 np late fo7 ate⸗
Aimontall onto them. And the Folpell muſt
Ne nente e a n Sah ee.
ut when the pleade vau and pꝛelent von Lage pre;
talieno thought alcpehande what pe Wall true


ſapt / nether pmagton:but whatloeuer is gee m4


uen vou atthe lame tyme/ that ſpeake. soz
it Hall not be pe that call ipeane but the
holy gooſt. Ve andthe bzother tall deliucr
brother to deeth / and the father the ſonne /
the childzen hall ryle agarnſte their fathers
and mothers / and wall put them to deeth.
And pe Hall be hated of all men koꝛ my naz
meg lake. But wholoeuer Hall endure vnto
the ende / the fame chalbe fate. '
: e et che abbominacyott Sat. rug. A
fest e toheneth befolacton/wherotisfpowe Lube d.
pDantel § prophet / ande where it ought Bunte. ·
not / let him p redeth vnderſtäde. Chen let the
J bein Furie fic to the mountarneg. Andlet
hymthat is onthe houle toppe not delcende
doune into the houle nether entretherin to
fetche eny thynge oute of hys houle. Andlet
him 5 is in $ telde / not tourne backe agayne
vnto the thinges which he leekt behrnde him
foꝛ to take bys clothes wythhrm wochall
be then to them that are wyth chride / and to
daxes. But
pꝛare /


ie ede let eny man de Sat rasa


Ok S. M


9. b.
Rech e.


bel
E


one ende of the woꝛlde tothe other.
Larne atymilitude ok d kygge tree Whe
bis bꝛaũches are pet tender K hath bꝛought
D forth leues / ye hnowe that lonimer is neãre
So in lyke maner when ve te thele thynges
come to palle:vnderſtand / chat it is npe euen
at the doꝛes. Merely I Cave bnto vou / 6 thys
ebene er thal not pace / tyll thefe thinges
done. Heuen and erch Mall pate / but x


andalen anoyntetb brit. Che eter 1a
Tea een deren een any
other thynges that were demaunded of Lilt,
Che. rij. Chapter. K
GA [Miter two dapes kolowedelter / and
che dapes of lwete bꝛeed. Ind the


arcke. 1
ol Simon p leper / euẽ as he lace at meate /
ther cam a wom hauyng an alabaſter boxe
of oyntmẽt called narde / that was pure and
coftip:e We bꝛake the bore a powꝛed it on is
heed. Andther were fone p were not cötent
in thẽ lelues /e lapde. what neded this wacte
ol oyntment? Foz it myght haue bene loolde
Foz moze then thꝛe hundꝛed pens at bene geuẽ
vnto ß pooꝛe. and ther grudged agaynſt her.

And Fetus lapde: tect her be in reeſt / why
trouble pe her? phe hath donen good wolte
on me Foꝛ pe Mall haue poze with vou alt
wayes : when loeuer ye will ve mape do thé
good: but me pe ſhall not haue alwapes.
She hath done p che coulde: che came a fore
hande to anopnt my body to hys buryinge
warde. merelpz Cape onto pou:whereldeuer
this S olpell halbe pꝛeachedthoꝛow out the
whole woꝛzlde:thts allo p che hath done / ſhal
be rehearled in remembꝛaunce okher.

And Fudas Fleavioth one of the twelue / B
went awape vnto the hpeſdzelteg / to betrape Wat. erl. b.
bim onto them. when they herde thar / they Lune fta
were gladde / and pꝛompled that they wolde
geue hym money. And he fought / howe he
myght conveniently betrape him.

ind the Epette dave ok Cwete bzeed / when
men offers palcall iambe / his dilciples layd
vnto him: where wilt thou p we go g peepa⸗
re / that thou mayſt eate the efter fambe? Ind
he lent forth two or his dilctples / g layde vn
tothem. Go pe into p cptte/ether Mallama
mete pou berpng a pitcher of water / kolowe
him. And whither ſoeuerhe goeth in / laye ye
to the good mã of p houle / the matter athety
where is the geett chambze / where J tall
cate the eſter ſambe with mydilctples. And
he wyll ſhewe pou a greate parlour / paued
and prepared; there mane ready kor vs. And
bis difciples went koꝛth and came to p cptie
and kounde as he had layde onto them: and
made ready the elter lambe. ;

And at euẽ he came with the. rij. And ag g.
ther kate at bozbe and ate Lelis lade wie⸗ och.
rely A lape ynto vou: that one of pou challbe⸗ saya lte os
trapẽ me which catech with me and they be⸗⸗
ganne to moꝛne /a to ſapeto him one by one:
ig it J: And another ſayde: is it: He an⸗
cwerẽd a layd onto them t is one ok the. rij.
and the tame deppeth with me in the platter.

Che konne ol man goeth / as it is wꝛptten ol
pnt: but wo be to that man / by whome the
lonne ok man is betrayed. Good were it fog
him: pr that man had neuer bene bone.

And ag thep ate/Felus tote bzeed / bleged


ri,


and bꝛake andgaue to them andtayd: Cake /


eate / this is my body Andhe tone h cup / gaue
thannes / a gaue it (othe / a ther all dzancke
okt. Andhe layne onto them: hys is my
bloude of thenew Ceſtament which is ne
0;


b.


The Golpell


kor many. Merkl cave vnto pon: J wylt
dzincke no mooꝛe or this krute ok the vyne /
vntyll p daye / J dzincke it new in ß keng⸗
Donte of God. And whe therhad layde grace:

they went out to mount olpuete.
ind Fetus Capo onto the: All ve thatbe ok⸗
fended choꝛow me this night Foꝛ it is wꝛittẽ:
Seth. yvi. Apu Smypte the chepherd / a che chepe Hal-
Luberrg. d. be tcattered⸗But arter s A amrplenagapyne/
John xiß.d. J will go into Salile betoze vou Petertard
vnto him. And though all men Mould be offen=
ded / pet wolde not J. And Zelus lapde onto
him: erelp I Cape onto the / this da ye euẽ in
this night betoze d cocke crowe twyle / thou
Walt denpe metheple. And he lpake boldlper:
2 no / yt J ſbulde dye with the / J wyll not dene

Wat. rrbld. herwple allo fapne ther all.
alee 1 into a place named Gethte
mant. Andhe lapde to his dilciples: Ort ye
here toh yl d go aparte & pꝛape. Andhe tone
with hun Pecer/James ¢ John / a he began
to ware abated a to be in an agonye alapd
Onto them: Mp loule is perp heuy euen vnto
the deeth / tarp here and watche. And he went
Eoath a lptle and tell doune onthe grounde a
h athlrebt. d. 55 i were ponies oure might
age rige  patte trd him. Andhelarde Abba kather all
ihrnges are pottbic onto ? take awape this
cup from me. Peuerthelelle not that J well:
but that thou wilt / be done.


Andhe cam a kounde the Slepyng/e tayoe
to Peter: Simon llepeſt thou: Coüldeſt not
Ethou watche with me one houre: watche ve /
gpꝛape leeſt ve entre into kẽ ptacton / Pipzete
ts redy / but the kledh is weeke. Andagayne


he went awape g pꝛapde andlpake the lame
woꝛdes. Andheteturned a kode thé a Clepe
agapne Foz their eyes were heupmether wilt
andolepe hece (hep what to anfwerebint . Andhe came the
forth and taue thyzde Cyne a lapde vnto them tlepe ** bens
jour eate/looke Forth / and tale voure eale / it is vnough. Che
at. xvid houre ig come / peholde d konne of ma halbe
delivered into d handes of lynnerg. Wyle vp /
let vs go. Lohe z betrayeth me / is athande.
And immediatly whilt he pet ſpale / came
Judas one ofthe twelue / ¢ Whim agreate
homber of people withlweardes and ſtaues
krom the hye Pꝛeſtes and Scribes a elders
And he that betraped bymbadgeuen them g
general token taping: wholoeuer; do küche /
he it is:take him A leãde him awaye warely,
And as fone as he was come he wet ſtreight
waye to him / ¢Capde vnto him: maſterma⸗
ftev/e hytied him. And they lapdetheir hades
on him / and tone hym. And one of chemthat
ſtode by / dzue out a twearde / and tote a ler
taunt Of chehve Pꝛelte / and cut ol his eare.
And Fetus antwered ¢ Lay vnto chem: pe
become out as onto a theke Wiweardes a W
ſtaueg / to to take me. A wasdayly with vou
5 *


inthe keple teachinge / z pe cone me not: bue
6 the fcriptures uid he kulkpiled. Andthey
all kozcoke him a ranne awape. And ther tos
lowed him a cevtapne yonge man / clotye in
Ipnné ppd the bare a the rongemen caught
bim a be leftevis tyne tleed from the nas
ned. And thepieenzetus lee Sy Seher,
Pꝛeſte ot allie tohim cam all Hhye Pꝛeſtes / Tune rrhe
and the elders / and the Scribes. And Peter Jen nen
Sa dhe great wape ok euen into the =
pallps of thebpe prette/andfat with the fer 1
uauntes / and warmed him kelke at the kyze.
And F hre Pzeſtes all b countell taught
koz witnes agaynſt gelu / to put himto death
¢ kounde noone. Vet many bare kalce witnes
agapnite' D
to gether. And ther arole certarne d bꝛought
falie witnes agaynſt him fayinge. we herde
him ape: J will debrope thys temple made
with handes / and with in thꝛe daves J writ
bylde another / made wythout handes. But
thelr witnes agreednot together.
And phpelte Pꝛeſte ſtode vp amögelt thẽ /
g alked gelus tapings: antwereſt thou nos
thinge? How is it thãt thele beare witnes a⸗
gaynſt dꝛàndhe helde is peace / a antwered
nothing Agapne d hpeſte Prete alkedhim
Elapde onto him: Arte thou Chath d tonne 3
ok the bleſſed: And Fetus Wen deren ba
ſhall ſe the tonne or ma Cyt on the ryght hand Lade. rag
ol power / a come in the cloudes of heauen.
Chen thehpeſt pretke renthts clothes ¢ layd:
what nede we eny further of wytnes: Je ba
ue hearde blacpheme / what thincke ye? And
thep all gaue kentence that he was worthy
ok deeth And tome begane to lpit at him / a to
couer his face / a to bete him with kiſtes / and
to laye vnto him / arede vnto vg. And the ler⸗
uauntes bolleted him on the face.

And ag Peter was beneeth in che pallys / i
cher cam one o€ $ wenches of ö byett veette: Teer
wh the lawe Peter warmynge him telt / zohn riß e
ſhe loked on him / s layde:waſt not thou allo 5
with Jelus of Nazareth? And he denyed it
lapig:3 hnowe him not / nether wot J what
thou la peſt. And he wet out into the poꝛche /
andß cocke crewe. And a damſell ſawe him:
gagayne beganne to tape to thẽ 5 ſtode by /
chis is one okthe. Andhe denpedit agarne.
Andanonc after cher that Kode by taxde
agapne to peter: ſuerly thou arte one ok thẽ /

Foz thou arte of Baltic / a thy cpeache agreth

therto. Andhe beganne to curlle ¢ to lweare ;

Capinge: knowe not thys man oF whom pe Path erde

cpeake. And agapne the coche krewe / Be MiReFN +

ter remembꝛed the woe that Jelus farde

vnto hint /befoze g rotke crowe twyle / thou

Se eee

Che palgon oe Che. al rr.
Ihe. Chapter. :


And


HIS.


gregacton ¢boundezeius g ledde
im awape a delpuered hem to Pilate. And
plate athenhym: arte thou the kynge of g
Ears he antwered and lard onto yim:
ou lapeſt it. And 6 hre pꝛeſtes accuſed him
gunsrogs: r manp thynges . wDbertoze Pplate atten
perro him agayne favinge:* Dntiwerett thou no⸗
thing? Beholde how many thynges ther lar
vnto ch charge Jelus vet antweredneuera
woꝛde to that Pplate merueled.
At that least Pylate was wont to delyuer
at their plealure a pꝛeloner:whloeuer ther
wolde delpze. Andther was one named Bar⸗
rabas / which lave bounde w them p made
inturreccion / a in the inturrecc von comitted
murther And the people called onto him / and
began to delpze accoꝛdynge as he had euer
done ontothem Pplate ankwered them and
faye: ill pe that J lowle onto pours yng
of d Fetes: For he bnewe F hebpePreltes
had delpuered hin of enuy. But p he pꝛeſtes
bad moued the people that he chulde rather
delpuer Barrabas vnto them.
nd Pylate antwered agapne / and ſarde
gtsrvg.o bnto er what well pe then chat J do with
Laerige bim whö ve call thekyng of the Lewes Ind
they cryed agayne:crucikye him Mate fayd
onto thé: what eupll bath be done; And they
erpedthe mo ue keruentlpe: Crucltie hrm.
And co Pylate wyllinge to content ß people
lowled them Wartabas and deltueredg eus
whé he had fcourged him / £02 to be crucified,
B. Andche Coudpers ledde hum awape into §
commen hall and called together the whole
multitude / a they clothed him with purple /
Kther platteda croune or tho nes a crouned
him with all / a begůne to lalute him Daple
Rynge of the Jeweß. And they fmotehpm on
the beed with a rede / and ſpat vyon him / and
woꝛſheped him.
And whe they had mocked him / they tone
the purple ol him / a put his awne clothes on
Suh spditd him and ledde him out / to ceucttehim.*and
pre. Wey compelled one that padled hr called t
mon of Cyrene (which cam oute ok the leide /
and was father of Alexander and Nukus)to
beare his crofie. And they bꝛought hem to a
qcPlacenamed Golgotha(tobich is by interpze
tacion/the place ofbecd mens ccoulles) and
they gaue him to dzinke / wyne mingled with
mypꝛre / but he receaued it not.
And rohen they bad crucpkled hym! ther
partedbis garmẽtes /cattinge lotes foꝛ the/
what euetyman chulde haue. And it was
aboute § chirde houre / z thep crucitied him.


And the tytle orhis cguſe was weytten: he
.


Martke -


bim two theueg: the one on the ryght hand

and the other an his lycte. And thẽ icupiute

was fulkiiled which lapeth che was counted ce

cher F wee bp taplen on init ,
Fannthey P wet by rapled on him: wag⸗ gary. Erie.

ginge bete herdes and tapinge:d wicht Nun el

that deſtropeſt the temple / and byldeſt il in

the dapes: laue typ reite / a come doune krom

95 crolle. L phewyle allo mockedhim p hre

zeſtes amonge them Celues with the Dert
bes a layde / he laued other men / him lelke he
cannot aue. Cet Chik the kynge ot Jerael
now deſcende krom the crolle / that we mape
fe and beleue. Andther that were crucplied
with hin / checked him allo.

And when p lixte houre was come darch⸗
nes arole ouer ail the erth vntpil the nynthe

oure. Andat the npnthe houre Fetus cryed

a loude vopce laxing: Clot / Elo / lamaal⸗ 8
bathant / which is pet be interpzeted: my Pc ria
Godmy God wh phat thou koꝛlanle me. Andy
lome ot thé that (ode by / when they hearde
that / lapd:beholde he calleth ko: Hellas. And
one ran and kelled a lponge kull ok veneger /
and put it on a rede / a gaue him to duncke /

Capinge:iet him alone / let va le whether he
drag will come and tale him doune. ‘

But Fetus cryed with a loude voyce / and as che vayle
Gaue bp the Gooſt And“ „the vayle ok che art ple rent
Fan incwopeces/ tro the toppe tog. on eer,

ottome. And when the Centurion whpch was a ceveen

ode before hym / kawe 5 he lo cryed a gaue cloth hat han
bp the gooſte / he fapoe: trulpthis ma wag p godin the teple
konne of God Cher were allo wemen a good ag hai
Wape of beboidynge bimsamonge who was e fromm ae
Mary Magdalen and Mary the mother ok or the tempie⸗
Tames the iptle / a of Fores / and Marpsda⸗ as dure cloche
lome which alfo when he was in Baltle/ fo: that dh
jowed him empnittred onto him and manp nh tye mute
ee came vp with him vntö from che veto?
Jeruſalem. 3 the chüͤrche.

And now whennyght was comelbecaue Che rencpage
ft tas the eué that gocth betoze che Cabot) garen aha
Joleph of Arimathia a noble Councellours tyroowes of
which allo loked Coz thekpngdonte ok God / Wales uwe
came ¢ wet in boldely onto Pilate / e begged bud nansdeea⸗
the body of geln. Ind Pilate merueleb hat regen fice
he wasalredpdeed/andcallenbnto hem there ones
Centurion/and acked of him / whether he had
bene eny while deed. And when he hnewe the
trueth of §* g enturton / he gaue the body to bug
Joleph. Andhe bought a Iennen clote/and ere ne o¢
tone him doune / and wꝛappedhim in the lyn an hudzeb men,

nde
nen clothe / and lapde hm in a tombe that
. oute of the fepulcre. and Marx
ier and ee behelde where
as lapde.


bugs rpfen agapre andgpered to the Apolen
Ke


The Golpell
K Golpell ok


b
Luke.


Math revit je
Heri, he a


Solo


Cy 2
the Saboth dape / he appered kyꝛſt to Mary
Magdalen / out of whom he cat leuẽ deupis

© And he went and tolde chem that were wi

him / as they mourned ¢ weapte Ind th

5 they herde that he was alpue and bad appes
Lube xxiſh.b red to her / vet they beleued it not.“ after. 15
be appered onto two of thẽ in a ttraunge ty⸗


gure / as they walked a went inta the counts Tepe . dane n?


trp. And they went x tolde it to the remnaũt.
And they beieued themnether.
I. Deter that / he appered onto the eleuẽ ag


they kate at meate: and caſt in their tech ter [sz
pnbeleke abaronesorberte:becaute ther be. 7


leued not chem which hadlene hum after hes

gp telueteccton.aind he lapoe bnto ehent-* Goo

ar aten e 8
0 al

krone dis wap elbe aued, Burhe f beleuety


4
ail ceeatuees “not habe den


Rion rene In myname thep (all cat out veupls/


@ hall Cpeake th newe töges /a Mall hpll ler
Sevres uno petbenbyinte ane Deol eninge?


¶ Th


ed. :
dn chebechinger al floine ehé thache


Oꝛ as moche as many haue take
inhande to compple a treates of
es / which are lurelx


krreche


at the dopnge: J determpned allo as fone
ag bad anche out plgently allehynges
fe Hegynnpng / chat then J wolde w2pte

ntothe good Cheophilus:ö chou mightelk
owe the certente of thole thinges wherot
thou aytetnfozmed,


Che cSceprion and byrth of Fo! baptit. Che


and Tacharp.


Ichs kraſt Chapter.


here was in the da
10 233 pr td


te Hall not hürte them Kherſpalllare their


handes on the lycke / a ther thall recouer.

So chen when the Loꝛde had cponen vn⸗
tothem he was receaued into heauen / a fate
him doune onß rynht hand of God. Andthey
went Forth / and preached euery where Ind
the Loꝛde wꝛought with them / ¢confpsmed
che woe with myzacles that kolowed. E
dad to e


onde ſtandynge an the


tare ofincente, And wh.


OES,Luke,


him / he wag abalched / z feare cam on him.
And the Angell lapde onto him: feare not


wyte Elizabeth Matt bearethe a tonne / and


nr W. Zachary ‘oz thy praperishearde:* Ano thy


thou ſhalt call his name Zohn a thou Halt
haue iope and gladnes /a many alt reiopce
at his byꝛth. Foꝛ he walbe greate in p cyaht
ofthe Lozd/¢ Mallnetherdsinche wyne ner
ftronge dzincke. Andhe calbe kylled with ö
oly goolt / euẽ in his mothers wombe:ama⸗
hy of the chyldꝛẽ ok Acrael wall he tourne to
their Loꝛde God. Andhe chail go befoze him
inthe lpzte a power a wellag / totourne the

to the chyldꝛẽ / and the


ind Heremembꝛeth mercy: and helpeth hys fer


ouer the houle ol Jacob Foz euer / and ol bys


kongdome chalbe none ende. :


xxiij.


Chen larde Bary pnto the angel: Bolv 0


hall this be / lerngz hnowe not a man: And


the angel anfwered ¢fayd onto her: The ho⸗
ip goott chall come vpon the / a the power ol
the hpelt tall ouer ſhaddowe che. Therkoze chene. y.
allo that holy thpnge whpch (halbe bome /
Walbe called the tonne of God. And beholde
thpcofen Elizabeth che hath allo conceaued
a lonne in her age. And thys is her lyrte mo⸗


neth / though tebe called barren: oz wit

God can nothinge be vnpochbleſand Mary)
lapde:beholde the ande mapden of ö Loꝛde /
be it onto me euen as thou bat lapde. Fand


the angel departed krom her.

I And Marx arole in thole dapes / a went
into the mountayns with halte / into a cytie
ol Jurte /a entred into the houle ol vachary /
Klaluted Ellzabeth. Ind it koꝛtuned / as Cis
zabeth hearde the falutacton of Mary / the
babe (p2dge inher bellp. and elizabeth was
kylled with the holy goolt / e cryed vw a loude
vopce / a ſa de: Bleſted arte thou amonge the &
wemen a bleed is the krute of thy wombe.
And whence hapeneth this to me that the mo
ther ol my Loꝛde chulde come to me: Foꝛ lo /
as foneas § vopce OF thy falutacté lownded
in myne cares che babe ipꝛange in my belly
koz iope And bleſled arte thou that beleuedſt:
koz thole tyonges fhalbe performed whych
. 0 f 0 ec Nane 55

v Cowie magnpepech the Loꝛde. And q
my lpꝛete reiopleth in God mylauiour, 1. Magnificat
$02 he hath loked on the pooze degre of hys
hande mapden. Beholde now Fro hence forty
wball all generactons calleme bleſſed Foꝛhe
pis myghty hath done to me greate thinges /
and holpe ts his name. And his mercy on thé
that keare him thoꝛow out all generactons.
He cheweth ſirkgth ; with his arme / he lcat⸗
tereth chemthac are proude inthe vmagina⸗ e erna
cpon of their hertes . He putteth doune the with his 2
niyghty from theirfeates / andexalteth thema. Che arme
ok lowe degre. He kylleth thehongry w goodie Kin as in
thrnges: ö fendeth awape the rpche emptye. Gia
Zee deu tedto oure father / Ib
ur as he pꝛompledto 2th *

ham and to hs fecde ko euer. And Mary reer he
above wyth her aboute a. ii monethes / and
retourned agapne to her awnehoule.

. Eltzabethes tyme was conte 5 the chuld
be derpuered / and the bought forth a lone.
And her nepghboures andhercoling hearde
tell how the Loꝛde had ſwewed great mercy
vpon her / and they retopled with her.

And it koꝛtuned the eyght dave: they came

to circumcple the chyld:and calledhys name

acharias / atterb name ok his father. ow

e it his mother ant wered and layde mat lo /
but he chalbe called gohn. andther Aber


8 22 2
2 watt
The Gofpell „Ol TAC canning PU
4 bcd ? tame by incppꝛacyon into the temp. tapinge that hefpake to the. Andhe went ‘
to her: Cher ia none olchrkrnne/chaltg na⸗ led Bechleem /becdite he was betzeboule e W ene . „6
med with chis name. And her made ergnes Ipna dane iwas wih ch arp bis. to chẽ· But his mother nie pt alithele thitiges
tobis father hot he wolde haue emcalled. pa eo wore which mae th cbyloe, inher bert. Ind Fetus increaled in wyldome
Andheatheafoswepting tables and woste Andie totuned wäilicher werechere ber ay ut en and age and in fauoute with God a man. E
faping:bisnameis John. Andthevmatuel⸗ ume was come that the ſpuide bedelluerer. gotten au g 5
kedall. Andhys mouthe was opened imme⸗ And the bꝛoughte kozth ber » kid begot⸗ love naß. The prochenge unpepme, and precbnment of John
n men r Lade bes.
God. Ind keare came on ailthem that dwelk gerwas ¢tapbe bim rm wi Fern ieee
nye onto them. And all chele aapinges were ther was no raume for them w chin $ pane. 4 Che. iij. Chapter. L
noplenabjoadecyzougbautall hehren anther tneve in en region mah Ste kpttene vere ofthe raygne of x
tre of Furie and all they thatherde thé larde bes abo je in the feld and — 15 * Ciberius the Emperoure / Pon⸗
Shem bp in thet hextes taping: whatmaner klocke bynpabt. Ld Ache ius Pylate beynge lektenaunt of
chylde thall this Woehe lune, J Berore beynge Cetrach
was with him. gt Gallle / and his bꝛother Pyulip * Cetrach aa cetrar eh
in eures and in the region oe Traconlteg 10 W lh.

and l ylaniah the Cetrach of Abylne / when
Anna and Capphas were the hye pꝛeltes the
woꝛde of God came vnto John the fonne ol
Zacharias in che wylderneg. And he came in
H to all the cooſtes aboute Jozdan/ pꝛeachyng

a the baptyme of vepentatice koꝛ the vemidton
hetes which were lens the twozle wangen ae n dee bene wen abe ln of kynnes ag it is tezptten inthe bone ok the
at we chuld be lauen krö dure ene⸗ be which che had bene a wedowe aboute. tt. ccogze @ favinges of Efaias p Pꝛophet which layeth


— by 11 1 alate vl. g
ehulpreache? lil. pere / which wentnener out ofthe teple / „Ehe vorce ora crrarin wpiderneg pzepare 30h.
e bu Cecued God vrch kainge and paper Pere of P om manehis pathesteapght, ue
oy lor a ubaht o dape. And the tame came koꝛih that Cuerpbatlep chalbe kylled / and euery moun⸗
e oe lame houre and pꝛapledche Londe /etpake kapne and hyn chalbe bzoughtlowe and cro⸗
dicht ohm to all that loned fog redempepon in ned thunges chalbe made ttreight:¢ d rough
t ih Bierulalemn. waxes Malbe made tmoth: G allkleche Wail


te the laueour lent ot od. E
Chen ſayde he to the people that were co⸗
. 5 me to be baptited ochim. * O generacion o h., asenevacit
i OF Bevo inva to comes ande grade de
. a0 ame: Bꝛunge Fozth due krutes ol m Wach. ih.
14 Me nd ali pbearbe it wondzedat thote 2 i repentaunce /a begpnne not to faye in youre
were tolde thẽ ol 1 5 lelues/ we haue Abzaya to oure father. Foz
Reptall thote ta eg / and pondered ; J Cave onto pou : God is able of thele ſtones
in herhert. Andthe chepherdes in an 1 Corepte bp chridzen onto Abꝛaham. How al⸗
rynge and laudpnge God fo; all = fo is the axe lexde onto the rote of the trees:
lo that euerytree which bꝛyngeth not foztls
＋ 6 good krute / halbe hewen doune / and calte in
the chat tothe kpze. 5
1 And the people acked him Capinge : nohat
wall we do then: He ancwered and layde vn
10 5 oe a oe 490 20 hy me ah bong
: b arte with hym that bath none: and he that
cle cumellion of Chuil Bow he was re ndefkectes 5 5 V
Sangre pirate e 2 t l bath meate let hm do iphewpte,
errot hin dete wes founde uche temple among gb 2b 105 Chen cam ther publicang to be baptiled /
te D a and carde vnto hin: Maſter / what Mall we
th ery chyide that 9 1 ty 1 do: And he layd onto them: requpꝛe no moze
neth —— ul. them fpr then that which is appopnted vnto pou,
err re") Che foudpoures Iphewyle demaunded ol
Sen him lapinge: and what ſhall we do? and he
5 karde vnco them. Do violence to no mam ne⸗
ther trouble enp ma wꝛongkullp: but be con⸗
tent with voure wages.
1 ewe As $ people were in a doute / and all men
e ee e
He oute of a is butines And ther onder ‘
Lacke of Bau whic beat before pe hadtenethe kone ale mabe Fee Se OE eet


The Golpell


thek an: g baptyte you with water but a trd-


gertheñ J cometh after mie / whole woe lat⸗
chet Jam not wosthr to vnloule: be wyll
baptite von with cheholr good ,a with Fore:
which hath bis kanne in his hande / and weill
pourge his klooze / a will gather the coꝛne in


ee But thetobis barne:but the: *chatie wyll bebourne wohnt


chalte wyll


wan
in Math. iin. e.
2


Path ißt. a.
acme


ath.t
780 0 x


wich Evrethat neuer halbe quenched And
many other thinges in his exhoꝛtacion pꝛea⸗
ched he onto the people.

en Perode the Cetrach ( when he was


Uppes wyke / and kaz all the eu pls which He
rode had done) added this abous all / and leyd
John in pꝛelon. :

And it koztuned as all ß people receaued
baptime(¢ when Telus was baptyled a bpd
pꝛape) p beaut was opened ¢ the holy goolt
cam doume ina bodely thape like adoucbpo
him / anda vopce came kromheauen faving:


Chou arte my dere lonne / in the do JAdelpte.
eae ech


um lelke was aboute thirty
pere ok age wh he beganne / beynge as men
Auppoled the forme of Joleph: which was >
fone ot Heli: which was the lonne of Ma⸗


wh
rebued o inn for evans eln teh BUF wh


“4


gelen Bei @ forine of eu: which was


je konne 17 which was p lonne of Jan⸗
na:which twas 6 fonne or Joleph: which was
the Conne of Matatthlas: which was d lonne
or Amos: which was the konne of Nahum:
which was the tonne of CCI: which was the
konne of Hag + whrch was the tonne ol
Magath: which was p lonne of Matathias:
which wag the konne of Hemei: which was
the Connie he Joleph: which was the tonne ot


f Juda: which wasp Conne of Johanna: which


‘ 151


was the konne ol Mhelta which was z lonne
fe ozobabel:iwhich was the fonne oF Da⸗
ten which was the lonne of Meri: whych
was the tonne of elch: which was p tonne
of Addtzwhich was § Conne of Cocam: which
was the lonne of Heimadami:which was
konne ok Her: which was the lonne ok Jelo:
which was the lonne ol heltezer : which was
konne Jozam: which was $ konne of Mat⸗
tha: which was p tonne ol Leui: which was


the tonne ol Simeon: which was the konne


ol Juda: which was z tonne ok Joleph: which


but by euerp woꝛde of God.

And the deupli tone him into an hye mofks
tapne / and ſhewed him all the yngdom of &
wozide euẽ in the twincklyng of an eye. Al

deupll fade vntohinnall this power will
geue the euerr tobit the glory ofthe sox
that is delxuered tome and to wholoeuer
wyll/ J geue it. FE thou therkoꝛe wylt woꝛ⸗
Spppe ime / thep Mhalbe all chyne. Jelus an⸗
lwered him and larde : hence krom me Spas
tan. Foz it is witten hou halt honoure e
and him oni lerue.
him to Jeruſalem /æ let him


was thefonne of Jonam: which was Stone YE ch


pd unc ich was p konne ok Peles:
ch was che tonne ol Menam: which was
the Conne ot Mathathan : which was d fonne
ich was the lonne ol Dautd:
was ehe kanne ok Felleswhich was the

konne of Obed: which was p conne of Booz:
which was tonne of Spalmon: which was
ye tonne ot Maalon: which was the Conne oF
iminadab: which was the fonne of Aram:
which was the konne of Elrom:wohleh wash


Seth fl.
,


dae oF bares: wölch was che fonne or air thor


be ſtaught in their tnagog


ded ol ali men.


pꝛeache ß Golpelitothe
me: to heale the Dokeboneaa renter 5
ipucratice to p keenethe cane bixnde /


But I tel pou of a truthe / many wyd⸗


4.


vi. d.
iche. vi. a.


dowes were in Flraelin $ dapes of Hei
wh heuyn was Hut theeveres food —
hethes/whé great kampſhmeẽt was though
out all the land / and vnto none of them wag


elyas Cent / laue in to Savepta b
fon vnto a woman aware wy me,


ep had

de OF

ep made

exe inthe
ree

pes

lawe that / he fell
1 100 0 krõ
‘Oz He was btter⸗


pany

with him.
eagonnche yew)

k ners Pe ug anlweredem fapoe vntothem:

ne Chey chat are whole nede not old philicton:

eee

but kynnt bn bebe ue


Leut. xh .
mee
hole dapes. 8
fame efpakeontoche atymélitude: No
areata mentee
rer 1
. e pecethac was tuen post
eth not wich the olde. Alto / nom
wyne into olde betlels . or ve
wyne bꝛeaketh thebettels/ €
e
wyne mutt be poured in
debe nd d borbate prefecucd, Alcon md den
man ipinge ibys eth old wyne Sane ware a ante.
apaltte:etougye W newe Foz he lareth / olde is pleafaunter,
i 7 Iuche the eares of
ende by  enecrctetd he argen thatpluche the cates Of
e Geseeneaeemastacm
tearheth to do god
7 Che. vi. Chapter.
Shnppen denen afterSaboth/ 4
that


aves of come / a ate and rubbed
eirhandes. And rerta


wave


Math te.
hn


When J.

deinen hen ee
been 0 7 wat ed and thep w
‘stone When hom be went nta he Houte of 600/


— 0 hald wed bꝛeed /
8 on erth / atoke andate the loues otaloln bin ul


be. K.
forth andlawe a
ech d. 5 Ard alter baat nr pen


latb tri


choꝛow the come keld / ach- ut
db dune piuckedthe cart ld.


4]


Ok. S. Luke,


mddeg. Andhe stole g ſtepped lozthe. Chen It ye loue thẽ which loue vou: what thanle

fapoe Jelus vnto the: willathe zou a que⸗ ave pe worthy of? sez the very Cynners loue

ton: iohether is it lawkull on the Saboth cheir louers. And vk ye do koꝛ them whych do

Daves to do good oz to do euill to laue ipte oꝛ Foz vou: what thanckte are ve woꝛthy of? Foꝛ

kor topeſtrope it: And he beheldethemall in che very lynners do euẽ the lame. Ak pe lende

cõpalle /a cabde ontothe mã: Stretche kozth to them of whome ye hope to receaue: what

chr hande. And he dyd loꝛa his hande was re⸗ chancke Mall ve haue: koꝛ the bery lynners

oed / a made as whole ag p other. And then lende to tynners to receaue as moch agapne.

4 were kylled kull ofmadnes / a comuned one UPyerfoze Aouc ve youre enempes / do good k

90 W another / what ther myght do to Jelu. E lende / lokynge koꝛ nothynge agavnes¢voure

Ss cant fortune n thole Dayes/thatheiwet rewarde chaſbe greate / and pe walbe p chyl⸗
5 out into a mountapne foztopz fs dꝛen ok the hyeſl: toꝛ he is hynde onto the vn⸗

44 but into koztopꝛarpe / and cött che hre: ko he is unde bnto the bn⸗

bade nued all neght in pꝛaper to God. And as lone Rynde andto che eur.

bla as it was da pe he called his dilctples / and ob . Be pe therfore mercplull / as youre ka

760 ities p bouche: e med 50% be iudged. Conden me not: and ve Mall not be

2 Andꝛew his bꝛother. James and John / Phie condemned. Foꝛgeue / and ve halbe forges,

itpand Bartlemew / Wathew s Khomas Geue / and it halbe geuen onto vou: good

ies § Connie ol Alpheus ¢ Simon called mealure / pꝛelled doune / Make to gether and

elotes and Judas James lonne / a Judas runnynge ouer / wall men geue into poure

Ilcarioch / which fame was the traptour.


in che plapne elde with the company of bys nd he put koꝛth a kynulitude onto them:
dilciples /a agreate multitude of people dut Can the blynde leade 5 biynde? Vo chepnot
ok all parties of Jurie and Jeruſalem / a krõ both then kal into the dyche: Che dylet ple is
the ee coſte ol C pꝛe & core which came not aboue bis matter.cuery man haibeper
to heare him / and to be healed of their dyſea⸗ kecte / euẽ as his maſter is. hy ſeyſt thou a
ſes:and they allo chat were bered wich koule moote in thy bothers eye / a conlyderelt not
ſpꝛetes / a they were healed. And allß people che beame that is in thyne awne eye? cher
te pꝛealed totouchehim: foz there went vertue how canneſt chou lave to thy brother: Bꝛo⸗
out ot him. and heated them all. ther let me pull out d modte that is in thyne
ndhelpktedophis eyes opp dilciples / epe:whẽ thou perceaueſt not the beame that

and lapde: Bleſſed be ve a pooze:koꝛ ours is is in thynẽ awne eye: Ypocrite caſt oute the
ol God Bleſled are ve that hon⸗ beanie out o thyne atone eye kyolt / and then


: Suhpeh Jer niowwstoz pe Walde fatiteyen. Wiedrd are halt chou se perfectip/to pull out the mooce jane oh.


dhe in fpr pe that wepe now:£o2 ve Malllaugh. Bleed out ot thy bꝛothers exe.
o which are ye when men hate vou / a thut pou oute It is not a goodtree that bꝛingeth koꝛthe
at fh NO ob cheir companye / and raple/ and abhozre ben erde ge e bi
end oute name as an eurnthenge / 40; 8 fonne by
rieb of DE mänes take Retopte ve chen / e be gladde: hnowen byhis krute Hether ol thoꝛnes ga⸗
ist’ bepnge koz beholde / youre rewarde is e in bee ther men kygges / noz ot bullhes gather they
bre nen. E Alterthis manner their kathers en. grapes. L goodimé out of the good treahure
de wos exeaten the Pꝛophetes. Sehis herte(bzyngeth Forth 5 whichis good,
Here in the. But wo be to vou that are e: oe And an euyll man oute ok the euyll trealure
e lecauſe haue therin voure cõtolacton. Wo be to vou of his hert / bungeth forthe ö which is euyll.
Bake an, that ate full: to: pe ſhall höger. noo be to you Fo ot che aboldaunce of ß hert / hys mouth
5 at now laugh:for xe ſhall warle and wepe tpeaketh. 8
1 dohy can ve Maſter Matter: and do not
2 6holoeuercomethto me / and


ed de pe a
when the


E;
Na. . v. 20


bolomes.“ Foz with what mealure pe mete / qyatth. vi.
. Andhe came doune with them and tone with ö lame Hall men mete to vou 915 Wack 65


ingech koche good krute. Foz euerp tree ig C


a


reve,


‘pemibe Ommen wanne eie g geris ence naue e Halt wa aba.


e
‘otpeake vnto ol
I wyldernes fo7t0 fe? bu


“cag wehen eee
chattz. ig. thou
263 the
pe vnto vou: a greater Pꝛophete then
oa mone nchen he n


one that ts tede in che Heng: be Duet


9;
tit
went forthe thzoughout all Jurte / a thoꝛow
dut all the ret lang ttc Ire rounde about.


les OF John chewed hum ok all
5 ee calle nope two and anoynted them with opntment.


his people, EK. And this rumo: ol hym


9105 B }

His dilclpies / a bent the to Jelus lapinge- tahenthe Pharile which bade him faire
Aether tune hellgelbe that / he fpake w in him telke la ring: Ie this
fog another: When d men were come vnto man neren propbete/ he wodde Futete en


_ Rnolwett who e wharmaner woman thys is
which touchetg him / ko che isa lynner. Ind
usantwered g la pde vnto bint: Simon J
auetome what to ſãpe vnto g And he lad.
maſtevlape on. Chere was acertapne lender
which had two detters / the one ought kyue
hundied pence ¢ che other lylty. taken ther
had nothinge to pape he forgaue che bothe.
Bhich ot thé tell me / well ioue him moot?
5 luppole / that
to whom he koꝛgaue moot. And he iayde

vnto him: Chou bat truly iudged.
And he turned to the woman g lapde vnco
Simon: Seilt thou this wom : J entred in
to thy houle / a thougaueſt me no water to
my fete:but che hath welhedmy fete witea⸗


Chou gaueſt me no kde: but te / lence the


5 syne reiß d topped the with the heren of herheed.
irt Forges


— ad came in hach not cealed to kyde my
Man ete,
aper none bur che hach anopnted mp fete wych
add of ber opntmẽt. noherkoze I Cape vnto then many
out taith Cones are koꝛgeuẽ her: ko che loued moche
of which Fo nbd lelle is koꝛgeuẽ / the lame doeth lelle
derte lowe. And he Capde unko her / thy manes are
Git openty fongeuen the. And ther that late at meate w
Eunetl- bp hint / heganne to fape with in chem lelues:
hath ma⸗ Hors chys which koꝛgeueth lynnes allo?
lac kn Andbeardto the woms hp lave bath fas
Fel maebbut ued the: Go in peace F.
ib 15 it un⸗ C Chꝛig with his Apogles goeth krõ towne to towne ¢
: ne / euẽ p Came which be luppoled p he hath, thalbe geue sce


pne heed with ople thou dydeſt not a⸗


all cpties he (pake by alyrnttitude. A lower
went out to fowe his leede: and ag he oven
dome tell by the wave lde / and it was trode


Inder kete / and the koules of che apze deuou⸗
Breit vp. Andome fell on


e and as fone
agit was lpꝛonge vy / tt widdꝛedawaxe / bes
caule it lachedmopltn and tometellamöge
thoꝛnes and the thoꝛnes lpꝛange vp with it /
and choned it. And lome Fell on good grotine
and fpzange vp / and bare krute / an hündꝛed
Seesen Mpa ds e crxedt
m heare.


Dethachath cares toheare let


„Luke.


e bi
Andhis dicciples arned him taping: what
manercpmilitude ig this: ndhe kapde: von a bento von
to pou is it geuẽ to knowe the Lecvetes oF the in it peuen to
kyngdomm of God:butto other in finiiveuness awe the, te
that toben they le they chulo not le / and whe ac. Lohe in
ther heare they chuld not vnderſtande. War. iy b.
Che lynuiptude is this. Che leede is the

woꝛde of God. Chole p are belpde the waxe /
ave they chatheare and akterwardẽ cometh
the deupll and taketh awaye the woꝛde oute
ok theirhertes lett they uid beleue ano be
laued. Chey on 5 ſtöneg / are they which whe
chep heare / receaue d woꝛde with tye, Wut
chele haue no rotes / which kor a twhyie tn ies
ue / and in tyme ol temptaciõ go awayc. And
5 which fell amöge thoꝛnes / are they wyych
heare / and go koꝛch / a are choked with cares
and with ryches / and volupteous lyuinge / a
bꝛinge fozth no krute . Chat in ß good groũde /
are they which with a good and pure herte /
beare the worde and hepe it and beinge tozth
krute with pacience,

om lighteth a canden / couereth it vn L.
der a belell meter putter) it onder ehe table nech le
but letteth it on a cadelllicke / that thepthat b. ue
enter in / niaxe le the lyght. Mo thinge is in le
cret that Hall not come abzoode : ether enx
thinge hyd / that Malt not be lmowẽ / a come
400 50 —.—— ype 15 15 heare.

07 wholoeuer bath / to hym halbe geuen: „ potdeuer
And wholoeuer hath not / kt him walbe tachaae copie


Chen cameto him his mother andbts bee Lore tu Wate
thzen/andcoulae not come at bim Fo preate” cl haber @
Andehep tolde him faving: Thy mother and wreehze a5 tow
thy bꝛethꝛen ſtande without / a wolde Ce the .chpnge bre / hz
85 anfweredandfapde onto them mpmo⸗ ih Gene

er g mpbzechzen are thele which beave the vi. o.
worde ol God and do it.

EL Ind it challled on a certayne daye that he
went into a chippe g his dilciples alto /g he
lapde onto the: Let ve go ouer vnto the other
Gye ok the lane And they Lanchen loꝛthe.
And as they layled / he ken a llepe / and there
arole a ſtoꝛme of winde in the lane / and they
were kylled with water / a were in ieoparby.
And they went to him a awoke him lapinge:
Walter Master / we are took. Chen he aĩo⸗
fea rebunted ) wyrde a the tepeſt of water /
and they cealed / and it wered calme. Ind he
fayoe vnto thes where is poure kayth? They
keared and thondzcd fapinge one to Another:


what felowe is this: lo lie comadneth both ........
che wyndes a water / a they gbexhim⸗
theplavied onto the region ofthe Gaderent⸗


tes / which is ouer agaynſt Galle.
And as he went out to land cher methym
a certapne m out of g citie / which had a de⸗
upll longe tyme / a ware no clothes / nether
abode in ent houle:but amonge graues.

D. ij, When


The Golpell


when he lawe Fetus he crved a kelldoune
bekoꝛehim / æ with a loude vopce Cayo: nohat
haue J to do with che Jelus the tonne ol the
God moot bpett 73 beteche the
not. Chen he comaunded the koule cpꝛete to
come out of § m. Foz ofte tymes he caught
him / a he was bounde with chaynes / a kept
with letters: and he bake § bondes / ¢ was
carped ol the kende / into w


pidernes.
e AndFelusathedhim taping: nhac is che


deLegtowar, name? And he Cayo:? * Legis / becaule many
ter Megeclus deuplg were entred into hom. Ind ther bes


commebendet loughthim / that he wolde not comaunde ch.
aie ear 8010 0 dur intache dene And ther was chere


hundred. xx by an heerde ol many ewyne fedpnge on an


arc. v. b.


Sath. ix. c
Mar. vb


hyll and belought him / chat he wolde fofive
chemto enterinto them. Andhe Coffeen them.
Chen went the deupls out or the mã / and en⸗
tred into the lwyne: And the herd tobe their
courle and ran heedlpnge into the lake / and
were choked, When the herdmen lawe what
had chaunten / they tleed a tolde it in the citie
and in the villages. 8 .

And they came outto le what was done:
came to Jelus / and kounde the man / oute oF
wohö the deuyis were departed / iyttynge at x
fete of Fetus / clothed a in his rraht mynde / a
hep were akrapde. Chevalco which kawelt
tolde the by what meanes he that was pots
leſled ok the deupll / was healed. Ind all che
whole multitude oft cortege o£ b Gadere⸗
nites / veloughehim Ahe wolde departe eta

the:foz they were tan 1b ayeate keare. And

he gate hym into ß chippe a returned backe
agapne. Chen the ma dutok who d deurls
were den eee him that he myght
be whim. But Fetus kenthim e bone 8
So home agapfie into thyne awne houle / a
ewe that great thynges god hath done to
the. Andhe wẽt his ware / a pꝛeached thoꝛow
outall the cytye what great thynges Jelus
had done vnto him. ;

And it koꝛtuned when Fetus was come
agayne 5 the people receaüed him. soz ther
all waptedkoz hem: And beholde ther came
à man named Jairus (and he was a ruler of
d Cynagoge) andhe fell doune at Fetus kete
A beloughthim thathe wolde come into bys
houle / ko he had but a daughter only / von
atwelue pere of age / and che laye a dyinge.
And as he went the people thꝛorged him.

And a woman haupnge anitue ok bloud
twelue peres which had ipent all her tubſta⸗
ce amonge Philicions nether coulde be hol⸗
pen ok end came behinde him / a touched the


bem ok his garment / a immeplatiy her iche Prophetes


ok blond ſtaunched. Ind Jelus layde: oho is
le that touched me! When euerymã denxed /
Peter one B were Whim / lapde: Matter,
the people thzuſt ihe and bere the: and lar


tozment me that


our who touched me? And Fetus Cayd: oz
me body touchedme. Foz perceaue Hoertue
is gone oute or me. Hoven che woman ſawe
(he was nothrd / ye cametrmblinge / a
fell at his kete / z todde him bekoze all ß people
fo2 what cauſe ſye had touched him / and how
be was bealenimmentatie. comte
toher: ter be or good comtozte. Chy E
kapch bath mavetveboale/goin peace. a
Ihüll he vetfpake there came one Hr the
rulers of thefynagogis boute which fe
him:thy daughter is deed /difeate not ? ma⸗


e Hekate ag hearde that / He ancwered


*Feavenot / beleue oniy ¢ Matthir.0


the father, Sand


che chalbe made whole, And whenhe camto
A er
laue Peter / Zames and John / a che tacher e
the mother of the mapden. Euerx body weept
Klozowed koꝛher. And he kapde: we pe not:
ko the is not deed / but leßeth. And ther
jewah him tofcome, Foz her knew that e
was need: and he thautk the all out / o caught
herby the hande:and cryed laringe: Marde
Aryle. and her cpꝛete came agapne / andthe
role Urapght wave. And he commaundedto
1 ind the Father a 5 mother of
er were altonped.Wuthe warned them that
chey ſhuld tell no man what was done.


‘peareth tellof bim. Petkedeth gue thoufand'
jpue loaues a two fpThed- the dite
Ihen dee toe of and teacheth

n N
1 SE arp delt benennt) babe
repzoueth them.

Abe. lr. chapter. .

en callenbe . i. co gether and 2 „.
gaue the power / ¢ auctozite ouer Sud
pall deurisathatcher might heale
dileaces And he lent the to pꝛeache
the nyngdom of God / z to cure the lyck. And
hetaddetothe Kate nachyns to lucher va gehe
bpb ware: nether ſtalle / nos errpe / necher aße oy kein
breed / nether moner / nether haue two coteg. 78. Looke
And whattoeuer houte pe enter into there sparcre vil
abyde a thence departe. And wholoeuer wyn i
not receaue pou/whe ve go out oF that citie/
Make ofthe verx duſt trom voure fete /toza a
teftimony agapntt them. Andther wet out
9 1
ofpell and healynge euery 2
Ge gm herodethe * eeteatch heatbe dealt egg
shat wasdone n ihne Achn wa ruten fach. u


4 95
from deeth:and ok lome / that Heiyas
ee ae


ſpꝛed to ſe um. 2 5
8 .


Ok.
rig d- whatgreatthenges therhad done. v Ardhe
ee tote them ¢ wet alyor into folitary .
nye to a cytie called Bethlalda. Andß people
Hnewe of it / a kolowed him. And he receaued
them / a tpake onto them ok the kyngdome ok
“God te healedthẽ that had nede to be healed.
And when p dave beganne to weare awaye /
chen came the tweluẽ a layd onto him: lende
the people a waye / that they maye go in to ß
tounes and billages rounde about d lodge /
get meate / koꝛ we are here ina place of wyl⸗
dernes. But he layde onto them: eue pe the
to eate. And they larde ive haue no mo but
tue loues and two kyſches / except we ſhuld
G0 e bye meate foz all this people. Andther
were aboutes tpue thoulande men. And hẽ
fapde to his dilciples: Caule thẽ to lyt doune
by kytties in a companꝝ and they bpd lo / and
made them all lyt doune. And he tone $ krue
ioues /a the two kiiſhes / z loked vp toheuen /
and blelled them / and bꝛake / and gaue tothe
dilciples / to fete bekoꝛe the people . And face
ate / d were all latilkxed Ind there was tak
vpot § remapned to thé / twelue barkettes
gat te Moe iecortunedas betas alone paging)
‘ na tt fozturn e ne p,
AO gts pilcpples were with hem / ¢ he adh
lapinge: Who faye the people? J am: Cher
ank wered a fayd: John Waptiſt:⸗Domelape
Belpas. And lone fave one ob the olde pꝛo⸗
phetes is rylen agapne. He fapde vnto chem
who lape ve that J am: Peter ancwered and
ſapde: thou arte the Chzitt of God. Andhe
warned a cõmaunded thẽ that ther Mud tell
noms une taping: p tha tonne of ma
mutt ſuttre manp thynges / and be repꝛoued
ot the elders / a or thehye pieſtes and lcrybes
abe llapne / and the thirde dave ryte agapne.
e after me / let him denpe an
ib hun dee ane bp his croti-baply krlomeme bo.
eetad ge Cocuce wyll aue bys pte / wall lotet. And
4 Cin wholeuer chall lote his lpke koꝛmx lake che
de) refante Mall laue it. Fos what auauntageth it
ewig manta wönnethe whole warde ehe Loore
it l hymlelke og runne in damage or hem kelke⸗
it
barby Co; me 07 wholoeuer is achamed dk me / and ot my
an tyme re apinges: ok him call $ Conne of mã be acha⸗
Aba ected, tobe he cometh tn bis awneglone / and
erna. ache gio te ofbis facher“ of holy angels,
And J tell pou ok a lurety. chere be tome
of therm ebat ane herne Hntot taſt


ecw

1 them Ui they fe the by a dest
Ra „And tt bol an il. Daves alter
del abes ole Cavinges thathetokie Peter James e


d e en, L went vp into a mountapne to pape
Bs a ac, and benen of bts counte.


naunce was chaunged/ ehisgatment was


God which
pte s ſhoone. And behold two men talked
B soho bina ev vee dBotes and Belgas


Luke,


i bo
Txviij.
which appered gloꝛioullx / a lpake ok bi * a 25
partynge / which he ſhuld ende at Jeluralẽ⸗ bone wpth
Peter And hen mere sobs ier uwe! ‘+ fongoane. oF
lepe. And when thep woke ther tawe hys rit why: h.
gion, and two tien dtandynge wich hum, knee h dp
And tt chaunled as cher departed rd him ter te uhren
cker larde bnto Fetus: Wacker it is good ohn gam
evnge here korb: Let vs malte che taber⸗ mhle they tne
nacleß one fo thee one koꝛ Holes / a onekoz we the clouses
elpas:a wilt not whache Cape. Wypll he the glove of
18 fpake chere cane cloude a tadowen d hen
em andthep kegred when they were comme the ſelpmonx
vnder the cloude And there came a voyce out a wytnesutthe
Of the cloude laying⸗ This is my deare ſonne Father of hone
hearehim Andas fone as ppoßce was packe an e
Fetus was kounde alone. And cher keptit Tthendwal
Aoole: a tolde no man in thole dapes eny ok incre aboune
thole thynges whichthey had lene. dauntly fetilie
And it chaunled on the nexte dave as they) Loe wann
came bounefromtheheil noche peopiemet toe ar Cob.
him And beholde a man o the cöpanp cryed o. 4
out kapinge: Matter, J beteche the beholde
mytonne / ko: he is all that I haue: and le / a
ſpꝛete takech him a lodenlx he czpeth / andhe
teaveth bim that hekometh agapne / and will
moche payne departeth krõ him whe be hath
rent him / A beloughe thy dilcpples to calt
him oute, A they coulde not Fetus ancwered
und lapd: O generacton w our karte, cro⸗
fen-how inge Mall A be wpth vou: ¢ dall
dufte vou: Bzpnge thy tonne hydder Ashe
‘pet was a comim yng / the tende rent him and
karehym. And Fetus rebuned the vnclene
lpꝛete / andhealed the chylde / and delpuered
him to his father. Andthep were allamaled
at the myghty power ol God.
A Whylcher wödzedeuerr one at all ehingy
which he dpd / he lade vnto his dilctples: let
thele fapinges lynne doune into voure cares
Chetyme wyll come / when the tonne ol mi
chalbe deliuered into the handes of men. But
they wiſt not whatthat woꝛde meant / and it
was bpd krom them / that they vnderſtode it
not. And ther kearedtoacke him of p tapinge
Chen ther arole a dilputacion a moge thé
ceaucd thethouahtes of chekrherkes he tone zune
achrdde a fet him bard by hem / ¢ fayde uno
thé. n holoeuer receaueth this chylde in my
VV Wee
ueth me / receaueth him z ent me Koꝛhe
is leaſt amõge vou all / flame ſhalbe greate.
And John antweredandlayd: da ker we
Cate one caſtinge oute deuyls in thyname /
we tozbade hem / becaule he koloweth not
with vs. Zid Fetus card onto him: koꝛbyd ye
himnot Foꝛ he 6 is not agaynſt vs / is w vs.
And it kolowed when the tyme was come
that he chulde be receaued vp / then he tet his
kace to goto Jerulalem / c fentmenengers
D. fil. before


ho chuld be e barer per⸗ Math vviß.


The Golpell


beloze him. Ind they went and entred into a
Gitic of ? Samaritäs to maße redp fo2 him.
But they wold not receaue him / becaulẽ his
face was as though he wolde go to Jerula⸗
lem. When his dilciples James on nlawe
that / they lapde. Lozd/ wilt thou that we co
maunde / that tyꝛe come doune From heuen
Econlume them / euen as Hellas dyd⸗ Fetus
turned about / a rebukedthẽ faving: pe wote
not what maner ipete pe are ot The tonne
ol mA is not come to deftrope mẽnes lues /
but to laue them. And they went to another
toune. I And it chaunled as he went in the
wape / a certapne man larde vnto him: J will
kolowe the whpther loeuer thou goo. Jelus
fapde vnto him fo xes haue holes / brddes
okthe aper haue neckes but the tonne of ma
ath not where on to lape his heed.
And he lapde vnto another: folowe me.
And thelame fapde:Lozde lutkre me kyꝛſt to
Go g burpmp kather. Jeſus lapde onto hym,
en lerthe derd Let the deed burptheir deed: but go thou
bur p their deed and pꝛeache the kyngdome of God.
due Chacialet , And another fapd:J wll kolowe ß Lord:
Alone babe in but let me kpſt go bythe fare well / which
fydelite/and fo are at home at my houle. Telus lapde vnto
Lowe chaume⸗chynn No man that putteth brs hande to the
that is veleue pfowe / Kloleth . apte to the kyng⸗


thou in me. gc.
And go prache dome ok God.


the üpnbdome che lendeth the leuentpe before him to preache / and
ol God ac. geueeh den a charge how to behaue the lelues / pꝛay⸗


eth his ed ee the Herpbe that
tempted him / s (bp the example of the Hamaritane)
Geweth who is a mans nepghboure⸗ Martha recen
ueth the Lorde m to her boule. arp Magdalene 1
feruent in heariuge his wolde.


receaue pou not / go poure warez out infos
Gretes of the fame a tape:euẽ the very dul /
which cleaueth on vs of pour citie / we wype
ol agaynſt vou: Notwithſtandynge / mat!
this p the kyngdome of God was come nye
th batbapetay dene de ene

in that daye ko ome then Foz e.

Wo beto ß cho: zum wo be to the Beth⸗ C
(aida. Fo: vłthe mpzacies had bene done in
FA $s 3 ea bene pose 15 wel
ep had a greate whpleagone repente
ting in beeve a alhes Meuertheletle it halbe
eatter £02 ꝙ pꝛe a Sidon / at the iudgement /
then koꝛ vou. And thou Capernaum whych
arte exalted to heauen / chalt be chzuſt doune Seth.
tohell. „pez heareth vou /hearech me: g he 5 Jahn ih. .
delppleth pou delpileth me: a he that delpr⸗
We ene him that ſent me.
ind the feuentpe turned agayne W ore /

Capinge: Loꝛde euẽ the very deuels are ſub⸗
duedtops thoꝛowe thy name Andhe larde
nto the: J fawe Satan / as it had bene ligh⸗
tenpng / kaule doune fromheauẽ. Beholde J

geue onto vou power to treade on cepentes e
tcoꝛpiõ / a ouer all maner power of the ents

mpe: 6 nothynge Hall hurte vou. Heuerthe⸗
lelle / in this reiople not / that ihelpꝛetes are

vnder poure power: but reiopte / becaule

* P are w. onl 4 1 e /

Chat lame tyme retopled Jelus inp pꝛite / 5
Klapde: A cOfette vnto the father: “ Lose of Sattberin,
heaué ¢ erth chat chou ha t hydtgele chyngg

from the wyle ¢ pꝛudẽt / a batt opened them

tothe babes Euen lo father/foz ko plealedit

the All chynges are geuenme of my father,

Andno man hnoweth who the lonne is / but

the father nether who the father is / caue the


é tonne /a he to who $ fonne wpll chewe hym.


And he turned tohis dilciples /a lard ſecret
Ip-Lappp are the eyes / which le that ve le.
Foz Iten vou that many pꝛophetes a kyngs
haue deliredto le thole thynges which ye le /

g haue not ſene thé:¢ to heate thole thynges
Wed ge Dente an hauenothearde them.

And beholde a certayne la weer ſtode vp / a
tempted him / ſa ping! Maſter what hall g Wetth. u
do to inheret eternall Ipfe : He fayde vnto ‘
bim: hat is wꝛytten in the lawe? Pow re⸗ ig
delt chouzAndbe antwered a Cayde:* L oue deut. vl.
thp Loꝛde God / with all thy bert / a wych all 5
thy Conte and with allthy ſtrengthe / a wyth :


all thy mpnde:¢ thy nepghbour ag thy teife.
Andhela roghine babar eid


„ $PGbLThisno andthou halt ipue.*pe wil: (ees eat


Math. x. a.


Ipnge to tultifpe him lelke / lapde vnto Fetus; is he w

Woo wseyenmep cepgobone * rte
9 efus antweren a faye: 2 certayne man Sie
delcended fr Bicrutele te ierico kel keerneb) Capt
into the handes ortheues / which robbed him whole nutze
eee 1


1 bath Martha /


Ok. S. Luke.


came a certapne Pꝛelte that tame ware / z

whe he fae hum he patted by. And iphewile

a Leuite / when he was come nxe to ß place /

went and loked on hun / and padled by. Then

a certapne Samaritane / as he toꝛneped / ca

me nye vnto him a when he ſawe him / he had

cõpaſſion onhim / a went to a bounde vphis

woundz / a poured in ople a wyne / z puthim

on his awne beatere bzought him to achmẽ

vmie /a made prouition toꝛ him. Andon mo

Lowe whe he departed / he tone out two pice

E gaue thẽ to ö hoſt / lapde vnto him: Cale

cure o£ hym / and whatloeuer thou lpendeſt

moare / when J come agane / z will recom⸗

pence the. which now of thele thꝛethynneſt

chou / was neyghbour onto him that keil into

che theues handes: andhe layde:he that ſhe⸗

wed mercy on hym. Chen lapde Fetus onto
Sbinncho and do thou lake wele. F

. It koꝛtuned as they wet / that he entred

into a certayne toune. ada cevtapne womã

named Martha / receauedhim into herhou⸗

le. And this woman had a liſter calſed Wa⸗

ry / whpch fate at Jelus fete / and hearde bys

pꝛeachinge. And Martha was cöbzedabout

moche leruinge / a ode a lapd:maſter / doeſt

thou not care / that my lyſter bath left me to

minister alone: Byd her therkoꝛe / H ce helpe

me. And Jelus anlwered / and larde vnto her

Agiary Martha / chou careſt / a arte trou:

ber that bled about many thinges:verelx one is ned:

10 ge Eull.>* Warp bath cholen her § good parte /

choten the WHICH Mall not be taken awape from her. E.

of the Che teacheth bys dicciples to rape. dpueth out a de⸗


ueil / and rebunethj the blacphemous 39 hariles, a
2 tequypze cyg nes and tokens. Be eateth with the Whar


keulngehim halle deed. And br chaunce ther


Chapter.

Md it koztuned a8 he was pꝛaying
ina certapne place: whé he cealed
one ok his dilciples fapde vnto him
Malter / teache vs to pꝛaye / as Jo⸗
taught hys dylcyples. And he la pde vnto
them: when pe prape/ lare: O oure father
which arte in heauen, halowed be thy name.
Chr kyngdome come. Thy win be tulkyled /
euen in erth as it is in heauen. Oure davly
bꝛeed geue vs euermoꝛe. And koꝛgeue vs dur
Lynnes: Fo: euen we koꝛgeue euery man B
treaſpaleth vs. And leade bs not into temp⸗

tacion. But velpuer vs krom euyll.
Andhe fapde vnto them: N pr anp of vou
Wuldhauea krende /g ſhuld go to him at mid
nrxabt / a faye vnto him:trende lende me the
los / toꝛ a rende of myne is come out of §
waye to me /a Ihaue noth inge to let bekoꝛe
Vhen:a he within Huldantwere g lape / trou⸗
ble me not / che doze is now hut / and my ter
Mie nguntes fre wich me in the chamber / Aran


8 4


sag Trix.
not ryte a geue them tothe. Cape brits volt / „
though be wolde not aryle and geue him, ve
caule he ig his krende: pet becaule or hys tite
rortumtte he wold rple/ageuc him as MANY ch ne
asheneded And Alape onto vou*athe/ wit 00 f
Walbe geuẽ vou. Sene / and pe wall pride. Zaco.ia
Anocke / and it che lbe opened onto vou Foz
euerpone packeth receaueth:a heb teleth /
kindeth to him p knocketh / all it be ope⸗
ned. J pfonne tall atte bzeed of env of pou
that is a father: willhe geue hima ttone? Oz
che athe kühe / will he toz a kiuhe geue hin
a lerpẽt: Oꝛ yt he athe an cage: wilhe offer
hum alcozpion? Pt ye then which are euyl /
can geue goodgpkte onto poure hald / how
moche moare dial bfather ol heauẽ geue an
holy lpꝛete tothe /chatdelpꝛeit olhiin? E.
Fändhe wag cattinge out a deupll/ whych
was dome. Ind it kolowed when the deuilt
was gone out / the dõme fpake / a the people
wondꝛed. But Come ok them kapd: he cattery
out deupls by the power oke wBetgebubtheas DE ebe
chete of thedeupls. Andother tepten bum te: ach. we.
Uynge of him afygne krom heauen But he n Oh”
unewetheirthoudhtes / ¢fapde vnto them:
Cuery kyngdom deutded with in it lelke hal
be detolate and one boute (pall fall ops ano⸗
ther. Ho pk Satan be deuyded with in hynt
lelke how Mail hes nyngdome endüre: Be⸗
caule ve faye pq calt out deupis by power
ok Pelzebub. 3 / by s power of Weiz ebub
caſte out deus by whom do poure chydꝛen
cat them out.“ Cherkoze ſpall ther be pour b. 367 bythe
moge, Wut pez wich  fenger of cod alt eden
pap Deupls/ nodoute the kengdome ok God are hat pee
is come vpon vou. by} power of
Whena trongemés armed watchethhyg Wed cate cheng
Houtesthathe pottertcth is in peace But whe out ze.
a ſtrongerthenhe cometh vpö him and ouer⸗
cometh bimibe taketh From him bys harnes
wherin he truged adeupdeth his goodeg. He
that is not with me / is agapnſt mie. Andhe ß
gathereth not with me / lcattereth.
When the vnclene lpꝛite is gone oute ola
man / he walketh thꝛough waterleſſe places /
ſekinge reeſt. and when he Fyndeth none / he 7
lapetß:J will returne agapnebnto mphoule
ce A came out. And when he cometh / he
ch it and garntülhed. Then goelh
he a taßeth to him teuẽ other ſpꝛetes woꝛiſe
en him lelle:a they enter in a dwall there,
ind the ende of that man / is twozte then the


begpnnynge.
eid it fostunedas he ſpake thole thinges/
à certayne womũ of the copany ipkte vp her
voyce / a lapde vnto him: Happy ts § wonibe
chat bare the / and the pappes which gaue d
kucke. But he fapoe:Ye happy are they that
heare de ok God and hiepeit, E
B people were gathered thickets
D. b. getherz


The Gotpell


erche began tolare: his is an eüylina⸗ they wall cle a pertecute:that th ‘
Ane ee gn eta garde all Prophetes/ whych was heen hs che b
cite ute Conc or donee e Ginninge of the wozlde/mave be requpze
Pa e tes / 71
: p Mall che tonne of man be to chys nacyon. bl p
e , Che quene ofthelouthe Mallrpieatiuoges che aulker uche temple . Gerely J lape bnto
ab rh l. mene wuchs men ok chsgeneragan sche poustt halbe teque;eD dechis naten. 2
"FOO depnetheitos We camekro bende old wonde / 190 be copou laweatg: for yebauctaken . - {
to heare the wyrdome of Salomon. And be⸗ awape the wei oF area ee entred not
T e,
men ok Miniue wall e
thee 9 wal cOpempnethem:foz and the ‘Poantes begã to were butye about


ented at the pꝛeachynge of Jonas. bim / and to Cop his mouth with many quel⸗
E engen een eg re. kong / lapinge wapte foz him / and lekinge to

Goth. vb. „ Ho mälightech a candell and putteth catche Come chynge of hys mouth / wherbp

ark inf. c. ſt in a peu place / nether under a bulchell: they myght accule hym.

Line vih.a. but ona candellticke chat they that come in be leuen of the y hartes Chyite conlortetd her
mape fe the lyght. Che lyght ot thy bodyig & Wa of e nenten che waraey tober
mene i cumiiubeota certame
pa TG 199 ebe ln deres thpnges bär to watch and tö be rendp agapnd bys

e then commptiges

nes. Caheheve therfore that the light whycy ¶ Che. xi Chapter.

te in che / be not darcknes. Foz vr all ty body Other Sasheren co gether an in⸗

ſhalbe 1 hauinge no parte darcke: then mera

‘hall al be tulloeltght / euen as when a can⸗

dell doeth iygüt the with his bꝛighenes. F

And as he lpake/a certapne Sharyle bes

loußhe him to dene with yrmandhewene in Phariles wörch is ypocritp. Foz ther is no⸗ mud aw

Klate dounetomeate.iWhenthe Pharile ſa⸗ chynge couered / chat wall not be bncouered: offis mosey

we chat he maruerled chat he had not fy2tt netherhyd b wall not be knowen Foz hac na Le

welthed berozedrner. And then owe larde to wpeuer ze haue boten in davknes:that fame weezeh en,
F yim:* Mow do pe Wyatites/ maßeclene bout Palbeuearde mz lighr. ands which pe haue Dee Ae

Watzxilee, one ok che cup fand che platter: but poure in⸗ poke in the eave eu in lecret places /chalbe the docteyne
warde parttes are Cull of rauenynge a wyc⸗ pyeached euen on the toppe or che houles.  thuencpon of
heoneg. Ve koles / dyd not he that made that OF alt ober ne
which is wit rama Car eyed 6 toe un ol them that byl the bodr / and alter p baue tete conbp
allo: ſelelle geue almole ak p yehaue no moare that they can do. But J wn ewe B donde
and beholde all is elene to you. But wo be vou / whom pe thall keare Feare oly cl wait
topouPharites/fo7 pe tithe d mynt a rewe / after cer unt path Fünfer a into nn ae

al manner erbes /a pate ouer judgemẽt e hell. Yee J
Gf loue ot Seb hel cube pete bone pue (patowes bought foz two farthynges: cratefull fal
. bet notto haue leche ocher ondone. Alno yetnot one of chem is forgotten oF Gop, andongoriwes
ad n srs ee 52 Allo euẽ the verr heeres of poure heedes are —
ermoſt (cates in the trnagoges / greting
Inthe markets. wo be to you kcribes a Pha⸗ value then many lparowes.
rileß ypocryteg / koꝛ ye are as graues whych fave vnto you: wholoeuer conteleth me
appere not / a the menchat walke ouer them befoze men / euen him Chall the tonne of man
are not ware ol them. Chen and wered one or conferte alfobetoze the angels or God. Ind
thelawears/etapd ontobym: Wader chus he chatdenyeth me befoze me thalbedenved „ Copen
e Cyatetysimorr ogagnt the torre resis
obe to you allo ears:
3 Dues onen eon tt halbe kogeuenbim But onto bimp blal-tatalg ee


Ht S. Luke


ith ime, Andhelokdebntohrm pan who. annocnethſcher mapc open bnto him. Ha
e me a ſudge 07 a deurder ouer vou?

1 jevfoze he ſarde vntothẽ:take hede / a bez
ware ok couetouſnes. fog no mannes lpfe

ec gannety in the aboundaunce oethethynges
which he pollellech And he put kozch a tymy⸗
fapne pce man beach dae.
ne ryche man bz 2 es plen⸗
Ceoudp; andhe thought in hym kelke taping: lei


rr,


pe


commeth cal kynde wallenge Wierelp J
ape pnto pou he will gerdde him felfeabouie
amakee eto lye doune comeate/awalhe by
Amrnylkervnto them And prhe come in the
leronde watche pe vk become in the thyꝛde
watche /g ſpall funde thé to / happy are thole

tuauntes. This vnderg onde / 5 pep good


ene e the Loꝛde whe
ye


rekobeſtowe ntpfrutes? Andhe fapoe: wolde come / he wolbe fuerip watche: a not


ihe ait do: becauſe J haue no roume man of the houlle knewe what houres theke
e


ls will A do. A wylldeſtroye mp barneg / a
ride greater ¢eyerin wyll J gadder allmp
krutes a my goodes: and J wyll fapeto my
coule: Doule thou halt moche geodes layne
bp in ſtooꝛe fo2 man pearꝭ / take chpne cate:
kate duncke / a be mery. But God lade on-
tohim:hou kole / chis night will they Fetche full feruaunt ¢ wple/ whom his Loꝛde Wall loueey(wyycy

the Then whole maße ruler ouer his houcholde/ to geue theme then ae peace

routs their duetie or megte at due featon:happp is

ches? that leruaũt / wh bys matter when he com⸗

meth wall Epnde ko doyng. Oka trueth g fap

Andhelpanke onto ys ditciples: cherkoze ‘onto vou:p he wylf make hem ruler over aljeusll agree 1b
thought tos youre Phe hath. But eve > eupliteruadt challlape f

er kon pourebos in his hert edge p matter wyil deferre his cont to cer

menge / and tall begynne tofmyte the ler⸗erth

uuatites & mapdene / à to eate & dꝛynclie @ to ccc cam 3/0

be bzonche the lope ok p lerua

ma dave whenhe thinneth not g at

when he is not ware / a wyñ deupd


awaye thy fouleagapne
thali thofe 4 wich ay Coan bat p
bed? So ig it with him that gadereth

b ts not riche in God.


ok vou with tali
e
0 e wl eat:

£02 theremnatit? c onde
growe: hey laboure not:they lpyn not: and
det J tape onto vou /p Salomon in all this
ropalte / was not clothed iphe to one okthele.

Ir the grade which isto daye in the kelde / 4.
to moꝛowe ſhalbe caſt into ß foꝛnace / God
fo clothe/ how moche moze wyil he clothe Jam come to lende tyre on erthꝛand what
ou / o ve endued ib iptle karth : and acke not
Anbat pe thall eate oz what pe wall dzincke /
nether clpme ve bp an hye:toꝛ all loche thins


due father knoweth that ye haue neade of
loche thynges. 1wherkoze tene pe alter the
kyngdome of God / and all
be mynyſtred vnto pou.
N Bene nne ou peed py el
Nan. ac. geue pou a kyngdome. ell b ye haue / a
5% lohe: Eeucalmes Arb male ver bagges / whych p doughtevagapnt p mother Che mothere⸗


10/0 bet
Gpe pol touche not § packes merh Boly got all nor beromeuk wi te Mee
oe pute g WB obe purer WB epbzpnge you oncocberynageges Meee
deen o€be Byophetes a poute tae ebontoprulers and officers / take no thou b cer bumble
ers killedchem / krulp ve beare witnes / chat 5 gat 2 lowe deg!
e alowe the dedes oF poure kachers: ko they pe tall cpeake. Foz ß holy
ccc.
fenoiner Proppetes 9 Apoties anbot the satire bybnagbsocyecoeutoepenjeritate ee


tupteth


2 vou: Cake no
e / what ve Mali eate: ne
dp, what ve Mall put on. Che Ike is moare
then meate a the bodye is moare then rape
ment. Contpdꝛe the rauens / toꝛ cheynether
fowe nos vepe/ twhych nether haue (ooze
Houle nee barne/ and pet God fedeth chem. t
D How moche are pebetter then koules. Which wyll geue hi Bs rewarde tb
t can adde tohrs Che terua

Ik ye then be not able to


fathers pleature / te


Pee dexe not oſde / a treaſure 5 kapleth not tube lawe agapnit hz doughterelawe / and t
nen where no thete cometh / necher moth coz
Fos where youre trealure is / there
wyll voure hertes be allo.
€ Let poure lopnes be gerdde about / a pour
kygbtes bꝛẽnyng / a ve youre ſelues tyke bnto
mien p wapte £02 their maſter / when he well
returne fxd a wedding: alone ag he cõmeth


8/ oz toatl 2;
dlarde. FE there be any kapch⸗ as


e wil come on
anboure arc
e hym / g of tl worde?
e vnbeleuers for (pth the doc
tehat hnewe bis matters wil ge ee
prepared nothpm felfe/ne
take pethouahe ding ko his will/malbeb
Diele how ey Buthe that knewe not / and pet dyd comittemany it cinoe
thynges wozthy ot Arppes / halbe beaten be cut debate
with keawe ſerppes Foz onto whom moche
18 geuen (ol hum tMatbe moche regupꝛed.


ther dyd acco⸗⸗
té Wimanpüüripes. Gal


ig my delpze / but that it were all veadpe
Kyndled: Hot withſtandynge J mult be bap⸗
tpled wa baptyme:e how am J papnen kl lecue iheppecg
Pes the hethen people oF the worde lee koz, it be ended: Huppole peß J am come to end
peace on erth?
debate. Foꝛ krõ


het
doughterelawe agarnd hy: mötherelawe. 4.

Chen tayde he to the people:
cloude rple out of the welt ſtrayght ware pe ther hauebego⸗
laye:we tall haue a Mower / a toit is. apne eau tus.
when ve fe the fouth topnde blotwe/ ye faye: am Jr thete
we hall haue heet / and it co


mmeth to pale. :
ꝓpocrites / re can tuxn of i calion ot


luffer his houtte to he bzonẽ bp. Be ve prepa

td therkoze ko the tonne of man welt come

at an houre when pe thynne not. E 58
Chen Peter card onto him:* Malter / tel⸗ Mat. er

leg thou ches fymplytude unte d

me? Ind p Lon


ar. ii.


teſt Evpndes ¢


ndto whom men moche commit/ the moze fon 00 tae
oFhpm willehep athe, ‘will fonevepey
ep le crueleye to
warde the they
Hone beck, then


Iten pou hape, but rather nenne ie

hence forth ther halbe kyue med vnto, And

efethpnges wal in one höuchedeurded / threagayntt two / a agapne / thole
Cate not Iptelt: two agapndctthꝛe. Che father lbalbe deupded

agaynt the conne / ¢ the fonne agapnſt the

käther. Che mother agaynſt the doughter / g


whom the ye
OF the chavitye
‘belonging top


Wolpell hath


be deupded


when pe le ats that which


Soche peace
this wozide


when meunes

appetpteg ¢ deo
ies ave latil⸗
kled z when the


the euell)
tum 4 noe
nde on the
but there


ondeg OF ve
peace / to de⸗
ethe peace


eH (which ten
Yall peace)
lucentiicd ol


muſt ryſceuen
amongeſt greg


whpche


touched / wpil
end meanes


üer chelelurs
e. to


—

io fet peace /bin

etch debe.
lf


The Goſpell


vnto vou chat lyne wyce tore walbe in heuẽ. mery with mr loiierg: but a gone ag this the
duer one kynner ihatrepentetg / mooze then lonne was comme / whych bath deucured chr
ouer nyntp a nyne tutte perlons / which nede ae harloteß thou batte foz his pied
hovepentaunce Ether wyat woman bautt ure kylled p fatted caulfe. And he tapd onto
F. rotes / vt ſbe loołe one ſdoth not lyght a ca⸗ him: Sonne / thou walt euer wyth me / and
della twepe the houlle / lefie diligently tyil allthat haue is chyne it was mete that we
we kyndett⸗ And when che hath kounde is che und male merr and be glad: koz thys thy
calleth her louers a her neghbours tayinge: bother was deed and is alyue agapne: and

3 t oedeg A ad wasiotte/andigfounde. .

i Yad toot. de ene de porable oe the weckebgpammon.fot on
en Garett waite tare sh oe eee eee
ol Bod oucrone lynner that repenteth. E. — — e

＋ Andhe lapde: A certarne man had two ¶ he. xbi. Chapter.
connes a the ponger ok them larde to his ka⸗ Fx
ther:lather gene me the parte ol thegooded ß
tome belongeth. Inde deupded bhto them
Bae nd ede gehe 1 2 i
onne gaddered all g he had to geder / stone his goodes And he called hem: andfardonto
VWoduer erte a hig lo mey into a fare countre/ſand thererhe binn og t hat bes zig döche Gus
waſted his goodeg  tyctous ipupnge. And a comptes ok chp ſteward chyppe: Foz chou
when he had lpent all thathe had / ther arole maptte be no longer ſtewarde The ttewarde
A pele ci idee ata ung diane fayd win hym felfe:what Wall J do: foxmp :
dhe began tolacke. Andhe went a claueto maſter wl tane aware krö me the tewarde
Heptetpn ok p came countre / which cent him chippe. I can not dygge / and to begge Jam
to his kelde / co kepe his [wyne. Andhe wolde a chamed. J woote what to do / that when j
kane haue kplled his belp with the codes B. am put out of the ſtewardchippe / cher mae
eden eee receaue me into their houles.

Chen he came tohymtelke andlardehow Chen called he all hes matters detters / a
manphpzed leruauntes at my fathers haue Cayd vnto the Fy: bow moche oweſt thou
breed pnough/e A dre kazhöger. 4 willärpſe ante mp maler an je fayd an hondzedton⸗
goto mp father / a wyll tape onto him: ka⸗ nes ot oyle. And he lardto him:ta ke thy by /
ther Jhaue tynned agapuſt heuẽ a betoꝛe g g tyt doüne queckly and werte kretre. Chen
Kam iiomoze worthy to be called thy ſonne / fardheto another: what oweſt chou: And he
make me as one ol thyhrzedleruaütes And he kapde:anhondꝛed quarters of wheate. Pe
he arole and went to his kather. And when he lapd tohim: cake thy bl / and wipte toute
was peta greate wave of / hrs father (awe fcooze. And the Lo; che vmuſk
him / & had cõpaſſpon / ran o tell on his neck ſtewarde becaule he had done wyrlp. Foꝛ the
Kkrdephym. Andche konne tapd onto hem: chrldzen ok thys wozide are in their kynde /
father / J haue lynned agaynſt heuẽ / a inchr then the chyldzen ok lyght. And J laye C
light / a am no moare woꝛchpte be calledthy allo vnto pou mate vou tienes ofp wicked an mer

fonne. Buc bis father faye to his Ceruatites: iudmon babe roche derart tbepmape: 3

cha


- a +
HtSFZuke
JaweandthePzophetes raygned vn: Cyne agapnt the feuen tymes inadape/ a
1 of eri lence that tyme d feuentymes in a daye tourne agapneto the
: Hyngname of @odts preached eeuerpman. fayinge trepentety me/ tozgeuehim.
3 ftrpucthtogoin. SonerHallheueneerth Andtze Apoſtleg tapde onto che Lode:

2 - Perplthethen onetpele oF thelawe Mall pe⸗ increale dure fapth.Andthe Loide fapne:pe
4 kllche Wvotocucr kozcaketh his wye a ma⸗ pe had fapehipke agvapne of muſtard lede / a
1 rpeth another-beeaketh matrimonp. und eue ſpuld fave bnto thystycamine tree / pluche
rp man which marpech her p is deuoꝛled kr chy ſelte vp bythe rootes / and plant thy celle
herhulbande / committeth aduoutryallo. in che leeche would ober pou. =e.
e. Cher was a certarne rpche man which — Whotsitof ou vkhe hadaleruaüte plo⸗
* was clothedin purple and tyne bye / a tared wing oꝛ kedinge catel/ chat wolde faye onto
i delicioulip eucrp dare. And there was a cer⸗ him when he mere come From the kelde: Go

tayne begger named Lazarus / whyche lare quickly and lt doune to meate:a wolde not
at his gate full ok Coozes delpunge tobere⸗ rather kape to hm dzeſſe wherwith J mare
krelſbed with the cromes whpche Fell ho the ſupfand grꝛde bp thpkelke and terue me/tyll
ryche manes bozde Heuerthelelle / dogges Fharte eaten a dzonchen: g alterwarde / eate
came and licked bys foozes. Ind it koztuned thou /anborincas thou: ]poeth be thane that
thatthe beggert d / and was carped bythe ferugunt a ehe dyd that which was cõ⸗


the angelles into: Abzahams bolome. Che rye maunded unte him: Atrowe not So nilewi⸗

a ch en ae nge and as bunker. le ve/ when Pe haut done all chore chynges K
en, And beinge in hell in tonnẽtes / he lpfte vp which are commaunded vou fave, we are one
find This eres and lawe Abzahama farte of/e La. profitable*feriauntes. We haue done char „zu woe
mothe zarus in his bolome / a he cried elapdyfather which was oure durtyptodo. „ maße no kapth

ove Abꝛaham /haue mercx on me / Cel sae Audit chaunted ashe went Co genung / m put’ for vp
dee nus f be mape dyppe the cvppe of bis ken er gehe paticd thtowsdamarmn ano Galife. Hage vere
vrrhaien in water / colemip toge:top J am tourt ted as beenteninto a certapnctounc He n
bin this flame, But Ahaham tayo bnto eM: et him ten men p were lepets. nohich ſtode Chumes bioud
4 ge ende che enen nen the lyle tyme / a karre of a put koꝛth their bo pees andlapde: onixe.
— tel teceauedſt thy pical re / contrarꝰ wle a Jetu maſter haue metcponbs , IWhẽ he fae

5 inet, zar payne. Bow therkoze is he cõkoꝛted / a we them / he lade vnto them: Go and ſhewe
medtceip thou att punitcped Bexonde allthis / pptwe⸗ bother went ontop Daettes dnd Anon
path nO ne pou and vs ther is a greate pace let / to ? as they went they were clenled. And one of
rere they which wolde go krom hence to you can⸗ the / when he lawe thathe was clẽled / turned
t ther- not necher mape come from thence to us. backe agapne / a wrth a loude vopce pꝛapled

ue; Chen he tapdg pꝛape the therkoze tather / God / a fell doune on his face at his fete / and

de rerpbümto mp kathers haue 02 baue tr- gaue himthänes. And p lame was a Sama⸗
wfruett. ue bꝛethzen ko to warne thẽ lelt they allo co kitane. Ind Fetus anfwered lapde: are ther
„ Sme into the piace ofcourment. Abzahg tard not ten clenfed: Wut where are thorenyne?
. vnto him: they baue Moles a the Pꝛophetes Cher are not kounde that returned agarne /
fee them heare thé. Andhe card nape father to gene God pꝛayle ſaue only this ttrafiger,
Abꝛaham / but vr one came vnto them kram Ard he lapde vnto him:arple / a gothy ware


*


bange konth that belt garment and put it an reaue von into eu bitactons. Ef. De lapde vnto thyfarth hath made the whole.
bene ene A. Hethatis h mt 2 u sete aunnoe bern A her dearenek dpotes dhe Bro. 5 c ee ofc Bh
is fete. And bange hrdder that tatked caulfe the came is fa l mmoche. Indhe e ts maden phetes / nether wyl ther beleue / though one riles whe the kyngdome ol dod chuld come .arpenyngctio


krom deeth agarne. e antwered them g larde⸗Khektpngdome okmeoß podle
Serre dee neee Scheme not wich waptinge koz. Methertone od with
Lues to agen mib nenne mar men kae L ohezeſlo there. Fa beholde auen hee,
and n lhre ether ae eevee iis the- Mengdome ul Sadie nich inv. ale ug
ende of the worlde. d And he lapde vnto the dilciples the dapes acooynge to ß
; @ J will come / when ve Mal delpʒe to le one dave couengunt wa
ofthe fonne of man / a pe ball not le it. And e ec e
cher cal fayeto pon: Be here e there Go la done 0.


mapa gn une iw hebe nioche. Bo ben vt pe en kapthrul oe hath


i
was loſte / a is now kounde. epbegan inß wicked mämon who wil beleue zou in text meanet)?
to be merxe. Che elder brother was in che that is true: Ind pt pe haue n. e Biewer
ewe whe he came gdzeimcnye tof outes Archlul tn anotyer mares. butynes: tho ie wen
beberde minckrellpe daumpng ¢ called one ail geue pou po cf Gare
his leruaũtes / a atked arb dru eebexoreabet e Malt hate b one ve pieaica


me
@ Hill hm / let bs eate and be merp:to this a


Fmeäte. Andhelapde onto himthr bꝛocheris


comte/a thy Catherhan hilien b fattencalilfe/. Npefeßocher Fecanot Antag. he f not atter chem mos folowe themt/ £0208 the poure go hun
Brecute Deiat receaurh yim Cate bys.” AU thete thinges herde th res allo pvp, een chat apereth out orden elch ae
anne lg aher vere uneacinn Bee, See mien: Sethe won Eu de n on or heuen: and chpnech vntothe other parte o


heauen* So fail the tonne of man Gi e fe.
jack, viij. de


A J wh i
Swerene larde to bys father: Lo there 4 Aicpe vours relues hetoꝛe men but God no Peeve Cee chen chat he tuto ofende one of daves. But tye mug ecutive many dingy,


peares haue done cee weth poure hertessfoz chat whitey is bpablie mum e af rt 58. pour lelueg. Af and be rekuled of this nacion. Lube vibe,
n ee elt 5 ce ate : Ot th aed pee eue Ag it happened meve tyme of Hoedo Male


t a ft che, ie bint
CCC


The G


cher dꝛanze / theyma es z wete ma: that
eee 25


into the urkeig the foun cam ¢ deäropedthe
all. phew pte alto / as it chaũced in § dares
ol Lot. They ate / they dzancke / chey bought
the plolde / cher pianted / cher bplte. Ind cuen
the lame dape that l ot went out ol Jodom it
rapned krze & hrmſtone kr heauẽ / and de⸗
Groped thé all. Atter thele enfamples/ Wat it
beim $ dave whe d lonne of ma Mall appere.
G  Acwhatdavebethatig on che houle toppe
his duckein § hole let him nac come dou⸗
netotakeit out. Ind ipkewile let not him 5
lain the feldes kurne backe agayne to 6 he
dette bevinde Remeber Lottes wykt. Who⸗
loeuer wrll go about to laue bys ire / call
Lote tt:¢ wholoeuer Hall ole hys lte / Malt
laue it. I tell vou in 6 nyght / cher halbe two
mone beed done ſbalbe keceaueds the other
Walbe fozfaké, Two chalbe alto agrindinge
together: the one thalbe receaued / and the
% Where⸗ OEE kocallen. And they ancwered / z lade
Seeler the bo co hem: wheare Lowe: Indhe larde vnto
e halbe hp chemstherfocue the *bodp chalbe / crther
ther weil the Wyll che egles retote.
ache on nn Ke ee eee
man de P par lei the publican. Ehe ‘hpngbome of Sol
e
a om e! ſoch as e
Renee he his rund owe hym. The bipnde man Ude


10 iy
ther io gehe re cabis pant.
vnto me.


be. riß. Chapter. ＋
ld be put forth a lymilitude vnto
che /fpanttying char men ought al
wapes to pꝛape a not to be wery /
Icaringe: Cher was a Judge in a


Dave andnraht onto hem ve though he
e
4 utchiy. ett
Sonne ot m m ehe al


-fayth ontheerch.

. Indhe put koch his cymilltude onto
certayne which trucked in chemkelues $ they
were perkecte and berppled other. wo men
Avent bp into the te ple to pꝛape: d one a Pha⸗
vile @the ottier a publica. The Pharile tone
weed need ee
the thit J amn. ‘ottos
ners /oniutte/aduoutrers/o? as this publics


I Eat twyte in the wene. Jgeue iythe of all


che cs abe his dicclples ae


that /theprebuben thé But Fetus called the
onto him larde: Soufice chrwzen ko come
vnto me / a koꝛbidde them not. Koz of loche is
che kyngdonie ol God. wierely 3 lave onto
vou: wholoeuer receaueth hot f kyngdome
ot Godaga chploe:be Wall not enter cherin.

Anda certapne ruleratgedhym laxinge:
goodmafer-what ought Ito do / to obtarne
eternal tye? Jelus ſapde onto him: noh cal
lett thou ie good: Mone is good/ laue God


only. Thou knoweſt the comaundementeg: End. fr.


Chou ſpalt not commit aduoutry:thou Male
hot kpll chou chalt not ſteale: thou Malt not
beare falle wytnes: Bonoure thy father and
thy mother. And Sheen thele haue G
Rept krõ my pouthe. noh Actus earde 6 He
fapdebnte him: Vet lache


A eek ate
**Sellalthatthoubatt/anittributettonto


that / he was heux:koꝛ be was bevy ryche.
when Fetus fawe hymmozne / he lapde:
with what ditkrculte Mail they that haue rp⸗
ches enterinto the nyngdome ok God: it
ealper £03 a camell to go thozowe a nedleg
eve / then Foz a ryche man to enter into the
nyngdome of cod. Then lapde they p hearde
ne ie Leah a a Ld pony ioe
ſarde: Chenges whych are vnpo
men are potpble wyth God.


Chen Peterlarde: Lo tne ett atl


Ehaue Folowedthe. And he larde 4
*wetelp ¥laye vnto pou / ther is no ma that
leaueth houle / ocher father a mother / other
bzethzen/ og wyle / oꝛ cyplozen Foz the kyng⸗
dome of Gordes lane / wypch Came hall not
receaue moche moare in thys wozde: and in


. ee f
the pocze schon walk haue treagre inheg⸗ in gut
uen / and come / a folowe me. nohẽ he hearde E


uedthe. And immedlatlyhe tawe / and kolo⸗
wedhim / pꝛaplinge God. Ind allthe people /


che xix. Chapter. L.
Moye entred in a wet thozow pies


And
opde:beholde Lande / haulfe of my good⸗


paths xtr. d.
Jar . b.


2 tan en
we n
Chauetpis man tovaygne due h. : — ü


S.Lube,


WMico. And beholde / ther was a man


beet,


And iecame to patte/ when he was conte


iploge/tahe chou auctozite ouer ten cyipeg.
ndbother came lapinge: Lone thy pounde


not doune / n repe ſt that thou dyddeſt not lo⸗
we Andhe ſapde vnto hum: De thyne awne


bim that paunde / a geue it him that hath ten

pounde . And they fayoe onto hem Lorde he ato gym tha
bath ten peunde. J fave onto pou / that önko bath l lor
allthem that haue te chalbe geuen g és hin e lees
that bath not euen thache bath halbe talen Bal rig. b
Wopcouerthole myne enempes /


Fetus theron. And as he went / lheplpꝛedde
their cloches in the waye. 0
And when he mas now come /wheare he


And


ir peace / che tones wolde crie
peace ch hebchele


rounde / ¢
the euen with the


John. vf. e.
War. xib.


Bath rege,
Wark. ri. b.


a
emen og" meu
of “Seo. ante fapinge-pt we wall faye from heauen:he


Wah. ric. lape:whp then beleued pe hem not: But and ces whichdenvetha
ewe Malta ok men / all the people wyll And they ackedht


ophete. And they anlwered that they
. —— tell whence it wag. And Fetus


ark. h. a. pr
featon.and whe the tyme was come he ſent
cher fhuld


relurrecciõ whole w
Foꝛ feuen hadher to


Zeus entered anh fapbebnto he. Sg


NE er want baie taret are ma


rked / but ther w


‘worthy to’
{halbe manele rape bat


Dt.. Luke, xrriiij


knlore chat worde and che recurreccpon kr
deeth nether mary wyues nether are maried
‘no pet cã dye enp moare. fo thep are equal
vnto the angels: i are the ſonneg ot God in
as moche as thex are the childꝛen of p relur⸗
recridn. Andthat che deed hall ryte agapne /
euen Moles lygnptped belxdes the bulthe /
when he tapde: che L ode God ol Abꝛaham
and the God of Ilaac / and the Goo ol Jacob.
Fon he is not the God of the deed / but or them
which liue Foꝛall lyue in him. Chen certay⸗
ne of the Pharites antwered and lapde: Ma⸗
fer thou hat wel layde. And alter that durſt


Step not acke him enp queſtion at all.
berg.. Chen lapde he onto them: how fave they
uF.» chat Chzittis Baud lonne: And Baud and mother / and of poure bꝛethꝛen / a hyut⸗


him elke laveth in the boke of the Plalmes:
Che Lozde fapoe vntomp Loꝛde / yt on my
ryght bande’ tpil Tmeke thyne enemps thy
fote tole. Senge Dauid calleth him Lond:
how is he chen his fonne?

Chen in § audpence ok all the people / he


N rtf a. layde vnto his diccipies:⁊ beware ot ; Ocri⸗
mirid. bes whych delpꝛe to go in löge clothynge: a


Ioue gretinges in the markets / and the hpelt
leates in the fynagoges a the chefe roumes
at keaſtes / which deudure widdowes houleg
andthat vnder a coloure of longe pꝛapinge:
the lame (hall receaue greater danmacton.


ELH AE commendeth the poore wyddow / telleeh ofp
Sectrucclon of gerulaiem / ot tale teachers / ot the tor
kes aud troubics foz to come / of the ende or p worde /
and of hes awne commpnge. 3


Che. xxi. Chapter.


a She beheide / he lawe z ryche mé/
jo ot they cat in their es
into ß treaſurp. Ind he tawe alto a


certapne pooze wyddowe / whych
Caf in thyther two mytes. And he lapde: or a
trueth J fave onto pou / this pooze wyddowe
bath putin moare then they all. Foz ce
haue ot᷑ their ſuperflupte added onto p offe-
ringe of God: but ſhe / ot her penurp hach catt
in all the lubſtaunce that che had.
As ſome ſpake ol the tempie / how it was
garnilſped with goodly tones Jewels / he


ald. karte. Che dapes wll come, of thete


thpnges whych ve le call not Be lette ſtone


* vpon ſtone / chat wall not be thzowendoune.


And they alkedhemtapinge: Water when
Mal thele thingdbe / a what ligne will therbe
when luche thinges thall co. ie to patie.
And hellard: take hede /p pe be not decea⸗
ued foꝛ many will come in my name laping
Z am he:and the tyme dꝛaweth neare. Folo⸗
we pe not them therkoꝛe. But when pe heare
ok warre and diſlencion. be nat afraped. Foz
thele chenges mi ſckpzſt come: but the ende
koloweth not by a by. Chen layd he vnto the:
C Nac pon wall tyte agayntt nacpon /a kyng⸗


247


dome agapnck kyngdonie / and greatt etth⸗
‘quakes chalbe in all quarters / and honger /
And peſtilece:a fearkult thinges. And greate
ſygnes ſhal ther be from beauen; 8

But befoze all thele / they Matt tape their
handes on vou and perlerute vou / delpuerin⸗
ge pou bp to the D pnagoges g into pꝛelon /
andbzpnge pou betoze tynges a rulerg fog
mynames fake.And this Wall chaunce you
£o2 atectimontall Let it ſticke thertoze ratte
in poure hertẽ mot once to ſtody hetoꝛe what
ve Hall anfwere:fo2 ꝗ wil geue you a mouth
and wyldome / where agapnſte / all vourad⸗
uerlarpes chal not be able tolpeanr noz ves
Lit. Ve & pe chalbe betraped of youre kathers


men / and louertz / and lome of you fall they d
put to deeth. And hated hail ve be or all men
foz my names fake. Vet ther all not one he
te of poure heedes perplche. Wyeth voure , With pack
“*pactence polſeſſe poure foules, ce polecle pouce
And when ye le Ferulatem beleged wyth foutes 50. Che
an holte / hen önderttande that the defolacig tele poresten
ol thefame ts nye, Chenterthem whpchare geh a ah
in Jewrpe fipe ko the mountaynes’. And let dard bp pacik⸗
them whych are in the myddes o€ it / departe ce pett thozow
oute. And let not them that are in other coun fayth in hic
trees enterther na thete be the dapes of er a aner
bengeance to fultitaltehat are waite bene
wo be to them that be with chylde / a to them
P geue cucke in thofe dapes Fo ther walbe ¢
Greate trouble inthe jande / and wath ouer
Allchrs people. And they hall fall on the ed⸗
ge ok the lwearde / and halbe leed captyue /
into all nacrong. Ind Jerulalem Walbe roe
den onder kote of the gentyls / vntyll the tyme
ol the gentyls be kulfplled.
„ kAnd ther chalbe lygnes in p ſunne / and
in the mone / and in the ttarves; @ in the erth
the people chalbe in loche perplexite / they
Wall not tell whych wape to turne them fel:
ueg. Che fee andthe waters Wall rooze/ and
mẽnes hertes thall faple them fo feare / and
foz 2 alter thole thinges whych call
come on the erth Foꝛ the powers of heauen
thali moue. And then Mail they te § tonne ol
man come in a cloude wyth power e greate
gloꝛp.i when theſe thinges begynne to come
Copatte:thentokebp/eltiteop poure>* yeas „ en
des oz poure redempcfondzatweth npe, pour heedes ec,
Andhe chewed thema krmulttude behodde . Goltte by
the fpage tree/andall other trees / when they F the bed /
Goute forth their buddes/ ye fee knowe of ame e
poure atone Celues that Commer is then pe arte. 10 e
at hand. So lyle wyle ye (when ve le thele :
thinges come to pale) vnderſtande / thatthe
nyngdome of God ig npe. merelyg Cape onto
oUuthis generacpon (hall not vaſſe/ cyl all
fulkplled. Heauen and erth Hall pate:but
mr woꝛdes (hall not pale. E
Ci & Cake


The Golpell


. Cake hede ko poure telues lelt voure
hertes be ouercome wyth turkettinge ¢d254
Hennes and cares of thys wonlde: and that /
-pdave come on vou onwares Foz as alnare
Wall it come on all them that Cyt on the fate
ofthe erthe. Watche 4 contynually €
pꝛape / that ye mape ol
this that Wall conte / and that ve maye ſtande
-befoze the fonne ok man. E.

Inthe daye tyme / he taught in the temple
and at nyght / he went out/andbadabpoinge
in che mount olluete. And all people came
in the mognpage to hrm in the temple / ko; to
hearehym. 85 1 .

Chilat is vetvayed, eate! er (abe, Che
Aellrerenoeigeſte ande pep erte pais
greateſt / he reproueth the: the pꝛapeth thre tymes vpon
the mount. Chep take hym and önnge him to the hye
prettes boule: S eter denpeth him ehzples they bringe
bpm before the countell.

Che xi. Chapter.
Af e Fatt of Cwete bꝛeed dzue nye
Math. xxvta. whych is called efter / and the hye
Mare. pill. a. zeltes a Scribes tought how to

: An him / but they keared ö people.

; Then entre Satan into Judas / wholelrz
name was Iccariot (which was of the nöbze

ol p tweluẽ) a he went his wave a cömuned

with the bye pre tes a offices how he myght

betrape him tothe. And they were glad:¢ p20

miled to geue him monep. And he contented/

: = 1 3 Kade vnto

. orbi. b. them when the people were awape.
Barra. nerdaperche the bave of mc be ou
Of ne ceapte the elterlambe mut be offered,
Andhe lent Peter a John fapinge:go a pꝛe⸗
pare bs the eſterläbe / ß we mare eate. They
de to him. Where wilt thou, that we pꝛe⸗
are: And he ſapde vnto the. Beholde whe ve
Be entred into the citie / ther Mall a man mete
vou bearinge a pitcher of water / him kolowe
into the tame houle that he entreth in / x laxe
vnto the good man of the houle. Che matter
ſapech onto the: where ig the gett chamber /
‘where g (hal eate mine eſter lambe with my
dilciples? Andhe thai Hew vou a greate par
Toure paued. Cher make redp. Ardthey wet
and founde as he had lapde vnto them; a ma⸗
de redptheelker lambe.


John. viß . a.


And whẽ p houre was come / he tate doune or me / haue an ende.


and thetwelite Dpotties wyth bynt. Andhe beholde here are twocweardeg. And he la
Klaxdebntothem: J haue inwardiy delrzed to vn itis 5 1
5 Pie De ented ene e l nd he vent as he was wate


: _ Guffce.sfoz A faye onto pouhence fost

om hot eate ot i eny mooꝛe / vntyll it be kulkilled

Math. rbi. e. in the kyngdome of God nd he tone d cup

EER ETM ano gaue thanties /anbfayd. cake thys and

trorri-e. deupde it amonge pout. For Tape onto pou:
‘J wyll not derncke of the frute of the bone /
öntpll che kyngdome of God be come.

Andbe ton bꝛeed / gaue thankes / a gaue


taynegtacetofipeall ©


tothem laringe hrs tomy body whpch i
geuen koꝛ vow. Chys do Hi the remem ae
de olme. Aphewyte allo when theyhad cup⸗
pedſhe toke the cup laringe: his cup is the
‘netwe teſtament in my bloude/ wyrch alt
koꝛ vou be chedde. 85 8
et beholde / bande ob him chat betraveth
me / is wyth me on the table. Ind the lonne
ok man goeth as it is apoynted: But wo be
to that man by wh he is betraped. And they
began to enqupꝛe amoge chem feines / which
oF chem it chulde be / that chulde do that.

. Andtger was a lrpe amonge them / Sach. 25 hl.
which oF tue che ihr Urner deche gem p e 5
he larde onto thé: the kynges ok the gentyls Tate. . .
Vapgnie ouer them, and they that beare rule
ouerthem / are called gracious loꝛdes. But
ve halt not be fo But he p is greateſt amige
vou / walbe as the poungelt: and he that fg
chete/Matbe ag the myniſter. Foz whether is
greater / he that lytteth at meate:oz he p fers
uueth? Jg höthe that kitteth atmeate? Ind y
am anſoge vou /as he thatminttreth. Je ae
they which haue bpdden wyth me in mytẽp⸗
taclong, Andz apopnt onto pou a kingdonie
as my kather pass apporaten tome: that ve
mape cate and diyncke at my table in my
kyngdome / andlyr on leates / and iudge the
tweſue trybes of Irgell. F.

„ Andß Lord tapde: Simon / Sims beholde

Satan hath delpzed vou / to lfte vou / ag it

were wheate: but J haue pꝛaped for the / chat

thy laythtarle noi. And when thou arte con⸗

uerted / krengthe thybꝛethꝛen. Ind he tarde wD

bnto hym. L ozde J am tedy to go wyth the Bath. rel e
into pꝛerong to dect. And he tapde: tel the Wer rug.
Peter / p cocke chall not crowe is dape tpt

thou haue thzple denped p thou kneweſt me.

Andhe lapde nto chem: when I lent vou
wythout wallet wthrend lacked .
pe eny thinge? and hid apd / no. Ind he layd
to them: but now he that bath a wallet let
himtahe it vp / and like wyle bis ſerippe. And
he that hath 0 de bo po us coote
and bee one, Fos A tae vnto be . chat
that merh 4e witten mul be verko med eth rr
in me: *euen wyth the wyeked was he ont: Saz. 70.
bꝛed. Foz thole thynges whych are waptten John. Foih ke.

nd Cp riod


to mounte Oliuete. And the difcyples kolo⸗
wedhrm And when he cante ta the piace /
fapde tothe: pꝛape lett ye fall into téptacto,
Ind he gate him lelte trom them / abouta
ſtones caſt /a kneled doting/a prayen / a
Father vr thou wilt / zawe this cup tra e
1 0 e not my will / but thne be
kulfplled. And n bnto


ents


dem rom beatien coufoztynge!


Hem, Andhe


wat in an agonpe/ and prapedfomwhat lo.


BE; Andhps Cweate wag ipke dꝛoppes of


foe


rr, lig,


ned bpon


manbich te wech


Sfapde bnte him / beko


.
Bed


n


Lade
EET


joke


= _
2 5
ukt⸗ xxrb

not beleue. And pallo I athe pott / ve wyn ‘
not ant were me oz let me go. Heratter mall

the lonne ol man lyt on the ryght hand ok the

vower ot God. Chen ſapde they all arte thou

then tze tonne of God? He llapdto then: pe i

faye that am.chentapre thep:*what neve gpath. rl.

wo enpkurther wines? We dure lelues ha: Wart. Fuße

ue herde ol hys awne mouthe,


C Jelus ts hꝛought before 30 pl é
. en e e ive
enempes Fors
anbopety on che rode nnd is epd TE a
A pe any Convers, ih x
= whole multitude of thé arole /
VY) Stendebum onto wriate, Ader char nn
begãne to accule hym fayinge: we Joh zvihte⸗
haue kounde thys kelowe peruer⸗
nge to pave
e is Chzpta


e people: %

ther were b
th d people /
and begalme


fu
all


ine daye get. 0.6,
es toge⸗


And Pylate calledto gether p hye Pzelteg
be the tulers /a the people / and kayde vnto
mipe haue bꝛought this man vnto me/as
onethat peruertedthe people. And beholde n C
haue examined him betoze vou / a haue toüde
no faute inthis man/o€ thote thinges where
ok re accule hum. Nonozpet Perode. Foz 4
Seht vou co hem: and lo nothinge worthy ol
deeth is done to him. Iwill therkoze chaten
him / g let hi loule. Fo: ok necedite / he must ggath. roh. b
haue let one loule vnto themat that feaſt. Ware b..
Andall the people cryed atonce lapinge: Ibn. ug. a.
awape with hem / a delyuer to vs Bartabas:
hlch foz infutreccton made in citie a moz
ther was caſt in pꝛelon. Plate ſpane againe
E. ii. tothem


The Solpell


tothe wyllynge to let Fetus lowte. Andther

cried laringe:Cruciky him / Crucikr him. e

fade vnto thé the thyꝛde tyme. What eupll

ath be done: kynde no caule of deeth inhi

gwoillehertoze chaſten him / a let hym joule.

. Ind ther cryed i aloude voce /a required

puer. thathempght be.crucpfped And the vopce ol
Zehn. E. 4. chem and or che hre Prelkes pꝛeuapled.

And Pilate gaue tentence that it Huld be

as they required a let loule vnto them / himß

koꝛ inlurreccion and moꝛther / was caſt into

pꝛelon / whõ they delp ed: delpuered Fetus

Math. xxvß. to do Whym what they wolde. And as they

ark. pv. b. ledde him awape / chey caught one Symo ol

souiencicompnge out ok the feldes on hem

japoe thepthe cromte/ to beate ttatter Fetus.

And there kolowed hum a greate cöpanp of

people ¢ of wemẽ / which wemé bewarled a

lamentedhim. But Jeſus turned backe onto

chẽ / a lapde Daughters ol Lerulalem / wepe

not koꝛ me: but wepe koꝛ vdure ſelues / a Foz

poure childzẽ. Foꝛ beholde / d dayes wil come /

Viale. ſwhen men call tape: bappe ave & baren g

Sad 8. the wombes that neuer bare andthe pappes

Silatsii}.8 hich neuer gaue kucke. Chen Wall they bee

Ginnetofape to p mountapnes / kal on os: a

tothe bplles/couer bs. Foz pr ther do chys to


à gene tree / w albe done tothedzpe.
Ind Cher wee two tupll deers ledde wyth
Math reh. dhin to be clapne.“ And when they were come
John Fe . tof place, which is called Caluary/ther they
Zehn. Fr.d. v cructepeDbinn/@ Feurlidoers/one on bright
hande ¢ the other on f lekte. Chen layne Fes
lus:kather . ed them / koz oe ‘wootenot
what ther do And they parted his rayment /a
catt loottes. And the people ſtode ¢ behelde.

„ Andß ralers mocked him with the taying
he holpe other men / let hym heipe him tele,
kk he be Chri z cholen of God. The Couriers
allo mockied him / and came and gaue him ve
neger and tapde: pk thou be that kyngeok the
Tewes laue chy lelke. Andhys luperlcripciõ
was wꝛitten ouerhim / in Gehe / in Latin / a
Hebzeu: his is the kynge of the Jewes.

And one ok the cupll oders which hanged /
rapled on him favinge: Fé thou bechzitt laue


ert) ve or kame a darckneg ouer all the lande / vntyñ
een gude npneb hure fand the Conne was Davehenek:
mb pleatave, And varle ot the tepie drd rent euẽ thoꝛow


the mroͤdeg. Ind Jelus erped wrth a greake
vopce andlard: facher / into chr handes Feo
mende mpfpiete andiugen helps hadkerd,
he gaue vp ihe gooſt. hen the Centurion
fawe what had happened / he glozitped God
kapinge: Ska ſuretpe this m was perkecte.
And al the people that came to gethertothat
kyght / beholdynge the thenges whech were
done: tmoote their bzettes/¢ returned home.
And all his acquayntaunce / and the wemen
that kolowed hym from Galile / ſtode a karre
ok beholdynge thele thynges. 9

And beholde ther was a man named Jo⸗
leph / a councellour / and was a good ma and
alte / a did not content to the codtell a dede
Of them / which was of Aramathia / a citie oc.
the Jewes: whych kame allo wapted for the
kyngdome of God:he went vnto P plate and
begged $ boddpot Felus/etohe it doune / k
wapped it in a ſynnẽ clooth / a layed it in an
he wẽ toũbe / wherin was neuer man hefoze
laped E And g dave was p Saboch euen / c
the Sa both dzue on. Che wemen z kolowed
alter which came wyth him from Galle / ve⸗
helve the fepulcre ¢ how bis body was laped⸗
And they returned epzepared odoures and
opntmentes:butretted the Daboth dare / ac?
cozdynge to the commaurdement.
EC Thewemé come tothe graue / Chuiſt apear eth vnka ~
che two dicciples that go to warde Gaus ondeth in
the mpddet of all bis ptepples/ openeth their vnder⸗
Mandynge in the lerpptures / geueth them a charge /
altenbelh vp to heauen. A 2

Ahe xrüitj. Chapter. K
Nie Smozowwe after $ Spaboth eng z
in the mozninge/thep came vnto
Nees ofibe a brought Fodoures

cher had pꝛepared a other wenne
thé. And they kounde 5 one rowled awape
{6 d lepuicre / a went in; but kounde not the


wyth them. But their eyes were holden / that
they coulde not knowe hym. Andhe fapoe
vnto them: what maner or communicaciõs
are thele that ve haue one to another as ve
walk / and are fade? And the one of them
named Cleophas / antwered and faye vnto
hem: arte thou only a ſtraunger in Jerula⸗
lem / and haſte not knowen pthynges whych
haue chaunten therin in thele dayes? Co
whom he ſapd: what thynges:

Andthey lapd onto him:ok Fetus of Maxa⸗
reth wyych was a Pꝛophet / myghtye in deve
and wo ꝛde before God / and all the people.
Andhop the hve Pꝛeſtes / and oure rulers
delpuered bym to be condempned to deech:
and haue crucytpyed hym. But we truſted
that it ſhuld haue bene he that ſbuld haue de
Ipuered Ilrael. Ind as touchynge all thele

_ thenges to dave is euen the thrꝛd daye / that
hep were done.
2 Je and cevtapne wemen alto of dure cont⸗
Pany made bs altonxed / whych came erly
önto the ſepulchze / and tounde not bys body:
and came fapinge/ that they had tene abi
tion ok angels / whych layde that he was alps
ue. Ind cẽrtapne of them whpch were wrth
bs / went their wave to the fepulchze / and
founde it euen fo as the wemen bad layde:
but hem they lawe nok.
ndhe Capde onto them: O foles and clo⸗
we ol herte to beleue all that che Pꝛophetes
efpoken, Oughtnot Chzitt to haue tule


nere


be opened to vs the teryptures: Ind they :
foot pe ame outs etme 88e


here endeth che wotpert or
Sakncte lus


Metts,
Wath. xvi. U,


C The Golpell 0
Sayncte John.


che enerlaſtyng byꝛth of Chi / and how he bera⸗
e Minow of Foon. Thecallenge of Ane
ew / Peter. dc.


4
9


f


knewe him not

ee 16
ere taken

fox the *


Sones after,


gather / whych we
beige gehn bare wytnes of h
tavinge: Chys was he of whome


ug.
em fol.


And Fetus.
owe / a lard


DES,
One ot d two which heave John tpeane
und kolowed Jelus / was Andzew Simon
Peters brother. Che lame foũde bys bꝛother
Simon kpꝛit, and fapoe onto hym: we haue
tounde ellas / which is by interpꝛetacyõ /
annoynted:and bought bpm to Jelug. Ind
Fetus behelde him and lapde: thou arte St⸗
mon the lonne of Jonas / thou Malt be called
Cephas: which is byinterpꝛetacion / a fone,
Che dape kolowyng Fetus wolde go into
Galtie / a founde Phiſip / and lard vnto him /
kolowe me. Philip was of Bethtalda 5 citie
of Andze w and Peter. And Philip kounde
Hathanael / and lapde onto hym. We haue
kounde hym of whome Moles in the lawe /
andthe Pꝛophetes dyd werte Fetus d fonne
ok Joleph of Mazareth. And Mathanacl kad.
vntohym: can there enp good thynge come
oute of Nazareth: Philip apde to him: come
a


5 nd fe,
© Jelus ſawe Nathanael compnge tohym /


and fapde of hum. Beholde a ryght Ilraelpte /
in whom is no gyle. Nathanael fayde vnto
: bem: where fnewett thou me: Fetus an⸗
lwered / and ſayde vnto him: Before that Wht
Upcalledthe / when thou waſt onder p kygge
tree / Flawe the. Hathanael anfwered and
ſayd vnto him: Nabbi / thou arte the lonne ol
Sod / thou arte p kyng ol Icrael. Fetus ans
ſwered and fapde onto him: Becaule layde
vnto the / tawe the onder ð kygge tree / thou
beleueſt. Thou ſhalt le greater chinges then
chele. And he ſayde onto him: merelx / verelp /
Ilave vnto vou: herafter call pe tee heuen
open / andthe angels ol God alcendynge and
delcendynge ouer the konne ol man.
Chia curneth the water vnto wyne / and dxpueth >
‘bpers¢ lellero out of the temple.
che. ij. Chapter.
Hdthe thꝛrde dave was ther a ma
rpage in Cana a citie of Galle: ¢
che mother of Felus was there.
nd Felus was called allo and his
dilcpples onto the matyage. And when the
wyne fayled / the mother or Fefus fayoe vnto


phimthex haue no wyne Jeluis lard vnto her:
woman what haue J to do wych the? myne eave


houre is not yet conie. Bis mother kapde une
tothe myniſtres: whatloeuerhe fapeth vnto
Pou doit. Ind ther were ti e there /


pre waterpottes of ſtone akter the maner or
the purikringe of the Jewes / contaynynge 5


two oꝛ thie fun a pece.

And Jetus larde vnto them: ty ß water
pattes with water. And they kylledthe opto
che bꝛym. And he fapde vnto them: dꝛawe out


Ae „ beare vnto the gouerner of d featte,


V Ind ther bare it. when the ruler ok the kealt
had taſted the water that was turned vnto
wyne / and knewe not whence it was ( but z


5


Short, kechty,


mpfuares which dzue the water knewe) He
Called the bꝛrdegrome / and layde vnto hym:
All men at tur begynnynge / lett foꝛth good
Sopne/and*when men be deoncke then that a. whenmnen
which is woꝛle. But thou halt kept backe p ve dꝛonche ace
good wyne / vnt yl now. That i0/ when
Chis begynnynge of mpꝛacles dyd Jelus mein be krlleb
in Cana ofGaltie/and hewed his glo zh / and tite.
his dilciples beleued on him. E Aktertharhe , . 5.5 motives
delckded into Capernaum, ats be mother / ehm lone
and his bꝛethꝛen / and his dilciples / but con: in czene xi. b.
trnued not manpe dapes there. c
I Andthe gewes eſter was ruen at hande /
and Fetus wet vp to Jerulalem / and kounde
lvttynge in the temple thole that lolde overs
and chepe and doues ¢ chaungers ot money.
And he made alcource of (mail cozdes / and
dꝛauẽ ChE all out or the tẽ ple / with the Mepe
goxen / à powwzed out the chaungers monep/
and ouerthzue the tables / and ſayde vnto the 75
that lolde doues: aue thele thinges hence / a
make not my fathers houle an houle ol mar
chaundple Ind his dilciples remẽbꝛed / how 4
that it was wzpten:* the zele or thyne houle Pam vi le
hath euen eaten me. A
Chen antwered the Fewes and fayoe vn⸗
tohym: what token ſheweſt thou vnto vs /
leynge that chou doſt theſe thynges? Jelus
anlwered ¢fapde vnto them: deftrope thys Muth. ete
kemple and in thee dapes J wyll reare tt vp arch. fühl
agar aber fayde p Jewes lvl. eres was
this temple abplopnge: a wyit thou reare it
vp inthze dapes? But helpaheo€the temple
ok his body. As lone therfore ashe was rylen
fed deeth agapne, bys difeppies remembzed
Phe thus lapde. And thepbeleued p leriptu⸗
re / and the woꝛdes which Jeſus had ſayde.
When he was at Jerulalem at eſter in the
feaſte / many beleued on his name / whe they
lawe his myzactes which he dyd. But Fetus
put not hym lelke in their handes / becaute
be hnewe all men (and neded not / that enx
mi (ould teſtilie of him. Foꝛ he tnewe what
was in man. 7
Cbecömunptacion of Chriſt w Micotenius. Che
dockrpne 120 — or John / and what wytnelſe he
th ot —
2 Che. ij. Chapter.
Mer was a mũ or the Phariles na⸗
ed Hycodenmis a ruler amonge
che Jewes che lame came to Je⸗
Atusbynyaht/andtapdeonto hym.
Rabbi / we anow p chou arte a teacherwhich
arte come fromm God. Foz no man coulde do
fuche myꝛacles as thou doeſt / except God
were with hym. Jelus anlwered a layd onto
binn wierelpbereip 2 faye bnto the: except
67 60 anewe he cannot le the kyngds
ol God. Nicodemus Cayde vnto him: how can
ama be bozen when he is olde? an 1 5
b. in


ue
Bing
know / a teſtity that we haue lene: and pe ves
ceaue not oure wytnes. Ik when J tell pou
erthlpthenges / ve beleue not: how Guile pe
beleue / pr J Mail tell pou ofbeuenty things?
baNgman ar, And ino man alcendeth op to heauẽ / büt
fendeth.into he that came doune from heauen / that is to
Heauen “Au Dera ye the konne or man which is in heauen
aut oc. Chal And as Moles lylte vp che lerpent in the
. 1 no man een wyldernes / euẽ lo muſt the lonne of man be


tur op e nabe man eee inhym pe⸗
u


it haue eteman lyke. L
>] Foꝛ God to loueth the woꝛlde / that he
255 only forme / that none that be


but by Chzilt f
Funn of oo Sb!
that cam from
beau gc. Duly hath geut


bo bts rade jeue in him / wüde pertChe:but Wulde haue
e wenge ite fen 80D Cent not ie Conne
er aBue that gde cödempne the wonde: but


that the wozldthzough him / myght be fauedi


bore mpi be He that belueuech on hym, tall not be con⸗


ym mpgbt


Lea
l ane bch eae
ovtety greate lp of $ 20 ac,
„hat


90
e ſpieite are


elouynge communteac pon of Chuiſe with the
Boran int che kl yor Bow epee wo and eh
leth the culers foune, was tt geuen
¶ Che. iti. chapter, boue mealuct.
lone as the Loꝛde in Tunit.


faucd ge + Chenempnen, But he that beleueth not / is con⸗


both
mpned all redy / becaule he beleueth not in
4 ioe same ok the only lonne of God And thys
and thofe is the condempnacton / that lyght is come in
hatha beleue. to the woꝛld / a the men loued darcknes moze
then lyght / becaule their dedes were euyll.
Foz euerp man that eupll doeth / hateth the
ipgbt:nether commeth to lyght lelk bys dedes
chuld be repꝛoued. But he chat doth trueth /
commeth to 5 lyght that his dedes myght be


nnowẽ/ how b they are wiought in God. K whych


Alter ehete chynges cam Jelus a hys dil⸗
chen tothe ewes land / a ther he hallted
with che @ baptifed. Ind John allo baptiled
in Enon belpdes Salim / becaule ther was
moche water there / a they came a were bap⸗


tiled. $02 John was not pet catt into pꝛelon.


ind ther arole a queſttõ betwene Johns
vitcplesanb the Jewes aboute purifpinge,
And they came brito John / Alarde onto hin:
Sabbt cen uren werner Beh Joꝛdan /
to wh thou bareſt wytnes. Beholdẽ ß fame
baptiletb / a all men come to hym. Lohn an⸗
Cwered/afayde:a ma can receaue nothrnge
at all except it be geuẽ him krom heauen. Je
route felues are witnelles / bowthat J card


agarne. But
materia: J wal geue bem / wanne a


moteathzlzbut § water chat J Wall geue
bim / halbe in hyma well of water / cpꝛyn⸗
Synge vp into euerlaſtynge lpte The womã
kad bntobim: Spꝛgeue me of that water /
BF thet not / nether come hyther to dꝛawe.


Fetus ayo vnto her. Go g call chr hulband /


and come hyther. And the woman ancwered
and lapde ta hin: J haue no hucband. Fetus
larde to her: Choũ hat wel tapd / q haue no
bulband Fo thouhaſte had kpue hufbädes /
and he whom thou now batt is not th buts
band. Chat lapdeſt thou truelp.

Che woman lapde vntohrm: Drꝛ J pers
ceaue 5 thou arte à Prophet. Dure fathers
Wwozthippedin thys mountapne: a ve fave D
in Jerulalemis p place where men ought to

ite


e⸗


Che woman lapde vntohym: J wot well
Melllas wall come / wrhch is called Chzptt,
When he is come che will tell vs all thinges:


257
3 7
„ xxbiij.
beleued on him koz the taping ok the womã / 5
which tettitied: he tolde meal thynges that
euer J dyd. Chen when the Samaritans
were come vnto him ther betought hym / B
he wolde tarp with them. And he abode there
two dapes. Ind many moo beleued becaule
or his awne woꝛdes and lapde vnto the wor
man: Now we beleue not becaule of thy
lapinge:toꝛ we haue herde hym dure lelues /
and knowe that thesis euen in deve Chilt
the lautoure of the wonde. 9 2
After two dapeg he departed thence / and

wentawaxe into Galle.“ And gelus hym Math ih. d
elke tettifien that aPzophete hach none jo? apaunevta
houte in his awne countre. Ihen as lone ag Lune. uh. e
he was come into @alile/ the Galiieans rez
ceauedhem whrch had kene all the thonges
chat hedrdatgerulalemat ö feaſt. Foz they
wet alto vnto the keaſt dape. And Jelus cam
Agapne into Cana of Galile / wher he turned
the water into wyne. 8 8
„ Andther was a certapne ruler / whole c
lonne was leche at Capernaum. às fone as
the lame herde that Fetus was come out ol

ewzr into Galile / he wet vnto him / and bes

ught him / that he wolde delcende / a heale


Jelus fayde vnto hir that kpeake ontoche th


amhe. And euen at § popnte 1 dilci⸗
vles / z maruelledthat he talned with §
man. Vet no man lapd onto him:

gu wi


rege


hate


how


to be


ealeth the man that was Cycheepabte ehprtie
Sd cancel pane ankwereth for hen
fe / and reproueth them.
4 Che. b. Chapter.
Ri Kter that there was a keaſt of the


terhouke / a pole called,
bethleda / hau yng kiue


lo as moche to
faye ao atpitele


Many oF the Samaritans ok that cxtie uer chen txt alter the terynge of 2 of an botpitally


thete vepnge.
0 pace
was by a poe di
where 5 fo!
that were of
kecd in > teple,
were hept. B


A canakmyneawne kelke do nothpng at des into § [ye


5 net he it was. soz Jelug had
gotten aie meer ee ‘was
iegce ok people in the piace.

center that / Fetus kounde ben in the
temple/ a lade vnto him: behölde chou arte
made whole / ſynne no mooze / leſt a worte
chynge happen vnto the. The man departed
Fthlde che Jewesthar it was Jelus / whych
j ta ſade hum whole, K And therfoze che Je⸗
weg dpd perlecute zelus /a foughtp meanes
to lie hun / becaulè he had done there ch

on $ Baboth dave And Fetus antwered the:


Py „ derte /a J worke, .


be Mr tee Nherkoze the Jewes loughe d moate tony
sega bmn nt ecaule beben brane the Sa
ether ger. both but larde alto thatesod was bis Father
ee ad um equall with God.
Vina Daye’ derelp / verely/ J fave vnto pourthe konne can
aa enter Hhochpnigeofbin fcife, but thaebeeeth ®
_ Béeth no cSmen father do. Noz whatloeuer he doeth / doeth
, Mecshaunbpte the konne allo. Foz the kather loueth ö lonne /
b none 50 . and peweth hn be wih whbakloeuer he
: him kelke doeth. ndhe will chewehym grea⸗
ker woꝛkes then chele/becaufe ve ſhuld mar⸗


ede pcheneth the / eliẽ fo che
quasar! whom ep eter


cae at


E ge kacher enp man: but


elehgelus z lapbe vnto them: that ve


{ave soz Iphewple as the ee :
11


sobatto
wie te


opted
‘come kozthe: they chat haue done goodvntoß ¢ wherby5,y

relurrec net en thep that haue dane Par 0
eupil onto che recurreccton of bapitacion, E. K ug tat


(else not myne atone wyll /
but the well of father which bath lent me.
e on

e. Cher
orm and am ſure chat the wytnes which


pen


a 1
5


leue

criptures / to in thé tethincke

vc haue eternal ite: a ther are they whych
kellikx of me. And pet will ye not cometome /

tre might haue ile. Ireceaue not pꝛapte

omen. But J knowe pou / that ve haue not

the loue of Godin you. J am come in me fas

thers name / and pe receaue me not. Itano⸗


80 2 Wolde
0

ene ok me. But e ye beleue noche

wirtrnge: how Huld ye beleue my word: L

i Nk 2285 Fpoe Cont wen bepeeteey — 2 *

Lease cb l wa pere: er


ecalled Cibertas. Anda great
irauleteude tolo wedhrm / be


Gk. S.
ther had ene his mp:acles wgpch ye dd on
_ them that were dikealed. and gelus went vp
into amountayne there he tate wyth hes
iteipies. And etter; a feaſt of ß Fewes was
nye. EL Chen Jelus lykte vp his eyes / and
lame a great cõpan come vnto hm /a ſayd
bnto Philip: whence Wall we bye bꝛeed that
chele might eate.Chis he layd to pꝛoue him:
oz he him lelfe knewe what he wolde do.
i Phllip ancwered him / two hundꝛed penp
Woꝛthe or bꝛeedare not ſullicient Foz them / x
eur man haue a lptell. Chen lapde onto
him one okhis dilciples Andzew Simo Pe⸗
ters brother. Chere ig a lad here / which bath
-Eprie barlp loues and two kylches: but what


that amonge tomanp:? And Fetus tapde:


Wahe § people cytdoune: Cher was moche
gralle in che place And the men late doune /
in nombꝛe / about fyue thoutand. Ind Fetus
fohe the bꝛeed / and gaue thanckes a gaue to

the dilciples / and hys dilciples to them that
were let doune. Andiphewple of the kylhes


Ass moche as they wolde.


When ther had eate ynough he fapde vn⸗


“° fopisnttetpies gatherbp the bionen meate


chat remapneth: chat nothynge be lot. And
gathered it to gether ana kylled twelue
ttes with the bꝛonen meate / or the tyue
barlp loues: which broken meate remayned
vnto them that had eatẽ. Chen the men / whe
they had fene the myracle p Jelus dyd / capd:
this is ot a trueth the Pꝛophete that hu lde
come into the wonde. &
he geluis perceaued 5j they wolde come /
take him vp to make him kyng / che depar⸗
ted agayne into a moũtayne him lelle alone.


fade.
ib And whẽ euẽ was come his dilciples wee


vnto che lee a entred into a Mippe and went
ouer the tee vnto Capernaum. And anone it
was darcke / btw not come to them.
Atrdthe lee avote with a greate wynde that
blew. And when they hao tote abouta.rrb,
Oz a. xxx.ſurlonges / they tawe Zerus walke
© on thetee/@nzawenyeoneod Gippe/¢ were
atyaped. Andhe apne onto them: Ft is J / be
hota frarde. Chen wold they haliẽ receaued
into the pp / andthe chyp was by and

pat the lande whither they went.

Che dare kolowynge / the people whych
ſtode on the other lyde of the lee / lawe p ther
was none other Hyp theare / auc that one
wherin to his dirciples were entred / a that
Fetus went not in with bys dilcpples in the
Hipbut that his dilciples were gone a wave
Alone. How be it / ther cam other chippes fd

cv Ctheriag nye onto the place / where they ate
bꝛeed / when the Lozd had bledten. Chen the
A people lawe that Jelus was not there ne⸗
ther his dicciples / they alto tone chippyng a
came to Capernaum lekynge koꝛ Fetus,


John,


a PEERS

And whe they had kounde hym on 5 10

lde of the lee / they layde vnto hym: Nabbt /

WHE camel chou Bpdder⸗Jelus antwerd thE

and fayde:berelp/oerely I faye onto vou: ve

kene me / not becaule pe fawe the mpzacies?

hilt becaule ve ate of § loues /g were Eplted,

A Kabeure not toꝛ the meate which peryl⸗

ſheth / hut forthe meate that endureih onto

eyetiatinge lrke / which meate the tonne ol

man chall Feat onto pon. Foz him hach God

the father* lealed. :
Chen layre they vnto hint: what Hall we senteny that

do p we myght woꝛche the wozches of ov? 580 50

ih won oer and lapdeuntochem. THY wave of the

ig the Woke ok God/ that ye beleue on bint, poipe gor ov

who be bath fene.chep layde vnto him: what is Which tea

fygne cheweſt thou then / that we maye le a ale

beleue the 1Bhatdoeſt thou woelle? Pure cles what he ls,

fathers dyd eate Manna in the delert / as it

i wepttet he gaue them breed krom heauen

to eate. Jelus layde vnto thẽ: verely / verely

I Cave vnto pou: Moles gaue vou not bꝛeed

krontheauen: but mpfarber geueth vou the n che lyccbe

true bꝛredkrom heauen Foz thek breed nf oF axon (9 he

Godishe which cometh doune krom heaut / which coueey

andgeueth lpfe onto the wozlde. Dotne Fes eae


Chen fapd thep onto him: d euermoze Wns gseh
geue bs this bꝛeedſand Fetus iayd vntothẽ: !
Aamthat breed öklpfe. ethar commeth ol Hatt) is 8


me ſhallnot honger:and he that beleueth on tue and tpucly
ime hall neucrehurtt. e But Aland buco pen of heme
vou: that ye haue lene me / a vet beleue not, b whole wall.
Al chat the father geueth me Mall come to
me: and hym that cometh to me / Jcaſt not
awape. Foz came doune from heauen mot
to do myne awne wyll / bit hyg wyll whych
bath tent me. Andthrs is the fathers wyll
which hath ſent me / chat ofall whpehhehath
geuen me / J MHuldetoote nothinge: but Muto
rayle it pp agapne at Platt dave, And thys id
Y wil of bini g Cenc me: that euer y ma whtch
fepth ö fone @ beleueth on hym / haue euer⸗
lalting lpke. And J will rapſe him bp at ö talk
dape Che Jewes then murmuredac him / be⸗
caule be capd: q ani that bꝛeed which is come 0
doune frObeané And they lapde. Js not thys
Jetus the lonne OF Fofeph whofe father and
mother we knowe? How is it then that he
lapeth / I came doune fro heauen: Fetus an⸗
twered d lapde bnto them. Murmur not be⸗
twene voure keines. E No man can come gyary 1,
to me except pkather which bath lent me dea Kt. ra.
wehrm. And A will rate hym op at the lalt
dape. Ic ig wzlttẽ in d Pꝛophetes / that they
Ibe ali taught ot God. CEuery man ther⸗
ze that bath hearde and hath learned ol the
father commeth onto me. Hoc that enpman
hath fene 6 kathet / laue he which is of God,
the lame bath lene the father,
Gerelyberely A Cape onto vou / he that be
; euely


The Golpell


leueth on me hath euerlactyngelrke. Lam 5ß
bced of lyle. Fouxe fathers dd eate Wanna
inthe wpldernes and are deed Chysts that
breed which commeth krom heauen that he
which eateth of it / chülde alco not dye. J ant
that Ipuinge bꝛeed which came doune krom
heaus. Ik eny man cate of this bꝛeed / he chall
kur fo; eurr. And the bꝛeedthatz will geue /


Fis my kleühe / which J well geuẽ fos the Ile


okthe worde. k.
nd the Jewes ſtroue amögethem lelues

taping: How can this kelow geue his lleuhe
to eate: Chen Fetus lapde onto the: Lusees
Ip / verelp i Cape vnto vou / except pe cate the

dhe off konne of ma ¢ dzineke his bloude /
pe challnot haue lyke in vou. IW holoeuer ea⸗
tech my fleabe adzyncketh mp bloude. hath
eternallipie:¢ A wyll rayte him bp at d iat
Dave. HKsfoz my Hedhe is meate in dede: a my
bloude is dzinchie in dede. He that eateth mp
fletthe a dzincheeh mp bloude / dwelleth in me
and z in him. As the ipuinge Father hath tent
me / euen Co lyue J bympkather: and he that
eateth me chall rue by me Chr is? breed
which cam kromheauk:mot as poure fathers
haue eaten Manna garedeed. He P eateth
ok this bꝛeed / hall lyue euer. E

Chele thinges layd be in the lynagoge as
he taught in Capernaum.Manptherkoze ot
bis difciples: whe they badherde this / lapde:
chig is an hae fapinge: who can abpde the
hearpnge of it: Fetus ünewe in hym telle / 6


a wer
vs Doth thpa them:* Both this ol ?
ster ates e all fete tonne of ma alcende bp there


Chet 16 pf my
worde do lo of
tendepou / what
wyll then the


he was befoze It is 6 Cpzete g qupckeneth /
the fledihe profteteth nothinge. The woꝛdes 8
Icpeate vnto vou / are fpzete and lte. But


pecformaunce there are fome ol pou thatbeleue not Foz Je
Same ce an dus ane we krom the beginunge which ther
{ {onue ar wie? were chat beleucd not e who Pumebetope


he hath now him. And he Capdstherfoze larde A onto vou.


oben,


Wath rote
E
Luce.ix.c.


chat no mã can conie onto me / except it were
geuen onto him ol my father.

From 5 tyme many of his dilciples went
backe a walked no moare with hym. Chen
lapde Jelus to the twelue: wyll ve allo goo
aware: Chen Simo Peter anlwered: Ma⸗
ſter ko whom chall we goo? Chou hatte the
woꝛdd ok eternall lyke a we beleue a know
thatthou arte Chzitt the conne ok? kpurnge


God Jelus anlwered the: aue not g chore:


vou twelue / and pet one of vou is a deupll⸗

e fpakett of Judas Ilcariot che tonne ol

mon. foꝛ he it was p chuld betraxe hem /
and was one or che twelue. I.


. Jelus cömeth to Fequtalem atthe feat teacheth >


ſewes g reprourth the: There are diuerle opinions of
55 m amonge the people. The B harites rebuke the
oer betaule they haue not taken him / and chrde w
Hicodemus kor takpnge his parte.


che. bi chapter.

ter that / Jeſus went about into y
Galile / wolde not go aboute in
ewzykoꝛ p Zewes fought to Ryll
2 rm. Che Jewes tabernacie feat
Was äthande. Ps biethzẽ thertoze ſarde vn.
to him:get the hence and go into Jewꝛp that
thy dilepples mape le thy woꝛckẽs that thou
doeſt Foz ther is no man; doeth en chenge
kecretip / andhe him lelle keketh to be hnowẽ
opentye. Je thou do loche thynges hewe che
lelfe to the woꝛlde. Foz as pet his bʒethzẽ bes
ecten ch faybe tnto hen: 29
Chen Fetus faye em: Mr

48 not yet come: but poure tyme is all —
dare en not hate vou · But me it
hateth:becaule Iteſtiy of it / that d woꝛkes
al it are cutl Go pe vp bnto this leaſt. J wilt


not go pp pet vnto this feat / ko: mytpme is


not pet Full come. Chele woꝛdes he lapde vn
to th / a abode ſtyll in Galile. But as ſone
ag his biechzen were gone bp then wer he ©,
alfa peng chen anheben 9e ges c. em,
pꝛeuely, Chen Coughe hym the Jewes x1
atthe keaſt atappeswhere is he. ‘Savino ree
murmurpnge was ther ol hym amonge the
people. Dome ſapde: He is good. Wother
fayde nape / but he deceaueth 5 people. How
be it no man Cpake openlpothym / foz feare
okthe Jewes. K
I Fn che mrddes of the feak / Telus went
vp into the temple and taught. And d Jewes
maruepledlaping: How knoweth he the lcri⸗
ptures / leynge that he neuer learned? Fetus
anfweredthem / z lapde: My doctrine it not
myne: but his that tent me: It eny man wyll abe F touetd
bobys* wril e hall know of tye Doctrine, epa zee
whether it be of God / oꝛ whether F lpeahe OF che une ner
my ſelke. e p ſpeaketh or him lelke / leketh aadech the.
his awne pꝛapſe. But he ß leketh his pꝛayle ctemne.
chat lent hun / the lame is true a no vnrrah⸗ K
tewelnes is inbim, dend le
Dydnot Moles geue vou a lawe / a pet ec. Oct w
none of pou >* hzepeth the late? nohy go pe pyng the
about to kyll me. Che people antwered and rende Mats
fapde:thou halt tbe deuill: who goeth aboute
tofipllthe? Fetus ant wered ¢lapde to them:
ue done one woꝛcke / a ve all matuaple,
ofe therkoze gaue bnto por circticityon
not becaule it is of Moles but of f fathers:
And pet ye on the Saboth daxe / circumcrle
aman. Ika ma on the Sabot dave receaue
tircumcilyon without bꝛeakynge of $ lawe
ol Moles:dildarne ve at me / becaule J haue
made a man euerp whit whoale on the Sa⸗
both dape: Judge not after d vtter aperaũce: d
but iudge ryghtewes tudgement.
Chen lapde dome of them or Jeruſalemeis
not this he whom they go about to byl; Be⸗
bolde he lpeaketh b daher cape rg i.


LES,


tohim. Dothe rulers tnowein dzde 8 thig
is very Chat? ow beit we knowe this inã
whence he is: but whe Chꝛiſt cometh / no ma
fhall knowe whence he is. N
Chen crped Fetus in g tẽple as he taught
fapinge:pe knowe me / and whence J am xe
knowe. Ind pet J am not come of my Ceite/
but hethat tent me is true / whom ve know
not. J know him :oꝛ ꝗ am ot him / he bath
ſent me. Chen they loüght to take hym: but


no mã lapde hades on lum / becauſe his tyme
was not pet come ip oF the people bele
ued on him Fapde:whE Chit cometh, will


he do moompꝛacles then this ma bath done?
E Che Pharil es hearde that) people mur⸗
mured fiche thinges about him. Pherkoze
the Phariles and hye prettes Cente miniltres
font totakehym .qhenfayde Jelus vnto
the: Vet am Ja iptell tohple w pou / e then
Qo J vntohim p lent me. Ve hail (eke me /
€ chällnot kende mere where Jam / thrther
can ye not come. Chen lapde the Fewes be⸗
twene them lelues: whither well he go / that
we Hall not kynde him: yl he go amonge
the gentyls which are lcattered all abꝛoade
Pteache the gentils: What maner ol la
is this that he lad: xe (hall lee me / a (hal
— finde metand where am thither ean ve
not come? 2
the lat daye / p great ape ok the Eealt
9 gehe ſtode and cryeblapinge: Ik eny man
pott / lett him come vnto me a dipncke. He
that beleueth on me / as lapeth the fcripture
out ok his belly tall flowe ryuers of water
of Inte .chistpahebe of the fprete whych
they that beleued onhym / wuſde receaue. K
Foꝛ p holy gooſt was not vet there / becaule
that Jelus was not pet gloufped,
Manx ofthe people / when they hearde
this la ping lard ok a truth this is a pꝛophet:
other fapde / this is Chꝛiſt:ſome Cape : Wall
Chet come out or Salle: Spaperh not 6
Ceoviptuve that Chzitt wall come ot the feed
Gol Waid: e cute of the toune of Wethieent
where Dauid was? Do was ther digencton
amonge the people abouthim. And Come of
thé woͤlde haue tanenhim: but no ma taped
bandes of him. Chen came the mrniters to
dhe hre pꝛeſtes u Phartles. Andther Capo vn
kothem wür haue pe not bzoughehim⸗ Che
Ceruauntes ant wered: neuer man lpane as


ſchis ms daeth Then ankwered the the Pha⸗
“ee Alete elo denne ot eny of the


rulers 02 of ö Pharites beleue on hym : But
8 ‘which knowe not 6 lawe⸗


axe curled Hleodemus karde vnto them. Pe cht


chat came to Jelus bynpaht / a was one of


em. Doth dure lawe iudge enr m bekoꝛe
2255 band nee Wa he hach done?


eredandlapd onto him:arte thou


‘tvs. And Jelus was lefte alone /a the woe


John, rl.


allo of Gaulle: S earche and lot / lo out ol
Galile aryſeth no Pꝛophete. And euery man
went vnto his awne hoiue. ¥


CA woman is taken in aduoutrit / Thick detpuereth
ber. Che kredom of loche as folowe heilt / whõ they
Accule to haue the deuell with him / aud go abaute to
ſtone bpm... 5

Ahe. vil. Chapter. X.
II Fetus went onto mounte oye
nete a erwinthe moznpnge ames oy rl g
agapne into the temple and alte
people camvnto hym / and he late
doune & kaught the, and the Scribes a Pha ‘
ules brought vnto hima woman take in ad
uoutrp / a let hy in themxdbes ¢ fayde vnto
him: Maſter chis wen was tanz in aduon
rp / eu as p dede was adorng.“Moles in ß Luck. r. l
lawe commaunded bs that fuche chulde be
oned hat lapeſt thoutherkoze: And thys
they fade to temipt hin: p they mpghehaue/
wherok to accute him. Jelus ſtoupeddoune /
and with his tynger wrote on the grounde.
And whpu ther contynued al kynge him / he
lytte him elke vp / a layde vnto the let hum p
ts amonge pou without lynne / caſt the Evatt
ftone at her. And agapne he ſtouped donne @
wꝛote on the grounde. And as lone as they
hearde that / they wet out one by one / peldelt


Gandpnge in the myddes . ehen gelus had
lplte vp him lelke agapne / andlawẽ no man /
but the woman / he lade vnto hiv: woman
where are thole thinesccularg, Path no mit
condempned the? She fapde: Moema Lorde, ‘
And Fetus larde: ether do J condẽ pne the. ay og quite
o / and ſynne no moare. k nomoze nc. Che
Chen (pake Jelus agapne vnto the tavig:golpell preas
Yam thelpgheofthe worde. Be p koloweth mot ee
ine/Wallnot walcke in darchnes but Mall ue ona
ase light ok lyke. Che Phariles fapde vnto we quia contio
im: thou beareſt recoꝛde ot thy lylke / thy re⸗ new in pines
coꝛde is not true. Jeſus ant weed a lapde vn but we ſhuide
tothe chough s beare recogoe of mp elke pet yr, and walhe
mp recozde istrue: fo J ünowe whence Jun a newe ſpke
cam a whither g go. But pe canot cell whẽce o¢ ihe tprvite
ae and whither 2 go Fetunge ell the C Fan s
iellhe / iudge no man. And pk J tudge / np,
— ts true Foz J amnot alone: bit Jene gür mae
the father p Cent me. Itis allo wꝛytten ii
poute lawe that the cedtimony of twomen
true. Jam one p beare wytnes of mypfelfe!
€the kather that lent me / beareth wytnes ol
me. Then layde they vnto hym: where is thy
father? Jelus antwered:penether know me /
noꝛ vet my father. Ik e had knowen me / ye
ulde haue Brower mp father allo. Chee
wordt lpake Jelus in p trelury / as he taught
in the temple / and no man lapde handes on
him / kor his tyme was not vet come. .
Chen ſapde Jelus agayne tnt 40


The Golpell


MF gory ware / a pe wall ceke me / i wall
dye in youre lynneg. Whyther J go / thyther
can pe not come. Then lapde the Jewes: will
e hubim Cette /becaute the tapth:whyther
Go/thyther can ye not come: And he fave
neo them pe are krö beneth / Jam kr aboue
e are oF this woꝛld / Jam not of this wozld.
J ſapdtherkoze onto pu / that pe Mall dye in
Poure lynnes Foz except ve beleue that am
de / ge chall dre in youre tynnes.
2 Chen Cayo ther onto him / who arte thou?
And Felus fapde onto th: u che very kame
_ Chynge that J fave vnto you. Jhaue many
thrnges to lape / and to tudge of pou. ye a he
kent me is true. And Ilpeake in d wond /
Chote thynges which J haue hearde of hym.
How beit cher vnderckode not that herpake
ol his Eather. hen lad Jelus onto the: whe
pe haue lot vp an hye the tonne of mã / chen
tall ve knowe that Nam he / ¢ chat J do no
thynge of my celle; but as mp father bath
taught me / euẽ lo A Cpcake: andbe that tent
me / is with me. Che Father hath not lette me
alone / to J do all waves thole thynges that
pleale hm. E As he tpake thete woꝛdes /
many beleued on him
fayde Tenis to thole dewes which
C Beleucd on hym. FE pe cOtinue in my wozdt/


ee are pe my very dicciples /a fall hnowe


ettucth + g the trueth hall make pou kree.
They antweredhym: we be Abzahũs leede /


and were neuer bonde to enymã: why lareſt


thou then / ye halbe made Ere, b

Roma. vi. f. Jelus ant wered eerberelp/ evel fave
J. Metri. h. b. Onto you / that wholoeuer comptteth tynne /
Cig the leruaunte of Cyne, Ind the leruaunt

al not in d goule Foz euer: But § lonne

abpdeth euer Je dlonne thevfoze wall make

Pou kre / then are pe Eve in dede. J Rnowe that

pe are Abyabams leede: but pe teke meanes

to kill me / becauſe my faving. haue no place

in you. A Cpeake that I haue lene wrth mp
father: and pe do that which ye haue kene w

poure tather. Chepantwered and layde vnto

bim: bzaha is oure father. Fetus tapde vn⸗


kothem. Ik pe were Abꝛahams chyldꝛen ve


wolde do the dedes ol Abꝛaham. But now ye
go aboute to kyll me / a man that haue tolde
Tou the truthe whych haue herde or God:
this dyd not Abꝛahã. Ve doß dedes ol youre
facher. hen lapde they to him: we were not
bome of koꝛnicacpon. e haue one lather /
which is God. Jelus lad vnto them: yt God

ere poure father / then wolde pe loue me.

02: pꝛoceaded forthe and come from God.


Hecher came ol my tele / but he Cent me. w


‘Mbp do ve not knowe my fpeache? Cut bee


caute ve cãnot abꝛde phearyng om woz. che


care ok youre father che deuplt / an nthe


7,
luſkes or raue kater ze welldo. Se was a


Spvloe / which by interpꝛetacton / ignikrẽch
tent. Se went his ware a wadhed and came
agayne ſeynge. Che nerghboureg a they &
hãd kene him before how p he was a begger /
fapbe:18 not this he p late a begged: Dome

Clapde:chis is he. Other lapdethe is phe him.

But he him ſelke lade: am euẽ he. hex
ſapde vntohym. Bow are chyne eyes opened
chen: e ant wered and tarde. Che man 5 is
talledz elus / madeclape / and anopnted myne
eyes / ã capde vnto me. Go to the pole Siloe
and weſthe. And J went and wellhed and rez
ceaued nip tyght. Cher layd onto him: where
is he: he lade: can not tell.

Chen bꝛought thepto $ Phariſes hym 8
a lytell befoze was blynde: foꝛ it was Sa
both dave when Fetus made the claye ¢ ope-
hedbis eyes. Chen agapne the Phartles allo
alkedhim how he had receaued his lyght. Be
fayde vnto thé: He put clarevpõ mne eres
A waſſhed / a do ce. Chen kayde tonie o€ the
Whariles:thys mä te not of God / becaule he

* hepetl not the Saboth dare. Other layde:
how can a man g isa ſynner / do luche myꝛa⸗
cles? And ther was ctryle amongethẽ. Chen
Spake thep vnto the biynde agapne: what
Capt thou of hym / becauſe be bath opened
thpneepes? Andhe lade: eis a Pꝛophet.

But che Jewes dyd not beleue of ö kelow /
how that he was blynde and receaued bys

ſpght / vntyll they had called the father a mo⸗
7 8 en bap ach 8510 me)
epackedthem Caving: poureforne,
Youre father Abzaham was glad to fe my, thom ve lape was bonne bipnde? Pow doth
“oape/¢ he la weit and reiorled. Chen fade be now le chen? Pys father and mother ane
the Jewes onto him:thou arte pocset q Sroeve chem a lapde, we wote well that this
olde and hack thou lene Abzahä: Jelus ta ; 48 oure lonne / a p he was bozne biynde: but
vnto the: Merelx verelp I fae onto pou : per . bywhat meants he now leyth that can we
Abzaham was Jam Chen kane cher vp to- npn, not Cell /o: who hath opened his exes / can we
nes / to caite ath Butz eſus hid hun lelle / wan noc tell. Beis olde ynough / acke him / let him
and went out ofthe temple. k. faust Eantwere foz him Ceife. Duche wozdes (pake
CLs maketh the man to e) was bonne bipnde, Chat ib his kather and mother / becaule they kearedß
Hache er chapter, Gewwes. Foz tye Lewes hadcölppped all red
that yr eny man dyd conkeſle ß he was Chait
chuld be ercommunicat out of the lynago
e. Cherkoꝛe fapde bis father and mother: he
is olde pnougn / acke him.

Chen agavne called ther the man ß was
i bipnde/e Cayo vnto him: eue Sodß pꝛaple:
nigh we know ß this ma is a liner. He antwered

nptt and fapde : whyther he be a Conner oꝛ no / J

8 cannot tell: One thynge J amſure ot / chat Z
was bind / a nowy le Tůen apo they to him
agayne. hat dyd be tothe; Pow opened he

fthene eves? He ancwered them / J tole ou
per whyle / and ve dyd not heare. therfore
wold ye heave it agayne: yl ve allo behis
dicclples: Chen rated they hint a larnchou
artehrs delciple we be Motes dircpples.
We are ure that God fpake wyth Moes.


muttherer from the begynnenge / and abode
not in the trueth / becaule there is no trueth
in him iohẽ he lpeaketh a le / then ipeaketh
he of his awne. Foꝛ beis alvat/ and $ father
therok. And hecaute g tell vou the trueih /
therkoꝛe pe beleue me not.
F Toph of pou can rebuke me ol tynne?
ae een e deen.
H be. .
yecherkoze heave thé not / becaule ve are not Jun. ga
ol God. Chen ancwered the Z ewes and ſard
vntohim: Hape we not well chat chou arte
a Samapftane and haſt d deupll? Fetugan
foe aue not the deupll:but J honoure
my father / a ve haue dichonoured me. J tene
not myne atone pꝛayle: but ther is one that
ſeketh and iudgeth.
Uerelp verelx I Cape onto vou / yt a man
kepe my Capinges / he Hail neuer fe deeth.
Chen lapde the Jewes tohrm. How knowe
we that thou batt the deupli. A bꝛahã is deed /
and alto the Pꝛophetes: and vet thou laxeſt /
pk a mã nepe my laping / he chan neuer tate
ordeeth. Arte thou greater ther oure kather G
Abꝛaham / which is deed2and the Pꝛophetes
ate deed. Whom makeſt thou thy keite.
Jelus antwered : It g bonoure my ſeite /
mpnehonoure isnothpnge wozth. It is my
father that honoureth me / whrch ve tape, is
voure God / and re haue not knowẽ him: but
unowe him. And vez wuld ſape / A knowe
m not / J cbulde be alxar iyne onto vou.
But 2 knowe him / and kepe his fapinge.


ch was blend 15
bpzth. And his dicciples atned bi
fare Wale be —


this man oz hig father g mother


goed war
ers


HID. John


This telow we knowe not krõ whence he is
Che man ant wered and lapde vnto them:
this is a meruelous thinge that pe wote not
whẽce he is ſeing he hath opened myneeves. de cbod head
$02 we be Lures Hod hearech not Inner. eth dle
But vt enꝝ ma be a wochipper of God a do gc. chat is / he
his will / him heareth he. Hence ß wozloe bez Heavety none
Janne was it not hearde that ent ma opened aer vepee not
the epes ak one that was bone Dipnd.3£ thts rube to eau
iMG were not OF God / he coutde haue done no heisieuell (pte,
thinge. hey antwered and lade vnto hym:
thou arte all together boznein lynne / a doll
thou teache vs: Ind they catt him out.
, Jelus hearde that theyhad excomunicate
hin: a allone as he had founde hym / he layde
vnto hym: doeſt thou beleue on the lonne ol
God: He antwered a lapde: Who is it Loꝛd /
BF mypght helene onhym: And Jelus tapde
bnito hin chou halt ene hym / a heit is that
talheth Wehe, Andhe layde: Loz J beleue /
K woꝛlbipped him. EFelug tayd: Jam come
vnto ſudgement into thys wozlde: that they
which fe not myght le / a they which le might
be made blynde. Androme of the Phariles
which were with him / hearde thele woꝛdes &
ſapde vnto hym:are we then blynde? Fetus
lapde vnto them: yt ve were blynde ve Huloe
haue no lynne. But now pe lape / wẽ le / ther⸗
koꝛe voure lynne remaynẽth.
¶ Chia is the true ſhepherde / x the doe of the ſhepe /
Some Cape: CThꝛiſt hath the deuell y lo madd / Home
Cape : he (peaketh not the wardes ok one that hath the
deuell. Wecauſe he telleth the trneth the age tale
vp tones to caſt at him / call his preachpug bialphemp
and go aboute to tante bitt.
Che r. Chapter. 1
Erelpperelps ſape vnto vou:he ß
entreth not in by the doꝛe into the dl
ſchepekolde / but clymeth vp fome
other wape: the fanie ig a theke aa
robber. Hep goeth in bythe doꝛe / is p cepe⸗
herde of the ſbepe:to hum the poꝛter openeth /
ethe chepeheare hig bopce / Khe calſethhys
atone ſhepe byname / x leadeth the out. Ind
when he hath Cent koꝛth bys awne chepe / he
Goeth bekoze the / athe chepe tolowe him: koz
they uno we his vopce. A ſtraunger they will
nat kolowe / put will klpe kromhym: £02 ed
knowe not $ bopce of ttratigers.chis times
Utude fpake Fetus onto thẽ. But they onder
ſtode not what thynges they were whych he *
Cpake onto the. Then tayd Fetus vntothem
agapne werely berelr 175 vnto pou: A am
the doꝛe okß ſhepe. Iii / euẽ as many as came
befoze me / are theues ¢ robbers: büit d chepe


6


dpd not heare the J am $ doze :bymepeeny


niz enter in he Malbe lage / a hal go in aout
g Fore Patture. Che theke cometh not but
orto ſteale / kyll / and dettrove . Jam come
that they myght haue lyke / andhaue it moze

aboundantiß. 7
A Ham


The Golpell 91 Sk John. lh,


Ag amthe good chepeheerd. Che good hes chen tholigh ve beleue not me per beleue the

cen geh bys 1972 fo2 Oe chepe. An woꝛkes / that ve mape knowe ¢ —
byzedleruatit/ which is not p chepeherd / ne⸗ the kather is in me / and J in him.

cher the i a yet 5 0 3

cOmpnge/e¢ leueth the cbepe / a klpeth/ a elcaped out of ent a i i

op k ngemthe re, lat da pr. Jelus tapde onto her: J am p rex magnes Mall conte a take awaye oure coũ⸗

wolfe cätcheth thẽ/ c kcattereth 8 Wepe. The Bt beponde Joꝛdan / intoß place where 5 ana Curteccion g $ pte: He chat beleuech on me / tre ö the people. And one of the named ‘caps


bpredteruatictipet) /becaute he is anhyꝛed bn befoze had baptiled / a there abode And 15 4
ruaunt /a careth not £oz the chepe. Jam ß mManpyrefozted vnto him / A fayo.Foyndpono anthems pe though he were desd ket Wal he lẽne And phas which was § hre pzeſt that lame pere /
Shath. 2.6 good rd Tie a mene ana rtr ali all ben b John cue ichs Be reture. tohofocuer lpueth and beleueth onme / Wall tayaontothem:Yeperceaue nothinge at all


Wh erd. ee rgb nee mã / are true. And many beleued onhi theare,
me:euẽ fo knowz my kather. And J geue mp .
ite 1 8 11 1 tee sae 05 10 S eee e 1 1 the lonne of God which ſhulde come into the petite chistpake be une pere lelke / but
ave not ol old. Them alſo must bz! geth him out of the waye, 1 *
ia 4 b th r. : into. went her wave a called Marie her tylterte- tied 5 Fetus chulde dye fo2 the people / ¢ not ö
that thermaßehearemr bopce achat ther Cave. chapter. | & aeg ceetiptapinge:che matter is come g calleth kor tye people ontp/ but he quldgather to ;


B® mave be one klocke and one ſhepeherde. Ti Certayne man was fyche / named 4 §
Ghetogconth map Catiec buen bereue Ties or Bethe thun 01 soe Foz the. And ſhe alone as the hearde Bavole gether in one the chyldzé of God which were


pit my lyle from me / that z myght take ĩt W385 andher lyſter Martha. It


agayne. No ma taketh it krom me: but z put ag B Mary which anopnted Je⸗
sCawwape of my leite. J haue power topucit
krom me / and haue power to take it agapne:
This cõmaundemẽt haue receaued of my
father, And there was a dillencyon agapne
amongeß Jewes Coz chele lapinges / a many
ofthent la pde. Pe hath the deux / a is made:
why heare ve him: Oiher ſayd / thele are not
the woꝛdes of him that hath ihedeupll. Can
the deupll open the epes of the blynde :
TInd it was at Jerulalem the featke of ß
dedicacton / and it was winter: Fetus wal⸗
ned in Halomös poꝛche. Chen cam ß Jewes
Erounde aboute hin / and favo vnto hun: How
longe doſt thou male bs doute ? FEthoube
Chia / tell vs playnly. Fetus ant wered thé:
kolde vou and pe beleũe not. The wozkes >
do in mp kathers name / they beare witnes
of me. But ve beleue not / becaule ve are not
ol my cbepe. Is J layde vnto pou: my chepe
heave my bopce / a3 knowe them / and they
folow nie / and J geue onto thé eternal lte /
A they chall neuer peryühe / nether Mall ene


man plucke them oute ok my hande. My faz
ther whych gaue them me / is greater then


all a no mũ ig able to take them out of mp ta
thers hande. And J and my kather are one.
Chen ß Fewes agapne toke bp ſtones / to
ſtoneh vm Wall. gelus anfwered thé: manp
good woꝛckes haue J chewed vou krõ myfa⸗
cher:loꝛ which ofthe wil ye tone me? The
Jewes antweredhim lapinge «forthe goo
wozkes fake we Hones not:butfoz thy blat-
phemy/ a becaule g thou beinge ama/maz
ett thy Celte God. Fetus antwered them. 38


Wüaemt ee in poure lawe. * I fape/pe are


Goddes: Ache called themcßoddeg onto whõ
the woꝛdẽ of God was [poken (a ß Ccripture
can not be bꝛonen tape ve then to hym / whõ
the father hath lanctikyed / and Cent into the
Wolde / thou blalphemelt / becaule J Capo J
am the lonne of God FEF do not ö woꝛckes
or m Father / beleue ine not. But vl J do /


Tug with oyntment a wyped bys fete wier
eere / whole bꝛother Lazarus was kycke / ¢
is lyſters lent onto him ſayinge. L onde bes

holde be whõ thou loueſt / is ſycke. rohen Je

kus hearde 1 lapde: this inkirmite is not
vnto deeth / but ko the laude of God / that the
lonne ol God might be pꝛayled by the reaton
ok it Jelus loued Martha and her lelter and

Lazarus . Chen after he hadhearde that he

was lycke / vet abode he two daes ſtyll in e

fame place where he was.

Chen after p / capdhe tohrs dilctples:lett


bs go into Jewiy agapne. His dilciples ſayd v


bnto hen: Malter the gewes lately koughe
meanes to ſtone the / a Wylt thou gothpther
againe: Jeſus ant wered / are thernottwelue
houres in the daxe; ta ma walle in p dae /
he ſtombleth net / becaute he leyth the lyght
ot this woꝛld. But yr a mã walke in p night /
he ſtöbleth / becaule ther is no lyght in hem.
Cbis ſarde he / a after that / he lard vnto thẽ:
oute kende Lazarus ſiepeth / but ¥ goo to


wake him oute of depe. Ehen larde hys dil ⸗


cpples: Lozde pk be depe / he (hall do well
ꝓnough. How beit Jelus tpake ol his deeth:
but ther thought F he had kpoken old natu⸗
rall llepe. Chen Capo Fetus vnto thẽ playni /
Lazarus is deed / AJ am glad koꝛ your fan /
6 was not there / becaule ye mape beleuẽ.
Heuercheleſe let vs go vnto him. Chen lard
Chomas which is called x poimus onto the
dilciples:let vs alſogo / p we maxe dye with


him. Chen went Fetus/e kounde that he had C


lyne in bps grauẽ koure dapes already. Be⸗
thanie was nye vnto Jerulalem / aboute. rv.
furlonges ot / a many old Zewes were come
to Martha and Mary to comkoꝛte chẽ auer
their bother. Martha allone as the hearde
that Zelus was comynge / went a met hem:
but Mary late ctpil inthe houfe.
hen fap Martha bnto Fetus: . dd ve
thou haddeſt bene here / mp brotherban not


a


za


(us lawe her wepe / and ) Lewes allo wepe / pe / leyng he cõmeth not tothe fealt.chebpe
which came with her / he groned in 6 cpzete / Hvetes a Phariles had geuen a ciate


Loꝛdè come q le. Ind Jeſus went. Chen card Tan anoynteth c hrtntes tete Judas murmureth /
‘put extulerh herz rydeth in to Jerulalem.
e not he which opened Cape. r Gba. .
Hen Felusliredapesbetoze eller / i.


And Jelus larde: cake ve awape 8 ſtone. him a lupprr/and Martha ſerued but Laa
Martha the lpſter or him p was deed / carde rus was one of them that late at the table
vnto him: Loꝛde by this tyme he ſtyncketh. with him Chen tone marya pounde of oynt⸗
Foꝛ he bath bene deed koure dapes: Jelus ment called Nardus / perkecte a pꝛecious /a
card ontoher: Sayde g not vnto the / chat ye anoynted Fetus lete / and wypt his Fete with


thou dydeſt beleue / thou ſuldeſt fe $ ae herheer ache houle was kyſled of the rauer apaty.cevica,
ofthe oyntment. Chen fapde one ok his dilct arc. Fuße


ol. God. Chen they tone awape p ſtone co
place where the deed was lade. And Zelus ples named Judas lcartoth Simog lonne /
ſpfte vp hys eyes and lapd: Father J thancke which atterward betrapedhim: wüy wag not
che becaute that thou had hearde me. J wor this opntment lolde Foz thze hundzed pence /
that thou heareſt me all wapes:buthecaule @ geuẽ to the pooꝛe:? Chis ſapde he / not that
okthe people that ſtande by Jlapde it g they he cated koꝛthe pooze: but becaule he was a
mape beleue / that thou halt kent me. theke / a kept the bagge / and bare that which
And when he thus had lpoken / he orped was geuẽ. Chen ſapde zelus: Let her alone /
aloude vopce. Lazarus come foꝛth. And heß agapnlt che dave of mp burving che kept it.
was deed / came forth / bounde hande and kots Che pooze all wareschallyehaue with vou /
wich graue bondes / bys lace was bounde but me Mall ve not all waxes haue.

with a naphin. Jelus lapde vnto thé lowſe Moche people ofthe Jewes had know: 8
him a let him go Chen many ol the Jewes ledge z he was there. Andthey came / not koꝛ
inbich came to Marx / and had ene p things Fetus lake only / but that the myght le La:
wich Fetus dyd / beſened on hi. ut tome sarus allo whom he rapted rom deeth. Che
or chem went cheir wapes to che Pharites / he Pzeltes therfore helda . 2

“i ‘A, mg


came to Bethany where Lazarus ah rr,
was wich was dre ewido Fetus ic. v i
rapled from deeth here they made


at. xt. a
War xu. a.
Luc. pix.


C an alles coolte hele thinges vnderſtode not L oꝛde who thall beleue oure laxinge: and 5
, opencosecher-Sne kt
glozilied / then remẽ bed they loche thing koꝛe could ther not beleue / becaule Z Elatag Wah. ,
were witten of him / and that loche thinges Capth agapne:ye bath diundedtheiterenend de ig


Withelrepeg a bnderckade with heir bertes . e


The Golpell


myght vut Lazarus to deeth alco becaute pp: woe is chat forte of man? Chen
thakkaz bps fake many ot the Jewes went


awape / and beleued on Jelus. E

*Onthe mozowe / moche people s were
come to the kealt when they beards g Jelus
{hula come togeruſalem / tone bꝛaunches ol
palme trees ¢ wet a met him / a cryed Holan
na / blelledis he that in the name ol p Loꝛd /
commeth kynge OF Icrael. And Felus got a
ponge alle a fate thẽron / accoꝛdhnge to that
whych was wꝛptten: keare not daughter ol
Sron / beholde thy kung cõmeth lyttyng on


chey had done vnko him. Che people z was W
him whẽ he called Lazarus out his graue / a
vaplen him kr deeth / bare reco we. Eherkoꝛe
met hym the people / becaule they hearde &
he had done Cochea myyacle. Che Phariles
therkoꝛe lade amõge them Celues perceaue


ve how we pꝛeuaple nochynge :! Beholde the
woꝛlde goth awape alterhim. 4

Fe Cevtayne Grekes amöͤge thẽ /

aveat p keaſt:the fame came


hat came wle n
to Philip which was ok Bethlaida a citie in
Galile / & delpzedhüm taping: Dpz we wolde
kane le Jelus. Philip came & tolde Andꝛew


Andagayne Andzew ¢ Philip tolde Fetus,


gp And Jelus antwere the Caping:theboure ts


come p the fonne of man mutt be gloztfped,
TWerelpberelyg tape onto vou except 5
wheate cozne Fall into ame anddre / it
bpdeth alone. Ikit dpe tt bzingeth koꝛth mo⸗
che krute. He 5 loueth his ile wall deſtrope
ttrdo*he Phateth his Ike in this wozld chall
kepe it onto lpleeternall Ar enp ms miniſter


an hethatha⸗ onto me letihym kolome me and where J


teth bisſptesc am


ther chall alto my miniſter be And yr enx


kapde onto the pet a lptell whyle is the lrggt
with you. Walke whyll ve haue lyght / iet e
darcknes come on pou. Pe that walneth in
che darcke / wotteth not whpther he goeth.
ih vll ve haue lyght beleue on the lyaht / S
ve mae be the chrldzen of thelrght. K
Chele thingestpake Jelus à departed / a
brd bim kelke krom chert. and though be hart
Done fo many miracles before the / yet bele⸗
ued notthey on hum /p the favinge of Elalas
the Pꝛophet myght be kulkilſed / 6 he fpake,


hardened their hertes that they (hulve not fe


€ Mould be cduerted / and Jchuld heale them.
Soche tongs lapd Elatãs whe he fawe his
Nox / a lpake orhim. Heuertheleſſe amöge
the chefe rulers manpbeleued on him. But
becaule of ß Phariles they wolde not bea
knowẽ ok it / lelt they chuld beexcõmunicat.
Foz they loued the pꝛaple 5 is geuẽ of men /
moe then the pꝛaxle that cometh of God.
And Felus crped a larde:he chat beleueth G
on me / beleueth not onme / but 12 that
lent me. andhe p feith me / teich him p lent
me. TJ am come a lyght into F wonde that
wholelier beleueth on me / Wuld not byde in
darcknes. And vt eny mä heare mp worde / e
beleue not / J tudge him not. Foz J came not
to iudge the woꝛide:but to laue F world. be
p retuleth me a receaueth not my woꝛdes
Wath one 6 fudge) him. Che wondes that
haue tpone/ ther Hall nee in the lalle
dape. Foz I haue not pon or my lelke: but
father which kent me / he gaue mea cdmaũd⸗
met what J chuldlape / a what J bud lpea⸗


that ese that ma mintſter bhto me / hym wrulme Father ne. And J know Hehis cömsundemet is lte


can be content
to lole his tem⸗
porall lyfe in
‘this wo7lde for


honoure. E
Now és my foule troubled / and what
(hall J tape: Father delluer me krõ this hou⸗


FFC
He cher glozity thy name Chencam ther avo}
e e. ed ben g bane glontiedt @ winner


in Watch x.
Mar. pig.
Luke. ix.


agavne.chen Capo the people that tone by e
hearde:t¢ thoundzeth. Other lapde an angel
kpane to hym. Jelus antwered efapde : thrs
voyce cam / not becaule of me / but koꝛ poure


lanes .
ih How isthe tuagementoe is wolde: th


now thall § peince ofthis worldbe cact out
And g/ vl J were lytte bp krom the erth / will


dꝛawe all men onto me. This lapde Jelus /


kygnikpinge what deeth he chulde de. The
people ant wered him: wehauehearde oute
ot dlawe ß Chꝛiſt bydech euer / a how lapelt
thou then chat the tonne of ma mutt be lylte


euerlacfyng. whattocuer z Cpeate therkoꝛe /
euen as the father bade nie / ſo Alpeane. E
walcheth the bitciples kete / telleth the oe Fue
eta n kümlunberh them pte ipto
loue one another,
¶ Che rij. Chapter. o%
lose the feat or cher whe Fetus,
A Ss new 6 his houre was comẽ / p he
wude departe oute ok this worde
b onto the Father. iP hẽ he loued hrs
which were in d woꝛlde / vnto p ende he loued
f. And whe lupper was ended / alter p the
deuyll had put in ö bert ol Judas Ircartoch
Simons lonne / to betrape htm: Fetus kno⸗
wyng that the katherhad geuẽ all chyngd in
tohts handes / a that he was come fr Sod /
and wet to Godthe role from peed dal
A lpde his vpper garmẽtes / a toße a towell /
and grꝛde hym Lele. Alter that / he poured


to declare


veto pur.
et


las


pin fo once


.


D


ouer⸗


geue
headed


wal B Sot ale haueno part with me. D


ult 2 5
attic 3 U. 5
Mi the ve, J We haue nede or agaynſt the
A nthe be a 1


eto wach his


nes Up tHe bis clothes /a was let doune agapne / he fayd
pe of bee onto benen be wine Aha bene Co pous af
upeaithy Ve call mematter a L oꝛd / k ve fave well / koꝛ


mor recen men ereneh i mihzekenme 5


on Felus brett / card onto hum: Lozde whois
JZelus ant wered / he it is to who N geue a
toppertobe'g bane ppc Arbe ince op:


eden, Ol O, Jaht,

eser
: i

wart care wherwithhe was Gyre,” —

bh ame o Chen came heto Simon peter. And pe⸗

eqitre (0 0° ter la deto hum Londe Wall chou wellhe mx


/ amin 5 ke
beleue me kor che very woꝛckes lane.


l
3 kli.
3
oon 8 is 99 1 OF hie ean
And God ig gloꝛikyed by hym. FE
Godveaionteien bp hun God alle ge ger ge?
g h inhimtelke: ¢ Hall ſtrarght wape lelle. In Ine
al eis 8 roten hab ae
care chyldnen / pet a lyten whple am e ballen bad the
Veo Fecaftege mega tape fore patente
Fewwes / whether g goo /thpéher can ye not turveecis woe
rome. Allo to pou fave’ now a new comaii- tev betoucds we
DeMiée geue Aönto pou / ve lone to gether/ Jen e
asZhauelcuedvou / § euen lo pe lone one teen
Another.6y this chall all men knowß pe are Godeces wut
mpdicctples pe ve wanhaue loue one to ano thencupdentty
thee.<pimon Peter tapoe bntohym: Londe uahen Hout
eo geld thou Fetus autwered Hone ee ne,
toh rg Bo thou cant na¢Eolow ment, act ga Z
butthouthaittolowe me acterwardes.
ter lapde vnto hym: Loꝛde / why can not
Akoloweß now wyll geue my ipte fo2 thy
kane: Jelus ancwered hum; wylt thou gene


maſter thy le to: mylake: dierelp Vverelp g fave
vnto the / che cocke Mati not rrowe /t

haue denyedme thzpte, e

* Che armeth his dtcelples with coufolactan agaynt


krouble aud prompteth the eye bot
of comfort hE the Poly golk / the tpivite


¶ he. xiiij. Chapter.
dhe lapde vnko his dirripieg: let
not poure hertes be troubled. We:
leue in God / and belcue in me. In
|! imp Eathers houle are many mane
fons, Ait were not lo / wolde haue tolde
3901 go to pꝛepare a place to vou. And yr
Soto prepare a place koꝛ vou / will come
agapne /a receaue vou euen onto mylelle h
here Jam there mape ve be allo. And wht:
ther d go e owe / a the wave ve tnowe,
Thomas fayde vnto him: Lozd we ting
not whitherthou goelt Allo how ig itpoſible
£0208 to knowe the wave? Fetus ſapde onto
nog amthe wape / the tuithe a p pte. Ind
nom cometh onto the kather / put by me. J
Pebadtinowwé me / pe had knowẽ my father al
ko And now pe knowe him / a haue lene him.
Pbiliplayde onto him: Loꝛde ſhew bs the
father/ it fuffitety vs. Jetus fay onto him /
bate A bene lo longetyine W you: a pet halt
thou not knowe mie⸗ Philtp / he ß hath lene
me pach tene 5 father And how layett chou
chen: bew bs the father? Beleueſt thou not
H Jam inche facher $ Father in me: he
wozdes $3) (peake'onto pont /A fpeatienot o£
my felfe:but the father 5 dwelleth in me / ig
he chat doeth the woꝛckes. Beleue me that
er / a the father in me. At d lceih


2


8


Nerelp / verelp Ilape vnto vou / he ß bele⸗
ueth on me / the wozckes that z do / thetame
ae

Fi.


Th


he do / becaule J go bnto mpkather And what
koeuer he alke in my name / chat 5 do / 5
a6 expan eye he father mragt⸗ be glontten by donne.
fathee mpght Ak e Wall arne eny thynge in my name J
be gloneled c. Will do it. K I. FE pe loue me kepe my com⸗
ave catty és maundemetes/¢'3 well pꝛaye the father/ a
donne wit we e all gene pou another cofozter (that he
Enowicbge and Mave bpoe 1 pou euer: which is P Welpzete
geue thanckes ok truthe whom the woꝛlde cannot receaue /
that he gaue becaute the wozſde teeth hym not / nether
bes tonne for Anoweth hm. But vehnowe ym Koshe
e Which 1s dwellech Wpou g albe in you . J well not
the (plete at leaue vou co foztleſle:but wyll come to you,
zcuelh he ts cel Pet a lptell while and the wo / de ſeeth me
{eo ube ene ng moare:but pe hall fe me. sfoz Jlpue a re
ipoctaute pris wall ue . Chat dave thall ve Hnowe that A
teue: unt bee am in my lather / z pou in mel I in voin.
cautehemaacty He P hath mycömaundemekes ¢hepeth
Speman: E them / the lame is he that loueth me. And he
enteeth tue, P loulech me Walbe louevok my kather ig
where as all p will Lou him / & will Wewe mpne awne ſelke
they do wyth⸗ to him Judas ſayde vnto him (not Judas Zl
our thetpueteia cartoty ) Lorde what 18 the caule that thou
bete. "DIS wy ple chewe thy telke vnto ds / A not onto the
wollde: Aelus aul wered and layd vnto hym:
pfamäloueme and wo kepe mp lapinges /
my katherallo will loue him /a we will come
vnto hym / and wyll dwell with him. He that
loueth me not / fe peth not my layinges And
5 wofdes 5 peheare / are not myne / but
the kathers which ſent me.

Chis haue J cpoken onto vou beynge vee

Dpjelent with pou But 5 cOfozter which is 6
Holy goott ( whdmy father wyll tende in mr
name )he tall rache vou all thynges / and
bzpnge all thynges to youre vemembzaunce
whatkoeuer J haue tolde pou,

Peace I leue with vou / my peace geue
vnto vou. Mot asp woꝛlde geueth / geũe J vn
to vou Let notrourhertes be greued / netyer
feave pe. Ye haue hearde how J larde vnto
vou: J go e¢comeagapne nto pow. Ik pe lo⸗
ned me / ye wolde verelp reiopce / bẽcaule
fapde J go vnto the father . Koꝛ the father
egg chen J. Andnow hauez chewed vou /

ekoze it cone /p when it is come to palle / ye
mygbt beleue. Pere after wyll J nottalcke
many woꝛd vnto you. Foz the rular ol thys
wozlde cometh / a hath nought in me. But y
the wozlde mape finowe that J loue the fas
ther: therkoze ag p father gaue mie cõmaund⸗
ment / euẽ lo do J. K Ale let vs go to hence.
Che true vne / the hucuandman s the beaunches. A
Boctvine of loue'g Afwete cBfoste agapne perletuciõ.

Che. xv. Chapter.


＋
’ the true byne / a my rather is
* butbande mä. uetp byaumcie
6 beareth not frute in me / he well
Jake awape Andeuerr bꝛaunche


i bearech krute / wr he paurge / ie maxe


e Golpell


bꝛinge moare krute. Now ate ve cleane thos
row the wondes whuch Jhaue kpoken vnto
pou. Byde in me / a let me brde in pou. as f
bꝛaunche cinot beare trute ok itleite / except
it byde in the bynes no moare can ve excepte
fe abyde in me. J am the vyne / and ve are the

yaunches. He chat abpoety in me and Z in
him / d fame bzingeth kozth moche krute. Foz
without me can ve do nothing Ika mũ byde
not in me / he is cat koꝛche as a bzaũche / a is
wyddered: and men gather it and call it into
the kyꝛe / and it burneth.? Ik ve brde in me a
my wozdes allo brde in vou: athe what pe


wel andi wealbe done to pou, E Herrin ig 30h


my father glozitped / p ye beare moche krute /
and be made my dilcipies. f
As the kather hath loued me / euen to haue
Ape chenden e cal e Walt
epe*mp cömaundementes / ve chan bebe in
my loue / euẽ as I haue kept my fathers cos
maͤundementes / and byde in bis loue Cheſe
thenges haue J fpoken vnto vou / that my
iope myght remaxne in vou / and that poure
iope might be full,
＋ Chis is my commaundement: that ve
loue to gether as J haue loued you. Greater
Joue then this hath no man / then that a man
bettowe hrs lpke kozhes krendes. Ve ate my
krendes / vr ye do whattoeuer J commaunde
vou. Hencetoꝛth call J pou not ſeruauntes:
koꝛ the leruaumt knoweth not what his loꝛde
doeth. But pou haue I called trendes: fo; all
chynges that Jhaue hearde ot my father F
haue opened to vou.
pe haue not cholenme / but Lhaue hovers
Pou and ozdepned/ that ve goo and bzynge
koꝛth krute / and that poure frute remarne
that whatloeuer ve wall athe of the Father
in my name / he cwulde geue tt vou. E
HTS commaunde J vou / that ve loue to


ute ne
bs —


che
ugute of Cn
Eyhe. v.a.
C


és bone into the woꝛlde. And pe now are i
fozowe:but J wyll le vou agapne / and bout


erto haue pe
cht eta


7
ol the woꝛzlde / the woꝛlde wolde loue bys che he will leade you into all truech e wall that in me
wende Fur baue poten pow oute ofthe eu mottheae oFbemteee:butwbatiozur be were Wall eee be
onde ch bc ehatkelh pou he worde. A seat Bere pon hinges uren e gange good cheare / J haue outcome the tooyioe. :
mene de tntnge pat P< bo Fou and me fos hall teceaue ofmpne Wall e. deere eee wen


So wyll they kepe yours.

8
Ik Z had not come
ep Hulde not haue


2


ohrle ve Malle me andthat J goto ther mpabe znowe i
yet aher. Cher faybe therfore: tohat is this wenden dan ar eech


wand what he ſlapth Jelus F
e earn


Goce


il.


car thathe fapth alter a whyle? we cannot tel J haueglopifiedthe on the erth. Ahaue ff


u ga
dnow glozitpme thou kater währe


awne


Cave Be ‘ety


1 .& cundtmpnen,
ache. F Lerne ee 55


t


85 pell . Wat his mouth burte
. —
Ech. rl chapter. E.

; Aan,

15 Hath, ls

Sack. rug d


allo Which becrapedhym /
ent. But alone as he hadlapde Bath. ru e.
am he / chey wet backe wardes Parc ritt. a
egrounde. Andhe acked them Tuer. rde


att Cent me. And that glory that by
Sen geh me / haue geuẽ enth.


Foz thou louede nethema
fo bata tense Sehne güne now anion

ath ino 7
celeb ebetepaue omen tat thou halt he hye p


POnth. x
dae


DES, Jol


fobyathelt thounie? Atsethe which heardẽ

pee mt Fag lip mer ep can

tell what lard. hs be had thus pon ane

orks mmuſkers which Kode bp / kmote gelus on

Place lapinge:ancweteſt thou the hpe pꝛeſte

ko- Jelus amweredhim. r A haue cupll (po

ken / beare wirnes of d eupll:ve A well

fpoken, whylmptteſt ehon me⸗ Ind Annas

ent him bounde onto a8 bore pzette,

‘Simon Peter Cove ¢ warmed yim felfe,

And ther fayoe ontohym: arte nor chou allo
one ol hes bilciples: Be den per it / a larde:

am not. One of lermatites ok f hee pꝛectes

See eee ere en

5 ter dener agapnese trmmeblattp Beocke eres

vg. a we. Chen ico ther Fetus kr Capphas into

suas ball of mudgemek. t was in dmormen eis

fan. ri. a. chep them Celucs went not into the i

hall leſt they ſbald be defplen/ but that they

mxght eate the palchall lambe. plate then

went out vnto them ¢ farde: what acculacid

bzinge ve agaynſte this ma; Cher ancwered

 fapd vnto him. Ikhe were not an eupn doar

we wolde not haue delrueredhym vnto the.


iets


en Pilate tohe Fetus atcourized
bert, ⸗Andthe fauniets mount Soth. rpg e.
Neroune of thoznes ¢ put it on bys Aar. .d.
Aheed. Andther drd on bina purple
Baw t/efayd:bapll kyng o£ Jewes: they
ote him on Place Pilate wet koꝛth agapne
Flapde onto thẽ:beholde J bzinge him foztly
to pou /p ye maye knowe /p 9 Epnde no kaute
in hem. Chen came Fetus forth wearinge a
croune of thoꝛne e a tobe of purple. And Pi
late lapde onto them: beholde man. When auth. yo. c.


J thebve Petes empniters lawehym / they Marh.rv.2,


crped la ohe ale pe im ande
late fapde onto thé. Calle ye him and eruciky ,
bimitoz J Fynde no caule in him The Jewes 4
Anfweredhim We haue a lawe / a bp dure la 28"

we he ought to dye:becaule he made him Cele

Hlonne ok God. ohe Pilate hearde p fayinge

he was pmoare ho beine be into

the ludgemẽt hall / z lade vnto getus:whece

arte thou: But Jelus gaue him none ant we

re. Chen fapde Pylate onto hrm. Speahett

thou not vnto me: Anoweſk thou not that 9,

haue porrerto crucyky the / e haue power to

lowle che ? Fetus ant wered: Thou couldeſt

haue no power at all agaynſt me / except it

were geué the ftom aboue. Cherkoꝛe he that


delluered me vnto pig moare in tynne. And anat. evg. „


From thence kong fought Ppiatemeaneß ka aul pe
jewieh rm: butthe ewe crpeD Capinge: ye ge e
thou let hym go thoũ arte not Cefarstenve” >.
Foꝛ wholdeuer maketh him elle a kynge / is 4
agaynſt Cetar.
HOHE Pilate hearde ö lapinge / he bꝛought
elus kozthe / a fate doune to geue lentence /
a place called the pauementt but in 5 Pes
bzue tonge / Gabbatha. It was the Haböth
euen which kalleth in the eſter teſt / z aboute
Hlorte hourr. And he lad nto 5 J ewes:be⸗
holde voure ning Chey erved / awãye w him /
awapew him / ctucikr him Piſate tayde bnto
thé hall F cruciſie pour king? Che bye elt
anlwered: we haue no hyng but Celar: Ahe math. vf. b.
delpyuered he hym vnto them / to be crucikped. Mari. xv. c.
ndtheptole Felus/and ledyvmawape. dune. xxl x
And he bare hys crolle / and wet forthe into a
Place calledthe place of deed mens dculles /


th which is named inhebzue / Golgotha. nher


ot bodes khynge is tructh? And whẽ he had tapdchat /
digdene be went outagapne pntoche ewes a Ca

pine, tito them: J kynde in him no caule at all, Ve

em thehaue a cuſtome /p I chulde delyuer vou one

sof the loüile at eſter. w yl pe that loule vnto vou

ach, dor the henge of the fewes Then crred the all

the werde / Agayne fapinge: Not hym but Barrabas:


ae ee that Barrabas was arabber.,


id is crucieped he tõmendeth his mother vnto
anche bie blonde ande busyed, 5


Ihe air Chapter.


they crucikped him / and two other with him /
on ether lyde one / and Jelus in the myddes.
And plate wrote his tötle / and put it on the
crolſe. Che writings was Jelus of Nazaret
kynge of the Jewes. Chys tytle reed man

okthe Jewes. Foz 5 place where Telus wa

crucyt᷑ped / was nyẽ to the cytye. And it was
witten in Hebzue / Grene and l atyn Chen
fapde the bye pꝛeſtes ofthe Jewes to Plate:
wepte not kyng ol the Jewes / but p he ſayde
Jam kynge ot the Fewes. Pplate antwered:


what Jbaue wꝛrtten that haue J wepttens,


.


Chen


e. Shen the touriers whe thephad cnnrcttper


—— ea =
BES, John.
were he dytcbples glad when ther tawe the t
8 Lond. CThenlarde gekusto che agarnetpeace were two hondzedcubites /a they dꝛewe the
5 Fe wrth vou. As mpfatherlencme/euento net wrth kylſhes. Allone as they were cone
lende A you. And when he bad larde that / he ko lande they lawe hoot coles andéifthe layd
eden chem g lande onto them Receaue theron /a bꝛerd Fetus fapde onto the: bainge


. mie reccpön of Chipke)teh peateiß ta
Zelus tone his gavmctes ¢ made foure pays Se eee
raccoons be 5 5 che x. chapter.

Hen out anepey tape cnecoanotye emozow afters Sabothoape 5%


ozolwe out, And they Capde one to another. bꝛeth
e tet tervcntcars datos emcee rine en a
0 ſcripture m e 0 e 0 4 . 2 n
Preh eh Lc dean Bidone take mmoapeteomPeoumig ee erbetene cer erden a


eparten my rapment
ä ang bio hoc lar jot» K But Chomas one or the twelue / called lit). And ko all ther were lo many / yet was


the / von mz coote dd calt lotes. and Chen We kane / came co Simon Peter gto
t in dede. Hotherditciple who Jelus loued /a fapde bn⸗ Didymus / was not wyth them when Jelus not the net bꝛonen. Jelus lapde vnto them:
ce ache came. Che other dilciples lard vnto him: we come a dyne. And none of the difciples butte


01 82 5
hen ſtode by the cvolle of Fetus his mo⸗ I vt

N ate tye ute hauefenethe Lozde, And helapde pntothe: afhebinutohatarte thous Fos they tinewe

leophas /a Marr Pagdalene. whe Terns except Ae in bis handes bent of Snayles/ chat ie was the Lorde. Jelus then came and
ſawe his mother / poilciple ſtandingẽ wih th zuck my hãde into his lpde / J wii not bes coke bed / and gaue them / and Eplthe iyhez
leue. And after. vii dares agarne hrs dilcr⸗ wyle. Ins thys is now the thyꝛde tyme that
ples were win a Thomas with them Chen Jelus appered to hs dilciples / alter thathe
came geſus when ß dozes were chut / a ſtode besen cher denen deeth. L
in the myddes a tarde: peace be with pou,

Alter chat larde he to Thomas: beinge thy mon Peter: Simon Joana, loueſt thou me
kengerhether a ſemphandeg / and bzinge thy moze then thele⸗ He faye onto him: pe Lor
bande a thiuſt it into my lde / a be not karth thou knoweſt / chat z loue the. enge She toitett)
ledle hut beleuinge. Thomas antwered and himttede myrläbes. Helapde toh 0
larde vnto him ni Lofde ame Goo. Fetus the feconde tyme: Simd Joins / ouelk thou etd bys laben
kapde vnto him. Chomas/Vecaute thou halt me? Pe larde onto hine pe Lozde thou Eno and fee.
Gene me/ cherkoze thou beleueſk: Mapppare welt z J loue 5. He lapde vnto him: kede mp


&


jouth. Affoneas
e


8 ger/hefapde:


foil ; thepthathaucnotfene/andpetbeleuc, E —thepe. Be larde bnto him p chyzdetyni erp te
ook. t Ir And many other tygnes brd Fetus in che on Bogus lace thou me: And Peter foe
: 158 pretence ok his dilciples / which are not waite rowed becaule he lade tohim öthy rde tyme


1 0 ken in ches boke. Chete are witten that pe loueſt thou me / a layde vnto him: Lon / thou
Dave was an Pinge . And as the wept / he bowed her lelke bad:colve hyn myght beleue / chat Fetus is Chapt ? konne knowelk all thinge / thou knoweſt that J 102
cen arme inc b Cepulcve g cawe rwo angels in whpte mr. OF Sod, athat in beleurnge ve mrght haue ue the Telus larde onto hym: ede my he pe.


ae RN ; ‘Apte thoꝛowe his name. . pe ent
ete / where they had layne the body of Fetus, eRe appeareth to hrs dlcples agaynebpthe le of thou gerdedſt thy lelke / a wale
n de önto her: woma why wepeſt kedlt whrther thou woldeſt: but when thor
ihne Boe ede be 4 ne eter oreo fe atte nel thou dal ürekehe Cort typ bane


thou: Ohe layne onto the:fo2 ther haue take

awapemp 0 hd wote not where ther

haue lapde hum hs che had thus larde / be 8
turned her lelke bacheg tawe gelus ſtädinge

Kunewe not p it was Jecus. Jelus ſard onto ©

ou: IW hom kekeſt


zwomẽ why we
cs se abot bebadbenea gar: 7


dener/fapde vnto ht. Or ve thou haue bone
i here tell me wher thouhaſt larde him ?
d umd he eie e dee n

he tumedber kelle / lardynto him: Rab⸗

ont / which is to laxe matter. Jelus Capde vn
ta her /e ktouche me not / ko Jam not pet als va ccnthe
sertoedto mp father. Bucgo to mpbetzene bargelſen
faye vnto them / afcende vnto mp father ¢ 1
vonre tacher:to m̃y cod a youre God, Marp z um


Spit
Lell ſtode ond Moze:neuerthelette theditct Soiccple due notype Perec fapdenot dpeche whych
Plestinewenot p tt was Fetus. Fefusfapde cobim/He thall noc dpe-bueye eee


er e g tolde the dilcypl Ppqov-but Into haue xe enpmeate? heran- tarytyllig come / what is that ko the? The la⸗thiuget
enen Lope ant Gu Be pan webe << wereDbinmoAndbe lar bntoche cack out mie Divcyplets he! whych teltityct: oF thetewmuere routes


foe thinges vnto her. L
& Chelamedaye at negbt which was b keuche nenn


waß neuer mũ larde. There lapde ther Fetus and


r . Leber’ pints”


pole the woꝛlde coulde not contarne ue mache


b. en to dzawe it foz the ok kyſches. are allo many other thing which Fetus dpd ps this piace.
ber Querubee nie wer aufabtene 6 aeg b nde e ene e en eee ee
dere mie w er: Ode ohe 1 7
e ane ne b pee terhearde that it was che ode / he gyde his webekesrbar hand be wle.


ſtodein p myddes / a lapdto thẽ: peace be
e wödbntd


becaute ok the Tewes Spaboth euen / toꝛthe Lovey voll. And when he had do lapde / he thes
t . Chen
: ie sare ase


lepulcte was npe athande. E


abe ce erde


mamtell to him (ko: he was naked) a kpꝛange
John. uacpon.
Gabe


intothe lee Che otherdicciples cameby hip


Luke. xxitß. g.


6
phi, Sobplithep behelde / he was tal
Sane fone bereuen


i The Artes
¶ The Actes ofthe


Apoltles / wutten by Sapnete
Lubethe Euangelpſt / wyych
was pꝛelent at d doynges
ok them.


either 8 ac bins is tholen in the
—


.


N che konner treatyle
(Weare krende Theophtlus)
haue witten ok all chatze⸗
lch tt ares e
vntyll the dape in whych be
me

ſozowe the holy got Ci =
este onto the Apotties /whych he had
cholen:to whi allo he ſhewed him lelke alpue
after bis padion bymanptones apperpnge
bnto them kourtye dapes/etpeahinge of the
kyngdonie of wod/¢ gathered che to gether /
¥and commaunded chem / chat they chuld not
departe From Jerulalem but to wapte koz p
promps of the father wherok ye haue herde or
me. oz John baptiſed wyth water: but ve
ſhalbe baptiled with the holy gol / and that
with in this featve daes. 3
cometo gether / they athed of hym lapinge:
Lowe wilt thou at this tyme/vettozeagapne
the hyngnometo Ilrael: And he lapdẽ onto
them: It is not foz pou to nnowe the tymes /


orthe Ceatans wh rch the kather bath put in das


his awne power: but pe Mal receaue power
of the holy goot whych Mall come on you.
And pe thall be wyrneſles onto me in Jeru⸗
ralem / and in all Jewzpe and in Saniaty/¢
euen onto the woꝛldes ende.

And whenbebadtpoken meee ned
bp oute oe thett (aht.
And whrle ther loo bed tentatly vpto


as he wẽt / behode two men diode by them in
Fear en ypc afaaybe: be ent
Galle / why ſtande ve galinge bp into heauẽ
Chis lame Fetus which is taken vp fd you
into heué tall lo come / eu? as pe haue tene
him go into heauen. K Chen returned they
vnto Jeruſalẽ rom mount Olxuete /

ig npẽ tog erulat / cotepninge ad

da ves iomep. And then thep were


ed wyth one accozde in vꝛaper and lup⸗
plpcacvon wyth the wemen and Mary the
mother ok Jelnn / and with his bꝛethzen.

I And in thole aves Peter ode vp ing
middes es Be epee ait cape Grog
of names that were to gether / were aboute
anhondzedandtwentpe) Ye men g bꝛethzen
this leripture mu ſt haue nedes ben kulkpiled
which the holy gooſt thoꝛowz mouth of Das
utd [pale beo ie ok Judas / which was gyde
to them that tone Jeſus. Foꝛhe was noum⸗
bzed with vs and had obtapned fellowiip in
thys mynvitracron. And the fame hath now
pollelled a plat or grounde wich the rewarde
ol im quite / and when he was hanged / bꝛaſt
& fondze in the myddes / and all bys bowels

72 oute. Ind ie is knowen onto all the
1100 called auc en nder moche 5 that
kelde is called in their mother tonge / achel⸗
dama / that is to ſape / the bloud telde.


100
leis watts tn the bone of wialmes hrs mn. tg,


habitacton bepoxde / a noman be dwellinge


cherin ra hig Bil a hie Tee antec Re wa.


*

MOherfoze ot thele m haue cdpar
with vg / all the tyme thatthe Loꝛde Fetus
went in and aut amonge vs / unge at
the baptime ol vnto that lame nape 6
be was take bp 00 bs mutt one be aꝛdeyned
to beaze witnes with vs of his relurteccion.
And ther apopnten two / Foteph called
Battabag( whole kyz name was Ztidtus)and
Mathtas, And they prayed fapinge: thou
Lozde which knoweſz the hertes of all men /
theme whether of theletwo thou batt cholen
chat the one maxe take the roume uh gu
niſtracton a Apotlechtppe / kcromwhich Gus

bytranigredion . to
tara e
counted with the eleuen a . F


he comm. 22 5 Seren ;
L oe


che feconde chapter,
. zen


40. f.
et —


x. c.


Ok the Apottles;


Hen d kyktith nape was come / they
were all YW one accogde to gether
in one place. And ſodẽlꝝ ther came
5 alounde fd heauẽ᷑ / as it had bene
nge OF a myghty wynde / and it kyl⸗
ied alls houte where they fate Andthere ap⸗
pered vnto them clouen tonges / ipke as the}
had bene kper / and it fate vpon eache of thé:
e they were all kylled wyth the holy Gooſt /
and beganne to tpeake worth other tonges /
euen as the lpꝛete gaue thembtteraunce,
IAndther were dwelunge at Jerulalẽ / e⸗
weg ſdeuoute men which were oF allnacpos
vnder heauẽ. When this was nopledaboute
che multitude came to getherand were atta:
nyed / becauſe that eue ry man hearde them
Cpeakiebis atone tounge. Cher wondꝛed all
Kmatuepled / lapunge amöͤge the lelues:be⸗
Bpolde are not all thete toh pel lpeake / or az
ite? And how heare we euery man his atone
tounge wherin we were bozen? Parthians/
Medes & Clamptes/ and the inhabiterg of
Melopotamia / or Jurx / e ol Capadocia / ot
Ponthus ¢ Aa Shzigia/ Paniphilla /a of
Egypte /a of the parties ot Lybia whych is
belpde Sp prene/¢ draungers of Rome / ge⸗


igonuertes: toes and*conuertes/Grekesearabiang:we
agen haute hevde the Cpeake twpth oure atone ton.


1 all ammated/@ wodzed fapinge one ta another


ey geg ö greate woꝛnes OF God. EK Chey were


what meaneth thys? Other mocked them
fapinge:thep ave full ot newe wyne.
. But Peter ſtepped fozth wyth z eleuẽ /
C and lptt vp his bopce / alayde vnto chem: Ye
men of Jewꝛpe / a all pe that inhabite Jeru⸗
Salem:be this ino wẽ vnto you ¢ with poure
eares heare my woꝛdes Cbele are not dꝛöc⸗
ken / as pe cuppole:foꝛ it is vet but 6 chyꝛde
houre ok the dape. But this is g which was
lpoken by the Pꝛophete Johel: t halbe in
the laſt dayes fapth Godot my ſpꝛete will
vowꝛe out bps all fleſche. Ind youre fonnes
g voure daughters all pꝛopheſp and youre
vonge men Mal Ce ditions /a poure olde men
wall dꝛeme dzemeg And on my leruaũtes /a
on mrhande mapdẽs will powꝛe out ol mx
Cppete in thole dapes / a they Wall pꝛophetpe.
And q will chewe wonders in heauẽ aboue /
Atokens in the erth beneth / bloud and kyꝛe / a
the vapour ok monte. Che ſunne chalbe tur
ned into darcknes / a the mone into bloud be⸗
£o2e that greate a notable dapeot the Loꝛde
come. And it halbe / p wholdeuer Mall call
on the nam De palbe taued. E
2 emen ok Ftrael heare thele woꝛdes.
Jelus of Nazareth a man apꝛoued of God
amonge pou with mpꝛacles / wondzes g kyg⸗
nes whych Goddydbyhym in the mpodes ol
vou / as pe youre Celucs nowe:hym haue ve
katzen be ö handes ol vnrightewes perlones /


bij
alterhe was delpuered hy ödeterminat corte *
fell ¢ Coxehnowelenge of god / and haue cru
tified a tlapnenrhom God hath rapled bp @
lowledthe fozowes ok deeth / becauke it was
vnpogpble thathe ſpuld be holden ot it. Foz
Daäuld lpaketh of him. Alfoze häde A carve 49 (al. une
Godalwates bekozeme ko he ig on mp right
bande / chat J Wuld not be moued. Cherkoze
pomp bert teiorce / and mp tonge wag glad.
Moreoucralto my elie wail telt in hope /
becaute thou wilt not leue my toute in hell /
nether wile luttre chine holxe / tole coꝛrupciõ
Chbu halt chewed me d wapes of like / zhalt
mate me full of ore with thy cofitenatice, E

Men s bzethzen / let me krelx (Peake onto
You ofthe patriarkte Dauid: Foz he is both ll. Ne. ele
deed a bur ed / a hys lepulcre remapneth id
bs nto this daye. Therkoze leinge he was a
Prophete knewe chacc od had tworne with
an othe to him / chat z Erte ok his loynd uid
lt on his leat in p Chzitk ſpulde rte agayne
in che fletthe) he tawe befoze:¢ Cpake of the
relurreccton of Chzptt, that his foule chulde
not be lelt in hellmether bys kelche chuld ſe
coꝛrupcion. his Jelus hath God rayled vp /
wherot we all arẽ witnelles,

Denee nod that he by the ryght hande of
Soderaltedis / hath receaued ok the kather
che pzompte of the holy Goolt / he hath ſheed gf
kozth s which venow le g heave, Fo? Vaud rr
ö notalcendid into heus buche iapde. Che wal lr .
‘Lope ſarde tomy L oꝛd lt on my right hade
vntpll J maße thy fooes thy kote ſtole. So
therfore let al the houle ol Jerael knowe fo⸗
a luerty / chat God hach made ? lame Fetus
whom pe haue cruclkyed / Loꝛde and Chevit,
„when ther hearde this they were packed
in their hertes, g lapd vnto beter a vntothe
other Apoſtles: eme a bꝛethzen / what tat
we do: Peter fayoe vnto them: repent and be
baptiled euerr one of vou in che name of Jes
dus chꝛiſt kor 6 vemittyon ot lynnes / and vs
Gall receaue the gytte of the holy goott. Foz
che pꝛomple was made vnto vou d to poure
chyldzen / and to all that are a tarre / euen ag
nianp asg Lozde oure God call call. And W
many other woꝛdes bare he wilnes derhoz⸗
tedthem lapinge: Saue poure lelues from
this hntowardẽ generacion. Chen they that
gladly receaued his pꝛeachinge / were bapti⸗ @ i
ledꝛand the fame dape / ther were added vnto
them aboute thꝛe thou rande loules.

Andcher contpnued in ß Apoſtles doctrine
K kelouchippe / and in bꝛeakynge of bꝛeed /a
in pꝛaper. And feare came ouer euer toute,
Ind many wondzese lignes were ſhewed by
L Apoltles. Andallthat beleued kepe the tele
ues to gether /a had all thingscõmen / d lolde
thei volleſlions and goodes / ebeparted the
to all men / as euer man had nede. And they

ebntrnued


wich — tulkriled. 5 Meßent ze therkoze g turnt that :
e e Pe tt
theivmeate together with gladn Ah ob eaten edger y fled abe
neg of here praptinge God / a had fauour m Mail hau re
E de addedto the cõ⸗ God chall tende him / which befoze was prea
: greg on bai iche af wid beau ched onto ben es wit actus et
. Che halt toxetsozed to hys fete, Wetce preacherh a e hne) Sobel
e e e Carer
ö Job ether ing worde . i
lber e e joureot Foz Wotes Cayd onto the fathers: *a 20 peut. btb. t.
yaver. Andther wasacertapne phet Mal theLozve youre Gedtaplebp onto Act.vj.e,
man hait krom his mothers wobe / you/euen of poure bꝛethzẽ Ike onto me: hin
whom ther bꝛolight and lapdeat the gate or wall ve heare inal thynges whatroeuer he
the temple called beut peu / to acke almes chall faye onto you gos the ne dend 8
ok them (hat entred into the temple. nohrch chat euer r n bb amen
wan ae civic cotecauc an de yconie-eloallje Nee an Ser
i e 0 A
poly unpeeterratencet hrs eres onhym muel ¢ thence koꝛth / as many as haue poke
with John / s tap. a:loke on b. and he gaue bane eee ende e ee 8
e e eee
gelte hene nde) lache n bn e ge kathers la ping to Abꝛaham: : Euen in cent. b.
golde haue J none / cuche as Ahaue / geue 3 Pra Sula Keren che erde
the. In name of Fetus Chzitt of Hazareth / nend e tah 0 en bp
bys tonne Jelus / a bimbebath kent coblyt
vou / that euery one of vou ſpuld turne from
poure wyckednes. E
che Apontles are taken ¢ brow ae the atoms
Atera mareabebrconto Gab VnamNE
¶ Che. ſiij. Chapter.


fro deeth. And theß layde bandes on them ant
buche m holde öntpilche nexte da pe: £07 it hem.
was now euen tyde. Bow be it man of the
which hearde woꝛdes / beltueda the noũbꝛe
ok the men was aboute kyue thoulande.

And it chaunled on che mozowe that thelr
rularg & elders & Scribes / as Annas p chete


Hl the Apoltles.


che comer. Hetheris ther laluacpoñ in en


other. Noꝛ petallo is ther eny other name ge
uen to men wherin we nut be laued. L
When chey lawe theboldnes of Peter and
John / a vnderſtodethat they were vnlerned
men and lape people / they marueplen/e they


knew the / chat they were with Jelu:and be⸗


holdinge allo the man which was healed ſtã⸗
dinge with the they coulde not ape agaynſt
it. But they cõmaunded thẽ to go a Cpe out
Of the countell and counceled amonge them
Clues lapinge: what thal we do to there me?
Fozamanifet tygnetsdonebpeyem/andis
Openiphnowen toalt the thacdwell in Jeru⸗
lalem a we cannot denpe it. But that it be
nopfedno tarther amonge the people / let vs
cheaten and charge them that they ipeane
hence koꝛth to no man in this name. 5
Andthey calledchem / and cömaunded thE
that innowile they uiotpeatic oꝛ teache in
the name ok Jelu. But Peter a John ankwe⸗
red vnto them̃ and lapde: whether it be ryght
in the light of God / to obere you moare then
God/iudge ve. Foꝛ we canot but fpeake that
which wẽ haue lene a hearde. So thꝛeatened
they them and let them go / and lounde no⸗
thinge howto punytthe them / becaule of the
people. For ali mien lauded God koꝛ the my⸗
tacle which was done: ko ß man was aboue
fourtypeate olde / on whom thys myꝛacle of
healinge was chewed.
Allone as they were let go / they came to
2 felowes / and chewed all chat the bye
zeſtes a elderg hadlapde toché, And when
they yeardethat/theptpite vp their voyces to
God wyth one accoꝛde / a ſapde: Lozde/ thou
rte God which halt made heauen ¢ erth the


*


€ “fee and al that in them is / which byß mouth


ol thyleruaunt auid hat fap: hy dyd
the hethẽ rage / a the people immagen apne
thinges.che kynges ol che erth ſtode vp and
the rulats came together / agayndt p Loꝛde
and agaynſt his Chztt, :

For ol attucth/agapnt thyholp chylde
Jelus whõ thou hak anopnted/bothewerode
andallo Ponctus Pylate with the Gentyls
and the people of Icrael gathered the lelues
to gether / ko to do whatloeuer thy handes a
thy counlen determyned befoze to be done.
And now Lorde beholde their thzeatenpngy,
and graunte vnto thy feruauntes with all co
kydence to lpeale thy worde. So that thou
ſtretche fozth thyne hande / that healinge and
lygnes and wonders be done by the name ol
the Holy chylde Fetus. And allone as they
had pꝛaped the place moued wheare they we
Featlembledto gether / and they were all Fpl.
led weth the holy Gol / and they tpake the
woe ok Cod boldely. ;


zy


W Andehenusteitude oF che that beleued /


KUTT;
were ok one hert / and ok one lolile. Alco none
ok them larde / that enp ol the thinges whych
he pottetiea was his awne but had alt doings
comment. And wyth greate power gaue th.
Apoſtles witnes ok the relurreccid of p Lo
Jelu. And greate grace was wyth them all.
ether was ther eny amonge them / that lac
ked. Fos as many as were pole lets of landt
of houtes/folde chem and bꝛoughtthe payee
ok the thynges that were lolde / and lapedit
doune at the Ipoltles kete. And diſtribucton
wat made bnto eueryman accoꝛdinge as he
had nede. & ; e
And Zoles which wag allo called of 8 Apo
ſtles / Barnabas that is to lape / the ſonne ol
conlolacton beynge a Leuite / x ofthe coun⸗
tre of C ppers had lande / and folbe it ¢ layde
the pꝛyce doune at the A poltles tete.
Che dyllemblpnge of Ananias and Suphira is pus
upched. Cclpracles ave done by the Apoſtles / which are
tahen-but the angell of God Lapageth ehem ou of pies.
fon. They are brought before the councell. Che tens


thise of Bamalicl. Cyeapontes ave bett/ehep reioy⸗
fim trouvle.


thou duidett ive pnto che holpgoolt a he peut ron


And they were all to getherw one accowe in
Salomons


Che Actes


Salomos porche, And ok other dur noma


topne him kelke to the neuerthelater d people
magnikied them. Ehe noumbze ol them that
beleuedin the ll ozde bothe of men and wem
grewe moare and moare: in lo moche ß they
brought the fiche into the ſtrettes / and lapde
them on beddes and paletteg / that at the lett
might ene een dene
mygbt ipadowe tome o

foa multitude aut o the cities round about


D bnto Jerulalem / bungynge kyche kolneg /a


e whych were vexed wyib vnclene ſpꝛetes.
pnd ther were healed euer one.
CThenthe chete Pꝛeſte role vp a all ther
at were with him (whych is the lecte or the
aduces) and were kuli or indignacion / and
fapve handes on the Apockles /s put the ind
comen pzefon. But the angell ol d Lozve by
nyaht opened the pꝛelon doꝛes / and bꝛought
them fozth, and lapde: go / ſteppe koꝛth / and
{pease in the temple to the people allp woꝛde
ol this Ile. nohen they hearde z / they entred
into the tẽple erty ind mozninge a taught.
Che cheke Pret came a then that were with
him / a calleda countell fogetbet/and all the
elders of the chyldzen ol Arrael / lent to the
pꝛelon to fetthem nohen the miniſtres came
and founde thé not in the pꝛelon / they retur⸗
ned a tolde layinge: J pꝛelon kounde we fut
as Cure as was poll ble /and the hepers fan
dinge without betoze the dozes. But whe we
had opened / we kounde no man with in. hẽ
chele Pret ol all a the ruler ok h temple æ
bye pzeſtes bearne thele hinges ther bow
ted ol them / wher vnto this wolde gtowe. .
Chen came one and chewed them beholde
the men chat pe put in pꝛelon / ſtande in d tẽ⸗
ple / a teache the people. Chen went § ruler
of the temple with mintkres / a bought thé


e hede to poure lelues what ve


had in auictogite amonge all the people a cd⸗
maunded to put the Apoſtles a ide a Iptell
ſpace / a layde vnto them: men of Acrael take
e de to do as
touchinge thele mẽ. Before thele dayes role G
vp one Cheudas boſtinge hrin telfe/ to whõ
refogteda nõbꝛe ot men / about a foure bore
dꝛed which was clarn / z they all which bele⸗
uedhym were fcatred à bzoode a bꝛought to
nought, Alter thrs man / arole ther vp one
beg ol Galle in the tyme when trybute
egũ / and dzewe awaye moche people alter
him. He alto peridhed: a all euen as inanꝝ as
barkened tobimare ſcattered a bꝛood.
And now FZ lave onto pou:rekrapne
ſelues from chele men / let them alone. Foꝛ yl
che coũlell of this woꝛke be or men. it will co
me to nought. But a ve it be ot God ye cinot
deſtrore it lett baply yebe founde to trpue
agapnt God. And to hm ther agreed / and
called the Apotties / and bet them / and com⸗
maunded that they ſbulde not ſpeake in the
name ol gelu / and let them go.
And ther departed krö the countell / reioy⸗
Cynge that they were counted worthy to fuf-
fre rebuke koꝛhis name. And dapiyindtẽple
and in euery houle ther cealednot / teaching
and pꝛeachinge Fetus Chꝛvſt.


5 “glen asi das
d bene, Sl he Apoltlts, „ , kli.
eee céttapne of the Synagoge / he cent oure fathers kt. And at che lecade cherer. ri. a.
ane 5 are called Lybertines à Srzenites / 4 trmeJoleyt was knowen ok bys beth en /
cel cel Ale rana and Cilicia and Atta andbpl and Jolephs fnited was made ünowne neo
A Becher Puted with Steuen And they caulde not ke! Pharao. Chen Lent Folepy a cauledhrs ka⸗
igrace and ME che wildome / athe pete / with which he ther to he bꝛought a all his Kynne;thze Lcoꝛe
0 (pate. Chen ſent they in men / whych larde: C. xv. count. Ind Jacob delcẽ oed into Egipt a elles are
we haut hearde hem tpeake bialphemous and dped boti he amid oure tuthers / and were men and wweme
woꝛdes agarnſt Moles / and aga rnit God. trantlatedints Sichem / and were put in theand., gene rb.
And the mouedlhepeopie andtheeiders c Cepulcre tac Ibzaham bought fo; monep bf n. rug. d.
the lerpbes: and came vponhymand kaughe the lonnes ok Emos / at Hichem. €
Dhim / e bought him to the coGtell/ebzoughe < gen the tyme ol the pronics dzue npe
forth falle witnelles which capde. This nian (which Godhadlwozne to Absahi(} people
ceaſpth not to lpeane blalpgemous woꝛdeg grewe e multiplped in Cgppic,tyil another
agarnſt this holp place andthe lawe:toꝛ we ing drole which kne we not ol J oleph. Che
hearde bpm Cave :thys Jelus of Pazareth lanie dealte lutteſp with oure hipnven ¢ cupil
Gall deſtrope thys place/and (all chaunge intreated oure kathers / ano neave che to cat
the oꝛdinaunces which Moles gaue vs And oute their vounge cheldzen / that they ſulde
all that late in the countell / loned ſtedkaltly not remapne alxue. Che fame tyme was g
vn him / and ſawe hys lace as it had bene the tes boꝛne / z was a proper chylde in the aht
face of an Angell, Of God / whych was noꝛylſhed vp in hys fa
CHteuenmaneth anlwere to his acculnetb / rebubeth ther houle chze moneths. no hen he was calt
Ide hardneched Jucs/aud in Goned vnto death. out / Pharoes daughter tone him bp / and no⸗
5 ¶ Che. vij. Chapter. rylched hym vp fo2 her awne lonne. Ind
bange toy chete pꝛeſt: is it eu: Moles was learned in all maner wyldome
o. Andhe lapde:pe nien / bꝛethiẽ c ok the Egypctans / and was myghty in dedes
Ikatherschearb to. The God ol gio and in woꝛdes. f
Arpappered vnto oure kather Abza⸗ And when he was full koꝛty veare olde / it
ba whi he was vet in etopotamia / betoꝛe came into hys hert to viiet hys bzethen / the
nega. he dwelt in Charran / a laydontohim: come chyldzen of Flrarl. And when he lawe one ol
Out of thy contre / a from thy kynred / a come them fuffve wꝛonge / he delended himz auen⸗
into the lande / which J hal chewe the. Then gedhys quarell that had the harme done to
came he out ol the lande of Chalder / a dwelt hym / and tmote the gypcian. Foꝛ he luppo⸗
in Charran. Ind after that / alone as his ka- fed bys bꝛethꝛen wolde haue vnder ſtande /
cher was deed / he brought him into this lade how that God bphis handes Muloe laue the
in whych ve now dweli / ahe gaue him none But they vnderſtode not.
tnberttafice in it /no not the bĩedeth ol a tote: ¶ And the next dae he ſhewed him lelle vn⸗ re)


jat.pig.n, but prompledthathe wolegeucittohym tothem as ther (troue/ and wolde haue let


topotede and to his led atterhim / when as them at one agarne fapinge : Sys / ye are
vet he hadno chylde. bꝛethen why hurte pe one another? But he


bn kene he wendet Bed n leer
elt uld haus bene ſoned. And when d leaue che worde ol Pod and terue a 11
He pcb dangltchem eher eie b 8 eee
c . e acked ihẽ layinge pou len u 5 i
Sonn ine Uraptetyconmaunbe you toate holy goott and wpfoome/ tohpch we maße s g into wäom they chalbe n bondage wen J „ben feed otesat that tapinge andwas C06
Wuldnotteache inthrs name: And beholde äpopnte tochis nedéull bulpnd. But we will oF hender fee Get fudge /fapde God. And alter that Wallthey a ſtranger in the lande ol Madian / where he
pebauc fillevgevutatem with poure doctrine gens dure felues continually to praper ande us aufe come fopth and keruemeln this place, aud begat ewo fonnes, d
G pe intende tobzingethismasblouddpoys tothe rintttracton off worde, rd tapinge cr then BM: he gaue him the couenaunt of circumcityon c Tl. peares were expired / cher ap⸗ Gxodi tu v
. Peterand the other Apoſtles ancwered ¢ pleated che whoatemuttitupe.zinptiep chote e eme Andhe begat Flaac/and circumciledhim the peredto him in the wyldernes of moũte S p⸗
Seel rv Acarbet:? Be ought mosretoober Godthen Soteuen aman kun o€ karchand at che help ter ra NR Be es amelie wen
10d. Fb. c. pulser bg 5 j ulche. When awe it he wödꝛed
Grenade muenchen oF oure fathers o Fe. zunge ind{qnacid folbe Foreph into Eglpt at $ Ceghe. And ashedguc neare to beholde/
nid God was with hint, adellue red hum out the bopce ofthe L ode came vntohpn: Jam
ok all his aduerlities and gaue him fauoure the God ot thy fathers / the God of Abꝛaham
and wyldome in the lyght ol Pharao kynge the Sodok Jlaac / a the Pod ol Jacob. Mo⸗
or Egipte whych made hym gouerner ouer kes trembled a durct not beholde⸗Then kapde rob. 15. b.
: and ouer all his houcholde. dhe Lom tohim. Put ot thy Mawes frb thy Zolue. v.
Chen came there a derch ouer all p ande kete / ko the place where thou ſtandeſt is hol
. G/that grounde. Jhaue perkectip tene the affliccpon
pur Fathers kounde nofuttenafice. But why ek my people which is in Egppte and J haue
Lacob hearde that thet was coꝛne in Egipte hearde chli gronpmge, aß amt 905 1
5 o delpue


God verelx ipake onthys wyle / that hrs that dyd his nepghboure wꝛöge / thzuſt him
ion poem btolence. ebene people/ feade hunde beadweller in a fraunge lande Serbe bene fen mitrerdg
and that they Muld kepe them in bondage € iudge amonge vs: nohat / writ thou yl me /


entreate thé eupll. li. C. peares. But thena⸗ as chou dyddect che Egypclan peſter dae:


Beute fl. dus whom pellewe andhangedonkre. Pom

bath God lylte op with bis rpght hand /to be

aruler¢ a kautour / co to geue repentaunce the Apoſtles / and ther p.

e tice ay And we are their handes on them.
is recomdes cöcerninge chele es Gallo And che worde of
e holpgooſt whom God hath geuc to them
fat abephim. when cher hearde that / they

claue a ſunder:a fought meanes to fee thé.

Chen Kove ther by one in the cofitelt/a Pha⸗

Aleynamed Gamaltel / a doctoure ol lawe /


. 72


The Actes


todelpnerthent. Ind now come and J well And ve alfohaucteccaued a lawe by the o
ele Egppte. dinaunce of Angels / and haue not kept ie.
Chis Moles whomther koꝛloke ſayinge: . Whenthep hearde thele thrnges / cher
who made the a riler and a tudge: the fame hertes elaue a ſunder and ther gnalched on
Sod tent bothe a ruler anda delpuerer / br d — with their tethe. But he beinge full of &
panes ofthe Angell whych apperedtohrm holp goolt / loned bp ſtedlactlie with his eves
Lbulche. Andehe lame brought them out! intoheauen / and ſawe the glorre ol od / and
ſhewinge wondzes ¢ lignes in Egipt / a in ? Fetus ſtandinge on the ryght bande ol God
reed ler Gin the wydernes. xl peares. Chys and layde: beholde / Ae the heauens open /
iS that Motes whpch Cave onto che chloe and che tonne of man ſtandrnge of the right
Grobt.vig.c, ol Arrak A Prophet Hall the Loge youre bande of God. Chen ther gaue a oute with
Deut. xvih. ö. God raple vp vnto vou of youre bꝛethꝛen / a loude vopce / and ſtopped chert cares grane
Ipke vntome / hm tall pebeare, vpon him all at once/and catt him out of the
Chig is he that was in the congregacpd/ cirie / a ſonedhym. Andthe wytnelles le
in the wyldernes with Angell which lpane doune their clothes at a ponge manes
to him in the mounte Synã / a with dure ta⸗ named Saul. And they toned Steuen cate
thers. Chis ma receaued the woꝛde ok lyte to lynge on a layinge: Loꝛde Jel receaue my
geue vnto bs / co who oure katherg could not kpzete. Ind he kreleddoune and erped with a
obeye / but cat it krö thẽ / and in their hertes loude bopce:Lozdiave not this lynne to their
turned backe agarne into Egypte / tavinge charge. And when he had thus lpoken / he
Exodi. rxxſ a andes eee bra n verte kell a llepe. 1
97 0 2044 dut ol d lande :
€ egypt os tote nt ati becom of e Bot tonne sans
prt ey made a calfe inthofedapes/@ mon magus ts bapt mbieth. Philip bape.
offeven acrptyce bntothe pmage/ s related eth trechanvertpne, . bt r


2 se %
| Ok the Apoſtles. l.
ebeleued alto / and was baptited / a continued Ind Philtp opened his mouth / x beganne men e wg abe
with Pyrlip/ a wondzed beholdynge the mp at the lame lerypture / a preached vntohym ben eue vnen
racles and ipgnee which were chewed. Jets Andas ther went on these wave ther sen etooryt
A Woyenp Apolties which were at Ferula came vnto a certapne water / athe chambers festhevtore enn
lemhtatde laye that Samaria hadreceaued layne lade: Se here is water / what Malt let not the Jeweg
te wozde ot God:they lent vnto the Peter e me to be baptiled: Philip Capde orto him: Ak zen bpm coz
John. Würch when ther were come / pꝛared thou beleue with all thyne hert/ thou mayſt. Poerie Beni!
tod ihẽ that they might receaue d holy gooſt. He antwered and lapde: J beleue that Fetus
’ Foꝛas vet he was come on none ot thesbut Ehꝛiſt is the conne of God. Andhe comaun«
u ld cher tethep were baptiled onip in ß name of Chꝛiſt ded the charet to ſtande ſtyll. Ind they went
fa abn. e- hen läpde ther theirhandes on them / doune bothe into the water: bothe e hnip and
pet mamas? and chepreceaucdthe holy gooſt. E allothe chamberlapne / andhe baptiked him.
diet vilpble hen imb lawe / chat thoꝛowe layinge Andadone as chey were come out or the mas
le che; on oF the Apoſtles handeg on them / the holy ker / the (pzete or § Loꝛde caught aware ht
lies #0 spook was geué:be offered the moneptaping: pſthat che chäberlarne tawe him nomooze
ie re rperpe gene Me allo this power? onwhomfocuer Andhe wet on his wave retoplinge:bue Whe:
a} (as we J put the handes/bemape receaue the holy lip was kounde at Asotus. And he walker
p sot „Then tape Petervntohrmthymo⸗ thozowout the countre pꝛeachynge in their
ney perpche wyth the / be cauſe thou wene cities / til he came to Celarea. E


dia eh that the kite of Godmape be obtepned with T. 20 mul is conuerteb and conkoundeth the Jeweg.
05 Daulpet biethinge out thꝛeat
in the wozkes ol their awnehandes. ¶ Che. bij. Chapter Apꝛeſte/ ¢ delpꝛedok hym lettres to


tagetfrememoney . choubattnetyrpartenoz fellow Deter taper Cab.
¶ Che. ir. Chapter. .
6 5 lerer one weren e
ples of } Loꝛdẽ / went on to the hye
Chen God turned hymkeike ¢ gaue them a ui bad plealure in his deeth. And n aco toplinagoges:*that pr he founde Act. vih. a.
pp / that they ſhulde woꝛchip the dars ol at that tyme ther wan a great per⸗ agree: Chenantwered Simon elayd: pꝛape ve eny of thys waye whether they were men og


ſkiye / as it is written in the boke of the Pꝛo⸗ recucton agarnſt the kongregacrõ 0 tothe L onde fe / me / p none ol theletyynges wemẽ he mpght boinge thé bounde vnto Fe:
an v.g. I phettg. 0 pe okthehau 5 ſuhpch was at gerulale/ and they bed ches n whych ze hate cpo ßen, al on me. And ep i wee erb pie
tome cacrykpces & meateoficrynges by the were.all (cattered abzoade thozowout 5 re⸗ inlemp:ecte is whe thephadtettified bd ed d woꝛde oF to Wantatco/Lodély there chyned rolid about
Cpace ot. xl. peares in che wyldernes? And ve gids of Juz g Damaria f excepts Apoſtles. ma peer b Lord returnedtowardzerulaléß pꝛeached hym a lyght krö heau / z he Fell to the erth / e


e a che gocpell in many cities of 5 Damaritäg. hearde a popce faving to him: Saul / Saul gt. rd b
se a WE Chen the Angelot the Lozde fpake one whp perteeuter: chou me: Andherapoanhae
0 Eta Pbilipfapinge-arple ¢ gotowarde midde arte thou Lozde? And the Loꝛde Cayo: am
u edape onto the wape that goeth doune krom Jelus whö chou perlecuteſt / it walbe harde Saul is cü⸗
rarbeng Fevufalembuto Gaza which sinthe delerk. Fozceto che agarnſt the piche. And he zorn is ch
Mies And he arole and wet on And behalde a man bochetrebünge g aſtonpedlarde : Cod what uerted.
got al. ok Ethtopia which was a chamberlarne / and wilt thou haue me to do; Ind the Loꝛde cayd
fey 05 0 19 9 8 e Ka of — be weather ne the citir / q it albe
A e Cthiophians/ and had the rule ok all ber e what thou ſbalt do.
b nech, treadukeſ cane to Ferutalé fon to pape. and Cle men whych ta meyed with hum / trode B
b recea / d he returned home agaxne lyttvnge in hrs amaled / koꝛ they heardea boyte / but lawe no
‘Crit to charet/he rede Elaythe Pꝛophete. man. And Saul arole from the erth / a ope⸗
en,, Eben che lpzete karde vnto Philip:gones nedhrsepes but cawe no man. Chen ledde
ucts 2eFtopne thy lelte to pondercharet. And Pye they bim by the hande/andboughthim into
Kin. i. ö lip tine to him / a hearde him redeß Pꝛophet Damalco. And he was.tij dapes wout light .
F Clavas/¢ lapde: wunderſtandeſt thou what g netherate nor dꝛancke. And ther was a cer
chou redelt: And he tayo: how can / except taxne diccipie at Bamalco named Ananas
Thadagyde: And he delyꝛed Philip that he and to him lapde the Loꝛde in a vilpon: na⸗
wold come vp a lit with him. Che tenoure ok mas: Andhe layde:beholde g amhere Lose
Scripture which he redde was this. He was Ind the L od lapde onto him: aryle a go into
ledde as a ſhepe ta be klapne:a lpßke a lambe the Grete whch is called trapght, and lenke
i dame before his ſherer / fo openedhe not hrs inthehoule of Judas / after one calleoSpaut
Upccaute he Molch. Becaule ochig humblenes he mas ok Eharlus. For beholde he pꝛapeth / ahath
int (o lowe not eſtemed: who Mal declare his generaciõ: fene in a vitpon aman named Ananias coz
ein thes 50 his lpke is takin fro the erthe Che hams minge intohlm and puttinge his handeg on
carpatee, derlapne antwered Philip a larde. A paare him ,hat he mraht receauehis rahe.
ee eee
vnto N in * * FE . 4 m 600 h { at
: 1 e ha


tole vnto pou the tabernacle ol Moloch / 4 Then devout men dꝛeſſed Steuen / a made
un Moloch: the ſtarre of youre God Remphan / tpgures great lamẽtaciö ouerhim. But Daul made
this \serpouns which e made to wopchpppe the. And zy wylt bauockhe ok the congregaci / and entred into
rp. kränklate von beponde Pabrlan. euerphoule a dzewe out bothe man ¢ woma
* Oure kathers had the tabernacle ot wing th /uſt thẽ into pꝛelon. Powbeit they that
“inthe wyldernes / as he had apoynted them were Ccattered abzoade/ went eucrp 117
Cpeahinge onto 9 oles / hat he ſbuld make pꝛeachinge d woꝛde. Chen came Philly into

itaccopdynge to the kallyon that he had lene. acitte ot Damaria / a pꝛeached Chk onto
Which tabernacle oure kathers receaued /e them. And the people gaue hede onto thole
bꝛought it in with Jolue into p potledion or thinges whichtshllip pate, with one acoꝛde
the Gentris whych God dꝛaue out befoze ? in that ther hearde and lawe the myꝛacles
face ot oure fathers vnto the tyme ol Dauid. which he drd Noz vnclene lpꝛetes cryinge w
Ihych kounde kauour bekoze God / a wolde loulde vorce / came out of many p were pos
fapne haue made a tabernacle fo the God ol lelled oF thE. And man taken with paltres /
Jacob. But Salomon byle him an houſe. and manpthat halted / were healed. And cher
Pow be tthe that is hyeſt of all / dwelleth was areatetoye in that citie.Andther was a
not in téples made with handes as lath. 9 certarne ma called⸗ Dimon which betoꝛe tye
Pꝛophettheaue ia mpfeate / a erch is my kote me in d lame citie / pled wltchecraltea bewits
Hole / what houle wyll ye bylde koꝛ me kapth ched the people of Samarie / lapinge that he
Loꝛde: 07 what place is it $3 chulde reſt in was a man that coulde dogreate chenges.
ath not my hande made all chele hinge“ iWhomther regarded / frd the lelt to L grea⸗
G., Yeltiffenected gor oncivcumcticn heites Ed aneh kelow is $ great power or

and eares: pe haue all wapes relpſted ) holy God. Andhem they tet mochẽ br / becaute ?

gooſt: as youve fathers dpd / lo do pe. Whych ok longe trme he had mocked chem wyth coꝛ⸗
ofthe Pꝛophetes haue not voure kathers per cerr. But alone ag ther beleued Philippes
lecuted: Andthephaue klapnethem / whrch pꝛea e or the kyngdome ok God ¢ ol?
ſhewed bekozt ofthe comminge ok chat zuck / name of Jem Chzitt hep were baptyled bos
whom ve haue now betraxed and mozdzed, the men and wenien. Then Sime


—


The Actes


ny faynteshe bath done to thy a laynctes . aten e And he atore immediatlp. And all that dwelt
the feeipeure elere be hath auctozpte of thebve Pꝛeſtes to at Lynda and I daxon / fave hym / and tours
bude none bende all call on thpnamecheLozdfapde ned to the Lande. ‘
other but vip Dito Hum: gothy wapeg: korhe ig a chotens Cher was at Joppa a certayne woman 5
thote that vctebettell vnto me / o beate my name bekoze che (wüpche was a dplcpple named Tabitha / Tabitha.
cd the Golpel Gentyles a kynges e the childzen ok Ilrael. which by mterpzetacio is called Bocas ſche Dozeas.
soa vue cig 02 J will bewehmhow great thynges he fame was full of good wozkese almes deb
whichwere ma mut lultre Foz my names lake. which ſbe did. And it chaunled in thole dayes
Ipningem thys Tnanas wet his wape and entred into ß that che was lpcke and dped. hen ther had
monde and noe houle / and put his handes on him and layde: welcbed her and lapd her in a chaͤber:becaule
FF chat apperydonto Wyoda tas nye to Fopna/a the altciplesyad:
bepartediae che inthe wave asthoucamit/bath entme/ beardechat Peter was there they lent une:
Ly their necedy that thou myghteſt receaue the ſyaht and be hin/defyzinge him that he wolde not begre⸗
ten which Pau Fplled wyth the holygooſt. And immediatly ued to come vnto them. 1 28
ala mother kellkro bps eyes as ithad bene tcales/¢ Peter arole a came with chem and when
nite bueoae he receaued aht g arole and was baptiten/
im bro hap. AND receaued meate a was comforten, Chen
krearthe was Saul a certapne dapes wyth the dilcy⸗
better gg = ples twhich were at Damatco, and lreyght
Jenn öl) ua pe bepreachen Chait inthe s ynagoges/
and in map Yor that he wasthe fonne of God. All that
other places, hearde him / were amaled ¢lapdes not thys
he that fpoplen the whych called on thys na⸗
mne in Jerulalem /a came hyther koꝛ d entent
that he thuld bynge them bounde onto dhre
prettes? But Saul encreated in ſtrẽgth / a cõ
founded p Jewes which dwelt at Samalco
alfyzmingẽ that this was very Chit, L
Andaltera good whyle / HJewes toke coũ
fell to gether / to hell him. But their layinge
awapte was hnowe ok Haul. Andthepwat⸗
ched at the gates daye and nyght to kyl him.
Chen the difciples tone hym by night ¢ put
qbhim thozom p wall ¢ let hi doune ina bather.
And when Saul was come to geruſalẽ /
he allapde to cople him lelke with § dilciples
and they were all ar rayde of hym / abeleued
not p he was a dilciple. But Barnabas to⸗
ne him a bꝛougbt him to the Apoſtles and de⸗
clared tothẽ how he had lene the l ode in the
1 wape / a had Cpoken wyth hym: a how he had
done boldeip at Damalco in $ name of Jelu.
And he had his couerfactd with them at Fee
rulalem / æ quit him Celfe boldly in the name
ok the Loꝛde Jelu. And he ſpake and dilputed
swpth the Grekes: ¢ they went about tollee
hem. But when the bꝛethnen knewe ok that /
they bꝛought bpm to Cefarea/ and lent hym
foꝛch to Charſuis. Chen had the cõgregaciõs
reſt thozowoute all Jewzy and Galtle and
Samiary/and were ediéped/a walked in the
__ feave of the Hozde / and multiplied by the cõ⸗
Fonte of tye holy goott.

And it chaunled as Peter walked thzou⸗
Ghoute all quarters / he cam to the faynctes
which dwelt at l ydda. Ind there he kounde a
certapne ma named Eneas which had kepte
his beed. vii peres kycke ofthe pallpe. Then
faye Peter vnto hym: Eneas Fetus Chꝛilt

make the wholesarpreand make the beed.


,


he was come / they bꝛought him in to the cha⸗
ber. And allthe widdowes rove round about
him wepinge ¢ thewinge the cotes a garmẽ⸗
tes which Boꝛcas made whill he was wrth
thé. And Peter put the all toꝛth a kneleddou
ne s pꝛarde a turned him to the body ¢ layde:
Cabitha / arile. And che opened her exes / and
when the lawe peter / lat vp. Undhe gaue her
d hande a lytt her vp / a called p ſainck a wr⸗
dow / achewed her aliue Ind it was nnowne
thozowout ait Akne man beleued on 6
Loꝛde. And it foztunedthat he tarved man


dayes in Joppa wyth one Simon a tanner.


ition that Peter (atve « Baio he tors lenk to
Shes. Abe bibel tete! e ſpitte / and 2
are bapt 2


Ache. r. capter. KE ,
Ver was a certapne ms incetarra: ame. e Fa)


b. can. fi. g.
calledComeliusya captapne of the 2,80") ©


fawe in a pilpon eutdétly aboute the npnthe can de ma
houre of the nape /anAngell of God cominge P l. cm
into him /andtapinge onto bpm: Coznelius. saaine. Jethen
ihc Ye lochen bin Be was aftayde LAPD ravers La
what is it loꝛde: He fapde vnto hem. 2 CHP a ore who Gal
pravers ¢ thy almefes are come bp into re- ue abletovenre
membzaunce befoze God And now lende mẽ ede Pale
to Joppa g call fo2 one Simon named allo Pente dare u
Peter. He lodgeth with one Simon a tanner co hardye as:
whole houle is by the lee ipde. He Mall tell aterpbute f at
the what thou oughteſt ko do wohenthe An⸗ uacpor of thes}
gell which anke pntoComnelius was depar wee gane
ked / he called two ok his houtholve feruatites taponge . e
and a deuoute loudper of them that wayted tye pe ce
on hym and tode them all the mater / and asa gut,
fent them to Foppa. mre
Onß mozowe as the wet on their toner ver ge the
a dꝛewe nye onto the citie / Peter wet vp HPO iawe ner ner
the toppe of theboute to pape about $ Hi. chmbinge thee}
houre . Chen wexedhe an hongred / Ewode u br g
baue estk-But whellthermadercdr Pe fell Pee yo rarty
r.. eine pring


Eneas.


che. Chen lenz Foz the immedtatip:e haun
bat weil dane for tacome. How are we all jane tutors
here pꝛelent befoze God / to heare ali thinges che g rer oug


were ail mauer ot. iii. foted beaſtes of the
rn the ertu / and vecmen a wozmeg / a koules of the
wangen / aper. And ther came a bopce to him: rpce pe
it the — ter kyl ¢ cate, But Peter ſarde: Goo fozbpy
feed L. be, don 3 baue neuer eate enp thinge that
pece he Capeh is comen o7 onclene.And} vorce Spake vnto
gat be Fented ying agapae the lecöde tyme: what God hath
. edu clented cat mate chou not come, Chis was
ieapaue do, DONE th 7PLe/and the beüell was receancdop
artes ap agayneintoheauen, :
F l öhilepeter muled in him kelke what this.
iner ge bil pon which he bad kene meat: bcholde / the


thatarecommaundcd onto the of od. en ben nl
en ecet operitD bis mouth larde ragte ee
atrueth J perceaue/ chat God is not parcial held ain tres
but in all people he that keareth hem a tog: e chole v but
keth rightewelnes / is accepted wih him. f ure ware
Yetmowwe the preachynge chat God Cent pny”
vnto the chploze of Firael/peachinge peace Aude rſtande
bp Jelus hilt whych is Logde ouer all cherkoye chat
thing B hich preachinge was publifihen dy is worches
Aube thozoww oute all 3 ewwzye/and beganne in Ga unt in cal
cot he bad men Wypch werelent From Cozneuus had ile, aster the baptynie which John zeachederpih at oe
wed: for made inquirãce for Simons houle / a ſtode hom Godhadannopneed Fetus of Hazareth which hes wore
fpald he ha betoze the Dose, Ind called out one and alked with the holy goolt / and with power. Which urn Manges
calcd ehe whelher Dumon which was alto called Pe: Fetus went aboute doinge good / eheatinge YY? faytd/
me VE ker were odge there. HM Peterthought all that were wen deuelgoscodneh en
e we ON thig bignon / the lpꝛete capde onto umbe⸗ was pth hem. And we are witneſſes OF all Evelpcalica hun
died to al. holde /me fcke the: arple theckoꝛe getpooune chynges whych he dyd in the lande of the Je⸗ Aa he calleth x
fan ruh 0 wech chem ndourenottko Jhauslent wes eat Ferutaleswyom they leww/ ehonge wet) vs al.
ino fot) hem erer wer dounc tvtyemewyPc) wee on trec.drmeooreptenop tye typaredave gg wees
beute of be fent Suto bin from Coznelius/and farde. ſbewedhim openly motto'all he people/ burt eh man dpd g
rg faden Beholde / anche whom pe ſeke what is the vnto vs witnes cholen befoze of God / whych that with alte
Toene caule wherkoꝛe pe are come: And they ſarde ate a dzoncke with him /atter he arate kromues ernegueg /
r -- And be comaundedonto bs to pea MU«dert0
; aum one that fearcth God/and oF good repose che vnto? people etcttific that tise that dune weh
bur: ts te amonge all the people ok the Lewes was is oꝛdened ot Goda loge of quycke o deed. out chem can ik
dene oe warned byanboly angell to lende ko: d into Cohimgeue all the Pꝛophetes wiknes / thatnotbeunowen
pes ihe Came his houle and to hearẽ wozdes ol the. Then chozowe bys name, ail that beleue in hynt/ whether webe
b. Ehe called he chem in andlodgeuthem. call receaue remigion ot lynnes. E. o noten er
Fürthen And on the moꝛowe Peter went aware th hic Pcter pet Cake there wore the then we cd und
He aa will them / and cerrapne bꝛethzen from Joppa ac holp got teil on all che which hearde p pꝛen we a tre to be
ee ne cüpanpedhim And b thpzd dape entred they chinge. Andthep of the circumcilpon tolypch 1900 8 nens Fe
sear ttnte Cefatia. ind Comelius wapted kor che / beleucd/ were altonped / as manyas came wid onto hit
foerpound * pas came w
& tertethara ND had called together hrs kynlmen / a lpe⸗


Peter / becaule that on thesentpls allo was counicoureee
aur mape Chall krendg. And ag it chaũled Peter to come a Seren
with t doin/ Coznelius met him / and kell doune at hys


herd oute che gylte of pholpgooſt. soz thepueiutiticacion
Mat heren ele and worMeppco lpm. But Peter tone


hrerde them tpeane with tonges a magnify % luacyon to

i 0 God Chen andweredppcter: ci eny ms koybid wle tate
oute cl DUM vp fapinge:(taoe bp:Fo2 euyn Imylelle
6 ttelp am a man. And a he talked with him he cam


water? chele Huld not be bapticen whch pen pee
mn of God in / a kounde many that were come to gether.
tie foune And he Cayde waochem: Je owe how that


hatꝛe receaued the help gooſt as well ag we: donc all ve can
Pace kane it is
u lde de, it is an vnawrull thinge fora manthat 18 6


Andhe commaundedthem to be baptyled in do Lape de ave
thename of the Lozte. L Chen pꝛapde the pura


binnto tarpa feateenapes, oeh hd


ier & ewe to company oz come onto an aliẽt:but only can recea
Pion. God hath hewed me that J ſhulde not call ue the beuckpte
se Hes enp man commen oz onclen:therfore came OF Abate bee
Eibe gert onto vou twithoutfavinge nape;attone ag g


Sue of was Cent foz. Jaſketherkoze/toꝛ what in⸗
e tent haue ve lent koꝛ me.
az n. And Comelins fapde. his dape now ul.
Franlelene dapeg J faſted a at § nynthe houre J pzapde
kr yet acter in MYHoule:e heholde/a mia (rode befoze ine
it: thecfo:e in bzight clothynge / a layde: Coꝛnelius / thy
unh e pra peers hearde d chine almes dedes are bad
mye Mat unyemebsaunnce in ehe ear of God. Hende
crkidmtgerkoze to Sovpare call fo: Dimon tolypcl)
b holpeſ is allo called peter. He is lodgedin the houle


ge in oide tothe lapinge:J was in the cytye'? HOt one
OF Toppa pꝛaxinge / ina 8 390 .
Uy, ilion


10
|


bition/s .
a large lxnnyn clothe / iet doune kröheuen by

the kower copners/ a it cam to me. Into the

which when J had faltened myne eves / J cõ⸗

kydered and fate kowerkoted veabes of the

erch / bermen and wozmes / Foules of the

aper. And J herbe a voce ſapinge vnto me:

4B avple Peter cler ¢ eate. Ind Cayd:@od loz

* Che gewes byd MLozde/Fo2 nothynge comien oꝛ vnclene /
wwe comed Bh at eny tyme entred into my mouth. But
kel butler J. bopce antweredmeagayne fd hes cpat
wylch they we not thou thole thynges comen / whych Wad
re Corbydden by hath clenbed. And this was done thze times.
we to cate And all were taken vp agapne into beauctt,
Leute And beholde immediatiy cher were taze m
i come onto the boule where J was lent from
Celarea vntome. And the lpzete ſapde vnto
me / tharz utd go with them / with out vou⸗
tynge. Moꝛeouẽr thele fire bꝛethꝛen accom⸗
anpedme:a we entred into the mans houle.
ind he chewed vs / how he had tene an angel


Attes


vnto Anttoche. And it chaunted thgea whole


ciples cuerp man accoꝛdinge tobis Wer

purpoſed to fende locoure vnto the bꝛeihꝛen
erde dente ewe che dane

a 2

ol Barnabas and Saul.


erode perſecuteth the Chꝛiſten / uplleth James /:
tteth Beter in prelon/ whom the Lorde delpueret
bean Angel. Ge chamekull death ol Errcbe *


fies houle / which ſtode a lapde to bim:fena
m |


mẽ to Joppa /a cail koꝛ Simon / named allo

Peterche wall tell the woꝛdes / wherby both

Cihon. Call thyne houle halbe ſaued. And as

Ibeganne topꝛeache / the holpgooſt fell on

chem / as he drd on bs at p beginnnge. Chen

gabel came to mpremembzaunce the wo des Of d

ter but pe chalbe baptiled with d holy gooſt.

Foꝛ as moche then as God gaue then Ike

gittes / as he dyd vnto vs / when we beleued

on d Loꝛde Fetus Chꝛiſt: what was a / that J

ſhuld haue withſtande God: tobe they heard

thrs / thephelde their peace & gloꝛikped God /

ſapinge: then hach God allo to the Gentyls
grauntedrepentaunce vnto lyte.

ciyep which inereCcatteyd abzoade 020

the atklicckon that arole aboute tene / wal⸗

kedthozow oute tyll they came vntoshenicz

and Cypers a Intioche preachinge the woꝛ⸗

Vde to no man / but vntoß Jewes only. Dome

of them were men ol Eppers and Orꝛene /

whych when ther were come into Antioche /

Cpakebntothe Prekes and preched Loꝛde

Jelus. Ind the hande of the Loꝛde was with

them / anda greate nombze beleued g turned

onto the Lozve,

Cydinges ol thele thinges came vnto the
eares ok the congregacis / wyych was in Fee
rulalem. Andthep tent Cost Barnabas that
he chuld go onto ntioche. Whych when he
was come and had ſene p grace ot Hod / was
glad / and exhoꝛted thé all / chat wich purpole
Of hert / ther wolde continually cleaue vnto
the Loꝛde. Foꝛ he was a goodman / and kull
ok the holy gooſt g of fapthe: a moche people
was added bnto the Lore. Chen departed
Barnabas to ᷑arlus / to toceke Saul. And


Loꝛde/ how he lapde: John baptiled w was whe bebadcaugh


when he had founde hem / he bꝛought hem


Ok the Apottles,


Cwayting fo2 ok § people ofthe Jewes. E
: And as be conſydzed the thinge / he came to e
ch zobnis houfe of Marp the mother of one John
fiene ache which was calicd Marke allo / where many
us wre e were gatherrd to getherin paper As peter
at O92" nocukd ac § entry dazeg badet came forth
toberhen/namedaihona.and whẽ che knew
Peters vopce / che opened not the entre Foz
Peron ae in and told how Peter ſtode
efoze p entre. And they fapde vnto her: thou
arte mad. And the bare thé doune that it was
euen lo. Chen layde thep:tt is his angel. But
Peter contynued knockynge: and when they
bad apenedthe doꝛe / alawe hym they were
attonped. Andhe beckened onto the wyth the
hande / to holde their peace / and tolde them by
what meanes 5 Lozde had brought him oute
ok the pꝛelon. K And he tayde:go ſhew thele
thinges onto James ¢ to the bꝛethꝛen. And
he departed and went into another place.
Allone ag it was dave ther was no lyttell a
do amoge the foudiers / what was become ol
Peter. When Herode had called for him / and
founde him not / he eraminedthe kepers / and
cOmaundedthe to departe. und he delcended
krom Jewzy to Celarea, and ther aboode He⸗
D rode was dilplealed wyth them ol pe and
Sidon. And they came all at once / and made
interceſſton vnto Blaſtus the kynges cham⸗
berlen / and delpzed peace / becaule their coms
trey was noꝛviched bp the kinges lande. Ind
bpon a dape appoynted / Perode araxedhym
in ropall appareil / and let him in his leate /
made an oacion ontothem. And the people
gaue a ſhoute, ſlapingeiit is p voce ok a God
erode is and not ofa man. And immedtatlythe angel
urn ente OF 5 Lozde*fmote him becaufe he gaue not
mes, Sodthe honoure / a he was eaten of woꝛmes
Egaue ppthe gooſt. Andthe worde of Pod
grewe ¢ multiplied. And Barnabas ¢ Paul
keturned to Jerulalem / whe they bad külkpl⸗
led their offpce/e tone wyth thé John / which
was allo called Marcus.
aul and Barnabas are called to pꝛeache amonge
pthen DE Sergius Paulus Slpmas che ſoice
tar. Baul preacheth at Anttoche.
Che. xiij. Chapter.
Here were at antioche / in the cons
gregacion certayne⸗Pꝛophetesg
Meeachers:as Warnabas and dimd
8 [SZ ED caiten niger / z Lucius of Cerene
Manahen Herode the Cetrarkes nozt⸗
kelowe / and Saul. As they miniſtred to the
Loꝛde ¢ faſted / the holy goſt layde:leparate
me Barnabaga Saul / foꝛthe wozke where
vnto J haue called them. Chen kaſted they a
eae their Pape ande put their handes on them /g jet
vc. lobe chem go. Ind they akter ther were lent ok the
b hol Soolt / came onto Seleutta / and krom


ghencẽ che tapled to Cypꝛus. And when ter


Andalkter that / they delyꝛeda kynge / Pod


lij,


were come to Solamine / they chewed the
woꝛde of God in the ſynagoges ol § Lewes.
And they had John to their minitter;
Whenthey had gone thoꝛo out ß Fle vnto
the citie of Paphos / they kounde a certayne
fozcerer/a kalle prophet which was a ewe / 5
namedb ! Bariefu / which was wyth §ruler » ewarielu g
OF che countre one Sergius Waulusa pin aa aan
Dentman. Che lame ruler called nto hym nee thie un
Barnabas and Saul /s deryꝛed toheare the me had chys lor
worde OF God, But elpmas the lozcerar (Fog cerar golte to
fowwas bis name byinterpyetactd) with bode rage n
thE/afougheto turne awape tye ruler krom duct As Now
che kapth. Chen Saul which allo is called cöhmrero whe
Paul bepnge Cull ok Hyoly gook let his eyes they go to wor
on hym ¢ fayoes O füll of all cuttelthe a dil be thev fall co
fepttulnes the chride of the deu /e p enr⸗ „ning wih
mye ok all rpghteoutnes/ thou ceatett not to ail hoi wonder
peruert the ſtrapght wapes of the lozd. Ind to deccaue the
nowe beholde the hande of the Loꝛde is bps people with att
2 achon Mate be blonde a not ſeplunne kor rouge toe
Afcafon, And immedtatlpcher Celi onhhma rather eile i
mpſtea a darcknes / a he wer aboute fehinge God then w >
the that ſhuld leade him by the hande⸗Then § deuell And Gilt
rular whe he fawe what hadhappened / bele- ane ur Ds
ued / a wondꝛed at Che doctrine ol the Loꝛde. Belt lapth
ohen they that were withPaule/were de C the tert /
—. bychippe fd Paphus / they came to. whpch (a
erga. citic ot Pamphiita:and here John aneh ate
Departed Feomthern/anoveturnente Fertt=preaphrans
Falemt Butthey wandꝛedthoꝛowe the coun⸗ tofideeh as no
tres krõ Perga to Antioche a citie ot the coũ⸗ che in the oye
trey oF Pilidta / and wet into the linagoge on ran language /
the Haboch dave and fate doune. Andakter gen per
the lawe and the Pꝛopheteg were rende / the? Baulwhich
rulers oF the lvnagoge lent vntothẽ fapinge alto is called
Ve men and bꝛethzen / yk ve haue enylermon Wal. DE che
koerhoztethe peopie / ae on. We earl
Then Paul ove op and beckencd wyth revue the och
the hande / a lade: Men oF Ilrael / ve that alowed opps
feare od / geue audience. Che God ok thys is/ that of the
people chote dure fathers, and erated the gallen Jane
people when thepdweltas traungersinthestter F mance
lande of Egypt / and wrth a mpqhey ave of (peache of d
brought them oute of it/ and about thetyme Gentptes and
ber. Peares Cuffcen hetheir maners in che doe call be
wyldernes, Andye deltroped.bij.nacpons in Pa led
the lande ol Canaan / and deuided their lande
to them by lot. And akter warde he gaue onto v Noure hun
CHE tudges aboute the pace ok. 7. Cand fen Ahe
Iperes pnto the epic of Bammel ibzophet fees wle
reaken fro
gaue onto chem Saul the donne oF Eis / a B their cone
man of the trpbe OF Sentamin by eye pace gung fort oF
ok Al peres. Ind alter he had yutlypmdoune/ Cares chen
he let vy autdto be their hynge /of whome eye Judge.
he repoꝛted layinge: J haue kounde Dautd Judi ie
the lonne of Zelle / am̃an after myne awne
Hert he Wait kulkyn all my wyll. 7
Okthis manes leedhalh Godlaccoꝛdinge
Gai. do hys


Lobes pzomes) bꝛought koꝛth to the people
Af Arael / a lauiour / one Jelus / when Jovi
bad ive pꝛeachedbetozehis chmynge bap:
tinte ok repentaũce to Akrael. And whe John
had kulkplledhys courte ye lapde: whom̃e pe
thinke that Jam / the lame am J not. But be
holde ther cometh one akter me / whole tems

5 Fam not woꝛthy to lowle.
T Yemen ¢O7erhzen/chplozen ok the ge⸗
Heracion of Abzahan /e whofocucramoge
vou keareth God / to pou is this woꝛde of fal-
Macys Cent. Che inhabiters of J erulalẽ and
their rulers / becaule they knew him not / noꝛ
pet Hoovces of p Pꝛophetes whych are vende
E euery Saboth dave / theyhaue kultylled thé
Math. rv. c. in condẽpnynge bim. And whe they kounde
Lüke. ih. c. no caule of pect) in him / pet delyzed they pet
latetohyllhim. Ind when thephad fulkplied
all that were wꝛitten of hym / they toke hym
doune krö ö tree u puthimm a lepulcre. But
God rapledhym agapne krö deeth /a he was
lene man dapeg ol them whpch came wyth
hom krom Falile to Yerufalem, WWhychare

bis witnelles onto the people.

And wo declare onto zou / how that ß pꝛo⸗
mes made onto ö kathers / God hath kulkpled
nto vs their chyldꝛẽ / in that he reyled vpze⸗
4 lug agapne E euen as it 18 wꝛytten in the
talm. f. b. alte plalme: Thou arte mp lonne / this tas


zes. f. b. medavebegat 4 the. As concerninge that he
reyled him vp krom deeth now no moꝛe to re⸗

türne to coꝛtupcxon / he fayde on this wyle:

Che holy pꝛomples niade to Dauid / J wylt

geue the kalthkullpto vou. Wherkoze he laith

; allo in another place. Chou Malt not fufice
Ege, w. b. thine holpe tolle cosrupcid Howbeit Baud
hes altere haben bys tyme Fulteltca the wyll of


Godhe liepte/¢ wag lapde with his fathers/
and fate coꝛrupciõ. But he whõ God reyled
agapne / lawe no coꝛrupclon.

Beit knowne nto pou therkoꝛe ve men a
bꝛethzen / that thoꝛow ehys man is preached
onto pou the fozgeuenes oklinnes / athat by
bim /all that beleue / are tu (tified kr all thin⸗
ges from which ve coulde not be iuſtikved by
the lawe of Moles. Beware therkoꝛe lett p
tall on vou / which is Cpoké ok in d Prophet;
Beholde ve delpplers a wonder / ¢ peryoche
pe: lo: 2 do a wore in youre daxes / which pe
hal not beleue / y a ma wolde declare it pou
i he they were come out od Synagoge
ok the Jewes the Gentyls belought 6 they

wolde pꝛeache the woꝛde to thé betwene the
Sp aboth daßes. When the congreqactd was
ahne lone bn e Bamba which


couertes koͤlowed Barnabas / which
‘ ſcpake to them ¢ exbozig themto contynue
in p grace ok God. I nexte Caboth dave


came almoſte d whole citie togethevtobeare
the woꝛde of God. When the Leif lawe the


4


The Attes


people they were kull ok indignaciõ a traue
agaynſt thole thinges which were fpoken ot
Paul (pebinge agapnſt it / z raplinge on it.
Chen Paul and Barnabas wered bolde / and G
lapde:it was mete p the woꝛde of God chuld
fps haue bene pꝛeãched to vou. But ſeynge
pe put it from vou / thinke youre felues vn⸗
onthe ok euerlaſtinge lyke:lo, we turne toß
Gentyls: Foz fo hach Lorde cõmaunded vs


haue made the a lrght to 5 Gentpls / that ela. ur. .


thou be laluacton oneo p ende ok the wonde.

Che gentyls hearde a were glad and glo⸗
rilyed thẽ woꝛde ok the Loꝛde / a beleued cut
as Many as were ozdeyned vnto eternal like.
And the woꝛde of the Loꝛde was publylched
thoꝛowe oute all the region. But the Jeweg
moued the woꝛchipkull and honoꝛable wemẽ
andthe chefemen ok the citie / r reyled perle⸗
cucion agaynſt Paul and Barnabas ander⸗
pelled the oute of their coſtes and the


me vnto Jcontum. And the dilciples were fl qui
led with dope and with the holy gooſt. EK
CPauland Barnabas preach at Jcontum / ſome be-
leue)ſome tere vp ledicyon. At Uiſtra they wolde do
facvafpce to Barnabas and aut / which refute it / and
erhözte the people to wopſhpppe the true God Paul
is ſtoned / arter that commeth he to Derba / Lyra 3c
nium and to Antloche.

Che. ruin. Chapter.
MdIt koztuned in Jcontum p they z
wet both to gether into ß lynãgoge
of ß Jewes / fo ſpake / iht a gret
multitude both olp Jewes a alto oF
es beleued. But ß vnbeleuingeg ew /
fterpdop a vngimeted the mpndes od getyls
agayntte ) bzeth2e. Longe tyme a bode ther
there a qupt thẽ Celucs boldly wrth p beipe
okthe l ode / which gaue teſtimonp onto the
woꝛde ok his grace / a cauled lignes a wõdꝛes
to be done bytheir handes. Che people of the
citie were deupded:and parte helde wyth the
Jewes / and parte with the Apoſtles.

When ther was a laulte made boch of che
Gentyles d allo ok the Jewes with their ru⸗
lers / to put them to ſhame and to ſtonethem
they were ware of it / z fled vnto L yſtra and
Derba / cities ot L ycaonia / a ontop reatons
irethroundaboukeſs there preached § Bot
pell. And ther late a certayne man at Lpſtra
wealie in his kete / bernge creple ro his mo⸗
thers wombe / andneuer walkpd. Che ſame
hearde Paul pꝛeache. Which beheldehym a
perceauedthat he had kapth to be whole / and
fat with a oude noyce:ſtand v on thx
Fete And he ſtert vp / and walked. Ind whe ?
people ſawe / what pend . done / they lte
vptheir voyces / laxinge in ð fpeache of n v⸗
caonia: Soddes are come doune to vs inp lxn
nes of mé. And they called Barnabas Jußpt⸗
ter /a Paul Mercurius / becaute 3 —


ſhou
mien mute of tet fete agapat che /g ca: Marg te


ide. lx. a.


*


We des


3


via.


gente thi


3, lacritice with the people.

C. But whẽ the a poſties / Barnabas a Paul
herde chat / they rent their clothes / and ran in
amonge the people / cryinge and laying:ſyꝛs
hp do pe this: Weare moztall men like vn
to vou / and pꝛeache vnto vou / that ve ſhulde
tutne kromthele vanpties vnto the ipuinge

GSod / which madehrauẽ ¢ erth a the lee a all
Ein tho is: the whoch in trmes pa ſt fuffved
all nacions to walche in their awne wapes.
Heuerthelelle he lekte not him telke withoute
wytnes / in that he ſbewedhys benelites / in
Geupnge vs rapnc Frombeaué and krutetull
cealons / fylling oure hertes w ode / a glad⸗


nes. And with thele lapinges / lcale rekrayned


- they the peopſe / that they had not done lacri⸗
kyce vnto thent, oe
‘Thyther came certapne Jewes krõ Intio⸗

che and qconunn / x obtapned the peoples co


lent / a ſtoned Paul / and dꝛewe hym out of b


D itie / ſuppoſpuge/ he had bene peed. How be
it as the difcipies ſtode rounde about himhe
arole vp and came into the citie. And p nexte
daye he de parted with Barnabas to Derba.

Alter they had pꝛeached to that citie / and had
taught many, chepreturnedagapne to Ly
tra /a to Foontum a Antioche / a ſtrengthed
‘the dilcipfes foules / exhoztynge them to con.
tynue in the fayth / afurminge that we mutt
thoꝛowe moche trybulacyon / entre into the

Uungdome ot Hod. And they odened them el⸗
dert by eleccion in euer congregacton/ and

pꝛapde and kaſted / and chmended the to God
on whom they beleued And they wet thoꝛow
out Pilidia a came to Pamphilia and when
they had pꝛeached the woꝛde of God in Pers

/thep delcended into Attalia / athence de⸗
parted by chyppe to Anttoche / krom whence
chep were deſpuered onto che grace of God
to the woꝛclie which they had kulkrlled. nohẽ
they were chme a had gathered the congrega
cion to gether / they reſjerled all that God had
done by them / a how he had opened the doze
ok fapth vnto the Gentpls. And there they
abode longe tyme with che dilciples.
CMarisunce aboute circumciſion. Che Apoſele pa
cifpce the matter at Jerulalem. Bauland Barnabas
cheat Antloche. The. Tb. Chapter.

Hen came rertayne front Jewꝛie /

indtaught the bꝛethzen v excepte

e be circumcyled after the maner

8 of Moleg / ye cannot be laued. And

rohen ther was ryren dillencton a dilputyng
nta ipttel vnto Paul a Barnabas agapnſt
them Chen deternuned that Waul and Bar⸗
nabas / and rertapne other or them chuld al⸗
cende to Jerulalẽ pnto the Apollles k elders


Hk the Apottles,
pale are pꝛeacher hen Zupiterspꝛecke / which dwelt
iar abbozre pefoze their citi/bꝛought oren a garlandes


es og Ditto the churche pozche / @ wolde haue done


litt,


aboute thys queftport. And after they wele
bꝛought on their waye by the cõgregacxon /
ther patted ouer Phenices a Samaria / de⸗
rlarynge the conuerſton of the Gentyls / and
they brought great ioye vnto ail the bꝛethzẽ
And when they were cometo Ferufale, they
were receaueo of the congregacion and ok »
Apoltles andelders-Anulhep declaredwhat z
thpnges God had done bythe Chen role vp
certa pne of the lecte of the Ehariles / whych
dpd beleue / laying / that it was nedfuil to cir
cumeyle them and to entopne them to hepe


d awo ok Moles. andthe Apotties g eweis
“caine to gether to realon ofthis matter.


And whether was moche dilputynge/ pe⸗


ter role vp a layd vnto thẽ: e men d bieih t ⸗


ve Unowe how that a good wüple agoo/ G

chole amõge vs p the Wentyls bymy mouth

MHuldheare the wozde ofthe Golpell and be⸗

leue. And Ged which knoweth the hert / bare

them wytnes / and gaue onto them the holy

goolt / euen ag he dyd onto vs and he put no

Difference betwenethẽ a vs / but wyth laych

an purikiedtheirhertes Pow therfore WHY au fayth pus

tempte ve God / that ve wolde put a pole on viticd 0. ür der

the dilciples neckes / whpch nether oure fa⸗ſco nd. Cheiv

chern nor we were able to beate But we be⸗ ewf

leue that thoꝛowe the grace ok the Loꝛde ge⸗ pecan theke

lu C heilt / we Halve laued / as they do. Chen c seated by

all the multytude was pealed and gaue au⸗ „ Faythrthat

dience¢o Warnadas and Paul which tolde dnn tonnes

what ſygnes and wondzes God had ſhewed ted ynco them /

amonge the Gentyis by them, Dut forgcu fog
And whe theyhelde heir peace James an. *hitkees dione

fweredfaying:aeen a bꝛethꝛen hertien vnto des fabs

me. Sinieon tolde how cod at 5 beginning:

dyd bilit p Gentyls / receaucd of th peopie

vnto his name. Andto this agrerch d wondg

Of the Pꝛophetes / as it is wzittẽ. A kter inis

wyll returne / a wyll bylde agayne / the taber

nacle of Wauid which is fallen doune / andß

which is kalen in detepok ie) wynz byive

agayne/and + toll 10 itp, that the 110

ok men myghte lenke alter the Loꝛde / Gio fh , up

Setpis, po who np names emedlapch es eh

5 Londe, which doth all thele thungs:knowe meoace Cat

vnto God are allhis wozhes krö the begyn⸗ me hac that

ming oF the woeld therfore mp fentence fg, Une

that we troublenotehs which krö amäge the gre ryote pave

Gentpls/are turned to God: but p we wepte called 5 people

onto thé / that they abſteyne thẽ telues krom ofasots y frre

kilthynes oF pages kromkoncacton krom gane ahe ite

sebvangiyd ¢ fro blonde. For Motes of vide 2 gregaciou

tyme hath in euer citie that pꝛeache him / x ot Khilt /

he iz rede inf ſynagogdeuery Saboth dape. othe Thien

„Chen pleaten te che Tpocles gelder wende

the whole togregacton/tofende choken men zahichreehe

Oetheir ane company eo Anttoche iw Saul path nor hes

ad Barnabas, Chey fent Judas calledalto woud deb,

Baͤrlabas /a Splas, which eee chefe men .
.. amonge


amonge the bꝛechzen / and gaue them letters
in their handes akter this maner.
Che Apoſtles / elders a bꝛethzen lend gre⸗
tynges onto the bꝛethꝛẽ which are ol z Gen⸗
Etels in Antioche / Sia and Cylicia sor ag
moche as we hauehearde p certapne whych
departed tom bs / haue troubled pou wyth
wozdes / and combzed poure myndes laxing:
Ve mut be circumcyled and kepe the lawe /
to whom we gaue no loche cömaundement.
It fermen therkoze to vs a good thinge / when
we were come to gether with one acco de / to
ſende cholen men vnto vou / woure beloued
Barnabas and aul / men that haue ieopar⸗
ded ther ipues Foz the name ok oure Loꝛde
Jelu Chit. We haue lent cherkoze Judas
und Silas / which Hall alto tell vou S fame
chrnges bymouth. Foz it lemed good to the


holy gooſt a to vs / to put no greudus thynge npgh


to vou / moze then thele necedlary thinges:
is to laye / that pe abſtayne krom thinges of
kered to pmages/from bloud/ krom ſträgled
and koꝛnicacion. Frõ which yr ve kepe youre
kelues / ye hall do well. So kare pe well.

F ohe they were departed / they cam to An⸗
tioche and gathered d multtude to gether /
E deliuered the picctle. when theyhad redeit /
they retopled of that confolacton. and qudas


1 Prophets u Dla beinge Pzophetes exhoztebd bie
re fabenth,


rie pla
new


chougl t
00 ny which departed from the at Pamphi
4 . — with thẽ to the woꝛcke. And
e ditencion was lo carpe betwene them /
e
aba toke Marc ö
Epen, ofthe moſthye God / which che we vnto be b


to Eppers. And Paul chole SHplas a depar⸗
ted / delpuered ofthe bꝛethzẽ onto the grace
ok God. Andhe went thoꝛo we all C ytã and
Cylicia Aablinyinge the conregactons.
| Timothy is circumepſed. P aul preacheth at hi
ſippos / anb chee is he put in prefon,

¶ Che. rot


pt. Chapter.
en camhe to Berba a to U pſtra.
‘ And beholde a cevtapne vifcpple
Up] was there named Cimotheus / a
e 2) womndsforne which was aFewel:
Seg beleued:but his father was a Greke. Ol


Actes


whom repozted wen / che bꝛethꝛen of L ptra
Kol gconium. Che lame Paul wolde that he
chu ld go koch with him / and tobe a circum⸗
ciled him becaule ok the Jewes whych were
in tuole quarters :toꝛ they nnewe all / 6 bys
kather was a Greke .Asthey went thozom
the cyties / they deliueredthẽ d decrees koꝛ to
kepe / opdepned ofthe Apotties and elderg /
whpch were at Jerucalem. And lo were the
congregactons ſtablpahed in the fayth / and
encrealed in noumbꝛe davip. 2

When theyhad gone thoꝛow out Phꝛigia /
a the region of alacia /ſand were koꝛbydden
ol the holy gooſt to pꝛeach the woꝛde inã lia /
bey came to Mylia / a fought to go into Be
thrnta. But the ſpꝛete Cofiven thẽ not. Chen
they went ouer Mylla / and came doune to
Eroada. And a vifion appered to Paul in 8
t. here ade aman of Macedonia and
prapedbhim faptg: come in to Macedonia a
helpe vs. Akter he had lene the viſton / imme⸗
diakly we prepared to go in to Macedonia /
cevtifieds the Loꝛd had called vs / ko to pꝛes
che ß gol peil onto thẽ. Chen lowled we koꝛth
tr Croada/ a with a ſtra yght courte cant to
Damothꝛacia a 5 nexte dave to Neapolim /
€ £10 thence to Phillppos / which is  chefe
citie in p partes of Macedonta / a a tre citie.

We were in that citte abyding a certarne
dapes. Andon p Sabot daxes we wet out
ol the citie belydes a ryuer where men were
wont to pꝛape. And we fate doune and Cpake
vnto the wemen which reloꝛted thether. And
à certapne woman named L pdia a feller ot
purple / ot the citie ot C hratira / which woꝛ⸗
tipped God / gaue bs audience. whole heit v
the Loꝛde opened that che attended onto the
thrnges / which Paul (pate, when the was
baptiled and her houcholde the befought vs
ſaping: qt ve thincke 6 J beleue on Lord /
come into myhoute / a abyde there. And he
conſtrapned os"


. xx. b.
"and ir ko tuned as we wentto pꝛaper / a Ear ,
cevtapndambell pode ſled with a cpꝛete that i. neg Fo


pꝛophetped / met vs / which bꝛought herma⸗
ker ¢mafires moche bauntage dw Prophe⸗
ſpinge. he fame folowed Paul and vs and
Capinge:thete men are the feruauntes


wape ok ſaluacpon. Andthys dyd the many
Daves. But aul not content / turned about
and fapde to the fprete. I commaunde the
in thename ot Jelu Chꝛilt / that thou come
out or her. Andhe came out the lanie houre.
that boveat de be eee trp
ope of their g
caught Paul and Splag / and due the into
che market place onto therulars/¢ bz E
thẽ to the officers laing: here men le
oitre crtie / which ave Je wes a pꝛeache of


Jelus ethou ſhalt be faued 4


on dozes open he dzue oute his cwearde and
wolde haue kylled him telle / luppolinge the
preloncrs had bene kledde. But Paul cried w
Aldude vopce taping: do thy telke no harme /
Foz we are all hearẽ. Chen he called fora
lyght and Cpzange in and cam tremblynge /
Klelldoune beko ze paul a SDrlae / abꝛought
thé oute a lapde: Spis what mutt J do to be
faued? And they lapde: beleue En ae 1—
ouſholde
Ind they preached vnto him che worde of the
Loꝛd/ a to all that were in his houſe. Andhe
tone thé the lame houre of the nyght ¢ wal:
chedtheir woundes / a was baptited wich alt
B belonged onto him fraight wape Phe he
Har bought thé into his houle / he fet meate
bekozethem / and toped chat he with all bys
hou ſolde / beleued on God.
Ano when it was daye / the officers tents
miniſters lapig:ietthole men go. Che neper
ot the pꝛelon tolde this fayinge to Paul che
officers haue ſent woꝛde to lowfe pow. How
fae get vou hẽce and goin peace. Chen
po aul bntothe ther haue beate vs opens
iy bncondẽ pned / toz all 8 we are Romans /
S haue caſt vs into pꝛelon:a now wolde they
lende vs awapepꝛeuelp: Nape not fo/ but let
thE come thẽ Celucs a fet vs out. When $ mi⸗
niſters tolde thele woꝛdꝭ vnto officers/ chey
keared when ther hearde that theywere doz
mayng / a cam a belought the / and bzought
thé out / and delpꝛedthem to departe out of 6
cytte Indthey went out ok ß pꝛelon a entred
tnto $ houſe of Lidia ¢ when theyhad fene
the bꝛethꝛen / they cõtoꝛtedthem a departed,
Faul cõmeth to Chelaiontcawher the Jewes (et
the cytie ona roze. S aul eccapeth/ e commeth to A⸗
thens / where he preacheth the true ¢ vnknowne God
Che. roi. Chapter.
S ther made theirtonepthoꝛow.
Amphipolis and A ppolonia/ther
cam to Chellalonica where was a
Ornagoge of the Tewes. And


0 ur ther bzpnge
Ps i out to the people Bit whe they kounde

ni not / they dꝛue Jaton and certayne bꝛe⸗
thaé onto the heedes oF p citie cryingerthele /
that troubie the worde are come hydder al⸗


fo which Jalon hach veceaued ppeuelp. And 30hn re.


thefe all do contrary to the decrees of Celar /
aftiompnge another kynge / one Fetus, And
they troubledthe people a the officers of the
cptie / when theyhearde thele thynges. And
when they were fuffictently antwered of Faz
fon g of che other / they let themgo. 5
And the bꝛethzen unmedlatiplent aware
Paul and Srlag by nygöte onto Werres,
Which when they were come chyther / they E
entred in to the Synagoge of the Jewes.
Cbele were the nobietk of byzthe amöge the
Of Chelfalonta / whych reccaued the Worde
doth all dyligente of mynde / and learched


1 bed,
*thefcriptures daply whether thole thünges! Keirehe the
were euen Co.Andmany or them Deleucosa pitt
Fo of wozthypfull wemen whych were dre2ye trpe alldoc⸗


nes, and of men not afeawe.wbhe the Fees trie,
ofabetalontababtmowicoge aes eoe
ol God was pꝛeached or Paul at Berrea /
ther came and moued the people there and
then bp and bythe bzethẽ Cent awaye paul
togo as it were tothe fee: but Splas ete
motheus abode there ſtpil. And they thatgy⸗
ded paul / bought him bnto Athens / andre.
ceaued a cõmaũdemẽ t vnto Drlas acim:
cheus Foz to come to him atöce ¢ came their
wape. WHI Paul wapted fo7 thé at athet /
bistpzete was moned in him / to ke the cptie
geuen to woꝛchippyng of mages. Chen he
dilputed in the lynagoge wihe Jewes / a W
$ deuout perlonnes and in che market Daye
Ip with chemchat came vnto hem. Certapne
Pbilofophers ok the Epicures and of the
eDtoveh tnten with um. Bnd Come ther
were which ard: what will this babler faye?
Other fayde : he kemeth to be a trdrnges
bringer of newedeutis / becaule he pea de
bntothem Fetus ¢ thereturreccio. Andther
tobe him / ¢bzoughthym into Marce trete
an. NTO Be
ring


nber g


_ doctrine wherot thou tpeakett is? soz chou
bypngett ſtraunge tyompes to dure eaves;
— Wino tpttone what thet cing

meane. $02 all tye Schentangand Gradgers

which were there / gaue the Celut to nothing /
elt / but ether to tell oꝛ toheare new tydingd.
Paul Kode inthe myddes of Marce trete

@ lapde: pe men of Athens perceauc that in

all chinges pe are to Cupersticous. soz ag

palled by and behelde p maner how ve woz⸗
chip wren koũde an aulter wherin
was wzittẽ onto the vnknowẽ God. Whom
ve then ignozũtly wozthip him chewe J vnto
vou: God ß made the wozide ¢ all that are
int / le yinde that he is Loꝛde of beaue and
erth / he dwelleth not in tempels made wyth
andes / nether is wozthipped wich mennes
andes / as though he neded ok enp thynge /
inge he him lelke geucth lpke and bꝛeeth to
all men every where and hath made of one
bloud all nacions of men / koꝛ to dwell on all
the face of the erth / and hath atignen betoze/
ow longe trme / ĩ alto the endes of their in⸗
abitacion / that they wuld lenke God / yr ther
inyght fele a Fynde him though he be not kar⸗
re from euerp one ol vs. Lo in him we lrue /
maue and hade youre beinge / as certayne o£
pour awne Woetes lard. $02 we are allohis
Seeg as moche then aße * we are

au We are hrs p generacion ot od / we ought not to thinke

Gencvacionece B the Godhed is Ipke vnto golde / cyluer oz

that tsy we are ſtone / grauẽ by cralte a pmaginactd of ma.

ge oute buyer. And che tyme of this ignozaunce God tee
ino mages garded not. Buendiu he biddeth all men cues
tp were vepent/becaule he bath a ppoynted a
dape / in the which he willtudge the wazln ac
os cozdinge to ryghtewelnes / bythat ma whom

ur Tartpis co dn.

bere Alen dale Feth apopnked / F hath offered Eaith™ co ali

b promptes ofmtieit/after that he had rapſed him fro deeth.

52 when they hearde of the relurreccion krõ
05

fane vs: whit .

r heare the agayne ol thys matter. Ho paul
an bepatte EVD aMIONCLDE, beit certayne
eee eee

3 which twas Wionitiys a 0

70 inen man ngmen amavis and other wich the.

not to ßgewes C. patil preacheth at Lorinthumveontpnuing there

nie / as bete and a halt / goeth agapne into camech tor
ha epbeau,tetarm an boche. eff aque
ia and pci.

che. vii. Chapter, .


EX fter that Paul departed from Wi
W —. to ointhũ /g koũde
a}


*


Act gig. c.


The Actes


deeth / lame moched/ and other lard. we wyll 21


was to maße tented, And be Hreachen i the
euern eee eee
5 When laren Einegeng were come
trom MBaproonta/ uche gewerbe geln
che lp ꝛete tote ile to che Jewes that
was very chzid. And when they lade cotras
rab ed be wone hes rarment and
fayde onto thé:pourebloud bps poure awne
herddes / g from hence fort 4 goblamelette
into che genteig And he depärced thence / 2
entred into a certaxne mannes houte named
kenn bern id age whole houle
jopned hard 10 the fpnagoge. Pod beit one
Crilpus the chete ruler of the Cynagoge be⸗
leued on the Lorde wrth allbis houſpolde g
many of the Cozinthians gaue audiẽce / a be
Sn pale Wer et Ba 1 in the negbe

n LC {i
Warden ene perde but ſpeahe / and
bolde not thy peace: koꝛ I am with the / s no⸗
mé wall inuade the that hall hurte the. Kor
Jbaue mache people inthis clic. And he ee
tinued there a peare and tyre monethes / and
taught them the woꝛde ol Sd.

Loben Hallo was ruler ofthe countre ok yy
accopcagaynd Raul ebougorbintetye
accoꝛde agapn! @b20u 1. 5
tudgement leate taping: this felow counces
leth mento worthip God cötraryto piawe. |
And as Paul was about to open his mouth /
Gailio ſaxde vnto the Jewes: pe it were a
matter of wzonge /o an curl dede (O ve
kart bega that g chudde heare pou:
jut yr it be a queſtton of woꝛdr / o or names /

07 of poure lawe / lohe ve to it voure ſelues.
Foz I wyll be no fudge in loche matters / 6
hedzaue thé td the lẽate. Chen tobe al the
Grebes Sottenes b cheke ruler a ae
nagoge / fmotebim befoze f tuoges tate, ©


ie


a


Spanying bin. Ande he cw. n
Centern ehe dene Aud team tog


Jewes. nohen they detyzed
Tanger cometh tebe ctenteynae bur eae
bad them fare well rayinge. I muſt nedes at
this feat that cometh / be in Jerulalem: but
— — —ͤ—
nd he departed from Ephelus a came vntof
Celarea: i accended and laluted the
sion /@beparieboneoextoche/ 6 me had


nept evap, her rot Him / chep coke him nto the a expo


onto hem: no we haue not hearde whether
bpb, er be enyholy gooſt oz no. Ind he tape bn


Gk the Apoſtles,


. lb
bonne at Alerandzia came to Ephelus/ an Jelus capinge: ie adiure vou bp Jetu wh
eloquent ma /and myghty in the teriptures; Saul ney ane Leet ree

G Woe fame was infopmed inthe wave of che df one Sceua a Jewe and cheke ok § prettes


taught dilpgentip the thynges ol ß Loꝛde / Se ee . 1 wie 2
1 8 nowe a Paul A know:
ne we but the w baptime of John a d dined i


who are pe: And the man in whome the euyll
Eprete was ranne un theni q ouercame th /
and pꝛeuapled agaynſt them / lo p they fledde
out ok that houle naked ¢ wounded. and this
was knowen to all the Jewes & Grekes al⸗
lo / which dwelt at Ephelus and keare came
on them all and they magnified the name ol
the Lobe Fetus: :

And many that beleued/ cam ¢ confcdiey
& Hhewed their wozckes. Manpokthe which
fed curious crattes brought their bones &
butnedehem befoze all men / k they counted
the pzpce ol them / a kounde it Epety thouland
Se

and peuapled. Akter thete thynges 07

were ended Saul purpoten in che pete; to wagen are
patie ouer Macedonia ¢ Achaia / c to go to we now and
Jeruralemaping: iter A haue bene there / then call pens
Smut eo le Rome, go tenthe into Wa⸗ (de an
Cedonta-tino of the that mpntttred onto hym are eee ay
Cimotheus and Cratus:buehe him Celfere- pence. nerirug
poe MaynedinAlia fozateaton, the pece,

Che lame tyme ther avoteno Ivtell a do E
aboute that ware For a certapne ma named
Demetrius a lpluerlinpth / which made ſyl⸗
ner fchzpnes tos Piana / was not a iptell be
neliciall onto the craktes men. Which he cal
led together tthe woꝛnemen oflpßke occupa
ciõ a Capo: Opyſ / ve tnowe 5 bp this cratte
wehaue bauntage, Mozeouer pe fe ¢ heare
filed in che name p not alone ate phelug / but al moſt thoꝛow

but all Afi thts Paul hach perluaded a tur
ned aware moche people tapinge i they be
not goddes which are made with hades. So
$ not only thes oure crafte cometh into pax
ofthe benennen Ban duke e

a8 Diana ſhulde be de⸗
thes / dilputinge and geutnge them exhoꝛta⸗ fppled / and hermagnikpcence chulde be de⸗


dtrored/ which all Alia and the woꝛlde wo;
Shyppeth bade 3


¢ iWhencherhearde there tapinges / they
multitude: he departed from the and lepera⸗ were full of wuathe / mn ceyEDOUE tha
Greate ts Diana of theepyerians. And alls
Citic was ona rooze/ g they rudhedinto the
comen ball with one allent / a caught@apus
and anſtarcus men of Macedonia Pauls
ofthe Lode Fetu bothe Jewes a Prekes. compantos. Bhen Paul wolde haue entred
And God wought no mali mpzactes by the in ontothe people the dicciples fufiered
andes of Paul:fo that Eom his body / were not. Certayne allo of the che fe of Alia r ch
Rroughtontop fiche naptpnsozpartelettty were is krendes llent brito hym / defyringe
andthe difeates departed krom them / and the him that he wolde not preace into the comen
euyll fyzetes went out of them. ball. Some cryed one thynge and lome ano⸗
pa oun sper ede vy ape pod Bn f moet pant ewt bite e N
i calli ent: moare parte hnewnot wherkoꝛe they.
which had eupll cpzetes the name of 8 Loꝛd were come together. n


ded vnto him p wape al Goo moze perfectly.
And whẽ he was dilpoledto go into Acata/
the bzethzen wzote exhoꝛtynge the dilcypies
to receaue him. A tter he was come thyther /
he holpe them moche which had beleued tho⸗
Lom grace. And megbtely he ouercame the
Jewes / and that openlp / chewynge by the
tcriptures that Fetus was Chꝛiſt.


a


Dome


The


which avenetherrobvers of churches /
thintet to wyn not pet delpllers or poure goddes Wyerfoze
ue ß moare ab, PE Demetrius a the crates men whych are
Nauntage ther with him / haue eny fapinge to eny man / the
byAapncd that lawe is open / and ther ate rulers / let thé ace
top wann tend cule one another Zl pe goo aboute eny other
Fouthor buen chenge /it ape he determined tna latntull
and that they congregacpon, Foz we are in leopardy to be
werenat moze accuted of this dayes bulpnes: foz as moche
tall of fubiect. ag ther is no caule wherby we mape geue a
todeatb. rehenpnge of thys concourte of people. And
inbnbe erben

jonbdeparte,
5 ecbonia and into Prece. At
Klan geet ta aces bobp. At Sphbeſus he
.
nach ben oe dene erg / maketh his praper wyth
them / and ene ee 090
e tage was ceated / Paul


Ms Agointo Macedonia. and when be
had gone ouerthote partpes / a geuen them
large erhoztaciös ye cam intew@rece/¢ there
abode ii. monethes. And when the Jewes
lapde wapt Foz him as he was about to faple
into Sppzta / he purpoled to returne thoꝛom
Macedonia. Ther accompaniedhum into As
lia / Sopater of Berrea and of Chedſalonia
Atiſtarcus and Secundus / and Sapus ol
Derba / and Cimotheug: oute of Atta Cy-
chicus and Crophimos Chele went befoze/
Etarved vs at Croas. And we fayled awaxe
from Philtppos alter the etter boty daxes / a
cam 1 . in rue dapes / where
we abode leuen dapes.

And on d moꝛowe after d Spaboth dave ß


dilciples cam to gether kor to bzeake bzerd / ha


ul preached vnto the ( redy to departe
auen pee continued the pꝛeachynge
onto mydnpaht. And ther were mang lightes
Feuer helene Perner certapne

. r
Longe un named eutichus/talé noa bepe


Attes ‘eal lated / he was ti
. with Kere, acids


che thyzbe lofte/¢ wat taken bp deed. ? Paul ¢


wẽt doune and Fell on him / a embꝛafed him / 16.
and larde: make noth

in hem. hen he was come vp agayne / he
brake bꝛeed / a talcked / and comeneda longe
vhyle euen teil the moznyng / a lo departed.
And they bꝛought the pounge man a lxue / &
were not a lptell conikoꝛted.

And we went a foze to ſhippe / and lowled
vnto Adlon there to receaue Paul. o: lo had
he apopnted / ard wolde him kelke goo a kote.
Whẽ he was come vnto vs to Adſon / we tone
him in / a came to Mptilenes. And we faplen
chence / and cam the nexte daye ouer agapnſt
Chtos. Ind the nexte dave we artued at Spas
mos / and taried at Crogilon. Che nexte daye
we came to Myleton:foꝛ Paulhad determés
ned to leaue ẽ phelus as ther ſapled / becaule

e wolde Lee nee the tyme in Alia. Fo he
ted to bel yk he coulde pollible) at Ferulas
lem at the daye ol pentecoſte. i herkoze krõ
Myleton he lent to Ephelus and called the
elders of the congregaclon. And when they
were come to him / he layd vnto thẽ: ye nnow
from the kyꝛlt daye that J cam into alia / ats
ter what maner haue bene with you at all
cealons ſeruynge the Loꝛde wyth all hum⸗
blenes of mynde / a with many teareg / a tẽp⸗
tacios which happened bnto me byß large
awayte ofthe Jewes / a how J hepte backe
nothinge p twas profitable : but that J haue
ſhewed pou g taught you opẽly and at home
inpout outes,twieneaing both to p Jewes
G alloto the Grekes / che repentatice toward
God / s lapth toward oure Loꝛde Fetus,

And now beholde J go bounde in p ſpꝛete
vnto Jerulale/¢ knowẽ not what (all come &
on mẽ there / but p the holy gooſt witnelleth
in euerp cptte lapinge:that bandes a trouble
abyde me. But none of thole thynges moue

me: nether is my lyre dere onto my telle / that
‘Fmpahe kulkill mp courle with iope / and the
mpniſtracton which J haue receaued oF the
Loꝛde Jelu / to teſtitxe ? Gocpell of 8 grace


ol God.

And now behodde / J am lure p hence forth
peall(thozow whõ J haue gone pꝛeachinge
the kyngdõ of God) hail fe my Face no moze.
*iherfoze J take pou to recozde thys lame


. eg, fit.
dave / that J am pure from the bloude of un 2


men. Fo2 Nhaue kepte nothynge backe: but
ue 1 — pou all $ coũſell of God. Cake
hede therfoze onto poure felues andtoall the
klocke / where of § holy goon hath made you
ouer lears / to rule thec acton ol God /


wich bebath purchaten x bis bloune, Kor f Se.
am taco tos tac ance? depatteugk pate


wolues entre in amõge vou
= h


g. rug.
ea do Foz his Ipte ig fh. fig. f. l.


Ot the Apoſtles,


which wyñ not fpare the kiocke. Mozeouer
of poureawne felues Mall men arple cpea⸗
Ring penurtte thinges to dꝛawe ottciples af:
ter th. Cherkoꝛe awake a remẽber / p bythe
Space of ij. peres I ceatea not to warne eue⸗


rx one of pou bot) npgyt a dape with teares. bi


Amd nom bzethzé Icbmende you to God a
to ß wozde of his grace which is able to binde
kurther a to geur vou an inheritaũce amoge

Gall che which are tanctttyen. A haue delpꝛed
no mans Ipluer / golde / oz veſtüre. ye knowe
well p tgele hande⸗ haue mimiſtreb onto my
necellities /a to thé p were with me. J haue
wpewed vou all thinges / how p lo labo zunge

ye ought to receaue che weake a to remeber
che wozdes of ? Loꝛde Jelu / how 5 he card:
it is moꝛe bleſẽd togeue then to receaue.

when he had thus [pon he kneled doune
Kpzaped wb thé all. And ther wept all aboun
roi fell on Pauls necke / a kilſed hym / lo⸗
rowinge mot of all koꝛ the wozdes which he
Ache nennen ume face no moze,

ndthe yacompanied him onto the wippe.


* CP auls Jomepe bp chyppe. DE Philippe the Euũ


and a gabüg the Prophet / which warned aul
55 0 Jeeulden rs — Redtak hrs
pur p. le/and is taken in the tempie.

2. Cabe.rriChapter,
bolt chaunced chat adone as we
q 5 bad launched loꝛth / z were depar⸗

ed rom them / we came wrth a

S frapabt courte onto Choon and ß

Daye koldu vng vntothe Ahodeg / x fr thẽce
fonto ra And we kounde a thipperedpto
Saple bnto Phenices / and went a boꝛde a let
fozthe C hen appered onto bs Eyp nis / a we
Jette it on the lette hande / a Cayley vnto Si⸗
kia g cam onto pie. Foz there § chippẽ vn⸗
laded her burthen. And when we had founde


© bzethzen we tarped there bij dapes. And they


kolde Paul thozowe the ipꝛete, that he culd
not go vp to Jeruſalem. and when the dapes
were ended / we departed a tet oure wayes /
and they all bought vs on oure ware
t tell we were come


wrues a chpldzen
spout of Fecht piviocurcienoonre in the


woe ¢ pꝛaxde. And when we had tant oure
keaue one ot another / we toke ſpippe / other
returned home agapne. : :
ihen we had full ended the courte trom
Cue we arrued at Ptalomalda / ¢ laluted
the bzethꝛẽ / r a bode with thé one dae. Che
nexte bape / we that were of Pauls cOpany
departed ¢ came onto Cefares . And we en⸗
fred into the houle of Philfpthe Euangeliſt /
which was one ok the leuẽ deacones g abode
w hirn. The lame man had kower daughters


Cbirgens which oye pꝛophelx. And as we ta


there a good may ol re cam
derem — — tyne


dus. whenhe was come bnto bs / he tone
Pauls gerdeil / a hounde his hades a kete / a
karde: Thus lapth che holy goott: fo hall the
Zewes at Jerulalem bynde the ma p ower
thys gerdell / and Wall delpuer hym into the
andes of the Gentpls. :
When we hearde this both we z other of
the lame place belought him that he wolde
not go vpto Jerulalẽ. Then Paul ancwered
andlarde: what do ye wepynge ¢ beatinge
myne exter am redy not to be bound oni
but alloto dpe at Jerulaié for the name of b.
Lozde gelu. hohen we coulde not turne bys D
mende / we cealed lapinge: the well of the
Logo be fullilled alter thole dapes we made
dure telues red / wet bp tog erufalk, Cher
went with vs allo certapne of the dilciples
ok Celarea /a bꝛought with them one Mna⸗
fon of Cypzus / an olde dilcipie wich whome
we chulde lodge. And when we were come to
Jerulalem, the bzethen receaued bs glavly
Don the mozowe Paul wẽt in with vs vn
to James. And all the eloers came to gether.
And when he had faluccdthem /he tolde by
onder all 15050 b Godhad wzought amöge
e gentyls by His minttracpon, and when
ep hearde it / they glozitpen the Loꝛde / and
fayddutobim:chou feet bꝛother / how maz
ny thoulande Ames cher are which beleue /
aubthey ate an Leious och awe And u,
hep ate norm of the /thattbouteachett one hen we
all che Jewes which are amonge p gentvis, fe,
to fozlahe Motes / and apt that they ought
not to circumcyle their chyldꝛẽ nether to line
alter the cuſtomeg. nohat is it therkoze? be
multytude muck nedes come together. Fo:
wep 127155 n ae come , Do ther⸗
fore thi oe tape tothe. ot
„wenne itt. men which haue a botveon gn
them. Chem take a purtfye thy leife wyth
chẽ / and do colt on thé, that they mape haue
theirheddes and all thail owe that hole
thing es which cher haue hearde concernpng


weh che ate nothinge:but that thou thy telfe allo


walkeſt ehepett the lawe. For astouchyng
the gentyls which beleue / we haue weite de
concluded chat they obferue nofoche thingy:
but that thep hepe them felues from thpnag
offred to pdo les / from blond / r ſtrangled / e
from koznicacton. Chen the nerte daye Paul
tobe the men /a puritien him lelfe with them
and entred into the temple / declarynge that
be oblerued the dapes of the purikicackon / on
ane uche, chuld be offered fo2 euerx
Andas che ſeuen dayes ſhuld haue bene en
ded/ 6 Jewes which were oF Alia when they
lawe him in che teple/ theymoued ail § peor
pie and lapde handes on him cryinge nen of
Arge l/ heipe. Chis is the man chat


if
i
|


Ok the


iwhen the Centution hearde that / be went /
and colbe the vpper Captapne taping: What
intẽdeſt thou to do? This ma is a Momapn.

Chen the vpper Captapne cam / glapd to
himitell nie / art thou a Komapne? He lava;
Te And the captapne anlwered: with a great
tome obtapnedꝰ this fredõ: And Paul Cape:
was fre bone. Chen ſcrarght wape depar
ted krom him / ther which chuilde haue examt
ned hym. And the bye Captayne allo was
alrarde / alterhe knewe thathe was a No!
tmapnerbecaute he had bounde him. 5
On the moꝛowe becaule he wolde haue
knowen the certarntie wherkoꝛe he was ace
culed of the Jewes/he lowled him krom hys
bondes / and comman the bye Pꝛeſtes a
all tze counſell to come together / p bꝛought
Paul and let him betoze them.


all men euery where ft che peoplẽ and thzen / and went to Damalco to byynge the
$ lawe /a this place. Mozeouer allo hehath which were there boũde vnto Pt
baoughe@rehes into thetepie/e hath pollu- tobe punrahed. : :
tedth zs holr place. Foꝛ ther lawe onẽ Cro⸗ And it fortuned/as'

phinius an Epheltan wych him in the cytre.
imine luppoled Paul had bꝛouggt into

e tple. And all the cytie was moued / a the
Patte twarmed together. And cher coke
Eee,

ies were ur to.

! is they went about to krllhem / tydunges
came pnto the hype captapne of the coudperg /
that all Jerulalem was moued. Which im⸗
medtatlp tone Coudiers a undercaptaynes /
ranne doune vnto them. When theykawe p
vpper captarne g che loudiers ther lelte imp

Gtinge ol aul. Chen the captapne camneare
take him / and cõmaunded him to be boãde
Wtwo charnes / a demaunded what he was /
4 what he had done. and one cryed chig / ano⸗
ther ß amoͤge che people. And when he coulde
not hnowe p certayntie 02 the rage / he com
e eres
nhe cam bntoa Grece / un i

be eas borne oftyeCoubicea tos tye reer 1 alt goon enge chem on.
oF the people. Foz the multitude of 8 people tui this dare. chehpe pꝛelt Ana⸗
og dekke erging aufe wech him. mas comaunded thé that ſtode by / to myte

And as Paul culde haue bene caried into kmenthe mouth. Chenlarde Paulkohrm:
the caltle / he larde vnto chehye Captapne: Hod lupte the thou papnted wall. Sittett

mapeAlpeake onto the: Which Capne : Catt chou and iudgelt meatter thelatwe:and com:
"thous fpeake Grete: Arte not thou that eay- maundeſt me to be Craptten contrary coche
pcian iuhich befoze thele daxes made anbp- e e e be spn wanes
roure / and ledde out into the wylderneg fit), 515 nod tocthoon Phe wa the er ne
ba. rl. d. Nor it is warte: thou walt not curte the ru
ier ortöx people. a
B. When Paul perceaued that the one parte
were Daduces / and the other Pharlles: he
crped out in the cauncell. Men and bꝛethꝛẽ /
5... Jama Phartlape / 8 tonne vf a Pharilape.
Ol the hope and relurreccion krom deeth / J
am Judged. And when he badto layde / thet
arolè a debate betwene the Pharitayes'e the
abuces andthe multitude was deurded.
‘oz the Haduces fave chat ther ig no relur
recciõ nether angell nog cpꝛete. But 5 Pha
tilaxes graunt bothe And ther arole a great
crxe/andthe Scribes which were ol p ha⸗
kHlapes parte /arole and ſtroue fayinge : we
krnde none eupl l in this mã S hough a kppete
07 an angelibath apered tohym / lett vs not
Artue agarnſt God. :
¢ And toben ther arote greate debate che
capeapne fearyng leſt Paul chuld haue bene
pluickt a fondze of them / cõmaunded p tou⸗
diers to go doune/eto take him kr amonge
chem and to bꝛynge hyminto the cactell. Che
nyghe folowyng / God Code by him a lapde:
be ot good cheare Paul: fo: as thou haſt telt
tledolme in erulalem / to muſt thou beate


6


. And they that were wine fawe

Wy te and were afrarde: but they
hearde not vorce ot hum ? Spake with me,

And ¥ fayde.what Wail Ado Lowe andthe @
fLozd fayd onto me: Arple a goin to amal
co and there it chalbe tolde the ofall thinges
which are apornted koꝛ the todo. And when
lame nothing kor p bzpabtnes or f legbt /
was ledde by the hande of them that were

tp ean ee wamatco, -


thoufande men that were moꝛtherers? But
Paul Capde:F am ama which am a Fewe ol
Charlus a citie in Cicill a C itelin oł no vyle
eptie / J beſechethe lolkre me to ſpeale vnto
the peope. nohen he had geuen him lycence /

aul Code on the ſteppes / and beckened w
the hande onto the people / a ther was made
4 lelence. And he lpake onto them in 6:
heb zue tonge lapinge.


. xxij. c.


tie / at the kete ot Gamaltel/and


gently in dlawe of the fathers/ vin


Edelpuerrng
into pꝛelon bothe men a wemen / as J chele
pzell doth beare me wyenes / e all d elders

Bor whom allo J receaued letters onto d bꝛe⸗


sey
thae ove


a manchat is a Romapnand


28 it lautuſi to pou to fcourge
oncddempned?


Apoſtlesʒ, “If,


wyrnes at Rome, nhen dave was come / eck
taxne of the Jewes gathered them lelueg to
gether / and made a vowe / layinge / that they
wolde nether eate no dꝛyncke tylt they had
kylled Paul. hey were about xi. which had
made this contpiracion. indthey came to ð
chete Pꝛeſte and elders / and lade: we haue
bounde oute lelues with a vote; P we wyll
eate nothpnge ontpll we haue flayne Paul.
Mow therfore gene pe knowledge to the bp⸗
per captapne t to the counceli / that he bꝛing
him loꝛth onto vs to moꝛow / as though we
wolde knowe lome thynge moze perkectipot
him. But wel of euer he eeme neare) are re⸗
dein the meane lealon to kyil him.

when Pauls (piers tonne hearde of their
lapunge awapte ye went and entted into the
cattle and tolve Paul And Paul called one
ol the vnder captaynes vnto him / and lapde:
bypnge this pounge man onto the hye Cap:
tapne:foz he hath acevtapne thyng to ſhewe
pim dnp be tobe him and lapde Paul $ pꝛe⸗

oner calledme vnto him / and pꝛayed meta
bꝛynge this younge man vnto the / whych
bath a certayne matter to ſhewe the,

Che hre captayne tone him by the hand a d
went a parte with him oute or the wape rand
alked him: what hatt thou to faye vnto me?
And he lapde: the Jewes are determpned to
delpethe § thou woldel binge koꝛth Paul
to moꝛowe into the councell / as thoughthey
wolde eurquive ſomwhat ok him moze perke⸗
ctly. But folowe not their myndes: fo ther
Ive in wayte toꝛ bim ot thẽ/ mo then. xl. men /
which baue bounde them telues tba bowe /
that they wyll nether eate ner dꝛyncne tyit
thephaue killed hum. And now are thepredy /
and loke Foz thy pꝛomes. 5

Che vpper captapne let the vounge man
departe ¢ charged hem: le chou tell it out to
ho man 5 thou bat cbewed thete thyngeg to
me. And be called vnto him two vnder Cap⸗
tapnes ſapinge:ma ne redytwohundꝛedlou⸗
diers to goto Celarea a hoꝛſmen thꝛelcoze a
ten / a lpeare mentwo hundꝛed / at the thirde
houre of chenraht Ind delpure che bealles
chatthey maye put Waul on / and binge him
lake vnto Felix the hre debrte / and wiote a
letter in this maner.

12 140 Lyltas vnto “ 55 m tg
tular Felix fendeth gretyngd. & his ma wa
take den came alen bene hylled
ok the. Came wich loudters a rethuen
hum / a perceaued chat he was aR omayne,
And when z wolde haue knowen the caule /
smberfore thepaccuted him I bꝛoughte hym
koꝛth into che counrell. {cbete perceauen 0
bur ese gie ck euch oe 5

ofeny thynge woꝛthy o
beet 07 ol bondes. Itterwarde when it was
D thewes


*


Ghewwed ne holw z theFewes larde warte fo;


the mã / J tent him Grapahtwapetotyesana which


gaue cömaundment to his accufars/ pt ther
had ought agaynſt him / to tell it onto d: fare
well. Shen the foudiers as it was cõmaun⸗
Ded the tone Paul / a bꝛought him by nyghte
to Antipatrag. On the mozowe they leite p
boꝛlmen to go with him / a returned onto the
cattle, Mhych when they came to Celarea /
they delpueked the epittle to che debyte / a pꝛe
ſented Paul befoze him. the debyte had
redde che letter / he alked ok what countre he
wag. And whẽ he vnderſtode p he was of Cie
cell J wyllhearethellapde hey whe thyne ac-
culats are come allo: cõmaũded him to be
kepte in Herodes pallys.

Ten is acculed vefore Felix heantwereth for him

elke.


¶ Che. xxiiij. Chapter.
ter kyue dapes / In


tothe. Ot whom thou mapſt( yk thou wilt en
qupꝛe)knowe the certaynẽ of all thele things
wherok we accule hym. Che Jewes lyle⸗
wyfe affermed / la pinge thatit was euen ſo.
Chen Paull alter that the rularhym elke
had beckened vnto himthat he cbuld kpeake)
anlwered: J Mall with a moare quiet mynde
anl were ko mp lelle / koz as moche as J vn⸗
derſtande that thoubatt bene of many peres
atudge onto this people / becaule that thou
qo Mavlt hnowe there are vet but ri. dapes
fence J went vp to geruſalem koꝛto pꝛaye /a
they nether kounde me in the temple dyrpu⸗
tynge wych eny man / ether raycynge vp the
people nether in the Yynagoges / noz in the
crtre: Mether can they proue the thenges
wherob ther accuſe me.
But this I conte onto the / that atter $
wayel which they can berely)to wozchippe⸗


a


The Actes =


the God of my fathers / beleuinge an theng
are wꝛittẽ in the lawe a 5 Pꝛophetes
Khaue hope towardes God thacthe came re
kurreccion ok the deed (which they the telues
loke £0; allo) halbe / both ot iult and vniult.
And therkoꝛe opp Ito haue a cleare con⸗
Steel Cnet SY de Calne ng

ut altermanp peres J came a bꝛou
almes to my peple ¢ o es inthe which
theytounde me purifies in $ tempie / nether
with multitude / no pet Wonqutetnes how
beit there were certapne Zewes out of Ala /
which ought to be here pretent befoze the / a
accule me / pt they had ought agaynſt me: oꝛ
els lett thele kante here Cape r ther haue E
founde eny eupll doinge in me / whyll J have
here in the councell except itbe lo: thps one
vopee / that A cryed ſtandyng amonge them /
O€ the relurteccion krom deeth am J iudged
ol pou this dape. 8

~ Nahe Felirhearde tbete thing’, he dekerde
them / koꝛ he inewe very well of that wape/
Flaxde: when l pias the captapne is come /

well unowe the vtmoſt of youre matters.

nde comafived an vndercaptarne ta nepe @
Paulandthat he chuld haue ret / and that he
Shuld fozbyd none or hrs acquapntaunce to
minitter onto him / o to come vnto him.

And alter a certapnedayes/cam Felix a his
wyle Pꝛufilla which was a Jewas / a called
koꝛth Paul / and hearde him of $ fapth which
is toward Chylſt. And as he pꝛeached of rah
teoulnes / temperaũce / a ĩudgemẽt to come /
Felixtrembled and ant wered⸗ thou halt done @
vnough at this tyme veparte / when A haue
cduemẽt time / wyl lende koꝛ a a em
allothat money chulde haue bene geuẽ hem
ol Paul / that he mpght lowle him: — . —


he called h. oktenner and comen
4 e e .


Into Helix roume. and Feux willyng to bew
bande. ere lelte Paul in pꝛetcon


e Fetwes accule id aule s/he *
Pn the @ 1 —
e. rxv. Chapter.

[Ny en Fettus twas come into pore
uince /afterthze dapes/beatcended
E trom cetarea bneo Jena. chen
——— =~ enfozmedhpm the bye Pꝛeckes and
the chete ol the Fewes ot Paul. Andthey bez
cought him a delpꝛed faucour agaynit hem /
that he wolde lende koꝛ him to Jerulalem: 4d -
lapde awapte koꝛ him in waße / to kyll him.
Feltus antwered chat Paul Mule be kept at
Celarea: but that he hym felfe wolde tho;
departe thrther. Let them thertoꝛe larde he
lohych amonge pou are able to do it / come
doune with vs and accule him / vr ther be eng
kaute in the man. when


PitheApotiies,


B+ Whenhe had tarped there moare then ten
daes / he departed onto Cetarea / ache nerte
dave late doune in the iudgement feate/.¢ cd
maunded Paul to be bzoughe.wWyen he was
come the Je wes which were come krõ Jeru⸗
Cale cam aboute hym and lapde manp and
greue oug cõplayntes agaynſt Paul / wyych
they coulde not pꝛoue as lunge as be an⸗
Cwered kor hm lelfe chat he had nether a⸗
Laynſt p late of the gewes / nether agarnſt
the temple / noꝛ vet agapnſt Celar ollended
enythynge at all.

C. Feltus wyllinge to do $ Jewes a pleature
antwered Paul a fapde: pit chou go to Fes
rulalemandthere be iudged of theie thinges
bekoꝛe me: Chen layne aul: ande at Ces


lars iudgement feate / where J ought to be


iudged. Co the Jeweg haue no harme done /
as thou very well knoweſt. FEF haue hurte
thé / oꝛ comptted eny thinge woꝛthx of deeth
Iretuſe not to dye. t none of thele thinges
are / where ol they accule me / no man ought
to delpuer me to them Jappeale vnto Celar
Then Cpake feſtus with deipberacion / x an⸗


Vlwered. Chou hat appealed onto Ceſat:bn⸗


nee Ba thou 8575

: a certapnedapes,hynge Agrippa
Bernice came vnto Cevarca to ĩalute f eltus
Ind wi theyhad bene there a good ceaton/
Feſtus reherked Pauls caule vnñtothe hinge
laping: ther is a certayne man lett in pꝛelon
ol Felix / about whom when J came to Jeru
lalem the hye Pꝛeſtes a elders ofthe Fewes
enfozmed me / and delpzed to haue iudgemẽt


Eagarnſt bim. Co whd J ancwered: It is not


the maner of p Romans to delxuer enymã /
that he ſhuld perifihe / betoꝛe thãthe which is
accuſed / haue che accutars befoze hym / and
haue lpcence to ancwer koꝛ him felfe concer⸗
nynge § eryme larde agarnſt him: when they
were come hydder / without delaye on the mo
rowe J fate to geue iudgemẽt / g cõmaunded
the man to be bought forthe. Agapnt wha
wh § acculers ove vp / thepbzought none
acculacton of loche thynges as F füppoled:
but had certapne que ſtions agapnſt hym of
their awne fuperttycton and ok one Fetus
which was deed whome Paul affirmed to be


Falpue. Indbecaule i douted of koche maner


quettions /I ackedhim whetherhe wolde go


to Zerulalem a there be tudged or thele mat


ters. Chen when Paul had appealed to be
kept vntoß knowledge orcetar / cõmaũded
him to be kept / yu A myght lend him to Ce⸗
far. Agrippa ſapd onto Fetus: J wolde alto
heave the man mp lelke. To mozow ( fayobe)
thou ſhalt heare hym. And on the moꝛowe


when Agrippa was come and Bernice with


ate pompe / a were entred into p councell
ute with the captarnes ¢ chele men ofthe


citie/atGethig commaundement Paul was
brought kosch: And Feltus lad: rng Agrip g
pa/@ all men whych are heave pꝛelent woch
bs:ke le this man about whom all the multt
tube of the zewes haue bene with me / both
at Jerulalem / and allohere / cryinge that he
ought not to ixue enp lenger. Yet tounde J
hot) ynge woꝛthy ol deeth that he had comic
led. Meuertheletle leynge that he hath appea
ledtocelar /g haue determined to lende hint
Ot whõ J haue no certapne thynge to weite
vntomp Lord herfoze haue brought him
buto vou /a fpecially onto the Rynge aglip⸗
pa /p after examinacion had / J mpage haue
lumwhat to wꝛyte. Foz me thincketh it vn
Yeafonable: £o2 to lende a pꝛeloner / a not to
dbewe p caules which are ſarde agaynſt him
8 rippa heareth Paule / eth bit
Feet en eie hinge eta ph
e ¶ he. xxbi. Chapter.
FY Grippalaydinto Paul: thou arte
permptted to lpeane fo2 thy telte.
Chen Paul ſt etched forth d hũde /
B aanlwered for him tele. J thinne
mp kelke happr unge Agrippa / becaule 2
Wall antwere this dape bekoze che / of allthe


@ thenges wherok A amacculed ok the Fewes


Sa 55 which in all cult
ons which are amonge the 1
Aa beleche the to bete me *


Mylxuinge of a chyde / which was at
Foz amoge mpne awne nacion at Fevutal
knowe all $ Jewes which knewe me krö the
begynninge pt they wolde tettitic it.sfoz at:
ter the mot traptett lecte ok oure laye Iued
Ja Phariſape. nd now J ſtande a am iud⸗
Ged koꝛ the hope of the promes made of God
nto oure kathers onto whpch pzomes dure g
7H. trybes inftantly ferupnge @od dave and
hyghe hope to come. fo which hopes lane /
krnge agrippa / am F acculed ot theg ewes.
hp Hulde it be thought a {henge incredy⸗
ble onto pou / that God thud rapie agape ?
deed Z alfoberely thought in my leite / chatd
ought to domanx contratythynges / ciene a⸗
gapnſt p name of Fetus OF Nazareth : which
hinge afo dro in Ferufalem. Where many
ol the laynctes 3 Wut bp in pꝛelon / a had re⸗
ceaued auctozite of the hye pzeſtes. And thé 7
cher were put to deeth J gaue the lentence.
Andg puniſched thẽ ofte in euery lynagoge /
ard compelledths toblalpheme: 4 was pee
more mad bpon thé) ¢ perlecutedthem / cuẽ
onto ſtraũge cities. About which thinges ag
J went to Damalco with auctozite ¢ licẽce
dethehye Pꝛeſtes /euẽ at middapeld yng)
lawe in the waye a lyght ftom heauẽ abou
che bughines ok p gainne / ay yne roũde about -
me and them which iozneped with me.


H.


i,


The Actes


88
Paul 8 cestarne other


& Yoetonets
Ento one named Julius/anbnder
captayne of Celars coudiats. And we entred


vp into a ip ot adꝛamuciũ / owted fd ard /


ve entreated Paule gate


Arberg ur de coſtes of Alia / one
riſtarcus out of Macedonia / of the contre
of Chellalia beinge wos And $ nexte

we came to don. And Jultus cou
lxberte to go vn
tobps krendes / a td retredhe hym celte. And
kr chenee lanched we / a 2 harde by Cy⸗


‘a Pers /Decautethe wenoes ere contrarye,


obedient vntothe he
Fy vnto them of Dan


ich

e /
it wulde futlkre chulde be the
owt that eine dt Ko th van une


elpght onto the people / ro p gentyls.
Fits , fue antioer Fe


e oz bym belke: Feltus
Are h a lowde vopce. ‘eat toou arte bes
felfe, Moche learninge bath made
Zmad. inp Paul fa Jam not mad / moſt
dere Keſtus: but cpeake p wozdes of trueth
und lobemes. Che kynge knoweth ol thete
thinges / bekoze whome Icpeke krelymether
thrne J 6 enx ok there es are hydden
from: 07 tote i was not done ina
coznet. Aynge Agrippa beleueſt thou $ 7220
phetes: J wote well chou beleuct Agrippa
tarde vnto Paul: Sumwhat thou bzpngelt
me in mende £02 to be come a Chꝛiſten. And
kelleal erben to God ß not only thou:
allo al
dumwhat only but altogether koche as 3
am /exceptthele bondes . And when he had
thus tponen / the kynge role yy / a the debite /
and Bernice) and they that fate with them.
And when they wee gone /thep tals


Chenlapled we ouer N and
Damphilta /a cam to:

Ain here @ onbcscapea ne fosbes put l
ofAlerader/tedy to laple into tal / put bs
therin. And when we had lapleduowir many
da pes / a ſcace were come ouer agaynſt nx
FTT
arde co Candy / ouevagapn
Salmo / a W moche wozke tapled beponde


keis cambnto a place callen gooopoozte 2
wher bnito was a tecalle Laken en


moche time was ſpẽt g fapling was now leo
kai ane alſo p we bad ouerlonge
ted / thé in remembzaunce / and


5


reli th.


eare me to daye / were / not weth.


nexte
e Fak e lend re


che. rrbiſ. chapter. a


ra acitieinLycta, %.


*


&


Ok the Apolkles.


code forth inthe myddes ot them and cayde:
Fee pe huloebauebarkened tome / not
iowled from Candy / nether to haue
bꝛought onto vs this harmie a lolſe. And now
Jexhoꝛte pou to be of of good chere. Foꝛ ther
Halbe no loſſe of enx mans lyte amõge vou /
Laue of 5 ſbip onix. Cox ther ſtode by me this
Sipghethe angel of God / whole J am / a whõ
beben been ce not Paul fog thou mut
‘brought before Ceſar. And io / Godhath


E onto the all that faple with the. noher⸗


Tpꝛs be of goodchere: koꝛ J beleue God /


Fir Dalbe eus agit wag todde ms. Powbe it


we muſt be caſt into a certayne plonde.
But when the kourtench nyght was come
as we were caried in Adꝛia about midnyaht /


the Hppmen demed that ther appered Come
countre onto them: andlounded / and kounde 5


tt. xx. teddõs. And whẽ they had gone a lytell
kutther/ they lounded agayne / and konnde xv
keddoms Chen kearynge lett they buld haue


fallẽ on ſome rocke / they caſt iin. ancres out the


ok the ſterne / and waved fo2 the dare ag the
fhipnten were about to fle out of the chyp / a
had let doune ß bote into the lee / vnder a cou⸗
loure as though they wolde haue caſt ancres
oute of the foꝛſhippe: Paul fapde vnto the
onder captapne and the Doudters: ercepte
thefe abrde in p chyp / ye cãnot be lake. Chen
the Doudierg cut oF the rope ofthe bote / and
let it kal aware. 3
Andin the meane tyme betwyrt that and
dave Paul belought thé all to Cakeimeate/
Capinge:this is the fourtenthaape. p pebaue
taryed and contynued kactinge / reeaupnge
nothing at all. noherkoze pꝛape pon fo take
meate:toꝛ this no dout ig Coz poure heith: for
ther hall not an here fall from g herd of enp
ok vou. And when he had thus (poker /hetone
bꝛeed and gaue thanckeg to Godin pretence
ol chẽ all / and bꝛake it / and begannẽ ko eate.
Chen were they all ot good chẽare / and they
Allo toke meate. i e were all to gether in the
Heed et tiga igi pm
when thephadeaten vnough / je
tened$ chip / a caſt out? Abele ticoebe e.


When it was dape / they knew not p lande


but they tpted a certapne hauen % abancke
into the which they were mynded (eit were
E ende de nee ip. sem eben they
bad tagen ppthe ancres they commxtted th
anbbotrd optic magne dpi oh wynde

pthe mayne lapie tothe €
due to lande. But they chaunced on a place /


Srudderbonves Dutiolus


out chulde lie awaye. But $ onder captapne
wyllynge to ſaue Paul kept them krom their
purpolẽ and cömaunded that they p coulde
kwyme wulde caſt them felues kpzlt into
the lee and lcape to lad. andthe other he ca
maunded togo / come on boꝛdes / and come on
broken peces ok the Hip, Andto it came to
pale / chat they came alt fae to lande.
N hurteth not Pauls hande / he heate
1 Litt phates 0
e
id when they were ſcaped / then
cher knewe thattye ple was called


Buthe Hhouke of the vermen intothe tyze a *
kelk noharme. How be it they wapted when!
De ulbebauc tes “


thy of bectly/ 1 —
‘worthy o tho? of bon
Chen layne Agri eto cht
mxght haue bene lowled / v he had not ap⸗
pealed onto Celar.

paul Hipppnge towarde Rome / Julius the Cap⸗


Toute fandp p which had the lee on bothe che krdes fa thut brethzen hearde or bs / they came agaynſt bs 2 : |
be den d in the thip.andthe foore parte ducke fact g 0e bi hen ato heehpecauemes then arge m n J
ANY of Apbrt ch —̃ nga itch hebto Paullawe chem pe thancked God / wexed Navlet bees |

he Spoudpars councell was to kn the Captarne delpuereds ppelorerg to che cheke ON
Preloners tel eny o thẽ / whEHCbadtinome captapne of the holt but Patel was fuffred to coxtuante and


8 : Oi, dwell j


cruell. Che dwell byhym kelfe wyth one Soudper that when they agreed not amonge he celueg
Bunce ok the kept him. ther departed / alter that Paul had tpoßen
r er
not wpthoute called the cheke ofthe Jewes to gether. And che Prophet onto oure Cathers / laring: S0 Bath, oe
gecat confpoen when they were come / he fayde vnto them. vnto this people g ſaxe: W poure cares Mall Harth. b
kun there Wen and ai pepe l poe ve Beeren . with 5
te nothinge agaynſt ö people 02 lawes ok out roure ept al 5 not perceaue. rh. ke

baer he apes dere g delenerchpeäener fam oz thehert o€ this people ts wered geome
ge Hecante he Jerulalem into che handes ob theRomarns. andeheiveares were thycke of heareng and

ououredehem Which when thephad examined me / wolde cheirepes haue they cloledeleſt they chulde le


The Actes, f tot!


apns;


gree car ping haue let nie go / becaule they kolide no caule
N ok deeth in me Wut when the gewes cryed cos
trary / J was conftrapned to appeale onto
Cefar not becaule Ahadoughtto accuce my
people ok. Foz thys caule haue J called foz
berate to le zou / and to lpea lie wyth vou:
ecaule p Coz d hope oF Jlracl / Jani bounde
with this chayne.

And they ſayde vnto hrm: We nether re⸗
ceaued lettres out ol Jewy pertapninge vn
to the / nether came en ok the bꝛethꝛen that
ſhewed oz Cpalic eny harme ol the But we
sopil heave ok what thou chinckett. Foz we
haue hearde of this Cecte/ that euern wheare
it is Cpoken agapnſt. and when they had
apountephina bape ther came many onto

Fyinrineovistorgyng. Co who he erpounded
and teſtikled the yngoom of God / and pꝛea⸗
ched vnto them of Jeku:both out ol the lawe
ok Mofes and allo out or the Pꝛophetes / euẽ
krom moꝛnynge to nyght. And tome beleued
te ne. ich were (poke / and lome bee
leued not.


with their eyes / and heare with their eares /
and vnderſtande with their hertes / and chuld 6
be conuerted / and J chuldhegle them Beit
knowen therkoꝛe Onto pou / chat thys lalua⸗
cyon of God is kent to the gentyls / and th
wallheare it. And when he had lardethat /
Jewes departed / and hadgreate delpycions
amonge them ſelues.

And Paul dwelt two peres full in his lod⸗
gynge / a receaued all that cam to him / pꝛea⸗
chynge the kyngdome ok God / and
teachynge thole thynges which
concerned the Loꝛde Fetus
with all conkydence /
vnkozboden.


Obere endeth the Actes or the
Apockler.


e 2 2


Feeth of hym lelle / h as toucl
png was pet a mürderer ace


not the lawe / there no de
fae ae th oute is all


Booth the lawe / s rpahteaus before od / mens


owde
tormé ted che Co ooze / p he cõ
Ie oucward good wozk re.
the Uawe from the grounde


lech
ue
hat
rde


lucion „that thou Fed the gre
hat thou tenchertan o 44 ma 125
woldeſk kapne ſteale pt thou durſt /


e lawe is
ſckped and
/ lpꝛinge The (picite a


pete that maketh a mannes erk kee / and geuel
a remäpneth lynnd / grudgenge Sp


1255 it
tt


enge: Mat wit
dag fe .


Captive at his pleatuce, Lan thole workes ple ate Sod chinhelt thou / which are done with
% an tun bd fritter grudginge mpndcrs holp Caynete prolperus/how ith tie
 thott refounde this berelpe / Woüte (3 trowe) a (woelue
worbes therofe twhatfoeuer the lawe cömaunde lh / wit
6 well rely wylipngiy/ z without compulcion of 5 laroc/ euren as though there were
only by the worckruge of the pute m the herte? as
then bp Fapth ontyrin p we beleue the promples of
AL EUIEpll Ail his good promyples toward vs /o Thꝛiſtes blondes
i th Wau Lbzittes glade tydynges kor it is the power
deleue. Fon attonce ¢ to gethercurt as bor beleue tye glad tpopnges pieached
to bs / the holy ghott entrech into dure hertes/s lowleth the bonde sat thedcupli which before polleled oure hertes
oo in ehe awe. And as the Cprite commer by
God / when Mitte is pꝛeached / dow that he
he. li. iii. g. x. Chapters. AU oures -


th deterueth the Cprite/ oz che pte
e worhpng OF the Cprite. 22 ae
keare of Sud / ſo uy
couenaunt of Sod)


undꝛed pores go/ oz the


ru
Protperns, 15
8 laue ludb ¢ in war d affeccion


derſpture of Paule
fuléplt the lawe / to do
e delectactortsand to lyue
no lawe at all. Suche tu
Capth in che. . hay Bowis
‘ne ae eee Ke Lene
788 ne „Jam not al
God vnto faluacion to e


l
.


no luck to the wyll of,


to dure cane / as he ſapth in ti
l elbe — of God: made ps.


captinite/s held them that we conloe!
th onlp/eus do Fayeh cometh bp yea
e
. .
8 Wen we kapekapeh bringeth the (pritett is nor tobe vnde rſtande / chat
2.
0 egynnetl to wozke in vs, And as by preac! ine th
Preachenp 1 cb. And not bien wr leute are come vnder tl
the (prite accompanteth kapth inte parablie /a we beginne


Fapth cometh eng


neachpng the glad tydpn;
then ace deter i, er roped of Gods then
to kele his wo-kpnge.And ſo fapih cer tptieth vs of the fpsiters allo brngeth the (prite wyth her / vnto the wozbpng of
ret of dure faluacponontpil we have all co gether ouexcome
eech hell s Satan / x ace come onto thecnetlat pug lpfe of glopte. And fo? chis caule Cape we kayth upngeth S
Pere oF cometh. dt/that kapth onlp tuſtikle th / mant ih ryghtewes / Eul€plieth the lawe / ko it uyngelh the
ungeth luſt looceih the hert / make th him re / letteth hym at tpberte /¢ geo
dedeg of the la de with loue / cu as the lawe requyꝛeth Then at the laſt oute of the
eve awne accchde. Chat meaneth he in the thirde
alter de hath cat awape theworkes of the lawe / lo p he ſoundeth as though be wolde breakes dytznult
the iswe tho fapth:he anfwereth to that mpght be lapde agaͤpng / lapinge: we deſkrope not the lawe
Hue malntäpne Tarther 07 Rabiptihe the tawe thö ow kapth. Chat ts co
une in the leripture is not called that outward worke only cömptted by the body / but all the whole bufinee g
whattoeuer accöpaniech / moueth or ſtereth vnto the out warde dede / x that whence the wozkes ſpzinge / as vnbeleke /
pronenes ¢ redines vnto the dedatn the grounde of the herte / with all the powers / affeccrons ¢ appetites wher wih
‘We can but ſynne. Wo that we Cape / that aman then lynneth / when be is caried awape hedlonge ſuto l pnne / all
thev as moche as he e / br that poylon ine ipnacion s coupte nature whe rin he was coce yued z borne. Foz there ts
none outwarde cynne cömprted except à man be car led awaye all together / wipe / oule / herte / body / lute e inynde
e hert / x vnto the rote ¢ originall kountapne of alt cynne / which
Only tuſcpkpech s myngeth che Cprite s Lute vnto the outwarde
ouoheth the klecches ſterelh vp lune vnto the


alt other gpfres of grace / to the woꝛnpuge out oe


i fous

ontye pe

ect ihne Th lden betten ges he zee hn
Neth hin ſtrength to woche t


rapth fo workpnge in the herte / lpꝛinge all good workes by th:


‘Wozhes tpzing nn,


ewe kulfpll the lawe thozow kapth.


therunto. The ſeripture i
me ig vnbeleke in the botome ok the herte. Tor as fap
good worhes/eué fo vnbeleke oniy damn
eupll out warde toorkes/ as happened to Roam and Suain Marat
8 caule LUE calleth cynne vnbelefe / z that notabip in the. xv Chapter of laynct John. The Cprete lapth
ke the worlbe of dynne Uecaute they beleue not in me. And John. vith. he layth. J ant p (pght oF ö world.)
And therfore in the. rij. of John be pyddeth them / whple they haue irght / to beleue in the iydnt / that pe mape be the!
chplozen of lyght / kor he that walteth in dur cknes wotcth not whether he goeth. How as
perok he ſpeaketh / n wohich hep waͤlzeth / woteth not whyther he goel
work in the lyghe ok God / o what a good warne is. And therfore in t
he lapth / as longe as J am in the waslde J am the lyghe of the wonde / but there cometh npght he no ma can woe /
in which no ma can le to do anp worke that pleaieey God. And jo:
adithorows the ignoe
the olde ma which is corrupt thoſowe the
autice. And Rom pit Let vs caſt awape the dedes ot darckues / that io to laye / or
fe tutes of iguozatice. And. 1. John. l.
iht / and he that hateth his mother walde th in darchnes/s woteth uot whis
es. By lyg he he meaneth the knowledge of Chi / z be darcknes / the
tunqzaunce oF Chic. or it is impodiible that he chat knoweth Lhe trulp/ſchulde hate his Mother.

urther mon / to perceaueth is thynge moare clearlp/thou thalt vnderſtade / p it ts umpoflibie to fpune anpſyune
ama bzeane the kpia cSmaundemét Lefoje. How ts the Fpr& comaũdemet deupded into two verles. Thy
is one God thou Galt loue thy A :e Hod with all ch
with all¢hpmpght. And the tohoale caule whp Z|
Hert, kor were this louie wyptte tu my hertes were full ¢ perfect in my ſoule / it wold kepe myne hert fed confenting
pihts loue fs not wiptté in oure hertes /s that we beleue not 5 fp
IJ what thele woꝛdes / one Lorde ¢ one Mod meanech / ihat is to faye?

Alls ruleth all /g p what(qeuer in done to me / whether it be good o7 bad i
ruleth / a doth it/s wilt therto what thys woꝛde / my e / meütie th / that is to
the infinite benefites z bynbdedes of Sd to ine warde / vnderſtode e erneddipe beletied
bath bounde bpm tele tobe myne wholpe s all


leth z kepeih oute the Le


ute is the ipgbt / fois the(
-Aguozaunce of Lit that Barchnes:
* sslhe knoweth not how to woe ag


Which nygyt is but iguorauince of.
elt. uh. hat they walne not as other hethen which are tei
raunte that is in the. And agapne in the fame Chapter.
Juſtes ok exroure/ hat is to
fgnosaunces vnbelek. And. 1. Petri,
Be that loueth hin brother dwelleth in
ther he goeth oz darcknes hath blynded his


ion not poure felues buto poute a


me hert ad all thy foule/with all chp power aud
i inferioure precepts this loue is uot in myne


Y Sntdanp fprine, And the whoale s onlp cate:
parte oun de h u nnr Scl 707


fogeter wir all bys
phe hectifonte/potoee/e mpg bof:

this the mother of all gootues¢ ok all gosdi
naue / pk anp ma hath fortan? (pune:


ach with ö rode OEY


lde couenauntes of mercye wherwith God
owner laue / merepe /s mpght? then chuld J ioue him with all m.
epe his commaundementes, So ſe pe now that as
leke 5 grounde s rote ot all eupll e
zee eee ere keene dea erde

ſedhers taken krom hp: the kode or bye
rkull dedes / in the many kolde coucnauntes of hys mer.


joxdw negligence
walten 0


b x
jerfore then before all good workes as good frutesitherc mutt nedes be kayth in the herte wi they ping,
ind before all bad dedeg as ted feuteaithere mute benden the hert as mch 5 deer ch dk
denn. Which vndelefe z sgngzaie ts called the herd ok the lerpet z ot the olde daz / wpieh ee Geb one


Tothe Roiiayns,


mug exeabe bnber'fote/as tt was prompiob onto Adam. reac g gitte hate thisditecense, Brace property te obs Bvaces
des kauoureſbeuenolẽce oꝛ amen hbe e awne lte wipe e e teateth e be Seite


was moueds enclined to geue Chuiſt vnko ua with all his other gyrtes or grace. Gitte is the holp good his werning
obi he pometh into the ber tes of che / on wh he hath mercſ / whom he kauceth. Chough the gpétes of the lprite
encrcacein ba dapipess haue not pet chelr full perfection: pes though there remapne in vs petenpll luſtes and tyane
which fpghtagayat the pete as he fapth here athe, vß. Chapter im the. v. to the MHalachiansrg as it was fatten,
Before in the. ih. chapter oF Gene. ot the debate vetwene the womãs ſeed / x the led oF the Cerpentiyet neuerthelelle
Soddeg kauoure is to greate /a fo Hronge ouer vs fo; Chiles lake /h we are counted fo} full hole d pref.cte b:fore 1
Had. To Siddes fauuure toward vi beurdeth not hp? Celfe/encecatinge a peli g a Iptell)as da the gprlea / but ves ¢
seaneth vs hole ¢ all ta gether in kult loue fon Chiles (ake onre inter cellorand mediato /i becaule that the giktes ol
the (prite andbataple betwe ne the ſpalte and eupll luctes are begonne in vs all ready, a N

DE this now vnderſtädem thou che. vg. Chap. where aul acculech him beike asa cpnnet / pet in the. vlg. chap.
ape th / here is no da nacyon to the that are m Chyla / that becaule of the (prite/and becante the gpftes of the lpeyte
are begonne in vo. Hynners we are becaule the klelche is not kull kylled and mortified, Neuer theleſſe in as mache as
we beleue in Ehritt / S haue the erneß ¢ beginninge re ‘wold Fapne be pe rfecte/ Sod ig folouinges.fauoza |
ble vnte vnd de wit not lone on loche lynne / nether will collte it as lynne nt wil deale tb vs according tocurebeleke
in Louie s accoidyng to Mengen amen beſhath woe to va / vntpll § (pie be Full Clapne ¢ syortitycd by dethe.
Fach ie not mas opinion g dzeame /s Come pmagin s tapne / whe they her the @ozie of the Golpell wich
te Ce that there folowe no good woes oz mendemẽt of liuinge/thougl
oF fapch then they fall £c5 the righte wape ¢ Cape/Eapth onlp tuttificth nut aman mut haue good woztes alCorpe he
wil righteons~¢ Cafe. Che caule is when thep heare the AHotpell a glad tpbingeavthep kapne ok heir awne Rregtly
skevtapne pmaginacios 2 thoughtes in their bectes Capinge/ J haue heard the Solpell/j remeber the louie / lo Jubcie⸗
ue. And that ep counte righte kapch / which neuerthelelle As it is LU mas pmaginacidg fapninge / eus Co profiteth it
not mether folowe there anp good works o: mendemét of iuinge But righte Fapth is a thinge wꝛoughte by the oly att
Gok in verwhich chaungeth de turneth vo mtoanewenalure e begettech vs a newe in Sd / m maveth vs the


soe Tavth l nat h
thepheare!r pet cä babeltmaup thynges wome OF mane


one ok;


vues of Gud:ao thou re det m the tpt of John / uplleth the olde Ada / and maketh vs all to gether newe in the herte,
mynd/ will luſt c in alt oure affeccigns a —.— 1 the ſoule / che holy ghoſt ae ehire mage öder. e fpayte off


Fapch un ipueip chingennightp m wozkinge/valsauntes rongeeuce Comgevener keutkulf ca chat it is bnpoflible
That he which is endurd there with Aulde not worke al wapes good woes without ceafinge pe acketh not whether
good wor hes are to ur done o: not büt hath done the all rebg pr mencid be made of the /: 19 alltoaye Doinge/for koche
1s his nature: nowe quyche Fapth in his herte e lxuelp mouunge of the (price dalue him a cterre him see wnta, Wise
foeuce docth not good workes/is an vnbeleulnge perkon e faithiellz/s loneth rod about gropinge after fapth x good
wolken / wottel not what fapth or good werd meancthough he vabill newer fo many thing of fapth ¢ good worn.
Fapch is thena tpuelpe Kedfak tructe in the fauowce of AHod/wherwpth we cainptte dure ſelues all to gether
Shuto God x that truſte in Co (urelp grounded ¢ Keketh do fat in oure hertes / chat a man wolde not once doute of it /
£hough be chuld bre athauland tpmescherfore. And liche trug wrought by che halp good ch zough fapch / maneth a ls.
man glad luſkp)cheretutt ¢ true hertcd puto God s to alf creatures, Wy the meanes where of willingiy ¢ with out
cöpuidlon he is glad g red tu do good to euery man / to do ferupce Foeurey ma to fulkre all thynges/hat food maße be
loued s papled which An ee grate: lo that fe ts intpottpble to leparat good workes fro kapth / euen as
itis unpoltpole to feparat heete ¢ burninge fed Fyre. bertoze take hede to thy elke / beware of thyne awne kanta⸗
ces e pmaginacids which to iudge of fapttys good workies will leme rope / when in deade they are tterke blind g of al
enges mot kolpſche. Wzape Bod that he will wite lake to worke 00 in tees do bh cite hate thou remapne
cuermope rgpthleſle / faytie ihõu/ymagin thou enfopce thou / waſt pil wich chp lelte / do what thou wilte o7 cant.
51d Solbes tg enen luche kapth / ts called Godes righteoufneg / rpghceoutnes that is of valoure before God.
Fort nd a getters italtereth ama ¢ chaungelh bin to anewe fprituall naturc/s maketh him fre v liverall to;
pape euet p ma bis dutic. Fo; throw fapthisa man purged ot bis (yunes/and obtepneth lutte vnto the lawe of ob,
wherby he geueth Gor his honouree papeth him that he oweth him / s vnto me he daeth Cernis willingly wher wich
loeuer he can /a 2 chery man his dukte. Hüche tighteontues can nature / krewpll k oure gwne ſcreugth neuer
Bringe to pale. Fos as no ma can — bim Ceife kapth / lo can be not take awape vnveie fe (hom then can he taheawape
enp thing at all. Wher fare al is kalle ppocrilps cpune/ whaltoeue r is done % out Faith or m pnbelcte / as it is einde t in
the. rü. Thapter vnto the Momapns/sougy it appe re neuer ſo gloꝛious or beautpfull out wardes.

Fielche e trite mapſte thou noe fer dnderRandas though flelche were only that which pertapneth vnto vnchg⸗
ite / x the ſpupte / that which iuwardly per th to the bertesbut Paul calteih klecche here as Lb doth John ii. fs
All that is borne ob Fletthe/p is to wete / the whole ma wyeh ipte / ou eee whatloeuer he ig o:
doth with in g wyth out: becaule that theſe alle all chat is in man / d ud ater the wozide and the fle lſhe. Cali bee
therfore wpactoeuer (as longe as we are wpth out the fprpte of Mod) we thpnüe or fpene / of God / of tapt of good
Wworkes g ot cpiritualt matters, Call fleliHe alto all won which ate done toute grace / wont ß woꝛkinge o b ſpipta /

wv ſocuer good/hotp ¢ kptrituall thep teme to be aa thou mäptt pꝛoue by 5. v. Chnpter vuto the Salathpang where

ul nombieth worihipppnge of Pdolewilchecrafte/ enuß hakt / möge the de des of the felche / by the. vih. vnto
the Romapne / where he kayth oe oe tae by the realon of the flelche is weake. Whpch isnot vnde rdande of vn⸗
chaltpte onlp/but of alt (pnncs/s mot tpecpaltp/of vnbe lere whpch is a byce mot (py:peuall e ground of all fpnness
+ Andes thou called hym: whpch is not renewed wyth the fprpte o borne agayne in Chpft / tlecche / alt hrs dedeg
kuk the very mocpds ok byshert ¢ mynd hrs lernynge doctrpne s conti placpö of bye thynges / ys pꝛenchynge / tea⸗
chynge s Ruopin; dengölt en e ach le ar or abbe pes / g unge ofaltpeematormatcne I what
Cocuer be dorth/though tt Ceme (piritualls after the luwes of God: So contrarp beak call heim fprettualt which un
Th alt bps dedes tohyeh Sipnge of kapch lem thep neuer fo grote/as the watthynge of the dyl⸗
ciples tetedone-by Lhritand Peters kplchpnge akter the relurreceps pe and all ny es OF mätermonp ace
alt pk thep peocede of fapth / and what foever is done beg 10 the tatves ak God/though it be wrought
bod /as the eds wüde OF Werves ¢ ſoche lone /howſgener grole che p appere outwarde, Wpthout uche vn
R . om eae Seer weet ed toe of 5 981 2 70 Place in the holy
Tae hede the nderſtaudeth thele wandeg other e lame vnde vſtandel
Paul what ſocuer he be. Oowwelt we prepare oure felucs vnto the epikle. eis rome oe


+ FN as moche ag tt becommeth the piecher of Lhepites gind tydynges /Epre 29 e 80 f. the lawe: to re⸗ Che bn he


büne all thynges/e to pꝛoue all thynges cynne / that proccde not of the (prpte ¢ of f Mt 6 to t
shen ng © ep cr tp r lh tt 0 batons fo er fe russen ih 33
8 2 „ alg


kan none other tuple do than to lynne / and be * the bd of marvand to butt ge him bnto the knowledge
of him Keane acm ee mi abt dete He en o doeh geen ponent tae the
fyi Sbapten torevubevubelete ¢ grove fpnucs which all men (e/as yoolatrle/and as the grote fynnes of the bethen
Were and as the tyunes How ave of all he wohlch line in (guorance without faptivand without thefanoure of Bod:
6 (apth.Ghe whathof Godot heauen appereth tYozoww the Solpell ppon alt men kan their vngodlpues e bityoly fpr
ninge. Fos the ithe unswens daplp vnde rgände by the creatures chat ther tobult orie Gad pet 9 nature of by
elke with out the (pete z grace /o corvupte ¢ Co popfoned / that men nether can thäne hym / necher warchippe him / ne
ther geuc hm his due hondur ut blind the Celues s faule wilh out ceatinge im to worle cate/eus brit pl thep come vnto
‘worthippin ge of ymagess tworburge of chamekull kynnes which are abbominablee agapnſt nature / z moze ouer tute
SHeconde _, the came ongebubedin other /haningedelectacion s pleature therin. In dhe. G. Chapter. he proceaderh further and re
Thapter. buheth all thote holy people alto which wolch out lutte s love to che latuertpue well autw⅛ardip in the face of Fwozlde g
* —conbempne other gladipras the nature of all ppocrſtes 4e / to thinke thé felues pure in reſpecte of open (ynners’e pet
„ hate the lawe intvardip /m ate kullof couetoutaes ¢ enute of all vriclennes/ Wat. riß. Chete are they which
‘the goodnes of Modis accondunge to the hardenes of their herteg / hepe ko gether for thé Celues che wach of Cod ut
‘thermaze lapnt Paul asa teueerpounder of the lawe(lutireth no man tobe with out ſpune ent declareth ß all they
ahd ebapter ae vndoc (pnne which of krewill andof nature will {tue well Cufferetl them not tobe Letter then the ope Cynners
hn be callech them harde herted and focheas cannot repente In the ta Khapter he myngleth both to gerber ath the
ewes ¢ the gentpies / Capth.that the one is as the other / both cynnerg / & nud biker ene betwene the caue ip?


that 80 the tw:
at 2 120 he worde of the lap inge of the, L Pia.


Che lawe indi e. detur nech to his purpore


fleih not / vut
vtterethöllune
untpe and con,


Demers orl


whech

0 mites Chae

ave pattitherbp prouinge h 1 ich tpghe
pai Lda eed ect c EN ute


ch, al ehe(e bore
‘Fourthe chap.
ter.


le / lap
t


an:


lend s Hep
Hath biocennes
FoyeNeN hym.


ont the fpete ny
fee ede ‘hin his mile Fable eſtatt

K bate him then cOforte him agay

5 U Chia /e dere bp ape


ee atut
abot


Tothe Nomapns, 52


that the righte wapen workes abpde not behinde / but accompanye kayth / uen erg dh ne the lunne / are cal Good worned
led ok Wall the krutes ol the lprete. Where ö pic te ig / lher it is alwayes omer ¢ ther are af ayes good keuteg h ite the kruteß
ts to faye: good wo; lies. Pauls order in that good wozhes lprynge oF the (prite / he ſprite cometh by kaylh a fayth Bo ot the lpꝛite .
meth by hearinge the worde ol God / when the glad tpopuges ¢ promptes which Bod hath made to vs i LYsttierare
pꝛeached teniys receaued in 5 grounde ok ß heart wont waucringe oz dolltinge / after that the lawe hath, pulled vpõ
bag hath däned dure cOfcieces. Where 5 wonde of God is cached purely s receaued in the herte / there is kayth 25
ſpeitrot Bodi ther are allo good wozkes of netellpte whe Cocner occalid is geue: where goddis worde is nat purely
Peenched but mens deeames/tradicions/pmaginacions inuencids/ceremonyes e luperſticion / there is no fapth. x cone
kequthilꝑ no lprite that cometh of Sod. And where Goddis lpꝛite is not / there cã be no good works / eue as Whert an
Appell tre is not there can growe no appel, ont there is vnbeleke / the deuels lpꝛite s cupll wosties, DF this odds
pte ¢ bps frutes, aue ou re holy ppocrites not once zo wen nether pet tatted how kwete the xave / obere they
an nian goad worhes of their avwne pmagingcions / to be iuſtikted with all / which is not one crome of true fapth
ok (pirituali loue o of miward ſope / peace ¢ qupetues ot coulcpence / loꝛ as moche as they haue not the woꝛde or God
foz thenvthat ſuche works pleale God but they are euen the roten krutes of a roten tre.
Acer that he bꝛeake th koꝛth z runneth at large / Heweth whence voth fpunes ryghteoucnes deethy a lyke come.
And he cöpareth Adam 8 Ahk to gether / thus wyle realonynge s dilputpnge / that Ehziſt mut neaves'come asa
fecond Adam to make vs he pꝛes of his rightewelnes / hoo w a newe ſpirituali byrth without oure deſerupnges / euẽ
hoo we the bodelp gencracxon / without oure deleruynge. Wheruy ig euy⸗


jence Forth go vp and ter.
eve is (pune remay⸗


. — mpg


mech iu vs thoꝛowe the law
dominion:


1 5
pape that which the lawe requpzeth.Andto be low From the ntoens to kultpll t a to pape char which the lawe de⸗ Mo be vnder p
eudanberh le that it can now hence forth are the nought. Lontequentlp an Declaveth tes largely dhe nahere of auc. Co bee
Epune and of the tame howehac thozowe the latwe fpune reupueth mouceh by: kelke and gadereth kerength. To the lowle krom the
oloman and corrupte nature iche monce he is Foxboden and kepte vnder the lawe /in the moare offended and difpleaten lawe.
there wythfo; an moche as he cannot pape chat whpeh io requyzed of the lawe. For fpune is hys nature: and of him
felfe/ye cannot but lynne e Cherfore ts the lawe deeth to hym / toꝛmente and marterdome. Not that the lawe ig cupll
but becaulc that the eupll nature cannot fiiffce that wppch is good cannot abpde that the tatve Gulve requpie of
hem any good thpnge. Lphe as a ſycke man cannot Cuffce that a man chulde delt. of bpm to runne / ta lepe and ta
do other de deg oF an whole man. c whych caule Haynct Paul conciudeth / chat where the awe is nderſtande
and per ceaued of the bette wyle/ there it doeth uo moave but vtter lynne / and brynge vs bute the knowledge
ok cure ſelues ) and therbp kylle bs and make vs bonde vnto eternall damnacpon and detters of the euerlaſtynge
mach of Had /euen as he well fealeth and vnderſtandeth whole contcpence is teuclp touched ok the lawe. Inlu⸗
che daunger were we per the tawe came / that we une we not what ſynne mente / nether fied unowe we the tuzatly
ol God vpon (puners/tpll the lawe hath vite red tte So feel thou that a man muſt haue tome other charter ad 4
aretter and a


t in the ka
nce/how p
no hurte /


1


cäuot
19


Flelche g (pitt

de bpght to geo

thee,
puch the fprptecepeth x fyghcech agapnee the Aetihere well haute hto lucde datickled. And thio ür pte dureth in va ag
lolige ag we tpuerin Come moace d in dome telle ehe Cprite-pe: we klelche is ſtronger / the very man-bys arne kelke

Of ig büch the tpriteg the Hlelſhewhypch kyghteth with his aru telle dirtpll (pane he vecerty Clapne z we all to gether

MpeoGechay. piritücll zu the. bi). Ip. be cofart ech tuche Cyghters f chip dilyFec not Lecante oF kuche klelchedocher thinte that
thep arleſke in kungure wil Mod. And he Herweeh köln hät che ping remapuitige in ba hurteth not / ro Ther is uo
dauuger to them that ave: ige de which walke no after the Feribe Ape kpghe agg put it. And he exvoundeth moze
largely what the nature of the klelſhe ¢ ol the Cpeite 5/7 Hutu che ries cometh by hut which Cprite maketh vs tpie
vituall/tameth/Cubduerh ¢ mroztifieth the klellhr / x ce eCifpeeh vs Tuche we ave netevehelee che Cornes of Gon / r allo
veloued though chat kynne 155 neuer Co moche in oslo fonge us We Lolowe the type ¢ Epghte agaynſt lune ta hell
€ moꝛtikte it. And becauce no thuuge 1s (9 yaoi fy the mozti€perige ne che le che / ao che crollẽ & tvibulactonye cõkoꝛte n
vs in oure pallpons ¢ afilicciOs/bp Ue alliitenss pb the (pite Wüyich malie th inter cellton to Sod For vs myghtelp wit
groupuges that palle mag veteruumce /h char mas le che cäuot cöpzehende them ¢ wpth the mournpnge allo of the
cr catures wyth b / ok greate gelyꝛe that the y haue / that we were lowleb leo ſyune a coꝛrupcid of the klelſhe. Safe
wo that hele Chee chapters) the. Pl. vy. viß. do none other thynge to moche as to depue vs vnto the vyght worde or

Che. lex . xl. lapth/ which is cobylt the olde man aud mgrritye the klellhe. Ju the. tx. P. . pl. chapters he trenteth of Soddis pree

e

ee led. By which predeRinacid oure mifplinge x Caluncté are clene tale oute of dure handes / put in che handes of God

onlp/ which chinges is mot ne celarp of all. Fot we are Co wele ¢ Co vncertapne / that vr it ode in vs / there wolde ok a

tructh uo man be laued / the deuell no doute wolge decegue vs. But now 10 Hod lure / that his pꝛedeſtinaciũ cauot dee

ceaue hym / nether can euy man withckaulr az let him / and therfore haue we hope and trüſte agapuſte (pane,

Wu here muſte a marke be (ot vͤto thole pnqupet / oucpe and hye clpmring (prites howe ferrechep.hatt go which
ft of all bringe hether there hye realong ¥ nennt wytkes / beginne kyꝛlt From an bye to ferche botomlelle 7
tes ol Soddis pedeſtinacid / whether they be bꝛedeſtiuat ot not. Chele mut nedes ether caſt the leiues bon hedelig.
Mito delperaciò of clfe cOmrpe (HE Celucs to Fre chaunce care leſſe, But colowe thou the onder OF this epittie/# nooceſi
thy tete wyth Chuiſt ¢ lerne to vnderſtande what the tawe e the golpell meane / z the ollpce of both two / thut thou

bps do pk Maplin the one nnowe thy Celfe/s how that thou hatt of thy elke no ſtrength / but to Cpnne g in the other the grace
ps Tt ee OF ALbnit. And then Ce thou Fpydte , . Loapters tenche the.AEter that when
thou bos eile thou arte come to che vij. chapter ¢ arte vnder the crolſe g (ult-rynge of tributacio/the ne cellite ol pꝛedeſtinaciõ will
derſtande. pape lwete/z thou halt well kele hotv precionte n thinge it ia En ex cepte thou haue bore the cvotte of abuerlyte and
templaciò a halt keite thy lelle bought vnto the very bꝛymnie ok delper acyon / xe a vnto hell gates / thou cant neuer

medle wich the lentence of pꝛedeſtinactö without thyne atone harme / without lecret wath z grudgyngemwardip

agepnt Hod / ko other wyke iv Wall not be pollpble for the to thynke that Bod is ryghteoug g luſte. Therfoe mat

Aan ve well mortik ped and the klelſhely wprte brought vtteriy to nought / per t thou mapſt awape with this thiuge /

o dulnche loſtronge wyne. Cake hede therfore bnto thy lelke / that thou deincke not wyne / whyie thou art pet buta

kutklyng. Foz euerpternynge bach bye kyme / mealure g age /g in Lhrit is there a ccrtapne chyldhod / in which a ma

Che. pi. Thuy mut be content with mpltze kor a coafon/ontpll he ware ſcronge ¢ growe vp vnto a perkecte man in hit / be able
ter, e to eate of monve ſtronge meate. In the. xh. Chapter he geueth erhortactons. Foz this maner obe rueth Put in all

* HyscpittlesEp:t he tcacheeh Lhe the kapth chen exhorteth he to good workes/s vnto contlunalt moztifpinge ok
the leche Ho he le teacheth he good worhes in dende / z the true ſerupnge ok God a make th all m Mꝛeſtes/ to offer
vp / not money z beafteas as the maner was in the tyme ok the tawe but chetr atone vodpes with hyltpnge n mozti⸗
kpinge of the tuftes of the klelche. Akter that be deterpbeth che outwarde conuerlacpon of Chiiſten men how they
oughte to behaue be felues in (pivitualt thinges / hom to teache pꝛeache ¢ rule ts the cogvegacio of Chiiſt / to leruẽ
one to another / to tuffce all thinges pacpet ip / z to cõmpt the wiene ¢ bengeafice to Sd / in coc lucyõ howa Cheiſen
man ough le to behaue him Celfe vnto att men / to krend / tos oꝛ what Loeuer he be. Cheſe are the rpghte workes of a
Chiiſce md which ings oute ol kayth Foz lapth hepeth not holpe dae / neter tuffreth nab m to be vdle / wherloe ⸗
üer che dwelleth In d riß he teacheth io hononre the wordly s eeporall werde Aothough mis lav ¢ ozdinafice
make not a mä good befoze AHodmether iuſtik pe him in the herte pet are ep arbeyned kor the kurderaunce ok the
con une welth) to mapntene peace / to punplche the eupll z ka dekende the good. Chertore ought the good to hanoure
the poralt (werde g to haucit in veuerence/though as céceenpnge the lelues they nede it not / buk wolde abſtarne
n krocupllof their awne ac code / ye ¢ do good wythout mis lawe hüt by che dawe of the (prite which gouerneih the
Tout is the ful harte / und gydech it vntg alt that to the will of God. Finally he cOprehendeth and knetteh vp all in loue. Loue ok her
ſpuynge ok the awne nature beſtoweth all that che hath / and euen her awne lelke on that whech is loned. Thou neabeſf
Arnie, not to bpd a bende mother to be lonynge vnto her gnly ſonne . Moche lee Cpyzptuall lone whech, ec


Che riß Chap
ter.


Dettinacwarhence it cpungeth all together nohether we hall beleue of not beleue / be lowled fro lynne 07 not be low⸗


th Th t do the


nterkapte / that


ngniftveh
aud Ayde of them for chi
in this ppſtle pie tubuliy /
at the lawe / che Golpell /


be Fecal his: ab aach to ſytte.
er they agre oz not. Audi cõnutte thy leite whole z all together vr nit /

wl ae arsine, eee ee

be Comme and hole cauſe of the wrptinge:

dpa bs who lo denpeth / to him is not on} nt

1 e e Mall neuer vnderckande it to vases iam to the buderRandpnge and fee
19 fo popfoned ¢ fo c rupte ye

ple for ypz tehepe h lawe in the cheat dotehee

Wd catcth or dzincheth / vntpll the be Quychenedagapne

Other thun ge then tobe vecdculed to aod g to be rettozed

brgeuen che. As when J taps God mttificth vs / vnderſtande therby / hat God

ve / kauore s grace / and kozgeueth vs oure

i bath dux redemed vo, bought y belpuered

e Fationee and

de therby that

woꝛnes onlpe /


pr with all myne he rt / cor
ns COpated with fe “finn 4 bannt fis bey 1
me and Forgenetl me. Finally: that we lape fapth onip iu⸗
d vs / Thyiſt onlpe bare oure Sprites) made
hat b truck onlpe in Chulteg
onlpe quyet the conkcpence ¢ cove
e (prunes haue a purpote to fpune


ages HE 228 thou,
ively turne thyne
Exceadpnge mercpe of thy moon kpnde ¢ foupnge father. Thprdix renner a 240
that thou ſhuldeſk anger God agapne / nether dyed he For thy kynues / chat thou
led he the / chat thou chuldeſt returne ag alwyne / vnto thpne olde podell agapne: but
tute and lxue anew ipke after the mypll of ob- and not of the Fleabe. And be dp!
negligence s buthanbFutnes/thou lose this t auoure and mercpe agayne.
beende of the prologe se the Romapuese


ter.
AER man is luſtikped by kayth onlye:
aul wꝛyte th / but allo fh inte


Juſtitpenge⸗


Che Epittle


Cry ce


to the Romayns,


„ Paul declareth his lone towarde the Nomapneg /
ch. welh what the Gotpell is with the oute the rok /e
Tebubeth the beeſtſpnes of the llelche.


Aul the ſeruaunt ol Je⸗
ug d hilt called to be an po
ttle put a parte to pꝛeache the
Gol pell of God, which he pꝛo⸗
ted afore byhis Prophetes
5 che holplcriptures ? make
menclon ot his lone / the which was begot⸗
ten of the ſced ol Dauid / as pertayninge to
thellerche and declaredto be kanne ol od /
wyth power of the Poly goott chat tanctp⸗
kyeth lence the tyme that Fetus Chat oure
Loꝛde role agapne front deeth / vy whom we
haꝛie receaued grace and Apoſtleſbyppe / to
range all maner hethen people onto the obe
dpence of the karth / that is in rs name: ol §
ꝛhych hethen are pe a part alto / whych are
Jelus Ehziltes byvocacton. E
as Sapnttes Toall vou ok Rome beloued ok God and
bp callg ogg fa pnctes by calipnge . &* Grace be wyth
mache lors pou and peace krom God oure kather / and fro
as called to be
fapnctes) aa the Lode Fetus Chiict.
cara to B pr vereir Athanne my Goo thozotn Fe-
Holpneos polyfug Chaitt/Eor pou al / becaule youre fapth
+ Iovpng: forthe fg palblilchedehzough outall ebe wwoslde.s02
fi cqotre o en son is mp wytnes whom 9 ferue wich mp
the 5 be alpue Ipꝛete in the Golpell orhys konne that wrd
tapnctes / ond it out cealynge J make mencyon of vou alls
ough: tobe au wapes in my papers belechpnge that at
ont /¢0 Cope n one tyme or other“ a profpecous tomiep( bp ?
Enit n md o WPT OF Wod)nrpghe koꝛtune me / to come vn⸗
a Thyinpan. bo you. Fo: J longe to le vou / that Ampght


beſtowe amonge vou Come ſpyntual gyſte / u: Grateben


melyto the ewe / and altoto the @entyle. r chr ache
o bpit the ryghtewelneg whi cometh fhe pte
ol God / is opened / from fayth tod vfayth. A8 of tpgbiwv: tu
it is wultten:the tut han lyue by farth. c wet wi
$02 the wah of God apereth kram beau futech yo
agapnſt all ongodlynes and vnryghtewelnd nouneeth vs
or men which withholde the trueth in vmigh rightweo rely
tewelnes: ie unge / what mape be no wen of theiowmercß


lp
wyſe gaue thé vp bnto theirhertes luſteg / vn at fr a
to vnclennes / to dckple thetvatone boddyes
bitwene thé lelues: wich tourned bys tru⸗
the vnto a lye / a woꝛchypped and lerued the
creatures moze then ð maner/ which is blel⸗
{cb Foz euer. Amen Foz this caute Godgaue
them by onto ſbamkull luſtes. Fos euẽ their s
wemen dpa chaunge the natural ple vnto d
vnnaturall. And lyhe wyle allo the men lekte
the natural bfe ot the womã / a bent in their
jute one to another. And ma w ms w2oughe
kilchynes / a receaued in the (clues prewarde
ol thetr erroure / as it was accoꝛdpnge.
And ag it ſemed not good vnto the to he a
knowen of God / euẽ co God delpuered thẽ op
vnto a leawde mynd / that they wulde do tho
thinges which were not comp beinge ful of
all vnrighteous doynge / ol koꝛnicacion / mic⸗
kednes /coueteoutnes malictoutnes, Eull of
enupe / moꝛtheer / debate / diſſe te /euplt condi⸗
croned / wyylpererg / bachbrters haters ol
God / doers


jeteame thy thp leite.
ſiſerraht we fame leite


Peatve ye cher
PH. aut
0 not heare


1h / that is 4
Fey a ent


Bites
dene Of


Heo


ie eebntie kal
Zetves Lettyng
ic nal ftoavey
‘bp them kriegt


Luc pb hon eld
neabes be wiltia
fev e made igh
Kves miyeHghe
of Sun by the

dato, ae thou te


me epales
0


tgthefvrete a nok m the letter, whore
is not omen / but ol Goo. hole pꝛaple


Che Gewweeh what preferment th pose

chat both the zeweg ab Geutpls pr tl eae tae tosen

are tuſtikped oniy by d Geaccor Gedim Thug. N
Che. ih. Chapter.


bat 0
enn 0
ben


*


en they?
0 /in na


1 fai tu 5 iner
od 00 prompfes.


ty
ai Neltuecaute the


Aoteminittrerly
no hower ner


Dat Hal we tape then? Shall we A
cotinue in lynnie / p theic mape be
aboundatice of grace: God eopind


wil binge,
ust hope to


vnto, a goon,
coral “

wqrckegcö! ghe/ whether

God wolde


ano dye vntg
kpune isnot to


tic thinch/thAt ge beclareth bypera ple of Alnah that fant fuftic


thou 155 the
p tuſtikped oz
made rightwes A eue youre
Ucfore God. a 5 ; htewelnes


r Wedes tuſti⸗
pe not before


Are not


The Ep


grenot onder $ lawe: but onder grace? God
kozbyd. M Remeber pe not how that to whõ
focuct pe cömpt poure felues as feruauntes
toobep:his leruaũtes ve are to whõ ve obe x
whether it be of lynne vnto deeth / 02 of obe⸗
dience vnto rightewelnes: God be thanked /
D that though ve were once the leruauntes of
lynne / ve haue pet obeped wyth herte vnto p
foꝛme of doctrine wher bute ve were dellue⸗
red. Ve are then made fre krõ ynne / and are
be come the ſeruauntes of rrahtewelnes. L
A willtpeaßte gvotiy becaute of the inflr⸗
mitie of youre klelche. As ye haue gent poure
meébers leruaütes to onclénes etoiniquitie
fro intquttye vnto iniquitye:euẽ lo now ges
ue poute members leruauntes onto rpabtes
welnes / that ye maxe be canctilped. oz whe
ve were the leruauntes of tynne / ve were not
pnder rightewelnes. what krute had pe then
in tho thingeg / wherol ye are now alchamed
Foꝛ d ende of cho thingdis deeth. But now are
he deliuered krõ lynnẽ / a made p leruaũtes ol
Bod / a haue poure truce b ye chuld be tancti-
fied / a d ende euerlaltinge like. Foꝛ d rewarde


+ Gternalllpfeis OE Lyn tie is deeth:buit eternal pte is ö gylte
thetetecupnge OF God / thoꝛow Fetus Chꝛiſt oure Loꝛde.


OF Thi.


d lawe hath power duera ma as

Alonge as it endureth⸗ Foz ß wom

hich is in lubiecctd to am / is bounde byß
lawe to the man / ag longe as he lyueth. FE
the man be deed / he is lowled from the lawe
ok the man. So then pk whüll the man kpueth
ſbe couple her kelke another mã / che chalbe
counted a wedlocke bzealier. But yl the man
be deed/ dhe ig fre krö the lawe to that the is


2
ite
fayd/*thou Matt not lult. But ſynne tone an Erod. ex. e.
occalpon by the meanes ok the cemmaunde⸗ Deut. b. b.
ment and wꝛought in me all manner ok con⸗
cupilcẽce. Sor verelp without) lawe / lynne
was deed, J once lyued without lawe. But
when the comaundement came / lynne reup⸗
ued / and J was deed. And the very lame coni⸗ €
maundenient which was oꝛdeyned vnto lite /
was loũde to be vnto me an occafys ol deeth.
Foꝛ lvnne toke occacton by the nieanes of ß
commaundement / and fo dylceauedme / a by
the lelke comaundement llewe me. Wherkoꝛe term lb.
the jawe is hol / andthe cõmaundemtt holp /
tuſt andgood. i
was that then which is good / made deeth
vntome: God foꝛbyd. Nave tynne was deeth
vntome / that it myght appere / how p lynne
bp the meanes of that whych is good / had
wꝛought deeth in me that Come whych is
onder the commaundement / might be out of


mealure lynkull.Koꝛ we knowe that $ Tatve Cove Cotte un


is Cpivituall; but q am carnan code i vnder der tyuneisto
lvnne / becaule J wote not what J do. Foz
what wold / that do J not: but what z hate /
do J. FE 4 do now that which J wolde not / 7
Agraüte to $ lawe that it is good, So then
niowe / it is not J that doit / hut lynne that
dwelleth in me. Foz g knowe chat in melthat

is to lape in my klelche) dwelleth no good
chinge. Co will is pꝛelent  me:bue Akpnde

no meanes to perfogme that whych is good.
Foz J do not that goodthinge which J wold
but chat euildo / which z wold not. Finally
pea do that F wolde not / then is it not I that

bolt / but Lynne that dwellech in me / doeth lt.
Ikynde then by the lawe / that when J wolde

do good / euyll is pꝛelent with me. J delite in
the la we of God / concerningethe inner man.
But J fe another lawe inſny membzes ves
bellinge agaynſt the lawe ol my mynde / and
fuboupnge me vnto the lawe oktynne / which

is in my members. O wꝛetched man that F
am: who shall delpuer me krom thys body of
deeth: Ithanlie God thoꝛow Fetus Chilt
oure L oꝛde. So then I my lelfe in my myn⸗

de lerue the lawe of God / and in my klelſhe
the lawe of Tyne,


ok tune guy,


C. Cbe lawe of the lpꝛete geueth lyke. Chetprete of


red from dhe uerlacion ok the letter.


lawe of
Galat.


k det
50


*


Abe den ie Sab enn be epee,
¶ Che. viij. Chapter. 4

er iz then no damiteicton tothem

bych are in Chzilt Jeu / whych
e

hespzete. for the lawe oF |

B bzingeth red bewege Chu / hath

„delpueredimie krom the lawe oF lynne a deeth.

Ai w a cour do in as moche
it was weahe becaule oe theflesMe:thag .

5 0 V pekkozmed


be made nbond
md to doß wyll


movie thaé
ALbat
now 16 ms and


foe Audpbodype
la decu becnu⸗


| Win.
1
fee


ie hal capg p.
ech opin Ut
Harpe,


creatures ahpbeth lokynge
ol God ſhall appere/becautep creatures are
kubduedto banpte agaynſt their wil: but ko
bis will whpch iubdueth them in hope. Foz
the very creatures ſhalbe delxuered krö the
bondage of coꝛrupclon into gloꝛpous liber
te of the fonnes of God. Foz we hnowethat
Cucty creature groneth with bs alto / atra⸗
88 uayleth in papne euen onto this tyme,
ae 80 Hot they only but eue we allo whpchha⸗
porciong gett che pack rufes ot 5 cpꝛite / mo zue in oure
ie Fut gyfteoglelueg @ wapte ko the(adopctd) a lone Foz p
beute. deliuraũce of ove bodyes. E Noz we are


bear cnuedlaupd by*howe.. Bul hope that is lene is no
j 9810 ae I hon cn a ma hope £o2 that which


ecco onse of But and yt webhopefoz that me ſe
e een bo we I PactEnee abe
en to? Lyne wyle the tpete allo helpeth oure in


0


athe that dert
2 what Hyatt
ach Done Foe
hym / canot but
wicue (hae gow
ſoueth him und


Cent ane med wen Hevtes of ß Jeweg
eceatn uiſt / ai 0
are cholen in theyꝛ ‘heave, eee


Ache. tr. Chapter.


Soave the trueth in hut / and lye
notlin that wherol my confcpence
Ai beareth me wyrnen inß holygholk


chat haue gret heuynes and con⸗

nual Tao we fn nwherb. oz iz haue wyl⸗
Shed my Celfe to be curled krö hill / koꝛ m
brethzen amy hyntmen as pertayninge to
lebche/ which are 5 Alrgelltes. ao wha per⸗
täpneti the adopcii / the (lozte /g the cours
ſiauntes ache lawe that tous geuen / and ehe
fevutce of God and che yeoirptessinbote allo opel wit
are the fathers and they ot whonne las concer {bereeannc:


Hpnge the flellbe zahlt came / ohich ts Can ce


our all hinges blelled ko; euer amen.
. U. Alpealle


he epittle


‘FY Cpeakenottheteehpngesas though tye card bekoꝛe:ercept the Loꝛde of Saboth had
970 of Godhad take none effecte.ffoz they let vs leede / we had bene made as Zodoma /
are not all Plraclites wich came of Icrael: and had bene lykened to Gontozra,
netherare they all chyidzen ſtrapght ware What Mall we fayethen: We faye that 8
because they ate the leedok Abzaham But gentyls which folowed not rightewetnesha
in Ilaac ſhall thy feede be called: p is to lape / ue ouertakẽ rightewelnes: A meane p righ⸗
they which are the childꝛen or the klelche / are teweſnes which cometh of kapth. But Iltael
not tyechplozen of Bad. But the chlldzen or which tolo wed z lawe ok rightewernes could
pꝛonies are counted the ſeede. Foꝛ thys is a notattapne vntothe lawe of ryghtewelnes.
woꝛde ol pꝛomes / aboute thys tyme wyll. J And wherkoze? Becaule ther lought it not
come ano Dara wall haue a tonne, by fapth:but ag it were by the workes or the
Nether was it ko wyth her onlp: but allo lawe. For theyhaue ſtonibled at d ſtöblynge
when Rebecca wis woch chylde be one / J Cone, Js it is wꝛittẽ: Beholde J put in Sys
Cmeane by ours father Jtaac / per te childzen a Lombiprige ſtone and a roche which Malt
were boꝛne / when ther had nether done good make men kaule. And none that beleue on
nether bad: that the purpole ol God which is him / halbe a Hamed,
by eleccton myzt ſtande / it was cayde vnto Gh vnfapehsulues ot the Jeweg. C wo maner af
her / not byß realon of wozhes / but by grace rpghteoutnes.
Okthe callerrthe elder wall kerue d younger, che. r. Chapter. 4
As it is wꝛyttẽ: Jacobhe loned but Clauhe TAI Leth emp hertes delpze a prayer
hated. What Mall we faye then is there eny Nato God £oz Ilrael is / that they
bnrightewelnes ws Sn orb pd. he myght be laued. Foꝛ 4 beare them
fapth to Moles: 4 wyll ewe mercyto whõ Vrecoꝛde that they haue a feruent
J Hewe niercr and will haue compädton on mynde ro God warde / but not accozdpngets saryzit isthe
HhomFbhauccdpation So lieth itnotthen Knowledge. Foz they are ignozaunc ot the cube of p tawer
ina mas will oz runninge / but in the merepe ryghtewelneg twhpch ig alowed befoze Goo, tat is Lone
euen £02 this lame purpole haue z ſtered the tewelnes / and therkoze are not obedient vnto joe 10 babe
by / to Merwe my power on the / a chat myna⸗ the rpghtewelnes whpch is ol valew befoze bin veteucth ß
nie mraht be dectaredthozow out alp won. God Koz echnik rhe ende ok the lawe / to dae
de. So hath he merexe on whom he will / and tuttievealt thar beleue. 1 bay
whom he will / he maketh hard herted.


Moresdeiccyoeth p rahtewelnes which buen er.
Thou wylt dape chen vnto me: why then comẽth ol che lawe/ how that the man which with ouercome


deetd and


blameth he vs pet: Ko: who ca reliſchis wil? doth che chinges os the lawe /all Ipucthers 3 reine}


But ch ms, what arte thou wypchdilputeſt mm. But the ryabtewetnes whpcl cometh ot obama § tee

che fle; with Gon? Shallthe worcke tape to) woz⸗ kapth, ſpcagech on this wyle. Saye not in your of yps far

5 oupempndep he man: wüphact thou made me on his fats thine hert, who Mallatcende into heauen (p ther foralt hae

will be as wile lyon? Wath not the potter power ouer the is nothynge cis then to Fetch Chak DOLE) dune

a cd mutebe claye/ cen of the lame lompeto maße one Other rho Mall detcende into p deve? (B is d alem

kee 10 £0 pettell pntobonoure/anranotver bute dio: nothinge els but tofetch wpcbztt fro Dect) pepo ot npea

Gol z to obep ULC? Euenlo/ God willingeto bewe hys But what layth the tertpture Cue worde tsde incittye the
wꝛath / and tomate his power khnowẽ lulle⸗ pe the / euẽ in thy mouth and inthyne deere g
ch tr fir

een finae 2


ace
Thnce


„


ec ofpieachig
Spe 4


ol God. For the Ccripture 4th onto wharao andgoabout to ſtablpcche their awne rygh- or ens


4 fits. John. vb. ¶ All the Jetwes ure not ert a vape / therfoꝛe Paul
uc Coche as


8290 the oo eut xls that be arian lo be hye ae
* cd NO? Co becppte the zcwes / Fo; (hs indgementeg o.
der DE pee Sod are depe aud leerete. U


che. xt. Chapter.
Hupe then: bath God caſt awaye


es


Orte nnd
babes abe con
arte hinges.


at
Zp 2 be ie
12 hey pated nedontothe geepls / ko: to proucke the wut ¢ uno wledge of God: how önlerchegble are
the gentpies all. hero yr the kauleot thẽ / be ryches n
ca vor 4 : fj, out?


The


out? oz whobath Uncwen the mynde ok d


Lozde: O: who was hpscountelier? other


ho hath geuẽ vn ohim yet / that he might


be tecompentes ayapne? Foz okhym/ a tho⸗


row him /g fo him ate alithynges. Cohrm (

be gloꝛve kon euer amen. 5

€ e l r lone / and workes of loch
Che. rij. Chapter. .


BVeleche pou therkoze bꝛethꝛen / y


the mercpkulnd of God / pve make
voure bodyes a quic ke lacrytpce /


Ergeſeruinge hal g acceptable vntocho: which


i poure vefcnable feruinge of God e kalfpö
not pour felut Ihe onto thys wozlde: but be


8 fie lawe of pe chatiged in poure ſhape / byd renuynge of
od.


voure wittes that ve mape tele what thynge
5 good / that acceptable / a perkaycte wyñ of
God is. Foz Ilape (thozowe p grace ß writo -
me geuẽ is) to euery man amonge vou /S no
man eſteme ok bynt elfe moare then it beco⸗
meth him to eſteme / but 6 he diccretly fudge
or himikelke / accoꝛdynge as God hath dealte
to eukryman the mature of fapth.
B As we haue many members in one body /s
all mébers haue not one office:fo we beynge


l. Cor. xi. b. nian / are one body in Chꝛiſt / and euer ma
Erbe b. Amdge oure cclues / one anothers mebers. E.


ES cynge that weharentuers giktes accoz
denge tothe grace that is geuen dntobs: PE

egen ian haue p gvée ol! paophelpe / let pnt
2 haue it p it be age ynge vnto the kayth. Let


rpounoynge him phathe an office wayle on bis office Let
of tceyptuces him that teacheth /taltelgene to his doctrine.
bilden nu de Let hum Perbosteih, geué attendatice tog
5 e b terhortaciö, 3c eny mangeue / jethundo tt w
agre to theope linglenes. Lee him ß ruleth, do it w diligece,

places e gene. Ik eny m ſhewe mercy / let him do weherkul


nt. Let loue be without haamulacto Hate!
C which 18 euyl / and cleauẽ vnto that which i

good. Be hunde one to another w bꝛotherlx
loue In geuinge honoure / go one before ano


1 Jetrt. 3. b. ther. Act not that bulpnes which ye haue in


hande / be tediolis to vou. Be ferucntin che
lpꝛete, Applpe poure lelues to the tyme. Ne⸗
foyce in hope. Be paclent in tribulactö. Con⸗
tinue in pꝛaperBiſtribute onto 5 necelipte
of ßlaynctes a be readie to harboure. Bleſſe
them which perlecute pou: bleſſe but courte
not. Be merp wyth th that aremery, Wepe
with thé 6 wepe. Be ok Ike alleccid one to⸗
wardes another. Benothfeminded:bu
de pour feluy emen to thẽ ok lower loꝛte K
. Be noe wile in youre awne op
pẽce to no mã eupii for eupll. Pzoupde afore
ande thinges honed in d kyght ot all men.
kit be pottpbie / how beit of poure parte / ha
ue peace with all men. Derly beloued pe
not poure ſelues / but geue roume onto the
Inzath of God. fog it is wꝛitten: vengeaunce


Epilkle


is myne /e J will rewarde larth the Loꝛde:

Cyerkoꝛe e thyne enemy honger / kede him
ehe churd geue him dꝛinhe. Kor in todoing » gotcothatis
thou Walt heape* coles of kyie on hes Heed, thou dattyns
Benot ouercome ot eupi:but ouercome eu dle byms maße
wyth goodnes. & ben toit.
Ehe obedience of men vnto hep: rulers. Loue ful

Eplteth the inves Zt is how no time to Folowe $ wore


hes ok darcknes. .


¶ Che xiij Chapter.
Et cuety Coute lubnut him leite vn


behare ozbepned or
Gi oLoeuer therfoze velitteth power /
reliſteth d oꝛdinaunce of Gay:aindthep ö res
lcd / pal receaue to thé felfe danacron. Foz
rulers are not to be keared oz good woꝛles /
but fo2 eupil Wiltthou be Wont keare of the
power Do wel then. z fo Male thou be pray
ledok the lame. Foꝛ he is p miniſter of God /
foz thy welth. But and yt thou do eupll / then
feave:foz he bearech not a lweard foz noughe
butig 6 miniſter ok God / to take vengeatice
on thé that do eupl. W herkoze pe mut nedes
obeye / not fo2 keare of bengeaunce onlp:but x Thonghthon
allo becaute or eoncctegee and cue for this a reh
caule pape ye tribute, Foz thepare Godoes ers per ei
miniſkers ſeruinge ko the fame purpole. hon apne in
Geue to euery man therkoꝛe his duetie:tri thy contcipece
bute to whom tribute belongeth:cuttome to Bald wen,
whom cutome ts due: Feare to thd feate be gang gebe
Aögeth:honoureto whi hongure pertapneth. maundement,
“ED ive nothinge to enymã: but to loue one C 5
another. Forhe 5 loueth another / kultpieth
the lawe. Foz thele cõmaundementes: chou
Malt not comitaduoutrp:thou chalt not hylt
thou ſhalt not ſteale:thou Walt not beare fat
le wytnes:chou halt not delpꝛe ¢ lo Forth (vE
there be eny other cõmaundemẽt)they are al Loue is the fut


ay


¶ Che weake ought not to be delpyſed. Oo ma Guide
offende anothers cõleſence. Agapne / toi outwarde thin
ges chulde no man condempne another.

ym that


meg ler⸗
hether he ſtande v kuunte / that
his maſter:xe / he that tide,


fer teabe to ha bꝛother be gRrcurdw thy meate now walnelt
ritablte Beſtrope not him with
ict, be mea, thy meate /o whom Chzit open. Caule not
ec weates, Poute’*cresdure to be eupllCpon? of, Foz 5
ee rer Ryngdome of god 1s not megte e deine: but
Heal rpattewenies/peace a ioye in z holy gooſt.
eos wholocuer in there thingsletueth cht

uve trea pleateth welk ca) / ais commended or men.
+ Leche Eolovor tho thinges which mate for
wherwith one ma ye edifye
pe not the woꝛke ol God foz
alptell meates lune. All chings are pure:but
tels eupll fo 5 m / which eateth with hurte
OF hys conlcxence. It is good netherto cate


Tothe Nomayuns. Irxbilſ⸗


¶ Che. xitij. Chapter.


glecthe / nether to derncke wyne / nether enx
thinge / wherby thy brother ttomblety / ether
falieth/oz is made weake, Halk thou fayth? Mobs agayna
latte te wit thy leite beFoze od, Papppis Todt aaron
he that condépneth not him ſelle in 5 chynge nable. And all,
wh ych he aloweth. Kozhe that mafteth con⸗ (uot of tate
fcéence igdipnen vehe eate: becaule he doth ® fame,
ik not ol tapi). Foꝛ whatloeuer is not or
kayth / that lune is fynne,
al Che inkpꝛmpte and kraplneg of the weale ought ta
be bogne with ull loue and npndneſie / acer the entam⸗
ple of Chtiſt.
The. xv. Chapter.
E which are ſtröge / ought to beare 1
trap nes ot thé which ave weake
e not co (Longe in oure awne con⸗
x Zs) lapteg. Let cuery man pleatehys
nepahbour onto his welth and edikyinge.
Chat pleated not hum lelke: but as it is wait he in Rronge g
ten Che rebuleg of them which rebutienege gun ange
Felton ne ok Nohattocuerthingesare wait: enen en
te afoze tyme / are wyittẽ Foz oure learninge / Bal vi.
that we choꝛow pacpence a comkozte OF the
bxipture / niyght haue hope.
Ehe God of pacicnce ¢ contolacton / geue 5
buco euery one ot vou /p ye be Iphe myided
une towardes another alter che enfampie ol
Chait Jelutthat ye all agreynge to gether /
mape with one mouth prapledod ß father ok
Outre Logde Fetus. wWyerfore receaue ve one
Anotheras Chzitt receaued vg / to d pꝛaple of
God. Ind lapethatz eus chet was n mi⸗
niſter oF p circũciſion ko the c᷑ruech of God /
to conkerme the pꝛomptes made onto ho fas
chers. And let the gentpis prapte God fo his
mercp / as it is weiten: oꝛ this cnule J wil
pꝛapſe the amonge the gentyitz / and lyuge in
thy name. Andagapnehetapeh:reiople ve ge
tyles with his people. Andagapne) pꝛaple ß
Logde all pe gentyls / a laude hint an nactig,
And in another place capas tavth:cher (al
be 5 rote of Jeſſe/ahe z thall ryre to rapgne
ouer the gentyls: in him chan p gentpls truſt.
Che God of hope kyil you woth all toye and
peace in beleuinge: hat ye mape ve ryche in
hopethoꝛowe the power ok the holy goott. E
„Implelke am Full certified ok you mybꝛe⸗
thzen / chat ye youre lelnes are full of goodne
and kylled wyth all knowledge /a areable to
erhoꝛte one another. Peuerchelete bꝛethꝛen
Jhaue tome what boldlp wzptten vnto vou /
as one that putteth vou in remembꝛaunce /
thozowp grace b is geuen me of cod / hat
Wuld be che mynpſter ok Jet Chet tt amöge
the Gentylg / and chuldminiſter the glad ty⸗
dinge ol God / that the gentyls mygůt be an
acceptable offerpnae fanctpfped by the holy
soos bale cherkaze wert i maye retople
n CHAK Fels / in tho thing which pertayne
to God. Foz i dare not ipeane ok enx or tha
RG hinges


The Epittle


thenges toh ych Chic hach not wꝛought by
me / to make § Gentyls obediẽt / with woꝛde
and dede / in myghty tygnes a wonders / by e
power of the pzcte ot God: lo that from Je⸗
rufalem and the coltes rounde aboute vnto
egit Ihaue kylled all countres wyth

e gladde tydynges of Chat.

Sohaue A enkoꝛced my teife to preachep
Solpell / not where Chzitt was named / leſt
ſhuld haue bylt on another mannes koundã⸗
con: but as it is werten: Co whom he was
not ſpokẽ of / they ſhall le:a they that hearde
not / chall onderitande. Foꝛ thys caute J hae
ue bene ofte let to come onto vou: but now
leynge J haue no moare to do in thele coun⸗
tres / and allo haue bene delyꝛous many peas
res to come onto vou / when Jchall tane my


Gla liß. d.


toꝛner into Cpapne/ J wyll come to vou. °


truſt to ſe vou in my io zneꝝ /a to be bꝛought
on mp wape thytherwarde by pou / alter that
14 halie lomwhat entoped vou. i?
Now go J bnto Jerulalem / and minttter
vnto the fapnctessfoz it hath pleated them ol
Macedonia and Achata to make a certayne


2 fein 1 bouts 2 5 my welbeloued

es / whych i alt krute amonge
theordcpata Site hel wülchbelowed z
moche labour on vs. Salute Andzonpcus ¢ thattwas coueg
Junfamp colens / whych were pzelonerg werd es Sen.
me allo / whych are well taken amonge the
Apolkles / a were in Chꝛiſt befoze me. Erete
Amplias my belgued in the Love. Salute
Maban oure helper in Chzict / a Stachys my
beloued. Salute Appel appꝛoued in chꝛilt
Salute them which are of Ariſtobolus hou⸗
Wolde. Salute Herodion my kpntina. Grete
thE oF the houtholde of Harcyllis whych are
in the Lozde. Salute Criphena ac riphola /
which wemen drd labour in the Loꝛde. Sa⸗
luke the beloued Perlis which laboured 1102


cheinthe Loꝛde. Salute Rufus cholen ind


Lorde g bis mother a myne. Grete Alineri⸗
tuts Thlegon/ Herman / Patrobas / Permen
Kthe biethꝛen which are with them. Salute
Phllologüis a. Julta / Nereug 2 hs fyſter / a
Olimpha a all the ſapncteg which are wich
chem. Salute one another with an holy Rille
Che congregacions of Chꝛiſt lalute pou.


d bat fapne diſtribucion vpong pooze**fapnctes which


tes Bunde mare at Jerulalem. Ic hath pleated the bereir /
hte det be and chelrdetters ate cher Kop vf chewentpls
be made partetaners ol their ſpirituall thin⸗
ges / their dutie is to miniſter vnto thé in care
hall thinges. Phe A haue perkozmedthys / a
haue bꝛolight the thys krute kealed. J will co


Fance ih ee Barg dee Pi


aan Cure why A come / chat J thal come with

aboundatice of the bledpnge or d Gofpell of
Chult. Ibeleche pou bꝛethzẽ kor dure Loꝛde

GZetus Chnſtes lake / Foz Ploue of § fpzete/
that ve helpeme in my bukynes wyth youre
pꝛapers to God koꝛ me / chat mae be delp⸗
tered from them which beleue not in Jewzy
and that this my leruice / which hauẽ to Je
rulalem / maye be accepted ol the fapnctes/
BF maye come vnto pon with tope bp ö will
Of God / a mape wyth vou be rekrelched. Che
Godot peace be with vou: aᷣmen.
C chapter of talutaciös. pe warneth thé to beware
ot mens docte ine / z commendeth vnto them certapne
godly men / that were louers and bethꝛen in vᷣtrueth.


Che. rot. A hapter.


;Commende onto pou phebe dure


ſter which is a minitter ot p con⸗

regacton oF c enchꝛea that pe re:

ceaũe her in the Loꝛde as it becom

axdoapnetes Meth**faynctes/¢ that ve alyſt her in what
lobe actine, loeuer bulpnes che neadeth of youre apde.

Foz che hath luckered many / a mynie atone

kelke. Grete Pꝛilca a Aquila my heſpers in

Chik Jelu whych haue koꝛ my pte laxde

doune ther atone neckes canto which not z

only geue thankes / but alloß congregacton

ok F Gentyls. Lune wyle grete d cogregactd


tech zou. And Quartus a bꝛother laluteth
vou. The grace ok oure Loꝛde Felu C hꝛiſt be
wych pou all men.
Co him that is of power to ſtablicche vou
accozdinge to my golpell a pꝛeachinge of Fe
Las Chett in otteringe of the mpttery which
as Kept Cecret fence} woꝛlde beganne / but
. — Euvoypetie
at the comm ok the eueriattpnge
‘God/ to ltere bp dbedyence tothe fayth/ pus
Seb uche . Co the lame
God / which alone is wie / be pꝛaxte thozowe
Jelus Chꝛict koꝛ euer. Amen.
‘es esomreontaebum be bebe we B
Sen t ebe
was the minitterbntothe congte⸗
Aacion at Cenchꝛea. 8 che


e conmenbech the Corinthians - erhozteth them


ta be ok one mpude / and rebubeth the diuption p was


athionge chem. Wozdlp wyldamẽ is fot
ol God.


kellychippe ok his tonne; elus Chat oure
Lone. I beleche vou bzetyzen in the name o
dure Lozde Jelus hilt / that ve alllpeane
one thynge a p there be nodiftencion amõge
zou: but be pe znyt to gether in one mynde a
in one meanynge : t is hewed vnto mel mx


: buethyzen jot pourbythemeyataveot Shoute


there is na wploa nue inthe delppied croſſe


reachyngot |


he cvotte isthe
power ot


15
all the Gen⸗
tples / ao here /
and Mom. l. b.


cettenty:


OF cod is made pnto be toploonie / and allogrowe nee,
elnes /a Cancttfpinge and redẽ peion. tech hem top

Chat accompnge as itis weten hewhych f Gps le
tefoptethyfputde retopce che Kane. tyes ete
Citisnot eloquence and gien, which pe dorhe
28 tet
kn 1 Thrill but the plapne wordes of the teriptureyhyme te 1 i
Dep make mention of him and his cru. Putedntobing


che. in Chapter. 0


men: but in the power of God.
Chat we ſpeake ol / is wyldome amonge
ChE that are perlecte:not the wyldom ol thes
woglde / nether ok the rulars ot thys worde
which go to nought) but we tpeate ß wyl⸗
dome ol cod / which is in lecrete a 955 brd /
whtch God oꝛde yned beFoze tye worde / onto
oure gloꝛp:which wyldom none ok d rulars
ok this wozlde knewe. Fo had they tnowen
it / they wolde not haue crucikſed the Loꝛdol
gioꝛv. But as it is wyptten: Che eye hath not
Lene / x the earehath not hearde/netherhaue
entred into the hert al ma / che thinges which
cGodhath prepared Coz then that ou yym.
But Goo hath opened thé vnto vs by hys
Eppete.sfoz the lpꝛete learcheth all chynges /
pethe borome of Goddes lecretes. Foz what
man knoweth the thinges ofa man: laue the
Chelplelte Lpꝛete ok a man which is with inhim. Eu lo
van hngeh che thynges o€ Godkinoweth nom / bur the
eae ant 7 ele of od. And we haue notveceauedthe
man p is not re lpꝛete ol the woꝛlde: but the lpꝛete which cõ⸗
nued m HAE nie th ol God / kor to knowe the thynges that
khn pe renne ave geuen to ys of God / which thynges allo
Gch e oe we pealie not inehe connynge wodes OF
: mannes wyldome / but wich the connynge
woꝛdes ok the holy gholt / makyng Cpirieuall
compavifons of Ipzetuall thynges Kor the
haturali man perceaueth not the chinges of
the ſpꝛete ol od Foz they are but kolpchnes
buto him. ether can he perceaue them / be:
cauleheis petuallpexamined. But he that
Gate rl. d. ig lpꝛetuald / dilcuſech all thinges: yer he him
Bomptö him kelke is iudgedor nom ik. Fox who nno⸗
1 ~ . Meth the mynde oF the Lozd/other who tall
frifozme bint But we vnderſtande d mynde
ol Chꝛilt.
Cpcul rebuketh the ſertes and authores therok.
Tit le the Foundacion of hes church. Po ma ought
tu reiopce in men but in Bod,
¶ Che ii. Chapter.

4 d F coulde not fpeahe vnto vou
bzethzen as onto tpꝛetuall: but as
vnto carnall /euen as it were vnto

A babes in Chart. J gaue voumpike
to deinke a not meate. Fo ve then were not
ſtronge / no nether yet are. foꝛ ve are pet car⸗
‘Hall, As longe vereſꝝ as ther is amonge pow


of pou/ether og mans dape] Ho J tudge not panne vare
mne atone keike. J knowe noughe A my *
elke:


belle: pet am Jnot ch. rupiuftikted. Fe 18 th


To th Cant.


Lopoe that mogeth me. Therkoꝛe ludge nae
thenge betoze the tyme by tpi § Lo: de come /
which weil lyghten thynges that are hyd in
darcknes ano open the counfels ot p herteg.
sn it N man haue pzaple of
God. 5 .
here to ynges brethren z haue detcribed
Bin mene we perlön and Lpotlos/fo your.
Sabes that ye might learne Op vs p no man
counte ok hem lecke beyonde that. whypch is
aboue wett“: 0 not agapuſt ano⸗
ther Foz eng mans cälüke Foz who pzeferreth
che; Whathatk thou / chat thou haft not ree
ceaued: Ik thon haue receàued it / why retoy
felt thou as though thou haddeſt not reca⸗
uedit: Pow pe ate full: now pe are made
roch: pe rapgne as hyngcs without vs: and
woldẽ to God he dyd rargne / that we myght
raygne with you. .
Me thynterh that God hach cet forth vs
which are Apottles, foꝛ the iowek or all / as
it were men a poynted to deeth. $02 we are a
C gatynge ttocke vnto the worde / and ko ) An


be elle. fu ad tamen. tee are foies for Chzides


lane and pe are wyle thoꝛow Chi. e are
weahe a pe are ſtronge . ye are honoꝛable / a


3 v. b. we are belpiled. Euen vnto thig da ye we hon


el. ij. ger andthirſt / and are naked / and are bofiets
ted wich foltes and haue no certarnc dwele
lunge place / and laboure wozchynge wyth
ure atone handes. me are reupled / and pet
we bette. use are perlecuted / and ſufker it.
We are cuit pol ok / and we prare. de are
made ag it were the fplthynes of the woꝛdde /
oe ollcowꝛynge ol all thynges / euen onto
e.


Awypte not there thrnges to name peu:
but as mp beloued tonne s Fwatne pon. Fo;
though pe haue ten thoutai ind ructourg
in chick. yethaue ye not manp ath 18. In
Chit Fetu, Ahaue begotten you thozow d
Golpell. 1Wherkoze 1 ou to folowe
me For thts cauſe hae J rent onto pont Ci
motheus / which is nu dea re Conne and fapth
full in the Loꝛde , which thall put pou in te.
membzaunce ot my wapes whpch J haue in
Chik euẽ ag Iteache euery where inali ca
gregactons. Some lwell as though J wold
come no moze at po-:. But J wyll come to
Pout chostelg/vf God wpiltg wyf note / noe
Z wondes oF the which twell / but the power:
£2 the Ryngdome ok God is not in woꝛdes /
but in power. hat wyll ve: Shall A come
vnto vou with a rodde / 07 els in loue gin 8
dier oemenene⸗ 1


T
czmtted fornicacion with his mother in awe,
N che. v. Chapter.


rebue ih (HE fo: goitige to law e together be
whe Selben orm na. Wes ber
Che. vi. Chapter.


Dw are one oF you haupnge bree Co ga to late


fines with another go colawe brs
Nya ppbetthe wyckeb/¢ not rather vndet


thefapnetes? Eo pe not hnow that 5


hefapnetes wall tudge the worde? TF the
woglde halbe tudgedby pou: are pe notgooy
ynough to fudge mall trifies: hnowe pe not
bow 6 we hall judge? angels How moche
mos mape we fudge thynges that pertapne
to the lyfẽ: Ik ye haue luidgementes of woꝛl⸗
delp matteis / aue them which are delppled .
inthe congregacpon / a make them ludges. B
Chis A Cave to poure ame. 2 f ther vtterly
no ple manamonge vou: What notone at
all that can iusge betwene bꝛother and bꝛo
ther but one bother goeth tolawe with ang
ther: and that vnder the vnbeleuers: An

of


The Epiſtle


Now ‘therfore there is vtterlp a raute a⸗

mange pou/vecaule ye goto lawe one wyth
another, hr rather lütker ve not wzonge?

why rather Cuffce pe not voure ſelues to be
robded naye / ve pouze lelues do wꝛonge / a
robbe: a thar the bꝛethꝛẽ. Do pe not reiem⸗

bevbotw that the vnryghreous Malt not inhe

. ret the kyngaome ol God: Be not deceaued.

5 Foz nether romicatours / nether woꝛſhyp⸗
Chet s cuche pers of pmages / nether whoꝛmongers / nes
fac bauene wer weakling’ meter abuters oF tHe Celues

PALE hug. wuch ß mäbpnde / nethertheues / nether cos
uetcule / nether dꝛonckardeg / nether curled
tpeakers / nether pellers chall inheret the

Chyngoom ot God. and ſoche ware pe verelp:
Sanctifienges hut pe are wellhed: ze are lanctikieo: ve are
br kacke hs unden bp chename ofthe Londe Fetus /
cpr. bp the cpꝛece of ouve God.

; all chonges are lawkull onto me: but all
thynges ate not pꝛotptavle. J mape do ail
thpnges: but z wal be vzdught vonder nomas
power. Weates are ode vied Foz the beilp / a
the belip kozmeatcg: but God Wall deſtrope
both it a them. Let not the body be applxed
into fo¢npcacton / but onto the Loꝛde / a the
Londe vnto tse boop, Godhath rapled op the
Loꝛde / a ſhall rape vs bp by bis power.
ether remember ve not / that youre bodpes

hadpes ate ße members of Chill: Hail Jnow tare

Sethe auen Members oe Chick / gmake che che mem⸗

OF Like Vers ok anbarloe: od fozbyd,WDo pe nat vn⸗

75 derſtande that he whych coupleth hym lelle

with an harlot / is be come one body: Foꝛtwo

(fapth he) halbe one liehe. Buthe that is

fopned vnto the Lopde / is one lpꝛete.

Fie Cognicacpor.blifynnes pa mG dothe /
ave without the body. But he that is a Font:
catoꝛ / lynncth agapnſt his awne body. Ether
knowe ve not hom tliat voure bodyes are the
téple otthe holy gholt. wich is in you / who
ve haue ot E od / a how that ve are not youre
atone2soz pe are deatty bought. herkoꝛe
gloꝛitpe pe@edin youre bodpesandin youre
Fpzetes/fozthepare Goddes. L
H. Ol mariage virgynite a wyddowheade.

Ache. vij Chupter. He -
S cöcernyng the thynges wherol
pe wzote vnto nie: it is good fora


iet euerymanhauc his wyleꝛ let cuery wo⸗
man haue herhulbande. Let che ma geue vn
tothe wyte due beneuolence. Lynewyle alto
$ wpfe vntoß mã. Che wyle hath not power
oner her awne body: but the hulbande And
lykewyle p hulbãde hath not power ouer his
atone body: but the wre. opty dyawe not
pourefelues one krom another / except it be
Mb lent Foz a time / fo: to geue youre ſelues
to kalt enge z paper. And akterwarde come


Agapne to the fame thynge / let Satan tẽpt
Pou koꝛ poure incontinencie.

Chis J Cave ot fauoure and not ok com-
maundem̃ent.Foꝛgq wodde that all men were 2. eo burn
as I my tele am: but euery man hath hys afters. Ame


proper gytte otchod / one alter this manner / a


tothe luſt ok 8
fielſhe .


;


pt che be content topwell wich him / jet hem
not put her awayc. And ö won whtch bath


tofoche . God bath called vs in peace. Fo:


ee not men


.
wherin he was called. Artethou catleda Cer: Pear wel
uaunt- care not fo? it. euerthele tte pkthhou ts to oure e
betofio accoptig|
to ihe cem; der
azopmec d in tom
men welt her


ze oman ban
eech


&


we.


To the Loy


be wyle thou fennel not. Lpheluple pf a bits
d mende gin marp/ dhe lynnech not. Meuerth⸗ ede
koche chall haue trouble in their Heabe:buty
eu kauer Pour.
ei
1


Motte oe bed it not. For the talliö or this wozld goety


nee Fawape. 4 wolde haue pou without care. Che


ae tt .
Mtppatts,
but one God/ which is the father / ol twhd are B
all thrnges / and we in him: and one Loꝛde
Fetus Chiſt by whom are ail thynges / and
we bp ban But cuery man bath not know⸗
Teoge Foz fame ſuppole chat ther is an pdoll
vbatpllthis houre / and eate ag a thynge offe>
red vnto the poole / and lo their conletences
beynge vet weake / are dekyled. Meate mas
heth vs not acceptable to God Nether yr we c
eate / are we p better. ether yr we cate not /
pin ee iiss 15 10
But take hede that youre bertye caule
not the weak ko kaule For pr Come mant Jaan h
the which had knowledge / lxt at meate in ö retpect oe
pools temple / bal not the conſcience of Gt
wöhych is weake / be boldeneg to eate tholr wel
thpnges which ave ofeved to the poole? And D
fo thozow thy finowleage Mall 6 wealte bꝛo⸗
ther perilſhe koꝛ whom Chꝛiſt dyed. lo hen ve
lvnne lo agaynſt the bꝛethꝛẽ / a wounde their
wea ke contciences / ye ſonne agaynſt Chꝛilt
Wherkoꝛc r meate hurt my bzother / J wyll
eate no ftetihe whill the woꝛide ſtondeth / be⸗Tharpte wyat
cauſe J well noc hurte my bꝛother. e
Cloue fo: bearcth the thyngethat che mae do by ß
lawe. he exhoꝛteth (he to vunne on koꝛth in ihe courte
that they haue begonne.
¶ Che. tr. Chapter.
not an Upottiezamy not fre?
haute not dene cluts Chziſt oure ¥
Hogde? Are venot my wozle in the dne
. Lopoe? Ake be not an Spowic on, porte equatt ta
to other / yet amy vnto pou. C oz the leale of the bering the
mpue Apoctlechippe are pe in} Lor. U pne Mirite berech
aniwerto them that alle me /ig this. Baye Mere to brs
wenot potver to eateand to deencke ether hat dera
baue we not power toleadcabout a litter to bre by him ß
wyle / ag well ag other A poſtleg / and as the uertedas ied
bpethzen of the Lozde a Cephas: Cher onipstberApaties
J and Barnabas haue not power this todo?
Who goeth a warkare enytpme at his atone
coſt: who plantech a vyne xarde / z eatech not
ok ß krute : Who kedeth a flocke ¢ eatech not
ok the mylckc:
Sape Ithele thynges after the maner ok
men Sz kaythnot ß late the lame allo. Foz
it is wzyttẽ in p lawe ol Moles: Chou Male
not moſlell the mouth of p ore that treadeth


oute the come, Doth Godtake thought foz


oxen? Ether ſapth he it not all together fos
oure fakes: oz oure lakes no dolite thys is


*
wiytten: that he which enreth / ſyulde care in


tue


cher m heauẽ other inerth(as ther be odd
manp and lo: des many) vet vnto vs is there


hope: thathe which thꝛoſleth in hope / hund
bepattaher othishope. Ak werowe onto von 4g
ſpitituallthynges: is it ã great thynge vt we The pegchel
ee
leuge a ips
nora 1 cc vou /wherfoze neath
euerthelelle we haue not vled thys po-
wer: but ſuffre all tyynges lette we ——
under


T


hunder the Golpellok Chi. Bo pe noton:

derſtande how that they which nuriſter in d
temple / haur their tyndynge ok the temple?
And ther which warte at che aulter / are par
tabers with the aulter. Euen fo allo dyd the
‘Lozde oꝛdayne / that they which pꝛeache the
Solpel / chudde lpue of he Golpell. But 3

Chaus bled none okthele thynges.

Nether wzoce J thele thyngs that it wuld
be lo done vnto me. Foꝛ it were better koꝛ me
to dye / then that en man chuldtane this re⸗
ioylynge from me. Inthat J pꝛeache the gots
peil haue nothynge to relopce ok. Kor ne⸗
cellite is put ynto me. Wo is ĩt vnto me vt A
pꝛeache not the Golpell. FEF do it wa geod
wp haue a reward But pez do it agapnſt
my will / an office iscOmitted onto me What
Be p worcheth is my rewarde then? Terely that when J
OF due to ber peache the Golpell/F mate the Gotpell of
bid ewiek. Khril ere chat Amülale not mene auctoztee
* inthe Golpell. 2
Gor though J be fre trõ all men / vet haue
m̃ade my lelfe ſeruaunt vnto al men that
Doi mpght wynne the moo-wnto the Jeweg
e came as a qewe / to wynne the Jewes. Co
them that were vnder the lawe / was J made
as though J had bene vnder p lawe / to 02
nethem that were vnder the jawe. Tothk ?
were with out lawe / becam Fas though?
had bene with oute tae when z was nat
out lawe as pertepnynge to God / but onder
a lawe as concernpnge Chili (to wynne the
that were with oute lawe.co the weahe be⸗
came J a8 weane to wynne § wealke. zn all
unge J kaſſponed mylelle to all men / to
laue at the lett wape tome. Andthis J do for
the Golpels lane / that J myghte haue my
parte therof.

M Perteaue ve not how 5 ther which runne
in a courle / runne all / vet but one receaueth
the rewarde. So runne 5 ve mape obtapne.
Euerymanß pꝛouechmaſteriesabſtapneth
Tromällthynges. Andtheydo it to obtapnea

cozruptible eroune:but we to obtayne an vn
/copeuptible croune. Itherkoze lo runne / not
ag ut an oncertapne chinge. So kyght z / not
as one that beateth the aper: but tame my
body / and bzynge it into lubiecciõ / leſt after
pba pꝛeachedto other / J mplelée chuld
e boa cal aware. E.
. he kroreth them with the entamples of the olde
Aamentianderhorerh them toa Godly conuer⸗


che. x. Chapter.
AMechzen J wolde not thatye Huid
be ignoꝛaumt ok this / how oure
10540 hers were all ondeva cleude / a
de Atbeue Yall patfed thozow 9 lee / a were all
Grobi. if. d. ba ptiled vnder Moles / in the cloude z inthe


the olde Cecta


Grodtxlii e. lee: did all eate of one lpintuallmeate / and


he Epiltle


dyd all dyrne ne ok one maner ok tppzituall erat. rot:
duncke. And thepdzancke of that lpirituall Fro. rgb.
woche dba folowen hem! wöpch rorke was Pune fg g.
Chuck. I. Buemmany of thembad God Fumert miss
nodelpte . Foꝛ they were ouerthꝛowen inthe
twploernes. .

Chele are enfamples tous. E; we ſbulde S
not luiſt after euyllchynges / as they luted,
Hether be ye wospppers of mages as
were Come ok thé accoꝛdynge at it is wꝛpttẽ: 9
Che people fate doune to cate a dayneſſe / + erodl xh. 5
role vp agayne to plape. ether let bs cõmit
fosnicacio* as ome of jem conmmptted fo2- Steg
nicacion/¢ were dell roped in one dape. xxiij.
thoulande Nether lect vs tempte C hilt / as
Come ok them tempted and were dellroredok
ſerpẽtes. Hethernunmure peas lome of thé
murmured ¢ were deftroped ok z dellroper. C

All thete thynges happened vnto them for
enlamples / and were wipttẽ to put vs in re⸗
membꝛaunce/whoni the endes of the woꝛlde
are come vpon. noherkoꝛe let hum that thyn⸗
keth he ſtõdeth / take hede leaſt he fall. Cher
hath none other temptac von taken vou / bue
loche ag foloweth the nature of man. But
God is kaythlull / which ſhall not ſuller you
tobe tempted aboue youre dcrenght: but tall
in the myddes ok? temptacion make aware
to elcape out. Eiherkoꝛe mydeare beloucd


kle From woꝛchippenge of pools.


J {peate as onto them which haue dilere⸗
cion / ludge pe what J fape Js not the cuppe guy.
ol blellyng which we bleſſe / partanvnge off Bed.
ploude of Chill: is not the bꝛeed whyih we
bieake / partetak ynge ok the body ol Cyzitt?
becquiſe thatwelchol:gh we be many) pet are
one bꝛeed a one bodyẽ in as moche as we all
lire partakers ol one bꝛeed. Beholde Icrael
which walheth carnallp. Are not they which
eate E

nohat fave 3 then? thatthe pmage is eny
thinger oꝛthat it which is offered to bmages e
ig enp thynge? Nap but Jlave/that thele
thinges which the gentyls otter / ther offer to
Sonn none not tat ye gube haue ele
and wolde pe ute
thippe with the deupis. e can not dzincke ol
the cup ofthe Loꝛde / a of the cup of p deuyls

ecannot be $ parttahers ofthe Lopes ta nb
ie / and of the table ok deuelles. Ether ir all E cler


Whatloeueris folve inchemarcket / hat dern
eate / aalne no queſtions foꝛ cõſctence fake
Foꝛ the erthe is the Loses / a an that therin
is. It enx ol them which beleue not / a


He rebubeth them fo p abuſe and miloꝛdꝛe that they

bad aboute the Sacrament of the body and baude of

„ Meters wringeth the agapne to the falt inttitucton.
Che. xi. Chapter.


5 mende vou bzethzen that ve re⸗
2 ember me in all chynges / a nepe
e odinaunces euen as A delpue⸗


ted them to vou. J wolde ve knew
that Chzttis the heed ol hk mana che
— es —— heed. And God — —.—
. man pꝛapinge oz pꝛophefpinge
hauing enp thynge on his berd amet) bs
bed. Euerb wontan that pꝛayeth oz pꝛophe⸗
lleth bare bedded dichoneſtech bys heed. Foz
it is tuen all one and the very lame thynge /
Beuen as though che were bauen Ft tye wo⸗
man he not couered / let her alto be Goren. At
it be thame foz a woman to be ſyo me 07 Has
uen / let her couer her heed.

A man ought not to couer hit heed / toꝛ as
moche as he is the ymage and glozy ot God.
Che woman is the glozp of the man. Foꝛ the
man is not of the woman / hut the woman of
the mã Nether was the ma created kor p wo⸗
mä fahe:but the wo kor the manes fake,

C Fo; this caule ought che womi to haue; po⸗


Judge in youre lelues whether it be comip

Ba wom pave onto God bare heeded. G⸗

Els doth not nature teach you / z it is a hame
ko aman / vt he haue longe heere:a a pꝛayle


tos woman yk che haue longe here: Foꝛ her
heere isgeuẽ her to wfrker del gather
be anx man amõge vou that luſteth to trpue


lethym knowe p we haute no koche cuttome,
1 ether the congregac ro ae God. .


Chat which J delyuered vnto you 4 fe- .
ccaued or p L ode. For the L ode Fetus che He l
lame nyaht in which he was betra ped / cok e rx.

bzeed:¢ thanked ¢ bzalke / alarde Cake ve /

Cate peithig is mi body which is broken ko:

Fou. Chis do pe in the remembzance ofme he inſeitu⸗
Akter the fame maner he toe the cup / when cyon oF the
lupper was done lapinge: his do as ot ag Sacrament
ve deyncke it / in remembꝛaũce ot me. Foꝛ as

olten as ve Wall cate this bꝛeed / and dꝛincke

this cup he Mail ſbewe 5 Loꝛdes beeth / tyit

he come. IWherkoze wholoeuer half cate of

this bꝛeed / oꝛ dꝛynchee ol $ cup vnwoꝛthelp /

Walbe gyltve of the body ¢ bloudof F Lose,

Let a man therfoze examen hym leite / ¢ to

let hym cate of the bzeed a dzynehe ol p cup.

Foßhe that eateth ozdzynckieth bnwoꝛtheir /

Catetl a deinckethhps atone danmacps / bes

52. 50007 no dilterẽce of p Loꝛdes bo⸗

dp. Eo this caule manp are weake a fych
amonge du /a many llepe. Ik we haue truly

fudged oure felues/ weſhud not haue bene

tudged. But when we are iudged ol F Lone.

we are chaſtened / berauſe we chu nere

damned with the worde. Wherkoze mx J

thzen whẽ ye come to geder co eats / tarz ond
another. I any mã höger let him eate at ho⸗
me / p ve come not to getheubnto gondẽnacid.
Other thing will g let in oꝛder wheF come.
« wevtpte of the gpéted of the Ho y
HeaPeoktan’ copreng eme ee
vers ol a mans body lerue one another..


rags arta ae ink

= page en 5
(&) (9) |twolve not haue vou il 0 ley echte
elnowechat pe were chet that
J a Went poure toapes


tea
2
Pooles/cué as pe were ledde. Wherköze g bes
clare vnto yous no ma cpeakpng in d cPpete
ok God dellech Felus, Lilo no man can faye
e

yj 3
one pzete And zer atcbiteveces oF eg Bie e


ſtracrons / z pet but one Lozde. And thecate Due or,
druers 5


‘


diu ers maners of operactons/ a vet but one
God whych woꝛcketh all chynges that are
2. be optt wꝛought / in all creatures. che gytes ol p
oth tele arelpacte ate geuen ko cuccy man to pzolkpt the
geuen vs to do congregacton. Co one is geuen thoꝛowe the
fevupce to curelpirlte / the vtteraunce of wyldomie. Co ano⸗
nieſen der ts geuen the vtteraunce of knowledge
bp $ fame fpscte, Co another is geut farth⸗
Bbb the kame tpzete, Coanother the gyltes or
helpnge by the Came lpꝛite. Toa nother pee
wer to do miracles. Coanather prophetye,
Coa nother iudgement ol lpꝛetes. Co a no⸗
ther diuers tõges. Co a nother § interpꝛeta⸗
ston oftonges . Andthele all wozketh euen
che lelke fame Cpzete / deuldynge to euery mia
keuerall gyktes / euen as he well. E
‘92.48 the body is one / z hach many ment
bꝛes fand all d membzes of one body though
they be many / ret are but one body: euẽ lo is
Chriſt. Foz in one ipꝛete are we ali baptyled
to matic one body / whether we be gewes 07
Gentyls / whether we be bonde oz ke / a haue
all dꝛonche ok one (pzete.oz the body is not
Cone member but manr. It § tate klare: am
not the bande / therkoze Jam not of the body:
ishethertoze not ol the bony? And ve d care
fape/Jami not the eye:therkoꝛe g am not ol ß
bodpüshe cherkoze not ok b body: Ak all the
body were an eye / where were then the care?
Fi alyapere cata e: where were the fel
ſpnge: ee God dilpoled the mem⸗
bes euerp one oF thé in d body / at his atone
plealure. Ic they were alone méber: where
were the bodye? Mow are there many mem⸗
zes / pet but one body. And the eve can not
fave onto $ hand /A haue no neve of chemoꝛ
ye heed allo top fete /Ahauenonede of pou,


Nola. rl. a.
Gphe. lb.


ee rathera great deale thole membꝛes ol d
ody whych femeto be mot keble / are moſt
neceſlarp. And dps thole membꝛes of d body
which we th ynkẽ lest honeſt / yut we not ho
neſtie on. And oure pngodive parties haue
moſt beauty on. Foz ourehoneſt membres
nede it not. But God hath fo dilpoled z body /
Da hath geus moſthondure to s parte whych
laked /ieſt there chuld be eny dupte ind body:
but that the membzes Hui indilferẽtly care
one koz another. Ind yr one member lutter /
all luller with him: vr one member be had in
Honour / all membzes be glad allo.

Pe are $ body of Chit / amembzes one ol
another. And Godbhath allo ozdepned in the
cögregacion / tpꝛſt che Apoſtles / lecondarely
prophetes / thꝛidlp teachers / then them that
do mpꝛacles: after that / the gyltes ol hea⸗
Ipng helpers / gouerners / diuerlite of töges.

re all Apoſtles: Ire all Pꝛophetes: Are
all teachers: Are all doars ol mirack:? Haue
all the gyltes ol healynge: No all cpeane w
tonges: Do all interprete? Couet atter the


fi
pittle
en gyttt. And pet thewe A vnto pou mog
re excellent wape.
Cckhe nature and condicions of tour,
Che rij. Chapter. J.
OUugy 4 Spake with the tonges
en g angels /e pet had no loue/ A A
re euẽ as loundyng bꝛaſhe:oꝛ as
a tynklynge cymbal. And though
Auwa nnen Sede ie all W
gebe pk had! all kapth / a.
10 8 could mouemountapns oute oftheir es nacht
places / a vet had no loue / J were nothynge. areas le grog
And though J beſtowed all mpgoont to kede fabthe.
e pooze and though J gaue my bod euen
at A burned/¢ vet had no loue / it pꝛoketeth
me noͤthynge.
Loue lüflteth longe ¢ is cozteoug. Loue B
enureth not. Loue doth not krowardly/lwel⸗
leth not / dealech not dichoneſti / fekety not
her awne is not pꝛouoked to anger thunneth
not eur / reiopleih not in intquite: but re⸗
loyleth in the trueth / luſtreth all thyngs / be⸗
leueth all chingz/hoperh all things / enduretg
in all thyng’ Though ß pꝛophelpinge fayte/ C
other tonges call ceale / o Hnowledge ba⸗ 7 ge
nylſhe awape / vet loue falleth neuer awapc. conse: 0
Foz oure knowledge is vnperkect @ ove gange e


peculiar
Dpuerttyrcteeret
10 be nolo inte


Tut concern
tie olarmengef
autiificacion ant


tanges / except he expounde it allo: that the

congregacion maye haue editing. How be

then / v I come onto vou Cpeakrnge wrth

tonges: what call J pꝛokrt veu / ee
ea


10


ll te
‘at °fapett, Chou bevel


lexi


(J


ino. J. ab
Bene. ih.


Che woman
be bein in
feccyon to hy
hul band.


5


Rethren as pertayninge to p gol
A vell whych J preached vnto vou /
which ve haue allo accepted / and
inthe whych ve contynue / by the
which allo pe are laued: z do you to wit / al⸗
ter what maner J pꝛeached vnto vou / yk ye
kepe it / ercept ye haue beleued in bayne.

Fon fact ol ali I delpuered onto you that che tn vin
which J receaued how z Chyiſt dyed koꝛ our tppie of dure
kenne / agreynge ca the fcriptuves: and that set, ti
be was buried, 9 P beatoleagayne J chltde ge. F.


JE Dave accozdyng to the lenlptures: and that he Joh. . c. Act.


ext opened / and lo fatteth he doune on hys


Face/and woztippeth God / and lapch that


Godig wich dou indede.


wü lene of Ce phas / then of the twelue. At x . ph ih. ö.
ter that he was lene ol moo then tyue buns
dꝛed bꝛethꝛẽ attice: of which many remayne
onto thisdave / and many ate fallenaflepe,
Ware ee chen to ali

And lalt ofall be was tene or me / as otone
that was bone oute of due tyme. Foz J am 1B
Siete oF Alithe apoſtles which am not woz.
chpto be called an Apoſtſe, becaute à pertez
cutedthe congregacion ol God. But bythe
grace of God J am that J e

* whle


5
v |


which is in me / was not inbayne: Kbutz In
bozed moate aboundauntly then ther all /
ret not / hut 5 grace of God which is wrth
me. MWhetherit were J 02 they / lo we pꝛea⸗
che / and lo haue pe beleued.
af chat be pꝛeached how that he role
eluvveccion. krõ che deed how faye Come that are amonge
ou / that ther is no relurreccion of the decd?
Ik ther be no rylynge agayne ol 5 deed: then
is Chall not ryien. Ak chic be not rylen /
then is dure pꝛeachyng varne/ g pour kapth
18 allo in bapne. Ye and we are founde kalle
swptnettes of God, Fo we haue teſtikyedol
God / how that he rapled vp Ch whom he
sapled not vp / pe it beta that h deed ryle not
agayne oꝛ pk the deed ryle not agapne / then
is Ch nt not rylen agapne . Ik it be fo that
Chuiſt role not / then is youre faith in vayne /
K pet are ve in poure lynnes. Andtherto they
which are kallen a llepe in hut are peryl⸗
qed Ak in this lyfe only we beleue onchyttt/
then are we ofall men toe milerableſk.

But now is Chit rylen from the deed / a
is be come the fpatt krutes or them that llept.
Foꝛ by a man came deeth / and by ania came
the relurreccton ol the deed, Foꝛ as by Adam
all dye: euen fo by hut Wall all be made
alpuie / and euer man in his awne order. K
The kyꝛſt is Chailt / then they that are Chyts
fis athig compnge. Chen cometh tke ende /
when he hath delpuereb op the Kyngdome to
Godthe fates / whenhehath put doune all
rule / auctoꝛite a power. soz he mutt raygne
tpllhe haue put allbys enempes onder bys
D ete he laſt enempe that dalbe dettroved/
Ip deeth ; Foꝛ he hatt pit al thingvonder his
kete. But toben he fayih / all hel are put
vnder him it io mente chat he isexcepted /
which dyd put all thynges vnder him. hen
all thynges are tuboucd onto him: then wall
the lonne alto him leite be lubiect vntohim
that put thynges vnder him / that God maxe
be all in alfthynges. Ether els what do ther
whych are baprpfed ouer the deed / ye d deed
¥ Sade chte not at all. hy are theythen v baptiled
Somemzlpe oller thc dcede ye @ whp onde we in eoper⸗
that iaccheuak UP euerphoure⸗ Bp oure reiopflinge which J
thegen:rall EA haue in Chuiſtz elu oure l oꝛde / I dye day⸗


rclürrecti)


det men dert cus after che maner ot men / what auaunta⸗
Eaptind oer gech it me prthe deed ple not sgarne: Lett


deco mensgra⸗ Vs kate and dꝛyncke to moꝛow we chall dye.


y Cyguifpig’ "
pra th eel Ape decency aner N
bred men chulde wur 95 8 1
erte agapue. 115 enot. Noz ſome haue not p know


edge of God. J {peake this to poure rebuke.
But Lome ma will lape how arple 5 need?
with what bodyes come theyin: Chou ole /


Fit touted.
i


pa. tix . a.
elbe. ld


dan r.c.
e,
bre. ij .d.


that which chou loweſt is not quickened er⸗ wethn


tept it dye. Ind what loweſtthou? Chou fo:


ip . Chat J haue fought Wbeattes at Ephe⸗ ch.


The epittle


wwett notthat body 8 halbe: but bate come
Imeane ether ol pees oz ok fome other)
and Godgeueth it a bodr at his plealure / to
euerx feed a eueran bodr. :
. All ſiedhe is not one manner offleahe
but ther is one maner flelhe of mẽ / another
maner fhe of beactz / another maner fleühe
OF kydhes / a a nother or bytes. Cher are ce⸗
leſtiall boopes / a ther are bodies terreſtriall.
But the gloꝛ ot the celettiall is one /a $ glo
xx ok the kerreſtriall is another. Cher is one
nianer glozp o the tunne / a a nother glozp oF
the mone/¢ another glozp ok the ltarres. Taz
one (tavvedifferth fro a nother in giow. Do
is the relurreccion of deed. It is lowen in
coꝛruption / and rteth in incoitupcton. It is
low in diſponoure / a ryleth in honoure . It is
kowẽ in wealmet / and ryleih in power. It is
ſowe a natural bod / and rpleth a lpꝛetuall
body. Cher is a naturall bodxe and ther is a
lppetuall body: as it is wꝛpttẽ the froſte man
Adam was made a lpuinge foule: and § iat
Adam was made a quychenpng pete ow
be it / chat is nat lezit which is ſpirituall: but
which is natural / a then dae ig lpꝛe⸗
tuall. ECThe Eps man is of perth / erihxithe
feconde man is the Loꝛde from beaut. Asis G


fo Mall we beare the ymage ok the heuenty. bef
blonde can not


tp.Deeth wperetschr EEpnge: Bell pe v erin tube


deeth is lynne: e that cala


Cherkoꝛe

my deare bꝛethzen / and vnmo⸗

Tan dne are dne bau tae
02 ve ou

roure labour is not in vapne in the Lozbe, 3


them in remel te dk the ring
ü desen enen Zelte, un Et 4
bis pile with the lalntat ions of certayne lounge
ien.


ache. xpt. chapter, bial


e gatherynge Foz thelaynctes/
4 enen gegn


‘gg pall go with me. wrü come bote Pong


Ibaiſe gone ouer Pacedonta. For A will go
choꝛow out Macedonia. With pou parauen
ture I wyll abrde a whyle: oꝛ eis wynter / p

> pe mave bꝛꝛnge me on mp ware whrther⸗
doeuer J go. 1


Vet all poure bulpnes be done in loue.
Bꝛethꝛen / ye knowe the houle of Stepha


Dagehow ether areche pz trut:s Schals


and that they haue appoynted thé felues to
mynii ‘nto the tapnctes: 4 beteche pou f


vebeobedient unto koche & fo allchat beipe 4


and laboure J am gladde of the cõmynge of
tephana / Foztunatus and Achaicus: for
was lachynge on poure parte /
e
ures, Lol 208 ve
themthat are ſoche.
e ct gacpons o cia Talute vou.
Aquila and Pytteitta falute tn
Lone and lo doeth the regacton that is
incheir heute. Illß brethze grete vou. Grete


ithe trmede 5e nf another weed an hole Er. Che kalu⸗


ncurted
dadeg ¢


N


€
to


Sy


bat 115 tacion of me Paul wich mpne awne bande,
mt

* alone l
elame brex⸗
munpcate
arten


Irene man ioue notthe Loz Fetus Chꝛiſt /
‘the tame beanathema maranatha Che gra
ce OF the Loz Jelug chiſt be twit pou all.
My loue be w pou atl in Chzitt Jet Amen,
— 5


end ok §
———


The leconde epittle
of meme Baul SheAporte to the


Che fyrtte Chapter.


Aul an Apoſtle of Je-
lu Chk bythe wyn or God /
t and brother Cimotheus.
G  Untothecongregacton ok
God whichis at Cozinthum
8 with all the iapuctes wüörch
. LN t 15 g peace
dure father / and krom the Loꝛde
ſelus Chiſt. 5


Bletlen be God the father of oure Loꝛde
Jelus Chzitt the father or mercy / a the God
OF all comkorte / whych comforteth bs mall
dure tribulacton /in to moche 5 we are able
to comfozte thé which are troubled / in what⸗
foenertributacion it be, with the lame come
koste wherwith we oure felues are comkoꝛ⸗
ted oF God. Foz asthe affliccions of Chzitt
are plenteous in vs / cuen to is oure conſola⸗
ue . by cone.

er we be trouble fo;
lacion a laluacion :


8


Py


%


poure cites forse
which ſaluacig heweth N
ber power in ß pe foffve the lame attticctons,
wytch we alto lullre: o whether we be cölo⸗
ted For poute cOfolacton & faluacion: pet oub
bope is ſtedtact foz you / inas moche ad we
inom how 5 ag pe haue pour parte in atlic⸗
cions (lo Waitve be partaters of cöſolacion.
Bꝛethzen g wolde not haue pou igno ait
of dure trouble / whych happened onto bs in
lia. Fo we were greued oute of mealure
pal frength/Co greatip 6 we delpeared
euen oF lle. Allo we teceaued an an wer ol
deeth in dure felueg/a that becaute we ſhuſd
not put oure trult in our felues but incdod /
which vapleth Seed eo ipfe agayne /a which
delpuered bs krö lo great a deeth / and doth de
luer, On whom we trust / that vet here alter
be will denuer / by the beipe of poure pꝛaper
fozbs/6 by the meanes of many occalions /
tbankes mape be geuen or manp on oure bes
balke / koꝛ the grace geuen nto bs.
Oure reioplinge is this / the teltimonx ol
dure confcience that in eynglenes and godly c
purenes a not in flechly wi but bythe contciences
777 ol cod / we haue had oure conuertactd
I world /e Mott of all to pou warde. te
wßte no nother thinges vnto you / thend pe
reade a allo Enowe. Pee and g teutt ye Mail
kynde vs onto p ende / euẽ as ye haute fonde
bs partly to we are youre reſopfynge / euen
às pe are oures in the daxe ol d Wh, an .


ate


aMiceionsos
Pallydo of chit
are koche ſolſe⸗
o ag chziſt


Theil Epittle


Andin his conkldence was J mynbedthe

other tyme to haue come onto you / that pe

mpgbt baue had et one picaturemoare / c

to haue paſſed by vou into Macedoma / a to

haue come agayne oute of Macedonia onto

pou / andto haue bene ledde Cozth to Jewzye

2 warde of von. Phen | thus wyle was myn⸗

dedidtd J ble lpahtnes: D2 thinke Jcarnallr

thole thinges which Athinke; chat with me

anpee pee) and Huld be pee pee / nape nape. Godis kapth⸗

pu hape te Full:gfoz oure pꝛeachyng to vou / was not yee

biene Knabe Koschddls konne gelus chat which

Acne tapnig Was pecached amonge you bros ( hat ts to

of Sipttpnge of dare / byme and Hilaire and Simotheus)

* with wordes, was not vee and naye: but inhim it was pee:

Efoꝛ all the promiles*of God / in him are pee.

Fall prompe andave in him amen / onto the tatode or God

fen of de oer cho zowe ns, Sor tts God which ctablicched

S ne de ene e eee

te ich ha uenthe
4 erneſt of thetprete into cute bette


4 ere was come co Croada forChzittes -
Golpels tabe(g agreatdoze wasopenedo , he u.
tomeoeeheLojd)gbadnoted imp tpzcte/ truncate
beraule A Coundenot Titus mp brother but reer deren
toke my leaue okthem and went awa ye into the. b af p Ro.
Macedonia Chances ees God whych MAPICS dee n
alwares genet) vs he vſctoneim chnd“ ae
openech che lauer oc his knowledge bp vs in e ferret
euerp place. Fo we are onto God the twete ture npantfelh
Cayoute of Chit both amonge thé that are the meg ode
kaued g allo amonge the which pertähe. Co c Ante
the one parte are we 5 Taucur ok deech Ditto Seele ers
deeth. And ontop otherpart are we p lauour teaament and
ol lyke vnto lyle. And who is mete vnto thete (0 doth. S Au
k lple vnto ple. And who is niece bi fe {0 doth. 5.


pnges: Foz we arenot as manp are which 90 panne


pe ä chaüge with che wozde of Godibut piace, 5 f
cue out or purenes/4 bp the power of Hod / fun ung e
e in lyght of God / lo Cpeatie we in Chꝛiſt. more ok § tete


e prapteth the peachynge af the Setpell aboue p ing Grit.
Aueh ge, d e ne abe Satpel shoved gud San


Che. lh, Chapter allo both in bis


i wodes! Ca eerie preacher is dlltgent / he core


ough it be with the parel


leet;


That he hee


itethy nor the


3 . Paraphiar
% Be begrn toprapleoureteluesaeAD tise Au,
1 e eth the is abſence and e A
i PNRV/AaeRE Sede we as Coe ot cx/ofnatxaes 26
bim agapne with tones NAV Za Epvittles of recommendacion vnto puted og me »
Che i Chapter. 4. en 7 07 letters ot wecommnenda⸗ fee benen fa au
a Cali God koz a recopde onto my cron ktompou: Ye ate oure epiſtle wzttté in coocmueth vs) bi pn „
Ole) p toꝛ to fauer vou wyth ali dure hertes / whych is vnderſtande a reed ol 1 lach 5


cae not eny moare vnto Cozin porte ryghte


tum, Mot that webe lozdes duer ch An
our kapth:but helpers ok vourtope. Ko; bp
kayth ve ſtande. But J determined ihis in my th 4


baue Leper de Berge e Bie leva:


heupnes. Foz yt A make vou toꝛpe / whois it
at Gould mate ine urg fame whpch ie
is made lo by me? And wrote this fame God oF thys
epittlebnto pou/lett ve J came/ A chuldtaue *
heuynes ol thé / or whom J oughe to reiopce.
Cerkapnly this cõkidence haue z in vou al / x
myiope is tope of pou all. $02 in great at:
fliccton andanguelche of bert J wzote onto inh
You wich manyteaves:nottamate voutozy/ / f be Moonee C
bukthar pempghe perceaue the laue whrch i b brite
Ihaue / moſt Cpectatly onto vou. Bad: nyoute re nat tte
Fenyman hath cauled Cozotw /ehe fame eee: |
* pach not made me fozp/ but parteip: lect A br aye ett SSod/ehat ff eCpnges. an |
wulde greue you all. It is ſullicient vnto the Hs
tame ma that he was rebukedor many. Do
now contrarp wyte ye ought to to koꝛgeue
Bim and comfozte hum: leſt that fame pertone
Auld be lwalowed vp wrth ouer moche he⸗
upnes. Wherkoꝛe Jexhoꝛte vou ß loue maye
haue ttrenghe outer him. Fozthüs caule bere⸗ People lotipnge
ipdrd J arte ehatympale Hnowe $ proce ac eget ente he
ol pou / whether ve ſhulde be obedient in all ed pp: ole! 2 F
thrnges. Co whom pe koꝛgeue enpthynge / be? wh :
kozgeue alto. Arto bereiy yr v forgaue enp 8 Theken Coes
thynge)to wid A Eozgaue ik tor poure fakes ak 2 ne a
ec forgaue Ait incheroume of Chnilt / let Sa bree lite dedhe. In comoche chough we haue aud aue n
fa oulbprmentes. $918 he er EN Hower Chet atterchelleuhe, now lente heaven
e ¢ 1 — koꝛth now we him lo e bun.
5 i 5 . if. ony


5


The, i Epilkle


A new erta / eny man be in Chu / he is anewe creature.
n piimnepar oeeonenent eee
on 2 0
cthengz are ok God, which bach reconciled be
men derten vito hun Celfe vr Zefüs Chick, P hach geus
880d emai tn oe he atk peace ar nt
Thick is the Foz Gol n Cyst / and made agrem
Apoſtles olfpce betwene the woꝛld g him leite / ald imputed
54 dehnen 5b thele Cennes onto them. a bath cümteted
fo; varthat isto 6908 the pcachinge of the attonemẽt. Nom
dab ca be the athen are we mellengers in $ roume of Cyst
cvifice For dure euen as thoug4 od yd beleche you thoꝛow
Sere fue b. Do prape we vou in Chꝛiſtes ſtede / that
10 cbm erer e Deatone with God: kor he hach medehrn
thea fopenetacce’™ to be cynne Foz vs / which knew no lynne /
fice of tynne. that we by his nicanes wuld be that ryghte⸗


uh.
11 1125 pate he weinen which befoz¢ God is alowed,


kpuncg oF peo ran erhoztacion to receaue the worde or God with

pie. Aud Moin. channkalnecke and amendemenk of ipfce Che diligence

Dig WE Cpare of aul in theSolpell/and how he warneth heim co
‘Ye dance pn extlie the company of theepeben,

ne meheneaye, Che. vi. Chapter. *

a Gag helpers therfore exhoꝛtexou /
2 ee fut. rte er 1 in

APNE, Foz he J haue heard

2 e the ina tyme accepted: and in the
wu be krute⸗dape ok laluacton / haue J luckered the. Be⸗
leite do ecure Holde / now is § well accepted tyme: beholde
en not t8 chat dave offaluacion, Tete bs geuk
5 no man occatton of eupi / that in oure offyce
ve kounde no faute:but in all thynges let vs

behaue oure ſelues as the mpntiters orhod.

In moche paciẽce /in affitcctds/ in necel⸗

lytẽ / in angub dhe / in ctrypes / in pyeſonmẽt /

in ſtryke / in aboure / in watching / inkalſting /

. Cœint. ih. in purenes / in hnowledge / in ongetuckering
in kyndnd in p Holy goolt / in louẽ vnkayned /

7 in the wozdes of triieth / in d power of God /

Saen bythe armoure“ or rightewelnes of d ryght
Ache wende cebande @on he Ipéte/inYonoure @ dichondu⸗

Bod with hope re / in eulll vepozte a goodrepozte/ as delea⸗

Aoucifeare.s c. uers g vet true / as vnknowen / a vet nnowẽ:

Bante oes dyinge / e beholde we vet lyue: as chatte-

= 1 Boned/ Not hilled:as too wyng / ¢ pet alwaye

ma. xilj.


# Bayne) that


Cuinge no thyng / a pet potleding all thing’. L
O pe Cointhrans / oure mouth is open vn
to vou. Pure hert is made large: ye are in no
ſträpte in vs / but are ina trapte in poure
atone bowelles: J pꝛomvle vou tyke reward
tb me / as to mp childs. Det pour felues ther
koze at large / a Eheare not a ſtraũgers poke
with ß vnbrieuerg. Foz what kellpchip hath
ryahtewelnes with vnryghtewelnes
copanp bath light with darcknes nD!
gp copdehath Chztd wich Weltall Ether hat
pärtehath he that beleucth with an tnefoel?
how agreeth the tẽple of od with vmages!
Teuitl. xxbi. And pe are the temple ok that lyuinge God /
Ela. y. ag lapde God. J wylldwell amonge them 6


merp:as pooꝛe /a vetmakemanp riche:as ha


walche amonge them /e wylbe their od: g
they halbe my people, P2herfoze come out
tr amonge thé / and leparate poure Telues
(Capth the Lozbe ) and touche none vn cleane
thinge:fo wyll J recegue pou / and wilbe a fa
ther vnto pou / and ve cbalbe my lonnes and
daughters fapth the Loꝛde almyghtr.

e exhoꝛteth them to reteaue the promptes of aod
ant Werum: al fuentes kor —
obedien ee and loue towarde Paul. 8

Che vij. Chapter.

Eynge that we haue koche pꝛomy⸗
8 derelpbelcued / Jett vs clente
ure Celucs fd all Cilthpnes ofthe
eabe a (pete /a growe vp to full
holpnes in the keare ot God. Underſtand vs /
wehaue hurte no man: we haue coꝛrupte no
mam: we haue dekrauded no ma A cpeane not
this to condemne vou: fo: J hauẽ chewed vou
befoze that ve are in oure hertz to dye ¢Ipue
W vou. I am very bolde ouer vou / d reiopce
greati in vou. Jam kylled with comkozte €
amexceadpnge topoute in all dure trybula⸗
clons. Fos when we were come into Mace⸗ I
donta / oure fledhe had no reſt / but we were
troubled on euer lde. Outwarde was figh
tyng / inward was feare . Heuerthelede God

at comkozteth the abtecte / comkoꝛted vs
at the commpnge of Citus.

And not wich his comynge only: but allo
with the confolacton wherwith he was coms
kozted of pou. Foꝛhe tolde bs youre delpꝛe /
polite mournyng / poure keruẽt mynde tome
warde: lo that J now reiopce p moze. iWher⸗
Fore though Imade pou Cozy with a letter / C
repent not:though J dyd repel Foz¥ perceã⸗
ue that Brame epittie made pou toꝛp / chough
it were but koꝛ a cealon. Butz now vetopce/
not that ve were loꝛr / but that ve lo loꝛowed
that pe repented. N or ve cozowedgodlp 200 f . Betr.
in nothynge ve were hurte by vs. Foz godly .
lozowe cauteth repentaunce onto fajuacto
not to be repented ot: when woꝛldely lobow
cauleth deeth. .

Beholde what diligence thys godly toꝛo⸗
we that pe tone hath wꝛought in pou: pee it
caused pou to cleave youre lelues. It cauled
indignaciũ / it cauted teare / it cauled vetpze/
it cauled a feruent mynde / it cauled puniihe
ment: Foz in all wre l ve haue ſbewed pour
lelues that ve were cleare in that matter.
Wherkoze though Awzote vnto vou / A did it
not Foz hys caute that dyd hurte / nethertoꝛ
his caule that was hurte: but that oure good
mynde whych we haue towarde vou in the
ſvant or cod / myght appere vnto pon.

Cherkoꝛe me are cõtoꝛted / becaule pe are z
comkoꝛted:per and excedyngiy d moare ioped
we / toꝛ the tope that citus hadi be caule bys
pete was rekrelihed of pou all. Lam a

‘ fo2


bers wether in minddryns
5


SoS


Co the Lorinthyans,


foze/notnow a wamedthough J boſted my
kelle ta him of pou Sozag all thonges bone
preached vnta pou are true / uẽ lo is our
ſcinge / that g batted my lelke to Titus wd
all / tounde true. Ind now is his inwarde al⸗
€eccton moare aboundant towarde vou / whe
he remembꝛeth the obedience of euerp one ol
vou:how with keare and tremblyng ye recea⸗
ued him. reiopet that J maye bebolde ouer
vou in al thynges, t
che putteth the in cemembrauncetohelpe the poore.
Her egee ger tei a eee
. Che. vii. Chapter.
Do vou ta wit bzethzẽ᷑ / oF p grace
(a) of God which is geuen in the cons
Ne Riise egactons of Macrdonia how &
2 SV [the aboũdaunce of their reio lung
8/5 they ave tryed with moche tribulacpon,
And therto though ther were exceding pooze
zet haue they geuen excedynge richlx / that
in kynglenes Foꝛ to their powers (J beare re
cozde) pee and be pode their power / ther were
wyllynge of their awne recode / a pꝛaped vs
wich great inſtaũce / that we wolde receaue
their benelite / and tulſte them to be parteta⸗
e tothe täynctes.


And thys they dd / not as we loked faz: but
gaue their awne lelues kyꝛſt to the Loꝛde / a
alter vnto vs by the wyll of God: lo that we
coulde not but delyꝛze Titus to acomplpſhe
che lame heniuolence amonge vou allo / euẽ
as he had hegonne.

How therkoze / as pe are ryche in all pave
ties / in karth / in woꝛde / in knowledge / in all
kernentnes / a in loue / which ye haue to vs:
euẽ lo le that ye be plente dus inthis bentuo⸗
lence. Chis tape not as cõmaundynge: but
becaule other ave lo keruent / therkoꝛe pꝛoue
A vour loue / whether it be perkayt oꝛ no. Je
Enowe the lpberalitte of dure Lozde Fetus


* CHAE / which though be were ryche vet Foz


poure fakes be came pooze: that ze thoꝛowe
bis pouertie / myght be made ryche.
psc eee
vou /
ip-butaito kowella pee ago. lowcherdoße
pertonme the dede:that as ther was in vou a
redxnes to wyll / euen Co xe maye perloꝛme }
“eve of g which ve haue. or vecherbe Fez
Awpllenge mynde / it is accepted accoꝛdeng
fothatamanbath/ o not acco enge tothat


hehatb not. : ;

Itis not mymypnde that other be let at eas

ce / and ye bꝛought into combzatice: but that

ther be egalnes now at this time / that poure

aboundaũce ſuckertheir lackerz their abot
upplpe youre lache:


bad neuer
ace / z he chat gathered les


f mape ft e Hat they
i ualite agvepnge to ich is
Seat gaben wecken ——


ten had neuertheleſſe. Cha hes be vnto cd /.
which put in the bert olckitus the lame good,
mynde towarde vou. Kon be accepted the re⸗
que pee rather be was lo wen willing that
ol his awne accozde/came vnto you, 5
We haue ent with him 5 bꝛother / whole
laude is in the gofpeli thozow out alithe co:
gregactons:¢ not to oniꝝ / but is alto chofen
oF the cogregacrons to be a kelowe wich vs
in dure ioꝛneꝝ cocernynge this beniuolence
Stemmnictred byds onto the praple ofthe
Hopdeandto Here bp poure prompt mynde.
For this we extus / that enp man chulde re
buſte bs in this plenteousdittrybucyd that
is mynyſtred by vs / and therkoꝛe make pꝛo⸗
uplion Foz honeſt hinges / not in the light of
God oni / hut allo in the ryabt olmen.

We haue tent with che a bother or oures
whom we haue ofteepmes pꝛoued diliget in
many thinges / but now moche moze diligẽt.
Che greatẽ contidence which J haue in you /

th cauledme this to do: partely for Titus

jake which is my kelowe and helperas cone
cernyng pou / partely becaule of other which


are dure bzechzen and the mefiengers of the i


congregacpon / v the glozp of Chzitt. wher
foze (here onto them pꝛolle of youre loue / a
of the reioylynge that we haue ol vou / that
the congregacpons mape le it.
ter both he the lame that he dpb in
20 igs nene gane 2
J poze, Wiethzen at Jerulgiem.
Che. ir. Chapter.
If the minpllring to d caynctes it
un 5 for me to wzite abit 155
0 owe poureredp⸗ cer enn
e ee where f bod mp epee?
fel€e onto the of Macedonia /e fay bAchaia™ act. fc.
was pꝛepaxed a perea 205 zour feruẽtnes 8
ath pꝛouokedmanp Reuertheleſſe pet haue
kent there bzethzen / leſt oure reioplynge
duer you ſpulde be in bayne in this behalte /
andthat ye (as 3 baue ſapde) pꝛepare youre
Celues left parauenture vether or Macedo⸗
nia come with me / and kynde vou vnpꝛepa⸗
red / the bolt 6 J made in this matter / Huld
bea ame tobs. I cave not onto vou. *
i herkoze F thought itnecetlary to exhozte
che bzetyzen/to come before hande onto vou
£07 topzepate your good hlelünge peomitey
à foze / chat it mpaht be redy: fo that it bea
bletuinge, a not a dekraudynge. L his yet re
member /potwe that he whpch fowethtpeell/’
saucer Se a
An 0 leren
accogbengeas hebath purpoteniebis bent ote
not groubgyninty/onntnece tite: 03 God lo g
wetha cheartull geuer. .
ier in led due l
et / that ve in all chrnges bauinge futticfene
B. iti. onta


DL


sp titers


Thi. ij, Epiltle


onto all més he oure ſeluen of the nambze of 2/0; ta com
nergood won / as dülttk Me bath lpar pare dure les to the / which laude the ele
led abzgade and hath geuen to the pooze / his ues /nencrthelede whill thepmeature the fet
kightewelnes remapneth kor ener. He h Epn= ues Wihe lelues / compare the keueswyth
delh the tower feed/ all myniſt er bzeed oz the Leluesthey önderſtande nought. But we
Fode/ ¢ wall multipile poure feed d increace will not telopce aboue mealure: but acc oz⸗
the krutes of youre rightewemes Aecthat on ding tod quatitcofthe mealure which God
D all parties / pe mape be made rpche in all tyne bath didrtbuted vnto vs / a meature that res
glenes/ which cautery tho zom ös / cannes cherh euen to ou. Foz we ktretche not out
geuinge vnto God. dure felues beponde meafure as though we
Foz the office oe this mintitracton / not on⸗ had not reached onto vou Foz euẽto pou haue
Ip füpplpeth the nede derhe larnctes but als we come wich $ gotpell of Chait a we bok
Jo iß aboundaunt here in chat kor this laudg not oute Peegveb ol meaſure in other més.
Dieminitringe / thanzes myght be geuen to jabouts Fee zwe hope / when youre kapth is
God or mans / which pꝛayle God kor the obe⸗ incteafen amd ge you / to be magnified accoz
dlence ok youre profetipnge che Golpell ö dynge to dure mealure / moze largely/andto
Chritt/¢ fo poure linglenes in diſtributyng Peron gblpell in thole regtons which are
tothé c to all men: in theit pꝛapers to cod beponde pour not to retopte ol tal wh ED ay een A
for pou longe after vou, ko che aboundaunt is by another mans mealute zeparedallre erte Hite
Grace of Godgeuenonto pou. Chanckes be dy. Lethim e th retorte in ? Lorde. crn rede
‘nto God koꝛ his vnpekeabie gte. Fos he chat pꝛapteth him elke / s notalowed; bins notin
Spe touchery ehe le Apotles e defender his aye. bur he whom the Lide wapteth. date
ctoßitt and callpüge. 1 Cpaul(vnder luer aunce) chende th him ſelte and .
8 Che. x. chapter. dekendeth hisauctorite agayntt the falte prophetes.
¶ che. xi. chapter.
Obe to God / pe couſde lutte me a
e irtel in my kollwnes: pe ag prave
Hdu kor beare me Ko; amgeloug
eas OEE pon with godlp geloukp. FOF uge yemaren
ni coupled you to one m ſto make vou a cha⸗ 40 iyi a ot
e birgen to hlt. But J keare leſt as ö ter to the preacher


brite ß vemoſte / ma


*


2 / chat wyl J do to cut awape occallon
krom them which vetyze occallon / that
R

5


5


a
klel⸗-negor


be’ 15 ai


F as A beten with ropes,’ gert d


lufkeredthꝛpte Mipwpache . Hyght e dare
eae Zbemein the veprotthe fee.Fn ‘ome
2000 Olten in parels of waters: in pavels of
robbers in ieopardies of myne awne nacion
infeoperdies amonge the hethen Abaue be⸗


am weaße / then am
Jam made afole in bo


ne in pavels in cities in varels in wüldernes w


In parels in the lee / in parels amonge kalte
Uethzé/in iabourea trauapie / in watehinge
okten mhonger in thystt/ in fattiniges often
in colbe ¢in nakednt. And belpde p thinges
which outwardip happen önte mel am cb:
bed daity/a do care kor alc ch h.
fan e bene me eee
Imp hert burneth nat⸗ Ik A mutt ned
reiopce / will reioyce ol myne inkirmit es.
C cults taken pp into the thyrde heauen / heareth
wofdes not to be fpoken ok. .
he. rij. Chapter.
he ccd and father of oure N oꝛde
elus Chzict / whych is bletked for:
Yeuermope knoweth thatZ ive not.
— E Inthe cttie ot mamalcon / Pao:
uerner ok che people onder kynge Aretas /


; Aagor toatce tn he cite of ehewDamatcens):
Lae


lde haue caught me / and at a wyndo⸗
we! let doune in a barket thoꝛow the


alla scapenbes bandes


+


bp foz the fathers and mothers: but the
thers and mothers fo2 the chyldzen.

Iwill berp gladly beſkowe /g wilbe beſto⸗
wed fo youre louleg: though the me lo⸗
ue vou / f ĩelle 4 am loued agapne. But be it
HF grewed pou hot: meuerthelelle J was crak
ty stoke pou wagile. Bed A pill poubyenꝝ
okthem which Arent onto vou⸗ z delpzed Ci⸗
cus a with him A fenta brocher. Dy Citus
dekraudr pou of eny thynge? inalken we noc
& . like ſteppe:

gapne thinke pe p we excule oure lelues?
ne neee

20, t


¢


tan


ing Chis
minitter


*


rb b.


8 E
g


i


| Theepitle
But we do all hinges dearly betouent og ( The E ttle of :


poure edikpinge. Foz J keare leſt it come to
kaufächeae g mere Golbefoumeente Sapnct Paul the Apollle outa
the Galathpang,


loche as J wolbe:¢ J Waibe founde onto
dase, eee :
Sounde mage po enuping ante they were Fallen away
five /bacabecinges, whytpermnges ives | sul seul ether they re len nee
linges and dircoꝛdẽ. J teare leſt when come suigyeto bis fice ub ehe l bm
agayne/@od bzingẽ me lowe amãge vou) tobeequall with the bye Apotiens
Ie conſtraned to bewayle manp ot them .
which haue lynned all red / and haue not re⸗ 8
pented ot che vnclennes / foꝛntcacion ¢ wane
tannes which they haue committed.
ge prompleth to come vnto them and erhorteth che


fo to ode them ſelues th at he map tynde them pace
kecte / and of one mynde.


Che. riil. Chapter.


ow come Ithe thrzdtrme onto i
1 N pourinp meaty otto ge 2
ig EN ſaelles all euerpthinge ſtande. J x


ae gn Aru
dag J lade whe J was pꝛelen
Kauder re wirte q now beinge blen
tothe whpch in tyme pat haue Cenned, eto
all other: p pF J come agapne/F will not tpa
ze ſeynge that ve lene experpence of chiſt
which fpeaketh in me / which amonge vou is
not weake / but is mighty in pou. And verelx
though it came ot wea nes that he was cru⸗
cikled, vet ltueth be thozow the power ol oD
And we no dout are weake inhi: but we Wat
Hue whim / by h myght of God amõge vou.
Pꝛoue youre felues whether pe are in the
fapth 02 not. Examen poure awne ſelues:
knowe pe not poure atone lelueg how? Je⸗
Sus hilt ig in vou / except ve be cat awax⸗
es: Akruſt that pe Mall knowe 5 we are not
Cea awapes. Idecpze before od ß ve do no⸗
fe 19 7 w. nae K uich 1 pai
ut ö ve Muld dothat whi
bs — Eounted as leamde pertones, e cã do


e ee


che ty chapter. 4
Aut an apoltle not of 5
men / neither by man, but by ze came touge.
eus hngt andbv God the deter the arg
i EAS, father which rapteoiim From tes ee ine
Ozh ee dhethjk which log Pruner


= ok anp that wer
Lunto the congtegacpons of Galacia. befce yym.fe
Satt he tet ‘oon ath peace from God the ther bret
kather and From pure Lozbe Fetus Chalk, wy yt wees
which gaue him kelte to oute tynnes / to de⸗ yz cn putes of
luer bs from this pꝛelent euyll woꝛlde / tho. conticmacyon,
butto Bt rom La will 121 oute — — be eee 84 81
inge agayntt ötrueth / but oz g trueth. pꝛapſe fo2 euer and euer. Amen.
kent gab wür we are weake/@ ye dröge. 0 J maruaple that ye ate fo Cone turned kr f gef
Chys alto we wilſhe koꝛ / euen that ye were him that called vou in the grace ol Chart, vn colciece of
perfect. Cherkoze wzyte Ithele thingd being to another Golpeil: wü pch is nothynge eis » the Leg 25
Ablent / leit when J am pꝛelent / J chuld ple but that ther be tome which trouble yon / and ate
Hharpenesacconpnge tote powertohpch & itendeto perucrt the opel oF chuck. Hern by 25
‘Losde hath geuen nie / to edifpe/ a not tode⸗ uertheleſte though we oure lelues / oꝛ an an⸗ cies angmanye
rope. Fimallpe bꝛethꝛen fare ye well / be per gell From heuen / pꝛeache eny other Gorpell foive gfeies of
fect / be ol good comkoꝛte / be ok one mynde / pnto vort / chen that which we haue un 8
ipue in peace /a p God ot loues peace / ſhalbe vnto voni / holde hym aß a curled. As J ſayde B
with pou.@rete one another inan holp kiſe. Before) fo tape J now agapne / pt eny man
Daynctes Lo All § ca ynctt falute you. Ihe grace ot oure pꝛeache eny other thinge onto vou / then that
e Aeiegur. b.. Coane Telus Chait / a the loue ot God / a the pe haue receaued / holde hi accurled Pꝛeache
iellicſpippe ot dholy goot be w pou al amẽ. Aman doctrine or Gon’? Other go J about


topleate men- Ik Aſtodpedto pleate men /A
che ende ol the Ceconbe wütete the 4
orn


were not the feruaunt of Chꝛiſt. —

5 C. ns. ＋ I cevtifpe vou bꝛethꝛen / p the Go! ;
Sent from Philippos a citie in Ma- which was preached of me / was 2
ccdoni / b Citus and Lucas. manner o men/netherveceaut pine


To the Galathpans,


netter was z taughsitsbutvecesucntt by
Creuelacid of gcſus Coat Fo pr haue heard
ok mp conurrlacpon in tym pat / in the Je⸗
wes wapes how 6 Depondemeature J per⸗
lecuted the congregacton of God / ¢ (popled
Tt. and pzeuapled in the Jewesnupe / aboue
Many ot my copanions / which were of mine
atone naclon / and wag a moche moze teruẽt
mapntenerot theteanicions ol the elders.
t whẽ it pleated God / which leperatrd
me From my mothers wombe / called me by
bis grace / kor to declare his Conne by me / 74
dhuſd pꝛeache him amonge the bethen:immes
n Fleche aud dlatip i cõmened not ok matter w. flelſbe
Houde bere and blond / nether returned to Jerutalem to
hem whych were Apotties befoze me: but


went my wa pes into rabia / ⁊ came agayne
Poy


ito Damalco. Chen alter thze peare/F re⸗
turned to Jerulalem tole Peter / and abode
with hem To. dapes na nother ok the Apoſt⸗
les lawe laue James the Loꝛdes bꝛother.
Che thindes which J wꝛite / behodde / God
knoweth F ive not.
Akterthat J went into p coltes of Opzia
@ Cilicia: was vnknowen as touching my
perlon onto the congregacpons of Jewꝛre /
which were in Chi. But they hearde only
B he which perlecuted vs in tyme paſt / now
pꝛeacheth p kayth which bekoze he deſtroped.
Andther glozificd God on my behalfe. K
Che wulhttondeth Peter in the face / and proucth that
the lawe z circumtilpon are not necellary to laluacid.
¶ che. ij. Chapter.
Hen rij. pes res ther atter / wet
bpagapne to Jerulalẽ with Bare
yj [nabas and tobe wpch me citus
Naldo. Ve a went bp hy reuelacion
A cõmened with thẽ / ol the Golpel which F
pꝛeache amonge the Gentyls: but betwene


dure lelueg / with chem whpch were counted ke


chele / leſt it hund haue ine tpoushy that A
{ould runne oꝛ had runne in bapne. Alco Cĩ⸗
tus whpch was wyth me/ though be were a


Greke/ pet was not cõpelled to be circũciſed


@ that becaule of incõmers beynge kalle bꝛe⸗
then which came in amüge other to lpye out
dure libertie which we haue in Chzitt Fetus
aut is of char they mpabt binge bs into bondage Co
ler, zameg 00 we gaue no roume/no not Co2bfpace ol
an houre / as concerninge to be bꝛought into
lublecepon: and that becaute that the trueth
okthe Solpellmeght continue with pour,
DEAE which femed to be great (what they
B were intyme paticn it maketh no matter to
me. Codloketh on no mis perton)neuerthe⸗
: ; lelle they which femed great / added nothyn
bunte es, tome sSutcontrary wyte/ wben theplawe ß
Tontecumep, che opel oucr the pncir cäcicion was cont
. tip / miptted vnto me / as the Golpel ouer the rcir⸗
ies, Cunrctfpon was onto Peter:foz he that was


John.


0 actus cot. Andtherkoze we


mpgben in peter in the Tpolllercblppe dulr
the civeticityon) the lame was myahtpin me
amonge che Gentpis: and theréoze the thep
den an the grace that was geuẽ vnto me /
hen Janies / Cephas a John / whych lemed
ko be pplers / gaue to me and Barnabas the
rpahthandes and agreed with v8 we chuſd
piesche amänge the Pethen a thepamonge
the Jewes: warninge onipthat we quiere
mem̃ber the pooze which thinge alto was
diligenttodo. ay
nd when Peter was tome to Anttoche / Paul reluteth
Awuthlkode him tn the Face tor he was woz: ee in the
thp to be blamen.ffo2 ver that certarne came ·
krom James / heate wyth the wentyls. Bue
when thepwere come / he withdꝛue and tepa⸗
dae neee, the whpch were of
the ctrcumcilpon. Andthe other Jewes dite
femblediphewpre/iri Co moche that Barna⸗
bas was bzougyt into their fimulacts allo.
But when Cawe/p they went not the right,
wape alter the trueth of the Golpell /A tayoe
onto Peter befoze all men / y thou ernte
à Jewe [puck after the maner ok the Getyls
and not asdothe Jewes: why cauleſt thou
Gentyls to tpueas do the Fewes? We whic
are Jewes by nature / and hot lynners ol the
Gehtyls/ knowe chat a man ts not tuctikred
Dy tber dedes of che lawe: but be the fapth of z weder of the
aue betened or ee
Fetus c chenden be tatty ihe
bythe fapch of Chztttcandnot by the dedes ol
the late: becaule that by the dedes or plate
no fletMhe can be tuſtilped.
af then whyll we fee to be maderyghte⸗ a
weß by cht / we oure lelues are kounde lin
nes ee Chziſt p nuniſter of tyne?
God tos bd. Fo pt A bylde agayne p whych
Adectroped/ then maße Jmplelke a treatpas a a ass
Burd thopow thelawe/ambeedto the e
lawe: that q mightipue vnto God. Jam cru⸗ decd to the ine
elkxed with Chiiſt. g liue berelx. pet now not werthat i by >
{hatcas Ipucth in me. Foz 5 ple toh pch latve of leberte
dum ipuein the tielche Airs bpehe tapty en
OF the donne of od which louedme / z gaue am EN:
hym elke ko me. uebi not the grace of kom the {awe
God. Foz ve ryghlewelnes come of d lawe / oevondage my
chen hn dredin bayne, tse fom toe


ACBe vebuneth the onctedfattnette of the AFalathpans fürth s chee


‘evpuge We vnparkectneltrof he nwwere Declavety kberok.
aed eles chact we wot gence kn unghe. J


delcribed before peves/@ amonge
vou crucitped. Chis only woive Fearne of
pou /veceaued ye ötpꝛete byß dedes ofpiatwey ©
dels be peach rnge of the karth? Ate veto
; ie briwyle/


The Epiltle


dnwyle / chat atter ze haue begonne in che
ſpꝛete pe wolde nowe endein the llelhe?
Somanv thinges pe haue lulled in barne /
that be varne. iwhich miniſtred to pou the
Ipzete and wozheth mrzac les amonge pou
doch he it thoꝛo the dedes or the lawe / o by
peachpuge of the fapth? Euen as Bbraba
eleued God / and it was adcrpbento hem
kor ryghteweines wünderſtande therfoze that
cher whyeh are of faye / the fame are d chri⸗
dichok Abzaham. : ,
for the tcrppture lawe afozehande/ that
‘Sov woloetutkitye the Pethen thozow kapth
and therkore Mewen befoze hande gladtr⸗
bynges onto 4 bzaham: In the hall all nas
Bepo be bleued. So thenthey wü rch be of
J fapth/ are bletten wpth kapchkull Bb zabam.
* for a8 many as are under p dedes of the las
& tawe cut we / are vnder maledtccpor. Foꝛ it is witten
ii
bel


ne. xv. b.
0 5
Jacob, J. d.


bs bus, Fapty cartfed ts euery man that contynueth not in
eth. all thynges which are witten in the bone oF
che lawe / to kultpilchem. That no man is tus

l Aikredbpthe lawe in the lraht of God / is cut

To fayth) on dent. Los the tutte call ipueby karch aut.
Ae maketh thelatwe is not of lapthꝛbut the man that eulfil«
sofctence a rüe eth the thynges contapnedin the lawe (call
Alpue in them.) But bela bath delpuered vs
from the curle of che lawe / and was made a
Lia ente curled kon be. Fo} its waptten: cured is.
ales that ts euerp one that hangeth on kree/ chat § blel⸗
te swag punpl Fpnge of Abraham myght come on the Gen⸗
nnd CLapnee pts thozow gens chr / and that we might
$0 one fenebyeceaue J pio mes ofthe fyzete thozow farth
„Bꝛethzen F wyll (peaheatter the maner
» Of men. Chough it be but a mans teament
pet no man derppleth it, oz addeth enpthinge
cherto when it is once alowed. I. Co mee.
bam and hrs feed were che pꝛomples made.
e lapth not in the ſeedes as many: but in
N ee one / which is Chek. Chrs
Ikape / that the lawe whpch beganne after:

. warde. beponde. ih. C.. xrr. part Doty jot
dilnaull the teſtament / chat was conkermed.
aloze of God vnto chiſt ward / to make the
pꝛomes ok none effect Fos pkche Mberitatice
dome ok the lawe it cometh not of pꝛomes.
But cod gaue it onto Abzaham by womes

Wherloze then terueth the lawe : Che la⸗
we was added becaule of trantgrettyon (tpl,
he feed cameto whych Magee was made)
And it was oꝛdeyned by Angels in che hande
of a mediatoz. mediato: ig not a medtatoz
ok one. But God is one. Jg the lawe then
arndt the pzomes ok God? God fozbyd.

Wecpetnwe ge Powwbeit pr ther had bene s lawegeukwhich
nech nolit ür coulde haue geuen iple:then no douterygh⸗
bentencth kewelnes thulbbane rome byche lawe. But
deeth. go the tcrypture conchrded alt chenges bnder
fpnne thatthe pzomes bp the kapth oF Jerse
CHAR Huldbe geuen onto them that beles


te, K Before that favth caine / we were hepe
wut bponder the lawe / vnto Stavth which
uldacterwarde be declared.
Whertoze the lawe was oriré ſcolemaſter
vnto the txme of Chk) that we myght be
made ryghtewes by tapth. But akter that


larth is come / now are we na lẽger · onder ae ove nites


alcolematter.ffoz vc are all p connes of God alcolemaſterz
by he Fant red tpn abe dees Ken ee e
all ye that are baptriedchaue put on Ch ziſt. one nd are te
Komm is ther no Jewenether Gentyit:theris pounded in ge
nether bonde ner fre ther is nether man ner P:9loge to the
woman: but ve are all one thynge in Chit eae
‘Fetu.FE ve be Chzittes then are pe Abzahas l.
ed / and herzes by prontes, page


ters and gouer⸗
nern / duc pll the tyme appoßnted of p father.
2 fo we / as longe as we were chyldzen /
were in bondage vnder the oꝛwinaunces of B
topline. Kut whé the *tpme was fullcome/ , , une
God lent his lonne boꝛne pk a womũ a made kulicome,wuuß
bonde vnto the lawe / to redeme them wüpch yme of Tſpi⸗
were onder the latve:that we thozo w elecctd r comme
Ipabtreceaue the tnleritarince hat Delon en madean
eth bnto p naturall fonnes Becaule pe are: delpuercd vs
fonnes/God hath Cent the ipꝛete ot his fone fromthe bur⸗
into oure hertes / which cryeth Abba father, then therol.
i hertoꝛe now / thou art not a feruaft / but
a ſonne. Ik thou be the tonne / thou arte allo
the hepze or God thozow cht. K
Not withſtandynge / when ve knewe not
9 — ve dyd 10 980 tg Pia 91 10 by na⸗
ure were no Goodeg. But now feynge ve
finowe Godlper rather are knowen of Goo) Sedgatipe
How ig it p pe tourne agayne bnto § weake ceremontes
and bedgarlp cerimontes, wher bnto agayne
Fur der akretche to be in bondage? Yeobs
true Daves and monethes / a tynies / q peary
Jam in cave of youlekF haue bettowed on
vou laboure in vupne.
: Brethren q betech vou / be e as N am: fo

am as be ate. Ye haue not hurte nie at afl.

e nowe how thozow inkiemitpe of § klef⸗ufrmtfe em
we, J preached the Golpell onto pou at the temptactonare
Epott.Andmy temptacion which J tuffreaby abe ede
realon of mp klelche / ve delpyled not nether
abhoꝛred: but receaued me as an Angell ot
God: pre as Chait Jelus. How happy twee
repe then? for I beare you rẽcoꝛde that pete
had bene pottible ye wolde haue plucked out
poure atone eyes / and haue geuen ti tone.

Am A therkoze become youre enemye ‘bes
caule I tell pou the true. \ —
5


5
3


Tothe Galathyans,


. Cher are gelous ouer pou amitte,Yee/tuep
intende to exclude potty that ye hulp be ker⸗
uentto chem warde. It is good alwares to
be keruent. lo ic be in a good thenge / and not
only when Jam pꝛetent wich Por.

My lettellcheidzen (of whom Jtrauaple
In birth agapne/oneilt Curt be facſloned in
vou) wolde I were with pou now / s coulde

chaungemy dopce: fo: lande in a doute of
vou. Cell me pep decꝑꝛẽ to be vnderthe ia we
baue pe not hearde ot the lawe: I Foxit is
wuptten that Abꝛaham had two tonnes / the
one bya böde mapde d other by akte womã.
Yee and he whych was of che bonde woman
was bozne alter g klelche but he which was
ol the fte woman / was bozne by pꝛomes.
Which thynges betonen mpltery. Foz thele
wenen are twoteſtamentes / the one krom ß
mounte Spna / whych gendzeth onto bon⸗
dage / which is gar, Foz mounte Dyna is
called Agar in q cabia / and boꝛdzeth vpon p
cltie / which is now Jerulalem / and is in bon
dage with her chyldꝛen.

But Zerulalem / whych is aboue / is ere;
which is the mother or vs all. Foꝛ it is waite
reiopce thou baren / that beareſt no chyldꝛen
bycake fozth a crye / thou p traueleſt not. Foꝛ
the defolate hath many moo chyldꝛen then


2 Gewhecd hath anbutband.28zethpé we are/ peeve whieh’ tell pouberoze us Ahauetolhe be


alterthemaner of Alaac / chyldiẽ of borne

But as chenhe p was bozne carnallp / perle⸗

cuted int that was bozne lpiritually. Euen

lo is it nw. Neuerthelete what lapth the

ber eme awape the bonde woman and

her lone. Foz the tonne or the bonde woman

Wall not be hepze withe tonne ol z fre womã

bade e bzethzen we are not chplozen ofthe

onde woman: but or the fre woman. EK
¢ laboureth to deawe them awape From circum⸗
br u heurch then beuatapt bewerte the ſpꝛete
the ſieſh / and the krutes o them both.
Che. v. Chapter.

Cand kalt therkoze in the libertye

whcrwyth Chit bath made vs

1 re / and wꝛappe not poure telus
bt enerp SJagapne in the poke ol bondage.

to ande br Beholde 3 Paul tape vnto vou / that pr pe be

Circticited/Chztk Wall pꝛoltyt vou nothinge

at all. I tettifye agapne to eucry man which


ts circũmepled that he is bounde to kepe the ane


whole lawe. Ye are gone qupte from Chziſt

„ag manxpas are tuſtitied by che lawe / and are

— kalen from grace. e lone for / and hope ind

cpulte to be fuſkikted thozow kayth. For in ge

u Chyt / nether is circumcilion enythynge

och ether pet vnctrcũcilpon / but*fayth

: Thich) bp loue is mighty in operaciõ. Ye dys
ity ea wandere was a iet bntovou that de.

that God re, muld nat obey the trueth ; Euen that cofitelt
nge ch or vs. W lrtell le⸗


lrxix⸗
y +
uen doch leuen the whole lompe okdowr. 48
A hbaue truſt towarde you in the Loꝛde /
that ge woplt benone other wrle mynded. Pe
that troubleth yeu, tail beate his iudgeniet
whatloeuer he be. Bꝛethzen ve J pet pꝛeache
cirtumcikxomwhr do Athen per fiir perle⸗-
cucpon: For then had the offence whpch the (tates tre
trod geueth/ceaten . Jwolde to Gon there hege
were fepevated trom patr/which evouble eu e nc ache
Bzethzen pe were called into (tibertpe) oniyklaiche.
let not poure libertie be an occalion onto the
klelche / but in loue ſerue one another; Foꝛ al c
the zawe fs fulfpliedin one warde, whpeh is Joa
this:thou Walt loue thenencpabbouras thp pet h.
lelle. Ik ve byte a deuoure one another:tate
hede ſeſt pe be confumed one ok another. .
. J fave walne in the lpꝛete / and kulkyll . ‘
noßis luttes oF the lere Foz the kielche Petts oF,
luſteth tothe Lpaete / and the ſpꝛete e ·
contrary to the flelſpe. Chele are citvary one .
tothe other / ko that pe cannot do that whych 0
pe wolde. But and pt ve be ledde of $ cpꝛete / D ‘
chen are pe not vnder the lawe. Che dedes of
the klelſpe are manikeſt / whiche are thele / ad
uoutrpe/koꝛntcacton/vnclennes, wantänes gy Bye C04
Poolatrpe, wtchecrakt / hatred, baviaunce/ ch dedeo mae.
zele /twzath / ſtryke / ledicion / lectes / enupinge bech vo vnder
muureher/ozonhennes tan F forhe the che. of
bon in tyme pack / that they whych commpt
koche thonges tall not inherite / che kung⸗
bonie oF esod.26ut*the Crute oF the tpzetets, arena
lowe/tope peace/tonge futteinge aenelent eden ande
cones /fa pth fulnes mennes /temperiicye-we are not ne
gaynſt hiche ther is no lawe. Chey ß are der the damua⸗
Chelſtis / haue crucikped the llelſhe with the cis ok the we.
appetites and luſtes. E . —
fl a we Ipucin the pete Actos warhe inß
lpꝛete U et vs not be bapne glozious / pꝛouo⸗
Hinge one another / a enu inge one another.
erhoztech them to brotherly loue / z one to beare
Sh caters see ende ewe che to beware
ok circumellpon. 12
She. bj. chapter.
is Rethzen / pe eny man be fatten by
0 haunce into enp kaute: pe whych
9 ave Cpivituall,beipeto ten
end ere of metines:catpberinge Te 2 115 :
bete telt chou alto be tempted. Beare pe Cer? Hi
mothers burthé / and fo fulfpll the lawe
OF Chzict. FE enymanleme tobymtelte that
bets fomwmbat/when in dede he is nothinge /
che fame deceaueth bym kelke in hys pmagi⸗
naclon. Let eue ry ma prone hig atone woz⸗
ke / and chen chall he haue retopkynge in bys.
atone kelte and ot in another.gfoz euerym v
fail beare his atone burthen. mußt beten
Leehimehatistangte in che wozbe mint in hüt
ferontobym that teachech bym / in al good de oulye to the
e |
700 at


a


wags


8. Celſalo.


that all thinges othe the thinges which are


b been Ben on. ¶ The Epiltle of ag roa eras wb a


weth in che of thetpzete reepe Cyjitt-thacistolaye/in hem in wü
FC Saynet Paul the apoltle onto 13 Sexier eee


Cvopng⸗ Foz wijen the tyme is come / we ba! the Ephelpans. : Copoinge to p purpole of him which wo nech


were ie bo good pnt al men an Feae bic beigeben meh bn
ze tyne boa i é 3 le 10 { 4 a
Spectally ontotiens whrch ate of the hous a cet al ne thore felt a dns dae bebnto theprapte vtbis glory,
cholde of fayth. E : . ‘We ace o;dencd unt o good workes, The dominion or : In whom allo ve (after that ye hearde the
BVegolde how large a letter J haue write Thi worde oF trueth / Z meane g Sorpell of youre
bnto you wyth mynẽ atone hande. Is many faluacpon / wherin pe beleued were fealed


às del pꝛe with vt warde apperatice to pleale Say Sy : Swpth the bolytpzete of prontes whych is the


il lie / they con e pon tobe citcume 0 ernelt of oure inherptaunce / to redeme the
W hs i wae Pot not tude pee * 2 purchaled potedtion / and chat vnto the laude
fecuctO withthectone oe con d. Kopchepche § 8 . a 4 gebe g
kelues whrch areeten n hepe nocthe PY 3 8 > Wherloze euẽ latter that Ihearde of the
innebune uumicptt 5 \ i Fane to fapth which ve haue in d Loꝛde gelu / a loue

lelce. si 4 : ss/chere vnto all the Lapnctes)ceate not to geue thane
efoyce / but in d 95 laue to alt » kes £0? vou /niakinge mencion ot pou in my
7 f 2 Canctofped papers / Pthe god ok oute io de Fetus Chyilt

sbloudes ano che Father ofglozy might geue onto pout
che lpzete of twptoome/ and open to you the
knowledge or hem lelle / andivghten p eyes
of youre myndes that ze myght imowe what
that hope is / where onto he hath called you /
en I rpches of 6 done inheritatice


Gabe ryt chapel, >. me euen as ober he kaptedhumkrom the deed/ ger hem
Aul an apoltle of Jeſu Thi, all rule power and mpght and dominacpon


*
ea by the will ol GD”d. Laboue al names p are named / not in thys
5 re chere Wande onlp/butalioin the twoglbe to come:
obs Tat ephetus/andto which 8 ahath put allthynges onder bis kete / ahath
r beicue on Jelus Chi. i made hem abouc alt chynges che heed of the
2 . 6. Corn. a congregacpö whtch ts his body @the kuines


60 oure . pap ytd N Cpaulche wech che what maner of people they we
{ 0 0 fi 1 maner ok people re
ne 10 he gets bnd b hath ble led 5 0 2 thelr cöülerkion / what ber renown Chia.


; 5 Ache. h, Chapter.
e bieüenges in i 5 ol hach Needed altos


Grace be with ben G peace t. Peirtug,


e N *


lp thynges by Chꝛiſt / accoꝛdynge as 12 rh
en vs inbymbefoze the foundas 3 were deed in treatpatie and fynne/
ct 1 1 — 1 —— that we uld ite the which in teme patted pe wal


wnctes / and without blame befozebim/ \hed/accozopnge to 11 OF this


bef 020% 3B after the gouerner z ruleth in the

Ae Gh tube be dee onto tele ne Baer dene ange not worker ad
Feopdenge to ß pleature of bis will to ß papte 7 pa 1151 8
Of the glozpe oF his grace where with he hath . fone an fulfolleothe welt of te fete g


made bs accepted in the beloued. e at okthe E 1
whom we haue redẽption thoꝛow his neden re the MBE: naturally
„F 1 fore cb wath OF wrath /euen as welas other.
D E eee d ren,, a betouedbseuen
D OnE cies .) __ bBeoactoecin tt tos bpqeaceate ets
: ier of ns wo ac Hep e ira g Dees herben g been
e it declared whe ö trme wer — bs 'rttetoge beuenly thinges thozow
—.— alt. e


are


SE: The Epiltle To the Ephelyans. Tere,


. For whattoeucraman Totveth/that Hall he


Chun Fetus, foto cgewe intymes to coriid
the excedinge riches ok his grace / in kyndnes
to vs warde in Chꝛiſt Jelu. Fos by grate are


ve made fate thozowe kapth / and that not of,


Poure lelues. Fo it is the gyfte of Gd / and ae
commeth not orm denken en man Couloedachevotstee
bot yim lelfe. Foz weave his wozchmé Mypace blonde a5
created in chin Felu bnto** good wo lte made vs on thas
bntothe which God oꝛdeyned vs beFoze thatheve be lara ¢
we chulde walne in them. yey
Wherkoꝛe remẽber that pe beynge in tyme vo.
palled gẽtyis in the flelſhe / a were called vn⸗ C 5
Chrcutncifion to them which are called ccü- eth re
cifton ind fletthe; which circncition is maDesseee nen onder
brhandeß Remember Alape hat ve were ieee rte
At thar teme without Chzitt/¢ were reputed ene,
aliantes fd the comen weith of Akrael/ and ger eur ee,
were traungers from the>*tetamentes or ane
zomtes/ehadno hope / a were wich out Gods sews e
nthisworibe . Buknow in chin Feru/perercioare, an
whicha whyle agoo were karre ol / are made ne come to love
npebpthe blonde ok Chic. Al e ve
For he is oure peace / which hath made or vecye caute of
both ane, hach brohe doune P G wall ear gn ehen 1 e
was a ſtoppe bitwene vs / and hath allo put he adde For be
aware chororo bistietthe/? che caute or ha⸗ dee,
tred / chat is to 75 lawe oF cõmaunde⸗ ben, Bee
mentes contapned inthe lawe weytten fog wer her duc on


ch tomake oftwapne one newe mi in hum leile row Kol


fomalipnge peace: andto rrcöcile both onto eur he kae
Godin one body thozotw his cvotle and newe ud art an
batred therby:g cameand preached peace to alen sorb omer
vou which were a karre ol / A to them 5 were Aine
Nive. Foz ibo owpim ine beth nanegn open? von
nn —— Etfulibacyot,
. Sotnthertore lu e no Ian m 1 5
gers and koꝛeners: but cytelyns wy e ks Temple in the
karncteg and ok thehoutholne of God: gare Sunes ote,
bpit vpon thes*foundacid of the Apoctles gen eib
Prophetes / Jelus Chzlct bepnge the weed spire veruout
derer lone in udo auer bpidingd cou- men. omer,
ledto gether groweth onto anhoty kteple e her beter
the Kode un whom ye allo are bplttoge⸗ nem
W an habitacron fo2 God in che n
nete. cs
be Herweth the caute ok his pꝛetonment hetpreth the
ot to Fapnte be caule of his trouble / apet
bee hen moet bret. e
che. iti. Chapter.


2 „

Dz this caute à Paul am frp bone Jau was an

Ptr babe src banevene tap
ate hethe Ak pe haue hearde ned

N winifttaciS oF grace gcc r leer.


Dok
which 1 vou warde. Foz byreue⸗


lacton che wed he ch ys miſtery vnto me / as
wꝛote aboue in keawe woꝛdes / wherby wh
Fe pruerpentaee knowe myne vnderckädinge
mikeryolChzilt which nuſteryin tymeg
palled was opened onto the fonnes ol ates
i


ts now declared vnto his holy Apoſkles a
Pꝛophetes by the cpꝛete: at the wentyls
wulde be inheritouts alto / and ok the lame
bodp/and partetakers of bis promes that is
in Chziſt / by the meanes of $Gotpell / wher⸗


Bot g am madea miner / bytde gykte of the hath
Grace of Godgeuen vnto me thozow wor, 8


Binge ol his power.

Unto me the lett of all laynctes is thys
grace geuen / that I chulde pꝛeache amonge
the Gentpls z onfearchable rpches ok Chat
and to maße all men Ce what the kelpſbippe
ok the miſteryis / which From the beginning
ol the woꝛlde 1 hyd in God whrch
made all thinges thoꝛow Fetus Chꝛiſt / to d
intent / that now vnto the rulers and powers
in heauen mrght be knowen by the congre⸗
gacpon / the manpkolde wyldonie of God / ac
cozdynge tothe eternal purpole / whych he
purpoled in Chꝛiſt Jelu oure Loꝛde / by who
we are bolde to dꝛawe nye in 6 truſt / whych

we haue by kayth on hyin. E IPherkoze 3
C delpze that ye faynt not becaute or my tribu
laciqs £02 poure falt: which is voure pꝛaple.
os deat st ag
09) ev Of dure Lode Fetus Chat /whych i

bans t father auer all that is called father in heauẽ
16% here uioue f in erth / p he wolde graunt pou accoꝛdinge
tothe nepbour. ko the rpches ok hs gloꝛzpe / that ve mape be
tbphys ſpꝛete in the
vnderſkande al inner man that Chiict mape dwell in youre
Abinges, Navi hertes by kayth that ve beyinge roted and
dhe elne oe rolurded n loue / nyght beable to compꝛe⸗
Sent ihrer bende wich al karnckes tubat ts shat beat
che chat is gous d length / der pth a heythrand to knowe what
Hir in Lhak. is p loue of Chꝛiſt / which loue palleth know:
Sd love Wledge:that ve mpghe be fulkplled wyth all

A att V
n nepboure , Untohym that 18 able to do excedynge
a eden, boy 5 e eaten ato

n accoꝛdyngẽ to the power oheth in
Lewe band be pꝛaple in the congregacron by Fetus


dene mahl vo ktrengthed weth mn


Anoweeh how


Fare futhlhey Chꝛilt / chozowout all generacions krom tye
are toe hepee me to tyme Amen. K

when to de dil / CHeerhorteth them onto mekenes longe lufferynge /
pened with. Into lone and prace ruery one to ſerue and cdifieanos


r wit te that God hath geuen be.
ther with the gréte that God hath ee 8 88


A 2
ce kupng or in bondes toz


n true beltuer.


kayth.
‘Docospipine, be butone Lopde one fapth/ one bayepme:


Evite


one od and tatherol alt / which is about an
thoꝛow all / andin vou all. E

I Wanto euerp one of vs is geuen grace ac⸗
cogdinge to the mealure of p gytte of hut. Bom. rz.
Wherkoze he lapth: He is gone vp an bye and um
Tene captiuttic capsiue/anpbath geue fee
pltes dato men. Chat he alcended: what”
meaneth it / but that he alfo delcended kyꝛlt
into the Idweſt


wherwith one mynxſtreth to another (accozs
dinge to the operacxon as euerp parte 1 1
his meaſure) and increateth the bodr / vnto
edyrpinge ok it lelle in loue. x

W Chis {lave therfozeandeetifve in the
‘Logde that ve béce forth walkenot as other
Gentyis waike/ in banytye ol their mynde /
blinded in their onder! /bepnge ſtra⸗
ungers Ed the ipte whych is in God thoꝛow
the ignozancy that is in them becaute of $
blindnes ok their hertes / which beynge palt sanorunce 4
repentaunce / haue geuen them felues vnto saute of eur
waͤntannes to wozke all manner or bnclen⸗ Nurnke.


at the pdolateß
ok the Icrael.


Tothe Ephepans,


wlewnite State Let no kilthycõmunicacpon pꝛocede out
a deb lol route monde bühne which is good eo
„u. Tv. 4

4% Hieber He kälbebur withche heavers, Andgreuendt
Bichler u Asthe holy Cpzete ol God hy whö ve a re lealed
al e brech Bito Save ok redempciö. Let all bitternes/
ott 125°) Kalles and tozadh/ vogpnge ¢ cuttyD (peas
ppacn/asit fo. Hinge / be put awaxe from pou/wwith allmas
loweth here in lictoulneg. Be ve courteoule onc to another
hu Chiottr. and mercykull / koꝛgeurnge one another /
euen as God koꝛ Chꝛiſtes take koꝛgaue vou.


¶ He exboꝛteth them vnto loue / warneth them to be⸗
ware of vncteunes / coueteouſneſte / folych talnynge ¢
kalte doctryne: to be circuimſpecke / to a voyde dꝛonc⸗
kennelſe / o reioyſe and to be thannkull to warde od /
to ſubmptt the lelues one to another. he teacheth dow
wemen ipulde obepe their hucbandeg / how toupnglp
men ought to intrrate thetr wyucs.
he. v. Chapter.
exe tolowers of God as dere chil⸗
2¢/(¢ walke in loue cus as Chꝛilt
; Houcd b8/egaue bpm elke ko vs
i Nan ovieritng ¢ a lacrittce ofa lwete
ungodiy cʒmu lauer Co od. So ß koꝛnicacida all vnciẽnes
cnc ebe oꝛ coueteouſnes be not once named amonge
bende bon aß lt becometh laphcteg:nether fileypny
san MPH. nether kolplche talkenge /nether gettpnge
whichare not cõly:but rather geuinge orthã
kes. Foꝛ this pe tndowe that no whozmoger /
ony . ere 02 Coren — on /
: which i oꝛchypper oF ymageg hath enx
gane Thule inieettarice i pküngdome o€ Chztt @ of God
Let nom deceaue pou Wvapne wozdes.
Foz thoꝛow toche thynges cometh d wzath
of God bpon the chylozé of vnbelele. Be not
tyerfoze cõpanpons wyth thẽ. Je were once
dercknes / but are now iyght in che Loꝛde.
C ivalke ag chyldzen ol iyght. Foz the rute
ok the ippete is mall goodnes / ryahtewennes
Atrueth. E Accept that which 1s plealynge
tothe Lozde:¢ haue no kellpchippe wyth the
sgnornunce is Vnkrutkluil wozckeg OF dercknes: but rather
cute of cuell bebuke them. Koꝛ it is ame euen to name
chole thing whpch are done or thẽ in lecrete:
but all thinges / when chey are rebuned ok ß
light are manikeſt. Foꝛ whatloeuer is mani⸗
fet / chat tame is yah. Wherkoze he Lapth:
awake thou that flepett and donde bp front
deeth / and Ch zit (HAN geue the Iyght.
DD. Cale bede therkoze that pe walnte tircum
a acdempnge b Fpectipinot agkoleg but as wyle tedeminge
ume that is pe the tyine:toꝛ the da yes are eupll. Wherfoze/


inge.


se the tpk he pe not vnwple bitt vnderſtande what the


will of the Lozde it / z be not dꝛoncke d wine
wherln is ercelle hut be kulkplled wyth the
cpzete Cpeatinge onto poure Celucs in plal⸗
‘thes ahemm a Cpretuall Longes ingingee
making melodie to the Lon in youre bertes/
Sbitpagge chankes all apes for al thynges
nta Godehe kather / in dname of oure Lorde
8 5


Na


dil xe with all / when nede is: chat it mare ha


Zelus Chat:tubmypetyng poure telues one
ko another in the teare ol Wod. k
Wemen lubmxt voure felucs vnto poure 0
Stone hulbandes as nto the Lozde. oz the
hucbande ts the wrues herd euẽ ag Chin is
e heed ot che cagreggciö / & the lame ig the
aucoure of § body. Cherkoze as the cögre⸗
Gacton is in lubiecrid to Chat / newylẽ jet
Iwrues bein ſubieccton to their hulbandeg
in all thnges Hurbandes ioue poure wines
cut a8 Chiiſt loued the 5 regaciõ /a gaue
im Cette for it co lanctikpeit / a clented it in
*Fountayne of water thozow the worde / o
make it vntohym keike / a gloꝛtous cõgrega⸗
don with out por o: wepncſle oy enp Locke wan
thing:but hit mind be bolye without blame row kr eh ind
So dught men to loue their wyueg / as their wand agcosdig |
Atwne bodpes. He b loueth bys wyke / oueth a decor,
bum elke. Forno man euer pet hated hig aw⸗ made n hne
he llelcpe:but nozilcheth ee chericſweth it / euẽ
asthe Londe doch the congregacton. Foz we
are memberg of bis bod /ok bys llelche / a or
his bones. Foz thys caule hall a man leaue
Father a mother / and Wall continue with hig
wyke / a tna chalbe made ong fletthe. Chis 18
agkegt lecrete / but J Cpeahe bitwene Chill
and the congregacron. ertheleſle do ve
to that euerx one of vou loue his wife truelx
euen as him felfe And let the wife le that We
leare her hulbande. .
Cow children Gutdebehane Gabi toward their
fathers and mothe es: umewyle fathers tawarde their
chplozen:Socruati¢es towarde their maters/agapne
matters towarbe their lerununtes anerhortarpon to
the gpivituall battapt/ and what weapens Thiſten
nien chulde kyght with all,


\


Seruauntes be obediẽt bnto youre carnall
matters / wich keare a trẽblinge in finglenes

ol youre hertes / a onto Chailt: not with ler⸗

ulce in the exe ſyght / as men plealers:but ag

che leruaunteg of Chziſt / doyngethe wyll ol

God fromthe herte with good will / leruinge
l nd 3

atCoenct good e enpmandoeth that ry ha

ſhallhe receaueagapne of the Lozde / whe⸗ 5 eas
therhe be bonde oz fre. And ye matters / do de foral thinges
euen the tame thynges vnto them / puttynge 2
awapethpeateninges:and remember p eyen “


“poute matter allo is in heauẽ / nether is than


K. eme en in fegen 5 L

Iympbzethꝛen / be ſtronge inß Loꝛt

anmthe power ol bebe Paton the axe
moi


The epittle


moure of God / chat ye mape ande ſtedkaſt
agaynſt the crattyatautes of the deupll. Foz
we weeſtie not agaruſt llerche a bloud:but
agapntt rule / agapnde power / and agarnſt
woꝛldly rulers of the dercknes of this wozd
abs Cpzetuall wyckednes / to heauenly


. Cthrnges.
HMChearmnoue Foz this caule take vnto you che armoure
feof S00 Col of God / chat pe mape be abet retpe in the
We or aged cuplldave/e (tande pertect in allchinges.
ene wnt dere dae ben
old we zol ⸗
peu fapth) plate of ryghtewelnes / anhand nch thos
betonter nes es piepareb by Gotpell of peace Abou
dre at prä. e af All take to you che ſhelde of kayth / wherwith
ter ft hatheos ve maye quenche all the kyne dartes ol the
nen fete Cg wyelled. And take the helmet of laluacpyon /
Bund wboeh a alnd che kwearde of che lwete“wüpchls the
bopt wand oF worde OF God. E And piapean wapes wich
‘God which is all manner paper and fupplicacpon:ethat
b lwerde. de. in the lpꝛete:and watch therunto with all in⸗
ſtanee and lupplicacion ko; all fapnetes and
foꝛ me / that vtteraunce mape be geuen vnto
me / {att mape open my mouth bolvip/to
beter the fecretes or $ Golpell / wherol Jam
mellenger in bondes / ptherin J mae tpeake
trelp / aß it becommeth me to lpeake.
But that pe maye allo knowe what con:
Fam inand what 2 do / Cichicus my
Ddeare brother and fapthkull er in the
Lozde / ali ewe pou ofall chrnges / whõ
A ſent vnto you fog the lame purpole / that
ve myght ünowe what cate J Kande in
that he might cöfoꝛt voure herteg.
eace be with the bzethzen z
joue with kapth krom God
the Cather d krö the L070
Jelu &hꝛiſt. Grace be
with all them which
Joule oure Loꝛde
Fetus Chat
in purenes.
n.


ent from Nome vnto the eyhe
— kran ür ichen.


e T. 2


C The Epiſtle ok
Sayntt Paul the Apottle onto
the Pilihppiang.


He csbortett the toincreale in toue in ane wiege d et
perience of Godly thinges: make th mencié of his pee
fonment at Nome / is glad to heare Chyiſt pꝛeached / is
content ether to dye d lpue / and prapeth them to lede
a Godly conuer lation / to be af one mende / and to fear
no perlecucron.


N


2


‘peace From God oure kather / and trom the baue


ope Fetus chet.


A Athanke my Bod with an remẽbꝛadce


ok pol / all wapes in all my pꝛapers koz vou /
@ pꝛape with giadnes /becaute ot the fellow⸗
Wep wörch pehaue in the Solpell from che
ſpidt dape vnto now: and am furely certifped
bethis / that he whien beganne a good wozke
in pou / thal go foꝛthe with it vñtyll p dave
ol Fefus Chzitt as it becqnieth me lo to iud⸗
ge ok pout all;becautey haue vou in my herte
and haue you allo euerp one compantons of

ce with me / euen in mx bondes / as J de⸗

ende and ſtablylche the Golpell.


J iongeatter pon ail
in Fetus Chzit. A, G
loue mae increace mozeand mozein knows
ledge / and in all kealnge / that pempgbt ace
cepte thinges mot excellent / that ve t
conteence uty foe erer O76 fle
conlcpenc i

: ; 9 with the


‘ Ke,


2


with the krutes ot ryghtewelnes⸗ wi


kes come by Fetus Chait onto the gio zr and bi


. — bzethzen that
ve e bzethzen that my
It esis bappencaontathegreatc tute,
ringe of the Gorpell. Sothacmyp bandes in
Chak/aremanplett thozow out allthe tude
ball e in all other pia do moche
that many ok the bzethzen in che L oꝛde are
boldned thozow my bandes g dare moze lat
gelplpeake the worde wichoukkeare. Some
cher are which pꝛeache hilt ot enute ¢ fry
ke / and lonie of good twil. he one parte prea
eth Chzitt of ltrpe andnot purely/tuppos
linge to adde mange aduerlitie ko my bandes.
Che other parte or loue / becaule they le that


Jam Cet to dekendthe Golpell.


What then: So 6 Chat be pꝛeached all *thi


e
'ope: pe and
lowe — . — i this wall chaunce to
/ pure pꝛaper o mpniy=
firpng ok the lpꝛete ot Jelu Chziſt as J her⸗
telplote fo; /f hope that in nothing Ichalbe
athamed:but that with all conkidence / as all
pavesincymies paſt / euẽ fo now Chri hal
magnykred in my bod / whether tt be tho⸗
Low lyte / ox els deeth. soz Chit is to me
Ike (and deeth is to me auauntage.


Fit chaunce me to lxue in the lleſche / that difputt


Ss tome krutetul £02 to wozche / and what to
Greg. rrlih, e. pole I wote not (ais conſtrapned of two
L Facal. eri. b. J derpze to be lowledand to be wich
met i.. C halt / which chinge is belt of all. Meuerthe
delle to abyde tn} fletche is moare nedfull Foz
vou. Andchts am ure ok Achallabrde /
S with vou all citinuc/foz the kurtheraunce
And tope ok poure fapth that ze mape moare
aboundãtiy rciopce in Fetus Chꝛilt thoꝛow
me / by my comnunge to you agapne.

Only iet youre conucrfacpon be / as it be
D chmeth che gotpeit o£ Chzik:that whether F
come and ſe you / os eis be ablent / I mape pee
heare ok pou / p ve cõtinue in one ĩpꝛete / a in
one ſoule / labouringe as we do / to mapntar⸗
nethe tapth ol the gotpell a in nothinge kea⸗
ringe pourcaductlartes: which ig to thé a to⸗
hen of perdicton / a to you of lauacion andp
of Gob. fo7 onto pou ike dür ald bre
chuld beleue on Chattt:but alfo ative fo
lake / a haue euen the fame kyght whych

toptrue he lawe me haue and nowheare dme.


Alioue / pr cher be eny felltthippe of $
Alpꝛete / c ther be enr cõpallxon or


Tothe Philipppans, . rr.


merchfulkill my iope / p ve dꝛawe one waye /
aurnge one loue / beynge ok one accoꝛde / o
OF one mynde / chat nothinge be done thozow
Grpfeo2 bayne glory / but 6 in mekenes ot
mende cuccy mũ elteme other better then h
felfe/**andioke not euere man on his awne a oLootetiee
chinges but tuer man on öthinges of other Mpaure atone
nie. k. Lerthe fame mende bein pou § was hüten al
in Chniſt Jelii: which beinge in the ſhape of vnite.
Sod / a thought it not robberyto be equallid
God: Keuerthelede he made hym lelke of no
reputacton / a tone on him the hape of ater:
uafite/¢ became line bnto me / was kounde
in his aparell as a man. He hübledhym elle
@. became obedpent vnto the deeth / euen the v
deeth ok b crotie lherkoze God hach exal⸗ bebre. gib.
ted him / z geuẽ him a name aboue all nan:
at in § namie of Fetus wude eueryinee Ganz
owe / boche or thinges in heauẽ a thinges in Gia · iv. d.
erth a thingd onder che erth /a that al coges
Mhuide confelle that Jelus Chek is 5 Loꝛde
vnto the pꝛaple of God the kather. K
AWherkoze mpdeariy beloucd/ as pe haue
alwayes obe ed not whe ¥ was pꝛelent only
but now moche mozein mine ablence euẽ lo he g bebe in
worke out voure awne v rſaluaciö w keare ued from tpune
Gtrembling soz tts God which wozketh in thozowe tap
Tou boch will Kato ßbedeeue oF good wis © we e
Wo allchenge with out murmuryngeande here
nge /g pe mape be kauteleſle a pure /a naunt vntill ye
che Connes of od without rebuke im d mid⸗ come tothe cat
den of acronedand peruerfe nacpo:amonge c dean
which te 6 ve thencas egveesin 8 wonbe/ Was nge g
oldinge kalte the woꝛde oF ple / vnto mp re⸗ rite ‘quenchest
linge ib dave of Chzitt that J haue not agayne, aud ye
rũne in bayne nether haue labozed in vayne sede tobe pav
„ Peed though be offerea op opon the otte- onen
ringe alacrttyce oF poure fayth: J reiopce /g bre thoughe
reiopce with pou all. Foz the fame caute alto J ve onered 64.
relopce ve/andvetoyce ye with me. Ve male here
 trulk tn the Kode Fetus ko to rende r: Nuhr he
motheus thoztly' vnto pou hat J alfomaye fapth lane
be of good cofoste / when J knowe what cale he aneAvyoye
ve ſtande in. Foꝛg haue nd ma that is lo lpne red to Chung
mgnibed toni wc with fo pureatfeccyon che bens
caveth lo youve matters. Foz all otlev elie be totyers e
cheir awne / anot that whych is Jebus Chi: offer b oteyug
thes. Ve kno we the pꝛotte ok him how that 10 Soda vight
asa fonne with the father co with me betta: be be put co
ted he labour bpon the Galgen Pein Barrons
hope ko lende atfoneas 3 knowwe howit wyfl inhicy eying he
do wich me. J trult inthe Loꝛde / that J alto ab not / aa
np kelke Mall come (hoztly. : that be rug ta
“- ¥ fuppolen tt necetiary to fende brotheu 3a Pateto Ine
Spaphzobitus ditto ou mpcõpanpon itt a+ hy of ode
boute ¢ felowe loudier / voure Apottel emp
mynpſter at mypnenes, Fozhe longed after
vou / & was full of heuxneg / becaute that ye
badhearde tape 6 he chulde be fyctic. Anda
doute he was licke / z E nxe vnto deeth. ul
hii, Gow


| The Epillle f
God had merey on him: not on him one / put other wyle mynded /A pꝛape God open euen


on me allo let J chuld haue loꝛowe vpõ lo⸗
rowe. I lent hum tnerkoꝛe the diligentliar / ß


whẽ ve Muld le him pe might reiopce againe
and J mpaht be the lelle Cozowfull Receaue
him thevéoze in the Lozde with all gladnes / a
make moche ok koche: becaule that Foz the
woꝛke ol Chꝛiſt he wẽt lo karre / that he was
nye onto deeth / and regarded not bys lle to
kulkyll that ceruyce whych was lackynge on
route parte towarde me, ‘
Che warneth them to beware of kalle techers whom
he calleth dogges z enempes of Chiſt and reproucth
mannes awne rpghtcoutnes,,
be. ih. Chapter. 0
Oꝛeouer / mybzethꝛẽ reiopce in d


ges / beware of euyl workers. Beware ok dil

We worship, Lelnclon. Foz we are circlicilion which; woz⸗
Peqodin cpin chip Godin zlpete / a rclopce in Chin Felts
te throw faith a haueno confidence in the wehe telt q
G loner we re- haue wherok J myght reiopce in the fletthe,
buch LEME FE enpother mé thynbeeh that he bath wher
59 ö trug not ok he myght truſt in the fletſheanoche moare


in ore wonkes J: circumcipedthe eyght daye/ ok the kinred Licht


Thrice ontye ts oF Ilrael / ot p tribe of Bemamin / an Ebzue
dure ase, borne of the Ebzues:as concerningeß lawe /
Teonte Quread PYaxilape and as concerninge feruetneß /
are forgeus bs. J perlecuted the congregacion / and as tou⸗
Ann for prstane chinge the rightewernes which is in d lawe /
pure good wor g was vnrebukable.
uad art Aces.” Buc che ehinges that were bauntage onto
eile were Bnie / counted tolte Foz Chzittes lane. Yee!
pamuable fo: p thynne all thinges but loſſe Foz that excellẽt
{pre that to in tnowlenges late of Chztt Jelu my Loꝛde.
tem. Foz whom A haue counted all thinge iolke /
Dotudge the but donge / that J myght winne
Chzilt / and myght be kounde in hym / not ha⸗
ninge myneawne ryghtewernes which is ol
the ſawe: but that whych lpꝛyngeth ok the
fapth which is in Chiſt. I meane the righte
welnes which cometh of God thoꝛow kayth
in knowinge him and the vertueok the relur
„Preth) we reccion / and the kellowchtppe of his palliös
That oe web ht Jmpaht be cord mabie bntotis deeth)
wyll ire with z vyeny meanes I myght attavne vnto the
hem. relurreccton ok the deed.
C Notas though J hadall redyattapned to
t / ether were all redy parkect: but J kolowe /
pr that Imaye cõpꝛehende p wherin J am
cöpꝛehended ok Chick Zelu. Bꝛethzen J cots
‘ag lobe not onte not my felfe that J haue gottense:but one
ide wannes 5 J thinge A lape: Jkoꝛget p whych is behinde
baue done bute ſeretche mp lelke onto that which is before
sone lacke Fg Peace onto that marke apopnted to ob-
eben. . tarnerhe rewarde of the hye callinge at 00


be perkect / be thus wyle mynded:e pF pe be


in Chꝛiſt Jetu. Let vs therkoꝛe as manp as fuſlre


this vnto pou, Peuerthelelle in p wher onto
we are come / let vs pꝛocede by one rule / that
we mare be of one accoꝛde.
I Bꝛethzẽ be Folowers ok me / z lone on the
which wa lke euẽ lo / as pe haue vs ko an en:
ſample. Foz many walke (of whom J haue
tolde pou orten a nom tell vou we pingejthat
thepare the enempes ok the croſle of Ch it /
whole ende is damnacyõ whole God is their
belp /a whole glozy is totheir ſbame/ whych
ave twozlbelp mipnoed. But oure conurertacto n te dn,
isin beaueh/ from whence we lone kor ata: nertecpon we
uecut / euẽ p L ode Fetus Cy2ttt / which Mal watve ite hun
coaunge oure vyle bodyes / that they maveinglorye,
be fadioned lykẽ vnto his gloꝛpous body / ac⸗
coꝛdyng tothe woꝛkinge / wherby he is able
to lubdue all thinges vnto him lelſe. &

Uuẽteth certapne of themperhoztet to be
Spe — benen of
the protistpomp cher made fo2 him be pnge in prelone

he. iiij. Chapter.


pape Euodias / a beleche Sins
iches p they be ot one accozde in the Loꝛde.
Yee and J beleche the fapthfull ꝛockkelowe /
helpe the wemen which jaboꝛed w me in the
golpell / z with Clemẽt allo / z with other my
labour felowes / whole names are inß **bos
ke of lyfe. K Retopce in? Lozde alwape e 25 Okchrbot
agayneꝗ Cave reiopce. Let youre foftenes be of ite is (pone
knowen bnto all men. Che Lozde is euen at nd Put
bande. Be not carefull: be in all eypnges ®
fhewe poure peticiõ vnto Godin pꝛaxer and
lupplicaciõ w geuinge of that, ands peace
of God which palleth al vnderſlädinge kepe
poure hertes andmyndes in Chek Jelu. E
Furthermore bꝛethzẽ / whatloeuerthinges
are true / whattoeuer thingtarehonet what
loeuer thinges are iuſt / whatloeuer thinges
are pure / whatloeuerthinges pertapneto lo⸗
ue / whatloeuer thingy ave ok honeſt revoꝛte:
yk ther be eny vertuolis thinge / yk ther be enp
laudable thinge / thole lame haue pe in pour
mynde / wöpch ve haue both learned e recea⸗
ued / herde a allo lene in me: thole things do /
g the Godot peace halbe z vou. Ireiopce
in the Lode great that now at the lack ve
are reupued agagieto care lo me / in that €
wherin pe were alfo carefull) but ye lacked
opoztunite . cpeake not becaule of necetitie
For 4 haue learned in whattoriter eckate 3
am / cherwyth to be content. J can both call
doune my lelte / I cH allo excede.Euery whee
re a mall chynges J amin tructed/ both to
be full ¢ to behongr / ko haue plenty and to
ne toa aa A
elpe ol Ch 21 rengthneth me.
2 swith fandgnge


ndinge ve haue wen done / d re bare
parte with ne in my trihulacion.

YeokPhitippog hnowe that in the begin⸗
hinge of the Golpel / when A departed kom
Macedonia no congregacpon vate parte W
me as cücerninge geuingee rectauinge / but
pe onlx. Fos when F was inchedalonica / pe
gp Went once K attermärde agapne onto my Nee
des mot p Zoelyre gprees:but Adelpze aboũ⸗
dant krute on youre parte. J receaued al /s
baue pientpe. J was euen kplled alter that J
bad receaucd of G paphzoditug /h whrch ca⸗
me front voii / an odour p cmelleth fweee/ a
| @rechixe.e, *lactifice accepted and plelaũt to God. My
Bantry. God fulkilt all youre nedes thoꝛow his glozt
e bus riches in Jelu Chꝛiſt. wnto God e dure
father be prapte kozeuermoꝛe. Amé Salute
all the fapnetes in Chait Jelu. Che bzethzen
which are wme / grete pou, All Blapnctes ſa
lute vou: a moſt of all they which are of hem
perourg houcholde. Che grace of oure Loꝛde

Jelu Chik be with vou all. Amen.

Sent from Nome by Epaphzoditus.


¶ The Epiſtle of


Sapnct Paul the Apoltl
. pn oli aah ie


he geueth thankes vnto Lod fo: thepze fapthAoue
ever ogee ecg ty

ipugdome 1
he ts the heede of — en


D


3 Kelleuem hit.
dermalen et Grace be with you and peace from God


lloſſyans.


1 %

e xx

dure father / a from the Loide Jelu Chꝛiſt. yous peace. 10
We geue thanles to Gad p kather of oure ie moe ar d

Lord Fetus Chzitt/alwayes pzapenge for Wonne. b.

vou fence we hearde ol vourc*fayih whpch s nöohere he

ve haue in Cheit z eli / and ok p joue why. h Med oF Thi.

de beare toall fagnctes kon che hopes lune lo hebel

which is lade vp in ſtoꝛe foz you in heuz / o *

which bope pe haue herde befoze bythe true

wonde of § Golpelt which is come onto vou

euen as it is into all the worde / and is kru⸗

tekull / as itis amonge pou Eto the tpꝛſt dae

in the which ve herde of it / and had experiẽcc 26

in the grace of God in the trueth / as ve tears

ned of Epaphꝛa oure deare lelowe leruaunt /

which is Fo2 vou a faithful minitter of chꝛiſt

whpch allo declared onto bs poure lore

which 95 haue in the lpꝛete.
A Foꝛthts caule we allo / fence the dave

we herde of it / haue not cealyd pꝛayinge fog

pou sanddelyringe that ye mygut be Euléitica

with the knowledge ok hig will n all wildo⸗

mea ſpzetuall vnderſtandrge / chat ve might

Walle worthy of the Lozve in ail thonges

pleale bepnge frutéult in all god woes a

encrealyngẽ in the uno wiedge ol God / lrẽ

then wych all mygut / thozowe hys gloziou

power / vnto all pactence a longe luteringe

with fopfulnes F geuinge thantes onto the

father which bath made bs mate to be parta

Kets of the ‘nhevitaunce of laynctes in light.
aphich bath deltuered vs krö the power of

derknes and hath trantlated vs into dyng

dome of bys dere ſone / in whom wehaue res 2

Demvcton thozow bps blond that is tolape / Dur redemetd


forgetiencs |,


the koꝛgeues of lynnes whych is the vmage ar 0
ofthe inulcpble God, zt begottk ok allcrea . rns.
fures. Fos byhim were all thynges created /
thinges that are in heuen / achinges that are
tn evth:thinges bilpble & thinges inuifpbie/
whether they be mateſte oz loꝛdſhippe / ether
rule 02 power. All thinggare creatyd byhim /
and in hym and he ts befoze all thynges,¢ in
him all thinges haue their beynge.
Andbe is the heed ol the bob p / that is to
wit of the congregacté:be ts the beginnynge eis the fun
and kpaſt begotten ok the deed / that in ail that bath pgtve
thinges he myght haue the pꝛeminence. Foz ren Neweryse
it pleated the tather that in him ſpuld an fule ane vetabees |
hes dwell and by him to reconcile all tinge n
vnto hym Cele / and to let at peace by hym
thoꝛow the bioud oF bys croſte / both thynges
in heuen and thinges in erth. at
And rou( which were in tymes patk ttratie
Bes eenpmes/becaule youre myndes were
tin cutpll twozttes hath he new teconctlpey
tnd bobp of bis flelche thozotwe deeth / to maz
ke pou bolp/onblameabte and with out fant
in his a wne ſyght / vt ve contynue grounded
and ffablyl ched in the fayth / and le not mo⸗
uedaware fd the hope ofthe Solpell / wher
L. ig. of ye


The


of pe haue herde / hbowwe that it is pꝛeached
amonge all creatures whych are vnder heuẽ
ae 71 am ae A miniſter. vrch
Kone d Noro ĩope q in m. rynges mh pd

«gations ute for voi and EulEplt chat wüpch is be-
oad ta pat- hynde ofthe patipons of Ch zit in my flelche
lions which we Fo his bodyes lake which is the congregaciõ
didnt ewe WHEE OE Fam made aminitteraccozdinge to
baue profedied ö the ogdinatice ot God / which ozdinafice was
Ace appopnted geuen me onto vou warde / to kulkyll d woꝛde
to fuffce pth or Godthat mpiterp hyd fence the wozlde be
Ag aher gane/ @ fence the beginnynge of generactoõs:
kent teeta (ene UUE now ig opened ko his Caynctes to whorn
de J pou, God wolde make knows the gloztousrpches
ok this myctery amonge the Gentyls, / wyych

when 6 ‘Che in pou; the ope of mcg.

hom we preach, warnpnge allmen / z tea⸗

2 tre babe al chbnge all men in all weldomeſ to make all
men perkecte mmen parkect in hꝛiſt Jelu. Wherin g allo
the hnowledge laboure and ſtryue / euen as tartoꝛth as hrs


b Lys and of, i p ‘
oe 000 ctepne, wozüynge worzeth in me mrghtel z.


Chat gregte care Paul tobe Foz all congregactiss.
Beerborterh them, ide un in C hiſt / o be ware of
fait 9 5 ait aF1DLY wyldom / and delcrrbeth ß
alle Biophetes. 8 :
Che. ij. Chapter.
am Wolde pe ünewe what kyghtynge
J haue Foz poure Cakes ano fo whe
lof Laodicia / and fo: as many ag
aue not tene my parton in g uel⸗
che / that their hertes myght be cõkoꝛted and
knet to gether in loue / a in all ryches of full
vnderſtandynge / foꝛ to knowe the myſterx
ol God the kather and of Ch il / in whom are
hyp all the trealures of wyldome and now:
4 ledge. Chis J lave lek enp man chuld begile
i. Counth. v. b. von with entplinge word. Foz though, be
äblent in the llelche vet am J pꝛelent 11
vou in the lpꝛete / ioringe and behodynge
oꝛder that ye kepe / a poure ſtedtalt tapth in
Chziſt. As ve haue therfore receaued chat
Baeln the Loweſeuen Co walkey roted ¢ belt
inhim ¢ ſtedkaſte in § fayth / as ze haue lear⸗
ned: d therin be plẽteous in geuyngethalies
. Beware leſt eny man come and ipoyie
Pouthozow philofophy edifceattul banitie/
thoꝛow the tradicvons ol men / a oꝛdinaũces
after the wonde / and not after Chiſt. Foz
“in himdwelleth all 6 kulnes ok p Godheed


ae home
aie auc bod le and pe are complete inhem whpchts


bed bodelp attheheedok allrule and power / in whom allo
de fer 95 pe dal den bel oye leer
abe notin Harpeth out handes / by puttynge of the lyn

eee eee
ought not to ig in Chꝛiſt / in that ye are buryed wyth hym
folowe the tha. thozow baptime / in whom pe are alto ryten
otues uf Soe agapne thozowe karch chat is wroughe br z
Tuipimenses's operncia of Bod tohich rapred him fro deeth,
gugipnges And pe which weare aeedin Cyne thoꝛow

Cche vncircumcllion of pore Merwe hath he


+ OF inamnes


Epiltle

quychened wyth hym and bath kozgeuen op wytdemr. he

all oure treſpaces E and hath put out the truth is new

bpm be abe weder eher bach
apned! 5 e youre fence:

talen out of the waye and path fatteneDit to map nett

his crofie and bath Cpopled rule and power / dolde fygures¢

andhath made a hewe oe the openip g hath d. u mant

ttiumphed ouer theminhis awne perkon. beche hes
Let no mi thertoꝛe trouble poure cafcreces oure handewis

aboute meate anddzinche oꝛ fo2 a pece ofan 1 that p

Holpdape/as § hardape of the newe mone, ag alen

62 of the spaboth vayes, which are nothinge ccriveth s coven

but ſhaddowes of thinges to come:but the teth that ß lave

body is in Chict. Let no ma make pou chote is ute. we tpn

atawräge markewbich akterhrs atone pma W Aenne ct.

ginacton walketh in the bumblenes ¢b01v- ceruinge danas

hes ok angels / thinges which he neuer kawe: cyon is nn

cauleleſſe puft vp with

holdeth not che herd whevoe all the boop bp Lene

Aovntes and couples rergaucth noztttoment m hn

and is knet to gether/andencreateth wyth p wel nnz

increatynge that commeth of God. perkomadcelg
‘Hobertoze pt ve be derd wyth Chin fom Pek el

opdinatices of the worlde/ why as though ve dro plane.

pet c ere Kune with tras

ditions 15 that fave : Touche not / tak

not / handel tiot⸗ which all perilſhe wyth the

vlynge ok themand are alter the commaund

metes and dockrynes of men. which thynges

harre the ſympjptude ol. wyldome in cholen

holynes andhitiublenes /A in that they lpare

not the body / and do the fletthe no woꝛchype

vnto hrs nede. : . :


CHeputteth them in rememb:aunce of the (picitualt
rrlurretepon to laye a/ yde ali maner of coxrupte ly⸗
upnge / to be krutrfu an godlpnede and ver tut / and
ſheweth all degrees tur ir dutye.
CAChe. fil. Chapter. T 4
F ve be then rplen agamewchuſt authe merck
Lelie thofe thingdwhich ate aboue / is let forth tn:
where Chziſt lytteth on the ryght two vpper t
hande ok God. Set poure afleccya eres ane ht
oil hunde pate aboue/@ not en thingy which oi roiowe
are on the erth. Foz re fre deed / z route ſpte Chic einen
ishyd Chꝛiſt in God. Wien christ whpch here after tolo ⸗
is oure ile hall ewe hin leite / then wall eth.
ve allo appere with him in glory. K
Moztikre therfoze youre meinbzes which .
are onthe erth / koꝛnicacxon / vnclennes / yn⸗ Thee mites
naturallluſt / cupll concupplcence / a cougs mud be Cagney
teoutnes which is wozchyppinge of vdoles:
£02 which thinges fakes the wzath of cod co
meth on the chplozen of bnbelete, In ſohreh
things ye walked once / whe pe lyüed in the, .
But now put xe alſo awape tom vou all
chinges: wꝛath / kearing / mauictoiienz / curſed s
fpeakynge fplthy wenne out oF route eren
moutheg, Lye ot one to another p the olde le icy one
man with his woꝛkes be put at / and the new eln sia.
put on / Khich is renued in knowledge akterẽ Erhel -
‘ pmage


his llelchiy mynde / a swore how


Tothe Colloſſyans,


wveuacſeokhem & made him / where is nether,
Gucry man is ho: Fewe/ citcumcplton ne; vncir⸗
Abril to anoe cummeptpon/Barbarous oz Sp vehian/bonde
ther. 03 lte: but chuſt is all in all thinges. :
5 Now therkope as electe of God / holy and
beloued put on tender mere pe /Ayndnies h
Cblenes of mendes / mekenes jonge kuttring /
kozbearinge one another / c koꝛgeuynge one
another / xr anz man haue a quareil toa no⸗
cherteuen as & hilt toꝛgaue ou / euen lo do
ve. Aboue all thele things put on lave / which
Is the bonde of pertecenes. And the peace ol
Sod tule in poure herteg / to the which peace
ve are called in ane body. And te chat ve be
thankküll. et the wozde al Chit dwell in
vou plente aua in gu wyldome.geache and
exhozte youve atone felues/ in Plalmes / and
hymne /g cpirituall Conges which haue faz
udur with tie / anginge in poure herteg to ß
Lordk. Alm all hinges (whatloeuer ye do in
wonde 02 dede) uo in che name oF p L ode Fee
du geuing eines to God kather bphym. L
Fio pues iuluupt poure atone ſelues onto
pouxe awnehulbändes / ag it is conip in the
Loꝛde. Hul bandes loue youre wyues andbe
® not byiter ontothé.cbplozen obey youre fae
thers and mothers in an thingeg / Foz that is
well plealyng brite the Lobe. Fathers rate
not poure chyldzen Alek they be oF a delperate
mipnde, *Speruatites be obedpent biito pour
bodplp matters in allthinges: not wyth eve
Cerupce as men pleaters but in linglenes of
Herte/fearynge Pod. And whatloriler ve do /
Boitlertelp/as though peopDieto 9 Kae
Enotontonen:fozasmoche as ve tinowwe z
ok the Lozve pe Mall veceane the rewarde ot
inberitautice Cuz ye ferue the Loe Chzit,
But he that boeh) waotige Hall receaue for
the wzonge that he bath done ko there is no
reſpect of perlones with God. Ye maſterg do
dnto youre tetuulites that which is iult and
equall / ſeinqge he moe that pe allo haue
miaſter in heauen. ‘


Ephe. v. e.
i. Set. j. a.


Ephe. vi, a.
Titus. ije.
Petr. i. e.


Sr enter engt kin wulle
A Ge serrto


falutceh them,


bnowledge of £1
Chapter.


avert


ees
nieranofelpioe fetiinde tn he ode lerxiij
owe keritaat inthe Lope /
7 — ente ente ‘oe fate putpoty
chat hempghe kuidtee Yow be do /and myghe
ange an f bed ot Duc 4
larthkull and a beloued-baotber/ toh yeh is
one ok You. hep Wall Meme pou or all thins
ges which ate adornge here.
toute Bien Sommer eee f
nabas kpſters lonne: 94
touchinge whom / e receaued commaunde- Eines. |
i come vnto vou / receaue hym:
elus which is called ultus / which are
ob the circunicitpon. heſe dip are my woz⸗
kekelowes onto 5 Kr dome ok God / whych
were onto my confolatts Epaphꝛas the fer:
naunt ot Chzilt / whech is one oF pou/Calus
teth vou / and allwapes Iabozeth fevuentip
fo2 vou in pꝛaper / chat pe tape it ande pers
ect and full in all that is the wpll of Cod. J
beare him recoꝛde ß he hach a keruentmynde yy
rowarde you and towarde them of Laodicta
and them of Pierapolis. Weare Lucas the
Pbiltcton greteth vou / and Demag. Salute
the bzethzen whpch are of Lacdicia /andla⸗
inte pmpbag gre congregacion / which is
inhis houle. And whö ß epitticts reed or you
malte chat it he reed in the cougregacyon of
the Laodicpang alto: and that pe ine wyle
reade the eile u N aodtcis. And Cape to ar⸗
When eee Kane eue
that thou
kulkyll it. Che ſalutacion bribe
bande of me Paul. Meme
ber my bondeg. Grace 4
be mpth pou:
Amen.


0 ent tyom Ron
8 ee e


1. fn. eave


tA 2% lime wiliavle nee
„ eee oy
00 we pli pow te! —


= Let pot
bea Ele
vnde.


The. i, Epillle


8 ‘ , fozto enue the buinge andtrue God / tof
C The kpalt epiltle e.
ne the — — er.
ace chanheth So ortbenvebatthepare Warberg F denden in anpnted the gut enue act


8 5
in fapth and good wozkes/ and teceane the Solpell vnto chem / thanketh Bod that thep reccaue his
wichkacheneſeänege ken enn ue
ots ¶ he. ij. chapter,

i pe poure ſelues knowebꝛetht
er dure entraũce in onto pouchom
E Ichatit was not in vayne: but euen
Eterchat we had tufferedbetoze g
were amfuliyentveatedat Philippos (as
ve well knowe) then were we bolde in oure
Godtolpeake onto vou the Solpell of God /
Wmoche ltriurnge. Oure exhaztacron was
not to byynge pou to erroure / no vet toons
clẽnes nether was it w gyle:but aswe were
alowed of od / that the Golpell culd be cis
mytted onto vs: euen Co we Cpake / not as
though we entendedto pleale men / but God /
which tryeth oure hertes.
Hetzer was oure conuertaciũ at enptyme 2S

wyth llatterznge woes as ye well knowe
nether in cloned coueteouſnes / God is recoz⸗
demether lought we pꝛayle of men / nether or
vou / noꝛ pet of eny other / when we myght ha
ue bene chargeable / as p Apodtles of Chat
but we were tender amonge vou / euen as &
toate cherelcheth her chplozen/ fo was oure
alleccpon towarde vou: oute good well was ¢
to baue dealte vnto vou / not che Gotpell ol
God onip: but allo oure atone foull/ becauſe
pe were deare vnto bs,

* 3 ien 8 —
etrauaple . Foz we laboureddave ¢ 2
decaule we wolde not be greucous orto eng ö del.
ol vou / and preached onto pou the Golpell ot
God Ve are witnelles / a o is God how holx⸗

Iv eiuttiy¢ onbiameably we behaued dure
lelueg a monge pou that beleue:as pe hnowe
how 6 weerhozten a cõkoꝛted and be lought
euerx one ol pou / as a father bis chyldzẽ that
pe wolde walne woꝛthr ol God / whych bath
called you vnto bys kyngdome and gio⸗ p.
Foꝛ this caule hake we God with out ce
kenge / becaule that whẽ ve receaued ol vs 6
woide wherwyth God was preached/peres
ceauedit not as che woꝛde of man · but euen
as it was in dede / the wozde ol God / whych
wonketh in you ß beleue. E for ve bzechzen
became kolo wers ol p cangregacxos ot God
which in Jewꝛp are in Chel Fetu-toz veba
ue buffered irke thinges of xoüre kinder / as
e
cl er *

ge at all. Foꝛ they them lelues ſbewe or awne Pꝛophett / euẽ lo haue they pertecuted
vou what maner of entrynge in we had vnto vs: and God they pleate not / and are ctrary
vou g how ve tourned to God krom mages / to al men and toꝛbrdvs to pꝛeache .


Jelus Chꝛiſt.
ide geue God thankes all wave koꝛ vou
all / makynge mécion ol pou in oute pꝛaperg
with out cealynge / g call toremembzaunce
‘poure woꝛke in the tarth / a labour in loueg
erſeueraunce in the hope ol oure Lozve Je
Blus Chat inthe tyaht ot God oure fathers
becaule we knowe bꝛethꝛen beloued ol Gon
how that pe are electe. Foꝛ oure Golpell ca⸗
me not vnto vou in wo de oni / but allo in
power / g alco ind holy gooſt ¢ in mache cere
kapntre / as pe knowe after what maner we
bebauh oure lelues amonge pow / foꝛ poure
Clakes. And ve became folowers of vs ¢ of 6
Horde / a receaued the woꝛde in moche affitce
clon / wich toye of ö holy gooct to that ve wee
re an enlample to all p beleue in Macedonia
Achaia. Fos krõ vou ſounded out the woꝛde
ol che Loꝛde / not in Macedonta ¢ in Achata
onl : but poure faith allo which ve haue vnto
God / ſpꝛedher felfe abꝛoade in all quartars /
ri reatly thatitnedeth not vs tolpeake enp


Wentyls that they might be taued to kulkill
their lpnnes all wape. Foz the wꝛath of God
is conie on them euen to the vtmoſt.

Foꝛ as moche bꝛethꝛen as we are kept kr
vou to: a ſealon / as concerninge the bodply
pꝛelenee / but not in the herte / we enkoꝛted &
moze to le vou perfonally with great delpze.
Andtherkoꝛe we wold haue conte onto vou /
Ades once andagapne: but Satan with⸗

ode vs. soz what is oure hope oz foye / o
croune ok reioplinge are not ve it in the pꝛe⸗
fence ol oure Loꝛde Jecus Chzt at his com
mynge : ves pe are oure glozy and tope.

Se bow greatly he was eiopled when Mie
moch tolde him of their kapth and loue,

¶ Che. ij. Chapter.

HHerfoze Cence we could no lenger
koꝛbeare / it pleated vp to remapne


ch

God / and our lapoure telowe in the Golpell

ol Chꝛiſt / to ſtablilſpe vou and to combozte

vou dein nete alle that no man ſhulde be
iccids. fox ve pour felues

there vn⸗


int a the tempter had tempted
7
pou/ethatoute laboure had bene bettowed
nvabne. 8
But now lately when Cimothens came
from pou vnto vs / and declared to vs youre
kapth and poure loue and hom that ye haue
good remembꝛaunce of vs all wapes / defy-
ting to fe vs as we delpꝛe to ſe vou. Cherkoꝛe
bzethzen we had conlolacyon in vou / in all
dure abuerfyte and necetitte/ 3
katth. Foꝛ now are we alpue / pt ve ſted⸗
Cea in the Loꝛde. Foz what thankes can we
tecompenceto God koꝛ you / ouer all
the iope that we love kes befoze
age
al
aut Tulkell that bE is lachynge in


voure kath.
God him lelke oure kather / and oure 107d
Fetus chꝛiſt gyde oure io mer onto pon: and
gp the Lade increace vou and make vou flowe
ouer in loue one to warde another / andto⸗
warde all men / euen as we do to warde vou /
ko make pouve hertes ſtablea vnblameable /
in holynes bekoꝛechod oure kather / at the cõ⸗
mynge of oure Loꝛde Fetus Chꝛiſt with all


bis tapncees.

Eheerhorteth the to Medefat nelle to kepe tht ſelurs

krs lynne z vnclenip cõuerlaci / to lone one another:

rebunketh pdelnelle and (peakceh of the relurrecclan.
be. ij. chapter. *


Tothe Thettalonyans;


Win
0b, 65


and that pe ſbuld abſtayne from fognicacio/
chat every one ot pou thulde knowe howt
kepe his veckell in holpnes a honoure /a not
in ß luk of cOcupitcence as doß hethẽ which
which know not od that no ma go to karre
and defraude bis bzocher in bargarnrng be >
cauſe 5 Lord is avenger or all uche 4800
Sabbath nl time and teſtikied. Foz ‘
bncobotpnespeibrfre tbat entero
o holpnes. Petherloze that de ee ö
kprlech not man / but God / which hath tent i
his boty ſpꝛete amonge pou,
I. But as touchpnge bzotherly loue / penede @
noc J wirte bnto pou.* For pe ave taught John 76e
ol God to loue one another. Ye ¢ that eng andere,
Herel ve do onto all thebzethzen whych are Zb. 0 v,.
Shoe out all acedonta. We beleche vou 30h. . b./ ;
bzethiẽ that ve encreace moze a moze /a that
ve ſtudye to be qupet / ato medle with youre
atone burpnes / v to wozke with rour atone * A good lenon
des an we cohtaunded pou:thac pe nape genen,
aue poure felueshonettiy towarde them kaietrertv.
. nothynge be lac
u.
& J woldenoc brethzé haue vou anopalle
cõceinynge the D
ve loꝛowẽ not as other do which haue Hobos
pe. soz pk we beleue that Fetus oped a role
agapne:euẽ fo the allo bn Abb
will God bunge agarne wich him.ano thys
faye we vnto pon in the woꝛde of the Loꝛde /
that we which irue gare remarninge inthe
commpnge of the L. onde / Mall not come per
cher which llepe. Foz 5 Lozoe him Celfe wall
delcende krom heauen with a wbowte and the
voyce of the Archangell and trompe of God,
And the deedin Chzitte Hal arple Evett:then
wall we which Iyucandremayne/be caughe
bp with them aifo in the cloudes / to mete
Lopde in che arer. Andlo Walt we euer be
the Lobe. iwherkoze comfozte voure lelues
one another with chele woꝛdes N
‘Che enfourmeth them of the Bape of dome and comms
mynge of the Lordererhozterh the to watch / and to reo
garde foch as preach Bods worde Amonge them.
Che. b. Chapter.
if the trmes and teatons biethzen
ve haue no nede that J werte onto J. wetti. g.
s:*£o? pe your telueg dnow pets Apbcatg. .
kectlz / che dape of the To wthall nd ui.
come euẽ ag a theke in the nyght. Ihen th
ball faye peace ¢ no daunger chen comme
: b. onthem


. orm. xd he


‘@begepile
The feconbee epiſtle


enthe toden deltruecton / as the trait pnge
£4 woman wyth chride / and ther (all not
Cape But ve bꝛethꝛen are not in darrknes /
that that daze uid come on vou as it were


datheke. ‘
LY cave all the chplozen of lyghe / and the
chyldꝛen of the daye. ie are not of thenpabt
nether otdaunes.
35 Cherkoze let vs not eye as do other: but
let vs watch and be lober Foz cher that Mepe
Hlepe in the nyght:and they that be dꝛonckẽ /
are dꝛonchzen in the nyght. But let vs which
„ate Ebene d Tober armed with § brett
Tarthis che Plate ol Ire s with hope of lalua⸗
belt plate andclon as an helmet Foz God hath not apoyn⸗
bhope is the hel ted bs onto wꝛath: but to obtapne laluacion
mer. by the meanes ok oure Loꝛde Jelu Chat


which ped to vs: that whether we wane o


ſlede / we chuld ipucto gether with him.
_ Uoberfozecomforte pour felues to gether /
and edikie one another euen as ve do. F
Cy mch eg vt yeu ea bane
5 0 em which laboure amonge vou aue
e
eth in YoU erhoztactor .
Fie etn rn 08 woꝛckes tal / ANDY a at
} eace with them.
. ‘Hdedetpze dou bzethzery warne thems
Sade bene eae gate continual pacence
And as he 5. is beare the haue continua
kpche Del brd alt men, Sethat none W
» Phot nen to bull Foz euplt onéo eny mam cbut euer koiew
2 Ke, Poem Berne ere ecke
1 hel a . 5
feu n elta thenatgeue thankes . Foz this is b
aug when hr k. Well OF od in hz in Feru kowarde pou.
meth nut to”. Muenche not P 7. lppete. Becpple not pꝛo
pape Forpaper phelpinge. Examen ail thynges / a nepe that
xoliteth not in pic is good Abſtarne from all lutpictous
moche oabling. chyngs. Che very God ol peace fanctitye you


Wespen Go om e e hole


ſohn ih. Andlpꝛete / loule and body / be kept Fauctetic vn⸗
nie we maden aue ot dure Lozd Fetus Cheitt. .
delſze of n, Tabchknll i e which called ou: which will
bebe ft: ll dot, Bzeth e pape fo bs: Setra ß
wberby tue be, byethꝛen with an holp hyde. Ichar ze pon in
herby
lene in Chika the Lozde/that this ept ttle be reed ten oll.
7 to fosholp hethzen che rate of the Lo⸗de fetus
agent . el hell be wih vou amen.
{fone connie -~“Agecheend ofthe fpattepiatebntoene
0 —
eneon. ‘ eran renee ae


age


e Heweth them that the daye of thex aide Hatt not
come / tylt the departyng from the fapth come ten: &


therfore heerhorteth them not to be dicceaued / but ta
nande Kedfatt in the thynges p he hath taught chem.
Che. ij. Chapter. i

bereche vou bꝛethyen by the com ay
mynge of dure Lozde Fetes hilt /
and in that we Wail adembie vnto
him / that ve be not foneniy —


Tothe Thellalonvang.


kro voure myude z be not troubled nether by

lpꝛete / nether by wozdes / noꝛ vet by letter

Gelber a. which Gut keme to come kr bs/ as though
as Char (ons the dape of Chꝛiſt were at hand. Let no mã
full man cpguldeceaue vou by eny meanes / koꝛ the Loꝛde
hethAutichit cõmeth not / excepte ther come a departynge
kalt a that vg fynkull man be opened che


0 0
Axxut,
Loꝛde to vou warde / that ye both do / z wl
doſ that which we cotiunaunde vou. andthe
Loꝛde gyde youre hertes to the loue of God
and paclence or Chiſt. 5

Tae requpze pou bzethzen in the name Actum. pets
ok dure L onde zelu ahettt/b ve wethdꝛawe 25
poure ſelues fro euerp bother that walfech
iriozdinatip / a not atter p; inſtitucion which
pe receaued of vs. e pour lelues hnow how


dre ought to falowe vs. Foz we behaued not


in the cölcten⸗
as or men / and
there to cõ⸗
wunde
where Sod o.
nelphath place


ber made


Where no


i


Gepe falle pz
pieces to dec
1


ae them


t


elu chꝛiſt him tele / and God oure fa
ther which bath loued os / and hath geuen vs
euerlaſtyng cofolacton g goodhope thoꝛow
grace / comkoꝛte voure hettes / and ſtablyuſhe
vou in all doctryne a good doynge. T.


he ij. Chapter.

F urthermoze biethzẽ pape op bs /
char the twozde of Ged maye haue

Ire pallage and be gloztfied / ag it

is with you: a that we mape be be
Ipuered From buvefonable andeutil men. Foꝛ
all men haue not kapth: but ö Lord is fayth·
kull / which hall ſtablpdche pou / q kepe pou


krom eupli.i Be haue contrdence thozow the


dure felues inoꝛdinatip anigge von. Nether
toke we breed ok eny man fognought: but
wrought with laboure a trauaple night and
dave / beraute we wolde not be greubus to
en ok vou: x not but that we had auctonte: c *
busto make oure kelueg an enfaniple onto geet. £60
vou / to tolowe vs. Foz when we were w vou /
this we warned vou of / that yt ther were enx
neten wold not woꝛcke / that the lame duly
eate, ‘ se

Side hauehearae lapr no doute ö ther are
Come which walkie amonge vou fnozdinatly/
@ wonke not at all/butare betybodyes. Che
that are koche we cOmatioe ¢ exhuzte by dür
Lope FelePhzttt chat ther woche wh
Quyetnes/¢ cate their awne bꝛeed : Bꝛethzẽ
meint fe Feeprmnan yD | -
ober not pure ravings ene wozde of Sula vi b.
him bya letter: haue no cöpanie with him /
chat he maxe be a chamed. And coſſt hym noe
as an enemp: but warne him as a brother.

Che bery Lorde ol peace geue vou peace
AN tapes by all meanes, Che I 070 be will
vou all. Che lalutacion of meP@aul /w mne
awnehande. Chis is the token in allepttties
So A wapte. Che grace of oure Loꝛde Jctus
‘Chalet be with vou all. Amen.


(Sent krom Athens.


of Saynet Pau vnto eae
Ee exhotteth Imochy to wapte vps his oftce:nas
dere.
.
thpa twete¢ glad iydenges / that Lhe Jelus came
in to the woꝛlde to laue (pnners °
che fratte chapter. ;


ser ame
us chu: / br the cõmaunde
d mentok Bed dure faufoute/ Actum. rl,
% Lone Fetus Chritt which
ig dure hope. 2
inte chmange hrs natu⸗
e fach.. A
Grace metcp and peace from God oute fa
ther and Lozve Jelug Chziſtcme L onde.
As Zbelo e toab de rn meg


The i epillle


dus when J departed into Macedama / euen
{odo / that thou commaunde fome that they
teache nonother wele:mether geue hede to ka
bles and genealogtes which are endieſſe and
pede doutes moare then Godly; edpkringe
Which is by Eapth:toz the ende ol d cõmaũd⸗
8 5 mentis*ioue that commeth ok a pure herte
sLoueisé em? and ot a good contcience / Cor faptl onfaps
San 2 mug NedsFro the whichthynges come haue erred /
intepetit. und haue turned vnto bapae 115 be⸗
Caule thep wolde be doctours ind ccriſtture /


and pet vnderſtãde not what they dpeale / ne⸗
2 Bom. vi. ther wherok the paftirme.


a. 1.8
Exo xv. a


H* We hoe that the lawe is good / ka
man ole it lawkullp / vnderſtandynge thps/
how that the lawe is not geuen vnto a righ⸗
teous man! but onto the vnryghteous a dil:
obedtẽtto the vngodlyand to lenners / toon:
holy and vncleane / to murthererg of fathers
und murtherers of mothers /to manflears &
whozmongers:to thẽ thacdefple them ſelues
with makpnde:to menteaters:tolpars ¢ to
perlured / a Co fozth yk ther be eny other thing
that is contrary to holſome doctryne / accoꝛ⸗
dinge to the Golpeil of the glozy of the blel⸗
led God, which gofpell is cõmitted vnto me.

And Athanßze Chalt Jelus oure Lope
which bath made me ſtronge: fo; he counted
me true / and put me in office / when before J
was a blalphemar / and a perlecuter / a a Ch
raunt. But Jobtapned mercy / becaule J dib
ttignozaunkip thozow onbeieke Heuerthe⸗
later the grace of oure fore was moare
aboundaunt with ka vth and loue which is in
Chꝛiſt Relu. E 8


Che grownde . Chis is a ttue ſapinge a by all meanes


ot terry wo th y to be receaued / 5 Chick Fetus came
into the wo lde to laue kynners ſol dc ena
am chele. Mot withſtandynge foꝛ this caule
paul is an ene was mercy geuẽ vnto me / that Fetus Chet
fample tuot na chu lde kpꝛſt Crewe on me all longe pacience /
‘ne D:tpeavetbat dnto the entample of the which wall in tyme
un epent., to conte beleue on hem vnto eternal lee.
Sothen onto Hod uynge euerlaſlonge / im⸗
moptall/inuilpble / a wyte only / be hoͤnoure

and pꝛayle ko euer and euer. Amen.
bis commaundement commit A onto 6
konne crimotheug / accoꝛdynge to the pꝛophe
Hes which in tyme pat were pꝛophilied ol
the that thou in them chuldelt kyght a good
kygut hauyng fapth a good clclence which
ſome haue put awape Erom them / a as cöcer
nung Fapth haue made 0 e Ot who
fenombze is Himeneus a Alexander whych
haue delpuered vnto Satan / z they might

be taught not to blalpteme.
Cr erlorteth to prays for all men. de wyll not haue
emen to be ouerceſti araped noꝛ to teathe in the cã
Feregatibö, but ro be in vere obepe their hulbades.
che. ij. Chapter.


J wll therfoze that the men pꝛape cuerp
where / lpitynge vp pure handes wythouk ¢
wiath /o bowting. Likewyle alfothe wemẽ
that they araye them (clues in comipe appas
rell with amkaſtnes a diſcrete bchaueour /
not with bꝛoydedheare other golde / oꝛ pears
mer D i —
meth wemen that pꝛolelle the woꝛſhippyng
Of Godthozow good wozches:* Letthe wo. Koln. riß
man learne in Cpience with all Cubteccion. J
ſulfre not a womã to teache / nether to haue D
auctoꝛtte ouer the man: but £02 to be in ſilen⸗
cr. For Adam was fystte formed and ehen aenerbe Neg.
Cue. Lilo Adam wag not deceaued / but che aan 2 sara
woman wag deceaurd / and was in trälgrel⸗ u due te!
lion. Mot he theben t bearpnge e wien be
of chplazen they halbe Caued / ko ther contp- inne et
nue in tapth / laue a holpnes with dilcrecton. foul the oe of


Const maner amd n bichoppe ci pred ought fo be teweneeine
and what condicon his wye aud chyldren ful haue pes ded pee


Che properties alſo requ pied in adeacon o7 myniſter 28 fh eae
5


luce Jatt
erte cue AE


tales , pardies/
opting
pes veh


ler.
€
Lyhewpte my tt Weacons be honeſt /Motistety le
double tonged / notgeuen vnto moche dunc⸗ sof wo the
. knge / arb.


‘hat (as
Can


Tymothe. a


kpng necher to krichy urcre: but hauyng 8
miſtery of the ayth in pure contcience. Ind
let them kpꝛlt be pꝛoued / and then let the mi
niſter / yt they be tounde fautiette, 8
CEuen to muſt their wyues be honeſt / not
kult Ipeahers: but ſober and fapthkull in all
che wrues oe thynges. Let the Deacons be the hulbãdes
beben and gk one wyfe / and luche as rule their chyldꝛen
arenen . well / and their awne houcholdes Fos they
that myniſter well / get them lelues good de⸗
. ge and greate Ipbertic in the fapth / which is
Chuck Jeu.
Chele th ynges waite J onto the / truſtinge


to come ſhoꝛetly onto the:but and vr J tarie dowe⸗


longe / that then thou mayſt yet haue now⸗

ledge how thou oughteſt to be haue thy lelke

in the houle of God / which is d cogregacton

gn che ſprete of the iyuinge God / the pyllar e grounde of

b derte bar: teeth. and without nape great 1s 5 mylte⸗

recorde to bpm EP OF godlynes: God was ſhewed in d flelche /

and to his doce wag luſtifled Inthe *fpzete / was ene ol An⸗

re. gels was preached onto the gẽtyls / was be⸗
leued on in erth and receaued vp in glozp,


Che prophecicth of the latter daxes / z exhoꝛteth Cy⸗
mothy to the diligent rendynge ok the holy leripture.


¶ he. iiij. chapter,
He lpzete Cpeaketh eupdentlp that
un the later tymes Come hail de⸗
parte from the karth / a wall geue
PES Dilyede onto lpꝛetes of erraure and
? dpuelplche doctryne ok them which tpeake
achaue their kalle thoꝛow ppocrilpe / a haue their cõcciẽ⸗


beg an nae ces märckked with an hote pꝛon / fosbrddyng krde


pote thongs to math dich ende to abttapne from


andeurplt doaes meates which God bath created to be recea⸗
are mavched inated with geupngethanches / ol them whych
fhe bates . beleue and Hnowe the trueth For all g creas
uber piv’ B tures of Godare good and nothynge to be re
body / with hote kiiled / yk it be receaued with tha inge.
Fons to thpue Foz it is fanctified by the wo de of God and
kent that thett pꝛaper. Ik thou Mart put the bꝛechꝛen in ver
N membzaunce ol thele thynges / thou Malt be
ie be openip AGoodmIpnttter of Fetes Chait / whrchbalt
wow cüer af bene nozifthed op in the wozdes of the farth
krteuen lo are and good doctrine which doctryne thou halt
a dere cant imme olleweb. Bue alk aware bi
marched / in p SOCTY and Olde wyues fables, 56
lep be wit⸗ C. Exercyſe thylelke vntd godlynd. Foꝛ bones
miles to tue, Iykxerciſe pꝛoftteth Iptell: bit g.
ka- 2000 bnto all things / as a thinge which batty


Cpple thy vouth : but be onto thé that beleue /
anenlample / n woꝛde / in connerlacxon / in


Ixxxvij.
loue / in cpꝛete / in kãpth and in purenes.
Cyllg come /Geucattendaunce to redyng / 7
to exhoꝛtacion and to doctryne:velpyle not
that gylte that is inthe / which was geuẽ the
thozow prophetic and wich d naringe on oF z. de inptige
thehandes of anelder Chelethynges ever: „nor han lol
cbſe / a geue thy lelte onto thé / that it mape in che At. vi
be fene how thou pꝛoketeſt in all thynges.
Calle hede onto thy leife and vnto learning ⸗
and contpnue therin. Eoꝛ vt thou ſhalt todo /
thou thalt laue thy leite and the p heare the.
Che teatheth him how he Gal be haue hym lelke in re


bukpnge all degrees. An aide concetupnge wyd⸗
By


thetr elders. Foz that ig good and acceptable
before God. Ohe that is a berp wyddowe &
krendlelle putteth her ttuſt in God / and cons
trnueth in Cupplicacton and pꝛaxer nyght e
daye. But the that et in plealuveigdecd
euen pet alxue.andthelt thinges cõmaũde /
that they maxye be wythout kaute. t ther be
enp that pꝛoupdeth not foꝛ ys ane and
namely £02 them of bys houtholde / the fame
benpety the fapth / andiswozte then an in⸗


Let no wyddowe be choren vnder thꝛelco· B

re pere olde / and loche a one as was the wyle

ol one man / well tepozted oF in good woz⸗

kes: pk che haue norplched chyldzen / ve che

baue bene liberallto ttraungers/ye we har

wellhed the laxnctes kete / vr We haue mynt⸗

Atred vnto them which were in aduerlithe /

vr che were contynualip geuen onto all nas

ner good worches Che ponger wyddowes

tekufe .g02 whenthep haue begone to were
wwantone/totheophhonoure of heit / then

Swell ther marx / hauynge damnacpon / bee a Wbatforuer
Finn fixie Eapel anny Lemenameset
alto ther leatne togooftomboute to Woute they ope
pdle: zee not ꝛle onix/ but allo trpflyng and uourcditoughe


a belyboopes/ tpeakynge thenges whch are 4 holen.


Aer that th
5 rkoze e vonger wemen
marpandbeave cheldas / and ade the houle /
and geue none accalpon to the aduerkarpto
fpeake eupll. o: many ok them are all redy
turned backe / a are gone atter Satan and
pt eny man oꝛ woman that beleueth haue
widdo mes / jet thẽ miniſter bnto the / zletnot
vcögregactä be charged:§ pe maye halle ful
e N
Cheel⸗


Deut. xrb· d.
1 Koptn. ir. a.


Wache r. b.


The, ij Epiltle


Che elders that rule well / are worthy of
double honoure most lpectallyther which la
boure inthe wozde z teachyng. Foz ö crip⸗
ture lapth thou (halt not moutell § mouthe
okthe ore that treadech out the cozne. And

. labourer is worthy oF his reward. Agapnſt
an elder receaue none acculacion:but nder
two o7 chee wytnelles. Chem that lynne / re⸗
bube openty/that other maye keare.

Iteſtikie bekoꝛe God and the Loꝛde Jelus
Chilſt a the electe angels that thou obterue
thele thinges without batty iudgement / a do
nothinge parcialip. Lape handes foventy on


Pno man nether be partalter of other mens


0b r.
Giclevee,


fynnesshepe thy tele pure. Dꝛincke no lene
qerwater but ble a lyttell wyne koꝛ thy ſtõ⸗
makes fale and thyne often dpleales.

Some mennes kynnes are open before
bande a gobefoze bnto iudgemẽt: Come més
nes fpnnes kolowe after. Lphewple allo
Good woꝛkes are manikelt bekoze hande and
cht y that are other wyle / cannot behyd.
Che dutpe of ſeruauntes towarde thelr matters,
Agapntt Coch as are not catick led im the wonde of God,
Agap ut couretcoutnes.A good teflon kor ryche men.

4 Che. vi. Chapter.

Met as manv ſeruauntes as are vn⸗
der the pole /counte th eir maſters
A wohvof all honcur / that $ name
Jof d&b g his doctryne be not eupll
Spoken ot. Se g they which haue beleupnge
maſters delpyte them not becaule ther are
bꝛethꝛẽ: but io moche the rather do lerupce /
top as moche as thex are beleupnge ¢ belo⸗

urd and patakers of the benelite. ;

Thelethynges teache a erhozte It en mil

Bteache other wle / z is not content wyth the
wholſome wozd ol oure Loꝛdezeſu d hit /
S with the doctryne of Godipnes / he is pute
bp and noweth nochynge: but watteth bys
bꝛapnes about queſtions ¢ ſtryte of woꝛdeg
wherol lpꝛvnge enuye / lryke / raxlyngd euill
lurmilynges a bapne dilputacpons of men
with cozrupte myndes and deſkytute ok che
trueth / which thinke that lucre is godlpnes.


From foche leparate thy telfe. Godipnes is E


Greate ryches / yt a man be cötent with that
he bath, Foꝛ we bꝛought nothynge into the
pent ar iets plapne cate that we can
carp nothrnge out. 8

dohen we haue kode a raymt Actos thers
with be cötent. Cheythat wylbe ryche / taule
into temptacton ¢ cares and into man foe
Clpiche a nortome luſtes / which dꝛounde men


Mourteoumes in perdicion e deſtruccid Foꝛ coueteoutnes


rote ok ali euill / which will Come luſten
alter / chey erred fromthe karth / and tangiyd
themlelues with many loꝛowes. But thou
which arte the man ot God / pe foche things,
Folowe ryghtewelnes / godlpnes / loue / pas


cence and meaknes Krghe che goodkrgheot
fayth Lare hand on eternal l ixt᷑e / wherunto
Shou atte called, halt profetied a good pꝛo⸗
kellion befoze many wirnelles.

Fgeuc the charge ind (yghe of God/ which
guickneth all tyynges / e befoze Felu Chae
whrch onder Ponctus Pylate kytnetkda
good witnelyng / p thou kepe the cõmaunde
ment / a be without tpotte ¢ vnrebußzeable /
ett me paper OF dure Loꝛde Fetus,

1 app
come) he Mail chewe that is bieded a mighty
onlp/hpnge oehynges / and loꝛde ok loꝛdes /
which oniphath immoztalite / and dwelleth
inthe lyght that no man can attaxne /


whoni 5
neuer ma lawe nether can le / onto* whom Jeb. ..


be honoure and rule euctlatt nge Amen.
Charge them that are ryche in this woꝛld /
that ther he not excedyng wyle / ¢ that th
tiuſt not in the vncertapne rpches / but in
Ipuinge God / which geueth vs aboundaũt⸗
wall thynges toentope them. g that ther do
good / a be tyche in good woꝛkes / and redy to
gee Gdiftribute/ lavinge vp in Koze fo the
lues a good foundacponagapnt the tyme
to come p they mare obtapne eternall ipfe,
D Cimoche laue that which is geuẽ p to
kepe / a auopde vngoſtiy vanittes ot vopces
and oppolpctons of ſcience taluyſo caſied /
which lciẽce whyll ſome pꝛoleſſed / they haue
chen as n d the kapth. Grace be with
Am


Senckrom Laovicea / which is
the cheleſt cytie ol Phzigia i
Pacaciana,


The letonde epittle


of Sayntt 2 Ae tonto


CPaulerhorteth Cimoehy to Kedfatnette s paciene
ae
Che fy chapter. ;


ts
©
nne.


call to remembzaunce the vnkayned tayth


ich dwelt kt i fie
Bis inthe / which en oe ee


Bom. vg. e tynge on or my


erpng when the kemnets ug. we


Bi
(otndpaa, W Eval veceas
‘2 0


To Tymothe.


mother L ois /andin thy motherekuntca: and
am aſſure chat it dwelleth in the allo.
Bgertoze J warne the that thou ſtere vp
the gylte of Gud which ts in the / by the put:
bandes.* For Goo hath not
Cgeue to vs the (pzete of Feare/ but of power /
andofloue/¢_of Lobzenes of mynde. Be not
aſbamed to tettifpe dure Lozve / nether be
albamed ot me / which am bounde koꝛ his la⸗
he: but fuffre thou aduerlitpe allo wyth the
Gotpelt/ thoꝛowe the power of God / wizrch
laued vs / and called vs with an holx calling /
not accoꝛdynge to oure dedes / but accoꝛding
to his awne purpole andgrace / which grace
Was geuenthozowe Chalk Jeiu before the
wonlde was but is now declared openty bp
the appearinge of dure faufoureFetuchzttt
which hach püt aware deechKhach bought
ipfe aimmortalite vnto lygbt thoꝛowß Go⸗


tmn . 8. Phen / wherunto j am apopnted/s preacher


ano Apoſtle anna teacher of the gentyls:koꝛ
the which carte I allo ſullre thete thynges.
Heucrtheleue Fam not aſhamed. Foz
nnowe whom 9 baue beleued / and am ture
he is abie to kepe that which A haue cõmyr⸗
ted to his keppuge / agaynſt chat dape.
Se thou hauẽ the ẽnlample of d hollome
wondes which thou heardeſt ot me in kapth a
Dloue whych is in Jeſu Cyst, Chat good
thinge / which was cömptted to thy kepyng/
kepe in the holy gooſt which dwelſeth in vs.
Chis thou towel how chat all ther which
axe in Alta be turned fed me. DE which torte
are Phigelos and Hermogenes . Che Lorde
geue mercye onto p boule of Oneliphoꝛus⸗
foz he ofte rekrelſhed me / and was not alſha⸗
ined oẽ my chayne: hut when he was at Rox
me / belought me oute very dylrgentir / and
kounde me. The Loꝛde graunt vnto him that
he mape Epnde mercye with the Lozd at that
dape. Ind in how many thyngd he miniſtred
vnto me at Ephelus thou ioweſt very well.


as in the k pit Chapter / ſo here he erhortetl
date outa in oablenotuter 225 1 5
bpdefatk in the whollome docttyne of oure Loyde Jeo


dus Lyne, che il chapter. .
E= bdoutherkoße mptonne/ be ardge


att ebeliuereo cateheull me which ate bee
ache other. Chou therkoꝛe futkre allipc⸗
clon ag a good foudier of Fetu christ. Do
2 entanglpth him kelke wich wozde⸗
Ip bycpnes / and that hecaule he wolde pleate
bim that garh cholen himto be aloudter. Ind
though a nan ſtryue Foz a maſtery / yet is he
noc croune d ercent he ſtryue laukullx. Che


a


8


ue ok the krutes. Conlpder what q fave, Che
Londe geues vnderctandpng in all hing’, E

Remember that Fetus Chziſt beynge ck
fede ot Dautd/rotcagayne from deeth accoz
deng tomp Golpell/wherin A lufre trouble
as an euxil doar / euen vnto bondeg. But the
worde ol God was not bounde. Tales
Guffve allchrnges kor the electes lakes that
cher mpghe allo obtapne $ caluacion which
is in cn Jeli with eternal glo zv.

It is a true laying / vk we be deed with hum
we allo Hall lyue with hum. Ak we be paciet / ¢


we fail allo rargne with hum. Ik we denie Bom that


bint he alto wall den pe ba I we beleue not /
Petabyoeth he kapthkull. he cänot denve hun
elfe. De thele th vnges put them in remem⸗
bꝛaunce / teſtitpe before the Loꝛde / z they
frpue not about wozdz: which is to no profs
ket / but to peruert the hearers.

Studp to thewe thptelfe iaudable vnto
Goda workman that nedeth not to be a waz


med, dputdronge the wonde ok trueth HUY. . Emo. lg b
*amgottlp and vapne vopces patte outro . fl. G.


they Malt encreace vnto greater bugoulys
nes / and their wozdes hall fret euẽ as doeth
a cancre:ot whole nombꝛe is Hymeneos and
peter which as concernpnge the trueth

ue erved/fapinge thatthe returveccpon is
patt all redg / and do dettrope the fapth of dps
28 Ache

ut the ture grounde olchod remayneth /

and hath this leale the Loꝛde knoweth them
thatarehis and let euerx mä that calleth on w
the name of Chꝛiſt departe fro intquite. Mot
wythſtädyng in a greate houle are not only
vellelles of goulde and ok lyluer: but allo ot
woodand of erthe / lome koꝛ honoure / x lone
SntodpMhonoure. But pła man purge hym
elke krom Cuche felowes / he thatbe a vettelt
lanctifieo vntohonoure / mete koꝛthe Loꝛd /
and prepared vnto all good woꝛheg.

Luttes of youth auopde / folowe right⸗


welnes kapth / loue and peace / wich them Bt. um ler
call on the Loꝛde with bree. ee name


and bnlearned quettiog put frõthe / remem⸗
brynge thatthep do but gendze ſtrpke. But 9
feruaunt of the Loꝛde mutt not ttrpue’: but
mutt be peatable onto allmen / and apte to
teache / aͤndone that can luftte the euyli in
mennes and can intoꝛme them that relylt /
vk that God at enp tyme wyll geue them re⸗
pentaunce for to no we the trueth:that they
mape come to them telues agayne out of the
rate of te well. wake nots taken ol
hem at hrs wyll.


Che prophecpcehi of che parlous tymes / tteth ante
Ppocritea in heir colours, telleth vs what they be
within Los all thete fapze faces dutwardip. Perle ⸗
cuexon forthe Gotpell. N
he ij chapter.

- Cbis


xxxbiiß


EE
1 a 2 . = =

5 To Titus, Ixxri
(The epitle of gg
e poor es rs

Shane emanate a, ibid was ayer o pet amnc tae che
Sih sei ceils Se ene


Citus to rebuke forh as wich ande the Soipell, foze rebuke them Wavply that they maye be
5 9 fountde in the karth and nor takbnge hede to
4


The Epiltle

Pls onderſtande / chat in che lat call ther whole caves ptehe) gett them an
Daves ſhall come parelous tymes heepe ok teachers / a Mail turnẽ their eares
for the men ſwalbe louers ob their from the trueth / z Wa lbe geuen vnto fables.
Aawne ſelues / coueteous / bolters But watch thou in all thynge / and luſtre ad⸗

pꝛoude / curlod tpeakers / dylobedient to ka⸗ uerditie and do the woꝛcke of an Euũgelit /

ther and mother / vnthankull / vngolp / vn⸗ kulkxll thrne offyce onto the vtmolk.

kpnde / trucebzeakerg / ſtubbozn / falleaccus For Jamnowredp to be offeren / and the B

lars / riatourt / tearce / delpiſerg ofthe which tyme or my depart enge is at hande IJ haue

are good / traptours / head / hve mynded / gre⸗ kought a good kyght / andhaue kulkyiled my

his wap d OVO baluüpteouces moze then d louers courte and haue nepothe faye From hence

grovuelyed of GE God/hauynge a* kymilitude of goblp ly kopch is lade wp for me a crounẽ oF ryghte⸗
ice chat thulde upnge / but haue denpedthe power therof:¢ welnes which the Loꝛde that is a righteous
Pretedeholpiss loche abho re. Ok this lozte are they whych tudge Mall gene meat that dave: not to me

entte into houles / and bzinge into bondage onfp but onto all them that loue his cõming.

wymmen laden wyth Lynne / whych wemen Mane ſpede to come vnto me atonce,

are ledde ok diuers lliſtes / euer les rnynges Fo; Demas hath left me and loueth thys


Jewes fables and cOmaundementes of met

that turne krom the trueth.* unto the pure / sedi
Bd ateallthonges pure bur intochemthac ar math as
452  defpledand önbeleurnge is nothynge pure:

but euen the very myndes d confctences of N

them are dekpled. Chepconkeſſe zthey know ö
God:but with the dedes they dende him / and !
are abominable and dirobediet / and onto all


neuer able to come vnto the tinowleoge ok pꝛetent woꝛlde / and is departedonto hela good wozches difconmiendable,
448 an DFambyes withlt de cho tugonio aimed. snip Lucas oped Eve retteed Hyd ti
8 Fares and gamb; ode Mp nto Dalmacid. Only Lucas ig th ym how he Spall tench al eyes
Zanmeg. besen dodothele deri Frech mende me, Take Marke and bainge him with the / due hem leite dee


Gradl uh, ale or caprupt indes /andleawocas cöcer fog beisnecellarporttame / for to rupnitter. dhe. i. chapter.


nynge the kapth bur they all preuayle no And C pchicug haue J lent to Epheſus. Che Lolas. i.
Clenger. Kor their madneg Walbe bttered onto clohe that Ilekte at Troada with Carpus /
all men as theits was. But thou halt lene 5p when thou commett/bzinge with the / K the
experience ol mp doctrine /fatiion ol lyuing / boltes / but ſpeciallp the paͤrtchemẽt. Alexan
purpole / fapth / longeluſterynge / ue / pa⸗ der the copperlmpth dyd me moche eupll the
gfence / perlecucions / and affiicctons whych Loꝛde te warde him accoꝛdinge to his dedes /
happened onto me at Antioche / at Zcomũ ol whd be thou ware allo. Foz he wythſtode
und at L pitra; which perfecuctds J fliſtered oure peach unge ſoꝛe.
acientlp, Andkrom them all the Loꝛde delle aAtmp krzſt ancwerynge / no man agſtcted
ueredme. Fe a allß will lyue godlyin hut me / but all koztoße me. J prave God / that it
Jelu / mut Cure perlecuctous. But 5 euyli mape not be lapde to their charges: . not
inen and dylceauers call wexe wozle and wpihſtandynge the Loꝛde aüpſted me / and
‘ woꝛde wh bl they deceaue and are deccaucd ttrengtheome / hat by me p pꝛeachyng Mula
them fclucs, 8 be fulkylled to the vimoſt / and that ald Gens
Vut continue thou in the thyngeg which tyls ſyuld heare. And J was delpuered out oF
Dthouhaſt learned / which allo were comitted the mouth o€ the lyon. And the Lozde call de
vnto the / lepng thou knoweſt ol whom thou ipuerme krom all cuplidopnge/ a thal kepe
hald learned the c loꝛas moche allo ag thou me vnto his heuen kengdom Co whom
halt knowẽ holy lcripture ofa chylde / which pꝛaple koꝛ euer and euer: men. L
is able to make the wyle vnto kaluacyon Dalute Prifca ee houcholde
thoꝛowß kapth which is in Chiſt gelu. Fo: of Oneliphozus Eraſtus abode at Coꝛin⸗
J Petri. i. d. all ferfptutegeuen bp inſpiracpon of God / thum. Crophimos Ilekte at Myletũ tyctie,
Ils pꝛollitable to teache / to impꝛoue / to amẽ⸗ Manke lpede to come bekoze wynter Eubo⸗
de and to inſtruct in rrahtewelnes / that the ug gretith the / and Punens / and Linus
man ot God mape be perkecte and pzepared Claudia and all the bzethzen. Che Lode ze
onto al good wo nes. dus .


gde erhorteth Cimothy to be kernent in the wome voutamen.


ä
5


ll dient vnto their awne butt ates gehe 0
ge bath pzo⸗ of God be not eupli ponen of. rementp
moter J e beganne ee bath newyle esbogte tater pe hy lad eon. men.


mutted onto nie bythe commaundement of ctryne with honeſtie and with t
God dure faucoure. Co Citus hrs natur l 0 he wholkame
tonne in the commen lapth. a A ene ee ee he which


e anldwering aga


which are not (clandzen ok ropote / nether are God /s b; ingeth S Le
anddllobedtent. Foz a*bithopy ether kaute⸗ Serre e kene dehnen


And to (nffce aduerlite / maketh meuctonok his awne * f "Yelle / as it becé D
deathandpdderh Mpmothy come vnto him. e ende oF the leconde Epiltle bntoCyy f /as tt becömetg the mintſker or od not bngodl ynes g woꝛdlp lu
sip 0 e lil. Chapter, * si . beenden panne to Inuctobyemnptven oral led
IG Celtifve therkoꝛe he koꝛecod and ib zptten froma ome when Paul wag pre ne ee duo ne but herbe- this pꝛelent worde lo pnge Coz that blend
4 betone 5 Lon Feta chaitt,wh écly lented the leconde tyme vp beloze ? /one that toueth goobnes/fabze minded Hope and glo nous app eof He meghty D>
Wall tudge quiche and deed at his Emperoure Nero, 8 us hold temperat a ſuche as cleueth God / ok dure auen geln Chat hep 8
C7 SY laperpnge mnbis kyngds / pꝛeache i Mic woda boctrpne/thache mape auen felfe Foz bs/co ledeme bs kroma
the worde he keruent / be it tnfeaton ng oute * 7 20 exijorte with whöllome learnyng / burrattewelnes g to pourge us a peculxar
„Cher hare gk Fea ton. Impro rebulie/erhortetntth all a: uethemehattapecapn it. peopfebnta humkfelke fetuentſygeuen bnto


2 Hee are manp dilobediẽt a talners ot good woꝛckes Chele t

banites dticauersot memdes numelpchey Ponte Fand reh ole lehman e.

ot tecscutycnionppotemoutbesmubbe Becher mmemhehteche. .
Ee ag W aot


bo tur Fapth Jonge ker page anddocteyne, Foz the tyme
_. poblpithe cher myll rome / when they wyll not luffer whol:
nw doctonyes lome doctryne : but after their awne luſtes


Hf S. Peter. Fk,
Ans Baal 4 are inbeupnes/ thoowe mantkoldetempta⸗ N
Che talk Cpilte ee

5 10 10 Pr ethat perrl⸗
oklaynct Peter the Apoſtle. the (chou tebe expeD wich kee pant oe
Che Gerueth that thorowe theaboundant merep af kounde bntoiawoe/giorp and honoure / at §,


0 officers that they be readre vn 1 kurt 9 8 ‘ ive ave begotten agapuetoalpuetp hope: Yow apperynge ok gelus Chiſt: whom re haue


Allgood woes“ theytpeane dhe Perth Siesta hnageeeoppervarebe Herder dio dene feriene hm undomerns non


enofegbterg/ but Hemiongovipomecteyoupefomorpestperare wur veCebininot/ rer Do pou Beleuc: ang
Be dal igen Hed z i no Lasnea MUP adele Sch. EAE elope wech iope bnipeakable @ gleppous:
we dure feltics allo were in tymes pat / vn⸗ : receaurnge the ende oF youre faviy/the tal⸗
wyle:dprobedient / deceaued / in daunger to 2 A uacſon of poure ſoules. f ;
duſtes /a to dpucrsmanners ok volupteoul⸗ ed . 8 aneh ai nut
ne rung th maltctoutnes and enupe/tult grace f ChultDconte pnto pou/fearching whe
02 at what tyme of p lpꝛete of C hꝛiſt which
was in thẽ / ſhuldlignitie / which Cpzete tent
fied bekoze / the pantds that utd come unta
Chꝛiſt / a the glozy that chulde folowe after:
vnto which Pꝛophetes it was declared / that
not vnto ene u onto be / che huld c
miniſter ö thing’ which are now chewed vn
to pou ofthem which by the holy goof lent
doune from heuẽ / haue pꝛeached vnto you p
thynges which the angels delpꝛe to belyolve;
uldeſt cer⸗ fi
myabt be
belt


1. Timo tb
v. Timo. 440


AG.
C


—


oliũhe


AG henz (hal fende Artemas onto the / oz e ee
W eichicus oe vliget to come rome onto gie sue the op 1
echopalls T0 A haue Determined thereto win charze. 1 75.
ker einde Senas the latmgar ¢ Apoltog, . . N g ter an Apoltle of Je⸗
delt lorſevdlug eit thar nothyng be A don bow thatthouowerbn * du Chzitt/ to chem chat bivell
Epnge onto the.dnditt outes andere Fico mi Oe If) MAAC bereand there as Kraungers
cell gon oyna Fath as ae de. Cantate men 3 er |thozowout Pontus / @aln-
e c mel engt un 1 ‘ : te cia; Capadocta/Alia/and Be
sate 0 alt amg. Mere Ame ay thpnia/clecte bp theton.
olg les to genes Pacher thozow 5 ſanctikying
polis a 8 pence al help fe onto obedtence and lpꝛinchling
Nimtte wat we OF che DiC: ur Fetus Cheilt.
2 5 pou and peace he multyplted.
the father of oute N. Ar
cl e a inant 15
0 a i ne bute se Tpuntp hope by
8 pace of hekaprp and lone er Phlle é * 2 ve Fetus Whitt kr beeth / te
0 denen ecpats cadageus dee m 14 5 . 81 imceimmoztall a vndefy⸗
l An nc e af Felt (Sent seco: 14 ee
N ep 0 . ; feruaunt, : g si are keyt by the poder of ol
eee e n A 2 ito Fadieacion/ whieh faluaz
winter Ph the beloued / ee 3 pce ald rep to be chewed inthe
jandourebelper/etochebeloued ; is sive kuchen tinte pe ſhall retoer
to hrchtppug dure feiowe ſouder a 1 ‘ though nots u lealon( pk nede requyzeype
and to the congregacpon ol thy houle =; .


a en
4


ij. Oe


The i.Epiltle


totisdntethy nien to lape atpdealt ice rthervety that
en ase ne es midis
‘them to abftepne from klechlp luttes/ ¢ to abeye wort
Ip rulers. ow ſeruauntes ulde behaue them lelues
toward their matters.Be exhoꝛteth to after the
enlample olf Chu.
Che. i chapter.

Erkoze labs alrde all malictoulnes
iar and bebe bree ages
churches et enupe andall backbytinge: an
ir eh newe barne Dates ele tat Eee
Tüll lac iter lonable myſte / which is w out cozrupcxon /
wodilye lacri⸗that ye mape growe therin. Ar lo be that ve
fice mutt be of- haue taſted how plealaunt the Loꝛde ig to
wesen ty Yd ve came ac bntoa Tpupnge (tone dikalo⸗
perbon ofteren wed omen but chover ok Cod e prectouss &
it to Pod chou pe a8 Ipupnge ſtones / aye made a cpꝛetuall
manetta body, houſe / c an holy pꝛeſthode koꝛto offersp tyre
ker rdole ob hum kuall facrpkpce / acceptable to God by Ze⸗


tus Chit,
B  toherfozeie is contapned in the tcripture:
beholde⸗ put in S pon an heed coꝛner ſtone /
celecte and pꝛectous: and he that beleueth on
al, ervite. him / ſhall not be a chamed. Tinto pou therko
sInith.rxiv. re which beleue / he is prectous: but nto the
Actuuin. fn. c. which beleue not / the one which p bylders
rekuled / the lame is made the heed tone in &
comer / a a tone to ſtomble at / and a rocke

to offend thé which ſtomble at the woꝛde / a

beleue not that wher on they were let. But
ve are a cholen generacid / a ropall pꝛeſthod
an holx nacton / and a peculiar people that
ve chuld ſhewe p vertues ol him p called you
dut ol darcknes into hys maruelous lyght /
which in time pat were not a people / vet are
Chow B people of cod: which were nat under
mercpe / but now haue abtapned mercye. E
Moma. ir. c. T. Derlp beloued J beleche pou as ſtraũ⸗
Hiav.c gers & pilgrems / abſtapne krõ dechly luſtes /
Aoma tg d which kight agavnſt the toule / and le that pe
haue honen conuerfactonamonge the Gen⸗
wee ee ee e

af authe de ma 07 e
90 edge Godatin the daye biotech.

So doch peter Suübmpt voure lelues vnto all maner oꝛ⸗
uhren es blffaunce oF ma £02 the lowes take whether
ponchtafech wie be bntothe Nynge as onto the cheke heed:
bin inſpiracion other vnto rulars / as vnto the that are (ent
tocalla ma took hum /koꝛ p pumtchment of euplidoars / but
‘etter urg. for the laude oF them that do well $f; Cots 8

Of God / that xe put to lplence the igno⸗
rauncie of che folythe men: aß fre / and not as
hauynge che lpbertie fo2 a clocne ol malt⸗
Coutnes/buteué as Fleruadtt of god. 50
fouteall men. woue bzotherlp kelechpppe,
Fegre God / and honoure the kynge.

Deruaũtes ober pour matters with all


a
_ wltde be th


Mee. id,


OMAR Gece


Ephe. vt. a.
Sage.


but allo though ther be frowarde. Foꝛ it is
thanke wozthpe pra man for conccience to⸗
warde Ged endu re grele / lullerynge wrongs


keare not only yrthey be good ¢ courteous:


Mopꝛeouer who is it that wyll barme you /
PE ve tolowe that which is good: Notwith-
Ganopnge happy are ve pt pe Cuffce to rygy
tewelnelles lane. Ve and feare not the
cher leme terryble to pou / nether be troli⸗
bled: but fanctifpe the Lozoe God in poure
bert. Be redyali wapes to geue an antwere
toeuerꝝ man that atteth vou a reton of the
bope that is in youre that wych mneabnes &
keare: haufig good contcience/that when
they bachhipée you as eüpldoars / thep mi:
be achamten in ag moche ag chey haue falle
kpacculenvune good couerfacionin Chzilt.

ig rc pe the wyll ol God be lo) p ve
fufite ko vue nopnge thenfoz eupll dinge.
DEN nh ag Chl bath once tufferer


12 fo2 Cynics:
5 re


eMDure cal,
ipnge- is to for
lowe Lut.


tapningrtuchellelſhe: but was quyckened
in che lpꝛrte.


che. ih, Chapter,
0 the topes be in fub⸗


Dene and fen
inge the in nos


this maner in the olde tynie yd thehoir we⸗ f°
me bid ere evchemtelues/a fo sear ge
were obrdionttto Ude eue as Spa pee abe bee fo
ra ghe rcd AE zaham / and called hm Lozoe:

be daughherg ve are ag As bed
weil / not be enge atvapde of euerx ſbadotde.


lies bloude.
as; bnto
this purpote


Dpuerore
ions / but tab


* 4

fate
full ſbe
Gupti me


wit


r teDube Cop web


were in pre
ion 3 vn


avers Jute
Depofoes oem hat bo eu
Mort


Ol. S. P


eiulte fog the britstte / for ta’.
bꝛynge vs ta 50d / and was Bplled / as per⸗


eter’, T̃tl.


Kreis-
betoze Godin blpꝛete. Che ende ok all thing ockeu n oe .
tea hade W ae a a a
K. Pe pe thertoze dilcrere g tober p ve mare ao wperüpthey


ougy be apte to pꝛapers. But aboue ali thyngesiveretowied: 5


haue keruent loue amonge vou. Foz loue co⸗Arengehthero
zuereth p multitude of lynnes. Be pe herbe⸗ bernd fo reh
Yous one boanothet andchat wichougrudch en ge
une euery manhath reccaucd pgptte, rity ee paclen
miniſter § tame one to another / as gogd mi⸗ tu immortalitte.
nitters of § manptolde grace of God. FEenyC Audvecante
ma Cpeabe let him talkie ag though he tpake u, bene
the woꝛdes of cone ce an myniter / let ded how y tous
him do it as of the abplite which God mpni-tes oF cheſe bler
treth onto bent. Chat God in all thynges led rain forth ot
maye be glozttien thozotn Fetus hn Esto ahh
whom be peaple ¢ nontinton for euer g shill poapen or onete
the worde ſtandeth. Amen. An the pure tab
Pearly beloued / be not troubled inthrs tance of pipes
beate which now is come amöge pou totrbe 1 —
vou fas though fome fraunge thing had bap her gude be
pened vnto vou: but vetopce / in as moche as i


of 8 dilobediet
Ca Checpall erhoptacton for alt biſchopes a: J zeſtes 2 —
fo fede the klocke ol Chrilt / and what their dutpe is / v be.
what e they Mall haue yk they be dpligent. be
exhartöth pange perfonnesto fubmpe them kelurs to
theelder euerß one to loue anotheritobe lober and to
watche / that they maße relpfte the enemye.
Che. b. Chapter.


he elders which are amonge vou /
fl FJ exbortes whych aitalfoaneloey
ads wytnes of the acklicctons of
PLS} Ch2itt/andaitoa partatier br the
sstozy that chalbe opened le that ye kede Chen
ites klocke which is amonge vou tak ynge B
nuerkpght of chem not as though ye were cis
pelieotyerto buctwplipngly: not kos the de⸗
„ che eren,
ough pe lord ouer the*partlibes:, o grpubers ?
but chat ge be an eam he gt, a i
j. int


A r 5 .

Olf, Peter, tif,

— Syeweth cher cloudea catied about ot a teſnpelt / to home Jude ges

25 . sky

pat i re 5 en 0} e 02

V 77 Herwer tale Proplietes aner ofvangtie chep vegple m wantancs ores

pésare ere nS one to anöcher untt poure Celuesto ger she people eus as therthalbe fat eheluttes of f fee, themthat were ciene

fed/ Op oto! e ever m lowirner of unde $09 God relle five . cteachers amöge velrawhich pre- elcaped: but now are wrapped in errourg.

leclow/ tot he pꝛarde / and geueth gvace tothe humble. -of woptdf elan bzengemdanmable tec: Chepyzomes them irbertie / andare the ſel⸗

beleben. Soubmpe youre felues thertope bre the And Heumto gente alldiugence: tn poure zz : Hen a hingeben heben n en. nes bonde feeuauntes of co rupcion. Fo:
FF . @trvertue Rnowteds © peat ent ¢ byinge bpon chem elues fappetdamls Of whom forueya man is ouct come bnto the 29


The. ij, Epittle


büekofere, B And whe p chele theperd wall appere veal
pavetihes an pei 3 came glozye.


toben the tyme is come. Catt all youre care
to him: koꝛ he careth ko vou. :
Be lober and watch / for youre aduerfarpy
che deupll as avozynge lyon walketh about /
Cchynge whom he mape deuoure: whomre⸗
Spt ctedkag in che taych / remembꝛenge that
ve do but kulkyll the Came affliccions ih ych


swe be apbpn are apopnted to poure bzethzen that are in
{eb to fate (0 § tpg ine Che Godot ali gvace/ which called


Pou onto his eternall glozy by Child Fetus,
Gall his àwne ſelte after pe haue tuffred a ly
tell affliccion make pou perfect: (ball Cettie/
P rengytand tadiitipe you.cobim be giozp
anddomihton oz euer / and whyll the worde
enduxkth. men. E

By Sluanus a faytheutt bother onto
pou(as J luppoſe)haue 3 wozpeten bzefly/ers
boztynge and teltti ine born tbat this 189
true grace of chod / wherin pe ſtande Che cos
palttons of youre eleccion that are of Baby

ion / lalüte vou / and Marcus my lonne.

Grete ye one another with the Kyle

eee ee
J n.


* I 2


The leconde epittle
e of Saynct peter.
Ae ee ere a ibe


be
* tofipe f coicupciom of worldly tutta make chert cal
kung dare wü 000 alete and krutes of fapth.


Len ee Pryce br tJ


de Jelus tobe # true ſonne of Hob) as

ith ene vyon the mount.
ee Chapter,

eters ſeruaunt


ats wre 08
ie 33 ch ol dure Gone lauioure
: end peace be multyplied
onde. Acco
geuen dato vs all tyynges that pertarne vn


ge / and in knowledge temperance / and intẽ 1


75 * olive workes
ote ¢ ibe ce


vou all wa
though

Pine
Jam in this


Fetus Chi.
wyll enfoarce cherfoze/ that on euerp ide e
Hate bau B reno rr bpb nnen :


Braunce of theke thyngt alter my departing.
HM Foz we kolowed not deceuabie tabies the


we opened onto pou the powet ¢ commpnge.


or oute Loꝛde Telus Chat / but wrth oure
eyes we fate his mateſtle: euen then berelx
rom 7 — ee 2 10

ai excellent poe
cen

*

bepnge um

mae with h. A


115


ed eee
holpgoocck. 1 5


he iaphete.
Die eho tn


a Bacon and manp tall folowe thetydamna fame ta hein bondage Kor vethep/atter they Sant
le wapes / by which the wave oF trueth hal
e eupli (potien of/¢ thozow * courteoutnes
Wall they wpth karned wozdes make mare
chandyle of vou / whole iudgemẽt is not fat
and that becan re ot / and theilt damnacion flepet) not.

le we baue ne Foz pt God lpared not the angels that ten
Bed / but caſt them doime into heli and dip
beben d and Ueredtheim into chäpnes ofberchnes to be
coueteoutnes Rept nto iudgement: nether ſpared the olde
che father wozlde / but laued Moe the epght preacher of
rygbtewelnes / and bought in the lud vpon
2, che wozde ol the vngodlr / and turned the cys


haue eccaped from the kyithrneg of d woe
thozowe the knowledge of the Loꝛdẽ and oF
the laulour Fetus hilt / are pet tangled
agayne therin and ouercome: then is the lat⸗
ter ende wonlle with them then b begynning.
Foz it had bene better fo7 them / not to haue
*hnowne the wape of rrahteoulnes then al⸗


ter ther haue knowen it / to turne krom the t is better
bole commaunberent geue nchen eis neue
bappenſdonto che ccc opng to che true pro chen not o lr
uerbe: * Che dogge ig turned to his vomet ue cher alter.
agapne / a the low that was wellhed / to her Wiouer pl.


wallowenge in themrer.
Cec exhaꝛtech men to beware ol loch as wolde male
them beleue / that the Bape of the Lobe were lache in
pet spac them to ede a godly ipke / ¢ to lone
verelp foi che commpnge of the Lorde/whole longe 14
rpenge ts laluaclon / and bergie he wolde haue no mi
ton but wolde reccawe alt men to repentaunce.
¶ Che ij. Chapter. 5
Big is the leconde epiltle 6 ¥ now
‘wzite vnto vou heloned wherwillh
4 tere vp / and warne voure pure
D Amendes / to call toremembzaunce
the woꝛdes whych were tolde befoze ol the
holy Piophetes / and allo the cömaundment
okbathe Apaglesokthe Conde alauedur. .
„his kpzd vnderltäde that ther Mall co⸗
mein the late dapes / mockers / whych wyl 5,
wall atterthetyawune luſtes b late. nohere
is the pzomes 1117 commpnge?: Kor fence
the Fathers oped / all thenges contpnite inthe
lame efate wherin they were at the begyne
nynge Chis they nnowe not (and that wyl⸗
Ipngty vow that the beauens a great wöple
ago were, and the erth chat was in the water,
apeared vp oute of the water / bythe woe
OF Goo: by the which thynges the world tae


2


then was /perifiped/oucrtlowing i} waer.


But the heauens bevely and erth whych ure
nom / are kept by tye late woꝛde in ſtoze / e
refetued onto Fpze / agapnlt the Dave ob iud⸗
1 men.
Derelp beloued / be not tgnozant ot thys
one thrnge / bow that one dape is wyth the
Loꝛde / as a thouſande pere / and a thouſand


bu⸗ pere aß one daye. Che L onde is not flacke to


fulfill his pꝛomes as Come men countſlacu⸗
nes: hut is pacrent tobs warde / ard wolde
haue no ma lot / hut wolde receaue all men


to repentaunce.
2 8 M.lij. Peuer⸗


debe. bi.


f. 7
und. xl.


The.i, Epiſtle


*Meucrtheledle the dave ok the Lone welt
3 whech
dape / the beauens Wall perptive with terry⸗
ble nopte andthe elementes Hallmett wrth
heet / and the erty with the woꝛkes that ave
therin Hall burne.

Fall there chenges chan perpitpe / what
maner percons ought ye tobe in holy conuer
Cacyon and godlpnes lokynge C07 f hallinge
e free

e heaue pore
andthe clemétes chalbe contumen Wheate.


gp * Keuertheletle we lobe for anewebeauen g


puncme crib rate bene pꝛomes / wher
indwelleth ryghtewelnes.
Whereoꝛe derlp beloued / fepnge that ve


(The ft Epillle


price e Apoſtle.

re
e |

Roman is without fynne,


loke kor loche thynges be dripgent that ve 8


mape be tounde of hym in peace / wythout


Spotte and vndetpled. Andtuppote tyatthe &


Longe luflerynge of the Lopde is Caluacyon/
euen agoue bret bebued bzother Paul /
accozdinge tothe wyldome vnto him /


geuen 4% FS
wꝛote to pou/pec/alimootincuerpepittle/ Ae bf 2


Speahpnge of toche thrngest amonge which
ure mant thenges hardẽ to be vnderſtande /
which ther char are vnlearned and vnſtable
peruert / aß ther do other ker vnto
their awne deckruccton. Fethertoꝛe beloued /


fepnge ve kno we it betoze hand / beware leſt


pe be alto pluckedawape wichche ertoure ol
the wycked / and fall From youre awne feds
faftnes:but growe ingrace / and in the
knowledge of dure Loꝛde andla⸗
ueoute Jeſus Ehziſt. Co
whom be glozpboch
now and fo? euer.

Imen.


en

whrch we nn eit
Andes c ¢
then
Spitties: teas


ue


07 the


15 i ob che lle.
bane feneatibectewpt


d that alt

br eh iy

wich Thul oni
which 1 5


its che tydrnges whrch

Erz ol bim s declare bnto you / chat God
a
e fave that we haue 0
and yet walcke in dercknes / welpe. ade erte tig
not the truth. But and ve we walke ing Feu
eut ag he is in lyaht / chen haue we ffeil
pe with him / and the bloude or chi
big ſonmtie clenteth bs from all .
A we Cave that we haue no lynne / we de. x
Ber cute felues ani nns snot nbs e
wer knowledge dure lynnes / be is Capit zur oe
ene be fot ar eee dere Are
e aaah

a 1 . 5
Capit ee rue enya


Che. i. b. K
wel are pn


fonnes cannot
a |


Ol, H.


LAY lytell chitoz? there thinges wzi-
A lice A onto pou, that ve feine not:
Het en man fynne/yet we haue an
ſaduocate wyth the kather / Fetus
Chat / wyrch is ryghteous: andhe it is that
obterneth grace ko: dure cynnes: not foz
oure lynnes only: but allo fo the cynnes of
all che wozde. And herby we are ture that
we knowe hm / pr we kepe bps*commaune
dementes. Be that lapth J znowe hym / and
kepeth not hys commaundementes is a Ivar:
Gthe veritre is nut inhrm. Wholoeuer hes
peth his woꝛde / in himis the loue of God par
kect in dede. And therbp knowe we that we
2e
eught to .

2 Biethzeng warte nonewecomaundemét
vnto vou: hut that olde cõmaundemẽt which
ve hearde from the beginnynge. Che olde cis
maundement is the wozde whpch ve hearde
from the beginnynge. Agapne a newe coms
maundement I wzpte onto you / a thynge z
ig true in lum / q alfo in pou:toꝛ the dercknes
is pal / a che true light naw — 2
fapth bow thatheis in the lyght / and pet bas


teth bys bꝛother / is in dercknes euen bntril be


Chigtpme . Hethat loueth hrs bꝛother / abp⸗
deth in the lyght and ther is none occation of
Weener bem. Betharebatethhes bzocher lg
znoweth noe in dercknes / and walketh in dercknes: and
wyac Lope cannot tell whpther he goeth / becaule that
haty done for derckneshath birnded his eres.
ham but he Babes I w7pte vnto you how that youre
Sn abe nd SPINES are orgeuf pou tor bis names Cake,
woteth what A werte vntopou fathers/ bow f pe knowe
Lone path him that was krö the beginnyng. Jwiite vn ·
done. to pou vounge men / how that pe
come $ wicked. J write vnto pou ipten chri⸗
dꝛen / how that ve knowe the father, A wiyte
bnto pou fathers / how that ye knowe hem
that was from the begynnynge. L wzite onto
zou pounge men / how that peare ctronge &
che woꝛde of Go abideth in pou and pe haue
tony abe thar eto ot the worde / ether p
de that e that ye loue notthe er
tre dae, chynges that are in the woꝛde . E en man
ueth not Gad. toue the woꝛlde / che foue of the kãther is not
inhem. Foz all that is in the worde (as the
ul ofthe tlelche / che luk ofthe epes / and the
parde OF Goodes) is not ot the father / but ot
the worde. And ß worde vanylchech aware
and the luck ther ofbut he that kulkpllech che
will of Goo/abpoeth euer.
Lytell chplozen it is the lat tyme / and as
Ot antyeryin ve haue herde how 5 *Antichzit tall come
ige hartz euen nowarethere man Antichetttes come
Chapter foloe Allredy. 1 herby we knowe that it is p lak
wenger, kyme. Cher went oute krã vs / but chey were
not ol vg. Foꝛ pt they had bene ol bs / they
wolde no dout / haue continued with vs. But


ue ouer⸗


res |

ohn⸗
that koztuned that it might appere / thattheß
were not ol vs. 5 cae oi
And rehaue an opntnient ok the holy golt
Eve howe all chinges; E I wzote not onto
pou/as though ve knewe not the tructh:but
as though pe knewe it / and knowe alfothat
nolpe commeth of trueth. wijo isa lar but
be that denpech that Jelus is Chzilt the ta
me is the Intich zul that denpeth the kather
ethe tonne. Wlofoeucrdenpetl the tonne / 115
the lame hath not the kather. Let therkoze
abrde in pou that fame which pe hearde krõ
La beginnynge. It that which ve hearde kr

e beginninge chal remapne in vou / ve allo
Wall contynewe inthe tonne / and in dhe ka⸗
cher. And this is the pꝛomes that he hath pꝛo
myled vs euen eternalllpfe. 8

This haue A write vnto vou / cõcerninge
chem that difceaue pou, And the anorntinge
whrch pe receauedot hym / dwelleth in vou.
And penede not that eny ma ceache pourbut derb pete that
as the annorntynge ceacheth vou all thingz / LHR tonne
and is true / and i no pe / z as it taught pou can not dwell
euen fo brde therin. And nowe babes abpde to gether for
inbomdjattwhen be pal appere/ woemape kehre
bolde and not be made a Hamed or hym at gern tyunes
bis commynge: Ak re nowe chat he is rygh⸗
teous / knowe alfo that he whpch foloweth
ryghtewelnes / is bone ol hem.


Ache ſpnguler loue of god toward un and how we
agapne oughte to loue one austher.


che. ii. Chapter.
15 kcbolde what loue the tather hath 2


xtiij.


übe wed on da that we chuld be cal⸗
Hens fornes of God fo this caule
Ahe worde ünoweth you not / bes
cautett knoweth not hem. Derelp belouep /
nom are we the fonnes of Cod / s vet it doth
not appere what we halbe. But we knowe
tebé it chall appere / we halbe pne him.
e pn eee
e nt, e 7

euen as he is pure, Whoſdeuer commptteth


apperedto take awape oure kynnes / and nech.
km isnofmme,dsmanyag brde in him San e ght
fpnne not: whoroeuer ſynneth / hath not ſene of pps tpivice,
him nether hach knowenbym, --
Babe let no man deceaue vou Hethat
doeh renbteoumes ig ryqhteous / euẽ as be
isrpahtcous He th at cömitteth lynne / ol
thedeupli:fozthe deuxll kynneth fence z bes
Ainnpnge. Kor this purpote apperedß tonne
ol ad to lo wle the warckes of the deuyll.
eee ee
a he cinok tynne /
becault he is bone of God. mee are tze
b. pldꝛen


The epille


S chyldzen ol Bod knowen / and the chiidzen ot
che deupil. Wholoeuerdoech ndt rygbtewel⸗
nes / is not ot God / nether he that loueth not
hrs bzother. 3
Lane (s $fe8 "gon chis sschetioniges hat pe hene fe
dallocher. che beginninge;é ve Wald Tone one anvthee
not as Capit which was ol p wicked ¢ lieve
his bꝛocher. Ind wherkoꝛe rie we he hime Se
caule his amne wozkes were euyll / and hyg
Hrothers good +$Daruaple not my bettie
though the woꝛlde hate pon. We nove h
Tho ploneth is We ave wantlated krone deelh vnto lyf / he⸗
be den anne courte we loue che bechzen. Ie cha icueth
Reems not hen brolher abpdech indrech Ueboroe⸗
va murchernv ler Hatech hs bꝛother / is a man llear. And
and hach not pe linotde that no man kleur / hath eternal
ete call lptr. ſpte abydynge in hym.
Herby perceaue we louc:thathe gaue his
An bath wo pte tops: @ cherkoze dught we aiko fo yeue
eth noe Od. oure lines koche bzeth zen w oloeuer ha
this worldes good ¢ Lepth hys brother haue
neade:¢ ſhuttẽth vp his cõpa ion rom hum:
oo dwelleth ß loue oF Gov inbhim? Ip bas
. we bes (let 08 not loue in wozde/nether in tages
Prarie Se but with the debe cinberitfe: Eos theror
in the teuthee s we knodwe that we ire of the veritte / an can
have quyet P befoze bpm duet oure herten. But ye gure
zoilhencen , hertes toͤdẽ pne o/ God ls gretter then ure
$0 Dod warde. herteg /a towel all chynges. Beioutd/ ve
gure hertes condẽpne vs not/ then haue we
ktult ko God warde: a whattocuer we ale
We thal receauk of hini:becaule we kepe his
comma undemßtes /a do hole hinges which
ave pleefpnge in his tyght,
th tue am bps ishps cöniaundement / chat we
the eig ce helene on name ok lutz ron yeas cy zit /
al chnaude⸗ ib tou-one kanocher as eoziwe cinmun⸗
munten be pbemenk Andhethat tepelh h cömaunde⸗
Hath them is nmentes / dwellech in hym / and he in hym and
Dod and hath herby we knowe that ther ah ꝛdeth in i ol
hin pirite. the lpʒete which he gaue bs,
. Diltereuce of (pretewand howe the ſpꝛete or Hod
mage be ho wne kö the tppete orerroure. Ot the loue
ot God aud of oure neyghbeures.
che. iti Chapter.
Ac beloued / heſeue not euery chete
but pꝛoue { fppeteg whether they
Nare or God oz not / o: many kalſe
: Pꝛophetes are gone out inta the
hey ß tive wozide Herdp Mail pe tinowe the (pꝛete of
soothes intbifye God. Euerp lpzete chat contereth that Fetus
Eco tonne are Ch ile ia conte mthellethe ug ok Gd. And
h sue to, eucey gece which conkedeth not that Fetus
ine in leCihe. Th it is come in the flefthe is not of Pod.
fx Autichne Bay ehis is P Ipzete of 4*Aniich2ttt / or wd
KogntEvet) Hot pe Hane bearde/ howe Chat he Wunde came:
And ih cancttent How altedy ig he im the worde.
the people dien “Wyte chrlbzen / ve are of God andiynue
o ulde cov duerkoine them: for greatter is he that 18
im che endeſn pon chen he tial is in 5 wande. Ehe z are


of the wonde / e therfore tpeaßte they ok the B of pam
wozlde / a the woꝛlde heareth thé, We are of 8 fo, yele p
Gov.Ye § hnotweth Goriheareth nachervat ees sane
isnot of God/heareth bsnot Derby knowe 1 bp comes
wep lpꝛete ok peritie / athe lpꝛete ok erroure. vnc au b tcache
Beloued / let vs joue one another: oz loue me bocerpue

ommelh OF God. Ind euerpone that Loucth wende bg G
is bonne of od / and knoweth God. He that aur Anica
Loueth not Ainoweth not God: K fo2 Gop is 8
loue. In this appered the loue of God to bee
ward / becaure that God ſent his only begot⸗
ten tonne into $ woꝛlde / that wemightitue
thoꝛow him. Perun is loue / not that we loued
God but that he loued vs / and Cent his lonne
to male agrement Foz dure lyn nes.

Beloues / yl God fo loueb os / we ought allo
to loue one another. Oo man hath lene God C
al eny tyme. It we loue one another / God
dwelleth in vs / and hig loue is parlect in vs.


th Perby know we: that wedwellin hem / a he


in vg: becaule hehach geuen vs ofbis lpꝛete.
And we haue tene and do tertifpe that the fas
ther Cent the lonne / which is the faucour of &
wogloe, holoeuer contelleth that Jclus 8
the lonne ol God / in hym dwellrih God / and
he m God. And we haue nowẽ and beleued
the loue that God hath to vg.

God is loue and he thar dweneth in loue P
dwelleth in God / and God in him. Herin is >
loue perfect in vs that we ſhuld haue truſt
inthe dave of tudgement: Foz ag he is, euen
lo are weinthys wozlde. Eher ig no repre in
louc/but parfect foe caſteth out all te :
£02 Fearehath papntiiines, He that keareth /
ig not parkect in uu. ae

We louehym / ko: he foued os fpr. If we that leueth
mi lape / A loue Gch / a pet hate hig brother ot his löcher
hei a pak. Ko: how can he chat laueth not eth worwad
bis bꝛother who he hath ſene / our God whũ
he hath not Cone? and this commaundement
haue we ol brntthache whpch loueth God /
fhuldtoue his vzother allo. N *.


his


Er.


toe


meth not.


„ DES,

. This debug cht ia he that cam öpwa⸗

ter and bioud / not by water only but bx wa

terand bloud. Andit fg che Cpzete that bea⸗
reth wytnes becaule the-tpzete is tructh,

‘93 ther ace thre which beare recosde in heauen / öka

typ worde J wholy good. And thete thre are one)

ther gre thze which bearereco de merth)

the Cpzete/ andi water / and bloud: and chele

thze ave one. It we receaue the nes ol

men / the wytnẽs of Godis greater. Foz ches

Whe wytnes ok God / whych he teſtikpedol

bs konne. He that beleueth on the fonneot

Sod / hach d wytnes in hym elke. E He chat

beleueth not God / hath miade him a lpar / be⸗

C cauſe he beleued not the recozde that God


hitte b Baue OF hes forme And thps is that recozde⸗


how chat Goo hath geuen bnto bs eternal
Ipfe/and his pte is in hrs tonne. He's hath
thefonne hath kyte: and he that bath not the
tonne of God / hach not ite.
Ehelethenges haue J wuytten nto vou
that beleue on che name of the konne of God
that ye mape inowe howe chat ye haue eters
nall ipte / and that ve mape beleue onthe nas
me ol che lonne of God, Andthes ts the truſt
p we haue inhymichat ye we are enpthinge
accoꝛdynge to hys well / heheareth vs. And:


bery God/and etenall
fe. babes eps vou 1


Celues krõ pages,
Amen.


John ⸗


4 pee 20%
ib tecott Kaiti,
tleok Sarntt John.
Shee toute erden
warnech them to beware of Coch di(ceauers.asdenpe
that Zeluis Louk came in the flech pꝛapeth them to
Continue in the bockrpne or Thick to haue nothinge
ta do with them that beinge not this lernpnge. 4

i Jape elder to che electeia-#
fache chridze which J tone


net /tos the erutyes tage
: bt dwelleth in bs ian


. t 6 the K. us Chat
onthe father a krö the Kose Fetus
40


Mou out another And chis is the loue / that cimaundemkte
weihen nenen
is commaundemenk ts chat as pe haue
hearde from the beginnpnge)pe thud walhe
init For manpdeceauers are entred into the
woꝛlde / which conkelle not that zecus Chyiſt
tS cometn $ delche. Chis is & beceauer g an
Antichzick. Lone on poure felues/# we loole
not that wehaue twzought:but that we may
haue a full rewarde noholoeuer elleth
Gbydeth not in che doctryne of Chzlt/hath
not God. He that endureth in the docerene or
Chyllt hach boche the father and the fonne,
ther come eny brito pou and bzinge not
this learnungeſ him receaue not ko houle me⸗
cher bro him @on dpede. For he that byddeth
him God lpede / a partatier of his euyl dedes
Shad manpthingzto wzpte vnto pou / neuer
chelede J wolde not wepte w paper a ynne:
but J trüct to come onto powe lpeane rw pour
mouth to mouth / chat oure ſope mae be full
Che lonnes oF chy electe ter gretes-Ame,


The thyrde epittle
cpp eee, -=
een eee
epbesrand the good ceporte of Demetris. a
be 4 a he jbelouen
Saus lowe inthe cruel,
sSeloued'y wikthe man
thous profperenedt! ¢ karede a
45 r


= ng ome of


dach uhren


115 whrchts a et ly
ir 1 85 = aoe 15


the
enthe at 1 ag wache en
e


Abe 45
e halbem ke
2 in 560 A


che Lon epee Larthffito himithat


— the with lygnes and wonders alfo/ and with


To the Hebꝛues


seit Lae tn agen . inet nb Aribagagné:behoneere
theo nen amg ech bi ep el
— aber et moche 4 en were


ad

mmprpgbe band: (col Sia —.— iwc ae nen
fote tole: Ire anigels:but the nah ta ;

- ee 1 *


= eee


tempted / he is abie tofucher
4 fet — —


See to be e bntp toe 2205 of
erde * oe tes dn sar err
e. *
fedtalt:fo that eu
theater poe retin be
om e elcape 2 — at broken
e medal d races oe e
acta e
onto bs warde by chem that Kuen of morgan dos
an Eom beE erto / bo· both moon 0 eae
fear Be


kane tole g e e ;
are L ae onto tbe angel Va ume


. dee weh

0

7 tia be fpok Spoken afterwarde. But Ache 143

mds aime Ast i oer i tout
re es wee that we holdkalt the conkꝛdence 8


Wwe vette oe
ceremonies’ bas
bet Be at mt


en 200

dit bert thingt

1 85 mea e Hod hut erhorte
alben ont


ast“
n


name 7a
zen /a in genden ofthe ore entbepbeatoe tebe
pa ptr all hat came out of cine


reb⸗


Aut n
1 is


leg. But woth whom was he defpleaten.ri
peares: Mag henot Natal wc chen 2
kenned whole carkales were duer thor wẽ in
thedelert? Co wyd fware he that they chuld
not enter into his vett:butonto them that be⸗
leued not: And we le that they coulde not en⸗
ter in / becaule of vnbeleke. 8


* reg of the £bzitten‘punptibement
Serenata ly event


into bys rett thulve teme to come


E


Abchynde. Foz vnto vs was it decla⸗


red / as well as onto the. Butit pꝛoltyted not


che that they hearde the worde becaute ther
As fapth ia p which hearde it / coupled it not with rkarth.
Around of an But we whpch haue beleued / do enter into
ir outlet dhe hug belt / s cotrarp wle helardeto chr other
role oF al (inne, A haue ſwoyne in my wath / they wall not
enter into my reſt. Andthat (pakehe verely
ea at the worte were made an
longe atter that the wozkes tw de and
che foundacto of p woꝛlde lapde. Foz he fpake
in a certapne place of the feuenth dape / on
B this wle: and God dpd reſt pleuẽ ih dave trõ
all bys woꝛkes. And in thys place agapne:
Che call not come intompreſt.

Seynge thertoꝛe it koloweth 1 tome mutt
enter the rinto / a they to whom it was fort
pꝛeached / entred not therin koz vnbelekes

, take. Agarne he apopnted in Bauida cer⸗
tapne pielent dave alter fo lunge a tyme /
lapinge as it is reheartedrthis dare pr pe hes

KErehis bopceſbe nok hardherted. Kor ve Jolue

had geuẽ them relt / chen wolde be not afters

warde haue lpoken of another dare. Cher re

* pnne ts du ina pneth therkoze pet a reſt to the people ol

wh alm rang wege andre cea
erdke chat ente le CCODPS atone worhesas Goddrofröhrs

lo the ret or Let bs ſtudytherkoze to entre into 6 rett /
ita the I

aquéct conteg-lett enpmũ taule after the tame enlampleſin

be n Thin.  copnbelete fozthe worde of Godis qupcke /

Pa mighty in operacion / and charper then eny
. though / euẽ vn
tothe e a Conder of the loulẽ and the

. Eprete/s ot the iopntes a the mary: iudgeth
erte enn ane mur erte me⸗
cher is ther eny creature imulyble ind lyght
‘oF him. Foz all things are naked a bare onto
the eyes orhym / ot whom we fyeake,
AHR is oure de / and feate of graces
ie chere or the elbeſewe, e
he. b. Chapter.
A1 erngethen that we haue a great
pe pꝛeſt which is entred into hea⸗
meant Jelus g fonne of God)
t bs holde dure pioleſiõ Foꝛ we
haue not anhye prett / which ci not haue cõ⸗
palſpon on oure infyzmitics: hut was in all
poyntes tẽpted / lyne as we artibut yet with


Epille


our cynne. Let vs therfore go boldelx bnto )

feate ot grace / that we mare receaue merctz /

and krnde grace to heipe in tyme ol nede.
Foꝛ tuery hre pꝛeſt that is tanken trom


amògẽ men is oꝛdeyned koz men / in thinges


pertãpninge to God: to offer gyftes a facritts
ces Foz lynne: which canhauẽ cd pallion on §
ignoꝛaunt / and on them that ate out ol the
wape / becaule that he hymlelfe allo is com>
pated with intirnutie: kz the wohich inkirmi⸗
ties fake he is bounde to offer koꝛ ſynnes / as
well koz his awne parte / an kor the peoples,


Andno man taketh honour vnc hem kelfe / a


buthe that is called of God as was Aaron.
Euẽ co lynewile / Chꝛiſt gloꝛitied not him
kelle / to be made the hye pꝛelt: but he 6 Cay
nto hym: thou arte my ſonne / ihys dave be⸗
gat J P/gloztfien him. 28 he allo in another


place tpeaketh:thou arte ad ꝛeſt for euer at:
ker poder ak Melchtledech. Ei hich “ing as Che


daes ot hig flelche / dd oller vp pꝛayers and
ſupplicaciõs/ with ſtronge cryinge a teares


vnto him that was able to laue him krõ deeth manptie.
and wag allo hearde / becaule of hys Godly⸗
nes. And though he were Goddes lonne / vet
learned he obediẽce / by tho thinges which he
Cuffeved/a was made parkapcte / a the cause
ok eternall taluacidõ vnto ali them that ober
him: andis called of Godan hye pelt / alter


the oꝛder ot Melchiledech.


Wherok we haue manpthinges to laye /
which are harde to be vttered: becaule ve are
duell o e. Foz when as concerninge ß
tyme / ye ought to be teachers / yet haue pene
de agayne that we teache vou the kyzſt pzin=
cyples of the woꝛde ot God: and ure become
loche ag haue nede orb mylne / not of ſtrõ
ge meate:toꝛ euerꝝ man that is {ccd mpl:
. ke / is inexperte in b woꝛde or ryghteoutnes, thynges
Foz be is but a babe. But tronge meate be⸗ to verceaue’
longeth to thé p are parfecte whyych thoꝛow
cuſtome haue their wptnes exerciled / to lud harder dolce


ge both good and euyl allo.


Che goeth forth with the thynge that he began in the
latter ende of the pte chapter / and exhorteth the not
to faput / but to be Redfa and pacyent : toy lo moch as


God is ſure in his pꝛomeſſe.
Che. vj. Chapter.


Herkoze let vg loue § doctryne per
tarnynge to the begynnynge of a
ChAKE man / z let bs go onto pers
Z leccið /a now no moꝛe lapep toun⸗


taunt
men ag malities


hea⸗
@
bua.
deare Erendestwe truſt to le
accgpanplal⸗
e, Fos Gods
thab he cbude fozget poure


Tpuiczand ka, Hew th gence to the


hpnge parte a. OF hope / euen onto the ende: that pe fait not
ga Jenn folotoe hem pech geo fach pas
. kt Cence inheret the promples,
bers wolde con, £02 when God made pzomes to Abꝛaham
nere ap call pecaufe he had nr, gregter thynge to lweare
won ce Dörchelwarebp him lelke/ apinge: Durel
Ar or re, will biede tye aimuiciplic thein dede, Ando
milron. acer p be hab kärieda loge teme he emoped
che promies. Men berelpkweare bp him that


othe herzes ot pꝛomes /

as coca ſhe added an othe

able went

7 id lxe) we might

haue perkecte cõtolaci / which haue lied / foz

bo holde kalt the hope that is let before vs /

zwhich hape we haue as an ancre of the foule

Looe keen fedfatt. nohych hope alto en⸗

5 In into tho thrnges which are wrth in

eee,

i { ig made an bpe .

pꝛelk tog euer / akte rd oer or Melchiledech.
ee areth tl de OF 4

Tac ene geren uwe wicht


.
fe


1 1 a
N


am as he ree


. Put


we 1


—


with gut all nape tapi
receatieth bleüynge ol him which is greater
Andhere men that dpe / receaue tythes. But
there he receaueth tythes ot whom it is wit-
hetlen/that he liueth. And to tape the trueth /
Leup him feite allo which receaueſh tythes /
tent erb kacher db fan wür Weh
s okhis Father abjaham whe Welz
chiledech met him. 1 5 '
FE now therfore perfeccion came bp the
pretthod ol theLenites(fo2 vnderthat prette
hodthe people recraued p awe) what neded
it further moze that another pret Wuldryle /
alter the oꝛder ol Melchiledech / z not alter
jon betrandtr ten feet ne e
en of neceltie mu
Rae 00 5 5
oz be of whomthele thing es are ſpoken
pertapneth onto anotyer epost bh nes
uer man lerued at the aultre. Foz itis euidẽt
that oure l. oꝛde tpzoge of p tribe of Juda / ok
whych trybe tpahe Moles nothinge concer:
hinge pretthod.And itis pet amoze eupdent C
cher eee er OF Melchitedech
er arple another pret whych is not made
alter the lawe ofthe carnall comaundement:
but after the power of the endledle lle. (Foz
he tellikreth chou arte a pret fozeuer / after
the opder elchtledech) Chen the tuͤmaũ⸗
demẽt that wẽt a koꝛe / is dilanulled / becauſe
Of he weaknes and bnpzofiptabimies . Foz
the lawe made nothrnge parkecte but was


an introducc pon ol a better ho
e ee pe / br whych


nd Foz this caute it is a betterhope / that
it was not pꝛomiled with out an olhe Ehole
prettes were made without an othe / but this
ep =p othe/bybpm that fayve vnto
Hem. The Lorde ware / and wll not repent:
Thou ate a 15 Foz euer alter the o wer ol
Melchiledech. And lo that caule was Zelus


a ſtabircher ofa better keſtament.


Andamionge them many were inade pre ⸗


‘Stes becaule ther were not fufterdt: 5
Feat ea e eee


tt fuer hath an eueriaſtynge

ert sa a ee
5 um / gehe
intercenron fo as.


be int
Boche


— be A ee e i
Sochi e bſ to haue the ode. Ho

PF end do apne bd mee . —

From Cynners/and made hrer then heauen. The pꝛotyte and wortbynette of the otde Cedumtt
ul


sein par eden pee a


ae Seel hegt ance fp all WUE je oferenbp


270d, 6. 2 all the people taying:*thists the loud oe etu chatte once for al
eg.


n ~ ano cuery pret is veop dapipinintiitinggsc
dmorou. ah oreouct be erna. eof tomes tere one nan ott
vprenes pale was ther g . call betnacle with bloudalfo;ealt Sminttringe 721175 neuer take awape Cynics. ue 0
Kere dk one nue wren Rierfeceme holpeck oe afl toh pch badthe golden lenler g Seficis. and alto almoftall eyynges/are by ches ng ater bead offered one actlköck tos
Si ey pont ich gue devin ious tye gung pet ‘helaoe pounyeo nn, .
Ache vic chapter. e of bloud is n emen. bande of Gob /anv from ence foxth tarretſ
che things which webauetpoke wilh Manna / and Aarons rodde that 5


the pych: 5 we haue loche and the tables ok che teſtamẽt. Ouer ß arcke
ten on t were the Cherubis of glozy ſbadowynge the
die dime ſeate of grace. DE whi


Atemabde wit hahdes/which arebutty male onto them alter tore dapeg a th the. ly
militudes of true: enges bull entred into Loꝛde J will putmplawes inthelt betes €

Gberp beaut /o to appere now inthe fight ol in thet monde 3 twpll werte them / andtheir i
God fo vs not to offer hym felfe ottẽ / as the fynnes and iniquitres wil J remember ng 4
hye prett entreth into p hoi place euety peas moare. Bnd where vemition ok theſe thinges i
re with ſtraũge bloud ko then muſt he haue is cher is no moare offerin efogtynne, ‘i
often fufferen fence the wozloe began. But Spepnge bechzé that by the meancs or the B 0
now in the ende ok z worde ath e appered bloud oe eln we mave be bolde toenterin⸗ 1
Spor hene: Zw pe oſterpnge to that hol place / bythe newe and ipuinge q


e were on peare: and not wyth out vioud /
he were not a prette/ yt b the Pept Laie i


eaucnipthinges: kignikpedthatthe wape ofbolp thinges / was
353) gvmppentn — —— 5 tabers


FE

e! p once fog
al. t 6 Out toauerpnge ( fozheistapthfull that pro:
thanttulp ouppacrncesanaeoese h. e mio le abe


sche lawe which hach but z wa ⸗ oure lelues
owe OF good thy bo come exhonte one another / achat io moche che mos
9


nre. \
Aan neuer wit ratte dauern tngip ater tate 1% ee


b bear by ren chene malle g Saueteceaucd the knotwledae of the krueth Pen ers

. Garen ante ere derem wee eg 5

lach the L onde. Fyinge of ch mochemoare thote factityces baueceatentobauebene al- but 15
etegamentthat g winmake the bioud oe chstteitwblch thezow $ eternall

toa dh undee Ad eet tote nes dete offerenbimn lenke without (poe to Sd) .
Sap the Lod: I will put my la wes in their pourge pourecontciences | derd wonzeß afl rot t.
mendes / and in cheir he 5
and J wplbe the


*
5


. Maher kore tobe
JT. ook, eee


udge bps people,
QBs


ban⸗


Dir zompted


ee pile


Ann therkczeipräugether /of one(¢ of one
was ap good ap need)to nanp in mul⸗


titudẽ / as the Barres of the cke / and as the
ont 0 the thpe/ aa :


fond ol the fee hoze fs fans 9
Zuncheral bers h g receaued not


inge che pꝛomples: but la we thema karre ol / Abe⸗


the

* 1 wall come will come / and will noc tarp.

But the tut ball Ipue by kayth. And yr he

withdzawe bpm keikemy koule hall haue no

ee btiegh ah! withdza⸗
oure felues onto dãpnacið / but partarne

to karth / to the winninge of the Coule,


leued them / and laluted them and con
they were ſtraungers and piigrems on
e erthe. Chey that faye foche, de⸗
e that thepteke a contre. Alto pe cher had
bene myndkull of chat countre / krom whence
cher came oute cher bad leacure to haue re⸗
tumedagavne:but now they del pzea better
chat is to fape aheautive, Wabertoze God iß
Se
1 ems =, Gene, 9
„Y Me ban Sa


bintec wwe


toppe
Fath ti
25 l chen


ue commaumdement ot


ele esp tr ao Oe
be beocyemonethe of


ce

te thinges

Which ca recen and prepared the atche to the tauinge of his

Beer dütr C Yourthorde,thozow che which atcke he con-

Shale a green an onan ß berze o€ the
0 2 4

e Wenn Sbrabanuwobenbe wate

4 = 1 fh btn el ene here be cbuld
ade abc ſerhe uid go.


pth he remaiied into che lande? was


prompfed him / as into a ftraunge countre / a
dwelt intabernatleß and lo 2 ¢a-


caute they ſawe he
ther feared Wit ja es 8
bee Holes whe be was great / retu⸗
led to be called che tonne of Pharao .
ratherto fufive aduerlitie t
copie ot God / chen to entope the pleaturs or
ynne fog a ceacon /g eſtenied the rebuke of
Chavet great


was calles and the eff
nberttatice/ebe wet *Spfapth


der Bands Bammel, pleas:


Tishich thozowe fay


of weake were made ſtronge / waxed b
e
. men
raxled to lle agarne. e
Other were racked,


ofitapnes in dennes and caues ofthe erth.
nd thetcal ehozovw agb obtavumeey
paar Wa ssa e 0 1 eth tod fo
oud pn chynge £02 bs / that
wich dur bs bude ot be made puro “Gh
An erhortacion to he


Aduerlite vpö hope of euertagt
5 of the a, A Arent ados Cheat cimen pet to myſt and darckne⸗


Lcbe. riß chapter.
Wie Dertore let bg alfo teyng that we


are cOpated with fo
i saan — great a muſti⸗


ae


en ave pe bat
bes beheben


air es


.


keawe dapes /nurtred vs alter th


ag lpohen. gk a


itmuſt haue
Wadarte eus f augen


be
ane ut e f :
6 Cine


tobe the ve
meanpng ol
are not


Ci hape

et botherip loue cötinue. Be not
B ozgeckull to lodge ſtraügers. Foz

fe
gels into their boutes bnwares.
Remeber the gare inbondes / eus as thou
ve were bounde with thẽ. Be myndkul of the
which are in aduertptpe / as ve which are vet
in pour bodpes. Let wedlocke be had in pace
in all poyntes / d lett the chaber be vndekpled
£02 whoze kepers ¢ aduoutrars God wil iud
Ge. Let youre conuerläcpon be wythout cos
ucteoutnes a be cOtent with that pe haue alt


Breb. Kos he verely fayd:*9 will not karle z /


Dumme. rtr. a.


ah..


nether foztakte the: that we mape boldly fapes
che Lopne is myhelper / and J will not teate
what man doeth vnto me. Remember chem
which haue the ouerlyght of pou which ha⸗
us declared vnto vou the woꝛde or God. Ehe
ende of whole conuerlacron fe that pe loone
vpon / and folowe their fayth.

Fetus Chzitt peſterdape a to dape / and the
came cOtinueth koz eucr. ETL Be not caryed
aboute with diuers ¢ ltraſige learninge. Foz
it ig a good thingethat § herte be ſtablicched
with grace / z not with meates / whych haue
not proffered che that haue had their pacty⸗
me in them. We haue an aulter wgerorthey
mayenot cate which lerue in the tabernacle.
Foz bodpes of thofe beattes whole bioud
15 brought into the holp place by d hre pet
topourge ſynne / are burnt with out 8.
Cherkoze Jelus to tanctitve d people wich
his awne bioud / kullered wyth out che gate.
Let vs goo fozth therkaze out ok the tentes /
Klulferrebune with him,*Fozbere haue we
no cötinupnge citie:but we fehe one to come

Foz by him oller we the lacritpce ol laude
alwapes to God: p ts tolaye / the krute of tho
Selypp / which cofette his nanie. Co do good
Kto didritute forget not / co wych tuche fae
crifices God ig piealed. E · E Obepe the that
haue the ouerlpgyt of you/ ¢fubmpt youre


ape oz bs. e haue con
we haue a good confcpence in all
and derpze to liue honeſtip. Adelpze


Altberbr haue druers receaued an⸗ wh.


God oF pear
. — dure 10


top
K
befeche pou bꝛethyen / lultre the woꝛdes
of ee e vnto vou
pred wn ep ad pe nce
ont peur be with
come woztir) A well fe vou. Salute the that
haue the ou
Ther o€ Ftaly


vou. Grace bewpth
von äll:a men.


krom Ital.
sae


CThe Epiſtle of


Saynct James. 35


erborteth to reloyce in trouble / o be feruent in
es with Redfatt beiefe/ to lobe Foz alt food thyne
ges from aboucsto fo;Cake all vpte / and thankfully to
Seccaue the worde of puget
{peabpnge of it but to do theraftes in dede. re e
lig ion o deuo cyon what it is.


.


Games


Tot you / j al the laxnctes.


Ok,
a h


ae zen / count it excedynge
ae ops tena
pacience:and let pas
wozne / chat ye mape
kenx of vou lacke wyrdome / let

Sache ebe Pane reer


thps warde es rentlpe / and caſtech no man in the teeth and
ber bes ut ee Halbe geuen bem s But jethym ache 15


ter ß Hebn
Legnikieth bum
Which in leulg


Heche to other
forL prises fae


th he anpe man.
e
barhener C Chen when lutt hach conceaued / tye byyn⸗
kempted 8 pro+ geth kozth ben when it is trnit⸗


25
—


8 w e of I we
e E eres:
erna, ISherkoze deare brethzen / ieteuery man
e
lapth . Foꝛ
2. Ene Hot eat which rpabteous beer God,


lites. Deu. big, é
Pas .
con bate em fe that ve Deboats of eewomeann | @MeIEy toptety


prays in Oe Paine hearers only /deceaupnge poure amne

ker noger to be .
rue wrth Cophiftrve. $02 vf enyhearẽ the

ib ibe ( OPE/aMDbO Lenot/ Gets phe onto aman


James.


xtix-


rb jes Dangly face mä glatt. concusptrericd
03 aeg bepathichroort: copy He of cure, lege“


goeth bis ware and
Pgh fafipon 2 5


rer / pt a doar ofthe wozhe)tbe fame calde
happre in hrs dede. ;

ent man amonge vou feme deuoute /
and rekrarne not bys tonge: but dece aue his
awne herte / this manes deuoctõ is in vayne.


ats Pure deuocpon and vndekrled betoze God 6


kather / is this:to vilpt the kaderlede and wid⸗
dotpes in their aduerlpte / and to kepe hem
ſelte vnlpotted of the woꝛlde. K


Be Forbyddeth to daue enp relpecte of perlonnes /
du to regarde the poche as well as the ryche / to be lo⸗
üpnge and merc pelt Aud not to boatt of fäpth where
no dẽdes are: fait is hut a deed fayth where good way
ats kolowe not.


Ache. ij chapter.
; 4


th
aparell a chercome
e e dre haue


karth /g bevzes of the kingdomẽ
ompledto them that loue brm? |.
haue detppten the pooze. Are not the S
tech they which opzette pore ther which dia
we pou befoze tudges? Wonottheylpeake
euil ofp good name after which pe be named
FE ve Culéyli che ropall lawe acco)dyn


rg. ole
lame / a pet gen one poynt he is gyltle in
all. oz he that taxd. Chou Malt not commpt
— fayedaito: thou calt not kpl.


erteth imediarlpeen renate


erbrwe art


enalied on deſtitute ok date fone, ** enell Commeth thozots
ene, . udn ace uns ch e


Of, O. James. 2


i titre 92 5 3 3 any ien pehaue heaped treature to ge


crim ce commeth twat er in pcure lat dares: Beholde the hyꝛc of
loucismnightye yous wärmneg and lade: not wöchtkandynge oF Se tpl aie pane eme ange pour comethep ber Fabel whrchbauereved 5
ard wen A 5 gelte ye noe thorhnnger es which ar ned 1 . ud und/ cea of pure bo⸗ fetes wee bprets of vou hept backe bp
f so we ende ne 1 — karth / Cecbe Ah. chapter. bilupteoutnes 2 vapgne im voure fraude) crpeth andthe cryes ok them wüpch 16


meg 'Pelutanbbauense Fe ce g haue repcd/ are entred into the eares of the
Spe obtapne. e 8 Fehauelpuedim pleature z Slught rng


, mercumememmen) turn tts cu
ewe the my ta jemoze lude other of 25 not! e and receauenot / beca youre in a dave of*faughter

e Imanyebinges Nena Ae & meſk: euen to conſume it bpon pourevo⸗ 8 ai ae e Pa ours
setotowe Wdoelt well. Che deupls allo beieue ¢ . man kenne not in wo de p lame le a perfecte nach dem Yeaduouterars/and wemen and he bath not tel ib it there (ht


NO good wore apie chou bnderande O chou barne ms thar abe otameatepebeop,etorne toe re Sa
r . thattney tanet sees
cee Jah ouce Fatber ta ified thozot warkes thulbobeve vs, toe ume about alte bo ma wn
rapie dk £600 whe he offered Paachis fonne bpon the aul⸗ dy. Beholde a eder sac u eu ne at
be Cote e n eee they be to gret / g are: Buch beringt are
ee ee ee ee ee eee

thys Chapter ral

gien bene pep Fapth: e eee mene Cur fo he cnge isa vel

11 iti eputedonto en fog ryghtewelneg: and he me ehedem are ache c t

60 en kü pee was called che krende or God Kerpelechen Peholde how gret a a Ipétell tyre

And. xvi. d. not how that of dedes a mã is iutityed / andnot k Vand the tonge is Frie / and a wozide

tobe made un or kapth only. Ligewyle allo was not Raab of wyckednes. Dots the let amonge

iuitigh fof 500 the harlot kucklepedthazow worhes whe We oure membꝛes / that it defpleth the whole bos

be danch wis keceaued chemedengers anden them out do kettech a real that we haueofnature
ee et oute eee ee

gather luckitled ed / euen 60 ka 1

bee ed. . * e 0e 0 ee e


dhe so Sater ae woꝛrckes declared tute ebenem ofthe naureorman put the


eee eee
ok the woz! 0 07 e u
mite to god warde: wholdeuer wilbe a fede man wertah Foz the precpous krute of the eee — 5 |
eo the wonlde / is mae fee dare OF God, erth / a hath longe pacience ther opon/ontyll z ll sheprthe one ag!
Ether do pe thenke that the ſcrypture layth he receaue the erip: site piste t rapa, , Be Cowege teme
hs i, bay e. ebe ippnlethardbwelehin vou / pe alto pacient thertoꝛe and lettle youre her⸗ he other ar bio
site (whprh, eluted euen contrary to enupe: but geueth fee Eo Singen ang of ebene ebzec fe
Aa , San Grudge not one agai . ſdanother be C The len
fptteth pateten Dubmt voure lelues to God / and retyſt een U
bre call pene! encoeuyls he wle ro pow Drawenpe ede. lade. 7 i
whotemor | to God andhe will dawenyetayou.Ciente the Prophetes Foz an enfammple of fufferinge
ae. poure handes ve fpnners/¢ po voure aduerlitieè / æ or jongepacience / which cpane (.
— r ne pe toaueranige mpnbeD. Sou Cafiic in the name of F Lord. E Beholde we conte 0
pnp. clons fo owe ye and wepe. L et youre laugh them happy which endure. Je haue yearde of i
fhe /¢ thectore ter be turned to mournupnge / 2 voure toyeto the pacience of Job / and haue imowen what
dune done gl yeupnes . Catt doune poure felucs bekdze ß carte Lance. $ Sor the Lope is very
1 Jono /an ye foal you cast tens pikikull and mercprufl
anotyer/ bechzen. Pe that hack Butaboueailegingestipbzethyé weave


tige can nomũ tame. Cherweth ble nec eth backe hyp e that dee chende not nether by bent / netter by erth / necher by whether pa
face onensof ght 11 meet ler den perten bent ble br ft eben te a kame and {udgeeh thelawe, en otheroche Let pourepce be pre f pou: ico
His tuogehes made tt before ben Seen ee ‘ther dalhe tub. But and pe thou ludge he lawe thou art re nape naye:lett pe taule into ppocrecy. Ik ſeitbc o. For


reputed
nue or 1 bec nher er arches ne E. Bus decne wah pol len 00,
7 coete ty tbat geg amm un oe hu ud Dutof onemouth proceadety bledinge and


curlynge. My brethzen th
erden, dee tye ener te oat


Zune other couldena ng be moare folytihe than agg bes one place twete watera bytter allo: Can the
A beviess
Inylpouo fone bea pris ery off greaca, Page tre me brethzen beate olpue


ge ß lawwetove Hot an obleruer ok the lawe:butaiudge, anyof vou be tuell bered/let pape. FER ve Haue due
Ect ert one late ger tbh sae en offou bemery le dung eine en
10 00 0. e iB hat art chou that iud⸗ a enpbe peop pede ee.
N a notherman?
Go to now pe that lape: co dape and tomo⸗ pape ouer him / and anopnte
D row let vs go into ſoche a cytie and continue in Teuer eg eg chr pine ane 0 dit


placer
a byne beare fyages? So can no four chere a peaxe and bye andkell / and wynne g lapth chall aue the ĩycke / and the l. o de thal

Aae ga bay he cen eh bree gene babe Git waiere Feigen. Betrannot tel e fal bapp? ronson eae beau nee ddim ge
to be coated whe tt ert e cen och Nen nd be tuple g enbuca wich tear 5 pentedde dene ne pk enn 128 hey toalbe forgeucn bpm. 19905
e anagsa ee terare nae en chat Femi vcs tidied rw pe menace inant Meander dd Lemme a utube vote Causes onto other cid
. emetacl sara become, Steal be Lee leb ee fvuciec os e ener,
breed eherne e ‘ut st dane an ee . a ea Sno ore ae taleunastcer erde ee |
fubat ca bermonreplapnelyCpohervtpan that fpunesare ee eech e Cherkoze tohym that knowetß how to do that tmoghtnot capes iteapncdnaton fn 1 0


ee tab tor ano ner hom x estes —


delcendeth
Sworches but kreip. Ko con where auen and natura /


e not/tobpmit is lenne. ext bpthetpace ofthve pees @ fpsemtone tie tas tee


Aeta 125 iner to anopnt
e e ee timen mam rau tae fag
SILuMyreeRe pooh and ope fe a eh ng then eee ts/thereisbndablenes gall mance of eure wpth cute beware o. g/one to knowledge 5 coi ae
rag uta bee nate ren pre beg nde wpl neee. wo kes. Buc the topCoome adometpar is feS aboue pipe God. e e for another ene. Bzethꝛen pr eng of pou erte tro che tructh irs pen
Ae eee we ne ye ls kat pure / then peatable / gentie / ealyto Aolabouretobrpnge another ta the tructh. amb another buen bim lecche dame nme e
numbze of Authantzeg if sone placeoe James onertbotoen wi i] be entteaten full otmeccyanb gock nes 0 Che. b. Chater. “a: Wee connie Ce Fear Port aa te
stone thouaierbcnoothe Kerr Shen de apt, Snithout tudginge/and toithout fimutactom, z to now pervchemen.wwepe/ govged Grapeout of hrs ware / ee
Sean eme Lerchen we de putes pee andthe krute ol


rrobtewelnes is owe on poure wecchednes that Ghalifateatoute fromdeeth / ne nere
ben we nocht gere pmnesarenoeiuputedvutomatuccemes in pearr/orchem chat marntene peace, CG | Ghat come ops pou. Youre rpchesis a al bn emt aue der tye
Ble les an. When james fapt


ene leontupte / voure gatmentes are no of lynnes. darkened ot |
din e heben ann ie act Ping 159 55 te barresfigheng cnet re erg — Youre gone 10 Poure fplucrate . pos saci fie of bene {
me me heres e
ln merece ome + ets eee, eee BE
Ait ö : , Ache 5 ; Nm. Gaye


¶ The
Saynct Judas.


Fe e ane Tee leone


en the better / be layeth ther be Cu
Kipagapnc nature and detpple rulers. Zt. Beerbare
pelt ater etl
0
onde / and one to hetpe mother out ar the fyre.


N das the feruaunt of


Raby
(eo
em Chzitt. Mercy

und peace and lowe be multtplred.
Beloued / when A gaue all opligéce to wep
te bnto pou of the commen faluacpon it was
nedluf £02 me to wꝛrte vnto vou / to exhozte
vou / that pe shuld contynually laboure in §
layth which was once geuen ento the taync
tes. Foꝛ ther are certäpne craftelp crept in /
ol which it was written a koze tyme vnto fos
che iubgement. Chey are vngodix and turne
the grace of oure God onto wantannes / and
Benge 0b e only Londe / and oure Lade


18 Chit,
mende ts chertoze to put vou in remẽ
33 owe thys


ume. th. bow thatthe Lozde atter thathebaddelys patyon


uered the people out of egypt )*dettroped
Wem tbich arertoaroe belle not he ane
iid allo whpch kept not their kract ettate:
2 ut lekte their awne habitacvõ:he hath refer
es uedin euerlattynge chapnes vnderdarckneg
+  bneothetudgement of the greate dave: veuẽ
Gene. xir.t. chen pth inipbe trance d 5
os em (which in Iphe maner .
' ee kopnicacpon / and folbwed* fratige

eed gna fletthe)are tet fogth fog anentample/etu
kurall vie nto the vengeaunce ol eternal krze. Lykewyſe
the pnnatural theledzeamers delle $ flefihe / delptſe rulars
oma. aupdlpeabe eupil of the chat are in auctozite,
C Vet Michael the archangell when he tro-
ucagayntt the deuyll / and dilputed about p
bodpof Moles / durdt not gene raplinge fens
1 — ee

thele Speake eus L

they knowe not: d what thinges they knowe


naturally / as beattes which are without rea


bon ſintho thinges they conupte them lelud.


The Epittle
Epittle ‘of 1 50


tog euer.


neee prophetped

befoze of lache ⸗ * Behoive/p L onde

dl ome wr tans of Capmcteg; to g he

bussal e agapnt all men / ard co re. :
Beall that are bigodiyamonge chem of

all cher ongobly bedes which ther haue bn⸗

godip committed and of all thelrcruellkpeg

ie , eee


um.

Chele are murmurerg / cöplapnerg / wal E
henge after their atone iuftes/ whole mous
thes Ipeake proude thonges, Chey haue mẽ
in greate reuerence beccule of a vauntage.
But pe beloued / remẽ ber che woꝛdes tohych
were cpoken Lefoze of the Xpoſtles of oure.
Lopde Telus Chztt how that ther tolde ou
that ther Qhulve be begplers:


a
unge nocpzete.
But pe derive beloued / editpe youre felues
inpouremott bolptapth/prapingeintyebos
Ip goottandRepe pure keiues in the loue ot
God / J fo tHe mercp of oute Loꝛde .
Felus Chit / vnto eternal lite. And haue cõ
Feary tere pal thi Mot ete
re, pullynge the ou e ke
and hate the Evithp belture ofthe lelche.
Uinto him that is able to kepe you / that ye
faule not / and to pꝛeſent vou fautleſſe befoze
the pretence of his gloꝛy with tope that is to
ſape / to God gurẽ ſaueour which onlpis
wyle / be gloꝛp/maleſte / dominton /
and power / now and lo⸗ 5
euer. Amen.


* 2


Do be onto them / ko thephaue kolowedthe


wape ol Capn and are vtteriy geuen to the


Hume. ful. e. errbure oF alan oz lußers dane / and pe-


rylche in che treatonof Cope.


Chele are ſpottes which ot poure kindnes


= feat together / wyth out feare / kedynge the


lelues. Cloudes they are with oute water /


.


whi 1d walke aft i cl ed rie
oi os eo


tea letter and al


Bf S. John.


The Reuelation
of aynet John eHeventne


; Tehapter
reevelacion of Fetus


BSE} e lent and hewed by
‘bes angell vnto bys feruaunt John / which
bare recoꝛde of the woꝛde ol God / and ot the
teſtimonp of Fetus Chilt / and ok all thyngt
that he awe. Happy is he that redith / o they
that heare the wozdes of the prophetp / and
kepe thole thynges which ate wzittẽ therin.
1 jong in Ata, Gra
N E 0 the. bi action: fa.
ir Fat eu oe be with you and peace from bim whichis
5 and wich was / and which is to come / f Kro
che. vi ſpꝛetes which ave pietent before hrs
krone / and fro Fetus Chzitt which is a tapth⸗
kull wetnes g kyſt begotten of the deed: and
Loꝛde ouerthe kinges of the erth. Lanto him


bb. chat tourdos/anutwentbenbs from lemes.


tn is awne bloude / E and made bs f.
Sich rrüll, and Brettes rita GoD his father be 115 €
Sulalc. m. c. rae e e atop

l COnteth wi es / c all eyes tall le hym:
Semen 4 thepalto whlch perttedhem. 2d all


fers of theaste redeg of the erch {yall wayle. Euen lo: men.


e crollerowe )


Bipha is che Waere Alpha and Omega the begpnneng


indthe endynge / layth oꝛde alnipghty /

Omega $ lad. wy ie ah tous amt hich to en
5 E bu) youre bꝛocher a companton intti
5 dulacig / p in the Bengpome ¢ pactẽce which


ain Jem Chalk waz in the ple ok sachs
eee
ol Felu Chri. I was in the (pete on a lon⸗
dape) a berde beßinde me a gret vopce / as it
bad bene of a trompe capinge: Jam alpha
der weer ing bon em hat thou
lepſt/ w a boke / a lende it önto the con
gregactös Which are in Alla / vnto E phelus /
and brite mpina and onto Pergamos / a


4 puto Chlatira / and ohto Sardis and vnto


label phia ‘and vnto Lacdicia.


And 4 turned backe to ſe the vopce that: ,
Cpaketo ie-Andwhe g twas turned: awe Sscuen golden
vih golden candelttiches/ a in the myddes oF candeileiches.
the candelttiches/ one ipke vnto the tonne
e
othe ground / a gpd about! pappes wyth „
a golden gyzdie. Bis herd /s bis beaves were
wohrte / as whyte woll / and as owe: a hys *
ehes wete as a flame of fpze : Shes kete lyne “yf
28e ee ther bꝛẽt in a foꝛnace: *
Ahis vopce as $ oũde of many waters. Ind
he had in his rrante hande oh. tarres. And soeuen eared
out ol his mouthe went a charpe two edged
ſwearde. And his face one euen as ß tonne
nge
as deb And he lapde bis ryahte bande vvon
me / taping vnto mei fe are not.: J am 8 kt
andthe laſte andam a lxue / and was deed,

And betzorde J am a tpue for enermoze / and
haue the eyes of bell and ot deeth. W zpte
Hytetoze the thynges wüpch thou batt lene/
andthe thinges whpch are / and the thinged
which thalbe fultptledhere atter:and the mi⸗
Ae jae a 7 eves
mp Tyghe bande and the. vi golde Tandel⸗ ae ihe rea,
dickes eien ad Leg
b. „ OF tHE


15


Li.


iam him ken at pls kete/ eue grate tlüd.


Seca. of he du. congeemacl


cogregaclons.


“qbeerorteth butt iat aver / b
1 — oueE chine thy.
che. i chapter. ths
Meo the mesenger oF che 2 4
Sar e.
be un cearees m his right bande / and


congeegacton,


kozbeare them w are : and exami⸗ ar 0 bees i .

nedſt them wh; pe ther are Apoltles/ God / whi

Hare not: and hack founde them lxars and Steve wot

RD p Te finer ray 4 ——.— ut e 4

b eee enn dana agen (ela then athe Senken
x che / koꝛ thoubattelette thy kpzſt loue. Remẽ⸗ Hane aes a keawe thenges Boro “ny that ig. neg. roi. g.
J sayy siowcatbonne cere
Fulle wp deceaue mpferuauntes / to make them conts


8 epee eat
bann Sens ett che deden ore
etiques whle! what e


nae oe ee


e cõgregacion of
re thynges which


pages Beholde / the dewpll Mail adp. H.
into e ou a
ende / to him welt aun,


onto the Awyll gene the a croune
5 pln vein oa eaves / eaten


82 them to teu
1 — bare ot eck . —
vol the clõ in darth to th. congeegacions


deeth.
D. <p e ebem
Yetvecangres PCrgamTiOs witer


hn oe) r
gacion of Perthe tharpe lwearde
Lamos. thp wozks g


ue Antipas was a faythfull wyenes ol myne
i Dy rode yes ia bar Da⸗


et, ue d aue enen


Pd ee
em ‘ ai ent


whe Reuelactort,


b
tus ae e een
Hregacions.


en and I
ar, Seien ode cafebertn tbe


know pon Decl allo ther
1 eee is


chyldꝛẽ o. i ep ue
3 hohe
cron * Euen do bat thou them


ouercome! 3
Ishyo/and well geue him a whrte tone / and
in the tone an no


: ome baden with ex ne!


ructeth and enfou e angels oF
eRe intructerh sme 40054


cay 1425
fe eee a teense) ones
which remarne that are red to dre. tae


ft
af


(Che. v.
5. Bett 22 2 ehe
etri.iij.c. Bathe


te ston k boure
Zul . Welche 5 keawe
Sardis / baue not 25 * with ine 2 8 in np de wyll Z,


ouer⸗ haue fytten with my father
patape h be inbis teate K ett him that ha
. —


e .
ae S aaa kötedeaden gg
e 3 025 9


Aud w. anche keen es bringer of Che an. Es
x Ste aoe & 8 a 2
char is bolp andtrue / r whych hach the hepe :
of Dauto:whicy openeth 6 nom wuttkth / 0 BS
and chutteth andnoman openeth A knowe : SY
She worches e haue let bekoꝛe the 4 8 5
an open doze / and no ehem Mö Y
— epdey cok ebatte kept me
. atthe 2 —.— 5
ol E on n,
noise fas
dolpe: make chem
hep wall come a wo eloꝛe 3 genen
8 deen fi ee
ethou omen ofp
iclence therto; hepe the from
carbamate tee
chr chene game 2 olde chat 1
aes ee ere * ee) = Ths Se l
beta a prlacine OF my: 60/6 .
1 — of opty pte e D
: 205 bint che name orm God / and the name 5 beg tots 9 ob i
i of my God / newe Ferufatem: was open inheauen / and the krüe
doune out ol heauẽn from my ee eee
a ween bm mp newẽ ere of a trom̃petttalnynge w
bin aba ears beta me to 20 eee be wit
toecyaetetapeh oan icons. whych mutt be fulkrlled
And pntoche ok the congrega⸗ pee nd immediatly J was in the,
ahn de Lud oon whichts bis lapel pete: behdide a leate was put in heauen /
(2men)the karthkull and true wptnes (che Lone late on the leate. Ind he that lat / was
begynnpng o ber cobe ne foloke Bon, tyke atatper and mare bote,
chr woꝛzes that thou arte noꝛ fone: And ther was a rapne bowe
Wendet were colde 07 hotte. So — 1 toan emeralde.
cance bothe / and Andaboute Srl tates. And
pincer . — 2 on een reba dene
l ine pm on
F700 rronnes ol sa
and knowelk not how chou arte wzetchen entbunden beg
uferable/pooze /biynde and nahyd.¥ coun: CC a
e eien e neo tad F
Werbe th thereaterherinadatee of glete eb unos :


thou mapfte be cloched /
bednen do wap fleet nge duithal / andin che pddes OF che 0
e


HS ohn. iy,


chem ouerthe Fourth parte of z erh / to Bp Ceale/andio ther was a great evth quake /
’ Init fwoeatde a with Yonge a wth bee # lurme vases lacheas tached
that cometh or bermen ol the erh. —— arate $ rae ae Led aß biouds
¢ eas ama / 5 eee. of heauen nto the erth a
nee ene ting dave N 8 2 dee d
3 1 PP whẽ the ini
bad Adee 988 Andheauve vamidbed awake / aga teroll whe
And the. criti * = it is rolled together and an mountayns and
20 : j : Pies were moued oute of there places. And
Che ander thingy : 2 N == ¥ 2 che krnges of the erty / and the gret men / and
1 Heise che 15 i a 7 2 therpchemenyand the chefe captapnes / and
5 „ . = themrgbtymen and euerr boundman / and
) Kuerpfrer man / hrochem kelueg in dennes / r
invoches ofthe holes rand fayoe tothe bpl- Obe. h.
les androckes kall on bs andörde bs kram fue ri,
the pretence of him that lytteth on the teate /
S krom the wꝛach of the lambe: fo the grete
dave ok his wach is come / and who can en⸗
dure it. F
Eee the rhalteg of Sob teated in ther Fore
be es oUt ok all nacions ¢ people which though (hey
fice troupte / ptt thetambe kedeth chem / iedech ehen
b. : 8 5 5 5 e water / and (50d call
— 4 9 5 4 7 wype awaye all teares From the ir eyes.


0 2 N aN Ape vil. Chapter.
Atsge angel wohl
whole win me


. ohe ato rene the bone nether to lone theron,
. „. And one ok the eloers fapde vnto me: w. wo Flame whe che la ned
A on notabebolnea ple mae oF be tbe orga lone of $ Ceales / z J berde one of p
jg dene an the na eye rote of aund ach obtaynedto open. tis becestaperaste meres deen a de ä IK 5
n ſeboge gte lore the bh, keales therok. Ind ob horde come a reien J Cate. ace, Diez 5 4 Cre bike,
bebeing/eioin Smppoesofthefeate/ aof Andbebolde cher was a whrte horte adh lz. 1 n 8 TAN bi EY!
At beſkes / s in themeddes or the elders „ P lat on him had a bowe and a croune was 5 \ 9 P 2 sues
Kode s lambe as though he had bene hylied/ geuẽ onto him / ahe went fozth 7 — a
wöhteh had oeh homes a piteres which are Flor to ouercome . And when be opened the swoit pate
{p7etes of Sod /tenk into all che wozlne, feconde feate/¥ herde the leconde bette tapes
11 nd he came g toke the boke oute ok right come a le. Ind ther went oute another hole
i CCC i s oe ee
ind tal je lith. bel 4 J Ge .
r r
hben Mo offapnetes athey le . ede ee 2 . ) 9 ; ſcande on the ttf. comers of che
ae fongetapngestbou ator weotake 5 thtrde bette tape: come a fe. beeing; 4 erth / holdynge the. iin. wyndes ol
P bobe/ to open the reatestheroe: top thor @lo/a blachebors:e be 6 fate on bint ada dun ban aay 5 ARE erte thatthe wyndes thuld not
walte killed a halte redemed bs by thy bioud J ‘ 8 blowe on che erth / nether onthelee / nether
Out ab all kenredes a tongess¢ peopie ans 95 8 pore) onenptree. + Ander another angel ate
cfons/e halte made be bnto ure cod / rng atures de agcenbe tom thenengedeche dumme wüich near
e enn e ine se anise
. ws a loude bopce tothe till An 0' „Ane
ag about ge i barer bas geen co jure theenty@ ere) aoaesur
r faying hurt nor che erchnethertetee / nee tees) wats
e. ther $ trees / tpl we haue lealed the leruaũ⸗ they are ſentſo
when he opened the lerte tes ol oure God in their foveades. *


„ ky


tes / preaches


are called An⸗


tonsenon B. i athe ehombze of thein wyych “Geena trae
imeflage: te were fealed/ andther were Ceale an. C. and
s chere bl. OD. ofall the tepbes ok the ehplozen of
b the prelate Afrael. DE the trybe of Fuda were fealed. xij.
oF thechurehe / N. Ok the trybe ol Ruben were lealed. rij.
M. Okthe trybe of Gad were tealed rij. .


he Meldedaten it
5


gellsithat s (0 Gkthe trybe ok Acer were lealed. r. . Ot


> Eapemeffens
erg / becaute the trybe oF Heptalim were (eaten rif, M.
fete ae isto Ok p trybe of MPanaties werelealed.r1j.99
duinge the mele DE the töpbe of Symes were ſealed. ij.
{age of-Dadbn Ok § tepbe of Leup were lealed. xi . Se
ie dogs ane the crpbe oF Bacar were fealed il. . t
A Gules here ms erpbe of Fabulon were lealed.t4j, B. DE
f fw bone are trybe of Foleph were lealed rij. M. Ol the
dea en- Eten of Bentamin were lealed. ri). W.
ben . Akter this bevelde and los guet mmttitu
the euell gue del which nom coulde nombze dk all naciõs
elles arc the and people / and tonges / ſtode befozes feate/
5 ie ctphes and. @ bekoze the lantve/clothed with jongewhite
n hene gaan tees /and palms iche pandes and
crped with a lotvde bopce/Capinae:faluacion
pe Fah 0 0 be sficrpbed to him that Cytteth bpon p feate
2707 ehe ot a 0 md unn a And all the
white, angels ltode indhe compate ofthe rege oe
il plaged ne the elders / 0€ che lh bettes and Fell befoze
_ tothe ende ofthe leat on their kaces / a woꝛchypped God /
he worlde / asfapinge,
abe worde / as fapinge /AmeBleminge and glozy wyldome
thut aeg. and cles g honour(g power amight/ be
elegant Able ure Godforevermore Amen.
: And one ok theelders ant wered / Capi
nto me what are thele which are araxed
Aonge whrte garmentes / and whence came
Aber A0 fayde onto hym:Lozdthou wot⸗
telt. And he layde tome: thele are ther delete
cam out oł great lacion and in
garmentes large, a mabe chem
4 che bloune ot thelarpibe: therkoze tent
tpepyetence ob thes 17 enue
dape and nrgbt in bis temple andy 990 ty
teth inthe keate well Dwell amõge thé. Cher
call honger nomoze nether thpzlt / nether
Wall h lunne lyght on th fae den Deate
Foz the lambe which is in ofthe a.
trate / ball fede thent/and ede (hE vn⸗
tofountaynes niere runter
wype atwape all teares from their eres


aoe
abe if . 5 al
12


Hure.


2 ce
teate. And the fmoke ofthe odoures wohpch
cam örche prayers of all lapnctes / atcended
pid ‘befoze God out ofthe Angeles hande

the Angell toke the Center and Fpliedit
es ee aultetand.catte it into che

erth / and vopcetz were made / a chondzunges
and ipghenynges / and erth quake,

Andthe. di angel Die te

pettes prepared them Celuestoblowe. abe
pale fell ohn
they were calteinto the erthe: and the thitde
weir parte of trees was burnt /s all grene grade
in was bzent. enen ee E So.
06 | oer 6 gree ou ee wit
kit was cal e epee
Of the fee tourned to bloude / and the
Lache EE eee n deim
and the thirde part ol

on . — ee e

vet favre krom heut

Sanne
rpuers / and into ke Of waterg / ache
name of the ttavte ts called wonnwod. And

thirde parte was turned to woꝛmwod.

dee

m. ng

fmt andthe thtrde parte of the Cunne was


8 Ublowe their trompettes:
See —
OF thelmone: ye kp two lo paßt: the foure angels


that were bol
meng en bedr the thit de parte of


Ice x Kbapter.
Ho the lte FA ——


Ok. hn


S
ſlawe a ſtarre fall kr heauen onto eee,
e erth. Andto bim was geuen the e ng diewe / andy beide
nave ok the bottomlede pptt. And a vopce from the. ill. coꝛners of che 10 f
he opened the bottomlelle pytt / a ther aroce ue before God / ſaxinge


the ſmoke of a gret foꝛnact. And the lunne @


tyrte i gelb he eb the crompesoctes


the aper were darckned by the reaton of lil. Ingelles / which are bounde inthe gr
ſmoke ok the pytt.. aan rpuer Euphzates. And 5. iiij. Bogen e


moe locuſtes pon the erth:and vnto them looled
was geuen power as the fcorpi
haue power. And it was cõmaunded


which were prepared fo2 an Werde
ons of — cel han amoneth @ tora vere)


‘og ta dee


che. iin patt of men. And the nomb e oF boss


that they ſbuld not hurt the oe off — N warre were. rx. 1 And


netheren thenge:nether eny tree: e
only thotennen which bate wee 1 an


nombze okthẽ and thus A tawe t
e dee 9 70e on chem /


cheir kozheades. Ind tolh wag erent kbzpbabergtong of a ſaci
1 1127


that che mean are were
oo 4 — v. monethes g their payne
fnbenbe ai ken ren
Daves wall men lebe deech / 3 wall not

5 delpꝛe to dye / a deeth Mall ure


vnto hoꝛlles pꝛeparedvnto battapil / and on vnto


apmittone / Ache heade go


asthe heades of lyons. Ind out of th
Ea fc pid / mmouthes went
And in thote Mone. And of dyete


15 ie and per 4 Fae


proceded put of the mouthed o
chelr power was in thett mouches


Land had heaves / x


Sno cheTpiitube of lbruker wanipbe en . —. eirtayles were Ipue


cir heades were as it were crounes) Ine By!
—.— a ther taces wert eg l bab he me


tent
rtrund the remnaunk of the m ij
e .


netten hen i thepbabientte a8 ioe .


hearre ok wemen. And their teethe were as?
teeth of lyons And they hadhabb * .
it were habbergions of prom. And § lounde wood /
ok their wynges / was as the ſounde or cha⸗ cher go.

when many hoꝛues runne to gether to


rettes Ah el rid
battayle nce bene ae cation nether oF chelr


hippe deuplg / and yi =
2 ee dene und and


c


as b. f. partor nen
kriledichgt is to'fapelof tpꝛe/cmone /g bi
fone / which


*


D neither heare ne


not OF mur⸗
eset oktheirtorm


oche


The Reuelacion


the bone open: pe fweareth iet out ot hig hande, and eate it bp / g it was in /
me: he geueth the babe bute John / nx ahs at lwete as bony: e ap


dee eg e,
8


pd mony,
che angel /e karde
eme the irtle bone / an
55


— a


Hess ah


Andthey ofthe people a kinredeg / atonges /
and thep of the nactong / wall fe their bodyes
had eaten it / my belly was bytter. Andhe


ne DAVES 4 an halle / 4 1 ane ae
arde vnto int:thou mute pꝛophelr odyes to be put in graues. And
eee anduaclons / —— bpd che erty, wall reiopce ouer them and be
en Seen en ae
Ke d. The row. n e 0
acs bi Ie C onthe rth


wee


5 — . iin Dayes and an halte the tpzete
ol iple From Sd / entred into them. And ther
node vp vpon their fete: Igreate feave came
Aarau. ate 1
a Greate vopce From

them. Come vp hydder. And ther ate .


Sree abet Lone was 2


Of S. N


ä
* 2


into heauen in a cloude / and their ennempes Z\
fae them. And the fame houre was ther a 5)
great exthquate and the tenthe parte of the 8
cptie tell/andin theertyquatke were arne
names of men leuen. M. andthe remnaunt
were feared/a gaue gloꝛy to God of heauen.
DD Thelecond woo is patt/¢ beholde the chyzde
wood wyll come anon.
the teuenth angell blewe / a ther were noche
made greate voptes mbeauen / la the — . —
Ryngdans oF this 4 — are oure 107068 &
hischuſtes a he hail ra euer moze And che brought forth a m
Pathe rr bers toed fpr betoze OD Guide rule alinacpons with a rode ol yon,
ontheit teates / fell vpon their kaces /a wo: Andberfonne was taken vp vnto God / eto
cpypped God lapinge: we geue the thankes his leate. Indthe woman fieed into wyider⸗
LopeGodainighte:which arte a walt / and nes / where lor hada place / pꝛepared od /
arte to come / fez thou bate receaued the that they chudde kede her there a. M. laun⸗
2 Sena dam toy n iaceme/ an er oe Bgveatbattasilinbeauen/
at *
Axle and meate the tempieot fheepme ofthe pecothat cher 0) be & bis Angels foughe mh the dec. c
that chou chuldeſt geue Jena the dragentöught a bis angebe
th feruauntes the Prophetes and soaynctes/ nee: nether mag chetr place Toäbe
ir le / cat oute aid mate it hot ld. atothem that teare e enpmoze tu heauen. And the great
e ge e
. ndthe temple out. Which dece 5
3 — gue power vnto my two wee⸗ ＋ e che worde. And he was caſt into abe
0 t bun b D were cad out alto. aa
8 / clotbed irs npnges/and bopces / and th 4 alomde vopce fapinge zin
ct Chaat te, an erebquabesandmochebaple, * sical move mabe faluacpon @ fe
ae eee e egg 2 : 4 eee
br bene) nl ae b 8 Sehe en ty heisen, whee peste alen pen betoze od ape ander
mb er . ‘eth chetoman cher ourtcamebim by tye bloude of blambe/
I ied 2 — 3 Cache i andbp the worde of cheir teſtinonp/
fople muſte be be filled. Thee baue ee neee enen Tourd not thett ipues bnco 5 deeth, *
Beat de ge ding: aer pes a caut᷑:4 woman clothed with the setopce Geuens / and pe that dwell in
Karree gehen 7 4 5 — angel. t Aden conebotr 1 15 100 3
„ then to bloude / eg and pon herheeda . oz un
a flares, “ips an pare bebe — —
. ylwed their test ipucted. And ther a other wonder eee
mn vegnbigeric ho 5 80 een a, er Se at,
. S
Wall Ive mm the lireteg of the 5 ide parte
. ip 18 called . the erty, dato her place / Were dhe is no


The Renelacyon


entrar pe rier the pretence
of the lerpent. Ind d dꝛagon caſt oute of bys
mouth water after che womũ as it had bene
arxuer / becauſe ce wuldhaue bene caught
ofthe Cloud. And the erth holpe the woman /
and the erth opened her mouth a lwalowed /
vpthe reuer / which dꝛagon cat out ol —
mouth. Andthe 7 — woth with the
toma: and went and made warre with the
remnaunt of by? fede / wyych kepe the com⸗
maundemẽ tes of cv od / haue the teltimony
ol geſus Chiſt⸗ And hove on g fee ſtonde.
CA beak ryſeth out of the (ee with ſeuen heades and
ue "grated ‘Dea commeth out ol the earth
¶ he. xiij. Chapte.


And it was geuen onto hym to mate warre

with the Däynctes / and to ouercome them. ¢
And power was geuen him ouer all kynred /
tonge / and naclon: and all that dwell v . the
erth woꝛchipt him: whole nam are n

ten inchebchec lle oF the libe / which oe
Rylled From the beginnpnge of che wonde.
fenemanbaue an eare / let him heare. 1e


*


hl


at leadeth into captluite/ hall go into caps


jufte:*he that bplieth with afwearde / mult Matd.


be kylled woch a twearde. Heare is the pas
nance the fapth ot the ſarnctes.
behelde another belt comminge vp
. e erth / and he hadtwo hoꝛnes ipke
a läbe / a he fpake as dyd the dꝛagon. And be
dyd all that the tyꝛſte beeſt coulde do in hrs
pretence . he cauledthe erth / and thé which
dwell therin / to woꝛchyppe ‘aye kyilt beet /
whole dediy wounds was healed. And he yo
dun wonders / lo he made tyꝛe come doune
From heauen in the ght of nen. And decea⸗
ee die erth bythe meanes
of thole kygnes whych he had powerto do in
the of pA. beett/fapingeto Seema tent


dweit on the erth: that they Gulp make an


be
A owe 85 hadthe wounde
ol 2 — lrue.
eke to bgcucatprete onto t
Pate 15 the belt / a that the pmage of the
tpeake / and (utd cauſẽ that as
manp as pti sept deny the pmageot
the belt / dbuld be kylled. and bemsbe ail bo
the mall and gret / ryche and pooꝛe / kre and
bond / to receaue a marie in their ryght han⸗
— 02 in their fozheddes. Andthat no inan
t by 07 Fell / ſaue he that had the 7525
2 e name ofthe beck / other the nombze o
his name. Here is wyldome. Let him p 100
wytt count the nombze of the beeſt. Foz it is
the nombze of a man / and his nombze is tyre


croues hondzed / chꝛelcaze andipxe.


= .
. .
ee
wer was bm / to do. xi. mone⸗ and no man 8


euen
„


chez. Ind :
rai them 1 —


ss 0
on with hun: Che angell er bar


ped 15. eaerch vend ceueibofebetatof a


Ihe. nil. Chapter. K
e
I — Soot lande bau 1

me wꝛpttẽ in thet koz⸗
eaboprk fro eon


Henesra
ROMY n


*


ate 4 eget * — i
3 5


e ores al —


r


Aicher
1
Binge drrd in che lee. And the tyne.


Tat


The Rewelaeyon . 1 „s Jon,


entre into


tempie / tyll
ol thefeuen — wre


WL he Angels poure out there brelli full ot wrath.


888


: ‘ one ts /g nes
slathetce haurnge the barpes ot Scdzand Chedouthisotall bpon heryuergandfoun: = * ion anges tye bE GE gum Te
longe the Conge of Moles theceruaunt taynes of waters / and thr y turncd to bioud. tontinew a tpace And tye beaſt tha
dab or od andth e longe ol / favinges And 3 berde an argelllare lane tohich ats 9, cud the erbt / s is one of the Rur
i matuelous arcchr workes: L 0nd ke and waũ thou atte rahtcous andboly/ 722 F etallgointodearuction, Ind b ten
*” 99 Godalmyghertuteandceucaretyp waves becautechou bat geuen koche üdgementes i GD ch chou tet fare ten Bengt wü

„ho chall not keare o lor ther Hed out che blown of laynctes / and we reccaued no k t wallre⸗
gloneychv name: Foꝛchou only Piopbetesranntocrfosetat chou geuen tye iN oy R¢) wer as hyriges at one houre w
arte bolp/andall gentris ali come a wo- to . \ 6 hele baug one mrnde / and th
Hyppe betoze the / top thy ludaementes are berde another out of the aultre fape:euento ss powers Crenghtbatotycbeat Khete peu,
mabemanifette, Lozde God almpghty true and rpghtcous RAEN Fight wehbe sante sche lamibe
c. And atter that / N loged / and deholne the are chr tungementes, n ede“ geben
temple of the tabernacte of eeRtmonp was Ad $ fourty Angen poured out his biall FAM Benge of hinges other 5
drm inbeauen/andtbefeuen Angels came en the dünne e power twas geuen onto hem : ‘BE arecalied/andchofen ard fa
Tac eren dae geen da er fan I ee ec whore
Van g lpane eu name 8 8
au 2995 9 5 790 1 ae ae a ot lg ED) 5 2 —.—1.— an
i 5 one ue not / to geue op.
... mecteraetpart ae B
lueth ko cuer elte / a aa
the tem tuo thefmoke wexedderke / andthey gnew 11 es


e their tong
£07. Copowe/¢ blalphrmedthe Goo of heaucrs
co: ſoʒowe and payne ot their fozep / andre⸗

ed not of their dedeg


forty ahi en e
pented not i l l fas >
And the fyrte Angell poured out his ofall 2 ec wh e aer i
. Sees merece 5
eile Guulbebepyepareo Ind f thee n- f frp tele yrart
clene Cppetes ipke frogges come oute of che


e Mod har conte tortie


2
4


115
af


® be carredme
Swoghing mpzactes / to go out bnto the u uu ede
ofthe exth endok che whole woyld/ o gaddye wich dd en
ehemto the battaple of chat ger bare dich “i
alrughty.s26ebolbe 9 cum asathete. Bape seh pled pri
eee e
bis kruhrnes. Andhe gathered them toge⸗ : ; 5 Be
Auna dine Bebzue tonge /g 9
. a 0 pitas
And he teu Angell poured oute i fe byfick en
e qa
ct e/a: 2 „ in 0
Andedec olotoed vopces len pengeb ) am ö e


abr 6 was a great

LE ke wien were phone 5
erthfomeghtyan erthquake and fo great, i
Indthe greate extye was deurded into


BE
38
4


/¢


3
og an
323;


“ple Gedatmaye ache mountapnes wert

bande aon agret pane 4
benecalenteg out ot he auen bpon the men /
. roc hasaret ee oe
2 . =


Sides che women rttrnge hren 5 ee
c


ite
1 4 so


* pera


The Renelacyon |


kowle fpzetes, 20 cage of all vnclene a hate:
Sull br /ded (oz all nacions haue dꝛonken ol
the wyne of the wꝛath of her foꝛnicaciõ. Ind
the kynges ot the evel pave cõmttted lo mica
Clon will her, aher merchauntes are wexed
ryche ol the aboundaunce ot her pleatures,

And J herde a nother voyce krom heauen /
Sape:come aware frõ her my people / that ye
be not partetaneig inher lynnes that pe re⸗
ceaue not of her plages. Foꝛ her fynnes are
gon vp to heuen / a God hath remembzedher
wpcltednes Rewarde lier ruen as we rewar
ded poul a geue her double acco dyng to her
work. Ing poure in double to her in lame
cuppe which Me filled vnto pou, Ind as mo⸗
che as (ye gloufied her felfe à llued witanty


*


lo moche youre ye in fo2 her of punylſhemt


(ale, lv b. and loꝛowe / Foz che fapde in her feife: *¥ (pe


Jerem. iia


Tert. ll. k


C beinge a quene ¢am no wyddowe ¢ wall fe
no loꝛowe. Cherkoꝛe thal her plages come at
one dape deeth / lozowe / z honger / and che
Malve bent wich fpꝛe:koz ſronge is $ Loyd
God which iudgeth her.

And che kynges ok perth walbe wepe her
and waple ouer her, wöpch haue committed
fozntcacton wyth her / s haue lyued wantaly
wich ber / when they Wall le the (moke ol her
burnypnge / a (hail ftanve a tarre ot / foꝛ ſeare
O€ her punilſuement / ſapinge. Alas / Alas
that geet citie Babpid/ that mighty cite to


Dat one houre is her iudgement come.anoebe


marchauntes of the erth cha. wepe a waple
in them lelues / koꝛ no man wyll bye their
ware enymoꝛe / the ware ok gotde and liluer /
and pꝛecious tones nether of pearle / a tap:
nes / a purple / a Chatlet / a all thynne wodde
and all maner veſſels of puerx / a all manner
vellels of mot prectous wodde, und ot bate
and pꝛon / and lynamon and odours / a oynt⸗
mẽttes / and tranckpnlence / a wyne and ople
and Fyne lloure / and wheate / be tes / and ſbe⸗
pe / andhozlles / and charetes / and bodyes and
foules ot men. ‘

And the apples chat thy Couleiuttedatter
atebdeparted from the. And allthinges which
were deyntle / and had in pꝛyce are departed
Fed the / a thou Malt cnde thẽ no moꝛẽ. Che
marchauntes ok thelethynges whych were
wexedryche / all ande a karre of from ber/
{oz fete of the punilſbemẽt other / wepinge

and wapirngeolapunge:“ Alas alas tuat
gretccitie / chat was cloched in rapnes a pur⸗
ple / and lcarlet / and decked wyth golde / and
8 W one houre

ſogreat come to nought.

euerp wippe goucmer“ L anther g
occupied byppes and ſbipmẽ which wozke
in the lee / llode a karre ot / a cried / when they
fae $ ſmone other burning faping-what
citle is like vnto this gretettie: Andthepcalt


Dut on their heddeg ¢ cryeb wenynge / and
wapunge /a ſapde: Alas. aiag / that greate
citie / wherin were maor re be all p had wip
pes inthe ſee/ by the realon of her coftiynes/
fozatonchoure is che maw nelolate.
Nelopce ouer her thou henuen / a pe hoy
Ppotles and Propheten: f: Godhath geuẽ
voure iudgemẽt on her. Ind a nighty angel
tolle bp a lone lyke a gret myigone / g caſt
it into the lee fapinge:with iuche bpotence


mall that gret citte Babpion be caſt /a Wal g


be foundeno nioze. And p voyce of harpers /
A mulecions /and ol ppprrs / 6 trompetters
walbe herde no moze in the: z no craltes m /
ol whatloeuer cralthe be, halbe founde enp
moze in the. And tze Founde of a myll Walbe
herde no moze in the / a the voyce of the bꝛꝛd⸗
rome and or the bape / walbe berde nos
maoje in the kor thy marchauntes were the
gret men ot § erty And with thrne inchaunt
ment were deceaued all naciös:a in her was
founde the bloude of the Pꝛophetes / g of the
ſarnctes / a ot all d were Mayne bpd d erth.


‘Cprapte oy t. Ate geut vuto God for tudginge
the whores Jing the onde of bis fernalltes,
Mbe\Augelt wyll not be wos ppc, Che fouleo and
‘bprdes ore called to the (laughicr,


Che. tx. Chapter.
alter that /I herde the vopce of


oche people in heauẽ kapinge: 4


ſlelura. Saluacion and giozp eho

our and power be alcribed to the
Lord oure God / lo true a righteous are his
Wat en he bath iudgedz gret whoze
wylch did cozrupt che erth vb her to micacid /
Khath auẽgedß bloudof his ſerualites of hir
band. And agapnether larde: Tllclura. And


it not


: 2 erde tpg. that withit he Wudde Cmptethe berhen and Lack hum into the bottomictic pit /a he Poe
che g e Ah dect Kidd) we gde babe wallnule them with aroooc of pin, abe dim ardletg feale onbintyst Ge toubbedes
d tateon te Tea Capi Mealy de enue, ode Che wpnefat of Feartnes and mathe —ceaucthe peopleno moace til the haute
3 the leate / le Vet calmiabtr God And hath on hig bedure g on eres were Ned: Andatter f he un bg
lapinge:pꝛaple oure L. onde God all pe p are 7e. l. d. Ela. hin thrgh a name wntten: uynge of benges/ 24 Iptell feafon, 15
bis ent tkeareh a. and Lo eok Lopes And z Carve lates athey tat von
i N Bnd Flawe an Angell ſtande in p lunne / ee
And A herde the porte ot moche people / and he ciped with a lotwbe bopce / fapinge to ies of them that were bebeaded 761

cuehagthe voyce of many waters / and as alithe Cowles g five byche middeg of heauẽ / Of Jetu / and fo7 the wode ol G
the bopce of trenge bond enger ſapinge: come and gather poure fe lues to gether bnto ch hadnot wozchipped the bead /
‘Bulehupa fo; ead onmntporsc ta eth let the fuppet ot the gret God that ye maxe cate bis | badtakenbys marke
bs be glan and telopce ano gau bonoute the fledbe of nenges andot bpe captapnes/ ades lar on their yarrnes:;
tobpmntozthe martage ot flame sene andthe flehe ofmpghtp men a the gehe oF opis with Chit a. B. pere
and his wefemadeberteitereoy. Andtober bozdes andarthem that tit on chem andche the other of che dredmen iyued
— minted chat Qe wunde be a 7 : Hedhe ofall free men a bond men / a of mal Feen n ente pon 1
ope pute nm qocdlp rapnes or toe vey: andgret. And I lawethe beatethe kynges is chat lps refurreccyon .Sleded and boty
nests the tyabtewetnes of fapnctes. md Perth rb ofthe exth / athe warriers gathered ka ge. ii de hathath parte in the feattrehivteccas,
Uetapoe tntome/* bappp ave cher wörch bite 2: thectomakebattaple agapnt bemchat kat gc on urbe thall the lecontedccth benen
are called bnto che lambrs fupper And be ; on the hore and agapnit bis founiers, Poloer fo they Walbe che Pres OF Bon
darde onto me: chele are the true fapinges eee agg ne mac ard all rorgne wich Gym &
ol God. And J fell at bys fete / to tosyps fe pꝛonpet pere.
ve hm. And be larde vnto we / te chau do 1 bim / with which he deceaucntbentthat reces

q

1

!


Jete. ll. lh. ony ot geſus. Woꝛſhippe God. Foz che
; teftimony of
NED woe


9:


ered
¢ 400 we beauen open/a bebolde a wh pte
boꝛlle:and he that fat bpd him was
afid true / and in ryghtewelnes did tudge and
take battaple. Pes eyes were as a of
Eyze:andon bis heed were mane crounes: &
Dee wuttten / that naman knewe
t he him lelke., And he was clothed with a
veſture dipt in blond / and his name ts called
the woꝛdeol God. Ind the warriers
boats e wnt) wie a pute eee
clothed Tpure rapnes +
Out of his mouth wet out acharpe . N


clue irig.


29 y this


John.


tt not Foꝛ J am thy felowe leruaunt / g one


Ot H.


Uedthe beettes marke a them cha wopthip⸗
pedhis e. Chele both were ca into a.


OF Fpze buminge w ymſtone: theres
rae Gapne with the Cwearde or hem
that fat ops e hoe / which Cwearde proceas
ded out of bis mouthe / a all the koules were
kulkvlled with
Chet
derd a


cthetrllellhe.
jon ts bounde fo a thoutande eres. ht
and reteaut ſudge ment. 5


pte
an Angell come doune 2
heauen / hauinge the napr ot
/ 1. — ppt / a a gret chayne
bis hand. Ind he tone 1 10 22.
chat olde ler dent which is the deuyſi ¢ Ha⸗
tanas /a hr bounde him a thoufande peresze


5 a t


Cmeralbe : the tote Sardonizs the lyxt Sar, at hunde. De that dortn rapll let bl do eu!
Deas pbil Crysolite: the egbt Berall the ir {tpll: and he which 15 fils» tet him pe Mey
+ a Topas: the tenth Erplopragos: the ele: {pll: The that is righteow,s let hun he more
venth a Jacpnete ; the twelvetl) an Amatist. + 4 C be that is boty let him be more
Ehe fli gates were pir pearles euerp ga. bol 15 bepolve J come thortlp and my re
te was of one pearle and the itrete of hel. warde with me to gene euerp man accor:
tie was pure golde as thorowe thpnynge Dinge as bps dedes Gall be. Jam alpha ard
glalle. And ther was no temple therein. Kor n the beginninge and the ende: the art
Lorde God almighty and the lambe are the And the lalt. Blecled are they that do hys com.
G temple of it. and the cttie hath no nede af the maundementes that their power wmape bet ,
con us, fonne nether of the mone to ipabten tt. or he tree of Ipfe and male entre in, thorow Paya, gin v.
the brpgbtnes of Eod dyn ipyht it; and the gates tnto citie.* Sor wilbaut Gal be Bom wie. bay
lame Was the Ipgbt of it. And the people Fes aud incbauters and whormongers and, 3
whpeh are Coven ait walke in the 1) ght of Mortherers and walsters aud whotoeuer 4
itz and the kynges of Perth wall bronge thei’ loveth or maketh leatinges. l ;
: glory unto it. And 5 gates oc tt are not Hur 9. ant fent mine, angel to teſtttie untg O :
cen. ue Sy dle. Sor ther hal be no night there. And pou thele thinges in n dl . Fam 0
ther hall entre intu jt none unclene thynge: rote and the generatlon of Daud and the
nether whatgoeuer worketh . Set morninge ſtarre. And the Iprete and
r.


The Reclacion |


Grech. reeviy lbalbe lowled out of his pꝛelon and pago —noure from Gop vu: of heaut prepared as 4
and. rx. cut to decraue the people whych ace in che bpde garded tu; ber hurbnd. Ind z herde
foure quarters of d erth Gog and Magog / agretvoyce out oihraucn ſe inge: beholde
to gather them to gether to battayl whole the tabernacle of 0 ig with inen, Fhe will
Cnombꝛe is as the Coiwe ofthe lee: and they dwell with thẽ. And chr y Haibe hes people /
went vp in che plapne ot the erth:and compa and God hmlelſe Maive wyth chem and be
ledthe tenteg ofthe laynctd about / a the be⸗ their God.“ Ind cod Mall wppe dwape all Ela
loued cytie. Ano tyꝛe came doune krom God / teares from their cyeg. Inu there ſhalde no⸗ n
out okheauen, and deuouredthem: and the de moze derth / nether lo :o wnether crringe / ne⸗
uypll that dectaued thẽ / was caſt into a lane ther Mall ther be en moze papue / fo; $ olde
of fpze and byymtone / where the beck a the chrnges / are gone. Andhe that late vpon the :
kalle prophet were and Walbe tannzted dare feate,fayde.* Beijolde Aman all thynges Sve ride, |
andneght fo; ewer more. newe. E Indhe Capo tnito me: ite / lap eyete o · cer. .d
And Ilawe a greate wypte ſeate andhem wo des are karthtuu and true. .
chat late onit / trom whole kace fleed aware And helard vnto mezitis done, Jam Al- an Alpha
Dotwebeerthandyeauc/ @ thetic place was pha andDmega/the begennynge a the ende Diese det
notmoze founde, Andy lawe the derd / boch X will geue tohun chat is a third oftye well the l. Kr


4 fatbe come, And let bpm that bea» i
great and mall onde betoje Goo: Snbehe dhe water of rle re. he chat ourtcSmeth/ a eae e Onde HD ET ne" inp let Huan that s a ut
fies rte nen anbagseheroonewes Gelernt al evingcs/ ao’ Pll be DPB E ien dent. Jun hi poataeece ane een
opened / which is the boke ot ipke / a the deed Sod / andhe albe my Conne. But the keare⸗ C ofthe water of life the cruttkul the water of ele tre. ;
were iunged of Wole thenges tohych were full andonbeleutnge/and the abbonunable c nett §logbt of te ar of Seb. Che 0 won telle unto euerp man that peareth .,
topitté in che bones gcco hg to thetr dedes: and mutdzerg / and whozmongers/ andfojce ud der dis Cevitauntes Warninge. ol worden of Tun del te cen he le.
Andtbe lee gaue bpher deed / tobpcy were in rers /s Foolaters o an pars cballhaue chert ' for to come, toe angel twill not de man fall abDe unto Bete nene enn
ber/anobecty andbeubeipueredup cbenecd/ paste tn the lake which duch with rie d . twordbipped. €o the worde der mape nos, 4 lor. bimn ie bate 255
which were in hes they were tud eb eu. F byymttone/twhich is the leconde pech. thinge be aöden nor mpnithed theretcom, ' Pe unden Fotdis prope
man acco; to his dedes, Anddeeth and nd thete cam vnto me one of the. bn. An⸗ che. xxl. chapter dal take d parte out ot the: it
bell were ca thelahe ot tze. Cyiz is? gels badthe.otj .opais fullo€ che. bit. Sas ite and out of the v citie and maa
Cecondpeeth.Andwhotocuerwasnot folde latte plages:a talhen with me ſapingẽ come oer be ſbewen me a pure epucr - Ear an dende 5 4
witten in che boke or lte / was cat into de bydder J wel che we the d bzpde/ che iamdes of water of Ipfe clereas 9 thete things {apts bt. 0
lake ot Be : wpte. And he caryed me aw pe in the Cpzete protedynge oute of the Ceate dr dome g. Amen Euen to co. f
En thio Khapter u deleribed the new ond ſplrttuall to a gret and an hye mountayne / andhe hee God anv of the lambe. the me ſelu. Che grace
Juden. wedmeche guet cilie hop Terutalem deicen Ar der fhe ict ce de ure Hie, den a \
: See  ymaeout ofheaucn from Goo, yaupnge ? twas ther iste opts whi bare Fl a= — * 4
brvgueneg of Ged. And der Menpnge tas yp ner ot frultes: and gabe fente enerp monety : ‘
de bneoa tone motte precious Aue a Jat and the lues of the wabbe Cecuen ku peale : * 5
cleave as C nal: andhad walles gret a people all, And ther thal be Ah id „be ende of the vewe 1
and had. fil gates and af the gate. ti. but F teate of od ¢ the Lambe thal be ; Ceftament. J
and namiet wzittẽ which are the. xij 2 in ft: and bps ferbantes shalferbe hym. And 54
ol Yeracl:on the eet parte. lh. gates / % thep thall {ee bis fare and bis name alben. g 5 1
onthe Ponherde. . gates @ lc wamen EA , * uf
the rundet ans and From the nenen. i fauna fot the Lorbe eset Chem fie 7 At
gates and the wall of the ette had ni. loun⸗ i ‘hall rapgne for evermore, we
dactons / and in them the names ofplambes And Be kapde unto me: 996 1 008 800 axe a
ue co with me baba gomen Sede any pipi ent Ops angel ts 75
altel me. 1 aul .
reetorcaturethe cette 1.49 d e fg e | debe unto bs feabautes the thinges tubieh
therofandthe wall therok. Ind the citie was i ; mufte Shorten ddr wer urn i eig :
eee nee
tebe en ee th Pere geg anb bebe tye. AND DE
rede. Ff. G. lurlonges: a the lenght a the w herve a iene. fell 115


letze bepth of il / were equal. Ind
biedeh e the he


5535S fe thou do ‘notary an fecumt

meature that man oicth, Sndebe bpeeng of and the felotwe (ecuaunt of thp brethren the
oftt twas of Jat gk : Prophetes G of chem which kepe the Caping

or hale kris N arch doe But 10 m. .

ans ed inn bite mur /o8 i And be Lade untu me; teale not 5, faving

; OF the tall oF coe eite were gate ; ofthe prophetic of this dont. Sor the teme is

ned u all manerolpectous 2

kyille keunda cid was Jalpar Ade krrzde i


phere the cheꝛdea Calcedon the tourthan 9
emerals *


4


The Table


gis is the Table


wherin ye ſhallkynde the Epi ·
Bicsandthe Solpelg, alter the
‘ole of Dallburp.


Oꝛto kynde themthe ſo
10 ner: ſo (yal ye fee atter turle


on or onder the letter ther
kalk pe erde Acro + woerethe pile
Gol pel beginneth / a where the ende is/ ther
ſhall pe fynde an halle crolle &

Gnd the Lyre Ipne inthis table alware is
Spittie à Pleconde irne is alwapep Galpel
On the fest Dondape in ye Aduent.
he nt eet eet

ewe ave . 4
hen theydz 7 1 5


see pactentencetne een. Jaco. v. 8
C ee ol the Golpell. Mar. i. 1
5 On the kerdare


fate the. ll. Chapter

Wehn dapes Jonn. Mat. ij.
Ontbe. 1j.Sponday inthe aden

soba eee No. xb. A

And there walbe tygnes, Luc. xxi. E


Jacharie the. ol chapter La


Maetely Abart onto pou. .: And


Elaie the. un, dbaptee

John bart witnes of him. Soh 8
Onche. i. Sondap in the Aoucnt.

sLatmentbistopte eures, 1 Conn. in.

ben Ache beinge in pret = Wat xi. 1


Ind this is the recoꝛde or John. Joh. i.
On the wendldare


weet red bee 2
— Lu · bil


€
‘Paul the fetuaunt of | Jau. n am |
Iphen his mother marx was. Sat · · C


te dutta ga e. i. made.
5 ol Gt 15 Cit. ij.
boten 1 Lugs


Tt the. u. wate,
Put alter that the uxnumeg. Ct. li.
Che Hephearders layor one to. Lu. ij. C
Ac thr. in malle
God in tymt pak diu eiſip. Hebze. 5
Jnche beginuynge was that. Joh. 1.
Onlaxnct doccucnsdape
Steuen Full of tarih and power. Actu. vi. c
Wherfozre beholde g lende Nat ri ID
On ſaynct John Cuangeliſte.


Ectleſiad the xv chapter


Folowe me / Ptter turned, Joh xxl
On the chploermate dave
Ind F ioked/aioniambe, rr
on el ol che CLoꝛde ape. Mat. ij. C
Hondaye alter chuſtmalle
ans: „ Gala. ilij. O
And his lather and mother mer. Lu. il. E
¶ On the Newe peres daye
Foꝛ the grace ot God that bung. Cit. il.
And when the erght dare was · Lu. j ·
¶ Onche twrlut euen ·
Foz thegraccotecothatbang. Ct. ij.
ivhen Berode wag dead. Wat. ij. 5
Mn the tweike dart.
Cfate the. 8
Hoven Fetus was bome. Mat. i A
Seen ewe wee
Eſaie the ix. chapter 2
Che nextt daye / John ſawe. Ich. . D
¶Onthe. ij. ſondaye after twelle daxe ·
ITbeleche pou therfore bzethzen. Nom rh. 2
nd when he was. rij. yere ode. IU. M1
Onthe wendldape.
Biethenmyhertrgdbcipze. Nom x. A
e wis Mat · uij


poare
Aetcuerpfoute lubmp. inte Nom xiij
And Jeluis retourned oy the. Luluiſ·
¢ ame: n Dondape alter


welle dare.
that we haue diuerg. Nom xii.


2 seer hari rag the. Jh · .. A


Onthe wendſdare
C his ig a tri ſapinge / ard bp. . Cum. i.
And he departedtheng: und. ar · vi· A


On the frydaye
C077 mwefanblüntiy beit. Bom · xt.
Andhe came into d apc tnaum. Lu. j
( Onthe . in. Sy ondape after


twelle dart.
2 Wörndl youre atone opt Nom xi
when gelus was come doune. Mat · viij· A

Onthe wendldare ·

beteche you bꝛethzen lo · Rom xb
eee Mar

2 e fredaye.
Ire pe not ware that ve are · . Co ti
Ind Jelus went about all. ar itt. 2D
6


bape,
Septuage⸗ Howe therfoyeaselectol,  CololL.iti.B
Che kyngoome of beauenis,


. wendedare

Grothe tritij. chapter 9. ij. Reg xx. C yemen and ſcheſdzen. Be
ſembꝛinge.

inge Wee Mat. xi. C * . r


The Table


Owe nothinge to en man. As ri. C en another ſimilttude.

Andhe entrcb into a chippe. Sat ul c = sonnei ie ee 1
meme” venssa Eat. e, f
5 ca

Aechaunteoas ge 8 Tue on See ae,


On the (rpdaye.
erpman abpoeintye.'t L Conn. vi. S Aan ke gene,


Let eu
8 brought chridzen. ax. r. On ite! e.
EOnethe, omens . nr


Aenegesnet sie. Sung e. ape,
cesta man wo don. Mak. at FAD rend he apter / and emfe i.
— . — Loch oute: Gndas Fetus packd be. nee 4


—
Percraue pe not how chat. 1. Cor fr. W Freda
Fade r g oben, Wasi * MH equne satan


wenlday.
2 otpe bevetbro. t. Coy. lin. A 6
ev bepastce tbens/ano, War tx. & bernge they Dez ir. c


re.

Which ol ö

S Nba 6. Coz. iuij. C 505 e Lanz

8 wit me Wat. ij. We 2, Ja
alem the eat 258

Lo: pe lutte toles ij com xf.

6 Lad —— — 5

call Gd tose recone bate, g. Coy f. A nch ri

sear 1 Mar. ul. A Let che fame mende be in you, Ea


e. — Daves, Wat. fz
0 we moewe. if, .
— e con. o. r


Elate the are
CMnthe ondaye.t, 5 b; x
imag ane geo x oe rican 1 asst


ma. Be Coke bre pn deem. Exode che. e.
toenibape Serge, Saad
qobelthe., 0 Onelercuens ·
Moroucr' ben re fattebenct, Dat li We ee Como
Tee ge wand .
. . S n 4c.
n Sache
eas thertoje.


t. con t. A — od ‘
Chenwwag Feusierawape. ' Wat ih.
7 Laie 5 ee 5 n . a


Etechlel the rot). chapter
Alter that there was a lead. . J0h. v. A
©: at an . Hondape in lent.


Betterehestii.chapter.
Ind Fens atcendentoy


5 re.
Genetis che. xxvij Chapter, :


Lr an


Jama good ch


0 5 tg —


375 xx. 4 Ita man loue me and will hepe. Jah. xi.
on 0 D wire robe mambo eae Actus.
Sean meta pe gte wo, Jobs. Seo Tea bet — Ach. ).


tye
ia 7.59.9 when the z 2 ee, Act. vih.
be ge ees eee “Gas
& Pet ion wich de. Actu tl.
8 es 5 re John. vi. E

Onche. J. Honda re

tudkered chen cam nto a citie oł. Betws
Seno in eee Senate ogee pase |


chemozowe afterthe.


ee.

. iB ſrael heareche. Act.

Stb, n. Pet Runes marci . 2

On tyemennidaye.
„Nom. b. 2 nerte Mabothdare. Act pi,

— nie ae 2 22224
On the.ty-oondape a fonda:

* ac ter ioked / a brholde. Revue ff. 2

Dertip beioueb J beleche you, J. Per Alterthis ) 0 / 2250 eae 12


eee 1 ly


tell den tele.
Ae bitwe.


nche
Teng 2 . as
eueryg euerx. Sbapeep b bsc 5 4.
rnck not that q an.
But cede che a Co. = — ie one ae ns
See — Soe is


Leiden.
Weg apl.
b drwaft in the


0.0. D
oh. % D 4
W 10

fe sof,
zee 1 —


5.
_ seine =


sien


The Table


Ind when he was come.

On the. vii. Dondape alter echt tana

wil kprahe grole becauie ot No. bl. S

In chole dapes when there. Mar. vij. I

On the wenldape

There is chen no demnaclan. Nom. viij.

In that tyme went Jelus. Mat. xij. 1
On the. vii / bene re


Cherkoꝛe bꝛetyen we are. No viij. C

eee 5 Mat. vi. C
wen

But God letteth out his toue Nav. 8

Malter welawe one,


Ohr. i
uche. ir. Sondape alter trinite kek


Chat we ſyulde not luſt after . Coꝛ 995
Chere . Lu. xvi A
Aemember yr nothow that. 177105 C


De that is fapthtull in.


Lu. xbi
Outhe. x. un dcr ee
i. Co


Ye knowe that

And when he was come 2 ix.
Onthe wenſdape 5

All flefthe is not one maner. 1. Co. xb. E


Other remember pe not.
He put forth a ſimilitude
¶Onthe . rij. Sondape alter
trinite fonda:
Suche truſt haue we.
Andhe bepartco agapne
Dnthe wentda;


For we pꝛeache not oure. i Coꝛin · iii. 8
Eben gn er ayo Mat. xi. C
Onthe ris. Dondaye alter

trinitefondape
Co Abꝛahani a his ſeede. Gala. ic
Bappr ate the epes. Lux.
Onthe wen
e,
en a
Dn the.rilfj. Condave atter
trinite fonda;


re ·
9 Gala. b.
Lantech Luk soy


si ij. gon ii
Mar. vuij. D


. c


Soe hnotwe that be laters, tameie 3
— r —— Luke. xx. A


e
1 — Erde hee


75
Chou ———.—— be


4
Aung, bzeth.


And it lotuned atter that
Onth 19
Beware le eny nian cone
Andhe cam to Bethlayda 47507
On che. rij. sdondaxe a
Tripite londape.
therfore winch am in bondes: Ephe. ll A
ind it e one Spent nan ij. a


e
come to Caper. Mat:
n Tull. Sponnayeattectitete tong


icf 1 thanke my God all tapes on. 1 2 5


enthe Phariſes hadherde. Bat
ks 9 the l. nar 5


15


entredintoatpppe,

Onthe wenloape
ehertore byetyyen carne tate 1. Get t
Shen tent ir ere, at. rtf S
. Led


im u
den d the rat mana, 4 c
0 akon, eee atte
on 4
aeg ul e
Becauſe we duch —.—9 t geg
C Lu. bi.
C Onthe. 11810 londabe alter :


trinite fondape.
And Yam tureiy certifien of, 1
Cheroye is Su he den Mat. bai


Ye etoetnobetinttebar ee Romt.€


Gierelp J faye vnto pou that,
Congest i). Dondapr ate *


fete.
tolowe me /anbz. Pöntp.
Sabre Babes
Onthewendaye
9 5
On the. rriit.


8 ite ſondaye.
re For this caute we alfo/fence *


he bhto
. ae Den Spy
Ind A woide noc ſhat pe i
cettayneruanbabttoo ‘
1
3 —


The Table


coe the embatinge tebe

‘Amos the ir Chapte

reco compe, Dar x.
the krdare


ee the. rij.
erregt g Lue


the Spaterbare
tabernacle was b. 2
‘a 5


Jas:
tate tat ar 1151


258 9

0 the Cable of cheepities and

bat smite

Vereagef dee the Epis and
ra rattan


Aae ad
is ra bai thetee ot. anne
1 17 92 5


count it see a 10


cen


Sobel 11 5 1 5 2


Thaue tru ee Gal. b. 2

‘here wag a man a
near oe

———— Lu

eee e
tha

when Fetus came into * Sat wic


3 Ten anwerben that


r.  qbhen peter full ofthe
2 ehispecremenberbor bw


12 Eccleche xi
Ie foztuned


2 eecletian ce meee


Fn the conmicmozacion of O. Paul
Then an. wered Peter


ameg
— — . 41.
mee xx ·


Andas 1 cdthechinge. Act.
when e 3
On tran{rigutacton of oute Levee
Foz we lolowed not deceauabie 1. Be.
Andatter vi. dapes Jelus pat bij. A
On the name ot Jets


While be g 15
On ſaynt Lar


re
Voz. tx.
Werelp perelpg faye
the: manatee oure
hapter


ES 22
Endep V0 rth
Pe Soto therfore ve arenomoate phi.
ite 5
On the natiulte of oure 3


at

r 1
allet

pm we *


2 = betete wemtb.


2 . Stee


2 Chapter.
ane 1 Luke. r. 7


8 Agb e that all. Rom bit


citnaunde J vou that re Jon


.


Agarne the nyngdome of, uw?
che ende okthis
Cable.
