oe

ieee ee
tte a

st
Bs:
at
ae

SER eae
- *

‘

dopnainaibad egal =

WL aes , BOROUGH Author
LEWISHAM

LIBRARY SERVICE

=, a C) ”
ml A 3 l¢ :
Bh! Wrens” ‘ ay

Books or discs must be returned on or before the last date stamped on label or on
eard in book pocket. Books or discs can be renewed by telephone, letter or personal
| unless required by another reader. After library hours use the Ansafone

rvice (01-698 7347). For hours of opening and charges see notices at the

above branch, but note that all lending departments close at 1 pm on Wednesday
and all libraries are closed on Sundays, Good Friday, Christmas Day, Bank Holidays

and Saturdays prior to Bank Holidays.

apwanuncormneemene iran ters fetonenre ye mee EN EN ls

) fort
suc 3 Gevrne| “ieee! BS

=
;
i Cn, fend be Ih Ph tk Ct” te

7m}

“_ “yy vad if
aS thet aa :

ee

FLOWERS OF HISTORY,

ESPECIALLY: SUCH AS RELATE TO

THE AFFAIRS OF BRITAIN.

FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD TO THE YEAR 1307.

COLLECTED BY ”

MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER.

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL

BY

C.D. YONGH, B.A.

IN TWO VOLUMES.
VOR: I.
B.C. 4004 TO A.D. 1066.
LONDON :

HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN,

: : MDCCCLITI.

TRANSFERRED TO

Metropolitan Spe ial Collections

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

Tue author of the following Chronicle was a Benedictine Monk,
who flourished probably in the early part of the fourteenth cen-
tury, though some place him near the end of it. It begins with
the creation of the world, and continues to the end of the reign
-of Edward the First. In his Preface, the Author speaks as if he
intended to write the history of the whole world ; but after the
time of the Heptarchy, he very rarely mentions the affairs of any
country except Great Britain. The early portion of the work
is merely an abridgment of the Bible: then he gives us a brief
sketch of Rome, making little mention of Greece, except where
its history is connected with that of the Jews or Romans. Of
our own early times he gives us the fabulous traditions of Brutus
(whom he represents as the great-grandson of Auneas), and Pan-
drasus, and Corineeus, and Camber; relates the sad story of
Lear, the prophecy of Merlin, and so conducts us through the
wars of Vortimer and Vortigern, &c., to the times of compara-
tively certain history. It is, of course, after this point that his
work begins to be really valuable ; for he was not only a careful
observer, and a great master of plain and simple narrative, but,
what was even more uncommon in the days in which he wrote,
he paid great attention to order and chronology. As might be ex-
pected, he is very credulous on the subject of the miracles attested
bythe Roman church, as performed by the early martyrs, dead and
alive ; of which he gives us copious accounts: but the frequent
recurrence of such marvellous stories ought not to diminish our
confidence in him when relating facts, where there was no room
for ascribing them to supernatural agency ; for we must recollect
that the belief in such events was common in his time ; and not
only have we no right to quarrel with him for not being in

advance of his age on such points, but we may derive some in-
' a 2

il TRANSLATORS PREFACE.

struction from seeing what in those days the most learned mow —
could look upon as matters of sober history. Inthe reigns «/
our kings after the Conquest, he is exceedingly minute ar!

careful ; and as such, is constantly referred to by Hume and othr

historians. His account of the troubles of the reigns of Johu. |

and Henry the Third, bears internal marks of accuracy and

fidelity ; and in his relation of the wars of Edward, he shows no _

small power of vivid description.

He is said to have formed his work very much upon the ple~
of that of: Matthew Paris, who lived in the preceding century -
and both were largely indebted to Roger. of Wendover, as fer
as his history extended, which was to a.p. 1238. For the las:

seventy-two years of his work, he appears to have drawn onh

own resources and industry. On the whole, there can be 1~
doubt that he is one of the most valuable authorities for the timc~
of which he treats, and well deserving the reputation which b~
has earned among modern historians.

|

ee

so

se

CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.

SE BANC a eat all opal gtk my ofS pe ee

THE FIRST AGE OF THE WORLD.
From B.c. 4004 To B.c. 2349.

The Creation—Adam is driven from Paradise—Cain and Abel—
Noah A : 4 : 3 5 ‘ é F : .

THE SECOND AGE.—From Bs.c. 2348 To B.c. 1921.

The Deluge—The descendants of Noah—The different divisions of the
Nations—The reigns of Belus, Semiramis, Ninus, Astyages, Cyrus,
Darius—The divisions of the world into Europe, Asia, and Africa
—The colonization of Europe—The tower of Babel 5

THE THIRD AGE.—From B.c. 1921 To B.c. 1059.

The call of Abraham—The birth of Isaac and Ishmael—The foun-
dation of Argos, by Machus—The story of Esau and Jacob—Apis
arrives in Egypt—The history of Joseph—The Exodus—Moses a
contemporary of Cecrops—Joshua a contemporary of Bacchus—
Busiris, Cadmus, Europa—Apollo is born—The Jewish Judges—
Paris carries off Helen—Triptolemus—The Minotaur—Ampheon
—Cdipus—Danze—Fall of Troy, and arrival of Aineas in Italy—

PAGE

Brutus, son of Silvius, is banished into Greece—An oracle warns -

him to go to Albion—Description of Albion—Brutus founds

London in the time of Saul—Descendants of Brutus—David is -

king .
THE FOURTH AGE.—From s.c. 1055 To B.c. 606.

Ebrancus founds York—Solomon builds the temple—The division of
the Jewish Tribes—Elijah—Bladud, king of Britain, is contempo-
rary of Blijah—Shishack plunders Jerusalem—Sardanapalus—End
of the kingdom of Assyria—History of king Lear—Rome is

13

iv

CONTENTS.

founded by Romulus and Remus—The old kings of Italy, Janus,
Saturn, Jupiter—Early history of Alba and Rome—Kings of Rome
after Romulus—Constantinople is founded in the time of Tullus
Hortilius—Story of Lucretia—Nehemiah is a contemporary of
Spurius Cassius—Story of Esther—Regulus—List of the Jewish
kings—The prophecy of the Sibyls—The Jews are carried off to
Babylon . : oc) Ne 3 é 3 : : :

THE FIFTH AGE.—From s.c. 606 To B.c. 4.

Account of Babylon—Kings of Babylon—Jerusalem is restored—

uh

List of the kings of Britain—Kings of Persia—Brennus, king of
England, makes war upon Rome—Alexander subdues Persia—
Division of the kingdom of Alexander—Antiochus—Ptolemy—
The Punic wars—Other wars of the Romans—The High Priests
of the Jews, Onias, Jason, &c.—Wars of the Maccabees—Czesar
invades Britain, is defeated by Cassibelaunus—Augustus Casar—
Herod-—Joseph is espoused to Mary . A“ . - .

THE SIXTH AGE.
CHAP. I.—From Bs.c. 4 ro a.p. 14.

ne birth of Christ—Question when the Sixth Age of the world is
properly said to begin—Circumstances attending the birth and
early age of our Saviour—Invective against the Heathen Philoso-
phers and their theories—The wise men of the East—Herod’s
massacre of the Innocents—Account of Josephus—Violence of
Herod to his own family—Treachery of Antipater—Cymbeline and
his sons in England—Death of Herod—His kingdom is divided—
Trogus—Archelaus—Death of Augustus Cesar . : .

CHAP. II.—From a.p. 15 vo a.p. 38.

Reign of Tiberius—Livy—Ovid—A great earthquake in Asia Minor

—The invention of glass—Death of Cymbeline—History of Pilate
—The preaching of John—The principal events in our Saviour’s
life—Judas Iscariot—Letter, of Casar to the Senate about Christ
—The Apostles—Saint Stephen—Saint Paul—Portrait of our
Saviour—Death of Pilate . : : . : .

CHAP. IlJ.—From a.p. 39 To a.p. 117.

Herod is deprived of his kingdom—Caligula—Claudius—Saint Peter

is made Pope—Saint Mark—Guiderius and Arviragus, kings of
Britain—Famine at Rome—Nero—Festus—Saint J ames—Mary
Magdalene—Simon Magus—Nero sets fire to Rome—Galba—
Otho— Vitellius—Vespasian persecutes the Jews—Titus takes
Jerusalen—J ohn, Simon—Livius succeeds Peter as Pope—Arvi-
ragus dies—The Picts, under Roderic, arrive in Britain—The Scots
—Marius, king of Britain—Domitian—Saint John is banished to
Patmos—Quinctilian—Clement is Pope—Trajan’s reign, victories,
persecution of the Christians, and death

PAGE

ive)
~

LUG

. 129

143

CONTENTS. Vv

CHAP. IV.—From a.p. 118 To a.v. 284.
PAGE
Hadrian succeeds Trajan—Rebuilds + Jerusalem—Lucius, king of
Britain—Antoninus Pius—The heresy of Valentinus—Galen—
Dispute about the day of Easter—Polycarp—Marcus Antoninus—
Two Emperors at a time—Commodus—Irenzus—The Britons are
converted to Christianity by Faganus and Deruvianus—Pertinax—
Severus—He comes to Britain—Is slain there—Tertullian—Bas-
sianus—Macrinus—Alexander—The heresy of Sabellius—Origen
—Maximus—Gordian—Philip—Decius—Gallus—Valerian—Galli-
enus—Cyprian—Claudius—Aurelian—Tacitus—The heresy of the
Manicheans—Probus—Carus . f 5 ° 5 : P158

CHAP. V.—From a.p. 285 To a.p. 340,

Diocletian’s reign — Carausius in Britain — Constantius — Galerius,
Maximian—The empress Helena—The persecution of Diocletian
—Amphibolus—Saint Albanus—Diocletian and Maximian abdicate
the throne—Constantine is made emperor in Britain—Comes to
Rome—Octavius—Silvester—The Arrian heresy—Death of Con-
stantine . = . : . : : : : A . 176

CHAP. VI.—From a.p. 341 To a.p. 434.

Constantius—Death of Arrius—The bones of Saint Andrew and
Saint Luke are taken to Constantinople—Julian—Eusebius dies—
Saint Hilary—The bones of John the Baptist are collected—Alaric
—Valentinian and Valens—Octavius, king of Britain, dies—Gratian
—Maximianus becomes king of Britain—Conan—The Franks—
Pharamond—Death of Athanasius—Gregory Nazianzen—Basil—
Theodosius — Arcadius — Maximus, king of Britain — Death of
Maximus—Rufinus—Stilicho—Saint Ambrose dies—The Pelagian
heresy—Saint John Chrysostom—Saint Augustine—Honorius—
The Nestorian heresy—The Romans abandon Britain—The Scots
and Picts invade it . c 5 : - : F ‘ — 193

CHAP. VII.—From a.p. 435 To a.p. 464.

The Britons receive aking from Brittany—Attila—Vortigern— Saint
Germain—Wars between the Britons and the Picts and Scots—
The Saxons are invited into Britain—Meroveus, king of the Franks
—The Saxons arrive in Britain—Are defeated by Vortigern—The
Counel of Chalcedon—Vortimer—Horsa—Hengist—Death of
Vortimer—Return of Pee eee Saxons destroy the British
Churches—Merlin= . °° . 5 : A : . 208

CHAP. VIII.—From a.p. 465 To a.p. 498.

Prophecy of Merlin—The red dragon—The white dragon—The
Revolution in Britain—Aurelius returns to Britain—Death of
Vortigern—Of Alaric—Odoacer, king of the Goths—Theodoric,
king of the Goths—Au elius defeats Hengist, and puts him to

v1

CONTENTS.

death—Restores the Churches—Saint Patrick in Ireland—Olla,
king of the South Saxons—Cedric, king of the West Saxons—
Death of Aurelius—Birth of Arthur, son of Uther Pendragon

CHAP. 1X.—From a.p. 499 To a.p. 585.

Clovis enriches the Church—The Saxons become nearly masters of

Britain—They are defeated by Uther Pendragon—Olla, king of the
Saxons, dies—Uther Pendragon dies—King Arthur is crowned—
His victories over the Saxons—Justin, emperor of Rome—Boethius
—tThe Saxons again invade Britain, and are defeated—Arthur’s
sword, caliban, and other arms—He restores the Churches—
Marries—Justinian, emperor of Rome—Saint Anthony—Saint
Denis—Saint Benedict—lIotila—Arthur kills Mordred, and is
mortally wounded—Clothaire, king of the Franks—The Saxons
become masters of Britan—The Heptarchy. . 4 5

CHAP. X.—From a.p. 586 To A.p. 621.

The Britons retreat to Wales—And to Cornwall—The whole island

of Britain obtains the name of Anglia—Gregory becomes pope—
Saint Augustine is sent to England—The English become Chris-~
tians—The Church of Rome is declared the chief of all the churches
—Death of Ethelbert—Wars between the different kings in Eng-
land— Chosroes, king of Persia . ; , j :

CHAP. XI.—From a.p. 622 To A.p. 676.

The heresy of the Monothelites—The Saracens attack the Roman

Empire—Mahomet—His wife Cadijah—Pope Honorius—King Ed-
win becomes a Christian—Heraclius becomes a Monothelite—
Cadwallan, king of Wales—Oswald, king of Northumberland—
Oswy — The heresy of the Monothelites is condemned — King
Louis violates the tomb of Saint Denis—Cadwallan dies

CHAP. XII.—From a.p. 677 To a.p. 704.

Disputes and Ecclesiastical affairs in Britain—Wilfrid is deposed

from his Bishopric—Saint Etheldreda—Saint Hilda—A Council is
held at Hatfield— Saint Cuthbert, Bishop of Lindisfarne— Eg-
frid is killed—Cadwallader is baptized—Dies—The Histories of
Geoffrey of Monmouth, Caradoc oMneiben: William of Malmes-
bury, and Henry of Huntingdon—Pepin, king of France—Part
of the true cross is found at Rome—A Dead Man is restored
oon pce in Northumberland—The Bishopric of Winchester
is divide : : :

. « . .

CHAP. XIII.—From a.p. 705 ro av. 742.

Death of Ethelred—The See of Worcester is founded—Saint Guth-

lac of Croyland—Gregory is Pope—Jna, king of the West Saxons,
defeats and kills Eadbert—Bede writes his History—Schism of
the Iconoclasts—Wars of Ethelbald, king of Mercia—Death of
Bede—His character—Death of Gregory

PAGE

. 226

250

270

. 289

. 318

341

CONTENTS. Vil

CHAP. XIV.—From a.p. 743 ro 802.
Wars in Britain—Miracles wrought at the tomb of Benedict—Offa, ee
king of Mercia—Charlemagne makes war upon the Saxons and on
the Lombards—Allies himself with Offa—Honours paid to the
body of Saint Alban—Ethelbert, king of the East Angles and Mar-
tyr—Offa goes to Rome—Dies—Charlemagne goes to Rome—
Egbert succeeds to the throne of the West Saxons c ; . 308

CHAP, XV.—From 4.p. 803 To’ a.p. 870.

Eghert begins to subdue the other kingdoms of the Heptarchy—
Charlemagne summons five councils in France—Dies—Egbert be-
comes sole king of England—Subdues Wales—The Danes land at
Sheppey—Are defeated by Egbert—He dies—They return a se-
cond time—Constant wars between them and the English—Alfred,
son of Ethelwolf, is born—Story of the old woman of Berkeley—
Ethelwolf devotes a tenth part of his kingdom to the service of
God—He takes Alfred to Rome—Ethelwolf dies—Saint Swithun
—Alfred marries—The Danes overrun England and Scotland—
Death of King Edmund. . . : } : A ; - 389

CHAP. XVI.—From a.p. 871 To a.p, 900.

The Danes invade the West Saxons—Reach Reading—Battles with
Alfred—King Ethelred dies and is succeeded by Alfred—The youth
and education of Alfred—His wisdom—His wars—Brithred, king
of Northumberland and Mercia—The body of Saint Cuthbert is
brought from Lindisfarne—A truce is made between Alfred and
the Danes—It is broken—Alfred besieges Exeter and builds a fleet
—The Danes ravage Wiltshire—Alfred retires to Athelney—King
Gytro becomes a Christian—An account of John or Dun Scotus—
Alfred defeats the Danes—Story of a vision of the emperor Charles
abont purgatory—Alfred becomes king of all Britain—A List of
the kings of the Heptarchy—Alfred founds monasteries—Appoints
governors throughout his icici abel of Ralls duke of Nor-
mandy—Death of Alfred . : & - . 420

CHAP. XVII.—From a.p. 901 ro a.v. 941.

Edward the Elder succeeds Alfred—A great council of the English
Church is held—Edward wars against the Danes—Rollo becomes a
Christian—The Danes continue their ravages—Many towns are
built throughout the kingdom—Edward dies—Athelstan succeeds
him—Saint Dunstan flourishes—Treaty of peace between Athel-
stan and Robert of Normandy—Athelstan puts his brother Edwin
to death—His wars with Constantine, king of Scotland, and An-
laf, king of Ireland—Otho becomes emperor of the Romans—
Athelstan dies, and is succeeded by eer is divided
between Edmund and Anlaf ‘ : ‘i . 455

vill CONTENTS.
CHAP. XVIII.—From a.p. 942 To A.D. 975.
PAGE
Anlaf dies—William, duke of Normandy, is murdered-—Death of king
Edmund—Eadred succeeds to the throne—His courage and death
—Edwy succeeds—Dunstan is banished—Edwy is banished, and
Edgar made king—Dunstan is recalled—Simony in the Church
—The wisdom and power of Edgar—He dies, and is succeeded by
Edward . A ° 4 “ ° : : : ‘ 3 ¥ 2

CHAP. XIX.—From a.p. 976 To a.p. 1016.

‘The death of Edward the Martyr—Ethelred succeeds to the throne—
Death of Dunstan—Quarrel between Ethelred, and Richard of Nor-
mandy—Tribute is paid to the Danes—Death of Richard—Story
of Silvester or Gerebert—Ethelred builds a fleet-—Slaughter of the
Danes—-Sweyn, king of Denmark, subdues England—Ethelred
flies to Normandy—Death of Sweyn—Return of Ethelred—He
dies, and is succeeded by Edmund Ironside—Edmund’s victories—

His peace with Canute—His death . « : < “ . 487

‘CHAP. XX.—From ap, 1017 To a.v. 1042.

Canute becomes sole king of England—Banishes the nobles—Marries
Emma, sister of Richard, duke of Normandy—A conference at Ox-
ford establishes the laws of Edward—Character of Canute—His
liberality —He subdues Norway—Birth of William of Normandy—

He succeeds to his father’s dukedom—Death of Canute—Corona-
tion of Harold—Hardicanute is set up in opposition to him by God-
win, and is crowned king—Dies, and is succeeded by Edward the
Confessor : . : ‘ . : : : , . 517

CHAP. XXI.—From a.p. 1043 ro a.p. 1066.

King Edwin marries earl Godwin’s daughter—Godwin and his sons
become enemies to Edward—Death of Godwin—Siward defeats
Macbeth, and Malcolm is made king of Scotland—Edward sum- .
mons from Hungary his nephew Edward to become his suecessor—
The story of Lady Godiva—aA singular piece of sorcery is detected
at Rome—An agreement is made between Harold and William of
Normandy—Harold ravages Wales—Saint Oswin—Quarrel between -
Tosti and Harold—Death of Edward—Harold is crowned king of
England—William of Normandy invades England—The Battle of
Hastings . : * . ° c : : . . . 933

THE

FLOWERS OF HISTORY

ESPECIALLY SUCH AS

RELATE TO THE AFFAIRS OF BRITAIN.
_ FROM THE BEGINNING OF THE WORLD TO THE YEAR 1307.

COLLECTED BY

MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER.

PREFACE.

We have thought fit to set forth the chief accidents of the
times, and the series of events from the beginning of the
world to the present hour, and also the successions of certain
kingdoms and monarchs, for the instruction of future ages ;
‘in order that an attentive reader may, from our brief notices,
be led to gather a fuller knowledge of the facts related.

But what are we to say in reply to certain dull auditors,
who, in a spirit of detraction, say, ‘ What occasion is there
to commit to writing the lives and deaths of men, and different
events which happen to mankind? Why perpetuate by written
records the recollection of prodigies in heaven and earth, or
those which affect the other elements?’ Let them know that
the good lives and virtuous manners of men of old time, are
recorded to serve as patterns for the imitation of subsequent
ages ; and that the examples of the wicked are set forth, not
that they may be imitated, but that they may be shunned.
But prodigies and portents, in past time, threaten the faithful

VOL. I. B

2 PREFACE.

with famine, or mortality, or other sources of supreme ven-
geance. Therefore, the recollection of these events is handed
down in books, that if at any time similar occurrences should
take place, sinners who recollect that they have by any means
incurred the wrath of God, may flee to the remedy of repen-
tance, and appease God by such means.

It is on this account, therefore, (not but what there are
‘other sufficient reasons likewise) that Moses, the lawgiver,
sets before us, in his Divine History, the innocence of Abel,
the envy of Cain, the simplicity of Jacob, the craftiness of
Esau, the malice of the eleven sons of Israel, the goodness of
the twelfth, to wit, Joseph, and the punishment of the five
cities which were consumed by fire and brimstone; in order
that we may imitate the good, and avoid being followers of
the wicked, and by shunning all temptations to sin, we may
radically weaken it ; and this is the effect produced in us not
only by Moses, but by all the authors of the Holy Volume,
both in their historical and moral works, where they commend
virtue, and show their detestation of vice, and so teach us at
the same time to fear and to love God.

Those men, then, must not be listened to, who say that books
of Chronicles, and especially those published by Catholics,
ought to be neglected; since by the study of them a diligent
enquirer may be able to discover by his memory, to under-
stand by his intelligence, and to set forth, with eloquence, all
that is necessary for human life, and for human safety.

sein iat tr eye

BOOK I.
THE FIRST AGE OF THE WORLD.
FROM THE CREATION OF THE WORLD TO THE DELUGE. °

B.C. 4004—2349.

THE CREATION—ADAM I§ DRIVEN FROM PARADISE—CAIN
. AND ABEL—NOAH.

Cu. I.—The Creation of the World.
In six days God accomplished the creation of the world.

On the first day he made the light.

On the second day he poised the firmament of heaven in the
midst of the waters: the waters themselves, and the earth, to-
gether with the upper heaven, and those virtues which enabled
them to praise their maker, having been created before the be-
ginning of these six days.

On the third day, having collected the waters, which had
previously covered everything, into their place, he bade the
dry land appear.

On the fourth day he placed the stars in the firmament of
heaven, and that day, as far as we can now collect, by a cal-
culation of the equinox, was the twelfth day of the calends
of April (March 21).

On the fifth day he created all swimming and flying and
breathing creatures.

On the sixth day he formed the terrestrial animals, and the
man Adam himself, in the district of Damascus; and from
the side of Adam, while he was sleeping, he produced Eve,
the mother of all living. And the day on which he did this,
was, according to the most credible conjecture, the tenth of
the calends of April (March 23). From which circumstance,
it is deservedly believed, (unless some more probable opinion
shall be maintained hereafter,) that on this same tenth day of
the calends of April the Lord was crucified. For God ap-
pointed that on one and the same day, not only of the week,
but also of the month, the second Adam, having been con-

B2

4 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 4003.

demned to the sleep of death, for the object of the life-giving
salvation of the human race, and having produced the heavenly
sacraments out of his own side, shall sanctify to himself the
church as his spouse, on the same day on which he had
originally, himself, created Adam, and, taking a rib out of his
side, had formed a woman, by whose assistance the human
race might be propagated.

Cu. I].— Adam is driven out of Paradise. .«

Apam having been transferred into Paradise, from whence the
four rivers’ arise, after he had given names to his wife and
to all the other animals and things, yielded to his wife in the
matter of eating the apple. After this, having made girdles
because of their feelings of shame at their nakedness, they
are driven by the Lord out of Paradise, and in the sweat of
their brow do they seek bread out of the earth, which has
been cursed. After this, cherubim armed with a flaming sword
are placed by the Lord before the gate of paradise, and not
only our first parents, but their whole posterity, are driven out
from the delights of paradise.

Cu. IN.—The birth of Cain and Abel, and the death of Abel.

Apam knew his wife, not indeed while in Paradise, but after
he was guilty, and banished from it. And although the law-
giver Moses has given us a brief list of the generations of
Adam, as he was hastening on to the times of Abraham, the
father of the Hebrews, still he has passed over the names of
many sons and daughters of Adam.

But Methodius, the martyr, when he was in prison, prayed
to God, and the revelation which he prayed for, concerning
the beginning and end of the world, was given to him by the
Holy Spirit. And he has left us a written statement, (drawn
up indeed in a simple style) saying that they both, to wit,
Adam and Eve, were virgins when they departed from Paradise.

‘ The names of these rivers are thus given in the Bible, Genesis ii.
11—14. “The name of the first is Pison, that is it which compasseth
the whole land of Havilah: where there is gold. And the gold of that
land is good: there is bdellium and the onyx stone. And the name of
the second river is Gihon ; the same is it that compasseth the whole land of
Althiopia. And the name of the third river is Hiddekel: that is it which
goeth toward the east of Assyria. And the fourth river is Euphrates,”

B.C. 3000. THE DESCENDANTS OF CAIN. 3

And in the fifteenth year of the life of Adam, Cain? was born
to him, and also his sister Calmana. Fifteen years later, Abel
was born to him, and also his sister Delbora. Then in the
hundred and thirtieth year of his (that is of Adam’s) life,
Cain slew Abel, and Adam and Eve mourned for him a hundred
years, and then Seth was born to him in the thirtieth year of
the first Chiliad, that is to say of the first age.*

Cu. 1V.—Cain becomes a Wanderer.

Cain the husbandman, grieving that his own offerings were
rejected, while those of Abel were not, slew his brother, al-
though for the action he was reproved by the Lord, and
destined to be punished by a sevenfold* sin. Subsequently
he was made a vagabond and a houseless man upon the face
of the earth, after he had been cursed by the Lord.

Cu. V.—The Descendants of Cain.

Carin knew his wife Calmana, and she brought him forth
Enoch; Enoch begat Irad; Irad begat Mamael ;> Mamael
begat Matusael; Matusael begat Lamech ; Lamech had two
wives, to wit, Adah and Zillah. By Adah he had a son named
Jabaal ;° by Zillah he had Tubalcain and Naamah. This
Lamech was the first man who introduced bigamy ; and when
he had slain a man to his wounding, and a young man in his
envy, he foretold to his wives that on this account there was
a seventy-fold punishment due to him.’

2 The date of Cain’s birth as at present believed, and inserted in the
margin of the Bible, is the year after the Creation’of the World, viz.
4003. Abel’s birth is supposed to have followed immediately ; the death
of Abel is by the same authority placed in the year 3875.

3 This is not very plain; the year of Seth’s birth is usually given as
3769 3.c., 235 a.m., and, by the account of our author himself, it would
be the two hundred and thirtieth, or thirty-first of Adam’s life,

4 This seems to refer to Gen. iv. 15. ‘And the Lord said unto Cain,
therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him seven-
fold.” See note on chap. v.

.5 The name in the Bible is Mehujael.

6 The Bible tells us that Adah had two sons, Gen. iv. 20, 21. “ And
_ Adah bare Jabal; he was the father of all such as dwell in tents, and of
such as have cattle. And his brother’s name was Jubal; he was the father
of all such as handle the harp and organ.”

7 This refers to Gen. iv. 23, 24. ‘‘And Lamech said unto his wives,
Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto my
speech ; for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my
hurt : if Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy and seven

fold.”

f)

6 MATTHEW OF “WESTMINSTER. B.C. 2348.

Jabaal, having invented portable tents for shepherds, was
the first man who distinguished flocks according to their
quality, and breed and age. Jabaal was the father of those
who play on the organ and the harp, that is to say, he was the
inventor of the art of music, and he engraved a description of
his art on two pillars, one of brick and the other of marble,
as a durable record, in case of fire or flood.

Tubalcain was the inventor of the smith’s art; he wasa
fabricator of works of sculpture in metals; and it was by
the sound of his hammers that Jabaal was delighted, and so
was the first person to lay down rules for the harmony of
sounds derived from these hammers.

Cu. VI.—The descendants of Seth.

ApAM, as has been already mentioned, begat Seth ; Seth begat
Enos; Enos begat Canaan-; Canaan begat Malaleel; Malaleel
begat Jareth; Jareth begat Enoch. This Enoch pleased God,
and being translated to Paradise, dwells there with Elias.
And Enoch, as some kind of letters had been invented, wrote
a book (as is stated in the Epistle of Jude). And in his
time Adam is believed to have died.

Enoch begat Methusaleh ; Methusaleh begat Lamech; La-
mech begat Noah.

But Adam lived nine hundred and thirty years; Seth nine
hundred and twelve; Enos, nine hundred and five; Canaan,
nine hundred and ten; Malaleel, eight hundred and ninety-
five; Jareth, nine hundred and sixty-two ; Enoch, three hun-
dred and sixty-five ; Methusaleh, nine hundred and sixty-nine ;
Lamech, seven hundred and seventy-seven. When Noah was
five hundred years old, he begat Shem, Ham, and Japhet.

HERE ENDS THE First AGE—Containing, according to the

Hebrews, 1656 years ; according to the Seventy translators of
the Bible, 2242.

8 This refers to Jude 14, “ And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam,

prophesied of these, saying, Behold the Lord cometh with ten. thousand
of his saints,’’

BOOKIE

THE SECOND AGE OF THE WORLD.
B.C. 2448—1921.

THE DELUGE—THE DESCENDANTS OF NOAH—THE DIVISIONS
OF THE NATIONS—THE REIGNS OF BELUS, SEMIRAMIS, NINUS,
ASTYAGES, CYRUS, DARIUS—THE DIVISIONS OF THE WORLD
INTO EUROPE, ASIA, AND AFRICA—THE COLONIZATION OF
EUROPE—THE TOWER OF BABEL,

Cu. I.—The Deluge, and Life and Death of Noah.

In the hundredth’ year of his life, Noah, now that the fiood
covered the earth, entered the ark with seven souls, whieh ark
he had finished twenty years before, as God had conversed
with him fora hundred years. And the waters increased upon
the earth for a hundred and fifty days, the Lord raining upon
it for forty days and nights ; when, on the twenty-seventh?
day of the seventh month, the ark rested on the mountains
of Armenia; after forty days, Noah sent out a raven, and
after that a dove bearing an olive branch, and at last, on the
twenty-seventh day of the second month, he went forth out
of the ark, the year having come round again to the very
same day on which he had entered it; when the moon had
entered the seventeenth day of the second month.

And the sacrifice of Noah was accepted, and he received
permission to eat flesh, provided it was without blood ; and
the rainbow was placed in heaven, as a covenant the deluge

1! This clearly means the hundredth year of Noah’s life, after the birth
of Shem, Ham, and Japhet; that is to say, when he was six hundred
years old. See, however, note on chap. vii.

2 Our author is not quite correct here; the flood began on the seven-
teenth day of the second month (Gen. vii. 11), and on the seventeenth
day of the seventh month the ark rested on Ararat (Gen. viii.4). On
the twenty-seventh day of the second month he left the ark (Gen. viii.
14). Moreover, he did not send out a dove bearing an olive branch; but
he sent forth the dove, and she returned to him in the evening, “ And lo,

_in her mouth was an olive leaf plucked off” (Gen. viii. 11).

8 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 2250.

was passed and should not return, and that what should here-
after come was a conflagration.

He got drunk with wine, of which he was the first inventor,
and was mocked by Ham; on which account he cursed him,
but blessed his other sons. And so he died.

Cu. I1.—The Generations of Noah.

THERE are seventy-two® generations catalogued of the three
sons of Noah. To wit, fifteen of Japhet, thirty of Ham, and
seventeen of Shem. And these men were scattered over the
world. Shem obtained Asia, Ham Africa, and Japhet Europe ;
and the ancients distinguish their genealogies in this manner.

Shem, the eldest of the family, came into Asia, and ar-
ranged the provinces in this manner.

Cu. UI.—The Divisions of the Nations—the Reigns of Belus,
Semiramis, Ninus, in Assyria ; Astyages, Cyrus, and Darius
in Persia.

As the people increased after the flood, there arose four prin-

cipal kmgdoms ; that of the Assyrians in the East, where the

first king was Belus; that of the Sicinii in the West, where
the first king was Egialeus; that of the Scythians in the

North, where the first king was Tanus ; that of the Egyptians

in the South, where the first king was Myneus. Belus was

succeeded by his wife Semiramis, who made the district of

Babylon the metropolitan district of her kingdom. She was

succeeded by Ninus, who was the inventor of idols, making

an image in honour of his father Belus. At length came

Sardanapalus, from whom Arbaces wrested the kingdom and

transferred it to the Medes. And after a time, Astyages be-

coming king of the Medes, gave his daughter to a prince’ of
the Persians, who became the father of Cyrus, by whom
_ > There is again some error here. Fifteen, thirty, and seventeen make
sixty-two, not seventy-two ; nor do the numbers exactly coincide with the
list of names given in the Bible, where (Gen. x.—1 Chron. i.) we find

the names of fourteen descendants of Japhet, thirty of Ham, and twenty-
seven of Shem.

* Our author is mistaken here. Cambyses, the father of Cyrus, was
not a prince, though of a good family (oiking dyaOijc. Hat. i. 107).
And Darius did not reign as the colleague of Cyrus, but succeeded to the
kingdom on the death of Smerdis the Magus, seven or eight years after

the death of Cyrus (Bc. 36), and he was the son of Hystaspes, not of
Astyages (Hat. iii. 75).

B.0. 2250. DIVISIONS OF THE WORLD. 9

Astyages was conquered; and when he died, the sovereignty
was transferred to the Persians, and Darius, the son of Asty-
ages, reigned with this same Cyrus as his colleague.

Cu. IV.—The Divisions of the World; Europe, Asia, and
Africa—The Colonization of Europe.

Tuts habitable world of ours, which is surrounded on all
sides by the ocean, has three principal divisions. To wit,
Asia, Africa, and Europe; but Asia is the largest. In it
there are the following countries :—India, Parthia, Syria,
Persia, Media, Mesopotamia, Cappadocia, Palestina, Armenia,
Cilicia, Chaldeea, Biffamia, Lydia. In Africa there are these
_ provinces :—Lybia, Cyrene, Pentapolis, Aithiopia, Tripolitania,
Egypt, Geetulia, Natabria, Numidia, the greater and the lesser
Syrtes.

In Europe there are these countries :—Italy, Spain, Ger-
many, Macedonia, Thrace, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Gaul, Achaia,
the greater and the lesser Britain, Ireland, and the Northern
Isles beyond the ocean.

The first man of the race of Japhet who came to Europe
was named Alanus, and he came with his three sons, whose
names are as follows: Isicion, Armenion, and Negno. _Isi-
cion had four sons; they are these: Francus, Romanus,
Alemannus, and Brito. Armenion had five sons, as follows:
Gothus, Valagothus, Ceebidus, Burgundus, and Longobardus.
Negno had four sons, whose names are these: Wandalus,

~ Saxo, Bogarus, and Targus. From Isicion, the first-born of

Alanus, sprang four nations: the Latins, the Franks, the
Germans, and the Britons. From Armenion, the second son,
are descended the Goths, the Valagoths, the Ceebidi, the Bur-
gundians, and the Lombards. From Negno, the third son,
are derived the Bogari, the Vandals, the Saxons, and the
Tharinci. And these nations are scattered over the whole
of Europe.

But Alanus was, as they say, the son of Frethevit, the son of
Ogomun, the son of Thay, the son of Boyb, the son of Simeon,
the son of Mayr, the son of Athach, the son of Aurtaach, the
son of Cephet, the son of Cozech, the son of Abrech, the son of
Ra, the son of Ezra, the son of Isram, the son of Bach, the
son of John, the son of Jabach, the son of Japhet, the son
of Noah.

Of Asia and Africa we will speak in another place.

10 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 2247.

Cu. V.—The Tower of Babel—The Descendants of Shem,
down to Thare or Terah.

Sem was a hundred years old when he begat Arphaxad,
which happened two years after the flood. Arphaxad begat
Sale, or Cainan. Sale founded acity, which he called after
his own name, Salem, and he was the father of Heber, from
whom the Hebrews (Hebrei) derive their name, or else they
are called so from Abraham, as if they were Abrahai. Heber
begat Phaleg, in whose time the sons of the sons of Noah, not
having faith in the covenant of God which he had made with
Noah, to the effect that there should not again be a flood, put
together bricks for stones, and bitumen for cement, in order
to build a tower, the height of which should reach to heaven ;
in order that if a flood should inundate the earth, they might
remain safe on its summit. And since they thought that they
might be able by their own skill to escape all danger, from
either flood or fire, there was caused in that very place,
to wit, in the land of Shinar, a division or confusion of
tongues, so that no one of them could understand the lan-
guage of his neighbour; therefore the Lord scattered them
over divers countries, and they left off building the tower.
And the name of that place was called Babel, that is to say,
confusion, because there the language of the whole earth was
confused.

And Phaleg, in whose family the Hebrew language re-

mained, which is the most ancient of all languages, was on
that account called Phaleg, that is to say, divided from the
others. Phaleg begat Ragau, Ragau begat Saruch, who begat
Nachor ; that Nachor, when he had departed from Chaldeea,
married a wife named Melcha, the daughter of his brother
who was dead, and dwelt in Charran of Mesopotamia. His
father having died there, and Abraham having taken up his
abode as a sojourner in Canaan, Nachor begat these three
brothers: Huz, Buz, and Bathuel, with five others, from one
of whom, namely, Buz, was descended Balaam, who, accord-
ing to the Hebrews, is the same person spoken of in Job as
Elihu the Buzite.®

That Nachor begat Thare, who, not being able to bear the
injuries that were inflicted on him in the matter of adoring

5 Job xxxii. 6.

;
.
;
;

B.C. 2075. REIGN AND CHARACTER OF SEMIRAMIS, ee

fire in Chaldzea, where they put to death his first-born son,
Aran, travelled away with Abraham and Nachor, and the
family of Aran, to Charran in Mesopotamia, where Thare®
died, at the end of two hundred and five years.

Cu. VI.—The Reign and Character of Semiramis—Duration
of the Assyrian Monarchy.
In the times of Thare reigned Ninus, the most powerful king
of the Assyrians, the son of queen Semiramis. She, a woman
of manly strength of mind, governed the kingdom of the
_ Assyrians with great power, for two and thirty years. And in
order to resemble a man more closely, she clothed her legs
and arms in the dress of a man, and wore a tiara on her head.
‘And that she might not by any-chance be supposed to con-
ceal any secret design under this unusual garb, she ordered
| the people in general to wear the same dress, and ever since
the whole nation retains that fashion.
_ She performed great exploits; and as she was a woman of
manly courage, she was not content with the boundaries of
her dominions, which had been acquired by her husband, and
to which she had succeeded, but she overwhelmed Ethiopia
with war. She carried her arms into India; a country which
no one before her had ever subdued.
She it was who built the city of Babylon, and surrounded
it with a wall, and appointed it to be the metropolis of the
kingdom of the Assyrians. At last she was slain by her own
son ; and when he had succeeded his mother, he, being con-
tent with the kingdom as it had been made by his parent’s
toil, laid aside all thoughts of war; and, as if he had changed
‘sexes with his mother, seldom came into the sight of men,
but grew old amid the bands of women. And his posterity
followed his example so far, as to give their answers to people
by the intervention of messengers.
_ After Ninus, thirty-six kings, in continual succession, pos-
sessed the monarchy of the Assyrians, for a period of thirteen
hundred years, down to the time of Sardanapalus.

Cu. VII.—Generations from Noah to Abraham.
Bur Noah lived after the deluge’ eight hundred and fifty

6 Called Terah, in Genesis.
7 There is a difficulty here: if he means that Noah lived after the

12 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ~~ B.C. 1921.

years. Shem lived six hundred years. Arphaxad lived three
hundred and thirty-eight years. Heber lived four hundred
and sixty-four years. Sale lived four hundred and thirty-
three years. Phaleg lived two hundred and thirty-nine years.
Ragau, or Reu, lived two hundred and thirty-nine years. Sarug
lived two hundred and thirty years. Nachor lived one hun-
dred and thirty-nine years. But Thare lived seventy years, and
begat Abraham in the forty-third year of the before-mentioned
Ninus king of the Assyrians.

In Thare, the Second Age of the world terminates, consisting,
according to the Hebrews, of 1292 years. According to the
seventy translators of the Bible, of 1072 years.®

deluge, and died at the age of eight hundred and fifty years, our author is
wrong, for Noah’s age was nine hundred and fifty years (Gen. ix.29). If
he means that he lived eight hundred and fifty years after the flood, that
would make him out as haying lived to the age of 1450. But, by com-
paring the statement in the first chapter of this book, it appears possible
that the writer may have fancied, by some mistake, that the flood took
place in the hundredth year of Noah’s life, instead of the six hundredth.

8 ee aol date of the death of Thare, or Terah, was B.c. 1921.
A.M, 2083.

EB

BOOK III.

THE THIRD AGE OF THE WORLD.
B.C. 1921—1055.

THE CALL OF ABRAHAM-——THE BIRTH OF ISAAC AND ISHMAEL
—THE FOUNDATION OF ARGOS BY MACHUS—THE STORY OF
ESAU AND JACOB—APIS ARRIVES IN EQGYPT—THE HISTORY
OF JOSEPH—THE EXODUS—MOSES A CONTEMPORARY OF
CECROPS—JOSHUA A CONTEMPORARY OF BACCHUS—BUSIRIS,
CADMUS, EUROPA—APOLLO IS BORN—THE JEWISH JUDGES
——PARIS CARRIES OFF HELEN—TRIPTOLEMUS—THE MINO-
TAUR—-AMPHION—ADIPUS—DANAE—FALL OF TROY AND
ABRIVAL OF ANEAS IN ITALY—BRUTUS, SON OF SYLVIUS,
IS BANISHED INTO GREECE—AN ORACLE WARNS HIM TO GO
TO ALBION—DESCRIPTION OF ALBION—BRUTUS FOUNDS
LONDON IN THE TIME OF SAUL—DESCENDANTS OF BRUTUS
—DAVID IS KING.

Cu. 1.—The Travels of Abraham—The chief events of his Life
—The Birth and Marriage of Isaae—The Birth of Esau and
Jacob.

TARE, as has been already said, begat Abraham, Aran, and
Nachor. Aran begat Milcah, Lot, and Sarah. When Lot had
departed from Sodom, after the destruction of the five cities,
he begat these two sons, Moab and Ammon, on his two daugh-
ters, having been made drunk by them.

Nachor begat Huz, Buz, and Bathuel, and their mother
was Milcah, the daugther of Aran. Bathuel begat Laban and
Rebecca.

Abraham had a wife by name Sarah, the daughter’ of Aran his
brother. He had also two handmaids, Hagar, an Egyptian, and
Cethura. By Sarah he became the father of Isaac ; by Hagar
of Ismael ; by Cethura of Madan and Madian. Ismael begat

' The Bible speaks of Sarah as the daughter of Terah. Abraham says
to Abimelech (Gen. xx. 12), “ And yet indeed she is my sister ; she is the

daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother ; and she be-
came my wife,”

14 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1898.

Naiaboth and Cedar. This Abraham, after Aran his brother
had been suffocated, adopted his son Lot, and haying taken
Sarah to wife, journeyed with his father into Carran. From
thence, after the death of his father, he came to Sichem, and
from thence to Pentapolis. After that, pitching his tent be-
tween Bethel and Hay, after he had in Egypt pretended that
his wife was his sister, he returned into the valley of Mamre,
and there dwelt in agreement with his three brethren. Abra-
ham taught the Egyptians arithmetic and astronomy, from
which nation these arts subsequently passed into Greece. And
coming after the slaughter of the four kings, he was honoured
by Melchisedec, who received tithes from him ; and he obtained
a sign of the offspring that should be given him, in cattle and
lands.

After this, when he was seventy-five years of age, and was
attacked out of envy by the people of Chaldea and Mesopo-
tamia, because they themselves worshipped fire and images of
the gods; but he himself worshipped one God alone, the
Creator of all things; and asserted that the honour of wor-
ship, and the payment of thanks, were due to himalone. And that
the creature is governed by the power and rule of his Maker,
and does not exist by his own excellence. At the command of
the Lord, he left his nation and his country, and came into the
land of Canaan, receiving the promise that he should increase
and become a great nation; having his name changed from
Abram to Abraham, which, being interpreted, is ‘A father
of many nations,” and being also promised that in his seed
should all the nations of the earth be blessed.

Lastly, he receives this law from the divine will, that he should
circumcise himself and his offspring, not that God himself
had made anything superfluous in man which he subsequently
commanded to be cut off, but in order that the posterity of
the chosen man might be distinguished among other nations
by this bodily mark. And when he was now an old man he
begat Isaac. But he had previously, as I have already said,
begotten Ismael, from whom are descended the Arabs and.
other nations who boast that they are sprung from the race of
Abraham. Isaac also was circumcised, on the eighth day after
his birth. Besides these things, when Abraham was now very
old, God again commanded him to sacrifice to him his before-
mentioned son Isaac on Mount Moriah. Which command he

| B.C. 1739. LIFE OF ISAAC AND OF JACOB. 15
was willing to fulfil, being more desirous to obey his Creator
than to gratify his own affections. But the Deity, who is never
harsh to believers, withheld the man, by the voice of an angel,
| from the slaughter of his son, showing him a ram which he
_ might slay instead of his son, so that the sacrifice of such a
| man might be consummated without the cost of any pious
affection.

_ After these events, when Isaac was sixty years old, he begat
_ Esau and Jacob, the patriarchs of the Idumean and Israelitish
nations.
|
Cu. I1.—The Foundation of the Kingdom of Argos in Greece.

_ ApourT this time the kingdom of the Argives was established,
of which Machus was the first king, who is reported to have

_ been the father of Io, the wife of Osiris, who is worshipped in
Egypt as a mighty goddess, because she ruled there with jus-
tice, and instructed the people of the country in literature.

PCa. I].—The chief circumstances in the life of Isaac and of
Jacob—The Character of Esau.

Isaac, who has been already mentioned, having gone with
Rebecca, who was great with child, and who had heard the
oracle that Esau should fear Jacob, to Abimelech in Gerar,
after he had called his wife his sister, and gathered crops
of an hundred-fold from his seed, and cleaned out three wells,
and digged a fourth in Beersheba, and made a treaty in the
same place with Abimelech and Phicol, without intending it,
rejected Esau and blessed Jacob, who having supplanted his
brother both in his birthright as the elder, and also in his
blessing, went into Mesopotamia, and on his way he erected a
pillar with an inscription on it near Luz;' and he served a
servitude of fourteen years to Laban for Rachel and Leah,
and made a covenant with him to serve him seven years more
for his flocks ; but when this latter period, in which he varied
the rods, was scarcely fulfilled, he departed with his wives and
his eleven sons, and as Rachel had privily carried off his images
from Laban, he was caught by him at Galaad. There having
made a treaty with Laban, he stopped his bands at the stones
near Manaim,” where on his journey he saw camps of angels,

i This was the same as Bethel (Gen, xxviii. 19).
2 Manaim, or Mahanaim, means Two Hosts or Two Camps. ‘“ When

16 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1747.

and he crossed the ford of Jaboch, and in the morning he —
wrestled with an angel and injured his sinew. . And then,
having had his name changed, he sent forward gifts to his
brother, and, being in great alarm, met him. Afterwards,
when his daughter Dinah had been injured by Sichem, and the
Sichemites had been treacherously slain, by the command of
God, he erected an altar at Bethel, and purified his house.

Esau was a hairy man anda hunter ; he sold his birthright as
the elder for a mess of pottage, and from the red pottage he
got the name of Edom. He married some Canaanitish wives,
Judith and Basemath, and though he had been supplanted by
his brother in the matter of his blessing, he met Jacob peace-
ably as he was returning from Mesopotamia with four hundred
men.

Moreover, it was Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, who
brought the mother of Esau and Jacob, namely Rebecca, to
Isaac, from Mesopotamia, and she was the sister of Laban, and
the daughter of Bathuel.

Cu. IV.—Of the Edomites and Balaam.

In the time of the sons of Isaac, as some authors relate, the
second king of Edom was Job, of the race of Huz, the son
of Nachor, called afterwards Balak, who is also called in Genesis
Jobab, the great grandson® of Esau. But the Hebrews, as we
have already mentioned, assert that he was descended from
Huz, the first born son of Nachor.

At the same time Balaam was born, who in the book of Job
is called Elihu; he was descended from Buz, and being hired
by Balak the king to curse Israel, blessed him, his ass having
previously spoken to him; and he prophesied about the rising
of the star and of the Saviour.

Cu. V.—The Birth of the Patriarchs.

Bor the before-mentioned Jacob begat the twelve patriarchs,
from whom the twelve tribes of Israel derive their origin. For
he had by Leah, who was also called Weakeyed, Reuben,
Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Zabulon, and Dinah his daugh-
ter, who is recorded to have been ravished by the Sichemites.

Jacob saw these (the angels), he said this is God’s Hosts. And he called
the name of that place Mahanaim.” (Gen, xxxii. 2.)

* The steps of this genealogy, as given in Genesis (c. xxxvi.), are Esau
Revel, Zerah, Jobab. when ) :

pee O ALS sic IN BE ES I, Ts

a3 ere

B.C. 1729. EVENTS IN THE LIFE OF JUDAH. 7

By Bala‘ he had Dan and Naphtali; by Gelfa* he had Gad and
Asser. By Rachel, who was called the Beautiful, he became
the father of Joseph and Benjamin. Joseph begat Manasseh
and Ephraim, each of whom makes a tribe by himself, the tribe
of Levi being removed from the lot of inheritance.

Cu. VI.—Apis comes into Egypt, and is deified.
Axsovu'r the same time Apis, the son of Phorceus, king of the
Argives, came by sea into Egypt. And after he had died in
that country, he was called Serapis, the greatest god of all the
Egyptians. And he is called Serapis, not Apis, because the
Egyptians call a sarcophagus Soros. And they began to
worship him while buried in-a sarcophagus, before they built
him a temple. His son was Argus, from whom the Argi derive
their name.
Cu. VIL.—Joseph is sold by his Brethren—The famine in Egypt—

Jacob comes down to Egypt, and dies.

But when Joseph was fifteen years of age, he fed the flocks
with his brethren, while he himself was still a boy; and he
was with the sons of Bala and Zelfa, the wives of his father.
And as he had accused his brethren before his father, and had
related mamy dreams which he had dreamt to his brethren,
they envied him, and sold him to the Egyptians.

But while Joseph was sojourning in Egypt, in the second
year of the famine, Jacob also came down thither with seventy-
two souls, and dwelt there; and also died there, blessing all
his sons in regular order.

SH. VIII.—LEvents in the life of Judah.

Jupau, the son of Jacob, had a wife named Shuah, and begat
Er, Onan, and Zela; by Thamar he had Phares and Sarah.
Judah had given Thamar as a wife to his two sons Er and Onan
successively ;' and when they had perished, owing to their
shameful wiclsedness, he sent her back to her father’s house,
fearing to give her to Zela, as he ought to have done, for the

sake of raising’ seed. And afterwards, as she was sitting in the

road, Judah, going with Iram his shepherd, to the sheepshear-
ing, after the death of Shuah his wife, begat Phares and Sarah,
who were twins, thinking that Thamar was a harlot. And
afterwards, when she was being led to the stake as having

been detected im adultery, she delivered herself by the display

+ Cajled Bilhah and Zilpah in the Bible.
VOL. I. Cc

18 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.O. 1531.

of his ring and staff and armlet which she had received as a
pledge.

Cu. IX.—The descendants of Jacob are oppressed in Egypt—
Moses is born—The Egyptians are lost in the Red Sea—God
leads the Israelites through the wilderness.

Bur after that Israel had died in Egypt, and had been carried
into Canaan, and buried there, the people of the Hebrews
increased wonderfully for many years, until the Egyptians
became jealous of their increase, and till their very fecundity
became troublesome to them. Then they began to oppress
them with many labours, but at length the Divine pity had
regard to the people. For in these days there went forth a
man of the house of Levi, by name, Amram, who, haying re-
ceived a wife of his own family, by name Jochabeth, begat
Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. Afterwards, when Moses
had grown up under the favour of the Lord, he led forth his
_-people from Egypt by great portents and prodigies, and they
crossed the Red Sea with dry feet. And when the king of
Egypt pursued them, being moved by repentance for having
permitted them to depart, he himself, with his chariots and
his horsemen, entered the middle of the dry sea ; but suddenly
the whole mass of water was poured back upon him from be-
hind, and he was overwhelmed there with his entire army. And
even now there exist on that shore the most undoubted traces
of this miracle ; unto this day the tracks of the wheels and
the footsteps of the horsemen and foot-soldiers are beheld

there, and if by any chance they are disturbed, they are re-

' paired again at sunrise by Divine interposition.

But after the people of the Hebrews had passed the Red
Sea, they were in the desert of Sinai forty years; in the first
of which years, they received a law from God by the hand of
Moses. Nevertheless, during all these years none of their
shoes or garments became worn out, nor did their hair or
nails grow long, so as to inconvenience them. But, as if
immortality had been restored to them, their simple integrity
preserved the form of man unchanged. And a column of
light preceded them by night as a guide to their road, which
by day bore the appearance of a cloud, and defended them
from any injury from the heat, so that the vast. solitude might

not overwhelm them with weariness.

B.C. 1490. THE TRIBES OF ISRAEL. 19

Cu. X.—The founding of Athens—Cecrops—Atlas—Mercury.

Bur Moses led this people out of Egypt, in the latter days of the
life of Cecrops, king of the Athenians, who founded the city of the
Athenians, in honour of Minerva, and called the Attics Atheni-
ans, from her name.® For Minerva is called in Greek ’ Adavérn
Tiapéevn, that is to say, ‘ Immortal Virgin,’ since Wisdom, of
which she is the goddess, can neither die nor be seduced.
She is said to have appeared of the age of puberty in the
times of Ogygius, at the lake which is called Imtonis. Owing
to which circumstance she was thought a goddess, the more
easily in proportion as her real origin was less known.

The Athenians are reported to have been the first to teach
the neighbouring nations the art of spinning wool, and the
use of oii and wine. It is also related of Cecrops, that he
was the first person who sacrificed an ox to Jupiter. More-
over, at this time they say that he formed men out of clay,
because he was a most excellent teacher of wisdom. His
brother was Atlas,° who was himself also a consummate as-
tronomer.

At this time also, Mercury, the grandson of Atlas by his
daughter Maia, is said to have lived, a man who was an in-
ventor of many arts.

Cecrops was succeeded by Carnao, in whose time the de-
luge of Deucalion took place. To this time is also ascribed
the fabulous conflagration of Pheethon.

Cu. XI.—The numbers of the Tribes of Israel.

Wuite the children of Israel remained in the desert, the
Lord ordered Moses and Aaron to number them by pedigrees,
and houses, and families, and to count the names of each per-
son of twenty years of age and upwards, of the male sex, who
was able to go out to war.

And there were found to be of the tribe of Reuben, the
first-born son of Israel, forty-six thousand four hundred men.

5 The Greek name of Minerva is ’A0niv7.

6 This does not agree with any account that has come down tous. There
is no mention made of any parent of Cecrops, who is represented as earth-
born; while Atlas, according to Hesiod (Theog. 507), was son of Tarpetus
and Clymene.

20 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1491.

Of the tribe of Simeon,’ seventy thousand three hundred. Of
the tribe of Gad, forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.
Of the tribe of Judah, seventy-four thousand six hundred.
Of the tribe of Issachar, fifty-four thousand four hundred.
Of the tribe of Zebulon, fifty-seven thousand four hundred.
Of the tribe of Joseph, that is, of the sons of Ephraim, forty
thousand four hundred; andof the tribeof Manasseh, the brother
of Ephraim, thirty-two thousand‘two hundred. Of the tribe of
Benjamin, thirty-five thousand four hundred. Of the tribe of
Dan, seventy-two thousandseven hundred. Of the tribe of Asser,
forty-one thousand five hundred. Of the tribe of Naphtali,
fifty-three thousand four hundred. And the sum of all the
children of Israel was six hundred and three thousand five
hundred and forty. The Levites were not numbered with the
rest, but by the command of God, they were appointed to
bear the tabernacle of the testimony, and all its utensils, and
were attached to the service of the tabernacle, and pitched
their camps around the circuit of the tabernacle.

Cu. XII.—The different resting-places of the Israelites in the
wilderness.

In the first year of their wanderings, the first resting-place of
the people of Israel in the desert was Rameses; the second,
Succoth ; the third, Echam ; the fourth, Phiairoth ; the fifth,
Marah ; the sixth, Helem ; the seventh, the wilderness of Sin ;
the eighth, Dephea; the ninth, Alus; the tenth, Raphidim ;
the eleventh, the wilderness of Sinai. In the second year,
their first resting-place was the Tomb of Concupiscence ; the
second was Mount Sepher; the third, Mount Seroch; the
fourth, Rechima; the fifth, Remon Phares ; the sixth, Lebna ;
the seventh, Ressa: the eighth, Chelata; the ninth, Arada ;
the tenth, Maceloth ; the eleventh, Chaach ; the twelfth, Mare ;
the thirteenth, Melcha ; the fourteenth, Esmena ; the fifteenth,
Bameca Cham ; the sixteenth, Mount Golgay ; the seventeenth,
Rechalathar ; the eighteenth, Elrona; the nineteenth, Asion

7 These numbers are not quite consistent with the account in the Bible
(Numbers i.) or with themselves. The number of Simeon’s tribe is stated
in the Bible at 59,300; of Ephraim, at 40,500; and of Dan, at 62,700.
And the total amount of the numbers mentioned in the text is not
603,540, as it is stated, but 624,450.

B.C. 1450. JOSHUA SUCCEEDS MOSES. |

Gaber ; the twentieth, Cades. In the third year their first
resting-place was Mount Hor; the second, Salmana; the
third, Phenon ; the fourth, Oboth; the fifth, Jeabarim; the
- sixth, Gibon Gad; the seventh, Hemon; the eighth, Blataim ;
the ninth, Abarim ; the tenth, the plains of Moab.®

Cu. XIII.—Joshua succeeds Moses—The story of Achan—Of the
Gibeonites—Jericho and Ai are taken—The sun and moon are
stopped in their course.

AFTER Moses died, Joshua, the son of Nun, succeeded him in
the leadership of the people of Israel, at the command of
God; and he, having sent spies to Jericho, Sethim, after
seven days, crossed over Jordan with all the people with dry
feet. He brought twelve stones out of the bed of the river on
to the dry land, and also a second set of twelve out of the bed
of the river on to the dry land ;° and he renewed the people by a
second circumcision in Gilgal. He compassed the city. of
Jericho for seven days, the priests clanging with trumpets,
and on the seventh day he destroyed it. He stoned Achan,
who had stolen a wedge of gold and a purple garment from
the offerings, because the Lord, being angry thereat, had slain
thirty-six men before Ai. He took the city of Ai by ambush,
and burnt it, and received the Gibeonites as slaves to hew wood
and draw water. He slew five kings who had besieged Gibeon,
having lengthened the space of day, the sun and moon stand-
ing still; he also slew twenty-four kings who were with Jabin.

Having built an altar on Ebal, he ordered blessings and
curses to be proclaimed, and divided the land, giving it to
some by concession, to others by tradition. He dismissed two
tribes and a half, which, on their return after fourteen years,
had built an altar' by the borders of Jordan ; and he wrote in
a book an account of his covenant with the people about wor-
shipping God, which was entered into with the effusion of

water.”

3 These wanderings of the Israelites are recorded Numb. xi. xii. xx. Xxi.
But the greater part of the names given here differ from those in the Bible.

9 This is a mistake ; the second set of stones were “‘ set up in the midst
of Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of
the covenant stood.”’ (Josh. iv. 9.)

1 See Josh. xxii, 10. 2 See Josh. xxiv. 14, 26.

22 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1425. —

Cu. XIV.—Mention is made of Bacchus, Cadmus, Apolio,
Perseus, §c.

In the time of Joshua, Liber Pater is said to have revealed the
vine to his host in Greece. Also, about this time, Europa is
said to have been carried off, and her sons were Rhodoman-
thus, Sarpedon, and Minos. In these days also, lived Busiris,
a son of Neptune and Lybia, the daughter of Paphus, who
used to sacrifice his guests to his gods.

Phcenix and Cadmus having come from Thebes, a city of
Egypt, into Syria, reigned in the countries of Tyre and Sidon.
But as Cadmus migrated into Greece, the whole country got
the name of Pheenicia, from Phoenix.

Jupiter got possession of Europa, the daughter of Phcenix,
and Danaus by the means of his fifty daughters, slew the sons
of his brother Aigisthus,* one only being left alive, who suc-
ceeded him in the kingdom.

About this time Latona brought forth Apollo, not that Apollo
whose oracles used to be consulted, but the one who with Her-
cules became a slave of Admetus; and he nevertheless was
accounted a god, so that many believe that he was one and
the same Apollo with the other. '

Moreover at this time also Liber Pater warred in India;
and it is said that he had many women in his army, who were
ealled Bacchee, celebrated not so much for their virtue as for
their madness.

About the same time also Perseus and his wife Andromeda
are said to have been received into Heaven.

Cu. XV.—The Judges of Israel from Othniel to Sampson.

Artur the death of Joshua, the son of Nun, who succeeded
Moses, the people of the Hebrews continued under judges for
many years ; and the names of the judges are these :—Othniel,
Aioth, Deborah, Gideon, Abimelech, Mola, Jair, Jephtha,
Abesan, Aldon, Samson, Eli, and Samuel, who anointed Saul
to be king.

The above mentioned Othniel slew Carrathsepher, by which
exploit he gained his wife .Achsah, who asked of her father

* This is a mistake of our Chronicler for Aigyptus ; Hgisthus is known as
the paramour of Clyteemnestra.

B.C. 1161. THE JUDGES OF ISRAEL. 23

the upper springs and the lower springs. He judged Israel
forty years.

He was succeeded by Aioth,* who had equal use of both his
hands, and slew Eglon, « fat king, and so delivered Israel, and
Sane defended Israel, and died the same year. He judged

srael.

Eighty years afterwards, Shamgar slew six hundred men
with a ploughshare.

Deborah, the wife of Barachor Lapidoth, Sisera having been
slain by the hand of Jael, the wife of Abner® the Kenite, who
gave him a cup of milk, at length slew Jabin, whose general
Sisera was, and sang a song over him. Deborah judged Israel
forty years. ‘ :

Gideon having been saluted by an angel to whom he offered
flesh on Petra, and who was called Jerubbaal from having
destroyed an altar, having received a sign by means of a fleece,
with three hundred men who lapped water like dogs, with
broken pitchers and clanging trumpets, overthrew four kings,
Oreb, Zeb, Zeba, and Salmana.

Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal by his concubine, being
made king in Sichem over the Sichemites, slew his seventy
brothers, leaving only one surviving, who told the Sichemites
a parable about the brier, the fig tree, the vine and the bram-
ble. Healso destroyed this same Sichem, with Gaal, its king,
by means of Zebul, and died himself in the town of Thesbe,
having a millstone thrown upon him by the hand of a woman.
Abimelech, the son of Jerubbaal, reigned over Israel three years.

Thola succeeded Abimelech, and judged Israel twenty-three

ears.
a Jair judged for twenty-two years.

Jephthah, who had been discarded by the children of Israel
_ as illegitimate, and who abode in the country of Thob, was
afterwards made prince over them; and, having bound himself
by a vow, in consequence of his victory over the Ammonites,
he sacrificed his daughter, after giving her two months and
forty days to bewail her virginity. Chechoiat* slew forty-two
thousand of Ephraim by Shibboleth and Sibboleth, trying them
at the fords of Jordan. Jephthah judged Israel six years.
After him Abesan judged Israel seven years.

4 Called in the Bible Ehud. 5 Called in the Bible Heber.
6 Called in the Bible Gilead.

24 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 11202

Ailon judged Israel ten years.

Abdon, or Labdon, judged eight years.

Sampson judged Israel twenty years. This Sampson was
the son of Manoah of the tribe of Dan, and his birth was foretold
by an angel. He wasa Nazarite, and he married a wife in Tim-
nath ; and he proposed a riddle about a lion to guests, which was
solved by the treachery of his wife. He burnt the corn crops
of his enemies by tying fire to the tails of foxes. He slew a
thousand men with the jawbone of an ass, which gave him
water in Ramathlesbi. He carried the gates of Gazah to the
mountain. At length, by the treachery of Dalilah his hair
was cut, and he was blinded by the Philistines, and compelled
to grind corn ; but when his hair grew again, he, in the tem-
ple of Dagon, slew more men when dying than he had slain
while alive.

Cu.XVI.—Of therape of Helen—The Minotaur, the Centaurs,and
other monsters of Bellerophon, Amphion, Ganymede, Danae, §c.
t

Durine these years, in which the people of the Hebrews after
the death of Jehu or Joshua, were subject under judges to the
alternatives of humiliation and distress, of prosperity and
comfort, Alexander, called also Paris, carried off Helen; and
the kingdom of the Argives was transferred to Mycene, where
Agamemnon reigned. About the same time also some fables
were invented, which are celebrated among the grammarians.
To wit, the fable of Triptolemus, that he, at the command of
Ceres, being borne on the wings of serpents, bore corn, as
he flew, to the earth which as yet had none.

The fable of the Minotaur : how that it was a beast shut
up in a labyrinth, which when men had entered, they were in-
volved in inextricable wanderings, so that they could not escape.

The fable of the Centaurs, that their nature was one com-
bined of that of horses and men.

That of Tricerberus, that he is a three-headed dog in the
shades below.

That of Phrixus and his sister Helle, that they were borne
on a ram, and so flew.

That of the Gorgon, that she had serpents for hair, and
turned those who beheld her into stone.

That of Bellerophon, that hewas borneon a flying horse, which
was named Pegasus.

B.C. 1184. THE FALL OF TROY. 25

That of Amphion, that by the sweetness of his harp he
soothed stones and drew them after him.

That of Deedalus, the artist, and his son Icarus, that they
flew by means of wings which they fitted on.

That of Gdipus, that he compelled a certain monster which
was called the Sphinx, a quadruped with a human face, by
solving a riddle which she was in the habit of proposing as
unanswerable, to perish by a fall from her own precipice.

That of Anteeus, whom Hercules slew, which relates that he
was a son of the earth, and that consequently whenever he fell
to the ground he rose up more vigorous.

That of Ganymede, a boy carried off for lustful objects,
a crime which is said to have been committed in reality, not
by Jupiter to whom it is ascribed, but by Tantalus the king.

Danaé too is said to have lain with Jupiter himself, who
descended in a shower of gold, by which fable it is implied
that the chastity of the woman was corrupted by gold.

Cu. XVII.—The fall of Troy—Aineas arrives in Italy—
Ascanius, Sylvius, Brutus.

In this third age of the world, when Labdon had judged Israel
_ three years, the destruction of Troy took place, four thousand
‘ ‘nineteen years having been accomplished since the beginning of
_ the world, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-seven years
since the Deluge, fourteen hundred and three since the birth
of Abraham ; eight hundred and thirty-five since the age of
Ninus king of the Assyrians.

It was also four hundred and four years since the founda-
tion of the city of Alba, and four hundred and six before the
first Olympiad.” And Aneas, the son of Venus and Anchises,
escaping from the destruction, came into Italy, in the third
year after that destruction. He fought with Turnus, the son
of Daunus, king of the Tuscans, and slew him; and married
his betrothed wife Lavinia, daughter of king Latinus.

AGneas reigned as king of the Latins three years. And
when he died Ascanius succeeded to the kingdom, being the
son of Aineas, whom he had born to him in Troy, being the
son of his wife Creusa, and whom, when he came into Italy,

7 Our historian probably refers to the institution of the Olympic games by
Hercules, not to the Olympiad of Cebus, from whence chronologists date
B.c. 776. The inconsistency of the previous dates it is hardly necessary
to point out.

26 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1100. |

he brought with him. Ascanius built Alba on the Tiber, and
begat a son whose name was Sylvius. He,. indulging in
further love, married a granddaughter of Lavinia, and caused
her to be with child. And when the day of her delivery
arrived the woman brought forth a son, and died herself at
his birth. The boy is given to the midwife, and called
Brutus. Afterwards, when fifteen years had elapsed, the youth
was accompanying his father out hunting, and by an uninten-
tional wound of an arrow, he slew his father instead of a wild
beast. And after his death he was driven out of Italy, his
relations being indignant at his having committed such a
crime.

Cu. XVIII.— Brutus goes to Greece—Collects the Trojans around
him—Pandrasus.

Brutvs, therefore, being driven into exile, went to the land of
Greece, and there he found the posterity of Helenus, the son
of Priam, who were held in slavery under the power of
Pandrasus, the king of the Greeks. The fact was, that
Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles, after the overthrow of Troy, had
carried off with him in chains the before-mentioned Helenus,
and many other persons; and had ordered them to be kept
in prison, that he might avenge on them the death of his
father.

Brutus now, recognising the pedigree of his ancient fellow-
citizens, remained among them. And he became so eminent
for military renown and for honesty, that he was beloved both
by the kings and princes beyond all the youth of the country.
For he was wise among the wise, impetuous among the war-
like, and whatever gold or silver or ornaments he acquired, he
gave wholly among the soldiers. Therefore, as his fame had
spread abroad among all nations, the Trojans began to flock
to him, entreating him to become their leader, and to deliver
them from their slavery to the Greeks, which they asserted
might easily be accomplished, as they had already multiplied
in the land to such an extent, that they were reckoned at
seven thousand souls besides women and children. There
was also a certain youth of the noblest blood in Greece, by
name Assaracus, who favoured the cause. For he was born
of a Trojan mother, and placed the greatest confidence in the
Trojans, so that by their assistance he resisted the unquiet

B.O. 1100. BRUTUS DEFEATS PANDRASUS. 27

spirit of the Greeks. For his brother was accusing him for
the sake of three castles which his father, when dying, had
given to him, and he endeavoured to take them from him,
because he was the son of a concubine. But his brother was
a Greek on both the father’s and the mother’s side, and he
had won over the king and all the other Greeks to favour his
party.

Brutus, therefore, beholding the multitude of the men, and
the castles of Assaracus, which were open to him, agreed to
their request the more fearlessly. Accordingly, being raised
to the office of their general, he collects the Trojans from all
quarters, and fortifies the castles of Assaracus. But he him-
self, and Assaracus, with the whole multitude of men and
women which adhered to them, occupied the woods and hills.
Then he sent letters from himself to the king, entreating his
Highness and Mightiness to permit the people to migrate
to other lands and nations, or else to return to their pristine
dignity in their own country. On this, Pandrasus, being
inflamed by great anger, collected a yast army to pursue the
Trojans and subject them to still more rigorous slavery. But

as -he was marching by. the city of Sparata, towards the

desert places in which he conjectured that they were assem-
bled, Brutus sallied out with three thousand men, and
attacked him quite suddenly, while he was expecting nothing
of the sort, and routed the whole of his army, and put the
chief part of it to the sword. But at last, as Mars turned
out favourable to him, he took Antigonus, the mother of the
king, and Anacletus his companion, and put them in chains.

Cu. XIX.—Brutus defeats Pandrasus and takes him prisoner.

Brutus having gained this victory, fortified his city with six
hundred soldiers, and delivering his prisoners to guards,
again sought the more secret parts of the woods. But Pan-
drasus, being anxious, on account of his own defeat and the
captivity of his brother, employed his leisure in re-uniting
his distracted people, and when he had accomplished his
object, he proceeded to besiege the town. For he thought
that Brutus had thrown himself into it with Antigonus, and
the rest of the prisoners whom he had taken. When there-
fore he came near the walls, he ordered some of his troops to
‘cut off all egress from the garrison, which was blockaded ;

s&s

'

MATTRSEW QF WESTMINSTER —

fi

! |
f a
tits Hite Ldtiti

,

nd

ited

my Seer
by Brats, whe
Seta

sau

Lili

ale

B.C. 1100. BRUTUS SETS SAIL TO SEEK A HOME. 29

either taken away from or granted to me at your pleasure.
Accordingly I give to your general my daughter Imogene; I
give gold and silver, corn and wine and oil, and whatever you
think necessary for your march.”

Accordingly, his daughter having been married to Brutus,
and everything else having been properly performed, the
king was released from prison, and the Trojans, having suc-
ceeded in their wishes, escaped from his power.

Cu. XXI.— Brutus sets sail in quest of a home—Consults the
oracle of Diana. |

Brurvs, then, and his comrades having sailed two days and
one night with a fair wind, came to a certain island called
Leogicia, which having been laid waste in old time, was
inhabited by no one. Disembarking from their ships they
came to a certain deserted city, in which was a temple of
Diana, and they found an image of the goddess herself, which
gave answers if any question was put to it by any one. His
comrades suggest to the general to visit the temple, and
having offered propitiatory gifts, to enquire of the deity what
country would give them an abode and a secure resting-place.
Brutus acquiescing in their advice, stood before the altar of
the goddess, holding in his right hand a sacrificial vessel full
of wine and the blood of a white doe, and broke the silence
with these words :—

Tuer QuEsTION PuT BY Brutus To Diana.

Queen of the groves, of all wild beasts the foe,
You who through heav’n and shades below can roam ;
Reveal, I pray, the future fates, and show
What land shall give us a safe, lasting home,
Where I may kindle you a sacred fire,
And build a temple for your virgin choir.

When he had repeated this nine times, he walked round the
altar four times, and poured forth the blood and wine which
he held on the altar, and lay down on the skin of the doe,
which he had stretched before the altar, and thus, having
invited slumber, he fell asleep. It was then about the third
hour of the night, when mortals are sunk in the most pleasant
sleep ; then it appeared to him that the goddess was standing
before him, and addressing him in this manner :—

\

30 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. | B.C. 1100.

ANSWER OF DIANA.

In the far west, beyond the Gallic shore,
A seagirt isle in that vast ocean lies ;
A seagirt isle, which whilome giants bore,
Now desolate, invites your band’s emprise.
Seek that, for it shall be your lasting home,
Your flag shall on a second Troy be unfurl’d ;
There, of your blood shall mighty monarchs come,
And to their mighty sway subject the world.

Cu. XXII.—Brutus proceeds on his voyage—Joins Corineus—
A battle with Goffravius—Bravery of Corineus and Turnus.

Tue leader being awakened by such a vision as this, reported
what he had heard to his companions ; they being elated with
great joy, immediately return to the ships. Passing over the
sea, after a voyage of thirty days, they came to Africa. From
thence they came to the altars of the Philzeni, and to the lake of
Salivee, and sailed between Ruscitada and the mountain Azara.
Then crossing the river Malua, they went towards the pillars
of Hercules, and the Tyrrhenian sea, where, near the shore,
they found four families of Trojan exiles, which had accom-
panied Rutinor in his flight. Their leader was Corineeus, a
man of great wisdom, boldness and virtue. Brutus united
him, and the people which he governed, to himself. From
thence they proceeded to Aquitania, and entering the mouth of
the Lijer,° they examined the situation of the country. Co-
rinzeus himself, disembarking from the ships, with two hun-
dred men, collected supplies with great bravery. And when
the news of that proceeding was brought to Goffrarius, who
at that time reigned in Aquitania, he came against him with
the Gauls and Aquitanians, and endeavoured to wrest their
booty from them. So a battle began, and a contest of great
fierceness on both sides ensues. But Corinzeus, with a dense
phalanx, forces his way through the squadrons of the enemy,
and put them to flight; and as he had lost his sword by
accident, he wielded a battle-axe. One man’s hand arm and
all he cuts off; another’s shoulder-blade he separates from his
body ; another’s head he cuts off at one blow ; another’s legs
he cuts asunder from their union; all were rushing at him,
and he by himself was rushing against all. And Brutus, per-

8 The Loire.

— B.C. 1100. BRUTUS ARRIVES IN BRITAIN. 31

ceiving this, inflamed with love for the man, came with one
_ squadron, and put Goffrarius the king, with the Pictavians®
_ and Gauls, to flight.
There was in the battle a Trojan, of the name of Turnus,
a nephew of Brutus, than whom there was no one more bold
or fearless, except Corinzeus. He with his single sword slew
six hundred men, but, alas! was slain sooner than he deserved
to be, by the attacking Gauls. And from his name the city ©
of the Turni' derived its appellation, because, as Homer’? bears
witness, he was buried there. And, although so important a
victory filled Brutus with the greatest joy, still he was also
afflicted with great grief, because he had lost his nephew, a
» youth of such great excellence.
Without delay, he sought his fleet, with the consent of all his
companions, filling it with all the booty which he had acquired,
and embarking on board his ships, he approached the promised
‘island with a fair wind, and anchored on the Istonesian*
coast.

Cu. XXIII.—Brutus comes to Britain— Divides it among his
chief comrades.

Tuer name of the island was at that time Albion, and it was
inhabited by no one except a few giants. Nevertheless, by
its pleasant situation, and the abundance of its rivers full of
fish, and the beauty of its groves, it inspired Brutus and his
companions with a desire of taking up their abode in it;
accordingly, having traversed certain provinces, they drive the
giants whom they find into the caverns in the mountains ; they
divide the country, which their leader gives them, by lot ;
they begin to cultivate the land ; to build houses ; so that in a
short time you would have supposed that the island had been
inhabited from the earliest ages.

Lastly, Brutus calls the island Britain, after his own name,
and calls his comrades and friends Britons. For he wished
to leave behind him a perpetual recollection of himself, by
such a derivation from his name; with which view subse-
quently, the language of the nation which was formerly called
Trojan, or crooked Greek, was now called British.

9 The inhabitants of the district of Poictiers. 1 Now Tours.

2 This must be some mistake of the good monk. There is no such
place or people mentioned in Homer, 3 Near Thionville, in Belgium.

32 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1100.

But Corinzeus called that portion of the kingdom which fell
to his lot Corinza, after his own name; and his people he
called Corinzean, following the example of his leader. And
the reason why he especially chose that district, which, from
being the horn (cornw) of Britain, is called Cornubea,* was,
because above all things he was eager to fight the giants.
For there were a greater number of them there, than im any
other of the provinces which were distributed among his com-
panions. ; i

In sooth, as it is read in the history of the Britons, he him-
self engaged in a personal combat with one of the giants, by
name of Gogmagog ; whose stature was twelve cubits high, and
putting him on his shoulders, he carried him down to the sea-
shore, and throwing him down over the precipice, he dashed
him to pieces.

Cu. XXIV.—Brutus founds London.

At length, having divided the kingdom, Brutus was desirous
to found a city. Accordingly, proceeding to execute his wish,
he travelled round the whole country till he came to the river
Thames, where he found a situation suitable for his purpose.
Accordingly, hebuilt a city there, and called it Troja Nova, which
name afterwards got corrupted, and was called Trinovantum.°
Then he dedicated it to the citizens who were to live in it, and
he gave them a law under which they might live peaceably.

At that time the sons of Hector were reigning in Troy,
having expelled the posterity of Antenor.

Sylvius Aineas was reigning in Italy, the son of Alneas, and
grandfather, in the third degree, of the Brutus of the Latins.

Eli the priest was reigning in Judeea; and the ark of the
covenant was taken by the Philistines, about the same time.

Cu. XXV.—Of the priesthood of the tribe of Levi—Of Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram—Of the taking of the ark and death of Eli.
Iv has been already mentioned, that by the command of the
Lord, the tribe of Levi was separated from the allotment of
inheritance, for the purpose of ministering in the tabernacle
of the covenant, and of offering sacrifices and victims for
sin. That Levi begat Caath ; Caath, by his wife Jochabeth,
became the father of Ishar and Amram; Ishar, the first-
* Now Cornwall. 5 Now London.

B.C. 1491. THE STORY OF ELKANAH, SAMUEL, ETC. 33

_ born, begat Dorah; Amram begat Aaron and Moses. This
Moses Jed the children of Israel out of the Egyptian bond-
age, as has been already mentioned. Aaron begat Nadab,
_ Abihu, Hleazar, and Ithamar. The above-mentioned Corah
strove with Aaron in the wilderness about the priesthood, be-
cause he was the son of Ishar, the elder brother of Amram.

_ And on this account he perished by fire from heaven, with

two hundred and fifty of his followers. Also Dathan and
_Abiram, and Nadab and Abihu were destroyed at the same
time.

The priests descended from Eleazar down to the time of
Christ, according to the appointment of the judges, kings and
prophets. Eleazar was succeeded by Phineas, Phineas by
_ Abisve, Abisve by Boezi, Boezi by Ozi, after whom the priest-
_ hood was transferred from the line of Eleazar to Eli, who was

the son of Thamar, and Azariah, Meraioth, Amariah, and
_ Achitob were deprived of the priesthood. But Eli was luke-
_ warm in correcting his sons, Hophni and Phineas, who, to-
gether with him, discharged the duties of the priesthood, and
treated the sacrifices at the aitar with irreverence, and there-
_ fore it is related that he was rejected by the Lord. And
_ when he heard of the slaughter of his sons, and that the ark
of the Lord was taken by the Philistines, he fell down from
his seat, and broke his neck,and died. And he judged Israel

forty years.
Cu. XXVI.—The story of Elkanah, Samuel, and Saul.

Iy those days there was a man named Elkanah, descended
through Corah from Ishar, and he had two wives, Peninah
who was fruitful, and Hannah who was barren. And Hannah
having made a vow, that if God would grant her a male child,
she would make him a Nazarene, brought forth Samuel, who
was both prophet and judge. And he delivered Israel from
the Philistines by a lamb, which he slew on the stone of Help,
which was placed on the borders of the land, with reference
to the petition of Israel.’

* The Bible account (1 Sam. vii. 12.) is, that Samuel sacrificed, “and
the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines
and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel......... Then
Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called
the name of it Ebenezer, [The stone of help. Margin.] saying, hitherto
hath the Lord helped us.”

VOL. LI. D

34 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1095.

He anointed Saul, who was pointed out to him by the Lord,
king over Israel, confirming his anointing by three signs, and
giving him an injunction, for transgressing which, subsequently
he was rejected by the Lord, and placed in such straits that he
tried to raise Samuel from the dead, by the assistance of the
magic art of a Pythoness. King Saul was descended by many
successions from Abel, through the tribe of Benjamin, of whose
descendant Cis, he was the son. Saul begat Jonathan,
- Joshua, Melchisiah, and Ishbosheth, and two daughters, Merob
and Mishcol.

Cu. XXVII.—Brutus dies—His sons divide his kingdom—The
invasion and death of Humber—The fate of Estrildis—Locrinus
_ marries Guendolen—Homer flourishes.

Wutte that Saul reigned in Judzea, Brutus, the king of Britain,
became the father of three sons by his wife, Imogene; and
their names were Locrinus, Albanactus, and Camber. These
men, after their father departed this life, in the twenty-fourth
year of his reign (and he was buried in the city which he
had built), divided the kingdom of Britain among them, and
departed each to his own place. Locrinus, who was the first-
born, possessed the middle portion of the island, which was
afterwards called Loegria, after his name. Camber took that
part which is beyond the river Severn, and which was after-
wards called Cambria, from his name; being the country
which is now called Wales. Albanactus, who was the youngest,
had that part which is now called Scotland, and he called it
Albania, from his own name.

These men reigned a long time in peace and unanimity with
one another, till Humber, the king of the Huns, invaded Albania,
and in a great battle with Albanactus, slew him. ‘Therefore
Locrinus, his elder brother, uniting with his brother Camber,
came to meet the king of the Huns on this side of the river
which is now called the Humber, where a battle took place,
and they put Humber the king to flight, who fled as far as
the river and was drowned in it, and bequeathed his name to
the river.

After this victory Locrinus carried off three maidens, one of
whom, by name Estrildis, was of wonderful beauty ; and she
was the daughter of some king of Germany. So Locrinus being
attracted by love for her, wished to unite her to himself in

B.C. 1050. THE REIGN AND DEATH OF MADDAN. 35

marriage. And when Corinzus heard this, he was exceedingly
_ indignant, because Locrinus had agreed to marry his daughter.
He therefore went to the king, and, partly by threats and
partly by caresses, compelled Locrinus to perform what he —
had promised. Accordingly he married the daughter of Cori-
neeus, whose name was Guendolen; but he did not for all that
forget his love for Estrildis, but having made a subterraneous
cave in the city Trinovantum, he was content to enjoy stolen
pleasures with her in that. In the mean time HEstrildis be-
came with child, and brought forth a daughter, whom she
called Habre. And Guendolen too being pregnant, brought
forth a son, whom she called Maddan. But when Corinzeus
died; then Locrinus forsook Guendolen, and made Estrildis his
queen: and in consequence, Guendolen became beyond all
measure indignant, and went to Cornwall. There she col-
lected an army and laboured to disturb Locrinus: and when
a battle took place near the river Styra, Locrinus received a
wound from an arrow, and died when he had reigned ten
_ years.

Then Guendolen, raging with a frenzy equal to that of her
father, orders Estrildis and her daughter Habre to be thrown
into the river, which was at the time called Habre, from her
name, but it is now corrupted into the pronunciation Sabrina,‘

- for she was willing to give her the honour of an eternal
memory, because her husband had begotten her.

At this time Homer lived, who was accounted an illustrious
orator and poet, and Samuel the prophet flourished in Judea.

Cu. XXVIII.—Maddan’s reign and death.

Manpan being invested with thecrown, begottwo sons, Mempu-
lius and Malas, and administered the kingdom in peace for forty
years. When he died a quarrel arose between the above-men-
tioned brothers, because each of them wished to possess the
whole island. But Mempulius having slain his brother, be-
haved with such cruelty to the nation, that he laboured to put
to death nearly every man of the highest birth in the kingdom.
However, in the twentieth year of his reign, when he was out
hunting, he went out by himself and quitted his companions,
and was devoured by a troop of furious wolves.

7 The Severn,

36 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1045.

Cu. XXIX.— Of the genealogy of our Saviour—the story of Rahab.

Tne line of the genealogy of the Saviour took its rise from
Abraham, in this third age of the world.

Abraham (as it has been said before) begat Isaac, Isaac begat
Jacob, Jacob begat Judah and his brethren; Judah begat Pharez
and Zarah by Thamar, Pharez begat Esrom, Esrom begat Aram,
Aram begat Aminadab, Aminadab begat Naasson. This Naas-
son departed from Egypt and was the prince of the tribe of
Judah, and that became true which God foretold to Abraham
in Genesis; that in the fifth generation, reckoned according
to the royal family, so that we mean by generations, not persons,
but successions, the children of Israel depart from Egypt; as
you may see if you calculate from Judah to Naasson. For in
that list the word “begot”’ occurs five times. But if that
succession is limited to the fourth generation in the sacerdotal
tribe, then those who make the calculation must proceed from
Levi to Eleazar.

Naasson begat Salmon, Salmon married Rahab the harlot,
who received the spies in Jericho, and hid them under straw
of flax, and let them down over the wall, and delivered her
own house by a scarlet thread, which she placed in the window,
while Jericho was being destroyed. By Rahab Salmon became
the father of Boaz. In the days of Boaz, Elimelech, a man of
Bethlehem, with his wife Naomi, and his sons Mahlon and
Chelion, came at a time of famine into Moab, where he ob-
tained wives for his sons, to wit, Ruth and Orpah. And when
he and his sons died, Naomi returned with Ruth the Moabi-
tess, and by her Boaz became the father of Obed, raising up
seed to his dead kinsman. And Obed begat Isai or Jesse, for
he had two names; and Jesse begat David and his brethren.

This David Samuel the prophet anointed to be king, when
Saul had been rejected for disobedience. .

Tap Enp oF tHE Turrp AGE or THE WorzD, which ends
in Saul, consisting, according to the Hebrews, of 942 years;
according to the seventy translators, of 940.

BOOK IV.

THE FOURTH AGE OF THE WORLD.
B.C. 1055—606.

EBRANCUS FOUNDS YORK—SOLOMON BUILDS THE TEMPLE—
THE DIVISION OF THE JEWISH TRIBES—ELIJAH—BLADUD,
KING OF BRITAIN, IS CONTEMPORARY OF ELIJAH—SHISHAK
PLUNDERS JERUSALEM—SARDANAPALUS—END OF THEKING-
DOM OF ASSYRIA— HISTORY OF KING LEAR— ROME IS
FOUNDED BY ROMULUS AND REMUS—THE OLD KINGS OF
ITALY, JANUS, SATURN, JUPITER—EARLY HISTORY OF ALBA
AND ROME—KINGS OF ROME AFTER ROMULUS—CONSTANTI-
NOPLE IS FOUNDED IN THE TIME OF TULLUS HORTILIUS—
STORY OF LUCRETIA—NEHEMIAH IS A CONTEMPORARY OF
SPURIUS CASSIUS—STORY OF ESTHER—REGULUS—LIST OF

THE JEWISH KINGS—THE PROPHECY OF THE SIBYLS—THE
JEWS ARE CABRIED OFF TO BABYLON.

Cu. 1.—Of the reign of David—Sauls visit to hin—The
rebellion of Absolom—His death and character.

Davrp, as it has been already said, though the youngest of
his brethren, was elected king by the Lord, and anointed
by Samuel in Bethlehem, as a token of his being king. After
that, he reigned in Hebron over the tribe of Judah seven. years
and six months; and thirdly, he reigned over the whole of
Israel thirty-three years. After the death of Goliah he soothed
the mind of Saul, by playing on the harp ; he gained the affec-
tions of Jonathan, and became the king’s son-in-law. But
the king conceived envy against him because of the praises
which the virgins bestowed on him ; David, however, frustrated
his designs against him, and brought him a hundred foreskins ;
and avoided a blow from a lance which Saul aimed at him
while he was playing the harp ; and also he escaped from the
treacherous attack of his guards by the device of Michol, who

38 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1055.

placed an image in his bed instead of him. By the kindness of
Samuel he saw Saul prophesying in Naioth, without receiving
any injury from him. And he made a treaty with Jonathan, who
practised shooting arrows.® In Nob he ate the priests’ bread,
having pretended to be mad at Achish.

Abiathar was the only one of the priests who escaped when.
the rest were slain by Doeg, after which David slew the robbers
and delivered Keilah. Once, while Saul was asleep, he privily
took away a pitcher of water and his spear, and forded the
civer, delivering his lord the king from the enemies that were
coming against him. ‘Afterwards, when Saul pursued him
he cut off the skirt of his garment. When Nabal, who was a
foolish man, died, he married his wife Abigail. Returning from
Achish to Ziklag, he smote the Amalekites, and slew the man
who brought him news of Saul’s death, and composed a mourn-
ful elegy over him, and lamented him.

After Ishbosheth died he reigned alone in Jerusalem, which
was formerly called Solema, casting the Jebusites out of it ;
and he built Mello. Having defeated the Philistines in Baal-
pharosin, the ark of the Lord is brought back to Jerusalem,
and David danced before the ark, for which he is laughed at
by Michal. Posterity is promised him, but he is forbidden
himself to build a house for the Lord. He measured the
Moabites with a line and smote them, and overthrew the Philis-
tines and Edomites in the valley of Salt, and delivered Israel
out of their hands. He distributed official dignities, and slew
Uriah by the hand of the Ammonites. He fled before Abso-
lom, who had at first been rejected by him, and who after-
wards pursued him ; and when he was slain, and when Ahi-
tophel had hanged himself, he returned to Jerusalem, and by
numbering the people brought the anger of God upon himself,

David was both king and prophet, born of the tribe of
Judah, the son of Jesse, born in Bethlehem: as a boy he was
a keeper of sheep, he was the youngest of his brothers, but
superior to them in genius. He was called by the Lord to
the kingdom, and anointed king by the prophet. In war he
was brave, for personal courage he was conspicuous, he
triumphed gloriously : he was a veteran in victory, patient in

8. Jonathan gave notice to David of Saul’s disposition towards him by
shooting arrows, see 1 Sam. xx. 20. 9 David cut off Saul’s skirt
before he took his spear and cruse, 1 Sam. xxiv. 4; xxiv. 12.

B.C. 1055. SOLOMON BUILDS THE TEMPLE. 39

adversity, prudent amid dangers, grieving for his own sins,
mournful for the deaths of others, proue to repentance,
swift to pardon, gentle as a companion, inclined to mercy,

_ Inasmuch as he did not injure the king who was his enemy,

when he might have done so; and he did not only save him
when he was in his power, but he avenged him after he had
been slain. He slew a lion and a bear without a sword; he
drove away an unclean spirit by the sweetness of his harp-
playing, and he slew the giant.

Therefore he ended_his life in the fiftieth year of his reign
and the seventieth of his life, and was buried in his city of
Bethlehem, which is called also by another name Ephrata,
where also our Lord Jesus Christ was born after the flesh,
and where also Rachel died after she had brought forth Benja-
min; where also the tomb of Jesse the father of David is shown.

And this town is in the tribe of Judah, six miles from
Jerusalem, on the south, in the road to Hebron.

Cu. I1.—Ebrancus founds York—Brutus II.—Leyl.

Av the same time that David reigned in Judeea, Membritius,
the king of the Britons, died, and Ebrancus his son succeeded
to the kingdom, and reigned forty years in it. He was the
first king since Brutus, who directed his fleet towards Gaul,
and he returned victorious. After that he founded a city
on the other side of the Humber, which he called after his
own name Caerbrance, that is, the City of Ebrancus.

(At that time Sylvius Latinus was reigning in Italy.)

He also built the city of Alched towards Scotland, and the
town of Mount Agnel, which is now called the Castle of the
Maids. He begat twenty sons and thirty daughters, all of
whom he sent into Italy to Sylvius Alva, who succeeded
Sylvius Latinus in the kingdom, and there they became the
wives of the noble Trojan. After him, Brutus, surnamed
Green Shield, took the helm of the kingdom and reigned
twelve years. He was sueceeded by his son Leyl.

Cu. III.— Solomon builds the temple-—Dies — Leyl founds
Carlisle—Dies, and is succeeded by Rudhudibras, who founds
Canterbury.

Arter the death of King David, in the fourth age of the
world, Solomon his son succeeded him, having been anointed

40 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 975.

king by Nathan the prophet, and by Zadok the priest.
After that, Joab being slain, and Shimei, and.Adonijah his
brother, Solomon, having received wisdom from God after a
sacrifice which he offered, began to build a temple to the
Lord at Jerusalem, in the fourth year of his reign, and the
five hundred and second year after the Exodus of Israel from
Egypt; on the thousand and twentieth’ year of the arrival of
Abraham in the land of Canaan from Mesopotamia in Syria,
and the fourteen hundredth year after the flood.

In these days also, Leyl, king of the Britons, who was
mentioned in the last chapter, built a city and called it after
his own name Carlisle, that is to say, the city of Leyl. He
reigned twenty-five years. After him, his son Rudhudibras
took the kingdom ; he founded Caerceynt, that is, Canterbury,
and Caerguyent, that is, Winchester, and the town of Mount
Paladin, which is now called Septonia.?

Solomon the son of David was the son of Bathsheba, and
born in Jerusalem. And before he was born it was pro-
nounced that he should be the wisest of men. He dedicated
the temple of the Jord; he was prosperous in his empire,
though not so warlike a king as his father: he was beloved
by God, discreet in judgment, just in giving sentence, pacific
in his administration, one who begged for wisdom and gained
it to such a degree as to know the entire arrangement of the
world, the virtues of the elements, the power of the different
minerals and herbs, the nature of all animals and the thoughts
of men. His beginning was good, and his end evil. For
after wonderful glory on account of his virtues, he became
corrupted by his love for women, and lost the wisdom that he
had received, and sank in the deepest idolatry, which was his
ruin. He reigned forty years and lived fifty-two. Then he

ended his life and his reign ; and he was buried in Bethlehem,
in the city of his father.

1 These dates are not quite correct, or quite consistent. The flood took
place n.c. 2349. The call of Abraham, 1921, The Exodus, 1491. The
distance of time between the call of Abraham and the departure from
Egypt being 430 years, not 518.

2 Now Shaftesbury.

3This is not quite correct. Solomon was born B.c. 1033; David died

1015; Solomon died 975, so that he was fifty-eight years old, not fifty-
two.

B.C. 1004. DEDICATION OF THE TEMPLE. Al

Cu. IV. — Solomon dedicates the Temple — The reign of
_ Rehoboam — The separation of the kingdoms of Judah
and Israel.

Tre temple, as it has been mentioned, having been built by
Solomon, he consecrated it with great solemnity on the tenth
of September. The house of the forest of Lebanon, and the
royal palace, were built ina wonderful manner. The queen of
Sheba was received with great honour. But his praiseworthy
life was miserably stained by illicit love.

After Solomon, his son Rehoboam became king, against
whom there rose up Jeroboam of the tribe of Ephraim, and
he separated the ten tribes from Judah, and from the house
of David, which happened, not by chance, but by the decree
of God, on account of the offence of Solomon, who, after he
had built that most noble temple at Jerusalem, was seduced by
the blandishments of women, and fell into idolatry. But the
pitying and merciful God would not deprive him of the
kingdom of his father before his death, on account of David
his servant.

Afterwards, when each part, as it is written, began to have
its separate king, there remained with the tribe of Judah, and
the tribe of Benjamin, the tribe of Levi also, which was the
tribe of the priesthood, dedicated to the especial service of
the Lord. And after this time, these three tribes were called
the kingdom of Judah, and the other tribe had the name of
the kingdom of Israel. -There adhered also to the people of
Israel the two tribes Manasseh and Ephraim, which are not
of the twelve tribes. For Joseph, who was one of the twelve
patriarchs, did not make one tribe like the other patriarchs,
but two, namely, those which we have just named.

Jeroboam being a man of perverse mind, established idola-
try in Samaria and throughout all his kingdom. For he
was afraid lest, by coming to the temple of God which was in
Jerusalem, and to which, according to the divine command,
the whole nation was bound to come for the purpose of
sacrificing, his people should be reduced and restored to the rule
of the race of David, as being the royal family. On which
account, as has been already said, he polluted the whole people
of Israel with wicked impiety. For he lived by the advice of
Abdo the prophet, and did not forsake his evil ways, and

42 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 850.

accordingly he received a severe announcement of his impend-
ing desolate condition from Ahijah at Shiloh, transmitted to
him by his wife, who consulted the préphet about the safety
of her child. After this he died, and he reigned twenty-two
years.

Cu. V.—Different kings reign in Israel—Eliyah the Tishbite
flourishes—His actions—Prophecies about Antichrist—Bla-
dud succeeds Rudhudibras in Britain—He is succeeded by
Leyr—Ahab reigns in Israel and Jehu—Elisha flourishes—
His Character and Actions—The Israelites are carried into
Assyria by Tiglath, Pileser, and Shalmaneser.

ACCORDINGLY, after the kingdom was divided, Jeroboam was
succeeded by Nadab his son, who reigned over Israel in
Samaria for two years. This Nadab besieged Gebbithon, a
city of the Philistines, and was slain by Baasha who succeeded
him, and reigned twenty-four years. This Baasha was re-
proved by Jehu the prophet, and nevertheless he built Rama
as a fortress against Asa, and being hindered by Benhadad he
died. But this Benhadad was one of the ancient kings of
Syria, who were always hostile to the kingdom of Israel.
Baasha was succeeded by Hela his son, and he reigned two
years; and then becoming tipsy or drunk, he was slain by
Zimir. Zimir reigned in his stead for seven days, and then
being besieged by Omri, he was burnt alive in Titzah. Omri
succeeded him, and reigned twelve years. This Omri, three
years before he became sole king, was at war with Thebit, and
he built Samaria, and then he died. He was succeeded by |
Ahab his son, who reigned after him twenty-two years. At
this time flourished the prophets Elijah, Michaiah, and Oba-
diah.

Elijah the Tishbite, a great priest and prophet, and a dweller
in the desert, a man full of faith, and of the greatest devotion,
brave in enduring labours, clean and industrious, of excellent
abilities, strict in the practice of discipline, constant in holy
meditation, and fearless of death, scourged tyrants, put sacri-
legious persons to death, and was eminent for many acts of
virtue. Moreover, he closed up the heaven so that it should
not rain, and caused a drought for three years. Again he
prayed, and the heaven gave forth rain. He raised from death

B.C. 750. ELIJAH THE TISHBITE. 43

the son of the woman whose virtue he had rewarded, by pre-
venting her measure of meal from wasting, and by keeping
her cruse of oil flowing in a perpetual stream. At his word
fire from heaven descended on a sacrifice. He burned two
companies of fifty soldiers with their commanders, by fire from
heaven. When crossing Jordan, he divided the waters by a
touch of his mantle. After this, he was carried off in a fiery
chariot, and ascended into heaven; being about to come
again, according to the prophet Malachi, at the end of the
world, and to precede Christ, and to announce his last advent,
with great wonder and prodigious portents; so that Antichrist
will wage war against him, and he shall conquer him, and
slay him. And the carcasses of these men shall lie unburied
in the streets. After that, a great kingdom shall be raised by
the Lord, and shall smite the kingdom of Antichrist. After
this the Lord shall come, and shall slay Antichrist with the
sword of his mouth, and all those besides, who have worshipped
him; and the Lord shall reign with all his people in everlast-
ing glory.

In the days of this Elijah the prophet, Bladud, the son of
Rudhudibras, succeeded to the kingdom of Britain, and held it
for twenty years. He built the city of Caerbodun, which is
now called Badonia (Bath); and he made in it warm baths
fit for the use of mankind, which he committed to the presi-
dency of Minerva; in whose temple he established an ever-
lasting fire, which was never to burn away to ashes ; but as
soon as the flame gets feeble, it is turned into globes of stone.
He also taught necromancy throughout the kingdom of Britain.
And he was incessantly doing marvellous tricks, till at last he
made himself wings, and endeavoured to go through the air;
and fell down on a temple of Apollo, just below the city Tri-
novantum, and was dashed to pieces.

He was succeeded by Leyr, his son, who reigned forty years.
He founded a city on the river Sora, which is called in the Bri-

tish language, Caerleyer ; and in the Saxon language, Leicester.

At the same time that Elijah slew the priests of Baal, Aha-
ziah, his son, succeeded Ahab, and reigned two years. Ahaziah
was succeeded by Joram, his brother, who reigned twelve years.
Jehu slew Joram, having been anointed by the disciple of
Elisha, for the purpose of scattering the family of Ahab, ac-

’ cording to the prophecy of Elijah. And Jehu reigned twenty-

44 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 750.

eight years. He was succeeded by Joacham, his son, who
reigned seventeen years. In his reign, Elisha the prophet
died, a man of a very illustrious life, and very glorious for his
miracles ; and he was buried in Samaria.

Elisha, the disciple of Elijah, was a native of the town of
Amelmoth, and of the tribe of Reuben. At his birth, a golden
calf, which was in Gilgal, lowed ; and its voice sounded in
Jerusalem. Then a prophet, being inspired, said, ‘This day
is born in Jerusalem a man who shall destroy all idolatry.”
He being glorified with a double portion of Elijah’s spirit, was
distinguished by many important actions, and displays of vir-
tue. He divided Jordan, in order to pass through it, and
having checked the waters, he then turned them back to their
course. He threw a pitcher into the barren waters of Jericho,
and so embued them with fertility. By a single word, he gave
up some boys who mocked him to wild beasts. He made
waters run with blood, so as to cause the slaughter of his ene-
mies. By a word, he made a woman fruitful who before was
barren ; and when her son died, he raised him from the dead.
And he so‘tened the bitterness of some men’s food. He fed
the people with ten loaves, and collected fragments that were
left afterwards. He cleansed Naaman of the stain of leprosy,
by washing in Jordan ; and he inflicted the leprosy upon his
disciple, whom he cursed. He made the iron of an axe
which fell into the Jordan to float, by throwing a piece of wood
into the water. He smote the host of Syria with blindness ;
he predicted death to one who did not believe him. He put
the enemy to flight by the sound of chariots; he dispersed a
besieging force ; he warded off a famine. After his death, he
restored life to a dead corpse, and his sepulchre is shown to this
day in the city of Sebastia, deserving, indeed, of all honour,
and held in great veneration.

Joachim, the king of Israel, was succeeded by his son Joash,
who reigned sixteen years. After Joash, his son Jeroboam
reigned for forty-one years. In his time, the prophets Hosea,
Amos, Joel, and Jonas prophesied. Jeroboam, the king, was
succeeded by his son Zechariah ; he reigned six months, and
was slain by his servant Shallum. After Shallum, who reigned
only one month, Menahem succeeded him, and reigned ten years.
This Menahem gave a thousand talents to Pul, the king of
the Assyrians, in order to let him depart from his kingdom ;

B.C. 700. THE KINGS OF JUDAH. 45

but provoked his anger by a gift of some false calves. After
Menahem, there reigned Pehahiah, his son, for two years.
Pehahiah was succeeded by Pekah, the son of Remaliah, under
whom Nahum the prophet flourished; and Pekah reigned
twenty years.

But he could not resist Tiglath Pileser, or prevent his taking
prisoners two tribes and a half, and as many out of the tribe of
Zabulon and Naphtali as were equivalent to half a tribe
more. He was succeeded by Hoshea, who was taken prisoner
by Shalmanezer, king of the Assyrians, who removed the
Israelites into the country of the Assyrians, settling them in
the cities of the Medes, near the river Goza. Under the
same Hoshea, although he had granted permission for them to
go thrice a year to Jerusalem, the ten tribes were taken by
Shalmaneser ; and among them was Tobias taken, whose his-
tory is well known.

Samaria having been besieged for three years, was filled
with Cutheans,* or Jacobites, or Samarians; but though they
received the law from fear of lions, they did not cast away their
idols.

Cu. VI.—-Of the Kings of Judah—Edom revolts—Character of
Sardanapalus— Abastus revolts from him—The Empire of the
Assyrians is transferred to the Medes—Amalius and Numitor
flourish in Italy.

We are now about to treat of those kings who were con-
temporaries of the kings of Israel ; and we will begin with
Rehoboam, the son of Solomon. This Rehoboam, when the
Lord had divided the kingdom, and when ten tribes followed
Jeroboam, retained only two with the tribe of Levi; and his
kingdom was called the kingdom of Judah. And as their
sons provoked the Lord, Shishak, the king of Egypt, came
to Jerusalem, and despoiled the temple of the Lord. And he
took away the golden shields, and left brazen ones in their

2 “And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah
and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from Sepharvaim, and placed them
in the cities of Samaria, instead of the children of Israel; and they pos-
sessed Samaria and dwelt in the cities thereof. And so it was at the be-
ginning of their dwelling there, that they feared not the Lord; therefore
the Lord sent lions among them, which slew some of them.” (2 Kings
xvii. 24, 25.)

46 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 700.

place. At this time prophesied Ahijah, Jehu, Amos, Joel,
Zachariah, and Elijah who was carried off by the Lord, and
was nowhere seen afterwards. Rehoboam reigned seven-
teen years, and was succeeded by Abijah, who reigned three
years ; Asa succeeded Abijah. This Asa fortified the cities of
Giboah and Masphat with the stones and timber which
Baasha had collected in Rama, and was reproved by Jehu,
because he had placed his hope in Benhadad; and so he died
of a disease in the feet, the same which he had brought upon
the prophet by putting him in prison. He reigned fifty-one
years, and was succeeded by Jehosaphat. He reigned twenty-
five years; and after Jehosaphat Joram reigned for twenty-
seven years; while he was king, Edom revolted, and shook
off its allegiance to Judea, and appointed a king for itself.

Joram was succeeded by Othoziah, who reigned one year,
and he was also called Oziah and Azariah. And this Azariah,
with his son Joash, and his grandson Amaziah, the evangelist
Matthew has omitted from his genealogy of Christ. After
Azariah, Athaliah reigned for six years; and after her, who
making a good beginning, but a most wicked ending, slew
Zachariah the son of Jehoiada the priest, between the temple
and the altar ; and he reigned forty years. After Joash came
Amaziah, who reigned twenty-nine years.

About this time, Sardanapalus was king of the Assyrians,
a man more profligate than any woman. He always lived
among the women; and when, on a certain day, Arbastus,
his prefect, whom he had appointed governor of the Medes,
had obtained admittance to him, he found him among troops
of harlots, dressed in woman’s apparel, spinning purple on a
distaff, and distributing their tasks to the virgins, while he sur-
passed all the women who were in his company in the effemi-
nacy of his person, and the wanton carriage of his eyes. And
when Arbastus had seen this, he returned to his companions,
and related what he had seen, and declared that he could no
longer obey one who preferred being a woman to being a
man. So aconspiracy of the Medes is quickly excited against
the nation of the Assyrians, and war is proclaimed against
Sardanapalus; and he, when he was no longer able to resist
the revolted nations, retired into his palace, where he had had
a funeral pile built; and having set it on fire, he burnt him-
self and all his riches ; and so Sardanapalus, the king of the

A

B.C. 700. THE STORY OF LEYR AND HIS DAUGHTERS. 47

Assyrians, died, after he had reigned thirty-six years. And
the kingdom of the Assyrians was transferred to the Medes,
by means of Arbastus, the prefect of the Medes.

After this, the kingdom of the Medes ran on through a
succession of ages and of kings, till the time of Astyages, the
grandfather of Cyrus, a period of three hundred and fifty
years. But the kings of the Medes are not reckoned in the
number of illustrious kings, until we come to the before-
mentioned Cyrus, although they were all possessed of the
power of the Chaldeeans, and were illustrious, too, from the
name of Babylon.

We must at the same time note this, that the kingdom of
the Assyrians was transferred to the Medes by the Arbastus
already spoken of; at the same time that Boras was king
among the Latins, being the father of Amulius and Numitor,
and the grandfather of Rhea Sylvia, who was the mother of
Romulus and Remus.

Cu. VII. — The conduct of King Leyr to his daughters—The
ingratitude of the two elder, and the affection of Cordelia—
Leyr dies—Cordelia succeeds him.

Axzour this time, Leyr, king of the Britons, being very old,

and having no son, determined to marry his three daughters

to noble husbands, and to divide the kingdom among them.

But in order to know which of them was most worthy of the

best portion of his kingdom, he collected them all together,

putting questions to them, to see by which of them he was
most beloved ; and when two of them had answered that they
loved their father more than their own selves, the third, who
was the youngest, perceiving the flattery of her sisters, said,

«I have always loved you as my father, and in no other man-

ner, and if you wish to extort anything more from me, I tell

you, that as your wealth is, so is your influence, and I love you
in that degree.” And when the king heard this, he answered

_with great indignation, “Since you have despised my old age

so greatly, in proportion as I have loved you more than the

others, I shall, for the future, be ashamed to love you at all,
nor shall you have any share in my kingdom with your
sisters.” So when he had said this, he married the other
two girls whom I have mentioned, to the dukes of Cornwall
~ and Scotland, giving them each a half of Britain, in such a

48 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 650.

way, that after his death they were to enjoy the dominion of
the whole island. At length, when a report of this had
reached the ears of Aganippus, king of France, he immedi-
ately sent ambassadors to the before-mentioned king, entreat-
ing him to give him his younger daughter, whose name was
Cordelia, for his lawful wife. But the king persisting in his
indignation which I have spoken of, answered thus, “ That
he wuold willingly give her to him, but it must be without
land, or money, or gold, or silver.””. And this wasdone. Then,
after some time, when king Leyr began to grow feeble from
old age, the before-mentioned dukes, to whom he had given
his daughters and all Britain, made an insurrection against
him, and took the kingdom and all his royal power from
him. Therefore, the king, not knowing what to do, decided,
at length, to betake himself to his daughters, among whom
he had divided his kingdom, in order that, if possible, they
might support him as long as he lived, and forty soldiers,
whom he kept about him. But they, taking his words out
of his mouth with great indignation, said that he was an old
man, a dotard and a beggar, and not worthy of the noble
family to which he belonged; but if he chose, he might
remain with one soldier, provided he dismissed all the rest.
But the king, when he was thus recalled to a recollection
of his former dignity, wept, and uttered a groan, saying, ““O
my daughter, Cordelia, how true are those words which you
replied to me, to wit, ‘As your wealth is, so is your influence,
and I love you in that degree.’ So while I had wealth, I had
power ; now I have no wealth, therefore I have no power.
From which it is plain that it was not myself that you loved,
but my gifts.” Resolving these and similar thoughts fre-
quently in his mind, he at length determined to visit his
daughter who was in the countries across the sea, in order,
in his miserable and destitute condition, to try the disposition
of her whose kindness he had not all deserved. Accordingly,
he embarked on the sea in haste, and arrived on the other
side of the sea, having had a prosperous voyage. So he came
to Caricia, where his daughter was, and sent his messenger
to her to tell her to what a state of misery he was reduced.
But Cordelia, when she heard it, was much affected, and with
tears asked how many soldiers he had with him. And when
the messenger told her that he had come with only one soldier

B.O. 650. REIGN AND DEATH OF CORDELIA. 49

and one armour-bearer, she immediately gave orders that he
should conduct her father to another city, and give him a
bath there and cherish him, and clothe him in royal apparel.
She also commanded that he should take forty soldiers with
noble equipments, and then announce to Aganippus, king of
_ France, that he had arrived. When this had been done, he
sent a messenger to the king and to his daughter, to in-
form them that he had been driven from the kingdom of Britain
by his sons-in-law, and that he had come to them, in order,
by their aid, to recover his kingdom. But they came to meet
him with their magistrates and nobles, and received him with
great honour ; and sending ambassadors throughout the whole
of France, they commanded all soldiers, and all who could
march to battle, to meet as speedily as possible, with horses
and arms, in order to invade Britain, with the father of the
queen. And when this was done, Leyr took with him his
daughter, with the multitude of warriors who had been col-
lected, and fought with his enemies, and gained the victory.
And when he had reduced both his sons-in-law under his
power, he died in the third year after. Aganippus, the king
of France, died also. Therefore, Cordelia, the daughter of the
king, succeeded to the helm of the kingdom, and buried her
father in @ subterraneous cave, which she had commanded to
be made in Leicester, beneath the river Sera.

Cu. VIII.—The reign and death of Cordelia—She is attacked
by her Nephews—They defeat her—They quarrel with one
another—Cunedagius becomes sole king. ~

Wuen, therefore, Cordelia had governed the kingdom peace-
ably for five years, the two sons of her sisters, Marganus and
Cunedagius, began to disquiet her; and they were the sons
of her sisters, by Maglaurus and Henorinus, the dukes of
Cornwall and Albany, and the young men themselves had the
character of being men of admirable virtue. Maglaurus was
the father of Marganus, and Henorinus of Cunedagius. These
youths then, when, after the deaths of their fathers, they had
succeeded to their dukedoms, felt indignant that Britain should
be subject toa woman. Accordingly, having collected armies,
they rose up against the queen, and would not desist from
_ their ferocious hostility, until, after laying waste several pro-
vinces, they met her in battle. At last, she was taken, and
VOL. I. E

50 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 650.

thrown into prison by them; where, being overwhelmed with
grief, on account of the loss of the kingdom, she slew herself. .

_ After this, the young men divided the island between them ;
that part which is on the other side of the Humber, extending
towards Catanesia, fell'to Marganus, and the other part, which
is on the other side of the river, and looks towards the west,
became subject to Cunedagius.

At the end of two years, some persons, who were desirous to
cause disturbances in the kingdom, came to Marganus, and
worked upon his mind, saying, that it was base and shameful
for him not to be lord of the whole island, as he was the first-
born. And when he had been excited by these and other argu-
ments, he led an army through the provinces of Cunedagius,
and began to lay them waste with fire; therefore, quarrels
sprung up between the kings, and Cunedagius came to meet
him with all his forces, and a battle took place, in which he in-
flicted great slaughter upon Marganus, and put him to flight.
Then, as he fled, he pursued him from province to province,
and at last slew him, in a village of Cambria, which, after his
death, was called by the people of the village Margan, after
his name, and retains the appellation to this day. Therefore,
Cunedagius having gained the victory, obtained the sove-
reignty of the whole island, and governed it gloriously for
thirty-three years.

Cu. IX.— Rome is founded by Romulus and Remus — The
former Kings of Italy, Janus, Saturn, Picus, Faunus, Lati-
nus—Aineas, his descendants ; Amulius, Numiter—Birth
of Romulus and Remus—The institutions of Romulus—The
Senate—The Rape of the Sabines—Union of the Romans
and Sabines — Death of Remus and of Romulus.

Axourt the same time the celebrated city of Rome was founded
by the twin brothers, Romulus and Remus, the origin of
whose kingdom I will proceed to explain in a few words, in
such a manner as not to exceed the moderate limits that I
have allotted myself.

Of a surety, that nation carried its arms so extensively over
the world, that they who read the account of their exploits
and power, as it really was, are learning the history not of
the nation, but of the whole human race. For virtue and

fortune appear to have laboured in unison to build up their
empire,

B.C. 750. FORMER KINGS OF ITALY. 51

According to some accounts, the first king who reigned in
Italy was Janus ; then came Saturn, who fleeing out of Greece
from his son Jupiter, came to a city which was called Saturnia,
from his name, the ruins of which are seen to this day on the
borders of Tuscany, not far from Rome; and because Saturn
lay hid (/atuit) in Italy, the country was called Latium! from
that fact. He taught the people, who as yet were quite un-
civilised, to build houses, to cultivate the land, to plant vihe-
yards, and to live in such fashion as became men, when pre-
viously they had been half savage, supporting life only by the
nourishment derived from acorns, and living in caves or huts,
roofed with leaves and twigs. He also was the first to teach
men the use of brazen money, in return for which services he
was called a god by the ignorant and barbarous multitude.

After Saturn his son Picus reigned in Italy. And there is
a fable told about him, that because he despised the love of a
very celebrated sorceress named Circe, he was changed by her
into a bird of the same name, which is called pica (the wood-
pecker), to punish his disdain. After Picus, Faunus his son
became king; he was the father of Latinus, whose mother,
Carmentis Nicostrata, is believed to have been the inventress
of the Latin letters, in reference to which, some one has said—

“To wise Carmentis all our books we owe.”

In the reigns of these sovereigns, a hundred and fifty years
_are said'to have elapsed.

During the reign of Latinus, who corrected the Latin lan-
guage and called the people Latins after his own name, Troy

1 This is the etymology given by the purest Latin writers. Virgil says,—

“ Primus ab zthereo venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Jovis fugiens, et regnis exul ademptis.
Is genus indocile ac dispersum montibus altis
Composuit, legesque dedit : Latiumque vocari
Maluit, his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris.” —n. viii. 323.

Which is thus rendered by Dryden—

“Then Saturn came, who fled the power of Jove,
Robb’d of his realms and banish’d from above ;
The men, dispers’d on hills to towns he brought,
And laws ordain’d and civil customs taught,
And Latium called the land where safe he lay
From his unduteous son, and his usurping sway.”—Ibid. 430.
E2

oe MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1100.

was taken by the Greeks in the eight hundred and forty-third
year after the birth of Abraham, eight hundred and thirty-four
years after that of Ninus, king of Assyria; forty-four years
before the foundation of Rome, and forty-six before the first
Olympiad. When therefore Troy was taken, as has been said
before, Aneas, the son of Venus and Anchises, came into Italy.
In the third year after the fall of Troy, he fought with Turnus,
and slew him. But Turnus was the son of Danaus, the king
of the Tuscans ; and Lavinia, the daughter of the king Latinus,
had been betrothed to him. She was now married to Aineas,
who called the town which he had founded Lavinium, after her
name, ®neas reigned over the Latins for three years after he
obtained the kingdom. After him Ascanius, who is also called
Julius, the son of Atneas, became king; he left Sylvius Pos-
tumus his heir, being his own brother and the son of Aineas by
Lavinia, whom he had brought up with great affection. Then
Ascanius begat Julius, from whom the family of the Juli de-
scended: but he was only a child when Ascanius died,
unequal as yet to govern his fellow-citizens. When Ascanius
had reigned thirty-eight years he died, and Sylvius Postumus
succeeded him in the kingdom, and reigned twenty-nine years.
And he was called Postumus, because he was born after (post)
the death of his father, and Sylvius because he was bred up
in the country and in the woods (sylvis). And all the Alban
kings were called Sylvius from him. Sylvius Postumus was
succeeded by Aineas Sylvius, who reigned thirty-one years.
After him Latinus Sylvius reigned fifty years.
About this time David the king of the Jews flourished.
Latinus Sylvius was succeeded by Alba Sylvius, who reigned
thirty-nine years. Alba Sylvius was succeeded by Hgyptus,
or Atis, his son, who reigned twenty-four years. He again
was succeeded by Capys Sylvius, the son of the preceding
king, who reigned twenty-eight years, and founded Capua, in
Campania. Carpentus Sylvius, the son of Capys, succeeded
him, and reigned thirteen years. The next king was Tyberi-
nus, the son of Carpentus : his reign lasted nine years ; and it
was from him that the river Tyber derived its name, because
he was drowned in it; as it had been previously called the
Albula, After him, Agrippa Sylvius reigned forty years."
About this time, Homer is said to have flourished in peace.
Agrippa Sylvius was succeeded by Aremus Sylvius, his son,

B.C. 1100. ORIGIN OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE. 53

who reigned nineteen years. He built a fortress for the Albans
amongst the mountains, where Rome now stands; and being
@ wicked man, was slain by a thunderbolt, for his wicked-
ness. Aventinus Sylvius succeeded him, and reigned thirty-
seven years; and died and was buried on that mountain,
which is now part of the city of Rome, and he left his name
for ever to the place. Then Procas Sylvius, the son of Aven-
tinus, took the kingdom, and reigned twenty-three years.

About this time, Phedon, the Argive, invented weights and
measures. Also, among the Hebrews, Zechariah was king of
Judah, and Jeroboam of Israel.

The successor of Procas Sylvius was Amulius, his elder
son, who reigned forty-three years; and was succeeded by
Numitor, the youngest son of king Procas, who having been
driven from the kingdom by his brother, Amulius, lived on
his own estate. Rhea Sylvia, the daughter of Numitor, had
been appointed a Vestal virgin, with the object of preventing
her from having any children. Aud as, in the seventh year
of her uncle’s reign, she had twins, she was buried alive in
the earth, in accordance with the law which at that time éx-
isted. But Faustulus, the shepherd of the royal flock, took
the children, who had been exposed near the banks ofthe
river ; and brought them to Alla Laurentia, his wife, a woman
who, on account of her beauty, and the rapacity with which
she made money of it, was called Lupa (wolf) by the ncigh-
bours. And from her, even down to our own time, the harlots’
houses are called Lupanaria. When the children had grown
up, they collected a powerful band of shepherds and banditti,
to slay Amulius in Alba, and restore their grandfather, Numi-
tor, to the kingdom.

Therefore, the Roman Empire, than which none in the whole
world can be recollected by human memory, which was either
smaller at its beginning, or more mighty in its increase, derived
its origin from Romulus, who, being the son of Rhea Sylvia,
and, as it was thought, of Mars, was born at one birth with his
brother Remus. Romulus lived as a bandit among the shep-
herds, and when he was eighteen years old, he founded a
small city on the Palatine hill, on the tenth of the calends of
May (April 21), in the third year of the sixth olympiad, the four
hundred and nineteenth after the destruction of Troy, or the
four hundred and fourth as Rosius says, and six years before

34 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. . B.C. 720.

the ten tribes were carried off to the mountains of the Medes,*
by Sennacherib, king of the Chaldeans. When then he had
built the city, which he called Roma, after his own name, and
from which name the citizens were called Romani, he acted
in the following manner. Having built a temple, which he
called Asylum, he promised freedom from punishment to all
who fled to it; by which means he collected a multitude of
people from the neighbouring nations, who had got into any
trouble in their own country, and who now fied to him, and were
received as citizens in his new city. The Latin and Etruscan
shepherds, and the Iriges from across the sea, who had come
to Italy under Aineas, and the Arcadians, who had come with
Evander, all flocked to that place, and in this way, as it were,
composed one body out of various elements, and made one
Roman people.

He chose a hundred of the elders as a council, whose advice
he might take on every matter, and whom he called Senators, by
reason of their age (Senectus), and Fathers, from the resemblance
of their care to that of a father. He also chose a thousand (male)
fighting men, whom he called Milites (soldiers), from their
number. Then, as neither he nor his people had any wives,
he invited all the nations which were neighbours to the city of
Rome, to a spectacle of games. And he carried off all their
virgins, in the fourth year after the building of Rome. And
one of the virgins, who was the most beautiful of all, is given
by acclamation on the part of all the ravishers, and by the
gift of Romulus, to the general Thalassus: on which account,
at the nuptial solemnities they commonly cry out “for Thalas-
sus,” meaning that the bride is beautiful enough to be worthy
of Thalassus. As war was stirred up on account of the injury
done by carrying off the virgins, he conquered the people
of Cecina, of Antenne, of Crustumium, the Sabines, the
people of Fidene, and the Brizantes, all which tribes sur-
round the city. Then also, the virgin Tarpeia was crushed
by the shields of the Sabines, on the hill, which from her name
was called the Tarpeian Mount, and on which the Capitol was
subsequently built.

However, the Romans made a treaty with the Sabines,

1 This is not quite correct ; it was Shalmaneser, and not Sennacherib, who

ne Hosea, took Samaria, and carried the Israelites away to Assyria,
B.c. 724.

B.C. 715. THE REIGN OF NUMA POMPILIUS. 55

whose daughters they had carried off, and a lasting friendship,
so that Tatius, the king of the Sabines, reigned jointly with Ro-
mulus, and with equal power. And the Sabines and the Romans
became one people, and the Romans, to confirm the union,
placed the names of the Sabines before their own; and in like
manner the Sabines prefixed Roman names to theirs ; and from
this time forth the custom prevailed, that no one of the Ro-
mans was without a preenomen. It was from this union of
the two nations that Romulus got the name of Illirinus, as,
after the fashion of the Sabines, he used to carrya spear, which in
the Sabine language is called “ Quiris.”’ And the Romans too
were called Quirites, either from the Quiris, that is to say, from
the spear, or from Quirinus.

Afterwards, Remus, the brother of Romulus, was slain by
Fabius, the general of Romulus, by a shepherd’s rake;
whether by the consent of Romulus or not, I know not. The
cause of his death was this: that he found fault with the ram-
part, as being insufficient for the protection of the new city,
and leapt over its scanty defence.

But Romulus having in the thirty-ninth year of his reign
disappeared near the Caprean Marsh, was believed to have been
translated to the gods, and was worshipped under the name of
Quirinus. After that the senators ruled at Rome, each govern-
ing for five days; and their successive governments occupied
one year.

Cu. X.—The reigns of Numa, Tullus, Aulus, Tarquinius,
Servius—The first census is taken—Tarquinius the Proud—
Constantinople is founded, and Marseilles—Arion flourishes—
Nabuchodonosor takes Jerusalen—Belshazzar—Daniel—Cyrus.

Arvur Romulus, Numa Pompilius was created king over the
Romans, at the same time that Hezekiah was king over the
Jews. He carried on no wars, but he did not less good to the
state than Romulus had done. For he, like another Moses,
gave laws and customs to the Romans, who, from their constant
wars, hitherto appeared mere robbers and semi-barbarians.
He also divided the year into ten months, which had pre-
viously been confused, and left destitute of any accurate com-
putation, and he established an infinite number of sacrifices
and temples at Rome; or, according to some accounts, he

56 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 672,

added two months, January and February, to the year; as
there had been only ten months in the system established
among the Romans by Romulus. He also built the Capitol
from its foundations, being especially devoted to religion and
sacred things, and he taught his people the observances of
sacrifices and ceremonies, and the whole worship of the gods.

He instituted the pontiffs, the augurs, and the other ranks
of the priesthood, and some other secret pledges of the em-
pire; and the worship of Janus with two faces. He was
the first who delivered the sacred flame of Vesta to the virgins
to be taken care of by them, in order that a flame kindled from
the stars of heaven might watch for ever over his image, as a
guardian of the empire. For he was so much led away by
vanity, that he made many laws at the dictation of the devil,
which afterwards he perceived would be very injurious if they
ever came to the knowledge of men: but as he was afraid to
burn them, he buried them under ground secretly, near his
own tomb, where he thought that no one would come. But in
process of time, a certain countryman found these books, while
ploughing in that place. He brought them to the Preetor, and
the Preetor laid them before the Senate. But the Senate, when
it saw them, was filled with detestation, and shuddered, and
committing them to the flames burnt them, lest the curiosity
of any one should reveal such guilt and such diabolical wick-
edness to the knowledge of man. Numa died of disease in
the forty-first year of his reign.

In the reign of Numa, Glaucus invented the way to solder
iron together. Also in his time, the prophets Isaiah and
Hosea flourished.

The successor of Numa was Tullus Hostilius, who established
all the details of military discipline and of the art of war,
and he was the first of the Roman kings who wore the purple,
and used the fasces.

In his time Manasseh was king of Judah.

Tullus also enlarged the city by the addition of Mount
Celius. When he had reigned thirty-two years, he was struck —
by lightning and burnt in his palace.

About this time the city of Byzantium, which was afterwards
called Constantinople, was founded.

After him Aucus Martius, the grandson of Numa Pom-

1 Meaning the Ancilia.

B.C. 550. NUMA AND: HIS SUCCESSORS. 57

pilius by his daughter, succeeded to the kingdom, while Josiah
was king over the Jews. He built the city of Ostia, at a dis-
tance of sixteen miles from the city, at the spot where the river
and sea unite; he fought against the Latins, and he added
the Aventine mount to the city, and also the Janiculan mount.

During his reign Epidamnus, which was afterwards called
Dyrrachium, was founded. He died of disease in the twenty-
third year of his reign.

After him, Tarquinius Priscus became king. He doubled
the number of the senate, he conquered the Sabines, and
joined no small quantity of land, which he took from. them,
to the territory of the city; and he was the first person who
celebrated a triumph in Rome. He built walls and towers,
he began the Capitol,” and subdued’ twelve tribes of Etruria.
In the thirty-seventh year of his reign he was slain by a son
of his predecessor Aucus.

In his reign Arion of Methymna is said to have been carried
by a dolphin to Tzenarus. About the same time, Marseilles was
founded; also, Jerusalemwas subdued by king Nabuchodonosor.

After him, Servius Tullius reigned thirty-four years.

In his reign Belshazzar was king of the Chaldeans, under
whom Daniel read the mystic writing on the wall, and inter-
preted it.

This Servius Tullius finally subdued the Sabines, and added
three hills, namely the Quirinal, Verrinal and Esquiline, to
the city. He was the first man who instituted the census.
In his time a census took place at Rome, and there were found
to be eighty-seven thousand men capable of bearing arms.
At last, Servius Tullius was slain by the wickedness of Tarquin
the Proud, his son-in-law, and the son of that king whom he
himself had succeeded, and of his own daughter, who was
Tarquin’s wife.

After him, Lucius Tarquin the Proud, the seventh and last
of the kings, seized upon the kingdom.

2 Our author has said above, that Numa built the Capitol ; the truth is,
that Numa built a small temple, dedicated to Jupiter, Juno and Minerva,
on the Esquiline Hill, which was not called Capitolium till after the
foundation of that which was built by Tarquin, and then it was distin-
guished as Capitolium Vetus, while the great Capitol, the temple of Jupiter
Opt. Max., was founded by Tarquinius Priscus, in consequence of a vow
made by him during the Sabine wars, and was finally completed by the

second Tarquin, though not dedicated till after his expulsion by M.
Horatius.

58 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ' B.C. 510.

In his time, by the indulgence of Cyrus, king of Persia,
forty-two thousand four hundred Jews returned to Jerusalem.
* Tarquinwasthe firstinventor of the different modes of torture,
suchas scourges of oxhide, clubs, red-hot plates, prisons, chains,
fetters, exile, working in mines. He completed the temple of
Jupiter, in the Capitol; afterwards, while besieging Ardea, he
was expelled by the Romans, and lost his kingdom. For the
younger son of this Tarquin had violently ravished a most
noble matron of the Roman state, by name Lucretia, the wife of
Collatinus, and a relation of Brutus, a man of most noble
birth ; and she, having complained to her husband Collatinus,
and to her father, and to Brutus her kinsman, and to her other
friends and relations, of the injury done to her, and having
bound them by an oath to avenge her, chastising in her own
own person the foul crime which had been committed against
her, slew herself before them all.

And in this way seven kings reigned at Rome, for a period
of two hundred and forty-three years.

Cu. XI.—The Consular Government is established at Rome—The
war with Porsenna—The Dictatorship—The wars of Camillus
—Rome is taken by the Gauls—History of Esther and Mor-
decai — Torquatus —Corvinus—Alexander the Great—Wars
with the Samnites—Papirius Cursor—The Caudine Forts—
War with Pyrrhus—Cineas—Fabricius—Death of Pyrrhus—
The first Punic war—Duilius’s naval victory—Regulus’s death.

Arter this, two consuls began to be created instead of one
king; with this view, that if one of them chose to be a bad
ruler, the other, who had equal power with him, might re-
strain him; and it was determined that they should retain
their office more than one year, that they might not be made
insolent by a long duration of power. The consuls in the
first year were Lucius Junius, and Brutus,® who had been the
main instrument of the expulsion of the Tarquins. And it
was determined that no one should remain in the city who
bore the name of Tarquin.

° Our author is mistaken here; it was Brutus whose prenomen was
Junius, and not Lucius Collatinus his colleague; but I shall not think it
necessary, except in very important instances, to point out the variations

between the account given in these chronicles and that which is more
usually received.

B.C. 450. CAMILLUS DELIVERS ROME FROM THE GAULS. 59

In the ninth year after the expulsion of the kings, when the
son-in-law of the younger Tarquin, Porsenna, king of Etruria,
_ had collected a numerous army, with the object of avenging
the injury done to his father-in-law, a new office was created
at Rome, which was called the Dictatorship, being a magis-
tracy of greater power than the consulship. In the same
year, also, the master of the horse was created, who was to be
under the orders of the dictator. Nor can there be mentioned
a more lofty magistracy than the ancient dictatorship in the
whole history of. the Roman empire, especially when Octavi-
anus Augustus, and Caius Cesar before him reigned under
the name and honours of the dictatorship. The first dictator
at Rome was Largus,’ and the first master of the horse was
Spurius Cassius, who was created sixteen years after the expul-
sion of the kings.

_. The Roman people rose in a formidable sedition, on the

plea that they were oppressed by the senate and consuls.
And at that time Spurius Cassius created tribunes of the
people, as if they were to be judges and defenders of himself,
so that by their means he might be protected from the enmity
of the senate and the consuls.

About the same time, by the permission of Xerxes, king of
Persia, Nehemiah arrived in Judzea, and restored the walls and
the city. In the three hundred and second year after the
building of Rome, the consular form of government was put
an end to, and instead of the two consuls, ten magistrates
were appointed, who should exercise supreme power under
the name of decemvirs. In the three hundredth and fifteenth
year after the building of Rome, the people of Fidenz revolted
and attacked the Romans; but they were defeated by them,
and submitted, and twenty years afterwards they revolted a
second time; but Furius Camillus, the dictator, was sent
against them, and defeated them, and after a long siege he
took their city, which was very ancient, and afterwards he
took Falisci, which was another city of equal renown.

After this, the Galli Senones came against Rome and took
it, nor could any thing be defended except the Capitol. And
when they had besieged this last fortress for a long time, Ca-
millus, who was in banishment in a neighbouring city, came
upon the Gauls and defeated them with enormous slaughter.

4 This should be Lartius.

60 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 400.

And so Camillus entered Rome, and was called a second
Romulus, as being the deliverer of his country.

At this time the illustrious queen Esther flourished, and
also Plato the philosopher. Queen Esther, daughter of the
brother of Mordecai, of the tribe of Benjamin, was a captive,
and was taken from Jerusalem to Susa, and on account of
her beauty and her very celebrated virtue, while only a girl,

. she was united in marriage to the king of Persia. She ex-
posed herself to death, in order to deliver her people, and she
persuaded the king to crucify a friend of his, who was advising
wicked measures against the people of God, on a cross, which
he had prepared for Mordecai. And so she saved a free
nation from destruction, and delivered them from slavery.
She is buried in Susa, a city of the Medes, in which she was
queen. In the three hundred and sixty-fifth year after the
foundation of Rome, military tribunes were created instead of
the two consuls, and under them the Roman affairs began to
prosper. The following year, an immense gulf, reaching down
to hell, suddenly opened in the middle of the city, and as it
remained a long time, and alarmed every one, and as the
soothsayers declared that it demanded the burial of a living
man within it, Marcus Curtius mounted his horse, and in
complete armour plunged into the gulf; and thus it was
closed. In the mean time, Titus Quintius the dictator was
sent against the Gauls, who had invaded Italy ; but the Gauls
were encamped four miles from the city, on the other side of
the river Anio, where a young man named Lucius Manlius,
one of the most nobly born of the whole senate, went forward
and slew a Gaul, who challenged him to single combat, and
having stripped him of his golden chain (torguis), and placed
it on his own neck, received in triumphant manner the name
of Torquatus, for himself and his posterity. Then the Gauls
were put to flight, and were also defeated soon after by Caius
Sulpicius.

Another time, a certain Gaul challenged the bravest of the
Romans. Then Marcus Valerius, a military tribune, offered
himself, and having gone forth in armour, a crow (corvus)
settled on his right arm. Presently, when he was fighting
with the Gaul, the same crow with his wings and talons
battered the eyes of the Gaul, so as to prevent him from look-
ing straight forward. And so he was slain by the tribune

B.C. 360, THE ROMANS WAR WITH THE SAMNITES. 61

Valerius, and gave him not only a victory, but also a name;
for he was afterwards called Corvinus, and on account of this
exploit he was made consul, though he was only twenty-three
years old. About this time, the night was lengthened on one
occasion, and was seen to be extended over a great part of
the followimg day. And stones fell from the clouds.

About the same time Alexander the Great was born.

Now the Romans began to be a powerful people, for a war
was carried onbythem a hundred and thirty miles from the city,
against the Samnites, who are a people between Picenum
Campania and Apulia. If you enquire about their wealth,
they wear arms inlaid with gold and silver, and garments
embroidered down to the very edge. If you enquire about
their skill in manceuvres and ambushes, you must know that
that nation owed its power to its defiles, and to the facilities
afforded by its mountains for manceuvres. If about their rage
and madness, know that they hastened to the destruction of
the world with their sacrilege and human sacrifices. If you
would understand their obstinacy, think of that treaty which
they broke six times over; so that their pertinacity was even
more violent than their enmity. Therefore, the Romans under-
took war against the Samnites on behalf of the Campanians
and Tidicini. a

The district of Campania is the most beautiful of all the
regions, not in Italy only, but, I may almost say, in the whole
world. Lucius Papirius Cursor was despatched to that war,
with the appointment of dictator. And as he wished to
return to Rome, he left Fabius Maximus, his master of the
horse, in command of the army, with orders not to engage the
enemy in his absence. Fabius, however, having an oppor-
tunity offered him, fought a most successful battle, and
utterly routed the Samnites, on which account he was con-
demned to death by the dictator, because he had fought with-
out his permission; but he was delivered by his great. popu-
larity with both the soldiers and the people, as such a sedition
was excited against Papirius the dictator, that he was nearly
killed himself. Afterwards the Samnites defeated the Romans
in the consulship of Titus Veturius and Spurius Postu-
mius, when they were hemmed in, in a narrow strait at the
Candine Forts, with great disgrace. And their general Pontius
employed the security which his victory gave him, in consult-

62 ~~ MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.c. 290.

ing his father Herennius whether he should slaughter them,
hemmed in as they were, or spare them now that they were
subdued. He eventually chose to keep them alive to disgrace
them. For he compelled the whole Roman army, which was
disgracefully taken prisoners, stripped of their arms, and even
of their clothing, only one single covering of the most trifling
nature being left them to cover their persons for modesty’s
sake, to make a long procession, passing under the yoke, and
submitting to an act of slavery. Then having taken six hun-
dred Roman knights as hostages, he sent back the rest loaded
as they were with ignominy, and the consuls too, stripped of
their arms, under such conditions of peace as the Samnites
chose to impose. And if the Romans, when subjected to the
Samnites, had preserved that faith in their treaty with them,
which is expected to be observed towards them by those who
become subject to them, there would either be no Romans at
this day, or they would be subjects to a Samnite master.

But the next year, at the command of the senate, the peace
which had been made with the Samnites was broken, and
Lucius Papirius sent against them as consul. For he had at ©
that time such a reputation as a soldier, that when it was said
that Alexander, king of Epirus, and brother of Olympia the
mother of Alexander the Great, was preparing to invade Italy,
the Romans chose him, as the chief of all their generals, to
resist his invasion. Accordingly the Samnites were defeated
in a battle with Papirius, seven thousand of them were made
to pass under the yoke, and Papirius celebrated a triumph for
their conquest.

About the same time Appius Claudius the Censor made the
Claudian aqueduct and the Appian road.

About this time also, Jaddua the High Priest flourished
at Jerusalem, whose brother Manasseh built the temple on
Mount Gerizim.

The Samnites having renewed the war, defeated Quintus
Fabius Maximus, with the slaughter of three thousand of his
men. Afterwards, when his father Fabius Maximus had been
given him as his lieutenant, he defeated the Samnites and took
several of their towns. After that, Publius Cornelius Rufinus
and Marcus Curius Dentatus, being both consuls, were sent
against the Samnites, and defeated them in great battles,
destroying the very ruins of their cities to such a degree, that

~ B.C. 280. WAR DECLARED AGAINST THE TARENTINES. 63

to this very day the town of Samnium is songht for in the
- district, and cannot easily be found. And so the war, which
had been carried on against the Samnites for forty-nine years,
was put an end to, nor was there any enemy left in Italy to
give any more trouble to the Roman valour.
About the same time war was declared against the Tarentines,
_ who are a people at the extreme end of Italy, because they
had insulted the ambassadors of the Romans. They entreated
the aid of Pyrrhus, king of Epirus, who traced his descent
from Achilles, against the Romans. He immediately invaded
Italy, and that was the first occasion on which the Romans
fought with an enemy from beyond thesea. Against Pyrrhus
was sent the Consul Publius Valerius Leevinus; who, when
he had taken Pyrrhus’s spies, ordered them to be led through
the camp, and desired all the Roman army to be shown to
them, in order that they might tell Pyrrhus what was being
done by the Romans. Afterwards a battle took place, and
Pyrrhus, when on the point of being routed, restored the
_ battle, and defeated the Romans by the aid of his elephants,
of whom the Romans were afraid, because they were quite
strange to them. But night. put an end to the battle: and
during the night, Lzevinus retreated. But Pyrrhus took
eighteen hundred Romans prisoners, and treated them with
great honour, burying the dead: and when he saw the corpses
with all their wounds in front, lying, even after death, with
fierce countenances, he is said to have raised his hands to
heaven, with these words, ‘“‘ That he could become the master
of the world if he had such soldiers as them.” After that
Pyrrhus marched towards Rome, and laid the whole country
waste with fire and sword, ravaged Campania, and came to
Preeneste, which is only eighteen miles from the city. But
presently, from fear of the army, with which the consul was
pursuing him, he retreated into Campania. The ambassadors
who were sent to him to treat about ransoming the prisoners,
were honourably treated by him, and he restored the captives
to the Romans without any payment; one of the ambassadors
of the Romans, by name Fabricius, he admired so greatly, that,
knowing him to be a poor man, he sought to tempt him by
_the offer of a fourth part of his kingdom, to come over to him,
but his offers were despised by the Roman, and at last, as on
all these accounts, he was possessed by a great admiration for

64 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. | B.C. 280.

the Romans, he sent an ambassador, one of his chief men,
whose name was Cineas, to propose peace on equal terms,
provided Pyrrhus might be left in possession of that portion
of Italy which he occupied with his army. Cineas, his am-
bassador, the very next day after he arrived in Rome, addressed |
the whole order of the knights and all the senators by their —
names.© The peace, however, which he proposed was not”.
agreed to, and he was sent back to Pyrrhus by the senate,’
with the answer, that there could be no peace between him’
and the Romans unless he withdrew from Italy. :

Then the Romans ordered all the prisoners whom Pyrrhus
had restored, to be accounted infamous for having permitted
themselves to be taken prisoners with arms in their hands,
and decreed that they should not be restored to their former
condition, till they had brought back victorious spoils from
enemies whom they had slain. And so the ambassador of
Pyrrhus returned, and when Pyrrhus asked him what sort of
place he had found Rome, Cineas, the ambassador, replied that
**he had seen a country of kings, and that nearly every one
there was equal to what Pyrrhus alone was thought in Epirus
and the rest of Greece.”

So an army was again sent against Pyrrhus, under Publius
Sulpicius and Decius the consuls. A battle took place, in
which he was wounded, some of his elephants killed, twenty
thousand of the enemy slain, and five thousand of the Romans.
Pyrrhus was driven back to Tarentum. After an interval of
a year, Fabricius, who had formerly rejected the offers of
Pyrrhus when he tried to bribe him with a fourth part of his
kingdom, was sent against Pyrrhus. And as he and king Pyrrhus
had pitched their camps near one another, the physician of
Pyrrhus came to him by night, offering to take off Pyrrhus
by poison if he would promise him a reward. But Fabricius
put him in chains, and ordered him to be led back to his
master king Pyrrhus, and ordered the king to be informed of
what his traitorous physician had offered against his life. On
which the king, struck with admiration, is reported to have
exclaimed, ‘Fabricius is a man whom it is more difficult to

° This fact is alluded to by Cicero,Tusc. Disp. i. 24,where he is speaking
of the memory of Cineas, and is expressly mentioned by Seneca, who,
however, substitutes for “ the knights,” “‘ every one of the common people

of the city that flocked round him,” ‘“QOmnium urbanam circumfusam
plebem.”—Controv. Proem.

B.C, 260. THE AFRICANS SEND MARCUS REGULUS TO ROME. 65

turn from the path of honour, than it is to divert the sun
from its course.’ Then Pyrrhus the king went to Sicily :
Fabricius having defeated the Tarentines, celebrated a triumph ;
but Pyrrhus, on his return to his own country, was killed at
Argos, a city of Greece.

About this time, among the Jews, Simon, the son of Onias,
flourished as high priest, he who was surnamed the Just.

At this time blood flowed from the springs in many places,
and milk fell from the clouds in the form of rain.

Up to the four hundred and seventy-seventh year of the
city, though the name of Rome was by this time illustrious,
still its arms had never been carried out of Italy. Therefore,
that it might be known what was the amount of the forces of
the Romans, a census was taken, and there were found to be
two hundred and ninety-two thousand and three hundred and
thirty-four citizens, although wars had never ceased since the
first foundation of the city.

War was now commenced against the Africans, and in the
first and second year of it triumphs were celebrated for vic-
tories gained over them in Sicily. Duilius also defeated the
admiral of the Carthaginians in a pitched battle; he took
thirty-two ships and sank twenty-four ; took seven thousand
of the enemy prisoners, and slew three thousand; nor was
there any victory which caused more delight to the Romans,
because being previously invincible by land, they henceforth
were very powerful by sea also. At this time Aulus Regulus
killed a serpent of wonderful size near the river Bagrada; its
skin was a hundred and twenty feet long, and it was brought
to Rome, where it was for a long time an object of astonish-
ment to all beholders. About this time silver money was
coined at Rome for the first time.

About the same time the Africans, after a battle with the
Romans, requested Mareus Regulus, the Roman general whom
they had taken prisoner in the war, to go to Rome and obtain
peace for them from the Romans, and effect an exchange of
prisoners. When he arrived in Rome he was introduced into
the senate ; but he refused to act asa free Roman. For he
said, that ever since the day on which he had fallen into the
hands of the Africans, he had ceased to be a Roman; and in

‘order to confirm his assertion, he removed his wife from his

embrace. And he advised the senate not to make peace with
Vou. I. F

66 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 250.

the Africans ; for he asserted that they were so much broken
by their disasters that they had no hope of recovering them-
selves, and that it was not for the advantage of the Romans
that so many thousand prisoners as they had should be restored
for the sake of himself, who was but one old man, and the few
Roman prisoners besides, whom the Carthaginians had taken.
And so he carried his point; for no one of the Romans voted
for the admission of the African ambassadors who had come
to ask for peace. And after he had given that advice he was
not compelled by the Romans to return to the Carthaginians,
since they strove to detain him by force, but because he hadsworn
to the Carthaginians, he fulfilled his oath of his own accord.

Regulus having returned, announced to the Carthaginians
the answer of the Romans. But the Carthaginians put him
to death with unheard-of and horrible tortures. For they
fastened him in a narrow frame of wood in which he was com-
pelled to stand, which frame was filled on all sides with sharp
nails, so that he could not bend himself in any direction with-
out the most terrible suffering, and then, cutting off his eye-
lids, they murdered him by excessive want of sleep.

About the same time the river Picenus flowed with blood,
and in Tuscany the sky was seen to be on fire, and there was
an extraordinary light visible at night, three moons appearing
in the heavens at the same time.

Cu. XII.—The kings of Judea—Shalmaneser carries off the ten
tribes—Pharaoh Necho carries off Jehoahaz to Egypt—Nebu-
chadnezzar carries off Zedekiah to Babylon—Daniel—Shedrach,
Meshach, and Abednego—End of the kingdom of Judah.

HAvInG now explained these matters briefly, our pen must
turn back to the Jewish history. After the reign of Amaziah,
king of Judah, whom I have already mentioned, the people
remained without a king for thirteen years, as is proved by the
books of the Kings, and by a comparison of the years of the
kings of Judah and of the kings of Israel. After that interreg-
num, ‘Ozias reigned fifty-two years, and after him Jotham

1 Ozias, (called by this name also, Matth. i. 8) who is also called in
the Old Testament Uzziah, 2 Kings xv. 13, and Azariah, 2 Kings xv, 1.
But our Chronicler appears to be mistaken as to the interregnum, which
had no existence; he was misled by 2 Kings xv. 1, where the twenty-
seventh year of Jeroboam’s reign is spoken of, but that refers to his

partnership in the kingdom with his father ; it was only the sixteenth year
of his reign as sole monarch of Israel.

Bic. 750: THE KINGS OF JUDMA. 67

reigned sixteen years. He built the gate of the House of the
Lord, which in the Acts of the Apostles is called Beautiful,
by the Hebrews the Gate of Jotham, and by others the Tower
of the Flock. At this time the prophets Hosea, Amos, Isaiah,
and Jonah prophesied in Judea.

After Jotham, Ahaz reigned sixteen years ; after Ahaz, Heze-
kiah reigned twenty-eight years; and in the sixth year of his
reign, Shalmaneser the king of the Assyrians descended into
Samaria and carried off the ten tribes of Israel, and made them
dwellers in the land of the Assyrians ; and into their country
he introduced in their stead the people who were called
Chuszeans. And as they began to serve other gods in that
land, the Lord sent lions among them, who devoured them;
and when king Shalmaneser heard this, he sent one of the
priests, who were his prisoners, to teach them the doctrines of
the law of Israel, and to convert them to the worship of the
God of that land, in hopes that by that remedy this annoy-
ance or curse might be removed from them. But they received
indeed the pentateuch of Moses, but did not desert the gods
of their fathers : and moreover, they erected an altar on Mount
Gerizim, and would never enter the temple which was at Jerusa-
lem, which they were enjoined by the law to go to, and in which
they were bound to pay their vows to God. And we read that
these people were called Samaritans from Samaria, and the Jews
abstained from all intercourse with them.

The years during which Israel was divided from Judah and
from the house of David were three hundred and sixty.

After Hezekiah, Manasseh reigned over Judah for thirty-five
years. After Manasseh, Amon reigned two years. After Amon,
Josiah reigned thirty-one years. He fought with Necho, king
of Egypt, and was slain in the plain of Megiddo. About this
time Jeremiah, Oldah, and Zephaniah prophesied in Judea.
After Josiah, Joachaz reigned in Judeea three months ; and be-
fore the end of these months, Necho the king of Egypt, who
has been already mentioned, came to Jerusalem, and took
Joachaz prisoner, and carried him into Egypt, and set Eliachim,
whom he called Joachim or Jeconiah, the son of Josiah, over
his kingdom. And he condemned Judea to pay a tribute of
a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold. In the eleventh
year of Eliachim, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came to
Jerusalem, demanding from him the tribute which he had

4

68 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 610.

been accustomed to pay to the king of Egypt, and which he
for three years was not ashamed to pay. But in the third
year, hearing that the Egyptians were about to make war upon
Babylon, he postponed making the payment. On which ac-
count Nebuchadnezzar put him to death as a rebel, and led
three thousand men of Judah captive to Babylon, among
whom was the prophet Ezekiel, who was as yet a boy; and
then he set Joachim, who is also called Jeconiah, over them
as king.

But not many days after, Nebuchadnezzar, in the eleventh
year of his reign, took Jeconiah, who was coming to meet
him with his mother and some of his people, and carried him
to Babylon, and instead of him he set Zedekiah, his uncle,
whom he also called Mattaniah, over Judah and Jerusalem.
But this Zedekiah, not long after, began to rebel against Nebu-
chadnezzar, who had adjured him by the Lord, and to act
with hostility against his liberal benefactor. And then again
Nebuchadnezzar returned, to wit, in the eleventh year of the
reign of Zedekiah, and carried him away captive to Babylon,
and threw down the wall of the city, and burnt the temple,
and carried off all the vessels of the house of the Lord with
him, and placed them in the temple of his own god. Daniel
also, and the three children, Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, who
were of the royal blood, were carried off as captives, whom
Nebuchadnezzar of his liberality caused to be instructed in the
literature of the province and also in that of the Chaldees.

Moreover the fire of the altar of burnt-offerings was taken
away by the priests, and hidden in a deep and dry well, and
there preserved with great diligence. There too Jeremiah
the prophet caused the tabernacle of the covenant and the
ark, and the altar of incense, to be taken with him to mount
Abaris, which Moses had once ascended, that he might see
the inheritance of the Lord ; and Jeremiah found a cave there,
and he placed those things in it, offering the sacrifice of the
consummation of the temple. Then he blocked up the mouth
of the cave, and all those things are hidden there to this day.
But in the ark were contained the golden pot which held the
manna, and the rod of Aaron which had blossomed, and the
tables of the covenant.

The kingdom of the nation of Judah remained there up to
the present devastation and destruction of the temple, nine
hundred and fourteen years and six months and ten days.

B.C. 600. PROPHECIES OF THE STBYL. 69

And this devastation is said to have been committed not in the
presence of Nebuchadnezzar himself, but by the agency of
Nabuzardan, the chief of his army. For he, after the return
of the king into Egypt, was sent to Jerusalem by him, and
utterly destroyed the temple, and threw down the wall of the
city, and led the people who remained there, captive to Baby-
lon, In this Zedekiah the kingdom was terminated, which
had lasted, according to Josephus, five hundred and fourteen
years, seven months and ten days; but according to the books
of the Kings, not quite five hundred years. Four hundred
and eighty years, six months and ten days had elapsed since
the building of the temple. A thousand and seventy-two
years, six months and ten days since the departure of the
people from Egypt.
_ After this the administration of the state was in the hands
of the priests, subsequently to the return from the captivity,
except that about the time of Christ there were a few kings,
who are recorded hereafter, after the priests.

Cu. XIII.—List of the Priests.

THE priests in this fourth age of the world were sixteen, ac-
cording to the account of Hegesippus. Abiathar, Zadok, Achi-
maah, Azariah, Eleazar, Oziel, Jehoiada, Azariah, Amariah,
Achitob, Zadok, Shallum, Elkiah, Azariah, Saraiah, Josedech.
These are called not only priests, but high priests ; and they
occupy a period of three hundred and ten years. For the
temple was overthrown in the four hundred and thirtieth year
after its foundation.

Cu. XIV.—An account of the Sibyl—Prodigies seen at Rome.

THERE was also a sibyl, the daughter of king Priam, her
mother’s name was Hecuba, and she was called in the Greek lan-
guage Tyburcina, but in Latin Albunea. She, traversing the
different regions of the east, prophesied in Asia, Macedonia,
Herostea, Pamphilia, Agalgudea, Cilicia, and Galatia, And
when she had filled all this part of the world with her pro-
phecies, she went from thence into Aithiopia, Gabaon, Babylonia,
Africa, Libya, Pentapolis, Maritima, and Palestine. Through-
out all these provinces she, being inspired with prophetic spirit,
prophesied good things to the good, and evil things to the
evil, as the Lord had commanded her; and we know that in
her prophecies she announced true things, and foretold what

70 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.c. 1000.

would come to pass in the latter times. Accordingly, the
Romans hearing of her fame, told all these things to their
leader ; he therefore, in accordance with a vote of the Senate,
sent ambassadors to her, and inviting her, with great honour
caused her to be conducted to Rome.

It happened at that time that a hundred Romans >of the
Senate saw a wonderful dream ; all seeing one and the same
vision on the same night. They saw in a vision of the night
nine suns shining in heaven, each of which bore a different
appearance in its face. The first was brilliant and shining
over the whole earth. The second was more brilliant, and
larger, being of aremarkable brightness. The third was of a
blood-red colour, fiery and terrible, and sufficiently brilliant.
The fourth was red with blood, and four lines branched off
from it towards the south. The fifth was dark, having doors
in it, asin adark thunder-cloud. The sixth was dark, and
had a sting in it like the tail of a scorpion. The seventh was
dark, terrible, and of the colour of blood, having a stained
sword in it. The eighth was suffused, having a hue of blood
in the centre. The ninth was dark, having only one bright
ray.

And when the sibyl entered Rome, the Romans, beholding
her, admired her exceeding beauty ; for she had a beautiful
face, an elegant person, was graceful in her gestures, copious
in eloquence, pouring forth to her hearers an acceptable dis-
course, fraught with proofs of great wisdom.

The men, then, who had seen these dreams came to her,
for her fame had been widely spoken of and celebrated; and
they say, “O mistress and queen, we entreat you by the
great beauty of your person, and by the wisdom of your
mind, and by the eloquence of your mouth, such as we have
never found in any other woman, to explain and interpret to
us a certain wonderful dream, in which we all, a hundred in
number, saw separately in one night, and to set before us
what it indicates of futurity.” The illustrious virgin answered
and said to them, “It is not proper to reveal a sacred mys-
tery in a dunghill or a place which is polluted with all sorts
of contamination.’ (For after she had heard the before-
mentioned dream related to her by them all, one after another,
she felt her spirit agitated, and was amazed at the strangeness
of the matter.) ‘Come, then,” she added, “and let us

B.C. 1000. INTERPRETATION OF THE SENATORS DREAM. 7}

ascend the Aventine hill, and there I will foretell to you what
shall happen to the Roman state.”’ And they did as she said.
And a second time the virgin demanded an account of the
vision from them ; and they, reciting it to her, did not vary
from their previous account ; and she said, “The nine suns
which you saw are nine different ages among the sons of

+3

men.

Cu. XV.—The interpretation of the Dream of the Senators.

Tue first sun is the first generation; and men shall be
simple, frank, loving liberty, veracious, gentle, kind, com-
forters of the poor, sufficiently wise.

The second sun is the second generation. Men shall live
splendidly, increasing in riches, fearing the Lord, living on
the earth without wickedness.

The third sun is the third generation ; and nation shall rise
against nation, and there shall be many battles in Rome.

The fourth sun is the fourth generation; and men shall
deny the truth; and in these days a woman shall arise, Mary
by name, having a husband whose name is Joseph, and she
shall bring forth a child, and she shall be a virgin before her
delivery and a virgin after her delivery. But the child that
shall be born of her shall be very God and very man, as the
prophets have predicted. He shall fulfil the law of the Jews
blamelessly, and shall add thereto laws of his own, and He
shall reign for ever and ever. Amen.

And when he is born there shall be a host of angels on the
right hand and on the left, saying, ‘‘ Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace to men of good will.’”? And when,
he is baptised in the water by John, his forerunner, a voice
shall come from heaven, saying, ‘This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased; hear ye him.” But there were
then some of the priests of the Jews who heard these words,
and who were indignant at them, and said to her, ‘These
are terrible things; let not the queen speak thus.” The
Sibyl answered, and said, “O Jews, it is inevitable that these
things must come to pass; but you will not believe in Him.”
“We do not believe,” they reply, ‘because he has given His
everlasting word and covenant to our holy nation that He will
not take his protecting hand from us.’ She answered them,
a second time, and said, ‘The God of heaven is born the

72 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1000.

Son of a Virgin, as it is written; and he shall be like his
Father, and he shall grow up in his age as a young child,
and the kings and princes of the earth shall rise up against ©
him. In those days the kingdom shall belong to Cesar
Augustus, and he shall reign in Rome, and subject all the
earth to himself. After these things, the priests of the
Hebrews will rise up against the Lord himself and against the
man whose name will be Jesus, because he will perform many
miracles, such as have never been heard of nor seen before ;
and they will take him, and give him slaps with hostile hands,
and will spit poisonous spittle at his sacred face, and they
will inflict stripes upon his holy back, and he shall receive
their buffets in silence. They shall give him gall for meat,
and vinegar to satisfy his thirst; and, at length, they shall
hang him on the tree, and shall slay him; and these things
shall avail them nothing ; because, on the third day, he shall
rise again, and shall show himself to his disciples, and in
their sight he shall ascend into heaven; and of his kingdom
there shall be no end.”’

And to the chiefs of the Romans she said, the fifth sun is
the fifth generation ; and the Lord Jesus will choose himself
two fishermen of Galilee, and he will teach them his law,
saying, ‘Go ye and teach all nations the doctrine which you
have received from me, and teach all nations in seventy-two
languages.”

The sixth sun is the sixth generation; and the men shall
besiege this city for three years and three months.

The seventh sun is the seventh generation ; and men shall
arise and shall cause many persecutions in the land of the
Hebrews, on account of the Lord.

The eighth sun is the eighth generation; and Rome shall
be a prey and a desolation, and men shall struggle, shall howl
in tribulation and pain, saying, ‘‘Do you think we shall live
till the time of the delivery?”’

The ninth sun is the ninth generation ; and princes of the
Romans shall arise to the destruction of many. Then shall arise
two kings out of Syria, and their army shall be increased to a
countless multitude, as the sand of the sea; and they shall
be masters of the cities, and provinces, and countries of the
Jews as far as Macedonia, and then there shall be much
shedding of blood. All the people of the East shall fear at

B.C. 1000. INTERPRETATION OF THE SENATORS’ DREAM. 79

their coming, and shall be scattered. And, ufter these things,
there shall arise two kings from Egypt, and shall conquer
four kings, and shall slay them and all their army, and shall
reign for three years and six months. After them shall arise
a king, C. by name, mighty in war, and he shall reign thirty
years, and he shall build a temple to the Lord, and shall fulfil
the law, and shall do justice in the earth for the sake of the
Lord. And after him shall arise another, and shall reign a
short time, and barbarian nations shall conquer him and slay
him.

After him shall arise a king, B. by name; and from B. shall
proceed Andon, the king; and from Andon shall proceed
another A.; and from A. shall proceed a third A.; and from
him shall descend a fourth A., and he shall be of a too warlike
disposition and a victorious warrior. From him shall descend
a king, by name R., and to R. shall be born L., and he shall
have power over nineteen kings. After him shall arise a Salic
king in France, by name R. He shall be great, and very pious,
powerful, and merciful, and he shall execute judgment, and do
justice to the poor ; and so great shall be the power of the virtue
that is in him, that, as he goes on his way, the tops of mountains
and of trees shall bow before him, water shall stop when it
meets him, and there has been no king before him equal to
the Roman power, neither after him shall there be any. After
him shall come aking, by name L., and, after him, B., who
shall reign for twenty-three years upon the earth. From B.
shall descend A., and he shall be brave in battle and of a
warlike disposition ; and though he shall go a great deal over
sea and land, he shall not be given into the hands of his ene-
mies, but he shall die as an exile from his kingdom, and his
soul shall be in the hand of God. Then there shall rise up
another, V. by name, being in one part a Salic, in another part
a king, in another a Lombard, and he shall have power on earth,
and he shall die in battle against his enemies.

In those days there shall be one of the name of O.; he too
shall be very powerful, and brave, and good; and he shall do
justice to the poor, and shall judge rightly. And from this O.
shall proceed another O., a most powerful king; and under
him there shall be battles between the Pagans and the Chris-
tians, and their blood shall be shed, and his heart shall be in
the hand of God, and he shall reign for seven years. And of

74 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1000.

his wife shall be born another king named O. ; he will bea
bloody and wicked man, destitute of faith and truth ; and by
his means many evils will exist, and there will be great blood-
shed, and cities too will be destroyed by his power. For
there will be much tribulation and many battles in other
countries than his. Then nation shall rise up against nation in
Cappadocia, and in Pamphilia; and nations will be made cap-
tive in his time ; because he did not enter the sheepfold by the
door: and he will reign four years. After him shall arise a
king whose name is H., and in like manner in his days shall
there be many battles. He shall conquer Syria, and he shall
become master of Pentapolis by taking it, being himself a king
of the race of the Lombards. Then shall there arise a king
named C., and shall subdue the Lombards, and there shall be
wars and battles.

And the Salic king will be brave and powerful, but his king-
dom will endure but a shorttime. Then will arise Hagarenes,
and tyrants, and will take Tarentum and Barro; and will
plunder the cities and will be eager to go to Rome, and will
rage, nor will there be any one to resist them, except the God
of Gods and Lord of Lords. Then the Jews will come to
Persia, and will lay it waste, so that the cities that they plun-
der shall not recover. And the Persians hastening forwards
will pitch their tents near the ditch towards the East, and
will take Rome, and will obtain peace for a while. And there
will enter a warlike king of the Greeks, and will destroy —
the temples of the idols; by name Hierapolim. And locusts
and worms will come and will devour the trees and the crops
of Cappadocia and Cilicia. And the people will be tormented
with famine, and afterwards there will be such things no more.

Then will there rise up another Salic king, a brave man
and a warrior, and many of his neighbours, powerful nations,
will be indignant with him. In those days, brother will de-
liver brother to death, and father will deliver son. Brother
shall marry sister, and one man’s wife shall go with another
man ; fathers and sons and the whole family will work detes-
table works on the earth ; old men will lie with virgins, and
priests of evil with deluded maidens. Bishops will be fol-
lowers of evil deeds ; and there will be shedding of blood in
the earth ; the temples of the saints will be polluted and there
will be filthy fornication, and the wickedness of Sodom in

\

B.C. 1000. INTERPRETATION OF THE SENATORS’ DREAM. 75

the people. So that the sight of them will be manifest in their
insults, and there will be men rapacious, insolent, hating jus-
tice, and loving falsehood, and the Roman judges will be
changed. If they judge one thing to day, they will alter it the
next day for a bribe which they look to receive; and they
will not judge what is true, but what is false.

In these days there will be perjured, rapacious men, loving
the rewards of falsehood, and law will be destroyed, and truth.
And there will be earthquakes in divers places, and the cities
and regions of islands will be submerged; and there will be
in many places pestilences of men, and the earth will be de-
solated by enemies. And their vanity will not be able to com-
fort them.

After these things, there will arise a king by name H.,
in whose time there will be wars, and he will reign two years.
After him, there will arise another king by name A.; and
he, when he comes, will obtain the kingdom for a time, and
will come to Rome and take it. And his rival shall not be
mortified in the hands of his enemies. In the days of his life
he will be good and great, and he will do justice to the poor ;
and he will live along time. After him will arise another
king by name H. ; and from this H. will proceed twelve more.

He will be a Lombard by birth, and will reign an hundred
years. And after him, there will arise another king H. by
name, and he will come from France. This shall then be the
beginning of sorrows, such as have not been since the beginning
of the world; and in those days there shall be wars, and the tri-
bulation of many, and bloodshed, and earthquakes in cities and
in countries. And many cities will be taken, and there will be
no one who can resist the enemy, because God will at that
time be angry with the earth. Rome will be in striking, and
in the sword ; it will be stormed and taken in the hand of the
king himself. And men will be rapacious, covetous, tyrants,
hating the poor, oppressing the innocent, and saving the
guilty, and they will be unjust, wicked, condemners of the in-
nocent. They shall be taken from the borders of the earth,
and there shall be no one on the earth who can resist them, or
destroy them on account of their wickedness and covetousness.
Then there will arise a king of the Greeks, whose name will
be Constans ; and he will be king of Greeks and Romans.
He will be tall of stature, and beautiful in countenance ; splen-

~

76 , MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.c. 1000.

did in appearance ; well made in all the outline of his limbs ;
and his reign will be ended ina hundred and twelve years.

In his days there will be great riches, and the earth will
yield its fruit in abundance, so that a bushel of wheat shall be
sold for one penny, a measure of wine for one penny, a mea-
sure of oil for one penny. And he will be king, keeping the
scripture before his eyes; and the king of the Greeks and
Romans will claim all the kingdoms of Christendom for his
own. He will lay waste all the cities and islands of the rebels,
and will destroy all the temples of the idols ; and will invite
all the heathen to baptism, and the cross of Jesus Christ will be
erected throughout alltemples. Then Egypt will pass through
AXthiopia to submit to God. But they who do not adore the
cross of Jesus Christ shall be punished by the sword. And
when a hundred and seventy years are fulfilled, the Jews will
be converted to Jesus, and his sepulchre will be glorious in
the eyes of all men, In those days, Judah will be saved, and
Israel will dwell fearlessly.

Cu. XVI.—Continuation of the Sibyl’s prophecy—Of Anti-
christ-—The different Sibyls.

In that time shall arise a prince of the tribe of Dan, who shall
be called Antichrist ; he will be the son of Perdition, and the
teacher of error, the fulness of wickedness ; who will subvert
the world, and will do prodigies and great miracles by false
pretences, and will delude many by false pretences, and magic
art. So that he will appear to send fire from heaven,
and the years will be diminished like months, and months
like weeks, and days like hours. Then too there will
arise foul nations from the north (which Alexander hemmed
in), and Gog and Magog. These are the twenty-two kings
whose number is like the sand of the sea. But when the
king of the Romans comes, having collected an army, he
will subdue them and crush them to their utter destruction.
And after that he will come to Jerusalem, and having there
laid down the crown from off his head, and all his kingly ap-
parel, he will leave his kingdom to God the Father and to
Christ. his Son.

But during his reign, two most illustrious men will come
forth, Elias and Enoch, to announce the arrival of the Lord
Christ ; and Antichrist will slay them, and after three days
they will be raised again by the Lord. ‘Then there shall be a

B.C. 1000. THE DIFFERENT SIBYLS. 77

great persecution, such as never was before, and shall not be
afterwards. The Lord will shorten those days for his elect’s
sake, and in the virtue of the Lord, Antichrist will be slain
on Mount Olivet, by Michael the Archangel.

When the Sibyl had prophesied these and many other
future events to the Romans, as signs by which the Lord
might be known to be coming to judge the world, she pro-
ceeded in her prophecy, saying :—

J udgment shall make the earth to drip with sweat.
E ternal God shall then from heav’n descend—

S wift, to decide the fate of quick and dead;

U pright and wicked men shall fear alike ;

S oshall each soul before its judge appear.

C lose darkness shall o’erwhelm the savage world ;

H ot flames shall scorch the earth, and sea, and heav’n.
R estore the dead, and all their wealth, O grave—
Inquiring souls shall burst the gates of hell.

S_ afe, holy light shall to all flesh be given,

T h’ undying flame shall burn the guilty men,

U nveiling every secret act, and each thought

S urveyed beneath the light of God’s pure word.

G rief shall make all men gnash their teeth in vain :
O ne darkness shall envelop earth, sea, sky,

D im shall all the sunbeams be, and lost the stars ;
T he hills shall sink, the vallies shall uprise.

H ere shall no heights, no eminence be seen,

E ach mountain with the plain shall levelled be.

S eas shall their billows check, the earth shall melt ;
“A ll fountains dry, all rivers burn with flame—

V ainly lamenting human guilt and toil ;

I impetuous trumpets a sad note shall pour,

O ld earth shall gape, and hell’s wide gulf display,
U nder the Lord’s dread glance all kings shall stand
R ound that great throne which with dread lightnings beams.

These things were spoken of the nativity, passion, resurrec-
tion, and second coming of Christ ; and are found to have in
Greek in their first letters the words ’Inoots Xgicros vio 2wr7e,
which is also seen when they are translated into English,
except that the propriety of the Greek letters could not be so
exactly observed.

Generally speaking, all female prophetesses are called
Sibyls in the Greek language, for the word o1d¢ in the Holic
dialect means God; and the Bovay is the Greek for mind or
intention; so that the name means the mind of God. And
so they were called Sibyls because they were interpreters of

78 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 1000.

the will of God. And as we call all men who prophecy pro-
phets or seers, so every woman who prophecies is called a
Sibyl. And by credible authors there are said to have been
ten sibyls. The first of whom came from the Persians; the
second was an African; the third was a Delphian, born in the
temple of the Delphian Apollo; she it was who predicted the
Roman wars. The fourth was the Cumzan Sibyl, in Italy.
The fifth was an Erythrean, by name Eriphile, and born in
Babylon; and sheit was who prophesied to the Greeks when they
were engaged in the expedition against Troy, that Troy would
fall, and that Homer would write lies. The sixth was a Sa-
mian, who was called Femonote. The seventh was a Cumean,
called Amalthea. The eighth was a native of the Hellespont,
born in the Trojan territory, and it is related that she lived in the
time of Solon andCyrus. The ninth was Phrygian, who pro-
phesied atAncyra. The tenth a native of Tibur, named Albunea.

There are verses of all of these prophetesses extant, in which
they are most evidently proved to have written about God
and Christ, and the heathen. But the Erythrean is said to
have been more celebrated than the rest, and she, in Greek,
was also called a native of Tibur, as has been previously men-
tioned. And some relate that she prophesied at the time
when Rome is proved to have first began to flourish ; when
Ahaz, or, as some say, when Hezekiah, who succeeded him,
reigned in Judea. And she wrote some prophecies manifestly
relating to Christ, as has been already mentioned. And a
most illustrious man, and most acute interpreter, Flaccianus,
has shown some verses of hers in a Greek manuscript, the
first letters of which make up the words "Inootg Xgforog viog
Zwrje, which, in English, is Jesus Christ, the Son of God the
Saviour ; and these verses, the first letters of which give the
sense, some one, namely, Saint Augustine, has translated in
Latin verses, which are still extant.

And besides all these, they say that there was another Sibyl,
who adored and worshipped the wood of the cross, which was
for a long time despised by all men, and trampled on and
looked disdainfully on in Jesusalem.

Here enps THE FourtH AcE or tHE Worzp ; consisting,
according to the Hebrews, of four hundred and seventy-three
years ; according to the seventy translators of the Bible, of
four hundred and eighty-four.

BOOK V.
THE. FIFTH AGE OF THE WORLD

BEGINS IN THE NINTH YEAR OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR, KING
OF BABYLON, WHO LIVED AFTER THIS OVERTHROW
TWENTY-FIVE YEARS.

 B.c. 696—4.

ACCOUNT OF BABYLON—KINGS OF BABYLON—JERUSALEM IS
RESTORED—LIST OF THE KINGS OF BRITAIN—KINGS OF
PERSIA—BRENNUS, KING OF ENGLAND, MAKES WAR UPON
ROME — ALEXANDER SUBDUES PERSIA—DIVISION OF THE
KINGDOM OF ALEXANDER—ANTIOCHUS—PTOLEMY=—— THE
PUNIC WARS—-OTHER WARS OF THE ROMANS—THE HIGH
PRIESTS OF THE JEWS, ONIAS, JASON, ETC.—WARS OF
THE MACCABEES—CASAR INVADES BRITAIN, IS DEFEATED
BY CASSIBELANUS—AUGUSTUS CHSAR—HEROD—JOSEPH
IS ESPOUSED BY MARY.

Cu. I. — Babylon, its situation, §c.—Cresus—Belshazzar—
Cyrus—The rebuilding of the temple of Jerusalem—The
restoration of Babylon—The successors of Cyrus— Nehe-
miah.

Arter the destruction of the temple of the Lord, in the

manner already spoken of, and the carrying away at the same

time of the people of the Jews to Babylon, they remained
there seventy years, at the end of which, Jeremiah had pro-
phesied that the captivity of the Jews would be terminated,

During which time there reigned over Persia, after Nebuchad-

nezzar, four kings, to wit, Evilmerodach, Labosardach, Egesar,

and Belshazzar, nor had the Jews any hope of escaping from

Babylon, which at that time was the strongest and richest, and

highest of all cities. In its circuit was four hundred and

eighty-six furlongs. And it was built in a plain, and in the
likeness of a camp, arranged with walls of equal length, so as

80 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 550.

to form a square. And the width of those walls was fifty
cubits; and their highest was four times as great as their
width, and on the face of the walls were a hundred brazen
gates. And through the middle of the city ran the river Eu-
phrates, and outside the walls was a fosse of great width, like
a river, completing the entire circuit of the city.

The citadel, which commanded the city from within, is that
tower, which was began to be built after the flood of Nimrod,
a most famous giant, being in height five thousand one hun-
dred and seventy-four paces. And its width is well known to
be four thousand paces. There were besides, other houses in
the city, consisting of eight towers piled one upon the other,
so as to be of a wonderful height, so that it seemed incredible
that such a city could ever be destroyed by human valour.

Crcesus, the king of Lydia, had come thither, a king of great
renown for his riches, in order to assist the Babylonians, with
many other kings and princes. And when Belshazzar had
completed the seventeenth year of his reign, thinking the
prophecy of Jeremiah a vain one, in which he had prophesied
that after the seventieth year the captivity of the Jews should
be terminated, he caused the sacred vessels of the temple of
the Lord to be displayed on his own table, and contrary to all
divine and human law, he drank out of them. But Cyrus, the
grandson of king Astyages, being instigated by a divine oracle,
exacted punishment for this wickedness.

Cyrus had been educated among the Persians, and when he
grew up, having collected a powerful band of Persians he pro-
claimed war against his grandfather, and, having come toa
battle with him, he routed his army, and took Astyages him-
self prisoner. But he took nothing from him but the kingdom,
therefore Cyrus transferred that dignity from the Medes to
the Persians, and he subjugated Syria and Scythia ; and when
he had done this he then besieged Babylon ; and so Cyrus, ac-
cording to the prophecy of Isaiah, the prophet who had _pre-
dicted that these things would hereafter come to pass, put to
flight the king and his defeated army, and entered the city.
And when he began to arrange the affairs of the city, he re-
laxed the captivity of the Jews and permitted nearly fifty
thousand men to return to Judea, restoring to them the gold
and silver vessels of the temple of the Lord, which were five
thousand and forty in number. He also commanded Josedech

B.C. 500. REBUILDING OF THE TEMPLE. 81

the Priest, of the race of Aaron, who had been carried away
with his fathers to return to his country, in order that the
ancient rites of the sacred worship might be re-established by
the experience of an experienced priest.

The Jews therefore returning to Jerusalem, began to re-
build the temple of the Lord. But as the Samaritans hindered
them, the work was interrupted, till at last it was completed
under Darius, in the second year of his reign; and we must
remark that at one and the same time that Babylon was taken,
by Babylon Rome was delivered from the arrogant domination
of the profligate king Tarquin.

Moreover, after the haughtiness of ancient Babylon had
been chastised by that most mighty monarch Cyrus, he built
in the same spot the city which is at present inhabited under the
name of Babylon, rejecting all the superstition of the ancient
Babylon ; and so the old Babylon, according to the prophecy
of the holy prophet Isaiah, was reduced to the waste condition
of a desert. At this time the prophets Haggai, and Zachariah
and Malachi, flourished in Judea.

Cambyses, the son of the before-mentioned Cyrus, is called
Nebuchadnezzar the Second. In his time, the events. which
are contained in the history of Judith are supposed to. have
happened. After his death two Magi reigned for eight years ;
and after their death, Darius,’ the son of Antipastes, was ap-
pointed king, who had married the daughter of Cyrus the king,
and had secured to himself the kingdom by his marriage with
the royal family, so that the kingdom did not appear to be
transferred to another house, but rather to be brought back
again to the family of Cyrus. And in the second year of the
reign of this Darius, as I have already said, the rebuilding of
the temple was completed in the forty-sixth year, that is, after
it was begun to be rebuilt. On which account, the Jews in
the gospel are reported to have said to our Lord, that “ this
temple was forty and six years in building,” &c. &.

1A great deal of this account is evidently taken from Herodotus i, 178,
who, however, does not mention the enormous and impossible height of the
tower here spoken of. Our author is mistaken in saying that the taking
of Babylon, which took place B.c. 536, was the same year as the expul-
sion ef the Kings, B.c. 5U9, Also only one Magus, named Smerdis, reigned
after Cambyses, and he only reigned a few months, The name of the
father of Darius was Hystaspes, not Antipastes.

Vou. I. : MONS AG

82 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER, B.C. 460.

Darius was succeeded by Xerxes his son. In the seventh
year of whose reign Ezra, the scribe of the law of God, went
up from Babylon to Jerusalem, bringing to the temple of the
Lord the sacred*money, namely, six hundred and fifty talents
of silver, and vessels of silver of the weight of a hundred talents,
and vessels of gold of the weight of twenty talents; and he
celebrated the solemn feast of tabernacles. Nehemiah also,
who had been the cupbearer of the king himself, returned
from the camp at Susa, in the twentieth year of the same king’s
reign; and he rebuilt the walls of the city with the greatest
care.

Cu. I].—Of the kings of Britain—Riwallus, Gurgustus, Por-
rex, Molmutius—The kingdom is divided between Belinus and
Brennius.

AxourT this time Cunedagius, king of Britain, was succeeded
by Riwallus his son, in whose time a shower of rain fell on
the earth, and lasted three days. He was succeeded by his
son Gurgustius, and he again by Sisillius, who was succeeded
by Jago, the grandson of Gurgustius, he by Cunarus the son
of Sisillius, and he by Gorbonego. This last monarch had
two sons, namely, Terrex and Porrex, between whom a con-
test arose, after the death of their father, as to which of them
should obtain the sovereignity of Britain. But Porrex laying
an ambush for his brother, slew him ; and when their mother
became acquainted with this circumstance, she was exceedingly
enraged at the death of her son. Accordingly, watching the
opportunity when Porrex was asleep, she with her hand-maidens
cut him in many pieces in a cruel manner.

After this, civil discord oppressed the people for a long
time, and the kingdom fell into the hands of five kings, who
harassed one another with mutual disasters. At length, as time
wore on, Hurom excited a young man, the son of Clotho, king
of Cornwall, who is called Molmutius by Dunwall; and he,
when he had succeeded to his father’s kingdom, rose up
against the kings of Loegria, and Wales, and Scotland, and
slew them, and from thenceforward he reigned by himself.
He established the Molmutine laws, which to this day are
celebrated among the English. Moreover, he enacted that the
temples of the gods and their cities should have such dignity,
that whatever fugitive or criminal took refuge in them, he
might be allowed to depart unhurt through the midst of his

B.C. 460. XERXES IS SLAIN, 83

enemies. He also made a law that the arable lands of the
farmers, and the roads which led to the before-mentioned tem-
ples or cities, should be confirmed in the same privilege.

After this, when he had maintained the kingdom forty
years in peace he died, and was buried in the city Trinovantum,
near the temple of Concord, which he himself had built, for
the purpose of giving confirmation to his laws.

After that, his two sons, Belinus and Brennius, divided the
kingdom between them, in such a way that Belinus had Loe-
gria, Wales, and Cornwall ; and Brennius, who was the younger,
had Northumberland and Scotland.

Cu. II].—The succession of the kings of Persia—The expedition
of Xerxes against Greece—Vashti—LEsther—The war between
Artaxerxes and Cyrus—Aristolle.

ArtrR the before-mentioned Darius, son of Antipastes, Xerxes,
a most powerful monarch, and one of great riches and power,
reigned in the country of the Persians. Ne is said to have
had seventy thousand armed men, and three hundred thousand
auxiliary troops, in the army with which he marched to attack
Greece. THe had also twelve hundred ships of war, and three
thousand transports. But all this great army was without a
general, for Xerxes was always seen to be the last in battle, and
the first in flight ; he was timid amid dangers, and insolent
the moment that he was released from fear ; owing to which,
before he commenced the war, he, relying on his great wealth,
levelled mountains with the plains, loaded seas with bridges,
and made enormous canals of water navigable.

But when he came to the straits of Thermopyle, which is
the entrance into Greece, he was shamefully defeated; and
when he had returned from thence, having been defeated in
battles both by land and sea, he began to be despised by his
own subjects also. Accordingly, as the majesty of the king
grew less every day, Artabanus, his prefect, being led to en-
tertain a hope of obtaining the kingdom, entered the palace
im the evening, with seven strong young men, and slew him,
and took possession of the kingdom. And Artaxerxes Longi-
manus succeeded Artabanus. He, in the third year of his
reign, entertained all the nations which are subject to the Per-
sians, with their satraps and generals, for a hundred and
eighty days, with a magnificent and luxurious banquet. Also

84 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 400.

queen Vashti, his wife, entertained all the women at a feast, in
the most splendid and sumptuous manner. And as the king,
amid his ecstasy, wished to display the beauty of the queen to
his guests, he sent to desire her to come to him, but she, elated
with pride and arrogance, disdained to go to him; and the
king, being indignant at this conduct, deserted her, and mar-
ried Esther, a Hebrew maiden, who appeared to surpass all
the damsels of Babylon in the beauty and sweetness of her
countenance.

This Artaxerxes ordered all Greece, which was now sub-
dued in war, and which he claimed as his own, to lay down
arms, threatening that whoever spoke against peace, should
be punished with death ; and he did this not with the view of
consulting the welfare of the nation by peace, but in order to
be left in quiet as far as they were concerned, so as to be able
to occupy himself with other wars.

After these events a civil war broke out among the Persians,
as Artaxerxes and Cyrus, being brothers, quarrelled about the
kingdom ; and when both the brothers, coming in opposite
directions, met on horseback and fought together, Artaxerxes
was wounded, but was saved from death by the swiftness of
his horse ; but Cyrus, being overwhelmed by the guards of the
king, was slain, and by his death put an end to the battle, and
so Artaxerxes confirmed the power of his kingdom by fratricide.
He also fought with success against the most powerful of the
Persian prefects Phamalnyus and Sissaplurius ; and after much
labour he reduced Egypt under his dominion.

About this time Aristotle the philosopher flourished.

After Artaxerxes another Artaxerxes reigned, who was sur-
named Oethus.

Cu. IV.—Of the quarrels between Belinus and Brennius—The
character of Brennius— The brothers are reconciled—Brennius
invades Italy—The great reputation of the Gauls in Asia—
They get a footing in Bithynia.

In these days a great quarrel arose between the aforesaid

kings of Britain, Belinus and Brennius, because each was

anxious to obtain the sovereignty of the whole island. And
as war was proclaimed on both sides, they both met with
their armies duly marshalled, and prepared for battle. When,
therefore, they had consumed a great part of the day in fight-

B.C. 380, BRENNIUS ARRIVES IN BRITAIN. 85

ing, victory declared for Belinus, and the greater part of the
army of Brennius was slain, and the rest were put to flight.
But Brennius himself escaped with difficulty, and fled full of
anxiety to the Gauls. And when he had related his disaster
to the chief men of the country, he implored their aid, in
order to recover his lost kingdom. But after assistance had
been refused him by them all, he came at last to Seginus, the
duke of the Allobroges, and by him he was honourably re-
ceived. And as he stayed with him for some time, he became
so intimate with him that he was preferred by him to all the
nobles in his council, for he was energetic in war, tranquil in
peace, well-made in his limbs, full of expedients in counsel,
and sufficiently accomplished in the arts of hunting and fowl-
ing. And when the duke saw that so many excellencies were
met in one man, he determined in his mind to give him his
only daughter in marriage. And so, without delay, the damsel
is married to Brennius, and the chief men of the country are
made subordinate to him, and he obtains the ducal throne.

There did not elapse more than a year after this time,
before the last day of the duke’s life arrived, which took him
from this world. Then Brennius, by liberally distributing the
duke’s treasures to the chief men of the country, won the
good-will of all of them with great prudence, and was especially
liberal in entertaining them at feasts, which the men of that
province thought a great thing. When, therefore, all of them
were gained over to his friendship, he told them how he had
been driven from Britain by his brother Belinus. And when
the nobles heard his story they promised that they would go
with him, wherever he chose to conduct them.

Accordingly a great army was collected without delay, and
he set sail, and being borne on with a fair wind, he arrived in
Britain. Therefore, when his arrival was known, Belinus,
his brother, having enlisted the whole youth of the island,
went to meet him, with the intention of fighting him.
But when the armies were arrayed opposite to one another,
and had almost begun to engage, the mother of the two
princes came with speed, rushing through the marshalled
hosts, longing to see her son, whom she had not beheld for a
long time. When, therefore, she came to the place where her
son was, she threw her arms round his neck, and pressed her
long-desired kisses on his cheeks ; then, showing him her

86 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. .. BiG. 3852

bosom, she addressed him inthis manner, sobbing as she spoke :
«Remember, my dearest son, Brennius, remember these
breasts which you have sucked, remember your mother, whose
bowels brought you forth to the light with intolerable agony.
Remembering, therefore, the anxiety which I have endured
on your account, pardon your brother at my request, and
check the anger which you have conceived against him.”
Brennius, being moved at these and many other arguments
used by his mother, submitted to be pacified, and laying down
his helmet where he stood, he went forward with his mother
to meet his brother. And when Belinus perceived this, he
also threw away his arms and rushed forward to his embrace
with a kiss ; and, as they were thus made friends, they retired
to the city of Trinovantum, where, after they had taken coun-
sel as to what they should do, they determined to lead a joint
army into the country of Gaul, in order to reduce the neigh-
bouring nations under their power.

Then, after an interval of a year, they crossed the sea to
Gaul, and began to lay waste the country. And when news
of this was spread through those nations, all the chiefs of
the Gauls came against them, and a battle ensued. But the
Britons gained the victory, and the Gauls fled, their army
being severely damaged. And the Britons and Allobroges
pursued them and took them prisoners, and compelled them
to surrender. Moreover, after they had fortified some castles
and cities, they proceeded towards Rome. For such a mul-
titude of soldiers accompanied them, that they compelled all
the provinces through which they passed to pay them tribute.

Of these brothers the Roman history gives the following
account. Three hundred thousand Gauls having gone forth
to seek a new habitation, under the command of Belinus and
Brennius, invaded Rome, and stayed there some time. But
having received a thousand pounds’ weight of gold from the
Romans as the price of their departure, they divided their
forces, and some proceeded onwards to Greece, some to Mace-
donia, and others to Thrace, and they filled the whole of Asia
with their posterity like a swarm of bees. And so great was
the dread of the Gallic name and of the Gallic arms, and so
invincible was their prosperity in those days, that the kings of
the east did not presume to carry on any war without the aid
of a mercenary force from their nation, and when they were

B.C. 380, THE ROMANS UITERLY ROUTED. 87

driven from their kingdoms, they never fled to any people
for aid but to the Gauls. For they did not think that they
could defend their majesty or recover what they had lost
except by the aid of Gallic valour. Therefore they were
summoned to the assistance of the king of Bithynia, and when
they had gained the victory they divided the kingdom with
him, and named all that district Gallo Grecia.

Cu.V.—The History of Rome—Wears with the Gauls -—
Belinus and Brennius defeat the Romans—Belinus returns
to England and reigns peaceably—Beautifies the Island—
Ireland 1 colonised — Martia — Archigallo — Elidurus’s
three reigns. -

Tue two consuls at that time at Rome were Gabius and Por-
senna, by whose wisdom the republic was governed. And
they, seeing that no one could resist the bravery of these
brothers, with the consent of the senators, came to them, offer-
ing them many presents of gold and silver, and they promised
to pay them tribute every year. Therefore a treaty was made
and hostages given, and then the kings led their forces into
Germany. But when they were departed, then the Romans
were vexed at the before-mentioned treaty, and recovering
their courage, they went to the assistance of the Germans.
And when this was related to the brothers, they took counsel
how they might be able to subdue both the nations ; and hay-
ing decided, Belinus remained in Germany, to wage war
against the enemy in that country, but Brennius went to Rome,
in order to chastise the Romans for the violation of the treaty.

When, therefore, their armies were divided in this manner,
Gabius and Porsenna, by an unexpected chance, met Belinus,
and were eager to engage: there was no delay. The Romans,
being unable to bear the weight of the battle any longer, fled
from the field. And Belinus pursuing them without mercy,
did not cease slaughtering them till night came on, so that his
troops were unable to complete the massacre that they had
begun. The Romans, therefore, being utterly routed, Belinus,
with his victorious army, arrived at Rome, where he found his
brother vigorously attacking the city; therefore they joined
their forces, and did not cease battering the walls. And in
order to strike the enemy with the more alarm, they hung
the Roman hostages on a gallows before the gates of the city.

88 MATTHEW OF WESIMINSTER. B.C. 380.

In the meantime the consuls Gabius and Porsenna, having
recruited their armies, ordered the Romans to sally forth out
of the city with the dawn, and to attack the enemy vigorously,
while they themselves would set upon them in the rear, and
endeavour to slaughter them. As soon therefore as it was
dawn, the citizens in front, and the consuls in the rear, made
an attack on the Allobroges and Britons unexpectedly, and
there fell on each side many thousand armed men. But the
brothers, making many onsets, at last compelled the enemy to
give ground. Atlength, when Gabius was slain and Porsenna
taken prisoner, victory declared for the brothers, and the city,
with all the wealth of the citizens, fell into their power. Bren-
nins therefore remained in Italy, and oppressed the people with
unheard-of tyranny. And of him Lucan, an admirable poet,
speaks in the following lines :—

“ When Brennus with his fierce victorious band
Planted his banner on Tarpeia’s hill.’”’
That is, in the Capitol. But his other exploits I have decided
to pass over, because the Roman histories relate them fully,
and in order to prevent a feeling of weariness: from growing
on my readers.

But Belinus, when he returned to Britain, governed his
country im tranquillity. And he built a city near the mouth
~ of the Severn, on the river Usk, which he called Caeraski;
which was the metropolis of Demecia, which, a long time
afterwards, the Romans called the city of Legions,' because the
Roman legions used to winter in that place. He also built a
gate of wonderful beauty in the city of Trinovantum, which to
this day is called Belinsgate, by the people of that part of the
city. When he died he was succeeded by Gurgunt Barbitul, his
son, who was a diligent imitator of his father’s actions, to
such a degree that he reduced all his adversaries to proper
subjection.

Among many other praiseworthy actions which he per-
formed, he led an army into Dacia, and compelled the Dacians
to pay him the tribute which they owed to his father. Then
returning after his victory, he found thirty ships coming through
the Orkney isles, full of men and women. And when he had
enquired the reason of their voyages, their leader, whose name
was Partholiam, answered that he was seeking a place in which

1 Afterwards Caerleon,

B.C. 350. ARTIFICE OF ELIDURUS. 89

to dwell, and asked him to allot him a portion of the kingdom
of Britain, where he might live under his government. And
the king, being willing to listen to them, sent some of his
men with them to the island of Hibernia, which was at that
time utterly without any inhabitants, and he gave them that
country. Accordingly they increased in that place, and have
retained the island to this day by hereditary right.

When Gurgunt died, and was buried in the city of Legions,
Guithclin, his son, succeeded to the crown. And he had a
wife of noble birth, Martia by name, excellent in all accom-
plishments, and even the inventress of that code of laws
which the Britons call the Martian laws, and which afterwards,
Alfred, translating them into the Saxon language, called Mar-
chenleage. When Guithelin died, his son Sesillius succeeded
him, the name of whose eldest son was Cimaras. And _ his
brother’s name was Elavius. He died, and was succeeded by
his son Morindus, who was born of a concubine. He, when
moved by anger, used to spare no one, but slew every one who
was standing near him. But a savage monster came out of
the Irish sea, and made him pay the penalty of lis combat
with it. For as the report of the monster reached the king,
who heard that a monster of unheard-of savageness was de-
vouring the inhabitants of the coast, he himself went to fight
it. But he did not succeed, for the monster hastened towards
him, and opening its jaws swallowed him as if he had been a
little fish. After him his son Gorbonianus became king ; and
he was succeeded by his brother, Archigallo. He laboured to
depress all the nobles, and to exalt the lower orders. But the
nobles deposed him from the throne, and made his brother,
Elidurus, king. And he, after five years, coming into the
Calatrian wood, by chance met his brother, and being moved
at the circumstance, went with haste up to him, and throwing
his arms upon his neck gave him repeated kisses, leading them
to the town of Alclud, where he hid him in the royal bed-
chamber. After this, the king, pretending that he was unwell,
sent messengers unto all the borders of Britain, ordering the
princes who were subject to him to come with all the speed
possible to visit him. And when they had all assembled at
the king’s command, he desired that they should enter his
chamber singly and without any noise, because his wickedness
required silence. Accordingly, the nobles, believing the state-

90 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 350.

ments of the king, all entered his bedchamber one after the
other. And Elidurus had commanded his servants to cut off
all their heads, that they might not again refuse to submit to
his brother Archigallo. And they, being influenced by fear,
obeyed him unanimously. And so, having made a secure
treaty with him, he took the crown from his own head, and
put it on that of his brother.

After which action Elidurus acquired the surname of Pius ;
afterwards Archigallo died, when he had been king ten years,
and was buried in the city of Caerleyr. So Elidurus becomes
king a second time, and is restored to his former dignity ; but
his two younger brothers, Vigenius and Pendurus, having
collected a body of armed men from all quarters, and made
an insurrection against him, and having fought a battle, they
took him prisoner, and put him in prison in the city of Trino-
vantum.

After this, the kingdom being divided, they held it for seven
years, till at last they both died by sudden deaths; and so
Elidurus was taken out of prison and raised to the kingdom a
third time. And having passed all his time in piety and justice,
he departed this life, leaving an example of piety to his suc-
cessors.

Cu. VI.—Nehemiah governs the Jews.

In the meantime, Nehemiah, who has been mentioned before,
the scribe of the law of God, when he had restored the
ornaments of the temple of God, and all things which related
to the worship of religion, sent the grandsons of those priests
who had hidden the sacred fire of the altar of burnt-offerings
in a dry well, as has been already mentioned, to look for it.
But they did not find the fire, but some thick water, which
they drew and brought to Nehemiah, and he ordered it to be
sprinkled on some logs and on a burnt-offering, and fire was
kindled from that water, so that all men marvelled. And
Nehemiah himself presided as priest in Jerusalem for twelve
ears.
: But after the return of the Jewish nation from Babylon, all
the government was carried on by the priests. Therefore
both he and Josedech, who, as it has been mentioned, returned
from Babylon by command of Cyrus, and fourteen men, their
descendants, filled the office of High Priest in a regular order

Bat, 38h. ALEXANDER SUBDUES DARIUS. 91

of succession from the return of the people till the time of
Antiochus Eupator, a period of three hundred and three years,
the most eminent in reputation of whom were Jesus the High
Priest, Joachim, Eliasaph, Simon, Onias, and Jaddua.

Cu. VII.—Victories of Philip in Greece—Alexander subdues
Darius.

Moreover in the time of Jaddua, Philip, the son of Amyntas,
and father of Alexander the Great, king of Macedon, subdued
the Athenians and Phocoeans, and Thessalians, and also re-
duced Cappadocia under his dominion. And when he died,
Alexander the Great succeeded him ; who, when he was twenty
years old, began to attack the kingdom of Persia, with an army
of thirty thousand infantry and four thousand five hundred
cavalry. And the ranks of this army were commanded by no
one under sixty years of age; and if you had seen the chief
officers of the camp, you would have thought you were look-
ing upon a senate, and not upon a body of captains of an .
army. No one of them all ever thought of flight in battle, or
of anything but victory, nor did any one place his hope in his
legs, but in his arms.

Moreover Darius the king, in the confidence of his strength,
thought it would be more glorious not to repel the enemy from
the borders of Persia, but to admit them within the bosom of
his kingdom ; and accordingly he allowed them to cross the
river Euphrates and the mountains of Cilicia without hindrance,
and at last in the plains of Adrastus he arrayed his army against
Alexander. And Darius had in that battle six hundred thou-
sand men. But that numerous army soon turned their backs,
conquered not less by the skili of Alexander than by the
valour of the Macedonians. There was a great slaughter of
the Persians in that battle; but of the army of Alexander
there only fell nine hundred infantry and a hundred and twenty
cavalry. After this victory the greater part of Asia revolted
to Alexander. Subsequently, Alexander fought many battles
with the prefects of Darius, whom he defeated, not so much
by arms as by the terror of his name. For by this time the
soldiers of Alexander looked on the Persian gold, and the
riches of all the East, as their own booty, and took no thought
of the war or of dangers, but only of the riches that were to
be acquired.

92 MATTINEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 328.

Cu. VIII.—The last Victory of Alexander over Darius.

Arrer these events, Darius again went forth to battle with
four hundred thousand infantry and a hundred thousand
cavalry. Alexander met him, and a battle was fought with
great carnage on both sides. In that battle both the kings
were wounded, and the battle was a long time in doubt, till
at last Darius fled. After that, a great slaughter of the Per-
sians occurred, for sixty-one thousand infantry and ten thousand
cavalry were slain, and forty thousand were taken prisoners.
But of the Macedonians there fell only a hundred and thirty
infantry and a hundred and fifty cavalry.

In the Persian camp a great deal of gold and other riches
was found ; and among the prisoners who were taken in the
camp, was the mother of Darius, and his sister, and two of
his daughters ; and though Darius offered half of his kingdom
for their ransom, he could not obtain them. But Alexander
- ordered them to be treated like queens in his camp; and bade
the daughters look forward to a marriage which should be not
inferior to the rank of their father.

Cu. [X.—Darius dies—Alexrander takes Tyre—Founds Alex-

andria—Becomes Master of the East—Dies.

AFTER these events Darius was bound with golden chains by
his own relations, who were anxious to gain the favour of the
victorious Alexander ; and he ended his life in bondage. But
Alexander buried his body as became a king; and so the
Persian kingdom came under the power of the Macedonians,
after it had stood for two hundred and thirty-one years.

But in the meantime Alexander took Tyre, a most flourish-
ing city; and he built Alexandria on the river Thanais, and
he marched upon India, in order to extend the boundaries of
his empire as far as the extreme borders of the Eastern ocean ;
and there he, on horseback, fought with Porus, the most valiant
monarch of the Indian nation, in single combat. But Porus,
who was overthrown by the death of his horse, was protected
from death by the prompt assistance of his guards. Then
Alexander, having subdued all the nations of the East as far
as the river Indus and the ocean, determined to return
back again. But only five years after the death of king Darius,
after his return to Babylon, he was plotted against by the

.

B.C. 284. PIOLEMY PHILADELPHUS. 93

treachery of his own people in the same city, in the flower of
his age, and at the summit of victory ; and died by poison, in
the thirty-second year of his age, and the twelfth of his reign.

Cu. X.—The Division of Alexander's kingdom after his death—
Ptolemy——Philp—Seleucus—Antigonus.

Arter his death, his kingdom was immediately transferred to,
or divided among many successors. ‘The first part of Egypt,
Africa, and Arabia fell by lot to Ptolemy.

Philip, who was also called Arrhideeus, the brother of
Alexander, obtained Macedonia.

Seleucus obtained Syria, and Babylon, and all the kingdoms
of the East. 2

Antigonus obtained the kingdom of Asia Minor.

Besides this, other illustrious men, who had served under the
great Alexander, occupied different provinces, and becoming
kings, from having been prefects, they not only acquired vast
riches for themselves, but they also bequeathed them to their
posterity. But all these kings not long afterwards destroyed
one another by mutual wars and contests. Of them, however,
Seleucus founded Antioch, Laodicea, Seleucea, Apra, Esse,
Berzea and Pella; all famous cities, and settled Jews in all of
them. The son of this Seleucus was Antiochus the Great.

Cu. XI.—Antiochus the Great.

Tuts Antiochus released the priests and scribes and singers of
the temple of the Lord from tribute, and from the royal tax,
and from all other exactions. But Seleucus and Lysimachus
fought against one another with great vehemence. This was
the last war of the comrades of Alexander. And when they
were both slain, Ptolemy, the son of Lagus, reduced Judea
and Jerusalem under his own power by treachery, and they
continued so for forty years.

Cu. XII.—Ptolemy Philadelphus.

Arrzr him Ptolemy Philadelphus became king, and he reigned
thirty-eight years, and sent many presents to Jerusalem ; and
he caused the Holy Scriptures to be translated out of the
Hebrew language into Greek, by seventy translators. In his
time silver money was first coined in the city,

94 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 219.

Cu. XIII.—Ptolemy Euergetes — Cleopatra — Seleucus—He-
liodorus profanes the Temple — Demetrius —- Antiochus Ept-
phanes.

Arter him Ptolemy Euergetes reigned for twenty-six years.
In his time Jesus the son of Sirach composed the book of
Wisdom.

The daughter of this Ptolemy, Cleopatra by name, Antiochus
the Great made his lawful wife, receiving with her from the
aforesaid Ptolemy part of Syria and Samaria, and Judeea, and
Pheenicia, under the name of dowry. This Antiochus became
the father of Seleucus, and of his brother Antiochus. Of
whom, Seleucus sent Heliodorus to Jerusalem, to plunder the
treasury of the temple of the Lord, and to bring to him the
money which he procured from it. But when Heliodorus and
his guards, desirmg to perform the command of the king,
had entered the temple, a certain terrible horse appeared to
him, which scourged him terribly, so that he went back and
returned to the king without having succeeded in his object.

The Parthians revolted from this Seleucus, and made Arsaces
their king. After the death of Seleucus, Antiochus, his
brother, who was called Epiphanes, that is to say illustrious,
obtained his kingdom. Seleucus, however, had a son, whose
name was Demetrius.

After the death of Ptolemy Euergetes, Ptolemy Sotor reigned
in Egypt, and he was succeeded by Ptolemy Epiphanes, and
Epiphanes left two sons, one of whom was called Philometer,
and the other was named Physcon.

. Cu. XIV.—Hannibal—His Oath—He invades Italy—The Battle
of Lake Thrasymene.

At this time Hannibal, the son of Hamilcar, flourished at
Carthage. He was appointed commander-in-chief of the
Carthaginians and Africans ; which was a fatal misfortune not
so much to the Romans, as to Africa itself. When he was nine
years old he took an oath that he would never be a friend to the
Romans. And when he was appointed general, he, with the
purpose of invading the territories of the Romans, crossed the
Pyrenees; opened himself a way with a sword through the most
ferocious tribes of the Gauls, and marching from the Pyrenees to
the Alps, fought with Scipio, who was at that time consul at

BiG. 2155 DESCRIPTION OF CARTHAGE. Yo

Rome, and defeated him. Afterwards he slew Flaminius, the
Roman consul, at lake Thrasymene, and utterly destroyed his
army.

Cu. XV.—The Battle of Canne—Scipio—The Battle of Zama.

ANOTHER time Lucius Aimilius Paulus and twenty men of
consular and preetorian rank were slain by him at Canna, a
small town of Apulia ; many senators also were taken prisoners
and slain; and three hundred men of noble birth; and Varro
the consul fled with fifty knights. Besides these, forty
thousand infantry soldiers and three thousand five hun-
dred knights perished. And Hannibal, in testimony of his
victory, sent three bushels of golden rings to Carthage, which
he had stripped off the hands of the Roman knights who had
been slain. So that nearly all the flower of the Roman troops
perished in that battle ; and the Romans were in such despair,
that they thought it fit te deliberate on the plan of leaving
Italyand seeking anew habitation. After this, the two brothers
Scipio, both consuls of the Romans, were slain in Spain by
Hannibal’s lieutenants. But their nephew, Scipio, who was
called Africanus, having received, by lot, a command in Spain
as proconsul, bent all his thoughts on avenging his father and
uncle, and crossing the Pyrenees, defeated Hasdrubal, the
general of the Carthaginians, in a battle, and stripped him of
his camp, and reduced all Spain, from the Pyrenees as far
as the ocean, to be again a Roman province. And then at
length Hannibal was compelled to return into Africa in order
to assist the harassed Carthaginians, and Scipio defeated him
in a pitched battle. In that battle twenty thousand five bun-
dred and eighty Carthaginians were slain, and all the Car-
thaginian elephants either taken or killed.

Ca. XVI.—Description of Carthage—It is destroyed.

Ar last Carthage was destroyed by the Romans; a city which
embraced thirty thousand paces within its walls, and was
almost entirely surrounded by the sea, except the entrance,
which was open for a space of three thousand paces. More-
over the town had a wall twenty feet thick, built of square
stone, and ten cubits high. The citadel of the same city, which
was called Byrse, contained a space of more than two thousand
paces. On one side of it, its wall which served also for the city

96 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 180.

wall, and hung over the sea The city was destroyed and burnt
seven hundred years after its original foundation ; and in this
manner the Punic war was finished.

Cu. XVII.—State of Numidia—And Mauritania—Jugurtha—
Metellus—Marcius— Bocchus — Wars with the Romans in
Spain—Death of Attalus.

Ar this time, Micipsa, a friend of the Roman people, was
reigning in Numidia. After his death, Jugurtha succeeded
to the kingdom ; and he provoked a war with the Romans by
the deaths of Adhubal and Hiempsal, the children of Micipsa.
On this occasion, Numidia was first conquered by Metellus,
the consul, and afterwards it was entirely subdued by Marcius.

So also Mauritania, which was governed by king Bocchus,
was subjugated by the Romans.

After that, the Biscayans, the people of Gallicia and Lusi-
tania, Spanish tribes, were almost wholly conquered in a single
battle. In Italy too, the Epirots, who had conspired in Illy-
ricum with Pyrrhus, their king, against the Romans, were first
pacified and tranquillised, but afterwards were conquered and
compelled to submit to the Roman yoke, along with the
Acheeans and Messalians.

After this, the Roman fortune, not content with the limits
of Italy, began to extend itself over distant kingdoms. fn
nearly almost this very time Attalus, the king of Asia, died, and

by his last will left the Roman people the inheritors of his
kingdom.

Cu. XVIII.—Antiochus—Onias—Jason.

Bur to return to the Jewish history. The generais of Alexander
the Great being dead, by one fortune or another, then Antio-
chus Epiphanes, already spoken of, reigned in Syria, the son
of Antiochus, the great king, in about the hundred and thirty-
seventh year of the reign of the Greeks. In those days Onias
was the high priest at Jerusalem. And his brother Jason
being desirous to wrest the priesthood from him, began without
disguise to violate the laws of Judea, and to trample on them
openly in all particulars, as if he were unable to gain the

priesthood, which he was desirous of, by any other means than
wickedness,

B.C. 170. CRUELTIES OF ANTIOCHUS. 97

Cu. XIX.—The Wickedness of Jason—The Sacrilege of Antiochus.

For he dared to construct a gymnasium under the very tower
of the temple, and to place all the best of the youths in bro-
thels, and to entitle those who were at Jerusalem Antiochians.
But the divine vengeance overtook the nefarious and unheard-
of wickedness of this impious Jason, who was no priest at all.
For to act impiously with respect to divine laws does not
usually escape unpunished. And at the end of three years,
Jason, who had violated the laws of God, and made his own
brother prisoner, was, by the command of king Antiochus,
banished to the district of Ammonitis, and a man of the name
of Menelaus, of the tribe of Benjamin, obtained the priesthood.
But by the contrivance of this Menelaus, Onias, who was a
pious priest, was treacherously slain by the agency of a certain
prefect of the king, named Andronicus. And not long after- —
wards, Menelaus was removed from the priesthood, and his
brother Lysimachus succeeded him But as even then he
would not desist from his malpractices, he at length came toa
miserable end, being precipitated from a tower fifty cubits high.

Lysimachus too, after he had carried off a great quantity of
gold from the temple, was stoned by a concourse of the people
close to the treasury, and so died.

After these events, Antiochus, the king, who has been men-
tioned before, went up to Jerusalem, and entered the sanctuary
with great arrogance, and carried off the golden altar, and the
candelabrum, and the table of the shewbread, and the veil, and
the other ornaments of the temple, and returned to Antioch.
And after this, he proclaimed to all the nations of his domi-
nions, that they should be all one nation, and he forbade burnt-
offerings or sacrifices to be offered in the temple of the Lord;
and he ordered the Jews to be polluted by being made to eat
unclean meats, in order that they might transgress the com-
mands of God.

Cu. XX.—The Cruelties of Antiochus towards the Jews.

In these days, a certain man named Eleazar, a very old man, was

endeavoured to be compelled to eat swine’s flesh ; but he said,

“It is not worthy for Eleazar, who is ninety years old, to go over

to the fashion of foreigners.” And preferring a glorious death

to an odious life, he died, worn out by many punishments, leav-
VoL. I. H

98 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 170.

ing to the younger men and the whole nation a noble exam-
ple of virtue and fortitude. '

It happened at the same time, that seven brethren and their
mother were endeavoured to be compelled by scourges to eat
similar food, in the presence of that most cruel king. But
they chose rather to be put to death by tortures, than to eat
swine’s flesh, contrary to divine and human law. And last
of all, their holy and noble mother suffered, after she had
already witnessed with calmness the deaths of all her seven
sons in one day.

Information was laid against two other women that they had
circumcised their children: and their sons were suspended
round their necks, and then the executioner led them pub-
licly through the city, and threw them down from the wall.
Besides this, all those in whose houses any books of the cove-
nant of the Lord were found, and all who observed the law of
Moses, were put to death in accordance with the command of
the king. On which account the multitude of the people was
alarmed, and forsook the law of the Lord, according to the
commandment of king Antiochus, and sacrificed to idols, and
broke the sabbath, and built altars and temples to idols, after
the manner of the gentiles ; nor did any one dare openly to
confess himself to be a Jew ; but they imitated the pursuits of
the Greeks, and wished to become in all things like that people,
. who had been their enemies and murderers.

Cu. XXI.—Of Judas Maccabeus.

In these days, Judas Maccabzeus withdrew into the desert,
and there among the wild beasts he passed his life with his
friends, that he might not be a partaker in the pollutions and
errors of his nation. But although they who abode with him
were few in number, still they so defeated the numerous armies
and generals of Antiochus in many battles, that they recovered
the temple which was at Jerusalem, and the laws which had
been abolished were restored by their successful obstinacy.
By which it was made evidently plain, that the strength of men
was nothing against God.

Cu. XXII.—TZhe Death of Antiochus.

In the meantime Antiochus, the king, as he was unable to ac-
complish all the wickedness that he had conceived, because

B.C. 160. NICANOR SENT AGAINST THE JEWS. 99

God hindered him, swelling with anger, was hastening to Jeru-
salem. And as he was on his way thither, it happened that he
fell from his chariot, and having some limbs broken by the
violence of the fall, he took to his bed, and after being afflicted
for a long time with miserable weakness, he died. But he
left a heir, a young son, also named Antiochus, whom he
called Eupator.

Cu. XXIII.—Demetrius recovers Syria—Death of Eupator—
Alchimus—Nicanor is sent against the Jews—Death of Judas
Maccabeus—Jonathan.

AnD when Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, whom we have
mentioned before, heard this, he escaped secretly from Rome,
where he was detained as a hostage, and hastened to come to
Syria, where he was received with great good will by the
people, and soon collected an army, and afterwards he took
Eupator, who was still a minor, and his guardian Lysias, and
put them both to death.

And when he was thus seated on the throne of his fathers,
that most wicked man, Alchimus, came to him, being of the
race of Aaron, indeed he was the brother of Onias, the high
priest, but he had nothing worthy of the priesthood about him.
For in the time of offence he had voluntarily polluted himself
out of flattery to king Antiochus, and so he began to speak
ill of the people of God, and to inflame the king by many
harangues against Judas Maccabeeus.

For he used to say, ‘These men who are called Assideans
of the Jews, the head of whom is Judas Maccabeeus, nourish
wars and cherish seditions, and do not allow the kingdom to be
tranquil. On which account I, who have been defrauded of the
glory of my fathers, I mean the office of high priest, have
come hither, in the first place keeping my faith as regards
the service of the king, and in the second place consulting also
the good of my fellow-citizens. For owing to the wickedness
of the before-mentioned men, the whole of our nation is sadly
afflicted. But concerning all these matters, I beseech you, O
king, that you, according to your universal humanity towards
all men, will condescend to provide for the welfare of our coun-
try and nation.” ;

Then the king sent to Jerusalem Nicanor, the master of his
elephants, with orders to take Judas Maccabeeus and to make

100 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 80.

Alchimus high priest. But when Alchimus, inspired with
almost the ferocity of a wild beast, had come to Jerusalem, and
had obtained the office of high priest by bribery, in order to
leave no law human or divine unbroken, he ordered the walls
of the inner chamber of the holy temple, the work of the
holy prophets, to be broken down; three hundred and three
years after the people had returned from Egypt. But he,
wretched man! could not long escape the punishment of his
wickedness. For suddenly his mouth was closed, and he could
not speak, but being attacked by paralysis, he died miserably.
And so, as there were now no priests of the family of Aaron, ard
as Judas Maccabeeus had been slain by the chance of war, as he
was fighting in defence of the laws of his country, Jona-
than, his brother, obtained the chief command of the Jews, and
the office of high priest at the same time.

~ Cue XX1V.—Demetrius is slain by Alexander — Jonathan is
killed — Simon — Tryphon — John Hyrcanus — Pompey the
Great — The wars of the Romans in the East — Crassus —
Catiline—Cicero— Ptolemy.

Burin the mean time, Alexander, the son of Antiochus Eupa-
tor, kills king Demetrius. But Demetrius had become the
father of a son, who was also named Demetrius, and who after-
wards slew the aforesaid Alexander, and who defeated the
Parthians in many battles ; but at last he was taken prisoner
by them, and died in Hyrcania. But king Alexander had en-
trusted his son, who was not yet grown up, to Tryphon, one
of his soldiers, that he might be brought up by him. And he,
believing that the young man, Demetrius, was dead, having slain
his ward, Anthinocor (for that was the name of the boy to
whom Tryphon ought to have been guardian), he invaded the
kingdom of Syria. And when he had made himself master of
it, he took Jonathan, the brother of Judas, and the high priest
of the Jews, by treachery, and put him to death. And not
long afterwards, Tryphon was defeated in battle by Antiochus,
the brother of Demetrius, who was bred up in Asia, and was
put to death. And so the kingdom of Syria came again into
the family of Demetrius. Jonathan was succeeded by his
brother Simon. And after Simon, the high priesthood came
to his son John, who from fighting against the Hyrcanians, got
the name of Hyrcanus. Hyrcanus was succeeded by Aristo-

B.C. 70. THE JEWS BECOME TRIBUTARY TO ROME. 101

bulus, who was made both king and high priest ; Aristobulus
was in like manner succeeded by Alexander, who was also both
king and high priest. Alexander died and left two sons
surviving him, namely, Aristobulus and Hyrcanus. But he
ordered by his will, that Alexandra, his wife, should have the
administration of the kingdom till kis sons grew up, leaving it
at the same time to her decision, to which of the two she
might think fit to entrust the office of high priest.

She appointed Hyrcanus to succeed his father as high
priest, on account of his prerogative as the elder, giving no
public office to his brother Aristobulus. But after the death
of Alexandra, Aristobulus invaded the kingdom, and at last
flyrcanus ceded to him the-dignity of high priest. But sub-
sequently, the same Hyrcanus being stirred up by Antipater,
the father of Herod, repented of what he had done, and
betook himself in the first instance to the king of Arabia, and
afterwards to Pompey, the general of the Romans (who had
come into Syria with the object of subduing Tigranes, the
king), and he laid before him his complaint about the conduct of
his brother. On which occasion the same Pompey, the consul
of the Romans, besieged the city of Jerusalem, and polluted
the temple, and sent Aristobulus, the high priest, prisoner to
Rome with his children ; and left the priesthood to Hyrcanus,
and appointed the before-mentioned Antipater governor of the
whole kingdom.

And so at length the nation of the Jews became tributary
to the Roman empire, and in this way (as I have related) the
brothers Aristobulus and Hyrcanus, quarrelling with one
another about the kingdom, first gave occasion to the Romans
to invade Judea. And in these days Pompeius, whom I have
mentioned above, and Gabinius, the consuls of the Romans,
reduced the whole of Syria under the power of the Romans,
and reduced it to the form of a province, and in this way the
east was gradually subjected to the Roman power. —

In the mean time the conspiracy of Catiline, as it has been
related by Sallust, broke out at Rome. But it was quickly
put an end to and extinguished by the vigilance of the consul,
Cicero. Crassus succeeded Gabinius, and Ptolemy Dionysius
succeeded Ptolemy Alexander, as king of Syria.

102 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 70.

Cu. XXV.—Of some of the British kings — Regin, Margan,
Cinerus, &c. — Lud — Cassibelaunus — Trinovantum gets the
name of London.

In these days, after the reign of Elidurus, king of the Britons,
Regin, the son of Gorbonianus, succeeded to the kingdom. He
was succeeded in his turn by Maranus, the son of Archigallo.
He by his brother Ennianus, who in the sixth year of his
reign was deposed for the tyrannical conduct which he prac-
tised on his people, and in his place Idwallo, the son of Vige-
nius, became king. He was succeeded by Cinerus, the son of
Pendurius, he by Geroncius, he by Catellus, he by Coillas,
he by Porrex, he by Chuin. Chuin’s three sons, Fulgenius,
Eldadus, and Androgius all reigned after him in succession.
After them came Urianus, the son of Androgius. He was suc-
ceeded by Eliud, he by Eledauch, he by Cloten, he by Gur-
guncius, he by Morcan, he by Bledudo, he by Capetus, he by
(Enus, he by Sisellus, he by Bledgaberd, he by Atchival, he
by Eldol, he by Redion, he by Rederchius, he by Samulius, he
by Penissel, he by Pyr, he by Capsyr, he by Degucillus, he by
Heli. Heli governed the realm for forty years.

He had three sons, namely, Lud, Cassibelaunus, and Nennius,
of whom Lud was the eldest, and obtained the kingdom after
the death of his father. He being a very celebrated builder
of cities, renewed the walls of the city of Trinovantum, and
surrounded it with a great number of towers. He also com-
manded the citizens to build themselves houses and edifices in
it, so that there was not ever in such distant kingdoms any
city which contained more beautiful palaces. He was a man
of a warlike disposition, and very liberal in making presents.
And though he had a great many cities, yet he loved this one
above them all, and he spent the greater part of the year in it,
from which circumstance it was subsequently named Caselud ;
and then, by corruption of the name, Caerlunden. And in later
ages, as the language changed, it was called Lundone, and
afterwards Lundres, which was the name given to it by the
foreigners who subjected this country to themselves.

When he died, his body was buried in the above-named
city, near that gate which is still called after his name, Port-
lud, in the British language, but Ludgate in Saxon. He had
two sons, Androgeus and Tennancius. And as they, by reason

B.C. 55. JULIUS CHSAR INVADES BRITAIN. 103

of their tender age, were unequal to the management of the
kingdom, his brother, Cassibelaunus, was raised to the throne
in their stead. Afterwards, when he was invested with the
crown, he began to be so celebrated for liberality and honour,
that his fame became known throughout distant kingdoms,
owing to which, it happened that the sovereignty over the
whole realm was given to him, and not to his nephews. Still,
Cassibelaunus gratified his natural affection by not leaving the
young men destitute of royal power, but by dividing a great
part of the kingdom among them. For he gave the city of
Trinovantum, in the duchy of Kent, to Androgeus, and the
duchy of Cornwall to Tennancius. But he himself retained the
kingly crown, and was supreme over them and all the other
princes in the whole island.

Cu. XX VI.—VJulius Cesar invades Britain—He is defeated and
returns to Gaul—The Death of Nennius.

In the mean time it happened, that Julius Ceesar, having sub-
jugated Gaul, came to the coast of the Ruteni.’ And when he
beheld Britain from that point, he asked of the bystanders
what country it was, and what nation dwelt across the sea.
Then, when he had learnt the name of the island from his infor-
mants, he sent messengers over thither to the king of the island,
demanding, with threats, that he should pay him tribute every
year, in the same way that he received it from other nations.
But Cassibelaunus, king of the Britons, when he had learnt the
object of the coming of the ambassadors, answered with
indignation, that he would by no means pay any tribute. The
Britons, said he, are of the same vein of nobility with the
Romans, being equally descended from the daughter of Priam
and Aneas, and our offspring is accustomed to enjoy such a
degree of liberty, as to be utterly ignorant what slavery is.
And if the gods themselves were to attempt to deprive us of it,
we would labour with all our energies to resist them, even if
we were forced to encounter death in the maintenance of it.
When the ambassadors returned, and when Julius Ceesar had re-
ceived this answer, he was very angry, and ordered vessels to
be got ready, in order to prosecute by force the demand which

1The Ruteni were a tribe of Northern France—their chief town was
Segedunum, now Rhodes.

104 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. BiC.055.

he had made of Cassibelaunus. And as the fair wind offered
which he wished for, he entered the mouth of the river Thames
with his army. :

At that moment, king Cassibelaunus, with all the bravest
men of his kingdom, was taking counsel how he might best
repel the enemy. There were present with him, Belinus, the
general of his army, and Androgeus, the duke of Trinovantum,
and Tennancius, duke of Cornwall. There were present also
three of his feudatory kings, namely, Cridiosus, king of Albany,
‘and Oquerth, a king of Penedocia, and Britael, king of Demecia.
At last, they all agreed in this, that they should attack the
camp of Cesar, and endeavour to drive him out of the country
before he had taken any city or town. Accordingly, the
opposing armies met and fought a long time with great vio-
lence. At last, when a chance had opened to Nennius an
opportunity of meeting with Cesar, he rushed vehemently
upon him, and putting forth all his strength, he smote him on
the helmet, being greatly delighted at having the opportunity
of engaging sword in hand with so greata man. But Julius
putting forth his shield, fought gallantly himself with his
drawn sword, and sriking him twice on the helmet, wounded
him mortally. And his sword glided off from the helmet of
Nennius to his shield, and being directed with all his strength,
stuck in it.

And so Nennius having in this manner got possession of
the sword of Ceesar, did not desist from rushing upon his ene-
mies. And whoever he struck with it he disabled, striking off
his head or some one of his limbs. While he was raging in this
manner, Labrenus, the tribune, met him, and was slain by
him. At last, when the greater part of the day was gone,
victory declared for the Britons. So when night came, Cesar
embarked his shattered legions on board his ships, and returned
to Gaul in great disorder. And it is with reference to this
retreat, that Lucan, an admirable poet, speaks thus in praise
of the Britons :-—

“« What time great Caesar showed his back in flight
To the brave Britons, whom he sought as foes.”

But Nennius, the brother of the king, having been mortally
wounded, as I have said before, died a fortnight after the
battle. And the Britons when they buried him, placed along
with him in his sarcophagus the sword of Cesar, which was

B.C. 53. CASSIBELAUNUS RETURNS TO TRINOVANTUM. 105

named Bloody Death, because no one who was wounded by it
ever escaped alive.

Cu. XXVII.—Cesar invades Britain a second time — Cassi-
belaunus defeats him—He returns to Gaul.

As Julius Cesar, therefore, had been put to flight in this
manner, not one single day passed without his bewailing his
own flight and the victory of the Britons. Then, after two
years had elapsed, he prepares again to cross the ocean and
to avenge himself on Cassibelaunus. And when Cassibelau-
nus learnt this from messengers, he fixed stout iron stakes in
the channel of the Thames, beneath the surface of the water,
as he expected that the general would sail up that river to-
wards Trinovantum, hoping that his ships would be dashed
to pieces if they came upon them. Accordingly, Julius, when
he had prepared everything necessary for himself, arranged
to approach the city of Trinovantum by the river Thames. But
his ships, sticking on the stakes that I have already mentioned,
suddenly incurred great danger. For, in consequence, there
were about a thousand soldiers drowned, as the river, entering
in the holes made in the ships, sucked the vessels down.
Cesar, therefore, having suffered shipwreck in this manner,
with great difficulty reached the land with those of his men
who had escaped this danger. But Cassibelaunus, when he
saw this, made an attack on the Romans, who resisted the
onset of the Britons gallantly. But being in great danger in
the river, they suffer more damage than they inflict. So, as
they were enfeebled in an excessive degree, the Britons gained
the triumph. But Cesar, flying with a few troops to his
ships, was quickly borne away by his vessels, and arrived at
the shores of the Morini, and entering a town which he had
previously built, and which was called Odrea, he there waited
for more numerous reinforcements of troops.

Cu. XXVIII.—Rejoicings for the Victory of Cassibelaunus—
His quarrel with Androgeus—Treason of Androgeus—Cas-
sibelaunus is defeated—Pays tribute to Cesar—Dies—Is
succeeded by Tennacius.

THEREFORE Cassibelaunus, being delighted at his repeated

victories, returned to the city of Trinovantum, with the whole

multitude of his kingdom, and ordered all men to pay due

106 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 53.

honours and sacrifices to their gods, who had granted him
triumph over so great a general. Soon after therefore, as
soon as they had performed the proper solemnities due to
their gods, and had refreshed themselves with banquets and
drinking parties, they spent the rest of the day in arranging
games. While therefore they were playing, a great quarrel
arose between the grandson of the king and the grandson of
Androgeus, duke of Trinovantum, which was carried to such
a height, that while they were quarrelling, the grandson of
the king lost his head. And, in consequence of his death, the
whole council was thrown into disorder, and the sad news
was brought to Cassibelaunus.

The king, being indignant at the misfortune of his grandson,
in his anger ordered Androgeus to give up his grandson, and
prepare to submit to such a sentence as the nobles of the king-
dom should pass upon him. But Androgeus, in reply, desired
the king to remember that it was he himself who had the
right of deciding about his own subjects, and that it was
before him that any complaint which any one might have to
bring against them ought to be decided. And as they, in
this manner, separated from one another with indignation,
Cassibelaunus hastened to lay waste the provinces of Andro-
geus, to carry fire and sword through them, and did not cease
to do him all the harm he could. Afterwards, as the king,
though often entreated by Androgeus, would in no respect
abate his fury, Androgeus being deprived of all comfort, sent
messengers with hostages to Julius Ceesar, entreating his assist-
ance, in order that he, aided by Ceesar’s highness, might be
able to resist the injuries of Cassibelaunus. He also added
that, if by Ceesar’s power he were restored to his former dig-
nity, he would make Ceesar master of the whole of Britain.
And Androgeus sent him his son Sueva and thirty of the chil-
dren of the noblest birth in the kingdom, to give him a feel-
ing of security, giving him leave to kill them if he, in any.
respect, behaved with falsehood towards him.

But when the Roman general heard an invitation of this kind
from the messengers who brought it to him, he ordered the
hostages to be detained in an honourable manner; and being
elated with great joy, he quickly embarked on board his ships
with the whole of his army, and crossing rapidly with a fair
wind, he landed successfully at the harbour of Rutupium,

B.C. 53. BRITAIN BECOMES TRIBUTARY TO ROME. 107

which is now called Sandwich ; there he found Androgeus the
duke of Trinovantum, who promised him faithful obedience,
and pointed out to him with great prudence how he ought to
proceed.

In the meantime king Cassibelaunus had besieged the city
of T'rinovantum, but as soon as he heard of the arrival of Cesar
he hastened to meet him. When therefore the opposing
armies met in a certain valley near Dover, there ensued great
bloodshed on each side. And after they had spent a great
deal of the day in fighting, suddenly Androgeus appeared out
of a certain wood which was near at hand, with five thousand
armed men, and attacked the army of Cassibelaunus in the
rear, and, although with great-difficulty, routed it. But the
king being compelled to flee with his army, occupied a high
and precipitous mountain, which had on its summit a thick
cover of hazel bushes, and was rocky ; and which had been
used at times by the Britons for an encampment, Cesar
therefore blockaded that mountain towards the close of day,
and cut the enemy off from all means of escape.

After a second day had elapsed, when Czesar was unable to
compel the Britons to surrender, he determined to reduce them
by famine, if Androgeus had not come to himself again, and
felt some pity for his own nation. Consequently he came to
Julius, and addressed him in this manner: ‘‘ Behold you have
now sufficiently avenged yourself on Cassibelaunus, and you
have made all Britain subject to yourself by my assistance,
Our omnipotent gods are not willing that I should allow my
master to be condemned to a shameful death, or to be bound
with chains. Have pity on him therefore, because he cannot
be in danger as long as J am alive.” Czesar therefore being
moved to thoughts of peace by the request of Androgeus,
came to a treaty in the terms that Cassibelaunus should pro-
mise to pay to Cesar from Britain, every year, three thousand
pounds weight of silver, under the name of tribute. Then,
having become friends, they gave one another mutual gifts.
And when seven more years had elapsed, Cassibelaunus died,
and was buried in York. He was succeeded by Tennacius,
the brother of Androgeus; because Androgeus himself had
gone to Rome with the Roman general.

108 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.O. 44.

Cu. XXIX.—Cesar returns to Rome—His war with Pompey
—Pompey is slain—and Cesar. —

As Cesar had now finished all his wars in the west, in ten
years he hastened to Rome to oppose Pompey, being impatient
to reign alone. For as Lucan says,—

‘‘ Partners in power ne’er one another trust,
No king will bear a rival near his throne.”

But as soon as his approach was made known to Pompey
and the Romans, they were alarmed, and voted that he should
not come into the city unless he first disbanded his army.
And Cesar, being indignant at this, proceeded towards Rome
in an hostile manner. But Pompey and all the Roman Senate
were struck with consternation, and fled to Greece. Then
Ceesar, entering the city, took the money from the public trea-
sury, and gave it to his soldiers. At length, a battle was fought,
and Ceesar put Pompey to flight, and drove him through Syria
into Egypt. In that battle twelve thousand of Pompey’s sol-
diers and thirty-four centurions are said to have been slain.
But as soon as Pompey reached the shore, he was, for the
sake of gaining the favour of Cesar, murdered by command
of the young Pompey.

Then Ceesar marched through all the kingdoms of the east,
and subjugated all that came in his way. Then he returned
to Rome, and by himself governed the whole republic, and
enjoyed supreme power. But while he was thus insanely new
modelling the whole constitution of the republic in a manner
contrary to the customs of his ancestors, he was pierced with
twenty-four wounds, and slain in the senate house, Brutus
and Cassius being the prime movers of the deed; three years
and six months after he had attained absolute power. It is
said that two hundred and sixty men were privy to this con-
spiracy.

Cu. XXX.—The character and reign of Augustus— His mode-
ration—Antony—Cleopatra—Herod.

THe second monarch of Rome was Augustus Octavianus, than

whom no commander: was ever more successful in war, or

more moderate in peace. Having in his youth been involved
in civil wars, he without any difficulty made subject to the

B.C. 31 THE PEDIGREE OF OUR SAVIOUR. 169

Roman empire all the kingdoms which he attacked. But
he attained the supreme power by himself; the republic was
divided between him and his father-in-law Antony. At last,
when Antony had slain himself with his own hand for the
sake of Cleopatra his queen, who preferred espousing the
party of Augustus to his own, he by himself governed all the
countries of the world. For the princes of the very extremi-
ties of the earth, invited by the fame of his wisdom and kind-
ness, thought it desirable to live under him, and to take their
share in the government as his subordinates. For Augustus
did more among all men by the influence of his name, than
any other commander could have effected by the might of his
arms. For Herod, the king of the Jewish nation, who had
received his crown from Antony, whom I have already men-
tioned, betook himself to Augustus of his own accord; and
although he had come to him trembling, because he had been
an adherent of Antony, he is said to have received the fol-
lowing reply :—

* You are worthy to reign over many men, and you are full

of good dispositions, inasmuch as you do not desert a friend
who is placed in adverse circumstances. But it seems to us
an unworthy thing not to surpass in kindness a man whom
we have already subdued with our arms.”

And when Augustus had said this, he placed a crown on his
head, giving him Godacus and Hippo, and Samona, and Ipe-
nus, and the tower of Strato, and the cities on the coast.
When therefore all the kingdoms all over the world were now
at peace, and when the whole tumult of war was put an end
to, he returned to Rome, and governed the republic in tran-
quillity, according to the Roman laws, giving to every one his

rights.

Ca. XXXI.—The pedigree of our Saviour—Ezra—Nehemiah.
Tue line of our Saviour, who was born in this fifth age of the
world, is traced from Salathiel, whom Jechoniah the younger
begot after the migration to Babylon. For the elder Jechoniah,
of whom we have already spoken, by the advice of Jeremiah
gave himself up into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, king of
Babylon; and with him about ten thousand of the Jews
migrated, among ‘whom were Ezekiel and Daniel, and the
three children. But Salathiel begot Zerubbabel, Zerubbabel

110 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 30.

begot Alrud, in whose time Ezra, having founded a library, re-
turned to Jerusalem, with seventeen hundred of the Jews, and
cast out the foreign women from all commerce with the Jews.

About the same time, Nehemiah, coming to Jerusalem, built
the walls with six gates in a narrow place, and delivered the
people from usury. He kindled fresh fire from sticks which
had been hidden by Jeremiah. Esdras read in the tabernacle,
and caused the people to assemble to hear the law four times
every day, and four times by night, and he also led the people
to the celebration of the Sabbath.

Alrud begot Eliachim, Eliachim begot Azor, Azor begot
Achim, Achim begot Eliud, Eliud begot Eleazar. This Eleazar
stabbed an elephant, and perished with it. Eleazar begot
Mathan. Mathan by his wife Escha became the father of
Jacob. But when Mathan died, Mathas or Melchi took Escha
his wife, and by her had Heli, who was the uterine brother of
Jacob. And Jacob begot Joseph, the husband of Mary. Joseph
was the adopted son of Heli according to the law, and not ac-
cording to nature. With reference to which we read in the
Gospel of Luke the Evangelist: ‘‘ Being as it was thought the
son of Joseph, who was the son of Heli.”’

This Joseph had a wife according to the law of the Jews, of
his own tribe and family, by name Mary. And of her, in
accordance with the announcement of an angel, a true king
and priest was born, Christ, the son of God, after the order
of Melchisedech.

Cu. XXXII.—The Tyranny and Cruelty of Herod—Marries
Mariamne—His Love for her—He kills her—The Wicked-
ness of Antipater—Birth of Herod Agrippa.

Bur now, when the legitimate line of kings and priests of the
Jews was extinct, Herod, who was a foreigner, the son of Anti-
pater, the prince, and of Cypis, an Arabian, was invested by the
Roman senate with the kingdom of the Jews, and, contrary to all
human and divine laws of the Jewish nation, he promoted all
the lowest of the people. He kept the vestments of the high
priest shut up, and never permitted any one to use them. And
in order to mingle his own posterity with the royal family of
the Jews, he repudiated Dosis, the wife whom he had originally
married, and married Mariamne, the grarfldaughter of king
Aristobulus, and the daughter of Hyrcanus, the high priest.

B.C. 30. HEROD PUTS MARIAMNE TO DEATH. 11]

And lest by any chance he might be proved to be a foreigner,
and not of the seed of Israel, he burnt all the books in which
- the noble pedigrees of that nation were inscribed, and which
were preserved in the temple, in order that, when all evidences
were destroyed, he himself might appear to belong to it. He
is said to have had nine wives, two of whom brought him no
children.

But the one who had the most influence with him, of all of
them, was Mariamne, by reason of her extraordinary beauty, on
account of which he would never allow her to be annoyed.
For she bore him five sons, two of whom, Alexander and Aris-
tobulus, “were conspicuous for their wit and manly courage.
And although Herod would never thwart Mariamne in anything,
she was by no means at any concern to requite her husband
with similar affection ; but having watched her opportunity,
because she had found out that Hyrcanus, her grandfather, had
been put to death by the contrivance of her husband, because
he erronously suspected him of having had a design upon the
kingdom, she attacked her husband with expressions of the
greatest hatred. Herod, hearing this, lays all the blame on
Mariamne, because he had sent her picture into Egypt to An-
tony, whom I have spoken of before, and had roused him by
the splendour of her beauty, amd excited his passions, and he
was a man whom she knew to be violently given to all kinds
of amorous indulgences. And so Herod ordered her to be
put to death, though repentance for the deed very soon fol-
lowed upon the action.

Her sons, whom I have spoken of, succeeded their mother,
desirous to be avengers of her death, if they could; asserting
that no sufficient cause could be alleged to justify the crime of
parricide. By these circumstances, Herod was immoderately
enraged, so that there was no kind of ferocity to which he did
not give way; he trusted no one, suspected every one. And
Antipater, the son of Herod and of his wife Dosis, whom I men-
tioned just now, seeing this, relying on two weapons, namely,
his skill in flattery and his cunning in simulation, began to
accuse his brethren before his father to such a degree, that
his father, forgetful of humanity, put them all to death in the
city of Sebaste. But the blood-thirsty mind of Antipater
was not satisfied with the death of his brothers, who were thus
slain; but his impious mind, when he had no longer any

Ti2 _ MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER, Bace257

brethren to hate, began secretly to persecute his father. But
when the king discovered his intrigues, he suddenly caused
him to be decapitated. But before he was executed he begot
Herod Agrippa, of whom we shall speak hereafter.

Cu. XXXIII.—Of the birth of John the Baptist.

THERE was, in the days of Herod, king of Judea, in the
twenty-ninth year of his reign, a priest of the name of Zecha-
riah, of the course of Abijah, and his wife Elizabeth was of
the family of Aaron. For David, the king, wishing to in-
crease the worship of the Lord, instituted twenty-four chief
priests, of whom, however, one was the principal, who was
called the Chief of the Priests. For he appointed sixteen men
of the family of Eleazar, and eight of the family of Ithamar,
and, according to lot, he gave each of them a week of their
turn. And Abijah had the eighth week, of whose family
was Zechariah ; and when on the day of propitiation he was
offering incense, an angel foretold to him that he should have
a son born to him from his wife. But he, considering the
barrenness of his wife and the age of both himself and her,
did not believe it, and for this he was struck dumb till the
day of her delivery. The angel also told him what should
be the name of the child, and foretold to him his noble cha-
racter and his abstinence. So Elizabeth conceived, and hid
herself for five months.

Cu. XXXIV.—The Angel Gabriel is sent to the Virgin Mary.

Bor in the sixth month the angel Gabriel was sent to Naza-
reth, to Mary, who had been espoused to Joseph ; and when
he had saluted her and told her that she should bring forth
Jesus, the Son of the Highest, and when he had enquired
how this should be, seeing that she knew not a man, and had
even vowed not to do so, unless God arranged it otherwise,
the angel added that she should conceive, not by any man,
but by the operation of the Holy Spirit, and told her that her
cousin Elizabeth had already conceived. For the tribes of
the priesthood and of the kingdom were mingled. For
Aaron had a wife named Elizabeth, of the tribe of Judah, the
sister of Naason; and Jehoiada the priest had a wife named
Jochabeth, the daughter of king Joram. And Mary answered,
“Be it done to me according to thy word.’’ And immediately
Christ was conceived by the Virgin, a complete man in soul and

B.C. CESAR'S EDICT. 113

flesh, so that the lmeaments of his limbs were discernible to
human vision.

And he is believed to have been conceived on the twenty-
fifth day of March, and when thirty-three years had elapsed,
to have died on the same day. And we must remark that
there were two sisters in Judzea, by name Hymeria and Anna,
the first of whom was the mother of Elizabeth, who brought
forth John, the forerunner of the Lord. The second had
three husbands, Salome, Joachim, and Cleophas. And Salome
begot Mary the wife of Zebedee, of whom were born James
the Greater, and John the Evangelist ; Cleophas begot Mary -
the wife of Alpheus, of whom were born James the Less, and
Jude, or Thaddeus. And Joachim begot Mary, the Mother of
the Lord. And we have detailed these circumstances in order
to show the relationship between Elizabeth and the Mother of
the Lord ; as it was said by the angel, “Behold, your cousin
Elizabeth has also conceived a son in her old age.”’

Cu. XXXV.—Joseph thinks of putting away Mary.

AnD immediately after the departure of the angel, Mary arose
and went into the city of Judah, and entered into the house of
Zechariah, and saluted Elizabeth, and remained there three
months, ministering to her cousin until she was delivered.
And when the child was circumcised on the eighth day, and
was called John, Mary returned to her own home to Nazareth.
And when Joseph her husband knew that she was with child,
he was unwilling to divorce her, but was minded to put her
away privately. Then he was warned in his sleep by an angel
to take her as his wife, for the angel told him that her child
had been conceived by the Holy Ghost, and that he was one
who should save his people from their sins. So he, receiving
his wife, remained with her, both of them living in a state of
virginity, in order that she might enjoy the comfort of a hus-
band, and that the Son of God might be concealed from the
devil. .

Cu. XXXVI.—The circumstances preceding the Birth of our

Saviour—Cesar’s Edict—Christ is born.

Tupn went forth an edict of Cesar Augustus, that a census
should be taken of all the world. The emperor wished to
know the number of countries in the world which were subject
to the Roman dominion, and also the number of the citizens

VOL. I. ib

114 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 4.

in every country, and the number of heads in every city. He
also commanded that every one should come from all the sub-
urban towns and villages and boroughs to his own city, from
which he derived his origin, and that each should bring a
piece of money for himself, which should be of the value of
ten sesterces, and should have an image of Cesar and the
inscription of his name. And as Judea appeared to be in the
very centre of our carth, the order was that this taxing should
be begun there. }

Now this taxing was first made when Cyrinus was governor
of Syria, or else it may’ be called “first,” because it was the
first that took place after the entrance of Cyrinus on his
government, or it may be called “ first,” as being universal
and the greatest ever made by Augustus, because no such is
said to have been made either before or since.

Joseph, therefore, went up from Nazareth to Bethlehem,
because he was of the family of David, in order to give in his
name with Mary, his wife, who was great with child. And
when she was there she brought forth her first-born son (nor
did she ever bring forth any one after him), and she wrapped
him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger, between
an ox and an ass, which Joseph had, as it happened, brought

1 With respect to the difficulty which our chronicler here endeavours to
explain, I probably cannot do better than quote the note given in Doyley
and Mant’s Bible (Luke ii. 2), condensed from Paley, Prideaux, and Dr.
Hammond :—‘ A difficulty has arisen respecting these words, from the cir-
cumstance of its appearing, from other historical records, that Cyrenius
was not made governor of Syria till ten or twelve years after the birth of
Christ, and that at the beginning of his government an assessment was
made in Judea. In order to meet this difficulty, it is to be stated that the
words inthe original admit of being translated ‘ This was the first assessment
(or enrolment) of Cyrenius, the governor of Syria.’ Thus we may suppose
that the assessment now spoken of, was made under the superintendence
of Cyrenius, who was afterwards the governor of Syria; and that as he was
subsequently well known by this title of governor of Syria, he is here by anti-
cipation called by that title. It should be observed that the assessment
here mentioned, is expressly said to be that ‘first made,’ an expression
which clearly has reference to a second assessment, that is, to the assess-
ment mentioned in history, about twelve years afterwards, when Cyrenius
was actual governor. An important confirmation of this mode of explain-
ing the difficulty is, that Josephus mentions the fact of the whole Jewish
nation having taken an oath to be faithful to Caesar, about the time of
Christ’s birth. And this may be the occasion of the very assessment or
enrolment of which we read in this verse,’

Bcd. JESUS CHRIST IS BORN. 115

with him to carry the things that were necessary for his jour-
ney. And because, on account of the number of rich men
who had come thither for the same purpose, there was no room
for poor people in the inn, they laid him in a manger, that the
Scripture might be fulfilled, “The ox knoweth his owner, and
the ass his master’s crib.” And Habakkuk’ says, “You are
known between two animals.’
Therefore, now as the legitimate line of kings had ceased, as
has already been said, there came, according to the prophecy
of Daniel, the expectation of all nations, Jesus Christ our Lord,
_of the race of kings and priests, taking flesh upon him out of
his great mercy.

1 It is not clear what passage in Habakkuk our author refers to here.

BOOK VL.

THE SIXTH AGE OF THE WORLD.

Cu. I.—FRoM B.C. 4 TO A.D. 15.

The Birth of Christ —Question when the Sizth Age of the World
is properly said to begin—Circumstances attending the Birth
and Early Age of Our Saviour—Invective against the Heathen
Philosophers and their Theories—The Wise Men of the East
—Herod’s Massacre of the Innocents—Account of Josephus—
Violence of Herod to his own Family—Treachery of Antipater
—Cymbeline and his sons in England—Death of Herod—His
kingdom is divided—Trogus— Archelaus—Death of Augustus
Cesar.

In the fifty thousand nine hundred and ninety-ninth year
after the creation of the world, in the fifty-second year of the
reign” of Augustus Cesar, and the thirtieth of the reign of
Herod, Cymbeline, the son of Tennancius, being king of
Britain, and in the third year of the hundred and ninety-third
Olympiad, in the fourth indiction,’ in the second existing

1 From this period, our Author no longer divides his work into Books
or Chapters, but proceeds without any break to the coronation of William
the Conqueror. For the divisions into chapters, as given in this volume,
the Translator is responsible.

2 This looks as if he dated the reign of Augustus from the murder of
Julius Cesar, which, however, took place B.c. 44, not B.c. 42. The
battle of Philippi was s.c. 42. The battle of Actium not till Bc. 3].
The era a.p. coincides with the first year of the 195th Olympiad.

5 “The indiction, instituted by Constantine the Great, is properly a
cycle of tributes orderly disposed for fifteen years, and by it accounts ot
that kind were kept. Afterwards, in memory of the great victory obtained
by Constantine over Megentius, 8 Cal. Oct. (24 Sept.) 312, by which an
entire freedom was given to Christianity, the Council of Nice, for the
honour of Constantine, ordained that the accounts of years should be no
longer kept by Olympiads, which till that time had been done, but that,

B.C. 4. WHEN THE SIXTH AGE BEGAN. 117

epact,* and fifth concurrent,’ on the twenty-fifth day of
December, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was born
in Bethlehem of Judzea, in order, by sanctifying the people of
the Gentiles, and the Jewish nation, to bind them together,
and unite them to himself. And he was born, according to
his most exactly ordered arrangement, on the night of the
Lord’s day ; because, if you reckon back in the chronological
tables, you will find the fifth concurrent of this year, the third
regular of January. And when they are added together, and
seven are subtracted, one remains. And so you will find that
the first of January on that year fell on a Sunday, which
corresponds to my calculation. For on the same day in
which God said, “ Let there be light, and there was light,”
the day-star from on high visited us, in order to give light to
those who sat in darkness, and to guide them into the way of

eace.
: And the sixth age began, according to some people, with
the Nativity of Christ. According to the Apostle, for instance,
who says, ‘ When the fulness of time shall have come,” &c.
According to others, with the day on which he was baptized,
on account of the regenerative power given to the waters.

instead thereof, the indiction should be made use of by which to reckon,
and date their years.””—Johnson’s Dict. in voc. But this can hardly be
what our author means. Ducange says, “Indiction is a name given by
the Latins to a number of fifteen years, usually added to the years of
Christ, to prevent mistakes in chronology.” The passage in the text is
not very clear, and Ducange confesses that there is great difficulty about
the word, on more accounts than one, ;

4 « Epact, a number whereby we denote the excess of the solar year
above the lunar, and thereby may find out the age of the moon every year.
In the solar year consisting of 365 days, and the lunar but of 354; the
lunations every year get eleven days before the solar year, and thereby, in
nineteen years, the moon completes 20 minutes (times ?) 12 lunations, or
gets up one whole solar year, and having finished that circuit, begins again
with the sun, and so from 19 to 19 years.” —Johnson’s Dict. in voc.

> “ Concurrents is a name given to a number of days never exceeding
seven, which, being added to the regulars, make up a festival.”’— Ducange
_ in voc. Cone. “In the works of the ecclesiastical chronologers, there are
solar and lunar regulars. A solar regular is an invariable number added
to a month, which, being added to a concurrent, points out in what day
of a week any month of which it is the regular begins. A lunar regular
is an invariable number added to a month, in order to find out the moon
in the calends of each month.”—ZJbid. Regularis.

118 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. B.C. 4.

According to others, with his Passion, because then the door
was opened, and the seventh glory of those at rest began.
Therefore, Christ put off his Advent to the sixth age, in order
that the length of time might not destroy the fulness of the
new law. For if he had come before, perhaps the length of
time would have effaced all the precepts of the new law.
Moreover, it was becoming that he who had made man on the
sixth day, should bring him to the fulness of the law in the
sixth age of the world, and as the world was now growing
old, should refresh it by his new arrival.

As shepherds, at a distance of one mile from Bethlehem,
were keeping the watches of the night, in attendance upon
their flocks, behold! an angel of the Lord stood near them,
announcing that a Saviour had been born in Bethlehem, and
as a sign of it, he told them that the child was placed in a
manger. For it was a custom from old time among the Gen-
tiles, at each ‘solstice, to keep the watches of the night, on
account of their veneration for the sun; and this custom had
probably obtained among the Jews, from the practice of those
with whom they dwelt.

And when the angel departed, there appeared a multitude of
spirits, saying, “Glory to God in the highest,” &. Very
deservedly, at the birth of the Lord, is the Song of Peace
heard from the angels, because by His birth peace was made
between God and man, between angel and man, and between
Jew and Gentile. Therefore, the shepherds going to Beth-
lehem, found there the Great Shepherd in the manger, and
related what they had heard and seen. But Mary kept all
these things in her heart.

And although Christ was thought the son of Joseph, still
his generation was in this manner. For the first creation of a
human being was out of the earth ; the second out of the side
of the man ; the third from man and woman ; and this one from
woman and the Holy Ghost, without a man. And on the
eighth day, Christ was circumcised, and his prepuce is said to
have been brought down by an angel, in the time of Charle-
magne, to the temple of the Lord at Jerusalem, and by him to
have been transferred to Aix la Chapelle, and afterwards to have
been placed by Charles the Bald in the Church of the Saviour,
“ Carosium, and to have been reverently honoured in that

hurch.

B.C. 4. VARIOUS OPINIONS OF PHILOSOPHERS. 119

And after the days of the Purification of Mary were accom-
plished, his parents brought Jesus to Jerusalem, and offered
victims for him, a pair of turtle-doves and two young pigeons,
and moreover they redeemed him with five pieces of silver.
And there, was at Jerusalem an old man, named Simeon, who
had received an answer from the Holy Spirit, that he should
not see death till he had first seen the Lord’s Christ; and he
came with the Spirit into the temple, and took Jesus in his
arms. And in the same hour, Anna, the prophetess, coming
in, spoke of him to all those who were looking for the re-
demption of Israel.

Let, therefore, those philosophers of the Gentiles be con-
founded, who, by their sagacious investigations, have been
able to conjecture that the world and all the courses of things
are composed of four elements; and who, seeking for the
author of the world in the elements, have never been able to
find him. For Thales, the Milesian, having comprehended
the calculations of astronomy, began to predict the eclipses of
the sun and moon; for he thought himself that water was
the origin of all things. Anaximander, his pupil, asserted
that all things were derived not from moisture, but from their
own several beginnings, and he taught that first principles
were infinite in number. And as Thales had asserted that
the origin of all things was to be found in water, Anaximenes in
air, the Stoics in fire, and Epicurus in atoms, Plato is praised,
who was the first person who divided Philosophy into three
divisions, namely, Moral Philosophy, which is conversant about
actions, Natural Philosophy, which is devoted to contemplation,
and Logical Philosophy, by which the truth is distinguished
from falsehood.

But the philosopher Pythagoras, when he was asked what
he professed, replied, ‘‘'That he was a philosopher, that is
to say, a lover of wisdom.” For to profess himself a wise
man, appeared to him to be a most arrogant proceeding.
But all these men, because they sought for wisdom without
faith, perished on account of their folly. Were not these
men, the Holy Fathers of the Old and New Testament, wiser
than they? for they, being clear-sighted with lynxes’ eyes,
found God as he is; while those who sought him in the ele-
ments, could never find him at all.

Also Abel the Just, by giving tithes and first-fruits, made God

120 MATTHEW OF WESIMINSTER. AED aize

propitious to himself, and was the first person who gained the
crown of martyrdom. Enoch, the seventh from God, pleased
God, and was translated into Paradise. Noah also by faith de-
livered himself and his children from the danger of the deluge.
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righte-
ousness. Moses believed, and wrote that the Trinity created
the Heaven and the Earth and all that is therein. The holy
David and his son Solomon, and Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and
Ezekiel, and Daniel, and the rest of the Prophets preached
the true God and worshipped him, asserting that the natures
which had been created by him, derived the beginning and
end of their existence and motion from him; and that he
gave all living things that rational spirit which is called the
mind; and that he regulated the human race in its beginning
and progress, andinits end. Lastly, these men, being inspired

with the Holy Spirit, announced to us that the Author and _

Governor of all things, being fettered by no chains, and divi-
sible into no parts, is confined to no place, isin no part change-
able, filling heaven and earth with his power, but with a
nature which is in need of nothing; and that he regulates
everything which he has created in such a manner that he
allows it to practise and exercise its own appropriate motions.

Lastly, among those wise men of .the world who are ac-
counted fools before God, there is found to be such excessive
disagreement, that it is difficult. to perceive in what opinion
even a diligent reader may rest. But our writers, though they
were not contemporaries or fellow-disciples, are still found to
agree with one another, and to be at variance in no respect.
For they were the organs of God, and therefore they all, if
moved by the divine harmony, knew that there was one be-
ginning, one progress, and one end of all things.

A.D, 2. These astronomers, through their own skilfulness in
their art, without any divine inspiration, came to Jerusalem say-
ing, ‘‘ Where is he that is born king of the Jews? For we have
seen his star in the East, and are come with giftsto worship him.”
And when Herod heard this, he was alarmed, being a man who
had no connection with the royal family ; and having sent for the
doctors of the law, he asked of them where Jesus should be
born. And they said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judah; for
thus it is written in the book of Micah the Prophet. And
thou Bethlehem, in the land of Judah, art not by any means

all

se Die 2. THE LORD ADORED BY THE MAGI. 121

the least among the princes of Judah, for out of thee shall
come a babe who shall rule my people Israel.” Then Herod
having privily called the wise men, enquired of them carefully
the time of the star which had appeared to them. And send-
ing them to Bethlehem, he said, ‘Go ye and enquire diligently
about the young child, and when ye have found him bring me
word, that I may go and worship him also.” But he said this
treacherously, wishing to kill him, because he was to be the
king of the seed of David, who might be able to get posses-
sion of his kingdom.

Then the wise men, coming to the cradle of Christ, found
him with Mary his mother, and falling down they worshipped
him, and opening their treasures they offered him gifts, gold,
frankincense, and myrrh. And when the duty of their devo-
tion had been wisely discharged, they omitted to return to
Herod; on which account the king was alarmed with more
suspicion, and adopting a wicked counsel, he sent and slew all
the children who were in Bethlehem, from two years old and
under, hoping that among the boys of the same age, he should
slay the child Jesus. For he had learnt that the star had
arisen on the day in which the Lord was born, and according
to the rising of the star, he knew that Jesus was a year old,
and a few days over; and therefore he let loose his fury upon
the children of two years old and under, down to the infant
who was only one night old. But Joseph, having been warned
by the voice of an angel, took the child and his mother and
fled into Egypt on the second of February, and remained there
till the death of Herod. In reference to which it is said that
as when the children of Israel departed from Kgypt, there was
not one house in Egypt in which, by the contrivance of God,
there was not some one lying dead, so now there was not a
temple in Egypt in which an idol had not fallen down.

Some say that it was on the thirteenth day after his birth,
that the Lord was adored by the Magi, and that the star had
appeared to them a considerable time before Christ was born,
and that so they were able to come from a distance, or per-
haps they travelled over a wide extent of country, sitting on
dromedaries. But the account given by Josephus, appears to
contradict this opinion. For he says that Herod was summoned
by letter by Cesar Augustus, to go to Rome to answer the
accusations of his sons, whom I have spoken of above; and

22) MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ADS

that he took Alexander, his son, with him to Rome, and ac-
cused him before Ceesar of having prepared poison for him.
And as he was travelling through Sicily, hearing that the ships
of the people of Tarshish had conveyed the Magi, he, being
vehemently enraged, burnt the ships of Tarshish, so that the
prophecy of the Psalmist was fulfilled, “In an angryspirit,”’ &c.

But when he had pleaded his cause against his sons, before
Cesar, a reconciliation was made up between them, on these
conditions, that the young men should obey their father in
all matters, and that he himself should leave his kingdom to
whoever he chose. And when he came to Jerusalem he con-
vened the people, and relating the peace that had been made
between them by Ceesar, he declared that he would appoint an
heir. Thus being more firmly established in his kingdom
than before, he ordered the children to be put to death; the
greater part of whom are buried at the third milestone from
Bethlehem, on the southern road. Chrysostom says that the
star appeared during the year before the Nativity of the Lord,
and that Herod believed that the Lord had been born at that
time, and therefore he thought that the Lord was two years
old with the addition of a few days ; and therefore he slew all
the children of two years old and upwards, up to five years,
but none less than two years old; and he speaks below of the
age of two years according to his calculation of the number.
For as from a calculation of the time, those who are younger
than two years old are inferior to those who are born after
them, so by calculation of number, those who are more than
two years old are inferior to them, because they are reckéned
after them. And it appears, to prove this assertion, that some
bones of the Innocents are considered so large that they cannot
belong to children who were but two years old. But it may be
said to this, that men at that time were far taller and larger
than of late. This year also was Bissextile, consisting of
- three hundred and sixty-six days, and it was called Bissextile,
because the sixth of the calends of March was reckoned
twice.

A.D. 3. By the cunning of the before-mentioned Antipater,
Alexander and Aristobulus were a second time rendered objects
of suspicion to Herod ; and on this account the father wrote to
Augustus and accused his sons of many crimes. Cveesar there-
fore sent Saturninus and Piarius, his lieutenants, with a rescript,

cD; Ss HEROD PUTS HIS SONS TO DEATH. 123

that they should bring the two young men before a council of
the nobles which they should convoke, and try the sons, and
that Herod should do what he pleased with them if he could
convict them. But when both sides had been heard, the
hieutenants pronounced that they deserved to be condemned,
but not to death. Then their father threw them into prison
at Sebaste, and ordered their accomplices to be put to the tor-
ture, in order that, by their confession, he might learn if his
sons were contriving anything against his life. And one of
them confessed that he had had great promises made to him
by Alexander, if he would give his father poison. And his
barber confessed that great gifts had been promised him if,
while he was trimming their. father’s beard, he would cut his
throat. He added also, that Alexander had said that there
was no hope to be placed in an old man who dyed his hair in
order to seem young.

Herod, being influenced by these things, sent javelin men,
and ordered his sons to be put to death, and to be carried to
Alexandria, and to be buried there, with Alexander, his ma-
ternal grandfather. Then Herod made a will, and appointed
Antipater to be king after him, and Herod who was surnamed
Antipas, to govern in the place of Antipater ; but Antipater in-
curred intolerable hatred from the people, as every one knew
that he had heaped calumnies on his brothers and fellow sub-
jects ; and on this account, his father regarded him with an un-
favourable eye. Besides this, Antipater was displeased with his
father, because he had substituted his brother for him, and
shown that he was unwilling that the kingdom of Antipater
should come to his children. He had another and still more
influential cause of dislike towards his father. For he che-
rished with paternal affection the youthful children of those
sons whom he had slain, joining them to other grandchildren of
hisin matrimony. For, according to Josephus, there were little
children left by Aristobulus, namely, Herod Agrippa, who
slew James with the sword, and Herodias, whom Herod An-
tipas afterwards took away from his brother Philip. Anti-
pater, therefore, was afraid that, some time or other, Herod
would restore the kingdom to his brother’s youthful children,
because he was related to them on the mother’s side. He
also excited Feroras to a frantic hatred of Herod, to such a
degree, that Feroras left his father, and settled in the land
‘which had been granted to him on the other side of Jordan.

124 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 4.

But Antipater himself, with even the consent of his father,
when he had devised some opportunity for doing so, went to
Rome, and procured a very efficacious poison from a_ certain
female poisoner of Arabia, and gave it to the wife of Feroras,
that while he himself was absent, it might be given to his
father by a servant whom he himself had bribed for the pur-
pose. But while Antipater was absent at Rome, Feroras died,
and Herod received information about the poison which was
thus stored up in the care of the wife of Feroras, from a hand-
maid who left her mistress in a passion. Accordingly, having
summoned his brother’s widow, he orders her to bring him the
poison. She having left the palace as if for the purpose of
getting it, threw herself down a height, but being brought
half dead to the king, she said, ‘‘ When your brother and my
husband died, he said to me, O wife bring hither the poison
that Autipater left us, and burn it in the fire before my eyes,
in order that I may not carry with me to the shades below, a
conscience which will be the avenger of my fratricide. But I
threw a great portion of it into the fire, but kept back a small
part for my own use in any doubtful circumstances, because
I was afraid of you.’’ But when she had given him the box
she died.

And as he had received many other proofs that Antipater
was labouring to effect his father’s death, Herod recalled him
suddenly, and repudiated his mother. And when he had pub-
licly aceused his son of parricide, in the presence of Varus,
the governor of Syria, who had come to Jerusalem at that
time, he threw him into prison at Jericho. And when the
father sought for the accomplices of his son, in order to slay
them all together with his son by exquisite punishments, he
was hindered by a violent attack of illness.

The same year John the Evangelist was born.

A.D. 4, Ceesar Augustus was passing the forty-fifth year of
his reign. At which time there were two sophists in Jerusa-
lem, whom not a few of the young men used to follow when
they expounded the law. It seemed a good opportunity to
them while Herod was seen to throw down the golden eagle
which the king had set up contrary to the laws of his country
over the principal gate of the temple. And when it was thrown
down, the king being very angry, got the better of his disease
bythe violence of his anger, and proceeding to the public assem-

A.D. 7. HEROD’S MESSENGERS RETURN FROM ROME. 125

bly, endeavoured to revenge the insult upon all the people of
Jerusalem. But, yielding to the entreaties of the people, he
revenged himself on the authors of the action only. Accor-
dingly he took those who had been let down with ropes, to cut
the eagle to pieces, and burnt them alive with the two sophists.

After this he was afflicted with various distempers. For
he had no slight fever, and an intolerable itching over the
whole surface of his body; he was harassed incessantly with
the pains of the cholic, his feet were swollen with dropsy,
rottenness in his members was breeding worms; his panting
for breath was incessant, he was constantly giving vent to
broken sobs, which were referred by all people to the ven-
geance of God. He crossed the Jordan at Calirope, where he
took the warm baths, and as the physicians had recommended
the bathing his body with warm oil, he was placed in a-ves-
sel full of it, and relaxed to such a degree that he even rolled
his eyes in a powerless manner, like a dead man. But then,
when the bystanders raised a shout, he with some difticulty
was brought to look up again.

A.D. 5. Cymbeline, the king who had reigned over Britain,
begot two sons, namely, Guiderius and Arviragus, of whom
Guiderius was the elder ; and when his father died, as is stated
below, he succeeded to the helm of the kingdom, and governed
the people who became his subjects in joy and peace.

About this time, Herod sent ambassadors to Rome, and
brought many accusations against his son Antipater.

A.D. 6. Herod returning to Jericho, as he had heard that the
Jews had shown great joy at the news of his expected death,
ordered all the youths of noble birth in Judzea to be collected
and shut up in the hippodrome, that is to say, in the prison of
the Circus, giving a charge to his sister Salome, that when he
expired she should immediately put them to death, so that ali
Judea might mourn at his death as well as during his life.
This year also was a Bissextile year.

A.D. 7. The messengers whom Herod had sent to Rome
returned, and brought a letter from Cesar, to the effect that he
might send Antipater into banishment, or, if he preferred it,
might condemn him to death ; and he wasa little remvigorated
by the messengers ; but afterwards he asked for an apple, (a
fruit that he was very fond of eating) and also fora knife: to cut
it with ; and as on a sudden he was shaken by a violent cough,

126 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 8.

he, looking round to see that there was no witness to hinder
him, raised his right hand to stab himself. But Asciabus, his
cousin, held his hand, and immediately a lamentation arose in
the king’s palace, as if the king were dead. And Antipater
hearing it, exulted greatly, and promised the guards large
rewards to release him. And when Herod heard this, he was
more indignant at the exultation of his son than grieved at
death, and he instantly sent guards to execute him, and he
ordered him to be buried in Hyrcania. And immediately he
altered his will, and left Archelaus his son his successor in his
kingdom, but in such a manner that he was to receive the
diadem from Augustus. But five days after the death of his
son, Herod, who had lived miserably, died more miserably
still, in the forty-ninth year of the reign of Augustus; and
Archelaus buried him in Herodium, according to his own in-
junction. And sitting in the tribunal, he said that he meant to
govern in the name of the king till his succession was con-
firmed by Cesar, promising to show himself a better governor
than his father in every respect.

But a sedition arose in Rome, a thing which often happens
under new kings ; and as Archelaus could not quell it, though
he sent a great body of guards and slew about nine thousand
men, he went to Rome himself, leaving Archelaus governor of
the kingdom. Herod Antipas, also, went in order to dispute
the possession of the kingdom with his brother. At length,
by the advice of the senate, Cesar divided the monarchy of
Herod; giving the central part, that is Judea and Idumea,
to Archelaus. But he divided the central’ part into two te-
trarchies, and the country on the other side of Jordan and
Galilee fell to the share of Herod, but Itureea and Trachonitis
were given to Philip. Andso the three brothers were sent
back into Judeea, having remained four months at Rome,
awaiting the decision in the matter. But Archelaus raged
against his subjects more savagely than his father had done.

A.D. 8. The second year of the reign of Archelaus. The
angel told Joseph to return with his child and its mother
into the land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus
was reigning in Judeea in his father’s stead, he did not like to
go thither, but went to Galilee, and abode in Nazareth.

1 There is evidently some error in the text here, The sense seems to

require ceeteram, or some such word, instead of mediam, so that the |
translation should be, “ he divided the remainder.”

AcD= LY: CANINUS THE ORATOR DIES. re

A.D. 9. The fifty-first year of the reign of Caesar Augustus.
Trogus Pompeius’ terminated his chronicles, in which he
had, as it were, handed down the course of the world which
was past to the memory of posterity. For he so relates the
history of the republic of the Romans, and of their arms which
that nation carried so widely over the whole world, from the
beginning to the present time, that any one who reads his
account may learn that virtue and fortune laboured together
to build up the Roman empire.

A.D. 10. The Athenians endeavoured to create a sedition in
their city against the Romans; but were put down, and the
leaders of the insurrection were put to death.

About the same time, Archelaus, to show his contempt for
his family, repudiated Mariamne, his brother’s daughter,
whom his father had given him as his wife; and married
Glasira, the daughter of the king of Cappadocia, and pre-
viously the wife of his brother Alexander, who had been mar-
ried after the death of Alexander to Juba, king of Libya;
and ever since the death of Juba, had lived in widowhood with
her father. And when she had returned to Judzea, and mar-
ried Archelaus, she fancied that she saw Alexander standing
over her, and saying, “ Was not a lawful marriage enough to
content you, but must you again return to my house, and
form a shameless connection with my brother? I will there-
fore, recover you though against your will.” And she, after
she had related the dream, survived scarcely two days.

A.D. 11. The fifty-second year of the reign of Augustus
Ceesar, and the fifth of the reign of Archelaus, king of Judea.
Caninus the orator died of starvation.

2 Trogus Pompeius was a Gaul by descent, whose grandfather received
the citizenship of Rome from Pompey the Great, during his war with
Sertorius. His history is not extant, but we have forty-four books of Jus-
tin’s history, which the author tells us was entirely derived from the
universal history of Trogus Pompeius. And from Justin we learn that
Trogus’s history consisted also of forty-four books, called Libri Historiarum
Phillipicarum, as the main object of the writer was to give an account of
‘the rise and fall of the Macedonian monarchy; though he digressed so
as to take in the history of the eastern nations: the Peloponesian war,
the Sacred war, the history of the Apulians, Sabines and Samnites, while
the last books contained a sketch of the Roman history and notices of
the Ligurians, Massilians and Spaniards. One of the last events men-
tioned in it was the recovery of the standards of Crassus from the Par-

thians, B.c. 20,

128 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ACDAlos

A.D. 12. The boy Jesus remained in Jerusalem behind his
parents, and after three days he was found by his parents, sit-
ting in the middle of the doctors, both hearing and asking them
questions ; and all were astonished at his wisdom and answers.

A.D. 13. Augustus, with his son Tiberius, had a census of
Rome taken, and the population was found to amount to nine
million three hundred and seventy thousand.

a.d. 14, The fifty-fifth year of the reign of Augustus Ceesar.
King Archelaus, who had been often accused, was sum-
moned before Ceesar. And five days before he was to appear
before him, he dreamt that nine full and excellent ears of corn
were devoured by oxen. And while he was consulting the pro-
phets whom he had summoned respecting this dream, Simon the
Essene interpreted the ears of corn as meaning years, and the
oxen the change of affairs, because oxen turn over and changes
the land by ploughing it. And he said, therefore, that the
dream portended that he should reign nine years, and die after
he had experienced several changes of circumstances. Accor-
dingly, coming to Rome in the ninth year of his reign, he was
condemned by Ceesar, and sent into banishment to the city of
Vienne, in Gaul; just at the time that an eclipse of the sun
took place.

A.D. 15, Augustus Ceesar was stricken by illness at Nola,
and died, after he had reigned fifty-seven’ years, six months,
and ten days. For as the Lord was born in the forty-second
year of his reign, and was thirty years old in the fifteenth
year of the reign of Tiberius Ceesar, it follows that Augustus
Ceesar died when the Lord was in his fifteenth year.

And he died in the seventy-seventh year of his reign, at
Acella, a city of Campania ; and he was buried in the Campus
Martius, boasting above all things that he had left that a
marble city which he had found a brick one.

2 Our Chronicler here is inconsistent with himself. If the fourteenth —
year of the Incarnation of our Lord was the fifty-fifth year of Augustus’
reign, it is quite plain that in the next year he would not have reigned
fifty-seven years anda half. He is also not quite right about our Lord’s
age. Augustus really died ]4th Cal. September, 19th August, a.p. 14,
when our Saviour was in the eighteenth year of his age. Consequently,
the thirtieth year of his age coincides with the twelfth of the reign of
Tiberius. And the crucifixion took place a.p. 33, in the thirty-seventh year
of his age.

A.D. 21. THE TEMPERING OF GLASS DISCOVERED. 129

Cu. Il.—From a.p. 15 To a.p. 38.

Reign of Tiberius—Livy—Ovid—A great earthquake in Asia
Minor—lInvention of Glass—Death of Cymbeline—History of
Pilate — The preaching of John—FPrincipal events in our
Saviour’ s life—Judas Iscariot—Letter of Cesar to the Senate
about Christ—The Apostles—St. Stephen-—St. Paul—Portrait
of our Saviour—Death of Pilate.

A.D. 16. Tiberius Claudius, the son of Julia, and stepson of
Augustus Czesar, was raised to the empire; and he reigned
twenty-two years. At first, he governed the republic with great
moderation, so much so, that when some people advised him
to increase the tribute imposed on the provinces, he answered
that it was the part of a good shepherd to shear the sheep,
and not to flay them. :

A.D. 17. Livy the Ortensian, the historian, finished his
history. And it was in this year, according to some authors,
that Augustus Cesar died. For those who adopt this opinion
reckon the half year and the few days that are over as an
entire year. i

A.D. 18. The second year of the reign of Tiberius Cesar.
The admirable poet Ovid died in exile. For he had been
banished by Augustus Czesar, and sent to an island in
Pontus, on account of Ceesar’s wife, with whom he was sus-
pected of too great an intimacy. It was also said that he
had composed some books in verse about her; and on that
account he was banished by the emperor her husband.

A.D. 19. Valerius, the historian, wrote an account of the
sayings and actions of the Romans. In the same year, Ger-
manicus, the son of Drusus and father of Caligula, triumphed
over the Germans, against whom he had been sent by Augustus
Ceesar.

A.D. 20. Thirteen cities were overthrown by an earthquake,
namely, Ephesus, Magnesia, Sardis, Monestene, Hiero, Czesarea,
Philadelphia, Thimolus, Themus, Cyme, Smyrna, Apollonia,
and Hyrcania.

A.D. 21. Fenestella, a writer of histories and poetry, died in
the seventieth year of his age, and was buried at Cume, in
the tenth indiction.

In the same year, a certain artist discovered how to temper
glass, making it flexible and ductile. And when he had been
brought before Tiberius Czesar, he offered him a small bottle ;
* VOL. I. K

130 MATTHEW OF: WESTMINSTER. ASD #285

at which the emperor was indignant, and threw it down on
floor. But the artist picked the bottle up from the floor,
which had become bent like a vessel of brass,-and taking a
hammer out of his bosom, he beat the bottle into shape again.
When he had done this, Ceesar said to the artist, “Is any one
else acquainted with this manufacture of glass?” And when
he had affirmed with an oath that no one else understood it,
he ordered him to be decapitated, lest, if the art became
known, gold might come to be esteemed as clay, and all the
value for the precious metals entirely destroyed ; because, in
fact, if glass vessels could not be broken, they would do better
than either golden or silver ones.

A.D. 22. King Cymbeline, im whose reign out Lord was
born, died in Britain, and was succeeded by Guiderius, his son,
who disdained to pay the Romans the usual tribute, a thing
which none of his predecessors from the time of Julius Ceesar
had dared to attempt.

A.D. 23. Tiberius Ceesar summoned a great number of kings
before him, and sent none of them back to their kingdoms,
but reduced all their kingdoms into provinces, and appointed
procurators where there had been kings.

A.D. 24. Valerius Gracchus was sent as procurator of Judea;
who thinking all gain to be piety, openly sold the office of high
priest, and removed Annas, and appointed Ishmael high priest.

A.D. 25. The ninth year of the reign of Tiberius Ceesar,
The theatre of Pompey was burnt, in the fifteenth indiction.

_ A.D. 26. Gracchus, the procurator of Judea, removed Ish-
mael the high priest, and appointed Eleazar, the son of Annas,
in his room.

A.D. 27. The same procurator removed Eleazar, and ap-
pointed Simon high priest.

A.D. 28. Simon is removed, and Josippus, who is also
called Caiaphas, appointed in his place. After which event
Valerius returns to Rome. There was a certain king, by ~
name Tyrus, who had a carnal knowledge of a certain damsel
named Pila, the daughter of a certain miller, by name Atus,
and who compounded one name out of the two, and gave
the son whom the damsel bore the name of Pilatus. When
Pilatus was three years old, Pila sent him to the king. But
the king had also a son by his wife, who was very nearly

A.D. 28, HISTORY OF PILATE. 131

the same age as Pilate. While the two children were growing
up to vears of discretion, they constantly played together,
contending with one another in wrestling, and boxing, and
slinging. But the legitimate son of the king, as being of
noble blood, was found to have in every point more action than
Pilate, and more skilful in every kind of contest, and there-
fore Pilate, being moved with envy, and being excited with
bile and indignation, privily slew his brother. And the
king, hearing of this, was greatly grieved, and having sum-
moned an assembly, asked them what ought to be done with
this wicked homicide. And all cried out with one accord that
he was a criminal worthy of death. But the king, coming to
himself again, would not crown one iniquity with another,
but sent him to Rome as a hostage for the tribute which he
was bound annually to pay to the Romans, wishing both to be
innocent of the slaughter of his son, and at the same time to
be freed from the tribute to the Romans.

There was at this time at Rome the son of the king of the
Franks, whom the king had sent to Rome in a similar manner,
on account of his tribute. Pilate associated with him, and
_ finding that he was surpassed by him im accomplishments
and energy, gave way to the stings of envy, and murdered
him. But when the Romans inquired what ought to be done
with him, they said this man, who has murdered his brother
and assassinated our hostage, will be very useful to the republic
if his life is spared, and being of a savage disposition himself,
will bow down the necks of our savage enemies. ‘They said,
therefore, as he is guilty of a capital crime, let him be ap-
pointed judge in Pontus over those nations who would endure
no judge at all; so that perhaps their obstinacy may be sub-
dued by his severity ; and if he does not succeed, let him meet
with the punishment that he deserves. Accordingly, Pilate
was sent to that ferocious nation, which was in the habit of
murdering its judges, not being ignorant of the character of
the people among whom he was sent, and on what a thread
his life hung; and so he, having due regard to so important
a matter, wished to save his own life, and by great severity he
utterly broke the spirit of the nation by threats and promises,
by punishments and bribery.

But Herod, when he heard of the energy of the man, felt
a kindred delight in his cunning, being a cunning man him-
: K 2

132 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 30.

self, and by gifts and messengers incited him to come and
see him, and gave him up his power and authority over Judea
and Jerusalem. The aforesaid Pilate, when he had collected
a countless sum of money, went to Rome without the know-
ledge of Herod, and offered a vast sum to the emperor Tiberius,
and prevailed upon hin, by presents, to confirm him in the
government, which at present he held from Herod. Pontius
Pilate therefore was sent by Tiberius as procurator of Judea;
in whose time Herod Antipas called the town which he had
built Tiberius, in honour of Tiberius. On this account, Pilate
and Herod became enemies, until, at the time of our Lord’s
Passion, Pilate again made Herod his friend, by sending the
Lord to him.

Another cause is assigned for their enmity in the scholastic
histories. For a certain person making himself out to be the
Son of God, led a number of the Galileans to Mount Gerizim,
where he said that he would ascend into heaven. But Pilate
coming upon them, slew him and all his followers, fearing
Jest he might seduce the Jews in the same manner. And on
this account they became enemies, because Herod was ruler
over the Galileans. And either cause may be the true one.

A.D. 29. Servius Plautus, being accused of having cor-
rupted his son, and being convicted, killed himself, before
the tribunal.

A.D. 30. John the Baptist, in the time of the high priests
Annas and Caiaphas, preached in the desert the baptism of
repentance for the remission of sins, because he moved
those who were to be baptized to repentance, and did not bap-
tize any, except those whom he saw to be repentant.

The same year, Jesus coming from Galilee to Jordan to him,
was baptized by him. And Jesus himself began to be about
thirty years of age, that is to say, he had began his thirtieth
year, thirteen days of that year being passed. And according
to this, Jesus lived only thirty-two years anda half. But
John Chrysostom was of another opinion. For the opinion of
some authors is, that in the same year the Lord called his
Apostles, began to teach the doctrine of the Gospel, fasted,
was tempted, and performed the miracle of the wine ; because
it is read that he and his disciples were invited to a marriage.
But the opinion of others is more probable, which says that
he did all these things before John the Baptist was thrown

A.D, 31. HISTORY OF JUDAS ISCARIOT. 133

into prison, but that he did them privately, and that after
that time he preached publicly ; and we shall follow this order
of events, without prejudice to the other opinion.

But we read in the Gospel that the Lord called the Apostles
twice. First of all, when he saw Nathanael under the fig-tree ;
but they did not at that time follow him perfectly, because
they returned to their former occupations. A second time also
he called them, when crowds were flocking to him ; and when
he himself saw there two ships standing by the lake. And
then, leaving all, they followed him perfectly.

A.D. 31. On the thirteenth day, according to the opinion,
which I have already mentioned, the Lord turned the water
into wine, at the marriage of the governor of the feast, his
mother obtaining this favour from her Son. In the same year
we read that John was thrown into prison by Herod. In this
year, too, we read of the second calling of the Aposties, in
which Jesus chose twelve to preach the faith of the Gospel,
and to bear witness to the truth; among whom he had one
whose wickedness he turned to a good purpose, and so fu!-
filled the sacrament of his Passion, and gave an example to
his church of enduring the injuries of wicked men.

We read in a certain history, that there was a man in Jeru-
salem, by name Reuben, who was also called Simon, of the tribe
of Judah, or, according to Hieronymus, of the tribe of Issachar,
who had a wife who was called Cyborea. Accordingly, one
night, when each of them was well satisfied with the other,
Cyborea being asleep, saw a dream, which she, being greatly
alarmed, related to her husband, with groans and sighs, saying,
“‘Tt seemed to me that I was bringing forth a wicked son, who
was the cause of the destruction of the whole of our race.”
And Reuben answered her, ‘‘You are saying a shocking thing,
one which ought not to be said ; and I think you are hurried
away by a frantic spirit of divination.” Butshe replied, “If [
feel that I have conceived, and if I bring forth a son, then
beyond all doubt it will have been no frantic spirit that pos-
sessed me, but a certain revelation.”

Accordingly, as time went on, when she had brought forth
a son, his parents were greatly alarmed, and began to con-
sider what they should do with him. And as they were re-
Juctant to put him to death, and yet were unwilling to breed
up the destruction of their race, they placed the child ina

134 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D.-31.

basket, and exposed him on the sea, and the waves of the sea
drove him upon an island which is called Scarioth. And from.
that island he was called Judas Iscariot. But the queen of that
place, who had no children, happened to go down to the sea-
shore, for the sake of bathing, and when she saw a basket
tossed about by the waves of the sea, she ordered it to be
opened. And finding in it a child of elegant shape, she
sighed, and said, ‘‘O, if I were relieved by the comfort of such
an offspring, so that I might not be without a successor to
my kingdom!” Therefore, she caused the child to be secretly
bred up, and feigned that she herself was with child. At
length she pretended that she had been delivered; and the
matter becomes known by common report over the whole
kingdom. All the princes are greatly rejoiced at the birth
of a child, and the common people are delighted with extrava-
gant joy. Accordingly, she causes the child to be bred up
in a way suited to the royal magnificence.

But not long afterwards, the queen did really conceive by
the king, and brought forth a son to his father. But when
the two children had grown up to some size, they were often
playing together, and Judas used to annoy the king’s son
by repeated injuries, and often drove him to tears. But the
queen, being vexed at this, and knowing that Judas was not
in any way connected with her, used frequently to beat him.
But even then he did not desist from annoying the other boy.

At length the truth is made known, and it is divulged that
Judas is not the real son of the queen, but only a foundling.
And when Judas found this out, he was exceedingly ashamed,
and privily murdered his putative brother, the king’s son.
And as he feared sentence of death for this action, he fled
with the tributaries to Jerusalem, and gave himself up to the
court of Pilate, who was governor at that time. And as the
circumstances of both of them were very much alike, and Pilate
found that Judas very much resembled him in disposition,
therefore he began to feel a great affection for him. There-
fore, Judas is appointed to preside over the whole of Pilate’s
court, and every thing is regulated by his nod. Accordingly,
on a certain day, Pilate, who was looking from his palace at
a certain garden, was seized with such a longing for the apples
that grew there, that he appeared almost ready to faint. But
that orchard belonged to Reuben, the father of Judas; but

A.D. 3]. JUDAS HANGS HIMSELF. 135

Judas did not recognise his father, nor did Reuben recognise
his son, because Reuben thought that he had perished in the
waves of the sea, and Judas was utterly ignorant who was _ his
father, or what was his country.

Accordingly, Pilate sent for Judas, and said to him, “I am
seized with such a longing for those apples, that if I am dis-
appointed of them, I shall die.”” Judas, therefore, being thus
excited, leaps into the orchard, and quickly gathers the apples.
In the meantime Reuben comes, and catches Judas while he
is stealing the apples; therefore they both struggle together
vigorously, and there is a great quarrel. After the quarrel
they come to blows, and heap mutual injuries on one another.
At last Judas strikes Reuben with a stone in that part where
the head is joined to the neck, and kills him. Andso he took
the apples, and went and told Pilate what had happened. |

The day is sinking and the night coming on, when Reuben
is found dead, and is supposed to have been overtaken by
sudden death. Then Pilate gave Judas all the property be-
longing to Reuben, and gave Cyborea, the wife of Reuben, as
a wife to Judas. After this, when one day Cyborea was sigh-
ing bitterly, and Judas, her husband, asked her anxiously what
cause of grief she had, she answered, “ Alas! I am the most un-
happy of all women, because I have found my infant drowned in
the waves of the sea, and my husband overtaken by death ;_ but
Pilate has added grief to my grief, in making me a miserable
bride, and in giving me, against my will, in marriage a third
' time.” And when she had related the whole of the story about
her child, and Judas had told her all that had happened to
him, it was discovered that Judas had married his own mother,
and had slain his father. Being influenced, therefore, by re-
pentance, at the persuasion of Cyborea, he sought our Lord
Jesus Christ, and implored pardon for his sins, and became
the disciple of Christ. And afterwards, when Satan entered
into him, he sold his Lord and master for thirty pieces of
silver, namely, to the Jews, who bound him and led him away,
and gave him up to Pontius Pilate, under whom he suffered,
was crucified, died, and was buried.

And, as the history of the Gospels teaches us, Judas him-
self, when he saw that he had been condemned, threw down
the pieces of silver in the temple, and went away and hanged
himself and, while hanging, burst in the middle, and all his

136 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ADS oos

bowels were scattered. And the devil went off with that im-
pure and sordid soul of his through his belly, and not through
his mouth, as he had entered through his cheeks, in order
that he might have nothing to do with the mouth with which
he had kissed our Saviour. For that mouth which had touched
the glorious mouth of Christ was not to be polluted in so vile
a manner. It was fitting that the bowels which had conceived
such treachery should be burst and fall to pieces; and that
the throat from which the words of treason had gone forth
should be pressed by a halter. For it very often happens that
the manner of the punishment intimates the manner of the
fault ; on which account the head of the body is cut off from
a man, because he himself has cut off the head of the mind,
that is to say, reason. And so Judas died in the air, to show
that he was to be associated with the powers of air. For it
was fitting that that man should be separated from the region
of men and angels, who was an object of detestation to both ;
and therefore, both the manner and the place of his punish-
ment corresponded to his crime.

A.D. 32. The beginning of the twentieth jubilee according
to the Hebrews. In this year also the Transfiguration
of our Lord is believed to have taken place, on the eighth
of the ides of August (6th August); an event which the
Lord forbade to be divulged, lest his Passion should be
hindered. At this time, also, our Lord Jesus Christ chose
seventy-two disciples, who were to go before him into every
place whither he himself was about to come; and Matthias,
who succeeded the before-mentioned Judas, is believed to have
been one of them, and likewise Joseph, who was called the
Just, and Cleophas, who is related to have been the brother of
Joseph, the father of our Lord, and Barnabas, whom we have
mentioned before. All these men were sent to prepare the
gospel before the Lord, in order that their master, when he
came after them, might be more honoured.

A.D. 33., Our Lord Jesus Christ was betrayed by his dis-
ciple, and suffered under Pontius Pilate, as has been already
said, and was crucified on the twenty-fifth day of March, and
the twenty-fifth of the moon. And he rose again the third
day, in the month which is called by the Hebrews Nisam.
He ascended up to heaven on the fifth of May, and on the
fifteenth of the same month the Holy Ghost descended upon
the apostles.

A.D. 33. PILATE’S LETTER TO CHSAR. 137;

Now concerning this Passion of our Lord, Pontius Pilate
wrote to Tiberius Ceesar in the following manner :

‘Pontius Pilate to his master Claudius, greeting. The
thing has lately happened, which I myself am also pleased at,
namely, that the Jews out of envy have ruined themselves and
their posterity with a cruel damnation, For as their fathers
had a promise that God would send them his Holy One from
heaven, who should be deservedly called their king, and had
promised that he would send him upon earth by means of a
virgin ; and when, during my government, the God of the
Hebrews had come, and they had seen him give sight to the
blind, cleanse the lepers, cure the paralytic, drive devils out of
men, raise the dead, command the winds, walk over the sea
with dry feet, and do many other marvellous things, and when
all the people of the Jews called him the Son of God, then
the chief priests became full of envy towards him, and de-
livered him to me, and, telling all sorts of different falsehoods,
said that he was a sorcerer, and that he was acting contrary
to their law. And I believed that the fact was so, and having
scourged him, I gave him up to their will. And they crucified
him, and put guards over him after he was buried. But he,
though my soldiers were guarding him, rose again the third
day. Buttheir envy was inflamed to such a height that they
gave the soldiers money, saying to them, ‘Say ye that his
disciples have stolen his body?’ But the soldiers, after they
had received the money, could not keep silence about what had
really happened. For they testified that he had risen again,
and that they had received money from the Jews, and there-
fore I have suggested this, that no one may speak falsely by
giving any other account of it, or may think it necessary to
believe the lies of the Jews.”

Then Ceesar, with an expression of great satisfaction, laid
the letter before the senate, requiring that Christ should be
considered a God. But the senate refused to consecrate Christ,
being moved with indignation because the letter had not been
laid before them first, according to custom. ‘Then the senate
passed an edict that the Christians should be exterminated out
of the city. But Ceesar, being indignant at this, threatened
their accusers with the death which they wished to inflict upon
the Christians. And from that day forth, the formerly much-
praised modesty of Cesar began to be changed, as a punish-

138 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 33,

ment to the contradictory senate. For he behaved with such
savage cruelty to the Romans, that he scarcely left one of them
safe. ‘And it so fell out that they who had hoped to be saved
by the guidance of Christ, were punished by their own Ceesar.
For it was a scandalous thing that the consecration of Christ
should stand in need of human assistance.

But in the meantime the apostles at Jerusalem ordained
Matthias an apostle, and they ordained also seven deacons,
whose names are these, Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor,
Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolaus, a stranger of Antioch ; from
whom arose the heresy of the Nicolaitans. When he went
forth to preach, he took with him a most beautiful wife; and
when on a certain day he was reproached by his companions
with jealousy, he brought her forward into the middle of them,
that if any one chose he might abuse her. From which
circumstance, some heretics think that one may lawfully in-
dulge in promiscuous and illegitimate connections, taking in a
wicked way his contempt for that lust as a sanction for the
gratification of their own lusts.

Moreover, when the preaching of the word of God was ex-
tending itself widely abroad through different provinces, Philip,
going down into Samaria, preached there the word of God.
There was at that time in the city a certain magician, named
Simon, seducing the people; and he was called by them the
Virtue of God: and he, seeing the miracles which Philip per-
formed, believed, and was baptized by him. But when, a few
days afterwards, Peter and John arrived, and had laid their
hands on the heads of those who believed, they received the
Holy Ghost. And Simon seeing this, brought them money, in
order that he might receive this power. But Peter said to him,
«Thy money perish with thee, since thou hast thought that the
gift of God can be acquired by money.” Simon then, being
confused by these words, departed, not being able to bear the
thunderbolt of the word of God. » About the same time, James,
the brother of the Lord, was ordained by the apostles Patriarch
of Jerusalem; and he was the son of Alpheus and Mary the
sister of the mother of the Lord. Then the apostles, being about
to go over the whole world, to preach the gospel toevery creature,
arranged a creed, in order that, as they were going to different
nations, they might not preach different doctrines, but might
all deliver the same truths. And so Peter entered Pontus,

A.D. 37. TIBERIUS SENDS TO PILATE FOR CHRIST. 139

Galatia, Cappadocia, and Bithynia; Andrew went to Achaia,
Thomas to Indus, John to Asia, Matthew to Athiopia, all with
-one accord preaching the faith of the gospel everywhere, the
Lord working with them, and confirming their discourse with
signs following.

A.D. 34. Stephen, the deacon and protomartyr, was stoned
at Jerusalem by the Jews, and Saul, a young man, took care
of the garments of the Jews who stoned him. Peter held
the chair of Antioch seven years.

A.D. 35. Paul the Apostle is converted to the faith and is
baptized at Damascus by Ananias, and then immediately enter-
ing the synagogue, he confounded the Jews who dwelt at
Damascus. After that he filled all the provinces, from Jeru-
salem as far.as [llyricum, with his preaching.

A.D. 36. The Apostle Matthew wrote his gospel, and from
having been an apostle became an evangelist. The same
year, Tiberius Claudius, after he had reigned twenty-two years,
was killed by the intrigues of Caligula.

A.D. 37. Caius, surnamed Caligula, succeeded to the king-
dom, and reigned for three years, ten months and two days.
Because he had been born in the army, he got the name of a
military boot, that is of a caligula.’’ He, in the first year of
his reign, gave the kingdom of the Jews to Herod Agrippa,
the son of Aristobulus, adding to him the tetrarchies of Philip,
Lysanias, and Herod, who had beheaded John the Baptist,
and who had clothed the Lord Jesus in a. white robe, and
sent him back to Pilate.

When Tiberius lay ill of a severe attack of leprosy, news
was brought to him that there was at Jerusalem a certain
physician, who cured all diseases with a single word; and he
was not aware that the Jews and Pilate had killed him. Accord-
ingly he said to Volusianus, who was his intimate friend, “Go
quickly across the sea, and tell Pilate to send this physician to
me, to restore me to my former health.” And when Volusianus
had come to Pilate, and had reported to him the command of
the emperor, Pilate was alarmed, and asked for a fortnight’s
respite. Within which space of time, Volusianus had ex-
amined a certain matron, by name Veronica, who was well

3 The name of the boot, however, was caliga, and those who wore it

were caligati.
Adjutor gelidos veniam caligatus in agros. Juv. III. 322.

140 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AD aSSe

acquainted with Jesus, where Christ Jesus could be found,
and she replied, ‘Alas! he was my Lord and my God, and Pilate,
when he had been delivered to him, out of envy, condemned
him, and ordered him to be crucified.’ Then Volusianus, being
greatly grieved, said, “I am greatly grieved that I cannot do |
what my master had ordered.’’ And Veronica said, “‘ As my
Lord used to go about preaching, and as I was very unwilling
to be deprived of his presence, I wished to have his likeness
drawn for myself, that, while I was deprived of his presence
I might at least have, as a comfort, the figure of his resem-
blance. And as I was taking a linen cloth to the painter to be
painted, the Lord himself met me, and asked me whither I was
going; and when I had told him the reason of my journey, he
asked me for the cloth, and gave it me back again, stamped with
a likeness of his adorable countenance. Now if your master
looks devoutly on this likeness of his, he will immediately
enjoy the blessing of health.” And he replied, ‘ Is not such
a resemblance as this to be acquired by silver or gold?” And —
she said, “No; I therefore will go with you with serious feel-
ings of devotion, and I will bring to Cesar the likeness which
he must look at, and then I will return.”

Accordingly, Volusianus went to Rome with Veronica; and
said to the emperor Tiberius, “ Pilate and the Jews have given
up to death, and out of envy have crucified Jesus, who was
formerly much wished for by you; therefore a certain matron
has come with me, bringing the likeness of Jesus himself; and
if you look on that devoutly, you will presently obtain the
blessing of your health.”” Ceesar therefore ordered the path
to be covered with silken cloths, and desired the likeness to
be shown to him. And presently, when he had gazed upon
it, he obtained his former health. And this likeness is kept
to this day at Rome, in the church of the Chief of the Apostles,
and is shown to the people, and it is called by some Veronica,
from the name of the woman who brought it to Rome.

A.D. 38. Pontius Pilate is taken by command of Cesar,
and is led to Rome. And when Cesar heard that Pilate had
arrived in Rome, he was filled with excessive fury, and caused
him to be brought before him. And Pilate brought with
him the robe of the Lord, which was without seam, and
he put it on, and wore it before the emperor. And presently,
when the emperor saw him, he laid aside all his anger,

AWD. 28. PILATE KILLS HIMSELY. 141

and immediately rose up before him, and could not prevail

himself to speak to him harshly on any subject; and
he, who in his absence appeared so terrible and cruel, is
now in his presence found to be very mild. And when
he had Jet him depart, he immediately became terribly
enraged with him, calling out that he was miserable, because
he had not at all explained to him the madness of his pretor ;
and immediately he caused him to be recalled, swearing and
vowing that he was the Son of Death, and that he was not
worthy to live upon the earth. But the moment that he saw
him again, he saluted him, and laid aside all his ferocity of
disposition. Ail marvel, and he marvelled himself, that he
was #0 enraged against Pilate while he was absent, and that
while he was present, he was unable to speak at all harshly
tohim. And when this had happened three times, Veronica
came in, and said to Cesar, “O Lord Cesar, that wicked
man being clothed in the garment without seam, of my Lord
Jesus, which his most glorious mother made for him with her
own hands, makes every man peaceable towards him.” Then
Cesar ordered him to be stripped at that time, and imme-
diately resumed towards him all his ferocity of disposition.
And when the emperor expressed great astonishment at this
circumstance, he was told that that had been the tunic of the
Lord Jesus.

Then the emperor ordered him to be thrown into prison,
while he was deliberating with the council of his wise men
what ought to be done with him. Sentence therefore was
given against Pilate, that he should be banished and con-
demned to the most shameful death. And Pilate, being ba-
nished by Cesar to Vienne, a city of Gaul, slew himself with
his own hand and with his own knife, and by such a death
escaped from a miserable life. And when Cesar heard of the
death of Pilate, he said, “ He has truly died by a most shameful
death, when his own hand has not spared him.” Therefore
he was fastened to a great weight, and thrown into the river
Tiber. But the malignant and sordid spirits, rejoicing in his
malignant and sordid body, and carrying it aloft in the air,
excited wonderful inundations in the waters, and produced
in a terrible manner, lightnings, and tempests, and thunders,
and hailstorms in the air, so that all men were kept in a state
of fearful alarm. Wherefore the Romans dragged him out of

142 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. | A.D. 40.

the stream of the Tiber, and by way of derision took him to
Vigenna, and threw him into the Rhone. For it is called
Vigenna, as if it were Via Gehennee (the way to hell), because
it was then the place of a curse. But the wicked spirits
were there also, doing the same things in that place. There-
fore, these men, not being able to bear being infested with
demons to such a degree, removed that vessel of cursing
from them, and sent it to be buried in the territory of the
city of Lausanne. The men of Lausanne, as they were also
greatly afflicted in consequence by such hostilities as I have
already described, removed it from themselves, and threw it
down a well, which was surrounded on all sides by moun-
tains, where even to this day, according to some accounts,
some diabolical machinations are seen to be boiling over.

In the scholastic histories it is said that Pilate was accused
before Tiberius of the violent murder of the Innocents, and
because too, in spite of the outcries of the Jews, he had
placed images of the Gentile gods in the temple, and because
he had appropriated to his own purposes money which had
been laid up for Corban, and with it had made an aqueduct
leading to his own house ; and that for all these things he
was exiled to Lyons, where he was born; in order that he
might die to the disgrace of his nation.

Cu. IIJ.—From a.p. 39 To a.p. 117.

Herod is deprived of his kingdom—Caligula—Claudius—St.
Peter is made Pope—St. Mark—Guiderius and Arviragus,
kings of Britain—Famine at Rome—Nero—Festus—St.
James—Mary Magdalene—Simon Magus—Nero sets fire
to Rome— Galba— Otho — Vitellius— Vespasian persecutes
the Jews—Titus takes Jerusalem—John — Simon— Linus
succeeds Peter as Pope—Arviragus dies—The Picts under
Roderic arrive in Britain—The Scots—Inacus, king of Bri-
tain—Domitian—St. John is banished to Patmos—Quinc-
tilian—Clement is Pope—Trajan’s reign, victories, persecutions
of the Christians, and death.

A.D. 39. The emperor stripped Herod of his kingdom, and
condemned him with the adulterous Herodias to eternal exile ;
the damsel who danced was swallowed up alive by the earth.

A.D. 40. Cesar ordered the temple which was at Jerusalem
to be profaned by the sacrifices of the Gentiles, and placed a

A.D, 44, CLAUDIUS CROSSES OVER INTO BRITAIN, 143

statue of Jupiter there, and ordered himself to be worship-
ped and adored as the Lord of heaven and earth. Then,
having become hated by all men, he was slain by his own
’ guards. In his secret repositories were found two documents,
in which were contained the names of picked men, who were
destined to death. And there was also found there a chest
full of all kinds of poisons. But by the command of his suc-
cessor Claudius, they were all thrown into the sea, where
they caused the death of a great many fish.

A.D. 41. Claudius, the uncle of Caligula, was raised to the
empire, and reigned thirteen years and eight months.

At the beginning of his reign, Peter, who had previously
governed the church at Antioch, came to Rome, and taught
the saving faith to all who believed his faithful words ; and
there he held the episcopal chair for twenty-five years, that is
to say, till the last year of the reign of Nero.

A.D. 42. Mark the Evangelist published first at Aquilia, the
Gospel, which he had written at the dictation of. Philip, and
having ordained Hermagoras his disciple at that place, he
went on to Egypt.

A.D. 43. Herod Agrippa desired to oppress some of the
‘Church. And he slew James, the brother of John, with the
sword ; and seeing that what had been done in the matter of
the death of James pleased the Jews, he apprehended Peter
the Apostle, and threw him into prison. But the angel of
the Lord released him from prison and caused him to depart
in safety.

A.D. 44. Tiberius Claudius, having crossed over into Britain,
which no one had ever dared to do before Julius Ceesar, and
which no one had ventured to attempt since his time, landed
in the city of Caerperis, which is now called Porchester.
For Guiderius, king of the Britons, had disdained to pay the
tribute which had now for many years been accustomed to
be paid to the Romans. And Claudius, being indignant
at this, determined to recover it. But Guiderius, as soon
as he had heard of the arrival of Claudius, attacked the
army of the Romans, and in a pitched battle compelled
the Romans to flee to their ships. And Lelius Hamo, the
general of the emperor’s army, seeing this, threw away his
own arms, and took up British arms, and began to fight
as though against his own countrymen. He encourages

144 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. wD; 44. 4

the Britons to pursue, promising thema speedy triumph. For
he had learnt their language and their customs, because he had —
been brought up among the British hostages at Rome. At last,
coming by degrees to where the king was, he slew. him with ©
his sword, while he was expecting no such thing. Then escap-
ing among the enemy, he joined his own men again with his im-
pious victory. But Arviragus, the king’s brother, when he knew
that he was killed, clothed himself in the royal armour as if
he were Guiderius himself, and urged the Britons to persevere.
At length, the Romans dividing into two parts, basely left the
field to the enemy. Arviragus therefore did not desist from
pursuing the enemy, until he caught them on the sea-shore,
and came upon Lelius Hamo unexpectedly and slew him.
And that port is to this very day called the port of Hamo, that
is Hampton [Southampton].

In the meantime, Claudius having recruited his forces, be-
sieged Caerperis, that is Porchester, with great vigour, and
threw down the walls, and subdued the citizens. But Arvi-
ragus pursued him with a hostile army, and Claudius threw
himself into Winchester; then Arviragus besieged that city,
and endeavoured to take it by all sorts of machines. But .
Claudius having thrown the gates open, came forth with his
men to battle. But, before the armies closed, they sent mes-
sengers from one to the other, and made peace on these con-
ditions, that Claudius should give his daughter in marriage to
Arviragus, and that Arviragus should hold the kingdom of
Britain from the Romans, subject to tribute. Arviragus agreed
to this, and, by advice of his friends, made submission to Ceesar.

After this, Claudius sent for his daughter, and in the mean-
time, by the assistance of Arviragus, he reduced the Orkney
islands under his power. Then when the winter was passed,
the ambassadors returned with his daughter, whose name was
Gevuisa, and she was married with all due ceremony to Arvi-
ragus. But Arviragus built a city in honour of Claudius, and
to preserve the recollection of such an honourable marriage,
which, from his name, was called Caerglou, that is to say the
city of Claudius, and it is even now called Gloucester. Then
when Claudius had returned to Rome, the whole government
of all the islands in the province fell into the hands of Arvi-
ragus. The same year Herod Agrippa was smitten by an
angel, and swelling over his whole body, expired in a miserable

A.D. 52. VESPASIAN SENT BY CLAUDIUS TO BRITAIN. 145

manner. And he was succeeded by Agrippa, his son, and re-
mained king till the ultimate destruction of the temple.

a.p. 45. The twelfth year after the Passion of our Lord.
The blessed Virgin Mary was taken up to heaven by angels.
She had lived and remained in the house of the blessed Evan-
gelist St. John, to whom Christ, when on the cross, had
recommended her. And the same year, between Thera and
Therasia, an island rose out of the deep, being thirty stadia
in extent.

A.D. 46. The Eyangelist Mark, having strengthened the
churches throughout Libya, Marmorica, ‘Ammoniaca, Penta-
polis, and Alexandria, was at last seized by the heathens, and
received the crown of martyrdom at Alexandria. The same
year, Paul and Barnabas, having taken upon themselves the
Apostleship, preached to the Gentiles.

A.D. 47. When Cumanus was procurator of Judea, a great
sedition arose at Jerusalem, in the days of unleavened bread ;
to such a degree that the people were crowded together at the
entrance of the gates, and thirty thousand Jews are said to have
been trampled under foot, and suffocated by the pressure.

A.D. 48. A census of Rome was taken under Claudius, and
there were found to be six millions nine hundred and forty-
four thousand Roman citizens.

A.D. 49. Claudius, the emperor, expelled the Jews from
Rome, as they behaved seditiously; a fact which is mentioned
by Luke the Evangelist, in the Acts of the Apostles.

A.D. 50.. The emperor was passing the tenth year of his
reign. And in his timea great famine took place throughout
Syria; but Helen, the queen of the Allabeni, who had been
converted to the faith of Christ, supplied him most abundantly
for the necessities of the Christians.

A.D. 51. There was so great a famine at Rome, that the
emperor was attacked with abuse by the populace, in the
middle of the forum, and was shamefully pelted with crusts
of bread.

A.D. 52. Arviragus, king of Britain, arrived at such a pitch
of pride, that he would not any longer be held in subjection
to the Roman power. Therefore Vespasian was sent by
Claudius to Britain; and when he had begun to anchor his
vessels in the harbour of Sandwich, Arviragus met him, and
forbade him to enter the port. But Vespasian, backing his

VOL. I. L

146 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. © A.D. 57.

sails, anchored off the coast near Totness, and besieged the
city which was then called in the British language Carpenhuel-
goit, bat which is now called Exeter. Then, when seven
days had elapsed, Arviragus arrived, and engaged the Romans
in a battle; and when each army had received a great deal
of damage, by the mediation of Gevuisa, the daughter of
Claudius, the generals were made friends. Then Vespasian
returned to Rome, and Claudius remained in Britain.

After this, Arviragus began to hold a senate, and to exhibit
such proofs of honour and liberality that his fame was cele-
brated throughout all Europe. On which account Juvenal is
related to have addressed the emperor in the following manner,
speaking of Romulus, who had been taken :

“Then you will take a king, or else, perhaps,
Arviragus will fall from off the pole
Of the Britannic chariot.”

a.D. 53, The Emperor Claudius disinherited his son Britan-
nicus, making him incapable of succeeding to the Roman em-
pire, and adopted Nero, the husband of Octavia, his daughter,
as his successor. And not long after, Claudius died by poison.

A.D. 54. Nero, the fifth emperor beginning from Augustus,
having attained the sovereign power, reigned there ten years
and eight months. He shewed himself not only the follower,
but even the surpasser of all the sins and wickednesses of
his uncle Caligula. In the first year of his reign, Anianus
undertook the presidency over the church of Alexandria, as
successor to the Evangelist St. Mark.

A.D. 55. Festus, having been appointed by Nero, succeeded
Felix as procurator of Judea. By whom Paul the Apostle was
sent bound to Rome, where he was detained for two years in
free custody.

a.D. 56. Aman of the name of Longius, who had formerly
been a soldier of the governor Pilate, and who at the time of
our Saviour’s Passion was converted to the true faith by a
miracle, and who afterwards at Ceesarea, in Cappadocia, was
instructed by the Apostles, and made a bishop, finished his
life by martyrdom,

A.D. 57, Paul is said to have travelled as far as Spain, and
to have left Trophius at Arles, and Crescens at Vienne, who
were both disciples of his, to preach the gospel in these places,

A.D. 60. INHUMAN CONDUCT OF NERO. 147

A.D. 58. Albinus succeeded Festus, as procurator of Judea.
And at this time, Nero, who was capable of scarcely any actions
of military daring, very nearly lost Britain.

A.D. 59. Peter the Apostle ordained two bishops, namely,
Linus and Cletus, to perform all the duties to the people in -
the city of Rome as his suffragans, and to preach the faith of
Christ to the infidels without ceasing,

A.D, 60. Nero slew Agrippina, his own wife, and the sister
of his father. And he indulged in luxury to such a degree,
that he used to be bathed in both cold and warm unguents,
and to fish with golden nets, which he drew up with purple
cords.

Nero, urged on by the madness of his wicked mind, or-
dered his mother to be slain and cut to pieces, that he might
see how it was that he was cherished in her womb. And his
physician used to say, accusing him of his wicked conduct |
towards his mother, ‘‘ All laws, both human and divine, forbid
a son to kill his mother, who has brought him forth with so
much pain, and has nourished him with so much trouble and
anxiety.”” And he answered them, “‘Cause me then to be-

“come pregnant with a boy, and afterwards to bring him forth,
that I may know how great was the pain which was endured.
by my mother.”’ (And he had conceived this desire of bring-
ing forth a child, because while passing through the city he
heard a woman crying out.) They tell him that such a thing
is not possible, because it is contrary to nature; nor can any-
thing be known which is inconsistent with reason. Nero re-
plied to them, “‘ Unless you cause me to become pregnant with
a boy and to bring forth, I will cause you all to die bya
cruel death.”’’ Then they gave him a drink, and in it they
secretly gave him a frog to swallow, and by their devices they
caused this frog to grow in his belly. And presently his belly
began to swell, not being able to endure what was contrary to
his nature, so that Nero believed that he was pregnant with
child. And they made him observe a regimen, such as they
were aware was adapted to nourish a frog, saying “that it
was necessary to adhere to such a diet, because of his preg-
nancy.” At length, when he was harassed with excessive pain,
he said to the physicians, ‘‘ Hasten the time of my delivery,
because my languor is such that I am unable to pant or
breathe.” Then they gave him potions to cause him to vomit,

148 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 66.

and at last he brought up a frog of a terrible appearance, in-
fected with humours, and all stained with blood. And Nero
beholding what he had brought forth, abhorred it, and won-
dered at its being so monstrous athing. But they said, ‘that
he had brought forth so deformed an offspring, because he was
unwilling to wait patiently for the due time of his delivery.”
And he said, “‘Was I such as that, when I first quitted the hiding-
place of my mother?’ And they said, ‘‘Yes.’’ Therefore he
ordered that this offspring of his should be bred up, and
should be shut up in a vault of stone, and kept so. So the
physicians going to Rome, found the frog lying hid in a vault,
and threw it out of the city and burnt it. And from this cir-
cumstance, as some people affirm, that part of the city where the
frog lay hid, received the name of Lateran, from the frog lying
hid (a latente rand). Nero, too, as it is related in the Chroni-
cles, married a man as his wife.

A.D. 61. Statius Suesullius, of Toulouse, in Gaul, taught
rhetoric, a man perfect in every branch of knowledge relating
to that art.

A.D. 62. James, the brother of the Lord, who was called the
Just, and was the Bishop of Jerusalem, was stoned by the
Jews, and had his brains dashed out with a fuller’s pole; in
whose place Simeon the Second is made bishop.

A.D. 63. Mary Magdalene departed to the Lord; she who
washed the feet of the Saviour with her tears, and wiped them
with the hair of her head.

A.D. 64. Florus succeeded Albinus as procurator of Judea ;
and as the Jews could not endure his luxury and avarice,
and all his other wickednesses, they began to rebel against
the Romans. And Vespasian was sent by Nero to put them
down, with his son Titus ; and they took many cities of Judea,
and utterly destroyed them.

A.D. 65. Persius the poet died. Lucretius was put to death
by Nero, and he also deprived of his life his own preceptor
Lucan, whom he caused to be bled to death in a bath, because
in his youth he had flogged him, saying that he could not bear
the sight of him.

A.D. 66. Simon Magus came to Rome, and by his magic
arts caused the people to go mad, to such a degree, that by
some he was adored as a god. But the Almighty Lord, as
we read in the Acts of the Apostles, discovered his vanities

A.D. 67. VESPASIAN SLAYS THE JEWS. 149

and insanities by means of his Apostle Peter, who exposed him
so, that he threw himself down from a height, and broke his
neck, and died. Then Nero, being perplexed, gave orders to
apprehend Peter; but Peter being at that time desirous to
escape from the city, when he came to the gate, saw Christ
meet him; so he, adoring him, said, ‘ Lord, whither goest
thou?” And he said, ‘I am coming to Rome, to be cruci-
fied asecond time.” Peter, understanding that it was in him-
self that the Lord was going to suffer, inasmuch as he suffers
in his saints, not by pain of body, but by the compassion of
his mercy, returned into the city, and was seon taken by
his persecutors, and led to the cross. And he was crucified
with his head downwards ; and Paul, who had been a long time
detained in the city as a prisoner, was beheaded the same day.

A.D. 67. Nero ordered the city of Rome to be set on fire.
And in order to behold a likeness of Troy when it was burn-
ing, he feasted his eyes for six days and six nights with a
view of the violent fire ; and while he was surveying it from
alofty tower, he was singing the Iliad with great joy, dressed
in the dress of a tragedian.

While these things were being done at Rome, Vespasian
crushed the Jewish race with a miserable overthrow. For
he took the city of Jocapata, and slew forty thousand men
init. He took Joppa, and drowned in the sea, in cold blood,
four thousand five hundred souls. In Tarichia, when it was
taken, six thousand seven hundred persons were slain, and
six thousand youths sent to Nero. He slew twelve hundred
more, and sold thirty thousand four hundred prisoners for:
slaves. At the taking of Gamale, four thousand are stated
to have been slain, and five thousand perished by being
thrown down a precipice ; two thousand more, who followed
John as their leader, were slain in Gilgala, and three thousand
sentenced to captivity. After this, Jericho was destroyed, and
ninety-two thousand two hundred people perished. Of this
destruction, Isaiah thus prophesied against the wicked Jews,
saying, “ Alas, sinful nation! a people heavy with iniquity, a
worthless son, impious children: they have forsaken the
Lord, they have blasphemed the Holy One of Israel, they are
turned backwards.”’ In this destruction, when Josephus the
historian, and the military general of the Jews, was on the
point of being slain by the Romans, he predicted to Vespa-

150 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AD. FY.

sian the death of Nero, and that he himself would be emperor
after him, and so for the time he escaped danger of death.

A.D. 68. Galba was created emperor of Spain, and Nero was
pronounced at Rome a public enemy by the whole people.
And when Nero heard that Galba had been created emperor
by the Roman army, he lost all courage and hope, and flying
in a most ignominious manner from the city, slew himself at
the fourth mile-stone, and in him the whole family of Ceesar
became extinct. Galba, coming to Rome, reigned six months
and six days.

A.D. 69. Otho, who was born of a most illustrious family in
the town of Ferentum, came to Rome, and slew Galba in the
middle of the forum, and usurped the empire. He reigned
taree months.

In the mean time, Vitellius having been created emperor by
the German legions in Gaul, hastened on his march towards
Rome. But Otho met him, and fought with him, and de- .
feated him in three battles. And in the fourth battle, when
Otho found that his troops were beaten, he slew himself ;
and so Vitellius came to Rome, and he reigned there eight
months.

A.D. 70. As Vitellius was behaving in Rome with great
cruelty and wickedness, he was murdered by pricks of innu-
merable most minute wounds, and at last was thrown into
the Tiber, and deprived of common burial.

Therefore, Vespasian, having heard of the death of Nero,
and that Vitellius was slain, having taken a great many cities
of the Jews, turned his attention to besieging the city of
Jerusalem. And after he had blockaded an innumerable
multitude of the Jewish nation in the city, who were assembled
there on account of one of their festivals, he appointed his son
Titus governor in his stead, and came to Rome. For as he had
been elected by the senate on account of the nobility of his
family, and his bravery in war, he would not be wanting to
the Romans, nor would he spare the Jews, whom Titus his
son continued to attack.

A.D. 71. Vespasian obtained the empire, and he reigned nine
years, eleven months, and twenty-two days. In the meantime,
Titus, his son, was pressing the Jews with a terrible and lasting
siege. For, as all the rights of law had been corrupted, and
all religion violated by them, God deserted them ; and not only

A.D. 71s THE ROMANS BESIEGE JERUSALEM. 151

did the Romans press upon them, but they themselves also
afflicted one another by their domestic seditions. For they
were busy hunting for extravagances of luxury, and rare per-
fumes ; they were curling their hair with curling-irons, and
painting their eyes with antimony, and dressing themselves in
female attire, and imitating their delicacy; trying even to make
their voices effeminate, to change their sex, to walk with a min-
cing pace, letting their hair grow, painting their faces white,
pumicing their cheeks, plucking out their beards, and besides
all these things, they delighted in the practice of intolerable
cruelty.

Terrible sedition was let loose among them, peace was
buried, faith was withered, avarice was dominant to such a
degree, that nothing appeared to them to be honourable which
was unconnected with money.

They had two especial encouragers of this baseness ; one of
whom was John, a fickle man, a pest of the people; inferior
to no one in cunning, a man never free from a desire of doing
injury, crafty and treacherous, learned in lies, he believed
that deceitfulness was virtue, and would circumvent his dearest
friends. The other was called Simon; a man equal to the
other for cruelty ; of a harsh disposition, and savage, one who
could be moved by no impulse to pity. These men, under
the pretext of preserving liberty, let loose their rage against
the nobles, who were either attacked by false accusations and
put down, or else thrown into prison and murdered. Also
foreign priests, who had obtained the priesthood by the
employment of bribes, dragged on the ignoble common people
to every wickedness, at the pleasure of their iniquitous chiefs.
But while these things were being done by the Jews, the
Romans were endeavouring to batter down the walls of Jeru-
salem, with machines and every sort of warlike instru-
ment. Nor was there any intermission, nor was any respite
given. Despair gave courage to the Jews, desire of glory
increased the valour of the Romans. Numbers of men were
slain, while the ramparts of the walls were loosened by con-
tinued blows.

At length the Jews gave way, and the Romans entered the.
outer walls of the city, not without great injury and loss
on their own side. Then the war was rekindled, because
there still remained the walls to be won. ‘Titus exhorts his

152 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ALD. 72%

Soldiers on the one side, on the other the Jews who were
- hemmed in had leisure for defence. In the meantime, miserable
famine attacked the besieged, so much that the whole city
was filled with corpses. Sons tore the food from the mouths
of their parents, and parents from those of their sons ; some
tore to pieces the carcases of horses, others stripped off the
bark of trees. Mothers roasted their own children and
drowned them ; many fed on the vomiting and dung of others.
And so four years passed from the time that siege was first
laid to the city. Titus ascended the walls, not without great
loss on the side of his army, and obtained possession of the
fortifications of the city, polluted the temple and the Holy of
Holies, plundered the sacred vessels, and distributed the gold
and silver and precious stones among his soldiers.

At last the Romans, weary with the enormous slaughter,
sought for men to whom the captive slaves might be sold ; but
because they were very many to be sold, and few buyers were
found, thirty slaves were sold for one piece of money. But
ninety-seven thousand captives were led away, and some
of them were even thrown to wild beasts to be eaten by
them. This last destruction of the temple happened eleven
hundred and two years after its foundation ; and the city was
burnt on the eighth day of the seventh month, and the temple
was utterly destroyed. And these things were done at the
time of the solemnity of Easter, which the Jews used to call
Pascha. For it was fitting that they should be slaughtered
on those same days of Pascha in which they had ignominiously
scourged the Saviour of the world, who would have been their
own Saviour too if they had been willing, and hung him on
the cross. The Lord himself showed in the Gospel that this
destruction would take place, when he wept over the city of
Jerusalem, saying, ‘‘ The days will come upon thee, and thy
enemies shall surround thee with a trench, and shall dash thee
to the ground, and thy sons who are in thee, and shall not
leave in thee one stone upon another, because thou knewest
not the time of thy visitation.”’

At the same time, Linus, the second pope, succeeded Peter
the Apostle in the chair at Rome, and sat in it eleven years,
three months, and twelve days.

A.D. 72. Judea having been subdued by Titus, and Jeru-
salem having been destroyed, a dispersion of the Jews over

A.D. 75. THE KING OF THE PICTS LANDS IN BRITAIN. 153

the whole world took place; and many signs and wonders
preceded their dispersion. For a star in the form of a sword
was seen to stand over the city of Jerusalem, and a comet
lasted an entire year. At Easter the eastern gate of the
temple, which was closed, and which could scarcely be moved
by twenty men, opened in the night of its own accord.
Chariots and armed bands were in like manner seen to
move through the air. At the solemn festival of Kaster,
one night a light shone in the temple equal to the light
of day, for half an hour. An ox which was brought as a
victim, brought forth a lamb in the middle of the temple. At
Pentecost a voice was heard in the temple, saying, ‘“ Let us
depart hence, let us depart hence, let us depart hence.” Jesus,
the son of Anianus,a man of the common people, kept con-
tinually crying out four years before the commencement of
the war, ‘‘ A voice from the east, a voice from the west, a voice
from the four winds ; a voice in Jerusalem and in the temple,
a voice against new husbands and new brides, and against all
this people.” And even though he was scourged, without
cursing or blessing any one, he cried out without ceasing for
seven years and five months, ‘‘ Woe to Jerusalem!’ And he
never became hoarse, and never ceased crying out. During
the siege he stood upon the wall and cried, “‘ Woe to the wicked
city! woe to the shrine! woe to the temple!’ And when he
added, ‘‘ Woe to myself!’ an enormous stone struck and killed
him.

A.D. 73. Arviragus, the king of the Britons, having fulfilled
the days of his life, died, and was buried by Claudius at Chester.
Marius, his son, succeeded him in his kingdom, a man of won-
derful wisdom and prudence, and who formed such a friendship
for the Roman people, that he took care without the least ob-
jection to pay the tribute which was required of him.

a.p. 74. A Colossus was erected at Rome, which was a hun-
dred and seven feet in height.

A.D. 75. Roderic, king of the Picts, coming from Scythia,
landed in the northern part of Britain, and began to lay
waste that province. But Marius, king of the Britons, attacked
him in a hostile manner, and slew him. After that, he grants
to the conquered people who had come with Roderic a’ part
of Albany to dwell in, which is called. Caithness, a desert
district, previously destitute of all inhabitants.

154 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 82.

A.D. 76. The Picts who had come with Roderic into Britain,
having no wives, asked the Britons to give them their daughters
and kinswomen in marriage. But when they were refused,
they crossed over the sea into Ireland, and bringing back
women out of that country, they begot children who were
all after their own likeness, men of moderate stature.

A.D. 77. The people who derived their origin from the Picts
and from the Irish, begun to be called Scots, as a people made
up of different nations. For that is called ‘Scot’? which is
collected from many things into one heap. {Moreover, that
land which was formerly called Albany, now gets the name of
Scotland from the Scots.

A.D. 78. Marius, king of the Britons, departed this life, and
left Coillus, his son, as his successor. He having been brought
up in Rome from his infancy, was much beloved by the senate.
For he paid the tribute which was demanded of him, and ruled
his kingdom in peace and tranquillity.

A.D. 79. John the Evangelist was accounted very. eminent
in the church of the Ephesians. For having founded seven
churches in that city, the names of which we read in the Apo-
calypse, he took care to ordain suitable ministers in all of
them.

A.D. 80. Vespasian died at Rome of a flux of the belly, in
the seventeenth year of his reign. But some say that he died
of a violent attack of fever.

A.D. 81. Titus, the son of Vespasian, succeeded to the em-
pire, and reigned two years, and as many months; a man
admirable for every kind of virtue to such a degree, that he
was called the love and delight of the human race. He was
so merciful in his government that he shed no blood whatever,
but dismissed some men who had been convicted of conspi-
racy against him, and retained them in the same intimacy
with himself as they had previously been.

A.D. 82. Titus was passing the second year of his reign.
He built an amphitheatre at Rome, and at his dedication he
killed five thousand wild beasts. He was also so far the most
eloquent man of his day, that he pleaded causes in Latin, and
composed poems and tragedies in Greek. He also said that
he had lost a day, when one had passed in which he had done
no good. At last he died in the city of Rome, to the great
grief of all the citizens.

A.D.94. THE NEW FAITH FOUNDED AMONG THE GAULS. 155

The same year, Cletus became the third pope, and occupied
the Roman chair eleven years, one month, and two days.

A.D. 83. Domitian, the younger brother of Titus, succeeded
to the empire. He reigned fifteen years and six months. He
advanced to such a pitch of* pride that he ordered himself to
be ealled God and Lord, and to be worshipped; and he was
the second emperor after Nero, who endeavoured most cruelly
to persecute the Christians and the Church of Christ by formal
edicts.

A.D. 84. John the Apostle was sent by Domitian into exile,
to the island of Patmos. There he wrote the Apocalypse,
which is called or translated in Latin the Revelation. -

A.D. 85. Domitian the emperor built the Pantheon, that is,
a temple in honour of all the gods.

A.D. 86. Habilius succeeded Anianus at Alexandria, who
had been the successor of Mark.

_ A.D. 87. Flavia Domicilla, the niece of Flavius Clemens,
the consul, by his sister’s side, was banished to the isle of
Pontia, on account of, her bearing witness to the faith; at
the same time, Quintilian the orator flourished.

_ A.D. 88. Domitian banished the mathematicians and philo-
sophers from the city of Rome.

A.D. 89. Domitian caused the Jews of the seed of David to
be put to death with bitter torments, as if there might have
been some king among them, who might obtain possession of
his kingdom.

A.D. 90. The Capitol, the Forum of Trajan, the Warm
Baths of Trajan, the Morning School, the Pantheon, the
Golden Roll, and the Temple of Vespasian, were all completed
at Rome.

A.D. 91. Domitian the emperor triumphed gloriously over
the Dacians and Germans.

A.D. 92. Domitian ordered gold and silver statues to be
erected to him in the Capitol. The same year, Cletus, the pope,
received the crown of martyrdom from Domitian.

A.D. 93. Clemens was elected fourth pope. He occupied
the Roman chair nine years, two months, and ten days.

A.D. 94. Clement, the bishop of the Roman see, sent some
energetic and noble men to lay the foundation of the new
faith among the Gauls. He sent Dionysius to the Parisians,
Nicasius to the people of Senlis, Taurinus to Evreux, Trophi-

156 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 98.

mus to Arles, Paul to Narbonne, Saturninus to the people of
Toulouse, Astremonius to Rennes, Martial to the Limoisin,
Gratian to Tours, Julian to Le Mans, Lucian to Beauvais,
Firmius to the people of Amiens, Photivus to Lyons. And by
their efforts an innumerable multitude of men was induced
to abandon the worship of idols.

A.D. 95. John the Apostle is related to have been thrown,
by the emperor Domitian, into a cauldron of boiling oil ; and
he was taken out of it completely unhurt, as he had always
remained free from all carnal corruption.

A.D. 96. Apollonius and Euphrates flourished, who are ac-
counted illustrious philosophers. Dionysius and Nicasius with
their companions received the crown of martyrdom ; and Domi-
tian ordered every one of the seed of David to be put to death.

A.D. 97. St. Denis, the disciple of the blessed pope Clemens,
suffered with his companions, Rusticus the archbishop, and
Eleuthericus the archdeacon, under Fecennius Sisinnius the
proconsul, in the city of Paris, on the seventh of October. At,
the same time, the blessed Nicasius also suffered with his
companions, under the same proconsul, in the city of Rouen.

A.D. 98. Domitian was murdered in the city of Rome, in his

palace, by the senate. And his corpse was exposed on a com-
mon bier, and carried to burial by the common night buriers,
and ignominiously insulted.
- The aged Nerva succeeded him, and reigned one year, five
months, and six days. He, by his first edict, ordered all the
exiles whom Domitian had banished, to be recalled. In con-
sequence, the Apostle John was released by this indul-
gence, and returned to Ephesus. And because he saw that
the faith of the church had, during his absence, been shaken
by heretics, he condemned the heresy of Cerinthus and Ebion
in that city. For they both made out the world to have been
created by angels, and asserted that Jesus was only a man, and
deniedhis resurrection. Nor did they believe in the resurrection
of the dead. The Apostle being urged by his brethren to
overturn this heresy, wrote his Gospel, showing in the be-
ginning of it, that ‘In the beginning was the word, and the
word was God, and by him all things were made.”

Nerva the emperor wishing to provide for the welfare of
the afflicted republic, when dying, adopted Trajan, a man of
the most consummate wisdom, as his son. ‘

A.D. 111. ANTIOCH DESTROYED BY AN EARTHQUAKE. 157

A.D. 99. Trajan succeeded to the Roman empire, and reigned
nineteen years, six months, and fifteen days. In his time,
John the Apostle being ninety-nine years of age, went to Christ,
having delivered a discourse to his disciples who were present.

A.D. 100. Trajan subdued many nations on the other side
of the Danube, and reduced Germany on the other side of the
Rhine to its former condition.

A.D. 101. Trajan occupied Seleucia, Ctesiphon, and Babylon;
and was the first man, since Alexander, who marched as far as
the borders of India.

A.D. 102. After the death of the blessed Clement, Anacletus
sat in the Roman chair, and occupied it nine years and ten

months. And the see was vacant thirteen days.

A.D. 103. Trajan put in operation a persecution against the
Christians, and Simon, the son of Cleophas, bishop of Jeru-
salem, was crucified, and succeeded by Justus.

A.D. 104. Saint Ignatius, bishop of the city of Antioch, was
brought to Rome, and given to wild beasts to be devoured, on
the first of February.

A.D. 105. Alexander, bishop of Rome, received the crown of
martyrdom, and is buried at the seventh milestone from the
city, on the Numantine road, on the spot where he was be-
headed.

A.D. 106. The aged Zachariah, bishop of the church at
Vienne, received the crown of martyrdom. And his predeces-
sors, of whom the first was Crescens, and the next Martinus,
were disciples of the apostles.

A.D 107. Pliny the orator and historian, who among other
judges had been sent to prosecute the church, inflicted severe
death on no one, but, as soon as he was appointed, mode-
rated the original edict by rescripts of a more gentle tenor.

A.D. 108. The golden palace at Rome, which had been built
by Nero, was burnt by a sudden conflagration.

A.D. 109. The Pantheon at Rome, which Domitian had
built to the admiration of all men, was burnt by lightning.

A.D. 110. Anearthquake destroyed almost the whole of the
city of Antioch, and many other cities also in different parts
of the world.

A.D. 111. Evaristus, the sixth pope, succeeded. Anacletus,
the bishop of the Roman see, and governed the church fourteen

years.

158 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 119.

A.D. 112. The Jews simultaneously, and as if under the in-
fluence of frantic rage, rose in insurrection in different nations
of the world, and carried on most atrocious wars, until they
were put down by deserved slaughter, according to the com-
mand of the emperor.

A.D. 113. Vetus, bishop of Vienne, who had been one of the
disciples and hearers of the apostles, was very eminent for his
confessions of faith and doctrine.

A.D. 114. Phocas, bishop of the city of Cynops, endured
martyrdom most gloriously ; and his sacred remains were car-
ried to Vienne, a city of Gaul, and there placed in the church
of the Holy Apostles.

A.D. 115. Coillus, the king of the Britons, had an only son
born to him, whom he called Lucius, and who was born to the
great joy and exultation of his father, because he had begotten
him in his old age, when he had given up all hope of an heir.

a.D. 116. Justus was discharging the office of priest at Alex- —
andria.

A.D. 117. Trajan died at Seleucia, a city of Isauria, and the
Romans burnt his body, and buried his ashes in a marble
column.

Cu. IV.—F rom a.p. 118 To 284.

Hadrian succeeds Trajan—Rebuilds Jerusalen—Lucius king of
Britain—Antoninus Pius—The Heresy of Valentinus—Galen
—Dispute about the day of Easter—Polycarp—Marcus Anto-
ninus—Two Emperors at a time—Commodus—Ireneus—The
Britons are converted to Christianity by Faganus and Deruvia-
nus— Pertinaxc—Severus—He comes to Britain—Is slain there
—Tertullian—Bassianus—Macrinus— Alerander—The Heresy
of Sabellius—Origen—Mazimus--Gordian—P hilip—Decius—
Gallus—Valerian— Gallienus—Cyprian—Claudius— Aurelian
—Tacitus—The Heresy of the Manicheans—Probus—Carus.

4.D. 118, Ailius Adrian became master of the Roman empire,
and he reigned twenty-one years. He was the son of the cousin
of Trajan, a man of industry and discretion, and one who
was easily moved to mercy.

4.D. 119, Adrian the emperor regulated the republic with
most just laws, so that he was called by the senate the “ Father
of his Country.” He was learned in both the Latin and Greek

A.D. 126. MARK APPOINTED BISHOP OF JERUSALEM. 159

languages, and built a library at Athens, which was a wonder-
ful building.

A.D. 120. Alexander succeeded pope Evaristus, and ruled
eighteen years, five months, and two days. He appointed
the words of the Lord about the bread and wine to be recited
in the canon, and ordered holy water to be sprinkled in the
habitations of men.

A.D. 121. The emperor Adrian was taught and instructed in
the books composed on the subject of the Christian religion,
by Quadratus, a disciple of the apostles, and Aristides an
Athenian, a man full of faith and wisdom, and by Serenus, his
lieutenant, On which account, in a letter addressed to the
' proconsul of Asia, he enjoined that no one should be allowed

to condemn the Christians without accusing them of some
crime, and proving it.

A.D. 122. The emperor Adrian crushed, with tremendous -
slaughter, the Jews who had rebelled and were laying waste
Palestine, which had formerly been their own province, and
he avenged the Christians.

A.D. 123, Ailius Adrian rebuilt Jerusalem, and ordered it
to be called Atlia, after his own name. He ordered, also, that
no Jew should be allowed to enter it, as the city was only open
to the Christians,

A.D. 124. Coillus, king of the Britons, died, and Lucius, his
son, was invested with the crown. He followed all the acts of
goodness of his father, and was esteemed by all men as Coillus
himself had been.

A.D, 125. Mark was appointed bishop of Jerusalem, being
the first of the Gentiles who ever was so, as all those were
now dead who had been bishops from the time of the Passion
of our Lord to the present moment. For the first bishop of
Jerusalem was James, the brother of our Lord. The second
was Simon, the son of Cleophas. The third, Justus; the
fourth, Zaccheus ; the fifth, Tobias ; the sixth, Benjamin ; the
seventh, John; the eighth, Matthias; the ninth, Philip; the
tenth, Seneca; the eleventh, Justus; the twelfth, Levi; the
thirteenth, Ephraim; the fourteenth, Joseph; the fifteenth
and last, Judas.

A.D. 126. Aquila the orator, a man of Pontus both by birth
and extraction, flourished ; and he was the first translator of

the divine law since the seventy translators,

160 . MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 136

A.D. 127. Justus, bishop of the church at Vienne, was
highly distinguished for his confession of Christ.

. A.D. 128. Sixtus, the eighth pope, succeeded Alexander, and
ruled for ten years, three months, and twenty days. And the
see was vacant two days.

A.D. 129. Publius, bishop of Athens and a disciple of the
apostles, received the crown of martyrdom on account of the
faith of Christ, and was succeeded by Quadratus, whom we
have mentioned before, who with great industry gathered the
church of Christ together again, which had been dispersed in
great alarm.

A.D. 130. Basilides, the heresiarch, greatly polluted the —
church of Christ by his treachery; it was from him that the
Basilidians, who adhered to his sect, derived their name.
These men, among other blasphemies which they have invented
about Christ, deny that he suffered.

A.D. 131. Cornelius was appointed fourth bishop of Antioch.
At the same time the blessed Cuthdrat, a bishop and disciple
of the apostles, suffered gloriously. He gathered together, by
his faith and energy, the church which had been scattered
abroad in great alarm by the persecution of Adrian.

A.D. 132. Nicopolis and Czesarea were destroyed by an
earthquake. At the same time, Saint Symphrosia suffered in
the city of Tibur, with seven of her sons ; first of all, her hands
were stricken off, then she was hung up by the hair, and last
of all she was thrown into the river.

A.D. 133. Hymeneeus presided over the church at Alexandria
as bishop. At the same time, Saint Sabina, the martyr, suffered
most gloriously at Rome, under the emperor Adrian. She was —
slain with the sword, and so flew to heaven with the palm of
martyrdom.

A.D. 134, Sylvius Julianus composed a perpetual edict.
Adrian having built some beautiful temples at Athens, also
built there a library of marvellous grandeur.

A.D. 135. The Jews flew to arms, and ravaged Palestine.

At the same time the blessed Aristides was deposed, who had
offered the emperor Adrian some works on the Christian
religion, and made him an elegant address, proving that Jesus.
was the only God. eat

A.D. 136. The Jewish war which was being carried on in
Palestine was terminated.

}

A.D. 145. HERUS APPOINTED BISHOP OF ANTIOCH. 161

A.D. 137. Mark is appointed bishop of Jerusalem, being
the first of the Gentiles who was so,! there being an end to
all those bishops who had been of the circumcision.

A.D. 138. Antoninus, surnamed Pius, was created emperor ;
he reigned twenty years and not quite three months. He lived
in such tranquillity, that he was deservedly called ‘ Pious, and
the Father of his country.”

A.D. 139. Telesphorus was appointed pope, being the ninth
who had sat in the Roman chair. | He ruled for eleven years,
aba months, and twenty days, and the see was vacant seven

ays.
A.D. 140. Antoninus, with his sons Aurelius and Lucius,
released all men from their debts and burnt their bonds,
throughout the whole Roman empire.

A.D. 141. Justin the philosopher gave to Antoninus a work
which he had composed on the subject of the Christian religion,
and rendered him favourable to the Christians. And Justin,
not long afterwards, when a persecution was set on foot, was
betrayed by Crescens Cinicus, and shed his blood for Christ’s
sake.

A.D. 142. The heresy of Valentinus and Marcion wickedly
attacked the Church of Christ, and the inventors of this
wickedness set up Alones,” that is to say, some wickednesses,
as the original creator of the world, They also affirmed that
Christ did not derive his body from a virgin’s, but asserted
that he only passed through her as through a pipe.

A.D. 143. Galen, the eminent physician, a native of Perga-
mus, flourished at Rome. About the same time, in the reign
of the emperor Antoninus, Saint Alexander the bishop endured
martyrdom, and was slain by the sword, after the infliction
of many kinds of torture.

A.D. 144, Pius was ordained bishop of the Roman Church.
About the same time, Saint Concordius, a Presbyter, suffered
at Spoletum, and received the crown of martyrdom after the
endurance of many kinds of torture, being at last slain with

the sword.

a.D. 145. Herus was appointed bishop of Antioch. About

1 Our Chronicler has already stated this fact as having happened in the

year 125.
2 The theory of Auones was asserted by Valentinus, not by Marcion.

See Mosheim Eccl, Hist. Cent, II. Part II. §§ vii.—xv.

VOL. I. M

162 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 156.

the same time, Saint Pontianus, at the command of the emperor
Antoninus, arrived nobly at the glory of martyrdom, and re-
ceived the palm of a martyr after the fire of many tribulations.

A.D. 146. Mark succeeded to the bishopric of Alexandria.
About the same time, at Smyrna, Saint Polycarp was delivered
to the flames in the time of the emperor Antoninus; and being
thoroughly tried, and found pure, deserved a crown from the
Lord.

A.D. 147. The heretic Valentinus became notorious, and
prevailed till the time of Nicetus. About the same time, the
Blessed Philip, bishop in the city of Cortina, being made per-
fect in holiness, fell asleep in the Lord.

A.D. 148. Vesomedius of Crete, a musical poet of lyric poems,
flourished.

‘a.p. 149. Taurus Hyresius, an illustrious philosopher of the
Platonic sect, flourished. About the same time, Saint Papy-
rus, the bishop, became a glorious martyr at Pergamus.

A.D. 150. Hyginus became pope, and sat in the Roman
chair four years, three months, and six days. He arranged
the order of the clergy, and settled the different ranks in
regular order.

A.D. 151. Apollonius the Stoic, and Basilida, both eminent
philosophers, flourished. About the same time, Maria, a virgin,
went to the Lord happily, being made a martyr by the com-
mand of the emperor Antoninus.

A.D. 152. Adrian of Nicomedia, and Maximus of Tyre,
flourished. At the same time, Saint Felicitas and her seven
sons were beheaded for Christ’s sake, by command of the em-
peror Antoninus.

A.D. 153, Celadion flourished as bishop of the Church at
Alexandria.

A.D. 154. Pius satin the Roman chair; he ruled his see for
eleven years, three months, and twenty-one days, and it was
vacant twenty-two days.

A.D. 155. Hermes wrote a book, which is called the “ Shep-
herd’s Book,” in which is contained the precept of an angel,
that Easter should be always celebrated on the Lord’s day.

A.D. 156. Polycarp, a disciple of the blessed Saint John,
came to Rome, and delivered many men from the taint of
heresy, who had been lately corrupted by the doctrine of
Valentine and Cerdo.

aa Le tes

A.D. 169. HARTHQUAKES AND INUNDATIONS OF RIVERS. 163

A.D. 157. Justus, bishop of the people of Vienne, and Pho-
tinus, bishop of Lyons, flourished in the Church of Christ.

A.D. 158. Antoninus, surnamed Pius, was attacked by dis-
ease, and died at the twelfth milestone from the city.

A.D. 159. Marcus Antoninus Verus obtained the Roman
empire, and reigned nineteen years and eleven months. He
took to himself as partner in the empire, Aurelius Commodus,
his relation. Up to this period, there was only one Augustus
at the same time.

A.D. 160. Marcus Antoninus and Aurelius Commodus car-
ried on war against the Parthians, with admirable virtue and
success. And at the same time, the fourth persecution against
the Christians since the time of Nero, was kindled throughout
Asia and the Gauls. :

A.D. 161. Pionius and Polycarp, disciples of the blessed
Saint John, and bishops of Smyrna, suffered a glorious mar-
tyrdom.

A.D. 162. A great many persons in the Gauls gloriously
shed their blood for the sake of Christ; and among them,
Justus, bishop of Vienne, having been wasted away a long
time in banishment, was made a glorious martyr.

A.D. 163. The heresy of Cataphrygians arose, which de-
rived its name from the province of Phrygia, where its authors
lived.

A.D. 164. Anicetus was appointed to the Roman chair, where
he sat for eleven years. He established a rule that the clergy
should not wear long hair. we

A.D. 165. ‘Photinus, bishop of Lyons, an admirable old
man, suffered martyrdom, with forty-eight more, of the cities
of Vienne and Lyons.

A.D. 166. Severinus, Exuperius, and Felicianus, received the
crown of martyrdom.

A.D. 167. A terrible plague spread over Italy, to avenge
the martyrs; so that villages and farms in every direction
remained without cultivators or inhabitants, and even Gaul
did not escape unhurt by this pestilence.

A.D. 168. There were numbers of earthquakes, accompanied

by the destruction of cities and inundations of rivers, through-
out several provinces. Swarms of locusts also infested the
fields in every direction.
A.D. 169. Aurelius Commodus, while he was sitting in a car-
-M 2

>

164 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 178.

riage with his brother, died of the disease which the Greeks
call apoplexy. And after his death, Marcus Antoninus for some
time governed the republic by himself.

A.D. 170. Marcus Antoninus took Lucius Commodus, his
son, as his partner in the kingdom. And he also moderated
the old severe laws by new constitutions.

A.D. 171. Marcus, with his son, ordered all the records of
the fiscal transactions, which were full of false accusations, to
be collected and burnt.

A.D. 172. Melletius Asianus, bishop of Sardicas, delivered
to the emperor Marcus Antoninus an apology for the Christians.

A.D. 173. The heretics called the Montanists arose ; who
got their name from the circumstance of their lying hid in the
mountains during the time of the persecution, on which oc-
casion they separated themselves from the body of the Catho-
lic Church.

A.D. 174. Marcus Antoninus, the emperor, with his son
Lucius, happily terminated the war with the Marcomanni.
But after the barbarian nations, namely, the Vandals and Sar-
matians, had surrounded nearly the whole of the German and
Roman army, certain Christian soldiers who were with the
emperor, invoking the name of Christ with great constancy,
threw the enemies into consternation, and put them to flight.
And the emperor wrote a letter to the senate to convey them
the information, and delightedly attributed his victory to Christ.

A.D. 175. Sother was elected pope, as successor to Anicetus.
’ He occupied the Roman chair nine years, three months, and
twelve days. And the see was vacant twenty-two days. He
established a rule that no monk should touch the sacred ves-
sels, or the sacred robe; or should put incense on the incense-
burner.

A.D. 176. Tatianus the heresiarch attempted to cloud the
Church of Christ with his own doctrines ; and from him arose

the Encratites, who were so called because they avoided eating .

flesh. Severianus carried this error further still. From him
are derived the Severians.

A.D. 177. Theophilus, the sixth president of the Church of
Antioch, flourished. And also Pinitus of Crete, bishop of the
city of Gnossus.

A.D. 178. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, the emperor, being
stationed in Pannonia, was attacked by sudden illness and died.
And after his death Lucius Antoninus Commodus, his son,

ont

/A.D. 185. CHRISTIANITY SET UP IN BRITAIN. 165

reigned fifteen years. He waged war successfully against the
‘Germans.

A.D. 179. Lucius Antoninus, being utterly depraved by
luxury and profligacy, and being rendered quite shameless,
constantly fought in arms among the gladiators in the schools,
and also in the amphitheatre, and constantly exposed himself
to fight with wild beasts. 3

A.D. 180. The Capitol of Rome was struck by lightning,
and that caused a conflagration, which burnt with its devour-
_ ing fury the hbrary which had been collected by the care of

former ages, and several temples situated in the neighbourhood.

A.D. 181. The emperor Lucius murdered the senators, and
especially those whom he had observed to be eminent for
nobleness and energy. -

A.D. 182. Irenzeus, bishop of Lyons, flourished, and also
Dionysius, who had been a disciple of the disciples of Christ,
and who at that time governed the church at Corinth.

A.D. 183. The emperor had the head taken off the Colossus,
and ordered one bearing his own resemblance, to be placed
upon it.

A.D. 184. Theodotius of Ephesus, the third translator of the
divine law, flourished with high reputation.

. A.D. 185. Eleutherius was elected the fifteenth pope. He
sat in the Roman chair for fifteen years, six months, and five
days ; and the see was vacant six days.

About the same time, Lucius, king of the Britons, directed
letters to the same pope, entreating of him that he might be
made a Christian. And the blessed pontiff, having ascertained
the devotion of the king, sent to him some religious teachers,
namely, Faganus and Deruvianus, to convert the king to Christ,
and wash him in the holy font. And when that had been

done, then the different nations ran to baptism, following the
example of the king, so that in a short time there were no
infidels foundin the island. Therefore, those blessed teachers,
when they had destroyed paganism throughout the whole of
Britain, dedicated the temples, which had been founded in
honour of many gods, to the one God, and to his saints, and
filled them with different companies of ordained priests ;
and they appointed in the different cities of the kingdom
twenty-eight bishops, who were under the supreme jurisdiction
of three archbishops and three metropolitan sees. The first
see was that of London, to which Cornwall and Loegria were

166 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 192.

subject, provinces which the Severn separates from Wales.
The second was at York, to which Deira and Scotland were
subject, and which the great river Humber separates from
Loegria. The third was in Caerleon, to which Cambria, that is,
Wales, which the Severn separates from Loegria, was subject.
The old walls and buildings testify to us that this city was for-
merly situated on the river Usk, in Glamorgan.

A.D, 186. The blessed priests Faganus and Deruvianus re-
turned to Rome, and easily prevailed on the most blessed pope
that all that they had done should be confirmed. And when it
had been, then the before-mentioned teachers returned to
Britain, with a great many more, by whose teaching the nation
of the Britons was soon founded on the faith of Christ, and
became eminent as a Christian people. And their names and
actions are found in the book which Gildas the historian wrote,
concerning the victory of Aurelius Ambrosius.

A.D. 187. Lucius, the glorious king of the Britons, when he
saw that the worship of the true faith was extended in his king-
dom, having with great liberality giving possessions and terri-
tories to the churches and to ecclesiastical men, confirmed all
his gifts by papers and muniments. And he appointed all
churches with their burying places to be free, so that whatever
malefactor fled to them, should remain unhurt by any one.
Then living happily in the love of God and of his neighbours,
he governed his kingdom in the greatest tranquillity.

A.D. 188. Eleutherius, bishop of the city of Rome, made
a law that no food should be rejected by Christians, which
was reasonable and fit for man.

A.D. 189. Hegesippus, bishop of Jerusalem for nineteen
years, and a most veracious writer of ecclesiastical history,
flourished.

a.D. 190. Lucius Commodus the emperor, who was a cruel
monster to all, died, being strangled in the temple of Vesta.

A.D, 191. Helvius Pertinax was created emperor by the
senate. He reigned six months, and they were scarcely com-
pleted, when he was murdered in his palace, by the wickedness
of Julian, who reigned after him for seven months. Severus
defeated Julian in civil war, and slew him.

A.D. 192. Severus, an African by descent, obtained the
Roman empire, and reigned eighteen years. He, being cruel
by nature, was often attacked by many wars. He governed the
republic with great courage, but with great difficulty.

A.D. 203. DEATH OF LUCIUS, KING OF THE BRITONS. 167

A.D. 193. Severus defeated all Cyzicus, and slew Pestenninus
Niger, who in Egypt and in Syria had aspired to the tyranny.

A.D. 194. Severus checked the Jews and Samaritans, who
were endeavouring to rebel with the sword; and conquered
the Parthians, the Arabians, and the Alabeni. :

A.D. 195. Severus began the fifth persecution after Nero,
against the Christians. Anda great many saints in the different
provinces received the crown of martyrdom; among whom
were Leonidas, the father of Origen, and Clement, the bishop
of the church at Alexandria.

A.D. 196. Trenzeus of Lyons, with a vast multitude of every
sex and age, underwent martyrdom for the sake of Christ.

A.D. 197. Claudius Albinus, who had made himself Czesar
in the Gauls, was slain at Lyons.

A.D. 198. Victor was appointed pontiff of the Roman see,
being the sixteenth pope. And he remained in it ten years,
two months, and ten days, and the see was vacant six days.
He established the rule of regulating Easter by the moon; so
that it should be celebrated from the fourteenth day of the
first month to the twenty-first.

A.D. 199. Apollonius, a most discreet man, wrote against
Montanus, Prisca, and Maximilla, all heretics, who aftirmed
that the Holy Ghost had been given not to the Apostles, but to
them.

A.D. 200. Serapion, bishop of the church at Antioch, and
Apollonius, a senator, were made martyrs.

A.D. 201. The illustrious king of the Britons, Lucius, was
taken in the midst of his good actions, and departed this life,
to go to Christ, at Claudiocestria ; and was honourably buried
in the church of the principal see. After his death, a dissen-
sion arose among the Britons, because he died without an heir,
and because the Roman power was weakened. And so Britain
remained in a state of division till the arrival of Severus, who
afterwards restored it to obedience to the Romans.

A.D. 202. At the command of Severus, Perpetua and Feli-
citas were in the camp at Carthage, in Africa, given up to
wild beasts, for Christ’s sake, to be devoured by them, on the
seventh of March, and with them, Revocatus and Saturninus.
But Secundolus, after he had been a long time kept in prison,
fell asleep in Christ.

A.D. 203, Panthenus, a philosopher of the Stoic sect, was

168 =. MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. Ac: 207<

sent to India, to teach the natives, by Demetrius, bishop of -
Alexandria. And he was the first person who was sent thither;
and he founded the church of Christ, by his industry and good
example.

a.D. 204. Symmachus, the fourth translator of the divine
law, flourished.

A.D. 205. Severus the emperor transferred the war to the
districts of Britain, where he reduced the greater part of the
island to obedience to him, by great battles often repeated.
But that part of the people whom he could not subdue at the
time, he put to flight, and drove across the Deira. And being
continually harassed by their formidable rebellions, he often
lost great numbers of his men. Therefore, he determined to
separate that part of the island which he had reduced, from
those tribes who were® still unconquered, by fosses and walls,
so as to keep off those indomitable enemies at a greater distance
from himself. Therefore he constructed a vast dyke, and with
a very strong wall, fortified with many towers; extending a
hundred and thirty-two miles in length, from sea to sea, and
having stationed garrisons along it, he proceeded to York.

A.D. 206. Fulgentius, the leader of the people, wha had been
put to flight, when he saw that he and his troops were cut off
by this wall, crossed the sea into Scythia, in hopes, bythe assist-
ance of the Picts, to be restored to his former dignity. And
when he had collected there all the youth of his country, he
returned with a large fleet to Britain, and besieged York. And
when news of this event was brought to Severus, he immediately
marched his army to the besieged town. And a hard-fought
battle took place, and Severus, the emperor, was slain, and
Fulgentius was mortally wounded. Severus left two sons,
Bassianus and Geta, of whom the Britons elected Bassianus
for their king, because he was born of a British mother, and
the Romans elected Geta, because he was connected with them
on both sides of his house. But the brothers engaged in battle, ~
in which Geta was killed, and Bassianus gained the victory.
After that, he marched towards Rome with all speed.

A.D. 207. Bassianus Aurelius Antoninus Caracalla gained
the sovereign powers; he reigned seven years, and showed
himself in all respects a sterner character than even his father
Severus. Moreover, he was so frantic in his lusts, that he
married his step-mother Julia.

A.D. 219. CALIXTUS ELECTED POPE. 169

A.D. 208. A fifth edition of the divine law was found at
Jericho ; the author of which is not known.

A.D. 209. Zephyrinus was elected pope. He sat in the
Roman chair eight years, six months, and ten days. And the
see was vacant six days.

A.D. 210. While Bassianus was emperor, Symmachus dif-
fused his heresy abroad, by preaching that Jesus was born of
Joseph in the natural way, and that the Mosaic law ought to
be observed according to the Jewish fashion.

A.D. 211. Alexander, bishop of Cappadocia, being full of a
desire to see the sacred places, came to Jerusalem, while Nar-
cissus, who was the bishop of that city, and a man of ex-
ceeding old age, was still alive; and the Lord himself, in a
revelation, directing such a step, he is made bishop in the room
of Narcissus.

A.D. 212. Tertullianus, an African, the son of a centurion
of proconsular rank, flourished; he was celebrated in all the
churches, but afterwards he fell away, and embraced the doc-
trines of Montanus, and wrote books against the church.

A.D. 213. Bassianus the emperor waged a war against the
Parthians, and was surrounded by the enemy, between Edessa
and Carree, and slain.

A.D. 214. Maerimus the prefect usurped the empire, and
reigned one year. And when the year was passed, he was
slain in a tumult of the soldiers.

A.D. 215. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus succeeded to the em-
pire, and held it for four years.

A.D. 216. The city of Nicopolis in Palestine, which was
formerly called Emmaus, was built. This is that Emmaus,
which the Lord, after his resurrection, condescended to sanc-
tify by his entrance into it.

A.D. 217. Sabellius the heresiarch appeared, who asserted
that one ought to preach one person only, of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost.

A.D. 218. Alexander was created emperor, by the consent
of both the Senate and the soldiers, and reigned fifteen years
with great glory for his equity.

A.D. 219. Calixtus was elected the eighteenth pope. He sat
in the Roman chair five years, two months, and two days, and
the see was vacant six days. He appointed a fast to take
place at the fruit season every year, to obtain fine weather and
abundant crops.

170 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ALD0231. 9

A.D. 220. A sixth edition of the divine law was found at
Nicopolis ; the author of which is not known.

A.D. 221. Hippolytus the bishop, who was the author of |
many small works, wrote a canon of the times, and brought
it down to his own day.

A.D. 222. Mammeea, the most Christian mother of the
emperor, was anxious to hear the presbyter Origen, and sent
for him from Antioch, and treated him with the greatest re-
spect.

ine 223. The emperor Alexander carried an expedition into
Persia, and defeated and subdued Xerxes, king of Persia.

A.D. 224. Urbanus was elected pope; he held the Roman
chair eight years, ten months, and eleven days, and the see was
vacant seventeen days. He strengthened many nobles to pro-
fess the faith of Christ and to encounter martyrdom.

A.D. 225. Almachius, prefect of the city of Rome, raged
against the Christians with great cruelty, and brought the
blessed Ceecilia to the palm of martyrdom. And influenced
by her miracles and example, Tiburtius, Valerianus, and Maxi-
mus, endured martyrdom in a glorious manner.

A.D, 226. The emperor Alexander most gloriously defeated
Xerxes, king of the Persians.

A.D. 227. Ulpian the lawyer, the assessor of Alexander,
flourished with great renown. At the same time, many mar-
tyrs were put to death, whom Alexander the emperor con-
demned by a capital sentence.

A.D. 228. Terninus, a presbyter of Antioch, Hippolytus,
Berillus, and Hostrenus, all flourished as eminent writers.

A.D. 229. The presbyter Calepodius suffered under the em-
peror Alexander, who caused him to be slain with the sword,
and his body to be dragged through the city, and at last thrown
into the Tiber.

A.D. 230. Zebennus, bishop of Antioch, flourished. About
the same time, Palmatius, the consul, with his wife and chil-
dren, and forty companions of both sexes, endured an illus-
trious martyrdom.

A.D. 231, Origen of Alexandria, after he had castrated him-
self for the love of the kingdom of heaven, and had lived
freely with both men and women, came from Alexandria to
Jerusalem ; on which account, he is celebrated over the whole
world ; and he was a man of so admirable a genius, that he

A.D. 240. ORIGEN INSTRUCTS TWO BISHOPS. 171

surpassed in every kind of learning all the doctors of his
time. At last, however, this presbyter became infatuated and
deceived, and said, “That the Son could not see the Father,
nor could the Holy Spirit see the Son.”’ He also said, “‘ That
the souls had sinned in the beginning of the world, and had
deserved different torments for their different sins, and that
it was on this account that the world was made.’’ He also said,
«That the Son was yet to suffer, and that he would redeem the
devils as well as men.” When he argued on the right side
no man spoke better, when on the wrong side no man spoke
worse.
A.D. 232. Pontianus was elected into the Roman chair, and
he ruled four years, two months, and two days.
A.D. 233. The emperor Alexander was slain at Mayence, in
a tumult raised by the soldiers, after he had reigned thirteen
ears.
A.D. 234. Maximinus was elected emperor by the army,
without the consent of the senate, after he had carried on the
war in Germany successfully ; and he reigned three years.

A.D. 235. The emperor Maximinus put in force a persecution
against the prelates of the Churches; especially on account
of Mammeea, the mother of Alexander, whom he had suc-
ceeded, and her most Christian family ; in which many per-
sons flew to the kingdom of heaven, having obtained the crown
of martyrdom.

A.D. 236. Pontianus, bishop of the Roman see, received
the crown of martyrdom, and was buried in the cemetery of
pope Calixtus.

A.D. 237. Antherius was elected pope ; he sat in the Roman
chair one month and fifteen days; at the expiration of which,
by the command of Maximinus, he went to heaven as a martyr.
But after a few days, Maximinus himself was slain by Pompey.

A.D. 238. Gordian obtained the Roman empire ; he reigned
six years. For Pompey, the slayer of Maximinus, and his bro-
ther Albinus, who had usurped the empire, were slain in the
palace. The same year, Fabian was elected pope, and sat in the
Roman chair fourteen years, eleven months, and eleven days.

A.D. 239. Lucianus Africanus flourished, among the eccle-
siastical writers. And he is spoken of as exceedingly learned
in all philosophical studies, and in all the learning of the Greeks.

a.p. 240, Origen, in Ceesarea of Palestine, instructed Theo-

172 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ADH 2522

dorus, surnamed Gregory, and Athenodorus, both bishops, in
divine philosophy.

A.D. 241. Florentius, bishop of Vienne, was illustrious for
his life and learning, and he lived till the reign of Gallienus and
Volusianus, and was banished and endured martyrdom.

A.D. 242. Fabian ruled the Roman Church. At whose pro-
motion the Holy Spirit, in the form of a dove, descended on
his head.

A.D. 243. Gordian, who was still a boy, marching against
Parthia in the east, was slain by the treachery of his friends,
near Circea, on the Euphrates.

A.D. 244, Philip was elected emperor; he reigned seven
years, and associated Philip, his son, with himself, as partner
in the empire.

A.D. 245. The emperor Philip is made a Christian, being the
first of all the emperors who was so. And he remained a Chris-
tian unto the end.

A.D. 246. Origen wrote eight volumes, disputing against a
certain Celsum, .an Epicurean philosopher, who had written
books against us. And Hieronymus testifies that he had read
five thousand books of this writer.

A.D. 247. The year of the nativity of Christ was celebrated
by the most Christian emperor Philip.

A.D. 248. The third year of Philip’s reign, the thousandth
year from the foundation of Rome was completed.

A.D. 249. Pope Fabian appointed that a new chrism should
be made every year, and the old one burnt.

A.D. 250. Philip, both the father and the son, were both,
although in different places, murdered in a military tumult by
the treachery of Decius.

A.D. 251. Decius, the originator of the civil war, became
emperor, and reigned a year and three months. He, out of
hatred of Philip, whom he had succeeded, disseminated deadly
edicts, for the persecution and slaughter of the Christians ;
and he was the seventh, since Nero, who had raged against the
worshippers of Christ. At this time, also the blessed Fabian
suffered at Rome. And at Ephesus the seven Holy Sleepers
lay hid on Mount Ceelius. Alexander the bishop suffered at
Jerusalem, and Laurentius and Hippolytus at Rome.

A.D. 252. Gallus, having obtained the kingdom, with his son
Volusianus, held it for thirty-one years and five months. At

“ALD. 255. VALERIAN TAKEN PRISONER. 173

which time a terrible pestilence raged throughout almost all the
provinces of the Roman empire, beyond a question as divine
-_ vengeance for the injuries done to the name of Christ. At the
same time, the presbyter Origen, whom we have spoken of above,
died. His writings are found, in some passages, to be corrupted
by heretical errors. For he asserted that all who had ended
their lives in sins, even in the greatest, and the devil and all his
angels, are to be purified after a long time, and restored to
the kingdom of God; and that some again fall into torments,
and again return to happiness. And he says that all rational
creatures always have been, and always will be, going through
these alternations of happiness and misery. He is related to
have published a thousand tracts and more, and many books of
commentaries; and he castrated-himself for the sake of chastity,
although he did not do it scientifically. And he acted in that,
as the pilot of a ship would, who, seeing a tempest coming,
for the sake of avoiding the storm, were in a passion to break
his rudder, and bury the vessel in the waves. At the same
time, Cyprian, the light of the doctors, flourished at Carthage.
In this year, also, Cornelius was elected bishop of the city
of Rome, and held the chair two years and as many months,
and ten days. He, being asked by a certain matron named
Lucinia, for the bodies of Peter and Paul, took them out of
the catacombs by night, and Lucinia placed the body of the
blessed Paul in her farm in the road to Ostia, where he was
beheaded. The corpse of the blessed Peter, pope Cornelius
placed near the spot where he had been crucified. The same
year, Gallus and Volusianus, while carrying on a civil war
against Aimilianus, who was plotting a revolution, were slain :
and Aimilianus also died in the third month of his tyranny.
A.D. 253. Valerian succeeded to the empire with his son
Gallienus, and reigned fifteen years. He was the first person
who worshipped the saints to such a degree that his house
was believed by the faithful to be the church of God.
A.D. 254. Lucius was elected bishop of the city of Rome,
and held the chair three years, three months, and three days.
A.D. 255. Valerian, immediately after having set on foot
the eighth persecution against the Christians, was taken pri-
soner by Sapor, king of Persia, and deprived of his eyes, and
kept in ignominious slavery among the Persians as long as he
lived ; and he lived to a great age. Gallienus, terrified by so

174. MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 268. —

clear a judgment of God, restored peace to the church by a
lukewarm satisfaction.

A.D. 256. Cyprian, bishop of Carthage, receives the crown of
martyrdom. His life, and an account of his passion, have been
written by Pontianus, his deacon, and left by him to the faith-
ful, for their edification.

A.D. 257. Stephen was elected to the Roman chair, which
he held four years, three months, and three days. He ordered
the priests and Levites not to wear their sacred vestments in
daily use, but only in the church.

A.D. 258. The Germans invaded all Italy in a hostile man-
ner, and penetrated as far as Ravenna.

A.D. 259. Greece, Macedonia, Pontus, and Asia were de-
stroyed by an inundation of the Goths.

A.D. 260. Sixtus was elected to the Roman chair, and held
it for two years, eleven months, and six days, and then it was
vacant.

4.D. 261. Postumius, by means of great bloodshed for
twenty-one days, seized the supreme power in Gaul, and he
retained it ten years, displaying great virtue and moderation.
He expelled the enemies who had previously got the mastery,
but he was nevertheless slain in a sedition of the soldiers.

A.D. 262. Victorinus was created emperor by the Gauls,
and, after a short time, was slain at Vienne.

A.D. 263. Dionysius was appointed pope, and occupied the
Roman chair two years and two months.

A.D. 264. Gregory, bishop of Neo Ceesarea in Pontus, wish-
ing to build a church, was hindered by some mountain. And
as there was not room for building the church, he, by his
prayers, removed the mountain, and founded the church.

A.D. 265. Felix was appointed to the Roman chair, and oc-
cupied it two years, ten months, and twenty-five days. About
the same time, also, Lupicinus, bishop of the church at Vienne,
flourished with great renown.

A.D. 266, Gallienus, the emperor, having deserted the repub-
lic, and given himself up to licentiousness at Milan, was slain.

A.D. 267. Claudius assumed the supreme power with the
good-will of the-senate, and reigned two years.

A.D. 268. Eutychianus became pope of Rome, and continued
so for eight years, ten months, and three days. And the see
was vacant eight days.

A.D. 277. ANATOLIUS, BISHOP OF LAODICEA. 175

A.D. 269. Claudius attacked the Goths, who had now for
fifteen years been devastating Illyricum and Macedonia, and
routed them with incredible slaughter. And a golden shield
in the senate house, and a golden equestrian statue in the
Capitol were decreed him by the senate. But immediately after
this, he fell sick and died at Smyrnium.

A.D. 270. Quintillus, the brother of Claudius, a man of sin-
gular moderation, having been elected emperor by the army,
was slain on the seventeenth day of his reign. The same
year, Madion, a presbyter of the church at Antioch, argued
against Paul of Samosata, the bishop of Antioch, who asserted
the doctrine that Christ was a man of common nature ; and
only notaries were present at the argument.

A.D. 271. Aurelian obtained the empire, and held it four
years and six months, a man eminent for military excellence.

A.D. 272. Aurelian undertook an expedition in the Danube,
and defeated the Goths in great battles.

A.D. 273. Aurelian surrounded the city of Rome with
stronger walls, and rendered it impregnable. The same year,
Paul, who has been mentioned above, is convicted of his heresy
at Antioch, and condemned.

A.D. 274. After Aurelian had decided to adopt measures of
persecution against the Christians, a thunderbolt fell at his
feet, to the great alarm of the bystanders. And not long
afterwards, he was killed on a journey. .

A.D. 275. Tacitus became emperor. He reigned six months;
and after he was slain in Pontus, Florian succeeded to the em-
pire, and reigned eighty-eight days, and was slain at Tarsus.

The same year, Eutychianus, bishop of Rome, received the
crown. of martyrdom, and was buried in the cemetery of Calix-
tus; and he had buried three hundred and forty-two martyrs
with his own hand.

A.D. 276. Caius was made bishop of the city of Rome, and
remained so eleven years, four months. In which year, also,
Probus obtained the empire, and reigned six years and four
months.

A.p. 277. Anatolius, bishop of Laodicea, in Syria, flourished,
and was greatly celebrated. The greatness of his genius may
be plainly known from the book which he composed on the
subject of Easter, and from the ten books of his arithmetical
institution.

176 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 285.

A.D. 278. The insane heresy of the Manicheans rose up; the
author of which was Manes. These men teach that there are
two principles, one of good and the other of evil, one of light
and the other of darkness; they affirm that souls flow from
God as from a kind of spring ; they reject the Old Testament,
and receive the New in part. About the same time, Simplides,
bishop of Vienne, a man of wonderful sanctity, flourished.

A.D. 279. Probus, the emperor, completely delivered France
from the barbarians by whom it had been long occupied,
having at last defeated the enemy, in many terrible battles.

A.D. 280. Probus carried on two wars, one in the east,
in which he defeated and took prisoner the tyrant Saturninus,
the other in which he defeated Proculus and Bonosus in great
battles at Agrippina, and slew them. Archelaus, bishop of Meso-
potamia, composed an account of the argument which he held
against Manicheeus of Persia, which was published in the
Syrian language, but has been translated, and is in the hands,
of many of the Greeks.

A.D. 281. The emperor Probus was slain at Sirmium in a
military tumult. The second year of his reign was, according
to the Hebrews, the beginning of the eighty-sixth jubilee, in
which are contained four thousand two hundred and fifty years.

A.D. 282. Carus became emperor, and reigned two years
with his sons Carinus and Numerianus.

A.D. 283. Phierius, presbyter of Alexandria, under Theo-
nas, the bishop, taught the people, and composed different
books of tracts. He was also master of so elegant a style, that
he was called the younger Origen.

A.D. 284, Carus being occupied with the Persian war, after
he had taken two most noble cities, Coelon and Ctesiphon,
and had triumphed over the Persians, was struck by lightning
in his camp on the Tigris, and died.

Cu. V.—a.p. 285 To 340.

Diocletian's reign—Carausius in Britain—Constantius—Gale-
rius Maximian—The empress Helena—The persecution of
Diocletian—Amphibalus—Saint Albanus—Diocletian and
Masimian abdicate the throne—Constantine is made emperor
in Britain—Comes to Rome —Octavius — Silvester— The
Arrian heresy—Death of Constantine.

A.D. 285. Diocletian obtained the empire of Rome, and held

A.D. 292. ALECTUS IS SENT TO REDUCE BRITAIN. 177

it twenty years ; and immediately, as soon as he had the power,
he slew with his own hand Aper, the slayer of Numerianus.

A.D. 286. There was in Britain a certain youth named Carau-
sius, of the lowest class of the people, who, having gone to
Rome, demanded permission from the senate to protect the
maritime coast of Britain from barbarian invasion with a fleet.
At last, after he had deceived the senate with his false promises,
he obtained what he asked, and departed for Britain with
sealed papers. Presently putting to sea, with a band of pirates
for his companions, he plundered the lands in all the islands
of the province, and overthrew the cities and towns, sparing
no one. All who coveted the property of others flocked to
him ; and he laboured to unite them into one band by con-
tinual largesses. Nevertheless he was uneasy in his mind from
being conscious of wicked=ess, and so he told the Britons
that if they would make him king, he would exterminate the
Romans, and deliver the whole island from that barbarous na-
tion. When they all consented, he assumed the royal diadem,
and reigned seven years, and disdained to pay the accustomed
tribute to the Roman senate.

A.D. 287. Caius, bishop of the city of Rome, received the
crown of martyrdom under the emperor Diocletian.

A.D. 288. Marcellinus succeeded to the Roman chair, and
filled it seven years, two months, and twenty-four days. And
the see was vacant for seven-years and ten days.

A.D. 289. Diocletian, after a most difficult war and exceed-
ing labour, subdued Carinus, whom Carus Ceesar had left in
Dalmatia.

A.D. 290. When Amandus and Alian had stirred up perni-
cious tumults in Gaul, Diocletian made Maximian, surnamed
Herculeus, Ceesar and partner in the empire ; and sent him to
Gaul, where by his military valour he easily routed the disor-
derly armies of uncivilised men.

A.D. 291. Sudden disturbances took place in nearly every
part of the Roman empire. On which Diocletian was moved,
‘and sent Constantius, Maximian, Galerius, and Maximin to
the different provinces, in order to defend the republic by
military force.

A.D. 292. As Carausius was rebelling against the Romans
in Britain, the senate send Alectus to slay the tyrant and
reduce Britain to obedience to the Romans. And he having
VOL. I. N

178 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 299.

arrived in the island, fought a battle and killed Carausius.
After that, he made great slaughter among the. Britons, who,
having deserted the republic, had submitted themselves to the
commands of Carausius. And then, having himself assumed
the crown of the kingdom, he held the island for three years.

A.D. 293. Diocletian ordered jewels to be inserted in his
garments and shoes, a thing which none of his predecessors
had done, as hitherto the emperors had worn only the plain
purple.

A.D. 294. Asclepiodotus, duke of Cornwall, coming as an
ally of the Britons, attacked Alectus while he was at London
offering sacrifices to his national gods. But Alectus, as soon
as he was informed of the arrival of Asclepiodotus, left the
sacrifice, and went forth against him, and having fought
a very severe battle, he was put to flight by Asclepiodotus,
and all his army was routed. And as they fled, the Britons
slew many thousands of them, and Alectus himself. But Lenius
Gallus, the colleague of Alectus, collected the rest of the
Romans in the city of London, to resist Asclepiodotus,
and avoid the death that threatened them. Therefore the
Britons attacked the city with great vigour, and endeavoured
to batter down the walls. And forming in close line of battle, —
they attacked the Romans, and in one day slew them all, at
the torrent below the city which the Britons afterwards called
Nantgallus, from the name of the general, but in Saxon it was
styled Walbroke.

A.D. 295. Asclepiodotus, with the consent of the people, took
the crown of Britain, and reigned with great uprightness for
ten years.

A.D. 296. Constantius married the step-daughter of Her-
culeus Maximianus, whose name was Theodora. And by her
he had six sons, the brothers of Constantine.

A.D. 297. Constantius Cesar had his army so completely
routed in his first battle against the Alemanni, that he could
scarcely escape himself; but he retrieved his fortunes by a
subsequent victory so complete, that seventy thousand of the
Alemanni are said to have been slain in a few hours.

A.D. 298. Maximianus Herculeus subdued Achilleus, who
was rebelling against the Romans in Egypt, and the Quinque-
gentiani.

A.D. 299. Diocletian took Achilleus, who had been besieged
at Alexandria eight months, prisoner, and put him to death.

A.D. 303. THE TENTH PERSECUTION OF THE: CHRISTIANS. 179

A.D. 300. Galerius Maximian, after he had already fought
two battles against Narses, was defeated in the third conflict,
and, having lost his army, fled to Diocletian.

A.D. 301. Ambrosius ‘flourished, and taught rhetoric in
Africa, and published some admirable volumes against the
Gentiles.

A.D. 302. Marcellus was elected to the papal chair at Rome,
and occupied it four years and six months.

The same year, Ceelus, duke of Caercolun, thatis of Colchester,
rose in insurrection against Asclepiodotus, king of Britain, and
in a pitched battle slew him, and obtained his kingdom. But the
Romans sent Constantius, a senator who had subdued Spain and
many other countries for them, that he might reduce Britain
to obedience to the Romans. But when Ceelus, king of the
Britons, heard of his arrival, he was afraid to fight with him,
as the report of his wisdom and courage made him out invin-
cible.. When, therefore, Constantius had arrived in the island,
Coelus sent ambassadors to him, and asked for peace, and
promised submission. And Constantius agreed to his requests,
and demanded nothing mere than the accustomed tribute.
But when peace had been made and hostages given, at the
end of the month Coelus died. Then Constantius obtained
the crown, and united with himself in marriage Helena, the
daughter of king Ceelus, a virgin of great beauty, and most
perfectly accomplished in all liberal arts and musical instru-
ments. For her father had no other child to enjoy the throne
of the kingdom after him, on which account he had taken
care that she should be thoroughly accomplished, so that she
might be able to rule the kingdom with honour and tranquil-
lity after his death. And Constantius had a son by her, and
called him Constantine.

A.D. 303. Which was the twenty-first year of the reign of
Diocletian, a terrible persecution of the Christians was com-
menced, being the tenth since the time of Nero; in which
Christianity was almost destroyed throughout the whole world.
For Diocletian in the east, and Maximian Herculeus in the
west, ordered the churches to be destroyed, and the Christians
slain. An edict waslikewiseissued, thatall the churches through-
out the whole world should be levelled with the ground, and
the sacred Scriptures burnt in the fire, in the middle of the mar-
ket place, andall those who presided over the different churches

180 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 303.

should bethrown into prison, and by exquisite tortures compelled
to sacrifice to the gods. Thensome, being overwhelmed with fear,
yielded, but some were supported by divine virtue, and flew to
heaven through torments. In this slaughter, the legion of the
Holy Thebeans, which contained six thousand, six hundred and
sixty-six soldiers, suffered, gloriously enduring martyrdom for
Christ’s sake, at the command of Maximian. And of this
multitude of martyrs, some few names have been ascertained by
us, those, namely, of Mauricius, Exuperius, Candidus, Victor,
Innocentius, and Vitalis. But the other names, though they
are not known to us, are inscribed in the book of life. The
passion of Victor and Ursa took place at Castrum Solodi.
The martyrdom of Gereon and his companions, three hundred
and twenty-eight in number, took place at Cologne.

This persecution was so cruel and so bloody, that in one
month seventeen thousand martyrs are recorded to have been
put to death. For it crossed over the sea, and kindled the
illustrious funeral piles of holy martyrs among the Britons,
since Saint Alban suffered among that nation; of whom the
presbyter Fortunatus speaks, thus praising his martyrdom :

“The fertile Britain boasts the noble Alban.’

And this Alban, when the commands of the treacherous
emperors against the Christians were raging, received in hos-
pitality a certain clergyman, who was fleeing from his perse-
cutors. And seeing that he devoted himself to continual
prayers and watchings, he being suddenly filled with the divine
grace, began to imitate the example of his faith, and being
gradually instructed by his salutary exhortations, forsook the
darkness of idolatry, and became a Christian with his whole
heart. The name of that clergyman, although the Roman
histories pass it over, is nevertheless stated in the history of
the Britons. For it is said, that Alban, glowing with affec-
tionate gratitude, first of all, hid his confessor Amphibalus
from his persecutors when he was pursued by them, and then
changing garments with him, exposed himself to the danger
of death, in this imitating Christ, who laid down his life for
his sheep.

Therefore every day, when the hour of evening was coming
on, the master and the disciples, avoiding the society of men,
betook themselves to a more remote dwelling, which is called

AD. 303. SAINT ALBAN IS SEIZED. 181

- In the common language a cabin, and there spent the whole

- night in the praise ‘of God. And they did this, that their se-
eret might not become known to the infidels, who vied with
one another, not in imitating the worshippers of the Christian
religion or their faith, but in persecuting the faithful. But
after some time had elapsed, a certain gentile went boldly to
the judge, and told him what was done, omitting no statement
by which he more easily could injure the innocent, or stir up the
judges to fury. So when these things were known, the judge
was presently excited to great fury and anger, and ordered
Alban and his master to be summoned to his presence, to make
them sacrifice victims to his gods with all the reverence that
they deserved. And if they_refused, he ordered them to be
arrested by force and violence, to be bound with chains, and
to be placed on the altars of the gods to be slain, like vic-
tims. But this decree was not unknown to Alban, who wishing
to escape the machinations of the ruler by any means possible,
exhorted Amphibalus to retire from the city, and take care of
himself, giving him a cloak embroidered with gold, that he
might be safer from his enemies. Fora dress of this kind
was at that time held by ali men in such honour and reverence,
that any one who was clad in it, might penetrate unhurt
through bands of enemies. But he himself returned the
cassock of his master, though he most certainly knew that his
enemies would not look upon it with favourable eyes, but would
be furious against it. Therefore Amphibalus, acquiescing in

- the entreaties of Alban, fled before daylight, going by the road
which leads from the city to thenorth. And Alban conducted
him, as long as it seemed desirable to both of them. And
when they were departing from one another, and taking leave
of each other for the last time, who could recall their tears to
his recollection, without weeping himself?

Therefore Amphibalus hastened into Wales, to become a
martyr there. And Alban wore the dress of his master, that
by this course he might the more readily attract the rage of

- the gentiles to himself alone. But when day broke, the horse-
men rushed with ferocious spirit to the house of Alban, and
hunted through every part of it, and at last they found
Alban himself in the cabin, in a foreign dress, barefoot before
the cross of the Lord which his master had left him, earnest

in prayer. Then seizing him imhumanly, they bound him

182 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 303.

with chains, and dragged him into the presence of the judge,
who at that moment was, with the whole city, standing by the
altars, to sacrifice the victims to his gods. But Alban, to show
that he was the servant of the cross, bore aloft in his hand
the sign of the Lord without ceasing. And when the judge,
looking on him with a most ferocious countenance, com-
manded. him to offer libations to the gods, the blessed Alban
replied, “I by no means sacrifice to your false gods, who
have never been able to help either themselves or others.”’ Then,
by command of the judge, Alban was seized and stretched out
to be scourged, but amid the stripes his prayers to God were
heard without ceasing. And when the hands of the victors
were wearied, and the point was not gained, he was ordered
to be detained in the judge’s prison six months and more.
But presently the elements began to testify to the wickedness
done to the martyr. For, from the time of his arrest to the
day when he was to be released from prison, no dew or rain
moistened the earth, but every day the whole country was
burnt up under a most scorching sun. No fields, no trees
produced any crops, the elements themselves fighting against
the wicked. But as the judge and the citizens of Verola-
mium could not bear such an infliction, they impeach Alban,
and having collected everybody into one place, they caused
him to be brought before them. And while he was standing
in the middle of the multitude, they all with one accord
gave sentence of death against this holy man of God. And
he, frequently kissing the cross of the Lord, which he held
in his hand, and praying, commended his cause to the Lord.
Therefore, Alban was dragged from the judgment-seat to
punishment. And when those who were leading him came to
a rapid river, he, uttering a prayer to God, opened a way for
the people through the waters. Then the soldier who was
dragging Alban to punishment, seeing the miracle, threw away
his sword, confessed his errors, and entreated pardon of the
Saint. After this circumstance, the enemies of the truth
seize the man, dash out his teeth, and in a merciless manner
break all his bones; and though there was no part of his
body remained unhurt, still the faith which glowed in his
breast could not be impaired.

At length, ascending to the summit of a mountain, they
found there an innumerable crowd of men, who burning with

A.D. 303. ALBAN BECOMES A MARTYR. 183

thirst beneath the scorching sun, were now at the very point
of death. And Alban, sympathising with their miseries, by
his prayers produced a spring on the top of the mountain ;
the infidels quenched their thirst, but still thirsted for human
blood. Why need I dwell on the circumstances? Out of the
whole people one is selected as executioner, to perpetrate the
wickedness before them all. And he, with his whole force,
striking liis sword against his neck, at one blow cut off the
martyr’s head; but as the eyes of him who gave the blow fell
on the ground at the same time as the head of the martyr, he
became utterly blind. And the cross which the holy man had
been used continually to bearin his hands, being now besprinkled
with his happy blood, fell on the ground, and a certain
Christian secretly carried it away, and hid it from the ignorant
pagans. And when this was done, the soldier whom the pagans
had a little while before left half dead, using all his efforts,
ascended the mountain by climbing. Then the judge, insulting
the wounds of the man, said: ‘Pray now to Alban, that he
would condescend to restore your bones to their former con-
dition.” ‘‘I do believe,’ hereplied, ‘that the blessed Alban
by his holy merits will be able to restore to me perfect
soundness, and to lead me to the mercy of the Saviour.”
Then reverently taking hold of the head of the martyr, and
devoutly placing it close to his own body, he began to recover
his bodily strength, which before seemed hopeless, and having
been made sound, he did not cease from preaching the merits
of Alban and the power of Christ, in the hearing of all the
people. Then opening the earth, he buried the body of Alban
in the ground, and himself raised a mound over it. . And when
this was seen, that soldier is ordered to be apprehended by the
enemies of the cross, and after punishments too horrid to
relate, as they tore his holy body hmb from limb, at last they
cut off his head with a sword. And thus that soldier, per-
severing in the faith of Christ, deserved to be elevated to the
crown of martyrdom with the most blessed Alban. Accord-
ingly, on the following night, a column of light appeared to
rise from the tomb of the blessed martyr, and to penetrate
into heaven ; down which angels descending and ascendihg,
spent the whole night in praising God. And among other
things which they sung, this expression was frequently heard :
“Alban, an illustrious man, has become a glorious martyr.”

184 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 303.

And when suddenly a great concourse of gentiles flocked to
behold this sight, one of them broke out into the following
language: “It is quite plain that Christ the Son of God is
effecting all these wonderful things which we have seen; let
us go and seek out the man of God, because, as you know,
he by his preaching converted Alban to Christ.” And as they
all approved of this advice, about a thousand men began to
journey towards Wales, and there they found Amphibalus, the
man of God, preaching the word of life to the men of that
country. And they, explaining to him the cause of their

coming, offered him the cross sprinkled with blood, which he
‘ had formerly given to his dear Alban. And he, returning
thanks to God, preached about religion to his new hearers.
And they immediately with one accord eagerly took the sign
which is in Christ from his sacred hands. And when a few
days had passed, the news of the circumstance came to Vero-
lamium. And the citizens there, excited with immoderate fury,
set out on the journey with all their strength, and with great
uproar, as if they had been going to battle. But hearing of
the illustrious name of Amphibalus, after a few days they
found him, his fame acting as their guide, and as they went
they found those whom they sought listening eagerly to his
words. But the gentiles, carried away with diabolical fury,
rushed with frantic wildness upon the saints of God, and
cutting their bodies into small ae, sent their happy souls
with joy to heaven. And so father was slain by son, brother
by brother, and citizen by citizen. Of this Holy College one
alone survived, who being detained by the way by the infirmity
of his body, was not able to be present. The holy Amphibalus,
surrounded by the bodies of those who had been slain,  re-
commended their blessed souls to the Lord, and then the
bloody executioners pouring forth all their rage upon him,
and binding his arms with the most cruel thongs, compelled
him to walk barefoot before their horses towards the city of
Verolamium. But the nearer he came to his dear Alban, the
more the roughness of the road and the pain of the toil be-
came softened in his eyes.

And as they proceeded on their journey, Amphibalus, though
in bonds himself, released a sick man, in the sight of them all,
from the bonds of his sickness. Then, when at last they
came in sight of the walls of the city, they for a while laid

A.D. 303. MARTYRDOM OF AMPHIBALUS. 185

down their shields in a desert place, and planted their spears
in the ground. But while all the others rested, Amphibalus
alone took no rest, but taught his persecutors the word of sal-
vation because the word of God could not be bound.

In the meantime the news was brought to the city that the
citizens had returned home, and had brought back with them
the master of Alban. It was also said that all those for whom
they had undertaken that laborious journey had perished in a
distant country. But when the judge was informed of this,
he saic, in the presence of all the people, “Let us all go forth
and meet our enemy, that he who is known to have offended,
may feel that vengeance is taken upon him by all.”” Then
each one exhorts his fellow to-go more swiftly, and they excite
one another against their enemy. And as they proceeded on
the road which leads from the city towards the north, they
left the city nearly empty. And coming to the man of God,
they found him bound with chains. And presently they
seized him, and stripped him cruelly, and laid open his bowels
with the sword, and bound him to a stake which was fixed m
the ground, and caused the holy man of God to walk round
the stake. When Amphibalus, the man of God, placed among
all these terrible straits, still showed no sign of pain, the enemies
of the cross, becoming more exasperated, placed him as a
sign among them, and stab and break to pieces with knives
and spears all that there was left of his body. Then many men
beholding the constancy of the blessed martyr, and admiring
it more and more, submitted themselves to the faith of Christ,
praying to God with a loud voice, that by the merits and in- ©
tercession of the blessed martyr, they might deserve to become
partakers in eternal life. And when this was known, the
javelin-men put a thousand men to death, the blessed Amphi- _
balus looking on, and commending their souls to God.

After these events, the wicked raged to effect the death of
this innocent man, and in order to destroy his blessed life,
they pelt him cruelly with a shower of stones. But he, per-
sisting in his prayers, and minding nothing else, did not cease
for 2 moment. And when at length he was on the point of
restoring his invincible spirit to heaven, two angels, radiant
with heavenly brightness, came down from above to him, and
took up with them the soul of the blessed man, shining with
extraordinary brilliancy, and bore it off to heaven with hymns

186 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 310.

and praises. And a voice from heaven was heard addressing
him in this manner, in the hearing of all men: “Verily I
say unto you, this day you shall be with your disciple Alban
in paradise.’ Then a certain one of the faithful in Christ
secretly took away the body of the blessed martyr, and reve-
rently buried it in the earth.

About the same time there suffered in Britain, Aaron and
Julius, with many other men and women, who went up by
martyrdom to the desirable joy of the heavenly Jerusalem ; the
blessed Alban still being the protomartyr of the English, who
first purpled Britain with his blood. And in the same slaughter,
Pamphilus suffered, whose life has been written in three books
by Eusebius, bishop of Czesarea.

A.D. 304. Diocletian at Nicomedia, and Maximian Herculeus
at Milan, laid aside the purple; but the persecution when it
had been once begun did not cease to rage till the seventh year
of Constantine.

A.D. 305. Galerius obtained the Roman empire, and reigned
three years. In the same year, which is the third year of the
persecution, Constantius, a man of the greatest magnanimity,
died in Britain at York. And his son Constantine succeeding to —
the kingdom of Britain, laboured to govern his realm with the
greatest tranquillity and honour.

A.D. 306. Maximin and Severus, who had been made
Czesars by Galerius, increase the persecutions against the Chris-
tians. At this time, Peter, the bishop of Alexandria, suffered,
and many Egyptians with him. Lucian also suffered, a pres-
byter of the church of Antioch, and Timotheus was put to
death at Rome on the twenty-first of June.

A.D. 307. Constantine, son of Constantius and Helen, was
made emperor, from having been king of Britain, and reigned
twenty years and ten months.

A.D. 308. Nicolas, a man eminent for sanctity and virtue,
was consecrated bishop of Mirrhe, the metropolis.

A.D, 309. Eusebius was elected to the Roman chair, and
occupied it two years and two months. The same year, Gale-
nius died, and Constantine became sole emperor.

A.D. 310. Pascasius flourished in the church at Vienne, and
Phileas, the Egyptian, composed a book in most elegant style
in praise of martyrdom, and at last he gloriously ended his
own life by martyrdom.

Naess PERSECUTION OEASES. 187

A.D. 311. Melchiades became pope; he occupied the Ro-
man chair three years, eight months, and eight days.

A.D. 312. Maxentius, son of Herculeus Maximian, was called
Augustus at Rome. He behaved with great tyranny towards the
Roman people, endeavouring to ruin all the most noble men of
the city. And as his savageness increased, men quitted their
country and fled into Britain to Constantine, and were ho-
nourably received by him. At last, as great numbers had
come to him, they excited him to hatred of Maxentius, often
addressing him in this manner :—“‘ You are the only one of
our race ; you, by expelling Maxentius, can restore to us what
we have lost, and by our assistance you will be able to obtain
the empire of Rome, which is-your due. For you have great
wealth of gold and silver, and a great number of valiant sol-
diers.’? Constantine, therefore, being excited by these and
other inducements, prepared a fleet by the advice of the Ro-
mans, which he adopted in all particulars.

A.D. 313. Constantine, coming to Rome, led with him the
three uncles of Helena, his mother, namely, Trahernius, Marius,
and Leolinus, and a countless number of soldiers. And when
Maxentius the tyrant had been expelled, he restored all whom
he had proscribed to their former dignity. He also advanced
his three uncles to the rank of senators, and after that he
governed the monarchy of the world with tranquillity.

The same year, the persecution of the Christians ceased,
and peace was given to the churches; and this persecution
had lasted the preceding ten years, or something like it, as
Bede relates in the first book and sixth chapter of his History.
During which time, Diocletian in the east, and Maximian
Herculeus in the west, ordered the churches to be laid waste,
and the Christians to be afflicted and put to death, being the
tenth persecution since Nero. But when the whirlwind ot
this persecution had, after the lapse of ten years, become
calmed, then the faithful in Christ coming forth in public,
(men who, during the time of danger, had hidden themselves

‘in remote woods, and desert places, and secret caves,) re-
newed the churches of the saints which had been thrown to
the ground, and founded, and built, and completed temples to
the Holy Martyrs, and set them up like victorious standards,
and celebrated days of festival, and performed sacrifices. .

At this time, a temple is founded in honour of the blessed

188 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 315:

Alban, the proto-martyr of the English, as Bede tells us, in
the first book and sixth chapter of his History, where he
relates the matter thus: ‘The blessed Alban suffered on
the twenty-first day of June, near the city of Verolamium,
which is now called Warlancestria, or Watlingecestria by the
nation of the English, where, in subsequent times, when the
Christians were in peace, a church of wonderful beauty,
and worthy of his martyrdom, was built, ten years after his
passion. In which spot to this very day, the cure of the
sick, and the manifestations of numerous virtues, are displayed
without ceasing. And the following is the reason why the
before-mentioned city is spoken of by two names ; for from
the river which is called the Warlame, and which flows
through the country to the east of the city, it is called Warlan-
cestria : but from the royal road, which is called Watlinge-
strete, and which lies on the west of the city, it is called Wat-
lingecestria.”’

And peace now continued inviolate in the churches of Bri-
tain till the times of the Arrian heresy.

A.D. 314. Octavius, king of the Gevisci, made an insurrec-
tion against the pro-consuls appointed by the Romans, to whom
the government of Britain had been entrusted, and having slain
them, made himself master of the kingdom. And when news
of this was brought to Constantine at Rome, he sent Trahernius,
the uncle of his mother, with three legions, to reduce the island
again to obedience to the Romans. Trahernius therefore landed
in the island, and in two days took the city of Caerperis, which
is now called Porchester. And when this was known, Octa-
vius came to meet him with a powerful army, and a battle
was fought, in which he routed the forces of Trahernius and
put him to flight. But he retreated to Scotland by sea, and
began to lay waste the provinces. And Octavius having got
his forces together again, fought with him in the province
which is called Westmoreland ; but on this occasion, Octavius
was thrown into disorder and fled without the victory, and
Trahernius pursuing him, deprived hirn of the crown and king-
dom. And then Octavius went to Norway, and besought aid
from king Humbert.

A.D. 315, Saint Silvester was appointed pope ; and occupied
the Roman chair twenty-three years, ten months, and eleven
days, and the see was vacant fifteen days. This holy man is

A.D. 318. CONSTANTINE IS BAPTIZED. 189

described as having been of an angelic aspect, elegant in his
discourse, holy in his works, great in counsel, a catholic in
faith, most patient in hope, liberal in charity, the comfort of
orphans and widows, the support of the monks and clergy,
the defence of laymen and poor men, the succour of matrons
and virgins. His therefore being adorned by such eminent
and great virtues, was accounted honourable before God and
before man.

A.D. 316. The before-mentioned Octavius, being anxious on
account of the kingdom that he had lost, issued an edict to his
friends, to endeavour with all their efforts to kill Trahernius.
At last, when, one day, Trahernius was leaving thé city of Lon-
don, a certain count laid wait. for him in one of the suburbs in
a valley, and slew him. But Octavius returned into Britain,
and having routed the Romans, occupied the kingdom, and
governed it peaceably many years.

A.D. 317. Saint Silvester, fleeing from the persecution of
the emperor Constantine, lay hid in Mount Seraphus.

A.D. 318. After Constantine Augustus had made a great
slaughter of the Christians, he was violently attacked with
leprosy. And as lie was advised to make himself a bath of the
blood of innocent children, three thousand were brought to him.
But their mothers, with dishevelled hair and naked breasts,
prostrated themselves before him, groaning and howling, and
caused great alarm to him and his nobles. Then the emperor,
abhorring sucha crime, ordered the children to be restored to
their mothers with ample presents, in order that they who
had come weeping might return rejoicing. God having re-
gard for this pious action, the next night sent to him the
Apostles Peter and Paul, who addressed him in the following
manner: ‘‘ Since, Constantine, you have abhorred the effusion
of innocent blood, we are sent by God to give you salutary
advice with reference to the recovery of your health ; send,
therefore, to Silvester, the bishop of the city of Rome, who is
lying hid in Mount Seraphus, by whose means, when you
have believed in the one God, and have been baptised in the
font in the baptismal water, you shall be cleansed from all
contagion of leprosy.”

The emperor therefore, rising up, caused Silvester to come
to him, and carefully related to him all that had been said to,
and seen by him. Then the holy Silvester baptized him,

190 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 323.

after he had been strengthened in the faith. And _ he, rising
up from the font, confessed that he had seen Christ, and
being perfectly cleansed from his leprosy, ordered by his
imperial edict, that the one true Almighty God should be
worshipped by the whole city, and that all those who despised
this order should be punished.

A.D. 319. The emperor Constantine, being now become a
Christian, gave leave freely to restore the churches, and to
build new ones in honour of Christ; and he gave privileges
to the Christians throughout nearly the whole of the Roman
empire, so that the Christian people might live in freedom and
safety under bishops regularly ordained to their bishoprics.

A.D. 320. The Arrian heresy began, so called from Arrius,
a presbyter of Alexandria, who, not acknowledging the Son to
be co-eternal with the Father, asserted the existence of differ-
ent substances in the Trinity, saying, that une was greater
than the other, in contradiction of that Word of our Lord, “I
and the Father are One.” To condemn this man, and to re-
establish the pure faith, a council of three hundred and
eighteen bishops was assembled by Constantine from all quar-
ters of the world. ;

A.D. 321. The most sacred council of Arles was convened,
consisting of six hundred bishops; Mauritius being at this
time bishop of the aforesaid city.

A.D. 322. The heresy of the Donatists arises in Africa, having
its beginning from a certain Donatus, who coming from Numi-
dia, deceived nearly all Africa by his persuasive eloquence,
asserting that the Son was inferior to the Father, and the
Holy Spirit inferior to the Son, and that Catholics required to
be baptised again after a lapse.

A.D. 323. A great multitude of barbarians was collected to-
gether on the river Danube, ready for war against the Romans,
which Constantine hearing, prepared an army against them,
and went to meet them. And the following night there came

to him a person of great splendour, saying to him, ‘“ Constan-.

tine, look up to Heaven, and see.’ But he, looking up to
Heaven, saw a figure of the Holy Cross, and ordered the
figure to march before him, trusting in it, because on it
he had seen inscribed, radiant with splendid brightness, “In
this sign shalt thou conquer.” And when he had seen this
sight, he made a cross resembling it, to serve as the imperial

A.D. 329. POPE SILVESTER CONFOUNDS THE JEWS. 191]

standard, a sign full of terrror to the enemy ; and the barbarians
coming on, fell in battle, being miserably slaughtered, and an
infinite multitude of them perished. And the Lord gave the
victory to Constantine by virtue of the Holy Cross.

A.D. 324. Helena, the mother of Constantine, being warned
by some divine visions, went to Jerusalem, and diligently
looking for the cross of the Lord, instead of one she found
three ; but the impossibility of distinguishing between the
several crosses disturbed her joy at the success of her search.
At last, of the three crosses which she had found she was
made undoubtedly sure which was the true one, by means of a
certain sick woman who was cured by the true cross. The nails
by which the body of our Lord had been fastened to the cross,
she with maternal affection brought to her son, and bade him
make bridle-bits of them, to use in any doubtful war, in order
that the prophecy might be fulfilled, ‘And it shall come to
pass in that day, that in the bridle of a horse it shall be called
Holy to the Lord.”

A.D. 325. Constantine built a baptistery at Rome, of won-
derful beauty, near the church of the blessed John the Baptist,
which was called Constantine’s church, where he had formerly
been baptised; and he also made a church for the blessed
Peter, out of a temple of Apollo, and another for the blessed
Paul. He also surrounded the body of each, to the height of
five feet, with beautiful brass.

A.D. 326. The emperor ordered a church to be built in the
Soran palace, which is called Jerusalem, where he deposited a
portion of the Holy Cross ; also a church to the blessed martyr
Agnes, at the request of Constantia his daughter, where Con-
stantia herself, the sister of Augustus, had been baptised.

A.D. 327. The same emperor built a church in honour of
Saint Lawrence the martyr, in the road to Tibur and the Vera-
nian field, where the martyr was buried.

A.D. 328. Pope Silvester enacted that the holy chrism should
be reverently consecrated, not by presbyters, but by bishops.

A.D. 329. A hundred and twenty of the wisest of the Jews
were collected before Constantine and his mother Helena, to
argue against pope Silvester, maintaining that the faith of the
Christians was groundless, and invented not by God but by men
devoid of reason; whom the holy Silvester, supported by a
_ band of twenty-four bishops, manfully resisted and confused

192 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 336.

them all, and rendered them dumb, by the authority of the Old
as wellas of the New Testament ; and the greater part of them,
leaving the blindness of Judaism, were converted to the faith of
the Trinity which they attacked. Also the faith of many
Christians was strengthened by the fact of a ferocious bull which
had been slain in a pasture of the Jews, who were unable to
recover him, being afterwards restored to life by the blessed
Silvester.

A.D. 330, The emperor Constantine built a church to the
blessed Peter and Paul the Apostles, in the Lavican road, be-
tween two bay trees.

A.D. 331. The emperor built a mausoleum, constructed with
extraordinary beauty, where he afterwards buried his mother,
in a most costly sarcophagus.

A.D. 332. The emperor built a church in the city of Ostia,”
near the gate of the city of Rome, in honour of the blessed
Apostles Peter and Paul, and Saint John the Baptist, and in
the city of Alba he built a church in honour of the same
Saint.

A.D. 333. The emperor Constantine built a church in the —
city of Naples, of wonderful beauty, to all the apostles and
martyrs ; and in Drepana, a city of Bithynia, he built a church
in honour of the martyr Lucian. And he ornamented the city
with new buildings, and called it Helenopolis, from the name
of his mother. {

A.D. 334. Marcus and Julius are appointed bishops of Rome.
The Romans defeated the Goths in the country of the Sarmatia.
In consequence of an edict of Constantine, the temples of the
gentiles were thrown down.

A.D. 335. The emperor Constantine built in Thrace a city,
which he honoured with the title of his own name, and
destined it to be the seat of the Roman empire, and the capi-
tal of the east, and Rome to be the capitol of the world, which
last city he bequeathed by will to the blessed Peter and Paul.
He also commanded the noblest of the Romans, and nearly
the whole body of the senators with their wives and children,
to take up their abode in the new Rome, that is, in Constan-
tinople.

A.D. 336. Reccius, bishop of Augustina, was greatly cele-
brated, and Juvencus, a Spanish presbyter, who turned the
four books of the Gospels into hexameter verse.

A.D. 343. JULIUS ELECTED POPE. 193

A.D. 337. The emperor ordered (without putting any one to
death) that the temples of the pagans should be closed, and
all the altars of the gods to be broken to pieces.

A.D. 338. Firmian, who is also called Lactantius, a disciple
of Arnobius, went to Nicomedia to write a treatise on rhetoric.

A.D. 339. James, bishop of the city of Nisibis, who in the
council of Nice, with the other bishops, condemned the Arrian
heresy, and who was besides the author of many books, flou-
rished with great distinction in the church.

A.D. 340. The noble emperor Constantine terminated his life
by a glorious death. In which year also, the holy Silvester,
going the way of all flesh, departed to the Lord. It was
in truth worthy, and altogether suitable, that those who had
laboured together so perseveringly for the increase of the
church, should together receive the deserved recompense of
their labours. .

Cu. VI.—From a.p. 341 To a.p. 434.

Constantius—Death of Arrius—The bones of St. Andrew and
St. Luke are taken to Constantinople—Julian—LKusebius
dies—St. Hilary—The bones of John the Baptist are col-
lected—Alaric—Valentinian and Valens—Oltarius, king of -
Britain, dies—Gratian—Mazimianus becomes king of Britain
—Conan —The Franks—Pharamond—Death of Athanasius
—Gregory Nazianzen — Basil— Theodosius — Arcadius—
Maximus, king of Britain—Death of Maximus—Rufinus—
Stilicho—St. Ambrose dies—The Pelagian heresy—St. John
Chrysostom — St. Augustine — Honorius —The Nestorian
heresy—The Romans abandon Britain—The Scots and Picts
invade it.

A.D. 341. Constantius with his brothers Constantine and

Constans became emperors, and reigned fourteen years. The

same year Marcius was elected pope, and occupied the Roman

chair two years, eight months, and twenty days.

A.D. 342. James, the bishop of Nisibis, a man of great learn-
ing, in both the divine and human writings, died. The same
year, Saint Nicholas, bishop of the metropolis of Mirrha, de-
parted to Christ.

- a.d. 343. Julius was elected to the papal chair at Rome,

and held it eleven years, two months, and seven days.

VOL. I. fe)

tion as

194 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 352.08

a.p. 344. The Arrian impiety persecuted first of all Atha-
nasius, the bishop of the city of Alexandria, and afterwards
other eminent bishops, with banishment, imprisonment, and
various kinds of affliction.

A.D. 345. Maximin, bishop of Treves, flourished, by whom
Athanasius was honourably received and protected, while he
was being sought for by Constantine, who intended to punish
him.

A.D. 346. Nectarius, bishop of the church at Vienne, was
eminent for his learning and faith ; he was the principal per-
son at the council of Arles; and he both taught and preached
in the church, that the essence of the Father, of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost was of one nature, power, divinity, and
virtue.

A.D. 347. Antony the monk departed to the Lord, in the
wilderness, in the hundred and fifth year of his age.

A.D. 348. The remains of the blessed Timothy were brought

to Constantinople.

A.D. 349. While the heretic Arrius, relying on the favour of 3

Constantine, was going to Constantinople to the church, with

the intention of contending for his belief, against the faithful
in Christ, turning aside in the forum of Constantine to ease —
himself, he suddenly left his bowels, and his life, and his heresy

at once on the same spot.
A.D. 350. Constantius having entered Rome, the bones of

Saint Andrew the Apostle and of Saint Luke the Evangelist —

were brought to Constantinople, and deposited there with great
honour.

A.D. 351. Hilarius, the bishop of Poictiers, who having
been driven out by the Arrians, had gone into exile into Phry-
gia, gives a book to Constantius at Constantinople, and then
returned to Gaul.

A.D.352. The heresy of the Anthropomorphites' arose in Syria
and Macedonia, deriving its origin from a certain Anthropos,
who asserted that Jesus had only a human form, and that his
Godhead was distinct from his bodily parts ; which is contrary
to the Catholic faith. About the same time the bishop Paph-
nutius, a man of eminent virtue, flourished.

1 There is a manifest mistake in our author’s statement here. The sect
of the Anthropomorphites derived its name from dv@pwaoc, man, and
#0092), form, and not from. the name of its founder,

A.D. 363, SERAPION, BISHOP OF THANES, DIES. 195

A.D. 353. Donatus, a writer and teacher of the art of gram-
mar, was celebrated at Rome.

A.D. 354. Eusebius, of Ceesarea, in Palestine, a man most
learned in the Holy Scriptures, first fell into the Arrian heresy,
but afterwards corrected himself before he died.

A.D. 355. Kustacius, bishop of Antioch, composed some
short works against the Arrian doctrines, and was afterwards
banished.

A.D. 356. When Eustacius, bishop of Antioch, was banished,
Liberius was appointed pope, and occupied the chair at Rome
ten years.

A.D. 357. Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra, who wrote many
things against the Arrians, was accused of the Sabellian heresy,
as Hilarius. mentions. But he defended himself, denying that
he held the heresy of which he was accused.

A.D. 358. Basil, bishop of Ancyra, in Macedonia, with
Eustacius Sebasteus, was an eminent man, and very skilful
in the art of physic.

a.D. 359. Lucifer, bishop of Carela, was banished by Con-
stantius, because he would not condemn the Nicene creed.
But after he returned from exile, he agreed with the heretics,
and, departing from the communion of the church, he shared
the fall of his namesake and adviser Lucifer, the star of the
morning.

A.D. 360. Rusebius, bishop of Vercelle, on account of his
eonfession of faith, was banished by Constantius to Catapolis,
and when he returned from exile he was murdered by the
treachery of the Arrians.

A.D. 361. Hilary, bishop of Poictiers, in Aquitaine, was by
the contrivance of Saturninus, bishop of Arles, sent from the
council into exile in Phrygia, with the sanction of Constantius,
and he there wrote twelve books against the Arrians. And
when he returned from exile he wrote a book about the coun-
cils, addressed to the bishops of the Gauls.

A.D. 362. The emperor Constantius, on account of the per-
secution of the Arrians, banished Liberius, bishop of the
Roman see. And as he was going into exile, Fortunatius,
bishop of Aquileia, first tampered with him and corrupted
him, and dragged him into subscribing to heresy.

A.D, 363. Serapion, bishop of Thanes, a man of elegant

02

196 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 366.

genius, died, in the reign of Constantius; a man illustrious
for his confession of faith.

A.D. 364, Acarius, bishop of Neo Czesarea, was. so illustri-
ous during the reign of Constantius, that he consecrated Felix
bishop of Rome, in the place of Liberius ; and he remained so
a whole year.

The same year the emperor Constantius died, and Julian
succeeded to the empire, and reigned two years and eight
months. He having become emperor from having been a
priest, fell into the worship of idols, and inflicted martyrdom
on the Christians, and, in his fierce hatred, sent them to
heaven. And among others who are found to have suffered
for the sake of Christ throughout the world, John and Paul
endured illustrious martyrdom at Rome. Julian also, out of
hatred towards the Christians, allowed the Jews to repair the
temple at Jerusalem. And when they, having collected out of
all the provinces, were laying new foundations, on a sudden
an earthquake took place at night, and all the stones are said
to have been shaken from the very bottom of the foundation,
and to have been scattered far and wide. Moreover, a ball
of fire came out of the inner part of the temple, and threw
down many of their houses with the conflagration which it —
caused.

A.D. 365, The pagans at Sebaste, a city of Palestine, entering
the sepulchre of the blessed John the Baptist, scattered his bones;
they are again collected, and again they scatter them widely over
the fields, and burn them. But by the providence of God,
some monks from Jerusalem and some other persons were pre-
sent, who carried off all that they could, and bore them reve-
rently, first to their father Philip, and then to the chief pontiff.
At the same time, the apostate Julian ordered the bones of.
the venerable James, bishop of Nisibis, to be carried out of the
aity. And not long afterwards, when he was marshalling his
crmy against the Persians, he was slain (by whom is uncer-
tain), and scattering his entrails in the air, he blasphemed
Christ the Lord in his frantic fury, crying out, ‘You have
conquered, O Galilean! you have conquered!’ This miracle,
however, is attributed to the Mother of the Saviour, who
admirably executed this revenge by the agency of the blessed
Mercurius, her soldier.

A.D. 366. Liberius, bishop of the city of Rome, after the

A.D. 373. YALENS PERSECUTES THE CHRISTIANS. 197

death of Felix, returned from banishment, and again sat in
the chair of Peter, and remained there five years. The same
year, Jovinian obtained the empire, and held it and reigned
one year and eight months. And as he immediately affirmed
_ that he was a Christian, he said that he was unwilling to rule
over pagans. And the whole army, which, because of the
influence of Julian, had cast off the name of Christ, hearing
this, confessed themselves Christians. But a premature death
cut short the pious and joyful beginnings of this great emperor.
The same year, the council at Antioch was convened, consisting
of bishops from Miletus and the districts of Antioch, in which
the Macedonian doctrine was wrongfully established; and it
derived its name from Macedonius, a bishop of Constantinople,
who deemed that the Holy Ghost was God.

A.D. 367. Valentinian, with his brother Valens, succeeded to
the empire, and reigned ten years. At the same time, Apolli-
naris, bishop of Laodicea, compiled many books on the subject
of our religion ; but afterwards, incautiously deviating from the
faith, he adopted the heresy which goes -by his name, saying
that Christ took upon himself only body, without any soul.

A.D. 368. The heresy of Photinus and Eunomius flourished.
Photinus was bishop of the city of Sira, and asserted that
Christ was begotten on Mary, by Joseph, according to the
usual matrimonial process.

A.D. 369. The Goths in the Danube became divided into two
parts, under Frigedern and Alaric. But Frigedern subdued
Alaric by the assistance of Valens, and in requital of this
assistance, he, from having been a Catholic, became an Arrian
with the whole nation of the Goths. At this time, Hilary,
bishop of Poictiers, wrote.

A.D. 370. Vulfila, bishop of the Goths, beg a master of
Gothic literature, translated each Testament into his own
language.

A.D. 371. Damasus was elected to the Roman chair, and
occupied it eighteen years, two months, and ten days. And the
see was vacant twenty-one days. Pope Damasus was accused
of adultery, but was acquitted by forty-four bishops.

A.D. 372. Pope Damasus built a church near his palace in
honour of Saint Laurence, and adorned it with most sump-
tuous presents. .
 a.D. 373. Valens, having been baptized by Eudoxius, bishop

_of the Arrians, persecuted the Christians.

198 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 379.

A.D. 374. Pope Damasus built a church at the Catacombs,

‘where the bodies of Saint Peter and Saint Paul lay, and

adorned with verses the street in which their holy bodies had
been placed.

A.D. 375. Octavius, the before-mentioned king of Britain,
died, being worn out with old age. He had one only daughter,
and no male offspring. Therefore Britain continued some time
in a state of dissension, because different people embraced
different opinions as to whom they should give the damsel who
had the kingdom for her dowry in marriage.

A.D. 376. Damasus established a rule of saying in church
at the end of the Psalms, ‘“‘Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, and to the Holy Ghost.”

A.D. 377. Gratian became emperor of Rome, and reigned
six years. The same year, Ambrosius was consecrated bishop
of Milan, and by his industry all Italy was strengthened in the
faith of Christ.

A.D. 378. Valens and Gratian, having issued a law that the
monks should serve-in the army, ordered those who refused,
to be beaten to death with clubs.

A.D. 379. The nobles of Britain, in order to enjoy a lasting
peace, sent ambassadors to Rome to invite Maximinianus, a
senator, to marry the daughter of Octavius, the king of whom I
have before spoken. For he was a Briton on the father’s side,
being the son of Leolinus, the uncle of Constantine ; but on
the mother’s side he was a Roman; and on both sides he
traced his origin up to royal blood. And when the messengers
had explained to Maximinianus the cause of their coming, he at
once agreed to their proposals, because he was treated in a
very hostile manner by Gratian and Valentinian; and on his
way to Britain he overthrew the cities and fortifications of the
Franks, and reduced them to obedience to himself, and ac-
quired great riches in gold and silver. But when at length
he arrived in the port of Southampton, Conan, the grandson
of king Octavius, came to meet him with all the youth of the
kingdom, intending to fight with him, as he panted with all
his heart for the kingly power. But he defeated Conan with
the assistance of the Britons, and then they married the
daughter of the king to Maximinianus with all due ceremony.
But Conan, being beyond measure indignant, went to Scotland,
and occupied himself in collecting an army, There, with all

A.D. 387. _ JUSTUS DIES IN EGYPT. 199

the whole multitude of his nation, he crossed the river Humber,
and began to ravage all the provinces. But Maximinianus
coming up, defeated him in battle. However, at length, through
the intervention of friends, they made peace.

A.D. 380. The Franks uniting with the Romans, defeated
the Alemanni, who were in rebellion, between the Danube and
the sea of Azov. In reference to which victory, the emperor
Valentinian first gave that tribe the name of Franks, in the
Achzean language, calling them so from their fierceness, stern-
ness, and boldness. And they, a short time afterwards, as
they refused to pay tribute to the Romans, and would not
submit to the sovereignty of the Romans, quitted Sicambria,'
and went to the most distant parts of the river Rhine, to the
cities of the Germans, who had been settled there for some
years, with their chiefs, Marcomirus and Subnon. And there
they elected Pharamond to be their first king, and submitted
to the laws which their former chiefs, Guisonastus and Sale-
gastus, had established.

- A.D. 381. Titus, bishop of Ostia, a most energetic arguer
against the Manicheeans, died. The same year, Athanasius,
bishop of Alexandria, having suffered much ill-treatment from
the Arrians under the sanction of the emperor Valentinian,
died. Priam, the first king of the Franks, reigned six years.

A.D. 382. Theodosius became emperor of Rome ; he reigned
sixteen years. In his time, Gregory Nazianzen, a most eloquent
man, and the teacher of Hieronymus, paid the debt of nature.

A.D. 383. Basil of Ceesarea, and Effrem, a deacon of the
church at Edessa, died.

A.D. 384. Saint Martin was born. The same year, Theo-
dosius defeated the Alans, the Huns, and the Goths, in several
great battles.

Maximus also defeated the Picts and Scots, who invaded
Britain.

A.D. 385. The Arrians, unable to bear the emperor Theo-
dosius’s study of the faith, after forty years, abandoned the
churches which they held by force.

A.D. 386. Marcomir, king of the Franks, died, in thirty-
four days after he succeeded to the kingdom. Niceta, bishop
of Vienne, a most eminent man for learning, flourished.

a.D. 387. Justus, bishop of Lyons, who subsequently left

2 Sicambria was in Lower Germany, on the Rhine,

200 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 390.

his see and chose the life of an anchorite, died in Egypt.
The same year, a council of a hundred and fifty fathers was
assembled at Constantinople, against the heretic Macedonius,
while Damasus remained at Rome.

A.D. 388. Siricius was elected to the Roman chair ; he held
it fifteen years, eleven months, and ten days ; and the see was
vacant twenty days.

A.D. 389. Theodosius associated his son Arcadius with him-
self as partner in the kingdom. The same year, after the
death of Auxentius the bishop, a great defender of the erfors
of the Arrian sect, when there was a discussion among the
Catholics about the election of his*successor, and when Am-
brosius, a man of consular rank, had come forward to pacify
the people, on a sudden the voice of an infant was heard,
‘That Ambrosius should be the bishop.” And presently,
Ambrosius, who was at the time a catechumen, was taken and
baptized, and eight days afterwards was ordained bishop, to
the great joy of the people. And when, not long afterwards,
the same Ambrosius was sowing the word of God in the church
of God, one of the Arrians saw an angel of God standing at
the ear of the bishop, indicating to him what he ought to
announce to the people. And when he saw this miracle, he
began to defend the faith which he had previously attacked.

A.D. 390. Maximus, king of the Britons, in consequence of
the vast quantity of gold and silver of which he was possessed,
and of his great number of valiant soldiers, was so much
elated, that, as his kingdom was not sufficient for him, he be-
came desirous of subduing the country of Gaul, and subjecting
it to himself; therefore, having prepared a fleet, he proceeded
towards the kingdom of the Armorici, which was afterwards
called Lesser Britain (Brittany). And he took with him such
a very numerous army, that he left almost the whole of Britain
entirely destitute of an armed force. When therefore he had
sailed witha fair wind to the before-mentioned country, and
had begun to ravage the neighbouring provinces, Unibald, the
duke of that country, met him, with fifteen thousand armed
men. But at their first meeting he was put to flight, and the
greater part of his army was slain. Therefore Maximus
summoned over Conan, from whom, as I have said before, he
had wrested the kingdom of Britain, and gave him the king-
dom of the Armorici, and ordered it to be called Lesser Britain.

A.D. 392. CONAN SENDS FOR WIVES FOR HIS SOLDIERS. 201

But Conan, thanking him with an inclination of his head,
promised to remain faithful in his obedience to him as long as
they both should live. Then having united their armies, they
- manfully reduced the cities and towns under their power.
And all that resisted they gave to the flames, and utterly
destroyed. And so, as all fied from him, Maximus within one
year reduced all that part of Gaul to obedience to himself,
sparing, however, the women and children. And he united to
himself all whom he was aware were discontented with the
existing state of things, and distributing silver and gold among
them, he allowed them to exult in their spoils and gains.

A.D. 391. Maximus the tyrant, wishing to fill the kingdom
which he had taken with British mhabitants, issued an edict,
that a hundred thousand men, taken from the common people,
should come to him from Britain, in order to fill that country,
and also thirty thousand soldiers to defend the bishops, who
were already ordained, from the incursions of enemies. And
when he had finished everything according to his wish, he
divided the land liberally among each of the nations, and
also the woods, and the rivers full of fish, with which that
region abounded. And committing to Conan the government
of the whole people, he appointed him king of that country,
and called the country the Lesser Britain, as has been already
mentioned. Then Maximus, advancing with his entire forces,
penetrated the interior of Gaul, and after some most severe
battles subjugated the whole of Germany. And placing the
throne of his empire at Treves, he attacked the two emperors
with such violence that he slew Gratian, and drove Valentinian
from the city of Rome.

A.D. 3892. Conan, king of the Armorican Bretons, wish-
ing. to give wives of his nation to his fellow-soldiers, that
they might not form a mixture of races with the Gauls, sent
to Dionotus, king of Cornwall, to whom Maximus had en-
trusted Britain in his absence, to desire him to manage this
matter, and to send the damsels to him with speed. Dionotus
therefore, having received the message of Conan, collected
throughout all the provinces the daughters of the nobles to the
number of eleven thousand; and of others sprang from the
lower orders to the number of six thousand, all of whom em-
barked on board ship at London. There were, however, some
of them who, preferring chastity to marriage, would have chose

202 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 393.

rather to lose their lives than to be married to husbands, how-
ever noble, in this manner. When, therefore, the fleet entered
the sea by the mouth of the river Thames, a sudden tempest
arose, and they all began to be in danger, and the greater part
of them were drowned. And eleven thousand virgins, who
are said to have suffered at Cologne after this disaster, fell
in with the lawless army of Wannius, king of the Huns, and of
Melga, duke of the Picts, who by the orders of Gratian were
oppressing the Maritime nations with terrible cruelty. These
troops, meeting with the before-mentioned damsels, and” be-
holding their beauty, desired to wanton with them. And when
the damsels had refused, and had in a most Christian spirit
looked with due disdain on the pagans, both armies rushed
upon them. And in this way the chaste band, being cut to
pieces with bloody swords, went to the kingdom of heaven as
martyrs. :

Then the wicked generals, when they had learnt that the

island of Britain was destitute of armed soldiers, march thither,
and invade the kingdom, which was without any ruler or de-—

fender. For Maximian had taken away with him, as I have
already stated, all the soldiers and warlike youth, leaving only
the unwarlike rustics in the country; and the chiefs, whom
I have spoken of, making vast slaughter of the common
people, began to lay waste the towns and cities. When there-
fore this sad calamity was announced to Maximus,! he sent the
senator Gratian with two legions, who routed the enemy with
enormous slaughter, and drove them to Ireland. Inthe mean-
time, Maximus having been killed at Rome, the Britons who
were with him fled to their fellow-citizens in Lesser Britain.
Gratian therefore, when he heard of the death of Maximus,
assumed the crown, and made himself king. After this, he
behaved with such cruelty to the Britons, that the people as-
sembled and murdered him; and after he was dead, the
enemies who have been mentioned before, returned and afflicted
Britain with most terrible and lasting oppression.

A.D. 393, There flourished in the church of God, Gregory
Nazianzen, Gregory of Nyssa, Hilary of Poictiers, Martin of

1 There is a great confusion of names in this account; our Chronicler
sometimes speaks of Maximus, sometimes of Maximian. It is plain that
we are always to understand Maximus to be the person meant.

A.D. 401. THE HERESY OF THE MESSALIANS. 203

Tonx, Ambrose of Milan, Jerome, abbot of Bethlehem, and
Pachomius, abbot of Egypt.

A.D. 394. The chronicles of Jerome and those of Gen-
nadius begin. The same year, Saint Patrick, a Scot, was
sold as a slave into Ireland, with his sisters; and he became
the swineherd of the king, in which situation he was often
honoured with conferences with the angels.

A.D. 395. As Jerome translated the sacred scriptures of both
the Old and New Testaments into the Latin language, the
edition of the seventy translators began to be less thought of.

A.D. 396. The bodies of the prophets Habakkuk and Micah
are discovered.

A.D. 397. The bodies of the martyrs Nazarius and Celsus
were found at Milan by Ambrose, and taken up.

A.D. 398. On the death of Theodosius the great emperor,
Arcadius and Honorius, his sons, succeeded to the empire,
and reigned fourteen years; and they dividing the monarchy
of the world between them, placed the principal seats of their
government, the one at Rome and the other at Constantinople.
And in their time Donatus, the bishop of Epirus, was eminent
for his virtues, who killed a savage dragon by spitting in his
mouth: a monster so large, that as it was desirable to destroy
him, lest he should taint the air, eight yoke of oxen could
scarcely drag it to the place where it was to be burnt.

A.D. 399. Ambrose first appointed hymns to be sung in the
church ; and at the same time Arsenius, from having been a
senator, became amonk. About the same time the temples
of the Gentiles, at the command of Theodosius, were destroyed
throughout the world, and in their stead temples of Christ are
built in every direction.

a.D. 400. Rufinus, the commander of the oriental army,
being carried away by the desire of empire, and rebelling,
from a hope of attaining the chief power, was slain by Stilicho,
the commander of the western army ; of whose death the ad-

mirable poet Claudian thus speaks :
. “No longer do I grieve that wicked men
Rise to the topmost height of prosperous power—
They are but raised to fall more fatally. ”’

A.D. 401. The heresy of the Messalians arose; of those
men, that is to say, who say that devils can be driven out of
men by merely speaking to them.

204 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 407.

A.D. 402. There was a certain heretic, by name Eunomius,
who presumed to baptise by immersion, saying that people
ought to be baptised, not in the name of the Trinity, but in
that of the death of Christ; and he used to rebaptise those
who had been baptised in the Trinity.

A.D. 403. Saint Ambrose finished his life gloriously, and
his actions and character are described in clear language to
the bishop Augustine by Paul, bishop of Nola. At the same
time, Sisinnius and Alexander received the crown of martyr-
dom in Italy. About the same time, Stilicho, wishing to disturb
the peace of the emperor, appointed Alaric, the king of the
Goths, his master of the soldiers.

A.D. 404. The Pelagian heresy arose, which was originated —
by a certain Pelagius, a native of Britain. He taught that
men could be saved without the grace of God, by their own
merits, and that every man was guided to justice by his own
will; that infants are born without original sin, and are as inno-
cent as Adam was before his fall; and that they require to be
baptised, not in order to be freed from sin, but that they may
be admitted to the kingdom of God by adoption ; though, even
if they were not baptised, there could still be for them a happy
and everlasting life out of the kingdom of heaven. That Adam
was injured by his own sin alone, and that he died, not because
of his offence as deserving of death, but because of the con-
dition of his nature, as he would have died even if he had not
sinned. He affirmed also, that all prayers which are offered
by the church, whether for the faithful or for infidels, are vain.

A.D. 405. Anastasins was appointed to the Roman chair,
and he occupied it two years and twenty-six days, and the see
was vacant twenty-one days. The same year, the abbot Pacho-
vius ended his life in virtue, in the hundred and tenth year of |
his age.

A.D. 406. John Chrysostom was very eminent in the church
of Christ ; at the same time also, John, bishop of Constanti-
nople, and Theoplitus, bishop of Alexandria, flourished.

A.D. 407. A boy was born in a fortress of Judeea, by name —
Emmaus, perfect from the navel, and divided upwards, so
that he had two bosoms, and two sets of arms, two heads, and
each body had its own separate sensations. But when one
ate the other did not eat, when one slept the other was awake ;
they played at the same time, and they lived nearly to the age

A.D. 417. COUNT CONSTANTIUS EXPELS THE GOTHS. 205

of manhood. But after a time one body died, and the other
survived it three days. The same year, Innocent the First was
made pope, and he sat in the Roman chair fifteen years, two
months, and twenty days ; and the see was vacant fifteen days.

A.D. 408. Innocent, bishop of the city of Rome, dedicated
a church to the most blessed martyrs Gervasius and Prothatius ;
which was built by the devotion of a most illustrious woman,
by name Vestina,

A.D. 409. Pope Innocent made a rule that the kiss of peace
should be given at mass, and that the oil for the sick should
be consecrated by the bishop.

A.D. 410. Saint Alexius flourished at Rome; a man who
left his bride on the first night of his marriage, and travelled
eighteen years for Christ’s sake.

A.D. 411. Saint Augustine, bishop of Hippo, was very much
distinguished in the church of Christ for learning and sanctity.

A.D. 412. Honorius succeeded Arcadius the emperor, and
reigned twenty years.

A.D. 413. The heresy of the Priscillanists arose, which was
originated by a certain Priscillus, who connected men with stars
that influenced their fate ; and who affirmed that the human
body itself was arranged with reference to the twelve signs of
the zodiac; placing Aries in the head, Taurus in the neck,
Gemini in the shoulders, and Cancer in the breast; in
this manner running through all the limbs down to the feet,
which he assigned to the fishes. He despised marriage and
the use of meat He also attributed the creation of human
flesh not to God, but to the evil angels.

A.D. 414. Honorius the emperor appointed Constantius, his
comrade, master of his army; who, in the first place, going
into Gaul, took Constantine prisoner at Arles, and put him
to death.

A.D. 415. The heresy of Pelagius came to an audience of
pope Innocent, and gave rise to a council of two hundred and
twenty-four bishops of Carthage ; which convicted and con-
demned it.

A.D. 416. Orosius, a presbyter and historian, flourished, who
was sent by Saint Augustine to Saint Jerome, to learn the
theory of the soul.

A.D. 417. Count Constantius, being at Arles, and displaying
great energy in the transaction of affairs there, expelled the

206 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 426. —

Goths, who were commanded by Atavulfus, the husband of
Placida, from Narbonne, and compelled them to retire into
Spain.

ie 418. Lucian, the presbyter, flourished with great dis-
tinction. He wrote a treatise on the revelation of Stephen,
the proto-martyr, andof his companions, in the Greek language;
which afterwards Avitus, a Spanish presbyter, translated into
Latin. He also sent by Orosius the remains of the blessed
Stephen to the western nations.

A.D. 419, Anianus, bishop of Aurelia, flourished, who by
his prayers delivered the citizens of Aurelia from the Huns.

A.D. 420. The Britons, unable to endure the hostile attacks
of the Scots, Picts, and Norwegians, sent to Rome requesting
aid; and a legion is immediately sent to them, which slew a
vast multitude of the barbarians, and expelled them from the
borders of Britain. After that, for the sake of repelling the
enemy, they built a wall between the two seas, which, how-
ever, as it was made more of turf than of stone, was of no use ©
to the Britons in their works, without a commander. For ©
presently, when the Romans departed, the enemies whom I
have spoken of arrived again in ships, and cut down, laid
waste, overthrew and destroyed everything that they met with.

A.D. 421. Pharamund became king of the Franks, and he
reigned eleven years. Again the Britons implored assistance
from the Romans, who came and drove the enemy back to
the sea, and uniting themselves, the Britons made the wall
solid with stone, and extended it from sea to sea; they also
all along the shore of the southern sea placed numerous towers —
at intervals, and fortified the country; and then bade farewell
to their companions, as not intending to return again.

A.D. 422. Zozimus was made pope. He sat in the Roman
chair three years, eight months, and twenty-five days. And
the see was vacant eleven days.

A.D. 423. Jerome the presbyter ended his life in sanctity,
the last day of September, in the ninety-first year of his age.

A.D. 424, Macharius, an Egyptian monk, was eminent for
wonders and virtue.

A.D. 425. Boniface was appointed pope. He occupied the
chair at Rome three years, eight months, and thirteen days.
And the see was vacant nine days. ‘

A.D. 426, Severus, the presbyter, by name Sulpitius, who

A.D. 434, THE ROMANS WITHDRAW FROM BRITAIN. 207

wrote a book about the life of the blessed Martin, died. He in
his old age was seduced by the Pelagians, but, acknowledging his
fault in having been too talkative, he kept silence to the day

of his death, making amends by his silence for the evil that

he had done by talking.
A.D. 427. Coelestinus was appointed pope. He occupied
the Roman chair seven years, one month, and nine days. And

_ the see was vacant twenty-one days. The same year, Theo-

dosius the younger succeeded to the empire, and reigned
twenty-seven years.

A.D. 428. Valentinian the younger, the son of Constantius,
was created emperor at Ravenna, and Placida, his mother, had
the title of Augusta given her.

A.D. 429. Nestorius, bishop of Constantinople, revealed his
faithless heresy. He asserted that the blessed Virgin Mary
was not the mother of God, but only of a man, so that he
made one person of the flesh, and another of the Deity. And
he did not believe that there was one only Christ in the world
and in the flesh ; but he preached that there were two separate
persons, one the Son of God, and the other the Son of Man.

A.D. 430. The devil appeared to the Jews in Crete in the
figure of Moses, and promised to lead them across the sea
with dry feet to the land of promise; and then exulted when
many lost their lives. The rest who were saved were all con-
verted to Christ.

A.D. 431. The ferocious nations of the Vandals, Alans, and
Goths crossed over from Spain to Africa, and polluted every
place with fire, and sword, and rapine, and also with Arrian
impiety. But the blessed Augustine, bishop of Hippo, and
likewise an illustrious teacher of all the churches, departed to
the Lord in the third month of the siege of Hippo, to escape
seeing the ruin of his city.

A.D. 432. The Vandals, after having taken Carthage, de-
vastated Sicily. The same year, Clodoveus became king in
Gaul, and reigned seventeen years.

A.D. 433. Palladius was ordained by pope Ccelestinus, and
sent as the first bishop to the Scots who believed in Christ.

A.D. 434. When the Romans withdrew from Britain, the
Picts and Scots returned with the Norwegians and Dacians,
and took possession of the whole island, which was almost

He r :

208 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 435.

destitute of all its original inhabitants, from the northern
coast as far down as the wall which the Romans had erected
for the defence of the country. And after this, the enemy
attacked the wall, and loosened its joints, and with iron hooks
threw down the Britons who were placed on the high ramparts
of the walls to resist it, against the bulwarks. For they were
without a ruler; ignorant how to fight, and always inclined
to flee. On which account, those who were able to escape
from this calamity sought hiding-places in the thicknesses of
the groves, in lairs and secret places of the earth. At last,
when they had abandoned their cities, the miserable people
were torn to sae like lambs by wolves. Why need | dwell
on the story? They again sent a letter filled with tearful
lamentations to Altius, the Roman governor and consul, wing
contained these words among others :—

The groans of the Britons to Aitius, the consul, prientiall
“The sea drives us on the barbarians, and the barbarians |
drive us to the sea; and between the two, two kinds of death |

arise. We are either drowned or stabbed.”

But when the Romans had told them that they were not in-—
clined any longer to exhaust themselves with such laborious
expenses for them, the messengers departed in grief, and re-—

ported their repulse to their fellow-citizens.

These are the transactions of the eighth year of the reign
of the younger Theodosius. In this year the tribute of Britain
ceased, which had been paid to the Roman senate ever since
the time of Julius Ceesar.

Cu. VIT.—a.p. 435 To 464.
The Britons receive aking from Brittany—Attila—V ortigern—

Saint Germain—Wars between the Britons and the Picts and

Scots—The Saxons are invited into Britain—Meroveus, king
of the Franks—The Saxons arrive in Britain—Are defeated
by Vortigern—The council of Chaleedon—V ortimer—Horso
—Hengist—Death of Vortimer—Return of Hengist—The
Saxons destroy the British Churches—Merlin.

A.D. 435. Guithelin, archbishop of London, flourished, a man
remarkable for his learning and virtues. fle, as soon as
he was made aware of the calamitous state of Britain, and of
its desertion by the Romans, being filled with pity, crossed
the sea to the Lesser Britain, which had formerly been called

A.D. 435. ALDROENUS SENDS TROOPS TO BRITAIN. 209

Armorica, or Lezecania, to entreat assistance for his. brethren.
The king of that country at that time was Aldroenus, the
fourth successor of Conan, to whom the tyrant Maximus had
given that kingdom. And he, when he saw that venerable
man, received him with due honour. But the archbishop,
relating the cause of his arrival, burst into tears, and said,
“Your nobleness is sufficiently aware, O king, how Maxi-
mus, who conferred this kingdom on you and your predecessors,
deprived our island of its soldiers, and also robbed it of its
men and women of the highest rank, and we and our fellow-
citizens have suffered great misery, having become a mere
object of prey and plunder to all nations. We are not only
oppressed by the enemy, but we are dying of hunger, being
deprived of every sort of food, except what we can obtain by
our skill in hunting.

“We, therefore, cut off from all other hope, approach your
grace, O most serene king, imploring you to come in person
to bring us assistance ; and to dispose of the kingdom, which
will then be your due after you have expelled the barbarians,
at your own pleasure ; and to govern the people, and to restore
to its ancient state a country which in old time subjugated
very distant kingdoms.” And when the archbishop, in a very
long speech, had said this and a great deal more, the king
replied in the following manner :—

“There was once a time when I would not have refused to
receive the island of Britain, but now that disasters have fallen
on it, it has become less valuable in my eyes, and odious in
those of my nobles. But because my grandfathers and great-
grandfathers possessed that island, I give you my brother
*Constantine, and two thousand soldiers with him. And if
God permit, he will deliver the country from its enemies, and,
being invested with the crown, he will possess the kingdom,
with honour and glory.” The king had scarcely made an
end of speaking, when the archbishop addressed Constantine,
a man of great reputation as a soldier, in the following cheer-
ful words :—“ Christ is victorious! Christ is king! Christ is
emperor! May the grace of Christ, therefore, stand by the
king of Britain, who is our defence, that he may restore our
miserable island to its former dignity.” In short, ships were
made ready on the shore, and the number of troops that I
have already stated was enlisted from the different parts of the

VOL. I. by

210 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 442

kingdom. And they having embarked and set sail, landed
prosperously in the harbour of Totness. And not long after,
the Britons who had been dispersed in caves and hiding-
places flocked together, and engaging the enemy in battle,
gained the victory by the energy of the new king and the
merits of the blessed Guithelin.

After this, an assembly was held at Chichester, where they
raised Constantine to the throne, and gave him a wife de-
scended from a noble race of Roman blood, who had been
educated by the care of the blessed Guithelin, archbishop of
London; and by her, in process of time, he had three illus-
trious sons, namely, Constans, Aurelius Ambrosius, and Uther
Pendragon. Constans, his first-born, he devoted to God, giving
him to the church of Amphibalus, at Winchester, when he took
upon himself the orders of a monk ; Aurelius Ambrosius and
Pendragon he committed to the archbishop of London to be
educated.

A.D. 436. Sixtus became pope. He sat in the Roman chair

eight years and eighteen days. He rebuilt in an admirable —

manner the church of Saint Mary, the Mother of the Lord,
which had originally been a temple of Liber Pater.

A.D. 437. Eudoxia, the wife of Theodosius, the emperor,
returned from Jerusalem, bringing with her the remains of
the blessed proto-martyr Saint Stephen, which were found in

the church of Saint Lawrence, and are piousiy worshipped by —

the faithful.

A.D. 438. Bleda and Attila, who were brothers, and kings
of many nations, laid waste [llyricum and Thrace.

A.D. 439. Maximus, bishop of Turin, flourished, a man of

great learning in the Holy Scriptures. «

A.D. 440. Petronius, bishop of Bologna, in Italy, a man of
great holiness of life, deeply versed in monastic studies, and
highly accomplished in secular literature, died.

A.D. 441. Julian, the bishop, and Ccelestine, flourished,
being both followers of Pelagius.

A.D. 442. Leporius, a presbyter, adopted the doctrine of
Pelagius, presuming on the purity of his own life, by which, of
his own will alone and through his own unassisted efforts, with-
out any assistance from God, he thought that he had obtained
grace. At length, however, he was convinced of his error, and
composed a book of recantation, written in the spirit of the
true Catholic faith.

A.D, 445. VORTIGERN SCHEMES TO GAIN THE CROWN. 211

A.D. 443. Leo the First became bishop of Rome, and sat in
the Roman chair twenty-one years, one month, and nine days.
_ And the see was vacant twenty-one days.

A.D. 444. Victor of Marseilles, an orator, who wrote a book
on Genesis addressed to his son Aithereus, but who was not
possessed of much learning in the Holy Scriptures, died.

A.D. 445. Constantine, king of the Britons, one day, when he
was going out hunting, was assassinated with a knife by a cer-
tain Pict, who was in his train, in a very dense thicket. On his
death, a dissension arose among the nobles as to who should be
raised to the kingdom; for the sons of the deceased king,
Aurelius Ambrosius and Uther Pendragon, had been sent into
Lesser Britain to be educated. And even if they had been
present, they would have been incapable of becoming kings,
because of their tender age. Then Vortigern, the consul of
the Genvisei, who was labouring with all his might to become
king, went to Winchester, and took Constans, the monk, the
son of Constantine, out of the cloister, and conducted him to
London, and although the people scarcely approved of the
measure, because he was a monk, raised him to the kingdom.
For Guithelin, the archbishop of London, was dead, and there
was no one else who would have presumed to make him king.
But Vortigern took upon himself the part of a bishop, and with
his own hands placed the crown on his head.

Constans, therefore, being made king, committed the regu-
lation of all the affairs of the kingdom to Vortigern. But
Vortigern, being a crafty man, committed the castles and for-
tifications of the kingdom to his own guards, and began to
deliberate with himself how he might most cunningly betray
the king. Therefore, he took the treasures of the king into
his own custody, and every day he augmented the number of
his soldiers and servants. Then he wrote to the king, and
advised him to take into his service a hundred Picts (whom he
knew to be inclined and ready for any kind of fraud or
treachery), to protect his person day and night from any attack
of his enemies.

The king having given his consent, the before-mentioned
number of Picts was admitted into the private household of the
king. And Vortigern enriched them to such a degree with
military pay, and so pampered them with the most delicate
food, that they almost adored him, and used to assert loudly

r Pp2 ‘

/

212 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 446.

in the streets that he was the man who deserved the empire.
When, then, Vortigern perceived that he had acquired the
good-will of all classes, he one day invited all these men to a
feast, saying with tears that he was goimg to leave Britain,
because he had not revenue enough of his own to provide pay
for fifty soldiers. Then departing, as if out of spirits, to his own
house, he left them drinking in the hall. But the Picts, having
heard his address to them, murmured among one another,
saying, ‘“‘ Why should we not kill that monk, so that Vortigern
may become master of the kingdom?’’ Therefore they all,
being drunk, rose up, and attacked the king. And when
they had slain him, they brought the head of the monarch to
Vortigern. But when Vortigern saw it, he burst into tears,
as if grieved at the sight, in order to disguise his treachery
under the veil of tears. Then, as soon as these things had
taken place, he convoked the citizens of London, and ordered

these Picts to be put to death, that is, to be decapitated, in order _

to excuse himself from having had any share in this wicked-
ness. At length, when he saw that he had no rival to dread,
he placed on his own head the crown of Britain, and became
the superior of all the princes of the land. Now, when he
was thus raised to the throne, the moral pestilence of all kinds
of wickedness began to increase ; shameful wickedness stalked
abroad, and hatred of truth, and contempt of God, and liti-
giousness, and rivalry in luxury and crime, so that Vortigern

himself appeared to be a vessel containing all kinds of wicked- —

ness, and (what is above all things contrary to the honour
of a king) he depressed the nobles, and promoted those who.
were base both in manners and -extraction, and so became
odious both to God and men.

A.D. 446. The Pelagian heresy, which had been introduced
by Agricola, a disciple of Pelagius, polluted the faith of the
Britons, with its foul pestilence. But the Britons, as they
were neither willing in any degree to receive a perverse doctrine,
blaspheming the grace of Christ ; and on the other hand were
not able by reasoning to refute the crafty wickedness of argu-
ment, adopted a salutary counsel, of seeking aid in their
spiritual warfare from the Galician bishops. Wherefore, a
numerous council was collected in that country, and a man
was sought for who might be sent to Britain to succour the
faith. At last, by the judgment of the whole synod, some

A.D. 446. PELAGIANISM REFUTED. 213

priests were selected to be sent thither as apostles, namely,
Germanus, bishop of Altisiodoria, and Lupis, bishop of the city
of Troyes, who hastened to Britain to confirm the faith of the

church. When they with prompt devotion had yielded to

the prayers and injunctions of the holy church, they set sail
on the ocean, and although with labour and danger, they ina
short time crossed the sea, and enjoyed the wished-for shore
in quiet. Then they convened a synod at Verolamium, and
an immense multitude of men, with even their wives and
children, came thither to the summons. The people was
assembled, the judge who was to preside was waited for, the
parties were present similar though in unequal condition ; for
on one side was divine faith, on the other human presumption ;
on one side Christ, on the other Pelagius, the author of the
perverse error.

As the first step, the blessed priests gave their adversaries
liberty of arguing, and of proposing what they pleased, and
they permitted them to give utterance to their chattering lo-
quacity ; so they, with naked, unmeaning words, long and
fruitlessly wasted the time, and tired the ears of the auditors.
Then the venerable priests, overflowing with eloquence, poured
upon them with showers from the Gospels and words of
the Apostles. They also mingled their own arguments with
the divine ones, and followed up their modest assertions with
testimonies, which they read. Vanity is convicted, perfidy is
confounded and refuted, so that, not being able to answer,
they confess at each objection that is alleged against them, that
they have erred. The people who witness the conference,
can hardly restrain themselves from violence, and bear their
testimony in favour of the decision with uproar. After that
day, that cunning superstition was so thoroughly eradicated
from the minds of all men, that they embraced with thirsty
desire the doctrine of the priests and of the orthodox be-
lievers. Therefore that damnable sin having been checked,
and its authors confuted, and the minds of all men settled in
purity of faith and consolidated in unity, the honest priests

sought the blessed Alban, with the intent of returning thanks

to God by his intervention ; that now that they were victorious,
they might discharge their devoted feelings of gratitude to that

person whose assistance they had implored when entering upon
the contest.

214 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 447.9

But when the blessed Germanus arrived at the martyr’s tomb,

having with him relics of all the apostles and of the different.

martyrs, having made a speech, he ordered the sepulchre to
be opened, with the intention of placing his precious offerings
in it, thinking it suitable that the hospitable receptacle of the
tomb of one saint, should contain the limbs of the saints col-

lected from different countries, whom heaven had received as ~

equal in merit. And when they had been honourably deposi-
ted and regularly placed together, from the very place where
the blood of the martyr had been shed, the priest took up a
mass of dust to carry away, in which there was visible blood
which had been preserved, and was red from the corpse of
the martyr, while his persecutor was pale. But the priest,
after he had consummatedeverything prosperously according to
his wish, and having properly arranged everything, which was
previously in confusion, returned with joy to his own land, being
a grateful acceptor of the kindness of God, and of the blessed
Alban, the proto-martyr of the English, to whom he ascribed
the victory, and preaching tidings of great joy. And after
these things had happened in this manner, an innumerable
multitude of each sex was conyerted to the Lord.

A.D. 447. When the wickedness of king Vortigern, and

the fickleness of his mind, had become known to all the nations —

round about, the Scots from the west and the Picts from the
north rose in insurrection against him (for Vortigern had
slain a hundred of their fellow-citizens). And they kept over-
running the kingdom. of Britain with the most active hostility
and incessant diligence. For, destroying everything by fire
and sword, with plunder and ravages, they wore out the offending
nation, because the nature of the country favoured their dis-
dain of them; and in this way the wicked people as well as
the king, was involved in one common vengeance. And those
of the miserable people, who were not affected by their ruption
of the enemy, were utterly destroyed by a terrible famine, so
that they were ground down and crushed as it were between
two millstones. While the pestilence was at its height, the
sword also came upon them so fiercely, that the living were not
sufficient even to bury the dead. Therefore the king, with a
desolate people, exhausted by warlike attacks, not knowing
what to do against the irruption of the enemy, began to despair.
At length it was decided by all to invite the nation of the

A.D. 448. THE ISLAND OF BRITAEN TRANQUILLIZED. 215

Saxons from the parts beyond the sea, to their assistance.
And it is plain that it was so arranged by the divine providence,
in order that evil might come against wicked men, as in fact,
the event plainly showed. In the meantime, ambassadors
were sent that the business which had been already discussed
might be concluded.

A.D. 448. The Picts and Scots united their forces and under-
took the war against the Britons. But as the Britons judged
that their army would be unequal to that of the enemy, they
implored the aid of the holy priests Germanus and Lupus. At
last, when the greater portion of their army was preparing to
take arms and to make ready for war, Germanus promised. to
act as their general. He selects men without any baggage,
he reconnoitres the adjacent country, and from the side from
which the arrival of the enemy is expected, he sees a valley
surrounded with mountains, in which he, as general of the
British host, marshals his new army. And now the fierce
multitude of the enemy was at hand, and those who had been
placed in ambush saw it approaching. Then on asudden, Ger-
manus, as their standard bearer, exhorts them, and bade them all
reply to his words with one shout. So the priests all shouted,
repeating Hallelujah three times. One shout from the whole
multitude ensues, and the enclosed confined spaces within the
mountains, reverberating with the crash, re-echoed the swelling
ery; the army of the enemyis panic-struck, and thinking, in their
fear, that not only the surrounding rocks, but that the very
vault of heaven itself is coming down upon them, are thrown
into such alarm, that the speed of their feet was scarcely thought
sufficient. They fled in every direction, they threw away their
arms, glad to save even their naked bodies out of danger. The
river which they had to cross showed that numbers in their
headlong flight had been drowned in that. The army, without
striking a single blow, beholds its vengeance, and becomes a
leisurely spectator of the victory which is offered to it. The
spoils which have been thrown down are gathered up, and the
religious soldier embraces the joys of the heavenly victory.
' The pontiffs triumph over the enemy thus thrown into con-
fusion without bloodshed ; they triumph also in a victory won
by faith and not by armies.

_ The island therefore being now tranquillised, and in the en-
joyment of complete security, and all enemies, whether invisible

216 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 449.

or manifest in the flesh, bemg subdued, they prepare to return
with all convenient speed to their own country, from which they
had been summoned ; and their own merits, and the inter-
cession of the blessed martyr Alban, secured thema favourable
voyage, and a prosperous passage restored them in tranquillity
to their longing friends.

This year Meroveus became king of the Franks, and he
reigned ten years.

A.D. 449. The nation of Angles or Saxons having been invited
by king Vortigern, arrive in Britain in their ships of war, and
receive a place of abode in the eastern part of the island from
the king, as being about to fight for his country. They there-
fore accepted the district when the Britons gave it to them,
on condition that they should fight for the safety and peace
of the country, against all enemies, and that the Britons them-
selves should furnish them with sufficient pay while doing
military service. They came from the three most warlike tribes
of Germany, that is, from the Saxons, the Angles, and the
Jutes. From the Jutlanders the men of Kent and the Wic-
tuarii are descended ; the latter tribe is that which possesses
the Isle of Wight, and those parts, which to this day, in the
province of the West Saxons, are called the country of the
Jutes, lying opposite the Isle of Wight itself. But the East
Saxons, the South Saxons, and the West Saxons came from
that part of Saxony which is now called the country of the —
old Saxons.

Moreover, from the Angles, that is to say, from that district
which is called Angulus (the corner), and which from that
time to the present day, as it is said, has remained deserted.
Between the provinces of the Jutlanders and the Saxons, come
the East Angles, the Midland Angles, and the other tribes of the
Angles claim their origin from the nation of the Northumbrian
Mercians, which dwells to the north of the river Humber.

Their leaders are reported to have been two brothers, Hen-
gist and Horsa, who were the sons of Withgisius, whose father
was Witha, the son of Wetha, the son of Woden, from whose
blood the royal family of many provinces derived their origin. ©
And when at last they were brought into the presence of the
king, he asked of them what faith and what religion their
fathers had espoused. And Hengist replied, ‘‘We worship
their national gods, that is to say, Saturn and Jupiter, and the

y
i,
i

1

:

A.D. 450. THE SCOTS AND PICTS RAVAGE BRITAIN. 217

rest of those deities who govern the world, and most especially
Mercury, whom we call Woden. To him our ancestors dedi-
cated the fourth day of the week, which to this day is called

_ Wodenesday. Next to him, we worship that goddess who is

the most powerful of all the goddesses, named Frea, after
whose name we call the day Friday. But Frea, as some people
assert, is the same as Venus, and is called Frea as if it were
Froa, from Frodos, which means the foam of the sea, from
which, according to some authors, Venus was born. On which
account the same day is also called the day of Venus.” Vor-
tigern replied to this, “I am greatly grieved at your bar-
barism (it might be more properly termed your infidelity), but
I am rejoiced at your arrival, because either God or some
one else has brought you hither in a suitable time for my
necessity. For my enemies oppress me on all sides; and if
you will share with me the labour of my battles, I will main-
tain you honourably in my kingdom, and I will enrich you with
all kinds of gifts and with lands.’’ The barbarians agreed at
once to his proposal, and having made a treaty with him, they
remained at his court.

The same year, news was brought to Britain that the Pela-
gian error had again sprung up under the influence of a few
promoters of it. Again the prayers of the Britons are borne to
the blessed Germanus, that he would condescend to undertake
the cause of God and the contest in this spiritual warfare. He
promptly assents to their petition, taking with him Severus, a
man of proved sanctity, who was a disciple of the most blessed
father Lupus, and who was then ordained bishop of Treves.
The two together set sail, and, as the elements are favourable,
they reach the shores of Britain with a prosperous voyage. And
Germanus, by the antidote of his preaching, heals the wounds
of infidelity, and the medicine of learning cures the apostasy
of blasphemy. And all those erroneous opinions are con-
demned with their authors. And the consequence was, that
from that time forward the faith remained inviolate in that
country. Accordingly, all things being now settled, the
blessed priests returned successfully to that country from
which they had come.

a.p. 450. After the departure of the most blessed pontiffs
from Britain, the Scots and Picts, rising again from death,
collected an enormous army from the north, and began to

218 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 450.

ravage the northern parts of the island. And when news of
this was brought to Vortigern, he collected soldiers and
marched across the Humber to meet them, and there was no
great necessity for the citizens to fight ; for the Saxons who
were present, fought so gallantly, that the enemies who were
previously accustomed to be victorious, were now at once put
to flight. Vortigern, therefore, having gained the victory by
their means, increased his donations to them, and gave their _
general, Hengist, a great deal of land in Lyndenscia (Lincoln- —
shire), to support himself and his comrades. But Hengist, as
he was a crafty man, having ascertained the good-will which
the king bore him, addressed him in this manner :—‘‘ My
lord king, your enemies are disquieting you on every side, and
threatening you, and saying that they will bring over Ambro-
sius Aurelius from the country of Armorica (Brittany), in
order, when they have deposed you, to promote him to be king.
If you please, therefore, we will send to our own country, and
invite troops from thence, that our number may be increased.”’

The king then adopted their advice and request, and desired
Hengist to send to Germany, in order that the soldiers, who
were invited over from thence, might bring speedy aid to his —
timidity. Accordingly, without any delay, an embassy was
sent to Germany, and the messengers, when they returned,
brought with them eighteen ships filled with picked soldiers.
They also brought the daughter of Hengist, Rowena by name,
with whose beauty Vortigern was so charmed, that he begged
her of her father. And Hengist, when he knew how easily
moved the mind of .the king was, granted him his daughter.
Therefore Satan entered into his heart, inasmuch as he, being
a Christian, was desirous to marry a pagan wife. So the king
that very night married a pagan wife, who charmed him
exceedingly. On which account he incurred the enmity of his
nobles and his sons. He had previously had sons by another
wife, whose names were Vortimer, Catigern, and Pascentius.
He had also a daughter by the same wife, whom he himself
married, and had a daughter by her, for which he was excom-
municated by Saint Germanus, and by the whole convention —
of bishops.

The same year, as Sigisbert writes in his chronicle, Saint
Germanus, having come to Ravenna, for the sake of the peace
of the Armorican nation, and having been received with rever-

]
|

A.D. 453. HENGIST’S ADVICE TO VORTIGERN. 219

ence by Valentinian and his mother Placida, departed to

Christ, and his body was brought by a worshipful band of

saints and by companies of religious men, on account of his
great virtue, to Altisiodorum. At which time, Severus, a

presbyter, a man of great eminence on account of the miracles
which he wrought, by having destroyed a temple of idols, where

Gentile error adored a hundred gods with an insane worship,
built a church to the blessed proto-martyr, Stephen, that it

might be consecrated before the gates of Vienne. But as he
was waiting for the return of the blessed Germanus from
Ravenna, as he had engaged that he should come to the dedi-
cation of it, it so fell out that on the day of dedication, before
the offices were begun, the body of that blessed confessor of
Christ was brought through Vienne, and was borne into this
identical new church, for the sake of resting there ; and in this

_ manner, it is well known that the engagement of the man of

God was fulfilled. The miracles and eminent acts of virtue
which God wrought in Britain by that blessed man, the account
which has been written of his life will enable those to judge
who wish to do so. But. Bede, in his History of England,
relates that he departed this life in the sixth year of the reign
of Marcianus, which is eight years later than this.

A.D. 451. Philip, a presbyter and disciple of the blessed
Jerome, who wrote some commentaries on the book of Job in
plain, simple language, ended his life.

A.D. 452. Theodosius the emperor died, and Marcian and
Valentinian succeeded him, and reigned six years. At the
beginning of their reign, the Council of Chalcedon was held,
owing to the exertions of the blessed Pope Leo, when Huty-
ches, with Dioscorus, bishop of Alexandria, were publicly con-
victed and condemned. But Hutyches was abbot of Constan-
tinople, and denied that Christ, after his assumption of huma-
nity, existed in two natures, asserting that the divine nature
was the only one that was in him.

A.D. 453. Hengist, when he had married his daughter to
Vortigern, addressed him in this manner, saying, “ Listen to
my advice, and let us invite hither my son Octa with his cou-
sin Abissa, for they are warlike men, and will subdue countries
for you, which you may give them, to hold of you; those,
for instance, which are in the northern parts of Britain,
near the wall, between Deira and Scotland ; and they being

220 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 455.

there, will check the incursions of the barbarians, and so you
will remain in peace on this side of the Humber.” Vortigern
consented, and immediately they sent ambassadors, and they
who had. been invited, namely, Octa, Abissa, and Cerditius, -
came with three hundred ships full of armed men, all of whom
were kindly received by Vortigern, and enriched with liberal
presents. But when the Britons saw this, they feared their
treachery, and desired the king to expel them from his terri-
tories, for that pagans ought not to associate with Christians,
because the Christian law forbadeit. Moreover, a murmur and
complaint of the nobles was heard against the detestable mar-
riage of the king, of which one poet speaks in a tone of invec-
tive and in elegant verse :—

“Law, love, and marriage bonds unite the two;
But what a law? what love? what kind or bonds ?
The law is lawless, hateful is the love,

Discordant all the bonds.”

Moreover, the number of those who arrived was so great, that
they were a terror to the natives to whom they were to have
been a protection. But Vortigern disdained to attend to the
advice of his countrymen, because he loved them above all
nations, on account of his wife.

A.D. 454. The nobles utterly deserted Vortigern, king of
Britain, and unanimously raised Vortimer his son to the throne,
who by their advice, which he adopted in every particular,
began to expel the barbarians, and pursuing them as far as
the river Derwent, he defeated them and put great numbers of
them to the sword. And with them fled Vortigern, who gave
them all the aid that he could, on account of his wife, as he
was very uxorious. Then Vortimer, having gained the victory,
began to restore to the native citizens the possessions which
they had lost, and to treat them with affection, and to restore
the churches that had been destroyed, and to treat with espe-
cial honour the ecclesiastics and religious men.

A.D. 455. Which is the seventh year after the arrival of the
Angles in Britain, the nations of the Angles with Vortigern,
having recovered their strength, began again to provoke Vor-
timer, king of the Britons, to war. And the armies meeting
here and there about Aylesford, fought a long time with great
vigour. At length the weight of the battle turned against the

A.D. 457. TERRIBLE CONFLAGRATION AT VIENNE. 221

Saxons, who abandoned the fight and the field of battle. But
the Britons pursued them manfully, and slew e countless num-
ber of them, and routed the rest, and Vortimer returned vic-

_ torious to his home. And not long after, Vortimer, with his

brothers Catigern and Pascentius, and with the whole people
of the island, declared war against the Saxons. And when
they were met they arrayed their armies for battle. But
Horsa, the brother of Hengist, to whom Vortigern had given
the province of Kent, and who was called king by his coun-
trymen, fell on the army of Catigern, the brother of Vortimer,
with such impetuosity, that it was scattered like dust, and
completely dispersed. And afterwards he slew Catigern, who
was thrown from his horse. And when Vortimer, his brother,
saw that, he rushed against him, and having slain him, he put
to flight the remainder of his squadrons, and drove them back
to Hengist, and the whole weight of the battle was turned
against Hengist. And as the enemy‘ could not resist the jus-
tice of Vortimer’s cause, they at length fled, not, however,
before they had inflicted great loss upon the Britons, for even
those who bad never done so before, were now exhausted, and
fled.

a.D. 456. After the death of Horsa, the Saxons raised Hen-
gist, his brother, to the kingdom of Kent. And the same year
he is recorded to have fought against the Britons. But being
unable to withstand the justice of Vortimer’s cause, he fled to
the isle of Thanet, where he was incessantly harassed by
naval attacks. At length the Saxons embarked on board
their own vessels, and leaving their wives and sons behind
them, returned to Germany.

A.D. 457. Saint Mamertus, bishop of Vienne, when the
solemnity of the vigil of our Lord’s resurrection was beginning,
saw at twilight the public buildings of the city of Vienne
blazing with a terrible conflagration. I need not dwell on the
circumstances; the people were filled with alarm, and the
church was emptied, as every one was afraid of a similar dis-
aster for his own house. But still the holy Mamertus stood
before the altar clothed in festival garments; and kindling
with the warmth of his faith, he checked the power of the
flames with the stream of tears which he shed. Therefore,
laying aside despair, they return to the church, all ascribing
the miracle to the holy man.

222 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. © A.D. 461.

A.D. 458. Saint John the Baptist revealed the place where
his head lay, near what was formerly the palace of Herod, to
two eastern monks who had come to pray at Jerusalem. And
after that it was transported to Edissa, a city of Phoenicia, and
buried with all due honour.

A.D. 459. The emperor Marcian being dead, Leo the Greater’
and Leo the Less became emperors, and reigned sixteen years.
At the same time, Alexandria and Egypt, becoming infected
with the errors of the heretic Dionysius, were filled with an
unclean spirit, and barked with the madness of dogs. Hil-
deric succeeded to the throne of the Franks, and reigned
twenty-six years. :

A.D. 460. Vortimer, king of the Britons, and the flower of
the youth, died, and with him all the hope and victory of the
Britons was extinguished. For the devil entered into the
heart of his step-mother, Rowena, and she gave him poison by
means of one of his intimates, in consequence of which he
died suddenly, and was buried in the city of London. And
after his death, Vortigern, at the instigation of his wife, sent
into Germany for Hengist, to desire him to come privately and
with only a few attendants, to Britain, lest, if he came in any
other way, the Britons might set upon him with one general
attack.

A.D. 461. Hengist, having heard of the death of Vortimer,
returned to Britain with four thousand armed men, whom
he had induced to join him. But when the arrival of such a
numerous host was made known to Vortigern and the princi-
pal men of the island, they were very indignant, and deter-
mined to fight with them. And when his daughter had by
messengers communicated that determination to Hengist, he
thought of betraying his country under the pretence of peace,
and he sent ambassadors to the king, saying that he had
engaged such a numerous body of men without the idea of
offering any violence either to him or to his kingdom, but that
he thought Vortimer was still alive, whom he was, above all
things, desirous to conquer. Butas he was now dead, he had
no hesitation about committing himself and his people to the

‘Our Chronicler is mistaken here; there were not two emperors of
the name of Leo, but Leo I., the pope, was contemporary with Leo the
emperor of the East, and this is probably what has misled Matthew. See
Gibbon, c, xxxv. Xxxvi. :

A.D. 462. DEVASTATIONS COMMITTED BY THE SAXONS. 223

' disposal of Vortigern, so that he might keep in his kingdom

as many as he chose, and the rest should set sail again and

~~ return to Germany. When this message was given to the

king, and when a time and place for confirming this agree-

-ment was fixed by common consent, the king ordered the
nations and the Saxons to meet on the first of May at Ames-

bury, that what had been agreed to, might then and there be
ratified. But Hengist ordered his comrades to bring with
them, each of them, a long knife concealed in their boots, and
while the Britons were conferring together without fear of
danger, every one of the Saxons was to be ready, when the
signal was given, — ‘*42pmet bon Seyes,’? —to draw his
knife and stab the Briton who sat next to him. And they did
so. Hengist himself kept Vortigern close to him, holding
him by his cloak ; and all the rest, who were expecting nothing
of the kind, to the number of four hundred and sixty men,
princes, and illustrious barons, and magistrates, they mur-
dered. The magistrate of Gloucester, named Eldol, was there,
and he, when he saw the treachery, seizeda stake which he
happened to find, and dashed to pieces and sent to hell every

one whom he could reach with it, and breaking the heads of

one, the arms of another, the collar-bone of another, and the
legs of several, he caused no small consternation among the
enemy, and did not.quit the place till he had slain seventy
men and worn out his stick. But at last, as he was unable
to resist so great a multitude, he turned from them and fled
to his own city. Many were slain on both sides, but the
Saxons gained the victory, because the unarmed Britons had
no means of resistance.

a.p. 462. The Saxons threatening death to king Vortigern,
put him in prison, and demanded of him that he should give
up his cities and fortifications as a ransom for his life. And
when he had confirmed his concessions by an oath, they
released him, and first of all went and seized upon London.
Then they seized York and Lincoln, and also Winchester, lay-

ing waste each of the provinces. And they attacked the citi-

zens with great violence, as wolves attack sheep which the
shepherds have deserted. They levelled all churches and
ecclesiastical buildings with the ground, and slew the priests
by the very altars. They burnt the Holy Scriptures with fire,

_ and heaped mounds of earth over the burial places of the holy

224 | MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 464.

martyrs. The religious men who were able to escape from
this slaughter, carried off the remnant of their sacred things
with them, and took refuge in caves, and groves, and deserts
and abrupt hills and mountains. But when Vortigern had
beheld the devastation which they made, not knowing what to —
do against that wicked nation, he retired into the district of
Wales, and shut himself up in the town of Genorium.

A.D. 463. The heresy of the Acephali, who rejected the
council of Chalcedon, sprung up, and they were called Ace-
phali, that is to say, “without a head,” because it cannot be
ascertained who was the original author of this heresy. They
deny that there is in Christ the property of two substances,
but contend that there is only one nature in his person.

A.D. 464. The British nation sent messengers into Brittany,
to Aurelius Ambrosius and Uter Pendragon, his brother, who
had been sent there out of fear of Vortigern, entreating them,
with great zeal and earnestness, to come quickly from the —
Armorican country to them, in order that when they had
expelled the Saxons and king Vortigern, they might take on_
themselves the crown of Britain. And they, as they were now
grown up to man’s estate, prepared for the expedition, pru-
dently, with ships and armed soldiers. And when this was
told to king Vortigern, having summoned his wise men, he
asked them what he ought to do in such circumstances. And
they, in reply, advised him to build a very strong tower, which
might preserve himself and his family from death. Accord-
ingly, having passed over several provinces with the view of
finding out a suitable place, he came at last to mount Erith,
where he found a suitable place as it seemed to him. Accord-
ingly, having collected masons from all parts, he ordered a
tower to be built. And they began the foundations, but
whatever they did in the day the next night the earth swal-
lowed up. Vortigern, therefore, asked his wise men the
cause of the ruin, enquiring what this prodigy portended to
him. They therefore counselled him to seek out a youth who
had no father, in order that the mortar and the stones might
be sprinkled with his blood, and so the work which had been
begun, might have strength and firmness. He at once sends
messengers about to the different provinces to find a youth
answering to this description. At length the messengers came
to the city which was afterwards called Caermarthen, and

_ A.D. 464, MERLIN IS BROUGHT BEFORE VORTIGHRN. 225

there they saw two youths quarrelling, one of whom was at-
tacking his companion and saying, “Why do you contend
with me, you fool ?—Can you who were born without a father,

| pretend to rival my nobleness, who, being born of the royal

family, am illustrious by both sidés of my house?” The
messengers hearing this expression, took the youth and his
mother, and straightway brought him to the king. And when
they were all standing in the royal presence, the king began
diligently to enquire of the boy’s mother who was the father
of her son. And she answered him, ‘‘ As my soul liveth, my
lord king, when I was in the chamber of the king of Demecia,
my father, there appeared unto me a person in the appear-
ance of a very handsome young man, and embracing me
repeatedly, he gave me many kisses. And when we had em-
braced tenderly, he suddenly vanished and departed. And as
he frequently returned to me, he left me at last with child ;
nor is there any one else who was the father of this youth.”
‘Then the king, being astonished beyond measure, called the
youth, and enquired of him by what name he was known.
And when he had said that he was called Merlin Ambrosius,
he asked the king why he and his mother had been brought
into his presence. And the king replied, “‘ My wise men gave
me counsel to seek out a youth without a father, by whose
blood my work might be bedewed, and so be strengthened.”
Merlin answered, ‘“‘ Order your wise men to come before me.
and I will convince them that they have devised a lie ; for as
they did not know what was under the foundation, they endea-
voured to satisfy you by alie. But call your workmen and
order them to dig the earth, and you will find a swamp below
which does not allow your work to stand.’ Then Merlin
coming to the wise men said, ‘‘ Tell me, you vilest ofHlatterers,
what lies hid beneath the swamp?”’? But they made him no
answer, but kept silence. And Merlin turning to the king,
said, “Order the swamp to be drawn off by small drains, and
at the bottom you will find two hollow stones and two dragons
sleeping in them.” And the king, believing his words, or-
dered the swamp to be drained, and, to the astonishment of
every one, he found that to be true which had been spoken by
Merlin.

Otay a Q

226 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

Cu. VIII.—From a.p. 465 To a.p. 498.

The prophecy of Merlin—The Red Dragon—The White Dra-—

gon—The Revolutions in Britain—Aurelius returns to Bri-

tain—Death of Vortigern—of Alaric—Odoacer, King of the —
Goths—Theodoric, King of the Goths—Aurelius defeats

Hengist and puts him to death—Restores the Churches— _

Saint Patrick in Ireland—Olla, King of the South Saxons—_
Cedric, King of the West Saxons—Death of Aurelius—Birth —
of Arthur, son of Uther Pendragon.

A.D. 465. Hilary was appointed to the Roman chair ; he held
it for six years and three months, and the see was vacant ten

days. At his request Victorinus made out the Paschal cycle

of five hundred and thirteen years.

The same year, when Vortigern, king of the Britons, had sat _

down on the bank of the swamp which had been drained, two

dragons came forth, one of which was white, and the other

red. And when they had come near to one another, they

began a terrible battle. For they breathed out fire and smoke; i
and the white prevailed, and at last drove the red one to the

extremity of the swamp. But he, being grieved at being
driven off, attacked the white one, and made him also retreat.
And as they fought in this way, the king ordered Merlin.
Ambrosius to say what the battle of the dragons: portended.
And presently he, bursting forth into weeping, imbibed the
spirit of prophecy, and took up his parable, and said— ~
“Woe to the red dragon, for his extermination draweth nigh.
The white dragon (which indicates the Saxons whom you have
invited) shall occupy his caverns. But the red dragon signi-
fies the nation of the Britons, which shall be oppressed by the.
white one. Therefore these mountains shall be made plain as
the valleys, and the rivers of the valleys shall flow with blood.
The worship of religion shall be destroyed, and the’ruin of
the churches shall be made manifest. At last the oppressed
people shall prevail, and shall withstand the cruelty of the
foreigners. For the boar of Cornwall shall bring succour,
and shall trample their necks under his feet ; the isles of the
ocean shall be subjected to his power, and he shall possess the
power of the Gauls. The house of Romulus shall tremble at
his fierceness, and his end shall be doubtful. He shall be

A.D. 465. THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 227

celebrated in the mouths of the people, and his acts shall be
food to those who tell of them. Six of his posterity shall

_ sway the sceptre, but after them there shall arise a German

worm, and a wolf out of the sea shall raise him up, whom the
African shores shall furnish with a train. A second time shall
religion be destroyed, and there shall be a change of the prin-
cipal sees. The dignity of London shall adorn Canterbury, and
the seventh pastor of York shall dwell in the kingdom of Brit-
tany. St. David’s shall be clothedwith the pallium of the city of
Legions,’ and the preacher of Ireland shall be dumb on account
of the child that is growing in his womb. It shall rain showers of

_ blood, and terrible famine shall afflict mortals. While these

things are taking place, the red dragon shall grieve, but when
the trouble is past, he shall again flourish. Then the misfor-
tune of the white dragon shall draw near, and the buildings of
his gardens shall be destroyed. Seven sceptre-bearing princes
shall be slain, and one of them shall be sanctified. The wombs

‘of matrons shall be cut open, and infants shall be born out of

season. The punishment of men shall be great, and the
nations shall be restored. He who does this shall appear a
brazen man, and mounted for many ages on a brazen horse,
he shall keep the gates of London. Then the red dragon
shall reassume his natural character, and shall endeavour to
put forth his rage against him. ‘Therefore the vengeance of
the thunderer shall come upon him, and the whole land shall
deceive the husbandmen. Mortality shall ‘seize the people,
and shall thin all nations. Those who are left shall forsake
their native soil and shall sow foreign lands. The blessed
king shall prepare a fleet, and in the court of the twelfth he
shall be reckoned among the good or blessed. There shall be
miserable desolation of the kingdom, and the threshing-fioors
of the harvest shall show barren fields. The white dragon
shall arise a second time, and shall invite the daughter of
Germany. Our gardens shall again be filled with foreign
seed, and the red dragon shall languish in the extremity of
the swamp. Then the German worm shall be crowned, and
the brazen prince shall be brought low. A boundary is ap-
pointed before him, which he shall be unable to pass over.
For he shall remain for one hundred and fifty years in dis-

1 Now Caerleon.

228 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

quietude and subjection, and then he shall flourish for three
hundred years. Then shall rise up against him the north,
and shall strip him of the flowers to which the west wind has
given birth. There shall be gilding in the temples and the
edge of the sword shall not slacken. The German dragon
shall scarcely maintain his caverns, because the vengeance for
his treachery is at hand. At last he shall flourish for a while,
but the decimation of Neustria shall injure him. For a peo-
ple on wooden horses and clothed in iron cloaks shall come
upon him, which shall exact revenge for his wickedness, and —
shall restore their abodes to the former inhabitants, and the
ruin of the foreigners shall be made manifest. The seed of
the white dragon shall be destroyed from out of our gardens,
and the remains of his generation shall be decimated. ‘They
shall bear the yoke of perpetual slavery, and shall wound their
mother with spades and ploughs. Then shall succeed two
dragons, one of which shall be clothed with the dart of envy, —
but the other shall retire under the shadow of his name. Next
shall come the lion of justice, at whose roaring the towers of _
the Gauls and the dragons of the isles shall quake. In his
days gold shall be extracted from the city and from the nettle,
and silver shall flow from the hoofs of oxen. Men with
curled hair shall wear embroidered woollen garments, and
their external dress shall be a token of their inward disposi-
tion. The feet of them that bark shall be cut short, the wild
beasts shall have peace, and humanity shall put an end to pun-
ishment. The form of the land shall be divided, and the half
shall be round. The rapacity of the hawks shall be done away
with, and the teeth of the wolves shall be made blunt; the
lion’s whelps shall be transformed into the fishes of the sea,
and the eagle shall build his nest on mount Aranius. Vene-
dotia shall be red with the blood of matrons, and the house |
of Corinzeus shall slay six brethren. The isle shall be wet |
with nightly tears, and all men shall be stirred up to all sorts of
actions. Woe to thee Neustria, for on you shall the brain of
the lion be poured forth, and he shall be driven with torn limbs
from his native soil. His posterity shall strive to fly beyond
the decrees of the highest, but the power of the new-comers
shall be exalted. Piety shall injure him who gains possession
by impious means, until he clothes himself with his father.
Therefore, girding himself with the teeth of a boar, he shall

A.D. 465. THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 229

pass over the tops of the mountains, and the shade of him
who wears the helmet. Albania shall be indignant, and, calling

_ together its allies, shall seek to shed blood. A bit shall be put

into its jaws, which shall be forged in the bay of Armorica.
The eagle of the broken treaty shall gild it, and shall rejoice
at its third nest making. Roaring whelps shall be awake,
and neglecting the groves, shall hunt within the walls of cities.
They shall make no small slaughter of those who resist, and
shall cut out the tongues of bulls. They shall load with chains
the necks of them that roar, and shall renew ancient times.
Then the thumb shall roll round in oil, from the first to the
fourth, from the fourth to the third, and from the third to
the second. The sixth will overthrow the fortifications of
Treland, and will level the groves with the plain, will reduce
different portions into one whole, and will be crowned with the
head ofa lion. His beginning will yield to vain affections,
but his end will rise to heaven. He will clothe two cities with
the pallium, and will give to virgins the gifts of virgins.
Then he will deserve the favour of the thunderer, and will be
placed among the blessed. There will go forth from him a
lynx penetrating everything, which will threaten the ruin of
his own nation. For by its means Neustria will lose both
their lands, and will be deprived of its former dignity. Then
the citizens will return to the island; for a dissension will
arise among the foreigners. Also, a snow-white old man on
a snow-white horse will divide the river, and:with a white rod
will measure out a mill-stream above it. Cadwallader will
invite Conan, and will receive Albany in alliance. There will
be a slaughter of foreigners ; their rivers will flow with blood ;
then the Armorican mountains will burst forth, and the Bruti
will be crowned with a diadem. Cambria will be filled with joy,
and the strength of Cornwall will flourish ; the island shall
be called by the name of Brutus, and the use of the name of
the foreigner shall perish. From Conan shall come forth a
warlike boar, who shall exercise the sharpness of his. teeth,
within the Gallic woods. . For he shall cut down every large
oak, and shall afford his protection to the smaller ones. The
Arabs shall tremble before him, and the Africans. For he
shall extend his impetuous course into farther Spain. A goat
of the camp of Venus shall succeed, having golden horns and
a silver beard, and who will breathe forth out of his nostrils

230 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

so dense a cloud, that the whole surface of the island will be

overshadowed by it. In his time there shall be peace, and

the crops shall be multiplied in the fertility of the soll. Women
as they walk shall become serpents, and every step of theirs
shall be filled with pride. The camps of Venus shall be re-
newed, nor will the arrows of Cupid cease to wound. A foun-
tain will be turned into blood, and two kings will fight a battle
on account of the lioness near the Ford of the Staff. The
whole ground will be luxuriant, and human nature will not
cease practising fornication. These ages shall see all these
events, till three kings are known to have been buried ia
London. Famine will return again, mortality will return

again, and the citizens will grieve for the desolation of

the cities. The boar of commerce will come at this time, who

will recall the scattered flocks to the pastures that they had —

lost. His breast will be food to those who want, and his
tongue will appease the thirsty. From his mouth will pro-

ceed rivers, which will moisten the dry jaws of men. After

that, a tree will be produced above the Tower of London,
which, though content with only three branches, will overshadow ©

the surface of the whole island with the breadth of its leaves.

After this, the north wind will come upon it as an adversary,

and with its cruel blast will carry offits third bough. But the

remaining two shall fill up the place of the one that has been
extirpated, till the one destroys the other by the multitude of
its leaves. Then that one shall occupy the place of the other
two, and shall support birds from foreign countries. It will
be considered injurious to the flight of native birds, for
through fear of its shade they will lose their freedom of flight.
The ass of wickedness will succeed, swift against the workers
in gold, but slow against the rapacity of wolves. In these days
oaks shall burn in the groves, and acorns shall be produced on
the boughs of holm oaks. The Severn shall run into the sea
by seven mouths, and the river Usk shall boil for seven
months. The fishes shall die from the heat thereof, and ser-
pents shall be generated from them. The baths of Bath shall
grow cold, and its wholesome waters shall cause death. Lon-
don shall mourn the death of twenty men, and the Thames

shall be turned into blood. Men in cowls shall be invited to |

marriage, and their outcry shall be heard in the mountains of
the Alps. Three springs shall burst up in the city of Win-

A.D. 465. THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 231

chester, the streams from which shall divide the island into
three parts ; he who drinks of one of them shall enjoy a longer
life, and shall not be oppressed by languor coming upon him.
He who drinks of the second shall die of want and hunger,
and paleness and horror shall sit in his face. He who drinks of
the third shall die a sudden death, nor shall his corpse be able to
- rest in the tomb; but ashes alone shall be found in his belly,
- and ashes shall be turned into water if they be cast upon him.
Besides this, from the city of the grove of Canute a maiden
will come forth, to exercise the labour of healing, and, as soon
as she enters all the citadels, she will by her breath alone heal
the injurious springs. Then, when she has refreshed herself
with the wholesome water, she will bear in her right hand the
grove of Calidon, and in her left the bulwarks of the wall of Lon-
don. Wherever she goes she leaves sulphureous footsteps, which
smoke with a double flame. The smoke that arises will arouse
the people of Rhodey, and will make food to exist beneath
the deep ; she will draw forth lamentable tears, and will fill
the island with fearful cries. A stag of ten tines shall slay her,
four of which shall bear golden diadems, but the remaining
six shall be turned into ox horns, which with their ill-omened
sound shall shake the three islands of Britain. The forest. of
Dean shall be shaken, and shall burst out in human voice and
cry, “ Approach, O Cambria, and join to your side Cornwall,
and say to Winchester, the earth shall swallow thee up.
Transfer the seat of the shepherd to where the ships land,
and the other lands will follow the head. For the day is
near at hand when the citizens shall perish for their wicked
perjury. The whiteness of the wool has been injurious, and
the diversity of its dyes. Woe to the perjured nation, because
an illustrious city shall be destroyed for its sake. The ships
shall rejoice in that great increase, and one shall be made out
of two. Hericius, loaded with fruit, shall rebuild it, to the
perfume of which, birds will flock from different woods. He
will add a huge palace, and will fence it round with six hun-
dred towers; on each tower will a captain of ten be placed,
_ who will give laws to the subjects. Therefore shall London be
envious, and shall increase her walls threefold. The Thames
shall surround it on all sides, and the fame of the work shall
reach beyond the Alps. Hericius shall conceal his fruit be-
neath it, and shall prepare subterranean roads. In that time

232 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

shall stones speak, and the sea by which one sails to Gaul, ©
shall be contracted to a short space. A man on one coast
shall be heard by a man on another, and the solid space of
the island shall be extended. The secrets of the depths below
the sea shall be revealed, and Gaul shall tremble for fear.
After these things, a heron shall proceed from the Calaterian
grove, which shall fly round the island for three years. With
its nightly cry it shal] summon all the birds around it, and
shall unite every kind of bird to itself; then they shall descend
upon the cultivated lands of man, and shall devour all the
grain of the harvest. Famine shall ensue, and terrible mor-
tality shall follow the famine. But when this great calamity
has ceased, then the detestable bird will go to the valley of
Galabes, and will raise it till it become a high mountain. And
on its top shall it plant an oak ; and in the boughs of the oak
will it build its nest, from which a fox, and a wolf, anda bear
will come forth. The fox shall devour its mother, and shall
wear an ass’s head ; and having assumed this monstrous ap- |
pearance, it shall frighten its brethren, and shall drive them —
to Neustria. But they shall rouse up a shaved boar there, —
and returning in a ship shall meet with the fox, and the fox —
when it begins to fight with them shall feign itself dead, and —
shall move the boar to pity. Presently the boar shall approach —
the carcase, and while standing over it, shall breathe into its eyes —
and on its face; but the fox, not forgetful of its previous tricks, —
shall bite its left foot, and shall tear it entirely away from its
body, and making a leap, shall also tear off its right ear and —
its tail, and then shall hide in the caverns of the mountains.
Therefore, the boar having been mocked, will seek the wolf
and the bear, that they may restore him the limbs which
he has lost. And when they enter into the matter, they will
promise him two feet, and ears, and a tail, and will make the
limbs of a pig out of them. He will acquiesce, and look on
at the promised restoration. In the meantime the fox will
descend from the mountains, and will change himself into a
wolf, and as if it intended to hold a colloquy with the boar,
it will address him cunningiy, and eat him entirely up. Then
it will transform itself into a boar, and as if it were devoid of
limbs, it will await the Germans, but these too, after they
arrive, it will destroy with an unexpected attack, and will be
covered with a lion’s head. In its days will be born a serpent,

A.D. 465. THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 233

which will threaten mankind with death, and with its length
will surround London, and will devour every one who passes
_by. The mountain ox will assume the head of a wolf, and will
whiten his teeth in the workshop of the Severn. He will as-
sociate with himself the flocks of Albany and of Cambria, and
they shall dry up the Thames, by drinking it. The ass shall
call the goat a beast with a long beard, and shall change its
form ; therefore the beast from the mountains shall be indig-
nant, and having invoked the assistance of the wolf, shall be-
come a horned bull against them ; and indulging its ferocity,
it shall devour their flesh and bones, but shall be burnt itself
on the top of Urianus. The ashes of its funeral pile shall
be changed into swans, which shall swim on dry land, as if
onariver. Fishes shall feed on fishes, and men shall devour
men. But when old age comes on, they shall become lights,
and shall devise submarine plots. They shall sink ships, and
shall amass no small quantity of money. The Thames shall
again be flooded, and, collecting all its streams, shall proceed
beyond the bounds of its channel, shall bury the cities in its
neighbourhood, overthrow the mountains that are in its way,
‘and shall add to itself the spring of Galabes, full of treachery
and wickedness. From that shall arise seditions exciting the
Venedoti to battle. The strength of the woods shall meet,
and shall combat with the rocks of the Gewissi; the crow will
fly with the hawks, and devour the bodies of the slain; the
owl shall build its nest on the walls of Gloucester, and an ass
shall be bred in its nest. A serpent at Malvern shall rear it,
and shall teach it many tricks. Having assumed a crown, it
shall ascend the high places, and with its horrid appearance '
it shall alarm the people of the country. In his days the
Pachacian mountains shall shake, and the provinces shall be
stripped of their groves. For there shall come a worm of
fiery breath, who, with the vapour which he breathes forth,
shall burn up the trees. From it there will go forth seven
lions, defiled with the heads of goats ; with the foulness of his
nostrils he shall corrupt the women, and shall make good
women common. ‘The father shall not know his own son,
because they shall act wantonly like cattle. Therefore, the
giant of wickedness shall succeed, who, with the brilliancy of
1 The Latin is racanatu, racanatus being, according to Ducange, a species
of ragged garments, especially worn by monks.

234 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

his eyes, shall terrify all mankind. Against him there shall
rise up the dragon of Worcester, and shall endeavour to exter-
minate him, but when they meet, the dragon shall be conquered, —
and shall be oppressed by the wickedness of the conqueror.
For he shall mount the dragon, and, stripping off his garments, —
shall sit upon him naked. The dragon shall bear him aloft
to the skies, and, erecting his tail, shall buffet him, being ~
naked. The giant, having again recovered his strength, shall
beat his jaws with his sword. But at length, the dragon shall —
be entangled under his tail, and he shall be poisoned and —
perish. To him shall succeed the boar of Totness, and shall
oppress the people with terrible tyranny. Gloucester shall
send forth a lion which shall harass the serpent with frequent
battles. He shall trample him under his feet, and shall frighten
him with his jaws open. At last, the lion shall quarrel with the -
kingdom, and shall mount the backs of the nobles. The bull”
will come in upon the quarrel, and will smite the lion with
his right foot. He will drive him over the different parts of —
the kingdom, but will break his horns against the walls of —
Exeter. The fox of Caerdubal shall avenge the lion, and A
utterly destroy him with his teeth. The serpent of Lincoln
shall surround the fox, and shall give evidence of his presence
with many dragons and with horrible hissings. Thedragons shall
meet in fight, and one will tear the other. The one which is
winged will overwhelm the one which is without wings, and fix.
his poisonous talons in his cheeks. Others will come to the
battle, and kill one another. A fifth will succeed to those that
are slain, and by different machinations will crush the rest.
He shall mount the back of one with a sword, and separate
his head from his body. Stripping off his garments, he will
mount another, and will lay both his right and his left hand on
his tail. Being naked, he will cut him in pieces and succeed,
though without clothing. The rest he will torment in the
rear, and drive them over the whole surface of the kingdom.
Then will come a roaring lion, formidable with savage ferocity.
He will reduce fifteen portions into one, and he alone will
possess the people. A giant will shine with snow-white warmth,
and shall give birth to a white people. Luxury will enervate
the princes, and their subjects will be changed into beasts.
Among them shall arise a lion swollen with human blood; a
mower will be beneath him in a corn-field, and while he labours

A.D. 465. THE PROPHECY OF MERLIN. 235

in his mind, will be overwhelmed by him. A charioteer of
York will appease them, and having driven his master into a
chariot which he brings, will mount it. Having drawn his
sword, he will threaten the east, and fill the tracks of his
wheels with blood. Then will be produced in the sea a fish,
which, being recalled by the hissing of the serpent, will breed
with it. From them will be born three fiery bulls, which,
when they have devoured their pastures, will be converted into
trees. The first shall bear a scourge made of snakes, and shall
turn his back on the one which is born after him. This
one will seek to wrest his scourge from him, but will in his
turn be attacked by the last. They willeach turn their faces
from the other till they have produced a poisoned cup. To
the last will succeed a countryman of Albany, who will be
threatened in the rear by a serpent. He will occupy himself
in turning up the land, that the country may be white with
corn-fields. The serpent will labour to diffuse his poison,
that the corn may not grow up to harvest. The people will
be thinned by deadly slaughter ; and the walls of cities will be
made desolate. The city of Claudius will be given as aremedy,

' which will interpose a foster-daughter of the one with the

scourge. For she will carry a medicinal amulet, and in a brief
time the island will be recovered. Then two persons shall
obtain the sceptre; and a horned dragon shall minister to
them. The one will come in arms, and ride a flying serpent.
He will sit with naked body on his back, and put his right
hand on his tail. By his shouts the seas will be awakened ;
and he will strike the second with fear. Therefore, the second

will ally himself with a lion; but a quarrel will spring up

between them, and they will fight. After mutual disasters
they will mutually yield, but the fierceness of the beast will
prevail. Some one will come up with a drum and harp, and
smooth the fierceness of the lion. Therefore, the nations of
the kingdom will be pacified, and bring the lion to the amulet.
Having taken a seat, he will study measures of corn, but will

stretch his hands into Albany. Therefore, the provinces of

the north will be saddened, and willl open the doors of the
temple. The standard-bearing wolf will levy troops, and his
tail will surround Cornwall. A soldier in a chariot will resist

him, who shall change that people into a boar. Therefore,
the boar will lay waste the provinces, but will hide his head in

236 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 465.

the depths of the Severn. A man will embrace a lion on the
ground, and the brilliancy of gold will blind the eyes of the
beholders. Silver will glisten around, and vex the different
wine-presses. When the wine is put in mortals will be
drunken, and, disregarding heaven, will fix their eyes on the
earth. The stars will avert their countenances from them,
and will confuse their accustomed courses. The crops will
wither under their indignation, and the moisture of heaven
will be denied to them. The roots and branches will change
places, and the novelty of the thing will be a wonder. The splen-
dour of the sun will grow pale with the admixture of Mercury,
and horror will be to the beholders. Stilbon of Arcadia will —
change his shield, the helmet of Mars will invite Venus. The
helmet of Mars will cause a shade; the fury of Mercury will
pass its bounds. Iron Orion will bare his sword, the watery
Pheebus will vex the clouds ; Jupiter will leave his lawful paths,
and Venus forsake her’appointed lines. The lust of the star of —
Saturn will fall, and slay mortals with his curved sickle. The —
twelve numbers of the houses of the stars will grieve that the
hosts do so transgress. The Gemini will change their accus-
tomed embraces, and call the urn to the springs. The scales of
Libra will hang awry, while Aries places his crooked horns be-
neath. The tail of the Scorpion will appease the lightnings, and —
Cancer will quarrel with the sun. Virgo will mount on the back —
of Sagittarius, and will darken her virgin flowers. The chaunt
of the moon will disturb the zodiac, and the Pleiades will
break forth into weeping. No duties will return, but the closed
door will be hidden in the fissures of Adrianne. At the stroke
of a ray the seas will arise, and the dust of the ancients will
be renewed. The winds will ‘strive together with terrible
blast, and make a noise amid the stars. ”’

When Merlin had uttered this long prophecy, he raised all
his hearers to a kind of extasy and excessive admiration,
though different people had different opinions about him. For
some said that he had imbibed a pythonical inspiration, and
that, in the fashion of demons, he spoke in riddles obscurely
and ambiguously, as Balaam had done; while others made
contrary assertions. Vortigern therefore, desiring to know
his end, asked the youth to tell him what he knew. And
Merlin answered him, “Escape the fire of the sons of Con-
stantine, if you can. For they will subdue the nation of the

|

A.D. 467. ‘THEODORUS FLOURISHES. 237

Saxons, and will burn you yourself, having shut you up in
the town of Genorium. The faces of the Saxons will be red

- with blood, and after Hengist is slain, Aurelius Ambrosius

will be crowned.” Accordingly, immediately the very next
day Aurelius Ambrosius landed, with his brother Uther Pen-
dragon, and a very large company of armed men. Therefore,
the Britons who had been scattered all about came together,
and having convoked an assembly of the kingdom, made
Aurelius king. And he, when he was raised to the throne,
laboured to repair, as well as he could, the churches that had
been levelled to the ground. He was very liberal in giving
presents, diligent in his obedience to the gods, modestly
despising liars and their flatteries, strong in his feet, and still
stronger as a rider, and very skilful in managing armies of
soldiers. Being distinguished for such virtues as these, he
was a man of great celebrity and renown, even among distant
nations.

A.D. 466. When the Britons were urging Aurelius their
king to attack the Saxons, the king objected. For he wished
first to pursue Vortigern, and therefore he directed his army

‘towards Wales, and attacked the town of Genorium. And when

he arrived before it, remembering the treachery that had been
practised against his father and his brother, he said to those
who were standing by, ‘‘ Look, ye noble princes, and see if the
walls of this castle can protect Vortigern, who has laid waste
a fertile country, destroyed holy churches, and eradicated
Christianity almost from sea to sea, dnd who (and this I think
the most grievous thing of all) has betrayed my father and
brother.

“Now, therefore, O most noble princes, strive manfully, and
first of all avenge yourselves in him by whomall these things have
been done ; and then let us turn our arms against the enemy.”
They act at once upon his words, and endeavour with all sorts
of machines to batter down the walls. At last, when every-
thing else had failed, they employed fire, and when that was

properly kindled, it did not stop till it had consumed the castle

and Vortigern.

A.D. 467. Theodorus, bishop of the city which had been
built by Cyrus, king of Persia, and bore the name of Cyria, a
man thoroughly learned in the Holy Scriptures, flourished, as

_ a most brilliant pillar of the church.

238 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 476,

A.D. 468. Clodoveus,! king of the Franks, slew Alaric, king
of the Goths, ten miles from the city of Poictiers. And his
son Almaric escaped and fled to Spain.

A.D. 469. King Clodoveus subdued Toulouse, the Santones,

and all the land of Aquitania, and driving out the Arrian Goths

from these countries, caused the Catholic Franks to dwell in
them.
A.D. 470. Silvian, a presbyter at Marseilles, addressed to

Claudian, a presbyter at Vienne, a book which he had written, —

being an exposition of the latter part of Ecclesiastes.

A.D. 471. Simplicius was elected to the Roman chair, and

occupied it fifteen years, one month, and six days.
A.D. 472. Hilary, president of the church at Arles, a chari-

table man and lover of the poor, flourished as a teacher of the —

Holy Scriptures.
A.D. 473. Aurelius Ambrosius provoked Hengist and his

son Osric, surnamed Aisc, to war in Kent, and marshalled —

twelve battalions of Britons in the place which was afterwards —
called Wipedeflete, where the battle raged a long time with —

great vigour on both sides; and no small quantity of blood
was shed; but the victory was doubtful, and the battle so
disastrous, that for a long time afterwards the Saxons never

dared to enter the territories of the Britons, nor the Britons to

enter Kent. But the Saxons, who lost there among other men
a great prince named Wiped, called the field of battle Wipede-
flete in memory of him.

A.D. 474. Claudian, a presbyter of Vienne, flourished, a
man very learned in ecclesiastical matters, and a subtle dis-

putant.

A.D. 475. Prosper, of the district of Aquitania, dictated
some epistles against Eutyches, who had adopted erroneous
opinions on the subject of the real incarnation of Christ, and
on free-will.

A.D. 476. Hilary, bishop of the city of Rome, ordered that
the clergy should not wear the dress of the laity, and forbade
presbyters to have concubines. The same year, when Clodoveus,
king of the Franks, was fighting against the Alemanni and his
army was being terribly cut up, he raised his eyes to heaven, and

1 Our Chronicler antedates Clodoveus or Clovis. He began to reign
A.D. 481, and he was only fifteen when he succeeded his father, Childeric.
(See Gibbon, c. xxxvili.) And the date of the defeat and death of Alaric,
who was not the great Alaric, is a.p. 507,

“A.D. 482. CRUELTY OF HONORICUS. 239

said, “O Lord Jesus Christ, whom my wife Clotilde worships,
I devoutly entreat your assistance. And if you grant me the
victory in this contest, I will be baptized, and for the future
will believe in your name.” And after he had said this, the
Alemanni were compelled to flee, and the king returned in
triumph to his country. Then, having sent for Saint Remigius,
he was baptised with all his family. And it happened at his
consecration that the minister was slow in bringing the holy
chrism to the bishop, and the crowd was impatient, and still
he did not come, and the bishop was concerned at it, and
prayed that the delay might not cause any mischief ; when, lo
on a sudden a chrismatical unction in a miraculous vase was
brought to him from heaven by the ministry of an angel,
and the vessel is preserved to the present day in the church
at Rheims. And from it, as it is always full miraculously, the
kings of the Franks who are to be anointed are consecrated.

A.D. 477. Zeno succeeded to the Roman empire, and reigned
seventeen years. The same year, Ella and his three sons,
Cymen, Plentingus and Cissa, came over to Britain, and landed
at the place which was afterwards from Cymen called Cymen-
‘shoara, that is to say, the port of Cymen. But as they were
landing, great multitudes of Britons flocked to the place, and
immediately waged war against them. But the Britons aban-
doned the field, and were put to flight, and driven as far as
the nearest wood, which is called Andredeswold. And the
Saxons, occupying the sea-coast of Sussex, gradually reduced
all the territory of that district to subjection.

A.D. 478. When Zeno the emperor was desirous to slay his
son Leo, his mother substituted some one else who resembled
him, whe afterwards remained a clergyman, and lived to the
time of Justinian.

A.D. 479. The body of Saint Barnabas, the Apostle, and the
Gospel of Matthew, written with his own hand, was discovered,
in consequence of a revelation made by himself.

A.D. 480. Odoacer, king of the Goths, made himself master
of Rome, which the Gothic kings occupied for some time after-
wards. ;

A.D. 481. Theodoric, king of the Goths, ravaged both the
Macedonias and Thessaly, and occupied Italy with a hostile
army.

fe 482. Honoricus, an Arrian, the king of the Vandals,

240 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 487.

having banished three hundred and three Catholic bishops,

shut up their churches, and inflicted all kinds of punishments
on the common people, and put to death a countless multitude
of them as victims to their faith in Christ. He also cut off

the hands and cut out the tongues of the orthodox, and so
made many thousand martyrs.

A.D. 483. Clodoveus, king of the Franks, took prisoner and
killed Regnacarius, his kinsman, and his brother Farro.

A.D. 484. Timotheus, after Protherius had been slain by the

people of Alexandria, or by his own desire, or at all events by ©
his own permission, was ordained by a single bishop to supply —

the place of the bishop who had been slain.
A.D. 485. The Britons under the command of Aurelius
Ambrosius met at Mereredesburne, in battle against Ella and

his sons, and after a long and obstinate battle, Ella and his sons ~
abandoned the field, not without great loss to the Britons. —

Therefore Ella sent to his own country, asking for a more
numerous army.

A.p. 486, Felix was elected to the Roman chair, and he
occupied it eight years, eleven months, seventeen days, and
the see was vacant five days.

A.D. 487. Aurelius Ambrosius, having collected an enor-

mous number of Britons, determined to provoke the Saxons

a ee

ew

to battle. Therefore he led his army towards the north, and

found Hengist with his Saxons, on the other side of the Hum-

ber. But when Hengist heard of his arrival in that district, —

he went boldly to meet him, and intending to make a sudden

and unforeseen attack on the plain which is called Maysbely, —
through which Aurelius must pass, he expected to catch the
Britons unprepared. But his design was not unperceived by —

Aurelius, though he did not on account of it abandon his in-
tention of crossing that plain ; and accordingly, the military
legions on each side having been duly marshalled, the armies
met, and causing no small bloodshed on both sides, they made
a great slaughter. On one side the Britons, and on the other
the Saxons were wounded by various chances, and slain by
the sword. At last, when Hengist saw that his allies were
yielding and the Britons prevailing, he immediately fled and
hastened to the town of Caerconan, which is now called
Coningsburgh. But knowing that all his hopes consisted in
his sword and spear, he would not quit the town because he

A.D. 489. AURELIUS DEFEATS THE SAXONS. 241

did not think that it could resist Aurelius. Aurelius pursued
him, and cut off the heads of all whom he fell in with on his
march, and so sent them to hell. Therefore Aurelius, having
gained the victory, glorified the God of Heaven from the bottom
of his heart, who had permitted him to triumph over the enemy.
A.D. 488. Aurelius Ambrosius, while he was passing all
through Britain seeking the enemy, found the churches every-
where levelled with the ground, at which he was greatly
grieved. Therefore, having sent for masons and carpenters,
he laboured to restore the holy buildings. Accordingly, having
placed presbyters and clerks in them, he recalled the divine
worship toits former state. But whenever he found any pro-
fane temples to the gods, and any idols, he utterly banished
them from the recollection of all men under heaven, and
completely destroyed them. He took care himself, and en-
joined all churches and ecclesiastical persons to observe jus-
tice and peace; giving them out of his royal munificence
many benefices with ample revenues, and he ordered ail men
to pray for the kingdom and for the constitution of the church.
A.D. 489. Aurelius Ambrosius directed letters to all the
districts in Britain, ordering all men who could bear arms to
come to him as speedily as possible, and to labour without
ceasing, to exterminate the pagans from the kingdom of Bri-
tain. When therefore every one had come, Aurelius marched
his army towards the north, and found Hengist and his Saxons
on the river which is called the Don, with: his forces all in
order of battle. Not to dwell on the circumstances, the batta-
lions meeting in all quarters, engaged in a most violent battle,
and spilt no little blood. And when they had fought in this
manner for a very long time, Eldol, duke of Gloucester, who
burned with an eager desire of meeting with Hengist, penetra-
ting with the phalanx which he commanded through the ranks
of the enemy, caught Hengist by the visor of his helmet, and
putting forth all his strength, dragged him among his own
countrymen. ‘This day,” said he, “has God fulfilled my
desire, for our victory is in the hand of God.’ Therefore the
Saxons fled in every direction, as fancy directed each of them,
and Aurelius pursued them, and bravely slew them. But Octa,
the son of Hengist, with a great number of his men, reached
York : while Eosa and many others sought the city of Alclud.
VOL. I. a R

242 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 490.

As, therefore, Aurelius had got the victory, he took the city of
Conan, and remained there three days. After this, having
summoned his generals, he ordered them to decide what ought
to be done with Hengist. Therefore Eldol, the bishop of
Gloucester, and brother of duke Eldol, ordered all men to hold
their peace, and gnashing his teeth for rage, he himself spoke
thus :—‘“ Although all were willing to release him, yet I would
cut him in pieces. Why do ye hesitate, ye effeminate men?
Did not Samuel the prophet, when he cut the king of Amalek
in pieces, limb by limb, after he was taken in war, say, ‘As
thou hast made mothers childless, so I will this day make thy
mother childless among women.’ And do ye the same with

this second Agag, who has deprived many mothers of their

sons.” And when he had said this, Eldol drew his sword
and dragged him out of the city, and cutting off his head, sent
him to hell. He was succeeded by his son Osric, surnamed
Ase, who reigned over the nation of the Saxons in Kent, from
whom, to this day, the kings of Kent are called Aiskings. For
Vortigern had given that province to Hengist for his daughter,
as has been related above. And he had possessed it for
twenty-four years, as if it had been his by hereditary right.
A.D. 490. Aurelius Ambrosius led his army to York, in order
to attack Octa, son of Hengist. And when he had. besieged
the city, Octa was afraid to hold the city against a multitude.
Therefore, having taken salutary counsel, he went out with the
nobles whom he had with him, and surrendered himself and
his friends in these words: ‘ My gods have been conquered,
and I have no doubt that your God is king, as he has com-
pelled so many nobles to come to you. Receive us, therefore,
and, unless you are inclined to mercy, take us as bound and
ready to endure any punishment you can inflict.” Aurelius
was moved with compassion, and pitied them. And led by
the example of Octa, Eosa also came in, and the rest who had
fled, all begging for and obtaining pardon. Therefore he gave

them the district which is close to Scotland, and made a treaty |

with them. Then he went to the monastery of Amesbury,
which is near Caerbaradot, which is now called Salisbury,
where the princes who were dead lay, whom Hengist had
betrayed, and being moved by pity, was dissolved in tears.
Therefore, considering with himself, and wishing to make the

A.D. 490. MERLIN S ADVICE FOLLOWED. 243

place where so many noble men lay memorable, he sent Mer-
lin, the prophet, to enquire diligently how he might best
fulfil the design which he was anxious about. But when
Merlin had been conducted into the presence of the king, he
related to him the circumstances of the death of the before-
mentioned noble men, how the Saxons had betrayed them, and
told him his own wish also, to mark the place with due
honour.

Then Merlin, having been for a short time rapt in an
ecstasy of mind, at length answered him, and said, “If, my
lord king, you wish to adorn the place of their burial with a
perpetual monument, send for the Giant’s Dance, which is on
Killard, a mountain of Ireland, where there is such a structure
of stones as no one of this age has ever beheld with his eyes.
For they are large and wonderfully put together, and if they
are arranged in this place, they will stand for ever as a memo-
rial and representation of the memorable slaughter that you
have spoken of.’ On this, Aurelius burst out laughing, and
answered Merlin, “ Are the stones of Ireland better than the
stones of this country, that they need be brought from such
a distance into Britain?’? And Merlin answered, ‘Do not
indulge, O king, in unwise laughter, for they are mystical
stones, and wholesome as cures for different diseases. The
giants formerly brought them over from the most remote dis-
tricts of Africa, in order to make baths of them here for them-
selves when they were attacked with various infirmities. For
they washed the stones in various confections of herbs, and
poured them into baths in which the sick were cured. Nor
is there one stone among them which has not some medicinal
property.” And when the Britons heard this, they deter-
mined to send for the stones. Therefore, Uther Pendragon, the
brother of the king, was selected, with fifteen thousand armed
men, to bring away the stones by force, in case any one endea-
voured to hinder them. Merlin was also appointed to super-
intend the work, that everything might be done by his genius
and prudence.

Accordingly, when ships had been prepared, they set sail and
came, after a prosperous voyage, to Ireland. And when Gil-
lomannius, king of Ireland, had heard of their arrival and of
its cause, he said to those who stood by, “‘ Arm yourselves, O
men, arm yourselves, because as long as life isin me, they

944 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 491.

shall not carry away from us the least stone of the Giant’s
Dance. Immediately the two armies met in battle, but victory
declared for the Britons. Then they went to Mount Killard,
and in vain attempted to throw down the structure of stone.
And as they were all unable to effect anything, Merlin laughed
at them, and then making his own machines, he pulled down
the stones more easily than it is possible to believe, and put-
ting them on board ship, joyfully carried them off to Britain.
And when the news was brought to Aurelius, he came with
his bishops and abbots and other nobles to the hill of Ames-
bury, where, on the day of Pentecost, he wore the crown, and
appointed pastors to the two metropolitan churches, giving
the see of York to the holy Sampson, and that of Caerleon to
Dubricius. And when he had done all this in that place,
he ordered Merlin to erect the stones around the burial
place of the nobles. And he, in obedience to his orders,
placed them in a marvellous manner in the same way in which
they had been placed on Mount Killard. The same year, Idatius,
bishop of Libitana, a city of Spain, finished his chronicles, which
he brought down from the first consulship of Theodosius to
this date. Gennadius too, this year, finished his book on
illustrious men.

A.D. 491. Saint Patrick, the second archbishop of Ireland,
rested in the Lord in the hundred and twenty-second year of
his age. Of his sanctity and miracles many proofs are related.
For forty years he preached the virtues of the apostles, while
he gave sight to the blind, caused the deaf to hear, drove out
devils from bodies which they had occupied, released men in
prison, whom he redeemed at his own expense, and, endued
with divine virtue, raised nine men from the dead. He also
wrote three hundred and forty-five grammars and more; he
ordained an equal number of bishops, and a thousand presby-
ters, and he converted twelve thousand men in the district of
Connaught to the faith of Christ. He also baptized in one
day, seven kings, who were the sons of Amolgith, and he
fasted forty days and as many nights on the top of mount
Hely, where he offered up three prayers for those Irish who
had received the faith of Christ. in the first place, he prayed
that every one of them might feel repentance, though it were
in the last stage of their hves. Secondly, that he might not
be eternally worn out by the unbelievers. Thirdly, that no

A.D. 491. HISTORY OF SAINT PATRICK. 245

one of the Irish may survive at the advent of the Judge, be-
cause Ireland, according to the prayer of Saint Patrick, will
be destroyed seven years before the judgment. And on that
hill he blessed the people of Ireland, and went up thither in
order to pray for them and to see the fruit of his labour.

_ There also came to him to that place, innumerable birds of
various colours, that he might bless them, which, as the Saint
interprets it, indicate that all the saints of both sexes of the
Irish will come to him at the day of judgment as to their
father and teacher, and will follow him into the presence of
God.

There are four points of view in which Moses and Patrick
are parallel. In the first place, because an angel conversed
with Patrick also, in a burning bush. Secondly, because he
fasted on a mountain forty days and forty nights. Thirdly,
because he also lived to the age of a hundred and twenty-two.
Fourthly, because his tomb cannot be found ; but he was buried
in a secret place, without any one knowing where.

In his childhood, as he was by nation an Irishman, he was
sold by his father with his two sisters, to go to Scotland, and
purchased by a certain man named Cuulcu, whose swineherd
he became. Then, when he was seventeen years of age, he
returned from his captivity into his own country, and having
been instructed in sacred literature by the providence of God,
he then went to Rome, and spent his time there till he was
aecounted more learned still ; and perusing the Holy Scriptures,
he penetrated the divine mysteries. And while he abode at
Rome, Palladius was sent by pope Celestine to the Scotch, as
their bishop, in order to convert them to Christ; and he,
first of ail preaching the word of God in Scotland, at length
came to Britain, and died in the country of the Piets.
But when the death of Palladius was heard of, Patrick, while
Theodosius and Valentinian were emperors, was sent by pope
Celestine to the parts of the west, in order to preach the stan-
dard of the true cross to the Gentiles. And when he had come

to Britain, he preached there the word of God, and was gladly

received by the nations who inhabited those countries. Then
he proceeded onwards to Scotland, and preached the word of
God, which could not be kept in bonds. At last, bemg pro-
moted by the archbishop Matthew to the rank of bishop, he

at his ordination assumed this name of Patrick, for his name

246 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 493.

before was Nannus. With him also were ordained Ansilius and
Iserninus, and some others also to inferior degrees, in order
that they might serve God under him, as their chief. Then,
having received a blessing in the name of the Holy Trinity, he
embarked on board ship, and coming to the island of Britain,
he preached there many days. ‘Then he went on to Ireland;
being girded up to preach the Gospel, and being rich in spiritual
treasures, he baptised them, gaining manyto God, and preaching
the Gospel for eighty years; and at last, having arrived at the
highest perfection in religion, and being full of days, and
illustrious with all kinds of proofs of his virtues, he rested in
Christ. :

A.D. 492. Ella, who had occupied the country of the South
Saxons, as has been said above, came from the country of
Germany, bringing with him a military reinforcement, relying
on the aid of which, he besieged the very strongly fortified
city of Andredcestria. And when this was known, the Britons
' flocked together from all quarters, like a swarm of bees, and
as enemies vigorously attacked the blockading Saxons, always
hanging on their rear with archers. And so, leaving the siege
of the city, the pagans directed their march and their arms
against them. But the Britons, being superior to them in
swiftness of foot and activity of body, took refuge in the
woods, and when the pagans again turned against the city, —
they again attacked them in the rear. The Saxons were long
harassed by this system, and suffered no small loss. Then the
Saxons dividing their army into two parts, assigned to one
portion the duty of besieging the city, and to the other, that
of subduing the Britons. But the citizens being worn out
with long famine, and wasting away, and being unable any
longer to bear the weight of the hostile pagans, all perished
by the edge of the sword, and the enemy utterly destroyed
the city. And the place of the city is to this very day shown |
to passers-by as desolate. Ella then remained there, with his
three sons, and began to inhabit that district which is to this
day called in English, Sussex, but in the Latin the country of
the South Saxons. ‘

A.D. 493. Anastasius succeeded to the empire of Rome,
and reigned twenty-five years. And we may remark, that the
year when Zeno died and Anastasius began to reign, was, ac-
cording to the Romans, the five thousand nine hundred and

A.D. 497. PASCENTIUS OBTAINS AID FROM IRELAND. 247

eighty-ninth year from the birth of Adam; but, according
to the calculation of the Alexandrines, the five thousand nine
hundred and eighty-third.

A.D. 494. Gelavius was appointed to the Roman chair, and
occupied it four years, eight months, and nineteen days. The
same year Cedric, and his son Kenric came with five ships to
Britain, and landed in the place which was afterwards called
from his name, Cerdioshoara, that is to say, the port of Cedric.
But the same day, a great multitude of the inhabitants of the
country came against them, and fought manfully. But the
Saxons stood firm in front of their ships, till the darkness of
the night put an end to the contest. But when they found
the Saxons so formidable, the Britons withdrew, and the pa-
gans began gradually to occupy more and more of the sea
coast in a hostile country, though not without frequent battles
with the inhabitants. From this Cedric, the kings of the
West Saxons derive their descent.

A.D. 495. Anastasius the emperor wished to recall the heretic
Acatius, but the Romans would not consent. Acatius was
bishop of Constantinople, but he had become odious to God
and the Holy Church.

A.D. 496. The before-mentioned heretic Acatius was struck
by lightning, and died. The same year, Pascentius, the son
of Vortigern, who had fled (as has been related above) into
Germany, landed in the northern part of Britain, with a power-
ful and well-appointed army, in order to avenge himself and
his father on Aurelius, king of the Britons. And when news of
this was brought to the king, he collected an army and went
to meet him, and the two leaders eagerly engaged in battle,
but at last Pascentius was conquered, and put to flight.

A.D. 497. The above-mentioned Pascentius betook himself to
Gillomannius, king of Ireland, and besought him for aid, to
avenge himself on Aurelius, and Gillomannius, being mindful
of the injury done to himself by Aurelius, in carrying away
the Giant’s Dance by force from Ireland, promised him assist-
‘ance. Accordingly, having prepared ships, he crossed the sea
and landed at St. David’s. And when the news of this reached
the king, Uther the brother of Aurelius (for Aurelius himself
was ill) went towards Gillomannius and Pascentius. But be-
fore Pascentitis engaged in battle with Uther, the king’s brother,

_ knowing that Aurelius was lying sick at Winchester, he bribed

248 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 498.

a certain Saxon, by name Eopa, with many gifts, to take off
Aurelius by poison. Accordingly, the traitor, assuming the
dress of a monk, went to Winchester. After he reached the
city, he professed to be a physician, and offered his services
to the king’s attendants, who were anxious for nothing so
much as for a physician. And at last he was introduced to
the presence of the king, and gave him poison. And when the
king had taken it, the wicked traitor desired him to go to
sleep, and that then he would at once recover his health. How-
ever, the poison immediately entered the pores and veins of
his body, and death ensued. hen that traitor, escaping privily,
departed from the palace.

But while these things were taking place at Winchester,
Gillomannius and Pascentius fought a most severe battle in
Wales, with Uther, the brother of the king; but at last Uther
prevailed, and gained the victory, and Gillomannius and Pas- |
centius were both slain. After these-occurrences, a star of |
marvellous size and brilliancy appeared, shining with one sin-
gle ray, attached to which ray, was extended a ball of fire, in
the shape of a dragon, and out of its mouth proceeded two
rays, one of which appeared to extend its length beyond the
regions of Gaul, and the other was bent towards the Irish sea,
and terminated in seven smaller rays. This star having been
seen, Uther was agitated with excessive fear, and asked his wise
men to tell him what the star portended. And they answered
and said, “‘ The star and the fiery dragon under this star in-
dicate you. The ray which is extended towards the country
of Gaul, portends that you will have a most mighty son, who
shall possess the numerous kingdoms which the star covers.
But the other ray indicates a daughter, whose sons and grand-
sons shall possess the kingdom of Britain in succession.
Hasten therefore, most noble general, hasten. For that brother
of yours, the illustrious king of the Britons, Aurelius Ambro-
sius, is dead, with whom both the military skill and glory of
the Britons has expired.’’ And immediately messengers ar-
rived relating the death of the king, and that he had been
already buried in a royal manner by the bishops and abbots
of the kingdom, within the Giant’s Dance, which he himself
had ordered to be built.

A.D. 498. Anastasius was appointed to the chair of Rome,
and occupied it one year, eleven months, and twenty-four

A.D. 498. THE SAXONS COMPLETELY ROUTED. 249

days. The same year, Uther, the brother of Aurelius, the de-
ceased king of Britain, having heard of the death of his brother,

- came in haste to Winchester, and having convoked the people

and clergy of the kingdom, took upon himself the sove-
reignty of Britain. And remembering the star that has been
already mentioned, he ordered two dragons to be made of gold,
in the likeness of the dragon which he had beheld in the ray
of the star, and he placed one in the church of the first see of
Winchester, and retained the other to be borne before him-
self in battle. Accordingly, from that time forth he was
called in the British language Uther Pendragon. But in the
language of the Angles, @ther Drafe Beucd, and in Latin,
Uther the Dragon’s Head. On which account, to this. very
day the custom has prevailed among the kings of this land, of
ordering a dragon, instead of a standard, to be borne before
them in their warlike expeditions.

About this time, Octa, the son of Hengist, and Eosa, his kins-
man, having been released from the treaty which they had made
with Aurelius, endeavoured to wage war against king Uther, and
to extend their own territories. Accordingly, being accom-
panied with a very numerous multitude of Saxons, they in-
vaded the northern provinces of Britain, and utterly destroyed
the fortifications from Scotland down as far as York. After-
wards, when they had began to besiege the city of Alclud,
Uther Pendragon arrived with all the strength of the district,

nd engaged in battle with them. The Saxons resisted man-
fully, and put the Britons to flight, and the pagans pursued
them as far as Mount Danet; when day dawned, the Britons
occupied the mountain, and took it for their refuge, not know-
ing what to do. At last, they, with wise counsel, determined
to make a nocturnal attack on the enemy, and to come upon
them while asleep and unarmed. Being therefore arranged
in battalions and armed, they marched upon the camp of the
enemy, and attacked it vigorously. And the Saxons being
thus surprised unexpectedly, could make no effectual resistance,
while the others derived boldness from their deliberate design.
At last Octa and Eosa were taken prisoners, and the Saxons
were completely routed. Then, when peace was restored every-
where, the king went to London, and caused Octa and Eosa

‘to be detained as prisoners in that city. And as the feast of

Easter was at hand, he ordered the nobles of the kingdom to

250 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 499.

assemble there, in order that when he assumed the diadem, they
might celebrate the holy day with due honour. All immediately
obeyed, and the king celebrated the festivity with joy. Among
other nobles, Gorlois, duke of Cornwall, was present, with his
wife Igerna, whose beauty surpassed that of all the women in
Britain. When the king beheld her, he was at once inflamed
with love for her, and sent her alone cups of wine and spiced
dishes without ceasing. But when her husband heard of it, he
was very angry, and departed from the court without leave. At
this, the king was very indignant, and went in haste to Corn-
wall, burning all his towns and cities with fire. At last, when
he had arrived at Dimilioch, he provoked the count, who was

besieged there, to battle. And the count acting foolishly, went

forth from the city; but he fell among the first, mortally
wounded, and his comrades were completely routed. And the
king, after his death, married his wife, and had by her a son
and daughter. And the son was named Arthur, and the

Caughter Anna. But Arthur, by his wonderful virtue, well de-_

served to be accounted illustrious.

Cu. IX.—From a.p. 499 To a.D. 585.

Clovis enriches the Church—The Saxons become nearly masters
of Britain—They are defeated by Uther Pendragon—Elia,
king of the Saxons, dies—Uther Pendragon dies—King
Arthur is crowned—His victories over the Saxons —Justin,
emperor of Rome— Boethius — The Saxons again invade
Britain, and are defeated—Arthur’s sword Caliburn, and
other arms—He restores the churches—Marries—Justinian,
emperor of Rome—Saint Anthony— Saint Denis—S aint Bene-
dict—Iotila—Arthur kills Mordred, and is mortally wounded
—Clothaire, king of the Franks—The Saxons become masters
of Britain—The Heptarchy.

A.D. 499. After the death of pope Anastasius, two successors

to the apostolic see were consecrated, namely, Symmachus

and Laurentius. And as on this account great dissensions
arose at Rome, the Roman sefhate decreed that they should
both go to Theodoric, king of Italy. And when they had done
so, the king gave sentence that whichever of them was first
ordained, and whichever had the good will of the greater part
of the people, should retain the apostolic see. Accordingly,
Symmachus, being confirmed in the see, ordained Laurentius

A.D. 505. CUSTOM INSTITUTED BY POPE SYMMACHUS. 251

as bishop in the church of Miscen. But three years afterwards,
Symmachus was impeached, and Laurentius recalled. Then

Symmachus, a synod of a hundred and fifteen bishops having

been.convened, cleared himself most eloquently from the accu-
sations brought against him, and proved his own innocence.
And so Laurentius was again ejected, and Symmachus restored.
But when Symmachus died, then it was determined that Lau-
rentius should be elected to the apostolic see in his place.
A.D. 500. Clodoveus, king of the Franks, gave many estates
to the church of Rheims, out of his own innate royal munifi-
cence. Remigius having given a great portion of them to the
church of Lyons, founded the seat of a bishopric there, that
the dignity and honour of the church might be increased.
A.p. 501. Port, and his two sons, Bleda and Magla, came to
Britain with two ships, and landed in the place which, from the
name of Port, is called Portsmouth. Moreover, expelling the
duke of that district, they occupied the sea-coast, and began

_ to inhabit the place which was previously unoccupied.

A.D. 502. Symmachus Patricius, and his son-in-law Boe-
thius, translated books treating of all the liberal sciences out
of Greek into Latin.

A.D. 503. A certain exceedingly mad man from Africa,
named Olympus, while he was in a bath blaspheming the Holy
Trinity, was burnt by a thunderbolt which came down on him
from heaven.

a.D. 504, While Deuterus, the Arrian bishop at Constanti-
nople was baptizing a man of the name of Barba, and expressing
the distinction between the persons of the Trinity incorrectly,
saying, ‘I baptize you, O Barba, in the name of the Father,
by the Son, in the Holy Ghost,” the water suddenly disap-
peared. :

A.D. 505. Alamund, king of the Saracens, having been bap-
tized by the orthodox, when the Hutychians were desirous to
seduce him, refuted them by this fabulous argument ; that he
had received letters mentioning the death of the archangel
Michael. As they replied that this was impossible, because
the nature of an angel was impassible, ‘‘ How then,” said he,
“was Christ, according to your statement, crucified naked,
unless he really had two natures, since, according to you, even
an angel cannot die 2?”

252 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 511.

AD. 506. Pope Symmachus instituted a custom on every
Sunday or birth-day of a saint to sing the Gloria in Excelsis at
mass, a hymn which pope Telesphorus had only appointed to
be sung on the night of the birth-day of our Lord; and he
added to it the words of the angels which follow.

a.D. 507. There flourished in Britain Saint Samson, arch-
bishop of York, and Saint Dubritius, archbishop of Caerleon.

A.D. 508. Hormisda was elected pope, and occupied the
Roman chair nine years and seventeen days, and the see was
vacant six days. The same year, Cedric and his son Kenric pro-
voked the Britons to battle. For Uther, king of the Britons, was
sick, and could not turn himself on either side; on which
account he appointed duke Nathanlioth general of the army
of the Britons. And when the Saxons and Britons met, they
fought with great vigour. But the Saxons, piercing the ranks
of the Britons, slew duke Nathanlioth ; and with him there fell
of the Britons five thousand men, and the Saxons withdrew
exulting in their victory. j

A.D. 509. The keepers of the prison in which Octa and

Eosa were passing their tedious life, being corrupted by bribes,
fled with them into Germany, and returned witha large fleet to
compass the destruction of Britain. Therefore, king Uther
entrusted the army of Britain to Lothus, the magistrate of
Leyli, a most energetic man. But when he had advanced
against the enemy, he was several times repulsed by them,
because the Britons would not obey his counsels.

A.D. 510. The emperor Anastasius sent letters to Louis,!
king of the Franks, about the consulship, and a golden crown,
and ever after that day he was styled consul. .

A.D. 511. The Saxons who inhabited Britain, seeing that
Uther Pendragon, the king, was afflicted by great infirmities,
all agreed together to expel all the islanders from their country,
and, uniting their forces, to subdue that fertile country to obedi«
ence to them forever. Therefore, overrunning all the pro-
vinces, as they knew that no one could resist them, they began
to ravage almost the whole island from sea to sea. Nor did
they spare the prelates or the property of the church; but
extirpated nearly the whole of Christianity out of the island.
But the islanders, abandoning their infirm monarch, fled to

1 The same who has hitherto been called Clodoveus, or Clovis.

A.D. 513. JOHN APPOINTED TO THE ROMAN CHAIR. 253

| the precipices of the mountains and in the hiding-places in the
woods, according to the ancient proverb—
f “« Where’er the head deceased is,
The other limbs know little ease.”

A.D. 512. Uther Pendragon, king of the Britons, being greatly
grieved at the subversion of the kingdom, and the oppression of
the holy church, and the desolate state of the nobles, and the
dispersion of the people, having convoked all the nobles of
his kingdom, reproached them bitterly for their pride and
indolence. And, heaping many hard words and reproaches
on them, he swore that he himself would lead them against the

' enemy in order to recall the minds of all men to their former

state and boldness. Therefore, he ordered a litter to be made
in such a manner that he might be carried in it, as his in-
firmity prevented him from advancing in any other way.
Accordingly, the king having been placed in a litter, he marched
to Verulamium with all the force of his kingdom, where the
_ wicked Saxons were encamped, and from whence they were
oppressing the whole kingdom. And when Octa and Eosa
heard of the advance of the Britons, and that their king had
come in a litter, they disdained to fight with him, because he
came in a carriage : therefore, they withdrew into the city, and
left the gates open, out of indignation. But Uther ordered
his men at once to blockade the city, and to batter down the
walls on every side; and, accordingly, having beaten down
the walls, they would at once have entered the city, and shed
no little blood, if the Saxons had not at last determined to
resist them. But when morning came, the Saxons marched
out with their forces in battle array, challenging the Britons
to battle; the Britons opposed them gallantly, the Saxons
charged intrepidly, and great slaughter took place on both
sides. At last, after many bloody battles, the victory was
decided in favour of the king of the Britons, and Octa and
Eosa having been slain, the remainder of the Saxons fled before
the Britons.

Therefore, the king was delighted and derived such vigour
of mind and such happiness from his victory, that he who
was previously unable to rise without the support of another,
now with a slight effort reseated himself in his litter as if he
had recovered his former health.

A.D. 513. John was appointed to the Roman chair, and oc-

254 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 516. |
cupied it two years and nine months. The same year, Saint
Genevieve, a virgin of Paris, being eighty years old, departed
to the Lord. i

a.p. 514, The grandsons of Cedric, Scupha and Wihgarus,
arrived in Britain with two ships, and landed on the western
side of the island. Therefore, the generals of the Britons
came forth against them to battle, but their forces were routed
in a moment. The prowess of Cedric was very terrible ; and
though he passed through the whole island in a hostile manner,
he scarcely found any one to resist him: so that the magnifi-
cence of the pagans increased every day. The same year, Ella,
whom all the Saxons obeyed as their king, died; and Cissa,
his son, reigned in his stead; from whom the city which he
founded derived its name of Chichester. }

A.D. 515. Felix was elected pope, and occupied the Roman
chair four years, two months, and thirteen days. He separated
the clergy from the people in the church; as the two bodies
had previously been accustomed to sit together. .

a.p. 516. When Uther Pendragon, king of the Britons,
was lying, weighed down by infirmities, at Verulamium, the
Saxons agreed together, and sené some wicked men, disguised
in the dress of the poorest class, to take off the king by
poison. So they came to Verulamium, and carefully began to
examine into the means of killing the king. At length they
selected this device in preference to any other, as the best by
which to effect their design. There was, outside the city, a
fountain of very clear water, which the king used to drink,
because he was disinclined to any other liquid. Therefore,
these wicked traitors attacked the fountain itself, and imbued _
it thoroughly with the most deadly poison; to such a degree,
that even waters at a distance which proceeded from it were cor-
rupted. And, when the king had drank of it, he speedily died,
and several other persons beside him, till the wickedness was
discovered, and the fountain blocked wp and covered with a
mound of earth. This is believed to have been the very foun-
tain which the invincible martyr, Alban, produced for the
thirsty people out of the dry soil of the steep hill, when he
was being led to martrydom.

But, when the king was dead, the priests met together with
the clergy of the kingdom and the people, and buried him in
royal fashion within the Giant’s Dance ; and, after this had been

A.D. 518. BONIFACE PLACED IN THE ROMAN CHAIR. 2395

_ done, Dubritius, archbishop of the city of London, in union

with the bishops and nobles of the land, made Arthur, his son,

a youth of fifteen years of age, king, with great pomp. He

was a man of unheard-of valour and liberality, by which he
became so popular, that he was praised by all men, even by
his enemies; for such a host of soldiers flocked to his standard,

and so great was the number of those who wished to serve
under him, that he had not sufficient means to supply pay for

them. At that time the Saxons had invited over their fellow-
countrymen from Germany ; and, under their leader, Colgrin,
had subjugated the whole of that part of the island which
extends from the Humber to the sea of Caithness. And
when Arthur heard that, he, with those who owed allegiance
to him, marched to York, which had been already subdued by
the Saxons. But Colgrin, hearing of the advance of Arthur,
went to meet him with a very numerous army, near the river
Douglas, and a battle took place, in which Arthur put Colgrin
to flight, and pursued him as far as York, and there blockaded
him in that city. But Baldulph, the brother of Colgrin,

while awaiting the arrival of the Saxons on the coast, pro-

posed to makea night attack upon Arthur. Arthur, however,
being forewarned of this by his spies, sent Cador, duke of
Cornwall, with six hundred cavalry and three thousand in-
fantry, on the road by which the enemy would come; and
they, attacking them unexpectedly, killed and wounded a great
many of them, and put the rest to flight.

A.D. 517. Duke Cheldric came from Germany with seven
hundred ships, and landed in Scotland, and the Britons were
afraid to enter in a contest, of which they thought the result
doubtful, with so great a force; therefore, Arthur raised the
siege of York, and retreated to the city of London with his

army. Then, having taken counsel of his friends, he sent

messengers into Brittany, to king Hoel, to tell him of the
difficulties of Britain. But Hoel was the son of Arthur’s sister,
by Dubritius, king of the Armorican Britons ; and he, hearing

‘of the danger with which his uncle was threatened, ordered a

large fleet to be prepared; and, having collected fifteen thousand
armed men, arrived with a fair wind at the port of South-
ampton. Arthur received him with joy and due honour.
The same year the holy virgin Bridget departed to the Lord.
A.D. 518. Boniface was placed in the Roman chair, which

256 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 520.

he occupied two years and seven days. The same year,
Arthur, having collected a large army, marched to the city of
Caerlindcoit, which is now called Lincoln, where, having found
the Saxons, he made an unheard-of slaughter of them; for
there fell of them in one day six thousand men, who all
perished miserably, some being drowned in the river, some
being pierced with arrows, and others slain by the sword while
flying. But Arthur never ceased pursuing the fliers till they
came to the grove of Calidon ; but there they all gathered into
a body, and endeavoured to resist him, defending themselves
manfully ; and Arthur, seeing this, ordered the trees to be cut
down around that part of the wood, and the trunks to be ar-
ranged around in such a way that all egress was utterly denied
to them ; for his object was to blockade them there till they
all died of famine. Accordingly, the Saxons, having nothing
to eat, begged leave to depart, on condition of returning with
nothing but their persons to Germany. And Arthur, having
deliberated with his council, granted their request, and, re-
taining all their property and spoils, and exacting tribute and
hostages from them, conceded them nothing but a safe retreat.

A.D. 519. Justus became emperor of the Romans, and
reigned eight years. This year also, Boethius, who had been
banished by the pope, wrote his book on the subject of the
consolation of philosophy.

A.D. 520. The Saxons, Colgrin, Baldulph, and Cheldrie,
repented of having made the agreement with Arthur. On
which account they retwned to Britain, and landed on the
shore of Totness, and at last besieged the city of Bado. And
when the news of this got abroad, Arthur ordered their hos=
tages to be hung. Then, hastening towards the besieged city,
he ordered all men to take arms; and he himself put on a
breastplate, put on his head with the image of a dragon en-
graved on it, and to his shoulders he hung his shield named
Pridwen, in which was embossed the image of the Holy
Mother of God, which constantly recalled her to his memory.
He was also girded with a trusty sword, called Caliburn, and
a lance named Iron adorned his right hand. Then, having
marshalled his troops, he boldly attacked the enemy. But
they manfully resisted the whole day, and dealt unwearied
slaughter among the Britons. At last, when the sun was
approaching its setting, the Saxons occupied a mountain close

A.D. 521. ARTHUR’S GENEROSITY TO HIS ENEMIES. 257

at hand, intending to use it as a camp. But the next day, at
dawn, Arthur, with his army, ascended to the top of the hill;
but, in ascending, he lost many of his men; for the Saxons
descended from the summit to meet him, and so inflicted
wounds on his troops more easily than his troops could wound
them. The Britons, however, having, by great valour, won the
top of the hill, inflicted terrible slaughter on the enemy ; and
the Saxons, opposing their breasts to them, resisted them

obstinately with all their might. And when they had spent a

great part of the day in fighting, at last, Arthur, drawing
Caliburn, invoked the name of the Blessed Virgin Mary, and
threw himself with fierce impetuosity among the dense lines
of the enemy, and slew every one he could reach, with blows
that were not trifling, and which needed no repetition. Nor
did he cease from his fury till he had slain eight hundred and
forty men with his single sword. Colgrin, and Baldulph, his
brother, fell there, and with them many thousands of the
barbarians. But Cheldric, when he saw the danger of his
companions, fled with the remnant of the army. Therefore
the king ordered Cador, duke of Cornwall, to pursue them.
And, as they could find no safe place of refuge, they at last,
with: their scattered battalions, reached the Isle of Thanet ;
but the duke pursued them, and gave them no rest till he had
slain Cheldric, and received the surrender of the rest.

The same year, John was appointed to the Roman chair, and
occupied it two years.

A.D. 521. Boethius, having been long an exile, was put to
death by Theodoric, king of the Goths. The same year, news
was brought to Arthur that the Scots and Picts had besieged
king Hoel, in the city of Alclud, where he was lying sick.
On which account he hastened to go to his assistance, that he
might not be overwhelmed by any means by the barbarians.
And when the enemy heard of his advance, they fled to Mureif.
And Arthur pursued them, and besieged them in that town,
and they escaped by night, and entered the lake of Lumonoy.
But Arthur having collected some ships, surrounded the island,
and blockading them, pressed them so much with hunger for
fifteen days, that about a million of them died. After which
circumstance, the bishops of that district came barefoot and
weeping to the king, entreating him to have mercy upon that
miserable people, and to permit them to inhabit a small

VOL. I. 8

.

258 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 526,

portion of the country, under the yoke of perpetual slavery.
Therefore, the king being moved at the tears of the bishops,
pardoned his enemies and granted their request.

A.D. 522. Agapitus was placed in the Roman chair, and oc-
cupied it eleven months. He was succeeded by Silverius, who
was pope for one year. The same year, when king Arthur had
entered the city of York, when the day of the nativity of the
Lord was at hand, he was greatly grieved at seeing the de-
solation of the holy churches, and having convoked the people,
he gave the see of the archbishopric to Pirannus, his chaplain.
He restored throughout all Britain the churches that had been
destroyed, and recalled the nobles of the kingdom who had been
expelled by the Saxons, and restored them their lands and
paternal possessions very liberally.

A.D. 523. When Arthur, king of Britain, had restored the
island to its former condition, he married a wife, by name Guen-
humara, descended from the noble race of the Romans. She
had been brought up in the palace of the duke of Cornwall,
and was superior to all the women of this island in beauty.
Then, having invited numbers of nobles from distant kingdoms,
he began to display so much elegance of behaviour at home,
in dress, in bearing arms, in speaking and all his conduct, that
he excited distant nations to an emulation of him, And the
fame of his liberality and virtue becoming notorious through-
out different countries, affected the kings across the sea,
exciting affection m some, and no small apprehension in
others.

A.D, 524, Vigilius became pope, and occupied the Roman
chair sixteen years and twenty-six days, and the see was va-
cant three months and five days..

a.p. 525. King Arthur, having prepared a powerful fleet,
went to the island of Ireland, and on his landing he was met by
Gillamurius, the king, with the people of that country. At
last Gillamurius was taken prisoner, and the rest of the chiefs
were compelled to capitulate. After that he ravaged Holland,
Jutland, and the islands of the Orkneys with fire and sword,
and placed all these countries under tribute. And when he
had done this, he returned to Britain.

A.D. 426. The heresy of Acephali was refuted and con-
demned. They were called Acephali, that is to say, without a
head, for it cannot be ascertained who was the author of that

=a

A.D. 532, DIONYSIUS ARRANGES HIS CYCLE. 259

heresy. The Acephali are impugners of the three articles agreed
to by the Council of Chalcedon. They deny the property of two
substances in Christ, and assert that there was only one nature
in his person. — They also assert that the Apostle Paul, in his
Epistles, ordered women to be made deaconesses, because he
mentions them after the deacons.

A.D. 527. Justinian succeeded to the Roman empire, and
reigned thirty-eight years. The same year, Pagans came from
Germany and occupied East Anglia, that is to say, that dis-
trict which is called the country of the East Angles; some of
whom invaded Mercia, and fought many battles with the
Britons. But as their leaders were very numerous, their
names have not been preserved. The same year, the kingdom
of the East Saxons, which was called Essex, was first established,
and Erkenwin is believed to have been its founder and first
king ; he was the son of Offa, the son of Bredecan, the son of
Sigewolf, the son of Spetua, the son of Geser, the son of
Andesse, the son of Saxuad, the son of Woden.

A.D. 528. Cedric and his son Kenric having collected very
large bodies of armed men in the Isle of Wight, made a great
slaughter there, at Wigaresbin, and made themselves masters of
the whole island.

A.D. 529. The body of Antony the monk was found, in con-
sequence of a divine revelation, and was brought to Alexandria.

A.D. 530. Some orthodox bishops in Africa having had
their tongues cut out by the roots by the Vandals, spoke dis-
tinctly afterwards, in such a way as to be a marvel and a sight
to many. And one of their number increased the miracle,
because he becoming unduly elated, was deprived of the divine
gift, and became dumb again.

A.D. 531. Saint Adastus was ordained as the first bishop of
Artois, by Saint Remigius.

A.D. 532. The abbot Dionysius arranged his cycle, consisting
of five cycles of nineteen years. And because the second

ear of this arrangement ought to correspond, in the calcu-
Been, with the first year of the nativity of Christ, the
thirty-fifth year of the cycle of Dionysius ought to correspond,
in the calculation, with the thirty-third year of the nativity of
Christ, that is to say, in such a way that the fourteenth day
of the moon in April, would be the ninth of the calends of
April, and the fifth day of the week. The passion of Christ

8 2

260 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 536.

would be the eighth of the calends of April (March 25), and
the sixth day of the week ; the resurrection, the sixth of the
calends of April and the Lord’s day. But as this is not really
the case, but in that year the fourteenth day of the April
moon fell on the twelfth of the calends of April, and the first
day of the week, and the Lord’s day of Easter on the fifth
day of the calends, on that account this cycle isrejected, because
it is inconsistent with the Gospel truth.

This year also, the emperor Justinian abridged the books
of the Roman laws into one volume, which is called the Code
of Justinian.

A.D. 533. Cedric, the first king of the West Saxons, died, and
Kenric, his son, reigned in his stead. He reigned twenty-six
years. The same year, king Arthur, designing to subdue all
Europe, having prepared a fleet, went to Norway. And when he
nad arrived there, he found Sichelm, the king of that country,
already dead, who dying, had assigned the kingdom of the Nor-
wegians to Lother, Arthur’s sister’s son. For he was the grand-
son of Sichelin, and a youth of wonderful virtue and hberality,
on which account he had adopted him as his successor in the
kingdom. There was also at that time, Walwan, the son of the
before-mentioned Lother, a youth of twelve years of age, who
had been entrusted to pope Vigilius to bring up, and who re-
ceived from him also the belt of military service. When Arthur,
having subdued the Norwegians, had raised Lother to the
throne, he returned to Britain with joy, intending to invade
the country of Gaul, which he was excessively desirous to re-
duce under his own power.

A.D. 534. The abbot Theodoric, a disciple of Saint Remi-
gius, and the abbot Theodulph, a disciple of Theodorie him-
self, flourished in Gaul.

A.D. 535. Two uterine brothers flourished in Gaul, who
were born the same day, and consecrated pontiffs the same
day ; one of them, named Medardus, to the see of Nismes, the
other, named Gildardus, to that of Rouen, and who also de-
parted from this world to Christ, being released on the same
day.

A.D. 536. Saint Benedict, according to some accounts, de-
parted to Christ. Likewise king Arthur, desiring to reduce
the countries of Gaul under his power, having prepared a
fleet, committed the protection of the whole of Britain and

ie

A.D. 540. A GREAT MORTALITY AT BYZANTIUM. 261

his wife to Mordred, his nephew. Then sailing across the sea,
with a prosperous voyage, he, without difficulty, subdued
Estrusia, which is now called Normandy; then advancing
onwards, he ravaged all the provinces of Gaul, and at last
slew Frollo, the governor, in battle, and compelled the city of
Paris to capitulate and acknowledge him forits master. Then
marching towards the west, he reduced Anjou, Poictiers, Gas-
cony, and al] Aquitaine to submission.

A.D. 537. A miracle happened of universal notoriety, affect-
ing Theophilus the apostate, and the blessed Mary, the mother
of the Saviour. The same year also, Arthur, king of the
Britons, having subdued the countries of Gaul, marched to
Anteus, where he defeated Lucius, the consul of the city of
Rome (who had come to assist the Gauls with all the power of
Rome), near Lengrize, in the valley which is now called Seisias,
and slew him.

A.D. 538. King Totila persecuted Benedict the younger, on
account of his faith in Christ; and as, though he wished to
burn him and his cell, he was not able to do so, he threw
him into a heated furnace in Campania, in Italy, and the next
day he came out unhurt, with his garments uninjured.

A.D. 539. The sun was obscured from the morning till the
third hour. The same year, king Arthur, having subdued the
provinces around the Alps, prepared to march onwards to sub-
due the Roman people. His name was very much magnified
over the whole earth. On which account princes and nobles
came from distant countries to live under him and to be in-
structed by him, and to enjoy the delights of his presence and
politeness. Of his magnificence and virtue, Merlin, the pro-
phet of the Britons, prophesied, saying, “ At length oppressed
Britain shall prevail, and shall withstand the fierceness of the
foreigners. For the boar of Cornwall shall bring help, and
shall trample the necks of his enemies under his feet. The
isles of the ocean shall be subjected to his power, and he
shall be lord of the Gallic priests ; the house of Romulus shall
tremble at his fierceness, and his end shall be doubtful. He
shall be celebrated in the mouth of the people, and his exploits
shall be food to the relaters of them.”

a.p. 540. A great mortality of mankind took place at
Byzantium. On which account, by command of the emperor
Justinian, the solemnity of the Holy Mother of God began to

262 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 541.

be celebrated, which is called the Purification, on the second
day of February, and the pestilence ceased. The same year,
Mordred, the nephew of Arthur, to whom Arthur had entrusted
Britain, caused himself to be crowned with his uncle’s diadem,
and took his queen, Guenhumara, to be his own wife, violating
the rights of her former marriage. And that traitor was con-
federate with the Saxons, who under the command of Chel-
dric came from Germany with eight hundred ships full of
soldiers, who all obeyed Mordred as their own lord. And
when the infamy of that wickedness came to the ears of Arthur,
who had already began to ascend the Alps on his march to-
wards Rome, he returned with only the kings of the island
towards Britain, inflamed with the greatest wrath and inextin-
guishable hatred against Mordred.

A.D. 541. A comet appeared in Gaul, so bright that the
whole heaven appeared to be on fire. And the same year, real
blood rained out of the clouds; and about the same time, a
certain individual’s house was seen to be sprinkled with blood,
and a terrible mortality of men followed. The same year, the
noble king Arthur, coming to Britain with great haste,
arranged to land in the harbour of Rutupium, which is now
called Sandwich. And while he was disembarking, Mordred,
with a very numerous army came against him, and inflicted
no small slaughter on his troops as they were landing. On
that day Anguselus, King of Albany, fell, and Walwan, the
king’s grandson, and innumerable others. But at last, after a
great deal of labour and a doubtful and bloody battle, Arthur
and his army effected their landing. And then attacking the
enemy with great impetuosity, they put Mordred and his army
to flight, with no ordinary loss. And Mordred, rallying his
forces as well as he could, threw himself into Winchester.
And when the news of this event was brought to queen Guen-
humara, she fled im haste to Caerleon, and there took upon
herself a religious habit amongst the nuns in the monastery of
Julius the Martyr. :

Arthur, greatly enraged, hastened to Winchester and besieged.
Mordred, who had already entered that city. But in the
morning, having marshalled his troops, Mordred sallied out
from the city and attacked the king vigorously. Then there
was no small slaughter made of the opposing armies, but at

A.D. 543. MORDRED’S SONS RISE AGAINST CONSTANTINE. 263

last, Mordred abandoned the field, and took his way towards
Cornwall. And Arthur pursued him, and overtook him at the
river Camblan. But Mordred being the most impious and
most audacious of men, marshalled his troops and attacked
the king and his army with great impetuosity, choosing rather
to die than to flee any longer before his enemies. Then, as
they fought in different parts of the field, there was no small
bloodshed on both sides, and the groans of the dying inspired
the living with ferocity. But after a great part of the day
was passed, at last Arthur rushed on, borne onwards by a lion’s
spirit, against that part of the army in which he knew that
Mordred was ; and making himself a way with his sword, and
scattering the enemy, he made a most bloody slaughter of
them, scattered their close ranks, and drove them different
ways. The battle grew thick and fierce, and the air rattled
with the clang of the blows. Therefore that traitor Mordred
fell, and with him the Saxons, Cedric, Elaphius, Egbrith, and
Bruning, and many thousands of soldiers with them, and so,
by the favour of God, the victory fell to Arthur. But, alas!
he was mortally wounded, and was carried from thence to the
island of Avalon, which is now called Glasconia, to be healed
of his wounds.

A.D. 542. King Arthur, as his life was despaired of, his
enemies being now slain, bestowed the crown of Britain on his
kinsman, Constantine, the son of Cador, duke of Cornwall.
The dying king kept himself from sight, that his enemies
might not insult his misfurtunes, and so his friends be grieved.
On which account, as the histories say nothing of the death of
Arthur or of his burial, the nation of the Britons, out of the
greatness of their affection for him, contend that he is still
alive.

The same year, while Clothaire, king of the Franks, was
besieging the city of Saragossa, in Spain, the citizens prayed
to the Lord, and carried the tunic of the blessed martyr
Vincentius round the walls. And the king accepted it as a
present from them, and so returned again to his own country.

A.D. 543. The two sons of Mordred rose in insurrection
against Constantine, king of the Britons, wishing to avenge
their father, and having made an alliance with the Saxons, they
fought many battles. But at last Constantine put them to
flight, and pursuing them, slew one of them at Winchester, in

264 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 550.

the church of Saint Amphibalus, before the altar. And the
other he condemned to a cruel death at London, where he
was hidden in a convent of a religious brotherhood.

A.D. 544. Herculianus, bishop of Perugia, became a martyr,
having been beheaded by Totila, king of the Ostrogoths. And
his head, after his death, was found to be united to his body.
The same year, Withgar, the prince of the Isle of Wight, died,
and was buried in the place which is called after his name
With qaersberie.

a.D. 545, Saint Remigius, archbishop of Rheims, fell asleep
in the Lord. About the same time, Constantine, king of the
Britons died, and was buried within the Giant’s Dance. He
was succeeded by Aurelius Conan, a youth of marvellous vir-
tue, and his own grandson, a man in all respects worthy of a
crown, except inasmuch as he was a lover of civil war. In
fact, he imprisoned his uncle, who ought to have reigned after
Constantine, and put his two sons to death, and so obtained
the kingdom and reigned thirty years.

A.D. 546. Pope Vigilius was driven into banishment by the
emperor Justinian, because he refused to recal the heretic
Anthymus to his bishopric.

A.D. 547. Alboyn, king of the Lombards, slew Cunimund,
king of the Gepidee, in battle, and he had the skull of his head
made into a drinking cup for himself, and carried off his
daughter prisoner, and made her his wife.

A.D. 548. The kingdom of the Northumbrians took its rise.
For when the nobles, of the Angles, by great and- continued
exertions, had subdued that country, they unanimously elected
a most noble youth, of the name of Ida, to be their king. And
Ida had by his queen six sons, Adda, Ethelric, Theodoric,
Etheric, Osmer, and Theofred. And by his concubines he
had six other sons, Oga, Alric, Eecha, Osbald, Segor and Sego-
ther. They all came into Britain with forty ships, and landed
at Flemesburgh. Ida reigned twelve years, and built the
castle of Bebanburgh, which he fortified at first with wooden
pales, and afterwards with a wall. Ina subsequent page I
shall give an account of his family.

A.D. 549. Agerirus, bishop of Verdun, flourished, and was
very eminent for sanctity.

A.D 550. An alder tree bore the berries and fruit of a vine,
and some other monstrous and portentous things were seen.

‘

A.D. 554. men VERY SEVERE WINTER. - 265

A.D. 551. The fifth universal synod was held at Constanti-
nople ; in which an epistle which is called Iba, is reproved as
being full of error, and Theodorus, who separated the person
of the Mediator of God and man in two substances, was con-
victed and condemned as having fallen into impiety and infi-
delity. The same year, the bishop Jordan ended his history.

The same year, Justinian Augustus having been seduced by
the heretic Anthymus, began to deviate from the catholic
faith, so his wife Theodora sent to Pope Vigilius, desiring him
to recal Anthymus. For he had been the bishop of Constanti-
nople, and had been degraded by pope Agapetus, because he
was a favourer of heretics, and because pope Vigilius post-
poned recalling him, he, being compelled by force, made him
come to him. And as he then treated him very injuriously,
pope Vigilius is reported to have said to him, “As far as I
see, it is not Justinian and Theodora who have made me come
to them, but Diocletian and Eleutheria.”’

A.D. 552. Pelagius succeeded Vigilius in the Roman chair,
four years, ten months, and eighteen days. And the see was
vacant six months. The same year, when a certain boy in the
east, the son of Jewish parents, had been induced by his fellows,
who were the sons of Christians to receive the body and blood
of Christ, in the church of the mother of the Lord, and was
on that account thrown by his father into a burning furnace,
he was drawn out from thence unhurt by the Christians, and
asserted that the woman who was painted in that church
holding a child in her arms, had blown away the flames with
her cloak, so as to keep them from him.

A.D. 553. Saint Maurus, a disciple of the blessed Benedict,
flourished in high reputation, for his virtues and the miracles
which he wrought. And when a nobie man, by name Florus,
had heard of his arrival in the country of Gaul, he came to
him, and with great elevation poinied out to him a suitable
place for building a monastery. And having scarcely given
himself time to obtain the consent of the man of God, he
collected workmen, and began and completed the work ; and

Florus entrusted his son Bertulph to the blessed Maurus to

be educated, and many other nobles followed his example, and

made that place remarkable.
a.p. 554. The winter was so severe with frost and snow,

that the birds and wild beasts could be caught by the hand.

266 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AD. 561.

A.D. 555, An appearance like that of lances was seen in the
air, reaching from the north to the west.

a.p. 556. Saint Medard, a bishop of Nismes, a man illus-
trious for his virtues, departed to the Lord, and was buried at
Soissons.

A.D. 557. Queen Radegund, the wife of Clothaire, formerly
king of the Franks, assumed a new garment, and became
eminent for every kind of holiness. At this time, there were
a great many battles between the Britons and the Angles, and
a great many soldiers were slain on each side, the victory de-
claring for both parties in turn.

A.D. 558, Gregory, son of Gordian, a senator, arrived at
man’s estate at Rome. He founded six monasteries in Sicily,
and a seventh at Rome in his own house, out of his patrimony ;
and, from having been preetor of the city, became a monk,
and was exceedingly eminent for learning, wisdom, doctrine,
and holiness.

a.D. 559. Kenric, king of the West Saxons, died, and Ceva-
linus, his son, reigned in his stead, and was king thirty years.

A.D. 560. Ida, king of the Northumbrians, died, and his
realm was divided into two kingdoms. Ella, the son of Iffus,
a most valiant general, began to reign in Deira, and gave that
name to his kingdom, and reigned over it for thirty years.
While Adda, the son of Ida, succeeded his father in the king-
dom of the Bernicians, and reigned seven years. That Ella,
king of the Deiri, is the same who is mentioned in the life
of the blessed pope Gregory, as will be seen in the subsequent
pages of this history.

The same year, a certain Jew carried off by stealth a statue
of the Saviour out of a church, and took it privily to his. own
house, and there pierced it with a dart. And as he was going
to burn it in the fire, he found himself covered with blood from
the image, and, being awe-struck, he hid it. And the Chris-
tians sought for it, and found it by means of the traces left
by the blood, and recovered it all stained with blood, and
stoned the Jew.

The same year, Ethelbert, the great king of Kent, according
to some authors, with whom Bede agrees, began to reign. But
the opinion of the others appears more probable.

A.D, 561. Saint Brendan flourished in Scotland, who, during

A.D. 566. ETHELBERT REIGNS IN KENT. 267

a voyage that lasted seven years, went to the Fortunate Islands,
and saw many things worth relating. And he had a disciple
Machutus, who was completely educated by him, and who was
the companion of his voyage, and who was very eminent in
Britain for his miracles and holiness. And he, being provoked
by the Britons, cursed them, and went over to Gaul, where he
flourished, and was very eminent for virtue, living under the
protection of Leontius, bishop of Guienne. And as, by reason
of his curse, the Britons became afflicted with many disasters,
he subsequently healed them by giving them his blessing, and
absolved them. About the same time, Sampson, archbishop
of the Dolensians, and successor of the holy Sampson, who
crossed over from the Greater Britain to the Lesser, was emi-
nent for learning and holiness.

A.D. 562. A mountain in Gaul, on the river Rhone, bellowed

for many days, and was at length driven from its place by

another mountain, and with the churches, and buildings, and
men, and beasts that were on it, was precipitated into the river.

A.D. 563. Priscian, the grammarian and orator, a sub-
deacon, who turned the Acts of the Apostles into hexameter
verse, flourished at Rome. ‘There flourished at the same time
Fortunatus, an eminent man, of illustrious genius, of acute
discernment and pleasing eloquence, who came from Italy to
Tours, and wrote an account of the acts of the blessed Martin
in heroic metre, in four books. And, removing from thence,
he was made bishop of Poictiers.

A.D. 564. After the death of Clothaire, king of the Franks,
his four sons divided the kingdom between them; and the
eldest of them, named Chilperic, reigned twenty-three years.

A.D. 565. Justin the younger obtained the empire of Rome,
and reigned twelve years. In this year also there were seen
many signs in the sun and moon.

A.D. 566. John was appointed to the Roman chair, and
occupied it twelve years, eleven months, and twenty-seven
days. And the see was vacant ten months and three days.

_ The same year, Saint Columbus flourished, who came from

Scotland into Britain. The same year, Ethelbert, son of
Ermeric, succeeded to the kingdom of Kent, and governed it
with great vigour for fifty-six years. He was the most power-
ful of all the kings of England, and extended the boundaries
of his empire as far as the river Humber, by which the people

268 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AD. 5750

of the north are divided from those of the south, and ruled
the inhabitants of all those provinces with great nobleness.

A.D. 567. On the death of Adda, king of the Bernicians,
Glappa succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned five years. The
same year, fiery spears were seen in the air, portending the
irruption of the Lombards into Italy.

A.D. 568. Ceauline, king of the west Saxons, and Cutha, his
brother, united their forces, and made war upon Ethelbert,
king of Kent. And two counts, the allies of Ethelbert, were
slain, and he himself was put to flight.

A.D. 569. Glappa, king of the Bernicians, died, and Theo-
bald reigned in his stead, and was king for one year.

A.D. 570. Fretheulfus became king of the Bernicians, and
reigned seven years. The same year, the people of Armenia
adopted the faith of Christ, and the abbot Wandregisilus was
born.

A.D. 571. One cycle of the sacred passover of four hundred
and twenty-two years since our Lord Jesus Christ was cruci-
fied ; in the seventh indiction, the five thousand and seventy-
fifth year after the creation of the world, according to the
Greeks. Affa was at this time the king of east Anglia.

A.D. 572. Gregory was ordained bishop of Tours, and was
esteemed very eminent for his piety.

A.D. 573. The Spaniards and the Gauls differed about the
celebration of Easter ; as the Spaniards celebrated it on the
twenty-first of March, and the Franks on the eighteenth of
April. But it was proved, by divine interposition, that the
Franks were the more correct as to the days, because the
fountains in Spain, for the purpose of baptism, which had been
accustomed to be filled on the sabbath of the sacred passover
by divine agency, became filled, not on the passover of the
Spaniards, but on that of the Franks.

A.D. 574. The following circumstance happened : Albinus,
king of the Lombards, had formerly slain in battle his wife’s
father Cunimund, king of the Gepidee, and had made a drink-
ing cup for himself out of his skull. And as one day he gave
it to his wife to drink out of, saying, “Drink with your father,”
she, being inflamed with womanly fury, procured him to be
assassinated by his armour-bearer.

A.D. 575. Benedict became pope, and sat in the Roman
chair four years, six months, and seventeen days. He was the

A.D. 582. GREGORY SENT TO CONSTANTINOPLE. 269

pope from whom Gregory received permission to depart and
preach to the Angles, but he was afterwards recalled, as the
people behaved tumultuously, and was ordained the seventh
Levite.

A.D. 576. A famine attacked Rome, and many of the Romans
fled to the Lombards. But Tiberius, who was afterwards
emperor, sent a quantity of corn from Egypt, and delivered
Rome from scarcity.

A.D. 577. Tiberius obtained the Roman empire, and reigned
seven years. And as he was very liberal to the poor, God
permitted him to find many treasures. The same year, Fre-
theulph, king of the Bernicians, died, and Theodoric succeeded
him, and reigned seven years.

A.D. 578. Saint Germanus, bishop of Paris, by his death
went to adorn the heavenly regions. The same year, Aurelius
Conan, king of the Britons, died, and Vortiper succeeded
him, and reigned three years. And he, being an enemy of the
Saxons, triumphed gloriously over them several times.

The same year, after Uffa, king of the East Angles, from
whom the kings of that province are called Uffingi, Titillus,
his son, succeeded to the kingdom. And Titillus was the father
of Redwald, who was the tenth in descent from Woden.

A.D. 579. Pelagius became pope. He occupied the Roman
chair ten years, eight months, and ten days. And the see
was vacant six months and twenty-five days.

A.D. 580. Fire was seen to run along the heaven. About
this period, there were continual irruptions of the Britons and
Saxons into one another’s territories. For Ceaulinus took
Bedcanford castle, which is now called Bedford ; and other for-
tresses also, namely, Lienbury, Aylesbury, Bensington, Hene-
sham, Gloucester, Cirencester, and Bath. And his name be-
came very illustrious.

A.D. 581. Pope Pelagius determined that nine prefaces only
ought to be sung at mass, and abolished the daily sentences
which were used to be repeated. The same year, Vortiper,

_king of the Britons, died, and was succeeded by Malgo, a most

excellent man, eminent for his orthodoxy, valiant in arms, and
excessively liberal; but being enervated by the disease of
Sodom, he made himself odious to God and men. He also re-
duced six islands of the ocean, which joined his province, under
his dominion.

A.D. 582. Gregory the teacher was sent by pope Pelagius to

270 MATTHEW OF -WESTMINSTER. A.D. 586.

Constantinople, and composed books of morals on Job, and also,
in the presence of the emperor in that city, confuted Euty-
chius, the bishop of Constantinople, who advanced erroneous:
dogmas about the resurrection of the dead, and affirmed that
in the glory of that resurrection the human body would come

impalpable to the winds, and more subtle than air. And when ~

Eutychius died soon after, he utterly put down his opinions.

A.D. 583. At Tours, real blood flowed from the head of the
altar when broken.

A.D. 584. Tiberius-Ceesar, having gone mad and died, was’
succeeded by Mauritius, who reigned twenty-two years. The
same year, Ceauline, king of the West Saxons, and his brother
Cuthwine, fought a battle with the Britons at Frithculey,
where Cuthwine was severely wounded and killed. Therefore,
the Angles were conquered and put to flight.

A.D. 585. The kingdom of Mercia took its rise, and Creod-
da was its first king: so that all the kingdoms of the Angles
or Saxons were by this time began, and they are eight in
number, namely, the kingdom of Kent, the metropolis of which
is the city of Canterbury. The kingdom of the South Saxons,
that is, Sussex, the metropolis of which is the city of Chi-
chester. The kingdom of the East Saxons, thatis Essex, the
metropolis of which is the city of London. The kingdom of
the East Angles, that is, Hast Anglia, the chief city of which
is Norwich. The kingdom of the West Saxons, or Occidental
Saxons, the metropolis of which is the city of Wentana, which is
now called Winchester, The kingdom of Mercia, or Middle An-
glia, the chief city of which is Doncaster, but now Lincoln. And
the kingdom of Northumberland, the chief city of which is
York. And this last kingdom was divided into two parts, as
has been said above.

From a.p. 586 To a.p. 621.

Cu. X, —The Britons retreat to Wales and to Cornwall—.
The whole island of Britain obtains the name of Anglia—
Gregory becomes Pope—Saint Augustine is sent to England
—The English become Christians—The Church of Rome is
declared the chief of all churches—Death of Ethelbert—
War between the different kings in England — Chosroes
king of Persia.

A.D. 586, Caretius, a lover of civil wars, and a man hated

A.D. 586. THE CHURCHES DESTROYED BY THE BRITONS. 271

by both gods and Britons, succeeded Malgo, king of the Britons.
And the before-mentioned kings, those, that is to say, of the
Angles and Saxons, being aware of his inconsiderable character,
united and rose in insurrection against him, and after many
battles drove him from city to city, till at last, after a severe
battle, they drove him across the Severn into Wales. And the
clergy and the priests were all driven out of the country,
swords flashing on every side, and flames crackling in the
churches in every direction. Therefore the remnant of the
Britons retreated into the western parts of the island, that is,
into Cornwall and Wales, abandoning the greater portion of
the island ; and from thence they made frequent and fatal
attacks on their enemies without intermission. Then the
archbishops, Theonus, archbishop of London, and Thadiocus,
archbishop of York, seeing all the churches, which were under
their government, levelled with the ground, fled with many
of the ordained clergy who had survived the perils of those
times, and with the relics of the saints, into Wales, fearing lest,
by the irruption of such numerous and terrible hosts of bar-
barians, the holy bones might be effaced from the recollection
of men, if they did not withdraw them from the impending
danger. A great many people also fled to Armorican Britain
(Brittany), and abandoned the whole church of two provinces,
namely, Loegria and Northumberland, which were thus stripped
of their convents and left desolate.

Some, however, of the bodies of the saints which lay reverently
concealed in burying places, they covered with mounds of
earth, to prevent them from exposure to the contempt of un-
believers. For the most valiant kings of the Angles and Saxons
were most atrocious pagans, who thirsted for nothing mare
than to utterly subvert Christ and the worship of Christians.
For if any church remained unhurt after the district was sub-
jugated, it tended more to the confusion of the name of Christ
than to his glory. For these unbelievers made there thirty
temples to their own gods, and polluted the holy altars of God
with their profane sacrifices. Therefore, the Britons abandoning
the crown of the kingdom for many ages, that is to say, till
the time of Cadwallon, whom Bede calls Cedwallus, never
ceased from attacking uninterruptedly with civil wars that
part of the country which remained to them, and which was
subject not to one king, but to their tyrants.

272 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 586.

Therefore, the miserable relics of the Britons remained in
three provinces only, to wit, in Cornubia, which is called
Cornwall by some people, because it stretches into the sea like
ahorn (Cornu), and Demecia, which is also called South
Wales, and Venedocia, which is also called North Wales. So |
being confined, though sorely against their will, within these
boundaries, they nevertheless never forsook their faith in
Christ. In this particular alone are they considered blameabie,
that they always regard the nation of the Angles, even to this
very day, with mortal hatred, as if it were owing to them that
they were banished from their proper country, and they are
not more willing to associate with them than with dogs. But
their provinces are impregnable, being thickly planted with
dense woods, entrenched behind deep marshes, and swelling
with lofty mountains; out of which they often sally like mice
out of dhe and wickedly attack the nation of the Angles,
and will take no other ransom from them in war, except their
heads.

At this time, the church of the blessed martyr Alban, which
is related to have been built after his passion, with wonderful
stone-work, in a manner worthy of his martyrdom, is believed
to have been with other buildings of the same sort utterly over-
thrown and destroyed, till by the ministry of king Offa, acting in
obedience to the revelation of an angel, the body of the glorious
confessor and martyr was found and his monastery rebuilt.

Britain therefore,- having been subdued, and the kings
banished, the kings of the Angles or Saxons occupied the
country in every direction, extended their kingdoms, and set
limits to their dominions with respect to nothing, but the
power of each individual. At this time, eight kings reigned,
whose names are these—Athelbert was king of Kent; Cissa
of Sussex ; Cealine of Wessex ; Creodda of Mercia ; Erkenwin
of Essex ; Titillus of East Anglia; Ella of Deira, and Ethefrid
of Bernitia. And these kingdoms in process of time were thus
distinguished.

The kings of Canterbury reigned only in the province of
Kent ; the kings of Sussex bore sway only in that province ;
the kings of Essex reigned in that province and in Middlesex ;
the kings of East Anglia reigned in Norfolk and Suffolk, and
in the county of Cambridge, until their power was crippled by
Offa, king of Mercia. The kings of Mercia ruled over the

A.D. 589. BIRTH OF SEBERT. 273

counties of Gloucester, Worcester, Warwick, Chester, Derby,
Lincoln, Leicester, Oxford, Hereford, Stafford, Northampton,
Buckingham, Bedford, Huntingdon, Cambridge, and Hertford.
The kings of the West Saxons ruled over the counties of Berks,
Dorset, Southampton, Wilton, Salisbury, and Bath. These
provinces therefore, being thus distributed among six kings,
they were constantly engaged in civil wars, and worse than
civil wars, with one another. The two kings who reigned in
Northumberland, governed the country to the north of the
great river Humber, to the kingdom of Scotland. But we have
said enough about them before.

After matters had been arranged in this way, the kings above-
mentioned determined utterly to destroy Britain and the
memory of the Britons, with which view they unanimously
agreed that the island should no longer be called Britain, from
Brutus, but Anglia, from the Angles. 4

The same year, while Gunthran, king of the Franks, being
weary with hunting, was sleeping in his armour-bearer’s
lap, near a stream of water, the armour-bearer saw a little
animal issue out of the king’s mouth. And as it wished to
cross the stream and could not do so, the armour-bearer placed
his sword across the water, and so made it a path to go and
return. And when it came back into the king’s mouth, he
woke, and said that he had dreamed that he was passing over
an iron bridge, and said that he had seen great treasures under
a certain mountain. And when he went to the mountain, in
accordance with the faith he placed in his dream, he did find
great treasures there ; and when he had acquired them, he
appropriated them to the uses of the church.

A.D. 587. Clothaire became king of the Gauls, and reigned
forty-four years. The same year, Erkenwin, king of the East
Saxons, died, and Sledda, his son, reigned in his stead.

A.D. 588. Ethelfrid, king of the Bernicians, took for his wife
Acca, the daughter of Ella, king of the Deiri, and she, in precess
of time, brought him seven sons. And the names of his sons are

_as follows: Eanfrid, Oswald, Oswin, Ossac, Oswid, Osa, and

Offa. The same year, Creodda, king of the Mercians died,
and Wibba, his son, succeeded him, and reigned three years.
A.D. 589. Sledda, king of the East Saxons, became the father
of Sebert, who succeeded him in the kingdom, by the daughter
of Ermenric, a former king of Kent.
VOL. I. a

274 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 593.

a.p. 590. Cyssa, king of the South Saxons, died, and that —

kingdom devolved on Ceaulinus, king of the West Saxons.
A.D. 591. A flood, almost exceeding the belief of men, took
place in Italy, and after a great deal of confusion a pesti-
lence followed, which was called an inguinal plague; and
which slew Pelagius the pope first of all, and after that, thinned

the people with a terrible mortality. At that time, the blessed

Gregory was filling the office of archdeacon in the city of Rome,
and he ordered a sevenfold litany to be performed for this terri-
ble mortality among the citizens. It is called a sevenfold litany,
because in the first rank came all the regular clergy; in the
second, all the abbots and their monks; in the third, all the
abbesses and their nuns; in the fourth, all the infants; in the
fifth, all the laymen; in the sixth, all the widows ; in the seventh,
all the married couples. And so, having arranged all these
matters properly, the man of God, by appeasing the wrath of

God, completely eradicated this before-mentioned pestilence —

from the city.

A.D. 592. The blessed Gregory was elected pope, the people

joining their acclamations to those of the clergy , and although
he was himself very reluctant, and strove against it, and absented
himself, he was at last discovered and enthroned. Among other
works of piety, he was able by his prayers to release the soul
of Trajan, who had formerly been emperor, although he was
a pagan, from the pains of hell. He composed an Antiphoner,
and ordered Kyrie Eleeson with the Hallelujah to be sung at
the masses. And he very advantageously added three sentences
to the canon of the mass, namely, “And order our days in
thy peace, and deliver us from eternal damnation, and cause
us to be reckoned in the flock of thy elect.”

A.D. 593. Ceaulinus and his brother Quicheline died, and
Cedric succeeded Ceaulinus in the kingdom of the West Saxons,
and reigned five years. The same year, pope Gregory ordered
the Lord’s prayer to be recited over the host, after the canon.

The same year, Ella, king of the Deiri, died. And on his
death, Ethelred, king of the Bernicians, expelled his son Edwin
from the kingdom of the Deiri, and governed the two kingdoms
with great vigour. But Edwin being driven into exile, went
and dwelt in banishment at the court of Redwald, king of
the East Angles, till he was restored by his means to his
kingdom.

A.D. 596, AUGUSTINE PREACHES THE GOSPEL IN BRITAIN. 279

A.D. 594. The robe of our Lord and Saviour was, through
the confession of a Jew named Simon, found in the city of
Zaphat, not far from Jerusalem, and was placed at Jerusalem,
in the place where the cross of Christ is worshipped, by Gre-
gory, bishop of Antioch, Thomas, bishop of Jerusalem, and
John, bishop of Constantinople.

The same year, Wilba, king of Mercia, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Charles, who was not his son, but only a kinsman,
and who reigned ten years.

A.D. 595. Richard, king of the Visigoths, confirmed the
whole of his nation in the catholic faith, after a synod of sixty-
two bishops had been collected at Toledo, and had abjured
and anathematized the Arrian heresy.

A.D. 596. Which is the hundred and forty-seventh year after
the arrival of the brothers Hengist and Horsa in Britain, Augus-
tine, the servant of God, was sent by the blessed pope Gregory
into Britain to preach the word of God to the barbarous nation
of the Angles. For they, being blinded by pagan supersti-
tion, had destroyed all Christianity in that part of the island
which they occupied. But among some portion of the Britons
the faith of Christ still flourished, which, having been intro-
duced in the hundred and fifty-eighth year after the divine
incarnation, was never wholly lost from among them. On the
eastern side of Kent is the Isle of Thanet, on which the man
of God, Augustine, and his companions, to the number, as it is
reported, of about forty men, landed. And Augustine sending
interpreters to king Ethelbert, gave him notice that he had
come from Rome, and that he was the bearer of excellent
tidings, because he promised eternal joy in heaven to those who
should obey him. The king, hearing this, came a few days
afterwards to the island, and sitting down in the open air, invited
Augustine and his companions to come there to a conference
with him. And they, being endowed with divine courage,
came, bearing a cross for a standard, and a likeness of our
Lord and Saviour depicted on a picture, and chanting litanies
for their own salvation and that of those for whom they had
come. And when, at the command of the king, they had sat
down, they preached the Word of Life to him and to all who
had come with him, and he replied, saying, “The things which
you promise are beautiful, but because they are new to me
aud doubtful, I cannot at the moment give my assent to them,

7 2

276 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 598,

forsaking these things which I and my nation have so long
preserved. But because you, being foreigners, have come
hither from a great distance, and because you have been desi-
rous to communicate to me things which you yourselves believe —
to be true and excellent, we are not disposed to deal harshly
with you. But we will rather receive you in friendly hospi-
tality, and supply you with such things as are necessary for
your support. Nor do we prohibit you from winning over to
the faith of your religion, all whom you can influence by
preaching.” Accordingly, he assigned them an abode in the
city of Canterbury, which was the capital of his dominions,
where they began to imitate the apostolic life of the primitive
church, using continual prayers and fastings, and preaching
the Word of God, and bathing all whom they could convince
in the laver of salvation. And immediately many believed and
were baptized (imitating the simplicity of an innocent life) to
the sweetness of heavenly doctrine. On the east there was a
church close to the city itself, which had been built in old time
in honour of the blessed Martin, in whichthe queen, the daugh-
ter of the king of France, by name Bertha, had been accustomed
to pray, and in which these missionaries began also to meet to-
gether,and preach and celebrate masses and baptize. And when,
after a short time, the king himself, among others, being de-
lighted with the pure life of these holy men, believed and was
baptized, numbers began to flock together every day to hear
the word of life, and leaving the errors of the Gentiles, to
believe and unite themselves to the unity of the church. He
also allotted to the doctors a habitation suitable to their degree,
in his own metropolis, the city of Canterbury, and he gave
them what was necessary for them in other particulars. In
the meantime, the man of God, Augustine, went to Arles, and
having been ordained archbishop by the archbishop of that
city, he returned to Britain.

A.D. 597. The monastery of the blessed Benedict which
that father had founded in Castrum Cassinum, was destroyed
by the perfidy of the Lombards, and therefore the monks fled
from that place, and sought refuge in Rome, bringing with
them the rule which their saintly founder had taught them.

A.D. 598. Gregory, bishop of the city of Tours, flourished in
the Gauls: he brought the relics of Saint Julian out of the
territory of Auvergne. The same year, too, Saint Columban, the

td :
A.D. 603. AUGUSTINE HOLDS A SYNOD IN BRITAIN. 277

teacher of the Scots and Picts, died, and left many proofs of
his holiness to later ages.

A.D. 599. Redwald, king of the East Angles, died, and Eor-
penwald succeeded to the helm of the kingdom.

A.D. 600. Childebert, king of the Franks, died, and his two
sons, Theodebert and Theodoric, reigned in his stead.

A.D. 601. The blessed pope Gregory sent the pallium to
Augustine, to the church of London, which at that time was
the metropolis of the Britons, as Bede testifies in his History
of the Angles.

A.D. 602. The contention which had arisen between the
Roman church and the arrogance of John, bishop of Constan-
tinople, who usurped the name of Universal Patriarch, and
which having commenced in the time of Pope Pelagius had
been carried on with no want of energy by pope Gregory,
was terminated by the death of John, when there had been no
previous possibility of ending it.

A.D. 603. Ethelred, king of the Northumbrians, fighting
against the Britons at Caerleon, slew a great number of reli-
gious men belonging to the abbey of Bangor.

At this time the man of God, Augustine, availing himself of
the authority and assistance of king Ethelbert, summoned to
his synod the bishops and doctors of the nearest province of
Britain to the place which, in the language of the Angles, is
called to this day Auqustine’s Afe, that is to say, the Oak of
Augustine, on the borders of the West Saxons and the Wic-
tians, and began to persuade them with fraternal admonitions
to hold the catholic faith with him, and to unite with him in
undertaking the joint labour of preaching the gospel to the
nations for the sake of the Lord; as hitherto they had cele-
brated the sacred feastof Easter and done many other things ina
manner contrary to the unity of the church. And after a long
discussion, when they would not assent to either the prayers
or exhortations of Augustine, he said, “ Brethren, let us pray
to Almighty God that he will deign ‘to show us by heavenly
signs which tradition is to be followed, and by what path we
ought to hasten on our journey to the kingdom of heaven.
Let some sick man be brought, and let all belief be placed in,
and all authority given to, that party by whose prayers he is
cured.”? And when his adversaries, though against their will,
_ had agreed, a sick man was brought in, deprived of his eye-

. *
278 MATTHEW OF WISTMINSTER. A.D. 603.

sight. And when he had been submitted to the bishops of the
Britons, but had derived no advantage from their ministry,
at length Augustine bent his knees to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, entreating him to restore sight to the blind, in
order that, by the bodily illumination of one man, God might
kindle the grace of spiritual light in the heart of many believers.
And immediately the blind man received his sight, and Augus-
tine was proclaimed by every one as the true messenger of
the highest right. Then the Britons confessed they under-
stood that that was the true way which Augustine preached,
but still they said that they could not, without the consent of
their chiefs, forsake their ancient customs, so that they begged
that another synod might be held, consisting of more members.
And when that had been decided on, there came, as it is re-
lated, seven bishops of the Britons and many most learned
men, especially from their most noble monastery, which, in the
language of the Angles, is called Bangorneburg, over which,
at that time, Dionotus is said to have presided as abbot. And
they, when on their way to the before-mentioned council, came
first to a holy and prudent man, who had led the life of an
anchorite among them, and consulted him whether they ought
to desert their own traditions at the preaching of Augustine.
And he answered them, “ If he be a man of God, follow him.”
They said, “ And how can we prove this?” »He said to them,
“«“The Lord has said, ‘Learn of me, because I am meek and
lowly of heart.’ If, therefore, that Augustine is meek and
lowly of heart, it is credible that he himself both bears the
yoke of Christ, and offers it to you to be borne. If, however,
he is violent and insolent, then it is plain that he is not from
God, and that his discourse is not to be regarded by you.”
They replied again, “And how are we to discern this?”
‘*Contrive,”’ said the anchorite, “that he shall first arrive
with his friends at the place of council, and then if he, of his
own accord, rises up when you approach, you may know that
he is a servant of Christ, and obediently listen to him. But
if he disdains you, and will not rise up to you, though you are
more in number, then he, likewise, may be disdained by you.”
It therefore so happened, that when they arrived, Augustine
was sitting in his chair. And they, on seeing this, were im-
mediately turned to anger, and considering him full of pride,
laboured to contradict everything which he said. And Augus-

A.D. 603. ETHELRED SLAYS THE MONKS OF BANGOR. 279

time said to them, “‘If you are willing to comply with me in
three things only, namely, so as to celebrate Easter at its pro-
per time, to fulfil the ministry of baptism, by which we are
regenerated to God, according to the customs of the Roman
Church, and to preach the word of God to the nation of the
Angles in union with us, we will submit patiently to all your
other practices, although they are contrary to our customs.”
But they declared that they would do none of these things,
and that they would not consider him as archbishop, arguing
with one another—“If he would not rise up to us before,

‘how much more will he despise us when we are once actually

subject to him?’ And the man of God, Augustine, is related
to have said to them, “If they would not have peace with
their brethren, would they accept war from their enemies ?
And if they were unwilling to preach the way of life to the
nation of the Angles, he told them they would endure the
revenge of death at their hands.’’ And this happened in every
respect as he had foretold, the divine judgment so ruling
events. And not long afterwards, Ethelred, king of Northum-
berland, a man of great courage and a most ferocious pagan,
having collected a great army in the city of Legions, which is
called by the Britons Caerleon, and which was called the city
of the Legions, because the Roman Legions used to be sta-
tioned there, made a great slaughter of them. For being
about to engage in battle with the Britons, when he saw that
their priests, who had come together to address their prayers
to God on behalf of the soldiers who were occupied in war,
were stationed in a safe place, he asked who they were, or
what they were going todo there. For there were a great
many of them from the monastery of Bangor, which is said to
have contained such a number of monks that they were di-
vided into seven classes with seven rectors, and no division
contained fewer than three hundred religious brethren. And
the greater part of them having kept a fast for three days, met
together with other priests also for the sake of praying to God,
having Brochimallus for their defender, to protect them from
the swords of the barbarians while they themselves were
engaged in praying. And when the tyrant Ethelred had learnt
the object of their presence, he said, “And if these men in-
voke the aid of their God against us, then, although they do
not bear arms, they are fighting against us, inasmuch as they

280 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 604.

are pursuing us with their unfriendly imprecations.”” There-
fore he orders his troops to turn their arms against them first,
and in this way he destroyed the other bodies in this wicked
warfare, not without great loss to his ownarmy. In that bat-
tle it is said that of these men who had come only to pray,
there were about twelve hundred men slain, and that only
fifty escaped by flight. Brochimallus, too, fled with his men,
at the first onset of the enemy, and left those whom he ought
to have defended, unarmed and exposed to the swords of their
slayers. And thus the prophecy of the blessed pontiff Augus-
tine was fulfilled.

A.D. 604. The blessed Augustine built a church to Saint
Andrew the Apostle, by the liberality of king Ethelbert, in the
city which from some primitive name Rof was called Rofecester,
or the city of Rof. And he enriched it with many ample pos-
sessions, and ordained Justus as bishop of that city.

The same year, the same Augustine consecrated Mellitus as
pontiff in the city of London. And thus the dignity of the city of
London, which in the times of the Britons had always had an
archbishop, was transferred to Canterbury, in order that the
prophecy of Merlin might be fulfilled, when he said, ‘ Religion
shall be destroyed in the island, and a change of the principal
sees shall take place. The dignity of London shall adorn Can-
terbury,” &c. ‘The same year, Mellitus having been sent by
the blessed Augustine into the province of the East Saxons to
preach the gospel, converted king Sebert, with the whole of
his nation, to the true faith. And the same Sebert was nephew
of Ethelbert, the great king of Kent, being the son of his
sister Ricula, and was placed under his power ; for he governed
all the nations of the Angles as far as the boundary of the
river Humber. The same year, the emperor Maurice, a man
who feared God, was continually in his prayers entreating the
divine mercy to grant to him to expiate the guilt of his crimes’
in this life. Therefore, one night, while he was lying in his
bed, a voice came to him from heaven, saying, ‘‘ Maurice,
deliver yourself, and your wife Constantia, and your children,
to the soldier Phocas.” So, when he awakened, he asked his
servants whether they knew of any soldier in his army called
Phocas. And they answered, ‘“‘ We do.” And he asked, “ Of
what character is he?” And they said, “He is a proud and
rash young man.” Then Augustus related his dream, and

A.D. 605. THE BLESSED GREGORY DIES. 281

greatly glorified God, because of his vision. And after this,
being in the territories of the enemy, when he compelled his
soldiers to abstain from violence and plunder, and did not
give them their usual pay, they began to entreat Phoeas to
govern them as their emperor. And Phocas complied with
their request, and took upon him the royal purple. And
Maurice, hearing this, lost all courage, and yielded to the
stream of circumstances that flowed against him, and fled into
a wood near the sea; in which he and his wife and his five
sons were slain, by command of Phocas Augustus Ceesar,
Phocas therefore usurped the Roman empire, and reigned eight
years.
A.D. 605. Which is the second year of the reign of Phocas, the
blessed Gregory departed from this life to the Lord. This
blessed man, while still alive, was once walking through the
forum of Trajan, the emperor, which he had himself adorned
. with beautiful edifices, and recollecting a judgment of his with
which he had consoled a widow, as a reward for this great
humanity of the emperor, he went in haste to the church of the
holy Apostle Peter, and there it is related that he wept a long
time for the unbelief and error of that most merciful emperor,
till on the next night, he received an answer that he had been
heard on behalf of Trajan, on condition of never again praying
for any other pagan. And we are to believe that thus the
soul of Trajan was delivered from the torments of hell, so
that, though it is placed in hell, it, by the mercy of God, does
not feel the smallest of the torments of hell. In fact, the
same fire of Gehenna, if it is able equally to detain many
sinners, at the same time is able, by the mercy of God, to
avoid inflicting on all of them equal punishment. For souls
in Gehenna feel torture according to the degree of their guilt.
Now the act of piety by which Trajan moved God and the
blessed Father Gregory to mercy, was this.
At acertain time, when Trajan was hastening very eagerly
to some war, a certain very poor widow woman came to him,
‘dissolved in tears, and saying, ‘‘My son has been put to
death, though innocent, by your orders, and I entreat you
that, as you cannot restore him to me, you will condescend at
least to avenge his blood.” And when Trajan promised that,
if he returned in safety from the war, he would avenge him, the
_ widow said, “And if you die in battle, who will then do me

282 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 607.

justice ?”” Trajan answered, ‘‘ He who shall reign after me.”
And she said, “ But what good will it do you, if some one else
does me justice?’ Trajan replied, ‘‘ None, certainly.” And
the widow said, ‘Is it not then better for you to do me justice
yourself, and to receive your reward for it, than to transmit this
reward to another?’ Then Trajan, being moved both by her
piety and her reasoning, dismounted from his horse, and did
not depart before he had given sentence for the widow, and
seen his sentence executed. And, as a reward for this hu-
manity and exhibition of justice, he deserved to be released,
five hundred years afterwards and more, from the punishments
of hell by the prayers of the blessed Gregory.

The same Father Gregory was the first man who, in the begin-
ning of his epistles, before giving his greeting and favour and
blessing, announced himself as the servant of the servants of
God, and so showed to all his successors a pattern of humility.
Andhe added to his humility usefulness, when he said, ‘‘ Health,”
that is, health of soul and body, “‘ Goodwill,”’ that is, from God
and man, and “ Blessing,”’ which is in the seed of Abraham,
namely, Christ, in whom all the nations of the earth shall be
blessed. And this blessed father Gregory, although he was
‘so eminent for virtue and knowledge, still had numerous de-
tractors after his death to such a degree, that out of hatred
to him, and for the sake of eradicating all recollection of him, |
his books would all have been burnt, if Peter had not been his
deacon. Forhe said that he had seen the Holy Spirit hover-
ing over him like a dove, while he was writing his books.

A.D. 606, Sabinianus became bishop of Rome, and occupied
the Roman chair one year, five months, and nine days. ‘The
same year, a poor man was asking alms of some sailors, and
received none, as the captain said, ‘* We have nothing here but
stones ;”” so the poor man said, “ Let everything then be turned
into stones.”” And when he had said that, everything that
there was eatable in the ship was turned into stone, though
preserving its original shape and colour.

A.D. 607. Ceolric, king of the West Saxons, died, and
Ceulf succeeded him, and reigned twenty-four years. The same
year, pope Sabinianus reproved the hberality of his prede-
cessor the blessed Gregory, and under this pretence held back
his hand from the needy ; and so Gregory in a vision thrice
reproved him for the fault of covetousness, and for differing

A.D. 611. BONIFACE CONVOKES A SYNOD IN ITALY. 283

from his example in not regarding the poor; and appeared a
fourth time to him, reproaching him so severely and threaten-
ing him, and at last he smote him on the head, by which
Sabinianus was greatly afflicted, and soon after died.

A.D. 608. Boniface became pope, and sat in the, Roman
chair six years, eight months, and twenty-nine days. And the
same year, the blessed Augustine, first archbishop of Canter-
bury, died on the twenty-sixth day of May. He was succeeded
by Laurentius, who was a Roman by birth, and who he him-
self had ordained in his lifetime, in order that the church
in its tender state might not be in want of ashepherd. And he
was buried near the church of the Apostles Peter and Paul,
which had not yet been completed or dedicated; and in that
church the bodies of many archbishops are said to be buried.

A.D. 609. Boniface the Fifth succeeded to the Roman chair,
and occupied it six years, eight months, and twelve days; and
the see was vacant seven months and twenty-five days. And
Phocas the emperor, at his request, ordered that the Roman
church should from henceforth be the head and mistress of all
the churches. For up to this time the church of Constantinople
had been used to write itself the first of all the churches. The
same pope also procured from the same prince the temple at
Rome, which had been in ancient times called the Pantheon,
because in it the worship of all the (I will not say gods, but)
dzemons was celebrated. And when he had obtained this, he
expelled from it all the multitude of different images, and made
it a church of Almighty God and the Holy Virgin Mary, and
all the saints; so that in the same place where formerly the
worship of all the devils was celebrated, the memory of all the
saints should be preserved for the future.

A.D. 610. Ceulf, king of the West Saxons, died, and Cine-
gilf, the son of Ceola, reigned in his stead, and reigned thirty-
one years. At this time, Penda was king of Mercia, Redwald
king of the East Angles, Ethelbert king of Kent, Sebert
king of the East Saxons, and Ethelred, a proud man, and one

-eovetous of vain-glory, king of Northumberland.

A.D. 611. Pope Boniface, having convoked a synod in Italy,
in the month of March, on the third day of the month, or-
dained many things for the advantage of the church. And
there was present at this council Mellitus, bishop of London,

_who had been sent thither by Laurence, archbishop of Can-

284 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. Ghee

terbury, in order that on his return to Britain he might bring

back the decrees of the synod to the churches of the Angles,

and cause them to be observed on the authority of the chief pon-

tiff. The same year, John, archbishop of Alexandria, flourished,

who, on account of his eminent liberality to the,poor of Christ,

deserved to obtain the surname of the Alms-giver. And it

happened that a certain foreigner, beholding his excessive

compassion for the poor, wishing to tempt him, came to him

while he was visiting the sick according to his custom, and said

to him, “ Pity me, because I am poor anda prisoner.” And the

patriarch said to his steward, “ Give him six pieces of gold.”

Aud when the beggar had received: them, he changed his

dress, and coming again from another quarter, he fell at his
feet, saying, ‘‘ Have mercy upon me, because I am tormented
with hunger.”’ Again the patriarch said to his steward, ‘Give

him six pieces of gold.’ And when he had done s0, his
steward whispered in the ear of the patriarch, ‘ Master, he.
has now received twice to-day.” He came again a third time,
and asked alms; and the servant told his master that it was
the same man. And that merciful bishop said, “Give him
twelve pieces of gold, lest perchance he be Christ himself who

is come to tempt me.”

A.D. 612. Phocas the emperor, while he was raging with
cruelty against those of his own household, was put to death,
by command of Heraclius, the patrician of Africa, who, after
the death of Phocas, made himself master of the empire.

A.D. 613. Heraclius obtained the Roman empire, and reigned
thirty-one years. The same year, at Maurienne, a city of Gaul,
there was a certain woman too much devoted to the worship
of Saint John the Baptist. She, persevering in constant prayers,
in a prayer which she repeated for three years, entreated of
God that one of the limbs of the Baptist might be given to
her. And placing her hope in God, she made a vow not to
eat till what she was asking for was given toher. And accord-
ingly she fasted for seven days, and on the seventh day she
saw on the altar a thumb of wonderful whiteness, and joyfully
received the gift of God. And when three bishops who had
come to worship it tried to pull off a piece of this thumb, they
were astonished at seeing three drops of blood drop from it on
the cloth which was beneath it, and they were all delighted at
having deserved to become possessors of one of the drops.

A.D. 616. ETHELBERT, KING OF KENT, DIES. 285

A.D. 614. Godgave was elected pope, and occupied the
Roman chair for three years and twenty days, and the see was
vacant one month and six days. He made arule, that if any
men or women in any way received their sons from the sacred
fountain, they should be separated. And if any woman had
married her godfather, they should be separated, and that the
woman should receive back her dowry and might marry another
husband at the expiration of a year, if she pleased. The same
year, Kinigilf, king of the West Saxons, took Quichelin, his
son, to be partner in his kingdom.

a.D. 615. When Clodesvida of Mathe was fleeing from her
betrothed husband, a veil for her head was sent to her from
God, by an angel, and she dedicated herself and all her pos-
sessions to God.

A.D. 616. Ethelbert, king of Kent, after a temporal reign of
fifty-six years, distinguished by great glory, mounted up to the
eternal joys of the kingdom of heaven. He died twenty-one
years after he had received the faith, and was buried in the
porch of Saint Martin, within the church of the apostles Peter
and Paul, which he himself had founded. The same year that
Ethelbert died, his son Eadbald succeeded to the kingdom,
and was a great injury to the tender growth of the church ;
since he not only would not receive the faith of Christ, but
was polluted with such fornication, that he was mad enough
to marry his father’s wife. And this irregularity caused a
great storm, which was increased by the death of Sebert, king
of the East Saxons, who, seeking the eternal realms of heaven,
left three sons heirs of his temporal kingdom, who all remain-
ed pagans. And they soon began to become open slaves to
idolatry, which, while their father was alive, they appeared to
have somewhat interrupted, and they gave the nations which
were subject to them free license to worship idols. And when
they saw the pontiff, having first celebrated the solemnities of
the mass in the church, administer the eucharist to the people,
they, inflated with barbarous folly, said to him, ‘‘ Why do you
not give us the white bread which you used to give to our
father Sebert, and which, to this day, you do not cease to give
the people in church?” And Mellitus himself replied to
them, “If you are willing to be washed in the fountain of
‘salvation in which your father was washed, you may become
_ partakers of the holy bread, but if not, you cannot receive

the bread of life.’ And they answered, ‘If you will not

286 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 616.

assent to our requests in a case that is so easy, you shall not be
allowed to remain in our kingdom.” Accordingly Mellitus
was expelled, and came into Kent, intending to discuss with
Laurence and Justus, his brother bishops, as to what ought to
be done. And they determined, by their joint counsel, that it
would be better for them all to return to their own country, ©
and serve God with free minds, than to remain among rebels
to the faith without doing any good.

. Accordingly, Mellitus and Justus, in the first place, departed
into Gaul, intending there to await the result of the business.
But not long afterwards, the king, who had expelled the mes-
sengers of truth, went forth to battle against the people of the
Gewisei, and were all, in accordance with the divine judgment,
slain with their whole armies. But when Laurence, the arch-—
bishop, was about to follow Mellitus and Justus, and to abandon
Britain, the night before his departure he ordered a bed to be:
prepared for him in the church of the blessed apostles Peter
and Paul. And when, after having poured forth many prayers
and tears to God for the condition of the church, he had laid
down his limbs to rest there, and had fallen asleep, there
appeared to him the most blessed prince of the apostles, and —
scourged him for a long period in the secret silence of the |
night with a severe whip, and asked him, with apostolical —
severity, why he was forsaking the flock which he himself had
committed to him, or to what shepherd, now that he himself
was fleeing, he was entrusting the sheep of Christ who were
placed in the midst of wolves? ‘Are you,” said the vision,
“forgetful of my example, who, for the little ones of Christ
whom he recommended to me asa proof of his affection for me,
endured chains, and stripes, and imprisonment, and affliction,
and at last, even the death of the cross at the hands of infidels, ©
in order to be hereafter crowned with Christ?’ So Laurence,
the servant of Christ, being animated by the scourging and
simultaneous exhortation of the blessed Apostle, came at early
dawn to the king, and lifting up his garments, showed him
with what severe stripes he had been scourged. And the king
marvelled greatly, and asked who in his kingdom had dared
to inflict’such blows on so excellent aman. At length, when
he heard that it was for the sake of his safety that the bishop
had suffered such wounds and torments from the Apostle of
Christ, he feared greatly, and having anathematized all idola-

|
|
|
1

A.D. 618. COSDROA LAYS WASTE JERUSALEM. 287

trous worship, and renounced his illegal marriage, he received
the faith of Christ and was baptized; and endeavoured with
all his might, in all matters, to consult and favour the interests
of the church. And he himself, with all his nation, from the
time that he was converted to the Lord, studied to submit
himself to the laws of God. He also sent into Gaul and re-
called the bishops Mellitus and Justus, and desired them to
return fearlessly to their churches; and so, after seeing this
miracle, he returned to the unity of the church.

A.D. 617. The bishops Mellitus and Justus returned to
Britain, and were received with due honour by king Eadbald
and all his nation. The same year, Redwald, king of the
Hast Angles, provoked Ethelred, king of Northumberland, to
war. Therefore, the armies of these two monarchs met in
the district of the Jutes, on the eastern bank of the river which
is called the Idle. From which circumstance, the proverb
arose, which remains in force to the present day, ‘‘ The Idle
river was foul with Anglian blood.’ Therefore, Ethelred,
being fierce and indignant, and greatly marvelling that any
one should dare to fight with him, rushed boldly, but in no
kind of order, upon the enemy, although the army of Red-
wald, being arranged with great skill, caused no slight alarm
to those who beheld it. But the king of Northumberland, as
if he had found a prey, suddenly rushed upon the close
battalions and overthrew Reiner, the captain of the host of
Redwald, with all his army, and sent then in ‘haste to hell.
But Redwald, being not at all alarmed at the great slaughter,
but only animated to seek revenge, gloriously pierced the bat-
talions of Ethelred, and having shed a great deal of the blood
of the enemy, slew that haughty king. Then pursuing the
enemy, without any mercy, he routed all their army, and
utterly crushed them. In this battle the prowess of Edwin
was particularly eminent, who, having been expelled from that
kingdom, had lived in exile with Redwald for seventeen years.
Therefore, Edwin, the son of Ella, reigned over the two king-
doms of the Deiri and the Bernicians ; and afterwards becoming
a Christian, he reduced all the kings, both of the Angles and
of the Welch, to submission to him.

A.D. 618. Cosdroa, king of Persia, took Damascus, and
laid waste Jerusalem, and burnt all the sacred places in that

city, and took prisoners an immense multitude of the people,

288 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 621.

and slew ninety thousand of them, and expelled Zachariah, the
patriarch of the city, and carried off the precious wood of the
cross with him into Persia. But he was not permitted to
violate the sepulchre of the Lord, fenced round as it was with
divine virtue. About the same time, he occupied all Egypt,
and Alexandria, and Libya, and Carthage, in hopes by this
means to provoke Heraclius to battle; and Heraclius sent
messengers to him, requesting him to desist from his attempts ;
but he disdained to do so, and treated the ambassadors of the -
emperor with insult.

A.D. 619. Heraclius, the emperor, invested his son Con-
stantine with the kingly diadem, and gave him the title of
Augustus.

A.D. 620. Heraclius, the emperor, in the tenth year of his
reign, having collected a numerous army, marched against
Cosdroa, bearing with him the likeness of the Holy Mother
of God, which is at Byzantium, and which was painted not by
the hand of man, but bya divine miracle. And when he
had arrived on the borders of the city of Gozorem, Cosdroa
took to flight, and ravaged with fire all the lands which he
passed through, and then appointed a great many generals to
command his army, and to subdue Heraclius, while he him-
self kept fleeing from place to place, from the face of the em-
peror. But Heraclius, supported by the aid of the picture of
the Mother of God, slew all his enemies in battle, or else put
them to flight disgracefully, and at last, Cosdroa was taken
prisoner in his flight, and thrown into prison, and at last died
the death of wicked men. The emperor having gained the
victory, gave his soldiers rewards, such as were deserved by
their labours; and having reunited his forces a little, he brought
back to Jerusalem the wood of the cross of the Lord, giving
much thanks to God for so signal a triumph, and shedding
devout tears.

A.D. 621. Boniface the Sixth, pope of the Roman church,
was in the fourth year of his power, and he reigned five years
and fourteen days, and the see was vacant six months. About
the same time, Laurence, the second archbishop of Canterbury,
died, and was succeeded by Mellitus, bishop of London, who
occupied the archiepiscopal see five years. Mellitus was suc-
ceeded by Justus, who survived the same period of time.
After Mellitus, the church of London was vacant for many

4
A.D. 622. MAHOMET DELUDES CADIJAH. 289

years. But Justus was succeeded in the church of Rochester
by Romanus.

Cu. XI.—From a.p. 622 To A.p. 676.

The heresy of the Monothelites—The Saracens attack the
Roman Empire—Mahomet—His wife Cadijah—Pope Hono-
rius—King Edwin becomes a Christian—Heraclius becomes
a Monothelite—Cadwallan, king of Wales—Oswald, king
of Northumberland—Oswy—The heresy of the Monothelites
as condemned—King Louis violates the tomb of Saint Denis
—Cadwallan dies.

A.D. 622. Cyrus, bishop of Alexandria, and Sergius, patri-
arch of Constantinople, preached the heresy of the Monothelites.
About this time also, the Saracens, who are also called Turks,
under the leadership of Mahomet, a false prophet, went forth
from their own country, and began terribly to ravage the
empire of Heraclius. Now this Mahomet, the chief of the
Saracens and Arabs, was of the race of Ishmael, the son of
Abraham, who, having been in his early life a merchant, used
often to go with his camels into Egypt and Palestine, and have
intercourse with both Jews and Christians, from whom he
learnt both the Old and New Testament, but was only madea
most impious magician by them. And as he was travelling to
and fro, it happened that he entered the province of Corozonia,
of which Cadijah was said to be mistress. And as she was
admiring the various beautiful things which Mahomet had
brought with him, having obtained them by theft or pillage,
she began gradually to attach herself more intimately to him.
And after Mahomet had acquired a hold over her with his in-
cantations, he began cunningly to lead her by degrees into
error, saying that he himself was the Messiah, whom the Jews
were still expecting to come. And not only that powerful
woman was deluded into embracing this opinion, but all the
Jews, which his fanaticism reached, flocked to him in crowds,
together with the Saracens, influenced by the great novelty of the
event. And then he began to make new laws, and to deliver
them to these people, fortifying them with testimonies out of
both the Old and New Testament. These laws the Ishmaelites
call theirs, and claim him for their lawgiver.

And the woman, whom I have already spoken of, seeing
the man surrounded by an indiscriminate company of Jews
and Saracens, thought that a divine power was concealed in

VOL. I. : U

290 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 622,

him, and as she was a widow, she took him for her husband.
And in that way Mahomet obtained the principality of the
whole of that province. But at last, the Arabs who adhered
to him, began to attack the kingdom of Persia, and after that,
the territories of the Eastern Empire, and invaded Alexandria, —
in the reign of Heraclius.

After this, Mahomet began frequently to fall down in epilep-
tic fits, which Cadijah, his wife, seeing, was greatly grieved at
having married an unclean and epileptic man; and so he
wishing to pacify her, said, that the angel Gabriel was con-
versing with him, and that he, as being a carnal man, was
unable to support his brightness, and on that account, he as-
serted that it was that he had fallen down and fainted. And
so his wife, and all the Arabs and Ishmaelites, believed that
he received the laws from the mouth of the archangel,
which he afterwards gave them ; because the archangel Gabriel
is often sent to mankind. He used to preach that pleasures
and carnal delights were not to be preferred to future happi-
ness, though uncertain, and to live with glory was the highest
good. On which account, I imagine, that if he were alive at
the present day, he would find many disciples. At last, when
he had entangled such a number of men, as I have described, ©
in his heresy, one evening, when he was sitting in his palace
inebriated with strong wine, which had, however, been poisoned
by the touch of one of his companions, he knew that his ac-
customed sickness was coming upon him, and so went out in
haste, saying that he was invited to a conference with an angel,
and ordering that no one should follow him, lest he should be
unable to support the angelic brightness, which he himself
was unable to bear, and so should die. And he ascended a |
dunghill, that he might not hurt himself in falling, and im-
mediately fell down on the heap, and rolled about up and
down, gnashing his teeth and foaming. And a multitude of
pigs which were near, seeing this, ran up, and tearing him to
pieces, choked him. But his wife and family, hearing the
noise of the pigs, ran out in astonishment, and found the body
of their master for the most part devoured by the pigs. But
because he had predicted his resurrection within three days,
they carefully preserved his body ; but when thirty days had
passed, and he did not rise again, then his accomplices, that
they might not be convicted of falsehood, as they had often
in preaching borne testimony to him, buried his body, un-

A.D. 625. PAULINUS ORDAINED ARCHBISHOP OF yorK. 291

washed and half eaten, in a precious tomb; and collecting
what had been left by the pigs, they placed it with all honour
in a gold and silver chest, beautifully wrought, and related ©
that the angels of God would scarcely leave his body‘on earth,
and had carried off his soul with joy to the delights of heaven.

Moreover, he taught that those who kill their enemies, or
who are killed by their enemies, enter paradise ; and that there
isa choice refection of meat and drink, and a river flowing
with wine, milk, and honey; and a carnal commerce with
women, not such as exists at present, but of a different kind,
and abundant pleasure of all sorts. He appointed four go-
vernors in the kingdom of the Saracens, whom he called ad-
mirals, and he caused the book which contained his law to be
called the Protosymbolum. ,

The same year, Honorius became the sixty-eighth pope ; he
sat in the Roman chair twelve years, eleven months, and
seventeen days. And the see was vacant seven months and
eighteen days.

. A.D. 623. Saint Romanus, archbishop of Rouen, flourished,

in great eminence for sanctity and virtue. At the same time,
after the brothers Sexred and Siward Sigebert, surnamed the
Little, the son of Siward, reigned over the East Saxons; and
afterwards, by the just judgment of God, he and his brother
Sibert were slain by Kinegilf, king of the West Saxons, and
Quichelin, his son. For after the death of their father, they
returned to the worship of idols, and expelled Mellitus, bishop of
London. _ And now they were so completely destroyed, that
not an individual of their whole army escaped to tell of the
disaster.

A.D. 624. Redwald, king of the East Angles, died, and
Eorpenwald took the helm of the kingdom in his place, and,
having made a good beginning, finished with a glorious end.

A.D. 625. Paulinus was ordained archbishop of York by
archbishop Justus. And it happened that Edwin, king of
Northumberland, having sent ambassadors to woo her, asked
for Ethelburga, daughter of Ethelbert, the deceased king of
Kent, for his wife. But he received for answer from the
brother of the maiden, who was then king, that it was not
lawful to unite a Christian maiden to a pagan, lest the worship
of the true God should be profaned by commerce with an
unbeliever. And when his messengers brought back this an-
; U 2

292 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 626.

swer to king Edwin, he replied that if, after being investigated
by learned men, the religion of the damsel should be found
to be more holy and more worthy of God, he would not refuse
to receive it on the conditions before-mentioned. And ac-
cordingly, the damsel was immediately sent to him, and Pauli-
nus with her, that she might not be contaminated by intercourse
with pagans, and that he might strengthen her with daily
exhortations and the administration of the heavenly sacra-
ments. .

But when she arrived in Northumberland, the king granted
that all persons, whether men, women, or priests, who had
come with her, might observe their faith and the worship of
their religion in Christian fashion. And thus Paulinus came
with the virgin to king Edwin as a sort of companion in this
carnal union ; but his object was rather to strive with all the
energy of his mind to bring over the nation among which he
came, to a knowledge of the truth.

A.D. 626. Acertain assassin, named Eumerus, came (having
been sent by Quichelin, king of the West Saxons, who was
reigning as partner with his father Kinegilf) in order to kill
king Edwin. And he, pretending to have come on an embassy
from his master, rushed upon the king with a poisoned axe
near the river Derwent, intending at least to kill him with the
poison, if the axe failed. But a servant of the king, named
Lilla, seemg him, interposed himself to receive the wound,
and was pierced by it, and by the same blow the king was
slightly wounded. And aftera knight had been subsequently
slain, the assassin himself was slain with the sword, and en-
tirely cut to pieces. The king was much disturbed by the
occurrence, but a daughter whom his queen bore him the next
night somewhat mitigated his grief. And when the king had
given thanks to his gods, Paulinus reproved him, saying that
it was owing to his prayers that the queen had been delivered
without suffering. So the king, being delighted at his words,
promised to believe in the God of Paulinus if he would grant
him the victory over Quichelin, and as a pledge of the fulfil-
ment of his promise, he ordered his daughter to be baptized.
And she, being baptized with thirty of his family, was named
Eanfled. Then, having levied an army, the king marched
against Quichelin, and having declared war against all those
whom he had discovered in conspiring against his life, he
either slew them, or compelled them to surrender; and he

AcD. 627. REVELATION MADE TO PAULINUS. 293

slew Quichelin in the place which is called to this day, in the
language of the Angles, Quichelines haune, and in evidence
of his victory he gave the name to the place, and so returned
in triumph to his country.
A.D. 627. A certain revelation was made to archbishop
Paulinus by divine inspiration, as it is believed, which excited
king Edwin to believe in this manner. As Ethelred, who
reigned before him, had formerly persecuted him, he fled and
abode with Redwald, king of the East Angles ; but while there,
he ascertained, through some friend of his, that Redwald had
been bribed, by the presents of Ethelred, either to kill him
himself, or else to deliver him up to his enemy to be murdered.
On receiving this information, Edwin ‘answered his friend,
‘* Whither can I now fly, after having been for so many years
traversing all the territories of Britain, in hopes to avoid the
treachery of my enemies? If I must die, I had rather let
him kill me here, than fall by a meaner hand.” And as he
was lying on his bed the next night, tormented by mental
anguish in this manner, he saw a man utterly unknown to
him standing by him, and saying, ‘‘ What would you give to
the man who would release you from this misery, and persuade
king Redwald to love you ?’’ And when he replied, ‘‘ Every-
thing that is in my power,” the other continued, ‘“‘ What would
you give to any man who should promise you truly that you
should become a powerful king, having crushed your former
enemies ?’’ Edwin having made the same reply as before, he
proceeded, “‘ And if any one were to shew to youa better path
of life than any one of your ancestors enjoyed, would you be
guided by him?’”’ When Edwin had promised most firmly
that he would, then the other, placing his hands upon his head,
added, ‘‘ When then this token happens to you, remember this
‘time and this conversation.’’ And when he had said this, he
disappeared suddenly, that the king might understand that it
was not a man, but a spirit.
In the morning, the royal youth was sitting by himself, when
_ the friend of whom I have spoken before came to hin, and -
said, “‘ Arise and be cheerful, the king’s heart is changed to-
wards you. For by the advice of the queen, he has determined
to keep faith with you.” In short, Redwald, as has been
already related, declared war against king Ethelred, and restored
Edwin to his kingdom. And when Paulinus, being prompted
by the Holy Spirit, had brought this oracle to the king’s

294 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 632.

mind, he laid his hands upon him, and when the king was

going to throw himself at his feet, he raised him up, and ex-
horting him to embrace the faith, prevailed upon him. There-
fore, on the holy day of Easter, the king and many other
persons with him were baptized by Paulinus, in the church of
Saint Peter, which he himself had built of wood, and the idols
and their altars he utterly destroyed. After that, he erected an
episcopal see in the city of York for Paulinus, and built there
a church of stone, in which his children were baptized; with an
immense multitude of men, so that ina short time there was
no unbeliever found i the whole kingdom. i

A.D. 628. Archbishop Paulinus converted the province of
Lindsey, which is the district on the south bank of the river
Humber, to the Christian faith ; and first of all he baptized
Blecca, the governor of that province, with all his house. And
in that city he built a church, and consecrated Honorius as

-bishop of it. ;

A.D. 629. A battle took place between Penda, king of Mercia,
and Kinegilf, king of the West Saxons, at Cirencester. And after
a great slaughter on both sides, the two parties made a truce
and retreated.

A.D. 630. King Edwin, among the works of usefulness which
he did for his nation, conducted streams of clear water in brazen
pipes along the sides of the roads, for the refreshment of tra-
vellers. He ordered standards to be borne before him; and
brought all Britain into such a state of peace in his time, that a
woman loaded with gold, with a little child, might have gone
about unhurt wherever she pleased. This year, archbishop
Justus died, and was succeeded by Honorius.

A.D. 631. Sergius, the patriarch of Constantinople, and
Cyrus, the bishop of Alexandria, fell into the heresy of the
Monothelites, who asserted that there was but one operation in
Christ, and so disturbed the church of believers. On which
account the emperor, who favoured them, incurred the hatred
of all his subjects, and was attacked on all sides by all his
neighbours, and he, who had been used to conquer everybody,
was now conquered by everybody, by the permission of divine
justice.

A.D. 632. Eorpenwald, king of the East Angles, in conse-
quence of the exhortations of king Edwin, received the faith
of Christ. But after he and all his family had believed, and
been baptized by bishop Felix, he did not live long, being slain

A.D. 633. - QUARREL BETWEEN EDWIN AND CADWALLAN. 295

by a Gentile of the name of Regbert. After this event, the
province continued in error for three years. But Felix, the
bishop above-mentioned, was a Burgundian by birth, and had
been sent into that province to preach by Honorius, archbishop
of Canterbury ; and he was made bishop of the city of Dommoc,
where he discharged his pontifical duties for seventeen years,
till he ended his life in peace.
A.D. 633. A quarrel broke out between king Edwin and
Cadwallan, king of the Britons. They met in battle, and an
engagement took place, in which Cadwallan lost many thou-
sands of his troops, and was put to flight. So Edwin, having
gained the victory, led his army through the provinces of the
Britons, and in three of their kingdoms, namely, Demecia,
Venedocia, and Menevia, he-burnt the cities and slew the in-
habitants, and reduced all the provinces to submit to him.
But Cadwallan, who had fled into Ireland, having recruited his
forces, was always endeavouring to return to his country, but
was unable to do so, because whenever he arrived in any har-
bour and began to land, Edwin came to meet him, and pre-
vented him from doing so. For Edwin had a certain astrologer,
by name Pellitus, who showed him everything that was being
done. But Cadwallan becoming desperate, went into Brittany
to king Solomon, and was received by him with due respect.
And when Solomon had learnt the cause of his coming to
him, he promised him assistance and advice. Then Cadwallan
gave him a full account of the-astrologer of Edwin, and Solo-
mon advised him to send some wary and bold man in a foreign
disguise to endeavour to kill that magician. And the advice
seemed good to Cadwallan, and immediately he entrusted this
business to his nephew, by name Brian. And he, obeying the
orders of his master, hastened to fulfil them. And so, putting
on the dress of a foreigner, he made an iron staff, very sharp,
and fastened a wallet to his left side, and, coming to Britain,
hastened towards York, where he knew that Edwin was.
When, therefore, he entered the city, he associated with the
poor who were waiting for alms at the king’s gate. And as he
went to and fro, his sister came out from the palace having a
pitcher in her hand, in which to fetch water for the queen’s
use. For Edwin had carried her off in the city of Worcester,
when he was raging through the provinces of the Britons after
the flight of Cadwallan. And she, recognising her brother
among the poor men, was afraid lest he might be recognised

296 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 634..

by some of the enemy, and taken prisoner. And, therefore,
in a few words, she made known to her brother the state of.
the court, and told him how to know the magician whom he
was seeking, who at that very moment, as it happened, was
walking among the beggars. And Brian, recognising his
sister, desired her to come out secretly to him the next night,
‘to an old temple outside the city, where he would wait for her.
arrival. Then, returning to the poor men, he came to the
place where Pellitus was arranging them, and immediately he
lifted up his staff and thrust it in the breast of the magician,
and killed him. And then, throwing the staff down on the
ground, he concealed himself in the crowd, and, without being
suspected by any of the bystanders, he arrived at the secret
place which he had agreed upon with his sister. But she,
though she desired to come out to him secretly by night, was
not able to doso. For the whole court was in confusion because
of the death of Pellitus, on which account the king ordered
sentinels to be placed round the palace. But Brian, pene-
trating through the thick woods, came to Exeter, where he
assembled the Britons, and related what he had done. And
they fortified that city, and joyfully awaited the arrival of Cad-
wallan. And when the news became known throughout Britain,
Penda, king of Mercia, came to Exeter, with a great multitude
of Saxons, and blockaded Brian.

A.D. 634. When Cadwallan, king of the Britons, had learnt
what had happened to Pellitus; he landed in the island with
ten thousand soldiers, and marched rapidly to Exeter ; and in
a battle which took place, Penda, who was not prepared for
such a vigorous attack as was made upon him, was at once
taken prisoner, and his army routed. And, as he had no other
way of procuring his liberty, he swore fidelity to Cadwallan,
and gave hostages for his allegiance; and Cadwallan having,
in concert with the king of Mercia, convoked the Britons, went:
to Northumberland, and began to ravage the territories of king
Edwin. And when news of this fact was'brought to Edwin,
who was in the place called Heethfely, he went to meet him,
and fought a battle with the Britons. And Edwin himself was
killed, and his army cruelly defeated. And Edwin was slain,
and his son Offrid and Godbald, king of the Orkneys, on the
eleventh day of October. And Edwin’s head was brought to
York and buried in the church of the blessed Peter, which he
himself had founded. And a great slaughter took place in

A.D. 635. OSWALD, KING OF NORTHUMBERLAND. 297

the church and throughout all the nation of the Northumbrians.
Since Penda, king of Mercia, was devoted to idols and utterly
ignorant of the name of Christ, so that he spared no one, but
considered all the faithful of Christ public enemies. And Cad-

alan, though he had the name and profession of a Christian,
was so barbarous, that he spared neither the female sex nor
the innocent age of little children, but with the savageness
of a wild beast, inflicted death by torture upon all. And
traversing those provinces furiously for a long time, he en-
deavoured to get rid of the whole race of Angles from the
British territories. Therefore, as the churches of Northumber-
land were all in confusion, Paulinus, the archbishop, taking
with him queen Ethelburga, returned back by sea into Kent,
and was received with due respect by Honorius, the archbishop,
and king Eadwald. And he had with Affica and Eanfleda,
the son and daughter of Edwin, and Iffus, the son of Osred
his son, and many precious vessels belonging to the king, and
alarge golden cross, and a golden goblet, all which things
were preserved in the church at Canterbury, and shown for a
long time after. And at that time, as the church at Rochester
had no pastor, Paulinus took the care of it upon himself,
on the invitation of the pontiff Honorius and king Eadwald,
and continued in that office till he went above to the kingdom
of heaven. And when he died, he left in that city the pallium
which he had received from the Roman pontiff.

When Edwin died, he was succeeded in the kingdom of
the Deiri by Osric, his kinsman, and the kingdom of the Ber-
nicians fell to the lot of Eanfrid, son of king Ethelred. These
young men, in the time of king Edwin, lived in banishment
among the Scots and Picts, and were baptized there; but as
soon as they became kings, they turned to the worship of idols.
But in a very short time, Cadwallan, king of the Britons, slew
both the youths; dnd first of all, he made a sudden attack
upon Osric, and slew him, when he had rashly thrown him-
self into a town. And afterwards, when he had for an entire
year been devastating the provinces of Northumberland with
terrific slaughter, he treated Eanfrid in a similar manner, when
he came to him incautiously with only twelve soldiers, with the
view of obtaining peace.

A.D. 635. Oswald succeeded to the entire kingdom of Nor-
thumberland, and held it nine years. And soon afterwards,
in order to increase the spread of the faith in his kingdom, he

298 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 635.

sent into Scotland, where he had been in banishment, and in-
vited over Ardan, the pontiff, a man of great piety. And when
the bishop came, Oswald erected an episcopal see for him in
the island of Lindisfarne. When, therefore, the faith began to
extend itself, it happened that as Aidan, who was preaching
the gospel, had not a perfect knowledge of the English
language, the king himself served as his interpreter to his
generals and servants. For during the long period of his exile,
he had thoroughly learnt the language of the Scots, and owing ~
to this, it happened that in a short time the faith spread so
widely, that there was not a single unbeliever to be found in
all that district. But Oswald was the son of king Ethelred,
the brother of Eanfrid, on which account he succeeded to

both the kingdoms, and reigned over them gloriously.

In this year also, Penda, king of Mercia, was sent by Cad-
wallen, king of the Britons, with a large army, into Northum- —
berland, for the purpose of killing king Oswald. But Oswald,
being attacked by Penda in the place which is called Hefenz
filv, that is to say, the Heavenly Plain, raised up with his
hands the sign of the life-giving cross, and, fixing it in a hole, —
steadied it with turves, and ordered all his comrades to cry out
to God in these words with their loudest voice, ‘Let us all kneel
to God, and let us all together pray to him to defend us from
the army of the proud king of Britain, and his wicked general,
Penda; for He knows that we are engaged in war for the
just protection of our nation.” All therefore did as he com-
manded, and in this manner they advanced against the enemy,
and, as their faith deserved, gained the victory ; and the place
in which the king erected the cross is to this day accounted
to be endowed with miraculous power, and is held in great.
reverence.

In the same year, by command of pope Honorius, Birinus
came into the country of the West Saxons, and was ordained
bishop by Asterius, pontiff of Geuua, that he might preach
the grace of faith to that people; and, as he preached the
Gospel in that country, Kinigilf, the king of that province,
believed, and was baptized with all his nation. It happened
at that time that king Oswald was present, and received him
as he came up from the font, and Oswald was about to take his »
daughter to wife. Accordingly, both the kings gave the city
of Dorchester to be an episcopal see, and, when they had

A.D. 640. THEODORUS ELECTED POPE. 299

built and dedicated churches, Birinus laboured to bring the
seeds of Divine worship to bear fruit in them.

A.D. 636. Sigebert, a most Christian man in every respect,
and one of great learning, succeeded to the kingdom of the East
Angles. He, while his brother Eorpenwald was still alive, had
tbe sacraments of the faith administered to him while he was
in exile in Gaul. And, as soon as he began to reign, he
laboured to make his whole nation a partaker of them, and
established schools of learning in various places, in order that
the uncivilised inhabitants might become acquainted with the
charms of literature. At last, he renounced the world, and
became a ‘monk, leaving the throne of his kingdom to his

kinsman Egric.

A.D. 637. Severinus was appointed to the chair of Rome,
and filled it two years, four months, and twenty-nine days,
About the same time, Audéenus, the referendary of Dagobert,
the king, flourished in Gaul, and he was called by this title,
because all public documents were brought back (referesantur)
to him to be confirmed by the ring or seal of the king.

A.D. 638. Saint Laudo flourished, who was the master, from
his childhood, of Lambert, afterwards bishop and sia dee and
so led him into the way of truth.

A.D. 639. John became pope, and filled the Rtn chair
one year, eight months, and nineteen days; and the see was
vacant a month and thirteen days.

4.D. 640. Theodorus was elected as the successor of John,
and filled the Roman chair six years, five months, and eight
days ; and the see was vacant fifty-two days. The same year,
Eadbald, king of Kent, at last departed this life, and left two
sons, Ermenred and Erconbert, heirs of his temporal king-
dom, but the younger one, Erconbert, cunningly supplanted
his brother in the kingdom, and deprived him of it. And
then usurping it himself, he reigned gloriously for twenty-four
years and some months, for he was the first of all the kings of
England who ordered the idols to be destroyed throughout his
whole kingdom, and a fast of forty days to be observed. And
that his orders might not be easily despised by any one, he
ordered condign punishment to be inflicted on all transgressors.

-And he had a queen named Sexburga, daughter of Anna, queen
of the East Angles, by whom he hada son and daughter,
named Egbert and Ercongoda. Likewise, in process of time,
._ there were born to Ermenred the sons Ethelbert and Ethel-
red, of whom we shall speak at the proper time. But the

300 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 644,

before-mentioned Ercongoda took the habit of a nun in the
Briglensian monastery of the French, and serving God, there lived
as a virgin of great virtue. For at that time; as there were
not yet many monasteries in the kingdom of England, many
of the Britons went to the monasteries of Gaul for the sake of
a monastic life. And the inhabitants of that district relate
many works of virtue, and many miraculous signs wrought by
this virgin, after she was thus dedicated to God. But it will
be enough for us to give that account of her departure only,
when she took her way to the kingdom of heaven. Accordingly,
when the day of her call was at hand, she saw a band of men
in white garments enter her monastery, and when she asked
them what they were looking for, or what they wanted, it is
said that they replied, that they had been sent thither to bring
away with them a golden coin, which had arrived there from
Kent. And that very night, as it was drawing to a close,
that is to say, at the beginning of morning, she passed from
the darkness of this present world, and departed to the light
that is above. And many of the brethren of that monastery
who were in other houses, declared that they had heard the
voices of angels singing, and as they presently went out, wishing
to know what was the matter, they saw a very great light
shining from heaven, which was conducting that holy soul,
released from the bonds of the flesh, to the eternal joys of the
heavenly country.

A.D. 641. Heraclius Augustus died, and after his death, Herac-
lius Constantine, his son, became emperor, and reigned four
months ; and they were hardly expired, when he was poisoned
by his step-mother Martina.

A.D. 642. Heraclonas, the son of Heraclius, succeeded to
the empire, with his mother Martina, and reigned six months.
And at the end of this time they were driven out by the senate,
on account of the poison which they had administered to Herac-
lius; and Martina had her tongue cut out, and Heraclonas his
nose cut off, and in this condition they were sent to Constans,
the son of the younger Heraclius.

A.D. 643. Kinigilf, king of the West Saxons, departed this
life, after he had reigned thirty-two years, and Kiniwale, his
son, became king in his stead, and reigned thirty-one years.

A.D. 644, When Saint Oswald had reduced all the nations
of Britain, namely, the Angles and Scots, and Picts and Britons,
to submit to his power, nevertheless he always preserved his

“A.D. 644, CONSTANS EMPEROR OF ROME. 301

‘former humility, showing himself affable to strangers, a father
to the poor, terrible to the rich, and observing justice in all
things. When, on the sacred day of Easter, he was sitting at
dinner with bishop Aidan, and a silver dish was set before
him, laden with royal delicacies, and he was on the point of
putting out his hand to bless the bread, on a sudden, the ser-
vant came in to whom the charge of ministering to the poor
was committed, and told the king that there was a multitude
of poor people approaching, who were sitting everywhere about
the streets, entreating alms from the king. And he immediately
ordered the food that was set before him to be carried down
to them, and the dish to be broken into small pieces, and to be
distributed among them ; and Aidan, being delighted at this act
of royal piety, seized his right hand, and said, ‘This hand
shall never decay.’’ And so it happened ; for as in the battle
in which he was slain, that hand and arm were cut off, it is
the fact, that to this day that hand remains uncorrupted, and
being enclosed in a silver gilt chest, is preserved with his arm
in the royal city which is called Burgum, in the church of the
blessed Peter, and is devoutly worshipped by the people. He
was the nephew of king Edwin by his sister Accha, a worthy
heir of the religion and dominions of such a predecessor. But
his enemy envied his goodness, while the heart of Cadwallon
excited him to slay him. And so, in the thirty-eighth year of
his age, on the fifth day of the month of August, and in the
ninth year of his reign, he was slain in a terrible battle, which
was fought by Penda, king of Mercia, in an unfavourable
place, which is called in the language of the Angles {ilavel-
tel, in which place, where he, fighting for his country, re-
ceived the crown of martyrdom, to this day, the cure of sick
persons has never ceased.

The same year, Kiniwale founded an episcopal see at Win-
chester, in which Hedda was the first pontiff of the Angles.
For, after Birinus, bishop of Dorchester, departed to be with
Christ, and had been buried in his own church, when in pro-
_-cess of time that city was subdued by the kings of Mercia, the
see was transferred to Winchester, but the body of the blessed
Birinus was transferred to the same place by the bishop I have
named, and honourably buried in the church of the first see.

The same year, Constans, the son of Heraclius Constantinus,
became master of the Roman empire, and reigned twenty-six
years. He also fell into the heresy of the Monothelites, as

302 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 647.

his grandfather, Heraclius Augustus, had done. And the
Monothelites assert that there is but one nature in Christ,
contrary to the orthodox faith. For the Son of God says of
the divinity of his essence, ‘‘ I and the Father are one ;” and,
speaking of the substance of his humanity, he says—‘‘ The
Father is greater than I;’’ but we will discuss these matters
more at length hereafter.

A.D. 645. Oswald was succeeded in the kingdom of the
Bernicians by Oswy, his brother, who reigned with great
trouble for twenty-eight years; during whose reign, Oswin,
the son of King Osric, succeeded to the kingdom of the Deiri,
and reigned seven years. He, when firmly fixed in his king-
dom, made himself beloved by all men; for he was of an
angelic aspect, tall in stature, pleasant in disposition, polite in
his manners, liberal in giving, temperate at table, chaste in his
bed, elegant in his habits, and though raised to the highest
summit of kingly power, he studied to retain humility, which
is called the guardian of all virtue. And, accordingly, he
was reverenced by the great as their master, and beloved by
the lowly as their companion, so that all men were delighted
to live under his power. The same year, Godgave succeeded
Honorius, as archbishop of Canterbury. The same year,
Penda, king of Mercia, attacked in war Kiniwale, king of the
West Saxons, because he had repudiated his sister, and de-
prived him of his kingdom. The same year, Lewis succeeded
to the kingdom of France, and reigned seventeen years, while
Sigibert, his brother, was reigning in Austria.

A.D. 646. Kiniwale, king of the West Saxons, having re-
covered his kingdom, gave many houses to Cuthred, his
kinsman, the son of Quichelin. The same year, the holy
Paulinus, bishop of Rochester, changed this temporal life for
an eternal one, of whose sanctity Beda tells many laudatory
stories.

A.D. 647. Saint Furseus flourished in great eminence in
Italy. He having undertaken a journey for the sake of Christ,
went as far as the Gauls, and having been honourably received
by king Lewis, he founded the Latiniac monastery. And not
long afterwards, his brothers, Foillanus and Ulcanus, made a
similar vow of travelling, and followed him, and were ve
celebrated in Gaul. Of whom, Foillanus, out of the liberality
of the virgin Gertrude, founded the Fossian monastery, in
which he also reposes, after having received the crown of mar-

A.D. 650. FELIX, BISHOP OF THE EAST ANGLES, DIES. 303

tyrdom. The same year, Ithamarus succeeded Paulinus, bishop
of Rochester, in the government of that church.

A.D. 648. Martin was elected to the chair of Rome, and
occupied it six years, one month, and twenty-six days, and the
see was vacant twenty-eight days.

A.D. 649. King Oswy, as he was often visiting Sigebert,
king of the East Saxons, in the province of Northumberland,
exhorted him to embrace the faith of Christ. And at length,
as the consent of the king’s friends aided his exhortations,
Sigebert was baptized by Bishop Finan. Being, therefore,
now made a citizen of the eternal kingdom, on his return to
his dominions, he begged of king Oswy to give him some
teachers to convert his nation to the faith. And he sending
into the province of the Middle Angles, invited the man of
God, Cedda, to come to him, and having given him a certain
presbyter for his companion, he sent them among the East
Saxons, to preach the word of faith to them. And when they,
having traversed the whole country, had collected a numerous
church to God, it happened that Cedda returned home to have
a conference with bishop Finan. And when Finan heard how
the word of the Gospel had prospered, he appointed Cedda
bishop over the before-mentioned nation; and he, when he
had received the bishopric, returned to the province of the
East Saxons, where he built churches in various places, and
ordained priests and deacons. And they, having began the
administration of baptism in the cities which are called Ithan-
cester and Tileburgh, the first of which is on the banks of
the river Pentas, and the second on the banks of the river
Thames, fulfilled their duties properly. And not long after-
wards the king was slain by his own relations, because he was
in the habit of sparing his enemies, and because he bore a
gentle mind, and pardoned those who repented for injuries

which they had inflicted on him. But Sigebert was succeeded
in the kingdom of the East Saxons by Suithelin, the son of
Sexbald, who was baptized by bishop Cedda, in the province
of the East Angles, in the royal town, which is called Rendle-
sham. And Ethelwald, king of that nation, and brother of
Anna, their queen, was his godfather at the font.

A.D. 650. Egelbert succeeded Birinus, the first bishop of
Dorchester in that see. This year also Felix died, who had
been bishop of the East Angles for sixteen years, and Honorius
_ appointed Thomas his deacon, of the province of the Girvii,

304; MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 651.

to be bishop in his stead ; and when he died, five years after, —
Boniface succeeded in his room. The same year, Peada was
raised by his father Penda to the kingdom of Mercia, and
being in all respects worthy of the name of king, he came to
Oswy, king of Northumberland, and begged of him that he
would give him his daughter Effleda, to be his wife; but he
could not obtain that, unless he, and all the nation which he
governed, received the faith of Christ. He, therefore, having
heard the preaching of the truth, and the promises of the
kingdom of heaven, and being persuaded by Alfred, his friend,
the son of Oswy, whose sister, by name Kiniburga, was his
wife, was baptized by bishop Finan, with the whole of his
family, in the royal town, which is called Atwall. And having
received four priests, with a view to the conversion of his na-
tion to the faith, he returned with joy to his own land; and
these priests coming into that province, preached the word of
God, and the great body of the nation submitting themselves
to them, renounced the foulness of idolatry, and were regene-—
rated in the fountain of the faith. Nor did Penda, though he
was a most atrocious Pagan, forbid the word of God to be
preached in his nation, that is to say, in the nation of the
Mercians, saying that those men were wretched and contempti-
ble who refused to obey the God in whom they believed.

A.D. 651. After causes of dissension had arisen between the
kings of the Deiri and of the Bernicians, namely, between
Oswy and Oswin, they each collected as numerous an army as
they could for battle; but just as they were on the point of en-
gaging in the place which is called WHilfares¥une, Oswin,
seeing that his forces were unequal to those of his enemy,
sent back the army which he commanded, and ordered them
all to return home, and went to lodge himself with a single
soldier, named T'onherus, in the house of a Count Hunwald,
whom he belived to be very friendly to him; but he turned
out very different, for he was betrayed by this same count, and
so Oswy sent his general, named Ethelwin, to put the king to
death. And when Oswin heard of his approach, he immedi-
ately went forth to meet the swords of the wicked, and the
victors rushing upon him, slew him, with his soldiers, in the
place which is called Jugetlingen, by a most detestable death.
And so Oswin followed the example of his Saviour, for he too,
when he was on his road to his passion, and the Jews were de-
manding that he should be crucified himself, asked them

A.D. 651. CONDUCT OF THE MARTYR OSWIN. 305

whom they were seeking, and when they answered that they
were seeking Jesus of Nazareth, he said, ‘If ye seek me, let
these go their way,” meaning his disciples, for he alone was
sufficient for the redemption of the world. Animated then
by his example, as I have already said, Oswin, the glorious
martyr of God, after he had been betrayed by his friend, as
our Saviour had been by his disciple, offered himself to death
for his country and his nation, calling to mind the sentence
of our Saviour, in which he says—“ Greater love than this
hath no man, than to lay down his life for his friends.” On
which account there is no doubt that a virtuous life preceded
such a death, especially as no one can suddenly become per-
fect. But Oswin had been, as has been said above, from his
earliest years, a most sincere worshipper of the Christian
religion, and tall in stature, active in virtue, angelic in coun-
tenance, polite in manners, great in council, pleasant in dis-
position, liberal in giving, temperate at table, continent in bed,
affable to all men, very experienced and very pious, and so
impartial between poor and rich, that the poor looked upon
him as an equal, and the rich as their master and superior.
Owing to which, it happened that, on account of the amiability
of his royal disposition, all men flocked to him and loved him,
so that those who had been educated in the royal manner ap-
peared in the eyes of all men more learned than their fellows.

But we must not pass over his humility, which is called the
guardian of all virtue, because he has left a most complete ex-
ample of it to all future ages. For he had given to bishop
Aidan a valuable and most excellent horse, which he, though
he was ordinarily accustomed to journey on foot, made use of
either to cross the streams of rivers, or whenever necessity
compelled him to quicken his steps. And not long afterwards,
when a poor man met the bishop, and asked alms of him, he
jumped down and ordered the horse, all royally equipped as he
was, to be given to the poor man. And Aidan took great care
of the poor, and was, as it were, the father of the wretched.
And when. this was told to the king, he said to the bishop,
_ “Why, my master, did you prefer to give that royal horse,
which you ought to have kept for your own, toa poor man?
Had we not other horses of less value, or other gifts which
might have sufficed for a poor man, without your giving him
a horse which I selected especially for yourown?” But the
bishop replied, ‘‘ What are you saying, O king? which is

vou. I. =

306 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 652.

dearer to you, that son of a horse, or the Son of God?’ Then
the king, suddenly repenting of the expression which he ut-
tered, immediately rose up, and fell at the feet of the bishop,
entreating him to pardon his offence, on condition of his
giving as much as ever Aidan should enjoin of his substance
to the sons of God. And the bishop seeing this, immediately
rose up from his seat and raised him up, promising that he
would entirely pardon him, provided he would come to himself
again, and lay aside his sorrow. And when, at the bidding of
the bishop, the king resumed his spirits, the Pontiff was greatly
grieved, and shedding tears abundantly, said to his servants,
in his native language, ‘‘ Have I ever seen before so humble a
king? This land is not worthy to have sucharuler.”’ Lastly,
he was so eminent for the love of God and his neighbour, and
so loving to his neighbour in the love of God, that he was
willing to shed his own blood for his nation, and, what is more,
even while sparing the blood of others. Being then entirely
fenced round with such numerous and great virtues, he was a
victim worthy of God, and hastened to his martyrdom.

And this most blessed king and martyr, Oswin, suffered on
the nineteenth of August, in the ninth year of his reign, in
the place which is called Sugetlingum, and his body was
brought to the church of the mother of God, which is at the
mouth of the river Tyne, situated on its north bank, and was
buried in the open air. For the people in those parts were
ignorant and uncivilized, and so the body of the martyr was
enclosed in a stone sarcophagus, and buried in the deep bosom
of the earth, being hereafter brought to the light by the grace
of God. And Oidwald, the son of king Oswald, whom queen
Kanfleda, daughter of king Edwin, bore to him, succeeded him
in the kingdom of Deira. But when twelve days had elapsed
after the death of Oswin, bishop Aidan was also taken from
this life, and received from God the everlasting reward of his
labours. He was succeeded in the bishopric of Lindisfarne
by Finan, who was a Scot by birth, but he continued only a
short time in his bishopric.

A.D. 652. Hgric, king of the East Angles, having been at-
tacked in the war by Penda, king of Mercia, as he saw that
he was inferior to the enemy, asked his predecessor, Sigebert,
the monk of whom we have spoken before, to come in the
war with him to encourage his army. But as he was unwilling,
and refused, they dragged him, against his will, out of the

A.D. 654. ETHELBERT AND ETHELRED ARE VILIFIED. 307

monastery to the battle, hoping that the soldiers would never
think of flight in the presence of a king who had formerly
been a most gallant man, and of great experience in military
affairs. But he, not being unmindful of his profession, and
that it was not lawful for him to fight, was slain, together with
king Egric, and their whole army was put to the sword and

“routed. He was succeeded by Annas, the son of Enus, of the

royal family, a most excellent man, of whom we shall speak
in subsequent pages.

A.D. 653. Pope Martin held a council at Rome of a hundred
and fifty bishops, where he condemned the heresy of the
Monothelites and its follower, Paul, the pretended patriarch of
Constantinople. And when this was known, Constans Augus-
tus summoned pope Martin to Constantinople, and from
thence banished him to the Chersonesus. He also condemned
many of the orthodox with scourgings and banishment, because
they would by no means acquiesce in his heresy. The same
year, Godgave succeeded Honorius, as archbishop at Can-
terbury.

A.D. 654. Penda, king of Mercia,

“ Gave his whole soul to arms and brook’d no path
That was not red with blood,”

attacked Annas, king of the East Angles, a most pious man,
and in a moment crushed him and his whole army ; and Annas
was succeeded in his kingdom by his brother Ethelbert. The
same year, Erconpert, king of Kent, died, and was succeeded
in his kingdom by his son Egbert, who reigned nine years.
He had brought up in his palace the two sons of Ermenred,
his uncle, by name Ethelbert and Ethelred, who, after receiving
the regeneration of holy baptism, remained in innocence and
voluntary chastity, and protected the honesty of their morals
by the guardianship of humility. But there was in the house-
hold of the before-mentioned king, a certain servant, a limb of
the Devil, by name, Thunder (which answers to the Latin
Tonitru), and he envying the laudable progress of the boys,

began by sedulous flattery and incessant diligence to blacken

their innocence to the king. ‘I see,’’ said he, ‘that you,
O king, are carefully breeding up those who some day or other

will endeavour to deprive you of your kingdom. On which

account, I should think it a useful thing for you, that they

. should either be sent into distant banishment, or else that you

2.

308 : MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 654.

should allow them to be given to me to put to death.”” And
as the king dissembled his feelings, and this man was con-
tinually instigating him to sanction the deed, and the king
forbade it in such a lukewarm manner, at last Thunder came
to such a pitch of audacious rashness, that he determined on
the destruction of these innocent persons. In short, the
whirlwind, named Thunder, is armed with diabolical fury, and
in the absence of the king, he basely murdered the before-
mentioned innocents, and shamefully buried the bodies of
these holy youths in the royal palace, under the king’s chair.
When the king returned, the night was very stormy, and a
column of light, sent forth from heaven, filled the royal palace
with inconceivable brightness. And the servants of the king’s
household beholding this, fell in terror to the earth, and were
almost driven to madness. And when the king waked at the
noise made by the guards, and was ignorant of the cause of
the uproar, he got up, according to his custom, to hear ma-
tins. And having gone forth from his palace, he saw an orb
of unusual splendour, shining with rays. And the king re-
collected the conversation which he had had with that minister
of wickedness on the subject of murdering the boys, and was
greatly grieved ; and having summoned to his presence the
author of the wickedness, he asked him where his kinsmen
were, who were accustomed to stand in his presence every day,
and whom he had not seen the day before? And he, like
Cain, answered the king, “I know not; am I the children’s
keeper?’ But the king said to him, “ Thou wicked servant,
you always foretold to me evil things concerning them, there-
fore, thou wretch, you must tell me where they are;’’ and
when that wicked man, full of haughty pride, had told the king
what had happened, he was greatly enraged. But when he
recovered himself, he took all the blame of the crime on him-
self, and, being immoderately agitated, passed the whole night
in tears. At last, when the day dawned, he ordered Adeoda-
tus, the archbishop, and what nobles he could assemble, to be
summoned, and related to them the whole matter from be-
ginning to end, and how the pillar of light had been sent from
heaven, and had descended on the bodies of these holy youths.
The archbishop advised that the bodies of the innocent victims
should be carried to the metropolitan church, and there be
buried in royal fashion. And as soon as they came to the
place, they found the holy remains indecorously placed under

4

A.D. 655. PENDA INVADES NORTHUMBERLAND. 309

the king’s chair: but all these things were done in a royal
village, which was called Eastree.

When, therefore, the remains of these holy youths had been
collected, to be carried away on biers, the archbishop ordered
that they should be carried to Christ’s Church, in Canterbury ;
but in vain, for they could not be moved, although they strove
with all their efforts to doso. Therefore, he changed his in-
tention, and ordered them to be carried to the church of Saint
Augustine; but still they could do nothing in the way of moving
them. At last it was arranged that they should be carried to
that most celebrated monastery at Wearin; and when this design
was adopted, then they lifted the biers with as little difficulty
as if they had no burden at all on them. And when they
came to the monastery, the funeral solemnities were duly per-
formed by the archbishop, and they buried the bodies of the
holy youths near the high altar; and in that place, by the
divine mercy, many wonderful miracles are wrought to the
praise of God, and to the glory of these youths.

It happened, at this time, that Ermenburga, the sister of
the king, having repudiated her husband, the son of Penda,
king of Mercia, with his own consent, determined to lead a
chaste life. And when she, with her family, had come to her
brother, and had intimated her design to him, he gave her the
place indicated as that of the before-mentioned vision, when,
having built a monastery in honour of the martyrs, Ermen-
burga, beloved of God, offered up to God, in union with the
nuns who were associated with her, the fruit of good conver-
sation, and at last rested in the Lord. At this time, also,
Botolph built a church at Hiccanhoe.

A.D. 655. Penda, king of Mercia, at the instigation of Cad-
wallon, king of the Britons, invaded Northumberland with an
immense army which he had collected. But Oswy, being
compelled by necessity, promised him many presents and
royal ornaments, in order to induce him to abandon his war-
like designs, and return amicably to his own land. But when
he could be prevailed on neither by bribes or prayers, the king
fled to divine aid, to be delivered from the impiety of the bar-
barian ; and, binding himself by a vow, said—“ If that pagan
refuses to receive our gifts, we will offer them to the Lord our
God, who knows how to accept them.’ Therefore, he vowed
that if he were victorious, he would dedicate his daughter to
the Lord in sacred virginity, and would also give twelve farms

310 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 656.

for the erection of monasteries. And then, accompanied by
a small army, he gave battle to the pagans, who are reported to
have had thirty times as numerous an army as himself, for he
had thirty generals fully appointed for war; but Oswy alone,
with his'son Elfrid, under the leadership of Christ, met them,
put them to flight, pursued them, and slew them. Among
others, the wicked king, Penda, fell, who had deprived so
many noble men of their temporal life. And king Ethelher,
brother of king Annas, whom we have already mentioned, and
who was the instigator of the war, fell too, as he would not
survive the loss of all his army; and because the battle took
place near the river, which is called the Winwed, and which,
at that time, in consequence of the excessive rains, had broken
all its bounds, it happened that the water killed more in their
flight than the sword had slain in battle. From which, the
proverb went abroad: ‘The slaughter of Annas, the slaughter
of the kings, Sigebert and Egric, the slaughter of Oswald and
Edwin, have been all washed out in the river Winwed.”

Then king Oswy, showing his gratitude to God for the vic-
tory which had been granted him, in accordance with the vows
which he had made to the Lord, gave his daughter, who was
scarcely one year old, to be devoted to God in perpetual vir-
ginity, in a monastery which is called Hertsee, that is to say,
the island of the Hart, over which, Hilda was at that time
presiding as abbess. And she, having acquired the possessions
of ten families in the place. which is called Streneshalh, built
a monastery there. But king Oswy managed this war so as to
be of the greatest advantage to both the nations, as he de-
livered his own people from the hostile incursion of the pagans,
and converted to the beauty of the Christian faith the nation
of the Mercians, now that their perfidious head, who had
crushed every one, was thrown down. Ethelher was succeeded
in the kingdom of the East Angles by his brother Ethelwald,
and by a continued series of succession, the kingdom at last
came to Eadwolf and Eadwald, the sons of this same Ethelher.

A.D. 656. King Oswy gave to Peada, the son of Penda,
because he was his kinsman, the kingdom of the South Mer-
cians (who are divided from the Northern Mercians by the river
Trent), to be held of himself ; and he had the first bishop in
the province of Mercia, who was also bishop of the people of
Lindsey and the Middle Angles, and whose name was Dinam.
He died in the country of the Middle Angles, and was buried

A.D. 661. KINIWALC RENEWS THE WAR AGAINST ULFHER. 311

there; the second bishop of that province was Coellac, who
afterwards gave up his bishopric and returned to Scotland.
The third was Tunher, an Angle by birth, and who had been
brought up in Scotland, and had been ordained abbot in the
monastery which is called Ingetling, where Oswin, the king
and martyr, was slain.

A.D. 657. Peada, the son of Penda, was wickedly slain by
the treachery (as they say) of his wife, at the very time of the
festival of Easter. He was succeeded by his brother Ulfher,
who reigned seventeen years, the heir of his father’s virtues ;
and he, as soon as he was raised to the throne, rebelled against
king Oswy, supported by the assistance of Oswy’s enemies and
of the dukes Kabbus and Edbert, who expelled the servants of
Oswy from the kingdom of the Mercians, and so recovered
their territories and their liberty. Tunher was succeeded by
the bishops Jaruman, Ceaddam, and Winfrid, who successively
filled the office of bishop in Mercia.

A.D. 658. Kiniwale, king of the East Saxons, renewed the
war against the Britons at Pennum. But at first the Bri-
tons in some degree repelled the Angles, but afterwards they
became tired, and their courage melted away like snow, and
they were driven from Pennum to Pendred, and an irremedi-
able blow was inflicted on the race of Brutus on that day.

A.D. 659. Eugenius was raised to the Roman chair, which
he occupied two years, nine months, and twenty-two days, and
the see was vacant two months.

A.D. 660. Lewis, king of the French, discovered the body
of the blessed Dionysius, and covetously and impiously broke
off his arm-bone and carried it away, but soon fell into in-
curable madness.

A.D. 661. Kiniwalc, king of the West Saxons, renewed the
war against Ulfher, king of Mercia. But he displayed all
his father’s valour, and enjoyed his father’s fortune, and so
prevailed and put the king of the West Saxons to flight, and
ravaged his territories. At last, coming to the Isle of Wight,
he made himself master of it by force of arms. The same
year, Ethelwald, king of the South Saxons, in the thirteenth
year of his reign, being subdued by the before-mentioned
Ulfher, received the faith of Christ, and was taken from the
_ sacred fount by the same king as his godfather. And after
this event, he sent Eopa, the presbyter, to the Isle of Wight,

B12 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 663.

to convert that people to the true faith by his preaching.
There was at that time, in the province of Northumberland, a
certain clergyman, by name Wilfred, a great friend of Ailfrid,
the son of king Oswy, on account of his learning in all matters
of Christian erudition ; he, returning from Rome, spent a cop-
siderable time with Dalfinus, archbishop of Lyons, and re-
ceived from him the crown of ecclesiastical treasure, therefore
Alfrid gave him a monastery of forty families in Ripon, a
place which he had alittle before given to the bishops who
celebrated the Easter of the Lord according to the custom of
the Scots. But as they afterwards, when the choice was given
them, preferred leaving’that place rather than to change their
customs, he now gave the place to one whose life and doc-
trine were more deserving of it.

This year also, Mgelbertus, bishop of the West Saxons,
whom we have already mentioned, a friend of Ailfrid, arrived
in the province of Northumberland, and he, on the petition of
the before-mentioned lfrid, ordained the presbyter Wilfrid to
the monastery that I have spoken of, where he lived in all
good conversation of life, and himself laboured diligently to
perform all the precepts which he delivered to his disciples to
follow. Bishop Egelbert, leaving king Kiniwalc and the king-
dom of England, took a bishopric in Gaul, and Wina suc-
ceeded to his bishopric in his room.

A.D. 662. Vitalian was appointed to the chair of Rome, and
filled it for twelve years and six months, and the see was
vacant two months and thirteen days.

663. Clothaire succeeded to the throne of France, and reigned
four years. The same year, there was great discussion in
England between the English and the Scots about the ob-
servance of Kaster. The king Oswy and his son Alfrid, and
on the part of the Scots Colman, bishop of Lindisfarne, with his
clergy from Scotland, met at Strenelhalh ; there were present
also bishop Cedda and the abbess Hilda, who both took the
part of the Scots, and on the other side there was the priest
Wilfrid, with several monks and clergymen, who held different
opinions from those of the Scots about the celebration of
Kaster. When they were all seated, king Oswy addressed
them, saying, “That it behoved those who served one and the
same God to have one rule of life, and not to vary from one
another in the celebration of the holy sacraments, when they
all are expecting one kingdom in heaven; they ought, there-

A.D. G64. KING ERCONBERT DIES. 313

fore, to seek together to ascertain which is the more correct
tradition, and then they ought all to observe it faithfully.”
Then Colman said, ‘This Easter, which I have been accus-
tomed to keep, I received from my ancestors, who sent me
hither as bishop, and all our ancestors, so beloved by God,
are known to have kept it in the same manner. And that it
may not appear incorrect to any one, I may add, that it is the
very same manner in which the Evangelist John is said to
have kept it in all the churches over which he presided.”
And when he had spoken for some time in this manner, the
king commanded Wilfrid, the priest, to speak, who began and
spoke thus: “The Easter which we Romans, Italians, Gauls,
and Greeks keep, is the same which the whole church, univer-
sally diffused over the whole world, keeps in common, with the
exception of the Picts, Scots, and Britons, who foolishly con-
tend against the whole world. For when the Lord said to
Peter, the chief of the Apostles, ‘Thou art Peter, and on this
rock I will build my church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it, and I will give thee the keys of the king-
dom of heaven,’ can you, after that, O Colman, prefer our an-
cestors, the Picts and Scots, to the chief of the Apostles, to
whom the Lord committed the regulation of the whole church?”
When the king heard this, he said, ‘‘ Are those things, O Col-
man, which Wilfrid says, true?” And he replied, ‘ My lord
king, they are true.” ‘If, then,” said the king, “ you both of
you agree in this, that these words were said to Peter in his
character of chief of the Apostles, then I say to you that he is
an officer whom I am not disposed to contradict. But as far
as lies in my power, I desire to obey his regulations, lest, per-
chance, when I come to the doors of the kingdom of heaven,
there may be no one to open them to me, if he is averse who
is proved to have the keys.” When the king said this, all
those who were sitting around lifted up their hands to heaven
applauding him; and leaving the less perfect custom, they
adopted that which they ascertained to be the better.
A.D. 664. King Erconbert died, and Egbert, his son, suc-
ceeded him in the kingdom of Kent. The same year, Colman,
bishop of Lindisfarne, returned with his priests back to Scot-
land, and Tuda was ordained bishop in his stead. The same
year, an eclipse of the sun took place in the month of May,
and an unheard-of mortality ensued. Deodatus, archbishop
_ of Canterbury, died, and the see of Canterbury was vacant

314 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 668.

four years. The same year, Alfrid, son of king Oswy, sent
bishop Wilfrid into Gaul, that he might be there ordained
archbishop of York. Accordingly, he went to Egelbert, who,
having left Britain, had become bishop of Paris, and was con-
secrated by him. And while he was sojourning at Paris, king
Oswy sent Cedda, the priest, to the chief priest of the West
Saxons, whose name was Wina, who consecrated him bishop,
although against the statutes of the canons, because while
Wilfrid was still alive, no one else ought to have been elected
bishop in his stead. But that error was subsequently cor-
rected, as will be related hereafter.

A.D. 665. There was so terrible a mortality in England, that
men came in crowds to the precipices which overhang the
sea, and threw themselves headlong down, preferring to perish
by a speedy death rather than by the slow torture of disease.

A.D. 666. Wina, bishop of Winchester, was driven from
his bishopric by king Kiniwale, and bought the bishopric of
London from Ulfher, king of Mercia, for a large price, on
which account after his death he was not considered entitled
to be reckoned in the series of bishops of London.

A.D. 667. The emperor Constans, wishing to make the city
of Rome the head of the empire, met with great resistance
from the people of Constantinople, and so his design was
wholly dropped. After that he came to Rome, and made
an offering to Saint Peter of a pallium woven with gold.
And pope Vitilian received him with great honour, and con-
ducted him tothe threshold of Saint Peter, attended by a
numerous body of people. And when he had remained twelve
days in the city, inflamed by great covetousness, he carried
down to the Tiber every kind of ornament of brass or marble
with which the city was decorated, in order to take them
away to Constantinople. And, among other things, he stripped
the church of Mary, the blessed Mother of God, and of all
the martyrs, which was anciently called the Pantheon, of its
brazen tiles, and then he returned to Constantinople.

A.D. 668. Pope Vitilian ordained Theodorus to be bishop
of the church of Canterbury. And when he arrived in Britain
two years after, he degraded Cedda, a holy and modest man,
who he decided had been irregularly promoted to the arch-
bishopric of York, and recalled Wilfrid, who had been un-
justly expelled. But Cedda yielded with humility, and re-
ceived the bishopric of Lichfield to govern.

A.D. 673. A COUNCIL CONVENED AT HERTFORD. 315

A.D. 669. The emperor Constans was most wickedly mur-
dered in a bath by his servants. And after his death the
soldiers took an Armenian of the name of Mezentius, and
made him emperor. But a few days afterwards, Constantine,
the son of the deceased Constans, coming up with his friends,
condemned the before-named Mezentius and the assassins of
his father to a terrible death. About this time the false pro-
phet Mahomet, of whom we have spoken before, died, and
was buried in Hell.’

A.D. 670. Deodatus was elected pope, and. occupied the
Roman chair four years, two months, and five days, and the
see was vacant four months and fifteen days. The same year,
Constantinus, the son of Constans, obtained the empire of
Rome, and reigned seventeen years. He restored the churches
which had been destroyed ever since the time of Heraclius,
his great grandfather, and endeavoured to extirpate the heresy
of the Monothelites, and to put down its. favourers. The

same year, Oswy, the noble king of Northumberland, died,
worn out with sickness and old age, and was buried in the
church at Streneshale, where king Edwin had been buried
before, and his son, Egfrid, became king in his stead, and
reigned fifteen years. But Oswy was the son of Ethelfrid, who
was the son of Ethelric, who was the son of Ida, the first king
of Northumberland, of the nation of the Angles.

A.D. 671. There was a great battle of birds in England, so
that many thousands were found slain, and the foreign birds
seemed to be leaving the kingdom.

A.D. 672. Kiniwalc, king of the West Saxons, died, when he
had reigned thirty-one years, and his wife Sexburga reigned in
his stead, and reigned one year ; but as the nobles of the king-
dom were indignant, she was expelled from the kingdom, as
they would not serve under a female commander.

A.D. 673. While Lothaire was king of Kent, and Easewino
king of West Saxony, Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury,
convened a council at Hertford of all the bishops and kings
and nobles of England who were present in the island. The

archbishop of York, Wilfrid, was present, and Bosa, bishop of
the East Angles, and Leutherius, bishop of the West Saxons,
and Putta, bishop of Rochester, and Winfrid, bishop of Mercia. .
And when they were all seated, Theodore proposed before
, The real date of the death of Mahomet is June 7th, a.p. 632, in his
. sixty-third year; the date of the Hegirais a.p. 622.—Gisson, ch. 1,

316 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 675.

them all, ten articles, the first of which was that they should
all observe the sacred day of Easter together; on the next
Sunday after the fourteenth day of the first month, the second
that no bishop should invade the province of another; the
third, that no bishop should be permitted to disturb the monas-
teries which had been consecrated by God, nor to appropriate
any of their possessions ; the fourth, that monks should not go
from place to place, but should persevere in that obedience
which they had promised at the time of their conversion ; the
fifth, that no clerk should forsake his bishop or be admitted if
he went to any other diocese, without letters from his own
superior; the sixth, that foreign bishops and clergy should
perform no duty without the consent of the bishop in whose
diocese they were sojourning ; the seventh, that a synod should
be held twice a year, or at the very least once a year, because
different causes and occupations hinder many ; the eighth, that
no bishop should out of ambition prefer himself to another,
but that all should be guided by the time and order of their
consecration; the ninth, that more bishops should be made,
as the number of the faithful increased ; the tenth, that no one
should be permitted to contract any connection with a woman
except a legitimate marriage ; that no one should commit in-
cest, and that no one should put away his wife except for the
cause of fornication. And as all the bishops consented to these
articles, every one confirmed what was thus settled by the sub-
scription of his own signature.

A.D. 674. Bosa, the bishop, being removed while still alive,
because he was prevented by grave infirmity from the dis-
charge of his episcopal duty, two persons were ordained in
his place, namely, Acca and Bedwin ; and ever since that time
that province has been in the habit of having two bishops,
and the seats of their respective sees were Dommoc and Helm-
ham. And not long afterwards, archbishop Theodore being
offended at the disobedience of Winfrid, bishop of Mercia,
deposed him, and in his stead ordained Sexulf bishop, who
was the founder and abbot of the monastery which is called
S#leveshanisteVe, in the district of the Girvians. But Winfrid,
when he was deposed, returned to his monastery, which is
called Uybarune, where he ended his life in all goodly conver-
sation.

A.D. 675. When Sebba, son of Seward, and Sigeher, son of
the uncle of Sigebert, were reigning jointly in the country of

e

A.D. 676, CADWALLON DIES. 317

the West Saxons, Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury, or-
dained Erkenwald bishop of the city of London. He, before
he was made bishop, had founded two famous monasteries,
one for himself, and the other for Ethelberga, his sister; he
had established in each the most excellent discipline, and his
own was called Chertsey, and that of his sister Werfingum.

_ But in process of time Erkenwald became diseased in his feet,

and when he was going round his district in a litter, he came,
as it chanced, to the bank of a most rapid river; and when
his companions hesitated, because he, being infirm, could not
pass the river, either on horseback or on foot, the flood sud-
denly disappeared, and as soon as the bishop and his retinue
had passed over the dry channel, the river returned to its
natural bed. And the touch-of this litter of Erkenwald cured
many feeble persons and those afflicted with fevers. At last,
the man of God, Erkenwald, after he had finished the course
of this present life, died, and was buried in the church of the
blessed Paul, in London, where, to this very day, he gives
immediate recovery from many ailments to his suppliants.
The following are the names of his successors: Walder, Jug-
wald, Egulf, Wiger, Eadbrith, Eadgar, Kiniwalc, Eadbald,
Edbert, Osmund, Ethelnoth, Celbert, Revulf, Suithulf, Hadstan,
Ulf, Ethelward, and Elstan ; and all these men filled the chair
of the see of London till the time of Edward the Elder, king
of England ; but the memory of them all is so completely
effaced, that neither their acts nor their burial-places are
known.

A.D. 676. Cadwallon, king of the Britons, being worn out
by old age and infirmity, died, after he had reigned forty-
eight entire years, and the Britons embalmed his body with
balm and spices, and placed it in a brazen image, made with
wonderful skill in his likeness and of his size, over the west
gate of London ; and the figure was sitting on a brazen horse,
in token of the severe tyranny which he exercised over the
English. They also made a church at the gate in honour of
the blessed Martin, that divine service for him and for all the

- faithful who were departed might be everlastingly performed

in it. He was succeeded in his kingdom by Cadwallader, his
son, whom Bede calls the young Cadwalla, whose mother was
the sister of Penda, king of Mercia, whom Cadwalla, after he
had made peace with his brother, took for his wife, and by
her he became the father of Cadwallader.

318 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 676.

The same year Ulpher, king of Mercia, died, whose queen,
Hermengilda, daughter of Erconbert, king of Kent, and of
the holy Sexburga, daughter of Annos, king of the Hast
Angles, and sister of the holy Ethelfrida, made him the father
of the holy Wereburga, a virgin of great virtues. She, after
the death of her father, renounced the world, and entered the
monastery of her mother’s aunt, Ethelfrida. And when
Ethelred, her uncle, who succeeded Ulpher in the kingdom,
heard of her holy disposition, he appointed her to preside
over some monasteries of virgins devoted to God, with the —
rank of abbess, and she lived among them with great strict-
ness, and to the end of her life served Christ, her king. At
length, in one of her monasteries, which is called Trikinge-
ham, she departed this life, and her corpse, as she herself had
enjoined in her lifetime, was borne to the monastery called
Mihealbrig, and buried with all honours; and that monas-
tery remained uninjured to the time when the wicked race
of the Danes ravaged the provinces of England with cruel
slaughter.

King Ulpher had also brothers by name Ethelred and Penda,
of whom we have spoken above, and Merwald, who reigned in
the western division of Mercia. His queen, the holy Ermen-
burga, daughter of Ermenred, the brother of Erconbert, king
of Kent, bore him three daughters, namely, the holy Milburga,
the holy Mildrith, and the holy Mildgyth. She also bore
him a son, named Merefin, a boy of eminent sanctity. Ulpher
was succeeded by his brother Ethelred, who married Ostrica,
the sister of Egfrid, king of Northumberland, and had by her
a son named Ceolred. ‘The same year, Easewin, king of the
West Saxons, died, who was the son of Kenseus, who was the
son of Kenferth, who was the son of Cuthgis, who was the
son of Ceulf, who was the son of Kenric ; and Easewin was
succeeded by Kentwin, who was the son of Kinegilf, who was
the son of Ceulf, and who reigned ten years.

Cu. XIJ.—From a.p. 677 To a.v. 704.

Disputes and Ecclesiastical affairs in Britain—Wilfrid is de-
posed from his Bishopric—Saint Etheldreda—Saint Hilda
—A Council is held at Hatfield—Saint Cuthbert, Bishop
of Lindisfarne —Lgfrid is killed — Cadwallader is bap-
tized —Dies—The Histories of Geoffrey of Monmouth, Ca-

A.D. 678. WILFRID EXPELLED FROM HIS KINGDOM.. 319

radoc of Lancarban, William of Malmesbury, and Henry of
Huntingdon—Pepin, king of France—Part of the true
Cross is found at Rome—A Dead Man is restored from
Purgatory in Northumberland—The Bishopric of Winches-
ter ts divided.

A.D. 677. Donus was elected to the Roman chair, and filled it
one year, five months, and ten days, and the see was vacant
ten months and fifteen days. At this time Saint Ethelreda
flourished in the Isle of Ely. This year also, a comet ap-
peared for three months, and one day it shone in the morning
like the sun.

A.D. 678. A quarrel arose between Egfrid, king of Northum-
berland, and the venerable archbishop Wilfrid. And the holy
man being expelled, three bishops were appointed in his room,
namely, Bosa, to govern the province of Deiri, and Eatta, to
govern that of the Bernicians. The one had the seat of his
bishopric at York, and the other in the church of Hagustald ;
and both of them came from the community of monks. And
with them Eadhed was ordained bishop of the province of
Lindsey, which king Egfrid had lately made himself master
of, having defeated in battle and put to flight Wilfer, king of
Mercia. He was the first bishop of that province. The second
was Ethelwin, the third Edgar, the fourth Kinibert, who go-
verns it at present.’ For, before the appointment of Eadhed,
it had a president named Sexulf, who was also at the same
time bishop of the Mercians and of the Midland Angles. And
when he was driven out of Lindsey, he continued to regulate
these provinces. But these bishops whom I have mentioned
were ordained by archbishop 'Iheodore, who, three years after
the departure of Wilfrid, ordained two more bishops, namely,
Tunbert, for the church of Hagustald, when Eata returned to
Lindisfarne, and Trunwin, for the province of the Picts, which
at that time was reduced under the dominion of the Angles.
The same year, Agatho was appointed pope, and filled the
Roman chair two years, six months, and three days. And the
see was vacant one year, six months, and five days.

When Wilfrid was expelled from his bishopric, he went to
Rome, and intended to plead his cause and argue against his
expulsion before pope Agatho. But when he embarked on

1 There is manifestly some great error here, probably of the text, but
_ I cannot conjecture what it may be, or how it ought to he corrected.

320 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 678.

board ship, with a west wind blowing, he went to Friesland,
where he preached the word of faith to the people of that
country, and washed king Aldegils and his people in the laver
of salvation. And he spent the winter with the new people of
God in that country, and after that he went to Rome, where
his cause was sifted before Agatho, in the presence of many
bishops, and, by unanimous judgment of them all, he was pro-
nounced to have been guiltless of the accusations brought against
him, and to be most worthy of his bishopric. And at this —
time the pope had collected a synod of a hundred and twenty-
five bishops at Rome, against those men who espoused the —
doctrines of the heresy of the Monothelites ; he commanded —
Wilfrid also to be summoned, and ordered him to take his
seat among the bishops, and to declare his own belief and that _
of the province from which he had come; and as he and his”
flock were found to be true Catholics in faith, he was absolved
from the penalties which had been imposed on him. And
when he returned to Britain, he converted the province of the —
South Saxons from the darkness of idolatry to the faith of
Christ. He also sent ministers of the Word of God to the Isle
of Wight, and, in the second year of Ealfrid, who succeeded |
Egfrid as king of Northumberland, he recovered his see by
the express appointment of the king. And, as time went on,
when he was visiting his parishes, and had come to the village
which is called Tundanfre, a great number of women met him,
bringing him their children to be confirmed. And a poor
woman had mingled with the crowd, bearing in her arms a
dead child, whom she presented to the bishop for confirma-
tion, thinking that, by this device, she might receive back her
son in sound health. But when the bishop had uncovered
the boy, in order to perform his office, he perceived that he
was devoid of life. ‘Then, the woman being detected in her
trick, betook herself to prayer, and besought Wilfrid by God,
and by the Mother of God, to yield to pity and raise her dead
son to life; and falling at his feet, and taking hold of them,
she declared that she would not quit them till she had received
back her son safe and sound. In the meantime, the mind of
the holy man was wavering as to whether he should rashly
attempt an unaccustomed miracle, or hard-heartedly disregard
the tears of a widow. But pity prevailed over his virtuous
breast ; he yielded to her prayer, and placing his right hand
on the corpse, he recalled the soul into the body. The woman

A.D. 679. THE HOLY VIRGIN ETHELREDA DIES. 321

shouted for joy, but was checked by the bishop, and enjoined
to hold her peace.
A.D. 679. Egfrid, king of Northumberland, and Ethelred,
_king of Mercia, fought a terrible battle near the river Trent, in
which Esewin, brother of king Egfrid, a youth much beloved
in both these provinces, was slain. For Ethelred, king of
Mercia, had married his sister, by name Ostrica. And when the
war between the kings was supported on each side with
great animosity, Theodorus, the pontiff, supported by divine
assistance, put a complete end to it, making an arrangement,
according to which, a large sum of money was to be given to
king Egfrid, for the death of his brother. At the same time,
the holy virgin Ethelreda departed from this world, and ex-
changed this temporal life for an eternal one. She was the —
daughter of Annas, king of the Hast Angles, and a child worthy
of such a father, and she had been formerly married to Ton-
bert, prince of the South Girvians. But after his death she
remained a pure virgin. Afterwards she was yoked, by the
- compulsion of her parents, to Egfrid, king of Northumberland ;
but, though married to two husbands, she persevered in re-
taining a most immaculate virginity. And the man of God,
_ Wilfrid, was a witness of her virginity ; for when the venerable
Bede asked him questions on the subject, he said that Egfrid
had promised him an estate, and a large sum of money, if he
could persuade Ethelreda to consent to the consummation of
their marriage. And a divinely miraculous sign, namely, the
_ fact that the flesh of this same virgin, after it was buried, and
the clothes in which her chaste flesh was wrapped, could not
be corrupted, was a proof that she died wholly unpolluted by
the toueh of a man. For she lived twelve years with the
before-mentioned king, but never could be softened so as to
consent to his wishes; and at last this most holy virgin
_ prevailed upon him to allow her to become a nun at Coludes-
burch, (and she received the blessings of the holy Wilfrid,)
where Ebba, the aunt of her husband Egfrid, was abbess.
And after a year, the virgin was made abbess in the isle of
_ Hy, discharging the duties ef a mother to the virgins there,
by her advice and example ; and having lived there seven years,
serving God in an exemplary manner, she changed this fleeting
life for an eternal one. And in that place frequent miracles
are even now wrought by the glory of God and praise of that
virgin.
VOL. I. : : Y

322 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 680.

A.D. 680. The abbess Hilda, after she had lived in the
dress of holy religion at Strenefhalh for thirty-three years,
departed from this world to be with the Lord. And this
most blessed virgin, being of the high-born family of king
Edwin, and having been converted to the faith by the preach-

ing of the blessed Paulinus, afterwards, abandoning her ~

secular garb, proposed to transfer herself to the monastery of
Cala, where her sister Hereswitha, the mother of Alldulf, king
of the East Angles, was happily serving God. But she was
kept back by Bishop Aidan, and made abbess at ®ertesep,
and afterwards of the monastery called Strenefhalh, which
she had founded herself, and where she so instructed her
clergy in ecclesiastical habits that five of them rose to the epis-
copal dignity, namely, Bosa and Wilfrid, at York, Hedda, in
the church at Dorchester, John, in the church at Hagustald,
Ostfort, in the province of the Wiccians, which was at that
time governed by king Osric. ‘Tadfrid, also, of the ‘same

monastery, was elected bishop, but by his untimely death was —

prevented from being consecrated.

The mother of this same Hilda had had a dream, in which, —

when seeking her husband, she could not find him, but under
her garments she found a valuable necklace, which gave light

to all the borders of Britain. But the most holy Hilda

languished six years, while her soul was being gradually freed
from the annoyances of the flesh, and her virtue was being
made perfect in weakness; and after seven years’ fever, she
departed from death to life. And in the very hour in which
she died, a certain nun saw her soul being carried up to
heaven by angels, where she is enjoying everlasting joy with
Christ. The same year, Theodore, archbishop of Canterbury,
convened a council in the place which is called Hatfield, m
the sixth year of Ethelred, king of Mercia, while Ealdulf was
reigning in the kingdom of the East Angles (he was the
successor of Ethelwald), Egfrid being king of Northumberland,
and Kentwin of the West Saxons. In this council Theodore,
archbishop of Canterbury, presided, being present with his

suffragan bishops and many others. Accordingly, the sacred.

gospels being laid before them, Theodore produced a creed
to all the assembled holy fathers, framed in the following
language :—

“We admit the Five Holy General Councils of the Holy
Orthodox Fathers, to wit the Nicene Council, convened to

 —- ae

A.D. 681. A MONASTERY FOUNDED AT JAREWE. 323

oppose Arrius and his doctrines, the Council of Constanti-
nople, to oppose the madness of Macedonius and Eudoxius
and their doctrines; the Council of Ephesus, to oppose
Nestorius and his doctrines; the Council of Chalcedon, to
oppose Eutyches and Nestorius and their doctrines, and the
Second Council of Constantinople, to oppose Theodore, and
Ibis, and Cyril and their doctrines. We also adda Sixth
Council, held at Rome, in the time of Pope Martin, to oppose
the heresy of the Monothelites, in the reign of Constantine,
the most Christian emperor,—and we receive and glorify the
Almighty God as they glorified him, adding nothing and
subtracting nothing from their assertions. We condemn
those whom they condemned, and receive those whom they
received ; all which things we subscribe as articles to be
observed according to the belief which the holy prophets and
apostles held concerning God, and according to their writings.
Amen.”

A.D. 681. A monastery was founded at Jarewe. The same
year, the abbot of the Floriacensian monastery, by name
_ Nummolus, being forewarned by a divine revelation, sent one
of his monks, named Aigulfus, to Mount Cassinus, to bring
him from thence the body of the most holy Benedict. For
the convent which the same Benedict had formerly es-
tablished there, had been plundered by the Lombards and
reduced to desolation; but, nevertheless, the body of the
holy Benedict, with that of his sister Scholastica, were
preserved, these being buried in one place. It also hap-
pened that some people from Lyons were gomg at the
same time to the before-mentioned place to remove the
body of the holy Scholastica, But after they arrived at the
Floriacensian convent they joined the blessed Aigulfus, and
remained with him, until they arrived at the threshold of
Saint Peter,—and when they had reached that, then the blessed
Aigulfus left their company, and proceeded on by himself to
Mount Casinus, where he determined to spend the night.
_ And lo! im the silence of dark night he saw the tomb of the
holy father Benedict lit up from heaven in such a manner,
as if it were fenced all round with thick stones. But when
the night was passed, that splendor disappeared; then the
before-mentioned Aigulfus reverently approached the spot,
and breaking the tomb in the side, he emptied it, and put all
. that he found there in one basket, which he had brought

x2

324 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 681.

ready for the purpose. And when Aigulfus had done this,
and was returning to his own country, he showed it to the
companions of his journey, and returned with them to the
Floriacensian monastery. But before he reached it he came
to the place which they call Novus Vicus, which is distant
one mile from the before-mentioned monastery. And there
the abbot Nummolus, of whom -I have already spoken, came ~
out with a great crowd, and met them reverently, and received
the sacred pledges with due honour. And taking the basket
which I mentioned, he placed it in the church of the prince
of the Apostles, Peter, and took out the holy bones, which
were lying inclosed in it, ina confused manner. And then
taking them out, he separated them all from one another, dis-
tinguishing the greater from the less. And when this had
been done, lo! the perfect corpses of two dead persons were
carried out to burial, one of which was of the male sex, and
the other of the female. A marvellous thing—for when the
large bones had been placed upon the corpse of the male sex, —
immediately, through the merits of the blessed Benedict, life
was restored to the dead. Then the smaller bones were
placed on the corpse of the damsel, and the two instantly
revived. And there was no small multitude of men present
at this miracle. And the Cenomannian citizens were present,
who had been the partners of his journey and his labour.
And they with many prayers entreated that the bones of the
holy Scholastica might be given to them, and obtained it, in
order that two great luminaries might not be shut up in one
place, when one was enough for each. Accordingly, the Ceno-
mannians returned to their city, carrying with them the before-
mentioned corpse with great joy, and it was reverently buried —
near the walls of Lyons, in a new church which was built in
honour of it; where a band of holy and devout women was
collected under regular discipline. After these things had
been done in this manner, when the venerable father Num-
molus was one night praying in the open air to the Lord, that
he would give him a sign from heaven, to show him in what
place he should bury the body of the blessed Benedict, lo!
on a sudden a light was sent from heaven, appearing to him
like lightning, which showed him most plainly the place
where the body ought to be put. And he, delighted at this
token, buried it in the place which God had pointed out to
him, and the place was the oracle of the blessed mother of

A.D. 685. JOHN APPOINTED POPE. 3825

God, at no great distance from the church: of Saint Peter,
which has been previously mentioned. And this most holy
body was removed again a hundred and thirty-eight years
after this removal. And whoever, in the place where it now is,
shall invoke the name of the most pious father with pious
devotion, shall receive the wished-for reward of his devotion.

Theodoric reigned in France fourteen years.

A.D. 682. Kentwin, king of the West Saxons, attacked the
Britons in war, and as they made an ineffectual resistance, he,
with victorious energy, drove them with slaughter and confla-
gration as far as the sea.

A.D. 683. Saint Cuthbert was consecrated bishop of Lindis-
farne. The same year, Sigebert, king of the East Saxons,
died, and Sebba, his partner in the kingdom, began to reign
by himself.

A.D. 684. Leo was elected to the Roman chair, and filled it
ten months and seventeen days. The same year also, Pope
Benedict succeeded him, and was Pope two months and three
days.

The same year, Egfrid, king of Northumberland, having
sent an army into Ireland, under the command of Bertus,
ravaged the unoffending nation, and one which had always
been most friendly to the nation of the Angles, so as never to
lay a hostile hand on the churches or monasteries. But they,
with all their power, applied themselves to repelling force by
force, invoking the aid of the divine mercy, and, with inces-
sant prayers, they entreated heaven to avenge their cause.
And so it happened, that those who were deservedly spoken ill
of for their impiety, soon suffered the punishment of their
guilt under the avenging hand of God, as the history of the
following year will show.

A.D, 685. John was appointed to the Roman chair, and
filled it for one year. The same year, Egfrid, king of Northum-
berland, having rashly led his army to ravage the provinces
of the Picts, in spite of the advice of many of his. friends,
and especially of Cuthbert, of blessed memory, who had lately
been ordained bishop, was led into a narrow defile, among
inaccessible mountains, by the enemy feigning flight, and was
slain with the greater part of his army which he had brought
with him. His brother Ailfrid succeeded him, although not
born in lawful wedlock, a man of great learning in the Scrip-

‘tures, who gloriously retrieved the fortunes of his kingdom,

2

326 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 686.

which were beginning to be greatly depressed. Egfrid was the
son of Oswy, and Eanfleda, the daughter of Edwin. But Oswy
was the son of Bthelfrid, who was the son of Ethelric, who
was the son of Ida, the first king of Northumberland, of the
nation of the Angles. And a wonderful miracle was wrought
in a certain war between Egfrid and Ethelred, king of Mercia,
as has been mentioned above, which, if it is related, will, I
think, be profitable to the salvation of many.

In that battle there was slain, among others of the army of
Egfrid, a young man named Junna; and, after he had lain
all the night of the day on which he was slain, among the ©
other corpses of the slain, like a dead man, he at last recovered
his spirits, and revived ; and, sitting up, bound up his wounds —
as wellas he could. Then, after resting a short time, he got
up, and began to depart; but, as he was going away, he was —
taken prisoner, and put in chains by an officer of king Ethel- —
red’s. Now, this soldier, who was thus put in chains, had a’ _
very religious brother, by name Tunna; and when Tunna
heard that his brother had been killed in battle, he came to —
look and see if he could find his brother’s body. And, having —
found another body very like his brother, he thought that it —
was his brother, and so he carried it to his monastery, and —
gave it honourable burial, and often caused masses to be cele- —
brated for the absolution of his soul. But at the time when —
one brother caused masses to be celebrated for the soul of his
brother, the chains of the living brother were loosened, and —
could not be kept on by any means. The magistrate, there-
fore, seeing that it was impossible for him to be restrained by
chains, carried him to London, and sold him to a Frieslander.
And the Frieslander also finding the same thing to be the case,
took, as a ransom from him, the same price which he had paid
for him, and allowed to him to depart to become a soldier.
And when he, coming to his own country, had told his brother
and his countrymen of the province what had happened to’
him, many of them were prompted to offer victims more fre-
quently to God, and to do alms and offer prayers for the
delivery of those who had departed from life. And it is be-
cause I have ascertained this miracle to be undoubtedly true,
that I thought it deserving of insertion in this my history.

A.D. 686. Conon was appointed to the see of Rome, which
he occupied eleven months. The same year, bishop Hata died,
and John, a holy man, of Hagustald, succeeded to the presi-

A.D. 686, MIRACLE AT THE TOMB OF SAINT CUTHBERT. 327
dency of the church. The same year, Lothaire, king of Kent,
died on the sixth of February, for he had been wounded in
the war with the South Saxons, which Eadric, the son of
Egbert, his brother, had stirred up against him, and he died
under the hands of the surgeons. And, after his death, that
same Hadric reigned for a year and a half. The same year,
when the man of God, Cuthbert, had for two years governed
the church of Lindisfarne, he, knowing by the spirit of God,
of which he was full, that the day of his departure was at
hand, cast off the burden of his pastoral care, and was eager
to return to the struggle of the anchorite’s life which he had
forsaken, in order that the freer flame of his ancient compunc-
tion might burn up in him the obstinate thorns of worldly
solicitude. And when he had spent about two months with
great exultation in his recovered tranquillity, and had chastised
his body and sou! with the abundant vigour of his accustomed
strictness, he was seized with sudden infirmity, the fire of
temporal suffering, and so he began to prepare himself for the
joys of everlasting bliss; and after having been worn out for
three weeks with continued suffering, he thus came to his end.
And fortifying his departure by the reception of the body and
blood of the Lord, raising his eyes and hands to heayen, and
commending his soul to God, he breathed his last. Then he
was carried in a boat to theisland of Lindisfarne, and he rests
there, with an incorruptible body, in a stone sepulchre, in the
church of the blessed Peter, on the right hand of the altar,
and is placed as if he were asleep.

But even after he was dead and buried, the signs of these vir-
tues, which he had practised while alive, did not cease, for a cer-
tain boy in the district of Lindisfarne was vexed by a most cruel
devil, and could not be cured by any manner or power of exor-
cism ; therefore, he was placed on a carriage and brought to the
monastery, to be healed by the merits of the blessed man who lay
there. Then a certain priest, prompted by the Holy Spirit, taking
up a small portion of earth where he knew that water had been
spilt with which the dead body of the blessed Father had been
washed, dipped it in water, and then spread it over the mouth of
the patient, who, immediately that he touched the water, ceased
from his frenzy, and passed the night in quiet sleep, and in
the morning found himself released from his affliction by the
virtue of the blessed Father Cuthbert. Afterwards, after the
lapse of eleven years since his burial, God put into the hearts

ry

328 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 687.
of the brethren, his body, being as they supposed, reduced to
dust, to collect his bones, which they supposed were dry and
withered, after the fashion of dead men, in a small urn. When
they took the opinion of Eadbert, their bishop, on this matter,
he approved of their design. Accordingly, he ordered them
to do this on the day that they were to be so placed in the
um. But they, when they opened his tomb, found his whole
body as entire as if he had been still alive, and with all the
joints of the limbs still unrelaxed, much more like aman asleep
than dead ; in such a condition, indeed, that all his garments
in which he was clothed, as a bishop ought to be, were found
uninjured.

This year also there was an eclipse of the moon, on the
eighth indiction. The sun also was eclipsed at about ten
o’cloek on the third of May. And the same year a most ter-
rible pestilence ensued, which lasted three months, namely,
all July, August, and September. There was also a great
mortality at Rome. And this pestilence so ravaged Ticino,
that the citizens all fled to the mountains, and grass and
brambles grew in the city. In that city also, two angels
visibly appeared among the people, one a good, and the other
a malignant one. And as many times as the malignant angel,
with the sanction of the good angel, struck the door of any
house with a hunting spear which he carried in his hand, so
many dead corpses were carried out of that same house the
next day. Then it was told by revelation to some men of the
city, that that pestilence would not cease till an altar to Saint
Sebastian, the martyr, was erected in that church of the blessed
Peter the Apostle, which is called Ad Vincula. Accordingly,
the relics of the martyr were brought from the city of Rome,
and immediately, as soon as the altar was built to him in the
before-mentioned church, the plague ceased. .

The same year, Kentwin, king of the West Saxons, died,
and Cadwallader, king of the Britons, seized on his kingdom,
and reigned in it for two years. Respecting this Cadwallader,
there is a difference between the history of the Britons and the
chronicles of the Angles ; for the Angles assert that Cadwal-
lader was the son of Kinibert, of the race of Ceoline. The
Britons, on the other hand, say that he was the son of Cad-
wallon, king of the Britons, who slew the kings of the Angles,
_ Edwin, and the holy Oswald.

A.D. 687. Sergius was ‘appointed to the see of Rome, and

A.D. 688. CADWALLA ABANDONS. HIS KINGDOM. 329

filled it thirteen years, eight months, and twenty-four days ;
and the see was vacant one month and twenty days. The
same year, that catholic man, the Emperor Constantine, died,
and was succeeded by his son Justinian, who reigned ten years.
This year also, Kadric, king of Canterbury, died. And after
his death, his kingdom was invaded by foreigners ; for king
Cadwallader and his brother, Mollo, entered the province, and
ravaged and depopulated it without meeting with any resist-
- ance, and their barbarous power lasted for three years, till
the before-mentioned Mollo, desirous of empty glory, was cut
short by an early death. The same year, the before-mentioned
king Cadwallader subdued the Isle of Wight, and cruelly
slew Ethelwald, king of the South Saxons, who at that time
was the lord of these islanders, and desolated the island with
the most inhuman ravages. But he was soon expelled by
Ethelwald, Bertham, and Audun, and so he left the kingdom
to those leaders, and they occupied it fora long time after-
wards. But Cadwallader was, as I have said before, according
to the chronicles of the Angles, the son of Kinibert, who was
the son of .Cedda, who was the son of Cuther, who was the
son of Ceauline.

But I think that I ought not to pass over in silence how the
two sons of Arwald, the prince of the Isle of Wight, by the
grace of God, received the crown of martyrdom. While the
enemy were threatening the island, they fled, and escaped to
the neighbouring province of the Jutes; but being brought
back again, they were put. to death by command of Cadwal-
lader. And when the abbot of Redfort, whose monastery was
not far off, heard this, he came to the king, and entreated of
him, that if he was bent on slaying the youths, he would allow
them first to receive the sacraments of faith. And when the
king had given his consent, and they had been washed in the
- fountain of salvation, the executioner came, and they joyfully

underwent temporal death, by which they knew beyond a doubt
that they would pass to everlasting life.
A.D.688. Cadwallader was moved by the divine mercy to aban-
don his temporal kingdom for the sake of God, and so he went
to Rome, wishing to obtain this singular glory of being washed
in the fountain of baptism at the threshhold of the Apostles
Peter and Paul, as he had learned that by that fountain the
entrance to everlasting life was opened to the human race. He
_ also hoped that if he were baptized and soon released from the

330 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 689;

flesh, he should be quite clean to pass to eternal happiness.
Both which objects he, by the favour of God, accomplished as
he had desired.

a.D. 689. King Cadwallader came to Rome while Sergius
was filling the office of the pontificate, and was baptized on the
sacred day of the sabbath of Easter; and while he was still
wearing his white garments’ he was seized with sickness, and
on the twentieth of April he was released from the flesh, and
united to the kingdom of the blessed in heaven. At the time
of his baptism, the pope whom I have mentioned gave him
the name of Peter, in order that a king who, under the influ-
ence of pious love, had come to the threshhold of Peter from
the ends of the earth, should be joined.in fellowship with him
by likewise bearing his name. And, by the command of the
pontiff, he was buried in the church of the Apostle, and an
epitaph is inscribed on his monument expressed in the follow-
ing language :—

« Dominion, power, and a mighty realm ;
Fair children, willing nobles, subjects, home ;
And forts, and camps, and riches, which his sire
And he himself by virtuous might acquired,
The brave Cadwallader left for love of God,”

Cadwallader was succeeded in the kingdom of the West
Saxons by Ida, one of the royal family, who reigned thirty-
seven years. He was the son of Kenred, who was the son of
Ceolwald, who was the brother of Kiniwald, and Ceolwald and
Kiniwald were the sons of Cuthwin, who was the son of Ceau-
line ; and so, by tracing back his pedigree, he arrived at Woden.

The same year, Geoffrey of Monmouth, who was afterwards
bishop of Saint Asaph, terminated the history of the Britons,
which he had commenced with the fall of Troy, in this manner :
When the Britons had been driven from the island by the
Saxons, they went to Wales, where they degenerated from the
pure blood of the Britons, and came to be called not Britons,
but Welch (Wallenses), deriving their name from Wallo, their
leader, or from Galaes, the queen, or from their own savage-
ness, And lentrust to mycontemporary, Caradoc of Lancarban,
the task of writing the history of their kings who have success-
fully ruled over them in Wales since that time; while the
kings of the Saxons form the subject of the works of William

* The neophytes, or new converts, wore a white garment at their baptism,
and for some short time afterwards in most instances,

A.D. 692. WILFRID EXPELLED FROM HIS BISHOPRIC. oon

of Malmesbury and Henry of Huntingdon, whom, however, £
advise not to meddle with the kings of the Britons, as they
have not the book in the British language which Walter, arch-
deacon of Oxford, brought from Brittany, and which, as it
has been composed with truth on the subject of their history,
to the honour of the before-mentioned princes, I have in this
manner studied to translate into the Latin language.

A.D. 690. Theodore, of blessed memory, archbishop of Can-
terbury, died, full of days, after he had discharged the duties
of his bishopric twenty-two years, and he was buried in the
ehurch of the blessed Peter, in which the bodies of all the
archbishops of Canterbury are buried. And the following
epitaph is on his monument :—

“‘ Here, in this tomb, the blest archbishop lies,
Whom the Pelasgian language Theodore calls ;
His happy soul has mounted to the skies,
Joined to the angels in the heavenly halls.”
_. The same year, Elfwald, king of the East Angles, died, and
was succeeded in his kingdom by Beorna.

A.D. 691. Pepin,” king of the French, subdued Neustria, and
ordained Saint Lambert as bishop of the city of Utrecht. About
the same time, Willebrod, with twelve companions, passed
from England into Gaul, and was very eminent for sanctity.

A.D. 692. Brithwald, who had been abbot of the monastery
which is called Raculfe, succeeded Theodore as archbishop of ©
Canterbury. And he was elected on the first day of the month

of July, while the brothers Withred and Siward were reigning
in Kent, who, by their religion and energy, delivered the nation
from foreign invasion. They afterwards built a church in
honour of Saint Martin, in the town of Dover, in the place
assigned to them by that saint, in which they placed monks
who should live according to rule, and enriched them at the
same time with much property and with estates. These bro-
thers reigned thirty-four years and a half. The’ same year,
Wilfrid, archbishop of York, was accused before king Ailfrid,
and was expelled from his bishopric by the king and several
of the bishops. Accordingly, he went to Rome with his

2 This Pepin, however, never took the title of king. He was duke of
Austrasia, and governed France under the title of Mayor; nor did his son
Charles Martel ever assume the title of king. Pepin, son of Charles Martel
' and father of Charlemagne, was the first who assumed the royal titles,
which he did A.p. 751, with the sanction of pope Zachary, just sixty years
after the time when he is here spoken of as actual king. See Gibbon, clxix.

Bish MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 692,

accusers, in order to defend himself; and before a tribunal,
composed of many bishops, in the presence of the lord pope,
it was judicially proved that his accusers had contrived some
false accusations against him. And letters were written to
Alfrid, king of Northumberland, to canse him to be reinstated
in his archbishopric, because he had Ween unjustly condemned. _
But when he was on his way back to Britain, and had arrived
in the land of Gaul, he was seized with a sudden sickness, so
that he could not sit on a horse, but was carried on a litter by ©
the hands of servants. And in this way he arrived in Melun,
a city of Gaul, and lay for four days and nights like one dead.
And after he had suffered in this way, without eating or drink-
ing, unable to speak or hear, for four days, on the fifth day,
at dawn, he sat up again like a man rising up out of a heavy
sleep, and sighing gently, asked where the priest Eatta was.
And as he came as soon as he was summoned, Wilfrid addressed
him in the following manner :—

“ A terrible vision has lately appeared to me, which I wish
you to hear, and afterwards to bury in silence, until I under-
stand clearly what God intends to do with me. A person
stood by me, brilliant with white garments, saying that he was
Michael, the archangel, and said to me, ‘ For this object have
I been sent, to recall you from death to life. For God has
given you life on account of the intercession of the tears of your
disciples, and of the prayers of his own mother. But be thou
ready, for in four years I shall return and visit thee again.
And when you have arrived in your own country, you shall
recover a portion of the possessions which have been taken
from you, and you shall end your life in tranquil peace.’ Ac-
cordingly, the bishop recovered, to the joy of all men, and
having resumed his journey, he arrived in Britain. And when
the letters which he brought from the pope had been read,
Brithwold, the archbishop of Canterbury, and Ethelred, who
had formerly been king, but was now abbot, eagerly favoured.
him, but Ailfrid, king of Northumberland, disdained to receive
him. But when Ailfrid died not long afterwards, Ofred suc-
ceeded him in the kingdom, and he convened a synod near
the river Nid, and after a brief contest between the two sides,
at length, with the approbation of all men, Wilfrid was restored
to the government of the church. And in that office he passed
his life in peace for four years, as it had been predicted to him
by the angel, and at last rested in the Lord. And he died on

A.D. 696. THE MERCLANS MURDER QUEEN OSTRIOCA. 333

the twelfth of October, in his monastery, which he had in the
province of Indales, under the government of the abbot Cuth-
wold. And he was carried by the brethren to his original
monastery at Ripon, and there buried in the church of the
blessed Apostle Saint Peter, near the altar, on the south side.

A.D. 693. Ina, king of the West Saxons, arrayed a formid-
able army, and determined to avenge the burning of his kins-
man Mollo. But Withred, king of Kent, came to meet him
humbly, and gave him a-large sum of money for the death of
the young man, and so

“ The strife was ended and fair peace restored.”

The same year, Brithwald was consecrated archbishop of Can-
terbury by Godwin, archbishop of Gaul. And he consecrated
Tobias bishop, as successor to Godmund, bishop of the church
at. Rochester ; and Tobias was a man of great learning, both in
the Latin and Greek language.

A.D. 694. Lewis became king of France, and reigned four
years. And at this time, the sanctity and innocence of the
- blessed Leodegarius, bishop of Heducen, began to be very emi-
nent by the favour of Almighty God. But he was afterwards
decapitated, after having been cruelly tortured by that minister
of cruelty, Ebroin, who, having laid aside the monastic habit,
had the chief power under a certain king of France, named
Theodoric, and who treated him with terrible cruelty, because
he had been a friend of his predecessor. But while Ebroin was
yet alive, the merciful Lord adorned the holy man with grace
to work many miracles. ,

A.D. 695. Pope Sergius, found in the church of the blessed
Peter, at Rome, a great portion of the cross of our Lord, which
is now every year, on the day of the exaltation of the hfe-
giving cross, kissed and reverently worshipped by the whole
Roman people. The same year, Hewaldus the White and
Hebaldus the Black, two priests, went from Britain into Fries-
land, for the sake of preaching, and there received the crown
of martyrdom, and were buried at Cologne by order of Pepin,
the king. There was an eclipse of the sun this year, at three
o’clock in the day.

A.D. 696. The Mercians, who are also called the Suthumbrians,
that is to say, that part of the Mercians which is to the north
of the river Trent, committed a most atrocious crime. For
_ they murdered in a barbarous manner the queen Ostrica, the

334 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 699.

wife of king Ethelred, and daughter of Egfrid, king of North-
umberland. The same year, Hadbert, successor of the holy

Cuthbert, moved the body of that blessed saint, after it had

been eleven years in the tomb; and when he placed it on the
floor, both the body and the features were found to be unim-
paired. About the same time, the patrician Leo deprived
Justinian of the empire, and having cut off his nose and cut
out his tongue, sent him into banishment.

A.D. 697. Leo obtained the empire of Rome, and reigned
two years. The same year, Willibrod, a Briton by birth, was
sent by Pope Sergius to preach the gospel to the people of
Friesland, and by the gift of king Pepin received the episcopal
see of Utrecht.

A.D. 698. Hildebert was created king of France, and reigned
eighteen years. The same year, the holy Lambert received
the crown of martyrdom, and was buried at Utrecht. For
he had ventured to reprove Pepin the prince,’ because he had
taken an adulterous concubine, besides his legitimate wife.
And, accordingly, he was slain by her brother Dodon, and
was buried at Utrecht, as I said before. The same year,
Absimarus,, who is also called Tiberius, was appointed as the
keeper of the prison of Leo, who was deposed from the sove-
reign power, and mutilated by having his nose cut off.

a

ae

A.D. 699. Absimarus, who is also called Tiberius, obtained —
the empire of Rome, and reigned seven years. The same
year, Dodo, the slayer of the holy Lambert, was tormented by —
a most shameful illness, being eaten up by worms, and, on —
account of the intolerable stench that proceeded from him,

he was thrown into the Mease, and all his accomplices in

guilt were banished within the year, by the direct intervention ©

of the Deity. And the slayer of the holy martyr met with
his brother in battle, and both the combatants were slain by
one another.

This year, a certain father of a family in the county of Nor-
thumberland, being seized with a very severe illness of body,
died at the beginning of the night, but coming to life again

‘ To understand this—as in one sentence our author calls Pepin king,
then calls Lewis king, then Hildebert king, and Pepin prince—we must
recollect that Lewis and Hildebert were the real kings of that miserable
lot called Rois Fainéans, and that Pepin was their Maire du Palais, who

wielded the whole authority, though, as I said in a previous note, without
the title of king,

A.D. 699, A VISION OF THE UNSEEN WORLD. 335d

at dawn, and suddenly sitting up, he frightened all those who
were sitting weeping by the corpse, most terribly, and put them

‘to flight. But his wife, who loved him more than the others

did, although she was greatly frightened remained there, and
he, comforting her, said, “Fear not, for I am really risen
again from death, which had possession of me, and am per-
mitted again to live among men.” And immediately he rose

_ up and went to the oratory of the village, and remained all

day in prayer; and after that, he divided all the substance
that he possessed into three portions. Of which he gave one
to his wife, the second to his children, and retained one for
himself, which he immediately distributed among the poor.
And not long afterwards he received the treasure in the
monastery which is called Melrose, and was wholly released
from all secular cares, and having entered the monastery, he
related the horrible visions which he had seen, to the abbot
and to the brethren, in these words: ‘‘ A certain person of

brilliant aspect, and bright raiment, guided me. And we

proceeded silently, as it appeared to me, towards the place
where the sun rises at the time of the solstice, until we came
to a valley of immense width, infinite length, and unmeasur-
able depth. And this valley was on the left hand, presenting
one side excessively terrible with glowing flames, and the
other equally intolerable with furious hail and cold, which
penetrated and troubled everything. And each side was full
of the souls of men, which were seen by turns on one side
and on the other, tossed almost as if by a violent tempest.
And as they could not endure the violence of the general
heat, they leaped miserably into the middle of the intolerable
cold. And as even there they could find no rest, they leaped
again into the middle of the inextinguishable flames, to be
burnt in a miserable vicissitude, without any interval of rest.
And there was an innumerable multitude of unseemly spirits,
and I began to think what that infernal place was, of the in-
tolerable torments of which I had often heard a description.
The guide who was going before me answered to my thoughts,

— saying, ‘Do not look down here.’ But when he led me.

further on, frightened as I was with this horrible spectacle, I
suddenly saw the place in front of me begin to be obscured,
and become all full of darkness, and when we entered this
darkness, it gradually became so dense, that I could see nothing
else except just the form and dress of the person who was

336 MATTHEW: OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 699.

preceding me. And as we were going on in solitary darkness
through the shade, on a sudden there appeared to us frequent
balls of most ill-omened flame, ascending as it -were out of a
deep well, and again falling down into it. And when I had ©
been conducted to this pomt, my guide suddenly disappeared,
and left me alone in the middle of the darkness and of that
horrible vision. And when the same balls of fire kept on
without intermission, at one time rising on high, and at another
sinking down to the lowest gulf, I saw all the points of the
flanfes which mounted upwards, full of the spirits of men,
which rose like ashes which are thrown up with smoke, and
which at one time rose on high, and at another fell down to
the depths, when the vapours of the fire are drawn back. But
an extraordinary stench boiled up with these same vapours, |
and tainted all that place of darkness. And when! had stood
there for some time in alarm, and uncertain what to do, on a
sudden, I heard behind me a sound of miserable weeping, and
a laugh of mocking devils, which became louder, and reached
as far as me. And then I contemplated a crowd of malignant —
spirits, which with great exultation were thrusting down the
souls of men, grieving and howling, into the middle of the
darkness. And I was not able clearly to distinguish the
weeping of men and the laughter of the devils, but heard
only a promiscuous noise of both classes in my ears. And
some obscure spirits ascended from that fire- vomiting
abyss, and ran up and surrounded me, and alarmed me with
their fiery eyes, and breathed forth a fetid flame from their
mouth and nostrils, and endeavoured to lay hold of me with
fiery forceps which they held in their hands, and yet were
perfectly unable to reach me, though they ventured to frighten
me. And when I was thus hemmed in‘on all sides by enemies
and darkness, and was casting my eyes about in every direc-
tion, in case I might, by chance, see any means of salvation, I
perceived, on the road by which I had come, a brilliancy as
that of a star shining, amid the darkness, which gradually in-
creased in size, and hastened towards me ; and as it drew near,
all the hostile spirits dispersed, which were before endeavour-
ing to take hold of me with forceps, But the light which had
driven them away, as it came near, was the very guide who
had previously conducted me. And, presently, he turned his
course off towards the right, and began to lead me as if
towards the spot where the sun rises in the winter, and very

A.D. 699. A VISION OF THE UNSEEN WORLD. Sor.

soon he delivered me from the darkness, and led me into the air
of calm light. And as he was leading me there, I saw before
us a very large wall, to the height and length of which there

_ appeared to be no limit whatever. And I began to marvel

*

why we were approaching this wall, as there was no window
or door, or means of scaling it visible to any one; when,
therefore, we had arrived at the wall, immediately, by some
means or other, we found ourselves at the top of it, and there
was there a very wide and fertile plain, full of so delicious a
fragrance of blooming flowers, that the admirable sweetness of
its perfume at once drove away all the unpleasant smell of the
dark furnace which had overwhelmed me. And so brilliant a
light pervaded all that place, that it appeared brighter than all
the splendour of day, or than the beams of the noon-day sun.
For there was in this place an innumerable band of men in
white garments, and many places of abode for joyful souls.
And as he was leading me through the middle of the bands
of the happy inhabitants, I considered that it was the kingdom
of heaven; but he, answering my thoughts, said, ‘Do not
look towards this ;’ and when, proceeding onwards, we had
passed through the realms of good and blessed spirits, I saw
before us a much greater glory of light than before, and in
it I also heard most delicious voices singing; and such a
fragrance of marvellous perfume was diffused from the place,
that that perfume which, when I tasted it before, appeared to
me as strong as possible, now appeared to me very insignificant.
So also, that exquisite light of the flowery plain, in compa-
rison of the light which I now beheld, appeared trifling and
inconsiderable. When I hoped that we were about to enter
this delicious spot, my guide suddenly stopped, and, turning
his steps at once, led me back by the same way by which we
had come. Then he who was guiding me, said to me, ‘Do
you know what all these things are which you have seen?’ I
answered, ‘No.’ Then he said, ‘That valley which you be-
held, terrible with burning flames and rigid cold, is the very
place in which the souls of those people are to be examined

who postpone confessing and making amends for the crimes

which they have committed, and betake themselves to repent-
ance at the very moment of death, and thus leaving the body,
do all, at the day of judgment, arrive at the kingdom of
heaven: there are many also, whom the prayers of the living,

_and their alms and fasts, and, above all things, the celebration

VOL. I. Z

338 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 699.

of masses profit, so as to procure their release before the day
of judgment. Again, that fire-vomiting and fetid well, which

you saw, is the very mouth of hell, and whoever falls into that |

will not be released in all eternity. But that flowery spot
which you saw, in which you beheld beautiful youths, happy

and shining, is the place in which the souls of those persons |

are received who leave the body amid good works, and who,
nevertheless, are not so absolutely perfect as to deserve at once
to enter the kingdom of heaven; but they all in the day of

judgment will arrive at the sight of God and the joys of |

the kingdom of heaven. But those’ who are perfect in
every word, and deed, and thought, the moment that they quit
the body, enter the kingdom of heaven. And to the neigh-
bourhood of this place that other spot extends, where you
heard the sound of sweet song, amid sweet odours and brilliant
light. But as you are now about to return to the body, and
again to live among men, if you study to examine your own
actions curiously, and to keep your life and conversation in
uprightness and simplicity, you yourself shall, after your
death, receive a place of abode among these joyful bands of

good spirits whom you have seen. For I, when I departed |
for a time from you, did so, with a view to find out what was |

to become of you.’ When he had said this to me, I greatly
loathed returning to the body, being delighted with the sweet-
ness and beauty of the place that I had seen, and also with
the fellowship of the persons whom I beheld. But while
thinking of these things (in what manner it happened I know
not), I suddenly found myself alive among men.” At last, in
the vicinity of his cell, as has been said before, he used con-
stantly to go into the river which flowed by, for the sake of

the great effect it had in chastising his body, and he would |

often plunge into its rising waves, and there, as long as he
could stand, persevere in psalms and prayers, and remain fixed

there while the water rose up to his loins, and sometimes up |

to his neck; and when he left the water, he never took any
care to change his clothes, but kept them until they became
dry again by the warmth of his body. But in the winter, when

the crusts of ice were flowing down the river around him, those .

_ who saw him said, “It is a strange thing, brother Drichelm,
that you can stand such severity of cold ;’’? but he answered
simply, ‘I have seen things colder.’ And when they said,
“It is a wonder that you can like to preserve such austere
continence,” he answered, “I have seen things more austere.”

A.D. 703. SAINT BENEDICT DIES. 339

And so, to the day of his summons, he used, from his indefati-
gable desire for heavenly blessings, to tame his aged body with
daily fasting ; and he was the salvation of many, not only by
his actions, but also by his example. »

A.D. 700. Brithricus, count of Northumberland, wishing to
avenge his lord, king Egfred, invaded the land of the Picts in
a hostile manner ; but he fell, like his lord, feeling the effects
of the curses of the Irish. And so he was slain by the people
of the Picts. About the same time, the Romans overran Syria,
and slew twenty thousand Saracens.

A.D. 701. A good and learned man flourished, by name
Adamanunus, a priest, and the abbot of those monks who were
in the island of Hii. He being sent as an ambassador to king
A&frid, when he saw the rites of the ecclesiastical institution,
and of the observance of the feast of Easter, was at once
drawn over to agree to them. And when he had returned
home, he laboured to lead his flock, who were in the island
of Hu, into the way of truth; but he could not succeed, and
so he sailed to Ireland, and there he brought over almost
all the people to observe the legitimate time of Easter. And
this man of God also wrote a book on the place of our Lord’s
nativity, passion, and ascension, and gave a wonderful de-
scription of the character of the Holy Land.

A.D. 702. John was elected to the See of Rome, and held
it three years, two months, and thirteen days; and the see
was vacant one month and thirteen days.

A.D. 703. Saint Benedict, an English abbot, after a praise-
worthy life, rested in the Lord by a glorious death. This
man of God was born of a noble family of the English nation,
and in his youth he served in the army. Afterwards, though
he was a servant of King Oswy, and had received from him
no small estate, being the king’s own gift, he despised all the
perishable things of the world for the sake of Christ, and
went to Rome, that he might there become instructed in eccle-
siastical discipline, and apply himself to spiritual warfare, by
which he might benefit himself and others, and be found a
useful servant in the cultivation of the Lord’s vineyard ; and
returning from Rome to the island of Saint Honorat, he joined
a company of monks, received the tonsure, and having been.

regularly educated for two years, he then returned a second

time to the threshold of the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul;
at which time, when Pope Vitalianus had sent Theodore, arch-
Z2

340 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 704.

bishop of Canterbury, into Britain, he when he came brought
with him many relics of the saints. And afterwards, when
he became united with Egfrid, King of Northumberland, the
king gave him an estate sufficient for sixty families, to found
a monastery in honour of Peter the chief of the apostles, at
the mouth of the river Wira, a.D. 674, in the second indic-
tion. Another monastery, in honour of Paul, the teacher of
the Gentiles, is founded in Girwi, not far from the other, and
the same king also enriched that with estates sufficient for
sixty families, and the bishop took care to enrich it abun-
dantly, and filling these monasteries with religious monks,
he ordained Ceolfrid as president of the one, and Easterwin as
president of the other; and he did this with the view of having
a regular order preserved in them both, as well when he was
absent as when he was present. It was to this servant of God,
Benedict, that the venerable Bede, that teacher of the English,
was entrusted to be educated by him, and it was under him
that he is related to have been advanced to the order of the
priesthood. He is said to have gone to Rome five times, and
as he always returned enriched with divine improvement, he
laboured to educate those under his authority, both by his
actions and by his example. Atlength, after a laudable life,
Benedict, the conqueror of the vices, that most pious confessor
of Christ, yielded to the infirmity of the flesh, and rendered up
his spirit to his Creator, on the 12th of January. He was suc-
ceeded in his burdensome honours by a holy man, a pupil of
his own, Ceolfrid, under whom Bede, the servant of Christ,
most admirably filled up the labour which he had begun, by
sacred descriptions, to the advantage of the universal chureh.

A.D. 704. Hedda, bishop of Winchester, who had succeeded
Leutherius, died, and in the place where he died many mira-
cles were wrought, on account of the merits of his sanctity ;
for the men of that province were accustomed to throw dust
that they took up from that spot into the water, for the sake
of those who were sick, and then by having this water brought
to them or sprinkled on them, both men and cattle were de-
lighted to find that they recovered their health. And after
his death his bishopric was divided into two parts, one of which,
that is, the bishopric of Winchester, was given to Daniel, and
he held it to the time of Bede. The other diocese, that of Sher-
borne, was given to Aldelm, who held it four years, and there
remained to the bishop of Winchester only two provinces,
those, namely, of Hampton and Surrey. But the other had

———

A.D. 706. SICINNIUS APPOINTED TO THE ROMAN CHAIR. 341
the provinces of Wilton, Dorset, Berru, and Somerset, Devon,
and Cornwall. But the village of*Sherbornce is so small, that it
appears marvellous that a bishopric should have lasted there
so many ages.

Cu. XIJI.—From a.p. 705 ro 742.

Death of Ethelred—The See of Worcester is founded—Saint
Guthlac of Croyland—Gregory is Pope—Ina, king of the
West Saxons, defeats and kills Kadbert—Bede writes his
History—Schism of the Iconoclasts—Wars of Ethelbald,
King of Mercia—Death of Bede—His Character—Death
of Gregory.

A.D. 705. Ethelred, king of Mercia, who had become a monk,

after having ruled the kingdom with great vigour for thirty

years, died at Bardoneia, and was buried there. This king
had two sisters, who were most holy virgins, by name Kines-
drida and Kineswitha, both dedicated to God from their in-
fancy, and who nobly persevered to old age in their noble
determination of virginity. But the younger, not being con-
tent with the salvation of herself alone, restored Offa, her
betrothed husband, also to the kingdom of heaven; and Offa
reigned in the kingdom of the East Saxons a few years after

_Sigehard and Scofrid, being a youth of pleasant countenance,

in the flower of his age, and greatly beloved by his country-
men. He then, in consequence of the exhortations of the
before-mentioned Kineswitha, as she disdained to become his
wife, was taught to sigh for heavenly love, and went to Rome,
and having become a monk there, he ascended devoutly to
the kingdom of heaven. The remains of these holy virgins
are worshipped by, and bring good fortune to the people at
SFleVeshamstede, a village which is sometimes called the Bo-
rough of Saint Peter (Peterborough). The same year, A‘lfrid,
king of Northumberland, died, and was succeeded by his son
Osred, who reigned eleven years. Ethelred was succeeded as
king of Mercia by Kinred, who reigned five years. This year

also, John was selected pope of Rome, and occupied that see

one year.

ie 706. Sicinnius was appointed to the Roman chair, and
held it only twenty days. The same year, Justinian, who had
been an exile, was, by the assistance of Trehelbus, king of
Bulgaria, restored to his kingdom, and reigned six years.

- And when he was firmly seated on the throne, he put to death

all those men who had formerly expelled him, and ordered

342 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 707.

Absimarus Tiberius to be executed. He also tore out the
eyes of the patriarch Gallinicus, and sent him to Rome, and
slew a countless multitude of Roman citizens. He likewise
caused the town of Chersona, where he had lived in banish-
ment, to be destroyed, and practised unheard-of cruelties on
his enemies.

A.D. 707. Constantine was elected to the Roman chair, and
occupied it seven years and fifteen days, and the see was vacant
forty days. About the same time, there was a certain soldier,
of the family of Kinred, king of Mercia, a man openly devoted
to vice; and as the king earnestly advised him to seek repent-
ance, he so disregarded his warnings of salvation, that he
postponed all amendment of his flagitious life. But about
this time he was seized with an illness, and took to his bed,
and began to yield to the attacks of severe pain. Accordingly,
the king went to see him, and frequently exhorted him to tum
to repentance for his sins, before he died. But he replied that
he would not confess his sins till he recovered from his sick-
ness, lest his companions should reproach him with having done
so through fear of death. And when, as his disease became
more violent, the king came again to him to exhort him, he
began to cry out with a piteous voice, “‘ Why have you come
hither ? you cannot any longer be any advantage or salvation
to me.” And the king answered him, “ Do not say so; study
to adopt sensible and sane thoughts.” ‘I am not insane,”
said the man, “but I have a terrible conscience before my
eyes. For a little before you came, two youths entered this
house, and sat down close to me, the one at my head, and
the other at my feet, and one of them brought me forth a
book, very beautiful, but very small, for me to read, in which
I found all the good deeds which I have hitherto done, set
down. But they, looking on the book, said nothing, and imme-
diately there came up an army of most foul, malignant spirits,
which blockaded this house on the outside, and sitting down
inside also, filled the greater part of it. Then one of the foulest
among them, who appeared larger than his fellows, produced
a book of horrible appearance and enormous bulk, and insup-
portable weight, and ordered one of his attendants to bring it
to me to read. And when [ had read in it, I found all the
wickednesses, all the offences that I had committed, not only
in deed or word, but in even the slightest thought, written
down in it most legibly, in the blackest characters. And they

A.D. 710, KINRED PUTS ON THE MONASTIC HABIT. 343

said to those bright men in white garments, who were sitting
by me, ‘Why sit ye here, knowing that this man most un-
doubtedly belongs to us?’ They replied, ‘You speak truly,
take him and lead him away to the crowd of your damnation.’
Then two most wicked spirits rose up, having forks in their
hands, and smote me, one on the head and the other on the
feet, and they now are creeping, to my great torture, into all
my inward parts, and as soon as they meet I shall die, and
then, as all these devils are prepared to carry me off, I shall
be dragged down to hell.” Thus spoke that despairing wretch,
and inrmediately his miserable death ensued. But it is evi-
dent, in this case, that this display of his crimes was not made
for his own sake, as he derived no benefit from it, but for that
of others, that they, knowing the circumstances of his death,
might not delay their repentance, lest they should be antici-
pated by some unforeseen stroke of death, and so die unre-
pentant.

A.D. 708. Ina, king of the West Saxons, fought a battle
against Gerens, king of the Welch; and at the beginning of
the battle, Higebald, his general, was slain. But at last, the
king of Wales fled, and left his arms and spoils to the Angles,
who were pursuing him. The same year, Offer, governor of
Northumberland, fought against the Picts, and slew a great
multitude of them, and so became the avenger of king Egfrid.

A.D. 709. Aldelm, bishop of Sherborne, died. When that holy
man was only a priest, and abbot of the monastery which they
call the city of Maildulph, he, at the command of a synod,
wrote an admirable book to his nation against the errors of
the Britons, by which he induced them to adopt the Catholic
celebration of Easter. He also wrote an excellent treatise on
Virginity, and many other books likewise, being a man of the
greatest learning on every subject, and admirable for his eru-
dition, as well in mundane as in spiritual affairs. And after
his death, Forther succeeded him in his pontificate, who was
also a man of. most praiseworthy learning in the holy Scrip-
tures.

A.D. 710. Kinred, who had for some time governed the
kingdom of Mercia in a most noble manner, abandoned the
sceptre of the kingdom ina more noble manner still. For
while Constantine filled the office of pontiff at Rome, Kinred.
devoutly travelled to the threshold of the apostles, and there
put on the monastic habit, and remained there till the day of

344 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AD. 711.

his summons, in prayers, and fastings, and alms. He was
succeeded in the kingdom by Ceolred, the son of Ethelred,
who ruled that kingdom before Kinred. And he came to
Rome with Offa, king of the Saxons, of whom mention has
been made above. And Offa too, prompted by a devout mind,
left wife, and lands, and kinsmen, and country for Christ’s
sake, that he might receive in this life a hundred-fold, and
in the world to come life everlasting. He was succeeded in
his kingdom by Selred, the son of Segebert the Good, who
reigned thirty-eight years.

A.D. 711. In the province of the South Saxons, it was de-
termined, by a synodal decree, that those in that province who
had hitherto belonged to the diocese of Winchester, over which
Daniel at that time presided, should henceforth form a sepa-
rate diocese, and have a bishop of their own. And Eadbert
was consecrated their first bishop, who had been abbot of the
monastery of bishop Wilfrid of blessed memory, which is called
Selsey, where that servant of God, having been in exile for
five years, had obtained from the king of that province an
estate sufficient for eighty families, in which he might receive
his fellow-exiles, and supply them with the necessaries of life.
For it is a place surrounded on all sides by the sea, except on
the west, where it is connected with the main-land by a neck
of land of about the extent of a sling’s throw in width. And
when Wilfrid had received this spot, he founded a monastery
on it, and instituted a regular system of life, forming his con-
vent chiefly of those persons whom he had brought with him,
and his successors maintained his institutions for a long time
afterwards. And as king Ethelwald gave him not only the
land and the men on it, but also entire power over them, he
regenerated all those whom he found there in the water of
baptism, and strengthened them in the faith of Christ. And
there were in number, with servants and hand-maidens, about
two hundred and fifty souls, all of whom he delivered, as I may
say, from the service of the devil, and also, by giving them
their liberty, from the yoke of human slavery.

But when Wilfrid was recalled to the province of North-
umberland first of all, Cadwallader, king of the West Saxons,
and after him his suecessor Ina (having defeated and slain the
kings of that province), occupied that kingdom. Owing to
which circumstance, it happened that during all that time that
nation had no bishop of its own, but was subject to the bishop

A.D. 714. SAINT GUTHLAC DIES. 345

of the city of Winchester, as has been said before. And after
Eadbert, the first bishop of that country, Cella succeeded to
the office of the pontificate. And when he was withdrawn
from this world, that see was vacant till the death of Bede.
This year also the great Wilfrid died, forty-five years after he
first received his bishopric, as has been stated before. And
he was succeeded in the bishopric of Hagustald by Eatta, one
of his priests. And Bede the priest says a great deal about
his industry in his book of history, and greatly commends his
sanctity.

A.D. 712. Egwin, the third bishop of the Wicci, flourished.
But the first bishop of that province had been a man by name
Bosel, and the second was Ostfort. And Egwin, being the third
in order, going to Rome with Kinred, king of Mercia, and
Offa, king of the East Angles, obtained from pope Constantine
the privilege of liberty for the monastery which he had erected
in the district of Worcester, in order to render it more secure
from the irruption of wicked men. And his successors in the
_ bishopric of Worcester were Wilfrid, Mildred, Werenerd, Tilher,

Herefert, Debert, Herebert, Alwyne, Hereferth, Ethelhun, Wil-
ferth, Kinewolt, Dunstan, Oswald, and Eldulf, of whom the three
last were also afterwards archbishops of Canterbury. About
the same time, Justinian, the emperor, was slain by the heretic
Philippicus at Constantinople, and his son Tiberius with him.
For Justinian was the emperor who had treated those citizens
with excessive tyranny, ordering their city to be ploughed up,
and to be rased to the ground, because they had conspired
together to depose him, as has been related above.

A.D. 713. Philippicus usurped the Roman empire, and re-
ceived the purple at Constantinople, and reigned two years.
He, being a heretic, banished Cyrus, the bishop of Constanti-
nople, and placed in that see a proud monk of his own opinions,
by name John. And Philippicus himself sent to Rome to pope
Constantine letters full of erroneous doctrine, which that holy
man, by the advice of the Roman people, rejected, and ordered
that his name should not be inscribed in the rolls, that his
payment of money should not be received, and that his name
should not be recited at the solemnity of the mass.

A.D. 714. Saint Guthlac, the hermit, ended his days in a
marsh at Croyland. He was descended from no ignoble
family, but was of illustrious blood on both sides of his house.
_ And when his mother bore him, in the reign of Ethelred, king

346 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 714.

of Mercia, a certain hand of fiery brilliancy shone forth, which
seemed to descend from the sky and to be stretched out to the
cross, which was standing before the door of the house in which
was awomanin travail. And this mighty miracle wasimmediately
known all over the country of the Midland Mercians. And the
child was baptized, and, by desire of his parents, was called Guth-
lac. And when he advanced in age, and his strength increased,
he collected around him a band of followers, and followed the
profession of arms. But the innate kindness of his disposi-
tion was such, that out of the plunder that he collected from
every quarter, he always remitted a third part to those who
had possessed the property. Accordingly, when he had passed
eight years in this ferocious kind of life, one night he pon-
dered within himself, and recollected how vain the glory of
this world is, and how everlasting and certain the damnation
of the world to come. Therefore, when morning came, he
left his house and his fellow banditti, and betook himself to
the monastery of IAepenDune,’ which was famous at that time.
And there he received the tonsure, and assumed the clerical
garb, and determined to repent of his sins. And, after that,
he procured himself to be instructed in sacred literature and
monastic discipline, and laboured in solitude to emulate the
virtues of the saints ; and having read accounts of the virtues
of monks who had chosen a life of solitude, he desired to find
a wilderness, and undertook a journey to discover a suitable
place for himself. At last, he came to a large swamp, which
is situated on the eastern side of Mercia, and enquired dili-
gently what was the character of that district. And some one
told him that there was in that vast swamp a remote island,
which many people had endeavoured to inhabit, but which had
been abandoned by almost every one, on account of the monsters
seen in that desolate place. But when he heard that, this man
of God asked to have this place pointed out to him. And his
informant, taking with him a fishing-boat, carried the holy
man of God to the place. This island is called Croyland ; and
no one before had ever ventured to inhabit it, on account of
the terrible apparitions of the devils who dwelt in it.

In this place then the holy man began to dwell, commit-
ting himself especially to the protection of Saint Bartholomew.
And when he had abode there some time, he returned to
his companions, from whom he selected two boys, and then
returned with them to the island, where he took up his spi-

1 Now Repton.

A.D. 714. ACCOUNT OF SAINT GUTHILAC. 347

ritual arms with all faith, and manfully fought for the Lord.
And there was in the island a mound composed of earth of
the fields, in the side of which there appeared to be something
like a cistern, where the servant of God made himself a cabin,
in which he began to live, wearing garments of neither linen
nor wool, but. clothed only in skins. And so great was his
abstinence, that he only took a small portion of barley bread,
and a cup of water after sunset. But on a certain day, when
he was applying himself to his usual study of meditation, two
devils in human dress suddenly stood by him, who addressed
him familiarly in the following manner: ‘“ We have seen your
faith, and your fortitude, and invincible patience, and therefore
we will give over disquieting you, and moreover we wish to
instruct you in the way of life of the ancient hermits.
Moses, and Elias, and other fathers of antiquity, pleased
God by much abstinence. Therefore, you must keep afoot,
not for two days, or three, but rather for a whole week, that
as God formed the world in six days and rested on the
seventh, so man ought to replenish his spirit by fasting six
days, and eat on the seventh, and so refresh his body.” |The
man of God having heard this, replied as follows: ‘‘ Let them
be turned backward, who seek my soul to destroy it.” And
presently, according to his daily custom, he took a small piece
of barley bread,—but the evil spirits retired, and filled all
the place with their sad lamentations.

A short time after this event, while the blessed man was,
according to his custom, watching, during the dark night, and
intent on his prayers, foul spirits filled the whole of his cell,
and in a moment they bound the man of God, and cast him
out of his cell, and threw him into the muddy water of the
black swamp. Then, having taken him up and carried him
over very rough ground, they dragged him on till they nearly
dislocated all the joints of his body. At length they stopped
him for a while, and laid injunctions on him to depart from
that habitation. But he replied, ‘‘The Lord is on my right
_ hand, that I shall not be moved.’ They took him up a second
time, and began to scourge him with whips, made as it were
of iron, and when they had scourged him, and afflicted him
with all kinds of tortures, they carried him up into the air,
where the heaven appeared to be black with the multitude of
unclean spirits. And they immediately united, and bore the
servant of Christ to the jaws of hell. He, beholding the tor-

348 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 714.

ments of hell, forgot all the punishments which he had suffered,
in comparison with these greater ones. Then they began to
insult the holy man, saying, “ Behold, we have power to thrust
you down into these punishments, that you may there be
punished, everlastingly, for your sins.”” But he spoke to them
thus: “‘ Woe to ye, children of darkness! If ye have this
power, why do you delay ?”’ And as they are preparing them-
selves, as if to do so, lo! Saint Bartholomew arrives with
immense brightness, and orders the devils to restore the
servant of God to his abode, without delay. And they, quicker
than thought, fulfilled the commands of the apostle. But,
while Guthlac was being borne through the air, a voice was
heard as of people playing on the harp—“ The saints shall go
on from virtue to virtue, and the God of Gods shall appear in
Sion.” And it happened in the days of Ceoled, king of
Mercia, at the time of cock-crow, that the blessed Guthlae
appeared to himself to be hearing the outcries of a tumultuous
multitude. Then the man of God went forth from his cell,
and perceived a multitude, speaking the British language, ap-
proaching his house, and presently he saw his house on fire.
And as he hastened to come to the protection of his house, he
was intercepted by lizards, and borne aloft into the air. Then,
when he found that it was a snare of the enemy, he began to
chant this verse of the psalm, ‘The Lord is my helper, and I
shall look down upon my enemies.’

At another time he was occupied with his nightly prayers,
when he felt the island tremble with a great noise. And
presently he heard noise, as of herds of cattle running. And
immediately he beheld figures of various monsters, approach-
ing from all quarters, that is to say, figures of wild beasts,
and other animals. And as they all made a terrible uproar
around the soldier of Christ, he said, ‘“ Most wretched Satan,
why dost thou endeavour to imitate a strength which does not '
belong to you? In the name of Jesus Christ, I command you
to desist.”” And after these words, immediately all the phan-—
toms disappeared.

A certain bishop, by name Hebba, came to converse with
the holy man, having in his retinue a certain librarian of the
name of Wilfrid. He, hearing of his servants talking of the
virtues and miracles of the blessed Guthlac, said to some, who
were doubting by whose power he did these works, that if he
were to see him he should be able to discern whether he were a

I aha a:

A.D: 718. RABBOD DECLINES TO BE BAPTIZED. 349

attue worshipper of God, or whether he only put on an appear-
ance of sanctity. Accordingly, the bishop before-mentioned,
being refreshed by the conversation of the man of God, began
to exhort him earnestly to receive the ordination of priesthood
from him. And he, falling at the feet of the bishop, promised
to obey his injunctions. Therefore, the bishop being delighted,
having first consecrated a church, joyfully promoted him to
the rank of the priesthood. And on that day, contrary to
his usual wont, he was compelled, by the invitation of the
pontiff, to sit down at supper with the rest. Then, beholding

- Wilfrid, of whom I have spoken before, he said to him, “ Oh!

brother Wilfrid, what do you now think ought to be said of
the man of whom you yesterday undertook most positively to
pronounce an opinion ?” He, marvelling greatly, rose up, and
prostrated himself at his feet, humbly begging pardon. If I
were to desire to give a full account of all the virtues of this
holy man, it would be an undertaking resembling that of be-
ginning to count the sands of the sea. He commenced his
solitary life in the twenty-fifth year of his age, and continued
in it fifteen years. And when he died, being perfect in all

- holiness, he was buried in his own oratory, which he had de-

dicated to the honour of Saint Bartholomew. And in that
place, all who entreat his aid with pious minds obtain the
indulgence of divine mercy.

A.D. 715. Gregory was elected to the Roman chair, which
he occupied fifteen years, eight months, and twenty-two days ;
and the see was vacant thirty-five days. The same year,
Anastasius rose up in insurrection against the Emperor Philip-
picus, deprived him of his eyes, usurped his throne, and reigned
three years.

A.D. 716. Ina, king of the West Saxons, fought against
Ceolred, king of Mercia, at @ovnesbtrch, and the victory re-
mained undecided.

A.D. 717. Theodore having obtained the empire of Rome,
reigned one year. The same year, Osred, king of Northum-

berland, fought a battle near the sea-shore, and being unsuc-

cessful, was slain. He was succeeded by Kinred, who reigned
two years.
A.D. 718. Rabbod, duke of Friesland, was, by the preaching
of the blessed bishop Wilfran, induced to be baptized ; but
when he had put one foot in the font, he drew back the other,

~ and asked whether the greater number of his predecessors

350 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 722.1

were in Paradise or in hell? And when he heard that they
were in hell, he drew back altogether, saying, “It is better
for me to follow the greater than the smaller number.”’ The
same year, Leo was created emperor, who reigned thirty-three
ears.

A.D. 719. Ceolred, king of Mercia, died, and was buried at
Lichfielv, and was succeeded in the kingdom of Mercia by
Ethelbald, a brave and mighty prince, who reigned most _vic-
toriously for forty-one years. The same year, Kenred, king
_ of Northumberland, died, and left the government of his king-
dom to Osric, who held it twenty years. And king Ethelbald
was the son of Alwy, who was the son of Eoppa, who was the
son of Wibba, &c. &c.

A.D. 720. Ingilf, brother of king Ina, ended his days. And
this year, Cuthburga, the sister of king Ina, and of Kene-
burga, built an abbey at Wimborne. This Cuthburga was
given in marriage to Egfrid, king of Northumberland, but
separated herself from him in his life-time.

A.D. 721. The holy John, archbishop of Beverlac, rested in
the Lord. This holy man, a doer of many holy works, has
had Bede for his panegyrist in his actions of the Angles. But
there is also this remarkable circumstance with respect to that
holy man, that the inhabitants of Beverlac are accustomed to

exhibit, in the place where he is buried, very savage bulls as |

a spectacle, which, being bound with tight chains, are led
forward by great labour on the part of strong men. But the
moment that they enter his cemetery, all their ferocity is

calmed, and they are so quiet that, from their simplicity, you |
might think them sheep. Therefore, when their bonds are |

loosened, they are set free, to play in the court yard ; though,

before, they attacked, with their horns and feet, whatever |

came in their way. John was succeeded by Wilfrid the second,
one of his priests, who lived beyond the time of Bede.

A.D. 722. Ina, king of the West Saxons, led a great army |

into Sussex, and slew in battle Eadbert, whom he had _previ-
ously driven from the camp, which is called Taunton, where
Ina had built a fortress, which has already been mentioned.

The same year, Withred, king of Kent, died, and left three |

sons heirs of his kingdom, of whom Ethelbert, the first born,
succeeded to the throne, and reigned seventeen years. About

the same time, Tobias, bishop of Rochester, died, and was }

succeeded by Hadulfus.

A.D. 727. INA FORSAKES HIS KINGDOM. 351

A.D. 723. Ricobert, bishop of Rheims, was deposed from
his bishopric by Charles, king of France, because he showed
a hostile disposition in refusing to open the gates of the city
of Rheims to him when he was marching against Reginfred.
And on the same account, Eutherius, of Arles, was ejected
from his bishopric.

A.D. 724. A certain wicked Jew promised a certain noble
that he should reign for fifty years, and by that means per-
suaded him to order the images of God and the saints to be
destroyed throughout his whole kingdom ; and, accordingly,
he, influenced by a hope of a long reign, issued such an edict,
but expired immediately afterwards.

A.D. 725. Bede, a venerable priest of the Angles, began his
history, and having laudably began, and happily finished it, he
presented it to king Geolwlf.

A.D. 726. The Emperor Leo ordered the images of Christ
and his saints to be broken into small pieces, for which he
was abundantly refuted by Pope Gregory in his letters, but to
no purpose.

A.D. 727. Ina, a prosperous and powerful king, leaving his
kingdom to his kinsman Ethelhard, went to Rome, in order
to exchange his temporal kingdom for an eternal one. And
when he arrived in that city, he built a house in the city, with
the consent and goodwill of Pope Gregory, which he called
the school of the English, that the kings of England and the

. royal family, with the bishops and priests, and clergy, might

come to it to be instructed in the catholic doctrine and faith,
so as to prevent anything improper, or contrary to the catholic
unity, from being taught in the Anglican Church: and then,
when they had been strengthened im a lasting faith, they might
return to their own country. For the doctrine and schools of
the English, ever since the time of Saint Augustine, had been
interdicted by the Roman Pontiffs, on account of the continual
heresies which had arisen in Britain at the time of the arrival
of the English, when Pagans, being intermingled with the
Christians, corrupted the grace of the holy conversation of the

Christian faith. Therefore, Ina built, near the house which
_ I have already mentioned, a church in honour of the blessed
_ Virgin Mary, in which, whenever the English came to Rome,
the divine mysteries might be celebrated, and in which they

_ might be buried whenever it happened that any of the English

died in Rome. And that all these things might receive the

352 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 728

power of a lasting durability, it was, by a general decree, or
dained throughout the whole kingdom of the West Saxons, o
which the before-mentioned Ina was king, that a penny should
be sent by every family to the blessed Peter and the Roman —
church, which payment is called in English Romescot, in—
order that the English, who abode there, might have a means”
of support from that source. And this church, of which I
have already spoken, is often described in the chronicles of
the English as having been burned down and again rebuilt.

This is the same man who built the abbey of Glastonbury,
which has been long since destroyed, and which he enriched
with many possessions, and strengthened with the bulwark
of the privileges which he granted to it.. The name of this
king’s brother was Ingilfus, and his sisters were the holy Cuth-
burga and the holy Quenburga, and his wife’s name was Sex-
burga. He was succeeded in his kingdom by Ethelhard, his
kinsman, descended from the family of king Cedric, who
reigned fourteen years. The same year also, Ethelhard fought
a battle against the young Oswald, a youth of the royal family
of the kings of the West Saxons, who endeavoured to make
himself master of the kingdom. But when the young man
had found himself to be no match for the powers of the king,
he escaped in flight, and left Ethelhard his kingdom in peace.

A.D. 728. When pope Gregory had found the emperor Leo
wholly incorrigible, he withdrew Rome, Italy and Spain, from
his power, and forbade their revenues to be paid to him. This”
year also, a certain brother, whom I forbear to name, being
placed in a noble monastery, lived disgracefully among the
brethren. He was continually reproved by the brethren and
elders of the place, and admonished to betake himself to a
purer course of life. And although he refused to listen to
them, still he was endured by them on account of the need
they had of his works, because he was a man of extraordinary
skill as a smith. For he was much addicted to drunkenness, —
and to the other allurements of a dissolute life, and preferred
to remain day and night in his workshop to playing or praying
in the church, or listening to the word of life. At last, being
stricken by a severe sickness, and reduced to the last gasp
he summoned the brethren around him, and told them that
he saw hell opened, and Satan sunk down in the abyss of
hell; and likewise Caiaphas, and the rest of those who had
slain the Lord, all close together, and delivered to the aveng

A.D. 732. TADWIN ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY. 353

ing flames, and in their neighbourhood (said he), woe is me!
_ I see a place of eternal damnation prepared for me, miserable
that Iam.” The brethren hearing this, began earnestly to
exhort him even then, while he remained in the flesh, to be-
take himself to repentance. He answered despairingly, “I
have no longer any time to change my course of life, when I
myself have seen my judgment completely fixed.” And say-
ing this, he departed, without having received the last offices.
And this circumstance becoming extensively noised abroad,
excited many to turn themselves to repentance for their sins,
and not to delay.

A.D. 729. ‘Two terrible stars were seen around the sun,
one of which preceded the rising, and the other followed the
setting sun, as if they were at tlre same time omens to both east
and west of dire calamities, or else, at all events, one preceded
the approach of day, and the other the approach of night, to
show that misfortunes impend over mortals both day and night.
And they bore a heap of fire towards the north, inclining to-
wards the west, and they appeared in the month of January,
and remained about a fortnight. And the same year a most
terrible visitation of the pagans laid waste Gaul and Spain
with terrible slaughter ;' but they not long afterwards suffered
the deserved punishment for their treachery, being crushed
in a miserable manner.”

A.D. 730. Gregory became pope, and occupied the Roman
see ten years. ‘The same year, Osric, king of Northumber-
land, left his kingdom, which he had held for fifteen years, to
eolwolf. Ceolwolf was the son of Cutha, who was the son
of Cuthwin, who was the son of Lethewold, who was the son of
Egwald, who was the son of Aldelm, who was the son of Oga,
ho was the son of Ida. This king being truly blessed, and
ery sufficiently accomplished in literature and knowledge,
howed plainly by his end how much advantage he derived
rom his course of life.

A.D. 731. Brithwald, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and .
eft his archbishopric to Tadwin.
_a.p. 732. Tadwin was consecrated archbishop of Canterbury

1 The author here refers apparently to the subjugation of Spain and
vasion of Gaul by the Saracens. The battle of Xeres, which decided the
te of Spain, took place a,p. 711. The battle of Tours, by which Charles
Martel delivered Europe from the fear of being overrun in a similar man-
er, A.D. faa
Vou. 11. AA

354 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 734. ~

in his own city, by the venerable men Daniel, bishop of Win-
chester, Ingolgus, bishop of London, Alwyn, bishop of Lich-
field, and Ealdulf, bishop of Rochester, on the tenth day of
the month of June. He was a man very eminent for his
strictness as an ecclesiastic. y

A.D. 733. Archbishop Tadwin, having received a pallium,
ordained two bishops. The same year, also, king Ceolwolf was
taken prisoner, shaved, and sent back to his kingdom.

A.D. 734. Ethelbald, king of Mercia, having collected an
army, besieged the castle of Somerton. And as no one was
able to bring assistance to the beleaguered citizens, the said
king made himself master of the castle. And after that, having
compelled all the citizens to submit to him, he reigned over
all the provinces of England, as far as the river Humber. The
same year, an eclipse of the sun took place, on the fourteenth .
of August, about three o’clock in the day, to such an extent,
that nearly the whole orb of the sun appeared covered over
with a black shield.

The same year, Bede, a venerable man, and of an unvaryingly
heavenly disposition, ascended to the palaces of heaven. He
was a man endowed with divine virtue, restraining his own
vicious propensities and those of others, on which account he
deserves to be held in everlasting recollection. For he was a
venerable priest, having been educated in that monastery of
Peter the chief of the Apostles, which is at the mouth of the
river Wire, and is called Gerewi; where he spent the whole
period of his life, under the most reverend abbot Benedict, _
and afterwards under Ceolfrid, being a man of God, thrice
blessed, devoting all his labours to the Holy Scriptures and to
meditative studies, delighting always in learning, or writing,
or teaching. In the nineteenth year of his age he attained to
the office of deacon, and in his thirtieth year he was advanced
to the rank of the priesthood ; after which time, he employed
himself till his fortieth year in compiling from the works of
the holy fathers, for the benefit of the church, seventy-eight
books, in thirty-six volumes, which he himself gives a list of
in his History of England, composing them in a rigidly pure
style, by which he deserved to be accounted by the whole
church the teacher of the English, and their venerable father.
And when, last of all, he published his History of the Kings of
England, and other events and exploits, among his books,

j

A.D. 734, LETTER OF POPE SERGIUS. 359

having worked them up with great care and labour, he burst
forth into prayer, saying, “I entreat you, O good Jesus, to
give also to him, to whom you have by your favour granted
to imbibe sweetly the words of your knowledge, that he may
hereafter arrive at the fountain of all wisdom, and may appear
for ever before your face. Moreover, I most humbly entreat
all those to whom this history may ever come, all those of my
nation who either read or hear it, to remember often to entreat
the Divine clemency for my infirmities, both of mind and
body, and to give me this requital in their provinces, so that
I may find in all of them the fruit of their pious intercession,
Amen!” :

Moreover, the fame of this venerable man was so well known
to the Roman pontiff, that his eminence entreated his aid to
explain certain obscure questions in the Holy Scriptures. But
that he ever went to Rome I do not positively affirm. Never
theless, I have no doubt that he was invited thither, as this
letter will plainly show, which formerly pope Sergius directed
to the abbot Ceolfrid, and which is couched in the following
terms :—

“ Sergius, the bishop, the servant of the servants of God, to
Ceolfrid, the religious abbot, health, and the apostolical bene-
diction. ~With what words, and in what manner can we ex-
press the clemency and unspeakable providence of our God,
and give proper thanks for all his benefits towards us, in that
He leads us who are placed in darkness and the shadow of

_ death to the light of knowledge? We therefore exhort the

god-beloved kindness of your pious spirit, that (as there have
arisen some questions about certain articles relating to eccle-
siastical affairs, which cannot be cleared up without a nore
protracted examination, for which purpose we have need of
conferring with some one thoroughly imbued with a know-
ledge of literature), you, as becomes a devout helper of our
holy mother, the universal church, will not delay to accom-
modate your obedient devotion to this our exhortation, but
that you will, without any delay, send to the sight of our
mediocrity that religious servant of God, the venerable Bede,
a priest of your monastery, to the threshold of the chief
apostles, my lords Peter and Paul, your lovers and protectors,

z _ who, by the favour of God shown to your holy kings, you may

not doubt shall return successfully to you, when the desired
examination of the aforesaid articles have been completed by
AA2

356 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 734:

the aid of God. For whatever is made known and imparted
to the universal church, by his pre-eminent wisdom, will, as
we confidently trust, be an advantage to all those who are under
your rule.

But at the time when the Venerable Bede, a man worthy of
God, departed this life, for a fortnight before the resurrection
of our Lord, he was afflicted with an incessant pain and diffi-
culty of breathing. But even then, he was cheerful and full
of joy, giving thanks night and day and every hour to Almighty
God, up to the day of our Lord’s Ascension, that is, till the
twenty-fifth of May, and giving daily lectures to his disciples
out of the Holy Scriptures, and all the rest of the day he
passed in singing psalms and in prayer. And the whole night
he watched, and passed it in joy and exultation and giving
of thanks, except when occasionally a brief sleep interrupted
him. ‘The third day before the Ascension of our Lord, he
began to suffer more from his asthma, and a slight swelling
appeared in his feet, a warning and indication of impending
death. Then, having summoned a congregation, he was anointed
with the kiss of peace, and having reverently, and with tears
received his viaticum, he implored all present to have a remem-
brance of his soul. And for some of the brethren he showed
a more intimate friendship, and secretly gave them some
presents as memorials of him. And on the day of the Ascen-
sion of our Lord, when the departure of his soul from his
body was near at hand, he lay down on a cloak, that was placed
beneath him, in front of the oratory, at which he was accus-
tomed to pray, and with unchanged countenance and feeling,
he prayed for the grace of the Holy Spirit, speaking thus ;
“‘O king of glory, Lord of virtues, you who this day ascended
triumphant above all the heaven, leave us not orphans, but
send to us the promised gift of the Father, namely, the Spirit
of Truth.’ And when he had uttered this prayer, he yielded
up his spirit. And as his spirit departed, those present per-
ceived such an odour as frankincense does not emit, nor the
most precious balms supply. And he was buried at the time
in the same monastery; but afterwards he was placed to rest
with the blessed Guthbert, bishop of Durham, in a sarcophagus,
exquisitely wrought of gold and silver.

At the time when Bede, the servant of God, departed this
life, these kings were flourishing in England: Ethelbert .was
reigning in Kent ; Ethelhardin Wessex; Selred in Hast Saxony »

A.D. 738. ETHELWALD, BISHOP OF LINDISFARNE, DIES. 357

Ethelbald in Mercia ; Ethelred (who, by his queen Leofrona,
became the father of the Holy Albert) in East Anglia; Ceol-
wulf, in the province of Northumberland. Also under these
kings, were the following bishops; in Kent there was Tadwin,
archbishop of Canterbury ; Ealdulf in the city of Rochester ;
Ingoldus, bishop of London. Two in East Anglia, namely,
Eadbert, bishop of Helmham, and Ethelac, bishop of Dom-
merc, In Mercia, there was Alwyn at Lichfield, Wilfrid in
the province of the Wiccii, the seat of whose see was at Wor-
cester ; and over the nation of the Mercians, who dwelt beyond
the Severn, Wilfrid was bishop, whose cathedral city was
Hereford. In the province of Lindsay was Kinebert, at Win-
chester, Daniel. In the province of Northumberland were
four bishops, Wilfrid at York; Ethelwald at Lindisfarne ;
Acca at Hagustald; and Ethelin at Witern. The same year,
Tadwin, archbishop of Canterbury, died. The same year,
the moon appeared suffused with a bloody redness, for an
entire hour, on the last day of January. The same year, Acca
was driven from the bishopric of Hagustald, and after an in-
terval of two years, he was succeeded by Frithebert, on the
seventh of September.

A.D. 735. Nothelm was ordained archbishop of Canterbury,
of whom Bede in the preface to his History’of England, testifies
that he was the greatest use to him in compiling his account of
the exploits of the English, by bringing him letters out of the
Roman archives, which were necessary for that work, while
he was as yet only a priest in the city of London.

A.D. 736. Nothelm, archbishop of Canterbury, having re-
ceived the pallium from the pope, was confirmed in his epis-
copal office.

A.D. ~47. Alwyn, bishop of Lichfield, being of an extreme
old age, died ; and in his stead, two bishops were consecrated,
namely, Witta at Lichfield and Tota as the first bishop of
Leicester.

A.D. 738. Forther, bishop of Sherburne, went to Rome with
the queen of the West Saxons, forsaking all their splendid
possessions. Likewise, in those days, a great many kings,

bishops, noblemen, and men of meaner birth, clergy and laity,

did the same thing with their wives. The same year, Ethel-

_ wald, bishop of Lindisfarne, paid the debt of nature, and was

succeeded in his burdensome honour by Renulf. At this time
also, Frithebert was ordained bishop of Hagustald. The same

398 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 744.

year, Selred, king of the East Saxons, was deprived of both
his life and his kingdom. and was succeeded by Swithred.

a.p. 739. Ethelhard, king of the West Saxons, died, and
in his stead, his brother, Cuthred, reigned fifteen years. This
year also, as some assert, Ceolwolf, the most noble king of
Northumberland, departed from this life to Christ. He was
succeeded in the kingdom by Eadbert, his kinsman, who
reigned eleven years. Hadbert was the son of Kata, the son
of Lethewod, the son of Ceolwolf. The same year, Nothelm,
archbishop of Canterbury, and Ealdulph, bishop of Rochester,
both died.

A.D. 740. Cuthbert, the eleventh archbishop of Canterbury,
is said to have been consecrated. And when he had received
the pallium, he consecrated Dumi, bishop of the church of
Rochester.

A.D. 741. Ethelbald, the proud king of Mercia, harassed
Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, with war, and also with
internal seditions. At last they made peace with one another,
and kept it for a short time.

A.D. 742. Gregory died, and Pope Zachary became pope.
He occupied the chair of Rome nine years and three months.
The same year, Constantine became emperor, and reigned
thirty-five years.

Cu. XIII.—From a.p. 743 To a.p. 802.

Wars in Britain—Miracles wrought at the tomb of Benedict—
Offa, king of Mercia—Charlemagne makes war upon the
Saxons and on the Lombards—Allies himself with Offa—
Honours paid to the body of St. Alban—LEthelbert, king
of the East Angles and Martyr—Offa goes to Rome—Dies—
Charlemagne goes to Rome—Egbert succeeds to the throne
of the West Saxons.

A.D. 743. Fiery visions were seen in the sky on the first of
January, such as no men of that age had ever beheld. The
same year, Wilfrid the younger, archbishop of York, died,
and was succeeded by Egbert, a man thoroughly learned in
divine knowledge.

A.D. 744. Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, and Ethelbald,
king of Mercia, being at peace with one another, united their
forces, and fought against the Britons, who had collected an
army from all quarters. And when these most valiant kings,

A.D. 748, APPLICATION FOR THE RELICS OF BENEDICT. 359

rushing with strong battalions upon the enemy, pressed very
hard upon them, and bore them down terribly, the Welch
were put to flight, and gave their backs to the smiters, and
their spoils to the pursuers, and the kings returned victori-
ously to their own country.

A.D. 745. Egbert, archbishop of York, reclaimed, in a
praiseworthy manner, the pallium, which, ever since the time
of Paulinus, first archbishop of York, had been passed over
by eight bishops.

A.D. 746. Daniel, hishop of Winchester, ended his days in
the forty-fifth year of his bishopric, and was succeeded by
Humfrey. The same year, the emperor Constantine, who
devoted all his attention to magic arts, and bloody sacrifices
and luxury, caused many monks and clergy to be stoned for
their adherence to the true faith. And the pretended patriarch
of Constantinople agreed with him in all his measures, on ac-
count of his love of earthly dignities. On which account,
indignation descended from heaven upon the citizens of that
city, warning their wicked emperor to turn himself from the
madness with which he was raging, but he continued unal-
_ tered. Therefore, pestilence and death visited them, beginning
in Sicily and Calabria, till it reached the city of Rhegium,
which it so completely desolated, that there were many houses
in which there was not an inhabitant found. Anastasius him-
self was worn out with excessive sufferings, vomiting up all
his bowels as it were, and at last he died miserably.

A.D. 747. There were seen stars falling from heaven, so
that all who beheld them thought that the end of the world
was at hand.

A.D. 748. Some monks of the Cassian brotherhood, at the in-
stance of Charles the Great, procured letters from Pope Zachary
to Pepin, king of the French, begging him to cause the monks
of Floriacum to restore to its proper place the body of the
most blessed Benedict, which they had stolen, in order that ‘
the aforesaid servants of God might rejoice in the restoration of
this among them, and that they themselves might receive their
reward from God. And when the pious king, Pepin, had read
this letter, he gave a positive command to Remigius, arch-
bishop of Rouen, to go with three other bishops to Floriacum,
in order to restore the greatest portion of the holy Benedict
to the Cassian monks, without, however, wholly depriving the
monastery at Floriacum of it. But when the matter became

360 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 749.

known to the monks of Floriacum, they kept a three days’
fast, and prayed before his tomb with tears, saying, ‘‘O you,
our only hope after God, O father Benedict, receive, we beseech
you, our tears, and remain with us in this place, which you
have long since condescended to select ; but if you are so in-
dignant at the weight of our sins as to be unwilling to remain
with us, you shall at all events have us for most devout fellow
travellers.” And when they had spent the whole three days
in these sobbings and weepings, lo! the before-mentioned
bishops arrive, and endeavour to fulfil the commands of the
king. And when the abbot Medo, who.at that time ruled that
monastery, had learned the arrival of the bishops, and the
reason of it, he summoned the brethren of the congregation to
the neighbouring church of the blessed Peter, and shut him-
self up with them then, and there they all fell on the ground,
and pouring forth plentiful tears, betook themselves to prayer.
But the bishops having entered the temple of the Holy Mother
of God, before they came to the tomb of the blessed Benedict,
were struck with such great fear and blindness, that they could
not recognise one another. When then they found themselves
blinded by the divine vengeance, they began tremblingly to
go through the church, until in their wanderings they came
to the ropes of the bells. And pulling them with all their
might, they sought to bring themselves aid in this manner.
The abbot and the brethren, who were lying prostrate in prayer,
hearing these sounds, entered the. church, and found the
bishops, who could still see nothing. And when they said to
them, “‘ What are you doing, O Pontiffs ?”” they answered and
said, ‘ We have come hither rashly, in order to arouse the
blessed father Benedict to vengeance. Woe unto us, because
we have sinned! But ye, servants of God, pray for us to God
Almighty, that he may open our eyes, and we promise you
that we will never venture-to do such deeds in future.” On
this, the brethren shed abundance of tears in their behalf, and
some fell on the ground, and prayed more earnestly for them,
that the divine mercy would consent to restore them their
sight. And while they were praying, their eyes were opened,
and the bishops returned with trembling to their own homes.

The same year, Cuthbert, archbishop of Canterbury, and
Ethelbald, king of Mercia, held a council.

A.D. 749. Hadbert, king of Kent, after he had held the
helm of the kingdom for six years, ended his days, and was

A.D. 753. MARTYRDOM OF SAINT BONIFACE. 361

succeeded by Ethelbert, who reigned fourteen years. The
same year, Kineric, son of Cuthred, king of the West Saxons,
was slain. The same year, Hthelwold, king of the East
Angles, died, and Beorna and Ethelbert divided his dominions
between them.

A.D. 750. Eadbert, king of Northumberland, took prisoner
bishop Kinewulf, and brought him to the city of Bebba, which
is now called %aamburc, in French, and gave orders to be-
siege the church of the blessed Peter, in Lindisfarne.

A.D. 751. Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, fought a battle
against Ethelhun, a most gallant general, who raised a sedition
against his lord; and, although m the number of his soldiers
he was unequal to his lord, he still met him in the plain, and
fought a most severe battle. But at last the king retired
from the field victorious, and left Ethelhun severely wounded.
The same year, Stephen was elected pope, and occupied the
Roman chair five years and twenty-eight days. He, in the
last year of his pontificate, transferred the Roman empire
from the Greeks to the Germans, in the person of king Char-
lemagne, son of Pepin, king of France, who had been made
so in his youth.

A.D. 752. Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, unable to
endure the haughty exactions and insolence of Ethelbald, king
of Mercia, met him in a hostile manner at eorford, where the
two kings fought a most terrible battle. But Ethelbald,
while Ethelhun marched before him with his standard, on
which was embroidered a golden dragon} fought with furious
rage against his enemies; but the standard-bearer of king
Cuthred directed his lance against the hostile standard-bearer,
and ran him through, so that a shout arose, and the side of
Cuthred was greatly strengthened. And the thunders of war,
and the clang of blows, and the cries of men falling on both
sides, sounded terribly. On each side was there hope of vic-
tory, and on neither any thought of flight. But, at length,
God, who resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble,
put Ethelbald to flight, and joyful victory fell to the lot of
Cuthred. The same year, an eclipse of the moon took place
after midnight, on the last day of July.

A.D. 753. Saint Boniface, bishop of the city of Mayence,
with fifty-three other persons, received the crown of martyr-
dom in Friesland.

362 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AsD. 757%

‘a.p. 754. The holy Boniface, who is also called Winfrid,
archbishop of France, perished by martyrdom.

A.D. 755. Cuthred, king of the West Saxons, and Ethel-
bald, king of Mercia, fought a severe battle in the place which
is called Sacchenda. But Ethelbald, who would not escape
destruction by flight, was slain, and so died. And Ethelbald,
king of Mercia, was succeeded by Beorredus. And after the
death of Ethelbald, the king who reigned forty-one years, the
kingdom of the West Saxons was greatly strengthened.

A.D. 756. Paul became pope, and filled the chair at Rome
for ten years. In which year also, the most mighty king
Cuthred, who had enjoyed such a long course of prosperity,
and gained so many victories, ended his life by the pitiless
hand of death. He was succeeded in his kingdom by Sige-
bert, his kinsman, who held it, however, only a short time.
For he was so insolent and swoln in his pride, on account of
the exploits of his predecessor, that he was intolerable even to
his own servants. And as he ill-treated them in every ima-
ginable manner, and perverted or changed the laws of his
predecessors for his own advantage, Cumbra, a most noble
officer, reported to the king the complaints of the whole.
people ; and, because he advised the king to govern the people
committed to his care with greater mildness, and to clothe
himself with humility, and appear amiable to God and men,
the king ordered him to be put to death by an atrocious mode
of execution ; and from that time forth became more cruel ©
still, and increased the tyranny which he practised upon his
people. And, when that was found to be the case, the nobles
of the kingdom, with all the people, met together, and Sige-
bert was expelled from his kingdom by the deliberate wisdom
of the whole nation, and Kineulf, a youth of the royal family,
was elected, and promoted to be king. And king Sigebert,
after he was deposed, fled to the wood which is called An-
dredeswald, and hid himself where Ansian, the swineherd of
Cumbra, the officer who, as we have related, had been wickedly
put to death, found the king concealed at Pribetesflave, and
slew him to avenge his own master.

The same year, Humphrey, bishop of Winchester, died, and
was succeeded by Kinehard.

A.D. 757. Eadbert, king of Northumberland, voluntarily
left his kingdom to Osulf, his son, who held it for a year, and
then lost it. For he was wickedly slain by his own nation

A.D. 758. INSURRECTION IN MERCIA. 363

on the twenty-fourth of July. But king Eadbert assumed the
garb and tonsure of a monk. He is the eighth of the kings
of England who exchanged their temporal kingdom for an
eternal one, in order to have, as a reward in heaven, the de-
light of the eighth beatitude, which is due to voluntary poverty.
Osulf, his son, was succeeded in the kingdom of Northumber-
land by Ethelwold Mollo, who reigned six years.

A.D. 758. A tribe of the kingdom of Mercia rose in insur- °
rection against their king, Beornred, because he was ruling
the people, not according to just laws, but tyrannically. And
accordingly, all men, both noble and ignoble, met together,
and, under the leadership of Offa, a most gallant youth, ex-
pelled him from the kingdom. And when this had been
done, by the unanimous consent of all men, both clergy and
people, crowned the aforesaid Offa as king. For Offa was de-
scended from the royal family, inasmuch as he was the son of
Thinferth, who was the son of Ealdulf, who was the son of
Osulf, who was the son of Eoppa, who was the son of Wibba,
who was the son of Creodda, who was the son of Kinewold,
who was the son of Cnebba, who was the son of Ithel, who
was the son of Eomeri, who was the son of Angelthean, who
was the son of Offa, who was the son of Weremund, who was
the son of Withleig, who was the son of Wagon, who was the
son of Frethegeath, who was the son of Woden.

To this last the ancients dedicated the fourth day of the
week, which was called WHonesvap. And his wife was Frea,
to whom the ancients dedicated the sixth day of the week,
which is called gfrp¥ay. But Woden was the son of Frethe-
wold, who was the son of Freolaf, who was the son of Frithe-
wolf, who was the son of Godwolf, who was the son of Geta.
The Pagans long ago used to worship this last as God, and
Sedulius, a noble poet, makes mention of him in an eastern
hymn, where he begins thus :—

“ Let the Gentile poet strive
In loud high-sounding verse to tell
Their wicked figments, and in praise
Of Geta bid their voices swell.”

But Geta was the son of Cethwa, who was the son of Beau,
who was the son of Seldua, who was the son of Heremod, who
was the son of Itermod, who was the son of Hathra, who was
the son of Wala, who was the son of Bedwi, who was the son

364 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 765.

of Shem, who was the son of Noah, who was the son of Lamech,
who was the son of Methuselah, who was the son of Enoch,
who was the son of Malaleel, who was the son of Cainan, who
was the son of Enos, who was the son of Seth, who was the
son of Adam, whom the Lord formed out of the clay of the
earth.

King Offa then was the terror and dread of all the kings of
* England, for he defeated in battle the king of Kent, the king
of the West Saxons, the king of Northumberland, the king of
the South Saxons, the king of the East Angles, and, as will be
said hereafter at greater lengthS having conquered all the re-
maining kings, or made them tributary to himself, he extended
the kingdom of Mercia to no inconsiderable extent.

A.D. 759. Ethelwald Mollo, king of Northumberland, waged
war against the most powerful duke Oswin, whom he slew,
and retired with victory. This same year also, Unno, the king
of the Picts, died.

A.D. 760. An eclipse of the moon took place about mid-
night, on the first of August. The same year, Cuthbert, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, died, and was succeeded by Bregwin,
a prudent man, and of great acquaintance with literature.

A.D. 761. The head of Saint John the Baptist was brought
into the city of Edessa.

A.D. 762. Ethelbert, king of Kent, departed this life, and
left Kadbert heir of his kingdom. The same year, Ethelbald,
king of Northumberland, took Etheldreda for his queen.

A.D. 763. Bregwin, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and
Iambert succeeded him. The same year, Frethewold, bishop of
White Chase, departed this life, and was succeeded by Pethwin.

A.D. 764. Hemel, bishop of Lichfield, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Cuthfrid. The same year, Ealdulf, bishop in
Lindsey, ended his days, and Ceolwolf succeeded him. But
we are quite ignorant what city these bishops had as the
cathedral city of their diocese. But that there were many
bishops there, that is to say, in the district of Lindsey, which -
is between Lincoln and the river Humber, we are quite certain ;
and the first bishop, as the Venerable Bede testifies in his His-
tory of England, was ordained bishop by Paulinus, the first
archbishop of York. ‘This year, Adrian succeeded to the see
of Rome.

A.D. 765. Ethelwald Mollo, king of Northumberland, slew
that most valiant duke Oswyn, who rebelled against him, and

alll

A.D. 768. STEPHEN, POPE OF ROME. 365

not long afterwards he departed this life himself, and was
succeeded by Ealred, the great-great-grandson of king Ida,
who reigned eight years.

The same year, Offa, the most mighty king of Mercia, having
conceived an enmity sr the people of Kent, endeavoured
to strip lambert, archbishop of Canterbury, of the primacy,
and at the same time endeavoured to adorn the kingdom of
Mercia with the archbishopric. Therefore he sent messengers
to pope Adrian, entreating of him to decorate Ealdulf, bishop
of Lichfield, with the pallium, contrary to the custom of the
ancients, and to make all the bishops of his kingdom subordi-
nate to him. And he wearied the Apostolic See so long with
plausible arguments, that, as the Roman pontiffs, by reason
of their various occupations, are easily drawn in to give
their consent to ditferent things, he obtained what he asked,
namely, that all the provinces of Mercia should be made sub-
ject to the before-named bishop, the names of whom are as
follows: Denebert, bishop of Worcester ; Werebert, bishop of
Leicester ; Eadulf, bishop of Sinacester; Ulward, bishop of
Hereford ; and the bishops of the East Angles, namely, Halard,
bishop of Helmham, and Tidferth, bishop of Dommac. And
there remained to the archbishop of Canterbury, the bishops
of London, Winchester, Rochester, and Sherburne. And this
violence of the king continued in effect during the whole period
of the supremacy of lambert, although this archbishop
omitted nothing either of his acts of liberality or diligence,
and derogated in no respect from his former dignity. This
year, Constantine became pope, and occupied the see for one
year aud one month. He had been made a priest on a sudden
from having been a layman, and he was a tyrannical invader
of the papacy, but at last he was troubled by the church,
through the zeal of the faithful, and was deprived of his eyes.

A.D. 766. Haldulf, as archbishop of Lichfield, received the
pallium, and Frithbert, bishop of Hagustald, died.

A.D. 767. Egbert, archbishop of York, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Eanbald. This is that Eanbald, who, acting in
union with Ethelhard, archbishop of Canterbury, baffled and
defeated the invasion which Offa, king of Mercia, endeavoured
to make of the rights of the church of Canterbury. The same
year, Alemund succeeded Frithbert, as bishop of Hagustald.

A.D. 768. Stephen became pope of Rome, and governed the
see for three years. The same year, Werebert;. fourth bishop

366 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ALD. WiBe

of Leicester, died, and was succeeded by Unwona. For
Leicester is an ancient city, deriving its name from Leyr, king
of the Britons. And the first English bishop of that see was
named Totta, the second was Eadbert, the third was Werebert,
the fourth! was Unwona, who with Offa, king of Mercia, and
Hunbert, archbishop of Lichfield (as they commonly called
Berthun, transposing the syllables of his name), is said to have
been present, with the rest of the bishops, at the discovery of
the body of the blessed proto-martyr, Alban. But of this we
shall speak hereafter.

A.D. 769. The city Cataractawas burntwith fire, by Beornred,
the tyrannical king of Mercia, who had been deposed. But
Beornred himself perished miserably by fire, the same year,
by the just judgment of God.

A.D. 770. Charles, king of France, having collected a mighty
army, attacked the nation of the Saxons in war, and, though
a great number of his chief men were slain, he nevertheless,
returned home with the victory. The same year, stars were seen
to fall from heaven in an awful manner.

A.D. 771. Offa, king of Mercia, subdued the nation of the
Angles by force of arms. And the same year, Charles, king
of France, was cut short by a sudden death, and so expired ;
and Charles, his brother, who had previously obtained one
half of his father’s dominions, now took upon himself the
sole government of the whole kingdom, amid the acclamations
of the people.’

A.D. 772. Pope Stephen died, and Adrian the First suc-
ceeded him, and ruled the church twenty-three years, ten
months, and eighteen days.

A.D. 773. Haldred, king of Northumberland, departed this
life, and was succeeded by Ethelred. The same year, Offa,
king of Mercia, fought a battle against the Kentish people,
at Ottanforde. But at length, after terrible slaughter on both
sides, Offa was gloriously successful, and retired in triumph.
The same year, pope Adrian invited Charles to Rome, to defend
the church ; and he arriving there, besieged Papia, and leaving
his army there, went on to Rome himself, and there celebrated

! There is evidently some mistake or else some corruption of the text
here. At the beginning of the sentence Werebert was called the fourth
bishop, and if so, Unwona must have been the fifth.

? he Charles who died was Carloman: the Charles who obtained the

undivided sovereignty was Charlemagne. Pepin died 768, and Carloman
771, as is correctly stated here.

A.D. 774. THE KING OF FRANCE REDUCES ITALY. 367
4

the festival of the Holy Resurrection, and after that, he re-
turned and took Papia; and again returning to Rome, he held
a council in union with pope Adrian, and a hundred and fifty-
three other religious abbots and bishops, in which pope Adrian
and the general council gave him the right of electing the
Pontiff, and of regulating the Apostolic See, and the dignity
of patrician,*® and moreover, settled that all the archbishops
and bishops in all the provinces should receive their investi-
titure from him; and that a bishop should be consecrated by
no one, unless he had been first approved and invested by the
king. And the council anathematized all who rebelled against
this decree, and confiscated all their possessions, unless they
came to their senses. ‘This is the statement of Sigebert.

A.D. 774. Charles, the most mighty king of France, be-
sieged and blockaded Ticino, a most noble city of the Lom-
bards, and took it, with Desiderius, the king, and reduced all
Italy under his power.

3 «« After the recovery of Italy and Africa by the arms of Justinian, the
importance and danger of this remote province required the presence of a
supreme magistrate: he was indifferently styled the Exarch or Pairician.
And these governors of Ravenna, who fill their place in the chronology of
princes, extended their jurisdiction over the Roman city. Since the
revolt of Italy and the loss of the exarchate, the distress of the Romans
had exacted some sacrifice of their independence, and the decrees of the
senate and people successively invested Charles Martel and his posterity
with the honours of patrician of Rome. The leaders of a powerful nation
would have disdained a servile title and subordinate office, but the reign
of the Greek emperors was suspended, and in the vacancy of the empire
they derived a more glorious commission from the pope and the republic.
The Roman ‘ambassadors presented these patricians with the keys of the
shrine of St. Peter as a pledge and symbol of sovereignty, and with a holy
banner, which it was their right and duty to unfurl in defence of the
church and city. ... And the patriciate represented only the title, the
service, the alliance of these distant protectors. The power and policy
of Charlemagne annihilated an enemy and imposed a master. In his first
visit to the capital, he was received with all the honours which had for-
merly been paid to the exarch, the representative of the emperor, and
these honours obtained some new decorations from the joy and gratitude
of Pope Adrian the First.......In the twenty-six years which had
elapsed between the conquest of Lombardy and his imperial coronation,
Rome, which had been delivered by the sword, was subject, as his own, to
the sceptre of Charlemagne. The people swore allegiance to his person
~ and family ; in his name money was ‘coined and justice was administered,
and the election of the popes was examined and confirmed by his autho-.
rity.” —G1BBON, ¢, xlix. vol. ix. p. 153, Hdit. 1820,

368 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D: 7758

A.D. 775. Offa, king of Mercia, being eager to gain over
all the neighbouring kings to be his friends, that he might
be free from foreign enemies, in spite of all the damage which
he had done to his neighbours, endeavoured, by many pre-
sents, to make a friend of Charlemagne, king of the French.
But before this time they were enemies to‘ one another, to
such a degree, that all the traffic of merchants between the
two kingdoms was suspended. But it is shown evidently by
the letter of Charlemagne, king of the French, that a firm
treaty of friendship was now made between him and Offa; and
the letter is as follows : qe

“Charles, by the grace of God, king of the French and
Lombards, and patrician of the Romans, to the venerable man
and dearest brother, Offa, king of Mercia, greeting. In the
first place, we return thanks to Almighty God for the sincerity
of the Catholic faith, which we find most excellently expressed
in your pages. And as to the foreigners, who, for the love
of God and salvation of their souls, desire to approach the
threshold of the blessed Apostles, let them come in all peace,
without any alarm. But if there be any people found among
them who are not obeying the dictates of religion, but who
are only in the pursuit of gain, they must pay the appointed
dues at the proper places. We are willing also that traders
shall, in accordance with our command, have legitimate patron-
age in this our kingdom. And if in any place they are treated
with unjust oppression, they shall have an appeal to ourselves,
or to our judges, and we will take care that complete justice
isdone. Moreover, let your beloved highness know that we
have sent some presents from our dalmatics and pallia to
each of the episcopal sees of your kingdom or that of king
Ethelred, having begged them from the kindness of our lord,
pope Adrian, and we entreat you that you will order inter-
cession to be made for him. And also we have sent some
presents for your metropolitan cities, out of that store of
human riches which our Lord Jesus has granted us out of
his gratuitous mercy. We have also ordered a belt, and a
Hungarian sword, and two robes of silk, to be sent as presents
for your highness. Fare ye well.’’

“To Offa, Charles a belt and sabre gave,
To bid him bind the weak, the foeman brave,

A.D. 780. KING OF: NORTHUMBERLAND DEPOSED. 369

A robe a hint all secret things to hide;

And so with sword and belt and robe he tried
To crush the fierce, the humble friends t’unite,
And veil all foul and secret things from light.”

A.D. 776. Fiery and terrible signs were seen in the heavens
after the setting of the sun. And serpents, too, were seen in
Sussex, to the great wonder of the people, as if they rose in
abundance out of the earth.

A.D. 777. The emperor Constantine died, and Leo Zaccarus
succeeded to the Roman empire, and reigned five years.

A.D. 778. Pethwin, bishop of Witern, and also of White
Chase, came to the last day ef his bishopric and of his life, and
was succeeded by Ethelbert. The same year, Ethelwald and
Herebert, dukes of the kingdom of Northumberland, rebelled
against their king, and slew Ealdulf, the general of the army
of king Ethelred, at Itugesflibe, and afterwards the same
dukes slew the dukes of the king, by name Kinelf and Eggen,
in a terrible battle. And king Ethelred fled from their face,
and they appointed Alfwold king in his stead, and-he reigned
ten years.

A.D. 779. Offa, that most gallant king of Mercia, fought
against Kinewolf, king of the West Saxons, while he was be-
sieging the castle of Bensinton. But, by the fortune of war,
Kinewolf got worsted, and so fled from the place, and the in-
vincible king of Mercia, Offa, reduced the castle under his
own power.

‘¢ Offa, born of royal blood,
Stands unmov’d by battle’s flood :
Bold he crushes all that’s base,
No foeman dares to meet his face :
He’s Cato, Mars, and likewise Paris,
And Mercia safer now by far is,
While he upholds her laws, than when
She own’d the sway of weaker men.
He with his sword the proud subdues,
No prince obedience dare refuse.
E’en the great Charles, fair France’s lord,
Owns his great power and trusts his word,
And all fair Mercia’s peopled realm
Rests while his wisdom guides the helm ;
All at his coronation sing
The well-earn’d praises of their king.”

A.D. 780. Ethelred, king of Northumberland, was deposed,
VOL. I. BB

370 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 786.

and departed first of all to the city of Bebba, and afterwards
to the king of the Picts, named Kinothus, at whose court he
ended his life.

A.D. 781. The princes of Northumberland burned in his own
house a magistrate, their justiciary, who was severe beyond the
requirements of justice. ‘The same year, Kinewolf, bishop of
Lindisfarne, died, and was succeeded by Higbald.

A.D. 782. Hirenes, with his son Constantine, succeeded to the
empire of Rome, and governed it for ten years. The same
year, a man found a plate of gold at Constantinople, and on it
was a man, with this inscription—“ Christ is born of Mary, a
virgin, and I believe in him: in the time of the emperors Con-
stantine and Hirenes, O sun, you will see me again.”

A.D. 783. Alfwold, king of Northumberland, sent to Rome
for a pallium, and gave it to the archbishop. The same year,
Alemund, bishop of Hagustald, died, and was succeeded by
Gilbert.

A.D. 784. Wilbert, bishop of Sherburn, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Castanus.

A.D. 785. Withichind and Albion, dukes of Saxony, who
were infidels, were reconciled to Charlemagne, and baptized.

A.D. 786. Kinewolf, king of the West Saxons, after he
had reigned twenty-six years, and had fought many battles
with great glory against the Britons and many other nations,
banished a young man, by name Kinehard, the brother of
king Sigebert, whom Kinewolf had expelled from the king-
dom, as has been related before, suspecting him, lest he should
hereafter aspire to the kingdom, or perhaps avenge his brother’s
death. But Kinehard, thinking it best to yield to the times,
dissembled in his mind, and departed as if willingly. But
soon after, he joined some secret companies of banditti, and
sought the recesses of the woods, where he lay in ambush,
waiting many days, because of the proverb which is often re-
peated—

‘“‘ What expectation long denies,
A sudden hour full oft supplies.”

Meantime, while king Kinewolf, in the indulgence of ille-
gitimate amours in the village which is called Merton, was
giving himself up to secret joys, and when this had been dis-
covered by Kinehard, whom I mentioned just now, Kinehard
with his accomplices besieged the house. But the king, who

A.D. 789. ADRIAN SENDS AMBASSADORS INTO BRITAIN. 371

had come with a small retinue, and almost as it were by him-
self, when he found himself hemmed in on all sides by his
enemies, closed the duors of the house, hoping either to terrify
the banditti by his authority, or to pacify them by his address.
But in vain; for being surrounded by the multitude, as he
thought it injurious to his reputation to yield to the enemy,
hestood on his defence, and wounded Kinehard himself severely.
And when Kinehard saw this, he and his men rushed upon
the king and slew him; and a few of the king’s train who
were present, refusing to yield, and striving to avenge their
master, were all slain inthe same manner. The news was quickly
borne to the nobles of the murdered king, who were waiting
for him at no great distance, among whom Osric, above all
others, exhorted his companions not to allow such wickedness
to pass unpunished. Accordingly, with drawn swords they
rushed upon the enemy. Kinehard seeing this, reminded
them of his relationship to their former king, and made them
many promises ; but when he could not move them, he excited
his party toresistance. At length victory, as was just, declared
for the servants of the king, who slew Kinehard with all his
companions. And the body of the king was buried at Win-
chester, and that of Kinehard at Rependune, which was then
a noble and famous monastery.

A.D. 787. Kinewolf, king of the West Saxons, being dead,
Brithricus, his son, succeeded to the kingdom, and reigned six-
teen years. In which year also, Celdulf, bishop of Dorchester,
died, and was succeeded by Aldulph.

A.D. 788. Blood rained down on the earth from heaven,
and queen Ricdritha died.

A.D. 789. Pope Adrian sent ambassadors into Britain, to re-
establish the faith which Augustine had preached. And they,
having been honourably received by kings, clergy, and people,
built a beautiful edifice in the firm foundation of faith, the
grace of Christ working with them. And they held a council
at, Chalthuthe, where lambert, archbishop of Canterbury, re-
signed part of his archbishopric to the archbishop of Lichfield.
In that council also, Offa, the mighty king of Mercia, caused
Egfrid, his eldest son, to be solemnly crowned as king, who
afterwards, being a most pious youth, and of a most noble
disposition, reigned in conjunction with his father to the end
of his life. The same year, Alfwald, king of Northumberland,
was conspired against by one of his nobles, whose is was

BB‘

Sie MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ASD. 292"

Sigan, and cruelly slain near Wall; and his body. was buried
in the church of Hagustald. And in the place where this king
was slain, a light issuing from heaven was seen by many
people ; on account of the strangeness of which fact, a church
was built by the faithful of that place, and was dedicated to
the honour of God and king Oswald. He was succeeded in
his kingdom by Osred, son of Alered, the great-great-grandson
of king Ida, who reigned one year.

A.D. 790. The sign of the cross was seen on the garments of
several men, which was a strange thing both to speak and
hear of. For we suppose that it took place as a warning to
the nations of the country to avoid as far as they could the
infliction of the Danes, which happened immediately after.

A.D. 791. Brithric, king of the West Saxons, in order to
gain more influence among his neighbours, married the daughter
of Offa, king of Mercia, the most powerful king of that time.
And being strengthened by that connection, he drove Egbert
away into France, who was the only surviving member of the
royal family, and who he was afraid would be a hindrance to
his objects and to his reign. And after he had been driven
away, the king enjoyed quiet security, till the nation of the
Danes, a people accustomed to live by piratical rapine, coming
over in three ships, disturbed the peace of the province. It may
be suspected that they came also as spies, in order to see the
fertility of the land, as the multitude of their nation which
came afterwards and filled the whole of Britain proved as clear
as daylight. But on this occasion they landed secretly, and
attacking a royal village which was close by, they slew the
king’s bailiff, who went out to meet them in battle. He was
the first of the English nation who was slain by them, but
afterwards many thousands of thousands of them were slain
by that enemy. At last, the multitude of people that came up
was so great, that the Danes were stripped of their booty, and
compelled to flee to their ships.

A.D. 792. King Osred* was, by the treachery of some of

1 It is hardly necessary to point out the contradictions in this sentence,
in which Osred is stated to have been expelled after he had reigned one
year, while the same year is stated in the next line to have been the fourth
since he succeeded to the throne, as in fact it was, for his succession is
the last thing mentioned in the year 789. Any subsequent similar instances

I shall not think it necessary to point out, as they may be safely trusted to
the discernment of the reader.

A.D. 793. OFFA RECEIVES ETHELBERT WITH HONOUR. 373

his subjects, driven from his kingdom when he had reigned
one year. And Ethelred, the son of Mollo, was elected in
his stead. This year also, which is the fourth year after that
in which Osred originally became king, he collected an army
and returned, in order to expel Ethelred, by whom he him-
self had been expelled from the kingdom, but was taken pri-
soner on his march, near Tynemouth, and put to death. The
same year, a synod was convened in the place which is called
Finchale, over which the archbishop presided, and which was
attended by his suffragan bishops and many others.

A.D. 793. Constantine obtained the empire of Rome, and
reigned seven years. The-same year, Charlemagne, king of
France, sent a synodal book to Britain, in which there were
found many things contrary to the true faith, and especially
this, that it was laid down by the unanimous assertion of
nearly all the eastern teachers, that men ought to adore
images, a practice which the Catholic church utterly execrates ;
and against which Alban wrote an epistle, admirably resting on
the authority of the Holy Scriptures, and he took this epistle
with this same synodal book to the king of France, on the part
of the bishops and nobles. The same year, Ethelred, king of
Northumberland, married Elfleda, daughter of king Offa.

About the same time, Ethelbert, king of the East Angles,
son of king Ethelred, quitted his own kingdom, in spite of the
strong remonstrances of his mother, and came to Offa, the
most mighty king of Mercia, and begged of him that he would
give him one of his daughters in marriage. And Offa, that
most noble and most illustrious and most high-born king,
when he had learnt the object of the arrival of king Ethelbert,
received him with great honour in the royal palace, and showed
him all the attention and kindress that lay in his power, not
only to the king himself, but to all his comrades who had
come with him. But when king Offa consulted his queen
Quendritha, and asked her advice on the subject, she, being
urged by the promptings of the devil, is said to have made
answer to her husband, “ Behold, God has this day given your
enemy into your hands, whose kingdom you have so long
coveted with daily desire, so that now you can extinguish him
secretly, and so his kingdom will pass under the power of you
and your successors for ever.” But the king was greatly
agitated at the advice of his wife, and reproving her with in-
dignation, made answer to her, ‘ You have spoken like one

374 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 793.

of the foolish women; far from me, far from me may so de-
testable an action be, which, if it were perpetrated, would be
an everlasting reproach to me and my successors.” And,
having said this, the king departed from her. Afterwards,
when his agitation had become gradually calmed, both the
kings sat down at table, where, having refreshed themselves
with royal food, they spent the whole day with music, and
dancing, and harp-playing, to their great delight. But in the
meantime, the wicked queen, not abandoning her foul design,
treacherously ordered a bed-chamber to be adorned in royal
fashion with silk mattrasses and curtains, for king Ethel-
bert to pass the night upon ; and near the royal bed she caused
a chair to be made ready, furnished with the most princely
decorations, and surrounded on all sides by curtains, beneath
which, wretch that she was, she caused a deep hole to be dug,
in order to effect her wicked purpose. Accordingly, when
king Ethelbert, after a day of pleasure, wished to give up his
limbs to sleep, he was conducted into this bed-chamber, and,
as soon ashe sat down in the chair which I have described,
he was suddenly precipitated into the deep hole, chair and
all, and strangled by the executioners whom the queen had
concealed there. In the moment that the king had fallen
into the pit, the wicked traitors threw over him pillows, and
garments, and curtains, that his cries might not be heard.
And thus that king and martyr, being murdered, though inno-
cent, received the crown of life which God has promised to
those that love him.

But when this detestable action which the wicked queen
had done to the suitor of her daughter became known to the
comrades of the murdered king, they departed from the
palace before daylight, fearing lest they themselves might be
subjected to similar treatment. And the noble king Offa, when
he had received information of the crime that had been com-
mitted, mourned, and shut himself up in a chamber, and for
three days would not taste food. But, although he was quite
innocent of all participation in the king’s death, he neverthe-
less sent a powerful expedition, and annexed the kingdom of
the Kast Angles to his own dominions. And the holy Ethel-
bert was buried without any honour, and the place was known
to no one, till his body, having been pointed out by light from
heaven, was found by the faithful, and was conveyed to the

-

A.D. 794. KING OFFA WITNESSES A HEAVENLY MIRACLE. 375

city of Hereford, where it now adorns with its miracles, and
glorifies with its virtues, that episcopal see.

A.D. 794. Iambert, archbishop of Canterbury, died, when
he had discharged the duties of that see for twenty-seven years
with extraordinary diligence. And he was buried in the chapter
house of the church of Saint Augustine, and was succeeded
by Athelard, who had been thirteen years bishop of the city
of Winchester. The same year, Eanbald, archbishop of York,
consecrated Baldulph, bishop of Witerne, whith is called in
English White Chase. ‘

The same year, when Offa, the most mighty king of Mercia,
while residing in the city of Bath, was, after the labours of the
day, enjoying the rest of night in his royal bed, he was warned.
by a divine oracle, which was announced to him by an angel,
totake up out of the earth Alban, that saint of God, the .
proto-martyr of the Angles or Britons (which indeed is the
correct statement, because it is certain that he was a Briton,
and not an Angle, so that it is a mistake to call him the proto- |
martyr of the Angles). And king Offa was at the same time
commanded to place the remains of Saint Alban in a reposi-
tory which should be more worthy of them. Accordingly,
the king, being desirous immediately to obey the divine in-
junctions, having sent for Humbert, archbishop of Mercia,
to whom Lichfield had lately been given by this king for his
archiepiscopal see, declared to him the. will of God on the
subject. Then the aforesaid bishop, immediately having joined
with himself Ceolwolf, bishop of Lindsey, and Unwin, bishop
of Leicester, his suffragans, with an exceeding number of people
of both sexes and of every age, met the king on a day ap-
pointed at Verolamium. But the king, as he was journeying
thither, saw a ray of light issuing from heaven like a huge
torch, and descending like a flash of lightning towards the ~
place of the sepulchre. And as this heavenly miracle was
beheld by every one, they all by this indication were made
more certain of the truth of the vision. Then, when the
people had been sanctified by fasting, and alms, and prayers,
the bishops, adorned with their sacerdotal mitres, entreated
the aid of the blessed martyr to be present tothem. For the
place and the memory of the martyr had been entirely lost for
about three hundred and forty-four years since the arrival of
Saint Germain, bishop of Altisiodora, who withthe blessed Lupus,
bishop of the city of Troyes, had come to Britain to extirpate

376 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 794.

the heresy of the Pelagians. For since that time the pagan
nations of the Saxons, Jutes, and Angles, having expelled the
Britons, had subjugated Britain, as has been related already at
some length, and ravaging the lands, setting fire to the cities
and towns, levelling the holy churches to the ground, and
murdering the priests, had pitilessly destroyed almost the
whole surface of the island from sea to sea. And, during this
period, the church of the blessed Alban, the proto-martyr of the
Angles (which Bede in his History of England relates to have
been built of stone most exquisitely wrought), was wholly de-
stroyed, along with the other churches of the country. And
his sepulchre also, which at the time of the arrival of Saint
Germain, and before that, from the time of the passion of the
martyr to that of the desolation of his country, was well known’
to all men, and an object of adoration to all, on account of the
number of miracles wrought at it, was now unknown to any
one, till it was thus revealed to king Offa by the ministry of
the Anglican pontiff.

When then, as we have already said, prayers had been offered
up by the clergy and people with alms and fasting, they divide
the ground between them, and search everywhere for the
burial-place of the martyr. Nor were they compelled to be a
long time searching for the place, as the divine mercy con-
descended to reveal it by heavenly light. And so, while that
most valiant king Offa was standing by, they found the body
of the martyr in a wooden coffin, in which, owing to the cruelty
of the barbarians, and the critical circumstances of the times,
it had been hidden by the faithful, with the sacred relies of all
the apostles and of the different martyrs, which the Holy
Germain had deposited there a long time before. And this
discovery moved not only the clergy, but the whole people to
tears, especially because it confirmed the words of the Holy
Fathers respecting the relics which were found with the body,
and which we read were put with the martyr’s holy body, to his
great comfort. To make my story short, the archbishop with
his bishops raised the treasure, which had been long hidden
beneath the turf, out of its sepulchre with holy fear, and while
a solemn procession went before with hymns and praises, they
transferred it to a certain church, which had been formerly
consecrated outside of the city of Verulamium, in honour of
the holy proto-martyr, where they replaced the holy relics of

A.D. 794. ST. ALBAN’S MONASTERY ESTABLISHED. 377

the father in a coffin, exquisitely made of gold and silver and
precious stones.

In which place, down even to the present day, divine miracles
are incessantly wrought, and, in the sight of many, hearing is
there restored to the deaf, the power of walking to the lame,
sight to the blind, and to all who with faith implore the assist-
ance of the blessed martyr, desired health of mind and body
is given by God.

And these things were done in the five hundred and seventh
year after his passion, three hundred and forty-four years after
the arrival of the Angles in Britain, in the first indiction, on
the first day of August. — -

When this had been done in that place, the king convoked
@ provincial council, and deliberated with archbishop Hum-
bert and his suffragans, and all the nobles, on the subject of
collecting a brotherhood of monks, and establishing a monas-
tery in that place where he had found the remains of the
proto-martyr of his kingdom, and which that holy man had
consecrated with his blood. And the proposal of the king
pleased them all, and he adopted the advice of the bishops,
that the monastery which was to be built, should, by the
authority of the Roman pontiff, be canonized and privileged,
in honour of the martyr. And that all these things might be
_ more completely and regularly done, the king is advised to
treat with the Roman court about this matter, either by the
intervention of legates a latere, or else in his own person.
Accordingly, the king adopted this advice, and undertook a
laborious journey, in order that as the blessed Alban shone
forth as the proto-martyr of the Angles, so his monastery might
be superior, in. both possessions and privileges, to all similar
brotherhoods in the kingdom. Therefore, the king put to
sea, and landed at the port which he wished to, in Flanders;
‘and coming to a certain town, named Monasteriolum, he
stopped there for the sake of resting, and when he could
procure no fodder for his horses, he marvelled greatly, as
the whole district was seen to abound in fertile meadows.
Accordingly, the king enquired to whom those meadows
belonged, and he received for answer, that they had many
owners. Accordingly, the king commanded that all the
inhabitants should appear before him, and when they came,
‘he spoke seriously to them on the subject of selling those
fields; they who heard this were exceedingly indignant, as-

378 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 7948

serting that the owners of the meadows abounded sufficiently —

in temporal wealth. And when, at last, those nobles to whom
the lands belonged had been brought into the king’s presence,
he spoke to them of selling the fields. And as he heard that
they abounded in every kind of riches, “ You do not abound,”
said the king, “so greatly, but that you may be made to abound
still more. We will become purchasers of your lands, not
according to their valuation, but at the price at which you are
willing to sell them. Nor will there be any difficulty about
the price, though there is no option about the sale.” When
they heard these words, they all yielded to covetousness, and
received from the king a price for their meadows, according to
their will. And when the purchase had been completed, the
king consecrated those meadows, and with royal munificence
confirmed the enjoyment of them to all strangers who should

pass by, that all foreigners who were in that place for a time, —

should have grass and hay sufficient for the food of their
beasts, without any payment, for ever, in consequence of the
royal beneficence.

Then when the money for the purchase of the fields had
been paid, the king set out from that place, and proceeded
to Rome, where he reached the wished-for threshold of the
Apostles, and traversed the places consecrated to the different

Saints with pious devotion. Then he explained to the Supreme —

Pontiff Adrian the object of his visit, and in a spirit of devotion
addressing to him his entreaties respecting the canonization
of the place, and of the blessed Alban, and respecting the
building of a monastery, he easily inclined the Roman court
to grant his petition, especially on the ground that the dis-
covery of the martyr’s body had been brought about by
Divine revelation. Then he consulted the court on the
subject of the foundation of the monastery, and its eman-
cipation from all subjection to bishops ; and the Roman Pon-
tiff gave him the following answer: ‘My most beloved son,
Offa, most mighty king of the English, we exceedingly com-
mend your devotion about the proto-martyr of your kingdom,
and we gladly give assent to your request and proposal of
building a monastery and endowing it with privileges, enjoining
you, for the remission of your sins, that when you return to
your own land, you shall, by the advice of your bishops and
nobles, confer on the monastery of the blessed Alban whatever
possessions or privileges you choose; and when you have

A.D. 794. EXTENT OF KING OFFA’S RULE. 379

thus given it privileges, we will confirm your original grant,
by a grant of privileges from us corresponding to yours. And
we will adopt that monastery to be a special daughter of the
Roman Church, and we will make it subject immediately to
our own see, without any bishop or archbishop interfering
between us and it.” So when he had received this answer,
the king deliberated with himself as to what he could do in
return, which should be worthy of such great liberality. At
length, Divine grace inspiring the king, a wholesome idea oc-
curred to him, and the next day he went into the school of
the English, which was at that time flourishing at Rome, and
gave to that school, for the support of those subjects of his
kingdom who should come thither, a piece of silver money for
each family, every day and every year for ever, provided their
estate in land, besides their house, did not exceed the value of
thirty pieces of silver; and by this great liberality he obtained
the privilege, that no one of the kingdom of England who was
a public penitent, should be compelled to leave the kingdom
for the performance of any penance that might be enjoined
him. Having therefore executed this donation, and procured
its ratification from the pope, and having received remission of
his sins, and the benediction of. the Supreme Pontiff, that |
great king returned to his own dominions. Then, having con-
vened a council of bis bishops and nobles at Verulamium, with
their unanimous consent and good will, he conferred on the
blessed Alban ample estates and innumerable possessions,
which he invested with various liberties and privileges. And
he collected a brotherhood of monks from thoroughly religious
houses to his house, at the tomb of the martyr, and he set
over them an abbot named Willegod, to whom he granted the
monastery itself, and all the rights of a king.

This great king, Offa, ruled over twenty-three provinces,
which the English call shires, that is to say, over that of Here-
ford, whose bishop has his episcopal see in the city of the same
name; over those of Worcester and Gloucester, whose bishop
has his see at Worcester; over those of Warwick, Chester,
Stafford, Shrewsbury, and Derby, the cathedral city of
which shires is Lichfield ; over Leicestershire, whose bishop
has his see in the city of the same name; over Lincolnshire,
the cathedral city of which is Lindesey ; over the shires of
' Northampton, Oxford, Buckingham, Huntingdon, Cambridge,
and half of Hertford, the see of the bishop of which is at Don-

380 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 795.

caster ; over those of Essex, Middlesex, and the other half of
Hertford, the bishop of which has his see in London; over
Norfolk and Suffolk there are two bishops, the bishop of Helm-
ham and the bishop of Dommuc ; he also ruled over the pro-
vince of Nottingham, the Christian government of which
province belongs to the archbishop of York. And from all
these provinces the aforesaid king gave the donation of the
blessed Peter, which has been spoken of before, and which
is called in English Romescot.

Moreover, that most mighty king, Offa, gave to the blessed
proto-martyr Alban, his own lordly town, which is about
twenty miles from Verulamium, and is called ftiueslay, and
an equal space round it, as is testified to this day by the
writings of the king which are contained in the afore-men-
tioned church. Which church is eminent for such extra-
ordinary liberties and privileges, that it is the only place
exempt from the apostolic customs, and from the payment
which is called 3Aomescot, though neither king nor arch-
bishop, nor bishop, abbot nor prior, nor any one else in the
whole kingdom is exempt from the payment of it. And the
abbot, or archdeacon monk, appointed under him, exercises
pontifical power over priests and laymen throughout his whole
possessions, so that he owes no obedience to any archbishop or
legate, save only to the Supreme Pontiff. This also should
be known, that when the great king Offa granted this esta-
blished revenue to the vicar of the blessed Peter, the pontiff
of the Roman city, when, that is to say, he gave him the pay-
ment of MRomescot throughout his realm, he also prevailed on
the Roman pontiff to grant that the church of Alban, the
proto-martyr of the Angles, might faithfully collect this same
Womescot from the whole of the province of Hertford, in which
this church that we have so often mentioned is situated, and
having collected it, might retain it for its own use. On which
account, as the church itself has, as a gift from the king, all
manner of royal rights, so the abbot of the place for the time
being has a right to wear the full pontifical ornaments. And
this 1s enough to say at the present time about the holy Alban.

A.D. 795. Humbert, archbishop of Lichfield, died, and was
succeeded by Higbert. The same year, some terrible prodigies
alarmed the miserable nation of the English. For fearful light-
nings and dragons, blazing in a dreadful manner, were seen to
fly through the air, signs which foreshowed a mighty famine,

POPE ADRIAN DIES. 381

and a terrible slaughter among mankind. Accordingly, the

~ Danes came on with the Norwegians, and slew in a fearful

manner the people of the provinces of Northumberland and
Lindisfarne, and destroyed the churches of Christ with their
inhabitants. The island of Lindisfarne, which extends over
more than eight miles, contains a noble monastery, in which
the illustrious father and’ bishop Cuthbert was buried, and
also the other bishops who were his holy successors; but the
Lindis is a small brook which runs into the sea, and is about
two feet in width when the tide is low and the stream distin-
guishable, but when the tide is high, then the Lindis cannot
be discerned. :
A.D. 796. Constantine, the emperor, deprived many of
his subjects of their eyes, and condemned to a cruel death
pope Stephen, whom he had shut up ina prison, and kept pri-
soner for forty years: and he compelled all his subjects who
were objects of suspicion to him, to swear on the word of the
holy cross, that they would worship no image of God or his
Saints, and that they would address no invocations to the
- mother of God. And condemning all those who kept watch
in honour of God, and all who lived religiously, deprived them
of their patrimonies, and tormented them in every possible
manner. In the case of those who were the most pious,
he smeared their beards with wax or pitch, and then set fire
to them. And he compelled monks to marry wives, and
nuns to marry husbands ; which many refusing to do, came to
the palm of martyrdom. Nor is there any persecution of a
gentile in which more persons are said to have been martyred
than in this one. This year also, Sigar, the general, who had
slain the blessed king Alfwold in a shameful manner, perished
by deserved tortures.

A.D. 797. Pope Adrian died, and was succeeded by Leo,
who filled the papal chair twenty years, five months, and
sixteen days, and the see was vacant three days. The same
year, there were seen around the sun three other suns, inti-
mating perhaps the death of the many kings and nobles who
this year departed from this life. The same year, Ethelred,
king of Northumberland, forsook his proper wife, and mar-
ried a fresh one ; on which account he was slain by his own

people. And Osred succeeded him in his kingdom; but he
died on the twenty-fifth day of his reign, and Hardulf suc-
ceeded to the kingdom, and reigned ten years. This year also,

382 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 797.

Eanbald, archbishop of York, died, and Eanbald the Second
succeeded him. The same year, Ethelbert, king of Kent, died,
and was succeeded by Eadbert. About the same time,
Ethelhard succeeded to the administration of the archbishopric
of Canterbury, as successor to Iambert, the previous arch-
bishop.

On the twenty-eighth day of July died Offa, king of Mercia,
and his son Egbert succeeded to his glorious kingdom, and
reigned a hundred and forty-one days, and died before the
end of the same year. He was succeeded by Kenulf, a great
man, and very happy in a pious family, who governed the
kingdom in peace, justice, and piety. After the death of
Egfred, king of Kent, Eadbert, who is also called Pren, suc-
ceeded to that kingdom; he reigned three years, and was then
taken prisoner, and carried away by Kenulf.

The following letter’ was written by Charlemagne to
Offa :—‘* Charles, by the grace of God, king of France
and Lombardy, and patrician of Rome, to the venerable man,
our dearest brother Offa, king of Mercia, health. In the
first place we return thanks to Almighty God for the sin-
cerity of the catholic faith, which we find most excellently
expressed in your pages. And as to the foreigners who, for
the love of God and salvation of their souls, desire to ap-
proach the threshold of the blessed apostles, let them come
in all peace, as far as-we are concerned, without any alarm. But
if there be any persons found among them who are not obey-
ing the dictates of religion, but who are only in the pursuit of
gain, they must pay the appointed dues at the proper places.
We are willing also that traders shall, in accordance with our
command, have legitimate patronage in this our kingdom ; and
if in any place they are treated with unjust oppression, they
shal] have an appeal to us or to our judges, and we will take care
that full justice is done them. Moreover, let your beloved
highness know, that we have sent some presents from our
dalmatics and pallia to each of the episcopal sees of your
kingdom, or of that of king Ethelred, being the fruit of the
kindness of our lord the apostle Adrian. And we entreat you
that you will order intercession to be made for him, having
no doubt that his blessed soul is at rest. And in order that
we may show our faith and affection for you who are most
dear to us, we have, out of the treasure of human riches

! This letter is very nearly identical with that given under the year 775.

A.D. 797. EGFRID ENDOWS THE CHURCH OF ST. ALBAN. 383

which the Lord Jesus, out of his undeserved mercy, has be-
stowed on us, sent some gifts to your metropolitan cities, and
for your own beloved highness we have thought proper
to send one belt, one Hungarian sword, and two silk robes.
Farewell!” :

The same year, as is the opinion of many writers, Offa, the
magnificent king of Mercia, having built a most truly noble mo-
nastery, after the discovery of the body of the blessed Alban, in
the town which is called Offeeleia, died, and his body was borne
to the town of Bedford, and is said to have been buried with
royal magnificence in a chapel outside the town, built on the
banks of the river Usk. And to this day the report of nearly
all the people of that district affirms, that the aforesaid chapel
was destroyed by length of time and by the violence of the
river, and was, together with the royal sepulchre, by the ra-
pidity of the stream thrown down into the water; and in con-
sequence, even to the present day, that sepulchre is at times
clearly seen in the deep water by men who bathe in the
river there in the summer, while at other times, as if there
were some fate about it, if you seek for it ever so carefully,
you cannot find it.

_ ‘That most valiant king, Offa, was succeeded in his kingdom
by Egfrid, his son, who in his father’s life-time had reigned
with him as his colleague for eight years; therefore, as soon
as Egfrid, who was an excellent youth, and endowed with
great nobleness of disposition, was confirmed in his kingdom,
he, treading in the pious footsteps of his father, devoutly gave
to the church of the blessed Alban, the proto-martyr of the
English, many estates and possessions, and by his special
decree confirmed them, and all the other estates which his
father had given to the aforesaid church, in the enjoyment of
all the royal privileges which it now has, or which a king can |
confer on any church. And in order that his donation might
have the force of perpetual duration, he, according to the
custom of the Roman Church, added to the deed the subscrip-
tion of all the bishops, and counts, and barons of his empire,
and also the sign of the cross. And, moreover, avoiding in
all things to imitate the covetousness of his father, he with
ready devotion rescued all the different possessions of which
he had stripped any monastery, with a view to the exalta-
tion of his own kingdom, and he by a special decree con-
firmed their possessions to all who requested such a measure.

384 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 798.

Likewise, being softened by the request of Ethelhard, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, he would have willingly restored to him
the dignities of which archbishop lambert had been deprived,
as has been stated before, if an untimely death had not re- —
moved him from mankind, for he died on the hundred and
forty-first day after the decease of his father, and so gave all
the people of his kingdom cause for great grief, on which I
think that we ought not to suppose that so noble a youth died.
for his sins, but rather that he was taken away because his
father had spilt much to strengthen himself in his kingdom.
He was succeeded in the kingdom of Mercia by Kenulf, a
noble man, the son of Cuthbert, and great-great-grandson of
king Wibba, who reigned twenty-four years. He by his wife
Alfritha became the father of Kenelm, who was afterwards a
Saint, and of two daughters, Quendrida and Burgenilda.

The same year, after the before-mentioned king of Mercia,
Kinulf, had been invested with the crown of the kingdom,
he displayed his character religious in his palace, and in
war victorious as a lion. And Ethelhard, archbishop of Can-
terbury, and Eanbald, archbishop of York, came to him, and
consulted him respecting the lost dignities of the church of
Canterbury. And when the king fully understood how much
wickedness his predecessor Offa had committed in mutilating
the diocese of Canterbury, he with great devotion restored
the custom of antiquity. Accordingly, Ethelhard sending
letters, both from himself and from all the bishops in England,
to Pope Leo, the successor of Adrian, and himself discharging
the especial functions of an ambassador, obtained what he
asked. On which account it is related, very highly to the
praise and glory of that archbishop, that he restored the
pristine dignity of the see, which it behoves you his suc-
cessors carefully to guard. The same year, Mildred, bishop of
Worcester, died, and was succeeded by Weremund ; and again,
in the same year, Eanbald, archbishop of York, received the
pallium, and afterwards ordained Eadred as successor to
Ethelbert, uniting bishop Higbald with him to the honour
of the pontificate ; and this happened on the twenty-ninth of
October, at a place which is called Wudaford.

A.D. 798. Kinulf, king of Mercia, traversed the province
of Kent in a hostile manner, and ravaged it, and took pri-
soner their king Eadbert, who was surnamed Pren, and who
was unable to contend with him, and brought him back with

A.D. 798. THE VIRGIN APPEARS TO POPE LEO. 385

him in chains in triumph. But not long afterwards, when he
was dedicating the church at Winchelcombe, which he had
founded, on the day of the consecration he released the
captive king before the altar, and gave him his liberty. There
was present there Cuthred, whom king Kinulfus had set over
the see of Canterbury, in the place of the before-mentioned
Eadbert. The church reechoed with applause, the streets
resounded with men running to and fro, because in an assem-
bly of thirteen bishops and ten dukes no one had suffered any
denial of liberality, but every one went away with his pouch
fnll. For besides the presents which the chief men received
of incalculable value and number, in utensils, and garments,
and fine horses, there was given to all who had no estate a
pound of silver, and to each priest a mark of gold, and to
each monk a broad piece, and last of all, he distributed many
gifts among the general crowd. He also enriched the monastery
with such ample revenues, as would appear incredible at the
present time.

The same year, Eanbald, archbishop of York, convened a
synod at ffinchale. About the same time, Hardulf, king of
Northumberland, fought a battle against duke Wad and some
of his fellow conspirators, in the place which is called Btlingeba.
But at last, after many had been slain on both sides, the
king obtained a most royal victory over this enemy. Hirenes
reigned by herself for three years.

When Leo, while a young man, was doing penance for
wanton conduct, and while he was praying before the altar of
the blessed Virgin, she appeared to him, saying, ‘ O Leo,
correct your excesses, and I will promote you to the highest
rank.’’ He, remembering these words, abandoned the study
of rhetoric, and betook himself to that of theology, and be-
coming changed into quite another man, he became chaste
and modest, and diligent and learned. And he became a
most skilful rhetorician and theologian. Therefore when the

apostolic see became vacant he was raised to it, and when he

was celebrating solemn mass for the first time, an offering of
no small magnitude was made to him. For among those who
were bringing offerings, a certain woman, to whom, as it was said,
he had had access in former times, sweetly pressed the hand.

of Leo bimself, and while pressing it kissed it, till she raised

the flame of lust in the pope. He, reminding himself of the
VOL. I. OC

386 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. "A.D. 800. |

solemn duties in which he had been engaged, while he was
sitting in the conclave, suddenly cut off his hand, according
to that gospel, “if your foot or your hand shall offend you, cut
it off and cast it from thee,” &c. &c. And afterwards, as he was
often invited to officiate, and constantly excused himself, and
yet as the brethren would give him no respite, because they
did not know that he was mutilated, the pope withdrew him-
self into a secret place, and prostrating himself in devont
prayer before the altar of the Blessed Virgin, he said, “ O
most merciful virgin, you have hitherto promoted me and
raised me up; look now upon me, miserable that I am, now
that I have taken vengeance on my transgressions, that I may
not be confounded at the last; now therefore do you give
me comfort, lest I complain, and say you have crushed me by
raising me.” Therefore the blessed mother of mercy restored
a new hand to the mutilated arm. Accordingly, the pope, who
had hitherto preserved his former hand which he had cut off,
having convened the brethren, explained to them in order all
the events which had happened, that the glory of the holy
Virgin might not be concealed. And he showed to them, aye,
and to the whole church, the hand which he had formerly
cut off, and he did not conceal the cause; and he told them
how, while he was prostrate in prayer, the blessed Virgin ap-
peared to him and restored his hand to his mutilated arm.
And a rule was then made, that from that time forward those
who brought offerings should not kiss the hand of the pope,
but his foot; though it had formerly been the custom that
the hand should be kissed, and not the foot. In memory of
this miracle, the hand which was cut off is still preserved in
the Lateran treasury, and it is kept free from decay by the
Lord, in honour of his mother.

A.D. 799. The Romans being at variance among themselves,
seized pope Leo, a holy man, and one worthy of all praise,
and bound him, and cut out his tongue, and tore out his eyes,
and at last expelled him from the Roman see, and leaving him
half dead amid the blasphemies of the executioners, they com-
mitted a foul crime. But the piteous and merciful Lord, who
does not forsake those who hope in him, mercifully restored
him his tongue and his eyes, and enabling him to see and
to preach the word of faith better than he had done before,
restored him to his former dignity.

A.D. 800. A most wicked army of pagans cruelly plundered

A.D. 801. POPE LEO CROWNS CHARLEMAGNE. 387

_ the churches of Hercene and Tynemouth, and fied with the spoils
to their ships. The same year, Eadred, bishop of Hagustald,
died, and Hadbert succeeded in his stead. And the same year,
Alemund, son of king Eadred, was seized by the guardians of
Eardulf, king of Northumberland, and by his command was
slain with those who had deserted Eardulf. The same year,
on the twenty-third of December, a great wind came from
Africa, and with its terrible blast tore up by the roots cities
and trees, and the sea breaking its bounds, caused a great loss
of cattle in different places.

The same year, Charlemagne, king of France, a king of
extraordinary valour, with a countless host of armed men en-
tered the city of Rome, and visited the holy places many times.
And having stayed in that city for some months, he adorned
the church of Peter and Paul, the Apostles of Christ, with
royal gifts, of gold and silver and precious stones. He also
honoured Leo, the venerable pope, with numerous presents of
various kinds, and scattering his adversaries, slew some, and
drove others into banishment, and caused some to be even hung
on the gallows.

A.D. 801. When king Charlemagne, in the city of Rome,
had arranged many things which had reference to the honour
of God and the advantage of the people, on the day of the Na-
tivity of our Lord, he entered the church of Peter, the chief
of the Apostles, with his dukes, and magistrates, and soldiers,
and a great retinue. And there he was invested by pope Leo
with a royal robe, and a golden crown was placed upon his
head, and a royal sceptre was given into his hand. And on
that day, that great emperor deserved this dignity and magni-
ficence ; so as to be called the emperor of the whole world, as
in fact he was. And at the same time, ambassadors of the
Greeks were sent with gifts of inestimable value from the city
of Constantinople to Charles, begging him earnestly to con-
descend to accept that empire. And while these ambas-
sadors were still at Rome, messengers were sent from Jeru-
salem, from the Christians there, both clergy and laity, to
Charles, who had been lately created emperor, bringing to the
king, among other gifts, a silver standard, with the keys of
the most holy places, and they arrived on the day of our
~ Lord’s resurrection, and they brought him many other things,
- entreating him to condescend to be their defender and go-
- yernor. The most pious emperor consented to the desires of

cc2

388 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 802.

all who came to him, and promised that he would not only be
ready to conquer the enemies of the cross on earth, but also
on the sea, if necessity required it. For he understood that
states were happy if either those who studied wisdom governed
them, or if their governors were willing to apply themselves
to the study of wisdom. Then he went to the city of Ravenna,
and carefully deliberated with his nobles on the subjects that
have been already mentioned.

a.D. 802. Brithric, king of the West Saxons, died by
poison in this manner. This king had, as has been related
above, a queen named Hadburga, daughter of Offa, king of
Mercia, who being elated by her many honours, gave herself
up to strange thoughts of ambition. For being excited by ma-
ternal tyranny, she was in the habit of accusing all the men
of noble birth in the kingdom who had been ordained, and
all the men of any religious orders, to the king, and to curse
them, on which account she became hated by the princes and
dukes, and nobles, and the whole nation. And in this way
that wicked woman so won over the king by her blandish-
ments, that he either put to death or banished every one whom
she accused. And if she could not prevail on the king to do
this, she was accustomed to kill them secretly by poison. Now
there was at this time a young man of illustrious family, very
intimate with the king, and wholly devoted to him, against
whom the wicked queen brought her accusations in vain, on
which account she took him off by poison. And as the king,
without knowing it, tasted the same poison, he died imme-
diately, though she had not designed to administer poison to
the king, but only to the young man. However, they both
drank of it, and both died of the fatal draught. When, there-
fore, the king had been killed in this manner, that wicked
woman was greatly alarmed, and fled with incalculable trea-
sures and crossed the sea, and went to the court of Charle-
magne, king of France, and made him many presents. And
when this wickedest of all women, although one of most ex-
quisite beauty, stood before the king, the monarch addressed
her thus: ‘‘ Choose, Eadburga, whichever you prefer to marry,
me or my son, who is my comfort.” But she, without taking
time for deliberation, discarding all restraint of modesty, an-
swered and said, “If an option or liberty of choice were given
to me, I should choose your son rather than you, because he
is younger.” Then the king, perceiving that she was influenced

A.D. 805. ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY DIES. 389

only by the desire of gratifying her lust, made her this elegant
reply : “If you had chosen me, you should have had my son;
but because you have chosen him, you shall neither have me
nor him.” But the king, on account of her wickedness and
excessive beauty, gave her a noble nunnery of women, in
which, having laid aside her secular garments, out of hypo-
crisy, and assumed the habiliments of a nun, she filled the
place of abbess for a few years. In a short time afterwards,
while she was cursing some of her sacred duties, she is said
to have been ravished by a low-born man of her own nation.
Accordingly, the king ordered her to be expelled from the
holy nunnery, as a woman taken in adultery; and after that
she passed her time in poverty, most miserably and shame-
fully, to the end of her life.

And when king Brithric was killed in this manner, Egbert
succeeded him in his kingdom, and reigned thirty-six years.
He was descended from the royal family of his nation, and
with great might added many kingdoms to his empire. The
same year, Eadbert, bishop of London, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Edgar.

CaeRV <P aou 6), 803.10 870.

Egbert begins to subdue the other kingdoms of the Heptarchy
—Charlemagne summons five councils in France—Dies—
Higbert becomes sole king of England—Subdues Wales—

_ The Danes land at Sheppey—Are defeated by Egbert—He
dies—They return a second time—Constant wars between
them and the English—Alfred, son of Ethelwolf, is born—
Story of the old woman of Berkeley—Ethelwolf devotes a
tenth part of his kingdom to the service of God—He takes
Alfred to Rome—Ethelwolf dies—Saint Swithan—Alfred

 marries—The Danes overrun England and Scotland—
Death of King Edmund.

A.D. 803. Higbald, bishop of Lindisfarne, died, and was
succeeded by Egbert; this Higbald was present at the ravages
committed by the Danes in the province of Northumberland,
which have been already mentioned.

A.D. 804. Beornred, bishop of Rochester, died, and was
succeeded in his bishopric by Puthric.

A.D. 805, Ethelhard, archbishop of Canterbury, died,who (as

had been foretold to him) received with great power the dig-

390 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 814.

nity of the church of Canterbury, which had been lost. He

was succeeded by Wilfrid, who governed that see twenty-eight
ears.

: A.D. 806. Wilfrid, the archbishop of Canterbury, who has _

been mentioned before, received the pallium, and was con-

firmed in his dignity.

A.D. 807. Cuthred, king of Kent, died, and was succeeded
in his kingdom by Baldred.

A.D. 808. Eardulf, king of Northumberland, was driven
from his kingdom, and succeeded by Alfwold, who reigned
two years; and it was that same Alfwold who drove him out,
and occupied his kingdom. ,

A.D. 809. Egbert, king of the West Saxons, approached in
a hostile manner that district which is called Cornwall, and
made himself master of it, and added it to his kingdom, after
some battles, in which many persons were slain on both sides.

A.D. 810. Alfwold, king of Northumberland, died, and
Eandred reigned in his stead, and reigned thirty-two years.
The same year, Egbert subjugated the northern Britons, and
compelled them to become tributary to him.

A.D. 811. King Egbert compelled the Welch to pay him
tribute, as he had in the past year compelled the northern
Britons; and he traversed all their territories, piercing their
borders in every part; and ravaging their country from north
to south with fire, he plundered it, and then returned to his
own kingdom.

A.D. 812. Saint Amandus was exhumed at the monastery of
Elms, in France, and his body was found uninjured at a dis-
tance of a hundred and fifty-two years from his death; and
his hair and nails required to be cut, as they appeared to have
grown; and when some of his teeth were extracted out of
his mouth with a forceps, blood flowed from the gums, which is
still preserved, and is of miraculous power.

A.D. 813. Charlemagne, king of France, and patrician of
Rome, ordered councils to be held throughout Gaul; one at
Mayence, a second at Rheims, a third at Tours, a fourth at
Chalons, and a fifth at Arles ; at which councils some chapters
of Holy Scriptures, necessary to the Universal Church, are
said to have had their interpretation settled.

A.D. 814, Charlemagne, king of France, and emperor of
Rome, died, after he had reigned forty-five years. And he
was succeeded by his son Lewis.

A.D. 818, POPE STEPHEN DIES. 391

The same year, Wilfrid, archbishop of Canterbury, and
Wibert, bishop of Sherborne, went to Rome, on the business of
‘the Anglican Church.

The following is a statement made by Turpin, archbishop
of Rheims :— ’

“But a short time ago, the death of king Charlemagne
was intimated to me in the following manner. On a certain
day, when I was at Menna, standing in the church before the
altar, rapt in ecstasy, and occupied in my prayers, and singing
the psalm, ‘O God, come thou to my aid,’ I saw innumerable
hosts of odious-looking soldiers pass before me, and bend
their course towards Lothogaringia; and when they had all
passed, I saw one of them, resembling an Ethiopian, following
the others with a slow step, to whom I said, ‘ Whither are ye
going?’ and he replied, ‘To Aix-la-Chapelle are we going, to
the death of Charlemagne, in order to carry his spirit off to
hell.’ And I said to him, ‘I adjure you, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that after you have accomplished your
journey, and effected your object, you do not refuse to return
to me.’ Then, after a short interval, almost before I had

finished my psalm, they returned to me in the same order.
And I said to the last one, to whom I had originally spoken,
‘What have you done?’ And the devil said, ‘We weighed
the actions of Charles, but Galetian, without any regard to
the sum of them, put so many huge stones, and such a count-
less quantity of beams from his churches, in the scale, that
his good deeds weighed more than his evil ones, and therefore
he took his soul away from us.’ Having said this, the devil
disappeared. And, therefore, I understood that on that day
Charlemagne had departed from this life, and had been de-
servedly transferred, by the assistance of the blessed James
(to whom he had built many churches), to the kingdom of
heaven.”

A.D. 815. Louis, king of France, received consecration at
Rome, as emperor, from the hands of pope Leo.

A.D. 816. The holy pope, Leo, died ; and Stephen succeeded
him in the Roman chair, and filled it for one year.

A.D. 817. Pope Stephen died, and Paschal succeeded him
in the Roman chair, which he filled for seven years and seven-
teen days. The same year, the English school at Rome was
burnt with fire.

A.D. 818. Seloamer, king of the Abroditze, was driven from

392 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 821.

his kingdom by the emperor Louis, and passed over to the
Danes.

A.D. 819. Bernard, king of Italy, was accused of having
conspired against the emperor, and being convicted of lése
majesté, was deprived, first of all his kingdom, then of his
eyes, and at last of his life. ;

A.D. 820. Bythe arrangements of theemperor Louis, ageneral
assembly of bishops and abbots was held at Aix-la-Chapelle,
at which certain articles were agreed on, which were necessary
for the use of monksand nuns. Kenulf, the father of Kenelm,
founded the abbey of Winchelcombe, in a manner sufficient to’
support two hundred monks.

A.D. 821. Kenulph, king of Mercia, died, and his body re-
ceived burial at Wincheleoombe. He was succeeded in his
kingdom by Kenelm, his son, whom, when he was seven years
old, his father had entrusted to his sister Quendrida, to be
brought up by her. But she, being seduced by a wicked
desire of reigning, gave her nephew to one of the guards, who
had been educated by her, with injunctions to kill him. He
took the innocent boy out, as if to hunt, and having cut off
his head, hid him among the bushes; and, marvellous to re-
late, the crime which was perpetrated so secretly in England,
was made known at Rome by Divine revelation. Fora white
dove flew over the altar of the blessed Peter, the chief of the
apostles, and dropped upon it a paper, which gave regular
information of the death of the holy king and martyr, Kenelm,
and also of the place where he was buried. But, as this
paper was written in golden characters of the English lan-.
guage, it was in vain endeavoured to be deciphered by the
Romish priests, and by any others who were present, and
who, at the pope’s command, endeavoured to make it out.
But, in good time, an angel came to them, who, translating
the paper into the Latin language, caused an epistle of the
Roman pontiff to give information to the kings of England of
their martyred compatriot. For, among other things con-
tained in this paper, were these words: Yn clenc fau bathe
Kenelin fynebearne lith onder thorne heaued by reaued : which
means, in Latin, Jn clenc fou bathe: that is, in the pasture
of the cows, Kenelm, the son of the king, lies under a bramble,
deprived of his head, near the head. ‘Therefore, as has been
already said, the body of this blessed king having been mi-

A.D. 826. BERNULF SLAIN BY THE EAST ANGLES. 393

raculously revealed to the kings of England, his youthful
corpse was taken out of the cave, and, by a great multitude of
clergy and nobles, conveyed to Winchelcombe. The parricidal,
or rather fratricidal, woman, excited by the song of the clergy
and laymen, and their eager applause at the discovery of this
holy martyr, put her head out of the window of the chamber
in which she was standing, and sang the psalm, “Lord, do
not thou be silent about my glory ;” and then, designing I
know not what sorcery, repeating it backwards, she endea-
voured to check the joy of the singers; and when she had got
back from the end to this verse, ‘“This would be their work,
who speak ill of me before the Lord,” both her eyes burst at
once from their sockets, and fell down upon the page which she
was reading. And to this day, that psalter, wrought in silver,
and bedewed with the blood of her eyes that fell, shews the
mark of this seizure of hers. And of the martyrdom of this
holy youth, some one speaks thus :
« There lies beneath the thorn, by foulest murder torn,
Deprived of his head, the royal Kenelm dead.”

And the holy Kenelm was succeeded in the kingdom of
Mercia by Ceolwulf, his uncle, who reigned two years, although
he was in a short time deprived of his kingdom.

A.D. 822. Some earth in Saxony swelled up for the space
of a league, in the form of a rampart, to the astonishment of
many. ;
ae 823. Ceolwulf was expelled from the kingdom of Mer-
cia, and was succeeded by Bernulf, who reigned four years.

A.D. 824. A girl, twelve years of age, after the sacred com-
munion on the day of Easter, abstained first of all from bread
ten days, and after that from all meat and drink for three
years, and then she returned to the ordinary usages of life.
Eugenius became pope of Rome.

A.D. 825. Egbert, king of the West Saxons, fought a battle
against Bernulf, king of Mercia, who was invading his terri-
tories in a hostile manner, at Ellendown, inwhicha greatnumber
of men in both kings’ armies were slain, and Egbert returned
a fatal conqueror to his own kingdom.

A.D. 826. Bernulf, the before-mentioned king of Mercia,
was slain by the East Angles, because he endeavoured to in-
vade that kingdom, and to claim it, as having been his own
ever since the time of king Offa. The same year, the bodies
of the holy martyrs Marcellinus and Peter were removed from

394 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 830, -

Rome and conveyed to France, where they became famous for

many miracles. Ludican succeeded king Bernulf.

A.D. 827, Valentine succeded pope Eugenius; and governed
the see forty days. Egbert, king of the West Saxons, sent
Ethelwolf, his son, with Ethelstan, bishop of Sherburne, and
Wyhard, a commander, into Kent, with a very numerous body
of troops, who drove king Baldred across the river Thames,
and reduced the kingdom of Kent, and also Sussex, under the
power of king Egbert. And this year also, the East Angles
received king Egbert as their patron and lord. And at last,
Egbert was the only one left of eight kings, and he had sub-
dued and made himself master of the whole of this island,
from the river Humber to the south coast and Gallic Channel.
This year, Gregory became bishop of Rome, and filled that
see sixteen years.

A.D. 828. Ludican, king of Mercia was slain by king Egbert,
and was succeeded in his kingdom by Wilafer, who was im-
mediately driven out by king Egbert, and passed three years
in banishment. And at the same time, Egbert defeated Swi-
thred, king of the East Saxons, and drove him too from his
kingdom. And when Swithred had been driven away, the
kings of the West Saxons occupied that kingdom. The same
year, there rained, near Vaison, in France, a shower of corn,
like wheat, only with shorter and rounder grains. 'This year
also, Egbert, bishop of Lindisfarne, died, and was succeeded
by Eardulf.

A.D. 829. When Egbert, king of the West Saxons, had made
himself master of all the southern kingdoms of England, he
led a great army into Northumberland, and fearfully ravaged
and overwhelmed that province, and compelled Eandred, its
king, to pay tribute. This year is the four thousand seven
hundred and eighty-eighth year from the beginning of the
world, and the end of the ninth great year from the begin-
ning of the world, each great year consisting of five hundred
and thirty-two years.

A.D. 830. The most mighty king Egbert, leading a powerful
army into Wales, reduced all the Welsh, with their kings, to a
voluntary submission to his dominion. The same year, the
same king Egbert, being moved by pity, permitted Wilaf, king
of Mercia, to’ hold his kingdom under him, on condition of the
payment of tribute.

A.D. 837. EGBERT, KING OF THE WEST SAXONS, DIES. 395

A.D. 831. Theophilus became emperor of Constantinople.
The same year, Wolf, archbishop of York, paid the debt of
nature, and was succeeded by Wymond.

A.D. 832. Wilfrid, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and was
succeeded by Ceolnoth, who received the pallium the following
year.

A.D. 833. The army of the Danes, unbelieving pirates, after
they had been defeated and put to flight at Dunemuth, ravaged
Sheppy, thatistosay, theIsleof Sheep. For these paganshad put
in there with thirty-five ships, and having ravaged that island,
they sailed on and landed at the place which is called Carrum,
and there they gave themselves up to plunder and rapine, and
spared neither sex nor age.

A.D. 834. King Egbert, having collected a large army, di-

rected his standards and army against the aforesaid pagans ;

%

but, after great slaughter had taken place on both sides, pre-
vailed by the fortune of war. In these battles there fell,
among others, Herefrid, bishop of Winchester, and Sigelm,
bishop of Sherborne ; with duke Dudda, and duke Osmund.
And Edmund succeeded Herefrid, and Ethelwold succeeded
Sigelm.

A.D. 835. The Welsh united their forces to those of the
Danes, and the two together invaded the kingdom of Egbert
with fire and sword, and endeavoured to destroy his castles
and towns. But when king Egbert heard this, he met the
enemy with a numerous army, and, when they resisted, he
made a great slaughter of them, and at length he compelled
the Danes and the Welsh to betake themselves to a ruinous
flight, and delivered his country from the irruption of the
enemy.

A.D. 836. The same king, Egbert, overwhelmed with a
severe defeat, and utterly routed and put to flight, a fresh army
of the Danes which came over.

A.D. 837. Pope Gregory, who had been previously called
Leo the Fourth, called a new city, which he had lately com-
pleted, Leonia, after his own name. ‘The same year, Egbert,
king of the West Saxons, passed from this world, after he had
reigned thirty-seven years and seven months, and was buried
at Winchester. And his son, Ethelwolf, whom some call
Eadulf, succeeded him, and reigned twenty years and five
months. This Ethelwolf had, by his queen, four illustrious

396 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 838.

sons, of whom the eldest was named Eadbald, the second
Ethelbert, the third Ethelred, and the youngest Alfred, all of
whom reigned in succession after their father. Healso had a
fifth son, named Athelstan, who was not born in wedlock, to
whom he gave all the kingdoms which his father Egbert had
acquired by force of arms, remaining contented himself with
the kingdom of the West Saxons only.

A.D. 838. The Danes landed in the port of Southampton
with thirty-three ships, with great confidence and pride;
but count Ulfward having slain many thousands of them in a
pitched battle, compelled them to depart with disgrace. But
the same year, not long afterwards, the same pagans landed at
Portsmouth, and began to ravage the country. And when

the news got abroad, duke Ethelhelm met them with the men .

of Dorset, and put them to flight; but using his strength in-
considerately, he advanced with his men without sufficient re-
gularity, and so was slain by the enemy.

Now then, since we have come to that great and horrible
calamity which, on account of their sins, was inflicted by means
of the Danes on the English nation, it may be well to explain
briefly to our readers the cause of this disaster, that it may serve
as a caution to future ages.

In the primitive church of the Angles religion shone most
brightly, so that kings and queens, princes and dukes, counts
and barons, and rulers of churches, being all inflamed with
the desire of life in heaven, vied with one another, as we have
already shown, in seeking a monastic life, a spontaneous ba-
nishment, a life of solitude, and left all to follow their Lord.
But, in process of time, all virtue decayed so much in them,
that no nation appeared equal to them in treachery or fraud.
Nor was there anything hated by them except piety, and jus-
tice, and honour. Nothing was dear to them except wars,
worse even than civil wars, and the spilling of innocent blood.
Therefore, Almighty God sent against them pagan nations, most
cruel people, like swarms of bees, who spared neither the sex
of women nor the age of infants, namely, Danes and Norwe-
gians, Goths, Swedes, Vandals, and Frieslanders, who, from
the beginning of the reign of king Ethelwold till the arrival
of the Romans, for nearly two hundred and thirty years de-
stroyed this sinful land from sea to sea, and from man to
beast. Since, though they were constantly invading England

ae os ee

A.D. 842. THE ARMY OF THE DANES RAVAGES ENGLAND. 397

from all quarters, they did not labour to subdue it or to
become master of it, but only to ravage and plunder it. And
if they were at times defeated, the English gained nothing by
that, as a more numereus fleet and army came from some
other quarter unexpectedly and suddenly. Forsooth, while
the English kings were marching to the eastern side of the
kingdom to fight them, before they could reach the hostile
battalions, a messenger would hasten up, saying, “ O king,
whither are you going? Behold now a countless fleet of
barbarians is occupying the coast on the southern part of the
kingdom, and ravaging the cities and towns, and laying waste
with fire and sword every thing that it can meet with.” And
just in the same way, similar news would come from the east,
or west, or north, and despair the natives of all hope of safety.
And thus the kings, distracted with bad news and evil mes-
sages, went forth with cowed spirits, and entered on a doubtful
contest against the invading enemy. And the consequence
was, that sometimes the English were victorious, and some-
times the enemy.

A.D. 839. Count Herbert fought against the pagans at
Merswar ; where, as the Danes attacked gallantly, and his own
men ran away, the said count died.

A.D. 840. Eandred, king of Northumberland, died, and was
succeeded by Ethelred, his son, who reigned seven years.

A.D. 841. An army of pagans marched in a hostile
manner through the eastern parts of England, that is to say,
through Kent and East Anglia, where they slaughtered a vast
multitude of men. And in the same year, the same pagans
ravaged the district of Lindsey. The same year, Lewis, the
pious king of the French, and patrician of the Romans, died,
and was succeeded by Lothaire, who reigned fifteen years.

A.D. 842. The wicked army of the Danes penetrated more
deeply into England, and slew a vast number of persons of
both sexes around Canterbury and Rochester, and the city of
London. Theodolph Aurelian, a bishop, being accused of
felony before Lewis, the emperor, son of Charlemagne, by
some of his rivals, was by him committed to prison at Ande-
gavi. And when, on the Lord’s day, a procession with branches
of palm leaves was passing by the prison in which he was
guarded, he opened the window, and silence having been
produced, he chaunted these most beautiful verses, “ Glory

398 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 849.

and praise, and honour,” of his own composition, in the
presence of the emperor; and the emperor was so highly
pleased with them, that he soon released him from his bondage,
and restored his bishopric; and he established a rule, that
these verses should be chaunted on this day at the end of the
procession as it entered the church.

A.D. 843. Lothaire, king of the French and emperor of
the Romans, marching into Saxony, with great courage put
down a very formidable conspiracy of freedmen, who wished
to crush their masters, and condemned the ringleaders of the
sedition to death.

A.D. 844. Sergius, who is also called Pelagius, was ap-
pointed to the Roman chair, and governed that see three years.
The same year, Ethelwolf, king of the West Saxons, fought
the nation of the Danes at Carrum, but the Danes got the
victory. The same year, Ethelred, king of Northumberland,
was driven from his kingdom, and was succeeded by Read-
wolf, who, immediately after he was invested with the crown,
fought a battle against the pagans at Aluethelie, in which
he and his commander Alfred fell with the greatest part of
his troops; and after this, Ethelred became king a second
time.

A.D. 845. Duke Earnulf, with the men of Somerset, and
duke Osric, with the men of Dorset, and with Alstan, bishop
of Sherburne, fought a battle against the Danes at Pedredes-
mouth, and made a great slaughter of the enemy, and gained
the victory. The same year, Egbert, bishop of Lindisfarne,
died, and was succeeded by Hanbert. ;

A.D. 846. Ethelstan, the bishop, and Alcher, the general,
fought a battle at Sandwich against an immense army of the
pagans, and took nine of their largest ships, and put the rest
to flight.

A.D. 847. Pope Leo occupied the see of Rome, and ruled it
for eight years, three months, and six days; and the see was
vacant two months. ‘The same year, Hadbert, bishop of Wor-
cester, died, and was succeeded by Alhun.

A.D. 848. Ethelred, king of Northumberland, was slain, and
was succeeded by Osbert, who reigned in his stead eighteen
years. The same year, an eclipse of the sun took place at
six o’clock, on the first of October.

A.D. 849, A son was born to Ethelwolf, king of the Vest

A.D. 851. ETHELWOLF DEFEATS THE PAGANS. 399

Saxons, in the province of Berkshire, in the royal town which
is called Wantage, who, at the sacred regeneration of baptism,
received the name of Alfred. His mother’s name was Os-
burga, a very religious woman, of noble family and great abi-
lities, and she was the daughter of Aslat, the illustrious cup-
bearer of king Ethelwolf. And Aslat was descended from
the Goths and Jutes, of the family of two brothers, whose
names were Scuphus and Withgar. They, having received
power from their uncle, the king of the West Saxons, and
from Kenric, their cousin, first of all slew a few Britons
in the Isle of Wight, whom they found inhabiting the said
island, in a place which is called Withgaresburg, that is to
say, the town of Withgar ; and after that, as I have said before,
they occupied and made themselves masters of the whole
island.

The same year, on the vigil of the day of Pentecost, Berthfer,
son of the king of Mercia, wickedly slew his kinsman, the
son of Bertulf, the holy Wolstan. And he was the grandson
of two kings of Mercia. And the corpse of the deceased is
said to have been conveyed to the most famous monastery of
his time, which was called the monastery of Rependune, and
to have been buried in the tomb of his grandfather, king
Wilaf. But heavenly miracles were not wanting to his mar-
tyrdom. For, from the spot where he was murdered in his
innocence, a pillar of light rose up to heaven, and was visible
for thirty days to all the inhabitants of that place.

A.D. 850. The French were worsted in a terrible battle by
the Bohemians ; which battle a malignant spirit publicly pro-
fessed by the mouth of a certain demoniac, that he had regu-
lated, and that he, by his own labours and those of his com-
panions the spirits, namely, pride and discord, had caused the
French to fly before their enemies.

A.D. 851. A great army of pagans, with three hundred and
fifty ships, entered the mouth of the Thames, and sacked
Dorobernia, which is Canterbury, and put to flight Bertulf,
king of Mercia, who had come against them to give them
battle. And becoming more audacious still after this, they
marched with all their force into Surrey. But when the
news of this event was brought to Ethelwolf, king of the
West Saxons, he collected a great army, and with his son
Ethelbald, fought a battle against the pagans in a place which

400 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 852. —

is called Acte, and defeated them, and inflicted an unheard-of
slaughter upon them.

A.D. 852. Bertulf, king of Mercia, passed from this life, and
was succeeded by Berthred, who reigned twenty-two years.
He, in the first year of his reign, took for his wife the daughter
of Ethelwolf, and by so doing established himself firmly in
his kingdom. And his nuptials were celebrated in the royal
town which is called Chippenham, where the damsel, Ethels-
witha, received the title of queen.

About this time, a certain wicked woman, living in the town
which is called Berkeley,' devoted to gluttony and wantonness,
and even in her old age putting no limit to her crimes and
witchcraft, continued immodest to the day of her death. One
day, when she was sitting at dinner, a jackdaw, which she
kept as a pet, began to chatter something or other. And
when the woman heard it, her knife fell from her hand, and
her face began to grow pale; and uttering a groan, she said,
‘This day I shall meet with a great disaster, for my plough
has this day come to its last furrow.’’ And when she had
said this, a messenger of woe came in; and when the woman
had asked him why he came, ‘‘I bring you news,”’ said he,
‘‘of the death of your son, and of the decease of his whole
family, by a sudden destruction.” And the woman, being
greatly affected by this misfortune, immediately took to her
bed, and became afflicted with a sore disease. And when she
found that it was creeping down to her vitals, she wrote a
letter to summon her surviving children to her, and they con-
sisted of two,a monk and a nun. And when they came,
she addressed them thus, with a voice broken by sobs:
‘*My children,” said she, “1, to my great sorrow, have always
been a slave to the practice of demoniacal arts. I have been
a sink of all vices, a teacher of all unholy allurements. And
yet, amid all this wickedness, I have always had a hope founded
on your religion, which has steadied my despairing soul, and
I have looked forward to finding you my defenders against
devils, and my protectors against my most cruel enemies. Now,
therefore, since I have come to the end of my life, I entreat

you, by the breast on which I bare you, that you will endeavour —

to relieve my torments. When I am.dead sew me up in the
hide of a stag, and then place me in a stone sarcophagus,
and fasten the lid upon it with iron and lead; and then

1 Called Okeley by Hume,

————— ES CS SS

ETS |

A.D. 852. STORY OF A CERTAIN WICKED WOMAN. 401

bind the stone round with three most powerful chains of iron,
and employ fifty clerical singers of psalms to chaunt, and as
many priests to celebrate masses for three days, and by these
means to check the ferocious attacks of my adversaries. And
if I lie in this way unmoved for three days, on the fourth day
bury me in the ground.”

Accordingly, everything was done as she had commanded
them. But, alack the day! neither prayers, nor tears, nor
chains were of any avail. For though on the two first nights
the choirs of psalm-singers were watching by the body, the
demons came and broke open the door of the church, which
was shut fast with a mighty bolt, and easily burst asunder the
two outer chains ; but the middle one, which was the strongest,
remained uninjured ; and on the third night there was, about
cockcrow, a noise as of enemies marching up, and the whole
monastery seemed to be moved from its foundations. Then
one of the demons, who was more formidable in countenance
than the rest, and more conspicuous for his stature, shook
down the doors of the church with a violent assault, and dashed
them to pieces. Clergy and laity were stupified, all their
hair stood on end, and the singing of psalms ceased. Aud
then the demon, with arrogant gestures, as it seemed, pro-
ceeded to the tomb, and calling gently on the name of the
woman, commanded her to rise. And when she replied that
she could not because of her chains, ‘You shall quickly,”
said he, ‘‘ be released, to your own misfortune.” Andina
moment he burst the chain which had mocked the fierceness
of the other demons, as if it had been an hempen string. He
also pitched aside the lid of the sepulchre, and in the sight of
them ali, dragged the woman out of the church, where before
the doors was seen a horse neighing proudly, with iron hoofs,
and nails projecting from him on all sides, and the wretched
woman was thrown upon him, and so disappeared from the
eyes of the bystanders. But her horrible cries, imploring
help, were heard for nearly four miles. sid

Now this story which I have related will not be incredible,
if the dialogue of the blessed Gregory be read, in which he
relates that a man who had been buried in a church, was
turned out of doors by demons. Moreover, among the French,
Charles Martel, a man of illustrious courage, who compelled
the Saracens who had invaded Gaul, to return to Spain, is

‘related, when he had ended his course of this life, to have

VOL. I. ies D

402 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 854.

been buried in the church of the blessed Denys. But be-
cause, for the sake of the pay of his soldiers, he had tam-
pered with his own patrimony, and also with the tithes of
nearly all the churches of Gaul, he was carried away bodily
out of the sepulchre, in a miserable manner, by malignant
spirits, and has never. been seen since to this very day. ’

A.D. 853. Ethelwolf, king of the West Saxons, and Beornred,
king of Mercia, defeated the Midland Britons in battle, and
compelled them to submit to their dominion. _

A.D. 854. Wymond, archbishop of York, died, and was
succeeded by Wolfer. The same year, Eanbert, bishop of
Lindisfarne, died, and was succeeded by Eardulf. The same
year, the noble king Ethelwolf gave a tenth part of his king-
dom, free from all secular services, exactions, and tributes to
God and the blessed Mary, and all the saints. And I think
it well to set forth here the deed of this donation, and the
confirmation of the charter by which it was given, in order
that his devotion may be known among all men.

“Though our Lord Jesus Christ reigns for ever and ever,
nevertheless we see in our times wars, and conflagrations, and
plundering of our resources, and various and inhuman afflic-
tions of barbarian enemies, and nations of pagans laying waste
our country and afflicting us to the very point of death, and
we see perilous times at hand. Wherefore, I, Ethelwolf, king
of the West Saxons, with the advice of my bishops and
princes, have adopted a salutary counsel and one uniform
remedy in giving up a certain portion of my territory to God
and the blessed Mary, and to all the saints, to be possessed by
them of everlasting right, to wit, one tenth part of all my
territory, which shall be exempt from all gifts, and protected
from all secular services, and from the tribute due to the king,
both greater and less, and free also from the tax which is
called UWGliteredden. And this land shall be free from all
burdens for the release of souls, and for the remission of my
sins, and dedicated to God above, without any charges on ac-
count of any expeditions, or buildings of bridges, or fortifi-
cations of citadels, in order that the priests may the more
diligently pour forth prayers for us to God without intermis-
sion, in proportion as we by this donation do in some respects
lighten their heavy burdens. And it has seemed good to Alstan,
bishop of the church of Sherburne, and to Swithun, bishop
of the church at Winchester, with their abbots, and with the

PIR SEL e ND Sst wor

PP per ot

A.D. 854. ALFRED CROWNED KING BY THE POPE. 403

servants of God, namely, the religious men and women, on
whom the above benefits have been conferred, to adopt a rule
that all the brethren and sisters shall, every week, on the day
of Mercury, that is to say, on Wednesday, sing, in every
church, fifty psalms ; and that each priest shall celebrate two
masses, one for the king and another for his dukes who con-
sent to this measure, for the salvation and refreshing of their
souls. And after we are dead, they shall discharge the same
duty for the king separately, and for all his dukes together.
And let this deed be firmly established for all the days of
Christianity, as firmly as liberty is established, and let it last
as long as the faith flourishes among the nation of the English.”
And the charter of this donation was written a.p. 855, on the
fourth indiction, on the third of November, in the city of
Winchester, before the greater altar of the blessed Apostle
Peter.

After these events, Ethelwolf, the noble king of the West
Saxons, having gone to Rome with great honour, took with
him Alfred, his younger son, whom he loved more than all the
rest, in order that he might there be instructed by pope Leo in
morals and religion. And when the king had stayed there
with his son more than a year, he caused his son to be there
crowned king by the pope, and a few days afterwards he
returned to his own country, taking with him into England
Judith, the daughter of Charles,’ king of France, whom he had
married. But in the meantime, while the king was delaying
in the parts beyond the sea, there rose up a conspiracy of
some of his nobles against the aforesaid king, the object of
Ethelbald, the first-born son of the king, and of Alstan, bishop
of Sherburne, and of Eandulf, count of the county of Somerset,
to prevent the king, when he returned home from Rome, being
received again into his kingdom. And there were two pretexts
for this ; one, because he had, while at Rome, procured his
younger son Alfred to be crowned as king, as if his other sons
were excluded from the kingdom; the other, because he had
despised all the women of England, and taken to himself in
wedlock a foreigner, the daughter of the king of France. Be-
sides this, the before-mentioned conspirators heard that, con-
trary to the customs and laws of the kings of the West Saxons,
he was wont to address Judith, the daughter of the king of

France, whom he had lately espoused, as his queen, and caused

1 This was Charles the Bald.
ppd 2

404 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 855.

her to sit at table and eat by his side. But the nation of the
West Saxons does not permit the queen to sit by the side of
the king, and considers her proper title to be, not the queen,
but the king’s wife. And this disgrace originated in the con-
duct of Eadburga, the daughter of king Offa, a queen of that
nation, who destroyed her husband Brithric with poison, and
who, sitting by the king’s side, was accustomed to accuse all
the nobles of the kingdom, and to murder, by means of poi-
sonous draughts, all whom she could not destroy by her
accusations. Therefore, because of the wickedness of this
queen, as has been related above at some length, the West
Saxons had all agreed never to permit a king to reign over
them who offended in the before-mentioned particulars. At
last, when Ethelwolf, who was a peaceable king, returned from
Rome, his son Ethelbald, who has been already mentioned,
attempted with his accomplices to prosecute to its accomplish-
ment the wickedness which he had conceived. But Almighty
God did not permit this to succeed. For to prevent a worse
than civil war, one, namely, between father and son, from draw-
ing to a head, by the ineffable clemency of the king, the con-
spiracy of all the nobles and bishops was appeased, and the
king divided the kingdom of the West Saxons with his son, ©
which had never been divided before, so that the eastern dis-
tricts of the kingdom fell to the share of his son, and the
western part remained with the father. And, though the whole
nobility of the kingdom was willing to fight for the king, and
to exclude his son from a share in the kingdom, if the father
would have allowed it to be done, yet he was, by the innate
nobleness of his mind, so far removed from the vice of cove-
tousness, that he satisfied the ambition of his son to such a
degree, that when the father ought to have reigned by the
just judgment of God, his obstinate and wicked son did reign.

A.D. 855. Pope Leo died, and was succeeded by Benedict,
who ruled the see two years, six months, and ten days. The
same year, king Edmund, who traced his origin up to the
blood of the ancient Saxons, succeeded to the supreme power
in the province of the East Angles, in the thirteenth year after
his birth; and on the day of the Nativity of our Lord, the
twenty-fifth of December, that most pious youth, haying been
elected king by all the nobles and people of that district, and
being compelled, in spite of great resistance on his own part, to
assume the reins of government, received consecration from

A.D. 857. KING ETHELWOLF DIES. A405

Humbert, bishop of Helmham, in the royal town which is
called Bures.

A.D. 856. Lothaire, king of France, and patrician of Rome,
died, and was succeeded by Louis, who reigned twenty-one
years.

A.D. 857. Ethelwolf, the peaceful king of the West Saxons,
among his other good studies in this present life, thinking of
his passage to the life everlasting, lest his sons should quarrel
with one another after his decease, drew up an epistle touch-
ing the inheritance, in which he had the division of his kingdom
equitably apportioned between his sons Ethelbald and Ethel-
bert, and whatever treasures in money he should leave behind
him he divided between his- daughter and his relatives, and
the nobles of his kingdom. Moreover, and for the benefit and
salvation of his soul, he enjoined his successors to the end of
time, in every ten hides or manors to maintain one poor man,
whether a native or a stranger, in meat, drink, and clothing,
provided only that that district was full of cattle, and was culti- .
vated by men. And he ordered four hundred mancuses’* to be
carried to Rome every year, to be there divided, so that one
hundred mancuses should be spent in honour of Saint Peter,
the chief of the Apostles, in the especial purchase of oil for
filling all the lamps of the Apostolic Church on the eve of
Easter, and the same sum for refilling them at cock-crow ;
also a hundred mancuses in honour of Saint Paul for the same
purposes, and a hundred were to be given to the universal
pope for the purpose of increasing his alms.

Moreover, this king, so devoted to God, before the death of
king Egbert, his father, had been ordained bishop of Win-
chester ; but after his father’s death, though he was very un-
willing, he was created king, as there was no one else of the royal
family who was entitled to reign. At last, when the illus-
trious king Ethelwolf had governed the kingdom of the West-
Saxons with great care for seventeen years, he went the way of
all flesh, and left Ethelbert, his second son, the kingdom of

Kent with Sussex, while his eldest son, Ethelbald, succeeded

him in the kingdom of the West Saxons; and king Ethel-
wolf was buried with royal honours at Winchester, in the
cathedral church.

As soon as Ethelbald had been advanced to the kingdom,

he, in defiance of the laws of God, and the honour of the

1 A mancus was about the weight of our present half crown.— Hume, c. ii.

406 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 862.

Christian name, aye, contrary to even the customs which ob-
tain among pagan nations, he ascended the bed of his de-
ceased father, and married Judith, the daughter of the king of
France, and reigned with unbridled cruelty over the West
Saxons for two years and a half. The same year, Cedda,
bishop of Hereford, died, and was succeeded by Albert.

A.D. 858. Pope Benedict died, and Nicolas succeeded to the

Roman chair, and ruled that see nine years, two months, and .

twenty days. The same year, Ethelbald, bishop of Lichfield,
died, and was succeeded by Humbert.

A.D. 859. Ethelbald, king of the West Saxons, repenting of
the wickedness before-mentioned, divorced Judith, his step-
mother, whose bed he had defiled, and having done penance,
during the remaining time that he lived, he governed the
kingdom in peace and justice.

A.D. 860. Leuculf, duke of the Saxons, transported the body
of the blessed pope Innocent from Rome into Saxony.

A.D. 861. Ethelbald, king of the West Saxons, was cut off
by a premature death in the fifth year of his reign, and was
buried with royal honours at Sherburne. He was succeeded in
his kingdom by his brother Ethelbert, who reduced under his
dominion Wessex, Kent, Essex, and Sussex. In those days
a vast multitude of Danes came across the sea, and plundered
the city of Winchester in a hostile manner. But as they were
returning with immense booty to their ships, Osric, count of
Hampshire, and Ethelwolf, count of Berkshire, manfully en-
countered them, and slew many of them, and compelled the
rest to seek safety in flight. The same year, Rethune, bishop
of Leicester, died, and Aldred succeeded to the bishopric.

A.D. 862. Saint Swithun, bishop of the city of Winchester,

departed to the Lord. This holy man, while he was alive, was’
the possessor of many virtues, but was especially eminent for

clemency and humility. And once upon a time it happened
that this servant of God was sitting with some workmen on
the bridge of the city of Winchester, in order by the spur

given by his presence to excite the activity of the labourers. —

And lo! there came across the bridge into the city, a woman
bringing her wares to market, and carrying eggs, and the la-

bourers from all sides sprang upon her with wanton attack, as’

is the way with men of that sort, and broke all her eggs to

pieces. And when, through the lamentations of the woman,

this shameful deed came to the ears of the pious bishop, and

A.D. 867. POPE ADRIAN SUCCEEDS NICOLAS. 407

he had sighed for the loss of that poor woman, being moved
with pity, he made the sign of the cross over the broken eggs, -
and so repaired the fractures of all of them. And with re-
spect to the humility of the man, this fact is worthy of being
remembered, that as often as he was about to consecrate any
newly-built church, however long the journey was, he used to
walk thither vigorously on his feet, refusing the use of horse
or carriage. And that he might not be ridiculed by the igno-
rant, or remarked by the proud, and so give cause for boast-
ing; he avoided the sight of men, and usually made his jour-
ney by night. He was a lover of holy solitude, and thought
it not right to squander his possessions in any pomps. At
last, when about to bid farewell to this present life, he, with
the strictness which became a bishop, enjoined his domestics
to bury his corpse outside his church, where it might be ex-
posed to the feet of the passers-by, and to the drops that fell
from on high. He was succeeded in his bishopric by Eal-
ferth, a man of considerable erudition in ecclesiastical matters,
and who occupied the place of his predecessor with great
wisdom for some time.

A.D. 863. The pagans wintered in the isle of Thanet, and
made a firm treaty of peace with the men of Kent. But:
after the manner of foxes, they sallied by night out of their
camp, and ravaged the whole eastern district of Kent, and re-
turned with the spoil to their ships.

A.D. 864. Humbert, bishop of Lichfield, died, and was suc-
ceeded in his bishopric by Kineferth.

A.D. 865. The bodies of the Saints Eusebius and Pontianus
were, in consequence of the gift of pope Nicolas, transported
into Gaul, and honourably buried in two monasteries, which
by the vows of religious men had been conferred on Saint
Peter.

A.D. 866. Ethelbert, king of the West Saxons, died, and
his brother Ethelred reigned in his stead, and reigned five
years. And at this time a great fleet of the Danes arriving in
England, wintered in the country of the East Angles, when a
great part of those who had been infantry soldiers became
cavalry.

A.D. 867. Pope Adrian succeeded Nicolas, and ruled the
Roman see four years. The same year, the wicked army of
the Danes, on the day of All Saints, quitted the district of the
East Angles, and went to the city of York; at which time

408 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 867.

also, a great dissension arose among the people of Northum-
berland, in which the people expelled their lawful king, Os-
bert, from his kingdom, and raised to the supreme power a
tyrant named Ella, who was not descended from the royal
family. But under the influence of the divine guidance, when
the Danes arrived, Osbert and Ella made peace with one ano-
ther for the common good. And then, uniting their numerous
forces, they marched upon the city of York; and on their ar-
rival, the pagans at once retreated within the walls of the city,
determining to defend themselves there ; but the Christian kings
pursued them, making a most vigorous attack upon the enemy,
and battered down the walls of the city. At last, they entered
the city, and fought a battle against the pagans, in which they
themselves suffered severe loss. For in that battle fell the
kings Osbert and Ella, and with them eight generals, with a
great number of common men, and the battle was fought
on Palm Sunday. At last, the wicked Danes being victorious,
ravaged the whole province of Northumberland as far as the
mouth of the river Tyne, and having subdued their enemies,
made themselves absolute masters of the whole country. Then
the kings of Northumberland having been slain, a person of
the name of Egbert, an Angle by birth, obtained the kingdom
under the power of the Danes, and governed it six years.

The same year, Alfstan, bishop of Sherburne, died ; who, in
the time of the kings of the West Saxons, Egbert, and his son
Ethelwolf, flourished in the kingdom with great influence and
reputation for wisdom, and by his exertions in war he reduced
the people of Kent and the East Angles under the power of
king Egbert. And he excited the courage of king Ethelwolf
against the Danes, who then, for the first time, were infesting
this island ; drawing money out of the treasury himself, and
himself levying an army, and being successful in the results of
his warfare, he conducted many wars against the enemy with
great courage. Moreover, any one may judge of his power
from this fact, that when king Ethelwolf was returning from
Rome, he refused him entrance into his kingdom, and set up
his son Ethelbald as king in his stead, until he allowed the
father to return as a partner with his son in the kingly power.
And he left his church, which he had governed for fifty years,
very rich in estates which he had acquired on all sides. And,
as he was a man of unlimited covetousness, so also was he one

A.D. 870. DANES LAND IN SCOTLAND. 409

of pre-eminent liberality. And he was buried at Sherburne, in
the cathedral church.

A.D. 868. Alfred, brother of king Ethelred, a youth of ad-
mirable probity, married a wife of the royal family of Mercia,
who was the daughter of Ethelred, count of the Ganni, who
was surnamed f#luchel, which in Latin means Magnus. Her
mother’s name was Eadburga, of the noble race of the before-
mentioned kings. The name of the maiden whom Alfred: es-
poused was Alswitha. The same year, the army of the Danes,
which has been frequently mentioned, left Northumberland
and came down to Nottingham, and wintered there. But Not-
tingham was called in the British language Tingnobant, and
in Latin Domus Speluncarum (the house of caves). And
when Burrhed, king of Mercia, heard of their arrival in those
parts, he sent messengers to Ethelred, king of the West
Saxons, and to his brother Alfred, to beg for aid in a suppliant
manner, in order to enable him to defeat the army of the
pagans, which was hateful both to God and man. And Alfred
immediately collected an immense army, and joined the king
of Mercia, and then the two kings marched with one mind
towards Nottingham, purposing to fight a battle. But as the
pagans, being protected by the fortifications of the citadel, de-
clined a battle, and as the Christians were unable to batter
down the walls, peace was made for a time between the Mer-
cians and pagans, and both parties returned to their own ter
ritories.

The same year, the oratory of Saint Andrew the Apostle
was built, and dedicated at Cimesia, by Alwyn, bishop of Wor-
cester. This year a comet was seen very clearly.

A.D. 869. The before-mentioned army of the pagans passing
back again towards Northumberland, went to the city of York,
and wintered there.

A.D. 870. An innumerable multitude of Danes landed in
Scotland, under the leadership of Hinguar and Hubba, men of
terrible obstinacy and unheard-of valour. They endeavoured
to carry on a war of extermination throughout all the territory
of England; they murdered all the boys and old men whom
they met, and gave-up the holy matrons and virgins to the
sport of the soldiery. And when this tyrannical ferocity had
spread over all parts of the kingdom, Ebba, the holy abbess of
the nunnery of Collingham, fearing lest she herself, to whom
the pastoral charge of regulating the affairs of her house and

410 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 870.

order had been committed, should, with the virgins under
her authority, ‘be given up to the sport of the pagans, so as to
lose her virgin modesty, convened all the sisterhood toa chap-
ter, and burst forth in the following words, saying, “ There
have lately come into our district most wicked pagans, men
ignorant of every kind of humanity, who traverse every part of
this region, and spare neither the sex of females nor the age
of infants. They trample upon churches and ecclesiastical
persons, they defile women bound by the holiest vows, and
crush and destroy whatever they meet with. Therefore, if
you are willing to adopt my advice, I entertain certain hopes,
founded on the divine mercy, that we shall be able to escape
the rage of the barbarians, and to preserve the modesty of our

perpetual maidenhood.”” And when the entire assembly of —

the virgins had given her their pledge and most solemn pro-
mise that they were desirous to obey her maternal injunction
in all things, then that abbess of admirable courage, openly
giving to all the sisters an example of chastity which should
be profitable not only to those nuns, but which should be

worthy of being followed by all succeeding virgins, and by all.

who should at any time exist, took a razor, and cut off her
nose, and her upper lip close to the very teeth, and so made
herself a shocking sight to all the bystanders. And as the

whole assembly which beheld this memorable deed admired

it, they all inflicted similar treatment on themselves, and fol-
lowed the example of their mother. And after these things
had been done in this manner, the next morning, at dawn,
those most wicked tyrants came, in order to deliver up those
holy women devoted to God, to be the sport of their soldiery,
and to plunder the monastery itself, and burn it with fire.
But when they beheld that abbess and every one of the sisters.

so shamefully mutilated, and steeped in their own gore from.

head to foot, they retreated in haste from that place, as it
appeared too long for them to remain on that spot for even a
brief space of time. And the before-mentioned generals, retreat-
ing from that place, ordered their wicked guards to hurl fire
upon it, and so burn up the monastery itself, with all its
offices, and the nuns themselves. And when these commands
had been executed accordingly by those ministers of iniquity,
the holy abbess, and all those most holy virgins with her,
arrived at the glory of martyrdom.

And when these things had been done in this manner, those

A.D. 870. STORY OF KING EDMUND. 411

most impious infidels sailed upwards along the coast, laying
waste everything they met with, with fire and sword. And
in this diabolical persecution, many most noble monasteries,
which were situated on the sea-coast, are said to have been
destroyed, namely, the monastery of monks at Lindisfarne,
where at that time there was a cathedral see, which the blessed
bishop Cuthbert adorned with the sacred presence of his
body. Also the monastery at Tynemouth, for nuns, and
' the Gyrwian monastery for monks, and that of Wearmouth,
in which it is related that the venerable priest, Bede, was
educated. There was also the nunnery at Streneshele, which
the most blessed abbess, Hilda, founded, and in which she
assembled many virgins. And thus those wicked leaders,
passing through the county of York, burnt churches, and
cities, and towns, and destroyed the inhabitants of every sex
and age, with all their property and their cattle. Then sail-
ing up the river Humber, they raged there with similar fury ;
and advancing from thence, they destroyed all the monasteries
and nunneries situated in the fens, and slew all the inha-
bitants. And the names of these monasteries and nunneries
were that of Croyland, of Thorney, of Ramsey, of Hampstead,
which is now called Saint Peter’s Borough. They also ravaged.
the Isle of Ely, and destroyed a nunnery which was formerly
of the highest celebrity, in which the holy virgin and queen,
Elthelreda, gloriously filled the office of abbess for many years.

Now, therefore, since in that persecution the glorious king
and martyr, Edmund, was slain, and perished by the swords
of the wicked brothers, Hinguar and Hubba, it is fitting in
this place to relate the cause of this important martyrdom,
and to explain how the before-mentioned leaders got the oppor-
tunity of condemning that most pious king to a most bar-
barous death. There was then in the days which were not
long past, in the kingdom of the Danes, a certain man, des-
cended from the royal family of that nation, by name Lothbroc.
He by his wife became the father of two sons, namely, of
Hinguar and Hubba. And when one day he had embarked
in a little boat, alone with his hawk, in order to hunt the
ducks and other small birds in the islands of the sea which
were near the land, a sudden tempest arose, by which he was
carried out into the wide sea, and for many days and nights
tossed about in every direction, and grievously afflicted.

At last, after having encountered many dangers, he was

412 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ASIN SEOs

driven into Anglia, and landed in the province of the East
Angles, which is called S2orthfolke by the inhabitants, near
the town which is called 3edham. And being discovered
there alone with his hawk, by the men of that district, he was
brought before Edmund, king of the East Angles, as a won-
der. And having been honourably received by the king himself,
on account of the extreme elegance and beauty of his person,
he remained for some time at his court. And as the language
of the Danes is near akin to the dialect of the Angles, Loth-
broc began to relate to the king by what chance it was that he
had been driven to Anglia. Lothbroc also was much pleased
by the graciousness of the manner of king Edmund, and by
the admirable state of his military discipline, and by the nu-
merous retinue of servants who stood by, whom the industry
of the king had made fully accomplished in all honourable
actions and in every variety of knowledge. Lothbroc, there-
fore, being excited by his admiration for such manners and
discipline, asked with earnestness of the king to allow him to
remain at his court, in order to be more fully instructed in the
discipline of the king. And when king Edmund had graciously
listened to his request, Lothbroc united himself to the king’s
huntsman, whose name was Bernus, in order, in his company,
to become fully instructed in the art of hunting, in which
Bernus was thoroughly skilful; for he was thoroughly ac-
quainted not only with the practice of hunting, but also with
that of fowling, so that in catching both birds and beasts,
everything succeeded according to his wish. He caught what-
ever he wished, and frequently enriched the king’s table with
the most delicate dishes. And as he was greatly beloved by
the king, as the nobleness of his birth sanctioned, the king’s
huntsman began to envy him greatly, because he surpassed
him in the before-mentioned arts. And being inflamed against
Lothbroe with mortal envy, one day, when they were going
out hunting together, he made a treacherous attack upon him,
and wickedly slew him, and hid his body in the thickness of
the wood. And when he had done this, that wicked hunts-
man withdrew, and blowing his horn, called the dogs to him-
self. But Lothbroe had bred up a harrier in the palace of king
Edmund, which, as is often the case, became greatly attached
to him; and when the huntsman retreated with the rest of
the hounds, this harrier remained alone by the body of his
master. The next day, when the king was sitting at table,

A.D. 870. STORY OF KING DDMUND. 413

and observed that Lothbroc was not present with the rest of
his court, he asked eagerly of his servants what had became
of him ; and Bernus, the huntsman, replied, that the day be-
fore, when he returned home from hunting, Lothbroe re-
mained behind him in the wood, and he declared that he had
not seen him since. But he had scarcely finished speaking,
when, lo! the harrier which Lothbroce had bred, entered the
king’s palace, and began to wag his tail and fawn upon all
present, and especially upon the king. And when the king
saw this, he said to the byestanders, ‘‘ See, the hound of Loth-
broc is come as a forerunner of his master, who is on his way.”
And in his joy the king fed the hound carefully, hoping that
he was a sign that his master was coming: but he waited in
vain. For immediately that the hound was satisfied, he re-
turned to his master, and kept his accustomed watch near
his corpse. Again, after three days, being compelled by
hunger, he returned to the king’s table to be refreshed; and
the king, greatly marvelling, ordered his servants to follow
the footsteps of the dog if he left the palace, and carefully to
ascertain whither he went. And this was done by the ser-
vants, just as they had been commanded to do by the king;
and following the hound as he retired, they were conducted
to the lifeless body of Lothbroc. And when this had been
related to the king, he was greatly agitated, and ordered that
his body should be buried with all honour.
Then king Edmund, having made a diligent investigation into
the death of Lothbroc, convicted Bernus, the huntsman, of
this wicked action. And he ordered the soldiers and lawyers
of his court to pronounce their judgment as to what should
be done with the murderer. And they all agreed together in
this point, that the huntsman should be placed in the boat in
which Lothbroc had come to Anglia, and should then be cast
adrift in the middle of the sea, without any naval instruments,
so that it should be proved whether God chose to deliver him
from his danger. Therefore, the huntsman, in accordance
with the sentence that had been pronounced, was cast adrift
in the deep sea, and, after a few days, was driven to Den-
mark. And when he had been found by the guardians of the
harbours, the Danes recognised the boat, because in it their
master Lothbroc had been accustomed to go fowling; and so
they conducted him to Hinguar and Hubba, the sons of the
Danish prince who had been slain in Anglia, who were power-

414 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 870.

ful and cruel men, and who immediately applied the torture
to Bernus, inquiring of him what had become of their father,
who had departed from them in that boat. Bernus, having
been tortured severely for a long time with all kinds of tor-
tures, invented a lie, and said that their father, having been
by chance driven into Anglia, was found by Edmund, king of
the East Angles, and had been put to death by his command.
On this they burst forth into most bitter weeping, and, being
inconsolably afflicted at the death of their father, they swore
by their almighty gods that they would not leave that murder
unpunished. And they appointed Bernus, the huntsman, who
had come in their father’s boat, to be their guide, that they
might avenge themselves on king Edmund. After this, they
collected a numerous army, and put to sea, with twenty thou-
sand armed men, towards the district of the East Saxons, to
which point they directed their sails and their arms, in order
to avenge themselves on king Edmund, who was, in reality,
perfectly innocent of that murder. But, as the winds drove
their fleet the contrary way, they were compelled to land in
Scotland, at erfwick on the Tweed, where they began to lay
waste the country, as they had predetermined to do, and com-
mitting barbarities all around them, they at length came to
Kast Anglia. And, having pitched their camp near the town
which is called Chetforde, they slew with the edge of the
sword all the men and women whom they found there. At
last, when Hinguar, that most wicked tyrant, had im some
degree satiated his fury with the multitude of those whom he
had slain, he summoned before him some of the common
people, whom he judged unworthy of his sword, and strictly
examined them as to where their king was living at that time.
For a report had reached him that the most pious king, Ed-
mund, was a man of might both in power and in arms, and of
unequalled nobleness in all the proportions of his body, and
in height. On which account, he hastened to put to death
every one whom he found all round, lest Edmund should
gather around him such a band of soldiers as might enable
him to defend his country.

At that time, that glorious king, the future martyr, Hd-
mund, was at that time dwelling in the royal town which was
called Heglesdune, from which town also the neighbouring
wood derived its name, as that wicked robber learnt from the
common people. On which, he treacherously summoned one

A.D. 870. _ STORY OF KING EDMUND. 415

of his soldiers to him, and sent him to the king, commanding
him to divide with him all his treasures, and the riches which
he had inherited from his father, and to reign as tributary to
him. But it was in treachery that Hinguar demanded his
treasures, as he thirsted for the head of that most benevolent
monarch, rather than for his money. Accordingly, when the
soldier, after a rapid journey, had arrived at the dwelling of
king Edmund, he addressed him in the following words :—
‘My master, the universally-dreaded Hinguar, the most in-
vincible king of the Danes, has come to this country to winter.
And if you despise his power, you shall be judged unworthy
of either life or kingdom.’ And when, in this manner, he
had related to the king all the messages which he had been
commanded to deliver, one after another, as we have detailed
them before, the most pious king Edmund groaned out of the
depth of his heart, and, having summoned Humbert, bishop
of Helmham, he asked counsel of him, saying, “O Humbert,
servant of the living God, the half of my own soul, behold,
the arrival of barbarian enemies is at hand, who will endeavour
utterly to destroy, and to efface from the memory of succeed-
ing generations, all that is left of our dear country and its in-
habitants, which is already partly desolated. But, behold,
would that, by my death, the people who are subject to me
might escape with their lives. For, out of love for a temporal
kingdom, or for the gain of this present life, I will not subject
myself to a heathen tyrant, when, dying like a soldier for my
nation and my country, | may become a standard bearer of
the king of heaven.”

The bishop answered him thus: ‘ My most beloved king,
those whom you wish to preserve and to survive their country,
unless you guard against them and save yourself by flight,
will immediately be wicked traitors, who will endeavour to
destroy you and your subjects.” Then the most merciful
king replied: ‘This is the most ardent wish that I entertain, not
to survive my most faithful and beloved friends, whom that
savage bandit has most inhumanly slain; and, indeed, what
you suggest to me is to stain my glory with guilt, when, up to
this day, I have never incurred the disgrace of warfare; and
the King of Heaven shall be my witness to this, that no fear
of the barbarians shall ever separate me, alive or dead, from
the love of Christ.” Then the most blessed king Edmund
turned to the messenger wha had been sent to him by the

-

416 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 870. |

wicked Hinguar, and said to him, “ Stained as you are with
the blood of my people, you are worthy of the punishment
of death. But, imitating the example of my master, Christ,
if it shall so happen, I am not at all afraid willingly to die
for His sake. Return, therefore, with speed to your master,
and bear him my answer: ‘Though, with your might, you
may carry off my treasures and riches, which the mercy of
God has given me, still you shall never make me subject to
your infidel power ; for it is honourable to defend liberty for
ever, and to uphold at the same time the purity of the faith,
for which objects, if it be necessary, we do not consider it
useless to die; therefore, as your arrogant ferocity has begun,
murder the king after his servants, and the King of Kings,
who sees this, shall transport me to heaven, where I shall
reign for ever and ever.’ ”’

When, therefore, the savage messenger departed, king Ed-
mund ordered his soldiers to fly to arms, saying, that it was a
worthy deed to fight for their faith and for their country, and
not to show themselves deserters of the war and betrayers of
their nation. Therefore, the most blessed king Edmund,
being animated by the earnest exhortations of the bishop
Humbert, and of his nobles and soldiers, marched forth, with
all the army which he could assemble, boldly against the
enemy, and fought a terrible battle, accompanied with heavy
loss to both sides, against the enemy who came to meet him,
not far from the city which is called Chedforde; for when they
had mutually slaughtered one another from morning till even-
ing, and when the whole field was red with the excessive number
of the slain, and with their blood, the most pious king Edmund
grieved not only at the slaughter of his own troops, who were
fighting for their country and their nation, and for the faith
of Jesus Christ, and whom he knew to have received the
crown of martyrdom, but also for the death of the infidel
barbarians who are thrust with exceeding bitterness down to
the gulf of hell. Therefore, as soon as the pagans retreated
from the place of death, that most blessed confessor of Christ,
king Edmund, with the remainder of his soldiers who sur-
vived, marched to the royal town of Hegledune, and resolved
unchangeably in his mind, that he would never for the future
fight against the barbarians. But he only said this, that it was
needful that he alone should die for his people, and that the
whole nation should not perish.

A.D. 870. MARTYRDOM OF KING EDMUND. | 417

While, therefore, Hinguar was inconsolably anxious about
the slaughter which had fallen upon his troops, his brother
Hubba came to him at Thedforde, after having already laid
waste the whole of Mercia, bringing with him ten thousand
armed men ; and then uniting their forces, with the object of
avenging themselves on the holy king Edmund, they moved
their camp and soon arrived at the town of Heglesdune, where
the most blessed king Edmund at that time was. Then the
tyrant, Hinguar, commanded the king and all his army to be
surrounded, so that not one of them all might escape alive.
Therefore, the holy king Edmund, when he perceived that he
was surrounded on all sides by the enemy, by the advice of
Humbert, bishop of Helmham, fled to the church, to show
himself a member of Christ, and throwing away his temporal
arms, he put on the armour of heaven, humbly praying to the
Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, to give him con-
stancy in his sufferings. Therefore, the most merciful king,
Edmund, was pitilessly dragged out of the church by the
ministers of iniquity, and bound with cruel thongs; and as
Christ was brought before Pilate, the governor, so was Ed-
mund led before the unjust leader, wishing to follow the steps
of Him who was slain as a victim for us.

At the command of this wicked leader he was bound to a
tree, which was at no great distance, and scourged for a long
time, and mocked in many ways; but Edmund, the invincible
wrestler of Christ, by continually, with mournful voice, in-
voking Christ amid his stripes, drove his tormentors. to mad-
ness ; and they, amusing themselves with his body as with a
target, pierced every part of it with darts and arrows, nor
was there a vacant spot in the martyr’s body where a new
wound could be inflicted; for as a hedgehog is beset with
closely-set thorns over his whole skin, so was the body of the
invincible king pierced with thepointsof arrows. Andwheneven
thus the bloody monster Hinguar could not separate the holy
martyr Edmund from the faith of Christ and from the con-
fession of the Trinity, so as to gain assent to his wretched
persuasions, he immediately commanded the executioner to
cut off the head of the martyr with his bloody sword, and the
executioner, amid his prayers and confession of the name of
Christ, at one blow savagely struck his holy head from his
shoulders, and decapitated him, on the twentieth day of No-
vember, and so offered to God a grateful holocaust, which had

VOL. f. _ EB

418 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 870.

been purified by the fire of suffering, and transmitted it with
the palm of victory and crown of justice to heaven. And the
ministers of the devil leaving the body of the martyr deprived
of its head, conveying the head into the wood which is called
Heglesdune, threw it among the thick bushes and brambles,
for the cruel butchers were still anxious that the body of the
martyr should not, with his head, be given the burial which
became it by the few Christians whom they had left alive;
for Hinguar and Hubba, those most wicked robbers, had learnt
that their father, Lothbroe, had been formerly murdered in
the before-mentioned wood, on which account, at the lying
suggestion of the huntsman Bernus, they sought to retaliate
on the blessed king and martyr Edmund, and therefore
threw his head ignominiously into the same wood, and gave
it to be devoured by the birds of heaven and the wild beasts.
And with the most holy king Edmund, there also suffered
his inseparable companion Humbert, bishop of Helmham, who
had raised king Edmund to the supreme power, and who,
being animated by the constancy of the king to endure mar-
tyrdom, was with him made a possessor of the kingdom of
heaven. And when this blessed king had been thus removed to
the heavenly regions, the pagans, boasting extravagantly, win-
tered in that district, having driven out the few natives who
survived the previous massacre. The same year, Ceolnoth,
archbishop of Canterbury, died, and was succeeded by Ethel-
red, a venerable man, of great learning in all divine matters.
When, then, after the martyrdom of the most blessed king |
Edmund, the brothers Hinguar and Hubba, hated by God, had
passed part of the winter. season in the country of the East
Angles, devoting themselves to plunder and rapine, there
came to the same district to them a man of the name of Gytro,
the most powerful of the kings of the Danes, in order to pass
the winter with the before-mentioned brethren. When then
the spring season arrived, all the pagans departed together
from East Anglia. And when this was heard, the Christians
came forth on all sides from their lurking places, and laboured
most earnestly to find the head of the blessed king Edmund,
and unite it to his body, and then to give such a burial to the
whole body as a king was entitled to. And as they all united
in this object with equal eagerness, and traversed the woods,
seeking diligently for the martyr’s head, a thing wonderful to
relate, and unheard of in previous ages, happened. For while

A.D. 870. DISCOVERY OF THE HEAD OF KING EDMUND. 419

they were all seeking for the head among the thickets and
closely-growing woods, and one companion kept mutually
calling on another in his native language, and said, ‘‘ Where
are you? where are you !”’ the head of the martyr replied in the
same language, “‘ Her, her, her,’ which means in Latin “ Hic,
hic, hic.”” Noy did it cease to cry out and repeat the same words
until it brought all the seekers to itself; and then there was
found with the head a wolf of great size and horrible appear-
ance, which, embracing the holy head with his fore-legs, hung
over the holy martyr, keeping watch. Therefore the men fear-
lessly took up the head, pouring forth praises to God, and car-
ried it to its body, the wolf following them to the place of burial.
Then they joined the head to the body, and placed it in a suitable
mausoleum. And when this had been done, the wolf sought
the retirement of his favourite solitude. And there was built
by the faithful on the same spot a small chapel of moderate
workmanship, where afterwards, for many ages, the holy body
of the martyr rested. This most blessed king and martyr,
Edmund, suffered in the eight hundred and seventieth year of
grace, in the twenty-ninth year of his age, and the sixteenth
of his reign, on the first of December, on the second day ot ©
the week, in the third indiction, on the twenty-second day of
the month.

Afterwards, when an interval of many years had elapsed,
when the flames of war were completely quenched, the piety
of the faithful began to breathe again, who, having seen

- frequent miraculous signs in the place where the body of the

martyr was resting, which is now called Hoxon by the natives,
built a very large church in the royal town, which is called m
the English language Beodricheswort, but in Latin Beodrici-
curtis, or the dwelling of Beodric, and they transterred to
that church the body of the holy martyr with great solem-

nity. Buta marvellous circumstance occurred. For though

the most precious corpse of the martyr was believed to have
decayed, from the long time which had elapsed since his death,
it was found to be so entire and uninjured, that not only was
the head reunited and closely joined to the body, but that
there was absolutely no wound or scar visible on it. And so
Edmund, that martyr worthy of God, was removed to the before-
mentioned place like a living man, the sign of martyrdom
appearing on his neck all round, like a scarlet thread, as a

* woman of blessed memory was accustomed to testify, by name

EE2

420 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 871.

Oswen, who often practised fasting and prayer at the sacred
tomb of the martyr for a series of many years, opening the
mausoleum of the blessed martyr, and, on every occasion of
the Lord’s Supper, cutting his hair and his nails, and all the
fragments she carefully collected and deposited in a small
bag, and placed on the altar of that church, where to this
very day they are preserved with all due veneration.

The same year, died Weremond, bishop of Dummoc, after
whose death that see was transferred to Helmham, and instead
of two bishops, one of whom had his episcopal seat at Dummoc,
and the other at Helmham, there was ordained one bishop, by
name Wilred, who had as his successors in the same see Ath-
wolf, Alfric, Theodred, Athelstan, Algar, Alwyn, Alfric, a third
Alfric, Stigand, Ethelm, and Herstan.

Cu. XVI.—From a.p. 871 To a.p. 900.

The Danes invade the West Saxons—Reach Reading—Batiles
with Alfred—King Ethelred dies and is succeeded by Alfred
—The youth and education of Alfred—His wisdom—His wars
—Brithred, king of Northumberland and Mercia—The body of
Saint Cuthbert is brought from Lindisfarne—A truce is made
between Alfred and the Danes—It is broken—Alfred besieges
Exeter and builds a fleet—The Danes ravage Wiltshire—
Alfred retires to Athelney—King Gytro becomes a Christian
—An account of John or Dun Scotus—Alfred defeats the Danes
—Story of a vision of the emperor Charles about purgatory—
Alfred becomes king of all Britain—A list of the kings of the
Heptarchy—Alfred founds monasteries—Appoints governors
throughout his kingdom—Story of Rollo, duke of Normandy
—Death of Alfred.

A.D. 871. The before-mentioned army of the pagans quitted
the country of the East Angles, and invaded the kingdom of
the West Saxons, and came to the royal town which is called |
Reading, situated on the south bank of the river Thames, in
the county of Berks. After the arrival of whom, on the
third day, two of their counts, with a numerous multitude
of armed men, went forth to plunder, while others in the
meantime raised a fortification between the two rivers, namely,
the Thames and the Kennet, on the right hand of the above-
mentioned town. And they were encountered by Eadulf,
count of Berkshire, aud his army, in the place which is called

os

A.D. 871. BATTLE BETWEEN THE PAGANS AND CHRISTIANS. 421

Anglefely, that is to say, the Field of the Angles, where the
two armies fought vigorously, till a count of the pagans being
destroyed with the greater part of his army, gave the rest a
reason for flying. And so when the Christians had gained the
victory, four days afterwards, Ethelred, the king, and his bro-
ther Alfred, collected an army and came to Reading, slaying
and overthrowing whatever pagans they found outside of the
citadel. At last, the pagans sallying out of all the gates at
once, engaged in battle with all their strength, and fighting
long and bravely, they slew count Eadulf, and put the Chris-
tians to flight, at which disaster the Christians were greatly
alarmed, and again met to give them battle four days after-
wards, in the place which is called Hesselune, that is to say,
the Mount of the Ash, having assembled all the forces which
they could collect. But the pagans divided themselves into
two battalions, arranging in one the two kings, Bascai and
Halden, and in the other all the generals with their subjects.
And the Christians seeing this, divided their army in like man-
ner into two bodies, giving one to king Ethelred, and the
other to his brother Alfred. And king Ethelred was in his
tent hearing mass, and, as his men were constantly urging him
to come forth to battle, he affirmed resolutely that he would
not move till the priest had finished the mass ; and this faith
of the Christian king availed him much on that day.

There was on the field of battle a very low tree, around which
the hostile armies met with great shouts. And when they had
fought for a long time with great courage on both sides, the
pagans, in accordance with the judgment of God, not being
able to withstand the onset of the Christians, after the greater
part of their army had been slain, betook themselves to an
ignominious flight. There the two kings of the pagans, Bas-
cai and Halden, were slain, and they, and many thousands
more who were slain with them, descended to hell, to be tor-
mented in everlasting flames. But on the other side, where
the general and the dukes were, against whom Alfred, the
brother of the king, was fighting, there were slain these generals,
the elder and the younger Sidrac, Osbern, Frank, and Harold,
with innumerable others, and the whole army of the pagans
fleeing all the following day and night, were routed and
scattered over the whole plain of Hesseldune. Fourteen days
afterwards, king Ethelred and his brother Alfred came together
a second time with united forces to Basing, intending to give

\

422 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. Site

battle to the pagans. But when they had fought vigorously
a long time, the pagans gained the victory. Again, after the
lapse of two months, king Ethelred and his brother Alfred,
after a long battle at Mereton against the wicked infidels, de-
feated them, and compelled the pagans to betake themselves
to flight. But afterwards, when they returned to attack the
Christians, they came off victorious. In this battle Hamund,
bishop of Sherburne, received the crown of martyrdom, and
was succeeded in his bishopric by Ethelheg, a man of great
learning in ecclesiastical matters.

The same year, Ethelred, king of the West Saxons, died, on
the twenty-third of April. And when he had been buried
in royal fashion at Wimborne, his brother Alfred, who had
previously received the crown and royal unction at Rome from
pope Leo, assumed the government of the whole kingdom, to
the extreme joy of all the inhabitants. The ancient writers,
tracing up the genealogy of this king, have woven him a pedi-
gree, and carried him up to Christ.

King Alfred was the son of Ethelwolf, the great king of the
West Saxons, who was the son of Egbert, who was the son of
Alcumund, who was the son of Eafa, who was the son of Eoppa,
who was the son of Inoilf, who was the brother of Inas, and
these were both the sons of Kenred, who was the son of Ceol-
wald, who was the son of Cuthwin, who was the son of Cealwin,
who was the son of Kenric, who was the son of Cedric. He
was the first of the Angles who reigned in the kingdom of the

West Saxons. Cedric was the son of Elesas,who was the son of

queen Gewisa, as descendants of whom, some of the Britons
claim nobility of birth. Gewisa was the daughter of Gewy, who
was the son of Wingy, who was the son of Frewin, who was
the son of Frethegar, who was the son of Breendei, who was
the son of Beldag, who was the son of Woden. To Woden the
ancients dedicated the fourth day of the week, which, from
his name, they called Wovenesvap, that is to say, the day of
Woden. Woden was the son of Frethewold, who was the son
of Freolaf, who was the son of Frethewolf, who was the son of
Fin, who was the son of Godwolf, who was the son of Geta.
The ancient Gentiles used formerly to worship Geta as a god ;
and Sedulius, an admirable poet, making mention of him in
his paschal poem, says :

“When Gentile poets strive with labour vain,
To deck their fictions in high-sounding words

A.D. 871. THE CHILDHOOD OF ALFRED. 423

And tragic bluster, celebrating Geta,
That empty god, or showing off their skill.”

Geta was the son of Teathwy, who was the son of Beau, who
was the son of Seldua, who was the son of Seaf. Seaf, as it
is related, was driven by sea to a certain island of Germany, by
name Ncandalin, of which Jordan, the historian of the Goths,
speaks, having been placed, while he was a child, in a small
boat without any rower, a handful of corn being placed at his
head, which we in our native language call a Seaf, but which
is called in the language of the Gauls Garba, and in this con-
dition he was found asleep. And from this circumstance he
was called Seaf, and was received by the men of the district as
a miraculous gift, and was carefully brought up by them.
And when he grew up to man’s estate, he reigned im the town
which was then called Slaswic, but which is now called Haithebi.
And that is the district which is called Old Anglia, from which
the Angles came into Britain, and it lies between the Goths
and the Saxons. Seaf was the son of Heremod, who was the
son of Itermod, who was the son of Hathras, who was the
son of Wala, who was the son of Bedwy, who was the son of
Sem, who was the son of Noah, who was the son of Lamech,
who was the son of Methuselah, who was the son of Enoch,
who was the sonof Jared, who was the son of Malalehel, who
was the son of Cainan, who was the son of Enos, who was the
son of Seth, who was the son of Adam, who was the son of
God. : we

Alfred, in his years of childhood, was beloved with exceeding
affection by his father and mother, beyond all his brothers,
and what was still more, he was greatly beloved by all the
kingdom, on which account he was bred up in the king’s
palace without ever being removed from it, for he was more
beautiful in figure and more dignified in countenance than
any of his brethren. On which account he appeared more
gracious both in language and in manners. But, owing
to the neglect of his parents and teachers, he remained quite
devoid of all learning, up to the twelfth year of his age.
Nevertheless, he was day and night a diligent hearer of Saxon
poems, and also a docile repeater of them, so that he retained
them in his memory. He was incomparable both for his skill
and for his success in the arts of hunting and fowling, as he
was also in all other accomplishments. And when, one day,
his mother was showing him and his brothers a Saxon book

424 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 871.

on the art of poetry, which she held in her hand, she said to
them, ‘I will give this book to whichever of you can learn it
first.”? Then Alfred, being charmed with the beauty of the initial
letter of the book, answered his mother, ‘ Will you really give
that book to that one among us who shall be the most quickly
able to understand it, and to repeat it in your presence?”
And she ~ splied, ‘I will give it.””. Then he, taking the book,
went to a master, and read it, and, returning to his mother,
repeated it from memory. After that, with continued use,
without any intermission, he constantly carried about with
him, and diligently pondered, the psalms and prayers of David,
which he had written out in one book, and which out of his
devout spirit, he placed in his bosom. For he heard his mas-
ter say that an illiterate king was like a crowned ass. But
when, being in the flower of his age, he saw the law that was
in his members to be contrary to the law of his mind, and that
it was leading him captive to the law of sin, he often, at cock-
crow and at the hours of matins, would rise secretly from his
bed and visit the churches and relics of the saints, for the sake
of praying, and remaining there a long time prostrate in
prayer, he would implore the mercy of God, to strengthen his
mind in the love of his blessed majesty by some infirmity of
the body which he might be able to endure, but yet not to
such a degree that he should appear unworthy or unprofitable
in human affairs. And when, with great devotion of mind, he
had made this request to the Lord frequently, after a short
interval of time, by the kindness of God, he became afflicted
with the piles, with which complaint he was violently afflicted
for many years, and was brought even to despair of his life.
And on a certain occasion, when, by the prompting of the
Deity, he went to Cornwall for the sake of hunting, and had
turned aside, for the sake of praying, into a certain church, in
which the holy Gueriir and the holy Neoth were living, pros-
trating himself a long time in silent prayer, he implored the
mercy of God, entreating him to change the annoyance of the
disease which was pressing upon him, for some slighter infir-
mity, which, however, should not appear externally on his
body, so that he might not be more despised by men. And
when he had finished his prayer, he continued the journey
which he had begun, and no long time afterwards he was, as
he had prayed to be, entirely delivered from that disease, and
by the divine kindness, perfectly cured. But when that infir-

' A.D. 871. EXEMPLABY CONDUCT OF ALFRED THE GREAT.’ 425

mity was removed from him, another much more troublesome
complaint attacked him, namely a desire for the joys of marriage,
which wore him out incessantly from the twentieth to the forty-
fifth year of his life. Amid this whirlwind of temptations there
were born to him sons and daughters by his before-mentioned
queen, whose name was Aswitha, and they were born in the
following order ;—his first-born daughter was called Elfleda,
who, when the time of marriage arrived, was married to Ethel-
red, count of Mercia. Then he hada son born, by name
Edward, who, after his father, governed the kingdom of Eng-
land. In the third place a daughter was born to him, by name
Ethelgina, who, having been devoted to the rules of monastic
discipline, took upon herself _a religious habit. Edward and
Ethelward were constantly educated in the court of the king,
and were carefully taught the psalms and books of Saxon
literature. Ethelwald was the youngest of all, and with the
other noble youths of the country, he, by the diligent care of
his parent, was instructed in the knowledge of literature, that
he might have liberal knowledge instilled into him before he
acquired the strength suitable for manly pursuits and exer-
cises.

Moreover, king Alfred, among all the dangers of his wars
and the frequent hindrances of this present life, amid his con-
tinual infirmities of body and the invasions of the pagans, be-
gan to arrange the affairs of his kingdom, to practise every
kind of hunting, and to train his goldsmiths, and artisans,
and falconers, and hawkers. With a genius of his own which
was quite novel, he occupied himself in building edifices which
were venerable and noble beyond anything that had been at-
tempted by his predecessors. He was careful every day to hear
mass, with the Daily Hours. He was fond of psalms and
prayers, and constant in alms-giving. Many Frenchmen, and
others from distant countries, of their own accord, submitted
to his dominion, because he was amiable and affable to all
men, pleasant in his manners, and an incomparably strict
examiner into discipline in all things, and because he honoured,
protected, and enriched with treasures and estates all strangers
and foreigners, whether noble or low-born, as if they belonged
to his own people, according as the rank of each individual
deserved. He received with admirable grace all counts, barons,
soldiers, servants, and friends; and embracing their sons who
were bred up in the royal palace with no less affection than

426 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 8725

his own children, he was unwearied in his endeavours to form
their manners, and to imbue their minds with learning. And
this may be enough to say concerning his manners.

But now, being desirous to detail the painful wars of this
king, I must say this, in the first place, that, at the end of the
month in which he began to reign, he fought with a small
and exceedingly unequal army of warriors against the pagans,
on the hill which is called Wiltan, which is on the south bank
of the river Guilo, from which that county is called Guilt-
shire. For, during the preceding year, the nobles of that dis-
trict had been defeated in nine battles on the southern side of
the river Thames, leaving out of the question many cavalry
skirmishes which the nobles, with the people who were their
dependents, had made under the pressure of necessity. And,
as they were greatly weakened by these efforts, the Danes
gained the victory. And, after this victory, the pagans marched
on the city of London, and wintered there. And Buthred,
king of Mercia, came to an amicable arrangement with them,
and bought a truce with money.

A.D. 872. The people of Northumberland expelled from
the kingdom their king, Egbert, and Ulfer, the archbishop.
And when they were expelled, they fled to Buthred, king of
Mercia, and were honourably received by him. The same
year, Kinebert, bishop of Lichfield, died, and was succeeded
by Tunebert. In which year also, Alwin, bishop of Worcester,
was succeeded by Herefrid, who, on the seventh of J une, re-
ceived the honour of consecration from Ethelred, archbishop
of Canterbury. He, at the request of king Alfred, translated
elegantly the books of Dialogues of the blessed pope Gregory
into the Saxon language. At a later period, king Alfred sum-
moned before him this same bishop Herefrid, and Plegmund,
archbishop of Canterbury, Athelstan, bishop of Hereford, and
Werebert, bishop of Leicester, men of the most admirable
learning, and honoured them with many presents, that they
might aid him in acquiring a knowledge of literature. More-
over, he sent messengers into Gaul, and invited to partake of
his society the holy Grimbald, a priest and monk, a man of
great learning in matters relating to ecclesiastical discipline,
and John, a priest and monk, eminent for his virtuous cha-
racter; he also invited Asser from the most distant part of
Wales, from the monastery of Saint David; and, by the wis-
dom and learning of all these men, the desired object of the

A.D. 875. THE DANISH ARMY WINTERS AT CAMBRIDGE. 427

king was furthered, for they, in a short time, advanced him
so far, that he had a perfect knowledge of all books whatever.

A.D. 873. John was elected to the Roman chair, and filled
it for ten years and two days. The same year, the army of
pagans, which has been so often mentioned, left London, and
marched towards Northumberland. And having traversed that
district in a hostile manner, they wintered in Lindsey, in a
town which is called Torkesey. And, at that time, the nation
of Mercia gave them presents, and became reconciled to them.
The same year, Egbert, king of Northumberland, died, and
Ricsius succeeded him in his kingdom, and reigned three years.
In this year, also, Ulfher, archbishop of York, was restored
to his see; the same year, Eldred, bishop of Leicester, was
deposed, and succeeded by Ceolred.

A.D. 874. The wicked army of the Danes quitted Lindsey,
and invaded Mercia, and wintered in a town which is called
Rependune. And they expelled Burthred, king of Mercia,
from his kingdom, in the twenty-second year of his reign.
And he, going to Rome, a few days after, died there, and was
buried in royal fashion, near the school of the Angles, in the
church of the blessed Mary. After his expulsion, the Danes
reduced the kingdom of Mercia under their own dominion.
And then they gave it to an incompetent minister, by name
Ceolwolf, to be governed by him, on condition of peaceably
resigning it to them whenever they required. And he having
given hostages for his observance of these conditions, swore
fidelity to the pagans.

A.D. 875. The army of pagans, detested by God, quitted
Rependune,’ and having been lately reinforced, they divided
themselves into two armies; one of which, under king Halden,
marched towards the country of Northumberland, and wintered
near the river Tyne, and compelled all that province to sub-
mit to’its dominion ; they also harassed the Picts and Welsh
with terrible tyranny. Then Eadulf, bishop of Lindisfarne,
and Eadred, the abbot, took up the corpse of the blessed pon-
tiff, Cuthbert, from the island of Lindisfarne, and wandered
about with it as exiles for seven years.

But the other part of the army, under the Danish kings,
Gytro, Oscitel, and Hamund, marched to Cambridge, and win-
tered there that year ; and, in the summer, king Alfred, hay-
ing prepared a ship, put to sea, and coming upon seven ships

1 Rependune is Repton in Derbyshire.

4128 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 877.

who were just arriving off England, he took one, and put all
the rest to flight.

A.D. 876. The wicked army of the unbelievers left Cam-
bridge by night, and marched into the country of the West
Saxons, and took up their position in a camp which they oc-
cupied at Wareham. ‘There is there a monastery of religious
nuns between the two rivers dfrane and Crente, in the county
of Dorset, built in a most secure situation, because it has no
land joining it, except on the western side. Bnt when king
Alfred heard of their arrival, he immediately marched to meet
them, and marshalled his forces to give them battle. But the
pagans, fearing to encounter him in battle, chose rather to give
hostages, and so to procure a respite until they might be rein-
forced by a stronger army, so as to be able to support the
weight of the contest in an equal scale. Moreover, they swore
that they would immediately depart from the kingdom of the
West Saxons ; but, according to custom, they endeavoured to
practise their accustomed treachery, and breaking the treaty,
they one night made a secret attack, and slew all the cavalry
of the king. And, having done this, they marched to the city
of Exeter. Then king Alfred, having assembled an army,
pursued them ; but, because they had already entered the city,
he allowed them to winter there. The same year, the Danish
king, Halden, occupied Northumberland, and divided it among
himself and his soldiers, and caused it to be cultivated by his
army. Then the king of that province, by name Ricsius,
being worn out internally with grief of heart, died, and was
succeeded by Egbert.

A.D. 877. The wicked army of pagans, at the approach of
the autumn season, divided, and part established itself in
Exeter, while a part retired to ravage Mercia. And the num-
ber of the wicked increased every day to such an extent, that
if thirty thousand of them were slain one day, others came
the next day in redoubled numbers. Then king Alfred ordered
cyuls and gallies, that is to say, ships of war, to be built
throughout his kingdom, in order to encounter the enemy as
they arrived, in a naval battle; and having put some pirates
on board of them, he entrusted to them the guardianship of
the paths of the sea. But he himself marched in a hostile
manner to Exeter, where the pagans were wintering, and
having shut them in, he blockaded the city. And he gave charge
to his sailors to watch their portion of the sea, so as to cut off

A.D. 878. SUCCESS OF THE ARMY OF KING ALFRED. 429

all necessary supplies of food from the enemy. And when, in
accordance with the king’s injunction, the sailors hastened to
that quarter, they met with a hundred and twenty ships full
of armed soldiers, and fully loaded, which were all coming to
the assistance of their countrymen. And when the king’s
servants perceived that those ships were full of armed soldiers,
they rushed to arms, and gallantly attacked the barbarian
people. ‘The pagans, also, who had been now tossed about
amid the waves of the sea in great danger for nearly a month,
gave battle very unsuccessfully; and, accordingly, their
squadrons were routed in a moment, in the place which is
called Swannetvich, and they were all drowned together, and
perished in the waves.

A.D. 878. The army of the pagans which had wintered ir
Exeter, quitted that city, and marched to Chippenham, a royal
town situated in Wiltshire, and there wintered. Moreover
Gytro, king of the Danes, having now traversed all the dis.
tricts of England, with irresistible courage, everywhere ravaging
the holy places, distributed among his soldiers all the gold and
silver that he could lay his hands on anywhere. At length,
when the fame of king Alfred had reached him, how he alone,
in the kingdom of England, was preeminent above all the
other sovereigns for wisdom, and prudence, and riches, that
wicked Gytro directed his standard and arms against those
nations. And he proceeded, setting fire to all the towns and
cities, and slaying with the sword, and destroying whatever
came in his way; and, in order to strike greater terror into
the inhabitants, he spared neither the female sex, nor the age
of infants. And the storm of this persecution was increased
by the detestable wickedness of Hinguar, Hubba, and Halden,
who coming from the district of Demetia, where they had win-
tered, with three and twenty ships, like rapacious wolves, after
having shed much blood in that country, and burnt all the
monasteries, sailed towards Devonshire, in which district this
same Hinguar, with Hubba and Halden, and a hundred and
twenty men, were slain before the castle of KRenwith, by the
army of king Alfred ; and there the Christian soldiers of king
Alfred avenged the blood of the blessed king and martyr, Ed-
mund, which the before-mentioned ministers of iniquity had
shed. But, nevertheless, the greater part of their army saved
itself by flight, and escaped to Gytro, the king of the pagans.
And then, as soon as they had united their forces, forming

430 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 878.

one army, they ravaged all West Saxony, from sea to sea, and
covering the whole of that land like locusts, they reduced the
whole country under their power, as there was no one to de-
fend it.

In the whirlwind of this persecution, those who had been
appointed faithful bishops of Christ, fled over the sea with the
relics of the saints and the treasures of the churches, and
the natives of the country; and part of them followed king
Alfred into the woods and desert places, and there hid them-
selves, in the danger of their lives in which they were.

But king Alfred being touched with internal grief of heart,
knew not what to do, or which way to turn himself, for the
wicked king, Gytro, had occupied all the fortified places. On
which account, king Alfred, having no hope of a better success,
withdrew for the present, in order to see what would be the
ultimate end of the present circumstances.

There is a place in the furthest part of the territories of the
English towards the West, called Athelingay, that is to say,
the Island of the Nobles, surrounded on all sides with marshes,
and so inaccessible that it cannot be approached except by a
boat. The island has in it a very large coppice of alders, which
contains stags, and goats, and beasts of that sort. Of solid
land it contains scarcely two acres, being only a small plain in
the centre of the island. King Alfred then by himself, the
very few comrades who still remained to him being left behind
through grief, in order to lie concealed from the enemy; and
seeing the cabin of a stranger he turned aside from it, and
asked for and received hospitality, and for several days he
dwelt there as a stranger and a poor man, obeying the com-
mands of the cottager and his wife, and content with the
scantiest fare. But when the king was asked who he was, or
what he wanted in that deserted place? he answered that he
was a servant of the king, and that he had been defeated in
battle along with him, and that so, while fleeing from the ene-
mies who were pursuing him, he had come thither. Then the
swineherd believing his words, and being moved with pity,
with diligent care provided him with the necessaries of life.
But it happened that the swineherd one day, according to his
custom, was driving his pigs to their usual feeding places, and
that the king remained at home alone with the swineherd’s
wife : and when the woman had put some loaves, such as are
baked in the ashes, in the fire to be dressed, and being intent

_A.D. 878. KING ALFRED IS REPROVED BY ST. NEOT. 431

upon other business, saw that they were scorched, she became
indignant, and scolded the king, saying :—
* You see the cakes burn,
Yet ne’er give them a turn:
Though you won’t be so slow
To eat them, I trow.”’

But the king, with a cast-down countenance, being attacked
by the reproaches of the woman, not only turned the loaves,
but even gave them up to the woman, properly dressed and
untouched. But while king Alfred was living in solitude with
the swineherd, many of his soldiers joined him; and, at the
command of the king, they built a fortress there, and strength-
ened it with towers and bulwarks, and from thence they made
constant sallies upon the enemy.

It happened at this time, that king Alfred went for the sake
of edification to visit the holy Neot, who at that time was
leading a solitary life near Hamstoke, And Neot, that man
of God, among other familiar conversation, reproved him se-
verely for his wicked actions, and set before him the penalties
of eternal fire, and showed him that the powerful would suffer
mighty torments; and besides all this, he, with prophetic
spirit, set before him nearly all the things which were to
happen to him :-—-

*You suffer, O king,” said he, “many hardships at the
hands of your enemies, but you shall yet suffer many worse
misfortunes still. For, in that kingdom of which you are so
proud, and throughout which you rage, exercising an intolerable
tyranny over it, you shall be driven by nations who know not
Christ, before the face of the Divine Majesty, in whose presence
you ought to appear humble though you do not, and you shall
escape with difficulty, and hide yourself as a fugitive; and in
this state you shall continue for many days, since your sins
require this atonement. But, nevertheless, I, by my prayers
before God, have prevailed that if you draw back from your
cruel conduct and fiery lusts, He will still stretch over you the
countenance of His mercy, and will restore you to your former
power and prosperity.” And the king, when he had listened
humbly to these words of exhortation from the servant of
God, and had faithfully promised and given solemn pledges
for the amendment of his life, received the blessing of the man
of God, and returned to the island from which he had come
' forth. Accordingly, the next night, when he was lying in his

432 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 878.

bed, there stood by him, in a vision of the night, the holy
Cuthbert, who promised him the certain restoration of his
kingdom. And the king himself, receiving comfort from the
explicit declaration of the man of God, when he rose up in
the morning, promised God that he would build a monastery
in that place, and ever after that time he was invincible, and an
object of terror to his enemies. For the same hour, there
flocked to the king, all his soldiers, with the men of Somerset
and of Wiltshire, and came to 3éthelingap, relying on whose
aid, he waged unwearied war against the pagans. At length
king Alfred, when the sacred solemn festival of Pentecost was
at hand, went forth from the island, and rode to the rock of
Egbert, which is on the eastern side of the wood which is
called Bale. And there, too, all those who had remained
in that district flocked to him, and were filled with universal
joy at having recovered their king unhurt. And in the morn-
ing they moved their camp, and accomplishing a march of
two days, they came to the place which is called Zthenvune.
And there they found Gytro, the king of the pagans, and all
his army, against which they fought valiantly and with great
courage, the Divine mercy working with them, and so they
gained the victory, and, pitilessly pursuing the enemy, who
fled from the field of battle, they compelled them to enter a
castle which was in the neighbourhood, and then they seized
everything that they could find outside the castle, and the
horses and cattle, and slew all the men that were outside,
and so they shut the men up in the castle, and besieged it ;
and, when the siege had continued fifteen days, the pagans,
being worn out with hunger and despair of being able to escape,
begged for peace, on condition of swearing never again to
attack the kingdom or the king. And Gytro, their king, who
was blockaded in this castle along with them, promised to
embrace the faith of Christ, and faithfully fulfilled all the pro-
mises that he had made. For, fifteen days afterwards, that
same pagan king, with thirty chosen men of his army, was
baptised not far from Ethelingay, in a place which is called in
the native language Alre, and was taken up out of the font by
king Alfred, by whom also he was receivedas a son by adoption,
and Alfred, having become his godfather, changed his name
and called him Athelstan ; and the attestation of his baptism
was made eight days after, in the royal town which is called
Wavdmor, and the newly-baptised king, with the other persons

A.D. 882. CUTHBERT APPEARS INA VISION TO EADRED. 433

who had embraced the faith of Christ with him, remained
twelve days with king Alfred in great joy ; and, when they de-
' parted, the king gave them many valuable gifts, and allowed
their prince, Athelstan, to hold Hast-Anglia under him; the
country in which the holy Edmund had reigned.

A.D. 879. The wicked army of the pagans left Cirencester,
and marched into the country of the Hast-Angles, where
the newly-baptized Gytro had begun to dwell, and was divid-
ing that country among his followers. At which time also,
king Alfred founded Seaftonia, which was formerly a noble
city, but which is now only a village, where afterwards Algiva,
the queen of king Edmund, who was the great-grandson of
this king Alfred, built a monastery for nuns.

The same year, Lewis succeeded to the government of the
kingdom of the French. The same year, Charles obtained the
Roman empire, and governed it for twelve years. About the
same time, Dunbert, bishop of the city of Winchester, died,
and was succeeded in his bishopric by Dunewolf.. Dunewolf
is that same swineherd, as it is reported, whom king Alfred,
when retreating before the violence of the pagans, found feed-
ing swine in Ethelingay, and with whom he abode some time,
as we have related above; and the king, having discovered
his singular abilities, as soon as he was restored to his kingdom,
caused him to be educated in learning and literature; and
afterwards, when he had become fully instructed in those things,
he caused him to be consecrated bishop of Winchester.

A.D. 880. A great army of pagans came over from the dis-
tricts of Gaul, and arrived in the river Thames, and wintered
at gfulenham (Fulham). The same year, an eclipse of the
moon took place just after midnight, on the thirteenth day of
October.

A.p. 881. A great many monasteries in the kingdom of

France were demolished and overthrown by the pagans. On
which account, the brethren of the Floriacensian monastery
took the relics of the blessed abbot Benedict out of his tomb,
and, fleeing from the enemy, traversed the country in every
direction. The same year also, king Alfred overthrew and
slew a great army of pagans in a naval battle, and compelled
some of their tribes to submit to his authority.
A.D. 882. The holy Cuthbert appeared, in a nocturnal vision,
to the abbat Eadred, and commanded him to tell the bishop of
that district to cause the people to pay a ransom for, and to
E VOL. I. are

434 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 883. |

redeem Cuthred, the son of Hardecnute, whom the Danes had
sold as a slave to a certain widow at Wintigeham, and when
he was redeemed, to make him their king ; and when this had ~
been done, in the thirteenth year of the reign of king Alfred,
Cuthred was crowned as king, and the episcopal see, ‘which
had formerly been in the island of Lindisfarne, was transferred ~
to Chester, which was anciently called Cunegecestria. For the
same holy man had also sent and commanded, by the before-
mentioned abbot, that whoever, being in a crisis of the greatest
distress, fled to his body, should have peace for a month ; and
both king Alfred and king Cuthred determined that this con-
dition should be observed for ever. And besides this, for the
advancement of the former seat of the bishopric, these two
kings granted the whole country between the rivers Cyne and
Cepse to Saint Cuthbert, to be possessed by him in perpetual
ownership, and they devoted the violators of that decree of
theirs to infernal punishment. About the same time, the
bishopric of the church at Hagustald was vacant, through the
violence of the pagans.

A.D. 883. Marinus was appointed to the Roman See, and
ruled it for one year and five months. He, at the intercession
of king Alfred, released the English school at Rome from the
payment of the tribute. He also sent many presents to this king;
and, among other things, gave him no small portion of that
salvation-bringing cross on which the Son of God hung for
the salvation of the world. The same year, Asser; bishop of
Sherborne, died, and was succeeded by Suithelm. He carried
the alms of king Alfred into India, to the Holy Apostle Thomas,
and returning successfully from that country, brought back
many precious stones to the king.

The same year, there came into England the Master John, a
Scot by nation, a man of piercing genius and of singular elo-
quence. He, having left his country some time before, went into
the land of the Gauls, and visited Charles the Bald, and having
been received by him with great honour and dignity, became
his inseparable companion, both at his board and in his bed.
The greatness of this man’s genius and knowledge, and the.
proofs of his great wit, remain to this day. For one day he
was sitting at table, opposite to the king, and when they had
finished their meals and the wine-cup was going round, Charles
became more cheerful in his countenance ; and presently, when
the king saw that Master John had done something which

A.D. 883. ACCOUNT OF MASTER JOHN. 435

seemed to offend the politeness of the earls, he reproved him
very pleasantly, saying, “‘ John, how far is a Scotus removed
from a Sotus?”’* He answered and said to the king, “Only
a table’s width.’ And thus Master John retorted an old re-
proach upon its author. What can be more witty than this
repartee? For the question had referred to the difference of
pursuits and manners, and John’s reply bore on the distance
and difference of situation. Nor was the king offended at his
words, but was rather moved to laughter, as were all who were
sitting at meat with him. Again, at another time when the
king was at a banquet, and one of the servants had brought him
a dish which contained two very large fishes and one very
small one, he gave the dish to Master John to distribute it
fairly between two clerks who were sitting at table, for the
fishes were of enormous size, and Master John was of a very
slender person. Then he, who was always devising some plea-
sant thing by which he might raise the mirth of those at the
feast, kept the two large fish for himself, and gave the one small
fish to the two clerks. And when the king reproved Master
John for not having divided the fish equally, he answered, ‘I
have distributed them well and fairly; for here there is one
little one,”’ meaning himself, ‘‘and two great ones,” touching
the fishes. Then, turning to the two clerks, he continued, “and
here are two great ones,’ pointing to the two clerks, ‘and
one little one,’’ meaning the fish.

This John, at the request of the same king, translated the
Hierarchy of Dionysius the Areopagite out of Greek into Latin,
so that the Latin characters are scarcely understood, as the piece
is composed more with the fluency of the Greeks than the ordi-
nary construction of Latm. He also composed a book which he
entitled wep) puoimod wepiowaros; that is to say, “A Treatise on
the Division of Nature ;”’ a work of exceeding use, on account
of the difficulty of some of the questions to be solved, provided
that the author be pardoned as to some points in which he has
deviated from the path of the Latins, keeping his eyes too fixedly
upon the Greeks, on which account he has been considered a
heretic by some people. For a man of the name of Florus
wrote against him, who distorted his writings, and so con-
demned them. For there certainly are in that treatise very
many things which, unless they are carefully sifted, do seem at

1 Scotus, means a Scot. Sotus, a trunk, a log, z.e. a blockhead; the
origin probably of the French “ sot,” and of the English ‘ ge

‘FERS

436 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 884,

variance with the Catholic faith. And the Roman Pontiff is
known to be of the same opinion ; for he, in a letter which he
sent to Charles, said, “It has been related to our Apostolic
power that a certain man, by name John, by birth a Scot, has
lately translated into Latin the work of Dionysius the Areo-
pagite, which he wrote with the eloquence of the Greeks about
the Divine names and the arrangements of the heavens, which,
in accordance with the custom of the Church, ought to have
been sent to us, and to have been approved of by our judg-

ment, especially when the same John, although he is stated to’

be a man of great learning, was formerly said, by frequent
rumour, not to be quite sound in his doctrine on certain
points.” By reason of the disrepute mto which he had got
on this account, John left France and went to king Alfred,
and, tempted by the munificence and wise rule of this king,
he took up his residence at Meldun, as is shown in the writings
of the king himself. And in that place, some years afterwards,
he was stabbed by the boys who were his’ pupils with their
pens, and so expired in great and terrible torments ; and his
corpse lay for some time in a lowly grave, having been buried
in the church of Saint Laurence. But, after a ray of fire from
heaven had, by Divine agency, fallen upon his place of burial,
the monks, encouraged by such revelations, transferred him to
a larger church, and placed him with great honour on the left
side of the altar.

The same year, pope Marinus died, and was succeeded by
Adrian, who reigned one year and three months.

A.D. 884. The wicked army of the pagans divided itself
into two squadrons ; one of which withdrew into France, and
the other returned into Kent, and besieged the city of Roches-
ter. But, as the citizens resisted manfully, Alfred had time to
come to their aid, who compelled the pagans to raise the siege
and to retreat to their ships; and, having slain a great number
of them, he distributed their spoils among his soldiers. This
year also a powerful fleet, which had been sent by king Alfred
into Kast-Anglia, found sixteen ships of pirates in the mouth of
the river Stour; and, having attacked them vigorously, the six-

teen ships and their booty were all taken, and all the pirates were |
slain ; but those of the Danes who were able to escape to their |
ships, fought a second naval battle with the Angles, while the |

Mercians were sunk in sleep, and, coming upon them unarmed,
slew a great number of them, and so the Danes returned vic-
torious from the enemy.

A.D. 885. A VISION APPEARS TO KING CHARLES. 437

A.D. 885. Stephanus was appointed to the See of Rome, and
filled the papal chair five years and eight days. The same
year, Charles, the son of Lewis, having obtained the sovereignty
of the empire of the Romans and of the kingdom of France,
having summoned the bishops and nobles of the kingdom, re-
lated to them a wonderful vision which he had seen, in the
following manner :—

“In the name of God, the supreme King of all kings, I,
Charles, king of the French and patrician of the Romans, on
the holy night of the Lord’s Day, after having celebrated the
office of Nocturns, when I was going to bed and was desirous of
enjoying the repose of sleep, heard a voice which came upon
me, saying in an awful manner, ‘Charles, your spirit shall
presently depart from you at no distant. hour.’ And imme-
diately I was borne off in the spirit, and he who bore me
aloft in the spirit was white to behold, and held in bis hand a
ball of flaxen thread, emitting a ray of most brilliant light,
such as comets are accustomed to display when they appear,
and he began to unwind it, saying to me, ‘Behold this ball
of shining thread; bind it and knot it firmly on the thumb
of your right hand, because by it you shall be led into the
Jabyrinth-like punishments of hell.’ And when he had said
this, he went before me with great speed, unwinding the
thread of the light-diffusing ball, and guided me into very deep
and fiery vallies, which were full of wells glowing with pitch
and brimstone, and lead, and wax, and fat. There I found
the pontiffs of my father and of my uncle; and when I,
trembling, put questions to them as to why they were suffer-
ing such terrible torments, they answered me, ‘We were
the bishops of your father and of your uncles, and though we
ought to have admonished them and their people of the duties of
peace and concord ; and though we ought to have prayed to God,
we yet sowed discords among them, and were exciters of mischiefs ;
on which account we are now burning in these hellish punish-
ments, and not only we, but all other lovers of murder and
rapine. And to this place your bishops and guards will also
come, who now love to act in a similar manner.’ And while
I was listening in trembling to these words, lo! some very
‘black demons, flying towards me with fiery hooks, sought to
eatch hold of the thread of the ball which I was holding, and
to draw it towards themselves; but, because the rays of the
‘ball beat them back, they were not able to touch the thread.
Then, running behind my back, they sought to lay hold of me

433 MATTHEW OF WESTMENSTER. A.D. 885.

with their hooks, and to precipitate me into the wells of brim-
stone. But my guide, who was carrying the ball of thread,
threw it over my shoulders, and doubled it up, and dragged it
furiously after him. And, in that way, we climbed very high
mountains of fire, out of which there arose glowing streams,
and marshes, and all kinds of metals, all boilmg. And there
I found a countless number of souls of men, and of the nobles
of my father, and of my brothers, all cast headlong down,
some up to their hair, some up to their chin, others up to
their navel; and they were howling, and cried out to me,
saying: ‘ We, while we lived, did delight in company with
you, and with your father, and with your brethren, and with
your uncles, to make wars, and to commit murders and acts
of rapine, for the gratification of your earthly lusts, and there-
fore, now we are enduring torments in these boiling rivers and
all these different kinds of boiling metals.’ And when I was
gazing on these things, being greatly alarmed, I heard the souls
behind me cry out, ‘The mighty shall suffer mighty torments.’
And I looked behind me, and I saw on the banks of the
boiling river, furnaces of pitch and brimstone, full of huge —
dragons, and scorpions, and serpents of every kind; and
there I saw some of the princes of my father’s court, and of
my own, and of the courts of my brothers, and of my uncles, —
saying to me: ‘Woe to us, O Charles, woe to us! you see
what terrible torments we are suffering on account of our
wickedness and pride, and because of the evil counsels which
we gave to our kings and to you, and because of our covetous-
ness.’ And while I was grieving and groaning at these things,
some demons ran up to me, with open mouths full of fire, and
brimstone, and pitch, desirous to swallow me up. But my
guide threw a triple fold of the thread around me, by the
brightness of the rays of which, their fiery mouths were over-
come. And he protected me more powerfully, and we descended
into a valley which was on one side dark, but burning like a
fiery oven; and on the other side was so delicious and beau-
tiful, that I can by no means express it. And I turned myself
round towards the dark side, which was vomiting forth flames,
and there I saw some kings of my race suffering great punish-
ments. And then, being disturbed by great anguish, I thought -
that I myself was at once cast down among these same tor-
ments, by giants of exceeding blackness, who lit up the
whole valley with every description of fire. And trembling

A.D. 885. WONDERFUL VISION OF KING CHARLES. 439

exceedingly, while the ball of thread was illuminating my
eyes, I saw in the side of the valley, a light, gradually becoming
more and more brilliant ; and there, there were two fountains,
one of which was intolerably hot, the other brilliant and of a
pleasant warmth ; and there were two casks there. And when
I went thither, the ball of thread guiding my steps, I looked
upon the one in which there was the boiling water, and there
I saw my father, Lewis, standing up to his thighs, in great
agony from pain, and overcome with exhaustion ; and he said
to me: ‘My lord Charles, do not you fear, because I know
that your spirit will again return into your body, and God has
permitted you to come hither, in order that you might see on
account of what sins I, and all those whom you have beheld,
are suffering such fearful punishments. For one day I amin
this bath of the cask of boiling water, and on the next day I
am transferred into that most agreeable cask of cool water ;
and this is done in accordance with the prayers of Saint Peter
and Saint Remigius, under whose protection our family has
reigned up to this time. And if you soon come to my assist-
ance, you, aud my faithful bishops, and abbots, and all the
orders of ecclesiastics, with masses, and oblations, and psalmody,
and vigils, and alms, I shall speedily be delivered from this
cask of boiling water. For my brother, Lothaire, and his
son, Lewis, have been released from this punishment by the
prayers of Saint Peter and Saint Remigius, and have been
already conducted to the joys of paradise.’ And he said to
me, ‘ Look to your left ;? and when I had looked, I saw there
two casks of great depth, boiling. ' ‘Those casks,’ said he,
‘are prepared for you, unless you amend your life, and do
penance for your wicked sins.’ And then I began to shudder
fearfully ; and when my conductor saw that my spirit was in
such great alarm, he said to me: ‘Follow me to the right,
towards the brilliant valley of paradise.’ And, as we were
going thither, I beheld a scene of great brightness, and in the
midst, I saw my uncle Lothaire sitting in the company of
glorious kings, on a topaz stone of marvellous size, and
crowned with a most costly diadem. And when he saw me,
he called me close to him, saying with a caressing voice:
‘Charles, my successor, you, who are now the third emperor
of the Romans, come to me; Iknow that you have come through
the place of punishments, where your father, my brother, is
- placed, amid the punishments which have been prepared for
him. But, by the mercy of God, he will soon be delivered

440 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 886.

from them, as we also have been delivered, by the merits of
the blessed Peter, and by the prayers of Saint Remigius, to
whom the Lord has given a great Apostleship over the kings,
and over all the nations of the French ; and unless he favours
and assists the relics of our race, our family will soon come to
an end, and will furnish no more kings or emperors. Know,
therefore, that the power of the empire will be soon taken out
of your hands, and after that, you shall have but a short
time to pass in this life.” Then, Louis, turning to me, said to
me: ‘Louis, the son of your son, is fated to succeed to the
empire, which you have hitherto held by hereditary right.’
And when he had said this, it seemed to me, that a little boy
was present before me, and Lothaire, his grandfather, looking
on him, said to me: ‘ Restore to him the power of the empire,
by that ball of thread which you are holding in your hand.’
Therefore, unwinding the thread from the thumb of my right
hand, I gave him up the whole monarchy of the empire, by
that same thread ; and immediately, that ball of thread, shining
like a beam of the sun, became all united into one mass in
his hand.

“And so, after this marvellous occurrence, my spirit re-
turned into my body, greatly exhausted and afflicted.’ After
this vision, the same Charles enjoyed the empire for scarcely
two years, and was succeeded by Louis, who afterwards mar-
ried the daughter of Edward, king of England. But of this
we will speak hereafter.

The same year, Esne, bishop of Hereford, died, and was
succeeded by Ceolmund.

A.D. 886. King Alfred, after burning many cities, and com-
mitting great slaughter among the armies of the enemy, be-
sieged and blockaded the city of London, which was the
metropolis of the kingdom ; and all the nations of the English
flocked thither to him, and made submission to him. For
previously, they had all been scattered over the deserted and
woody parts of the country, because of the frequent invasions
of the Danes, and wandered about unsettled and homeless,
without any defender. Therefore, having united them all by
a treaty, and received their homage, and their oaths of fealty,
the king, supported by their assistance, made most rigorous
attacks upon the city, and erecting his machines all round,
endeavoured to batter down the walls. But the citizens,
fearing to contend against the king, opening the gates of the
city, received him with honour. Then, the king having restored

A.D. 886. NAMES OF THE KINGS OF ENGLAND. 44]

the city, and repaired the walls, committed it to the guardian-
ship of Ethelred, count of Mercia, who had married Elfleda,
the king’s daughter, and who was descended from the royal
family of that nation.

And so, from that time forth, for all the rest of his life, king
Alfred was the master of the whole kingdom of England, with
the exception of those parts of the country which the bar-
barian nation of the Danes still had in subjection to them.
For they had occupied the whole of Northumberland, with
East Angha, and many other districts, from which they made
constant irruptions, which were a cause of great trouble to
king Alfred.

Now, therefore, that, in the progress of our history, we have
come to one single king of the whole of England, it seems
good to us to recapitulate the names of all the kings of Eng-
land who reigned up to this time, distinguishing their several
kingdoms, in order that while we thus trace back the succession
of each in regular order, we may afford our readers the more
pleasure, and make this series of our history more plain and
intelligible.

Woden, then, deriving his origin from the ancient stock of
the Germans, after his death was translated to the gods. And
the ancients, worshipping him as a god, dedicated to him the
fourth day of the week, which they called from his name
WiovenesVap, that is to say, the day of Woden. He had a wife,
by name Frea, to whom, in like manner, the ancients dedicated
the sixth day of the week, and called it dfre¥ap, that is to say,
the day of Frea. And Woden had by his wife Frea seven
illustrious sons, from the succession of whom, seven kings
derived their origin, who afterwards reigned with great power
in Britain, after they had driven out the Britons.

From the first-born son of Woden, by name Wecta, were
descended the kings of Kent.

From the second son, by name Frehegeath, were descended
the kings of Mercia.

From the third, Baldaus, were descended the kings of the
West Saxons.

From the fourth, Beldagus, were descended the kings of the
Northumbrians, or Bernicians.

From the fifth, Wegdag, came the kings of the Deiri.

From the sixth, named Caser, were descended the kings of

- the East Angles.

442

MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER.

A.D. 886.

From the seventh, Saxuad, the kings of the East Saxons
are said to derive their origin. ;
But the eighth, that is to say, the king of the South Saxons,

derives his origin from the same nation, but not from the same

family.

The Kings of The Kings of |The Kings of the; The Kings of

Kent. Mercia. West Saxons. | Northumberland.

Hengist Creodda Cedric Ida
Osric Aise Wibba Kenric Adda
Octa Cearl Cealwine Glappa
Hermenric Penda Ceolric Theodwald
Ethelbert, the |Peada, the first|Ceolwolf Frethewolf

first Christian | Christian King|Kinegilf and | Theodoric

King Wolfher Quichelin §  |Ethelfrid
Eadbald Ethelfred Kinewale Edwin, King of
Erconbert Kinred Sexburga the Deiri, and
Egbert Ceolred Easewin the first Chris-
Lothaire Ethelbald Kentwin tian King
Eadric Beornred Cedwalla Lanfrid
Withred and2 Offa the Great Ina . Oswald
Siward § Egfrid Ethelhard Oswy
Ethelbert Kenulph Cuthred Elfrid
Eadbert Kenelm Sigebert Egfrid
Ethelbert Ceolwolf Kinewolf Ealfrid
Eadbert Pren Bertulf Brithric Osred
Cuthred Ludicane Egbert Kenred
Baldred Wiglaf Ethelwolf Osric
Ethelstan Bertulph Ethelbald Ceolwolf

From Ethelstan| Buthred Ethelbert Edbert
the kingdom of| From Buthred|Ethelred Osulf
Kent was trans-\the kingdom of| Alfred Ethelbert Mollo

Serred tothe Kings
of the West Sax-
ons,

Mercia was trans-

erred tothe Kings
of the West Sax-
ons.

This Alfred was] Bldred
the first sole mo-|Ethelred
narch of the king-| Alfwold
dom of England,|Osred
and the succession| Ethelred II.
of his family de-|\Osred
scended to King|Pardulf
William, who sub-| Alfwold

dued England.

Eandred
Ethelred
Readwolf
Osbert
Ella
Egbert
Ricsius
Egbert
Cuthred

A.D. 887.

The Kings of

the Deiri,

Ella. This Elia
reigned in the
land of the
Deiri, and eight
collateral King,
reigned in Ber-
nicia.

Ethelfrid

Eadwin

Osric

Oswin
From Oswin the|

kingdom of the

Deiri was trans-

JSerred to Oswy,

King of the Berni-

cians, and one

kingdom of North-
umberland was
made out of the
two, the borders
of which extend
from the river

Humber north-
wards as far as
the sea of Scot-
land, and this
kingdom was at
last transferred to
the Kings of the
West Saxons.

RAVAGES OF THE DANES.

The Kings of The Kings of
the Kast Angles. |the East Saxons.
Utfa Erkenwin
Titill Sledda
Redwald Sebert
Wibert Sexred and )
Eorpenwald Siward §
Sigebert Sigebert the Little
Egric Swithelin
Anna Sigeher and 2
Ethelher Sebba §
Ethelwald Sigehard and
Ealdulf Seofrid ;
Ealfwald Offa
Beorna Selred
Ethelred Suithred
Ethelbert From Suithred)
Edmund the kingdom 9

Gytro, the Dane | the East Saxons
From Gytro, the| was  transferre
Dane, the king-\to the Kings @
dom of the East| the West Saxons.
Angles was trans-

erred to the Kings

of the West Sax-

ons.

443

The Kings of the
South Saxons.

Ella —
Cissa
Ethelwald
Berthun
Aldhun

From  Aldhun
the king om of
the South Saxons
was transferred
to the Kings of
the West Saxons.

A.D. 887. Hastein, or Hasting, a Dane by birth, having

traversed England in a hostile manner, proceeded onwards
towards the country of Gaul, where he put into the harbour
of Vermond, with a most powerful army of infidel soldiers ;
and the unbelievers disembarking, gave the whole country to
the flames. They also burnt the monastery of Saint Quintin
the Martyr, and made a most wicked massacre of the people
of the district. The bishop of Nismes, by name Emmo, was
slain by their swords, and a great slaughter was made of his
people after their shepherd had been slain. Then, steering
their fleet to Gemeticum, they burnt a monastery, containing
nine hundred monks, From this place, they preceeded with

444 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 887.

no small fleet of ships to the city of Rouen, and having burnt
and plundered it, they made a massacre of the people. From
thence they proceeded to the inland parts of Gaul, and
destroyed the whole country from the city of Orleans,
throughout the whole district of Lutetia,’ as far as Paris, with
inhuman cruelty. Then they took up a station for their ships
by a certain island in the neighbourhood of the monastery of
Saint Florence, and laid waste the whole province all around.
They also gave the city of Nantes to the flames; and traversing
the district of Anjou, and polluting every place with blood-
shed, they laid it waste, as also they did all the cities and
castles of Poitou. Last of all, they came to the city of Tours,
which they defiled with the massacre of innocent persons,
and at last committed the city to the flames. Then sailing on
towards the upper part of the river Loire, they came to Or-
leans, which they stripped of everything, and then, they
destroyed the city by fire. Why should I relate the afflictions
of the people of Aquitaine, in which province no town, no
village, no city no castle, was either left in the enjoyment of
its freedom, or escaped destruction from the deadly fury of
the pagans? The people of Poitiers and of Guienne, the
towns of Angouléme, of Perigueux, of Limoges, of Auvergne,
and of Bourges, the metropolis of the province of Aquitaine,
bear witness to these facts.

The Gauls, therefore, having been overwhelmed and worn
out by these and similar disasters, as we have already ex-
plained, Hastein, that most infamous robber, coming with his
fleet to the city of Poitiers, formed the design of obtaining
possession of it by a sudden attack. But the citizens being
alarmed at so numerous a fleet of the pagans, garrisoned the
ramparts of the walls, armed with shields and javelins, and
encouraged one another to resist the attack. And when
Hasting found out how brave they were, he put forth all his
endeavours to obtain possession of the city, if possible. At
last, he sent word by his servants to the bishop of the city,
and to the count, that he was attacked by a mortal disease,
and he humbly entreated them that he might be made a Chris-
tian by them. When they heard this, the bishop and the
count, being cheered with great joy, made peace with the
enemy of peace, and so the entrance to the city is opened to

s Lutetia is the usual name of Paris, but it seems here to be used for
the district rather than for the city.

A.D. 888. KING ALFRED FOUNDS TWO MONASTERIES. 445

both the nations in common. At last, that wicked Hasting
is borne into the church, is bathed in the sacred font, and the
bishop and the count raise him out of the water to their own
destruction, and from thence he is borne back to his ships by
the hands of servants, after having been bathed in the holy
water of baptism. After this, at midnight, on a dark night,
he was placed on a bier, armed with a breastplate, having
given orders to his companions to clothe themselves with
breastplates beneath their tunics; then, amid the feigned la-
mentations of his soldiers, he is borne from his ship into the
church, the bishop adorns himself in his holy vestments, pre-
paring to offer up the sacred host for thedead man. But, be-
hold! Hasting, that son of perdition, suddenly leaps down
from off his bier, and slays the bishop and the count-with his
sword ; and, after that, he and his men attack the people with
the fury of wolves. These things having been done in this
manner by that blood-thirsty man, the young men are slain,
the old men are slaughtered, the city is laid waste, and the
walls are thrown down from their foundations. Then, when
the destruction of the city was fully completed, Hasting went
to Charles, king of France, and requested peace with him,
and prevailed, and gave him as a present the city of Chartres.
And so Gaul obtained a respite for a time from the disturb-
ances of civil wars. But I have related these events in this
place, to prevent any one from believing that England was the
only country which was harassed by this Danish persecution.

A.D. 888. Aithelin, bishop of Winchester, carried to Rome
the alms of king Alfred and the West Saxons; and at this
time Alfred founded two monasteries, one for monks, which
is at Ethelingay, that is to say, the Island of the Nobles, where
the king lived for a while in exile in the house of the swine-
herd, and there he appointed the priest John to be the abbot.
The other monastery he caused to be built more to the east,
at Schaftesburte, to be a dwelling for nuns, and over that he
appointed his own daughter, by name Agnes, to be the abbess,
as a virgin consecrated to God. He also abundantly enriched
these monasteries with treasures and estates. After this, in
obedience to the promptings of the Deity, he caused all his
revenues to be divided into two parts, the first part of which
he subdivided into three shares; and one share he allotted to
his soldiers, who were divided into three squadrons, in such a
manner that the first squadron, which consisted of cavalry,

446 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 888.

should be on duty one month at the king’s court, while the
other two were employed on military expeditions. And then,
when the month was over, and they returned from the war,
fresh warriors succeeded them ; and in this way he adhered to |
these regular turns of service during the whole period ofhis life.

The second share of this first part of his revenues he allotted
to the numerous artisans whom he employed, and who were
skilful in every kind of work on land. The third share he ex-
pended on the foreigners who flocked to his court from dif-
ferent nations.

The second part of what came into him from his annual
revenues he likewise’ subdivided into three shares, allotting the
first to the poor, the second to the monasteries which he had
founded, and the third to the school which he had assembled
from several parts of Gaul, and from other countries, consisting
of learned clerks and doctors, according to the competency and
deserts of each individual. He also ordered six candles to be
made of wax, of equal size, to the weight of seventy-two denarii,
so that each should be twelve inches in length, and which
should burn for twenty-four hours, night and day, without
intermission, before the relics of many of the saints.

In executing judgment, he was so acute an investigator of
the truth, that he enquired into everything which had been
done in his absence, whether it was just or unjust ; and if he
discovered any iniquity, he interrogated the judges as to
whether they had come to their decision through ignorance or
through malevolence, out of love or hatred, out of fear or
favour, or because they were influenced by desire of gain.
And if they confessed that they had decided as they had, be-
cause they did not know how to judge more correctly, then
he rebuked their unskilfulness with discretion and modera-
tion, speaking to them thus: ‘I marvel at your inexperience,
since, by the gift of God and of me, you have been promoted
to the rank and office of wise men, but you have neglected
the study of wisdom ; now, then, you must either give up
your office of regulating the affairs of the world, or else you
must apply yourselves to the study of wisdom with much more
devotion than you have hitherto done.”

The judges, being alarmed when they heard these admoni-
tions, as if they had been corrected with the severest venge-
ance, began to employ themselves with all their might to the
study of learning equity, so that Alfred thus caused illiterate

A.D. 892. A SWARM OF PAGANS COME FROM GAUL. 447

persons to study literature, and brought back the sluggish to
the strict discipline of wisdom. On which account even the
old men began to long for an acquaintance with liberal know-
ledge, and thought the young men of that time happy inas-
much as they had the opportunity of being instructed in the
liberal arts, and they thought themselves unhappy for having
remained in ignorance up to that time.

A.D. 889. Ethelred, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and
was succeeded by Phlegmund. The same year, king Alfred
commanded all the bishops and men of religious orders in
England to collect the alms of the faithful, and when they
had collected them, to send them to Rome and to Jerusalem.
The king also sent to those cities no small portion from his
own treasury, which he added to the alms of the faithful.

A.D. 890. Gytro the Dane, the king of the East Angles,
died. He had received that kingdom as a gift from king
Alfred, when he embraced Christianity, while Alfred was his
godfather. The same year, Ethelswitha, the sister of king
Alfred, and formerly the queen of Buthred, king of Mercia,
died at Ticino, in the garments of religion, and was buried
with due honour in that city.

A.D. 891. Arnulf, the guardian of Louis, obtained the em-
pire of Rome, and reigned as emperor twelve years. The
same year, three men came from Ireland to king Alfred, desir-
ing to lead a solitary life for the sake of Christ. For, out of
three bulls’ hides and a half, they had built themselves an ex-
ceedingly small boat without any naval appointments whatever,
and taking with them victuals for one week, they secretly put
to sea, determining to go wherever fortune might conduct
them. And, as the Lord guided them, on the seventh day
‘ after their embarkation they landed in Cornwall, and, on ac-
count of the wonderful character and unheard-of strangeness

of their achievement, they were presented to the king; and
their names were Dubslane, Manehet, and Manslin. The same
year, about the time of Rogation Sunday, a comet. appeared,
which was named in the English language Berete Sterre.

A.D. 892. A great swarm of pagans came over from Gaul,
with horses and two hundred and fifty ships, and passing by

Kent, ran into the mouth of the river Limenius, which takes
its rise in a great wood, which is called Andrevesvald, and
steered their ships four miles up the river, where they de-
- stroyed a small tower which was occupied by a few inhabi-

448 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 893.

tants, and built themselves another and a stronger one, in the
place which is called Appledore. And, not long afterwards,
Hasting came from the same parts, and entering the mouth of
the river Thames with eighty ships, made himself, at a great
expense, a fortification in the royal town which is called
Middleton. But though king Alfred was threatened with in-
vasion of the enemy on every side, and though, as some people
say, the laws are silent amid arms, nevertheless, amid the clang
of trumpets, and the crash of battle, and the rattling of arms,
he made laws, and delivered them down to be observed by
posterity, by which his people should become accustomed to
the worship of God, and to military discipline. And because,
owing to the opportunities afforded by the barbarians, even
the natives at times panted after plunder, so that scarcely any
body could find a place of safety, or procure any necessary
supplies, without the protection of an armed force, he insti-
tuted centuries, which he called hundreds, and decimee, which ©
he called ¢ythings, in order that every English-born citizen,
living under the protection of the law, might have both a
hundred and a tything to apply to. And if any one were |
accused of any offence, then the culprit, and one who should
be bail for him, was immediately required from' the hundred
and the tything. But he who could not produce a surety of
this kind, was to undergo the severity of the law. And if
any one absconded, either after giving security or before, then
all the people of that century and that tything were liable to
pay a fine to the king. By this contrivance he diffused peace _
over the provinces, so that even at the public fences, where —
the roads are divided in four directions, he ordered golden
amulets to be suspended, so as to excite the cupidity of travel-
lers, since there was no man who dared to take them away. ‘
A.D. 893. The pagans who inhabited. Northumberland and

East Angha made peace with king Alfred, giving hostages,
and binding themselves with oaths. But the treaty was
broken, because whenever the army of the pagans which was
stationed in Kent issued forth out of its fortifications, for the
sake of plunder, then the others did not cease to plunder also,
either in their company or by themselves, whenever they were
able. And when this was known, king Alfred marched into ©
Kent with his army, and pitched his camp between the two

armies of the pagans, so that, if they moved towards any

district for the sake of plunder or battle, he might be able to

A.D. 894. ALFRED MARCHES AGAINST THE DANES. 449

attack them. But they committed piracy at one time as
cavalry, and at another time as infantry, invading those dis-
tricts where they knew that the army of the king was not.
However, the king constantly encountering them with unex-
pected attacks, thinned their ranks with repeated slaughter.
On which account, they quitted Kent, and fled to Hastein,
their fellow-countryman, who had established his winter quar-
ters at Middleton (Milton). But the king pursued them
gallantly, and did not give over the pursuit till he had driven
them by force, with Hastein, that most cruel Dane, into the
small town which Hastein himself had lately built in that
place. And when Alfred arrived there, he blockaded the
town, and hemmed it in; and erecting machines all round, he
laboured to reduce it. But Hastein, the Dane, abandoning all
hope of resistance, began to devise by what means he might
_ deceive the most merciful king, by his fraudulent acts. Ac-
cordingly, sending messengers to the king, he promised, by
oaths and by offers of hostages, that he would, for the future,
desist from harassing him and the kingdom of England, if
he might be allowed to depart in peace; and moreover, for
greater security, he sent to the king his two sons, who were
children, that he might, if he pleased, consecrate them with
the sacraments of the faith and of baptism. Then that most
pious king, who was always more eager to deliver the souls of
the pagans than to slay them, granted their request. And
the boys, having been regenerated at the sacred font, he per-
mitted their father Hastein, with all the other infidels, to de-
part in peace, according to the covenant that had been made.

A.D. 894. King Alfred marched with a large army against
the pagans, who, as we have already said, had landed at the
mouth of the river Lea, and who now, having divided their
forces, were endeavouring to subdue all the provinces of that
district. And when the king had reached the place, he threw
himself, with his army, between the two armies of the pagans,
so that, if by chance they should leave their position among
the woods and determine to seek the plains, he might at once
march against them. But when the barbarians, worn out
with along period of hunger and scarcity, found they were
making no progress, but were rather losing ground, they in-
treated their countrymen, who had lately landed in Essex, to
join them, that then, being reinforced by a more powerful army,
they might be able the more easily to withstand the attacks of

VOL, I. etc

450 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 894. .

the Christians. And when, having moved their camp secretly,
they had arrived at the town of Farnham, desiring to cross
the river Thames, they were cut off by the boldness of the
king; and, after a terrible battle had been fought, the pagans
were put to flight, and, when they fled, the Christians slew them
without mercy, and having made a tremendous slaughter of
all who resisted, wounded their king in a terrible manner ;
and it was with the greatest difficulty that his soldiers, having |
placed him on a horse, conveyed him across the river Thames,
at a point where there was neither ford nor bridge, a great
many of them being drowned in the exploit. And at last
they reached a small island, between the rivers Thames and
Colne, and occupied that for some time instead of a town.
But, as the Christians had no ships, they were unable to be-
siege them, especially as they were in want of supplies, and
had completed their term of service. When therefore they
departed, king Alfred hastened towards the spot with one
half of his army. But, before he had completed the journey —
which he thus began, news was brought to him that the
pagans who inhabited Northumberland and East-Anglia had
divided, and that some of them had laid siege to Exeter,
and some of them to a certain castle situated in Devon-
shire. On this, king Alfred without any delay marched back
all the army which he could assemble, and proceeded towards
Exeter, leaving behind him, however, a few men to subdue the
enemies whom he had been pursuing. In the meantime, their
king having recovered his health, the pagans went to their
countrymen in Essex, and there they found that most wicked
traitor Hastein, who, in contravention of the treaty which he
had made with king Alfred, was already dwelling near the
town of Beam Jfleot, which was fortified with wide and deep
fosses ; and, making continual sallies out of it, he laid waste
the whole country. Then the pagans, who, as has been already
mentioned, had settled at Appledore, joining Hastein, made
a very numerous army of soldiers. In the meantime,
those soldiers whom king Alfred had sent away to attack them,
uniting themselves to the citizens of London, and to other
warlike men who had come from the territories of the Nor-
thumbrians and the East-Angles, at the command of the king,
marched in a hostile manner upon Beamfleot, but did not find
Hastein in the town. Nevertheless, they fought a most severe
battle against his companions who sallied out of the town

A.D. 895. KING ALFRED DEFEATS THE DANES.: 451

against them, and, at the first onset, they compelled them to
flee, and entering the town they destroyed it, and loaded the
wife of Hastein and his two sons with chains, burnt some of
his ships, and carried off some to the city of Rochester, and
sent Hastein’s wife and his two sons to the city of London.

After these exploits, king Alfred, having without much dif-
ficulty defeated, and scattered, and driven to their ships those
pagans on whose account he had gone to Exeter, returned to
the city of London, where count Ethelred presented the wife
of Hastein and his two sons to him, begging him to decide
what should be done with the wife and children of that traitor,
who had violated the covenant which he had made with the
king. Then, though it had been adjudged by every one that
they were worthy of the most shameful death, the king was
unwilling to do them any harm; because, as has been before
related, he had stood godfather to one of the children at the
sacred font, and count Ethelred had been godfather to the
other ; and so he allowed both the mother and children to
depart with their liberty.

A.D. 895. Pope Formosus was elected to the Roman chair ;
and he filled it three years and six months.

The same year, Ulfher, archbishop of York, died, and was
succeeded by Ethelbald. The same year, the wicked Hastein,
and the other pagans whom the army of king Alfred had
driven from Beamfleote, determined to pass over to their fellow-
countrymen who were dwelling in the western parts of Eng-
land. ‘Therefore, taking their journey secretly through the
provinces of Mercia, they came to a town situated on the river
Severn, called Guttingedune, where they were received with
great respect by their brethren, and introduced into the town
which they had built there. And when this was reported to
king Alfred, he collected an almost invincible army, and coming
to the before-mentioned town, which was washed on all sides
by the waves of the Severn, he surrounded the pagans, both
with his fleet, and also with his land army. But the enemy,
after having endured the siege for a long time, at last, when
~ all other food failed, devoured their horses; and at last, when
they were all eaten, being compelled by necessity, they went
forth out of the town, to fight against the army which was
on the eastern side of the river. And in the battle, there fell
on the king’s side, at the first onset, his minister, Ordein, and
_ many others with him, but at last the Christians prevailed, and
GG 2

452 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 897.

put the enemy to flight. And then the faithful pursued them
without mercy, and drowned many in the waves, and slew
some with the sword. And those who were able to escape
from this slaughter, fled, and came to Leicester, which is called
in English Wirhale, where they found many of their fellow-
countrymen in a certain town, and were allowed to join their
company. And when the king arrived before that town, he
could not maintain a siege of it; on which account he burnt
with fire all the corn and food which he could find outside of
the town.

A.D. 896. The wicked army of the pagans quitted Leicester,
and marched to Northumberland, where, having procured
ships, they began to sail over the sea. At last, they entered
the mouth of the river Lea, not far from the city of London,
and landing there, they drew their ships to land, and occupied
themselves in rapine and plunder. And when the citizens of
London heard this, they united to themselves all the people
of the district, and coming to the before-mentioned place,
found that the enemy had built themselves a town. And
when the two armies met in a hostile manner, the citizens of
London were put to flight, and four of the king’s soldiers
were slain. O with what frequent miseries, with what terrible
distresses, in what a fearful manner, and with what lamentable
evils was all England harassed, not only by the Danes who at
that time occupied a part of England, but also by these sons
of Satan! However, not long afterwards, king Alfred arrived,
and the pagans were compelled to abandon the place; and
departing by night through the province of Mercia, they did
not stop till they came to a town on the Severn, which is called
@nantebrige. And when they retreated, the king ordered
their ships to be burnt with fire.

A.D. 897. Boniface became pope and filled the Roman chair
for one year and sixteen days.

The same year, king Alfred appointed guardians of the
kingdom against the irruptions of the Danes, namely Ceol-
mund Primicerius in Kent; bishop Suithulf in the city of
Rochester ; count Brithwulf in Essex; count Ethelred in the
city of London; bishop Halard in Dorchester; Eadulf in
Sussex ; bishop Berthulf in Winchester, and many others in
different places, whose names it would be tedious to enume-
rate one after the other. At which time also, king Alfred
caused. ships of war, which he called cyuls or galleys, to be

A.D. 897. TREATY OF. PEACE WITH ROLLO. 4338

built, in which he placed armed men, and commanded them to
take care of the paths of the sea, providing in this way, both by
naval as well as land forces, for the tranquillity of his kingdom
and of the people who were his subjects.

About this time, a certain man named Rollo, a Dane by
birth, accompanied by a great army, came into England and
occupied himselfin ravaging the country. But Dania, or Den-
mark, is an island of the sea, exceedingly fruitful in all things,
and most especially in men, and its kings ordained in ancient
times, by a regularly enacted law, that whenever the island
was too full of men, a body of the bravest should be com-
pelled to quit their homes. Now this Rollo, of whom I am
speaking, is asserted to haye been one of those who were
driven forth from their country in this manner, being a vigor-
ous and mighty man, for his father, detaining his eldest son
at home to be his own successor, sent Rollo away to obtain
an inheritance by arms, wherever fortune would grant him
one. When, therefore, he, as I have said above, was driven
into England, the nations at once engaged in battle with him,
but when many of them had been slain, the rest fled from the
field of battle. When, therefore, Rollo, after the dangers of
the sea, was wintering in England to refresh himself and his
army, one night, as he was asleep, there appeared to him a
swarm of bees, flying over himself and his army, and with a
great hum, seeking the southern districts, and flying over the
middle of the sea, till, at last, they came to land. And there
also, they settled in swarms on the branches of different
trees; but presently they began to traverse the whole dis-
trict, and examining the flowers of various colours in the
different places, to collect in one spot. Therefore Rollo, when
he awoke, first of all considered over the vision and its inter-
pretation in his own mind, and after a careful deliberation, he
concluded that he was to find a rest for the labours of himself
and his comrades in that country in which he had seen the
bees descend and settle. Therefore he and his comrades put
‘to sea, and, the wind blowing according to their wishes, pass-
ing over the waves of the sea, they came to Gemeticum, where
they left in the chapel of Saint Vedast, upon the altar, a cer-
tain holy virgin, named Ameltrudis, whom they had brought
with them from England. But when Francs, archbishop of

Rouen, heard of their arrival, he, distrusting the possibility of
adequately resisting them, decided that it would be more

454 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 899.

advantageous to request peace from them than to provoke
them to war to his own destruction. Accordingly, he set out
on his journey and came to them with speed, and entreated
for peace, and prevailed, and confirmed it by a most faith-
fal treaty. Therefore Rollo, when he had obtained dominion
over the country, went to Rouen, and elegantly repaired the
walls of that city, which had been shamefully destroyed, and
occupied the surrounding provinces, fortified castles in suit-
able places, and subjected to his own power the whole land
which was at that time called Neustria, but which is now
called Normandy, from the Northmen who inherit it. From
this. Rollo the famous dukes of Normandy trace their descent,
as the following history will show in the proper place.

A.D. 898. Stephen was elected to the Roman chair, and
occupied it one year. The same year, Eastan, bishop of Lon-
don, died, and was succeeded by Theodred. The same year,
some pagans, with six galleys, sailed into the mouth of the
river which is called @thermare, and joccupied themselves
in plunder and rapine. And when news of this was brought
to king Alfred, he went with speed to encounter the robbers,
and having routed their forees, he took their booty from them
and compelled them to flee to their ships. And the king
manfully pursued them with his army, and slew a hundred
and twenty of them, and of the king’s army also, there fell
sixty-two soldiers. The pagans, therefore, fled to the sea, but
as the winds were unfavourable to the flying pirates, they lost
all their vessels and were shipwrecked. And the servants of
the king seized them, and bound them tight with chains, and
then, at the command of the king himself, they hung them all
on a gallows. After this, the king governed his kingdom in
peace all the remaining period of his life, devoting himself
wholly to the restoration of churches, to the giving of alms,
to the making of laws by which the rapacity of the hawks
ec repressed, and the simple devotion of the faithful con-
firmed.

A.D. 899. Romanus became pope, and occupied the Roman
chair four months and twenty-two days. He was succeeded
by Theodorus, who filled the same chair twenty-six days.
And he, the same year, was succeeded by John, who ruled
that see two years and fifteen days. The same year, Ethel-
wald, bishop of Sherburne, died, and the province of the West.
Saxons, in consequence of the violence of the enemy, re-
mained without bishops or pastoral care for seven years.

A.D. 901. THE HOLY OCUTHBURGA BUILDS A MONASTERY. 455

A.D. 900. Charles succeeded to the kingdom of France, and
reigned twenty-seven years.

The same year, that most merciful king, Alfred, king of
England, after he had reigned twenty-nine years and six
months, on the twenty-eighth of November, on the fourth day
of the week, in the fifth indiction, exchanged his temporal for
an eternal kingdom. He was buried at Winchester, in a new
monastery which he had founded himself, and was clothed in
the robe of a blessed immortality, in which he awaits the gene-
ral resurrection, where he shall then be crowned a second
time.

Cu. XVII.—From-a.p. 901 To a.v. 941.

Edward the Elder succeeds Alfred—A great council of the
English Church is held-—Edward wars against the Danes
—Rollo hecomes a Christian—The Danes continue their
ravages—Many towns are built throughout the kingdom—
Edward dies—Athelstan succeeds him—Saint Dunstan flou-
rishes—Treaty of peace between Athelstan and Robert of
Normandy—Athelstan puts his brother Edwin to death—
His wars with Constantine, king of Scotland, and Anlaf,
king of Ireland—Otho becomes emperor of the Romans—
Athelstan dies, and is succeeded by Edmund—LEngland
is divided between Edmund and Anlaf.

A.D. 901. Edward, the eldest son of Alfred, a prince inferior
to his father in learning and literature, but at the same time
even more glorious for power and dignity, was invested with
the crown of the kingdom of England. But after he had
been thus raised to the supreme power, Ethelwald Clito, the
son of his cousin, considering himself inferior, neither in point
of family nor of power, to the king, aspired to the kingdom,
and exerted all his efforts to obtain it; and, attacking the
royal towns called Oxley: and Wimborne, the gates of which
he found open, he easily introduced himself and his troops
into them. In this place; as has been already mentioned, the
holy Cuthburga, the sister of king Ina, had built a monastery
of virgins devoted to God, but this same Ethelwald injuriously
carried one of them off, and joined her to himself in wedlock.
Then king Edward, when he had heard the truth of this act,
and of the rashness of Ethelwald, collected a large army, and
came to Bath, and, marching onwards, pitched his camp not

456 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 902.

far from Winburne. And when Ethelwald heard this, he fled
away by night, and went to Northumberland,.and in a sup-
pliant manner intreated the Danes, who were in that country,
to admit him as their comrade, and to make him one of their
body, so that he might get the better of king Edward; and
he was immediately declared king, and invested with the royal
dignity by them all. But king Edward was vexed at his
flight, and when he found that he could not overtake and
seize him, he ordered the nun whom he had carried off to be
led back to her monastery ; but Ethelwald, having made ready
a ship, sailed over to Gaul, in order to collect a more powerful
army, and so return and attack the king.

In the meantime, the king extended the boundaries of his
kingdom more widely than his father had done, and built
many cities and towns, and repaired some that had been de-
stroyed. By a concubine named Egwin he had his first-
born son Athelstan. By another woman, who was his queen,
and who was named Elfleda, the daughter of Count Ealfelm,
he had two sons, Ethelward and Edwin. Moreover, his wife
bore him six daughters, of whom Eadfleda became a nun, and
is buried with her sister Ethelhild at Wilton. But the other
four are all related to have been married. The first of them,
by name Edgiva, was married to Otho, emperor of the Romans;
the second, who was called Hadhilda, was married to Charles,
king of France; the third to Siricius, king of Northumber-
land: her name was Edith, and she was a woman of great
piety ; the fourth, whose name was Algiva, became the wife of
Hugo, the son of duke Robert. Moreover by his wife Edith
this same king became father of Edmund and Edred. At this
time the monastery at Clugny was founded by William, the
pious duke of Aquitaine.

A.D. 902. Ethelwald Clito, who has been already spoken
of, returning from the parts across the sea, collected a nume-
rous army of pagans, who dwelt in Northumberland and East
Anglia and divers other places, and with that army and the
forces which he brought with him from the countries across
the sea, he invaded Mercia in a hostile manner, and destroyed
everything that came in his way, with fire and sword. At
last, when, having met with no obstacle, he had determined to
return with the great booty that he had collected, to his own
country, king Edward, accompanied by a numerous army of
soldiers, came up with him, and put him to flight, and pur-

A.D. 905. INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF BISHOPS. 457

sued him towards East Anglia, and finding him prepared to
do battle in the plain between the two fortifications of the
Holy Edmund, he first addressed an exhortation to his men,
and then attacked the enemy gallantly. But at the very first
onset, there fell on the side of the king, the primates Sigewolf
and Sichelm, the abbots Edwald and Rinulf, the nobles Sibert
and Edbald, and a great many other nobles with them. And
on the side of the enemy, there were slain, Isopus Hold and
Oscital Hold, and the counts Brithric and Synoth and king
Eanich, and Ethelwald Clito, and many thousands of the
common soldiers. But king Edward, when he learnt that the
bravest of the enemy were slain, wisely withdrew from the
field of battle. And not long afterwards, king Edward made
peace with the pagans in the place which is called Httingeforv.
And after these events the king reduced to proper submission
some rebellious districts in England, and especially the citi-
zens of London and Oxford.
The same year, Benedict was created pope, and ruled his see
for one year and six months.
A.D. 903. Louis obtained the empire of the Romans, and
reigned ten years. In which year also, pope Benedict died,
and was succeeded by Leo, who filled the Roman chair forty
days. He again was succeeded by Christopher, who died six
months afterwards.
A.D. 904. The holy priest Grimbald, a man of great sanctity
and one of the teachers of king Alfred, ascended to the joys
of the kingdom of heaven. The same year, the queen, the
mother of king Edward, a religious servant of Christ, who
had built a monastery for nuns at Winchester, departed this
life.
A.D. 905. Sergius was appointed pope of Rome, and
governed that see seven years and sixteen days. The same
year, the magnificent king Edward, and Phlegmund, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, convened a great council of bishops,
abbots, and the faithful, in the province of the Gewisei, that is
to say, in that part of England which is situated on the
southern side of the river Thames. But that district, in con-
sequence of the incursions of the enemy, had been now, for
seven years, deprived of all episcopal superintendence and
pastoral care. On which account this salutary determination
- ‘was come to by the council, that instead of two bishops, one

of whom had his seat at Winchester, and the other at Sher

458 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 907. @

burne, five should be created, that the Lord’s flock might not
be harassed by the attacks of wolves, because it was destitute
of all pastoral care. Accordingly, the council proceeded to a
regular canonical election, and appointed Frithstan, bishop of
the see of Winchester ; Ethelin, bishop of Sherborne ; Eadulf,
bishop of Wells; Werstan, bishop of Crediton ; and Herstan,
bishop of Cornwall. And besides these, two other bishops
were elected, namely, Kinulf, to the see of Dorchester, and
Bertheg was ordained bishop of the South Saxons, whose
bishops have the seat of their diocese at Chichester. All these
bishops received consecration, on the same day, from arch-
bishop Phlegmund. And not long after, when an arrange-
ment of the different dioceses was made, the following pro-
vineces were allotted to the bishop of Winchester, namely,
Hampshire, Surrey, and the Isle of Wight; the bishop of
Sherborne had Somersetshire; the bishop of Wells had Dor-
setshire and Berkshire; the bishop of Crediton had Devon-
shire ; and the bishop of Cornwall had Cornwall. But after a
few years there was a separate bishop appointed for Wiltshire,
the seat of whose see was at Ramsbury. Of the bishops who
succeeded these five, we will speak hereafter, in their proper
place. But we must not omit to mention this fact, which
appears marvellous to many people, that the pontifical sees
remained for such a length of time in the before-mentioned
towns, which were of such slight importance; for instance,
the bishops of Cornwall had the seat of their diocese at Saint
Petroch’s of Bodwin, and the bishops of North Wales had
theirs on the river Beilemuthe.

A.D. 906. A comet appeared, and lasted nearly half the
year, indicating, perhaps, the excessive effusion of blood, and
the great slaughter which soon after took place to a ruimous
degree in a battle which was fought between the English and
the Danes, in which many nobles of each nation were slain.

A.D. 907. The magnificent king Edward, having collected
a numerous army, reduced under his dominion Essex, East
Anglia, Mercia, and Northumberland, with many other pro-
vinces which the Danes had occupied for a long time, and he
wrested them all by force from their dominion. He also made
himself master of the territories of Scotland, and Cumberland,
and of the Galwalensians, and all the Western Britons, and
received the submission of their kings, and then he returned
with honour and glory to his own country.

ACD. 912: DEATH OF THE VICEROY OF MERCIA. 459

A.D, 908. The city of Leicester, which had been destroyed
by the invasion of the Danes, was restored by the anxious
care of Ethelred, duke of Mercia, and of Elfleda, his wife.

A.D. 909. King Edward sent a military expedition into
Northumberland, against the Danes, who were raising a
rebellion in that county, and the king’s soldiers pursued them
fiercely for nearly forty days, and slew many of them, and
took some prisoners, whom they carried off to their great
disgrace.

A.D. 910. The bones of the holy Oswald, the king and martyr,
were reverently transported from Bardennes in Mercia.

* The same year, Rollo, prince of the Normans, attacked the
city of Chartres in a hostile- manner, intending to take it by
surprise. But when, failing in that, he endeavoured to take
it by repeated attacks, the citizens armed for the defence of
their city, and manned the ramparts of the walls. But when
at last they began to despair of being able to hold out, they
adopted a most salutary counsel, and, erecting as their standard
the Supparum, that is to say, the chemise of the Mother of
God, which Charlemagne, when he returned from Jerusalem,
had placed in the monastery dedicated to that Blessed Virgin, °
raising this, I say, on the highest point of the wall of the city,
they provoked Rollo and his soldiers to laughter. But that
the virtue of the Mother of God might bridle the rashness of
the unbelievers, a sudden panic seized Rollo and all his forces,
so that they precipitately abandoned all the things which they
had collected for the siege, and placed their only hope of
safety in flight. And when the citizens beheld them flying,
they pursued them with the edge of the sword, and slew
many thousands of them, and compelled Rollo, himself, after
the rout of his army, to flee to the city of Rouen.

A.D. 911. ‘Anastasius became pope, and filled the Roman
see two years and as many months. The same year, the
Danes invaded Mercia in a hostile manner, and plundered and
ravaged that province. And when news of this was brought
to king Edward, he went forth with a military force and
encountered those robbers, and in Wovenffelve, that is to say,
in the field of Woden, he fought a battle against them, and
slew the two kings of the pagans, Eowils and Hildein, with
the two counts Scufa and Other, and nine of their nobles. ,

A.D. 912. Ethelred, viceroy of Mercia, a king of eminent

460 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ALD. 912: @

virtue, died. Andafter his death, his wife, Elfleda, the daugh-
ter of king Alfred, kept under her government the whole pro-
vince of Mercia, with the exception of the city of London and ©
the city of Oxford, which king Edward, her brother, retained
as his own, and ruled them in perfect tranquillity for a long
time. The same year, king Edward caused the borough of
Hertford to be founded between three rivers, namely, the
Maran, the Benefuthe, and the Lea ; and in Essex he founded
a borough which is called Witham, about the time of the feast
of Saint Martin.

The same year, Rollo, duke of Normandy, being extrava-
gantly elated in his mind, marched in a hostile manner to-
wards the city of Paris, collecting booty on all sides as he
advanced, and then determined to besiege the city itself. But,
at last, when he found that the city, both from its situation
and the strength of its walls, was quite impregnable, he turned
aside to the city of Bayeux. And finding that city destitute
of all defenders, he took it, and divided its spoils among his
soldiers, after he had slain all the inhabitants. In this city
he carried off a certain damsel of noble birth, by name Popa,
the daughter of duke Berengarius, a most illustrious man,
and not long afterwards he made her his wife by marriage.
And by her he had a son named Wilhelm, and a daughter
named Gerloc, a damsel of great beauty. After this, he took
the cities of Paris and Evreux, and slew the citizens, and carried
off great booty. And: proceeding in this way to harass the
French, he burnt the churches of Christ, and slew the people,
and carried away the women as prisoners. Then the French,
being weighed down by these calamities, went with their
mournful complaints before king Charles, unanimously com-
plaining that the Christian people was being destroyed by the
attacks of the pagans, owing to his inactivity. And the king,
being greatly affected by their complaints, sent Franco, arch-
bishop of Rouen, to Rollo, promising him that, if he would
become a Christian, he would give him all the sea-coast from
the river Epte to the frontiers of Brittany, and also, that he
would give him his daughter Gilla for a wife. The archbishop
having undertaken this embassy, delivered the whole of his
messages regularly to the pagan duke, and, by the advice of
his council, Rollo received the proposition favourably, and,
accordingly, on an appointed day, he met the king of the
French and duke Robert, in a sacred assembly, on the other

A.D. 912. GENEALOGY OF DUKE ROBERT. 461

side of the river Epte. Rollo himself was surrounded by
troops of warriors, But after many messengers had passed to
and fro between them, peace was at last established, and Rollo
pledged his fealty to the king, and the king granted him the
land which has been described above, and also gave him his
daughter for a wife. He also added the gift of the whole of
Brittany, the princes of which province, by name Berengarius -
and Alan, took the oath of fealty to Rollo. And then, after
all these things had been done in this noble manner, the
Frenchmen who were standing by, exhorted Rollo to kiss
the king’s foot, in acknowledgment of such a liberal gift.
But Rollo disdained to bend his knee, took up the king’s foot
with violence, and lifting it to his mouth, threw the king on
the ground on his back, and the Frenchmen, being indignant
at this action, excited the Normans to laughter. For it ap-
peared to Rollo to be an unworthy thing for him to possess
the land which he had subdued by force of arms as the gift
-of any one whatever.

Peace, therefore, having been made in this manner, the king
of France returned home, and Rollo, with duke Robert, re-
turned to Rouen, and was baptized, with all his companions,
by Franco, archbishop of Rouen, and duke Robert was his
godfather to take him from the sacred font, and gave him
his own name, a.D. 913. And then the magnificent duke
Robert,’ having made sumptuous preparation for his nuptials,
received the king’s daughter as his wife, and the partner of
his bed, in the Christian fashion. But she died a few years
afterwards by an untimely death, without any children, and
then duke Robert took Popa, whom he had divorced, and mar-
ried her again.

Since now many illustrious dukes and kings derive their
descent from this magnificent duke Robert, it appears desir-
able, for the clearness of this history, to give his genealogy in
a brief detail.

Japhet, the third son of Noah, begat a son whom he called
Magog, whose Gothic progeny, deriving the name of their an-
cestor from the similitude of the last syllable of the name
Magog, produced two tribes of Goths, who were both most
valiant in arms. One of which tribes invaded the Further
Scythia, and occupied that country, and for a long time car-

1 Meaning Rollo, who had been christened Robert.

462 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 914.

ried on war against the kings of Egypt. And their wives,
who were afterwards called Amazons, being vexed at the long
absence of their husbands in that country, repudiated all con-
nection with them, and took up arms themselves, and elected
two women, who were bolder than the rest, to be their queens.
And having burnt off their right breasts, for the sake of hurl-
ing the javelin, they overran the whole of Asia, and for nearly
a hundred years they oppressed that country with the yoke of
their most severe dominion. The other tribe of Goths, leav-
ing the island of Scanza with their king, whose name was
Berig, soon afterwards disembarked from their vessels as soon
as they reached the land, and gave the name of Scanza to the
place where they had landed, in memory of the country from
which they had set out. And proceeding onwards to more
remote countries, they invaded the German gulfs and the sea
of Azor, and occupied many of the provinces on all sides of
those seas. Of which countries, Denmark and Norway after-
wards had many famous and powerful monarchs. These men
allege that the god Mars was born in their country, a god
whom they laboured to propitiate by the shedding of human
blood. ‘They also say that the Trojans were descended from
their race, and that, after the destruction of that city, Antenor _
fled on account of the treason which he had perpetrated, and

landed in Germany. And afterwards he reigned in Dania, or

Denmark, and gave a name to the province from his own name.

And for these reasons the Danes are well known to derive

their origin from the Goths, though the former afterwards

prospered and increased to such a degree, that, whenever their

islands were too full of men, in accordance with a law which

had been established by their kings, the braver men were com-

pelled to emigrate from their homes, in order to acquire in-

heritances and lasting abodes for themselves and their suc-

cessors.

A.D. 913. Conrad became emperor of the Romans, and
reigned seven years. The same year, Elfleda, queen of Mercia,
coming with a great army to Strengate, built them a fortified
citadel, and restored another on the western bank of the river
Severn, in a place which is called Brigges.

A.D. 914. Elfleda, queen of Mercia, restored the borough
called Chameworth. Thence proceeding onwards to Stam-
ford, in the northern district, she restored a tower on the river
Wicilwany. The same year, a great slaughter of the Danes

A.D. 918. RAVAGHS OF THE DANES. 463

took place on the borders of Luitonia and the province of
Hereford. Laudo became pope of Rome, and occupied that
see for six months.

A.D. 915. Johu was appointed to the Roman See, and filled
it four years, two months, and three days. The same year,
Phlegmund, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and Ethelm,
bishop of Wells, was translated to the see of Canterbury, and
Wolfhelm was ordained bishop of the church of Wells in his
stead. In which year, also, Werferth, bishop of the Wiccians,
went the way of all flesh, and was succeeded in his bishopric
by Ethelhune, abbot of Berkeley. The same year, Elfieda,
queen of Mercia, built the towns of Jfavesburp and Wartham.

The same year, the pagans invaded the territories of the
South Britons, and destroyed everything throughout that dis-
trict with fire and sword, and took Camelec, the bishop, pri-
soner in Jirchenefel, and carried him off to their ships, but
not long afterwards king Edward ransomed him for forty
pounds sterling.. After this, the same pagans invaded the
provinces of Hereford, Worcester, and Gloucester, and chal-
lenged the people of those counties to come forth to battle ;
and a terrible battle took piace, in which there fell on the side
of the Danes, Other, the brother of the Danish king, and duke
Rohald, with the greater portion of their army. The same
year, king Edward, surnamed the Elder, went to %ufingeham,
where he caused fortifications to be erected on each side of
the river @ie. The same year, Cuthard, bishop of Lindis-
farne, died, and was succeeded by Mildred.

_4-D. 916. Laudo was elected pope of Rome ; he filled that
see for one year. In this year, too, Elfleda, queen of Mercia,
built the three towns of Cherenburch, Weadburch, and
Runcofa.

A.D. 917. John was created pope. The same year, king
Edward built a castle at the borough of Maldon, and entrusted
it to a garrison of soldiers..

A.D. 918. King Edward founded the towns of Towcester
and Wiggingemere, and filled them with an armed garrison.
But the pagans marched in a hostile manner upon Towcester,
and endeavoured to take it. They, on the other hand, who
were within, with the aid of the people of the province, de-
fended themselves manfully, and put all the besiegers to flight,
who then invaded the county of Buckingham, taking men pri-
-soners, and carrying off the cattle as booty; and they also

464 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 919. —

slew a great many of the common people between the wood —
called 3%ernfwove and the town of Aplesbury. After that,

uniting with a great effort, they invaded several provinces of
the English, and harassed them with cruel ravages, carrying
off a countless quantity of booty from different places. But
king Edward having collected a multitude of armed men,

attacked the pagans in a hostile manner, and having put them
to flight, pursued them as they fled, and slew Togleas, their
general, and his son Mannan, and his brother, as “they were
flying, and took the greater part of their army prisoners, and
bound them with chains; and after this, the power of the pagans
began by degrees to diminish.

The same year, Elfleda, queen of Mercia, marched upon
Canterbury in a hostile manner, and besieged it, and took it,
and put to death a great part of the Danes who were in it.
About the same time, king Edward besieged Colchester, and
took it, and slew without mercy the pagans who were in it,
with the exception of a few who saved themselves by flight.
After this, the king marched to Maldon, which was besieged
by the pagans, and drove them from before that town, and
slew many thousands of them as they fled. Then, the king
proceeded to Huntingdon, and restored the town and the
castle, and left an armed band; and after the interval of a few
days, he repaired the walls of Colchester, and placed a garrison
of warlike men in it, and assigned them a regular pay. Then
the Danes who were scattered throughout England in many
places, seeing the power and wisdom of the king, willingly
submitted to him, and elected him as their lord and protector.
The same year, Werstan, bishop of Sherborne, died, and was
succeeded by Ethelbald.

A.D. 919. Elfleda, queen of Mercia, and sister of king Ed-
ward, a matron of extraordinary wisdom, died, in the eighth
year after she had governed the kingdom of Mercia by herself,
with a vigorous and just government. And her body was
carried to Gloucester, and honourably buried in the church of
the blessed Apostle Peter. She left as the heiress of her king-
dom, an only daughter, named Algiva, being her legitimate
child by Ethelred, the viceroy of Mercia. And finding that
she had received a grievous injury at her birth, and being
overmuch alarmed at it, for nearly forty years while she lived
after that event, she withdrew herself from her husband’s bed,
and from all carnal connection with him, refusing any longer

A.D. 924. EDWARD THE ELDER DIES. 465

to again experience the pains of a laborious delivery, and being
led to this determination by her nobleness of mind.

A.D. 920. Henry became emperor of the Romans, and
reigned eighteen years. The same year, king Edward having
restored the boroughs of Tealvella and Manchester, and for-
tified them with a garrison, took his niece Algiva, whom some
call Alwina, and ordered her to be conducted into Wessex.
The same year, Athelstan, bishop of Wilton, died, and was
succeeded by Odo. He was descended of Danish blood, and
served for a long time in the army under king Edward; but after-
wards he received the orders of the priesthood, and the ton-
sure, and as he increased in merit he was raised to the honour
of the Pontificate. =

A.D. 921. King Edward coming to the town of Nottingham,
on the southern side of the river Crente, built a town opposite
to the borough, which was on the other bank of the river, and
caused a strong bridge to be made between the two towns.
From thence he passed on to Bedecanwell, and built a borough
at no great distance from it, and placed a garrison therein. In
which year, also, the king of the Scots, and Reginald, king
of the Northumbrians, a Dane by birth, and the duke of the
Galwalensians, all came to king Edward, and made submission
to him, and also made a thoroughly lasting treaty with him.

A.D. 922. Ethelward, brother of king Edward, died, and
was buried at Winchester. The same year, Ethelhune, bishop
of the Wiccians, died, and was succeeded by Wilferth.

A.D. 923. The blood of the Lord, which flowed from the
image of Christ, when he a second time suffered in his image
the same things at the hands of the Jews that he had suffered
before, came into England, on the eighth of November.

A.D. 924. Edward, king of England, surnamed the Elder,
who had governed with great power all the English, and
Welsh, and Scots, and men of Cumberland, and Galwalensians
who inhabit Britain, and also the two nations of the Danes in
the same country; after many illustrious exploits, died at a
royal town called Faringdon, in the twenty-fourth year of his
reign, and was buried with royal pomp at Winchester, in the
new monastery. And Athelstan, his first-born son, was created
king, and was crowned at Kingston, a royal town, by Ethelm,
archbishop of Canterbury. In the time of this king, an illus-
_ trious child was born in the district of Wessex, by name Dun-
stan. The same year, Ethelm, archbishop of Canterbury,

VOL. I. HH

466 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 928.

died, and was succeeded by Wolfhelm, bishop of Wells ; and
ZElfeg succeeded Wolfhelm, in the bishopric of the church of
Wells.

A.p. 925. Athelstan, king of England, married his sister
Eadgitha, in honourable matrimony, to Sithric, king of North-
umberland, a prince descended from the Danish nation. And
Sithric forsaking paganism out of love for this virgin, embraced
the faith of Christ; but not long afterwards, he repudiated
that blessed virgin, and rejected Christianity, and restored the
worship of idols; and a short time after his apostasy, he
ended his life in a miserable manner. Then, that holy damsel,
who had always preserved her virginity, continued her time
at Pollesbury, in fastings, and vigils, and prayers, and the
giving of alms, and persevered to the end of her life, being
mighty in good works. But after the course of this praise-
worthy life, she passed from this world, on the fifteenth of
July, and to this very day, divine miracles are constantly
celebrated at her tomb.

A.D. 926. Fiery rays in the northern portion of the heavens
were seen throughout all England, which portended the
shameful death of that king Sithric, whose name has been
mentioned ‘above, and who perished miserably no long time
after. And then Athelstan drove out his son Guthferth, and
added his kingdom to his own dominions, and after that, he
defeated in battle and put to flight all the inferior kings in
England, namely, Hunwal, the king of the Britons, Constan-
tine, king of the Scots, and Wolferth, king of the Wenti. He
also drove Eldred, the son of Eadulf, out of the castle of
Bebbanberik. And all these princes, with other governors of
provinces, seeing that they were not able to resist his energy,
came to him and besought him to grant them peace, and, re-
nouncing idolatry, they made a most lasting treaty with him.

A.D. 927. Hugo, the son of count Robert, took for his wife
the sister of king Athelstan. In which year, also, Tilred,
bishop of Lindisfarne, died, and was succeeded by Wilfred.

A.D. 928. Leo became pope of Rome, and occupied that
see for six months and fifteen days. In the same year, Tun-
frid, bishop of Lichfield, died, and was succeeded by Ella.
About this same period, so great a friendship arose between
king Athelstan and Robert, duke of Normandy, that each of
them had influence in the affairs of the other, and that, in all.
their wars, they were benefited by their reciprocal co-operation. .

4.D. 931. DEATH OF THE BISHOP OF CREDITON. 467

A.D. 929. King Athelstan, determining to seek all the
relics of the different saints throughout his kingdom, for the
sake of praying before them, first of all went devoutly to the
monastery of Glastonbury. And there was there a certain
noble matron of the name of Elfleda, the niece of the king,
who wishing to live a widowed life ever since the death of her
husband, had chosen an abode for herself in the western side
of the monastery. ‘This religious woman carefully prepared
a dinner for king Athelstan, who, she knew beforehand, was
coming to Glastonbury for the purpose of prayer. But the
precursors of the royal household knowing that the king had
granted: to his niece an exemption from the obligation of re-
ceiving travellers, to the intent that she might have leisure to
devote to her own thoughts, came the day before, to see if
everything that was necessary had been prepared. And when
they had carefully inspected everything, they said to her:
“You have plenty of every kind of necessary supplies, if you
had only plenty of mead, which the king prefers for his own
drinking above all other liquors.” And she replied: “The
Mother of my Lord Jesus Christ will never permit mead to
be wanting at the table of the king.’ Then, entermg the
church of the Mother of God, she prostrated herself in prayer
to God and his Mother. Why need I be tedious? The king
came, accompanied with a numerous retinue of servants, and
after the celebration of mass, he was invited to dinner, and
went in accordingly. But, at the first passing of the cup, the
greedy drinkers emptied the vessel within the measure of one
palm, and afterwards, God ‘increasing the liquor, and the
blessed woman well deserving such a miracle, it remained the
whole day, though the cup-bearers continued to carry it round
to such a degree that, to the marvel of all men, it sufficed for
the whole company of guests. And when the king had heard
of this miracle by the relation of his servants, he became
changed in his mind, and said to his followers: “‘ We have
sinned too much in vexing this servant of God by our exces-
sive superfluity ;” and so, rising up and saluting his niece, he
went on his holy journey.

The same year, Stephen was created pope, and filled the
chair at Rome two years and one month.

A.D. 930. Wilferth, bishop of Worcester, died, and Kine-
_ wolth succeeded him in his bishopric.

A.D. 931. Hadulf, bishop of Crediton,died, and was suc-
HH 2

468 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 934.

ceeded by Ethelgar. These bishops govern the whole pro- _
vince of Devonshire. John was elected pope, and ruled that
see four years.

A.D. 932. Frithstan, a man of singular piety, bishop of
Winchester, having ordained Birstan, a man of great piety, to
his bishopric in his stead, abdicated it himself, and lived the
life of a poor man in the city of Winchester. This most holy
bishop celebrated mass every day for the repose of the dead,
and was continually singing psalms for the salvation of their
souls. At last, one night, when, according to his custom, he
was walking round the cemeteries chaunting, and was reciting
psalms, and, after he had finished everything else, was adding
the words, ‘‘ May they rest in peace ;” on a sudden he heard
voices as of an innumerable army, answering out of the sepul-
chres, ‘‘ Amen.”’

A.D. 933. Athelstan, king of England, because the king of
the Scots had violated the treaty that he had made with him,
marched against Scotland with a very powerful fleet, and no
small army of cavalry, and ravaged the greater part of Scot-
land. On which account, Constantine, king of the Scots,
being compelled by force, gave him his son as a hostage, and
gave him worthy presents likewise ; and so peace was renewed,
and the king returned to his own land. The same year, the
holy man, Frithstan, died.

A.D. 934. King Athelstan ordered his brother Edwin to be
drowned in the sea; and the following is said to have been
the cause of this deed:—There was in a certain town of
Wessex the daughter of a shepherd, a damsel of beautiful ap-
pearance, and she, when she was asleep, thought that she saw
the moon shining out of her belly, and also, that all England
was lighted up by this light. And when she had related her
vision to a certain matron who had been used to nurse the
king’s sons, the matron received the damsel into her own
house, and taking care of her as her own daughter, nourished
her on dainty food, and arrayed her in delicate apparel, and
educated her in all good habits and manners. And not long
afterwards, Edward, the son of king Alfred, by chance pass-
ing through the town, turned aside to her house, thinking
that it would be injurious to his reputation if he neglected to
visit the nurse who had brought him up. And there he saw
the maiden, and being seized with love for her, he slept that
night with her, and by one single embrace he made her preg-

A.D. 936. LOUIS SUMMONED TO THE THRONE OF FRANCE. 469

nant: and when the time of her delivery came, she brought
him forth a son, whom, because of the faith that she placed
in her dream, she called Athelstan. Therefore, when king
Edward died, as has been said before, his son Edward, who
bad been born to him by his legitimate wife, followed his
father by a speedy death. Then Athelstan, although he was
born of a concubine, was elected king by the favour of all
men (Edwin being passed over, who, because of his tender
years, was yet incapable of reigning), and, as had been fore-
told, was consecrated king in the royal town of Kingston. But
Athelstan, after he was consecrated, hated, with the blackest
hatred, his brother Edwin, whom he knew to have been born
in lawful wedlock, fearing lest, through his means, he might
some day or other be deprived of the throne. Accordingly,
the king, being tempted by the opportunity, having put his
brother Edwin by himself, with only his armour-bearer, in a
little boat, which was worn out by age, exposed him in the
open sea, without any rowers or oars, and so committed him
miserably to the mercy of Neptune, when the youth, becom-
ing weary of his life amid the waves of the sea, threw him-
self into the sea of his own accord, and so was drowned. But
the armour-bearer, rowing not only with his feet but also with
his hands, brought the body of his master to land, and then
conveyed it from Canterbury to Whitlanv, and buried it ho-
nourably.

King Athelstan, after his anger had cooled, shuddered at
the lawless deed that he had done, and, undertaking a seven
years’ penance, bewailed his fratricide, and condemned his
cup-bearer, who had given him the advice, to a cruel death.

The same year, the holy Birstan, bishop of Winchester,
departed to the kingdom of heaven, and was succeeded by
Allfug, a man of eminent piety. And the same year, Wolfhelm,
archbishop of Canterbury, died, and was succeeded by Odo,
_ bishop of Wells ; and Odo was succeeded in the church of

Wells by Osulf.

A.D. 935. Leo became Pope, and ruled the Roman See three
years, six months, and ten days. The same year, Robert, the
first duke of Normandy, departed this life, in a good old age,
and appointed his son William, a most elegant young man, his
successor.

A.D. 936. Count Hugo sent messengers into England, to
summon Louis, the son of Charles, king of France, to the

470 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 940.

elevation of king of France; and king Athelstan, his uncle,
having administered an oath to the ambassadors of France,
sent him with some bishops into France: and count Hugo,
with several nobles, went to meet him, and on the very sea-
shore owned themselves to be the subjects of Louis. From
thence, Louis is led to Laudun, and is crowned there by arch-
bishop Arthald, in the presence of thirty bishops and princes
of the kingdom.

A.D. 937. Anlaf, the pagan king of Ireland and many other
islands, having been invited by Constantine, king of the Scots,
enfered the mouth of the river Humber with a mighty fleet.
And Athelstan, king of England, and his brother Edmund,
met him with their army, in the place which is called Brunen-
burh; anda battle was fought, which lasted from day-break
till evening, in which the English slew five kings and seven
dukes of the enemy, and shed such a quantity of blood as no
one had ever heard of being shed in England up to that time.
And compelling the kings Anlaf and Constantine to return
to their ships, they returned in glorious triumph back to their
own homes.

A.D. 938. Otho became emperor of the Romans, and reigned
thirty-six years. And as soon as ever he was raised to the
empire, he took Eadgiva, the sister of king Athelstan, for his
wife.

A.D, 939. Stephen was raised to the Roman chair, which
he filled for three years, four months, and fifteen days. About
the same time, Athelstan, king of England, ordered two
monasteries, one at Middleton, and one at Michelena, to be
founded for the soul of his brother Edwin, whom he, yielding
to wicked counsels, had caused to be drowned in the sea; and
he endowed them with many estates and large possessions.

A.D. 940. Athelstan, the magnificent king of England, died
at Gloucester, on the twenty-sixth of October. He was suc-
ceeded in the kingdom by his brother and legitimate heir,
Edmund, and his corpse was carried to Malmesbury, and
honourably buried in that town, in which, while still alive, he
had selected a place for his grave. But when king Edmund
had been invested with the ensigns of royalty, he appointed
the blessed Dunstan, whom even in the lifetime of his brother,
he had known to be a man of pure character and an eloquent
tongue, to be present at all his councils, so that he was to be
counted as one elected among the royal palatines and princes.

A.D. 940. ACCOUNT OF THE BLESSED DUNSTAN. 471

And some of his soldiers and dependents, beholding the con-
stancy of his virtuous manner of life, said that he was a good
man, others said, nay, but he seduces the people. On which
account, some people envied his goodness and prudence, and
endeavoured to disparage him in the king’s eyes; and he
giving a favourable ear to them without well examining the
matter, at once ordered him to be deprived of ali honour, and
of his rank as chancellor, and commanded him to find service
elsewhere wherever he pleased. But on the morrow, the king
went forth with his train to relieve his melancholy by hunting.
And immediately, as soon as the noise of the hunters blowing
their horns, and the barking of the hounds resounded in the
woods, many stags began their nimble flight. ‘And the king,
with his pack of hounds that followed him, selected from
among them one hart of wonderful size, which he began to
pursue; and at last, after it had been wearied by the activity
of the dogs which chased it over many difficult places, he and
the hounds drove it to a precipitous side of an abrupt moun-
tain, and compelled it to throw itself down; and all the
hounds springing down with it from the height, were dashed
to pieces, and so came to a sudden death. But the king, who
was following the stag and hounds at the full speed of his
swift horse, when he saw the precipice, strove to check his
horse; but as he was impetuous, and had a hard mouth, and
as, In consequence of this hard mouth, the king was altogether
unable to restrain him, he gave up all hope of safety, and
commended his soul to the goodwill of Almighty God: “TI
give thanks to Thee,” said he, ‘‘O Lord Jesus Christ, because
I do not recollect that I, of late, have injured any one except
Dunstan only; and this fault I will amend with ready devotion
by reconciling myself to him, if time is allowed me.” At these
words, in consequence of the merits of the blessed man, the
horse stopped on the extreme edge of the precipice, and the
king recovering himself, gave thanks to God for the restoration
‘of his life. And returning home, he ordered the blessed
Dunstan to be brought before him; and when he had been
brought into the king’s presence, they both immediately
mounted their horses, and proceeded straight along the road
which leads to Glastonbury. And when they had arrived there,
and had entered the monastery, the king took the right hand |
of Dunstan and kissed it, and leading him to the cathedral
throne, placed him in it, with the consent of all the monks,

472 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 941.

and said to him: ‘Be thou the most faithful abbot of this
seat and of this church, and if you find anything wanting for
the complete service of our holy religion, I will supply that
out of my royal treasures.” And so, the blessed Dunstan
being reestablished in favour, and being called by God to the
office of a ruler, studied to behave amicably to all men, without
impairing the strictness of his religious duties.

About the same time, Anlaf, a Norwegian by birth, who in
the time of king Athelstan had been expelled from the king-
dom of Northumberland, in this year, being accompanied by
a large fleet, proceeded towards York. After this, he ap-
proached the southern parts of England in a hostile manner,
and attempted to make himself master of England by a sudden
attack. And when news of this was brought to king Edmund,
he went to meet him with a numerous army, and the two kings
met in hostile fashion near Leicester, and, for the greater part
of the day, fought a battle which was only too murderous on
both sides. But the two prelates, Otho, archbishop of Can-
terbury, and Wolfstan, archbishop of York, when they saw the
mutual danger, and the impending destruction of the kingdom,
arranged a peace between the two parties, on condition of
Anlaf possessing the whole island of Britain on the northern
side of the royal street which is called @atlinge Strete ;
and of Edmund enjoying all the island to the south of the
same road, in peace. And whichever of the two lived the
longest, was to have the whole kingdom after the death of the
other. Then Anlaf married Alditha, daughter of count Or-
mus, owing to whose counsel and assistance it was that he had
gained the before-mentioned victory.

The same year, Alfred, bishop of Sherborne, died, and was
succeeded by Wolf. *

Cu. XVITI.—From a.p. 941 To a.p. 975.

Anlaf dies—Wiiliam, duke of Normandy, is murdered—Death
of king Edmund—Edred succeeds to the throne—His cour-
age and Death—Edwy suceeeds—Dunstan is banished—
Edwy is banished and Edgar made king—Dunstan is recalled
—Simony in the Church—The wisdom and power of Edgar
—He dies, and is succeeded by Edward.

A.D. 941. Anlaf, who had been lately created king was visited
by the judgment of God while he was plundering the church

A.D.946. KING EDMUND PLUNDERS CUMBERLAND. 473

of Saint Balter, and burning Cinningham with fire, and soon
after died miserably ; and king Edmund invading Northumber-
land in a hostile manner, expelled Anlaf, the son of Sithric,
and Reginald, the son of king Cuthred, from that province
by force, and became a second time master of the whole of
England.

A.D. 942. King Edmund wrested Lincoln, Nottingham,
Derby, Leicester, and Stamford, out of the hands of the Danes,
and likewise all Mercia, and compelled all those places to
submit to his authority.

A.D. 943. After his queen Algiva had made the magnificent
king Edmund father of ason, named Edgar, the holy Dunstan
heard the voices of persons playing the harp and singing in
the sky, “Peace to the church of England in the time of the
child that is now born, and of our beloved Dunstan.”

The same year, king Edmund received king Anlaf out of
the laver of holy regeneration, as his godfather, and honoured
him with royal gifts. He also held Reginald, viceroy of North-
umberland, while he was being confirmed by the bishop, and
adopted him his own son. Martin was elected pope, and ruled
the see of Rome three years, six months, and fourteen days.

A.D. 944. William, the second duke of Normandy, was
slain by the treachery of Arnulf, count of Flanders. For
because this William had occupied one of the castles of the
before-mentioned count Arnulf, making a pretence of good
faith, invited him to a conference in a ship, and while they
were discussing the question of peace, he slew him by the
hands of Balzo, his general. And he was succeeded by his son,
Richard, the third duke of Normandy.

A.D. 945. King Edmund gave to the blessed martyr,
Edmund Beatrichewith, a royal town, in which the body of
that holy martyr rests to this day. And he also gave the
same martyr an estate of no small size around that place,
which gift he confirmed with pious devotion, by the signature
of the bishops, and counts, and barons to the deed. _

A.D. 946. Agapetus became pope of Rome, and ruled that
see ten years, six months, and ten days. The same year, king
Edmund, relying on the assistance of Keoline, king of Demetia,
plundered the whole of Cumberland of all its riches, and hav-
ing put out the eyes of the two sons of Dummail, king of that

province, he granted that kingdom to Malcolm, king of Scot-

474 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 946.

land, to be held of himself, in order that Malcolm might defend
the northern districts of England by land and sea from the
incursions of enemies who might arrive from foreign countries.
The same year, Edmund, that most pious king of England,
when, on the festival of Saint Augustine, the apostle of the
English, he had invited all the nobles of the kingdom to a
great banquet in the royal town which is called {#Michelesberith,
as it was the fashion among the English to do every year, on
account of the veneration in which they held the blessed
Augustine, by whose means the English received the light of
the faith ; when they were all assembled, and were sitting down
at the king’s dinner, they began to feast and to rejoice, the
king himself doing his best to promote their entertainment.
At length, when the king raised his head in order to see the
guests sitting at table, he beheld, standing, among others in
the hall, a robber of the name of Leof, whom a few years before |
he had banished forrobbery. And the king being exceedingly
indignant at this, made a sign to his cupbearer to remove that
robber from the palace immediately. But when that wicked
man refused to go for the word of the cupbearer, the king,
being provoked and exceedingly angry, leaped up suddenly
from the table, and, seizing the robber by the hair, threw him
down on the floor. But that traitor, when he felt that he was
hurt, and found the king lying on him, quickly drew a knife,
which he wore secretly, and, alas! alas! he slew the king.
Then the soldiers and servants of the king, when they saw
their master slain and wallowing in his gore, all rushed upon
that robber and cut all his body and bones into the smallest:
pieces, and thus the splendid beginning of the king’s banquet
was terminated by a very cloudy ending of circumstances.
When, therefore, Edmund was dead and buried at Glaston-
bury, Edred, his brother, received the crown of the kingdom,
at Kingston, a royal town, from the. blessed Otho, archbishop
of Canterbury, on the fifteenth of August. Edmund, also, left
behind him two sons as his legitimate heirs, by name Edwin
and Edgar, who, because of the obstacle of their tender age,
could not succeed their father in his kingdom. He, as his
brother king Edmund had formerly done, reduced the whole
of Northumberland under his dominion, received an oath of
fealty from the king of Scotland, and with great devotion gave
to the metropolitan church of York two statues of great size.
Afterwards, when he had received the oath of fealty from the

A.D. 946. INTERPRETATION OF ST. DUNSTAN’S DREAM. 475

king of Cumberland, and had placed all that district in secu-
rity, he proceeded southward with his friends. And this
noble king, inferior in no respect to his predecessors, loved
the blessed Dunstan with such ardent affection, that he en-
trusted all his treasures to his guardianship. In the mean-
time the blessed Ailfeg, bishop of the city of Winchester, who
had invested Dunstan with the orders of monk and priest,
departed this life. And the king, wishing to appoint Dunstan
in his place, treated with him on the subject by the interven-
tion of the queen, his mother. But Dunstan replied, “I
entreat you, my mistress, to give up entreaties of this kind,
and to be assured that I will not be a pontiff in the days of
the king your son.” But the man of God said this because
he loved the king, and was unwilling to be compelled to absent
himself from his councils, because of the duties of the pontifi-
cate. But on the following night he had a vision, in which
he seemed to himself to have gone to Rome, and having
adored the Apostles, to have immediately returned home again ;
and when he had come to the Mount of Joy, behold Saint
Peter met him, with the apostles Paul and Andrew, each of
them holding a sword in his hand, and offering it to him with
outstretched hands. On the sword of Saint Peter was
written, ‘(In the beginning was the Word ;”’ and the swords
of Saint Paul and Saint Andrew were inscribed with their
own names. Then Saint Peter, the apostle, sang to him
in a sweet voice, ‘‘Take my yoke upon you, and you shall
find rest for your souls.”” Then, reproving him, he lifted up
the rod which he held in his hand, and, striking him a slight
blow on the hand, he said, “ Take this as a warning not to
persist any longer in refusing the yoke of the Lord.” On
this, the man of God woke, and in the morning related the
vision to the king, who marvelledatit. And the king said to
him, “As the swords which you have received by the bounty
of the Apostles, denote the armour of the Holy Spirit, you
may know for certain by the sword of Saint Peter, inscribed
as it is with the Word of God, that you are to’ be presented,
by heavenly invention, with the dignity of archbishop; by
the sword of Paul, you may know that you will receive a sim-
ple bishopric ; and by the sword of Andrew, that you will
receive another bishopric, over which you are to exercise the
rights of government.” And afterwards, in accordance with
- the interpretation of his dream, he ruled the church of Can-

476 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 948.

terbury, which was dedicated in the name of the Holy Trinity,
the church of London, which was dedicated in the name of
Paul, and that of Rochester, which had been consecrated in
the name of the blessed Andrew.

A.D. 947. Alffin succeeded the holy Ailfeg as bishop of Win-
chester. Of the blessed Ailfeg it is written that on Ash
Wednesday, when, according to custom, he removed the peni-
tents from the threshold of the church, he exhorted them to
devote themselves for the next forty days to fasting and chas-
tity, and during those days to abstain even from the delights
of their wives. But, when the others reverently expressed
their willingness to comply with the commands of the bishop,
one of them began to jest, and say that he could not abstain
from love and food and wedlock all at once. And the bishop
answered him, “‘ You make me very sorrowful, as you do not
know what the day that is coming may produce to you.”
And so that profligate man, departing, experienced the truth
of the hard prophecy of the blessed Ailfeg, for the next morn-
ing he was found dead in his bed, it being uncertain whether
he was not strangled by the devil.

At another time, when he had been celebrating holy orders,
he promoted three monks to the order of the priesthood. And
then, having completed his ordinations, the bishop of blessed
memory said to the bystanders, “ This day I have laid hands
on three monks, two of whom will hereafter obtain the dig-
nity of the pontifical rank, one in the city of Worcester and
subsequently in Canterbury, and the other will, at a future
time, fill my seat. The third being inflamed by wantonness
and love of pleasure, will have a miserable end.” And this
prophecy of the holy prelate was proved by the event which
turned out as he had predicted. The same year, the people
of Northumberland, violating the faith which they had pledged
to king Edred, raised a prince of the name of Eilric, descended
from Danish blood, to be their king.

A.D. 948. King Edred, as a punishment for the disloyalty
of the Northumbrians, laid that province waste. And in this
district, the monastery at Ripon, which had been formerly
built by the holy Wilfred, was burnt by fire. But when the
king was retreating, an army sallied out of York, and made a
great slaughter of the rear of the royal army. And when
this was made known to the king, he proposed to return back,
and to destroy all the enemy to a man. But the people of

A.D. 955. . EDWY SUCCEEDS TO THE THRONE. 477

Northumberland, being greatly frightened, deposed Lilric,
whom they had made their king, and made amends for the
insults that they had offered to king Edred, by honours, and
for the injuries that they had done him, by presents.

4.D. 949. There arose in Italy the heresy of the Anthropo-
morphites, who contend that God has abodily form. Against
which doctrine, Richerius, bishop of Verona, protested both
in speeches and writings.

4.D. 950. King Eilric with his son Henry and his brother
Reginald were treacherously slain in a desolate place, which is
called Steinmor, through the treason of count Osulf and by
the hand of the commander Maco; and, after that, Edred
reigned over these provinces. -

A.D. 951. King Edred committed Wolstan, archbishop of
York, to close custody, at Withabirith, because he had been
often accused before him, on certain grounds, as one who had
caused many citizens of Thetford to be put to death, in revenge
for the death of the abbot Adelm, who had been unjustly slain
by them.

A.D. 952. Algar, bishop of Crediton died, and by the
advice of the blessed Dunstan Alfwold was appointed to suc-
ceed him.

A.D. 953. Wolstan, archbishop of York, was released from
custody, and restored to the episcopal dignity at Dorchester.

A.D. 954. Oscitel, a good man, and one of very considerable
erudition in divine knowledge, was made archbishop of York.

A.D. 955. Edred, the most powerful king of England, in
the tenth year of his reign, when he had begun to feel very ill,
sent a swift message, to beg the blessed Dunstan to come to
him, for the sake of confession. And as he was hastening
rapidly to the palace, a voice sounded clearly above his head,
which he heard distinctly, ‘“‘ King Edred has gone to his rest
in peace.” At which words, the horse on which he sat, not
being able to endure the weight of the angels’ voices, fell
to the ground dead, without doing any injury to his rider.
At last, when the blessed Dunstan had come to the king, he
found that the king had died at the very moment that the
angel announced it to him on the road. And the body of the
king was carried to Winchester, and buried by the blessed
Dunstan in the old monastery.

_ He was succeeded in his kingdom by Edwy, son of king
Edmund and of his queen the holy Algiva, and received royal

478 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 956.

unction at Kingston, from the hands of Odo, archbishop of
Canterbury. ‘There was a certain unmarried woman, of noble
birth, who, with her grown-up daughter, lived with him in
the most wicked intercourse of familiarity, hoping to induce
him to unite himself to either the mother or daughter by
formal matrimony. Both of whom, they say, he used to han-
die alternately, in a shameful and immodest manner, without .
any decency or shame. For on the very day on which he
was consecrated king, the prince, immediately after he had
received the royal unction, suddenly he leapt down from the
table and left the pleasant banquet, while wanton and full of
wine, to satisfy himself with lascivious pleasures. The action
offended the nobles, and they sent the blessed Dunstan to
bring the king back, that he might be a pleasant messmate
with them at his royal banquet. And Dunstan, according to
the command of the nobles, taking with him bishop Cynesius,
his kinsman, entered the king’s bedchamber, where they
found the kingly crown, splendid and beautiful’ as it was,
thrown carelessly off his head down on the ground, and the king
lying between the two women wallowing in the mire of impu-
rity. Then Dunstan, being moved at such unhallowed conduct,
said to the king, “ Your princes have sent us to you to en-
treat you to return to the worthy couch on which was your
seat, and to associate pleasantly with them.” At the same
time he reproved the vanity of the women; and as the king
was unwilling to rise up, he took hold of his hand and led
him back, in great anger, to the royal banquet. Then that
strumpet, whose name was Algiva, rising up against the man
of God in a burning rage, said that he was over rash in en-
tering into the secret chambers of the king without being
invited.. And so that most abandoned woman did not desist
from persecuting the blessed Dunstan, till she had raised
in the king’s mind a mortal hatred against the venerable
abbot.

A.D. 956. John was created pope, and filled the Roman
chair seven years. At this time, Algiva, who has been men-
tioned before, that most abandoned woman, with the consent
of king Edwy, stripped the monastery of Dunstan, that man
of God, of all its property ; and having extorted a command
from the king to that effect, at last banished him from the
kingdom. And he, being thus driven into banishment, took
refuge in the Gallic territories ; but that woman, wishing to

A.D. 958. ODO, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY, DIES. 479

avenge herself on this man of God, sent officers, as it is said,
to deprive him of his eyes, if he could be found. But, as they
could not discover him, they returned home in confusion.

A.D. 957. King Edwy was wholly abandoned by the people
of Mercia and Northumberland, because he acted foolishly in
the government committed to his charge, through hatred and
folly ; destroying all the wise men of the kingdom, and all
the nobles, and cherishing the ignorant and wicked with love
and affection. And when he had been deposed by the una-
nimous conspiracy of all men, they, prompted by God, elected
his brother Edgar king, and, with the approbation of the
people, the whole government of the kingdom was divided
between the two brothers, so that the river Thames separated
their several dominious. Then Edgar brought back the blessed
Dunstan from banishment, and restored him in all honour to
his former dignity. After a short interval had elapsed, Kine-
wold, bishop of Worcester, died, and the blessed Dunstan,
although he opposed such a step vigorously, was elected and
consecrated by Odo, archbishop of Canterbury.

A.D. 958. Brithelm, bishop of London, died, and king
Edgar appointed the blessed Dunstan in his place, who imme-
_ diately founded a monastery in Westminster for twelve monks,

in the place where bishop Mellitus had formerly built a church
to Saint Peter; and he appointed the holy Wolty abbot of it.
The same year, the holy Odo, archbishop of Canterbury, sepa-
rated king Edwy and Algiva from one another, either on the
ground of consanguinity, or because he had lived with her in
adultery. The same year also, Odo, archbishop of Canter-
bury, a man of brilliant genius, exemplary virtue, and power-
ful in the spirit of prophecy, was released from all human
concerns, and carried to paradise by the hands of angels.
And when he had been translated to heaven, Ealftin, bishop
of the city of Winchester, sent profuse presents by the hands
of mediators, and endeavoured to cajole king Edgar, and so,
following the example of Simon Magus, he, by the interven-
tion of money, ascended the throne of the church of Canter-
bury. And even on the very day of his first entrance into his
office, he could not abstain from vomiting forth the madness
which he had conceived in his mind, but, going up to the tomb
of the holy Odo, and kicking it with his foot, said, ‘‘ You most
wicked old man! at last, though too late, you have given up
the ghost, and departed and made room for a better man. But

480 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. s ASD 9598

now I have what I long desired against your will, and I owe
you anything rather than thanks for it.” Thus he spoke;
but the next night, when this frantic man had yielded to sleep,
he saw the image of the blessed Odo standing by him, and
addressing rapid reproaches to him, and threatening him with
speedy destruction. But Ealffin, thinking what he had seen
was only an empty dream, was not deterred from hastening to
Rome to obtain the pallium. In which journey, while he was
proceeding over the Alps, he was frost-bitten by the snow in
the winter season, and could find no relief, except by plunging
into the still warm entrails of disembowelled horses those feet
with which he had kicked the tomb of the holy Odo. But as
the cold was not relieved, but rather made worse by these
means, he terminated a wicked life by a miserable death.
A.D. 959. King Edwy, after he had lasciviously and tyran-
nically oppressed the kingdom of England for four years, died
by the just judgment of God, and was buried in the new
monastery at Winchester; and his brother Edgar, being una-
nimously elected, succeeded to his kingdom, and so re-united
the kingdoms which had been divided. The same year,
Brithelm, bishop of Wells, was elected to the supreme pon-
tificate of the church of Canterbury. He was a man of ex-
ceeding modesty, humility, and kindness; to such a degree,
that he did not restrain as he ought, by the scourge of correc-
tion, the arrogant and rebellious. But when this was ascer-
tained by the king, he ordered him to return to the dignity
which he had left, and, with the approbation of all men, the
blessed Dunstan wasappointed archbishopin hisstead. And king
Edgar himself was instructed in his duty by him, and the other
princes of the land, and led to check rashness of wicked men
wherever it was seen, and to repress the rebellious by the seve-
rity of correction, and to show favour to the just and modest,
and to restore and enrich the churches of God that had become
desolate ; expelling from the monastery all the profligate men
of the secular clergy, to the praise and glory of the Supreme
Creator. And, moreover, he collected bands of monks and
nuns, and caused more than forty monasteries to be built.
All these men he honoured as his brothers, and loved as his
dearest sons, admonishing the pastors whom he set over them
to exhort them to live with regularity, so as to please Christ
and all his saints. For Dunstan, that man of God, was won-
derfully discreet in all things, and, by the assistance of

A.D. 963. BENEDICT BECOMES POPE. 481

God, most strictly observed prudence, and fortitude, and justice,
and temperance as long as he lived. The same year, Leofwin,
bishop of the district of Lindsey, died, and was succeeded by
Ailnoth, and he, in his turn, was succeeded by Osewin, at
whose request the holy Aswald, who was afterwards bishop of
Worcester, consecrated the monastery at Ramesey.

A.D. 960. The holy Dunstan went to Rome, and received
the pallium from pope John, and returned home by the way
of peace. Then, after an interval of a few months, king
Edgar consented, at his suggestion, that the blessed Oswald
should be admitted to the bishopric of the church of Worces-
ter, where he was consecrated bishop by the blessed Dunstan,
and flourished in it, being illustrious for many proofs of vir-
tue. About the same time, Guthard, bishop of Selsey, died,
and was succeeded by Alfred.

A.D. 961. Count Ordgar founded a monastery at Camstoke,
in Devonshire, and filled it with religious monks. Now count
Ordgar was the father of Elfrida, the queen of king Edgar,
by whom he*became father of Ethelred, who was afterwards
king of England, as the following history will more fully
declare.

A.D. 962. The holy Wibert, the founder of the Gemblacen-
sian monastery, departed to be with Christ.

A.D. 963. Brithelm, bishop of Winchester, died, and was
succeeded in his bishopric by the holy Ethelwold, abbot of
the monastery of Abingdon, who had been brought up and
educated and trained by the holy Dunstan. The same year,
by command of king Edgar, all the clergy who lived ina
secular manner having been expelled, he filled the old monas-
tery in their stead with religious monks, who observed an
orderly and regular course of life.

King Edgar, surnamed the Pacific, is recorded to have had
two queens in succession. By the first, whose name was
Elfleda the Fair, surnamed Aineda, the daughter of duke Ord-
mar, he had a son Edward, who wasafterwards king and martyr.
After her decease, he took to wife Eldfritha, daughter of
count Ordgar, and relict of Ethelwold, duke of the East- —
Angles, by whom he had two sons, namely, Edmund and
Ethelred. By Wilfrida, his concubine, who it is certain was
not a nun at that time, but who tovk the veil while a little
girl, out of fear of the king, he had a daughter, the holy Edith.

This year, Benedict became pope, and ruled his see two

VOL. I. td

}

482 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 967.

months and five days, and was succeeded by Leo, who go-
verned it one year and four months.

A.D. 964. King Edgar the Pacific placed monks in the new
monastery at Winchester and at Middleton; and appointed
Ethelgar as abbot of the former, and Kineward as abbot of the
latter. .

A.D. 965. John became pope, and occupied the Roman chair
seven years and eleven months. About the same time, when
the holy Ethelwold, bishop of the city of Winchester, was one
night standing at the great altar of his church in prayer before
the relics of the saints, three reverend persons appeared to
him, of whom the one which was in the middle uttered these
words distinctly: ‘“I,’’ said he, ‘‘am Birstan, formerly bishop
of this city, and,” pointing to his right hand, “this man,”
said he, “ Birin, formerly the preacher and first bishop of this
church ;” then, pointing to his left, he continued, “and this
is Saint Swithun, the spiritual! patron of this church and city.
And know that, as you now see me with them in your pre-
sence, so do I enjoy equal glory with them in heaven. Why,
then, am I defrauded of honour from mortals on earth, when
I am magnified by the company of heavenly spirits in hea-
ven?’? And when he had said this, he and his companions
rose up into the air, leaving a precious memory of themselves
to their fellow-countrymen on earth.

A.D. 966. When some Danes were disputing at a banquet
with one of the clergy named Popo, about the worship of God
and of the gods, the Danes asserting that Jesus Christ was
God, but that there were greater gods, and more ancient than
he ; but Popo, affirming on the contrary, that Jesus Christ was
the only true God, one in substance and triune in person;
Harold, king of the Danes, said to Popo, that he ought te
prove the faith which he thus asserted by the ordeal of truth.
And when Popo affirmed that he would so prove it before the
people, they brought him a piece of iron of great weight,
excessively heated, and placed it in his hands. And when
Popo had carried it before their eyes as long as they all de-
sired without receiving any injury, the king utterly discarded
his idols, and turned both himself and all his followers to the
worship of the true and only God. But Popo was promoted
to a bishopric.

A.D. 967. King Edgar collected a body of nuns in the mo-
nastery of Mummiesetge, which his grandfather, king Edward,

A.D. 973. CORONATION OF KING EDGAR. 483

ae built, and ordained the holy Merwinna as abbess over
them.

A.D. 968. King Edgar collected a body of monks at Exeter,
and appointed a religious man named Sideman to preside over
them as abbot. The same year, the bishop of the province of
Lindsey died, and was succeeded by Ailffy, a man of great
learning in ecclesiastical matters. The same year, a noble
monastery was founded at Ramesey, by count Ethelwin, which
subsequently received rich increase, both in spiritual and tem-
poral things.

A.D. 969. King Edgar the Pacific ordered the bishops whom
he had appointed throughout England to expel the secular
clergy from all the greater monasteries and cathedral churches,
and to elect monks in their places. On which account, the
holy Oswald made monks of' the secular clergy of Worcester,
and compelled them to assume the religious habit ; and those
who refused, he stripped of all their benefices.

A.D. 970. The venerable relics of Saint Swithun, after a
hundred and ten years had elapsed since his burial, were re-
moved from his sepulchre, on the fifteenth of July, and trans-
ferred with due honour to the church of the Apostles Peter
and Paul, by the blessed Ethelwold, bishop of the same church,
in accordance with a command that he had received from
heaven. The same year, Alfred, bishop of Selsey, died, and
was succeeded by Eadelm.

A.D. 971. Edmund, the son of king Edgar, Ailfeg, duke of
Southampton, and Ordgar, duke of Devonshire, the father-in-
Jaw of the king, all died. Benedict became pope this year,
and governed the see of Rome one year and six months.

A.D. 972. King Edgar caused a new monastery to be dedi-
cated in the city of Winchester, the building of which had
been begun by his father Edmund, and completed by himself.
The same year, Oscital, archbishop of York, died, and the
holy Oswald, bishop of the church of Worcester, was conse-
crated archbishop in his stead.

A.D. 973, Edgar the Pacific, king of England, in the thirtieth
year of his age, on the day of Pentecost, carried his crown in
the presence of the prelates Dunstan and Oswald, and all the
other bishops of the whole of England, and all the great
nobles, in the city of Gfemanecestre, which is called in Latin
Bathonia, and was there crowned in royal fashion with great
_ glory and honour, haying given every one the poaeariae
112

;
484 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. AIS 975+

donation which is usually given to the great nobles at the
coronation of the king. ; :

a.p. 974. Otho the Second obtained the empire of the
Romans, and reigned ten years. The same year, Donus be-
came pope, and ruled the Roman see one year and six months.
About the same time, there landed in the Isle of Thanet some
merchants coming from York, who were immediately taken
prisoners by the inhabitants of that island, and stripped of all
their goods. At which king Edgar was roused to anger, and
treated those robbers with such severity that he confiscated
the property of all of them, and some of them he even exe-
cuted. About this time also, the body of Elgiva, the mother
of Edgar, was discovered by divine revelation in the place
which is called Septonia, or Shaftesbury.

The same year, king Edgar the Pacific, coming to the city
of Caerleon, received an oath of fealty from eight of his tri-
butary kings; namely, from Kined, king of the Scots, from
Malcolm, king of Cumberland, from Maco, king of Man and
many other islands, from Dufnal, king of Demetia, from_
Siferth and Howel, kings of Wales, from James, king of Gal-
wallia, and Jukil, king of Westmaria. And the next day,
embarking on board ship with them, the tributary kings were
all placed at the oars, and he himself took the helm, and steering
the vesselskilfully along the course of theriver, to the admiration.
of many, while all his nobles followed him in a similar boat,
he sailed from his palace as far as the monastery of John the
Baptist, where, after he had finished divine service, he re-
turned back to the palace with the same pomp; but, as he
re-entered his palace, he is reported to have said to his nobles,
“that now at last all his successors might boast that they
were kings of England, since he had-enjoyed a procession of
such honour and triumph in the obedience of so many kings.”
The same year, a great earthquake shook the whole of Eng-
land. ,

A.D. 975. King Edgar the Pacific, consulting at the same
time the advantage and the tranquillity of his kingdom, col-
lected four thousand eight hundred strong ships; of which he
stationed twelve hundred on the eastern coast of England,
twelve hundred on the western coast, twelve hundred on the
southern, and twelve hundred in the northern ocean, to be a
defence to his kingdom, and sustain any dangers of war which
might arise from foreign nations. He had besides, during the

A.D. 975. DEATH OF KING EDGAR. 485

whole period of his life, a custom of travelling through all the
provinces of his kingdom, that he might see how the laws and
rights and ordinances laid down in his decrees were observed
by the princes, and to take care that the poor received no
injury from and were not oppressed by the powerful; both
which points he used to examine into carefully, studying
courage in one of them and justice in the other, and consulting
the interests of his nation and kingdom in both. On this ac-
count, his enemies in every quarter regarded him with fear,
and all his subjects with love. After this, he ordered a new
coinage to be struck throughout England, because the old one
was so impaired in value by the dishonesty of clippers, that a
piece of gold scarcely weighed an obol in the scale. The same
year, Ailffy the bishop and count Eadulf conducted Kined,
king of the Scots, to king Edgar. And when they had brought
him into the king’s presence he received many presents from
the king’s liberality, among which were a hundred ounces of
the purest gold, with many ornaments of silk, and rings, and
precious stones. Besides this, he gave the king all that dis-
trict which in the native language is called Laudian, on con-
dition that every year, on the principal festivals, when the king
and his successors carried their crowns through the streets,
they should come to court, and celebrate the festival with joy,
with the other princes of the kingdom. Moreover, the king
gave him many mansions on the road, in order that he and
his successors, when coming to the festival and returning
back again, might be able to lodge comfortably, and those
mansions remained till the time of king Henry the Second,
in the power of the king of the Scots.

The same year, that flower and pride of all kings, that ho-
nour and glory of England, king Edgar the Pacific, the fame
of whose liberality and magnificence had by this time filled’
all Europe, departed this life in the thirty-second year of his
age, and the sixteenth of his reign, and exchanged his earthly
kingdom for an eternal one. And his body was carried to
Glastonbury, and buried there with all royal solemnity. And
after his death, as has been said before, there arose a great
dissension among the nobles of the kingdom about electing a
king: for some voted for Edward, the first-born son of the
late king, and some agreed in electing his brother Ethelred,
who was born of the second wife. On which account, the two
archbishops, Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, and Oswald,

eerie

‘
486 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 975am

archbishop of York, uniting together with the other bishops,
and abbots, and dukes, elected Edward, according to the in-
junction of his dying father; and having elected him, they
consecrated him, and anointed him as king, though some
people murmured. For his step-mother, Elfdritha, was en-
deavouring to promote her son, Ethelred, a boy of scarcely
seven years old, in order that she might reign under his name.
And thus, after the decease of the pacific king, the whole state
of the kingdom was thrown into disorder, and changed for the
worse. For many of the princes and chiefs expelled the ab-
bots and monks from the monasteries in which king Edgar
had placed them, and in their places brought back the secular
clergy with their wives, as had been the case before. For one
of them, Allferius, by name, overthrew nearly all the monas-
teries which the most reverend Ethelwold had built in the pro-
vince of Mercia, and had behaved with great insolence.

But when reference was made on these points, to the blessed
Dunstan, he convened a synod at Winchester; and in the
middle of the conflict of discussion, the image of the Lord, —
which was standing in the church close to the disputants,
spoke distinctly, expressing such opinions that it rendered all
the secular clergy and their favourers dumb. But, as the
minds of the cruel persecutors were not yet appeased, another —
synod was held at Calne, when the king was not present on
account of his tender age, but at which the senators of the
whole kingdom attended; and, accordingly, the matter was
debated with great diversity of opinion in the council room, —
and many reproaches were directed like arrows against Dun-_
stan, as a sort of bulwark of the Church, but they could not
subdue him; when, all of a sudden, the whole floor on which —
they were sitting, with its boards and beams, came asunder, —
and they were all dashed violently to the ground, but one
single beam, that, namely, on which Dunstan was standing,
remained uninjured, and so he escaped unhurt. All the other
persons of the opposite party were either killed, or injured in
a lasting manner. This miracle procured the blessed Dunstan -
and the monks peace from the attacks of the secular clergy

and others ; the divine grace having produced these and other
similar effects.

A.D. 978. DEATH OF KING EDWARD. 487

Cu. XIX.—From a.p. 976 To a.p. 1016.

The death of Edward the Martyr—Lthelred succeeds to the
throne—Death of Dunstan— Quarrel between Ethelred and
Richard of Normandy—Tribute is paid to the Danes—
Death of Richard —Story of Silvester or Gerebert—Lthelred
builds a fleet—Slaughter of the Danes—Sweyn, king of
Denmark, subdues England—Ethelred flies to Normandy—
Death of Sweyn—Return of Ethelred—He dies, and is
succeeded by Edmund Ironside—Edmund’s victories—His
peace with Canute—His death.

A.D. 976. A comet appeared, and a terrible famine ensued.
_ The same year, Benedict was placed in the Roman chair, which
he occupied nine years and six months. The same year, Algar,
bishop of Crediton, died, and was succeeded by Ailwold.

A.D. 977. Ailfdritha, the step-mother of the new king, Ed-
ward, endeavouring with all her efforts to advance her son to
be king, tried to cajole Edward with flattering words; but he,
following in the steps of his father’s piety and religion, and
keeping only the name of king, allowed his brother Ethelred,
and his mother, to manage all the affairs of his kingdom.

A.D. 978. When, one day, king Edward was fatigued with
hunting, and oppressed exceedingly with thirst, so that he only
wanted for something to drink, while his comrades and ser-
vants had followed the hounds wherever chance led them,
having heard that his step-mother and his brother were dwelling
in a town which is called Cornesqate, he put spurs to his
horse, and hastened thither, suspecting no wickedness because
of his own innocence, but judging of the hearts of others by
the weli-regulated disposition of his own breast. But his
step-mother caressed him when he came with soft words, and
so persuaded him to listen to her; and when, after having
given him a kiss, she offered him a cup, one of her officers
stabbed him with a dagger while he was eagerly drinking of
it. But the king, when he felt that he was mortally wounded,
began to urge his horse on with the spur, so as to enable him
to return to his friends, while the blood was running from
him in streams, which gave his servants who were seeking
him intimation of his death. Then Alfdritha, that most
wicked woman, and her son Ethelred, ordered the body of the
blessed Edward, king and martyr, to be buried without any

‘honour at Wareham, displaying much public joy and pleasure,

488 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 979.

as if they had buried his memory at the same time with his
body. For they grudged ecclesiastical burial to the deceased
king, to whom while living they had denied the honours of
royalty. But he enjoyed the unanimous pity of the Deity,
who honoured him who had been thus murdered, though in-
nocent, with the divine grace of miracles; for lights from
heaven were seen to descend on the spot to such a degree, that
as the rays of light descended, motion was restored to the
lame, sight to the blind, speech to the dumb, and all who were
oppressed by any disease or infirmity, received the wished-for
prize of sound health. Accordingly, there was a great con-
course of people from every part of the kingdom flocking to
the martyr’s tomb, and, among others, his very murderess
took a journey thither. And when she had mounted her horse,
and began to urge him on with spurs, being one who before
used to go faster than the wind and outstrip the air itself, and .
to carry his mistress impetuously as if nothing could restrain
him, the same horse now, by the divine influence, stood im-
moveable, while the servants on all sides strove to urge him —
on with whips, and shouts, and spurs: it was all labour lost,
and when the horse was changed, the same scene took place.
Then Ailfdritha, seeing the miracle which was thus wrought by
God, repented greatly, to such a degree that she put on sack-
cloth, at Warewell, to afflict that body which for many years
had been nourished in all sorts of delights, and lay on the
ground to sleep, and applied all the tortures that she possibly
could to her body. Ailferius, too, he whom we have already
mentioned, repenting anxiously of his guilt because he had
destroyed the monasteries of the monks, brought the sacred
body of the king from the ignoble place in which it lay, and
buried it with due honour at Shaftesbury. But even thus he did
not escape the vengeance that he had deserved, for, a year
afterwards, his whole body is said to have been eaten up by
worms. But the glorious martyrdom of the most blessed king
shines brightly for ever and ever. Amen.

A.D. 979. Ethelred, the brother of the holy Edward, king
and martyr, and son of Ailfdritha, a most excellent youth,
of handsome figure, beautiful countenance and lofty bodily
stature, received the crown of the kingdom at Kingston, from
the holy prelates Dunstan, archbishop of Canterbury, and
Oswald, archbishop of York, and ten other bishops, on the
Lord’s day on the twenty-third of April. And at his corona-

A.D. 981. KING ETHELRED MARRIES. 489

tion the blessed Dunstan, being full of the spirit of prophecy,
foretold him all that would hereafter happen to him, and that

_he would suffer great tribulation in his kingdom, in these
words—“ Since you have aspired to the kingdom by the death
of your brother, whom your mother murdered, hear therefore
the word of the Lord. Thus saith the Lord—‘ The sword shall
never depart from your house, but shall rage against you all
the days of your life, slaying your offspring, until your king-
dom is transferred to another family, whose manners and lan-
guage the nation which you govern knows not; nor will your
sin, and that of your mother, and of these men who assisted
her wicked design, be expiated, except by along course of
punishment.’ After this prophecy of the blessed Dunstan,
the man of God, a cloud was seen over all England, at one
time of a bloody and at another of a fiery colour, then it dis-
solved and became changed into different rays and various
colours, and about dawn it disappeared.

Moreover of this Ethelred William of Malmesbury speaks
thus—‘‘ When, as a little child, he was dipped in the font of
baptism, he defiled the sacrament by the indulgence of his
natural necessities, in the presence of the bishops who were
standing round. And Dunstan, being disturbed at this, de-
clared by the Lord and by his Mother, that he would be a
lazy boy. When therefore he, being a boy of ten years of
age, heard people ery out that his brother Edward was slain,
he by his weeping so irritated his furious mother, that, be-
cause she had no whip at hand, she took up a torch and beat
the innocent boy with that. On which account, he for the
future so abhorred torches the whole of his life, that he never
allowed their light to be borne before him.”

The same year, Ailferius, duke of Mercia, came witha great
number of people to Wareham, as has been said before, and
caused the body of the precious king and martyr Edward to
be raised from the tomb ; and when it was stripped it was found
sound and free from all marks of any wound; and then,
having been washed and clothed in new garments, it was
honourably buried at Shaftesbury.

A.D. 980. Southampton was ravaged by pirates, and nearly
all its citizens were either slain or carried away prisoners.
After that, the pirates retreating plundered the Isle of Teneth,

-and subsequently they furiously attacked the city of Caerleon.

A.D. 981. King Ethelred took the daughter of some duke

ry

490 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 984.

for his wife, and had by her a son whom he called Edmund.
This year also, the monastery of Petrock, in Cornwall, was
plundered by Danish pirates, who committed many ravages in
Devonshire and Cornwall.

A.D. 982. Three ships of pirates landed in the province of
Dorsetshire, laid waste the whole island of Portland, and then
fled away to their ships.

A.D. 983. A contention arose between king Ethelred and
the bishop of Rochester; but on what account is uncertain.
Wherefore the king commenced a siege of the city of Rochester,
and prepared to subdue it, but the blessed Dunstan enjoined
the king to desist from his enterprise, lest he should provoke
Andrew, the patron of that city; but the king would not
abandon the siege for the admonition of the blessed man, till
he had received a hundred pounds from the bishop. The
holy Dunstan, marvelling at the covetousness of the king, sent
the following message to him by his followers. ‘‘ Because you
have preferred silver to God, money to an apostle, and cove-
tousness to me, the evils which the Lord has spoken shall
come violently upon you, but these things will not happen
during my lifetime.’”’ But immediately after the death of the
blessed man, as he had’himself predicted, the Danes infested
all the harbours of the kingdom; and as no one knew where
they could be encountered, it was determined by wise men
that those who could not be conquered by iron, must be con-
quered by silver. Therefore ten thousand pounds were paid,
and satisfied the avarice of the Danes, that the prophecy of
the blessed Dunstan might be fulfilled.

A.D. 984. John was appointed to the see of Rome, and occu-
pied the Roman chair nine months; when he was succeeded
by another John, who filled it nine years. In this year also,
Otho the Third obtained the empire of the Romans, and
reigned nineteen years. And although these three Othos
reigned by natural family succession, yet it was established
subsequently that the emperor should be elected by the officials
of the empire, who are seven; to wit, first of all, these three
chancellors, the bishop of Mayence, chancellor of Germany ;
the bishop of Treves, chancellor of Gaul; the bishop of
Cologne, chancellor of Italy ; the marquis of Brandenburgh,
the chamberlain; the palatine, the steward, the duke of
Saxony, the sword-bearer, and the king of Bohemia the cup-
bearer. From which arrangement came these verses :

A.D. 988. DEATH OF ARCHBISHOP DUNSTAN. 491

“Jn the three bishops of Mayence, Cologne, Treves,

The chancellors of three empires you have ;

The noble palatine arrays the board,

The fearless duke bears the imperial sword,

Brandenburg’s marguis doth the chamber tend,

Bohemia’s king the goblet round doth send ;

All with their well-weigh’d suffrages unite,

To raise a subject to the empire’s height.”
These verses are found in the Chronicle of Martin, written in
the time of the emperor Otho.

The same year, the holy Ethelwold, bishop of Winchester,
departed to the Lord, and was succeeded by Ailfeg, abbot of
Bath, a man of learning, politeness, and virtue.

A.D. 985. Kinewald, bishop of Wells, died, and was suc-
ceeded by the most reverend abbot Sigar. The same year,
filfric, duke of Mercia, son of duke Ailfer, was expelled from
his kingdom.

A.D. 986. Ethelred, king of England, who, in spite of the
prohibition of the blessed Dunstan, had extorted a hundred
pounds from thebishop of Rochester, was compelled to payasum
of sixteen thousand pounds for a peace of very short duration.

A.D. 987. Twoplagues afflicted the people of England, namely
a fever among the men, and a mortality among the animals ;
and afilicting the people and consuming the cattle with a very
heavy destruction, greatly weakened the nation throughout all
the provinces of the kingdom.

A.D. 988. That most blessed confessor of the Lord, the
archbishop Dunstan, finished his praiseworthy course of life
by a happy death on the eighteenth of May, being the sabbath
day. And the glorious miracles which he wrought, are re-
corded as having commenced while he was in his mother’s
womb. For God, the author of all things, indicating by a
pleasing prodigy his future sanctity, showed to his mother,
while she still bore Dunstan in her womb, what should be the
future destiny of her son, who was not yet born. For on the
day of the purification of the blessed virgin Mary, while she
was in the church, all the people of the city being present
with their candles lighted, and the priest being solemnly
adorned, according to custom, with his sacred vestments, and
ready for the office of the altar, suddenly, whether it was
chance or the act of God I know not, the candles of all present
were extinguished. Then, when all were amazed, the wax taper
of the mother of Dunstan suddenly rekindled, and so she,
giving light to all the rest, restored cheerfulness. Again, in

492 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. a2De 990.

process of time, her harp, which was hung up upon a peg,
without any one touching it, played sweetly the melody of
the Antiphone, “ They rejoice in Heaven.” Afterwards, Dun-
stan himself foreseeing, by the aid of the Spirit of God, all
the frauds of the devil, on one occasion took some burning
forceps and seized the devil, who came to him in the form of
a beautiful woman, and who was seeking to tempt him in the
spirit of fornication, by the nose, and held him a long time,
till at last, after having changed himself into many terrible
forms, he showed evidently that he was the devil. And
at last, when Dunstan released him, he polluted and tainted
the whole air, and as he departed he left foul traces of his
presence behind among the bystanders. When, therefore,
that most blessed father Dunstan was dead, he was succeeded
by Ethelgar, who had been previously created abbot of the
new monastery at Winchester, by the blessed Ethelwold, and
afterwards received the dignity of bishop of Selsey, and he
was now succeeded in his bishopric of Selsey by Ordbrith.

A.D. 989. Ethelgar, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and
was succeeded by Ailfric, who had been the first abbot of
Abingdon. Of whom some say that he expelled the secular
clergy and established monks at Canterbury, but this does not
seem probable. For it is quite clear that there were monks
in the church of the Holy Saviour there, ever since the time
of archbishop Lawrence, who was the first successor of the
blessed Augustine.

A.D. 990. Mildred, bishop of Lindisfarne, departed this life,
and was succeeded by Aldhun. The same year, Alfric, arch-
bishop of Canterbury, was succeeded by Siricius, who had
previously been bishop of Wilton. The same year, there
arose a quarrel between Ethelred, king of England, and
Richard, duke of Normandy, on this account: king Ethelred
had married Emma, the daughter of the said duke, and she
had borne the king two sons, namely, Alfred and Edward :
the king was used to behave so insolently to his wife, that he
would hardly condescend to admit her to his bed; but she,
who derived her origin from the blood of a very high family,
was wroth with her husband, and blackened the character of
her husband to her father, in no moderate degree; on which
account, the same duke took prisoners all the men belonging
to the kingdom of England, whether clergy or laity, who were
travelling through his country, and slew some, and committed

|

A.D. 993. THE PAGANS PLUNDER BAMBURGH. 493

others to custody in prison. And when this quarrel had be-
come known to pope John, he sent into England Leo, bishop
of Treves, who reestablished a lasting peace between them,
_ and reunited those two powerful princes.

A.D. 991. The Danes ravaged the county of Ipswich, and
slew Brithnoth, the duke of the East Saxons, at Maldon.
And when this became known, tribute was paid to’ them, to
the amount of ten thousand pounds, by the advice of Siricius,
archbishop of Canterbury, and the other nobles of the king-
dom, to induce them to desist from their incessant rapine, and
conflagrations, and massacres of men which they were com-
mitting on the sea coasts.

A.D. 992. The holy Oswald, archbishop of York, departed
this life, on the last day of February, and so ascended to the
joys of the kingdom of heaven, and was buried at Worcester,
in the church of the blessed Virgin Mary, which he had founded
himself, and was succeeded by Aldulph, abbot of Medesham.
The same year, by command of king Ethelred, many ships
were manned with picked soldiers, and the king appointed
_ Alfric, Theodred, Alstan, and Esewin, to command them, en-

joining them to strive to resist all invasions. And duke Atl-
fric sending a messsenger to the enemy, desired them to forbear
from planning treachery against him. But when at last a
naval battle was on the point of taking place between the
hostile parties, duke Ailfric himself became a traitor, and fled
secretly to the Danish fleet; but, as necessity compelled, he
only united with them in a shameful flight. And the forces
of the king pursued them, and took one ship of the Danish
fleet, and slew all the men who were in it, and spoiled it of its
treasures. But the rest of the Danish pirates were met in
their flight by the ships belonging to London, who fought a
battle ‘with them, and slew many thousands of the Danes.
Moreover, ‘they took the ship of duke A‘lfric, full of soldiers
and arms, the duke himself escaping with difficulty.

A.D. 993. The before-mentioned army of pagans broke into
Bamburgh, and plundered it, and ravaged the provinces of
Northumberland’ and Lindsey.’ And when the people of the

1 Tt must be remembered that in this and similar passages it is not the
modern county of Northumberland, but the old kingdom of the heptarchy
which is meant, which, though its boundaries are not accurately known,
_ included probably Yorkshire, Durham, Lancashire, Cumberland, West-
moreland, and great part of the south of Scotland.

494 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D, 996. —

province were preparing to encounter them in battle, the
generals of the army, Fretha and Frithegist, and, at the same
time, Godwin, because they were descended of Danish blood,
planning treachery against their followers, gave the first ex-
ample of flight. This year, also, by command of king Ethel-
red, Algar, the son of the traitor Aulfric, who was mentioned
above, was deprived of his eyes.

A.D. 994. Sweyn, king of the Danes, and Anlaf, king of
the Norwegians, came to London, with ninety-four vessels, and
they immediately attacked the city, and endeavoured to take
it, but, being repulsed with great loss by the citizens, they
turned all their fury upon the provinces of Essex, Kent, Sus-
sex, and Southampton, and plundered them, and crushed
them, cruelly slaughtering their inhabitants. Then, king
Ethelred, by the advice of his nobles, gave them a payment,
which he collected throughout the whole realm of England,
amounting to sixteen thousand pounds, to desist from their ra-
pine and slaughter of innocent persons. Then, king Ethelred
sent Atlfeg, bishop of Winchester, and duke Ethelwold, to
king Anlaf, who conducted him in peace to the royal town
where king Ethelred was at that time, and who, on his petition,
bathed him in the sacred fount, and caused him to be con-
firmed by the bishop. And then, the king received him as his
adopted son, and honoured him with kingly presents; and
after that, when the summer arrived, he returned in peace to
his own country.

A.D. 995. The body of the holy pontiff, Cuthbert, was
transferred to Durham, as had been foretold by the heavenly
oracle, and an episcopal see was afterwards established in that
city. For at the time when the church of Lindisfarne was —
pillaged by Hinguar and Hubba, Eardulf, who was then the |
bishop of that church, carried off the things which were in the
church, and also the body of the holy Cuthbert, which was
quite uncorrupted, and wandered about for several years in —
uncertain habitations, till at last an episcopal chair was estab-
lished in the place which is called Cunengeastre. But these
things happened in the time of the great king Alfred, as has
been related before in this volume.

A.D. 996. Gregory was placed in the Roman chair, and
filled it for two years. The same year, Richard, duke of Nor-
mandy, died, and was buried, at Fiscam, and was succeeded
by his son Richard, who was called Richard the Second.

A.D. 998. SILVESTER SUCCEEDS POPE JOHN. 495

A.D. 997. Sigar, bishop of Wells, died, and was succeeded
by Ailfwin. The same year, the provinces of North Wales,
Dorsetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, were desolated by the
Danes with fire and sword, with slaughter of men, and pillage,
without being able to offer any resistance. Also, the monas<
tery which is called Chabistoke was burnt with fire.

A.D. 998. John was elected pope, and filled the Roman
chair for ten months. And, in the course of the same year,
he was succeeded by Silvester, who is also called Gerebert,
and who governed the see four years and one month. This
Gerebert was born in Gaul, and from his boyhood lived as a
monk at Floriacum ; afterwards, being influenced either by
weariness or by cupidity, he fled by night into Spain, in order
to learn astrology. And when he had arrived in Spain, he
applied himself to a person skilful in that art, who gave him
some astronomical books to copy out; but among the books,
there was one book which contained a complete system of the
whole art, and this he could not by any contrivance get from
the hands of his master: on the other hand, Gerebert was
very earnest in his desire for the book, and as, when he had
had recourse to entreaties, he had not succeeded, he now offered
many gifts down, and promised many more. But, as all his
promises were despised by his master, Gerebert devised a noc-
turnal stratagem, that if he could not get it by any other means,
he might become master of it by theft. Therefore, he per-
suaded his master’s daughter, with whom he was in love, to
aid him when her father had been put to bed drunk, after a
banquet ; and then he took the book, which was placed. beneath
the pillow on which he was snoring, and fled with it. The
master, when he had shaken off sleep, pursued the fugitive, by
means of the information which he got from the stars, in whose
movements he was so skilful. Gerebert, also, ascertaining by
the inspection of the stars, that his master was pursuing him,
concealed himself, hanging to a wooden bridge which was in
his neighbourhood, and clinging to it in such manner that he
was touching neither earth nor water. And by these means,
the eagerness of the seeker was frustrated, and his master re-
turned home in confusion. Then, Gerebert proceeded swiftly
on his journey, and came to the sea, where, having summoned
the devil by his incantations, he did him homage, to persuade
him to convey him safely beyond the sea, out of the power of
his master, who was pursuiug him. And the devil did so.

496 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 998.

Therefore, Gerebert, returning to his country, Gaul, entered
the public schools, where he had many disciples in the science
I have spoken of.

It is related of this Gerebert, that he made for himself the
head! of a statue, by means of a certain inspection of the stars,
at a time, forsooth, when all the planets were beginning their
courses at the same time ; and that this head spoke, not only
when questions were put it, and pronounced the plain truth
either affirmatively or negatively. As, for instance, when Ge-
rebert asked, “‘ Shall I become Pope?” the statue answered
“Yes.” ‘Shall I die before I chaunt mass at Jerusalem? ”’
“No.” And here, they say, that he was deceived by its am-
biguous answer, so as to give no thoughts to repentance before

1 The same tale is told by English tradition of Friar Bacon and of Al-
bertus Magnus, bishop of Ratisbon, in the thirteenth century ; of whom
Bayle, quoting Maude principally, says—‘‘ There are some who have
believed it possible to make brazen heads under certain consteliations, and
to obtain answers from them to conduct us in all our affairs. One Yepes
relates that Henry de Vileina made one at Madrid, which was broken to
pieces at the command of John II., king of Castile. Virgil, pope Silves-
ter, Robert of Lincoln, and Roger Bacon have had such heads, if we may
believe some writers. Albertus Magnus was thought a more able man,
for they pretend that he had composed an entire man after this manner,
having laboured thirty years without interruption in forming him under
different aspects and constellations. The eyes, for example, when the sun
was in that sign of the Zodiac which answered to such a part, which he
founded of metals mixed together, and marked with characters of the same
signs and planets, and of their different and necessary aspects, and so the
head, neck, shoulders, thighs, and legs, fashioned at different times, and
mounted and fastened together in the form of a man, had the ingenuity
to reveal to the said Albert the situation of all his principal difficulties.
This is what they call the dndroido of Albertus Magnus. It was broken,
they say, by Thomas Aquinas, who could not endure its too great prattling.
Henry of Assia and Bartholomew Sibille affirm that it was composed of
flesh and bones, not by nature, but by art; which being always judged
impossible by modern authors, and the virtue of images, rings, and plane-
tary sigils being in great vogue, it has been thought ever since that such
images were made of copper, or some other metal, and worked under the
influence of the constellations and planets. Maude, however, who refutes
the accusers of Albertus, and shows that the devil could have had nothing
to do with such a machine, gives us a probable solution of the story, that
Albertus might have had in his cabinet a head or a statue of a man like
Boetius’s machines, of which Cassiodorus has said, ‘ Metals low, the birds
of Diomedes trumpet in brass, a brazen serpent hisses, counterfeited
swallows chatter, and those which have no proper note are taught by brass
to utter the sweetness of music.’”—See Bayle’s Dic. voc. Albertus Mag-
nus, Note F. Vol. i. p. 436.

eLeyiues

A.D. 999. ACCOUNT OF A BRAZEN STATUR. 497

his death, inasmuch as he trusted that he had a long time to
live, and he was not aware that there was at Rome a church
called Jerusalem, where the pope chaunts mass when the day
of the festival called the Station at Jerusalem is appointed.
For, when Gerebert had performed mass in that church, he
immediately fell sick and took to his bed, and, consulting the
statue, found out the deception, and learnt that his death was
at hand. But, although he had been a most wicked man,
nevertheless he did not despair of the mercy of God, but, con-
fessing his sins before all people, he ordered all his limbs with
which he had done any service to the devil to be cut off. “ Let
him,” said he, ‘‘have the service of those limbs who sought their
homage, for my mind was never attached to that wickedness, or,
I should rather say, sacrilege.” And he ordered his dead trunk
to be placed on a two-horse cart, that it might be buried
wherever the animals carried it and stopped. And this was
done. He was buried in the Lateran church, and, as a sign
that he had obtained mercy, his sepulchre, both by the tumult
of his bones and also by the sweat which flows from them, is
a presage of the death of the pope, as it is stated in letters
which are engraved on that sepulchre.

In the days of this Gerebert there was near Rome, in the
Campus Martius, a brazen statue, the right hand of which had
the finger which we call the forefinger stretched out, and an
inscription on the head, “ Strike here.’’ This the men of that
time thought ought to be understood to indicate that they
should find a treasure in the statue. Accordingly, many of
them beat the innocent statue with blows of axes to no pur-
pose. But Gerebert explained their mistake, interpreting the
words in another way ; and when the sun was in the centre
of the heaven, he took notice where the shadow of the statue
extended on the south, and there he fixed a stake. And pre-
sently, when night came, he, accompanied by his chamberlain
alone, carrying a lantern, went to the place ; and there, opening
the earth with the customary incantations, he made a wide en--
trance for them to go in by; and they beheld a vast palace,
having golden walls, golden ceilings, and everything of gold:
they beheld golden soldiers amusing their minds with golden
dice. They also saw a king of the same metal lying with a
golden queen, dishes of dainties set before them, servants
standing around, goblets of great value and great weight, the
work of which was superior to the material. In the interior

VOL, I. OBES

498 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1001.

part of the house, a carbuncle stone dissipated the darkness
of night. In the opposite corner, stood a boy holding a bow
with the string tightly drawn, and the arrow aimed at some ©
object, so that amid all the different tempting things presented

to our couple, there was nothing which could be touched with

impunity, though they were at liberty to gaze upon it. For

the moment that any one put forth his hand to touch anything,

all those images seemed to spring forward, and to threaten the

audacious toucher with an attack. So Gerebert, under the in-

fluence of this fear, abstained from these objects of his desire.

But the chamberlain seized a knife wrought with exquisite

skill, which he saw placed upon the table, thinking that amid

such an abundance of treasures, a petty theft might escape

notice. But, immediately, all the images arose with a shout,

and the boy shot his arrow at the carbuncle, and brought on

darkness, and if he had not, at the command of his master,

speedily dropped the knife, they would both have suffered

severe punishment. And so, they returned back in confusion,

the lantern guiding their steps, without having been able to

satisfy the covetousness of Gerebert.

A.D. 999. The wicked army of the pagans laid waste almost
the whole western district of Kent. After which they pro-_
ceeded to the city of Rochester, and besieged and blockaded
it. But the people of Canterbury marched against them, and
fought a severe battle with them. But though many were slain
on both sides, nevertheless the Danes at last got the victory.
And then king Ethelred sent an army against them, but effected
little or nothing.

A.D. 1000. The before-mentioned fleet of the Danes pro-
ceeded in a hostile manner to Normandy. And when he heard
that, Ethelred, king of England, during their absence reduced
the Isle of Man by force.

A.D. 1001. The before-mentioned army of the pagans re-
turning from Normandy, besieged the city of Exeter ; but, as
the citizens made a manly resistance, they retreated. And the
men of Devonshire, Somersetshire, and Dorsetshire assembled
against them, and fought a battle against them in the place
which is called Penho, where the Danes got the victory, and
made a great slaughter of the English. From thence the ©
pagans directed their course to the Isle of Wight, and plun-
dered it of everything, as they did all the neighbouring pro-

_vinces, no one making any resistance to them. The same

A.D. 1006. TREACHERY OF DUKE EADRIC. 499

year the body of the holy Iuon, bishop and confessor, was
found not far from the monastery of Ramsey, on the twenty-
third of April. And as the abbot of Ramsey heard of this
discovery, without evincing any respect for it, he was severely
punished.

A.D. 1002. King Ethelred, by the advice of his nobles,
paid the Danes a tribute of twenty-four thousand pounds for
the benefit of peace. The same year, Aidulf, archbishop of
York, took the remains of the holy archbishop Oswald out of
this sepulchre, and on the fourteenth of April placed them
with all honours in a tomb which he had prepared for them.
And not long afterwards, the same archbishop being removed
from this life, was succeeded by Wolstan, bishop of Worcester,
and Wolstan was succeeded in the church of Worcester by
Leoff.

A.D. 1003. Ethelred, king of England, gave the dukedom
of Mercia to a traitor, called Eadric, surnamed Streon, who
had acquired the king’s favour not by his nobleness, but by
his riches. For he was a wicked man, the lowest of the
people, the disgrace of the English, double-tongued, cunning,
a betrayer of secrets, skilful in dissembling, prompt at feign-
ing, and as often as he was sent to the enemy as a mediator
of peace, he only kindled war. But all these matters will be
mentioned hereafter. Likewise, in this year Wilfric, a man of
great sanctity and authority, considering the future and pro-
viding for himself, is recorded to have founded a noble monas-
tery at Burton, on the river Trent, and to have endowed it
with large possessions.

A.D. 1004. John became pope of Rome, and filled that
chair for five years. This year the Danes, with unheard-of
cruelty, broke out again, covering the whole of England like
locusts, plundering every place, and putting men to death, nor
was any one found who dared to encounter the enemy.

A.D. 1005. Such a grievous famine attacked England, as
no man remembered ever to have experienced. The same year,
Henry obtained the empire of the Romans, and reigned twenty-
two years.

A.D. 1006. Siricius, archbishop of Canterbury, died, and
ZElpheg, bishop of Winchester succeeded him. The same
year, the treacherous duke EHadric invited the noble duke
_ Athelstan to a great entertainment which he had prepared at
Shrewsbury, and when Athelstan arrived there upon this invi-

<4

500 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1010.

tation, on the fourth day of the entertainment, he led him
forth into a wood to hunt, and while every one was occupied
with the chase, a certain assassin named Godwin, whom Eadric
had corrupted by presents before-hand, suddenly sprung for-
ward from an ambush, and wickedly slew duke Athelstan.
In revenge for which action, his two sons had their eyes put
out by order of king Ethelred.

A.D. 1007. Sweyn, king of the Danes, a powerful and cruel
man, came with a numerous fleet into England, and his march
was accompanied everywhere by rapine, conflagration, and
murder. All England groaned like a bed of reeds shaken by
the agitation of the west wind. And therefore king Ethelred,
who was thrown into a state of great confusion and consterna-
tion, procured for a time, by means of money, that peace
which he could not procure by arms.

A.D. 1008. Ethelred, king of England, commanded one
ship to be furnished throughout all England by every owner
of three hundred and ten hides of land; and a horseman
armed with the helmet and breast-plate by every owner of eight
hides. The same year, Brithric, the brother of the treacherous
duke Eadric, a faithless and arrogant man, brought an unjust
accusation against the king’s servant Ulnoth. But Ulnoth
fled to avoid being taken, and having obtained twenty ships,
betook himself to the life of a pirate, and for a long time gave
great trouble to the king who pursued him.

A.D. 1009. Sergius was appointed to the see of Rome,
which he governed two years and nine months. The same
year, Brithric, bishop of Sherborne, died, and was succeeded
by Ailmar.

A.D. 1010. A new army of Danes came to Ipswich on the
day of the Ascension of our Lord, and occupied itself in
rapine and plunder. Against which force there assembled
Duke Athelstan, the husband of the king’s sister, the generals
Osway, Edwy, and Ulfer, and a large army with them. But
though the English disdained to flee, Turketil, who was a
Dane by the father’s side, first set the example of flight ; owing
to which, the Danes got the victory, and traversed East Anglia
and Cambridgeshire, and all the fens, plundering and - laying
waste with fire and sword every place they came to. After
this they turned westward, and grievously ravaged and deso-
lated the provinces of Huntingdonshire, Bedfordshire, Buck-
inghamshire, and Oxfordshire.

A.D. 1011. CRUELTIES OF THE DANES. 501

A.D. 1011. When the before-mentioned ministers of iniquity
had finished the ravages which I have described, they encom-
passed Canterbury with a siege. But on the twentieth day of
the siege a part of the city was set on fire by the treachery of
Almar, archdeacon of the province, whom archbishop Hlpheg
had formerly saved from being put to death; and after that
the whole city was taken, men were murdered, some were
thrown into the flames, others thrown headlong from the walls,
many were hung up in a most painful manner and so left to
expire, children were torn from their mothers’ breasts, and
either tossed up into the air and cdught on the points of lances,
_ or else cut into small pieces, matrons were dragged by their
legs through the streets, and at last thrown into the fire to
die. Amid all these miseries, Alpheg, the archbishop of the
city, was taken prisoner, bound, dragged along, and tortured
with every kind of torture. Almar, the abbot of Saint
Augustine’s, was permitted to depart. Godwin, bishop of
Rochester, and Leofrona, abbess of the nunnery of Saint
Mildred, were both taken prisoners, with an innumerable
crowd of both sexes. After that, the church of Christ was
stripped and burned ; the body of monks, and all the multi-
tude of men, women, and children decimated, so that nine
were slain and the tenth saved ; and the number of these thus
saved amounted to four monks and eighty men. Therefore,
the people having been massacred, the city plundered and
wholly burnt, the archbishop Ailpheg was dragged along in
chains, and driven on, and tortured, and brought to the fleet
and again thrust back into prison, where he was tortured for
seven months, in order to be compelled to ransom himself so
as to deliver himself from the injuries to which he was exposed.
And among all these miseries the anger of the divine mercy
so raged against the infidel people, that it destroyed two thou-
sand of them by the most fearful torments of the bowels.
But as even then those wicked traitors were not moved to re-
pentance, a certain Dane, by name Thrum, when he saw the
archbishop afflicted with such tortures, and yet, as it were,
unable to die, being moved by a wicked pity, dashed his axe
into his head, and so transforming the archbishop who kept
confessing Christ with all constancy into a glorious martyr,
sent his exulting soul to heaven. And in the place of his
passion a dry log, which had been besprinkled with his blood,
after one night became green again, and put forth branches

2 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 101255

and leaves. At the sight of which miracle the infidels were
alarmed, and, vying with one another in kissing the sacred
corpse, permitted it to be carried to London, where it was
consigned to honourable burial. Subsequently, after a lapse
of ten years, the body was again taken up and found to be
free from all taint of corruption, and was transported to Can-
terbury to be buried more becomingly, and there the blood
remains fresh to the present day, and the body continues per-
fect and free from corruption.

After these events, as the general fury of persecution grew
fiercer throughout all England, the treacherous duke Eadric,
and all the nobles of every order and rank, assembled in the
city of London before the solemn festival of Easter, and re-
mained there with the king till they had paid the Danes a_
tribute of forty-eight thousand pounds, on condition that all
the Danes who were in the kingdom should live peaceably
everywhere with the English, and that both nations should
have as it were one heart and one soul. And when this con-
vention had been confirmed by hostages and oaths given and
taken on both sides, Sweyn, king of the Danes, returned to
his own country, and so the rage of persecution ceased for a
while in England.

A.D. 1012. When, in a certain town of Saxony, the name of
which is Colewiz, in which there is a church of the blessed
Magnus the martyr, all the parish had assembled in the vigil
of the Nativity of the Lord, to be present at the divine offices ;
a priest of the name of Robert solemnly began the first mass
in the usual manner. And lo! twelve men and three women —
dancing in the cemetery and shouting out secular songs,
hindered the priest to such a degree, that the tumult of the
singers sounded loudly above the holy solemnities of the mass.
This was their song,—

‘“* A man rode through a leafy wood,
Leaving Meswinde fair and good ;
Why do we here any longer stay ?
Hence my brethren, haste away.”

At last, when they were ordered by Robert the priest to be
silent ; as they disdained to hold their peace, the priest cursed
them in his wrath, and said, “May it please God and the holy
Magnus that you may remain singing thus to the end of the
year.” What happened? The words of the priest had such
weight, that Azo, his son, seizing his sister (whose name was

A.D. 1012. STORY OF THE EMPEROR HENRY. 503

Ava, and who was singing among the others) by the arm to
drag her away, could not do it, but as the maiden was im-
moveable, he tore her arm from her body, and yet not a drop
of blood flowed. Accordingly, she remained with the rest the
whole year dancing and singing. No rain fell upon them, no
heat, no cold, no hunger, no thirst, no weariness afflicted
them; their clothes and their shoes were not worn out, but
they kept on singing incessantly like people insensible. First
of all they were plunged into the earth up to their knees, and
subsequently up to their thighs; a fabric like the roof of a
house was raised over them by the instigation of God, in
order to keep off the rain from them, but in vain. At last,
after the lapse of a year, Herebert, archbishop of Cologne, re-
leased them from the bonds by which their hands were bound,
and reconciled them before the altar of the holy martyr
Magnus. The daughter of the priest, with two others of
the company, immediately expired; the rest slept for three
days and nights, then some of them died, but others showed
the punishment that they had suffered by the trembling of
their limbs. Let those persons read this who are bound by
vows of obedience, that they may perceive how much efficacy
there is in such obedienee.

The emperor Henry going out to hunt on the Sunday
which is called Quinquagesima, came by himself, his com-
panions being all dispersed, to the edge of a certain wood,
near which wood he beheld a church, to which he went, and
stating himself falsely to be a soldier, he asked the priest in a
simple manner to give him the mass. This priest was a man
eminent for his religion, but so ugly in his person, that he
seemed rather a monster than a man; and when the emperor
had carefully looked at him, he began greatly to marvel why
God, from whom all beautiful things proceed, allowed so un-
sightly a man to perform his sacraments. But presently the
mass was commenced, and they came to that part of the
service in which a boy chaunted ‘Be ye sure that the Lord
is God;”’ and the priest reproving the boy because he was
singing carelessly, said with a loud voice, ‘It is He that hath
made us, and not we ourselves,’’—at which words the emperor
was struck, and thinking the priest a prophet, raised him, in
spite of great opposition on his part, to the archbishopric of
Cologne. But when he had received the archbishopric, he
adorned that see by his religion, and also by his worthy course

504 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 10125

of life: for in a monastery of nuns in that city there was a
certain damsel, brought there rather in consequence of the
wish of her parents, than of any devotion of her own; and by
her profane gestures and engaging conversation she attracted
many lovers to herself,—one of whom, whom his great wealth

and high blood had inflamed to lust, carried the damsel off, _

and kept her, and loved her as his lawful wife. A long time
elapsed ; but the deed was related to archbishop Herebert ;
but after that, in compliance with his mandate, the sheep had
been restored to the fold. Not long afterwards, in the absence
of the archbishop, she was again carried off from the monas-
tery by the same youth. Then a sentence of excommu-
nication was pronounced against him, so that none of his
fellow-citizens dared to converse or to eat with him. But the
young man disregarding this sentence, departed to some
distant estates of his, where he lived a wicked life with his
excommunicated mistress. But when at length God saw fit
to call the archbishop to himself, and he lay on his bed
stricken with a sore disease, his fellow-countrymen came
around him from all quarters, to enjoy the last benediction of
the blessed man. That lustful man alone did not presume to
come, but suborned others to speak for him, that he might
deserve absolution. But when the archbishop heard the name
of the young man he groaned, and uttered these words: ‘If
that wretched man leaves that cursed woman, let him be ab-
solved ; if he remains obstinate, then let him be prepared, in
the next year, on the same day and hour that I depart, to
render an account of his sins before God. But you will see
me depart from the body when the clock strikes the sixth
hour.”’ Nor did the words of the man of God want confir-
mation, but he died at the hour which he had foretold; and
that wretched young man, at the lapse of a year, died on the
same day and at the same hour, being struck by lightning
together with his mistress. The same year, Benedict became
pope, and filled the chair at Rome twelve years. The same
year, Living, who is called Athelstan, bishop of Wells, suc-
ceeded to the archbishopric of Canterbury, and Ethelwin was
consecrated bishop of Wells in his stead.

This year, also, a person of the name of Huna, the com-
mander of the army of Ethelred, king of England, a vigorous
and warlike man, who had undertaken the management of
the affairs of the kingdom under the king, seeing the inso-

|
:
:
|

A.D. 1012. PERFIDY OF THE ENGLISH TO THE DANES. 505

lence of the Danes, who even now, after peace had been made,
gave themselves such airs, and displayed such pride throughout
the whole of England, that they dared to offer violence to the
wives and daughters of the nobles of the kingdom, and to
make them the subjects of their insults, went in great agitation
to the king, and made him a mournful complaint on this sub-
ject. Then, the king being moved in no slight degree, by the
advice of Huna, sent letters throughout all the borders of the
kingdom, commanding all and every one of the provinces to
put to death, by a secret attack, all the Danes who were found
in any part of England, on an appointed day, namely, on the
festival of the holy bishop Britius, so that the whole nation of
the English might be delivered once and for all from the op-
pression of the Danes. And so, the Danes, who ought to
have lived in peace with the English, as a lasting treaty had
been lately sworn to on both sides, were murdered in a very
shameful manner, and even the women, with their children,
were dashed against the door-posts, and in that way expired
miserably.

As then, the sentence of this decree was being executed in
the city of London, without mercy, many of the Danes fled
to a certain church in the city, where they were all murdered
without mercy, while standing at the very altars.

But some young men of the Danish nation fled to a ship,
and went to Denmark, and relating the cruel destruction of
their race to king Sweyn, moved him to tears, and he, having
summoned all the chief men of his kingdom, related to them
the whole history of the deed that had been done, and en-
quired of them carefully what they advised to be done: who
all cried out with one voice as it were, and determined that
the blood of their relatives and friends must be avenged.
And the rage of this persecution was increased by the death of
Gunnild, the sister of king Sweyn, who had lately been mur- ~
dered in England, in this manner: the before-mentioned
Gunnild had been legally married to count Palia, a man of
noble birth, and in former years she had visited England with
her husband, and had embraced the faith of Christ, and had
received the sacrament of baptism in that country; this most
prudent virgin, having been the mediator of peace between the
English and the Danes, gave herself to king Ethelred, with

her husband and her only son, as a hostage for the security of

the peace. But, as she had been entrusted by the king to that

506 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1013.

most wicked man, duke Edric, to guard, that traitor, Edric, a
few days afterwards, caused her husband and. only son to be
murdered by four lances, in her presence, and last of all, he
ordered her herself to be beheaded. But the woman, bearing
death with a fearless spirit, neither grew pale when about to
die, nor even when dead did she lose the calmness of her
countenance, because of the effusion of blood. But when
dying, she predicted positively that the shedding of her blood
would be a great injury to the whole of England. On account
of these things, king Sweyn, a cruel man, and ready for the
shedding of blood, being animated to revenge, summoned all
the warriors throughout his dominions, and sent couriers with
letters to foreign nations, in which he invited all warlike sol-
diers, all who desired gain, and all who were unsettled in their
minds, to join in this expedition.

About this time, also, the holy Alpheg, a monk of wonder-
ful sanctity, by the management of Ethelwold, bishop of ©
Winchester, with the good-will of king Edgar, who was a lover
of monks, and a great founder of monasteries, was made abbot
of Deerhurst. But when king. Edgar was dead, and when his
son Edward was become king in his stead, (who, however, was
soon after treacherously slain), then Ethelred succeeded to the
kingdom, who gave the blessed Ailpheg a monastery in the
city which is called Bath, where the abbot presided over an
order of monks. And, subsequently, at the suggestion of the
holy Wolstan, archbishop of Canterbury, the blessed Alpheg
was created bishop of Winchester, and afterwards, when the
blessed Dunstan departed to the Lord, he was consecrated
archbishop of Canterbury, and when, as ruler of that see, he
had governed it prosperously for six years, he was slain by the
Danes, who incessantly persecuted him. For one of them
brained him with a Danish axe, in the Easter week, on the
sabbath, towards the evening, and his body was reverently
buried in the church of Canterbury, and in consequence of
the reverence paid to it, there is also more honourable service
paid to God.

A.D. 1013. The giant Sweyn, king of the Danes, put to sea
with a powerful fleet, in the month of July, and landed in
England at the port of Sandwich ; and, having stayed there a
few days, he circumnavigated Hast-Anglia, and entered the
mouth of the river Humber, and from that he entered the
river Trent, and sailed up to the town of @apnesborough,

A.D. 1013. SWEYN RAVAGES ENGLAND. 507

and there he established a station of his ships. Then, en-
trusting his fleet to his son Canute, he disembarked himself,
and employed himself in ravaging the provinces. And imme-
diately the people of Northumberland, and Lindsey, and Sis-
burgh set the example of making submission to him; and
afterwards, as they had no defender, all the people who were
on the northern side of that public road which is called
Watling HStrete, being compelled to surrender, made sub-
mission to him, giving hostages and taking the oath of fealty.
Then he moved his expedition southward, and issued a com-
mand to all his men to lay waste the fertile fields, to burn the
towns, to cut down the groves and orchards, plunder the
churches, murder all the male sex who fell into their hands,
and reserve the women to satisfy their lust. And while his
servants ravaged everywhere in this manner with their savage
fury, he at last came to Oxford ; and that city was taken with
very little trouble, and he received the oath of fealty and hos-
tages from it. From thence he proceeded across the country
to Winchester, and administered an oath to the people both of
the city and province, and so extorted security from them.
Then he directed his march with great glory to the city of
London, and put in force all kinds of expedients in hopes to
take it, either by force or by treachery. But, on his first ar-
rival, many of his troops were drowned in the river Thames,
and so perished, because they were led away by excessive
rashness, and would not look for either ford or bridge. King
Ethelred, who was at that time in the city, having no other
resource, defended the walls manfully with the citizens, and
deprived Sweyn of all hope of making himself master of the
city ; who, accordingly, retreated thence in haste, marching
first to Wallingford, and thence to Bath, raging with the
fury of a dog, and destroying everything that came in his way ;
and at Bath he stayed some time for to refresh his army. And
while he was there, Almac, count of Devonshire, and all the
potentates of the western part of the kingdom, with some of
the king’s servants, fearing his tyranny, came to him and
offered him hostages, and entreated peace. And, as they were
all disposed to consent, and he was sure that no one could re-
sist, he ordered himself to be called king of England, while
there was no one who dared either to fight for the rights of

- the kingdom, or profess himself to be king. While all this

was happening, Hthelred, king of England, was lying in the

508 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1014,

city of London, torpid with inactivity, timid and suspicious,
not daring to trust himself to any one, having his con-
science tortured, because of the death of his brother Edward,
lest he should too soon feel the long-expected vengeance. He
did not dare to assemble an army, or to lead it against the
enemy, fearing lest the nobles of the kingdom, whom he had
unjustly deprived of their inheritance, might abandon him in
the field, and give him up to the enemy to be put to death.
This was the wretched condition of this wretched king. —

At last, the king, worn out with all these troubles, withdrew
secretly from the city of London, and sailed first of all to
Southampton, and from thence to the Isle of Wight, and from
thence he sent Emma his queen, with his sons Alfred and
Edward, and their tutors, lfhun, bishop of Durham, and
fAlfey, abbot of Midesham, into Normandy, to his brother,
duke Richard, by whom they were received with all honour
and respect. Eadric also, the kinsman of king Ethelred, crossed
the sea with a hundredand fifty soldiers in the queen’scompany,
as her guard, and resided there with her two years, attending
upon her in amagnificent manner. And while they thus
crossed the sea in the month of August, Ethelred remained
with his fleet in the Isle of Wight till the day of the Nativity
of the Lord, intending to follow the queen and his sons im-
mediately that he received any good news from them ; and as
he presently heard from the countries across the sea that duke
Richard had received his sister and her sons with great joy,
king Ethelred crossed over into Normandy in the month of
January, and found relief for his miseries in the attentions and
consolations of that magnificent duke.

A.D. 1014. The tyrant Sweyn, as we have said before, was
oppressing England with slaughter and rapine; first of all
carrying off the substance of the people of the provinces, and
after that proscribing the nobles; and in this way both the
public treasures and those of individuals were carried off to
the ships, together with hostages, from which it appears evi-
dently that Sweyn was by nature not a prince, but a tyrant.
The people did not know what to do, because, if they desired
war, they had no leader, and if they chose submission, then
they had a tyrant for their ruler. But the Deity, who is kind
to those who are in necessity, did not allow England to be
long tossed about among so many calamities, since that same
tyrant ended his wicked life this year, on the day of the Puri-

A.D. 1014. CANUTE SAILS FOR SANDWICH. 509

fication of the blessed Virgin Mary, as some have written,
though it is uncertain by what kind of death he died. In the
book of the miracles of the holy Edmund, king and martyr,
it is written, that Sweyn, while he was exacting an insupport-
able tribute from the borough where the body of the aforesaid
martyr rests, and from its estates wherever they existed, and
was asserting that there was no sanctity in the martyr himself,
and was intending and threatening to burn his monastery,
with the monks themselves in it, was slain by that same mar-
tyr, and sent to hell, on the second of February, by a death
of terrible torture.

After his death, all the nations of the Danes elected Canute,
his son, to be their king and master. But Canute was at that
time in Lindsey, whither his father had sent him with a fleet,
and with the hostages, and where he was waiting not only for
cavalry as scouts but also for soldiers, in order that with
united forces he might pour out all the venom of his malice
on the English nation, and punish those who deserted him
with a fearful destruction.

While, then, these events were happening on the side of the
Danes, the English nation unanimously sent messengers with
all speed into Normandy to king Ethelred, to assure him that
they were not more attached to any one than to their own
natural lord, if he would only treat them more mildly than he
had formerly done. And when they had been heard, the king
sent his son Edward with the ambassadors into England,
saluting them all affectionately, and promising that if he had
erred in any point he would amend his ways in whatever way
they all desired. Therefore, king Ethelred returning im the
spring to England, was received with joy, and honoured by
every one; by the willing co-operation of whom he collected
a numerous army against Canute, who, having made a treaty
with the men of Lindsey, had already put his army in motion
for the purpose of plunder. But, king Ethelred coming up,
put Canute to flight, and, ravaging the whole of Lindsey, put

to death at once all the inhabitants he found there. Canute

saved himself by flight, and, setting sail, arrived with his fleet
at the harbour of Sandwich, to which place the winds bore him,
where, by way of insult to the English nation, he cut off the
hands, and ears, and noses of all the hostages who had been
given to his father from the kingdom of England, and then
let them go; and he himself went to Denmark, and busied
himself in increasing the number of his soldiers. The same

510 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ASD, LODae

year, on the twenty-ninth of September, the sea breaking be-
yond its proper bounds, destroyed many towns in England,
and an incalculable multitude of people.

A.D. 1015. A great conference between the Danes and En-
glish was held at Oxford, where the king of England, by the
advice of the wicked duke Eadric, ordered many of the Danish
nobles to be put to death, on the ground of their having been
convicted of treachery towards the king; and their depend-
ents, endeavouring to avenge the death of their masters, were
repulsed by the garrison of armed men, and pursued fiercely,
till, at last, they were compelled to enter the tower of the
church of the holy virgin Frideswitha. And as they could
not be expelled from thence, they were all burnt in the tower.
But soon after, by the command of the king, the church was pu-
rified and rebuilt. Among others who were slain, were Sige-
ferth and Morchar, counts of Northumberland, the sons of
Cargrinus, whom the wicked duke Hadric had invited to a
banquet, and then, after he had received them on his own
couch, he treacherously caused them to be murdered. After
this, the king commanded Aldgitha, the wife of count Sige-
ferth, to be conveyed to Malmesbury, and there kept in custody
as a woman of eminent nobility. And while she was being
kept there, Edmund, the son of the king, came thither, whom
the English nation, on account of his great vigour of mind
and strength of body, called Crenst¥e, which is in Latin, Latus
JSerreum, and, contrary to his father’s will, he took her for his
wife; and going, between the time of the Assumption and
the Nativity of the blessed Mary, into Northumberland, with
his wife, he invaded the whole district which had been the
property of the counts Sigeferth and Morchar, and reduced
their subjects under his own power. But this Edmund was
the son not of Emma, the queen, but of some woman of low
birth ; however, he redeemed the lowness of his origin on the
side of his mother, by the genius of his mind, and the strength
and activity of his body.

The same year, Canute, king of the Danes, having arranged
his affairs in Denmark, and having made treaties of peace with
the neighbouring kings, came into England, with the determi-
nation either to conquer, or, if conquered, to perish. There-
fore, he landed in the port of Sandwich, with a powerful fleet,
and from thence he proceeded into Wessex, polluting every
place with bloodshed and rapine. And, as king Ethelred was

A.D. 1016. EDMUND MARCHES AGAINST THE DANES. 511

at that time sick at Cotham, Edmund, the king’s son, under-
took to encounter him. But when the two armies were about
to meet in a hostile manner, that traitor, the duke Edric, laid
every kind of plot against Edmund, in hopes to slay him by
treachery. And when Edmund found this out, he withdrew
from the battle, and yielded the field to the enemy for a time.
And, not long afterwards, Hadric, to prove himself a complete
traitor, seduced forty ships of the king’s fleet, and went to
the assistance of Canute, and did him homage for his own
dominions. And all Wessex did the same, and gave hostages,
and furnished horses and arms for the Danish army. The
Mercians offered their aid in making resistance; but owing to
the inactivity of the king, the war was protracted. The same
year, Ethelwold, bishop of Winchester, died, and Alllffy suc-
ceeded him.

A.D. 1016, Canute, king of the Danes, and the wicked
duke Eadric crossed the river Thames, at rickelade, with a
numerous body of cavalry, and before the day of the Epiphany
of the Lord, they entered Mercia, in a hostile manner, burning
many towns in Warwickshire, and carrying off booty, and
murdering all the men who came in their way. And when
Clito Edmund heard this, he collected an army. But, as the
men of Mercia would not fight without king Ethelred and the
citizens of London, he dismissed the expedition, and every
one returned to his own home. Then Canute led his army to
the city of London, and surrounded it with a blockade ; but,
as he found the city almost impregnable, he raised the siege,
and, invading Mercia a second time, occupied himself in
plundering that province. And Edmund assembled an army
against him, sending messengers to his father, who was at that
time sojourning in London, and entreating him to collect all
his forces, and to march with all speed against Canute. Ac-
cordingly he made a vigorous effort, and jomed his son; but,
when they were on the point of engaging in battle with Canute, it
was intimated to the king, that unless he took great care of
himself, he would be betrayed to the enemy by his own nation.
And, when the king heard this, he returned to London; and
Edmund, his son, went to Northumberland. And when he
had arrived there with count Uthred, he ravaged Staffordshire,
Shropshire, and many other provinces, because they refused
to go forth with him to battle against the Danes. In the
meantime, Canute, after pillaging several provinces, at last

ol2 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1016. |

reached Northumberland in his course of ravage. And when
count Uthred, who was with Edmund, heard this, he returned
to Northumberland, and gave Canute hostages to preserve the
blessings of peace. But not long afterwards, the same Uthred
and Turketil, both counts of Northumberland, at the command
of Canute, were put to death by Turebrand, a Dane. And
then Canute appointed Egric count instead of Uthred. And
when Edmund, the king’s son, heard this, he came to London
to his father ; and Canute, rapidly moving towards the south,
returned to his ships before the festival of Easter, and carried
with him much booty and plunder.

About the same time, Ethelred, king of England, died, after
great labours and much tribulation in this life, on the twenty-
second of April, and was buried at London, in the church of
Saint Paul. And after his death, the greater portion of the
kingdom, both clergy and laity, assembled together, and
unanimously elected Canute king, and coming to him at South-
ampton, made peace with him, and swore fealty to him. The
citizens of London alone, and a few of the nobles who were in
that city at the time, agreed in proclaiming Edmund Ironside,
the son of the late king, king. And he, as soon as he was
raised to the royal dignity, fearlessly marched into Wessex,
and having been joyfully received by the whole people, he re-
duced that province under his dominion. _ And when this
became known, a great portion of the people of the whole
kingdom voluntarily submitted to his authority. In the mean-
time, Canute, with his whole fleet, came to London, about
Rogation Sunday, and dug a deep trench on the southern
side of the river Thames, and drew his ships into deep water,
on the western side of London Bridge. Then, he surrounded
the whole city with a wide and deep -fosse, and prepared to
blockade it; cutting off the inhabitants from all ingress or
egress, and making continual attacks on it, he endeavoured to
storm it. But, being repulsed by the citizens, who defended
their walls gallantly, he raised the siege in some disorder ; and
departing thence, he led his army into Dorsetshire, and occu-
pied himself in endeavouring to subdue that province. But
Edmund advanced to meet Canute, with all the forces whom
he could assemble, and encountered him in the place which is
called Pennurn, near Gillingham, on the ninth of June, and
put him and his whole army to flight.

After this victory, which was gained at Midsummer, Ed-

A.D. 1016. TREACHERY OF THE DUKE HADRIC. 513

mund collected a larger army than he had before, and deter-
mined to fight gallantly with Canute; and encountering him
in the county of Worcester, in the place which is called Ster-
nestan, he arranged his army with great skill, and exhorted
them all to remember that they were fighting for their country
and their children, their wives and their inheritances: and
thus he inflamed the minds of all with admirable and warlike
speeches. Then he commanded the trumpets to sound, and
the battalions to advance steadily. At last, the two armies
met, with a great shout, and fought first of all with their
lances, and afterwards with their swords. In the meantime,
king Edmund, standing in the front line, overthrew all that
was opposed to him, and smote the enemy unceasingly, doing
the duty of a valiant soldier and a good king, in a most
gallant manner. But, because the wicked duke Eadric, and
the counts Almar and Algar, who ought to have been his
guards, deserted to the side of the Danes, with a very nume-
rous body of their people, his army was exceedingly weakened.
Nevertheless, on the first day of the battle, that is to say, on
the twenty-fifth of June, the battle was so fierce and bloody
that both armies were forced to give over fighting, out of
pure weariness, while the sun was still in the west, and so
separated from one another by mutual consent. But the next
day, king Edmund would have utterly routed the whole Da-
nish army, if it had not been for the treachery of the wicked
duke Eadric. For while both armies were fighting vigorously,
and when Eadric saw that the English were the braver, he
raised up the head of a man very like king Edmund, which
had been cut off, and holding it up on high, he cried out and:
said: ‘‘Ye English are fighting in vain, since you have lost
your head; flee with all speed: behold, I have here in my
hands the head of Edmund, your king; flee, flee, with all
speed.”” And when the English heard this, they began to lose
some of their resolution in battle; but as immediately after-
wards it was ascertained that the king was still alive, the En-
glish recovered their spirits, and attacked the Danes with
impetuosity, slaying many of them, and fighting with all their
energy, and persisting obstinately in the battle till the dusk of
evening ; but when that time arrived they separated, as in the
preceding day, by mutual consent. But, when the night was
far advanced, Canute ordered his army to abandon their camp

VOL. I. LL

514 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1016.

silently, and, marching towards London and arriving at his
fleet, he a second time laid siege to that city. .

But when the morning dawned, and king Edmund ascer-
tained that the Danes had fled into Wessex, he returned with
the intention of assembling a more numerous army. But the
wicked duke Eadric, hearing of his activity, by the suggestion
of Canute, came treacherously to him in order to betray him,
and, peace having been made between them, he promised
fidelity to the king. Therefore king Edmund collected an
army a third time, and relieved the citizens of London from
their blockade, and drove the Danes to their ships, and, cross-
ing the river Thames at Brentford, fought a fourth battle with
the Danes, and, having driven them from the field in a shame-
ful manner, he gained the victory by his spear and sword, and
obtained great military glory, to his exceeding joy ; but Canute,
fleeing to his ships, retreated, and went to ravage Kent. And
king Edmund led an army against him, and fought a battle
with the enemy near Octanford ; and they, not being able to
withstand his attack, fled, and took refuge in the Isle of Shep-
pey. The king Edmund, marching into Wessex, vigorously pur-
sued Canute, but he, marching into Mercia, to ravage it, ordered
his army to commit greater atrocities than they had committed
before. And king Edmund, encountering the enemy courage-
ously at Assendune,’ and having arrayed his army in three
lines, went round his battalions, admonishing them to be
mindful of their former valour and of their previous victory,
and to defend themselves, and his and their kingdom, from.
the rapacity of the barbarians ; for he assured them that they
would have but a slight struggle with those whom they had
already repeatedly conquered. In the meantime, Canute led
his men into a level plain, and Edmund, giving the signal to
his men, suddenly attacked the enemy. The two armies
fought with all their energy, many were slain on each side,
but at length, by the fortune of war, the English prevailed.
And there the valour of king Edmund was conspicuous, who,
seeing the Danes fighting with more than usual vigour, left
his royal station, which was, according to custom, between the
Dragon* and the Standard, and hastened into the first line,
brandishing his sword in a terrible manner, and cleaving the

1 Assington, in Essex. * The “ Dragon” was a standard like

the Roman eagle. The “ Standard” a flag, with the royal arms embla-
zoned on it.

A.D. 1016. DUKE BADRIC ADDRESSES THE NOBLES. 515

enemy’s line like lightning, and piercing it through the cen-
tre, he passed right through it, and enabled his followers to
overthrow it completely. Then he rushed forth against the
squadron which was immediately behind Canute, shouting his
terrible battle-cry. There the most terrible part of the con-
flict between the two armies took place. But when that traitor
duke Eadric saw the army of the Danes begin to give way, he
deserted to Canute with the squadron which he commanded,
as they had arranged beforehand. By this desertion, the
Danes became the stronger army, and made a great slaughter
of the English. For there fell on the side of the English the
noble dukes Ailfric and Godwin, Uscital and his son Ethelwold,
Ethelwin beloved by God, Eadnoth, bishop of Dorchester, and
the abbot Wolfy, with nearly all the nobility of England,
which had never before lost such number of princes in one
battle. This battle took place on the festival of Saint Luke
the Evangelist. Canute also on his side suffered an irrepar-
able loss on the same day, by the death of several of his
dukes and nobles.

After this disastrous battle, in which so many nobles fell, a
few days intervened, and then king Edmund pursued Canute,
who was now committing his ravages in the province of Giou-
cester. Therefore the two kings met in battle in the place
which is called Deerhurst ; where Edmund, being posted on
the western side of the river Severn with his men, and Canute
and his army on the eastern bank, both prepared themselves
manfully for battle; and when the two armies were ready to
engage, the wicked duke Eadric, summoning all the nobles
round him, burst forth into the following speech, and said,
“OQ ye insensate nobles, men mighty in arms, why do we so
often expose ourselves to death in battle for our kings, who,
im spite of the slaughter which befalls us, neither succeed in
becoming masters of the kingdom, nor put any bounds to
their rapacity? My advice is, that they should both fight,
aye, fight in single combat, since their object is to reign singly.
What is the meaning of such a lust for kingly power, that
England is not sufficient for two kings, when it was formerly:
large enough for eight? Therefore, let them either singly
make peace, or singly fight for the crown.” And this opinion
pleased every one; andwhen the decision of the nobles was made
known to the kings, they both consented and approved of it.

There is an island situated in the middle of the river, which

“LL2

516 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1016.

was formerly called Oleneige, to which the kings were con-
veyed, clad in splendid armour, and where they began their
single combat in the sight of the people of each nation. But
when, by the might of the kings striking at one another, and
by the shock of their strong shields, their spears had been
broken, they drew their swords; and fought hand to hand,
continuing the encounter vigorously and long, his valour de-
fending Edmund, and fortune preserving Canute, their swords
rung upon their helmeted heads, and sparks flashed from the
heavy blows. At length, the mighty breast of Edmund kin-
dled with fury as the combat proceeded, and, becoming stronger
as his blood warmed within him, he raised his right hand,
brandished his sword, and redoubled his blows on the head of
his enemy with such vehemence, that he appeared to thunder
rather than to strike. Canute, therefore, feeling his strength
fail, and himself unequal any longer to withstand these ter-
rible attacks, bethought himself of coming to terms of peace
with the young king. But, as he was a cunning man, he feared
that if his weakness were perceived by the young king he
would not listen to his proposals of peace, he collected all his
courage, and rushed upon Edmund with marvellous valour.
And presently, retiring a little, he begged the young king to
pause for a moment, and to give him a hearmg. But he,
being of a sweet disposition, dropped his shield on the ground,
and listened to the words of Canute. ‘‘ Hitherto,” said Ca-
nute, “‘O bravest of men, I have been desirous of your king-
dom ; but now, considering you of more value not only of the
kingdom of England but also than the whole world, I am more
desirous of your love than of the kingdom. Denmark is
obedient to me, Norway is subject to me, the king of the Suevi
has yielded tome. Wherefore, although fortune has promised
me that I shall be victorious everywhere, still your wonderful
prowess has inspired me with so much love, that I desire
above all things to have you for my friend and my partner in
the kingdom. Would that you may be as well inclined to me,
so that I may reign with you in England, and you with me in
“Denmark.”

To make the story short, the most gracious king Edmund
consented, and he who could not be subdued by arms, yielded
to words. Therefore they both of them laid aside their splen-
did armour, and kissed one another, to the great delight of
both armies. Then they exchanged garments and arms in

_

A.D. 1017. DEATH OF KING EDMUND. 517

token of peace, and Edmund became Canute, and Canute
Edmund. And so the kingdom was divided between the
two, but the crown remained with Edmund, with Essex and
East-Anglia, and the city of London, and all the country to
the south of the river Thames; Canute having the northern
part of the kingdom. But peace continued between them on
the firmest footing till the death of the noble king Edmund.
King Edmund had two sons, Edward and Edwin, by his wife
Aldgiva, a woman of noble family; and they will be spoken
of hereafter in their proper place.

Therefore, while Edmund, king of England, surnamed Iron-
_ side, was merciful and kind to the just persons in his kingdom,
and terrible to the unjust, there was still a traitor envious of
his prosperity ; and Eadric, the wicked duke of Mercia, was
incessantly thinking how he might destroy the king. At last,
when the king was passing the night at Oxford, when he re-
tired to a more secret part of the house for the necessities of
nature, the son of the said Eadric, prompted by his father, lay
in ambush in a secret cupboard, and, on the night of the fes-
tival of the Apostle Saint Andrew, stabbed the king twice, in
a fatal part with a sharp knife ; and, having mortally wounded
him, fled, and left the weapon in his bowels. And he was
buried at Glastonbury, near his grandfather king Edgar, and
all England mourned for him exceedingly, because they hoped
that with him for their leader they would have a respite from
the oppression of the Danes.

Cu. XX.—From A.p. 1017 To a.p. 1042.

Canute becomes sole king of England—Banishes the nobles—
Marries Emma, sister of Richard, duke of Normandy—A
conference at Oxford establishes the laws of Edward—Cha-
racter of Canute; his liberality—Subdues Norway—Birth
of William of Normandy—He succeeds to his father’s duke-
dom—Death of Canute—Coronation of Harold—Hard-
canute is set up in opposition to him by Godwin, and is
crowned king—Dies, and is succeeded by Edward the Con-

Sessor.
a.p. 1017. Edmund, king of England, being dead, Canute
seized upon the whole kingdom of England, and reigned
twenty years. And, in the earliest days of his reign, he di-
vided England into four portions, retaining Wessex for him-

518 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1017. -

self, and entrusting Mercia to Eadric, Hast-Anglia to Turketil,
and Northumberland to Iric. But when the wicked duke
Eadric heard that he had been deprived of the duchy of Mer-
cia, which he had possessed for many years, he attacked the
king on account of this with exceeding asperity, reproaching
him with all the benefits which he had conferred on him; among
which he urged two, which especially excited him to anger,
saying, “ First of all, I deserted Edmund for your sake, and
after that I murdered him, because of my fidelity to you.”
But, when he said this, Canute’s countenance changed, and
he showed his anger by reddening, and immediately expressed
his opinion, and said, ‘And deservedly shall you yourself
die, since you are guilty of dése majesté, both against God and
against me, inasmuch as you slew your own master, and my
brother, who was bound to me by treaty. His blood be upon
your head, because you laid your hands upon the Lord’s an-

ointed.”” And, presently, he had him strangled on the spot, — |

to prevent any tumult being excited among the people, and he
was thrown out of a window into the river Thames, and so he
received the just reward of his treason. Now, of the death
of this traitor Eadric different writers have given different ac-
counts ; some stating that, after Edmund had been slain by

his treachery, he came himself to Canute, and saluted him, |

saying, ‘ Hail, sole king.’’ And then, in reply to the question
of the king as to why he saluted him in this manner, he re-
lated what had taken place repecting the death of Edmund,
Canute answered him, and said, ‘ For these great deserts, and
for this obedience of yours, I will this day raise you above all
the nobles of the kingdom ;”’ and then he ordered him to be
beheaded, and his head to be fixed on a stake, and set on the
tower of London, as a prey to the birds. But whether the
traitor Eadric ended his life in this, or in some other way,
does not make much difference ; because it is certainly known
that he, who had circumvented many, was at last circum-
vented himself, by the righteous judgment of God.

After these events, Canute came to the wonderful determi-
- nation in his own mind of either destroying or banishing, by
perpetual exile, the whole of the English nation. Accord-
ingly, beginning with Edwin, the brother of king Edmund on
the mother’s side, he gave him to an officer named Ethelward.
But Ethelward, loving the youth, concealed him in a certain
abbey, and delivered him fora time from the danger of death.

A.D. 1020. CANUTE RETURNS TO ENGLAND. | 519

He likewise sent the sons of king Edmund, Edwin and Ed-
ward, to the king of the Suevi, to be put to death. But that
king, although he was a confederate of Canute’s, refused to
comply with his entreaties. For he sent the boys to Solomon,
king of Hungary, to be brought up and preserved alive. And
after they had lived there some time in great honour, Edward
received the sister of the queen for his wife, whose name
was Emma, and by whom in process of time he had two sons,
Edmund and Edgar. He also had two daughters by her,
whose names were Margaret and Christina, of whom we shall
speak hereafter in the proper place.

The sons of king Ethelred also, whom he had had by Emma,
by name Alfred and Edward, hearing of the cruelty of king
Canute, escaped, and found a safe place of concealment in
Normandy, so as at least to avoid all danger of death. But
every one else whom he heard spoken of as related to the
royal family, Canute sent into banishment, labouring to pre-
serve the kingdom of England for his own sons, by hereditary
right. For by his queen Algiva, the daughter of count
flfelm, he had twosons, namely, Sweyn and Harold, although
scandal reports that Canute was not their real father.

The same year, Wolstan, bishop of Worcester, died, and
Leoft, abbot of Thorney, succeeded him in the bishopric.

A.D. 1018. Algiva, the queen of king Canute, died, and he
presently sent into Normandy to duke Richard, to ask his
sister Emma in marriage, who was the widow of king Ethel-
red. And she came to England in the month of July, and was
formally married to Canute; and he, taking her advice, sent
back the Danish fleet and all his mercenary soldiers to their
native land, giving them eighty-two thousand pounds of silver,
which he collected out of every part of England.

A.D. 1019. Canute, king of England and Denmark, passed
over into Denmark, and wintered there.

The same year, Ealmar, bishop of Selsey, died, and was suc-
ceeded by Ethelric.

A.D. 1020. Canute, king of England and Denmark, having
settled all his necessary affairs in Denmark, returned into
England at the time of the festival of Haster, and having as-
sembled a council at Orencester, passed a sentence of outlawry
against duke Ethelward. The same year, Living, archbishop
of Canterbury, died, and was succeeded by Ethelnoth. The
same year, after the see of Durham had been vacant, and de-

520 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1022.

prived of all pastoral consolation, for three years, ever since
the death of bishop Aldhun; having convened an assembly of
bishops, in order to discuss the election of a bishop, a certain
priest of one of the religious orders, by name Edmund, came
among them, and said jestingly, “‘Why do you not elect me
bishop ?”? And those who were present did not take his words
as a joke, but unanimously elected him, and proclaimed a fast
for three days, to take the will of Saint Cuthbert, the old
bishop, on the matter. Accordingly, when the priest was
celebrating mass at the head of the Saint’s tomb, in the middle
of the canon, a voice was heard as if from the tomb of the
father himself, which thrice named Edmund as bishop.

The same year, Canute, king of England and Denmark,
having built a royal monastery, with suitable offices, in the
place which is called Bedericeswirthe, where the most blessed
king and martyr, Edmund, awaits the day of the blessed re-
surrection, with an uncorrupt body, by the advice of Emma,
his queen, and also of the bishops and barons of England,
placed monks in it, and appointed an abbot to govern it, whose
name was Wido, a humble, modest, gentle, and pious man,
And all the priests who had lived there in an irregular manner,
he either, if he allowed them to remain there, advanced to
a much higher degree of religion, or else gave them other
means of providing for themselves with food and raiment to
amore plentiful extent than they were accustomed to, and
made them remove to other places. He also enriched the
monastery of the blessed king and martyr Edmund with such
numbers of estates and other revenues, that, as to its temporal
affairs, it is deservedly set at the head of all the other convents.
This year also, he adorned with churches all the places in
which he had fought battles, and especially Assendune, placing
ministers in them who were to celebrate divine offices for the
salvation of those who had been slain there.

A.D. 1021. King Canute took occasion against Turkill and
Iric, two Danish nobles, to banish them from England and
outlaw them. And they went to Denmark, their native coun-
try; but the moment that they reached the shore, Turkill, who
had been the prompter of the death of the blessed Alpheg,
was slain by the dukes of the country. The same year, Al-
gar, bishop of Helmham, died, and was succeeded by Halwin.

A.D. 1022. The English and Danes held a conference at
Oxford, and agreed on the subject of keeping the laws of

A.D. 1024. WOLSTON, ARCHBISHOP OF YORK, DIES. 521

king Edward the First. On which account, the same laws,
by command of king Canute, were translated from the Latin
language into English, and were ordered by the king to be
observed both in Denmark and in England, on account of their
equity. In this year, Richard, duke of Normandy, who was
called the Second, died ; and was succeeded by his son Richard,
who was called Richard the Third, who reigned one year.

A.D. 1023. John became pope, and occupied the Roman
chair nine years and as many months. The same year, Ca-
nute, king of England and Denmark, with his own hands,
took up from the tomb the body of the blessed Ailpheg,
archbishop of Canterbury, which was buried in the church of
St. Paul, and caused it to be xemoved to the church of Can-
terbury, and to be buried there with all due veneration. And
he took so much pains to make amends for all the errors that
he himself or his predecessors had committed, that he endea-
voured to efface the blot of the previous injustice both before
God and before man. And endeavouring, by the advice of
Emma his queen, to reconcile all the English to himself, he
gave them many gifts, and, moreover, promised them all good
and welcome laws. The same year, Robert succeeded to the
dukedom of Normandy.

A.D. 1024. The fortunate king, Canute, led an army of
English and Danes against the Sueni, and, in the first battle,
lost many of his men. But on the next day, when the enemy
were meditating a second attack upon him, Godwin, a count
of the English, and the commander of the English contin-
gents, without the knowledge of the king, boldly made a night
attack on the enemy, who were not expecting it, with no forces
but the English battalions, and surprised them and put them
to flight ; and having slain a countless number of them, com-
pelled Ulf and Eiglaf, the kings of that nation, to come to
terms of surrender and of peace. But at break of day, as
the king thought that. the English had either fled, or else
had perfidiously deserted to the enemy, when he was prepar-
ing to lead the Danish troops in battle array against the enemy,

. found nothing in their camp but blood and corpses of the

slain. On which account, he ever after held the English in
the highest honour, and rejoicing im his victory, sailed back
to England.

The same year, Wolston, archbishop of York, died, and was
succeeded by Ailfric.

522 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1029, —

A.D. 1025. Conrad obtained the empire of the Romans, and

reigned fifteen years. The same year, the religious man, Ed-
mund, whom we have mentioned before, was consecrated
bishop of Durham or Lindisfarne. The same year, king Ca-
nute decorated the old monastery of the city of Winchester
with so much munificence, that the gold and silver, and splen-
dour of the jewels, terrified the minds of the strangers who
beheld it. And the king did this at the exhortation of Emma,
his queen, who exhausted his treasures by her prodigal libe-
rality in such matters.
. A.D: 1026. Canute the Magnificent, king of England and
Denmark, having made prayers over the tomb of king Ed-
mund in the church of Glastonbury, where that king lies
buried, for the salvation of his soul, offered a cloak of various
colours, embroidered in the figures of peacocks. And he is
believed to have done this, that he might not be supposed to
have consented to the death of the man with whom he had
made a treaty at the time of single combat.

A.D. 1027. When news had been brought to Canute, that
the Norwegians held their king Olaus in exceeding contempt,
on account of his simplicity, he sent vast sums of gold and
silver to the nobles of that district, entreating them all ear-
nestly to expel Olaus, and to take him for their king. And
as they received the gifts which he sent them with eager
hands, they sent him a message to put an end to all antipathy,
and to come himself to them, because he would find them ail
ready to receive him. ;

A.D. 1028. Canute, king of England and Denmark, went
to Norway with fifty ships, expelled king Olaus from his
kingdom, and reduced it under his own power, with the con-
sent of the nobles. This same year, Marianus, the Scot, was
born, who afterwards, when he grew up and became learned
in liberal studies, by his own study and labour composed a
book of Chronicles, extending from the time of the emperor
Octavianus to A.D. 1131. He records the exploits of the
kings of England at greater length than any of the other his-
torians, observing all the dominical years, and so carried his
history down to the time of Henry the First, king of England.

A.D. 1029. Canute, king of England, Denmark, and Nor-
way, returning to England, sent Haco, a Danish count, into

‘ He afterwards speaks of Marianus as dying a.p. 1052.

A.D. 1030. HACO DIES AT SEA, 523

banishment, under pretence of sending him on an embassy.
For he had married Gunilda, a noble matron, the daughter of
his sister and of Victigern, king of the Wendi; on which ac-
count, he was afraid that he might be either deprived of his
life or expelled his kingdom by him. Ethelred had for his
wife the daughter of Richard the First, duke of Normandy,
and she, that is, Emma, was the daughter of Richard the
First, duke of Normandy, and Robert, the father of William,
was the son of Richard the Second, duke of. Normandy.
Ethelred had by his wife Emma two sons, Alfred and Ed-
ward the Third.

A.D. 1030. Robert the Second, son of Richard the Second,
.duke of Normandy, and brother of Richard the Third, after
he had for seven years governed the duchy of Normandy with
great power, went hke a devout man to Jerusalem, for the
sake of pilgrimage. But he left behind him a son of seven
years of age, whom he had by a concubine named Harlotta,
whose beauty he had beheld by chance as she was dancing in
a company, and so he became carnally acquainted with her
the same night. And as he afterwards loved her to a sin-
gular degree, he for aconsiderable time retained her as his
wife ; and the child who was born of her was called Wil-
liam. And his future greatness was presaged by a dream of
his mother, who saw her entrails dilate and extend over all
Normandy and England. And at the very moment when she
was delivered, and the boy was brought to light, he fell to the
ground, and filled both his hands with the rushes with which
the floor was strewed. When, therefore, this dream was re-
lated to the midwives, they all with joyful applause cried out,
that the boy would be a king. Therefore, duke Robert, when
about to depart for Jerusalem, summoned his nobles to a con-
ference at Feschamp, and there appointed his son William
his heir, and caused them all to swear fealty to him. Count
Gilbert was appointed guardian of the boy, and the superi-
ority over him was consigned to Henry, king of France,
on condition, that if within a term appointed before-hand,
his father did not return, the dukedom of Normandy was to
belong to William in absolute power.

The same year, Haco, the count, who has been already
mentioned, died at sea, or, as some say, was slain in the
Orkney Islands.

524 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. ASD? M08I%

The same year, the Holy Olaus, the king, teacher, preacher,
and apostle of the Norici, in Norway, and son of Harold, king
of the Norici, was slain in Norway, being cruelly wounded by
the Norici with an axe, for that nation uses axes, not swords.
For that pagan and most blood-thirsty nation was indignant
that the holy king Olaus, by his preaching, teaching, spreading
the Gospel, and making laws, was destroying their ancient
superstitious laws.

A.D. 1031. Robert, duke of Normandy, having gloriously
finished his pilgrimage to Jerusalem, died among the Alps,
while he was on his way back to his own country. He was
succeeded by William his son, who, when he became a man,

so vigorously attacked all his enemies who despised him in

his age of childhood, that he not only restored his own pos-
sessions to their former state, but even procured advantages
to himself from the losses of others.

The same year, Canute, the most mighty king of England
and Denmark, went to Rome with great honour, and offered
vast gifts of gold and silver, and silken cloth, and precious
stones, to Saint Peter, the chief of the Apostles, and procured
from pope John the exemption of the English school from
tribute. Both in going and returning he distributed large
alms among the poor. On his way, he, by payment of large
sums, abolished many barriers where tolls were extorted from
foreigners. And before the tomb of Peter, the prince of the
apostles, he vowed to God to amend his life and habits, as he
has stated plainly in the letter which on his return from Rome
he sent to the nobles of England by the hands of Living, a
prudent man, and afterwards bishop of the church of Credi-
ton, and by those of other ambassadors. And among other

things, he announced to Aigelnoth, archbishop of Canterbury,

and to Ailfric, archbishop of York, and to all the bishops and
prelates of England, that he had been at Rome at the great
and solemn festival of Easter, in the presence of pope John
and the emperor Conrad, and all the kings and princes of the
nations which lie between Mount St. Angelo and the nearest
sea, all of whom received him honourably, and distinguished
him with splendid presents. Among whom, the emperor in
particular bestowed on him many gifts, not only of very
valuable garments, but also of golden vessels. And he com-
plained before the lord the pope, that an immense sum of
money was extorted from the archbishops of this country

A.D. 1033. THE EMPEROR HENRY CROWNED. $20

when they sent to Rome to obtain the pallium; at which the
pope was exceedingly confused, and forbade such a thing
being done again. He also commanded the before-mentioned
bishops, in the same letter, to take care that before he returned
to England, all the dues which belonged to the Catholic
Church, such as alms for ploughs, and the small tithes from
the food of animals, and the first fruits from the seed of gar-
dens, which in English is called Chirchescor, and the tithes
of the sheaves of corn, and also the pence due to Saint Peter,
which in English is called %omesce, were duly paid. More-
over, he expressly ordered all the viscounts and governors of
the kingdom of England to do violence to no man, but to
judge rightly respecting both nobles and slaves, and in no
respect to deviate from justice for the sake of putting money
in their purses, as they had no need to increase their revenues
by means of sin. .

A.D. 1032. Archbishop Agelnoth, on the seventeenth of
October, dedicated the convent of Saint Edmund, which had
been splendidly built at Bevertchesworth, in honour of the
Mother of God and the before-mentioned Saint Edmund.

A.D. 1033. Leoff, bishop of Worcester, died, and Britheg
succeeded to the episcopal see.

This year also, Benedict, as Martin tells us, was deposed
from the papacy, and another was elected pope, namely, the
bishop Sabiniensis, who was henceforth called Sylvester. He
also was ejected, and then Benedict again recovered the papacy.
Benedict was a second time ejected, and the papacy was given
to John, the archdeacon of the church of Saint John before
the Latin gate, who was thenceforth called Gregory the Sixth.
And he, when he obtained the papacy, as he was ignorant of
literature, caused another pope to be consecrated with himself,
to aid him in performing the duties of his ecclesiastical office.
And as many disapproved of this, a third pope was elected
besides, that he by himself might discharge the duties of the
other two. As, therefore, there was one disputing about the
_ papacy with two, and two with one, and as Gregory died, the
emperor Henry came to Rome to act against the two. And
having deposed them by canonical and imperial sentence, he
by force elected to the papacy in their stead Sindeger, bishop
of Babenberg, who was thenceforth called Clement the Second,
and by him the emperor Henry was crowned, the Romans
promising him, and confirming the promise by an oath, that

526 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1035.

ti.

they would never elect a Roman pontiff without his consent.
Then Benedict, who was the nephew of the former Benedict,
appeared to a certain miller, in the form of a monstrous
animal, whose head and tail were those of an ass, and the
rest of his body like that of a bear. And when the beholder
had fled in his alarm, the monster cried out after him and
said, “Fear me not; know that I was once a man as you
are. But I present myself in this before, because formerly,
when I was a wretched pope, I lived like a beast.’ This is
the account given by Martin.

The same year, the most mighty king, Canute, returning

from Rome, led a hostile expedition against the Scots, who
rebelled, and without much difficulty subdued king Malcolm
and two other kings. Likewise the same king Canute built
the abbey of Saint Benedict of Elm, and placed monks there,
to serve God under the rule of Saint Benedict, whom he
mightily commended. He also made a solid road along the
marsh between Rames and Burgh, which is called Kingesvelfe,
in order to avoid the danger of the great swamps. Moreover,
out of gratitude to God for the victory which he had given
him, he gave many gifts, both in the way of privileges and
also of estates, to the brethren of the religious orders, and he
confirmed his gifts that they might last for ever. He also
very liberally ordered many presents to be distributed among
the poor.

A.D. 1034. Benedict was elected to the Roman chair, which
he filled fourteen years. The same year, Hadric, bishop of
Dorchester, died, and was succeeded by Eadnoth.

A.D. 1035. Canute, king of England, Denmark, and Nor-
way, appointed Sweyn, who was his son by Elgiva, king over
the Norwegians, and his son Hardicanute, whom he had by
Emma of Normandy, he caused to be crowned king of Den-
mark.

After that, he returned into England, and on the twelfth of
November he died at Shaftsbury ; and I think the following
story respecting him ought not to be omitted. As he was
flourishing and magnificent in the kingdom which he had
acquired by his bravery, he one day ordered his royal chair
to be placed on the sea-shore, and then mounting, he sat
down in it, and said in a threatening voice, “ You are under
my dominion, O sea, and the land on which I sit is mine, nor

A.D. 1035. HAROLD INVESTED WITH THE CROWN. 527

is there any one in it who oattinre with impunity to resist my
authority. I now command you not to come upon my land,
nor to presume to wet my royal vestments.” But as wave
after wave rose up and disregarded his injunctions, the sea
without any respect wetted the feet and legs of the king ; and
then the king, not leaping from his chair till he was almost
too late, said, “ Let all the inhabitants of the world know
that the power of kings is vain and frivolous, and that no one
is worthy of the name of king, except Him in obedience to
whose nod the heaven, and earth, and sea, and all that is in
them, are subject to eternal laws.’”? And from that time forth
the king never wore his crown, but he always placed it on the
head of the image of his crucified Master, and so gave a great
example of humility to all future kings. He was buried at
Winchester, in the old monastery, with all royal honour, and
may his soul enjoy eternal glory.

But when that most powerful king Canute was dead, the
nobles of the kingdom came together to Oxford to a confer-
ence, to discuss the subject of the election of a new king,
And the general Leofric, and all the Danish nobles in London,
elected Harold, the son of Canute by his concubine Algiva.
But Godwin, count of Kent, and the chiefs of Wessex, in op-
position to them, preferred Hardicanute, the son of Canute
by queen Emma, or else one of the sons of king Ethelred
and the same Emma, who was living in Normandy. But as
Hardicanute was at that time in Dacia, and Alfred and Ed-
ward, the sons of king Ethelred, were absent in Normandy,
the party of Harold prevailed, and having been invested with
the crown of the kingdom of England, he hastened to Win-
chester, and tyrannically seized all the treasures and riches
which king Canute had bequeathed to his queen Emma, and
banished Emma herself, his own stepmother, from England.
And she, seeking refuge with Baldwin, count of Flanders, re-
ceived from him the castle of Bruges, to dwell there; for
William, duke of Normandy, being still under the guardian-
ship of his guardians, had not as yet absolute power over his
dukedom.

William of Malmesbury says that this Harold was the son
of a cobbler, and that Ailfgina, the queen, had adopted him as
her son, without the knowledge of the king, and had ‘caused

him to be brought up as the king’s son.’

1 This was Harold Harefoot.

|

528 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1037.

A.D. 1036. Alfred, the etdestMon of king Ethelred, who was
still living in Normandy, when he heard of the death of
Canute, came to England, with twenty-five picked ships full
of armed men, in order peaceably, if possible, but, if need
were, by force of arms, to obtain his father’s kingdom, which
of right belonged to him. And, landing with his men in the
harbour of Sandwich, he marched as far as Canterbury. And
when Godwin, count of Kent, heard of his arrival, he went to
meet him, and pledging his faith to him, in the next night

layed the part of the traitor Judas to him and his comrades.
For after he had given him the kiss of peace, and after a cheer-
ful banquet, in the deep silence of the night, when Alfred and |
his companions had yielded their limbs to sleep, they were all _
taken, unarmed, in their beds, suspecting no evil, by a multi-
tude of armed men who rushed upon them, and, with their
hands bound behind their backs, they were compelled to sit
down in order, one by the side of the other ; and sitting there,
nine were beheaded, and the tenth released and preserved alive.
And all this was done at @ildefor¥e, a royal town. But as it
appeared to the traitor Godwin that in this way more people
were left alive than was desirable, he ordered them to be deci-
mated a second time, and then very few remained alive. And
the young Alfred, who was in all respects worthy of the honours
of a king, he sent bound to the city of London, to king Ha-
rold, with the small number of his followers who remained
after the decimation, that he might find more favour in Harold’s
eyes. But the moment that the king beheld the young Alfred,
he caused him to be conducted to the Isle of Ely, and there to
be deprived of his eyes, and the soldiers he put to death in a
pitiless manner ; and Alfred, that admirable young man, died,
and was buried there.

A.D. 1037. The body of Pallas, the son of Evander, of whom
Virgil speaks, was found at Rome quite uninjured, to the great
astonishment of all beholders, who marvelled at its having pre-
served its incorruptibility for so many ages. The hole made
by the wound which Turnus had inflicted in the centre of his
chest was four feet and a half long; there was also found an
epitaph inscribed on his tomb, in the following words :

“ Pallas, Evander’s son, whom Turnus’s spear
Pierced through the heart and slew, lies buried here.”

And a burning lamp was found at his head, composed with

A.D. 1040. HARDICANUTE COMES TO ENGLAND. 529

*

mathematical skill, so that no violence of wind, and no liquid
poured upon it, was able to extinguish it. And as many mar-
velled thereat, some one, who had a more subtle genius, made
a hole with a pen beneath the flame, and then, when air had
been introduced, the fire ceased to burn. The body, when
placed against the wall, was found to be taller than the wall
was high. But in process of time, as the dripping of rain and
dew fell upon the body and moistened it, it then experienced
the corruption of all mortals, its sinews and its skin dissolving
and decaying.

A.D. 1038. Agelnoth, archbishop of Canterbury, died on the
twenty-eighth of October, and was succeeded by Eadsy. This
year there also died Ethelric, bishop of Selsey, A‘lfric, bishop
of Helmham, and Britheg, bishop of Worcester. And they
had the following successors respectively: Grinketello in the
church of Selsey, Stigand in the church of Helmham, and
Living, bishop of Crediton, in the church of Worcester. But
Stigand was afterwards ejected, and Grinketello, bishop of
Selsey, (having paid no small sum of money for his promotion)
obtained the two bishoprics, Selsey and Helmham.  After-
wards, however, Grinketello was ejected, and Stigand restored.
And then Stigand, by a payment of money, procured the bish-
opric of Helmham for his brother Aigelmar ; and the same
Stigand, to gratify his avarice, paid sums of money, and pro-
cured for himself the thrones of Canterbury and Winchester,
and would scarcely allow a bishop to be appointed to the see
of Selsey.

A.D. 1039. Brithmar, bishop of Lichfield, died, and was
succeeded by Wolf. And the same year, Hardicanute, king of
Denmark, went over to Flanders to his mother, queen Emma,
and stayed with her some time at Bruges.

A.D. 1040. Henry succeeded to the empire of the Romans,
and reigned with great splendour for sixteen years. The same
year, Harold, king of England, after he had reigned four years,
died at Oxford, and was buried at Westminster. Then the
nobles, both of the English and of the Danes, agreeing in one
vote, sent ambassadors to Bruges in Flanders to Hardicanute,
king of Denmark, who was staying at Bruges with his mother,
entreating him to come and assume the crown of England. And
he immediately adopting the advice of the nobles, came at
Midsummer into England, and was received joyfully by every
one, and was consecrated king by Eadsy, archbishop of Can-

VOL. I. MM

530 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1041.

terbury. And as soon as he was established in his kingdom,

he showed that he was not unmindful of the injuries which |

had been inflicted on himself and his mother by his predeces-
sor, king Harold ; but sent Ailfric, archbishop of York, earl
Godwin, Eadric, his steward, and Trond, the executioner, to
London to dig up the body of the king; and then he ordered them
to cut off the head, and throw the carcass into the river Thames.
And when it had been thrown into the river, it was, a short
time afterwards, found by a fisherman, and buried by the
Danish people in London, in the cemetery of the Danes.

After these events, he ordered money to be collected through-
out all England, and eight marks to be paid to every rower of
his fleet, and ten marks to every pilot; by which measure he
earned the hatred of all those who had previously wished for
his arrival. Moreover, he was inflamed with violent anger
against the traitor, earl Godwin, and Living, bishop of Wor-
cester, on account of the death of his brother Alfred, of which,
fElfric, archbishop of York, and many other persons, were
continually accusing them. And on this account he degraded
Living, and gave his bishopric to Ailfric. But Godwin, to
atone for the death of his brother Alfred, and to secure his
friendship, gave him a ship wrought in gold, with a golden
beak, and equipped with every part of its furniture and arma-
ment of gold, and decorated with beautiful arms, and with
eighty soldiers all made of gold ; and every one of these sol-
diers had on his arms two golden armlets, weighing sixteen
ounces, a breastplate of triple threads of gold, a golden helmet
on his head, a sword with golden hilt, girt about his loins, a
Danish battleaxe, made of gold, hanging to his left shoulder,
a shield in his left hand with golden bosses and nails, a golden
spear in his right hand, which inthe English language is
called ®ateqar. And, besides all this, he swore, and he was
corroborated by nearly all the nobles of the whole kingdom,
and by all the men of the greatest reputation, that it had not
been by any advice or with any consent of his that his brother
had been blinded, but that king Harold had given orders for
what had been done.

A.D. 1041. Hardicanute, king of England, sent his servants
throughout all the districts of his kingdom to collect the tribute
which he had commanded to be levied without sparing any
one ; and from this tribute to supply his pirates with every-

thing that was needful for them. And the people of the pro-.

|
|

A.D. 1041. GUNILDA ACCUSED OF ADULTERY. 531

vince of Worcester uniting with the citizens of that city, slew
two of those servants, by name Foeder and Turstin, because
they had behaved towards them with too great severity, catch-
ing them in the upper room of a monastery to which they had
fled for refuge. At which, the king was moved to exceeding
anger, and in revenge for this crime he sent some counts and
armed soldiers into the district, ordering them to slay the men,
to plunder and burn the city, and to lay waste the whole pro-
vince. And when this had been done according as it had been
commanded, they returned to the king with great booty, and
so his wrath was appeased. The same year, Edward, son of
king Ethelred, came from Normandy into England, and was
joyfully received by the king; his brother, and remained at his
court, being held in great respect and consideration.

The same year, Hardicanute, king of England, sent Gunilda,
his sister, the daughter of king Canute and queen Emma, a
maiden of infinite beauty, to be married to Henry, emperor of
the Romans. And in the time of king Canute, this maiden,
by reason of her incomparable beauty, had been sought in
marriage by many men of noble birth, but they had not ob-
tained her. And so now the ceremony of her nuptials was
solemnized with extraordinary pomp, and the king her brother,
and nearly all the inhabitants of the kingdom, poured forth
their treasures of gold and silver, and went to such expense
in robes, and jewels, and valuable horses, that to this very day
actors and minstrels, at banquets and in taverns, are scarcely
able to celebrate this nuptial ceremony, with all their instru-
ments and songs, in a sufficiently worthy manner, And the
treaty of conjugal love lasted between them a long time ; but
at last, owing to some sowers of discord, Gunilda was accused
before the emperor of the crime of adultery. Accordingly, in
compliance with the custom of the kingdom, Gunilda was
bound to redeem the fame of her purity by doing battle against
her accuser, a man of gigantic size. But of all the soldiers and
servants who had come with her out of England, there was
not one found who dared to fight with the accuser, on account
of the terrible prodigiousness of his personal strength. So
when Gunilda was in a great strait on all sides, a certain boy,
whom she had brought with her from England, and who had
been bred up in her chamber, who was very little, and who,
on account of the smallness of his size, was called Mimecan,
undertook to do battle for his mistress, whom he knew to be un-

532 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1041,

justly accused ; and engaging the giant in battle, by a miracle
of God hamstrung him, and so deprived him of strength. And
when he fell to the ground, Mimecan cut off his head and pre-
sented it to his mistress. ‘Then the empress, being gladdened
at this unhoped-for triumph, divorced herself from the emperor,
nor could she from that time forth be won over, by either
threats or blandishments, to consent to enter his bed.

This emperor, while his father, Conrad, was still alive, had
received from one of the secular clergy a silver pipe, on con-
dition that, when he became emperor, he should confer a bish-
opric on him. And when the clergyman demanded the fulfil-
ment of the promise, Henry, who was now grown up, and who
had been created emperor after the death of his father, wil-
lingly gave him a bishopric. But not long afterwards, he was
afflicted for this wicked error, and struck with disease, and so
took to his bed, and as his illness increased, he lay three days
senseless and speechless, dumb as if his soul had departed from
his body ; so that the breath of life scarcely beat within his
breast, and the only sign of life was, that if a hand was held
before his nostrils a very weak breathing was perceived. Then
the bishops and his friends who were present ordered a fast
for three days, and with tears and prayers implored the divine
mercy for the safety of the emperor.

And when, in consequence of these remedies, as it is believed,
he became convalescent, he sent for the bishop whom he had
made so simoniacally, in return for the silver pipe, and de-
graded him by the decree of the council. For he confessed,
in the hearing of all men, that during the whole three days
that he had been lying in that lifeless state, he had been among
the devils, and had found them so hostile to him that they had
kept darting flames of fire into his mouth through a pipe, and
burnt his whole body both inside and outside. And the flame
burnt him to such a degree that, in comparison of that fire, all
earthly fire seemed only lukewarm, and absolutely devoid of
heat. But amid all this burning, the emperor had a young
man exceedingly hot, as if he had been roasted with fire, who
bore in his hands a golden goblet, of wonderful size, full of
water. And the emperor by his care being besprinkled with
the liquid, found the fire extinguished by it, and was restored
to his former health. And when he marvelled at this, and en-
quired of the roasted young man who had provided him with
this cooling aspersion who he was, he brought back to his re-

A.D. 1042. DEATH OF HARDICANUTE. 533

collection, that he had rebuilt a convent of the blessed martyr,
Laurence, which had been formerly destroyed by the pagans,
and established monks in it, and endowed it with large estates
and many benefices, and, among other things, had given it a
golden goblet, adorned with jewels, which, having then be-
stowed it on the church in honour of the martyr, he now, while
in the middle of the fire, recognized, while the roasted young
man supplied him with cooling water from it.

A.D. 1042. Hardicanute, king of England, being present at
a marriage feast, in which Osgod Glappa, a man of great
power, gave his daughter, Giva, to a certain Dane, by name Ca-
nute, at Lambey, while he was standing in sound health and
high spirits, and drinking with the bride and others of the
guests, fell to the ground all at once, and becoming speechless,
died on the eighth of June. After that, he was carried to Win-
chester, and buried near his father, Canute ; and his brother,
Edward, by the unanimous consent of the clergy and people,
was elected king at London, and on the first day of Easter was
consecrated king at Winchester, by Eadsy, archbishop of Can-
terbury, and Atlfric, archbishop of York, and their suffragan
bishops. But king Edward was the son of Ethelred, who was
the son of Edgar, who was the son of Edmund, who was the
son of Edward, who was the son of king Alfred the Great,
whose genealogy I have already traced up to Adam.

But king Edward, as soon as he was crowned king, took
away from queen Emma, his mother, who was at that time
living at Winchester, all the gold, and silver, and valuables that
she possessed, because before he was king she had given him.
nothing that he asked for. But, nevertheless, he ordered that
she should be provided with a sufficiency of necessary things,
and he commanded her to continue to live quietly at Winches-
ter. And note, that Edward the Second, the brother of Ethel-
red, that is to say, Edward the Martyr, was the uncle of this
Edward.

Cu. XXI.—From a.p. 1043 To a.p. 1066.

King Edward marries earl Godwin’s daughter—Godwin and
his sons become enemies to Edward—Death of Godwin—
Siward defeats Macbeth, and Malcolm is made king of
Scotland—Edward summons from Hungary his nephew
Edward, to become his successor—The story of lady Godiva

534 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1049.

—A singular piece of sorcery is detected at Rome—An agree-
ment is made between Harold and William of Normandy—
Harold ravages Wales— Saint Oswin— Quarrel between
Tosti and Harold—Death of Edward—Harold is crowned
king of England—William of Normandy invades England
—The battle of Hastings.

A.D. 1043. Eadsy, archbishop of Canterbury, being oppressed
with grave infirmities, abdicated his bishopric, and Siward
was consecrated archbishop in his stead. The same year,
Helstan, abbot of Ramsey, on the vigil of Saint Michael, was
stabbed with a knife by a stranger, at the hour of vespers,
within the church, and died, and was succeeded as abbot by
Ailfwin.

A.D. 1044. King Edward, by way of securing protection for
his kingly power, married the daughter of that most powerful
noble, earl Godwin, whose name was Edith. The same year,
Alfric, bishop of Helmham, died, and was succeeded by Sti-
gand, the king’s chaplain.

A.D. 1045. Brithwold, bishop of Ramsbury, died, and was
succeeded by Herman, the king’s chaplain. The same year,
king Edward collected a numerous fleet at the port of Sand-
wich, to act against the king of the Noricans, who was planning
an expedition against England. Buta war which was declared
against him by Sweyne, king of Denmark, prevented him
from carrying out his intention.

A.D. 1046. Silvester became pope, and occupied the Roman
chair fifty-six days, and was succeeded the same year by Gre-
gory, who ruled the see for two years. The same year, Living,
who had held the bishoprics of Worcester, Crediton, and Corn-

wall, died; and, after his decease, Leofric, the king’s chan- |

cellor, obtained the bishopric of Crediton and Cornwall, and
Aldred succeeded to the see of Worcester.

A.D. 1047. Grunketelle, the bishop of Selsey, died, and was
succeeded by Hecca, the king’s chaplain ; and the same year,
Ealfwin, bishop of Winchester, died, and Stigand, bishop of
Helmham, was promoted in his stead.

A.D. 1048. Clement was elected to the Roman chair, which
he occupied nine months and six days. The same year, Ed-
mund, bishop of Durham, died, and was succeeded by Eadred.

A.D. 1049. Damasus was made pope. He filled the Roman
chair twenty-six days, and was the same year succeeded by

A.D. 1049. SORCERY DISCOVERED AT ROME. 535

Leo, who ruled the see four years, two months, and six days.
In the time of this pope, king Edward sent ambassadors to

_ the Apostolic See, to procure him absolution from a vow which

he had made, for he vowed that he would go to Rome if he
obtained his father’s kingdom ; and the pope wholly released
him from this vow, and wrote to him, enjoining him strictly, in
the name of holy obedience and penitence, to distribute among
the poor the sum which he had prepared for his journey, and
either to build a new convent for monks, in honour of Saint
Peter the Chief of the Apostles, or else to repair an old one,
and to endow it with sufficient means for the support of the
brethren out of his own revenues; and, by his Apostolical autho-
rity, he commanded that whatever heshould give to that founda-
tion, or whatever had been given, or whatever should be hereafter
given by others, should be confirmed to it, and whatever pri-
vileges pertaining to the honour of God the king should en-
dow it with, the pope now sanctioned, and confirmed by the
most positive authority, and condemned all who infringed
them with his everlasting curse. Therefore, when the ambas-
sadors returned to England, the blessed Peter revealed, to a
certain monk of exemplary character, by name Wolsin, his
will that a certain foundation should be restored which was
called West Monastery [Westminster]. And when the monk
had related his vision to the king and to his brethren, the king,
by the advice of the whole kingdom, restored that foundation

and enriched it with estates, and revenues, and privileges.

The same year, a diabolical piece of sorcery, unheard of in
our times, was discovered at Rome. For there were in the
public road which leads to Rome, two old women living in one
cabin, and both imbued with the same wickedness, who were
in the habit of transforming any stranger who came to them by
himself, into a horse, or pig, or any other animal they chose, and
then, selling the animals that had been so transformed to mer-
chants, they spent the money that they procured in this man-
ner in drunkenness and debauchery. And, by chance, they
on one occasion received in their cottage a young man who
was well acquainted with the art of dancing, and who gained
his livelihood by the profession of an actor. And that night
they transformed him into an ass, and made a great profit by
means of him; for the young man, though he had become an
ass, had not lost his understanding, though he had lost his
power of speech. And whatever the old woman commanded,

536 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1049.

the ass performed, playing and dancing. And, accordingly,
as the multitude flocked to see the tricks of the ass, the old
witches did not allow them to see the ass play his tricks ex-
cept on payment of money. At last, when his fame was
spread over the whole province, a rich man came to the old
sorceresses, and, giving an immoderate price for him, became
the proprietor of this ass. But, as he was departing with his
purchase, he was warned by the woman that if he wished to
have a long enjoyment of the sport, he must keep the ass from
entering the water. Accordingly, the rich man appointed a
servant to watch him, and take diligent care of him. And
whenever he wished to be amused, the tricks of the ass de-
lighted him and all his company. But, after a considerable
period had elapsed, the tricks of the ass began to get weari-
some, and he began to be taken less care of by his keepers.
And so, one day he broke the halter by which he was fastened,

and threw himself into a lake which was close at hand, and ~

having rolled about for some time in the water, he recovered
his original form of aman. And his keeper pursued him, and,

seeing a man, enquired of him whether he had seen an ass —
g » eng)

running away. He told him that hehimself had been the ass, but
that he had just recovered the form of aman. And then he
related to him all that had happened to him, and told him all
the treatment that he had received. The servant marvelling,
reported the matter to his master, and his master reported it
to pope Leo. And the women being convicted, confessed
their crimes to the pope. And while the pope was in doubt
about the matter, he had his doubts set at rest by Peter Da-
mian, who adduced the instance of Simon Magus, who caused
Faustianus to appear in the shape of Simon, and to be regarded
with horror by his own sons.

Augustine tells a similar story of a certain man whose name
was Preestantius, which he says he heard from Preestantius’s
own son. For Preestantius had taken poison in some cheese ;
and as he lay in bed for many days as if he were asleep, when
he awoke, he said that he had become a horse, and he declared
that he had been carrying corn like a horse. The same Au-
gustine records, that when he was in Italy, he heard of some
women who used to give travellers. diabolical confections
wrapped up in cheese, by means of which they seemed to be
transformed into beasts of burden ; and then, when they had
finished the tasks that were imposed upon them, they returned

A.D. 1051. MEETING OF NOBLES AT LINDISFARNE. 537

to their human form, and testified that they had again re-
covered their rational minds. It is also found recorded by

_ the hermit Macarius, that a certain damsel was changed by

witches into a mare; and when she was presented by her
friends to Macarius, she did not appear to Macarius to be a
mare, but a damsel, but to all her own friends she appeared to
be a beast. When the man of God, having addressed his
prayers to the Lord, caused the damsel to appear to them all
to be really a woman: from which it is plain that the devils
cannot change human forms into beasts, but that they can
deceive the eyes of men with their machinations, so that a
body may be one thing,'and seem another.

A.D. 1050. The following bishops died :—Eadnoth, bishop
of Dorchester ; Siward, the deputy of Eadsy, archbishop of
Canterbury ; and, after Siward’s death, Eadsy himself died
also. Eadsy was succeeded by Robert, bishop of London,
and William succeeded Robert in the government of the church
of London; while Ulfo, the king’s chaplain, became bishop
of Dorchester.

A.D. 1051. King Edward released the English from a very
heavy tribute which had been accustomed, during the life-time
of his father, to be paid to the Danish mercenaries, to the
amount of thirty-eight thousand pounds. The same year, All-
fric, archbishop of York, died, and was succeeded by Kinsey,
the king’s chaplain.

The same year, William, duke of Normandy, came into Eng-
land, and was honourably received by king Edward, who pre-
sented him with many gifts, and sent him back with honour
to his own country.

This year also, many nobles of the Northumbrian nation
met at Lindisfarne, at a certain church, where they were going
to pass decrees, and they requested the priest to be charitable
enough to celebrate mass for them. But the priest, who that
night had been sleeping with a concubine, was afraid to ap-
proach the sacred office. But, as they earnestly entreated the

‘priest to chaunt the mass, at last, overcome by their entreaties,
he in great alarm began to celebrate the divine mysteries for
them at their request. But when he ought to have taken the
holy mystery, he carefully looked into the cup, and lo! he
saw the portion which, according to custom, had been put into
the cup so completely changed into an object of exceeding
blackness, that what he saw in the cup was rather of the colour

538 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1051.9

of a fish than of bread and wine. Immediately, the priest —
perceived his guilt, and, trembling greatly, he doubted what he -
ought to do with what he sawin the cup. For fearing to taste
it, as he would have feared death, he would have liked to spill
it on the ground; but he was afraid to do that, because it had
been consecrated. Being afraid, therefore, that whatever he
did he should not be able to escape the judgment of Almighty
God, he, with great fear, took it. But it was so bitter, that he
seemed never to have tasted anything more bitter. And the
mass was hardly finished, before he hastened to go to the bishop,
and lay before him the whole matter just as it had occurred.
And the bishop ordered him a penance, and enjoined him from
that day forth to endeavour to lead a pure and chaste life be-
fore God, which he promised faithfully, and, as long as he
lived, he kept his promise.

About the same time, Eustace, count of Boulogne, who had
married Goda, the sister of king Edward, landed at Dover with
his followers. And as his soldiers, in seeking for lodgings, be-
haved with exceeding folly and arrogance, they slew one of —
the men of the borough; and one of the citizens seeing this,
slew the soldier who had done the deed. On which account
the count and his soldiers were turned to anger, and slew many
men and women, and crushed two children under their own
feet and those of their horses. But, when the citizens assembled
together to resist, the enemy betook themselves to a shameful
flight, and eighteen of them were slain while flying ; but the
rest fled to king Edward, who was at that time at Gloucester.
Then earl Godwin, being exceedingly enraged at some of his
followers of the borough of Dover having been slain, collected
an army of all the principal men of his earldom, that is to say,
of Kent, Sussex, and Wessex ; and his eldest son, Sweyne, did
the same with respect to the provinces under him, that is —
to say, Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, Herefordshire, Somer-
setshire, and Berkshire; and his son Harold collected troops
from his provinces, that is, from Essex, East-Anglia, Cam-
bridgeshire, and Huntingdonshire ; so that they collected a vast
force. And when king Edward heard of this, he also collected
a numerous army, being prepared to fight with the enemy, if
it proved necessary. In the meantime, Godwin, coming with
his army into the province of Gloucestershire, sent ambassadors
to the king, and desired Eustace and his companions to be
given up to him, under a threat of war if they were not. But,

| A.D. 1052. GODWIN PLUNDERS KENT AND SUSSEX. 539

as the king was sufficiently provided with military forces, he
replied that he would not send count Eustace to him. More-
over, he commanded him, inasmuch as he had assembled an
army against him, and had disturbed the peace of the kingdom
without his permission, to come before him on an appointed
day, to make answer concerning this wrong, and to submit to
the law. But Godwin, as he did not dare to engage in battle
with the king, so also was he unwilling to come to his court
to submit to the law; on which account, the king, in accord-
ance with the unanimous decision of his court, outlawed God-
win and his four sons, and banished them from England.
And Godwin with his wife Giva, and Tosti his son with his
wife Judith, the daughter of Baldwin, count of Flanders, and
his other two sons Sweyn and Gurth, embarked on board ship
with large treasures, and directed their course into Flanders
to the before-mentioned count Baldwin. His sons, Harold
and Leofwin, went to Bristol and crossed over to Ireland.
The king, too, divorced his wife Edith, on account of her
father, and sent her without any honour to Redwell, with only
one handmaid, and entrusted her to the care of the abbess.
A.D. 1052. Marianus, the Scot, that most veracious writer
of chronicles, departed this life. The same year, queen Emma,
the wife of the kings Ethelred and Canute, died, and was
buried at Winchester. About the same time, Griffin, king of
Wales, laid waste the provinces of Hereford, and slew num-
bers of the men of the district who resisted. And not long
afterwards, count Harold, and his brother Leofwin, coming
from Ireland into Wessex, carried off great booty, and slew
those who opposedthem. But Godwin, plundering the coun-
ties of Kent and Sussex, and carrying off a great deal of
booty, came at last to the Isle of Wight, where his sons, Ha-
rold and Leofwin, joined him, and then, they all diligently
plotted to avenge themselves on king Edward. Accordingly,
they laboured to win over numbers of the warlike men of
these provinces, and having collected an immense army, on
the day of the exaltation of the Holy Cross, they steered their
fleet towards the city of London, and pitched their camp near
the city of Suthwerk. King Edward, who was at that time
in London, had collected a vast number of armed men, and
no inconsiderable fleet, in order to pursue Godwin and his
sons, both by land and water. But the English, whose sons,
and nephews, and kinsmen, and friends, were with Godwin,

:

540 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1054,

were unwilling to fight against him. On which account, five
wise men of each party zealously treated about the renewal of
peace between the king and duke Godwin. But when it was
morning, the king having taken counsel with his chief men,

restored their former honours to Godwin, and all his sons ex- |

cept Sweyn: for he, having been influenced by penitence be-
cause he had slain Beorn, a cousin of the king, had proceeded
bare-foot from Flanders to Jerusalem, and on his return, died
on the road, of a disease contracted from the excessive cold.
The king also received back, in a worthy manner, Edith, his
queen, the daughter of duke Godwin, and restored her to her
former dignity. And, concord having been thus produced,

and peace being thus established, the king promised all the
people upright laws and true justice, and sent back the Nor-_

mans, who had given him wicked counsel against the English,
to their native country ; among whom, Robert, archbishop of
Canterbury, and William, bishop of London, and Ulfo, bishop
of Dorchester, and their Normans, escaped with difficulty, and
crossed the sea. But not long afterwards, William was recalled
on account of his goodness, and restored to his bishopric.
Stigand, who formerly, when he was dismissed from the
bishopric of Helmham, aiming at a higher rank, had invaded
the bishopric of Winchester, now, circumventing the simplicity
of king Edward, obtained the dignity of archbishop of Can-
terbury, though Robert was stillalive. But Osbern and Hugo,
being both Normans by birth, left their castles, and sought
refuge with the king of Scotland, and were received by him.

A.D. 1053. The brother of Griffin, king of Wales, whose

name was Rhesus, was slain in the place which is called Bul-
lingdon, and his head was carried to Gloucester, and pre-
sented to king Edward on the vigil of the Epiphany.

A.D. 1054. Edward, king of England, celebrated the so-
lemn festival of Easter at Winchester. And the king, during
this solemn festival, was sitting at table, when his cup-bearer,
bringing the king’s cup full of wine to the table, caught
one of his feet in the floor of the room, but recovering him-
self with the other foot, he avoided any accident. And
when earl Godwin, the father-in-law of the king, who, ac-
cording to custom, was sitting next to the king at dinner, saw
this, he said, ‘‘ Here, one brother has brought assistance to
another.”” And the king, speaking ironically, answered this
Jest of his, saying, “ My brother might lately have been able

A.D. 1055. ALGAR AND GRIFFIN ENTER HEREFORD. 541

to assist me, if it had not been for the treachery of Godwin.”
And he, being indignant at this expression of the king, an-
swered, “I Know, O king, I know well, that you look upon
me with suspicion, because of the death of your brother Al-
fred. But may God, who is true and just, not permit this
morsel of bread which I have in my hand to go down my
throat without choking me, if ever your brother was nearer
death, or farther from life, owing to me or to my counsel.”
And when he had said this, the king blessed the mouthful
which Godwin put in his mouth, and he having an evil con-
science, was choked by it. And when the king saw him lifeless
and pale, “ Drag this dog out,” said he, ‘this traitor, and bury
him in the cross roads; for he does not deserve to receive
Christian burial.” But when his sons who were present saw
this, they drew their father away from the table, without the
king being aware of it, and buried him in the old monastery
of that city. Then king Edward gave his dukedom to his
son Harold.

_ The same year, by command of king Edward, Siward, the
gallant duke of Northumberland, led a large army into Scot-
land, and drove the king, Macbeth, from his kingdom, many
thousands of Scots being slain, and all the Normans, of
whom we have made mention above. And then king Kd-
ward gave the kingdom of Scotland to Malcolm, son of the
king of Cumberland, to be held of him.

A.D. 1055. Victor became pope of Rome, and filled the Ro-
man chair two years, three months, and thirteen days. The
same year, Siward, the noble duke of Northumberland, died,
and Edward granted his dukedom to Tosti, the brother of
duke Harold. And not long afterwards, in a council held at
_ London, king Edward banished count Algar from England,
who soon after went to Ireland, and having procured eighteen
piratical vessels, he united himself to Griffin, king of Wales,
and then entered the kingdom of England, with the intent to
lay it waste. At length, when Algar and Griffin had entered
the province of Hereford in a hostile manner, they were en
countered by duke Ranulph, king Edward’s sister’s son, with
a numerous army. But at the very first onset, Count Ra-
nulph and his men took to flight. And when Algar and
Griffin saw this, they pursued the flying enemy, and slew five
hundred of them, and having gained the victory, entered the
city of Hereford, where, having put to death seven canons

542 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 10554

who defended the principal doors of the church, they burnt
the church with all its vessels and ornaments; and having
slain or taken prisoners several of the citizens, and having
burnt the city and enriched themselves with a very noble
booty, they departed. When this exploit was made known to |
king Edward, he collected a large army at Gloucester; the |
command of which he gave to the valiant duke Harold, and
himself pursued Algar and Griffin with vigour, and boldly en-
tering the Welch territories, encamped under Snowden. But |
Griffin and Algar, knowing that Harold was a valiant and |
warlike man, fled from his face, not daring to resist him. |
And he, after having ravaged the district terribly, marched to |
Hereford, and surrounded it with a high and wide rampart, |
and fortified it with gates and bolts. But at last, as messen- |
gers went to and fro between Harold and his enemies, they
made a lasting peace with one another ; and Algar, coming to —
the king, received back his earldom by the king’s voluntary —
rant.
5 The same year, Herman, bishop of Wilton, being angry be-
cause the king would not transfer the seat of his see from
Ramsbury to Salisbury, abdicated his bishopric, and passing
over the sea, took upon himself the habit of a monk in the
monastery of Saint Bertin, and dwelt three years in the mo-
nastery of that convent. But this Herman was the last bishop
of the diocese of Wilton. The first bishop of that see was
Athelstan, the second Odo, who was afterwards archbishop of
Canterbury, the third was Osulf, the fourth Algar, the fifth
ABlfstan, the sixth Siric, the seventh Ailfric, the eighth Brith-
_ wald, and he lasted from the time of king Ethelred to the
reign of the last Edward.. Concerning this Brithwald, it is
recorded, that in the time of king Canute, he often occupied
his thoughts about the royal family of the English nation,
which was now almost destroyed, and about the question whe-
ther it was again to be recruited. But when, one night, sleep
overtaking him, while meditating on these matters, he was
raised up on high, and saw the chief of the Apostles, the
blessed Peter, holding by the hand Edward, the son of king
Ethelred, who at that time was living as an exile in Nor-
mandy, and consecrating him as king; and Peter showed him
that he would live a life of celibacy, and that he would reign
for twenty-four years. Moreover, when the same Brithwald
put a question about the succession of the king, it is said that

A.D. 1057. COUNT LEOFRIC DIES. 543

he received for answer, “The kingdom of England belongs to
God, and he will provide himself with kings.”” Herman, then,
as has been already said, succeeded him, who was the last
bishop of Wilton, as that bishopric was afterwards united with
the diocese of Sherborne, aud the cathedral city became Salis-
bury.

pe 1056. Athelstan, bishop of Hereford, died. He was
succeeded by Leovegar, the chaplain of duke Harold, a lover
of churches, a reliever of the poor, a defender of widows and
orphans, a helper of the oppressed, and a preserver of his own
virginity. This servant of God, perfect as he was in all re-
ligion, Griffin, king of Wales, deprived of life, after having
burnt the city of Hereford. He was succeeded by Walter,
who continued bishop till the time of king William. The
same year, Aigelric, bishop of Durham, resigned his bishopric
of his own accord, and retired to his monastery which was
called Burgh, where he assumed the habit of a monk, and
lived there twelve years in an exemplary manner.

A.D. 1057. Henry was elected emperor of the Romans, and
reigned fifty years. The same year, Edward, king of Eng-
land, being advanced in life, sent Aldred, bishop of Worcester,
to the king of Hungary, and invited back from that country
the son of his brother, king Edmund, whose name was Edward,
with all his family, that either he or his sons might succeed
him in the kingdom. Edward accordingly came, with his son
Edgar, and his daughters, Margaret and Christina. But this
Edward lived only a short time after his arrival in England, and
then died in the city of London, leaving his son, Edgar, and his
two daughters before-mentioned, tothe guardianship of theking.
The same year, that man of virtuous memory, count Leofric,
died on the last day of August, and was honourably buried at
Coventry, in the monastery which he and his wife, a devout
worshipper of God and lover of the blessed Virgin Mary, the
pious and noble countess Godiva, had built from its founda-
tions out of her own patrimony; and having established
monks in it, they endowed it so abundantly with estates, and
treasures of various kinds, that there was not found such a
quantity of gold, and silver, and precious stones in any monas-
tery in all England as there was in that monastery at that
time. They also magnificently endowed with estates, and
houses, and various ornamental gifts, the churches of Worces-
~ ter, Evesham, Wenlock, and Leominster, and some other con-

544 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1058. —

vents, especially that of Saint John the Baptist, and Saint
Wereburga the Virgin, situated in Leicester, and the church of
Saint Mary of Stowe, which Eadmot, bishop of Dorchester,
had built.

This countess, wishing, in a most pious spirit, to deliver the
city of Coventry from a burdensome and shameful slavery, often
entreated the count her husband, with earnest prayers, under
the favour of the Holy Trinity and the Holy Mother of God,
to deliver the town from that slavery to which I have alluded.
And when the count reproached her for persevering in asking
to no purpose for a thing which would be injurious to him, he
at last charged her never for the future to mention this subject
to him. She, on the contrary, prompted by female obstinacy,
incessantly attacked her husband with the request which I have
mentioned, and at last extorted this answer from him :—

“‘Mount,”’ said he, “‘your horse naked, and ride through the
market of the town, from beginning to end, at the time when
all the people are assembled, and when you return you shall
obtain your request.” And the countess answered and said,
“And if I am willing to do so, will you give me permission ?””
And the count replied, “I will.’ Then the countess Godiva,
beloved by God, on a set day, as I have already said, mounted
her horse naked, letting fall the hair and tresses of her head,
and so covering her whole body except her beautiful legs; and
when she had finished her journey, without having been seen
by any one, she returned with joy to her husband, who looked
on this as a miracle. And count Leofric, releasing the city of
Coventry from its slavery, confirmed the charter which he then
gave it with the sanction of his own seal.

A.D. 1058. Stephen was elected to the Roman chair, which
he filled for nine months. And the same year, he was suc-
ceeded by Benedict, who also governed the see nine months,
as his predecessor had done. About this time, a certain Ro-
man citizen, of youthful age, of senatorial rank, married a
nobly-born virgin, in honour of whom he gave a marriage-feast
to his companions, which lasted several days. And when one
day they had gone out to the fields to recruit by sport their
stomachs, which were weary with dainties, they called for a
ball, and spent a great part of the day in playing. But the
young man, that he might not while playing lose his wedding-
ring, he, unperceived by his companions, put it on the stretched-
out finger of a brazen statue which was at hand, and then he

-
A.D. 1058. STORY OF A ROMAN CITIZEN, 545

applied himself to the game; but when his bowels began to
warm with the violent running about, he retired from the sport
before any of the others, and found the finger on which he had
placed the ring bent down to the palm of the hand, and the
ring tight and fast on the finger. And having tried for some
time to no purpose to break the finger, or to get the ring
off some way or other; when he found that he could effect
nothing, he departed in great vexation, lest the matter should
become known to his companions. And the following night,
he came back to the statue with some servants, and then they
were amazed to find the finger stretched out, and the ring
taken away. So, concealing his loss, the next night, when he
had laid himself down by the side of his new bride, he felt
something dark and dense lying between her and himself, which
could be felt but not seen. And being prevented by this ob-
stacle from embracing his wife, he heard a voice saying to him,
“‘ Lie with me, because you have espoused me this day. I am
Venus, on whose finger you put the ring. I have it, end I
will not give it up.’ <A considerable time elapsed, during
which, every time that he wished to lie in his wife’s bosom, he
felt and heard the same thing. In all other respects, he was
a powerful and vigorous young man, of reputation in the forum
as well asin the army. At last, by the advice of his wife, the
matter was revealed to the parents of both of them ; and they,
having taken counsel on the matter, related the occurrence as
it had happened to a priest in the suburbs, named Palumbus.
He was well acquainted with the arts of necromancy, so as to
be able to raise up magic shapes, to summon devils, and to ex-
cite them to the performance of any action. They agreed to
give this priest a great heap of silver and gold to recover the
ring, if that were possible. But the priest said to the youth,
«« Find and bring me an epistle composed with mechanical art.
Go,”’ said he, ‘‘at the same hour of the night, to the road where
it branches off in four directions, and stand there, and carefully
watch for the event of what shall take place silently. For
there will pass by figures of persons of both sexes, of every
age, degree, and condition; some of whom will be on horse-
back, some on foot, some will bend their countenances on the
ground, and others will lift their heads high with pride and
arrogance. Do not you give an answer to any of them, not
even if they speak to you. For whatever has any bearing on
joy or sorrow, you will see at once in their countenances and
VOL. I. . NN

546 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D: 1059.

garments. Then one will follow that multitude, of a more |
noble stature and more ample size, sitting in a chariot, and if
you, without speaking, give him the epistle to read, what you
wish will be done immediately, if you only persevere with con- |
stancy.” Accordingly, the young man undertakes with great |
spirit all that was commanded him, and standing fearlessly |
at the place where four roads meet, he, by command of the |
priest, tests the fidelity of his statement. Among others who
passed by, he saw a woman in a meretricious style of dress,
riding on a mule, covering her shoulders with her dishevelled |
hair, holding a golden rod in her hands, with which she guided |
the animal on which she was riding ; she was as good as naked, |
by reason of the thinness of her garments, and practised im-
modest gestures. Not to dwell on the rest, at last came the |
|
:
|

one who seemed like the lord of the multitude, casting terrible
looks on the young man from that splendid seat of his chariot,
which was adorned with emeralds and pearls, and he asked
him the cause of his being there. But the young man answered
him not a word, but holding out his hand offered him the let-
ter. And the devil, not daring to despise the well-known seal,
read the writing: and presently, stretching forth his hands
towards heaven, he said: “O Almighty God, how long will you
endure the wickedness of the priest Palumbus?”? And imme-
diately he sent servants from his side to take the rmg away
from the Venus. She resisted for a long time, but at last gave
up the ring. And so the young man gained his wishes, and
enjoyed the embraces of his wife, which he had so long sighed
for, without any obstacle. But the priest Palumbus, when he
heard the complaints which the devil addressed to the Lord
respecting him, knew that the end of his days was at hand.
On which account, he amputated all his limbs with a knife,
and so died in wonderful penitence, having confessed unheard-
of crimes to the pope, in the presence of all the people.

A.D. 1059. When duke Harold was staying at an estate that
belonged to him, namely, at Boseham, he one day entered a
fishing boat to amuse himself. And when, in the progress of
his sport, he had advanced into the open sea, on a sudden, a
violent storm arose, and he, with his companions, was driven
to a village in the territory of Ponthieu, and was taken prisoner
by the men of that country and bound with chains, and thrown
into prison, as they charged him with having come thither as
aspy. Harold being a crafty man, considering how he might

A.D. 1062. WOLSTAN ELECTED PONTIFF OF WORCESTER. 547

obtain his release, sent a messenger, whom he induced by large
promises to carry the message, to William, duke of Normandy,
telling him that he had been sent to him by king Edward to
reveal some important affairs to him. He also added, that he
was detained a prisoner by Godwin,’ count of Ponthieu, and so
prevented from performing his commission. Then Harold, at
the command of William, was released by Godwin, and con-
ducted into Normandy, where duke William received him with
all honour, and gave him honourable presents of food and
clothing. Then Harold, that he might obtain the more fa-
vour in the eyes of king William, bound himself by an oath to
give up to him the castle of Canterbury, which was under his
authority ; and also the kingdom of England, after the death
of king Edward. In consequence of which promise, he was
honoured by being betrothed to the duke’s daughter, who was
as yet only a little girl, and enriched by the great extent of
her whole inheritance, and became an intimate friend of Wil-
liam. Others relate this matter in a different way, saying that
Harold had been sent into Normandy by king Harold on pur-
pose to conduct duke William into England, as king Edward
was thinking of making him his heir.

A.D. 1060. Nicolas was placed in the Roman chair, which
he filled two years and six months. ‘The same year, Kinsey,
archbishop of York, paid the debt of nature, and was suc-
ceeded by Aildred, bishop of Worcester; and the diocese of
Hereford, which had been entrusted to him on account of his
industry, was given to Walter Lotharing, the chaplain of queen
Edith. The same year, Duduc, bishop of Wells, died, and was
succeeded by Gisa, the king’s chaplain.

A.D. 1061. Aldred, archbishop of York, went to Rome with
count Tosto, and received the pallium from pope Nicolas. And
at the same time and place, Gisa, bishop of Wells, and Walter,
bishop of Hereford, were consecrated.

a.D. 1062. Wolstan, prior of the church of Worcester, a
man of exceeding piety, was canonically elected to the presi-
dency of the same church, and was consecrated its pontiff,
amid the acclamations of the people. And he was consecrated
by dred, archbishop of York, because Stigand, archbishop

1 Called Guy by Hume, who represents Harold as having been sent for
“the purpose of preventing the return of a son and grandson of earl God-
_ win, who had been given as hostages to king Edward, and whom he had
entrusted to the custody of the duke of Normandy. :
JANE Agy:

548 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1065.

of Canterbury, was at that time interdicted from performing |
the duties of the episcopal office ; because, during the lifetime
of Robert, the archbishop of that church, he had presumed to
occupy that archbishopric. |

The same year, a prodigy was born on the borders of Brit- —
tany and Normandy, in which in one, or I should rather say,
in two women, there were two heads and four arms, and every-
thing else double down to the navel. But below the navel
there were only two legs, two feet, and everything else single.
One of the heads laughed, ate, and talked, the other wept, was |
hungry, and was silent. The prodigy ate with both its mouths,
but what was eaten passed through only one passage. At —
length one died, and the other survived, and then the living
body bore the dead corpse united to it for nearly three years,
till at last she also died, worn out by the weight of her burden,
and the offensive smell of the corpse.

A.D. 1063. Harold, duke of the West Saxons, advanced into
Wales, in a hostile manner, by command of king Edward, to
attack king Griffin; but Griffin having heard beforehand of
his menaced invasion, went on board ship, and, fleeing in this
manner, escaped with some difficulty. But Harold, when he
ascertained that he had fled, withdrew from Wales, and assem-
bled a larger army. And when his brother Tosti had come to
meet him, by command of the king, they united their forces,
and began to lay waste the whole of that country, both by sea
and land. On which account, the Welch, under the pressure
of necessity, gave Harold hostages, and promised from that
time forth to pay tribute to king Edward, and expelled their
king Griffin, and drove him into banishment.

A.D. 1064. The Welch nation murdered their king Griffin
on the fifth of August, and sent his head to duke Harold ; and
Harold immediately transmitted it to king Edward, and placed
another king in the Welch throne, who took the oath of fealty
and allegiance to king Edward, and promised faithfully to pay
him all the tribute which had been accustomed to be paid to
the kings of England.

A.D. 1065. The most sacred bones of the holy Oswin, king
and martyr, were discovered in the following manner: After
the passion of the most illustrious king Oswin, as has been
clearly related, in the mention of his sufferings which I made
in the early part of this history, his body was carried to the
monastery of the blessed Mary, the mother of God, which is

A.D. 1065. ACCOUNT OF THE MARTYR OSWIN. 549

situated at the mouth of the river Tyne, on the north bank,
and was buried there in royal fashion. And there, on account of
the frequency of the miracles wrought at it, the place of his bu-
rial was, for a very long series of years, held in such great re-
verence by the people of the country, that they thought that the
king, who was buried among them, was their lord and patron on
earth, and their defender in heaven. On which account, in pro-
cess of time, to the greater glory of the martyr, virgins, under
the vows of nuns, from the convent of the Abbess Saint Hilder,
were introduced to watch by his body till the time of the Da-
nish persecution, which was raised by the fury of the brothers,
Hinguar and Hubba, and they remained in the church of the
blessed mother of God, in the northern part of the district.
In that furious persecution, that monastery, with all the other
convents of that part of the county, is believed to have been
demolished, and the holy virgins were translated by martyrdom
to the kingdom of heaven. After these events that district
fell into the power of the infidel Danes, and continued so for
many ages, and so the recollection of the holy martyr was ut-
terly effaced from the minds of the people of the province.
At length the devotion of the faithful gradually returned, and
as the purity of their faith increased, the bishop of the place
established some priests in the church of the mother of God,
and also some of the secular clergy, who should perform the
offices of divine service for all the inhabitants of the parishes
of the province. In the meantime, the most blessed martyr
lay buried beneath the lowly turf till the time of Mgelwin,
bishop of Durham, and Tosti, earl of Northumberland, who
obtained that earldom after the death of Siward, not by heredi-
tary succession, but by the gift of king Edward. It seemed
good, therefore, to the divine mercy to bring the relics of the
most blessed martyr to light, for the sake of the advancement
of the whole church, during the lifetime of the pontiff before
mentioned, in order that the light which had long been hidden
under a bushel might at last be set upon a candlestick, and
- lighten the darkness of infidelity. But there was a certain
keeper of the before-mentioned church in which the body of
the blessed martyr had been buried, by name Edmund, a man
of great piety, and devoted to the blessed martyr, who, al-
though he had never been attached by any formal profession
to the body of any monastery, had, nevertheless, been invested
with the monastic habit. He, one night, when after a noc-

550 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1065.

turnal vigil in the church, he had yielded up his limbs to sleep,
saw a man stand by his side of lofty stature, and shining with
heavenly brilliancy, who addressed him by his name, and said,
“Brother Edmund, brother Edmund, I am king Oswin, who
lies buried in this church, unknown to all men. Arise, there-
fore, and tell the pontiff Aigelwin to seek for my corpse beneath
the floor of this oratory, and when he has found it, not to

neglect to bury it more honourably than it has hitherto been —

in the same oratory.’ Edmund, therefore, awoke, and being
rejoiced at the vision, went, at early dawn, to the pontiff, and
with due reverence related to him all the circumstances of the
vision. And the pontiff, when he heard the story, exulted
with exceeding triumph, and came joyfully to the place, and
there he found a great number of people collected from remote
parts of the country, who, at the command of the prelate,
having all first duly offered up prayers, began to dig up the
floor of the oratory; and after having thus employed a great
portion of the day, though they sought, yet they found nothing.
Then Edmund, being agitated at the injury sustained by the
saint, took a spade and struck the earth vigorously in a place
where they had been all digging a long time, and having re-
peated his blow, he struck against a flat gravestone ; and drag-
ging back the stone, he joyfully discovered the precious relics.
Then the most holy body was raised by the prelate, and washed
by his own hands, and wrapped in a clean cloth, and honour-
ably buried in a more dignified spot in the same church. And
the water in which his most holy body had been washed, was,
by the command of the bishop, poured forth in a corner of

the oratory, and was afterwards very beneficial, not only to ©

men, but also to animals, in restoring them to health; and
the dust being infused in water and drank, delivered many
men from various kinds of diseases, and restored them to their
former health. And all these things were done on the tenth
of March, in the four hundred and fourteenth year after his
passion.
The countess Judith, the wife of Tosti, who, when the
bishop went forth to prosecute this search, had entreated of
him to give her some portion of the holy relics, received as a
present from him a great part of the hair of the holy martyr,
in an entirely uninjured condition. And she, prompted by
pious devotion, wished to confirm certain unbelievers in the
faith. Therefore she ordered a large fire to be kindled in the

A.D. 1065. QUARREL BETWEEN TOSTI AND HAROLD. 551

middle of the hall, and having with all faith heaped on piles
of wood, they, without feeling any injury from the raging fire,
were changed, and became of greater beauty than previously.
The countess, marvelling at the strangeness of the circum-
stance, took the hair of the holy martyr out of the fire, and
at the suggestion of the bishop, placed it in [a safe place
with all due honour, and then permitted the catholic people,
which had come together to see this spectacle, to depart, being
thus confirmed in their devotion to the blessed martyr.

The same year, duke Harold built a large house in the
Welch territory, and prepared many things which were requi-
site for the proper furnishing of it, with the intention that
king Edward, in the hunting season, might turn aside thither
and remain for some time. But Cradoc, the son of Griffin,
whom Harold had banished the preceding year, came thither
in a hostile manner, and slew the workmen, and the super-
intendents, and the soldiers, and the servants, and carried
away all the materials which had been collected with great
labour.

It happened the same year, in the presence of king Edward,
at Windsor, that Tosti, earl of Northumberland, being insti-
gated by envy, seized Harold, his brother, by the hair, as he
was pledging the king in a wine-cup, and while all the house-
hold of the king stood amazed, struck him violently, and
treated him with great indignity. But Harold, being excited
to revenge, seized him by the hands, and lifting him up on
high, dashed him down on the floor. And seeing this, the
soldiers started up on all sides, and parting the brothers by
force, they put an end to the strife, and separated the angry
combatants from one another. And the king foretold that
the destruction of both the brothers was at hand, and that
the avenging anger of God, and a mortal quarrel between
them, would not be longer suffered. For all the sons of the
traitor Godwin were men of such wickedness, that if they saw
any beautiful town belonging to any one, they caused the
lord of it to be slain by night, and his offspring to be de-
stroyed, that they might obtain the property of the deceased.
Nevertheless, by their soft and honied words, which’ were
only poisoned arrows, they cajoled the simplicity of the over-
credulous king, that, even after their many enormous crimes,
he appointed them justiciaries of the kingdom, governors of
the realm, and managers of all things. But Tosti, after his

552 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066. —

quarrel with his brother Harold, departed from the king’s
court in a rage, and went to the city of Hereford, where his
brother Harold had prepared a great banquet for the king,
and slew all his servants, and put an arm ora leg, or some
fragment or limb of their mutilated bodies, in every vessel of
wine, or mead, or beer, or other drink, sending a message to
the king, that when he came to his supper he would find
plenty of pickled meat, and that he might procure dainties
for himself. And the king, when he heard of this insolent
jest, cursing him because of this detestable wickedness, banished
him from the kingdom.

The same year, the men of Northumberland met together
on the tenth of October, and coming to York, drove away
Tosti, their count, and slew the whole of his household, both
English and Danes, and plundered and carried off his treasures,
and his arms, and every thing which belonged to him. And
when they had expelled him, they appointed Morchar, the
son of the noble Algar, count of that province, sending a mes-
sage to the king to beg him to confirm him in the earldom.
And when king Edward had given his consent, Tosti pre-
sently with his wife went into Flanders to count Baldwin, and
spent the winter at Saint Omers.

A.D. 1066. Edward, king of England, on the day of the
nativity of our Lord, held his court at Westminster, and caused
the church which he had built from its foundations outside
the city of London, to be dedicated with great pomp on the
day of the Holy Innocents, in honour of Saint Peter, the chief
of the Apostles. But amid the usual solemn festivities at-
tending on a dedication of this kind, the king was seized, as
he had been before, by a severe sickness. And as his illness
increased, he took to his bed; and when he had lain there
speechless, and as it were lifeless, for two days, on the third
day he arose again, as it were from the dead, and sighing
heavily and deeply, he took up his parable in this manner,
and said, “ Almighty God, if it be not a fanciful illusion, but
a real vision which I have seen, grant me the power of re-
lating it to the bystanders; but if, on the contrary, it be a
deceitful illusion, then I beg of you to deny me the power of
relating it.” But as soon as he had finished this prayer,
he spoke with sufficient readiness, distinctness, and plainness,
and said, “I just now saw two monks standing by my side,
whom formerly, when a young man in Normandy, I had seen

|

A.D. 1066. EDWARD, KING OF ENGLAND, DIES. §53

living in a most pious manner, and whom I know to have died
ina most christian manner. They assured me that they were
messengers of God, and that they had been sent to me; and
they added these words: ‘Since the nobles of England, and
the dukes, and the bishops, and the abbots are not the ser-
vants of God, but of the devil, God has given this kingdom,
for one day, into the hand of the enemy, and devils will
traverse the whole of this country.’ And when I said that
I would report this to the people, that, being sinners, they
might make confession, and satisfaction, and amend their
ways, and obtain mercy, as the Ninevites had done—‘ Nothing
of this,’ said they, ‘ will happen because they will not repent ;
and God will not have mercyupon them.’ And I replied: ‘And
when may are mission of these terrible calamities be expected ?”
To this question they replied—‘ With respect to this, it will be
like the case of a green tree when it is cut asunder in the
middle, and a part of it is cut off and carried to a distance
from the trunk ; when that part without the assistance of any
one shall begin again to flourish, and to bear fruit, then a
remission of these evils may he expected.’”? And the English
experienced the truth of this prophecy, inasmuch as England
became the habitation of foreigners, and subject to the domi-
nion of strangers, so that in a short time there was no English-
man, either duke, or pontiff, or abbot, nor was there any
prospect of an end of all this misery.

Therefore the peaceful king of England, Edward, the glory
of the English, the son of king Ethelred, exchanged his tem-
poral kingdom for an eternal one, after he had reigned twenty-
four years, on the fourth indiction, and the fifth day of the week,
on the vigil of the Epiphany of the Lord—so that most blessed
king died, and was buried the next day at London, in the church
which he himself had built in a new style of architecture,
from which many people who built churches afterwards, took
pattern, and emulated that work of his in a most costly manner.

In this king the line of the English kings ended, which is
recorded as not having been interrupted from the time of
Cedric, the first king of the West Saxons, of the race of the
Angles, but to have lasted five hundred and seventy-one years,
with the exception of the breaks in the succession caused by a
few Danes, who, when the sins of the English nation required
such a chastisement, reigned for a time.

Now, then, since a sufficient account is contained in the

554 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER, "A.D. 1066. —

preceding pages of this book, of the secular cares and warlike
deeds of that most blessed and peaceful king and confessor,
Edward, it, nevertheless, appears proper to say a little on the

subject of his sanctity and virtues. For, while he was yet in ~

his mortal body, he was a most learned and active inquirer
into the heavenly mysteries; and the King of kings, by the

spirit of prophecy, revealed to him some secret things, which -

deserve to be handed down to the recollection of. posterity.
For, once upon a time, when the king, being at Westminster,
on Haster-day, had been holding a court in kingly fashion, and
was sitting at table, he suddenly raised his voice and laughed
very loudly, and so turned the eyes of all the guests upon
himself. And when they all marvelled at his having laughed
thus without any reason as they fancied, when, after dinner,
the king had turned into the withdrawing room, and had taken
his seat among his bishops and nobles, duke Harold said to
the king: ‘O lord king, we saw an unusual circumstance to-
day, at which we all maryelled, because we never beheld you
laugh so openly before, nor was there, as we imagine, any
cause which excited your laughter.’’ The king answered him:
“‘T saw a strange thing, and therefore it was not without cause
that I burst out laughing.” Then the nobles who were sitting
around, not at all supposing that so great a man had laughed
without any reason, began humbly to beg of him to condescend
to explain to them the cause of his excessive mirth. And

when he had been wrought upon by their frequent entreaties, —

he said: ‘More than two hundred years are elapsed since the
seven sleepers in the cave of Mount Ccelius, near Ephesus,
have been resting on their right sides; but now, since we first

sat down at table, they have turned on their left sides, and -

there will lie seventy years more.’ But when those who were
present heard this, they asked him what this turning of the
men portended? And he said: ‘Of a truth, that turning is
full of an omen of dire import to mankind. For wars and
oppressions of nations will torment the human race in an in-
tolerable degree, and there will be changes of many kingdoms,
and through the virtue of Christ the pagans will be crushed
by the Christians.” When they heard this, anda good deal
more, the nobles before mentioned departed from the king in
great astonishment, and determined to send ambassadors to
examine into the truth of this circumstance. But duke Harold
sent a soldier, and a certain affluent bishop sent one of his

A.D. 1066. DISAGREEMENT AS TO APPOINTING A KING. Syst)

secular clergy, and an abbot sent a monk with royal presents
and letters sanctioned with the king’s seal, to Michael, empe-
ror of Constantinople, entreating him to command the seven
sleepers to be shown to the ambassadors of Edward, king of
England. And the emperor received the ambassadors of Eng-
land, who came from such a distant country, with all kind-
ness, and caused the before-mentioned seven sleepers to be
shown to them, who found all the signs about the holy sleepers
which king Edward had while in England predicted would be
found; and so, offering gifts and giving thanks to God, they
returned to their country.’

Especially we must not omit to mention in our account of
this most holy king, that he never violated either the purity
of his own person, or the chastity of any woman. Never-
theless, he had, as I have already stated, a queen, the daughter
of count Godwin, by name Edith, in whose breast there was
deposited a perfect mastery over all the liberal sciences.
But in secular matters, she exercised and displayed only a
moderate genius. And the king treated her, being his wife,
in such a manner, that he neither removed her from his bed,
and yet never knew her after the fashion of a husband. But
whether he did so out of hatred to her father, who had been
convicted of being a traitor, and to his family, which hatred
he prudently dissembled for a time, or out of a love for chas-
tity, is a point in dispute among some writers, who interpret
all doubtful matters in the worst way. But those who are
his well-wishers, and who, as it seems, are most im accordance
with the truth, undertake to say, that the truth was, that he,
being a pious king, was unwilling to corrupt the royal family,
and to propagate heirs to succeed to himself from the family
of a traitor.

When Edward, the pious king of England, was dead, in
whom the line of the kings of England terminated, the no-
bles of the kingdom were in doubt as to whom they should
appoint as their king and governor. For some favoured Wil-
_ jiam, duke of Normandy, and others count Harold, son of
Godwin, and others, Edgar,? son of Edward. And Edward

1 Our chronicler’s story is not reconcilable with the date usually assigned
to this fable. The seven sleepers are supposed to have been blockaded in
their cave by the emperor Decius, who reigned a.p. 249—251, and to have
awakened after a sleep of a hundred and eighty-seven years, in the reign
of Theodosius.—See Gibbon, c, xxxiii. vol. vi. p. 32.

2 Called Edgar Atheling. ;

556 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066. —

had been the son of Edmund Ironside, the legitimate king of
the royal family. And now Edgar was the son of that same
Edward, so that he was entitled of right to the kingdom of
England. But Harold, who was a cunning and crafty man,
understanding that

“>Tis always bad fixt measures to defer,”

on the same day of the Epiphany on which king Edward
was buried, extorted an oath of fealty from the nobles, and
placed the crown on his own head. And after his promotion,
his brother Tosti, coming from Flanders with forty ships, an-
chored in the mouth of the river Humber, where he gave him-
self up to rapine like a pirate, and at last he was driven from
the province by his brothers Edwin and Morcar, and set sail,
and proceeded towards Scotland; and there he met with Ha-
rold, king of the Norwegians, and made a treaty with him,
binding himself by solemn pledges, and with this view he
came to England, with a fleet of three hundred vessels, in order
to endeavour to reduce it under his power. At last, in North-
umberland, while he was still occupied in laying everything
waste, he defeated Morcar, the count of that province, and
an army levied from the men of the province, in a pitched
battle, and compelled him to shut himself upin York. And
when the news of this had got abroad, Harold, king of Eng-
land, collected all his forces, and marched up towards that dis-
trict with all haste. And when he had arrived at the town which
is called Stamford, he there found the enemy ; where, although
it may be hard to be believed, one single Morican stood at
the entrance of the town in the gate, and having slain many
of the English, prevented the whole army from passing in by
that way. And when he was invited to surrender, he laughed
at the English, saying, “that they were unwarlike men, and
possessed of no spirit, when they could not withstand a single
soldier.” Therefore, as no one dared to come near him, be-
cause it appeared to every one to be downright folly to come
to close combat with him ; at last, one of the king’s household
aimed a javelin at him, and transfixed him, and, falling dead
into the river, he yielded the victory to the English; and im-
mediately the English entered by the entrance which was now
free from all obstruction, and slaughtered the rear of the Mo-
ricans as they fled. At last, Harold, king of the Norwegians,
and Tosti, the brother of the king of England, were slain with

A.D. 1066. WILLIAM SENDS AMBASSADORS TO HAROLD. 557

many of their comrades, and the king of England seized all
the booty, and all the spoils for his own use, and did not give
the slightest share of them to any one. At which, his com-
rades were exceedingly indignant, and detesting the covetous-
ness of the prince, with one accord abjured all dependence on
him.

Therefore, Harold, king of England, becoming elated and
arrogant at such a triumphant termination of the war, behaved
like a tyrant instead of a king, and thought not at all of the
covenant between him and duke William, which had formerly
been confirmed by oaths. Moreover, his feeling of indiffer-
ence was increased by the death of the daughter of duke
William, whom he had espoused before she was of a marriage-
able age ; and also by the circumstance that duke William
was at this time engaged in wars with all his neighbours, owing
to which, he hoped that his threats would never break out into
actions. And as for the oath which he had made under com-
pulsion, th t he asserted was not obligatory, imasmuch as
while king Edward was still alive, it was not in his power to
give away the kingdom, nor, indeed, had he any right to yield
it up to any one without consulting the king. But the senti-
ments of Harold and of William on this point were different ;
for the very moment that William heard that Harold was in-
vested with the crown, he sent messengers to reprove him
gently for his violation of the treaty between them, assuring
him, with a threat, that he would exact. his due from him
before the end of the year. Harold, on the other hand, sent
the messengers back to duke William with the excuses that I
have already recited ; and so the ambassadors returned with-
out any success to their own country, and reported the result
of their embassy to duke William in these words.  ‘‘ Harold,
king of England, desires you to know that he was really
under the compulsion of necessity when he espoused your
daughter in Normandy, and when he swore to assist you in
obtaining the kingdom of England ; but, on the other hand,
he asserts that an oath extorted by force need not be observed.
For if a vow or oath which a maiden knowingly makes re-
specting her own person in the house of her father, but with-
out consulting her parents is recalled and annulled, much
more, as he affirms, ought the oath which he, when placed
under the king’s rod, swore to under compulsion, and without

558 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066.

being aware’ of all the circumstances, to be pronounced void.
He also affirms, that it was over-presumptuous in him to take
an oath to alienate his inheritance and make it over to you
without the general consent of the kingdom. He also added, _
that it was unjust to require him to give up that kingdom,
the government of which he had undertaken with such great
good will of the nobles.”

William, when he heard these assertions, began to be very
indignant, and that he might not by any precipitation injure
the righteous cause of war which he had, he sent messengers
to pope Alexander, in order that the undertaking which he
was engaging in might be sanctioned by apostolical authority.
Accordingly, the pope having considered the cause of both the
disputing parties, sent a banner to William, as an omen that
the kingdom should be his. And when he had received it,
he convened a council of his nobles at Liskeboune, and asked
the opinion of every individual about the matter in hand.
And when they had all animated him to undertake the expe-
dition by great promises on their part, the council was dis-
solved, on the understanding that they should all meet again
in the month of August, at the harbour of Saint Valori, with
cavalry and arms, in readiness to cross the sea immediately.
Accordingly, when they were all assembled at the appointed
rendezvous, the fair wind failed which was to have conveyed
them over to England. On this, the duke ordered the body
of Saint Valori to be carried out of doors by way of depre-
cating the foul wind, and to be placed in the open air, and
immediately the desired wind filled the sails. Then, after
dinner, they all embarked on board the fleet, and after a pros-
perous voyage arrived off Hastings. But duke William, when
disembarking from his ship, stumbled with his foot, and
turning pale, interpreted the accident as a bad omen, and
augury of an unsuccessful enterprise. But one of the soldiers
by his side who lifted up the duke after his fall, while he still

1 This refers to a trick of William, which is thus related by Hume :—
“Tn order to render the oath more obligatory, William employed an artifice
well suited to the ignorance and superstition of the age. He secretly
conveyed under the altaron which Harold agreed to swear, the relics of
some of the most revered martyrs; and when Harold had taken the oath,
he showed him the relics, and admonished him to observe religiously an
engagement which had been ratified by so tremendous a sanction.” —His-
tary of England, ¢. iii.

A.D. 1066, HAROLD MARCHES UPON HASTINGS. 559

had some of the mud in his hands, gave the accident a better
interpretation, saying, “‘ Most fortunate duke, you have already
ploughed up and taken possession of England; behold, the
land is in your hand; gird yourself, and rouse yourself to
good hopes, you who shall be king.” And presently, when
the duke ‘Janded, he restrained all his army from plunder,
saying that they ought to spare the property which would
soon be their own; and for fifteen days together he kept his
army so quiet, that he seemed to be thinking of nothing less
than of a battle: however, he immediately built a castle in
that place.

In the meantime, Harold, returning from the war against
the Norwegians, the moment that he heard of the arrival of
William, marched upon Hastings, accompanied by a very
small band of soldiers. For besides his stipendiary troops
and those whom he had hired from the provinces, he had
very few men with him, so that he might have been defeated
by the invaders with very slight trouble or contest. But Harold
sent messengers before him to make a calculation of the power
and numbers of the enemy, who were arrested in the camp of
the enemy, and then duke William ordered them to be led all
over the camp, that they might have a thorough sight of his
army ; and then, after they had been refreshed by a plentiful
meal, he ordered them to be sent back uninjured to their
master. When they returned, Harold enquired of them what
news they brought ; and they narrated to him fully all the
confidence and constancy of the duke, and asserted seriously
that every man in his army seemed to them to be priests, be-
cause they had the entire face and both the upper and lower
lip shaved, a custom which no one in England adopted except
the priests. The king, laughing at the folly of the messen-
gers who brought back such stories as that, told them that
these men were not effeminate priests, but soldiers of valiant
courage, invincible in arms. On this, the brother of the king,
whose name was Gurth, a man in advance of his age in his
excessive knowledge and virtue, took his words out of his
mouth, and said to him, “If youspeak so highly of the valour
of the Normans, then I think it a foolish thing to fight with
those to whom you are deservedly accounted inferior, both in
- merit and in strength. For you cannot deny that (whether
voluntarily or unwillingly is another matter) you did take an
oath to duke William. So that you will act more wisely if at

560 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066.

this present hour of need you retire, and that you may not,
by fighting as a perjured man, incur the disgrace of flight or
death. But we, who are altogether unshackled by any oath,
will undertake a righteous war, inasmuch as we shall be
fighting for our country. And if we fight by ourselves your
cause will prosper better, as you will be able to restore order
among us if we flee, or to avenge us if we are slain.” But
Harold, in his rashness, would not give a willing ear to his

admonitions, thinking it an inglorious thing, and one that |

would be a disgrace to him for the whole of his life, to flee
before any enemy whatever.

While the two brothers were thus talking to one another,
there arrived a certain monk, who had been sent by duke
William, to make three propositions to Harold, on his part.
Accordingly, he proposed to him, either to depart from the
kingdom in observance of his oath, or to reign, holding the
kingdom under him as a titulary prince, or else, in the sight
of both armies, to terminate the dispute by single combat,
each fighting alone with his single sword. When Harold
heard this, he would not condescend either to look with a
favourable countenance on the ambassador of William, nor to
receive him with civil words, but drove him away with indig-
nation, praying only for this, that the Lord might judge be-
tween himself and Wiliam. ‘To this the monk answered
boldly, and declared that if he did not choose to admit the
right of William, William was willing to prove his cause by
the decision of the Apostolic See, or by that of battle, if he
preferred it. In reply to all these assertions, Harold con-
tented himself with the single answer which I have recorded
above, and by this conduct exasperated the minds of the Nor-
mans, and excited them to wish for battle.

Then the adverse parties arrayed their troops. But the
English, who, being fatigued, had passed the whole night
without sleep, and who therefore in the morning felt them-
selves almost fainting, advanced without delay against the
enemy, all the infantry being armed with battle-axes, placing
before themselves the protection of their shields, which were
locked together, and thus they presented an impenetrable
phalanx ; and that day would have turned out one of festival
and salvation for them, if the Normans, beginning flight, ac-
cording to their custom, had not by this expedient disordered
their compact line. King Harold fought on foot by his ban-

—

&
A.D. 1066. BATTLE OF HASTINGS. 561

ner in company with his brother, that, as they all shared one
common danger, no one might think of fight. On the»
other hand, the Normans, who had spent the whole of the
preceding night either in sleep or in the confession of their
sins, or in preparing their arms, and who the first thing in
the morning had occupied themselves in receiving that most
excellent preparation for a march, namely, the body of our
Lord, were full of courage, raising their souls to heaven and
their bodies to oppose the enemy, and in this state they boldly
awaited the enemy’s attack. William strengthened his first
line with infantry, armed with bows and arrows, clubs, and
battle-axes. The cavalry, in accordance with the usual prac-
tice of military discipline, he divided among the two wings,
placing them in good order a little in the rear. Then, with
erect gait, calm countenance, and affable language, the brave
duke animated his own men, and unhesitatingly promised them
that God, the Lord of Hosts, would be present to them as the
more righteous side. They all shout out “To arms!” and
immediately the duke, with an unnerved spirit, calls for his
arms. And lo! his armour-bearer, whose mind was all in
confusion from the tumult, gave him his breast-plate upside
down, and put it on him in that condition. The duke burst out
laughing, and pleasantly exclaimed, ‘‘Some things that are
in our power are changed, and my valiant dukedom is changed
into a kingdom.” Then, beginning the song of Roland, the
standard was raised and waved, the trumpets and bugles
sounded, and, invoking the aid of the heavenly powers, they
began the battle on both sides. Both armies fought with great
vigour, and the battle was a long time in doubt, as neither
would retreat, and the victory was in suspense for a long time.
But, when William perceived this, seeing the valiant constancy
that existed on the opposite side of his invincible enemies, and
that, although they were few in number, they were in very
close and compact order, he betakes himself to a device of skill,
as the vehemence of sheer courage could not succeed. ‘'There-
fore, as I mentioned before, the warlike duke William cun-
ningly made a signal to his troops to feign to flee, after the
fashion of the Parthians, and to retire from the field. By
which device the English army was at once dissolved like sand
without lime, and, as if they had nothing to do but to slaughter
the flying enemy, they incautiously hastened their own de-
struction. For the Normans, turning their battalions back
VOL, I, ; 00

562 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066.

again, re-arranged their line of battle in perfect order, and in
.a moment put to flight the English, who were rushing on tri-
umphantly. At last, the English, having occupied a mound,
drove the Normans, who were vehemently inflamed with heat,
and panting up the hill, down into the valley again, and with-
out much trouble they rolled down large stones upon them from
the top of the hill, and, hurling javelinsamong them,slew many of
them, overthrowing them in many various manners. Moreover,
the English occupied a fosse with broken banks, with the passage
across which they were acquainted, and overthrew so many
Normans there, that the bodies of the dead produced astonish-
ment in the minds of the living. For some time the battle
was in suspense, amid all these vicissitudes, as at one time one
side, and at another time the other side got the better, as long
as the invincible spirit of Harold was united to his mighty
body. Nor was he contented only to exhort and encourage
others by his harangues, without performing in his own person —
all the duty of a soldier, making active and constant attacks |
upon the enemy, and slaughtering mercilessly all who came
within his reach, without any silly repetition of inadequate
blows, so that no one came near him with impunity, or without
his wounding incurably either the rider, or at least the horse, —
or else cutting both in two at one blow with his impetuous
courage. On the other side, William, undisturbed in his in-
vincible spirit, encouraging his troops by his own conspicuous
example, throwing himself among the first rank of combatants,
and being present wherever the soldiers on both sides were —
bravest, and the battle appeared doubtful, displayed his cou- —
rage as an active warrior, and stained both plain and hill with
the blood of many of the English; and penetrating the dense ~
lines of troops, as the prow of a ship pierces the stormy waves,
he opened his men a way with his own sword, not without —
much toil and danger to himself. From this it happened, that —
while he was raging everywhere among the thickest ranks of
the enemy, and dashing everywhere like lightning, slaying
men in every direction, he lost three fine horses on that one —
day, who were either killed under him, or who fell exhausted. —
And, although he was reproved in friendly whispers by his
body guard, still, the unwearied vigour of that magnanimons
duke continued, chiding the weaknéss of those who gave ground,
and the pusillanimity of those who felt fear, promising the
effeminate and unwarlike instant and glorious victory, without

A.D. 1066. DEATH OF HAROLD. 563

any more loss or delay, and holding out hopes to every one
that he and his posterity would be enriched with invaluable
spoils, and revenues, and treasures. And lo! the battle-cry
was heard again, and the courage of the soldiers was renewed,
and they pressed again to the conflict. The clang of arms
dashing together resounded ; and the neighing of horses, and
the crash of spears, and the blows stricken on the shields, and
the groans of the wounded, and the cries of the dying, filled
the air to the very clouds; and the dust.and the steam arising
from the panting combatants, and sweat, and blood, filled the
eyes, and the air appeared to every one to be quite darkened,
till at last Harold fell, with his brain pierced through by a
wound from an arrow, nambers of which rattled through the
air, flying like wintry hail; and so his brains were scattered
about, and he died. But one of the Normans rushed forwards,
and, giving vent to his execrable hatred, cut off the king’s
thigh, while he was still gasping; on which account, he was
disgraced for his baseness by William, and beaten in a most
shameful manner, and expelled as an abominable person, as
one who had done a detestable action. But, after the death
of the king, then the burden of the battle turned against the
English, and increasing audacity elevated the spirits of the
Normans, while amazement weighed down the English, who
were now without a head. And, as they saw that the whole
matter in dispute was for a head, and as the fortune of war
had now turned against them, they afforded their enemies a
bloody victory at their expense. And the common soldiers
sought refuge in flight, and sought all kinds of places of re-
treat and concealment. But the nobles, preferring to die rather
than to flee disgracefully, seeing that their complete spoliation
and an intolerable yoke was at hand, persevered in doing
battle, exposing their invincible breasts to the enemy, many
of them expiring through mere fatigue, till night put an end
to the contest. But the flight of the English of ignoble birth
lasted till night, and when that came, it descended in the com-
plete triumph of the Normans over their enemies, as had been
predicted.

Beyond all doubt, the hand of God, more than that of man,
protected duke William in this battle, as he afterwards, like a
wise man, oftenconfessed. For though, amid the showers of jave-
lins that were flying around, he was often struck by arrows,
yet the enemy could not draw one drop of blood from his

002

564 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066.

body. Therefore, duke William, now that everything had
turned out successfully, in accordance with the will of the
Lord of Hosts, permitted his enemies who were slain to be
buried, if any people chose to perform that work of charity.
But those of his own soldiers, of whom the fortune of war
had deprived him, he caused to be interred much more honour-
ably, with great funeral pomp and solemnity. And the body
of king Harold he sent to his mother, who begged it of him,
without any ransom, although she, by her messengers, had
offered a great sum. And when she received it, she buried it
at Waltham, in the church which Harold himself had built out
of his own revenues, in honour of the Holy Cross, and which
he had given up to the care of a body of secular canons. And
when he was departing from it, and about to set out for the
war, after he had offered up his prayers before the cross, it is
related that the cross, as if bidding him farewell for the last
time, moved forward, and remains in this attitude to the present
day. This subversion of a kingdom, and vast effusion of
blood, was presaged by the threatening brilliancy of a huge
comet, of a bloody colour, with long hair, which appeared at
the beginning of the year, in reference to which, some one has
said. :—

“In the course of the thousand and sixty-sixth year,
A huge comet did fill all England with fear.”

But a comet, whether it be a mere falling light, or a prog-
nostic, still being a flame of prodigious appearance in the air,
is always an omen of impending calamity. On which account,
Claudian, where he speaks of the three goddesses who con-
trived the rape of Proserpine, says in the middle of the epi-
sode,

‘And while the path glows ’neath the feet divine,
Lo! through the heated sky is seen to shine
An awful comet, whose ensanguin’d flame
Ne’er augurs aught but deeds of woe or shame,
The people gaze with half-averted head,
The sailor views the lurid heav’ns with dread ;
For sure that light portends destructive squalls,
Or hostile armies leagued around the walls.”

This conflict, so fatal and so deadly,. stained with the blood
of so many noble men, took place on the fourteenth of Octo-

ber, that is to say, on the day of pope Calixtus, at a little dis-
tance on this side of Hastings.

Wa oes

A.D. 1066. CHARACTER OF HAROLD. 565

On the fourth or fifth night after the battle, while duke
William was lying asleep in his bed, weary after all the varied
anxiety he had gone through, and buried in deep sleep, he
heard a voice saying to him, “ William, you have conquered,
and likewise you have taken possession. Therefore you shall

reign, and your children after you, in all freedom, for a hun-

dred and fifty years.” And the duke committed these words
to memory, and recommended himself and all that he had to
the divine protection. And there was founded a house for
a religious brotherhood on the very spot where the greatest
slaughter and bloodshed had taken place, that the brethren
might for ever offer prayers to God for the souls who were there
slain; and the duke, and other devout nobles, endowed it with
ample possessions, and fortified it with the sanctions of reli-
gion. And the abbey, in memory of the conflict that took
place, is called Battle to this day.

But the lord the pope, and likewise the whole brotherhood
of the cardinals, and all the Roman court, who had always
hated king Harold, because he had assumed the crown of the
kingdom without any agreement being entered into with them,
and without any ecclesiastical solemnities, or any consent of
the prelates being asked, dissembled at the time their sense of
the injury; but seeing now that this audacious presumption
had come to an end, as they had yielded to adverse fortune, now,
after the common custom of covetous men, or rather like reeds
shaken by a blast of wind, they at once returned to the side
which had proved the more powerful and the victorious one.
But king Harold, who in many respeciayas an imitator of his
father, was a rash and indiscreet prince, with headlong pre-
sumption, trusting too much in his own invincible courage,
eager for praise and for money, and, when prosperity smiled
upon him, forgetful of his former promises. On which account
he was disliked by the English whom he governed, even by
those who were his own kinsmen; and when the Lord of
Hosts and God of Vengeance had given him the victory, he
ascribed it not to God but to himself, and to his own courage
and activity ; and this was proved by recent experience, when,
being elated at the victory he had obtained over the Norwe-
gians, he retained for himself all the spoils which he had pro-
mised to others, and hastened, with precipitation and folly, to
the battle with the Normans. On which account, the name
of duke William, as of a prince who was magnanimous in the

+

~

F

566 MATTHEW OF WESTMINSTER. A.D. 1066. 2%

execution of his warlike projects, and circumspect and faithful
in the discharge of his promises, and sociable and affable in
time of peace, and cheerful and good tempered at: feasts, was _
well received among almost every people, both among the ~
English and their neighbours, and especially among the Nor-
wegians. And so all received him with good will, and said, {
«Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord, a pacific
king, a victorious warrior, afather and protector of the desolate.”
And so, by the excellently regulated arrangement of God, who
governs and who overturns kingdoms, and who, regulating
the counsels of princes, gives to every one as He wills, and for
‘such a time as He wills, nor is there any one who can say to
him, “Why doest thou this?” the kingdom of Englaid was

‘

:
. . F
transferred to the dominion of the Normans. 7
We put off the continuation of our book to the second ~
yolume. : i
if
4
:
{
’
a OF VOL. I.
f L.
(1a
l “
\
J. BILLING, PRINTER AND STERKKOTYPER WOKING, SURREY. y

a }
ite
