The Home of the Blizzard, Vol. II
Douglas Mawson, 1915
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Mawson's Home of the Blizzard, Vol. II — completing the 1911-14 expedition account. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/homeofblizzardbe02maws). This 1915 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

THE  HOME  OF

':  mil       i


THE    BLIZZARD


StiiBIBtJGLAS  MAWSON^


n.L^


THE  HOME  OF  THE

BLIZZARD


V


IN   MEMORIAM  ("ROSS  AT  CAPE  DENISON


JHE  HOME  OF  THE

BLIZZARD

BEING  THE  STORY  OF  THE  AUSTRALASIAN
ANTARCTIC    EXPEDITION,     1911-1914;

BY  SIR  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,  d.ScB.e.

ILLUSTRATED    IN    COLOUR   AND    BLACK    AND  WHITE   ALSO

WITH  MAPS


VOL.  II


LONDON
WILLIAM  HEINEMANN


London  :  William  IleinenUtan,  1915


CONTENTS

PAGE

CHAPTER  XVII

WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES  1

CHAPTER  XVIII

THE  SHIP'S  STORY.    BY  CAPTAIN  J.  K.  DAVIS  19

CHAPTER  XIX

THE  WESTERN  BASE— ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY
ADVENTURES.     BY  F.  WILD  50

CHAPTER  XX

THE  WESTERN  BASE— WINTER  AND  SPRING  65

CHAPTER  XXI

THE  WESTERN  BASE— BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE.
BY  F.  WILD  90

CHAPTER  XXII

THE    WESTERN    BASE— LINKING    UP    WITH    KAISER
WILHELM  II  LAND  108

CHAPTER  XXIII

A  SECOND  WINTER  131

CHAPTER  XXIV

NEARING  THE  END  ^  162

CHAPTER  XXV

LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND.    BY  G.  F.  AINSWORTH    167

CHAPTER  XXVI

A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST.    BY  G.  F.  AINSWORTH    195

CHAPTER  XXVII

THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR.    BY  G.  F.  AINSWORTH  237

CHAPTER  XXVIII

THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE  255

V


CONTENTS

PAGB

APPENDIX  I

THE  STAFF  281

APPENDIX  II

SCIENTIFIC  WORK  291

APPENDIX  III

AN  HISTORICAL  SUMMARY  297

APPENDIX  IV

GLOSSARY  304

APPENDIX  V

MEDICAL  REPORTS:    WESTERN   BASE  (QUEEN  MARY
LAND).    BY  S.  E.  JONES,  M.B.,  Ch.M.  307

MAIN  BASE  (ADELIE  LAND).    BY  A.  L.  McLEAN,  M.B.,
Ch.M.,  B.A.  308

APPENDIX  VI

FINANCE  311

APPENDIX  VII

EQUIPMENT  313

INDEX  323


VI


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

In  Memoriam  Cross  at  Cape  Denison  (Photogravure)  Frontispiece

COLOUR  PLATES

To  face
page

Islets  fringing  the  Mainland  :  View  looking  West  from  Stillwell  Island        2

Rafts  of  Floe-ice  32

Before  Sunrise  :    camped  near  the  Hippo  Nunatak  74

Avalanche  Rocks  82

Delay  Point  92

The  Great  "Bergschrund  "  of  the  Denman  Glacier  96

Tussock  Slopes  and  Misty  Highlands  166

The  Shack  and  its  Vicinity  166

A  Victoria  Penguin  on  the  Nest  254

A  Growth  of  Lichen  on  Red  Sandstone  254

Antarctic  Marine  Life  270

Brought  up  in  the  Deep-sea  Trawl  296


PLATES

Madigan  Nunatak — Close  and  Laseron  standing  by  the  Sledge  4

A  Desolate  Camp  on  the  Plateau  4

Sledginq  Rations  for  Three  Men  for  Three  Months  6

Stillwell  Island — a  Haunt  of  the  Silver-grey  Petrel  6

"  The  Bus,"  the  Air-tractor  Sledge  8

BiCKERTON  AND   HIS   SlEDGE   WITH   DETACHABLE   WHEELS  8

Amongst  the  Splintered  Ice  where  the  Ice-sheet  descends  to  the  Sea

NEAR  Cape  Denison  10

vii


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

Maccormick  Skua  Gull  on  the  Nest  with  Eqq  12

Chick  of  Maccormick  Skua  Gull  on  the  Nest  12

Where  the  Plateau  descends  to  Commonwealth  Bay  16

The  Big  Winding-drum  for  the  Deep-sea  Dredglng  Cable  20

Fletcher  with  the  Driver  loaded  ready  to  take  a  Sounding  20
At  the  Provision  Depot  for  Castaways  provided  by  the  New  Zealand

Government,    Casip    Cove,    Carnley    Harbour,    Auckland     Island.

Primmer  on  the  right  24
The  Brick  Pier  erected  at  Port  Ross,  Auckland  Islands,  by  the  Mag-

neticians  of  Sir  James  Clarke  Ross's  Expedition  24

The  "Aurora"  at  Anchor  in  Port  Ross,  Auckland  Islands  28

The  Monagasque  Trawl  hoisted  on  the  Derrick  :  Gray  standing  by  30
A  Remarkable  Berg,  two  Cusps  standing  on  a  Single  Basement.     Note

THAT  IT  has  risen  CONSIDERABLY  OUT  OF  THE  Sea,  EXPOSING  OlD  WaTER-
LINES  36

A  Portal  worn  through  a  Berg  by  the  Waves  36

A  TuRRETED  Berg  40

A  Midsummer  View  of  the  Hut  and  its  Neighbourhood,  looking  S.E.  42
Members  of  the  Main  Base  Party  Homeward  Bound,  January  1913.    From
left  to  right  :  Back  row,  Whetter,  Hurley,  Webb,  Hannam,  Laseron,

Close  ;  Front  row,  Stillwell,  Hunter,  Correll,  Murphy  44

"  Wireless  "  Corner  in  the  Workshop.     Our  Link  with  Civilization  44

Forging  through  Pack-ice  46

The  "Aurora"  anchored  to  the  Floe  off  the  Western  Base  48
The  Establishment  of  the  Western  Base.    Hauling  Stores  to  the  Top

of  the  Ice-shelf  52

The  Western  Base  Htjt  in  Winter.    Note  the  Entrance  ;  a  Vertical  Hole

in  the  Snow  in  the  Foreground  56

The  Western  Base  Hut — the  Grottoes — in  Summer  66

An  Evening  Camp,  Queen  SIary  Land  60

A  Man-hauled  Sledge  60
In  the  Veranda  of  the  Western  Base  Hut — the  "  Grottoes  " — looking

TOWARDS  the  ENTRANCE  DUG  VERTICALLY  DOWN  THROUGH  THE  SnOWDrIFT        64

The  Wind-weathered  Igloo  built  for  Magnetic  Observations — Western

Base  68

NuNATAK — Queen  Mary  Land  :    showing  remarkable  Moat  on  Windward

Side  and  Ramp  on  Lee  68

viii


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS


To  face
page


Midwinter's  Dinner  in  Queen  Mary  Land,  1912.     From  Left  to  Right:
Behind — Hoadley,  Covers,  Watson,   Harrisson,   Wild.    In   Front —

Jones,  Moyes,  Kennedy  72

A  Bevy  of  Emperor  Penguins  on  the  Floe  76

A  Yawning  Crevasse  86

Wild's  Party  MAKroo  Slow  Progress  in  Dangerous  Country  94

Wild,  Kennedy,  and  Harrisson  amongst  the  Abysses  of  the  Denman

Glacier  98

*'  The  whole  was  the  wildest,  maddest  and  yet  the  grandest  thing

imaginable  "  100

Wild's  Party  working  their  Sledges  through  the  Crushed  Ice  at  the

Foot  of  Denman  Glacier  104

The  Hippo  Nunatak  106

Dog-sledging  106

Where  the  Floe-ice  meets  the  Shackleton  Shelf  110

The  Hummocky  Floe  on  the  Southern  Margin  of  the  Davis  Sea  110

View  showing   the   Young   Birds    massed    together    at  the    Emperor

Penguins'  Rookery  at  Haswell  Island  114

Antarctic  Petrels  on  the  Nest  116

A  Snow  Petrel  Chick  on  the  Nest  118

A  Silver-grey  Petrel  on  the  Nest  118
The  Symmetrically  Domed  Outline  of  Drygalski  Island,  low  on  the

Horizon.  The  Island  is  1200  Feet  high  and  9  Miles  in  Diameter  122
The  Main  Western  Party  on  their  Return  to  the  "  Grottoes."    From  the

Left  :  Hoadley,  Jones  and  Dovers  124
The  Relief  of  Wild's  Party.    The  "  Aurora  "  approaching  the  Floe  at

the  Western  Base,  February  1913  128

Pacing  the  Deck  :  Capt.  John  King  Davis  and  Capt.  James  Davis  128
"  Amundsen,"  one  of  the  Sledge  Dogs  sent  down  to  us  prom  Amundsen's

South  Polar  Expedition  132

The  Head  of  a  Weddell  Seal  134

A  Weddell  Seal  scratching  himself.     "Drat  those  Fleas!"  134

Blizzard-harassed  Penguins,  after  m.\ny  Days  Buried  in  the  Snow  136

The  Pancake  Ice  under  the  Cliffs  at  Land's  End  140

A  Wonderful  Canopy  of  Ice  144

Sastrugi  sculptured  by  the  Incessant  Blizzards  146

ix


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

The  Terminal  Moraine  near  the  Hut,  Cape  Denison  148

Disappearing  in  the  Drift  152

The  Hut  looming  through  the  Drift  152

A  Wall  of  Solid  Gneiss  near  Winter  Quarters  154

An  Erratic  on  the  Moraine.    Cape  Denison  154

Frozen  Spray  built  up  by  the  Blizz^vrds  along  the  Shore  15C
A  View  of  the  Mainland  from  the  Mackellar  Islets  :   Ice-capped  Islets
EST  the  Foreground  :    the  Rock  visible  on  the  Mainland  is  Cape
Denison                                                                                           Between  158-159

A  Wilson  Petrel  on  the  Nest,  ]\Iackellar  Islets  160

CoRRELL,  Bage,  McLean,  Hodgeman,  Hunter,  and  Bickerton  lfi2
The  "  Aurora  "  lying  at  Anchor,  Coevionwealth  Bay.    In  the  Distance
the  Ice-slopes  of  the  Mainland  are  visible  rising  to  a  Height  of
3500  Feet.     In  the  foreground  is  a  striking  Formation  originatlng

by  the  Freezing  of  Spray  dashed  up  by  the  Hurricane  Wind  164
The  Shack  :   showing  the  Natural  Rocky  Protection  on  the  Windward

Side  172

The  Interior  of  the  Operating  Hut  on  Wireless  Hill  172

Weka  pecking  on  the  Beach  174

Chicks  of  the  Domlnican  Gull  174

Macquarle  Island  Skuas  feeding  178

Bull  Sea  Elephants  fighting  178

The  Thermometer  Screen,  Macquarie  Island  178

The  Wind-recording  Instruments,  Macquarie  Island  17S

"  Feather  Bed  "  Terrace  near  Eagle  Point,  Macquarie  Isi^nd  180

A  Glacial  Lake  (Major  Lake)  on  Macquarie  Island,  600  Feet  above  Sea-
level  1 80
Victoria  Penguins  182
View  of  the  Wireless  Station  on  the  Summit  of  Wireless  Hill  184
The  Wireless  Operating  Hut  184
The  Wireless  Engine  Hut  184

Panoramic  View  of  IMacquarie  Island,  as  seen  from  Wireless  Hill  at  the
North  Extremity  of  the  Island.  The  Shack  is  near  the  Bottom  of
THE  Picture  on  the  Left-hand  Side  :  the  Sealers'  Hut  at  the  far  end
OF  THE  Isthmus:  the  distant  Left-hand  Point  of  the  Coast  is  the
Nuggets  :  North-east  Bay  on  the  Left  :  Hasselborough  Bay  on
THE  Right  Between  pp.  188-189

X


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
jiaye

A  VIEW  OF  THE  Shore  at  the  Nuggets  :   the  Sealers'  Shed  on  the  Right.
The  Bare  Patches  far  Inland  high  on  the  Hills  above  the  Shed  are

Royal  Penguins'  Rookeries,  from  which  they  travel  to  the  Beach  in

A  Long  Procession  Between  pp.  188-189

Sooty  Albatrosses  nesting  190

A  White  Giant  Petrel  on  the  Nest  192

A  Giant  Petrel  Rookery  192

The  Macquarie  Island  Party.     From  Left  to  Right  :  Sandell,  Ainsworth,

Sawyer,  Hamilton,  Blake  ~  194

King  Penguins  198

The  Head  of  a  Sea-Leapoed,  showing  Fight  202

A  Precocious  Victoria  Penguin  204

Young  INIale  Sea  Elephants  at  Play  206

A  LARGE  Sea -Leopard  on  the  Beach  206

A  Sea  Elephant  208

A  Cormorant  Rookery,  Hasselborough  Bay  210

A  Young  King  Penguin  212

A  ScLATER  Penguin  212

Royal  Penguins  on  the  Nest  214

Gentoo  Penguin  and  Young  214

A  Cow  Sea  Elephant  and  Pup  216

The  Head  of  a  Bull  Sea  Elephant  216

A  Rookery  of  Sea  Elephants  near  the  Shore  at  the  Nelson  Reef,  chiefly

Cows  AND  Pups  218

A  Bull  Sea  Elephant  in  a  Fighting  Attitude  220

A  Cormorant  and  Young  on  Nest  224

A  Royal  Penguins'  Rookery  Betioeen  pp.  226-227

The  Wild  West  Coast  of  ]\Iacquarie  Island  228

The  Wreck  of  the  "  Gratitude  "  on  the  Nuggets  Beach  230

Kerguelen  Cabbage  232

Flowering  Plant  232

Darby  and  Joan.    Two  Rare  Examples  of  Penguins  which  visited  the

Shack,  Macquarie  Island.    On  the  Left  a  Sclater  Penguin,  on  the

Right  an  Albino  Royal  Penguin  234

Waterfall  Lake,  of  Glacial  Origin  Between  pp.  236-237

On  the  Plateau-like  Summit  of  Macquarie  Island  ;  a  Panorama  near  the

North  End.  Glacial  Lakes  and  Tarns  in  the  Foreground  Between  pp.  236-237

xi


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

To  face
page

Large  Erratics  and  other  Glacial  Debris  on  the  Summit  of  SIacquarie

Island  238

Pillow-form  Lava  on  the  Highlands  of  Macqttarie  Island  238

The  King  Penguins'  Rookery,  Lusitania  Bay  242

The  Head  of  a  Bull  Sea  Elephant  photographed  in  the  Act  of  Roaring  242
The  Rookery  of  Royal  Penguins  at  the  South  End,  viewed  from  a  Cliff

several  hundred  Feet  above  it  244
Young  Sea  Elephants  asleep  amongst    Royal  Penguins,  South  End

Rookery  24fi

Hamilton  inspecting  a  Good  Catch  of  Fish  at  Lusitania  Bay  252

Hamilton  obtaining  the  Blubber  of  a  Sea  Elephant  for  Fuel  252
An  Illustration  of  the  Life  on  the  Mackellar  Islets        Between  pp.  266-257

An  Ice  Mushroom  amongst  the  Mackellar  Islets  258
View  looking  out  op  a  Shallow  Ravine  at  the  Eastern  Extremity  of  the

Rocks  at  Cape  Denison  260

"  Hurley  had  before  him  a  Picture  in  Perfect  Proportion  .  .  ."  260

Antarctic  Petrels  resting  on  the  Snow  262

Silver-grey  Petrels  making  Love  262
Looking  towards  the  Mainland  from  Stillwell   Island  :   Silver-grey

Petrels  nesting  in  the  Foreground  264
Antarctic  Petrels  nesting  on  the  Rocky  Ledges  of  the  Cliffs  near  Cape

Hunter  266

Icing  Ship  in  the  Pack  North  of  Termination  Ice-tongue  272

Emperor  Penguins  follow  the  Leader  into  the  Sea  274

Emperor  Penguins  jumping  on  to  the  Floe  274

Cape  Hunter,  composed  of  Ancient  Sedimentary  Rocks  (Phyllites)  290

Examples  of  Antarctic  Marine  Crustaceans  294


TEXT  ILLUSTRATIONS


Page


Map  showing  the  Remarkable  Distribution  of  Islets  fringing  the  Coast-

LiNB  of  Adblie  Land  in  the  Vicinity  of  Cape  Gray  5

Map  showing  the  Tracks  of  the  Western  Sledging  Party,  Adelie  Land  15

Plan  illustrating  the  Arrangements  for  Deep-sea  Trawling  on  Board

the  "  Aurora  "  23

Map  of  the  Auckland  Islands  27

xii


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

Page

The  "  Contents  "  Page  of  the  First  Numbeb  of  the  "  Adelie  Blizzard  "  139
The  Meteorological  Chart  for  April  12,  1913,  compiled  by  the  Common-
wealth Meteorological  Bureau  143
A  Diagrammatic  Sketch  illustrating  the  Meteorological  Conditions  at

the  Main  Base,  Noon,  September  6,  1913  157

Plan  of  the  Hut,  Macquarie  Island  171

Map  of  the  North  End  of  Macquarie  Island  by  L.  R.  Blake  177

A  Section  across  Macquarie  Island  through  Mt.  Elder,  by  L.  R.  Blake  241

A  Sketch  illustrating  the  Distribution  of  the  Mackellar  Islets  257

A  Section  illustrating  the  Moat  in  the  Antarctic  Continental  Shelf  267

Signatures  of  Members  of  the  Land  Parties  289
A  Section  of  the  Antarctic  Plateau  from  the  Coast  to  a  Point  300  Miles

INLAND,  ALONG  THE  RoUTE  FOLLOWED  BY  THE  SOUTHERN  SlEDGING  PaRTY  293

A  Section  across  a  Part  of  the  Antarctic  Continent  through  the  South

Magnetic  Pole  293
A  Section  of  the  Floor  of  the  Southern  Ocean  between  Tasmania  and

Keng  George  V  Land  295
A  Section  of  the  Floor  of  the  Southern  Ocean  between  Western  Aus-
tralia and  Queen  Mary  Land  295
A  Map  showing  Antarctic  Land  Discoveries  preceding  1838  298
A  Map  showing  Antarctic  Land  Discoveries  preceding  1896  300
A  Map  of  the  Antarctic  Regions  as  known  at  the  Present  Day  302


FOLDING  MAPS

In  pocket  of  binding  case

Regional  Map  showing  the  Area  covered  by  the  Australasian  Antarctic
Expedition,  1911-1914

King  George  V  Land,  showing  Tracks  of  the  Eastern  Sledging  Parties
FROM  the  Main  Base

Queen  Mary  Land,  showing  Tracks  of  the  Sledging  Party  from  the  Main
Base


xin


CHAPTER  XVII
WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

LEAVING  Madigan's  party  on  November  19,  when
forty-six  miles  from  the  Hut,  Stillwell,  Hodge-
man and  Close  of  the  Near-Eastern  Party  diverged
towards  a  dome-shaped  mountain — Mount  Hunt.  A  broad
valley  lay  between  their  position  on  the  falling  plateau  and
this  eminence  to  the  north-east.  Looking  across,  one  would
think  that  the  depression  was  slight,  but  the  party  found
by  aneroid  that  their  descent  was  one  thousand  five  hundred
feet  into  a  gully  filled  with  soft,  deep  snow.  After  skimming
the  polished  sastrugi  of  the  uplands,  the  sledge  ran  heavily
in  the  yielding  drifts.  Then  a  gale  of  wind  rose  behind
them  just  as  the  ascent  on  the  other  side  commenced,  and
was  a  valuable  aid  in  the  pull  to  the  summit.

From  the  highest  point  or  cap  of  what  proved  to  be  a
promontory,  a  wide  seascape  dotted  with  bergs  was  un-
folded to  the  north.  To  the  west  the  eastern  cape  of
Commonwealth  Bay  was  visible,  and  sweeping  away  to  the
north-east  was  the  Mertz  Glacier  with  sheer,  jutting  head-
lands succeeding  one  another  into  the  distance.  True
bearings  to  these  points  were  obtained  from  the  camp,  and,
subsequently,  with  the  help  of  an  observation  secured  on
the  Aurora  during  the  previous  year,  the  trend  of  the  glacier-
tongue  was  determined.  Hodgeman  made  a  series  of  illus-
trative sketches.

On  November  21  the  party  commenced  the  return
journey,  moving  directly  towards  Madigan  Nunatak  to  the
south-west.  This  nunatak  had  been  sighted  for  the  first
time  on  the  outward  march,  and  there  was  much  speculation

VOL   II  A  1


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

as  to  what  the  rock  would  prove  to  be.  A  gradual  descent
for  seven  miles  brought  them  on  to  a  plain,  almost  at  sea-
level,  continuous  with  the  valley  they  had  crossed  on  the
19th  further  to  the  east.  On  the  far  side  of  the  plain  a
climb  was  commenced  over  some  ice-spurs,  and  then  a
broad  field  of  crevasses  was  encountered,  some  of  which
attained  a  width  of  fifty  yards.  Delayed  by  these  and  by
unfavourable  weather,  they  did  not  reach  Madigan  Nunatak
until  the  evening  of  November  20.

The  outcrop — a  jagged  crest  of  rock — was  found  to  be
one  hundred  and  sixty  yards  long  and  thirty  yards  wide,
placed  at  an  altitude  of  two  thousand  four  hundred  feet  above
sea-level.     It  is  composed  of  grey  quartzose  gneiss.

There  were  no  signs  of  recent  glaciation  or  of  ice-strige,
though  the  rock  was  much  weathered,  and  all  the  cracks  and
joint-planes  were  filled  with  disintegrating  material.  The
weathering  was  excessive  and  peculiar  in  contrast  with  that
observed  on  fresh  exposures  near  the  Hut  and  at  other
localities  near  sea-level.

After  collecting  specimens  and  placing  a  small  depot  of
food  on  the  highest  point,  the  party  continued  their  way  to
the  Hut,  reaching  it  on  November  27.

At  Winter  Quarters  noticeable  changes  had  taken  place.
The  harbour  ice  had  broken  back  for  several  hundred  yards
and  was  rotten  and  ready  to  blow  out  in  the  first  strong
wind ;  marked  thawing  had  occurred  everywhere,  and
many  islands  of  rock  emerged  from  the  snow  ;  the  ice-foot
was  diminishing  ;  penguins,  seals,  and  flying  birds  made  the
place,  for  once,  alive  and  busy.

Bickerton,  Whetter  and  Hannam  carried  on  the  routine
of  work  ;  Whetter  as  meteorologist  and  Hannam  as  mag-
netician,  while  Bickerton  was  busied  with  the  air-tractor
and  in  preparations  for  sledging.  Thousands  of  penguins'
eggs  had  been  gathered  for  the  return  voyage  of  the  Aurora,
or  in  case  of  detention  for  a  second  winter.

Murphy,  Hunter  and  Laseron  arrived  from  the  south  on
the  same  day  as  Stillwell,  Hodgeman  and  Close  came  in  from
2


Q

<  ^

-4      ,


?^


bo


H

o

ft,


WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

the  east.  The  former  party  had  plodded  for  sixty-seven  miles
through  a  dense  haze  of  drift.  They  had  kept  a  course
roughly  by  the  wind  and  the  direction  of  sastrugi.  The
unvarying  white  light  of  thick  overcast  days  had  been  so
severe  that  all  were  suffering  from  snow-blindness.  When,
at  length,  they  passed  over  the  endless  billows  of  snow  on
to  the  downfalls  near  the  coast,  the  weather  cleared  and
they  were  relieved  to  see  once  more  the  Mecca  of  all  sledging
parties — Aladdin's  Cave.

A  redistribution  of  parties  and  duties  was  made.  Hodge-
man joined  Whetter  and  Bickerton  in  preparation  for  the
air-tractor  sledge's  trip  to  the  west.  Hunter  took  up  the
position  of  meteorologist  and  devoted  all  his  spare  time
to  biological  investigations  amongst  the  immigrant  life  of
summer.  Hannam  continued  to  act  as  magnetician  and
general  "  handy  man."  Murphy,  who  was  also  to  be  in
charge  during  the  summer,  returned  to  his  stores,  making
preparations  for  departure.  Hourly  meteorological  observa-
tions kept  every  one  vigilant  at  the  Hut.

In  pursuance  of  a  plan  to  examine  in  detail  the  coast
immediately  east  of  Commonwealth  Bay,  Stillwell  set  out
with  Laseron  and  Close  on  December  9.  The  weather  was
threatening  at  the  start,  and  they  had  the  usual  struggle
with  wind  and  drift  to  "  make  "  Aladdin's  Cave.

Forewarned  on  the  first  journey  of  the  dangers  of  bad
ventilation,  they  cleared  the  entrance  to  the  cave  of  obstacles
so  that  a  ready  exit  could  be  made,  if,  as  was  expected,  the
opening  became  sealed  with  snow-drift.  This  did  happen
during  the  night,  and,  though  everything  seemed  all  right
the  next  morning,  the  whole  party  was  overpowered  during
breakfast  by  foul  air,  the  presence  of  which  was  not
suspected.

Hoosh  was  cooked  and  about  to  be  served,  when  Stillwell,
who  was  in  charge  of  the  primus,  collapsed.  Close  im-
mediately seized  an  ice-axe,  stood  up,  thrust  its  point
through  the  choked  entrance,  and  fell  down,  overcome.
Laseron  became  powerless  at  the  same  time.     An  hour  and

3


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

a  half  later — so  it  was  reckoned — ^the  party  revived  and
cleared  the  opening.  The  hole  made  by  the  ice-axe  had
been  sufficient  to  save  their  lives.  For  a  day  they  were  too
weak  and  exhausted  to  travel,  so  the  tent  was  pitched  and
the  night  spent  outside  the  Cave.

On  December  11  they  steered  due  south  for  a  while  and
then  eastward  for  three  days  to  Madigan  Nunatak  ;  delayed
for  twenty-four  hours  by  a  blizzard.

Still  well  goes  on  to  describe  :  "  Part  of  the  15th  was
spent  in  making  observations,  taking  photographs  and
collecting  specimens  of  rocks  and  lichens.  Breaking  camp,
we  set  out  on  a  northerly  course  for  the  coast  down  gently
falling  snowfields.  Gradually  there  opened  up  a  beautiful
vista  of  sea,  dotted  with  floes  and  rocky  islets  (many  of
which  were  ice-capped).  On  December  16  camp  was  pitched
near  the  coast  on  a  stretch  of  firm,  unbroken  ice,  which  en-
abled one  to  venture  close  enough  to  the  edge  to  discover
an  islet  connected  by  a  snow-ramp  with  the  icy  barrier.
Lying  farther  off  the  shore  was  a  thick  fringe  of  islets,
among  and  beyond  which  drifted  a  large  quantity  of  heavy
floe.  The  separate  floes  stood  some  ten  or  fifteen  feet
above  the  water-level,  and  the  lengths  of  several  exceeded
a  quarter  of  a  mile.  Every  accessible  rock  was  covered
with  rookeries  of  Adelie  penguins  ;  the  first  chicks  were  just
hatched."

A  theodolite  traverse  was  run  to  fix  the  position  of  each
islet.  The  traverse-line  was  carried  close  to  the  ice-cliff,
so  that  the  number  of  islets  hidden  from  view  was  as  few
as  possible.  Snow  mounds  were  built  at  intervals  and  the
intervening  distances  measured  by  the  sledge-meter.

The  party  travelled  west  for  seven  and  a  quarter  miles
round  a  promontory — Cape  Gray — until  the  Winter  Quarters
were  sighted  across  Commonwealth  Bay.  They  then  turned
eastward  over  the  higher  slopes,  meeting  the  coast  some
three  miles  to  the  east  of  the  place  where  they  had  first
encountered  it.  The  surface  was  for  the  most  part  covered
with  snow,  while  crevasses  were  frequent  and  treacherous.
4


J'-^F^^t^l  i


JIADIGAX  XUNATAK— CLOSE  AXD  LASEROX  STAXDIXG  Stilhvell

BY  THE  SLEDGE


A  DESOLATE  CAMP  OX  THE  PLATEAU


Hurley


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

In  the  midst  of  the  survey  the  sledge-meter  broke  down,
and,  as  the  party  were  wholly  dependent  upon  it  for  laying
out  base-lines,  repairs  had  to  be  made.

On  the  27th  another  accessible  rocky  projection  was
seen.  Over  it  and  the  many  islands  in  the  vicinity  hovered
flocks  of  snow  petrels  and  occasional  Antarctic  and  Wilson
petrels.  Masses  of  Adelie  penguins  and  chicks  constituted
the  main  population,  and  skua  gulls  with  eggs  were  also
observed.  The  rock  was  of  garnet  gneiss,  traversed  by
black  dykes  of  pyroxene  granulite.

A  great  discovery  was  made  on  December  29.  On  the
abrupt,  northern  face  of  some  rocks  connected  to  the  ice-cap
of  the  mainland  by  a  causeway  of  ice  a  large  colony  of
sea-birds  had  nested.  Cape  pigeons,  the  rare  silver-grey
and  snow  petrels  were  all  present.  Amongst  these  Laseron
made  a  collection  of  many  eggs  and  birds.

The  traverse  -  line  was  then  carried  back  to  Madigan
Nunatak  along  a  series  of  connecting  mounds.  After  being
held  up  for  three  and  a  half  days  in  a  blizzard  from  Decem-
ber 31  to  January  4,  the  party  were  home  once  more  late
on  January  5,  1913.

Returning  to  the  fortunes  of  the  air-tractor  sledge,  which
was  to  start  west  early  in  December.  Bickerton  has  a  short
story  to  tell,  inadequate  to  the  months  of  work  which  were
expended  on  that  converted  aeroplane.  Its  career  was
mostly  associated  with  misfortune,  dating  from  a  serious
fall  when  in  flight  at  Adelaide,  through  the  southern  voyage
of  the  Aurora,  buffeted  by  destructive  seas,  to  a  capacious
snow  shelter  in  Adelie  Land — ^the  Hangar — where  for  the
greater  part  of  the  year  it  remained  helpless  and  drift-bound.

Bickerton  takes  up  the  story  :

I  had  always  imagined  that  the  air-tractor  sledge  would
be  most  handicapped  by  the  low  temperature  ;  but  the
wind  was  far  more  formidable.  It  is  obvious  that  a  machine
which  depends  on  the  surrounding  air  for  its  medium  of
traction  could  not  be  tested  in  the  winds  of  an  Adelie  Land
6


I


SLED(iIX(;    I{A1'I().NS  FOi;  TllliKl':  .MEN'  FOl!   THREE  .AIONTHS  //»/7»',//


'IILLWELL  ISLAND.— A  HAUNT  OF  THE  SILVER-GREY  PETREL  Ilurlei/


WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

winter.  One  might  just  as  well  try  the  capabilities  of  a
small  motor-launch  in  the  rapids  at  Niagara.  Consequently
we  had  to  wait  until  the  high  summer.

With  hopes  postponed  to  an  indefinite  future,  another
difficulty  arose.  As  it  was  found  that  the  wind  would  not
allow  the  sea-ice  to  form,  breaking  up  the  floe  as  quickly  as  it
appeared,  the  only  remaining  field  for  manoeuvres  was  over
the  highlands  to  the  south  ;  under  conditions  quite  different
from  those  for  which  it  was  suited.  We  knew  that  for  the
first  three  miles  there  was  a  rise  of  some  one  thousand  four
hundred  feet,  and  in  places  the  gradient  was  one  in  three
and  a  half.  I  thought  the  machine  would  negotiate  this,
but  it  was  obviously  unsafe  to  make  the  venture  without
providing  against  a  headlong  rush  downhill,  if,  for  any
reason,  power  should  fail.

Suggestions  were  not  lacking,  and  after  much  considera-
tion the  following  device  was  adopted :

A  hand  rock-drill,  somewhat  over  an  inch  in  diameter,
was  turned  up  in  the  lathe,  cut  with  one-eighth-inch  pitched,
square  threads  and  pointed  at  the  lower  end.  This  actuated
through  an  internal  threaded  brass  bush  held  in  an  iron
standard  ;  the  latter  being  bolted  to  the  after-end  of  a
runner  over  a  hole  bushed  for  the  reception  of  the  drill.  Two
sets  of  these  were  got  ready  ;   one  for  each  runner.

The  standards  were  made  from  spare  caps  belonging  to
the  wireless  masts.  The  timely  fracture  of  one  of  the  vices
supplied  me  with  sufficient  ready-cut  thread  of  the  required
pitch  for  one  brake.  Cranked  handles  were  fitted,  and  the
points,  which  came  in  contact  with  the  ice,  were  hardened
and  tempered.  ^\Tien  protruded  to  their  fullest  extent,  the
spikes  extended  four  inches  below  the  runners.

The  whole  contrivance  was  not  very  elegant,  but  im-
pressed one  with  its  strength  and  reliability.  To  work  the
handles,  two  men  had  to  sit  one  on  each  runner.  As  the
latter  were  narrow  and  the  available  framework,  by  which
to  hold  on  and  steady  oneself,  rather  limited,  the  office  of
brakesman  promised  to  be  one  with  acrobatic  possibilities.

7


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

To  start  the  engine  it  was  necessary  to  have  a  calm  and,
preferably,  simny  day;  the  engine  and  oil-tank  had  been
painted  black  to  absorb  the  sun's  heat.  On  a  windy  day
with  sun  and  an  air  temperature  of  30°  F.,  it  was  only  with
considerable  difficulty  that  the  engine  could  be  turned —
chiefly  owing  to  the  thickness  of  the  lubricating  oil.  But
on  a  calm  day  with  the  temperature  lower — 20°  F.  for
example — ^the  engine  would  swing  well  enough  to  permit
starting,  after  an  hour  or  two  of  steady  sun.  If  there  were
no  sun  even  in  the  absence  of  wind,  starting  would  be  out  of
the  question,  unless  the  atmospheric  temperature  were  high
or  the  engine  were  warmed  with  a  blow-lamp.

It  was  not  till  November  15  that  the  right  combination
of  conditions  came.  That  day  was  calm  and  sunny,  and
the  engine  needed  no  more  stimulus  than  it  would  have
received  in  a  "  decent  "  climate.

Hannam,  Whetter  and  I  were  the  only  inhabitants  of
the  Hut  at  the  time.  Having  ascertained  that  the  oil  and
air  pumps  were  working  satisfactorily,  we  fitted  the  wheels
and  air-rudder,  and  made  a  number  of  satisfactory  trials
in  the  vicinity  of  the  Hut.

The  wheels  were  soon  discarded  as  useless  ;  reliance
being  placed  on  the  long  runners.  Then  the  brakes  were
tested  for  the  first  time  by  driving  for  a  short  distance  uphill
to  the  south  and  glissading  down  the  slope  back  to  the  Hut.
With  a  man  in  charge  of  each  brake,  the  machine,  when  in
full  career  down  the  slope,  was  soon  brought  to  a  standstill.
The  experiment  was  repeated  from  a  higher  position  on  the
slope,  with  the  same  result.  The  machine  was  then  taken
above  the  steepest  part  of  the  slope  (one  in  three  and  a  half)
and,  on  slipping  back,  was  brought  to  rest  with  ease.  The
surface  was  hard,  polished  blue  ice.  The  air-rudder,  by  the
way,  was  efficient  at  speeds  exceeding  fifteen  miles  per  hour.

On  the  20th  we  had  a  calm  morning,  so  Whetter  and
I  set  out  for  Aladdin's  Cave  to  depot  twenty  gallons  of
benzene  and  six  gallons  of  oil.  The  engine  was  not  running
well,  one  cylinder  occasionally  "  missing."  But,  in  spite
8


THE  liUS,"  THE  AIU-TKACTOK  SLEDGE  Maicson


BKKERTOX  AND  HIS  SLEDGE  WITH  DETACHABLE   WHEELS  Uurley


WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

of  this  and  a  head  wind  of  fifteen  miles  per  hour,  we  covered
the  distance  between  the  one-mile  and  the  two-mile  flags  in
three  minutes.  This  was  on  ice,  and  the  gradient  was  about
one  in  fifteen.  We  went  no  farther  that  day,  and  it  was
lucky  that  we  did  so,  for,  soon  after  our  return  to  the  Hut,
it  was  blowing  more  than  sixty  miles  per  hour.

On  December  2  Hodgeman  joined  us  in  a  very  successful
trip  to  Aladdin's  Cave  with  nine  8-gallon  tins  of  benzene
on  a  sledge ;  weighing  in  all  seven  hundred  pounds.

After  having  such  a  good  series  of  results  with  the
machine,  the  start  of  the  real  journey  was  fixed  for  Decem-
ber 3.  At  3  P.M.  it  fell  calm,  and  we  left  at  4  p.m.,  amid  an
inspiriting  demonstration  of  goodwill  from  the  six  other
men.  Arms  were  still  waving  violently  as  we  crept  noisily
over  the  brow  of  the  hill  and  the  Hut  disappeared  from
sight.

On  the  two  steepest  portions  it  was  necessary  to  walk,
but,  these  past,  the  machine  went  well  with  a  load  of  three
men  and  four  hundred  pounds,  reaching  Aladdin's  Cave  in
an  hour  by  a  route  free  of  small  crevasses,  which  I  had
discovered  on  the  previous  day.  Here  we  loaded  up  with
three  100-lb.  food-bags,  twelve  gallons  of  oil  (one  hundred
and  thirty  pounds),  and  seven  hundred  pounds  of  benzene.
Altogether,  there  was  enough  fuel  and  lubricating  oil  to
run  the  engine  at  full  speed  for  twenty  hours  as  well  as  full
rations  for  three  men  for  six  weeks.

After  a  few  minutes  spent  in  disposing  the  loads,  our  pro-
cession of  machine,  four  sledges  (in  tow)  and  three  men  moved
off.  The  going  was  slow,  too  slow — about  three  miles  an
hour  on  ice.  This  would  probably  mean  no  movement
at  all  on  snow  which  might  soon  be  expected.  But  some-
thing was  wrong.  The  cylinder  which  had  been  missing
fire  a  few  days  before,  but  which  had  since  been  cleaned
and  put  in  order,  was  now  missing  fire  again,  and  the  speed,
proportionately,  had  dropped  too  much.

I  made  sure  that  the  oil  was  circulating,  and  cleaned
the  sparking-plug,  but  the  trouble  was  not  remedied.     A

9


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

careful  examination  showed  no  sufficient  cause,  so  it  was
assumed  to  be  internal.  To  undertake  anything  big  was
out  of  the  question,  so  we  dropped  thirty-two  gallons  of
benzene  and  a  spare  propeller.  Another  mile  went  by
and  we  came  to  snow,  where  forty  gallons  of  benzene,
twelve  gallons  of  oil  and  a  sledge  were  abandoned.  The
speed  was  now  six  miles  an  hour  and  we  did  two  miles  in
very  bad  form.  As  it  was  now  11  p.m.  and  the  wind  was
beginning  to  rise,  we  camped,  feeling  none  too  pleased  with
the  first  day's  results.

While  in  the  sleeping-bag  I  tried  to  think  out  some
rapid  way  of  discovering  what  was  wrong  with  the  engine.
The  only  conclusion  to  which  I  could  come  was  that  it  would
be  best  to  proceed  to  the  cave  at  eleven  and  three-quarter
miles — Cathedral  Grotto — and  there  remove  the  faulty
cylinder,  if  the  weather  seemed  likely  to  be  favourable  ;
if  it  did  not,  to  go  on  independently  with  our  man-hauled
sledge.

On  December  4  the  wind  was  still  blowing  about  twenty
miles  per  hour  when  we  set  to  work  on  the  machine.  I
poured  some  oil  straight  into  the  crank-case  to  make  sure
that  there  was  sufficient,  and  we  also  tested  and  improved
the  ignition.  At  four  o'clock  the  wind  dropped,  and  in  an
hour  the  engine  was  started.  Wliile  moving  along,  the  idle
cylinder  was  ejecting  oil,  and  this,  together  with  the  fact
that  it  had  no  compression,  made  me  hope  that  broken
piston-rings  were  the  source  of  the  trouble.  It  would  only
take  two  hours  to  remove  three  cylinders,  take  one  ring
from  each  of  the  two  sound  ones  for  the  faulty  one,  and  all
might  yet  be  well !

These  thoughts  were  brought  to  a  sudden  close  by  the
engine,  without  any  warning,  pulling  up  with  such  a  jerk
that  the  propeller  was  smashed.  On  moving  the  latter,
something  fell  into  the  oil  in  the  crank-case  and  fizzled,  while
the  propeller  could  only  be  swung  through  an  angle  of  about
30°.  We  did  not  wait  to  examine  any  further,  but  fixed  up
the  man-hauling  sledge,  which  had  so  far  been  carried  by
10


WITH  STILWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

the  air-tractor  sledge,  and  cached  all  except  absolute
necessities.

We  were  sorry  to  leave  the  machine,  though  we  had
never  dared  to  expect  a  great  deal  from  it  in  the  face  of  the
unsuitable  conditions  found  to  prevail  in  Adelie  Land.
However,  the  present  situation  was  disappointing.

Having  stuffed  up  the  exhaust-pipes  to  keep  out  the  drift,
we  turned  our  backs  to  the  aero-sledge  and  made  for  the
eleven-and-three-quarter-mile  cave,  arriving  there  at  8  p.m.
There  was  a  cheering  note  from  Bage  in  the  "  Grotto,"
wishing  us  good  luck.

To  avoid  crevasses  we  steered  first  of  all  to  the  south-
west on  the  morning  of  the  5th,  which  was  clear  and  bright.
After  six  miles  the  sastrugi  became  hard  and  compact,  so  the
course  was  changed  to  due  west.  Shortly  afterwards,  a
piece  of  rock  *  which  we  took  to  be  a  meteorite,  was  found
on  the  surface  of  the  snow.  It  measured  approximately
five  inches  by  three  inches  by  three  and  a  half  inches  and
was  covered  with  a  black  scale  which  in  places  had  blistered  ;
three  or  four  small  pieces  of  this  scale  were  lying  within
three  inches  of  the  main  piece.  Most  of  the  surface  was
rounded,  except  one  face  which  looked  as  if  it  had  been
fractured.  It  was  lying  on  the  snow,  in  a  slight  depression,
about  two  and  a  half  inches  below  the  mean  surface,  and
there  was  nothing  to  indicate  that  there  had  been  any
violent  impact.

At  eight  o'clock  that  night  we  had  done  twelve  miles,
losing  sight  of  the  sea  at  a  height  of  about  three  thousand
feet.  All  felt  pleased  and  looked  forward  to  getting  over
a  ridge  ahead,  which,  from  an  altitude  of  four  thousand
feet,  ran  in  pencilled  outline  to  the  western  point  of  Common-
wealth Bay.

On  December  6  it  was  drifting  hard,  and  part  of  the

♦  This  has  since  been  examined  by  Professor  E.  Skeats  and  Still  well,
who  report  it  to  be  an  interesting  form  of  meteorite,  containing  amongst
other  minerals,  plagioclase  felspar.  This  is,  we  believe,  the  first  occasion  on
which  a  meteorite  has  been  found  in  the  Antarctic  regions. — Ed.

11


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

morning  was  spent  theorizing  on  our  prospects  in  an
optimistic  vein.  This  humour  gradually  wore  off  as  the
thick  drift  continued,  with  a  fifty-mile  wind,  for  three  days.

At  5  P.M.  on  December  8  a  move  was  made.  The  drift
was  what  our  Hut-standard  reckoned  to  be  "  moderate,"
but  the  wind  had  fallen  to  thirty  miles  an  hour  and  had
veered  to  the  east ;  so  the  sail  was  hoisted.  The  going  was
difficult  over  a  soft  surface,  and  after  five  hours,  by  which
time  the  drift  had  perceptibly  thickened,  we  had  done  eight
miles.

The  thirst  each  one  of  us  developed  in  those  earlier  days
was  prodigious.  Wlien  filling  the  cooker  with  snow  it  was
hard  to  refrain  from  packing  it  "up  to  the  knocker  "  in
order  to  obtain  a  sufficient  supply  of  water.

The  next  day  it  blew  harder  and  drifted  thicker.  Above
the  loud  flapping  of  the  tent  and  the  incessant  sizzling  of
the  drift  we  discussed  our  situation.  We  were  one  week
"  out  "  and  had  travelled  thirty-one  miles.  Future  progress
depended  entirely  on  the  weather — unfortunately.  We
were  beginning  to  learn  that  though  the  season  was
"  meteorologically  "  called  summer,  it  was  hardly  recognizable
as  such.

December  10  was  Whetter's  birthday.  It  was  heralded
by  an  extra  strong  wind  and  the  usual  liberal  allowance  of
drift.  I  was  cook,  and  made  some  modifications  in  the  meal.
Hodgeman  (who  was  the  previous  cook)  used  to  make  hoosh
as  thick  as  a  biscuit,  so  we  had  some  thin  stuff  for  a  change
— ^two  mugs  each.  Then  really  strong  tea ;  we  boiled  it  for
some  time  to  make  sure  of  the  strength  and  added  some
leaves  which  had  already  done  good  service.

Several  times  fault  had  been  found  with  the  way  the
tent  was  pitched.  I  had  not  yet  tried  my  hand  at  being
the  "  man  inside  "  during  this  operation.  One  day,  while
every  one  was  grumbling,  I  said  I  would  take  the  responsi-
bility at  the  next  camp  ;  the  proposal  being  received  with
grunts  of  assent.  When  the  job  was  finished  and  the
poles  appeared  to  be  spread  taut,  I  found  myself  alone  in
12


1


Adelie  Land  .MACCOR.MICK  SKUA    GULL  OX  THE  NEST   WITH  EGG  Hurley


Adelie  Lund  (HICK  OF  .MACC'OU.MKK   SKUA  GUUL  OX  THE   XKSl'  Hiiiiei/


WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

what  seemed  to  me  a  cathedral.  FeeHng  pleased,  I  called
for  the  others  to  come  in,  and  arranged  myself  in  a
corner  with  an  "  I-told-you-so  "  expression  on  my  face,
ready  to  receive  their  congratulations.  Hodgeman  came  in
first.  He  is  not  a  large  man,  though  he  somehow  gives  one
the  impression  that  he  is,  but  after  he  had  made  himself
comfortable  the  place  seemed  smaller.  When  half-way
through  the  "spout,"  coming  in,  he  gave  a  grunt  which  I
took  to  be  one  of  appreciation.  Then  Whetter  came  in.
He  is  of  a  candid  disposition  :  "  Ho,  ho,  laddie,  what  the
dickens  have  you  done  with  the  tent  ?  "

I  tried  to  explain  their  mistake.  But  it  was  no  good.
When  we  were  all  inside,  I  couldn't  help  seeing  that  the
tent  was  much  smaller  than  it  had  ever  been  before,  and  we
had  to  huddle  together  most  uncomfortably.  And  there  were
three  days  like  this.

At  nine  o'clock  one  morning  Hodgeman  woke  me  with,
"  What  about  getting  a  move  on  ?  "  The  wind  had  dropped
to  forty  miles  an  hour,  and  through  a  tiny  hole  in  the  tent
the  ground  could  be  seen.  Amid  a  thinning  fog  of  drift,  the
disc  of  the  sun  was  just  visible.

We  made  a  start  and  then  plodded  on  steadily  till  mid-
night over  a  soft  and  uncomfortable  surface.  Shortly  after
that  hour  I  looked  at  the  sledge-meter  and  found  that  it
had  ceased  working  ;  the  sprocket  had  been  knocked  off.
Repair  was  out  of  the  question,  as  every  joint  was  soldered
up  ;  so  without  more  ado  we  dropped  it.  In  future  we
were  to  estimate  our  speed,  having  already  had  some  good
experience  in  this  way.

No  sooner  had  Friday  December  13  come  on  the  scene
than  a  catastrophe  overtook  us.  The  superstitious  might
have  blamed  Fate,  but  on  this  occasion  there  was  no  room
for  doubt ;  the  fault  was  mine.  The  sail  was  up  and,
while  braking  the  load  upwind,  I  slipped  and  fell,  allowing
the  sledge  to  colUde  with  a  large  sastruga.  The  bow  struck
the  solid  snow  with  such  force  that  it  was  smashed.

Next  day  a  new  bow  was  manufactured  from  a  spare

13


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

bamboo  which  had  been  brought  as  a  depot  pole.  It  took
some  time  spHtting  and  bending  this  into  position  and  then
lashing  it  with  raw  hide.  But  the  finished  article  fully
justified  the  means,  and,  in  spite  of  severe  treatment,  the
makeshift  stood  for  the  rest  of  the  journey.

Wliile  on  the  march  on  December  16,  the  wind  dropped
and  the  drift  ceased  for  the  first  time  since  December  5  ;  for
eleven  days  it  had  been  heavy  or  moderate.  Before  we  got
into  harness  on  the  same  day,  a  Wilson  petrel  flew  above  us.
This  little  touch  of  life,  together  with  the  bright  sun,  light
wind  and  lack  of  drift  enabled  us  to  start  away  in  better
spirits  than  had  been  our  wont.

The  next  four  days  passed  in  excellent  weather.  The
surface  was  mainly  hard  and  the  clusters  of  large  sastrugi
could  generally  be  avoided.  Patches  of  softer  "  piecrust  "
were  met  but  only  lasted  for  two  or  three  miles.  Making  up
for  lost  time,  we  did  a  few  miles  short  of  one  hundred  in
five  days.

Unfortunately  there  was  always  drift  at  midday,  so
that  it  was  impossible  to  get  a  latitude  "  shot  "  with  a
sextant  and  artificial  horizon.

On  December  19  camp  was  pitched  at  1  a.m.  before  a
glorious  view  ;  an  horizon  of  sea  from  west  to  north-east
and  white  fields  of  massive  bergs.  In  the  extreme  west
there  was  something  which  very  closely  resembled  pack-ice.

On  the  20th  the  surface  was  softer  and  the  snow  more
recent,  but  the  wind  was  behind  us  and  for  part  of  the  day
the  track  led  downhill  into  a  peculiar  saucer- shaped  depres-
sion which,  on  our  first  entry,  looked  like  a  valley  closed  at
the  far  end,  while  when  we  came  to  the  middle  it  resolved
itself  once  more  into  a  saucer.

Camping  here,  I  managed  to  get  a  good  time-shot,  so
that,  provided  we  occupied  this  camp  on  the  return  journey,
I  reckoned  that  I  could  get  the  watch-rate  and  fix  the
approximate  longitude  of  the  pack-ice,  which  for  two  days
had  been  clearly  within  view.

December  21  marked  the  end  of  the  good  weather,  for
14


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

drift  and  wind  came  on  apace  lasting  four  days,  the  wind
attaining  about  eighty  miles  an  hour.  Sleeping-bags  and
tent-cloth  were  soon  in  a  wretched  state,  sodden  with
moisture.  Christmas  Day  was  not  very  enjoyable  in  cramped
quarters,  the  tent  having  encroached  on  us  owing  to  drift
settling  around  it.  Still,  by  the  evening,  it  was  clear
enough  to  break  camp  and  we  made  a  spurt  of  thirteen  miles.

From  the  next  camp  there  was  a  good  view  to  the  north-
west, the  pack  extending  beyond  the  limit  of  vision.  The
land  trended  to  the  west-north-west  and  we  could  see  it  at  a
distance  of  fifty  miles  from  our  altitude.

All  things  considered,  I  thought  it  right  to  turn  back
at  this  stage.  In  twenty- six  days  we  had  done  one  hundred
and  fifty-eight  miles,  and  ninety-seven  miles  of  that  distance
had  been  covered  on  the  only  five  consecutive  good  days.
We  waited  some  time  until  the  sun  appeared,  when  I  was  able
to  get  an  observation  while  Hodgeman  made  a  sketch  of  the
view.

By  December  30  we  reoccupied  the  camp  of  the  20th,
sixteen  miles  on  the  return  journey.  A  time-shot  was
successful,  and  observations  were  also  taken  for  magnetic
declination.

As  the  weather  was  fine,  Hodgeman  and  Whetter  went  to
investigate  two  odd-looking  pyramids  about  five  miles  away.
These  turned  out  to  be  high  snow-ramps,  two  hundred  yards
long,  on  the  lee  side  of  open  crevasses.

The  last  day  of  1912  was  calm  and  "  snow-blind  " — the
first  of  this  particular  variety  we  had  experienced  without
drift.  A  New  Year  pudding  was  made  of  soaked  biscuit,
cocoa,  milk,  sugar,  butter,  and  a  few  remaining  raisins,  and
it  was,  of  course,  an  immense  success.

On  January  1  and  the  two  succeeding  days  the  drift  was
so  thick  that  we  had  to  lie  up  and  amuse  ourselves  dis-
cussing various  matters  of  individual  interest.  Hodgeman
gave  us  a  lecture  on  architecture,  explaining  the  beauties  of
certain  well-known  buildings.  Whetter  would  describe
some  delicate  surgical  operation,  while  I  talked  about
16


Uv>^^^am'M«<a^ai■^i^


•v\


WITH  STILLWELL'S  AND  BICKERTON'S  PARTIES

machinery.  I  also  worked  up  the  time-shots,  and  the
hours  passed  quickly.  If  only  our  sleeping-bags  had  been
drier  we  might  have  enjoyed  ourselves  at  intervals.

The  evening  of  the  4th  found  us  camped  ten  miles  nearer
home,  beside  a  large  crevasse  and  with  a  closer  view  of  the
bay  seen  on  December  20.  This  time  we  were  greatly
excited  to  see  rocks  outcropping  near  the  water-line,  and  an
investigation  of  them  was  resolved  upon  for  the  following  day.

The  morning  broke  overcast  and  ghostly  white.  Although
only  ten  yards  away  from  it,  we  could  not  see  the  huge
crevasse  in  our  vicinity.  Thus  our  expedition  to  the  rocks
had  to  be  abandoned.

After  a  week's  travelling,  during  which  obscured  skies
and  intermittent  drift  were  the  rule,  we  were  once  more  in
the  neighbourhood  of  Madigan's  spring  depot,  forty-five
miles  west  of  Aladdin's  Cave.  It  had  been  passed  without
our  seeing  any  signs  of  it  on  the  outward  journey,  and,  as
we  never  relied  on  finding  it,  we  did  not  mind  about  missing
it  again.

Thick  drift  and  a  fifty- mile  wind  on  January  12  kept  us
confined  for  thirty-six  hours.  It  was  clear  enough  after  noon
on  the  13th,  and  five  miles  were  covered  in  four  hours
through  thick  surface  drift.  What  the  course  was  we  did
not  care  as  we  steered  by  the  sastrugi.  If  ever  a  man  had
any  "  homing  instinct  "  it  would  surely  show  itself  on  such
an  occasion  as  this.

Travelling  in  driving  snow  used  to  have  a  curious  effect
on  me.  I  always  imagined  that  we  were  just  coming  to  an
avenue  of  trees  running  at  right  angles  to  our  course.  \Miat
produced  this  idea  I  have  not  the  slightest  suspicion,  but
while  it  lasted,  the  impression  was  very  strong.

To  avoid  the  drift,  which  was  thickest  by  day,  travelling
had  for  some  time  been  conducted  at  night.  On  the  evening
of  the  14th,  during  a  clear  spell,  a  ridge  rose  up  behind,  and,
in  front,  a  wide  bay  was  visible  with  its  far  eastern  point
rising  in  mirage.  This  was  taken  to  be  Commonwealth
Bay,  but  the  fact  could  not  be  verified  as  the  drift  came  on
VOL.  II  B  X7


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

thickly  once  more.  The  day's  march  was  twelve  miles  by
concerted  reckoning.

Next  day  we  went  three  miles  to  the  north  to  see  if  any
recognizable  bergs  would  come  in  sight,  but  were  stopped
by  crevasses.     The  eastward  course  was  therefore  resumed.

After  continuing  for  about  a  mile  Hodgeman  told  us  to
stop,  flung  down  his  harness  and  dashed  back  to  the  sledge,
rummaging  in  the  instrument-box  till  he  found  the  glasses.
"  Yes,  it's  the  aeroplane,"  he  said.

This  remark  took  us  by  surprise  as  we  had  not  expected
it  for  eight  miles  at  least.  It  was  about  midnight — the
time  when  mirage  was  at  a  maximum.  Consequently,  all
agreed  that  the  machine  was  about  twelve  miles  away,  and
we  went  on  our  way  rejoicing,  steering  towards  the  Cathedral
Grotto  which  was  two  miles  south  of  the  aero-sledge.  After
three  miles  we  camped,  and,  it  being  my  birthday,  the
two  events  were  celebrated  by  "  blowing  in "  the  whisky
belonging  to  the  medical  outfit.

On  the  16th  the  weather  was  thick,  and  we  marched  east
for  ten  miles,  passing  a  tea-leaf,  which  it  was  afterwards
found  must  have  come  downwind  from  the  Grotto.  For
eight  hours  nothing  could  be  done  in  thick  drift,  and  then,  on
breaking  camp,  we  actually  came  to  a  flag  which  had  been
planted  by  Ninnis  in  the  spring,  thirteen  miles  south-east  of
Aladdin's  Cave.  The  distance  to  the  air-tractor  had  been
over-estimated,  and  the  Grotto  must  have  been  passed
quite  close.

We  made  off  down  the  hill,  running  over  the  crevasses  at
a  great  pace.  Aladdin's  Cave  with  its  medley  of  boxes,  tins,
picks  and  shovels,  gladdened  our  eyes  at  10  p.m.  on  the
17th.  Conspicuous  for  its  colour  was  an  orange,  stuck  on  a
pick,  which  told  us  at  once  that  the  Ship  was  in.


18


CHAPTER  XVIII

THE   SHIP'S    STORY

By  Captain  J.  K.  DAVIS

By  sport  of  bitter  weather

We're  walty,  strained,  and  scarred

From  the  kentledge  on  the  kelson
To  the  slings  upon  the  yard.

Kipling.

DR.  MAWSON'S  plans,  as  laid  before  the  Royal
Geographical  Society  in  1911,  provided  for  an
extensive  oceanographical  campaign  in  the  im-
mense stretch  of  ocean  to  the  southward  of  Australia.
Very  little  was  known  of  the  sea-floor  in  this  area,  there
being  but  a  few  odd  soundings  only,  beyond  a  moderate
distance  from  the  Australian  coast.  Even  the  great  Chal-
lenger expedition  had  scarcely  touched  upon  it ;  and  so  our
Expedition  had  a  splendid  field  for  investigation.

The  first  discovery  made  in  this  connexion  on  board  the
Aurora  was  the  fact  that  deep-water  work  is  more  intricate
than  books  would  make  it  appear.  Although  text-books
had  been  carefully  studied  on  the  subject,  it  was  found  that
most  of  them  passed  over  the  practical  side  of  the  work  in
a  few  words,  insufficient  to  give  us  much  help  in  carrying
out  difficult  operations  with  the  vessel  rolling  and  tumbling
about  in  the  heavy  seas  of  the  Southern  Ocean.

So  it  was  only  after  a  good  deal  of  hard  work  and  many
disappointments  that  the  experience  was  gained  which
enabled  us,  during  the  later  stages  of  the  Expedition,  to  do
useful  and  successful  work.

Before    passing   on   to  the   operations   of  the    Aurora

19


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

during  the  winter  of  1912,  I  shall  briefly  refer  to  the  equip-
ment provided  for  oceanographical  work.

The  Lucas  Automatic  Sounding  Machine  was  situated
on  the  port  side  of  the  forecastle  head.  It  was  suitable  for
depths  up  to  six  thousand  fathoms,  being  fitted  with  a
grooved  wheel  so  as  to  be  driven  by  a  rope  belt  from  a
steam-winch  or  other  engine.  The  wire  was  wound  in  by
means  of  a  small  horizontal  steam-engine  which  had  been
specially  designed  for  the  Scotia,  of  the  Scottish  Antarctic
Expedition  (1902)  and  was  kindly  lent  to  us  by  Dr.  W.  S.
Bruce.

The  wire  as  it  is  paid  out  passes  over  a  measuring  wheel,
the  revolutions  of  which  record  on  a  dial  the  number  of
fathoms  out.  A  spring  brake,  which  is  capable  of  stopping
the  reel  instantly,  is  kept  out  of  action  by  the  tension  of
the  wire,  but  when  the  sinker  strikes  the  bottom,  the  loss
of  tension  allows  the  brake  to  spring  back  and  stop  the
reel.     The  depth  can  then  be  read  off  on  the  dial.

A  hollow  iron  tube  called  a  driver  is  attached  to  a  piece
of  hemp  line  spliced  into  the  outer  end  of  the  sounding
wire.  This  driver  bears  one  or  two  weights  to  the  bottom
and  detaches  them  on  striking  it ;  a  specimen  of  the  bottom
being  recovered  in  the  hollow  part  of  the  tube  which  is
fitted  with  valves  to  prevent  water  from  running  through
it  on  the  way  up.  Immediately  the  driver  and  weight
strike  the  bottom,  the  reel  automatically  stops  paying  out
wire.

To  obtain  a  deep-sea  sounding  on  the  Aurora,  the  vessel
was  stopped,  turned  so  as  to  bring  the  wind  on  the  port-bow
and  kept  as  nearly  stationary  as  possible ;  the  engines  being
used  to  balance  any  drift  of  the  vessel  due  to  wind  or  sea.

The  difficulties  of  sounding  in  the  Southern  Ocean  were
much  increased  by  the  almost  constant,  heavy  swell.  The
breaking  strain  of  the  wire  being  only  two  hundred  and
forty  pounds  and  the  load  it  had  to  carry  to  the  bottom
weighing  nearly  fifty-six  pounds  in  air,  it  could  easily  be
understood  that  the  sudden  strain  imposed  by  the  violent
20


THE  BIG  WINDIXG-DUUJI  FOR  THE   DEEP-SEA   DKEDGINU  CABLE  Hurley


FLETCHER  WITH  THE  DRIVEU  LOAiJEK  READY    TO  TAKE  A  .-,OU.\DIXG  Davis


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

rolling  of  the  vessel  often  resulted  in  the  parting  of  the  wire.
We  soon  learnt  to  handle  both  vessel  and  sounding  machine
in  such  a  way  as  to  entail  the  least  possible  strain  on  the
wire.

Of  all  the  operations  conducted  on  board  the  Aurora,
deep-sea  trawling  was  the  one  about  which  we  had  most  to
learn.  Dr.  W.  S.  Bruce  gave  me  most  valuable  advice  on
the  subject  before  we  left  England.  Later,  this  was  supple-
mented by  a  cruise  in  Australian  waters  on  the  Endeavour,
of  the  Commonwealth  Fisheries  Investigation.  Here  I  was
able  to  observe  various  trawling  operations  in  progress,
subsequently  applying  the  information  gained  to  our  own
requirements  on  the  Aurora.

A  short  description  of  our  trawling  arrangements  may
be  useful  to  those  who  are  engaged  in  this  work  on  board
a  vessel  not  specially  designed  for  it.

We  were  provided  with  three  thousand  fathoms  of
tapered  steel  wire  (varying  from  one  and  three-quarters  to
one  and  a  half  inches  in  circumference  and  weighing  roughly
a  ton  to  the  thousand  fathoms  in  air) ;  this  was  kept  on  a
large  iron  reel  (A)  mounted  on  standards  and  controlled  by
a  friction-brake.  This  reel  was  situated  on  the  starboard
side  of  the  main  deck,  the  wire  being  wound  on  to  it  by
means  of  a  chain-drive  from  the  forward  cargo-winch.

For  heaving  in,  our  steam-windlass  was  fitted  with  a
specially  constructed  drum  (B),  which  absorbed  the  crushing
strain  and  then  allowed  the  slack  wire  to  be  wound  on  the
reel  (A),  which  was  driven  as  nearly  as  possible  at  the  same
speed  ;  the  windlass  usually  heaving  at  the  rate  of  four
hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  per  hour.

A  wooden  derrick  (D),  provided  with  topping  lift  and
guys,  was  mounted  on  the  foremast  by  means  of  a  band  and
goose-neck.  At  the  outer  end  of  the  derrick,  the  dynamo-
meter and  a  fourteen-inch  block  were  attached.  The
maximum  strain  which  could  be  supported  was  ten  tons.
In  paying  out,  the  wire  was  led  from  the  head  of  the  derrick  to
a  snatch-block  on  the  quarter  (E),  constructed  so  as  to  admit

21


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

of  its  disengagement  from  the  wire  when  it  was  necessary
to  heave  in.  This  block  kept  the  wire  clear  of  the  propeller
and  allowed  us  to  have  the  vessel  moving  slow  or  fast  as
required,  while  the  trawl  was  being  paid  out.  The  positions
of  the  various  parts  of  the  trawling  gear  are  shown  in  the
plan  on  the  opposite  page.

Before  trawling  in  deep  water  the  vessel  was  stopped
and  a  sounding  obtained  ;  then  the  derrick  was  hoisted,
the  wire  rove  through  the  various  blocks,  the  trawl  shackled
on,  and  the  men  distributed  at  their  stations.  When  all
was  ready,  the  engines  were  put  at  half -speed  (three  knots),  a
course  was  given  to  the  helmsman  and  the  trawl  lowered  into
the  water.  Allien  it  was  flowing  nicely  just  astern,  the  order,
"  Slack  away,"  was  given  ;  the  wire  being  paid  out  evenly
by  means  of  the  friction-brakes.  In  one  thousand  five
hundred  fathoms  of  water,  after  the  two-thousand-fathom
mark  had  passed  out,  the  order  was  given,  "  Hold  on  and
make  fast."  Speed  was  now  reduced  to  one  and  a  half
knots  and  the  wire  watched  until  it  gave  a  decided  indica-
tion of  the  trawl  dragging  over  the  bottom.  The  strain
was  now  taken  by  the  windlass-barrel,  controlled  by  a
screw-brake,  backed  if  necessary  by  a  number  of  turns
round  the  forward  bitts.  A  slow  drag  over  the  bottom  was
generally  continued  for  one  hour.  The  engines  were  then
stopped,  and  the  order  came,  "  Stand  by  to  heave  away."
This  was  quickly  followed  by  "  Knock  out,"  which  meant
the  disengaging  of  the  after-block  from  the  wire  and  allowed
the  vessel  to  swing  round  head-on  to  the  wire.  "  Vast
heaving  "  indicated  the  appearance  of  the  net  at  the  surface,
and,  when  the  mouth  of  the  net  was  well  above  the  bulwarks
the  derrick  was  topped  up  vertically,  the  lower  part  of  the
net  dragged  inboard  and  the  cod-end  untied,  the  catch
being  thus  allowed  to  empty  itself  on  deck.  The  contents
of  the  haul  supplied  the  biologists  with  the  work  of  sorting
and  bottling  for  the  next  twelve  hours  or  more.

The  form  of  trawl  used  on  board  the  Aurora  was  known
as  a  Monagasque  trawl,  of  a  type  employed  by  the  Prince
22


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

of  Monaco.  As  will  be  seen  from  the  sketch,  it  is  of  simple
construction  and  possesses  the  advantage  of  having  both  sides
similar  so  that  it  is  immaterial  which  lands  on  the  bottom.

The  winter  cruise  in  the  Sub- Antarctic  began  on  May  18,
1912,  after  we  had  refitted  in  Sydney  and  taken  on  board
all  the  oceanographic  apparatus,  during  the  previous  month.
Leaving  Port  Jackson,  we  proceeded  to  Port  Kembla,
N.S.W.,  and  took  in  four  hundred  and  eleven  tons  of  coal.

The  following  was  the  personnel  of  the  ship's  officers  on
this  and  the  two  following  cruises  :  Chief  Officer,  F.  D.
Fletcher;  Chief  Engineer,  F.  J.  Gillies;  Second  Officer,
P.  Gray ;  Third  Officer,  C.  P.  de  la  Motte.

During  the  first  dredging  cruise,  Mr.  E.  R.  Waite,  from
the  Canterbury  Museum,  Christchurch,  was  in  charge  of  the
biological  work.

My  plan  was  to  go  through  Bass  Strait  and  then  to  sail
towards  the  Royal  Company  Islands  as  given  on  the
French  chart,  before  heading  for  Macquarie  Island.  From
thence  we  should  steam  across  to  the  Auckland  Islands.
At  both  the  latter  places  Mr.  Waite  would  be  able  to  secure
specimens.  It  was  not  expected  that  the  weather  would
permit  of  much  trawling,  but  we  anticipated  some  good
soundings.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  sub-antarctic  weather  in
the  winter  may  be  predicted  with  some  certainty  :  strong
winds,  heavy  seas,  much  fog  and  general  gloom.

We  had  a  fine  run  through  Bass  Strait  with  a  light
south-east  breeze,  arriving  off  King's  Island  at  noon  on
May  23.  The  trawling  gear  was  got  ready  for  the  following
day,  but  the  sea  was  too  high  and  the  ship  continued  south
towards  the  position  of  the  Royal  Company  Islands.

On  June  1  we  were  in  latitude  53°  south,  longitude  152°
east,  and  had  been  cruising  about  fruitlessly  in  heavy
weather  for  days  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  dredge.
After  being  at  sea  for  a  whole  fortnight  we  had  only  three
soundings  to  our  credit,  and  it  was,  therefore,  resolved  to  make
for  Macquarie  Island.
24


Davis
AT  THE  PK0V18I0X  DEPOT  FOR  CASTAWAYS  PKOVIDEU  BY  THE  XEW  ZEALAND
GOVEKXMENT.  CAMP  COVE,  CARXLEY  HARBOUR,  AUCKLAXD  ISLAXI).      PRIMMER

OX  THE  RIGHT


I'rimmer
THE  BRICK  PIER  ERECTED  AT  PORT  ROSS,  AUCKLAXD  ISLAXDS,  BY  THE
MAGXETICIAXS  OF  SIR  JAMES  CLARKE  ROSS'S  EXPEDITIOX


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

On  the  7th  we  reached  the  island  and  anchored  at  North-
East  Bay  in  twelve  fathoms,  about  one  mile  from  land.

After  a  stiff  pull  ashore,  next  day,  we  landed  and  found
the  party  all  well.  They  had  built  a  comfortable  hut  and
were  enjoying  life  as  far  as  possible,  despite  the  constant
gales  and  continuous  days  of  fog.

We  then  climbed  up  the  hill  to  the  wireless  station,
where  everything  was  in  splendid  order.  Two  small  huts
had  been  erected,  one  for  the  engine  and  the  other  for  the
receiving  apparatus.  Sandell  and  Sawyer,  the  two  operators,
were  to  be  congratulated  on  the  efficient  way  the  station
had  been  kept  going  under  very  considerable  difficulty.  In
addition  to  the  routine  work  with  Hobart  and  Wellington
they  had  occasionally  communicated  with  stations  over
two  thousand  miles  distant.

I  was  able  to  send  the  following  message  to  Professor
David  :  "  Aurora  arrived  Macquarie  Island ;  all  well,
June  7 ;  constant  gales  and  high  seas  have  prevented
dredging  so  far.  Royal  Company  Islands  not  found  in
the  position  indicated  on  the  chart."

We  were  able  to  land  some  stores  for  the  use  of  the
land  party  under  Ainsworth.  Meteorological,  biological  and
geological  work  were  all  in  progress  and  the  scientific
records  should  be  of  great  value.  Up  to  the  date  of  our
arrival,  no  wireless  messages  had  been  received  from  Adelie
Land.  As  Dr.  Mawson  was  in  ignorance  of  its  exact
location,  the  position  of  the  Western  Base  under  Wild  was
given  to  Ainsworth  to  forward  to  Adelie  Land  in  case  com-
munication should  be  established.

After  Mr.  Waite  had  obtained  several  birds,  it  was  decided
to  move  down  to  Lusitania  Bay  to  secure  some  Royal
penguins  and  a  sea- elephant.  Two  days  later,  the  Aurora
anchored  in  the  bay,  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from  the
beach,  in  sixteen  fathoms;  the  weather  was  very  misty.
Mr.  Waite  and  Mr.  Haines,  the  taxidermist,  were  rowed
ashore.

The  island,  above  a  height  of  three  hundred  feet  from

25


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

sea-level,  was  shrouded  in  mist  throughout  the  day,  and,
before  dark,  all  signs  of  the  land  had  disappeared.  The
mist  did  not  clear  until  6  p.m.  on  the  15th.

We  stayed  for  a  whole  fortnight  at  Macquarie  Island,
during  which  time  the  highest  velocity  of  the  wind  recorded
on  shore  was  thirty-five  miles  per  hour,  although,  during  the
winter,  gales  are  almost  of  daily  occurrence.  On  June  22,
the  date  of  departure,  a  course  was  set  for  the  Auckland
Islands,  which  lie  in  the  track  of  homeward-bound  vessels
from  Australia  via  Cape  Horn.

The  group  was  discovered  in  1806  by  Captain  Bristow
of  the  Ocean,  owned  by  Samuel  Enderby.  It  comprises  one
main  island  and  several  smaller  ones,  separated  by  narrow
channels.  There  are  two  spacious  harbours  ;  a  northern,
now  called  Port  Ross,  and  a  southern,  Carnley  Harbour.
The  islands  are  situated  about  one  hundred  and  eighty
miles  south  of  Stewart  Island  (New  Zealand).

After  a  run  of  three  hundred  and  forty  miles  on  a  north-
east course,  we  entered  Carnley  Harbour  and  anchored  off
Flagstaff  Point.  A  breeze  blew  strong  from  the  west-north-
west. Next  day,  June  25,  we  stood  up  to  Figure  of  Eight
Island  and  found  good  holding  for  the  anchor  in  nine  and  a
half  fathoms.

The  eastern  entrance  to  Carnley  Harbour  is  formed  by
two  bluff  points,  about  two  miles  apart ;  its  upper  extremity
terminating  in  a  lagoon.  The  site  of  Musgrave's  house
("  Epigwaith  ")  is  on  the  east  side  of  this  lagoon.  Here  he
spent  twenty  months  after  the  wreck  of  the  Grafton.

We  set  off  in  the  motor-launch  on  the  26th  to  visit
Camp  Cove,  where  we  found  the  two  huts  maintained  by  the
New  Zealand  Government  for  the  benefit  of  castaways.  In
the  larger  hut  there  were  potatoes,  biscuits,  tinned  meats  and
matches.  The  smaller  hut  was  empty  but  on  the  outside
were  carved  many  names  of  shipwrecked  mariners.  The
Amakura  had  visited  the  depot  in  November  1911.  The
various  depots  established  on  the  island  by  the  New  Zealand
Government  are  visited  every  six  months.
26,


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

While  in  Carnley  Harbour  we  were  able  to  make  several
hauls  with  the  small  dredge.

After  passing  up  the  eastern  coast  of  the  main  island  we
entered  Port  Ross  and  anchored  west  of  Shoe  Island.  On
June  30  the  depot  on  Erebus  Cove  was  visited,  where  three
white  sheds  contain  the  usual  necessaries  for  unfortunate
castaways.  The  New  Zealand  Government  steamer,  Hinemoa,
while  on  a  scientific  expedition  to  the  Sub-Antarctic  in
1907,  rescued  the  sixteen  survivors  of  the  barque  Dundonald,
two  thousand  two  hundred  and  three  tons,  which  had  been
wrecked  on  Disappointment  Island.  The  captain  and  ten
men  had  been  drowned  and  the  chief  officer  had  died  from
the  effects  of  exposure  and  starvation.

On  July  2  we  went  to  Observation  Point,  finding  there
a  flat  stone  commemorating  the  visit  of  the  German  Scientific
Expedition  of  1874.

The  biologist  found  various  kinds  of  petrels  on  Shoe
Island,  where  the  turf  was  riddled  in  all  directions  by  their
burrows.

At  Rose  Island,  close  by,  there  are  some  fine  basaltic
columns,  eighty  feet  high,  weathered  out  into  deep  caverns
along  their  base.

In  Sandy  Bay,  Enderby  Island,  there  was  an  extensive
depot.  Among  the  stores  I  found  a  Venesta  case  marked
s.y.  Nimrod,  which  contained  dried  vegetables  and  evidently
formed  part  of  the  stores  which  were  sold  on  the  return  of
the  British  Antarctic  Expedition  of  1907.

After  leaving  the  Auckland  Islands  for  New  Zealand,
we  were  fortunate  in  having  fairly  good  weather.  Five
soundings  were  taken,  and,  on  July  9,  the  trawl  was  put
over  in  three  hundred  and  forty-five  fathoms.  The  net
unfortunately  fouled  on  a  rocky  bottom  and  so  we  gained
nothing  but  experience  in  the  operation.

The  Aurora  arrived  at  Port  Lyttleton  on  July  11  and
we  received  a  very  kind  welcome  from  the  people  of  Christ-
church.  Mr.  J.  J.  Kinsey,  well  known  in  connexion  with
various  British  Antarctic  expeditions,  gave  us  valuable
28


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

assistance  during  our  stay.     We  were  back  again  in  Mel-
bourne on  the  17th  of  the  month.

While  the  first  oceanographical  cruise  of  the  Aurora  did
not  prove  very  fruitful  in  results,  chiefly  on  account  of  the
stormy  weather,  it  provided  the  necessary  training  for
officers  and  men  in  the  handling  of  the  deep-sea  gear,  and
we  were  able  to  realize  later  how  much  we  had  learnt  on
our  first  cruise.

The  ship,  after  undergoing  a  thorough  overhaul  at  the
State  dockyard  at  Williamstown,  Victoria,  undertook  a
second  deep-sea  cruise.

Leaving  Hobart  on  November  12, 1912,  she  laid  her  course
to  the  southward  in  order  to  obtain  soundings  for  a  complete
section  of  the  sea-floor,  as  nearly  as  possible  on  the  meridian
of  Hobart.  Our  time  was  limited  to  one  month,  during
which  a  visit  to  Macquarie  Island  for  the  purpose  of  landing
stores  and  mail  had  to  be  made.  Professor  T.  Flynn
of  Hobart  University  accompanied  the  vessel  in  charge  of
the  biological  work.

An  interesting  discovery  was  made  two  hundred  miles
south  of  Tasmania.  Here  it  was  proved  that  a  rocky  ridge
rose  like  a  huge  mountain  from  depths  of  more  than  two
thousand  fathoms  to  within  five  hundred  and  forty  fathoms
of  the  surface.  A  great  number  of  soundings  were
taken  in  the  vicinity  of  this  rise,  subsequently  named
the  jMill  Rise,  until  a  heavy  gale  drove  us  far  from  its
situation.

On  November  21  we  were  not  far  from  Macquarie  Island
and,  at  7  p.m.,  sounded  in  one  thousand  four  hundred  and
fifty  fathoms.  As  the  weather  was  remarkably  fine  for
these  latitudes  we  decided  to  lower  the  trawl.  Before  dark
it  was  being  towed  slowly  towards  the  east  with  one  thousand
nine  hundred  fathoms  of  wire  out.

We  spent  an  anxious  night  hoping  that  the  weather
would  remain  fine  long  enough  to  permit  us  to  get  the  gear
on   board    again.     We    had    been    driving    before    a    light

29


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

westerly  wind,  when  the  trawl  caught  on  the  bottom  and
stopped  the  vessel.

A  very  heavy  strain  was  imposed  on  the  wire  as  the
vessel  rose  in  the  swell ;  the  dynamometer  registering  up  to
seven  tons.  I  decided  to  wait  for  daylight  before  attempt-
ing to  heave  in  the  trawl.  At  3  a.m.  we  cast  the  wire  off  the
after-block  and  started  to  heave  away  ;  it  was  two  hours
before  the  trawl  cleared  the  bottom  and  the  strain  was
reduced.

At  8  A.M.  the  trawl  was  once  more  on  board,  the  frames
being  bent  and  twisted  and  the  net  badly  torn.  On  sound-
ing, the  depth  was  found  to  be  only  six  hundred  and
thirty- six  fathoms,  so  that  we  had  evidently  put  over
the  trawl  on  to  the  edge  of  a  steep  rise  and  then  drifted
across  it.

In  view  of  our  position — only  thirty  miles  from  Mac-
quarie  Island — ^this  accident  might  have  been  expected.
But  opportunities  of  trawling  had  been  so  few  that  risks
had  to  be  taken  when  the  weather  quieted  down  for  a
few  hours.  Our  only  consolation  on  this  occasion  was  that
we  recovered  the  gear.

The  following  evening,  at  7.30,  the  anchor  was  dropped
in  North-East  Bay,  Macquarie  Island,  and  we  were  imme-
diately boarded  by  our  land  party  who  were  all  well.  They
had  become  very  clever  boatmen  during  their  stay,  using  a
small  dinghy  to  make  coastal  journeys.

On  November  24  we  left  the  anchorage  at  9  a.m.  and
spent  the  day  in  its  vicinity.  More  than  one  hundred
soundings  were  taken,  which  Blake,  the  geological  surveyor,
was  to  plot  on  the  chart  of  the  island  which  he  had  almost
completed.

Some  idea  of  the  steepness  of  the  submarine  mountain  of
which  Macquarie  Island  forms  the  crest  may  be  gathered
from  a  sounding,  taken  ten  and  a  half  miles  east  of  the
island,  which  gave  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  forty-
five  fathoms  and  no  bottom.  In  other  words,  if  the  sea
were  to  dry  up,  there  would  be  a  lofty  mountain  rising  from
30


THE   .MOXAOASC^JE  TKAWL  HOISTED  ON  THE    DEKKRTC
GKAY  STANDING  BY


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

the  plain  of  the  ocean's  bed  to  a  height  of  nearly  eighteen
thousand  feet.

A  great  deal  of  work  still  required  to  be  done  off  Mac-
quarie  Island,  but,  as  the  uneven  and  rocky  nature  of  the
bottom  prevented  dredging,  I  decided  to  sail  on  the  25th,
continuing  the  voyage  towards  the  Auckland  Islands.

Several  people  had  expressed  belief  in  a  submarine  ridge
connecting  Macquarie  Island  with  the  Auckland  group.
Three  soundings  which  we  obtained  on  this  voyage  did  not
support  the  suggestion,  ranging  as  they  did  from  one
thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty-five  to  two  thousand  four
hundred  and  thirty  fathoms,  eighty-five  miles  south-west  of
the  Auckland  group.  We  were  the  more  glad  to  obtain
these  soundings,  as,  during  the  winter  cruise,  in  the  same
waters,  the  weather  had  forced  us  to  abandon  the  attempt.

On  November  28  we  took  several  soundings  on  the
eastern  side  of  the  Auckland  Islands,  but  did  not  prolong
our  stay  as  we  wished  to  investigate  the  ridge  south  of
Tasmania — the  Mill  Rise.  The  course  was  therefore  directed
westward  with  a  view  to  outlining  the  eastern  edge  of  this
submarine  elevation.

The  first  sounding  to  indicate  that  we  were  once  more
approaching  the  Mill  Rise  was  in  one  thousand  and  seventy-
six  fathoms.  Continuing  west  we  secured  the  next  record
in  one  thousand  three  hundred  fathoms,  limiting  the  southern
extremity  of  the  ridge  which  extends  northward  for  nearly
one  hundred  miles.  From  this  sounding  the  water  shoaled
quickly  as  we  steered  north.  Thus,  on  the  same  day,  we
were  in  eight  hundred  and  thirty-five  fathoms  at  noon,  in
seven  hundred  and  thirty-five  fathoms  at  3.40  p.m.  and  in
seven  hundred  and  ten  fathoms  at  7.30  p.m.  After  the  last
sounding  we  lowered  the  rock-gripper.  On  the  first  trial,
however,  it  failed  to  shut  and,  on  the  second,  only  a  little  fine
sand  was  recovered.  As  it  was  blowing  hard  most  of  the
time,  we  were  very  fortunate  in  being  able  to  do  this  piece
of  work.

An  inspection  of  the  chart  reveals  the  fact  that  the


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

main  direction  of  the  shallowest  water  is  in  a  north-west  and
south-east  direction,  but  the  number  of  soundings  obtained
was  too  small  to  give  more  than  a  general  outline.  Later,
we  were  able  to  add  to  these  on  the  voyage  southward  to
relieve  the  Antarctic  Bases.

The  weather  was  so  bad  and  the  sea  so  heavy  that  we
were  unable  to  obtain  soundings  on  December  9,  and,  as
dredging  under  such  conditions  was  out  of  the  question,  I
decided  to  steer  for  the  east  coast  of  Tasmania,  where
dredging  might  be  possible  under  the  lee  of  the  land.  The
constant  gales  were  very  disheartening,  the  last  having
continued  for  four  days  with  only  short  intervals  of  moderate
weather.

On  December  12  and  13,  in  calmer  water,  some  thirty
miles  off  the  east  coast  of  Tasmania,  trawlings  were  made
successfully  in  one  thousand  three  hundred  fathoms  and
seventy-five  fathoms  respectively.  From  the  deeper  trawling
were  obtained  a  large  octopus  and  several  interesting  fish.

Just  before  noon  on  December  14  we  arrived  in  Hobart
and  immediately  began  preparations  for  the  voyage  to  the
Antarctic.

On  December  24,  1912,  preparations  for  sailing  were
complete.  For  ten  days  every  one  connected  with  the
Aurora  had  been  working  at  high  pressure,  and  Christmas
Day,  our  last  day  ashore,  was  to  be  celebrated  as  a  well-
earned  holiday.

There  was  on  board  a  good  supply  of  coal,  five  hundred
and  twenty-one  tons,  and  a  very  heavy  mail  of  letters  and
packages  for  the  members  of  the  Expedition  who  had  been
isolated  in  the  far  South  for  more  than  twelve  months.  We
were  to  take  thirty-five  sheep  on  board  as  well  as  twenty-
one  dogs,  presented  by  Captain  Amundsen  upon  his  return
from  his  South  Polar  expedition.  Captain  James  Davis,
of  Hobart,  of  long  whaling  experience,  was  to  accompany  us
to  give  an  expert  opinion  upon  such  whales  as  we  might  meet.
Mr.  Van  Waterschoot  van  der  Gracht,  who  had  had  previous
32


u
o

o

<

si


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

experience  in  the  Antarctic,  joined  as  marine  artist,  and
Mr.  S.  N.  Jeffryes  as  wireless  operator.  With  C.  C.  Eitel,
Secretary  of  the  Expedition,  the  whole  party  on  board
numbered  twenty-eight.

A  very  pleasant  Christmas  was  spent  ashore.  The  ship's
company  of  twenty-three  men  met  for  dinner,  and  we  did
not  forget  to  wish  a  "  Merry  Christmas  "  to  our  leader  and
his  twenty-six  comrades  who  were  holding  their  celebration
amid  the  icy  solitudes  of  Antarctica.  I  was  glad,  on  this
festive  occasion,  to  be  able  to  congratulate  officers  and  men
on  their  willing  and  loyal  service  during  the  previous  twelve
months ;  every  one  had  done  his  best  to  advance  the
objects  of  the  Expedition.

The  attractions  of  Hobart,  at  this  season,  are  so  numerous,
and  Tasmanian  hospitality  so  boundless,  that  it  gives  me
great  pleasure  to  place  on  record  that  every  man  was  at  his
post  on  the  Aurora  at  10  a.m.  on  Boxing  Day.

As  we  drew  away  from  the  wharf  amid  the  cheers  of  those
who  had  come  to  wish  us  God-speed,  the  weather  was  perfect
and  the  scene  on  the  Derwent  bright  and  cheering.  Captain
James  Davis  acted  as  pilot.

At  11.30  A.M.  we  had  embarked  the  twenty-one  dogs,
which  were  brought  off  from  the  Quarantine  Station,  and
were  steaming  down  Storm  Bay.  Outside  there  was  a
heavy  swell,  and  the  wind  was  freshening  from  the  west.  The
course  was  laid  south  50°  west,  true.

For  the  next  two  days  there  was  a  westerly  gale  with  a
very  high  sea,  and  the  dogs  and  sheep  had  a  bad  time,  as  a
good  deal  of  water  came  aboard.  Two  of  the  sheep  had  to
be  killed.  By  the  afternoon  of  the  29th  it  had  moderated,
and  a  sounding  was  secured.

This  storm  was  followed  by  another  from  the  west-north-
west. The  Aurora  weathered  it  splendidly,  although  one  sea
came  over  everything  and  flooded  the  cabins,  wliile  part  of  the
rail  of  the  forecastle  head  was  carried  away  on  the  morning
of  the  31st.  At  this  time  we  were  in  the  vicinity  of  the
reputed  position  of  the  Royal  Company  Islands.  A
VOL.  II  c  33


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

sounding  was  taken  with  great  difficulty,  finding  two  thousand

and  twenty  fathoms  and  a  mud  bottom.

January  4,  1913,  was  a  fine  day,  with  a  fresh  westerly

breeze  and  a  high  sea.     Occasionally  there  were  snow  squalls.

At  night  the  wireless  operator  was  able  to  hear  H.M.S.

Drake  at  Hobart,  and  also  the  station  at  Macquarie  Island  ;

the  ship  having  been  fitted  to  receive  wireless  signals  before

sailing.

Next  day  the  sun  was  bright  and  there  was   only  a

moderate    westerly    swell.     Large    bunches    of    kelp    were

frequently  seen  drifting  on  the  surface.     "  Blue  Billys  "  *

flew  in  great  numbers  about  the  ship.     Two  soundings  were

obtained  in  one  thousand  nine  hundred  fathoms.

On  the  8th  a  heavy  swell  came  from  the  south-east.

During    the    morning    a    sounding    realized   two    thousand

two  hundred  and  seventy  fathoms  and  the  sample  of  mud
contained  a  small,  black  manganese  nodule.     At  8  p.m.  a

floating  cask  was   sighted   and  taken   aboard   after   much

difficulty.     It  turned  out  to  be  a  ship's  oil  cask,  empty,

giving  no  clue  from  whence  it  came.

The  first  ice  was  observed  about  6  p.m.  on  the  10th.  The
water  was  still  deep — more  than  two  thousand  fathoms.

By  noon  on  January  11  loose  pack  came  into  view,  with  a
strong  blink  of  heavier  pack  to  the  south.  The  course
was  changed  to  south-west.  At  7  p.m.  the  ship  was  steaming
west  in  clear  water,  a  few  bergs  being  in  sight  and  a  marked
ice-blink  to  the  south.  Several  whales  appeared  which
Captain  James  Davis  reported  were  "  blue  whales  "  (finners
or  rorquals).

After  we  had  been  steering  westward  until  almost  mid-
night, the  course  was  altered  to  south-west  in  the  hope  of
encountering  the  shelf-ice  barrier  (met  in  1912)  well  to  the
east  of  the  Main  Base  station.  On  the  12th  we  sailed  over
the  position  of  the  ice-tongue  in  1912  without  seeing  a  trace
of  it,  coming  up  with  heavy  broken  floe  at  10  a.m.

For  four  hours  the  Aurora  pushed  through  massive  floes

*  Prion  Banksii.
34


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

and  "  bergy  bits,"  issuing  into  open  water  with  the  blink  of
ice-covered  land  to  the  south.  At  nine  o'clock  Adelie  Land
was  plainly  visible,  and  a  course  was  set  for  the  Main  Base.
In  squally  weather  we  reached  the  Mackellar  Islets  at
midnight,  and  by  2  a.m.  on  the  13th  dropped  anchor  in
Commonwealth  Bay  under  the  ice-chffs  in  twenty  fathoms.

At  6  A.M.  Fletcher,  the  chief  officer,  reported  that  a
heavy  gust  of  wind  had  struck  the  ship  and  caused  the  chain
to  carry  away  the  lashing  of  the  heavy  reheving-tackle.
The  chain  then  ran  over  the  windlass,  and,  before  anything
could  be  done,  the  pointer  to  which  the  end  of  the  chain  was
attached  had  been  torn  from  the  bolts,  and  our  best  ground-
tackle  was  lost  overboard.     It  was  an  exasperating  accident.

At  seven  o'clock  the  port  anchor  was  dropped  in  ten
fathoms,  about  eight  hundred  yards  west  of  the  first
anchorage,  with  ninety  fathoms  of  chain.  The  wind  shifted
suddenly  to  the  north,  and  the  Aurora  swung  inshore  until
her  stern  was  within  one  hundred  yards  of  the  cliffs  ;  but
the  depth  at  this  distance  proved  to  be  seventeen  fathoms.
After  a  few  northerly  puffs,  the  wind  shifted  to  the  south-
east and  then  died  away.

At  2.30  P.M.  the  launch  was  hoisted  over  and  the  mail
was  taken  ashore,  with  sundry  specimens  of  Australian  fruit
as  "  refreshment  "  for  the  shore-party.  The  boat  harbour
was  reached  before  any  one  ashore  had  seen  the  Aurora.  At
the  landing-place  we  were  greeted  most  warmly  by  nine
wild-looking  men ;  some  with  beards  bleached  by  the
weather.  They  all  looked  healthy  and  in  very  fair  condition,
after  the  severe  winter,  as  they  danced  about  in  joyous
excitement.

We  learned  that  five  sledging  parties  had  left  the  Hut :
Bage,  Webb  and  Hurley  had  returned  from  the  south,
Stillwell,  Close  and  Laseron  from  the  east,  and  the  others
were  still  out.  In  Dr.  Mawson's  instructions,  all  parties  were
to  be  back  at  the  Hut  by  January  15,  1913.

The  launch  made  some  trips  to  and  from  the  ship  with
specimens  during  the  afternoon.     I  returned  on  board  and

35


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

had  a  look  at  the  cable.  The  weather  was  fine,  but  changes
were  apt  to  occur  without  much  warning.  At  midnight  it
was  blowing  a  gale  from  the  south-east,  and  the  chain  was
holding ^well.  The  launch  was  hoisted  up  in  the  davits  and
communication  with  the  shore  was  suspended  until  8  a.m.
on  January  15.

The  lull  was  of  two  hours'  duration,  during  which
Murphy  came  aboard  and  furnished  me  with  some  parti-
culars about  the  sledging  parties  still  away.

Dr.  Mawson,  with  Ninnis  and  Mertz,  had  gone  to  the
south-east.  They  were  well  provisioned  and  had  taken
eighteen  dogs  for  transport  purposes.  Bickerton,  Hodge-
man and  Whetter  had  been  out  forty-three  days  to  the  west
and  had  food  for  forty  days  only.  Madigan,  McLean  and
Correll  had  been  away  for  seventy  days  in  an  easterly
direction.

Dr.  Mawson  had  left  a  letter  for  me  with  instructions  to
take  charge  if  he  failed  to  return  to  time,  that  is  not  later
than  January  15,  1913.

On  January  16  a  party  was  observed  from  the  ship
coming  in  over  the  slope.  There  was  much  speculation  as
to  its  personnel  since,  at  a  distance,  the  three  figures  could  not
be  recognized.  The  launch  took  us  ashore  and  we  greeted
Madigan,  McLean  and  Correll  who  had  returned  from  a  very
successful  expedition  along  the  eastern  coast  over  sea-ice.

Madigan  and  Bage  came  on  board  during  the  forenoon
of  the  17th  and  we  had  a  long  consultation  about  the
position  of  affairs  owing  to  the  non-return  of  two  parties.
It  was  decided  to  re-erect  the  wireless  mast  and  stay  it  well
while  the  ship  was  waiting,  so  that,  in  case  of  any  party
being  left  at  the  Main  Base,  the  wireless  station  would  be  in
working  order.*

*  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  during  the  summer  months  (November,
December,  January  and  part  of  February)  wireless  communication  with
the  outside  world  is  impossible  owing  to  continuous  daylight  reducing  the
effective  range.  In  summer  the  range  was  only  a  few  hundred^miles,  and
the  effective  working  distance  for  all  times  of  the  day  probably  not  above
one  hundred  miles.

36


Hurleu


A  REMARKABLE  BERG,  TWO  CUSPS  STANDING  ON  A  SINGLE  BASEMENT.

NOTE  THAT  IT  HAS  RISEN  CONSIDERABLY  OUT  OF  THE  SEA,  EXPOSING

OLD  WATER-LINES


A  PORTAL  WORN   THROUGH  A  BERG  BY  THE   WAVES


Hurley


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

At  one  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  January  18,  de  la
Motte,  the  officer  on  watch,  reported  that  a  party  could  be
seen  descending  the  glacier.  This  proved  to  be  Bickerton,
Hodgeman  and  Whetter  returning  from  their  trip  along  the
west  coast.  Thus  Dr.  Mawson's  party  was  the  only  one
which  had  not  yet  returned.

All  day  work  on  the  wireless  mast  went  along  very
satisfactorily,  while  Captain  James  Davis  and  Chief  Officer
Fletcher  spent  their  time  in  the  launch  dragging  for  the  cable
lost  on  the  morning  of  our  arrival.  The  launch  returned  at
10.30  P.M.  and  Captain  Davis  reported  that  the  grapnel  had
been  buoyed  until  operations  could  be  resumed.

On  January  19  we  tried  to  recover  the  chain,  and  to  this
end  the  Aurora  was  taken  over  to  the  position  where  the
grapnels  had  been  buoyed  and  was  anchored.  All  efforts  to
secure  the  chain  were  unsuccessful.  At  7  p.m.  we  decided  to
return  to  our  former  position,  having  a  hard  job  to  raise  the
anchor,  which  appeared  to  have  dragged  under  a  big  rock.
Finally  it  broke  away  and  came  up  in  a  mass  of  kelp,  and  with
the  stock  "  adrift."  The  latter  was  secured  and  we  steamed
back,  "  letting  go  "  in  eleven  fathoms  vnth  ninety  fathoms
of  chain.

When  Dr.  Mawson's  party  was  a  week  overdue,  I  con-
sidered that  the  time  had  arrived  to  issue  a  provisional
notice  to  the  members  of  the  Expedition  at  Commonwealth
Bay  concerning  the  establishment  of  a  relief  party  to
operate  from  the  Main  Base.

A  party  of  four  left  the  Hut  on  the  20th,  keeping  a
sharp  look-out  to  the  south-east  for  any  signs  of  the  missing
party.  They  travelled  as  far  as  the  air-tractor  sledge
which  had  been  abandoned  ten  miles  to  the  south,  bringing
it  back  to  the  Hut.

I  decided  to  remain  at  Commonwealth  Bay  until  January
30.  If  the  leader's  party  had  not  returned  by  that  day,  a
search  party  was  to  proceed  eastward  while  the  Aurora
sailed  for  Wild's  Base.  From  the  reports  of  the  gales
which  prevailed  during  the  month  of  March  in  1912,  and

37


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

considering  the  short  daylight  there  was  at  that  time,  I
felt  that  it  would  be  risking  the  lives  of  all  on  board  to
return  to  the  Main  Base  after  relieving  Wild's  party.  I
resolved,  therefore,  to  wait  as  lon^  as  possible.  As  a  result
of  a  consultation  with  Madigan  and  Bage,  I  had  a  provisional
notice  drafted,  to  be  posted  up  in  the  Hut  on  January  22.

This  notice  was  to  the  effect  that  the  non-arrival  of  the
leader's  party  rendered  it  necessary  to  prepare  for  the
establishment  of  a  relief  expedition  at  Winter  Quarters
and  appointed  Bage,  Bickerton,  Hodgeman,  Jeffryes  and
McLean  as  members,  under  the  command  of  Madigan  ;  to
remain  in  Antarctica  for  another  year  if  necessary.

On  the  same  evening  I  went  ashore  to  inspect  the  ^vire-
less  mast,  which  was  practically  complete.  The  work  had
been  done  thoroughly  and,  provided  the  mast  itself  did  not
buckle,  the  stays  were  likely  to  hold.  Hannam,  Bickerton
and  Jeffryes  were  busy  placing  the  engine  and  instruments
in  position.

I  then  went  up  the  slope  for  about  a  mile.  The  Winter
Quarters  looked  like  a  heap  of  stones  ;  boundless  ice  rose
up  to  the  southern  skyline  ;  the  dark  water  to  the  north
was  broken  by  an  occasional  berg  or  the  ice-covered  islands.
This  wonderful  region  of  ice  and  sea  looks  beautiful  on  a
fine  day.  But  what  a  terrible,  vast  solitude,  constantly
swept  by  icy  winds  and  drift,  stretches  away  to  the  south  !
A  party  will  go  out  to-morrow  to  visit  the  depot  at  the  top
of  the  slope.  This  is  the  seventh  day  we  have  been  waiting
and  hoping  to  welcome  the  absentees  !

On  the  23rd  the  breeze  was  very  strong  in  the  forenoon,
but  the  wind  moderated  about  4  p.m.,  when  the  launch  was
able  to  leave  for  the  shore.  We  could  see  a  search  party
(Hodgeman,  Stillwell,  and  Correll)  marching  against  a
strong  south-east  wind  on  their  way  to  examine  the  depot
at  Aladdin's  Cave  and  its  vicinity.

Though  there  was  a  moderate  south-easter  blowing,
communication  with  the  land  went  on  during  the  day.  I
went  ashore  early,  but  the  search  party  did  not  return  until
38


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

noon.  They  had  remained  at  Aladdin's  Cave  overnight
and  marched  farther  south  next  morning,  approaching  a
line  of  dense  drift,  without  seeing  anything.

It  was  arranged  that  another  party  of  three  men  should
start  next  morning  (January  25)  and,  going  in.  a  south-
easterly direction,  make  a  search  for  five  days,  laying  a
depot  at  their  farthest  point.  Hodgeman,  Hurley  and
McLean  made  preparations  to  set  out.  I  left  instructions
that  a  flag  should  be  floAvn  on  the  wireless  mast  if  Dr.
Mawson  returned.

I  now  went  through  the  supplies  of  provisions  and  coal
which  were  to  be  landed  for  the  use  of  the  Relief  Party.
I  intended  to  try  and  have  everything  on  shore  by
January  29,  taking  advantage  of  any  short  interval  of  fair
weather  to  send  a  boatload  to  the  landing-place.

On  the  25th  there  was  a  hard  south-east  gale  blowing
until  the  afternoon,  when  it  moderated  sufficiently  to  send
off  the  launch  with  thirteen  bags  of  coal,  Gillies  being  in
charge.  The  boat  harbour  was  reached  in  safety,  the  wind
freshening  to  a  gale  before  6  p.m.

Terrific  gusts  followed  in  rapid  succession  and,  without
warning,  the  cable  parted  sixty  fathoms  from  the  anchor
at  9  P.M.  Having  cleared  the  reefs  to  leeward,  we  managed
to  get  in  the  rest  of  the  chain  and  then  stood  along  the  coast
to  the  north-west.  By  keeping  about  three  miles  from  the
shore,  we  seemed  to  be  beyond  the  reach  of  the  more  violent
gusts,  but  a  short  sea  holding  the  ship  broadside  to  the  wind
during  the  squalls,  rendered  it  difficult  to  maintain  a  fixed
course.

With  reefs  and  bergs  around,  the  increasing  darkness
about  midnight  made  our  position  unpleasant.  The  engines
had  to  be  stopped  and  the  ship  allowed  to  drift  with  the
wind,  owing  to  a  bearing  becoming  hot,  but  in  a  quarter  of
an  hour  they  were  moving  once  more.

Early  on  January  26  the  Aurora  was  about  half-way
between  Winter  Quarters  and  the  western  point  of  Common-
wealth Bay,   when   the  wind   suddenly   ceased,   and  then

39


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

came  away  light  from  the  north-west.  We  could  see  that
a  south-east  gale  was  still  raging  close  inshore.  Over  the
sea,  towards  the  north,  dark  clouds  were  scudding  with
great  rapidity  along  the  horizon  :  the  scene  of  a  violent
disturbance.

We  returned  towards  our  late  anchorage.  On  reaching
it,  the  south-east  wind  had  moderated  considerably,  and
we  let  go  our  spare  anchor  and  what  had  been  saved  of  the
chain.

To  the  north,  violent  gusts  appeared  to  be  travelling  in
various  directions,  but,  to  our  astonishment,  these  gusts,
after  approaching  our  position  at  a  great  rate,  appeared  to
curve  upwards  ;  the  water  close  to  the  ship  was  disturbed,
and  nothing  else.  This  curious  phenomenon  lasted  for
about  an  hour  and  then  the  wind  came  with  a  rush  from
the  south-east,  testing  the  anchor-chain  in  the  more  furious
squalls.

The  gale  was  in  its  third  day  on  the  27th,  and  there  was
a  "  hurricane  sky  "  during  the  morning.  The  wind  would
die  away,  only  to  blow  more  fiercely  than  before.  The
suddenness  with  which  the  changes  occurred  may  be
gathered  from  the  following  extracts  from  my  journal :

"  January  27.  6  a.m.  A  whole  gale  blowing  from  the
south-east.

"9  A.M.  Light  airs  from  north  to  east.  Launch  taking
coal  ashore.  '

"11  A.M.  Last  cargo  of  coal  had  just  left  ship  when
the  wind  freshened  from  the  south-east.  The  launch
had  just  got  inside  the  boat  harbour  when  a  terrific  gust
struck  the  vessel  and  our  chain  parted.  We  were  blown
out  to  sea  while  heaving  in  thirty  fathoms  of  chain  which
remained.

"  4  P.M.  We  have  been  steaming  backwards  and  for-
wards until  the  wind  died  away.  The  launch  has  just
come  off  and  taken  another  load  of  stores  to  the  boat
harbour.

"7  P.M.  The  weather  is  moderating  with  rising  baro-
40


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

meter.     Nearly  everything  required  by  the  ReHef  Party  is
now  ashore.     Two  or  three  trips  will  take  the  remainder.

"  We  shall  steam  about  for  a  few  hours,  and  make  the
anchorage  early  to-morrow  morning."

Next  morning  a  kedge-anchor  (about  five  hundred-
weights) was  lowered  with  the  remainder  of  the  chain.  For
a  time  this  held  the  ship,  but  a  gust  of  wind  from  the  south-
east caused  it  to  drag.  It  was,  therefore,  hauled  up  and,
on  coming  to  the  surface,  was  seen  to  have  lost  a  fluke.

All  equipment,  coal  and  food  were  now  on  shore  for
the  use  of  the  Relief  Party.  I  had  given  them  everything
that  could  be  spared  from  the  provisions  set  apart  for  the  use
of  the  ship's  company.  Next  day  I  purposed  to  cruise
along  the  coast  to  the  east,  if  the  weather  were  clear.

January  29  was  fine,  so  we  steamed  off  at  6.30  a.m.
As  no  flag  was  seen  on  the  wireless  mast,  we  knew  that
Dr.  Mawson  had  not  returned.  A  course  was  kept  two  or
three  miles  from  the  ice-cliffs  beyond  the  fringe  of  rocky
islets.

At  4  A.M.  on  the  30th  we  were  alongside  the  Mertz
Glacier  and  reached  the  head  of  the  bay  at  the  confluence
of  glacier  with  land-ice.  Mount  Murchison  was  only  dimly
visible,  but  the  weather  was  clear  along  the  glacier-tongue.
Signals  were  fired  and  a  big  kite  flown  at  a  height  of  about
five  hundred  feet  to  attract  attention  on  shore  in  case  the
missing  party  were  near.

"  1.30  P.M.  We  are  now  about  half  a  mile  from  the
head  of  the  inlet.  From  the  appearance  of  the  country
(heavily  crevassed)  approach  to  the  sea  by  a  sledging-party
would  be  extremely  difficult.  There  is  no  floe-ice  at  the
foot  of  the  cliff.

"  10.30  P.M.  We  are  approaching  the  end  of  the  glacier-
tongue  around  which  there  is  a  collection  of  pack.  There
is  some  drift  ahead  and  it  is  difficult  to  see  far.  We  have
passed  the  eastern  limit  of  coast  to  be  searched.

"  10.35  P.M.  The  glacier-tongue  is  trending  to  the  east
and  a  line  of  heavy  pack  extends  to  the  north,  with  many

41


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

large  bergs.  No  sign  of  flag  or  signal  on  the  end  of  the
barrier.

"  January  31.  We  left  the  glacier-tongue  at  8  a.m.  and
steered  back  to  Winter  Quarters.

"  At  noon  we  could  see  Madigan  Nunatak,  a  rocky
patch,  high  up  on  the  slope.

"  4.15  P.M.  Sighted  the  large  grounded  berg,  fifteen  miles
from  the  Main  Base.

"  9  P.M.  Off  Main  Base.  There  is  no  flag  to  be  seen  on
the  wireless  mast  !

"  Dr.  Mawson's  party  is  now  sixteen  days  overdue ;
there  must  be  something  seriously  amiss.  But  from  our
examination  of  the  line  of  coast  as  far  as  64°  45'  south,
146°  19'  east,  there  does  not  appear  to  be  any  probability  of
finding  traces  along  the  shore  line  at  the  base  of  vertical
ice-cliffs."

No  communication  with  the  shore  was  possible  until
the  wind,  which  had  again  risen,  had  moderated.  We  could
just  stand  off  and  on  until  a  favourable  opportunity  occurred.
Once  the  returning  ten  members  of  the  Expedition  were
embarked  it  was  imperative  to  hasten  towards  Wild's
Base.

A  week's  gale  in  Commonwealth  Bay  !  The  seven  days
which  followed  I  do  not  think  any  of  us  will  forget.  From
February  1  to  7  it  blew  a  continuous  heavy  gale,  interrupted
only  when  the  wind  increased  to  a  full  hurricane  *  (eighty
miles  an  hour).

We  endeavoured  to  maintain  a  position  under  the  cliffs
where  the  sea  had  not  room  to  become  heavy.  This  entailed
a  constant  struggle,  as,  with  a  full  head  of  steam  during  the
squalls,  the  vessel  drove  steadily  seaward  to  where  the  rising
waves  broke  on  board  and  rendered  steering  more  per-
plexing. Then,  when  it  had  moderated  to  a  mere  "  howl,"
we  would  crawl  back,  only  to  be  driven  out  again  by  the
next  squall.     The  blinding  spray  which  was  swept  out  in

*  The  maximum  wind-velocity  recorded  at  this  time  by  the  anemometer
on  shore  was  approximately  eighty  miles  an  hour.

42


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

front  of  the  squalls  froze  solidly  on  board  and  lent  additional
difficulty  to  the  operation  of  "  wearing  ship."

It  was  on  this  occasion  that  we  realized  what  a  fine
old  vessel  the  Aurora  was,  and,  as  we  slowly  moved  back  to
shelter,  could  appreciate  how  efficiently  our  engine-room
staff  under  Gillies  were  carrying  out  their  duties.  The
ordinary  steaming  speed  was  six  knots,  yet  for  the  whole  of
this  week,  without  a  hitch,  the  ship  was  being  driven  at
an  equivalent  of  ten  knots.  The  fact  of  having  this  reserve
power  undoubtedly  saved  us  from  disaster.

A  typical  entry  from  my  diary  reads  :

"  February  6.  Just  as  the  sun  was  showing  over  the
ice-slopes  this  morning  (4  a.m.)  the  wind  became  very
violent  with  the  most  terrific  squalls  I  have  ever  experienced.
Vessel  absolutely  unmanageable,  driving  out  to  sea.  I
was  expecting  the  masts  to  go  overboard  every  minute.
This  was  the  worst,  I  think,  lasting  about  two  hours.  At
6  A.M.,  still  blowing  very  hard  but  squalls  less  violent,
gradually  made  shelter  during  the  morning.  ..."

On  February  8  the  weather  improved  after  1  a.m.  The
gusts  were  less  violent  and  the  lulls  were  of  longer  duration.
At  9  a.m.  there  was  only  a  gentle  breeze.  We  steamed  in
towards  the  boat  harbour  and  signalled  for  the  launch  to
come  off  with  the  ten  members  of  the  shore-party.  The  latter
had  been  instructed  to  remain  at  the  Hut  until  the  vessel
was  ready  to  sail.  Here,  while  the  gale  had  been  in  full
career,  they  had  helped  to  secure  enough  seal  and  penguin-
meat  to  keep  the  Relief  Party  and  their  dogs  for  another
year.

The  good-byes  were  brief  while  the  launch  discharged  the
men  and  their  belongings.  Instructions  were  handed  over  to
Madigan  directing  him.  to  follow  the  course  believed  to  have
been  taken  by  Dr.  Mawson  and  to  make  an  exhaustive
search,  commencing  as  soon  as  the  Aurora  left  Common-
wealth Bay.  Madigan  gave  me  a  letter  containing  a  report
of  the  work  done  by  the  party  which  had  left  on  the  25th.

It  appears  that  they  had   been  confined  in  Aladdin's

43


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Cave  for  twenty-four  hours  by  dense  drift  and  then,  in
moderate  drift,  made  four  miles  to  the  south-east.  Here
they  camped  and  were  not  able  to  move  for  thirty-six  hours
in  a  high  wind  with  thick  snow.

On  the  28th  the  drift  decreased  in  amount  and,  though
it  was  only  possible  to  see  a  few  hundred  yards  and  crevasses
were  frequent,  they  kept  a  course  of  east  30°  south  for  six  miles.
A  snow- mound  was  built  and  on  top  of  it  were  placed  pro-
visions and  a  note  giving  the  bearing  and  distance  from
Aladdin's  Cave.

In  the  afternoon  the  wind  subsided  and  it  became  clear.
Eight  miles  on  the  same  course  brought  them  to  their
farthest  camp,  twenty-three  miles  from  the  Hut.  A  mound
of  eleven  feet  was  erected  here,  provisions  and  a  note  being
left  and  some  black  bunting  wound  among  the  snow-blocks.
The  depot  was  on  a  ridge  and,  with  glasses,  several  miles
could  be  swept  to  the  south-east.

The  party  consisted  of  McLean,  Hodgeman  and  Hurley.

De  la  Motte  and  Hannam  took  the  Relief  Party  ashore
in  the  launch  and,  as  soon  as  they  had  returned — at  11.30  a.m.
— we  steamed  out  of  the  bay.  The  weather  had  calmed
and  there  were  light  airs  and  a  smooth  sea.

The  members  of  the  Relief  Party  were  as  follows  :
C.  T.  Madigan  (leader),  R.  Bage,  F.  H.  Bickerton,  A.  J.
Hodgeman,  Dr.  A.  L.  McLean  and  S.  N.  Jeff  ryes  (wireless
operator).  The  remaining  ten  members  of  the  Main  Base
Party  returned  to  Australia  :  J.  H.  Close,  P.  E.  Correll,
W.  H.  Hannam,  J.  G.  Hunter,  J.  F.  Hurley,  C.  F.  Laseron,
H.  D.  Murphy,  F.  L.  Stillwell,  E.  N.  Webb  and  Dr.  L.  A.
Whetter.

Throughout  the  afternoon  we  steered  north-west  and  at
8.30  P.M.  were  approaching  heavy  pack.  Just  then  Hannam
received  a  wireless  message  from  the  Main  Base  informing  us
that  Dr.  Mawson  had  reached  the  Hut  alone,  his  two  com-
rades having  perished,  and  instructing  me  to  return  at  "once
and  pick  up  all  hands.  We  turned  round  and  steered
back  immediately.
44


i


GiUii'S
MEMBERS  OF  THE  MAIX  BASE  PARTY  HOMEWARD  BOUND,  JANUARY  1913.
FROM  LEFT  TO  RIGHT:     BACK  ROW— WHETTER,  HURLEY,  WEBB.  HANNAM,
LASERON,  CLOSE;     FRONT  ROW— STILLWELL,  HUNTER,  CORRELL,  MURPHY


Adclir  Lund  Huiifif

•WIRELESS"   COKNER  IN  THE  WORKSHOP.     OUR   LINK   WITH   CIVILIZATION


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

At  8  A.M.  on  February  9  the  ship  entered  Commonwealth
Bay  steaming  against  a  strong  southerly  breeze  with  some
snow.  We  were  right  up  near  the  anchorage  about  noon  and
the  Pilot  Jack  could  be  seen  flying  from  the  wireless  mast.
Instructions  were  signalled  for,  but  our  efforts  were  un-
observed. We  then  steamed  to  and  fro  across  the  bay.
At  4  P.M.  it  was  blowing  a  hard  gale  and  showed  signs  of
becoming  worse.

At  6  P.M.  the  wind  was  growing  in  strength  and  the
barometer  was  falling.  Not  having  received  any  reply  to
my  signal  for  instructions,  I  felt  it  was  necessary  to  decide
whether  I  was  justified  in  remaining  any  longer.

After  considering  the  position  in  all  its  bearings  I  decided
to  sail  westward  without  further  delay  and  for  the  following
reasons  :

1.  Dr.  Mawson  and  his  companions  were  in  safety,
comfortably  housed  and  fully  equipped  for  another  winter.

2.  Any  further  delay  was  seriously  endangering  our
chance  of  being  able  to  relieve  Wild's  party  that  year.
The  navigation  of  the  fifteen  hundred  miles  to  the  Shackleton
Ice-Shelf  was  becoming,  daily,  more  dangerous  on  account
of  the  shortness  of  daylight  and  the  conditions  of  the
ice.

3.  The  only  vessel  which  had  wintered  in  the  vicinity  of
the  Western  Base  (the  Gauss)  had  been  frozen  in  as  early
in  the  season  as  February  22,  spending  more  than  twelve
months  in  the  ice.  The  Aurora  was  not  provisioned  for
a  winter  in  the  ice.

4.  It  had  been  ascertained  from  the  records  at  the  Main
Base  that  gales  were  often  protracted  at  the  close  of  the
short  summer  season.  We  had  just  experienced  one  such
gale,  lasting  seven  days.

5.  As  a  seaman,  I  had  realized  the  difficulties  encountered
in  approaching  and  getting  away  from  the  Western  Base
in  1912.     It  was  then  three  weeks  later  in  the  year.

I  felt  convinced  that  in  leaving  the  Main  Base,  without
further  delay,   I   was  acting  as  Dr.   Mawson  would  have

45


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

wished,  if  I  had  been  able  to  acquaint  him  with  the  position
of  the  Western  Party.

At  6.30  P.M.  we  steamed  out  of  the  bay,  the  wind
moderating  as  the  ship  got  well  out  to  sea.  At  midnight
there  was  a  moderate  breeze  from  the  south,  with  some
snow.

On  February  10  heavy  pack  was  met,  about  fifty  miles
north  of  Commonwealth  Bay.  After  coasting  along  its
margin  for  a  while,  we  pushed  among  the  floes  and,  after
three  hours,  reached  a  patch  of  fairly  open  water  about  1  p.m.

One  hour  later  a  large  ice-formation  was  sighted,  which
tallied  with  that  met  on  January  3  of  the  previous  year  (1912)
and  which,  on  this  occasion,  was  no  longer  in  its  original
position.  We  came  to  the  conclusion  that  the  whole  must
have  drifted  about  fifty  miles  to  the  north-west  during  the
intervening  year.  The  face  of  this  huge  berg,  along  which
the  Aurora  coasted,  was  about  forty  miles  in  length.

Hannam  heard  fragments  of  a  message  from  Dr.  Mawson
during  the  evening.  The  words,  "  crevasse,"  "  Ninnis,"
"  Mertz,"  "  broken  "  and  "  cable  "  were  picked  up.

Good  progress  was  made  on  the  11th  against  a  high
westerly  sea.  The  sun  set  in  a  clear  sky  and  the  barometer
was  slowly  rising.  Our  position  was  evidently  north  of  the
pack  and,  if  unimpeded  by  ice,  there  was  a  chance  of  the  ship
arriving  at  her  destination  in  time.

Poor  headway  was  made  for  nearly  three  days  against  an
adverse  wind  and  sea.  Then,  late  on  the  14th,  a  breeze
sprang  up  from  the  east- south-east  and,  under  all  sail,
the  Aurora  made  seven  knots.

Next  morning  we  were  driving  along  before  an  easterly
gale  in  thick  snow,  and  at  noon  the  day's  run  was  one
hundred  and  eighty  miles.

The  journal  describes  the  following  week  :

"  February  16.  The  weather  cleared  up  this  morning
and  the  sun  came  out,  enabling  us  to  fix  our  position.

"  We  are  doing  about  eight  knots  under  topsails    and


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

foresail.     The    sky    looked    threatening    this    evening    but
improved  considerably  betore  midnight.

"  February  17.  There  were  irequent  snow  squalls  to-
day, making  it  diiiicult  to  see.  Only  a  iew  scattered  pieces
of  ice  were  about.

"  February  18.  Bright,  clear  weather  to-day  enabled  us
to  get  good  observations.  There  are  a  great  many  '  blue
whales  '  round  the  ship,  and  the  many  bergs  in  sight  are
suggestive  of  heavy  pack  to  the  south.  A  great  many
petrels  and  Cape  pigeons  have  been  seen.

"  February  19.  The  ship  was  brought  up  this  morning
at  8. 45  by  a  line  of  heavy  pack  extending  across  the  course.
The  weather  was  misty,  but  cleared  up  before  noon.  We
have  been  obliged  to  steer  a  northerly  course  along  the  edge
of  the  pack.

"  The  margin  of  this  pack  is  some  sixty  miles  farther
north  than  that  which  we  followed  in  1912.

"  At  midnight  we  were  steering  north-north-west ;  many
bergs  in  sight  and  a  line  of  pack  to  port.

"  February  20.  At  daylight  we  were  able  to  steer  south-
west, being  at  noon  about  twenty  miles  north  of  Termination
Ice-Tongue.  Pushing  through  the  looser  edge  of  pack  for  a
couple  of  hours  we  saw  the  loom  of  the  ice-tongue  to  the
southward.  The  pack  becoming  closer,  we  turned  back  to
the  north  in  order  to  try  and  push  through  farther  west,
where  the  sky  looked  more  promising.

"  At  dark  we  were  in  a  patch  of  clear  water,  with  ice
all  around.  It  began  to  snow  and,  as  the  wind  remained  a
light  easterly,  the  ship  was  allowed  to  drift  until  daylight.

"  February  21.  The  morning  was  very  foggy  up  till
11  A.M.  We  steered  west  until  noon  and  then  entered  the
pack  ;  there  was  a  promising  sky  towards  the  south.  Fair
progress  was  made  through  the  ice,  which  became  looser  as
we  advanced  to  the  south.  At  8  p.m.  we  passed  through
leads  by  moonlight,  having  a  favourable  run  throughout
the  night.

"  February  22.     At  4  a.m.  the  wind  freshened  from  the

47


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

south-east  with  some  snow  ;  the  floes  were  getting  heavier
and  the  advent  of  a  bhzzard  was  not  hailed  with  joy.  About
noon  the  ship  approached  open  water  and  the  snow  ceased.

"  We  were  now  on  the  confines  of  the  sea  of  bergs  where
navigation  had  proved  so  dangerous  in  1912.

"  At  8  P.M.  the  driving  snow  and  growing  darkness  made
it  impossible  to  see  any  distance  ahead.  The  next  seven
hours  were  the  most  anxious  I  have  ever  spent  at  sea.
Although  the  wind  blew  hard  from  the  south-east,  we
passed  through  the  sea  of  bergs  without  mishap,  guided  and
protected  by  a  Higher  Power.

"  February  23.  At  4  a.m.  the  loom  of  an  ice-tongue  was
sighted  and  we  were  soon  standing  in  to  follow  this  feature
until  we  reached  the  Shackleton  Shelf.

"  At  8  A.M.  we  found  that  we  were  some  miles  south  of
our  reckoning.

"At  11  A.M.  we  sighted  a  depot-flag  on  the  slope.  Soon
after  the  ship  was  up  to  the  fast  floe  at  the  head  of  the
bay,  the  ice  being  nearly  a  mile  farther  north  than  on  the
previous  year.  In  fact,  the  ice-conditions  as  a  whole  had
changed  considerably.

"  At  noon  we  reached  the  Base  and  found  the  party  all
well."

Wild  and  his  comrades  were  as  glad  to  see  the  Aurora
as  we  were  to  see  them.  They  had  commenced  to  lay  in  a
stock  of  seal-meat  fearing  that  they  might  have  to  pass
another  winter  on  the  glacier.

All  the  afternoon  every  one  was  busy  getting  baggage  on
board  and  watering  ship.  The  weather  was  good  and  I  had
intended  to  sail  on  the  same  evening  by  moonlight,  follow-
ing the  glacier-tongue  northward  in  clear  water  for  sixty
miles.

As  we  turned  northward,  "  all  well  "  on  board,  I  felt
truly  thankful  that  Wild's  party  had  been  relieved  and
anxiety  on  their  account  was  now  at  an  end.  The  party
included  F.  Wild  (leader),  G.  Dovers,  C.  T.  Harrisson,  C.  A.
48


THE  SHIP'S  STORY

Hoadley,  Dr.  S.  E.  Jones,  A.  L.  Kennedy,  M.  H.  Moyes
and  A.  D.  Watson.

Early  on  the  24th  there  was  a  fresh  easterly  breeze,
while  the  ship  steamed  among  fields  of  bergs,  for  the  most
part  of  glacier-ice.  It  is  marvellous  how  a  vessel  can  pass
through  such  an  accumulation  in  the  dark  and  come  off
with  only  a  few  bumps  !

Pack  consisting  of  heavy  broken  floe-ice  was  entered  at
four  o'clock  on  the  same  day,  and  at  8  a.m.  on  the  25th  we
were  clear  of  it,  steering  once  more  among  bergs,  many  of
which  were  earth-stained.  The  day  was  remarkably  fine
with  light  winds  and  a  smooth  sea.

After  we  had  passed  through  three  hundred  miles  of  berg-
strewn  ocean,  large  masses  of  ice,  water-worn  in  most
instances,  were  still  numerous,  and  on  February  27,  though
our  position  was  north  of  the  60th  parallel,  they  were  just
beginning  to  diminish  in  numbers.  At  noon  on  that  day  a
sounding  was  made  in  two  thousand  two  hundred  and
thirty  fathoms.

Any  hope  we  may  have  had  of  steaming  to  the  east
with  the  object  of  attempting  to  relieve  the  seven  men  at
Adelie  Land  had  to  be  definitely  abandoned  on  account  of
the  small  supply  of  coal  which  remained.

There  was  now  a  clear  run  of  two  thousand  miles  through
the  zone  of  westerly  gales  and  high  seas,  and  on  March  14
we  reached  Port  Esperance.  Mr.  Eitel,  Secretary  of  the
Expedition,  landed  here  and  caught  the  steamer  Dover  to
Hobart.  We  heard  of  the  disaster  to  Captain  Scott  and
it  was  learned  that  wireless  messages  had  been  received
from  Dr.  Mawson,  which  had  been  forwarded  on  to  Australia
through  the  Macquarie  Island  party.


VOL.  II  D  49


CHAPTER  XIX

THE  WESTERN  BASE— ESTABLISHMENT  AND
EARLY  ADVENTURES

By  F.  wild

AT  7  A.M.  on  February  21,  1912,  the  Aurora  steamed
/-\  away  to  the  north  leaving  us  on  the  Shackleton
-^  -^  Ice- Shelf,  while  cheers  and  hearty  good  wishes
were  exchanged  with  the  ship's  company.  On  the  sea-ice,
that  day,  there  stood  with  me  my  comrades — the  Western
Party  ;  G.  Dovers,  C.  T.  Harrisson,  C.  A.  Hoadley,  S.  E.
Jones,  A.  L.  Kennedy,  M.  H.  Moyes  and  A.  D.  Watson.

We  proceeded  to  the  top  of  the  cliff,  where  the  remainder
of  the  stores  and  gear  were  hauled  up.  Tents  were  then
erected  and  the  work  of  hut-building  at  once  commenced.
The  site  selected  for  our  home  was  six  hundred  and  forty
yards  inland  from  the  spot  where  the  stores  were  landed,
and,  as  the  edge  of  the  glacier  was  very  badly  broken,  I  was
anxious  to  get  a  supply  of  food,  clothing  and  fuel  moved
back  from  the  edge  to  safety  as  soon  as  possible.

Of  the  twenty-eight  Greenland  dogs  that  had  reached
Antarctica  in  the  Aurora,  nineteen  were  landed  in  Adelie
Land  and  nine  with  us.  So  far,  none  of  these  had  been
broken  in  for  sledging,  and  all  were  in  poor  condition.
Their  quarters  on  the  ship  had  been  very  cramped,  and  many
times  they  had  been  thoroughly  soaked  in  salt  water,
besides  enduring  several  blizzards  in  Antarctic  waters.

Harrisson,  Hoadley,  Kennedy  and  Jones  "  turned  the
first  sod  "  in  the  foundations  of  the  hut,  while  Dovers,
Moyes,  Watson  and  I  sledged  along  supplies  of  timber  and
50


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

stores.  Inward  from  the  brink  of  the  precipice,  which  was
one  hundred  feet  in  height,  the  surface  was  fairly  good  for
sledges,  but,  owing  to  crevasses  and  pressure-ridges,  the
course  was  devious  and  mostly  uphill.

Until  the  building  was  completed,  the  day's  work  com-
menced at  6  A.M.,  and,  with  only  half  an  hour  for  a  midday
meal,  continued  until  7  p.m.  Fortunately,  the  weather
was  propitious  during  the  seven  days  when  the  car-
penters and  joiners  ruled  the  situation  ;  the  temperature
ranging  from  —12°  F.  to  25°  F.,  while  a  moderate  blizzard
interrupted  one  day.  The  chief  trouble  was  that  the
blizzard  deposited  six  feet  of  snow  around  the  stack  of  stores
and  coal  at  the  landing-place,  thereby  adding  considerably
to  our  labour.  As  evidence  of  the  force  of  the  wind,  the
fioe  was  broken  and  driven  out  past  the  foot  of  the  "  flying-
fox,"  tearing  away  the  lower  anchor  and  breaking  the  sheer-
legs  on  the  glacier.

An  average  day's  work  on  the  stores  consisted  in  bringing
thirteen  loads  over  a  total  distance  of  nine  and  a  half  miles.
First  of  all,  the  cases  had  to  be  dug  out  of  the  snow-drifts,
and  loading  and  unloading  the  sledges  was  scarcely  less
arduous.

On  February  27,  while  working  on  the  roof,  Harrisson
made  an  addition  to  our  geographical  knowledge.  Well
to  the  north  of  the  mainland,  and  bearing  a  little  north  of
east,  he  could  trace  the  outline  of  land.  Subsequently
this  was  proved  to  be  an  island,  thirty-two  miles  distant,
and  seventeen  miles  north  of  the  mainland.  It  was  twenty
miles  long  and  fifteen  miles  wide,  being  entirely  ice-covered.
Later  on,  it  was  charted  as  Masson  Island.

On  the  28th,  the  hut  was  fit  for  habitation,  the  stove  was
installed,  and  meals  were  cooked  and  eaten  in  moderate
comfort.  The  interior  of  the  house  was  twenty  feet  square,
but  its  area  was  reduced  by  a  lobby  entrance,  three  feet  by
five  feet,  a  dark-room  three  feet  by  six  feet  situated  on  one
side,  and  my  cabin  six  feet  six  inches  square  in  one  corner.
The  others  slept  in  seven  bunks  which  were    ranged    at

51


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

intervals  round  the  walls.     Of  the  remaining  space,  a  large
portion  was  commodiously  occupied  by  the  stove  and  table.

On  three  sides,  the  roof  projected  five  feet  beyond  the
walls  and  formed  a  veranda  which  was  boarded  up,
making  an  excellent  store-room  and  work-room.  This
was  a  splendid  idea  of  Dr.  Mawson's,  enabling  us  to  work
during  the  severest  storms  when  there  was  no  room  in
the  hut,  and  incidentally  supplying  extra  insulation  and
rendering  the  inside  much  warmer.  The  main  walls  and
roof  were  double  and  covered  with  weather-proof  felt.
Daylight  was  admitted  through  four  plate-glass  skylights
in  the  roof.

A  blizzard  effectually  prevented  outdoor  work  on
February  29,  and  all  hands  were  employed  in  the  hut,
lining  the  roof  and  walls  and  fixing  shelves  for  cooking  and
other  utensils.

An  attack  was  made  on  the  transport  of  stores  next
day.  As  a  result  of  twelve  hours'  work,  five  and  a  half
tons  of  coal  were  dragged  up  and  stowed  under  the  veranda.
It  was  Hoadley's  birthday,  and  the  cook  made  a  special
feature  of  the  dinner.  With  extra  dainties  like  figs,  cake
and  a  bottle  of  wine,  we  felt  that  the  occasion  was  fitly
celebrated.  On  March  2,  more  stores  were  amassed  round
the  house ;  Hoadley,  Harrisson  and  I  doing  odd  jobs  inside,
opening  cans,  sorting  out  stores,  fitting  bunks,  shelves  and
the  acetylene  gas  plant.

While  undoing  some  packages  of  small  boards,  Hoadley
found  that  a  space  had  been  arranged  in  the  centre  of  one
of  the  bundles,  and  a  box  of  cigars  inserted  by  some  of  the
men  originally  employed  upon  the  construction  of  the  hut
in  Melbourne.  Enclosed  was  a  letter  of  hearty  good
wishes.

During  the  afternoon,  Dovers  and  Kennedy  lowered  a
small  sledge  down  to  the  floe  and  brought  up  a  seal  and
three  Adelie  penguins.  These  served  for  a  while  as  fresh
food  for  ourselves  and  the  dogs.

Sunday  March  3  was  the  finest  day  we  had  up  till  then  ex-
52


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

perienced,  and,  since  the  work  was  now  sufficiently  advanced
to  make  us  comparatively  comfortable  and  safe,  I  determined
to  make  a  proper  Sunday  of  it.  All  hands  were  called  at
8.30  A.M.  instead  of  6  a.m.  After  breakfast  a  few  necessary
jobs  were  done  and  at  noon  a  short  service  was  held.  When
lunch  was  over,  the  skis  were  unpacked,  and  all  went  for  a
run  to  the  east  in  the  direction  of  Masson  Island.

The  glacier's  surface  was  excellent  for  travelling,  but
I  soon  foimd  that  it  would  be  dangerous  to  walk  about
alone  without  skis,  as  there  were  a  number  of  crevasses  near
the  hut,  some  of  considerable  size  ;  I  opened  one  twenty-five
feet  wide.  They  were  all  well  bridged  and  would  support  a
man  on  skis  quite  easily.

A  heavy  gale,  with  falling  snow  and  blinding  drift,  came
on  early  the  next  day  and  continued  for  forty-eight  hours  ;
our  worst  blizzard  up  to  that  time.  The  temperature,  below
zero  before  the  storm,  rose  with  the  wind  to  30°  F.  Inside,
all  were  employed  preparing  for  a  sledging  trip  I  intended
to  make  to  the  mainland  before  the  winter  set  in.  We  were
greatly  handicapped  by  the  want  of  a  sewing  machine.*
When  unpacked,  the  one  which  had  been  brought  was  found
to  be  without  shuttles,  spools  and  needles.  Large  canvas
bags,  made  to  contain  two  weeks'  provisions  for  a  sledging
unit  of  three  men,  were  in  the  equipment,  but  the  smaller
bags  of  calico  for  the  different  articles  of  food  had  to  be
sewn  by  hand.  Several  hundred  of  these  were  required,
and  altogether  the  time  consumed  in  making  them  was
considerable.

Emerging  on  the  morning  of  the  6th,  after  the  blizzard
had  blown  itself  out,  we  found  that  snow-drifts  to  a  depth  of
twelve  feet  had  collected  around  the  hut.  For  entrance
and  exit,  a  shaft  had  to  be  dug  and  a  ladder  made.  The
stores,  stacked  in  heaps  close  by,  were  completely  covered,
and  another  blizzard  swooping  down  on  the  7th  made
things  still  worse.     This  "  blow,"  persisting  till  the  morning

*  By  accident  the  small  sewing  machine  belonging  to  Wild's  party
was  landed  at  the  Main  Base. — Ed.

53


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

of  the  9th,  was  very  heavy,  the  wind  frequently  attaining
velocities  judged  to  reach  ninety  miles  per  hour,  accompanied
by  drift  so  thick  that  it  was  impossible  to  go  outside  for
anything.

Beyond  the  erection  of  the  wireless  masts,  everything
was  now  ready  for  the  sledging  journey.  On  the  day  when
the  wind  abated,  a  party  set  to  work  digging  holes  for  the
masts  and  stay-posts.  The  former  were  to  be  fifty-two  feet
high,  four  and  a  half  feet  being  buried  in  the  ice.  Un-
fortunately, a  strong  breeze  with  thick  drift  sprang  up
just  as  hoisting  operations  had  started,  and  in  a  few  minutes
the  holes  were  filled  up  and  the  workers  had  to  run  for
shelter.  Meanwhile,  four  men  had  succeeded  in  rescuing
all  the  buried  stores,  some  being  stowed  alongside  the
hut,  and  the  remainder  stacked  up  again  on  a  new
level.

On  came  another  severe  blizzard,  which  continued  with
only  a  few  minutes'  interval  until  the  evening  of  the  12th.
During  the  short  lull,  Jones,  Dovers  and  Hoadley  took  a
sledge  for  a  load  of  ice  from  a  pressure-ridge  rather  less  than
two  hundred  yards  from  the  hut.  While  they  were  absent,
the  wind  freshened  again,  and  they  had  great  difficulty  in
finding  a  way  to  the  entrance.

It  was  very  disappointing  to  be  delayed  in  this  manner,
but  there  was  consolation  in  the  fact  that  we  were  better
off  in  the  hut  than  on  the  glacier,  and  that  there  was  plenty
of  work  inside.  The  interior  was  thus  put  in  order  much
earlier  than  it  would  otherwise  have  been.

In  erecting  the  hut,  it  was  found  that  a  case  of  nuts  and
bolts  was  missing,  and  many  places  in  the  frame  had  in
consequence  to  be  secured  with  nails.  For  a  while  I  was
rather  doubtful  how  the  building  would  stand  a  really
heavy  blow.  There  was,  however,  no  need  for  uneasiness,
as  the  first  two  blizzards  drifted  snow  to  such  a  depth  in
our  immediate  vicinity  that,  even  with  the  wind  at  hurricane
force,  there  was  scarcely  a  tremor  in  the  building.

The  morning   of    Wednesday  March  13  was   calm  and
54


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

overcast.  Breakfast  was  served  at  six  o'clock.  We  then  set
to  work  and  cleared  away  the  snow  from  the  masts  and
stay-posts,  so  that  by  8.50  a.m.  both  masts  were  in  position.
Before  the  job  was  over,  a  singular  sight  was  witnessed.  A
large  section  of  the  glacier — many  thousands  of  tons — calved
off  into  the  sea.  The  tremendous  waves  raised  by  the  fall
of  this  mass  smashed  into  fragments  all  the  floe  left  in
the  bay.  With  the  sea-ice  went  the  snow-slopes  which
were  the  natural  roadway  down.  A  perpendicular  cliff,
sixty  to  one  hundred  feet  above  the  water,  was  all  that
remained,  and  our  opportunities  of  obtaining  seals  and
penguins  in  the  future  were  cut  off.  Of  course,  too,  the  old
landing-place  no  longer  existed.

The  whole  of  the  sledging  provisions  and  gear  were
brought  out,  weighed  and  packed  on  the  sledges ;  the
total  weight  being  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty-
three  pounds.  Do  vers,  Harrisson,  Hoadley,  Jones,  Moyes
and  myself  were  to  constitute  the  party.

It  was  necessary  for  two  men  to  remain  behind  at  the
base  to  keep  the  meteorological  records,  to  wind  chronometers,
to  feed  the  dogs  and  to  bring  up  the  remainder  of  the  stores
from  the  edge  of  the  ice-cliff.  Kennedy,  the  magnetician,
had  to  stay,  as  two  term  days  *  were  due  in  the  next  month.
It  was  essential  that  we  should  have  a  medical  man  with  us,
so  Jones  was  included  in  the  sledging  party;  the  others
drawing  lots  to  decide  who  should  remain  with  Kennedy.
The  unlucky  one  was  Watson.

To  the  south  of  the  Base,  seventeen  miles  distant  at  the
nearest  point,  the  mainland  was  visible,  entirely  ice-clad,
running  almost  due  east  and  west.  It  appeared  to  rise
rapidly  to  about  three  thousand  feet,  and  then  to  ascend
more  gradually  as  the  great  plateau  of  the  Antarctic
continent.  It  was  my  intention  to  travel  inland  beyond
the  lower  ice-falls,  which  extended  in  an  irregular  line  of
riven  bluffs  all  along  the  coast,  and  then  to  lay  a  depot  or
depots  which  might  be  useful  on  the  next  season's  journeys.
*  Days  set  apart  by  previous  arrangement  for  magnetic  "quick  runs."

55


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Another  reason  for  making  the  journey  was  to  give  the  party
some  experience  in  sledging  work.  The  combined  weight
of  both  sledges  and  effects  was  one  thousand  two  hundred
and  thirty-three  pounds,  and  the  total  amount  of  food
carried  was  four  hundred  and  sixty  pounds.

While  the  sledges  were  being  loaded,  ten  skua  gulls  paid
us  a  visit,  and,  as  roast  skua  is  a  very  pleasant  change  of
food,  Jones  shot  six  of  them.

At  1  P.M.  we  left  the  hut,  making  an  east-south-east
course  to  clear  a  pressure-ridge  ;  altering  the  course  once
more  to  south-east.  The  coast  in  this  direction  looked
accessible,  whereas  a  line  running  due  south  would  have
brought  us  to  some  unpromising  ice-falls  by  a  shorter
route.

The  surface  was  very  good  and  almost  free  from
crevasses  ;  only  one,  into  which  Jones  fell  to  his  middle,
being  seen  during  the  afternoon's  march.  Not  wishing  to  do
too  much  the  first  day,  especially  after  the  "  soft  "  days  we
had  been  forced  to  spend  in  the  hut  during  the  spell  of  bad
weather,  I  made  two  short  halts  in  the  afternoon  and  camped
at  5  P.M.,  having  done  seven  and  half  miles.

On  the  14th  we  rose  at  5  a.m.,  and  at  7  a.m.  we  were  on
the  march.  For  the  two  hours  after  starting,  the  surface
was  tolerable  and  then  changed  for  the  worse  ;  the  re-
mainder of  the  day's  work  being  principally  over  a  hard
crust,  which  was  just  too  brittle  to  bear  the  weight  of  a
man,  letting  him  through  to  a  soft  substratum,  six  or  eight
inches  deep  in  the  snow.  Only  those  who  have  travelled
in  country  like  this  can  properly  realize  how  wearisome
it  is.

At  9  A.M.  the  course  was  altered  to  south,  as  there
appeared  to  be  a  fairly  good  track  up  the  hills.  The  surface
of  the  glacier  rose  and  fell  in  long  undulations  which  became
wider  and  more  marked  as  the  land  approached.  By  the
time  we  camped,  they  were  three-quarters  of  a  mile  from
crest  to  crest,  with  a  drop  of  thirty  feet  from  crest  to
56


THE  WESTERN  BASE  HLT  IN  WINTEK.  NOTE  THE  ENTKANLK
A  VERTICAL  HOLE  IN  THE  SNOW  IN  THE  FOREGROUND


Watson


L


THE   WESTERN  BASE  HUT— THE   GROTTOES— IN  SUMMER


Jones


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

trough.  Despite  the  heavy  trudging  we  covered  more  than
thirteen  miles.

I  made  the  marching  hours  7  a.m.  to  5  p.m.,  so  that  there
was  time  to  get  the  evening  meal  before  darkness  set  in  ;
soon  after  6  p.m.

The  march  commenced  about  seven  o'clock  on  March  15,
the  thermometer  registering  —8°  F.,  while  a  light  southerly
breeze  made  it  feel  much  colder.  The  exercise  soon  warmed
us  up  and,  when  the  breeze  died  away,  the  remainder  of
the  day  was  perfectly  calm.

A  surface  of  "  pie-crust  "  cut  down  the  mileage  in  the
forenoon.  At  11  a.m.  we  encountered  many  crevasses,
from  two  to  five  feet  wide,  with  clean-cut  sides  and  shaky
bridges.  Hoadley  went  down  to  his  head  in  one,  and  we  all
got  our  legs  in  others.

It  became  evident  after  lunch  that  the  land  was  nearing
rapidly,  its  lower  slopes  obscuring  the  higher  land  behind.
The  crevasses  also  became  wider,  so  I  lengthened  the  harness
with  an  alpine  rope  to  allow  more  room  and  to  prevent  more
than  two  men  from  being  over  a  chasm  at  the  same  time.
At  4  P.M.  we  were  confronted  with  one  sixty  feet  wide.
Crevasses  over  thirty  feet  in  width  usually  have  very  sohd
bridges  and  may  be  considered  safe,  but  this  one  had  badly
broken  edges  and  one  hundred  yards  on  the  right  the  lid
had  collapsed.  So  instead  of  marching  steadily  across,
we  went  over  singly  on  the  alpine  rope  and  hauled  the  sledges
along  in  their  turn,  when  all  had  crossed  in  safety.  Imme-
diately after  passing  this  obstacle  the  grade  became  steeper,
and,  between  three  and  five  o'clock,  we  rose  two  hundred
feet,  traversing  several  large  patches  of  neve.

That  night  the  tent  stood  on  a  field  of  snow  covering
the  lower  slopes  of  the  hills.  On  either  hand  were  magnificent
examples  of  ice-falls,  but  ahead  the  way  seemed  open.

With  the  exception  of  a  preliminary  stiffness,  every
one  felt  well  after  the  toil  of  the  first  few  days.

In  bright  sunlight  next  morning  all  went  to  examine
the    ice-falls   to   the   east,    which   were   two    miles   away.

57


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Roping  up,«  we  made  an  ascent  half-way  to  the  top  which
rose  five  hundred  feet  and  commanded  a  grand  panorama
of  glacier  and  coast.  Soon  the  wind  freshened  and  drift
began  to  fly.  When  we  regained  the  tents  a  gale
was  blowing,  with  heavy  drift,  so  there  was  nothing
to  do  but  make  ourselves  as  comfortable  as  possible
inside.

All  through  Saturday  night  the  gale  raged  and  up  till
11.30  A.M.  on  Sunday  March  16.  On  turning  out,  we  found
that  the  tents  and  sledges  were  covered  deeply  in  snow,  and
we  dug  continuously  for  more  than  two  hours  before  we  were
able  to  pack  up  and  get  away.  Both  sledges  ran  easily  for
nearly  a  mile  over  neve,  when  the  gradient  increased  to  one
in  ten,  forcing  us  to  relay.  It  was  found  necessary  to  change
our  finnesko  for  spiked  boots.  Relaying  regularly,  we
gradually  mounted  six  hundred  feet  over  neve  and  massive
sastrugi.  With  a  steep  slope  in  front,  a  halt  was  made  for
the  night.  The  sunset  was  a  picture  of  prismatic  colours
reflected  over  the  undulating  ice-sheet  and  the  tumbling
cascades  of  the  glacier.

On  the  evening  of  March  18  the  altitude  of  our  camp  was
one  thousand  four  hundred  and  ten  feet,  and  the  slope  was
covered  with  sastrugi  ridges,  three  to  four  feet  in  height.
Travelling  over  these  on  the  following  day  we  had  frequent
capsizes.

The  outlook  to  the  south  was  a  series  of  irregular  terraces,
varying  from  half  a  mile  to  two  miles  in  breadth  and  twenty
to  two  hundred  feet  in  height.  These  were  furrowed  by
small  valleys  and  traversed  by  ridges,  but  there  was  not
a  sign  of  rock  anywhere.

The  temperature  varied  from  4°  to  14°  F.  during  the  day,
and  the  minimum  recorded  at  night  was  -  11°  F.

Another  nine  miles  of  slow  ascent  brought  us  to  two
thousand  feet,  followed  by  a  rise  of  two  hundred  and  twenty
feet  in  seven  and  three-quarter  miles  on  March  21.  Hauling
over  high  broken  sastrugi  was  laborious  enough  to  make
every  one  glad  when  the  day  was  over.  The  rations  were
58


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

found   sufficient,    but   the    plasmon   biscuits   were   so   hard
that  they  had  to  be  broken  with  a  geological  hammer.

There  now  swept  do^vn  on  us  a  blizzard  *  which  lasted
for  a  whole  week,  on  the  evening  of  March  21.  According
to  my  diary,  the  record  is  as  follows  :

^''Friday,  March  22.  Snowing  heavily  all  day,  easterly
wind  :  impossible  to  travel  as  nothing  can  be  seen  more
than  ten  to  twelve  yards  away.  Temperature  high,  T  to
18°  F.

"  Saturday,  March  23.  Blowing  hard  at  turn-out  time,
so  did  not  breakfast  until  8.30.  Dovers  is  cook  in  my  tent
this  week.  He  got  his  clothes  filled  up  with  snow  while
bringing  in  the  cooker,  food-bag,  etc.  The  wind  increased
to  a  fierce  gale  during  the  day,  and  all  the  loose  snow  which
fell  yesterday  was  shifted.

"  About  5  P.M.  the  snow  was  partially  blown  away
from  the  skirt  or  ground  cloth,  and  the  tent  bulged  in  a  good
deal.  I  got  into  burberries  and  went  out  to  secure  it ;  it
was  useless  to  shovel  on  snow  as  it  was  blown  off  immediately.
I  therefore  dragged  the  food-bags  off  the  sledge  and  dumped
them  on.  The  wind  and  drift  were  so  strong  that  I  had
several  times  to  get  in  the  lee  of  the  tent  to  recover  my
breath  and  to  clear  the  mask  of  snow  from  my  face.

"  We  are  now  rather  crowded  through  the  tent  bulging
in  so  much,  and  having  cooker  and  food-bag  inside.

"  Sunday,  March  24.  Had  a  very  bad  night.  The  wind
was  chopping  about  from  south-east  to  north  and  blowing
a  hurricane.  One  side  of  the  tent  was  pressed  in  past  the
centre,  and  I  had  to  turn  out  and  support  it  with  bag
lashings.  Then  the  ventilator  was  blown  in  and  we  had  a
pile  of  snow  two  feet  high  over  the  sleeping-bags  ;  this  kept
us  warm,  but  it  was  impossible  to  prevent  some  of  it  getting
into  the  bags,  and  now  we  are  very  wet  and  the  bags  like
sponges.  There  were  quite  two  hundredweights  of  snow  on
us ;  all  of  which  came  through  a  hole  three  inches  wide.

*  It  is  a  singular  fact  that  this  blizzard  occurred  on  the  same  date  as
that  during  which  Captain  Scott  and  his  party  lost  their  lives.

59


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

"  According  to  report  from  the  other  tent  they  are
worse  off  than  we  are  ;  they  say  they  have  four  feet  of
snow  in  the  tent.  All  this  is  due  to  the  change  of  wind,
making  the  ventilator  to  windward  instead  of  leeward.

"  March  25,  26  and  27.  Blizzard  still  continues,  less
wind  but  more  snowfall.

"  Thursday,  March  28.  Heavy  faUing  snow  and  drift,
south-east  wind.  At  noon,  the  wind  eased  down  and  snow
ceased  falling,  so  we  slipped  into  our  burberry  over-suits
and  climbed  out  to  dig  for  the  sledges.

"  Nothing  could  be  seen  except  about  two  feet  of  the  tops
of  the  tents,  which  meant  that  there  was  a  deposit  of  five
feet  of  freshly  fallen  snow.  The  upper  two  feet  was  soft
and  powdery,  offering  no  resistance  ;  under  that  it  was  still
soft,  so  that  we  sank  to  our  thighs  every  step  and  frequently
to  the  waist.  By  4.80  p.m.  both  sledges  were  rescued,
and  it  was  ascertained  that  no  gear  had  been  lost.  We
all  found  that  the  week  of  idleness  and  confinement  had
weakened  us,  and  at  first  were  only  able  to  take  short
spells  at  the  digging.  The  sky  and  barometer  promise
fine  weather  to-morrow,  but  what  awful  work  it  will  be
pulling ! "

At  5.30  A.M.  on  March  29  the  weather  was  bright  and
calm.  As  a  strong  wind  had  blown  throughout  the  night,
a  harder  surface  was  expected.  Outside,  we  were  surprised
to  find  a  fresh  wind  and  thick,  low  drift ;  owing  to  the  tents
being  snowed  up  so  high,  the  threshing  of  the  drift  was  not
audible.  To  my  disgust  the  surface  was  as  soft  as  ever.
It  appeared  that  the  only  resort  was  to  leave  the  provisions
for  the  depot  on  the  nearest  ridge  and  return  to  the  Base.
The  temperature  was  —20°  F.,  and,  while  digging  out  the
tents,  Dovers  had  his  nose  frost-bitten.

It  took  six  of  us  well  over  an  hour  to  drag  the  necessary
food  half  a  mile  up  a  rise  of  less  than  one  hundred  feet ;
the  load,  sledge  included,  not  being  five  hundred  pounds.
Nearly  all  the  time  we  were  sinking  thigh-deep,  and  the
sledge  itself  was  going  down  so  far  that  the  instrument-box
60


AN  EVENING  CAMP,  (^UEEN  .MARY   LAND


A   .^lAX-IlAUJ-EO  Sl.lOlxilC


Ihnl,'!i


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

was  pushing  a  mass  of  snow  in  front  of  it.  Arriving  on  the
ridge,  Moyes  found  that  his  foot  was  frozen  and  he  had  to
go  back  to  camp,  as  there  was  too  much  wind  to  bring  it
round  in  the  open.

Sufficient  food  and  oil  were  left  at  this  depot  for  three
men  for  six  weeks  ;   also  a  minimum  thermometer.

In  a  fresh  breeze  and  flying  drift  we  were  off  at  10  a.m.
next  day.  At  first  we  were  ambitious  and  moved  away
with  two  sledges,  sinking  from  two  to  three  feet  all  the  time.
Forty  yards  was  as  much  as  we  could  do  without  a  rest,  and
by  lunch  time  nine  hundred  yards  was  the  total.  Now  the
course  was  downhill,  and  the  two  sledges  were  pulled
together,  creeping  along  with  painful  slowness,  as  walking
was  the  hardest  work  imaginable.  After  one  of  the  most
strenuous  days  I  have  ever  experienced,  we  camped  ;  the
sledge-meter  recorded  one  mile  four  hundred  and  fifty  yards.

A  spell  of  two  days'  blizzard  cooped  us  up  once  more,
but  improved  the  surface  slightly  Still,  it  was  dreadfully
soft,  and,  but  for  the  falling  gradient,  we  would  not  have
made  what  we  did ;  five  miles  six  hundred  and  ten  yards,  on
April  2.  On  that  and  the  following  day  it  was  fortunate
that  the  road  chosen  was  free  of  crevasses.

At  the  foot  of  the  hills  I  had  decided  to  reduce  the  rations,
but,  as  the  track  had  grown  firm  once  more,  and  we  were
only  twenty- five  miles  from  the  hut,  with  a  week's  food,  1
thought  it  would  be  safe  to  use  the  full  allowance.

Soon  after  leaving  the  hills  (April  4),  a  direct  course  to
the  hut  was  made.  There  was  no  mark  by  which  to  steer,
except  a  "  water-sky  "  to  the  north,  the  hinterland  being
clouded  over.  During  the  afternoon,  the  sun  occasionally
gleamed  through  a  tract  of  cirro-stratus  cloud  and  there
was  a  very  fine  parhelion  :  signs  of  an  approaching  blizzard.
At  4.30  P.M.  we  had  done  seventeen  and  a  half  miles,  and,
as  all  hands  were  fresh  and  willing,  I  decided  to  have  a  meal
and  go  on  again,  considering  that  the  moon  was  full  and
there  were  only  six  miles  to  be  done.

After  supper  the  march  was  continued  till  8.30  p.m.,

61


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

by  which  time  we  were  due  for  a  rest.     I  had  begun  to  think
that  we  had  passed  the  hut.

April  5  was  far  from  being  a  Good  Friday  for  us.  At
2  A.M.  a  fresh  breeze  rose  and  rapidly  increased  to  a  heavy
gale.  At  10  A.M.  Hoadley  and  I  had  to  go  out  to  secure  the
tent ;  the  weather-side  bulged  in  more  than  half  the  width
of  the  tent  and  was  held  by  a  solid  load  of  drift,  but  the
other  sides  were  flapping  so  much  that  almost  all  the  snow
had  been  shaken  off  the  skirt.  Though  only  five  yards  away
from  it  we  could  not  see  the  other  tent.  At  noon  Hoadley
again  went  out  to  attend  to  the  tent  and  entirely  lost  himself
within  six  feet  of  it.  He  immediately  started  to  yell  and
I  guessed  what  was  the  matter  at  once.  Dovers  and  I
shouted  our  best,  and  Hoadley  groped  his  way  in  with  a
mask  of  snow  over  his  face.  He  told  us  that  the  wind,
which  was  then  blowing  a  good  eighty  miles  an  hour,  knocked
him  doAvn  immediately  he  was  outside,  and,  when  he  struggled
to  his  feet  again,  he  could  see  nothing  and  had  no  idea  in
what  direction  lay  the  tent.

The  space  inside  was  now  so  limited  by  the  combined
pressure  of  wind  and  snow  that  we  did  not  light  the  primus,
eating  lumps  of  frozen  pemmican  for  the  evening  meal.

The  blizzard  continued  with  unabated  violence  until
eleven  o'clock  next  morning,  when  it  moderated  within  an
hour  to  half  a  gale.  We  turned  out  and  had  a  good  hot
meal.  Then  we  looked  to  see  how  the  others  had  fared
and  found  that  their  tent  had  collapsed.  Getting  at  once
into  wind- proof  clothing,  we  rushed  out  and  were  horrified
to  see  Harrisson  in  his  bag  on  the  snow.  He  quickly
assured  us  that  he  was  all  right.  After  carrying  him,  bag
and  all,  into  our  tent,  he  emerged  quite  undamaged,  but
very  hungry.

Jones  and  Moyes  now  had  to  be  rescued  ;  they  were  in
a  most  uncomfortable  position  under  the  fallen  tent.  It
appears  that  the  tent  had  blown  down  on  the  previous
morning  at  ten  o'clock,  and  for  thirty-six  hours  they  had
had  nothing  to  eat.  We  did  not  take  long  to  dig  them  out.
62


ESTABLISHMENT  AND  EARLY  ADVENTURES

The  wind  dropped  to  a  moderate  breeze,  and,  through
the  faUing  snow,  I  could  make  out  a  "  water-sky  "  to  the
west.  The  three  unfortunates  said  that  they  felt  fit  to  travel,
so  we  got  under  way.  The  surface  was  soft  and  the  pulling
very  heavy,  and  I  soon  saw  that  the  strain  was  largely  due
to  the  weakness  of  the  three  who  had  been  without  food.
Calling  a  halt,  I  asked  Jones  if  it  would  do  to  go  on  ;  he
assured  me  that  they  could  manage  to  go  on  with  an  effort,
and  the  march  was  resumed.

Not  long  after,  Dovers  sighted  the  wireless  mast,  and  a
quarter  of  an  hour  later  we  were  safely  in  the  hut,  much  to
the  surprise  of  Kennedy  and  Watson,  who  did  not  expect
us  to  be  travelling  in  such  weather,  and  greatly  to  our  own
relief.  According  to  the  sledge-meter,  the  last  camp  had
only  been  two  miles  one  hundred  yards  from  home,  and  if
anything  had  been  visible  on  the  night  of  April  4,  we  could
have  got  in  easily.

I  was  very  pleased  with  the  way  all  the  party  had  shaped.
They  had  worked  splendidly  and  were  always  cheerful,
although  conditions  had  been  exceptionally  trying  during
this  journey.  No  one  was  any  the  worse  for  the  hardships,
except  for  a  few  blistered  fingers  from  frost-bites.  The
party  lost  weight  at  the  average  of  two  and  a  half  pounds  ;
Harrisson  was  the  greatest  loser,  being  reduced  six  pounds.
Out  of  the  twenty-five  days  we  were  away,  it  was  only
possible  to  sledge  on  twelve  days.  The  total  distance
covered,  including  relay  work,  was  nearly  one  hundred  and
twenty-two  miles,  and  the  greatest  elevation  reached  on
the  southern  mainland  was  two  thousand  six  hundred  feet
above  sea-level.

Kennedy  and  Watson  had  been  very  busy  during
our  absence.  In  a  few  days  they  had  trained  five  of
the  dogs  to  pull  in  harness,  and  transported  the  re-
mainder of  the  stores  from  the  landing-place,  arranging
them  in  piles  round  the  hut.  The  weather  at  the  Base  had
been  quite  as  bad  as  that  experienced  by  us  on  the  land
slopes.

63


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

In  the  first  blizzard  both  wireless  masts  were  broken
down.  Watson  and  Kennedy  managed  to  repair  and  re-erect
one  of  the  masts,  but  it  was  only  thirty-seven  feet  in  height.
Any  final  hopes  of  hearing  wireless  signals  were  dispelled  by
the  discovery  that  the  case  containing  the  detector  and
several  other  parts  necessary  for  a  receiving-station  were
missing.

Watson  had  fitted  up  a  splendid  dark-room,  as  well  as
plenty  of  shelves  and  racks  for  cooking  utensils.

Kennedy  was  able  to  secure  a  series  of  observations  on
one  of  his  term  days,  but,  before  the  next  one,  the  tent  he
was  using  was  blown  to  ribbons.


64


Hoadlpij
IX  THE  VEKAXDA  OF  THE  WESTERN  BASE  HUT-THE    GROTTOES-LOOKIXG
TOWARDS    THE    EMRAXCE    DUG  VERTICALLY  DOWX  THROUGH    THE  SNOW-
DRIFT


CHAPTER  XX
THE  WESTERN  BASE— WINTER  AND  SPRING

ON  Easter  Sunday,  April  7,  1912,  a  furious  blizzard
kept  us  close  prisoners.  To  meet  the  occasion,
Dovers  prepared  a  special  dinner,  the  principal
item  being  roast  mutton,  from  one  of  the  six  carcases  landed
with  the  stores.     Divine  service  was  held  in  the  forenoon.

The  blizzard  raged  with  such  force  all  Sunday  and
Monday  that  I  dared  not  let  any  one  go  out  to  feed  the  dogs,
although  we  found,  later,  that  a  fast  of  three  days  did  not
hurt  them  at  all.

I  now  thought  it  time  to  establish  a  ^vinter  routine.
Each  member  had  his  particular  duties  to  perform,  in
addition  to  general  work,  in  which  all  hands  were  engaged.
Harrisson  took  charge  of  the  lamps  and  checked  consumption
of  oil.  Hoadley  had  the  care  of  the  provisions,  making  out
lists  showing  the  amount  the  cook  might  use  of  each  article
of  food,  besides  opening  cases  and  stowing  a  good  assort-
ment on  convenient  shelves  in  the  veranda.  Jones  and
Kennedy  worked  the  acetylene  plant.  In  connexion  with
this,  I  should  mention  that  several  parts  were  missing,
including  T-pieces  for  joints  and  connexions  for  burners.
However  Jones,  in  addition  to  his  ability  as  a  surgeon,
showed  himself  to  be  an  excellent  plumber,  brazier  and
tinsmith,  and  the  Hut  was  well  lighted  all  the  time  we
occupied  it.  Moyes's  duties  as  meteorologist  took  him  out
at  all  hours.  Watson  looked  after  the  dogs,  while  Dovers
relieved  other  members  when  they  were  cooks.  The  duty
of  cook  was  taken  for  a  week  at  a  time  by  every  one  except
myself.  A  night  watch  was  kept  by  each  in  turn.  The
VOL.  II  E  65


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

watchman  went  on  duty  at  9  p.m.,  usually  taking  advantage
of  this  night  to  have  a  bath  and  wash  his  clothes.  He
prepared  breakfast,  calling  all  hands  at  8.30  a.m.  for  this
meal  at  nine  o'clock.  The  cook  for  the  week  was  exempt
from  all  other  work.  In  the  case  of  Kennedy,  whose
magnetic  Avork  was  done  principally  at  night,  arrangements
were  made  to  assist  him  with  the  cooking.

Work  commenced  during  the  winter  months  at  ten
o'clock  and,  unless  anything  special  had  to  be  done,  finished
at  1  P.M.,  when  lunch  was  served.  The  afternoon  was  usually
devoted  to  sport  and  recreation.

The  frequent  blizzards  and  heavy  snowfall  had  by  this
time  buried  the  Hut  so  deeply  that  only  the  top  of  the
pointed  roof  was  visible  and  all  the  outside  stores  were
covered.

My  diary  for  April  9  says  :

"  The  blizzard  "  (which  had  commenced  on  the  evening
of  the  6th)  "  played  itself  out  during  the  night  and  we  got
to  work  immediately  after  breakfast.  There  was  still  a
fresh  breeze  and  low  drift,  but  this  gradually  died  away.

*'We  were  an  hour  digging  an  exit  from  the  Hut.  The
day  has  been  occupied  in  cutting  a  tunnel  entrance,  forty
feet  long,  through  the  drift,  so  that  driving  snow  cannot
penetrate,  and  we  shall  be  able  to  get  out  with  less  trouble.

"  As  we  get  time  I  intend  to  excavate  caverns  in  the
huge  drifts  packed  round  the  house  and  stow  all  our  stores
inside  ;    also  a  good  supply  of  ice  for  use  during  blizzards.

"  I  had  intended  to  make  a  trip  to  Masson  Island  before
the  winter  properly  set  in,  but  with  the  weather  behaving
as  it  does,  I  don't  think  it  would  be  wise."

The  10th,  11th  and  12th  being  fine,  good  progress  was
made  in  digging  out  store-rooms  on  either  side  of  the  tunnel,
but  a  blizzard  on  the  13th  and  14th  stopped  us  again.

On  going  to  feed  the  dogs  during  the  afternoon  of  the
14th,  Watson  found  that  Nansen  was  dead  ;  this  left  us
with  seven,  as  Crippen  had  already  died.  Of  the  remainder,
only  four  were  of  any  value  ;  Sweep  and  the  two  bitches,
66


WINTER  AND  SPRING

Tiger  and  Tich,  refusing  to  do  anything  in  harness,  and,  as
there  was  less  than  sufficient  food  for  them,  the  two  latter
had  to  be  shot.  Sweep  would  have  shared  the  same  fate
but  he  disappeared,  probably  falling  down  a  crevasse  or
over  the  edge  of  the  glacier.

Until  the  end  of  April  almost  all  our  time  was  spent  in
making  store-rooms  and  in  searching  for  buried  stores ;
sometimes  a  shaft  would  have  to  be  sunk  eight  to  twelve
feet.  Bamboo  poles  stuck  in  the  snow  marked  the  positions
of  the  different  stacks.  The  one  marking  the  carbide  was
blown  away,  and  it  was  two  days  before  Dovers  finally
unearthed  it.  By  the  30th,  caves  roomy  enough  to  contain
everything  were  completed,  all  being  connected  by  the
tunnel.  We  were  now  self-contained,  and  everything  was
accessible  and  immune  from  the  periodic  blizzards.

The  entrance,  by  the  way,  was  a  trap-door  built  over
the  tunnel  and  raised  well  above  the  outside  surface  to  pre-
vent it  being  drifted  over.  From  below  it  was  approached
by  a  ladder,  but  the  end  of  the  tunnel  was  left  open,  so  that
in  fine  weather  we  could  run  sledges  in  and  out  with  loads
of  ice.  With  each  blizzard  the  entrance  was  completely
choked,  and  it  gave  two  men  a  day's  work  to  clear  it  out
once  more.

On  April  16  Kennedy  had  a  term  day.  A  fresh  breeze
was  blowing  and  the  temperature  was  —20°  F.  Some  of
his  observations  had  to  be  taken  in  the  open  and  the  re-
mainder in  a  tent.  The  series  took  three  hours  to  complete
and  by  that  time  he  was  thoroughly  chilled  through,  his
feet  and  fingers  were  frost-bitten  and  his  language  had
grown  more  incisive  than  usual.

Between  the  10th  and  the  19th  we  made  a  search  for
penguins  and  seals.  Hoadley  and  Moyes  staying  behind,
the  rest  of  us  with  tents  and  equipment  journeyed  along
the  edge  of  the  glacier  to  the  south,  without  seeing  the
smallest  sign  of  life.  The  edge  of  the  shelf-ice  was  very
much  fissured,  many  of  the  breaches  giving  no  sign  of  their
presence,    in    consequence    of    which    several    falls    were

67


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

sustained.  It  should  be  remarked  that  the  Shackleton
Shelf-Ice  runs  mainly  in  a  southerly  direction  from  the
Winter  Quarters,  joining  the  mainland  at  a  point,  after-
wards named  Junction  Corner.  The  map  of  Queen  Mary
Land  illustrates  this  at  a  glance.

From  the  25th  to  the  29th,  Kennedy,  Harrisson  and
Jones  were  employed  building  an  igloo  to  be  used  as  a
magnetic  observatory.  On  the  afternoon  of  the  30th,  the
magnetician  invited  every  one  to  a  tea-party  in  the  igloo  to
celebrate  the  opening.  He  had  the  place  very  nicely
decorated  with  flags,  and  after  the  reception  and  the  formal
inspection  of  the  instruments,  we  were  served  with  quite  a
good  tea.  The  outside  temperature  was  —  33°  F.  and  it
was  not  much  higher  inside  the  igloo.  As  a  result,  no  one
extended  his  visit  beyond  the  bounds  of  politeness.

On  May  1,  Harrisson,  Hoadley  and  Watson  went  away
south  towards  the  land  at  the  head  of  the  bay,  which  curved
round  to  Junction  Corner,  to  examine  icebergs,  take  photo-
graphs and  to  search  for  seals.  They  took  the  four  dogs
with  them  and,  as  the  load  was  a  light  one — ^three  hundred
and  forty-two  pounds — ^the  dogs  pulled  it  easily.

I  went  with  the  others  to  the  north,  hoping  that  we
might  find  a  portion  of  the  glacier  low  enough  to  give  access
to  the  sea-ice.  There  were  several  spots  where  the  ice-cliffs
were  not  more  than  forty  to  fifty  feet  high,  but  no  convenient
ramps  led  do^vn  from  the  cliffs.  In  any  case  neither  penguins
nor  seals  were  to  be  had  in  the  vicinity.  A  great,  flat  sheet
of  frozen  sea  stretched  away  to  the  north  for  quite  thirty
miles.

May  2  was  fine,  but  the  3rd  and  4th  were  windy  once
more  and  we  had  to  remain  indoors.  Saturday,  the  4th,
was  clean-up  day,  when  the  verandas,  tunnel  and  cave
were  swept  and  tidied,  the  stove  cleaned,  the  hut  and  dark-
room scrubbed  and  the  windows  cleared.  The  last  was  a
job  which  was  generally  detested.  During  the  week,  the
windows  in  the  roof  collected  a  coat  of  ice,  from  an  inch  to
three  inches  thick,  by  condensation  of  moisture.  Chipping
68


THE  WlXL)-\VEATiIEKElJ  lULOO  BUILT  FOU   MAGNETIC  ^yatson

OBSERVATIOXS     WESTERN  BASE


M.XATAK— QUEEX  .MAKY  LAXD  :    SHOWING  REJIAHKABI.E   .MOAT        Uidsoti
ON  WINDWARD  SIDE  AND  RAMP  ON  LEE


WINTER  AND  SPRING

this  off  was  a  most  tedious  piece  of  work,  while  in  the
process  one's  clothes  became  filled  with  ice.

One  Sunday,  Harrisson,  Hoadley  and  Watson  returned
from  their  short  trip  ;  they  had  missed  the  strong  winds
which  had  been  blowing  at  the  Base,  although  less  than
twenty  miles  away.  Some  very  fine  old  icebergs  were
discovered  which  were  of  interest  to  the  two  geologists  and
made  good  subjects  for  Harrisson's  sketches.  Watson  had
had  a  nasty  fall  while  crossing  a  patch  of  rough  ice,  his  nose
being  rather  badly  cut  in  the  accident.

On  May  7  another  blizzard  stopped  all  outside  work.
Moyes  ventured  as  far  as  the  meteorological  screen  at  noon
and  got  lost,  but  luckily  only  for  a  short  time.  The  baro-
meter behaved  very  strangely  during  the  blow,  rising
abruptly  during  a  little  more  than  an  hour,  and  then  slowly
falling  once  more.  For  a  few  hours  on  the  8th  there  was  a
lull  and  the  store  of  ice  was  replenished,  but  the  9th  and
10th  were  again  spent  indoors,  repairing  and  refitting  tents,
poles  and  other  sledging  gear  during  the  working  hours,  and
reading  or  playing  chess  and  bridge  in  the  leisure  time.
Harrisson  carved  an  excellent  set  of  chessmen,  distinguish-
ing the  "  black  "  ones  by  a  stain  of  permanganate  of  potash.

Bridge  was  the  favourite  game  all  through  the  winter,
and  a  continuous  record  of  the  scores  was  kept.  Two
medals  were  struck  :  a  neat  little  thing  for  the  highest
scorer  and  a  huge  affair  as  large  as  a  plate,  slung  on  a  piece
of  three-and-a-half-inch  rope,  with  "  Jonah  "  inscribed  on
it,  to  be  worn  by  the  player  at  the  foot  of  the  list.

Divine  service  was  held  every  Sunday,  Moyes  and  I
taking  it  in  turn.  There  was  only  one  hymn  book  amongst
the  party,  which  made  it  necessary  to  write  out  copies  of
the  hymns  each  week.

The  sleeping-bags  used  on  the  first  sledging  journey  had
been  hung  up  near  the  roof.  They  were  now  taken  down
to  be  thoroughly  overhauled.  As  a  consequence  of  their
severe  soaking,  they  had  shrunk  considerably  and  required
enlarging.     Dovers's  bag,  besides  contracting  a   good  deal,

69


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

had  lost  much  hair  and  was  cut  up  to  patch  the  others.  He
received  a  spare  one  to  replace  it.

May  15  was  a  beautiful  bright  morning  and  I  went  over  to
an  icy  cape  two  miles  southward,  with  Harrisson,  Hoadley,
Dovers  and  Watson,  to  find  a  road  down  to  the  sea-ice.
Here,  we  had  good  fortune  at  last,  for,  by  following  down  a
crevasse  which  opened  out  at  sea-level  into  a  magnificent
cave,  we  walked  straight  out  on  to  the  level  plain.  Along
the  edge  of  the  glacier  there  was  not  even  a  seal's  blow-hole.
Watson  took  some  photos  of  the  cave  and  cliff.

It  was  Kennedy's  term  night ;  the  work  keeping  him  in
the  igloo  from  10  p.m.  until  2.30  a.m.  He  had  had  some  diffi-
culty in  finding  a  means  of  warming  the  observatory — an
urgent  necessity,  since  he  found  it  impossible  to  manipulate
delicate  magnetic  instruments  for  three  or  four  hours  with
the  temperature  from  -  25°  F.  to  -  30°  F.  The  trouble
was  to  make  a  non-magnetic  lamp  and  the  problem  was
finally  solved  by  using  one  of  the  aluminium  cooking  pots  ;
converting  it  into  a  blubber  stove.  The  stove  smoked  a
great  deal  and  the  white  walls  were  soon  besmirched  with  a
layer  of  soot.

The  17th,  18th  and  19th  were  all  calm  but  dull.  One
day  I  laid  out  a  ten-hole  golf  course  and  with  some  home-
made balls  and  hockey  sticks  for  clubs  played  a  game,  not
devoid  of  interest  and  excitement.

During  a  blizzard  which  descended  on  the  evening  of
the  20th,  Zip  and  Sweep  disappeared  and  on  the  21st,  a
search  on  the  glacier  having  been  in  vain,  Dovers  and
Hoadley  made  their  way  down  to  the  floe.  They  found
Zip  well  and  hearty  in  spite  of  having  had  a  drop  of  at  least
forty  feet  off  the  glacier.  A  further  search  for  Sweep
proved  fruitless.  We  were  forced  to  conclude  that  he  was
either  killed  by  falling  over  the  precipice  or  he  had  gone  far
away  hunting  for  penguins.

The  regular  blizzard  immured  us  on  May  22,  23  and  24 ;
the  wind  at  times  of  terrific  force,  approaching  one  hundred
miles  per  hour.  It  was  impossible  to  secure  meteorological
70


WINTER  AND  SPRING

observations  or  to  feed  the  dogs  until  noon  on  the  24th.
Moyes  and  I  went  out  during  a  shght  cessation  and,  with
the  aid  of  a  rope  from  the  trap-door,  managed  to  find  the
dogs,  and  gave  them  some  biscuits.  The  drift  was  then  so
thick  that  six  feet  was  as  far  as  one  could  see.

We  did  not  forget  Empire  Day  and  duly  "  spliced  the
mainbrace."  The  most  bigoted  teetotaller  could  not  call  us
an  intemperate  party.  On  each  Saturday  night,  one  drink
per  man  was  served  out,  the  popular  toast  being  "  Sweet-
hearts and  Wives."  The  only  other  convivial  meetings  of
our  small  symposium  were  on  the  birthdays  of  each  member,
Midwinter's  Day  and  King's  Birthday.

On  the  25th  we  were  able  to  make  an  inventory  of  a
whole  series  of  damages  effected  outside.  The  dogs'  shelter
had  entirely  carried  away  ;  a  short  mast  which  had  been
erected  some  weeks  previously  as  a  holdfast  for  sledges  was
snapped  off  short  and  the  sledges  buried,  and,  worst  of
all,  Kennedy's  igloo  had  parted  with  its  roof,  the  interior
being  filled  with  snow,  underneath  which  the  instruments
were  buried.  The  dogs  were,  however,  all  quite  well  and
lively.  It  was  fortunate  for  them  that  the  temperature
always  rose  during  the  blizzards.  At  this  period,  when
on  fine  days  it  was  usual  to  experience  —  25°  to  —  37°  F.,
the  temperature  rose  in  the  snowstorms  to  25°  or  even
30°  F.

Monday  the  27th  was  beautifully  clear.  The  tunnel
entrance  was  opened  and  some  of  the  party  brought  in  ice
while  others  undid  the  rope  lashings  which  had  been  placed
over  the  hut.  This  was  so  compactly  covered  in  snow  that
the  lashings  were  not  required  and  I  wanted  to  make  a  rope
ladder  to  enable  us  to  get  down  to  the  sea-ice  and  also  to  be
used  by  Watson  and  Hoadley,  who  were  about  to  dig  a  shaft
in  the  glacier  to  examine  the  structure  of  the  ice.

Fine  weather  continued  until  June  2.  During  this  time
we  were  occupied  in  digging  a  road  from  the  glacier  down
to  the  sea-ice  in  the  forenoons  and  hunting  for  seals  or  skiing
in  the  afternoons.  Kennedy  and  Harrisson  rebuilt  the  magnetic

71


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

igloo.  A  seal-hole  was  eventually  found  near  the  foot  of  the
glacier  and  this  was  enlarged  to  enable  the  seals  to  come  up.

At  the  end  of  May,  daylight  lasted  from  9  a.m.  until
3  P.M.,  and  the  sunrise  and  sunset  were  a  marvel  of  exquisite
colour.  The  nightly  displays  of  aurora  australis  were  not
very  brilliant  as  the  moon  was  nearing  the  full.

On  the  days  of  blizzards,  there  was  usually  sufficient
work  to  be  found  to  keep  us  all  employed.  Thus  on  June  2,
Watson  and  I  were  making  a  ladder,  Jones  was  contriving
a  harpoon  for  seals,  Hoadley  was  opening  cases  and  stowing
stores  in  the  veranda,  Dovers  cleaning  tools,  Moyes  repair-
ing a  thermograph  and  writing  up  the  meteorological  log,
Harrisson  cooking  and  Kennedy  sleeping  after  a  night-watch.

Between  June  4  and  22  there  was  a  remarkably  fine
spell.  It  was  not  calm  all  the  time,  as  drift  flew  for  a
few  days,  limiting  the  horizon  to  a  few  hundred  yards.  An
igloo  was  built  as  a  shelter  for  those  sinking  the  geological
shaft,  and  seal-hunting  was  a  daily  recreation.  On  June  9,
Dovers  and  Watson  found  a  Weddell  seal  two  and  a  half
miles  to  the  west  on  the  sea-ice.  They  killed  the  animal
but  did  not  cut  it  up  as  there  were  sores  on  the  skin.  Jones
went  over  with  them  afterwards  and  pronounced  the  sores
to  be  wounds  received  from  some  other  animal,  so  the
meat  was  considered  innocuous  and  fifty  pounds  were
brought  in,  being  very  welcome  after  tinned  foods.  Jones
took  culture  tubes  with  him  and  made  smears  for  bacteria.
The  tubes  were  placed  in  an  incubator  and  several  kinds  of
organisms  grew,  very  similar  to  those  which  infect  wounds
in  ordinary  climates.

The  snowstorms  had  by  this  time  built  up  huge  drifts
under  the  lee  of  the  ice-cliffs,  some  of  them  more  than  fifty
feet  in  height  and  reaching  almost  to  the  top  of  the  ice-
shelf.  An  exhilarating  sport  was  to  ski  down  these  ramps.
The  majority  of  them  were  very  steep  and  irregular  and  it
was  seldom  that  any  of  us  escaped  without  a  fall  at  one
time  or  another.  Several  of  the  party  were  thrown  from
thirty  to  forty  feet,  and,  frequently  enough,  over  twenty
72


=  3

r  o


c  z


WINTER  AND  SPRING

feet,  without  being  hurt.  The  only  accident  serious  enough
to  disable  any  one  happened  to  Kennedy  on  June  19,  when
he  twisted  his  knee  and  was  laid  up  for  a  week.

There  were  many  fine  displays  of  the  aurora  in  June,
the  best  being  observed  on  the  evening  of  the  18th.  Curtains
and  streamers  were  showing  from  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.
Shortly  after  midnight,  Kennedy,  who  was  taking  magnetic
observations,  called  me  to  see  the  most  remarkable  exhibi-
tion I  have  so  far  seen.  There  was  a  double  curtain  30°
wide  unfolded  from  the  eastern  horizon  through  the  zenith,
with  waves  shimmering  along  it  so  rapidly  that  they
travelled  the  whole  length  of  the  curtain  in  two  seconds.
The  colouring  was  brilliant  and  evanescent.  When  the
waves  reached  the  end  of  the  curtain  they  spread  out  to  the
north  and  rolled  in  a  voluminous  billow  slowly  back  to  the
east.  Kennedy's  instruments  showed  that  a  very  great
magnetic  disturbance  was  in  progress  during  the  auroral
displays,  and  particularly  on  this  occasion.

Hoadley  and  Watson  set  up  a  line  of  bamboos,  a  quarter
of  a  mile  apart  and  three  miles  long,  on  the  20th,  and  from
thence  onwards  took  measurements  for  snowfall  every
fortnight.

On  Midwinter's  Day  the  temperature  ranged  from
-  38°  F.  to  -  25°  F.  and  dayhght  lasted  from  10  a.m.  until
4  P.M.  We  proclaimed  a  universal  holiday  throughout
Queen  Mary  Land.  Being  Saturday,  there  were  a  few
necessary  jobs  to  be  done,  but  all  were  finished  by  11  a.m.
The  morning  was  fine  and  several  of  us  went  down  to  the
floe  for  skiing,  but  after  twelve  o'clock  the  sky  became  over-
cast and  the  light  was  dimmed.  A  strong  breeze  brought
along  a  trail  of  drift,  and  at  6  p.m.  a  heavy  blizzard  was  in
full  career.  Inside,  the  hut  was  decorated  with  flags  and
a  savoury  dinner  was  in  the  throes  of  preparation.  To  make
the  repast  still  more  appetising,  Harrisson,  Hoadley  and
Dovers  devised  some  very  pretty  and  clever  menus.  Speeches,
toasts  and  a  gramophone  concert  made  the  evening  pass
quickly  and  enjoy  ably.

73


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

From  this  time  dated  our  preparations  for  spring  sledging,
which  I  hoped  would  commence  about  August  15.  Jones
made  some  experiments  with  "  glaxo,"  of  which  we  had  a
generous  supply.  His  aim  was  to  make  biscuits  which
would  be  suitable  for  sledging,  and,  after  several  failures,  he
succeeded  in  compressing  with  a  steel  die  a  firm  biscuit  of
glaxo  and  butter  mixed,  three  ounces  of  which  was  the
equivalent  in  theoretical  food  value  to  four  and  a  half
ounces  of  plasmon  biscuit;  thereby  affording  a  pleasant
variety  in  the  usual  ration.

July  came  in  quietly,  though  it  was  dull  and  cloudy,  and
we  were  able  to  get  out  on  the  first  two  days  for  work  and
exercise.  On  the  2nd  a  very  fine  effect  was  caused  by  the
sun  shining  through  myriads  of  fog-crystals  which  a  light
northerly  breeze  had  brought  down  from  the  sea.  The
sun,  which  was  barely  clear  of  the  horizon,  was  itself  a  deep
red,  on  either  side  and  above  it  was  a  red  mock  sun  and  a
rainbow-tinted  halo  connected  the  three  mock  suns.

On  the  5th  and  6th  the  wind  blew  a  terrific  hurricane
(judged  to  reach  a  velocity  of  one  hundred  miles  per  hour)
and,  had  we  not  known  that  nothing  short  of  an  earthquake
could  move  the  hut,  we  should  have  been  very  uneasy.

All  were  now  busy  making  food-bags,  opening  and
breaking  up  pemmican  and  emergency  rations,  grinding
biscuits,  attending  to  personal  gear  and  doing  odd  jobs
many  and  various.

In  addition  to  recreations  like  chess,  cards  and  dominoes,
a  competition  was  started  for  each  member  to  write  a  poem
and  short  article,  humorous  or  otherwise,  connected  with
the  Expedition.  These  were  all  read  by  the  authors  after
dinner  one  evening  and  caused  considerable  amusement.
One  man  even  preferred  to  sing  his  poem.  These  literary
efforts  were  incorporated  in  a  small  publication  known  as
"  The  Glacier  Tongue."

Watson  and  Hoadley  put  in  a  good  deal  of  time  digging
their  shaft  in  the  glacier.  As  a  roofed  shelter  had  been
built  over  the  top,  they  were  able  to  work  in  all  but  the
74


H

<

^

>i

5

tmi

?»

'i^

^-H

o

^

Oh

a.

■^

"Z,

^

D

X

-S'

en

b:

^

W

Lh

'-2

CfiJ

•S

O

a:

^

i^

u

«

z

*

u


WINTER  AND  SPRING

very  worst  weather.  While  the  rest  of  us  were  fitting
sledges  on  the  17th  and  18th,  they  succeeded  in  getting
down  to  a  level  of  twenty-one  feet  below  the  surface  of  the
shelf-ice.

Sandow,  the  leader  of  the  dogs,  disappeared  on  the
18th.  Zip,  who  had  been  missed  for  two  days,  returned,
but  Sandow  never  came  back,  being  killed,  doubtless,  by  a
fall  of  snow  from  the  cliffs.  All  along  the  edge  of  the  ice-
shelf  were  snow  cornices,  some  weighing  hundreds  of  tons  ;
and  these  often  broke  away,  collapsing  with  a  thunderous
sound.  On  July  31,  Harrisson  and  Watson  had  a  narrow
escape.  After  finishing  their  day's  work,  they  climbed
down  to  the  floe  by  a  huge  cornice  and  sloping  ramp.  A
few  seconds  later,  the  cornice  fell  and  an  immense  mass  of
hard  snow  crashed  down,  cracking  the  sea-ice  for  more
than  a  hundred  yards  around.

July  had  been  an  inclement  month  with  three  really
fine  and  eight  tolerable  days.  In  comparison  with  June's,
which  was  —  14*5°  F.,  the  mean  temperature  of  July  was  high
at  —  1-5°  F.  and  the  early  half  of  August  was  little  better.

Sunday  August  11  was  rather  an  eventful  day.  Dovers
and  I  went  out  in  the  wind  to  attend  to  the  dogs  and  clear
the  chimney  and,  upon  our  return,  found  the  others  just
recovering  from  rather  an  exciting  accident.  Jones  had  been
charging  the  acetylene  generators  and  by  some  means  one
of  them  caught  fire.  For  a  while  there  was  the  danger  of
a  general  conflagration  and  explosion,  as  the  gas-tank  was
floating  in  kerosene.  Throwing  water  over  everything
would  have  made  matters  worse,  so  blankets  were  used  to
smother  the  flames.  As  this  failed  to  extinguish  them,  the
whole  plant  was  pulled  down  and  carried  into  the  tunnel,
where  the  fire  was  at  last  put  out.  The  damage  amounted
to  two  blankets  singed  and  dirtied,  Jones's  face  scorched
and  hair  singed,  and  Kennedy,  one  finger  jammed.  It  was
a  fortunate  escape  from  a  calamity.

A  large  capsized  berg  had  been  noticed  for  some  time,
eleven  miles  to  the  north.     On  the  14th,  Harrisson,  Dovers,

75


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Hoadley  and  Watson  took  three  days'  provisions  and
equipment  and  went  off  to  examine  it.  A  brief  account  is
extracted  from  Harrisson's  diary  :

"  It  was  a  particularly  fine,  mild  morning  ;  we  made
good  progress,  three  dogs  dragging  the  loaded  sledge  over
the  smooth  floe  without  difficulty,  requiring  assistance  only
when  crossing  banks  of  soft  snow.  One  and  a  half  miles
from  '  The  Steps,'  we  saw  the  footprints  of  a  penguin.

"  Following  the  cliffs  of  the  shelf -ice  for  six  and  three
quarter  miles,  we  sighted  a  Weddell  seal  sleeping  on  a
drift  of  snow.  Killing  the  animal,  cutting  off  the  meat  and
burying  it  in  the  drift  delayed  us  for  about  one  hour.
Continuing  our  journey  under  a  fine  bluff,  over  floe-ice
much  cracked  by  tide-pressure,  we  crossed  a  small  bay
cutting  wedge-like  into  the  glacier  and  camped  on  its  far
side.

"  After  our  midday  meal  we  walked  to  the  berg  three
miles  away.  V^Hien  seen  on  June  28,  this  berg  was  tilted
to  the  north-east,  but  the  opposite  end,  apparently  in
contact  with  the  ice-cliffs,  had  lifted  higher  than  the  glacier-
shelf  itself.  From  a  distance  it  could  be  seen  that  the
sides,  for  half  their  height,  were  wave-worn  and  smooth.
Three  or  four  acres  of  environing  floe  were  buckled,  ploughed
up  and  in  places  heaped  twenty  feet  high,  while  several
large  fragments  of  the  broken  floe  were  poised  aloft  on  the
old  '  water-line  '  of  the  berg.

"  However,  on  this  visit,  we  found  that  the  berg  had
turned  completely  over  towards  the  cliffs  and  was  now
floating  on  its  side  surrounded  by  large  separate  chunks  ;
all  locked  fast  in  the  floe.  In  what  had  been  the  bottom
of  the  berg  Hoadley  and  Watson  made  an  interesting  find
of  stones  and  pebbles — the  first  found  in  this  dead  land !

"  Leaving  them  collecting,  I  climbed  the  pitted  wave-
worn  ice,  brittle  and  badly  cracked  on  the  higher  part.  The
highest  point  was  fifty  feet  above  the  level  of  the  top  of
the  shelf -ice.  There  was  no  sign  of  open  water  to  the  north,
but  a  few  seals  were  observed  sleeping  under  the  cliffs."
76


WINTER  AND  SPRING

Next  morning  the  weather  thickened  and  the  wind  arose,
so  a  start  was  made  for  the  Base.  All  that  day  the  party-
groped  along  in  the  comparative  shelter  of  the  cliff-face
until  forced  to  camp.  It  was  not  till  the  next  afternoon
in  moderate  drift  that  a  pair  of  skis  which  had  been  left
at  the  foot  of  "  The  Steps "  were  located  and  the  hut
reached  once  again.

After  lunch  on  August  14,  while  we  were  excavating
some  buried  kerosene,  Jones  sighted  a  group  of  seven
Emperor  penguins  two  miles  away  over  the  western  floe.
Taking  a  sledge  and  camera  we  made  after  them.  A  mile
off,  they  saw  us  and  advanced  with  their  usual  stately
bows.  It  seemed  an  a^vful  shame  to  kill  them,  but  we
were  sorely  in  need  of  fresh  meat.  The  four  we  secured
averaged  seventy  pounds  in  weight  and  were  a  heavy
load  up  the  steep  rise  to  the  glacier  ;  but  our  reward  came
at  dinner-time.

With  several  fine  days  to  give  us  confidence,  everything
was  made  ready  for  the  sledge  journey  on  August  20.  The
party  was  to  consist  of  six  men  and  three  dogs,  the  object
of  the  journey  being  to  lay  out  a  food- depot  to  the  east  in
view  of  the  long  summer  journey  we  were  to  make  in  that
direction.  Hoadley  and  Kennedy  were  to  remain  at  the
Base,  the  former  to  finish  the  geological  shaft  and  the  latter
for  magnetic  work.  There  remained  also  a  good  deal  to
do  preparing  stores  for  later  sledge  journeys.

The  load  was  to  be  one  thousand  four  hundred  and  forty
pounds  distributed  over  three  sledges  ;  two  hundred  pounds
heavier  than  on  the  March  journey,  but  as  the  dogs  pulled
one  sledge,  the  actual  weight  per  man  was  less.

The  rations  were  almost  precisely  the  same  as  those  used  by
Shackleton  during  his  Expedition,  and  the  daily  allowance
was  exactly  the  same — thirty -four  ounces  per  man  per  day.
For  his  one  ounce  of  oatmeal,  the  same  weight  of  ground  biscuit
was  substituted  ;  the  food  value  being  the  same.  On  the
second  depot  journey  and  the  main  summer  journeys,  a

77


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

three-ounce  glaxo  biscuit  was  used  in  place  of  four  and  a
half  ounces  of  plasmon  biscuit.  Instead  of  taking  cheese
and  chocolate  as  the  luncheon  ration,  I  took  chocolate
alone,  as  on  Shackleton's  southern  journey  it  was  found
more  satisfactory  than  the  cheese,  though  the  food  value
was  practically  the  same.

The  sledging  equipment  and  clothing  were  identical
with  that  used  by  Shackleton.  Jaeger  fleece  combination
suits  were  included  in  the  outfit  but,  though  excellent
garments  for  work  at  the  Base,  they  were  much  too  heavy  for
sledging.  We  therefore  wore  Jaeger  underclothing  and
burberry  wind  clothing  as  overalls.

The  weather  was  not  propitious  for  a  start  until  Thurs-
day, August  22.  We  turned  out  at  5.30  a.m.,  had  breakfast,
packed  up  and  left  the  Hut  at  seven  o'clock.

After  two  good  days'  work  under  a  magnificently  clear
sky,  with  the  temperature  often  as  low  as  —  34°  F.,  we
sighted  two  small  nunataks  among  a  cluster  of  pressure-
ridges,  eight  miles  to  the  south.  It  was  the  first  land,  in
the  sense  of  rocks,  seen  for  more  than  seven  months.  We
hoped  to  visit  the  outcrops — Gillies  Nunataks — on  our
return.

The  course  next  day  was  due  east  and  parallel  to  the
mainland,  then  ten  miles  distant.  To  the  north  was  Masson
Island,  while  at  about  the  same  distance  and  ahead  was
a  smaller  island,  entirely  ice-covered  like  the  former —
Henderson  Island.

A  blizzard  of  three  days'  duration  kept  us  in  camp
between  August  27  and  30.  Jones,  Moyes  and  I  had  a
three-man  sleeping-bag,  and  the  temperature  being  high,  11°
to  15°  F.,  we  were  very  warm,  but  thoroughly  tired  of  lying
down  for  so  long.  Harrisson,  Dovers  and  Watson  had  single
bags  and  therefore  less  room  in  the  other  tent.

The  last  day  of  August  was  beautifully  bright :  tem-
perature —  12°  to  —15°  F.  We  passed  Henderson  Island
in  the  forenoon,  and,  hauling  up  a  rise  to  the  south  of  it,
had  a  good  view  of  the  surroundings.  On  the  right,  the
78


WINTER  AND  SPRING

land  ran  back  to  form  a  large  bay,  seventeen  miles  wide.
This  was  later  named  the  Bay  of  Winds,  as  a  "  blow  "  was
always  encountered  while  crossing  it.

In  the  centre  of  the  bay  was  a  nunatak,  which  from  its
shape  at  once  received  the  name  of  the  Alligator.  In  front,
apparently  fifteen  miles  off,  was  another  nunatak,  the
Hippo,  and  four  definite  outcrops — Delay  Point  and
Avalanche  Rocks — could  be  seen  along  the  mainland.
The  sight  of  this  bare  rock  was  very  pleasing,  as  we  had
begun  to  think  we  were  going  to  find  nothing  but  ice-
sheathed  land.  Do  vers  took  a  round  of  angles  to  all  the
prominent  points.

The  Hippo  was  twenty-two  miles  away,  so  deceptive  is
distance  in  these  latitudes  ;  and  in  one  and  a  half  days,
over  very  heavy  sastrugi,  we  were  in  its  vicinity.  The
sledges  could  not  be  brought  very  near  the  rock  as  it  was
surrounded  by  massive  ridges  of  pressure-ice.

We  climbed  to  the  top  of  the  nunatak  which  was  four
hundred  and  twenty  feet  high,  four  hundred  yards  long
and  two  hundred  yards  wide.  It  was  composed  of  gneissic
granite  and  schists.  Do  vers  took  angles  from  an  eminence,
Watson  collected  geological  specimens  and  Harrisson
sketched  until  his  fingers  were  frost-bitten.  Moss  and
lichens  were  found  and  a  dead  snow  petrel— a  young  one —
showing  that  the  birds  must  breed  in  the  vicinity.

To  the  south,  the  glacier  shelf  appeared  to  be  very  little
broken,  but  to  the  north  it  was  terribly  torn  and  twisted.
At  each  end  of  the  nunatak  there  was  a  very  fine  bergschrund.*
Twenty  miles  to  the  east  there  appeared  to  be  an  uncovered
rocky  islet ;  the  mainland  turning  to  the  southward  twelve
miles  away.  During  the  night  the  minimum  thermometer
registered  —47°  F.

An  attempt  to  get  away  next  morning  was  frustrated
by  a  strong  gale.  We  were  two  hundred  yards  from  the
shelter  of  the  Hippo  and  were  forced  to  turn  back,  since  it  was

*  The  term  not  used  in  the  usual  sense.     Referring  to  a  wide,  imposing
crevasse  caused  by  the  division  of  the  ice  as  it  presses  past  the  nunatak. — Ed.

79


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

difficult  to  keep  one's  feet,  while  the  sledges  were  blown  side-
ways over  the  neve  surface.

I  resolved  to  leave  the  depot  in  this  place  and  return  to
the  Base,  for  our  sleeping-bags  were  getting  very  wet  and
none  of  the  party  were  having  sufficient  sleep.  We  were
eighty -four  miles  from  the  hut ;  I  had  hoped  to  do  one
hundred  miles,  but  we  could  make  up  for  that  by  starting
the  summer  journey  a  few  days  earlier.  One  sledge  was
left  here  as  well  as  six  weeks'  allowance  of  food  for  three
men,  except  tea,  of  which  there  was  sufficient  for  fifty  days,
seventy  days'  oil  and  seventy-eight  days'  biscuit.  The
sledge  was  placed  on  end  in  a  hole  three  feet  deep  and  a
mound  built  around  it,  six  feet  high  ;  a  bamboo  and  flag
being  lashed  to  the  top.

On  September  4  we  were  homeward  bound,  heading
first  to  the  mainland,  leaving  Delay  Point  on  our  left,  to
examine  some  of  the  outcrops  of  rock.  Reaching  the  coast
about  3  P.M.,  camp  was  shortly  afterwards  pitched  in  a  most
beautiful  spot.  A  wall  of  solid  rock  rose  sheer  for  over
four  hundred  feet  and  was  crowned  by  an  ice-cap  half  the
thickness.     Grand  ice-falls  surged  down  on  either  side.

The  tents  were  erected  in  what  appeared  to  be  a  sheltered
hollow,  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  Avalanche  Rocks.  One
tent^was  up  and  we  were  setting  the  other  in  position  when
the  wind,  which  was  blowing  fresh  from  the  west,  suddenly
veered  right  round  to  the  east  and  flattened  out  both  tents.
It  was  almost  as  humorous  as  annoying.  They  were  soon
raised  once  more,  facing  the  other  way.

While  preparing  for  bed,  a  tremendous  avalanche  came
do^vn.  The  noise  was  awful  and  seemed  so  close  that  we
all  turned  to  the  door  and  started  out.  The  fastening  of
the  entrance  was  knotted,  the  people  from  the  other  tent
were  yelling  to  us  to  come  out,  so  we  dragged  up  the  bottom
of  the  tent  and  dived  beneath  it.

The  cliff  was  entirely  hidden  by  a  cloud  of  snow,  and,
though  the  crashing  had  now  almost  ceased,  we  stood  ready  to
run,  Dovers  thoughtfully  seizing  a  food-bag.  However,  none  of
80


WINTER  AND  SPRING

the  blocks  had  come  within  a  hundred  yards  of  us,  and  as  it
was  now  blowing  hardball  hands  elected  to  remain  where
they  were.

Several  more  avalanches,  which  had  broken  away  near
the  edge  of  the  mainland,  disturbed  our  sleep  through  the
night,  but  they  were  not  quite  so  alarming  as  the  first
one.  A  strong  breeze  was  blowing  at  daybreak;  still  the
weather  was  not  too  bad  for  travelling,  and  so  I  called  the
party.  Moyes  and  I  lashed  up  our  bags,  passed  them  out
and  strapped  them  on  the  sledge  ;  Jones,  in  the  meantime,
starting  the  cooker.  Suddenly  a  terrific  squall  struck  the
front  of  our  tent,  the  poles  burst  through  the  apex,  and  the
material  split  from  top  to  bottom.

Moyes  and  I  were  both  knocked  down.  When  we  found
our  feet  again,  we  went  to  the  aid  of  the  other  men,  whose
tent  had  survived  the  gust.  The  wind  rushed  by  more
madly  than  ever,  and  the  only  thing  to  do  was  to  pull  away
the  poles  and  allow  the  tent  to  collapse.

Looking  round  for  a  lee  where  it  could  be  raised,  we
found  the  only  available  shelter  to  be  a  crevasse  three
hundred  yards  to  windward,  but  the  wind  was  now  so
strong  that  it  was  impossible  to  convey  the  gear  even  to
such  a  short  distance.  All  were  frequently  upset  and
blown  along  the  surface  twenty  or  thirty  yards,  and,  even
with  an  ice-axe,  one  could  not  always  hold  his  own.  The
only  resort  was  to  dig  a  shelter.

Setting  to  work,  we  excavated  a  hole  three  feet  deep,
twelve  feet  long  and  six  feet  wide  ;  the  snow  being  so
compact  that  the  job  occupied  three  hours.  The  sledges
and  tent-poles  were  placed  across  the  hole,  the  good  tent
being  laid  on  top  and  weighted  down  with  snow  and  blocks
of  ice.  All  this  sounds  very  easy,  but  it  was  a  slow  and
dijfificult  task.  Many  of  the  gusts  must  have  exceeded  one
hundred  miles  per  hour,  since  one  of  them  lifted  Harrisson
who  was  standing  beside  me,  clean  over  my  head  and  threw
him  nearly  twenty  feet.  Everything  movable  was  stowed
in  the  hole,  and  at  noon  we  had  a  meal  and  retired  into

VOL.  II  F  81


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

sleeping-bags.  At  three  o'clock  a  weighty  avalanche  de^
scended,  its  fearful  crash  resounding  above  the  roar  of  the
wind.  I  have  never  found  anything  which  gave  me  a  more
uncomfortable  feeling  than  those  avalanches.

The  gale  continued  on  September  6,  and  we  still  remained
packed  in  the  trench.  If  the  latter  had  been  deeper  and
it  had  been  possible  to  sit  upright,  we  should  have  been  quite
comfortable.  To  make  matters  worse,  several  more  avalanches
came  down,  and  all  of  them  sounded  horribly  close.

We  were  confined  in  our  burrow  for  five  days,  the  wind
continuing  to  blow  with  merciless  force.  Through  being
closed  up  so  much,  the  temperature  of  the  hole  rose  above
freezing-point,  consequently  our  sleeping-bags  and  clothes
became  very  wet.

On  Sunday  September  8,  Moyes  went  out  to  feed  the
dogs  and  to  bring  in  some  biscuit.  He  found  a  strong
gusty  wind  with  falling  snow,  and  drift  so  thick  that  he
could  not  see  five  yards.  We  had  a  cold  lunch  with  nothing
to  drink,  so  that  the  primus  should  not  raise  the  tempera-
ture. In  the  evening  we  sang  hymns  and  between  us
managed  to  remember  the  words  of  at  least  a  dozen.

The  long  confinement  was  over  on  the  10th  ;  the  sky
was  blue  and  the  sun  brilliant,  though  the  wind  still  pulsated
with  racking  gusts.  As  soon  as  we  were  on  the  ice,  away
from  the  land,  two  men  had  to  hold  on  to  the  rear  of  each
sledge,  and  even  then  capsizes  often  occurred.  The  sledge
would  turn  and  slide  broadside-on  to  leeward,  tearing  the
runners  badly  on  the  rough  ice.  Still,  by  9.30  a.m.  the
surface  changed  to  snow  and  the  travelling  improved.
That  night  we  camped  with  twenty  miles  one  hundred
yards  on  the  meter.

There  was  a  cold  blizzard  on  the  11th  with  a  tempera-
ture of  —  30°  F.  Confined  in  the  tents,  we  found  our
sleeping-bags  still  sodden  and  uncomfortable.

With  a  strong  beam  wind  and  in  moderate  drift  big
marches  were  made  for  two  days,  during  which  the  compass
and  sastrugi  determined  our  course.
82


o


^    5


o  ;:r


WINTER  AND  SPRING

My  diary  of  September  14  runs  as  follows  :
"  On  the  march  at  7  a.m.  ;  by  noon  we  had  done  twelve
miles  one  thousand  five  hundred  yards.  Lunch  was  hurried,
as  we  were  all  anxious  to  get  to  the  hut  to-night,  especially
we  in  the  three-man  bag,  as  it  got  so  wet  while  we  were
living  underground  that  we  have  had  very  little  sleep  and
plenty  of  shivering  for  the  last  four  nights.  Last  night  I
had  no  sleep  at  all.  By  some  means,  in  the  afternoon,  we
got  on  the  wrong  course.  Either  the  compass  was  affected
or  a  mistake  had  been  made  in  some  of  the  bearings,  as
instead  of  reaching  home  by  5  p.m.  we  were  travelling  till
8  P.M.  and  have  done  thirty-two  miles  one  thousand  one
hundred  yards.  Light  loads,  good  surface  and  a  fair  wind
account  for  the  good  travelling,  the  sail  doing  almost  all
the  work  on  the  man-hauled  sledge.

"  The  last  two  hours  we  were  in  the  dark,  except  for
a  young  moon,  amongst  a  lot  of  crevasses  and  pressure-
ridges  which  none  of  us  could  recognize.  At  one  time,  we
found  ourselves  on  a  slope  within  a  dozen  yards  of  the  edge
of  the  glacier ;  this  decided  me  to  camp.  Awfully  dis-
appointing ;  anticipating  another  wretched  night.  Tempera-
ture-35°  F."

Next  day  we  reached  home.  The  last  camp  had  been
four  and  a  half  miles  north  of  the  hut.  I  found  that  we
had  gone  wrong  through  using  149°  as  the  bearing  of  Masson
Island  from  the  Base,  when  it  should  have  been  139°.  I
believe  it  was  my  own  mistake,  as  I  gave  the  bearing  to
Dovers  and  he  is  very  careful.

Before  having  a  meal,  we  were  all  weighed  and  found  the
average  loss  to  be  eight  pounds.  In  the  evening,  Moyes
and  I  weighed  ourselves  again ;  he  had  gained  seven  pounds
and  I  five  and  three-quarter  pounds.

Comparing  notes  with  Hoadley  and  Kennedy,  I  found
that  the  weather  at  the  Base  had  been  similar  to  that
experienced  on  the  sledging  journey.

It  was  now  arranged  that  Jones  was  to  take  charge  of  the
main  western  journey  in  the  summer.     While  looking  for  a

83


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

landing-place  in  the  Aurora,  we  had  noted  to  the  west  an
expanse  of  old,  fast  floe,  extending  for  at  least  fifty  miles.
The  idea  was  for  Jones  and  party  to  march  along  this  floe
and  lay  a  depot  on  the  land  as  far  west  as  was  possible  in
four  weeks.  The  party  included  Dovers,  Harrisson,
Hoadley  and  Moyes.  They  were  to  be  assisted  by  the
dogs.

It  was  my  intention  to  take  Kennedy  and  Watson  up  to
the  depot  we  had  left  on  the  hills  in  March,  bringing  back
the  minimum  thermometer  and  probably  some  of  the  food.
Watson  was  slightly  lame  at  the  time,  as  he  had  bruised  his
foot  on  the  last  trip.

Until  Jones  made  a  start  on  September  26,  there  were
ten  days  of  almost  continuous  wind  and  drift.  The  equinox
may  have  accounted  for  this  prolonged  period  of  atrocious
weather.  No  time,  however,  was  wasted  indoors.  Weigh-
ing and  bagging  food,  repairing  tents,  poles,  cookers  and
other  gear  damaged  on  the  last  journey  and  sewing  and
mending  clothes  gave  every  man  plenty  of  employment.

At  6  A.M.  on  the  26th,  Jones  reported  that  there  was
only  a  little  low  drift  and  that  the  wind  was  dying  away.
All  hands  were  therefore  called  and  breakfast  served.

Watson,  Kennedy  and  I  assisted  the  others  down  to  the
sea-ice  by  a  long  sloping  snow-drift  and  saw  them  off  to  a
good  start  in  a  south-westerly  direction.  We  found  that  the
heavy  sledge  used  for  carrying  ice  had  been  blown  more
then  five  hundred  yards  to  the  edge  of  the  glacier,  capsized
among  the  rough  pressure-slabs  and  broken.  Two  heavy
boxes  which  were  on  the  sledge  had  disappeared  altogether.

The  rest  of  the  day  was  devoted  to  clearing  stores  out
of  the  tunnels.  It  was  evident  to  us  that  with  the  advent
of  warmer  weather,  the  roof  of  the  caves  or  grottoes  (by
the  way,  the  hut  received  the  name  of  "  The  Grottoes  ")  would
sink,  and  so  it  was  advisable  to  repack  the  cases  outside
rather  than  dig  them  out  of  the  deep  snow.  By  6  p.m.
nearly  two  hundred  boxes  were  passed  up  through  the
trap-door  and  the  caverns  were  all  empty.
84)


WINTER  AND  SPRING

After  two  days  of  blizzard,  Watson,  Kennedy  and  I
broke  trail  with  loads  of  one  hundred  and  seventy  pounds
per  man.  Right  from  the  start  the  surface  was  so  soft
that  pulling  became  very  severe.  On  the  first  day,  Sep-
tember 29,  we  managed  to  travel  more  than  nine  miles,  but
during  the  next  six  days  the  snow  became  deeper  and  more
impassable,  and  only  nineteen  miles  were  covered.  Cre-
vasses were  mostly  invisible,  and  on  the  slope  upwards  to
the  ice-cap  more  troublesome  than  usual.  The  weather
kept  up  its  invariable  wind  and  drift.  Finally,  after  making
laborious  headway  to  two  thousand  feet,  Kennedy  strained
his  Achilles  tendon  and  I  decided  to  return  to  "  The  Grottoes."

At  2  P.M.  on  October  8,  the  mast  was  sighted  and  we
climbed  down  into  the  Hut,  finding  it  very  cold,  empty  and
dark.  The  sun  had  shone  powerfully  that  day  and  Kennedy
and  Watson  had  a  touch  of  snow-blindness.

Two  weeks  went  by  and  there  was  no  sign  of  the  western
depot  party.  In  fact,  out  of  sixteen  days,  there  were
thirteen  of  thick  drift  and  high  wind,  so  that  our  sympathies
went  out  to  the  men  in  tents  with  soaking  bags,  waiting
patiently  for  a  rift  in  the  driving  wall  of  snow.  On  October
23  they  had  been  away  for  four  weeks  ;  provisions  for
that  time  having  been  taken.  I  had  no  doubt  that  they
would  be  on  reduced  rations,  and,  if  the  worst  came,  they
could  eat  the  dogs.

During  a  lull  on  October  24,  I  went  to  the  mast-
head with  the  field-glasses  but  saw  nothing  of  the  party.
On  that  day  we  weighed  out  provisions  and  made  ready
to  go  in  search  of  them.  It  was  my  intention  to  go
on  the  outward  track  for  a  week.  I  wrote  instructions  to
Jones  to  hoist  a  large  flag  on  the  mast,  and  to  burn
flares  each  night  at  10  p.m.  if  he  should  return  while  I  was
away.

There  was  a  fresh  gale  with  blinding  drift  early  on  the
following  morning  ;  so  we  postponed  the  start.  At  4  p.m.
the  wind  subsided  to  a  strong  breeze  and  I  again  went
up  the  mast  to  sweep  the  horizon.      Westward  from  an

85


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

icy  cape  to  the  south  a  gale  was  still  blowing  and  a  heavy
cloud  of  drift,  fifty  to  sixty  feet  high,  obscured  every-
thing.

An  hour  later  Watson  saw  three  Adelie  pengviins
approaching  across  the  floe  and  we  went,  down  to  meet
them,  bringing  them  in  for  the  larder.  Four  Antarctic
petrels  flew  above  our  heads  :  a  sign  of  returning  summer
which  was  very  cheering.

The  previous  night  had  promised  a  fine  day  and  we  were
not  disappointed  on  October  26.  A  sledge  was  packed  with
fourteen  days'  provisions  for  eight  men  and  we  started
away  on  a  search  expedition  at  10  a.m.

After  doing  a  little  over  nine  miles  we  camped  at  5.30  p.m.
Before  retiring  to  bag,  I  had  a  last  look  round  and  was
delighted  to  see  Jones  and  his  party  about  a  mile  to  the
south.  It  was  now  getting  dark  and  we  were  within  two
hundred  yards  of  them  before  being  seen,  and,  as  they  were
to  windward,  they  could  not  hear  our  shouts.  It  was
splendid  to  find  them  all  looking  well.  They  were  anxious
to  get  back  to  "  The  Grottoes,"  considering  there  was  only  one
serviceable  tent  between  them.  Kennedy  and  I  offered  to
change  with  any  of  them  but,  being  too  eager  for  warm
blankets  and  a  good  bed,  they  trudged  on,  arriving  at  the
Base  at  midnight.

Briefly  told,  their  story  was  that  they  were  stopped  in
their  westerly  march, when  forty-five  miles  had  been  covered,
by  a  badly  broken  glacier — Helen  Glacier — on  the  far  side
of  which  there  was  open  sea.  There  was  only  one  thing  to
do  and  that  was  to  set  out  for  the  mainland  by  a  course  so
circuitous  that  they  were  brousrht  a  long  way  eastward,
back  towards  "  The  Grottoes."  They  had  very  rousfh  travell-
ing, bad  weather,  and  were  beset  with  many  difficulties  in
moimting  on  to  the  land-ice,  where  the  depot  had  to  be
placed.  Their  distance  from  the  Base  at  this  point  was  only
twenty-eight  miles  and  the  altitude  was  one  thousand  feet
above  sea-level.  On  the  ice-cap  they  were  delayed  by  a
blizzard  and  for  seventeen  days — an  unexampled  time — ^they
86


:d     *


WINTER  AND  SPRING

were  unable  to  move  from  camp.  One  tent  collapsed  and
the  occupants,  Jones,  Dovers  and  Hoadley,  had  to  dig  a
hole  in  the  snow  and  lower  the  tent  into  it.

These  are  a  few  snatches  from  Jones's  diary  :

"  The  next  sixteen  days  (following  Wednesday, October  9)
were  spent  at  this  camp.  .  .  .  Harrisson  and  Moyes
occupied  one  tent  and  Dovers,  Hoadley  and  myself  the
other.

"  On  Saturday,  the  third  day  of  the  blizzard,  the  wind
which  had  been  blowing  steadily  from  the  east-south-east
veered  almost  to  east  and  the  tents  commenced  to  flog
terrifically.  This  change  must  have  occurred  early  in  the
night,  for  we  awoke  at  5  a.m.  to  find  clouds  of  snow  blowing
under  the  skirt  on  one  side  :  the  heavy  pile  on  the  flounce
having  been  cut  away  by  the  wind.  As  it  would
have  been  impossible  to  do  anything  outside,  we  pulled
the  tent  poles  together  and  allowed  the  tent  to  collapse.
The  rest  of  the  day  was  spent  in  confined  quarters,  eating
dry  rations  and  melting  snow  in  our  mugs  by  the  warmth
of  our  bodies.  .  .  .  Although  Harrisson  and  Moyes  were  no
more  than  twenty  feet  from  us,  the  noise  of  the  gale  and
the  flogging  of  our  tents  rendered  communication  im-
possible.

"  The  terrible  flapping  at  last  caused  one  of  the  seams
of  our  tent  to  tear ;  we  sewed  it  as  well  as  we  were  able
and  hoped  that  it  would  hold  till  daylight.

"  On  Monday  morning,  the  same  seam  again  parted
and  we  decided  to  let  the  tent  down  again,  spending  the
day  in  a  half-reclining  position.  .  .  .

"  At  6.30  P.M.  the  gale  eased  and,  during  a  compara-
tive lull,  Moyes  came  out  to  feed  the  dogs.  Noticing  our
position,  he  helped  us  to  re-erect  the  tent  and  Dovers
then  went  out  and  piled  snow  over  the  torn  seam.
Moyes  said  that  Harrisson  and  he  had  been  fairly  com-
fortable, although  the  cap  of  their  tent  was  slowly  tearing
with  the  pressure  of  the  wind  and  snow  on  the  weather
panels.  .   .  .

87


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

"  On  Friday,  the  18th,  Swiss,  one  of  the  dogs,  returned
very  thin  after  six  days'  absence  from  the  camp.

"  On  the  following  Monday  the  blizzard  moderated
somewhat  and  we  proceeded  to  make  om'  quarters  more
roomy  by  digging  out  the  floor  and  undercutting  the  sides  ;
thus  lowering  the  level  about  eighteen  inches.

"  Our  tent  now  looks  as  if  it  were  half  blown  over.  To
relieve  the  tremendous  strain  on  the  cap,  we  lowered  the
feet  of  the  two  lee  poles  on  to  the  new  floor.  The  tent
now  offered  very  little  resistance  to  the  wind.  We  were
able  to  communicate  with  Harrisson  and  Moyes  and  they
said  they  were  all  right."

When  the  snow  and  wind  at  last  held  up,  they  im-
mediately made  down  to  the  sea-ice  and  back  towards
home,  and,  when  they  met  us,  had  done  nineteen  miles.
All  were  stiff  next  day,  and  no  wonder  ;  a  march  of  twenty-
eight  miles  after  lying  low  for  seventeen  days  is  a  very
strenuous  day's  work.

Preparations  were  made  on  October  28  for  the  main
eastern  summer  journey,  the  object  of  which  was  to  survey
as  much  coast-line  as  possible  and  at  the  same  time  to  carry
on  geological  work,  surveying  and  magnetics.  The  party
was  to  consist  of  Kennedy,  Watson  and  myself.

Jones,  Dovers  and  Hoadley  were  to  start  on  the  main
western  journey  on  November  2.  I  arranged  that  Harrisson
and  Moyes  should  remain  at  the  Hut,  the  latter  to  carry  on
meteorological  work,  and  Harrisson  biology  and  sketching.
Later,  Harrisson  proposed  to  accompany  me  as  far  as  the
Hippo  depot,  bringing  the  dogs  and  providing  a  supporting
party.  At  first  I  did  not  like  the  idea,  as  he  would
have  to  travel  one  hundred  miles  alone,  but  he  showed
me  that  he  could  erect  a  tent  by  himself  and,  as  summer
and  better  weather  were  in  sight,  I  agreed  that  he  should
come.

Each  party  was  taking  fourteen  weeks'  provisions,  and
88


WINTER  AND  SPRING

I  had  an  additional  four  weeks'  supply  for  Harrisson  and
the  dogs.  My  total  load  came  to  nine  hundred  and  seventy
pounds;  the  dogs  pulling  four  hundred  pounds  with  the
assistance  of  one  man  and  three  of  us  dragging  five  hundred
and  seventy  pounds.


89


CHAPTER  XXI

THE  WESTERN  BASE— BLOCKED  ON  THE
SHELF-ICE

By  F.  wild

WE  started  away  on  the  main  eastern  journey  with  a
spurt    of    eleven  miles  on  a  calm  and  cloudless
day,  intending  to  follow  our  former   track   over
the  shelf -ice  to  the  Hippo  Nunatak.     The  surface  varied ;
soft  patches  putting  a  steady  brake  on  the  ardour  of  the
first,  fresh  hours  of  marching.

In  the  afternoon,  it  was  only  necessary  to  wear  a  shirt,
singlet,  heavy  pyjama  trousers,  finnesko  and  socks,  and  even
then  one  perspired  freely.  The  temperature  stood  at  17°  F.
The  dogs  pulled  their  load  well,  requiring  help  only  over
loose  snow.

The  evening  of  Friday  November  1,  1912,  saw  us  past
Masson  Island  and  about  ten  miles  from  the  mainland.  All
day  there  had  been  a  chill  easterly  breeze,  the  temperature
being  well  below  zero.  The  sky  was  hazy  with  cirro-stratus
and  a  fine  halo  "  ringed  "  the  sun.

Looking  out  from  the  tent  in  the  morning  we  saw  that
the  clouds  were  dense  and  lowering,  but  the  breezes  were
light  and  variable  until  5  p.m.,  when  an  east-north-east  wind
arose,  bringing  snow  in  its  train.  Travelling  through  foggy
drift,  we  could  just  ascertain  that  the  Bay  of  Winds  had
opened  up  on  the  right.  The  day's  march  was  a  good  one
of  sixteen  miles  thirty-five  yards.

The  Bay  of  Winds  did  not  belie  its  name.     Throughout
November  3  the  wind  veered  about  in  gusts  and  after  lunch
settled  down  to  a  hard  south-easter.
90


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

We  had  made  a  good  start ;  more  than  sixty-two  miles
in  a  Httle  over  four  days.  The  camp  was  half-way  across
the  Bay  of  Winds,  with  the  Alligator  Nunatak  six  miles  off
on  the  "  starboard  bow  "  and  the  Rock  of  the  Avalanches
seventeen  miles  straight  ahead.  Passing  glimpses  were
caught  of  the  Hippo  twenty-four  miles  distant.

On  November  5,  after  a  day's  blizzard,  there  was  much
accumulated  snow  to  shovel  away  from  tents  and  sledges.
Finding  the  hauling  very  arduous,  we  headed  in  for  the
land  to  find  a  better  surface,  passing  the  Alligator  Nunatak
close  on  its  southern  side.

At  noon  on  the  6th,  the  sledges  were  running  parallel
to  the  Rock  of  the  Avalanches,  three  miles  away,  and  soon
afterwards  we  came  to  a  large  boulder  ;  one  of  four  in  a
line  from  the  rock-cliffs,  from  which  they  had  been  evidently
transported,  as  they  were  composed  of  the  same  gneiss.

The  Hippo  was  close  at  hand  at  four  o'clock  and,  on
nearing  the  shattered  ice  about  the  depot,  we  released  the
dogs  and  pulled  the  sledge  ourselves.  On  being  freed,  they
galloped  over  to  the  rock  and  were  absent  for  over  an  hour.
When  they  returned,  Amundsen's  head  was  daubed  with
egg-yolk,  as  we  thought.  This  was  most  probable  as  scores  of
snow  petrels  were  flying  about  the  rocks.

A  nasty  shock  was  awaiting  us  at  the  depot.  The
sledge,  which  had  been  left  on  end,  two  feet  buried  in  hard
snow  and  with  a  mound  six  feet  high  built  round  it,  had
been  blown  completely  away.  The  stays,  secured  to  food-
bags,  were  both  broken  ;  one  food-bag  weighing  sixty-eight
pounds  having  been  lifted  ten  feet.  This  was  a  very  serious
loss  as  the  total  load  to  be  carried  now  amounted  to  one
thousand  one  hundred  and  eighty  pounds,  which  was  too
great  a  weight  to  be  supported  by  one  sledge.

It  appeared,  then,  that  the  only  thing  to  do  was  to
include  Harrisson  in  the  party,  so  that  we  could  have  his
sledge.  This  would  facilitate  our  progress  considerably,  but
against  that  was  the  fact  that  Moyes  would  be  left  alone
at  the  Base  under  the  belief  that  Harrisson  had  perished.

91


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

A  gale  was  blowing  on  the  7th,  but  as  we  were  partly
under  the  lee  of  the  Hippo,  it  was  only  felt  in  gusts.  A
visit  was  made  to  the  Nunatak  ;  Harrisson  to  examine
the  birds,  Watson  for  geology  and  photography,  while  I
climbed  to  the  summit  with  the  field-glasses  to  look  for
the  missing  sledge.  Kennedy  remained  at  the  camp  to
take  a  series  of  magnetic  observations.

There  were  hundreds  of  snow  petrels  pairing  off,  but  no
eggs  were  seen  in  any  of  the  nest-crevices.  They  were  so
tame  that  it  was  quite  easy  to  catch  them,  but  they  had  a
habit  of  ejecting  their  partially  digested  food,  a  yellow
oily  mess,  straight  at  one.  This  was  the  stuff  we  had
thought  was  egg-yolk  on  Amundsen's  head  the  previous
night.

Upon  returning  to  camp,  the  search  for  the  sledge  was
continued.  After  prospecting  with  a  spade  in  possible  snow-
drifts and  crevasse-lids,  we  walked  out  fanwise,  in  the
direction  of  the  prevailing  wind,  but  with  no  result.  I
decided,  therefore,  to  take  Harrisson  with  me.  I  was
extremely  sorry  for  Moyes,  but  it  could  not  be  helped.

On  the  way  back  towards  the  land  to  the  south,  we
found  that  the  surface  had  improved  in  the  morning's  gale.
Camp  was  finally  pitched  on  a  slope  close  to  the  high  land.

The  coast,  from  the  Base  to  this  spot — Delay  Point —
runs  almost  due  east  and  west  and  with  no  deep  indentations
except  the  Bay  of  Winds.  To  the  west,  the  slope  from  the
inland  plateau  is  fairly  gradual  and  therefore  not  badly
broken,  but  still  farther  west  it  is  much  steeper,  coming
down  from  two  thousand  feet  in  a  very  short  distance,  over
tumbling  ice-fields  and  frozen  cascades.  Several  outcrops
of  dark  rock  lay  to  the  east,  one  of  them  only  two  miles
away.

The  wind-velocity  fluctuated  between  sixty  and  eighty
miles  per  hour,  keeping  us  securely  penned.  Harrisson  and
Kennedy,  after  battling  their  way  to  our  tent  for  a  meal,  used
the  second  primus  and  cooker,  brought  for  Harrisson,  in  their
own  tent.  All  we  could  do  was  to  smoke  and  listen  to  the
92


?   .1


5  -


ci-


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

fierce  squalls  and  lashing  drift.  I  had  brought  nothing  to
read  on  the  trip,  making  up  the  weight  in  tobacco.  Watson
had  Palgrave's  Golden  Lyrics,  Kennedy,  an  engineer's
hand-book,  and  Harrisson,  a  portion  of  the  Reign  of  Mary
Tudor.  There  was  a  tiny  pack  of  patience  cards,  but  they
were  in  the  instrument-box  on  the  sledge  and  none  of  us
cared  to  face  the  gale  to  get  them.

The  wind,  on  the  10th,  saw  fit  to  moderate  to  half  a  gale ;
the  drift  creeping  low  and  thick  over  the  ground  ;  the  land
visible  above  it.  Donning  burberrys,  we  made  an  excursion
to  the  rocks  ahead.  Two  miles  and  a  climb  of  six  hundred
feet  were  rather  exliausting  in  the  strong  wind.  There
were  about  eighty  acres  of  rock  exposed  on  the  edge  of
the  ice-cap,  mainly  composed  of  mica  schists  and  some
granite ;  the  whole  extensively  weathered.  A  line  of
moraine  ran  from  the  rocks  away  in  an  east-north-east
direction.

Most  of  the  next  day  was  broken  by  a  heavy  gale  and,
since  the  prospect  ahead  was  nothing  but  bare,  rough  ice,
we  passed  the  day  in  making  everything  ready  for  a  start
and  repaired  a  torn  tent.  The  rent  was  made  by  Amundsen,
who  dragged  up  the  ice-axe  to  which  he  was  tethered
and,  in  running  round  the  tent,  drove  the  point  of
the  axe  through  it,  narrowly  missing  Kennedy's  head
inside.

Tuesday  November  12  was  an  interesting  day.  The
greater  part  of  the  track  was  over  rippled,  level  ice,  thrown
into  many  billows,  through  devious  pressure-hummocks  and
between  the  inevitable  crevasses.  The  coast  was  a  kaleido-
scope of  sable  rocks,  blue  cascades,  and  fissured  ice-falls.
Fifteen  miles  ahead  stood  an  island  twenty  miles  long,
rising  in  bare  peaks  and  dark  knolls.  This  was  eventually
named  David  Island.

The  dogs  were  working  very  well  and,  if  only  a  little
additional  food  could  be  procured  for  them,  I  knew  they
could  be  kept  alive.  Zip  broke  loose  one  night  and  ate  one
of  my  socks  which  was  hanging  on  the  sledge  to  dry  ;  it  prob-

9a


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

ably  tasted  of  seal  blubber  from  the  boots.  Switzerland,
too,  was  rather  a  bother,  eating  his  harness  whenever  he
had  a  chance.

On  the  14th,  a  depot  was  formed,  consisting  of  one  week's
provisions  and  oil ;  the  bags  being  buried  and  a  moimd
erected  with  a  flag  on  top.  Kennedy  took  a  round  of
angles  to  determine  its  position.

At  the  end  of  two  snowy  days,  after  we  had  avoided
many  ugly  crevasses,  our  course  in  an  east- south-east  line
pointed  to  a  narrow  strait  between  David  Island  and  the
mainland.  On  the  southern  side  of  the  former,  there  was
a  heaped  line  of  pressure-ice,  caused  by  the  flow  from  a
narrow  bay  being  stopped  by  the  Island.  After  lunch,  on
the  16th,  there  was  an  hour's  good  travelling  and  then  we
suddenly  pulled  into  a  half-mile  of  broken  surface — ^the
confluence  of  the  slowly  moving  land-ice  and  of  the  more
rapidly  moving  ice  from  a  valley  on  our  right,  from  which
issued  Reid  Glacier.  It  was  impossible  to  steer  the  dogs
through  it  with  a  load,  so  we  lightened  the  loads  on  both
sledges  and  then  made  several  journeys  backwards  and
forwards  over  the  more  broken  areas,  allowing  the  dogs  to
run  loose.  The  crevasses  ran  tortuously  in  every  direction
and  falls  into  them  were  not  uncommon.  One  large  lid  fell
in  just  as  a  sledge  had  cleared  it,  leaving  a  hole  twelve  feet
wide,  and  at  least  a  hundred  feet  deep.  Once  over  this
zone,  the  sledges  were  worked  along  the  slope  leading  to
the  mainland  where  we  were  continually  worried  by  their
slipping  sideways.

Ahead  was  a  vast  sea  of  crushed  ice,  tossed  and  piled
in  every  direction.  On  the  northern  horizon  rose  what
we  concluded  to  be  a  flat-topped,  castellated  berg.  Ten
days  later,  it  resolved  itself  into  a  tract  of  heavy  pressure
ridges.

Camping  after  nine  and  a  half  miles,  we  were  surprised,
on  moving  east  in  the  morning,  to  .sight  clearly  the  point —
Cape  Gerlache — of  a  peninsula  running  inland  to  the  south-
west. A  glacier  from  the  hinterland,  pushing  out  from  its
94


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

valley,  had  broken  up  the  shelf-ice  on  which  we  were
travelling  to  such  an  extent  that  nothing  without  wings
could  cross  it.  Our  object  was  to  map  in  the  coastline  as
far  east  as  possible,  and  the  problem,  now,  was  whether
to  go  north  or  south.  From  our  position  the  former
looked  the  best,  the  tumbled  shelf-ice  appearing  to  smooth
out  sufficiently,  about  ten  miles  away,  to  afford  a  pas-
sage east,  while,  to  the  south,  we  scanned  the  Denman
Glacier,  as  it  was  named,  rolling  in  magnificent  cascades,
twelve  miles  in  breadth,  from  a  height  of  more  than
tliree  thousand  feet.  To  get  round  the  head  of  this  ice-
stream  would  mean  travelling  inland  for  at  least  thirty
miles.

So  north  we  went,  getting  back  to  our  old  surface  over
a  heavy  "  cross  sea,"  honeycombed  with  pits  and  chasms  ;
many  of  them  with  no  visible  bottom.  There  was  half  a
mile  to  safety,  but  the  area  had  to  be  crossed  five  times  ;
the  load  on  the  twelve-foot  sledge  being  so  much,  that
half  the  weight  was  taken  off  and  the  empty  sledges  brought
back  for  the  other  half.  Last  of  all  came  the  dogs'  sledge.
Kennedy  remarked  during  the  afternoon  that  he  felt  like
a  fly  walking  on  wire-netting.

The  camp  was  pitched  in  a  line  of  pressure,  with  wide
crevasses  and  "  hell-holes  "  within  a  few  yards  on  every
side.  Altogether  the  day's  march  had  been  a  miserable
four  miles.  On  several  occasions,  during  the  night,
while  in  this  disturbed  area,  sounds  of  movement  were
distinctly  heard  ;  cracks  like  rifle  shots  and  others  similar
to  distant  heavy  guns,  accompanied  by  a  weird,  moaning
noise  as  of  the  glacier  moving  over  rocks.

November  18  was  a  fine,  bright  day :  temperature
8°  to  20°  F.  Until  lunch,  the  course  was  mainly  north
for  more  than  five  miles.  Then  I  went  with  Watson  to
trace  out  a  road  through  a  difficult  area  in  front.  At  this
point,  there  broke  on  us  a  most  rugged  and  wonderful
vision  of  ice-scenery.

The  Denman  Glacier  moving  much  more   rapidly  than

95


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  Shackleton  Shelf,  tore  through  the  latter  and,  in  doing
so,  shattered  both  its  own  sides  and  also  a  considerable
area  of  the  larger  ice-sheet.  At  the  actual  point  of  contact
was  what  might  be  referred  to  as  gigantic  bergschrund  :
an  enormous  chasm  over  one  thousand  feet  wide  and
from  three  hundred  feet  to  four  hundred  feet  deep,  in  the
bottom  of  which  crevasses  appeared  to  go  down  for  ever.
The  sides  were  splintered  and  crumpled,  glittering  in  the
sunlight  with  a  million  sparklets  of  light.  Towering
above  were  titanic  blocks  of  carven  ice.  The  whole
was  the  wildest,  maddest  and  yet  the  grandest  thing
imaginable.

The  turmoil  continued  to  the  north,  so  I  resolved  to
reconnoitre  westward  and  see  if  a  passage  were  visible  from
the  crest  of  David  Island.

The  excursion  was  postponed  till  next  day,  when  Kennedy,
Watson  and  I  roped  up  and  commenced  to  thread  a  tangled
belt  of  crevasses.  The  island  was  three  and  a  half  miles
from  the  camp,  exposing  a  bare  ridge  and  a  jutting  bluff,
nine  hundred  feet  high — Watson  Bluff.  At  the  Bluff  the
rock  was  almost  all  gneiss,  very  much  worn  by  the  action
of  ice.  The  face  to  the  summit  was  so  steep  and  coarsely
weathered  that  we  took  risks  in  climbing  it.  Moss  and
lichens  grew  luxuriantly  and  scores  of  snow  petrels  hovered
around,  but  no  eggs  were  seen.

Owing  to  an  overcast  sky,  the  view  was  not  a  great  deal
more  enlightening  than  that  which  we  had  had  from  below.
The  Denman  Glacier  swept  down  for  forty  miles  from  over
three  thousand  feet  above  sea-level.  For  twenty  miles  to
the  east  torn  ice-masses  lay  distorted  in  confusion,  and
beyond  that,  probably  sixty  miles  distant,  were  several
large  stretches  of  bare  rock-like  islands.

On  November  20,  a  strong  north-east  wind  blew,  with
falling  snow.  Nothing  could  be  seen  but  a  white  blanket,
above,  below  and  all  around  ;  so,  with  sudden  death  lurking
in  the  bottomless  crevasses  on  every  hand,  we  stayed  in
camp.
96


THE  GREAT  BERGSCHRUND  OF  THE  DENMAN
GLACIER

From  a  jminting  by  Harrisnon


J


'•^^"


■jiicr.


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

A  blizzard  of  great  violence  blew  for  two  days  and  the
tent  occupied  by  Kennedy  and  myself  threatened  to  collapse.
We  stowed  all  our  gear  in  the  sleeping-bags  or  in  a  hole  from
which  snow  had  been  dug  for  cooking.  By  the  second  day
we  had  become  extremely  tired  of  lying  down.  One  con-
solation was  that  our  lips,  which  were  very  sore  from
exposure  to  the  sun  and  wind,  had  now  a  chance  of  healing.

Next  afternoon,  the  gale  moderated  sufficiently  for  us  to
go  once  more  to  David  Island,  in  clearer  weather,  to  see  the
outlook  from  the  bluff.  This  time  the  sun  was  shining  on  the
mainland  and  on  the  extension  of  the  glacier  past  the  bluff
to  the  north.  The  distant  southern  slopes  were  seamed
with  a  pattern  of  crevasses  up  to  a  height  of  three  thousand
feet.  To  the  north,  although  the  way  was  certainly  im-
passable for  twelve  miles,  it  appeared  to  become  smoother
beyond  that  limit.  We  decided  to  try  and  cross  in  that
direction.

We  persevered  on  the  24th  over  many  lines  of  pressure-
ice  and  then  camped  near  an  especially  rough  patch.
Watson  had  the  worst  fall  on  that  day,  going  down  ten  feet
vertically  into  a  crevasse  before  his  harness  stopped  him.
After  supper,  we  went  to  locate  a  trail  ahead,  and  were
greatly  surprised  to  find  salt  water  in  some  of  the  cracks.
It  meant  that  in  two  days  our  descent  had  been  consider-
able, since  the  great  bergschrund  farther  south  was  well
over  three  hundred  feet  in  depth  and  no  water  had  appeared
in  its  depths.

A  few  extracts  from  the  diary  recall  a  situation  which
daily  became  more  serious  and  involved  :

"  Monday,  November  25.  A  beautiful  day  so  far  as  the
weather  and  scenery  are  concerned  but  a  very  hard  one.
We  have  been  amongst  '  Pressure,'  with  a  capital  P,  all  day,
hauling  up  and  lowering  the  sledges  with  an  alpine  rope
and  twisting  and  turning  in  all  directions,  with  waves  and
hills,  monuments,  statues,  and  fairy  palaces  all  around  us,
from  a  few  feet  to  over  three  hundred  feet  in  height.  It
is  impossible  to  see  more  than  a  few  hundred  yards  ahead

VOL.   TI  G  97


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

at  any  time,  so  we  go  on  for  a  bit,  then  climb  a  peak  or
mound,  choose  a  route  and  struggle  on  for  another  short
stage.  ...

"  We  have  all  suffered  from  the  sun  to-day  ;  Kennedy
has  caught  it  worst,  his  lips,  cheeks,  nose  and  forehead  are
all  blistered.  He  has  auburn  hair  and  the  tender  skin  which
frequently  goes  with  it.  .  .  .

"  Tuesday,  November  26.  Another  very  hard  day's
work.  The  first  half-mile  took  three  hours  to  cover  ;  in
several  places  we  had  to  cut  roads  with  ice-axes  and  shovels
and  also  to  build  a  bridge  across  a  water-lead.  At  1  p.m.
we  had  done  just  one  mile.  I  never  saw  or  dreamt  of  any-
thing so  gloriously  beautiful  as  some  of  the  stuff  we  have
come  through  this  morning.  After  lunch  the  country
changed  entirely.  In  place  of  the  confused  jumble  and
crush  we  have  had,  we  got  on  to  neve  slopes ;  huge  billows,
half  a  mile  to  a  mile  from  crest  to  crest,  meshed  with
crevasses.  .  .  .

"  We  all  had  falls  into  these  during  the  day  :  Harrisson
dropping  fifteen  feet.  I  received  rather  a  nasty  squeeze
through  falling  into  a  hole  whilst  going  downhill,  the  sledge
running  on  to  me  before  I  could  get  clear,  and  pinning  me
down.  So  far  as  we  can  see,  the  same  kind  of  country
continues,  and  one  cannot  help  thinking  about  having  to
return  through  this  infernal  mess.  The  day's  distance —
only  one  thousand  and  fifty  yards.

"  Wednesday,  November  27.  When  I  wrote  last  night
about  coming  back,  I  little  thought  it  would  be  so  soon.  We
turn  back  to-morrow  for  the  simple  reason  that  we  cannot
go  on  any  farther.

"  In  the  morning,  for  nearly  a  mile  along  a  valley  running
south-east,  the  travelling  was  almost  good ;  then  our
troubles  commenced  again.

"  Several  times  we  had  to  resort  to  hand-hauling  with
the  alpine  rope  through  acres  of  pitfalls.  The  bridges  of
those  which  were  covered  were  generally  very  rotten,
except  the  wide  ones.  Just  before  lunch  we  had  a  very  stiff
98


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

uphill  pull  and  then  a  drop  into  a  large  basin,  three-quarters
of  a  mile  in  diameter.

"  The  afternoon  was  spent  in  vain  searching  for  a
road.  .  .  .  On  every  side  are  huge  waves  split  in  every
direction  by  crevasses  up  to  two  hundred  feet  in  width.
The  general  trend  of  the  main  crevasses  is  north  and  south.  .  .  .

"  I  have,  therefore,  decided  to  go  back  and  if  possible
follow  the  road  we  came  by,  then  proceed  south  on  to  the
inland  ice-cap  and  find  out  the  source  of  this  chaos.  If
we  are  able  to  get  round  it  and  proceed  east,  so  much  the
better  ;  but  at  any  rate,  we  shall  be  doing  something  and
getting  somewhere.  We  could  push  through  farther  east
from  here,  but  it  would  be  by  lowering  the  gear  piecemeal
into  chasms  fifty  to  one  hundred  feet  deep,  and  hauling  it
up  on  the  other  side  ;  each  crevasse  taking  at  least  two
hours  to  negotiate.  For  such  slow  progress  I  don't  feel
justified  in  risking  the  lives  of  the  party."

Snow  fell  for  four  days,  at  times  thickly,  unaccom-
panied by  wind.  It  was  useless  to  stir  in  our  precarious
position.  Being  a  little  in  hand  in  the  ration  of  biscuits,
we  fed  the  dogs  on  our  food,  their  own  having  run  out.  I
was  anxious  to  keep  them  alive  until  we  were  out  of  the
pressure-ice.

From  this,  our  turning-point  out  on  the  shelf-ice,  the
trail  lay  over  eighteen  inches  of  soft  snow  on  December  3,
our  former  tracks,  of  course,  having  been  entirely  obliterated.
The  bridged  crevasses  were  now  entirely  hidden  and  many
weak  lids  were  found.

At  9  A.M.  Harrisson,  Watson  and  I  roped  up  to  mark  a
course  over  a  very  bad  place,  leaving  Kennedy  with  the  dogs.
We  had  only  gone  about  one  hundred  yards  when  I  got  a  very
heavy  jerk  on  the  rope  and,  on  looking  round,  found  that
Watson  had  disappeared.  He  weighs  two  hundred  pounds
in  his  clothes  and  the  crevasse  into  which  he  had  fallen  was
fifteen  feet  wide.  He  had  broken  through  on  the  far  side
and  the  rope,  cutting  through  the  bridge,  stopped  in  the  middle

99


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

so  that  he  could  not  reach  the  sides  to  help  himself  in  any
way.  Kennedy  brought  another  rope  over  and  threw  it
do^vn  to  Watson  and  we  were  then  able  to  haul  him  up,
but  it  was  twenty  minutes  before  he  was  out.  He  reap-
peared smiling,  and,  except  for  a  bruise  on  the  shin  and  the
loss  of  a  glove,  was  no  worse  for  the  fall.

At  2.30  P.M.  we  were  all  dead-beat,  camping  with  one
mile  one  thousand  seven  hundred  yards  on  the  meter.
One-third  of  this  distance  was  relay  work  and,  in  several
places,  standing  pulls  with  the  alpine  rope.  The  course
was  a  series  of  Z's,  S's,  and  hairpin  turns,  the  longest  straight
stretch  one  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  and  the  whole  knee-
deep  in  soft  snow  ;   the  sledges  sinking  to  the  cross-bars.

The  4th  was  a  repetition  of  the  previous  day — a  terribly
hard  two  and  a  half  miles.  We  all  had  "  hangman's  drops  "
into  crevasses.  One  snow-bridge,  ten  feet  wide,  fell  in  as
the  meter  following  the  twelve-foot  sledge  was  going  over
behind  it.

The  5th  was  a  day  of  wind,  scurrying  snow  and  bad
light.  Harrisson  went  out  to  feed  the  dogs  in  the  morning
and  broke  through  the  lid  of  a  crevasse,  but  fortunately
caught  the  side  and  climbed  out.

The  diary  again  :

"  Friday,  December  6.  Still  bad  light  and  a  little  snow-
fall, but  we  were  off  at  ten  o'clock.  I  was  leading  and  fell
into  at  least  a  dozen  crevasses,  but  had  to  be  hauled  out
of  one  only.  At  1.30  p.m.  we  arrived  at  the  open  lead  we  had
crossed  on  the  outward  journey  and  found  the  same  place.
There  had  been  much  movement  since  then  and  we  had  to
make  a  bridge,  cutting  away  projections  in  some  places  and
filling  up  the  sea-water  channels  with  snow  and  ice.  Then
Harrisson  crossed  with  the  aid  of  two  bamboo  poles,  and
hauled  me  over  on  a  sledge.  Harrisson  and  I  on  one  side
and  Kennedy  and  Watson  on  the  other  then  hauled  the
sledges  backwards  and  forwards,  lightly  loaded  one  way  and
empty  the  other,  until  all  was  across.  The  shelf-ice  is
without  doubt  afloat,  if  the  presence  of  sea- water  and
100


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

diatomaceous  stains  on  the  ice  is  of  any  account.  We
camped  to-night  in  the  same  place  as  on  the  evening  of
November  25,  so  with  luck  we  should  be  out  of  this  mess
to-morrow.  Switzerland  had  to  be  killed  as  I  cannot  afford
any  more  biscuit.  Amundsen  ate  his  flesh  without  hesita-
tion, but  Zip  refused  it."

Sure  enough,  two  days  sufficed  to  bring  us  under  the
bluff  on  David  Island.  As  the  tents  were  being  pitched,
a  skua  gull  flew  do^vn.  I  snared  him  with  a  line,  using
dog's  flesh  for  bait  and  we  had  stewed  skua  for  dinner.  It
was  excellent.

While  I  was  cooking  the  others  climbed  up  the  rocks
and  brought  back  eight  snow  petrels  and  five  eggs,  with  the
news  that  many  more  birds  were  nesting.  After  supper  we
all  went  out  and  secured  sixty  eggs  and  fifty-eight  birds.  It
seemed  a  fearful  crime  to  kill  these  beautiful,  pure  white
creatures,  but  it  meant  fourteen  days'  life  for  the  dogs  and
longer  marches  for  us.

Fresh  breeze,  light  snow  and  a  bad  light  on  the  9th  ;
we  remained  in  camp.  Two  more  skuas  were  snared  for
the  evening's  dinner.  The  snow  petrels'  eggs  were  almost
as  large  as  hens'  eggs  and  very  good  to  eat  when  fresh.
Many  of  them  had  been  under  the  birds  rather  too  long,  but
although  they  did  not  look  so  nice,  there  was  little  difference
in  the  taste.  I  was  very  glad  to  get  this  fresh  food,  as  we
had  lived  on  tinned  meat  most  of  the  year  and  there  was
always  the  danger  of  scurvy.

The  light  was  too  changeable  to  make  a  satisfactory
start  until  the  evening  of  December  11,  when  we  managed
to  dodge  through  four  and  a  half  miles  of  broken  ice,  reaching
the  mainland  close  to  our  position  on  November  16,  and
camping  for  lunch  at  midnight.  In  front  was  a  clear  mile
on  a  peninsula  and  then  the  way  led  across  Robinson  Bay,
seven  miles  wide,  fed  by  the  Northcliffe  Glacier.

Another  night  march  was  commenced  at  8  p.m.  The
day  had  been  cloudless  and  the  sun  very  warm,  softening
the  surface,  but  at  the  time  of  starting  it  was  hardening

101


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

rapidly.  Crossing  the  peninsula  we  resolved  to  head  across
Robinson  Bay  as  the  glacier's  surface  was  still  torn  up.
We  ended  with  a  fine  march  of  twelve  miles  one  thousand
two  hundred  yards.

The  fine  weather  continued  and  we  managed  to  cross
three  and  a  half  miles  of  heavy  sastrugi,  pressure-ridges
and  crevasses,  attaining  the  first  slopes  of  the  mainland  at
10  P.M.  on  December  14.  The  discovery  of  two  nunataks
springing  out  of  the  piedmont  glacier  to  the  south,  lured  us  on.

The  first  rock — Possession  Nunataks — ^loomed  ahead,  two
hundred  feet  above,  up  a  slope  of  half  a  mile.  Here  a  depot
of  provisions  and  spare  gear  was  made,  sufficient  to  take
us  back  to  the  Hippo.  The  rock  was  found  by  Watson  to
be  gneiss,  rich  in  mica,  felspar  and  garnets.  We  lunched  in
this  place  and  resumed  our  march  at  midnight.

The  second  nunatak  was  on  the  course  ;  a  sharp  peak  in
the  south,  hidden  by  the  contour  of  the  uprising  ridges.
In  four  miles  we  steadily  ascended  eight  hundred  feet.
While  we  were  engaged  pitching  camp,  a  Cape  pigeon  flew
overhead.

There  were  advantages  in  travelling  at  night.  The
surface  was  firmer,  our  eyes  were  relieved  from  the  intense
glare  and  our  faces  no  longer  blistered.  On  the  other  hand,
there  were  disadvantages.  The  skirt  of  the  tent  used  to
get  very  wet  through  the  snow  thawing  on  it  in  the  midday
sun,  and  froze  solid  when  packed  up  ;  the  floor-cloths  and
sleeping-bags,  also,  never  had  a  chance  of  drying  and  set
to  the  same  icy  hardness.  When  we  had  mounted  higher
I  intended  to  return  to  work  by  day.

It  was  not  till  the  altitude  was  three  thousand  feet  that
we  came  in  sight  of  the  far  peak  to  the  south.  We  were
then  pulling  again  in  daylight.  The  ice-falls  of  the  Denman
Glacier  on  the  left  were  still  seen  descending  from  the
plateau,  while  down  on  the  plain  we  saw  that  the  zone
of  disrupted  ice,  into  which  the  short  and  intricate  track
of  our  northern  attempt  had  been  won,  extended  for  quite
thirty  miles.
102


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

The  surface  then  softened  in  a  most  amazing  fashion
and  hauHng  became  a  slow,  dogged  strain  with  frequent
spells.  A  little  over  four  miles  was  the  most  we  could  do
on  the  18th,  and  on  the  19th  the  loads  were  dragging  in  a
deluge  of  dry,  flour-like  snow.  A  long  halt  was  made  at
lunch  to  repair  a  badly  torn  tent.

The  peak  ahead  was  named  Mount  Barr-Smith.  It  was
fronted  by  a  steep  rise  which  we  determined  to  climb  next
day.  On  the  eastern  margin  of  the  Denman  Glacier  were
several  nunataks  and  higher,  rising  ground.

Following  a  twenty-four  hours'  blizzard,  the  sky  was
overcast,  with  the  usual  dim  light  filtering  through  a  mist
of  snow.  We  set  off  to  scale  the  mountain,  taking  the  dip-
circle  with  us.  The  horizon  was  so  obscured  that  it  was
useless  to  take  a  round  of  angles.  Fifteen  miles  south  of
Mount  Barr-Smith,  and  a  little  higher  there  was  another
peak,  to  be  subsequently  called  Mount  Strathcona  ;  also
several  intervening  outcrops.  Not  a  distinct  range  of
mountains  as  we  had  hoped.  The  Denman  Glacier  sweeps
round  these  projecting  rocks  from  the  south-west,  and  the
general  flow  of  the  ice-sheet  is  thereby  concentrated  within
the  neck  bounded  by  the  two  peaks  and  the  higher  land
to  the  east.  Propelled  by  the  immense  forces  of  the
hinterland,  this  stream  of  ice  is  squeezed  down  through  a
steep  valley  at  an  accelerated  speed,  and,  meeting  the  slower
moving  Shackleton  Shelf,  rends  it  from  top  to  bottom  and
presses  onward.     Thus  chaos,  icequake,  and  ruin.

Our  tramp  to  Mount  Barr-Smith  was  through  eighteen
inches  of  soft  snow,  in  many  places  a  full  two  feet  deep.  Hard
enough  for  walking,  we  knew  from  experience  what  it  was
like  for  sledging.  There  was  only  sufficient  food  for  another
week  and  the  surface  was  so  abominably  heavy  that  in  that
time,  not  allowing  for  blizzards,  it  would  have  been  impossible
to  travel  as  far  as  we  could  see  from  the  summit  of  Mount
Barr-Smith,  while  four  miles  a  day  was  the  most  that  could
have  been  done.  Our  attempt  to  make  east  by  rounding
the  Denman  Glacier  to  the  south  had  been  foiled,  but  by

X03


THE  HOIME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

turning  back  at  that  point,  we  stood  a  chance  of  saving  our
two  remaining  dogs,  who  had  worked  so  well  that  they  really
deserved  to  live.

Sunday  December  22  broke  with  a  fresh  breeze  and
surface  drift ;  overhead  a  clear  sky.  We  went  back  to
Mount  Barr-Smith,  Kennedy  taking  an  observation  for
latitude,  Watson  making  a  geological  survey  and  collecting
specimens,  Harrisson  sketching.  The  rocks  at  the  summit
were  granites,  gneisses  and  schists.  The  latitude  worked
out  at  67°  10'4'  S.,  and  we  were  a  little  more  than  one
hundred  and  twenty  miles  in  an  air-line  from  the  hut.

In  the  next  two  days,  downhill,  we  "  bullocked  "  through
eleven  miles,  reaching  a  point  where  the  depot  at  Possession
Nunataks  was  only  sixteen  miles  away.  The  surface  snow
was  very  sticky  in  places,  clogging  the  runners  badly,  so
that  they  had  to  be  scraped  every  half-mile.  Stewed  skua
was  the  feature  of  our  Christmas  Eve  supper.

From  the  diary  :

"  Christmas  Day,  Wednesday.  Turned  out  and  got
away  at  8  a.m.,  doing  nine  miles  before  lunch  down  a  steep
descent.  The  sun  was  very  hot,  and  after  lunch  the  surface
became  sticky,  but  at  5  p.m.  we  reached  the  depot,  having
done  fifteen  miles  one  hundred  yards  and  descended  two
thousand  three  hundred  feet.

"  I  am  afraid  I  shall  have  to  go  back  to  travelling  by
night,  as  the  snow  is  so  very  soft  down  here  during  the  day  ;
not  soft  in  the  same  way  as  the  freshly  fallen  powdery  stuff
we  had  on  the  hills,  but  half -thawed  and  wet,  freezing  at
night  into  a  splended  surface  for  the  runners.  The  shade
temperature  at  5.30  p.m.  to-day  was  29°  F.,  and  a  thermo-
meter laid  in  the  sun  on  the  dark  rocks  went  up  to  87°  F.

"  Some  time  ago,  a  plum-pudding  was  found  in  one  of
our  food-bags,  put  there,  I  believe,  by  Moyes.  We  ate  it
to-night  in  addition  to  the  ordinary  ration,  and,  with  a
small  taste  of  spirits  from  the  medical  store,  managed
to  get  up  quite  a  festive  feeling.  After  dinner  the  Union
Jack  and  Australian  Ensign  were  hoisted  on  the  rocks  and
104


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

I  formally  took  possession  of  the  land  in  the  name  of  the
Expedition,  for  King  George  V.  and  the  Australian  Common-
wealth."

Queen  Mary  Land  is  the  name  which,  by  gracious  sanc-
tion, was  eventually  affixed  to  that  area  of  new  land.

Night  marches  commenced  at  1  a.m.  on  December  27.  The
sail  was  hoisted  for  the  first  time  and  the  fresh  breeze  was
of  great  assistance.  We  were  once  more  down  on  the  low
peninsula  and  on  its  highest  point,  two  hundred  feet  above
the  shelf -ice,  Kennedy  took  a  round  of  angles.

Along  the  margin  of  the  shelf  the  crevasses  were  in-
numerable and,  as  the  sun  was  hot  and  the  snow  soft  and
mushy,  we  pitched  camp  about  six  miles  from  the  bluff  on
David  Island.

At  6  A.M.  on  the  28th  we  rounded  the  bluff  and  camped
under  its  leeward  face.  After  lunch  there  was  a  hunt  for
snow  petrels.  Fifty-six  were  caught  and  the  eggs,  which
all  contained  chicks,  were  given  to  the  dogs.

It  was  my  intention  to  touch  at  all  the  rocks  on  the
mainland  on  the  way  home,  as  time  and  weather  permitted.
Under  a  light  easterly  breeze  we  scudded  along  with  sail  set
and  passed  close  to  several  outcrops.  Watson  examined
them,  finding  gneiss  and  granite  principally,  one  type
being  an  exceptionally  coarse  granite,  very  much  weathered.
A  mile  of  bad  crevasses  caused  some  delay  ;  one  of  the  dogs
having  a  fall  of  twelve  feet  into  one  abyss.

Next  day,  the  Hippo  hove  in  sight  and  we  found  the
depoted  food  in  good  condition.  The  course  had  been  over
high  pressure-waves  and  in  some  places  we  had  to  diverge
on  account  of  crevasses  and — fresh  water  !  Many  of  the
hollows  contained  water  from  thawed  snow,  and  in  others
there  was  a  treacherous  crust  which  hid  a  slushy  pool.  The
march  of  eighteen  miles  landed  us  just  north  of  the  Avalanche
Rocks.

While  we  were  erecting  the  tents  there  were  several
snow-slips,  and  Watson,  Kennedy  and  I  walked  landwards
after  supper  to  try  for  a  "snap"  of  one  in  the  act  of  falling,

105


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

but  they  refused  to  oblige  us.  If  was  found  that  one  or
more  avalanches  had  thrown  blocks  of  ice,  weighing  at  least
twenty  tons,  two  hundred  yards  past  the  hole  in  which
we  spent  five  days  on  the  depot  journey.  They  had,  there-
fore, travelled  six  hundred  yards  from  the  cliff.
\  The  Alligator  Nunatak  was  explored  on  January  2,  1913.
It  was  found  to  be  half  a  mile  long,  four  hundred  feet  high
and  four  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  width,  and,  like  most  of
the  rock  we  had  seen,  mainly  gneiss.

There  was  half  a  gale  blowing  on  the  4th  and  though
the  wind  was  abeam,  the  sail  was  reefed  and  we  moved
quickly.  The  dogs  ran  loose,  their  feet  being  very  sore
from  pulling  on  rough,  nobbly  ice.  The  day's  run  was  the
record  up  to  that  time — twenty-two  miles.  Our  camp  was
in  the  vicinity  of  two  small  nunataks  discovered  in  August
1912.  We  reckoned  to  be  at  the  Base  in  two  days  and
wondered  how  poor  Moyes  was  faring.

Early  on  the  5th,  the  last  piece  of  broken  country
fell  behind,  and  one  sledge  being  rigged  with  full  sail,  the
second  sledge  was  taken  in  tow.  Both  dogs  had  bleeding
feet  and  were  released,  running  alongside.  During  the
halt  for  lunch  a  sail  was  raised  on  the  dogs'  sledge,  using
tent  poles  as  a  mast,  a  floor-cloth  for  a  sail,  an  ice-axe  for
an  upper  yard  and  a  bamboo  for  a  lower  yard.  Getting
under  way  we  found  that  the  lighter  sledge  overran  ours  ;
so  we  cast  off  and  Harrisson  took  the  light  sledge,  the  sail
working  so  well  that  he  rode  on  top  of  the  load  most  of  the
time.  Later  in  the  afternoon  the  wind  increased  so  much
that  the  dogs'  sledge  was  dismasted  and  taken  in  tow  once
more,  the  sail  on  the  forward  sledge  being  ample  for  our
purpose.

At  4  P.M.  we  had  done  twenty  miles,  and,  everybody
feeling  fresh,  I  decided  to  try  and  reach  "The  Grottoes,"
fifteen  miles  away.  The  wind  increasing  to  a  gale  with
hurtling  drift,  the  sail  was  reefed,  and  even  then  was
more  than  enough  to  push  along  both  sledges.  Two  of  us
made  fast  behind  and  maintained  a  continual  brake  to  stop
106


A


Queen  Mary  Land


THE  HirPO  NUNATAK


l)OG-SLEI)GI\G


Merlz


BLOCKED  ON  THE  SHELF-ICE

them  running  away.  At  9  p.m.  the  gale  became  so  strong
that  we  struck  sail  and  camped.  Altogether,  the  day's  run
was  thirty-five  miles.

An  hour's  march  next  morning,  and,  through  the  glasses,
we  saw  the  mast  and  soon  afterwards  the  hut.  Just  before
reaching  home,  we  struck  up  a  song,  and  in  a  few  seconds
Moyes  came  running  out.  When  he  saw  there  were  four
of  us,  he  stood  on  his  head.

As  we  expected,  Moyes  had  never  thought  of  Harrisson
coming  with  me  and  had  quite  given  him  up  as  dead.  When
a  month  had  elapsed — the  time  for  which  Harrisson  had
food — Moyes  packed  a  sledge  with  provisions  for  Harrisson,
himself  and  the  dogs  and  went  out  for  six  days.  Then,
recognizing  the  futility  of  searching  for  any  one  in  that  white
waste  of  nothingness,  he  returned.  He  looked  well,  after  his
lonely  nine  weeks,  but  said  that  it  was  the  worst  time  he
had  ever  had  in  his  life.  Moyes  reported  that  the  Western
party  were  delayed  in  starting  by  bad  weather  until
November  7.

The  total  distance  sledged  during  our  main  summer
eastern  journey  was  two  hundred  and  thirty- seven  miles,
including  thirty-two  of  relay  work,  but  none  of  the  many
reconnoitring  miles.  Out  of  seventy  days,  there  were
twenty-eight  on  which  the  weather  was  adverse.  On  the
spring  depot  journey  the  travelling  had  been  so  easy  that
I  fully  expected  to  go  four  hundred  or  five  hundred  miles
eastward  in  the  summer.  It  was  therefore,  a  great  dis-
appointment to  be  blocked  as  we  were.


107


CHAPTER  XXII

THE  WESTERN  BASE— LINKING  UP  WITH
KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

By  Dr.  S.  E.  JONES

ON  our  return  from  the  Western  Depot  journey  towards
the  end  of  October  1912,  we  found  preparations
completed  for  the  long  western  trip,  towards
Gaussberg  in  Kaiser  Wilhelm  II  Land,  which  was  discovered
by  the  German  Antarctic  Expedition  of  1902.  The  depar-
ture was  delayed  for  several  days,  but  came  at  last  on
November  7,  Moyes  bidding  us  adieu  and  wishing  us  good
luck.

The  party  consisted  of  Do  vers  (surveyor),  Hoadley
(geologist),  and  myself  (surgeon).  We  were  hauling  one
sledge  with  rations  for  nine  weeks.  Our  course,  which  was
almost  due  south;  lay  over  the  glacier  shelf  practically
parallel  to  the  sea-cUffs.  The  surface  was  good,  and  we
covered  eleven  miles  by  nightfall,  reaching  a  point  some
two  or  three  miles  from  the  rising  land  slopes.  As  the  high
land  was  approached  closer,  the  surface  of  the  glacier- shelf ^
which  farther  north  was  practically  level,  became  undula-
ting and  broken  by  pressure-ridges  and  crevasses.  These,
however,  offered  no  obstacle  to  sledging.

Proceeding  in  the  morning  and  finding  that  an  ascent
of  the  slopes  ahead  was  rendered  impracticable  by  wide
patches  of  ice,  we  turned  more  to  the  west  and  steered  for
Junction  Corner.  Upon  our  arrival  there,  it  was  discovered
that  several  bergs  lay  frozen  within  the  floe  close  to  where
the  seaward  wall  of  the  glacier-shelf  joined  that  of  the  land
108


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

ice-sheet.     Some  of  these  bergs  were  old  and  rotten,  but  one
seemed  to  have  broken  away  quite  recently.

From  the  same  place  we  could  see  several  black  points
ahead  ;  our  course  was  altered  towards  them,  almost  due
westward,  about  halt  a  mile  from  the  sea-cliffs.  They
proved  to  be  rocks,  six  in  number,  forming  a  moraine.  As
it  was  then  half-past  five,  we  camped  in  order  that  Hoadley
might  examine  them.  There  had  been  a  halo  visible  all
day,  with  mock  suns  in  the  evening.

In  the  morning  a  high  wind  was  blowing.  Everything
went  well  for  a  little  over  a  mile,  when  we  found  ourselves
running  across  a  steep  slope.  The  wind  having  increased
and  being  abeam,  the  sledge  was  driven  to  leeward  when
on  a  smooth  surface,  and  when  amongst  soft  sastrugi,  which
occurred  in  patches,  was  capsized.  Accordingl}^  camp  was
pitched.

The  next  day  being  less  boisterous,  a  start  was  made  at
9  A.M.  There  was  still  a  strong  beam  wind,  however,  which
carried  the  sledge  downhill,  with  the  result  that  for  one
forward  step  two  had  to  be  taken  to  the  right.  We  were
more  fortunate  in  the  afternoon  and  reached  the  depot
laid  on  the  earlier  journey  at  5.30  a.m.  From  this  position
we  had  a  fine  view  of  the  Helen  Glacier  running  out  of  a
bay  which  opened  up  ahead.

Having  picked  up  the  depot  next  morning,  we  were
disappointed  to  find  that  we  should  have  to  commence
relay  work.  There  were  then  two  sledges  with  rations  for
thirteen  weeks  ;  the  total  weight  amounting  to  one  thousand
two  hundred  pounds.  By  making  an  even  division  between
the  two  sledges  the  work  was  rendered  easy  but  slow.
When  we  camped  at  6  p.m.,  five  and  a  half  miles  had  been
covered.  The  surface  was  good,  but  a  strong  beam  wind
hindered  us  while  approaching  the  head  of  Depot  Bay.
The  ice-cap  to  the  west  appeared  to  be  very  broken,  and
it  seemed  inevitable  that  we  should  have  to  ascend  to  a
considerable  altitude  towards  the  south-west  to  find  a  good
travelling  surface.

100


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

In  the  morning  we  were  delayed  by  heavy  wind,  but  left
camp  at  ten  o'clock  after  spending  an  hour  digging  out  the
sledges  and  tent.  At  lunch  time  the  sun  became  quite
obscured  and  each  of  us  had  many  falls  stumbling  over  the
invisible  sastrugi.  At  five  o'clock  the  weather  became  so
thick  that  camp  was  pitched.  Hoadley  complained  of  snow-
blindness  and  all  were  suffering  with  cracked  lips  ;  there
was  consequently  a  big  demand  for  hazeline  cream  in  the
evening.

On  Wednesday  November  13,  we  started  early,  and,
finding  a  good  firm  track  over  a  gently  rising  plateau,  made
fair  progress.  At  three  o'clock  a  gale  sprang  up  suddenly  ;
and  fortunately  the  sledges  were  only  a  quarter  of  a  mile  apart
as  we  were  relaying  them  in  stages  up  the  rising  plateau.
The  tent  was  pitched  hurriedly,  though  with  difficulty,  on
account  of  the  high  wind  and  drift.  The  distance  for  the
day  was  four  miles  one  thousand  five  hundred  'yards,  the
last  mile  and  a  half  being  downhill  into  a  valley  at  the
head  of  the  bay.  The  morainic  boulders  visible  from  the
camp  at  the  depot  were  now  obscured  behind  a  point  to
the  west  of  Depot  Bay.

The  next  sixty  hours  were  spent  in  sleeping-bags,  a  heavy
snowstorm  making  it  impossible  to  move.  Owing  to  the
comparatively  high  temperature,  20°  to  26°  F.,  the  snow
melted  readily  on  the  lee  side  of  the  tent,  and,  the  water
running  through,  things  became  uncomfortably  wet  inside.
At  midday  of  the  16th,  however,  we  were  able  to  go  out,
and,  after  spending  two  and  a  half  hours  digging  out  the
tent  and  sledges,  we  made  a  start,  travelling  two  and  three-
quarter  miles  on  a  south-westerly  course.

During  the  morning  of  the  17th  a  slight  descent  was
negotiated,  but  in  the  afternoon  came  the  ascent  of  the
slopes  on  the  western  side  of  Depot  Bay.  The  ice-cap  here
was  very  badly  crevassed,  and  spiked  boots  had  to  be  worn
in  hauling  the  sledges  up  the  steep  neve  slopes.  In  the  latter
part  of  the  afternoon  a  course  was  made  more  to  the  west,
and  about  the  same  time  the  south-east  wind  freshened
110


WHERE  THE  FLOE-ICE  MEETS    THE  SHACKLETOX  SHELF  Dad


THE  HUM.MOCKY  FLOE  OX  THE  SOUTHEKX   MAHGIX  OF  THE   DAVIS  SEA


Daiis


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

and  we  travelled  for  a  couple  of  hours  through  thick  drift.
The  night's  camp  was  situated  approximately  at  the  eastern
edge  of  the  Helen  Glacier.  The  portion  of  th  eice-cap  which
contributes  to  the  glacier  below  is  marked  off  from  the
general  icy  surface  on  either  side  by  a  series  of  falls  and
cascades.  These  appeared  quite  impassable  near  sea-level,
but  we  hoped  to  find  a  smooth  passage  at  an  altitude  of
about  one  thousand  feet.

A  start  was  made  at  7  a.m.  The  surface  consisted  of
ice  and  neve  and  was  badly  broken  by  pressure-mounds,
ten  to  twenty  feet  high,  and  by  numerous  crevasses  old  and
recent ;  many  with  sunken  or  fallen  bridges.  While  crossing
a  narrow  crevasse,  about  forty  feet  of  the  bridge  collapsed
lengthwise  under  the  leading  man,  letting  him  fall  to  the
full  extent  of  his  harness  rope.  Hoadley  and  myself  had
passed  over  the  same  spot,  unsuspecting  and  unroped,  a
few  minutes  previously,  while  looking  for  a  safe  track.
We  were  now  nearing  the  approximate  western  edge  of  the
Helen  Glacier,  and  the  broken  condition  of  the  ice  evidently
indicated  considerable  movement.  Later  in  the  morning
a  more  southerly  course  was  kept  over  an  improving  surface.

At  midday  Dovers  took  observations  of  the  sun  and
found  the  latitude  to  be  66°  47'  S.  Owing  to  the  heat  of
the  sun  the  fat  in  the  pemmican  had  been  melting  in  the
food-bags,  so  after  lunch  the  provisions  were  repacked  and
the  pemmican  was  put  in  the  centre  of  the  large  tanks.
In  the  afternoon  we  hoisted  the  sail,  and  by  evening  had
done  four  miles.  From  our  camp  the  eye  could  range
across  the  Helen  Glacier  eastward  to  the  shelf -ice  of  "The
Grottoes."  Far  away  in  the  north-west  was  a  wide  expanse
of  open  water,  while  a  multitude  of  bergs  lay  scattered
along  the  coast  to  the  west  of  the  Helen  Glacier.

The  next  day  was  gloriously  bright,  with  a  breeze  just
strong  enough  to  make  hauling  pleasant.  Erecting  a  sail,
we  made  an  attempt  to  haul  both  sledges,  but  found  that
they  were  too  heavy.  It  was  soon  discovered  that  a  con-
siderable detour  would  have  to  be  made  to  cross  the  broken

111


IHE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

ice  on  the  western  edge  of  the  Helen  Glacier.  By  keeping
to  the  saddles  and  valleys  as  much  as  possible  and  working
to  the  south,  we  were  able  to  avoid  the  rougher  country,
but  at  4  P.M.  we  arrived  at  what  at  first  appeared  an  impasse.

At  this  point  three  great  crevassed  ridges  united  to
form  the  ice-falls  on  the  western  side  of  the  glacier.  The
point  of  confluence  was  the  only  place  that  appeared  to
offer  any  hope  of  a  passage,  and,  as  we  did  not  want  to  retrace
our  steps,  we  decided  to  attempt  it.  The  whole  surface  was
a  network  of  huge  crevasses,  some  open,  the  majority  from
fifty  to  one  hundred  feet  or  more  in  width.  After  many
devious  turns,  a  patch  of  snow  between  two  large  abysses
was  reached.  As  the  ice  in  front  seemed  even  more  broken
than  that  behind,  camp  was  pitched.  After  tea  a  search
was  made  for  a  way  out,  and  it  was  found  that  by  travelling
along  a  narrow,  knife-edge  ridge  of  ice  and  neve,  with  an
open  crevasse  on  each  side,  a  good  surface  could  be  reached
within  a  mile  of  the  camp.  This  ridge  had  a  gradient  of
one  in  ten,  and,  unfortunately,  also  sloped  down  towards
one  of  the  open  crevasses.

During  the  next  four  days  a  heavy  blizzard  raged.
There  was  a  tremendous  snowfall  accompanied  by  a  gale
of  wind,  and,  after  the  second  day,  the  snow  was  piled  four
feet  high  round  the  tent,  completely  burying  the  sledges  and
by  its  pressure  greatly  reducing  the  space  inside  the  tent.
On  the  23rd,  the  fourth  day,  we  dug  out  the  floor,  lowering
the  level  of  the  tent  about  two  feet,  and  this  made  things
more  comfortable.  While  digging,  a  crack  in  the  ice  was
disclosed  running  across  the  floor,  and  from  this  came  a
considerable  draught.  By  midday  the  weather  had  im-
proved sufficiently  to  allow  us  to  move.

The  sledge  and  tent  were  excavated  from  beneath  a
great  mass  of  soft  snow  ;  the  new  level  of  the  snow's  surface
being  four  to  five  feet  above  that  on  which  the  camp  had
been  made  four  days  earlier.  The  wind  having  fallen,  we
went  ahead  with  the  sledges.  While  crossing  the  ridge  of
ice  which  led  into  the  valley  below,  one  man  hauled  the
112


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

sledges  while  the  other  two  prevented  them  from  sliding
sideways  downhill  into  the  open  crevasse.  That  afternoon
we  noticed  very  fine  iridescent  colouring  in  cirro-cumulus
clouds  as  they  crossed  the  sun.

The  next  day  gave  us  a  pleasant  surprise,  there  being  a
strong  breeze  dead  aft,  while  the  travelling  surface  ahead
looked  distinctly  favourable.  Sail  was  hoisted  and  the  two
sledges  were  coupled  together.  The  course  for  a  short
distance  was  downhill,  and  we  had  to  run  to  keep  up  with
the  sledges.  The  slopes  on  the  far  side  of  the  valley  we
had  entered  on  the  previous  afternoon  were  not  so  formidable
as  they  had  looked,  for  by  lunch  time  six  and  a  half  miles  had
been  covered.  The  surface  was  good,  with  occasional  long
undulations.  After  lunch  a  turn  to  the  north  was  made  for
a  short  distance  in  order  to  come  in  touch  with  the  coast-
line. Then  the  march  west  was  resumed  by  travelling
parallel  to  the  shore  at  a  distance  of  five  to  ten  miles.  At
halting-time  the  extreme  western  edge  of  Helen  Glacier
was  passed,  and  below  lay  young  floe-ice,  studded  with
numerous  bergs.

In  the  morning,  Dovers  called  attention  to  what  appeared
to  be  an  ice-covered  island  lying  to  the  north-north-west,
thirty  to  forty  miles  away.  We  watched  this  carefully
during  the  day,  but  found  its  form  to  be  constant.  Through
binoculars,  icy  patches  and  bluff  points  at  the  eastern  and
western  ends  were  distinguishable.*

As  soon  as  camp  was  struck  the  march  was  resumed
direct  for  what  every  one  thought  was  a  rocky  outcrop,
though  nearer  approach  proved  it  to  be  merely  the  shady
face  of  an  open  crevasse.  The  same  course  was  maintained
and  the  ridge  of  ice  that  runs  down  to  the  western  point
of  Depot  Bay  was  soon  close  at  hand.  From  its  crest  we
could  see  a  group  of  about  a  dozen  rocky  islands,  the  most

•  This  was  examined  in  detail  from  the  Aurora  in  January  1913  and  found
to  be  an  island,  which  was  named  Drygalski  Island,  for  it  is  evidently  the
ice-covered  "high-land"  observed  by  Professor  Drygalski  (German
Expedition,  1902)  from  his  balloon. — Ed.

VOL.   II  H  113


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

distant  being  five  miles  off  the  coast.  All  were  surrounded
by  floe.  Descending  steeply  from  the  ridge  into  a  valley
which  ran  out  to  the  sea-cliffs,  we  pitched  camp  for  lunch.

The  meal  completed,  Hoadley  and  I  descended  to  the
edge  of  the  glacier  in  order  to  see  if  there  were  a  passable
route  to  the  sea-ice.  Crossing  wide  areas  of  badly  crevassed
ice  and  neve  during  a  descent  of  nine  hundred  feet,  we
reached  the  sea-front  about  one  and  a  half  miles  from  the
camp.  Below  us  there  was  a  chaos  of  bergs  and  smaller
debris,  resulting  from  the  disintegration  of  the  land-ice,
which  were  frozen  into  the  floe  and  connected  to  one  another
by  huge  ramparts  of  snow.  Following  a  path  downward
with  great  difficulty,  we  approached  a  small  berg  which
was  discovered  to  be  rapidly  thawing  under  the  action  of
the  heat  absorbed  by  a  pile  of  stones  and  mud.  The
trickling  of  the  falling  water  made  a  pleasant  relief  in  the
otherwise  intense  silence.  As  it  seemed  impossible  to  haul
sledges  through  this  jumble  of  ice  and  snow,  Hoadley
suggested  that  he  should  walk  across  the  floe  and  make  a
brief  geological  examination  of  at  least  the  largest  islet.
I  therefore  returned  to  the  camp  and  helped  Dovers  take
observations  for  longitude  and  magnetic  variation.

Hoadley  returned  at  9  p.m.  and  reported  that  he  had  seen
an  immense  rookery  of  Emperor  penguins  near  the  largest
islet,  besides  Adelie  penguins,  silver-grey,  Wilson  and
Antarctic  petrels  and  skua  gulls.  He  also  said  that  he
thought  it  possible  to  take  a  sledge,  lightly  laden,  through
the  drifts  below  the  brink  of  the  glacier.

Accordingly  in  the  morning  the  eleven-foot  sledge  was
packed  with  necessaries  for  a  week's  stay,  althoitgh  we
intended  to  remain  only  for  a  day  in  order  to  take  photo-
graphs and  search  for  specimens.  Erecting  a  depot  flag  to
mark  the  big  sledge,  we  broke  camp  at  midday  and  soon
reached  the  sea-front.  Our  track  then  wound  among  the
snow-drifts  until  it  emerged  from  the  broken  ice  which  was
observed  to  border  the  land  ice-sheet  for  miles.  The
travelling  became  unexpectedly  good  for  a  time  over  highly
114


«    ffi


;:!;  -^


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

polished,  green  sea-ice,  and  thence  on  to  snow,  amid  a  field
of  numerous  small  bergs.  Many  of  these  showed  a  marked
degree  of  ablation,  and,  in  places,  blocks  of  ice  perched  on
eminences  had  weathered  into  most  grotesque  forms.  There
were  numerous  streams  of  thaw-water  running  from  mud-
covered  bergs.  Perspiring  in  the  heat,  we  more  than  once
stopped  to  slake  our  thirst.

Approaching  the  largest  rock — Haswell  Island,  as  it  was
called  later — we  saw  more  distinctly  the  immense  numbers
of  Emperor  penguins  covering  several  acres  of  floe.  The
birds  extended  in  rows  even  on  to  the  lower  slopes  of  several
bergs.  The  sound  of  their  cries  coming  across  the  ice
reminded  one  of  the  noise  from  a  distant  sports'  ground
during  a  well-contested  game.  We  camped  at  5  p.m.  on
a  snow-drift  at  the  southern  end  of  the  island.  A  large
rookery  of  Adelie  penguins  on  a  long,  low  rock,  about  a  mile
distant,  soon  made  itself  evident.

Although  the  stay  was  intended  to  occupy  only  about
twenty-four  hours,  we  were  compelled  to  remain  five  days  on
the  island  on  account  of  a  snowstorm  which  continued  for
practically  the  whole  of  the  time.  This  did  not  prevent  us
from  leaving  the  tent  and  wandering  about ;  Hoadley  keen
on  the  geology  and  Dovers  surveying  whenever  the  light  was
good  enough.  The  temperature  of  the  rock  was  well  above
freezing-point  where  it  was  exposed,  and  snow  melted  almost
as  soon  as  it  fell.  Our  sleeping-bags  and  gear  soon  became
very  wet,  but  we  rejoiced  in  one  compensation,  and  that  was
a  change  in  diet.  It  was  agreed  that  five  Adelie  penguins
or  ten  Cape  pigeons'  eggs  made  a  good  tasty  entree  to  the
monotonous  ration.

The  camp  was  situated  on  the  largest  of  a  group  of
about  twelve  small  islets,  lying  within  five  or  six  miles  of
the  coast,  on  the  lower  slopes  of  which  several  outcrops
of  rock  could  be  observed.  Haswell  Island  was  found
to  be  roughly  diamond-shaped  ;  three-quarters  of  a  mile
in  length,  the  same  in  width,  and  about  three  hundred
feet   on   the   highest   point.      It   was   surrounded   by   one

115


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

season's  floe,  raised  in  pressure-ridges  on  the  eastern  side.
On  the  northern,  southern,  and  especially  the  eastern  face,
the  rock  was  steep  ;  on  the  western  aspect,  there  was  a  more
gentle  slope  down  to  the  floe,  the  rock  being  almost  con-
cealed by  big  snow-drifts.  There  were  signs  of  previous
glaciation  in  the  form  of  erratics  and  many  examples  of
polishing  and  grooving.  The  rock  was  very  rotten,  and  in
many  places,  especially  about  the  penguin  rookeries,  there
were  collections  of  soil.  Two  deep  gorges  cut  through  the
island  from  north-west  to  south-east,  in  both  of  which  there
were  small  ponds  of  fresh  water.

The  most  marked  feature  was  the  wonderful  abundance
of  bird  life,  for  almost  all  the  birds  frequenting  the  shores
of  the  continent  were  found  nesting  there.  Adelie  penguins
were  in  greatest  numbers.  Besides  the  large  rookery  on
one  of  the  smaller  islets,  there  were  numerous  rookeries  of
fifty  to  one  hundred  birds  each  on  Haswell  Island.  In  most
cases  the  penguins  made  their  nests  on  the  rock  itself,
but,  failing  this,  had  actually  settled  on  snow-drifts,  where
they  presented  a  peculiar  sight,  as  the  heat  of^their  bodies
having  caused  them  to  sink  in  the  snow,  their  heads  alone
were  visible  above  the  surface.  One  bird  was  observed
carrying  an  egg  on  the  dorsal  surface  of  his  feet  as  the
Emperor  penguins  do.  Feathers  were  scattered  broadcast
around  each  rookery.  These  result  from  the  numerous  fights
which  occur  and  are  also  partly  derived  from  the  bare  patch
of  skin  at  the  lower  part  of  the  abdomen  which  provides
the  necessary  heat  for  incubation  when  the  bird  is  sitting.
Most  of  the  birds  had  two  eggs  in  a  well-advanced  stage  of
incubation,  and  it  was  a  difficult  task  to  find  a  sufficient
number  fresh  enough  for  culinary  purposes.  Attached  to
each  rookery  was  a  pair  of  skua  gulls,  who  swooped  down  and
quickly  flew  off  with  any  eggs  left  for  a  moment  unt ended.

The  Emperor  pengLiins  had  their  rookery  on  the  floe,
about  a  mile  from  the  island.  The  birds  covered  four  to  five
acres,  but  there  were  undoubted  signs  that  a  much  larger
area  had  been  occupied.  We  estimated  the  numbers  to  be
116


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

seven  thousand  five  hundred,  the  great  majority  being
young  birds.  These  were  well  grown,  most  of  them  stand-
ing as  high  as  the  shoulders  of  the  adults.  They  were  all
very  fat,  covered  by  a  grey  down,  slightly  darker  on  the
dorsal  than  on  the  ventral  surface,  with  dark  tails  and  a
black,  straight  beak.  The  eyes  were  surrounded  by  a  ring
of  grey  plumage,  and  this  again  by  a  black  band  which
extended  over  the  skull  to  the  root  of  the  beak.  Thus  the
markings  on  the  young  do  not  correspond  with  those  of  the
adults.  A  few  of  the  larger  chicks  had  commenced  to
moult,  the  change  of  plumage  being  observed  on  the
flipperSo

Daily  we  watched  large  numbers  of  adults  departing  from
and  returning  to  the  rookery.  The  direction  in  which  they
travelled  was  north,  towards  open  water,  estimated  to  be
twenty  miles  distant.  Although  more  than  once  the  adults'
return  to  the  rookery  was  carefully  noted,  we  never  saw
the  young  birds  being  fed,  old  birds  as  they  entered  the
rookery  quietly  going  to  sleep.

Hoadley,  on  his  first  visit  to  the  island,  had  seen  Ant-
arctic petrels  flying  about,  and  a  search  revealed  a  large
rookery  of  these  on  the  eastern  side.  The  nesting-place
of  this  species  of  petrel  had  never  before  been  discovered,  and
so  we  were  all  elated  at  the  great  find.  About  three  hundred
birds  were  found  sitting  in  the  gullies  and  clefts,  as  close
together  as  they  could  crowd.  They  made  no  attempt  to
form  nests,  merely  laying  their  eggs  on  the  shallow  dirt.
Each  bird  had  one  egg  about  the  same  size  as  that  of  a
domestic  fowl.  Incubation  was  far  advanced,  and  some
difficulty  was  experienced  in  blowing  the  specimens  with  a
blow-pipe  improvised  from  a  quill.  Neither  the  Antarctic
nor  any  other  petrels  offered  any  resistance  when  disturbed
on  their  nests,  except  by  the  expectoration  of  large  quantities
of  a  pink  or  green,  oily  fluid.

The  Cape  pigeons  had  just  commenced  laying  when  we
arrived  at  the  island.  On  the  first  day  only  two  eggs  were
found,  but,  on  the  fourth  day  after  our  arrival,  forty  were

117


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

collected.  These  birds  make  a  small  shallow  nest  with
chips  of  stone.

The  silver-grey  or  Southern  Fulmar  petrels  were  present
in  large  numbers,  especially  about  the  steep  north-eastern
side  of  the  island.  Though  they  were  mated,  laying  had
scarcely  commenced,  as  we  found  only  two  eggs.  They  made
small  grottoes  in  the  snow-drifts,  and  many  pairs  were  seen
billing  and  cooing  in  such  shelters.

The  small  Wilson  petrels  w^ere  found  living  in  com-
munities under  slabs  of  rock,  and  Hoadley  one  afternoon
thought  he  heard  some  young  birds  crying.

Skua  gulls  were  present  in  considerable  force,  notably
near  the  pengiun  rookeries.  They  were  breeding  at  the  time,
laying  their  eggs  on  the  soil  near  the  summit  of  the  island.
The  neighbourhood  of  a  nest  was  always  betrayed  by  the
behaviour  of  these  birds  who,  when  we  intruded  on  them,
came  swooping  down  as  if  to  attack  us.

Although  many  snow  petrels  were  seen  flying  about,  we
found  only  one  with  an  egg.  The  nests  were  located  in
independent  rocky  niches  but  never  in  rookeries.

Vegetable  life  existed  in  the  form  of  algae,  in  the  pools,
lichens  on  the  rocks  and  mosses  which  grew  luxuriantly,
chiefly  in  the  Adelie  penguin  rookeries.

Weddell  seals  were  plentiful  about  the  island  near  the
tide- cracks  ;  two  of  them  with  calves.

Though  the  continuous  bad  weather  made  photography
impossible,  Hoadley  was  able  to  make  a  thorough  geological
examination  of  the  locality.  On  December  2  the  clouds
cleared  sufficiently  for  photography,  and  after  securing
some  snapshots  we  prepared  to  move  on  the  next  day.
Dovers  built  a  small  cairn  on  the  summit  of  the  island  and
took  angles  to  the  outlying  rocks.

On  the  3rd  we  packed  our  specimens  and  left  for  the
mainland  at  9.30  a.m.,  arriving  at  the  land  ice-cliffs  at
2  P.M.  The  snow  surface  was  soft,  even  slushy  in  places,  and
the  heat  amongst  the  bergs  along  the  coast  of  the  mainland
was  very  oppressive.  After  we  had  dug  out  the  second
118


A  S-XOW  PETREL  CHICK   OX  THE  XEST


Hurley


SILVER-UREV  PETREL  ON  THE  XEST


Hurley


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II   LAND

sledffe  and  re-arranoed  the  loads,  the  hour  was  too  late  for
sledging,  so  Dovers  took  another  observation  in  order  to
obtain  the  rate  of  the  half- chronometer  watch.  While  on
the  island,  we  had  examined  the  coast  to  the  west  with
glasses  and  concluded  that  the  only  way  to  get  westward
was  to  ascend  to  a  considerable  altitude  on  the  ice-cap,
which,  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach,  descended  to  the  sea-
level  in  long  cascades  and  falls.  We  had  expected  to  place
a  depot  somewhere  near  Haswell  Island,  but  such  procedure
was  noAV  deemed  inadvisable  in  view  of  its  distance  from
what  would  probably  be  our  direct  return  route.

A  start  was  made  next  day  against  an  opposing  wind,
the  sledges  being  relayed  up  a  steep  hillside.  Later  on,
however,  a  turn  was  made  more  to  the  west,  and  it  was
then  possible  to  haul  both  sledges  at  the  same  time.  The
surface  was  soft,  so  that  after  every  halt  the  runners  had
to  be  cleared.  The  distance  for  the  day  was  five  and  a
half  miles,  and  the  night's  camp  was  at  an  altitude  of
about  one  thousand  five  hundred  feet,  located  just  above
the  broken  coastal  ice.

During  December  5  and  6  a  snowstorm  raged  and  con-
fined us  to  our  tent.  The  high  temperature  caused  the
falling  snow  to  melt  as  it  touched  the  tent,  and,  when  the
temperature  fell,  the  cloth  became  thickly  coated  with  ice.

On  the  7th  the  march  was  resumed,  by  skirting  a  small
valley  at  an  approximate  altitude  of  two  thousand  feet.
The  ice-cap  ahead  descended  in  abrupt  falls  to  the  floe.
Having  a  fair  wind  and  a  smooth  surface,  we  made  good
headway.  In  the  afternoon  w^e  ran  into  a  plexus  of  crevasses,
and  the  surface  was  traversed  by  high  ridges.  The  snow-
bridges  in  many  cases  were  weak  and  several  gave  way
while  the  sledge  was  crossing  them.  A  chasm  about  fifty
feet  deep  and  one  hundred  feet  long  was  passed,  evidently
portion  of  a  crevasse,  one  side  of  w^hich  had  been  raised
Later  in  the  afternoon  the  surface  became  impassable  and
a  detour  to  the  south  was  rendered  necessary.  This  difficulty
arose  near  the  head  of  the  valley,  in  which  situation  the

119


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

ice-cap  fell  in  a  series  of  precipitous  terraces  for  about  one
thousand  feet.

At  midday  on  the  8th  we  were  compelled  to  continue
the  detour  over  a  badly  crevassed  surface,  ascending  most
of  the  time.  On  that  night,  camp  was  pitched  again
amongst  crevasses.  The  sledge-meter  showed  only  two
miles  one  thousand  one  hundred  yards  for  the  afternoon,
relaying  having  been  necessary.

The  sledges  slipped  along  in  the  morning  with  a  fresh
breeze  in  their  favour.  The  sky  was  covered  with  rapidly
scudding,  cirro-cumulus  clouds  which,  by  midday,  quite
obscured  the  sun,  making  surrounding  objects  and  even  the
snow  at  our  feet  indistinguishable.  After  continuing  for
four  and  a  half  miles,  we  were  forced  to  camp.  In  the
afternoon  a  heavy  snowstorm  commenced  and  persisted
throughout  the  following  day.

Though  snow  was  still  falling  on  the  morning  of  the  11th,
camp  was  broken  at  10  a.m.,  and  we  moved  off  rapidly
with  a  strong  wind.  During  the  morning  the  surface  was
gently  undulating,  but  it  mounted  in  a  gradual  ascent  until
nightfall.  In  the  latter  part  of  the  afternoon  the  sun  was
clouded  over,  and  steering  had  to  be  done  by  the  aid  of  the
wind.  To  the  north  we  had  a  fine  view  of  Drygalski's
"  High  Land  "  (Drygalski  Island),  perceiving  a  distinct
seaward  ice-cliff  of  considerable  height.

As  there  were  no  prominences  on  the  ice-cap  that  could
be  used  for  surveying  marks,  Dovers  had  considerable
difficulty  in  keeping  a  reckoning  of  our  course.  The  trouble
was  overcome  by  building  snow-mounds  and  taking  back-
angles  to  them  with  the  prismatic  compass.  At  this  juncture
we  were  about  ten  miles  from  the  shore  and  could  see  open
water  some  thirty  miles  to  the  north.  Frozen  fast  within
the  floe  were  great  numbers  of  bergs.

We  started  off  early  on  December  12  with  the  aid  of  a  fair
breeze  over  a  good  surface,  so  that  both  sledges  were  easily
hauled  along  together.  The  course  was  almost  due  west,
parallel  to  the  coast.  Open  water  came  within  a  few  miles
120


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

of  the  ice-cliffs,  and,  farther  north,  a  heavy  belt  oi'  pack
was  observed.  When  the  sun  sank  lower,  the  bergs  on  the
northern  horizon  were  refracted  up  to  such  a  degree  that
they  appeared  to  be  hanging  from  the  sky.

The  aid  rendered  by  the  sail  under  the  influence  of  a  fair
breeze  was  well  shown  on  the  following  day.  In  four  hours,
on  a  good  surface,  both  sledges  were  transported  seven  miles.
When  we  moved  off,  the  wind  was  blowing  at  ten  to  fifteen
miles  an  hour.  By  10  a.m.  the  sky  became  overcast  and  the
wind  freshened.  Camp  was  pitched  for  lunch  at  11  a.m.,
as  we  hoped  that  the  weather  would  clear  again  later,  but
the  wind  increased  and  snow  began  to  fall  heavily  in  the
afternoon,  so  we  did  not  stir.  The  storm  continued  through-
out the  following  day  and  it  was  impossible  to  march  until
the  15th.

Continuing  the  ascent  on  the  16th  out  of  a  valley  we
had  crossed  on  the  previous  day,  we  halted  on  the  top  of  a
ridge  within  view  of  German  "  territory  " — a  small,  dark
object  bearing  due  west,  evidently  bare  rock  and  pre-
sumably Gaussberg.  The  course  was  altered  accordingly
towards  this  object  and  every  thing .  went  smoothly  for  ten
miles.  Then  followed  an  area  where  the  ice  fell  steeply  in
waves  to  the  sea,  crossed  by  crevasses  which  averaged  fifty
feet  in  width.  The  snow-bridges  were  deeply  concave,  and
the  lower  side  of  each  chasm  was  raised  into  a  ridge  five  to
ten  feet  high.  Making  fast  the  alpine  rope  on  to  the  sledges,
one  of  us  went  ahead  to  test  the  bridge,  and  then  the  sledges,
one  at  a  time,  were  rushed  down  into  the  trough  and  up  on
the  other  side.  After  crossing  ten  or  more  crevasses  in
this  fashion,  we  were  forced  to  camp  by  the  approach  of  a
rapidly  moving  fog  driven  before  a  strong  westerly  wind.
While  camp  was  being  prepared,  it  was  discovered  that  a
tin  of  kerosene  on  the  front  sledge  had  been  punctured
causing  the  loss  of  a  gallon  of  fuel.  Fortunately,  we  were
well  within  our  allowance,  so  the  accident  was  not  serious.
Soon  after  tea  our  attention  was  drawn  to  a  pattering  on  the
tent  like  rain,  caused  by  a  fall  of  sago  snow.

121


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

In  the  morning  the  weather  was  clearer,  and  we  saw
that  it  was  impossible  to  reach  Gaussberg  by  a  direct
route.  The  ice  ahead  was  cleft  and  split  in  all  directions,
and,  in  places,  vertical  faces  stood  up  to  a  height  of  one
hundred  feet.  The  floe  was  littered  with  hundreds  of
bergs,  and  in  several  localities  there  were  black  spots  which
resembled  small  rocks,  but  it  was  impossible  to  approach
close  enough  to  be  certain.  Retracing  the  way  out  of  the
broken  ice,  we  steered  in  a  south-westerly  direction,  just  above
the  line  of  serac  and  crevassed  ice.  The  coast  here  trended
to  the  south-west,  forming  the  eastern  side  of  Drygalski's
Posadowsky  Bay.  The  going  was  heavy,  the  surface  being
covered  by  a  layer  of  frost-crystals  deposited  during  the
night.  A  fog  came  up  again  early  in  the  afternoon  and  had
quite  surrounded  us  at  camping  time.  During  the  day  there
were  fine  clouds  of  ice-crystals  in  the  air,  and  at  8  p.m.  a
fog-bow  was  seen  in  the  east.

Turning  out  in  the  morning  we  saw  Gaussberg  peeping
over  a  ridge  to  the  west,  but  were  still  prevented  from
steering  directly  towards  it  by  the  broken  surface.  When
we  had  advanced  ten  miles,  a  heavy  fog  brought  us  to  a
halt  at  5  p.m.

On  Friday  the  20th,  in  spite  of  a  sticky  surface,  thirteen
miles  was  covered  on  a  west-south-west  course.  The  ice-
cap continued  to  be  undulating  but  free  of  crevasses.  The
altitude  was  between  two  thousand  five  hundred  and  three
thousand  feet.

In  the  morning,  after  travelling  two  miles,  we  came  in
sight  of  Gaussberg  again  and  steered  directly  towards  it.
The  surface  was  good  with  a  downward  grade.  At  five
and  a  quarter  miles  a  depot  was  made  of  the  small  sledge
and  most  of  the  food,  in  expectation  of  a  clear  run  to  the
mountain.  Not  far  ahead,  however,  were  two  broken-
backed  ridges  intersecting  the  course,  and  a  detour  had  to  be
made  to  the  south  to  cross  them  higher  up.

Midsummer's  day,  December  22,  was  spent  in  the  tent,
a  move  being  impossible  on  account  of  the  high  wind.  In
122


S5    W


o   <


S   sq


P  o
O    '^

a     V3


2     ^

H-1  T-,


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

the  afternoon  we  walked  ahead  a  short  distance  and  recon-
noitred six  or  seven  crumpled  ridges.  Though  the  baro-
meter had  been  falling  ominously  for  twenty-four  hours,
the  bad  weather  did  not  continue.

Gaussberg  was  reached  in  the  afternoon,  after  our
track  had  passed  through  seventeen  miles  of  dangerous
country.  For  the  first  few  miles  the  surface  consisted  of
a  series  of  steep,  buckled  ice-ridges;  later,  it  was  snow-
covered,  but  at  times  literally  cut  into  a  network  of
crevasses.

The  only  approach  to  Gaussberg  from  the  plateau  is
from  the  south.  To  the  east  and  west  there  are  magnificent
ice-falls,  the  debris  from  which  litters  the  floe  for  miles
around.

December  24  and  Christmas  Day  were  devoted  to
examining  the  mountain.  Dovers  made  a  long  series  of
observations  for  longitude,  latitude  and  magnetic  variation,
while  Hoadley  examined  the  rocks  and  took  photographs.

On  the  southern  side,  the  ice-cap  abuts  against  this
extinct  volcano  at  an  elevation  of  about  four  hundred  feet
above  sea-level ;  the  summit  of  the  mountain  rises  another
eight  hundred  feet.  On  the  north,  the  rock  descends  to  the
floe.  Gaussberg  is  pyramidal  in  shape,  falling  steeply,
from  a  ridge  at  the  summit.  The  sides  are  covered  with  a
loose  rubble  of  volcanic  fragments,  square  yards  of  which
commence  to  slide  at  the  slightest  disturbance.  This  renders
climbing  difficult  and  accounts  for  the  large  numbers  of
isolated  blocks  fringing  the  base.

At  the  summit  two  cairns  were  found,  the  bamboo  poles
which  had  previously  marked  them  having  blown  over.
Further  examination  revealed  many  other  bamboos  which  had
been  used  as  marks,  but  no  other  record  of  the  visit  of  the
German  expedition,  ten  years  before,  was  met.  Bird  life  was
not  plentiful,  being  limited  to  a  few  skuas,  Wilson  petrels
and  snow  petrels  ;  the  latter  nesting  under  slabs  of  rock.
There  were  large  quantities  of  moss  where  thaw-water  had
been  running.

123


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  ice  and  snow  near  the  mountain  showed  evidences
of  marked  thawing,  and  we  had  difficidty  in  finding  a
favourable  spot  for  our  camp.

Christmas  Day  was  gloriously  fine,  with  just  sufficient
wind  to  counteract  the  heat  of  the  sun.  At  midday  the
Christmas  "  hamper  "  was  opened,  and  it  was  not  long  before
the  only  sign  of  the  plum-pudding  was  the  tin.  In  the
afternoon  we  ascended  the  mountain  and  left  a  record  in  a
cairn  at  the  top.  By  the  route  followed,  Gaussberg  was
two  hundred  and  fifteen  miles  from  "  The  Grottoes/'  but  relay
work  had  made  the  actual  distance  covered  three  hundred
miles.

We  had  been  away  from  home  seven  weeks,  and,  though
there  was  sufficient  food  for  an  outward  journey  of  another
week,  there  was  no  indication  that  the  country  would  change.
Further,  from  the  summit  of  Gaussberg  one  could  see  almost
as  far  as  could  be  marched  in  a  week.  Accordingly  it  was
decided  to  commence  our  return  on  the  26th,  making  a
course  almost  due  east,  thus  cutting  out  numerous  detours
which  had  to  be  taken  on  the  outward  journey.

We  left  the  mountain  on  December  26,  pursuing  a
course  to  the  south  of  our  outward  track  so  as  to  avoid
some  crevassed  ridges.  Ascending  steadily  against  a  con-
tinuous headwind,  we  picked  up  the  second  sledge  at  midday
on  the  28th.

Next  day  all  the  gear  was  transferred  to  one  sledge  and
a  course  made  direct  to  the  Helen  Glacier ;  the  other  sledge
being  abandoned.

On  December  31,  after  a  day's  blizzard,  the  surface  was
found  to  be  covered  with  sastrugi  of  soft  snow  eighteen
inches  to  two  feet  in  depth.  In  crossing  a  wide  crevasse,
the  sledge  became  bogged  in  the  soft  snow  of  a  drift  which
had  a  deceptive  appearance  of  solidity.  It  took  us  ten
minutes  to  extricate  ourselves,  and,  after  this,  crevasses
were  negotiated  at  a  run.

A  violent  blizzard  raged  during  the  following  day — ^the
first  of  the  New  Year  1913.  This  proved  to  be  a  blessing,  for
124


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

it  made  the  surface  more  crisp  and  firm.  In  the  morning
the  sun  was  obscured  and  nothing  was  visible  but  the  snow  at
our  feet,  so  that  steering  was  very  difficult.  In  the  afternoon
the  sun  broke  through,  a  strong  westerly  wind  sprang  up
and  we  moved  along  at  a  good  pace,  covering  more  than
thirteen  miles  before  camping.

On  January  3  the  track  bordered  on  the  edge  of  the
plateau,  the  surface  being  almost  level,  rising  gently
towards  the  south.

After  a  violent  blizzard  of  three  days'  duration,  which
confined  us  in  the  tent,  we  continued  on  the  same  course  for
four  days,  averaging  about  eleven  miles  each  day.  The
surface  was  good,  but  a  strong  south-easter  blew  practically
all  the  time  and  reduced  our  speed  considerably.

At  10  A.M.  on  January  9,  a  fog-bank  was  observed  in
the  east.  This  rapidly  approached,  and  in  fifteen  minutes
was  quite  close.  There  was  now  a  splendid  display  of
rings  and  arcs,  caused  apparently  by  minute  ice-crystals
which  filled  the  air  without  obscuring  the  sun  or  sky.  First
an  arc  of  prismatic  colours  appeared
in  the  east,  and  in  a  few  seconds  the
sky  seemed  literally  to  be  covered  with
other  arcs.  At  first  they  seemed  to
be  scattered  indiscriminately,  but
after  a  short  time  several  arcs  joined
and  we  could  discern  a  symmetrical
arrangement.  The  sun  was  sur-
rounded by  a  ring,  the  lower  portion  of
which  was  broken  by  an  inverted  arc  ;
two  other  arcs  were  visible  on  either
side.  A  large  ring  appeared  encircling  the  zenith,  intersecting
the  first  and  passing  through  the  sun.  Two  pairs  of  arcs  were
also  seen,  one  pair  in  each  ring.  Excepting  the  arcs  and  ring
about  the  zenith,  which  was  greyish-white  against  the  blue
sky,  the  arcs  showed  prismatic  colouring.  The  display  lasted
ten  minutes  and  ended  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ice-
crystals.

125


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  diagram  (p.  125)  shows  the  arrangement  of  the  arcs  :

S  =  Sun.
Z  =  Zenith.
At  A,  B,  C,  mock  suns  could  be  seen.

From  our  camp  on  the  night  of  January  10,  broken
country  could  be  seen  ahead.  To  the  north,  open  water
was  visible,  and  to  the  north-east  the  Shackleton  Shelf,  so
that  we  were  nearing  home  at  last.  Here,  a  heavy  snow-
storm delayed  us  for  two  and  a  half  days,  and  it  was  not
till  the  afternoon  of  January  13  that  we  were  able  to  move
ahead.

The  next  day  was  dull,  the  sun  being  quite  obscured  ;  and
the  only  check  upon  the  steering  was  the  south-easterly
wind.  At  midday  the  thermometer  registered  35°  F.  in  the
shade,  and  the  surface  became  quite  sticky.  After  tea  we
walked  ahead  for  a  couple  of  hundred  yards  to  the  summit  of
a  ridge  where  the  full  extent  of  the  Helen  Glacier  was  laid
before  us.  It  was  evident  that  our  position  was  some  miles
north  of  the  true  course,  but,  considering  the  absence  of
steering  marks  and  the  constant  overcast  weather,  we
considered  ourselves  lucky  in  being  so  close  to  it.

The  bad  weather  continued  and  snow  fell  during  the
following  day.  On  the  16th  the  light  was  better,  and  we
pushed  into  a  strong  wind  which  freshened  to  the  force  of
a  moderate  gale  before  we  had  travelled  two  miles.  Ap-
proaching a  steep  ascent  we  were  compelled  to  camp.  The
morning  brought  an  improvement,  and  the  crossing  of  the
Helen  Glacier  was  commenced  a  mile  or  two  above  the
outward  course.

At  midday  on  January  18,  over  treacherous  ice,  in  the
face  of  strong  winds,  we  were  making  good  headway  towards
Junction  Corner.  Almost  daily  for  a  fortnight  a  Wilson
petrel  had  visited  us,  the  only  form  of  life  seen  on  the  return
journey.

On  the  19th  we  were  not  able  to  move  until  3.30  p.m.,
when  the  wind,  which  had  been  blowing  with  the  force  of
126


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

a  gale,  subsided.  During  the  afternoon  a  magnificent  view
of  the  Helen  Glacier  was  obtained,  and  in  the  west  we  could
see  Haswell  Island  and  Drygalski  Island.

Continuing  on  the  same  course,  throughout  the  following
day,  we  picked  up  the  hut  with  the  binoculars  at  5  p.m.
There  now  came  a  quick  descent  to  Junction  Corner.

On  the  lower  levels  there  was  clear  evidence  of  thawing
having  occurred.  The  firm  surface  of  snow  which  had
been  present  on  the  outward  journey  was  now  converted
into  rough  ice,  over  which  we  walked  painfully  in  finnesko.
Neve  and  ice  surfaces  were  covered  with  sharp  spicules,
and  the  sides  and  bridges  of  crevasses  were  unmistakably
thawed.

Leaving  Junction  Corner  at  6  a.m.,  we  steered  a  course
for  the  hut,  running  parallel  to  the  edge  of  the  glacier.  At
3  P.M.  the  mast  was  sighted,  and,  later,  the  hut  itself.
When  within  half  a  mile  of  "  The  Grottoes  "  we  saw  three  figures
on  the  floe  and  guessed  that  the  eastern  party  had  returned.
In  a  few  minutes  greetings  were  heartily  exchanged  and
they  had  welcomed  us  home.

Instructions  had  been  given  that  the  Western  Base
should  be  in  readiness  to  embark  on  the  Aurora  not  later
than  January  30,  1913.

When  Wild's  party  had  arrived,  preparations  for  depar-
ture were  immediately  made.  Geological  and  biological
collections  were  packed,  stores  were  sorted  out  and  cases  con-
taining personal  gear  were  sledged  to  the  edge  of  the
glacier.

Harrisson  contrived  a  winch  for  sounding  and  fishing.
Fourteen-gauge  copper  \vire  was  wound  on  it  and,  through
a  crack  in  the  sea-ice  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  glacier,
bottom  was  reached  in  two  hundred  and  sixty  fathoms.
As  the  water  was  too  deep  for  dredging,  Harrisson  manu-
factured cage-traps  and  secured  some  fish,  a  squid,  and  other
specimens.

At  this  time  there  was  abundant  evidence  of  life.     Skua

127


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

gulls  frequently  flew  about  the  hut,  as  well  as  Cape  pigeons,
Antarctic,  snow,  Wilson,  giant  and  silver-grey  petrels.  Out
on  the  sea-ice,  there  were  Adelie  and  Emperor  penguins  ;
the  latter  moulting.  Hundreds  of  seals  were  seen  with
glasses  on  the  edge  of  the  floe,  ten  miles  to  the  north.

On  the  whole,  January  was  a  very  fine  month.  Some  of
the  days  seemed  really  hot ;  the  shade  temperature  on  one
occasion  reaching  37°  F.,  and,  in  several  instances,  33°  F.
It  was  quite  a  common  thing  for  a  man  to  work  outside  in
loose,  light  garments  ;  in  fact,  with  nothing  more  than  a
singlet  on  the  upper  part  of  the  body.

On  January  26,  while  Kennedy  took  observations.  Wild
and  the  others  went  for  a  walk  towards  the  open  water.  The
surface  was  very  rough  and  broken  by  leads,  along  which
Weddell  seals  lay  in  great  numbers.  Three  miles  of  ice  were
found  to  have  drifted  out,  reducing  the  northern  expanse  to
seven  miles.

In  view  of  the  possibility  of  the  Aurora  not  relieving
them,  the  party  went  through  their  food-supplies,  finding
that  these  were  sufficient  for  another  year,  with  the  excep-
tion of  meat.  With  regard  to  coal,  two  tons  of  briquettes
remained,  which,  augmented  by  good  stock  of  seal-blubber,
would  provide  sufficient  fuel.

Laying  in  a  store  of  seals'  flesh  and  blubber  now  became
the  principal  work,  and  every  fine  day  saw  a  party  out  with  a
sledge.  Unfortunately,  the  nearest  crack  on  the  sea-ice  was
nearly  two  miles  away,  so  that  the  return  journey,  with  a
heavily  laden  sledge,  was  long  and  tedious.  Two  holes  were
dug  in  the  glacier  near  the  hut,  one  for  blubber  and  the
other  for  meat.

On  January  31  six  miles  of  sea-ice  still  remained,
and,  if  the  ship  had  arrived  to  time,  a  good  deal  of
sledging  would  have  been  required  to  transport  all  the  gear
aboard.

In  February,  the  weather  altered  for  the  worse,  and  there
was  not  a  single  fine  day  until  the  20th.  A  strong  east-south-
east wind  with  falling  snow  prevailed.  As  the  days  were
128


THE  RELIEF  OF  AVILD'S  PARTY.     THE  AUIIOIIA  APPROACHING  Uudey

THE  FLOE  AT  THE  WESTERN  BASE,  FEBRUARY   1913


PACING  THE   DECK:    CAPT.  JOHN  KING  DAYIS  AND
CAPT.  JA.MES   DAVIS


Hurley


LINKING  UP  WITH  KAISER  WILHELM  II  LAND

shortening  rapidly,  all  were  beginning  to  feel  anxious  about
the  Aurora.

Wild  erected  a  flagstaff  on  the  highest  ice-pinnacle  near
"  The  Grottoes  "  and  flew  a  large  flag  on  it  whenever  the  wind
moderated.  On  the  16th,  a  lamp-screen  and  reflector  were
fitted  at  the  mast-head  and  each  night  a  hurricane  lamp  was
placed  there,  which  could  be  seen  eight  miles  with  the  naked
eye.

On  the  20th  Dovers  and  Wild  made  a  large  signboard,
taking  it  out  to  a  prominent  point  on  the  glacier,  three  and
a  half  miles  to  the  north.  It  was  lashed  to  a  bamboo  pole
with  a  flag  flying  on  it.  The  open  water  was  then  only
three  miles  distant.

Wild  writes  :

"  The  22nd  February  was  the  anniversary  of  the  day
the  Aurora  left  us,  but  the  weather  was  very  different.  A
heavy  blizzard  was  raging,  the  wind's  velocity  ranging  up  to
eighty  miles  per  hour.  As  it  was  Saturday,  we  kept  the  usual
routine,  scrubbing  out  and  cleaning  up  the  hut.  We  could
not  help  speculating  as  to  whether  we  should  have  to  do  it
for  another  whole  year.  But  every  one  had  great  faith  in
'  good  old  Davis,'  and  nobody  was  at  all  downhearted.

"  When  we  '  turned  out  '  on  Sunday  there  was  still  a
strong  wind  and  drift,  but  this  died  away  to  a  light  breeze
before  breakfast  was  over,  and  the  sun  came  out.  I  had  a
look  round  with  the  glasses  and  saw  that  the  ice  had  broken
away  beyond  a  limit  of  one  and  a  half  miles.  As  there  was
a  sledge,  which  Harrisson  had  been  using  for  sounding,
within  a  few  yards  of  the  water's  edge,  Jones  and  I  went  off
to  bring  it  in.  We  had  gone  less  than  half  a  mile  when  we
saw  what  at  first  appeared  to  be  a  penguin,  standing  on  some
pack-ice  in  the  distance,  but  which  we  soon  saw  was  the
mast-head  of  the  Aurora.

"  It  was  evident  that  she  could  not  be  alongside  for  some

time,  so  Jones  went  back  to  the  hut  to  tell  the  others  to

bring  down  a  load  of  gear,  and  I  went  on  to  meet  the  ship.

Before  the  Aurora  had  reached  the  fast  ice,  all  the  party

VOL.  II  I  129


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

were  down  with  two  sledge  loads,  having  covered  the  mile
and  a  half  in  record  time.

"  We  were  all  anxious,  of  course,  for  news,  and  the  first
we  received  was  the  sad  account  of  the  deaths  of  Ninnis  and
Mertz  ;  then  of  the  wonderful  march  made  by  Dr.  Mawson.

"  Before  closing,  I  should  like  to  pay  a  tribute  to  the
good-fellowship,  unfailing  industry,  enthusiasm  and  un-
swerving loyalty  which  characterized  my  comrades.  During
the  whole  of  the  Expedition,  whether  carrying  out  monotonous
routine  work  at  the  Base  or  under  the  trying  conditions  of
sledging,  all  duties  were  performed  with  never-failing  good
temper  and  perseverance.

"  Should  it  ever  be  my  lot  to  venture  on  a  like  expedition
I  hope  to  have  some,  if  not  all,  of  the  same  party  with  me.
But  whether  we  meet  again  or  not,  I  shall  always  think  of
every  man  of  them  with  the  greatest  affection  and  respect."


130


CHAPTER  XXIII
A  SECOND  WINTER

DURING  the  first  busy  year  in  Adelie  Land,  when  the
Hut  was  full  of  life  and  work,  there  were  few  moments
for  reflection.  Yet,  over  the  speculative  pipe  at
home  after  a  successful  day's  labour  on  the  wireless  masts,
or  out  on  the  turbulent  plateau  when  the  hour  of  hoosh
brought  the  strenuous  day  to  a  close,  more  than  one  man
was  heard  to  say,  "  One  year  in  this  country  is  enough  for
me."  Still,  in  the  early  days,  no  one  could  predict  what
would  happen,  and  therefore  a  change  in  the  perverse
climate  was  always  considered  probable.  So  great  was  the
emulation,  and  so  keen  were  all  to  extend  our  geographical
boundaries,  that  the  year  sped  away  almost  before  the
meagre  opportunity  came.  With  the  cheery  support  of
numbers,  we  did  not  find  it  a  difficult  matter  "  to  drive
dull  care  away."

Now  there  were  only  seven  of  us  ;  we  knew  what  was
ahead  ;  the  weather  had  already  given  ample  proof  of  the
early  approach  of  winter ;  the  field  of  work  which  once
stretched  to  the  west,  east  and  south  had  no  longer  the
mystery  of  the  "  unknown  "  ;  the  Ship  had  gone  and  there
was  scant  hope  of  relief  in  March.

Against  all  this.  There  remained  the  Hut — a  proven
shelter  from  the  wmd  ;  and,  most  vital  of  all,  there  was
abundant  food  for  another  year.  Every  avenue  of  scientific
work  was  not  yet  closed.  Even  the  routine  of  meteorological
and  magnetic  work  was  adding  in  no  slight  degree  to  the  sum
of  human  knowledge.     Our  short  mile  of  rocks  still  held

131


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

some  geological  secrets,  and  there  were  biological  discoveries
yet  to  make.  A  wireless  telegraphic  station  had  at  last
been  established,  and  we  could  confidently  expect  com-
munication with  the  outside  world  at  an  early  date.  These
were  some  of  the  obvious  assurances  which  no  one  had  the
heart  to  think  about  at  first ;  and  then  there  was  always  our
comradeship,  most  enduring  of  all.

February,  during  1912,  was  a  tolerable  month  with  a
fair  proportion  of  sunny,  moderately  calm  days.  A  year
later,  the  first  eight  days  of  this  month  were  signalized  by
the  blizzard  in  which  the  Aurora  had  such  a  perilous
experience.  While  the  winter  began  in  1912  with  the
advent  of  March,  now  in  1913  it  came  on  definitely  in  early
February.  Autumn  was  a  term  which  applied  to  a  few
brilliant  days  which  would  suddenly  intervene  in  the  dense
rack  of  drift-snow.

We  set  to  work  to  make  the  Hut,  if  anything,  safer  and
snugger.  Bage  put  finishing  touches  to  the  break-wind  of
rock  and  cases,  and  with  Hodgeman  and  McLean  nailed
battens  of  wood  over  a  large  sheet  of  canvas  which  had  been
stretched  across  the  windward  side  of  the  roof,  overlapping
rolls  of  black  paper,  scraps  of  canvas  and  bagging,  which
were  also  battened  down  to  make  the  eastern  and  western
faces  more  air-tight.

Before  the  Ship  left  us,  the  remaining  coal  briquettes
had  been  dug  out  of  a  bed  of  ice  and  carefully  piled  on  a  high
point  of  the  rocks.  Round  them  all  the  spare  timber  and
broken  cases  were  gathered  to  provide  sufficient  fuel  for  the
ensuing  winter.  The  penguins'  eggs,  which  had  been  stored
in  boxes,  were  stacked  together  on  the  windward  side  of  the
Hut,  and  a  choice  selection  of  steaks  of  seal  and  penguin  for
our  own  use  were  at  the  storeman's  disposal  in  the  veranda.

Madigan,  in  addition  to  his  meteorological  duties,  took
charge  of  the  new  sledging-dogs  which  had  been  presented  by
Captain  Amundsen.  A  good  many  seals  had  been  already
killed,  and  a  big  cache  of  meat  and  blubber  was  made
alongside  the  Hut  to  last  throughout  the  winter.
132


•  AMUNDSEX,"  ONE  OF  THE   ,SLEii(iE  i)UUS  SENT  DOWN  TO  US
FROM  AMUNDSEN'S  SOUTH  POLAR  EXPEDITION


Uurley


A  SECOND  WINTER

Bickerton  found  many  odd  jobs  to  occupy  his  time  in
connexion  with  the  petrol-engine  and  the  wireless  installa-
tions. He  was  also  busied  with  the  anemometer,  which  had
broken  down  and  needed  a  strong  start  for  its  second  year
of  usefulness.

Bage,  following  the  parting  instructions  of  Webb,
became  the  owner  of  the  Magnetograph  House  and  the
Absolute  Hut,  continuing  to  keep  the  magnetic  records.
As  storeman,  Bage  looked  after  the  food-supplies.  The
canvas  coverings  had  made  the  veranda  drift-tight,  so  the
storeman  could  arrange  his  tins  and  cases  on  the  shelves
with  some  degree  of  comfort,  and  the  daily  task  of  shovelling
out  snow  was  now  at  an  end.  Further,  Hodgeman  and  he
built  an  annex  out  of  spare  timber  to  connect  the  entrance
veranda  with  the  store.  This  replaced  the  old  snow-tunnel
which  had  melted  away,  and,  when  completed  and  padded
outside  with  old  mattresses,  was  facetiously  styled  the
"  North- West  Passage."  The  only  thing  which  later  arose
to  disturb  the  composure  of  the  storeman  was  the  admission
of  the  dogs  to  a  compartment  in  the  veranda  on  the  eastern
side.  His  constant  care  then  became  a  heap  of  mutton
carcases  which  the  dogs  in  passing  or  during  the  occasional
escapades  from  their  shelter  were  always  eager  to  attack.

Hodgeman  helped  to  change  the  appearance  of  the
living-hut  by  cutting  the  table  in  two  and,  since  there  was
now  plenty  of  room,  by  putting  in  more  shelves  for  a  larder
on  which  the  storeman  displayed  his  inviting  wares  to  the
cook,  who  could  think  of  nothing  original  for  the  next
meal.

McLean  undertook  the  duties  of  ice-cutting  and  coal-
carrying  throughout  the  year,  kept  the  biological  log  and
assisted  in  general  observations.  He  also  sent  off  sealed
messages  in  bottles,  regularly,  on  the  chance  of  their  being
picked  up  on  the  high  seas,  thereby  giving  some  indication
of  the  direction  of  currents.

Jeffryes  was  occupied  regularly  every  night  listening
attentively   for   wireless    signals   and    calling    at    intervals.

133


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  continuous  winds  soon  caused  many  of  the  wire  stays
of  the  main  wireless  mast  to  become  slack,  and  these  Jeffryes
pulled  taut  on  his  daily  rounds.

Looking  back  and  forward,  we  could  not  but  feel  that
the  sledging  programme  of  the  previous  summer  had  been
so  comprehensive  that  the  broad  features  of  the  land  were
ascertained  over  a  wide  radius  ;  beyond  what  we,  with  our
weakened  resources  of  the  second  year,  could  reach.  The
various  observations  we  were  carrying  on  were  adding  to
the  value  of  the  scientific  results,  but  we  could  not  help
feeling  disappointed  that  our  lot  was  not  cast  in  a  new  and
more  clement  region.

It  was  to  be  a  dreary  and  difficult  time  for  the  five  men
who  had  volunteered  to  remain  behind  in  order  to  make  a
thorough  search  for  myself  and  comrades.  They  were  men
whom  I  had  learned  to  appreciate  during  the  first  year,  and
I  now  saw  their  sterling  characters  in  a  new  light.  To
Jeffreys  all  was  fresh,  and  we  envied  him  the  novelties  of
a  new  world,  rough  and  inhospitable  though  it  was.  As
for  me,  it  was  sufficient  to  feel  that

.  .   .  He  that  tossed  thee  down  into  the  Field,
He  knows  about  it  all — He  knows,  He  knows.


On  the  night  of  February  15,  Jeffryes  suddenly  surprised
us  with  the  exciting  intelligence  that  he  had  heard  Macquarie
Island  send  a  coded  weather  report  to  Hobart.  The  engine
was  immediately  set  going,  but  though  repeated  attempts
were  made,  no  answer  could  be  elicited.  Each  night  dark-
ness was  more  pronounced  and  signals  became  more
distinct,  until,  on  the  20th,  our  call  reached  Sawyer  at
Macquarie  Island,  who  immediately  responded  by  saying
"  Good  evening."  The  insulation  of  a  Leyden  jar  broke
down  at  this  point,  and  nothing  more  could  be  done  until
it  was  remedied.

At  last,  on  February  21,  signals  were  exchanged,  and  by
the  23rd  a  message  had  been  dispatched  to  Lord  Denman,
134


THE  HEAD  OF   A  WEDDELL   SEAL


Hurley


A  WEDDELL  SEAL  SCHATCUIXG   LILMSELF.     ••  DUAL  THOSE  FLIES  I"       Hudey


A  SECOND  WINTER

Governor-General  of  the  Commonwealth,  acquainting  him
with  our  situation  and  the  loss  of  our  comrades  and,  through
him,  one  to  his  Majesty  the  King  requesting  his  royal
permission  to  name  a  tract  of  newly  discovered  country  to
the  east,  "  King  George  V  Land."  Special  messages  were
also  sent  to  the  relatives  of  Lieutenant  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis  and
Dr.  X.  Mertz.

The  first  news  received  from  the  outside  world  was  the
bare  statement  that  Captain  Scott  and  four  of  his  com-
panions had  perished  on  their  journey  to  the  South  Pole.
It  was  some  time  before  we  knew  the  tragic  details  which
came  home,  direct  and  poignant,  to  us  in  Adelie  Land.

To  Professor  David  a  fuller  account  of  our  own  calamity
was  sent  and,  following  this,  many  kind  messages  of  sympathy
and  congratulation  were  received  from  all  over  the  world.
On  February  26  Lord  Denman  sent  an  acknowledgment
of  our  message  to  him,  expressing  his  sorrow  at  the  loss  of
our  two  companions  ;  and  on  March  7  his  Majesty  the  King
added  his  gracious  sympathy,  with  permission  to  afhx  the
name.  King  George  V  Land,  to  that  part  of  the  Antarctic
continent  lying  between  Adelie  Land  and  Oates  Land.

On  February  23  there  was  a  spell  of  dead  calm  ;  heavy
nimbus  clouds  and  fog  lowering  over  sea  and  plateau.
Fluffy  grains  of  sago  snow  fell  most  of  the  day,  covering  the
dark  rocks  and  the  blue  glacier.  A  heaving  swell  came  in
from  the  north,  and  many  seals  landed  within  the  boat
harbour,  where  a  high  tide  lapped  over  the  ice-foot.  The
bergs  and  islands  showed  pale  and  shadowy  as  the  snow
ceased  or  the  fog  lifted.  Then  the  wind  arose  and  blew
hard  from  the  east-south-east  for  a  day,  swinging  round
with  added  force  to  its  old  quarter — south-by-east.

March  began  in  earnest  with  much  snow  and  monotonous
days  of  wind.  By  contrast,  a  few  hours  of  sunny  calm  were
appreciated  to  the  full.  The  face  of  the  landscape  changed  ;
the  rocky  crevices  filling  flush  with  the  low  mounds  of  snow
which  trailed  along  and  off  the  ridges.

On  March  16  every  one  was  relieved  to  hear  that  the

135


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Aurora  had  arrived  safely  in  Hobart,  and  that  Wild  and  his
party  were  all  well.  But  the  news  brought  disappointment
too,  for  we  had  always  a  lingering  ray  of  hope  that  there
might  be  sufficient  coal  to  bring  the  vessel  back  to  Adelie
Land.  Later  on  we  learned  that  on  account  of  the  shortage
of  funds  the  Ship  was  to  be  laid  up  at  Hobart  until  the
following  summer.  In  the  meantime,  Professors  David  and
Masson  were  making  every  effort  to  raise  the  necessary
money.  In  this  they  were  assisted  by  Captain  Davis,  who
went  to  London  to  obtain  additional  donations.

It  was  now  a  common  thing  for  those  of  us  who  had  gone
to  bed  before  midnight  to  wake  up  in  the  morning  and  find
that  quite  a  budget  of  wireless  messages  had  been  received.
It  took  the  place  of  a  morning  paper  and  we  made  the  most
of  the  intelligence,  discussing  it  from  every  possible  point  of
view.  Jeffryes  and  Bickerton  worked  every  night  from  8  p.m.
until  1  A.M.,  calling  at  short  intervals  and  listening  attentively
at  the  receiver.  In  fact,  notes  were  kept  of  the  intensity
of  the  signals,  the  presence  of  local  atmospheric  electrical
discharges — "  static  " — or  intermittent  sounds  due  to  dis-
charges from  snow  particles — St.  Elmo's  fire — and,  lastly,
of  interference  in  the  signals  transmitted.  The  latter
phenomenon  should  lead  to  interesting  deductions,  for  we
had  frequent  evidence  to  show  that  the  wireless  waves  were
greatly  impeded  or  completely  abolished  during  times  of
auroral  activity.

Listening  at  the  wireless  receiver  must  have  been  very
tedious  and  nerve-racking  work,  as  so  many  adventitious
sounds  had  to  be  neglected.  There  was,  first  of  all,  the  noise
of  the  wind  as  it  swept  by  the  Hut ;  then  there  was  the
occasional  crackling  of  "  St.  Elmo's  fire  "  ;  the  dogs  in  the
veranda  shelter  were  not  always  remarkable  for  their  quiet-
ness ;  while  within  the  Hut  it  was  impossible  to  avoid  slight
sounds  which  were  often  sufficient  to  interrupt  the  sequence
of  a  message.  At  times,  when  the  aurora  was  visible,  signals
would  often  die  away,  and  the  only  alternative  was  to  wait
until  they  recurred,  meanwhile  keeping  up  calls  at  regular
136


v-ma)


^  t


A  SECOND  WINTER

intervals  in  case  the  ether  was  not  "  blocked."  So  Jeffryes
would  sometimes  spend  the  whole  evening  trying  to  transmit
a  single  message,  or,  conversely,  trying  to  receive  one.
By  experience  it  was  found  easier  to  transmit  and  receive
wireless  messages  between  certain  hours  in  the  evening,
while  not  infrequently,  during  the  winter  months,  a  whole
week  would  go  by  and  nothing  could  be  done.  During  such
a  period  auroral  displays  were  usually  of  nightly  occurrence.
Then  a  "  freak  night "  would  come  along  and  business
would  be  brisk  at  both  terminals.

It  was  often  possible  for  Jeffryes  to  "  hear  "  Wellington,
Sydney,  Melbourne  and  Hobart,  and  once  he  managed  to
communicate  directly  with  the  last-named.  Then  there  were
numerous  ships  passing  along  the  southern  shores  of  Australia
or  in  the  vicinity  of  New  Zealand  whose  "  calls  "  were
audible  on  "  good  nights."  The  warships  were  at  times
particularly  distinct,  and  occasionally  the  "  chatter  in  the
ether  "  was  so  confusing  that  Sawyer,  at  Macquarie  Island,
would  signal  that  he  was  "  jammed."

The  "  wireless  "  gave  us  another  interest  in  life,  and
plenty  of  outside  occupation  when  the  stays  became  loose
or  an  accident  occurred.  It  served  to  relieve  some  of  the
tedium  of  that  second  year  :

Day  after  day  the  same
Only  a  little  worse.

On  March  13  there  was  a  tremendous  fall  of  snow,  and
worst  "  pea-souper  "  we  had  had  during  the  previous  year.
Next  day  everything  was  deluged,  and  right  up  the  glacier
there  were  two-foot  drifts,  despite  a  sixty-mile  wind.

It  was  very  interesting  to  follow  the  changes  which
occurred  from  day  to  day.  First  of  all,  under  the  flail  of  the
incessant  wind,  a  crust  would  form  on  the  surface  of  the  snow
of  the  type  we  knew  as  "  piecrust,"  when  out  sledging.  It
was  never  strong  enough  to  bear  a  man,  but  the  sledge-runners
would  clear  it  fairly  well  if  the  load  were  not  too  heavy.  Next
day  the  crust  would  be  etched,  and  small  flakes  and  pellets  would
be  carried  away  until  the  snow  was  like  fleece.     Assuming

137


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

that  the  wind  kept  up  (which  it  always  did)  long,  shallow
concavities  would  now  be  scooped  out  as  the  "  lobules  "
of  the  fleece  were  carried  away  piecemeal.  These  con-
cavities became  deeper,  hour  by  hour  and  day  by  day,
becoming  at  last  the  troughs  between  the  crests  of  the  snow-
waves  or  sastrugi.  All  this  time  the  surface  would  be
gradually  hardening  and,  if  the  sun  chanced  to  shine  for
even  a  few  hours  every  day,  a  shining  glaze  would  gradually
form  on  the  long,  bevelled  mounds.  It  was  never  a  wise
thing  to  walk  on  these  polished  areas  in  finnesko  and  this
fact  was  always  learnt  by  experience.

Above  the  Hut,  where  the  icy  slopes  fell  quickly  to  the
sea,  the  snow  would  lie  for  a  few  days  at  the  very  most,
but,  lower  down,  where  the  glacier  ran  almost  level  for  a
short  distance  to  the  harbour  ice,  the  drifts  would  lie  for
months  at  the  mercy  of  the  wind,  furrowed  and  cut  into
miniature  canons  ;  wearing  away  in  fragments  until  the
blue  ice  showed  once  more,  clear  and  wind-swept.

Towards  the  end  of  March  the  wind  gave  a  few  exhibi-
tions of  its  power,  which  did  not  augur  well  for  the  maximum
periods  of  the  winter.  A  few  diary  jottings  are  enough  to
show  this  :

"  March  23.  During  the  previous  night  the  wind  steadily
rose  to  an  eighty-mile  '  touch '  and  upwards.  It  was  one
of  those  days  when  it  is  a  perpetual  worry  to  be  outside.

"  March  24.  Doing  at  least  seventy  miles  per  hour
during  the  morning.  About  8  p.m.  there  was  a  temporary
lull  and  a  rise  of  '15  in  the  barometer.  Now,  9.30  p.m.,
it  is  going  '  big  guns.'  The  drift  is  fairly  thick  and  snow  is
probably  falling.

"  March  25.     Much  the  same  as  yesterday.

"  March  28.  In  a  seventy-five-mile  wind,  Hodgeman
had  several  fingers  frost-bitten  this  morning  while  attending
to  the  anemograph.

"  March  29.     It  was  quite  sunny  when  we  opened  the
trap-door,  though  it  blew  about  sixty  miles  per  hour  with
light  drift.
138


^*S?!iSJ?^^2-^4y^


f


T^e^/j^ersj:/    ai    ihe    Qcnero/     T^/aieau    Office
for  iranjrrt'js'on    Oy   yyind  a^  a  mvrjpaper.


-f=#


nnritmTH


^c/iior/a/    .......

Southern  ^/edg/ng   3ong    •

(^  'Phaniasm    of  ihe  ^notV  -

Jhe  'T^omance    of  ^p/oraiion

T"'3'f^     Q'^S^'"^9    ^f  (jreen/ane/  (/lanjen)

Ode    io  J~o6acco  ....

y^unc/i,    the    dinner   yDi/oguz

Jo   the  ^itor    ...         -         -

^coU's    '^riiijh  CThiarciic  ^pexJiiion

_^iat/cj     and  (Jniarciics

Wirc/ejj  -   ihe    rea/zjaiion     -

^/rihj,  J)caihj    and  A/arr/a^gej   ■

Yhc  ^fo/uiion    of  Women

Q  (oncije    tiarratife.

The  J)ay/ighi    "^ropojlhon     •

f^eieoro/ogica/  and  /)fagmiic  //otej,

(a/endar   l^hymc^  ■         •         .     •    .

CThjtVerj     to    (orrespondenij  •


2
3

8
10

II
12
13
14
16

n

16
21
25
24
25
26


'D


4=


vni.-1-wt


A^mU  1HI3

■ — 1=


J.


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

"  March  30.  The  wind  is  doing  itself  full  justice.  About
8  P.M.  it  ranged  between  ninety-five  and  one  hundred  miles  per
hour,  and  now  the  whole  hut  is  tremulous  and  the  stove-pipe
vibrates  so  that  the  two  large  pots  on  the  stove  rattle."

At  the  beginning  of  April,  McLean  laid  the  foundations
of  The  Adelie  Blizzard  which  recorded  our  life  for  the  next
seven  months.  It  v/as  a  monthly  publication,  and  contribu-
tions were  invited  from  all  on  every  subject  but  the  wind.
Anything  from  light  doggerel  to  heavy  blank  verse  was
welcomed,  and  original  articles,  letters  to  the  Editor,  plays,
reviews  on  books  and  serial  stories  were  accepted  within  the
limits  of  our  supply  of  foolscap  paper  and  type-writer  ribbons.

It  was  the  first  Antarctic  publication  which  could  boast
a  real  cable  column  of  news  of  the  day.  Extracts  from  the
April  number  were  read  after  dinner  one  evening  and
excited  much  amusement.  An  "  Ode  to  Tobacco  "  was  very
popular,  and  seemed  to  voice  the  enthusiasm  of  our  small
community,  while  "  The  Evolution  of  Women  "  introduced
us  to  a  once-familiar  subject.  The  Editor  was  later  admitted
by  wireless  to  the  Journalists'  Association  (Sydney).

Many  have  asked  the  question,  "  Wliat  did  you  do  to
fill  in  the  time  during  the  second  year  ?  "

The  duties  of  cook  and  night-watchman  came  to  each
man  once  every  week,  and  meteorological  and  magnetic
observations  went  on  daily.  Then  we  were  able  to  devote
a  good  deal  of  time  to  working  up  the  scientific  work  accom-
plished during  the  sledging  journeys.  The  wireless  watches
kept  two  men  well  occupied,  and  in  spare  moments  the  chief
recreation  was  reading.  There  was  a  fine  supply  of  illus-
trated journals  and  periodicals  which  had  arrived  by  the
Aurora,  and  with  papers  like  the  Daily  Gh^aphic,  Illustrated
London  News,  Sphere  and  Punch,  we  tried  to  make  up  the
arrears  of  a  year  in  exile.  The  "  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  "
was  a  great  boon,  being  always  "  the  last  word  "  in  the
settlement  of  a  debated  point.  Chess  and  cards  were
played  on  several  occasions.  Again,  whenever  the
weather  gave  the  smallest  opportunity,  there  were  jobs
140


A  SECOND  WINTER

outside,  digging  for  cases,  attending  to  the  wireless  mast
and,  in  the  spring,  geological  collecting  and  dredging.  If
the  air  was  clear  of  drift,  and  the  wind  not  over  fifty  miles
per  hour,  one  could  spend  a  pleasant  hour  or  more  walking
along  the  shore  watching  the  birds  and  noting  the  changes
in  "  scenery  "  which  were  always  occurring  along  our  short
"  selection  "  of  rocks.  During  1912  we  had  been  able  to
study  all  the  typical  features  of  our  novel  and  beautiful
environment,  but  1913  was  the  period  of  "  intensive  cultiva-
tion "  and  we  would  have  gladly  forgone  much  of  it.
Divine  service  was  usually  held  on  Sunday  mornings,  but  in
place  of  it  we  sometimes  sang  hymns  during  the  evening,
or  arranged  a  programme  of  sacred  selections  on  the  gramo-
phone. There  was  a  great  loss  in  our  singing  volume  after
the  previous  year,  which  Hodgeman  endeavoured  to  remedy
by  striking  up  an  accompaniment  on  the  organ.

Cooking  reached  its  acme,  according  to  our  standard,
and  each  man  became  remarkable  for  some  particular  dish.
Bage  was  the  exponent  of  steam  puddings  of  every  variety,
and  INIadigan  could  always  be  relied  upon  for  an  unfailing
batch  of  puff-pastry.  Bickerton  once  started  out  with
the  object  of  cooking  a  ginger  pudding,  and  in  an  unguarded
moment  used  mixed  spices  instead  of  ginger.  The  result
was  rather  appetizing,  and  "  mixed-spice  pudding  "  was  added
to  an  original  list.  McLean  specialized  in  yeast  waffles,
having  acquired  the  art  of  tossing  pancakes.  Jeff  ryes  had
come  on  the  scene  with  a  limited  experience,  but  his  first
milk  scones  gained  him  a  reputation  which  he  managed  to
make  good.  Hodgeman  fell  back  on  the  cookery  book
before  embarking  on  the  task  of  preparing  dinner,  but  the
end-product,  so  to  speak,  which  might  be  invariably  expected
for  "  sweets  "  was  tapioca  pudding.  Penguin  meat  had
always  been  in  favour.  Now  special  care  was  devoted  to
seal  meat,  and,  after  a  while,  mainly  owing  to  the  rather
copious  use  of  onion  powder,  no  one  could  say  for  certain
which  was  which.

During  the  previous  year,   yeast  had  been  cultivated

141


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

successfully  from  Russian  stout.  The  experiments  were
continued,  and  all  available  information  was  gathered
from  cookery  books  and  the  Encyclopaedia.  Russian  stout,
barley  wine,  apple  rings,  sugar,  flour  and  mould  from
potatoes  were  used  in  several  mixtures  and  eventually
fermentation  was  started.  Bread-making  was  the  next
difficulty,  and  various  instructions  were  tried  in  succession.
The  method  of  "  trial  and  error  "  was  at  last  responsible
for  the  first  light  spongy  loaf,  and  then  every  night-watch-
man cultivated  the  art  and  baked  for  the  ensuing  day.

On  April  8  the  snow  had  gathered  deeply  everywhere
and  we  had  some  exercise  on  skis.  Several  of  the  morainic
areas  were  no  longer  visible,  and  it  was  possible  to  run
between  the  rocks  for  a  considerable  distance.  A  fresh
breeze  came  up  during  the  afternoon  and  provided  a  splendid
impetus  for  some  good  slides.  During  the  short  calm,
twenty-six  seals  landed  on  the  harbour-ice.

On  the  morning  of  the  same  day  Mary  gave  birth  to
five  pups  in  the  Transit  House.  The  place  was  full  of
cracks,  through  which  snow  and  wind  were  always  driving,
and  so  we  were  not  surprised  when  four  of  them  were  found
to  have  died.  The  survivor  was  named  "  Hoyle "  (a
cognomen  for  our  old  friend  Hurley)  and  his  doings  gave  us
a  new  fund  of  entertainment.

The  other  dogs  had  been  penned  in  the  veranda  and  in
tolerable  weather  were  brought  outside  to  be  fed.  Carrying
an  axe,  Madigan  usually  went  down  to  the  boat  harbour,
followed  by  the  expectant  pack,  to  where  there  were  several
seal  carcases.  These  lay  immovably  frozen  to  the  ice,  and
were  cut  about  and  hacked  so  that  the  meat  in  section
reminded  one  of  the  grain  of  a  log  of  red  gum,  and  it  was
certainly  quite  as  hard.  When  Madigan  commenced  to
chop,  the  dogs  would  range  themselves  on  the  lee  side  and
*'  field  "  the  flying  chips.

On  April  16  the  last  penguin  was  seen  on  a  ledge  over-
hanging an  icy  cove  to  the  east.  Apparently  its  moulting
time  had  not  expired,  but  it  was  certainly  a  very  miserable
142


A  J  HODGEMAN    OEi-T


600        lOOO


Statute     miles


17  O       East         180      West


THE  METEOROLOGICAL  CHART  FOR  APRIL  12,  1913,  COMPILED  BY  THE  COMMONWEALTH

METEOROLOGICAL  BUREAU
Mr.  Hunt  appends  the  following  explanation

"A  very  intense  cyclone  passing  south  of  Macquarie  Island,  where  the  barometer  fell  on  the  11th  from  29-49  at  9  a.m.
to  29  13  at  6  p.m.,  and  the  next  day  to  28-34  at  9  A.M.  and  27-91  at  6  p.m.  At  Adelie  Land  the  barometer  was  not  greatly
affected,  but  rose  m  sympathy  with  the  passage  of  the  '  low  '  from  28-70  to  28-90  during  the  twenty-four  hours.  The
influence  of  this  cyclone  was  very  wide  and  probably  embraced  both  Adelie  Land  and  Tasm.inia."


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

bird,  smothered  in  small  icicles  and  snow  and  partly  exposed
to  a  sixty-five  mile  wind  with  the  temperature  close  to
— 10°  F.  Petrels  were  often  seen  flying  along  the  foreshores
and  no  wind  appeared  to  daunt  them.  It  was  certainly  a
remarkable  thing  to  witness  a  snow-petrel,  small,  light  and
fragile,  making  headway  over  the  sea  in  the  face  of  an  eighty-
mile  hurricane,  fluttering  down  through  the  spindrift  to
pick  up  a  morsel  of  food  which  it  had  detected.  Close  to  the
western  cliffs  there  was  a  trail  of  brash-ice  where  many
birds  were  often  observed  feeding  on  Euphausia  (crusta-
ceans) in  weather  when  it  scarcely  seemed  possible  for  any
living  creature  to  be  abroad.

Throughout  April  news  by  wireless  came  in  slowly  and
spasmodically,  and  Jeffryes  was  becoming  resigned  to  the
eccentricities  of  the  place.  As  an  example  of  the  unfavour-
able conditions  which  sometimes  prevailed  :  on  April  14
the  wind  was  steady,  in  the  nineties,  with  light  drift  and,
at  times,  the  aurora  would  illumine  the  north-west  sky.
Still,  during  "  quiet  "  intervals,  two  messages  came  through
and  were  acknowledged.

A  coded  weather  report,  which  had  priority  over  all  other
messages,  was  sent  out  each  night,  and  it  is  surprising  how  often
Jeffryes  managed  to  transmit  this  important  intelligence.
On  evenings  when  receiving  was  an  impossibility,  owing  to
a  continual  stream  of  St.  Elmo's  fire,  the  three  code  words
for  the  barometric  reading,  the  velocity  and  direction  of  the
wind  were  signalled  repeatedly  and,  on  the  following  night,
perhaps,  Macquarie  Island  would  acknowledge  them.  Of
course  we  had  to  use  new  signs  for  the  higher  wind  velocities,
as  no  provision  had  been  made  for  them  in  our  meteorological
code-book.  The  reports  from  Macquarie  Island  and  Adelie
Land  were  communicated  to  Mr.  Hunt  of  the  Commonwealth
Weather  Bureau  and  to  Mr.  Bates  of  the  Dominion  Meteoro-
logical Office,  who  plotted  them  out  for  their  daily  weather
forecasts.

It  was  very  gratifying  to  learn  that  the  Macquarie
Island  party  to  a  man  had  consented  to  remain  at  their
144


A  SECOND  WINTER

lonely  post  and  from  Ainsworth,  their  leader,  I  received  a
brief  report  of  the  work  which  had  been  accomplished  by
each  member.  We  all  could  appreciate  the  sacrifice  they
were  making.  Then,  too,  an  account  was  received  of  the
great  sledging  efforts  which  had  been  made  by  Wild  and  his
men  to  the  west.  But  it  was  not  till  the  end  of  the  year  that
their  adventurous  story  was  related  to  us  in  detail.

On  the  23rd  Lassie,  one  of  the  dogs,  was  badly  wounded
in  a  fight  and  had  to  be  shot.  Quarrels  amongst  the  dogs
had  to  be  quelled  immediately,  otherwise  they  would
probably  mean  the  death  of  some  unfortunate  animal  which
happened  to  be  thrown  down  amongst  the  pack.  When-
ever a  dog  was  down,  it  was  the  way  of  these  brutes  to
attack  him  irrespective  of  whether  they  were  friends  or
foes.

Among  our  dogs  there  were  several  groups  whose
members  always  consorted  together.  Thus,  George  and
Lassie  were  friends  and,  when  the  latter  was  killed,  George,
who  was  naturally  a  miserable,  downtrodden  creature,
became  a  kind  of  pariah,  morose  and  solitary  and  at  war
with  all  except  Peary  and  Fix,  with  whom  he  and  Lassie
had  been  associated  in  fights  against  the  rest.  The  other
dogs  lived  together  in  some  kind  of  harmony.  Jack  and
Amundsen  standing  out  as  particular  chums,  while  the
"  pups,"  as  we  called  them — D'Urville,  Ross  and  Wilkes
("  Monkey  ") — were  a  trio  born  in  Adelie  Land  and,  there-
fore, comrades  in  misfortune.  Hoyle,  as  a  pup,  was  treated
benevolently  by  all  the  others,  and  entered  the  fellowship  of
the  other  three  when  he  grew  up.  Among  the  rest,  Mikkel
stood  out  as  a  good  fighter.  Colonel  as  the  biggest  dog  and
ringleader  against  the  Peary-Fix  faction,  Fram  as  a  nervous
intractable  animal,  and  Mary  as  the  sole  representative  of
the  sex.

It  was  remarkable  that  Peary,  Fix  and  George  in  their

hatred  of  the  others,  who  were  penned  up  in  the  dog  shelter

during  bad  weather,  would  absent  themselves  for  days  on  a

snow  ramp  near  the  Magnetograph  House,  where  they  were

VOL.  II  K  145


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

partly  protected  from  the  wind  by  rocks.  George,  from
being  a  mere  associate  of  Peary  and  Fix,  became  more
amiable  as  the  year  went  by,  and  at  times  it  was  quite
pathetic  to  see  his  attempts  at  friendliness.

We  became  very  fond  of  the  dogs  despite  their  habit  of
howling  at  night  and  their  wolfish  ferocity.  They  always
gave  one  a  welcome,  in  drift  or  sunshine,  and  though  ruled
by  the  law  of  force,  they  had  a  few  domestic  traits  to  make
them  civilized.

May  was  a  dreaded  month  because  it  had  been  the  period
of  worst  wind  and  drift  during  1912.  On  this  occasion  the
wind  velocities  over  four  weeks  were  not  so  high  and  con-
stant, though  the  snowfall  was  just  as  persistent.  On  the
17th  and  18th,  however,  there  was  an  unexpected  "  jump  "  to
the  nineties.  The  average  over  the  first  twenty-four  hours
was  eighty -three,  and  on  the  18th  it  attained  93*7  miles  per
hour.  One  terrific  rise  between  6.30  and  7.30  on  the  night
of  the  17th  was  shown  as  one  hundred  and  three  miles  on
the  anemometer — the  record  up  to  that  time.

Madigan  was  thrown  over  and  had  a  hard  fall  on  his
arm,  smashing  a  bottle  of  the  special  ink  which  was  used
for  the  anemograph  pen.  Bage  related  how  he  had  sailed
across  the  Magnetic  Flat  by  sitting  down  and  raising  his
arms  in  the  air.  He  was  accompanied  by  Fix,  Peary  and
George,  who  were  blown  along  the  slippery  surface  for  yards.
McLean  had  a  "  lively  time  "  cutting  ice  and  bringing  in  the
big  blocks.  Often  he  would  slide  away  with  a  large  piece,
and  "  pull  up  "  on  a  snow  patch  twenty  yards  to  leeward.

On  the  22nd  there  were  hours  of  gusts  which  came  down
like  thunderbolts,  making  us  apprehensive  for  the  safety
of  the  wireless  masts  ;  we  had  grown  to  trust  the  stabilty
of  the  Hut.  Every  one  who  went  outside  came  back  with
a  few  experiences.  Jeffryes  was  roughly  handled  through
not  wearing  crampons,  and  several  cases  of  kerosene,  firmly
stacked  on  the  break-wind,  were  dislodged  and  thrown
several  yards.

Empire  Day  was  celebrated  in  Adelie  Land  with  a
146


1.1 'j%i


vf  ^*  12,-  '   ;-4P'^^'---'


./  '      ^


V- ■  ?


thf


^'^


A  SECOND  WINTER

small  display.  At  2.30  p.m.  the  Union  Jack  was  hoisted  to
the  topmast  and  three  cheers  were  given  for  the  King.
The  wind  blew  at  fifty  miles  an  hour  with  hght  drift ;
temperature  —  3°  F.  Empire  greetings  were  sent  to  the
Colonial  Secretary,  London,  and  to  jMr  Fisher,  Prime
Minister  of  Australia.  These  were  warmly  reciprocated
a  few  days  afterwards.

Preceded  by  a  day  of  whirlies  on  the  7th  and  random
gusts  on  the  same  evening,  the  wind  made  a  determined
attack  next  morning  and  carried  away  the  top  and  part  of
the  middle  section  of  the  main  wireless  mast.  It  was  a  very
unexpected  event,  lulled  as  we  were  into  security  by  the
fact  that  May,  the  worst  month,  had  passed.  On  examina-
tion it  was  found  that  two  of  the  topmast  wire  stays  had
chafed  through,  whilst  another  had  parted.  At  first  it
seemed  a  hopeless  task  to  re-erect  the  mast,  but  gradually
ways  and  means  were  discussed,  and  we  waited  for  the  first
calm  day  to  put  the  theories  into  execution.

Meanwhile,  it  was  suggested  that  if  a  heavy  kite  were
made  and  induced  to  fly  in  the  continuous  winds,  the  aerial
thus  provided  would  be  sufficient  to  receive  wireless  messages.
To  this  end,  Bage  and  Bickerton  set  to  work,  and  the  first
invention  was  a  Venesta-box  kite  which  was  tried  in  a  steady
seventy-mile  wind.  Despite  its  weight, — at  least  ten  pounds
— the  kite  rose  immediately,  steadied  by  guys  on  either  side,
and  then  suddenly  descended  with  a  crash  on  to  the  glacier
ice.  After  the  third  fall  the  kite  was  too  battered  to  be  of
any  further  use.  Another  device,  in  which  an  empty
carbide  tin  was  employed,  and  still  another,  making  use  of
an  old  propeller,  shared  the  same  fate.

On  the  evening  of  the  19th  a  perfect  coloured  corona,
three  degrees  in  diameter,  was  observed  encircling  the  moon
in  a  sky  which  lit  up  at  intervals  with  dancing  auroral
curtains.  Coronge  or  "  glories,"  which  closely  invest  the
luminary,  are  due  to  diffraction  owing  to  immense  numbers
of  very  minute  water  or  ice  particles  floating  in  the  air
between  the  observer  and  the  source  of  hght.     The  larger

147


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  particles  the  smaller  the  corona,  so  that  by  a  measure-
ment of  the  diameter  of  a  corona  the  size  of  the  particles
can  be  calculated.  Earlier  in  the  year,  a  double  corona  had
been  seen  when  the  moon  was  shining  through  cirro-cumulus
clouds.  Haloes,  on  the  other  hand,  are  wide  circles  (or  arcs
of  circles)  in  the  sky  surrounding  the  sun  or  moon,  and
arising  from  light-refraction  in  myriads  of  tiny  ice-crystals
suspended  in  the  atmosphere.  They  were  very  commonly
noted  in  Adelie  Land  where  the  conditions  were  so  ideal
for  their  production.

Midwinter's  Day  1913  !  we  had  reached  a  turning-point
in  the  season.  The  Astronomer  Royal  told  us  that  at  eight
o'clock  on  June  22  the  sun  commenced  to  return,  and  every
one  took  note  of  the  fact.  The  sky  was  overcast,  the  air
surcharged  with  drifting  snow,  and  the  wind  was  forty  miles
an  hour — a  representative  day  as  far  as  the  climate  was
concerned.  The  cook  made  a  special  effort  and  the  menu
bore  the  following  foreword  :

Now  is  the  winter  of  our  discontent
Made  glorious  summer.  .  .   .

On  July  6  the  wind  moderated,  and  we  set  about  repairing
once  more  the  fortunes  of  the  "  wireless."  The  shattered
topmast  used  to  sway  about  in  the  heavy  winds,  threatening
to  bring  down  the  rest  of  the  mast.  Bickerton,  therefore,
climbed  up  with  a  saw  and  cut  it  almost  through  above  the
doubling.  All  hands  then  pulled  hard,  and  the  upper  part
cracked  off ;  the  lower  section  being  easily  removed  from  the
cross-trees.  The  mast  now  looked  "  shipshape  "  and  ready
for  future  improvements.

It  was  decided  to  use  as  a  topmast  the  mast  which  had
been  formerly  employed  to  support  the  northern  half  of  the
aerial.  So  on  the  29th  this  was  lowered  and  removed  to
the  veranda  to  be  fitted  for  erection.

Almost  a  fortnight  now  elapsed,  during  which  the  weather
was  "  impossible."  In  fact,  the  wind  was  frightful  through-
out the  whole  month  of  July,  surpassing  all  its  previous
records  and  wearing  out  our  much-tried  patience.  All  that
148


A  SECOND  WINTER

one  could  do  was  to  work  on  and  try  grimly  to  ignore  it.
On  July  2  we  noted  :  "  Thick  as  a  wall  outside  with  an
eighty-five  miler."  And  so  it  commenced  and  continued
for  a  day,  subsiding  slowly  through  the  seventies  to  the
fifties  and  then  suddenly  redoubling  in  strength,  rose  to  a
climax  about  midnight  on  the  5th — one  hundred  and  sixteen
miles  an  hour  !  For  eight  hours  it  maintained  an  average
of  one  hundred  and  seven  miles  an  hour,  and  the  timbers  of
the  Hut  seemed  to  be  jarred  and  wrenched  as  the  wind
throbbed  in  its  mightier  gusts.  These  were  the  highest
wind-velocities  recorded  during  our  two  years'  residence
in  Adelie  Land  and  are  probably  the  highest  sustained
velocities  ever  reported  from  a  meteorological  station.

With  the  exception  of  a  few  Antarctic  and  snow  petrels
flying  over  the  sea  on  the  calmer  days,  no  life  had  been  seen
round  the  Hut  during  June.  So  it  was  with  some  surprise
that  we  sighted  a  Weddell  seal  on  July  9  attempting  to  land
on  the  harbour-ice  in  a  seventy-five-mile  wind.  Several
times  it  clambered  over  the  edge  and  on  turning  broadside
to  the  wind  was  actually  tumbled  back  into  the  water.
Eventually  it  struggled  into  the  lee  of  some  icy  hummocks,
but  only  remained  there  for  a  few  minutes,  deciding  that  the
water  was  much  warmer.

On  the  11th  there  was  an  exceptionally  low  barometer
at  27'794  inches.  At  the  same  time  the  wind  ran  riot  once
more — two  hundred  and  ninety-eight  miles  in  three  hours.
The  highest  barometric  reading  was  recorded  on  September  3,
30-4  inches,  and  the  comparison  indicates  a  wide  range  for
a  station  at  sea-level.

To  show  how  quickly  conditions  would  change,  it  was
almost  calm  next  morning,  and  all  hands  were  in  readmess  to
advance  the  wireless  mast  another  stage.  Previously  there
had  been  three  masts,  one  high  one  in  three  lengths,  and  two
smaller  ones  of  one  length  each,  between  which  the  aerial
stretched  ;  the  "  lead-in  "  wires  being  connected  to  the  middle
of  the  aerial.  This  is  kno^vn  as  an  "  umbrella  aerial."  Since
we  were  without  one  short  mast  it  was  resolved  to  erect  a

149


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

"  directive  "  F-shaped  aerial.  The  mainmast  was  to  be
in  two  instead  of  three  lengths,  and  we  wondered  if  the
aerial  would  be  high  enough.  In  any  case,  it  was  so  calm
early  on  the  11th  that  we  ventured  to  erect  the  topmast
and  had  hauled  it  half-way,  when  the  wind  swooped  down
from  the  plateau,  and  there  was  just  time  to  make  fast  the
stays  and  the  hauling  rope  and  to  leave  things  "  snug  "  for
the  next  spell  of  bad  weather.

In  eight  days  another  opportunity  came,  and  this  time
the  topmast  was  hoisted,  wedged  and  securely  stayed.
Bickerton  had  fixed  a  long  bolt  through  the  middle  of  the
topmast  and  just  above  it  three  additional  wire  stays  were
to  be  placed.  Another  fine  day  and  we  reckoned  to  finish
the  work.

From  July  26  onwards  the  sky  was  cloudless  for  a  week,
and  each  day  the  northern  sun  would  rise  a  fraction  of  a
degree  higher.  The  wind  was  very  constant  and  of  high
velocity.

It  was  a  grand  sight  to  witness  the  sea  in  a  hurricane  on
a  driftless,  clear  day.  Crouched  under  a  rock  on  Azimuth
Hill,  and  looking  across  to  the  west  along  the  curving  brink
of  the  cliffs,  one  could  watch  the  water  close  inshore
blacken  under  the  lash  of  the  wind,  whiten  into  foam  farther
off,  and  then  disappear  into  the  hurrying  clouds  of  spray
and  sea-smoke.  Over  the  Mackellar  Islets  and  the  "  Piano-
forte Berg  "  columns  of  spray  would  shoot  up  like  geysers,
and  fly  away  in  the  mad  race  to  the  north.

Early  in  July  Jeffryes  became  ill,  and  for  some  weeks
his  symptoms  were  such  as  to  give  every  one  much  anxiety.
His  work  on  the  wireless  had  been  assiduous  at  all  times,
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  continual  and  acute  strain
of  sending  and  receiving  messages  under  unprecedented
conditions  was  such  that  he  eventually  had  a  "  nervous
breakdown."  Unfortunately  the  weather  was  so  atrocious,
and  the  conditions  under  which  we  were  placed  so  peculiarly
difficult,  that  nothing  could  be  done  to  brighten  his  prospects.
150


A  SECOND  WINTER

McLean  considered  that  as  the  spring  returned  and  it  became
possible  to  take  more  exercise  outside,  the  nervous  exhaustion
would  pass  off.  In  the  meantime  Jeffryes  took  a  complete
rest,  and  slowly  improved  as  the  months  went  by,  and  our
hopes  of  relief  came  nearer.  It  was  a  great  misfortune  for
our  comrade,  especially  as  it  was  his  first  experience  of  such
a  climate,  and  he  had  applied  himself  to  work  with
enthusiasm  and  perhaps  in  an  over-conscientious  spirit.

July  concluded  its  stormy  career  with  the  astonishing
wind-average  of  63*6  miles  an  hour.  We  were  all  relieved
to  see  Friday,  August  1,  appear  on  the  modest  calendar,
which  it  was  the  particular  pleasure  of  each  night-watchman
to  change.  More  light  filtered  day  by  day  through  the  ice
on  the  kitchen  window,  midwinter  lay  behind,  and  we  were
ready  to  hail  the  first  signs  of  returning  spring.


151


CHAPTER  XXIV
NEARING  THE  END

Seven  men  from  all  the  world,  back  to  town  again,
Seven  men  from  out  of  hell.  .  .  .

Kipling

IT  is  wonderful  how  quickly  the  weeks  seemed  to  pass.
Situated  as  we  were,  Time  became  quite  an  object
of  study  to  us  and  its  imperceptible  drift  was  almost
a  reality,  considering  that  each  day  was  another  step  towards
liberty — freedom  from  the  tyranny  of  the  wind.  In  a  sense,
the  endless  surge  of  the  blizzard  was  a  slow  form  of  torture,
and  the  subtle  effect  it  had  on  the  mind  was  measurable
in  the  delight  with  which  one  greeted  a  calm,  fine  morning,
or  noted  some  insignificant  fact  which  bespoke  the  approach
of  a  milder  season.  Thus  in  August,  although  the  weather
was  colder,  there  were  the  merest  signs  of  thawing  along
the  edges  of  the  snow  packed  against  the  rocky  faces  which
looked  towards  the  sun  ;  Weddell  seals  came  back  to  the
land,  and  the  petrels  would  at  times  appear  in  large  flocks  ;
all  of  which  are  very  commonplace  events  which  any  one
might  have  expected,  but  at  the  time  they  had  more  than
their  face  value.

August  5  was  undoubtedly  a  great  day  from  our  very
provincial  point  of  view.  On  the  4th  there  had  been  a
dense  drift,  during  which  the  Hut  was  buttressed  round
with  soft  snow  which  rose  above  the  eaves  and  half  filled
the  entrance- veranda.  The  only  way  in  which  the  night-
watchman  could  keep  the  hourly  observations  was  to  dig
his  way  out  frequently  with  a  shovel.  In  the  early  morning
hours  of  the  5th  the  wind  abated  and  veered  right  round
152


Adelie  Lund


DISATPEAEING   I.\  THE  DIUFT


liar  leu


Adelii- Lfuiil  THE  HUT  LOO.MIXO   THROUGJI  THE  ])KIFT


II  n,  I  I'll


NEARING  THE  END

from  south  through  east  to  north-east,  from  which  quarter
it  remained  as  a  fresh  breeze  with  falhng  snow.  By  7  a.m.
the  air  was  still,  and  outside  there  was  a  dead  world  of
whiteness  ;  flocculent  heaps  of  down  rolling  up  to  where
glimpses  of  rock  streaked  black  near  the  skyline  of  the  ridges,
striated  masses  of  livid  cloud  overhead,  and  to  the  horizon
the  dark  berg- strewn  sea,  over  which  the  snow  birds
fluttered.

We  did  not  linger  over  the  scenery,  but  set  to  work  to
hoist  to  the  head  of  the  mainmast  the  aerial,  which  had  been
hurriedly  put  together.  The  job  occupied  till  lunch-time,  and
then  a  jury-mast  was  fixed  to  the  southern  supporting  mast,
and  by  dusk  the  aerial  hung  in  position.  Bickerton  was  the
leading  spirit  in  the  work  and  subsequently  steadied  the
mainmast  with  eighteen  wire  stays,  in  the  determination  to
make  it  stable  enough  to  weather  the  worst  hurricane.
The  attempt  was  so  successful  that  in  an  ordinary  fifty-
mile  "  blow  "  the  mast  vibrated  slightly,  and  in  higher  winds
exhibited  the  smallest  degree  of  movement.

At  eight  o'clock  that  night,  Jeffryes,  who  felt  so  benefited
by  his  rest  that  he  was  eager  to  commence  operating  once
more,  had  soon  "  attuned  "  his  instrument  to  Macquarie
Island,  and  in  a  few  minutes  communication  was  re-
established.

We  learned  from  the  Governor- General,  Lord  Denman,
that  her  Majesty  the  Queen  was  "  graciously  pleased  to
consent  to  the  name  '  Queen  Mary  Land  '  being  given  to
newly  discovered  land."  The  message  referred  to  the  tract
of  Antarctic  coast  which  had  been  discovered  and  mapped
by  Wild  and  his  party  to  the  west.

On  August  6  Macquarie  Island  signalled  that  they  had
run  short  of  provisions.  The  message  was  rather  a  paradox  :
"  Food  done,  but  otherwise  all  right."  However,  on
August  11,  we  were  reassured  to  hear  that  the  Tutanekai,
a  New  Zealand  Government  steamer,  had  been  commissioned
to  relieve  the  party,  and  that  Sawyer  through  ill-health
had  been  obliged  to  return  to  Australia.     A  sealing-ship,

153


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  Rachel  Cohen,  after  battling  for  almost  the  whole  month
of  July  against  gales,  in  an  endeavour  to  reach  the  island,
with  stores  for  our  party  and  the  sealers,  had  returned
damaged  to  port.

Marvellous  to  relate  we  had  two  calm  days  in  succession,
and  on  the  6th  the  snow  lay  so  deeply  round  the  Hut  that
progression  without  skis  was  a  laborious  flounder.  The
dogs  plunged  about  in  great  glee,  rolling  in  the  snow  and
"  playing  off  "  their  surplus  energy  after  being  penned  for
a  long  spell  in  the  shelter.

On  skis  one  could  push  up  the  first  slopes  of  the  glacier
for  a  long  distance.  Soft  snow  had  settled  two  feet  thick
even  on  the  steep  icy  downfalls.  The  sea  to  the  north  was
frozen  into  large  cakes  between  which  ran  a  network  of  dark
water  "  leads."  With  glasses  we  could  make  out  in  the
near  distance  five  seals  and  two  tall  solitary  figures  which
were  doubtless  Emperor  penguins.  During  the  whole  day
nimbus  clouds  had  hung  heavily  from  the  sky,  and  snow
had  fallen  in  grains  and  star-like  crystals.  Gradually  the
nimbus  lightened,  a  rift  appeared  overhead,  and  the  edges
of  the  billowy  cumulus  were  burnished  in  the  light  of  the
low  sun.  The  sea-horizon  came  sharply  into  sight  through
fading  mist.  Bergs  and  islands,  from  being  ghostly  images,
rose  into  sharp-featured  reality.  The  masts  and  Hut,
with  a  dark  riband  of  smoke  floating  from  the  chimney,
lay  just  below,  and  two  of  the  men  were  walking  out  to  the
harbour-ice  where  a  seal  had  just  landed,  while  round  them
scampered  the  dogs  in  high  spirits.  That  was  sufficient
to  set  us  sliding  downhill,  ploughing  deep  furrows  through
the  soft  drift  and  reaching  the  Hut  in  quick  time.

During  August  we  were  able  to  do  more  work  outside,
thus  enlarging  our  sphere  of  interest.  Bage,  who  had  been
busy  up  till  August  8  with  his  daily  magnetograph  records,
ran  short  of  bromide  papers  and  now  had  to  be  contented
with  taking  "  quick  runs  "  at  intervals,  especially  when
the  aurora  was  active.  His  astronomical  observations  had
been  very  disappointing  owing  to  the  continuous  wind  and
154>


Adelie  Land


A  WALL  OF  SOLID  GNEISS  NEAR  WINTER  QX'ARTERS


Hurley


Adelie  Land


AX  ERRATIC  ON  THE  MORAINE.     CAPE  DENISON


Hurley


NEARING  THE  END

drift.  Still,  in  September,  which  was  marked  by  periods
of  fine  weather,  a  few  good  star  observations  were  possible.
Shafts  were  sunk  in  the  sea-ice  and  up  on  the  glacier,  just
above  the  zone  where  the  ice  was  loaded  with  stones  and
debris — the  lower  moraine.  The  glacier  shaft  was  dug  to  a
depth  of  twenty-four  feet,  and  several  erratics  were  met  with
embedded  in  the  ice.  In  this  particular  part  the  crystalline
structure  of  the  ice  resembled  that  of  a  gneiss,  showing
that  it  had  flowed  under  pressure.  I  was  able  to  make
measurements  of  ablation  on  the  glacier,  to  take  observa-
tions of  the  temperature  and  salinity  of  the  sea- water,  and
to  estimate  the  forward  movement  of  the  seaward  cliffs  of
the  ice-cap.

Geological  collecting  now  became  quite  a  popular  diver-
sion. With  a  slight  smattering  of  "  gneiss,"  "  felspar,"
"weathered  limestone,"  "garnets,"  and  "glacial  markings"
the  amateurs  went  off  and  made  many  finds  on  the  moraines,
and  the  specimens  were  cached  in  heaps,  to  be  later  brought
home  by  the  dogs,  some  of  which  were  receiving  their  first
lessons  in  sledge-pulling.

Rather  belated,  but  none  the  less  welcome,  our  midwinter
wireless  greetings  arrived  on  August  17  from  many  friends  who
could  only  imagine  how  much  they  were  appreciated,  and
from  various  members  of  the  Expedition  who  had  spent
the  previous  year  in  Adelie  Land  and  who  knew  the  meaning
of  an  Antarctic  winter.  A  few  evenings  later,  Macquarie
Islanders  had  their  reward  in  the  arrival  of  the  Tutanekai
from  New  Zealand  with  supplies  of  food,  and,  piecing  together
a  few  fragments  of  evidence  "  dropped  in  the  ether,"  we
judged  that  they  were  having  a  night  of  revelry.

The  wind  was  in  a  fierce  humour  on  the  morning  of
August  16,  mounting  to  one  hundred  and  five  miles  per
hour  between  9  and  10  a.m.,  and  carrying  with  it  a  very
dense  drift.

We  were  now  in  a  position  to  sit  down  and  generalize
about  the  wind.  It  is  a  tiresome  thing  to  have  it  as  the
recurring  insistent  theme  of  our  story,  but  to  have  had  it  as

155


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  continual  obstacle  to  our  activity,  the  opposing  barrier  to
the  simplest  task,  was  even  more  tedious.

A  river,  rather  a  torrent,  of  air  rushes  from  the  hinterland
northward  year  after  year,  replenished  from  a  source  which
never  fails.  We  had  reason  to  believe  that  it  was  local  in
character,  as  apparently  a  gulf  of  open  water  about  one
hundred  miles  in  width — the  D'Urville  Sea — exists  to  the
north  of  Adelie  Land.  Thus,  far  back  in  the  interior —
back  to  the  South  Geographical  Pole  itself — across  one
thousand  six  hundred  miles  of  lofty  plateau — is  a  zone  of
high  barometric  pressure,  while  to  the  north  lies  the  D'Urville
Sea  and  beyond  it  the  Southern  Ocean — a  zone  of  low
pressure.  As  if  through  a  contracted  outlet,  thereby  in-
creasing the  velocity  of  the  flow,  the  wind  sweeps  down
over  Adelie  Land  to  equalize  the  great  air-pressure  system.
And  so,  in  winter,  the  chilling  of  the  plateau  leads  to  the
development  of  a  higher  barometric  pressure  and,  as  the  open
water  to  the  north  persists,  to  higher  winds.  In  summer
the  suns  shines  on  the  Pole  for  six  months,  the  uplands  of
the  continent  are  warmed  and  the  northern  zone  of  low
pressure  pushes  southward.  So,  in  Adelie  Land,  short  spells
of  calm  weather  may  be  expected  over  a  period  of  barely
three  months  around  the  summer  solstice.  This  explanation
is  intentionally  popular.  The  meteorological  problem  is
one  which  can  only  be  fully  discussed  when  all  the  manifold
observations  have  been  gathered  together,  from  other
contemporary  Antarctic  expeditions,  from  our  two  stations
on  the  Antarctic  continent,  and  from  Macquarie  Island  ;
all  taken  in  conjunction  with  weather  conditions  around
Australia  and  New  Zealand.  Then,  when  all  the  evidence
is  arrayed  and  compared,  some  general  truths  of  particular
value  to  science  and,  maybe,  to  commerce,  should  emerge.

Of  one  thing  we  were  certain,  and  that  was  that  Adelie
Land  was  the  windiest  place  in  the  world.  To  state  the
fact  more  accurately  :  such  wind-velocities  as  prevail  at
sea-level  in  Adelie  Land  are  known  in  other  parts  of  the
world  only  at  great  elevations  in  the  atmosphere.  The
156


NEARING  THE  END

average  wind-velocity  for  our  first  year  proved  to  be
approximately  fifty  miles  per  hour.  The  bare  figures  convey
more  when  they  are  compared  with  the  following  average
annual  wind-velocities  quoted  from  a  book  of  reference  :
Europe,  10*3  miles  per  hour  ;  United  States,  9'5  miles  per
hour  ;  Southern  Asia,  6*5  miles  per  hour  ;  West  Indies,  6*2
miles  per  hour.

Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  fact  that  often
the  high  winds  ceased  abruptly  for  a  short  interval.  Many
times  during  1913  we  had  opportunities  of  judging  this
phenomenon  and,  as  an  example,  may  be  qvioted  September  6.


/   Revolving^  Approximate    Scale

^^C/ouc/:>y     t '■'•"■■•^ —     I  I  '     I  Miles


Strong

Easterly

Wind

\


Mackellar      Islets  j«j


A.J  HOOCEMAN.


A  DIAGRAMMATIC  SKETCH  ILLUSTRATING  THE  METEOROLOGICAL  CONDITIONS
AT  THE  MAIN  BASE,  NOON,  SEPTEMBER  6,  1913

On  that  day  a  south-by-east  hurricane  fell  off  and  the  drift
cleared  suddenly  from  about  the  Hut  at  11.20  a.m.  On  the
hills  to  the  south  there  was  a  dense  grey  wall  of  flying  snow.
Whirlies  tracked  about  at  intervals  and  overhead  a  fine
cumulus  cloud  formed,  revolving  rapidly.  Over  the  recently
frozen  sea  there  was  an  easterly  breeze,  while  about  the
Hut  itself  there  were  light  northerly  airs.  Later  in  the  day
the  zone  of  southern  wind  and  drift  crept  down  and  once
more  overwhelmed  us.  Evidently  the  "  eye  "  of  a  cyclonic
storm  had  passed  over.

During  September  the  sea  was  frozen  over  for  more  than
two  weeks,  and  the  meteorological  conditions  varied  from
their  normal  phase.  It  appeared  as  if  we  were  situated  on
the  battlefield,  so  to  speak,  of  opposing  forces.  The  pacific
influence  of  the  "  north  "  would  hold  sway  for  a  few  hours,

157


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

a  whole  day,  or  even  for  a  few  days.  Then  the  vast  energies
of  the  "  south  "  would  rise  to  bursting-point  and  a  "  through
blizzard  "  would  be  the  result.

On  September  11,  although  there  was  a  wind  of  seventy
miles  per  hour,  the  sea-ice  which  had  become  very  solid
during  a  few  days  of  low  temperature  was  not  dispersed.
Next  day  we  found  it  possible  to  walk  in  safety  to  the
Mackellar  Islets.  On  the  way  rushes  of  southerly  wind
accompanied  by  a  misty  drift  followed  behind  us.  Then
a  calm  intervened,  and  the  sun  momentarily  appeared
and  shone  warmly.  Suddenly  from  the  north-west  came
breezy  puffs  which  settled  into  a  Hght  wind  as  we  went
north.  On  the  way  home  we  could  not  see  the  mainland
for  clouds  of  drift,  and,  when  approaching  the  mouth  of
the  boat-harbour,  these  clouds  were  observed  to  roll  down
the  lower  slopes  of  the  glacier  and,  reaching  the  shore,
rise  into  the  air  in  columns.  They  then  sailed  away  north-
ward at  a  higher  altitude,  almost  obscuring  the  sun  with  a
fine  fog.  On  the  same  night  the  "south"  had  gained  the
mastery,  and  the  wind  blew  with  its  accustomed  strength.

Again,  on  September  24,  McLean  had  a  unique  experience.
He  was  digging  ice  in  a  fifty-mile  wind  with  moderate  drift
close  to  the  Hut  and,  on  finishing  his  work,  walked  down  to
the  harbour-ice  to  see  if  there  were  any  birds  about.  He
was  suddenly  surprised  to  leave  the  wind  and  drift  behind
and  to  walk  out  into  an  area  of  calm.  The  water  lapped
alongside  the  ice-foot,  blue  in  the  brilliant  sunhght.  Away
to  the  west  a  few  miles  distant  a  fierce  wind  was  blowing
snow  like  fine  spume  over  the  brink  of  the  cliffs.  Towards
the  north-west  one  could  plainly  see  the  junction  between
calm  water  and  foam-crested  waves.  To  the  south  the
drift  drove  off  the  hills,  passed  the  Hut,  and  then  gyrated
upwards  and  thinned  away  seawards  at  an  altitude  of
several  hundred  feet.

The  wind  average  for  September  was  36*8  miles  per  hour,
as  against  53*7  for  September  of  the  previous  year.  There
were  nine  "  pleasant  "  days,  that  is,  days  on  which  it  was
158


Adelie  Lan  he  MAINLAXL)  IS  CAPE  BENISON


Hurley


c


NEARING  THE  END

possible  to  walk  about  outside  and  enjoy  oneself.  On  the
27th  there  was  a  very  severe  blizzard.  The  wind  was  from
the  south-east :  the  first  occasion  on  which  it  had  blown  from
any  direction  but  south-by-east  at  a  high  velocity.  The
drift  was  extremely  dense,  the  roof  of  the  Hut  being
invisible  at  a  distance  of  six  feet.  Enormous  ramps  of  snow
formed  in  the  vicinity,  burying  most  of  the  cases  and  the
air- tractor  sledge  completely.  The  anemograph  screen  was
blown  over  and  smashed  beyond  all  repair.  So  said  the
Meteorological  Notes  in  the  October  number  of  the  Adelie
Blizzard.

Speaking  of  temperature  in  general,  it  was  found  that
the  mean-temperature  for  the  first  year  was  just  above
zero  ;  a  very  low  temperature  for  a  station  situated  near
the  Circle.  The  continual  flow  of  cold  air  from  the  elevated
interior  of  the  continent  accounts  for  this.  If  Adelie  Land
were  a  region  of  calms  or  of  northerly  winds,  the  average
temperature  would  be  very  much  higher.  On  the  other
hand,  the  temperature  at  sea-level  was  never  depressed
below  —28°  F.,  though  with  a  high  wind  we  found  that
uncomfortable  enough,  even  in  burberry s.  During  the
spring  sledging  in  1912  the  lowest  temperature  recorded  was
-35°  F.  and  it  was  hard  to  keep  warm  in  sleeping-bags.
The  wind  made  all  the  difference  to  one's  resistance.

There  was  an  unusually  heavy  snowfall  during  1913.
When  the  air  was  heavily  charged  with  moisture,  as  in  mid-
summer, the  falls  would  consist  of  small  (sago)  or  larger
(tapioca)  rounded  pellets.  Occasionally  one  would  see
beautiful  complicated  patterns  in  the  form  of  hexagonal
flakes.  When  low  temperatures  were  the  rule,  small,  plain,
hexagonal  stars  or  spicules  fell.  Often  throughout  a  single
snowfall  many  types  would  be  precipitated.  Thus,  in
September,  in  one  instance,  the  fall  commenced  with  fluffy
balls  and  then  passed  to  tapioca  snow,  sago  snow,  six-
rayed  stars  and  spicules.

Wireless  communication  was  still  maintained,  though
September  was  found  to  be  such  a  "disturbed"  month—

159


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

possibly  owing  to  the  brilliant  aurorse — that  not  a  great
many  messages  were  exchanged.  Jeff  ryes  was  not  in  the
best  of  health,  so  that  Bickerton  took  over  the  operating
work.  Though  at  first  signals  could  only  be  received
slowly,  Bickerton  gradually  improved  with  practice  and  was
able  to  "  keep  up  his  end  "  until  November  20,  when  day-
light became  continuous.  One  great  advantage,  which  by
itself  justified  the  existence  of  the  wireless  plant,  was  the
fact  that  time-signals  were  successfully  received  from
Melbourne  Observatory  by  way  of  Macquarie  Island,  and
Bage  was  thus  able  to  improve  on  his  earlier  determinations
and  to  establish  a  fundamental  longitude.

During  this  same  happy  month  of  September,  whose
first  day  marked  the  event  of  "  One  hundred  days  to  the
coming  of  the  Ship  "  there  was  a  great  revival  in  biological
work.  Hodgeman  made  several  varieties  of  bag-traps
which  were  lowered  over  the  edge  of  the  harbour-ice,  and
many  large  "  worms  "  and  crustaceans  were  caught  and
preserved.

On  September  14  Bickerton  started  to  construct  a  hand-
dredge,  which  was  ready  for  use  by  the  next  evening.  It
was  a  lovely,  cloudless  day  on  the  16th  and  the  sea-ice,
after  more  than  two  weeks,  still  spread  to  the  north  in  a  firm,
unbroken  sheet.  We  went  out  on  skis  to  reconnoitre,  and
found  that  the  nearest  "  lead  "  was  too  far  away  to  make
dredging  a  safe  proposition.  So  we  were  contented  to  kill
a  seal  and  bring  it  home  before  lunch,  continuing  to  sink  the
ice-shaft  above  the  moraine  for  the  rest  of  the  day.

The  wind  rose  to  the  "  seventies  "  on  September  17,
and  the  sea-ice  was  scattered  to  the  north.  On  the  19th —
a  fine  day — there  were  many  detached  pieces  of  floe  which
drifted  in  with  a  northerly  breeze,  and  on  one  of  these,
floating  in  an  ice-girt  cove  to  the  west,  a  sea-leopard  was
observed  sunning  himself.  He  was  a  big,  vicious-looking
brute,  and  we  determined  to  secure  him  if  possible.  The  first
thing  was  to  dispatch  him  before  he  escaped  from  the  floe.
This  Madigan  did  in  three  shots  from  a  Winchester  rifle.
160


^    F


M-^'  ^


*f


NEARING  THE  END

A  long  steel-shod  sledge  was  then  dragged  from  the  Hut
and  used  to  bridge  the  interval  between  the  ice-foot  and  the
floe.  After  the  specimen  had  been  flayed,  the  skin  and  a
good  supply  of  dogs'  meat  were  hauled  across  and  sledged
home.  On  the  30th  another  sea-leopard  came  swimming
in  near  the  harbour's  entrance,  apparently  on  the  look-out
for  seals  or  penguins.  Including  the  one  seen  during  1912,
only  three  of  these  animals  were  observed  during  our  two
years'  sojourn  in  Adelie  Land.

Dredgings  in  depths  up  to  five  fathoms  were  done  inside
the  boat  harbour  and  just  off  its  entrance  on  five  separate
occasions  between  September  22  and  the  end  of  the  month.
Many  "  worms,"  crustaceans,  pteropods,  asteroids,  gastro-
pods and  hydroids  were  obtained,  and  McLean  and  I  had
many  interesting  hours  classifying  the  specimens.  The
former  preserved  and  labelled  them,  establishing  a  small
laboratory  in  the  loft  above  the  "  dining-room."  The  only
disadvantage  of  this  arrangement  was  that  various  "  foreign
bodies  "  would  occasionally  come  tumbling  through  the
interspaces  between  the  flooring  boards  of  the  loft  while
a  meal  was  in  progress.

Some  Antarctic  petrels  were  shot  and  examined  for
external  and  internal  parasites.  Fish  were  caught  in  two
traps  made  by  Hodgeman  and  myself  in  October,  but
unfortunately  the  larger  of  the  two  was  lost  during  a  blizzard.
However,  on  October  11  a  haul  of  fifty-two  fish  was  made
with  hand-lines  off  the  boat  harbour,  and  we  had  a  pleasant
change  in  the  menu  for  dinner.  They  were  of  the  type
known  as  Notothenia,  to  which  reference  has  already  been
made.

By  October  13,  when  a  stray  silver-grey  petrel  appeared,
every  one  was  on  the  qui  vive  for  the  coming  of  the  penguins.
In  1912  they  had  arrived  on  October  12,  and  as  there  was
much  floating  ice  on  the  northern  horizon,  we  wondered  if
their  migration  to  land  had  been  impeded.

The  winds  were  very  high  for  the  ensuing  two  days,  and

on  the  17th  the  horizon  was  clearer  and  more  "  water  sky  "

VOL.  II  L  161


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

was  visible.  Before  lunch  on  that  day  there  was  not  a
living  thing  along  the  steep,  overhanging  ice-foot,  but  by
the  late  afternoon  thirteen  birds  had  effected  a  landing,
and  those  who  were  not  resting  after  their  long  swim  were
hopping  about  making  a  survey  of  the  nearest  rookeries.
One  always  has  a  "  soft  spot  "  for  these  game  little  creatures
— ^there  is  something  irresistibly  human  about  them — and,
situated  as  we  were,  the  wind  seemed  of  little  account  now
that  the  foreshores  were  to  be  populated  by  the  penguins —
our  harbingers  of  summer  and  the  good  times  to  be.  Three
days  later,  at  the  call  of  the  season,  a  skua  gull  came  flapping
over  the  Hut.

It  was  rather  a  singular  circumstance  that  on  the  evening
of  the  17th,  coincident  with  the  disappearance  of  the  ice  on
the  horizon,  wireless  signals  suddenly  came  through  very
strongly  in  the  twilight  at  9.30  p.m.,  and  for  many  succeeding
nights  continued  at  the  same  intensity.  On  the  other  hand,
during  September,  when  the  sea  was  either  firmly  frozen
or  strewn  thickly  with  floe-ice,  communication  was  very
fitful  and  uncertain.  The  fact  is  therefore  suggested  that
wireless  waves  are  for  some  reason  more  readily  transmitted
across  a  surface  of  water  than  across  ice.

The  weather  during  the  rest  of  October  and  for  the  first
weeks  of  November  took  on  a  phase  of  heavy  snowfalls
which  we  knew  were  inevitable  before  summer  could  be
really  established.  The  winds  were  very  often  in  the
"  eighties  "  and  every  four  or  five  days  a  calm  might  be
expected.

The  penguins  had  a  tempestuous  time  building  their
nests,  and  resuming  once  more  the  quaint  routine  of  their
rookery  life.  In  the  hurricanes  they  usually  ceased  work
and  crouched  behind  rocks  until  the  worst  was  over.  A
great  number  of  birds  were  observed  to  have  small  wounds
on  the  body  which  had  bled  and  discoloured  their  feathers.
In  one  case  a  penguin  had  escaped,  presumably  from  a  sea-
leopard,  with  several  serious  wounds,  and  had  staggered  up
to  a  rookery,  dying  there  from  loss  of  blood.  Almost  imme-
162


NEARING  THE  END

diately  the  frozen  carcase  was  mutilated  and  torn  by  skua
gulls.

On  October  31  the  good  news  was  received  that  the
Aurora  would  leave  Australia  on  November  15.  There
were  a  great  number  of  things  to  be  packed,  including  the
lathe,  the  motor  and  dynamos,  the  air-tractor  engine,
the  wireless  "  set,"  and  magnetic  and  meteorological  instru-
ments. Outside  the  Hut,  many  cases  of  kerosene  and
provisions,  which  might  be  required  for  the  Ship,  had  been
buried  to  a  depth  of  twelve  feet  in  places  during  the  south-
east hurricane  in  September.  So  we  set  to  work  in  great
spirits  to  prepare  for  the  future.

McLean  was  busy  collecting  biological  specimens,  manag-
ing to  secure  a  large  number  of  parasites  from  penguins,
skua  gulls,  giant  petrels,  snow  petrels,  Wilson  petrels,  seals
and  an  Emperor  penguin,  which  came  up  on  the  harbour-ice.
On  several  beautiful  days,  with  a  sea-breeze  wafting  in  from
the  north,  large  purple  and  brown  jelly-fish  came  floating
to  the  ice-foot.  Many  were  caught  in  a  hand-net  and
preserved  in  formalin.  In  his  shooting  excursions  McLean
happened  on  a  small  rocky  ravine  to  the  east  where,  hovering
among  nests  of  snow  and  Wilson  petrels,  a  small  bluish-
grey  bird,*  not  unlike  Prion  Banksii,  was  discovered.
Four  specimens  were  shot,  and,  later,  several  old  nests  were
found  containing  the  unhatched  eggs  of  previous  years.

On  the  highest  point  of  Azimuth  Hill,  overlooking  the
sea,  a  Memorial  Cross  was  raised  to  our  two  lost  comrades.

A  calm  evening  in  November  !  At  ten  o'clock  a  natural
picture  in  shining  colours  is  painted  on  the  canvas  of  sea
and  sky.  The  northern  dome  is  a  blush  of  rose  deepening
to  a  warm  terra-cotta  along  the  horizon,  and  the  water
reflects  it  upward  to  the  gaze.  Tiny  Wilson  petrels  flit
by  like  swallows  ;  seals  shove  their  dark  forms  above  the
placid  surface ;    the  shore  is  lined  with  penguins  squatting

*  On  arrival  in  Australia  this  bird  proved  to  be  new  to  science.

163


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

in  grotesque  repose.     The  south  is  paUid  with  hght — the
circHng  sun.     AdeHe  Land  is  at  peace  !

For  some  time  Madigan,  Hodgeman  and  I  had  been
prepared  to  set  out  on  a  short  sledging  journey  to  visit
Mount  Murchison  and  to  recover  if  possible  the  instruments
cached  by  the  Eastern  Coastal  and  the  Southern  Parties.
It  was  not  until  November  23  that  the  weather  "  broke  "
definitely,  and  we  started  up  the  old  glacier  "  trail  "  assisted
by  a  good  team  of  dogs.

Aladdin's  Cave  was  much  the  same  as  we  had  left  it  in
the  previous  February,  except  that  a  fine  crop  of  delicate
ice-crystals  had  formed  on  its  walls.  We  carried  with  us
a  small  home-made  wireless  receiving  set,  and  arrangements
were  made  with  Bickerton  and  Bage  to  call  at  certain  hours.
As  an  "  aerial  "  a  couple  of  lengths  of  copper  wire  were
run  out  on  the  surface  of  the  ice.  At  the  first  "  call  "
Madigan  heard  the  signals  strongly  and  distinctly,  but
beyond  five  and  a  half  miles  nothing  more  was  received.

Resuming  the  journey  on  the  following  day,  we  made  a
direct  course  for  Madigan  Nunatak  and  then  steered  south-
east for  Mount  Murchison,  pitching  camp  at  its  summit  on
the  night  of  November  28.

On  the  29th  Madigan  and  Hodgeman  made  a  descent
into  the  valley,  on  whose  southern  side  rose  Aurora  Peak.
The  former  slid  away  on  skis  and  had  a  fine  run  to  the
bottom,  while  Hodgeman  followed  on  the  sledge  drawn  by
Monkey  and  D'Urville,  braking  with  an  ice-axe  driven
into  the  snow  between  the  cross-bars.  Their  object  was
to  find  the  depot  of  instruments  and  rocks  which  the  Eastern
Coastal  Party  were  forced  to  abandon  when  fifty-three
miles  from  home.  They  were  unsuccessful  in  the  search,
as  an  enormous  amount  of  snow  had  fallen  on  the  old  surface
during  the  interval  of  almost  a  year.  Indeed,  on  the  knoll
crowning  Mount  Murchison,  where  a  ten-foot  flagpole  had  been
left,  snow  had  accumulated  so  that  less  than  a  foot  of  the
top  of  the  pole  was  showing.  Nine  feet  of  hard  compressed
164


S  2  a

fe  '-^  5
o  2  >


o  '^  <;

^"  I

a  c  5

S  5  ^

so"

s  a:  a


5  £  =1

I  K  S

c  H  a

a  z  2


.  <


?.  o


:i  2  a
^3g


^  a  o
"  5  z

i;   S5   :,;


■   t   O


a  5  Sst
—  S


NEARING  THE  END

snow  scarcely  marked  by  one's  footsteps — ^the  contribution
of  one  year !  To  such  a  high  isolated  spot  drift-snow
would  not  reach,  so  that  the  annual  snowfall  must  greatly
exceed  the  residuum  found  by  us,  for  the  effect  of  the
prevailing  winds  would  be  to  reduce  it  greatly.

On  the  third  day  after  leaving  Mount  Murchison  for  the
Southern  Party's  depot,  sixty-seven  miles  south  of  Winter
Quarters,  driving  snow  commenced,  and  a  blizzard  kept  us
in  camp  for  seven  days.  When  the  drift  at  last  moderated
we  were  forced  to  make  direct  for  the  Hut,  as  the  time  when
the  Ship  was  expected  to  arrive  had  passed.

Descending  the  long  blue  slopes  of  the  glacier  just
before  midnight  on  December  12,  we  became  aware  of  a  faint
black  bar  on  the  seaward  horizon.  Soon  a  black  speck  had
moved  to  the  windward  side  of  the  bar — and  it  could  be
nothing  but  the  smoke  of  the  Aurora.  The  moment  of
which  we  had  dreamt  for  months  had  assuredly  come.
The  Ship  was  in  sight !

There  were  wild  cheers  down  at  the  Hut  when  they
heard  the  news.  They  could  not  believe  us  and  immediately
rushed  up  with  glasses  to  the  nearest  ridge  to  get  the  evidence
of  their  own  senses.  The  masts,  the  funnel  and  the  staunch
hull  rose  out  of  the  ocean  as  we  watched  on  the  hills  through
the  early  hours  of  a  superb  morning.  The  sun  was  streaming
warmly  over  the  plateau  and  a  cool  land  breeze  had  sprung
up  from  the  south,  as  the  Aurora  rounded  the  Mackellar
Islets  and  steamed  up  to  her  old  anchorage.  We  picked
out  familiar  figures  on  the  bridge  and  poop,  and  made  a
bonfire  of  kerosene,  benzine  and  lubricating  oil  in  a  rocky
crevice  in  their  honour.

The  indescribable  moment  was  when  Davis  came  ashore
in  the  whale-boat,  manned  by  two  of  the  Macquarie  Islanders
(Hamilton  and  Blake),  Hurley  and  Hunter.  They  rushed
into  the  Hut,  and  we  tried  to  tell  the  story  of  a  year  in  a  few
minutes.

On  the  Ship  we  greeted  Gillies,  Gray,  de  la  Motte,
Ains worth,  Sandell  and  Correll.     It  was  splendid  to  know

165


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

that  the  world  contained  so  many  people,  and  to  see  these
men  who  had  stuck  to  the  Expedition  through  "  thick  and
thin."  Then  came  the  fusillade  of  letters,  magazines  and
"  mysterious  "  parcels  and  boxes.  At  dinner  we  sat  down
reunited  in  the  freshly  painted  ward-room,  striving  to
collect  our  bewildered  thoughts  at  the  sight  of  a  white
tablecloth,  Australian  mutton,  fresh  vegetables,  fruit  and
cigars.

The  two  long  years  were  over — for  the  moment  they
were  to  be  effaced  in  the  glorious  present.  We  were  to  live
in  a  land  where  drift  and  wind  were  unknown,  where  rain
fell  in  mild,  refreshing  showers,  where  the  sky  was  blue  for
long  weeks,  and  where  the  memories  of  the  past  were  to
fade  into  a  dream — a  nightmare  ?


166


TUSSOCK  SLOPES  AND  MISTY  HIGHLANDS
Macquarie  Island


THE  SHACK  AND  ITS  VICINITY
Macquarie  Island.     Paget  colour  photo  hy  Correll


1


•illT


\\^v\  .


CHAPTER  XXV
LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

By  G.  F.  AINSWORTH

LEFT  on  an  island  in  mid-ocean  !
It  suggests  the  romances  of  youthful  days —
Crusoe,  Sindbad  and  all  their  glorious  company.
Still,  wheYi  this  narrative  is  completed,  imagination  will  be
seen  to  have  played  a  small  part.  In  fact,  it  is  a  plain  tale
of  our  experiences,  descriptive  of  a  place  where  we  spent
nearly  two  years  and  of  the  work  accomplished  during  our
stay.

The  island  was  discovered  in  1810  by  Captain  Hassel-
borough  of  the  ship  Perseverance,  which  had  been  dispatched
by  Campbell  and  Sons,  of  Sydney,  under  his  command  to
look  for  islands  inhabited  by  fur  seals.  Macquarie  Islands,
named  by  Hasselborough  after  the  Governor  of  New  South
Wales,  were  found  to  be  swarming  with  these  valuable
animals,  and  for  two  years  after  their  discovery  was  made
known,  many  vessels  visited  the  place,  landing  gangs  of
men  to  procure  skins  and  returning  at  frequent  intervals
to  carry  the  proceeds  of  their  labours  to  the  markets  of
the  world.

The  slaughter  of  the  seals  was  so  great  that  the  animals
were  almost  exterminated  within  a  few  years.  One  ship
is  known  to  have  left  Macquarie  Island  with  a  cargo  of
35,000  skins  during  the  first  year  of  operations.  High
prices  were  obtained  for  them  in  London  and  China,  and
many  American,  British  and  Sydney  firms  were  engaged
in  the  enterprise.

167


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  value  of  a  skin  is  determined  by  the  condition  of
the  fur,  which  is  often  damaged  by  the  animals  fighting
amongst  themselves.  Furthermore,  at  a  certain  season  of
the  year,  the  seals  moult,  and  if  taken  within  a  certain  time
of  this  natural  process,  the  skin  is  almost  valueless.  These
facts  were  ignored  by  the  sealers,  who  killed  without  dis-
crimination.

Again,  both  male  and  female,  old  and  young  were  ruth-
lessly slaughtered,  with  the  obvious  result — ^the  extermina-
tion of  the  species.  If  supervision  had  been  exercised  and
restrictions  imposed,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  island
would  still  have  been  used  by  the  fur  seal  as  a  breeding-
ground.  During  our  stay  none  were  seen,  but  Mr.  Bauer,
who  acts  as  sealing  herdsman  and  who  had  visited  the
island  in  that  capacity  each  summer  for  eleven  years,  stated
that  he  had  seen  odd  ones  at  infrequent  intervals.

Associated  as  the  island  has  been  since  the  year  1812
with  sealing  and  oil  ventures,  it  follows  that  a  history  has
been  gradually  developed  ;  somewhat  traditional,  though
many  occurrences  to  which  we  shall  refer  are  well  authen-
ticated.

It  might  be  supposed  from  the  foregoing,  that  a  good
deal  is  known  about  the  place,  but  such  is  not  the  case,
except  in  a  general  sense.  Several  scientific  men  from  New
Zealand,  recognizing  the  importance  of  the  island  as  a  link
between  Australasia  and  Antarctica,  visited  it  at  different
times  within  the  past  twenty  years,  only  remaining  long
enough  to  make  a  cursory  examination  of  the  eastern  side.
They  had  to  depend  on  the  courtesy  of  the  sealing  ships'  cap-
tains for  a  passage,  and  the  stormy  conditions  which  are  ever
prevalent  made  their  stay  too  brief  for  any  exhaustive  work.

A  Russian  Antarctic  expedition,  under  Bellingshausen's
command,  called  there  in  1821  and  stayed  for  two  days,
collecting  a  few  bird  and  animal  specimens.  They  referred
to  the  island  as  being  "  half-cooled  down,"  in  a  short  but
interesting  account  of  their  visit,  and  remarked  upon  the
large  number  of  sea-elephants  lying  on  the  shores.
168


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

In  1840  the  ship  Peacock,  one  of  the  exploring  vessels'
of  the  American  Expedition  under  Wilkes,  landed  several
men  after  much  difficulty  on  the  south-west  end  of  the
island,  but  they  remained  only  a  few  hours,  returning  to
their  ship  after  securing  some  specimens  of  birds.  Express-
ing astonishment  at  the  "  myriads  of  birds,"  they  remarked,
"  Macquarie  Islands  offer  no  inducement  for  a  visit,  and
as  far  as  our  examination  showed,  have  no  suitable  place
for  landing  with  a  boat."

The  next  call  of  an  Antarctic  expedition  was  made  by
Captain  Scott  in  the  Discovery  in  November  1901.  He,  with
several  naturalists,  landed  on  the  eastern  side  to  collect
specimens,  but  remained  only  a  few  hours.  He  refers  to
the  penguins,  kelp-weed  and  tussock-grass  ;  certainly  three
characteristic   features.

Captain  Davis,  during  his  search  for  charted  sub-antarctic
islands,  when  connected  with  Sir  Ernest  Shackleton's  ex-
pedition, called  there  in  the  Nimrod  in  1909.  He  landed  a
party  of  men  who  secured  several  sea-elephants  and  some
penguins.

It  will  thus  be  seen  that  very  little  had  been  done  which
was  scientifically  important  or  generally  interesting.  Sealers
came  and  went  as  a  matter  of  business,  and  probably  the
arduous  nature  of  their  work  and  the  rugged  topography  of
the  island  combined  to  prevent  the  more  curious  from
exploring  far  afield.

Captain  Scott  was  desirous  of  establishing  a  base  on
Macquarie  Island  in  1910,  but  circumstances  compelled
him  to  abandon  the  idea.  And  so  it  came  that  we  five  men
of  Dr.  Mawson's  Expedition  were  landed  on  December  22,
1911,  with  a  programme  of  v/ork  outlined  by  our  leader.
H.  Hamilton  was  biologist,  L.  R.  Blake  surveyor  and
geologist,  C.  A.  Sandell  and  A.  J.  Sawyer  were  wireless
operators,  the  former  being  also  a  mechanic,  and  I  was
appointed  meteorologist  and  leader  of  the  party.

We  stood  on  the  beach  in  the  dusk,  watching  the  boat's
party  struggle  back  to  the  Aurora,  which  lay  at  anchor  one

169


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

and  a  half  miles  from  the  north-west  shore.  Having  received
a  soaking  landing  in  the  surf  and  being  tired  out  with  the
exertions  of  the  day,  we  started  back  to  our  temporary
shelter.  We  had  not  gone  very  far  when  a  mysterious
sound,  followed  by  a  shaking  of  the  earth,  made  us  glance
at  each  other  and  exclaim,  "  An  earthquake  !  "  The
occurrence  gave  rise  to  a  discussion  which  carried  us  to  bed.

Seeing  that  we  were  to  spend  a  long  time  on  the  island,
the  question  of  building  a  hut  was  the  first  consideration.
Through  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Bauer,  who  had  just  left  the
island  in  the  s.s.  Toroa,  we  were  able  to  live  for  the  time
being  in  the  sealers'  hut.

It  was  urgent  to  get  the  wireless  station  into  working
order  as  soon  as  possible.  The  masts  and  operating-hut  had
been  erected  during  the  stay  of  the  Aurora,  but  there  yet
remained  the  building  of  the  engine-hut  and  the  installation
of  the  machinery  and  instruments,  as  well  as  the  construction
and  erection  of  the  aerial.  Accordingly  we  proceeded  with
the  living-hut  and  the  job  on  Wireless  Hill  at  the  same  time,
working  on  the  hill  most  of  the  day  and  at  the  hut  in  the
evening.

Wireless  Hill  rose  to  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in
height,  and  formed  part  of  a  peninsula  running  in  a  north-
easterly direction  from  the  main  island.  It  had  been  chosen
by  Mr.  Hannam  of  the  Adelie  Land  party  because  of  its
open  northerly  aspect,  and  becavise  "  wireless  "  waves  would
probably  have  a  good  "  set-off,"  southward  to  the  Main
Base  in  Antarctica.

Just  a  few  yards  from  the  base  of  the  hill  on  its  south-
western side  was  a  huge  rock,  upon  the  easterly  side  of
which  we  decided  to  build  our  dwelling.  The  timbers  for
the  hut  had  been  cut  and  fitted  in  Hobart,  so  all  that
remained  for  us  was  to  put  them  together.

After  working  at  high  pressure  until  December  30,  we
were  able  to  establish  ourselves  in  a  home.  The  doorway
faced  to  the  east,  and  the  rock  protected  the  small  place
170


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

from  the  strong  westerly  weather  which  is  invariable  in
these  latitudes.  The  dimensions  were  twenty  feet  by  thir-
teen feet,  the  front  wall  being  nine  feet  six  inches  high,
sloping  to  seven  feet  six  inches  at  the  back.  All  the  timbers
were  of  Oregon  and  deal,  and  particular  attention  was  paid
to  bracing  and  strengthening  the  building,  which  rested  on
piles  just  clear  of  the  sandy  surface.     The  inside  was  lined


Plar\  of  Huf"  -  Maccjuahe  Island


T    I I


and  ceiled,  and  the  roof  of  galvanized  iron  was  set  flush
with  the  front  wall,  fascia  boards  along  the  front  and  sides
being  designed  to  keep  the  fine  snow  from  blowing  under
the  corrugations  and  lodging  on  the  ceiling.  "  George  V
Villa  "  was  fixed  upon  as  the  name,  but  the  hut  was  never
at  any  time  referred  to  as  the  villa,  and  in  future  will  always
be  known  as  the  Shack.

Twelve  live  sheep  had  been  landed,  and  these  had  been
driven  on  to  Wireless  Hill  so  as  to  be  accessible.  We  decided

171


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

to  kill  one  for  Christmas,  so  on  December  24  Sandell  and  I,
leaving  the  others  at  work  on  the  Shack,  started  out.

The  hillsides  are  deeply  ravined  and  the  slopes  covered
with  a  dense  growth  of  tussock,  which  renders  progress
uncertain  and  laborious.  Our  experience  was  a  foretaste
of  many  to  come.  We  found  the  sheep  huddled  together
in  a  deep  gully  on  the  eastern  side,  and  drove  them  round  to
the  front  of  the  hill,  where  one  was  caught,  killed  and
dressed.

Christmas  Day  dawned  fine  and  sunny,  and  we  decided
to  make  some  attempt  at  a  dinner.  Blake  produced  a  plum
pudding,  and  this,  together  with  roast  mutton  and  several
kinds  of  vegetables,  washed  down  with  a  little  claret,  con-
stituted our  first  Christmas  dinner.

The  sealing  schooner,  Clyde,  had  been  wrecked  without
loss  of  life  on  November  14,  1911,  on  the  east  coast,  and  was
now  lying  on  the  beach  nearly  half  a  mile  away.  A  two-
hundred-gallon  tank  had  been  saved  from  the  wreck  and  we
managed  on  Christmas  morning,  after  two  hours  of  carrying
and  trundling,  to  place  it  at  the  end  of  the  Shack.  This
was  a  valuable  find,  ensuring  in  the  future  a  constant,
convenient  supply  of  rain  water.  Further,  we  made  use
of  the  timber  of  the  wreck  for  building,  and  the  broken
pieces  strewn  about  were  stored  up  as  firewood.

On  the  26th  we  all  went  to  the  wireless  station,  and,  as
Sandell  had  the  aerial  made,  we  pulled  it  into  position.
In  the  afternoon  I  unpacked  all  my  instruments  and  started
them  off  so  as  to  make  sure  that  all  were  working  correctly.
I  did  not  intend  to  record  any  observations  till  January  1,
1912,  and  therefore  did  not  erect  the  meteorological  screen
until  the  28th.

On  moving  into  our  abode  domestic  arrangements  were
made.  With  regard  to  cooking,  each  man  took  duty  for  a
week,  during  which  he  was  able  to  write  up  his  work  and  to
wash  and  mend  clothes.  To  Hamilton  and  Sandell,  who  had
had  previous  experience,  frequent  appeals  were  made  as  to
methods  of  cooking  various  dishes,  but  by  degrees  each
172


Mficguarie  Idiuul

THE  SHACK  :  SHOWING  THE  XATUKAL  KOCKY  PKOTECTIOX  OX  THE
WIXDWARD  SIDE


Miirqiui,  )'(■  Isliiml


TflK   IXTKIilOl!   or  Tin;  OI'EKATIXG  llt'T  OX  WIRELESS   HILL


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

one  asserted  his  independence.  There  were  several  cookery
books  for  reference  and  each  week  saw  the  appearance  of
some  new  pudding,  in  each  instance  prefaced  by  the  boast  :
"  This  is  going  to  be  the  best  pudding  ever  turned  out
on  the  island !  "  The  promise  was  not  always  made
good.

We  had  a  good  deal  of  difficulty  at  first  in  making  bread
and  several  batches  were  very  "  heavy  "  failures.  This
difficulty,  however,  was  soon  overcome  and,  after  the  first
few  months,  the  cooking  standard  was  high  and  well
maintained.  Our  stove  was  very  small  and  only  two
loaves  of  bread  could  be  cooked  at  once.  It  frequently
happened,  therefore,  that  the  others,  which  would  go  on
rising  in  the  tins,  overflowed  ;  a  matter  which  could  only
be  set  right  by  experience.

On  New  Year's  Day,  1912,  we  carried  timber  in  relays
from  the  wreck  to  the  top  of  Wireless  Hill,  so  that  the
building  of  the  engine-hut  could  be  started.  The  next
few  days  were  occupied  in  getting  food-stuffs,  medicines,
stationery,  clothing  and  other  necessaries  over  to  the  Shack
from  the  landing-place  on  the  beach.  Blake  and  Hamilton
unpacked  their  instruments  and  appliances,  fitting  up  a
small  laboratory  and  photographic  dark-room  in  one  corner
of  the  hut.

Some  kind  Hobart  friend  had  sent  four  fowls  to  me  on
the  day  of  sailing,  requesting  me  to  take  them  to  Macquarie
island.  They  were  housed  in  one  of  the  meteorological
screens,  but  on  the  third  day  from  Hobart  a  heavy  sea
broke  on  board,  upset  the  temporary  fowl-house  and
crushed  the  rooster's  head.  The  three  hens  were  landed
safely  and  appeared  to  be  thoroughly  reconciled  to  their
strange  surroundings,  though  the  presence  of  so  many  large
birds  soaring  about  overhead  had  a  terrifying  effect  on  them
for  several  days.  They  did  not  appear  to  pick  up  much  food
amongst  the  grass,  but  scratched  away  industriously  all
the  same.  I  must  say  that  they  were  very  friendly  and
gave  the  place  quite  a  homely  aspect.     One  of  them  was

173


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

christened  "  Ma  "  on  account  of  her  maternal  and  somewhat
fussy  disposition.

On  the  first  Sunday  in  the  new  year  all  except  myself
went  along  the  coast  towards  West  Point.  The  party
reported  immense  numbers  of  sea-elephants,  especially
young  ones.  They  also  saw  many  wekas  and  three  ducks,
shooting  nine  of  the  former  for  the  kitchen.

The  wekas  or  Maori  hens  are  small,  flightless  birds,
averaging  when  full  grown  about  two  and  three-quarter
pounds.  They  were  introduced  twenty-five  years  ago  by
Mr.  Elder,  of  New  Zealand,  a  former  lessee  of  the  island,
and  multiplied  so  fast  that  they  are  now  very  numerous.
They  live  among  the  tussocks,  and  subsist  for  the  most
part  upon  the  larvae  of  the  kelp-fly,  small  fish  and  other
marine  life  which  they  catch  under  the  stones  along  the
rocky  shores  at  low  tide.  They  are  exceedingly  inquisitive
and  pugnacious  and  may  easily  be  caught  by  hand.

Usually,  when  disturbed,  they  will  pop  under  a  rock,
and  on  being  seized  immediately  commence  to  squeak.
This  is  sufficient  to  bring  every  weka  within  a  quarter  of  a
mile  hurrying  to  the  spot,  and,  in  a  few  minutes,  heads  may
be  seen  poking  out  of  the  grass  in  every  direction.  The  man
holding  the  bird  then  crouches  down,  preferably  just  on  the
border  of  the  tussock,  holding  the  protesting  bird  in  one  hand.
Soon  there  will  be  a  rustle,  then  a  rush,  and  another  furious
weka  will  attack  the  decoy.  The  newcomer  is  grabbed  and,
if  the  birds  are  plentiful,  five  or  six  of  them  may  be  taken
in  one  spot.

Their  call  is  peculiarly  plaintive  and  wild  and  may  be
heard  night  and  day.  Though  we  saw  and  caught  innumer-
able young  ones  of  all  sizes,  we  were  never  able  to  find  the
nests  of  these  Maori  hens.

A  depot  of  stores  had  been  laid  by  the  Aurora  at  Caroline
Cove,  twenty  miles  from  the  Shack  at  the  south  end  of  the
island,  and  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  lay  several  more
intermediate  food-depots  along  the  east  coast.

The  sealers  had  a  motor-launch  which  they  kindly
174


Macquarie  Island


WEKA  I'ECKIXG  OX  THE  JiEAClI


^^>i


Mawson


Maciiiiiiri^  Island  CIIICKS   OF    IIIK    I  lO.M  I  XICAX   lai.I.


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

placed  at  our  disposal,  and  a  supply  of  stores  was  put  on
board  for  transport.  At  8  a.m.,  January  9,  Sandell,  Blake,
Sawyer  and  Hamilton  started  out  accompanied  by  two
sealers  who  offered  to  point  out  the  positions  of  several  old
huts  along  the  coast.  These  huts  had  been  built  by  sealing
gangs  many  years  ago  and  were  in  a  sad  state  of  disrepair.

The  first  call  was  made  at  Sandy  Bay,  about  five  miles
from  the  Shack.  Stores  were  landed  and  placed  in  the  hut,
and  the  party  proceeded  to  Lusitania  Bay,  eleven  miles
farther  on,  where  they  stayed  for  the  night.  At  this  place
(named  after  an  old  sealing  craft,  the  Lusitania)  there  were  two
huts,  one  being  a  work-hut  and  the  other  a  living-hut.  They
had  not  been  used  for  sixteen  years  and,  as  a  result,  were
found  to  be  much  dilapidated.  In  the  locality  is  a  large
King  penguin  rookery,  the  only  one  on  the  island,  and  two
dozen  eggs  were  obtained  on  this  visit,  some  fresh  and  some
otherwise.

As  the  next  morning  was  squally,  it  was  decided  that  the
stores  should  be  deposited  in  the  hut  at  the  south  end  ;  a
distance  of  five  miles  across  country.  Through  bog  and
tussock  it  took  the  party  four  hours  to  accomplish  this
journey.  The  hut  was  found  in  the  same  condition  as  the
others  and  a  rather  miserable  night  was  spent.  A  short
distance  from  this  spot  is  situated  the  largest  penguin
rookery  on  the  island.  On  returning  to  the  launch,  the  six
men  had  a  quick  run  of  three  hours  back  to  the  north  end.

During  the  absence  of  the  party  I  had  been  busy  erecting
a  stand  for  the  anemo-biagraph.  Ordinarily,  such  an  instru-
ment is  kept  in  a  house,  the  upper  section  only  being  exposed
through  the  roof.  The  Shack  was  in  a  position  too  sheltered
for  my  purpose,  so  I  built  a  place  for  the  anemo-biagraph
behind  a  low  rock  well  out  on  the  isthmus.

Sandell  and  Sa^vyer  reported  on  the  16th  that  the  wireless
station  was  ready  for  testing.  Therefore,  on  the  following
day,  the  three  of  us  erected  a  small  set  on  the  farthest  point
of  the  peninsula — North  Head.  The  set  had  been  made
in  order  to  test  the  large  station.     Sawyer  then  returned

175


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

to  the  operating-hut  and  received  signals  sent  from  North
Head  by  Sandell,  who  in  return  received  Sa^vyer's  signals,
thus  showing  that  so  far  everything  was  satisfactory.  It
was  thought,  after  the  tests,  that  the  "  earth  "  was  not  by
any  means  good  and  Sawyer  erected  a  counterpoise,  which,
however,  failed  to  give  anything  like  the  "  earth  "  results.
More  "  earths  "  (connexions  by  wire  with  the  ground)
were  now  put  in  from  day  to  day,  and  on  the  27th  Sawyer
noted  an  improvement.  Successful  tests  were  again  made
on  the  30th.  The  wireless  men  now  expected  communica-
tion with  Australia.

Blake  and  Hamilton  were  soon  making  inroads,  each
on  his  own  particular  sphere  of  work.  On  the  17th  a  base-
line was  laid  down  on  the  plateau,  and  Blake  was  able  to
commence  his  survey  of  the  island.  He  had  already  made
some  geological  investigations  in  the  vicinity  of  North  Head
and  West  Point,  as  well  as  for  a  short  distance  along  the
east  coast.  Hamilton  had  visited  nearly  all  the  penguin
rookeries  in  the  vicinity,  and  already  had  several  fine  speci-
mens. Marine  collecting  occupied  part  of  his  time  and  plant
life  promised  to  provide  an  interesting  field.

From  the  intermediate  position  that  Macquarie  Island
occupies  relative  to  Australasia  and  the  Antarctic  continent,
it  was  highly  important  that  its  biology  should  be  fully
determined.  Investigation  of  the  marine  and  terrestrial
fauna  and  flora  shows  several  facts  indicating  the  part
this  island  has  played  in  the  supposed  connexion  of  the
great  land  masses  of  the  southern  hemispheres.  It  is  an
established  fact  that  the  flora  of  New  Zealand  has  strong
sub-antarctic  and  South  American  affinities  and  the  problem
is  to  account  for  this  distribution.  Many  forms  of  plant
and  animal  life  are  circumaustral,  being  found  in  all  suitable
sub-antarctic  situations.  To  account  for  this  fact  two
theories  have  been  advanced,  namely,  the  Relict  theory
(Dahl,  Schenck  and  others)  and  the  Antarctic  theory.

The  first  theory  supposes  that  the  inhabitants  of  the
sub-antarctic  islands  are  the  remnants  of  groups  of  animals
176


p-  *   ^M^^^^^^^%^^"^


Eagle  PV


Bauer'Bay


:'i)  O  •


Sandy  BsLy


THE  NORTH  END  OF  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

VOL.  II  M


177


THE  HOME  OiF  THE  BLIZZARD

developed  in  some  northern  land- mass,  and  driven  south
by  more  highly  developed  forms.  Again,  that  these  sub-
antarctic  islands  have  always  been  separated  from  continents,
and  that  the  distribution  of  life  on  the  former  must  have
proceeded  over  wide  stretches  of  sea.

The  Antarctic  theory  accounts  for  the  distribution  and
similarity  of  sub-antarctic  fauna  and  flora  by  establishing
a  connexion  between  the  sub-antarctic  islands  and  the
Antarctic  continent.  At  the  same  period,  the  Antarctic
continent  was  assumed  to  be  connected  by  land  with  South
America,  South  Africa  and  Australia,  and  the  similar  life
forms  now  found  in  these  continents  were  driven  northward
by  a  subsequent  colder  period.  This  theory  is  strengthened
by  several  facts,  chief  of  which  are,  (1)  the  existence  of  an
Antarctic  continent,  and  (2)  the  comparatively  shallow  waters
between  it.  South  Africa,  Australia  and  South  America.

Whichever  theory  is  adopted,  it  is  evident  that  our
scientific  opportunities  were  unique.

On  the  28th,  Sandell,  Sawyer  and  I  decided  to  climb  on
to  the  main  ridge  or  plateau  of  the  island.  We  had  already
discovered  that  the  easiest  way  to  get  on  to  the  hills  was  to
follow  up  one  of  the  many  ravines  or  gullies  which  run  down
to  the  sea.  This  necessitates  walking  in  water  most  of  the
way,  but  one  soon  gets  accustomed  to  wet  feet  on  Macquarie
Island.

The  slopes  rise  in  a  series  of  terraces  which  are  generally
soggy  and  covered  with  tussock  (pleurophyllum)  and  with
scattered  cushions  of  Azorella.  The  summit  of  the  ridge
is  a  barren  waste,  over  which  loose  rocks  are  scattered  in
every  direction,  while  a  wavy  effect  due  to  the  action  of
wind  is  plainly  visible  over  the  surface  of  the  ground.  The
steep,  descending  sides  are  very  soft  and  sodden,  supporting
a  scanty  growth  of  vegetation,  including  the  small  burr
known  as  the  "  biddy-bid."

Hundreds  of  tarns  and  lakes  are  visible  along  the  plateau-
like ridge  which  extends  throughout  the  length  of  the  island.
Several  of  the  lakes  are  half  a  mile  long  and  very  deep.
178


.\1A((M  AKJE  1>LAM>  ftlvLAS  J-EEDIXO  BULL  SEA  ELEFHAM>  FJ(iH  I  iN(i   Hiimilton


Blithe


THE  THEK.MOMETER  SCREEN',
-MACQUARIB  ISLAND


Blake
THE  WIXD-RECORDING  INSTRUMENTS,
MACQUARIE  ISLAND


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

The  tarns  are,  for  the  most  part,  shallow  with  hard  stony
bottoms.  The  water  is  beautifully  fresh  and  apparently
contains  no  life.

Skua  gulls  were  plentiful  and  washed  themselves,  with  a
great  flapping  of  wings,  in  the  shallow  waters  at  the  edge
of  the  lakes.  They  paid  particular  attention  to  our  dog
*'Mac,"  swooping  down  and  attempting  to  strike  her  with
their  wings.  A  yelp  at  intervals  came  from  Mac  if  they  were
successful,  though  the  former,  if  she  were  quick  enough,
would  spring  at  the  bird  and  retaliate  by  getting  a  mouthful
of  feathers.

We  eventually  came  out  on  to  a  point  about  seven
hundred  feet  high,  overlooking  the  west  coast,  and  it  could
be  seen  that  the  space  between  the  base  of  the  hills  and  the
ocean  was  occupied  by  a  plain  which  sloped  very  gradually
to  the  beach.  Here  and  there  across  its  surface  were  huge
mounds  of  earth  and  rock  and,  occasionally,  a  small  lakelet
fringed  with  a  dense  growth  of  tussock  and  Maori  cabbage.

A  descent  was  made  to  explore  the  place.  A  fairly  large
volume  of  water  flowed  rapidly  downward  by  several  deep
gullies  and,  coming  to  the  terrace,  cut  narrow,  sinuous
channels  which  were  soon  lost  to  view  in  the  tussocks.
Examination  of  the  watercourses  revealed  that  this  tract
was  simply  a  raised  beach  covered  with  sodden  peat  and
carrying  a  rather  coarse  vegetation.  The  ground  was
decidedly  springy  and  shook  to  our  tread  ;  moreover,  one
sank  down  over  the  ankles  at  each  step.  Occasionally  a
more  insecure  area  was  encountered,  where  one  of  us  would
go  down  to  the  thighs  in  the  boggy  ground.

As  the  shore  approached  we  came  to  thick  tussock  and
Maori  cabbage,  and  the  travelling  became  much  rougher.
A  group  of  earthy  mounds  and  rock  was  sighted  some  distance
away  and  we  decided  to  reach  them  and  have  our  lunch.
A  nearer  view  showed  us  a  large  opening  in  one  of  these
prominences  and  we  scrambled  up  to  examine  it.

Inside  there  was  a  small  cave,  high  in  front  but  sloping
sharply  towards  the  back  for  a  distance  of  thirty-five  feet.

179


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  roof  and  walls  were  blackened  by  smoke,  and  spikes
and  nails  driven  into  crevices  were  evidences  that  the  place
had  once  been  occupied.  Eagle  Cave  it  is  called  and  its
story  was  afterwards  related  to  us.

Between  thirty  and  forty  years  ago  the  schooner  Eagle,
in  attempting  to  make  the  island,  had  been  caught  in  a
gale  and  wrecked  on  the  rock-bound  western  coast.  As  far
as  can  be  learned,  there  were  nine  men  and  a  woman  on
board,  all  of  whom  were  saved.  They  lived  in  this  cave  for
almost  two  years,  subsisting  upon  what  they  could  catch.
Decayed  tussock  grass,  a  foot  in  depth,  now  covers  the  floor,
showing  that  some  attempt  had  been  made  to  improve
the  comfort  of  the  place,  while  bones  lying  strewn  about  in
all  directions  indicate  that  gulls,  penguins  and  cormorants
must  have  supplied  a  good  deal  of  their  food.  It  is  pre-
sumed that  some  of  them  made  a  journey  to  North  Head
periodically  to  look  out  for  relief,  as  a  well-defined  track
to  that  point  is  still  visible  in  places.

The  tale,  however,  has  its  tragic  side,  for  the  woman  died
on  the  very  day  when  the  rescuing  ship  called  at  the  island.
She  was  buried  on  the  isthmus,  not  far  from  our  Shack.
One  would  think  that  death  was  rather  a  relief  from  such  an
existence  as  this  unfortunate  woman  must  have  endured,
but,  at  the  same  time,  it  seems  hard  that  she  did  not  live  to
participate  in  the  joy  of  deliverance.

We  ate  our  lunch  and  had  a  smoke,  after  which  we
decided  to  walk  homewards  along  "  Feather  Bed  "  terrace.
A  few  minutes  after  leaving  the  cave.  Sawyer  and  Sandell
caught  three  young  ducks,  which  they  carried  back,  intend-
ing to  rear  them,  but  they  died  several  days  later.  A  weary
tramp  brought  us,  thoroughly  tired,  to  the  Shack,  where
Hamilton  had  an  excellent  meal  awaiting  us.

The  weather  during  January  was  rather  trying.  Precipi-
tation in  the  form  of  either  rain,  hail,  sleet  or  snow  occurred
on  twenty-six  days,  sometimes  all  forms  being  experienced
on  the  same  day.  As  a  result,  the  supply  of  water  was
well  maintained  ;  in  fact,  the  amount  caught  exceeded  the
180


FEATHEU   BED"  TEKRACE  NEAK   EAGLE  TOINT,  .\IA('(M'A1!IE    ISLAND       Bhike


A   (iLACLXL  LAKE   (.AFAJOR  LAKE)  OX  MAC'QUARIl.:   LSI^AND,  bUU  EEKT
ABOVE  SEA-LEVEL


lUalce


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

consumption  and  we  finished  the  month  with  the  tank
almost  full.  Gales  were  experienced  on  eight  days,  the
maximum  wind-force  being  forty-two  miles  an  hour.  The
sky  was  mostly  heavily  clouded  or  absolutely  overcast  and
on  many  days  the  sun  was  not  seen.  Fog  hung  about  the
hills  almost  continuously,  and  driving  mist  accompanied
the  northerly  winds.

January  24  was  a  glorious  day,  calm  and  sunny,  with  a
maximum  temperature  of  51*3°  F.  The  habit  of  former  days
induced  Sandell  and  myself  to  have  a  dip  in  the  surf,  but  as
the  temperature  of  the  water  was  about  42°  F.,  we  stayed  in
as  many  seconds.  The  mean  temperature  for  the  month
was  44*9°  F.  ;   the  minimum  being  35'5°  F.

My  first  view  of  the  island  when  the  Aurora  arrived  in
December  1911  left  rather  an  agreeable  impression.  The
day  of  our  approach  was  marked  by  fine  calm  weather  and
the  dark-sreen  tussock-clad  hillsides  were  rather  attractive.
On  the  other  hand,  one  was  immediately  struck  with  the
entire  absence  of  trees,  the  steep  precipices,  cliffs  and  the
exceedingly  rugged  nature  of  the  coastline.

Closer  scrutiny  shows  that  the  tussock  grass  radiates
closely  from  a  semi-decayed  mass  of  leaf-sheaths,  with  the
blades  of  grass  shooting  upwards  and  outwards  as  high  as
three  or  four  feet.  Scattered  through  it  are  patches  of
Stilbocarpa  polaris,  locally  known  as  Maori  cabbage.  It  is
of  a  more  vivid  green  than  the  tussock  and  is  edible,  though
somewhat  stringy  and  insipid.  Our  sheep  ate  it  readily,
even  nibblmg  the  roots  after  the  plant  had  been  cropped
down.

There  were  several  Victoria  penguin  colonies  round  about
the  rocky  faces  of  the  hills  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Shack,  and
their  hubbub  and  cackling  uproar  were  something  to  re-
member. The  rearing  of  the  young  appeared  to  be  rather
a  busy  process.  The  young  ones  look  like  bundles  of  down
and  seem  to  grow  at  a  remarkable  rate,  while  the  attempt
of  the  parent  to  shelter  the  usual  two  chicks  is  a  very  ludicrous
thmg  to  watch.

181


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  material  for  the  nest  made  by  these  birds  seems  to
depend  almost  entirely  on  its  immediate  surroundings.  The
rookery  is  established  on  a  broken  rocky  face  close  to  the
water's  edge  and  the  nests  are  made  under  rocks,  in  niches
and  passages,  as  well  as  amongst  the  tussock  growing  on
the  rocks.  Those  under  the  rocks  are  constructed  of  small
stones  and  a  few  blades  of  grass,  while  those  in  the  passages
and  fissures  are  usually  depressions  in  soft  mud.  Amongst
the  tussock  a  hole  is  first  made  in  the  soft  earth  and  then
neatly  lined  wi.h  blades  of  grass.

The  birds  lay  two  or  three  eggs  of  a  white  or  greenish-white
colour,  but  I  have  never  seen  three  chicks  hatched.  The  eggs
are  edible,  and  we  used  many  dozens  of  them  during  our  stay.

The  period  of  incubation  is  about  five  weeks,  and  male
and  female  take  turns  at  sitting.  A  young  one  is  fed  by
placing  its  beak  within  that  of  the  parent  bird  where  the
food — mainly  crustaceans — is  taken  as  it  regurgitates  from
the  stomach  of  the  latter.

Although  the  smallest  species  on  the  island,  the  Victoria
penguins  are  the  most  spiteful,  and  a  scramble  through  the
rookery  invites  many  pecks  and  much  disturbance.  They
have  a  black  head  and  back,  white  breast  and  yellow  crest,
the  feathers  of  which  spread  out  laterally.  During  the
moulting  season  they  sit  in  the  rookery  or  perched  on
surrounding  rocks,  living  apparently  on  their  fat,  which  is
found  to  have  disappeared  when  at  last  they  take  to  the  sea.
They  come  and  go  with  remarkable  regularity,  being  first
seen  about  the  middle  of  October,  and  leaving  during  the
first  week  of  May.  The  same  rookeries  are  occupied  year
after  year,  and  the  departure  of  the  birds  adds  to  the  general
desolation  during  the  winter  months.

Their  destination  on  leaving  the  land  is  still  a  mystery.
Although  they  are  never  seen,  it  is  conjectured  that  they
spend  the  winter  at  sea.  Their  natural  enemy  in  the  waters
round  Macquarie  Island  is  the  sea-leopard,  and  the  stomachs
of  all  specimens  of  this  animal  taken  by  us  during  the
penguin  season  contained  feathers.
182


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

The  presence  of  numerous  bones  just  at  the  rear  of  the
Shack  pointed  to  the  fact  that  here  must  have  been  at  one
time  the  site  of  a  King  penguin  rookery.  As  many  of  our
potatoes  and  onions  were  sprouting  in  the  bags,  I  determined
to  dig  a  portion  of  this  area  and  plant  the  most  "  progres-
sive "  of  these  vegetables.  The  sandy  soil  did  not  appear
to  contain  much  nutriment,  but  I  thought  that  something
might  be  gained  by  giving  it  a  trial.

On  the  night  of  February  2,  Sawyer  reported  that  he  had
heard  the  Wellington  wireless  operator  calling  Suva  station,
but,  as  no  further  signals  were  heard  from  anywhere,  he  was
inclined  to  the  idea  that  it  was  the  experience  of  a  "  freak
night."  In  explanation  of  this  term,  I  may  say  that  it
is  used  in  reference  to  nights  on  which  the  atmospheric
conditions  are  abnormally  favourable  for  wireless  work.

The  news  was  particularly  encouraging,  and  for  the  next
few  days  we  were  on  the  tip-toe  of  expectation.

In  the  early  morning  of  the  5th  a  howling  gale  sprang  up
and,  increasing  in  force  as  the  day  wore  on,  rendered  work
impossible.  A  tremendous  sea  worked  up,  and  the  ocean
for  a  distance  of  a  mile  from  shore  was  simply  a  seething
boil  of  foam.  Huge  waves  dashed  on  shore,  running  yards
beyond  the  usual  marks,  and  threatening  to  sweep  across  the
isthmus.  Masses  of  tangled  kelp,  torn  from  the  outlying
rocks,  washed  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  surf  or  were
carried  high  up  among  the  tussocks.  The  configuration
of  the  shingly  beach  changed  while  one  looked  at  it.  The
tops  of  the  waves  could  be  seen  flying  over  Anchor  Rock,
seventy  feet  high,  and  spray  was  blowing  right  across  the
isthmus.

On  the  advice  of  the  sealers  we  had  shifted  our  stores
farther  back  from  the  beach  and  it  was  just  as  well  we  did
so,  as  the  waves  reached  to  within  a  few  feet  of  the  nearest
box.  Meanwhile  I  began  to  wonder  how  our  benzine  and
lubricating  oil  were  faring.  Both  had  been  stacked  in  cases
among  the  tussock  and  rocks,  well  back  from  the  waters
of  Aerial  Cove  on  the  western  side  of  Wireless  Hill.

183


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Accordingly,  Hamilton,  Sandell  and  I  went  round  in
that  direction  the  following  morning,  while  Sawyer  made
his  way  up  to  the  wireless  station  to  see  if  there  were  any
damages  there.  We  worked  along  round  the  cliff- front
through  a  cave  rejoicing  in  the  name  of  "  Catch  Me,"  from
the  fact  that  the  waves  rushed  into  it,  frequently  catching
and  thoroughly  wetting  any  unfortunate  taken  off  his  guard.
A  massive  rock,  evidently  broken  from  the  roof,  lay  right
across  its  centre,  while  on  either  side  of  the  obstruction
were  masses  of  greasy  decaying  kelp.  We  were  "  caught  "
and  floundered  about  in  the  kelp  while  the  water  surged
around  us.  Arriving  at  the  Cove,  we  found  that  several
cases  were  missing.  One  was  discovered  buried  in  kelp,
and  a  little  later  we  came  upon  a  tin  battered  almost  out
of  recognition.  The  loss  was  not  serious,  but  the  precaution
was  taken  to  shift  the  oil  still  farther  back.

A\Tiile  we  were  engaged  on  this  task.  Sawyer  appeared
on  the  front  of  the  hill  above  and  signalled  to  us  that  the
aerial  had  been  blown  down.  The  three-inch  rope  keeping
the  aerial  taut  had  broken  off  close  to  the  bridle  and  torn  the
halyard  with  it.  It  meant  that  some  one  would  have  to
climb  the  mast  to  pass  a  rope  through  the  block,  and  the
wind  was  at  this  time  too  strong  for  anything  to  be  done.

On  February  7,  Blake  and  Hamilton,  who  had  been
making  preparations  for  several  days  past,  set  out  for
Sandy  Bay,  intending  to  do  some  work  in  that  locality.
Their  blankets,  sleeping-bag,  instruments  and  other  gear
made  rather  heavy  swags,  but  they  shouldered  them  in  true
]Murrumbidgee  style  and  tramped  away.

Sandell,  Sawyer  and  I  went  up  Wireless  Hill  to  fix  the
aerial.  Sandell,  the  lightest  of  the  three,  was  being  hoisted
up  the  first  section  of  the  mast  with  some  one-and-a-half -inch
rope  when  the  hauling-line  gave  way.  Fortunately,  he  had
a  strap  securing  him  to  the  mast,  otherwise  his  fall  would  have
been  from  twenty  feet.  This  was  the  only  rope  we  had,  so
we  had  to  think  of  some  other  means  of  reaching  the  top.
After  a  short  discussion,  I  suggested  that  decking-spikes
184


._._*'^^^

^^'^'8'


'V;^.,


Miirquaile  Iiilund  lllal.-i

VIEW  OF  THE  WIRELESS  STATION  OX  THE  SUMMIT  OF   WIRELESS   HILL


:^^tii


Mat-qmuie  Inland  THE   WIRELESS  OPEKATIXU  JILL


ShihIpI!


Mnniiuui,-  Inhind  Tin.;   WIRELESS   E.\(;IXL    HUT


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

should  be  secured  from  the  wreck  of  the  Clyde  and  driven
into  the  mast  at  intervals.  The  idea  was  followed  with
great  success,  and  Sandell  was  able  to  run  the  halyard
through  the  block  at  the  top  (ninety  feet).  The  aerial  was
then  hauled  into  position,  the  stay-wires  were  tightened,
an  extra  "  dead  man  "  was  put  in  and  the  station  was
once  more  ready  for  work.

Hamilton  returned  from  Sandy  Bay  on  the  11th  laden
with  botanical  trophies  and  four  specimens  of  a  small  land
bird  which  we  had  never  before  seen.  He  and  Blake,  who
remained  behind,  had  fixed  up  the  hut  there  so  that  it
afforded  decent  shelter.

On  the  night  of  the  13th  what  we  had  long  expected
happened.  Wireless  communication  was  established  for  the
first  time,  with  a  ship — s.s.  Ulimaroa.  Sandell  and  Sawyer
were  complimented  on  their  success.

On  the  following  night  communication  was  held  with
Sj^dney,  s.s.  Westralia,  s.s.  Ulimaroa  and  H.M.S.  Drake ;
the  latter  very  courteously  sending  us  time-signals.  We
heard  that  a  wireless  station  had  just  been  established  in
Melbourne,  and  that  the  Hobart  station  would  be  working
in  about  one  month.  It  was  with  the  latter  station  that  we
expected  to  do  most  of  our  business.  There  was  great  joy
in  the  camp  now  that  this  stage  of  practical  efficiency  was
reached  and  because  we  were  no  longer  isolated  from  the
world.

Blake  came  back  from  Sandy  Bay  on  the  16th  with  news
that  he  had  almost  finished  the  survey  of  that  section.
Foggy  or  misty  weather  gave  him  a  good  deal  of  trouble  in
getting  sights  with  the  theodoHte,  and  it  became  part  of  his
future  programme  to  devote  the  "  impossible  "  days  to
plotting  data,  writing  up  field-notes,  and  making  geological
collections.

The  afternoon  of  the  17th  was  fine,  and  I  went  along  the
beach  towards  West  Point  and  found  it  very  rough  travelling.
Hundreds  of  sea  elephants,  mostly  of  the  season's  young,
lay  about  in  the  tussock  or  amongst  the  rocks.     The  young,

185


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

silver-grey  in  colour,  looked  very  sleek  and  fat.  The  adults
consorted  in  groups  of  from  eight  to  ten,  packed  closely
and  fast  asleep.  They  seemed  to  fairly  luxuriate  in  a  soft,
swampy  place  and  were  packed  like  sardines  in  some  of  the
wallows.

Large  numbers  of  skua  gulls,  creating  a  dreadful  din,
drew  my  attention  to  a  spot  amongst  the  rocks,  and,  on
nearing  it,  I  found  them  squabbling  around  the  carcase  of
a  xiphoid  whale,  about  sixteen  feet  long,  which  had  been
cast  up  apparently  only  a  few  hours  before.

The  skuas,  as  they  are  commonly  called,  are  large  brown
birds  which  resort  to  the  island  in  great  numbers  for  the
purpose  of  breeding.  They  stay  longer  than  any  other
migrant,  being  absent  only  three  months  during  the  depth  of
winter.  Returning  early  in  August,  they  do  not  start  nesting
until  the  beginning  of  October.  The  nests,  nicely  made  of
grass  and  plant  leaves,  are  generally  built  on  the  terraces
and  slopes  amongst  the  hills.  The  ideal  site,  however,  is  a
pleurophyllum  flat  adjoining  a  penguin  rookery.  Two  or
three  eggs  of  a  brown  or  greenish-brown  colour  with  darker
spots  or  blotches  are  laid  about  the  end  of  October,  and,  from
this  time  till  the  chicks  are  reared,  the  parent  exhibits  much
annoyance  at  the  presence  of  any  person  in  the  vicinity.
They  utter  shrill  cries  and  swoop  down  continuously  in  an
attempt  to  strike  the  invader  with  their  wings.  Several  of
our  party  received  black  eyes  as  a  result  of  attacks  by  skuas.

The  young  grow  rather  quickly,  and  not  much  time  elapses
before  they  leave  the  nest  to  stagger  round  and  hide  amongst
the  vegetation.  The  parents  fly  down  and  disgorge  food,
which  is  immediately  devoured  by  the  young  ones.  The
skuas  are  bare-faced  robbers  and  most  rapacious,  harassing
the  penguins  in  particular.  They  steal  the  eggs  and  young
of  the  latter  and  devour  a  great  number  of  prions — small
birds  which  live  in  holes  in  the  ground.  The  skuas  are
web-footed,  but  are  very  rarely  seen  in  the  water.

Towards  the  end  of  the  month,  Blake  spent  two  days  at
Sandy  Bay  and  then  returned  to  work  up  his  results.
186


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

Hamilton,  in  order  to  get  into  close  touch  with  another
species  of  penguin,  stayed  several  days  at  "  The  Nuggets,"
two  and  a  half  miles  down  the  eastern  coast.  A  creek  flows
into  the  sea  at  this  point,  and  many  Royal  penguin  rookeries
are  established  along  its  course.

Meanwhile,  many  improvements  had  been  effected  in
the  interior  of  the  Shack.  Shelves  lined  the  walls  wherever
it  was  convenient  to  have  them,  and  many  perishable  food-
stuffs had  been  brought  inside.  Comfort,  after  all,  is  but  a
relative  matter,  and,  as  far  as  we  were  concerned,  it  was
sufficient.

Our  clothing  was  all  that  could  be  desired,  with  the
exception,  perhaps,  of  the  boots.  In  the  equipment  were
included  one  pair  of  sea-boots,  one  pair  of  raw  hide  knee-
boots  and  two  pairs  of  rawhide  hunting  boots.  The  latter  were
not  heavy  enough,  and  soon  showed  the  effect  of  travelling  from
a  water-logged  surface  to  one  of  rock  and  vice  versa.  In  fact,
our  boots  were  very  rarely  dry  on  Macquarie  Island.

An  event  of  some  moment  occurred  on  the  28th.  The
fowls,  in  order  to  justify  our  confidence  in  them  and  as  a
return  for  our  constant  care,  commenced  to  lay  and,  strange
to  say,  all  began  to  lay  at  the  same  time.  Ma,  who  was
greatly  concerned  during  the  turn  of  affairs,  suffered  from
prolonged  attacks  of  cackling.

During  the  opening  days  of  March,  Blake  and  Hamilton
were  engaged  in  field  work  down  the  island.  They  went  as
far  as  "  The  Brothers,"  a  rocky  promontory  about  two
miles  south  of  Sandy  Bay.  Wekas  were  so  plentiful  that
they  lived  almost  entirely  on  them.  Blake,  on  returning  to
the  Shack,  had  a  badly  blistered  heel  which  kept  him  indoors
for  a  few  days.  Hamilton,  who  had  secured  a  goodly
number  of  specimens,  had  to  attend  immediately  to  their
preserv^ation.

There  were  many  rats  on  the  island  and  we  frequently
heard  them  scuttling  about  on  the  ceiling  of  the  Shack  and
slithering  down  between  the  lining  and  the  wall.  Hitherto
they  had  contented  themselves  by  doing  this,  but  on  the

187


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

night  of  the  7th  several  of  them  flopped  one  after  another
into  the  hut,  awakening  the  inmates.  On  getting  ovit  to
investigate  I  found  a  hole  through  the  lining,  about  seven
feet  from  the  floor,  and  two  or  three  were  rustling  about  on
the  shelves.  After  much  shifting  of  boxes  and  searching
behind  tins,  the  intruders  were  killed.

On  March  10  our  station  held  communication  with  Suva
at  a  distance  of  two  thousand  four  hundred  miles  ;  a  remark-
able performance  for  a  one-and-a-half-kilowatt  wireless
set.

Hamilton  and  I  set  out  for  West  Point  and  Eagle  Cave
on  the  11th  with  the  object  of  examining  the  flora  of  the
locality  and,  incidentally,  to  shoot  ducks  which  frequent
the  pools  on  the  "  Feather  Bed  "  terrace.  The  weather  was
dull  and  misty  and  the  walk  very  uncomfortable.  We  made
our  way  across  this  treacherous  tract,  often  sinking  knee-
deep.  As  we  neared  the  first  pool  a  duck  rose  and  imme-
diately paid  the  penalty.  Although  we  saw  at  least  two
hundred,  only  one  was  shot,  owing  to  the  fact  that  there  is
no  cover  about  and  the  ducks  are  too  easily  scared.

Close  to  Eagle  Cave  Hamilton  gathered  some  plant
specimens  and,  after  lunching,  we  set  off  home.  Light,
steady  rain  set  in  about  3  p.m.  and  wet  us  thoroughly.
We  travelled  back  along  the  coast,  finding  it  fearfully  rough
but  not  so  tiring  as  walking  on  the  terrace.

Heavy  snow  fell  during  the  night  of  the  11th.  Among
other  things  we  learnt  by  wireless  that  Amundsen  had
returned  to  Hobart  with  the  news  that  he  had  reached  the
South  Pole.

Blake  had  just  recovered  from  his  blistered  heel  when  he
had  the  misfortune  to  meet  with  a  slight  accident.  He  and
Hamilton  were  engaged  cutting  a  track  through  the  tussock
from  the  Shack  to  the  beach,  when  the  spade  wielded  by
Hamilton  struck  Blake's  foot,  cutting  through  the  boot
and  inflicting  a  wound  on  the  great  toe.  It  was  treated
antiseptically  and  bound  up  ;  Blake  being  laid  up  for  a
few  days.
188


Macquarii  Sandell

PAN|px0M  of  the  picture  on  the  left-hand  side  :  THE

LEFT  :  HASSELBOROUGH  BAY  ON  THE  RIGHT


^  Macquarii
St     A  VlftjED


Hamilton
ARE  ROYAL  PENGUINS'  ROOKERIES,  FROM  WHICH


BEACH  IN  A  LONO  PEOCESSIOX


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

Cooking  was  still  on  the  up  grade.  Everybody,  as  his
turn  arrived,  embarked  on  something  new.  Blake  turned
out  a  magnificent  meat  pudding  during  his  week,  and  Sawyer
manufactured  a  salmon  kedgeree.  Sandell's  treacle  pudding
and  Hamilton's  soda  rolls  and  date  pudding  were  all  equally
good,  while  I  fairly  surpassed  myself  with  a  roly-poly  and
some  pancakes.

Hitherto,  Sawyer  and  Sandell  had  been  coming  down
to  the  Shack  each  night  after  finishing  the  wireless  work,
but  on  account  of  the  bad  weather  they  determined  to  sleep
up  there  and,  with  that  end  in  view,  each  built  a  bunk  for
himself;  Sawyer,  in  the  operating-hut,  had  ample  room  for
the  improvement,  but  Sandell  had  more  difficulty  in  the
engine-hut,  finding  it  necessary  to  add  a  small  structure
to  the  original  one.

Good  wireless  work  was  now  being  done,  and  almost
every  ship  trading  to  eastern  Australian  ports  gave  us  a
"call  up."  Much  difficulty  was  experienced  with  the  mast's
stays,  which  frequently  required  tightening  on  account  of
the  "deadmen"  working  loose  in  the  yielding  peaty  soil.
There  were  seven  stays  required  for  each  mast,  and  Sandell
spent  much  time  in  attending  to  them.

Hamilton  had  found,  some  weeks  previously,  several
nests  of  the  sooty  albatross  along  the  cliff-front  on  the
eastern  side  of  Wireless  Hill,  and  on  the  21st  he  visited  them
for  the  purpose  of  photographing  the  young  in  the  nest.
They  were  still  in  the  downy  stage,  and  vomited  vigorously
on  being  approached.

These  birds  build  their  nests  on  ledges  along  the  face  of
a  steep  cliff  and  always  betray  the  whereabouts  of  their
nesting-place  by  wheeling  and  soaring  around  the  vicinity.
When  sitting,  the  bird  utters  piercing  calls  for  its  mate  and
is  thereby  easily  located.  They  make  a  nest  of  grass,
generally  at  the  root  of  a  tussock  growing  on  the  cliff-front,
and  when  the  building  is  in  progress  the  two  birds  sit  side
by  side  entwining  their  necks,  rubbing  beaks  and  at  intervals
uttering  their  harsh  cries.     One  can  approach  and  catch

189


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

them  quite  easily,  either  at  this  time  or  when  sitting.  The
female  lays  one  large  white  egg,  which  has  a  peculiar  and
rather  disagreeable  odour.  They  have  beautiful  slaty  or
bluish-grey  plumage  with  a  dark  soot-black  head,  while
encircling  the  eye  is  a  white  ring  which  stands  out  con-
spicuously from  the  dark  feathers  surrounding  it.  Like  most
other  sea-birds  they  have  the  rather  revolting  habit  of
vomiting  quantities  of  partly  digested  food  and  fluid  when
an  attempt  is  made  to  get  close  to  them.  In  this  respect
old  and  young  are  alike.  Their  food  is  procured  at  sea,
and  consists  of  the  small  forms  of  marine  life.

Sandell  and  Hamilton  went  round  to  Aerial  Cove  on  the
25th  to  collect  shells  and  to  search  for  the  missing  lubricating
oil.  \Vlien  coming  home,  after  a  successful  day,  they  dis-
covered a  cave  quite  close  to  Catch  Me.  A  lantern  was
secured  from  the  Shack  and  they  went  back  to  examine  it.
It  penetrated  for  a  considerable  distance  and  opened  out  on
the  hill  side  about  eighty  feet  above  sea-level.  Many  rocks
hung  down  from  overhead,  and  altogether  it  appeared  a
very  unsafe  place.  Blake  went  along  later  and  collected
specimens  from  its  floor.

We  built  a  kind  of  annex  to  the  Shack  out  of  the  cases
of  provisions  ;  each  case  being  numbered  and  a  list  being
drawn  out  setting  forth  the  contents  of  the  case.  This  list
was  nailed  on  to  the  wall  inside,  and  besides  being  convenient
for  procuring  the  provisions,  gave  the  cook,  in  a  couy-d" ceil,
exact  information  and  afforded  him  a  glorious  scope.

With  regard  to  the  coal-supply,  our  allowance  at  Macquarie
Island  had  been  reduced  by  one-half,  on  account  of  the  large
amount  of  wreckage  lying  on  the  beach.  The  weekly  cook
limited  himself  to  three  briquettes,  and  these  he  supple-
mented with  sea  elephant  blubber  and  wood,  which  he
gathered  and  cut  up  for  use.

Each  man  commenced  his  cooking  week  on  Saturday
morning,  and  continued  until  the  following  Friday  night,
when,  after  having  cleared  up,  washed  the  towels  and
cleaned  the  stove,  he  retired.  The  incoming  cook,  who  for
190


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

half  an  hour  had  been  prowHng  about  keenly  observant  of
"  overlooked  "  dirty  "  things  "  and  betraying  every  sign
of  impatience  to  make  a  start,  proceeded  at  once  to  set  a
batch  of  bread,  sufficient  for  one  week,  which  was  baked
early  on  Saturday  morning.  Five  loaves  had  to  be  baked,
and  as  only  two  could  be  dealt  with  at  a  time,  the  chance  of
producing  at  least  one  doughy  loaf  was  reasonably  high
until  ever^^  one  became  a  master  baker.

For  a  time  we  had  been  rather  hard  put  to  it  in  the  matter
of  having  baths,  but  the  disability  had  been  overcome  by
means  of  sawing  a  cask  in  two  ;  an  expedient  which  answered
very  well.  The  bath  was  also  used  as  a  wash-tub,  each
man  taking  charge  as  his  cooking  week  came  round.  The
clothes  were  dried  inside  the  Shack  along  a  number  of
strings  arranged  at  the  back  of  the  stove.  Darning  and
mending  took  a  little  time,  and  our  experiences  in  this
direction  were  such  as  to  demonstrate  the  wisdom  of  putting
in  "  a  stitch  in  time."

In  going  over  to  the  meteorological  screen  one  morning
I  saw  a  giant  petrel  flapping  about  in  the  tussock,  gorged
to  such  an  extent  that  it  could  not  rise.  I  killed  the  loath-
some bird  with  the  rib -bone  of  a  sea  elephant,  and  Hamilton
made  a  fine  specimen  of  it  later  on.

These  birds,  properly  called  giant  petrels,  are  usually
known  as  "nellies"  or  "stinkers";  the  latter  title  being
thoroughly  justified  on  account  of  the  disagreeable  smell
which  comes  from  them.  As  may  be  inferred  from  the  name,
they  are  the  largest  of  all  the  petrels,  and  measure  about
seven  feet  from  tip  to  tip  when  on  the  wing.  The  colour
ranges  through  various  shades  from  almost  pure  white  to  a
dark  greyish-brown;  some  even  appearing  almost  black.
Very  large  and  ungainly  when  on  the  ground,  they  become
most  graceful  when  in  the  air,  and  soar  about  without  the
slightest  effort  even  on  the  stormiest  days.  I  have  seen
them  flying  into  a  forty-mile  wind  with  absolute  ease,  never
moving  a  wing,  but  occasionally  adjusting  their  balance.
They  are  gross  scavengers,  and  eat  apparently  for  the  sake  of

191


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

eating.  A  carcase  on  the  rocks  or  beach  attracts  them  in
large  numbers,  and  very  soon  they  can  be  seen  pulling  and
tearing  at  it  until  thoroughly  gorged,  when  they  waddle
away  into  the  water  and  sit  there  wholly  unable  to  rise  till
digestion  takes  place.  If  disturbed,  they  immediately  dis-
gorge and  fly  off.  They  nest  on  the  ground  and  lay  one
large  white  egg.  When  sitting,  they  are  reluctant  to  leave
the  nest  and  will  squat  there,  vomiting  evil-smelling,  partly
digested  food  and  fluid  at  any  intruder.  The  young,  even
in  the  downy  stage,  have  the  same  habit.

^^^len  mating  they  go  on  with  a  queer  kind  of  performance,
which  consists  of  running  around  each  other  on  the  shore
with  wings  outspread  as  if  displaying  their  charms,  finally
flying  off  or  waddling  into  the  water.

The  persistently  windy  weather  during  March  had  an
effect  on  everything  exposed  to  its  force.  Sandell  discovered
on  the  29th  that  the  rope  holding  the  wireless  aerial  had
cut  through,  leaving  only  one  strand,  Avhich  now  bore  all
the  strain.  It  was  just  a  matter  of  days  before  it  would
part,  and,  with  a  view  to  preventing  a  repetition  of  Feb-
ruary's happening,  we  went  up  to  lower  the  aerial,  but  the
frayed  portion  of  the  rope  would  not  pass  through  the  block,
so  we  had  to  leave  it  as  it  was  and  wait  for  the  inevitable.

Exceptionally  low  tides  at  the  end  of  the  month  gave
Hamilton  a  fine  opportunity  of  collecting  marine  specimens,
and  he  secured  amongst  many  other  things  some  striking
anemones.  Some  difficulty  was  experienced  in  preserving
them,  as  they  lost  colour  and  shrivelled  up.  But  a  special
line  of  treatment  was  attended  by  fairly  successful  results.
They  were  put  in  shallow  dishes  into  which  sea-water  was
poured.  Very  soon  they  attached  themselves  to  the  bottom
and  began  to  expand,  finally  opening  out  to  the  fullest
extent.  With  a  view  to  narcotizing  them  while  in  this
condition,  menthol  was  applied  to  the  water  but  did  not
seem  to  have  much  effect.  Chloral  hydrate  was  found  to
give  the  best  results.  It  killed  them  all,  but,  before  dying,
they  elongated  and  detached  themselves  from  the  bottom
192


Mdcquurie  Is-l/nul  A   WHITE  (ilANT   PEfKEL  ON  THE  NEST


make


M,lr,,ll,l,i,'  Ishuul


A  (JIANT  PETKEI,   KOOKEKV


II  a  mil  tun


LIFE  ON  MACQUARIE  ISLAND

of  the  dish ;  after  which  they  were  taken  out  and  placed  in
formalin  for  preservation.

Blake  had  very  little  opportunity  of  doing  much  survey
work  during  the  month,  as  he  was  hampered  by  a  sore  foot
and  the  weather  was  wretched.  He  therefore  spent  most
of  his  time  plotting  data,  making  geological  investigations
and  collecting  and  naming  specimens.

He  and  Hamilton  had  so  far  confined  their  attention  to
the  northern  half  of  the  island,  and  had  resolved  to  complete
the  study  of  this  area  before  tackling  the  southern  half.

The  weather  throughout  the  month  was  rather  severe,
and  only  two  days  were  really  appreciated.  Precipitation
occurred  on  twenty-five  days,  but  the  worst  feature  was  the
continuity  of  strong  winds,  which  however  did  not  reach
gale-force  on  more  than  three  occasions.  Much  snow  and
hail  fell,  the  former  accompanying  winds  with  a  southerly
component,  while  with  the  north-westers  came  the  depressing
mist  or  misty  rain  which  is  such  a  characteristic  of  the  place.
Temperatures,  as  might  have  been  expected,  were  beginning
to  go  down,  and  we  experienced  several  very  cold  days.
The  average  temperature  for  March  was  41*8°,  while  the
highest  was  46*9°  and  the  lowest  35-3°  F.  on  the  24th.

At  10  P.M.  on  April  1  the  rope  supporting  the  aerial
parted.  Sawyer  and  Sandell  were  on  duty  at  the  time,
but  of  course  suspended  operations  immediately.  As  before,
the  halyard  also  carried  away  and  Sandell  henceforth  re-
solved to  shackle  one  end  of  the  aerial  to  the  mast,  using  a
short  length  of  chain  instead  of  the  rope.  The  wreck  of  the
Clyde  was  once  more  our  standby,  providing  a  suitable
length  of  chain  and  four  shackles.  After  completing  this
job,  they  had  very  little  subsequent  trouble  with  the  aerial.

Hamilton  and  Sawyer  caught  several  three-pound  fish
on  April  2,  and  Sandell  served  them  in  good  style.  They
were  good  eating,  but,  unfortunately,  were  very  much  worm-
infested.  These  parasitical  worms  are  about  an  inch  and  a
half  long  and  taper  to  a  point  at  each  end.  They  penetrate
right  through  the  flesh  and  are  plainly  noticeable  after  the
VOL.  n  N  193


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

fish  is  cooked.  One  has  to  dodge  the  worms  as  the  meal
proceeds  :  either  that  or  persuade  oneself  that  they  do  not
matter.

The  flowing  contours  of  the  land  in  the  vicinity  of  "The
Nuggets  "  suggested  glacial  action  to  Blake,  and  on  the  4th,
while  making  geological  investigations  in  that  locality,  he
lit  upon  a  well-defined  basal  moraine.  Needless  to  say  he
was  very  interested  in  the  discovery,  and  brought  home  a
number  of  polished,  striated  boulders  as  convincing  evidence
of  his  theory.

It  was  rather  disappointing  to  find  that  the  vegetables
we  had  planted  were  making  little  progress.  They  would
shoot  up  at  first  very  strongly,  like  the  "  seed  which  fell  on
stony  ground,"  but,  as  soon  as  a  gale  arose,  the  tops  turned
black  and  shortly  afterwards  withered  away.  It  was  appa-
rently an  effect  of  the  salt  spray  which,  in  rough  weather,
used  to  blow  across  the  isthmus.  Hamilton  planted  some
willows  and  other  cuttings,  which  shared  the  same  fate.

The  winter  had  now  arrived  in  real  earnest,  and  the
months  which  followed  were  punctuated  by  a  succession  of
gales,  while  we  came  to  recognize  that  it  was  an  exceptional
day  when  the  hills  were  not  shrouded  in  mist.  The  only
thing  to  do  was  to  brace  oneself  up  for  the  ordeal  and  to
put  a  good  foot  forward.


194


O      .


%


CHAPTER  XXVI
A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

By  G.  F.  AINSWORTH

A  HEAVY  north-west  gale  was  experienced  on  April  12,
the  wind  attaining  a  force  of  over  fifty  miles  an  hour.
As  usual,  a  tremendous  sea  worked  up  very  quickly,
and  sheets  of  spray  shredded  across  the  isthmus.  About
2  P.M.  the  wind  shifted  to  west  and  later  to  south-west ;
these  changes  being  accompanied  by  fierce  hail  and  squalls
of  snow.  During  the  night  the  wind  moderated,  heavy
snow  fell  and,  when  morning  dawned,  all  the  pools  were
frozen  over  and  the  island  was  draped  in  white.  It  was  the
heaviest  fall  we  had  so  far  experienced.

On  the  15th  Hamilton  and  I  shot  several  gulls  for
specimens.

The  Dominican  or  black-backed  gulls  are  very  numerous
and  remain  on  the  island  all  the  year  round.  They  are  rather
pretty,  being  snow-white,  except  on  the  upper  part  of  the
wings  and  back.  Ordinarily  their  food  is  obtained  from  the
water,  but  at  Macquarie  Island  they  live  almost  entirely
upon  the  carcases  left  by  the  sealers,  and  are  usually  seen
defending  their  rights  against  skuas  and  giant  petrels.
They  build  nests  of  tussock  on  rocks  close  to  the  water  or
maybe  on  the  ground.  Three  eggs,  much  Hke  those  of  the
skua  in  colour,  but  with  a  greener  tint  and  smaller,  are  laid,
but  generally  only  two  are  hatched.  The  young  leave  the
nest  early  and  hide  amongst  the  rocks,  whither  the  old  ones
come  to  feed  them.

We  now  considered  it  advisable  to  prepare  for  the  winter,

195


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

and  with  that  end  in  view  papered  the  inside  of  the  Shack
in  various  places.  As  the  cold  winds  were  particularly
searching,  all  faulty  joints  in  the  lining  were  pasted  over
with  any  kind  of  paper  we  could  find.  A  leak  down  the
outside  of  the  stove-pipe  was  remedied,  after  a  good  deal
of  trouble,  by  soldering  a  collar  round  the  pipe  where  it
passed  through  the  roof.  Firing  was  an  important  considera-
tion, so  each  man  now  brought  home  several  loads  of  drift-
wood every  day,  until  we  had  enough  to  keep  us  going  for
some  months.  There  was  a  complete  boot-mending  outfit
which  was  put  to  a  good  deal  of  use,  for  the  weathered  rocks
cut  the  soles  of  our  boots  and  knocked  out  the  hobnails.
Our  supply  of  the  last-named  did  not  last  long,  and  several
of  the  party  used  strips  of  hoop-iron  in  their  stead.

Blake  found  it  necessary  to  make  a  kind  of  work-desk
in  his  section,  and  accordingly  had  a  thorough  rearrange-
ment. He  shifted  his  bunk  up  to  a  height  of  about  five  and  a
half  feet,  very  close  to  the  ceiling  ;  a  fact  which  necessitated
some  wriggling  and  squirming  on  his  part  to  get  into  the
sleeping-bag.  There  was  a  fine  open  space  left  underneath,
and  he  managed  to  fix  up  his  table  very  neatly.

Although  they  had  intended  to  leave  the  work  on  the
southern  half  of  the  island  until  the  spring,  Hamilton  and
Blake  set  out  for  Lusitania  Bay  on  April  23  to  make  a  short
reconnoitring  trip.  It  was  thought  advisable  to  spend  a
few  days  down  there,  to  improve  the  hut  and  generally
speaking  to  have  a  look-round.  Both  men  had  already  visited
the  place  and  depoted  some  provisions  there.  At  8  a.m.
they  started  off,  carrying  their  blankets,  sleeping-bags  and
a  few  other  articles.  Their  proposal  was  to  go  along  the
coast  as  far  as  Sandy  Bay  and  from  thence  along  the  hill-tops
for  the  remaining  ten  miles.

Hail  and  snow-squalls  succeeded  each  other  at  frequent
intervals,  and  by  the  time  they  reached  Sandy  Bay,  all
hope  of  proceeding  along  the  hill-tops  was  dissipated.
They  therefore  kept  near  the  coast.  The  going  was  fright-
fully rough  and  the  weather  was  very  bad,  so  on  making
196


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

Green  Valley  they  camped  in  a  small  cave  for  the  night.
The  floor  was  covered  with  tussock,  and,  by  searching  amongst
the  rocks,  enough  pieces  of  wreckage  were  found  to  keep  the
fire  going.  On  the  whole  they  passed  a  fairly  comfortable
night.  Mac  proved  a  bit  troublesome  by  persisting  in  her
attempts  to  curl  up  on  or  between  the  sleeping-bags,  and  by
finally  eating  the  jam  which  had  been  saved  for  breakfast.
The  weather  was  quite  as  bad  next  morning,  but,  after  a  meal
of  dry  biscuit  and  cocoa,  they  pushed  on,  taking  four  and  a
half  hours  to  do  the  six  miles.  The  next  day  was  spent
making  the  hut  weather-proof  and  fixing  up  a  couple  of
bunks.  The  provisions  which  had  been  cached  were  in
good  order  and  abundance  of  firewood  lay  around,  in  the
shape  of  old  barrel-staves.  Just  close  to  the  living-hut  was
a  works-hut  containing  boilers  and  digestors  which  years
ago  had  been  used  for  procuring  penguin  oil,  while  there
was  a  rookery  a  few  yards  away  from  which  the  victims  had
come.

This  rookery  was  the  resort  of  King  penguins,  the
largest  of  the  four  species  which  are  to  be  found  on  the  island.
They  are  magnificently  coloured  birds,  being  bluish-grey
on  the  back  while  the  head  is  greenish-black  and  on  each
side  of  the  neck  there  is  a  brilliant  yellow  band,  shading  to
a  greenish-yellow  on  the  upper  part  of  the  breast,  and
gradually  merging  into  the  glossy  white  of  the  lower  part  of
the  body.  They  attain  to  a  height  of  about  three  feet  and
weigh  thirty  pounds  approximately.  The  site  of  their
rookery  is  a  stony  flat  about  a  hundred  yards  from  the  water,
and  here  are  collected  between  five  and  six  thousand — all
that  remain  on  the  island.

They  make  no  nest,  the  single  egg  laid  being  supported
on  the  feet,  and  kept  in  position  and  incubated  in  a  kind  of
skin  pouch  which  conceals  it  from  view.  One  would  never
guess  the  egg  was  there,  for,  on  being  disturbed,  the  bird
shuffles  along,  carrying  it  in  the  manner  described.  The
egg  is  large,  tapering  very  much  at  one  end  and  resembling
a  pear  in  shape.     They  lay  during  December  and  January,

197


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

and  the  young  are  hatched  in  about  six  weeks.  A  pecuHar
feature  about  the  young  birds  is  that  the  parents  feed  them
for  two  seasons.  They  are  covered  with  a  coarse,  greyish-
brown  furry  growth,  and  a  year-old  chick  looks  bigger  than
the  old  bird.  This  furry  growth  is  lost  during  the  second
year  and  the  adult  plumage  replaces  it.  The  young  utter  a
peculiar  sound,  something  between  a  squeak  and  a  whistle.
It  is  probable  that  the  King  penguins  were  never  so  numerous
as  the  Royal  or  Victoria  penguins,  but  the  fact  remains  that
they  have  not  yet  recovered  from  the  wholesale  slaughter
to  which  they  must  have  been  subjected  over  sixteen  years
ago.

Down  on  a  strip  of  shingly  beach  the  birds  parade,
when  not  in  the  rookery  or  at  sea  getting  food.  Their  pro-
ceedings strike  one  as  being  extraordinarily  human,  while
the  dignity  and  gravity  of  the  participants  are  beyond
description.  On  one  occasion,  a  large  number  marching
along  the  beach  were  seen  to  halt  suddenly  and  talk  excitedly.
Three  birds  then  left  the  main  body,  consulted  together  for
a  short  time,  and  then  separated.  The  other  birds  imme-
diately separated  into  three  companies,  and  each  company
stood  behind  one  of  the  three  already  mentioned,  who  were
now  some  distance  apart.  The  individuals  of  each  party
then  talked  among  themselves  for  several  minutes,  after
which  two  parties  joined  forces  and  marched  off,  leaving  the
third  party  staring  after  them.

I  have  lost  myself  for  the  time  being  amongst  the  penguins
and  shall  now  return  to  Blake  and  Hamilton,  who  climbed
on  to  the  hill-tops  the  following  morning  to  spy  out  the  land.
The  island  is  generally  speaking  higher,  and  all  the  more
elevated  peaks  are  on  the  southern  half.

They  saw  numerous  rabbits,  of  which  many  were  black,
and  Mac  had  the  day  of  her  life  amongst  them.  These
animals  were  introduced  to  the  island  about  twenty-five
years  ago,  and  have  gradually  withdrawn  to  the  lonelier
southern  part,  though  occasionally  odd  ones  are  seen  about
the  northern  end.  They  are  very  tame  and  live  in  holes
198


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

amongst  the  rocks  or  make  burrows  in  the  gully  banks  and
broken  hill  sides.

Many  lakes,  frozen  over,  were  seen,  several  of  which  were
fairly  large.  Altogether,  the  topography  is  similar  to  that
of  the  northern  end.

In  an  endeavour  to  improve  the  evening  fare,  a  sweet
broth  consisting  of  biscuit,  milk,  jam  and  sugar  was  tried
but  it  was  not  a  success  ;  Hamilton  remarking  that  "  even
Blake  had  only  one  helping."  On  the  following  morning
they  started  for  the  Shack  and  chose  the  route  on  the  hill-
tops, as  the  ground  was  frozen  hard  ;  and,  though  there  were
frequent  snow-drifts  into  which  they  floundered  occasion-
ally, the  surface  for  travelling  was  much  better  than  along
the  coast.

Hamilton  slipped  and  hurt  his  ankle  on  the  trip,  and  the
boots  of  both  were  just  about  worn  out.  They  apprehended
no  difficulty  in  completing  their  prospective  work.  Blake
pointed  out  that  the  chart  of  the  island  shows  Lusitania
Bay  as  being  rather  a  large  indentation,  whereas  in  reality
it  is  almost  a  straight  stretch  of  coast.

An  earthquake  shock  was  felt  at  9.15  p.m.  on  the  27th.
I  was  sitting  in  the  Shack  writing  up  records  at  the  time,
and  it  seemed  as  if  somebody  had  struck  the  south-west
end  of  the  place  a  severe  blow  with  a  bag  of  sand.  Imme-
diately afterwards  a  crashing  sound,  apparently  some  distance
away  on  the  eastern  side,  indicated  that  some  rocks  on  the
cliff- front  had  been  dislodged.

Much  rough  weather  was  experienced  during  the  month,
and  it  rained,  hailed  and  snowed  on  twenty-five  days.
The  wind  attained  moderate  to  fresh  gale-force  on  six  days,
and  fog  and  mist  were  almost  invariable.  The  lowest  tem-
perature recorded  was  32" 7°  F.

The  average  relative  humidity  for  the  four  months
ending  April  30  was  93  per  cent.,  leading  to  copious  con-
densation on  the  instruments  exposed  to  the  air.  It  was
necessary,  therefore,  constantly  to  attend  and  frequently
clean  the  thermographs,  hygrometers  and  the  wireless  plant.

199


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

In  the  case  of  the  latter,  loss  of  power  occurred  in  the  form
of  "  brush  discharge,"  and  Sawyer  had  to  take  great  care
in  order  to  guard  against  this  accident.  He  shellacked  the
condensers  and  other  exposed  parts  and  found  the  pro-
ceeding rather  effective.  I  noticed  that  the  drifting  snow
and  misty  rain  managed  to  get  doA\Ti  the  opening  leading
to  the  liquid  surface  of  the  anemobiagraph,  thus  altering
the  zero  of  the  recording  apparatus.  When  this  happened
the  instrument  had  to  be  dismantled  and  set  right.

We  found  it  necessary  to  use  sea  elephant  blubber  in
the  stove  in  order  to  warm  the  Shack,  and  a  very  small
piece  put  on  the  fire  at  intervals  always  ensured  a  good  heat.
Sea  elephants  had  become  scarce,  so,  in  order  to  lay  in  a
supply  of  fuel  for  the  next  few  weeks,  we  went  round  to
Aerial  Cove  on  the  3rd  and  killed  the  largest  animal  we
could  find,  afterwards  carrying  the  blubber  round  to  the
Shack.  We  came  through  Catch  Me  and  had  the  same  old
experience.  Hamilton  examined  the  contents  of  the  stomach
of  the  sea  elephant  and  found  gravel,  stones,  cuttlefish,
beaks  and  "  worms  "  in  abundance.

A  violent  north-west  gale  during  the  early  morning  hours
of  the  4th  reached  a  maximum  velocity  of  fifty-two  miles
an  hour  at  5.20  a.m.,  but  at  8  a.m.  it  began  to  weaken  rapidly
and  an  hour  later  had  shifted  to  west-south-west,  coming
from  that  point  as  a  moderate  gale  for  the  rest  of  the  day.
As  was  usual  with  winds  having  any  southerly  component,
snow  and  squalls  of  soft  hail  were  experienced.  With  the
exception  of  the  wind- vane,  which  was  blown  a  few  yards
into  the  tussock,  nothing  was  damaged.

In  the  afternoon  Blake  and  I  had  a  trip  down  to  the
moraine  which  he  had  found  a  few  days  previously.  After
a  heavy  one  and  a  half  hours'  walk,  the  last  half-mile  of
which  was  along  a  creek  bed,  with  water  ankle-deep  all  the
way,  we  reached  the  spot  :  the  site  of  one  of  the  large
penguin  rookeries  up  on  the  hills  at  the  back  of  "  The  Nuggets."
The  sun  showed  between  squalls,  and  Blake  took  some
interesting  photographs  of  rocks  showing  striae  and  other
200


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

glacial  characteristics.  We  battled  with  one  enormous
boulder  for  some  time  before  getting  it  into  a  suitable
position  for  the  camera,  and  afterwards  walked  right  through
the  glacial  area.  The  U-shaped  character  of  the  valleys
was  very  pronounced,  while  boulder-clay  obtruded  itself
everywhere  on  our  notice.

Hobart  wireless  station  was  by  this  time  in  working
order,  a  fact  which  greatly  facilitated  wireless  business.
Sandell  took  the  engine  to  pieces  early  in  the  month  and
gave  it,  as  well  as  the  fittings,  a  thorough  overhaul  and  clean-
ing. We  received  a  message  on  the  7th,  saying  that  the
Aurora  was  leaving  Hobart  on  the  13th  for  a  sub-antarctic
cruise  and  would  call  at  the  island.  At  the  same  time  I
was  requested  to  send  a  list  of  articles  required.  I  found,
after  going  through  the  stock  and  consulting  each  member,
that  we  needed  nothing  but  strong  boots,  cartridges,
dungaree  trousers,  coarse  salt,  cigarettes  and  fresh  vege-
tables.

A  persistent  area  of  high  pressure  affected  the  weather
conditions  of  the  island  to  the  extent  of  shrouding  us  in
fog  from  the  6th  to  the  10th  inclusive,  and  we  did  not  catch
a  glimpse  of  the  sun  during  that  period.  The  average  daily
temperature-range  during  this  time  was  only  2"3°.  Such
conditions  have  a  rather  depressing  effect  on  the  spirits,
but  the  cheering  news  we  received  on  the  7th  made  some
amends  for  the  lack  of  sunshine.

The  sun  appeared  at  last  on  the  11th  and  shone  strongly,
so  Blake  and  I  went  up  to  Wireless  Hill  to  take  some  "  shots  "
with  the  theodolite.  I  noticed  four  of  our  sheep  on  the
front  of  the  hill,  and,  as  there  should  have  been  nine,  Sandell
and  I,  after  finishing  with  Blake,  walked  out  to  North  Head
to  see  if  the  others  were  all  right.  We  found  them  on  the
north-east  side  of  the  hill  and  drove  them  up  to  the  rest  of
the  flock.

From  the  hill-top  we  could  see  Hamilton  engaged  in
skinning  a  large  sea  leopard  on  the  coast,  so  we  climbed
down  to  render  any  necessary  assistance.     It  was  a  beauti-

201


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

fully  marked  animal,  about  eleven  feet  long,  and  made  a
fine  specimen.

Sea  leopards  frequent  Macquarie  Island  in  great  numbers
from  the  late  winter  to  the  early  summer,  and  may  be  seen
lying  about,  sleeping  close  to  the  water  and  apparently
always  very  tired.  They  do  not  give  birth  to  the  young
there,  and  from  observations  I  concluded  that  they  were
born  at  sea.  We  had  taken  female  specimens  on  several
occasions,  apparently  within  a  few  hours  of  parturition,
and  as  none  had  been  seen  with  newly  born  young,  and  no
islands  lay  within  several  hundred  miles,  it  was  presumed
that  the  birth  took  place  in  the  water.  Until  the  young
one  is  weaned,  its  habitat  is  evidently  in  the  water  as  we
never  saw  an  adult  suckling  its  offspring.

Sea  leopards — long,  lithe  creatures  with  a  reptilian  cast
of  head — are  remarkably  quick  in  the  water.  If  one  is
disturbed  on  shore  it  opens  its  mouth  very  wide,  revealing
a  wicked-looking  row  of  teeth  in  each  jaw  ;  the  canine
teeth  or  tusks  being  very  long  and  slightly  curved.

Unlike  sea  elephants  and  seals  they  are  solitary  animals,
and  should  several  of  them  be  found  on  a  small  gravelly
patch  of  beach  they  are  seen  to  be  as  far  as  possible  from
one  another.  We  have  never  seen  them  attempt  to  fight
on  the  shore,  but  the  gaping  wounds  and  scars  with  which
they  are  frequently  covered  indicate  that  they  treat  each
other  very  severely  in  the  water.  They  live  on  penguins,
gulls,  shags  and  fish.

I  saw  several  shags  on  one  occasion  very  busy  fishing,
and  between  diving  intervals  they  would  sit  on  the  water.
Suddenly  one  disappeared  under  the  water  and  the  rest  flew
off  ;  but  in  a  few  seconds  the  one  which  had  disappeared  was
thrown  into  the  air  and  caught  by  a  sea  leopard,  who  played
in  this  fashion  with  the  maimed  bird  for  several  minutes
before  devouring  it.

A  few  days  previously  we  had  received  a  request  from
Mr.  D.  C.  Bates,  the  New  Zealand  Meteorologist,  for  a  daily
weather  report,  and  from  the  12th  onwards  a  message  was
202


Miu-qud,!,'  Isliijiil  THE    HEAD   OF   A   SKA-EEOl'A  K  H,   SIIOWIXU   FKillT


Ham  ill  fin


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

sent  nightly  to  Wellington,  a  distance  of  about  eleven
hundred  miles.  In  acknowledging  these  reports,  subse-
quently, the  office  referred  to  their  immediate  value  in  the
issue  of  daily  forecasts,  and  expressed  indebtedness  to  the
Expedition.

The  two  species  of  penguins  which  leave  the  island  during
the  winter  months  had  disappeared,  and  silence  now  reigned
where  formerly  were  busy,  noisy  colonies.  The  departure
of  the  migrants  made  the  place  seem  lonelier  and,  during  the
depths  of  winter  when  snow  covers  the  ground  and  the  birds
and  animals  are  few  in  number,  a  more  dreary  spot  would
be  difficult  to  find.

The  weather  conditions  were  now  rather  severe,  and  as
Sawyer  and  Sandell  worked  from  8  p.m.  till  2  or  3  a.m.  every
night  and  slept  at  the  wireless  station,  they  were  exempted
from  the  necessity  of  coming  down  to  get  breakfast  during
their  cooking  weeks.  They  now  rested  till  about  noon,  and
arrived  at  the  Shack  every  day  in  time  for  lunch.  Hamilton,
Blake  and  I,  each  outside  his  own  cooking  week,  took  it  in
turns  to  prepare  breakfast.

Blake's  fieldwork  at  the  north  end,  more  particularly
in  the  vicinity  of  West  Point  and  North  Head,  was  just
about  finished.  West  Point  proved  to  be  an  area  of  gabbro,
a  coarse-grained  eruptive  rock  representative  of  basic  rocks,
while  North  Head  was  composed  of  basic  agglomerate,  and
volcanic  bombs  were  numerous.

Hamilton  had  got  together  a  good  collection  of  bird
specimens,  and  was  now  in  quest  of  skeletons.

On  the  night  of  the  13th  we  witnessed  a  rather  pretty
auroral  manifestation.  It  assumed  the  appearance  of  a
Noah's  ark  cloud,  that  is,  stretching  from  opposite  points
on  the  horizon  and  appearing  to  converge  at  each  one  of
these  points.  The  light  was  a  pale  yellow,  no  other  tint
being  visible.  In  addition,  a  nebulous  glow  appeared  at
intervals  in  the  south.

We  heard  on  the  16th  that  the  Aurora  had  sailed  on  that
day  from  Hobart  and  would  arrive  at  Macquarie  Island  in

203


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

about  three  weeks  ;  oceanographical  work  being  carried
out  on  the  trip  down.  This  was  indeed  cheerful  news,  and
we  began  to  look  forward  to  her  arrival.

A  fresh  west-south-west  gale  during  the  early  morning
hours  of  the  17th  was  accompanied  by  soft  hail  and  snow-
squalls,  and  the  temperature  at  9  a.m.  was  31"2°  F.  The  ground
was  covered  with  snow  and  all  the  pools  were  frozen  over,
but  at  9  P.M.  there  was  a  rapid  shift  of  the  wind  to  the
north-west  and  the  snow  almost  disappeared.  Soft  hail,
generally  a  little  larger  than  tapioca  and  of  the  same
shape,  frequently  fell.  These  little  pellets  are  formed  of  com-
pressed snow  and  are  commonly  supposed  to  be  frozen  cloud-
particles  mixed  with  raindrops  compacted  by  a  high  wind.

On  the  following  night,  Blake  and  I  went  up  to  Wireless
Hill  to  take  star  observations.  It  was  very  dark  and  the
hill-front  was  slippery,  frequent  falls  being  the  rule.  Just
after  setting  up  the  instrument,  the  wind  freshened  to  such
an  extent  that  it  was  impossible  to  do  anything,  so  we
descended  very  wet  and  muddy  to  the  Shack,  having  had
a  rough  passage.  The  reason  for  this  was  that  I  fell  on
the  lantern  and  extinguished  the  light.

We  were  supplied  with  two  hurricane  lamps  which  do
not  by  any  means  deserve  their  title  as  they  blow  out  in
even  a  moderately  strong  wind.  Sandell  made  a  lantern
for  his  own  use,  declaring  that  it  was  impossible  for  any
wind  to  blow  it  out.  I  firmly  believed  him,  as  it  was  a
little  binnacle  lamp  placed  inside  a  small  oatmeal  tin  into
which  a  cleaned  photographic  plate  had  been  fixed  and  with
holes  punched  in  the  bottom  and  top  of  the  tin  for  ventila-
tion. It  was  thus  a  lamp  with  two  covers,  and  frequent
demonstrations  of  its  ability  to  survive  heavy  blows  were
made  by  the  inventor.

During  the  next  three  days  a  forty-mile  wind  accom-
panied by  snow,  hail  and  sleet  was  experienced  and  the
maximum  temperature  on  the  25th  did  not  reach  freezing-
point,  the  ground  being  firmly  frozen  and  snow-covered.
During  the  evening  of  the  last-named  date  the  wind  shifted  to
204


A   PUECOCIOUS  VICTOIilA   PKNTiUIX


Ilurle;/


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

north-west,  and  by  noon  on  the  26th  no  snow  remained,
except  on  the  hills.

In  anticipation  of  the  Aurora's  arrival,  Blake  and
Hamilton  collected  some  stores  together  in  the  hope  that
Captain  Davis  would  transport  them  down  to  Lusitania
Bay,  thus  obviating  the  necessity  of  carrying  them  down  on
foot.  As  Blake  reckoned  that  he  would  remain  there
fully  three  months  and  Hamilton  about  two  months,  it  was
thought  that  such  another  opportunity  might  not  present
itself.

Through  the  courtesy  of  the  naval  officials,  H.M.S.
Drake  sent  us  time-signals  twice  a  week,  and  though  we  had
so  far  heard  no  sound  from  Adelie  Land,  there  was  a  possi-
bility that  they  could  receive  messages  from  us.  Sawyer
therefore  sent  out  time-signals  as  a  matter  of  routine.

Hamilton  made  a  trip  to  the  west  coast  on  the  28th  and
returned  with  thirteen  wekas.  Sawyer  did  not  care  for  these
birds,  but  each  of  the  others  could  account  for  one  at  a
meal.  They  seem  to  be  better  eating  if  plucked  like  a
fowl  and  roasted,  but  the  plucking  takes  too  long  and  we
generally  skinned  and  boiled  them.  It  is  advisable  to  hang
them  for  several  days  before  cooking  as  it  certainly  makes
them  tender.

Rough,  stormy  weather  prevailed  during  the  greater
part  of  the  month  and  the  wind  reached  the  force  of  a  gale
on  nine  days.  Much  snow,  soft  hail  and  sleet  fell  and  some
very  cold  days  were  experienced.  The  average  temperature
was  40°,  the  maximum  being  44*7°  and  the  minimum
27-8°  F.

A  heavy  snowfall  occurred  during  the  early  morning
hours  of  June  3,  and  the  temperature  was  below  freezing-
point  all  day.  In  the  afternoon  we  had  rather  an  enjoyable
time  tobogganing  down  a  steep  talus-slope  on  the  east  coast.
A  considerable  struggle  was  necessary  in  order  to  get  the
sledge  to  the  top,  but  the  Hghtning  sHde  to  the  bottom
more  than  compensated  for  the  labour.

We  made  wireless  inquiries  concerning  the  Aurora  at

205


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

night,  and  were  informed  by  Hobart  that  a  search  for  the
Royal  Company  Islands  was  included  in  her  programme.
It  was  therefore  presumed  that  she  was  engaged  in  prose-
cuting this  search  and  would  probably  not  reach  us  for  some
days.

Hamilton  killed  a  very  fine  sea  lepoard  on  the  5th  and
the  skin,  apart  from  being  unscarred,  was  handsomely
marked.  It  should  make  a  splendid  specimen.  The  stomach
contained  more  than  the  usual  number  of  worms  and  one
specimen  of  tape-worm,  seven  inches  long  and  three-eighths
of  an  inch  wide,  was  preserved.

Everything  was  going  along  in  the  usual  placid  manner
on  the  7th,  when,  as  we  were  just  taking  our  seats  for  lunch,
some  one  rushed  in  with  the  information  that  the  Aurora
was  in  sight.  There  was  a  scramble  to  various  points  of
vantage  and  she  was  soon  observed  coming  up  the  east
coast  very  slowly.  At  2.30  p.m.  she  dropped  anchor  in
North-East  Bay,  but,  as  it' was  blowing  strongly  and  a  nasty
sea  was  running,  no  boat  was  launched,  though  one  may
imagine  how  anxiously  we  watched  for  some  movement  in
that  direction.  As  soon  as  it  became  dark  a  message  was
"  Morsed  "  to  us  to  the  effect  that  a  boat  would  bring
mails  and  goods  ashore  in  the  morning  if  the  weather
moderated,  and  with  that  we  had  to  be  content.  Needless
to  say,  business  ashore  was  for  the  time  being  paralysed,
but  a  message  was  sent  to  the  Secretary  in  Hobart  advising
him  of  the  Ship's  arrival.

True  to  his  intimation  of  the  previous  night,  Captain
Davis  brought  a  boat  ashore  at  9.30  a.m.  and  with  him  came
several  visitors  who  were  to  be  our  guests  for  some  days.
They  were  Mr.  E.  R.  Waite,  Curator  of  the  Canterbury
Museum  and  his  taxidermist,  and  Mr.  Primmer,  a  cinemato-
grapher.  Conspicuous  in  the  boat  was  a  well-laden  mail
bag  and  no  time  was  lost  in  distributing  the  contents.
Letters,  papers,  and  magazines  were  received  by  every
member  of  the  party,  and  all  the  news  was  "  good."  Some
stores  were  brought  along  and,  after  getting  these  ashore,
206


YOUNG  MALE  SEA  ELEl'HAXTS  AT   PLAY


Hamilton


A   LAK(iE  SEA-LEOPAKI)   ON    IHE   HEAt'H


Utuiulton


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

we  took  the  visitors  across  to  the  Shack  and  invited  them
to  make  themselves  at  home.

Captain  Davis  also  came  along  to  the  Shack  and  after-
wards looked  over  the  wireless  station.  He  returned  to
the  ship  just  after  lunch,  and  Sandell,  Sawyer  and  Blake
took  the  opportunity  of  going  on  board.  Hamilton,  in  the
meantime,  piloted  the  visitors  on  a  short  trip  round  to
Aerial  Cove,  introducing  them  to  Catch  Me,  where  they
were  duly  baptized.  They  afterwards  climbed  up  Wireless
Hill  and  had  a  look  at  the  station,  returning  to  the  Shack
much  impressed  with  the  rough  nature  of  the  country.

Blake  went  off  to  the  ship  again,  taking  the  stores
which  had  been  got  ready  for  transport  to  Lusitania  Bay,
as  the  captain  had  agreed  to  land  them  when  he  visited  there
in  a  few  days'  time.

Amongst  the  cases  which  were  landed  was  one  containing
the  recording  apparatus  for  the  tide-gauge.  The  other
parts  of  this  instrument  had  been  left  on  the  island  in
December,  but  for  some  reason  the  clock  and  charts  had
gone  astray  and  were  not  found  till  the  vessel  was  being
unloaded  in  Adelie  Land.  Some  thermometers  and  a
Robinson  anemometer  had  also  been  overcarried  and,
when  they  came  to  light,  the  latter  was  immediately  placed
in  commission.

Captain  Davis  sent  a  boat  ashore  on  the  morning  of  the
12th  with  an  invitation  to  come  on  board  and  lunch.  I
accordingly  went  out  to  the  vessel  and,  after  lunching,
had  a  thorough  look  over  her,  mentally  contrasting  her
spick-and-span  appearance  at  the  time  with  what  it  had
been  when  I  left  her  in  December.  I  went  ashore  again  in
the  afternoon  and  assisted  the  visitors  to  get  their  loads
down  to  the  boat,  as  they  were  returning  to  the  ship,  which
was  leaving  next  morning  on  a  sounding  trip  down  the
island.

On  the  14th  we  started  to  carry  the  stores  across  to  the
Shack  on  our  backs.  We  soon  realized  that  seventy  or
eighty  pounds  was  not  a  light  load  over  a  half-mile  stretch

307


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

of  rough,  shingly  beach,  but  succeeded  in  transporting  the
onions,  apples  and  potatoes  before  finishing  for  the  night.
The  other  articles  were  brought  over  during  the  next  two
afternoons.

The  tide-gauge  pipe,  weighing  about  six  hundredweights,
and  the  box  for  the  housing  of  the  recording  gear  had  been
landed  in  December  round  in  Aerial  Cove,  where  a  site  had
been  chosen  for  the  erection  of  the  gauge.  Experience
showed  me  that  the  place  was  unsuitable,  so  I  took  Hamilton,
Sandell  and  Sawyer  round  to  the  cove  on  the  15th  and  we
decided,  as  we  had  no  boat,  that  it  was  impossible  to  carry
the  pipe  round  to  the  east  coast.

I  had  been  making  some  tidal  observations  on  an  upright,
fixed  in  a  comparatively  quiet  spot  on  the  east  coast,  and  it
was  here  that  I  contemplated  erecting  the  gauge.  Two
snow-gauges,  eight  inches  each  in  diameter,  were  amongst
the  meteorological  equipment  and  it  appeared  that  if  these
two  were  soldered  together  a  suitable  pipe  could  be  made.
Further,  the  pipe  was  to  be  protected  from  the  violence  of
the  seas  by  planks  fixed  round  it.  Sandell  agreed  with  the
idea  and  forthwith  set  about  soldering  the  two  together
and  making  a  suitable  float,  the  one  supplied  being  too
wide.     All  that  now  remained  was  to  erect  the  gauge.

The  two  following  afternoons  were  devoted  to  stowing
the  new  stores.  We  carried  everything  across  and  stacked
them  at  the  south-west  end  of  the  Shack.  Unfortunately,
the  boots  which  we  had  ordered  did  not  come,  but  Captain
Davis  let  us  have  five  pairs  of  light  bluchers  out  of  the  ship's
stores,  and  we  reckoned  that  these  with  extra  soles  and  a
few  hobnails  would  hold  out  till  August  or  September,
when  a  sealing  vessel  was  expected.

The  Aurora  returned  from  the  south  of  the  island  on
the  19th  and  reported  having  had  a  rough  experience  in
the  north-east  to  south  gale  which  blew  on  the  two  previous
days.  The  wind  came  out  of  the  north-east  very  suddenly
on  the  17th,  and  some  very  strong  squalls  were  experienced.
A  calm  prevailed  for  several  hours  in  the  evening,  but  a
208


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

south-east  gale  then  sprang  up  and  blew  all  day  on  the  18th,
gradually  working  into  the  south  and  dying  away  during
the  night.

Early  on  the  20th  the  Aurora  steamed  out  of  the  bay,
bound  north  as  we  thought,  but  she  returned  again  in  the
evening,  and  we  signalled  to  know  if  anything  were  wrong.
They  replied,  "  All  well,  but  weather  very  bad  outside."
She  lay  at  anchor  in  the  bay  all  next  day  as  it  was  snowing
and  blowing  very  hard  from  the  south-west,  but  at  8.45  a.m.
on  the  22nd  she  disappeared  in  the  north  and  we  did  not  see
her  again  for  some  months.  A  few  hours  after  her  departure
the  wind  increased  in  force,  and  a  continuous  gale  raged  for
the  next  five  days.

Sandell  and  I  now  made  a  start  at  erecting  the  tide-
gauge,  and  after  the  lapse  of  five  days  got  the  instrument
into  position.  We  could  work  on  it  only  at  low  tide,  for
much  rock  had  to  be  chipped  away  and  numerous  wire
stays  fixed.  The  work  was  therefore  of  a  disagreeable
character.  Its  appearance  when  finished  did  not  by  any
means  suggest  the  amount  of  trouble  we  experienced  in
setting  it  up,  but  the  fact  that  it  stood  the  heavy  seas  for
the  following  eighteen  months  without  suffering  material
damage  was  a  sufficient  guarantee  that  the  work  had  been
well  done.

A  tremendous  sea  was  running  on  the  25th  as  a  result
of  the  previous  two  days'  "  blow  "  and  a  heavy  gale  still  per-
sisting. Spray  was  scudding  across  the  isthmus,  and  the
sea  for  a  mile  from  the  shore  was  just  a  seething  cauldron.
The  wind  moderated  somewhat  on  the  26th,  but  strong
squalls  were  experienced  at  intervals  throughout  the  day,
and  on  the  27th  a  strong  wind  from  the  south-west  brought
rather  heavy  snow.

On  the  following  day  a  westerly  gale  sprang  up  which
shifted  suddenly  to  south-south-west  and  south-west  in  the
evening  and  was  accompanied  by  fierce  hail  and  snow-
squalls  throughout  the  night.  Without  moderating  to  any
extent  the  gale  continued  to  blow  on  the  29th  and  passed
VOL.  II  Q  209


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

through    west  to  west-north-west,  finally   lasting  till    the
end  of  the  month.

Something  in  the  nature  of  a  "  tidal "  wave  occurred  during
the  night  of  the  28th,  for,  on  rising  the  following  morning,  I
was  considerably  astonished  to  see  that  the  sea-water  had
been  almost  across  the  isthmus.  To  effect  this,  a  rise  of
twenty  or  twenty-five  feet  above  mean  sea-level  must  have
taken  place  and  such  a  rise  appeared  abnormally  high.
Our  coal  heap,  which  we  had  hitherto  regarded  as  perfectly
safe  from  the  sea,  was  submerged,  as  shown  by  the  kelp
and  sand  lying  on  top  of  it,  and  the  fact  that  seven  or  eight
briquettes  were  found  fifteen  feet  away  from  the  heap.

Nothing  at  the  wireless  station  was  damaged  and  work
went  on  as  usual.  The  wind  used  to  make  a  terrific  noise
in  the  aerial  wires,  but  this  did  not  affect  the  transmission
of  messages.  The  howling  of  the  wind  round  the  operating-
hut  interfered  with  the  receiving,  at  times  making  it
extremely  difficult  to  hear  signals  ;  particularly  on  nights
not  favourable  for  wireless  work.

Hamilton  was  at  this  time  concentrating  his  attention  on
shags  or  cormorants.  This  species  of  cormorant  is  peculiar
to  the  island,  being  found  nowhere  else.  They  are  blue-black,
with  a  white  breast,  and  on  the  head  they  have  a  small  black
crest.  At  the  top  of  the  beak  are  golden  lobes,  while  the
skin  immediately  round  the  eye  is  pale  blue.  They  remain
on  the  shores  of  the  island  all  the  year  and  nest  on  the  rocks
in  or  very  close  to  the  water.  They  form  rookeries  and
build  nests  of  grass,  laying  three  eggs  about  the  end  of
November.  The  period  of  incubation  is  six  weeks.  They
live  entirely  on  fish,  and,  on  that  account,  neither  the
birds  nor  the  eggs  are  palatable.  They  are  very  stupid,
staring  curiously  till  one  gets  almost  within  reach  of  them,
when  they  flap  heavily  into  the  water.  They  are  easily
caught  when  sitting  on  the  nest,  but  a  shag  rookery,  like
most  other  rookeries,  is  by  no  means  a  pleasant  place  in
which  to  linger.

I  had  the  satisfaction  of  getting  the  first  record  from
210


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

the  tide-gauge  on  the  first  day  of  July,  but  the  clock  worked
erratically,  requiring  some  attention.

Hamilton  had  a  lobster-pot  set  some  distance  from  the
shore  and  anchored  to  a  float,  but  unfortunately  the  pot
was  lost  in  the  rough  seas  at  the  end  of  June.  He  had  a
couple  of  fish-traps  also,  but,  in  view  of  this  disaster,  he
decided  to  set  these  in  Aerial  Cove,  where  the  water  was
quieter.  Having  a  couple  of  sea  leopard  heads  which
required  macerating,  he  baited  the  trap  with  them  and
lowered  it  into  the  water,  securing  it  to  the  rock  with  a
steel  wire.

Taking  advantage  of  a  bright  sun  on  the  following  day,
Blake  and  Hamilton  went  to  "The  Nuggets  "  and  took  some
geological  and  biological  photographs,  which  on  being
developed  turned  out  well.  They  had  occasion  to  enter
one  of  the  unoccupied  huts  down  there  and  found  a  wild
cat  a  little  more  than  half  grown,  which  they  caught  and
carried  home  with  them.  He  was  of  the  usual  tabby  colour
and  by  no  means  fierce,  quickly  yielding  to  the  coaxing
treatment  of  his  captors.  He  made  himself  quite  at  home
in  the  Shack,  and  we  looked  forward  to  a  display  of  his
prowess  as  a  rat-catcher.

A  bright  display  of  the  aurora  occurred  on  the  night  of
July  4,  the  ribbons  and  streamers  of  light  being  well
defined  and  occasionally  slightly  coloured.  We  could
establish  no  connexion  between  this  extraordinary  outburst
and  the  fact  that  it  occurred  on  American  Independence
night,  but  it  was  certainly  the  most  energetic  manifestation
of  the  phenomenon  we  had  so  far  witnessed.  Many  "  glows  "
had  been  seen,  and  also  a  few  displays  of  the  arch-shaped
form,  but  none  had  shown  much  activity  or  rapid  move-
ment.

The  operator  was  requested  by  the  Pennant  Hills  high-
power  wireless  station  at  Sydney  to  listen  for  signals  tapped
out  during  the  daytime,  and  Sawyer  spent  a  couple  of  hours
on  certain  mornings  assisting  in  these  tests,  which  were
attended    with    some    success.     We    occasionally    received

211


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

press  news  from  land  stations  or  from  ships  passing  across
the  Tasman  Sea,  but  it  was  only  a  brief  summary  of  the
cable  news  :  enough  to  whet  one's  curiosity,  rarely  ever
satisfying  it.

Very  cold,  rough  weather  was  experienced  on  the  6th
and  7th  and  a  temperature  of  26°  F.  occurred  on  the  latter
date,  while  the  maximum  did  not  reach  freezing-point.
Much  snow  and  soft  hail  fell,  and  the  ground  set  hard.  The
weather  interfered  to  some  extent  with  the  tide-gauge
clock,  and  it  became  so  unsatisfactory  that  I  took  it  to  pieces
on  the  9th  and  gave  it  a  thorough  cleaning,  after  which  it
had  a  new  lease  of  life.

We  received  a  message  on  the  11th  saying  that  the
Aurora  had  arrived  in  Dunedin,  "  all  well,"  but  had  ex-
perienced a  very  rough  voyage  which  greatly  interfered
with  the  dredging  and  sounding  programme.

Our  tank  water  gave  out  for  the  first  time  on  the  12th.
The  precipitation  for  a  fortnight  had  been  in  the  form  of
dry  powdery  snow  and  soft  hail ;  the  wind  blowing  it  off
the  roof  before  it  had  a  chance  to  thaw,  thus  robbing  us  of
our  usual  water-supply.  For  a  while  we  had  to  use  swamp
water,  which  contained  a  good  many  insects  of  various  kinds
and  had  a  distinctly  peaty  flavour.  Finding  good  water
running  from  the  hill-tops  down  a  deep  gully  on  the  east
coast,  three-quarters  of  a  mile  away,  we  carried  drinking
water  from  there,  using  the  other  for  washing  up.

The  13th  was  a  most  delightful  day — bright  sun,  very
little  wind  and  fresh  exhilarating  air.  Blake  and  Hamilton
went  out  early  on  a  photographing  excursion,  and,  later  on,
the  latter  shot  and  skinned  a  white  giant  petrel.

During  the  third  week  of  July  a  very  low  tide  exposed
rocks,  ordinarily  submerged,  and  Hamilton  was  occupied
all  the  week  in  collecting  marine  organisms,  worms  and
plants  and  then  preserving,  bottling  and  labelling  them.

A  most  peculiar  sight  was  witnessed  on  the  17th.  Aerial
Cove  is  a  favourite  nesting-place  for  shags,  and  they  may
be  seen  in  twos  and  threes  flying  round  in  that  direction
212


i^   p


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

almost  any  time  during  the  day  ;  but  on  this  particular
day  a  kind  of  wholesale  exodus  from  the  cove  took  place,
and  large  flocks  of  them  followed  each  other  for  a  couple  of
hours.  They  congregated  on  the  rocks  along  the  east  coast,
or  settled  in  the  water  in  scores ;  the  latter  fact  suggesting
that  the  probable  reason  for  this  extraordinary  behaviour
was  the  presence  of  unusual  shoals  of  fish.

We  used  to  relax  and  have  a  game  of  cards  occasionally,
while  our  small  organ  became  a  medium  of  much  enjoy-
ment. All  the  members  except  one  played  well  enough  to
enjoy  themselves  and  to  give  pleasure  to  the  others.  There
was  a  distinct  predilection  in  favour  of  "  ragtime  "  and  I
must  say  I  liked  to  hear  that  music  at  frequent  intervals.
Any  one  who  plays  a  musical  instrument  knows  that  the
mood  of  the  player  is  generally  reflected  in  the  character
of  the  music,  particularly  when  he  sits  down  and  plays  in
a  casual  way.

The  pursuit  and  killing  of  a  sheep  had  now  become
something  in  the  nature  of  an  experience,  and  when  Sandell
and  I  went  hunting  for  one  on  the  20th,  we  realized  it  before
we  reached  home.  The  flock  was  very  timid,  and  when
disturbed  on  North  Head  invariably  came  past  the  wireless
station  close  to  the  engine-hut.  Sandell  concealed  himself
there  with  a  gun,  while  I  went  out  to  startle  the  animals.
They  did  not  fail  to  do  their  part,  but  Sandell  missed  and  the
shot  frightened  them.  He  then  rushed  out  and  fired  another
shot  as  they  were  running,  managing  to  hit  one,  which
immediately  dropped  behind  and  ran  to  the  edge  of  the
cliff.  We  did  not  want  to  shoot  the  sheep  at  this  moment,
as  it  would  have  fallen  about  two  hundred  feet,  so  we
cautiously  approached  to  drive  it  away.  The  poor  creature
simply  took  a  leap  out  into  space  and  landed  on  the  talus
below,  down  which  it  rolled  to  the  water's  edge.  We
scrambled  down  and  skinned  it,  having  to  carry  the  carcase
along  the  rocks  at  the  base  of  the  cliffs,  and  getting  many
duckings  on  the  way.

On  July  26  I  went  round  to  Aerial  Cove  with  Hamilton

213


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

to  have  a  look  at  the  fish-trap,  but  it  had  disappeared,
the  wire  having  broken,  apparently  through  the  continual
friction  against  rock.  He  had  previously  caught  some  fish
in  it,  and  it  was  rather  a  misfortune  to  lose  it  so  soon.

During  the  last  week  of  the  month  we  all  had  our  hair
cut.  On  arrival  at  the  island,  several  of  us  had  it  shorn
very  closely  with  the  clippers  and  had  not  trimmed  it
since  then,  growth  being  very  slow.  We  had  a  proper
hair-cutting  outfit  and  either  Blake,  Hamilton  or  Sandell
acted  as  barber.

Blake  was  an  expert  with  the  needle  and  did  some  really
neat  mending,  while  with  the  aid  of  some  woollen  thread
and  a  mug  he  darned  holes  in  his  socks  most  artistically.
He  was  the  authority  on  how,  when  and  where  to  place  a
patch  or  on  the  only  method  of  washing  clothes.  The
appearance  of  his  articles  when  washed,  compared  with
mine,  made  me  wonder.  ^

Hamilton  was  busy,  about  this  time,  dredging  in  swamp
pools  and  securing  specimens  of  the  rockhopper  or  gentoo
penguin.

The  small  gentoo  penguins,  like  the  King  penguins,  do
not  migrate  and  are  few  in  numbers.  They  form  diminutive
colonies,  which  are  always  established  on  mounds  amongst
the  tussock,  or  on  the  hill  sides  not  far  from  the  water.
Their  eggs,  which  are  globular  in  shape,  are  about  the  best
of  the  penguin  eggs  for  eating,  and  if  their  nests  are  robbed
the  birds  will  generally  lay  again,  although  I  think  they
could  not  lay  more  than  four  eggs.  They  build  their  nests
of  grass  and  plant  leaves,  and  occasionally  have  been  known  to
establish  a  fresh  rookery  after  their  first  one  has  been  robbed.
They  are  more  timid  than  any  other  species  of  penguin,
and  leave  the  nests  in  a  body  when  one  ventures  into  the
rookery.  The  skuas  take  advantage  of  this  peculiarity
to  the  length  of  waiting  about  till  a  chance  presents  itself,
when  they  swoop  down,  pick  up  an  egg  with  their  beak
and  fly  off.  The  penguin  makes  a  great  fuss  on  returning
to  find  that  the  eggs  are  gone,  but  generally  finishes  up  by
214


Macquan'e  Island


KOVAL   i'HN(;UI.N>  OX   THE   NEST


Uamiltoii


Macguarie  Islun^l


GEXTOO  PEXGUIX  AXlJ   YOrX(i


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

sitting  on  the  em23ty  nest.  We  have  frequently  put  ten  or  a
dozen  eggs  into  one  nest  and  watched  the  proprietress  on  her
return  look  about  very  doubtfully  and  then  squat  down  and
try  to  tuck  the  whole  lot  under  herself  with  her  beak.

Weather  conditions  were  rough  enough  during  July,
but  occasionally  a  fairly  quiet  day  would  occur.  High  winds
were  experienced  on  ten  days,  the  greatest  hourly  average
for  any  twenty-four  hours  being  thirty-two  miles,  but  no
day  averaged  less  than  ten  miles.  Precipitation  occurred
on  twenty-one  days,  mostly  in  the  form  of  snow  and  soft
hail.  The  mean  temperature  was  37"7°,  with  extremes  of
43*3°  and  26°  F.  The  average  percentage  of  cloud  was  78  ;
somewhat  less  than  usual  and  due  to  the  greater  frequency
of  south-west  winds,  which  almost  always  bring  a  broken
sky.

Now  that  our  life  was  one  of  smooth  routine  I  devoted
a  good  deal  of  time  to  reducing  the  meteorological  obser-
vations. Hourly  pressure  and  temperature  readings  as
well  as  descriptive  remarks,  averages  and  other  details
required  to  be  summarized,  and  this  occupied  a  considerable
amount  of  time,  so  I  made  a  practice  of  spending  a  couple
of  hours  each  day  on  the  work,  whenever  possible,  hoping
thereby  to  pick  up  the  "  leeway."  I  did  not  take  too  kindly
to  inactive  writing  in  the  Shack,  but  the  weather  conditions
were  such  that  I  was  glad  to  stay  indoors,  though  that  meant
enduring  the  inevitable  cold  feet.  The  floor  of  the  Shack
was   never   warm,  and  of  course  there  were  no  carpets.

Mac  developed  a  great  animosity  against  the  rats  and
thoroughly  enjoyed  rooting  them  out  on  all  occasions.
The  only  explanation  of  their  presence  on  the  island  is  that
they  had  arrived  in  the  ships  which  were  wrecked  along  the
coasts.  They  got  into  the  Shack  several  times,  and  we
simply  brought  in  Mac  and  shifted  things  about  till  she
caught  them.

Rough  weather  occurred  during  the  first  week  of  August,
and  with  occasional  temporary  weakenings  a  gale  blew
throughout,  reaching  fifty  miles  an  hour  at  different  times.

215


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Snow,  hail  and  sleet  fell  every  day,  and  on  the  3rd  the
temperature  was  below  freezing-point  all  day.  The  Shack,
which  always  shook  a  little  in  exceptionally  heavy  gales,
now  vibrated  a  good  deal  in  a  forty-mile  wind,  no  doubt
feeling  the  effects  of  the  beating  it  had  undergone.

Blake  found  a  cave  running  through  North  Head  and
went  round,  on  the  5th,  to  examine  it.  He  proved  it  to  be
about  sixty  yards  from  opening  to  opening,  and  to  widen
out  very  much  inside;  the  roof  being  about  fifteen  feet
above  the  floor.

Hamilton  and  Sandell  went  along  the  coast  on  the
6th  and  brought  home  a  dozen  Maori  hens  for  the  pot.
Hamilton  secured  some  spiders,  parasites  on  birds  and
many  beetles  under  the  moss  and  stones  on  the  site  of  a
penguin  rookery,  besides  shooting  a  few  terns.

The  tern  is  a  very  pretty  bird  with  light  grey  plumage,
a  black  head  and  red  beak  and  feet.  We  found  no  nests
on  the  island,  though  the  fact  that  the  birds  remain  through-
out the  year  implies  that  they  breed  there.  They  fly  very
fast  while  not  appearing  to  do  so,  but  their  movements
are  by  no  means  graceful.  They  flit  about  over  the  water
close  to  the  shore,  every  now  and  then  dipping  down  picking
up  morsels  and  keeping  up  a  constant,  shrill  squeaking.

The  sea  was  so  high  on  the  7th  that  it  reached  the  weight
of  the  tide-guage  and,  lifting  it  up,  unshipped  the  recording
gear,  as  the  steel  wire  flew  off  the  wheel  before  the  latter
could  take  up  the  slack.  I  deemed  it  advisable  to  use
stout  cord  instead  of  wire  in  the  future  and  made  a  protective
slot  for  the  weight.  I  had  blocked  up  the  seaward  side  of
the  pipe  with  rocks,  but  found  that  these  caused  a  deposit
of  silt  so  I  had  to  get  into  the  water  at  low  tide  and  shift
them  all  out  again  to  clean  away  the  accumulation  of  sand.

Very  heavy  snow  fell  during  the  afternoon,  the  flakes
being  the  size  of  half  a  crown.  A  fresh  north-north-west
wind  dropped  to  a  calm  at  4  p.m.  and  almost  immediately
it  began  to  snow,  the  island  being  quite  white  by  5.30  p.m.

Bright  sunny  intervals  alternated  with  light  snow-squalls
216


'3


Mticfjuitiie  Isldiul


A  COW   SEA  ELEPHANT  AX1>  PUP


Vitnimuk'  l.sl„,„l  iiii.:    IIKAI)   OK   A    Ill'lJ.  SEA   ELEPIIAXT


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

on  the  10th,  and  the  temperature  was  below  freezing-point
all  day.  It  was  pleasant  to  be  out  of  doors,  and  I  walked
along  to  the  west  coast  to  see  if  there  were  any  signs  of
activity  amongst  the  sea  elephants.

An  unmistakable  sign  of  the  near  approach  of  the  breed-
ing season  was  the  presence  of  an  enormous  old  bull,  almost
too  fat  to  move,  lying  on  the  beach.  Very  few  small  ones
were  seen,  as,  on  the  arrival  of  the  adult  males  and  females
for  the  breeding  season,  the  young  ones  leave  for  a  while,
presumably  in  order  to  get  fat  for  the  moulting  period,  or
because  they  are  afraid  of  the  bulls,  who  are  particularly
savage  at  this  time.  The  full-grown  bulls  attain  to  a  length
of  twenty  feet,  and  have  a  fleshy  proboscis  about  eight  or
ten  inches  in  length  hanging  over  the  mouth,  suggesting
the  trunk  of  an  elephant.  It  is  from  this  fact  that  they
derive  the  name  of  sea  elephant.

There  is  a  considerable  disparity  in  size  between  the
adult  male  and  female,  the  latter  very  rarely  exceeding
eleven  feet,  though  we  have  seen  a  few  twelve  and  thirteen
feet  long.  The  females  have  no  snout  development  and
some  of  them  facially  very  much  resemble  a  bull  terrier.
The  adults  are  called  bulls  and  cows,  while,  curiously  enough,
in  the  sealers'  phrase,  the  offspring  are  referred  to  as
pups.  The  places  where  large  numbers  of  them  gather
together  during  the  breeding  season  are  known  as  rookeries  !
"  Rookery  "  appears  to  me  to  be  inapplicable  to  a  herd
of  sea  elephants,  though  "  pup"  supplies  a  more  apt  descrip-
tion of  the  young.

The  pups,  bom  during  September  or  early  October,  are
covered  with  a  long,  black,  wavy  fur,  which  they  lose  when
about  two  months  old,  and  in  its  place  comes  a  growth  of
silver-grey  hair,  which  changes  later  into  the  ordinary
brown  colour  of  the  full-grown  animal.

The  old  males  and  females  leave  the  island  about  the
end  of  January,  and  are  not  seen  again  (except  a  few  stray
ones)  till  August  in  the  case  of  the  males,  and  until
September  in  the  case  of  the  females.

217


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  fact  that  the  bulls  arrive  first  leads  one  to  the  con-
clusion that  their  feeding-grounds  must  lie  at  a  considerable
distance  and,  in  the  journey  therefrom,  the  males,  being
the  stronger,  should  arrive  before  the  females,  who  are  heavy
with  young  and  probably  make  a  somewhat  leisurely  pro-
gress, feeding  by  the  way.

The  rookeries  vary  in  size,  containing  from  half  a  dozen
to  four  or  five  hundred  cows ;  in  the  last  case,  of  course,  being
an  aggregation  of  smaller  rookeries,  each  with  its  proprietor,
in  the  shape  of  an  old  bull,  lying  in  or  somewhere  near  the
centre.  The  normal  rookery,  as  far  as  I  could  judge,  seemed
to  be  one  that  contained  about  forty  cows,  but  once  the
nucleus  was  formed,  it  was  hard  to  say  how  many  cows
would  be  there  before  the  season  ended,  as  females  keep
arriving  for  a  period  of  about  three  weeks.

The  young  vary  in  length  from  three  and  a  half  to  four
and  a  half  feet,  are  bom  within  a  few  days  of  arrival  and
suckled  for  about  a  month,  becoming  enormously  fat.  The
cow,  who  has  not  eaten  during  the  whole  of  this  time  and
has  become  very  thin,  then  leaves  the  pup,  but  remains
in  the  rookery  for  about  two  days,  after  which  she  escapes
to  sea,  remaining  there  till  the  beginning  of  January,  when
she  returns  to  the  island  to  moult.  The  pups  when  weaned
get  such  rough  usage  in  the  rookery  that  they  soon  make  off
into  the  tussock  and  sleep  for  about  a  month,  living  on  their
fat  and  acquiring  a  new  coat.  The  noise  in  one  of  the  large
rookeries  is  something  to  remember — the  barking  of  the
pups,  the  whimpering  and  yelping  of  the  mothers  and  the
roaring  of  the  bulls.

Another  feature  in  connexion  with  the  rookery  is  the
presence  of  what  may  be  called  unattached  bulls,  which
lie  around  at  a  little  distance  from  the  cows,  and  well  apart,
forming  a  regular  ring  through  which  any  cow  wishing  to
desert  her  pup  or  leave  the  rookery  before  the  proper  time
has  very  little  chance  of  passing,  as  one  of  these  grips  her
firmly  with  his  powerful  flipper  and  stays  her  progress.
The  lord  of  the  harem,  in  the  meantime,  hastens  to
218


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

the  scene  of  the  disturbance,  whereupon  the  other  bull
decamps.

The  sea  immediately  in  the  vicinity  of  a  large  rookery
is  generally  swarming  with  unattached  bulls,  who  may  be
seen  with  their  heads  out  of  the  water  eyeing  each  other
and  keeping  a  bright  look  out  for  escaping  cows.  Now  and
again  one  may  see  a  bull  in  the  water  gripping  a  cow  with
his  flipper,  despite  her  struggles,  and  roaring  at  a  couple  of
others  who  show  up  menacingly  quite  close  to  him.

It  may  be  remarked  that  towards  the  end  of  the  season
changes  in  the  proprietorship  of  a  rookery  are  rather  rapid,
as  continuous  raids  are  made  by  individuals  from  the
outside.  The  need  of  continuous  vigilance  and  the  results
of  many  encounters  eventually  lead  to  the  defeat  and  dis-
comfiture of  the  once  proud  proprietor.

I  have  never  seen  two  bulls  fight  without  first  indulging
in  the  usual  preliminaries,  that  is,  roaring  and  advancing
a  few  yards  and  repeating  the  performance  till  within
striking  distance.  Then  both  animals  rear  high  up,  support-
ing themselves  on  the  lower  part  of  the  body,  and  lunge
savagely  with  their  whole  weight  each  at  his  opponent's
head  or  neck,  tearing  the  thick  skin  with  their  teeth  and
causing  the  blood  to  flow  copiously.  Several  lunges  of  this
kind  generally  finish  the  battle,  whereupon  the  beaten  one
drops  to  his  flippers  and  makes  all  haste  towards  the  water,
glancing  fearfully  behind  him  on  the  way.  We  have  seen
bulls  with  their  snouts  partly  torn  off  and  otherwise  injured,
but  worse  injuries  must  occur  in  the  rare,  desperate  battles
which  sometimes  take  place  between  two  very  much  enraged
animals.

When  a  bull  in  the  centre  of  a  rookery  has  occasion  to
rush  at  an  interloper,  he  does  so  without  regard  to  anything
in  his  way,  going  over  cows  and  pups  alike  and  very  often
crushing  some  of  the  latter  to  death.  Again,  it  seems  as
if  all  the  outlying  bulls  recognize  the  noise  of  the  rookery
bull,  because  each  time  he  roars  they  all  lift  up  their  heads
and  take  notice,  whereas  others  who  have  just  been  roaring

219


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

have  not  the  sHghtest  regard  paid  to  them,  except  perhaps
by  one  immediately  concerned.

The  bull,  during  the  breeding  season,  will  on  provocation
attack  a  man,  and  it  is  surprising  how  quickly  the  former
covers  the  ground.  But  on  the  whole  he  is  an  inoffensive
animal.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  to  venture  into  a  rookery,
as  the  cows  are  very  savage  when  they  have  the  pups  with
them,  but  one  can  approach  within  a  few  yards  of  its  out-
skirts without  danger.  Their  food  consists  of  cuttlefish,
crabs  and  fish,  and  it  is  probable  that  they  frequent  the  ocean
where  this  food  is  plentiful,  when  they  are  absent  from  the
island.

It  has  been  stated  that  these  animals  are  nearly  extinct,
but  a  visit  to  Macquarie  Island  during  the  breeding  season
would  be  enough  to  convince  anybody  to  the  contrary.
There  are  thousands  of  them,  and  though  about  seven
hundred  are  killed  during  a  season,  the  increase  in  numbers
each  year,  on  Macquarie  Island  alone,  must  be  very  great.

The  skuas  were  now  returning  to  the  island  and  their
numbers  and  corresponding  clamour  were  daily  increasing.
They  were  the  noisiest  and  most  quarrelsome  birds  we  had,
but  their  advent,  we  hoped,  marked  the  return  of  less  rigorous
weather.

Blake  left  for  Lusitania  Bay  on  the  17th,  intending  to
spend  several  months  there  in  order  to  survey  and  geologi-
cally examine  the  southern  end,  so  we  gave  him  a  send-off
dinner.  He  had  a  very  rough  trip  to  the  place,  having  to
spend  two  nights  in  a  cave  about  six  miles  from  his  destina-
tion, as  a  result  of  getting  lost  in  a  dense  fog.

Hamilton  made  a  wire  fish-trap  to  replace  the  one
which  he  had  lost,  and  succeeded  in  getting  a  few  fish
on  lowering  it  for  the  first  time.  He  discovered  parasitical
mites  all  over  them  on  the  outside,  and  the  flesh  contained
many  worms.

A  heavy  north -north -west  gale  was  experienced  on  the
26th,  but  the  weather  during  the  last  three  days  of  August
was  very  quiet,  either  calms  or  light  winds  prevailing,  and
220


MdCqUdiii'  Isldiiil


Samhll


A   IIULJ,  SKA  Kl.Kl'JIA.M    IN   A  FKillTIXC    ArilTlDK


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

we  took  the  opportunity  to  do  some  work  on  Wireless  Hill.
All  the  wire  stays  were  tightened,  and  various  ropes  which
appeared  to  require  attention  were  renewed,  while,  as  a
final  improvement,  the  aerial  was  hauled  as  tight  as  we
could  make  it.

We  heard  on  July  31  that  the  Rachel  Cohen,  a  sealing-
vessel,  had  sailed  for  Macquarie  Island  and  was  bringing
a  few  articles  for  us,  so  there  was  something  to  which  we
could  look  forward  in  the  immediate  future.

The  most  remarkable  feature  of  the  month's  weather
was  the  wind,  as  gales  blew  on  eleven  days,  and  on  seven
other  days  the  velocity  reached  twenty-five  miles  per  hour.
Precipitation  occurred  on  twenty-seven  days,  and  the
average  percentage  of  cloud  was  eighty-four.  The  mean
temperature  was  38*1°  with  extremes  of  45*3°  and  26°  F.  A
prolonged  display  of  auroral  light  occurred  on  the  night  of
the  17th,  though  no  colours  other  than  the  light  lemon-
yellow  of  the  arch  and  streamers  could  be  seen.

Bull  elephants  were  now  arriving  in  great  numbers,  and
these  monsters  could  be  seen  lying  everywhere  on  the
isthmus,  both  up  in  the  tussock,  on  the  beaches,  and  among
the  heaps  of  kelp.  Now  and  again  one  would  lazily  lift  a
flipper  to  scratch  itself  or  heave  its  great  bulk  into  a  more
comfortable  position.

The  island  is  the  habitat  of  two  kinds  of  night-birds,
one  kind — a  species  of  petrel  (Lesson's) — being  much  larger
than  the  other,  both  living  in  holes  in  the  ground.  They
fly  about  in  the  darkness,  their  cries  resembling  those  made
by  a  beaten  puppy.  The  smaller  bird  (apparently  indigenous
and  a  new  species)  was  occasionally  seen  flying  over  the
water  during  the  day,  but  the  larger  ones  come  out  almost
exclusively  at  night.  A  light  attracts  them  and  Hamilton,
with  the  aid  of  a  lantern  and  a  butterfly-net,  tried  to  catch
some.  Others  swooped  about,  well  out  of  range,  shrieking
the  while  in  an  uncanny  way.  Numbers  of  them  were
secured  afterwards  by  being  dug  out  of  their  holes,  Mac
being  just  as  keen  to  locate  them  as  Hamilton  was  to  secure

221


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

them.  They  cannot  see  well  during  the  day,  and  seem
to  have  almost  lost  the  use  of  their  feet.  They  lay  two
small,  white,  thin-shelled  eggs  at  the  end  of  their  burrow ;
and  in  certain  parts  of  the  island,  where  the  burrows  are
numerous,  the  sound  made  by  hundreds  of  them  at  once,
during  the  nesting  season,  somewhat  resembles  that  made
by  a  high-power  Marconi  wireless  set  at  close  range.

Before  Blake  left  Lusitania  Bay,  I  promised  to  see  that
the  hut  on  Sandy  Bay  was  re-stocked  with  provisions  by  the
middle  of  the  month,  so,  on  the  8th,  Hamilton,  Sandell  and
I  carried  a  supply  of  stores  down  there,  leaving  a  note
which  informed  him  that  we  expected  the  Rachel  Cohen
to  arrive  any  day,  and  asking  him  to  return  to  the  Shack.
On  the  way  down  we  came  upon  a  vast  quantity  of  wreckage
piled  up  on  the  beach,  midway  between  "  The  Nuggets  "  and
Sandy  Bay.  This  was  all  that  remained  of  the  sealing
schooner,  Jessie  Nichol,  which  had  been  wrecked  on
December  21,  1910.  Three  men  were  drowned,  their  bodies
being  interred  among  the  tussock,  each  marked  by  a  life
belt  and  a  small  board  on  which  the  name  was  roughly
carved.

On  our  homeward  trip  we  caught  some  wekas  for  the
pot  and  duly  arrived  at  the  Shack,  tired,  wet  and  hungry.

Next  day,  while  sitting  in  the  Shack  reducing  records,
I  heard  a  yell  from  Hamilton  to  the  effect  that  the  Rachel
Cohen  was  in  sight,  and  about  an  hour  later  she  dropped
anchor  in  North-East  Bay.

The  sea  was  fairly  smooth  and  no  time  was  lost  in  bring-
ing a  boat  ashore  with  the  mails,  of  which  each  man  received
a  share.  A  gang  of  sealers  was  landed  with  a  view  to  obtain-
ing sea  elephant  and  penguin  oil.  I  had  wirelessed  asking  for
a  dinghy  to  be  sent  down,  which  would  enable  Hamilton  to
do  more  marine  work  ;  and  it  now  came  to  hand.  Further,
we  received  an  additional  supply  of  photographic  material
and  some  rubber  tubing  for  the  anemometer,  but  the  much-
needed  boots  did  not  arrive.

On  the  18th  a  strong  southerly  gale  sprang  up  and
222


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

compelled  the  Rachel  Cohen  to  seek  safety  in  flight ;  so  she
slipped  her  cable  and  put  to  sea.  She  had  not  yet  landed
all  the  sealers'  stores  and  was  forced  to  hang  about  the
island  till  the  weather  moderated  sufficiently  for  her  to
return  to  an  anchorage.

The  gentoo  penguins,  which  had  been  observed  at
the  beginning  of  the  month  building  their  nests,  commenced
to  lay,  and  the  first  ten  eggs  were  collected  by  us  on
September  18.  Many  sea  elephant  rookeries  were  now  well-
formed  as  the  cows  began  to  arrive  about  the  11th  and  were
soon  landing  in  large  numbers.  The  first  pups  were  heard
on  the  20th,  and  Bauer  and  I  walked  along  to  the  rookery
from  which  the  barking  came  and  had  a  look  at  the  new-
comers. There  were  only  four,  none  of  which  was  more
than  a  few  hours  old,  but  they  yapped  their  displeasure,
and  the  mothers  made  frantic  lunges  at  us  when  we  approached
to  get  a  close  view  of  them.

The  sealers  always  gave  the  animals  time  to  form  their
rookeries  and  then  killed  the  bulls  for  oil.  A  well- conditioned
full-grown  animal  yields  about  half  a  tun  of  oil,  and  as  the
commodity  when  refined  has  a  market  value  of  from  £20
to  £25  per  tun,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  industry  is  a  profitable
one.  The  cows  being  small  never  have  a  very  thick  coating
of  blubber,  but  I  have  seen  bulls  with  blubber  to  a  depth
of  eight  inches,  and  some  of  them  yield  nearly  two  thousand
pounds,  though  I  should  estimate  the  average  yield  at
about  one  thousand  one  hundred  pounds.  The  sealers  in
the  early  days  used  to  obtain  the  oil  by  cutting  the  blubber
up  into  very  small  pieces  and  melting  it  down  in  "  try  "
pots.  These  pots,  many  of  which  may  be  still  seen  about
the  island,  were  made  of  very  thick  iron  and  the  fuel  used
was  the  refuse  taken  from  the  pot  itself.  In  the  present
method  steam  digestors  are  used,  and  the  oil  from  the  melted
blubber  is  drawn  off,  after  steam  has  been  passing  for  twelve
hours.  Coal  is  brought  down  by  the  sealing- vessel  to  be
used  as  fuel.  The  "  elephant  season  "  lasts  only  about
three  months,  and  within  about  four  weeks  of  its  conclusion,

223


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  "  penguin  season "  begins ;  the  same  gang  of  men
being  employed  as  a  rule.  The  most  difficult  operation  in
connexion  with  both  of  these  industries  is  undoubtedly
the  loading  and  unloading  of  the  vessel.  If  auxiliary  power
were  used,  the  ship  could  then  steam  to  within  half  a
mile  of  the  shore,  but  as  it  is,  a  sailing-vessel  has  to  anchor
about  two  miles  off  and  the  oil  is  towed  in  rafts  over  that
distance.

We  heard  sounds  from  Adelie  Land  wireless  station  for
the  first  time  on  September  25,  1912,  but  the  signals  were
very  faint  and  all  that  we  could  receive  was  :  "  Please  inform
Pennant  Hills."  Sawyer  called  them  repeatedly  for  several
hours,  but  heard  no  acknowledgment.  Every  effort  was
made  to  get  in  touch  with  them  from  this  time  forward,
Sawyer  remaining  at  the  instrument  until  daylight  every
morning.

The  Royal  penguins  returned  to  the  island  on  the  27th
and  immediately  commenced  to  make  their  way  to  the
rookeries.  They  had  been  absent  since  April  and  were
very  fat  after  their  long  migration.

On  the  28th  Blake  and  Hamilton  started  out  in  the
dinghy  for  Lusitania  Bay.  They  had  already  made  a  step
and  sprit,  and,  with  a  calico  sail  hoisted,  the  frail  craft  ran
before  a  light  breeze.  Having  a  fair  wind  they  made  good
headway  along  the  coast,  dropping  in  at  a  gentoo  penguin
rookery  en  route,  and  collecting  about  two  hundred  and
twenty  eggs.  Mac  was  a  passenger  and  was  a  very  sick
dog  all  the  trip.

Shortly  after  their  departure,  the  Rachel  Cohen,  which
had  been  blown  away  on  the  18th,  reappeared  and  again
anchored.  The  captain  reported  having  seen  numerous
icebergs,  some  of  which  were  very  large,  about  thirty  miles
to  the  eastward  of  the  island.  The  sealers  immediately
commenced  to  get  away  the  rest  of  their  stores  and  coal  and
also  to  put  some  oil  aboard  the  vessel,  but  on  the  following
day  the  wind  increased  to  such  an  extent  that,  in  attempting
224


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

to  reach  the  ship  with  a  raft  of  oil,  they  were  blown
down  the  coast  and  had  to  beach  the  boat  several  miles
away.

On  the  night  of  the  29th  Adelie  Land  wireless  station
was  again  heard  tapping  out  a  message  apparently  with
the  hope  that  some  station  would  receive  it.  All  we  got
was  :  "  Having  a  hell  of  a  time  waiting  for  calm  weather
to  put  up  more  masts."  Sawyer  again  repeatedly  called,
but  they  evidently  could  not  hear  him  as  no  reply  was
received,  and  the  above  message  was  repeated  time  after
time.

The  weather  during  September  was  not  quite  so  rough
as  that  of  the  previous  two  or  three  months,  but  misty
days  were  very  frequent.  Gales  were  experienced  on  six
days  and  strong  winds  on  nine  days,  but  several  quiet  periods
occurred.  The  average  temperature  was  38'6°,  with  extremes
of  44-7°  and  26°  F.

October  was  ushered  in  by  a  strong  gale  and  rather
heavy  rain-squalls.  The  Rachel  Cohen  had  a  severe  buffet-
ing, though  she  was  lying  on  the  lee  side  of  the  island.

Just  about  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  the  west  of  the
Shack  were  two  large  sea  elephant  rookeries,  very  close  to
each  other,  and  on  the  3rd  Sandell  and  I  went  along  to  see
what  was  happening  there.  We  found  about  two  hundred
and  fifty  cows  in  the  nearer  one,  and,  as  closely  as  we  could
count,  about  five  hundred  in  the  adjacent  colony.  The
babel  of  sounds  made  one  feel  thankful  that  these  noisy
creatures  were  some  distance  from  the  Shack.  Nearly  all
the  cows  had  pups,  some  of  which  had  reached  a  fair  size,
while  others  were  only  a  few  hours  old.  We  saw  several
dead  ones,  crushed  out  almost  flat,  and  some  skuas  were
busily  engaged  gorging  themselves  on  the  carcases.  These
birds  are  indeed  professional  plunderers,  and  will  venture
almost  anywhere  in  pursuit  of  food.

During  the  evening  we  again  heard  Adelie  Land  station

working,  and  the  burden  of  their  message  to  an  apparently

chance  audience  was :    "  We  do    not    seem    able    to    get

VOL.  II  P  225


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Macquarie  Island ;  all  is  well,  though'  bad  weather  has  so  far
prevented  any  attempt  at  sledging."

Sa\vyer  again  called  them  at  regular  intervals  for  the
rest  of  the  night,  but,  as  before,  got  no  response.

Hamilton  and  Blake  were  busy  at  Lusitania  Bay  during
the  first  two  weeks  of  October  securing  sea  elephant  specimens
and  collecting  eggs.  They  visited  Caroline  Cove  where  is
estabhshed  a  giant  petrel  rookery  containing  about  four
hundred  birds,  and  gathered  a  large  number  of  eggs — purely
specimens — as  they  are  no  use  otherwise.

The  Rachel  Cohen  finally  left  us  on  the  8th,  expecting
to  pay  another  visit  in  December  for  the  purpose  of  taking
off  the  sea  elephant  oil  procured  by  the  sealers.  Sandell
and  I  visited  the  gentoo  penguin  colony  in  Aerial  Cove
during  the  afternoon,  for  the  purpose  of  getting  a  few  eggs.
We  found  plenty  there  and  collected  as  many  as  we  required.
On  returning  to  the  empty  nests,  the  birds  would  first  of  all
peer  round  to  assure  themselves  that  the  eggs  were  really
missing,  and  then  throw  their  heads  back,  swaying  them
from  side  to  side  to  the  accompaniment  of  loud,  discordant
cries.

Several  of  us  started  out  on  the  10th  to  visit  the  west
coast  for  the  purpose  of  getting  some  wekas  and,  incidentally,
to  make  any  observations  possible.  We  saw  thousands  of
sea  elephants  along  the  coast  and  passed  many  rookeries
of  various  sizes.  There  were  a  large  number  of  wekas  about,
but  after  shooting  fourteen  we  were  satisfied  with  our  bag.

A  westerly  gale  during  the  night  proved  too  much  for
the  aerial,  and  down  it  came.  Blake  and  Hamilton  were
away,  so  Sawyer,  Sandell  and  I  went  up,  and  after  much
battling  and  frequent  use  of  the  "  handy  billy  "  succeeded
in  fixing  things.  We  also  re-tightened  the  wire  stays  and
thoroughly  overhauled  the  ropes.  Snow  and  sleet  fell  all
the  time,  making  the  task  most  diasgreeable.

About  the  middle  of  the  month  the  Royal  penguins
commenced  to  lay,  and  on  the  17th  Sandell  and  I  went  to
their  rookeries  at  "The  Nuggets  "  and  collected  about  fifteen
226


Hurley


r^


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

dozen  eggs,  which  we  buried  in  a  hole  in  the  bank  of  the
creek  for  preservation.  This  species  of  penguin  is  the  one
which  is  killed  for  oil,  not  because  it  is  any  fatter  than  the
others,  but  because  it  lives  in  such  large  colonies.  There
is  one  rookery  of  these  birds  on  the  south  end  of  the  island
which  covers  an  area  of  sixteen  and  a  half  acres,  whilst  at
"  The  Nuggets  "  there  are  numbers  of  them  scattered  along  the
banks  of  a  creek  which  reaches  the  sea,  aggregating  ten  acres.
At  the  latter  place  are  situated  the  oil  works  belonging  to
the  sealers.

From  careful  observation  I  should  say  that  the  number
of  birds  killed  during  the  season  would  not  total  one  hundred
and  fifty  thousand.  The  method  of  killing — by  blows  from
a  heavy  club — is  about  as  humane  as  any  that  could  be
adopted,  and  the  yearly  increase  in  numbers  in  the  only
rookeries  that  are  being  worked  is  certainly  greater  than  the
decrease  due  to  the  depredations  of  the  sealers.  Apart
from  this,  there  are  acres  of  rookeries  on  the  island  from
which  not  a  single  bird  is  taken,  and  they  go  on  year  after
year  adding  thousands  upon  thousands  to  their  already
vast  numbers.

This  species  resembles  the  others  in  habits,  and  I  shall
not  describe  them  at  any  length.  They  are  of  the  same  colour
as  the  Victoria  penguins,  but  have  a  more  orderly  crest.
Their  rookeries  are  always  on  or  very  close  to  a  running
stream  which  forms  the  highway  along  which  they  travel  to
and  fro.  There  is  no  policeman  on  duty,  but  a  well-ordered
procession  is  somehow  arranged  whereby  those  going  up
keep  to  one  side  and  those  coming  down  keep  to  the  other.
Once  they  are  in  the  rookery,  however,  different  conditions
obtain.  Here  are  fights,  squabbles  and  riots,  arising  from
various  causes,  the  chief  of  which  appears  to  be  a  disposi-
tion on  the  part  of  some  birds  to  loiter  about.  During  the
nesting  time  much  disorder  prevails,  and  fights,  in  which
beaks  and  flippers  are  energetically  used,  may  be  seen  in
progress  at  various  places  throughout  the  rookery.  The
nests  are  made  of  small  stones,  and  occasionally,  a  bone  or

227


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

two  from  the  skeleton  of  some  long-dead  relative  forms  part
of  the  bulwarks.  The  attempt  on  the  part  of  some  birds  to
steal  stones  from  surrounding  nests  is  about  the  most  fruitful
cause  of  a  riot,  and  the  thief  generally  gets  soundly  thrashed,
besides  which  all  have  a  peck  at  him  as  he  makes  his  way
with  as  much  haste  as  possible  from  the  danger-zone.  As
the  season  advances,  these  rookeries  become  covered  with
filthy  slush,  but  it  seems  to  make  no  difference  to  the  eggs,
as  the  chicks  appear  in  due  course.  When  the  moulting
process  is  in  full  swing  the  rookeries  are  very  crowded,
and  feathers  and  slush  then  become  mixed  together,  making
the  place  anything  but  fragrant.

A  fifty-four  mile  gale  from  the  west-north-west  blew
down  on  us  on  the  20th,  but  shortly  after  noon  it  weakened,
and,  towards  evening,  with  the  shifting  of  the  wind  to  south-
west, came  squalls  of  sleet  and  snow  and  a  drop  in  tem-
perature. Hamilton  returned  from  Lusitania  Bay  in  the
dinghy  on  the  21st,  but  Blake  stopped  there  as  he  had  not
yet  finished  his  work  in  that  locality.  The  dinghy  was  well
laden  with  specimens  of  various  kinds  and,  on  the  way  up,
some  wood  and  pickets  were  left  at  Green  Valley  for  future
requirements.

On  the  25th  Sandell  and  I  visited  the  west  coast,  but,
instead  of  going  the  usual  way,  we  walked  down  the  east
coast  and  went  up  the  creek  at  "The  Nuggets  "  with  a  view
to  having  a  look  at  the  penguin  colonies  along  its  course,
finally  crossing  over  the  hills  and  getting  into  another  creek,
which  we  followed  all  the  way  down  to  the  west  coast.
Along  this  creek  were  numerous  waterfalls,  one  of  which
was  quite  sixty  feet  in  height  with  wind-blown  spray  frozen
white  on  the  rocks  on  either  side.  We  came  across  several
giant  petrel  rookeries,  and  were  treated  to  a  display  of  the
"  stinker's "  ability  to  make  himself  objectionable.  A
pair  of  sooty  albatrosses  were  seen  nesting  on  the  front  of
a  rocky  steep,  but  on  climbing  up  we  found  that  they  had
not  yet  laid.  After  catching  some  wekas  and  taking  a
few  photographs  we  returned  to  the  Shack.
228


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

On  the  last  day  of  the  month  several  of  us  crossed  the
hills  to  the  west  coast  in  search  of  plants  and  birds'  eggs.
We  secured  a  number  of  plant  specimens — a  further  sign  of
the  arrival  of  spring — including  two  which  bore  a  very  small
flower,  and  were  most  successful  in  obtaining  skuas',  giant
petrels'  and  sooty  albatrosses'  eggs.

During  the  evening  I  received  a  message  from  Captain
Davis  stating  that  the  Aurora  would  visit  us  in  about  three
weeks'  time  and  inquiring  if  we  needed  any  supplies.  This
was  entirely  unexpected,  as  we  thought  that  no  more  would
be  seen  of  the  Ship  until  she  came  to  take  us  home  at  the
end  of  March  1913.

Earthquake  shocks  were  felt  at  1.55  a.m.  and  9.35  a.m.
on  October  28,  but  did  no  damage  other  than  to  bring  down
some  loose  rock.  Auroral  displays  were  rather  frequent
but  not  very  pronounced,  and  in  most  cases  could  only  be
classed  as  "  glows."

A  bright  sunny  morning  on  the  3rd  induced  Hamilton
and  me  to  make  a  photographic  excursion  along  the  coast.
Hitherto  only  still-life  photos  had  been  taken,  but  with
the  sunlight  we  were  then  having,  any  work  was  possible,
so  we  determined  to  have  some  "  shots  "  at  the  sea  elephants.
They  were  rather  difficult  subjects,  strange  to  say,  but  we
spent  some  time  amongst  them  and  did  famously,  till  a
snow-squall  made  us  suspend  operations.

We  heard  the  discordant  but  mournful  cry  of  a  sooty
albatross  coming  from  the  cliff-front,  so  Hamilton  climbed
up  and,  after  scrambling  about  for  a  while,  succeeded  in
finding  a  nest,  which  contained  one  egg.  This  led  him  to
look  along  the  cliffs  fronting  the  east  coast,  and  on  the
following  morning  he  found  several  nests  and  caught  two
birds,  both  of  which  were  taken  by  hand  while  on  the  nest.
They  had  beautiful  plumage  and  made  very  fine  specimens.

Blake  returned  from  Lusitania  Bay  during  the  afternoon
of  the  4th  and  reported  that  he  required  only  four  or  five
days  to  complete  the  survey.  The  configuration  of  the
island  at  the  southern  end  is  vastly  different  to  that  shown

229


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

in  the  published  charts,  and  this  became  more  apparent  as
Blake's  figures  were  plotted.

The  news  that  Piastre  had  won  the  Melbourne  Cup  was
flashed  about  all  over  the  southern  ocean  during  the  evening,
and  we  picked  it  up  ;  but  as  this  was  the  first  we  had  heard
of  the  animal,  nobody  seemed  much  interested.  It  certainly
gave  a  turn  to  the  conversation,  and  quite  a  sporting  tone
permeated  the  discussions  of  the  ensuing  two  or  three
days.

The  subjects  of  discussion  were  usually  those  of  environ-
ment, and  most  of  our  talk  centred  round  sea  elephants,  sea-
leopards,  penguins,  temperatures,  wind,  wireless  telegraphy,
fish,  aurorae,  exploration,  ships,  Queensland  and  New  Zealand.
Sea  elephants  and  penguins  do  offer  scope  for  a  considerable
amount  of  conversation,  as  one  observes  them  under  such
different  circumstances,  and  they  are  so  odd  that  something
remarkable  is  always  associated  with  the  sight  of  them.  The
weather,  being  practically  the  bete  noire  of  our  existence,  came
in  for  a  good  deal  of  abuse.  Wireless  telegraphy  is  a  mighty
interesting  subject  at  all  times,  and  we  passed  many  hours
of  our  stay  in  discussing  its  future.  All  the  members  were,
allegedly,  fishermen  of  some  calibre,  and  when  I  have  said
that,  anybody  with  a  knowledge  of  the  man  who  claims
ability  as  an  angler  will  know  what  all  the  others,  in  turn,
had  to  receive  with  restrained  and  respectful  admiration.
The  advantages  of  settlement  in  Queensland  were  so  apparent
to  at  least  one  member  of  the  party  that  he  simply  could  not
understand  why  thousands  were  not  annually  killed  in  the
rush  to  get  to  this,  "  the  greatest  of  all  the  Australian
States."     Good  old  silky  oak  !

The  scenery  of  New  Zealand  was  almost  as  well  known  to
us  as  to  anybody  who  has  lived  in  the  country  all  his  life,
and  three  of  us  had  never  been  there.  We  have  sat  round
the  Shack  sometimes  and  only  the  roar  of  a  sea  elephant
outside  reminded  us  that  we  were  not,  as  we  imagined,  at
a  Maori  "  tangi."  The  wages  to  be  earned  there,  the  delights
of  travelling,  the  legislators,  Rotorua,  kauri  pine,  and  the
230


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

moon  they've  got  in  Auckland — we've  heard  of  all  these  and
marvelled  at  them.     "  Kapai  te  Maori !  "

Blake  and  Hamilton  went  to  Sandy  Bay  in  the  dinghy
on  the  6th  in  order  to  complete  some  work.  They  improved
the  hut  there,  to  the  extent  of  making  a  fire-place  and  laying
barrel-staves  on  the  floor,  afterwards  bringing  a  boat-load
of  timber  from  the  Jessie  Nichol  wreck  and  rigging  up  a
board  bunk  sufficiently  large  to  accommodate  both  of
them.

While  walking  down  to  the  Clyde  wreck  for  some  wood
on  the  7th  I  saw  a  strange  bird  on  the  beach,  and,  returning
to  the  Shack  for  the  gun,  I  got  him  at  the  second  shot.
He  was  a  land  bird  and  had  evidently  been  blown  out  of  his
course,  as  none  of  his  kind  had  been  seen  before  on  the
island.

On  getting  up  on  the  following  morning  I  found  poor  old
Ma  lying  dead,  and  the  feathers  which  lay  about  indicated
that  she  had  been  the  victim  of  a  savage  assault,  but  whether
at  the  teeth  of  a  dog  or  the  beak  of  a  skua  I  was  unable  to
determine.  This  was  most  unfortunate,  as  the  hens  had
all  started  to  lay  again  two  days  previously ;  but  apart
from  this  she  was  a  funny  old  creature  and  one  could  almost
hold  a  conversation  with  her,  so  we  regretted  her  loss.
However,  to  make  amends  for  this  disaster  the  Victoria
penguins  started  to  lay  on  the  same  day,  and  as  several  of
their  rookeries  were  only  a  few  minutes'  walk  from  the  Shack,
the  position  was  much  the  same  as  if  we  owned  a  poultry  farm.

Hamilton  returned  from  Sandy  Bay  on  the  17th  and
immediately  set  about  collecting  shags'  eggs.  He  visited
Aerial  Cove  for  the  purpose  but  did  not  get  enough,  and  was
compelled  to  go  to  West  Point,  where  he  gathered  twenty-
four  dozen  for  specimens.  He  now  had  a  collection  of  eggs
of  all  birds  which  nest  on  the  island,  with  the  exception  of
the  weka  and  the  tern.

At  6.30  P.M.  on  November  22  the  Aurora  steamed  into
North-East  Bay  and  dropped  anchor.  Hamilton,  Blake  and
Sawyer  launched  the  dinghy  and  pulled  out  to  receive  the

231


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

mails,  which  they  brought  ashore  for  distribution.  All  on
board  were  well  and  Captain  Davis  sent  word  to  say  he  would
land  in  the  morning,  bringing  our  goods  and  some  visitors
— Professor  Flynn  of  Hobart  and  Mr.  Denny.

The  Aurora  next  day  steamed  round  North  Head  and
took  a  series  of  soundings  between  the  main  island  and  the
Judge  and  Clerk.  These  latter  islets  lie  about  eight  miles  to
the  north  of  North  Head,  and  are  merely  rocks  about  eighty
feet  high  upon  which  thousands  of  shags  and  other  birds
have  established  rookeries.  On  the  following  morning  we
said  good-bye  to  the  Ship,  which  weighed  anchor  and  steamed
away,  leaving  us  once  more  to  our  own  devices.

All  the  flowering  plants  were  now  showing  their  extremely
modest  blooms,  and  the  tussock  looked  like  a  field  of  wheat,
each  stem  having  a  decided  ear.  The  gentoo  penguins,  as
well  as  the  giant  petrels,  had  hatched  their  eggs,  and  the
parent  birds  were  shouldering  full  responsibilities.

Blake  and  Hamilton  were  now  prepared  for  another
visit  to  the  southern  end.  Blake  had  almost  completed
the  chart  of  the  island,  and  the  difference  between  it  and  the
published  chart  was  very  striking.  In  the  latter  case  the
south  end  was  shown  as  being  six  miles  wide,  whereas  it
is  in  reality  only  a  little  more  than  two  miles  across,  and
the  width  of  the  island  is  nowhere  more  than  three  and  a
half  miles.  About  twenty  miles  from  the  southern  end  lie
two  islets  known  as  the  Bishop  and  Clerk.  The  former,
which  is  the  larger,  is  covered  with  a  gro^vth  of  tussock,
while  the  latter  is  mainly  bare  rock.

A  distinct  rise  in  temperature  was  noticeable  during
November  and  the  mean  worked  out  at  41*6°,  while  the
extremes  were  49°  and  32°  F.  Strong  winds  were  recorded
on  thirteen  days  and  six  short-lived  gales  occurred.  We
had  less  precipitation  than  during  any  previous  month,
as  thirteen  dry  days  were  experienced.  The  average
cloudiness  was  93  per  cent.  ;  largely  due  to  the  frequent
foggy  or  misty  weather.

On  December  2,  at  10  a.m.,  Blake  and  I  packed  our
232


Macquarie  Idaxii


KEKGUKLEX  CAISBACE


Iliiniilton


FLOWERIN(J   I'LAM


HdmUlon


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

sleeping-bags  and  blankets  and  started  for  Sandy  Bay.
The  swags  weighed  only  thirty-five  pounds  each  and  we
made  a  rather  quick  trip.

After  repairing  the  dilapidated  shack,  we  sallied  out
for  the  purpose  of  catching  our  evening  meal,  and  with  the
aid  of  Mac  soon  succeeded  in  getting  eight  wekas.  A  sea
elephant  was  then  killed,  and  the  blubber,  heart  and  tongue
taken  ;  the  first-named  for  use  as  fuel  and  the  others  for  food.
We  cleaned  the  wekas  and  put  them  in  the  pot,  cooking
the  whole  lot  together,  a  proceeding  which  enabled  us  to
forgo  cooking  a  breakfast  in  the  morning.  The  beach  was
swarming  with  young  sea  elephants  and  many  could  be
seen  playing  about  in  a  small,  shallow  lagoon.

Just  south  of  the  hut  there  is  a  sandy  spit  and  one  of  the
only  stretches  of  beach  on  the  island,  where  thousands  of
penguins  from  the  adjacent  rookeries  were  congregated,
amongst  them  being  three  King  penguins,  which  were  easily
distinguishable  on  account  of  their  great  size.

Feeling  a  little  weary,  I  sought  the  hut  about  9  p.m.  and
turned  into  the  sleeping-bag,  which  was  placed  on  a  board
bottom  covered  with  tussock,  which  was  by  no  means  uncom-
fortable. The  old  place  smoked  so  much  that  we  decided  to  let
the  fire  die  down,  and  as  soon  as  the  smoke  had  cleared  away,
the  imperfections  of  the  hut  became  apparent ;  rays  of
moonlight  streaming  through  countless  openings  in  the  walls
and  roof.

We  rose  at  6.30  a.m.  While  Blake  lit  the  fire,  I  went
out  to  fill  the  billy  at  a  small  stream  running  out  of  the
hills  about  sixty  yards  away.  After  breakfast  we  set  out  for
Green  Valley,  but  had  not  gone  very  far  when  it  began  to
blow  very  hard  from  the  south,  straight  in  our  faces,  and
we  scrambled  on  towards  our  destination  amidst  squalls  of
snow,  hail  and  sleet.  Eventually  we  reached  the  valley
and  had  a  somewhat  meagre  lunch  in  a  small  cave.  The
title  "  cave  "  rather  dignifies  this  hole  in  the  rock,  but  it
was  the  only  friendly  spot  in  a  most  inhospitable  locality,
and  we  were  inclined  to  be  generous,

23a


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

On  the  whole,  the  length  of  coast  we  had  traversed  was
found  to  be  as  rough  as  any  on  the  island.  There  is  not  a
stretch  of  one  hundred  yards  anywhere  that  can  be  termed
"  good  going."  In  many  places  we  found  that  the  steep
cliffs  approached  very  close  to  the  water,  and  the  mournful
cry  of  the  sooty  albatross  could  be  heard  coming  from
points  high  on  the  face  of  the  cliffs,  while  the  wekas  were
so  tame  that  one  could  almost  walk  up  and  catch  them.

A  large  creek  whose  banks  are  overhung  with  a  coarse
growth  of  fern  makes  its  way  out  of  the  hills  and  runs  into
Sandy  Bay.  Just  a  little  to  the  south  of  this  creek  Blake
discovered  a  terminal  moraine  about  two  hundred  yards
in  length  and  fifty  feet  wide.  It  rests  on  sandstone  about
fifteen  feet  above  the  present  sea-level  and  the  boulders  consist
of  polished  and  sub-angular  blocks  of  sandstone  and  porphyry
of  various  sizes.  It  evidently  belongs  to  the  valley  or  to  a
later  stage  of  glaciation.  The  rocks  along  the  coast  are  all
a  volcanic  series,  and  basic  dykes  are  visible  in  many  places.

We  arose  at  7  a.m.  next  day  and  breakfasted  on  porridge,
weka,  fried  heart,  "  hard-tack  "  and  cocoa.  Leaving  the
hut  shortly  afterwards  we  climbed  on  to  the  hills  and  travelled
south  for  several  miles  in  order  to  fix  the  position  of  some
lakes  and  creeks.  There  was  one  lake  in  the  vicinity
about  half  a  mile  long  and  to  all  appearances  very  deep.
It  lay  between  tAVO  steep  hills,  and  the  grassy  bank  at  one
end  and  the  small  sloping  approach  at  the  other  gave  it
an  artificial  appearance,  while  the  water  was  beautifully  clear
and  perfectly  fresh.  At  the  sloping  end,  dozens  of  skuas
were  busily  engaged  washing  themselves  and  the  flapping  of
their  wings  in  the  water  made  a  remarkable  noise,  audible
at  a  considerable  distance  on  the  hill-tops.  On  returning
to  the  hut  at  Sandy  Bay  several  rabbits  secured  by  Mac  were
cleaned  and  put  on  to  boil.

Next  morning  a  dense  mist  shrouded  the  island  till
about  11  A.M.,  but  the  weather  becoming  fine  and  bright,
we  started  for  the  west  coast  about  noon.  During  our
progress  along  the  bed  of  a  creek,  Blake  discovered  what
234


S2


•^    (3

c  o


o  c


A  LAND  OF  STORM  AND  MIST

was  believed  to  be  a  glacial  deposit  containing  fossil  bones,
and  considerable  time  was  spent  in  examining  this  and
attempting  to  extract  whole  specimens,  thereby  making  it
too  late  to  proceed  to  the  west.  On  returning  to  the  hut
we  decided  to  pack  the  swags.  We  reached  home  just  in
time  for  tea,  finding  that  nothing  unusual  had  occurred
during  our  four  days'  absence.

Hamilton  and  Blake  went  out  fishing  in  the  dinghy  on
the  9th  and  made  a  remarkable  haul  of  fish,  sixty  in
number,  ranging  in  size  from  a  few  ounces  to  twelve  and  a
half  pounds.  They  were  all  of  the  same  species,  somewhat
resembling  rock  cod,  but  as  usual  they  were  covered  with
external  parasites,  and  their  flesh  was  full  of  worm-cysts.
Hamilton  preserved  a  number  of  them  and  the  rest  were
cooked,  but  we  did  not  relish  them  very  much  and  the  one
meal  was  enough.

On  December  11  we  had  a  hard  gale  all  day,  the  ane-
mometer recording  "  bursts  "  of  over  fifty  miles  an  hour
frequently,  while  the  average  exceeded  forty  miles  an  hour
throughout.  Twelve  months  ago  on  that  day  we  had  made
our  first  landing  on  the  island  from  the  Aurora,  but  vastly
different  weather  conditions  prevailed  at  the  time.

Christmas  Day  was  now  very  close  at  hand,  and  as  Blake
and  Hamilton  were  going  to  celebrate  at  the  other  end  of
the  island,  whence  they  had  gone  on  the  10th,  Sawyer,
Sandell  and  I  arranged  a  little  "  spread "  for  ourselves.
Sawyer  produced  a  cake  which  he  had  received  in  the  recent
mail,  and  some  friend  had  forwarded  a  plum  pudding  to
Sandell,  so  on  Christmas  Day  these,  with  a  boiled  ham,  some
walnuts,  mince  rolls  and  a  bottle  of  stout  were  spread  on  the
table,  which  had  been  decorated  with  tussock  stuck  in  sea
elephants'  tusks.  The  highest  temperature  registered  on
the  island  during  our  stay — 51*8°  F. — was  recorded  on
Christmas  Day,  and  the  sun  seemed  so  warm  that  Sandell
and  I  ventured  into  the  sea  for  a  dip,  but  the  temperature
of  the  water  was  not  high  enough  to  make  it  an  agreeable
experience.

235


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

During  the  evening  of  the  26th  we  received  a  message
saying  that  the  Aurora  had  left  Hobart  on  her  trip  south
to  bring  back  the  two  parties  from  Antarctica,  but  no
mention  of  picking  us  up  on  the  return  journey  was  made.

The  King  penguins  and  "  night  birds  "  had  laid  by  this
time,  and  Hamilton  added  more  eggs  to  his  collection.  He
found  for  the  first  time  a  colony  of  mutton  birds  near
the  south  end.  He  also  came  upon  a  molly mawk  rookery
on  the  south-western  point  of  the  island,  and  managed
to  take  one  of  the  birds  by  hand.

Blake  and  he  had  an  accident  in  the  dinghy  on  the  29th,
fortunately  attended  by  no  serious  results.  They  had  gone
from  Lusitania  Bay  to  the  south  end,  and,  while  attempting
to  land  through  the  surf,  the  boat  struck  a  rock  and  capsized,
throwing  them  into  the  water.  They  had  many  things  in
the  boat  but  lost  only  two  billies,  two  pannikins,  a  sounding
line  and  Hamilton's  hat,  knife  and  pipe.  Their  blankets
floated  ashore  in  a  few  minutes,  and  the  oars  came  floating
in  later  in  the  day.  After  the  capsize  Hamilton  managed
to  reach  the  boat  and  turn  her  over,  and  Blake  made  for  a
kelp-hung  rock,  but,  after  pulling  himself  up  on  to  it,  was
immediately  washed  off  and  had  to  swim  ashore.  The  boat
was  afterwards  found  to  be  stove-in  in  two  places,  though
the  breaks  were  easily  patched  up  subsequently.

New  Year's  Eve  came  and  with  keen  anticipations  we
welcomed  the  advent  of  1913.


236


Macquarie  Id


BM-e


MtirqiKirie  7.S-,


IX  THE  FOREGROUND


Blake


CHAPTER  XXVII
THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

By  G.  F.  AINSWORTH

WE  had  now  thrown  a  year  behind  and  the  work
we  set  out  to  accompHsh  was  almost  finished ;
so  it  was  with  pleasurable  feelings  that  we  took  up
the  burden  of  completion,  looking  forward  to  the  arrival  of
April  1913  which  should  bring  us  final  relief  and  the  prospects
of  civilisation.  I  shall  deal  with  the  first  three  months  of
the  year  as  one  period,  since  almost  all  the  field-work,
except  photography,  had  been  done,  and,  after  the  return
of  Blake  and  Hamilton  from  Lusitania  Bay  on  January  8,
our  life  was  one  of  routine  ;  much  time  being  devoted  to
packing  and  labelling  specimens  in  anticipation  of  departure.

The  first  business  of  the  year  was  to  overhaul  the  wireless
station,  and  on  the  6th,  Sawyer,  Sandell  and  I  spent  the
day  laying  in  a  supply  of  benzine  from  Aerial  Cove,  changing
worn  ropes,  tightening  stay-wires,  straightening  the  southern
masts  and  finally  hauling  the  aerial  taut.  These  duties
necessitated  much  use  of  the  "  handy  billy,"  and  one  has
but  to  form  an  acquaintance  with  this  desirable  "  person  "
to  thoroughly  appreciate  his  value.

Blake  and  Hamilton  returned  on  January  8  and  reported
that  their  work  was  finished  at  the  southern  end.  Thence-
forth they  intended  to  devote  their  time  to  finishing  what
remained  to  be  done  at  the  northern  end  and  in  adding  to
their  collections.  Blake,  for  instance,  resolved  to  finish
his  chart  of  the  island,  and,  if  time  permitted,  to  make  a

237


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

topographical  survey  of  the  locality,  as  it  was  of  great
geological  interest.  Hamilton  made  the  discovery  that  a
number  of  bird  specimens  he  had  packed  away  were  mildewed,
and  as  a  result  he  was  compelled  to  overhaul  the  whole  lot
and  attend  to  them.  He  found  another  colony  of  mutton
birds  on  North  Head,  the  existence  of  which  was  quite
unexpected  till  he  dug  one  out  of  a  burrow  thought  to
contain  "  night-birds."

About  the  middle  of  January  I  endeavoured  to  do  a
little  meteorological  work  with  the  aid  of  some  box-kites
manufactured  by  Sandell.  But  though  a  number  of  them
were  induced  to  fly,  we  had  no  success  in  getting  them  up
with  the  instruments  attached.  They  all  had  a  habit  of
suddenly  losing  equilibrium  and  then  indulging  in  a  series
of  rapid  dives  and  plunges  which  usually  ended  in  total
wreckage.

The  Rachel  Cohen  again  visited  the  island  on
January  26,  but  this  time  she  anchored  off  "The  Nuggets,"
whither  the  sealers  had  gone  to  live  during  the  penguin
season.  We  could  see  the  ship  lying  about  a  mile  offshore,
and  walked  down  to  get  our  mails  and  anything  else  she
had  brought  along  for  us.  I  received  a  letter  from  the
Secretary  of  the  Expedition  saying  that  he  had  made
arrangements  for  us  to  return  by  the  Rachel  Cohen  early
in  April,  and  the  news  caused  a  little  excitement,  being
the  only  definite  information  we  had  had  concerning  relief.

The  end  of  the  first  nionth  found  Blake  and  Hamilton
both  very  busy  in  making  suitable  boxes  for  specimens.
Many  of  the  larger  birds  could  not  be  packed  in  ordinary
cases,  so  Hamilton  had  to  make  specially  large  ones  to
accommodate  them,  and  Blake's  rock  specimens  being  very
heavy,  extra  strong  boxes  had  to  be  made,  always  keeping
in  view  the  fact  that  each  was  to  weigh  not  more  than
eighty  pounds,  so  as  to  ensure  convenient  handling.

After  a  silence  of  about  four  months,  we  again  heard
Adelie  Land  on  February  3,  but  the  same  old  trouble
existed,  that  is,  they  could  not  hear  us.  Sawyer  called  them
238


J,Al<(iE   KKKATICS  AXJJ  OTHEK   <.1,ACJA]-  DEKKIS    OX  THE  ^^U.M.MIT
OF  MACQUARIE  ISLAND


PILI.OW-FOKM   LAVA   OX   THE   lIIOIfLAXDS  OF  MACQUAKIE  ISLAXD


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

again  and  again,  getting  no  reply,  but  we  reckoned  that
conditions  would  improve  in  a  few  weeks,  as  the  hours  of
darkness  increased.

Hamilton  and  I  made  a  trip  to  the  hill-tops  on  the
4th  for  the  purpose  of  taking  a  series  of  plant  and  earth
temperatures  which  were  of  interest  biologically,  and  while
there  I  took  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  temperatures  in
all  the  lakes  we  saw.  Hamilton  also  took  some  panoramic
photographs  from  the  various  eminences  and  all  of  them
turned  out  well.

During  the  evening  Adelie  Land  sent  out  a  message
saying  that  Dr.  Mawson  had  not  yet  returned  to  the  Base
from  his  sledging  trip  and  Sawyer  received  it  without
difficulty,  but  though  he  "  pounded  away  "  in  return  for  a
considerable  time,  he  was  not  heard,  as  no  reply  or  acknow-
ledgment was  made.

The  Rachel  Cohen  remained  till  the  5th,  when  a  northerly
gale  arose  and  drove  her  away.  As  she  had  a  good  cargo
of  oil  on  board  no  one  expected  her  to  return.  We  had  sent
our  mail  on  board  several  days  previously  as  experience
had  shown  us  that  the  sailing  date  of  ships  visiting  the
island  was  very  uncertain.

Sandell  met  with  a  slight  though  painful  accident  on
the  7th.  He  was  starting  the  engine,  Avhen  it  "  back-
fired "  and  the  handle  flying  off  with  great  force  struck  him
on  the  face,  inflicting  a  couple  of  nasty  cuts,  loosening  several
teeth,  and  lacerating  the  inside  of  his  cheek.  A  black
eye  appeared  in  a  day  or  two  and  his  face  swelled  consider-
ably, bat  nothing  serious  supervened.  In  a  few  days  the
swelling  had  subsided  and  any  anxiety  we  felt  was  at  an  end.

We  now  had  only  two  sheep  left,  and  on  the  8th
Blake  and  I  went  to  kill  one.  Mac  accompanied  us.
Seeing  the  sheep  running  away,  she  immediately  set  off
after  them,  notwithstanding  our  threats,  yells  and  curses.
They  disappeared  over  a  spur,  but  shortly  afterwards
Mac  returned,  and,  being  severely  thrashed,  immediately
left    for    home.      We    looked    for    the    sheep    during    the

239


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

rest  of  the  day  but  could  find  no  trace  of  them,  and
though  we  searched  for  many  days  it  was  not  till  five  weeks
had  elapsed  that  we  discovered  them  on  a  small  "  landing  "
about  half-way  down  the  face  of  the  cliff.  They  had
apparently  rushed  over  the  edge  and,  rolling  down,  had
finally  come  to  a  stop  on  the  ledge  where  they  were  found
later,  alive  and  well.

On  the  8th  Adelie  Land  was  heard  by  us  calling  the
Aurora  to  return  at  once  and  pick  up  the  rest  of  the  party,
stating  also  that  Lieutenant  Ninnis  and  Dr.  Mertz  were
dead.  All  of  us  were  shocked  at  the  grievous  intelligence
and  every  effort  was  made  by  Sawyer  to  call  up  Adelie
Land,  but  without  success.

On  the  following  day  we  received  news  from  Australia
of  the  disaster  to  Captain  Scott's  party.

Blake,  who  was  now  geologizing  and  doing  topographical
work,  discovered  several  lignite  seams  in  the  hills  on  the
east  coast;  he  had  finished  his  chart  of  the  island.  The
mainland  is  simply  a  range  of  mountains  which  have
been  at  some  remote  period  partly  submerged.  The  land
meets  the  sea  in  steep  cliffs  and  bold  headlands,  whose
general  height  is  from  five  hundred  to  seven  hundred  feet,
with  many  peaks  ranging  from  nine  hundred  and  fifty  to
one  thousand  four  hundred  and  twenty  feet,  the  latter
being  the  height  of  Mount  Hamilton,  which  rears  up  just  at
the  back  of  Lusitania  Bay.  Evidence  of  extreme  glaciation
is  everywhere  apparent,  and  numerous  tarns  and  lakes
are  scattered  amongst  the  hills,  the  tops  of  which  are  barren,
wind-swept  and  weather-worn.  The  hill  sides  are  deeply
scored  by  ravines,  down  which  tumble  small  streams,
forming  cascades  at  intervals  on  their  hurried  journey
towards  the  ocean.  Some  of  these  streams  do  not  reach
the  sea  immediately,  but  disappear  in  the  loose  shingly
beaches  of  peaty  swamps.  The  west  coast  is  particularly
rugged,  and  throughout  its  length  is  strewn  wreckage  of
various  kinds,  some  of  which  is  now  one  hundred  yards  from
the  water's  edge.  Very  few  stretches  of  what  may  be
240


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

called  "  beach  "  occur  on  the  island  ;  the  foreshores  con-
sisting for  the  most  part  of  huge  water-worn  boulders  or
loose  gravel  and  shingle,  across  which  progress  is  slow  and
difficult.

Apparently  the  ground  shelves  very  rapidly  under  the
water,  as  a  sounding  of  over  two  thousand  fathoms  was


West

Mt  Elder

East

l2IQ^>s

I200  -|

"ON  Lakes_^^.^^

lOOO  -

^^^^^m

800-

600-

\                                             4-00-

Sea

>^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

/A                                          200-

level  ^ ^

72          3/4           1                                                         2

//\.    Sea  level

0             /4

X.^'  ■  ■ '

1

—^                     ^^

Horizontal      Scale    in    Miles

^

V

Vertical

Scale     in    Feet     (exaggerated    four  times)                  eeo-L-^j

A  J  HODGEMAN     J

A  SECTION  ACROSS  ItfACQTJARIE  ISLAND  THROUGH  MT.  ELDER


obtained  by  the  Aurora  at  a  distance  of  eight  miles  from  the
east  coast.  The  trend  of  the  island  is  about  eleven  degrees
from  true  north ;  the  axis  lying  north  by  east  to  south  by
west.  At  either  end  are  the  island-groups  already  referred
to,  and  their  connexion  with  the  mainland  may  be  traced
by  the  sunken  rocks  indicated  by  the  breaking  seas  on  the
line  of  reef.

A  very  severe  storm  about  the  middle  of  the  month
worked  up  a  tremendous  sea,  which  was  responsible  for
piling  hundreds  of  tons  of  kelp  on  the  shore,  and  for  several
days  tangled  masses  could  be  seen  drifting  about  like  small
floating  islands.

On  the  20th  an  event  occurred  to  which  we  had  long
looked  forward,  and  which  was  now  eagerly  welcomed.
Communication  was  established  with  the  Main  Base  in
Adelie  Land  by  wireless  !  A  message  was  received  from
Dr.  INIawson  confirming  the  deaths  of  Ninnis  and  Mertz,
and  stating  that  the  Aurora  had  not  picked  up  the  whole
VOL.  II  Q  241


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

party.  Sawyer  had  a  short  talk  with  Jeffryes,  the  Adelie
Land  operator,  and  among  other  scraps  of  news  told  him
we  were  all  well.

Hamilton  killed  a  sea  elephant  on  the  22nd.  The
animal  was  a  little  over  seventeen  feet  long  and  thirteen
and  a  half  feet  in  girth  just  at  the  back  of  the  flippers,
while  the  total  weight  was  more  than  four  tons.  It  took
Hamilton  about  a  day  to  complete  the  skinning,  and,  during
the  process,  the  huge  brute  had  to  be  twice  turned  over,
but  such  is  the  value  of  the  nautical  handy-billy  that  two
men  managed  it  rather  easily.  When  the  skin  had  been
removed,  five  of  us  dragged  it  to  the  sealers'  blubber-shed,
where  it  was  salted,  spread  out,  and  left  to  cure.

We  had  communication  with  Adelie  Land  again  on  the
26th,  and  messages  were  sent  and  received  by  both  stations.
Dr.  Mawson  wirelessed  to  the  effect  that  the  Aurora  would,
after  picking  up  Wild's  party,  make  an  attempt  to  return
to  Adelie  Land  if  conditions  were  at  all  favourable.

Finding  that  provisions  were  running  rather  short  on
the  last  day  of  February,  we  reduced  ourselves  to  an  allow-
ance of  one  pound  of  sugar  per  week  each,  which  was  weighed
out  every  Thursday.  Altogether  there  were  only  forty-five
pounds  remaining.  Thenceforth  it  was  the  custom  for
each  to  bring  his  sugar-tin  to  the  table  every  meal.  The
arrangement  had  its  drawbacks,  inasmuch  as  no  sugar  was
available  for  cooking  unless  a  levy  were  made.  Thus
puddings  became  rareties,  because  most  of  us  preferred  to
use  the  sugar  in  tea  or  coffee.

March  came  blustering  in,  accompanied  by  a  sixty-four-
mile  gale  which  did  damage  to  the  extent  of  blowing  down
our  annexe,  tearing  the  tarpaulin  off  the  stores  at  the  back
and  ripping  the  spouting  off  the  Shack.  A  high  sea  arose
and  the  conformation  of  the  beach  on  the  north-western
side  of  the  isthmus  was  completely  changed.  Numbers  of
sea  elephants'  tusks  and  bones  were  revealed,  which  had
remained  buried  in  the  shingle  probably  for  many  years,
and  heaps  of  kelp  were  piled  up  where  before  there  had  been
242


#       •  »  '"tit.    ■  ^       »v


Mdcquarie  Island       THE   KING  PEXGUIX.S'   KOOKEUY,  Ll'SITAXIA   BAY


Hamiltrin


Muc(iU(U(e  Islnnil

THE   HEAD  OF   A  BULL  SEA  ELEPHANT  PHOTOGRAPHED
IN  THE   ACT  OF  HOAUING


Blake


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

clean,  stony  beach.  Kelp  is  a  very  tough  weed,  but  after
being  washed  up  and  exposed  to  the  air  for  a  few  days,
begins  to  decay,  giving  forth  a  most  disagreeable  smell.

At  this  time  we  caught  numerous  small  fish  amongst
the  rocks  at  the  water's  edge  with  a  hand  line  about  four
feet  long.  It  was  simply  a  matter  of  dropping  in  the  line,
watching  the  victim  trifle  with  destiny  and  hauling  him  in
at  the  precise  moment.

Wireless  business  was  now  being  done  nightly  with
Adelie  Land,  and  on  the  7th  I  received  a  message  from
Dr.  Mawson  saying  that  the  party  would  in  all  probability
be  down  there  for  another  season,  and  stating  the  necessity
for  keeping  Macquarie  Island  station  going  till  the  end  of
the  year.  This  message  I  read  out  to  the  men,  and  gave
them  a  week  in  which  to  view  the  matter.  The  alternatives
were  to  return  in  April  or  to  remain  till  the  end  of  the
year.

I  went  through  the  whole  of  the  stores  on  the  10th,
and  found  that  the  only  commodities  upon  which  we  would
have  to  draw  sparingly  were  milk,  sugar,  kerosene,  meats
and  coal.  The  flour  would  last  till  May,  but  the  butter
allowance  would  have  to  be  reduced  to  three  pounds  per
week.

It  was  on  the  12th  that  we  found  the  lost  sheep,  but  as  we
had  some  wekas,  sufficient  to  last  us  for  several  days,  I  did
not  kill  one  till  the  15th.  On  that  day  four  of  us  went  down
towards  the  ledge  where  they  were  standing,  and  shot  one,
which  immediately  toppled  off  and  rolled  do^vn  some
distance  into  the  tussock,  the  other  one  leaping  after  it
without  hesitation.  \Miile  Blake  and  Hamilton  skinned  the
dead  sheep,  Sandell  and  I  caught  the  other  and  tethered  it
at  the  bottom  of  the  hill  amongst  a  patch  of  Maori  cabbage,
as  we  thought  it  would  probably  get  lost  if  left  to  roam  loose.
However,  on  going  to  the  spot  next  day,  the  sheep  was
nearly  dead,  having  got  tangled  up  in  the  rope.  So  we  let
it  go  free,  only  to  lose  the  animal  a  day  or  two  later,  for  it
fell  into  a  bog  and  perished.

243


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

On  March  22  a  lunar  eclipse  occurred,  contact  lasting
a  little  over  three  hours  from  9.45  p.m.  till  within  a  few
minutes  of  1  a.m.  on  the  23rd.  The  period  of  total  eclipse
was  quite  a  lengthy  one,  and  during  the  time  it  lasted  the
darkness  was  intense.  Cloud  interfered  for  a  while  with
our  observations  in  the  total  stage.  No  coronal  effect  was
noted,  though  a  pulsating  nebulous  area  appeared  in  front
of  the  moon  just  before  contact.

A  message  came  on  the  27th  saying  that  the  Rachel
Cohen  was  sailing  for  Macquarie  Island  on  May  2,  and  would
bring  supplies  as  well  as  take  back  the  men  who  wished  to
be  relieved,  and  this  was  forwarded  in  turn  to  Dr.  Mawson.

He  replied,  saying  that  the  Aurora  would  pick  us  up
about  the  middle  of  November  and  convey  us  to  Antarctica,
thence  returning  to  Australia  ;  but  if  any  member  wished
to  return  by  the  Rachel  Cohen  he  could  do  so,  though  notifica-
tion would  have  to  be  given,  in  order  to  allow  of  substitutes
being  appointed.  All  the  members  of  the  party  elected  to
stay,  and  I  asked  each  man  to  give  an  outline  of  the  work  he
intended  to  pursue  during  the  extended  period.

During  March  strong  winds  were  recorded  on  fourteen
days,  reaching  gale-force  on  six  occasions.  The  gale  at
the  beginning  of  the  month  was  the  strongest  we  had
experienced,  the  velocity  at  5.40  a.m.  on  the  1st  reaching
sixty-four  miles  per  hour.  Precipitation  occurred  on  twenty-
six  days  and  the  average  amount  of  cloud  was  85  per  cent.
A  bright  auroral  display  took  place  on  the  6th,  lasting  from
11.20  till  11.45  P.M.  It  assumed  the  usual  arch-form
stretching  from  the  south-east  to  south-west,  and  streamers
and  shafts  of  light  could  be  observed  pulsating  upwards
towards  the  zenith.

We  now  started  on  what  might  be  called  the  second
stage  of  our  existence  on  the  island.  In  the  preceding
pages  I  have  endeavoured  to  give  some  idea  of  what  happened
during  what  was  to  have  been  our  full  period  ;  but  unfore-
seen circumstances  compelled  us  to  extend  our  stay  for  eight
244


Macquarie  Ixlnnd


Hurlet/


THE  ROOKERY   OF  ROYAL  PENGUINS  AT  THE  SOUTH   END  VIEWED  FROM
A  CLIFF  SEVERAL  HUNDRED  FEET  ABOVE    IT


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

months  more,  until  the  Aurora  came  to  relieve  us  in  Novem-
ber. As  the  routine  was  similar  in  a  good  many  respects  to
that  which  we  had  just  gone  through,  I  shall  now  refer  to
only  the  more  salient  features  of  our  life.

The  loyalty  of  my  fellows  was  undoubted,  and  though
any  of  them  could  have  returned  if  he  had  felt  so  inclined,
I  am  proud  to  say  that  they  all  decided  to  see  it  through.
^^^len  one  has  looked  forward  hopefully  to  better  social
conditions,  more  comfortable  surroundings  and  reunion  with
friends,  it  gives  him  a  slight  shock  to  find  that  the  door  has
been  slammed,  so  to  speak,  for  another  twelve  months.
Nevertheless,  we  all  found  that  a  strain  of  philosophy
smoothed  out  the  rough  realities,  and  in  a  short  time  were
facing  the  situation  with  composure,  if  not  actual  content-
ment.

We  decided  now  to  effect  a  few  improvements  round
about  our  abode,  and  all  set  to  work  carrying  gravel  from
the  beach  to  put  down  in  front  of  the  Shack,  installing  a
sink-system  to  carry  any  waste  water,  fixing  the  leaking
roof  and  finally  closing  up  the  space  between  the  lining  and
the  wall  to  keep  out  the  rats.

We  expected  the  Rachel  Cohen  to  leave  Hobart  with  our
stores  on  May  2,  and  reckoned  that  the  voyage  would  occupy
two  weeks.  Thus,  it  would  be  six  weeks  before  she  arrived.
I  was  therefore  compelled  on  the  10th  to  reduce  the  sugar
allowance  to  half  a  pound  per  week.  We  were  now  taking
it  in  turns  to  go  once  a  week  and  get  some  wekas,  and  it
was  always  possible  to  secure  about  a  dozen,  which  provided
sufficient  meat  for  three  dinners.  Breakfast  consisted
generally  of  fish,  which  we  caught,  or  sea  elephant  in  some
form,  whilst  we  had  tinned  fish  for  lunch.

Sandell  installed  a  telephone  service  between  the  Shack
and  the  wireless  station  about  the  middle  of  April,  the
parts  all  being  made  by  himself ;  and  it  was  certainly  an
ingenious  and  valuable  contrivance.  I,  in  particular,  learned
to  appreciate  the  convenience  of  it  as  time  went  on.  The
buzzer  was  fixed  on  the  wall  close  to  the  head  of  my  bunk  and

245


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

I  could  be  called  any  time  during  the  night  from  the  wireless
station,  thus  rendering  it  possible  to  reply  to  communications
without  loss  of  time.  Further,  during  the  winter  nights,
when  auroral  observations  had  to  be  made,  I  could  retire
if  nothing  showed  during  the  early  part  of  the  night,  leaving
it  to  Sandell,  who  worked  till  2  or  3  a.m.  to  call  me  if  any
manifestation  occurred.

We  had  heavy  gales  from  the  12th  to  the  17th  inclusive,
the  force  of  the  wind  during  the  period  frequently  exceeding
fifty  miles  per  hour,  and,  on  the  first-mentioned  date,  the
barometer  fell  to  27*8  inches.  The  usual  terrific  seas
accompanied  the  outburst.

Finding  that  there  were  only  eight  blocks  of  coal  left,
I  reduced  the  weekly  allowance  to  one.  We  had  a  good
supply  of  tapioca,  but  neither  rice  nor  sago,  and  as  the
sealers  had  some  of  the  latter  two,  but  none  of  the  former,
we  made  an  exchange  to  the  extent  of  twelve  pounds  of
tapioca  for  eight  pounds  of  rice  and  some  sago.  Only  fifteen
pounds  of  butter  remained  on  the  20th,  and  I  divided  this
equally,  as  it  was  now  one  of  the  luxuries,  and  each  man
could  use  his  own  discretion  in  eating  it.  As  it  was  nearing
the  end  of  April,  and  no  further  word  concerning  the
movements  of  the  Rachel  Cohen  had  been  received,  I
wirelessed  asking  to  be  immediately  advised  of  the  exact
date  of  the  vessel's  departure.  A  reply  came  that  the
ship  would  definitely  reach  us  within  two  months.  I
answered,  saying  we  could  wait  two  months,  but  certainly
no  longer.

With  a  view  to  varying  the  menu  a  little,  Blake  and  I
took  Mac  up  on  the  hills  on  April  26  to  get  some  rabbits  and,
after  tramping  for  about  six  hours,  we  returned  with  seven.
In  our  wanderings  we  visited  the  penguin  rookeries  at  ''  The
Nuggets,"  and  one  solitary  bird  sat  in  the  centre  of  the  vast
area  which  had  so  lately  been  a  scene  of  much  noise  and
contention.

On  May  1  I  took  an  inventory  of  the  stores  and  found
that  they  would  last  for  two  months  if  economically  used.
246


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

Of  course,  I  placed  confidence  in  the  statement  that  the
Rachel  Cohen  would  reach  the  island  within  that  time.

With  the  coming  of  May  wintry  conditions  set  in,  and
at  the  end  of  the  first  week  the  migrants  had  deserted  our
uninviting  island.  Life  with  us  went  on  much  the  same  as
usual,  but  the  weather  was  rather  more  severe  than  that
during  the  previous  year,  and  we  were  confined  to  the  Shack
a  good  deal.

The  sealers  who  were  still  on  the  island  had  shifted  back
to  the  Hut  at  the  north  end  so  that  they  were  very  close  to
us  and  frequently  came  over  with  their  dog  in  the  evenings
to  have  a  yarn.  The  majority  of  them  were  men  who  had
"  knocked  about "  the  world  and  had  known  many  rough,
adventurous  years.  One  of  them  in  particular  was  rather
fluent,  and  we  were  often  entertained  from  his  endless
repertoire  of  stories.

On  the  23rd,  finding  that  there  were  seventy-seven  and
a  half  pounds  of  flour  remaining,  and  ascertaining  that  the
sealers  could  let  us  have  twenty- five  pounds,  if  we  ran  short,
I  increased  the  allowance  for  bread  to  twelve  and  a  half
pounds  per  week,  and  this,  when  made  up,  gave  each  man
two  and  three-quarter  pounds  of  bread.  Our  supply  of
oatmeal  was  very  low,  but  in  order  to  make  it  last  we  now
started  using  a  mixture  of  oatmeal  and  sago  for  breakfast ;
of  course,  without  any  milk  or  sugar.

Just  about  this  time  Mac  gave  birth  to  six  pups  and
could  not  help  us  in  obtaining  food.  She  had  done  valuable
service  in  this  connexion,  and  the  loss  in  the  foraging  strength
of  the  party  was  severely  felt  for  several  weeks.  She  was
particularly  deadly  in  hunting  rabbits  and  wekas,  and  though
the  first-named  were  very  scarce  within  a  few  miles  of  the
Shack,  she  always  managed  to  unearth  one  or  two  somewhere.
Hut-slippers  were  made  out  of  the  rabbit  skins  and  they
were  found  to  be  a  great  boon,  one  being  able  to  sit  do^vn
for  a  while  without  his  feet  "  going."

June  arrived  and  with  it  much  rough,  cold  weather.
A  boat  was  expected  to  come  to  our  relief,  at  the  very  latest,

247


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

by  the  30th.  We  had  a  very  chilly  period  during  the  middle
of  the  month,  and  it  was  only  by  hand-feeding  the  "  jacket  "
of  the  wireless  motor  that  any  work  could  be  done  by  the
station,  as  the  tank  outside  was  almost  frozen  solid.

The  tide-gauge  clock  broke  down  towards  the  end  of  the
month,  and  though  I  tried  for  days  to  get  it  going  I  was  not
successful.  One  of  the  springs  had  rusted  very  badly  as  a
result  of  the  frequent  "  duckings  "  the  clock  had  experienced,
and  had  become  practically  useless.

We  had  ascertained  that  the  Rachel  Cohen  was  still  in
Hobart,  so  on  the  23rd  I  wirelessed  asking  when  the  boat
was  to  sail.  The  reply  came  that  the  Rachel  Cohen  was
leaving  Hobart  on  Thursday,  June  26.

Our  supply  of  kerosene  oil  was  exhausted  by  the  end  of
the  month,  despite  the  fact  that  the  rule  of  "  lights  out  at
10  P.M."  had  been  observed  for  some  time.  Thus  we  were
obliged  to  use  sea  elephant  oil  in  slush  lamps.  At  first  we
simply  filled  a  tin  with  the  oil  and  passed  a  rag  through  a  cork
floating  on  the  top,  but  a  little  ingenuity  soon  resulted  in
the  production  of  a  lamp  with  three  burners  and  a  handle.
This  was  made  by  Sandell  out  of  an  old  tea-pot  and  one,
two  or  three  burners  could  be  lit  as  occasion  demanded.
During  meal  times  the  whole  three  burners  were  used,  but,
as  the  oil  smoked  and  smelt  somewhat,  we  generally  blew
out  two  as  soon  as  the  meal  was  finished.  This  was  the
"  general  "  lamp,  but  each  man  had,  as  well,  one  of  his
own  invention.  Mine  was  scornfully  referred  to  as  the
"  house-boat,"  since  it  consisted  of  a  jam  tin,  which  held  the
oil,  standing  in  a  herring  tin  which  caught  the  overflow.

At  the  end  of  June,  Blake  and  I  surveyed  all  the  penguin
rookeries  round  about  "  The  Nuggets  "  and,  allowing  a  bird  to
the  square  foot,  found  that  there  must  have  been  about  half
a  million  birds  in  the  area.  The  sealers  kill  birds  from  these
rookeries  to  the  number  of  about  one  hundred  and  thirty
thousand  yearly,  so  that  it  would  seem  reasonable  to  suppose
that,  despite  this  fact,  there  must  be  an  annual  increase  of
about  one  hundred  thousand  birds.
248


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

The  end  of  the  month  arrived  and,  on  making  inquiries,
we  found  that  there  was  no  news  of  the  Rachel  Cohen  having
left  Hobart.  We  had  enough  flour  to  last  a  fortnight,  and
could  not  get  any  from  the  sealers  as  they  possessed  only
three  weeks'  supply  themselves.  However,  on  July  8,
Bauer  came  across  and  offered  to  let  us  have  some  wheatmeal
biscuits  as  they  had  a  couple  of  hundredweights,  so  I  readily
accepted  twenty  pounds  of  them.  We  now  had  soup  twice
a  day,  and  managed  to  make  it  fairly  thick  by  adding  sago
and  a  few  lentils.  Cornflour  and  hot  water  flavoured  with
cocoa  made  a  makeshift  blanc-mange,  and  this,  with  sago
and  tapioca,  constituted  our  efforts  towards  dessert.

On  the  12th  I  received  a  message  stating  that  the  Rachel
Cohen  had  sailed  on  July  7 ;  ncAvs  which  was  joyfully
received.     We  expected  her  to  appear  in  ten  or  twelve  days.

On  the  18th  we  used  the  last  ounce  of  flour  in  a  small
batch  of  bread,  having  fully  expected  the  ship  to  arrive  before
we  had  finished  it.  Next  day  Bauer  lent  us  ten  pounds  of
oatmeal  and  showed  us  how  to  make  oatmeal  cakes.  We
tried  some  and  they  were  a  complete  success,  though  they
consisted  largely  of  tapioca,  and,  according  to  the  respective
amounts  used,  should  rather  have  been  called  tapioca
cakes.

When  the  22nd  arrived  and  no  ship  showed  up,  I  went
across  to  see  what  the  sealers  thought  of  the  matter,  and
found  that  they  all  were  of  opinion  that  she  had  been  blown
away  to  the  eastward  of  the  island,  and  might  take  a  con-
siderable time  to  "  make  "  back.

On  this  date  we  came  to  the  end  of  our  meats,  which  I
had  been  dealing  out  in  a  very  sparing  manner,  just  to
provide  a  change  from  sea  elephant  and  weka.  We  had  now
to  subsist  upon  what  we  managed  to  catch.  There  were  still
thirty-five  tins  of  soup,  of  which  only  two  tins  a  day  were  used,
so  that  there  was  sufficient  for  a  few  weeks.  But  we  found
ourselves  running  short  of  some  commodity  each  day,  and
after  the  23rd  reckoned  to  be  without  bread  and  biscuit.

At  this  juncture  many  heavy  blows  were  experienced,

249


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

and  on  the  24th  a  fifty-mile  gale  accompanied  by  a  tremendous
sea  beat  down  on  us,  giving  the  Rachel  Cohen  a  very  poor
chance  of  "  making  "  the  island.  Our  last  tin  of  fruit  was
eaten ;  twelve  tins  having  lasted  us  since  March  31,  and  I
also  shared  the  remaining  ten  biscuits  amongst  the  men  on
the  24th.  We  were  short  of  bread,  flour,  biscuits,  meats,
fish,  jam,  sugar  and  milk,  but  had  twenty  tins  of  French
beans,  thirty  tins  of  cornflour,  some  tapioca,  and  thirty
tins  of  soup,  as  well  as  tea,  coffee  and  cocoa  in  abundance.
We  had  not  been  able  to  catch  any  fish  for  some  days  as
the  weather  had  been  too  rough,  and,  further,  they  appeared
to  leave  the  coasts  during  the  very  cold  weather.

Sea  elephants  were  very  scarce,  and  we  invariably  had
to  walk  some  distance  in  order  to  get  one  ;  each  man  taking
it  in  turn  to  go  out  with  a  companion  and  carry  home
enough  meat  for  our  requirements.  We  were  now  eating
sea  elephant  meat  three  times  a  day  (all  the  penguins  having
migrated)  and  our  appetites  were  very  keen.  The  routine
work  was  carried  on,  though  a  great  deal  of  time  was  occupied
in  getting  food.

Bauer  very  generously  offered  to  share  his  biscuits  with
us,  but  we  fellows,  while  appreciating  the  spirit  which
prompted  the  offer,  unanimously  declined  to  accept  them.
We  now  concluded  that  something  had  happened  to  the  ship,
as  at  the  end  of  July  she  had  been  tAventy-four  days  out.

On  August  3  we  had  a  sixty- three- mile  gale  and  between
1  and  2  a.m.  the  velocity  of  the  wind  frequently  exceeded
fifty  miles  per  hour.  Needless  to  say  there  was  a  mountainous
sea  running,  and  the  Rachel  Cohen,  if  she  had  been  anywhere
in  the  vicinity,  would  have  had  a  perilous  time.

A  message  came  to  me  on  August  6  from  the  Secretary
of  the  Expedition,  saying  that  the  Rachel  Cohen  had  returned
to  New  Zealand  badly  damaged,  and  that  he  was  endeavour-
ing to  send  us  relief  as  soon  as  possible.  I  replied,  telling
him  that  our  food-supply  was  done,  but  that  otherwise  we
were  all  right  and  no  uneasiness  need  be  felt,  though  we
wished  to  be  relieved  as  soon  as  possible.
250


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

Splendid  news  came  along  on  the  9th  to  the  effect  that
the  New  Zealand  Government's  steamer  Tutanekai  would
tranship  our  stores  from  the  Rachel  Cohen  on  the  15th
and  sail  direct  for  the  island.

Sawyer  now  became  ill  and  desired  me  to  make  arrange-
ments for  his  return.  I  accordingly  wired  to  the  Secretary,
who  replied  asking  if  we  could  manage  without  an  operator.
After  consulting  Sandell,  I  answered  that  Sandell  and  I
together  could  manage  to  run  the  wireless  station.

Everybody  now  looked  forward  eagerly  to  the  arrival
of  the  Tutanekai,  but  things  went  on  as  before.  We  found
ourselves  with  nothing  but  sea  elephant  meat  and  sago,
with  a  pound-tin  of  French  beans  once  a  week  and  two
ounces  of  oatmeal  every  morning.

We  heard  that  the  Tutanekai  did  not  leave  as  expected
on  the  15th,  but  sailed  on  the  afternoon  of  the  17th,  and  was
coming  straight  to  Macquarie  Island.  She  was  equipped
with  a  wireless  telegraphy  outfit,  which  enabled  us  on  the
18th  to  get  in  touch  with  her ;  the  operator  on  board
stating  that  they  would  reach  us  early  on  the  morning  of
the  20th.

On  the  evening  of  the  19th  we  gave  Sawyer  a  send-off
dinner ;  surely  the  poorest  thing  of  its  kind,  as  far  as
eatables  were  concerned,  that  has  ever  been  tendered  to
any  one.  The  fare  consisted  of  sea  elephant's  tongue
"  straight,"  after  which  a  bottle  of  claret  was  cracked  and
we  drank  heartily  to  his  future  prosperity.

At  7.30  A.M.  on  the  20th  the  Tutanekai  was  observed
coming  up  the  east  coast,  and  as  we  had  "  elephanted  "  at
6  A.M.  we  were  ready  to  face  the  day.  I  went  across  to  the
sealers'  hut  and  accompanied  Bauer  in  the  launch  to  the  ship,
which  lay  at  anchor  about  a  mile  from  the  shore.  We
scrambled  on  board,  where  I  met  Captain  Bollons.  He
received  me  most  courteously,  and,  after  discussing  several
matters,  suggested  landing  the  stores  straight  away.  I  got
into  the  launch  to  return  to  the  shore,  but  the  wind  had
freshened  and  was  soon  blowing  a  fresh  gale.     Still,  Bauer

251


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

thought  we  should  have  no  difficulty  and  we  pushed  off  from
the  ship.  The  engine  of  the  launch  failed  after  we  had  gone
a  few  yards,  the  boat  was  blown  rapidly  down  the  coast,
and  we  were  eventually  thrown  out  into  the  surf  at  "  The
Nuggets."  The  Captain,  who  witnessed  our  plight,  sent  his
launch  in  pursuit  of  us,  but  its  engines  also  failed.  It  now
became  necessary  for  the  crew  of  the  whale-boat  to  go  to
the  assistance  of  the  launch.  However,  they  could  do  nothing
against  the  wind,  and,  in  the  end,  the  ship  herself  got  up
anchor,  gave  the  two  boats  a  line  and  towed  them  back
to  the  former  anchorage.  The  work  of  unloading  now  com-
menced, though  a  fairly  heavy  surf  was  running.  But  the
whaleboat  of  the  Tutanekai  was  so  dexterously  handled  by
the  boatswain  that  most  of  our  stores  were  landed  during
the  day.

Sawyer  went  on  board  the  Tutanekai  in  the  afternoon,
thus  severing  his  connexion  with  the  Expedition,  after
having  been  with  us  on  the  island  since  December  1911.
On  the  following  morning,  some  sheep,  coal  and  flour  were
landed,  and,  with  a  whistled  good-bye,  the  Tutanekai  started
north  on  her  visit  to  other  islands.

Our  short  period  of  stress  was  over  and  we  all  felt  glad.
From  that  time  onwards  we  ate  no  more  elephant  meat
"  straight."  A  sheep  was  killed  just  as  the  Tutanekai  left,
and  we  had  roast  mutton,  scones,  butter,  jam,  fruit  and  rice
for  tea.     It  was  a  rare  treat.

All  the  stores  were  now  brought  up  from  the  landing-place,
and  as  I  had  put  up  several  extra  shelves  some  weeks
previously,  plenty  of  room  was  found  for  all  the  perishable
commodities  inside  the  Shack.

The  beginning  of  September  found  me  fairly  busy.  In
addition  to  the  meteorological  work,  the  results  of  which
were  always  kept  reduced  and  entered  up,  I  had  to  work
on  Wireless  Hill  during  the  evening  and  make  auroral
observations  on  any  night  during  which  there  was  a  display,
attending  to  the  stores  and  taking  the  week  of  cooking  as  it
came  along.
252


HAMILTOX  INSPECTIXr;   A  GOOD  C'ATfH   OF  FISH   AT  LUSITAXIA  BAY


Mncquaiie  Island  Blale

HAMILTON   OBTAIN'IXG  THE   BLUBBER   OF  A  SEA  ELEPHAXT  FOR   FUEL


THROUGH  ANOTHER  YEAR

Blake  and  Hamilton  went  down  the  island  for  several
days  on  September  3,  since  they  had  some  special  observa-
tions to  make  in  the  vicinity  of  Sandy  Bay.

The  sea  elephant  season  was  now  in  progress,  and  many
rookeries  were  well  formed  by  the  middle  of  the  month.
The  skuas  had  returned,  and  on  the  19th  the  advance-guard
of  the  Royal  penguins  arrived.  The  gentoos  had  established
themselves  in  their  old  "  claims,"  and  since  the  12th  we  had
been  using  their  eggs  for  cooking.

Early  in  September  time-signals  were  received  from
Melbourne,  and  these  were  transmitted  through  to  Adelie
Land.  This  practice  was  kept  up  throughout  the  month
and  in  many  cases  the  signals  were  acknowledged.

Blake  and  Hamilton  returned  to  the  Shack  on  the  24th,
but  left  again  on  the  30th,  as  they  had  some  more  photo-
graphic work  to  do  in  the  vicinity  of  Green  Valley  and
Sandy  Bay.

Blake  made  a  special  trip  to  Sandy  Bay  on  October  30
to  bring  back  some  geological  specimens  and  other  things
he  had  left  there,  but  on  reaching  the  spot  found  that  the
old  hut  had  been  burned  to  the  ground,  apparently  only  a
few  hours  before,  since  it  was  still  smouldering.  Many
articles  were  destroyed,  among  which  were  two  sleeping-bags,
a  sextant,  gun,  blankets,  photographic  plates,  bird  specimens
and  articles  of  clothing.  It  was  presumed  that  rats  had
originated  the  fire  from  wax  matches  which  had  been  left
lying  on  a  small  shelf.

On  November  9  we  heard  that  the  Aurora  would  leave
Hobart  on  the  19th  for  Antarctica,  picking  us  up  on  the  way
and  landing  three  men  on  the  island  to  continue  the  wireless
and  meteorological  work.

We  sighted  the  Rachel  Cohen  bearing  down  on  the  island
on  November  18,  and  at  5.15  p.m.  she  came  to  an  anchorage
in  North-East  Bay.  She  brought  down  the  remainder
of  our  coal  and  some  salt  for  Hamilton  for  the  preservation
of  specimens.

On  the  next  night  it  was  learned  that  the  Aurora  had  left

253


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Hobart  on  her  way  South,  expecting  to  reach  us  about
the  28th,  as  some  sounding  and  dredging  were  being  done
en  route.

Everybody  now  became  very  busy  making  preparations
for  departure.  Time  passed  very  quickly,  and  November  28
dawned  fine  and  bright.  The  Rachel  Cohen,  which  had
been  lying  in  the  bay  loading  oil,  had  her  full  complement
on  board  by  10  a.m.,  and  shortly  afterwards  we  trooped
across  to  say  good-bye  to  Bauer  and  the  other  sealers,
who  were  all  returning  to  Hobart.  It  was  something  of  a
coincidence  that  they  took  their  departure  on  the  very  day
our  ship  was  to  arrive.  Their  many  acts  of  kindness  towards
us  will  ever  be  recalled  by  the  members  of  the  party,
and  we  look  upon  our  harmonious  neighbourly  association
together  with  feelings  of  great  pleasure.

A  keen  look-out  was  then  kept  for  signs  of  our  own
ship,  but  it  was  not  until  8  p.m.  that  Blake,  who  was  up  on
the  hill  side,  called  out,  "Here  she  comes,"  and  we  cUmbed
up  to  take  in  the  goodly  sight.  Just  visible,  away  in  the
north-west,  there  was  a  line  of  thin  smoke,  and  in  about  half
an  hour  the  Aurora  dropped  anchor  in  Hasselborough
Bay.


254


A  VICTORIA  PENGUIN  ON  THE  NEST
yiacquarie  Island


A  GROWTH  OF  LICHEN  ON  RED  SANDSTONE

(An   E.xamplk  of  the   Most  Conspicuous  Vegetation  ok

Adelie  Land)
Adelie  Land  Paget  colour  photo  by  Correll


CHAPTER  XXVIII
THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

We  bring  no  store  of  ingots,
Of  spice  or  precious  stones  ;
But  what  Ave  have  we  gathered
With  sweat  and  aching  bones.

Kipling.

AS  we  sat  in  the  wardroom  of  the  Aurora  exchanging
the  news  of  months  long  gone  by,  we  heard  from
Captain  Davis  the  story  of  his  fair-weather  trip
from  Hobart.  The  ship  had  left  Australian  waters  on
November  19,  and,  from  the  outset,  the  weather  was  quite
ideal.  Nothing  of  note  occurred  on  the  run  to  Macquarie
Island,  where  a  party  of  three  men  were  landed  and  Ains-
worth  and  his  loyal  comrades  picked  up.  The  former
party,  sent  by  the  Australian  Government,  were  to  maintain
wireless  communication  with  Hobart  and  to  send  meteoro-
logical reports  to  the  Commonwealth  Weather  Bureau.  A
week  was  spent  at  the  island  and  all  the  collections  were
embarked,  while  Correll  was  enabled  to  secure  some  good
colour  photographs  and  Hurley  to  make  valuable  additions
to  his  cinematograph  film.

The  Aurora  had  passed  through  the  "  fifties  "  without
meeting  the  usual  gales,  sighting  the  first  ice  in  latitude
63°  33'  S.,  longitude  150°  29'  E.  She  stopped  to  take
a  sounding  every  twenty-four  hours,  adding  to  the  large
number  already  accumulated  during  her  cruises  over  the
vast  basin  of  the  Southern  Ocean.

All  spoke  of  the  clear  and  beautiful  days  amid  the  floating
ice  and  of  the  wonderful  coloured  sunsets ;    especially  the

255


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

photographers.  The  pack  was  so  loosely  disposed,  that
the  ship  made  a  straight  course  for  Commonwealth  Bay,
steaming  up  to  Cape  Denison  on  the  morning  of  December  14  to
find  us  all  eager  to  renew  our  claim  on  the  big  world  up  North.

There  was  a  twenty-five-knot  wind  and  a  small  sea  when
we  pulled  off  in  the  whale-boat  to  the  ship,  but,  as  if  conspiring
to  give  us  for  once  a  gala-day,  the  wind  fell  off,  the  bay
became  blue  and  placid  and  the  sun  beat  down  in  full  thawing
strength  on  the  boundless  ice  and  snow.  The  Adelians,
if  that  may  be  used  as  a  distinctive  title,  sat  on  the  warm
deck  and  read  letters  and  papers  in  voracious  haste,  with
snatches  of  the  latest  intelligence  from  the  Macquarie
Islanders  and  the  ship's  officers.  No  one  could  erase  that
day  from  the  tablets  of  his  memory.

Late  in  the  afternoon  the  motor-launch  went  ashore,
and  the  first  of  the  cargo  was  sent  off.  The  weather  re-
mained serene  and  calm,  and  for  the  next  six  days,  with
the  exception  of  a  "  sixty- miler  "  for  a  few  hours  and  a  land
breeze  overnight,  there  was  nothing  to  disturb  the  em-
barkation of  our  bulky  impedimenta  which  almost  filled
the  outer  Hut.  Other  work  went  on  apace.  The  skua
gulls,  snow  and  Wilson  petrels  were  laying  their  eggs,  and
Hamilton  went  ashore  to  secure  specimens  and  to  add  to
our  already  considerable  collection  of  bird  skins.  Hunter
had  a  fish-trap  lowered  from  the  forecastle,  used  a  hand
dredge  from  the  ship,  and  did  tow-netting  occasionally
from  the  launch  in  its  journeys  to  and  from  the  land.
Hurley  and  Correll  had  bright  sunshine  to  ensure  good
photographic  results.  Bage  and  Hodgeman  looked  after
the  transport  of  stores  from  the  Hut,  and  Gillies,  Bickerton
and  Madigan  ran  the  motor-launch.  McLean,  who  was  now
in  possession  of  an  incubator  and  culture  tubes,  grew
bacteria  from  various  sources — seals  and  birds,  soils,  ice
and  snow.  Ainsworth,  Blake  and  Sandell,  making  their
first  acquaintance  with  Adelie  Land,  were  most  often  to  be
seen  quarrying  ice  on  the  glacier  or  pulling  loaded  sledges
down  to  the  harbour.
256


Adelie  Land


Hurl  J


*i^^f^T^t  <


M


^^...^..:^^tJr^/i^<


^


c


MACKELLAR

ISLETS


o


N


lOOO  500  O

U  uj  U   t^   uj   L


lOOO


Scale   of  feet


J[


O


o  -


^V/  ^        '    ^ce-  capped


.tc


A  J  HODGEMAN    Otn


VOL.  II


^


?5T


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

On  the  18th  a  party  of  us  went  off  to  the  Mackellar  Islets
in  the  motor-launch,  taking  a  tent  and  provisions,  intending
to  spend  two  days  there  surveying  and  making  scientific
observations.

These  islets,  over  thirty  in  number,  are  clustered
mainly  in  a  group  about  two  miles  off  shore.  The  group  is
encircled  by  rocky  "  outposts,"  and  there  are  several  "  links  "
to  the  southern  mainland.  Under  a  brilliant  sun,  across
the  pale  blue  water,  heaving  in  a  slow  northerly  swell,  the
motor-launch  threaded  her  way  between  the  granite  knobs,
capped  with  solid  spray.  The  waves  had  undermined  the
white  canopies  so  that  they  stood  immobile,  perched  on  the
dark,  kelp-fringed  rocks,  casting  their  pallid  reflections
in  the  turquoise  sea.  Steaming  into  a  natural  harbour,
bordered  by  a  low  ice-foot  on  which  scores  of  Weddell  seals
lay  in  listless  slumber,  we  landed  on  the  largest  islet — a
succession  of  salt-encrusted  ridges  covered  by  straggling
penguin  rookeries.  The  place  just  teemed  with  the  sporadic
life  of  an  Antarctic  summer.

It  was  calculated  that  the  Adelie  penguins  exceeded  one
hundred  and  fifty  thousand  in  number  over  an  area  of
approximately  one  hundred  acres.  Near  the  landing-place
there  were  at  least  sixty  seals  and  snow  petrels;  skua  gulls
and  Wilson  petrels  soon  betrayed  their  nests  to  the  biologists.

The  islets  are  fiat,  and  afford  evidence  that  at  one  time
the  continental  ice-cap  has  ridden  over  them.  The  rock
is  a  hard  grey  gneiss.  A  rough  plane-table  map  of  the
group  was  made  by  Hodgeman  and  myself.

Our  scheme  of  local  exploration  was  now  continued  to
the  west.  For  two  years  we  had  looked  curiously  at  a  patch
of  rocks  protruding  beneath  the  ice-cap  eight  miles  away,
within  Commonwealth  Bay.  It  had  been  inaccessible  to
sledging  parties,  and  so  we  reserved  Cape  Hunter,  as  it  was
ultimately  called,  for  the  coming  of  the  Ship.

The  anchor  was  raised  on  the  forenoon  of  the  22nd,  and
by  midday  the  Aurora  steamed  at  half-speed  along  the
ramparts  of  the  glacier,  stopping  about  four  miles  from
258


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

the  Cape,  after  sounding  in  four  hundred  and  twenty-four
fathoms.  Through  field-glasses  much  had  already  been
seen  ;   enough  to  arouse  an  intense  interest.

One  could  not  but  respond  to  the  idea  that  here  was  a
new  world,  flawless  and  unblemished,  into  which  no  human
being  had  ever  pried.  Here  were  open  secrets  to  be  read
for  the  first  time.  It  was  not  with  the  cold  eye  of  science
alone  that  we  gazed  at  these  rocks — a  tiny  spur  of  the  great
unseen  continent ;  but  it  was  with  an  indefinable  wonder.

In  perfect  weather  a  small  party  set  off  in  the  launch
towards  a  large  grounded  berg  which  appeared  to  lie  under
the  ice-cliffs.  Approaching  it  closely,  after  covering  two
miles,  we  could  see  that  it  was  still  more  than  a  mile  to  the
rocks.

Penguins  soon  began  to  splash  around  ;  Wilson  petrels
came  glancing  overhead  and  we  could  descry  great  flocks
of  Antarctic  petrels  wheeling  over  cliff  and  sea.  Reefs  buried
in  frothing  surge  showed  their  glistening  mantles,  and  the
boat  swerved  to  avoid  floating  streamers  of  brash-ice.

The  rocky  cliffs,  about  eighty  feet  in  height  at  the  highest
point,  were  formed  of  vertically  lying  slate  rocks — a  very
uniform  series  of  phyllite  and  sericite-schist.  At  their  base
lay  great  clinging  blocks  of  ice  deeply  excavated  by  the
restless  swell.  One  island  was  separated  from  the  parent
mass  by  a  channel  cut  sheer  to  the  deep  blue  water.  Be-
hind the  main  rocks  and  indenting  the  ice-cliff  was  a  curving
bay  into  which  we  steered,  finding  at  its  head  a  beautiful
cove  fringed  with  a  heavy  undermined  ice-foot  and  swarming
with  Adelie  penguins.  Overhanging  the  water  was  a  cavern
hollowed  out  of  a  bridge  of  ice  thrown  from  the  glacier  to  the
western  limit  of  the  rock  outcrop.

Hurley  had  before  him  a  picture  in  perfect  proportion.
The  steel-blue  water,  paled  by  an  icy  reflection,  a  margin
of  brown  rocks  on  which  the  penguins  leapt  through  the
splashing  surf,  a  curving  canopy  of  ice-foot  and,  filling  the
background,  the  cavern  with  pendent  icicles  along  its  cornice.

The  swell  was  so  great  that  an  anchor  had  to  be  thrown

259


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

from  the  stern  to  keep  the  launch  off  shore,  and  two  men
remained  on  board  to  see  that  no  damage  was  done.

At  last  we  were  free  to  roam  and  explore.  Over  the
first  ridge  of  rocks  we  walked  suddenly  into  the  home  of  the
Antarctic  petrels !  There  had  always  been  much  speculation
as  to  where  these  birds  nested.  Jones'  party  at  our  western
base  had  the  previous  summer  at  Haswell  Island  happened
upon  the  first  rookery  of  Antarctic  petrels  ever  discovered.
Here  was  another  spot  in  the  great  wilderness  peopled  by
their  thousands.  Every  available  nook  and  crevice  was
occupied  along  a  wide  slope  which  shelved  away  until  it
met  the  vertical  cliffs  falling  to  the  ocean.  One  could  sit
down  among  the  soft,  mild  birds  who  were  fearless  at  the
approach  of  man.  They  rested  in  pairs  close  to  their  eggs
laid  on  the  bare  rock  or  among  fragments  of  slate  loosely
arranged  to  resemble  a  rest.  Many  eggs  were  collected,
and  the  birds,  losing  confidence  in  us,  rose  into  the  air
in  flocks,  gaining  in  feathered  volume  as  they  circled  in
fear  above  this  domain  of  rock  and  snow  which  had  been
theirs  for  generations.

In  adjoining  rookeries  the  Adelie  penguins,  with  their
fat,  downy  cheeks,  were  very  plentiful  and  fiercer  than
usual.  Skuas,  snow  and  Wilson  petrels  were  all  in  their
accustomed  haunts.  Down  on  the  low  ice-foot  at  the  mouth
of  a  rocky  ravine,  a  few  seals  had  effected  a  landing.  Algae,
mosses  and  lichens  made  quite  a  display  in  moist  localities.

Before  leaving  for  the  ship,  we  "  boiled  the  billy "
on  a  platform  of  slate  near  the  cove  where  the  launch  was
anchored  and  had  a  small  picnic,  entertained  by  the  penguins
playing  about  in  the  surf  or  scaling  the  ice-foot  to  join  the
birds  which  were  laboriously  climbing  to  the  rookeries  on
the  ridge.  The  afternoon  was  so  peaceful  and  the  calm  hot
weather  such  a  novelty  to  us  that  we  pushed  off  reluctantly
to  the  Aurora  after  an  eventful  day.

Those  on  board  had  had  a  busy  time  dredging,  and
their  results  were  just  as  successful  as  ours.  A  haul  was
made  in  two  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  of  ascidians,  sponges,
260


Hurley
VIEW  LOOKING  OUT  OF  A  SHALLOW   RAVINE  AT  THE  EASTERN  EXTREMITY
OF  THE  ROCKS  AT  CAPE   DENISON


Hurley


HURLEY   \l.\U  BEFORE   HIM  A  PICTURE  IN  PERFECT  PROPORTION


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

crinoids,  holothurians,  fish  and  other  forms  of  hfe  in  such
quantity  that  Hunter  and  Hamilton  were  occupied  in  sorting
the  specimens  until  five  o'clock  next  morning.  Meanwhile
the  Aurora  had  returned  to  her  old  anchorage  close  to  Cape
Denison.

The  sky  banked  up  from  the  south  with  nimbus,  and  early
on  the  23rd  a  strong  breeze  ruffled  the  water.  There  were
a  few  things  to  be  brought  off  from  the  shore,  while  Ains-
worth,  Sandell  and  Correll  were  still  at  the  Hut,  so  that,  as
the  weather  conditions  pointed  to  a  coming  blizzard,  I
decided  to  "  cut  the  painter  "  with  the  land.

An  hour  later  the  motor-launch,  with  Madigan  and
Bickerton,  sped  away  for  the  last  load  through  falling
snow  and  a  rising  sea.  Hodgeman  had  battened  down
the  windows  of  the  Hut,  the  chimney  was  stuffed  with  bag-
ging, the  veranda- entrance  closed  with  boards,  and,  inside,
an  invitation  was  left  for  future  visitors  to  occupy  and
make  themselves  at  home.  After  the  remainder  of  the  dogs
and  some  miscellaneous  gear  had  been  shipped,  the  launch
put  off  and  came  alongside  in  a  squally  wind  through  thick
showers  of  snow.  Willing  hands  soon  unloaded  the  boat
and  slung  it  in  the  davits.  Every  one  was  at  last  safe  on
board,  and  in  future  all  our  operations  were  to  be  conducted
from  the  ship.

During  the  night  the  wind  rose  and  the  barometer  fell,
while  the  air  was  filled  with  drifting  snow.  On  the  24th —
Christmas  Eve — the  velocity  of  the  wind  gradually  increased
to  the  seventies  until  at  noon  it  blew  with  the  strength  of
a  hurricane.  Chief  Officer  Blair,  stationed  with  a  few  men
under  the  fo'c'sle-head,  kept  an  anxious  eye  on  the  anchor
chain  and  windlass.

About  lunch  time  the  anchor  was  found  to  be  dragging
and  we  commenced  to  drift  before  the  hurricane.  All  view
of  the  land  and  lurking  dangers  in  the  form  of  reefs  and
islets  were  cut  off  by  driving  snow.

The  wind  twanged  the  rigging  to  a  burring  drone  that
rose  to  a  shriek  in  the  shuddering  gusts.     The  crests  of

261


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

the  waves  were  cut  off  and  sprayed  in  fine  spindrift.  With
full  steam  on  we  felt  our  way  out,  we  hoped  to  the  open
sea  ;  meanwhile  the  chain  cable  and  damaged  anchor  were
slowly  being  hauled  in.  The  ship's  chances  looked  very
small  indeed,  but,  owing  to  the  good  seamanship  of  Captain
Davis  and  a  certain  amount  of  luck,  disaster  was  averted.
Soon  we  were  in  a  bounding  sea.  Each  time  we  were  lifted
on  a  huge  roller  the  motor-launch,  swinging  in  the  davits,
would  rise  and  then  descend  with  a  crash  on  the  water,  to
be  violently  bumped  against  the  bulwarks.  Everything
possible  was  done  to  save  the  launch,  but  our  efforts
proved  fruitless.  As  it  was  being  converted  into  a  battering
ram  against  the  ship  itself  it  had  to  be  cut  away,  and  was
soon  swept  astern  and  we  saw  no  more  of  it.

Most  unexpectedly  there  came  a  lull  in  the  wind,  so  that
it  was  almost  calm,  though  the  ship  still  laboured  in  the  seas.
A  clearance  in  the  atmosphere  was  also  noticeable  for  Cape
Hunter  became  discernible  to  the  west,  towards  which  we
were  rapidly  drifting.  This  sight  of  the  coast  was  a  great
satisfaction  to  us,  for  we  then  knew  our  approximate  posi-
tion *  and  the  direction  of  the  wind,  which  had  veered
considerably.

The  lull  lasted  scarcely  five  minutes  when  the  wind  came
back  from  a  somewhat  different  quarter,  north  of  east,  as
violent  as  ever.  The  "  eye  "  of  the  storm  had  passed  over
us,  and  the  gale  continued  steady  for  several  days.  That
night  the  struggle  with  the  elements  was  kept  up  by  officers
and  crew,  assisted  by  members  of  the  shore  party  who
took  the  lee-wheel  or  stood  by  in  case  of  emergency.

"  December  25.  Christmas  Day  on  the  high  seas  off
Adelie  Land,  everything  wet  and  fairly  miserable  ;  incipient
mal  de  mer  ,  wind  55-60  ;  snowing  !  When  Davis  came
down  to  breakfast  and  wished  us  a  Merry  Christmas,  with
a  smile  at  the  irony  of  it,  the  ward-room  was  swaying  about
in  a  most  bewildering  fashion."

*  It  should  be  borne  in  mind  that  compasses  are  unreliable  in  the  vicinity
of  the  magnetic  pole.

262


■<!*»S.


^A


J

^5-^


AXTAKCTIC  PETRELS  I'.ESTIXG  ON  THE  SXOW


Uuiiej)


K  ^■..'-'


SlilhnM  lnUind


ULVKI!  (;i!KV  PETKELS  MAKIXii   LOVE


Hiiilfy


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

Towards  evening,  after  the  Aurora  had  battled  for
hours  slowly  to  the  east,  the  sea  went  down  somewhat  and
some  drifting  ice  was  sighted.  We  continued  under  full
steam,  pushing  forward  to  gain  the  shelter  of  the  Mertz
glacier-tongue.  It  was  now  discovered  that  the  fluke  of
the  anchor  had  broken  off  short,  so  great  had  been  the  strain
imposed  upon  it  during  the  height  of  the  hurricane.

On  Boxing  Day  the  ship  was  in  calmer  water  heading
in  a  more  southerly  direction  so  as  to  come  up  with  the
land.  Fog,  fine  snow  and  an  overcast  sky  made  a  gloomy
combination,  but  during  the  afternoon  the  fog  lightened
sufficiently  for  us  to  perceive  the  mainland — a  ghostly  cliff
shrouded  in  diaphanous  blink.  By  10  p.m.  the  Mertz  glacier
was  visible  on  the  port  bow,  and  to  starboard  there  was
an  enormous  tilted  berg  which  appeared  to  be  magnified
in  the  dim  light.

Allowing  a  day  for  the  weather  to  become  clearer  and
more  settled,  we  got  out  the  trawl  on  the  28th  and  did  a
dredging  in  three  hundred  fathoms  close  to  the  glacier-
tongue.  Besides  rocks  and  mud  there  were  abundant
crinoids,  holothurians,  corals,  crustaceans  and  "  shells."
In  addition,  several  pieces  of  fossilized  wood  and
coaly  matter  were  discovered  scattered  through  the
"  catch."

Bage,  under  Davis's  direction,  took  temperatures  and
collected  water  samples  at  fifty,  seventy-five,  one  hundred,
two  hundred  and  three  hundred  fathoms,  using  the  Lucas
sounding- machine  on  the  fo'c'sle.  The  temperature  gradient
from  the  surface  downwards  appeared  to  give  some  indi-
cation of  the  depth  of  ice  submerged  in  the  glacier-tongue
alongside  which  we  were  lying.

On  the  29th  a  cold  south-easter  blew  off  the  ice-cliffs
and  the  sun  was  trying  to  pierce  a  gauzy  alto-stratus.  The
Aurora  steamed  north-east,  it  being  our  intention  to  round
the  northern  limit  of  the  Mertz  Glacier.  Gradually  a  distant
line  of  pack,  which  had  been  visible  for  some  time,  closed
in  and  the  ship  ran  into  a  cul-de-sac.     Gray,  who  was  up

263


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

in  the  crow's-nest,  reported  that  the  ice  was  very  heavy,
so  we  put  about.

Proceeding  southward  once  more,  we  gUded  along
within  a  stone's  throw  of  the  great  wall  of  ice  whose  chiselled
headlands  stood  in  profile  for  miles.  There  was  leisure  to
observe  various  features  of  this  great  formation,  and  to
make  some  valuable  photographic  records  when  the  low
south-western  sun  emerged  into  a  wide  rift.  Hunter  trailed
the  tow-net  for  surface  plankton  while  the  ship  was  going  at
half-speed.

At  ten  o'clock  the  ship  had  come  up  with  the  land,  and
her  course  was  turned  sharply  to  the  north-west  towards
a  flotilla  of  bergs  lying  to  the  east  of  the  Way  Archipelago,
which  we  intended  to  visit.

On  December  30,  1913,  the  Aurora  lay  within  a  cordon  of
floating  ice  about  one  mile  distant  from  the  nearest  islet  of
a  group  scattered  along  the  coast  off  Cape  Gray.

Immediately  after  breakfast  a  party  of  eight  men  set  off
in  the  launch  to  investigate  Stillwell  Island.  The  weather
was  gloriously  sunny  and  every  one  was  eager  at  the
prospect  of  fresh  discoveries.  Cape  Hunter  had  been  the
home  of  the  Antarctic  petrels,  and  on  this  occasion  we  were
singularly  fortunate  in  finding  a  resort  of  the  Southern
Fulmar  or  silver-grey  petrels.  During  the  previous  summer,
two  of  the  eastern  sledging  parties  had  for  the  first  time
observed  the  breeding  habits  of  these  birds  among  isolated
rocks  outcropping  on  the  edge  of  the  coast.  But  here  there
was  a  stronghold  of  hundreds  of  petrels,  sitting  with  their
eggs  in  niches  among  the  boulders  or  ensconced  in  bowers
excavated  beneath  the  snow  which  lay  deep  over  some  parts
of  the  island.

The  rock  was  a  gneiss  which  varied  in  character  from
that  which  had  been  examined  at  Cape  Denison  and  in
other  localities.  All  the  scientific  treasures  were  exhausted
by  midday,  and  the  whale-boat  was  well  laden  when  we
rowed  back  to  the  ship.

Throughout  a  warm  summer  afternoon  the  Aurora
264


A,i4t.    L,i,„l


LOOKING  TOWARDS  THE  .AIAIXLAXD  FKOM  STILLWELL  ISLAND:
.SILVER-GREY  PETRELS  XESTIXc;  IX  THE  FOREGROI'XD


Uarkij


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

threaded  her  way  between  majestic  bergs  and  steamed
west  across  the  wide  span  of  Commonwealth  Bay,  some
fifteen  miles  off  the  land.  At  eleven  o'clock  the  sky  was
perfectly  clear  and  the  sun  hung  like  a  luminous  ball  over
the  southern  plateau.  The  rocks  near  the  Hut  were  just
visible.  Close  to  the  "  Pianoforte  Berg  "  and  the  Mackellar
Islets  tall  jets  of  fine  spray  were  seen  to  shoot  upward  from
schools  of  finner  whales.  All  around  us  and  for  miles
shoreward,  the  ocean  was  calm  and  blue ;  but  close  to  the
mainland  there  was  a  dark  curving  line  of  ruffled  water,
while  through  glasses  one  could  see  trails  of  serpentine  drift
flowing  down  the  slopes  of  the  glacier.  Doubtless,  it  was
blowing  at  the  Hut ;  and  the  thought  was  enough  to  make
us  thankful  that  we  were  on  our  good  ship  leaving  Adelie
Land  for  ever.

On  the  morning  of  December  31,  1913,  Cape  Alden  was
abeam,  and  a  strong  wind  swept  down  from  the  highlands.
Bordering  the  coast  there  was  a  linear  group  of  islets  and  out-
cropping rocks  at  which  we  had  hoped  to  touch.  The
wind  continued  to  blow  so  hard  that  the  idea  was  abandoned
and  our  course  was  directed  towards  the  north-west  to
clear  a  submerged  reef  which  had  been  discovered  in  January
1912.

The  wind  and  sea  arose  during  the  night,  causing  the
ship  to  roll  in  a  reckless  fashion.  Yet  the  celebration
of  New  Year's  Eve  was  not  marred,  and  lusty  choruses  came
up  from  the  ward-room  till  long  after  midnight.  Next
morning  at  breakfast  our  ranks  had  noticeably  thinned
through  the  liveliness  of  the  ship,  but  it  is  wonderful  how
large  an  assembly  we  mustered  for  the  New  Year's  dinner,
and  how  cheerfully  the  toast  was  drunk  to  "  The  best  year
we  have  ever  had  !  "

On  January  2,  1914,  fast  ice  and  the  mainland  were
sighted.  The  course  was  changed  to  the  south-west  so  as
to  bring  the  ship  within  a  girdle  of  loose  ice  disposed  in
big  solid  chunks  and  small  pinnacled  floes.  A  sounding
realized  two  hundred  fathoms  some  ten  miles  off  the  coast,

265


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

which  stretched  like  a  lofty  bank  of  yellow  sand  along
the  southern  horizon.  On  previous  occasions  we  had  not
been  able  to  see  so  much  of  the  coastline  in  this  longitude
owing  to  the  compactness  of  the  ice,  and  so  we  were  able
to  definitely  chart  a  longer  tract  at  the  western  limit  of
Adelie  Land.

The  ice  became  so  thick  and  heavy  as  the  Aurora  pressed
southward  that  she  was  forced  at  last  to  put  about  and  steer
for  more  open  water.  On  the  way,  a  sounding  was  made
in  two  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms,  but  a  dredging  was
unsuccessful  owing  to  the  fact  that  insufficient  cable  was
paid  out  in  going  from  two  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms
to  deeper  water.

Our  north-westerly  course  ran  among  a  great  number  of
very  long  tabular  bergs,  which  suggested  the  possibility
of  a  neighbouring  glacier-tongue  as  their  origin.

At  ten  o'clock  on  the  evening  of  the  2nd,  a  mountain
of  ice  with  a  high  encircling  bastion  passed  to  starboard.
It  rose  to  a  peak,  flanked  by  fragments  toppling  in  snowy
ruin.  The  pyramidal  summit  was  tinged  the  palest  lilac  in
the  waning  light ;  the  mighty  pallid  walls  were  streaked  and
blotched  with  deep  azure ;  the  green  swell  sucked  and
thundered  in  the  wave- worn  caverns.  Chaste  snow-birds
swam  through  the  pure  air,  and  the  whole  scene  was  sacred.

A  tropical  day  in  the  pack-ice  !  Sunday  January  4  was
clear  and  perfectly  still,  and  the  sun  shone  powerfully.  On
the  previous  day  we  had  entered  a  wide  field  of  ice  which
had  become  so  close  and  heavy  that  the  ship  took  till
late  in  the  evening  to  reach  its  northern  fringe.

From  January  5  onwards  for  two  weeks  we  steamed
steadily  towards  the  west,  repeatedly  changing  course  to
double  great  sheets  of  pack  which  streamed  away  to  the
north,  pushing  through  them  in  other  places  where  the
welcome  "  water-sky  showed  strong "  ahead,  making
"  southing  "  for  days  following  the  trend  of  the  ice,  then
grappling  with  it  in  the  hope  of  winning  through  to  the  land
and  at  last  returning  to  the  western  track  along  the  margin
266


AMie  Land      ANTARCTIC  PETRELS  NESTIX(i   OX  THE  ROCKY  LEDGES  OF
THE  CLIFFS  NEAR   CAPE   HUXTEl!


llinU'n


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE


of  brash  which  breaks  the  first  swell  of  the  Southern
Ocean.

The  weather  was  mostly  overcast  with  random  showers
of  light  snow  and  mild  variable  winds  on  all  but  two  days,
when  there  was  a  "  blow  "  of  forty  miles  per  hour  and  a
considerable  sea  in  which  the  ship  seemed  more  active
than  usual.

Many  soundings  were  taken,  and  their  value  lay  in  broadly
Of  course,  too,  we  were  supplementing  the  ship's  previous
work  in  these  latitudes.


Lat.  67 °S

ADELIE    LAND
Ice-cap


Horizontal     Scale  -  Statute  Miles
lo        o  20  40  6O


Fathoms


Vertical     Scale
exaggerated    20  times

A  J  HODGE^y^^


SECTION  ILLUSTKATING  THE  MOAT  IN  THE  ANTARCTIC  CONTINENTAL  SHELF

One  successful  dredging  in  eighteen  hundred  fathoms
brought  up  some  large  erratics  and  coaly  matter,  besides  a
great  variety  of  animal  life.  It  was  instructive  to  find  that
the  erratics  were  coated  with  a  film  of  manganese  oxide
derived  from  the  sea- water.  Several  tow-nettings  were  taken
with  large  nets  automatically  closing  at  any  desired  depth
through  the  medium  of  a  "  messenger."  Small  crustaceans
were  plentiful  on  the  surface,  but  they  were  if  anything  more
numerous  at  depths  of  fifty  to  one  hundred  fathoms.
Amongst  the  latter  were  some  strongly  phosphorescent
forms.  The  flying  birds  were  "  logged  "  daily  by  the  biolo-
gists. Emperor  and  Adelie  penguins  were  occasionally  seen,
among  the  floes  as  well  as  sea-leopards,  crab-eater  and
Weddell  seals.

267


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

Friday  January  16  deserves  mention  as  being  a  day  full
of  incident.  In  the  morning  a  thin,  cold  fog  hung  along
the  pack  whose  edge  determined  our  course.  Many  petrels
flew  around,  and  on  the  brash-ice  there  were  dark  swarms
of  terns — small  birds  with  black-capped  heads,  dove-grey
backs  and  silvery-white  breasts.  They  were  very  nervous  of
the  ship,  rising  in  great  numbers  when  it  had  approached
within  a  few  hundred  yards.  One  startled  bird  would  fly
up,  followed  by  several  more  ;  then  a  whole  covey  would
disturb  the  rest  of  the  flock.  Hamilton  managed  to  shoot
two  of  them  from  the  fo'c'sle,  and,  after  much  manoeuvring,
we  secured  one  with  a  long  hand-net.

Soon  after,  there  was  a  cry  of  "  killer  whales  !  "  from
the  stern.  Schools  of  them  were  travelling  from  the  west
to  the  east  along  the  edge  of  the  pack.  The  water  was
calm  and  leaden,  and  every  few  seconds  a  big  black  tri-
angular fin  would  project  from  the  surface,  there  would  be
a  momentary  glimpse  of  a  dark  yellow-blotched  back  and
then  all  would  disappear.

We  pushed  into  the  pack  to  "  ice  ship,"  as  the  water-
supply  was  running  low.  Just  as  the  Aurora  was  leaving
the  open  water,  a  school  of  finner  whales  went  by,  blowing
high  jets  of  spray  in  sudden  blasts,  wallowing  for  a  few
seconds  on  the  surface,  and  diving  in  swirls  of  foam.  These
finners  or  rorquals  are  enormous  mammals,  and  on  one
occasion  we  were  followed  by  one  for  several  hours.  It  swam
along  with  the  ship,  diving  regularly  underneath  from  one  side
to  another,  and  we  wondered  what  would  happen  if  it  had
chosen  to  charge  the  vessel  or  to  investigate  the  propeller.

Close  to  a  big  floe  to  which  the  ship  was  secured,  two
crab-eater  seals  were  shot  and  hauled  aboard  to  be  skinned
and  investigated  by  the  biologists  and  bacteriologist.  When
the  scientists  had  finished  their  work,  the  meat  and  blubber
were  cut  up  for  the  dogs,  while  the  choicer  steaks  were  taken
to  the  cook's  galley.

After  lunch  every  one  started  to  "  ice  ship  "  in  earnest.
The  sky  had  cleared  and  the  sun  was  warm  and  brilliant
268


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

by  the  time  a  party  had  landed  on  the  snow-covered  floe
with  baskets,  picks  and  shovels.  When  the  baskets  had
been  filled,  they  were  hoisted  by  hand-power  on  to  a  derrick
which  had  been  fixed  to  the  mizen  mast,  swung  inboard
and  then  shovelled  into  a  melting  tank  alongside  the  engine-
room.  The  melter  was  a  small  tank  through  which  ran  a
coil  of  steam  pipes.  The  ice  came  up  in  such  quantity  that
it  was  not  melted  in  time  to  keep  up  with  the  demand,  so
a  large  heap  was  made  on  the  deck.

Later  in  the  afternoon  it  was  found  that  holes  chipped
in  the  sea-ice  to  a  depth  of  six  or  eight  inches  filled  quickly
with  fresh  water,  and  soon  a  gang  of  men  had  started  a
service  with  buckets  and  dippers  between  these  pools  and
the  main  hatch  where  the  water  was  poured  through  funnels
into  the  ship's  tanks.  The  bulwarks  on  the  port  side  of
the  main  hatch  had  been  taken  down,  and  a  long  plank
stretched  across  to  the  floe.  At  nine  o'clock  work  was
stopped  and  we  once  more  resumed  our  western  cruise.

It  was  found  that  as  the  region  of  Queen  Mary  Land
approached,  heavy  pack  extended  to  the  north.  While
skirting  this  obstacle,  we  disclosed  by  soundings  a  steep
rise  in  the  ocean's  floor  from  a  depth  of  about  fifteen  hundred
fathoms  to  within  seven  hundred  fathoms  of  the  surface,
south  of  which  there  was  deep  water.  It  was  named  "  Bruce
Rise  "  in  recognition  of  the  oceanographical  work  of  the
Scottish  Expedition  in  Antarctic  seas.

On  the  17th,  in  latitude  62°  21'  S.,  longitude  95°  9'  E.,
the  course  ran  due  south  for  more  than  seven  hours.  For
the  two  ensuing  days  the  ship  was  able  to  steer  approxi-
mately south-west  through  slackening  ice,  until  on  the
19th  at  midday  we  were  in  latitude  64°  59'  S,,  longitude
90°  8'  E.  At  length  it  appeared  that  land  was  approaching,
after  a  westward  run  of  more  than  twelve  hundred  miles.
Attempts  to  reach  the  charted  position  of  Totten's  Land,
North's  Land,  Budd  Land  and  Knox  Land  had  been  suc-
cessively abandoned  when  it  became  evident  that  the  pack
occupied  a  more  northerly  situation  than  that  of  the  two

269


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

previous  years,  and  was  in  most  instances  thick  and  impene-
trable.

At  10  P.M.  on  the  19th,  the  ice  fields  still  remaining
loose  and  navigable,  a  dark  line  of  open  water  was  observed
ahead.  From  the  crow's-nest  it  was  seen  to  the  south
stretching  east  and  west  within  the  belt  of  pack-ice — the
Davis  Sea.  We  had  broken  through  the  pack  less  than
twenty-five  miles  north  of  where  the  Gauss  (German  Expedi-
tion, 1902)  had  wintered.

All  next  day  the  Aurora  steamed  into  the  eye  of  an
easterly  wind  towards  a  low  white  island,  the  higher  positions
of  which  had  been  seen  by  the  German  Expedition  of  1902,
and  charted  as  Drygalski's  High  Land.  Dr.  Jones'  party
had,  the  year  before,  obtained  a  distant  view  of  it  and
regarded  it  as  an  island,  which  proved  to  be  correct,  so  we
named  it  Drygalski  Island.  To  the  south  there  was  the  dim
outline  of  the  mainland.  Soundings  varied  between  two
hundred  and  three  hundred  fathoms.

On  January  21,  Drygalski  Island  was  close  at  hand,  and
a  series  of  soundings  which  showed  from  sixty  to  seventy
fathoms  of  water  deepening  towards  the  mainland  proved
beyond  doubt  that  it  was  an  island.  In  shape  it  is  like  a
flattened  dome  about  nine  miles  in  diameter  and  twelve
hundred  feet  in  height,  bounded  by  perpendicular  cliffs  of
ice,  and  with  no  visible  evidence  of  outcropping  rock.

The  dredge  was  lowered  in  sixty  fathoms,  and  a  rich
assortment  of  life  was  captured  for  the  biologists — Hunter
and  Hamilton.  A  course  was  then  made  to  the  south
amidst  a  sea  of  great  bergs  ;  the  water  deepening  to  about
four  hundred  fathoms.

During  the  evening  the  crevassed  slopes  of  the  main-
land rose  clear  to  the  south,  and  many  islets  were  observed
near  the  coast,  frozen  in  a  wide  expanse  of  bay-ice.  Haswell
Island,  visited  by  Jones,  Dovers  and  Hoadley  of  the  Western
Party,  was  sighted,  and  the  ship  was  able  to  approach
within  eight  miles  of  it;  at  ten  o'clock  coming  up  to  flat
bay-ice,  where  she  anchored  for  the  night.  Before  we  retired
270


^  J  s


o  <


S      fl-


Ed

S

O


2
<


Z     ?i


o


^     o


C/D


O     5


OS


1°


wjl


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

to  bunk,  a  Ross  seal  was  discovered  and  shot,  three-quarters
of  a  mile  away.

Next  day,  January  22,  an  unexpected  find  was  made
of  five  more  of  this  rare  species  of  seal.  Many  Emperor
penguins  were  also  secured.  It  would  have  been  interesting
to  visit  the  great  rookery  of  Emperor  penguins  on  Haswell
Island,  but,  as  the  ship  could  only  approach  to  within  eight
miles  of  it,  I  did  not  think  it  advisable  to  allow  a  party  to
go  so  far.

On  the  night  of  the  22nd,  the  Aurora  was  headed  north-
east for  the  Shackleton  Ice-Shelf.  In  the  early  hours  of
the  23rd  a  strong  gale  sprang  up  and  rapidly  increased  in
violence.  A  pall  of  nimbus  overspread  the  sky,  and  blinding
snow  commenced  to  fall.

We  had  become  used  to  blizzards,  but  on  this  occasion
several  factors  made  us  somewhat  apprehensive.  The  ship
was  at  least  twenty-five  miles  from  shelter  on  an  open  sea,
littered  with  bergs  and  fragments  of  ice.  The  wind  was  very
strong ;  the  maximum  velocity  exceeding  seventy  miles
per  hour,  and  the  dense  driving  snow  during  the  midnight
hours  of  semi-darkness  reduced  our  chances  of  navigating
with  any  certainty.

The  night  of  the  23rd  had  a  touch  of  terror.  The  wind
was  so  powerful  that,  with  a  full  head  of  steam  and  steering
a  few  points  off  the  eye  of  the  wind,  the  ship  could  just
hold  her  own.  But  when  heavy  gusts  swooped  down
and  the  propeller  raced  on  the  crest  of  a  mountainous  wave,
Davis  found  it  impossible  to  keep  steerage-way.

Drift  and  spray  lash  the  faces  of  officer  and  helmsman,
and  through  the  grey  gloom  misty  bergs  glide  by  on  either
hand.  A  long  slow  struggle  brings  us  to  a  passage  between
two  huge  masses  of  ice.  There  is  a  shock  as  the  vessel
bumps  and  grinds  along  a  great  wall.  The  engine  stops,
starts  again,  and  stops  once  more.  The  yards  on  the  fore-
mast are  swung  into  the  wind,  the  giant  seas  are  broken
by  the  stolid  barriers  of  ice,  the  engine  commences  to  throb
with  its  old  rhythm,  and   the  ship  slowly  creeps  out  to

?71


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

meet  the  next  peril.  It  comes  with  the  onset  of  a  "  bergy-
bit "  which  smashes  the  martingale  as  it  plunges  into  a
deep  trough.  The  chain  stay  parts,  dragging  loose  in  the
water,  while  a  great  strain  is  put  by  the  foremast  on  the
bowsprit.

Early  on  the  24th  the  ship  was  put  about  and  ran  with
the  wind,  while  all  hands  assembled  on  the  fo'c'sle.  The
crew,  under  the  direction  of  Blair,  had  the  ticklish  job  of
replacing  the  chain  stay  by  two  heavy  blocks,  the  lower
of  which  was  hooked  on  to  the  lug  which  secured  the  end
of  the  stay,  and  the  upper  to  the  bowsprit.  The  running
ropes  connecting  the  blocks  were  tightened  up  by  winding
the  hauling  line  round  the  capstan.  When  the  boatswain
and  two  sailors  had  finished  the  wet  and  chilly  task  of
getting  the  tackle  into  position,  the  rest  put  their  weight
on  to  the  capstan  bars  and  the  strain  on  the  bowsprit  was
relieved.  The  fo'c'sle,  plunging  and  swaying  in  the  great
waves,  was  encased  in  frozen  spray,  and  along  all  the
ropes  and  stays  were  continuous  cylinders  of  ice.  The
Aurora  then  resumed  her  easterly  course  against  the
blizzard.

Saturday  January  24  was  a  day  of  high  wind,  rough
seas,  watery  decks,  lively  meals  and  general  discomfort.
At  11.30  P.M.  the  waves  had  perceptibly  decreased,  and  it
was  surmised  that  we  were  approaching  the  berg,  about  thirty
miles  in  length,  which  lay  to  the  west  of  the  Shackleton
Ice- Shelf.

At  6  A.M.  on  the  25th  the  sun  managed  to  glimmer  through
the  low  rack  flying  from  the  east;  lighting  up  the  carven
face  of  an  ice-cliff  along  which  the  Aurora  was  coasting.
Up  and  down  we  steamed  until  the  afternoon  of  the  26th,
when  the  wind  lulled  away  to  nothing,  and  the  grey,  even
pall  of  cloud  rose  and  broke  into  fleecy  alto-cumulus.

At  the  southern  extremity  of  the  long  berg,  fast  bay-ice
extended  up  to  the  land  and  for  twenty  miles  across  to  the
shelf  on  which  the  Winter  Quarters  of  the  Western  Party
had  beeii  situated.  Further  progress  to  the  south  was
272


ICI.\(;  8HIP  IX   THE   VWK   NOItTH   OF  TERMIXATIOX  ICE-TOXGL'E         Hurle!/


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

blocked,  so  our  course  was  directed  to  the  north  along  the
western  border  of  the  berg.

When  not  engaged  in  sounding,  dredging,  or  tow-netting
members  of  the  land  party  found  endless  diversion  in  trim-
ming coal.  Big  inroads  had  been  made  in  the  supply  of
more  than  five  hundred  tons,  and  it  now  became  necessary
to  shift  many  tons  of  it  from  the  holds  aft  to  the  bunkers
where  it  was  accessible  to  the  firemen.  The  work  was  good
exercise,  and  every  one  enjoyed  the  shift  below,  "  trucking  "
and  "  heaving."  Another  undoubted  advantage,  in  the
opinion  of  each  worker,  was  that  he  could  at  least  demand
a  wash  from  Chief  Engineer  Gillies,  who  at  other  times  was
forced  to  be  thrifty  with  hot  fresh  water.

After  supper  on  the  28th  it  was  evident  that  we  had
reached  a  point  where  the  shelf -ice  veered  away  to  the  eastward
and  a  wide  tract  of  adhering  sea-ice  barred  the  way.  The
floe  was  exceedingly  heavy  and  covered  with  a  deep  layer
of  soft  snow.  Emperor  and  Adelie  penguins,  crab-eater
and  Weddell  seals  were  recognized  through  glasses  along
its  edge.  As  there  was  a  light  obscuring  fog  and  dusk  was
approaching,  the  Aurora  "  hung  up  "  for  the  night.

On  January  29  the  ship,  after  a  preliminary  trawling
had  been  done  in  three  hundred  and  twenty  fathoms,  pushed
into  the  floe  and  was  made  fast  with  an  ice-anchor.  Emperor
penguins  were  so  plentiful  in  the  neighbourhood  that  many
specimens  were  secured  for  skins.

A  sea-leopard  was  seen  chasing  a  crab-eater  seal  quite
close  to  the  bow  of  the  ship.  The  latter,  after  several
narrow  escapes,  took  refuge  on  an  ice-foot  projecting  from
the  edge  of  the  floe.

Advantage  was  taken  of  a  clearing  in  the  weather  to
walk  over  the  sea-ice  to  a  berg  two  and  a  half  miles  away,
from  the  summit  of  which  it  was  hoped  that  some  sign  of
land  might  be  apparent.  Away  in  the  distance,  perhaps
five  miles  further  on,  could  be  seen  an  immense  congrega-
tion of  Emperor  Penguins — evidently  another  rookery.
No  certain  land  was  visible.

VOL.  II  s  273


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

The  cruise  was  now  continued  to  the  north-west  in
order  to  skirt  a  collection  of  bergs  and  floe,  with  the  ultimate
object  of  proceeding  in  an  easterly  direction  towards
Termination  Ice-Tongue  at  the  northern  limit  of  the  Shackle-
ton  Shelf-Ice.

A  glance  at  the  map  which  illustrates  the  work  done  by
the  Western  Party  affords  the  best  idea  of  the  great  ice-
formation  which  stretches  away  to  the  north  of  Queen  Mary
Land.  It  is  very  similar  in  character  to  the  well-known
Ross  Barrier  over  which  lay  part  of  Scott's  and  Amundsen's
journeys  to  the  South  Pole.  Its  height  is  remarkably
uniform,  ranging  from  sixty  to  one  hundred  feet  above
the  water-level.  When  allowance  has  been  made  for  average
specific  gravity,  its  average  total  thickness  should  approxi-
mate to  six  hundred  feet.  From  east  to  west  the  forma-
tion was  proved  to  be  as  much  as  two  hundred  miles,  with
one  hundred  and  eighty  miles  between  its  northern  and
southern  limits.

This  vast  block  of  ice  originates  fundamentally  from
the  glacial  flow  over  the  southern  hinterland.  Every  year
an  additional  layer  of  consolidated  snow  is  added  to  its
surface  by  the  frequent  blizzards.  These  annual  additions
are  clearly  marked  in  the  section  exposed  on  the  dazzling
white  face  near  the  brink  of  the  ice-cliff.  There  is  a  limit,
however,  to  the  increase  in  thickness,  for  the  whole  mass
is  ever  moving  slowly  to  the  north,  driven  by  the  irresistible
pressure  of  the  land-ice  behind  it.  Thus  the  northern  face
crumbles  down  into  brash  or  floats  away  as  part  of  a  berg
severed  from  the  main  body  of  the  shelf-ice.

On  the  morning  of  January  30  we  had  the  unique  ex-
perience of  witnessing  this  crumbling  action  at  work —
a  cataclysm  of  snow,  ice  and  water !  The  ship  was  steaming
along  within  three  hundred  yards  of  a  cliff,  when  some  loose
drifts  slid  off  from  its  edge,  followed  by  a  slice  of  the  face
extending  for  many  hundreds  of  feet  and  weighing  perhaps
one  million  tons.  It  plunged  into  the  sea  with  a  deep
booming  roar  and  then  rose  majestically,  shedding  great
274


^||       //  Cf^lSSr^    ^^


*^


EMPEKUU   PEXGUIXS  FOLLOW  THE   LEADER  IXTO  THE  SEA  Hurley


E.MPEKOK  PEXdrrxs  .ir.\ipix(;  on   lo   iiik  flol  Hudeii


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

masses  of  snow,  to  roll  onwards  exposing  its  blue,  swaying
bulk  shivering  into  lumpy  masses  which  pushed  towards  the
ship  in  an  ever-widening  field  of  ice.  It  was  a  grand  scene
enacted  in  the  subdued  limelight  of  an  overcast  day.

During  the  afternoon  the  Aurora  changed  her  north-
westerly course  round  to  north-east,winding  through  a  wonder-
ful sea  of  bergs  grounded  in  about  one  hundred  and  twenty
fathoms  of  water.  At  times  we  would  pass  through  narrow
lanes  between  towering  walls  and  emerge  into  a  straight
wide  avenue  along  which  these  mountains  of  ice  were  ranged.
Several  were  rather  remarkable ;  one  for  its  exquisite
series  of  stratification  lines,  another  for  its  fayade  in  stucco,
and  a  third  for  its  overhanging  cornice  fringed  with  slender
icicles.

On  January  31  a  trawling  was  made  in  one  hundred  and
twelve  fathoms.  Half  a  ton  of  life  emptied  on  the  deck
gave  the  biologists  occupation  for  several  days.  Included
in  the  catch  were  a  large  number  of  monstrous  gelatinous
ascidians  or  "  sea-squirts."  Fragments  of  coal  were  once
more  found ;  an  indication  that  coaly  strata  must  be
very  widely  distributed  in  the  Antarctic.

The  pack  was  dense  and  in  massive  array  at  the  extremity
of  Termination  Ice-Tongue.  Davis  drove  the  ship  through
some  of  it  and  entered  an  open  lead  which  ran  like  a  dark
streak  away  to  the  east  amid  ice  which  grew  heavier  and
more  marked  by  the  stress  of  pressure.

Our  time  was  now  limited  and  it  seemed  to  me  that
there  was  little  chance  of  reaching  open  water  by  forcing  a
passage  either  to  the  east  or  north.  We  therefore  turned
on  our  tracks  and  broke  south-west  back  into  the  Davis  Sea,
intending  to  steam  westward  to  the  spot  where  we  had  so
easily  entered  two  weeks  previously.

On  February  4  the  pack  to  the  north  was  beginning  to
thin  out  and  to  look  navigable.  Several  short-cuts  were
taken  across  projecting  "  capes,"  and  then  on  February  5
the  Aurora  entered  a  zone  of  bergs  and  broken  floe.  No  one
slept  well  during  that  night  as  the  ship  bumped  and  ground

275


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD

into  the  ice  which  crashed  and  grated  along  her  stout  sides.
Davis  was  on  watch  for  long  hours,  directing  in  the  crow's-
nest  or  down  on  the  bridge,  and  throughout  the  next  day
we  pushed  on  northwards  towards  the  goal  which  now
meant  so  much  to  us — Australia — Home  !

At  four  o'clock  the  sun  was  glittering  on  the  great  ocean
outside  the  pack-ice.  Many  of  us  climbed  up  in  the  rigging
to  see  the  fair  sight — a  prevision  of  blue  skies  and  the  calm
delights  of  a  land  of  eternal  summer.  Our  work  was
finished,  and  the  good  ship  was  rising  at  last  to  the  long
swell  of  the  southern  seas.

On  February  12,  in  latitude  55°  S,  a  strong  south-wester
drove  behind,  and,  with  all  sails  set,  the  Aurora  made  eight
knots  an  hour.  The  last  iceberg  was  seen  far  away  on  the
eastern  horizon.  Albatrosses  followed  in  our  wake,  accom-
panied by  their  smaller  satellites — Cape  hens,  prions,  Lesson's
and  Wilson  petrels.

Before  leaving  the  ice,  Sandell  and  Bickerton  had  fixed
an  aerial  between  the  fore  and  mizen  masts,  while  the
former  installed  a  wireless  receiving-apparatus  within  the
narrow  limits  of  his  cabin.  There  was  no  space  on  the  ship
to  set  up  the  motor-engine,  dynamos  and  other  instruments
necessary  for  transmitting  messages  over  a  long  distance.

As  the  nights  began  to  darken,  Sandell  listened  eagerly
for  distant  signals,  until  on  February  16,  in  latitude  47°  S,
the  "  calls  "  of  three  ships  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Great
Australian  Bight  were  recognized.  After  this  date  news  was
picked  up  every  night,  and  all  the  items  were  posted  on  a
morning  bulletin  pinned  up  in  the  ward-room.

The  first  real  touch  of  civilization  came  unexpectedly
early  on  the  morning  of  February  21.  A  full-rigged  ship
on  the  southern  horizon  !  It  might  have  been  an  iceberg,
the  sails  flashed  so  white  in  the  morning  sun.  But  onward
it  came  with  a  strong  south-wester,  overhauled  and  passed
us,  signalling  "  Archibald  Russell,  fifty-four  days  out  from
Buenos  Ayres,  bound  for  Cape  Borda."  It  was  too  magical
to  believe.
276


THE  HOMEWARD  CRUISE

On  February  26  we  gazed  on  distant  cliffs  of  rock  and
earth — Kangaroo  Island — and  the  tiny  cluster  of  dwellings
round  the  lighthouse  at  Cape  Borda.  Then  we  entered
St.  Vincent's  Gulf  on  a  clear,  hot  day,  marvelling  at  the
sandy-blue  water,  the  long,  flat  mainland  with  its  clumps
of  trees  and  the  smoke  of  many  steamers.

The  welcome  home — the  voices  of  innumerable  strangers
— ^the  hand-grips  of  many  friends — it  chokes  one — it  cannot
be  uttered  !


277


APPENDICES


APPENDIX  1


J.  K.  Davis

J.  H.  Blair

P.  Gray

C.  P.  de  la  Motte

F.  J.  Gillies


G.  F.  Ainsworth
L.  R.  Blake
H.  Hamilton
C.  A.  Sandell
A.  J.  Sawyer


Dr.  D.  Mawson
Lieut.  R.  Bage

C.  T.  Madigan
Lieut.  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis
Dr.  X.  Mertz
Dr.  A.  L.  McLean
F.  H.  Bickerton
A.  J.  Hodgeman
J.  F.  Hurley
E.  N.  Webb
P.  E.  Correll
J.  G.  Hunter


THE  STAFF

The  Ship's  Officers

Master  of  S.  Y.  Aurora  and  Second-in-
Command  of  the  Expedition.

First  Officer  during  the  later  stages  of  the
Expedition.

Second  Officer.

Third  Officer.

Chief  Engineer.

Macquarie  Island  Party

Leader  :  Meteorologist.

Geologist  and  Cartographer.

Biologist.

Wireless  Operator  and  Mechanic.

Wireless  Operator.

Main  Base  Party

Commander  of  the  Expedition.
Astronomer,  Assistant  Magnetician  and

Recorder  of  Tides.
Meteorologist.

In  charge  of  Greenland  dogs.
In  charge  of  Greenland  dogs.
Chief  Medical  Officer,  Bacteriologist.
In  charge  of  air-tractor  sledge.
Cartographer  and  Sketch  Artist.
Official  Photographer.
Chief  Magnetician.
Mechanic  and  Assistant  Physicist.
Biologist.

281


APPENDIX  I


C.  F.  Laseron
F.  L.  Stillwell
H.  D.  Murphy
W.  H.  Hannam
J.  H.  Close
Dr.  L.  A.  Whetter


Taxidermist  and  Biological  Collector.

Geologist.

In  charge  of  Expedition  stores.

Wireless  Operator  and  Mechanic.

Assistant  Collector.

Surgeon.


F.  Wild

A.  D.  Watson
Dr.  S.  E.  Jones
C.  T.  Harrisson
M.  H.  Moyes
A.  L.  Kennedy
C.  A.  Hoadley

G.  Dovers


Western  Base  Party

Leader.

Geologist.

Medical  Officer.

Biologist.

Meteorologist.

Magnetician.

Geologist.

Cartographer.


In  addition  to  these  were  the  following  gentlemen  who  accom-
panied the  Expedition  for  a  portion  of  the  time  only  or  who  joined
later.


S.  N.  JefTryes
E.  R.  Waite   '

Professor  T.  T.  Flynn

J.  van  Waterschoot  van

der  Gracht
Captain  James  Davis

C.  C.  Eitel

N.  C.  Toucher,  and  later
F.  D.  Fletcher


Wireless  Operator,  who  relieved  W,  H.

Hannam  during  1913.
(Curator,    Canterbury   Museum,    Christ -

church),  Biologist,  first  Sub-Antarctic

cruise  of  Aurora.
(Hobart  University),     Biologist,     second

Sub-Antarctic  cruise  of  Aurora.
Marine   Artist,   second   Antarctic  cruise

of  Aurora.
Whaling    authority,     second    Antarctic

cruise  of  Aurora.
Secretary,    second    Antarctic    cruise    of

Aurora.
Served  in  the  capacity  of   Chief   Officer

on    the    Aurora    during    the    earlier

voyages.


G.  F.   A.INSWORTH,  thirty*  years    of   age,  single,  was   born    in

*  The  ages  refer  to  the  date  of  joining  the  Expedition  and  are  but
approximate.
282


APPENDIX  I

Sydney,  New  South  Wales.  His  services  were  loaned  to  the  ex-
pedition by  the  Commonwealth  Meteorological  Bureau,  Melbourne.
For  a  period  of  two  years  he  acted  as  leader  of  the  Macquarie  Island
Party,  carrying  out  the  duties  of  Meteorologist.  In  the  summer  of
1913-1914  he  visited  the  Antarctic  during  the  final  cruise  of  the
Aurora.

R.  Bage,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate  in
Engineering  of  Melbom-ne  University  and  a  lieutenant  in  the  Royal
Australian  Engineers.  A  member  of  the  Main  Base  Party  (Adelie
Land)  and  leader  of  the  Southern  Sledging  Party,  he  remained  in
the  Antarctic  for  two  years.  During  the  first  year  he  was  in  charge
of  clu'onometers,  astronomical  observations  and  tidal  records,  and
throughout  the  second  year  continued  the  magnetic  work  and  looked
after  stores.

F.  H.  BiCKERTON,  F.R.G.S.,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  single,
was  born  at  Oxford,  England.  Had  studied  Engineering :  joined
the  Expedition  as  Electrical  Engineer  and  Motor  Expert.  A
member  of  the  Main  Base  Party  and  leader  of  the  Western  Sledging
Party,  he  remained  in  the  Antarctic  for  two  years,  during  which  time
he  was  in  charge  of  the  air-tractor  sledge,  and  was  engineer  to
the  wireless  station.  For  a  time,  during  the  second  year,  he  was  in
complete  charge  of  the  wireless  plant.

J.  H.  Blair,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  in  Scot-
land. For  five  years  he  served  with  the  Loch  Line  of  Glasgow  as
apprentice  and  third  mate.  As  second  mate  he  joined  A.  Currie  and
Company,  of  Melbourne,  in  the  Australian-Indian  trade,  reaching  the
rank  of  first  mate,  in  which  capacity  he  acted  during  the  final  Ant-
arctic cruise  of  the  Aurora  in  the  summer  of  1913-14.

L.  R.  Blake,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  in  England,
but  had  lived  for  many  years  in  Queensland  previous  to  joining  the
Expedition.  Before  accompanying  the  Macquarie  Island  Party
as  Geologist  and  Cartographer,  he  obtained  leave  from  the  Geo-
logical Survey  Department,  Brisbane.  He  visited  the  Antarctic
during  the  final  cruise  of  the  Aurora  in  the  summer  of  1913-1914.

J.  H.  Close,  F.R.G.S.,  forty  years  of  age,  married,  was  born  in
Sydney,  New  South  Wales.  During  the  South  African  War  he
saw  active  service  in  Rhodesia,  and  at  the  time  of  the  Expedition's
departure  was  a  teacher  of  physical  culture  at  Sydney.  A  member
of  the  Main  Base  Party  (Adelie  Land)  and  of  several  sledging  parties,
he  spent  two  summers  and  one  winter  in  the  Antarctic.

P.  E.  CoRRELL,  nineteen  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  student
in  Science  of  the  Adelaide  University.     He   joined  the  Expedition

283


APPENDIX  I

as  Mechanician  and  Assistant  Physicist.  He  was  a  member  of  the
Main  Base  Party  accompanying  the  Eastern  Coastal  Party
dm-ing  their  sledging  journey.  He  spent  three  summers  and  one
winter  in  the  Antarctic,  acting  as  colour  photographer  during
the  final  cruise  of  the  Aurora.

J.  K.  Davis,  twenty-eight  years  of  age,  single,  was  master  of  the
Aurora  and  Second-in-Command  of  the  Expedition.  Born  in  Ireland
and  educated  in  England,  he  served  his  apprenticeship  on  the  Liver-
pool-owned sailing-ship,  Celtic  Chief,  obtaining  his  certificate  as
second  mate  before  joining  the  barque  Westland  trading  between
England  and  New  Zealand.  His  next  post  was  that  of  second  officer
on  the  training  ship  Port  Jackson,  following  which  he  joined  Sir
Ernest  Shackleton's  Expedition  (1907-1909)  as  chief  officer  of  the
Nimrod,  acting  subsequently  as  master.  Throughout  the  whole
period  of  the  Australasian  Antarctic  Expedition  (1911-1914)  Captain
J.  K.  Davis  commanded  the  Aurora  during  five  cruises.

G.  DovERS,  twenty-one  years  of  age,  single,  of  Sydney,  New
South  Wales,  was  completing  his  term  for  Licensed  Surveyor  in  the
service  of  the  Commonwealth  Government  when  he  joined  the
Expedition.  He  was  in  the  Antarctic  for  two  summers  and  one
winter,  being  stationed  with  the  Western  Party  (Queen  Mary  Land).
A  member  of  several  sledging  parties,  he  acted  as  Cartographer  to
the  party  which  reached  Gaussberg.

F.  J.  Gillies,  thirty-five  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  at
Cardiff,  Wales.  He  served  his  apprenticeship  as  an  engineer  on  the
steamers  of  John  Shearman  and  Company  and  P.Baker  and  Company
of  Cardiff.  For  six  years  previous  to  joining  the  Expedition  he
was  in  the  Indian  trade.  Throughout  the  five  cruises  of  the  Aurora
between  1911  and  1914  F.  J.  Gillies  was  Chief  Engineer.

P.  Gray,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  and  educated
in  England.  He  served  on  the  Worcester  as  cadet  captain  for  eighteen
months  and  as  apprentice  on  the  Archibald  Russell,  of  Glasgow,  and
in  the  New  Zealand  Shipping  Company.  In  1909  he  entered  the
Peninsula  and  Oriental  Company  and  reached  the  rank  of  third
officer,  joining  the  Australasian  Antarctic  Expedition  as  second
officer  of  the  Aurora.  Throughout  five  cruises,  from  1911  to  1914,
he  served  in  this  capacity.

H.  Hamilton,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  at  Napier,
New  Zealand.  Graduate  of  the  Otago  University.  Besides  being
employed  on  the  New  Zealand  Geological  Survey,  he  acted  as  Ento-
mological Collector  to  the  Dominion  Museum  at  Wellington.  A
member  of  the  Macquarie  Island  Party,  of  which  he  was  the  Bio-
284


APPENDIX  I

legist  for  two  years,  H.  Hamilton  visited  the  Antarctic  during  the
final  cruise  of    he  Aurora  in  the  summer  of  1913-1914.

W.  H.  Hannam,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  single,  was  of  Sydney,
New  South  Wales,  and  joined  the  Expedition  in  charge  of  the  arrange-
ments for  a  wireless  telegraphic  system.  He  was  in  the  Antarctic
at  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  for  two  summers  and  a  winter,  and
was  successful  in  transmitting  wireless  messages  for  a  short  time
during  1912  through  Macquarie  Island  to  Australia,  assistant
magnetition  for  a  time.

C.  T.  Harrisson,  forty-three  years  of  age,  married,  was  born  in
Hobart,  Tasmania.  For  many  years  previous  to  joining  the  Ex-
pedition he  had  done  illustrative  and  artistic  work  and  had  been
engaged  on  a  survey  and  in  botanical  and  other  scientific  observations
on  the  west  coast  of  Tasmania.  Stationed  with  the  Western  Base
(Queen  Mary  Land)  he  acted  as  Biologist  and  Artist,  accompanying
F.  Wild  on  his  main  eastern  journey  and  several  other  sledging
parties.

C.  A.  Hoadley,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
in  Mining  Engineering  of  Melbourne  University.  A  member  of
F.  Wild's  Western  Party  (Queen  Mary  Land),  he  took  part  in  several
sledging  journeys  and  was  Geologist  of  the  party  who  explored
westwards  to  Gaussberg.

A.  J.  Hodgeman,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  at
Adelaide,  South  Australia.  For  four  years  he  was  an  articled  archi-
tect, and  for  five  years  a  draughtsman  in  the  Works  and  Buildings
Department,  Adelaide.  A  member  of  the  Main  Base  Party  (Adelie
Land),  he  took  part  in  several  sledging  journeys,  and  throughout
two  years  in  the  Antarctic  acted  in  the  capacity  of  Cartographer
and  Sketch  Artist,  as  well  as  that  of  Assistant  Meteorologist.

J.  G.  Hunter,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
in  Science  of  Sydney  University,  New  South  Wales.  A  member
of  the  Main  Base  Party  (Adelie  Land)  he  carried  on  the  work  of
Biologist  during  two  summers  and  one  winter  ;  and  in  the  same
capacity  accompanied  the  ^wrora  in  her  final  summer  cruisel911-1914.

J.  F.  Hurley,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  single,  was  of  Sydney,
New  South  Wales.  He  had  been  the  recipient  of  many  amateur
and  professional  awards  for  photographic  work  before  joining  the
Expedition.  At  the  Main  Base  he  obtained  excellent  photo-
graphic and  cinematographic  records  and  was  one  of  the  three
members  of  the  Southern  Sledging  Party.  He  was  also  present  on
the  final  cruise  of  the  Aurora.

S.  N.  Jeffryes,  twenty-seven  years  of  age,  single,  of  Towoomba,

285


APPENDIX  I

Queensland,  was  a  qualified  operator  of  the  Australasian  Wireless
Company.  During  the  second  year  (1913)  he  took  W.  H.  Hannam's
place  in  charge  of  the  wireless  plant,  wintering  at  the  Main  Base
(Adelie  Land).

S.  E.  Jones,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate  in
Medicine  of  Sydney  University,  New  South  Wales.  A  member
and  Medical  Officer  of  F.  Wild's  Western  Base  (Queen  Mary  Land),
he  took  part  in  several  sledging  journeys  during  1912  and  was  leader
of  the  party  who  explored  westward  to  Gaussberg.

A.  L.  Kennedy,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  student
in  Science  of  Adelaide  University,  South  Australia.  Receiving
special  tuition,  he  acted  as  Magnetician  at  the  Western  Base  (Queen
Mary  Land)  during  the  year  1912.  He  was  a  member  of  several
sledging  parties  and  accompanied  F.  Wild  on  his  main  eastern  journey
as  Cartographer.

C.  F.  Laseron,  twenty-five  years  of  age,  single,  had  gained  a
Diploma  in  Geology  at  the  Technical  College,  Sydney,  New  South
Wales,  and  for  some  years  was  Collector  to  the  Technological  Museum.
At  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land),  during  1912,  he  acted  as  Taxidermist
and  general  Collector,  taking  part,  as  well,  in  sledging  journeys  to
the  south  and  east  of  Winter  Quarters.

C.  T.  ]\L^digan,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
in  Science  (Mining  Engineering)  of  Adelaide  University,  South
Australia.  Through  the  courtesy  of  the  Trustees  of  the  Rhodes
Scholarship,  the  necessary  leave  to  accompany  the  Expedition  was
granted  just  as  he  was  on  the  eve  of  continuing  his  studies  at  Oxford
University.  A  member  of  the  Main  Base  Party  (Adelie  Land)  he
acted  as  Meteorologist  for  two  years,  and  during  the  second  year
(1913)  was  also  in  charge  of  the  Greenland  dogs.  An  important
journey  in  the  spring  and  one  to  the  east  in  the  summer  were  made
under  his  leadership,  and  the  Party,  left  in  Adelie  Land  in  1913,
was  to  have  been  under  his  charge,  but  for  my  return.

D.  Mawson,  thirty  years  of  age,  single,  was  the  Organiser  and
Leader  of  the  Australasian  Antarctic  Expedition  and  was,  previous
to  it,  a  member  of  Sir  Ernest  Shackleton's  Antarctic  Ex-
pedition of  1907-1909,  being  one  of  the  party  under  Professor  David
which  reached  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.  A  graduate  in  Science
and  Engineering  of  Sydney  and  Adelaide  Universities,  he  had  filled
for  some  time  the  post  of  Lecturer  in  Mineralogy  and  Petrology  at
the  Adelaide  University.  The  only  survivor  of  a  party  sledging
to  the  east  from  the  Main  Base  in  the  summer  of  1912-1913.

A.  L.  McLean,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
286


APPENDIX  I

in  Arts  and  Medicine  of  Sydney  University,  New  South  Wales.
He  acted  as  Chief  Medical  Officer  at  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  and
carried  out  observations  in  Bacteriology  and  Physiology  during  the
first  year.  In  1913  (the  second  year)  he  was  Biologist,  Ice-Carrier
and  Editor  of  the  Adelie  Blizzard.  He  took  part  in  a  sledging  journey
along  the  eastern  coast  in  the  summer  of  1912-1913.

X.  Mertz,  twenty-eight  years  of  age,  single,  of  Basle,  Switzerland,
was  a  graduate  in  Law  of  the  Universities  of  Leipzic  and  Berne.
Prior  to  joining  the  Expedition  he  had  gained  the  Ski-running
Championship  of  Switzerland  and  was  an  experienced  mountaineer.
At  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  he  was  assisted  by  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis
in  the  care  of  the  Greenland  dogs.  On  January  7,  1913,  during  a
sledging  journey,  he  lost  his  life,  one  hundred  miles  south-east  of
Winter  Quarters.

C.  P.  DE  LA  MoTTE,  nineteen  years  of  age,  single,  of  Bulli,  New
South  Wales,  had  early  training  at  sea  on  the  barque  Northern  Chief
of  New  Zealand,  obtaining  his  certificate  as  second  mate  in  March
1911.  During  the  eight  months  prior  to  joining  the  Expedition
he  served  as  fourth  officer  on  the  S.S.  Warrimoo  of  the  Union
Steamship  Company  of  New  Zealand.  Throughout  the  five  cruises
of  the  Aurora  between  1911  and  1914,  C.  P.  de  la  Motte  was  third
officer  with  the  Ship's  party.

M.  H.  MoYES,  twenty-five  years  of  age,  single,  of  Koolunga,
South  Australia,  was  a  graduate  in  Science  of  Adelaide  University.
With  the  Western  Base  Party  (Queen  Mary  Land)  he  acted  as
Meteorologist  and  took  part  in  several  sledging  journeys  in  the  autumn
and  spring  of  1912.  During  the  summer  of  1912-1913,  through  an
unavoidable  accident,  he  was  left  to  carry  on  work  alone  at  Winter
Quarters  for  a  period  of  nine  weeks.

H.  D.  Murphy,  thirty-two  years  of  age,  single,  of  Melbourne,
one-time  Scholar  in  History  of  Oxford  University.  At  the  outset
he  was  to  have  been  leader  of  a  third  Antarctic  Base  which  was
eventually  amalgamated  with  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land).
Here  he  had  charge  of  the  stores  and  during  the  early  summer
of  1912  was  leader  of  the  Southern  Supporting  Party.

B.  E.  S.  Ninnis,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  single,  was  educated
at  Dulwich,  England,  and  entered  His  Majesty's  Army,  having  a
commission  as  Lieutenant  in  the  Royal  Fusiliers  prior  to  joining
the  Expedition  in  London.  At  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  he
was  assisted  by  X.  Mertz  in  the  care  of  the  Greenland  dogs.  On
December  14,  1912,  while  on  a  sledging  journey,  he  lost  his  life  by
falling  into  a  crevasse  three  hundred  miles  east  of  Winter  Quarters.

287


APPENDIX  I

C.  A.  Sandell,  twenty-five  years  of  age,  single,  of  Surrey,
England,  studied  electrical  engineering  for  some  years  and  then
came  to  Australia  in  1909  and  entered  the  Commonwealth  Branch  of
Telephony.  Having  a  practical  knowledge  of  wireless  telegraphy
he  joined  the  Expedition  as  a  Wireless  Operator  and  Mechanic  and
was  stationed  with  the  Macquarie  Island  Party  for  two  years.  After
the  departure  of  A.  J.  Sawyer  in  August  1913,  he  was  in  complete
charge  of  the  wireless  station.  C.  A.  Sandell  visited  the  Antarctic
during  the  final  cruise  of  the  Aurora  in  the  summer  of  1913-1914.

A.  J.  Sawyer,  twenty-six  years  of  age,  single,  was  born  in  New
Zealand.  Having  had  considerable  experience  in  wireless  tele-
graphy, he  joined  the  Expedition  as  an  operator  from  the  Austra-
lasian Wireless  Company.  At  the  Macquarie  Island  Station  he
was  chief  wireless  until  August  1913,  when  on  account  of  illness
he  returned  to  New  Zealand.

F.  L.  Stillwell,  twenty-three  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
in  Science  of  Melbourne  University,  Victoria.  A  member  of  the
Main  Base  Party  (Adelie  Land)  he  acted  as  Geologist.  F.  L.  Stillwell
was  leader  of  two  sledging  parties  who  did  detail  work  for  about
sixty  miles  along  the  coast  eastward  of  Winter  Quarters.

A.  D.  Watson,  twenty-four  years  of  age,  single,  was  a  graduate
in  Science  of  Sydney  University,  New  South  Wales.  A  member
of  the  Western  Base  Party  (Queen  Mary  Land)  he  acted  as  Geologist.
A.  D.  Watson  took  part  in  several  sledging  journeys,  accompanying
F.  Wild  in  his  main  eastern  trip  during  the  summer  of  1912-1913.

E.  N.  Webb,  twenty-two  years  of  age,  single,  was  an  Associate
of  Civil  Engineering  of  Canterbury  University  College,  and,  for  the
five  months  previous  to  joining  the  Expedition,  carried  out  magnetic
observations  under  the  Carnegie  Institute  of  Washington,  U.S.A.
At  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  E.  N.  Webb  was  Chief  Magnetician,
accompanying  the  Southern  Sledging  Party.

L.  A.  Whetter,  twenty-nine  years  of  age,  single.  He  graduated
at  Otago  University,  New  Zealand,  and  joined  the  Expedition  as
Surgeon,  acting  in  that  capacity  at  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)
during  1912.  He  accompanied  a  sledging  party  which  explored  to
the  westward  of  Winter  Quarters.

F.  Wild,  thirty-eight  years  of  age,  single,  was  Leader  of  the
Western  Base  Party  (Queen  Mary  Land).  He  joined  the  Merchant
Service  in  1889  and  the  Navy  in  1900,  served  on  an  extended  sledge
journey  during  the  National  Antarctic  Expedition  (Capt.  R.  F.
Scott)  of  1901-1904,  and  was  one  of  the  Southern  Party  of  Sir
Ernest  Shackleton's  Expedition  from  1907-1909.  During  the
288


o


/


CI,


■t^c^iu


^^^2^^:^!^


C^(x^-  yVfc^CAA^Z.^


^^w^  X.    ^fc^-^--^


SIGNATURES  OF  MEMBERS  OF  THE  LAND  PARTIES  IN  ANTARCTICA  AND  AT  MACQUABIE  ISLAND

VOL.  II  T  289


APPENDIX  I

Australasian  Expedition  he  opened  up  a  new  tract  of  country —
Queen  Mary  Land.

I  desire  to  make  specia  mention  of  the  Ship's  Party  who  faced
the  rigorous  conditions  of  Antarctica  and  the  stormy  Southern
Ocean,  during  five  separate  voyages,  with  a  cheerfuhiess  and  devotion
to  duty  which  will  always  stand  to  their  lasting  credit.  In  regions
of  heavy  pack-ice  and  sudden  blizzard  winds,  Captain  Davis  piloted
the  Ship  safely  through  many  situations  of  extreme  danger.  In  a
report  to  me  on  the  work  of  the  Ship  he  writes  an  appreciative
note  : —

"  I  wish  to  draw  particular  attention  to  the  loyal  way  in  which
the  officers  and  men  of  the  Aurora  supported  me.  Messrs.  Toucher,
Fletcher,  Blair,  Gray,  de  la  Motte,  and  Gillies,  in  their  respective
positions,  carried  out  the  duties  assigned  to  them  with  ability  and
cheerfulness,  often  under  very  trying  conditions.

"  Mr.  Gillies  not  only  looked  after  the  engines  but  assisted  mate-
rially in  the  deep-sea  work  by  the  invention  of  a  new  form  of  sound-
ing driver  which  was  used  successfully  during  the  various  cruises
of  the  Aurora.

"  The  Chief  Officer  was  in  charge  of  the  stores  and  equipment
of  the  Expedition  on  board  the  vessel,  in  addition  to  his  ordinary
executive  duties.  Messrs.  Toucher,  Fletcher  and  Blair  served  in
this  capacity  on  different  voyages.

"  Mr.  P.  Gray,  as  Second  and  Navigating  Officer,  and  Mr.  C.  P.
de  la  Motte,  as  Third  Officer,  acted  capably  and  thoroughly  through-
out the  Expedition."


290


APPENDIX  11


SCIENTIFIC  WORK

IT  should  be  remarked  that  there  is  no  intention  of  furnishing
anything  more  than  a  suggestion  of  the  general  trend  of  the
scientific  observations  of  the  Expedition.  The  brief  state-
ment made  below  indicates  the  broad  lines  on  which  the  work  was
conducted  and  in  some  cases  the  ground  which  was  actually  covered.
It  may  thus  give  the  general  reader  a  clue  to  the  nature  of  the  scientific
volumes  which  will  serve  to  record  permanently  the  results  amassed
during  a  period  of  more  than  two  years.


Terrestrial  Magnetism

1.  Field  Work,  (a)  Dip  determinations  were  made  at  Macquarie
Island,  on  the  eastern  and  southern  journeys  from  the  Main  Base
(Adelie  Land)  and  on  a  short  journey  from  the  Western  Base  (Queen
Mary  Land).

(6)  Declination  by  theodolite  observations  was  determined  at
Macquarie  Island  and  at  intervals  on  all  sledging  journeys  in  the
Antarctic.

(c)  Rough  observations  of  magnetic  variation  were  made  daily
on  the  Aurora  during  her  five  cruises.

2.  Station  Work.  (a)  Regular  magnetograph  records  were
kept  at  the  Main  Base  (Adelie  Land)  for  a  period  of  eighteen  months.
A  system  of  term  days  for  quick  runs  was  also  followed  ;  Melbourne,
Christchurch,  and  other  stations  co-operating.  In  connexion
with  the  magnetograph  work,  Webb  conducted  regular,  absolute
observations  throughout  the  year  1912.  Bage  continued  the
magnetograph  records  for  a  further  six  months  in  1913,  observed
term  days,  and  took  absolute  observations.

(6)  At  the  Western  Base  (Queen  Mary  Land)  Kennedy  kept  term
days  in  the  winter,  using  a  magnetometer  and  dip-circle.

291


APPENDIX  II


Biology

1.  Station  Collections,  (a)  At  Macquarie  Island,  Hamilton  worked
for  two  years  amongst  a  rich  fauna  and  a  scanty  but  interesting
flora.  Amongst  other  discoveries  a  finch  indigenous  to  Macquarie
Island  was  found.

(6)  In  Adelie  Land,  Hunter,  assisted  by  Laseron,  secured  a  large
biological  collection,  notwithstanding  the  continuous  bad  weather.
Dredgings  from  depths  down  to  fifty  fathoms  were  made  during  the
winter.  The  eggs  of  practically  all  the  flying  birds  known  along
Antarctic  shores  were  obtained,  including  those  of  the  silver-grey
petrel  and  the  Antarctic  petrel,  which  were  not  previously  known  ;
also  a  variety  of  prion,  of  an  um-ecorded  species,  together  with  its
eggs.

(c)  At  the  Western  Base  (Queen  Mary  Land)  eggs  of  the  Ant-
arctic and  other  petrels  were  found,  and  a  large  rookery  of  Emperor
penguins  was  located ;  the  second  on  record.  Harrisson,  working
under  difficulties,  succeeded  in  trapping  some  interesting  fish  on  the
bottom  in  two  hundred  and  fifty  fathoms  of  water.

2.  Ship  Collections. — (a)  A  collection  made  by  Mr.  E.  R.  Waite,
Curator  of  the  Canterbury  Museum,  on  the  first  Sub-Antarctic
cruise.

{b)  A  collection  made  by  Professor  T.  T.  Flynn,  of  Hobart,  on  the
second  Sub-Antarctic  cruise.

(c)  A  collection  made  by  Hunter,  assisted  by  Hamilton,  in  Ant-
arctic waters  during  the  summer  of  1913-1914.  This  comprised
deep-sea  dredgings  at  eleven  stations  in  depths  down  to  one  thousand
eight  hundred  fathoms  and  regular  tow-nettings,  frequently  serial,
to  depths  of  two  hundred  fathoms.  Six  specimens  of  the  rare  Ross
seal  were  secured.  A  large  collection  of  external  and  internal  para-
sites was  made  from  birds,  seals  and  fish.

Geology

(a)  A  geological  examination  of  Macquarie  Island  was  made  by
Blake.  The  older  rocks  were  found  to  be  all  igneous.  The  Island
has  been  overridden  in  comparatively  recent  times  by  an  ice-cap
travelling  from  west  to  east.

(b)  Geological  collections  at  the  Main  Base.  In  Adelie  Land
the  rocky  outcrops  are  metamorphic  sediments  and  gneisses.  In
King  George  V  Land  there  is  a  formation  similar  to  the  Beacon
292


W       o    0     o    <y  >

z
0                 <

9)-]

u

•^      o    o    o  rn  (D

h*        o     o     o  "-'Jh
6q       0)    (0    ^      "^

OJ

o

o
o

I

to       i_

1        1        1        1

0
0-

N

<

0)

E

.^VxxVvsX

"jj

^^NNSSS\

(0

i^Ov\\\\\\

CD

i\Kv\v$vw

■u

i^\\\vV\VV\

0)

^\\\\VvVVV

0

4->

i^VvvvvvvVx

o-

P3

ivv\\\vxvv\\

©

u

XXXxVxxS   >^v\

(U

^B

•oxi

■00
X

^^^^^

UJ

xvvvv^vvv^

o

0-1

(/)^^

NooCvvvvVvv

in

<u+>

-§

^^^

2ii!

^

^^^^^

C  C

O

v\\\\VVVvVV

4^      K\\\V\\\\\\

0

Q)  0)

^      tvVx\\\xVv\V

0-

—  —

&   ^^^

*

(0  (D

0  u

{/D(/)

^    ^^^^

"(olo

^^^^

0

t"-

■

0-

X

^^^^

0

i\\\\\\^

o-

^J

01

W

o

M

o-

^  *^-   ^^

3^    ^"^-o^

V  0-

q

Hi     -^

>  w
0  £


•nl    Ph

w

H
O


w   ■*


o


OS

Ph  H

H  -<  S

a  ^  R

c2  Iz;  f^

a  ^

o  w  w

I-*  I— I
O   H


<  S


CO  ^

c  a

rt  o

^  P


APPENDIX  II

sandstones  and  dolerites  of  the  Ross  Sea,  with  which  carbonaceous
shales  and  coaly  strata  are  associated.

(c)  Stillwell  met  with  a  great  range  of  minerals  and  rocks  in  the
terminal  moraine  near  Winter  Quarters,  Adelie  Land.  Amongst
them  was  red  sandstone  in  abundance,  suggesting  that  the  Beacon
sandstone  formation  extends  also  throughout  Adelie  Land  but  is
hidden  by  the  ice-cap.  A  solitary  stony  meteorite  was  found  by  a
sledging  party  lying  on  the  ice  of  the  plateau.

{d)  In  the  collections  made  by  Watson  and  Hoadley  at  the
Western  Base  (Queen  Mary  Land)  gneisses  and  schists  were  ascer-
tained to  be  the  predominant  types.

(e)  A  collection  of  erratics  was  brought  up  by  the  deep-sea  trawl
in  the  course  of  dredgings  in  Antarctic  waters.

Glaciology

(a)  Observations  of  the  pack-ice,  coastal  glaciers  and  shelf-ice
from  the  Aurora  during  her  three  Antarctic  cruises.

(b)  Observations  of  the  niveous  and  glacial  features  met  with  on
the  sledging  journeys  from  both  Antarctic  bases.

Meteorology

(a)  Two  years'  observations  at  Macquarie  Island  by  Ainsworth.
{b)  Two  years'  observations  in  Adelie  Land  by  Madigan.

(c)  One  year's  observations  in  Queen  Mary  Land  by  Moyes.

(d)  Observations  by  the  Ship  on  each  of  her  five  voyages.

{e)  Observations  during  the  many  sledging  journeys  from  both
Antarctic  Bases.

Bacteriology,  Etc.

In  Adelie  Land,  McLean  carried  out  many  months  of  steady
work  in  Bacteriology,  Haematology  and  Physiology.

Tides

Self-recording  instruments  were  run  at  Macquarie  Island  by
Ainsworth  and  at  Adelie  Land  by  Bage.

Wireless  and  Auroral  Observations

A  very  close  watch  was  kept  upon  auroral  phenomena  with
interesting  results,  especially  in  their  relation  to  the  "  permeability  "
of  (the  ether  to  wireless  waves.
294.


EXAMPLES  OF  AXTARCTIC  MARINE  CRUSTACEANS


fi.  Decapoda — a  bright  red  shrimp  from  870  fathoms,  h.  Isopoda — from  318  fathoms,
c.  Euphaus'acea — a  common  surface-water  form.  d.  Auiphipoda — from  60  fathoms.
e.  Isopoda — from  60  fathoms,  f.  Amphipoda — from  318  fathoms,  g.  Cumacea — from
318  fathoms.  li.  Isopoda  —  from  240  fathoms.  /.  Isopoda  —  from  32.5  fathoms.
/.   Isopoda — from  870  fathoms


c         o  o  o  o  o  o
O      ooooooo

•4->  Oin--<MC\irt(n


Q
->)

X
Pi
<i

iz;
a


APPENDIX  II


Geographical  Results

1.  The  successful  navigation  by  the  Aurora  of  the  Antarctic
pack-ice  in  a  fresh  sphere  of  action,  where  the  conditions  were  prac-
tically unknown,  resulting  in  the  discovery  of  new  lands  and  islands.

2.  Journeys  were  made  over  the  sea-ice  and  on  the  coastal
and  upland  plateau  in  regions  hitherto  unsurveyed.  At  the  Main
Base  (Adelie  Land)  the  journeys  aggregated  two  thousand  four
hundred  miles,  and  at  the  Western  Base  (Queen  Mary  Land)  the
aggregate  was  eight  hundred  miles.  These  figures  do  not  include
depot  journeys,  the  journeys  of  supporting  parties,  or  the  many
miles  of  relay  work.  The  land  was  mapped  in  through  33°  of  longi-
tude, 27°  of  which  were  covered  by  sledging  parties.

3.  The  employment  of  wireless  telegraphy  in  the  fixation  of  a
fundamental  meridian  in  Adelie  Land.

4.  The  mapping  of  Macquarie  Island.

Oceanography

1.  By  soundings  the  fringe  of  the  Antarctic  Continent  as  well  as
the  Continental  Shelf  has  been  indicated  through  55°  of  longitude.

2.  The  configuration  of  the  floor  of  the  ocean  southward  of
Australia  and  between  Macquarie  Island  and  the  Auckland  Islands
has  been  broadly  ascertained.

3.  Much  has  been  done  in  the  matter  of  sea- water  temperatures
and  salinities.


296


<
in


H
H

33


•<
O


9


1X1


H

Oh     '-^

Q


W


?i


S5,


<    1


c

»"

0)

b:

©I

«:

z

s

z

"

u

^

:?

O*

K

b.

Dh    £p

X
O

O


APPENDIX  III

AN  HISTORICAL  SUMMARY*

1775.  James  Cook  circumnavigated  the  Globe  in  high  southern
latitudes,  discovering  the  sub-antarctic  island  of  South  Georgia.
He  was  the  first  to  cross  the  Antarctic  Circle.

1819.  William  Smith,  the  master  of  a  merchant  vessel  trading
between  Montevideo  and  Valparaiso,  discovered  the  South  Shetland
Islands.

1819.  Fabian  Gottlieb  von  Bellingshausen,  despatched  in
command  of  an  Expedition  by  the  Emperor,  Alexander  I  of  Russia,
with  instructions  to  supplement  the  voyage  of  Captain  Cook,  circum-
navigated the  Antarctic  continent  in  high  southern  latitudes.  The
first  discovery  of  land  south  of  the  Antarctic  Circle  was  made  ;
namely,  Peter  I  Island  and  Alexander  I  Land  (also  an  island),  in
the  American  Quadrant  of  Antarctica.

1820.  Nathaniel  Palmer,  master  of  an  American  sealing- vessel,
sighted  new  land  to  the  south  of  the  South  Shetland  Islands.  It
seems  clear  that  he  was  the  first  to  view  what  is  now  known  as
the  Palmer  Archipelago  (1820-21).

1823.  James  Weddell,  a  British  sealer,  sailing  southward  of  the
Atlantic  Ocean,  reached  74°  15'  south  latitude  in  the  American
Quadrant,  establishing  a  "  farthest  south  "  record.

1830.  John  Biscoe,  a  whaling  master  of  the  British  firm  of
Enderby  Brothers,  sailed  on  a  voyage  circumnavigating  the  Antarc-
tic Regions.  Enderby  Land  was  discovered  south  of  the  West
Indian  Ocean  in  the  African  Quadrant  of  Antarctica.  This  was
apparently  a  part  of  the  Antarctic  continent.  New  land  was  also
met  with  to  the  south  of  America  and  charted  as  Graham's  Land,
Biscoe  Island  and  Adelaide  Island.

Kemp,  a  sailing  master  of  Enderby  Brothers,  extended  Biscoe's

*  For  this  compilation  reference  has  been  largely  made  to  Dr.  H.  R.
Mill's  "The  Siege  of  the  South  Pole."  Several  doubtful  voyages  during
the  early  part  of  the  nineteenth  century  have  been  omitted.

297


APPENDIX  III

discoveries  shortly  after  by  the  report  of  land  east  of,  and  adjacent
to,  Enderby  Land.  •

Neither  of  these  discoveries  has  yet  been  proved,  though  Enderby
Land  (Biscoe)  undoubtedly  exists.

1839.  John  Balleny,  another  of  Enderby 's  whaling  captains,
discovered  the  Balleny  Islands  within  the  Antarctic  Circle,  in  the


A  J  HODGEMAN


Note.    This  and  the  two  following  maps  of  the  series  illustrate  land  discoveries  only.    In  cases  where  the
existence  of  land  once  reported  has  since  been  disproved  no  record  at  all  is  shown


Australian  Quadrant  of  Antarctica,  and  gave  a  vague  description
of  an  appearance  of  land  to  the  westward.  This  has  been  charted
on  maps,  without  adequate   evidence,  as  Sabrina  Land.

1837.     Jules  Sebastian  Cesar  Dumont  D'Urville,  was  despatched
298


APPENDIX  III

by  King  Louis  Philippe  of  France  for  the  prosecution  of  scientific
researches  on  a  voyage  round  the  World.  His  cruise  in  the  Antarctic
resulted  in  the  charting  of  Joinville  Island  and  Louis  Philippe  Land
to  the  south  of  America  (American  Quadrant)  and  the  discovery
of  a  portion  of  the  Antarctic  continent,  named  Adelie  Land,  south-
ward of  Australia  (Australian  Quadrant).

1838.  Charles  Wilkes,  United  States  Navy,  in  accordance  with
a  bill  passed  by  Congress,  set  out  on  an  exploring  expedition  to
circumnavigate  the  World.  His  programme  included  the  investiga-
tion of  the  area  of  the  Antarctic  to  the  south  of  Australia — the
Australian  Quadrant.  The  squadron  composing  this  American
expedition  first  visited  the  Antarctic  regions  in  the  American  Quad-
rant, and  then  proceeded  eastward  round  to  the  Australian  Quadrant
from  which,  after  a  long  cruise,  they  returned,  reporting  land  at
frequent  intervals  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Antarctic  Circle  between
longitudes  157°  46'  E.  and  106°  19'  E.  He  shares  with  D'Urville
the  full  honour  of  the  discovery  of  Adelie  Land.  Some  of  the
supposed  landfalls  described  are  now  known  to  be  non-existent.

1839.  James  Clark  Ross  proceeded  south  in  charge  of  a  scientific
expedition  fitted  out  by  the  Admiralty  at  the  instance  of  the  British
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  and  approved  of  by
the  Royal  Society.  His  aim  was  to  circumnavigate  the  Antarctic
regions  and  to  investigate  the  Weddell  Sea.  The  geographical  results
were  fruitful ;  the  Ross  Sea,  the  Admiralty  Range  and  the  Great
Ice  Barrier  were  discovered  and  some  eight  hundred  miles  of  Antarctic
coastline  were  broadly  delineated^

1844.  T.  E.  L.  Moore  was  detailed  by  the  Admiralty  to  supple-
ment the  magnetic  work  of  Ross  and  to  explore  to  the  southward  of
Africa  and  of  the  Indian  Ocean,  but  no  additions  were  made  to
geographical  knowledge.

1872.  Eduard  Dallmann,  whilst  engaged  in  whaling  with  a
German  steamer  to  the  southward  of  America,  added  some  details
to  the  map  of  the  Palmer  Archipelago  but  did  not  go  further  south
than  64°  45'  S.  latitude.

1874.  The  Challenger  scientific  expedition,  under  the  command
of  George  Strong  Nares,  in  the  course  of  their  voyage  from  the  Cape
to  Australia  during  the  circumnavigation  of  the  World  penetrated
within  the  Antarctic  Circle  in  longitude  78°  22'  E.

1892.  A  fleet  of  four  Scottish  whalers  cruised  through  the
north-western  part  of  the  Weddell  Sea.  Scientific  observations  were
made  by  W.  S.  Bruce  and  others,  but  no  geographical  discoveries
were  recorded.

299


APPENDIX  III


1892.  C.  A.  Larsen,  master  of  a  Hamburg  whaler,  added  impor-
tant details  to  the  geography  of  the  American  Quadrant  of  Antarctica
on  the  western  side  of  the  Weddell  Sea.

1894.  Evensen,  master  of  another  Hamburg  whaler,  brought
back  further  information  of  the  American  Quadrant  on  the  Pacific
Ocean  side.

1895.  H.  J.  Bull  organized  a  whaling  venture  and  with  Leonard
Kristensen,  master  of  the  ship,  revisited  the  Ross  Sea  area  where


ANTARCTIC
LAND -DISCOVERIES

PRECEDING     1896


=T-zts?r^     STATUTE  M1LE5


AJ.MODGEMAN


a  landing  was  made  at  Cape  Adare  (Australian  Quadrant).  This
was  the  first  occasion  on  which  any  human  being  had  set  foot  on
the  Antarctic  continent.

1897.     Adrien  de  Gerlache  sailed  from  Belgium  on  a  scientific
300


APPENDIX  III

exploring  expedition  to  the  American  Quadrant.  Important  addi-
tions were  made  to  the  map,  but  the  ship  became  frozen  into  the
pack-ice  and  drifted  about  for  a  whole  year  south  of  the  Antarctic
Circle.  The  members  of  this  expedition  were  the  first  to  experience
an  Antarctic  winter.  Antarctic  exploration  now  entered  upon  a
new  era.

1898.  Carstens  Egeberg  Borchgrevink  led  an  expedition,  fitted
out  by  Sir  George  Newnes  ;  its  objective  being  the  Koss  Sea  area.
Fmrther  details  were  added  to  the  map,  but  the  most  notable  fact
was  that  the  expedition  wintered  at  Cape  Adare,  on  the  mainland
itself.  The  Great  Ross  Barrier  was  determined  to  be  thirty  miles
south  of  the  position  assigned  by  Ross  in  1839.

1898.  Chun  of  Leipsig,  in  charge  of  the  Valdivia  Expedition,
carried  out  oceanographical  researches  far  to  the  south,  in  the
vicinity  of  Enderby  Land  (African  Quadrant),  though  he  did  not
come  within  sight  of  the  continent.

1901.  Robert  Falcon  Scott,  in  command  of  the  Discovery
Expedition,  organised  by  the  Royal  Geographical  Society  and  Royal
Society  with  the  co-operation  of  the  Admiralty,  in  accordance  with
a  scheme  of  international  endeavour,  passed  two  winters  at  the
southern  extremity  of  the  Ross  Sea  and  carried  out  many  successful
sledging  journeys.  Their  main  geographical  achievements  were ;
the  discovery  of  King  Edward  VII  Land ;  several  hundred  miles
of  new  land  on  a  "  farthest  south  "  sledging  journey  to  latitude
82°  17'  S.  ;  the  discovery  of  the  Antarctic  plateau ;  additional
details  and  original  contributions  to  the  geography  of  the  lands  and
islands  of  the  Ross  Sea.

1 901 .  A  German  national  expedition,  led  by  Erich  von  Drygalski,
set  out  for  the  region  south  of  the  Indian  Ocean.  After  a  small
party  had  been  stationed  on  Kerguelen  Island,  the  main  party
proceeded  south  close  to  the  tracks  of  the  Challenger.  They  came
within  sight  of  Antarctic  shores  but  were  frozen  into  the  pack-ice
for  a  whole  year.  Kaiser  Willielm  II  Land  was  discovered  close
to  the  jimction  between  the  Australian  and  African  Quadrants.

1901.  A  Swedish  national  expedition,  planned  and  led  by
Otto  Nordenskjold,  wintered  for  two  years  on  Snow  Hill  Island  in
the  American  Quadrant,  and  did  much  valuable  scientific  work.

1902.  William  Speirs  Bruce  organized  and  led  a  Scottish  expe-
dition to  the  Weddell  Sea,  southward  of  the  Atlantic  Ocean.  The
party  effected  notable  oceanographic  researches  and  wintered  at
the  South  Orkney  Islands,  but  were  foiled  in  their  attempt  to
penetrate  the  pack-ice.     During  the  second  season,  conditions  were

301


APPENDIX  III

more  favourable  and  the  ship  reached  Coats  Land  in  74°  1'  S.
latitude.

1903.  Jean  Charcot  organized  and  led  a  French  expedition  to
tlie  American  Quadrant  and  there  added  many  details  to  the  existing
chart.

1907.  Ernest  Henry  Shackleton  organized  and  led  a  British
expedition  with  the  main  object  of  reaching  the  South  Geographical


A  MAP  OF  THE  ANTARCTIC  REGIONS  AS  KNOWN  AT  THE  PRESENT  DAY


Pole.  His  party  wintered  at  Cape  Royds,  McMurdo  Sound,  and  two
main  sledging  parties  set  out  in  the  early  summer.  E.  H.  Shackleton 's
party  ascended  the  Antarctic  plateau  and  penetrated  to  within
ninety-seven  geographical  miles  of  the  South  Pole,  discovering  new
302


APPENDIX  III

land  beyond  Scott's  "  farthest  south."  T.  W.  Edgeworth  David's
party  reached  the  South  Magnetic  Polar  Area,  filling  in  many  details
of  the  western  coast  of  McMurdo  Sound.

1908.  Jean  Charcot  organized  and  led  a  second  French  expedi-
tion to  extend  the  work  accomphshed  in  1903  in  the  American
Quadrant.  He  was  successful  in  discovering  new  land  still  further
to  the  south.  Loubet,  Fallieres  and  Charcot  Lands,  towards  and
beyond  Alexander  I  Land,  were  added  to  the  map  of  Antarctica.

1910.  Roald  Amundsen  organized  an  expedition  for  scientific
research  in  the  vicinity  of  the  North  Pole  but  changed  his  plans,
eventually  heading  for  the  South  Pole.  The  expedition  wintered
on  the  Ross  Barrier  near  King  Edward  VII  Land,  from  which  point
he  set  out  and  attained  the  South  Geographical  Pole,  mapping  in
new  land  on  the  way.  Another  party  visited  King  Edward  VII
Land.

1910.  Robert  Falcon  Scott  led  a  second  Antarctic  expedition,
the  main  object  of  which  was  to  reach  the  South  Geographical  Pole.
The  principal  party  wintered  near  his  old  winter  quarters  at  Hut
Point,  McMurdo  Sound.  A  second  party  was  landed  at  Cape  Adare.
Scott  reached  the  Pole  soon  after  the  Norwegian  Amundsen,  but
he  and  his  party  perished  on  the  return  journey.  Other  parties
added  details  to  the  map  of  Victoria  Land.  Oates  Land  was  sighted
from  the  ship  to  the  westward  of  Cape  Adare  in  the  Australian
Quadrant.

1910.  A  Japanese  expedition  sailed  to  the  Ross  Sea,  but  on
account  of  the  lateness  of  the  season  was  forced  to  turn  back  without
landing.  The  winter  was  spent  at  Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
Next  year  a  summer  visit  was  made  to  the  South,  but  no  additional
land  discoveries  were  made.

1911.  A  German  expedition,  led  by  Wilhelm  Filchner,  proceeded
to  the  Weddell  Sea  ;  the  South  Pole  being  its  objective.  The  party
succeeded  in  reaching  further  south  in  that  region  than  any  previous
navigators  and  discovered  new  land,  to  be  named  Prince  Luitpold
Land.  They  were  driven  northwards  amongst  the  pack  in  a  blizzard
and  spent  the  winter  frozen  in  south  of  Coats  Land.


303


APPENDIX  IV

GLOSSARY

Oceanography.  The  study  of  the  ocean,  including  the  shape  and
character  of  its  bed,  the  temperature  and  salinity  of  the  water
at  various  depths,  the  force  and  set  of  its  currents,  and  the  nature
of  the  creatures  and  plants  which  haunt  its  successive  zones.

N^ve.  The  compacted  snow  of  a  snow-field  ;  a  stage  in  the  transi-
tion between  soft,  loose  snow  and  glacier-ice.

Sastrugi.  The  waves  caused  by  continuous  winds  blowing  across
the  surface  of  an  expanse  of  snow.  These  waves  vary  in  size
according  to  the  force  and  continuity  of  the  wind  and  the  compact-
ness of  the  snow.  The  word  is  of  Russian  derivation  (from
zastruga  [sing.],  zastrugi  [pi.]  ),  denoting  snow-waves  or  the  irregu-
larities on  the  surface  of  roughly -planed  wood.

Ice-foot.  A  sheath  of  ice  adhering  along  the  shores  of  polar
lands.  The  formation  may  be  composed  of  attached  remnants
of  floe-ice,  frozen  sea-spray  and  drift-snow.

Nunatak.  An  island-like  outcrop  of  rock  projecting  through  a  sheet
of  enveloping  land-ice.

Shelf-ice.  A  thick,  floating,  fresh  water  ice-formation  pushing
out  from  the  land  and  continuous  with  an  extensive  glacier.
Narrow  prolongations  or  peninsulas  of  the  shelf -ice  may  be  referred
to  as  ice-tongues  or  glacier-tongues.

Barrier  is  a  term  which  has  been  rather  loosely  applied  in  the  litera-
ture of  Antarctic  Exploration.  Formerly  it  was  used  to  describe
a  formation,  which  is  mainly  shelf-ice,  Imown  as  the  Great  Ross
Barrier.  Confusion  arose  when  "  Barrier  "  came  to  be  applied
to  the  seaward  ice-cliff  (resting  on  rock)  of  an  extensive  sheet  of
land-ice  and  when  it  was  also  employed  to  designate  a  line  of
consoHdated  pack-ice.  Spelt  with  a  small  "  b  "  the  term  is  a
convenient  one,  so  long  as  it  carries  its  ordinary  meaning  ;  it
seems  unnecessary  to  give  it  a  technical  connotation.

Blizzard.  A  high  wind  at  a  low  temperature,  accompanied  by
drifting,  not  necessarily  falling  snow.

304


APPENDIX  IV

Floe  or  Floe-ice.  The  comparatively  flat,  frozen  surface  of  the  sea
intersected  by  cracks  and  leads  (channels  of  open  water).

Pack  or  Pack-ice  is  a  field  of  loose  ice  originating  in  the  main  from
broken  floe,  to  which  may  be  added  material  from  the  disintegra-
tion of  bergs,  and  bergs  themselves.

Brash  or  Brash-ice.  Small,  floating  fragments  of  ice — the  debris
of  larger  pieces — usually  observed  bordering  a  tract  of  pack-ice.

Bergschrund  has  been  "  freely  rendered  "  in  the  description  of  the
great  cleft  between  the  lower  part  of  the  Denman  Glacier  and
the  Shackleton  Shelf-Ice  (Queen  Mary  Land).  In  a  typical
glacier,  "  the  upper  portion  is  hidden  by  neve  and  often  by  freshly
fallen  snow  and  is  smooth  and  unbroken.  During  the  summer,
when  little  snow  falls,  the  body  of  the  glacier  moves  away  from
the  snow-field  and  a  gaping  crevasse  of  great  depth  is  usually
established,  called  a  Bergschrund,  which  is  sometimes  taken  as  the
upper  limit  of  the  glacier"  (**  Encyclopaedia  Britannica  ").

Sub-Antarctica.  A  general  term  used  to  denote  the  area  of  ocean,
containing  islands  and  encircling  the  Antarctic  continent,  between
the  vicinity  of  the  50th  parallel  of  south  latitude  and  the  confines
of  the  ice-covered  sea.

SSracs  are  wedged  masses  of  icy  pinnacles  which  are  produced  in
the  surface  of  a  glacier  by  dragging  strains  which  operate  on
crevassed  areas.  A  field  of  such  pinnacles,  jammed  together  in
broken  confusion,  is  called  sSrac-ice

The  following  colloquial  words  or  phrases  occurring  in  the  narrative
were  largely  determined  by  general  usage  :  To  depot  =  to  cache
or  to  place  a  stock  of  provisions  in  a  depot ;  drift  =  drift-snow ;
fifty-mile  wind  =  a  wind  of  fifty  miles  an  hour  ;  burberry  =  "  Bur-
berry gabardine "  or  specially  prepared  wind-proof  clothing ;
whirly  (pi.  whirlies)  =  whirlwind  carrying  drift-snow  and  pursuing
a  devious  track  ;  night-watchman  =  night-watch  ;  glaxo  =
"  Glaxo  "  (a  powder  of  dried  milk) ;  primus  =  primus  stove
used  during  sledging  ;  hoosh  =  pemmican  and  plasmon  biscuit
"  porridge  "  ;  tanks  =  canvas  bags  for  holding  sledging  pro-
visions ;  boil-up  =  sledging  meal ;  ramp  =  bank  of  snow  slanting
away  obliquely  on  the  leeward  side  of  an  obstacle  ;  radiant  =  an
appearance  noted  in  clouds  (especially  cirro-stratus)  which  seem
to  radiate  from  a  point  on  the  horizon

The  following  appended  list  may  be  of  biological  interest ;


VOL.  II  U  *  805


APPENDIX  IV


BIRDS

Emperor  penguin

King  penguin

Adelie  penguin

Royal  penguin

Victoria  penguin

Gentoo  or  Rockhopper  penguin

Wandering  albatross

Mollymawk  or  Black-browed
albatross

Sooty  albatross

Giant  petrel  or  nelly

MacCormick's  skua  gull

Southern  skua  gull

Antarctic  petrel

Silver-grey    petrel    or    southern
fulmar

Cape  pigeon

Snow  petrel

Lesson's  petrel

Wilson  petrel

Storm  petrel

Cape  hen

Small  prion  or  whale  bird

Crested  tern

Southern  black-backed  or  Domin-
ican gull

Macquarie  Island  shag

Mutton  bird

Maori  hen  or  "  weka  "


AVES

Aptenodytes  forsteri
Aptenodytes  patagonica
Pygoscelis  adelice
Catarrhactes  schlegeli
Catarrhactes  pachyrynchus
Pygoscelis  papua
Diomedea  exulans

Diomedea  melanophrys
Phoebetria  fuliginosa
Ossifraga  gigantea
Megalestris  maccormicki
Megalestris  antarctica^
Thalassoeca  antarctica

Priocella  glacialoides
Daption  capensis
Pagodroma  nivea
Oestrelata  lessoni
Oceanites  oceanicus
Fregetta  melanogaster
Majaqueus  cequinoctialis
Prion  banksii
Sterna  sp.

Larus  dominicanus
Phalacrocorax  traversi
Puffinus  griseus
Ocydromus  scotti


SEALS


Sea  elephant
Sea-leopard
Weddell  seal
Crab-eater  seal
Ross  seal


PINNIPEDIA

Macrorhinus  leoninus
Stenorhynchus  leptonyx
Leptonychotes  weddelli
Lohodon  carcinophagus
Ommatophoca  rossi


WHALES  AND  DOLPHINS

Rorqual,  finner,  or  blue  whale

Killer  whale

S06


CETACEA


Balaenoptera  sibbaldi
Orca  gladiator


APPENDIX  y

MEDICAL  REPORTS

WESTERN  BASE  (QUEEN  MARY  LAND)
By  S.  E.  Jones,  M.B.,  Ch.M.

THERE  was  a  very  marked  absence  of  serious  illness  during
the  whole  period  of  our  stay  at  the  Base.  After  the  Aurora
left  Adelie  Land  on  January  19,  1912,  for  her  western
cruise,  an  epidemic  of  influenza  broke  out.  It  should  be  noted
that  one  case  occurred  on  the  voyajse  ^v  ^+h  from  Hobart,  and  then
an  interval  of  almost  a  month  occurred  before  the  infection  spread.
An  interesting  feature  of  the  outbreak  was  the  fact  that  the  recovery
of  those  who  were  convalescing,  when  we  arrived  at  Queen  Mary
Land,  was  much  more  rapid  than  was  the  case  with  those  whose
convalescence  occurred  on  the  Ship.

By  the  careful  use  of  snow-goggles  diu'ing  the  summer,  snow-
blindness  was  practically  prevented,  and  such  cases  as  occurred
yielded  quickly  when  zinc  and  cocaine  tablets  were  used  and  the
eyes  obtained  rest.  An  undoubted  factor  in  the  causation  of  snow-
blindness  is  the  strain  caused  by  the  continual  efforts  at  visual
accommodation  made  necessary  on  dull  days  when  the  sun  is  obscured,
and  there  is  a  complete  absence  of  all  light-and-shade  contrast.

Although  frostbites  were  frequent  during  the  winter  months,
immediate  attention  to  the  restoration  of  circulation  prevented  the
occurrence  of  after-effects,  so  that  no  one  suffered  the  loss  of  any
more  tissue  than  the  superficial  epithelium.  The  nose,  ears,  fingers
and  toes  were  the  parts  which  suffered  first.

Our  supplies  of  food  were  excellent  in  point  of  view  of  variety.
Some  tinned  onions  were  responsible  for  several  mild  attacks  of
poisoning,  but  these  were  not  used  after  our  first  experience.  There
was  no  sign  of  scurvy  in  any  form.

Hoadley,   on  one  occasion,   had  an  unpleasant  experience.     He
was  alone  in  the  hut  sleeping  one  night  when  he  awoke  to  find  the

307


APPENDIX  V

room  filled  with  smoke.  On  going  outside  he  found  that  the  chimney
had  become  blocked  with  snow  ;  as  the  fire  was  banked,  the  hut  was
filled  with  the  gases  from  the  imperfect  combustion  of  the  coal.
It  was  three  or  four  days  before  Hoadley  recovered  from  his  ex-
perience, having  marked  symptoms  of  carbon  monoxide  poisoning.

On  my  return  from  the  Western  Depot  journey  I  found  that  Wild
was  suffering  from  an  attack  of  herpes  zoster.  The  illness  came
on  while  he  was  out  sledging,  and  he  suffered  severely  from  the  pain
and  irritation.

Beyond  a  few  cases  of  minor  illness,  and  one  or  two  accidents,
there  was  nothing  of  serious  moment  to  report.


MAIN  BASE  (ADELIE  LAND)
By  a.  L.  McLean,  M.B.,  Ch.M.,  B.A.

Throughout  the  whole  period  of  the  Expedition — from  December
2,  1911,  to  February  26,  1914 — the  health  of  the  expedition  was
remarkably  good.  Undoubtedly  Antarctica  has  a  salubrious  climate,
and  it  is  simply  because  one  returns  in  a  measure  to  the  primitive
that  such  an  ideal  result  is  obtained.

The  first  thing  to  resist  is  the  cold,  and  additional  clothing  is
the  first  and  adequate  means  to  such  an  end.  No  one  needs  to  be
specially  inured  to  a  rigorous  climate.  If  he  has  a  normal  circula-
tion he  immediately  reacts  to  a  new  set  of  temperature  conditions,
and  in  a  few  weeks  may  claim  to  be  acclimatized.  Most  of  the
members  of  the  expedition  were  Australians,  so  that  the  change  of
latitudes  was  rather  abrupt  but  none  the  less  stimulating  and
healthful.

Appetite  for  food  had  suddenly  a  new  piquancy,  hard  manual
work  was  a  pleasure  in  a  novel  and  wonderful  environment,  the
intellect  and  imagination  were  quickened  and  the  whole  man  em-
bodied the  mens  sana  in  cm'pore  sano.  That  is  why  illness  was
practically  unknown  for  more  than  two  years  ;  and,  further,  it  may
be  said  with  partial  truth  that  in  the  high  sense  of  physical  and
mental  fitness  he  possessed  for  a  time,  lies  the  explanation  of  the
proverbial  desire  of  an  explorer  to  return  to  the  ice-lands

Regular  monthly  examinations  of  the  blood  were  made  from
the  date  of  leaving  Hobart  in  December  1911  until  October  1912,
with  an  interval  of  about  nine  weeks  between  the  first  and  second
examinations.  The  haemoglobin  or  red  colouring-matter  went  up
with  a  leap  and  then  very  steadily  increased  in  amount  during  the
308


APPENDIX  V

winter  months  in  Adelie  Land.  The  blood  pressure  became  slightly
more  marked,  the  weight  increased,  but  as  one  might  have  expected,
the  resistance  to  ordinary  civilized  germs  was  decreased.  With
regard  to  weight,  the  maximum  amount  gained  by  a  single  indi-
vidual during  a  period  of  eight  weeks  was  almost  two  stones,  and
every  one  became  heavier  by  as  much  as  ten  pounds.  As  clinical
evidence  of  the  loss  in  immunity  may  be  quoted  the  epidemic  of
influenza  to  which  Dr.  S.  E.  Jones  referred.  As  well,  it  was  noted
that  several  members  had  attacks  of  "  boils  "  during  the  voyage
southward ;  in  Adelie  Land  dm^ing  1912  there  were  two  instances
of  acute  abscesses  on  the  fingers  (whitlows)  and  one  jaw  abscess.  It
appears  as  if,  with  its  new  and  unbounded  energy  of  function,  the
body  attempts  to  throw  ofi  its  waste  products.  Then,  too,  ex-
perimental observations  of  opsonic  index  pointed  towards  the
lowermg  of  resistance,  and,  by  the  way,  it  was  rather  a  remarkable
fact  that  after  a  few  months  in  Adelie  Land,  staphylococcus  pyogenes
aureus — a  common  germ  in  civilization — could  not  be  cultivated
artificially  from  the  throat,  nose  or  skin,  of  six  individuals  from
whom  monthly  bacteriological  cultures  were  made.

Within  the  Hut,  at  a  temperature  which  ranged  from  40°  to  45°  F.,
the  number  of  micro-organisms  continuously  increased,  if  the  ex-
posure of  agar  plates  at  regular  intervals  (by  night)  gave  a  true
indication.  The  organisms  were  staphylocci  albi,  bacilli,  yeasts,  and
moulds  ;  the  latter  overgrowing  the  plate  after  it  had  been  for
forty-eight  hours  in  the  incubator.

Frostbites  were  common,  but,  perhaps  for  that  reason,  were  not
regarded  seriously.  No  one  suffered  permanent  harm  from  being
frost-bitten,  though  in  several  cases  rather  extensive  bhsters  formed
and  nails  and  skin  were  lost.

Whilst  the  Hut  was  being  built,  minor  casualties  often  occurred  ;
the  common  remedy  being  to  cover  the  injm'cd  part  with  a  small
piece  of  gauze  surrounded  by  adhesive  tape ;  for  open  wounds  will
not  heal  when  exposed  to  the  cold.  The  Greenland  dogs  had  small
accidents  and  ailments  which  often  required  treatment.

On  sledging  journeys  snow-blindness  was  an  affection  which
sooner  or  later  caught  everyone  in  an  unguarded  moment.  That
moment  was  when  he  ceased  to  use  goggles  if  the  light  were  at  all
trying  to  his  eyes.  Prevention  came  first,  and  then  the  "  zinc  and
cocaine  "  cure.

Adehe  Land  can  only  be  regarded  as  an  intolerable  country  in
which  to  live,  owing  to  the  never-ceasing  winds.  Usage  and  necessity
helped  one  to  regard  the  weather  in  the  best  possible  light ;  for  the

309


APPENDIX  V

sake  of  a  few  hours  of  calm  which  might  be  expected  to  occasionally
intervene  between  the  long  spells  of  the  blizzards.  It  is,  therefore,
with  regret  and  some  diffidence  that  I  speak  of  the  illness  of  Mr.
S.  N.  Jeffryes,  who  took  up  so  conscientiously  the  duties  of  wireless
operator  during  the  second  year  (1913) ;  but  upon  whom  the
monotony  of  a  troglodytic  winter  life  made  itself  felt.  It  is  my
hope  that  he  is  fast  recovering  his  former  vigour  and  enthusiasm.*
So  many  miles  of  sledging  were  done  at  both  Antarctic  Bases
in  a  climate  which  is  surely  without  a  parallel  in  the  history  of  polar
travelling,  the  Ship  was  so  often  in  jeopardy  during  her  three  main
cruises  to  the  South,  that  we  feel  the  meagre  comment  should  be
made  on  our  providential  return  to  civilization  with  the  loss  of  two
comrades  whose  memory  will  ever  be  imperishable  to  each  one  of  us.

*  With  the  advent  of  summer,  Jeffryes  became  normal,  but  unfortunately
suffered  a  temporary  relapse  upon  his  return  to  Australia. — ^D.  M.


310


APPENDIX  YI

FINANCE

A  GENERAL  reference  was  made  to  the  finanees  of  the
expedition  in  the  Introduction.  Here  is  an  extended  state-
ment which,  more  fully  amplified  with  a  detailed  list  of
donations,  will  be  again  published  when  additional  funds  have  been
raised  to  pay  off  the  debit  balance  and  establish  equilibrium.

GRANTS  AND  DONATIONS

Australia,  January  1911 :  £

Australasian  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  £1000  ;
R,  Barr  Smith  (South  Australia),  £1000 ;  Hugh  Denison
(Sydney),  £1000;  Samuel  Hordern  (Sydney),  £1000  (subse-
quently increased  to  £2500)  ......      4,000

London,  June  1911 :

S.  Hordern  (Sydney),  £1500  (second  donation)  ;  Roderick  Murchison
(Melbourne),  £1000  ;  W.  A.  Horn  (South  Australia),  £1000  ;
Lord  Strathcona,  £1000  ;  Eugene  Sandow,  £1050  ;  Imperial
Government,  £2000 ;  Royal  Geographical  Society,  £500 ;
Lionel  Robinson  (Sydney),  £250  ;  C.  D.  MackeUar,  £150  ;  G.  P.
Doolette,  £150;  G.  Buckley,  £150;  Lord  Denman,  £100;
Madame  Melba  (Melbourne),  £100  ;  S.  Y.  Buchanan,  £100  (later
increased  to  £200) ;  Daily  Mail,  £100  ;  Messrs.  Bulhvants  £100,
&c.,  aggregating  an  additional  £593       .....      9,843

Australia,  October  1911 :

Sydney  :   Government  grant,  £7000  ;   collected  by  Pro-         £
fessor  David,  £50  ;   Sydney  Morning  Herald,  £100  ;
Professor  David's  own  donation  and  lecture  pro-
ceeds, £100 7,250

Melbourne :    Government  grant,  £6000  ;    collected  by

Professor  Masson,  £70 6,070

Adelaide  :  Government  grant,  £5000  ;  collected  by  Mr.
Piper,  £250  (including  Angus  £100,  Simpson  £85,
Scarfe£50) 5,250

Hobart :  Government  grant,  £500  ;  collected,  £55  .  555

Commonwealth  grant  ......        5,000

24,125


Carried  forward  ....    37,968

311


APPENDIX  VI

£

London,  1913:  Brought  forward     .         .    37,968

Sir  Lucas  Tooth,  £1000  (Sydney)  ;  Imperial  Treasury,  £1000  ;  Royal
Geographical  Society,  £100  ;  S.  Y.  Buchanan,  £100  ;  Lady
Scott,  £100  ;  Commander  Evans,  £100  ;  other  members  of
Scott  Expedition  and  general  subscriptions,  £227    .         .         .      2,627

Australia,  1913:

Commonwealth  grant,  £5000  ;  collected  by  Professor  David  (ap-
proximately), £50 5,050

Australia,  1914 :

Collected  by  Professor  Masson  (approximately),   £80  ;    G.  J.  R.

Murray  (Adelaide),  £100  ;  Su-  Samuel  Way,  £50      .  .  .         230

Collected  in  London,  1914 10


Total  moneys  donated     £45,885

Assets  Realized  and  Added  to  the  Fund:

Sale  of  photos  and  newspaper  articles,  £490  ;  sale  of  ship  £  £


and  materials,  £3699  ;  lectures,  films,  &c.;

,  £726      .

4,915

Bills  Owing

.

6,932

5,932

Assets  to  be  Realized:

p

In  hand 560

Owing 340

Anticipated  sale  of  gear      .....     570

Debit  balance    ....
Total  cost  *  of  Expedition  .

1,470

£4,462

£56,732

There  is  therefore  a  deficit  of  £4462  to  be  made  up  by  the  royalty
on  the  sale  of  the  book,  lectures,  donations,  &c.,  and  the  cost  of  the
publication  of  the  scientific  results,  which  will  be  approximately
£8000,  has  yet  to  be  defrayed.

*  An  estimate  of  the  cost  of  the  expedition  should  also  take  account
of  donations  in  kind,  which,  as  can  be  gathered,  were  numerous.  Facilities
offered  by  harbour  boards  and  valuable  assistance  extended  in  the  matter
of  docking  and  repairing  the  Aurora,  particularly  in  the  case  of  the  State
of  Victoria,  and  to  a  less  extent  in  New  South  Wales.

Then  there  were  valuable  contributions  of  coal,  particularly  by  Mr,  J.
Brown  of  Newcastle  (N.S.W.),  Mr,  H.  D.  Murphy  (Melbourne),  and  the
Lithgow  CoUieries  Company,


312


APPENDIX  VII

EQUIPMENT

Clothing

WITH  regard  to  the  clothing,  the  main  bulk  was  of  woollen
material  as  supplied  by  Jaeger  of  London.  This  firm
is  unexcelled  in  the  production  of  camel's-hair  garments
and  has  supplied  most  polar  expeditions  of  recent  years  with  under-
clothing, gloves,  caps,  and  the  like.  From  the  same  firm  we  also
secured  heavy  ski-boots,  finnesko-crampons,  and  the  blankets  which
were  used  at  Winter  Quarters  at  both  Antarctic  Bases.  Some  of  the
Jaeger  woollens  were  damaged  by  sea  water  on  the  voyage  from
London  to  Australia  and  were  replaced  by  Eagley  goods  ;  an  Aus-
tralian brand,  which  proved  very  satisfactory.  The  Ship's  Party
were  outfitted  with  Kaipoi  woollens  (New  Zealand).

Outer  garments  were  made  up  to  our  design  from  Jaeger  fleece
by  tailors  in  Hobart.  The  suit  consisted  of  a  single  garment,  to  be
worn  with  combination  underclothing,  and  was  calculated  to  meet
the  requirements  of  a  severe  climate.

An  over-suit  of  wind-proof  material,  which  may  be  worn  when
required,  is  a  necessary  adjunct  to  woollen  clothing.  Such  a  suit
should  have  the  additional  properties  of  being  light,  strong,  not
readily  absorbing  moisture,  and  not  affected  by  the  cold.  Burberry
gabardine  was  found  to  possess  all  these  properties,  and  two  com-
plete suits  were  made  up  for  each  man.  One  suit  consisted  of  three
pieces,  whilst  the  other  was  made  of  two  ;  the  blouse-jacket  and
helmet  of  the  latter  being  combined.

Furs,  which  were  obtained  from  Norway,  were  restricted  to
sleeping-bags,  finnesko  or  fur -boots,  and  wolfskin  mitts  (Lapland).

The  outfit  of  clothing  for  the  party  at  Macquarie  Island  and
on  the  Ship,  respectively,  differed  from  that  used  in  the  Antarctic.
Warmer  temperatures  and  wet  conditions  had  to  be  taken  into
account,  and  so  rubber  boots,  oilskins,  and  rubberized  materials
were  provided  as  outer  coverings.

313


APPENDIX  VII


Food


The  food-stuffs  were  selected  with  at  least  as  much  consideration
as  was  given  to  any  of  the  other  requisites.  The  successful  work
of  an  expedition  depends  on  the  health  of  the  men  who  form  its
members,  and  good  and  suitable  food  reduces  to  a  minimum  the
danger  of  scurvy  ;  a  scourge  which  has  marred  many  polar  enter-
prises. Thus  our  provisioning  was  arranged  with  care  and  as  a
result  of  my  previous  experience  in  the  Antarctic  with  Sir  Ernest
Shackleton's  Expedition.

A  summary  which  may  be  of  possible  use  to  future  expeditions
is  appended  below  :

In  the  matter  of  canned  meats  we  had  some  six  tons  of  the  ex-
cellent Australian  article  supplied  by  the  Sydney  Meat  Preserving
Company,  Ramornie  Meat  Company  (N.S.W.),  Baynes  Brothers
(Brisbane),  and  the  Border  (rabbit)  Preserving  Company  of  South
Australia.  For  use  on  the  Ship  three  tons  of  salt  beef  and  pork
served  to  replenish  the  "  harness  cask,"  largely  obtained  in  Melbourne
from  Cook  and  Sons.

For  a  ton  of  sauces  and  pickles  we  were  indebted  to  Brand  and
Company  (London)  and  to  Mason  and  Company  (London).

Of  course  fresh  meat  was  consumed  as  far  as  possible  ;  a  number
of  live  sheep  being  taken  by  the  Aurora  on  each  cruise.  Some  of
these  were  killed  and  dressed  after  reaching  60°  south  latitude  and
supplied  our  two  Antarctic  Bases  with  the  luxury  of  fresh  mutton
about  once  a  week  throughout  a  year.

One  ton  of  preserved  suet  came  from  the  firms  of  Hugon  (Man-
chester) and  Conrad  (Adelaide).

Almost  all  our  bacon  and  ham,  amounting  to  well  over  one  ton,
was  of  the  Pineapple  Brand  (Sydney),  and  to  the  firm  which  supplied
them  we  are  indebted  alike  for  the  quality  of  its  goods  and  for  its
generosity.

Soups  in  endless  variety,  totalling  two  tons,  came  chiefly  from
the  Flemington  Meat  Preserving  Company  (Melbourne).     \^  ^  ..

Fours  tons  of  canned  fish  were  supplied  by  C.  &  E.  Morton
(London).  *

Variety  in  vegetables  was  considered  important.  We  decided
to  reduce  the  amount  of  dried  vegetables  in  favour  of  canned  vegeta-
bles. About  six  and  a  half  tons  of  the  latter  in  addition  to  one  ton
of  canned  potatoes  were  consumed  ;  from  Laver  Brothers  (Melbourne)
and  Heinz  (Pittsburgh).  There  were  one  and  a  half  tons  of  dried
vegetables.  In  addition,  large  quantities  of  fresh  potatoes  and
314


APPENDIX  VII

other  vegetables  were  regularly  carried  by  the  Aurora,  and  many
bags  of  new  and  old  potatoes  were  landed  at  the  Main  Base.  In
the  frozen  condition,  the  former  kept  satisfactorily,  though  they
were  somewhat  sodden  when  thawed.  The  old  potatoes,  on  the
other  hand,  became  black  and  useless,  partly  owing  to  the  com-
paratively high  temperature  of  the  ship's  hold,  and  in  part  to  the
warmth  of  the  sun  during  the  first  few  weeks  in  Adelie  Land.

Canned  fruits,  to  the  extent  of  five  tons,  were  supplied  by  Jones
Brothers  (Hobart)  and  Laver  Brothers  (Melbourne).  This  stock
was  eked  out  by  some  two  and  a  half  tons  of  dried  fruits,  chiefly
from  South  Australia.

The  management  of  Hartley  (London)  presented  us  with  two
tons  of  jam,  and  James  Keiller  and  Son  (London)  with  one  ton  of
marmalade.

Of  the  twelve  tons  of  sugar  and  half  a  ton  of  sjTup  consumed,  all
were  generously  donated  by  the  Colonial  Sugar  Refining  Company
(Sydney).

For  milk  we  were  provided  with  two  tons  of  Glaxo  (a  dry  powder)
which  was  used  at  the  land  bases,  and  a  ton  and  a  half  of  Nestle's
condensed  variety  for  use  on  the  ship.

Three  tons  of  cereal  meals,  largely  from  Parsons  (Sydney),  were
consumed.

As  one  might  have  expected,  the  amount  of  flour  used  was
enormous.  In  the  thirteen  tons  of  this  commodity  from  Colman
(London)  there  were  three  varieties,  self-rising,  plain,  and  wheat-
meal  flour,  encased  in  stout  metal  linings  within  strong,  well-finished
cases  of  a  convenient  size.  Until  required,  the  cases  of  flour  were
used  to  solidify  the  break- wind  on  the  southern  side  of  the  Hut.

Bird  and  Company  (Birmingham)  more  than  satisfied  our  needs
in  the  matter  of  baking  powder,  custard  powder,  jelly  crystals,  and
the  like.

There  was  over  half  a  ton  of  fancy  biscuits  of  excellent  quality
and  great  variety,  for  which  we  were  indebted  to  Jacob  and  Company
(Dublin),  Arnott  Brothers  (Sydney),  and  Patria  Biscuit  Fabriek
(Amsterdam).  "Hardtack,"  the  name  by  which  a  plain  wholemeal
biscuit  of  good  quality,  made  by  Swallow  and  Ariell  (Melbourne)
was  known,  constituted  the  greater  part  of  the  remaining  two  and
a  half  tons  of  ordinary  biscuits.  "  Hardtack  "  was  much  appre-
ciated as  a  change  from  the  usual  "  staff  of  life  " — soda  bread.

For  sledging  we  had  secured  one  ton  of  biscuits  specially  pre-
pared by  the  Plasmon  Company  (London)  containing  30  per  cent,  of
plasmon.     These,  together  with  one  ton  of  pemmican  and  half  a

315


APPENDIX  VII

ton  of  emergency  ration  prepared  by  the  Bovril  Company  (London),
are  specially  referred  to  in  the  chapter  on  sledging  equipment.

Butter  was  an  important  item  ;  the  large  stock  of  two  and  a  half
tons  coming  from  the  Colac  Danying  Company  (Melbourne).  The
butter  was  taken  fresh  in  fifty-six  lb.  blocks,  packed  in  the  usual
export  cases.  On  the  Aurora  it  was  carried  as  deck-cargo,  and  at
the  Main  Base  was  stacked  in  the  open  air  on  the  southern  side  of
the  Hut.  At  the  end  of  the  second  year  (1913)  it  was  still  quite
good  ;  a  fact  which  speaks  well  for  the  climate  as  a  refrigerator.  Of
Australian  cheese  we  used  half  a  ton,  and  this  was  supplied  in
forty-pound  blocks.

The  firm  of  Messrs.  Cadbmy,  well  known  for  their  cocoa  and
eating  chocolate,  supplied  us  with  these  commodities,  and  receive
om*  unqualified  praise  for  the  standard  of  the  articles  and  the  way
in  which  they  were  packed.  The  total  consumption  was  one  ton
of  cocoa  and  half  a  ton  of  chocolate.

The  three-quarters  of  a  ton  of  tea  was  donated  by  "  Te  Sol  "
(Guernsey)  and  Griffiths  Brothers  (Melbourne).  In  both  cases  the
articles  were  well  packed  and  much  appreciated.  Half  a  ton  of
coffee  was  used,  partly  supplied  from  London  and  partly  donated
by  Griffiths  Brothers.

Rose's  (London)  lime  juice,  as  an  antiscorbutic,  was  mainly
reserved  for  consumption  on  the  Ship.  This  lime  juice  was  much
in  favour  as  a  beverage.

Other  supplies,  taken  in  bulk,  and  for  which  we  are  indebted
to  the  manufacturers,  are  :  one  ton  of  Cerebos  Salt,  half  a  ton  of
Castle  salt,  one  ton  of  Sunlight  Soap,  our  complete  requirements  in
toilet  soap  from  Pears,  candles  from  Price,  matches  from  Bryant  and
May  including  special  sledging  vestas,  and  dried  milk  from  the
Trufood  Company.

Sweets,  which  were  used  for  dessert  and  on  special  occasions,
were  presented  by  the  firms  of  Fuller  and  Batger  of  London,  and
by  Farrah  of  Harrogate,  &e.  There  were  also  small  quantities
of  aerated  waters,  ales,  wines,  and  whisky  for  each  Base.*  At  the
Main  Base,  at  least,  there  was  no  demand  for  whisky  until  penguin
omelettes  became  fashionable.

The  smokers  were  well  provided  for  by  a  generous  donation
of  Capstan  tobaccos,  cigarettes  and  cigars  from  the  British  Ameri-
can Tobacco  Company  in  London.  At  a  later  date,  when  our
Macquarie  Island  party  was  formed,  the  Sydney  branch  of  the
same  firm  met  our  added  needs  with  the  same  generosity.

*  Donated  by  Schweppes,  Kopke,  Burgoyne,  and  others.
31G


APPENDIX  VII

There  are  many  other  items  which  have  not  yet  found  a  place
in  this  summary  which  cannot  be  acknowledged  severally,  but  for
which  we  are  none  the  less  grateful.  Mention  is  made  of  the  following  :
Horlick's  Malted  Milk,  Neave's  Health  Diet,  Brown  and  Poison's
Cornflour,  International  Plasmon  Company's  Plasmon  chocolate
and  Plasmon  powder,  Bovril  and  lime  juice  nodules  manufactured
by  Bovril  Limited,  Colman's  Mustard  and  Groats,  Flemington
Meat  Company's  desiccated  soups,  Seager's  meats,  Nestle's  nut-
milk  chocolate,  Escoffier's  soups,  &c.

The  cooking  range  which  served  us  well  for  two  years  in  the
Hut  at  Adelie  Land  was  from  J.  Smith  and  Wellstood  (London) ;
others  were  presented  by  Metters  (Adelaide).

The  total  supply  of  foods  purchased  and  donated  aggregated
quite  one  hundred  tons,  exclusive  of  packing.  Much  of  this  was
assembled  in  London.  In  Australia  the  Government  Produce
Department  of  Adelaide  rendered  valuable  assistance.


Table  of  Food-Supplies  for  a  Twelve-Man  Base

The  following  are  the  food  requirements  for  a  party  of  twelve
men  wintering  in  the  Antarctic.  It  is  our  own  store  list,  with
slight  modifications  where  these  are  found  desirable.  The  figures
are  based  on  the  supposition  that  unlimited  quantities  of  seal  and
penguin  meat  can  be  had  on  the  spot,  and,  furthermore,  are
ample  for  a  second  year's  requirements  should  the  party  be
unavoidably  detained.  The  fare  during  the  second  year  might  be
somewhat  less  varied,  but  would  otherwise  be  sufficient.  Health
was,  of  course,  the  first  consideration  in  this  selection,  but  economy
was  also  studied.     The  quantities  are  stated  in  pounds  weight.

Meats,  tinned — Corned  beef,  216  ;  roast  beef,  72  ;  roast  mutton,  lbs.
72  ;  boiled  mutton,  72  ;  Irish  stew,  216  ;  assorted  meats,  168,
including  mutton  cutlets,  haricot  mutton,  ox  tail,  ox  tongue,
sausages,  and  brawn  ;  sheep's  tongues,  288  ;  special  meats,  192,
including  rabbit,  hare,  duck,  fowl,  and  turkey  ....  1296
Live  sheep — 16  sheep  to  be  dressed  south  of  60°  S.  latitude  (weight
not  included)         ....  .....

Suet,  tinned — 400 400

Bacon  and  Ham — Bacon  in  sides,  packed  in  salt,  250  ;  ham,  250         500
Fish,  tinned — Salmon,  360  ;    haddocks,   96  ;    kippered  herrings,
216  ;  herrings  in  tomato  sauce,  72  ;  fresh  herrings,  72  ;  sardines,
300  ;  cods'  roe,  curried  prawns,  &c.,  72  .  .  .  .  .1188

Soups,  assorted  tinned,  1152     .         .         .         .         .         .         .1152

317


APPENDIX  VII

lbs.

Vegetables,  fresh,  in  wooden  cases — new  potatoes,  1200 ;  onions,  360       1560

Tinned — potatoes,  864  ;    onions,  216  ;    peas,  450  ;    Freneh

beans,   450  ;    spinach,   860  ;    cabbage,   144  ;    beetroot,   288  ;

carrots,  288  ;   parsnips,  144  ;  turnips,  108  ;  celery,  144  ;  leeks,

72  ;    champignons,  144  ;  Boston  baked  beans,  144  ;  tomatoes,

288 3240

Cereals  and  Dried  Vegetables,  &c. — Split   peas,  112;    lentils,  56j
marro^vfat  peas,  5Q  ;  haricot  beans,  56  ;  barley,  72  ;  rice,  252  ;
tapioca,  144  ;    semolina,  56  ;]  macaroni,  56  ;    rolled  oats,  648  ;
cornflour,  156       .........        1664

Flour,  including  plain,  wholemeal,  and  self-rising         .  .  .       4480

Biscuits,  &c. — Plasmon  wholemeal,  1344  ;    plain  wholemeal,  560  ;

assorted  SAvect,  560  ;  cake  tinned,  224  ;  plum  pudding,  224         .       1712
Fruit,  tinned  in  syrup — peaches,  288  ;    pears,  288  ;    plums,  288  ;
apricots,     288;    pineapples,    288;    apples,    288;    gooseberries,
216 ;    cherries,    216 ;    mulberries,    48 ;    strawberries,    48 ;   red
currants,  48  ;   black  currants,  48  ;   raspberries,  48  .  .  .       2400

Dried  fruits — Prunes,  112  ;   apples,  112  ;  peaches,  56  ;  nectarines,
56  ;    apricots,   56  ;    raisins  seeded,  224  ;    currants,   112  ;    figs,

224  ;  dates,  112  ;  candied  peel,  56 1120

Sweets,  (&c. — Eating  chocolate  (chiefly  for  sledging)  504  ;  assorted

sweets,  168  ;  crystallized  fruits,  56  ;  assorted  nuts,  84        .  .         812

3Iilk—as  dried  powder,  2400 2400

Butter — in  56  lb.  export  cases,  1456  ......       1456

Cheese — in  original  blocks  or  tins,  240         .....         240

Cocoa,  Tea,  and  Coffee— Cocoa,  576  ;  tea,  288  ;  coffee,  288  .  .       1152

Sugar,  Jam,   &c. — Sugar,   3584  ;    jam,   1456  ;    marmalade,   448  ;

honey,  576 ;  syrup,  288 6352

Sauces,  Pickles,  &c. — ^Tomato  sauce,  180  ;   Worcester  sauce,  135  ;
sweet  pickles,  162  ;   mango  chutney,  81  ;   assorted  pickles  (first

quality)  216  ;  vinegar,  210 984

Cooking  requisites — Baking  powder  (in  addition  to  that  in  self-
rising  flour)  56  ;  sodium  bicarbonate,  1  ;  ground  mixed  spice,  3  ;
ground  ginger,  4 ;  whole  cloves,  1  ;  nutmegs,  2 ;  assorted
essences,  10  ;  desiccated  cocoanut,  12  ;  mixed  dried  herbs,  2  ;
dried  mint,  6  ;  dried  parsley,  1  ;  onion  powder,  9 ;  curry
powder,  30  ;    mustard,  30 ;    black  pepper,  12  ;    white  pepper,

12  ;  table  salt,  784 975

Soapf  &c. — Soap,  448 ;  soda,  168       .  .  .  .  .  .         616

(16  tons  approx.)         lbs.  35,699

Note.  These  weights  are  exclusive  of  packing.  When  high
southern  latitudes  can  be  reached  within  three  weeks,  fresh  eggs
may  be  taken  with  advantage,  preferably  unfertilized,  but  care
should  be  taken  to  freeze  them  as  soon  as  possible,  and  not  to  allow
them  to  thaw  again  until  required  for  use.  It  is  advisable  to  take
318


APPENDIX  VII

small  quantities  of  whisky,  ale,  wines,  and  lime  juice.  Matches,
candles,  soap,  and  other  toilet  requirements,  kerosene  and  fuel  are  not
reckoned  with  here,  appearing  in  a  more  general  stores'  list.  Certain
medical  comforts,  such  as  malted  milk  and  plasmon,  may  also  be
included.

Medical  Equipment

The  medical  equipment  consisted  of  a  complete  outfit  of  Burroughs
and  Wellcome 's  drugs,  dressings,  &c.,  and  Allen  and  Hanbury's
surgical  instruments.  Sets,  varying  in  character  with  particular
requirements,  were  made  up  for  the  Ship  and  for  each  of  the  land
parties.  Contained  within  the  fifty-five  boxes  was  a  wonderful
assortment  of  everything  which  could  possibly  have  been  required
on  a  polar  expedition.  There  was  in  addition  a  set  of  Burroughs
and  Wellcome's  medicines  for  the  treatment  of  the  dogs.

Scientific  Equipment

The  scope  of  our  projected  scientific  work  necessitated  extensive
purchases,  and  these  were  amplified  by  loans  from  many  scientific
bodies  and  individuals.

Instruments  for  surveying  and  navigation  were  loaned  by  the
Royal  Geographical  Society  and  by  the  Admiralty,  while  many
theodolites,  chronometers,  and  half-chronometer  watches  were
manufactured  to  order.

An  assortment  of  oceanographical  gear  was  generously  supplied
through  H.S.H.  The  Prince  of  Monaco,  from  the  Institut  Oceano-
graphique  of  Monaco.  Dr.  W.  S.  Bruce  made  similar  donations  and
supervised  the  construction  of  our  largest  deep-sea  dredge.  The
three -thousand-fathom  tapered  steel  cables  and  mountings,  designed
to  work  the  deep-water  dredges,  were  supplied  by  Messrs.  Bullivant.
Appliances  were  also  loaned  by  Mr.  J.  T.  Buchanan  of  the  Challenger
Expedition  and  by  the  Commonwealth  Fisheries  Department.  The
self-recording  tide-gauges  we  employed  were  the  property  of  the
New  South  Wales  Government,  obtained  through  Mr.  G.  Halligan.

The  taxidermists'  requirements,  and  other  necessaries  for  the
preservation  of  zoological  specimens,  were  for  the  most  part  pur-
chased, but  great  assistance  was  rendered  through  Professor  Baldwin-
Spencer  by  the  National  Museum  of  Melbourne  and  by  the  South
Australian  Museum,  through  the  offices  of  Professor  Stirling.  Articles
of  equipment  for  botanical  work  were  loaned  by  Mr.  J.  H.  Maiden,
Director  of  the  Botanical  Gardens,  Sydney.

A  supply  of  heavy  cameras  for  base-station  work  and  light

319


APPENDIX  VII

cameras  for  sledging  was  purchased  ;  our  stock  being  amplified
by  many  private  cameras,  especially  those  belonging  to  F.  H.  Hurley,
photographer  of  the  Expedition.  Special  Lumiere  plates  and  material
for  colour  photography  were  not  omitted,  and,  during  the  final
cruise  of  the  Aurora,  P.  E.  Correll  employed  the  more  recent  Paget
process  for  colour  photography  mth  good  results.

The  programme  of  magnetic  work  was  intended  to  be  as  extensive
as  possible.  In  the  matter  of  equipment  we  were  very  materially
assisted  by  the  Carnegie  Institute  through  Dr.  L.  A.  Bauer.  An
instrument  was  also  loaned  through  Mr.  H.  F.  Skey  of  the  Christ-
church  Magnetic  Observatory.  A  full  set  of  Eschenhagen  self-
recording  instruments  was  purchased,  and  in  this  and  in  other
dispositions  for  the  magnetic  work  we  have  to  thank  Dr.  C.  Chree,
Director  of  the  National  Physical  Laboratory,  and  Dr.  C.  C.  Farr
of  University  College,  Christchurch.  Captain  Chetwynd  kindly
assisted  in  arrangements  for  the  Ship's  compasses.

Two  complete  sets  of  Telefunken  wireless  apparatus  were  pur-
chased from  the  Australasian  Wireless  Company.  The  motors
and  dynamos  were  got  from  Buzzacott,  Sydney,  and  the  masts  were
built  by  Saxton  and  Binns,  Sydney.  Manilla  and  tarred-hemp
ropes  were  supplied  on  generous  terms  by  Melbourne  firms  (chiefly
Kinnear).

The  meteorological  instruments  were  largely  purchased  from
Negretti  and  Zambra,  but  a  great  number  were  loaned  by  the
Commonwealth  Meteorological  Department  (Director,  Mr.  H.  A.
Hunt)  and  by  the  British  Meteorological  Office  (Du-ector,  Dr.  W.  N.
Shaw).

For  astronomical  work  the  following  instruments  were  loaned,
besides  transit -theodolites  and  sextants  :  a  four-inch  telescope  by
the  Greenwich  Observatory  through  the  Astronomer  Royal :  a
portable  transit-theodolite  by  the  Melbourne  Observatory  through
the  Director,  Mr.  P.  Baracchi ;  two  stellar  sidereal  chronometers
by  the  Adelaide  Observatory  through  the  Astronomer,  Mr.  P.  Dodwell.

The  apparatus  for  bacteriological  and  physiological  work  were
got  in  Sydney,  in  arrangements  and  suggestions  for  which  our  thanks
are  due  to  Dr.  Tidswell  (Microbiological  Laboratory)  and  Professor
Welsh,  of  Sydney  University.

Artists'  materials  were  supplied  by  Winsor  and  Newton,  London,
while  the  stationery  was  partly  donated  by  John  Sands,  Limited,
Sydney

Geological,  chemical,  and  physical  apparatus  were  all  acquired
at  the  instance  of  the  several  workers.
320


APPENDIX  VII

Adjuncts,  such  as  a  calculating  machine,  a  typewriter,  and
duplicator  were  not  forgotten.*

Apart  from  the  acquisition  of  the  instruments,  there  were  long
preparations  to  be  made  in  the  arrangement  of  the  scientific  pro-
gramme and  in  the  training  of  the  observers.  In  this  department
the  Expedition  was  assisted  by  many  friends.

Thus  Professor  W.  A.  Haswell  (Biology),  Professor  T.  W.  Edge-
worth  David  (Geology),  and  Mr.  H.  A.  Hunt  (Meteorology),  each  drew
up  instructions  relating  to  his  respective  sphere.  Training  in
astronomical  work  at  the  Melbourne  Observatory  was  supervised
by  Mr.  P.  Baracchi,  Director,  and  in  magnetic  work  by  the  Depart-
ment of  Terrestrial  Magnetism,  Carnegie  Institute  (Director,  Dr.  L.
A.  Bauer).  Further,  in  the  subject  of  magnetics,  we  have  to  thank
especially  Mr.  E.  Kidston  of  the  Carnegie  Institute  for  field  tuition,
and  IVIr.  Baldwin  of  the  Melbourne  Observatory  for  demonstrations
in  the  working  of  the  Eschenhagen  magnetographs.  Professor
J.  A.  Pollock  gave  us  valuable  advice  on  wireless  and  other  physical
subjects.  At  the  Australian  Museum,  Sydney,  Mr.  Hedley  rendered
assistance  in  the  zoological  preparations.  In  the  conduct  of  afTairs
we  were  assisted  on  many  occasions  by  Messrs.  W.  S.  Dun  (Sydney),
J.  H.  Maiden  (Sydney),  Robert  Hall  (Hobart),  G.  H.  Knibbs
(Melbourne),  and  to  the  presidents  and  members  of  the  councils  of
the  several  Geographical  Societies  in  Australia — as  well,  of  course,
as  to  those  of  the  Royal  Geographical  Society,  London.

In  conclusion,  the  proffered,  disinterested  help,  of  all  the  above
and  many  other  friends  contrived  to  make  our  scientific  equipment
well-nigh  complete  and  eminently  up-to-date.

*  Acceptable  donations  of  various  articles  were  made  by  the  firms  of
Ludowici,  Sydney ;  Allen  Taylor,  Sydney ;  Sames  and  Company,  Bir-
mingham ;  Gamage,  London ;  Gramophone  Company,  London ;  the
Acetylene  Corporation,  London;  Steel  Trucks  Ltd.;   &c.

Through  the  offices  of  Mr.  C.  A.  Bang  we  are  indebted  to  "De  Forenede
Dampskibsselskab,"  of  Copenhagen,  for  the  transport  of  the  dogs  from
Greenland.


VOL.  II  X  321


INDEX


Abrasion  effects  of  drift  snow,  1 123-24
Abruzzi  expedition  1900,  rations,  I  188
Absolute    Hut,    the,     I     150,     154-55  ;

II 133
Acetylene  Corporation,  London,     II    321

note
Adare,  Cape,  I  3,  7,  8,  49,  61,  C4  ;  II  300,

301,  303
Adelaide  Island,  II  297
University,  II  320
Adelie  Blizzard,  I   126-27,   141-44,   318,
323,  327;  II  139-40,  159
Land,   I  8-10  ;    II  299  ;    the  main
base  at,  I  41,  46-69,  70,  72,  118  ;
II  35,  38-40  ;  glaciation  of,  I  61  ;
hurricanes   of,    I   63,    104-6,    114,
221  ;     II    149,    155-60  ;     Wilkes'
account    of,     I    76 ;     the    Hut,

I  84-9  ;  drifts,  I  119  ;  wireless
installation  at,  I  149  ;  II  25,
134-44,  147-50,  159-60,  205,
224-26,  238-43,  253  ;  clothing
for,   I   177-80 ;    Empire   Day  in,

II  146-47  ;    temperatures,  II  159
Admiralty  Range,  II  299

Aerial  Cove,  depot,  II  183-84,  190,  200,

207,  208,  211-13,  226,  231,  237
Aeroplane  sledge.   See  Air-tractor  sledge
Ainsworth,   G.   F.,    "  Life  on  Macquarie

Island,"  II  25,  145,  165,  167-94  ;   "  A

Land  of  Storm  and  Mist,"  II  195-236  ;

"  Through  Another  Year,"  II  237-54  ;

picked  up  by  the  Aurora,  II  255  ;  the

home  journey,  II  256,  261  ;    account

of,  282-83,  289
Air -tractor  sledge,  the,  I  24  ;    II  3,  6,

18,37
Aladdin's    Cave,    I    195-208,    217,    218,

269-71,  274,  307,  310-11,  319,  348-49  ;

II   3-4,   8-9,    17,   18,    38-39,    43-44,

164


Albatross,  I  42-43, 49, 161-62  ;  II 189-90,

228,  229,  234,  276
Alden,  Cape,  265
Alexander  I  Island  II  297,  303
Alexandra,  Queen,  I  25,  289
Allen  and  Hanbury,  Messrs.,  II  319
Alligator  Nunatak.  II  79,  91,  106
Amahura,  the,  II  26
American  expedition  under  Wilkes,  I  2,

9,  71,  72  ;  II  169
Quadrant,    the,    accessibility,   I   3  ;

whaling  industry  in,  I  6
Amundsen,    Captain,    I    82,    269,    349;

II   188,  274,  303  ;    sledging  dogs

presented  by,  II  32,  132
dog,  II  91,  92,  93,  101,  145
Anchor  Rock,  II  183
Anemo-biagraph,  the,  II 175
Anemometers,  I  114-17,  121-22,  170-71
Anemones    preservation  of,  II  192-93
Angas  Jklr.  C,  II  312
"  Annie  Hill,"  1 168
Antarctic  theory  of  distribution  of  flora,

II 176-78
Antarctica,  history  of  discovery,  I  2,  64  ;

II  297-303
Antliology  of  Australian  Verse  (An),  I  315
Anthony,  Messrs.,  of  Melbom-ne,  I  86
Archibald  Russell,  the,  II  276
Arnott  Bros.,  Messrs.,  II  315
Asia,  Southern,  wind  velocities,  II  157
Astrolabe,    D'Urville's    journey    in    the,

18-9
Astronomer  Royal,  the,  II  148,  320
Astronomical  Hut,  the,  I  152
"  Atmospherics,"  I  153
Auckland  Islands,  II  24,  26-28,  31
^«rora, the  S.Y.  plan  and  section  110-13;

adaptation  and  fitting  out,  I  14-

20  ;     from    Macquarie    Island    to
Adelie  Land,  I  46-69;    the  first

823


INDEX


ice,  I  51-56,  58  ;  landing  of  cargo
at  main  base,  I  64-68  ;  new  lands,
I    70-82 ;     food    carried    by    the,

I  189;  return  of  the,  I  253,
258,  269,  271,  272  ;  observations
secured  on  the,  II  1  ;  deep-sea
soundings,  II  18-24,  232,  241  ;
at  Macquarie  Island,  II  24-26 ;
arrival  at  Port  Lyttleton,  II  28  ;
at  Melbourne,  II  29  ;  second  deep-
sea  cruise,  II  29-32  ;  departure
from     Hobart,     Christmas     1912,

II  32-34  ;  visit  to  the  main  base,
Adelie  Land,  II  35-44  ;  reception
bv  Wild,  II  48 ;  relief  of  Wild's
party,  II  127-30,  242  ;  arrival  in
Hobart,  II  136  ;  papers  brought
by  the,  II  140  ;  stores  laid  at
Caroline  Cove,  II  174  ;  visits  to
Macquarie  Island,  II 201-9, 229-32,
244-45,  253-54;  at  Dunedin,
II 212  ;  leaves  Hobart  on  Southern
trip  to  bring  back  the  two  parties,
II  236  ;  wireless  commimication
with,  II  240-41  ;  the  Homeward
Cruise,  II  255-77  ;  list  of  ship's
officers,  II  281

Peak,  I  224-26,  230,  262,  322,  325,

327-28;  II  164

Auroral    phenomena,     I     106,     157-58 ;

II  72    73   136-7   203,  211,  229,  244,

246,252,294

Australasian     Association    for    Advance

Science, — Intro.,  II  311
Australian  ensign  hoisted,  1 3,  7,  289, 296,

324 ;  II  104-5
Avalanche  Rocks,  II  79,  80,  91,  105
Avalanches,  80-82

Azimuth  Hill,  II  150  ;  memorial  cross
on,  II 163

Bactebiology,  work  of  the  expedition,
II,  294

Bage,  R.,  at  the  main  base,  I  62  ;  work
at  the  hut,  I  95-97,  99,  133  ;  the  tide-
gauge,  I  171-72  ;  transit  house,  I  173  ;
food  experiences,  I  185-86 ;  search
for  the  dogs,  I  198-99;  with  the
Southern  Sledging  Party,  I  215,  217,
274-308  ;  return  to  the  hut,  I  272  ;
on  building  a  tent    I  284-85,  296;

324


snow-blindness,  I  302-3,  307  ;  return
to  Aladdin's  Cave,  I  349  ;  note  left
by,  at  Cathedral  Grotto,  II  11  ;  return
from  the  south,  II  35  ;  visit  to  the
Aurora,  II  36,  38  ;  the  relief  expedi-
tion, II  38,  44 ;  winter  work,  II  132-
41  ;  wireless  work,  II  146-48,  164 ;
magnetograph  records,  II  154-55,  160  ;
the  home  journey,  II  256,  263  ;  account
of,  II  283,  289

Baldwin,  Mr.,  II  321

Baldwin-Spencer,  Professor,  II  319

Balleny  Islands,  I  8,  49,  95  ;  II  298
John,  I  8,  74  ;  II  298

Bang,  C.  A.,  II  321  note

Baracchi,  Mr.  P.,  II  320,  321

Barometer,  movements  of  the,  I  133-34

"  Barrier,"  the,  at  the  Winter  Quarters,
1113

"  Barrier-formations,"  I  71

Barron,  Lady,  I  25
Sir  Harry,  I  25

Barr-Smith,  Mount,  II  103-4
Mr.  Robert,  II  311

Basilisk,  dog,  I  95,  198,  208,  220,  244

Bass  Strait,  II  24

Bates,  Mr.  D.  C,  II  144 ;  request  for
weather  reports,  II  202-3

Batger,  Messrs.,  II  316

Bauer,  Dr.  L.  A.,  II  320,  321

Mr.,  Sealer  at  Macquarie  Island,  II
168,  170,  223,  249,  250,  251-52,
254

Baynes  Bros.,  Messrs.,  II  314

"  Beaufort  scale  "  of  wind-pressure,  1 114,
127

Belgian  Antarctic  expedition,  I  2-3

Bellingshausen  expedition  of  1821,  II 168,
297

"  Benzine  Hut,"  I  67

Bergschrund,  II  79,  96,  97

Betli,  dog,  I  95,  220,  232

Bickerton,  F.  H.,  at  main  base,  I  17,  24,
37,  62,  66,  67  ;  work  at  the  hut,
I  95,  100,  128,  175,  209,  272  ;  erection
of  the  wireless  installation,  I  151,  152,
153  ;  food  experiences,  I  185-86 ;
"  bus  driver,"  I  191  ;  the  air-tractor
sledge,  I  212  ;  II  2,  3,  6  ;  the  Western
sledging  expedition,  I  215,  217  ;  on
tent  pitching,    II  12 ;    his    birthday


INDEX


II  18;  the  relief  party,  II  36-38,
44  ;  winter  work  at  the  liut,  II  133,
141  ;  wireless  work,  II  136,  147-48,
150,  153,  160,  164;  clredge  con-
structed by,  II  160  ;  the  home  journey,
II  256,  261,  276 ;  account  of,  II  283,
289
Biology,    work    of    the    expedition,    II

292
Bird  &  Coy,  Messrs.,  II  315
Birds,  Antarctic,  weight    in  relation  to

wing  areas,  I  162
Birthday  Camp,  I  205-7
Biscoe  Island,  II  297,  298

John,  work,  II  297
Bishop  and  Clerk,  islet,  I  29,  48
BlackSunday,  1153,  211
Blair,  J.  H.,  Chief  Officer  on  the  Aurora,

II  261,  272,  283,  290
Blake,  Cape,  I  231

L.  R.,  work  on  Macquarie  Island,
II  30,  165,  169,  172,  173,  175,  176,
189,  190,  193-94,  203-5,  214,  216,
246 ;  visits  to  Sandy  Bay,  II
184-87,  231-35,  253-54  ;  accident
to,  II  188  ;  visits  to  Lusitania
Bay,  II  196-99,  220-22,  224-30,
236-37 ;  photographs  taken  by,
II  200-1,  211-12  ;  visits  to  the
Aurora,  II  207,  231-32  ;  speci-
mens obtained,  II  238,  240  ;  sheep-
killing,  II  239-40,  243  ;  the  home
journey,  II  256  ;  accoimt  of,
II  283,  289
Blizzard,  puppy,  I  102,  220,  226-27,  232

the,  I  111-34
Blizzard  (The),  poem,  I  126-27
Blood-pressure,  observations  by  McLean,

I  201  ;  II  308-9
"  Blue  Billys,"  II  34
"  Board-sliding,"  I  119
Bollons,  Captain,  II  251
Borchgrevinck,  13;  II  301
Borda,  Cape,  II  276,  277
Border  (Rabbit)  Preserving  Coy.,  II  314
Bovril  Coy.,  the,  11  316,  317
Brand  &  Coy.,  Messrs.,  II  314
Bridge -playing  at  Western  Base,  II  69
Bristow,  Captain,  II  26
British  Antarctic  expedition  1907,  II  28
British  Expedition  1902,  I  50


British  Meteorological  Office,  II  320
"Brothers  (The),"  II  187
Brown,  Mr.  John,  II  312
Brown  &  Poison,  Messrs.,  II  317
Bruce,  Dr.  W.  S.,  II  20,  21,  299,  301-2,
319

Rise,  II  269,  295
Bruni  Island,  I  38
Bryant  &  May,  Messrs.,  II  316
Buchanan,  Mr.  J.  Y.,  I  69  ;  II  311,  319

S.  Y.,  II  311,  312
Buckley,  Mr.  G.,  II  312
Budd  Land,  I  75  ;  II  269
Buenos  Ayres,  II  276
Bull,  H.  J.,  II  300
Bullivant,  Messrs.,  II  312,  319
Burberry,  the,  I  123,  177-78 ;  II  313
Burroughs  &  Wellcome,  Messrs.,  II  319
Buzzacott,  Messrs.,  II  320

Cadbury,  Messrs.,  II  316

Camp  Cove,  II  26

Campbell  &  Sons,  Messrs.,  II  167

Camping,  I  284-85

"  Cannonading,"  I  262,  263,  266

Canterbury  Museum,  Christchurch,  II  24,

206
Cape  Town,  I  18,  20
Carbohydrates,    definition    of    the    term

I  186  note
Cardiff  to  Hobart,  the  journey,  I  20-22
Carnegie  Institute,  II  320,  321
Carnley  Harbour,  II  26-28
Caroline  Cove,  Macquarie  Island,   I  30,

33-36,  41,  42,  46,  47  ;  II  174,  226
Carr,  Cape,  I  72
Caruso,  dog,  I  95,  102-3
Castor,  dog,  I  95,  198,  220,  224
Cat,  wild,  II  211

Catch  Me  Cave,  II  184,  190,  200,  207
Cathedral  Grotto,  the,  I  201,  217,  274,

310  ;  II  10-11,  18
Cliallenger  expedition,  I  9,  10,  69  ;  II  19,

299
Charcot,  Jean,  II  302,  303

Land,  II  303
Chetwynd,  Captain,  II  320
Chocolate  as  barter,  I  146
Chree,  Dr.  C,  I  97-98  ;  II  320
Christchurch,  New  Zealand,  II  28
Magnetic  Observatory,  II  320

325


INDEX


Christmas  Carol  {A),  I  300-1,  304

Day,  Dr.  Mawson's,  I  252-53  ;  with
the  Southern  Sledging  Party,  1
299-300,  301  ;  Madigan's  account,

I  337-39  ;  with  Bickerton's  party,

II  16  ;  1912,  at  Hobart,  II  32-33  ;
with  Wild's  party,  II  104  ;  with
S.  E.  Jones's  party,  II  124  ;  1911,
Ainsworth's  account,  II  172  ;  on
the  homeward  joiu'ney,  II  262

Chun,  Professor,  of  Leipsic,  II  301
Close,  J.  H.,  at  Main  Base,  I  44,  62,  92,
104,    120,    128  ;     at    Aladdin's    Cave,

I  199  ;  journey  to  the  West,  I  203-8  ;
and  the  Near  Eastern  Party,  I  215-16,
220  ;  II  1-3  ;  jonrney  to  Common-
wealth Bay,  II  3-6  ;  return  from  the
East,  II  35  ;  back  to  Australia,  II  44  ;
account  of,  II  283,  289

Clothing  for  the  expedition,  I  177-80  ;

II  313

Clyde,  wreck  of  the,  I  34,  35  ;    II  172,

185,  193,  231
Coal-supply,  difficulties  of,  I  78
Coats  Land,  II  302,  303
Cocoa,  value  of,  189-90
Colac  Dairj'ing  Coy.,  II  316
Colman,  Messrs.,  II  315,  317
Colonel,  dog,  II  145
Colonial  Sugar  Refining  Coy.,  II  315
Commonwealth  Bay,  I  61,  65,  70,  99,  209,
272-73;    II   1,   3-6,   11,    17,   35,
38-43,  45-46,  256,  258,  265
Fisheries  Department,  II  21,  319
Meteorological  Department,  II  320
Weather     Bureau,     reports    to,     II
143-44,  255
Comorant.     See  Shag
Compass,   variations   of  the,   I   76  ;    the
bearing  of  the  sun  and  the  magnetic
needle  compared,  I  286-87
Conrad,  Messrs.,  II  314
Cook,  Captain  James,  I  1,  6  ;  II  297
Copenhagen, I  20
Coronse  lunar,  II  147,-48
Correll,  P.  E.,  at  Main  Base,  I  62,  90,  121,
125,  131,  281  ;  and  the  tide-gauge,
I  172  ;  production  of  The  Washcr-
xvomari's  Secret,  I  208,  209  ;    the
Eastern  Coastal  Party,  I  215-16,
310-33  ;    at   Horn   Bluff,    I   336,

326


338-39,  341,  342,  347-48;  the
search  party,  II  36,  38  ;  return
to  Austraha,  II  44,  165  ;  photo-
graphs taken  by,  II  255,  256,  320  ;
the  homeward  journey,  II  261  ;
account  of,  II  283-84,  289
Nunatak,  I  227

Cote  Clarie,  I  8,  71

Crampons,  use  of,  I  116,  179,  270

Crippen,  dog,  II  66

Crown  Fuel  Companj',  briquettes,  I  20

Daily  Graphic,  II 140
Mail,  II  311

Dallman,  Eduard,  II  299

Danish  Geographical  Society,  I  20

Darwin,  Charles,  I  6

David  Island,  II  93,  94,  96,  97,  101,  105
Professor  T.  W.  Edgeworth,  II  25,
135,  136,  303,  311,  312,  321

Davis,  Captain  J.  K.,  appointment,  I  17  ;
arrival  at  Hobart,  I  18-19  ;  work
of  stowage,  I  23 ;  the  journey  to
Macquarie  Island,  I  28  ;  voyage
in  the  Nirarod,  I  30  ;  II  169  ;  at
Marquarie  Island,  I  34,  35,  47  ;
events  on  board,  I  57,  63,  67,  68,
76  ;  narrative  quoted,  I  70-72,
78-82  ;     retitrn    of    the    Aurora,

I  271,  272,  273  ;  his  decision  re-
garding Wild's  party,  I  273  ;  "  The
Ship's  Story,"  II  19-49  ;  mission
to  London,  II  136  ;  visits  to
Macquarie  Island,  II  205,  206-8,
229-32  ;     the    homeward    cruise,

II  255-77  ;  account  of,  II  284,
290

Captain  James,  of  Hobart,  joins  the
Aurora,  II  32,  33,  34  ;    efforts  to
recover  ship's  lost  chain,  II   37  ;
account  of,  II  282
Sea,  I  77  ;  II  270,  275
"  Dead-Beat  Gully,"  I  289
Deakin,  Hon.  Alfred,  Introd.
Declination  of  the  magnetic  needle,  I  287,

291,  295-96
Decouverte,  Cape,  I  61
Delay  Point,  II  79,  80,  92
Denison,  Cape,  I  64,  65,  69,  70,  83,  215  ;
II  256,  261,  264,  293
Mr.  Hugh,  II  311


INDEX


Denman  Glacier,  the,  II  95-96,  102-104
Lord,    messages    to    Antarctica,    II
134-35,  153  ;  Finance,  II  311
Denny,  Mr.,  visit  to  Macquarie,  II  232
D'Entrecasteaux  Channel,  118
Depot  Bay,  II  109,  110,  113
Depots  maintained  by  the  New  Zealand

Government,  II  26-28
Derwent  River,  the,  I  82  ;  II  33
Dietetics,  I  184,  186-7
Disappointment  Island,  II  28
Discovery,  voyage  of  the,  I  7,  9-10,  178  ;
II 169,  301
Cape,  I  70,  71
Dixson  Island,  I  232,  249,  252

Mr.  Hugh,  II  312

Dodwell,  Mr.  P.,  II  320

Dogs    for    the    expedition,    journey    to

Hobart,  I  19-26  ;  at  the  hut,  I  94-95,

102, 107,  173  ;  harness  for  the,  I  182 ;

food  for  the,  I  190  ;  at  Aladdin's  Cave,

I  195-99,  208;  with  the  sledging
parties,  I  216,  217-18,  220-42  ;  the
lost,  1 243-44  ;  used  for  food,  1 245-57  ;
presented  to  the  Aurora  by  Amundsen,

II  32-33,  132;  with  the  Western
Party,  II  50,  63,  66-67,  94,  99-106  ;
pups,  II  142-44  ;  quarrels,  II  145-46

Dolerite,  I  335  note

Dominion  Meteorological  Office,  II  144

Doolette,  Mr.  G.  P.,  II  311

Dovers,  G.,  member  of  Wild's  party,  I  62  ;
II  48,  50,  52,  54,  55,  59,  60,  62,
63,  65,  67,  69-70,  72,  73,  75-76,  78,  79,
80,  83 ;  depot -laying  party  formed,
II  84-88 ;  surveying  work,  II  108,
111,  113,  114,  115,  118-19,  120,  129;
at  Haswell  Island,  II  270  ;  account,
II  284,  289

Drake,  H.M.S.,  wireless  communication
with,  II  34,  185,  205

Drift  gauge,  a,  I  122-23

Drift  snow,  I  119-23  ;  abrasion  effects
of,  I  123-24 ;  electrical  effects  of,
I  124-26

Drygalski  Island,  II  113  note,  120,  127,
270
Professor,  17;    II   113  note,   120,
122,  301

Ducks,  II  180,  188

Dun,  W.  S.,  II  321


Dundonald,  barque,  II  28

Duncdin,  II  212

D'Urville  Sea,  I  71  ;  II  156,  293

Eagle  Cave,  II  180,  188

schooner,  wreck,  II  180
Earthquake  shocks  at  Macquarie  Island,

II  199,  229
Eastern  Barrier,  I  199

Coastal  Party,  formation,  I  185,  215.
216,  220  ;  account  of,  by  Madigan,

I  309-33  ;  instriunents  cached  by,

II  164-65
Eclipse,  lunar,  244

Eitel,  Mr.  C.  C,  I  18,  39  ;  II  33,  49,  282
Elder,  Mr.,  II  174

Mount,  II  241
Eliza  Scott,  the,  I  8
Empire  Day,  at  the  Western  Base,  II  71  ;

on  Adelie  Land,  II  146-47
Encyclopcedia   Britannica,  use  of,  II  140

142
Endeavour,  the,  II  21
Enderby  Island,  II  28
Land,  II  297,  298
Equinox,    effects    of    the,    I    106,    111,

127
Equipment  of  the  expedition,  I  218-20  ;

II  313-21
Erebus  Cove,   II  28
"Erratics,"  1110
Esperance,  Port,  II  49
Esquimaux,  dogs  of  the,  I  221  ;   method

with  snow-blindness,  225
Euphausia,  II  144
Evans,  Commander,  II  312
Evensen,  work  of,  II  300

Fabr,  Dr.  C.  C,  II  320

Fallieres  Land,  II  303

Fantome,  H.M.S.,  I  25

Far-Eastern  Party,  the,   I  215-42  ;    the

return,  I  244-73
Farrah,  Messrs.,  II  316  "»

Fats,  definition  of  term,  186  note
"  Feather  Bed  "  terrace,  II  180,  188
Fiala,  quoted,  I  16
Figure  of  Eight  Island,  II  26
Filchner,  Wilhelm,  II  303
Finance  of  the  expedition,  II  311-12
Firmesko  footwear,  I  178-80

327


INDEX


Fisher,   Hon.   Andrew,   wireless   message

to,  II  147,  Litrod.
Fishing,  II  161,  193-94
Fix,  dog,  II  145,  146
Flag  depot,  I  280-81
Flagstaff  Point,  Carnley  Harbour,  II  26
Flemington  Meat  Preserving  Coy.,  II  314,

317
Fletcher,  F.  D.,  II  24,  35,  282,  290
Flora,     Antarctic,     theories    concerning

II  176-78
Flying  Fish,  the,  I  9

Fox,  working  of  the,  36,  38,  39-41,
43,  78-80
Flynn,  Professor  T.  T.,  II  29,  232,  282
Foehn  effect,  I  170
Food,    for    sledging    journey,    dietetics,

I  183-87  ;    rations,  I  187-88  ;    items
1 188-90  ;  II  314-17  ;  table  of  supplies,

II  317-18
Fram,  dog,  II  145

voyage  of  the,  I  14,  27,  82
Franklin,  dog,  I  95,  199,  200,  208,  220,

244
Freshfield,  Cape,  I  237,  333
Fuller,  Messrs.,  II  316
Fusilier,  dog,  I  95,  220,  232

Gadget,  dog,  I  95,  102,  220
Gamage,  Messrs.,  II  320  note
Gauss,  expedition  of  the,  I  9,  48,  77-78,

80;  II  45,  108,  113  no<e,  270
Gaussberg,  I  7,  64  ;  II  108,  121-24
Geographical  results   of  the  expedition,

II  296
Geological   work   of   the   expedition,    II

292-94
George,  dog,  I  95,  220,  239,  245 ;  II  145,
146
V,  King,  wireless  message  to,  134-35
Georgia,  South,  I  2  ;  II  297
Gerlache,  Adrien  de,  I  2-3  ;  II  300-1

Cape,  II  94
German  Scientific  Expedition,  1874,  II 28  ;

expedition  of  1902,  see  Gauss
Gillies,  F.  J.,  chief  engineer  of  the  Atirora,
I  37,  46,  67  ;   II  24,  39,  43,  165,
256,  273,  284,  290
Nunataks,  II  78
Ginger,  dog,  I  95,  220,  247,  254

Bitch,  dog,  I  95,  220,  226-27,  244

328


Glacier,  the  continental,  108-10

Glacier -ice,  structural  composition,  1 159-
60

Glacier-tongues,  I  58-60

Glaciology,  work  of  the  expedition,  II
294

Glaxo,  I  189  ;  II  74,  78,  315

Gloves,  I  179-80

Goggles  for  snow-blindness,  I  280

Golf  at  Western  Base,  II  70

Gracht,  Mr.  Van  Waterschoot  van  der,
II  32-33,  282

Grafton,  wreck  of  the,  II  26

Graham's  Land,  II  297

Gramaphone  Coy.,  London,  321  note

Grampuses,  I  57

Grandmother,  dog,  I  95,  198

Gray,  Cape,  II  4,  264

P.,  second  officer  Aurora,  II  24,  165,
263-64,  284,  290

Great  Australian  Bight,  II  276,  295

Britain,  Antarctic  Expeditions,  I  2,  3
Ross  Barrier,  I  56  ;  II  299,  301

Greely  expedition  of  1882,  I  14,  188

Green  Valley,  II  197,  228,  233,  253

Greenland,  dogs  from,  I  20
pup,  I  209

Greenwich  Observatory,  II  320

Griffiths  Brothers,  Messrs.,  II  316

"  Grottoes  (The),"  the  hut  at  the  Western
Base,  building,  II  50-53  ;  return  of
the  sledging  party,  II  63  ;  entrance
and  tunnels,  II  67  ;  the  igloo,  II  68  ;
clearing  the  tunnels,  II  84-85  ;  return
of  the  Western  depot  party,  II  86  ;
preparations  for  the  Eastern  summer
journey,  II  88  ;  retm'n  of  Wild,  II
106-7;  distances  from,  II  111,  124;
return  of  Jones's  party,  II  127  ;  the
flagstaff,  II  129

Guano  deposits,  I  108

Gulls,  Dominican  or  black  backed,  II  195

skua,   I  94,   161-62,  211,   289,  320,

340,  342  ;    II  101,  114,  116,  118,

127-28,   162,   163,   179,  186,   195,

214,  220,  229,  234,  253,  258,  260

Haines,  Mr.,  taxidermist,  II  25
Haldane,  dog,  I  95,  220,  248-49
Hall,  Robert,  II  321
Halligan,  Mr.  G.,  II  319


INDEX


Hamilton,  H.,  life  at  Macquarie  Island,
II  165,  169,  172-73,  175,  176,  180,
184,  187,  188-90,    191,    203,   205,
214,  216,  222,  243  ;  visits  to  Sandy
Bay,  II 184-85,  231,  233-35,  253  ;
biological   work,   II   192-95,"  200,
201-3,    206,    211,     212,    213-14,
220-22,  238,  242,  256  ;    reception
of   the   Aurora,    II   207,   231-32  ;
erection  of  the  tide  gauge,  II  208  ;
a   dinghy  for,   II  222  ;    visits  to
Lusitania  Bay,  II  224-28,  236-37  ;
photographs  by,  II 229,  239  ;  home
journey,  II  261,  270  ;   account  of,
II  284-85,  289
Mount,  II  240
Hangar,  I  106-7,  127-29,  133
Hannam,  W.  H.,  at  Main  Base,  I  35,  41,
46,  62  ;   work  at  the  hut,  I  86,  87-88,
95,  175,  191,  217  ;  wireless  work,  I  96,
150-51,    153,   272;    the    drift   gauge,
1 122  ;  as  magnetician,  112,  3  ;  working
of   the   air-tractor  sledge,    II   8  ;    the
wireless  at  Winter  Quarters,  II  38,  46,
170  ;     return    to    Australia,     II    44  ;
account  of,  II  285,  289
Harbour  Board,  Hobart,  I  18-19
Harness,  sledging,  I  182
Harrisson,  C.  T.,   I  37,  41-43,   62,   79  ;
member  of  Wild's  party,  II  48,  50,  51,
52,  55,  62,  63,  65,  68,  69-70,  71-72,  73,
75-76,  78,  79,  81,  129  ;    visit  to  the
capsized    berg,     accoimt,     II    76-77  ;
Hippo  depot,  II  84-89  ;  meteorological
work  at  The  Grottoes,  II  88  ;  included
in  the  Eastern  simimer  journey,  II  91,
92,    98,    100,    104,    106,    107  ;    winch
contrived  by,  II  127  ;  account,  II  285,
289
Hartley,  Messrs.,  11  315
Hasselborougb  Bay,  1  35,  39,  44  ;  II  254

Captain,  II  167
Haswell  Island,  II  115-16,  119,  127,  260,
270-71
Professor  W.  A.,  II  321
Hedley,  Mr.  C,  II  321
Heinz,  Messrs.,  II  314-5
Helen  Glacier,  II  86,  109,   110,   111-13,

124, 126-27
Henderson,  Professor  G.  C,  Introd.
Henderson  Island,  II  78


Hens,  Cape,  II  276

Hinemoa,  rescue  by,  II  28

Hints  to  Travellers,  I  315

Hippo  Xunatak,  II  79,  88,  90,  91,  92,  102,
105

Hoadley,  C.  A.,  I  62,  65,  79  ;  member  of
Wild's  party,  II  48-50,  52,  54,  55,
57,  62,  65,  67,  68,  69,  70,  71,  72,
78-75,  76,  83,  307-8;  party  to
lay  depot  formed,  II  84-88  ;  main
western  journey  starting  November
2,  II  88  ;  geological  work,  II  108,
109,  110,  111,  114,  115,  117,  118;
at  Haswell  Island,  II 270  ;  accoimt,
II  285,  289

Hobart,  I  11,  18,  25,  69,  78,  81-82,  92  ;
II  25,  29,  32,  33,  134,  136-37,  185,
201,  206

Hodgeman,  A.  J.,  at  Main  Base,  I  44,  62  ;
work  at  hut,  I  84-87,  95-96,  121-22  ;
Near  Eastern  Party,  I  215,  216,  220  ;
the  cairn,  I  269  ;    return  to  the  hut,

I  272,  273;  journey  of  the  Near
Eastern  Party,  II  1-3,  12,  18,  36,  37  ;
trip  to  Aladdin's  Cave,  II  9  ;  on  tent-
pitching,  II  13  ;  investigation  of  a
snow  ramp,   II  16  ;    the  relief  party,

II  38,  39,  44  ;  winter  work  at  the  hut,
II  132,  133,  138, 141,  160-61  ;  journey
to  Mount  Murchison,  II  164  ;  the  home
journey,  II  256,  261  ;  map  ot  Mackellar
Islets,  II  258 ;  account  of,  II  285,
289

Holliman,  Captain,  i  38

Holman,  Hon.,  W.  A.,  Introd.

Hoosh,  I  183,  187,  188

Hordern,  Mr.  Samuel,  II  311

Horlick,  Messrs.,  II  317

Horn  Bluflf,  I  332-33

"  Horn  Bluff,"  by  C.  T.  Madigan,  I  334-49

Horn,  Mr.  W.  A.,  II  311

Hoyle,  pup,  II  142,  145

Hugon,  Messrs.,  II  314

Hunt,  Mount,  I  320  ;  II  1

Mr.  H.  A.,  I  26  ;  II  143-44,  320,  321
Hunter,  Cape,  II  258,  262,  264

J.  G.,  at  Main  Base,  I  62,  66  ;  bio-
logical work,  I  92,  94,  132,  165,
199  ;  parasitology,  1 166  ;  sledging,
I  200  ;  production  of  The  Washer^
woman's    Secret,    208,    209 ;     the

329


INDEX


Southern  Supporting  Party,  1  215,
216,  217,  274,  276,  281  ;  expansion
of  the  cave,  I  311  ;    return  from
the   south,    II    2,    3  ;    return   to
Australia,  II  44  ;  arrival  with  the
Aurora,  II  165  ;    fishing,  II  256  ;
the    homeward    journey,    II    261,
264,  270  ;  account  of,  II  285,  289
«'HuntoyIette,"  I  146
Hurley,  J.  F.,  I  36-37,  41,  42,  43  ;  Main
Base,    I    62,    100,    131,    198  ;     camera
work,  I  103,  107,  281,  285-86,  292-93,
297  ;    II  255,  256,  259  ;    observations,
I    125-26,    164  ;    rescue   of   the   dogs,
I  198,  208  ;  production  of  The  Washer
woman's    Secret,     I     208,     209  ;      the
Southern  Party,  I  215,  217,  274,  275,
276,  287,  299-300  ;    the  cairn,  I  269  ;
pitching    tent,    I    285,    296 ;     "  Lot's
Wife,"    I   299  ;    the    Christmas   Carol,
I  300-1,  304  ;    snow-bUndness,  I   302,
307  ;  return  from  the  south,  II  35,  39,
44  ;   arrival  with  the  Aurora,  II  165  ;
sledging,  II  285,  289
Hiirricane -walking,  I  115-19
Hut,  the  Main-Base,  I  I  83-96  ;  tempera-
ture, I  105-6  ;   tunnels,  I  128-30  ;   the
nightwatchman's  duty,  I  130-31
Point,  McMurdo  Sound,  II  303
Hutchinson,  sealer  of  Macquarie  Island,
I  36,  41-43

Ice,    Arctic    and    Antarctic    compared,
I   51  ;    the   first,   I   51-56  ;    pack-ice,

I  52  ;    bergs,  I  58 ;    structural  com-
position, I  159-60

"  Ice  floods,"  I  109
"  Ice  islands,"  I  56-58
Ice-shafts,  digging  of,  I  158
"  Icing-ship,"  I  54  ;  II  268-69
Illustrated  London  News,  II  140
Insect  hunting,  I  341

Jack,  dog,  II  145

Jackson,  Port,  II  24

Jacob  &  Coy.,  Messrs.,  315

Jaeger  fleece,  I  178  ;  II  313

Japanese     Antarctic     expedition     1910,

II  303

Jappy,  dog,  I  95,  220,  232
JeflEreys  Deep,  II  295

330


Jeffryes,  S.  N.,  wireless  operator,  1 272-73;
II  33,  38,  44,  133-44,  140,  150-51,  153,
160,  242,  282,  285-86,  310

Jessie  Nichol,  wi-eck,  II  222,  231

John  Bull,  dog,  I  95,  220,  244

Johnson,  dog,  I  94,  95,  220,  246

Joinville  Island,  II  299

Jones,  Dr.  S.  E.,  autopsy  on  the  dogs,
I  21  ;  member  of  Wild's  party
I  62  ;  II  49,  50,  54,  55,  56,  62,  63,
65,  68,  72,  74,  75,  77,  78,  81,  83;
party  formed  to  lay  a  depot  on
September  26,  II  84-88  ;  Wild's
instructions  to.  II  85  ;  main
western  journey  starting  Novem-
ber 2,  II  88  ;  "  Linking  up  with
Kaiser  Wilhelm  II  Land,"  account
by,  II  108-30  ;  discovery  of
Antarctic  petrels,  II  260  ;  view
of  Drygalski  Island,  II  270  ;
account  of,  II  286,  289  ;  medical
report  for  Western  Base,  II  307
Bros.,  Messrs.,  II  315

Journalists'  Association,  II  140

Joyce,  Mr.  E.,  delivery  of  the  dogs,  II  26

Judge  and  Clerk,  islet  of,  1 29  ;  soundings,
II  232

Junction  Corner,  II  68,  108,  126-27

KAISER  Wilhelm  II  Land,  I  9,  78  ;
linking  up  with,  account  by  Dr.  S.  E.
Jones,  II  108-30,  301

Kangaroo  Island,  II  277

Keiller,  Messrs.  James  &  Son,  II  315

Kelp,  I  108  ;  II  243

Kembla,  Port,  II  24

Kemp,  work  of,  II  297-98

Kennedy,  member  of  Wild's  party,  I  62,
78  ;  II  49,  50,  52,  55,  63,  64,  65-66,
67,  68,  70,  71-72,  73,  75,  83  ;  attempted
trip  with  Wild  for  the  minimum  ther-
mometer, II  84-85  ;  Eastern  summer
journey,  II  88-89  ;  blocked  on  the  ice-
shelf  with  Wild,  II  91-107  ;  observa-
tions, II  128 ;  account  of,  II  286,
289

Kerguelen  Island,  II  301

Kidston,  Mr.  E.,  II  321

King  Edward  VII  Land,  II  301,  303

George  V  Land,  naming  of,  II 134-35  ;
map,  II  295


INDEX


King's  Birthday,  at  Western  Base,  II  71

Island,  II  24-25
Kinsey,  Mi-.  J.  J.,  II  28-29
Kites,  work  with,  II  147,  238
Knibbs,  G.  H.,  II  321
Knox  Land,  I  10,  75,  76  ;  II  269
Kristensen,  Leonard.  II  300

Lake-ice,  1 160

Lamp,  a  non-magnetic,  II  70

Lamp-wick,  uses  of,  I  178

Larsen,  C.  A.,  II  300

Laseron,  C.  F.,  Main  Base,  I  62,  88,  112  ;
biological  work,  I  132,  199,  281  ;
collection  of  petrel  skins,  I  162  ;  at
Aladdin's  Cave,  I  199  ;  production  of
The  Washerwoman's  Secret,  I  208,  209  ;
the  Southern  Supporting  Party,  I  215,
216,  217,  274,  276-77;  recording
Webb's  observations,  I  280  ;  expansion
of  the  Cave,  1 311  ;  journey  to  Common-
wealth Bay  December  9,  II  2-6 ;
collection  of  eggs  and  birds,  II  6 ;
return  from  the  east,  II  35 ;  back  to
Australia,  II  44  ;  account  of,  II 286

Lassie,  dog,  II 145

Laver  Brothers,  Messrs.,  II  314-15

Lewis,  Sir  Elliott,  1 19,  25-26

Lithgrow  Colleries,  II  312

"  Lot's  Wife,"  I  299

Loubet  Land,  II  303

Louis  Phillippe  Land,  II  299

Lucas  Sounding-machine,  II  20,  263

Lucas -Tooth,  Sir  Robert,  II  312

Ludowici,  Messrs.,  II  321  note

Lusitania  Bay,  I  42  ;  II  25,  175,  196-99,
205,  207,  220,  222,  224,  226-30,
236-37
the,  sealing  boat,  II 175

Lyttleton,  Port,  arrival  of  the  Aurora,  II 28

"  M.H.S.  Championship,"  the  start,  I  310
Mac,  dog,  II  179,  197,  198,  215,  221,  233,

234, 239,  246-47
McClintock,  expedition  of  1850,  rations,

1188
Mackay,  Dr.  F.  A.,  I  297
Mackellar    Islets,    I    63,    65,    100,    307;

II  35,  150,  159,  165,  257-58,  265
Mackellar  Library,  1 146-48
C.  D.,  II  311


McLean,  Dr.  A,  L.,  autopsy  on  the  dogs,
I  21  ;  at  Main  Base,  I  62,  90,  103,  112,
209 ;  electrical  observations,  I  125 ;
lines  on  The  Blizzard,  I  126-27;
erection  of  the  wireless,  I  152 ;  ob-
servations regarding  seals,  I  164,
166-67;  at  Aladdin's  Cave,  I  199;
blood-pressure,  observations,  I  201  ;
at  Cathedral  Grotto,  I  202  ;  expedition
of  the  Eastern  Coastal  Party,  I  215-16,
220,  269,  272,  310-33  ;  snow-blindness,
I  314,  322  ;  at  Horn  Bluff,  I  334,  336,
338-39,   341  ;    photographs  taken  by,

I  340,  342,  346-48  ;  return  of,  II  36 ;
the  relief  expedition,  II  38,  39,  44;
winter  work  at  the  Hut,  II  132,  133,
141,  146;  founding  of  The  Adelie
Blizzard,  II  139-40;  on  illness  of
Jefiryes,    II    151  ;     a    wind    episode,

II  158  ;  dredging  operations,  II  161  ;
biological  specimens,  II  163  ;  the  home
journey,  II  256;  account,  II  286-87,
289 ;  medical  report  for  Main  Base,
II  308-10

McMurdo  Sound,  I  95 ;   II  302-3 ;   wind
velocities,    chart,    I    118;     the    Scott
expedition,  I  292
Macquarie  Island,  the  base  at,  I  10,  11,
22-31,  149,  163;    II  24-26,  29-31,  34,
134,  144-45,  153,  155,  160,  167,  170,
175-76,     189,     237,      241-43,      253;
"Life  on  Macquarie  Island,"  by  G,  F.
Ainsworth,  II   167-94;    "A   Land   of
Storm  and  Mist,"  by  G.  F.  Ainsworth,
II 195-236  ;  "  Through  Another  Year,"
by  G.  F.  Ainsworth,  II  237-54 ;   Mac-
quarie Island  Party,  list  of,  II  281
Madigan,  C.  T.,  at  Main  Base,  I  45,  62,
63 ;     meteorological   observations,
I  91,  170  ;    at  the  Hut,  I  95,  99,
101,  104,  120-21,  134;    electrical
observations,    I    125 ;    spring   ex-
ploits, I  194-97 ;    journey  to  the
west,   September   1912,   I  203-4;
sledging,     I    208 ;      the     Eastern
Coastal   Party,    I   215,    216,   220,
235,    237;     return    to    the    Hut,
I  272 ;   his  account  of  the  expedi-
tion of  the  Eastern  Coastal  Party,
I     309-33;      "Horn     Bluff    and
Penguin    Point"    by,    I    334-49;

331


INDEX


depot  of,  II  17;  visit  to  the
Aurora,  II  36,  38,  43,  44;  care
of  the  dogs,  II  132,  142-44;
winter  work  at  the  Hut,  II  141,
146,  160-61  ;  journey  to  Mount
Murchison,  II  164;  the  home
journey,  II  256,  261 ;  account,
II 286, 289
Nunatak,  I  223,  269,  348 ;  II  1-2,
4,  6,  42,  164
Magnetic  Flat,  the,  II 146

meridian,  I  154  and  note,  295
needle,    use    for   steering    purposes,

1286
Pole,  North,  1 154

Pole,  South,  observations  regarding
the,  I  62,  154,  156,  215,  247,  330 ;
Bage's    search    for,    I    274-308 ;
chart,  II  293
Magnetograph    House,    I    97-98,    102-3,
122,  150,  154,  173  ;  II  133,  145  ;  work
of  the  magnetician,  1 155-57
Magnetometer,  the,  1115
Maiden,  Mr.  J.  H.,  II  319
Main   Base,   Adelie   Land,   visit   of   the
Aurora,    II    34-35,    42 ;     wireless
installation  at,  II  170
Base  Party,  list  of,  I  62  ;  II  281-82  ;
return   of  members   to  Australia,
II  44
Maori  cabbage  {Stilbocarpa  polaris),  II 181

hens,  see  Wekas
Martelli,  ]\Ir.,  assistant    harbour -master,

Hobart,  1 18,  25
Mary,  dog,  I  95,  220,  248  ;  II  142,  145

Queen,  message  to  Antarctica,  II  153
Mason  &  Coy.,  Messrs.,  II  314
Masson  Island,  II  51,  53,  66,  78,  83,  90
Professor,    efiorts    to    raise    fmids,
Introd.,  II  136,  311,  312
Mawson,  Dr.,  plans  for  the  expedition,

110  et  seq.  ;   party  of,  I  274
Medical  equipment   for   the   expedition,
II  319
reports,  II  307-10
Melba,  Mme.,  II311

Melbourne,  arrival  of  the  Aurora,  II  29 ;
wireless  calls,  II  137,  185;    time
signals  from,  II  253
Observatory,  II  160,  230
Memorial  cross  on  Azimuth  Hill,  II 163

332


Men,  choice  of,  for  a  polar  campaign,
I  16-17

Mertz,  Dr.  Xavier,  appointment,  I  17 ;
at  Hobart,  care  of  the  dogs,  I  19,
20,  21-22,  43,  94,  173,  182,  190,
193,  198,  208,  316-17;  at  Main
Base,  I  62,  100,  121  ;  meteoro-
logical observations,  I  91  ;   skiing,

I  97,  224;  cooking,  I  193,  216,
258;  at  Aladdin's  Cave,  I  199,
200 ;  journey  to  the  south-east,
September  11,  I  202-3;  the  Far
Eastern  Party,  I  216,  218,  221-42,
244  ;  the  return  journey,  I  245  ;
illness     and     death,     I     256-60 ;

II  130,  240,  241 ;  Bage's  parting
from,  I  274 ;  meeting  with  the
Eastward  Coastal  Party,  I  310,
316-17  ;  Captain  Davis's  inquiries
after,  II  36-37 ;  message  to  his
relatives,  II  135 ;  account  of,
II  287,  289

Glacier,    I   59   note,    71,    226,    230,
262-63,     267-73,     278,     325-29,
342-43 ;  II  41
Glacier-tongue,    I    215,    222,    341  ;
II  41-42,  263
Meteorology,    work    of    the    expedition,
I  90-91  ;  II  294  ;  meteorological  chart
for  April  1913,  II  143
Meteorite  found,  II 11  and  note
Midsummer  Day,  temperature,  I  297
Mid-winter  Day  at  Western  Base,  II  71,

73;  1913,  II  148
Mikkel,  dog,  II 145

mil.  Dr.   H.    E.,    "Siege  of  the  South
Pole,"  I  1  note,  8-9  ;  II  297  note
Rise,  II  29,  31,295
Minerals  of  Adelie  Land,  1 110
Mitts,  1 179-80
Mollymawk  rookery,  II  236
Monaco,  Prince  of,  II  22-24,  319
Monagasque  trawl,  II  22
Monkey,  dog,  II  145, 164
Moore,  T.  E.  L.,  II  299
Morning  Herald,  Sydney,  II  311
Morton,  Messrs.  C.  &  E.,  II  314
Motte,  C.  P.  de  la,  II  24,  37,  44, 165,  287,

290
Moyes,  M.  H.,  member  of  Wild's  party,
I  45,  62 ;   II  50,  55,  61,  62,  65,  67,  69,


INDEX


71,  72,  78,  81,  82,  83,  91,  104,  106-8  ;
account  of,  II  287,  289

Moraine,  terminal,  Adelie  Land,  I  109-10

Morning,  the,  British  expedition,  1902,  I
05

Murchison,  Mount,   I  322,   324-28,   340,
342-45;  II  41,  164
Mr.  Roderick,  II  311

Murphy,  H.  D.,  at  Main  Base,  I  62,  90,
92,  95-96,  120-21  ;  erection  of  the
wireless  installation,1 152  ;  at  Aladdin's
Cave,  I  200  ;  journey  to  the  south-east
September  11,  I  202-3;  observations,
1212-13;  formation  of  the  Southern
Supporting  Party,  I  215-16,  217,
274-77,  280;  return  to  the  Hut,
I  281-82 ;  composition  of  party  at
Cathedral  Grotto,  I  309,  311,  312-13;
return  from  the  south,  II  2,  3 ;  visit
to  the  Aurora,  II  36 ;  return  to
Australia,  II  44 ;  account  of,  II  287,
289  ;  II  312

Murphy,  H.  D.  (senior),  II  312

Murray,  G.  J.  R.,  II  312

Mutton  birds,  II  236,  238

Nansen,  expedition  in  the  Fram,  I  14  ;
Farthest  North,  I  141  ;   use  of  the
primus  stove,  1  182-83
dog,  II  66

Nares,,  Captain  G.  S..  I  25,  188  ;  II  299

National  Museimi,  Melbourne,  II  319

Physical  Laboratory,  London  II  320

Near  Eastern  Party,  1 215-16, 220  ;  II 1-3

Neave,  Messrs.,  II  317

Negretti  &  Zambra,  Messrs.,  II  320

Nestle,  Messrs.,  II  317

Neve,  1 160

New  Zealand,  dejKjts  maintained  by,
II  26-28  ;  flora  of,  theories  re-
garding, II  176-78

Newnes,  Sir  George,  II  301

Night-birds,  II  236,  238

Nimrod,  the,  voyages,  I  7,  30  ;  11  28,  169

Ninnis  Glacier,  I  232,  234-35,  248
252-53,  330-31,  338-39
Lieut.  B.  E.  S.,  appointment,  1 17, 19  ;
care  of  the  dogs,  I  20,  21-22,  37,
94,  121,  173,  182,  190,  193-94,
208.  316-17  ;  at  the  Main  Base,
I    62,    90-91  ;    clothing   artifices.


I  177  ;  spring  exploits,  I  194-97,
199,  200  ;  journey  to  the  south-
east, September  11,  I  202-3  ;  the
Far  Eastern  Party,  I  216-39  ;
his  death  in  the  crevasse,  1 239-42  ;

II  130,  240,  241  ;  Bage's  parting
from,  I  274 ;  flag  planted  by,
II  18  ;  Capatin  Davis's  inquiries
after,  II  36-37  ;  message  to  his
relatives,  II  135  ;  account  of,
II  287-89

"  Nodules  (The),"  I  290,  298
"  Nordenskjold,  Otto,  II  301
North,  Cape,  I  7

East  Bay,  I  34,  41,  43  ;   II  25,  30,

206,  222,  231,  253
End,  II  177

Head,  II  175-76,  180,  201,  203,  213,
216,  232,  238
NorthclifEe  Glacier,  II  101
North's  Land,  I  73  ;  II  269
Notothenia,  II  161

"  Nuggets  (The),"  I  41,  43  ;  II  187,  194,
211,  222,  226-28,  238,  246,  248,  252

Gates  Land,  17;  II  135,  303

Observation  Point,  II  28

Oceanography,     results     of     expedition,

I  50  ;  II  296
Oil,  seal,  methods  of  the  sealers,  II 223-24
Organ  Pipe  Cliffs,  I  231

Pack-ice,  I  52-56  ;  II 14,  34,  47-49
Pahner  Archipelago,  II  297,  299

Nathaniel,  II  297
Parisitology,  I  166
Parsons,  Messrs.,  II  315
Parties    for    sledging,     arrangement,    I

215-16
Patria  Biscuit  Fabriek,  II  315
Partridge  &  Twiss,  Messrs.,  11  314
Pavlova,  dog,  I  95,  196,  198,  220,  250
Peacock,  the,  19;  II  169
Peary,  dog,  II  145,  146
Pemmican,  1 188
Penguin  Hill,  1 115
"  Penguin   Point,"    by   C.    T.    Madigan,

1334-49
Penguin  rookeries,  1 108,  216  ;  II 175-76,

182,    183,    186,    187,    197-98,  226-28,

246,  248

333


INDEX


Penguins,  I  60,  61,  64,  94,  107,  161,  209

Adelie,  I  32,  63,  166,  212-13,  329,

340-42  ;  II  4,  52,  86,  114, 115, 116,

118,  128,  162-63,  258-60,  267,  273

an  Albino  penuin,  I  212

Emperor,   I   78,   213,   332;    II   77,

114-17,  128,  154,  267,  271,  273
Gentoo,  II  214-15,  223,  226,  232,  253
King,  I  42  ;  II  183,  197-98,  214,  233
Royal,  I  30,  32  ;  II  25,  187,  198,  224,

226-28,  253
Victoria,  II  181-82,  198,  227,  231
Pennant  Hills,  II  211,  224
Perseverance,  the,  II  167
Peter  I  Island,  II  297
Petrel  rookeries,  II  226,  228,  232
Petrels,  I  32-33,  61

Antarctic,    I   55,   57,    161-62,    311  ;
II  6,  86,  114,  117,  118,  149,  161,
259,  260,  264
Giant,  I  94,  161-62;    II  128,   163,

191-92,  195,  212,  226,  228,  232
Lesson's,  II  221,  276
Silver-grey     or     Southern     Fulmar,
I  57,  161-62,  211,  342  ;   II  6,  114,
118,  128,  161-62,  264
Snow,  I  55,  57, 161-62,  285,  328,  331,
335,  340  ;    II  6,  79,  92,  96,  101,
105,  118,  123,  128,  144,  149,  163,
258
Wilson,  I  49,  56,  161-62,  166,  241,
328,  342  ;   II  6,  14,  114,  118,  123,
126,  128,  163,  258,  259,  260,  276
Petrol,  amount  carried,  I  24
Pianoforte  Berg,  I  307  ;  II  150,  265
"  Piecrust,"  II  137-38
Pigeons,  Cape,  I  57,  161,  211,  342  ;  II  6,

102,  115,  117-18,  128
Piper,  Mr.,  II  311
Plasmon,  I  188,  190  ;  II  315,  317
Pollock,  Professor  J.  A.,  II  321
Porpoise,  the,  I  9
Posadowsky  Bay,  II  122
Possession  Nunataks,  II  102,  104
Primmer,  Mr.,  II  206
Primus  heater,  the,  I  182-83
Prince  Luitpold  Land,  II  303
Prion  Banksii,  I  42,  251  ;  II  34,  163,  276  ;
Proteins,  value  of,  I  186  and  note
"  Puffometer,"  the,  I  167-68
Punch,  II  140

334


Quarantine  Station,  Hobart,  I  19,  25 ;

II  33
Queen  Mary  Land,  I  77,  78,  81-82  ;  II  68,

73,  105,  153,  269,  274,  295
Queen's  Wharf,  Hobart,  I  18-19,  22,  92

Rabbits,  II  198-99,  234,  246

Rachel  Cohen,  the,  II 154,  221-26,  238-39,

244-50,  253-54
Ramornie  Meat  Coy.,  II  314
Rations,  daily  polar,  I  187-88  ;    for  the
Far  Eastern    Party,    I    254  ;   for    the
sledge  journey  from  the  Western  Base,
II  77-78
Rats,  II  187-88,  215
Reid,  Sir  George,  Introd.

Glacier,  II  94
Robinson,  Lionel,  II  311
Bay,  II  101,  102
anemometer,  the,  I  114,  170-71
"Rock  Flour,"  I  110
Rocks,  effect  of  wind  and  rain  on,  I  124

igneous,  I  335,  336
Rose  Island,  II  28

Messrs.,  II  316
Ross  Barrier,  I  298  ;  II  274,  303
dog,  II  145

Expedition,  I  2,  7,  9,  56  ;  II  299, 301
Port,  II  26,  28

Sea,  the,  I  3,  6,  49,  61,  64,  106,  158,
289  ;  II  293,  299,  300
Royal  Company  Island,  II  24,  25,  33,  206
Geographical  Society,  Introd.,  II  311
Royds,  Cape,  I  17,  118  ;  II  302
Russian    Antarctic    Expeditions,    I    2  ;
II  168

Sabrina  Land,  I  74

Sabrina,  the,  I  8

Sails,  value  of,  I  14

St.  Elmo's  fire,  1 125,  136  ;  II  136,  144

St.  Vincent's  Gulf,  II  277

Sames  &  Coy.,  II  321  note

Sandell,  C.  A.,  wireless  work  at  Macquarie
Island,  II  25,  165,  169,  172-73,  175-78,
180-81,  184-85, 190,  192,  193,  201,  203,
216,  222,  226,  228,  235,  237,  243,  251  ;
cooking,  II  189 ;  lantern  made  by,
II  204  ;  visit  to  the  Aurora,  II  207  ;
erection  of  the  tide-gauge,  II  208-9  ;
sheep-killing,     II     213  ;      as     barber,


INDEX


II  214  ;  an  accident  to,  II  239  ;  tele-
phone installed  by,  II  245-46  ;  lamp
made  by,  II  248  ;  the  home  journey,
II  256,  261,  276  ;  account  of,  II  288,
289
Sandow,  dog,  II  75

Mr.  Eugene,  II  312
Sandy  Bay,  Hobart,  I  82
Enderby  Island,  II  28
Macquarie  Island,  II 175, 184-86, 196,
222,  231-35,  253
"  Sarcophagus,"  the,  I  292-93
Sastrugi,  I  124,  223,  248,  250,  252,  256,
258,  275,  287,  288,  291-94,  314,  321 ;
II  13,  14,  17,  110,  124
Sawyer,     A.     J.,     wireless    operator    at
Macquarie    Island,    II    25,    134,    137,
153-54,  169,  175-76,  178,  180,  183-85,
193,   200,   203,   205,   211-12,   224-26,
237-40  ;    visits  to  the  Aurora,  II  207,
231-32  ;    erection   of    the    tide-gauge,
II    208  ;     leaves     Macquarie     Island,
II  251  ;  visit  to  the  Tutanekai,  II  252  ;
account  of,  II  288,  289
Saxton  &  Binns,  Messrs.,  II  320
Scarfe,  Mr.,  II  311

Scientific  equipment  for  the  expedition,
11  319
work  of  the  expedition,  II  291-96
Scotia,  the,  II  20

Scott,  Captain,  work  of,  I  50,  56,  61,  95  ;
II  301,  303  ;    voyage  of  the  Dis-
covery, I  7,  9-10  ;  II  169  ;  voyage
in  the  Terra  Nova,  I  7,  48  ;  rations
allowed  by,  I  187  ;  stay  in  Ant-
arctica, I  269,  349  ;  at  McMurdo
Sound,    I    292  ;    the    disaster   to,
II    49,    59    note,    135,    240  ;     on
Macquarie  Island,  1910,  II  169
Islands,  I  50
Lady,  II  312
the  dog,  I  95,  199,  200
Scott  Expedidon  Staff,  II  312
Scottish  Antarctic  Expedition,  II  20,  269
Sea,  temperature,  effect  of  snow  on,  I  124
Sea  bears,  I  163

Sea-elephants,   I  30,   33,   38,   42,   94-95,
164  ;   II  25,  174,  185-86,  200,  217-23,
242^3,   250,   253  ;    rookeries   of   the,
II  217-26,  253
Seager,  Messrs.,  II  317


Sea-ice,  I  160

Sea-leopards,  I  54,  57,  164  ;    II  160-63,

182,  201-2,  206,  267,  273
Sealers  of  Macquarie  Island,  I  30,  34,  35  ;

methods  of  the,  II  223-24,  247,  249
Sea-lions,  I  163

Seals,   I  57,   60,   61,    107,   162-65,  341  ;
II  163,  167-68
Crab-eater,  I  94,  163-64  ;  II  267,273
Fur,  I  163
Hair,  I  163,  164
Ross,  I  164  ;  II  271
Weddell,  I  56,  63,  64,  78,  94,  162-3,
164,  211-12,  332  ;   II  72,  76.  118,
128,  149,  152,  258,  267,  273
Sewing-machine,  Wild's  need  of  a,  II  53

and  note
Shack,  the,  171,  196

Shacklcton  Expedition,  I  7,  17,  50,  61,
187  ;  II  77.  78,  169,  302-3
Ice-Shelf,    the,    I    79 ;     II    45,    48;
establishment  of  the  Western  Base
on,    II   50-64,    126 ;    winter   and
spring    on,    II    65-89  ;     Western
Party  blocked  on.  Wild's  narrative,
II  90-107  ;  the  Aurora  at,  II  271  ;
the  dog,  I  95,  220,  233,  244
Shags,  II  202,  210,  212-13,  231
Shaw,  Dr.  W.  N.,  II  320
Shelf-ice,  I  59-60,  79-80
Shell  Brand  benzine  and  Shell  kerosene,

I  24

Shoe  Island,  II  28

"  Shut-eye,"  practice  of,  I  254,  288

Signatures  of  members  of  land  parties,

II  289
Simpson,  Mr.,  II  311

Skeats,  Professor  E.,  examination  of  the
meteorite,  II  11  note

Skey,  Mr.  H.  F.,  II  320

Skiing,  I  97,  224-26,  228,  231,  238,  244,
247  ;  II  53,  154

Sledge,  the  air-tractor,  I  24,  212,  214-15

Sledging,  I  97,  127  ;  preparation  of
equipment,  1 176-91  ;  wood  for  sledges,
I  181-82  ;  harness  for,  I  182  ;  a  load,
I  218-20  ;  camping,  I  284-85

Smith  &  Wellstood,  Messrs.,  II  317
William,  work  ot,  II  297

Snow,  temperatures,  I  287

Snow-blindness,  I  225,  246,  253,  278-80,

335


INDEX


294,    302,    307,    314,    322,    324,    332;
II  3,  16,  85,  110
Snow  drift,  electrical  effects,  I  124-26
Snow  gauges,  II  73,  208

HiU  Island,  II  301
Soundings,    Lucas    automatic    sounding

machine,  II  20
South  Australian  Museum,  II  319
Orkney  Islands,  II  301
Shetland  Islands,  II  297
Southern  Cross  Depot,  declination  of  the
needle  at,  I  283
Ocean,  I  50  ;  II  156,  255
Party,    I    215,    217  ;     instruments

cached  by,  II  164-65
Supporting    Party,    I    215-17,    274,
276,  281
Sphere,  the,  II  140

Spratt,  Messrs.,  care  of  the  dogs,  I  20
Steel  Trucks  Ltd.,  II  321  note
Stewart  Island  (New  Zealand),  II  26
Stillwell,  F.  L.,  at  Main  Base,  I  62,  91,  97,
107,    108  ;     geological   researches,
I  109  ;    map  of  Winter  Quarters,
I  192 ;    records,   I  202  ;    produc-
tion of  The  Washerwoman's  Secret,
I  209  ;   finding  an  albino  penguin,
I  212  ;    the  Near  Eastern  Party,
I  215,  216,  220,  309-18,  320  ;   his
sledge,  I  218,  224  ;   pitching  tent,
I  311-16 ;    joiirney   of   the   Near
Eastern  Party,   II   1-3,   11    note,
35  ;     the    search    party,    II    38  ;
return  to  Australia,  II 44  ;  account
of,  II  288,  289
Island,  II  264
Stirling,  Professor,  II  319
Storm  Bay,  II  33
Strathcona,  Lord,  II  312

Mount,  II  103
Sun,  the  midnight,  I  288,  295  ;    display

of  rings  and  arcs,  II  125-26
Suva,  wireless  station,  II  183,  188
Swallow  &  Ariell,  Messrs.,  II  315
Sweep,  dog,  II  66,  67,  70
Swiss  Confederation  Day,  I  193

the  dog,  II  88
Switzerland,  the  dog,  II  94.  101
Sydney,  Wilkes's  expedition  started  from,
I  9  ;    Cathedral  of,  1  25  ;    wood
from,  I  181  ;  the  harbour,  I  331  ;

336


wireless   communication   with,   II
137.  185
Meat  Preserving  Coy.,  II  314
Sydney  Morning  Herald,  donation,  II  312


Tasman  Sea,  II  212

Tasmania,     hospitality    of,     I     19,    25  ;

soundings,  II  29,  31-32
Taylor,  Mr.  Allen,  II  321  note
"  Te  Sol,"  II  316
Tea,  I  189-90
Temperature,    Foehn   effect,    I    170  ;    in

Adelie  Land,  II  159
Tent-pitching,  I  180-81,  284-85  ;  Bicker-
ton  on,  II  12
Terehus  and  Error  in  Eruption,  I  141-44
Termination    Ice    Tongue,    I    77,    79 ;
II  47,  274-75
Land,  I  9,  76-77
Terns,  II  216,  268
Terra  Nova,  Scott's  voyage,  I  7,  48
Terrestrial     magnetism,     work     of     the

expedition,  I  153  ;  II  291
"  The  Steps,"  II  76,  77
Theodolite,  use  of  the,  I  319,  340  ;  II  4
Tich,  dog,  II  67
Tide-gauge,   Bage's,    I   171-72  ;    use   on

Macquarie  Island,  II  208-11,  248
Tides,  work  of  the  expedition,  II  294
Tidswell,  Dr.,  II  320
Tiger,  dog,  II  67
Tooth,  Sir  R.  Lucas,  II  312

Lady  Helen — see  Helen  Glacier
Toroa,  s.s.,  I  24-25,  35,  37-39  ;  II  170
Totten's  Land,  I  73-76  ;  II  269
Toucher,  N.  C,  I  28,  55  ;  II  282,  290
Transit  House,  1 155,  173  ;  II 142
Trawl,  Monagasque,  II  22
Trawling,    experiences    of    the    Aurora,

II  21-24,  30,  32
Tussock  grass,  II  181
Tutanekai,  the,  relief  of  Macquarie  Island,

II 153,  155,  251-52


Ulimaroa,  s.s.,  the,  II  185

Umbrella  aerial,  use  of  the,  II  149-50

Union  Jack,  hoisting  the,  I  289,  296,  324  ;

II  104-5,  147
University  College,  Christchurch,  II  320


INDEX


Urville,   Dumont   D',   expedition  under,
I  2,  8-9,  48,  55,  61,  69,  70,  71  ;
n  298-99
the  dog,  n  145,  164

VcHdivia  expedition,  II  301
"Veranda  Club,"  I  121
Verran,  Hon.  J.,  Introd.
Vickers  &  Coy.,  Messrs.,  I  24
Victoria  Land,  I  3-4,  50  ;  II  303
Vincennes,  the,  I  9

Waits,  Mr.  E.  R.,  11  24,  25,  206,  282
Washeriooman's  Secret  (The),  I  209-11
"  Water-sky,"  II  61,  63,  161-62
Watkins,  Lieut.,  aviator,  I  24
Watson,   A.   D.,   at   the   Western  Base,
I    45,    62  ;     II    50,    55,    63-79
attempted  trip  with  Wild  for  the
minimvun  thermometer,  II  84-86
preparation  for  the  Eastern  summer
journey,     II     88-89,     288,     289
blocked  on  the  ice-shelf  with  Wild
n  91-107  ;    fall  into  a  crevasse
n  99-100
Bluff,  n  96-97
Watt,  Hon.  W.,  Introd.
Way  Archipelago,  II  264
map,  n  5
Sir  Samuel,  II  312
Weather,  the,  as  a  conversational  subject,

1 167-68
Webb,  E.  N.,  at  Main  Base,  I  32,  62,  91,
94-95,  97,  101-2,  122  ;  care  of  the
dogs,  I  37  ;  work  at  the  Magnet ograph
House,  I  101-4,  156,  199,  202,  283,
286-92,  295,  297-302  ;  photo-work,
I  107  ;  magnetic  ice-cave  of,  I  193  ;
his  first  camp,  I  204  ;  formation  of  the
Southern  Sledging  Party,  I  215,  217,
274-77  ;  observations  of  the  needle,
I  278,  280,  281-82  ;  use  of  the  theo-
dolite, I  295-304  ;  building  a  break-
wind,  I  296  ;  the  toasts  on  Christmas
Day,  I  300  ;  sighting  Aladdin's  Cave,
I  307  ;  return  from  the  south,  II  35  ;
return  to  Australia,  II  44  ;  account  of,
n  288,  289
Weddell,  James,  work,  II  297
Sea,  II  299,  301

VOL.  II


Wekas,  I  33  ;  n  174,  187,  205,  216,  226,
228,  233,  243,  245,  247

Wellington,  Mount,  I  25

wireless  communication  with,  II  25,
137,  183,  203

Welsh,  Professor,  11  320

Western  Base,  the  party  at,  I  62,  81-82,
189,  215;  II  25,  282;  winter  and
spring  at  the,  II  45,  65,  89  ;  estab-
lishment and  adventures  by  F.  Wild,
U  50-64  ;  the  geological  shaft,  II
71-74  ;  "The  Glacier  Tongue,"  II  74  ;
Wild's  party  blocked  on  the  Ice  Shelf,
II  90-107  ;  linking  up  with  Kaiser
Wilhelm  II  Land,  account  by  Dr.
S.  E.  Jones,  II  108-30  ;  medical
reports  from,  II  307-8

West  Point,  II 174, 176, 185, 188,  203,  231

Western  Sledging  Party,  II  15

Westralia,  s.s.,  11  185

Whale-birds,  I  29

Whales,  I  6,  54  ;  n  34,  186,  268

Whetter,  Dr.  L.  A.,  at  Main  Base,  I  43,
62,  66,  92,  103,  115,  120,  129,  199  ;
the  "  Toggle  King,"  I  178  ;  journey  to
the  west,  I  203,  205,  207,  208  ;  the
Western  Party,  I  215,  217  ;  meteoro-
logical work,  n  2  ;  preparations  for
the  air-tractor  sledge  trip,  11  3,  8 ;
his  birthday,  11  12  ;  on  tent -pitching
II  13  ;  investigations  of  a  snow  ramp,
II  16;  return,  II  36-37;  return  to
Australia,  II  44 ;  account  of,  II  288,
289

"  Whirlies,"  1 111-12

Wild,  Frank,  the  work  at  Hobart,  I  17,
22,  :4;    working  of  the  "flying-fox,"

I  36,  38 ;  incidents  on  board,  I  54 ;
leader  of  the  Western  Base,  I  62,
63-69,  78,  316;  the  winter  station  on
the  ice  shelf,  I  79-80 ;  rations  for  the
expedition,  I  187-89 ;  arrangements
with  the  Aurora,  I  273 ;  return  to
Aladdin's  Cave,  I  349 ;  his  party  at
Western  Base,  II  25,  48-49,  50-64,
288-90;  relief  of,  II  37-38,  42,  45,
127-30,  136,  145,  242;  reception  of
the  Aurora,  II  48 ;   winter  and  spring,

II  65-89  ;  land  mapped  out  by,  II 153  ;
blocked  on  the  ice  shelf,  narrative,
II  90-107

337


INDEX


Wilkes,  discoveries  of,  I  2,  7,  9-10,  48,
50,  61,  69,  72,  95,  241,  331  ;  II  169,
299;  charts,  I  74-76  ;  I^ox  Land,
176

Wilkes's  Land,  I  72

Willesden-drill,  tents,  1 180-81

Williamstown,  Victoria,  TI  29

Wind,  velocities,  I  114-17,  133-34,  169 ;
II  42  and  note-iS,  146,  149,  155-60

Winds,  Bay  of,  II  79,  90-92

Winsor  &  Newton,  Messrs.,  II  320

Winter  quarters,  Adelie  Land,  I  99,
108-10,  118  ;  Stillwell's  map,  I  192

Wireless  Hill,  establishment  of  the  station,

I  34,   36,    37-39,   43,    149,    211;

II  170,  171,  173,  175-76,  183-85,
189  201  204,207,221,238-43,252


installation  range,  in  the  Antarctic,
II  36  and  note;  report  of  Captain
Da\as,  II  38  ;  messages  received
by  Hannam  on  the  Aurora,  II  46  ;
messages  from,  and  to,  Adelie
Land,  II  134-37,  144,  147-50,
159-60,  238-43 ;  effect  of  ice  on
intensity  of  waves,  II  162  ;  work
of  the  expedition,  II  294 ;  tele-
funken  apparatus,  II  320
Worms,  parasitical,  in  fish,  II  193-94,
200,  235


Zelie,  the,  I  8-9

Zip,  the  dog,  II  70,  75,  93,  101

Zoological  investigations,  1 161


PRINTED  AT
THE  BALLANTTNE  PRESS
LONDON     *     EDINBURGH


G-


rb


University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.


gl^    APR


L9l99i


DUE

SRLF  GnAR^;


Series  9482


L  LIBRARY  FACILITY


i9  965    0


CofiLcal  ProjexJiDi


,L  LIBRARV  FACILITY


39  965     0


9

\

\

1

i


J


-  cmnyEBNJttGlONAL  UBHABY  F*CIUTy


OO


c^


:^^sr  j^


)^i><y


)9  965    0


LIBRARY
UNlVERSnV  OF  CALIFOUNU


ANTARCTIC   REGIONS

AuHli'uIuMia.n    Kxpt'ditioii


SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY


D     000  459  965     0


