The Home of the Blizzard, Vol. I
Douglas Mawson, 1915
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Mawson's 1915 Australasian Antarctic Expedition narrative, Vol. I — the windiest place on earth, and his lone survival trek. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/homeofblizzardbe01mawsrich). This 1915 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

i'plip{!!i^!!i!!^:;ip!;;!iii^ 


j^^  CftciUv---*  X    -V^.  tt    '^■''O 


(}nffJornia   iy^/cademu  oJ  t/clence^ 


RECEIVED    BY    PURCHASE 


7u  ^^<-  — 


THE  HOME  OF  THE 

BLIZZAED 


k 


i 


SIR  DOUGLAS  MAWSON 


THE  HOME  OF  THE 

BLIZZARD 

BEING  THE  STORY  OF  THE  AUSTRALASIAN 
ANTARCTIC    EXPEDITION,     1911-1914  ; 

BY  SIR  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,d.Sc.,b.e. 

ILLUSTRATED   IN   COLOUR   AND   BLACK    AND   WHITE    ALSO 
WITH   MAPS 

VOL.  I 


ERRATA 
Vol.  I 

P.  93.     The  reference  to  Rock  iu  text  map  should  be 

liatclied  and  not  left  blank. 
r.  158  (illiistrfttion  facing).    For  "  Moon  "  read  "  Noou." 

Vol.  II 
r.  331,  column  1,  laNt  line.    Delete  "  the  Hon." 


PHILADELPHIA  :  J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 
LONDON:  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN 


SIK   DOUGLAS  MAWSON 


THE  HOME  OF  THE 

BLIZZARD 

BEING  THE  STORY  OF  THE  AUSTRALASIAN 
ANTARCTIC    EXPEDITION,     1911-1914  ; 

BY  SIR  DOUGLAS  MAWSON,D.Sc.,B.E. 

ILLUSTRATED   IN   COLOUR   AND    BLACK    AND   WHITE    ALSO 

WITH   MAPS 


VOL. 


PHILADELPHIA  :  J.  B.  LIPPINCOTT  COMPANY 
LONDON:  WILLIAM  HEINEMANN 


Printed  in  England 


TO   THOSE    WHO   MADE  IT  POSSIBLE 

THE  SUBSCRIBERS  AND  CO-OPERATORS 

TO  THOSE  WHO  MADE  IT  A  SUCCESS 

MY  COMRADES 

AND  TO 

THOSE  WHO  WAITED 


AUTHOR  S  PREFACE 

THE  object  of  this  book  is  to  present  a  connected  narra- 
tive of  the  Expedition  from  a  popular  and  general 
point  of  view.  The  field  of  work  is  a  very  extensive 
one,  and  I  feel  that  this  account  provides  a  record  inadequate 
to  our  endeavours.  However,  I  am  comforted  by  the  fact 
that  the  lasting  reputation  of  the  Expedition  is  founded 
upon  the  scientific  volumes  which  will  appear  in  due  course. 

Allusion  to  the  history  of  Antarctic  exploration  has 
been  reduced  to  a  minimum,  as  the  subject  has  been  ably 
dealt  with  by  previous  writers.  This,  and  several  other 
aspects  of  our  subject,  have  been  relegated  to  special  appen- 
dices in  order  to  make  the  story  more  readable  and  self- 
contained. 

A  glossary  of  technicalities  is  introduced  for  readers 
not  familiar  with  the  terms.  In  the  same  place  is  given  a 
list  of  animals  referred  to  from  time  to  time.  There,  the 
common  name  is  placed  against  the  scientific  name,  so 
rendering  it  unnecessary  to  repeat  the  latter  in  the  text. 

The  reports  handed  to  me  by  the  leaders  concerning  the 
work  of  sledging  journeys  and  of  the  respective  bases  were 
in  the  main  clearly  and  popularly  written.  Still  it  was 
necessary  to  make  extensive  excisions  so  as  to  preserve 
a  "  balance  "  of  justice  in  all  the  accounts,  and  to  keep  the 
narrative  within  limits.  I  wish  to  assure  the  various  authors 
of  my  appreciation  of  their  contributions. 

Mr.  Frank  Hurley's  artistic  taste  is  apparent  in  the 
numerous  photographs.  We  who  knew  the  circumstances 
can  warmly  testify  to  his  perseverance  under  conditions 
of  exceptional  difficulty.     Mr.  A.  J.  Hodgeman  is  responsible 

vii 


AUTHOR'S  PREFACE 

for  the  cartographical  work,  which  occupied  his  time  for 
many  months.  Other  members  of  the  Expedition  have 
added  treasmxs  to  our  collection  of  illustrations  ;  each  of 
which  is  acknowledged  in  its  place. 

To  Dr.  A.  L.  McLean,  who  assisted  me  in  \vriting  and 
editing  the  book,  I  am  very  greatly  indebted.  To  him  the 
book  owes  any  literary  style  which  it  may  possess.  Dr. 
McLean's  journalistic  talent  was  discovered  by  me  when 
he  occupied  the  post  of  Editor  of  the  Adelie  Blizzard,  a 
monthly  volume  which  helped  to  relieve  the  monotony  of 
our  second  year  in  Adelie  Land.  For  five  months  he  was 
constantly  at  work,  revising,  cutting  down  or  amplifying 
the  material  of  the  story. 

Finally,  I  wish  to  express  my  thanks  to  Dr.  Hugh  Robert 
Mill  for  hints  and  criticisms  by  which  we  have  profited. 

DOUGLAS  MAWSON 

LoNDOX,  Autumn  1914. 


vm 


FOREWORD 

Nor  on  thee  yet 
Shall  burst  the  future,  as  successive  zones 
Of  several  wonder  open  on  some  spirit 
Flying  seciu-e  and  glad  from  heaven  to  heaven. 

Browning 

THE  aim  of  geographical  exploration  has,  in  these 
days,  interfused  with  the  passion  for  truth.  If 
now  the  ultimate  bounds  of  knowledge  have 
broadened  to  the  infinite,  the  spirit  of  the  man  of  science 
has  quickened  to  a  deeper  fervour.  Amid  the  finished 
ingenuities  of  the  laboratory  he  has  knitted  a  spiritual 
entente  with  the  moral  philosopher,  viewing  : 

The  narrow  creeds  of  right  and  wrong,  which  fade 
Before  the  unmeasured  thirst  for  good. 

Science  and  exploration  have  never  been  at  variance  ;  rather, 
the  desire  for  the  pure  elements  of  natural  revelation  lay 
at  the  source  of  that  unquenchable  power — ^the  "  love  of 
adventure." 

Of  whatever  nationality  the  explorer  was  always  em- 
boldened by  that  impulse,  and,  if  there  ever  be  a  future  of 
decadence,  it  will  live  again  in  his  ungovernable  heritage. 

Eric  the  Red  ;  Francis  Drake — ^the  same  ardour  was 
kindled  at  the  heart  of  either.  It  is  a  far  cry  from  the  latter, 
a  born  marauder,  to  the  modern  scientific  explorer.  Still 
Drake  was  a  hero  of  many  parts,  and  though  a  religious 
bigot  in  present  acceptation,  was  one  of  the  enlightened 
of  his  age.  A  man  who  moved  an  equal  in  a  court  of  Eliza- 
bethan manners  was  not  untouched  by  the  glorious  ideals 
of  the  Renaissance. 


FOREWORD 

Yet  it  was  the  unswerving  will  of  a  Columbus,  a  Vasco 
da  Gama  or  a  Magellan  which  created  the  devotion  to  geo- 
graphical discovery,  yer  se,  and  made  practicable  the  concept 
of  a  spherical  earth.  The  world  was  opened  in  imaginative 
entirety,  and  it  now  remained  for  the  geographer  to  fill  in 
the  details  brought  home  by  the  navigator. 

It  was  long  before  Thule  the  wondrous  ice-land  of  the 
North  yielded  her  first  secrets,  and  longer  ere  the  Terra 
Australis  of  Finne  was  laid  bare  to  the  prying  eyes  of  Science. 

Early  Arctic  navigation  opened  the  bounds  of  the  un- 
known in  a  haphazard  and  fortuitous  fashion.  Sealers  and 
whalers  in  the  hope  of  rich  booty  ventured  far  afield,  and, 
ranging  among  the  mysterious  floes  or  riding  out  fierce 
gales  off  an  ice-girt  coast,  brought  back  strange  tales  to 
a  curious  world.  Crudely  embellished,  contradictory,  yet 
alluring  they  were  ;  but  the  demand  for  truth  came  surely 
to  the  rescue.  Thus,  it  was  often  the  whaler  who  forsook 
his  trade  to  explore  for  mere  exploration's  sake.  Baffin  was 
one  of  those  who  opened  the  gates  to  the  North. 

Then,  too,  the  commercial  spirit  of  the  generations  who 
sought  a  North  West  Passage  was  responsible  for  the  in- 
cursions of  many  adventurers  into  the  new  world  of  the  ice. 

Strangely  enough,  the  South  was  first  attacked  in  the 
true  scientific  spirit  by  Captain  Cook  and  later  by  Bellings- 
hausen. Sealing  and  whaling  ventures  followed  in  their 
train. 

At  last  the  era  had  come  for  the  expedition,  planned, 
administered,  equipped  and  carried  out  with  a  definite 
objective.  It  is  characteristic  of  the  race  of  men  that  the 
first  design  should  have  centred  on  the  Pole — the  top  of 
the  earth,  the  focus  of  longitude,  the  magic  goal,  to  reach 
which  no  physical  sacrifice  was  too  great.  The  heroism  of 
Parry  is  a  type  of  that  adamant  persistence  which  has  made 
the  history  of  the  conquest  of  the  Poles  a  volume  in  which 
disaster  and  death  have  played  a  large  part.  It  followed 
on  years  of  polar  experience,  it  resulted  from  an  exact 
knowledge  of  geographical  and  climatic  conditions,  a  fear- 


FOREWORD 

less  anticipation,  expert  information  on  the  details  of 
transport — and  the  fortune  of  the  brave — that  Peary  and 
Amundsen  had  their  reward  in  the  present  generation. 

Meanwhile,  in  the  wake  of  the  pioneers  of  new  land 
there  were  passing  the  scientific  workers  born  in  the  early 
nineteenth  century.  Sir  James  Clark  Ross  is  an  epitome 
of  that  expansive  enthusiasm  which  was  the  keynote  of 
the  life  of  Charles  Darwin.  The  classic  "  Voyage  of  the 
Beagle''  (1831-36)  was  a  triumph  of  patient  rigorous  in- 
vestigation conducted  in  many  lands  outside  the  polar 
circles. 

The  methods  of  Darwin  were  developed  in  the  Challenger 
Expedition  (1872)  which  worked  even  to  the  confines  of 
the  southern  ice.  And  the  torch  of  the  pure  flame  of  Science 
was  handed  on.  It  was  the  same  consuming  ardour  which 
took  Nansen  across  the  plateau  of  Greenland,  which  made 
him  resolutely  propound  the  theory  of  the  northern  ice- 
drift,  to  maintain  it  in  the  face  of  opposition  and  ridicule 
and  to  plan  an  expedition  down  to  the  minutest  detail  in 
conformity  therewith.  The  close  of  the  century  saw  Science 
no  longer  the  mere  appendage  but  the  actual  basis  of 
exploratory  endeavour. 

Disinterested  research  and  unselfish  specialization  are 
the  phrases  born  to  meet  the  intellectual  demands  of  the 
new  century. 

The  modern  polar  expedition  goes  forth  with  finished 
appliances,  with  experts  in  every  department  —  sailors, 
artisans,  soldiers  and  students  in  medley  ;  supremely,  with 
men  who  seek  risk  and  privation — ^the  glory  of  the  dauntless 
P^st.  A.  L.  M. 


INTRODUCTION 

ONE  of  the  oft-repeated  questions  for  which  I  usually- 
had  a  ready  answer,  at  the  conclusion  of  Sir  Ernest 
Shackleton's  Expedition  (1907-09)  was,  "Would 
you  like  to  go  to  the  Antarctic  again  ?  "  In  the  first  flush 
of  the  welcome  home  and  for  many  months,  during  which 
the  keen  edge  of  pleasure  under  civilized  conditions  had  not 
entirely  worn  away,  I  was  inclined  to  reply  with  a  somewhat 
emphatic  negative.  But,  once  more  a  man  in  the  world 
of  men,  lulled  in  the  easy  repose  of  routine,  and  performing 
the  ordinary  duties  of  a  workaday  world,  old  emotions 
awakened,  the  grand  sweet  days  returned  in  irresistible 
glamour,  faraway  "  voices  "  called  : 

.  .  .  from  the  wilderness,  the  vast  and  Godlike  spaces, 
The  stark  and  sullen  solitudes  that  sentinel  the  Pole. 

There  always  seemed  to  be  something  at  the  back  of  my  mind, 
stored  away  for  future  contemplation,  and  it  was  an  idea 
which  largely  matured  during  my  first  sojourn  in  the  far 
South.  At  times,  during  the  long  hours  of  steady  tramping 
across  the  trackless  snow-fields,  one's  thoughts  flow  in  a 
clear  and  limpid  stream,  the  mind  is  unruffled  and  composed 
and  the  passion  of  a  great  venture  springing  suddenly  before 
the  imagination  is  sobered  by  the  calmness  of  pure  reason. 
Perchance  this  is  true  of  certain  moments,  but  they  are  rare 
and  fleeting.  It  may  have  been  in  one  such  phase  that  I 
suddenly  found  myself  eager  for  more  than  a  glimpse  of  the 
great  span  of  Antarctic  coast  lying  nearest  to  Australia. 

Professor  T.  W.  E.  David,  Dr.  F.  A.  Mackay  and  I,  when 
seeking  the   South  Magnetic   Pole   during  the   summer  of 


INTRODUCTION 

1908-09,  had  penetrated  farthest  mto  that  region  on  land. 
The  Hmiting  outposts  had  been  defined  by  other  expedi- 
tions ;  at  Cape  Adare  on  the  east  and  at  Gaussberg  on  the 
west.  Between  them  lay  my  "  Land  of  Hope  and  Glory," 
of  whose  outline  and  glacial  features  the  barest  evidence 
had  been  furnished.  There,  bordering  the  Antarctic  Circle, 
was  a  realm  far  from  the  well-sailed  highways  of  many  of 
the  more  recent  Antarctic  expeditions. 

The  idea  of  exploring  this  unknown  coast  took  firm  root 
in  my  mind  while  I  was  on  a  visit  to  Europe  in  February 
1910.  The  prospects  of  an  expedition  operating  to  the  west 
of  Cape  Adare  were  discussed  with  the  late  Captain 
R.  F.  Scott  and  I  suggested  that  the  activities  of  his  ex- 
pedition might  be  arranged  to  extend  over  the  area  in  ques- 
tion. Finally  he  decided  that  his  hands  were  already  too 
full  to  make  any  definite  proposition  for  a  region  so  remote 
from  his  own  objective. 

Sir  Ernest  Shackleton  was  warmly  enthusiastic  when  the 
scheme  was  laid  before  him,  hoping  for  a  time  to  identify 
himself  with  the  undertaking.  It  was  in  some  measure 
due  to  his  initiative  that  I  felt  impelled  eventually  to  under- 
take the  organization  and  leadership  of  an  expedition. 

For  many  reasons,  besides  the  fact  that  it  was  the  country 
of  my  home  and  Alma  Mater,  I  was  desirous  that  the  Ex- 
pedition should  be  maintained  by  Australia.  It  seemed  to 
me  that  here  was  an  opportunity  to  prove  that  the  young 
men  of  a  young  country  could  rise  to  those  traditions  which 
have  made  the  history  of  British  Polar  exploration  one  of 
triumphant  endeavour  as  well  as  of  tragic  sacrifice.  And 
so  I  was  privileged  to  rally  the  "  sons  of  the  younger  son." 

A  provisional  plan  was  drafted  and  put  before  the  Austra- 
lasian Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  at  their 
meeting  held  at  Sydney  in  January  1911,  with  a  request 
for  approval  and  financial  assistance.  Both  were  unani- 
mously granted,  a  sum  of  £1000  was  voted  and  committees 
were  formed  to  co-operate  in  the  arrangement  of  a  scientific 


I'HOFESSOK  T.  W.  EDGEWOETH   DAVID 


PROFESSOR  ORMB    MASSON 


INTRODUCTION 

programme  and  to  approach  the  Government  with  a  view 
to  obtaining  substantial  help. 

The  three  leading  members  of  the  committees  were  Pro- 
fessor Orme  IMasson  (President),  Professor  T.  W.  Edgeworth 
David  (President  Elect)  and  Professor  G.  C.  Henderson 
(President  of  the  Geographical  Section).  All  were  zealous 
and  active  in  furthering  the  projects  of  the  Expedition. 

Meanwhile  I  had  laid  my  scheme  of  work  before  certain 
prominent  Australians  and  some  large  donations*  had  been 
promised.  The  sympathy  and  warm-hearted  generosity  of 
these  gentlemen  was  an  incentive  for  me  to  push  through 
my  plans  at  once  to  a  successful  issue. 

I  therefore  left  immediately  for  London  with  a  view  to 
making  arrangements  there  for  a  vessel  suitable  for  polar 
exploration,  to  secure  sledging  dogs  from  Greenland  and  furs 
from  Norway,  and  to  order  the  construction  of  certain  instru- 
ments and  equipment.  It  was  also  my  intention  to  gain 
if  possible  the  support  of  Australians  residing  in  London. 
The  Council  of  the  University  of  Adelaide,  in  a  broad-minded 
scientific  spirit,  granted  me  the  necessary  leave  of  absence 
from  my  post  as  lecturer,  to  carry  through  what  had  now 
resolved  itself  into  an  extensive  and  prolonged  enterprise. 

During  my  absence,  a  Committee  of  the  Australasian 
Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  approached  the 
Commonwealth  Government  with  an  appeal  for  funds. 
Unfortunately  it  was  the  year  (1911)  of  the  Coronation  of 
his  Majesty  King  George  V,  and  the  leading  members 
of  the  Cabinet  were  in  England,  so  the  final  answer  to  the 
deputation  was  postponed.  I  was  thus  in  a  position  of 
some  difficulty,  for  many  requirements  had  to  be  ordered 
without  delay  if  the  Expedition  were  to  get  away  from 
Australia  before  the  end  of  the  year. 

At  length,  through  the  kindness  of  Lord  Northcliffe,  the 

columns  of  the  Daily  Mail  were  opened  to  us  and  Sir  Ernest 

Shackleton  made  a  strong  appeal  on  our  behalf.   The  Royal 

Geographical   Society  set  the   seal  of  its  approval  on  the 

*  Refer  to  Finance  Appendix, 

VOL.  1  h  XV 


INTRODUCTION 

aims   of  the   Expedition   and   many   donations   were   soon 
afterwards  received. 

At  this  rather  critical  period  I  was  fortunate  in  securing 
the  services  of  Captain  John  King  Davis,  who  was  in  future 
to  act  as  Master  of  the  vessel  and  Second  in  Command  of  the 
Expedition.  He  joined  me  in  April  1911,  and  rendered 
valuable  help  in  the  preliminary  arrangements.  Under  his 
direction  the  s.y.  Aurora  was  purchased  and  refitted. 

The  few  months  spent  in  London  were  anxious  and 
trying,  but  the  memory  of  them  is  pleasantly  relieved  by 
the  generosity  and  assistance  which  were  meted  out  on 
every  hand.  Sir  George  Reid,  High  Commissioner  for  the 
Australian  Commonwealth,  I  shall  always  remember  as 
an  ever-present  friend.  The  preparations  for  the  scientific 
programme  received  a  strong  impetus  from  well-known 
Antarctic  explorers,  notably  Dr.  W.  S.  Bruce,  Dr.  Jean 
Charcot,  Captain  Adrian  de  Gerlache,  and  the  late  Sir  John 
Murray  and  Mr.  J.  Y.  Buchanan  of  the  Challenger  Expedi- 
tion. In  the  dispositions  made  for  oceanographical  work  I 
was  indebted  for  liberal  support  to  H.S.H.  the  Prince  of 
Monaco. 

In  July  1911  I  was  once  more  in  Australia,  a  large 
proportion  of  my  time  being  occupied  with  finance,  the  pur- 
chase and  concentration  of  stores  and  equipment  and  the 
appointment  of  the  staff.  In  this  work  I  was  aided  by 
Professors  Masson  and  David  and  by  ]\Iiss  Ethel  Bage,  who 
throughout  this  busy  period  acted  in  an  honorary  capacity 
as  secretary  in  Melbourne. 

Time  was  drawing  on  and  the  funds  of  the  Expedition 
were  wholly  inadequate  to  the  needs  of  the  moment,  until 
Mr.  T.  H.  Smeaton,  M.P.,  introduced  a  deputation  to  the 
Hon.  John  Verran,  Premier  of  South  Australia.  The  de- 
putation, organized  to  approach  the  State  Government  for 
a  grant  of  £5000,  was  led  by  the  Right  Hon.  Sir  Samuel 
Way,  Bart.,  Chief  Justice  of  South  Australia  and  Chancellor 
of  the  Adelaide  University,  and  supported  by  Mr.  Lavington 
Bonython,  Mayor  of  Adelaide,  T.  Ryan,  M.P.,  the  Presidents 


INTRODUCTION 

of  several  scientific  societies  and  members  of  the  University- 
staff.  This  sum  was  eventuaUy  forthcoming  and  it  paved 
the  way  to  greater  things. 

In  Sydney,  Professor  David  approached  the  State  Govern- 
ment on  behalf  of  the  Expedition  for  financial  support,  and, 
through  the  Acting  Premier,  the  Hon.  W.  A.  Holman,  £7000 
was  generously  promised.  The  State  of  Victoria  through 
the  Hon.  W.  Watt,  Premier  of  Victoria,  supplemented 
our  funds  to  the  extent  of  £6000. 

Upheld  by  the  prestige  of  a  large  meeting  convened  in 
the  Melbourne  Town  Hall  during  the  spring,  the  objects 
of  the  Australasian  Antarctic  Expedition  were  more  widely 
published.  On  that  memorable  occasion  the  Governor- 
General,  Lord  Denman,  acted  as  chairman,  and  among 
others  who  participated  were  the  Hon.  Andrew  Fisher 
(Prime  Minister  of  the  Commonwealth),  the  Hon.  Alfred 
Deakin  (Leader  of  the  Opposition),  Professor  Orme  Masson 
(President  A.A.A.S.  and  representative  of  Victoria),  Senator 
Walker  (representing  New  South  Wales)  and  Professor  G. 
C.  Henderson  (representing  South  Australia). 

Soon  after  this  meeting  the  Commonv/ealth  Government 
voted  £5000,  following  a  grant  of  £2000  made  by  the  British 
Government  at  the  instance  of  Lord  Denman,  who  from 
the  outset  had  been  a  staunch  friend  of  the  Expedition. 

At  the  end  of  October  1911  all  immediate  financial 
anxiety  had  passed,  and  I  was  able  to  devote  myself  with 
confidence  to  the  final  preparations. 

Captain  Davis  brought  the  Aurora  from  England  to 
Australia,  and  on  December  2,  1911,  we  left  Hobart  for 
the  South.  A  base  was  established  on  Macquarie  Island, 
after  which  the  ship  pushed  through  the  ice  and  landed 
a  party  on  an  imdiscovered  portion  of  the  Antarctic  Con- 
tinent. After  a  journey  of  fifteen  hundred  miles  to  the 
west  of  this  base  another  party  was  landed  and  then  the 
Aurora  returned  to  Hobart  to  refit  and  to  carry  out  oceano- 
graphical  investigations,  during  the  year  1912,  in  the  waters 
south  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand. 

XV  ii 


INTRODUCTION 

In  December  1912  Captain  Davis  revisited  the  Ant- 
arctic to  relieve  the  two  parties  who  had  wintered  there. 
A  calamity  befell  my  own  sledging  party,  Lieut.  B.  E.  S. 
Ninnis  and  Dr.  X.  Mertz  both  lost  their  lives  and  my 
arrival  back  at  Winter  Quarters  was  delayed  for  so  long, 
that  the  Aurora  was  forced  to  leave  five  men  for  another  year 
to  prosecute  a  search  for  the  missing  party.  The  remainder  of 
the  men,  ten  in  number,  and  the  party  fifteen  hundred  miles 
to  the  west  were  landed  safely  at  Hobart  in  March  1912. 

Thus  the  prearranged  plans  were  upset  by  my  non- 
return and  the  administration  of  the  Expedition  in  Aus- 
tralia was  carried  out  by  Professor  David,  whose  special 
knowledge  was  invaluable  at  such  a  juncture. 

Funds  were  once  more  required,  and,  during  the  summer 
of  1912,  Captain  Davis  visited  London  and  secured  additional 
support,  while  the  Australasian  Association  for  the  Ad- 
vancement of  Science  again  successfully  approached  the 
Commonwealth  Government  (The  Right  Hon.  J.  H.  Cook, 
Prime  Minister).  In  all,  the  sum  of  £8000  was  raised  to 
meet  the  demands  of  a  second  voyage  of  relief. 

The  party  left  on  Macquarie  Island,  who  had  agreed  to 
remain  at  the  station  for  another  year,  ran  short  of  food 
during  their  second  winter.  The  New  Zealand  Government 
rendered  the  Expedition  a  great  service  in  dispatching 
stores  to  them  by  the  Tutanekai  without  delay. 

Finally,  in  the  summer  of  1913,  the  Aurora  set  out  on 
her  third  cruise  to  the  far  South,  picking  up  the  parties  at 
Macquarie  Island  and  in  the  Antarctic,  carried  out  observa- 
tions for  two  months  amid  the  ice  and  reached  Adelaide  late 
in  February  1914. 

Throughout  a  period  of  more  than  three  years  Professors 
David  and  IMasson — ^the  fathers  of  the  Expedition — worked 
indefatigably  and  unselfishly  in  its  interests.  Unbeknown 
to  them  I  have  taken  the  liberty  to  reproduce  the  only 
photographs  at  hand  of  these  gentlemen,  which  action  I  hope 
they  will  view  favourably.     That  of  Professor  David  needs 


CAPTAIN   JOHN   KlN(i   DAVI!^ 


INTRODUCTION 

some  explanation  :  It  is  a  snapshot  taken  at  Relief  Inlet, 
South  Victoria  Land,  at  the  moment  when  the  Northern 
Party  of  Shackleton's  Expedition,  February  1909,  was 
rescued  by  the  S.Y.  Nimrod. 

In  shipping  arrangements  Capt.  Davis  was  assisted 
throughout  by  Mr.  J.  J.  Kinsey,  Christchurch,  Capt.  Barter, 
Sydney,  and  Mr.  F.  Hammond,  Hobart. 

Such  an  undertaking  is  the  work  of  a  multitude  and  it 
is  only  by  sympathetic  support  from  many  sources  that  a 
measure  of  success  can  be  expected.  In  this  connexion 
there  are  many  names  which  I  recall  with  warm  gratitude. 
It  is  impossible  to  mention  all  to  whom  the  Expedition  is 
indebted,  but  I  trust  that  none  of  those  who  have  taken 
a  prominent  part  will  fail  to  find  an  acknowledgment  some- 
where in  these  volumes. 

I  should  specially  mention  the  friendly  help  afforded 
by  the  Australasian  Press,  which  has  at  all  times  given  the 
Expedition  favourable  and  lengthy  notices,  insisting  on 
its  national  and  scientific  character. 

With  regard  to  the  conduct  of  the  work  itself,  I  was 
seconded  by  the  whole-hearted  co-operation  of  the  members, 
my  comrades,  and  what  they  have  done  can  only  be 
indicated  in  this  narrative. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

AUTHOR'S  PREFACE  vii 

FOREWORD  ix 

INTRODUCTION  xiii 

CHAPTER  I 

THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS  1 

CHAPTER  II 

THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART  AND  THE  VOYAGE  TO 
MACQUARIE  ISLAND  18 

CHAPTER  III 

FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND  46 

CHAPTER  IV 

NEW  LANDS  70 

CHAPTER  V 

FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND  83 

CHAPTER  VI 

AUTUMN  PROSPECTS  99 

CHAPTER  VII 

THE  BLIZZARD  111 

CHAPTER  VIII 

DOMESTIC  LIFE  135 

CHAPTER  IX 

MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK  U9 

CHAPTER  X 

THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT  17& 

CHAPTER  XI 

SPRING  EXPLOITS  192 

xxi 


CONTENTS 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  XII 

ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND  214 

CHAPTER  XIII 

TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION  243 

CHAPTER  XIV 

THE  QUEST  OP  THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE  274 

CHAPTER  XV 

EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE  309 

CHAPTER  XVI 

HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT  334 


XXI 1 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Sir  Douglas  Mawson  (Photogravure)  Frontispiece 

COLOUR  PLATES 

To  face 
page 

Virgin  solitudes  2 

A  Weather-worx  Sxow-berg  50 

A  Grottoed  Iceberg  50 

The  Mertz  Glacier-tongue,  at  a  point  50  miles  from  the'  Land  CO 

The  Grey  Rock  Hills  at  Cape  Denison  108 

Winter  Quarters,  Adelie  Land  130 

The  Alpine-Glow  156 
"Antarctica  is  a  world  of  colour,  brilliant  and  intensely  pure  .  .  ."        172 

Sledging  in  Adelie  Land  236 

PLATES 

Professor  T.  W.  Edgeworth  David  xiv 

Professor  Orme  Masson  xv 

Captain  John  King  Davis  xviii 

The  Wall  of  the  Antarctic  Continent  6 

Flnner  Whales  of  the  South  7 

The  "Aurora"  crossing  the  Equator,  August  1911  1-i 

Frank  Wild  15 

Ginger  and  her  Family  on  the  Voyage  from  London  20 

Queen's  Wharf,  Hobart,  an  Hour  before  Sailing,  December  2,  1911             21 

The  Last  View  of  Hobart  nestling  below  Mt.  Wellington  21 

A  Big,  following  Sea  26 

McLean  walking  aft  in  Rough  Weather  26 

xxiii 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

Crfising  along  the  West  Coast  of  Macquarie  Island  27 

A  Giant  Petrel  on  the  Nest  32 

A  Young  Giant  Petrel  on  the  Nest.    Caroline  Cove  32 

The  Wreck  of  the  "  Clyde  "  33 

The  Boat  Harbour — Hassleborough  Bay  38 

The  North  End  of  Macquarie  Island  showing  Wireless  Hill.  The  Living 
Hut  is  at  the  North  End  of  the  Isthmus,  with  North-East  Bay  on  the 
Right  and  Hassleborough  Bay  on  the  Left  Side  3& 

The  "Aurora"  anchored  in  Hassleborough  Bay.    In  the  Foreground 

Giant  Seaweed  is  swinging  in  the  Wash  of  the  Surge  44 

A  Wanderer  Albatross  at  rest  on  the  Water  45 

Hunter  Tickles  a  Sleeping  Baby  Sea  Elephant  45 

A  TYPICAL  Table-topped  Neve  Berg  originating  from  Floating  Shelf-ice      52' 
An  Antarctic  Iceberg  with  a  Reticulation  of  Crevasses  on  its  Tilted 
Surface.    This  Berg  had  no  doubt  taken  its  Origin  from  the  Ice  of 
the  Coastal  Cliffs  of  Adelie  Land  52 

In  Pack-ice  53 

A  Cavern  in  the  Wall  (120  Feet)  of  the  Shelf-ice  of  the  Mertz  Glacier- 
tongue  56 
A  Glempse  from  within  the  Cavern  (shown  in  the  preceding  illustration)      57 
The  "  Aurora  "  in  Cojuionwealth  Bay'  ;    the  Rising  Plateau  of  Adelie 

Land  in  the  distance  62 

The  invaluable  Motor-Launch  ;  left  to  right,  Hamilton,  Bickerton,  and 

Blake  63 

The  Whale-Boat  with  Passengers  for  the  Shore  ;  Wild  at  the  Steering 

Oar  63 

First  Steps  in  the  Formation  of  the  Main  Base  Station  ;  Landing  of  Stores 
and  Equipment  at  the  Head  of  the  Boat  Harbour,  Cape  Denison.  In 
the  Distance  Men  are  to  be  seen  sledging  the  Materials  to  the  Site 
selected  for  the  Erection  of  the  Hut  66 

A  View  of  a  Rocky  Stretch  of  the  Adelie  Land  Coast  West  of  Common- 
wealth Bay  67 
A  Panorama  looking  West  from  Winter  Quarters.    On  the  Left  and  in 
the  Distance  are  the  Rising  Slopes  of  the  Inland  Ice.    The  Moraine 
is  in  the  foreground                                                                     Bettveen  pp.  68-60 
A  Panorama  of  the  Sea-front  looking  Eastward  from  Winter  Quarters. 

The  Plateau  Slopes  are  visible  to  a  Height  of  1500  Feet    Between  pp.  68-69 
In  Open  Pack-Ice  72 

xxiv 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
pags 

The  Face  of  the  Shackleton  Ice-shelf  100  Miles  North  of  the  INIaenland. 
Each  strongly-marked  Horizontal  Band  on  the  sheer  Wall  repre- 
sents A  Year's  Snowfall  73 
The  "  AiTRORA "  anchored  to  thick  Floe-ice  100    Miles    North  of  the 
Western  Base,  Queen  Mary  Land.    In  this  region  the  Annual  Snow- 
fall is  very  heavy,  so  that  it  is  possible  that  the  Great  Thickness  of 
Floe  is  due  to  the  Accumulation  of  one  Year  78 
A  Berg  with  Inclusions  of  Mud  and  Rock.    Long.  110^  E.  79 
The  "  Flying-Fox  "  viewed  from  the  Floe-Ice  below  the  Brink  of  the 

Shelf-Ice  on  which  the  Western  Party  wintered  79 

Summer  at  the  Boat  Harbour,  Cape  Denison  82 

An  Adelie  Penguin  on  the  Nest  defending  her  Egcs  83 

The  Lives-g-Hut,  nearen^g  Completion.    The  Tents  and  Shelter  built  of 

Benzine  Cases  used  as  Temporary  Quarters  are  shown  86 

The  C03IPLETI0N  of  the  Hut — cheering  the  fNiON  Jack  as  it  was  hoisted 

ON  THE  Flag-pole  86 

Adelie  Penguins  "At  Home,"  Cape  Denison  87 

A  View  of  the  Main  Base  Hut  in  February  1912,  just  prior  to  its  comple- 
tion. Within  a  few  days  of  the  taking  of  this  picture  the  hut  became 
so  buried  in  packed  snow  that  ever  afterwards  little  beyond  the 

ROOF   WAS   to   be   SEEN  94 

Weddell  Seals  asleep  on  Pancake  Ice  96 

Adelie  Penguin  after  weathering  a  Severe  Blizzard.    Observe  the  Lumps 

OF  Ice  adherexg  to  it  97 

A  Panoramic  View  looking  South  from  near  the  Hut.  In  the  Distance  are 
THE  Slopes  op  the  Inland  Ice-sheet.  In  the  Foreground  is  the 
Terminal  Moraine.    Between  the  Rocks  and  the  Figure  is  a  Zone 

WHERE  raped  ThAWING  TAKES  PLACE  IN  THE  SUMMER  OWING  TO  THE  AMOUNT 

OF  Dert  CONTAINED  EN  THE  IcE  Between  pp.  98-99 

A  Panoramic  Vie w  looking  North  towards  the  Sea.  In  the  jMiddle  of  the 
Picture  is  Round  Lake.  The  Hut  is  towards  the  Left-hand  Side 
and  the  Anemograph  is  on  the  Hill.  The  Men  are  practiseng  Ski- 
RUNNEN^G  Between  pp.  98-99 

An  Evening  View  from  Cape  Denison  100 

The  Head  of  a  Weddell  Seal  101 

A  Weddell  Seal  scratching  heviself.     "Drat  those  Fleas!"  101 

The  Meteorologist  with  an  Ice-mask  104 

Where  the  Plateau  descends  to  Coidionwealth  Bay  105 

XXV 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

Maccoemick  Skua  Gull  on  the  Nest  with  Egg  106 

Chick  of  JMaccormick  Skua  Gull  on  the  Nest  106 

Protection — Adelie  Penguin  and  Chick  107 

The  Lower  Moraine,  composed  of  Water- worn  Boulders,  Cape  Denison  110 

An  Ice-polished  Surface,  Cape  Denison  110 
The  Boat  Harbour  in  ISIarch.     The  Hut  is  seen  duvily  through  Light 

Drift  1 1 1 

"Eace  of  the  Spray-smoke's  Hurtling  Sheet"  114 

Walking  against  a  Strong  Wind  115 
Picking  Ice  for  Domestic  Purposes  in  a  Hurricane  Wend.    Note  the  High 

Angle  at  which  Webb  is  leaning  on  the  Wind  115 

Leaning  upon  the  Wind  ;  LLidigan  near  the  Meteorological  Screen  122 

Stillwell  collecting  Geological  Specimens  in  the  Wend  123 
In  the  Blizzard  ;  getting  Ice  for  Domestic  Purposes  from  the  Glacier 

adjacent  to  the  hut  123 
An  Incident  in  March  soon  after  the  Completion  of  the  Hut  :  Hodgeman, 

THE  Night  Watchman,  returning  from  his  Rounds  outside,  pushes  his 

way  into  the  Veranda  through  the  rapidly  accumulating  Drift 

Snow  128 
Mertz  in  the  Snow  Tunnels  on  his  way  to  the  Interior  of  the  Hut  with 

a  Box  of  Ice  for  the  Melters  129 

Mertz  emerging  from  the  Trap-door  in  the  Roof  129 

Working  in  the  Hurricane  Wend,  Adelie  Land  132 
Getteng  Ice  for  Domestic  Purposes.    Whetter  picking  ;  Madigan  with  the 

Ice-box  132 

The  Ice-cliff  Coastline  East  of  Winter  Quarters  134 

Madigan's  Frostbitten  Face  135 

CoRRELL,  Bage,  McLean,  Hodgeman,  Hunter,  and  Bickerton  136 
A  Winter  Afternoon  Scene  in  the  Hut.    From  the  Left  :  Mertz,  McLean, 

]\Iadigan,  Hunter,  Hodgejlin.    High  on  the  Left  is  the  Acetylene 

Generator  137 
Taking  a  turn  in  the  Kitchen  Department.    HinsrTER,  Hodgeman,  Bage. 

The  Doorway  on  the  Right  is  the  Entrance  to  the  Workroom  137 

A  Corner  of  the  Hut — Bage  mending  his  Sleepeng-bag.  The  Bunks  in 
two  Tiers  around  the  Wall  are  almost  hidden  by  the  Clotheng  hang- 
ing FROM  THE  Ceiling  .  138 

xxvi 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

A  Winter  Evening  at  the  Hut.    Standing  up  :  IVIawson,  JMadigan,  Ninnis, 

AND  CORRELL.     SITTING  ROUND  THE  TABLE  FROM  LEFT  TO  RIGHT  :    StILLWELL, 

Close,    McLean,    Hunter,    Hannam,    Hodgeman,    Murphy,    Laseron, 

BiCKERTON,  MeRTZ,  AND  BaGE  139 

A  Morning  in  the  Workshop.    From  Left  to  Right:  Hodgeiman,  Hunter, 
Laseron,  Correll,  and  Hannam.    The  Petrol  Engine  part  of  the 

Wireless  Plant  on  the  Right  142 
Welding  by  Thermit  in  the  Workroom,  Adelie  Land.     Bickerton,  Correll, 

Hannam  and  Mawson  143 

In  the  Catacombs.    Ninnis  on  the  Right  146 

Bage  and  his  Tide  Gauge  which  was  erected  on  the  Frozen  Bay  Ice  147 

Raising  the  Lower  Section  of  the  Northern  Wireless  Mast  147 
The  Weathered  Cliffs  of  a  Glacier  Sheet  pushing  out  into  the  Frozen 

Sea  East  of  Cape  Denison  Between  pp.  148-149 

Bage  at  the  Door  of  his  Astronomical  Transit  House  152 

Webb  and  his  j^Lignetograph  House  152 
At  Work  on  the  Air-tractor  Sledge  in  the  Hangar  ;  Bage,  Ninnis,  and 

Bickerton  153 

Webb  adjusting  the  Instruments  in  the  Magnetograph  House  153 

A  Calm  Noon  in  Winter,  Cape  Denison  158 

The  Ridged  Surface  of  a  Lake  frozen  during  a  Blizzard  159 
A  Lively  Scene  in  the  Vicinity  of  an  Antarctic  Petrel  Rookery,  Cape 

Hunter  162 

A  Weddell  Seal  swimming  below  the  Ice-foot  163 

A  RASCALLY  SeA-LEOPARD   CASTING  A  WiCKED   EyE  OVER  THE  BROKEN  FlOE  AT 

Land's  End.  Main  Base  163 
A  Crab-eater  Seal  ;  common  amongst  the  Pack-ice  166 
The  rare  Ross  Seal  166 
One  of  McLean's  Cultures  ;  Bacteria  and  Moulds  ;  illustrating  Micro- 
organisms in  the  Hut  167 
Ice  Flowers  on  the  newly  formed  Sea-ice  167 
Madigan  visiting  the  Anemograph  Screen  in  a  High  Wind  170 
The  Puffometer,  designed  to  record  Maximum  Gust  Velocities  170 

An  Enormous  Cone  of  Snow  piled  up  by  the  Blizzards  under  the  Coastal 

Cliffs  171 

The  Cliffs  at  Land's  End,  Cape  Denison.    On  the  Brow'of  the  Cliff  in 

Front  of  the  Figure  (Mertz)  is  a  Good  Example  op  a  Snow  Cornice  178 

xxvii 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
2- age 

On  the  Fkozen  Sea  m  a  Cavern  eaten  out  by  the  Waves  under  the  Coastal 

Ice-cliffs  1 79 

Ice  Stalactites  draping  the  Foreshores  184 

A  Grotto  of  "  Mysteries  "  185 
The  Relief  of  Wild's  Party.    The  "  Aurora  "  approaching  the  Floe  at 

the  Western  Base,  February  1913  190 

Paceng  the  Deck  :  Capt.  John  King  Davis  and  Capt.  James  Davis  190 

An  Adelie  Penguin  FEEDr^fG  its  Young  191 

"  AsrUNDSEN,"  ONE  OF  THE  SlEDGE  DoGS  SENT  DOWN  TO  US  FROM  AmUNDSEN's 

South  Polar  Expedition  192 
At  the  Foot  of  a  Snow  Piamp  beneath  the  Coastal  Ice-cliffs,  Coivimon- 

wealth  Bay  193 
At  Aladdin's  Cave.    The  Vertical  Passage  leading  down  into  the  Cave 

ITSELF   IS   situated   IMMEDIATELY   BEHIND    THE   FiGURE   ON   THE   RiGHT  194 

Beneath  the  Surface  of  the  Plateau.    Bage  preparing  a  Meal  in  Aladdin's 

Cave  in  August  194 
Laseron  and  Hunter  using  the  Collapsible  Steel  Handcart  in  preparing 

FOR  Dredging  on  the  Frozen  Sea  195 
Greenland  Sledging  Dogs — "  John  Bull  "  and  "  Ginger  " — tethered  on 

the  Rocks  adjacent  to  the  Hut  195 
The  IVIackellar  Islets  viewed  from  an  Elevation  of  SOO  Feet  on  the  ]Main- 

LAND  Between  pp.  202-203 

Snow  Petrels  preparing  to  Xest,  Cape  Denison  208 

A  Snow  Petrel  on  the  Nest  208 

Adelie  Penguins  drtng  into  the  Sea  in  quest  of  Food  209 

Adelie  Penguins  jumping  on  to  the  Floe  209 

Mertz  in  an  Icy  Ravine  214 

Mertz  and  Ninnis  arrwe  with  the  Dogs  at  Aladdin's  Cave  215 

Mertz  emerging  from  Aladdin's  Cave  220 

A  Team  of  Dogs  eagerly  following  Ninnis  221 

The  Dogs  enjoy  their  Work  221 

Speeding  East  224 

A  Distant  View  of  Aurora  Peak  from  the  West  224 

Lieutenant  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis,  R.F.  238 

Mertz,  Ninnis,  and  Mawson  erecting  the  Tent  in  a  High  Wind  239 

A  Later  Stage  in  Erection  of  the  Tent  in  a  Wind  (one  IMan  is  inside)  239 

xxviii 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 

To  face 
page 

Dr.  Xaviee  Mertz  246 

Pages  from  Dr.  Mertz'  Diary  247 

IVIawson  emerging  from  his  iviAKESHiFT  Tent  266 

The  Half-sledge  used  in  the  Last  Stage  of  Mawson's  Journey  266 

"...  the  Long  Journey  was  at  an  end — a  Terrible  Chapter  of  my  Life 

WAS  finished  !  "  267 

The  Southern  Supporting  Party  on  the  Plateau.    Hunter,  Murphy  and 

Laseron  274 

The  Southern  and  Supporting  Parties  building  a  Depot  on  the  Plateau  275 
Depot  made  by  the  Southern  and  Supporting  Parties  at  a  Point  67  Miles 

South  of  Commonwealth  Bay.    Murphy,  Laseron,  and  Hunter  packing 

Sledge  in  the  Foreground  ;  Bage  in  the  Distance  282 

A  Rough  Sledging  Surface  of  High  Sasteugi  encountered  by  the  Southern 

Party  200  Miles  S.S.E.  of  the  Hut  283 

Farthest  South  Camp  of  Southern  Party,  17  "Minutes"  (about  50  Miles) 

FROM  THE  South  Magnetic  Pole.     Bage  near  Sledge  ;   Webb  taking 

Set  of  SL^gnetic  Observations  behind  Snow  Barricade  296 

Sastrugi  furrowed  by  the  Mighty  Winds  of  the  Plateau,  250  Miles  S.S.E. 

op  Winter  Quarters,  Adelie  Land  297 

Under  Reefed  Sail.    Southern    Party    290    Miles    S.S.E.    of    Winter 

Quarters,  Adelie  Land  297 

Hurley  in  Sledging  Garb  304 

CORRELL  ON   THE   EdGE   OF  A   RaVINE   IN   THE   ICE-SHEET  303 

Madigan's,  Murphy's,  and  Stillwell's  Parties  breaking  Camp  at  Aladdin's 

Cave  at  the  Commencement  of  the  Sumivier  Journeys  309 

The  Surface  of  the  Continental  Ice-sheet  in  the  Coastal  Region  where 

IT  is  badly  Crevassed  326 

Working  the  Sledge  through  broken  Sea-ice,  45  Miles  off  King  George  V 

Land.    ]\Li.DiGAN,  Correll  and  McLean  327 

The  "  Organ-pipes  "  of  Horn  Bluff  (1000  Feet  in  Height)  pushing  out 

FROM  the  Mainland  332 

Madigan,  Correll  and  McLean  Camped  below  the  Cliffs  of  Horn  Bluff 
(1000  Feet  in  Height).  Columnar  Dolerite  is  seen  surmounting  a 
Sedevientary  Series  partly  buried  m  the  Talus-slope  333 

An  Outcrop  of  a  Sedimentary  Formation  containing  Bands  of  Coal  pro- 
jecting through  the  Talus-slope  below  the  Columnar  Dolerite  at 
Horn  Bluff  336 

xxix 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS 


To  faci 

Page 


The  Face  of  a  Graxite  Outcrop  near  Penguin  Point,    At  its  Base  is  a  Tide 

Crack  and  Ice  Foot  337 

The  Granite  Cliffs  at  Penguin  Point  where   Cape   Pigeon  and  Silver 

Petrel  Rookeries  were  found  ;  the  Site  of  New  Year's  Camp  344 


TEXT  ILLUSTRATIONS 

Page 

Antarctic  Discoveries  preceding  the  Year  1910  5 

Plan  and  Section  of  the  S.Y.  "  Aurora  "  13 

Map  op  IVIacquarie  Island  by  L.  R.  Blake  31 

Ships'  Tracks  in  the  Vicinity  of  Totten's  Land  and  North's  Land  73 

Ships'  Tracks  in  the  Vicinity  of  ICnox  Land  and  Budd  Land  75 

Plan  of  the  Hut,  Adelie  Land  85 

Sections  across  the  Hut,  Adelie  Land  89 

The  Vicinity  of  the  IVIain  Base,  Adelie  Land  93 

A  Section  of  the  Coastal  Slope  of  the  Continental  Ice-Sheet  Inland  from 

Winter  Quarters,  Adelie  Land  109 
Wind-velocity  and  Wind-direction  Charts  for  a  Period  of  Twenty-four 

Hours,  Adelie  Land  117 
A  Comparison  of  Wind -velocities  and  Temperatures  prevailing  at  Cape 

RoYDS,  McMuRDO  Sound,   and   at  Winter  Quarters,   Adelie   Land, 

during  the  Months  of  May'  and  June  US 

The  Drift-gauge  123 

The  Wind -velocity  and  Wind -direction  Charts  for  Midwinter  Day  169 

The  Tide-gauge  171 

Midwinter  Day  Menu  at  the  Main  Base,  Adelie  Land,  1912  174 

Section  through  a  Nansen  Sledging  Cooker  Mounted  on  the  Primus  183 
Map  showing  the  Track  of  the  Southern  Sledging  Party  from  the  INIain 

Base  279 


XXX 


CHAPTER  I 
THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

NOTWITHSTANDING  the  fact  that  it  has  been 
repeatedly  stated  in  the  pubhc  press  that  the 
Australasian  Antarctic  expedition  had  no  intention 
of  making  the  South  Geographical  Pole  its  objective,  it  is 
evident  that  our  aims  were  not  properly  realized  by  a  large 
section  of  the  British  public,  considering  that  many  refer- 
ences have  appeared  in  print  attributing  that  purpose  to 
the  undertaking.  With  three  other  Antarctic  expeditions 
already  in  the  field,  it  appeared  to  many,  therefore,  that  the 
venture  was  entirely  superfluous. 

The  Expedition  had  a  problem  sketched  in  unmistakable 
feature,  and  the  following  pages  will  shortly  set  forth  its 
historical  origin  and  rationale. 

The  Antarctic  problem  *  assumed  its  modern  aspect 
after  Captain  Cook's  circumnavigation  of  the  globe  in  high 
southern  latitudes,  accomplished  between  1772  and  1775. 
Fact  replaced  the  fiction  and  surmise  of  former  times,  and  maps 
appeared  showing  a  large  blank  area  at  the  southern  extremity 
of  the  earth,  where  speculative  cartographers  had  affirmed  the 
existence  of  habitable  land  extending  far  towards  the  Equator. 
Cook's  voyage  made  it  clear  that  if  there  were  any  considerable 
mass  of  Antarctic  land,  it  must  indubitably  lie  within  the 
Antarctic  Circle,  and  be  subjected  to  such  stringent  climatic 
conditions  as  to  render  it  an  unlikely  habitation  for  man. 

*  Dr.  H.  R.Mill  has  compiled  a  complete  account  of  Antarctic  explora- 
tion in  his  "  Siege  of  the  South  Pole." 

Refer  also  to  the  Historical  Appendix  for  an  abridged  statement. 
VOL.  I.  A  1 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Cook's  reports  of  seals  on  the  island  of  South  Georgia 
initiated  in  the  Antarctic  seas  south  of  America  a  commercial 
enterprise,  which  is  still  carried  on,  and  has  incidentally 
thrown  much  light  upon  the  geography  of  the  South  Polar 
regions.  Indeed,  almost  the  whole  of  such  information, 
prior  to  the  year  1839,  was  the  outcome  of  sealing  and 
whaling  projects. 

About  the  year  1840,  a  wave  of  scientific  enthusiasm 
resulted  in  the  dispatch  of  three  national  expeditions  by 
France,  the  United  States,  and  Great  Britain  ;  part  at  least 
of  whose  programmes  was  Antarctic  exploration.  Russia 
had  previously  sent  out  an  expedition  which  had  made  notable 
discoveries. 

The  contributions  to  knowledge  gained  at  this  period 
were  considerable.  Those  carried  back  to  civilization  by 
the  British  expedition  under  Ross,  are  so  well  known  that 
they  need  not  be  described.  The  French  under  Dumont 
D'Urville  and  the  Americans  under  Wilkes  visited  the 
region  to  the  southward  of  Australia — ^the  arena  of  our  own 
efforts — and  frequent  references  will  be  made  to  their  work 
throughout  this  story. 

What  has  been  termed  the  period  of  averted  interest 
now  intervened,  before  the  modern  movement  set  in  with 
overpowering  insistence.  It  was  not  till  1897  that  it  had 
commenced  in  earnest.  Since  then  many  adventurers  have 
gone  forth ;  most  of  the  prominent  civilized  nations  taking 
their  share  in  exploration.  By  their  joint  efforts  some,  at 
least,  of  the  mystery  of  Antarctica  has  been  dispelled. 

It  is  now  a  commonplace,  largely  in  the  world  of  geogra- 
phical concerns,  that  the  earth  has  still  another  continent, 
unique  in  character,  whose  ultimate  bounds  are  merely 
pieced  together  from  a  fragmentary  outline.  The  Continent 
itself  appears  to  have  been  sighted  for  the  first  time  in  the 
year  1820,  but  no  human  being  actually  set  foot  on  it  until 
1895.  The  Belgian  expedition  under  de  Gerlache  was  the 
first  to  experience  the  Antarctic  winter,  spending  the  year 
1898  drifting  helplessly,  frozen  in  the  pack-ice,  to  the  south- 
2 


in    h 
Q   ^ 


B'                ^^H^K^IS^JB 

J     * 

THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

ward  of  America.  In  the  following  year  a  British  expedition 
under  Borchgrevinck,  wintering  at  Cape  Adare,  passed  a 
year  upon  the  Antarctic  mainland. 

The  main  efforts  of  recent  years  have  been  centred  upon 
the  two  more  accessible  areas,  namely,  that  in  the  American 
Quadrant  *  which  is  prolonged  as  a  tongue  of  land  outside 
the  Antarctic  Circle,  being  consequently  less  beset  by  ice  ; 
secondly,  the  vicinity  of  the  Ross  Sea  in  the  Australian 
Quadrant.  It  is  because  these  two  favoured  domains  have 
for  special  reasons  attracted  the  stream  of  exploration  that 
the  major  portion  of  Antarctica  is  unknown.  Nevertheless, 
one  is  in  a  position  to  sketch  broad  features  which  will 
probably  not  be  radically  altered  by  any  future  expeditions. 

Certain  it  is  that  a  continent  approaching  the  combined 
areas  of  Australia  and  Europe  lies  more  or  less  buried 
beneath  the  South  Polar  snows  ;  though  any  statement  of 
the  precise  area  is  insufficient  for  a  proper  appreciation  of 
the  magnitude,  unless  its  elevated  plateau-like  character 
be  also  taken  into  consideration.  It  appears  to  be  highest 
over  a  wide  central  crown  rising  to  more  than  ten  thousand 
feet.  Of  the  remainder,  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  major 
portion  stands  as  high  as  six  thousand  feet.  The  average 
elevation  must  far  exceed  that  of  any  other  continent,  for, 
with  peaks  nineteen  thousand  feet  above  sea-level,  its  moun- 
tainous topography  is  remarkable.  Along  the  coast  of 
Victoria  Land,  in  the  Australian  Quadrant,  are  some  of  the 
most  majestic  vistas  of  alpine  scenery  that  the  world  affords. 
Rock  exposures  are  rare,  ice  appearing  everywhere  except 
in  the  most  favoured  places. 

Regarding  plant  and  animal  life  upon  the  land  there  is 

*  For  convenience,  the  Antarctic  regions  may  be  referred  to  in  four 
main  divisions,  corresponding  with  the  quadrants  of  the  hemisphere.  Of  the 
several  suggestions  thrown  out  by  previous  writers,  the  one  adopted  here 
is  that  based  on  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  referring  the  quadrants  to  an 
adjacent  continent  or  ocean.  Thus  the  American  Quadrant  lies  between 
0°  and  90°  W.,'  the  African  Quadrant  between  0°  and  90°  E.,  and  the 
Austrahan  Quadrant  between  90*  and  180°  E.  The  fourth  division  is 
called  the  Pacific  Quadrant,  since  ocean  alone  lies  to  the  north  of  it. 

3 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

little  to  say.  The  vegetable  kingdom  is  represented  by  plants 
of  low  organization  such  as  mosses,  lichens,  diatoms  and  algae. 
The  animal  world,  so  far  as  true  land-forms  are  concerned, 
is  limited  to  types  like  the  protozoa  (lowest  in  the  organic 
scale),  rotifera  and  minute  insect-like  mites  which  lurk  hidden 
away  amongst  the  tufts  of  moss  or  on  the  under  side  of  loose 
stones.  Bacteria,  most  fundamental  of  all,  at  the  basis,  so 
to  speak,  of  animal  and  vegetable  life,  have  a  manifold 
distribution. 

It  is  a  very  different  matter  when  we  turn  to  the  life  of 
the  neighbouring  seas,  for  that  vies  in  abundance  with  the 
warmer  waters  of  lower  latitudes.  There  are  innumerable 
seals,  many  sea-birds  and  millions  of  penguins.  As  all  these 
breed  on  Antarctic  shores,  the  coastal  margin  of  the  continent 
is  not  so  desolate. 

In  view  of  the  fact  that  life,  including  land-mammals, 
is  abundant  in  the  North  Polar  regions,  it  may  be  asked 
why  analogous  forms  are  not  better  represented  in  corre- 
sponding southern  latitudes.  Without  going  too  deeply  into 
the  question,  it  may  be  briefly  stated,  firstly,  that  a  more 
widespread  glaciation  than  at  present  prevails  invested 
the  great  southern  continent  and  its  environing  seas,  within 
recent  geological  times,  effectually  exterminating  any  pre- 
existing land  life.  Secondly,  since  that  period  the  continent 
has  been  isolated  by  a  wide  belt  of  ocean  from  other  lands, 
from  which  restocking  might  have  taken  place  after  the 
manner  of  the  North  Polar  regions.  Finally,  climatic  con- 
ditions in  the  Antarctic  are,  latitude  for  latitude,  much  more 
severe  than  in  the  Arctic. 

With  regard  to  climate  in  general,  Antarctica  has  the 
lowest  mean  temperature  and  the  highest  wind-velocity  of 
any  land  existing.  This  naturally  follows  from  the  fact  that 
it  is  a  lofty  expanse  of  ice-clad  land  circumscribing  the  Pole, 
and  that  the  Antarctic  summer  occurs  when  the  earth  is  farther 
from  the  sun  than  is  the  case  during  the  Arctic  summer. 

There  are  those  who  would  impatiently  ask,  *'  What  is 
the  use  of  it  all  ?  "     The  answer  is  brief. 
4 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 


AFRICA 


ANTARCTIC 
LAND -DISCOVERIES 

PRECEDING       I9IO 


ANTARCTIC  DISCOVERIES  PRECEDING  THE   YEAR   1910 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  polar  regions,  like  any  other  part  of  the  globe,  may 
be  said  to  be  paved  with  facts,  the  essence  of  which  it  is 
necessary  to  acquire  before  knowledge  of  this  special  zone 
can  be  brought  to  even  a  provisional  exactitude.  On  the 
face  of  it,  polar  research  may  seem  to  be  specific  and  dis- 
criminating, but  it  must  be  remembered  that  an  advance  in 
any  one  of  the  departments  into  which,  for  convenience, 
science  is  artificially  divided,  conduces  to  the  advantage  of 
all.  Science  is  a  homogeneous  whole.  If  we  ignore  the  facts 
contained  in  one  part  of  the  world,  surely  we  are  hampering 
scientific  advance.  It  is  obvious  to  every  one  that,  given 
only  a  fraction  of  the  pieces,  it  is  a  much  more  difficult  task 
to  put  together  a  jig-saw  puzzle  and  obtain  an  idea  of  the 
finished  pattern  than  were  all  the  pieces  at  hand.  The  pieces 
of  the  jig-saw  puzzle  are  the  data  of  science. 

Though  it  is  not  sufficiently  recognized,  the  advance  of 
science  is  attended  by  a  corresponding  increase  in  the 
creature  comforts  of  man.  Again,  from  an  economic  aspect, 
the  frozen  South  may  not  attract  immediate  attention.  But 
who  can  say  what  a  train  of  enterprise  the  future  may  bring  ? 

Captain  James  Cook,  on  his  return  to  London  after  the 
circumnavigation  of  Antarctica,  held  that  the  far-southern 
lands  had  no  future.  Yet,  a  few  years  later,  great  profits 
were  being  returned  to  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States 
from  sealing-stations  established  as  a  result  of  Cook's  own 
observations.  At  the  present  day,  several  whaling  companies 
have  flourishing  industries  in  the  Antarctic  waters  within 
the  American  Quadrant. 

Even  now  much  can  be  said  in  regard  to  the  possibilities 
offered  by  the  Antarctic  regions  for  economic  development, 
but,  year  by  year,  the  outlook  will  widen,  since  man  is 
constantly  resorting  to  subtler  and  more  ingenious  artifice 
in  applying  Nature's  resources.  It  Avill  be  remembered  that 
Charles  Darwin,  when  in  Australia,  predicted  a  very 
limited  commercial  future  for  New  South  Wales.  But  the 
mastery  of  man  overcame  the  difficulties  which  Darwin's 
too  penetrating  mind  foresaw. 
6 


Atlelie  Land  THE   \VAJ>L  OF  THE  ANTARCTIC  CONTINENT 


Hiuiey 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

What  will  be  the  role  of  the  South  in  the  progress  of 
civilization  and  in  the  development  of  the  arts  and  sciences,  is 
not  now  obvious.  As  sure  as  there  is  here  a  vast  mass  of  land 
with  potentialities,  strictly  limited  at  present,  so  surely  will  it 
be  cemented  some  day  within  the  universal  plinth  of  things. 

An  unknown  coast-line  lay  before  the  door  of  Australia. 
Following  on  the  general  advance  of  exploration,  and  as  a 
sequel  to  several  important  discoveries,  the  time  arrived 
when  a  complete  elucidation  of  the  Antarctic  problem  was 
more  than  ever  desirable.  In  the  Australian  Quadrant,  the 
broad  geographical  features  of  the  Ross  Sea  area  were  well 
known,  but  of  the  remainder  and  greater  portion  of  the 
tract  only  vague  and  imperfect  reports  could  be  supplied. 

Before  submitting  our  plans  in  outline,  it  will  be  as  well 
to  review  the  stage  at  which  discovery  had  arrived  when 
our  Expedition  came  upon  the  scene. 

The  coast-line  of  the  eastern  extremity  of  the  Australian 
Quadrant,  including  the  outline  of  the  Ross  Sea  and  the 
coast  west-north-west  of  Cape  Adare  as  far  as  Cape  North, 
was  charted  by  Ross  and  has  been  amplified  by  seven  later 
expeditions.  In  the  region  west  of  Cape  North,  recent 
explorers  had  done  little  up  till  1911.  Scott  in  the  Discovery 
had  disproved  the  existence  of  some  of  Wilkes's  land ; 
Shackleton  in  the  Nimrod  had  viewed  some  forty  miles  of 
high  land  beyond  Cape  North  ;  lastly,  on  the  eve  of  our 
departure,  Scott's  Terra  Nova  had  met  two  patches  of  new 
land — Oates  Land — still  farther  west,  making  it  evident 
that  the  continent  ranged  at  least  two  hundred  and  eighty 
miles  in  a  west-north-west  direction  from  Cape  Adare. 

Just  outside  the  western  limit  of  the  Australian  Quadrant 
lies  Gaussberg,  discovered  by  a  German  expedition  under 
Drygalski  in  1902.  Between  the  most  westerly  point  sighted 
by  the  Terra  Nova  and  Gaussberg,  there  is  a  circuit  of  two 
thousand  miles,  bordering  the  Antarctic  Circle,  which  no 
vessel  had  navigated  previous  to  1840. 

This    was   the    arena    of    our   activities    and,  therefore, 

7 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

a  synopsis  of  the  voyages  of  early  mariners  will  be  en- 
lightening. 

Balleny,  a  whaling-master,  with  the  schooner  Eliza 
Scott  of  one  hundred  and  fifty-four  tons,  and  a  cutter,  the 
Sabrina  of  fifty-four  tons,  was  the  first  to  meet  with  success 
in  these  waters.  Proceeding  southward  from  New  Zealand 
in  1839,  he  located  the  Balleny  Islands,  a  group  containing 
active  volcanoes,  lying  about  two  hundred  miles  off  the 
nearest  part  of  the  mainland  and  to  the  north-west  of  Cape 
Adare.  Leaving  these  islands,  Balleny  sailed  westward 
keeping  a  look-out  for  new  land.  During  a  gale  the  vessels 
became  separated  and  the  Sabrina  was  lost  with  all  hands. 
Balleny  in  the  Eliza  Scott  arrived  safely  in  England  and 
reported  doubtful  land  in  122°  E.  longitude,  approximately. 
Dr.  H.  R.  ]Mill  says  :  "  Although  the  name  of  the  cutter 
Sabrina  has  been  given  to  an  appearance  of  land  at  this 
point,  we  cannot  look  vipon  its  discovery  as  proved  by  the 
vague  reference  made  by  the  explorers." 

On  January  1,  1840,  Dumont  D'Urville  sailed  southward 
from  Hobart  in  command  of  two  corvettes,  the  Astrolabe  and 
the  Zelee.  Without  much  obstruction  from  floating  ice,  he 
came  within  sight  of  the  Antarctic  coast,  thenceforth  known 
as  Adelie  Land.  The  expedition  did  not  set  foot  on  the 
mainland,  but  on  an  adjacent  island.  They  remained  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  coast  for  a  few  days,  when  a  gale  sprang  up 
which  was  hazardously  weathered  on  the  windward  side  of 
the  pack-ice.  The  ships  then  cruised  along  the  face  of  flat- 
topped  ice-cliffs,  of  the  type  known  as  barrier-ice  or  shelf- 
ice,  which  were  taken  to  be  connected  with  land  and  named 
Cote  Clarie.  As  will  be  seen  later,  Cote  Clarie  does  not 
exist. 

Dr.  H.  R.  Mill  sums  up  the  work  done  by  the  French 
expedition  during  its  eleven  days'  sojourn  in  the  vicinity  of 
the  Antarctic  coast  : 

"  D'Urville's  discoveries  of  land  were  of  but  little  account. 
He  twice  traced  out  considerable  stretches  of  a  solid  barrier 
of  ice,  and  at  one  point  saw  and  landed  upon  rocks  in  front  of 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

it ;  but  he  could  only  give  the  vaguest  account  of  what  lay 
behind  the  barrier." 

Wilkes  of  the  American  expedition  proceeded  south 
from  Sydney  at  the  close  of  1839.  His  vessels  were  the 
Vincennes,  a  sloop  of  war  of  seven  hundred  and  eighty  tons, 
the  Peacock,  another  sloop  of  six  hundred  and  fifty  tons, 
the  Ponpoise,  a  gun-brig  of  two  hundred  and  thirty  tons  and 
a  tender,  the  Flying  Fish  of  ninety-six  tons.  The  scientists 
of  the  expedition  were  precluded  from  joining  in  this  part  of 
the  programme,  and  were  left  behind  in  Sydney.  Wilkes 
himself  was  loud  in  his  denunciation  both  of  the  ships  and 
of  the  stores,  though  they  had  been  specially  assembled  by 
the  naval  department.  The  ships  were  in  Antarctic  waters 
for  a  period  of  forty-two  days,  most  of  the  time  separated  by 
gales,  during  which  the  crews  showed  great  skill  in  navigating 
their  ill-fitted  crafts  and  suffered  great  hardships. 

Land  was  reported  almost  daily,  but,  unfortunately, 
subsequent  exploration  has  shown  that  most  of  the  landfalls 
do  not  exist.  Several  soundings  made  by  Wilkes  were 
indicative  of  the  approach  to  land,  but  he  must  have  fre- 
quently mistaken  for  it  distant  ice-masses  frozen  in  the  pack. 
Experience  has  proved  what  deceptive  light-effects  may  be 
observed  amid  the  ice  and  how  easily  a  mirage  may  simulate 
reality. 

Whatever  the  cause  of  Wilkes's  errors,  the  truth  remains 
that  Ross  sailed  over  land  indicated  in  a  rough  chart  which 
had  been  forwarded  to  him  by  Wilkes,  just  before  the  British 
expedition  set  out.  More  recently.  Captain  Scott  in  the 
Discovery  erased  many  of  the  landfalls  of  Wilkes,  and  now  we 
have  still  further  reduced  their  number.  The  Challenger 
approached  within  fifteen  miles  of  the  western  extremity  of 
Wilkes's  Termination  Land,  but  saw  no  sign  of  it.  The 
Gauss  in  the  same  waters  charted  Kaiser  Wilhelm  II  Land 
well  to  the  south  of  Termination  Land,  and  the  eastward 
continuation  of  the  former  could  not  have  been  visible  from 
Wilkes's  ship.  After  the  voyage  of  the  Discovery,  the  land- 
falls, the  existence  of  which  had  not  been  disproved,  might  well 

9 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

have  been  regarded  as  requiring  confirmation  before  their 
validity  could  be  recognised. 

The  only  spot  where  rocks  were  reported  in  situ  was  in 
Adelie  Land,  where  the  French  had  anticipated  the  Ameri- 
cans by  seven  days.  Farther  west,  earth  and  stones  had 
been  collected  by  Wilkes  from  material  embedded  in  floating 
masses  of  ice  off  the  coast  of  his  Knox  Land.  These  facts 
lend  credence  to  Wilkes's  claims  of  land  in  that  vicinity. 
His  expedition  did  not  once  set  foot  on  Antarctic  shores, 
and,  possibly  on  account  of  the  absence  of  the  scientific  staff, 
his  descriptions  tend  to  be  inexact  and  obscure.  The 
soundings  made  by  Wilkes  were  sufficient  to  show  that  he 
was  probably  in  some  places  at  no  great  distance  from  the 
coast,  and,  considering  that  his  work  was  carried  out  in  the 
days  of  sailing-ships,  in  unsuitable  craft,  under  the  most 
adverse  weather  conditions,  with  crews  scurvy-stricken  and 
discontented,  it  is  wonderful  how  much  was  achieved.  We 
may  amply  testify  that  he  did  more  than  open  the  field  for 
future  expeditions. 

After  we  had  taken  into  account  the  valuable  soundings 
of  the  Challenger  (1872),  the  above  comprised  our  knowledge 
concerning  some  two  thousand  miles  of  prospective  coast 
lying  to  the  southward  of  Australia,  at  a  time  when  the  plans 
of  the  Australasian  expedition  were  being  formulated. 

The  original  plans  for  the  expedition  were  somewhat 
modified  upon  my  return  from  Europe.  Briefly  stated,  it 
was  decided  that  a  party  of  five  men  should  be  stationed  at 
Macquarie  Island,  a  sub-antarctic  possession  of  the  Common- 
wealth. They  were  to  be  provided  with  a  hut,  stores  and  a 
complete  wireless  plant,  and  were  to  prosecute  general 
scientific  investigations,  co-operating  with  the  Antarctic 
bases  in  meteorological  and  other  work.  After  disembark- 
ing the  party  at  Macquarie  Island,  the  Aurora  was  to 
proceed  south  on  a  meridian  of  158°  E.  longitude,  to  the 
westward  of  which  the  Antarctic  programme  was  to  be 
conducted. 
10 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

Twelve  men,  provisioned  and  equipped  for  a  year's 
campaign  and  provided  with  wireless  apparatus,  were  to  be 
landed  in  Antarctica  on  the  first  possible  opportunity  at 
what  would  constitute  a  main  base.  Thereafter,  proceeding 
westward,  it  was  hoped  that  a  second  and  a  third  party, 
consisting  of  six  and  eight  men  respectively,  would  be 
successively  established  on  the  continent  at  considerable 
distances  apart.  Of  course  we  were  well  aware  of  the 
difficulties  of  landing  even  one  party,  but,  as  division  of  our 
forces  would  under  normal  conditions  secure  more  scientific 
data,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  be  prepared  for  excep- 
tionally favourable  circumstances. 

Macquarie  Island,  a  busy  station  in  the  days  of  the  early 
sealers,  had  become  almost  neglected.  Little  accurate  in- 
formation was  to  be  had  regarding  it,  and  no  reliable  map 
existed.  A  few  isolated  facts  had  been  gathered  of  its 
geology,  and  the  anomalous  fauna  and  flora  sui  generis  had 
been  but  partially  described.  Its  position,  eight  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  south- south- east  of  Hobart,  gave  promise  of 
valuable  meteorological  data  relative  to  the  atmospheric 
circulation  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  and  of  vital  interest 
to  the  shipping  of  Australia  and  New  Zealand. 

As  to  the  Antarctic  sphere  of  work,  it  has  been  seen  that 
very  little  was  known  of  the  vast  region  which  was  our 
goal.  It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  almost  every  observation 
would  be  fresh  material  added  to  the  sum  of  human  know- 
ledge. 

In  addition  to  the  work  to  be  conducted  from  the  land 
bases,  it  was  intended  that  oceanographic  investigations 
should  be  carried  on  by  the  Aurora  as  far  as  funds  would 
allow.  With  this  object  in  view,  provision  was  made  for  the 
necessary  apparatus  which  would  enable  the  ship's  party  to 
make  extensive  investigations  of  the  ocean  and  its  floor 
over  the  broad  belt  between  Australia  and  the  Antarctic 
Continent.  This  was  an  important  branch  of  study,  for 
science  is  just  as  much  interested  in  the  greatest  depths  of 
the  ocean  as  with  the  corresponding  elevations  of  the  land. 

11 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Indeed,  at  the  present  day,  the  former  is  perhaps  the  greater 
field. 

The  scope  of  our  intentions  was  regarded  by  some  as 
over-ambitious,  but  knowing 

How  far  high  failure  overleaps  the  bound 
Of  low  successes, 

and  seeing  nothing  impossible  in  these  arrangements,  we 
continued  to  adhere  to  them  as  closely  as  possible,  with 
what  fortune  remains  to  be  told. 

To  secure  a  suitable  vessel  was  a  matter  of  fundamental 
importance.  There  was  no  question  of  having  a  ship  built 
to  our  design,  for  the  requisite  expenditure  might  well  have 
exceeded  the  whole  cost  of  our  Expedition.  Accordingly 
the  best  obtainable  vessel  was  purchased,  and  modified  to 
fulfil  our  requirements.  Such  craft  are  not  to  be  had  in 
southern  waters  ;  they  are  only  to  be  found  engaged  in 
Arctic  whaling  and  sealing. 

The  primary  consideration  in  the  design  of  a  vessel 
built  to  navigate  amid  the  ice  is  that  the  hull  be  very  staunch, 
capable  of  driving  into  the  pack  and  of  resisting  lateral 
pressure,  if  the  ice  should  close  in  around  it. 

So  a  thick-walled  timber  vessel,  with  adequate  stiffening 
in  the  framework,  would  meet  the  case.  The  construction 
being  of  wood  imparts  a  certain  elasticity,  which  is  of  great 
advantage  in  easing  the  shock  of  impacts  with  floating  ice. 
As  has  been  tragically  illustrated  in  a  recent  disaster,  the 
ordinary  steel  ship  would  be  ripped  on  its  first  contact  with 
the  ice.  Another  device,  to  obviate  the  shock  and  to  assist 
in  forging  a  way  through  the  floe-ice,  is  to  have  the  bow  cut 
away  below  the  water-line.  Thus,  instead  of  presenting  to 
the  ice  a  vertical  face,  which  would  immediately  arrest  the 
ship  and  possibly  cause  considerable  damage  on  account  of 
the  sudden  stress  of  the  blow,  a  sloping,  overhanging  bow 
is  adopted.  This  arrangement  enables  the  bow  to  rise  over 
the  impediment,  with  a  gradual  slackening  of  speed.  The 
12 


XaiiBQ 


aiJoiBJoqe"! 


13 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

immense  weight  put  upon  the  ice  crushes  it  and  the  ship 
settles  down,  moving  ahead  and  gathering  speed  to  meet  the 
next  obstacle. 

Of  importance  second  only  to  a  strong  hull  is  the  posses- 
sion of  sails  in  addition  to  engines.  The  latter  are  a  sine 
qua  non  in  polar  navigation,  whilst  sails  allow  of  economy  in 
the  consumption  of  coal,  and  always  remain  as  a  last  resort 
should  the  coal-supply  be  exhausted  or  the  propeller  damaged. 

The  Aurora,  of  the  Newfoundland  sealing  fleet,  was  ulti- 
mately purchased  and  underwent  necessary  alterations.  She 
was  built  in  Dundee  in  1876,  but  though  by  no  means  young 
was  still  in  good  condition  and  capable  of  buffeting  with  the 
pack  for  many  a  year.  Also,  she  was  not  without  a  history, 
for  in  the  earlier  days  she  was  amongst  those  vessels  which 
hurried  to  the  reHef  of  the  unfortunate  Greely  expedition. 

The  hull  was  made  of  stout  oak  planks,  sheathed  with 
greenheart  and  lined  with  fir.  The  bow,  fashioned  on  cut- 
away lines,  was  a  mass  of  solid  wood,  armoured  with  steel 
plates.  The  heavy  side-frames  were  braced  and  stiffened  by 
two  tiers  of  horizontal  oak  beams,  upon  which  were  built  the 
'tween  decks  and  the  main  deck.  Three  bulkheads  isolated 
the  fore-peak,  the  main  hold,  the  engine-room  and  the  after 
living-quarters  respectively. 

A  hull  of  such  strength  would  resist  a  heavy  strain,  and, 
should  it  be  subjected  to  lateral  pressure,  would  in  all  prob- 
ability rise  out  of  harm's  way.  However,  to  be  quite  cer- 
tain of  this  and  to  ensure  safety  in  the  most  extreme  case  it 
is  necessary  that  the  hull  be  modelled  after  the  design 
adopted  by  Nansen  in  the  Fram. 

The  principal  dimensions  were,  length  one  hundred  and 
sixty- five  feet,  breadth  thirty  feet,  and  depth  eighteen 
feet. 

The  registered  tonnage  was  three  hundred  and  eighty- 
six,  but  the  actual  carrying  capacity  we  found  to  be  about 
six  hundred  tons. 

The  engines,  situated  aft,  were  compound,  supplied  with 
steam  from  a  single  boiler.  The  normal  power  registered  was 
14 


HE   ACUOHA  Cr«OSSL\(;   the  ECH'ATOK,  august  ion  Mertz 


FKAXK   WILD 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

ninety-eight  horse-power,  working  a  four-bladed  propeller, 
driving  it  at  the  rate  of  sixty  or  seventy  revolutions  per 
minute  (six  to  ten  knots  per  hour). 

Steam  was  also  laid  on  to  a  winch,  aft,  for  handling 
cargo  in  the  main  hold,  and  to  a  forward  steam-windlass. 
The  latter  was  mainly  used  for  raising  the  anchor  and 
manipulating  the  deep-sea  dredging-cable. 

The  ship  was  square  on  the  foremast  and  schooner-rigged 
on  the  main  and  mizen  masts. 

Between  the  engine-room  bulkhead  and  the  chain  and 
sail  locker  was  a  spacious  hold.  Six  large  steel  tanks  built 
into  the  bottom  of  the  hold  served  for  the  storage  of  fresh 
water  and  at  any  time  when  empty  could  be  filled  with  sea- 
water,  offering  a  ready  means  of  securing  emergency  ballast. 

On  the  deck,  just  forward  of  the  main  hatch,  was  a  deck- 
house, comprising  cook's  galley,  steward's  pantry  and  two 
laboratories.  Still  farther  forward  was  a  small  lamp-room 
for  the  storage  of  kerosene,  lamps  and  other  necessaries. 
A  lofty  fo'c'sle-head  gave  much  accommodation  for 
carpenters',  shipwrights'  and  other  stores.  Below  it,  a  capa- 
cious fo'c'sle  served  as  quarters  for  a  crew  of  sixteen  men. 

Aft,  the  chart-room,  captain's  cabin  and  photographic 
dark-room  formed  a  block  leading  up  to  the  bridge,  situated 
immediately  in  front  of  the  funnel.  Farther  aft,  behind  the 
engine-room  and  below  the  poop  deck,  was  the  ward-room 
a  central  space  sixteen  feet  by  eight  feet,  filled  by  the  dining- 
table  and  surrounded  by  cabins  with  bunks  for  twenty 
persons. 

From  the  time  the  Aurora  arrived  in  London  to  her 
departure  from  Australia,  she  was  a  scene  of  busy  activity, 
as  alterations  and  replacements  were  necessary  to  fit  her  for 
future  work. 

In  the  meantime,  stores  and  gear  were  being  assembled 
Purchases  were  made  and  valuable  donations  received  both 
in  Europe  and  Australia.  Many  and  varied  were  the  re- 
quirements, and  some  idea  of  their  great  multiplicity  will  be 

15 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

gained  by  referring  to  the  appendices  dealing  with  stores, 
clothing  and  instruments. 

Finally,  reference  may  be  made  in  this  chapter  to  the 
staff.  In  no  department  can  a  leader  spend  time  more 
profitably  than  in  the  selection  of  the  men  who  are  to  accom- 
plish the  work.  Even  when  the  expedition  has  a  scientific 
basis,  academic  distinction  becomes  secondary  in  the  choice 
of  men.  Fiala,  as  a  result  of  his  Arctic  experience,  truly 
says,  "  Many  a  man  who  is  a  jolly  good  fellow  in  congenial 
surroundings  will  become  impatient,  selfish  and  mean  when 
obliged  to  sacrifice  his  comfort,  curb  his  desires  and  work  hard 
in  what  seems  a  losing  fight.  The  first  consideration  in 
the  choice  of  men  for  a  polar  campaign  should  be  the  moral 
quality.     Next  should  come  mental  and  physical  powers." 

For  polar  work  the  great  desideratum  is  tempered 
youth.  Although  one  man  at  the  age  of  fifty  may  be  as 
strong  physically  as  another  at  the  age  of  twenty,  it  is  certain 
that  the  exceptional  man  of  fifty  was  also  an  exceptional  man 
at  twenty.  On  the  average,  after  about  thirty  years  of  age, 
the  elasticity  of  the  body  to  rise  to  the  strain  of  emergency 
diminishes,  and,  when  forty  years  is  reached,  a  man,  medically 
speaking,  reaches  his  acme.  After  that,  degeneration  of 
the  fabric  of  the  body  slowly  and  maybe  imperceptibly  sets 
in.  As  the  difficulties  of  exploration  in  cold  regions  approxi- 
mate to  the  limit  of  human  endurance  and  often  enough 
exceed  it,  it  is  obvious  that  the  above  generalizations  must 
receive  due  weight. 

But  though  age  and  with  it  the  whole  question  of  physical 
fitness  must  ever  receive  primary  regard,  yet  these  alone  in 
no  wise  fit  a  man  for  such  an  undertaking.  The  qualifications 
of  mental  ability,  acquaintance  with  the  work  and  sound 
moral  quality  have  to  be  essentially  borne  in  mind.  The 
man  of  fifty  might  then  be  placed  on  a  higher  plane  than  his 
younger  companion. 

With  regard  to  alcohol  and  tobacco,  it  may  be  main- 
tained on  theoretical  grounds  that  a  man  is  better  without 
16 


THE  PROBLEM  AND  PREPARATIONS 

them,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  his  behaviour  in  respect  to 
such  habits  is  often  an  index  to  his  self-control. 

Perfection  is  attained  when  every  man  individually 
works  with  the  determination  to  sacrifice  all  personal  pre- 
dispositions to  the  welfare  of  the  whole. 

Ours  proved  to  be  a  very  happy  selection.  The  majority 
of  the  men  chosen  as  members  of  the  land  parties  were  young 
graduates  of  the  Commonwealth  and  New  Zealand  Univer- 
sities, and  almost  all  were  representative  of  Australasia. 
Among  the  exceptions  was  Mr.  Frank  Wild,  who  was  ap- 
pointed leader  of  one  of  the  Antarctic  parties.  Wild  had 
distinguished  himself  in  the  South  on  two  previous  occasions, 
and  now  is  in  the  unique  position  of  being,  as  it  were,  the 
oldest  resident  of  Antarctica.  Our  sojourn  together  at  Cape 
Royds  with  Shackleton  had  acquainted  me  with  Wild's 
high  merits  as  an  explorer  and  leader. 

Lieutenant  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis  of  the  Royal  Fusiliers,  Dr. 
X.  Mertz,  an  expert  ski-runner  and  mountaineer,  and  Mr. 
F.  H.  Bickerton  in  charge  of  the  air-tractor  sledge,  were 
appointed  in  London.  Reference  has  already  been  made 
to  Captain  Davis  :  to  him  were  left  all  arrangements 
regarding  the  ship's  complement. 

A  "  Who's  who  "  of  the  staff  appears  as  an  appendix. 


VOL.  I.  B  17 


CHAPTER  II 

THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART  AND  THE  VOYAGE 
TO  MACQUARIE  ISLAND 

"  Let  us  probe  the  silent  places,  let  us  seek  what  luck  betide  us  ; 
Let  us  journey  to  a  lonely  land  I  know. 

There's  a  whisper  on  the  night-wind,  there's  a  star  agleam  to  guide  us. 
And  the  Wild  is  calling,  calUng — Let  us  go." — Service. 

IT  will  be  convenient  to  pick  up  the  thread  of  our  story 
upon  the  point  of  the  arrival  of  the  Aurora  in  Hobart, 
after  her  long  voyage  from  London  during  the  latter 
part  of  the  year  1911. 

Captain  Davis  had  written  from  Cape  Town  stating 
that  he  expected  to  reach  Hobart  on  November  4.  In 
company  with  Mr.  C.  C.  Eitel,  secretary  of  the  Expedition, 
I  proceeded  to  Hobart,  arriving  on  November  2. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  November  4  the  Harbour  Board 
received  news  that  a  wooden  vessel,  barquentine-rigged, 
with  a  crow's-nest  on  the  mainmast,  was  steaming  up 
the  D'Entrecasteaux  Channel.  This  left  no  doubt  as  to 
her  identity  and  so,  later  in  the  day,  we  joined  Mr. 
Martelh,  the  assistant  harbour  -  master,  and  proceeded 
down  the  river,  meeting  the  Aurora  below  the  quarantine 
ground. 

We  heard  that  they  had  had  a  very  rough  passage  after 
leaving  the  Cape.  This  was  expected,  for  several  liners, 
travelling  by  the  same  route,  and  arriving  in  Australian 
waters  a  few  days  before,  had  reported  exceptionally  heavy 
weather. 

Before  the  ship  had  reached  Queen's  Wharf,  the  berth 
generously  provided  by  the  Harbour  Board,  the  Greenland 
18 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

dogs  were  transferred  to  the  quarantine  ground,  and  with  them 
went  Dr.  Mertz  and  Lieutenant  Ninnis,  who  gave  up  all  their 
time  during  the  stay  in  Hobart  to  the  care  of  those  important 
animals.  A  feeling  of  relief  spread  over  the  whole  ship's 
company  as  the  last  dog  passed  over  the  side,  for  travelling 
with  a  deck  cargo  of  dogs  is  not  the  most  enviable  thing  from 
a  sailor's  point  of  view.  Especially  is  this  the  case  in  a 
sailing-vessel  where  room  is  limited,  and  consequently  dogs 
and  ropes  are  mixed  indiscriminately. 

Evening  was  just  coming  on  when  we  reached  the 
wharf,  and,  as  we  ranged  alongside,  the  Premier,  Sir  Elliot 
Lewis,  came  on  board  and  bade  us  welcome  to  Tasmania. 

Captain  Davis  had  much  to  tell,  for  more  than  four 
months  had  elapsed  since  my  departure  from  London, 
when  he  had  been  left  in  charge  of  the  ship  and  of  the  final 
arrangements. 

At  the  docks  there  had  been  delays  and  difficulties  in  the 
execution  of  the  necessary  alterations  to  the  ship,  in  conse- 
quence of  strikes  and  the  Coronation  festivities.  It  was 
so  urgent  to  reach  Australia  in  time  for  the  ensuing  Antarctic 
summer,  that  the  recaulking  of  the  decks  and  other  improve- 
ments were  postponed,  to  be  executed  on  the  voyage  or  upon 
arrival  in  Australia. 

Captain  Davis  seized  the  earliest  possible  opportunity  of 
departure,  and  the  Aurora  dropped  down  the  Thames  at 
midnight  on  July  27,  1911.  As  she  threaded  her  way 
through  the  crowded  traffic  by  the  dim  light  of  a  thousand 
flickering  flames  gleaming  through  the  foggy  atmosphere, 
the  dogs  entered  a  protest  peculiar  to  their  "  husky  "  kind. 
After  a  short  preliminary  excursion  through  a  considerable 
range  of  the  scale,  they  picked  up  a  note  apparently  suitable 
to  all  and  settled  down  to  many  hours  of  incessant  and 
monotonous  howling,  as  is  the  custom  of  these  dogs  when 
the  fit  takes  them.  It  was  quite  evident  that  they  were 
not  looking  forward  to  another  sea  voyage.  The  pande- 
monium made  it  all  but  impossible  to  hear  the  orders  given 
for  working  the  ship,  and  a  collision  was  narrowly  averted. 

19 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

During  those  rare  lulls,  when  the  dogs'  repertoire  temporarily 
gave  out,  innumerable  sailors  on  neighbouring  craft,  wakened 
from  their  sleep,  made  the  most  of  such  opportunities  to 
hurl  imprecations  in  a  thoroughly  nautical  fashion  upon 
the  ship,  her  officers,  and  each  and  every  one  of  the  crew. 

On  the  way  to  Cardiff,  where  a  full  supply  of  coal  was 
to  be  shipped,  a  gale  was  encountered,  and  much  water 
came  on  board,  resulting  in  damage  to  the  stores.  Some 
water  leaked  into  the  living  quarters  and,  on  the  whole, 
several  very  uncomfortable  days  were  spent.  Such  incon- 
venience at  the  outset  undoubtedly  did  good,  for  many 
of  the  crew,  evidently  not  prepared  for  emergency  condi- 
tions, left  at  Cardiff.  The  scratch  crew  with  which  the 
Aurora  journeyed  to  Hobart  composed  for  the  most  part  of 
replacements  made  at  Cardiff,  resulted  in  some  permanent 
appointments  of  unexpected  value  to  the  Expedition. 

At  Cardiff  the  coal  strike  caused  delay,  but  eventually 
some  five  hundred  tons  of  the  Crown  Fuel  Company's 
briquettes  were  got  on  board,  and  a  final  leave  taken  of 
English  shores  on  August  4. 

Cape  To^Mi,  the  only  intermediate  port  of  call,  was 
reached  on  September  24,  after  a  comparatively  rapid  and 
uneventful  voyage.  A  couple  of  days  sufficed  to  load  coal, 
water  and  fresh  provisions,  and  the  course  was  then  laid  for 
Hobart. 

Rough  weather  soon  intervened,  and  Lieutenant  Ninnis 
and  Dr.  Mertz,  who  travelled  out  by  the  Aurora  in  charge  of 
the  sledging-dogs,  had  their  time  fully  occupied,  for  the 
wet  conditions  began  to  tell  on  their  charges. 

On  leaving  London  there  were  forty-nine  of  these  Green- 
land, Esquimaux  sledging-dogs  of  which  the  purchase  and 
selection  had  been  made  through  the  offices  of  the  Danish 
Geographical  Society.  From  Greenland  they  were  taken  to 
Copenhagen,  and  from  thence  transhipped  to  London,  where 
Messrs.  Spratt  took  charge  of  them  at  their  dog-farm  until 
the  date  of  departure.  During  the  voyage  they  were  fed  on 
the  finest  dog-cakes,  but  they  undoubtedly  felt  the  need  of 
20 


;EJ;   and   IIEU  family,      ox   TIIK   V()V\<iE   KKOAI  ]>ONI)ON  MfrU 


Mertz 
QUEEX'S   WHARFTHOBAKT,  AX  HOUR   BEFORE'SAILIXG.   DECEMBER  2,  1911 


THE  LAST  VIEW  OF   HOBART  XESTLIXG  BELOW  MT.  WELLIXGTOX  Medz 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

fresh  meat  and  fish  to  withstand  the  cold  and  wet.  In  the 
rough  weather  of  tlie  latter  part  of  the  voyage  water  broke 
continually  over  the  deck,  so  lowering  their  vitality  that  a 
number  died  from  seizures,  not  properly  understood  at  the 
time.  In  each  case  death  was  sudden,  and  preceded  by 
similar  symptoms.  An  apparently  healthy  dog  would 
drop  down  in  a  fit,  dying  in  a  few  minutes,  or  during  another 
fit  within  a  few  days.  Epidemics,  accompanied  by  similar 
symptoms,  are  said  to  be  common  amongst  these  dogs  in 
the  Arctic  regions,  but  no  explanation  is  given  as  to  the 
nature  of  the  disease.  During  a  later  stage  of  the  Expedition, 
when  nearing  Antarctica,  several  more  of  the  dogs  were 
similarly  stricken.  These  were  examined  by  Drs.  McLean 
and  Jones,  and  the  results  of  post-mortems  showed  that  in 
one  case  death  was  due  to  gangrenous  appendicitis,  in  two 
others  to  acute  gastritis  and  colitis. 

The  dog  first  affected  caused  some  consternation  amongst 
the  crew,  for,  after  being  prostrated  on  the  deck  by  a  fit,  it 
rose  and  rushed  about  snapping  to  right  and  left.  The  cry 
of  "  mad  dog  "  was  raised.  Not  many  seconds  had  elapsed 
before  all  the  deck  hands  were  safely  in  the  rigging,  dis- 
playing more  than  ordinary  agility  in  the  act.  At  short 
intervals,  other  men,  roused  from  watch  below  appeared 
at  the  fo'c'sle  companion-way.  To  these  the  situation  at 
first  appeared  comic,  and  called  forth  jeers  upon  their 
faint-hearted  shipmates.  The  next  moment,  on  the  dog 
dashing  into  view,  they  found  a  common  cause  with  their 
fellows  and  sprang  aloft.  Ere  many  minutes  had  elapsed 
the  entire  crew  were  in  the  rigging,  much  to  the  amusement 
of  the  officers.  By  this  time  the  dog  had  disappeared 
beneath  the  fo'c'sle  head,  and  Mertz  and  Ninnis  entered, 
intending  to  dispatch  it.  A  shot  was  fired  and  word  passed 
that  the  deed  was  done  :  thereupon  the  crew  descended, 
pressing  forward  to  share  in  the  laurels.  Then  it  was  that 
Ninnis,  in  the  uncertain  light,  spying  a  dog  of  similar 
markings  wedged  in  between  some  barrels,  was  filled  with 
doubt  and  called  out  to  Mertz  that  he  had  shot  the  wrong 

21 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

dog.  In  a  flash  the  crew  had  once  more  climbed  to  safety. 
It  was  some  time  after  the  confirmation  of  the  first  execution 
that  they  could  be  prevailed  upon  to  descend. 

Several  litters  of  puppies  were  born  on  the  voyage,  but 
all  except  one  succumbed  to  the  hardships  of  the  passage. 

The  voyage  from  Cardiff  to  Hobart  occupied  eighty- 
eight  days. 

The  date  of  departure  south  was  fixed  for  4  p.m.  of 
Saturday,  December  2,  and  a  truly  appalling  amount  of 
work  had  to  be  done  before  then. 

Most  of  the  staff  had  been  preparing  themselves  for 
special  duties  ;  in  this  the  Expedition  was  assisted  by  many 
friends. 

A  complete,  detailed  acknowledgment  of  all  the  kind 
help  received  would  occupy  much  space.  We  must  needs 
pass  on  with  the  assurance  that  our  best  thanks  are  extended 
to  one  and  all. 

Throughout  the  month  of  November,  the  staff  continued 
to  arrive  in  contingents  at  Hobart,  immediately  busying 
themselves  in  their  own  departments,  and  in  sorting  over 
the  many  thousands  of  packages  in  the  great  Queen's 
Wharf  shed.  Wild  was  placed  in  charge,  and  all  entered 
heartily  into  the  work.  The  exertion  of  it  was  just  what 
was  wanted  to  make  us  fit,  and  prepared  for  the  sudden  and 
arduous  work  of  discharging  cargo  at  the  various  bases. 
It  also  gave  the  opportunity  of  personally  gauging  certain 
qualities  of  the  men,  which  are  not  usually  evoked  by  a  uni- 
versity curriculum. 

Some  five  thousand  two  hundred  packages  were  in  the 
shed,  to  be  sorted  over  and  checked.  The  requirements  of 
three  Antarctic  bases,  and  one  at  Macquarie  Island  were 
being  provided  for,  and  consequently  the  most  careful  super- 
vision was  necessary  to  prevent  mistakes,  especially  as  the 
omission  of  a  single  article  might  fundamentally  affect  the 
work  of  a  whole  party.  To  assist  in  discriminating  the 
22 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

impedimenta,  coloured  bands  were  painted  round  the 
packages,  distinctive  of  the  various  bases. 

It  had  been  arranged  that,  wherever  possible,  everything 
should  be  packed  in  cases  of  a  handy  size,  to  facilitate 
unloading  and  transportation ;  each  about  fifty  to  seventy 
pounds  in  weight. 

In  addition  to  other  distinguishing  marks,  every  package 
bore  a  different  number,  and  the  detailed  contents  were 
listed  in  a  schedule  for  reference. 

Concurrently  with  the  progress  of  this  work,  the  ship 
was  again  overhauled,  repairs  effected,  and  many  deficiencies 
made  good.  The  labours  of  the  shipwrights  did  not  interfere 
with  the  loading,  which  went  ahead  steadily  during  the  last 
fortnight  in  November. 

The  tanks  in  the  hold  not  used  for  our  supply  of  fresh 
water  were  packed  with  reserve  stores  for  the  ship.  The 
remainder  of  the  lower  hold  and  the  bunkers  were  filled 
with  coal.  Slowly  the  contents  of  the  shed  diminished  as 
they  were  transfered  to  the  'tween  decks.  Then  came  the 
overflow.  Eventually,  every  available  space  in  the  ship 
was  flooded  with  a  complicated  assemblage  of  gear,  ranging 
from  the  comparatively  undamageable  wireless  masts  occupy- 
ing a  portion  of  the  deck  amidships,  to  a  selection  of  prime 
Australian  cheeses  which  filled  one  of  the  cabins,  and  per- 
vaded the  ward-room  with  an  odour  which  remained  one  of 
its  permanent  associations. 

Yet,  heterogeneous  and  ill-assorted  as  our  cargo  may 
have  appeared  to  the  crowds  of  curious  onlookers.  Captain 
Davis  had  arranged  for  the  stowage  of  everything  with  a 
nicety  which  did  him  credit.  The  complete  effects  of  the 
four  bases  were  thus  kept  separate,  and  available  in  whatever 
order  was  required.  Furthermore,  the  removal  of  one  unit 
would  not  break  the  stowage  of  the  remainder,  nor  disturb 
the  trim  of  the  ship. 

At  a  late  date  the  air- tractor  sledge  arrived.  The  body 
was  contained  in  one  huge  case  which,  though  awkward, 
was    comparatively   light,    the   case   weighing   much    more 

23 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

than  the  contents.  This  was  securely  lashed  above  the 
maindeck,    resting   on   the   fo'c'sle   and   two   boat-skids. 

As  erroneous  ideas  have  been  circulated  regarding  the 
"  aeroplane  sledge,"  or  more  correctly  "  air-tractor  sledge," 
a  few  words  in  explanation  will  not  be  out  of  place. 

This  machine  was  originally  an  R.E.P.  monoplane, 
constructed  by  Messrs.  Vickers  and  Co.,  but  supplied  with 
a  special  detachable,  sledge-runner  undercarriage  for  use 
in  the  Antarctic,  converting  it  into  a  tractor  for  hauling 
sledges.  It  was  intended  that  so  far  as  its  role  as  a  flier 
was  concerned,  it  would  be  chiefly  exercised  for  the  purpose 
of  drawing  public  attention  to  the  Expedition  in  Australia, 
where  aviation  was  then  almost  unknown.  With  this  object 
in  view,  it  arrived  in  Adelaide  at  an  early  date  accompanied 
by  the  aviator,  Lieutenant  Watkins,  assisted  by  Bickerton. 
There  it  unfortunately  came  to  grief,  and  Watkins  and 
Wild  narrowly  escaped  death  in  the  accident.  It  was  then 
decided  to  make  no  attempt  to  fly  in  the  Antarctic  ;  the 
wings  were  left  in  Australia  and  Lieutenant  Watkins 
returned  to  England.  In  the  meantime,  the  machine 
was   repaired  and  forwarded  to   Hobart. 

Air-tractors  are  great  consumers  of  petrol  of  the  highest 
quahty.  This  demand,  in  addition  to  the  requirements 
of  two  wireless  plants  and  a  motor-launch,  made  it  necessary 
to  take  larger  quantities  than  we  liked  of  this  dangerous 
cargo.  Four  thousand  gallons  of  "  Shell  "  benzine  and 
one  thousand  three  hundred  gallons  of  "  Shell  "  kerosene, 
packed  in  the  usual  four-gallon  export  tins,  were  carried 
as  a  deck  cargo,  monopolizing  the  whole  of  the  poop-deck. 

For  the  transport  of  the  requirements  of  the  Macquarie 
Island  Base,  the  s.s.  Toroa,  a  small  steam-packet  of  one 
hundred  and  twenty  tons,  trading  between  Melbourne 
and  Tasmanian  ports,  was  chartered.  It  was  arranged 
that  this  auxiliary  should  leave  Hobart  several  days  after 
the  Aurora,  so  as  to  allow  us  time,  before  her  arrival,  to  inspect 
the  island,  and  to  select  a  suitable  spot  for  the  location  of 
the  base.  As  she  was  well  provided  with  passenger  accommo- 
24 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

dation,  it  was  arranged  that  the  majority  of  the  land  party 
should  journey  by  her  as  far  as  Macquarie  Island. 

The  Governor  of  Tasmania,  Sir  Harry  Barron,  the 
Premier,  Sir  Elliot  Lewis,  and  the  citizens  of  Hobart  extended 
to  us  the  greatest  hospitality  during  our  stay,  and,  when  the 
time  came,   gave  us  a  hearty  send-off. 

Saturday,  December  2  arrived,  and  final  preparations 
were  made.  All  the  staff  were  united  for  the  space  of  an 
hour  at  luncheon.  Then  began  the  final  leave-taking. 
"  God  speed  "  messages  were  received  from  far  and  wide, 
and  intercessory  services  were  held  in  the  Cathedrals  of 
Sydney  and  Hobart. 

We  were  greatly  honoured  at  this  time  by  the  reception 
of  kind  wishes  from  Queen  Alexandra  and,  at  an  earlier 
date,  from  his  Majesty  the  King. 

Proud  of  such  universal  sympathy  and  interest,  we 
felt  stimulated  to  greater  exertions. 

On  arrival  on  board,  I  found  Mr.  Martelli,  who  was  to 
pilot  us  down  the  river,  already  on  the  bridge.  A  vast 
crowd  blockaded  the  wharf  to  give  us  a  parting  cheer. 

At  4  P.M.  sharp,  the  telegraph  was  rung  for  the  engines, 
and,  with  a  final  expression  of  good  wishes  from  the  Governor 
and  Lady  Barron,  we  glided  out  into  the  channel,  where 
our  supply  of  dynamite  and  cartridges  was  taken  on  board. 
Captain  G.  S.  Nares,  whose  kindness  we  had  previously 
known,  had  the  H.M.S.  Fantome  dressed  in  our  honour,  and 
lusty  cheering  reached  us  from  across  the  water. 

As  we  proceeded  down  the  river  to  the  Quarantine 
Station  where  the  dogs  were  to  be  taken  off,  Hobart  looked 
its  best,  with  the  glancing  sails  of  pleasure  craft  skimming 
near  the  foreshores,  and  backed  by  the  stately,  sombre 
mass  of  Mount  Wellington.  The  "  land  of  strawberries  and 
cream,"  as  the  younger  members  of  the  Expedition  had 
come  to  regard  it,  was  for  ever  to  live  pleasantly  in  our 
memories,  to  be  recalled  a  thousand  times  during  the 
adventurous  months  which  followed. 

25 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Mr.  E.  Joyce,  whose  name  is  familiar  in  connexion 
with  previous  Antarctic  expeditions,  and  who  had  travelled 
out  from  London  on  business  of  the  Expedition,  was  waiting 
in  mid- stream  with  thirty-eight  dogs,  delivering  them 
from  a  ketch.  These  were  passed  over  the  side  and  secured 
at  intervals  on  top  of  the  deck  cargo. 

The  engines  again  began  to  throb,  not  to  cease  until 
the  arrival  at  Macquarie  Island.  A  few  miles  lower  down 
the  channel,  the  Premier,  and  a  number  of  other  friends 
and  well-wishers  who  had  followed  in  a  small  steamer, 
bade  us  a  final  adieu. 

Behind  lay  a  sparkling  seascape  and  the  Tasmanian 
littoral;  before,  the  blue  southern  ocean  heaving  with  an 
ominous  swell.  A  glance  at  the  barograph  showed  a  con- 
tinuous fall,  and  a  telegram  from  Mr.  Hunt,  Head  of  the 
Commonwealth  Weather  Bureau,  received  a  few  hours 
previously,  informed  us  of  a  storm-centre  south  of  New 
Zealand,  and  the  expectation  of  fresh  south-westerly  winds. 

The  piles  of  loose  gear  presented  an  indescribable  scene 
of  chaos,  and,  even  as  we  rolled  lazily  in  the  increasing 
swell,  the  water  commenced  to  run  about  the  decks.  There 
was  no  time  to  be  lost  in  securing  movable  articles  and 
preparing  the  ship  for  heavy  weather.  All  hands  set  to 
work. 

On  the  main  deck  the  cargo  was  brought  up  flush 
with  the  top  of  the  bulwarks,  and  consisted  of  the  wireless 
masts,  two  huts,  a  large  motor-launch,  cases  of  dog  biscuits 
and  many  other  sundries.  Butter  to  the  extent  of  a  couple 
of  tons  was  accommodated  chiefly  on  the  roof  of  the  main 
deck-house,  where  it  was  out  of  the  way  of  the  dogs.  The 
roof  of  the  chart-house,  which  formed  an  extension  of  the 
bridge  proper,  did  not  escape,  for  the  railing  offered  facilities 
for  lashing  sledges  ;  besides,  there  was  room  for  tide-gauges, 
meteorological  screens,  and  cases  of  fresh  eggs  and  apples. 
Somebody  happened  to  think  of  space  unoccupied  in  the 
meteorological  screens,  and  a  few  fowls  were  housed 
therein. 
26 


/ 


A  BIG.  FOLLOWING   SEA 


.M(IJ:a.\   \VALKIX(i   AFT  IN    KOU(iH   WEAIHK 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

On  the  poop-deck  there  were  the  benzine,  sledges,  and 
the  chief  magnetic  observatory.  An  agglomeration  of  in- 
struments and  private  gear  rendered  the  ward-room  well 
nigh  impossible  of  access,  and  it  was  some  days  before 
everything  was  jammed  away  into  corners.  An  unoccupied 
five-berth  cabin  was  filled  with  loose  instruments,  while  other 
packages  were  stowed  into  the  occupied  cabins,  so  as  to 
almost  defeat  the  purpose  for  which  they  were  intended. 

The  deck  was  so  encumbered  that  only  at  rare  intervals 
was  it  visible.  However,  by  our  united  efforts  everything 
was  well  secured  by  8  p.m. 

It  was  dusk,  and  the  distant  highlands  were  limned  in 
silhouette  against  the  twilight  sky.  A  tiny,  sparkling  lamp 
glimmered  from  Signal  Hill  its  warm  farewell.  From  the 
swaying  poop  we  flashed  back,  "  Good-bye,  all  snug  on 
board." 

Onward  with  a  dogged  plunge  our  laden  ship  would 
press.  If  Fram  were  "  Forward,"  she  was  to  be  hereafter 
our  Aurora  of  "  Hope  " — the  Dawn  of  undiscovered  lands. 

Home  and  the  past  were  effaced  in  the  shroud  of  dark- 
ness, and  thought  leapt  to  the  beckoning  South — the  "  land 
of  the  midnight  sun." 

During  the  night  the  wind  and  sea  rose  steadily,  develop- 
ing into  a  full  gale.  In  order  to  make  Macquarie  Island,  it 
was  important  not  to  allow  the  ship  to  drive  too  far  to  the 
east,  as  at  all  times  the  prevailing  winds  in  this  region  are 
from  the  west.  Partly  on  this  account,  and  partly  because 
of  the  extreme  severity  of  the  gale,  the  ship  was  hove  to 
with  head  to  wind,  wallowing  in  mountainous  seas.  Such 
a  storm,  witnessed  from  a  large  vessel,  would  be  an  inspiring 
sight,  but  was  doubly  so  in  a  small  craft,  especially  where 
the  natural  buoyancy  had  been  largely  impaired  by  over- 
loading. With  an  unprecedented  quantity  of  deck  cargo, 
amongst  which  were  six  thousand  gallons  of  benzine, 
kerosene  and  spirit,  in  tins  which  were  none  too  strong,  we 
might  well  have  been  excused  a  lively  anxiety  during  those 
days.     It  seemed  as  if  no  power  on  earth  could  save  the 

27 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

loss  of  at  least  part  of  the  deck  cargo.  Would  it  be  the 
indispensable  huts  amidships,  or  would  a  sea  break  on  the 
benzine  aft  and  flood  us  with  inflammable  liquid  and  gas  ? 

By  dint  of  strenuous  efforts  and  good  seamanship, 
Captain  Davis  with  his  officers  and  crew  held  their  own. 
The  land  parties  assisted  in  the  general  work,  constantly 
tightening  up  the  lashings  and  lending  "  beef,"  a  sailor's 
term  for  man-power,  wherever  required.  For  this  purpose 
the  members  of  the  land  parties  were  divided  into  watches, 
so  that  there  were  always  a  number  patrolling  the  decks. 

Most  of  us  passed  through  a  stage  of  sea-sickness,  but, 
except  in  the  case  of  two  or  three,  it  soon  passed  off.  Seas 
deluged  all  parts  of  the  ship.  A  quantity  of  ashes  was 
carried  down  into  the  bilge-water  pump  and  obstructed  the 
steam-pump.  Whilst  this  was  being  cleared,  the  emergency 
deck  pumps  had  to  be  requisitioned.  The  latter  were 
available  for  w^orking  either  by  hand-power  or  by  chain- 
gearing  from  the  after- winch. 

The  deck-plug  of  one  of  the  fresh-water  tanks  was 
carried  away  and,  before  it  was  noticed,  sea-water  had 
entered  to  such  an  extent  as  to  render  our  supply  unfit  for 
drinking.  Thus  we  were,  henceforth,  on  a  strictly  limited 
water  ration. 

The  wind  increased  from  bad  to  worse,  and  great  seas 
continued  to  rise  until  their  culmination  on  the  morning  of 
December  5,  when  one  came  aboard  on  the  starboard 
quarter,  smashed  half  the  bridge  and  carried  it  away. 
Toucher  was  the  officer  on  watch,  and  no  doubt  thought 
himself  lucky  in  being,  at  the  time,  on  the  other  half  of  the 
bridge. 

The  deck-rings  holding  the  motor-launch  drew,  the 
launch  itself  was  sprung  and  its  decking  stove-in. 

On  the  morning  of  December  8  we  found  ourselves  in 
latitude  49°  56'  S.  and  longitude  152°  28'  E.,  with  the 
weather  so  far  abated  that  we  were  able  to  steer  a  course 
for  Macquarie  Island. 

During  the  heavy  weather,  food  had  been  prepared  only 
28 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

with  the  greatest  difficulty.  The  galley  was  deluged  time 
and  again.  It  was  enough  to  dishearten  any  cook,  repeatedly 
finding  himself  amongst  kitchen  debris  of  all  kinds,  includ- 
ing pots  and  pans  full  and  empty.  Nor  did  the  difficulties 
end  in  the  galley,  for  food  which  survived  until  its  arrival 
on  the  table,  though  not  allowed  much  time  for  further 
mishap,  often  ended  in  a  disagreeable  mass  on  the  floor  or, 
tossed  by  a  lurch  of  more  than  usual  suddenness,  entered 
an  adjoining  cabin.  From  such  localities  the  elusive  piece 
de  resistance  was  often  rescued. 

As  we  approached  our  rendezvous,  whale-birds  *  ap- 
peared. During  the  heavy  weather,  Mother  Carey's  chickens 
only  were  seen,  but,  as  the  wind  abated,  the  majestic  wander- 
ing albatross,  the  sooty  albatross  and  the  moUymawk 
followed  in  our  wake. 

Wliales  were  observed  spouting,  but  at  too  great  a 
distance  to  be  definitely  recognized. 

At  daybreak  on  December  11  land  began  to  show  up, 
and  by  6  a.m.  we  were  some  sixteen  miles  off  the  west  coast 
of  Macquarie  Island,  bearing  on  about  the  centre  of  its 
length. 

In  general  shape  it  is  long  and  narrow,  the  length  over 
all  being  twenty-one  miles.  A  reef  runs  out  for  several 
miles  at  both  extremities  of  the  main  island,  reappearing 
again  some  miles  beyond  in  isolated  rocky  islets  :  the 
Bishop  and  Clerk  nineteen  miles  to  the  southward  and  the 
Judge  and  Clerk  eight  miles  to  the  north. 

The  land  everywhere  rises  abruptly  from  the  sea  or 
from  an  exaggerated  beach  to  an  undulating  plateau -like 
interior,  reaching  a  maximum  elevation  of  one  thousand 
four  hundred  and  twenty-five  feet.  Nowhere  is  there  a 
harbour  in  the  proper  sense  of  the  word,  though  six  or  seven 
anchorages  are  recognized. 

The  island  is  situated  in  about  55°  S.  latitude,  and  the 

*  For  the  specific  names  refer  to  Appendix  which  is  a  glossary  of  special 
and  unfamiHar  terms. 

29 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

climate  is  comparatively  cold,  but  it  is  the  prevalence  of  strong 
winds  that  is  the  least  desirable  feature  of  its  weather. 

Sealing,  so  prosperous  in  the  early  days,  is  now  carried 
on  in  a  small  way  only,  by  a  New  Zealander,  who  keeps  a 
few  men  stationed  at  the  island  during  part  of  the  year  for 
the  purpose  of  rendering  down  sea  elephant  and  penguin 
blubber.  Their  establishment  was  known  to  be  at  the 
north  end  of  the  island  near  the  best  of  the  anchorages. 

Captain  Davis  had  visited  the  island  in  the  Nimrod,  and 
was  acquainted  with  the  three  anchorages,  which  are  all 
on  the  east  side  and  sheltered  from  the  prevailing  westerlies. 
One  of  the  old-time  sealers  had  reported  a  cove  suitable 
for  small  craft  at  the  south-western  corner,  but  the  infor- 
mation was  scanty,  and  recent  mariners  had  avoided  that 
side  of  the  island.  On  the  morning  of  our  approach  the 
breeze  was  from  the  south-east,  and,  being  favourable. 
Captain  Davis  proposed  a  visit. 

By  noon,  Caroline  Cove,  as  it  is  called,  was  abreast  of 
us.  Its  small  dimensions,  and  the  fact  that  a  rocky  islet 
for  the  most  part  blocks  the  entrance,  at  first  caused  some 
misgivings  as  to  its  identity. 

A  boat  was  lowered,  and  a  party  of  us  rowed  in  towards 
the  entrance,  sounding  at  intervals  to  ascertain  whether 
the  Aurora  could  make  use  of  it,  should  our  inspection 
prove  it  a  suitable  locality  for  the  land  station. 

We  passed  through  a  channel  not  more  than  eighty 
yards  wide,  but  with  deep  water  almost  to  the  rocks  on 
either  side.  A  beautiful  inlet  now  opened  to  view.  Thick 
tussock-grass  matted  the  steep  hillsides,  and  the  rocky 
shores,  between  the  tide-marks  as  well  as  in  the  depths 
below,  sprouted  with  a  profuse  growth  of  brown  kelp. 
Leaping  out  of  the  water  in  scores  around  us  were  penguins 
of  several  varieties,  in  their  actions  reminding  us  of  nothing 
so  much  as  shoals  of  fish  chased  by  sharks.  Penguins  were  in 
thousands  on  the  uprising  cliffs,  and  from  rookeries  near  and 
far  came  an  incessant  din.  At  intervals  along  the  shore 
sea  elephants  disported  their  ungainly  masses  in  the  sun- 
30 


MACOUARIE    I 

«  Miles 


Scale  1:200 000  or 

llncli  .  3  16  Stahiteifiles 

Heights  in  feet 

Depths  in  falhams 

Contours  ev^ery  200  feet 


ZarrlNeLson 
Beef 


ffasselbordh^^h  j^^^^p^  Head 

^o/Mnn  ^-^Jl  I  ^  |l  lyfre/ess  Hill  &,  SV 

■j?J Expodiiion  Hut 
KovUt  ErUit  Bay 

th  lyi^  937 

15    -M 

Nu^g-et  P.^ 

^^     so 

Elder  1218 


',?£ 


soutii  \^^stP 

Greetv 


ilon 

usilaida  Bay 
Aurora  125a 
Jeffryes  i309 


*30  rlr. 

''-.South  Hast  Beer 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

light.  Circling  above  us  in  anxious  haste,  sea-birds  of 
many  varieties  gave  warning  of  our  near  approach  to  their 
nests.  It  was  the  invasion  by  man  of  an  exquisite  scene  of 
primitive  nature. 

After  the  severe  weather  experienced,  the  relaxation 
made  us  all  feel  like  a  band  of  schoolboys  out  on  a  long 
vacation. 

A  small  sandy  beach  barred  the  inlet,  and  the  whale- 
boat  was  directed  towards  it.  We  were  soon  grating  on 
the  sand  amidst  an  army  of  Royal  penguins  ;  picturesque 
little  fellows,  with  a  crest  and  eyebrows  of  long  golden- 
yellow  feathers.  A  few  yards  from  the  massed  ranks  of 
the  penguins  was  a  mottled  sea-leopard,  which  woke  up 
and  slid  into  the  sea  as  we  approached. 

Several  hours  were  spent  examining  the  neighbourhood. 
Webb  and  Kennedy  took  a  set  of  magnetic  observations, 
while  others  hoisted  some  cases  of  stores  on  to  a  rocky  knob 
to  form  a  provision  depot,  as  it  was  quickly  decided  that 
the  northern  end  of  the  island  was  likely  to  be  more  suitable 
for  a  permanent  station. 

The  Royal  penguins  were  almost  as  petulant  as  the 
Adelie  penguins  which  we  were  to  meet  further  South. 
They  surrounded  us,  pecked  at  our  legs  and  chattered  with 
an  audacity  Avhich  defies  description.  It  was  discovered 
that  they  resented  any  attempt  to  drive  them  into  the  sea, 
and  it  was  only  after  long  persuasion  that  a  bevy  took  to 
the  water.  This  was  a  sign  of  a  general  capitulation,  and 
some  hundreds  immediately  followed,  jostling  each  other 
in  their  haste,  squawking,  whirring  their  flippers,  splashing 
and  churning  the  water,  reminding  one  of  a  crowd  of 
miniature  surf -bathers.  We  followed  the  files  of  birds 
marching  inland,  along  the  course  of  a  tumbling  stream, 
until  at  an  elevation  of  some  five  hundred  feet,  on  a  flattish 
piece  of  ground,  a  huge  rookery  opened  out — acres  and 
acres  of  birds  and  eggs. 

In  one  corner  of  the  bay  were  nests  of  giant  petrels  in 
which  sat  huge  downy  young,  about  the  size  of  a  barn-door 
32 


Mdctjmti  if  Ishiiid 


A  GIANT  PETREL  ON    J'HE   NEST 


Ishtnd 

A  YOUNfi  GIANT  PETREL  ON  THE  NEST.     CAROLINE  COVE 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOHAICT 

fowl,  resembling  the  grotesque,  fluffy  toys  which  might  b^ 
expected  to  hang  on  a  Christmas-tree. 

Here  and  there  on  the  beach  and  on  the  grass  wandered 
bright-coloured  Maori  hens .  On  the  south  side  of  the  bay ,  in  a 
low,  peaty  area  overgrown  with  tussock-grass,  were  scores  of 
sea  elephants,  wallowing  in  bog-holes  or  sleeping  at  their  ease. 

Sea  elephants,  at  one  time  found  in  immense  numbers 
on  all  sub-antarctic  islands,  are  now  comparatively  rare, 
even  to  the  degree  of  extinction,  in  many  of  their  old  haunts. 
This  is  the  result  of  ruthless  slaughter  prosecuted  especially 
by  sealers  in  the  early  days.  At  the  present  time  Macquarie 
Island  is  more  favoured  by  them  than  probably  any  other 
known  locality.  The  name  by  which  they  are  popularly 
known  refers  to  their  elephantine  proportions  and  to  the 
fact  that,  in  the  case  of  the  old  males,  the  nasal  regions  are 
enormously  developed,  expanding  when  in  a  state  of  excite- 
ment to  form  a  short,  trunk-like  appendage.  They  have 
been  recorded  up  to  twenty  feet  in  length,  and  such  a  speci- 
men would  weigh  about  four  tons. 

Arriving  on  the  Aurora  in  the  evening,  we  learnt  that  the 
ship's  company  had  had  an  adventure  which  might  have  been 
most  serious.  It  appeared  that  after  dropping  us  at  the 
entrance  to  Caroline  Cove,  the  ship  was  allowed  to  drift  out  to 
sea  under  the  influence  of  the  on-shore  wind.  When  about 
one-third  of  a  mile  north  west  of  the  entrance,  a  violent 
shock  was  felt,  and  she  slid  over  a  rock  which  rose  up  out 
of  deep  water  to  within  about  fourteen  feet  of  high-water 
level;  no  sign  of  it  appearing  on  the  surface  on  account  of 
the  tranquil  state  of  the  sea.  Much  apprehension  was  felt 
for  the  hull,  but  as  no  serious  leak  started,  the  escape  was 
considered  a  fortunate  one.  A  few  soundings  had  been 
made  proving  a  depth  of  four  hundred  fathoms  within  one 
and  a  half  miles  of  the  land. 

A  course  was  now  set  for  the  northern  end  of  the  island. 
Dangerous-looking  reefs  ran  out  from  many  headlands,  and 
cascades  of  water  could  be  seen  falhng  hundreds  of  feet 
from  the  highlands  to  the  narrow  coastal  flats. 

VOL.  I  c  S3 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  anchorage  most  used  is  that  known  as  North-East 
Bay,  lying  on  the  eastern  side  of  a  low  spit  joining  the  main 
mass  of  the  island,  to  an  almost  isolated  outpost  in  the  form 
of  a  flat-topped  hill — Wireless  Hill — some  three-quarters  of 
a  mile  farther  north.  It  is  practically  an  open  roadstead, 
but,  as  the  prevailing  winds  blow  on  to  the  other  side  of 
the  island,  quiet  water  can  be  nearly  always  expected. 

However,  when  we  arrived  at  North-East  Bay  on  the 
morning  following  our  adventure,  a  stiff  south-east  breeze 
was  blowing,  and  the  wash  on  the  beach  put  landing  out  of 
the  question.  Captain  Davis  ran  in  as  near  the  coast  as  he 
could  safely  venture  and  dropped  anchor,  pending  the 
moderation  of  the  wind. 

On  the  leeward  slopes  of  a  low  ridge,  pushing  itself  out 
on  to  the  southern  extremity  of  the  spit,  could  be  seen  two 
small  huts,  but  no  sign  of  human  life.  This  was  not  sur- 
prising as  it  was  only  seven  o'clock.  Below  the  huts,  upon 
low  surf-covered  rocks  running  out  from  the  beach,  lay  a 
small  schooner  partly  broken  up  and  evidently  a  recent 
victim.  A  mile  to  the  southward,  fragments  of  another 
wreck  protruded  from  the  sand. 

We  were  discussing  wrecks  and  the  grisly  toll  which  is 
levied  by  these  dangerous  and  uncharted  shores,  when  a 
human  figure  appeared  in  front  of  one  of  the  huts.  After 
surveying  us  for  a  moment,  he  disappeared  within  to  reap- 
pear shortly  afterwards,  followed  by  a  stream  of  others 
rushing  hither  and  thither  ;  just  as  if  he  had  disturbed  a 
hornets'  nest.  After  such  an  exciting  demonstration  we 
awaited  the  next  move  with  some  expectancy. 

Planks  and  barrels  were  brought  on  to  the  beach  and  a 
flagstaff  was  hoisted.  Then  one  of  the  party  mounted  on 
the  barrel,  and  told  us  by  flag  signals  that  the  ship  on  the 
beach  was  the  Clyde,  which  had  recently  been  wrecked,  and 
that  all  hands  were  safely  on  shore,  but  requiring  assistance. 
Besides  the  shipwrecked  crew,  there  were  half  a  dozen  men 
who  resided  on  the  island  during  the  summer  months  for 
the  purpose  of  collecting  blubber. 
34 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

The  sealers  tried  repeatedly  to  come  out  to  us,  but  as 
often  as  it  was  launched  their  boat  was  washed  up  again 
on  the  beach,  capsizing  them  into  the  water.  At  length 
they  signalled  that  a  landing  could  be  made  on  the  opposite 
side  of  the  spit,  so  the  anchor  was  raised  and  the  ship 
steamed  round  the  north  end  of  the  island,  to  what  Captain 
Davis  proposed  should  be  named  Hasselborough  Bay,  in 
recognition  of  the  discoverer  of  the  island.  This  proved  an 
admirable  anchorage,  for  the  wind  remained  from  the  east 
and  south-east  during  the  greater  part  of  our  stay. 

The  sealers  pushed  their  boat  across  the  spit,  and, 
launching  it  in  calmer  water,  came  out  to  us,  meeting  the 
Aurora  some  three  miles  off  the  land.  The  anchor  was  let 
go  about  one  mile  and  a  half  from  the  head  of  the  bay. 

News  was  exchanged  with  the  sealers.  It  appeared 
that  there  had  been  much  speculation  as  to  what  sort  of  a 
craft  we  were;  visits  of  ships,  other  than  those  sent  down 
specially  to  convey  their  oil  to  New  Zealand,  being  practi- 
cally unknown.  For  a  while  they  suspected  the  Aurora  of 
being  an  alien  sealer,  and  had  prepared  to  defend  their 
rights  to  the  local  fishery. 

All  was  well  now,  however,  and  information  and  assist- 
ance were  freely  volunteered.  They  were  greatly  relieved 
to  hear  that  our  auxiliary  vessel,  the  Toroa.  was  expected 
immediately,  and  would  be  available  for  taking  the  ship- 
wrecked crew  back  to  civilization. 

Owing  to  the  loss  of  the  Clyde,  a  large  shipment  of  oil 
in  barrels  lay  piled  upon  the  beach  with  every  prospect  of 
destruction,  just  at  a  time  when  the  realization  of  its  value 
would  be  most  desirable,  to  make  good  the  loss  sustained 
by  the  wreck.  I  decided,  therefore,  in  view  of  their  hospi- 
tality, to  make  arrangements  with  the  captain  of  the  Toroa 
to  take  back  a  load  of  the  oil,  upon  terms  only  sufficient  to 
recoup  us  for  the  extension  of  the  charter. 

In  company  with  Ainsworth,  Hannam  and  others,  I 
went  ashore  to  select  a  site  for  the  station.  As  strong 
westerly  winds  were  to  be  expected  during  the  greater  part 

35 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

of  the  year,  it  was  necessary  to  erect  buildings  in  the  lee  of 
substantial  break- winds.  Several  sites  for  a  hut  convenient 
to  a  serviceable  landing-place  were  inspected  at  the  north 
end  of  the  beach.  The  hut  was  eventually  erected  in  the 
lee  of  a  large  mass  of  rock,  rising  out  of  the  grass-covered 
sandy  fiat  at  the  north  end  of  the  spit. 

It  would  have  been  much  handier  in  every  way,  both  in 
assembling  the  engines  and  masts  and  subsequently  in  operat- 
ing the  wireless  station,  had  the  wireless  plant  been  erected  on 
the  beach  adjacent  to  the  living-hut.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
position  on  top  of  the  hill  had  the  advantage  of  a  free 
outlook  and  of  increased  electrical  potential,  allowing  of  a 
shorter  length  of  mast.  In  addition  the  ground  in  this 
situation  proved  to  be  peaty  and  sodden,  and  therefore  a 
good  conductor,  thus  presenting  an  excellent  "  earth  "  from 
the  wireless  standpoint.  In  short,  the  advantages  of  the 
hill-site  outweighed  its  disadvantages.  Of  the  latter  the 
most  obvious  was  the  difficult  transportation  of  the  heavy 
masts,  petrol-engine,  dynamo,  induction-generator  and  other 
miscellaneous  gear,  from  the  beach  to  the  summit — a 
vertical  height  of  three  hundred  feet. 

To  facilitate  this  latter  work  the  sealers  placed  at  our 
disposal  a  "  flying  fox  "  which  ran  from  sea-level  to  the  top 
of  Wireless  Hill,  and  which  they  had  erected  for  the  carriage 
of  blubber.  On  inspecting  it.  Wild  reported  that  it  was 
serviceable,  but  would  first  require  to  be  strengthened.  He 
immediately  set  about  effecting  this  with  the  help  of  a 
party. 

Hurley  now  discovered  that  he  had  accidentally  left 
one  of  his  cinematograph  lenses  on  a  rock  where  he  had  been 
working  in  Caroline  Cove.  As  it  was  indispensable,  and 
there  was  little  prospect  of  the  weather  allowing  of  another 
visit  by  the  ship,  it  was  decided  that  he  should  go  on  a  journey 
overland  to  recover  it.  One  of  the  sealers,  Hutchinson  by 
name,  who  had  been  to  Caroline  Cove  and  knew  the  best 
route  to  take,  kindly  volunteered  to  accompany  Hurley. 
The  party  was  eventually  increased  by  the  addition  of 
86 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

Harrisson,  who  was  to  keep  a  look-out  for  matters  of  bio- 
logical interest.     They  started  off  at  noon  on  December  13. 

Although  the  greater  part  of  the  stores  for  the  Macquarie 
Island  party  were  to  arrive  by  the  Toroa  there  were  a  few 
tons  on  board  the  Aurora.  These  and  the  dogs  were  landed 
as  quickly  as  possible.  How  glad  the  poor  animals  were 
to  be  once  more  on  solid  earth  !  It  was  out  of  the  question 
to  let  them  loose,  so  they  were  tethered  at  intervals  along 
a  heavy  cable,  anchored  at  both  ends  amongst  the  tussock- 
grass.  Ninnis  took  up  his  abode  in  the  sealers'  hut 
so  that  he  might  the  better  look  after  their  wants,  which 
centred  chiefly  on  sea  elephant  meat,  and  that  in  large 
quantities.  Webb  joined  Ninnis,  as  he  intended  to  take 
full  sets  of  magnetic  observations  at  several  stations  in  the 
vicinity. 

Bickerton  and  Gillies  got  the  motor-launch  into  good 
working  order,  and  by  means  of  it  the  rest  of  us  con- 
veyed ashore  several  tons  of  coal  briquettes,  the  benzine, 
kerosene,  instruments  and  the  wireless  masts,  by  noon  on 
December  13. 

Everything  but  the  requirements  of  the  wireless  station 
was  landed  on  the  spit,  as  near  the  north-east  corner  as 
the  surf  would  allow.  Fortunately,  reefs  ran  out  from 
the  shore  at  intervals,  and  calmer  water  could  be  found 
in  their  lee.  All  gear  for  the  wireless  station  was  taken 
to  a  spot  about  half  a  mile  to  the  north-west  at  the  foot 
of  Wireless  Hill,  where  the  "  flying  fox  "  was  situated.  Just  at 
that  spot  there  was  a  landing-place  at  the  head  of  a  charm- 
ing little  boat  harbour,  formed  by  numerous  kelp-covered 
rocky  reefs  rising  at  intervals  above  the  level  of  high  water. 
These  broke  the  swell,  so  that  in  most  weathers  calm  water 
was  assured  at  the  landing-place. 

This  boat  harbour  was  a  fascinating  spot.  The  western 
side  was  peopled  by  a  rookery  of  blue-eyed  cormorants  ; 
scattered  nests  of  white  gulls  relieved  the  sombre  appearance 
of  the  reefs  on  the  opposite  side  :  whilst  gentoo  penguins  in 
numbers   were   busy   hatching   their   eggs    on   the   sloping 

37 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

ground  beyond.  Skua-gulls  and  giant  petrels  were  perched 
here  and  there  amongst  the  rocks,  watching  for  an  oppor- 
tunity of  marauding  the  nests  of  the  non-predacious  birds. 
Sea  elephants  raised  their  massive,  dripping  heads  in  shoal 
and  channel.  The  dark  reefs,  running  out  into  the  pellucid 
water,  supported  a  vast  gro\vth  of  a  snake-like  form  of 
kelp,  whose  octopus-like  tentacles,  many  yards  in  length, 
writhed  yellow  and  brown  to  the  swing  of  the  surge,  and 
gave  the  foreground  an  indescribable  weirdness.  I  stood 
looking  out  to  sea  from  here  one  evening,  soon  after  sunset, 
the  launch  lazily  rolling  in  the  swell,  and  the  Aurora  in  the 
offing,  while  the  rich  tints  of  the  afterglow  paled  in  the 
south-west. 

I  envied  Wild  and  his  party,  whose  occupation  in  con- 
nexion with  the  "  flying  fox  "  kept  them  permanently 
camped  at  this  spot. 

The  Toroa  made  her  appearance  on  the  afternoon  of 
December  13,  and  came  to  anchor  about  half  a  mile  inside 
the  Aurora.  Her  departure  had  been  delayed  by  the  bad 
weather.  Leaving  Hobart  late  on  December  7,  she  had 
anchored  off  Bruni  Island  awaiting  the  moderation  of  the  sea. 
The  journey  was  resumed  on  the  morning  of  the  9th,  and 
the  passage  made  in  fine  weather.  She  proved  a  handy 
craft  for  work  of  the  kind,  and  Captain  Holliman,  the  master, 
was  well  used  to  the  dangers  of  uncharted  coastal  waters. 

Within  a  few  minutes  of  her  arrival,  a  five-ton  motor- 
boat  of  shallow  draught  was  launched  and  unloading  com- 
menced. 

Those  of  the  staff  arriving  by  the  Toroa  were  housed 
ashore  with  the  sealers,  as,  when  everybody  was  on  board, 
the  Aurora  was  uncomfortably  congested.  Fifty  sheep  were 
taken  on  shore  to  feed  on  the  rank  grass  until  our  departure. 
A  large  part  of  the  cargo  consisted  of  coal  for  the  Aurora. 
This  was  already  partly  bagged,  and  in  that  form  was 
loaded  into  the  launches  and  whale-boats ;  the  former  towing 
the  latter  to  their  destination.  Thus  a  continuous  stream 
of  coal  and  stores  was  passing  from  ship  to  ship,  and  from 
38 


'J 

^      Hi 


-H      O 


■f.   -r 


3    O 


THE  LAST   DAYS   OF  IIOBART 

the  ships  to  the  several  landing-places  on  shore.  As  soon 
as  the  after-hold  on  the  Toroa  was  cleared,  barrels  of  sea 
elephant  oil  were  brought  off  in  rafts  and  loaded  aft,  simul- 
taneously with  the  unloading  forward. 

We  kept  at  the  work  as  long  as  possible — about  sixteen 
hours  a  day  including  a  short  interval  for  lunch.  There 
were  twenty-five  of  the  land  party  available  for  general 
work,  and  with  some  assistance  from  the  ship's  crew  the 
work  went  forward  at  a  rapid  rate. 

On  the  morning  of  the  15th,  after  giving  final  instructions 
to  Eitel,  who  had  come  thus  far  and  was  returning  as  arranged, 
the  Toroa  weighed  anchor  and  we  parted  with  a  cheer. 

The  transportation  of  the  wireless  equipment  to  the  top 
of  the  hill  had  been  going  on  simultaneously  with  the  un- 
loading of  the  ships.  Now,  however,  all  were  able  to  con- 
centrate upon  it,  and  the  work  went  forward  very  rapidly. 

All  the  wireless  instruments,  and  much  of  the  other 
paraphernalia  of  the  Macquarie  Island  party  had  been 
packed  in  the  barrels,  as  it  was  expected  that  they  would 
have  to  be  rafted  ashore  through  the  surf.  Fortunately, 
the  weather  continued  to  "  hold  "  from  an  easterly  direction, 
and  everything  was  able  to  be  landed  in  the  comparatively 
calm  waters  of  Hasselborough  Bay  ;  a  circumstance  which 
the  islanders  assured  us  was  quite  a  rare  thing.  The  wireless 
masts  were  rafted  ashore.  These  were  of  Oregon  pine,  each 
composed  of  four  sections. 

Digging  the  pits  for  bedding  the  heavy,  wooden  "  dead 
men,"  and  erecting  the  wireless  masts,  the  engine-hut  and 
the  operating-hut  provided  plenty  of  work  for  all.  Here 
was  as  busy  a  scene  as  one  could  witness  anywhere — 
some  with  the  picks  and  shovels,  others  with  hammers 
and  nails,  sailors  splicing  ropes  and  fitting  masts,  and  a 
stream  of  men  hauling  the  loads  up  from  the  sea- shore  to 
their  destination  on  the  summit. 

Some  details  of  the  working  of  the  "  flying  fox  "  Avill  be 
of  interest.  The  distance  between  the  lower  and  upper 
terminals  was  some  eight  hundred  feet.     This  was  spanned 

39 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

by  two  steel- wire  carrying  cables,  secured  above  by  "  dead 
men  "  sunk  in  the  soil,  and  below  by  a  turn  around  a  huge 
rock  which  outcropped  amongst  the  tussock-grass  on  the 
flat,  some  fifty  yards  from  the  head  of  the  boat  harbour. 
For  hauling  up  the  loads,  a  thin  wire  line,  with  a  pulley- 
block  at  either  extremity,  rolling  one  on  each  of  the  carrying 
wires,  passed  round  a  snatch-block  at  the  upper  station. 
It  was  of  such  a  length  that  when  the  loading  end  was  at 
the  lower  station,  the  counterpoise  end  was  in  position  to 
descend  at  the  other.  Thus  a  freight  was  dispatched  to 
the  top  of  the  hill  by  filling  a  bag,  acting  as  counterpoise, 
with  earth,  until  slightly  in  excess  of  the  weight  of  the  top 
load  ;  then  off  it  would  start  gathering  speed  as  it  went. 

Several  devices  were  developed  for  arresting  the  pace 
as  the  freight  neared  the  end  of  its  journey,  but  accidents 
were  always  liable  to  occur  if  the  counterpoise  were  unduly 
loaded.  Wild  was  injured  by  one  of  these  brake-devices, 
which  consisted  of  a  bar  of  iron  lying  on  the  ground  about 
thirty  yards  in  front  of  the  terminus,  and  attached  by  a 
rope  with  a  loose-running  noose  to  the  down-carrying  wire. 
On  the  arrival  of  the  counterpoise  at  that  point  on  the  wire,  its 
speed  would  be  checked  owing  to  the  drag  exerted.  On  the 
occasion  referred  to,  the  rope  was  struck  with  such  velocity 
that  the  iron  bar  was  jerked  into  the  air  and  struck  Wild 
a  solid  blow  on  the  thigh.  Though  incapacitated  for  a  few 
days,  he  continued  to  supervise  at  the  lower  terminal. 

The  larger  sections  of  the  wireless  masts  gave  the  greatest 
trouble,  as  they  were  not  only  heavy  but  awkward.  A 
special  arrangement  was  necessary  for  all  loads  exceeding 
one  hundredweight,  as  the  single  wire  carrier- cables  were 
not  sufficiently  strong.  In  such  cases  both  carrier-cables  were 
lashed  together  making  a  single  support,  the  hauling  being 
done  by  a  straight  pull  on  the  top  of  the  hill.  The  hauling 
was  carried  out  to  the  accompaniment  of  chanties,  and  these 
helped  to  relieve  the  strain  of  the  work.  It  was  a  familiar, 
sight  to  see  a  string  of  twenty  men  on  the  hauling-line 
scaring  the  skua-gulls  with  popular  choruses  like  "  A' 
40 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT  HOBART 

roving  "  and  "  Ho,  boys,  pull  her  along."  In  calm  weather 
the  parties  at  either  terminal  could  communicate  by  shouting 
but  were  much  assisted  by  megaphones  improvised  from  a 
pair  of  leggings. 

Considering  the  heavy  weights  handled  and  the  speed  at 
which  the  work  was  done,  we  were  fortunate  in  suffering 
only  one  breakage,  and  that  might  have  been  more  serious 
than  it  proved.  The  mishap  in  question  occurred  to  the 
generator.  In  order  to  lighten  the  load,  the  rotor  had  been 
taken  out.  When  almost  at  the  summit  of  the  hill,  the 
ascending  weight,  causing  the  carrying-wires  to  sag  unusually 
low,  struck  a  rock,  unhitched  the  lashing  and  fell,  striking 
the  steep  rubble  slope,  to  go  bounding  in  great  leaps  out 
amongst  the  grass  to  the  flat  below.  Marvellous  to  relate, 
it  was  found  to  have  suffered  no  damage  other  than  a  double 
fracture  of  the  end-plate  casting,  which  could  be  repaired. 
And  so  it  was  decided  to  exchange  the  generators  in  the  two 
equipments,  as  there  would  be  greater  facilities  for  engineer- 
ing work  at  the  Main  Base,  Adelie  Land.  Fortunately,  the 
other  generator  was  almost  at  the  top  of  the  ship's  hold, 
and  therefore  accessible.  The  three  pieces  into  which  the 
casting  had  been  broken  were  found  to  be  sprung,  and  would 
not  fit  together.  However,  after  our  arrival  at  Adelie  Land, 
Hannam  found,  curiously  enough,  that  the  pieces  fitted 
into  place  perfectly — apparently  an  effect  of  contraction  due 
to  the  cold — and  with  the  aid  of  a  few  plates  and  belts  the 
generator  was  made  as  serviceable  as  ever. 

In  the  meantime.  Hurley,  Harrisson,  and  the  sealer, 
Hutchinson,  had  returned  from  their  trip  to  Caroline  Cove, 
after  a  most  interesting  though  arduous  journey.  They 
had  camped  the  first  evening  at  The  Nuggets,  a  rocky  point 
on  the  east  coast  some  four  miles  to  the  south  of  North- 
East  Bay.  From  The  Nuggets,  the  trail  struck  inland  up 
the  steep  hillsides  until  the  summit  of  the  island  was  reached ; 
then  over  pebble-strewn,  undulating  ground  with  occasional 
small  lakes,   arriving  at  the  west  coast  near  its  southern 

41 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

extremity.  Owing  to  rain  and  fog  they  overshot  the  mark 
and  had  to  spend  the  night  close  to  a  bay  at  the  south- 
end.  There  Hurley  obtained  some  good  photographs  of  sea 
elephants  and  of  the  penguin  rookeries. 

The  next  morning,  December  15,  they  set  off  again, 
this  time  finding  Caroline  Cove  without  further  difficulty. 
Harrisson  remained  on  the  brow  of  the  hill  overlooking 
the  cove,  and  there  captured  some  prions  and  their  eggs. 
Hurley  and  his  companion  found  the  lost  lens  and  returned 
to  Harrisson  securing  a  fine  albatross  on  the  way.  This 
solitary  bird  was  descried  sitting  on  the  hill  side,  several 
hundreds  of  feet  above  sea-level.  Its  plumage  was  in  such 
good  condition  that  they  could  not  resist  the  impulse  to 
secure  it  for  our  collection,  for  the  moment  not  considering 
the  enormous  w^eight  to  be  carried.  They  had  neither 
firearms  nor  an  Ancient  Mariner's  cross-bow,  and  no  stones 
were  to  be  had  in  the  vicinity — when  the  resourceful  Hurley 
suddenl}^  bethought  himself  of  a  small  tin  of  meat  in  his  haver- 
sack, and,  wuth  a  fortunate  throw,  hit  the  bird  on  the  head, 
killing  the  majestic  creature  on  the  spot. 

Shouldering  their  prize,  they  trudged  on  to  Lusitania 
Bay,  camping  there  that  night  in  an  old  dilapidated  hut ;  a 
remnant  of  the  sealing  days.  Close  by  there  was  known 
to  be  a  large  rookery  of  King  penguins ;  a  variety  of  penguin 
with  richly  tinted  plumage  on  the  head  and  shoulders,  and 
next  in  size  to  the  Emperor — the  sovereign  bird  of  the 
Antarctic  Regions.  The  breeding  season  was  at  its  height, 
so  Harrisson  secured  and  preserved  a  great  number  of  their 
eggs.  Hutchinson  kindly  volunteered  to  carry  the  albatross 
in  addition  to  his  original  load.  If  they  had  skinned  the 
bird,  the  weight  would  have  been  materially  reduced,  but 
with  the  meagre  appliances  at  hand,  it  would  undoubtedly 
have  been  spoiled  as  a  specimen.  Hurley,  very  ambitiously, 
had  taken  a  heavy  camera,  in  addition  to  a  blanket  and 
other  sundries.  During  the  rough  and  wet  walking  of  the 
previous  day,  his  boots  had  worn  out  and  caused  him  to 
twist  a  tendon  in  the  right  foot,  so  that  he  was  not  up  to 
42 


THE   L4ST  DAYS   AT   HOBART 

his  usual  form,  while  Harrisson  was  hampered  with  a  bulky 
cargo  of  eggs  and  specimens. 

Saddled  with  these  heavy  burdens,  the  party  found  the 
return  journey  very  laborious.  Hurley's  leg  set  the  pace, 
and  so,  later  in  the  day,  Harrisson  decided  to  push  on  ahead  in 
order  to  give  us  news,  as  they  had  orders  to  be  back  as  soon 
as  possible  and  were  then  overdue.  When  darkness  came  on, 
Harrisson  was  near  The  Nuggets,  where  he  passed  the  night 
amongst  the  tussock-grass.  Hurley  and  Hutchinson,  who  were 
five  miles  behind,  also  slept  by  the  wayside.  When  dawn 
appeared,  Harrisson  moved  on,  reaching  the  north-end  huts 
at  about  9  a.m.  Mertz  and  Whetter  immediately  set  out 
and  came  to  the  relief  of  the  other  two  men  a  few  hours 
later. 

Fatigue  and  the  lame  leg  subdued  Hurley  for  the  rest 
of  the  day,  but  the  next  morning  he  was  off  to  get  pictures 
of  the  "  flying  fox  "  in  action.  It  was  practically  im- 
possible for  him  to  walk  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  but  not  to 
be  baffled,  he  sent  the  cinematograph  m.achine  up  by  the 
"  flying  fox,"  and  then  followed  himself.  Long  before 
reaching  the  top  he  realized  how  much  his  integrity  depended 
on  the  strength  of  the  hauling-line  and  the  care  of  those  on 
Wireless  Hill. 

During  the  latter  part  of  our  stay  at  the  island,  the 
wind  veered  to  the  north  and  north-north-east.  We  took 
advantage  of  this  change  to  steam  round  to  the  east  side, 
intending  to  increase  our  supply  of  fresh  water  at  The 
Nuggets,  where  a  stream  comes  down  the  hillside  on  to  the 
beach.  In  this,  however,  we  were  disappointed,  for  the 
sea  was  breaking  too  heavily  on  the  beach,  and  so  we  steamed 
back  to  North-East  Bay  and  dropped  anchor.  Wild  went 
off  in  the  launch  to  search  for  a  landing-place  but  found 
the  sea  everywhere  too  formidable. 

Signals  were  made  to  those  on  shore,  instructing  them 
to  finish  off  the  work  on  the  wireless  plant,  and  to  kill  a 
dozen  sheep — enough  for  our  needs  for  some  days. 

The  ship  was  now  found  to  be  drifting,  and,  as  the  wind 

43 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

was  blowing  onshore,  the  anchor  was  raised,  and  with  the 
launch  in  tow  we  steamed  round  to  the  calmer  waters  of 
Hasselborough  Bay.  At  the  north  end  of  the  island,  for 
several  miles  out  to  sea  along  the  line  of  a  submerged  reef, 
the  northerly  swell  was  found  to  be  piling  up  in  an 
ugly  manner,  and  occasioned  considerable  damage  to  the 
launch.  This  happened  as  the  Aurora  s^vung  round;  a 
sea  catching  the  launch  and  rushing  it  forward  so  that 
it  struck  the  stern  of  the  ship  bow-on,  notwithstanding 
the  fact  that  several  of  the  men  exerted  themselves  to 
their  utmost  to  prevent  a  collision.  On  arrival  at  the 
anchorage,  the  launch  was  noticeably  settling  down,  as 
water  had  entered  at  several  seams  which  had  been 
started. 

After  being  partly  bailed  out,  it  was  left  in  the 
water  with  Hodgeman  and  Close  aboard,  as  we  wished 
to  run  ashore  as  soon  as  the  weather  improved.  Contrary 
to  expectation  the  wind  increased,  and  it  was  discovered 
that  the  Aurora  was  drifting  rapidly,  although  ninety 
fathoms  of  chain  had  been  paid  out.  Before  a  steam- 
winch  *  was  installed,  the  anchor  could  be  raised  only  by 
means  of  an  antiquated  man-power  lever-windlass.  In 
this  type,  a  see-saw-like  lever  is  worked  by  a  gang  of  men 
at  each  extremity,  and  it  takes  a  long  time  to  get  in  any 
considerable  length  of  chain.  The  chorus  and  chanty  came 
to  our  aid  once  more,  and  the  long  hours  of  heaving  on  the 
fo'c'sle  head  were  a  bright  if  strenuous  spot  in  our  memories 
of  Macquarie  Island.  In  course  of  time,  during  which  the 
ship  steamed  slowly  ahead,  the  end  came  in  sight — 'Vast 
heaving  ! — but  the  anchor  was  missing.  This  put  us  in  an 
awkward  situation,  for  the  stock  of  our  other  heavy  anchor 
had  already  been  lost.  There  was  no  other  course  but  to 
steam  up  and  down  waiting  for  the  weather  to  moderate. 
In  the  meantime,  we  had  all  been  too  busy  to  relieve  Close 
and  Hodgeman,  who  had  been  doing  duty  in  the  launch, 
bailing  for  five  hours,   and  were  thoroughly  soaked  with 

*  Fitted  on  return  of  the  vessel  to  S3^clney  after  the  first  Antarctic  cruise. 
44 


Mucqiiiiiie  I4in,d  H'l'l'- 

THE  AURORA  ANCHORED  IX  HASSLEBOROUGH  BAY.     IX  THE  EOUEGKOUND  GIANT 

SEAWEED  IS  SWINGING  IN  THE  WASH  OF  THE  SURGE 


A  WAXDEl; 


:  I , -  I    (I .\    I  1 1 E  \Y ATE R  Matrson 


HUNTEK  TICKLES  A  SLEEPING   BAliY  SEA-ELEPHANT 


Hurley 


THE  LAST  DAYS  AT   HOBART 

spray.  All  hands  now  helped  with  the  tackle,  and  we  soon 
had  the  launch  on  board  in  its  old  position  near  the  main 
hatch. 

These  operations  were  unusually  protracted  for  we  were 
short  handed  ;  the  boatswain,  some  of  the  sailors  and  most 
of  the  land  party  being  marooned  on  shore.  We  were  now 
anxious  to  get  everybody  on  board  and  to  be  off.  The 
completion  of  their  quarters  was  to  be  left  to  the  Macquarie 
Island  party,  and  it  was  important  that  we  should  make  the 
most  of  the  southern  season.  The  wind  blew  so  strongly, 
however,  that  there  was  no  immediate  prospect  of  departure. 

The  ship  continued  to  steam  up  and  down.  On  the 
morning  of  December  23  it  was  found  possible  to  lower 
the  whale-boat,  and  Wild  went  off  with  a  complement  of 
sturdy  oarsmen,  including  Madigan,  Moyes,  Watson  and 
Kennedy,  and  succeeded  in  bringing  off  the  dogs.  Several 
trips  were  made  with  difficulty  during  the  day,  but  at  last 
all  the  men,  dogs  and  sheep  were  brought  off. 

Both  Wild  and  I  went  with  the  whale-boat  on  its  last  trip 
at  dusk  on  the  evening  of  December  23.  The  only  possible 
landing-place,  with  the  sea  then  running,  was  at  the  extrenie 
north-eastern  corner  of  the  beach.  No  time  was  lost  in 
getting  the  men  and  the  remainder  of  the  cargo  into  the 
boat,  though  in  the  darkness  this  was  not  easily  managed. 
The  final  parting  with  our  Macquarie  Island  party  took 
place  on  the  beach,  their  cheers  echoing  to  ours  as  we 
breasted  the  surf  and  "  gave  way  "  for  the  ship. 


45 


CHAPTER  III 
FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

THE  morning  following  our  farewell  to  Ainsworth  and 
party  at  the  north  end  of  the  island  found  us 
steaming  down  the  west  coast,  southward  bound. 

Our  supply  of  fresh  water  was  scanty,  and  the  only  re- 
source was  to  touch  at  Caroline  Cove.  As  a  matter  of  fact, 
there  were  several  suitable  localities  on  the  east  coast,  but 
the  strong  easterly  weather  then  prevailing  made  a  landing 
impossible. 

On  the  ship  nearing  the  south  end,  the  wind  subsided. 
She  then  crept  into  the  lee  of  the  cliffs,  a  boat  was  dropped  and 
soundings  disclosed  a  deep  passage  at  the  mouth  of  Caroline 
Cove  and  ample  water  within.  There  was,  however,  limited 
space  for  manoeuvring  the  vessel  if  a  change  should  occur  in 
the  direction  of  the  wind.  The  risk  was  taken  ;  the  Aurora 
felt  her  way  in,  and,  to  provide  against  accident,  was  anchored 
by  Captain  Davis  with  her  bow  towards  the  entrance.  Wild 
then  ran  out  a  kedge  anchor  to  secure  the  stern. 

During  the  cruise  down  the  coast  the  missing  stock  of 
our  only  remaining  anchor  had  been  replaced  by  Gillies 
and  Hannam.  Two  Oregon  "  dead  men,"  bolted  together 
on  the  shank,  made  a  clumsy  but  efficient  makeshift. 

Two  large  barrels  were  taken  ashore,  repeatedly  filled 
and  towed  off  to  the  ship.  It  was  difficult  at  first  to  find 
good  w^ater,  for  the  main  stream  flowing  do^vn  from  the  head 
of  the  bay  was  contaminated  by  the  penguins  which  made 
it  their  highway  to  a  rookery.  After  a  search,  an  almost 
dry  gully  was  found  to  yield  w^ater  when  a  pit  was  dug  in 
its  bed.  This  spot  was  some  eighty  yards  from  the  beach, 
46 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

and  to  reach  it  one  traversed  an  area  of  tussocks  between 
which  sea  elephants  wallowed  in  soft  mire. 

A  cordon  of  men  was  made  and  buckets  were  inter- 
changed, the  full  ones  descending  and  the  empty  ones  ascend- 
ing. The  barrels  on  the  beach  were  thus  speedily  filled 
and  taken  off  by  a  boat's  crew.  At  11  p.m.  darkness  came, 
and  it  was  decided  to  complete  the  work  on  the  following 
day. 

As  we  rowed  to  the  ship,  the  water  was  serenely  placid. 
From  the  dark  environing  hills  came  the  weird  cries  of 
strange  birds.  There  was  a  hint  of  wildness,  soon  to  be 
forgotten  in  the  chorus  of  a  'Varsity  song  and  the  hearty 
shouts  of  the  rowers. 

About  2  A.M.  the  officer  on  watch  came  down  to  report 
to  Captain  Davis  a  slight  change  in  the  direction  of  the 
breeze.  At  3  a.m.  I  was  again  awakened  by  hearing  Captain 
Davis  hasten  on  deck,  and  by  a  gentle  bumping  of  the  ship, 
undoubtedly  against  rock.  It  appeared  that  the  officer 
on  watch  had  left  the  bridge  for  a  few  minutes,  while  the 
wind  freshened  and  was  blowing  at  the  time  nearly  broadside- 
on  from  the  north.  This  caused  the  ship  to  sag  to  leeward, 
stretching  the  bow  and  stern  cables,  until  she  came  in  contact 
with  the  kelp-covered,  steep,  rocky  bank  on  the  south  side. 
The  narrow  limits  of  the  anchorage  were  responsible  for  this 
dangerous  situation. 

All  hands  were  immediately  called  on  deck  and  set  to 
work  hauling  on  the  stern  cable.  In  a  few  minutes  the 
propeller  and  rudder  were  out  of  danger.  The  engines  were 
then  started  slowly  ahead,  and,  as  we  came  up  to  the  bower 
anchor,  the  cable  was  taken  in.  The  wind  was  blowing 
across  the  narrow  entrance  to  the  Cove,  so  that  it  was  ad- 
visable to  get  quickly  under  way.  The  kedge  anchor  was 
abandoned,  and  we  steamed  straight  out  to  sea  with  the 
bower  hanging  below  the  bows.  The  wind  increased,  and 
there  was  no  other  course  open  but  to  continue  the  south- 
ward voyage. 

47 


THE   HOME   OF  THE   BLIZZARD 

The  day  so  inauspiciously  begun  turned  out  beautifully 
sunny.  There  was  additional  verve  in  our  Christmas 
celebration,  as  Macquarie  Island  and  the  Bishop  and  Clerk, 
in  turn,  sank  below  the  northern  horizon. 

During  the  stay  at  the  island  little  attention  had  been 
given  to  scientific  matters.  All  our  energies  had  been 
concentrated  on  speedily  landing  the  party  which  was  to 
carry  out  such  special  work,  so  as  to  allow  us  to  get  away  south 
as  soon  as  possible.  Enough  had  been  seen  to  indicate  the 
wide  scientific  possibilities  of  the  place. 

For  some  days  we  were  favoured  by  exceptional  weather ; 
a  moderate  breeze  from  the  north-east  and  a  long,  lazy 
swell  combining  to  make  our  progress  rapid. 

The  sum  of  the  experiences  of  earlier  expeditions  had 
shown  that  the  prevailing  winds  south  of  60°  S.  latitude 
were  mainly  south-easterly,  causing  a  continuous  streaming 
of  the  pack  from  east  to  west.  Our  obvious  expedient  on 
encountering  the  ice  was  to  steam  in  the  same  direction  as 
this  drift.  It  had  been  decided  before  setting  out  that  we 
would  confine  ourselves  to  the  region  west  of  the  meridian 
of  158°  E.  longitude.  So  it  was  intended  to  reach  the 
pack,  approximately  in  that  meridian,  and,  should  we 
be  repulsed,  to  work  steadily  to  the  west  in  expectation 
of  breaking  through  to  the  land. 

Regarding  the  ice  conditions  over  the  whole  segment 
of  the  unknown  tract  upon  which  our  attack  was  directed, 
very  little  was  known.  Critically  examined,  the  reports  of 
the  American  squadron  under  the  command  of  Wilkes  were 
highly  discouraging.  D'Urville  appeared  to  have  reached  his 
landfall  without  much  hindrance  by  ice,  but  that  was  a  fortu- 
nate circumstance  in  view  of  the  difficultiesWilkes  had  met. 
At  the  western  limit  of  the  area  we  were  to  explore,  the  Ger- 
mans in  the  Gauss  had  been  irrevocably  trapped  in  the  ice  as 
early  as  the  month  of  February.  At  the  eastern  limit,  only  the 
year  before,  the  Tetra  Nova  of  Scott's  expedition,  making  a 
sally  into  unexplored  waters,  had  sighted  new  land  almost 
48 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

on  the  158th  meridian,  but  even  though  it  was  then  the  end 
of  summer,  and  the  sea  was  ahnost  free  from  the  previous 
season's  ice,  they  were  not  able  to  reach  the  land  on  account 
of  the  dense  pack. 

In  the  early  southern  summer,  at  the  time  of  our  arrival, 
the  ice  conditions  were  expected  to  be  at  their  worst.  This 
followed  from  the  fact  that  not  only  would  local  floes  be 
encountered,  but  also  a  vast  expanse  of  pack  fed  by  the  dis- 
integrating floes  of  the  Ross  Sea,  since,  between  Cape  Adare 
and  the  Balleny  Islands,  the  ice  drifting  to  the  north-west 
under  the  influence  of  the  south-east  winds  is  arrested  in  an 
extensive  sheet.  On  the  other  hand,  were  we  to  wait  for 
the  later  season,  no  time  would  remain  for  the  accomplish- 
ment of  the  programme  which  had  been  arranged.  So  we 
were  forced  to  accept  things  as  we  found  them,  being  also 
prepared  to  make  the  most  of  any  chance  opportunity. 

In  planning  the  Expedition,  the  probability  of  meeting 
unusually  heavy  pack  had  been  borne  in  mind,  and  the 
three  units  into  which  the  land  parties  and  equipment 
were  divided  had  been  disposed  so  as  to  facilitate  the  land- 
ing of  a  base  with  despatch,  and,  maybe,  under  difficult 
circumstances.  Further,  in  case  the  ship  were  frozen  in, 
"  wireless  "  could  be  installed  and  the  news  immediately 
communicated  through  Macquarie  Island  to  Australia. 

At  noon  on  December  27  whales  were  spouting  all 
round  us,  and  appeared  to  be  travelling  from  west  to  east. 
Albatrosses  of  several  species  constantly  hovered  about, 
and  swallow-like  Wilson  petrels — those  nervous  rangers  of 
the  high  seas — would  sail  along  the  troughs  and  flit  over 
the  crests  of  the  waves,  to  vanish  into  sombre  distance. 

Already  we  were  steaming  through  untravelled  waters, 
and  new  discoveries  might  be  expected  at  any  moment. 
A  keen  interest  spread  throughout  the  ship.  On  several 
occasions,  fantastic  clouds  on  the  horizon  gave  hope  of  land, 
only  to  be  abandoned  on  further  advance.  On  December  28 
and  29  large  masses  of  floating  kelp  were  seen,  and,  like  the 
VOL.  I  D  49 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

flotsam   met   with   by   Columbus,    still    further   raised   our 
hopes. 

The  possibility  of  undiscovered  islands  existing  in  the 
Southern  Ocean,  south  of  Australia  and  outside  the  ice- 
bound region,  kept  us  vigilant.  So  few  ships  had  ever 
navigated  the  waters  south  of  latitude  55°,  that  some  one 
and  a  quarter  million  square  miles  lay  open  to  exploration. 
As  an  instance  of  such  a  discovery  in  the  seas  south  of  New 
Zealand  may  be  mentioned  Scott  Island,  first  observed  by 
the  Morning,  one  of  the  relief  ships  of  the  British  Expedi- 
tion of  1902. 

The  weather  remained  favourable  for  sounding  and 
other  oceanographical  work,  but  as  it  was  uncertain  how 
long  these  conditions  would  last,  and  in  view  of  the  anxiety 
arising  from  overloaded  decks  and  the  probability  of  gales 
which  are  chronic  in  these  latitudes,  it  was  resolved  to  land 
one  of  the  bases  as  soon  as  possible,  and  thus  rid  the  ship 
of  superfluous  cargo.  The  interesting  but  time-absorbing 
study  of  the  ocean-depths  was  therefore  postponed  for  a  while. 

With  regard  to  the  Antarctic  land  to  be  expected  ahead, 
many  of  Wilkes's  landfalls,  where  they  had  been  investigated 
by  later  expeditions,  had  been  disproved.  It  seemed  as  if  he 
had  regarded  the  northern  margin  of  the  solid  floe  and  shelf- 
ice  as  land  ;  perhaps  also  mistaking  bergs,  frozen  in  the 
floe  and  distorted  by  mirage,  for  ice-covered  land.  Never- 
theless, his  soundings,  and  the  light  thrown  upon  the  subject 
by  the  Scott  and  Shackleton  expeditions,  left  no  doubt  in 
my  mind  that  land  would  be  found  within  a  reasonable 
distance  south  of  the  position  assigned  by  Wilkes.  Some 
authorities  had  held  that  any  land  existing  in  this  region 
would  be  found  to  be  of  the  nature  of  isolated  islands.  Those 
familiar  with  the  adjacent  land,  however,  were  all  in  favour 
of  it  being  continental — a  continuation  of  the  Victoria 
Land  plateau.  The  land  lay  to  the  south  beyond  doubt ; 
the  problem  was  to  reach  it  through  the  belt  of  ice-bound 
sea.  Still,  navigable  pack-ice  might  be  ahead,  obviating 
the  need  of  driving  too  far  to  the  west. 
50 


CO      ^ 

S  I 


f« 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

"  Ice  on  the  starboard  bow  !  "  At  4  p.m.  on  December 
29  the  cry  was  raised,  and  shortly  after  we  passed  along- 
side a  small  caverned  berg  whose  bluish-green  tints  called 
forth  general  admiration.  In  the  distance  others  could  be 
seen.  One  larger  than  the  average  stood  almost  in  our 
path.  It  was  of  the  flat-topped,  sheer-walled  type,  so 
characteristic  of  the  Antarctic  regions ;  three-quarters  of  a  mile 
long  and  half  a  mile  wide,  rising  eighty  feet  above  the  sea. 

It  has  been  stated  that  tabular  bergs  are  typical  of  the 
Antarctic  as  opposed  to  the  Arctic.  This  diversity  is  ex- 
plained by  a  difference  in  the  glacial  conditions.  In  the 
north,  glaciation  is  not  so  marked  and,  as  a  rule,  coastal 
areas  are  free  from  ice,  except  for  valley-glaciers  which 
transport  ice  from  the  high  interior  down  to  sea-level. 
There,  the  summer  temperature  is  so  warm  that  the  lower 
parts  of  the  glaciers  become  much  decayed,  and,  reaching 
the  sea,  break  up  readily  into  numerous  irregular,  pinnacled 
bergs  of  clear  ice.  In  the  south,  the  tabular  forms  result 
from  the  fact  that  the  average  annual  temperature  is  colder 
than  that  prevailing  at  the  northern  axis  of  the  earth. 
They  are  so  formed  because,  even  at  sea-level,  no  appreciable 
amount  of  thawing  takes  place  in  midsummer.  The  in- 
land ice  pushes  out  to  sea  in  enormous  masses,  and  remains 
floating  long  before  it  "  calves "  to  form  bergs.  Even 
though  its  surface  has  been  thrown  into  ridges  as  it  was 
creeping  over  the  uneven  land,  all  are  reduced  to  a  dead  level 
or  slightly  undulating  plain,  in  the  free-floating  condition, 
and  are  still  further  effaced  by  dense  drifts  and  repeated  falls 
of  snow  descending  upon  them.  The  upper  portion  of  a 
table-topped  berg  consists,  therefore,  of  consolidated  snow  ; 
neither  temperature  nor  pressure  having  been  sufflcient  to 
metamorphose  it  into  clear  ice.  Such  a  berg  in  old  age 
becomes  worn  into  an  irregular  shape  by  the  action  of 
waves  and  weather,  and  often  completely  capsizes,  exposing 
its  corroded  basement. 

A  light  fog  obscured  the  surrounding  sea  and  distant 

51 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

bergs  glided  by  like  spectres.  A  monstrous  block  on  the 
starboard  side  had  not  been  long  adrift,  for  it  showed  but 
slight  signs  of  weathering. 

The  fog  thickened  over  a  grey  swell  that  shimmered 
with  an  oily  lustre.  At  7  p.m.  pack-ice  came  suddenly  to 
view,  and  towards  it  we  steered,  vainly  peering  through 
the  mists  ahead  in  search  of  a  passage.  The  ice  was  closely 
packed,  the  pieces  being  small  and  well  worn.  On  the  out- 
skirts was  a  light  brash  which  steadily  gave  place  to  a  heavier 
variety,  composed  of  larger  and  more  angular  fragments. 
A  swishing  murmur  like  the  wind  in  the  tree-tops  came  from 
the  great  expanse.  It  was  alabaster-white  and  through 
the  small,  separate  chips  was  diffused  a  pale  lilac  coloration. 
The  larger  chunks,  by  their  motion  and  exposure  to  wind  and 
current,  had  a  circle  of  clear  water ;  the  deep  sea-blue  hovering 
round  their  water-worn  niches.  Here  and  there  appeared 
the  ochreous-yellow  colour  of  adhering  films  of  diatoms. 

As  we  could  not  see  what  lay  beyond,  and  the  pack  was  be- 
coming heavier,  the  ship  was  swung  round  and  headed  out. 

Steering  to  the  west  through  open  water  and  patches 
of  trailing  brash,  we  were  encouraged  to  find  the  pack 
trending  towards  the  south.  By  pushing  through  bars  of 
jammed  floes  and  dodging  numerous  bergs,  twenty  miles 
were  gained  due  southwards  before  the  conditions  had 
changed.  The  fog  cleared,  and  right  ahead  massive  bergs 
rose  out  of  an  ice-strewn  sea.  We  neared  one  which  was  a 
mile  in  length  and  one  hundred  feet  in  height.  The  heaving 
ocean,  dashing  against  its  mighty,  glistening  walls,  rushed 
with  a  hollow  boom  into  caverns  of  ethereal  blue  ;  gothic 
portals  to  a  cathedral  of  resplendent  purity. 

The  smaller  bergs  and  fragments  of  floe  crowded  closer 
together,  and  the  two  men  at  the  wheel  had  little  time 
for  reverie.  Orders  came  in  quick  succession — "  Star- 
board !  Steady  !  "  and  in  a  flash—"  Hard-a-port !  "  Then 
repeated  all  over  again,  while  the  rudder-chains  scraped 
and  rattled  in  their  channels. 

Gradually  the  swell  subsided,  smoothed  by  the  weight 
52 


LE-l'Ol'PEL)  NEVE  BKKli  Ul'.KUXATlNC 
).M  FLOATING  SHELF-IOR 


lliirlni 
AX    ANTAKCTIC    ICEBElMi   WIIH    A    I;  E  IK  U  LA  11  O.N    OF  CKEVASSES  ON    LIS  TILTED 
SlliFACE.     THIS  BEKG  HAJJ  NO  DOUBT    TAKEN    ITS    ORIGIN     FItO.M  THE     ICE    OF 
THE  COASTAL  CLIFFS  OF   ADELIE   LAND 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

of  ice.  The  tranquillity  of  the  water  heightened  the  superb 
effects  of  this  glacial  world.  Majestic  tabular  bergs  whose 
crevices  exhaled  a  vaporous  azure  ;  lofty  spires,  radiant 
turrets  and  splendid  castles ;  honeycombed  masses  illu- 
mined by  pale  green  light  within  whose  fairy  labyrinths 
the  water  washed  and  gurgled.  Seals  and  penguins  on 
magic  gondolas  were  the  silent  denizens  of  this  dreamy 
Venice.  In  the  soft  glamour  of  the  midsummer  midnight 
sun,  we  were  possessed  by  a  rapturous  wonder — the  rare 
thrill  of  unreality. 

The  ice  closed  in,  and  shock  after  shock  made  the  ship 
vibrate  as  she  struck  the  smaller  pieces  full  and  fair,  followed 
by  a  crunching  and  grinding  as  they  scraped  past  the 
sides.  The  dense  pack  had  come,  and  hardly  a  square  foot 
of  space  showed  amongst  the  blocks ;  smaller  ones  packing 
in  between  the  larger,  until  the  sea  was  covered  with  a  con- 
tinuous armour  of  ice.  The  ominous  sound  arising  from 
thousands  of  faces  rubbing  together  as  they  gently  oscillated 
in  the  swell  was  impressive.  It  spoke  of  a  force  all-powerful, 
in  whose  grip  puny  ships  might  be  locked  for  years  and  the 
less  fortunate  receive  their  last  embrace. 

The  pack  grew  heavier  and  the  bergs  more  numerous, 
embattled  in  a  formidable  array.  If  an  ideal  picture,  from 
our  point  of  view  it  was  impenetrable.  No  "  water  sky  " 
showed  as  a  distant  beacon  ;  over  all  was  reflected  the 
pitiless,  white  glare  of  the  ice.  The  Aurora  retreated  to 
the  open  sea,  and  headed  to  the  west  in  search  of  a  break  in 
the  ice-front.  The  wind  blew  from  the  south-east,  and,  with 
sails  set  to  assist  the  engines,  rapid  progress  was  made. 

The  southern  prospect  was  disappointing,  for  the  heavy 
pack  was  ranged  in  a  continuous  bar.  The  over-arching 
sky  invariably  shone  with  that  yellowish-white  effulgence 
known  as  "  ice  blink,"  indicative  of  continuous  ice,  in 
contrast  with  the  dark  water  sky,  a  sign  of  open  water, 
or  a  mottled  sky  proceeding  from  an  ice-strewn  but 
navigable  sea. 

Though  progress  can  be  made  in  dense  pack,  provided 

33 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

it  is  not  too  heavy,  advance  is  necessarily  very  slow — 
a  few  miles  a  day,  and  that  at  the  expense  of  much  coal. 
Without  a  well-defined  "  water  sky  "  it  would  have  been 
foolish  to  have  entered.  Further,  everything  pointed  to 
heavier  ice-conditions  in  the  south,  and,  indeed,  ii^i  several 
places  we  reconnoitred,  and  such  was  proved  to  be  the  case. 
Large  bergs  were  numerous,  which,  on  account  of  being 
almost  unaffected  by  surface  currents  because  of  their 
ponderous  bulk  and  stupendous  draught,  helped  to  compact 
the  shallow  surface-ice  under  the  free  influence  of  currents 
and  winds.  In  our  westerly  course  we  were  sometimes 
able  to  edge  a  little  to  the  south,  but  were  always  reduced 
to  our  old  position  within  a  few  hours.  Long  projecting 
"  tongues  "  were  met  at  intervals  and,  when  narrow  or  open, 
we  pushed  through  them. 

Whales  were  frequently  seen,  both  rorquals  and  killers. 
On  the  pack,  sea-leopards  and  crab-eater  seals  sometimes 
appeared.  At  one  time  as  many  as  a  hundred  would  be 
counted  from  the  bridge  and  at  other  moments  not  a  single 
one  could  be  sighted.  They  were  not  alarmed,  unless  the 
ship  happened  to  bump  against  ice-masses  within  a  short 
distance  of  them.  A  small  sea-leopard,  shot  from  the 
fo'c'sle  by  a  well-directed  bullet  from  Wild,  was  taken  on 
board  as  a  specmien ;  the  meat  serving  as  a  great  treat  for 
the  dogs. 

On  January  2,  when  driving  through  a  tongue  of  pack, 
a  halt  was  made  to  "ice  ship."  A  number  of  men 
scrambled  over  the  side  on  to  a  large  piece  of  floe  and  handed 
up  the  ice.  It  was  soon  discovered,  however,  that  the  swell 
was  too  great,  for  masses  of  ice  ten  tons  or  more  in  weight 
swayed  about  under  the  stern,  endangering  the  propeller 
and  rudder— the  vulnerable  parts  of  the  vessel.  So  we 
moved  on,  having  secured  enough  fresh-water  ice  to  supply  a 
pleasant  change  after  the  somewhat  discoloured  tank-water 
then  being  served  out.  The  ice  stiU  remained  compact 
and  forbidding,  but  each  day  we  hoped  to  discover  a  weak 
spot  through  which  we  might  probe  to  the  land  itself. 
54 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

On  the  evening  of  January  2  we  saw  a  high,  pinnacled  berg, 
a  few  miles  within  the  edge  of  the  pack,  closely  resembling 
a  rocky  peak ;  the  transparent  ice  of  which  it  was  composed 
appeared,  in  the  dull  light,  of  a  much  darker  hue  than  the 
surrounding  bergs.  Another  adjacent  block  exhibited  a 
large  black  patch  on  its  northern  face,  the  exact  nature  of 
which  could  not  be  ascertained  at  a  distance.  Examples 
of  rock  debris  embedded  in  bergs  had  already  been  observed, 
and  it  was  presumed  that  this  was  a  similar  case.  These 
were  all  hopeful  signs,  for  the  earthy  matter  must,  of  course, 
have  been  picked  up  by  the  ice  during  its  repose  upon  some 
adjacent  land. 

At  this  same  spot,  large  flocks  of  silver-grey  petrels 
were  seen  resting  on  the  ice  and  skimming  the  water  in 
search  of  food.  As  soon  as  we  had  entered  the  ice-zone, 
most  of  our  old  companions,  such  as  the  albatross,  had  de- 
serted, while  a  new  suite  of  Antarctic  birds  had  taken  their 
place.  These  included  the  beautiful  snow  petrel,  the 
Antarctic  petrel,  and  the  small,  lissome  Wilson  petrel — a 
link  with  the  bird-life  of  more  temperate  seas. 

On  the  evening  of  January  3  the  wind  was  blowing  fresh 
from  the  south-east  and  falling  snow  obscured  the  horizon. 
The  pack  took  a  decided  turn  to  the  north,  which  fact  was 
particularly  disappointing  in  view  of  the  distance  we  had 
already  traversed  to  the  west.  We  were  now  approach- 
ing the  longitude  of  D'Urville's  landfall,  and  still  the  pack 
showed  no  signs  of  slackening.  I  was  beginning  to  feel 
very  anxious,  and  had  decided  not  to  pass  that  longitude 
without  resorting  to  desperate  measures. 

The  change  in  our  fortunes  occurred  at  five  o  clock  next 
morning,  when  the  Chief  Officer,  Toucher,  came  down 
from  the  bridge  to  report  that  the  atmosphere  was  clearing 
and  that  there  appeared  to  be  land-ice  near  by.  Sure 
enough,  on  the  port  side,  within  a  quarter  of  a  mile,  rose 
a  massive  barrier  of  ice  extending  far  into  the  mist  and 
separated  from  the  ship  by  a  little  loose  pack-ice.  The 
problem  to  be  solved  was,  whether  it  was  the  seaward  face 

55 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

of  an  ice-covered  continent,  the  ice-capping  of  a  low 
island  or  only  a  flat-topped  iceberg  of  immense  pro- 
portions. 

By  7  a.m.  a  corner  was  reached  where  the  ice-wall  trended 
southward,  limned  on  the  horizon  in  a  series  of  bays  and 
headlands.  An  El  Dorado  had  opened  before  us,  for  the 
winds  coming  from  the  east  of  south  had  cleared  the  pack 
away  from  the  lee  of  the  ice- wall,  so  that  in  the  distance 
a  comparatively  clear  sea  was  visible,  closed  by  a  bar  of 
ice,  a  few  miles  in  extent.  Into  this  we  steered,  hugging 
the  ice-wall,  and  were  soon  in  the  open,  speeding  along 
in  glorious  sunshine,  bringing  new  sights  into  view  every 
moment. 

The  Avail,  along  the  northern  face,  was  low— from  thirty 
to  seventy  feet  in  height — but  the  face  along  which  we  were 
now  progressing  gradually  rose  in  altitude  to  the  south. 
It  was  obviously  a  shelf -ice  formation  (or  a  glacier-tongue 
projection  of  it),  exactly  similar  in  build,  for  instance,  to 
the  Great  Ross  Barrier  so  well  described  by  Ross,  Scott, 
and  others.  At  the  north-west  corner,  at  half  a  dozen 
places  within  a  few  miles  of  each  other,  the  wall  was  puckered 
up  and  surmounted  by  semi-conical  eminences,  half  as  high 
as  the  face  itself.  These  peculiar  elevations  were  unlike 
anything  previously  recorded  and  remained  unexplained  for  a 
while,  until  closer  inspection  showed  them  to  be  the  result 
of  impact  with  other  ice-masses — a  curious  but  conceivable 
cause. 

On  pieces  of  broken  floe  Weddell  seals  were  noted. 
They  were  the  first  seen  on  the  voyage  and  a  sure  indica- 
tion of  land,  for  their  habitat  ranges  over  the  coastal  waters  of 
Antarctic  lands. 

A  large,  low,  dome-topped  elevation,  about  one  mile 
in  diameter,  was  passed  on  the  starboard  side,  at  a  distance 
of  two  miles  from  the  long  ice-cliff.  This  corresponded  in 
shape  with  what  Ross  frequently  referred  to  as  an  "  ice 
island,"  uncertain  whether  it  was  a  berg  or  ice-covered 
land.  A  sounding  close  by  gave  two  hundred  and  eight 
56 


A   (.l,l\ll'~l.    I  i;ii.\i   WITHIX   THE  CAVERX  SHOWX  IX  THE 
PRECEDIX(;   ILLrsiRATIOX 


Hurley 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

fathoms,  showing  that  we  were  on  the  continental  shelf,  and 
increasing  the  probability  that  the  "  ice  island  "  was  aground. 

Birds  innumerable  appeared  on  every  hand  :  snow 
petrels,  silver  petrels,  Cape  pigeons  and  Antarctic  petrels. 
They  fluttered  in  hundreds  about  our  bows.  Cape  pigeons 
are  w^ell  known  in  lower  latitudes,  and  it  was  interesting 
to  find  them  so  far  south.  As  they  have  chessboard-like 
markings  on  the  back  when  seen  in  flight,  there  is  no 
mistaking  them. 

The  ice-wall  or  glacier-tongue  now  took  a  turn  to  the 
south-east.  At  this  point  it  had  risen  to  a  great  height, 
about  two  hundred  feet  sheer.  A  fresh  wind  was  blowing  in 
our  teeth  from  the  south-south-east,  and  beyond  this  point 
would  be  driving  us  on  to  the  cliffs.  We  put  the  ship  about, 
therefore,  and  made  for  the  lee  side  of  the  "  ice  island." 

In  isolated  coveys  on  the  inclined  top  of  the  "  island  " 
were  several  flocks,  each  containing  hundreds  of  Antarctic 
petrels.  At  intervals  they  would  rise  into  the  air  in  clouds, 
shortly  afterwards  to  settle  down  again  on  the  snow. 

Captain  Davis  moved  the  ship  carefully  against  the  lee 
wall  of  the  "island,"  with  a  view  of  replenishing  our  water- 
supply,  but  it  was  unscalable,  and  we  were  forced  to  with- 
draw. Crouched  on  a  small  projection  near  the  water's 
edge  was  a  seal,  trying  to  evade  the  eyes  of  a  dozen  large 
grampuses  which  were  playing  about  near  our  stern.  These 
monsters  appeared  to  be  about  twenty-five  feet  in  length. 
They  are  the  most  formidable  predacious  mammals  of  the 
Antarctic  seas,  and  annually  account  for  large  numbers  of 
seals,  penguins,  and  other  cetaceans.  The  sea-leopard  is  its 
competitor,  though  not  nearly  so  ferocious  as  the  grampus, 
of  whom  it  lives  in  terror. 

The  midnight  hours  were  spent  off  the  "  ice  island  "  while 
we  waited  for  a  decrease  in  the  wind.  Bars  of  cirrus  clouds 
covered  the  whole  sky — the  presage  of  a  coming  storm. 
The  wind  arose,  and  distant  objects  were  blotted  out  by 
driving  snow.  An  attempt  was  made  to  keep  the  ship  in 
shelter  by  steaming  into  the  wind,  but  as  "  ice  island  "  and 

57 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

glacier-tongue  were  lost  in  clouds  of  snow,  we  were  fortunate 
to  make  the  lee  of  the  latter,  about  fourteen  miles  to  the 
north.  There  we  steamed  up  and  down  until  the  afternoon 
of  January  5,  when  the  weather  improved.  A  sounding 
was  taken  and  the  course  was  once  more  set  for  the  south. 

The  sky  remained  overcast,  the  atmosphere  foggy,  and 
a  south-south-east  wind  was  blowing  as  we  came  abreast 
of  the  "  ice  island,"  which,  by  the  way,  was  discovered 
to  have  drifted  several  miles  to  the  north,  thus  proving  itself 
to  be  a  free-floating  berg.  The  glacier-tongue  on  the  port 
side  took  a  sharp  turn  to  the  east-south-east,  disappearing 
on  the  horizon.  As  there  was  no  pack  in  sight  and  the 
water  was  merely  littered  with  fragments  of  ice,  it  appeared 
most  likely  that  the  turn  in  the  glacier-tongue  was  part  of  a 
great  sweeping  curve  ultimately  joining  with  the  south- 
ward land.  On  our  south-south-east  course  we  soon  lost 
sight  of  the  ice -cliffs  in  a  gathering  fog. 

On  the  afternoon  of  January  6  the  wind  abated  and 
the  fog  began  to  clear.  At  5  p.m.  a  line  of  ice  confronted 
us  and,  an  hour  later,  the  Aurora  was  in  calm  water  under 
another  mighty  ice  face  trending  across  our  course.  This 
wall  was  precisely  similar  to  the  one  seen  on  the  previous 
evening,  and  might  well  have  been  a  continuation  of  it. 
It  is  scarcely  credible  that  when  the  Aurora  came  south  the 
following  year,  the  glacier -tongue  first  discovered  had  entirely 
disappeared.  It  was  apparently  nothing  more  than  a  huge 
iceberg  measuring  forty  miles  in  length.  Specially  valuable, 
as  clearing  up  any  doubt  that  may  have  remained,  was  its 
re-discovery  the  following  year  some  fifty  miles  to  the 
north-west.  Close  to  the  face  of  the  new  ice-wall,  which 
proved  to  be  a  true  glacier-tongue,  a  mud  bottom  was  found 
at  a  depth  of  three  hundred  and  ninety-five  fathoms. 

While  we  were  steaming  in  calm  water  to  the  south-west, 
the  massive  front,  serrated  by  shallow  bays  and  capes,  passed 
in  magnificent  review.  Its  height  attained  a  maximum  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  In  places  the  sea  had  eaten  out 
enormous  blue  grottoes.  At  one  spot,  several  of  these  had 
58 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

broken  into  each  other  to  form  a  huge  domed  cavern,  the 
roof  of  which  hung  one  hundred  feet  above  the  sea.  The 
noble  portico  was  flanked  by  giant  pillars. 

The  glacier-tongue  bore  all  the  characters  of  shelf-ice,  by 
which  is  meant  a  floating  extension  of  the  land-ice.*  A 
table-topped  berg  in  the  act  of  formation  was  seen,  separated 
from  the  parent  body  of  shelf-ice  by  a  deep  fissure  several 
yards  in  width. 

At  11  P.M.  the  Aurora  entered  a  bay,  ten  miles  wide, 
bounded  on  the  east  by  the  shelf-ice  waU  and  on  the  west 
by  a  steep  snow-covered  promontory  rising  approximately 
two  thousand  feet  in  height,  as  yet  seen  dimly  in  hazy  out- 
line through  the  mist.  No  rock  was  visible,  but  the  contour 
of  the  ridge  was  clearly  that  of  ice-capped  land. 

There  was  much  jubilation  among  the  watchers  on 
deck  at  the  prospect.  Every  available  field-glass  and  tele- 
scope was  brought  to  bear  upon  it.  It  was  almost  certainly 
the  Antarctic  continent,  though,  at  that  time,  its  extension 
to  the  east,  west  and  south  remained  to  be  proved.  The 
shelf-ice  was  seen  to  be  securely  attached  to  it  and,  near 
its  point  of  junction  with  the  undulating  land-ice,  we  beheld 
the  mountains  of  this  mysterious  land  haloed  in  ghostly 
mist. 

While  passing  the  extremity  of  the  western  promontory, 
we  observed  an  exposure  of  rock,  jutting  out  of  the  ice  near 
sea-level,  in  the  face  of  a  scar  left  by  an  avalanche.  Later, 
when  passing  within  half  a  cable's  length  of  several  berg-like 
masses  of  ice  lying  off  the  coast,  rock  was  again  visible  in 
black  relief  against  the  water's  edge,  forming  a  pedestal  for 
the  ice.  The  ship  was  kept  farther  offshore,  after  this 
warning,  for  though  she  was  designed  to  buffet  with  the 
ice,  we  had  no  desire  to  test  her  resistance  to  rock. 

The  bottom  was  very  irregular,  and  as  an  extra  pre- 
caution, soundings  were  taken  every  few  minutes.     Through 

*  Subsequently  this  shelf-ice  formation  was  found  to  be  a  floating 
glacier-tongue  sixty  miles  in  length,  the  seaward  extension  of  a  large 
glacier  which  we  named  the  Mertz  Glacier. 

59 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

a  light  fog  all  that  could  be  seen  landwards  was  a  steep, 
sloping,  icy  surface  descending  from  the  interior,  and  ter- 
minating abruptly  in  a  seaward  cliff  fifty  to  two  hundred 
feet  in  height. 

The  ice-sheet  terminating  in  this  wall  presented  a  more 
broken  surface  than  the  floating  shelf -ice.  It  was  riven 
and  distorted  by  gaping  crevasses  ;  an  indication  of  the 
rough  bed  over  which  it  had  travelled. 

Towards  midnight  another  bay  was  entered  and  many 
rocky  islets  appeared  on  its  western  side.  The  engines  were 
stopped  for  a  few  hours,  and  the  voyage  was  resumed  in 
clearer  weather  on  the  following  morning. 

All  day  we  threaded  our  way  between  islands  and  bergs. 
Seals  and  penguins  swam  around,  the  latter  squawking 
and  diving  in  a  most  amusing  manner. 

Cautiously  we  glided  by  an  iceberg,  at  least  one  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  high,  rising  with  a  faceted,  perpendicular  face 
chased  with  soft,  sno^vy  traceries  and  ornamented  with 
stalactites.  Splits  and  rents  broke  into  the  margin,  and 
from  each  streamed  the  evanescent,  azure  vapour.  Each 
puncture  and  tiny  grotto  was  filled  with  it,  and  a  sloping 
cap  of  shimmering  snow  spread  over  the  summit.  The 
profile-view  was  an  exact  replica  of  a  battleship,  grounded 
astern.  The  bold  contour  of  the  bow  was  perfect,  and  the 
massive  flank  had  been  torn  and  shattered  by  shell-fire 
in  a  desperate  naval  battle.  This  berg  had  heeled  over 
considerably,  and  the  original  water-line  ran  as  a  definite 
rim,  thirty  feet  above  the  green  water.  From  this  rim 
shelved  down  a  smooth  and  polished  base,  marked  with 
fine  vertical  striae. 

Soundings  varied  from  twenty  to  two  hundred  fathoms, 
and,  accordingly,  the  navigation  was  particularly  anxious 
work. 

Extending  along  about  fifteen  miles  of  coast,  where 
the  inland  ice  came  down  steeply  to  the  sea,  was  a  marginal 
belt  of  sea,  about  two  or  three  miles  in  width,  thickly  strewn 
with  rocky  islets.  Of  these  some  were  flat  and  others  peaked, 
60 


a:  5 

H    2 

SI 

^.  an 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

but  all  were  thickly  populated  by  penguins,  petrels  and  seals. 
The  rocks  appeared  all  to  be  gneisses  and  schists. 

Later  that  night  we  lay  off  a  possible  landing-place  for 
one  of  our  bases,  but,  on  more  closely  inspecting  it  in  the 
morning,  we  decided  to  proceed  farther  west  into  a  wide 
sweeping  bay  which  opened  ahead.  About  fifty  miles  ahead, 
on  the  far  side  of  Commonwealth  Bay,  as  we  named  it,  was  a 
cape  which  roughly  represented  in  position  Cape  Decouverte, 
the  most  easterly  extension  of  Adelie  Land  seen  by  D'Urville 
in  1840.  Though  Commonwealth  Bay  and  the  land  already 
seen  had  never  before  been  sighted,  all  was  placed  under  the 
territorial  name  of  Adelie  Land. 

The  land  was  so  overwhelmed  with  ice  that,  even  at 
sea-level,  the  rock  was  all  but  entirely  hidden.  Here  was 
an  ice  age  in  all  earnestness  ;  a  picture  of  Northern  Europe 
during  the  Great  Ice  Age  some  fifty  thousand  years  ago. 
It  was  evident  that  the  glaciation  of  Adelie  Land  was  much 
more  severe  than  that  in  higher  Antarctic  latitudes,  as 
exampled  on  the  borders  of  the  Ross  Sea ;  the  arena  of  Scott's, 
Shackleton's  and  other  expeditions.  The  temperature  could 
not  be  colder,  so  we  were  led  to  surmise  that  the  snowfall 
must  be  excessive.  The  full  truth  was  to  be  ascertained 
by  bitter  experience,  after  spending  a  year  on  the  spot. 

I  had  hoped  to  find  the  Antarctic  continent  in  these 
latitudes  bounded  by  a  rocky  and  attractive  coast  like 
that  in  the  vicinity  of  Cape  Adare ;  the  nearest  well-explored 
region.  It  had  proved  otherwise,  only  too  well  endorsing 
the  scanty  information  supplied  by  D'Urville  and  Wilkes 
of  the  coastline  seen  by  them.  A  glance  at  the  austere 
plateau  and  the  ice-fettered  coast  was  evidence  of  a  rigid, 
inhospitable  climate.  It  was  apparent,  too,  that  only  a 
short  summer  could  be  expected  in  these  latitudes,  thus 
placing  limitations  upon  our  operations. 

If  three  bases  were  to  be  landed  it  was  important  that 
they  should  be  spread  at  sufBciently  wide  intervals.  If 
one  were  placed  in  Adelie  Land,  the  ship  would  probably 
have  to  break  through  the  pack  in  establishing  each  of  the 

61 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

other  two  bases.  Judging  by  our  previous  experience  there 
was  no  certain  prospect  of  this  being  effected.  The  successful 
landing  of  three  bases  in  suitable  positions,  sufficiently  far 
apart  for  advantageous  co-operation  in  geographical,  meteoro- 
logical and  other  observations,  had  now  become  problematical. 
In  addition,  one  of  the  parties  was  not  as  strong  as  I  would 
have  liked,  considering  what  would  be  undoubtedly  its 
strenuous  future. 

For  some  days  the  various  phases  of  the  situation  had 
occupied  my  mind,  and  I  now  determined  to  risk  two  bases, 
combining  the  smallest  of  the  three  parties  with  the  Main 
Base.  Alterations  in  the  personnel  of  the  third  party  were 
also  made,  by  which  the  Main  Base  would  be  increased  in 
strength  for  scientific  work,  and  the  other  party  under  the 
leadership  of  Wild  would  be  composed  of  men  of  specially 
good  sledging  calibre,  besides  being  representative  of  the 
leading  branches  of  our  scientific  programme. 

We  had  a  splendid  lot  of  men,  and  I  had  no  difficulty  in 
choosing  for  Wild  seven  companions  who  could  be  relied  upon 
to  give  a  good  account  of  themselves.  It  was  only  by  assuring 
myself  of  their  high  efficiency  that  I  could  expect  to  rest 
from  undue  anxiety  throughout  the  year  of  our  separation. 
The  composition  of  the  two  parties  was  as  follows  : 

Main  Base :  R.  Bage,  F.  H.  Bickerton,  J.  H.  Close, 
P.  E.  Correll,  W.  H.  Hannam,  A.  J.  Hodgeman,  J.  G.  Hunter, 
J.  F.  Hurley,  C.  F.  Laseron,  C.  T.  Madigan,  A.  L.  McLean, 
X.  Mertz,  H.  D.  Murphy,  B.  E.  S.  Ninnis,  F.  L.  Stillwell, 
E.  N.  Webb,  L.  H.  Whetter  and  myself. 

Western  Party :  G.  Dovers,  C.  T.  Harrisson,  C.  A.  Hoadley, 
S.  E.  Jones,  A.  L.  Kennedy,  M.  H.  Moyes,  A.  D.  Watson, 
and  F.  Wild  (leader). 

I  was  now  anxious  to  find  a  suitable  location  for  our 
Main  Base ;  two  reasons  making  it  an  urgent  matter.  The 
first  was,  that  as  we  advanced  to  the  west  we  were  leaving 
the  South  Magnetic  Pole,  and  I  was  anxious  to  have  our 
magnetographs  running  as  near  the  latter  as  possible. 
Secondly,  we  would  be  daily  increasing  our  distance  from 
62 


HE  IXVAHAP.LP:  MOTOH-LArxCH;    LEFT  TO  lUOH' 
HAMILTOX.  BRKEJ!T()X  AND  BLAKE 


Hurley 


THE   WHALE-BOAT   WITH  PASSENGERS  FOR  THE 
SHORE;    WILL)   AT  THE  STEERING   OAR 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

Macquarie  Island,  making  wireless  communication  more 
uncertain. 

At  noon  on  January  8,  while  I  was  weighing  the  pros 
and  cons  with  Captain  Davis,  Wild  came  in  to  say  that 
there  was  a  rocky  exposure  about  fifteen  miles  off  on  the 
port  side,  and  suggested  altering  our  course  to  obtain  a 
better  view  of  it. 

Just  after  4  p.m.,  when  the  ship  was  about  one  mile  from 
the  nearest  rocks,  the  whale-boat  was  lowered  and  manned. 
We  rowed  in  with  the  object  of  making  a  closer  investigation. 
From  the  ship's  deck,  even  when  within  a  mile,  the  outcrop 
had  appeared  to  project  directly  from  under  the  inland  ice- 
sheet.  Now,  however,  we  were  surprised  to  find  ourselves 
amongst  an  archipelago  of  islets.  These  were  named  the 
Mackellar  Islets,  in  remembrance  of  one  who  had  proved 
a  staunch  friend  of  the  Expedition. 

Weddell  seals  and  Adelie  penguins  in  thousands  rested 
upon  the  rocks  ;  the  latter  chiefly  congregated  upon  a  long, 
low,  bare  islet  situated  in  the  centre.  This  was  the  largest 
of  the  group,  measuring  about  half  a  mile  in  length  ;  others 
were  not  above  twenty  yards  in  diameter.  As  we  came 
inshore,  the  main  body  of  the  archipelago  was  found  to  be 
separated  by  a  mile  and  a  half  from  the  mainland.  A  point 
which  struck  us  at  the  time  was  that  the  islets  situated 
on  the  southern  side  of  the  group  were  capped  by  unique 
masses  of  ice  ;  resembling  iced  cakes.  Later  we  were  able 
to  see  them  in  process  of  formation.  In  the  violent  southerly 
hurricanes  prevalent  in  Adelie  Land,  the  spray  breaks 
right  over  them.  Part  of  it  is  deposited  and  frozen,  and 
by  increments  the  icing  of  these  monstrous  "  cakes  "  is 
built  up.  The  amount  contributed  in  winter  makes  up 
for  loss  by  thawing  in  midsummer.  As  the  islets  to  wind- 
ward shelter  those  in  their  lee,  the  latter  are  destitute  of 
these  natural  canopies. 

Soundings  were  taken  at  frequent  intervals  with  a  hand 
lead-line,  manipulated  by  Madigan.  The  water  was  on 
the  whole  shallow,  varying  from  a  few  to  twenty  fathoms. 

63 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  bottom  was  clothed  by  dense,  luxuriant  seaweed. 
This  rank  growth  along  the  littoral  was  unexpected,  for 
nothing  of  the  kind  exists  on  the  Ross  Sea  coasts  within 
five  or  six  fathoms  of  the  surface. 

Advancing  towards  the  mainland,  we  observed  a  small 
islet  amongst  the  rocks,  and  towards  it  the  boat  was  directed. 
We  were  soon  inside  a  beautiful,  miniature  harbour  com- 
pletely land-locked.  The  sun  shone  gloriously  in  a  blue  sky 
as  we  stepped  ashore  on  a  charming  ice-quay — the  first  to  set 
foot  on  the  Antarctic  continent  between  Cape  Adare  and 
Gaussberg,  a  distance  of  one  thousand  eight  hundred  miles. 

Wild  and  I  proceeded  to  make  a  tour  of  exploration. 
The  rocky  area  at  Cape  Denison,  as  it  was  named,  was 
found  to  be  about  one  mile  in  length  and  half  a  mile  in 
extreme  width.  Behind  it  rose  the  inland  ice,  ascending  in 
a  regular  slope  and  apparently  free  of  crevasses — an  outlet 
for  our  sledging  parties  in  the  event  of  the  sea  not  firmly 
freezing  over.  To  right  and  left  of  this  oasis,  as  the  visitor 
to  Adelie  Land  must  regard  the  welcome  rock,  the  ice  was 
heavily  crevassed  and  fell  sheer  to  the  sea  in  cliffs,  sixty 
to  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  in  height.  Two  small  dark 
patches  in  the  distance  were  the  only  evidences  of  rock 
to  relieve  the  white  monotony  of  the  coast. 

In  landing  cargo  on  Antarctic  shores,  advantage  is 
generally  taken  of  the  floe-ice  on  to  which  the  materials 
can  be  unloaded  and  at  once  sledged  away  to  their  destina- 
tion. Here,  on  the  other  hand,  there  was  open  water,  too 
shallow  for  the  Aurora  to  be  moored  alongside  the  ice-foot. 
The  only  alternative  was  to  anchor  the  ship  at  a  distance 
and  discharge  the  cargo  by  boats  running  to  the  ideal 
harbour  we  had  discovered.  Close  to  the  boat  harbour 
was  suitable  ground  for  the  erection  of  a  hut,  so  that  the 
various  impedimenta  would  have  to  be  carried  only  a  short 
distance.  For  supplies  of  fresh  meat,  in  the  emergency 
of  being  marooned  for  a  number  of  years,  there  were  many 
Weddell  seals  at  hand,  and  on  almost  all  the  neighbouring 
ridges  colonies  of  penguins  were  busy  rearing  their  young. 
64 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

As  a  station  for  scientific  investigations,  it  offered  a  wider 
field  than  the  casual  observer  would  have  imagined.  So 
it  came  about  that  the  Main  Base  was  finally  settled  at 
Cape  Denison,  Commonwealth  Bay. 

We  arrived  on  board  at  8  p.m.,  taking  a  seal  as  food 
for  the  dogs.  Without  delay,  the  motor-launch  was  dropped 
into  the  water,  and  both  it  and  the  whale-boat  loaded 
with  frozen  carcasses  of  mutton,  cases  of  eggs  and  other 
perishable  goods. 

While  some  of  us  went  ashore  in  the  motor-launch,  with  the 
whale-boat  in  tow,  the  Aurora  steamed  round  the  Mackellar 
Islets  seeking  for  a  good  anchorage  under  the  icy  barrier, 
immediately  to  the  west  of  the  boat  harbour.  The  day  had 
been  perfect,  vibrant  with  summer  and  life,  but  towards 
evening  a  chill  breeze  sprang  up,  and  we  in  the  motor-launch 
had  to  beat  against  it.  By  the  time  we  had  reached  the  head 
of  the  harbour,  Hoadley  had  several  fingers  frost-bitten  and  all 
were  feeling  the  cold,  for  we  were  wearing  light  garments 
in  anticipation  of  fine  weather.  The  wind  strengthened 
every  minute,  and  showers  of  fine  snow  were  soon  whistling 
down  the  glacier.  No  time  was  lost  in  landing  the  cargo, 
and,  with  a  rising  blizzard  at  our  backs,  we  drove  out  to  meet 
the  Aurora.  On  reaching  the  ship  a  small  gale  was  blowing 
and  our  boats  were  taken  in  tow. 

The  first  thing  to  be  considered  was  the  mooring  of  the 
Aurora  under  the  lee  of  the  ice-wall,  so  as  to  give  us  an 
opportunity  of  getting  the  boats  aboard.  In  the  mean- 
time they  were  passed  astern,  each  manned  by  several  hands 
to  keep  them  bailed  out;  the  rest  of  us  having  scrambled 
up  the  side.  Bringing  the  ship  to  anchor  in  such  a  wind 
in  uncharted,  shoal  water  was  difficult  to  do  in  a  cool  and 
methodical  manner.  The  sounding  machine  was  kept  running 
with  rather  dramatic  results ;  depths  jumping  from  five  to 
thirty  fathoms  in  the  ship's  length,  and  back  again  to  the 
original  figure  in  the  same  distance.  A  feeling  of  relief  passed 
round  when,  after  much  manoeuvring,  the  anchor  was  success- 
fully bedded  five  hundred  yards  from  the  face  of  the  cliff. 
VOL.  I,  E  65 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Just  at  this  time  the  motor-launch  broke  adrift.  Away 
it  swept  before  a  wind  of  forty-five  miles  per  hour.  On 
account  of  the  cold,  and  because  the  engine  was  drenched 
with  sea-water,  some  difficulty  was  found  in  starting  the 
motor.  From  the  ship's  deck  we  could  see  Bickerton 
busily  engaged  with  it.  The  rudder  had  been  unshipped, 
and  there  was  no  chance  of  replacing  it,  for  the  boat  was 
bobbing  about  on  the  waves  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner. 
However,  Whetter  managed  to  make  a  jury-rudder  which 
served  the  purpose,  while  Hunter,  the  other  occupant,  was 
kept  laboriously  active  with  the  pump. 

They  had  drifted  half  a  mile,  and  were  approaching  the 
rocks  of  an  islet  on  which  the  sea  was  breaking  heavily. 
Just  as  every  one  was  becoming  very  apprehensive,  the 
launch  began  to  forge  ahead,  and  the  men  had  soon  escaped 
from  their  dangerous  predicament.  By  the  united  efforts 
of  all  hands  the  boats  were  hoisted  on  board  and  everything 
was  made  as  "snug"  as  possible. 

The  wind  steadily  increased,  and  it  seemed  impossible 
for  the  anchor  to  hold.  The  strain  on  the  cable  straightened 
out  a  steel  hook  two  inches  in  diameter.  This  caused 
some  embarrassment,  as  the  hook  was  part  of  the  cable 
attachment  under  the  fo'c'sle-head.  It  is  remarkable, 
however,  that  after  this  was  adjusted  the  ship  did  not  lose 
her  position  up  to  the  time  of  departure  from  Adelie  Land. 

Though  we  were  so  close  under  the  shelter  of  a  lofty  wall, 
the  waves  around  us  were  at  least  four  feet  in  height  and 
when  the  wind  increased  to  sixty-five  and  seventy  miles 
per  hour,  their  crests  were  cut  off  and  the  surface  was 
hidden  by  a  sheet  of  racing  spindrift. 

Everything  was  securely  lashed  in  readiness  for  going 
to  sea,  in  case  the  cable  should  part.  Final  arrangements 
were  then  made  to  discharge  the  cargo  quickly  as  soon  as 
the  wind  moderated. 

Two  days  had  elapsed  before  the  wind  showed  any  signs 
of  abatement.  It  was  8  p.m.  on  January  10  when  the  first 
boat  ventured  off  with  a  small  cargo,  but  it  was  not  till  the 
66 


;  o  H 
S  o 


>'^ 


IS 

■O    fi 


a  2; 


o 


^^ 

H    P 

o    an 

o  . 


"y2    & 

O 

H  pq 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

following  morning  that  a  serious  start  was  made.  In  good 
weather,  every  trip  between  the  ship  and  the  boat  harbour,  a 
distance  of  a  mile,  meant  that  five  or  six  tons  had  been 
landed.  It  was  usual  for  the  loaded  launch  to  tow  both 
whale-boats  heavily  laden  and,  in  addition,  a  raft  of  hut 
timbers  or  wireless  masts.  Some  of  the  sailors,  while  engaged 
in  building  rafts  alongside  the  ship,  were  capsized  into  the 
water  and  after  that  the  occupation  was  not  a  popular  one. 

Ashore,  Wild  had  rigged  a  derrick,  using  for  its  con- 
struction two  of  the  wireless  royal  masts.  It  was  thus 
possible  to  cope  with  the  heavier  packages  at  the  landing- 
place.  Of  the  last-named  the  air- tractor  sledge  was  by  far 
the  most  troublesome.  With  plenty  of  manual  labour, 
under  Wild's  skilful  direction,  this  heavy  machine  was 
hoisted  from  the  motor-launch,  and  then  carefully  sw^ung 
on  to  the  solid  ice-foot. 

Captain  Davis  superintended  the  discharging  operations 
on  the  ship,  effected  by  the  crew  and  some  of  the  land 
party  under  the  direction  of  the  ship's  officers.  Wild 
supervised  conveyance  ashore,  and  the  landing,  classifica- 
tion, and  safe  storage  of  the  various  boat-loads.  Gillies 
and  Bickerton  took  alternate  shifts  in  driving  the  motor- 
launch.  The  launch  proved  invaluable,  and  we  were  very 
glad  that  it  had  been  included  in  the  equipment,  for  it  did  a 
remarkable  amount  of  work  in  a  minimum  of  time. 

In  view  of  the  difficulty  of  embarking  the  boats,  if 
another  hurricane  should  arise,  tents  were  erected  ashore, 
so  that  a  party  could  remain  there  with  the  boats  moored 
in  a  sheltered  harbour. 

Everything  went  well  untill  just  before  midnight  on 
January  12,  when  the  wind  again  swept  down.  Wild,  four 
of  the  men  and  I  were  forced  to  remain  ashore.  We 
spent  the  time  constructing  a  temporary  hut  of  benzine 
cases,  roofed  with  planks;  the  walls  of  which  were  made 
massive  to  resist  the  winds.  This  structure  was  thenceforth 
known  as  the  "Benzine  Hut." 

The  barometer  dropped  to  28*5  inches  and  the  wind 

67 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

remained  high.  We  were  struck  with  the  singular  fact 
that,  even  in  the  height  of  some  of  these  hurricanes,  the 
sky  remained  serene  and  the  sun  shone  brightly.  It  had 
been  very  different  when  the  ship  was  amongst  the  pack  a 
few  miles  to  the  north,  for,  there,  cloudy  and  foggy  conditions 
had  been  the  rule.  The  wind  coming  to  us  from  the  south 
was  dry;  obviously  an  argument  for  the  continental  ex- 
tension of  the  land  in  that  direction. 

At  2  A.M.  on  January  15  a  pre-arranged  whistle  was 
sounded  from  the  Aurora,  advising  those  of  us  ashore  that 
the  sea  had  moderated  sufficiently  to  continue  unloading. 
Wild  sped  away  in  the  launch,  but  before  he  had  reached 
the  ship  the  wind  renewed  its  activity.  At  last,  after  2  p.m. 
on  the  same  day  it  ceased,  and  we  were  able  to  carry  on  work 
until  midnight,  when  the  wind  descended  on  us  once  more. 
This  time,  eighteen  men  remained  ashore.  After  twelve 
hours  there  was  another  lull,  and  unloading  was  then  con- 
tinued with  only  a  few  intermissions  from  1  p.m.  on  January  16 
until  the  afternoon  of  January  19. 

Never  was  landing  so  hampered  by  adverse  conditions, 
and  yet,  thanks  to  the  assiduous  application  of  all,  a  great 
assortment  of  materials  was  safely  embarked.  Com- 
prised among  them  were  the  following :  twenty-three 
tons  of  coal  briquettes,  two  complete  living- huts,  a  mag- 
netic observatory,  the  whole  of  the  wireless  equipment, 
including  masts,  and  more  than  two  thousand  packages 
of  general  supplies  containing  sufficient  food  for  two  years, 
utensils,  instruments,  benzine,  kerosene,  lubricating  oils 
an  air-tractor  and  other  sledges. 

Then  came  the  time  for  parting.  There  was  a  great 
field  before  Wild's  party  to  the  west,  and  it  was  important 
that  they  should  be  able  to  make  the  most  of  the  remainder 
of  the  season.  My  great  regret  was  that  I  could  not  be  with 
them.  I  knew  that  I  had  men  of  experience  and  ability 
in  Davis  and  Wild,  and  felt  that  the  work  entrusted  to  them 
was  in  the  best  of  hands.  Through  the  medium  of  wireless 
telegraphy  I  hoped  to  keep  in  touch  with  the  Macquarie 
68 


FOKEGKO'J.\D 


^^^'^^^^^ 


FROM  MACQUARIE  ISLAND  TO  ADELIE  LAND 

Island  party,  the  Western  Base,*  and  the  ship  itself,  when  in 
Australian  waters. 

It  was  my  idea  that  Wild's  party  shoidd  proceed  west 
and  attempt  to  effect  a  landing  and  establish  a  western 
wintering  station  at  some  place  not  less  than  four  hundred 
miles  west  of  Adelie  Land.  On  the  way,  whenever  oppor- 
tunity presented  itself,  they  were  to  cache  provisions  at 
intervals  along  the  coast  in  places  liable  to  be  visited  by 
sledging  parties. 

The  location  of  such  caches  and  of  the  Western  Base,  it 
was  hoped,  would  be  communicated  to  us  at  the  Main  Base, 
through  the  medium  of  wireless  telegraphy  from  Hobart. 

All  members  of  the  land  parties  and  the  ship's  officers 
met  in  the  ward-room.  There  were  mutual  good  wishes 
expressed  all  round,  and  then  we  celebrated  previous 
Antarctic  explorers,  more  especially  D'Urville  and  Wilkes. 
The  toast  was  drunk  in  excellent  Madeira  presented  to  us 
by  Mr.  J.  T.  Buchanan,  who  had  carried  this  sample  round 
the  world  with  him  when  a  member  of  the  celebrated 
Challenger  expedition. 

The  motor-launch  was  hoisted  and  the  anchor  raised. 
Then  at  8.45  p.m.  on  January  19  we  clambered  over  the  side 
into  one  of  the  whale-boats  and  pushed  off  for  Cape  Denison, 
shouting  farewells  back  to  the  Aurora.  Several  hours  later 
she  had  disappeared  below  the  north-western  horizon,  and 
we  had  set  to  work  to  carve  out  a  home  in  Adelie  Land. 

*  They  were  supplied  with  masts  and  a  receiving  set  sufficiently  sensitive 
to  pick  up  messages  from  a  distance  of  five  or  six  hundred  miles. 


69 


CHAPTER  IV 
NEW  LANDS 

LEAVING  the  land  party  under  my  charge  at  Common- 
j  wealth  Bay  on  the  evening  of  January  19,  the 
Aurora  set  her  course  to  round  a  headland  visible 
on  the  north-western  horizon.  At  midnight  the  ship  came 
abreast  of  this  point  and  continued  steaming  west,  keeping 
within  a  distance  of  five  miles  of  the  coast.  A  break  in 
the  icy  monotony  came  with  a  short  tract  of  islets  fronting 
a  background  of  dark  rocky  coastline  similar  to  that  at 
Cape  Denison  but  more  extensive. 

Some  six  miles  east  of  D'Urville's  Cape  Discovery,  a 
dangerous  reef  was  sighted  extending  at  right  angles  across 
the  course.  The  ship  steamed  along  it  and  her  soundings 
demonstrated  a  submerged  ridge  continuing  some  twelve 
miles  out  to  sea.     Captain  Davis's  narrative  proceeds  : 

"  Having  cleared  this  obstacle  we  followed  the  coast- 
line to  the  west  from  point  to  point.  Twelve  miles  away 
we  could  see  the  snow-covered  slopes  rising  from  the 
seaward  cliffs  to  an  elevation  of  one  thousand  five  hundred 
feet.  Several  small  islands  were  visible  close  to  a  shore 
fringed  by  numerous  large  bergs. 

"  At  10  P.M.  on  January  20,  our  progress  to  the  west 
was  stopped  by  a  fleet  of  bergs  off  the  mainland  and  an 
extensive  field  of  berg-laden  pack-ice,  trending  to  the 
north  and  north-east.  Adelie  Land  could  be  traced  con- 
tinuing to  the  west.  Where  it  disappeared  from  view 
there  was  the  appearance  of  a  barrier-formation,  sug- 
gestive ot  shelf-ice,  running  in  a  northerly  direction. 
Skirting  the  pack-ice  on  a  north  and  north-west  course, 
70 


NEW  LANDS 

we  observed   the  same  appearance  from  the   crow's-nest 
on  January  21  and  22." 

The  stretch  of  open,  navigable,  coastal  water  to  the 
north  of  Adelie  Land,  barred  by  the  Mertz  Glacier  on  the 
east  and  delimited  on  the  west  by  more  or  less  compact  ice, 
has  been  named  the  D'Urville  Sea.  We  found  subsequently 
that  its  freedom  from  obstruction  by  ice  is  due  to  the 
persistent  gales  which  set  off  the  land  in  that  locality. 
To  the  north,  pack-ice  in  variable  amount  is  encountered 
before  reaching  the  wide  open  ocean. 

The  existence  of  such  a  "barrier-formation,"*  as  indi- 
cated above,  probably  resting  on  a  line  of  reef  similar  to  the 
one  near  Cape  Discovery,  would  account  for  the  presence  of 
this  ice-field  in  practically  the  same  position  as  it  was 
seen  by  D'Urville  in  1840. 

Quoting  further  :  "  We  were  unable  to  see  any  trace  of 
the  high  land  reported  by  the  United  States  Squadron  (1840) 
as  lying  to  the  west  and  south  beyond  the  compact  ice. 

"  At  1.30  A.M.  on  the  23rd  the  pack-ice  was  seen  to 
trend  to  the  south-west.  After  steaming  west  for  twenty- 
five  miles,  we  stood  south  in  longitude  132°  30'  E., 
shortly  afterwards  passing  over  the  charted  position  of 
Cote  Clarie.  The  water  here  was  clear  of  pack-ice,  but 
studded  with  bergs  of  immense  size.  The  great  barrier 
which  the  French  ships  followed  in  1840  had  vanished. 
A  collection  of  huge  bergs  was  the  sole  remnant  to  mark 
its  former  position. 

"  At  10  A.M.,  having  passed  to  the  south  of  the  charted 
position  of  D'Urville's  Cote  Clarie,  we  altered  course  to 
S.  10°  E.  true.     Good  observations  placed  us  at  noon  in 

*  An  analysis  of  the  data  derived  from  the  later  voyages  of  the  Aurora 
makes  it  practically  certain  that  there  is  a  permanent  obstacle  to  the  westerly 
drift  of  the  jiack-ice  in  longitude  137°  E.  There  is,  however,  some  un- 
certainty as  to  the  cause  of  this  blockage.  An  alternative  explanation  is 
advanced,  namely,  that  within  the  area  of  comparatively  shallow  water, 
large  bergs  are  entrapped,  and  these  entangle  the  drifting  pack-ice. 

At  a  distance,  large  bergs  would  be  undistinguishable  from  shelf-ice, 
appearances  of  wliich  were  reported  above. 

71 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

latitude  65°  2'  S.  and  132°  26'  E.  A  sounding  on  sand 
and  small  stones  was  taken  in  one  hundred  and  sixty 
fathoms.  We  sailed  over  the  charted  position  of  land 
east  of  Wilkes's  Cape  Carr  in  clear  weather. 

"  At  5.30  P.M.  land  was  sighted  to  the  southward — 
snowy  highlands  similar  to  those  of  Adelie  Land  but 
greater  in  elevation. 

"  After  sounding  in  one  hundred  and  fifty-six  fathoms 
on  mud,  the  ship  stood  directly  towards  the  land  until 
9  P.M.  The  distance  to  the  nearest  point  was  estimated 
at  twenty  miles  ;  heavy  floe-ice  extending  from  our  posi- 
tion, latitude  65°  45'  S.  and  longitude  132°  40'  E.,  right 
up  to  the  shore.  Another  sounding  realized  two  hundred 
and  thirty  fathoms,  on  sand  and  small  stones.  Some 
open  water  was  seen  to  the  south-east,  but  an  attempt 
to  force  a  passage  in  that  direction  was  frustrated. 

"  At  3  A.M.  on  the  24th  we  were  about  twelve  miles 
from  the  nearest  point  of  the  coast,  and  further  progress 
became  impossible.  The  southern  slopes  were  seamed 
with  numerous  crevasses,  but  at  a  distance  the  precise 
nature  of  the  shores  could  not  be  accurately  determined." 

To  this  country,  which  had  never  before  been  seen, 
was  given  the  name  of  Wilkes's  Land  ;  as  it  is  only  just 
to  commemorate  the  American  Exploring  Expedition  on 
the  Continent  which  its  leader  believed  he  had  discovered 
in  these  seas  and  which  he  would  have  found  had  Fortune 
favoured  him  ,with  a  fair  return  for  his  heroic  endeavours. 

"  We  steered  round  on  a  north-westerly  course,  and 
at  noon  on  January  24  were  slightly  to  the  north  of  our 
position  at  5.30  a.m.  on  the  23rd.  A  sounding  reached  one 
hundred  and  seventy  fathoms  and  a  muddy  bottom. 
Environing  us  were  enormous  bergs  of  every  kind,  one 
hundred  and  eighty  to  two  hundred  feet  in  height.  During 
the  afternoon  a  westerly  course  was  maintained  in  clear 
water  until  4  p.m.,  when  the  course  was  altered  to  S. 
30°  W.,  in  the  hope  of  winning  through  to  the  land  visible 
on  the  southern  horizon." 
72 


c  a 


73 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

At  8  P.M.  the  sky  was  very  clear  to  the  southward, 
and  the  land  could  be  traced  to  a  great  distance  until  it 
faded  in  the  south-west.  But  the  ship  had  come  up  with 
the  solid  floe-ice  once  more,  and  had  to  give  way  and  steam 
along  its  edge.  This  floating  breakwater  held  us  off  and 
frustrated  all  attempts  to  reach  the  goal  which  we  sought. 

"  The  next  four  days  was  a  period  of  violent  gales  and 
heavy  seas  which  drove  the  ship  some  distance  to  the  north. 
Nothing  was  visible  through  swirling  clouds  of  snow.  The 
Aurora  behaved  admirably,  as  she  invariably  does  in  heavy 
weather.  The  main  pack  was  encountered  on  January  29, 
but  foggy  weather  prevailed.  It  was  not  until  noon  on 
January  31  that  the  atmosphere  was  sufficiently  clear  to 
obtain  good  observations.  The  ship  was  by  this  time  in 
the  midst  of  heavy  floe  in  the  vicinity  of  longitude  119°  E., 
and  again  the  course  had  swung  round  to  south.  We  had 
soon  passed  to  the  south  of  Balleny's  Sabrina  Land  without 
any  indication  of  its  existence.  Considering  the  doubtful 
character  of  the  statements  justifying  its  appearance  on 
the  chart,  it  is  not  surprising  that  we  did  not  verify  them. 

"At  11  A.M.  the  floes  were  found  too  heavy  for 
further  advance.  The  ship  was  made  fast  to  a  big  one 
and  a  large  quantity  of  ice  was  taken  on  board  to  replenish 
the  fresh-water  supply.  A  tank  of  two  hundred  gallons' 
capacity,  heated  within  by  a  steam  coil  from  the  engine- 
room,  stood  on  the  poop  deck.  Into  this  ice  was  con- 
tinously  fed,  flowing  away  as  it  melted  into  the  main  tanks 
in  the  bottom  of  the  ship. 

"  At  noon  the  weather  was  clear,  but  nothing  could  be 
discerned  in  the  south  except  a  faint  blue  Hne  on  the  horizon. 
It  may  have  been  a  '  lead '  of  water,  an  effect  of  mirage,  or 
even  land-ice — in  any  case  we  could  not  approach  it." 

The  position  as  indicated  by  the  noon  observations 
placed  the  ship  within  seven  miles  of  a  portion  of  Totten's 
High  Land  in  Wilkes's  charts.  As  high  land  would  have 
been  visible  at  a  great  distance,  it  is  clear  that  Totten's 
74 


75 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

High  Land  either  does  not  exist  or  is  situated  a  considerable 
distance  from  its  charted  location.  A  sounding  was  made 
in  three  hundred  and  forty  fathoms. 

Towards  evening  the  Aurora  turned  back  to  open  water 
and  cruised  along  the  pack-ice.  A  sounding  next  day 
showed  nine  hundred  and  twenty-seven  fathoms. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  a  marked  improvement 
was  noted  in  the  compass.  Ever  since  the  first  approach 
to  Adelie  Land  it  had  been  found  unreliable,  for,  on  account 
of  the  proximity  to  the  magnetic  pole,  the  directive  force 
of  the  needle  was  so  slight  that  very  large  local  variations 
were  experienced. 

The  longitude  of  Wilkes's  Knox  Land  was  now  ap- 
proaching. With  the  exception  of  Adelie  Land,  the 
account  by  Wilkes  concerning  Knox  Land  is  more  con- 
vincing than  any  other  of  his  statements  relating  to  new 
Antarctic  land.  If  they  had  not  already  disembarked,  we  had 
hoped  to  land  the  western  party  in  that  neighbourhood. 
It  was,  therefore,  most  disappointing  when  impenetrable 
ice  blocked  the  way,  before  Wilkes's  "farthest  south" 
in  that  locality  had  been  reached.  Three  determined 
efforts  were  made  to  find  a  weak  spot,  but  each  time 
the  Aurora  was  forced  to  retreat,  and  the  third  time 
was  extricated  only  with  great  difficulty.  In  latitude 
65°  5'  S.  longitude  107°  20'  E.,  a  sounding  of  three 
hundred  fathoms  was  made  on  a  rocky  bottom.  This 
sounding  pointed  to  the  probability  of  land  within  sixty 
miles. 

Repulsed  from  his  attack  on  the  pack.  Captain  Davis 
set  out  westward  towards  the  charted  position  of  Termina- 
tion Land,  and  in  following  the  trend  of  the  ice  was  forced 
a  long  way  to  the  north. 

At  7.40  A.M.,  February  8,  in  foggy  weather,  the  ice- 
cliff  of  floating  shelf-ice  was  met.  This  was  disposed  so 
as  to  point  in  a  north-westerly  direction  and  it  was  late 
in  the  day  before  the  ship  doubled  its  northern  end. 
Here  the  sounding  wire  ran  out  for  eight  hundred  and 
76 


NEW  LANDS 

fifty  fathoms  without  reaching  bottom.  Following  the 
wall  towards  the  south-south-east,  it  was  interesting 
at  5.30  P.M.  to  find  a  sounding  of  one  hundred  and  ten 
fathoms  in  latitude  64°  45'.  A  line  of  large  grounded 
bergs  and  massive  floe-ice  was  observed  ahead  traihng 
away  from  the  ice-wall  towards  the  north-west. 

On  plotting  the  observations,  it  became  apparent  that 
the  shelf-ice  was  in  the  form  of  a  prolonged  tongue  some 
seven  miles  in  breadth.  As  it  occupied  the  position  of  the 
"Termination  Land"  which  has  appeared  on  some  charts, 
(after  Wilkes)  it  was  named  Termination  Ice-Tongue. 

A  blizzard  sprang  up,  and,  after  it  had  been  safely 
weathered  in  the  lee  of  some  grounded  bergs,  the  Aurora 
moved  off  on  the  afternoon  of  February  11.  The  horizon 
was  obscured  by  mist,  as  she  pursued  a  tortuous  track 
amongst  bergs  and  scattered  lumps  of  heavy  floe.  Gradu- 
ally the  sea  became  more  open,  and  by  noon  on  February 
12  the  water  had  deepened  to  two  hundred  and  thirty- 
five  fathoms.  Good  progress  was  made  to  the  south ;  the 
vessel  dodging  icebergs  and  detached  floes. 

The  discovery  of  a  comparatively  open  sea  southward 
of  the  main  pack  was  a  matter  of  some  moment.  As 
later  voyages  and  the  observations  of  the  Western  Party 
showed,  this  tract  of  sea  is  a  permanent  feature  of  the 
neighbourhood.  I  have  called  it  the  Davis  Sea,  after  the 
captain  of  the  Aurora,  in  appreciation  of  the  fact  that  he 
placed  it  on  the  chart. 

At  noon,  on  February  13,  in  latitude  65°  54j'  S.  longi- 
tude 94°  25'  E.,  the  western  face  of  a  long,  floating  ice- 
tongue  loomed  into  view.  There  were  five  hundred 
fathoms  of  water  off  its  extremity,  and  the  cliffs  rose 
vertically  to  one  hundred  feet.  Soon  afterwards  land 
was  clearly  defined  low  in  the  south  extending  to  east 
and  west.  This  was  thenceforth  known  as  Queen  Mary 
Land. 

The  sphere  of  operations  of  the  German  expedition 
of    1902    was   near   at   hand,   for    its   vessel,    the   Gauss, 

77 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

had  wintered,  frozen  in  the  pack,  one  hundred  and 
twenty-five  miles  to  the  west.  It  appeared  probable  that 
Queen  Mary  Land  would  be  found  to  be  continuous  * 
with  Kaiser  Wilhelm  II  Land,  which  the  Germans  had 
reached  by  a  sledging  journey  from  their  ship  across  the 
intervening  sea-ice. 

The  Aurora  followed  the  western  side  of  the  ice-tongue 
for  about  twenty  miles  in  a  southerly  direction,  at  which 
point  there  was  a  white  expanse  of  floe  extending  right  up 
to  the  land.  Wild  and  Kennedy,  walking  several  miles 
towards  the  land,  estimated  that  it  was  about  twenty-five 
miles  distant.  As  the  surface  over  which  they  travelled  was 
traversed  by  cracks  and  liable  to  drift  away  to  sea,  all  pro- 
jects of  landing  there  had  to  be  abandoned  ;  furthermore,  it 
was  discovered  that  the  ice-tongue,  alongside  of  which  the 
ship  lay,  was  a  huge  iceberg.  A  landing  on  it  had  been 
contemplated,  but  was  now  out  of  question. 

The  main  difficulty  which  arose  at  this  juncture  was 
the  failing  coal-supply.  It  was  high  time  to  return  to 
Hobart,  and,  if  a  western  base  was  to  be  formed  at  all, 
Wild's  party  would  have  to  be  landed  without  further 
delay.  After  a  consultation,  Davis  and  Wild  decided  that 
under  the  circumstances  an  attempt  should  be  made  to 
gain  a  footing  on  the  adjacent  shelf -ice,  if  nothing  better 
presented  itself. 

The  night  was  passed  anchored  to  the  floe,  on  the  edge  of 
which  were  numerous  Emperor  penguins  and  Weddell  seals. 
A  fresh  south-easterly  wind  blew  on  February  14,  and  the 
ship  was  kept  in  the  shelter  of  the  iceberg.  During  the 
day  enormous  pieces  were  observed  to  be  continually 
breaking  away  from  the  berg  and  drifting  to  leeward. 

Captain  Davis  continues  :  "At  midnight  there  was  a 
strong  swell  from  the  north-east  and  the  temperature 
went  down  to  13°  F.  At  4  a.m.,  February  15,  we  reached 
the  northern  end  of  the  berg  and  stood  first  of  all  to 
the  east,  and  then  later  to  the  south-east. 

*  Such  was  eventually  proved  to  be  the  ease. 
78 


^   H    ^ 


o  "  5 

^  H  g 

W  ^  ^ 

h^  1^  ^ 

i^  ^  O 

rt  ?  ^ 
o 

2  o 


o  ^ 


*^^tes^ 


A  BEIUJ  WITH  INCLUSIOXS  OF  MUD  AND  ROCK.     LONG.   110"  E.         Hurley 


■ah 


THE  "  FLYING  FOX  "  VIEWED  FROM  THE  FLOE-ICE  BELOW  THE  BRINK      Gray 
OF  THE  SHELF-ICE  ON  WHICH  THE  WESTERN  PARTY  WINTERED 


NEW  LANDS 

"  At  8.45  A.M.,  shelf-ice  was  observed  from  aloft, 
trending  approximately  north  and  south  in  a  long  wall. 
At  noon  we  came  up  with  the  floe-ice  again,  in  about 
the  same  latitude  as  on  the  western  side  of  the  long 
iceberg.  Land  could  be  seen  to  the  southward.  At 
1  P.M.  the  ship  stopped  at  the  junction  of  the  floe  and 
the  shelf-ice." 

Wild,  Harrison  and  Hoadley  went  to  examine  the 
shelf-ice  with  a  view  to  its  suitability  for  a  wintering 
station.  The  cliff  was  eighty  to  one  hundred  feet  in 
height,  so  that  the  ice  in  total  thickness  must  have  at- 
tained at  least  as  much  as  six  hundred  feet.  Assisted  by 
snow-ramps  slanting  down  on  to  the  floe,  the  ascent  with 
ice-axes  and  alpine  rope  was  fairly  easy. 

Two  hundred  yards  from  the  brink,  the  shelf-ice  was 
thrown  into  pressure-undulations  and  fissured  by  crevasses, 
but  beyond  that  was  apparently  sound  and  unbroken. 
About  seventeen  miles  to  the  south  the  rising  slopes  of 
ice-mantled  land  were  visible,  fading  away  to  the  far  east 
and  west. 

The  ice-shelf  was  [proved  later  on  to  extend  for  two 
hundred  miles  from  east  to  west,  ostensibly  fusing  with 
the  Termination  Ice-Tongue,  whose  extremity  is  one 
hundred  and  eighty  miles  to  the  north.  The  whole  has 
been  called  the  Shackleton  Ice-Shelf. 

Wild  and  his  party  unanimously  agreed  to  seize  upon 
this  last  opportunity,  and  to  winter  on  the  floating  ice. 

The  work  of  discharging  stores  was  at  once  commenced. 
To  raise  the  packages  from  the  floe  to  the  top  of  the  ice- 
shelf,  a  "  flying-fox  "  was  rigged. 

"  A  kedge-anchor  was  buried  in  the  sea-ice,  and  from 
this  a  two-and-a-half-inch  wire-hawser  was  led  upwards 
over  a  pair  of  sheer-legs  on  top  of  the  cliff  to  another  anchor 
buried  some  distance  back.  The  whole  was  set  taut  by  a 
tackle.  The  stores  were  then  slung  to  a  travelling  pulley 
on  the  wire,  and  hauled  on  to  the  glacier  by  means  of  a 
rope  led  through  a  second  pulley  on  the  sheer-legs.     The 

79 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

ship's  company  broke  stores  out  of  the  hold  and  sledged 
them  three  hundred  yards  to  the  foot  of  an  aerial,  where 
they  were  hooked  on  to  the  travelling-block  by  which 
the  shore  party,  under  Wild,  raised  them  to  their  des- 
tination." 

"It  was  most  important  to  accelerate  the  landing  as 
much  as  possible,  not  only  on  account  of  the  lateness  of 
the  season — the  Gauss  had  been  frozen  in  on  February  22 
at  a  spot  only  one  hundred  and  seventy  miles  away — but 
because  the  floe  was  gradually  breaking  up  and  floating 
away.  When  the  last  load  was  hoisted,  the  water  was 
lapping  within  ten  yards  of  the  '  flying-fox  '." 

A  fresh  west-north-west  wind  on  February  17  caused 
some  trouble.     Captain  Davis  writes  : 

"  February  19.  The  floe  to  which  we  have  been  at- 
tached is  covered  by  a  foot  of  water.  The  ship  has  been 
bumping  a  good  deal  to-day.  Notwithstanding  the  keen 
wind  and  driving  snow,  every  one  has  worked  well. 
Twelve  tons  of  coal  were  the  last  item  to  go  up  the  cliff." 
In  all,  thirty-six  tons  of  stores  were  raised  on  to 
the  shelf-ice,  one  hundred  feet  above  sea-level,  in  four 
days. 

"  February  20.  The  weather  is  very  fine  and  quite  a 
contrast  to  yesterday.  We  did  not  get  the  coal  ashore  a 
moment  too  soon,  as  this  morning  the  ice  marked  by  our 
sledge  tracks  went  to  sea  in  a  north-westerly  direction, 
and  this  afternoon  it  is  drifting  back  as  if  under  the  in- 
fluence of  a  tide  or  current.     We  sail  at  7  a.m.  to-morrow. 

"  I  went  on  to  the  glacier  with  Wild  during  the  afternoon. 
It  is  somewhat  crevassed  for  about  two  hundred  yards 
inland,  and  then  a  flat  surface  stretches  away  as  far  as 
the  eye  can  see.  I  wished  the  party  '  God-speed  '  this 
evening,  as  we  sail  early  to-morrow." 

Early  on  February  21,  the  ship's  company  gave  their 
hearty    farewell    cheers,    and    the    Aurora    sailed    north, 
leaving  Wild   and   his   seven  companions   on   the   floating 
ice. 
80 


NEW  LANDS 

The  bright  weather  of  the  immediate  coastal  region 
was  soon  exchanged  for  the  foggy  gloom  of  the  pack. 

"  February  21,  11  p.m.  We  are  now  passing  a  line  of 
grounded  bergs  and  some  heavy  floe-ice.  Fortunately  it 
is  calm,  but  in  the  darkness  it  is  difficult  to  see  an  opening. 
The  weather  is  getting  thick,  and  I  expect  we  shall  have 
trouble  in  working  through  this  line  of  bergs. 

"  February  22.  I  cannot  explain  how  we  managed  to 
clear  some  of  the  bergs  between  11  p.m.  last  night  and 
3  A.M.  this  morning.  At  first  stopping  and  lying-to  was 
tried,  but  it  was  soon  evident  that  the  big  bergs  were 
moving  and  would  soon  hem  us  in  :  probably  in  a  position 
from  which  we  should  be  unable  to  extricate  ourselves 
this  season. 

"  So  we  pushed  this  way  and  that,  endeavouring  to 
retain  freedom  at  any  cost.  For  instance,  about  midnight 
I  was  '  starboarding  '  to  clear  what  appeared  to  be  the 
loom  of  a  berg  on  the  starboard  bow,  when,  suddenly,  out 
of  the  haze  a  wall  seemed  to  stretch  across  our  course. 
There  was  no  room  to  turn,  so  '  full  speed  astern  '  was  the 
only  alternative.  The  engines  responded  immediately, 
or  we  must  have  crashed  right  into  a  huge  berg.  Until 
daylight  it  was  ice  ahead,  to  port  and  to  starboard — 
ice  everywhere  all  the  time.  The  absence  of  wind  saved 
us  from  disaster.  It  was  a  great  relief  when  day  broke, 
showing  clearer  water  to  the  northward." 

On  February  23,  the  Aurora  left  the  shelter  of  Termina- 
tion Ice-Tongue,  and  a  course  was  set  nearly  true  north. 
There  was  a  fresh  breeze  from  the  north-east  and  a  high 
sea.  The  ship  was  desperately  short  of  ballast  and  the 
coal  had  to  be  carefully  husbanded.  All  movable  gear  was 
placed  in  the  bottom  of  the  ship,  while  the  ashes  were 
saved,  wetted  and  put  below.  The  ballast-tanks  were 
found  to  be  leaking  and  GiUies  had  considerable  trouble 
in  making  them  watertight. 

The  distance  from  the  Western  Base  in  Queen  Mary 

Land  to  Hobart  was  two  thousand  three  hundred  miles, 

VOL.  IF  81 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

through  the  turbulent  seas  of  the  fifties  and  forties.  It 
was  the  end  of  a  perilous  voyage  when  the  Aurora  arrived 
in  Hobart  with  nine  tons  of  coal. 

On  March  12,  the  captain's  log  records  : 

"  The  Aurora  has  done  splendidly,  beating  all  attempts 
of  the  weather  to  turn  her  over.  We  had  two  heavy  gales 
during  the  first  week  of  March,  but  reached  Hobart  safely 
to-day,  passing  on  our  way  up  the  Derwent  the  famous 
Polar  ship,  Fram,  at  anchor  in  Sandy  Bay.  Flags  were 
dipped  and  a  hearty  cheer  given  for  Captain  Amundsen 
and  his  gallant  comrades  who  had  raised  the  siege  of  the 
South  Pole." 


82 


*      f  H  *-■  >r>  I 

M 1 


CHAPTER  V 
FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND 

THE  overcrowded  whale-boat  disgorged  its  cargo  at 
10  P.M.  on  the  ice-quay  at  Cape  Denison.  The  only- 
shelter  was  a  cluster  of  four  tents  and  the  Benzine 
Hut,  so  the  first  consideration  was  the  erection  of  a 
commodious  living-hut. 

While  the  majority  retired  to  rest  to  be  ready  for  a  fresh 
burst  of  work  on  the  morrow,  a  few  of  us  discussed  the  pre- 
liminary details,  and  struck  the  first  blows  in  the  laying 
of  i  he  foundations. 

A  site  for  the  living-hut  was  finally  approved.  This  was 
a  nearly  flat  piece  of  rocky  ground  of  just  sufficient  size, 
partially  sheltered  on  the  southern  side  by  a  large  up- 
standing rock.  Other  points  to  recommend  it  were,  proximity 
to  the  boat  harbour  and  to  a  good  sledging  surface  ;  the  ice 
of  the  glacier  extending  to  the  "  front  door  "  on  the  western 
side.  Several  large  rocks  had  to  be  shifted,  and  difficulty 
was  anticipated  in  the  firm  setting  of  the  stumps.  The  latter 
were  blocks  of  wood,  three  feet  in  length,  embedded  in  the 
ground,  forming  the  foundation  of  the  structure.  Unfortu- 
nately, no  such  thing  as  earth  or  gravel  existed  in  which  to 
sink  these  posts,  and  the  rock  being  of  the  variety  known  as 
gneiss,  was  more  than  ordinarily  tough. 

Since  two  parties  had  combined,  there  were  two  huts 
available,  and  these  were  to  be  erected  so  that  the  smaller 
adjoined  and  was  in  the  lee  of  the  larger.  The  latter  was  to  be 
the  living-room ;  the  former  serving  as  a  vestibule,  a  workshop 
and  an  engine-room  for  the  wireless  plant.  Slight  modifica- 
tions were  made  in  the  construction  of  both  huts,  but  these 

83 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

did  not  affect  the  framework.  After  the  completion  of  the 
living-hut,  regular  scientific  observations  were  to  commence, 
and  the  smaller  hut  was  then  to  be  built  as  opportunity 
offered. 

Nothing  has  so  far  been  said  about  the  type  of  hut  adopted 
by  our  Antarctic  stations.  As  the  subject  is  important,  and 
we  had  expended  much  thought  thereon  before  coming  to  a 
final  decision,  a  few  remarks  will  not  be  out  of  place. 

Strength  to  resist  hurricanes,  simplicity  of  construction, 
portability  and  resistance  to  external  cold  were  fundamental. 
My  first  idea  was  to  have  the  huts  in  the  form  of  pyramids  on 
a  square  base,  to  ensure  stability  in  heavy  winds  and  with  a 
large  floor-area  to  reduce  the  amount  of  timber  used.  The  final 
type  was  designed  at  the  expense  of  floor-space,  which  would 
have  been  of  little  use  because  of  the  low  roof  in  the  parts 
thus  eliminated.  In  this  form,  the  pyramid  extended 
to  within  five  feet  of  the  ground  on  the  three  windward 
sides  so  as  to  include  an  outside  veranda.  That  veranda, 
like  the  motor-launch,  was  a  Avonderful  convenience,  and 
another  of  the  many  things  of  which  we  made  full  use.  It 
lent  stability  to  the  structure,  assisted  to  keep  the  hut  warm, 
served  as  a  store-house,  physical  laboratory  and  a  dog- 
shelter. 

Round  the  outside  of  the  three  veranda  walls  boxes  of 
stores  were  stacked,  so  as  to  continue  the  roof-slope  to  the 
ground.  Thus,  the  wind  striking  the  hut  met  no  vertical 
face,  but  was  partly  deflected  ;  the  other  force-component 
tending  to  pin  the  building  to  the  ground. 

All  three  huts  were  essentially  of  the  same  construction. 
The  largest,  on  account  of  its  breadth,  had  four  special  sup- 
porting posts,  symmetrically  placed  near  the  centre,  stretch- 
ing from  the  ground  to  the  roof  framework.  The  only  sub- 
divisions inside  were  a  small  vestibule,  a  photographic  dark- 
room and  my  own  room.  This  rough  idea  I  had  handed 
over  to  Hodgeman,  leaving  him  to  complete  the  details  and 
to  draw  up  the  plans.  The  frame  timbers  he  employed 
84 


Food    Store 


r 


l-ii 


lotneiers   1    •Bare 


Baromoter 


DmmS  Table 


HanSi 


/  Gcaie   of  feet 

Ground    Plan   of  the   Hut 


PLAN  OF  THE  HUT,  ADELIE  LAND 


85 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

were  stronger  than  usual  in  a  building  of  the  size,  and  were 
all  securely  bolted  together.  The  walls  and  roof,  both 
inside  and  outside,  were  of  tongued  and  grooved  pine-boards, 
made  extra  wind-proof  by  two  courses  of  tarred  paper.  As 
rain  was  not  expected,  this  roofing  was  sufficient.  There 
were  four  windows  in  the  roof,  one  on  each  side  of  the  pyramid. 
We  should  thereby  get  light  even  though  almost  buried  in 
snow. 

The  largest  hut  was  presented  by  the  timber  merchants 
of  Sydney,  and  proved  its  astonishing  strength  during  the 
winter  hurricanes.  The  smallest  was  purchased  in  Adelaide  ; 
the  third  was  built  and  presented  by  Messrs.  Anthony  of 
Melbourne. 

On  the  morning  ot  January  20  all  were  at  work  betimes. 
As  we  were  securely  isolated  from  a  trades  hall,  our  hours  of 
labour  ranged  from  7  a.m.  till  11  p.m. 

Dynamite  was  to  be  used  for  blasting  out  the  holes  for  the 
reception  of  the  stumps,  and  so  the  steel  rock-drills  were 
unpacked  and  boring  commenced.  This  was  easier  than  it 
appeared,  because  the  rock  was  much  traversed  by  cracks.  By 
the  end  of  the  day  a  good  deal  of  damage  had  been  done  to  the 
rock,  at  the  expense  of  a  few  sore  fingers  and  wrists  caused  by 
the  sledge-hammers  missing  the  drills.  The  work  was  tedious, 
for  water  introduced  into  the  holes  had  a  habit  of  freezing. 
The  metal  drills,  too,  tended  to  be  brittle  in  the  cold  and  re- 
quired to  be  tempered  softer  than  usual.  Hannam  operated 
the  forge,  and  picks  and  drills  were  sent  along  for  pointing ; 
an  outcrop  of  gneiss  serving  as  an  anvil. 

Among  other  things  it  was  found  difficult  to  fire  the 
charges,  for,  when  frozen,  dynamite  is  not  readily  exploded. 
This  was  overcome  by  carrying  the  sticks  inside  one's  pocket 
until  the  last  moment.  In  the  absence  of  earth  or  clay,  we 
had  no  tamping  material  until  some  one  suggested  guano 
from  the  penguin  rookeries,  which  proved  a  great  success. 

Next  day  the  stumps  were  in  place  ;  most  of  them  being 
fixed  by  wedges  and  other  devices.  Cement  was  tried,  but 
86 


AtMlf  Land  Mertz 

THE   LlVINd-UUT,  NEAKINU  CO.Ml'LE  I'lOX.     THE  TENTS  AND  SHELTER  BUILT  OF 

BENZINE  CASES  USED  AS  TE.MPORAKV  (JCAETEltS  ARE  SHOWN 


Adelif  Lund  ;/,, 

THE   COMPLETION  OF  THE   HUT— CHEERING  THE  UNION  JACK  AS  IT  WAS 
HOISTED  ON  THE  FLAG  POLE 


FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND 

it  is  doubtful  if  any  good  came  of  it,  for  the  low  temperature 
did  not  encourage  it  to  set  well.  By  the  evening,  the  bottom 
plates  were  laid  on  and  bolted  to  the  tops  of  the  stumps, 
and  everything  was  ready  for  the  superstructure. 

On  January  22,  while  some  were  busy  with  the  floor- 
joists  and  wall-frames,  others  carried  boulders  from  the 
neighbouring  moraine,  filling  in  the  whole  space  between 
the  stumps.  These  were  eventually  embedded  in  a  mass  of 
boulders,  as  much  as  three  ieet  deep  in  places.  By  the  time 
both  huts  were  erected,  nearly  fitty  tons  of  stones  had  been 
used  in  the  foundations — a  circumstance  we  did  not  regret 
at  a  later  date. 

Hodgeman  was  appointed  clerk  of  works  on  the  construc- 
tion, and  was  kept  unusually  busy  selecting  timber,  patrolling 
among  the  workmen,  and  searching  for  his  foot-rule  which 
had  an  unaccountable  trick  of  vanishing  in  thin  air. 

Hannam  had  various  occupations,  but  one  was  to  attend 
to  the  needs  of  the  inner  man,  until  the  completion  of  the 
hut.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  was  regarded  at  this  time  as 
the  most  important  and  popular  member  of  the  party,  for  our 
appetites  were  abnormally  good.  About  an  hour  before  meals 
he  was  to  be  seen  rummaging  amongst  the  cases  of  provisions, 
selecting  tins  of  various  brands  and  hues  from  the  great 
confusion.  However  remote  their  source  or  diverse  their 
colour,  experience  taught  us  that  only  one  preparation  would 
emerge  from  the  tent-kitchen.  It  was  a  multifarious  stew. 
Its  good  quality  was  undoubted,  for  a  few  minutes  after  the 
"  dinner-bell  rang "  there  was  not  a  particle  left.  The 
"  dinner-bell  "  was  a  lusty  shout  from  the  master  cook, 
which  was  re-echoed  by  the  brawny  mob  who  rushed  madly 
to  the  Benzine  Hut.  Plates  and  mugs  were  seized  and  por- 
tions measured  out,  while  the  diners  distributed  themselves 
on  odd  boxes  lying  about  on  the  ice.  Many  who  were 
accustomed  to  restaurants  built  tables  of  kerosene  cases 
and  dined  al  fresco.  After  the  limited  stew,  the  company 
fared  on  cocoa,  biscuits — "  hard  tack  " — and  jam,  all  ad 
libitum. 

87 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

On  those  rare  summer  days,  the  sun  blazed  down  on  the 
blue  ice;  skua  gulls  nestled  in  groups  on  the  snow;  sly 
penguins  waddled  along  to  inspect  the  building  operations  ; 
seals  basked  in  torpid  slumber  on  the  shore  ;  out  on  the 
sapphire  bay  the  milk-white  bergs  floated  in  the  swell.  We 
can  all  paint  our  own  picture  of  the  good  times  round  the 
Benzine  Hut.  We  worked  hard,  ate  heartily  and  enjoyed 
life. 

By  the  evening  of  January  24  the  floor  and  outside  walls 
were  finished,  and  the  roof-frame  was  in  position.  Work  on 
the  roof  was  the  coldest  job  of  all,  for  now  there  was  rarely 
an  hour  free  from  a  cold  breeze,  at  times  reaching  the  velo- 
city of  a  gale.  This  came  directly  down  from  the  plateau, 
and  to  sit  with  exposed  fingers  handling  hammer  and  nails 
was  not  an  enviable  job.  To  add  to  our  troubles,  the  boards 
were  all  badly  warped  from  being  continually  wet  with  sea- 
water  on  the  voyage.  However,  by  judicious  "  gadgetting," 
as  the  phrase  went,  they  were  got  into  place. 

The  windward  roof  was  up  on  January  25,  and  several 
of  us  camped  in  sleeping-bags  under  its  shelter.  Already 
Hannam  had  unpacked  the  large  range  and  put  the  parts 
together  in  the  kitchen.  Henceforth  the  cooking  operations 
were  simplified,  for  previously  a  sledging-cooker  had  been 
used. 

Mention  of  the  stove  recalls  a  very  cold  episode.  It 
happened  that  while  our  goods  were  being  lifted  from  the 
boats  to  the  landing-stage,  a  case  had  fallen  into  the  harbour. 
When  the  parts  of  the  stove  were  being  assembled,  several 
important  items  were  found  to  be  missing,  and  it  was  thought 
that  they  might  compose  the  contents  of  the  unknown  case 
lying  in  the  kelp  at  the  bottom  of  the  bay. 

Laseron  and  I  went  on  board  the  whale-boat  one  day  at 
low  water,  and  located  the  box  with  a  pole,  but  though  we 
used  several  devices  with  hooks,  we  were  unable  to  get  hold 
of  it.  At  last  I  went  in,  and,  standing  on  tip-toe,  could  just 
reach  it  and  keep  my  head  above  water.  It  took  some  time 
to  extricate  from  the  kelp,  foflowing  which  I  established  a 


89 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

new  record  for  myself  in  dressing.  The  case  turned  out  to  be 
full  of  jam,  and  we  had  to  make  a  new  search  for  the  missing 
parts.  I  do  not  think  I  looked  very  exhilarated  after  that 
bath,  but  strange  to  say,  a  few  days  later  Correll  tried  an 
early  morning  swim  which  was  the  last  voluntary  dip 
attempted  by  any  one. 

The  enthusiasm  of  the  builders  rose  to  its  highest  pitch 
as  the  roof  neared  completion,  and  we  came  in  sight  of  a  firm 
and  solid  habitation,  secure  from  the  winds  which  harassed 
us  daily.  A  dozen  hammers  worked  at  once,  each  concen- 
trated upon  a  specific  job.  The  ardour  with  which  those 
engaged  upon  the  ceiling  inside  the  hut  plied  their  nails  re- 
sulted in  several  minor  casualties  to  those  sitting  on  the  roof, 
deeply  intent  on  the  outer  lining.  A  climax  was  reached  when 
McLean,  working  on  the  steeply  inclined  roof,  lost  his  footing 
and,  in  passing,  seized  hold  of  the  wire-stay  of  the  chimney  as 
a  last  hope.  Alas,  that  was  the  only  stay,  and  as  he  pro- 
ceeded over  the  end  of  the  roof  into  a  bank  of  snow,  Ninnis, 
within  the  hut,  convinced  that  nothing  less  than  a  cyclone 
had  struck  the  building,  gallantly  held  on  to  the  lower  hot 
section  amidst  a  shower  of  soot. 

Everybody  was  in  the  best  of  spirits,  and  things  went 
ahead  merrily.  On  January  30  the  main  building  was  almost 
completed,  and  all  slept  under  its  roof.  Bunks  had  been 
constructed,  forming  a  double  tier  around  three  sides  of  the 
room.  For  the  first  time  since  coming  ashore  we  retired  to 
sleep  in  blankets ;  fur  sleeping-bags  had  been  previously  used. 
That  night  the  sky  which  had  been  clear  for  a  fortnight  banked 
up  with  nimbus  cloud,  and  Murphy,  who  was  sleeping  under 
a  gap  in  the  roof,  woke  up  next  morning  to  find  over  him  a 
fine  counterpane  of  snow.  He  received  hearty  congratu- 
lations all  round. 

Regular  meteorological  observations  began  on  February  1. 
The  various  instruments  had  been  unpacked  as  soon  as  the 
outer  shell  of  the  Hut  was  completed.  The  barometer  and 
barograph  were  kept  running  inside.  Outside  there  were 
two  large  screens  for  the  reception  of  a  number  of  the 
90 


FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND 

instruments.  It  was  important  to  erect  these  as  near  the 
Hut  as  possible.  The  standard  thermometer,  thermograph 
and  hygrograph  were  to  occupy  one  of  the  screens,  a  con- 
venient site  for  which  was  chosen  about  twenty  yards  to 
the  east.  Close  by  there  was  also  a  nephoscope  for  deter- 
mining the  motion  of  clouds.  The  immediate  vicinity  of 
the  Hut,  being  a  gully-like  depression,  was  unsuitable  for 
the  wind  and  sunshine  recorders.  A  more  distant  site,  on  a 
rocky  ridge  to  the  east,  was  chosen  for  these.  There  were 
set  up  a  recording  anemometer  (wind- velocity  meter),  a 
sunshine-meter  and  the  second  screen  containing  the  anemo- 
graph (wind-direction  recorder). 

Madigan  was  to  take  charge  of  the  meteorological 
observations  and  he,  assisted  by  Ninnis  and  Mertz,  erected 
the  two  screens  and  mounted  the  instruments.  Special  care 
was  taken  to  secure  the  screens  against  violent  winds. 
Phosphor-bronze  wire-stays,  with  a  breaking  strength  of 
one  ton,  were  used,  attached  to  billets  of  wood  driven  into 
fissures  in  the  rock.  Strong  as  these  wires  were,  several 
breakages  had  to  be  replaced  during  the  year. 

Webb  was  busy  with  the  magnetic  work.  For  this  two 
huts  were  to  be  erected  ;  the  first  for  "  absolute  "  deter- 
minations, the  second  for  housing  the  recording  instruments 
— the  magnetographs.  Distant  sites,  away  from  the  mag- 
netic disturbances  of  the  Hut,  were  chosen.  Webb  and 
Stillwell  immediately  set  to  work  as  soon  as  they  could  be 
spared  from  the  main  building.  For  the  "  absolute  hut  " 
there  were  only  scrap  materials  available  ;  the  "  magneto- 
graph  house,"  alone,  had  been  brought  complete.  They  had  a 
chilly  job,  for  as  the  days  went  by  the  weather  steadily  became 
worse.  Yet  in  a  little  over  a  week  there  were  only  the  finish- 
ing touches  to  make,  and  the  first  observations  were  started. 

It  was  now  necessary  to  institute  a  routine  of  night- 
watchmen,  cooks  and  messmen.  The  night-watchman's 
duties  included  periodic  meteorological  observations,  atten- 
tion to  the  fire  in  the  range,  and  other  miscellaneous  duties 
arising  between  the  hours  of  8  p.m.  and  8  a.m.     The  cook  pre- 

91 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

pared  the  meals,  and  the  messman  of  the  day  rendered  any 
assistance  necessary.  A  rotation  was  adopted,  so  arranged 
that  those  most  actively  engaged  in  scientific  observations 
were  least  saddled  with  domestic  duties.  Thus  each  con- 
tributed his  equivalent  share  of  work. 

Whilst  others  were  occupied  finishing  off  the  interior  of 
the  hut,  Whetter  and  Close  sledged  the  cases  of  stores  across 
from  the  landing-stage,  classified  them  and  stacked  them 
against  the  veranda  walls.  An  additional  barricade  was 
constructed  of  flour  cases,  in  the  form  of  a  wall,  which 
increased  the  breadth  of  the  rocky  break-wind  on  the 
southern  side. 

Murphy,  who  was  in  charge  of  all  the  stores,  saw  that 
a  good  stock  of  tood  was  accessible  in  the  veranda.  Here 
he  put  up  shelves  and  unpacked  cases,  so  that  samples  of 
everything  were  at  hand  on  the  shortest  notice.  Liquids 
liable  to  freeze  and  burst  their  bottles  were  taken  into  the 
Hut. 

Already  we  had  several  times  seized  the  opportunity  of 
a  calm  hour  to  take  out  the  whale-boat  and  assist  Hunter 
to  set  traps  and  make  a  few  hauls  with  the  hand-dredge. 
Even  in  five  fathoms,  bright  red  and  brown  star-fish  had  been 
caught  in  the  trap,  as  well  as  numerous  specimens  of  a 
common  Antarctic  fish  known  as  Notothenia.  In  ten  fathoms 
and  over  the  results  were  better,  though  in  no  case  was  the 
catch  so  abundant  as  one  would  expect  from  the  amount  of 
life  in  the  water.  The  luxuriant  kelp  probably  interfered 
with  the  proper  working  of  the  traps.  Fish  of  the  same 
species  as  the  above  were  caught  on  a  hand-line. 

Hunter,  our  biologist,  was  very  unfortunate  in  crushing 
some  of  his  fingers  while  carrying  a  heavy  case.  This  accident 
came  at  a  time  when  he  had  just  recovered  from  a  severe 
strain  of  the  knee-joint  which  he  suffered  during  our  activi- 
ties in  the  Queen's  Wharf  shed  at  Hobart.  Several  of  us 
were  just  going  out  to  the  traps  one  afternoon  when  the 
casualty  occurred.  Hunter  was  very  anxious  to  go,  so  we 
92 


^    15 

O         1 


^  ^V  IV  O  J 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

waited  until  McLean  had  sewn  up  a  couple  of  his  finger- 
tips. 

Weddell,  and  with  them  occasional  crab-eater  seals, 
were  at  this  time  always  to  be  found  in  numbers  sleeping  on 
the  ice-foot  around  the  boat  harbour.  It  appeared  as  if 
we  would  have  plenty  of  meat  throughout  the  year,  so  I 
waited  until  the  building  was  completed  before  laying  in  a 
stock.  The  penguins,  however,  were  diminishing  in  numbers 
fast  and  the  young  birds  in  the  rookeries  had  grown  very 
large  and  were  beginning  to  migrate  to  warmer  regions. 
Several  parties,  therefore,  raided  them  and  secured  some 
hundreds  for  the  winter. 

Giant  petrels  and  skua  gulls  swarmed  in  flocks  round 
the  seals'  and  penguins'  carcases.  These  scavengers  de- 
molish an  incredible  amount  of  meat  and  blubber  in  a  short 
time.  It  is  a  diabolical  sight  to  witness  a  group  of  birds 
tearing  out  the  viscera  of  a  seal,  dancing  the  while  with 
wings  outspread. 

During  the  afternoon  of  February  11  Webb  came  in  with 
the  news  that  a  sea  elephant  was  making  its  way  over  the 
rocks  near  the  shore.  We  rushed  out  in  time  to  see  it  stand- 
ing over  Johnson,  one  of  the  dogs,  who,  true  to  his  name, 
did  not  look  abashed.  Attracted  by  more  formidable 
antagonists,  the  monster  left  Johnson  and  came  towards 
us.  He  was  a  fair-sized  male  with  a  good  skin,  so  we  shot 
him  before  he  had  time  to  get  back  into  the  sea.  His 
measurements  were  seventeen  feet  six  inches  in  length  and 
twelve  feet  in  maximum  circumference. 

With  the  temperature  well  below  freezing-point,  skinning 
is  cold  work  in  the  wind,  and  must  be  done  before  the  animal 
has  time  to  freeze  stiff.  A  number  of  us  set  to  work  flaying. 
In  order  to  move  the  mountain  of  flesh  a  Westing  purchase 
and  a  "  handy-billy  "  (rope  and  block  purchase)  had  to  be 
rigged.  It  was  several  hours  before  everything  was  disposed 
of  ;  the  skin  and  skull  for  the  biological  collection  and  the 
meat  and  blubber  for  the  dogs.  Ninnis  and  Mertz,  who  were 
the  wardens  of  the  dogs,  cut  up  about  one  ton  of  meat 
94 


>  ? 

w  ^ 


2^== 


FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND 

and  blubber,  and  stored  it  as  a  winter  reserve  for  their 
charges. 

It  may  be  mentioned  that  sea  elephants  are  sub-antarctic  in 
distribution,  and  only  rarely  have  these  animals  been  observed 
on  the  shores  of  the  Antarctic  continent.  As  far  as  I  am 
aware,  the  only  other  occasion  of  such  an  occurrence  was  noted 
by  Captain  Scott  in  MacMurdo  Sound.  Wilkes  reported 
many  of  them  on  the  pack-ice  to  the  north  of  the  Balleny 
Islands,  so  possibly  they  have  a  stronghold  in  that  vicinity. 

The  dogs,  ever  since  their  arrival  ashore,  had  been  chained 
up  on  the  rocks  below  the  Hut.  The  continuous  wind 
worried  them  a  good  deal,  but  they  had  a  substantial  offset 
to  the  cold  in  a  plentiful  supply  of  seal-meat.  On  the  whole, 
they  were  in  a  much  better  condition  then  whan  they  left 
the  Aurora.  Nineteen  in  all,  they  had  an  odd  assemblage 
of  names,  which  seemed  to  grow  into  them  until  nothing  else 
was  so  suitable  :  Basilisk,  Betli,  Caruso,  Castor,  Franklin, 
Fusilier,  Gadget,  George,  Ginger,  Ginger  Bitch,  Grandmother, 
Haldane,  Jappy,  John  Bull,  Johnson,  Mary,  Pavlova,  Scott 
and  Shacklet on .  Grandmother  would  have  been  better  known 
as  Grandfather.  He  was  said  to  have  a  grandmotherly 
appearance ;  that  is  why  he  received  the  former  name.  The 
head  dog  was  Basilisk,  and  next  to  him  came  Shacklet  on. 

Early  in  February,  after  having  experienced  nothing  but  a 
succession  of  gales  for  nearly  a  month,  I  was  driven  to  con- 
clude that  the  average  local  weather  must  be  much  more 
windy  than  in  any  other  part  of  Antarctica.  The  conditions 
were  not  at  all  favourable  for  sledging,  which  I  had  hoped 
to  commence  as  soon  as  the  Hut  was  completed.  Now  that 
the  time  had  arrived  and  the  weather  was  still  adverse,  it 
seemed  clear  that  our  first  duty  was  to  see  everything  snug 
for  the  winter  before  making  an  attempt. 

Hannam,  assisted  by  Bickerton,  Madigan  and  others, 
had  laid  heavy  and  firm  foundations  for  the  petrol-motor 
and  generator.  The  floor  of  the  smaller  room  was  then  built 
around  these  bed-plates,  and  last  of  all  came  the  walls  and  roof. 
Murphy,  Bage  and  Hodgeman  were  chiefly  responsible  for  the 

95 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

last-named,  which  was  practically  completed  by  February  10. 
Minor  additions  and  modifications  were  added  after  that 
date.  Meanwhile,  Hannam  continued  to  unpack  and  mount 
the  instruments  forming  the  wireless  plants.  Along  one 
wall  and  portion  of  another,  in  the  outer  hut,  a  bench  was 
built  for  mechanical  work  and  for  scientific  purposes.  This 
was  in  future  to  be  the  work-room. 

Our  home  had  attained  to  a  stage  of  complex  perfection. 
To  penetrate  to  the  inside  hut,  the  stranger  reverently  steps 
through  a  hole  in  the  snow  to  the  veranda,  then  by  way  of 
a  vestibule  with  an  inner  and  outer  door  he  has  invaded 
the  privacy  of  the  work-room,  from  which  with  fear  and 
trembling  he  passes  by  a  third  door  into  the  sanctum 
sanctorum.  Later,  when  the  snow-tunnel  system  came 
into  vogue,  the  place  became  another  Labyrinth  of  Minos. 

The  three  doors  were  fitted  with  springs  to  keep  them  shut 
unless  they  were  jammed  open  for  ventilation,  which  was 
at  once  obtained  by  opening  an  aperture  in  the  cooking- 
range  flue.  A  current  of  air  would  then  circulate  through 
the  open  doors.  The  roof  windows  were  immovable  and 
sealed  on  the  inside  by  a  thick  accumulation  of  ice.  An 
officer  of  public  health,  unacquainted  with  the  climate  of 
Adelie  Land,  would  be  inclined  to  regard  the  absence  of 
more  adequate  ventilation  as  a  serious  omission.  It  would 
enlighten  him  to  know  that  much  of  our  spare  time,  for  a 
month  after  the  completion  of  the  building,  was  spent  in 
plugging  off  draughts  which  found  their  way  through  most 
unexpected  places,  urged  by  a  wind-pressure  from  without 
of  many  pounds  to  the  square  foot. 

Excepting  the  small  portion  used  as  an  entrance-porch, 
the  verandas  were  left  without  any  better  flooring  than 
well-trodden  snow.  In  the  boarded  floor  of  the  porch  was 
a  trap-door  which  led  down  into  a  shallow  cellar  extending 
under  a  portion  of  the  work-room.  The  cellar  was  a  re- 
frigerating chamber  for  fresh  meat  and  contained  fifteen 
carcases  of  mutton,  besides  piles  of  seal-meat  and 
penguins. 
96 


'i 

Ml 


-^M^. 


Hurley 
ADELIE  PEXGUIX  AFTER   WEATHEIUXli   A  SEVERE   liLIZZAKD.     OBSERVE 
THE  LUMPS  OF  ICE  ADHERIXG  TO  IT 


FIRST  DAYS  IN  ADELIE  LAND 

In  preparation  for  our  contemplated  sledging,  masts, 
spars  and  sails  were  fitted  to  some  of  the  sledges,  rations 
were  prepared  and  alterations  made  to  harness  and  clothing. 
Soon  a  sledge  stood  packed,  ready  to  set  out  on  the  first  fine 
day. 

For  several  days  in  succession,  about  the  middle  of 
February,  the  otherwise  continuous  wind  fell  off  to  a  calm 
for  several  hours  in  the  evening.  On  those  occasions 
Mertz  gave  us  some  fine  exhibitions  of  skiing,  of  which  art 
he  was  a  consummate  master.  Skis  had  been  provided  for 
every  one,  in  case  we  should  have  to  traverse  a  country 
where  the  snow  lay  soft  and  deep.  From  the  outset,  there 
was  little  chance  of  that  being  the  case  in  wind-scoured 
Adelie  Land.  Nevertheless,  most  of  the  men  seized  the  few 
opportunities  we  had  to  become  more  practised  in  their  use. 
My  final  opinion,  however,  was  that  if  we  had  all  been  ex- 
perts like  Mertz,  we  could  have  used  them  with  advantage 
from  time  to  time. 

The  end  of  February  approached.  We  were  fully  pre- 
pared for  sledging,  and  were  looking  forward  to  it  with  great 
expectation.  The  wind  still  continued,  often  rising  to  the 
force  of  a  hurricane,  and  was  mostly  accompanied  by  snow. 

One  evening,  when  we  were  all  at  dinner,  there  was  a 
sudden  noise  which  drowned  the  rush  of  the  blizzard.  It 
was  found  that  several  sledges  had  been  blown  away  from 
their  position  to  the  south  of  the  Hut,  striking  the  building 
as  they  passed.  They  were  all  rescued  except  one,  which 
had  already  reached  the  sea  and  was  travelling  rapidly 
toward  Australia. 

Mertz,  Bage  and  I  had  taken  advantage  of  a  lull  to 
ascend  the  ice-slope  to  the  south,  and  to  erect  a  flag-pole  at 
a  distance  of  two  miles.  Besides  being  a  beacon  for  sledging 
parties,  it  was  used  for  ablation  measurements.  These  were 
determinations  of  the  annual  wasting  of  the  ice-surface, 
whether  by  evaporation,  melting,  or  wind-abrasion. 

Webb  and  Stillwell,  assisted  by  others,  had  commenced 

to  build  the  Magnetograph  House.    Dr.  Chree,  of  the  British 

VOL.  I  G  97 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

National  Physical  Laboratory,  had  arranged  that  the 
German  Antarctic  Expedition,  several  observatories  in  low 
latitudes  and  our  own  Expedition,  should  take  special  "  quick 
runs,"  synchronously,  twice  each  month.  A  "quick  run" 
was  a  continuous,  careful  observation  made  over  a  period  of 
two  hours,  on  a  more  searching  time-scale  than  usual.  Until 
the  Magnetograph  House  was  established  this  could  not  be 
done  efficiently,  and  so  the  construction  of  this  hut  was 
pushed  on  as  quickly  as  possible. 

Many  other  schemes  required  our  attention,  and  there 
was  not  a  spare  moment  for  any  one.  Though  avc  chafed 
at  the  delay  in  sledging,  there  was  some  consolation  in  the 
fact  that  the  scientific  programme  was  daily  becoming  more 
and  more  complete. 


98 


..-^-i 


1  --l,lll„,ll 

■6?=— 

^atf 

M^^^ 

-.  '^'^^^^ 

^4^ 

'^A^^^'^^;^^-^ 

■~«-ar 

■^jm^. 

'-<Y^,^ 

ki^^JHilflllf 

■^M-^^J^      ■-■..!^ 

^ 

W^'i 

^'K^: 

■f  ,.*/... 

-«»siigsskij:*^> 


MIDliLE  IIF  THE   PICTUIIE 


:  SKI-KUNNIN 


<E.MOC.ltAPII   IS  OX   THE   HILL. 


CHAPTER  VI 

AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

AS  far  as  we  could  see,  the  inland  ice  was  an  unbroken 
J-\  plateau  with  no  natural  landmarks.  From  the  hinter- 
land in  a  vast  solid  stream  the  ice  flowed,  with  heavily 
crevassed  downfalls  near  the  coast.  Traversing  this  from  north 
to  south  was  a  narrow  belt,  reasonably  free  from  pitfalls,  run- 
ning as  a  spur  down  to  the  sea.  To  reach  the  Hut  in  safety 
it  would  be  necessary  for  sledging  parties  returning  from  the 
interior  to  descend  by  this  highway.  The  problem  was  to 
locate  the  path.  Determinations  of  latitude  and  longitude 
would  guide  them  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Commonwealth 
Bay,  but  the  coastline  in  the  vicinity  of  Winter  Quarters, 
with  the  rocks  and  islets,  would  not  come  into  view  until 
within  two  miles,  as  above  that  point  the  icy  slopes  filled 
the  foreground  up  to  the  distant  berg-studded  horizon. 
Delays  in  reaching  the  Hut  owing  to  the  difficult  descent 
might  have  serious  consequences,  for  provisions  are  usually 
short  near  the  conclusion  of  a  sledging  journey. 

The  necessity  of  making  artificial  landmarks  was,  there- 
fore, most  obvious.  Already  we  had  a  flagstaff  two  miles 
to  the  south.  It  was  now  my  intention  to  run  a  line  of 
similar  marks  backwards  to  the  plateau. 

Bage,  Madigan  and  I  were  to  form  a  reconnoitring 
party  to  plant  these  flags,  and  to  make  a  journey  of  a  few 
days'  duration  into  the  hinterland,  to  see  its  possibilities, 
and  with  a  view  to  an  extended  sledging  campaign  to  com- 
mence as  soon  as  possible  after  our  return.  It  was  decided 
not  to  make  use  of  the  dogs  until  later  in  the  year,  when 
they  would  be  in  better  form. 

99 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  wind  continued,  accompanied  by  more  or  less 
drift-snow.  This  appeared  to  be  the  settled  state  of  the 
weather.  We  decided  to  move  out  as  soon  as  a  moderate 
phase  should  occur. 

On  the  afternoon  of  February  28  the  weather  cleared  up 
for  several  hours,  and  we  decided  to  leave  on  the  following 
day.  The  wind  resumed  operations  once  more,  but  fell 
off  late  on  February  29,  when  we  made  a  start.  We  intended 
to  get  the  packed  sledge  up  the  first  steep  slope,  there  to 
leave  it  until  the  morrow.  The  drift  was  slight  and  low, 
flowing  along  like  a  stream  below  our  knees.  Bickerton, 
Hurley  and  Mertz  assisted  us  with  the  hauhng.  At  a  dis- 
tance of  a  little  more  than  a  mile,  at  an  elevation  of  five 
hundred  feet,  the  sledge  was  anchored  and  we  returned 
to  the  Hut  for  the  night. 

Next  morning  the  weather  cleared  still  more,  and  we 
left  just  before  noon.  Three  miles  out,  a  mast  and  flag 
were  erected,  when  our  companions  of  the  day  before, 
who  had  again  assisted  us,  turned  back.  At  five  and  a  half 
miles  the  brow  of  the  main  rise  was  reached,  and  the 
gradient  became  much  flatter  beyond  it.  The  elevation  was 
found  to  be  one  thousand  five  hundred  feet. 

To  the  south  nothing  was  visible  but  a  great,  wan, 
icy  wilderness.  To  the  north  a  headland  appeared  on 
either  hand,  each  about  twenty-five  miles  away,  and 
between  them  lay  an  expanse  of  sea  dotted  with  many  bergs. 
The  nearer  portions  of  the  coast,  together  with  the  Mackellar 
Islets,  were  lost  to  view  on  account  of  the  curvature  of  the 
foreground. 

During  most  of  the  day  we  had  travelled  over  a  surface 
of  clear  ice,  marked  by  occasional  scars  where  fissuring, 
now  healed,  had  at  some  time  taken  place.  Beyond  the 
three-mile  flag,  however,  the  ice  was  gashed  at  frequent 
intervals,  producing  irregular  crevasses,  usuaUy  a  few 
yards  in  length  and,  for  the  most  part,  choked  with  snow. 
At  five  and  a  half  miles  we  were  on  the  edge  of  a  strip  of 
snow,  half  a  mile  across,  whose  whiteness  was  thrown 
XOO 


TJIE   HEAD   UF  A   WEDDELl.  SEAL 


iiHii 


A   WEIUiKM.  SICAI.  ^(  l:  \  irlllNi,    HIMSELF.     "  BEAT  THOSE  FLIES !  "       Hurley 


AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

in  dazzling  contrast  against  the  foil  of  transparent,  dark 
ice. 

It  was  dusk,  and  light  drift  commenced  to  scud  by,  so, 
as  this  was  a  suitable  place  to  erect  a  flag,  we  decided  to 
camp  for  the  night.  Some  hours  later  I  woke  up  to  hear 
a  blizzard  blowing  outside,  and  to  find  Madigan  fumbling 
amongst  some  gear  at  the  head-end  of  the  tent.  From 
inside  my  bag  I  called  out  to  inquire  if  there  was  anything 
wrong,  and  received  a  reply  that  he  was  looking  for  the 
primus-pricker.  Then  he  slipped  back  into  his  sleeping- 
bag,  and  all  became  quiet,  except  for  the  snow  beating 
against  the  tent.  So  I  presumed  that  he  had  found  it. 
Revolving  the  incident  in  my  mind,  and  dimly  wondering 
what  use  he  could  have  for  a  primus-pricker  in  the  middle 
of  the  night,  I  again  fell  asleep.  In  the  morning  the  blizzard 
was  still  blowing,  accompanied  by  a  good  deal  of  drift. 
On  inquiry  I  found  that  Madigan  knew  nothing  of  his  mid- 
night escapade.     It  was  a  touch  of  somnambulism. 

It  would  serve  no  useful  purpose  to  go  on  in  thick  drift, 
for  the  main  object  of  our  journey  was  to  define  the  best 
route  through  the  crevassed  zone  ;  and  that  could  only 
be  done  on  a  clear  day.  I  decided,  accordingly,  that  if 
the  weather  did  not  improve  by  noon  to  leave  the  sledge 
with  the  gear  and  walk  back  to  the  Hut,  intending  to  make 
another  attempt  when  conditions  became  more  settled. 

Whilst  the  others  erected  a  flagstaff  and  froze  the  legs 
of  a  drift-proof  box  (containing  a  thermograph)  into  the  ice, 
I  made  lunch  and  prepared  for  our  departure.  The  tent  was 
taken  down  and  everything  lashed  securely  on  the  sledge. 

It  was  nearly  3  p.m.  when  we  set  out  in  thick  drift, 
and  in  two  hours  we  were  at  the  Hut ;  the  weather  having 
steadily  improved  as  we  descended.  On  comparing  notes 
with  those  at  home  it  appeared  that  we,  at  the  flfteen 
hundred  feet  level,  had  experienced  much  more  wind  and 
drift  than  they  at  sea-level. 

Webb  and  his  assistants  were  beginning  to  make  quite  a 

101 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

display  at  the  Magnetograph  House.  The  framework, 
which  had  ah'eady  been  erected  once,  to  be  demohshed  by 
the  wind,  was  now  strongly  rebuilt  and  was  ready  for  the 
outside  covering  of  boards. 

From  the  night  of  our  return  to  March  8  there  was  a 
high  wind  accompanied  by  much  drift ;  for  some  hours  it 
continued  at  eighty  miles  per  hour,  the  mean  temperature 
being  about  15°  F.,  with  a  minimum  of  5°  F. 

Up  to  this  date  the  dogs  had  been  kept  on  the  chain,  on 
account  of  their  depredations  amongst  the  seals  and  penguins. 
The  severe  weather  now  made  it  necessary  to  release  them. 
Thenceforth,  their  abode  for  part  of  the  day  was  inside 
the  veranda,  where  a  section  was  barricaded-off  for  their 
exclusive  use.  Outside  in  heavy  drift  their  habit  was  to 
take  up  a  position  in  the  lee  of  some  large  object,  such 
as  the  Hut.  In  such  a  position  they  were  soon  completely 
buried  and  oblivious  to  the  outside  elements.  Thus 
one  would  sometimes  tread  on  a  dog,  hidden  beneath  the 
snow  ;  and  the  dog  often  showed  less  surprise  than  the 
offending  man.  Wliat  the  dogs  detested  most  of  all  during 
the  blizzard-spells  was  the  drift-snow  filling  their  eyes  until 
they  were  forced  to  stop  and  brush  it  away  frantically  with 
their  paws.  Other  inconveniences  were  the  icy  casing  which 
formed  from  the  thawing  snow  on  their  thick  coats,  and  the 
fact  that  when  they  lay  in  one  position,  especially  on  ice, 
for  any  length  of  time  they  become  frozen  down,  and  only 
freed  themselves  at  the  expense  of  tufts  of  hair.  In  high 
winds,  accompanied  by  a  low  temperature,  they  were  certainly 
very  miserable,  unless  in  some  kind  of  shelter. 

Several  families  were  born  at  this  time,  but  although 
we  did  everything  possible  for  them  they  all  perished,  except 
one ;  the  offspring  of  Gadget.  This  puppy  was  called 
"  Bhzzard."  It  was  housed  for  a  while  in  the  veranda  and, 
later  on,  in  the  Hangar.  Needless  to  say.  Blizzard  was  a 
great  favourite  and  much  in  demand  as  a  pet. 

On  the  night  of  March  7,  Caruso,  who  had  been  in  poor 
condition  for  some  time,  was  found  to  have  a  gaping  wound 
102 


AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

around  the  neck.  It  was  a  clean  cut,  an  inch  deep  and 
almost  a  foot  in  length.  The  cause  was  never  satisfactorily 
explained,  though  a  piece  of  strong  string  embedded  in  the 
wound  evidently  made  the  incision.  Caruso  was  brought 
inside,  and,  whilst  Whetter  administered  chloroform,  McLean 
sewed  up  the  wound.  After  careful  attention  for  some 
days,  it  healed  fairly  well,  but  as  the  dog's  general  health 
was  worse,  it  was  deemed  advisable  to  shoot  him. 

The  outer  shell  of  the  Magnetograph  House  was  nearly 
completed,  affording  a  protection  for  those  who  worked 
on  the  interior  linings.  When  completed,  the  walls  and 
roof  consisted  of  two  coverings  of  tongued  and  grooved 
pine  boards  and  three  layers  of  thick  tarred  paper. 

While  there  still  remained  a  breach  in  the  wall,  Hurley 
repaired  there  with  his  cinematograph  camera  and  took  a 
film  showing  the  clouds  of  drift-snow  whirling  past.  In  those 
days  we  were  not  educated  in  methods  of  progression 
against  heavy  winds  ;  so,  in  order  to  get  Hurley  and  his 
bulky  camera  back  to  the  Hut,  we  formed  a  scrum  on  the 
windward  side  and  with  a  strong  "  forward  "  rush  beat  our 
formidable   opponent. 

On  March  8  the  blizzard  died  away  and  a  good  day 
followed.  All  hands  joined  in  building  a  solid  stone  wall 
around  the  outside  of  the  Magnetograph  House.  This 
piece  of  work,  in  which  thirty  tons  of  rock  were  utilized, 
was  completed  on  the  following  day.  The  wall  reached 
almost  to  the  roof  on  every  side.  The  unprotected  roof 
was  lagged  with  sacks  and  sheep-skins  and,  after  this  had 
been  effected,  the  hut  became  practically  windtight.  The 
external  covering  controlled  the  influx  of  cold  from  the 
penetrating  winds,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  conduction  of 
the  sun's  warmth  in  summer.  Thus  a  steady  temperature 
was  maintained  ;  a  most  desirable  feature  in  a  magnetograph 
house.  Webb  had  the  instruments  set  up  in  a  few  days, 
and  they  were  working  before  the  end  of  the  month. 

After  the  calm  of  March  8,  the  wind  steadily  increased 

103 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

and  became  worse  than  ever.  Madigan,  who  was  in  charge 
of  the  whale-boat,  kept  it  moored  in  the  boat-harbour  under 
shelter  of  the  ice-foot.  An  excursion  was  made  to  the  fish 
traps,  buoyed  half  a  mile  off  shore,  on  February  8,  and  it 
was  found  that  one  had  been  carried  away  in  the  hurricane. 
The  other  was  brought  in  very  much  battered.  That  night 
it  was  decided  at  the  first  opportunity  to  haul  up  the  boat 
and  house  it  for  the  winter.  Alas  !  the  wind  came  down 
again  too  quickly,  increasing  in  force,  with  dense  drift.  It 
was  still  in  full  career  on  the  12th,  when  Madigan  came  in 
with  the  news  that  the  boat  had  disappeared.  It  was  no 
fault  of  the  rope-attachments  for  they  were  securely  made 
and  so  we  were  left  to  conclude  that  a  great  mass  of  ice  had 
broken  away  from  the  overhanging  shelf  and  carried  every- 
thing before  it. 

The  regularity  of  the  high-velocity  winds  was  already 
recognized  as  one  of  the  most  remarkable  features  of  Adelie 
Land.  By  itself  such  wind  would  have  been  bad  enough, 
but,  accompanied  by  dense  volumes  of  drifting  snow,  it 
effectually  put  a  stop  to  most  outdoor  occupations. 

The  roof  and  walls  of  the  veranda  being  covered  with  a 
single  layer  of  tongued  and  grooved  boards,  the  snow  drove 
through  every  chink.  The  cases  outside  were  a  partial  pro- 
tection, but  the  cracks  were  innumerable,  and  in  the  course 
of  twenty-four  hours  the  snow  inside  had  collected  in  deep 
drifts.  This  required  to  be  shovelled  out  each  day  or  the 
veranda  would  have  been  entirely  blocked. 

Much  time  was  spent  endeavouring  to  make  it  drift- 
tight  ;  but  as  the  materials  at  our  disposal  were  very  limited, 
the  result  was  never  absolutely  satisfactory.  The  small 
veranda  serving  as  an  entrance-porch  was  deluged  with  snow 
which  drove  in  past  the  canvas  doorway.  The  only  way 
to  get  over  this  trouble  was  to  shovel  out  the  accumulations 
every  morning.  On  one  occasion,  when  Close  was  night- 
watchman,  the  drift  poured  through  in  such  volume  that 
each  time  he  wished  to  go  outside  it  took  him  half  an  hour 
to  dig  his  way  out.  On  account  of  this  periodic  influx,  the 
104 


THE  METEOROLOGIST  WITH  AN  ICE-MASK 


Uurh'ij 


L-MU 


'"^    -^^^  ,\  :\ 


AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

vestibule  doorway  to  the  workroom  was  moved  to  the  other 
end  of  the  wall,  where  the  invading  snow  had  farther  to 
travel  and  was  consequently  less  obstructive. 

One  advantage  of  the  deposit  of  snow  around  the  Hut  was 
that  all  draughts  were  sealed  off.  Before  this  happened  it 
was  found  very  difficult  to  keep  the  inside  temperature  up 
to  40°  F.  A  temperature  taken  within  the  Hut  varied 
according  to  the  specific  position  in  reference  to  the  walls 
and  stove.  That  shown  by  the  thermometer  attached  to 
the  standard  barometer,  which  was  suspended  near  the 
centre  of  the  room,  was  taken  as  the  "  hut  temperature." 
Near  the  floor  and  walls  it  was  lower,  and  higher,  of  course, 
near  the  stove.  On  one  occasion,  in  the  early  days,  I  remem- 
ber the  "  hut  temperature  "  being  19°  F.,  notwithstanding 
the  heat  from  the  large  range.  Under  these  conditions  the 
writing-ink  and  various  solutions  all  over  the  place  froze, 
and,  when  the  night-watchman  woke  up  the  shivering 
community  he  had  many  clamorous  demands  to  satisfy. 
The  photographer  produced  an  interesting  product  from  the 
dark  room — a  transparent  cast  of  a  developing-dish  in  which 
a  photographic  plate  left  overnight  to  wash  was  firmly 
set. 

We  arranged  to  maintain  an  inside  temperature  of  40° 
F.  ;  when  it  rose  to  50°  F.  means  were  taken  to  reduce  it. 
The  cooking-range,  a  large  one  designed  to  burn  anthracite 
coal,  was  the  general  warming  apparatus.  To  raise  the 
temperature  quickly,  blocks  of  seal  blubber,  of  which  there 
was  always  a  supply  at  hand,  were  used.  The  coal  con- 
sumption averaged  one  hundred  pounds  a  day,  approxi- 
mately ;  this  being  reduced  at  a  later  date  to  seventy-five 
pounds  by  employing  a  special  damper  for  the  chimney. 
The  damper  designed  for  ordinary  climates  allowed  too  much 
draught  to  be  sucked  through  daring  the  high  winds  which 
prevailed  continually. 

The  chimney  was  fitted  with  a  cowl  which  had  to  be 
specially  secured  to  keep  it  in  place.  During  heavy  drifts 
the  cowl  became  choked  with  snow  and  ice,  and  the  Hut 

105 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

would  rapidly  fill  with  smoke  until  some  one,  hurriedly 
donning  burberrys,  rushed  out  with  an  ice-axe  to  chip 
an  outlet  for  the  draught.  The  chimney  was  very  short 
and  securely  stayed,  projecting  through  the  lee  side  of  the 
roof,  where  the  pressure  of  the  wind  was  least  felt. 

The  first  good  display  of  aurora  polaris  was  witnessed 
during  the  evening  of  March  12,  though  no  doubt  there  had 
been  other  exhibitions  obscured  by  the  drift.  As  the  days 
went  by  and  the  equinox  drew  near,  auroral  phenomena 
were  with  few  exceptions  visible  on  clear  evenings.  In  the 
majority  of  cases  they  showed  up  low  in  the  northern  sky. 

In  the  midst  of  a  torment  of  wind,  March  15  came  as  a 
beautiful,  sunny,  almost  calm  day.  I  remarked  in  my  diary 
that  it  was  "typical  Antarctic  weather,"  thinking  of  those 
halcyon  days  which  belong  to  the  climate  of  the  southern 
shores  of  the  Ross  Sea.  In  Adelie  Land,  we  were  destined  to 
find,  it  was  hard  to  number  more  than  a  dozen  or  two  in 
the  year. 

A  fine  day  !  the  psychological  effect  was  remarkable  ; 
pessimism  vanished,  and  we  argued  that  with  the  passing  of 
the  equinox  there  would  be  a  marked  change  for  the  better. 
Not  a  moment  was  lost  :  some  were  employed  in  making 
anchorages  for  the  wireless  masts  ;  others  commenced  to 
construct  a  Hangar  to  house  the  air-tractor  sledge. 

In  building  the  Hangar,  the  western  wall  of  the  Hut  was 
used  for  one  side  ;  the  low  southern  end  and  the  western 
wall  were  constructed  of  full  and  empty  cases,  the  lee  side 
was  closed  with  a  tarpaulin  and  blocks  of  snow  and  over  all 
was  nailed  a  roof  of  thick  timber — part  of  the  air-tractor's 
case.  To  stiffen  the  whole  structure,  a  small  amount  of 
framework,  in  the  form  of  heavy  uprights,  was  set  in  the 
ground.  The  dimensions  inside  were  thirty-four  feet  by 
eleven  feet ;  the  height,  eleven  feet  at  the  northern  and 
six  feet  at  the  southern  end.  As  a  break- wind  a  crescent- 
shaped  wall  of  benzine  cases  was  built  several  yards  to  the 
south.  As  in  the  case  of  the  veranda,  it  was  very  difficult 
106 


■H     ^ 

PV!]f|l 

^^^B|^E» 

"%*._■»  ?■ 

MslV'^^'^L*  W^^^^ 

»«^«^^B|^^ 

.^^ 

%■  ^^^H^^ 

^^  Wi 

ImSL  '   ^^"* 

a'^^^'^^^B 

wM 

Pf^"'^i>;            i 

-f  '^^^^^^^^H 

^B 

'         \  .  _'C^1 

^^'^^i^n 

P 

MMi^' yr-gg^'.^j^te^eiwacyj^giai 

f  V* '^^  >  -r^^^^JH^^ 

i:  JSfo»«r:::^3ai 

,/,'/(>  /,./;»/  MACCOltMIC 


OX  Tiih;  m:.si-  with  Era; 


Adelie  Land  (  }1KK   OF  MACCORMICK  SKUA  GULL  ON  THE   NKST  //»,/^,i/ 


AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

to  make  the  Hangar  impervious  to  drift ;  a  certain  quantity 
of  snow  always  made  its  way  in,  and  was  duly  shovelled  out. 

Seals  had  suddenly  become  very  scarce,  no  doubt  dis- 
gusted with  the  continuous  winds.  Every  one  that  came 
ashore  was  shot  for  food.  Unfortunately,  the  amount  of  meat 
necessary  for  the  dogs  throughout  the  winter  was  so  great 
that  dog-biscuits  had  to  be  used  to  eke  it  out. 

Only  a  few  penguins  remained  by  the  middle  of  March. 
They  were  all  young  ones,  waiting  for  the  completion  of  their 
second  moult  before  taking  to  the  sea.  The  old  feathers 
hung  in  untidy  tufts,  and  the  birds  were  often  in  a  wretched 
plight  owing  to  the  wind  and  drift-snow.  Many  were 
added  to  the  bleaching  carcases  which  fill  the  crevices 
'  or  lie  in  heaps  on  ancient  rookeries  among  the  rocky  ridges. 
None  were  free  from  the  encumbrance  of  hard  cakes  of 
snow  which  often  covered  their  eyes  or  dangled  in  pendent 
icicles  from  their  bodies.     The  result  was  very  ludicrous. 

Hurley  obtained  some  excellent  photographs  of  the  seals 
and  penguins,  as  of  all  other  subjects.  So  good  were  they  that 
most  of  us  withdrew  from  competition.  His  enthusiasm  and 
resourcefulness  knew  no  bounds.  Occasional  days,  during  which 
cameras  that  had  been  maltreated  by  the  wind  were  patched 
up,  were  now  looked  upon  as  inevitable.  One  day,  when  Webb 
and  Hurley  were  both  holding  on  to  the  cinematograph  camera, 
they  were  blown  away,  with  sundry  damages  all  around. 
It  was  later  in  the  year  when  Hurley  with  his  whole-plate 
camera  broke  through  the  sea-ice — a  sad  affair  for  the  camera. 

The  good  conditions  on  the  15th  lasted  only  a  few  hours, 
and  back  came  the  enemy  as  bad  as  ever.  On  the  18th  the 
wind  was  only  thirty  miles  per  hour,  giving  us  an  opportunity 
of  continuing  the  buildings  outside.  It  was  only  by  making 
the  most  of  every  odd  hour  when  the  weather  was  tolerable 
that  our  outdoor  enterprises  made  any  headway.  Some- 
times when  it  was  too  windy  for  building  we  were  able  to 
improve  our  knowledge  of  the  neighbourhood. 

A  glance  at  Stillwell's  map  (page  93)  is  instructive  as  to  the 

107 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

extent  and  character  of  the  rocky  area.  It  is  devoid  of  any 
forms  of  vegetation  sufficiently  prominent  to  meet  the  casual 
eye.  Soil  is  lacking,  for  all  light  materials  and  even  gravel  are 
carried  away  by  the  winds.  The  bare  rock  rises  up  into 
miniature  ridges,  separated  by  valleys  largely  occupied  by 
ice-slabs  and  lakelets.  Snow  fills  all  the  crevices  and  tails 
away  in  sloping  ramps  on  the  lee  side  of  every  obstacle.  In 
midsummer  a  good  deal  thaws,  and,  re-freezing,  is  converted 
into  ice.  The  highest  point  of  the  rock  is  one  hundred  and 
forty  feet.  The  seaward  margin  is  deeply  indented,  and  the 
islets  off  shore  tell  of  a  continuation  of  the  rugged,  rocky 
surface  below  the  sea.  On  the  northern  faces  of  the  ridges, 
fronting  the  ice-foot,  large,  yellowish  patches  mark  the  sites 
of  penguin  rookeries.  These  are  formed  by  a  superficial 
deposit  of  guano  which  never  becomes  thick,  for  it  blows 
away  as  fast  as  it  accumulates.  Standing  on  the  shore,  one 
can  see  kelp  growing  amongst  the  rocks  even  in  the  shallowest 
spots,  below  low- water  level. 

To  the  south,  the  rocks  are  overridden  by  the  inland  ice 
which  bears  down  upon  and  overwhelms  them.  The  ice-sheet 
shows  a  definite  basal  moraine,  which  means  that  the  lowest 
stratum,  about  forty  feet  in  thickness,  is  charged  with  stones 
and  earthy  matter.  Above  this  stratum  the  ice  is  free  from 
foreign  matter  and  rises  steeply  to  several  hundred  feet,  after 
which  the  ascending  gradient  is  reduced. 

The  continental  glacier  moves  down  to  the  sea,  regularly 
but  slowly ;  the  rate  of  movement  of  some  portions  of 
the  adjacent  coastal  ice  cliffs  was  found  to  be  one  hundred, 
feet  per  annum.  The  rocky  promontory  at  Winter  Quarters, 
acting  as  an  obstacle,  reduces  the  motion  of  the  ice  to  an 
annual  rate,  measured  in  inches  only.  Perhaps  the  condi- 
tions now  prevailing  are  those  of  a  comparative  "drought," 
for  there  is  clear  evidence  that  our  small  promontory  was 
at  one  time  completely  enveloped.  In  a  broad  way  this  is 
illustrated  by  the  topography,  but  the  final  proof  came 
when  Stillwell  and  others  discovered  rock-faces  polished  and 
grooved  by  the  ice. 
108 


CTj 

i^ 

^ 

fi; 

a- 
< 

1 

o 

^o 

(O 

(JH 

c 

5^ 

CTj 

5 

C) 

J 

1 

I 

a 

C) 

~ti 

Ui 

8 

o 

o 

U 

« 

^Q 

l-N 

^^ 

w 

tf 

o 

K 

I 

C-, 

AUTUMN  PROSPECTS 

Whatever  "  ice-floods  "  there  may  have  been  in  the  past, 
the  position  of  the  margin  of  the  glacier  must  have  remained 
for  a  long  period  in  its  present  situation.  The  evidence  for 
this  is  found  in  the  presence  of  a  continuous,  terminal 
moraine,  at  or  just  in  advance  of  the  present  ice-front. 
This  moraine,  an  accumulation  of  stones  of  all  kinds  brought 
to  their  present  resting-place  by  the  ice-sheet,  was  in 
itself  a  veritable  museum.  Rocks,  showing  every  variety 
in  colour  and  form,  were  assembled,  transported  from  far 
and  wide  over  the  great  expanse  of  the  continent. 


i° 

■<9 

fJr 

/ 

/c; 

■s^ 

^1 

^o 

^'';>'' 

JJC                                                      ,  ,_ 

rvy/^    1 

2000 

c 

4f 

<^^^^^__^r^^^^^^^^ 

m 

«oo 

§ 

-'i     ^^ 

^_— rr^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

W/ 

lOOO 

.   k 

C^^/ 

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ 

^p 

100 

p^% 

^^m^y 

^^^^^^^mM^. 

'^, 

0 

1             a 

3436789                 10 

u 

u 

Horizontal    Scale  in  Miles 

Vertical    Scale  in  Feet  (Exaggerated  stimes) 

...,.«„..  1 

A  section  of  the  coastal  slope  of  the  Continental  Ice  Sheet  inland  from  Winter 
Quarters,  Adelie  Land 


Still  well  found  these  moraines  a  "  happy  hunting-ground" 
for  the  geologist.  His  plane-table  survey  and  rock  collec- 
tions are  practical  evidence  of  work  carried  out  in  weather 
which  made  it  seldom  short  of  an  ordeal. 

The  story  of  the  buried  land  to  the  south  is  in  large 
measure  revealed  in  the  samples  brought  by  the  ice  and 
so  conveniently  dumped.  Let  us  swiftly  review  the  opera- 
tions leading  to  the  deposition  of  this  natural  museum. 

As  the  ice  of  the  hinterland  moves  forward,  it  plucks 
fragments  from  the  rocky  floor.  Secure  in  its  grip,  these  are 
used  as  graving-tools  to  erode  its  bed.  Throwing  its  whole 
weight  upon  them  it  grinds  and  scratches,  pulverizes  and 
grooves.  The  rocky  basement  is  gradually  reduced  in  level, 
especially  the  softer  regions.  The  tools  are  faceted, 
polished  and  furrowed,  for  ever  moving  onwards.     Finally, 

109 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  rock-powder  or  "  rock-flour,"  as  it  is  termed,  and  the 
boulders,  thenceforth  known  as  "erratics,"  arrive  at  the 
terminal  ice-face.  Here,  the  melting  due  to  the  sun's 
heat  keeps  pace  with  the  "on-thrust"  and  some  of  the 
erratics  may  remain  stationary,  or  else,  floating  in  the  sea, 
a  berg  laden  with  boulders  breaks  off  and  deposits  its  load 
in  the  depths  of  the  ocean.  Each  summer  the  ice-face 
above  the  rocks  at  Winter  Quarters  thawed  back  a  short 
distance  and  the  water  ran  away  in  rivulets,  milky-white 
on  account  of  the  "rock-flour"  in  suspension.  The  pebbles 
and  boulders  too  heavy  to  be  washed  away  remained  behind 
to  form  the  moraine. 

The  "  erratics  "  comprised  a  great  variety  of  meta- 
morphic  and  igneous  rocks,  and,  on  a  more  limited  scale, 
sedimentary  types.  Amongst  the  latter  were  sandstones, 
slates,  shales  and  limestones. 

Apart  from  the  moraines,  the  rock  exposed  in  situ  was 
mainly  a  uniform  type  of  gneiss,  crumpled  and  folded, 
showing  all  the  signs  of  great  antiquity — pre-Cambrian, 
in  the  geological  phrase.  Relieving  the  grey  sheen  of  the 
gneiss  were  dark  bands  of  schist  which  tracked  about  in  an 
irregular  manner.  Sporadic  quartz  veins  here  and  there 
showed  a  light  tint.  They  were  specially  interesting,  for 
they  carried  some  less  common  minerals  such  as  beryl, 
tourmaline,  garnet,  coarse  mica  and  ores  of  iron,  copper 
and  molybdenum.  The  ores  were  present  in  small  quantities, 
but  gave  promise  of  larger  bodies  in  the  vicinity  and  indi- 
cated the  probability  of  mineral  wealth  beneath  the  con- 
tinental ice-cap. 


110 


.1, /.'/■/,•  L,u„/  TIIIO    LOW- 


ER  MOKAIXE,  COMPOSE!*  OF  WATER-WOltX  Ilich 

BOULIJEKS.  CAPE  DEXISON 


AdelU' Land  AN  ICE-POLISHED  SURFACE.  CAPE   J)ENISON 


Hurley 


CHAPTER  VII 
THE  BLIZZARD 

THE  equinox  arrived,  and  the  only  indication  of 
settled  weather  was  a  more  marked  regularity  in 
the  winds.  Nothing  like  it  had  been  reported  from 
any  part  of  the  world.  Any  trace  of  elation  we  may  have 
felt  at  this  meteorological  discovery  could  not  compensate 
for  the  ever-present  discomforts  of  life.  Day  after  day  the 
wind  fluctuated  between  a  gale  and  a  hurricane.  Over- 
cast skies  of  heavy  nimbus  cloud  were  the  rule  and  the  air 
was  continually  charged  with  drifting  snow. 

Lulls  of  a  singular  nature  occasionally  relieved  the 
monotony.  During  these  visitations  the  sequence  of  events 
could  almost  be  predicted ;  indeed,  they  would  often  occur 
at  the  same  time  on  several  succeeding  days. 

On  March  19  the  first  well-marked  lull  intervened  at 
the  height  of  a  gale.  On  that  day  the  wind,  which  had  been 
blowing  with  great  force  during  the  morning,  commenced 
to  subside  rapidly  just  after  noon.  Towards  evening, 
the  air  about  the  Hut  was  quite  still  except  for  gusts  from 
the  north  and  rather  frequent  "  whirlies." 

This  was  the  name  adopted  for  whirlwinds  of  a  few 
yards  to  a  hundred  yards  or  more  in  diameter  which  came 
to  be  regarded  as  peculiar  to  the  country.  Similar  disturb- 
ances have  been  observed  in  every  part  of  the  world, 
but  seldom  possessed  of  the  same  violence  and  regularity 
as  is  the  case  in  Adelie  Land. 

The  whirlies  tracked  about  in  a  most  irregular  manner 
and  woe  betide  any  light  object  which  came  in  their  path. 
The  velocity  of  the  wind  in  the  rotating  column  being  very 

111 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

great,  a  corresponding  lifting  power  was  imparted  to  it. 
As  an  illustration  of  this  force,  it  may  be  mentioned  that  the 
lid  of  the  air-tractor  case  had  been  left  lying  on  the  snow 
near  the  Hut.  It  weighed  more  than  three  hundredweights, 
yet  it  was  whisked  into  the  air  one  morning  and  dropped 
fifty  yards  away  in  a  north-easterly  direction.  An  hour 
afterwards  it  was  picked  up  again  and  returned  near  its 
original  position,  this  time  striking  the  rocks  with  such  force 
that  part  of  it  was  shivered  to  pieces.  Webb  and  Stillwell 
watched  the  last  proceeding  at  a  respectful  distance. 

Again  ,the  radius  of  activity  of  these  whirlies  was  strictly 
limited;  objects  directly  in  their  path  only  being  disturbed. 
For  instance,  Laseron  one  day  was  skinning  at  one  end  of 
a  seal  and  remained  in  perfect  calm,  while  McLean,  at  the 
other  extremity,  was  on  the  edge  of  a  furious  vortex. 

Travelling  over  the  sea  the  whirlies  displayed  fresh 
capabilities.  Columns  of  brash-ice,  frozen  spray  and 
water-vapour  were  frequently  seen  lifted  to  heights  of  from 
two  hundred  to  four  hundred  feet,  simulating  water  spouts. 

Reverting  to  the  afternoon  of  March  19.  Beyond  the 
strange  stillness  of  the  immediate  vicinity,  broken  occasionally 
by  the  tumult  of  a  passing,  wandering  whirly,  an  incessant, 
seething  roar  could  be  heard.  One  could  not  be  certain 
from  whence  it  came,  but  it  seemed  to  proceed  either  from 
the  south  or  overhead.  Away  on  the  icy  promontories  to  the 
east  and  west,  where  the  slopes  were  visible,  mounting  to 
an  altitude  of  several  thousand  feet,  clouds  of  drift-snow 
blotted  out  the  details  of  the  surface  above  a  level  of  about 
six  hundred  feet.  It  certainly  appeared  as  if  the  gale, 
for  some  reason,  had  lifted  and  was  still  raging  overhead. 
At  7.30  P.M.  the  sound  we  had  heard,  like  the  distant 
lashing  of  ocean  waves,  became  louder.  Soon  gusts  swept 
the  tops  of  the  rocky  ridges,  gradually  descending  to  throw 
up  the  snow  at  a  lower  level.  Then  a  volley  raked  the  Hut, 
and  within  a  few  minutes  we  were  once  more  enveloped  in  a 
sea  of  drifting  snow,  and  the  wind  blew  stronger  than  ever. 

The  duration  of  the  lulls  was  ordinarily  from  a  few 
112 


THE  BLIZZARD 

minutes  to  several  hours  ;  that  of  March  19  was  longer  than 
usual.  In  the  course  of  time,  after  repeated  observations, 
much  light  was  thrown  on  this  phenomenon.  On  one 
occasion,  a  party  ascending  the  ice  slopes  to  the  south  met 
the  wind  blowing  at  an  elevation  of  four  hundred  feet. 
At  the  same  time  snow  could  be  seen  pouring  over  the 
"Barrier  "  to  the  west  of  the  Winter  Quarters,  and  across  a 
foaming  turmoil  of  water.  This  was  evidently  the  main  cause 
of  the  seething  roar,  but  it  was  mingled  with  an  undernote 
of  deeper  tone  from  the  upland  plateau — ^like  the  wind  in  a 
million  tree-tops. 

In  the  early  spring,  while  we  were  transporting  provisions  to 
the  south,  frequent  journeys  were  made  to  higher  elevations. 
It  was  then  established  that  even  when  whole  days  of  calm 
prevailed  at  the  Hut,  the  wind  almost  without  exception 
blew  above  a  level  of  one  thousand  feet.  On  such  occasions 
it  appeared  that  the  gale  was  impelled  to  blow  straight 
out  from  the  plateau  slopes  over  a  lower  stratum  of  dead-air. 
An  explanation  was  thereby  afforded  of  the  movement  of 
condensation  clouds  which  appeared  in  the  zenith  at  these 
times.  A  formation  of  delicate,  gauzy  clouds  developed 
at  a  low  altitude,  apparently  in  still  air,  but  doubtless  at  the 
base  of  a  hurricane  stratum.  Whirling  round  rapidly  in 
eddying  flocculi,  they  quickly  tailed  away  to  the  north, 
evaporating  and  disappearing. 

The  auditory  sense  was  strangely  affected  by  these  lulls. 
The  contrast  was  so  severe  when  the  racking  gusts  of  an 
abating  wind  suddenly  gave  way  to  intense,  eerie  silence, 
that  the  habitual  droning  of  many  weeks  would  still  rever- 
berate in  the  ears.  At  night  one  would  involuntarily 
wake  up  if  the  wind  died  away,  and  be  loth  to  sleep  "  for  the 
hunger  of  a  sound."  In  the  open  air  the  stillness  conveyed 
to  the  brain  an  impression  of  audibility,  interpreted  as  a 
vibratory  murmur. 

During  one  hour  on  March  22  it  blew  eighty-six  miles. 

On  the  morning  of   that   day  there   was   not   much   snow 

in  the  air  and  the  raging  sea  was  a  fearful  sight.     Even 

VOL.  I  H  113 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  nearest  of  the  islands,  only  half  a  mile  off  the 
land,  was  partially  hidden  in  the  clouds  of  spray.  What 
an  impossible  coast  this  would  be  for  the  wintering  of  a 
ship  ! 

Everybody  knows  that  the  pressure  exerted  by  a  wind 
against  an  object  in  its  path  mounts  up  in  much  greater 
proportion  than  the  velocity  of  the  wind.  Thus  may  be 
realized  the  stupendous  force  of  the  winds  of  Adelie  Land 
in  comparison  with  those  of  half  the  velocity  which  fall 
within  one's  ordinary  experience.  As  this  subject  was  ever 
before  us,  the  following  figures  quoted  from  a  work  of 
reference  will  be  instructive.  The  classification  of  winds, 
here  stated,  is  that  known  as  the  "  Beaufort  scale."  The 
corresponding  velocities  in  each  case  are  those  measured 
by  the  "Robinson  patent"  anemometer;  our  instrument 
being  of  a  similar  pattern. 


Velocities 

Pressures 

Beaufort  scale. 

in  miles 
per 

in  lbs.  per 
square  foot 

Apparent  efEect. 

hour. 

of  area. 

0 

Calm 

2 

0-02 

May  cause  smoke  to  move 
from  the  vertical 

1 

Light  air 

4 

0-06 

Moves  the  leaves  of  trees 

2 

Light  breeze 

7 

0-19 

Moves  small  branches  of 

3 

Gentle  breeze 

10 

0-37 

trees  and  blows  up  dust 

4 

Moderate  breeze 

14 

0-67 

5 

Fresh  breeze 

19 

M6 

Good  saihng  breeze  and 

6 

Strong  breeze 

25 

1-90 

makes  white  caps 

7 

Moderate  gale 

31 

2-81 

Sways  trees  and  breaks 

8 

Fresh  gale 

37 

3-87 

small  branches 

9 

Strong  gale 

44 

5-27 

Dangerous    for    saiHng- 

10 

Whole  gale 

53 

7-40 

vessels 

11 

Storm 

64 

10-40 

Prostrates  exposed  trees 

12 

Hurricane 

77 

14-40 

and  frail  houses 

Beyond  the  limits  of  this  scale,  the  pressures  exerted 
rise  very  rapidly.  A  wind  recorded  as  blowing  at  the  rate 
of  a  hundred  miles  per  hour  exerts  a  pressure  of  about 
twenty-three  pounds  per  square  foot  of  surface  exposed  to  it. 
114 


f 


WALKIXG  AGAIXST  A  STRONG  WIND 


Hurley 


AdclU-  Land 


Hudeu 


PICKING  ICE  FOR  DOMESTIC  PURPOSES  IN  A  HURRICANE  WIND.     NOTE  THE 
HIGH  ANGLE  AT  WHICH  WEBB  IS  LEANING  ON  THE  WIND 


THE  BLIZZARD 

Wind  above  eighty  miles  per  hour  is  stated  to  "  prostrate 
everything." 

The  mileages  registered  by  our  anemometer  were  the 
mean  for  a  whole  hour,  neglecting  individual  gusts,  whose 
velocity  much  exceeded  the  average  and  which  were  always 
the  potent  factors  in  destructive  work. 

Obviously  the  greatest  care  had  to  be  taken  to  secure 
everything.  Still,  articles  of  value  were  occasionally  missed. 
They  were  usually  recovered,  caught  in  crevices  of  rock  or 
amongst  the  broken  ice.  Northward  from  the  Hut  there  was 
a  trail  of  miscellaneous  objects  scattered  among  the  hum- 
mocks and  pressure-ridges  out  towards  Penguin  Hill  on  the 
eastern  side  of  the  boat  harbour  :  tins  of  all  kinds  and  sizes, 
timber  in  small  scraps,  cases  and  boards,  paper,  ashes,  dirt, 
worn-out  finnesko,  ragged  mitts  and  all  the  other  details 
of  a  rubbish  heap.  One  of  the  losses  was  a  heavy  case  which 
formed  the  packing  of  part  of  the  magnetometer.  Weighted 
down  by  stones  this  had  stood  for  a  long  time  in  what  was 
regarded  as  a  safe  place.  One  morning  it  was  discovered 
to  be  missing.  It  was  surmised  that  a  hurricane  had  started 
it  on  an  ocean  voyage  during  the  previous  day.  Boxes  in 
which  Whetter  used  to  carry  ice  for  domestic  requirements 
were  as  a  rule  short-lived.  His  problem  was  to  fill  the  boxes 
without  losing  hold  of  them,  and  the  wind  often  gained  the 
ascendancy  before  a  sufficient  ballast  had  been  added. 
We  sometimes  wondered  whether  any  of  the  flotsam  thus 
cast  upon  the  waters  ever  reached  the  civilized  world. 

Whatever  has  been  said  relative  to  the  wind-pressure 
exerted  on  inanimate  objects,  the  same  applied,  with  even 
more  point,  to  our  persons  ;  so  that  progression  in  a  hurri- 
cane became  a  fine  art.  The  first  difficulty  to  be  encountered 
was  a  smooth,  slippery  surface  offering  no  grip  for  the  feet. 
Stepping  out  of  the  shelter  of  the  Hut,  one  was  apt  to  be 
immediately  hurled  at  full  length  down  wind.  No  amount 
of  exertion  was  of  any  avail  unless  a  firm  foothold  had  been 
secured.  The  strongest  man,  stepping  on  to  ice  or  hard  snow 
in  plain  leather  or  fur  boots,  would  start  sliding  away  with 

115 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

gradually  increasing  velocity  ;  in  the  space  of  a  few  seconds, 
or  earlier,  exchanging  the  vertical  for  the  horizontal  position. 
He  would  then  either  stop  suddenly  against  a  jutting  point 
of  ice,  or  glide  along  for  twenty  or  thirty  yards  till  he 
reached  a  patch  of  rocks  or  some  rough  sastrugi. 

Of  course  we  soon  learned  never  to  go  about  without 
crampons  on  the  feet.  Many  experiments  in  the  manu- 
facture of  crampons  were  tried  with  the  limited  materials  at 
our  disposal.  Those  designed  for  normal  Antarctic  conditions 
had  been  found  unserviceable.  A  few  detachable  pairs  made 
of  wrought  iron  with  spikes  about  one  and  a  half  inches  in 
length,  purchased  in  Switzerland,  gave  a  secure  foothold. 
Some  of  the  men  covered  the  soles  of  their  boots  with  long, 
bristling  spikes  and  these  served  their  purpose  well.  Ice- 
nails,  screwed  into  the  soles  without  being  riveted  on  plates, 
were  liable  to  tear  out  when  put  to  a  severe  test,  besides 
being  too  short.  Spikes  of  less  than  an  inch  in  length  were 
inadequate  in  hurricanes.  Nothing  devised  by  us  gave  the 
grip  of  the  Swiss  crampons,  but,  to  affix  them,  one  had  to 
wear  leather  boots,  which,  though  padded  to  increase  their 
warmth,  had  to  be  tightly  bound  by  lashings  compressing  the 
feet  and  increasing  the  liability  to  frost-bite. 

Shod  with  good  spikes,  in  a  steady  wind,  one  had  only  to 
push  hard  to  keep  a  sure  footing.  It  would  not  be  true  to 
say  "  to  keep  erect,"  for  equilibrium  was  maintained  by  leaning 
against  the  wind.  In  course  of  time,  those  whose  duties 
habitually  took  them  out  of  doors  became  thorough  masters 
of  the  art  of  walking  in  hurricanes — an  accomplishment 
comparable  to  skating  or  skiing.  Ensconced  in  the  lee  of  a 
substantial  break-wind,  one  could  leisurely  observe  the 
unnatural  appearance  of  others  walking  about,  apparently 
in  imminent  peril  of  falling  on  their  faces. 

Experiments  were  tried  in  the  steady  winds  ;  firmly 
planting  the  feet  on  the  ground,  keeping  the  body  rigid  and 
leaning  over  on  the  invisible  support.  This  "  lying  on  the 
wind,"  at  equilibrium,  was  a  unique  experience.  As  a  rule 
the  velocity  remained  uniform ;  when  it  fluctuated  in  a  series 
116 


f400NOTVU9WVZ  'JliaJMOiM 


tinOH     U3d     S31IM 


i 

— ^ 

ii 

2 

I    ? 

1 

CO 

i 

;    ? 

i 

1 

;     1 

« 

b                S 

i          1 

i ' 

1 

: 

X 

1- 

1 

'■    : 

1          <- 
2 

5 

[ 

i 

1 

-8 

:l    ^ 

2 

^  '^ 

1 

1 

li    I 

• 

i         1 

2  - 

3  i 

-s 

11    • 

B 

E 

I 

0) 

li    ' 

J         P 

117 


>  £   2      o 

.  1-5    3  OJ 


I  fa  £5  S5 


118 


THE  BLIZZARD 

of  gusts,  all  our  experience  was  likely  to  fail,  for  no  sooner 
had  the  correct  angle  for  the  maximum  velocity  been  assumed 
than  a  lull  intervened — with  the  obvious  result. 

Before  the  art  of  "hurricane-walking"  was  learnt,  and 
in  the  primitive  days  of  ice-nails  and  finnesko,  progression 
in  high  winds  degenerated  into  crawling  on  hands  and  knees. 
Many  of  the  more  conservative  persisted  in  this  method, 
and,  as  a  compensation,  became  the  first  exponents  of  the 
popular  art  of  "board-sliding."  A  small  piece  of  board,  a 
wide  ice  flat  and  a  hurricane  were  the  three  essentials  for  this 
new  sport. 

Wind  alone  would  not  have  been  so  bad  ;  drift  snow 
accompanied  it  in  overwhelming  amount.  In  the  autumn 
overcast  weather  with  heavy  falls  of  snow  prevailed,  with  the 
result  that  the  air  for  several  months  was  seldom  free  from 
drift.  Indeed,  during  that  time,  there  were  not  many  days 
when  objects  a  hundred  yards  away  could  be  seen  distinctly. 
Whatever  else  happened,  the  wind  never  abated,  and  so,  even 
when  the  snow  had  ceased  falling  and  the  sky  was  clear,  the 
drift  continued  until  all  the  loose  accumulations  on  the  hinter- 
land, for  hundreds  of  miles  back,  had  been  swept  out  to  sea. 
Day  after  day  deluges  of  drift  streamed  past  the  Hut,  at 
times  so  dense  as  to  obscure  objects  three  feet  away,  until 
it  seemed  as  if  the  atmosphere  were  almost  solid  snow. 

Picture  drift  so  dense  that  daylight  comes  through  dully, 
though,  maybe,  the  sun  shines  in  a  cloudless  sky ;  the  drift  is 
hurled,  screaming  through  space  at  a  hundred  miles  an  hour, 
and  the  temperature  is  below  zero,  Fahrenheit.*  You  have 
then  the  bare,  rough  facts  concerning  the  worst  blizzards  of 
Adelie  Land.     The  actual  experience  of  them  is  another  thing. 

Shroud   the  infuriated   elements  in  the   darkness   of  a 

*  Temperatures  as  low  as  -28°  F.  (60°  below  freezing-point)  were 
experienced  in  hurricane  winds,  which  blew  at  a  velocity  occasionally 
exceeding  one  hundred  miles  per  hour.  Still  air  and  low  temperatures,  or 
high  winds  and  moderate  temperatures,  are  well  enough ;  but  the  combination 
of  high  winds  and  low  temperatures  is  difficult  to  bear. 

119 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

polar  night,  and  the  bhzzard  is  presented  in  a  severer  aspect. 
A  plunge  into  the  writhing  storm-whirl  stamps  upon  the 
senses  an  indelible  and  awful  impression  seldom  equalled  in 
the  whole  gamut  of  natural  experience.  The  world  a  void, 
grisly,  fierce  and  appalling.  We  stumble  and  struggle 
through  the  Stygian  gloom;  the  merciless  blast — an  incubus 
of  vengeance — stabs,  buffets  and  freezes  ;  the  stinging  drift 
blinds  and  chokes.     In  a  ruthless  grip  we  realize  that  we 

are 

poor  windle straws 
On  the  great,  sullen,  roaring  pool  of  Time. 

It  may  well  be  imagined  that  none  of  us  went  out  on  these 
occasions  for  the  pleasure  of  it.  The  scientific  work  required 
all  too  frequent  journeys  to  the  instruments  at  a  distance  from 
the  Hut,  and,  in  addition,  supplies  of  ice  and  stores  had  to 
be  brought  in,  while  the  dogs  needed  constant  attention. 

Every  morning,  Madigan  visited  all  the  meteorological 
instruments  and  changed  the  daily  charts  ;  at  times  having 
to  feel  his  way  from  one  place  to  the  other.  Attending  to  the 
exposed  instruments  in  a  high  wind  with  low  temperature 
was  bad  enough,  but  with  suffocating  drift  difficulties  were 
increased  tenfold. 

Around  the  Hut  there  was  a  small  fraternity  who  chose 
the  outside  veranda  as  a  rendezvous.  Here  the  latest 
gossip  was  exchanged,  and  the  weather  invariably  discussed 
in  forcible  terms.  There  was  Whetter,  who  replenished  the 
water-supply  from  the  unfailing  fountain-head  of  the  glacier. 
For  cooking,  washing  clothes  and  for  photographic  and 
other  purposes,  eighteen  men  consumed  a  good  deal  of  water, 
and,  to  keep  up  with  the  demand,  Whetter  piled  up  many 
hardly-won  boxes  of  ice  in  the  veranda.  Close  unearthed 
coal  briquettes  from  the  heap  outside,  shovelled  tons  of  snow 
from  the  veranda  and  made  himself  useful  and  amiable  to 
every  one.  Murphy,  our  stand-by  in  small  talk,  travel, 
history,  literature  and  what  not,  was  the  versatile  storeman. 
The  store  in  the  veranda  was  continually  invaded  by  similar 
snow  to  that  which  covered  the  provision  boxes  outside. 
120 


THE  BLIZZARD 

To  keep  the  veranda  cleared,  renew  the  supplies  and  satisfy 
the  demands  of  the  kitchen  required  no  other  than  Murphy. 
Ninnis  and  Mertz  completed  the  "  Veranda  Club,"  to  which 
honorary  members  from  within  the  Hut  were  constantly 
being  added. 

The  meteorological  instruments,  carefully  nursed  and 
housed  though  they  were,  were  bound  to  suffer  in  such  a 
climate.  Correll,  who  was  well  fitted  out  with  a  lathe  and 
all  the  requirements  for  instrument- making,  attended  to 
repairs,  doing  splendid  service.  The  anemometer  gave 
the  greatest  trouble,  and,  before  Correll  had  finished  with 
it,  most  of  the  working  parts  had  been  replaced  in  stronger 
metal. 

When  the  recording  sheets  of  the  instruments  had  been 
successfully  changed,  the  meteorologist  packed  them  in  a 
leather  bag,  strapped  on  his  shoulders,  so  that  they  would 
not  be  lost  on  the  way  to  the  Hut.  As  soon  as  he  arrived 
indoors  the  bag  was  opened  and  emptied  ;  the  papers  being 
picked  out  from  a  small  heap  of  snow. 

It  was  a  fortunate  thing  that  no  one  was  lost  through 
failing  to  discover  the  Hut  during  the  denser  drifts.  Hodge- 
man on  one  occasion  caused  every  one  a  good  deal  of  anxiety. 
Among  other  things,  he  regularly  assisted  Madigan  by 
relieving  him  of  outdoor  duties  on  the  day  after  his  night- 
watch,  when  the  chief  meteorologist  was  due  for  a  "  watch 
below."  It  was  in  the  early  autumn — few  of  us,  then,  were 
adepts  at  finding  our  way  by  instinct — ^that  Hodgeman  and 
Madigan  set  out,  one  morning,  for  the  anemometer.  Leaving 
the  door  of  the  Hut,  they  lost  sight  of  each  other  at  once, 
but  anticipated  meeting  at  the  instrument.  Madigan  reached 
his  destination,  changed  the  records,  waited  for  a  while  and 
then  returned,  expecting  to  see  his  companion  at  the  Hut. 
He  did  not  appear,  so,  after  a  reasonable  interval,  search- 
parties  set  off  in  different  directions. 

The  wind  was  blowing  at  eighty  miles  per  hour,  making  it 
tedious  work  groping  about  and  hallooing  in  the  drift.  The 
sea  was  close  at  hand  and  we  realized  that,  as  the  wind  was 

121 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

directly  off  shore,  a  man  without  crampons  was  in  a  dangerous 
situation.  Two  men,  therefore,  roped  together  and  carefully 
searched  round  the  head  of  the  boat  harbour  ;  one  anchoring 
himself  with  an  ice-axe,  whilst  the  other,  at  the  end  of  the 
rope,  worked  along  the  edge  of  the  sea.  Meanwhile  Hodge- 
man returned  to  the  Hut,  unaided,  having  spent  a  very 
unpleasant  two  hours  struggling  from  one  landmark  t 
another,  his  outer  garments  filled  with  snow. 

The  fact  that  the  wind  came  steadily  from  the  same 
direction  made  it  possible  to  steer,  otherwise  outdoor  opera- 
tions would  not  have  been  conducted  so  successfully.  For 
instance,  Webb,  who  visited  the  Magnetograph  House,  a 
quarter  of  a  mile  distant,  at  least  once  a  day,  made  his  way 
between  various  "beacons"  by  preserving  a  definite  bearing 
on  the  wind.  His  journeys  were  rendered  all  the  more  difficult 
because  they  were  frequently  undertaken  at  night. 

In  struggling  along  through  very  dense  drifts  one  would  be 
inclined  to  think  that  the  presence  of  the  sun  was  a  matter 
of  small  concern.  As  a  matter  of  fact  there  was,  during  the 
day,  a  good  deal  of  reflected  white  light  and  a  dark  object 
looms  up  within  a  yard  or  two.  In  darkness  there  was  nothing 
to  recognize.  So  Webb  would  often  run  by  dead  reckoning 
on  to  the  roof  of  the  Hut,  and  would  then  feel  his  way  round 
it  till  he  caught  the  glimmer  of  a  hurricane  lantern  coming 
through  the  veranda  entrance. 

I  had  always  the  greatest  admiration  for  the  unfailing 
manner  in  which  those  responsible  for  the  tidal,  magnetic 
and  meteorological  work  carried  out  their  duties. 

As  a  measure  of  the  enormous  amount  of  drift,  we  set 
about  constructing  a  gauge,  which,  it  was  hoped,  would  give 
us  a  rough  estimate  of  the  quantity  passing  the  Hut  in  a 
year.  Hannam,  following  the  approved  design,  produced  a 
very  satisfactory  contrivance.  It  consisted  of  a  large  drift- 
tight  box,  fitted  on  the  windward  side  with  a  long  metal  cone, 
tapering  to  an  aperture  three-quarters  of  an  inch  in  diameter. 
The  drift-laden  air  entered  the  aperture,  its  speed  was  checked 
on  entering  the  capacious  body  of  the  gauge  and  consequently 
122 


^.-Ji 


^ 


Adelie  Land         STII.LWELL  COLLECTING  GEOLOGICAL  SPECIMENS  IX  THE  WIXD 


AJ elk  Land  IN   IHE  BLIZZAKO:    GETTING  ICE  FOR  DOMESTIC  PURPOSES 

FROM  THE   GLACIER  ADJACENT  TO  THE  HUT 


Hudey 


THE  BLIZZARD 

the  snow  fell  to  the  bottom  of  the  box  and  the  air  passed  out 
behind  through  a  trap-door.  The  catch  was  taken  out 
periodically  through  a  bolted  lid,  the  snow  was  melted,  the 
resulting  water  measured  and  its  weight  calculated. 

In  thick  drifts,  one's  face  inside  the  funnel  of  the  bur- 
berry helmet  became  rapidly  packed  with  snow,  which,  by 
the  warmth  of  the  skin  and  breath,  was  changed  into  a  mask 
of  ice.     This  adhered  firmly  to  the  rim  of  the  helmet  and  to 


THE  DRIFT  GAUGE 


the  beard  and  face.  The  mask  became  so  complete  that  one 
had  to  clear  away  obstructions  continually  from  the  eyes. 
It  was  not  easy  to  remove  the  casing  of  ice,  outside  in  the 
wind,  because  this  could  only  be  done  slowly,  with  bare 
fingers  exposed.  An  experienced  man,  once  inside  the  Hut, 
would  first  see  that  the  ice  was  broken  along  the  rim  of 
the  helmet ;  otherwise,  when  it  came  to  be  hastily  dragged 
off,  the  hairs  of  the  beard  would  follow  as  well.  As  soon 
as  the  helmet  was  off  the  head,  the  icicles  hanging  on  the 
beard  and  glazing  the  eyelashes  were  gradually  thawed  by 
the  fingers  and  removed.  The  above  treatment  was  learned 
by  experience. 

The  abrasion-effects  produced  by  the  impact  of  the  snow 

123 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

particles  were  astonishing.  Pillars  of  ice  were  cut  through 
in  a  few  days,  rope  was  frayed,  wood  etched  and  metal  polished. 
Some  rusty  dog-chains  were  exposed  to  it,  and,  in  a  few  days, 
they  had  a  definite  sheen.  A  deal  box,  facing  the  wind, 
lost  all  its  painted  bands  and  in  a  fortnight  was  handsomely 
marked  ;  the  hard,  knotty  fibres  being  only  slightly  attacked, 
whilst  the  softer,  pithy  laminae  were  corroded  to  a  depth  of 
one -eighth  of  an  inch. 

The  effect  of  constant  abrasion  upon  the  snow's  surface 
is  to  harden  it,  and,  finally,  to  carve  ridges  known  as  sastrugi. 
Of  these  much  will  be  said  when  recounting  our  sledging 
adventures,  because  they  increase  so  much  the  difficulties 
of  travelling. 

Even  hard,  blue  ice  may  become  channelled  and  pitted  by 
the  action  of  drift.  Again,  both  neve  and  ice  may  receive 
a  wind-polish  which  makes  them  very  slippery. 

Of  the  effect  of  wind  and  drift  upon  rock,  there  was  ample 
evidence  around  Winter  Quarters.  Regarded  from  the  north, 
the  aspect  of  the  rocks  was  quite  different  from  that  on  the 
southern  side.  The  southern,  windward  faces  were  on  the 
whole  smooth  and  rounded,  but  there  was  no  definite  polish, 
because  the  surface  was  partly  attacked  by  the  chipping 
and  splitting  action  of  frost.  The  leeward  faces  were 
rougher  and  more  disintegrated.  More  remarkable  still 
were  the  etchings  of  the  non-homogeneous  banded  rocks. 
The  harder  portions  of  these  were  raised  in  relief,  pro- 
ducing quite  an  artistic  pattern. 

In  regard  to  the  drift,  a  point  which  struck  me  was  the 
enormous  amount  of  cold  communicated  to  the  sea  by 
billions  of  tons  of  low-temperature  snow  thrown  upon  its 
surface.  The  effect  upon  the  water,  already  at  freezing-point, 
would  be  to  congeal  the  surface  at  once.  Whilst  the  wind 
continued,  however,  there  was  no  opportunity  for  a  crust  to 
form,  the  uppermost  layers  being  converted  into  a  pea- 
soup-like  film  which  streamed  away  to  the  north. 

A  description  of  the  drifts  of  Adelie  Land  would  not 
be  complete  without  mentioning  the  startling  electrical 
124 


THE  BLIZZARD 

effects  which  were  sometimes  observed.  The  first  record  of 
these  was  made  by  McLean,  when  on  night-watch  on  March  22. 
While  taking  the  observations  at  midnight,  he  noticed 
St.  Elmo's  fire,  a  "brush  discharge"  of  electricity,  on  the 
points  of  the  nephoscope.  As  the  weather  became  colder 
this  curious  phenomenon  increased  in  intensity.  At  any 
time  in  the  drift,  an  electroscope  exposed  outside  became 
rapidly  charged.  A  spark  gap  in  a  vacuum,  connected  with 
a  free  end  of  wire,  gave  a  continuous  discharge.  At  times, 
when  the  effects  were  strong,  the  night-watchman  would 
find  the  edges  and  wire  stays  of  the  screen  outlined  in  a 
fashion  reminiscent  of  a  pyrotechnic  display  or  an  electric 
street-advertisement.  The  corners  of  boxes  and  points  of 
rock  glowed  with  a  pale  blue  light.  The  same  appeared  over 
points  on  the  clothing,  on  the  mitts  and  round  the  funnel  of 
the  helmet.  No  sensation  was  transmitted  to  the  body  from 
these  points  of  fire  ;  at  least  nothing  sufficiently  acute  to 
be  felt,  with  the  drift  and  wind  lashing  on  the  body  outside. 
However,  the  anemograph  several  times  discharged  a  con- 
tinuous stream  of  sparks  into  Madigan's  fingers  while  he  was 
changing  the  records.  Once  these  sparks  reached  half  an 
inch  in  length,  and,  as  his  fingers  were  bared  for  the  work, 
there  was  no  mistaking  the  feeling. 

For  regular  observations  on  the  subject,  Correll  fixed 
a  pointed  collector — a  miniature  lightning-conductor — above 
the  flagpole  on  the  summit  of  the  roof.  A  wire  was  led 
through  an  insulator,  so  that  the  stream  of  electricity  could 
be  subjected  to  experiment  in  the  Hut.  Here  a  "brush" 
of  blue  light  radiated  outwards  to  a  distance  of  one  inch. 
When  a  conductor  was  held  close  to  it,  a  rattling  volley  of 
sparks  immediately  crossed  the  interval  and  the  air  was 
pervaded  with  a  strong  smell  of  ozone.  Of  course  sparks 
were  not  always  being  emitted  by  the  collector,  and  it 
was  important  to  determine  the  periods  of  activity.  To 
ensure  this,  Hurley  devised  an  automatic  arrangement,  so 
that  an  electric  bell  was  set  ringing  whenever  a  current  was 
passing ;  the  night-watchman  would  then  note  the  fact  in  the 

125 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

log-book.  However,  the  bell  responded  so  often  and  so 
vigorously  that  it  was  soon  dismantled  for  the  benefit  of 
sleepers.  It  was  singular  that  the  "brush  discharge"  was 
sometimes  most  copious  when  the  atmosphere  was  filled  with 
very  fine  drift,  and  not  necessarily  during  dense  drift. 

After  what  has  been  said,  it  will  be  obvious  that  the 
drift-laden  hurricanes  of  the  country  were  more  than  ordi- 
narily formidable .  They  scarcely  seemed  to  provide  a  sub j  ect 
for  poetic  inspiration  ;  still  the  following  effusion  appeared 
by  McLean,  Editor  of  the  Adelie  Blizzard : — 

THE  BLIZZARD 

A  snow-hush  brooding  o'er  the  grey  rock-hills  ! 
A  wold  of  silence,  ominous,  that  fills 
The  wide  seascape  of  ice-roofed  islands,  rolls 
To  ether-zones  that  gird  the  frigid  Poles  ! 

Realm  of  pm-est  alabaster-white, 
Wreathed  in  a  vast  infinitude  of  hght ; 
The  royal  orb  swings  to  thy  summer  gaze 
A  ghtt'ring  azure  world  of  crystal  days. 

The  lorn  bird- voices  of  an  unseen  land — 
No  hue  of  forest,  gleam  of  ocean  sand — 
Rise  in  a  ceaseless  plaint  of  raucous  din, 
On  northern  tides  the  bergs  come  floating  in. 

The  wiad-sprites  murmiu-ing  in  hinter-snow — 
The  pent  heart-throbbings  of  the  wan  plateau — 
Wing  through  the  pulsing -spell  thrown  o'er  the  sea. 
In  wild  and  shrieking  bhzzard  minstrelsy. 

Swirl  of  the  drift-cloud's  shimm'ring  sleet ; 
Race  of  the  spray-smoke's  hm-thng  sheet ; 
Swelling  trail  of  the  streaming,  sunbright  foam. 
Wafting  sinuous  brash  to  an  ice-field  home. 

Eddy-wraiths  o'er  the  sphntered  schist — 
Torrent  spume  down  the  glacier  liissed  ! 
Throbbing  surge  of  the  ebbing  seaward  gust. 
Raping  stillness  vast  in  its  madd'ning  lust. 

Lotus-floe  'neath  the  Barrier  brink, 

Starting  sheer — a  marble  bHnk — 

Pelting  shafts  from  the  show'ring  arrow-blast 

Strike — in  the  blackened  flood  seethe  riven  past. 

126 


THE  BLIZZARD 

Glow  of  the  vibrant,  yellow  west 

Pallid  fades  in  the  dread  unrest. 

Low'ring  shades  through  the  fury-stricken  night 

Rack  the  screaming  void  in  shudd'ring  might. 

Requiem  peace  from  the  hinter-snows 
Soft  as  river  music  flows. 
Dawn  in  a  flusliing  glamour  tints  the  sea  ; 
Serene  her  thrill  of  rhythmic  ecstasy. 

Sledging  was  out  of  the  question.  Indeed,  we  recognized 
how  fortunate  we  were  not  to  have  pushed  farther  south 
in  March.  Had  we  advanced,  it  is  more  than  hkely  that 
provisions  would  have  been  exhausted  before  we  could  have 
located  the  Hut  in  the  sea  of  drift.  Our  hopes  were  now 
centred  on  midwinter  calms. 

Looking  through  my  diary,  I  notice  that  on  March  24, 
"  we  experienced  a  rise  in  spirits  because  of  the  improved 
weather."  I  find  the  average  velocity  of  the  wind  for  that 
day  to  have  been  forty-five  miles  per  hour,  corresponding 
to  a  "strong  gale"  on  the  Beaufort  scale.  This  tells  its 
own  story. 

When  the  high  wind  blew  off  shore,  there  was  no  back- 
swell,  on  account  of  the  pack-ice  to  the  north  quelling  the 
sea.  The  arrival  of  a  true  ocean  swell  meant  that  the 
pack  had  been  dispersed.  On  March  24  such  appears 
to  have  been  the  case,  for  then,  during  the  day,  a  big 
northerly  swell  set  in,  dashing  over  the  ice-foot  and  scattering 
seaweed  on  the  rocks. 

After  the  equinox,  the  temperatures  remained  in  the 
vicinity  of  zero,  Fahrenheit.  The  penguins  took  to  the  sea, 
and,  save  for  the  glimpse  of  an  occasional  petrel  on  the 
wing,  the  landscape  was  desolate. 

It  was  high  time  that  our  programme  of  construction 
was  completed,  but,  however  much  we  tried,  it  was  im- 
possible to  do  a  great  deal  in  winds  exceeding  fifty  miles 
an  hour.  By  taking  advantage  of  days  freest  from  drift, 
the  exterior  of  the  Hangar  was  completed  by  April  6.  After 
the  air- tractor  sledge  had  been  moved  inside,  the  snow  was 

127 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

piled  so  high  on  the  leeward  face,  that  the  shelter  became 
naturally  blocked  with  a  rampart  of  snow  which  served 
admirably  in  place  of  the  wall  of  tarpaulin  which  we 
originally  intended  to  use. 

Bickerton  could  now  proceed  at  leisure  to  make  any 
necessary  alterations.  The  Hangar  was  also  used  as  a  store 
for  many  articles  which  had  been  crowded  into  odd  corners 
or  rescued  from  the  snow  outside.  To  increase  its  size,  tunnels 
were  afterwards  driven  into  the  bank  of  snow  and  timber 
was  stowed  in  these  so  as  to  be  safe  from  burial  and 
loss. 

The  building  was  finished  just  in  the  nick  of  time.  Snow 
came  down  so  thickly  that  had  the  falls  occurred  a  few 
days  earlier,  the  cases  from  which  the  place  was  constructed 
would  have  been  effectually  buried  and  the  construction 
made  an  impossibility. 

But  for  the  wind,  the  Hut  would  have  been  lost  to  sight. 
Still,  it  was  completely  surrounded  by  massive  drifts,  and 
the  snow  was  driven  by  the  wind  past  the  canvas  flap  and 
through  the  entrance,  until  the  veranda  became  choked. 

Close,  who  was  night-watchman  during  the  early  morning 
hours  of  April  7,  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  getting  out- 
side to  attend  to  his  duties.  To  dig  his  way  through  the 
entrance,  reach  the  instruments  and  to  return  occupied  a 
whole  hour. 

We  were  inundated  with  snow;  even  a  portion  of  the 
roof  was  buried.  The  situation  required  immediate  atten- 
tion ;  so  it  was  decided  to  make  a  tunnel  connecting  the 
entrance  veranda  with  the  store  veranda.  From  the  north- 
western end  of  the  latter,  an  out- draught  had  established 
itself,  preserving  a  vertical  funnel-like  opening  in  the  snow 
bank,  always  free  for  entrance  or  exit.  This  proved  a  fortu- 
nate accident. 

Further,  a  second  tunnel,  over  twenty  feet  in  length, 
was  driven  out  from  the  original  entrance  with  a  view  to 
reaching  the  surface  at  a  point  beyond  the  lee  of  the  Hut. 
It  was  thought  that  the  scouring  effect  of  the  wind,  there, 
128 


AN  INCIDENT  IN  MARCH  SOON  AFTEll  THE  CO.MPLETIOX  OF  THE   HUT: 

HODGEMAN,  THE    NIGHT   WATCHMAN,  EETURXING    FliO.M     HIS    ROUNDS 

OUTSIDE,     PUSHES     HIS     WAY     INTO     THE     VERANDA     THROUGH     THE 

RAPIDLY  ACCUMULATING  DRIFT  SNOW 


Hadey 
ME!!TZ   IX  THE  SNOW  TUNXELS  OX   HIS  WAY  TO  THE  INTERIOR  OF  THE  HUT 
WITH  A  BOX  OP  ICE  FOR  THE  MELTERS 


MERTZ  EMEEGIXG  FROM  THE  TRAP-DOOR  IX  THE   ROOF  Hurley 


THE  BLIZZARD 

would  keep  the  opening  of  the  tunnel  free  of  drift.  But 
when  completed,  it  filled  rapidly  with  snow  and  had  to  be 
sealed.  It  was  then  used  to  receive  slop-water.  While  the 
fever  for  excavation  was  at  its  height,  Whetter  drove,  as  an 
off-shoot  to  the  first,  another  tunnel  which  came  to  be  used  as 
a  nursery  for  the  pups. 

At  this  stage,  to  leave  the  Hut,  it  was  necessary  to  crawl 
through  a  low  trap-door  in  the  wall  of  the  inside  or  entrance 
veranda  ;  the  way  then  led  to  the  connecting  tunnel  and 
onwards  to  the  store  veranda  ;  finally  one  climbed  through 
a  manhole  in  the  snow  into  the  elements  without.  From 
the  store  veranda  there  was  access  to  the  Hangar  by  a 
hinged  door  in  the  common  wall,  and,  as  an  additional 
convenience,  a  trap-door  was  made  in  the  roof  of  the 
inner  veranda  to  be  used  during  spells  of  clear  weather  or 
in  light  drift. 

The  old  landmarks  became  smothered  in  snow,  making 
the  Hut's  position  a  matter  of  greater  uncertainty.  A  j ourney 
by  night  to  the  magnetic  huts  was  an  outing  with  a  spice  of 
adventure. 

Climbing  out  of  the  veranda,  one  was  immediately 
swallowed  in  the  chaos  of  hurtling  drift,  the  darkness  sinister 
and  menacing.     The  shrill  wind  fled  by — 

.  .  .  the  noise  of  a  drive  of  the  Dead, 
Striving  before  the  irresistible  will 
Through  the  strange  dusk  of  this,  the  Debatable  land 
Between  their  place  and  ours. 

Unseen  wizard  hands  clutched  with  insane  fury,  hacked 
and  harried.  It  was  "  the  raw-ribbed  Wild  that  abhors  all 
life,  the  Wild  that  would  crush  and  rend." 

Cowering  blindly,  pushing  fiercely  through  the  turmoil, 
one  strove  to  keep  a  course  to  reach  the  rocks  in  which  the 
huts  were  hidden — such  and  such  a  bearing  on  the  wind — so 
far.  When  the  rocks  came  in  sight,  the  position  of  the 
final  destination  was  only  deduced  by  recognising  a  few 
surrounding  objects. 

On  the  return  journey,  the  vicinity  of  the  Hut  would 
VOL.  I  I  129 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

be  heralded  by  such  accidents  as  tripping  over  the  "  wire- 
less" ground  wires  or  kicking  against  a  box  or  a  heap  of 
coal  briquettes.  These  clues,  properly  followed  up,  would 
lead  to  the  Hut  itself,  or  at  least  to  its  shelving  roof.  In 
the  very  thick  drifts  it  was  even  possible  to  stand  on  por- 
tions of  the  roof  without  any  notion  of  the  fact.  Fossicking 
about,  one  kept  on  the  alert  for  the  feel  of  woodwork.  When 
found  and  proved  to  be  too  extensive  to  be  a  partially 
buried  box,  it  might  safely  be  concluded  to  be  some  part 
of  the  roof,  and  only  required  to  be  skirted  in  order  to 
reach  the  vertical  entrance.  The  lost  man  often  discovered 
this  pitfall  by  dropping  suddenly  through  into  the 
veranda. 

At  the  entrance  to  the  tunnel,  the  roar  of  the  tempest 
died  away  into  a  rumble,  the  trap-door  opened  and  perhaps  the 
strains  of  the  gramophone  would  come  in  a  kind  of  flippant 
defiance  from  the  interior.  Passing  through  the  vestibule  and 
work-room  one  beheld  a  scene  in  utter  variance  with  the 
outer  hell.  Here  were  warm  bunks,  rest,  food,  light  and  com- 
panionship— ^for  the  time  being,  heaven !  Outside,  the  crude 
and  naked  elements  of  a  primitive  and  desolate  world  flowed 
in  writhing  torrents. 

The  night-watchman's  duty  of  taking  the  meteoro- 
logical observations  at  the  screen  adjacent  to  the  Hut  was 
a  small  matter  compared  with  the  foregoing.  First  of  all, 
it  was  necessary  for  him  to  don  a  complete  outfit  of  pro- 
tective clothing.  Dressing  and  undressing  vvcre  tedious, 
and  absorbed  a  good  deal  of  time.  At  the  screen,  he  would 
spend  a  lively  few  minutes  wrestling  in  order  to  hold 
his  ground,  forcing  the  door  back  against  the  pressure 
of  wind,  endeavouring  to  make  the  light  shine  on  the  instru- 
ments, and,  finally,  clearing  them  of  snow  and  reading 
them.  For  illumination  a  hurricane  lantern  wrapped  in 
a  calico  wind-shield  was  first  used,  to  be  displaced  later 
by  an  electrical  signalling-lamp  and,  while  the  batteries 
lasted,  by  a  light  permanently  fixed  by  Hannam  in  the 
screen  itself.  To  assist  in  finding  the  manhole  on  his 
130 


M    r^ 


Q 

^j 

<! 

-t^ 

o 

in 

o 

ca 

^ 

H 

5^ 

H 

^ 

Pi 

o 

< 

1 

O* 

1) 

^ 

H 

Z 

THE  BLIZZARD 

return,  the  night-watchman  was  in  the  habit  of  leaving  a 
Hght  burning  in  the  outer  veranda. 

I  remember  waking  up  early  one  morning  to  find  the  Hut 
unusually  cold.  On  rising,  I  discovered  Hurley  also  awake, 
busy  lighting  the  fire  which  had  died  out.  There  was 
no  sign  of  Correll,  the  night-watchman,  and  we  found  that 
the  last  entry  in  the  log-book  had  been  made  several 
hours  previously.  Hurley  dressed  in  full  burberrys  and  went 
out  to  make  a  search,  in  which  he  was  soon  successful. 

It  appeared  that  Correll,  running  short  of  coal  during 
the  early  morning  hours,  had  gone  out  to  procure  some  from 
the  stack.  While  he  was  returning  to  the  entrance,  the  wind 
rolled  him  over  a  few  times,  causing  him  to  lose  his  bear- 
ings. It  was  blowing  a  hurricane,  the  temperature  was 
-  7°  F.,  and  the  drift-snow  was  so  thick  as  to  be  wall-like 
in  opacity.  He  abandoned  his  load  of  coal,  and,  after 
searching  about  fruitlessly  for  some  time  in  the  darkness, 
he  decided  to  wait  for  dawn.  Hurley  found  him  about 
twenty  yards  from  the  back  of  the  Hut. 

The  suppression  of  outdoor  occupations  reacted  in  an 
outburst  of  indoor  work.  The  smaller  room  had  been  well 
fitted  up  as  a  workshop,  and  all  kinds  of  schemes  were 
in  progress  for  adapting  our  sledging-gear  and  instruments 
to  the  severe  conditions.  Correll  worked  long  hours  to 
keep  up  with  the  demands  made  upon  him.  Nobody  was 
idle  during  the  day,  for,  when  there  was  nothing  else  to  be 
done,  there  always  remained  the  manufacture  and  alteration 
of  garments  and  crampons. 

As  soon  as  the  wind  abated  to  a  reasonable  velocity, 
there  was  a  rush  to  the  outside  jobs.  Lulls  would  come 
unexpectedly,  activity  inside  ceased,  and  the  Hut,  as  seen 
by  a  spectator,  resembled  an  ants'  nest  upon  which  a  strange 
foot  had  trodden  :  eighteen  men  swarming  through  the 
manhole  in  rapid  succession,  hurrying  hither  and  thither. 

The  neighbouring  sea  still  remained  free  from  an  ice- 
crust.  This,  of  course,  did  not  mean  that  freezing  was 
not  going  on  continuously.     On  the  contrary,  the  chilling 

131 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

was  no  doubt  accelerated,  but  the  bulk  of  the  ice  was 
carried  off  to  the  north  as  fast  as  it  was  formed.  Quantities, 
however,  remained  as  ground-ice,  anchored  to  the  kelp  and 
stones  on  the  bottom.  Gazing  down  through  the  clear  waters 
one  saw  a  white,  mamillated  sheath  covering  the  jungle  of 
giant  seaweed,  recalling  a  forest  after  a  heavy  snowfall. 
The  ice,  instead  of  being  a  dead  weight  bearing  down  the 
branches,  tended  to  float,  and,  when  accumulated  in  large 
masses,  sometimes  succeeded  in  rising  to  the  surface,  up- 
rooting and  lifting  great  lengths  of  seaweed  with  it.  One 
branching  stem,  found  floating  in  the  harbour,  measured 
eighteen  feet  in  length. 

Whenever  a  temporary  calm  intervened,  a  skin  of  ice 
quickly  appeared  over  the  whole  surface  of  the  water.  In 
the  early  stages,  this  formation  consisted  of  loose,  blade- 
like crystals,  previously  floating  freely  below  the  surface 
and  rising  by  their  own  buoyancy.  At  the  surface,  if  un- 
disturbed, they  soon  became  cemented  together.  For 
example,  during  a  calm  interval  on  April  6,  within  the 
interval  of  an  hour,  an  even  crust,  one  inch  thick,  covered  the 
sea.  But  the  wind  returned  before  the  ice  was  sufficiently 
strong  to  resist  it,  and  it  all  broke  up  and  drifted  away  to 
the  north,  except  a  piece  which  remained  wedged  firmly 
between  the  sides  of  the  boat  harbour. 

In  the  calm  weather,  abundant  "  worms  "  freely  swim- 
ming, jelly-fish,  pteropods  and  small  fish  were  observed. 
Traps  were  lowered  along  the  edge  of  the  harbour-ice  and 
dredgings  were  made  in  every  possible  situation.  The  bulk  of 
the  biological  collecting  was  effected  under  circumstances  in 
which  Hunter  and  Laseron  might  well  have  given  up  work  in 
disgust.  For  instance,  I  noted  in  my  diary  that  on  May  16, 
with  an  off  shore  wind  of  forty-three  miles  per  hour,  they 
and  several  others  were  dredging  from  the  edge  of  the  slippery 
bay-ice.     The  temperature  at  the  time  was  —2°  F. 

During  April  the  head  of  the  boat  harbour  froze  over 
permanently,  the  ice  reaching  a  thickness  of  eighteen  inches 
in  ten  days.  By  that  time  it  was  strong  enough  to  be 
132 


WORKI.Vli   IX    IHE    HnUUCAXE   WIND,   ADELIE  LAND  Hioiei/ 


GETTING   ICE  FOR  DOMESTIC  PUBPOSES.     WHETTER   PICKING;  //«W«7 

MADIGAN  WITH  THE  ICE-BOX 


THE  BLIZZARD 

suitable  for  a  tide-gauge.  This  was  one  of  Bage's  charges, 
destined  to  take  him  out  for  many  months  in  fair  and  foul 
weather. 

There  were  several  occasions  in  April  when  the  velocity 
of  the  wind  exceeded  ninety  miles  an  hour.  On  the  evening 
of  the  26th,  the  wind  slackened,  and  for  part  of  the  27th  had 
almost  fallen  to  a  calm.  This  brought  the  optimists  to  the 
fore,  once  again,  with  the  theory  that  the  worst  was  over.  The 
prediction  was  far  from  being  fulfilled,  for,  as  the  days  passed, 
the  average  velocity  steadily  rose.  On  May  11  the  average 
for  the  twenty-four  hours  was  eighty  miles  per  hour.  By 
that  time  the  Hut  had  been  further  protected  by  a  crescent 
of  cases,  erected  behind  the  first  break -wind.  In  height 
this  erection  stood  above  the  Hangar,  and,  when  the  snow 
became  piled  in  a  solid  ramp  on  the  leeward  side,  it  was 
more  compact  than  ever.  Inside  the  Hut  extra  struts  were 
introduced,  stiffening  the  principal  rafters  on  the  southern 
side.  It  was  reassuring  to  know  that  these  precautions  had 
been  taken,  for,  on  May  15,  the  wind  blew  at  an  average 
velocity  of  ninety  miles  per  hour  throughout  the  whole 
twenty-four  hours. 

Having  failed  to  demolish  us  by  dogged  persistence, 
the  hurricane  tried  new  tactics  on  the  evening  of  May  24, 
in  the  form  of  a  terrific  series  of  Herculean  gusts.  As  we 
learned  afterwards,  the  momentary  velocity  of  these  doubt- 
less approached  two  hundred  miles  per  hour.  At  11.30  p.m.  the 
situation  was  cheerfully  discussed,  though  every  one  was 
tuned  up  to  a  nervous  pitch  as  the  Hut  creaked  and  shuddered 
under  successive  blows.  It  seemed  very  doubtful  whether 
the  roof  would  resist  the  gusts,  and  the  feasibility  of  the 
meat  cellar  as  a  last  haven  of  refuge  was  discussed.  After 
the  passage  of  each  gust,  the  barometer  dropped,  rising  again 
immediately  afterwards.  Similar  pulsations  of  the  baro- 
meter were  observed  many  times  later  in  the  year.  The 
maximum  sudden  movement  noted  was  one-fifth  inch. 
Had  the  interior  of  the  Hut  been  more  freely  in  communica- 
tion with  the  outside  air,  instead  of  resembling  a  hermetically 

133 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

sealed  box,  the  "  kicks  "  would  undoubtedly  have  been 
much  greater. 

Cyclonic  gusts  were  repeated  a  few  days  after,  when  the 
upper  tiers  of  boxes  composing  the  break-wind  were  thrown 
down  and  pebbles  from  the  moraine  were  hurled  on  the  roof. 
The  average  velocity  of  the  wind  for  each  of  the  three 
autumn  months  was  as  follows  :  March,  49  miles  per  hour  ; 
April,  51 '5  miles  per  hour,  and  May  60*7  miles  per  hour. 

On  May  1  the  temperatures  became  lower,  so  that  it 
was  difficult  to  move  about  in  the  gales  without  the  face 
getting  frost-bitten.  Our  usual  remedy  when  this  occurred 
was  to  hold  a  mitt  over  the  part  affected;  thus  sheltered, 
its  circulation  of  blood  was  soon  re-estabhshed,  unless  the 
cold  were  very  intense.  In  the  extremities — the  fingers  and 
toes — ^^varmth  was  not  so  easily  restored. 

Returning  from  attending  the  instruments  at  noon  on 
May  22,  Madigan,  according  to  the  usual  habit,  before 
taking  off  his  wind-proof  clothes,  commenced  clearing  away 
the  ice  adhering  to  his  helmet  and  face.  One  white  patch 
refused  to  leave  the  side  of  his  face,  until  some  one  observed 
that  it  was  a  frost-bite,  and  acquainted  him  of  the  fact. 
Frost-bites  that  day  were  excusable  enough,  for  the  wind 
was  blowing  between  ninety -five  and  hundred  miles  per  hour, 
there  was  dense  drifting  snow  and  a  temperature  of -28°  F. 

We  had  found  an  accursed  country.  On  the  fringe  of  an 
unspanned  continent  along  whose  gelid  coast  our  comrades 
had  made  their  home — ^\e  knew  not  where — ^we  dwelt  where 
the  chill  breath  of  a  vast.  Polar  wilderness,  quickening  to 
the  rushing  might  of  eternal  blizzards,  surged  to  the  northern 
seas.  Already,  and  for  long  months  we  were  beneath 
"  frost-fettered  Winter's  frown." 


13i 


Adelie  Land         THE   li 


\Mi,i\i:  i,Asi   (II    \\iNii:i;  i.u  akii-i;.-^  lUuleij 


mi'-:  ' 


MADKiAX'S   FltOSTlUTTRN  FACE 


CHAPTER  VIII 
DOMESTIC     LIFE 

OUR  hearth  and  home  was  the  hving  Hut  and  its  focus 
was  the  stove.  Kitchen  and  stove  were  indis- 
solubly  hnked,  and  beyond  their  pale  was  a  wilder- 
ness of  hanging  clothes,  boots,  finnesko,  mitts  and  what  not, 
bounded  by  tiers  of  bunks  and  blankets,  more  hanging  clothes 
and  dim  photographs  between  the  frost-rimed  cracks  of  the 
wooden  walls. 

One  might  see  as  much  in  the  first  flicker  of  the  acetylene 
through  a  maze  of  hurrying  figures,  but  as  his  eyes  grew 
accustomed  to  the  light,  the  plot  would  thicken  :  books 
orderly  and  disorderly,  on  bracketed  shelves,  cameras  great 
and  small  in  motley  confusion,  guns  and  a  gramophone-horn, 
serpentine  yards  of  gas-tubing,  sewing  machines,  a  micro- 
scope, rows  of  pint-mugs,  until — thud  !  he  has  obstructed 
a  wild-eyed  messman  staggering  into  the  kitchen  with  a  box 
of  ice. 

The  wilderness  was  always  inhabited,  so  much  so  that 
it  often  became  a  bear-garden  in  which  raucous  good  humour 
prevailed  over  everything. 

Noise  was  a  necessary  evil,  and  it  commenced  at  7.30  a.m., 
with  the  subdued  melodies  of  the  gramophone,  mingled  with 
the  stirring  of  the  porridge-pot  and  the  clang  of  plates 
deposited  none  too  gently  on  the  table.  At  7.50  a.m.  came 
the  stentorian  :  "  Rise  and  shine  !  "  of  the  night-watchman, 
and  a  curious  assortment  of  cat-calls,  beating  on  pots  and 
pans  and  fragmentary  chaff.  At  the  background,  so  to 
speak,  of  all  these  sounds  was  the  swishing  rush  of  the  wind 
and  the  creaking  strain  of  the  roof,  but  these  had  become 

135 


THE  ho:me  of  the  blizzard 

neglected.    In  fact,  if  there  were  a  calm,  every  one  was  rest- 
less and  uneasy. 

The  seasoned  sleeper  who  survived  the  ten  minutes' 
bombardment  before  8  o'clock  was  an  unusual  person, 
and  he  was  often  the  Astronomer  Royal.  Besides  his 
dignified  name  he  possessed  a  wrist-watch,  and  there  was 
never  a  movement  in  his  mountain  of  blankets  until  7.59  a.m., 
unless  the  jocular  night-watchman  chose  to  make  a  heap  of 
them  on  the  floor.  To  calls  like  "  Breakfast  all  ready  ! 
Porridge  on  the  table  getting  cold  !  "  seventeen  persons  in 
varying  stages  of  wakefulness  responded.  No  one  Avas 
guilty  of  an  elaborate  toilet,  water  being  a  scarce  com- 
modity. There  were  adherents  of  the  snow-wash  theory, 
but  these  belonged  to  an  earlier  and  warmer  epoch  of  our 
history. 

For  downright,  tantalizing  cheerfulness  there  was  no  one 
to  equal  the  night-watchman.  While  others  strove  to 
collect  their  befuddled  senses,  this  individual  prated  of 
"  wind  eighty  miles  per  hour  with  moderate  drift  and 
brilhant  St.  Elmo's  fire."  He  boasted  of  the  number  of 
garments  he  had  washed,  expanded  vigorously  on  bread 
making — his  brown,  appetizing  specimens  in  full  public 
view — told  of  the  latest  escapade  among  the  dogs,  spoke  of 
the  fitful  gleams  of  the  aurora  between  1.30  and  2  a.m.,  of 
his  many  adventures  on  the  way  to  the  meteorological 
screen  and  so  forth  ;  until  from  being  a  mere  night-watch- 
man he  had  raised  himself  to  the  status  of  a  public  hero. 
For  a  time  he  was  most  objectionable,  but  under  the  solid 
influence  of  porridge,  tinned  fruit,  fresh  bread,  butter  and 
tea  and  the  soothing  aroma  of  innumerable  pipes,  other 
public  heroes  arose  and  ousted  this  upstart  of  the  night. 
Meanwhile,  the  latter  began  to  show  signs  of  abating  energy 
after  twelve  hours'  work.  Soon  some  wag  had  caught  him 
having  a  private  nap,  a  Avhispered  signal  was  passed  round 
and  the  unfortunate  hero  was  startled  into  life  with  a 
rousing  "  Rise  and  shine  !  "  in  which  ah  past  scores  were 
paid  off. 
136 


fl 


M'i^ 


#, 


f{> 


t 


% 


Adi'lic  Land  Hniiey 

A  WINTER  AFTERXOOX  SCENE  IX  THE  HUT.     FROM  THE  LEFT  :    MERTZ, 

MCLEAN,  MADIGAN,   HUNTER,   HODGEMAN.     HIGH   ON   THE   LEFT   IS   THE 

ACETYLENE  GENERATOR 


A'felic  Land  Hinley 

TAKIN(i  A  TURN  IN  THE  KITCHEN  DEPARTMENT.         HUNTER.  HODGEMAN. 
BAGE.     THE  DOORWAY  ON  THE  RI(;HT  IS  THE  ENTRANCE  TO  THE  WORK- 
ROOM 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

Every  one  was  at  last  awake  and  the  day  began  in 
earnest.  The  first  hint  of  this  came  from  the  messman  and 
cook  who  commenced  to  make  a  Herculean  sweep  of  the 
pint-mugs  and  tin  plates.  The  former  deferentially  pro- 
ceeded to  scrape  the  plates,  the  master-cook  presiding  over 
a  tub  of  boiling  water  in  which  he  vigorously  scoured 
knives,  forks  and  spoons,  transferring  them  in  dripping 
handfuls  to  the  cleanest  part  of  the  kitchen-table.  Cooks 
of  lyric  inclination  would  enliven  the  company  with  the 
score  of  the  latest  gramophone  opera,  and  the  messman 
and  company  would  often  feel  impelled  to  join  in  the 
choruses. 

The  night-watchman  had  sunk  into  log-like  slumber, 
and  the  meteorologist  and  his  merry  men  were  making 
preparations  to  go  abroad.  The  merry  men  included  the 
ice-carrier,  the  magnetician,  the  two  wardens  of  the  dogs, 
the  snow-shoveller  and  coal-carrier  and  the  storeman.  The 
rest  subdivided  themselves  between  the  living  Hut  at  45°F. 
and  the  outer  Hut  below  freezing-point,  taking  up  their 
endless  series  of  jobs. 

The  merry  men  began  to  make  an  organized  raid  on  the 
kitchen.  Around  and  above  the  stove  hung  oddments  like 
wolf-skin  mitts,  finnesko,  socks,  stockings  and  helmets, 
which  had  passed  from  icy  rigidity  through  sodden  limpness 
to  a  state  of  parchment  dryness.  The  problem  was  to 
recover  one's  own  property  and  at  the  same  time  to  avoid 
the  cook  scraping  the  porridge  saucepan  and  the  messman 
scrubbing  the  table. 

The  urbane  storeman  saved  the  situation  by  inquiring 
of  the  cook  :  "  What  will  you  have  for  lunch  ?  "  Then 
followed  a  heated  colloquy,  the  former,  like  a  Cingalese 
vendor,  having  previously  made  up  his  mind.  The  argument 
finally  crystallized  down  to  lambs'  tongues  and  beetroot, 
through  herrings  and  tomato  sauce,  fresh  herrings,  kippered 
herrings,  sardines  and  corn  beef. 

The  second  question  was  a  preliminary  to  more  serious 
business  ;    "  What  would  you  like  for  dinner  ?  " 

137 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Although  much  trouble  might  have  been  saved  by 
reference  to  the  regulation  programme,  which  was  composed 
to  provide  variety  in  diet  and  to  eliminate  any  remote  chance 
of  scurvy,  most  cooks  adopted  an  attitude  of  surly  inde- 
pendence, counting  it  no  mean  thing  to  have  wheedled  from 
the  storeman  a  few  more  ounces  of  *'  glaxo,"  another  tin  of 
peas  or  an  extra  ration  of  penguin  meat.  All  this  chaffering 
took  place  in  the  open  market-place,  so  to  speak,  and  there 
was  no  lack  of  frank  criticism  from  bystanders,  onlookers 
and  distant  eavesdroppers.  In  case  the  cook  was  worsted, 
the  messman  sturdily  upheld  his  opinions,  and  in  case  the 
weight  of  public  opinion  was  too  much  for  the  storeman,  he 
slipped  on  his  felt  mitts,  shouldered  a  Venesta  box  and  made 
for  the  tunnel  which  led  to  the  store. 

He  reaches  an  overhead  vent  admitting  a  cool  torrent  of 
snow,  and  with  the  inseparable  box  plunges  ahead  into  dark- 
ness. An  hour  later  his  ruddy  face  reappears  in  the  Hut,  and  a 
load  of  frosted  tins  is  soon  unceremoniously  dumped  on  to  the 
kitchen  table.  The  cook  in  a  swift  survey  notes  the  absence 
of  penguin  meat.  "  That'll  take  two  hours  to  dig  out  !  " 
is  the  storeman's  rejoinder,  and  to  make  good  his  word, 
proceeds  to  pull  off  blouse  and  helmet.  By  careful  inquiry 
in  the  outer  Hut  he  finds  an  ice-axe,  crowbar  and  hurricane 
lantern.  The  next  move  is  to  the  outer  veranda,  where  a 
few  loose  boards  are  soon  removed,  and  the  storeman,  with 
a  lithe  twist,  is  out  of  sight. 

We  have  pushed  the  tools  down  and,  following  the  store- 
man,  painfully  squeezed  into  an  Arcadia  of  starry  mounds  of 
snow  and  glistening  plaques  of  ice,  through  which  project 
a  few  boulders  and  several  carcases  of  mutton.  The  store- 
man  rummages  in  the  snow  and  discloses  a  pile  of  penguins, 
crusted  hard  together  in  a  homogeneous  lump.  Dislodging 
a  couple  of  penguins  appears  an  easy  proposition,  but  we  are 
soon  disillusioned.  The  storeman  seizes  the  head  of  one  bird, 
wrenches  hard,  and  off  it  breaks  as  brittle  as  a  stalactite. 
The  same  distracting  thing  happens  to  both  legs,  and  the 
only  remedy  is  to  chip  laboriously  an  icy  channel  around  it. 
138 


Adelip  La  lid  llnrley 

A  CORNEi;   OF  XliK  HUT— BAGE  MENDIXG   IIIS  SLEEPIXG-BAG.       THE 

BUNKS    IX    TWO    TIERS  AROUND    THE  WALL    ARE    ALMOST    HIDDEN 

BY  THE  CLOTHING  HANGING  FROM  THE  CEILING 


O  N 


=  25  H 

-  <c  o 

.     HQ 

:;:    o 

■z  ^    . 
S5  ^g 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

In  a  crouching  or  lying  posture,  within  a  confined  space, 
this  means  the  expenditure  of  much  patience,  not  to  mention 
the  exhaustion  of  all  invective.  A  crowbar  decides  the 
question.  One  part  of  the  channel  is  undermined,  into  this 
the  end  of  the  crowbar  is  thrust  and  the  penguin  shoots 
up  and  hits  the  floor  of  the  Hut. 

The  storeman,  plastered  with  snow,  reappears  hot  and 
triumphant  before  the  cook,  but  this  dignitary  is  awkwardly 
kneading  the  dough  of  wholemeal  scones,  and  the  messman 
is  feeding  the  fire  with  seal-blubber  to  ensure  a  "quick" 
oven.  Every  one  is  too  busy  to  notice  the  storeman,  for,  like 
the  night-watchman,  his  day  is  over  and  he  must  find 
another  job. 

Jobs  in  the  Hut  were  the  elixir  of  life,  and  a  day's  cooking 
was  no  exception  to  the  rule.  It  began  at  7  a.m.,  and,  with 
a  brief  intermission  between  lunch  and  afternoon  tea, 
continued  strenuously  till  8.30  p.m.  Cooks  were  broadly 
classified  as  "  Crook  Cooks  "  and  "  Unconventional  Cooks  " 
by  the  eating  public.  Such  flattering  titles  as  "  Assistant 
Grand  Past  Master  of  the  Crook  Cooks'  Association"  or 
"  Associate  of  the  Society  of  Muddling  Messmen "  were 
not  empty  inanities  ;  they  were  founded  on  solid  fact — on 
actual  achievement.  If  there  were  no  constitutional  affilia- 
tion, strong  sympathy  undoubtedly  existed  between  the 
"  Crook  Cooks'  Association  "  and  "  The  Society  of  Muddling 
Messmen."  Both  contained  members  who  had  committed 
"  championships." 

"  Championship  "  was  a  term  evolved  from  the  local 
dialect,  applying  to  a  slight  mishap,  careless  accident  or 
unintentional  disaster  in  any  department  of  Hut  life.  The 
fall  of  a  dozen  plates  from  the  shelf  to  the  floor,  the  fracture 
of  a  table-knife  in  frozen  honey,  the  burning  of  the  porridge 
or  the  explosion  of  a  tin  thawing  in  the  oven  brought  down 
on  the  unfortunate  cook  a  storm  of  derisive  applause  and 
shouts  of  "  Championship  !    Championship  !  " 

Thawing-out  tinned  foods  by  the  heroic  aid  of  a  red-hot 
stove  was  a  common  practice.     One  day  a  tin  of  baked  beans 

139 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

was  shattered  in  the  "  port  "  oven,  and  fragments  of  dried 
beans  were  visible  on  the  walls  and  door  for  weeks.  Our 
military  cook  would  often  facetiously  refer  to  "  platoon- 
firing  in  the  starboard  oven." 

One  junior  member  of  the  "  Crook  Cooks'  Association  " 
had  the  hardihood  to  omit  baking  powder  in  a  loaf  of  soda- 
bread,  trusting  that  prolonged  baking  would  repair  the 
omission.  The  result  was  a  "  championship  "of  a  very 
superior  order.  Being  somewhat  modest,  he  committed  it 
through  the  trap-door  to  the  mercy  of  the  wind,  and  for  a 
time  it  was  lost  in  the  straggling  rubbish  which  tailed  away 
to  the  north.  Even  the  prowling  dogs  in  their  wolfish 
hunger  could  not  overcome  a  certain  prejudice.  Of  course 
some  one  found  it,  and  the  public  hailed  it  with  delight.  A 
searching  inquir}^  was  made,  but  the  perpetrator  was  never 
discovered.  That  loaf,  however,  like  the  proverbial  bad 
penny,  turned  up  for  months.  Allien  the  intricate  system 
of  snow-tunnels  was  being  perfected,  it  was  excavated. 
In  the  early  summer,  when  the  aeroplane  was  dug  out  of 
the  Hangar,  that  loaf  appeared  once  more,  and  almost 
the  last  thing  we  saw  Avhen  leaving  the  Hut,  nearly  two  years 
after,  was  this  petrifaction  on  an  icy  pedestal  near  the 
Boat  Harbour. 

No  one  ever  forgot  the  roly-poly  pudding  made  without 
suet ;  synthetic  rubber  was  its  scientific  name.  And  the 
muddling  messman  could  never  be  surpassed  who  lost  the 
cutter  of  the  sausage  machine  and  put  salt-water  ice  in  the 
melting-pots. 

There  appeared  in  the  columns  of  The  Adelie  Blizzard  an 
article  by  the  meteorologist  descriptive  of  an  occasion  when 
two  members  of  the  "  Crook  Cooks'  Association  "  officiated 
in  the  kitchen  : 


140 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

TEREBUS  AND  ERROR  IN  ERUPTION 

An  'Orrible  Affair  in  One  Act 
By  a  Survivor 

Dramatis  Personce 

TEREBUSJ  Crook  Cooks 
Error     J 

Other  Expedition  Members 
Scene :  Kitchen,  Winter  Quarters.     Time :  5.30  p.m. 

Error.  Now,  Terebus,  just  bring  me  a  nice  clean  pot, 
will  you  ? 

Terebus  [from  his  bunk].  Go  on,  do  something  yourself  ! 
Error.  Do    something  ?     I've    done    everything    that 
has  been  done  this  afternoon. 

Terebus.  Well,  you  ought  to  feel  pretty  fresh. 
Error.  And  all  the  melting-pots   are  empty   and   I'm 
not  going  to  fill  them.     Besides,  it's  not  in  the  regulations. 
Voices.  Who's  going  crook  ?     Error  ! 

[Terebus   climbs  from   his  bunk  and  exit  for  ice. 
Error  attempts  to  extricate  a  pot  from  the  nails 
in  the  shelves.     Loud  alarums. 
Voices.  Champ-ion-ship  ! 

[Alarums  without.     Loud  cries  of  "  Door  !  "     Enter 
Terebus  with  box  of  ice ;   fills  all  the  pots  on  the 
stove. 
Error.  Good  heavens,   man,  you've  filled  up  the  tea 
water  with  ice. 

Terebus  [with  hoarse  laugh].  Never  mind,  they  won't 
want  so  much  glaxo  to  cool  it. 

Error  [who  has  meanwhile  been  mixing  bread].  What 
shall  we  bake  the  bread  in  ?  I  believe  it  is  considered  that 
a  square  tin  is  more  suitable  for  ordinary  ovens,  but,  on 
the  other  hand,  Nansen  in  his  Farthest  North  used  flat  dishes. 
Terebus.  Use  a  tin.  There'll  be  less  surface  exposed 
to  the  cold  oven. 

141 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Error.  What's  all  this  water  on  the  floor  ?  I  thought 
my  feet  seemed  cold.  Some  one  must  have  upset  a 
bucket. 

Terebus.  Oh,  it's  one  of  the  taps  turned  on.  Never 
mind,  there's  plenty  more  ice  where  that  came  from.  Get 
your  sea-boots. 

[Enter  Meteorological  Staff  and  others  with  snow- 
covered   burberry s,    mitts,  etc.,  crowd  kitchen  and 
hang  impedimenta  round  the  stove.     Great  tumult. 
Terebus.  Here,  out  of  the  kitchen.     This  isn't  the  time 
to  worry  the  cooks. 

Error.  Take  those  burberrys  away,  please,  old  man. 
They're  dripping  into  the  soup. 

Terebus.  Give  it  some  flavour  at  least. 

[Great  activity  in  the  crater  of  Error  while  Terebus 
clears  the  kitchen.     Error  continues  stirring  soup 
and  tapioca  custard  on  the  stove.     Strong  smell 
of  burning. 
Voices  [in  peculiarly  joyful   chorus].  Something   burn- 
ing ! 

Error  [aside  to  Terebus].  It's  ah  right.  It  will  taste 
all  right.     Say  it's  cloth  on  the  stove. 

Terebus.  Somebody's  burberrys  burning  against  the 
stove  !  ! 

[General  rush  to  the  stove. 
Terebus.  It's  all  right,  I've  taken  them  away. 

[Interval,  during  which  much  sotto  voce  discussion  is 
heard  in  the  kitchen. 
Error.  We  haven't  put  the  spinach  on  to  thaw  and 
it's  after  six  o'clock. 

Terebus.  Warm  it  up  and  put  it  on  the  table  with  the 
tin-openers. 

Error.  I'm  afraid  that's  against  the  regulations.  Put 
it  in  the  oven  and  shut  the  door. 

[Terebus  does  so.     Later,  terrific  explosion,  followed 
by  strong  smell  of  spinach. 
Voices.  What's  the  matter  ?     Terebus  in  eruption  ! 
142 


rV  iMml  I 

A  .M01!NJ.N(;  IN  THE  WOUKSHOP.     FllOJl  LEFT  TO  lllGHT  :    HODGEMAN,  IIUNTEU. 
],ASE1!()N,  (OKliElJ.  AND  HANNAM.       THE  WIRELESS  ENGINE  AND  DYNAMO  ON 
THE  KIGHT 


^  V 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

T EREBUS  [wiping  spinach  off  his  face].  Nothing  wrong. 
Only  a  tin  of  spinach  opened  automatically. 

Error.  It's  plastered  all  over  the  oven  and  on  every- 
thing. 

Terebus.  Don't  worry,  it  will  be  served  up  with  the 
baked  penguin. 

[Period  of  partial  quiesce7ice  of  Terebus  and  Error, 
which  is  regarded  as  an  evil  omen. 
Error  [in  persuasive  tone].  Have  you   made   the   tea, 
old  boy  ?     It's  nearly  half-past  six. 

[Terebus   takes   off  the  lid   of  the  tea-boiler,    peers 
inside,  making  a  scoop  with  his  hand. 
Error.  Here,  don't  do  that.     Mind  your  hands. 
Terebus.  It's  all  right,  it's  not  hot. 
Error.  What  shall  Vv^e  do,  then  ?     We'll  never  keep  them 
quiet  if  we  are  late  with  the  tea. 

Terebus.  Put  the  tea  in  now.  It  will  be  warmed  up 
by  the  second  course. 

[Terebus  puts  the  infusers  in  the  pot  and  stirs  them 
round. 
Error.  Taste  it. 

[Both  taste  with  a  dirty  spoon. 
Terebus.  Tastes  like  your  soup — 'orrible  ! 
Error.  There's    nothing    wrong    with    the    soup.     You 
attend  to  the  tea. 

Terebus.  I  think  we'll  have  coffee.  Pass  the  coffee 
and  I'll  put  that  in  and  bring  it  to  the  boil.  The  coffee 
will  kill  the  taste  of  the  tea. 

Error.  Hope  you  make  it  stronger  than  that. 

[During  quiescent  stage  while  each  is  thinking  of  a 

retort,  6.30  p.m.  arrives,  and  the  soup  is  put  on 

the    table.     Interval    elapses    during    which    the 

victims  are  expected  to  eat  the  soup. 

Voices  [in  loud  chant  from  the  table].  How  did  you  do 

it,  Error  ? 

Terebus  [after  a  suitable  period].  Any  one  like  any  more 
soup  ? 

134 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

A  Voice.  Couldn't  risk  it,  Governor. 
Terebus.  Bowls  up  !     Lick  spoons  ! 

[Bowls  are  cleared  away  and  baked  penguin  is  put  071 
the  table. 
Error.  Cooks  have  got  their  penguin,  gentlemen. 

[Suspicious  glances  exchanged  at  table.     Later,  monoto- 
nous chant  goes  up,  preceded  by  a  soft  "  One,  two, 
three.^^     "  Didn't  scrape  the  blubber  ojf,  Error.'' 
[Plates  cleared  away  and  scraped  into  dogs'  bucket. 
Error  takes  tapioca  custard  from  oven  in  two 
dishes. 
Error  [aside  to  Terebus].  Take  some  out  of  this  one 
for  us  and  don't  forget  to  put  that  dish  in  front  of  the 
Doctor,  because  I  spilled  soda  in  the  other. 

[Terebus  takes  two  large  helpings  out  and  puts  rest 
on  table  as  directed. 
Terebus.  You  need  not  remember  the  cooks,  gentlemen. 
A  Voice.  Don't  want  to,  if  I  can  manage  it. 
Error  [aside  to  Terebus].  Put  on  the  Algerian  sweets, 
and  then  we  can  have  ours. 

Terebus  [taking  several  handfuls].  We'll  put  these  aside 
for  perks. 

[The  sweets  on  the  table,  Terebus  and  Error  retire 
to  kitchen  to  have  their  dinner. 
Error.  Is   this   my   pudding  ?     It's   only   an   ordinary 
share. 

[Terebus  is  too  busy  to  reply,  and  further  eruption 
is  prevented  by  the  temporary  plugging  of  Error. 

Cooking,  under  the  inspiration  of  Mrs.  Beet  on,  became 

a  fine  art  : 

On  bones  we  leave  no  meat  on, 
For  we  study  Mrs.  Beeton. 

So  said  the  song.  On  birthdays  and  other  auspicious 
occasions  dishes  appeared  which  would  tempt  a  gourmet. 
Puff-pastry,  steam-puddings,  jellies  and  blancmanges, 
original  potages  and  consommes,  seal  curried  and  spiced, 
144 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

penguin  delicately  fried,  vegetables  reflavoiired,  trimmed 
and  adorned  were  received  without  comment  as  the  culinary 
standard  rose. 

Birthdays  were  always  greeted  with  special  enthusiasm. 
Speeches  were  made,  toasts  were  drunk,  the  supple  boards 
of  the  table  creaked  with  good  things,  cook  and  messman 
vied  with  each  other  in  lavish  hospitality,  the  Hut  was 
ornate  with  flags,  every  man  was  spruce  in  his  snowiest 
cardigan  and  neck-cloth,  the  gramophone  sang  of  music- 
hall  days,  the  wind  roared  its  appreciation  through  the 
stove-pipe,  and  rollicking  merriment  was  supreme.  On 
such  occasions  the  photographer  and  the  biologist  made  a 
genial  combination. 

The  dark-room  was  the  nursery  of  the  topical  song. 
There,  by  lantern  or  candle-stump,  wit  Rabelaisian,  Aristo- 
phanic  or  Antarctic  was  cradled  into  rhyme.  From  there, 
behind  the  scenes,  the  comedian  in  full  dress  could  step 
before  the  footlights  into  salvoes  of  savage  applause.  "  A 
Pair  of  Unconventional  Cooks  are  we,  are  we,"  and  the  famous 
refrain,  "  There  he  is,  that's  him,"  were  long  unrivalled  in 
our  musical  annals. 

Celebrations  were  carried  on  into  the  night,  but  no  one 
forgot  the  cook  and  the  messman.  The  table  was  cleared 
by  many  willing  hands,  some  brought  in  ice  and  coal  or 
swept  the  floor,  others  scraped  plates  or  rinsed  out  mugs 
and  bowls.  Soon,  everything  had  passed  through  the 
cauldron  of  water,  soap  and  soda  to  the  drying-towels  and 
on  to  the  shelves.  The  main  crowd  then  repaired  with 
pipes  and  cigars  to  "  Hyde  Park  Corner,"  where  the  store- 
man,  our  raconteur  par  excellence^  entertained  the  smokers' 
club.  A  mixed  concert  brought  the  evening  to  the  grand 
finale — "  Auld  Lang  Syne." 

After  events  of  this  character,  the  higher  shelves  of  the 
kitchen,  in  the  interstices  between  thermographs,  pnoto- 
graphic  plates  ink  bottles,  and  Russian  stout,  abounded 
with  titbits  of  pie  crust,  blancmange,  jelly,  Vienna  rusks, 
preserved  figs,  and  other  "  perks."  Such  "  perks,"  or 
VOL.  I  K  145 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

perquisites,    were   the   property   of   the   presiding   cook   or 
night-watchman  and  rarely  survived  for  more  than  a  day. 

The  mania  for  celebration  became  so  great  that  reference 
was  frequently  made  to  the  almanac.  During  one  featureless 
interval,  the  anniversary  of  the  First  Lighting  of  London 
by  Gas  was  observed  with  extraordinary  eclat. 

The  great  medium  of  monetary  exchange  in  the  Hut 
was  chocolate.  A  ration  of  thirty  squares  was  distributed 
by  the  storeman  every  Saturday  night,  and  for  purposes 
of  betting,  games  of  chance,  "  Calcutta  sweeps  "  on  the 
monthly  wind- velocity  and  general  barter,  chocolate  held 
the  premier  place. 

At  the  "  sweeps,"  the  meteorologist  stood  with  a  wooden 
hammer  behind  the  table,  and  the  gaming  public  swarmed 
on  the  other  side.  Numbers  ranging  from  "  low  field  "  and 
forty-five  to  sixty-five  and  "  high  field  "  were  sold  by 
auction  to  the  highest  bidder.  Excitement  was  intense 
while  the  cartographer  in  clerical  glasses  worked  out  the 
unknown  number. 

As  a  consequence  of  wild  speculation,  there  were  several 
cases  of  bankruptcy,  which  was  redeemed  in  the  ordinary 
way  by  a  sale  of  the  debtor's  effects. 

Two  financiers,  indifferent  to  the  charms  of  chocolate, 
established  a  corner  or  "  Bank  "  in  the  commodity.  "  The 
Bank,"  by  barter  and  usurious  methods,  amassed  a  great 
heap  of  well-thumbed  squares,  and,  when  accused  of  rapacity, 
invented  a  scheme  for  the  common  good  known  as  "  Hun- 
toylette."  This  was  a  game  of  chance  similar  to  roulette, 
and  for  a  while  it  completely  gulled  the  trusting  public. 
In  the  reaction  which  followed,  there  was  a  rush  on  "  The 
Bank,"  and  the  concern  was  wound  up,  but  the  promoters 
escaped  with  a  large  profit  in  candles  and  chocolate. 

Throughout  the  winter  months,  work  went  on  steadily 
even  after  dinner,  and  hours  of  leisure  were  easy  to  fill. 
Some  wrote  up  their  diaries,  played  games,  or  smoked  and 
yarned  ;  others  read,  developed  photos,  or  imitated  the 
weary  cook  and  went  to  bed.  The  MacKellar  Library, 
146 


IX  THE  CATACOMBS.     NINNIS  ON  THE  RIGHT 


Ibnh'ij 


5M^ 


^C:-' 


AdeKe  Land  BAGE  AND  HIS  TIDE  GAUGE   WHICFI  WAS  ERECTED 

ON  THE   FROZEN  BAY  ICE 


Adelie  Land  RAISING  THE  LOWER  SECTION  OF  THE   NORTHERN 

WIRELESS  MAST 


Hurley 


DOMESTIC  LIFE 

so  called  after  the  donor,  was  a  boon  to  all,  and  the  literature 
of  polar  exploration  was  keenly  followed  and  discussed. 
Taste  in  literature  varied,  but  among  a  throng  of  eighteen, 
the  majority  of  whom  were  given  to  expressing  their  opinions 
in  no  uncertain  terms — there  were  no  rigid  conventions  in 
Adelie  Land — every  book  had  a  value  in  accordance  with 
a  common  standard. 

There  was  not  a  dissenting  voice  to  the  charm  of  Lady 
Betty  across  the  Water,  and  the  reason  for  this  was  a  special 
one.  The  sudden  breath  of  a  world  of  warmth  and  colour, 
richness  and  vivacity  and  astute,  American  freshness  amid 
the  somewhat  grim  attractions  of  an  Antarctic  winter  was 
too  much  for  every  one.  Lady  Betty,  in  the  realm  of  bright 
images,  had  a  host  of  devoted  admirers.  Her  influence  spread 
beyond  the  Hut  to  the  plateau  itself.  Three  men  went 
sledging,  and  to  shelter  themselves  from  the  rude  wind 
fashioned  an  ice-cavern,  which,  on  account  of  its  magical 
hues  and  rare  lustre,  could  be  none  other  than  "  Aladdin's 
Cave."  Lady  Betty  found  her  hero  in  a  fairy  grotto  of  the 
same  name. 

Lorna  Doone,  on  the  other  hand,  was  liked  by  many. 
Still  there  were  those  who  thought  that  John  Ridd  was  a 
fool,  a  slow,  obtuse  rustic,  and  so  on,  while  Lorna  was  too 
divine  and  angelic  for  this  life. 

The  War  of  the  Carolinas  took  the  Hut  by  storm,  but 
it  was  a  "  nine  days'  wonder "  and  left  no  permanent 
impression  on  the  thinking  community.  Mostly,  the  story 
was  voted  delightfully  funny,  but  very  foolish  and  farcical 
after  all.     A  few  exclusive  critics  predicted  for  it  a  future. 

Then  there  was  The  Trail  of  '98.  For  power  and  blunt 
realism  there  was  nothing  like  it,  but  the  character  of  the 
hero  was  torn  in  the  shreds  of  debate.  There  was  general 
agreement  on  two  points  :  that  the  portrayal  of  the  desolate 
Alaskan  wild  had  a  touch  of  "home,"  and  that  the  heroine 
was  a  "  true  sport." 

All  those  who  had  ever  hauled  on  the  main  braces,  sung 
the    topsail-halliard    chanty,    learned   the   intricate   Matty 

147 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Walker,  the  bowline-and-a-bite  and  a  crowd  of  kindred 
knots,  had  a  warm  spot  for  any  yarn  by  Jacobs.  Night 
after  night,  the  storeman  held  the  audience  with  the 
humorous  escapades  of  Ginger  Dick,  Sam  and  Peter  Russet. 

And  lastly,  there  was  a  more  serious,  if  divided  interest 
in  Virginibus  Puerisque,  Marcus  Aurelius,  The  Unveiling 
of  Lhassa — but  the  list  is  rather  interminable. 

The  whole  world  is  asleep  except  the  night-watchman, 
and  he,  having  made  the  bread,  washed  a  tubful  of  clothes, 
kept  the  fire  going,  observed  and  made  notes  on  the  aurora 
every  fifteen  minutes  and  the  weather  every  half-hour, 
and,  finally,  having  had  a  bath,  indulges  in  buttered  toast 
and  a  cup  of  coffee. 

The  Hut  is  dark,  and  a  shaded  burner  hangs  by  a  canvas 
chair  in  the  kitchen.  The  wind  is  booming  in  gusts,  the  dogs 
howl  occasionally  in  the  veranda,  but  the  night-watchman 
and  his  pipe  are  at  peace  with  all  men.  He  has  discarded 
a  heavy  folio  for  a  light  romance,  while  the  hours  scud  by, 
broken  only  by  the  observations.  The  romance  is  closed, 
and  he  steals  to  his  bunk  with  a  hurricane  lamp  and  finds 
a  bundle  of  letters.  He  knows  them  well,  but  he  reads  them 
— again  ! 

Pearly  light  rises  in  the  north-east  through  the  lessening 
drift,  and  another  day  has  come. 


148 


Hurley 


CHAPTER  IX 
MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

WITH  the  advent  of  the  fateful  Ides  of  March,  winter 
had  practically  set  in,  and  work  outside  had  a 
chequered  career.  When  a  few  calm  hours  inter- 
vened between  two  blizzards  a  general  rush  was  made  to 
continue  some  long-standing  job.  Often  all  that  could  be 
done  was  to  clear  the  field  for  action,  that  is,  dig  away 
large  accumulations  of  snow.  Then  the  furies  would  break 
loose  again,  and  once  more  we  would  play  the  waiting 
game,  meanwhile  concerning  ourselves  with  more  sedentary 
occupations. 

There  was  a  familiar  cry  when,  for  some  meteorological 
reason,  the  wind  would  relapse  into  fierce  gusts  and  then 
suddenly  stop,  to  be  succeeded  by  intense  stillness.  "  Dead 
calm,  up  with  the  wireless  masts  !  "  Every  one  hastily 
dashed  for  his  burberrys,  and  soon  a  crowd  of  muffled 
figures  would  emerge  through  the  veranda  exit,  dragging 
ropes,  blocks,  picks,  and  shovels.  There  was  no  time  to 
be  lost. 

So  the  erection  of  the  wireless  masts  began  in  earnest 
on  April  4,  continued  feverishly  till  the  end  of  the  month, 
suffered  a  long  period  of  partial  cessation  during  May  and 
June,  was  revived  in  July  and  August,  and,  by  September  1, 
two  masts,  each  consisting  of  a  lower-mast  and  top-mast, 
had  been  raised  and  stayed,  while  between  them  stretched 
the  aerial.  For  four  weeks  messages  were  sent  out,  and 
many  of  them  were  caught  by  Macquarie  Island.  Nothing 
was  heard  in  Adelie  Land,  although,  between  certain  hours, 
regular  watches  were  kept  at  the  receiver.     The  aerial  was 

149 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

about  sixty-five  feet  from  the  ground,  and  it  was  resolved 
to  increase  its  height  by  erecting  the  top-gallant  masts; 
but  before  anything  considerable  could  be  done,  a  terrific 
gust  of  wind  on  October  13  broke  three  wire-stays,  and 
down  came  the  mast,  broken  and  splintered  by  the  fall. 
That  is  a  brief  resume  of  the  fortunes  of  the  "wireless" 
during  the  first  year. 

During  February  and  March  there  were  various  other 
operations  of  more  immediate  importance  which  prevented 
concentration  of  our  workers  on  the  erection  of  the  masts. 
There  were  many  odd  jobs  to  finish  about  the  Hut,  the 
Magnetograph  House  and  Absolute  Hut  were  "  under  way,"  the 
air-tractor  sledge  had  to  be  efficiently  housed,  and  all  these  and 
many  other  things  could  be  done  in  weather  during  which  it 
was  out  of  question  to  hoist  a  mast  into  position.  At  first 
we  were  fastidious  and  waited  for  a  calm,  but  later,  as  we 
grew  more  impatient,  a  top-mast  was  actually  hauled  up  in 
a  wind  of  thirty  miles  per  hour,  with  gusts  of  higher 
velocity.  Such  work  would  sometimes  be  interrupted  by 
a  more  furious  outbreak,  when  all  ropes  would  be  secured 
and  everything  made  as  ship-shape  as  possible. 

On  March  15  the  following  note  was  made  :  "  The  wind 
was  on  the  cool  side  just  after  breakfast.  A  few  loads  of 
wireless  equipment  were  sledged  up  to  the  rocks  at  the  back 
of  the  Hut,  and  by  the  time  several  masts  were  carried  to 
the  same  place  we  began  to  warm  to  the  work.  One  of 
Hannam's  coils  of  frozen  rope  (one  hundred  and  twenty 
fathoms)  had  become  kinked  and  tangled,  so  we  dragged 
it  up  the  ice-slope,  straightened  it  out  and  coiled  it  up  again. 
Several  '  dead  men  '  to  hold  the  stays  were  sunk  into  ice- 
holes,  and,  during  the  afternoon,  one  mast  was  dragged 
into  position  by  a  willing  crowd.  Rocks  were  sledged  to 
and  packed  around  the  '  dead  men  '  in  the  holes  to  make 
them  compact.  Towards  sundown  snow  clouds  filled  the 
northern  sky  and  a  blizzard  sprang  vip  which  is  now  doing 
sixty  miles  per  hour.  We  philosophically  expect  another 
week  cooped  up  in  the  Hut." 
150 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

It  took  a  long  time  to  establish  the  twenty  good  anchor- 
ages necessary  for  the  masts.  Within  a  radius  of  eighty 
yards  from  the  centre,  ice-holes  were  dug,  cairns  of  heavy 
boulders  were  built  and  rocky  prominences  dynamited  off 
to  secure  an  efficient  holding  for  the  stout  "  strops  "  of  rope. 
April  24  was  a  typical  day :  "We  spent  the  morning  fixing 
up  '  strops  '  for  the  wireless  masts.  The  wind  was  blowing 
strongly  in  fifty-  to  sixty-mile  gusts  with  drift,  but  most  of 
the  fellows  '  stuck  at  it '  all  day.  It  was  cold  work  on  the 
hands  and  feet.  Handling  picks  and  shovels  predisposes 
to  frost-bite.  Several  charges  of  dynamite  were  fired  in 
one  hole  wherein  a  mast  will  be  stepped." 

Each  mast,  of  oregon  timber,  was  in  four  sections.  The 
lowest  section  was  ten  inches  square  and  tapered  upwards 
to  the  small  royal  mast  at  a  prospective  height  of  one  hundred 
and  twenty  feet.  At  an  early  stage  it  was  realized  that 
we  could  not  expect  to  erect  more  than  three  sections. 
Round  the  steel  caps  at  each  doubling  a  good  deal  of  fitting 
had  to  be  done,  and  Bickerton,  in  such  occupation,  spent 
many  hours  aloft  throughout  the  year.  Fumbhng  with  bulky 
mitts,  handling  hammers  and  spanners,  and  manipulating 
nuts  and  bolts  with  bare  hands,  while  suspended  in  a  boat- 
swain's chair  in  the  wind,  the  man  up  the  mast  had  a 
difficult  and  miserable  task.  Bickerton  was  the  hero  of  all 
such  endeavours.  Hannam  directed  the  other  workers  who 
steadied  the  stays,  cleared  or  made  fast  the  ropes,  pulled 
and  stood  by  the  hauling  tackle  and  so  forth. 

One  day  the  man  on  the  top-mast  dislodged  a  heavy 
engineering  hammer  which  he  thought  secure.  No  warning 
was  given,  as  he  did  not  notice  that  it  had  fallen.  It 
whizzed  down  and  buried  itself  in  the  snow,  just  grazing  the 
heads  of  Close  and  Hodgeman. 

The  ropes  securing  the  aerial  and  running  through  various 
blocks  were  in  constant  danger  of  chafing  during  the  frequent 
hurricanes,  from  their  proximity  to  the  mast  and  stays,  or 
from  friction  on  the  sharp  edges  of  the  blocks.  Unknown 
to  us,  this  had  happened  to  a  strong,  new  manilla  rope  by 

151 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

which  Murphy  was  being  hauled  to  the  top  of  the  lower-mast. 
It  gave  way,  and,  but  for  another  rope  close  by,  which  he 
seized  to  break  his  fall,  an  accident  might  have  ensued. 

Frost-bites  were  common.  There  were  so  many  occasions 
when  one  had  to  stand  for  a  long  time  gripping  a  rope, 
pulling  or  maintaining  a  steady  strain,  that  fingers  would 
promptly  become  numb  and  feet  unbearably  cold.  The 
usual  restorative  was  to  stamp  about  and  beat  the  chest 
with  the  hands — an  old  sailor's  trick.  Attempting  to  climb 
to  a  block  on  the  top-gallant  mast  one  day,  McLean  had 
all  his  fingers  frost-bitten  at  the  same  time. 

In  May  the  weather  was  atrocious,  and  in  June  building 
the  Astronomical  Hut  and  digging  ice-shafts  on  the  glacier 
absorbed  a  good  many  hands.  In  July,  despite  the  enthu- 
siasm and  preparation  for  sledging,  much  was  done.  On 
August  10  the  long  looked-for  top-mast  of  the  southern 
mast  became  a  reality  : 

"  We  were  early  astir — about  7  a.m. — while  the  pink 
coloration  of  dawn  was  stealing  over  the  peaceful  Barrier. 
For  once,  after  months,  it  was  perfectly  still.  We  hurried 
about  making  preparations — hauled  Bickerton  up  to  the 
cross-trees  and  awaited  the  moment  when  we  should  raise 
the  top- mast.  We  pulled  it  up  half-way  and  Bickerton 
affixed  a  pin  in  its  centre,  above  which  two  stays  were  to  be 
attached.  Suddenly,  down  came  the  wind  in  terrific  gusts 
and,  after  securing  the  stays,  the  job  had  to  be  given 
up.  .  .  .  We  were  just  about  to  have  lunch  when  the  wind 
ceased  as  suddenly  as  it  had  begun.  We  all  sallied  out 
once  more,  and,  this  time,  completed  the  job,  though  for 
a  while  the  top-mast  was  in  imminent  peril  of  being  blown 
away  by  a  sharp  northerly  gust." 

Next  day  the  aerial  was  hoisted  in  a  wind  of  sixty  miles 
per  hour,  but  the  strain  was  so  severe  on  the  block,  up- 
wind, that  it  carried  away.  Fortunately  the  insulators 
of  the  aerial  were  entangled  by  the  stays  in  their  fall  to 
ground,  otherwise  some  one  may  have  been  hurt,  as  there 
were  a  dozen  men  almost  directly  below. 
152 


HACK    AT    I'HK    DOOl!    OF    HIS   AS  TKOXOM ICAI, 
TKAXSIT   HOUSE 


r:^-: 

j'^^ 


"^t^^^j^^^^^ 


^V:^^^ 


JMie  Liiml  WEBB  AND  HIS  MAOXETOfiRAPH   HOUSE 


Hurley 


AJelif  Lund      AT  WOEK  OX  THE  AIR-TRACTOR  SLEDGE  IN    Nil.    II ANCAR; 
BAGE,  NINXIS   AND  BICKERTOX 


Hurley 


WEBB  ADJUSTING  THE  INSTRUMENTS  IN  THE 
MAGNETOGRAPH   HOUSE 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

Six  days  after  this  accident,  August  17,  the  top-mast 
halHard  of  the  down-wind  mast  frayed  through,  and  as  a 
stronger  block  was  to  be  affixed  for  the  aerial,  some  one 
had  to  climb  up  to  wire  it  in  position.  Bickerton  improvized 
a  pair  of  climbing  irons,  and,  after  some  preliminary  practice, 
ascended  in  fine  style. 

Finally,  by  September  30,  the  aerial  was  at  such  a  height 
as  to  give  hope  that  long-distance  messages  might  be  des- 
patched. There  was  a  certain  amount  of  suppressed  excite- 
ment on  the  evening  of  that  day  when  the  engine  started 
and  gradually  got  up  speed  in  the  dynamo.  The  sharp 
note  of  the  spark  rose  in  accompanying  crescendo  and, 
when  it  had  reached  its  highest  pitch,  Hannam  struck  off 
a  message  to  the  world  at  large.  No  response  came  after 
several  nights  of  signalhng,  and,  since  sledging  had  usurped 
every  other  interest,  the  novelty  soon  wore  off. 

"  Atmospherics  " — discharges  of  atmospheric  electricity 
— and  discharges  from  the  drift-snow  were  heard  in  the 
wireless  receiver. 

WTiile  messages  were  being  sent,  induction  effects  were 
noted  in  metalhc  objects  around  the  Hut.  A  cook  at  the 
stove  was  the  first  to  discover  this  phenomenon,  and  then 
every  one  conceived  a  mania  for  "  drawing  "  sparks.  A 
rather  stimulating  experience — the  more  so  as  it  usually 
happened  unexpectedly  and  accidentally — was  to  brush 
one's  head  against  one  of  the  numerous  coils  of  flexible 
metal  gas-piping  festooned  about  the  place.  Sparks  imme- 
diately jumped  the  interval  with  startling  effect. 

October  13,  the  day  when  the  mast  blew  down,  was 
known  in  wireless  circles  as  Black  Sunday.  All  had  worked 
keenly  to  make  the  "  wireless  "  a  success,  and  the  final  event 
was  considered  to  be  a  public  misfortune.  However,  the 
honours  were  to  be  retrieved  during  the  following  year. 

It  fell  to  the  lot  of  most  of  the  Staff  that  they  developed 
an  interest  in  terrestrial  magnetism.  For  one  thing  every 
man  had  carried  boulders  to  the  great  stockade  surrounding 

153 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  Magnetograph  House.  Then,  too,  recorders  were  regu- 
larly needed  to  assist  the  magnetician  in  the  Absolute  Hut. 
There,  if  the  temperature  were  not  too  low  and  the  observa- 
tions not  too  lengthy,  the  recorder  stepped  out  into  the 
bhzzard  with  the  conviction  that  he  had  learned  something 
of  value,  and,  when  he  sat  down  to  dinner  that  night,  it  was 
with  a  genial  sense  of  his  own  altruism.  In  his  diary  he 
would  write  it  all  up  for  his  own  edification. 

It  would  be  on  this  wise:   The  Earth's  magnetic  force, 
which  is  the  active  agent  in  maintaining  the  compass -needle 
in  the   magnetic   meridian*   at   any  particular   spot,  acts, 
not  as  is  popularly  supposed,  in  a  horizontal  plane,  but  at 
a  certain  angle  of  inclination  with  the  Earth's  surface.     The 
nearer  the  magnetic  poles  the  more  nearly  vertical  does  the 
freely  suspended  needle  become.     At  the  South  Magnetic  Pole 
it  assumes  a  vertical  position  with  the  south  end  down- 
■  wards  ;    at  the  North  Magnetic  Pole  it  stands  on  its  other 
end.     At  intermediate  positions  near  the  Equator  the  whole 
force  is  exerted,  swinging  the  needle  in  the  horizontal  plane, 
and  in  such  regions  ordinary  ships'  compasses  pivoted  to 
move  freely  only  in  a  horizontal  plane  give  the  greatest 
satisfaction.     On  approaching  the  magnetic  poles,  compasses 
become  sluggish,  for  the  horizontal  deflecting  force  falls  off 
rapidly.     The  force,  acting  in  a  vertical  direction,  tending  to 
make  the  needle  dip,  correspondingly  increases,  but  is  of  no 
value  for  navigation  purposes.     However,  in  the  scientific 
discussion  of  terrestrial  magnetism,  both  the  horizontal  and 
vertical  components  as  well  as  the  absolute  value  of  the 
total  force  are  important,  and  the  determination  of  these 
"  elements  "    is   the   work   of   the   magnetician.     Affecting 
the   average   values   of  the   "  magnetic  elements  "   at  any 
one  spot  on  the  Earth's  surface  are  regular  diurnal  oscilla- 
tions,  apparent  only   by  the  application  of  very   delicate 
methods  of  observation  :  also  there  are  sudden  large  irregular 
movements  referred  to  as  magnetic  storms  ;    the  latter  -are 

*  The  magnetic  meridian  is  the  straight  line  joining  the  North  and 
South  Magnetic  Poles  and  passing  through  the  spot  in  question. 
154 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

always  specially  noticeable  when  unusually  bright  auroral 
phenomena  are  in  progress. 

The  observations  made  in  the  "  Absolute  Hut,"  carried 
out  at  frequent  intervals  and  on  each  occasion  occupying 
two  men  for  several  hours  together,  are  necessary  to  obtain 
standard  values  as  a  check  upon  the  graphic  record  of  the 
self-recording  instruments  which  run  day  and  night  in  the 
"  Magnetograph  House." 

But  this  is  another  story.  Three  hours,  sitting  writing 
figures  in  a  temperature  of  -15°  F.,  is  no  joke.  The  magne- 
tician  is  not  so  badly  off,  because  he  is  moving  about, 
though  he  often  has  to  stop  and  warm  his  fingers,  handling 
the  cold  metal. 

The  Magnetograph  House  had  by  far  the  most  formidable 
name.  The  Hut,  though  it  symbolized  our  all  in  all,  sounded 
very  insignificant  unless  it  were  repeated  with  just  the 
right  intonation.  The  Absolute  Hut  had  a  superadded 
dignity.  The  Hangar,  in  passing,  scarcely  seemed  to  have 
a  right  to  the  capital  H.  The  Transit  House,  on  the  other 
hand,  was  the  only  dangerous  rival  to  the  first  mentioned. 
But  what's  in  a  name  ? 

If  the  Magnetograph  House  had  been  advertised,  it 
would  have  been  described  as  "two  minutes  from  the  Hut." 
This  can  be  easily  understood,  for  the  magnetician  after 
leaving  home  is  speedily  blown  over  a  few  hillocks  and 
sastrugi,  and,  coming  to  an  ice-flat  about  one  hundred  and 
fifty  yards  wide,  swiftly  slides  across  it,  alighting  at  the 
snow-packed  door  of  his  house.  The  outside  porch  is  just 
roomy  enough  for  a  man  to  slip  off  burberrys  and  crampons. 
The  latter  are  full  of  steel  spikes,  and,  being  capable  of 
upsetting  magnetic  equilibrium,  are  left  outside.  Walking  in 
soft  finnesko,  the  magnetician  opens  an  inner  door,  to  be  at 
once  accosted  by  darkness,  made  more  intense  after  the  white 
glare  of  the  snow.  His  eyes  grow  accustomed  to  the  black- 
ness, and  he  gropes  his  way  to  a  large  box  almost  concealing 
the  feeble  glimmer  of  a  lamp.  The  lamp  is  the  source  of 
light,  projected  on  to  small  mirrors  attached  to  the  magnetic 

155 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

needles  of  three  variometers.  A  ray  of  light  is  reflected  from 
the  mirrors  for  several  feet  on  to  a  slit,  past  which  revolves 
sensitized  photographic  paper  folded  on  a  drum  moving 
by  clockwork.  The  slightest  movements  of  the  suspended 
needles  are  greatly  magnified,  and,  when  the  paper  is  removed 
and  developed  in  a  dark-room,  a  series  of  intricate  curves 
denoting  declination,  horizontal  intensity  and  vertical  force, 
are  exquisitely  traced.  Every  day  the  magnetician  attends 
to  the  lamp  and  changes  papers ;  also  at  prearranged  times 
he  tests  his  "  scale  values  "  or  takes  a  "  quick  run." 

To  obtain  results  as  free  as  possible  from  the  local  attrac- 
tion of  the  rocks  in  the  neighbourhood,  Webb  resolved  to 
take  several  sets  of  observations  on  the  ice-sheet.  In  order 
to  make  the  determinations  it  was  necessary  to  excavate  a 
cave  in  the  glacier.  This  was  done  about  three-quarters 
of  a  mile  south  of  the  Hut  in  working  shifts  of  two  men. 
A  fine  cavern  was  hewn  out,  and  there  full  sets  of  magnetic 
observations  were  taken  under  ideal  conditions. 

On  sledging  journeys  the  "  dip  "  and  declination  were 
both  ascertained  at  many  stations,  around  and  up  to  within 
less  than  half  a  degree  of  the  South  Magnetic  Pole. 

While  the  wind  rushed  by  at  a  maddening  pace  and 
stars  flashed  like  jewels  in  a  black  sky,  a  glow  of  pale  yellow 
light  overspread  the  north-east  horizon — the  aurora.  A 
rim  of  dark,  stratus  cloud  was  often  visible  below  the  light 
which  brightened  and  diffused  till  it  curved  as  a  low  arc 
across  the  sky.  It  was  eerie  to  watch  the  contour  of  the 
arc  break,  die  away  into  a  delicate  pallor  and  reillumine 
in  a  travelhng  riband.  Soon  a  long  ray,  as  from  a  search- 
light, flashed  above  one  end,  and  then  a  row  of  vertical 
streamers  ran  out  from  the  arc,  probing  upwards  into  the 
outer  darkness.  The  streamers  waxed  and  waned,  died 
away  to  be  replaced  and  then  faded  into  the  starlight.  The 
arc  lost  its  radiance,  divided  in  patchy  fragments,  and  all 
was  dark  once  more. 

This  would  be  repeated  again  in  a  few  hours  and  irregu- 
156 


5  ^ 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

larly  throughout  the  night,  but  with  scenic  changes  behind 
the  great  sombre  pall  of  the  sky.  North-west,  north- 
east, and  south-east  it  would  elusively  appear  in  nebulous 
blotches,  flitting  about  to  end  finally  in  long  bright  strands 
in  the  zenith,  crossing  the  path  of  the  *'  milky  way." 

By  the  observer,  who  wrote  down  his  exact  observations 
in  the  meteorological  log,  this  was  called  a  "  quiet  night." 

At  times  the  light  was  nimble,  flinging  itself  about  in 
rich  waves,  warming  to  dazzling  yellow-green  and  rose. 
These  were  the  nights  when  "curtains"  hung  festooned  in 
the  heavens,  alive,  rippling,  dancing  to  the  lilt  of  lightning 
music.  Up  from  the  horizon  they  would  mount,  forming 
a  vortex  overhead,  soundless  within  the  silence  of  the  ether. 

A  "  briUiant  display,"  we  would  say,  and  the  observer 
would  be  kept  busy  following  the  track  of  the  evanescent 
rays. 

Powerless,  one  was  in  the  spell  of  an  all-enfolding  wonder. 
The  vast,  solitary  snow-land,  cold-white  under  the  sparkling 
star-gems  ;  lustrous  in  the  radiance  of  the  southern  lights  ; 
furrowed  beneath  the  icy  sweep  of  the  wind.  We  had  come 
to  probe  its  mystery,  we  had  hoped  to  reduce  it  to  terms 
of  science,  but  there  was  always  the  "  indefinable  "  which 
held  aloof,  yet  riveted  our  souls. 

The  aurora  was  always  with  us,  and  almost  without 
exception  could  be  seen  on  a  dark,  driftless  night.  The 
nature  of  the  aurora  polaris  has  not  yet  been  finally  demon- 
strated, though  it  is  generally  agreed  to  be  a  discharge  of 
electricity  occurring  in  the  upper,  more  rarefied  atmosphere. 
The  luminous  phenomena  are  very  similar  to  those  seen 
when  a  current  of  electricity  is  passed  through  a  vacuum 
tube. 

One  receives  a  distinct  impression  of  nearness,  watching 
the  shimmering  edges  of  the  "  curtains  "  in  the  zenith,  but 
all  measurements  indicate  that  they  never  descend  nearer 
than  a  few  miles  above  the  land-surface. 

Careful  records  were  taken  to  estabhsh  a  relation  between 

157 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

magnetic  storms  and  aurorse,  and  a  good  deal  of  evidence 
was  amassed  to  support  the  fact  that  auroral  exhibitions 
correspond  with  periods  of  great  magnetic  disturbance. 
The  displays  in  Adelie  Land  were  found  to  be  more  active 
than  those  which  occur  in  higher  latitudes  in  the  Ross  Sea. 

An  occupation  which  helped  to  introduce  variety  in  our 
life  was  the  digging  of  ice-shafts.  For  the  purpose  of  making 
observations  upon  its  structure  and  temperature  various 
excavations  were  made  in  the  sea-ice,  in  the  ice  of  the  glacier, 
and  in  that  of  the  freshwater  lakes.  The  work  was  always 
popular.  Even  a  whole  day's  labour  with  a  pick  and  shovel 
at  the  bottom  of  an  ice-hole  never  seemed  laborious.  It 
was  all  so  novel. 

A  calm  morning  in  June,  the  sky  is  clear  and  the  north 
ablaze  with  the  colours  of  sunrise — or  is  it  sunset  ?  The 
air  is  delicious,  and  a  cool  waft  comes  down  the  glacier.  A 
deep  ultramarine,  shading  up  into  a  soft  purple  hue,  blends 
in  a  colour-scheme  with  the  lilac  plateau.  Two  men  crunch 
along  in  spiked  boots  over  snow  mounds  and  polished 
sastrugi  to  the  harbour-ice.  The  sea  to  the  north  is  glazed 
with  freezing  spicules,  and  over  it  sweep  the  petrels — our 
only  living  companions  of  the  winter.  It  is  all  an  inspira- 
tion ;  while  hewing  out  chunks  of  ice  and  shovelling  them 
away  is  the  acute  pleasure  of  movement,  exercise. 

The  men  measure  out  an  area  six  feet  by  three  feet,  and 
take  a  preliminary  temperature  of  the  surface-ice  by  inserting 
a  thermometer  in  a  drilled  hole.  Then  the  ice  begins  to 
fly,  and  it  is  not  long  before  they  are  down  one  foot.  Never- 
theless it  would  surprise  those  acquainted  only  with  fresh 
water  ice  to  find  how  tough,  sticky  and  intractable  is  sea- 
ice.  It  is  always  well  to  work  on  a  definite  plan,  channelling 
in  various  directions,  and  then  removing  the  intervening 
lumps  by  a  few  rough  sweeps  of  the  pick.  At  a  depth  of  one 
foot,  another  temperature  is  taken,  and  some  large  samples 
of  the  ice  laid  by  for  the  examination  of  their  crystalline 
structure.  This  is  repeated  at  two  feet,  and  so  on,  until 
158 


jM 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

the  whole  thickness  is  pierced  to  the  sea- water  beneath. 
At  three  feet  brine  may  begin  to  trickle  into  the  hole, 
and  this  increases  in  amount  until  the  worker  is  in  a 
puddle.  The  leakage  takes  place,  if  not  along  cracks, 
through  capillary  channels,  which  are  everywhere  present 
in  sea-ice. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  the  temperature  gradually  rise 
during  the  descent.  At  the  surface  the  ice  is  chilled  to  the 
air-temperature,  say  -10°  F.,  and  it  rises  in  a  steep  gradient 
to  approximately  28°  F.;  close  to  the  freezing-point  of  sea 
water.  The  sea-ice  in  the  boat-harbour  varied  in  thickness 
during  the  winter  between  five  and  seven  feet. 

In  contrast  with  sea-ice,  the  ice  of  a  glacier  is  a  marvel 
of  prismatic  colour  and  glassy  brilliance.  This  is  more  notice- 
able near  the  surface  when  the  sun  is  shining.  Deep  down 
in  a  shaft,  or  in  an  ice-cavern,  the  sapphire  reflection  gives 
to  the  human  face  quite  a  ghastly  pallor. 

During  the  high  winds  it  was  always  easy  to  dispose  of 
the  fragments  of  ice  in  the  earlier  stages  of  sinking  a  shaft. 
To  be  rid  of  them,  all  that  was  necessary  was  to  throw  a 
shovelful  vertically  upwards  towards  the  lee-side  of  the 
hole  ;  the  wind  then  did  the  rest.  Away  the  chips  would 
scatter,  tinkling  over  the  surface  of  the  glacier.  Of  course, 
when  two  men  were  at  work,  each  took  it  in  turns  to  go 
below,  and  the  one  above,  to  keep  warm,  would  impatiently 
pace  up  and  down.  Nevertheless,  so  cold  would  he  become 
at  times  that  a  heated  colloquy  would  arise  between  them 
on  the  subject  of  working  overtime.  When  the  shaft  had 
attained  depth,  both  were  kept  busy.  The  man  at  the 
pit's  mouth  lowered  a  bucket  on  a  rope  to  receive  the  ice 
and,  in  hauling  it  up,  handicapped  with  clumsy  mitts,  he 
had  to  be  careful  not  to  drop  it  on  his  companion's  head. 

The  structural  composition  of  ice  is  a  study  in  itself. 
To  the  cursory  glance  a  piece  of  glacier-ice  appears  homo- 
geneous, but  when  dissected  in  detail  it  is  found  to  be 
formed  of  many  crystalline,  interlocking  grains,  ranging 
in  size  from  a  fraction  of  an  inch  to  several  inches  in  diameter. 

159 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

A  grain-size  of  a  half  to  one  inch  is  perhaps  commonest  in 
Antarctic  glacier-ice. 

The  history  of  Antarctic  glacier-ice  commences  with 
the  showers  of  snow  that  fall  upon  the  plateau.  The  snow 
particles  may  be  blown  for  hundreds  of  miles  before  they 
finally  come  to  rest  and  consolidate.  The  consolidated  snow 
is  called  neve,  the  grains  of  which  are  one-twenty- fifth  to  one. 
hundredth  of  an  inch  in  diameter,  and,  en  masse,  present 
a  dazzling  white  appearance  on  account  of  the  air  spaces 
which  occupy  one-third  to  one-half  of  the  whole.  In  time, 
under  the  influence  of  a  heavy  load  of  accumulated  layers 
of  neve,  the  grains  run  together  and  the  air  spaces  are 
eliminated.  The  final  result  is  clear,  transparent  ice,  of 
a  more  or  less  sapphire-blue  colour  when  seen  in  large  blocks. 
It  contains  only  occasional  air-bubbles,  and  the  size  of  the 
grains  is  much  increased. 

Lake-ice,  freezing  from  the  surface  downwards,  is  built 
up  of  long  parallel  prisms,  like  the  cells  of  a  honey-comb 
on  a  large  scale.  In  a  lakelet  near  the  Hut  this  was  beauti- 
fully demonstrated.  In  some  places  cracks  and  fissures  filled 
with  snow-dust  traversed  the  body  of  the  ice,  and  in  other  places 
long  strings  of  beaded  air-bubbles  had  become  entangled  in  the 
process  of  freezing.  To  lie  down  on  the  clear  surface  and 
gaze  "  through  the  looking-glass  "  to  the  rocky  bottom, 
twenty  feet  below,  was  a  glimpse  into  "  Wonderland." 

In  the  case  of  sea-ice,  the  simple  prismatic  structure 
is  complicated  owing  to  the  presence  of  saline  matter  dis- 
solved in  the  sea  water.  The  saline  tracts  between  the 
prisms  produce  a  milky  or  opalescent  appearance.  The 
prisms  are  of  fresh  water  ice,  for  in  freezing  the  brine  is 
rejected  and  forced  to  occupy  the  interstices  of  the  prisms. 
Water  of  good  drinking  quality  can  be  obtained  by 
allowing  sea  water  ice  to  thaw  partially.  The  brine,  of 
lower  freezing-point,  flows  away,  leaving  only  fresh  water 
ice  behind.  In  this  way  blocks  of  sea-ice  exposed  to  the 
sun's  rays  are  relieved  of  their  salty  constituents,  and 
crumble  into  pellucid  gravel  when  disturbed. 
160 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

A  popular  subject  commanding  general  interest,  apart 
from  the  devoted  attention  of  specialists,  was  zoological 
collecting.  Seals  and  birds  were  made  the  prey  of  every- 
one, and  dredging  through  the  sea-ice  in  winter  and  spring 
was  always  a  possible  diversion. 

It  was  a  splendid  sight  to  watch  the  birds  sailing  in  the 
high  winds  of  Adelie  Land.  In  winds  of  fifty  to  seventy 
miles  per  hour,  when  with  good  crampons  one  had  to  stagger 
warily  along  the  ice-foot,  the  snow  petrels  and  Antarctic 
petrels  were  in  their  element.  Wheeling,  swinging,  sinking, 
planing  and  soaring,  they  were  radiant  with  life — ^the  wild 
spirits  of  the  tempest.  Even  in  moderate  drift,  when  through 
swirling  snow  the  vistas  of  sea  whitened  under  the  flail  of 
the  wind,  one  suddenly  caught  the  silver  flash  of  wings  and 
a  snow  petrel  glided  past. 

But  most  memorable  of  all  were  certain  winter  mornings 
of  unexpected  calm,  when  ruddy  clouds  tessellated  the 
northern  sky  and  were  mirrored  in  the  freezing  sea.  Then 
the  petrels  would  be  en  fete,  flying  over  from  the  east  follow- 
ing the  line  of  the  Barrier,  winding  round  the  icy  coves, 
darting  across  the  jutting  points  and  ever  onward  in  their 
long  migration.  In  the  summer  they  flew  for  weeks  from 
the  west — a  never-ending  string  of  snow,  silver-grey  and 
Antarctic  petrels,  and  Cape  pigeons.  The  silver-grey  petrels 
and  Cape  pigeons  were  only  abroad  during  that  season  and 
were  accompanied  by  skua  gulls,  giant  petrels,  Wilson  petrels, 
and  penguins.  The  penguins  remained  in  Adelie  Land  for  the 
longest  period — almost  six  months,  the  skua  gulls  and  giant 
petrels  for  five  months,  and  the  rest  for  a  shorter  period — 
the  tolerable  season  of  midsummer. 

Birds  that  haunt  the  wide  oceans  all  make  use  of  the 
soaring  principle  in  flight,  some  much  more  than  others. 
The  beautiful  sliding  sweep  of  the  albatross  is  the  most 
familiar  example.  With  wings  outspread,  it  is  a  miniature 
aeroplane  requiring  no  engines,  for  the  wind  itself  supplies 
the  power.  A  slight  movement  of  the  tail-feathers  and 
wing-tips  controls  its  balance  with  nice  precision.  Birds 
VOL.  I  L  IGl 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

employing  this  method  of  flight  find  their  home  in  the 
zone  of  continuous  steady  winds  which  blow  across  the  broad 
wastes  of  the  southern  seas. 

Many  petrels  on  the  wing  were  shot  during  the  winter. 
Laseron,  who  prepared  the  skins  of  our  Adelie  Land  collec- 
tion, determined,  in  the  case  of  a  number  of  specimens,  the 
ratio  of  weight  to  horizontal  area  exposed  to  the  wind.  This 
subject  is  one  which  has  lately  exercised  the  curiosity  of 
aviators.  The  ratios  are  those  evolved  by  nature,  and,  as 
such,  should  be  wellnigh  perfect.  Below  is  appended  a 
table  of  the  results  obtained. 

Weight  of  Certain  Antarctic  Birds  in  Relation  to  Wing  Areas 
(Stated  in  pounds  per  square  foot  of  wing  surface) 

Each  is  the  mean  of  several  determinations  by  Laseron 

Giant  petrel         .......       3-5 

Albatross    ........       2-4 

Antarctic  petrel  .  .  .  .  .  .  .2-1 

Skua  gull 1-6 

Snow  petrel         .......       1-1 

Wilson  petrel       .  .  .  .  .  .  .0-0 

Values  from  a  book  of  reference  quoted  for  comparison 

Bat 0-1 

Sparrow      ........  0-4 

Wild  goose  .......  1-7 

During  the  winter,  for  a  long  period,  no  seals  ventured 
ashore,  though  a  few  were  seen  swimming  in  the  bay.  The 
force  of  the  wind  was  so  formidable  that  even  a  heavy  seal, 
exposed  in  the  open,  broadside-on,  would  be  literally  blown 
into  the  water.  This  fact  was  actually  observed  out  on 
the  harbour-ice.  A  Weddell  seal  made  twelve  attempts  to 
land  on  a  low  projecting  shelf — an  easy  feat  under  ordinary 
circumstances.  The  wind  was  in  the  region  of  eighty-five 
miles  per  hour,  and  every  time  the  clumsy,  ponderous 
creature  secured  its  first  hold,  back  it  would  be  tumbled. 
Once  it  managed  to  raise  itself  on  to  the  flat  surface,  and, 
after  a  breathing  spell,  commenced  to  shuffle  towards  the 
shelter  of  some  pinnacles  on  one  side  of  the  harbour.  Imme- 
diately its  broad  flank  was  turned  to  the  wind  it  was  rolled 
162 


fTr',  f-V'^  \r'>.  n 


52 


'  fi^l 

2 

»^l 

if 

»   J 

^ 

j 

-^ 

■ 

w 

33 

lJJ 

<« 

w 

Q 

P 

MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

over,  hung  for  a  few  seconds  on  the  brink,  and  then  splashed 
into  the  sea.  On  the  other  hand,  during  the  spring,  a  few 
more  ambitious  seals  won  their  way  ashore  in  high  winds  ; 
but  they  did  not  remain  long  in  the  piercing  cold,  moving 
uneasily  from  place  to  place  in  search  of  protecting  hum- 
mocks and  finally  taking  to  the  water  in  despair.  Often 
a  few  hours  of  calm  weather  was  the  signal  for  half  a  dozen 
animals  to  land.  The  wind  sooner  or  later  sprang  up  and 
drove  them  back  to  their  warmer  element. 

Under  the  generic  name,  seal,  are  included  the  true  or 
hair  seals  and  the  sea-bears  or  fur  seals.  Of  these  the  fur 
seals  are  sub-polar  in  distribution,  inhabiting  the  cold 
temperate  waters  of  both  hemispheres,  but  never  living 
amongst  the  polar  ice.  The  southern  coast  of  Australia 
and  the  sub-antarctic  islands  were  their  favourite  haunts, 
but  the  ruthless  slaughter  of  the  early  days  practically 
exterminated  them.  From  Macquarie  Island,  for  example, 
several  hundred  thousand  skins  were  taken  in  a  few  years, 
and  of  late  not  a  single  specimen  has  been  seen. 

Closely  related  to  the  fur  seals  are  the  much  larger 
animals  popularly  known  as  sea-lions.  These  still  exist  in 
great  numbers  in  south  temperate  waters.  Both  are  dis- 
tinguished from  the  hair  seals  by  one  obvious  characteristic  : 
their  method  of  propulsion  on  land  is  by  a  "  lolloping  " 
motion,  in  which  the  front  and  hind  flippers  are  used  alter- 
nately. The  hair  seals  move  by  a  caterpillar-like  shuffle, 
making  little  or  no  use  of  their  flippers ;  and  so,  the 
terminal  parts  of  their  flippers  are  not  bent  outwards 
as  they  are  in  the  fur  seals  and  sea-lions. 

Of  the  hair  seals  there  are  five  varieties  to  be  recognized  in 
the  far  South.  The  Weddell  seals,  with  their  mottled-grey 
coats,  are  the  commonest.  They  haunt  the  coasts  of  Antarctica 
and  are  seldom  found  at  any  distance  from  them.  Large 
specimens  of  this  species  reach  nine  and  a  half  feet  in 
length. 

The  crab-eater  seal,  a  smaller  animal,  lives  mostly  on 
the  pack-ice.     Lying  on  a  piece  of  floe  in  the  sunshine  it 

163 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

has  a  glistening,  silver-grey  skin — another  distinguishing 
mark  being  its  small,  handsome  head  and  short,  thin  neck. 
Small  crustaceans  form  its  principal  food. 

The  Ross  seal,  another  inhabitant  of  the  pack-ice,  is 
short  and  bulky,  varying  from  a  pale  yellowish-green  on 
the  under  side  to  a  dark  greenish-brown  on  the  back.  Its 
neck  is  ample  and  bloated,  and  when  distended  in  excitement 
reminds  one  of  a  pouter-pigeon.  This  rare  seal  appears  to 
subsist  mainly  on  squid  and  jelly-fish. 

The  sea-leopard,  the  only  predacious  member  of  the  seal 
family,  has  an  elongated  agile  body  and  a  large  head  with 
massive  jaws.  In  general  it  has  a  mottled  skin,  darker 
towards  the  back.  It  lives  on  fish,  penguins  and  seals. 
Early  in  April,  Hurley  and  ^IcLean  were  the  first  to  obtain 
proof  that  the  sea-leopard  preyed  on  other  seals.  Among 
the  broken  fioe-ice  close  beneath  the  ice-cliffs  to  the  west 
of  Winter  Quarters,  the  wind  was  driving  the  dead  body 
of  a  Weddell  seal  which  swept  past  them,  a  few  yards  distant, 
to  the  open  water.  Then  it  was  that  a  sea-leopard  was 
observed  tearing  off  and  swallowing  great  pieces  of  flesh 
and  blubber  from  the  carcase. 

The  last  variety  of  hair  seal,  the  sea  elephant,  varies 
considerably  from  the  preceding.  Reference  has  already 
been  made  to  the  species  earlier  in  the  narrative.  The  habitat 
of  these  monstrous  animals  ranges  over  the  cold,  south- 
temperate  seas ;  sea  elephants  are  but  occasional  visitors 
to  the  ice-bound  regions.  Although  they  have  been  ex- 
terminated in  many  other  places,  one  of  their  most  populous 
resorts  at  the  present  day  is  Macquarie  Island. 

In  the  case  of  all  the  hair  seals  a  layer  of  blubber  several 
inches  in  thickness  invests  the  body  beneath  the  skin  and 
acts  as  a  conserver  of  warmth.  They  are  largely  of  value 
for  the  oil  produced  by  rendering  down  the  blubber.  The 
pelts  are  used  for  leather. 

The  operation  of  skinning  seals  for  specimens,  in  low 
temperatures  and  in  the  inevitable  wind,  was  never  unduly 
protracted.  We  were  satisfied  merely  to  strip  off  the  skin, 
164 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

leaving  much  blubber  still  adhering  to  it.  In  this  rough 
condition  it  was  taken  into  the  work-room  of  the  Hut  to  be 
cleaned.  The  blubber  froze,  and  then  had  the  consistency 
of  hard  soap  and  was  readily  severed  from  the  pelt.  It 
was  found  that  there  exuded  amongst  the  frozen  blubber 
a  thin  oil  which  remained  liquid  when  collected  and 
exposed  to  low  temperatures.  This  oil  was  used  to 
lubricate  the  anemometer  and  other  instruments  exposed 
outside. 

The  main  part  of  the  biological  work  lay  in  the  marine 
collections.  Hunter  with  the  small  hand-dredge  brought  up 
abundant  samples  of  life  from  depths  ranging  to  fifty 
fathoms.  In  water  shallower  than  ten  fathoms  the  variety  of 
specimens  was  not  great,  including  seaweeds  up  to  eighteen  or 
more  feet  in  length,  a  couple  of  forms  of  starfish,  various  small 
mollusca,  two  or  three  varieties  of  fish,  several  sea-spiders, 
hydroids  and  lace  corals,  and,  in  great  profusion,  worms 
and  small  crustaceans.  In  deeper  waters  the  life  became 
much  richer,  so  that  examples  of  almost  every  known  class 
of  marine  animals  were  represented. 

Early  in  June  the  sea  bottom  in  depths  less  than  ten 
fathoms  had  become  so  coated  with  ice  that  dredging  in 
shallow  water  was  suspended. 

Floating  or  swimming  freely  were  examples  of  pteropods, 
worms,  crustaceans,  ostracods,  and  jelly-fish.  These  were 
easily  taken  in  the  hand-net. 

In  those  regions  where  ice  and  water  are  intermingled, 
the  temperature  of  the  water  varies  very  slightly  in  summer 
and  winter,  remaining  approximately  at  freezing-point.  In 
summer  the  tendency  to  heating  is  neutralized  by  a  solution 
of  some  of  the  ice,  and  in  winter  the  cold  is  absorbed  in  the 
production  of  a  surface  layer  of  ice.  This  constancy  of  the 
sea's  temperature  is  favourable  to  organic  life.  On  land 
there  is  a  wide  range  in  temperature,  and  only  the  meagre 
mosses  and  lichens,  and  the  forms  of  insect  life  which  live 
among  them  can  exist,  because  they  have  developed  the 
capacity  of  suspending  animation  during  the  winter.     The 

165 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

fresh-water  lakelets  were  found  to  be  inhabited  by  low  forms 
of  life,  mainly  microscopic.  Among  these  were  diatoms, 
algae,  protozoa,  rotifera,  and  bacteria. 

The  last-named  were  investigated  by  McLean  and  were 
found  to  be  manifold  in  distribution.  Besides  those  from  the 
intestines  of  animals  and  birds,  cultures  were  successfully 
made  from  the  following  natural  sources  :  lichen  soil,  moss 
soil,  morainic  mud,  guano,  ice  and  snow.  The  results  may 
open  some  new  problems  in  bacteriology. 

Of  recent  years  much  attention  has  been  given  to  the 
study  of  parasites — parasitology.  Parasites  may  be  external, 
on  the  skin ;  internal,  in  the  alimentary  canal ;  or  resident, 
in  the  corpuscles  of  the  blood.  In  tropical  countries,  where 
there  is  great  promiscuity  of  life,  one  is  led  to  expect  their 
almost  universal  presence.  But  in  polar  regions,  where 
infection  and  intimate  co-habitation  for  long  periods  are  not 
the  rule,  while  the  climate  is  not  favourable  to  organic 
existence,  one  would  be  surprised  to  find  them  in  any  great 
number.  The  fact  remains  that  internal  p?>rasites  were  found 
in  the  intestine  of  every  animal  and  fish  examined,  and  in 
all  the  birds  except  the  Wilson  petrel.  External  parasites 
were  present  on  every  species  of  bird  and  seal,  though 
individuals  were  often  free  of  them.  This  was  so  in  the 
case  of  the  Adelie  penguins.  It  is  a  demonstration  of  the 
protective  warmth  of  the  feathers  that  Emperor  penguins 
may  harbour  insect  parasites  in  great  numbers.  It  is  only 
less  wonderful  than  the  fact  that  they  are  able  to  rear  their 
young  during  the  Antarctic  winter.  A  large  number  of 
blood-slides  were  prepared  and  stained  for  examination  for 
blood-parasites. 

Searching  for  "  fleas  "  amongst  the  feathers  of  birds  and 
the  hair  of  seals,  or  examining  the  viscera  for  "  worms  "  is 
neither  of  them  a  pleasant  occupation.  To  be  really  success- 
ful, the  enthusiasm  of  the  speciahst  is  necessary.  Hunter 
allowed  no  opportunities  to  pass  and  secured  a  fine  collection 
of  parasites. 

Amongst  other  work,  McLean  carried  out  monthly 
166 


*^ 


A  C'UAll-EATEl!   SEAL;    COMMON   AMON(;ST    THE   PACK-ICE 


II II  r  ley 


THE   UAltE   I'.OSS  SEAL 


llurtey 


ONE  OF  MCLEAN'S  CULTURES;  BACTEKIA   A.M)  .MOULDS: 
ILLUSTKATIXG   MICEO-ORGANISJIS  IX   THE  HUT 


Hurley 


Wm 


m.  % 


I(E  FLOWEKS  OX  THE   XEWLV    FOILMEIJ  SEA-ICE 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

observations  on  six  men,  determining  the  colour-index 
and  haemoglobin  value  of  their  blood  over  a  period  of  ten 
months.  The  results  showed  a  distinct  and  upward  rise 
above  the  normal. 

Among  societies  privileged  to  see  the  daily  paper  and 
to  whom  diversity  and  change  are  as  the  breath  of  life,  the 
weather  is  apt  to  be  tabooed  as  a  subject  of  conversation. 
But  even  the  most  versatile  may  suddenly  find  themselves 
stripped  of  ideas,  ignominiously  reduced  to  the  obvious  topic. 
To  us,  instead  of  being  a  mere  prelude  to  more  serious 
matters,  or  the  last  resort  of  a  feeble  intellect,  it  was  the 
all-engrossing  theme.  The  man  with  the  latest  hare-brained 
theory  of  the  causation  of  the  wind  was  accorded  a  full 
hearing.  The  lightning  calculator  who  estimated  the  annual 
tonnage  of  drift-snow  sweeping  off  Adelie  Land  was  received 
as  a  futurist  and  thinker.  Discussion  was  always  free,  and 
the  subject  was  never  thrashed  out.  Evidence  on  the  great 
topic  accumulated  day  by  day  and  month  by  month;  yet 
there  was  no  one  without  an  innate  hope  that  winter  would 
bring  calm  weather  or  that  spring-time,  at  least,  must  be 
propitious. 

Meanwhile  the  meteorologist  accepted  things  as  he  found 
them,  supplied  the  daily  facts  of  wind-mileage  and  direction, 
amount  of  drift,  temperature  and  so  forth,  which  were 
immediately  seized  by  more  vivacious  minds  and  made  the 
basis  of  daring  speculations. 

The  daily  facts  were  increased  by  the  construction  of  a 
new  instrument  known  as  the  puffometer.  It  was  entirely 
a  home-made  contrivance,  designed  to  measure  the  speed 
of  heavy  gusts  of  wind.  A  small  aluminium  sphere  was 
arranged  to  blow  out  at  the  end  of  a  light  cord  exerting 
tension  on  a  calibrated  spring.  The  pull  was  transferred 
to  a  lever  carrying  a  pencil,  which  travelled  across  a  disk 
of  carbonized  paper.  The  disk,  moving  by  clockwork,  made 
a  complete  revolution  every  hour.  The  recording  parts  of 
the  instrument  were  enclosed  in  a  snow-proof  box  in  which 

167 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

there  was  a  small  aperture  on  the  leeward  side,  through 
which  ran  the  cord  attachment  of  the  sphere.  This  may 
give  a  rough  idea  of  the  apparatus  employed  to  measure  the 
momentary  velocity  of  the  cyclonic  gusts.  The  idea  is  not 
an  original  one,  having  been  previously  applied  for  use  on 
kites. 

It  was  not  always  possible  to  use  the  puffometer  in  the 
strongest  gusts  because  these  were  often  transient,  occurring 
unexpectedly  or  during  the  night ;  while  it  took  a  little 
time  to  get  the  instrument  into  running  order.  Even  in 
daylight,  with  the  landscape  clear  of  drift,  it  was  a  time- 
absorbing  and  difficult  task  to  secure  a  record. 

Two  men  start  from  the  Hut  with  iron  crampons  and  a 
full  complement  of  clothes  and  mitts.  Outside  they  find 
themselves  in  a  rushing  torrent  of  air,  pulsating  with  mighty 
gust-waves.  Lowered  from  the  estate  of  upright  manhood, 
they  humbly  crawl,  or  make  a  series  of  crouching  sprints 
between  the  gusts.  Over  the  scattered  boulders  to  the  east 
of  the  Hut,  across  a  patch  of  polished  snow  they  push  to  the 
first  low  ridge,  and  there  they  stop  for  breath.  Up  on  the 
side  of  "  Annie  Hill,"  in  the  local  phrase,  the  tide  sweeps 
by  with  fiendish  strength,  and  among  the  jagged  rocks  the 
man  clutching  the  puffometer-box  has  a  few  desperate  falls. 
At  last  both  clamber  slowly  to  an  eminence  where  a  long 
steel  pipe  has  been  erected.  To  the  top  of  this  the  puffo- 
meter is  hauled  by  means  of  a  pulle}^  and  line.  At  the  same 
time  the  aluminium  sphere  is  released,  and  out  it  floats  in 
the  wind  tugging  at  the  spring. 

The  puffometer  was  left  out  for  an  hour  at  a  time,  and 
separate  gusts  up  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  and  one  hundred 
and  eighty  miles  per  hour  were  commonly  indicated.  I 
remember  the  final  fate  of  this  invention.  While  helping  to 
mount  it  one  day,  the  wind  picked  me  up  clear  of  the  ground 
and  dashed  myself  and  the  instrument  on  some  rocks  several 
yards  away.  The  latter  was  badly  damaged,  but  thick 
clothing  saved  me  from  serious  injury. 

The  steadiness  of  the  temperature  was  a  subject  for 
168 


NOOHOTtfa9HVZ'?IJ-L3a93N  *So 


anoH    a3d    ssiiw 


CD 

N    i    f  I"!   1    i    Si  1 

3     s       1      ii     1     ^     ^              M     i 

1      2          |!         <i      5  «  c       3         ,1         ii      o 

i   ^     ^'     ■'    gj    "     -         i 

1  MM;  iJ^    !i   n  1 

THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

debate.  The  stronger  the  wind  blew,  the  less  variation  did 
the  thermometer  show.  Over  a  period  of  several  days  there 
might  be  a  range  of  only  four  or  five  degrees.  Ordinarily, 
this  might  be  expected  of  an  insular  climate,  but  in  our 
case  it  depended  upon  the  fact  that  the  wind  remained 
steady  from  the  interior  of  the  vast  frigid  continent.  The 
air  which  flowed  over  the  Hut  had  all  passed  through  the 
same  temperature-cycle.  The  atmosphere  of  the  interior, 
where  the  plateau  stood  at  an  elevation  of,  say,  eight  thou- 
sand feet,  might  have  a  temperature  —  45°  F.  As  the  air 
flowed  northwards  over  Adelie  Land  to  the  sea,  it  would  rise 
slowly  in  temperature  owing  to  the  increased  barometric 
pressure  consequent  on  the  descending  gradient  of  the 
plateau.  At  sea-level  the  temperature  of  the  river  of  air 
would  be,  approximately,    —  20°  F. 

Such  a  rise  in  temperature  due  to  compression  is 
a  well-known  phenomenon,  referred  to  as  the  Foehn 
effect. 

The  compression  of  the  atmosphere  during  the  gusts 
affected  the  air  temperature  so  considerably  that,  coincident 
with  their  passage,  the  mercury  column  could  often  be  seen 
rising  and  falling  through  several  degrees.  The  uniform  condi- 
tions experienced  during  steady  high  winds  were  not  only  ex- 
pressed by  the  slight  variation  in  the  temperature,  but  often 
in  a  remarkably  even  barometric  curve.  Thus  on  July  11 
the  wind -velocity  for  twenty-four  hours  was,  throughout, 
seventy  miles  per  hour  ;  the  temperature  remaining 
within  a  few  degrees  of  -  21°  F.,  and  the  barometric 
curve  did  not  show  as  much  range  as  one-twentieth  of  an 
inch. 

In  attending  to  the  many  instruments  and  in  gathering 
the  voluminous  meteorological  data,  Madigan  had  his  hands 
very  full.  Throughout  two  years  he  carried  on  the  work 
capably  and  thoroughly.  It  was  difficult  to  keep  the 
instruments  free  from  the  penetrating  snow  and  in  good 
running  order.  The  Robinson  anemometer  was  perhaps  the 
greatest  source  of  worry.  Repairs  and  readjustments 
170 


pi 


gP5 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

were  unavoidable,  as  the  instrument  was  constantly  work- 
ing at  high  pressure.  In  order  that  these  might  be 
carried  out  efficiently,  the  whole  apparatus  had  to  be 
carried  down  to  the  Hut.  Here,  Bickerton  and  Correll  were 
continually  in  consultation  with  the  meteorologist  on  the 
latest  breakdown.  Cups  were  blown  off  several  times,  and 
one  was  lost  and  replaced  with  difficulty.     Most  aggravating 


Lid  (open) 


Sea    water 


THE  TIDE-GAUGE 

The  rise  and  fall  of  the  tide  is  coincident  with  the  movements  of  a  perpendicular  wire  to  which  the 

y/ooi  is  attached.     The  Wheel  is  revolved,  and  through  wire  connections  (indicated  above)  displaces 

vertically  the  Pen.     This  traces  a  record  on  paper  folded  on  the  Drwn  which  Is  driven  by  clockwork. 

In  all  weathers,  the  box  was  enveloped  in  drift-proof  canvas. 


of  all  was  a  habit  the  clocks  developed  of  stopping  during 
the  colder  spells.  The  old-fashioned  method  of  boiling  them 
was  found  of  assistance,  but  it  was  discovered  that  the  best 
treatment  was  to  put  them  through  successive  baths  of 
benzene  and  alcohol. 

The  most  chronic   sufferer  throughout  the  vicissitudes 
of  temperature  was  the  clock  belonging  to  Bage's  tide-gauge. 

171 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Every  sleeper  in  the  Hut  who  was  sensitive  to  ticking  knew 
and  reviled  that  clock.  So  often  was  it  subjected  to  warm, 
curative  treatment  in  various  resting-places  that  it  was 
hunted  from  pillar  to  post.  A  radical  operation  by  Correll — 
the  insertion  of  an  extra  spring — became  necessary  at  last. 
Correll,  when  not  engaged  designing  electroscopes,  improving 
sledge-meters  and  perfecting  theodolites,  was  something  of  a 
speciahst  in  clocks.  His  advice  on  the  subject  of  refractory 
time-pieces  was  freely  asked  and  cheerfully  given.  By 
perseverance  and  unlimited  patience,  the  tide-gauge  down 
on  the  harbour-ice  was  induced  to  supply  a  good  series  of 
unbroken  records. 

Antarctica  is  a  world  of  colour,  brilliant  and  intensely 
pure.  The  chaste  whiteness  of  the  snow  and  the  velvet 
blackness  of  the  rocks  belong  to  days  of  snowy  nimbus 
enshrouding  the  horizon.  Wlien  the  sky  has  broken  into 
cloudlets  of  fleece,  their  edges  are  painted  pale  orange, 
fading  or  richly  glowing  if  the  sun  is  low.  In  the  high  sun 
they  are  rainbow-rimmed. 

The  clouds  have  opened  into  rifts  and  the  sun  is  setting 
in  the  north-west.  The  widening  spaces  in  the  zenith  are 
azure,  and  low  in  the  north  they  are  emerald.  Scenic 
changes  are  swift.  Above  the  mounting  plateau  a  lofty 
arch  of  clear  sky  has  risen,  flanked  by  roseate  clouds.  Far 
down  in  the  south  it  is  tinged  with  indigo  and  ultramarine, 
washed  with  royal  purple  paling  onwards  into  cold  violet 
and  greyish-blue. 

Soon  the  north  is  unveiled.  The  liquid  globe  of  sun  has 
departed,  but  his  glory  still  remains.  Down  from  the  zenith 
his  colours  descend  through  greenish-blue,  yellowish-green, 
straw-yellow,  light  terra-cotta  to  a  diffuse  brick-red;  each 
reflected  in  the  dull  sheen  of  freezing  sea.  Out  on 
the  infinite  horizon  float  icebergs  in  a  mirage  of  mobile 
gold.  The  Barrier,  curving  to  east  and  west,  is  a  wall  of 
delicate  pink  overlaid  with  a  wondrous  mauve — ^the  rising 
plateau. 
172 


< 


%  I 

<    I 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

A  cold  picture — yet  it  awakens  the  throb  of  inborn 
divinity. 

Despite  contrary  predictions,  there  were  some  enjoyable 
days  in  June.  Occupation  had  to  be  strenuous,  making  the 
blood  run  hot,  otherwise  the  wind  was  apt  to  be  chill.  So 
the  Transit  House  was  founded,  and  there  were  many  volun- 
teers to  assist  Bage  in  carrying  the  tons  of  stones  which 
formed  its  permanent  base.  The  nearest  large  collection  of 
boulders  was  twenty  yards  away,  on  the  edge  of  a  moraine,  but 
these  after  a  while  became  exhausted.  Plenty  of  rocks  actually 
showed  above  the  surface,  but  the  majority  were  frozen-in, 
and,  when  of  suitable  size,  could  only  be  moved  by  a  heavy 
crowbar.  Some  of  the  men,  therefore,  dislodged  the  rocks, 
while  others  carried  them. 

"When  Bage  was  wondering  how  long  the  supply  would 
last,  Ninnis  and  Mertz  came  to  the  rescue  with  sledges  and 
dog-teams.  Boxes  were  piled  on  to  the  sledges  and  away 
the  teams  went,  careering  across  the  ice- flat  towards  the 
Magnetograph  House  close  to  which  there  were  many  heaps 
of  stones,  wind-swept  and  easily  displaced.  Soon  a  regular 
service  was  plying  to  the  foundations,  and,  at  the  same 
time,  the  dogs  were  being  trained.  This  occupation  was 
continued,  weather  permitting,  for  several  weeks  before 
Midwinter's  Day.  Thus  the  drivers  gained  experience, 
while  the  animals,  with  a  wholesome  dread  of  the  whip, 
became  more  responsive  to  commands.  Eagerly  the  huskies 
strained  at  their  traces  with  excited  yelps.  The  heavily 
laden  sledges  would  break  out  and  start  off  with  increasing 
speed  over  the  rough  ice.  The  drivers,  running  at  full 
speed,  jumped  on  the  racing  loads — Mertz  in  the  lead 
shouting  some  quaint  yodel  song ;  Ninnis,  perhaps,  just 
behind  upbraiding  a  laggard  dog. 

Midwinter's  Day  !  For  once,  the  weather  rose  to  the 
occasion  and  calmed  during  the  few  hours  of  the  twilight- 
day.  It  was  a  jovial  occasion,  and  we  celebrated  it  with 
the  uproarious  delight  of  a  community  of  eighteen  young 

173 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

men  unfettered  by  small  conventions.     The  sun  was  return- 
ing, and  we  were  glad  of  it.     Already  we  were  dreaming  of 


or 


-B 


i^r^-y  dy  pir^er" 


(3cof|ief  pofage  d  la  l^cioe 

j^aricot  Vertb 

'pifjgouiQ   a   \a  "tzrrz    Qdelie 

fefir5  foi^  a  la  <fT}eQtt)e 

fferQrrjcs  ^ou\/elle5 

"Plun}  fbudiQg  yQiorj  JacK. 
f^te  de  Qro^eille^ 

Cesser  tb 


Caret 
Ti  n  fa  ra 


Burgundy 
169a 


Port 
f\6pKe 


occon5poo.r»)tnfj  -  Tlj«  T«n,|M jf.    for  £.Vtf   oT^  £,''«'■  •'= 


Bi 


Jl] 


MIDWINTER'S  DAY  MENU  AT  THE  MAIN  BASE, 
ADELIB  LAND,  1912 


spring  and  sledging,  summer  and  sledging,  the  ship  and 
home.  It  was  the  turn  of  the  tide,  and  the  future  seemed 
to  be  sketched  in  firm,  sure  outline.  While  the  rest  explored 
all  the  ice-caves  and  the  whole  extent  of  our  small  rocky 
174 


MIDWINTER  AND  ITS  WORK 

"  selection,"  Hannam  and  Bickerton  shouldered  the  domestic 
responsibilities.  Their  menu  du  diner  to  us  was  a  marvel 
of  gorgeous  delicacies.  After  the  toasts  and  speeches  came 
a  musical  and  dramatic  programme,  punctuated  by  choice 
gramophone  records  and  rowdy  student  choruses.  The 
washing-up  was  completed  by  all  hands  at  midnight.  Out- 
side, the  wind  was  not  to  be  outdone  ;  it  surpassed  itself 
with  an  unusual  burst  of  ninety-five  miles  per  hour. 


175 


CHAPTER  X 
THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

THE  world  of  fashion  insists  on  its  mniute  vagaries 
in  dress  not  always  with  an  eye  to  utility  and  an 
explorer  in  the  polar  regions  is  a  very  fastidious 
person,  expending  a  vast  amount  of  care  on  his  attire,  but 
with  the  sole  idea  of  comfort,  warmth,  and  usefulness.  The 
clothes  he  wears  are  many  and  often  cumbersome,  but  they 
have  gradually  been  perfected  to  meet  the  demands  of  the 
local  weather  conditions.  After  a  sojourn  in  the  ice-lands, 
he  returns  to  civilization  with  a  new  concept  of  the  value 
of  dress.  At  last  he  can  stand  still  without  being  reminded 
that  his  feet  are  chilly  ;  he  experiences  the  peculiar  sensa- 
tion of  walking  about  in  an  airily  light  suit,  in  glove-tight 
boots,  without  helmet  or  mitts.  It  gives  him  such  a  delicious 
feeling  of  freedom  that  his  energy  is  unbounded  and  life  is 
a  very  pleasant  and  easy  thing.  Then  it  is  that  he  can  turn 
in  retrospect  to  the  time  in  exile,  appreciate  his  altered 
circumstances  and  recall  the  many  ingenuities  which  were 
evolved  to  make  him  master  of  his  environment. 

It  is  sufficient  to  say  that  we  found  the  proposition  of 
clothing  one  of  unusual  interest.  Any  one  who  was  not  a 
practised  needleman  and  machinist  was  handicapped  for 
a  time,  until  he  fell  into  the  ways  of  the  through-and- 
through  and  blanket-stitch,  thimbles,  shuttles,  spools  and 
many  other  things  he  had  once  affected  to  despise  as  belong- 
ing to  the  sphere  of  women's  work.  It  was  not  long  before 
he  was  an  enthusiast  in  many  arts  attaining  to  a  stage  of 
independence,  in  which  he  patented  new  ideas  and  main- 
tained them  in  hot  opposition  to  the  whole  community 
176 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

of  the  Hut.  On  some  fundamental  points  all  were  in  agree- 
ment, and  one  of  them  was  that  Adelie  Land  was  the  country 
par  excellence  for  the  wind-proof,  drift-tight  burberry. 

Outside  all  other  garments  the  burberry  gabardine  was 
worn.  The  material  was  light  and  loosely  fitting,  but  in 
wind  and  drift  it  had  to  be  hermetically  sealed,  so  to  speak, 
for  the  snow  crept  in  wherever  there  was  an  aperture.  The 
trousers  were  of  double  thickness,  as  they  were  exposed  to 
the  greatest  wear.  Attached  by  large  buttons,  toggles  or  lamp- 
wick  braces,  they  reached  as  high  as  the  lower  part  of  the 
chest.  Below,  they  had  lamp-wick  lashings  which  were 
securely  bound  round  the  uppers  of  boots  or  finnesko. 
In  walking,  the  trousers  would  often  work  off  the  leather 
boots,  especially  if  they  were  cut  to  a  tailor's  length,  and 
snow  would  then  pour  up  the  leg  and  down  into  the  boots 
in  a  remarkably  short  time.  To  counteract  this,  Ninnis 
initiated  the  very  satisfactory  plan  of  sewing  a  short  length 
of  canvas  on  to  the  boots  to  increase  the  length  of  the 
upper. 

The  burberry  helmet  and  blouse  were  either  in  one  piece 
or  separate.  For  use  round  the  Hut,  in  thick  drifts,  the 
combination  of  helmet  and  blouse  was  handy  and  time- 
saving.  For  sledging,  when  low  temperatures  and  strong 
winds  might  be  expected  all  the  time,  it  met  the  conditions 
well ;  there  being  no  necessity  to  worry  about  keeping  the 
neck  drift-tight.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  it  was  very 
convenient  to  have  a  blouse  and  helmet  detached,  as  one  so 
often  could  wear  the  former  with  a  well-padded  woollen 
helmet  and  be  reduced  only  as  a  last  resource  to  wearing  the 
burberry  helmet. 

The  blouse  was  roomy,  giving  great  freedom  of  move- 
ment. Around  the  neck  was  a  draw-string,  which  bunched 
in  the  jacket  tightly  over  the  lower  part  of  the  helmet. 
There  was  also  a  draw-string  round  the  waist.  It  was  here 
that  we  had  the  greatest  difficulty  in  making  the  garment 
fit  snow-tight.  If  simply  tied,  the  blouse  would  soon  slip 
up  from  below,  especially  if  one  were  working  with  pick  and 
VOL.  I  M  177 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

shovel,  carrying  cases  or  blocks  of  ice.  To  obviate  this, 
some  of  the  men  sewed  loops  or  tags  of  lamp-wick  on  to  the 
sides  of  the  trousers,  to  connect  with  corresponding  attach- 
ments on  the  blouse.  As  an  additional  security,  others 
wore  an  outside  belt  which  was,  even  if  the  blouse  slipped  up 
for  some  distance,  a  line  of  defence  against  the  drift- snow. 

The  burberry  helmet  completely  enclosed  the  head 
except  for  the  face,  which  remained  uncovered  at  the  bottom 
of  a  funnel  stiffened  by  several  rings  of  copper- wire.  Lamp- 
wick,  the  universal  polar  "cord,"  was  sewn  in  short  strips 
in  front  of  the  ears  and  tied  at  the  back  of  the  head,  firmly 
securing  the  helmet.  Since  the  voyage  of  the  Discovery 
(1901-1904)  lamp-wick  had  been  used  widely  in  sledging 
on  account  of  its  width,  softness,  comparative  warmth  and 
because  of  the  fact  that  ordinary  cord  is  not  so  easy  to 
manipulate  in  cold  weather.  Large  buttons  of  leather  or 
bone  were  not  nearly  so  popular  as  small,  smooth  lengths 
of  stick  engaging  cross-wise  with  loops  of  cord — known  as 
toggles,  which  became  quite  a  mania  with  some  members 
of  the  Expedition.  Whetter,  for  instance,  was  known  as 
the  "  Toggle  King,"  because  of  the  multitude  of  these  stick- 
and-cord  appendages  which  hung  from  every  part  of  his 
clothing. 

Under  the  burberrys  thick,  but  light,  suits  of  Jaeger 
fleece  were  worn.  They  combined  trousers  and  a  sleeveless 
coat,  over  which  a  woollen  jersey  was  worn.  In  calm  weather 
these  with  underclothing  were  all-sufhcient,  but  in  the 
average  fifty-mile  wind  at  any  temperature  in  the  neighbour- 
hood of  zero  Fahrenheit,  they  felt  distinctly  porous. 

In  less  windy  weather  the  luxury  of  discarding  burberrys, 
either  partly  or  wholly,  was  an  indulgence  which  gave 
great  satisfaction. 

Finnesko  were  the  favourite  foot-gear — soft  and  com- 
modious reindeer-skin  fur  boots.  Once  these  were  stuffed 
with  Lapp  saennegras  or  manilla  fibre,  and  the  feet  covered 
with  several  pairs  of  socks,  cold  could  be  despised  unless 
one  were  stationary  for  some  time  or  the  socks  or  padding 
178 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

became  damp.  Even  though  the  padding  were  wet,  violent 
exercise  kept  the  temperature  "  balance "  in  the  warm 
direction,  especially  if  one  were  also  under  the  stimulus  of  a 
recent  hot  meal. 

Of  course,  on  smooth  ice  or  polished  snow  in  even  moderate 
winds  it  was  useless  to  try  and  keep  one's  feet  in  finnesko, 
although  practice  gave  great  agility  in  calmer  weather. 
As  already  indicated,  spiked  crampons  on  approved  models, 
tested  on  the  glacier-slopes  in  a  hurricane  wind,  were  almost 
always  worn  encasing  the  finnesko.  With  so  many  coverings 
the  feet  often  became  uncomfortably  hot,  and  for  odd  jobs 
about  the  Hut  and  not  far  abroad  spiked  leather  boots 
gave  most  satisfaction. 

There  were  various  coverings  for  the  hands :  felt  mitts, 
mittens,  instrument-gloves  and  wolfskin  mitts. 

The  first  were  used  in  conjunction  with  fingerless 
mittens.  The  wear  and  tear  on  these  was  greater  than  on 
any  other  item  of  clothing.  It  was  a  common  sight  to  see 
them  ragged,  canvas-covered,  patched,  repatched  and  again 
repatched,  to  be  at  last  reluctantly  thrown  away.  There 
were  two  compartments  in  a  single  glove,  one  for  the  thumb 
and  the  other  for  the  fingers.  It  is  much  easier  to  keep  the 
fingers  warm  when  in  contact  with  one  another  than  by 
having  them  in  separate  stalls. 

Instrument-gloves  of  wool  were  used  for  delicate  manipu- 
lations, as  a  partial  protection,  since  they  reduced  the  stinging 
chill  of  cold  metal  at  low  temperatures. 

Wolfskin  mitts  are  unexcelled  for  use  in  cold  windy 
weather.  Their  shaggy  external  hair  entangles  the  drift- 
snow,  which  thaws,  soaks  the  skin  and  refreezes  until  the 
mitt  is  stiff  as  buckram.  This  is  their  main  disadvantage. 
These  mitts  or  rather  gauntlets  were  made  longer  in  the 
arms  than  usual  so  as  to  overlap  the  burberry  sleeves  and 
keep  the  wrists  warm. 

Lambskin  mitts  with  the  wool  facing  inwards  were 
very  useful  and  wore  well  for  occupations  like  hauling  on 
ropes  and  lifting  cases. 

179 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Like  every  other  movable  thing,  mitts  had  to  be  made 
fast  to  prevent  them  blowing  away.  So  they  were  slung 
round  the  neck  by  a  yoke  of  lamp-wick.  The  mittened  hand 
could  then  be  removed  with  the  assurance  that  the  outer 
mitt  would  not  be  far  away  when  it  was  wanted,  no  matter 
how  hard  the  wind  blew. 

There  has  been  much  discussion  as  to  the  relative  merits 
of  fur  and  woollen  clothing.  After  all  the  question  has  re- 
solved itself  into  one  of  personal  predilection.  It  has  been 
claimed  that  furs  are  warmer  and  lighter.  The  warmth 
follows  from  the  wind-proof  quality  of  the  hide  which, 
unfortunately,  also  tends  to  retain  moist  exhalations  from 
the  body.  In  Adelie  Land,  the  only  furs  we  used  were 
finnesko,  wolfskin  mitts  and  sleeping-bags  of  reindeer  skins. 

As  in  every  part  of  the  equipment,  modifications  had  to 
be  made  in  the  circular  Willesden-drill  tents.  To  facilitate 
their  erection  in  the  perpetual  winds  they  were  sewn  per- 
manently on  to  the  five  bamboo  poles,  instead  of  being 
thrown  over  the  latter  previously  set  in  position.  Thus 
the  tents  opened  like  large  conical  umbrellas.  A  raw- 
hide loop  was  fixed  to  the  middle  one  of  the  three  windward 
legs  and,  when  raising  a  tent  during  a  high  wind,  it  was 
the  usual  thing  for  a  man  to  be  inside  gripping  the  loop 
to  pin  down  the  windward  legs  and  at  the  same  time,  kicking 
out  the  two  leeward  legs.  On  hard  surfaces,  holes  were 
dug  to  receive  the  ends  of  the  poles  ;  at  other  times  they 
were  pressed  home  into  the  snow  by  the  man  inside  the 
tent. 

When  pitched,  the  tent  was  held  down  by  blocks  of  snow 
or  ice,  helped  by  spare  food-bags,  which  were  all  piled  round 
on  a  broad  flounce.  Ventilators,  originally  supplied  with 
the  tents,  had  to  be  dispensed  with  on  account  of  the 
incessant  drift.  The  door  of  the  tent  was  an  oval  funnel 
of  burberry  material  just  large  enough  to  admit  a  man  and 
secured  by  a  draw-string. 

Strips  of  caUco  and  webbing  were  sewn  over  the  insides 
of  the  fight  tents  to  strengthen  them  for  sledging  in  the 
180 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

summer.  For  heavy  weather  we  also  had  japara  sail-cloth 
tents  with  Willesden  canvas  flounces.  These  gave  one  a 
feeling  of  greater  security  and  were  much  more  wind-proof, 
but  unfortunately  twice  as  heavy  as  the  first- mentioned. 

A  floor-cloth  of  light  Willesden  canvas  covered  the 
surface  of  snow  or  ice  in  the  interior  of  the  tent ;  performing 
when  sledging  the  alternative  office  of  a  sail. 

In  order  to  cut  snow,  neve  or  ice  to  pile  on  the  flounce, 
a  pick  and  spade  had  to  be  included  in  the  sledging  equip- 
ment. As  a  rule,  a  strong,  pointed  shovel  weighing  about 
six  pounds  answers  very  well ;  but  in  Adelie  Land,  the 
surface  was  so  often  wind-swept  ice,  polished  porcelain- 
snow,  or  hard  neve  that  a  pick  was  necessary  to  make  any 
impression  upon  it.  It  was  found  that  a  four-pound  spade, 
carefully  handled,  and  a  four-pound  miner's  pick  provided 
against  all  emergencies. 

Our  sledges  were  similar  to  those  of  other  British  Ant- 
arctic expeditions ;  of  eleven-  and  twelve-foot  lengths. 
The  best  were  Norwegian,  made  of  ash  and  hickory.  Others 
built  in  Sydney,  of  Australian  woods,  were  admirably  suited 
for  special  work.  Those  made  of  mountain-ash  had  the 
advantage  of  being  extremely  light,  but  the  runners  wore 
out  quickly  on  ice  and  hard  neve.  Sledges  of  powellized 
spotted  gum  were  very  strong  and  stood  plenty  of  rough 
usage,  but  were  heavier  than  those  procured  in  Norway. 
A  decking  of  bamboo  slats  secured  by  copper-wire  to  the 
crossbars  was  usually  employed. 

A  light  bamboo  mast  and  spar  were  fitted  to  each  sledge. 
Immediately  in  front  of  the  mast  came  the  "  cooker-box," 
containing  in  respective  compartments  the  primus  and  a 
bottle  of  spirit  for  lighting  it,  as  well  as  spare  prickers, 
openers  and  fillers  for  the  kerosene  tins,  repair  outfits  and 
other  odd  articles.  The  cooker-boxes  were  of  Venesta 
board,  with  hinged  lids  secured  by  chocks  and  overlapped 
by  japara  cloth  to  exclude  as  much  drift-snow  as  possible. 
An  instrument-box  was  secured  to  the  sledge  near  the  rear 
and  just  forward  of  a  Venesta  or  aluminium  tray  on  which 

181 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  kerosene  contained  in  one-gallon  tins  was  carried.  In 
several  cases  the  tray  was  widened  to  receive  as  well  a  case 
containing  a  dip-circle.  Rearmost  of  all  was  a  wooden 
crosspiece  to  which  the  shaft  of  the  sledge-meter  was  attached 
through  a  universal  joint.  On  the  middle  section  of  the 
sledge  between  the  cooker-box  and  instrument-box,  sleeping- 
bags,  food-bags,  clothes-bags,  tent,  alpine  rope,  theodolite 
legs,  and  other  articles,  were  arranged,  packed  and  im- 
movably stiffened  by  buckled  straps  passing  from  side  to 
side. 

Sledging  harness  for  both  men  and  dogs  was  constructed 
of  canvas.  In  the  former  case,  a  wide  belt  of  triple  thick- 
ness encircled  the  body  at  the  hips,  sewn  to  braces  of  narrower 
strips  passing  over  the  shoulders,  while  hauling-rope  was 
attached  to  the  belt  behind.  The  strength  of  the  whole 
depended  on  the  care  bestowed  in  sewing  the  parts  together, 
and,  since  his  life  might  depend  upon  it,  no  one  made  any- 
thing else  but  a  thorough  job  of  his  harness. 

Ninnis  and  Mertz  ran  a  tailoring  business  for  the  dogs, 
who  were  brought  one  by  one  into  the  outer  Hut  to  be 
measured  for  harness.  After  many  lengths  had  been  cut 
with  scissors  the  canvas  bands  were  put  through  and  sewn 
together  on  the  large  sewing-machine  and  then  each  dog 
was  fitted  and  the  final  alterations  were  made.  The  huskies 
looked  quite  smart  in  their  "  suits." 

Upon  the  primus  heater,  alone,  did  we  rely  for  cooking 
the  meals  on  sledging  journeys.  First  used  for  purposes 
of  sledging  by  Dr.  Nansen  in  his  journey  across  Greenland, 
the  primus  is  only  economically  managed  after  some  practice. 
To  light  a  primus  in  a  draughty  tent  at  a  low  temperature 
calls  for  some  forbearance  before  one  is  a  thorough  master 
of  the  art.  A  sledging  cook  will  often  make  a  disagreeable 
faux  pas  by  extinguishing  the  primus  in  the  preparation  of 
hoosh.  This  is  most  readily  done  by  lowering  too  quickly 
the  outside  cover  over  the  rest  of  the  cooker.  Fumes  of 
vaporizing  kerosene  soon  fill  the  tent  and  when  matches  are 
found,  the  cooker  pulled  to  pieces,  the  primus  relighted  and 
182 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

the  choking  vapours  have  cleared,  one  is  apt  to  think  that  all 
is  well.  The  hoosh  is  quite  as  successful  as  usual,  but  the 
cocoa,  made  from  water  in  the  annulus,  has  a  tincture  of 
kerosene  which  cannot  be  concealed. 

In  the  "  Nansen  Cooker,"  which  we  used,  a  maximum 
result  is  secured  from  the  heat  of  the  primus.  The  hot  gases 
from  the  com- 
bustion of  the 
kerosene,  before 
they  escape  into 
the  outside  air, 
have  to  circu- 
late along  a 
tortuous  path, 
passing  from 
the  hot  interior 
to  the  colder 
exterior  com- 
partments, 
losing  heat  all 
the  time.  Thus 
a  hot  hoosh  is 
preparing  in  the 
central  vessel 
side  by  side 
with  the  melt- 
ing of  snow  for 
cocoa  or  tea  in 
the  annulus.  By  the  combination  of  "  Nansen  Cooker  "  and 
primus  stove  one  gallon  of  kerosene  oil  properly  husbanded 
is  made  to  last  for  twelve  days  in  the  preparation  of  the 
ordinary  ration  for  three  men. 


SECTION  THllOUGH  A  NANSEN  SLEDGING  COOKEE  MOUNTED 
ON  THE  PRIMUS 


The  subject  of  food  is  one  which  requires  peculiar  con- 
sideration and  study.  It  is  assumed  that  a  polar  expedition 
must  carry  all  its  food-stuffs  in  that  variety  and  quantity 
which  may  approximately  satisfy  normal  demands.    Fortu- 

183 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

nately,  the  advance  of  science  has  been  such  that  necessaries 
hke  vegetables,  fruit,  meats  and  milk  are  now  preserved 
so  that  the  chances  of  bacterial  contamination  are  reduced 
to  a  minimum.  A  cold  climate  is  an  additional  security 
towards  the  same  end. 

Speaking  generally,  while  living  for  months  in  an 
Antarctic  hut,  it  is  a  splendid  thing  to  have  more  than  the 
mere  necessaries  of  life.  Since  one  is  cut  off  from  the 
ordinary  amenities  of  social  existence,  it  is  particularly 
necessary  that  equipment  and  food  should  be  of  the  very 
best ;  in  some  measure  to  replace  a  lack  which  sooner  or 
later  makes  itself  keenly  felt.  Explorers,  after  all,  are  only 
mortal. 

Luxuries,  then,  are  good  in  moderation,  and  mainly  for 
their  psychological  effect.  After  a  spell  of  routine,  a  cele- 
bration is  the  natural  sequel,  and  if  there  are  delicacies 
which  in  civilization  are  more  palatable  than  usual,  why  not 
take  them  to  where  they  will  receive  a  still  fuller  and 
heartier  appreciation  ?  There  is  a  corresponding  rise  in  the 
"  tide  of  life  "  and  the  ennui  of  the  same  task,  in  the  same 
place,  in  the  same  wind,  is  not  so  noticeable.  So  we  did  not 
forget  our  asparagus  and  jugged  hare. 

In  the  matter  of  sledging  foods,  one  comes  down  to  a 
solid  basis  of  dietetics.  But  even  dietetics  as  a  science  has 
to  stand  aside  when  actual  experience  speaks.  Dietetics 
deals  with  proteins,  carbohydrates,  fats,  and  calories  :  all 
terms  which  need  definition  and  comprehension  before  the 
value  of  a  sledging  ration  can  be  fundamentally  understood. 
When  the  subject  was  first  introduced  into  table  conversa- 
tion at  the  Hut,  it  was  regarded  somewhat  suspiciously  as 
"  shop."  But  it  gradually  won  interest  simply  because  it 
was  of  such  vital  concern. 

In  sledging  there  is  undoubtedly  a  critical  allowance 
which  will  yield  the  best  results.  Circumstances  alter  cases, 
and  the  correct  ration  under  one  set  of  conditions  cannot 
be  expected  to  coincide  with  that  in  another  situation. 
Thus,  the  journey  may  be  conducted  under  conditions  of 
184 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

great  cold  or  of  comparative  warmth,  by  man-hauling  or 
auxiliary  power,  at  sea-level  or  on  an  altitude,  through 
regions  where  there  is  a  reasonable  hope  of  securing  addi- 
tions of  meat  by  the  way,  or  across  barren  tracts  devoid  of 
game.  In  each  instance  particular  demands  must  be 
supplied. 

In  selecting  the  articles  of  diet,  idiosyncrasies  of  indi- 
viduals should  be  consulted  in  reason,  and  under  no 
consideration  should  anything  be  taken  which  bears  the 
slightest  stigma  of  contamination.  It  remains,  then,  to 
discriminate  those  foods  which  contribute  the  greatest 
amount  of  nutriment  for  a  given  weight,  and  which,  inter  se^ 
preserve  a  proper  dietetic  balance.  Variety  is  very  desirable, 
provided  that  there  is  no  important  sacrifice  in  nutrient 
value.  The  proof  of  a  wisely  selected  ration  is  to  find  at 
the  end  of  a  long  sledge  journey  that  the  sole  craving  is  for 
an  increase  in  the  ration.  Of  course,  such  would  be  the  ideal 
result  of  a  perfect  ration,  which  does  not  exist. 

Considering  that  an  ordinary  individual  in  civilization 
may  only  satisfy  the  choice  demands  of  his  appetite  by 
selecting  from  the  multifarious  bill  of  fare  of  a  modern 
restaurant,  it  will  be  evident  that  the  same  person,  though 
already  on  the  restricted  diet  of  an  explorer,  cannot  be 
suddenly  subjected  to  a  sledging  ration  for  any  considerable 
period  without  a  certain  exercise  of  discipline. 

For  example,  the  Eastern  Coastal  Party,  sledging  at 
fairly  high  temperatures  over  the  sea-ice,  noted  that  the 
ull  ration  of  hoosh  produced  at  times  a  mild  indigestion, 
they  drank  much  liquid  to  satisfy  an  intense  thirst  and  on 
returning  to  the  Hut  found  their  appetites  inclined  to  tinned 
fruit  and  penguins'  eggs.  Bickerton's  and  Bage's  parties, 
though  working  at  a  much  higher  altitude,  had  a  similar 
experience.  The  former,  for  instance,  could  not  at  first 
drink  the  whole  allowance  of  thick,  rich  cocoa  without  a 
slight  nausea.  The  latter  saved  rations  during  the  first 
two  weeks  of  their  journey,  and  only  when  they  rose  to 
greater  heights  and  were  in  fine  condition  did  they  appreciate 

185 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  ration  to  the  full.  Again,  even  when  one  becomes  used  to 
the  ration,  the  sensation  of  full  satisfaction  does  not  last  for 
more  than  an  hour.  The  imagination  reaches  forward  to  the 
next  meal,  perhaps  partly  on  account  of  the  fact  that  march- 
ing is  often  monotonous  and  the  scenery  uninspiring.  Still, 
even  after  a  good  evening  hoosh,  the  subconscious  self  may 
assert  itself  in  food-dreams.  The  reaction  from  even  a  short 
sledging  trip,  where  food  has  been  plentiful,  is  to  eat  a  good 
deal,  astonishing  in  amount  to  those  who  for  the  time  being 
have  lived  at  the  Hut. 

It  may  appear  that  a  serious  case  is  being  made  against 
the  polar  sledging  ration.  On  the  whole,  it  was  found  to  be 
excellent  and  the  best  that  experience  had  been  able  to 
devise.  Entering  the  polar  zones,  one  must  not  be  over- 
fastidious,  but  take  it  as  a  matter  of  course  that  there 
will  be  self-denial  and  deprivation  of  small  luxuries. 

The  energy  exerted  by  man,  and  the  requirements  of 
tissue-building  are  derived  from  the  organic  compounds 
known  as  proteins,*  fats  and  carbohydrates,  though  in  a 
slight  degree  from  other  substances,  most  important  of 
which  are  minute  quantities  of  mineral  matter. 

A  calorie  as  used  in  dietetics  is  the  amount  of  heat  re- 
quired to  raise  the  temperature  of  one  kilogramme  of  water 
at  0°  C.  to  1°  C.  The  heat-value  of  food-stuffs,  stated  in 
calories,  can  be  quickly  reckoned  when  chemical  analyses 
stating  their  protein,  fat  and  carbohydrate  contents  are 
available.     It  has   been  ascertained  that   one  gramme   of 

*  The  'proteins  are  complex  nitrogenous  compounds  which  are  pre- 
eminent in  fulfilHng  the  two  functions  of  a  food :  to  form  tissue  and  to 
produce  work  and  heat.  As  examples  may  be  quoted,  myosin  the  chief 
protem  of  ordinary  meat  or  muscle,  ovalliumin  one  of  the  proteins  of 
egg-white,  casein  belonging  to  milk  and  cheese,  and  gluten  a  protein- 
mixture  in  flour. 

Fats  are  organic  non-nitrogenous  substances  obtained  from  both  animal 
and  vegetable  som-ces,  e.g.  butter  and  ohve  oil. 

The  carbohydrates  are  compounds  of  carbon  with  hydrogen  and  oxygen 
in  a  certain  proj)ortion,  e.g.  cane-sugar  and  starch. 

Mineral  matters  are  inorganic,  being  chlorides,  carbonates  or  phosphates 
of  calcium,  sodium  and  potassium. 
186 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

protein  or  carbohydrate  yields  4-1  calories,  whilst  the  same 
amount  of  fat  produces  9*3  calories.  Thus  the  value 
of  fat-containing  foods  in  a  sledging  ration  is  at  once 
apparent. 

Theoretically,  any  of  the  three  classes  of  foods  mentioned 
might  be  thought  to  supply  adequate  energy,  if  taken  in 
sufficient  amount.  Practically,  however,  protein  and  carbo- 
hydrate are  essential,  and  it  is  better  to  have  a  mixture  of 
all  three.  So,  in  concentrating  foods  for  sledging,  the 
largest  possible  proportion  of  fat,  compatible  with  other 
considerations,  is  included. 

Ordinarily,  a  normal  man  consumes  some  four  or  five 
pounds  weight  of  solid  food  per  diem,  of  which  50  per  cent., 
it  is  rather  surprising  to  learn,  is  water.  When  sledging, 
one  has  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that  all  but  the  smallest 
quantity  of  the  food  dragged  is  solid  nutriment.  The  water 
is  added  when  the  meals  are  cooked.  It  is  just  in  this  arti- 
ficial addition  that  the  sledging  ration  is  not  perfect,  though 
as  a  synthesis  it  satisfies  the  demands  of  dietetics.  Food 
containing  water,  as  cooked  meat  oozing  with  its  own  gravy 
is  a  more  palatable  thing  than  dried  meat- powder  to  which 
boiling  water  has  been  added.  In  the  same  way,  a  dry, 
hard  biscuit  plus  liquid  is  a  different  thing  from  a  spongy 
loaf  of  yeast  bread  with  its  high  percentage  of  water.  One 
must  reckon  with  the  psychic  factor  in  eating.  When 
sledging,  one  does  not  look  for  food  well  served  as  long  as 
the  food  is  hot,  nourishing  and  filling.  So  the  usage  of  weeks 
and  a  wolfish  appetite  make  hoosh  a  most  delicious  prepara- 
tion; but  when  the  days  of  an  enforced  ration  are  over, 
the  desire  for  appetizing  well-served  food  reasserts  itself. 
The  body  refuses  to  be  treated  merely  as  an  engine. 

The  daily  polar  sledging  ration  for  one  man  has  been 
concentrated  to  a  figure  just  above  two  pounds  in  weight, 
For  instance,  in  recent  Antarctic  expeditions,  Scott,  in  1903, 
used  34*7  ozs.,  Shackleton  in  1908  used  34*82  ozs.  and  our 
own  amounted  to  34*25  ozs.  Exclusive  of  tea,  pepper  and 
salt,  Shackleton's  ration  and  that  adopted  by  Wild  at  the 

187 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Western  Base  and  ourselves  in  Adelie  Land  were  identical 
— 34  ozs.  Reverting  to  earlier  explorers,  for  the  sake  of 
comparisons,  McClintock  in  1850  brought  his  minimum 
down  to  42  ozs.,  Nares  in  1875  to  40  ozs.,  Greely  in  1882 
to  41*75  ozs.,  and  Abruzzi  in  1900  to  43*5  ozs. 

Our  allowance  was  made  up  as  follows,  the  relative 
amounts  in  the  daily  sledging  ration  for  one  man  being 
stated  :  plasmon  biscuit,  12  ozs.  ;  pemmican,  8  ozs.  ;  butter, 
2  ozs. ;  plasmon  chocolate,  2  ozs.  ;  giaxo  (dried  milk),  5  ozs.  ; 
sugar,  4  ozs.  ;  cocoa,  1  oz.  ;  tea,  -25  oz.  It  will  be 
instructive  to  make  a  short  note  on  each  item. 

Plasmon  biscuit  was  made  of  the  best  flour  mixed  with 
30  per  cent,  of  plasmon  powder.  Each  biscuit  weighed 
2-25  ozs.,  and  was  made  specially  thick  and  hard  to  resist 
shaking  and  bumping  in  transit  as  well  as  the  rough  usage 
of  a  sledging  journey.  The  effect  of  the  high  percentage  of 
plasmon,  apart  from  its  nutritive  value,  was  to  impart 
additional  toughness  to  the  biscuit,  which  tested  our  teeth 
so  severely  that  we  should  have  preferred  something  less  like 
a  geological  specimen  and  more  like  ordinary  "  hard  tack." 
The  favourite  method  of  dealing  with  these  biscuits  was  to 
smash  them  with  an  ice-axe  or  nibble  them  into  small  pieces 
and  treat  the  fragments  for  a  while  to  the  solvent  action  of 
hot  cocoa.  Two  important  proteins  were  present  in  this 
food  :  plasmon,  a  trade-name  for  casein,  the  chief  protein  of 
milk,  and  gluten,  a  mixture  of  proteins  in  flour. 

The  pemmican  we  used  consisted  of  powdered  dried 
beef  (containing  the  important  protein,  myosin)  and  50  per 
cent,  of  pure  fat  in  the  form  of  lard.  The  large  content  of 
fat  contributes  to  its  high  caloric  value,  so  that  it  is  regularly 
included  in  sledging  diets.  Hoosh  is  a  stodgy,  porridge- 
like mixture  of  pemmican,  dried  biscuit  and  water,  brought 
to  the  boil  and  served  hot.  Some  men  prefer  it  cooler  and 
more  dilute,  and  to  this  end  dig  up  snow  from  the  floor  of 
the  tent  with  their  spoons,  and  mix  it  in  until  the  hoosh  is 
"to  taste."  Eating  hoosh  is  a  heightened  form  of  bhss 
which  no  sledger  can  ever  forget. 
188 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGINCx  EQUIPMENT 

Glaxo  is  a  proprietary  food  preparation  of  dried  milk, 
manufactured  in  New  Zealand.  It  is  without  doubt  an  ideal 
food  for  any  climate  where  concentration  is  desirable  and 
asepsis  cannot  be  neglected.  The  value  of  milk  as  an  all- 
round  food  is  well  known.  It  contains  protein  as  casein,  fat 
as  cream  and  in  fine  globules,  carbohydrate  as  lactose  (milk 
sugar)  and  mineral  substances  whose  importance  is  becoming 
more  recognized.  At  the  Western  Base,  Wild's  party  in- 
vented glaxo  biscuits;  an  unbaked  mixture  of  flour  and 
dried  milk,  which  were  in  themselves  a  big  inducement  to  go 
sledging.  At  the  Hut,  making  milk  from  the  dried  powder 
required  some  little  experience.  Cold  water  was  added 
to  the  dried  powder,  a  paste  was  made  and  warm  or  hot 
water  poured  in  until  the  milk  was  at  the  required  strength. 
One  of  the  professional  "  touches  "  was  to  aerate  the  milk, 
after  mixing,  by  pouring  it  from  jug  to  jug. 

Butter,  although  it  contains  nearly  20  per  cent,  of  water, 
is  a  food  of  high  heat- value  and  is  certainly  more  easily 
digested  than  fat,  such  as  dripping,  with  a  higher  melting- 
point.  Ours  was  fresh  Victorian  butter,  packed  in  the 
ordinary  export  boxes,  and  carried  to  the  Antarctic  on  the 
open  bridge  of  the  Aurora.  With  a  sheath-knife,  the  sledg- 
ing cook  cut  off  three  small  chunks  of  two  ounces  each  from 
the  frozen  butter  every  day  at  lunch.  To  show  how  the 
appetite  is  affected  by  extreme  cold,  one  feels  that  butter 
is  a  wholesome  thing  just  in  itself,  being  more  inclined  to 
eat  a  pound  than  two  ounces. 

Sugar — the  carbohydrate,  sucrose — has  special  qualities 
as  a  food  since  it  is  quickly  assimilated,  imparting  within  a 
few  minutes  fresh  energy  for  muscular  exertion.  Athletes 
will  support  this  ;  in  fact,  a  strong  solution  of  sugar  in  water 
is  used  as  a  stimulant  in  long-distance  running  and  other 
feats  of  endurance.  Wild,  for  instance,  found  as  a  matter 
of  experience  that  chocolate  was  preferable  to  cheese  as  a 
sledging  food,  even  though  similar  weights  had  approxi- 
mately the  same  food- value. 

Cocoa  and  tea  were  the  two  sledging  beverages.     The 

189 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

cocoa  was  used  for  two  meals,  the  first  and  the  last  in  the 
day,  and  the  tea  for  lunch.  Both  contain  stimulating 
alkaloids,  theobromine  and  caffeine,  and  fat  is  a  notable 
constituent  of  cocoa.  Of  course,  their  chief  nourishing  value, 
as  far  as  we  were  concerned,  lay  in  the  glaxo  and  sugar 
added. 

Lastly,  plasmon  chocolate  is  a  preparation  of  pure 
chocolate  (a  mixture  of  ground  cocoa,  white  sugar  and  starch) 
with  the  addition  of  10  per  cent,  of  plasmon. 

As  food  for  the  dogs,  there  was  nothing  better  than  dried 
seal- steaks  with  the  addition  of  a  little  blubber.  Ordinary 
pemmican  is  readily  eaten,  but  not  appreciated  by  the  dogs 
in  the  same  way  as  seal  meat.  To  save  weight,  the  meat  was 
dried  over  the  stove  without  heating  it  sufficiently  to  cook 
it.  By  this  measure,  almost  50  per  cent,  in  weight  was 
saved. 

The  Hut  was  all  agog  with  movement  and  bustle  on  the 
days  when  rations  were  being  made  up  and  packed.  Starting 
from  the  earliest  stage  in  the  process,  there  would  be  two 
men  in  the  outer  Hut  grinding  plasmon  biscuit  into  powder. 
One  would  turn  away  for  dear  life  and  the  other  smash  the 
biscuit  with  a  hammer  on  a  metal  slab  and  feed  continuously 
into  the  grinder.  The  atmosphere  would  be  full  of  the 
nauseous  vapours  of  blubber  arising  from  dishes  on  the 
stove  where  seal  meat  was  drying  for  the  dogs.  Ninnis  and 
Mertz  superintended  in  this  department,  in  careless  moments 
allowing  the  blubber  to  frizzle  and  diffuse  its  aroma  through 
the  Hut. 

Inside,  spread  along  the  eighteen-foot  table  would  be  the 
weighers,  the  bag-makers  or  machinists,  and  the  packers. 
The  first  made  up  a  compound  of  cocoa,  glaxo  and  sugar — 
cocoa  compound ;  mixed  glaxo  and  sugar  and  stirred  together, 
pemmican  and  biscuit — pemmican  compound.  These  were 
weighed  and  run  into  calico  bags,  rapidly  supplied  by  several 
machinists  farther  along  the  table.  In  spare  moments  the 
weighers  stowed  chocolate,  whole  biscuits,  butter  and  tea  into 
190 


THE   RELIEF   OF   WILirS   PAKTV.     Tllh;   Al'h'OI!  t   APPItOACIl  IXd  lliirl^ti 

THE  FLOE   AT   THE  WESTEKX   F.ASE,  FEBUUARV   1913 


A(  lN(i   THE    DECK:    CAPT.  JOIIX  KING  DAVIS   AXD 
CAPT.  JAMES    DAVIS 


Ihidcj 


THE  PREPARATION  OF  SLEDGING  EQUIPMENT 

sacks  of  various  sizes.  Lastly,  the  packers  had  strong  canvas 
tanks,  as  they  were  called,  designed  to  hold  food  for  a  week 
and  a  fortnight  respectively.  Into  these  the  rations  were 
carefully  distributed,  butter  in  the  centre,  whole  biscuits 
near  the  top.  Then  the  tanks  were  tightly  closed,  and  one 
man  operated  with  palm  and  sail-needle,  sewing  them  up 
with  twine.  At  the  same  time,  a  side-line  was  run  in  pemmican 
which  was  removed  semi-frozen  from  the  air-tight  tins,  and 
shaved  into  small  pieces  with  a  strong  sheath-knife.  Butter, 
too,  arrived  from  the  refrigerator-store  and  was  subdivided 
into  two-ounce  or  pound  lumps. 

Meanwhile,  other  occupations  were  in  full  swing.  An 
amateur  cobbler,  his  crampon  on  a  last,  studded  its  spiked 
surface  with  clouts,  hammering  away  in  complete  disregard 
of  the  night-watchman's  uneasy  slumbers.  The  big  sewing- 
machine  raced  at  top-speed  round  the  flounce  of  a  tent,  and 
in  odd  corners  among  the  bunks  were  groups  mending  mitts, 
strengthening  sleeping-bags  and  patching  burberrys.  The 
cartographer  at  his  table  beneath  a  shaded  acetylene  light 
drew  maps  and  sketched ;  the  magnetician  was  busy  on  calcu- 
lations close  by.  The  cook  and  messman  often  made  their 
presence  felt  and  heard.  In  the  outer  Hut,  the  lathe  spun 
round,  its  whirr  and  click  drowned  in  the  noisy  rasp  of  the 
grinder  and  the  blast  of  the  big  blow-lamp.  The  last-named, 
Bickerton,  "bus-driver"  and  air-tractor  expert,  had  con- 
verted, with  the  aid  of  a  few  pieces  of  covering  tin,  into 
a  forge.  A  piece  of  red-hot  metal  was  lifted  out  and  thrust 
into  the  vice  ;  Hannam  was  striker  and  Bickerton  holder. 
General  conversation  was  conducted  in  shouts,  Hannam's 
being  easily  predominant. 

The  sum  total  of  sounds  was  sufficient  for  a  while  to 
make  every  one  oblivious  to  the  clamour  of  the  restless 
wind. 


191 


CHAPTER  XI 
SPRING  EXPLOITS 

IF  the  "  winter  calms  "  were  a  delusion,  there  were  at 
least  several  beautifully  clear,  moderately  calm  days 
in  June.  The  expectation  of  colder  weather  had  been 
realized,  and  by  the  end  of  the  month  it  was  a  perceptible 
fact  that  the  sun  had  definitely  turned,  describing  a  longer 
arc  when  skimming  the  distant  fleets  of  bergs  along  the 
northern  horizon.  Thus  on  June  28  the  refracted  image  of 
the  sun  rose  into  visibility  about  eleven  o'clock,  heralded  by 
a  vivid  green  sky  and  damask  cloud  and  by  one  o'clock  had 
disappeared. 

On  the  same  day  every  one  was  abroad,  advancing  the 
wireless  masts  another  stage  and  digging  ice-shafts.  Stillwell 
commenced  a  contoured  plane-table  survey  of  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Winter  Quarters.  He  continued  this  with  many 
breaks  during  the  next  few  months  and  eventually  com- 
pleted an  accurate  and  valuable  map,  undeterred  by  the 
usual  series  of  frost-bites. 

There  was  much  anticipated  of  July,  but  the  wind 
soughed  on  and  the  temperature  decreased.  Just  to 
demonstrate  its  resource,  the  wind  maintained  ninety-seven 
miles  per  hour  for  six  hours  on  July  19,  while  the  puff- 
anemometer  indicated  several  "  breaks  "  of  one  hundred 
and  fifty  miles  per  hour. 

July  21  was  cold,  calm  and  clear.  For  the  first  time 
after  many  weeks  the  sun  was  mildly  warm,  and  all  felt  with 
a  spring  of  optimism  that  a  new  era  had  begun.  The  sea 
which  had  been  kept  open  by  the  wind  was  immediately 
overspread  with  thin,  dark  ice,  which  in  a  few  hours  was 
192 


AMUNDSEN,"  ONE  OF  THE  SLEDGE  DOUS  SENT   DOWN  TO   US  Ilinlc!/ 

FROM  AMUNDSEN'S  SOUTH  POLAll  EXPEDITION 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

dotted  with  many  ice-flowers — aggregates  of  fern-like, 
sprouting  fronds  similar  to  small  bouquets  or  rosettes.  Soon 
the  surface  had  whitened  and  thickened  and  by  next  morn- 
ing was  firm  enough  to  hold  a  man  out  beyond  the  nearest 
island.  The  wind  did  not  allow  this  state  of  affairs  to  last 
for  long,  for  by  lunch-time  it  had  hurried  away  the  wide 
floes  and  raged  across  a  foaming  sea. 

We  still  considered  the  question  of  sledging,  and  I 
decided  that  if  there  were  the  slightest  prospect  of  accom- 
plishing anything,  several  of  us  would  start  before  the  end 
of  July  on  a  short  journey.  The  month,  however,  closed 
with  nothing  to  commend  it.  The  night-watchman  for 
July  29  says  : 

"  The  moon  was  wonderfully  bright  to-night,  encircled 
by  a  complete  halo.  It  appeared  to  hang  suspended  like  a 
silver  globe  in  the  dark  blue  sky.  The  stars  flash  and 
sparkle  and  seem  much  nearer  here  than  in  Australia. 
At  midnight  the  wind  blew  at  ninety  miles  per  hour,  so  that 
it  was  no  easy  job  getting  to  the  screen  in  slippery  finnesko. 
Away  in  the  north  there  was  a  dense  cloud  of  spray  and 
sea-smoke,  and  the  wind  screamed  past  the  Hut.  The 
'  St.  Elmoscope  '  was  buzzing  merrily  in  the  roof  all  the 
time." 

Ninnis  and  Mertz  with  a  team  of  dogs  managed,  on  the 
morning  of  the  29th,  to  get  several  loads  of  forty  pounds  over 
the  first  steep  rise  of  the  glacier  to  Webb's  magnetic  ice- 
cave  against  a  "  blow  "  of  seventy  miles  per  hour. 

August  1  was  marked  by  a  hurricane,  and  the  celebration 
in  the  evening  of  Swiss  Confederation  Day.  Mertz  was  the 
hero  of  the  occasion  as  well  as  cook  and  master  of  ceremonies. 
From  a  mysterious  box  he  produced  all  kinds  of  quaint 
conserves,  and  the  menu  soared  to  unknown  delicacies  like 
"  Potage  a  la  Suisse,  Choucroute  garnie  aux  saucission  de 
Berne,  Puree  de  foie  gras  trufee,  and  Leckerley  de  Bale." 
Hanging  above  the  buoyant  assembly  were  the  Cross  of 
Helvetia  and  the  Jack  of  Britannia. 

It  was  not  till  August  8  that  there  was  any  indication 
VOL.  I  N  193 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

of  improvement.  The  sun  was  bright,  the  barometer  was 
steady,  the  wind  fell  to  forty  miles  an  hour  and  a  fine 
radiant  of  cirrus  cloud  spread  out  fan-like  from  the  north ; 
the  first  from  that  direction  for  months. 

On  the  afternoon  of  August  9,  Ninnis,  Madigan  and 
I  set  off  with  a  team  of  dogs  against  a  forty-mile  wind  in 
an  attempt  to  push  to  the  south.  Darkness  was  coming 
on  when  we  sighted  a  bamboo  pole,  three  and  a  quarter  miles 
south  of  the  Hut,  and  camped.  The  dogs  pulled  well  up 
the  steep  slopes,  but  the  feet  of  several  were  cut  by  the 
sharp  edges  of  the  wind-worn  ice. 

Very  heavy  gusts  swept  by  in  the  early  morning  hours  of 
the  10th.  and  when  the  time  came  to  get  out  of  our  sleeping- 
bags  it  fell  calm  for  a  short  space.  We  had  taken  down  the 
tent  and  had  started  to  move  away,  when  back  rushed  the 
wind,  strong  and  steady.  Still  we  pushed  on  with  our  willing 
team  and  by  a  piece  of  good  fortune  reached  the  sledge 
which  had  been  abandoned  in  the  autumn,  five  and  a  half 
miles  from  the  Hut,  and  of  whose  fate  in  the  winter's 
hurricanes  we  had  made  all  kind  of  conjectures. 

On  its  leeward  side  there  was  a  ramp  of  very  hard  snow 
slanting  down  from  the  top  of  the  sledge.  To  windward 
the  low  pedestal  of  ice  on  which  the  runners  stood  was 
hollowed  out,  and  the  wood  of  the  rails  and  cross-bars,  the 
leather  straps,  tent,  floor-cloth  and  canvas  food-tanks  were 
all  bleached  and  worn.  The  aluminium  cooker,  strapped 
on  its  box,  was  brightly  polished  on  the  weather  side 
by  the  dry,  drifting  snow  impelled  by  the  furious  winds. 
A  thermograph,  left  behind  in  the  autumn,  was  found  to  be 
intact  and  indicated  a  temperature  of  —  35°  F. — ^the  lowest 
for  the  eight  days  during  which  it  had  run.  The  remains  of 
Madigan's  plum-pudding  of  the  autumn  were  unearthed 
and  found  in  splendid  condition.  That  evening  it  was 
thawed  out  over  the  primus  and  we  demolished  it,  after  a 
pause  of  over  five  months  since  having  the  first  cut. 

At  this  spot  the  steepest  grades  of  the  ascent  to  the 
plateau  were  left  behind,  and  it  appeared  to  be  a  strategic 
194 


it,  .^>'^^- 


r 


Adeli,-  L,ni,l  Iluj/n/ 

AT  AI,AI)liIN-S  (AVE.      THE   VERTICAL  PASSAGE  LEADING  DOWN  INTO  THE  CAVE 

ITSKLF   [S  SITUATED  IMMliDIATELY  BEHIND  THE  FIGURE  ON  THE   RIGHT 


Adelie  Lund         BENEATH  THE  SURFACE  OF  THE  PLATEAU.     BAGE  PRE-  Mertz 

PARING  A  MEAL  IN   ALADDIN'S  CAVE  IN  AUGUST 


LASERON  AND  HUNTER  USING  THE  COLLAPSIBLE  STEEL  HAND-      Maicson 
CART  IN   PREPARING  FOR   DREDGING  ON  THE  FROZEN  SEA 


GKEEXLAM)  SLEDGING  J)OGS— -  JOHN   HULL"  AND  "  (ilXGER  "—TETHERED  OX 
THE  ROCKS  ADJACENT  TO  THE  HUT 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

point  from  which  to  extend  our  sledging  efforts.  The  main 
difficulty  was  that  of  pitching  camp  in  the  prevailing  winds  on 
a  surface  of  ice.  To  obviate  this,  the  only  expedient  was  to 
excavate  a  shelter  beneath  the  ice  itself ;  and  there  was  the 
further  consideration  that  all  sledging  parties  would  be  able  to 
make  use  of  such  a  haven  and  save  extra  wear  on  their  tents. 

On  the  morning  of  August  11  Madigan  and  Ninnis  com- 
menced to  sink  a  deep  vertical  trench,  at  one  end  of  which  a 
room  was  hewn  out  large  enough  to  accommodate  three 
men.  The  job  was  finished  on  the  following  day,  and  we 
struck  the  tent  and  moved  to  our  new  abode.  The  tent 
was  spread  over  the  vertical  shaft  which  served  as  the 
entrance. 

It  was  a  great  relief  to  be  in  a  strong  room,  with  solid 
walls  of  ice,  in  place  of  the  cramped  tent  flapping  violently 
in  the  wind.  Inside,  the  silence  was  profound ;  the  blizzard 
was  banished.  Aladdin's  Cave  it  was  dubbed — a  truly 
magical  world  of  glassy  facets  and  scintillating  crystals. 

Shelves  were  chipped  out  at  a  moment's  notice  for  primus 
stove,  spirit  bottle,  matches,  kerosene  and  other  odd- 
ments. At  one  side  a  small  hole  was  cut  to  communicate 
with  a  narrow  fissure  which  provided  ventilation  without 
allowing  the  entrance  of  drift  snow.  Whatever  daylight 
there  was  filtered  through  the  roof  and  walls  without 
hindrance.  A  small  crevasse  opened  near  at  hand  and 
was  a  natural  receptacle  for  rubbish.  The  purest  ice  for 
cooking  could  be  immediately  hacked  from  the  walls  without 
the  inconvenience  of  having  to  don  one's  burberrys  and  go 
outside  for  it.  Finally,  one  neatly  disposed  of  spare  clothes  by 
moistening  the  corner  of  each  garment  and  pressing  it  against 
the  wall  for  a  few  seconds,  where  it  would  remain  hanging 
until  required.  The  place,  in  fact,  was  simply  replete  with 
conveniences.  We  thoroughly  enjoyed  the  night's  rest  in 
Aladdin's  Cave,  notwithstanding  alarming  cracks  pro- 
ceeding occasionally  from  the  crevasses  around. 

Madigan  and  Ninnis  dug  a  shelter  for  the  dogs,  which  spent 
their    time  curled  up  so  as  to  expose  as  little  surface  as 

195 


THE  ho:me  of  the  blizzard 

possible  to  the  biting  wind.  Their  thick  coats  did  not  adliere 
to  a  snow  surface,  but  readily  became  frozen  do^^'n  to  ice, 
so  that  an  ice-axe  would  have  to  be  used  to  chip  them 
free. 

On  August  13,  though  there  was  a  steady,  strong  wind 
blowing,  we  continued  our  advance  to  the  south.  The 
dogs  hated  to  face  wind,  but,  on  the  whole,  did  better  than 
expected.  In  the  afternoon,  when  only  eight  miles  south  of 
Winter  Quarters  and  at  an  altitude  of  two  thousand  feet, 
dark  and  lowering  clouds  formed  overhead,  and  I  decided 
to  give  up  any  idea  of  going  farther  out,  for  the  time  being. 
We  had  provisions  for  a  few  days  only,  and  there  was  every 
indication  of  thick,  drifting  weather,  during  which,  in  the 
crevassed  ice  of  that  vicinity,  it  would  not  be  advisable  to 
travel. 

After  depoting  a  pick,  shovel  and  some  pemmican,  we 
started  back,  thinking  it  might  be  possible  to  reach  the 
Hut  the  same  night.  However,  driven  by  a  strong  wind 
over  a  polished,  slippery  surface  split  into  small  crevasses, 
down  a  grade  which  steepened  quickly,  we  required  to  have 
all  our  senses  vigilant.  Two  of  the  dogs  remained  in  harness 
and  the  rest  were  allowed  to  rmi  loose  ahead.  These  two 
strained  every  effort  to  catch  up  to  their  companions. 

We  retarded  the  sledge  as  much  as  possible  and  all 
went  well  for  a  few  minutes.  Then  the  wind  slewed  the 
sledge,  the  runners  struck  an  irregularity  in  the  surface  and 
the  whole  capsized.  This  happened  repeatedly,  until  there 
w^as  nothing  to  do  but  loose  the  two  remaining  dogs  and 
drag  the  sledge  ourselves.  The  dogs  were  soon  lost  to  sight, 
except  Pavlova,  who  remained  with  us  all  the  time.  As  the 
hours  of  light  were  short  in  August,  darkness  had  come 
before  Aladdin's  Cave  was  reached,  and  it  was  with  some 
rehef  that  we  saw  the  sledge,  flag-pole  and  the  expectant 
dogs  suddenly  loom  up  in  front.  The  sleeping-bags  and  other 
gear  were  passed  down  into  the  Cave  and  the  dogs  were  fed. 

WTien  the  doorway  was  opened  in  the  morning,  August  14, 
a  blizzard  with  dense  drifting  snow  was  in  full  progress.  As 
196 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

it  was  not  possible  to  see  any  distance,  and  as  our  quarters 
were  very  comfortable,  we  decided  to  wait  for  another  day. 
Madigan  and  Ninnis  went  out  and  fed  the  dogs,  who  were 
all  snugly  curled  up  in  beds  of  snow. 

The  weather  was  no  better  on  the  15th,  but,  as  we  were 
only  five  and  a  half  miles  from  the  Hut,  which  was  more 
comfortable  and  where  there  was  much  work  to  be  done,  it 
seemed  a  shame  to  remain  cooped  up  in  idleness.  Madigan 
and  Ninnis  were  both  strongly  in  favour  of  making  a  dash 
for  the  Hut,  so  we  set  off. 

The  sledge  having  been  dug  out,  one  man  went  in  front 
to  keep  the  course  and  two  men  brought  up  the  rear,  holding 
back  the  load.  With  long- spiked  Swiss  crampons  we  could 
hold  up  very  well  on  the  ice.  In  dense  drift  it  was  not  a 
simple  matter  to  steer  a  correct  course  for  the  Hut  and  it  was 
essential  not  to  de\aate,  as  the  rocky  foreshores  near  which 
it  stood  extended  only  for  a  mile  east  and  west ;  on  either 
side  abutting  on  vertical  ice-cliffs.  With  a  compelling 
force  like  a  hurriance  at  our  backs,  it  was  not  a  nice  thing  to 
contemplate  finding  ourselves  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice. 

The  wind,  however,  was  steady,  and  we  knew  at  what 
angle  to  steer  to  keep  a  rough  course  ;  and  we  were  also 
helped  by  a  number  of  small  crevasses  between  three  and 
five  and  a  half  miles  which  ran  approximately  north  and 
south. 

Half  a  mile  had  been  covered  before  we  remarked  the 
absence  of  the  dogs  which  had  been  left  to  follow.  We  had 
taken  for  granted  that  they  would  follow  us,  and  were  so 
fully  occupied  after  starting  that  their  absence  had  passed 
unnoticed.  It  would  be  difficult  to  locate  them  if  we  returned  ; 
the  weather  would  improve  in  a  few  days  :  if  they  felt  hungry 
they  would  come  down  of  their  own  accord.  So  we  decided 
to  go  on  without  them. 

At  two  miles  from  the  Hut  the  drift  thinned  out  and 
the  wind  became  more  gusty.  Between  the  gusts  the  ^^iew 
ahead  opened  out  for  a  considerable  distance,  and  the 
rocks  soon  showed  black  below  the  last  steep  fall. 

197 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Back  at  the  Hut  it  was  arranged  that  if  the  dogs  did  not 
return  in  a  reasonable  time,  Bage,  Mertz  and  Hurley  should 
go  up  to  Aladdin's  Cave  in  search  of  them. 

They  made  a  great  effort  to  get  away  next  morning. 
The  sledge  was  hauled  for  one  thousand  one  hundred  yards 
up  to  the  magnetic  ice-cave  against  a  bitter  torrent  of  air 
rushing  by  at  eighty-two  miles  an  hour.  Here  they  retreated 
exhausted. 

On  the  17th  the  wind  was  gauged  at  eighty-four  miles 
an  hour,  and  nothing  could  be  done.  Dense  drift  and 
ferocious  wind  continued  until  the  morning  of  August  21, 
and  still  none  of  the  dogs  had  come  home. 

Bage,  Hurley  and  Mertz  took  advantage  of  a  slight  lull 
to  start  off  at  6.30  a.m.  As  they  did  not  return  that  night  we 
presumed  they  were  making  good  headway. 

The  drift  was  thick  and  the  wind  high  for  four  days,  and 
it  was  not  until  the  morning  of  the  25th  that  the  weather 
showed  clearer  and  more  promising.  At  2  p.m.  Bage  and 
his  companions  arrived  at  the  Hut  bringing  all  the  dogs 
except  Grandmother,  who  had  died  of  exhaustion.  Aladdin's 
Cave  had  been  difficult  to  find  in  the  driving  snow,  which 
had  thickened  after  the  first  few  miles.  They  actually 
passed  close  to  it  when  Mertz,  between  the  gusts,  sighted 
Castor  jumping  about,  fully  alive  to  the  approaching  relief. 
The  other  dogs  were  found  curled  up  in  the  snow,  in  a  list- 
less, apathetic  state ;  apparently  in  the  same  positions  when 
left  seven  days  before.  They  had  made  no  attempt  to 
break  into  several  bags  of  provisions  lying  close  at  hand, 
preferring  to  starve  rather  than  expose  their  faces  to  the 
pelting  drift.  All  were  frozen  down  except  Basilisk  and 
Castor.  Pavlova  was  in  the  best  condition,  possibly  because 
her  last  meal  had  been  an  extra  full  one :  a  reward  for 
remaining  with  us  when  the  others  had  bolted.  Grand- 
mother was  in  the  worst  condition,  and,  despite  all  efforts 
at  revival,  died  four  hours  after.  As  the  poor  brutes  were 
very  weak  after  their  long  fast  and  exposure,  they  were 
taken  into  the  Cave  and  fed  on  warm  hoosh.  Everything 
198 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

possible  was  done  for  them,  and  in  return  the  party  passed 
a  very  miserable  time  cramped  in  such  a  small  space  with 
six  dogs.  The  accommodation  was  slightly  increased  by 
enlarging  the  Cave. 

Five  days  of  calm  weather  !  It  could  scarcely  be 
credited,  yet  September  came  with  such  a  spell.  They  gave 
us  great  opportunities,  and,  for  once,  a  vision  of  what  perfect 
Antarctic  days  might  be.  The  sea  speedily  froze  over  and 
extended  our  territory  to  the  north.  Every  day  we  dredged 
among  the  tide-cracks,  until  Hunter  and  Laseron  had  material 
enough  to  sort  and  bottle  for  weeks.  Seals  came  up  every- 
where, and  the  dogs  gorged  on  much-needed  meat  and 
blubber.  Three  large  Weddells  were  shot  near  the  "  Eastern 
Barrier"  on  September  1,  and  hauled  up  an  ice-cliff  eighty 
feet  high  to  the  rocks  above.  Work  on  the  wireless  masts  went 
on  apace,  and  the  geologist  was  abroad  with  his  plane-table 
every  day.  Webb  and  Bage,  after  a  protracted  interval,  were 
able  to  take  star  observations  for  time,  in  order  to  check 
the  chronometers. 

Mertz,  Ninnis,  Whetter  and  Laseron,  with  a  team  of 
dogs  sledged  a  big  load  of  food-stuffs  to  Aladdin's  Cave  on 
September  1.  At  the  Cave  the  dogs  were  let  loose,  but 
instead  of  running  back  to  the  Hut,  lingered  about  and 
finally  had  to  be  led  down  the  slope.  On  being  loosed  again, 
several  rushed  back  to  the  Cave  and  were  only  brought  along 
by  force.  That  night,  Scott  and  Franklin,  two  kindred 
spirits,  were  not  present  at  "  roll-call." 

On  September  3,  McLean,  Whetter  and  Close  took  more 
provisions  to  Aladdin's  Cave.  They  reported  light  drift  and 
wind  on  the  highlands,  while  at  sea-level  it  was  clear  and 
calm. 

The  sea-ice  was  by  then  thick  and  safe.  About  half  a 
mile  off  shore  a  very  successful  dredging  was  made  in  fifty 
fathoms ;  the  bottom  at  this  depth  simply  teemed  with  life. 
At  first,  the  dredge,  rope-coils,  tub,  picks  and  other  necessary 
implements  were  dragged  about  on  a  sledge,  but  the  sledge  was 

199 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

hauled  only  with  great  difficulty  and  much  exertion  over  the 
sticky,  new  sea-ice.  As  a  substitute  a  portable,  steel  hand- 
cart was  advantageously  employed,  although,  owing  to  its 
weight,  tide-cracks  and  rotten  areas  had  to  be  crossed  at  a 
run.  On  one  occasion  a  flimsy  surface  collapsed  under  it,  and 
Hunter  had  a  wetting  before  it  was  hauled  on  to  firmer  ice. 

On  September  4  there  was  a  cloud  radiant  from  the  north- 
west, indicative  of  a  change  in  the  weather.  Ninnis,  Mertz 
and  Murphy  transported  more  food-bags  and  kerosene  to 
Aladdin's  Cave.  They  found  Franklin  one  and  a  half  miles 
south  of  the  Hut  lying  on  the  ice  quite  well,  but  there  was 
no  sign  of  Scott.  Both  dogs  were  seen  on  the  1st  of  the 
month,  when  they  were  in  a  locality  south-east  of  the  Hut, 
where  crevasses  were  numerous.  It  seemed  most  probable 
that  Scott  had  lost  his  life  in  one  of  them.  The  party  visiting 
the  Cave  reported  a  considerable  amount  of  snow  drifting 
above  a  level  of  one  thousand  feet. 

There  was  another  day  of  successful  dredging,  and,  about 
four  o'clock,  while  several  men  were  still  out  on  the  ice, 
whirlies  with  great  columns  of  drift  came  steadily  doTVTi  the 
glacier,  pouring  over  the  seaward  cliffs.  In  a  few  minutes 
the  snow-clouds  were  round  the  Hut  and  the  wind  was  not 
long  in  working  up  to  eighty  miles  per  hour.  The  dredging 
party  reached  the  land  just  in  time  ;  and  the  sea-ice  drifted 
away  to  the  north.  Thus  ended  one  of  the  most  remarkable 
periods  of  fine  weather  experienced  by  us  in  Adelie  Land, 
only  to  be  excelled  in  the  height  of  summer. 

The  possibility  of  such  a  spell  being  repeated  fired  us 
with  the  hope  that  after  all  a  reasonable  amount  of  sledging 
could  be  accomplished  in  the  spring.  Three  parties  were 
chosen  to  reconnoitre  in  different  directions  and  to  test  the 
sledging  gear.  As  we  were  far  from  being  confident  in  the 
weather,  I  made  it  clear  that  no  party  should  penetrate 
farther  than  fifty  miles  from  the  Hut,  nor  remain  away 
longer  than  a  fortnight. 

Webb,  IMcLean  and  Stillwell,  the  southern  reconnoitring 
party,  were  the  first  to  set  off,  leaving  on  September  7  against 
200 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

a  wind  of  fifty-six  miles  per  hour.  Between  them  they 
had  only  one  pair  of  good  spiked  crampons,  and  it  was 
a  hard,  five  hours'  drag  up  to  Aladdin's  Cave.  A  tent  which 
had  been  spread  over  the  entrance  to  keep  out  snow  was 
picked  up  here.  It  had  suffered  punctures  and  small  tears 
from  crampons,  and,  as  the  next  day  was  one  of  boisterous 
wind,  the  party  spent  it  repairing  the  tent  and  endeavouring 
to  take  magnetic  observations.  The  latter  had  to  be 
abandoned  owing  to  the  instrument  becoming  iced  up. 

Next  afternoon  the  wind  fell  to  the  forties,  and  the 
party  struggled  on  to  the  south  for  three  miles  two  hundred 
yards  and  camped,  as  it  was  necessary  to  make  a  search  for 
a  small  depot  of  pemmican  tins,  a  pick  and  a  shovel  left  by 
us  in  the  vicinity  in  August.  The  drift  cleared  at  noon  on 
the  11th,  and  the  bamboo  pole  marking  the  depot  appeared 
a  quarter  of  a  mile  away  on  the  right.  The  pick,  shovel  and 
flag  were  secured  and  another  afternoon's  march  against  a 
fifty-mile  wind  with  a  temperature  at  -  20°  F.  brought 
the  party  three  and  a  quarter  miles  further,  to  a  point 
eleven  and  three-quarter  miles  south  of  the  Hut.  The  wind 
rose  to  the  eighties  during  the  night,  and  there  were 
many  small  holes  in  the  tent  which  provided  more  ventila- 
tion than  was  agreeable.  As  the  wind  was  too  strong  for 
travelling  on  the  12th,  it  was  decided  to  make  a  cave  in 
case  of  accident  to  the  tent. 

A  tunnel  was  driven  into  the  sloping  surface  of  the  ice 
towards  a  crevasse  about  a  foot  wide.  It  was  a  good  ten 
hours'  job  in  tough  ice  before  the  crevasse  was  reached. 
Into  the  fissure  all  the  hewn  ice  was  thrown  instead  of  being 
laboriously  shovelled  up  through  the  tunnel.  The  "  Cathe- 
dral Grotto  "  was  soon  finished,  the  tent  was  struck  and  the 
party  made  themselves  comfortable  inside.  The  cavern  was 
found  to  be  a  very  draughty  place  with  a  crevasse  along 
one  wall,  and  it  was  difficult  to  keep  warm  in  one-man 
sleeping-bags.  The  crevasse  was  accordingly  closed  with 
ice  and  snow.  That  evening  and  on  several  subsequent 
occasions  McLean  took  blood-pressure  observations. 

201 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

During  the  next  three  days  the  wind  was  so  strong  that 
Webb's  were  the  only  crampons  in  which  any  efficient 
marching  could  be  done.  The  time  was  spent  in  building 
a  high  break-wind  of  ice-blocks,  a  pit  being  excavated  on 
the  windward  side  in  which  Webb  took  a  full  set  of  magnetic 
observations.  Within  the  "  Grotto  "  the  instrument  rapidly 
became  coated  with  ice  -  crystals  ;  in  the  open  air  this 
difficulty  did  not  arise,  but  others  had  to  be  overcome. 
It  was  exceedingly  cold  work  at  —20°  F.  in  a  sixty- mile 
wind,  both  for  Webb  and  his  recorder  Stillwell. 

There  seemed  no  hope  of  going  forward,  so  the  depot 
flag  was  hoisted  and  a  fortnight's  provisions  and  kerosene 
stowed  in  the  lee  of  the  break- wind.  It  was  a  furious  race 
back  to  the  Hut  via  Aladdin's  Cave  with  a  gusty,  seventy- 
five-mile  wind  in  the  rear.  McLean  and  Stillwell  actually 
skied  along  on  their  short  blunt  crampons,  while  Webb  did 
his  best  to  brake  behind. 

The  second  party  comprised  Ninnis,  Mertz,  and  Murphy, 
who  went  to  the  south-east,  leaving  on  September  11.  After 
a  hard  fight  to  Aladdin's  Cave,  the  wind  approaching  fifty 
miles  an  hour,  they  diverged  to  the  south-east.  On  the 
12th  they  made  steady  progress  up  the  slope  of  the  glacier, 
delayed  by  many  small  crevasses.  The  surface  was  so 
rough  that  the  nuts  on  the  sledge-meter  soon  became  loose 
and  it  was  necessary  to  stop  every  quarter  of  a  mile  to  adjust 
them.  The  day's  march  was  a  solid  five  and  three  quarter 
miles  against  a  fifty-mile  wind. 

On  the  13th  Ninnis's  record  proceeds  as  follows  : 

"  The  sky  was  still  clear  but  the  wind  had  increased  to 
sixty-five  miles  per  hour,  the  temperature  standing  at  — 17°  F. 

"  We  kept  on  the  same  course  ;  the  glacier's  slope  being 
steeper.  Mertz  was  as  usual  wearing  leather  boots  and 
mountaineering  crampons,  otherwise  progress  would  have 
been  practically  impossible  ;  the  finnesko  crampons  worn  by 
Murphy  and  myself  giving  very  little  foothold.  Travelling 
was  very  slow  indeed,  and  when  we  camped  at  4  p.m., 
two  and  a  half  miles  was  all  that  had  been  covered. 
202 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

"At  9.15  A.M.  (September  14)  the  wind  practically 
dropped,  and  we  advanced  under  perfect  conditions." 

They  had  not  gone  far,  however,  before  the  wind  suddenly 
increased  so  that  only  about  four  and  a  half  miles  were 
completed  in  the  day.  That  evening,  curiously  enough, 
it  fell  calm  for  a  time;  then  there  was  a  period  of  alter- 
nating violent  winds  and  calm. 

On  Sunday,  September  15,  it  was  impossible  for  them 
to  move,  as  a  hurricane  raged  outside.  The  tent  was  very 
much  damaged  by  the  wind,  but  in  that  state  it  managed 
to  stand  up  till  next  morning.  In  the  meantime  all  three 
fully  dressed  themselves  and  lay  in  their  three-man  sleeping- 
bag  ready  to  take  to  the  road  at  a  moment's  notice. 

The  next  morning,  at  a  distance  of  eighteen  miles  south- 
east of  the  Hut,  there  was  nothing  for  it  but  to  make  for 
Aladdin's  Cave,  which  was  safely  reached  by  a  forced  march 
of  twelve  and  three-quarter  miles,  with  a  furious  wind 
partly  abeam.  On  the  way  the  sledge  was  blown  sideways 
on  to  the  lids  of  many  wide  crevasses,  which,  fortunately  for 
the  party,  were  strong  at  that  season  of  the  year. 

From  the  realistic  reports  of  the  two  parties  which  had 
returned  it  was  evident  that  Madigan  and  his  companions, 
Close  and  Whetter,  who  had  set  out  on  the  12th  to  the  west 
were  having  a  bad  time.  But  it  was  not  till  the  23rd,  after 
a  week  of  clear  skies,  low  temperatures  and  unceasing 
drift-free  wind  that  we  began  to  feel  apprehensive  about  them. 

September  24  and  25  were  punctuated  by  several  inter- 
vals of  calm  during  which  it  was  judged  the  party  would 
have  been  able  to  travel. 

On  the  morning  of  September  26  Ninnis  and  Mertz,  with  a 
team  of  dogs,  set  off  up  the  hill  to  Aladdin's  Cave  to  deposit 
some  provisions  and  to  scan  the  horizon  for  any  sign  of  the 
sledgers.  On  the  way  they  fell  in  with  them  descending  the 
slopes,  very  worn  and  frost-bitten. 

They  had  a  thrilling  story  to  tell,  and,  when  it  was  known 
that  the  party  had  reached  fifty  miles  to  the  west,  every- 
body crowded  round  to  listen. 

203 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  wind  average  at  the  Hut  during  their  fortnight  of 
absence  was  fifty-eight  miles  per  hour,  implying  worse 
conditions  on  the  plateau.     Madigan  gave  the  facts  : 

"  After  leaving  Aladdin's  Cave  on  the  12th  we  continued 
due  south,  lunching  at  2  p.m.  on  the  site  of  Webb's  first 
camp.  Our  troubles  had  already  begun ;  the  wind  aver- 
aging sixty  miles  an  hour  all  day  with  a  temperature  at  noon 
of-14°F. 

"  As  a  few  tears  appeared  in  the  tent  during  the  night, 
we  saw  that  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  put  it  up  next  day 
for  lunch,  so  we  had  a  cold  meal,  crouched  in  the  lee  of  the 
sledge.  This  custom  was  found  to  economize  time,  as  we 
became  so  cold  eating  our  fare  of  biscuit,  chocolate  and 
butter  that  we  got  moving  again  as  soon  as  possible.  The 
great  disadvantage  was  that  there  was  nothing  to  drink 
between  the  morning  and  evening  meals. 

"  We  sewed  up  the  rents  in  the  tent  during  the  halt* 
having  to  use  bare  fingers  in  the  open.  About  four  stitches 
at  a  time  were  as  much  as  one  man  could  manage,  and  then 
the  other  two  took  their  turns. 

"  The  next  day  was  the  only  comparatively  calm  period 
of  the  two  weeks  of  travelling.  The  wind  was  in  the  vicinity 
of  thirty  miles  per  hour,  and,  going  west,  we  reached  a  spot, 
twenty  miles  *out,'  on  a  snow-covered  surface,  by  nightfall. 

"  A  steady  seventy-five-mile  wind  blew  all  day  on  the 
15th  at  right  angles  to  our  course,  accompanied  by  a  thick, 
low  drift.  The  surface  was  partially  consolidated  snow,  very 
hard  and  smooth.  Sometimes  the  sledge  would  grip  and 
we  could  pull  straight  ahead.  Then,  suddenly,  it  would 
slide  away  sideways  down  wind  and  often  pull  us  off  our 
feet  with  a  sudden  vicious  jerk.  Most  of  the  time  we  were 
dragging  in  a  south-westerly  direction  to  make  the  sledge 
run  west,  stumbling  through  the  drift  with  the  sledge  now 
behind  us,  now  sliding  away  to  leeward,  often  capsizing  and 
requiring  to  be  laboriously  righted  and  sometimes  repacked. 

"  After  many  experiments,  we  found  the  best  device  was 
to  have  two  men  on  the  bow-rope,  about  twenty  feet  long, 
204 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

and  one  with  about  ten  feet  of  rope  attached  to  the  rear  of 
the  sledge.  The  man  on  the  tail-rope,  usually  Whetter, 
found  it  very  difficult  to  keep  his  feet,  and,  after  a  score 
of  falls  in  stinging  drift  with  incidental  frost-bites  on 
fingers  and  cheeks,  he  did  not  feel  exactly  cheerful. 

"  By  4  P.M.  on  the  15th  we  had  reached  twenty-five  miles 
and  were  exhausted.  We  pitched  camp  at  an  early  hour, 
partly  influenced  by  the  fact  that  it  was  a  special  occasion 
— Close's  birthday  !  Some  port  wine  had  been  slipped  in  to 
provide  against  that  '  emergency.'  On  taking  the  precious 
bottle  from  the  instrument-box,  I  found  that  the  cork  was 
out,  and,  for  one  awful  moment,  thought  the  bottle  was 
empty.  Then  I  realized  that  the  wine  had  frozen  solid  and 
had  pushed  the  cork  out  by  its  expansion  on  solidification. 

"  At  last,  the  tent  safely  pitched  and  hoosh  and  cocoa 
finished,  the  moment  came  to  drink  to  Close's  health  and 
happiness.  The  bottle  had  stood  on  the  top  of  the  cooker 
while  the  meal  was  being  prepared,  but  the  wine  was  still  as 
solid  as  ever.  After  being  shaken  and  held  over  the  primus 
for  a  good  half-hour  it  began  to  issue  in  lumps.  Once  the 
lumps  were  secured  in  mugs  the  rest  of  the  thawing  was 
easy.  Finally,  we  toasted  Close  and  his  wife  (in  far  Australia) 
in  what  we  voted  to  be  the  finest  draught  it  had  ever  been  our 
good  fortune  to  drink.  In  the  morning  a  cairn  was  made 
of  the  snow-blocks  which  were  taken  from  the  tent-skirt, 
and  it  was  surmounted  with  the  bottle,  being  called 
'  Birthday  Camp.' 

"  During  September  16  my  right  eyelid  became  frost- 
bitten. I  noticed  that  it  was  hard  and  refused  to  shut,  so 
I  rubbed  vigorously  to  bring  it  round.  However,  it  swelled 
and  blistered  badly  and  the  eye  remained  closed  for  two 
days. 

"  From  twenty  to  fifty  miles  'out',  the  surface  was  neve 
with  areas  of  sastrugi  up  to  three  feet  in  height.  No  crevasses 
were  noticed.  At  twenty-eight  miles  out,  we  lost  sight  of 
the  sea,  and  at  forty  miles  an  altitude  of  four  thousand  five 
hundred  feet  was  reached. 

205 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

"  We  turned  out  at  6  a.m.  every  morning  and  were  on 
the  move  by  9  a.m.  Lunch  only  took  half  an  hour  and  was  a 
most  uncomfortable  meal.  As  we  sat  in  the  lee  of  the 
sledge,  the  surface-drift  swirled  up  in  our  faces  like  fine  sand. 
We  never  camped  before  6  p.m.  and  were  obliged  to  consider 
five  miles  a  good  day's  run. 

"  Pitching  camp  took  nearly  an  hour.  Blocks  of  snow 
were  cut  and  arranged  in  a  semicircle,  within  which  the  tent 
was  laid  with  its  peak  upwind.  It  sounds  simple  enough, 
but,  as  we  had  to  take  off  crampons  so  as  not  to  tread  on 
the  tent,  our  difficulties  were  enormously  increased  by  having 
to  move  about  wearing  finnesko  on  a  smooth  surface  in  a 
high  wind.  One  man  crawled  into  the  tent,  and,  at  a  given 
signal,  the  other  two  raised  the  peak  while  the  former  held 
on  to  the  upwind  leg  and  kicked  the  other  legs  into  place 
with  his  feet.  The  others  then  quickly  piled  food-tanks 
and  blocks  of  snow  on  to  the  skirt,  calling  out  as  soon  as  there 
was  enough  to  hold  it  down,  as  the  man  gripping  the  bamboo 
leg  inside  would  soon  have  '  deadly  cold  '  fingers.  It  was 
always  a  great  relief  when  the  tent  was  up. 

"  Almost  every  night  there  was  some  sewing  to  do,  and 
it  was  not  long  before  every  one's  fingers  were  in  a  bad  state. 
They  became,  especially  near  the  tips,  as  hard  as  wood  and 
devoid  of  sensation.  Manipulating  toggles  and  buttons 
on  one's  clothing  gave  an  immense  amount  of  trouble,  and 
it  always  seemed  an  interminable  time  before  we  got  away 
in  the  morning.  Our  lowest  temperature  was  —35°  F., 
early  on  September  18. 

"We  were  fifty  miles  'out'  on  September  19  on  a  white, 
featureless  plain.  Through  low  drift  we  had  seen  very 
little  of  our  surroundings  on  the  march.  A  bamboo  pole 
with  a  black  flag  was  raised,  a  mound  was  built,  and  a 
week's  provisions  for  three  men  and  two  gallons  of  kerosene 
were  cached. 

"  In  the  morning  there  was  a  howling  eighty-mile  blizzard 
with  dense  drift,  and  our  hopes  of  an  early  start  homeward 
were  dispelled.  We  feared  for  the  safety  of  the  tent,  knowing 
206 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

that  if  it  had  gone  during  that  '  blow  '  our  hopes  of  getting 
back  to  the  Hut  would  have  been  small. 

"  The  wind  continued  all  day  and  the  next  night,  but,  to 
our  joy,  abated  on  the  21st  to  fifty  miles  an  hour,  per- 
mitting us  to  travel. 

"  Through  a  seventy-five-miler  on  the  22nd  and  a  quieter 
day  on  the  23rd,  we  picked  up  our  half-way  mound  at 
Birthday  Camp  on  September  24.  On  the  same  night 
the  long-suffering  sledge-meter,  much  battered,  gave  up 
recording. 

"  At  3  A.M.  I  was  awakened  by  something  striking  me 
on  the  head.  I  looked  out  of  the  sleeping-bag  and  found 
that  the  tent  had  fallen  in  on  us.  The  lashing  at  the  apex 
had  carried  away  and  the  poles  upwind  were  almost  flat. 
The  cap  was  gone,  and  one  side  of  the  tent  was  split  from  top 
to  bottom.  I  awakened  the  others,  and  Whetter  and  I  got 
out,  leaving  Close  inside  to  hang  on  to  the  bag.  Luckily  we 
had  kept  on  our  burberry s  in  case  of  accidents.  For  once 
the  entrance  had  not  to  be  unfastened,  as  there  was  a  ready- 
made  exit.  The  poles  were  roughly  bound  together  with  an 
alpine  rope  and  anchored  to  a  pick  on  the  windward  side.  It 
was  blowing  about  eighty  miles  an  hour,  but  fortunately 
there  was  no  drift.  When  daylight  came  the  tent  was 
found  to  be  hopelessly  ruined,  and  to  light  the  primus  was 
impossible,  though  the  wind  had  abated  to  thirty- five  miles 
an  hour. 

"  We  ate  some  frozen  food  and  pushed  on,  hoping  to  find 
Aladdin's  Cave  before  dark,  so  that  we  should  not  have  to 
spend  a  night  without  a  tent.  After  a  struggle  of  thirteen 
miles  over  rough  ice  we  came,  footsore  and  worn  out,  to 
Aladdin's  Cave.  Close's  feet  were  badly  blistered,  and  both 
my  big  toes  had  become  frost-bitten  at  the  fifty-mile  camp, 
giving  me  a  good  deal  of  trouble  on  the  way  back. 

"  Never  was  the  Cave  a  more  luxurious  place.  The 
cooker  was  kept  busy  far  into  the  night,  while  we  drank  and 
smoked  and  felt  happy." 

The  successful  conclusion  of  this  journey  in  the  face  of 

207 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  most  adverse  weather  conditions  was  something  upon 
which  Madigan,  Whetter  and  Close  could  well  feel  proud, 
for  in  its  way  it  must  be  a  record  in  the  sledging  world. 
They  were  indeed  badly  frost-bitten ;  Madigan's  great 
toes  having  suffered  most  of  all.  Whetter's  chief  injury 
was  a  wound  under  the  chin  occasioned  by  a  pair  of  scissors 
handled  by  Madigan  to  free  Whetter's  helmet  on  an  occasion 
when  it  was  firmly  frozen  to  his  face. 

On  October  1,  Mertz,  Hurley  and  Ninnis  made  a  gallant 
attempt  to  rescue  two  dogs,  Basilisk  and  Franklin,  which  had 
remained  at  Aladdin's  Cave  on  September  26,  after  accom- 
panying them  there  with  a  load  of  provisions.  At  the  Hut 
there  was  no  drift,  but  during  the  ascent  it  became  thicker, 
and  the  wind  stronger,  forcing  them  at  last  to  turn  back. 

Two  days  later  another  attempt  was  made  by  Ninnis  and 
Mertz,  and,  in  dense  drift,  after  wandering  about  for  a  long 
time  they  happened  on  the  Cave,  to  find  that  the  dogs  were 
not  there,  though  spots  were  discovered  where  they  had 
evidently  been  sleeping  in  the  snow.  Coming  back  discon- 
solately, they  found  that  the  dogs  had  reached  the  Hut  not 
long  before  them.  Apparently  the  two  vagrants,  hearing 
Ninnis  and  Mertz  blundering  about  in  the  drift  in  search 
of  the  depot,  had  decided  that  it  was  time  to  return  home. 
We  concluded  that  the  ways  of  these  Greenland  dogs  were 
past  finding  out. 

October  came  with  a  deluge  of  snow  and  transient  hours 
of  bright  sunlight,  during  which  the  seals  would  make  a 
temporary  landing  and  retire  again  to  the  water  when  their 
endurance  was  exhausted.  Snow  petrels  flew  in  great 
numbers  about  the  rocks  in  the  evening,  seeking  out  their 
old  nest-crevices.  Seeing  these  signs  of  returning  life,  every 
one  was  in  great  expectation  of  the  arrival  of  the  penguins. 

On  the  night  of  the  11th,  Hurley,  Laseron,  Hunter  and 
Correll  made  an  innovation  by  presenting  a  small  farce  to 
an  audience  which  had  been  starved  of  dramatic  entertain- 
ment for  a  long  time,  and  consequently  showed  tremendous 
appreciation. 
208 


Adtlic  Lend  SNOW  PETRELS  PREPAIUXG  TO   NEST,  CAPE  DENISON  Hurley 


A  SNOW  PETREL  ON  THE   NEST 


Uiuleu 


r^-f 


•^^C'iMY"    V- 


AI)ELIE|PEX(;ri.\s;i)IVIX(;  into  the  sea  IX  (H'EST  of^food 


Hiirky 


Adclu'  Lnnil  Hurley 

ADELIE  PEXUUIXS  JUMPING   UX   TO  THE  FLOE 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

The  first  penguin  came  waddling  up  the  ice-foot  against 
a  seventy-mile  wind  late  on  the  afternoon  of  October  12. 
McLean  brought  the  bird  back  to  the  Hut  and  the  new- 
comer received  a  great  ovation.  Stimulated  by  their  success 
on  the  previous  night  and  the  appearance  of  the  first  penguin, 
the  theatrical  company  added  to  their  number,  and,  dispens- 
ing with  a  rehearsal,  produced  an  opera,  "  The  Washer- 
woman's Secret  "  (Laseron).  Part  of  the  Hut  was  curtained 
off  as  a  combined  green-room  and  dressing-room ;  the 
kitchen  was  the  stage  ;  footlights  twinkled  on  the  floor  ;  the 
acetylene  limelight  beamed  down  from  the  rafters,  while  the 
audience  crowded  on  a  form  behind  the  dining-table,  making 
tactless  remarks  and  steadily  eating  chocolate. 

The  typed  programmes  advertised  the  following  : 


THE  WASHERWOMAN'S  SECRET 

{Opera  in  Five  Acts) 
Dramatis  Person.b 


Dr.  Stakanhoiser  (Tenor) 
Chevalier  de  Tintail  (Fiver) 
Baron  de  Brent  (Basso) 
Count  Hoopenkoff  (Barrowtone) 
Madam  Fuclose  (Don't  Sing) 
Jemima  Fuclose  (Soprano) 
Dr.  Stakanhoiser's  Dog 
Village  Idiot 
Orchestra 


Hoyle  " 
Johnny  " 
Joe  " 

Hurley 
Hunter 
Laseron 

Little  Willie  " 

Correll 

Also  Joe  " 

Laseron 

Dad" 

McLean 

Monkey  " 
Bick  " 

Greenland  Pup 
Bickerton 

Stillwater  Willie  " 

Stillwell 

ACT  I 

Scene  :    Room  in  poorer  part  of  Berlin  :   Madam  Fuclose  in  bed  dying  : 
Jemima  at  table  washing  clothes 

Song  "  When  Sparrows  Build  "  Jemima 

[Knock  at  door.    Enter  Dr.  Stakanhoiser. 
So7ig  :  "I  vas  a  Doctor  " 

[Attends  Madam  Fuclose,  who,  when  dying,  tells  him  that  Jemima 
is  not  her  daughter,  but  the  Princess  of  Adeliana,  ivhom  she  has 
rescued  in  Paris  during  the  Revolution. 
Death  Scene  and  Chorus  :   "  Who  Killed  my  Mother  ?  " 

VOL.  I  o  209 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

ACT  II 

Scene  :  Beneath  Jemma's  window 

{Enter  Dr.  Stakakhoiser  disguised  as  organ  grinder. 

Song  :  "  Vurds  der  Likum  "  Dr.  S. 

[Jeivoma  opens  windoiv  and  throws  flour  on  Doctok. 
[Ejiter  Bakon  de  Brent,  kicks  Doctor  out. 

Song  :  "  Baron  of  Brent  " 

[Baron  makes  love  to  Jeinhma,  who  laughs  at  him. 
Z)u,^t :  "  Wilt  love  me "  Jemima  and  Baron 

[Enter  Chevalier  de  Testtail,  who  denounces  the  Baron  as  already 
having  four  wives.     The  Baron  goes  off,  muttering  revenge. 

Song  :  "  I'm  in  love  Avith  a  wonderful  lady  "  Chevalier 

[The  Chevalier  makes  love  to  jE>nMA,  who  loves  Mm  in  return. 
Chorus  :  "  Jemima  " 

ACT  III 

Scene  :  Conspirators^  Chamber 

[Enter  Doctor,  who  hides  behind  a  barrel. 

[Enter  Count  Hoopenkoff,  who  amuses  himself  playing  a  piccolo. 

[Enter  Baron.     They   discuss   plot   to   kidnap   Princess,    which   is 

overheard  by  Doctor. 
[Enter  Ghost,  who  frightens  conspirators  away. 

Chorus  :  "  Little  Willie  Smith  " 


ACT  IV 

Scene  :  Jeishma's  room 

[The  Chevalier  de  Tintail  is  waiting. 
Song  :  "I  want  you  to  see  my  Girl "  Chevalier 

[Enter  Jemima.    Love  scene. 

[Enter  Doctor,  who  discloses  the  plot  he  lias  heard  and  tells  Jemma 
of  her  high  descent.  The  Chevalier  and  the  Doctor  hide,  and 
the  two  villains,  by  means  of  a  ladder,  enter  the  room.  The  heroes 
spring  from  their  hiding-place  and  the  villains  are  ejected. 

Chorus  :  "  There  is  a  Wash-House  " 

210 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

ACT  V 

Scene  :   Conspirators'  Chamber 

[The  Baron  atid  Count  enter  by  different  doors.     They  accuse  each 
other  of  having  betrayed  the  plot.     Duel  follotvs  in  which  both  are 
killed. 
Duet :  "  Mort  de  Botheo "  Count  and  Baron 

[All  the  others  rush  in.     The  two  lovers  come  together  and  the  Doctor 
says,  "  God  bless  you,  my  children.'^ 
Chorus  :  "  Auld  Lang  Syne  "         Company  and  Audience 

And 
God  Save  the  Kino 

Played  by  the  Society  for  the  Prevention  of  the  Blues. 

Saturday,  October  12,  1912. 

Adelie  Hall. 

Admission  Free.  Children  Half  Price. 

October  13  was  known  as  Black  Sunday.  We  were  all 
seated  at  dinner  and  the  Hut  was  quivering  in  the  tornado- 
like gusts  which  followed  a  heavy  "blow"  reaching  a  maxi- 
mum hourly  average  of  ninety-one  miles.  One  mighty  blast 
was  followed  by  a  crack  and  the  sound  of  a  heavy  falling 
body.  For  a  moment  it  was  thought  that  something  had 
happened  to  the  Hut.  Then  the  messman  ran  out  to  the 
trap- door  and  saw  that  the  northern  wireless  mast  had 
disappeared. 

The  weather  showed  but  meagre  signs  of  improvement, 
but  the  penguins  came  up  in  great  numbers.  They  were  in 
groups  all  along  the  ice-foot  in  the  lee  of  rocks  and  icy 
pinnacles.  They  climbed  up  to  their  old  resorts,  and  in  a 
few  days  commenced  to  build  nests  of  small  pebbles.  Skua 
gulls  mysteriously  appeared,  snow  petrels  hovered  along  the 
rocky  ridges  and  odd  seals  landed  on  the  wind-raked  harbour 
ice.  Silver-grey  and  Antarctic  petrels  flew  along  the  shore 
with  occasional  Cape  pigeons.  If  the  weather  were  in- 
different to  the  fact,  the  birds  did  not  forget  that  spring  had 
come. 

A  Weddell  seal  calved  on  the  bay-ice  on  October  18.  For 
a  week  the  pup  had  a  miserable  time  in  winds  ranging  mostly 

211 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

about  the  seventies,  with  the  temperature  below  zero  Fah- 
renheit. At  last  it  became  so  weak  that  it  thawed  a  hole  in 
the  soft,  sludgy  ice  and  could  not  extricate  itself.  Both  it 
and  the  mother  were  killed  and  skinned  for  the  biological 
collection. 

On  all  but  the  worst  days  a  gang  of  men  worked  with 
picks  and  shovels  digging  out  the  Hangar,  so  that  Bickerton 
could  test  the  air-tractor  sledge.  The  attack  was  con- 
centrated upon  a  solid  bank  of  snow  and  ice  into  which 
heaps  of  tins  and  rubbish  had  been  compactly  frozen.  In 
soft  snow  enormous  headway  can  be  made  in  a  short  space 
of  time,  but  in  that  species  of  conglomerate,  progress  is 
slow.  Eventually,  a  cutting  was  made  by  which  the 
machine  could  pass  out.  The  rampart  of  snow  was  broken 
through  at  the  northern  end  of  the  Hangar,  and  the  sledge 
with  its  long  curved  runners  was  hauled  forth  triumphantly 
on  the  25th.  From  that  time  onwards  Bickerton  continued 
to  experiment  and  to  improve  the  contrivance. 

On  October  21  there  was  a  marked  thaw  inside  the  Hut. 
The  frost  along  all  the  cracks  dissolved  into  water  and  ran 
down  the  walls  over  pictures,  on  to  book-shelves  and  bunks. 
The  thick  caking  of  ice  on  the  windows  dripped  continually, 
coming  away  in  layers  at  lunch-time  and  scattering  among 
the  diners  at  both  ends  of  the  table.  Every  available 
bucket  and  tub  was  in  use,  and  small  tin-gutters  hooked 
under  each  window  had  to  be  emptied  at  frequent  intervals. 

Stillwell  came  in  during  the  afternoon  bearing  an  albino 
penguin  with  a  prettily  mottled  head  ;  a  curious  freak  of  which 
the  biologists  immediately  took  possession.  The  penguins 
now  swarmed  along  the  foreshores,  those  not  settling  down  in 
the  rookeries  wandering  about  in  small  crowds,  occasionally 
visiting  the  Hut  and  exploring  among  the  rocks  or  up  the 
slippery  glacier.  Murphy  was  heard,  at  this  time,  to  advance 
a  theory  accounting  for  the  fact  that  Adelie  penguins  never 
made  their  nests  on  a  scale  more  elaborate  than  a  collection  of 
stones.  He  submitted  that  anything  else  would  be  blown 
away.  To  support  the  contention,  he  stated  that  as  soon 
212 


SPRING  EXPLOITS 

as  the  female  lays  her  egg,  she  places  a  stone  on  top  to 
weight  it  down.  The  biologists  kept  a  dignified  silence 
during  the  discussion. 

On  the  21st  an  Emperor  penguin  landed  on  the  harbour- 
ice,  and,  early  in  November,  two  more  were  captured. 
These  imperial  birds  are  very  rare  on  the  coasts  of  Adelie 
Land,  owing  to  the  fact  that  their  winter  breeding-grounds 
in  Antarctica  are  selected  in  spots  where  climatic  conditions 
are  comparatively  good. 

October  closed  with  an  average  wind  velocity  of  56*9 
miles  per  hour.  Yet  the  possibility  of  summer  sledging  was 
no  longer  remote.  The  sun  was  high,  spells  of  calm  were 
longer  and  more  frequent,  and,  with  the  certain  knowledge 
that  we  should  be  on  the  plateau  in  November,  the  sledging 
parties  were  chosen,  schemes  of  exploration  were  discussed, 
and  the  last  details  for  an  extensive  campaign  completed. 


213 


CHAPTER    XII 
ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

We  yearned  beyond  the  skyline. — Kepling 

OCTOBER    had    passed  without    offering    any    oppor- 
tunities for  sledging,  and  we  resolved  that  in  de- 
fiance of  all  but  the  worst  weather  a  start  would  be 
made  in  November.     The  Aurora  was  due  to  arrive  early 
in  January  1913  and  the  time  at  our  disposal  for  exploration 
was  slipping  away  rapidly. 

The  investigation  by  sledging  journeys  of  the  coastline 
to  the  eastward  was  regarded  as  of  prime  importance,  for 
our  experience  in  the  Aurora  when  in  those  longitudes  during 
the  previous  year  was  such  as  to  give  little  promise  of  its 
ever  being  accomplished  from  the  sea. 

Westward,  the  coast  was  accessible  from  the  sea; 
at  least  for  some  distance  in  that  direction.  Madigan's 
journey  in  the  springtime  had  demonstrated  that,  if  an}^- 
thing,  the  land  to  the  west  was  steeper,  and  consequently 
more  windy  conditions  might  be  expected  there.  Further,  it 
was  judged  that  information  concerning  this  region  would 
be  forthcoming  from  the  ship,  which  had  cruised  westward 
after  leaving  Adelie  Land  in  January  1912.  The  field  in 
that  direction  was  therefore  not  so  promising  as  that  to  the 
east. 

On  this  account  the  air-tractor  sledge,  of  somewhat 
doubtful  utility,  was  detailed  for  use  to  the  westward  of 
Winter  Quarters,  and,  as  it  was  obvious  that  the  engine 
could  only  be  operated  in  moderately  good  weather,  its 
final  departure  was  postponed  until  December. 
214 


IIEKTZ  IX  AN   ICY  KAVINE 


Hurley 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

The  following  is  a  list  of  the  parties  which  had  been 
arranged  and  which,  now  fully  equipped,  were  on  the  tiptoe 
of  expectation  to  depart. 

(1)  A  Southern  Party  composed  of  Bage  (leader), 
Webb  and  Hurley.  The  special  feature  of  their  work  was 
to  be  magnetic  observations  in  the  vicinity  of  the  South 
Magnetic  Pole. 

(2)  A  Southern  Supporting  Party,  including  Murphy 
(leader).  Hunter  and  Laseron,  who  were  to  accompany  the 
Southern  Party  as  far  as  possible,  returning  to  Winter 
Quarters  by  the  end  of  November. 

(3)  A  Western  Party  of  three  men — Bickerton  (leader), 
Hodgeman  and  Whetter — who  were  to  traverse  the  coastal 
highlands  west  of  the  Hut.  Their  intention  was  to  make 
use  of  the  air-tractor  sledge  and  the  departure  of  the  party 
was  fixed  for  early  December. 

(4)  Still  well,  in  charge  of  a  Near  Eastern  Party,  was  to 
map  the  coastline  between  Cape  Denison  and  the  Mertz 
Glacier-Tongue,  dividing  the  work  into  two  stages.  In  the 
first  instance,  Close  and  Hodgeman  were  to  assist  him  ;  all 
three  acting  partly  as  supports  to  the  other  eastern  parties 
working  further  afield.  After  returning  to  the  Hut  at  the 
end  of  November  for  a  further  supply  of  stores,  he  was  to 
set  out  again  with  Close  and  Laseron  in  order  to  complete 
the  work. 

(5)  An  Eastern  Coastal  Party  composed  of  Madigan 
(leader),  McLean  and  Correll  was  to  start  in  early  Novem- 
ber with  the  object  of  investigating  the  coastline  beyond 
the  Mertz  Glacier. 

(6)  Finally,  a  Far-Eastern  Party,  assisted  by  the  dogs, 
was  to  push  out  rapidly  overland  to  the  southward  of 
Madigan's  party,  mapping  more  distant  sections  of  the  coast- 
line, beyond  the  limit  to  which  the  latter  party  would  be 
likely  to  reach. 

As  the  plans  for  the  execution  of  such  a  journey  had 
of  necessity  to  be  more  provisional  than  in  the  case  of  the 
others,    I    determined    to   undertake    it,    accompanied    by 

215 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Ninnis  and  IMertz,  both  of  whom  had  so  ably  acquitted 
themselves  throughout  the  Expedition  and,  moreover,  had 
always  been  in  charge  of  the  dogs. 

November  opened  with  more  moderate  weather,  auguring 
still  better  conditions  for  midsummer.  Accordingly  No- 
vember 6  was  fixed  as  the  date  of  final  departure  for  several 
of  the  parties.  The  evening  of  November  5  was  made  a 
special  occasion  :  a  farewell  dinner,  into  which  everybody 
entered  very  heartily. 

On  the  mornmg  of  the  6th,  however,  we  found  a  strong 
blizzard  raging  and  the  landscape  blotted  out  by  drift-snow, 
which  did  not  clear  until  the  afternoon  of  the  following  day. 

At  the  first  opportunity,  Murphy,  Hunter  and  Laseron 
(supporting  the  Southern  Party)  got  away,  but  found  the 
wind  so  strong  at  a  level  of  one  thousand  feet  on  the  glacier 
that  they  anchored  their  sledge  and  returned  to  the  Hut 
for  the  night. 

The  next  morning  saw  them  off  finally  and,  later  in 
the  day,  the  Near-Eastern  Party  (Still well.  Close  and 
Hodgeman)  and  the  Eastern  Coastal  Party  (Madigan, 
McLean  and  Correll)  got  under  way,  though  there  was  still 
considerable  wind. 

My  own  party  was  to  leave  on  the  9th  for,  assisted  by 
the  dogs,  we  could  easily  catch  up  to  the  other  eastern 
parties,  and  it  was  our  intention  not  to  part  company  with 
them  until  all  were  some  distance  out  on  the  road  together. 

The  wind  increased  on  the  9th  and  the  air  became 
charged  with  drift,  so  we  felt  sure  that  those  who  preceded 
us  would  still  be  camped  at  Aladdin's  Cave,  and  that  the 
best  course  was  to  wait. 

At  this  date  the  penguin  rookeries  were  full  of  new- 
laid  eggs,  and  the  popular  taste  inclined  towards  omelettes, 
in  the  production  of  which  Mertz  was  a  past  master.  I 
can  recall  the  clamouring  throng  who  pressed  round  for 
the  final  omelette  as  Mertz  officiated  at  the  stove  just  before 
we  left  on  the  10th. 
216 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

It  was  a  beautiful  calm  afternoon  as  the  sledge  mounted 
up  the  long  icy  slopes.  The  Southern  Party  (Bage,  Webb 
and  Hurley)  were  a  short  distance  in  advance,  but  by  the 
help  of  the  dogs  we  were  soon  abreast  of  them.  Then 
Bickerton,  who  had  given  Bage's  party  a  pull  as  far  as  the 
three-mile  post,  bade  us  good-bye  and  returned  to  the  Hut 
where  he  was  to  remain  in  charge  with  Whetter  and  Hannam 
until  the  return  of  Murphy's  party. 

At  Aladdin's  Cave,  while  some  prepared  supper,  others 
selected  tanks  of  food  from  the  depot  and  packed  the  sledges. 
After  the  meal,  the  Southern  Party  bade  us  farewell  and 
set  off  at  a  rapid  rate,  intending  to  overhaul  their  supporting 
party  on  the  same  evening  at  the  Cathedral  Grotto,  eleven 
and  three-quarter  miles  from  the  Hut.  Many  finishing 
touches  had  to  be  put  to  our  three  sledges  and  two  teams  of 
dogs,  so  that  the  departure  was  delayed  till  next  morning. 

We  were  up  betimes  and  a  good  start  was  made  before 
anything  came  of  the  overcast  sky  which  had  formed 
during  the  night.  The  rendezvous  appointed  for  meeting 
the  others,  in  case  we  had  not  previously  caught  them 
up,  was  eighteen  miles  south-east  of  Aladdin's  Cave.  But, 
with  a  view  to  avoiding  crevasses  as  much  as  possible,  a 
southerly  course  was  followed  for  several  miles,  after  which 
it  was  directed  well  to  the  east.  In  the  meantime  the  wind 
had  arisen  and  snow  commenced  to  fall  soon  after  noon.  In 
such  weather  it  was  impossible  to  locate  the  other  parties, 
so  a  halt  was  made  and  the  tent  pitched  after  eight  miles. 

Five  days  of  wind  and  drift  followed,  and  for  the  next 
two  days  we  remained  in  camp.  Then,  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  13th,  the  drift  became  less  dense,  enabling  us  to 
move  forward  on  an  approximate  course  to  what  was 
judged  to  be  the  vicinity  of  the  rendezvous,  Avhere  we 
camped  again  for  three  days. 

Comfortably  ensconced  in  the  sleeping-bags,  we  ate 
only  a  small  ration  of  food  ;  the  savings  being  carefully 
put  away  for  a  future  "  rainy  day."  Outside,  the  dogs  had 
at  first  an  unpleasant  time  until  they  were  buried  in  snow 

217 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

which  sheltered  them  from  the  stinging  wind.  Ninnis 
and  Mertz  took  turns  day  by  day  attending  to  their  needs. 

The  monotony  and  disappointment  of  delay  were  just 
becoming  acute  when  the  wind  fell  off,  and  the  afternoon 
of  November  16  turned  out  gloriously  fine. 

Several  excursions  were  immediately  made  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood to  seek  for  the  whereabouts  of  the  other  parties, 
but  all  were  unsuccessful.  At  length  it  occurred  to  us 
that  something  serious  might  have  happened,  so  we  left 
our  loads  and  started  back  at  a  gallop  for  Aladdin's  Cave 
with  two  empty  sledges,  Mertz  careering  ahead  on  skis 
over  the  sastrugi  field. 

Shortly  afterwards  two  black  specks  were  seen  away 
in  the  north ;  a  glance  with  the  binoculars  leaving  no  doubt 
as  to  the  identity  of  the  parties.  We  returned  to  the  loads, 
and,  having  picked  them  up,  made  a  course  to  the  east  to 
intercept  the  other  men. 

It  was  a  happy  camp  that  evening  with  the  three  tents 
pitched  together,  while  we  compared  our  experiences  of 
the  previous  six  days  and  made  plans  for  the  outward 
journey. 

Our  sledge-meter  had  already  suffered  through  bump- 
ing over  rough  ice  and  sastrugi,  and  an  exchange  was  made 
with  the  stronger  one  on  Stillwell's  sledge.  A  quantity 
of  food  was  also  taken  over  from  him  and  the  loads  were 
finally  adjusted. 

The  details  and  weights  of  the  equipment  on  the  three 
sledges  belonging  to  my  party  are  sufficiently  interesting  to 
be  set  out  at  length  below.  Most  of  the  items  were  included 
in  the  impedimenta  of  all  our  parties,  but  slight  variations 
were  necessary  to  meet  particular  circumstances  or  to  satisfy 
the  whim  of  an  individual. 

Total  Load 

The  Principal  Sledge,  lift,  long,  451b. 

Fittings  for  Same  :  Instrument-box.  71  b.  5  oz.  ;  cooker- 
box,  7  lb.  6  oz.  ;  kerosene-tray,  3  lb.  ;  mast-attachment, 
218 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

2  lb.  8  oz.  ;  mast,  1  lb.  15  oz.  ;   spar,  1  lb.  8  oz.  ;  decking       lb.      oz. 

(canvas   and   bamboo),    3  lb.    5  oz.  ;  rigging,    7*5  oz.  ;  5 

leather  straps,  51b. 77       65 

Drill  Tent,  strengthened  and  attached  to  poles,  also  floor- 
cloth, 331b.     Sparedrillcover,  111b.  8oz 44      8 

Sleeping-bags,  3  one-man  bags 30       0 

Cooking  Gear  :  Nansen  cooker,  11  lb.  3  oz. ;  3  mugs, 
1  lb.  8  oz.  ,  2  tins,  10  oz.  ;  scales,  '5  oz.  ;  3  spoons,  1'5  oz. ; 
matches,  135  oz.,  and  damp-proof  tin  to  hold  same,  3' 7  oz. ; 
"  Primus  "  heater,  full,  3  lb.  10  oz.  ;  "  Primus  "  prickers, 
2*5  oz.  ;  "  Primus  "  repair  outfit,  2  oz.  ;  kerosene  tin 
openers  and  pourers,  4' 5  oz.  ;  spirit  for  "  Primus  "  in  tin, 
5  lb.  14  oz.,  also  a  ready  bottle,  full,  1  lb.  5  oz.        .         .         .25     14"2 

Repair  Outfit :  Spare  copper  wire,  rivets,  needles,  thread, 
etc.,  1  lb.  14"5  oz.  ;  set  of  12  tools,  15'5  oz.  ;  requirements 
for  repairing  dog-harness  and  medically  treating  the  dogs, 
31b.  8  oz 6       6 

Medical  Outfit  .•  6  "  Burroughs  &  Wellcome  "  first  field 
dressings  ;  absorbent  cotton  wool ;  boric  wool ;  pleated 
lint ;  pleated  bandages,  roll  bandages  ;  adhesive  tape  ; 
liquid  collodion  ;  "  tabloid  "  ophthalmic  drugs  for  treating 
snow-blindness  ;  an  assortment  of  "  tabloid  "  drugs  for 
general  treatment ;  canvas  case  containing  scissors,  forceps, 
artery-forceps,  scalpel,  surgical  needles  and  silk,  etc.    .         .  2     12-3 

Photographic  Outfit :  A  Opiate,  long,  extension-camera 
in  a  case,  with  special  stiffening  board  and  36  cut  films, 

4  lb.  4-5  oz.  ;  adaptor  to  accommodate  camera  to  theodolite 
legs,  2  oz. ;  a  water-tight  tin  with  14  packets,  each  containing 

12  cut  films,  3  lb.  10  oz 8      0-5 

Surveying  Requirements  :  A  3"  transit  theodolite  in  case, 

5  lb.  14  oz.  ;  legs  for  the  same,  3  lb.  6  oz.  ;  sledge-meter, 
8  lb.  ;  Tables  from  Nautical  Almanack  and  book  of  Lo- 
garithmic Tables,  1  lb.  3  oz.  ;  2  note  books,  1  lb.  6  oz.  ; 
angle-books,  5  oz.  ;  map-tube,  10  oz.  ;  maps,  6"5  oz.  ; 
pencils,  1*5  oz.  ;  dividers  and  rubber,  l'5oz.  ;  protractor 
and  set-square,  "5  oz.  ;  prismatic  comjjass  and  clinometer, 

8-5  oz.  ;  sun-compass  (Bage's),  rSoz.  .         .         .         .        22       0 

Other  Instruments  :  Zeiss  prismatic  binoculars  X.12,  1  lb. 
13' 5  oz.  ;  hypsometer,  2  lb.  1  oz.  ;  2  ordinary  and  2  small 
minimum  thermometers,  10  oz.  ;  specimen  labels,  1  oz.        .  4      95 

Rifle,  22-bore  with  cover  and  cleaner,  3  lb.  3"  7  oz.  ; 
ammunition,  1  lb.  "5  oz.  ;  sheath  knife,  5'5  oz.  ;  sharpening 
stone,  1-5  oz. ;  fishing  line  and  hooks,  3*5  oz.        .         .         .         4     14*7 

Waterproof  Clothes-bag,  4  lb.  8  oz.,  containing  9  pairs 
of  finnesko  stuffed  with  saennegrass,  21  lb.  ;  extra  saenne- 
grass,  3  lb.  ;  3  private  kit-bags  containing  spare  clothing, 
etc.,  39  lb.  ;  4  extra  rolls  of  lamp- wick  for  lashings,  1  lb. 

3-5,oz 64      3-5 

219 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Odd  Gear :  Pick,  4  lb.  5  oz. ;  2  spades,  8  lb.  4  oz. ;  ice-  lb.  oz. 
axe,  2  lb.  4  oz.  ;  alpine  rope  (20  metres)  3  lb.  ;  skis  (1 
pair),  11  lb.  ;  ski-stick,  1  lb.  1  oz.  ;  ski-boots  (2  pairs), 
6  lb.  ;  attachable  crampons  for  the  same,  4  lb.  ;  finnesko- 
crampons  (3  pairs),  9  lb.  ;  3  man-harnesses,  6  lb.  8  oz.  ; 
man-hauling  tow-rope,  1  lb.  1  oz.  ;  flags.  9"5  oz.  ;  a  water- 
proof bag  to  hold  oddments,  41b.  8  oz.  .         .         .         .        61       8-5 

Beacons  :  A  depot-flag  and  bamboo  pole,  5  lb.  ;  a  special 
metal  depot-beacon,  mast,  flag  and  stays,  16  lb.  ;  2  damp- 
proof  tins  for  depositing  records  at  depots,  7"  5  oz.          .         .        21       7' 5 

Other  Sledges  :  A  second  sledge  decked  with  Venesta 

boarding  and  fitted  with  straps 55      0 

A  third  sledge,  12  ft.  long  and  strong  rope  lashings  (spare 

spars  mentioned  elsewhere  acting  as  decking)        ,         .         .        CO       0 

Fuel :  Kerosene,  6  gallons  in  one-gallon  tins     .         .         .        60       0 

Food  :  Man  Food  :  9  weeks'  supplies  for  3  men  on  the 
ration  scale  ;  also  25  lb.  weight  of  special  foods-'  perks '        .      475      0 

Dog  Food  :  Dried  seal  meat,  blubber  and  pemmican  ; 
also  the  weight  of  the  tin  and  bag-containers        .         .         .      700      0 


Total        .         .         .    1723     113 


Madigan's  and  Stillwell's  parties  broke  trail  to  the  east 
on  the  morning  of  the  17th  while  we  were  still  attending 
to  the  sledges  and  dogs  preparatory  to  departure.  It  was 
decided  that  Gadget,  a  rather  miserable  animal,  who  had 
shown  herself  useless  as  a  puller  thus  far,  should  be  killed. 
The  following  dogs  then  remained  : — Basilisk,  Shackleton, 
Ginger  Bitch,  Franklin,  John  Bull,  Mary,  Haldane,  Pavlova, 
Fusilier,  Jappy,  Ginger,  George,  Johnson,  Castor,  Betli 
and  Blizzard. 

We  went  in  pursuit  of  the  other  six  men  over  a  surface 
of  rough  sastrugi.  The  dogs,  who  were  in  fine  fettle,  rushed 
the  sledges  along,  making  frantic  efforts  to  catch  up  to  the 
parties  ahead,  who  showed  as  black  specks  across  the  Avhite 
undulating  plain. 

At  noon  all  lunched  together,  after  which  we  separated, 
shaking  hands  warmly  all  round  and  interchanging  the 
sledgers'  "  Good  luck !  "  Our  dogs  drew  away  rapidly 
to  the  east,  travelling  on  a  slight  down  grade  ;  the  other 
two  parties  with  their  man-hauled  sledges  following  in  the 
220 


A    TEA.M   OF   1)0(;S   EA(;ERI.Y  FOI.LOWIXU   XIXXIS  Merit 


THE  DOGS  EXJOY  THEIR   WOKIC  -ycdz 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

same  direction.  The  surface  was  splendid,  the  weather  con- 
ditions were  ideal,  the  pace,  if  anything,  too  rapid,  for  capsizes 
were  apt  to  occur  in  racing  over  high  sastrugi.  Any  doubts 
as  to  the  capability  of  the  dogs  to  pull  the  loads  were  dis- 
pelled ;  in  fact,  on  this  and  on  many  subsequent  occasions, 
two  of  us  were  able  to  sit,  each  one  on  a  sledge,  while  the 
third  broke  trail  ahead. 

In  sledging  over  wide,  monotonous  wastes  with  dogs 
as  the  motive  power,  it  is  necessary  to  have  a  forerunner, 
that  is,  somebody  to  go  ahead  and  point  the  way,  other- 
wise the  dogs  will  run  aimlessly  about.  Returning  over  old 
tracks,  they  will  pull  along  steadily  and  keep  a  course.  In 
Adelie  Land  we  had  no  opportunity  of  verifying  this,  as  the 
continuous  winds  soon  obliterated  the  impression  of  the 
runners. 

If  the  weather  is  reasonably  good  and  food  is  ample, 
sledging  dogs  enjoy  their  work.  Their  desire  to  pull  is 
doubtless  inborn,  implanted  in  a  long  line  of  ancestors 
who  have  faithfully  served  the  Esquimaux.  We  found 
that  the  dogs  were  glad  to  get  their  harnesses  on  and  to  be 
led  away  to  the  sledge.  Really,  it  was  often  a  case  of  the 
dog  leading  the  man,  for,  as  soon  as  its  harness  was  in 
place,  the  impatient  animal  strained  to  drag  whatever 
might  be  attached  to  the  other  end  of  the  rope.  Before 
attaching  a  team  of  dogs  to  a  sledge,  it  was  necessary  to 
anchor  the  latter  firmly,  otherwise  in  their  ardour  they 
would  make  off  with  it  before  everything  was  ready. 

There  can  be  no  question  as  to  the  value  of  dogs  as  a 
means  of  traction  in  the  Polar  regions,  except  when  travelling 
continuously  over  very  rugged  country,  over  heavily 
crevassed  areas,  or  during  unusually  bad  weather.  It  is 
in  such  special  circumstances  that  the  superiority  of  man- 
hauling  has  been  proved.  Further,  in  an  enterprise  where 
human  life  is  always  at  stake,  it  is  only  fair  to  put  forward 
the  consideration  that  the  dogs  represent  a  reserve  of  food 
in  case  of  extreme  emergency. 

We  continued  due  eastwards  until  five  o'clock  on  the 

221 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

afternoon  of  the  17th  at  an  altitude  of  two  thousand  six 
hundred  feet.  On  the  crest  of  a  ridge,  which  bore  away 
in  distinct  outhne,  on  our  left,  a  fine  panorama  of  coastal 
scenery  was  visible.  Far  off  on  the  eastern  horizon  the 
Mertz  Glacier  Tongue  discovered  itself  in  a  long  wall  touched 
in  luminous  bands  by  the  south-western  sun.  A  wide 
valley  fell  away  in  front,  and  beyond  it  was  a  deep  in- 
dentation of  the  coasthne,  which  would  make  it  necessary 
for  us  to  follow  a  more  southerly  course  in  order  to  round 
its  head. 

I  determined  to  convey  to  the  other  parties  my  inten- 
tions, which  had  become  more  defined  on  seeing  this  view  ; 
and,  in  the  meantime,  we  halted  and  treated  ourselves  to 
afternoon  tea.  This  innovation  in  the  ordinary  routine 
was  extended  to  a  custom  by  saving  a  portion  of  the  lunch 
ration  for  a  "  snack "  at  5  p.m.  on  all  days  when  the 
weather  was  moderately  good.  As  latitude  sights  were 
required  at  midday  and  longitude  shots  at  5  p.m.,  the 
arrangement  was  very  convenient,  for,  while  one  of  us  made 
tea,  the  other  two  took  the  observations. 

About  6  P.M.  the  two  man-hauled  sledges  came  up  with 
us,  our  plans  for  the  future  were  reviewed  and  the  final 
instructions  were  given.  We  bade  our  comrades  adieu  and, 
turning  to  the  south-east,  descended  quickly  down  a  long 
slope  leading  into  the  valley.  The  sky  was  overcast  and 
it  was  almost  impossible  to  see  the  irregularities  of  the 
surface.  Only  a  dull-white  glare  met  the  eyes,  and  the 
first  indication  of  a  hillock  was  to  stub  one's  toes  against 
it,  or  of  a  depression  to  fall  into  it.  We  pulled  up  the  dogs 
at  7.30  P.M.  after  covering  thirteen  and  a  quarter  miles  in 
the  day. 

At  9.45  A.M.  on  November  18  everything  was  ready 
for  a  fresh  start.  The  other  parties  could  be  seen  rapidly 
bearing  down  on  us  under  full  sail,  but  our  willing  teams 
had  soon  dragged  the  three  sledges  over  an  eminence  and 
out  of  their  sight. 

It  was  a  lovely  day  ;  almost  like  a  dream  after  the 
222 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

lengthy  months  of  harassing  bhzzards.  A  venturesome  skua 
gull  appeared  at  lunch  time,  just  as  an  observation  for 
latitude  was  being  taken.  By  the  time  Ninnis  had  unpacked 
the  rifle  the  bird  had  flown  away. 

The  direction  of  the  sastrugi  was  found  to  vary  from 
that  which  obtained  farther  west,  owing  to  a  slight  swing 
in  the  direction  of  the  prevailing  Avind.  The  irregularities 
in  the  coastline  account  for  this ;  the  wind  tending  to 
flow  down  to  sea-level  by  the  nearest  route. 

To  the  north-west,  behind  us,  a  projecting  ridge  of 
rock — Madigan  Nunatak — came  into  sight.  From  the  camp 
of  the  previous  evening  it  had  evidently  been  hidden  from 
view  by  an  undulation  in  the  surface. 

During  the  afternoon  it  was  noted  that  the  surface  had 
become  very  deeply  eroded  by  the  wind,  troughs  three 
feet  in  depth  being  common,  into  which  the  sledges  fre- 
quently capsized.  Each  of  us  took  it  in  turn  to  run  ahead, 
jumping  from  one  sastruga  to  another.  As  these  were 
firm  and  poHshed  by  the  constant  wind,  one  often  shpped 
with  a  sudden  shock  to  the  ground.  Our  bodies  were  well 
padded  with  clothing  and  we  were  beginning  to  get  into  good 
form,  so  that  these  habitual  tumbles  were  taken  with  the 
best  grace  we  could  muster.  I  surprised  myself  during 
the  afternoon,  when  my  turn  came  as  forerunner,  by 
covering  two  and  a  half  miles  at  a  jog-trot  without  a  break. 
The  grade  was  slightly  downhill  and  the  sledges  moved  along 
of  their  own  accord,  accelerated  by  jerks  from  the  dogs, 
gliding  at  right  angles  to  the  knife-edge  crests  of  the  snow- 
waves. 

The  roughness  of  the  surface  was  not  without  its  effect 
on  the  sledge-meter,  which  had  to  be  repaired  temporarily. 
It  was  a  matter  of  some  inconvenience  that  after  this  date 
its  records  were  erroneous  and  approximate  distances  were 
only  obtained  by  checking  the  readings  against  absolute 
observations  made  for  latitude  and  longitude. 

At  5.30  P.M.  a  dark  object  stood  in  sahent  relief  above 
the  white  contour  of  the  snowy  sky-line  on  the  right.     Sup- 

223 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

pressing  our  excitement,  we  pressed  on  eagerly,  changing 
course  so  as  to  approach  it.  At  nine  o'clock  it  resolved 
itself  into  the  summit  of  an  imposing  mountain  rising  up 
from  a  mysterious  valley.  Aurora  Peak,  as  it  was  named, 
was  to  be  a  prominent  landmark  for  several  days  to  come. 

All  were  ready  to  be  on  the  move  at  8.45  a.m.  on  Novem- 
ber 19.  While  Mertz  and  Ninnis  built  a  cairn  of  snow, 
I  wrote  a  note  to  be  left  on  it  in  a  tin,  containing  instruc- 
tions to  Stillwell  in  case  he  should  happen  on  the  locality. 

The  weather  was  good  and  the  temperatures  were  high, 
ranging  at  this  time  (one  month  from  midsummer)  between 
zero  and  18°  F.  Wien  we  camped  for  lunch  the  air  was 
quite  calm  and  the  sun's  rays  were  extremely  warm. 

The  surface  became  softer  and  smoother  as  the  after- 
noon lengthened  until  Mertz  was  tempted  to  put  on  his 
skis.  He  then  became  forerunner  for  the  remainder  of 
the  day. 

Mertz,  who  was  skilled  in  the  use  of  skis,  found  them 
of  great  service  on  this  and  on  many  future  occasions.  At 
such  times  he  would  relieve  Ninnis  and  myself  in  the  van. 
On  the  other  hand,  over  deeply  furrowed  sastrugi  or  blue 
ice,  or  during  a  strong  wind,  unless  it  were  at  our  backs, 
skiing  was  impossible. 

Owing  to  a  steeper  down  grade,  the  sledges  were  now 
commencing  to  run  more  freely  and  improvised  brakes  were 
tried,  all  of  which  were  ineffectual  in  restraining  the  dogs. 
The  pace  became  so  hot  that  a  small  obstacle  would  capsize 
the  sledge,  causing  it  to  roll  over  and  over  down  the  slope. 
The  dogs,  frantically  pulling  in  various  directions  to  keep 
ahead  of  the  load,  became  hopelessly  entangled  in  their 
traces  and  were  dragged  along  unresistingly  until  the  sledge 
stopped  of  its  own  accord  or  was  arrested  by  one  of  us. 
At  length,  most  of  the  dogs  were  allowed  to  run  loose,  and, 
with  a  man  holding  on  behind  and  a  couple  of  dogs  puUing 
ahead,  the  loads  were  piloted  down  a  steep  slope  for  several 
miles. 

The  evening  camp  was  situated  at  the  crest  of  the  last 
224 


^«4 


#^t 


Adelie  L'lnd  SPEEDING  EAST 


ll 


^J^?g(^ 


Allelic  Land  Mawson 

A  DISTANT  VIEW  OF  AURORA  PEAK  FROM  THE  WEST 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

but  steepest  fall  into  a  wide  glacial  valley  which  was  clearly 
seen  to  sweep  northwards  past  the  eastern  side  of  Aurora 
Peak.  Looking  back  we  could  define  our  track  winding 
down  in  the  bed  of  a  long  shallow  valley,  while,  uprising  on 
either  hand  near  the  rim  of  the  plateau  were  crevassed 
bluffs  where  the  ice  of  the  tableland  streamed  abruptly  over 
the  underlying  crags. 

Ninnis  had  a  touch  of  snow-blindness  which  rapidly 
improved  under  treatment.  The  stock  cure  for  this  very 
irritating  and  painful  affection  is  to  place  first  of  all  tiny 
"  tabloids  "  of  zinc  sulphate  and  cocaine  hydrochloride 
under  the  eyelids  where  they  quickly  dissolve  in  the  tears, 
alleviating  the  smarting,  "  gritty  "  sensation  which  is  usually 
described  by  the  sufferer.  He  then  bandages  the  eyes  and 
escapes,  if  he  is  lucky,  into  the  darkness  of  his  sleeping-bag. 

In  certain  lights  one  is  sure  to  be  attacked  more  or  less 
severely,  and  coloured  glasses  should  be  worn  continually. 
Unfortunately,  goggles  are  sometimes  impracticable  on 
account  of  the  moisture  from  the  breath  covering  the  glasses 
with  an  icy  film  or  driving  snow  clogging  them  and  ob- 
scuring the  view.  For  such  contingencies  narrow  slots  of 
various  shapes  are  cut  in  plates  or  discs  of  wood  or  bone  in 
the  Esquimaux  fashion.  The  amount  of  light  reaching  the 
eye  can  thus  be  reduced  to  the  limit  of  moderately  clear 
vision. 

The  morning  of  the  20th  broke  with  wind  and  drift 
which  persisted  until  after  noon.  Already  everything  had 
been  packed  up,  but,  as  there  was  a  steep  fall  in  front  and 
crevasses  were  not  far  distant,  we  decided  not  to  start 
until  the  air  was  clear  of  snow. 

Wlien  at  last  a  move  was  possible,  it  became  evident 
that  the  dogs  could  not  be  trusted  to  pull  the  sledges  down 
to  the  edge  of  the  glacier.  So  they  were  tethered  to  ice- 
axes  while  we  lowered  the  sledges  one  by  one,  all  three 
checking  their  speed,  assisted  by  rope  brakes  round  the 
runners.  Finally,  the  impatient  dogs  were  brought  down 
and  harnessed  in  their  accustomed  places. 

VOL,  I  p  225 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Rapid  travelling  now  commenced  over  a  perfectly 
smooth  surface,  sloping  gently  to  the  bed  of  the  glacier. 
Mertz  shot  ahead  on  skis,  and  our  column  of  dogs  and 
sledges  followed  quickly  in  his  trail. 

From  this  day  forward  our  "  order  of  procession  "  was 
as  follows  : — Behind  the  forerunner  came  a  team  of  dogs 
dragging  two  sledges  joined  together  by  a  short  length  of 
alpine  rope.  Bringing  up  the  rear  were  the  rest  of  the 
dogs  dragging  the  third  sledge.  Each  team  pulled  approxi- 
mately equal  weights  ;  the  front  load  being  divided  between 
two  sledges.  Except  when  taking  my  turn  ahead,  I  looked 
after  the  leading  team ;  Ninnis  or  Mertz,  as  the  case  might  be, 
driving  the  one  behind. 

We  skirted  Aurora  Peak  on  its  south-eastern  side. 
The  mountain  rose  to  a  height  of  about  seventeen  hundred 
feet  on  our  left,  its  steep  sides  being  almost  completely 
snow-clad. 

The  wide  depression  of  the  Mertz  Glacier  lay  ahead,  and 
on  its  far  side  the  dim  outhne  of  uprising  icy  slopes  was 
visible,  though  at  the  time  we  could  not  be  certain  as  to 
their  precise  nature. 

As  the  sledges  passed  Aurora  Peak,  Blizzard  and  Ginger 
Bitch  ran  alongside.  The  former  had  hurt  one  of  her  fore- 
feet on  the  previous  day  during  the  "  rough-and-tumble  " 
descending  into  the  valley.  Ginger  Bitch  was  allowed  to 
go  free  because  she  was  daily  expected  to  give  birth  to 
pups.  As  she  was  such  a  good  sledge-dog  we  could  not 
have  afforded  to  leave  her  behind  at  the  Hut,  and  later 
events  proved  that  the  work  seemed  actually  to  benefit  her, 
for  she  was  at  all  times  the  best  puller  and  the  strongest 
of  the  pack.  However,  in  permitting  both  dogs  to  run  loose 
that  afternoon,  there  was  an  element  of  danger  which  we 
had  not  sufficiently  appreciated. 

Suddenly,  without  any  warning,  half  of  my  dogs  dropped 
out  of  sight,  swinging  on  their  harness  ropes  in  a  crevasse. 
Next  moment  I  realized  that  the  sledges  were  in  the  centre 
of  a  bridge  covering  a  crevasse,  twenty-five  feet  wide, 
226 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

along  the  edge  of  which  part  of  the  team  had  broken 
through. 

We  spent  many  anxious  moments  before  they  were  all 
hauled  to  the  daylight  and  the  sledge  rested  on  solid  ground. 
There  were  other  crevasses  about  and  almost  immediately 
afterwards  Ginger  Bitch  and  Blizzard  had  broken  through 
into  a  fissure  and  were  frantically  struggling  to  maintain 
their  hold  on  the  edge.  They  were  speedily  rescued ; 
following  which  Ginger  Bitch  gave  birth  to  the  first  of  a 
large  litter  of  pups.  After  this  second  accident  we  decided 
to  camp. 

During  the  morning  of  November  21  there  was  a  good  deal 
of  wind  and  drift  which  made  travelHng  rather  miserable. 
Occasionally  open  crevasses  would  break  the  surface  of  the 
snow. 

When  the  light  at  last  improved,  a  nunatak  was  ob- 
served some  fifteen  miles  or  more  to  the  south  rising  out 
of  the  glacier— Correll  Nunatak.  Ahead  of  us  was  a  glitter- 
ing fine  of  broken  ice,  stretching  at  right  angles  to  our 
path.  Studded  about  on  the  icy  plain  were  immense 
cauldrons,  like  small  craters  in  appearance.  Then  an  area 
dotted  over  with  ice  mounds  approached  and  crevasses 
became  correspondingly  more  numerous.  The  dogs  fre- 
quently broke  through  them  but  were  easily  extricated  in 
every  instance. 

Camp  was  pitched  for  lunch  in  the  vicinity  of  many 
gaping  holes  leading  down  into  darkness,  places  where  the 
bridges  over  large  crevasses  had  fallen  in.  Mertz  prepared 
the  lunch  and  Ninnis  and  I  went  to  photograph  an  open 
crevasse  near  by.  Returning,  we  diverged  on  reaching  the 
back  of  the  tent,  he  passing  round  on  one  side  and  I  on  the 
other.  The  next  instant  I  heard  a  bang  on  the  ice  and, 
swinging  round,  could  see  nothing  of  my  companion  but 
his  head  and  arms.  He  had  broken  through  the  lid  of  a 
crevasse  fifteen  feet  wide  and  was  hanging  on  to  its  edge 
close  to  where  the  camera  lay  damaged  on  the  ice.  He 
was   soon   dragged    into    safety.     Looking   down   into   the 

227 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

black  depths  we  realized  how  narrowly  he  had  escaped. 
As  the  tent  was  found  to  encroach  partly  on  the  same 
crevasse,  it  may  be  imagined  that  we  did  not  dally  long 
over  the  meal. 

In  the  afternoon  the  weather  became  clear  and  fine,  but, 
as  if  to  offset  this,  the  broken  surface  became  impassable. 
The  region  was  one  of  serac  where  the  glacier  was  puckered 
up,  folded  and  crushed.  After  several  repulses  in  what 
seemed  to  be  promising  directions,  we  were  finally  forced 
to  camp,  having  ten  miles  to  our  credit. 

Whilst  Mertz  fed  the  dogs  and  prepared  hoosh,  Ninnis 
and  I  roped  up  and  went  off  to  search  for  a  passage. 

All  around,  the  glacier  was  pressed  up  into  great  folds, 
two  hundred  feet  in  height  and  between  one  quarter  and 
a  third  of  a  mile  from  crest  to  crest.  The  ridges  of  the 
folds  were  either  domes  or  open  rifts  partly  choked  with  snow. 
Precipitous  ice-falls  and  deep  cauldrons  were  encountered 
everywhere.  To  the  north  the  glacier  flattened  out;  to 
the  south  it  was  more  rugged. 

In  this  chaos  we  wandered  for  some  miles  until  a  favour- 
able line  of  advance  had  been  discovered  for  the  march  on 
the  following  day. 

The  first  three  miles,  on  the  22nd,  were  over  a  piece  of 
very  dangerous  country,  after  which  our  prospects  improved 
and  we  came  to  the  border  of  a  level  plain. 

There  Mertz  slipped  on  his  skis,  went  ahead  and  set  a  good 
pace.  Although  the  sky  had  become  overcast  and  snow 
fell  fitfully,  our  progress  was  rapid  towards  the  rising  slopes 
of  the  land  on  the  eastern  side  of  the  glacier.  Over  the 
last  three  miles  of  the  day's  journey  the  surface  was  raised 
in  large,  pimply  masses  surrounded  by  wide  fissures.  Into 
one  of  the  fissures,  bridged  by  snow,  Ninnis's  sledge  fell,  but 
fortunately  jammed  itself  just  below  the  surface.  As  it  was, 
we  had  a  long  job  getting  it  up  again,  having  to  unpack 
the  sledge  in  the  crevasse  until  it  was  light  enough  to  be 
easily  manipulated.  Despite  the  delay,  our  day's  run  was 
sixteen  and  a  half  miles. 
228 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

At  8  A.M.  on  the  23rd  everything  was  in  readiness  for  a 
fresh  start.  Moderate  drift  and  wind  descended  from  the 
hills  and  there  were  yet  three  miles  of  hidden  perils  to  be 
passed.  With  the  object  of  making  our  advance  less 
dangerous,  various  devices  were  employed. 

First  of  all  the  towing  rope  of  the  rear  sledge  was  secured 
to  the  back  of  the  preceding  sledge.  This  arrangement  had 
to  be  abandoned  because  the  dogs  of  Ninnis's  team  persisted 
in  entangling  themselves  and  working  independently  of  the 
dogs  in  front.  Next,  all  the  sledges  were  joined  together 
with  all  the  dogs  pulling  in  front.  The  procession  was 
then  so  long  that  it  was  quite  unmanageable  on  account 
of  the  tortuous  nature  of  our  track  through  the  labyrinth. 
In  the  long  run,  it  was  decided  that  our  original  method 
was  the  best,  provided  that  special  precautions  were  taken 
over  the  more  hazardous  crossings. 

The  usual  procedure  was,  that  the  forerunner  selected 
the  best  crossing  of  a  crevasse,  testing  it  with  a  ski-stick. 
The  dog  teams  were  then  brought  up  to  the  spot  and  the 
forerunner  went  over  the  snow-bridge  and  stood  on  the 
other  side,  sufficiently  far  away  to  allow  the  first  team  to 
cross  to  him  and  to  clear  the  crevasse.  Then  the  second 
team  was  piloted  to  safety  before  the  forerunner  had 
resumed  his  position  in  front.  This  precaution  was  very 
necessary,  for  otherwise  the  dogs  in  the  rear  would  make  a 
course  direct  for  wherever  the  front  dogs  happened  to  be, 
cutting  across  corners  and  most  probably  dragging  their 
sledge  sideways  into  a  crevasse  ;  the  likeliest  way  to  lose  it 
altogether. 

Often  enough  the  dogs  broke  through  the  snow-bridges 
on  the  morning  of  the  23rd,  but  only  once  were  matters 
serious,  when  Ninnis's  sledge,  doubtless  on  account  of  its 
extra  weight,  again  broke  through  a  lid  of  snow  and  was 
securely  jammed  in  a  crevasse  just  below  the  surface. 

On  this  occasion  we  were  in  a  serious  predicament,  for  the 
sledge  was  in  such  a  position  that  an  unskilful  movement 
would  have  sent  it  hurling  into  the  chasm  below.     So  the 

229 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

unpacking  of  the  load  was  a  tedious  and  delicate  operation. 
The  freight  consisted  chiefly  of  large,  soldered  tins,  packed 
tightly  with  dried  seal  meat.  Each  of  these  weighed  about 
ninety  pounds  and  all  were  most  securely  roped  to  the  sledge. 
The  sledge  was  got  up  and  reloaded  without  the  loss  of  a 
single  tin,  and  once  more  we  breathed  freely. 

A  valley  almost  free  of  crevasses  was  chosen  as  the  upward 
track  to  the  plateau.  We  threw  in  our  weight  hauling 
with  the  dogs,  and  had  a  long,  steep  drag  over  furrowed 
neve,  pitching  the  tent  after  a  day's  journey  of  twelve 
miles. 

On  waking  up  on  November  24  I  found  that  my  watch 
had  stopped.  I  had  been  so  tired  on  the  previous  evening 
that  I  had  fallen  asleep  without  remembering  to  wind  it. 
The  penalty  of  this  accident  was  paid  in  my  being  forced  to 
take  an  extra  set  of  observations  in  order  to  start  the  watch 
again  at  correct  time  relative  to  the  Hut. 

Besides  the  observations  for  position,  necessary  for 
navigation,  sets  of  angles  were  taken  from  time  to  time 
to  fix  the  positions  of  objects  of  interest  appearing  within 
the  field  of  view,  while  the  magnetic  variation  was  obtained 
at  intervals.  In  this  work  Ninnis  always  assisted  me. 
Mertz  boiled  the  hypsometer  when  necessary  to  ascertain 
our  elevation  above  sea-level.  The  meteorological  con- 
ditions were  carefully  noted  several  times  each  day  for 
future  comparison  with  those  of  other  parties  and  of  Winter 
Quarters. 

The  day's  work  on  November  24  brought  us  high  up 
on  the  slopes.  Away  to  the  north-west  Aurora  Peak  was 
still  visible,  standing  up  Hke  a  mighty  beacon  pointing 
the  way  back  to  the  Hut.  Below  lay  the  Mertz  Glacier 
extending  out  to  sea  as  a  floating  tongue  beyond  the  horizon. 
Inland,  some  twenty  miles  to  the  south,  it  mounted  up  in 
seamed  and  riven  "  cataracts  "  to  a  smooth,  broad  and  shallow 
groove  which  wound  into  the  ice-cap.  Ahead,  on  our  south- 
east course,  the  ground  still  rose,  but  to  the  north-east  the 
ice-sheet  fell  away  in  long  wide  valleys,  at  the  extremity  of 
230 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

some   of   which   icebergs   were   visible   frozen   into   distant 
sea-ice. 

The  tent  was  raised  at  10  p.m.  in  a  forty-mile  wind  with 
light  drift;  temperatm^e  10°  F.  The  altitude  of  this  camp 
was  two  thousand  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet. 

One  of  the  worst  features  of  drift  overnight  is  that 
sledges  and  dogs  become  buried  in  snow  and  have  to  be 
dug  out  in  the  morning.  Thus  on  the  25th  it  was  10  a.m. 
before  we  got  away  in  a  strong  wind,  with  flying  snow, 
across  fields  of  sastrugi. 

The  dogs  detested  the  wind  and,  as  their  heads 
were  so  near  the  ground,  they  must  have  found  the  in- 
cessant stream  of  thick  drift  very  tantahzing.  The  snow 
became  caked  over  their  eyes  so  that  every  few  minutes  they 
had  to  scrape  it  away  with  their  paws  or  rub  their  faces 
on  the  ground. 

We  stopped  at  6  p.m.  after  a  miserable  day,  covering 
sixteen  miles  in  all. 

November  26  broke  overcast,  the  light  being  bad  for 
travelling  and  the  wind  still  strong.  Nevertheless  we  set 
out  at  10  A.M.  through  falling  snow. 

As  the  day  progressed  the  wind  subsided  and  Mertz 
was  able  to  put  on  his  skis  over  a  surface  which  sloped 
gradually  away  to  the  east.  The  light  was  diffused 
uniformly  over  the  irregularities  of  snow  and  ice  so  that  de- 
pressions only  a  few  feet  away  were  invisible.  Black  objects, 
on  the  other  hand,  stood  out  with  startling  distinctness, 
and  our  attention  was  soon  arrested  by  a  hazy,  dark  patch 
which  appeared  in  front  and  to  the  left.  At  first  there 
was  much  doubt  as  to  its  nature,  but  it  was  soon  clear  that 
it  must  be  a  group  of  rocks,  apparently  situated  at  a  con- 
siderable distance.  They  were  subsequently  found  to  be 
sixty  miles  away  (Organ  Pipe  Cliffs,  near  Cape  Blake). 

Presently  our  course  ended  abruptly  at  the  edge  of  a 
precipitous  fall.  We  skirted  round  this  for  a  while,  but 
were  ultimately  forced  to  camp  owing  to  the  uncertainty 
of  the  light  and  the  proximity  of  several  large  crevasses. 

231 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

At  11  P.M.  the  sky  cleared  and  a  better  idea  could  be 
gained  of  what  lay  ahead.  In  a  line  between  our  elevated 
position  and  the  distant  rocky  outcrops  the  ice  fell  in  a 
steep  descent  to  a  broad,  glacial  valley,  undulating  and  in 
places  traversed  by  torn  masses  of  serac-ice.  We  examined 
the  country  to  the  east  very  carefully  with  a  view  to  selecting 
a  track  for  the  journey  next  day  and  finally  resolved 
to  pass  to  the  south  of  a  large  ice-capped  island — Dixson 
Island,  which  was  only  about  ten  miles  to  the  north-east,  set 
within  Ninnis  Glacier  near  its  western  border. 

On  the  27th  Mertz  and  I  roped  up,  reconnoitred  for  a 
while  and  returned  to  the  sledges.  We  then  spent  several 
hours  in  advancing  a  mile  over  badly  broken  ground, 
arriving  at  a  slope  covered  with  sastrugi  and  descending 
steeply  for  one  thousand  feet  into  the  bed  of  the  glacier. 

In  order  the  more  safely  to  negotiate  this,  the  dogs  were 
all  let  loose  excepting  two  in  each  sledge.  Even  then  the 
sledges  were  often  uncontrollable,  rolling  over  and  over 
many  times  before  the  bottom  was  reached. 

When  the  dogs  were  re-harnessed  it  was  found  that  Betli 
was  missing  and  was  not  to  be  seen  when  we  scanned  the 
slopes  in  our  rear  with  binoculars.  It  was  expected  that 
unless  she  had  fallen  into  a  crevasse  she  would  turn  up  at 
the  camp  that  night.  However,  she  did  not  reappear,  and 
we  saw  no  more  of  her.  Two  other  dogs,  Jappy  and  Fusilier, 
had  been  previously  killed,  as  neither  was  of  any  use  as 
a  puller.  Blizzard,  who  had  been  always  a  great  favourite 
with  us,  had  to  be  shot  next  day. 

When  it  had  reached  the  edge  of  the  glacier,  our  path  led 
over  a  solid  ocean  rising  and  faling  in  billows,  two  hundred 
and  fifty  feet  in  height ;  no  doubt  caused  by  the  glacier 
in  its  northward  movement  being  compressed  against  the 
southern  side  of  Dixson  Island.  Still,  the  "  caravan  "  made 
considerable  progress,  ending  with  a  day's  journey  of  sixteen 
miles. 

During  the  small  hours  of  November  28  the  wind  rose 
to  a  velocity  of  sixty  miles  per  hour,  but  gradually 
232 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

diminished  to   a  twenty-knot  breeze  as  the  day  advanced. 
Light  snow  fell  from  a  sky  which  was  densely  clouded. 

We  still  pursued  a  devious  track  amid  rolling  waves  of 
ice,  encountering  beds  of  soft  snow  through  which  the 
sledges  moved  slowly.  By  6  p.m.  pinnacles  and  hummocks 
stood  around  on  every  side,  and  the  light  was  such  that 
one  could  not  distinguish  crevasses  until  he  was  on  top  of 
them.  We  had  to  camp  and  be  satisfied  with  seven  miles 
"  to  the  good."  By  this  time  the  dogs  were  in  good  train- 
ing and  grew  noticeably  ravenous.  In  the  evening,  before 
they  were  properly  tethered,  Shackleton  seized  a  one-week 
provision  bag,  ripped  it  open  and  ate  a  block  of  butter 
weighing  more  than  two  and  a  half  pounds.  This  was  a 
loss  to  us,  as  butter  was  regarded  as  a  particular  delicacy. 

The  sun  was  shining  brightly  next  day  and  it  was  at  once 
evident  that  we  were  in  a  zone  of  tumbled  and  disrupted 
ice. 

For  many  hours  a  way  was  won  through  a  mighty  turmoil 
of  serac  and  over  innumerable  crevasses  with  varied  fortune. 
Just  before  lunch  my  two  sledges  were  nearly  lost  through 
the  dogs  swinging  sharply  to  one  side  before  the  second 
sledge  had  cleared  a  rather  rotten  snow-bridge.  I  was  up 
with  the  dogs  at  the  time,  and  the  first  intimation  I  received 
of  an  accident  was  on  seeing  the  dogs  and  front  sledge  being 
dragged  backwards  ;  the  rear  sledge  was  hanging  vertically 
in  a  crevasse.  Exerting  all  my  strength  I  held  back  the 
front  sledge,  and  in  a  few  moments  was  joined  by  Ninnis 
and  Mertz,  who  soon  drove  a  pick  and  ice-axe  down  between 
the  runners  and  ran  out  an  anchoring  rope. 

It  was  a  ticklish  business  recovering  the  sledge  which 
hung  suspended  in  the  crevasse.  It  could  not  be  lifted 
vertically  as  its  bow  was  caught  in  a  V-shaped  cornice  formed 
by  an  overhanging  mass  of  snow.  To  add  to  our  troubles 
the  ground  all  about  the  place  was  precarious  and  unsafe. 

Mertz  and  Ninnis  therefore  lowered  me  down  and  I 
attached  a  rope  to  the  tail-end  of  the  sledge.  The  bow- 
rope  and  tail-rope  were  then  manipulated  alternately  until 

233 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  bow  of  the  sledge  was  manoeuvred  slowly  through  the 
gaping  hole  in  the  snow-lid  and  was  finally  hauled  up  on  to 
level  ground.  No  more  remarkable  test  of  the  efficiency  of 
the  sledge  straps  and  the  compactness  of  the  load  could 
have  been  made. 

After  lunch  Mertz  ascended  a  high  point  and  was  able 
to  trace  out  a  route  which  conducted  us  in  a  few  hours  to  a 
better  surface. 

We  were  now  at  an  elevation  of  from  four  hundred  to 
five  hundred  feet  above  sea-level,  running  across  a  beam- 
wind  on  our  right  which  increased  during  the  afternoon. 
A  rising  blizzard  made  it  necessary  to  camp  after  a  day's 
run  of  ten  and  one- third  miles. 

The  wind  blew  up  to  seventy  miles  an  hour  during  the 
night,  but  eased  in  strength  early  on  November  30.  At 
10  A.M.  we  tried  to  make  a  start,  but  the  dogs  refused  to  face 
the  drift.  On  the  wind  becoming  gusty  in  the  afternoon, 
it  was  once  more  possible  to  travel,  and  we  set  out. 

Dense  drift  was  still  to  be  seen  pouring  over  the  highlands 
to  the  south-east.  Above  the  glacier  ahead  whirlies,  out- 
lined in  high  revolving  columns  of  snow,  "  stalked  about  " 
in  their  wayward  courses. 

The  sledges  ran  through  a  sea  of  crevassed,  blue  ice, 
over  ridges  and  past  open  chasms.  Seven  miles  brought 
us  to  the  "  foot-hills  "  on  the  eastern  border  of  the  Ninnis 
Glacier,  where  we  pitched  camp. 

The  first  day  of  December  was  still  and  hot,  with  brilliant 
sunshine.  The  shade  temperature  reached  34°  F.  and  the 
snow  became  so  sticky  that  it  was  as  much  as  we  and  the 
dogs  could  do  to  move  the  sledges  up  the  slopes.  As  the 
evening  lengthened  and  the  sun  sank  lower  the  surface 
froze  hard  and  our  toil  was  lightened.  At  midnight  we 
reached  an  altitude  of  nine  hundred  feet. 

December  2  was  another  warm,  bright  day.  The  surface 
was  atrociously  bad  ;  hard,  sharp  sastrugi,  never  less  than 
two  feet  high  and  in  many  instances  three  feet  six  inches 
from  crest  to  trough.  The  dogs  were  not  able  to  exert  a 
234 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

united  pull  for  there  were  never  more  than  half  of  them 
in  action  at  a  time. 

Once  more  we  were  at  a  comparatively  high  altitude  and 
a  fine  view  presented  itself  to  the  north.  One  could  look 
back  to  the  mainland  slopes  descending  on  the  western  side 
of  the  Ninnis  Glacier.  Then  the  glacier,  tumultuous  and 
broken,  was  seen  to  extend  far  out  into  the  frozen  sea  and, 
sweeping  round  to  the  north-east,  the  eye  ranged  over  a 
great  expanse  of  floe-ice  dotted  with  bergs.  To  the  east 
there  was  a  precipitous  coastline  of  dark  rock  which  for  a 
while  we  thought  of  visiting.  But  then  it  seemed  likely 
that  Madigan's  party  would  reach  as  far  east,  so  we  set  our 
faces  once  more  to  the  rising  plateau  in  the  south-east. 

At  midnight  the  sun  was  peering  over  the  southern 
sky-line,  and  we  halted  at  an  elevation  of  one  thousand  five 
hundred  and  fifty  feet,  having  covered  eight  and  a  half  miles 
in  the  day.     The  temperature  was  5°  F. 

"  December  3. — We  were  not  long  on  the  way  before  the 
sky  became  overcast  and  light  snow  fell.  The  surface 
was  becoming  flatter.  Camp  was  pitched  at  11  p.m.  after 
eleven  and  two-thirds  miles. 

''December  4. — Another  day  of  bad  light  but  the  surface 
improved  and  good  headway  was  made  on  an  easterly  course 
at  an  elevation  of  between  two  thousand  and  two  thousand 
eight  hundred  feet.  The  crevasses  were  practically  past. 
The  day's  march  was  fifteen  miles. 

"  December  5. — A  bad  day ;  overcast,  snowing  and  a  gale 
of  wind  from  the  east-south-east.  However,  we  plugged 
on  bhndly  into  it  until  7.30  p.m.  and  then  camped,  having 
done  eleven  and  a  half  miles. 

''December  6,  7  and  8. — During  these  days  a  dense 
blizzard  raged,  the  wind  reaching  seventy  miles  per  hour. 
There  was  nothing  to  do  but  lie  in  our  bags  and  think  out 
plans  for  the  future.  Each  morning  Ninnis  and  Mertz 
took  it  in  turns  to  go  out  and  feed  their  charges,  who  were 
snugly  buried  in  the  deep  snow. 

"  One  day  in  the  sleeping-bag  does  not  come  amiss  after 

235 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

long  marches,  but  three  days  on  end  is  enough  to  bore 
any  one  thoroughly. 

"  Ninnis  was  not  so  badly  off  with  a  volume  of  Thackeray, 
but  Mertz  had  come  to  the  end  of  a  small  edition  of  '  Sher- 
lock Holmes'  when  blizzard-bound  near  Aladdin's  Cave, 
and  his  only  diversion  on  these  days  was  to  recite  passages 
from  memory  for  our  mutual  benefit." 

I  was  troubled  with  an  inflammation  in  the  face  just  at 
this  time,  while  Ninnis  suffered  pain  owing  to  a  "  whitlow  " 
on  one  of  his  fingers. 

As  usual  the  food  ration  was  reduced.  This  caused 
us  to  have  more  than  ordinarily  vivid  dreams.  I  happened 
to  be  awake  one  night  when  Ninnis  was  sledging  in  imagi- 
nation, vociferously  shouting,  "  Hike,  hike,"  to  the  dogs  ; 
our  equivalent  of  the  usual  "  Mush,  mush." 

Despite  considerable  wind  and  drift  we  got  away  at  8  a.m. 
on  December  9.  The  sky  was  overcast  and  there  was 
nothing  to  be  seen  except  a  soft  carpet  of  newly  fallen  snow 
into  which  we  sank  half-way  to  the  knees.  The  sledges 
ran  deeply  and  heavily  so  that  the  dogs  had  to  be  assisted. 
Ahead  Mertz  ghded  along  triumphant,  for  it  was  on  such 
occasions  that  skis  were  of  the  greatest  assistance  to  him. 

During  the  day  a  snow  petrel  circled  above  us  for  a 
while  and  then  returned  to  the  north. 

The  course  was  due  east  at  an  elevation  of  two  thousand 
three  hundred  feet  and  the  total  distance  we  threw  behind 
during  the  day  was  sixteen  and  a  half  miles. 

On  the  10th  light  wind  and  low  drift  were  the  order  of 
things.  Our  spirits  rose  when  the  sky  cleared  and  a  slight 
down  grade  commenced. 

During  the  morning  Ninnis  drew  our  attention  to  what 
appeared  to  be  small  ice-capped  islets  fringing  the  coast, 
but  the  distance  was  too  great  for  us  to  be  sure  of  their  exact 
nature.  Out  near  the  verge  of  the  horizon  a  tract  of  frozen 
sea  with  scattered  bergs  could  be  seen. 

Next  day  more  features  were  distinguishable.  The 
coast  was  seen  to  run  in  a  north-easterly  direction  as  a  long 
236 


g-i 

<     s 

^   I 


ra. 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

peninsula  ending  in  a  sharp  cape — Cape  Freshfield.  The 
north  appeared  to  be  filled  with  frozen  sea  though  we  could 
not  be  certain  that  it  was  not  dense  pack-ice.  Little  did 
we  know  that  Madigan's  party,  about  a  week  later,  would 
be  marching  over  the  frozen  sea  towards  Cape  Freshfield 
in  the  north-east. 

At  10  P.M.  on  the  11th,  at  an  altitude  of  one  thousand 
eight  hundred  feet,  the  highland  we  were  traversing  fell 
away  rapidly  and  sea-ice  opened  up  directly  in  front  of  us. 
The  coastal  downfalls  to  the  south-east  fell  in  rugged  masses 
to  a  vertical  barrier,  off  the  seaward  face  of  which  large, 
tabular  bergs  were  grouped  within  environing  floe. 

Throughout  December  12  a  somewhat  irregular  course 
was  made  to  the  south-east  and  south  to  avoid  the  broken 
area  ahead.  We  had  had  enough  of  crevasses  and  wished 
to  be  clear  of  serac-ice  in  the  future. 

For  some  days  Ninnis  had  been  enduring  the  throbbing 
pain  of  a  whitlow  and  had  not  been  having  sufficient  sleep. 
He  always  did  his  share  of  the  work  and  had  undoubtedly 
borne  a  great  deal  of  pain  without  showing  it.  On  several 
nights  I  noticed  that  he  sat  up  in  his  sleeping-bag  for  hours 
puffing  away  at  a  pipe  or  reading.  At  last  the  pain  became 
so  acute  that  he  asked  me  to  lance  his  finger.  This  was 
successfully  accomplished  after  breakfast  on  the  13th  and 
during  the  day  he  had  much  relief. 

While  Ninnis  rested  before  we  made  a  start,  Mertz  and 
I  re-arranged  the  sledges  and  their  loads.  A  third  sledge 
was  no  longer  necessary,  so  the  one  usually  driven  by  Ninnis, 
which  had  been  damaged,  was  discarded  and  all  the  gear 
was  divided  between  the  other  two  sledges  in  nearly  equal 
amounts.  When  the  work  was  completed,  the  rear  sledge 
carried  an  extra  weight  of  fifty  pounds.  As,  however, 
both  food  for  men  and  dogs  were  to  come  from  it,  we 
reckoned  that  this  superadded  load  would  soon  diminish. 

On  we  went,  during  the  afternoon,  up  a  steej^  ascent. 
Crevasses  were  so  numerous  that  we  took  measures  to  circum- 
vent them.     Some  were  as  much  as  a  hundred  feet  in  width, 

237 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

filled  with  snow  ;  others  were  great  open  holes  or  like  huge 
cauldrons.  Close  to  the  windward  edge  of  some  of  the  latter 
high  ramps  of  neve  with  bluff  faces  on  the  windward  side 
stood  up  like  monoliths  reaching  twenty-five  feet  in  maxi- 
mum height. 

In  the  evening  a  field  of  neve  was  reached  and  we  felt 
more  placid  after  the  anxiety  of  the  preceding  hours. 

During  the  passage  of  a  snow-filled  valley  a  dull,  boom- 
ing sound  like  the  noise  of  far-distant  cannon  was  heard. 
It  was  evidently  connected  with  the  subsidence  of  large 
areas  of  the  surface  crust.  Apparently  large  cavities  had 
formed  beneath  the  snow  and  the  weight  of  ourselves 
and  the  sledges  caused  the  crust  to  sink  and  the  air  to  be 
expelled. 

The  sun  appeared  late  in  the  day  and,  as  it  was  almost 
calm,  the  last  few  hours  of  marching  were  very  pleasant. 
At  midnight  we  camped  at  an  altitude  of  one  thousand 
nine  hundred  feet. 

A  light  east-south-east  wind  was  blowing  as  the  sledges 
started  away  eastward  on  the  morning  of  December  14. 
The  weather  was  sunny  and  the  temperature  registered 
21°  F. 

Mertz  and  I  were  happy  to  know  that  Ninnis  had  slept 
well  and  was  feeling  much  better. 

Our  march  was  interrupted  at  noon  by  a  latitude  ob- 
servation, after  which  Mertz  went  ahead  on  skis  singing 
his  student  songs.  The  dogs  rose  to  the  occasion  and  pulled 
eagerly  and  well.  Everything  was  for  once  in  harmony 
and  the  time  was  at  hand  when  we  should  turn  our  faces 
homewards. 

Mertz  was  well  in  advance  of  us  when  I  noticed  him 
hold  up  his  ski-stick  and  then  go  on.  This  was  a  signal  for 
something  unusual  so,  as  I  approached  the  vicinity,  I  looked 
out  for  crevasses  or  some  other  explanation  of  his  action. 
As  a  matter  of  fact  crevasses  were  not  expected,  since  we 
were  on  a  smooth  surface  of  neve  well  to  the  southward 
of  the  broken  coastal  slopes. 
238 


LIEUTENANT  B.   E.  S.  NINNIS.  R.F..  IN   UNIFOILM 


Hurley 


MERTZ.  NIXXIS  AXI)  MAWSOX  EIIECTIXG  THE  TEXT  IX  A  HIGH  WIXIJ 


i>- 


Huiieij 
LATER   STA(;E  IX  EREITIOX   OF  THE  TEXT   IN    A   WIND   (OXE   MAX   IS  IXSIDE) 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

On  reaching  the  spot  where  Mertz  had  signalled  and 
seeing  no  sign  of  any  irregularity,  I  jumped  on  to  the  sledge, 
got  out  the  book  of  tables  and  commenced  to  figure  out 
the  latitude  observation  taken  on  that  day.  Glancing 
at  the  ground  a  moment  after,  I  noticed  the  faint  indication 
of  a  crevasse.  It  was  but  one  of  many  hundred  similar 
ones  we  had  crossed  and  had  no  specially  dangerous  appear- 
ance, but  still  I  turned  quickly  round,  called  out  a  warning 
word  to  Ninnis  and  then  dismissed  it  from  my  thoughts. 

Ninnis,  who  was  walking  along  by  the  side  of  his  sledge, 
close  behind  my  own,  heard  the  warning,  for  in  my  backward 
glance  I  noticed  that  he  immediately  swung  the  leading  dogs 
so  as  to  cross  the  crevasse  squarely  instead  of  diagonally 
as  I  had  done.     I  then  went  on  with  my  work. 

There  was  no  sound  from  behind  except  a  faint,  plaintive 
whine  from  one  of  the  dogs  which  I  imagined  was  in  reply 
to  a  touch  from  Ninnis's  whip.  I  remember  addressing 
myself  to  George,  the  laziest  dog  in  my  own  team,  saying, 
"  You  will  be  getting  a  little  of  that,  too,  George,  if  you  are 
not  careful." 

Wlien  I  next  looked  back,  it  was  in  response  to  the 
anxious  gaze  of  Mertz  who  had  turned  round  and  halted 
in  his  tracks.  Behind  me,  nothing  met  the  eye  but  my  own 
sledge  tracks  running  back  in  the  distance.  Where  were 
Ninnis  and  his  sledge  ? 

I  hastened  back  along  the  trail  thinking  that  a  rise  in 
the  ground  obscured  the  view.  There  was  no  such  good 
fortune,  however,  for  I  came  to  a  gaping  hole  in  the  surface 
about  eleven  feet  wide.  The  lid  of  a  crevasse  had  broken  in  ; 
two  sledge  tracks  led  up  to  it  on  the  far  side  but  only  one 
continued  on  the  other  side. 

Frantically  waving  to  Mertz  to  bring  up  my  sledge, 
upon  which  there  was  some  alpine  rope,  I  leaned  over  and 
shouted  into  the  dark  depths  below.  No  sound  came  back 
but  the  moaning  of  a  dog,  caught  on  a  shelf  just  visible 
one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  below.  The  poor  creature 
appeared  to  have  broken  its  back,  for  it  was  attempting 

239 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

to  sit  up  with  the  front  part  of  its  body  while  the  hinder 
portion  lay  limp.  Another  dog  lay  motionless  by  its  side. 
Close  by  was  what  appeared  in  the  gloom  to  be  the  remains 
of  the  tent  and  a  canvas  tank  containing  food  for  three  men 
for  a  fortnight. 

We  broke  back  the  edge  of  the  neve  lid  and  took  turns 
leaning  over  secured  by  a  rope,  calling  into  the  darkness 
in  the  hope  that  our  companion  might  be  still  alive.  For 
three  hours  we  called  unceasingly  but  no  answering  sound 
came  back.  The  dog  had  ceased  to  moan  and  lay  without 
a  movement.  A  chill  draught  was  blowing  out  of  the  abyss. 
We  felt  that  there  was  little  hope. 

Why  had  the  first  sledge  escaped  the  crevasse  ?  It 
seemed  that  I  had  been  fortunate,  because  my  sledge  had 
crossed  diagonally,  with  a  greater,  chance  of  breaking  the 
snow-lid.  The  sledges  were  within  thirty  pounds  of  the 
same  weight.  The  explanation  appeared  to  be  that  Ninnis 
had  walked  by  the  side  of  his  sledge,  whereas  I  had  crossed 
it  sitting  on  the  sledge.  The  whole  weight  of  a  man's  body 
bearing  on  his  foot  is  a  formidable  load  and  no  doubt  was 
sufficient  to  smash  the  arch  of  the  roof. 

By  means  of  a  fishing  line  we  ascertained  that  it  was 
one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  sheer  to  the  ledge  on  which  the 
remains  were  seen;  on  either  side  the  crevasse  descended 
into  blackness.  It  seemed  so  very  far  down  there  and  the 
dogs  looked  so  small  that  we  got  out  the  field  glasses,  but 
could  make  out  nothing  more  by  their  aid. 

All  our  available  rope  was  tied  together  but  the  total 
length  was  insufficient  to  reach  the  ledge  and  any  idea  of 
going  below  to  investigate  and  to  secure  some  of  the  food 
had  to  be  abandoned. 

Stunned  by  the  unexpectedness  of  it  all  and  having 
exhausted  the  few  appliances  we  carried  for  such  a  con- 
tingency, we  felt  helpless.  In  such  moments  action  is  the 
only  tolerable  thing,  and  if  there  had  been  any  expedient 
however  hazardous  which  might  have  been  tried,  we  should 
have  taken  all  and  more  than  the  risk.  Stricken  dumb  with 
240 


ACROSS  KING  GEORGE  V  LAND 

the  pity  of  it  and  heavy  at  heart,  we  turned  our  minds 
mechanically  to  what  lay  nearest  at  hand. 

There  were  rations  on  the  other  sledge,  and  we  found 
that  there  was  a  bare  one  and  a  half  weeks'  food  for  our- 
selves and  nothing  at  all  for  the  dogs.  Part  of  the  provisions 
consisted  of  raisins  and  almonds  which  had  been  taken  as 
extras  or  "  perks,"  as  they  were  usually  called. 

Among  other  losses  there  were  both  spade  and  ice-axe, 
but  fortunately  a  spare  tent-cover  was  saved.  Mertz's 
burberry  trousers  had  gone  down  with  the  sledge  and  the 
best  substitute  he  could  get  was  a  pair  of  thick  Jaeger 
woollen  under-trousers  from  the  spare  clothing  we  pos- 
sessed. 

Later  in  the  afternoon  Mertz  and  I  went  ahead  to  a 
higher  point  in  order  to  obtain  a  better  view  of  our  sur- 
roundings. At  a  point  two  thousand  four  hundred  feet  above 
sea-level  and  three  hundred  and  fifteen  and  three-quarter 
miles  eastward  from  the  Hut,  a  complete  observation  for 
position  and  magnetic  azimuth  was  taken. 

The  coastal  slopes  were  fearfully  broken  and  scaured 
in  their  descent  to  the  sea,  which  was  frozen  out  to  the 
horizon.  No  islands  were  observed  or  anything  which 
could  correspond  with  the  land  marked  by  Wilkes  as  existing 
so  much  farther  to  the  north.  Patches  of  "  water  sky  " 
were  visible  in  two  places  in  the  far  distance.  As  we  stood 
looking  north  a  Wilson  petrel  suddenly  appeared  and  after 
flitting  about  for  a  short  time  departed. 

We  returned  to  the  crevasse  and  packed  the  remaining 
sledge,  discarding  everything  unnecessary  so  as  to  reduce 
the  weight  of  the  load.  A  thin  soup  was  made  by  boihng 
up  all  the  old  food-bags  which  could  be  found.  The  dogs 
were  given  some  worn-out  fur  mitts,  finnesko  and  several 
spare  raw  hide  straps,  all  of  which  they  devoured. 

We  still  continued  to  call  down  into  the  crevasse  at 
regular  intervals  in  case  our  companion  might  not  have  been 
killed  outright  and,  in  the  meantime,  have  become  conscious. 
There  was  no  reply. 

VOL,  I  Q  241 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

A  weight  was  lowered  on  the  fishing  hne  as  far  as  the 
dog  which  had  earlier  shown  some  signs  of  life,  but  there 
was  no  response.     All  were  dead,  swallowed  up  in  an  instant. 

Wlien  comrades  tramp  the  road  to  anywhere  through 
a  lonely  blizzard-ridden  land  in  hunger,  want  and  weari- 
ness the  interests,  ties  and  fates  of  each  are  interwoven 
in  a  wondrous  fabric  of  friendship  and  affection.  The 
shock  of  Ninnis's  death  struck  home  and  deeply  stirred  us. 

He  was  a  fine  fellow  and  a  born  soldier — and  the  end : — 

Life — give  me  life  until  the  end, 

That  at  the  very  top  of  being, 

The  battle  spirit  shouting  in  my  blood, 

Out  of  very  reddest  hell  of  the  fight 

I  may  be  snatched  and  flung 

Into  the  everlasting  lull, 

The  Immortal,  Incommunicable  Dream. 

At  9  P.M.  we  stood  by  the  side  of  the  crevasse  and  I 
read  the  burial  service.  Then  Mertz  shook  me  by  the  hand 
with  a  short  "  Thank  you  !  "  and  we  turned  away  to  harness 
up  the  dogs. 


242 


CHAPTER    XIII 
TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

THE  homeward  track !  A  few  days  ago— only  a 
few  hours  ago— our  hearts  had  beat  hopefully 
at  the  prospect  and  there  was  no  hint  of  this,  the 
overwhelming  tragedy.  Our  fellow,  comrade,  chum,  in  a 
woeful  instant,  buried  in  the  bowels  of  the  awful  glacier. 
We  could  not  think  of  it;  we  strove  to  forget  it  in  the 
necessity  of  work,  but  we  knew  that  the  truth  would  assuredly 
enter  our  souls  in  the  lonely  days  to  come.  It  was  to  be  a 
fight  with  Death  and  the  great  Providence  would  decide  the 
issue. 

On  the  outward  journey  we  had  left  no  depots  of  pro- 
visions en  route,  for  it  was  our  bad  fortune  to  meet  such 
impossible  country  that  we  had  decided  to  make  a  circuit  on 
our  return  to  Winter  Quarters  sufficiently  far  inland  to 
avoid  the  coastal  irregularities.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  on 
the  very  day  of  the  calamity,  preparations  had  been  made 
to  cache  most  of  the  food  within  twenty-four  hours,  as 
during  the  last  few  days  of  the  journey  we  were  to  make  a 
dash  to  our  "  farthest  east  "  point.  Such  were  the  plans, 
and  now  we  were  ranged  against  unexpected  odds. 

With  regard  to  the  dogs,  there  were  six  very  miserable 
animals  left.  The  best  of  them  had  been  drafted  into  the 
rear  team,  as  it  was  expected  that  if  an  accident  happened 
through  the  collapse  of  a  snow-bridge  the  first  sledge  would 
most  probably  suffer.  For  the  same  reason  most  of  the 
food  and  other  indispensable  articles  had  been  carried  on 
the  rear  sledge. 

All  the  dogs  which  had  perished  were  big  and  powerful ; 

243 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Basilisk,  Ginger  Bitch,  Shackleton,  Castor,  Franklin  and 
John  Bull.  We  had  fully  anticipated  that  those  at  least 
would  come  back  alive,  at  the  expense  of  the  six  dogs  in 
my  sledge. 

A  silent  farewell ! — and  we  started  back,  aiming  to  reach 
our  camping-ground  on  December  12  before  a  snowstorm 
intervened,  as  several  things  had  been  left  there  which 
would  be  of  use  to  us  in  our  straitened  circumstances. 
The  weather  still  held  good  and  there  were  no  signs  of  ap- 
proaching snow  or  wind.  So  Mertz  went  ahead  on  skis, 
while  we  plodded  slowly  up  the  hills  and  dashed  recklessly 
down  them.  During  the  descents  I  sat  on  the  sledge  and 
we  slid  over  long  crevassed  slopes  in  a  wild  fashion,  almost 
with  a  languid  feeling  that  the  next  one  would  probably 
swallow  us  up.  But  we  did  not  much  care  then,  as  it  was 
too  soon  after  losing  our  friend. 

At  2.30  A.M.  on  December  15  the  discarded  sledge  and 
broken  spade  came  into  sight.  On  reaching  them,  Mertz 
cut  a  runner  of  the  broken  sledge  into  two  pieces  which 
were  used  in  conjunction  with  his  skis  as  a  framework 
on  which  to  pitch  the  spare  tent-cover  ;  our  only  tent  and 
poles  having  been  lost.  Each  time  the  makeshift  shelter 
was  erected,  these  props  had  to  be  carefully  lashed  together 
at  the  apex,  which  stood  four  feet  from  the  ground.  Inside, 
there  was  just  room  for  two  one-man  sleeping-bags  on  the 
floor.  However,  only  one  man  at  a  time  could  move  about 
and  neither  of  us  could  ever  rise  above  a  sitting  posture. 
Still,  it  was  a  shelter  which  protected  us  from  the  bad 
weather,  and,  with  plenty  of  snow  blocks  piled  around  it,  was 
wonderfully  resistant  to  the  wind. 

When  we  retired  to  rest,  it  was  not  to  sleep  but  to  think 
out  the  best  plan  for  the  return  journey. 

It  was  obvious  that  a  descent  to  the  frozen  sea  would 
be  dangerous  on  account  of  the  heavily  crevassed  nature 
of  the  falling  glacier,  delay  would  undoubtedly  be  caused 
and  our  distance  from  the  Hut  would  be  increased.  To 
decide  definitely  for  the  sea-ice  would  be  to  take  other 
244 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

risks  as  well,  since,  from  the  altitude  at  which  we  were 
placed,  we  could  not  be  sure  that  the  floe-ice  which  covered 
the  sea  would  provide  a  good  travelling  surface.  In  any 
case  it  was  likely  to  be  on  the  point  of  breaking  up,  for 
the  season  was  nearing  midsummer.  On  the  other  hand, 
there  was  on  the  sea-ice  a  chance  of  obtaining  seals  for 
food. 

After  due  consideration  we  resolved  to  follow  the  shorter 
route,  returning  inland  over  the  plateau,  for  it  was  reckoned 
that  if  the  weather  were  reasonable  we  might  win  through 
to  Winter  Quarters  with  one  and  a  half  weeks'  rations  and 
the  six  dogs  which  still  remained,  provided  we  ate  the  dogs 
to  eke  out  our  provisions.  Fortunately  neither  the  cooker 
nor  the  kerosene  had  been  lost. 

George,  the  poorest  of  the  dogs,  was  killed  and  partly 
fed  to  the  others,  partly  kept  for  ourselves.  The  meat  was 
roughly  fried  on  the  lid  of  the  aluminium  cooker,  an  operation 
which  resulted  in  little  more  than  scorching  the  surface. 
On  the  whole  it  was  voted  good  though  it  had  a  strong, 
musty  taste  and  was  so  stringy  that  it  could  not  be  properly 
chewed. 

As  both  mugs  and  spoons  had  been  lost,  I  made  two  panni- 
kins out  of  tins  in  which  cartridges  and  matches  had  been 
packed,  and  Mertz  carved  wooden  spoons  out  of  a  portion 
of  the  broken  sledge.  At  this  camp  he  also  spliced  the 
handle  of  the  broken  shovel  which  had  been  picked  up,  so 
as  to  make  it  temporarily  serviceable. 

It  was  midsummer,  and  therefore  we  found  it  easier 
to  drag  the  sledge  over  the  snow  at  night  when  the  surface 
was  frozen  hard.  Camp  was  not  finally  broken  until  6  p.m., 
when  the  long  and  painful  return  journey  commenced. 

For  fourteen  miles  the  way  led  up  rising  snow  slopes 
to  the  north-west  until  an  elevation  of  two  thousand  five 
hundred  feet  had  been  reached.  After  that,  variable  grades 
and  flat  country  were  met.  Though  the  sledge  was  light,  the 
dogs  required  helping  and  progress  was  slow.  The  mid- 
night  sun   shone   low  in  the   south,   and   we  tramped   on 

245 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

through  the  morning  hours,   anxious  to  reduce  the   miles 
which  lay  ahead. 

Early  on  December  16  the  sky  became  rapidly  over- 
cast. The  snowy  land  and  the  snowy  sky  merged  to  form 
an  enclosed  trap,  as  it  seemed  to  us,  while  showers  of  snow 
fell.  There  were  no  shadows  to  create  contrast ;  it  was 
impossible  to  distinguish  even  the  detail  of  the  ground 
underfoot.  We  stumbled  over  unseen  ridges  of  the  hard 
neve,  our  gaze  straining  forward.  The  air  was  so  still  that 
advantage  was  taken  of  the  calm  to  light  the  primus  and 
melt  some  snow  in  the  lee  of  the  sledge.  The  water,  to 
which  were  added  a  few  drops  of  primus  alcohol,  helped  to 
assuage  our  thirst. 

The  erection  of  the  makeshift  tent  was  a  long  and  tedious 
operation,  and  so,  on  our  return  marches,  we  never  again 
took  any  refreshment  during  the  day's  work  excepting  on 
this  occasion. 

At  6  A.M.,  having  done  twenty  miles  and  ascended 
to  an  elevation  of  about  two  thousand  five  hundred  feet, 
we  pitched  camp. 

There  was  very  little  sleep  for  me  that  day  for  I  had 
an  unusually  bad  attack  of  snow-blindness.  During  the 
time  that  we  rested  in  the  bags  Mertz  treated  one  of  my  eyes 
three  times,  the  other  twice  with  zinc  sulphate  and  cocaine. 
On  account  of  the  smallness  of  the  tent  a  great  deal  of 
time  was  absorbed  in  preparations  for  "turning  in"  and 
for  getting  away  from  each  camp.  Thus,  although  we 
rose  before  6  p.m.  on  December  16,  the  start  was  not  made 
until  8.30  P.M.,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the  meal 
was  of  the  "  sketchiest  "  character. 

On  that  night  ours  was  a  mournful  procession  ;  the  sky 
thickly  clouded,  snow  falling,  I  with  one  eye  bandaged  and 
the  dog  Johnson  broken  down  and  strapped  on  top  of  the 
load  on  the  sledge.  There  was  scarcely  a  sound  ;  only  the 
rustle  of  the  thick,  soft  snow  as  we  pushed  on,  weary  but  full 
of  hope.  The  dogs  dumbly  pressed  forward  in  their  harness, 
forlorn  but  eager  to  follow.  Their  weight  now  told  little 
246 


XAVIER  -MEltTZ 


5 


^  r< 


=f: 


■J. 


J 


L  t%i  i-^.  i 


\mii 


a 


J- 


o  ,,^-r 


i^ 


i   X 


s  J  i^^ 
s  t:;-!?: 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

upon  the  sledge,  the  work  mainly  falling  upon  ourselves. 
Mertz  was  tempted  to  try  hauling  on  skis,  but  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  it  did  not  pay  and  thenceforth  never  again 
used  them. 

Close  to  the  Magnetic  Pole  as  we  were,  the  compass  was  of 
little  use,  and  to  steer  a  straight  course  to  the  west  without 
ever  seeing  anything  of  the  surroundings  was  a  difficult 
task.  The  only  check  upon  the  correctness  of  the  bearing 
was  the  direction  in  which  trended  the  old  hard  winter 
sastrugi,  channelled  out  along  a  line  running  almost  north 
and  south.  The  newly  fallen  snow  obliterated  these,  and 
frequent  halts  had  to  be  called  in  order  to  investigate  the 
buried  surface. 

At  2  A.M.  on  the  17th  we  had  only  covered  eleven  miles 
when  we  stopped  to  camp.  Then  Mertz  shot  and  cut  up 
Johnson  while  I  prepared  the  supper. 

Johnson  had  always  been  a  very  faithful,  hard-working 
and  willing  beast,  with  rather  droll  ways  of  his  own,  and 
we  were  sorry  that  his  end  should  come  so  soon.  He 
could  never  be  accused  of  being  a  handsome  dog,  in  fact 
he  was  generally  disreputable  and  dirty. 

All  the  dogs  were  miserable  and  thin  when  they  reached 
the  stage  of  extreme  exhaustion.  Their  meat  was  tough, 
stringy  and  without  a  vestige  of  fat.  For  a  change  we 
sometimes  chopped  it  up  finely,  mixed  it  with  a  little  pem- 
mican,  and  brought  all  to  the  boil  in  a  large  pot  of  water. 
We  were  exceedingly  hungry,  but  there  was  nothing  to 
satisfy  our  appetites.  Only  a  few  ounces  were  used  of  the 
stock  of  ordinary  food,  to  which  was  added  a  portion  of 
dog's  meat,  never  large,  for  each  animal  yielded  so  very  little, 
and  the  major  part  was  fed  to  the  surviving  dogs.  They 
crunched  the  bones  and  ate  the  skin,  until  nothing  remained. 

A  fresh  start  was  made  at  7.30  p.m.  and  a  wretched, 
trying  night  was  spent,  when  we  marched  without  a  break 
for  twelve  and  a  half  hours.  Overhead  there  was  a  dense 
pall  of  nimbus  from  which  snow  fell  at  intervals.  None 
of  the  dogs  except  Ginger  gave  any  help  with  the  load,  and 

247 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Mary  was  so  worn  out  that  she  had  to  be  carried  on  the 
sledge.  Poor  Mary  had  been  a  splendid  dog,  but  we  had 
to  kill  her  at  the  camp  in  the  morning. 

After  a  run  of  eighteen  and  a  half  miles  we  halted  at 
8  A.M.  on  December  18. 

At  5.30  P.M.  a  light  south-easter  blew  and  snow  fell  from 
an  overcast  sky.  Soon  after  a  start  was  made,  it  became 
apparent  that  a  descent  was  commencing.  In  this  locality 
the  country  had  been  swept  by  wind,  for  none  of  the  recent 
snow  settled  on  the  surface.  The  sastrugi  were  high  and 
hard,  and  over  them  we  bumped,  slipping  and  falling  in  the 
uncertain  light.  We  could  not  endure  this  kind  of  travelling 
for  long  and  resolved  to  camp  shortly  after  midnight, 
intending  to  go  on  when  the  day  had  advanced  further 
and  the  light  was  stronger. 

''December  19. — Up  at  noon  and  tried  a  few  more  miles 
in  the  snow-glare.  Later  in  the  afternoon  the  sky  began 
to  break  and  we  picked  our  way  with  less  difficulty.  Camped 
at  5  P.M.,  having  done  only  twelve  miles  one  thousand  and 
fifty  yards  since  the  morning  of  December  18. 

*'  Up  at  8  P.M.  again,  almost  calm  and  sun  shining.  Still 
continuing  a  westerly  course  we  dropped  several  hundred 
feet,  marching  over  rough,  slippery  fields  of  sastrugi." 

In  the  early  morning  hours  of  the  20th  the  surface  changed 
to  ice  and  occasional  crevasses  appeared.  It  was  clear 
that  we  had  arrived  at  the  head  of  the  Ninnis  Glacier  above 
the  zone  of  serac  we  had  traversed  on  the  outward  journey. 
It  was  very  satisfactory  to  know  this ;  to  be  certain  that 
some  landmark  had  been  seen  and  recognized. 

Soon  after  this  discovery  we  came  near  losing  Haldane, 
the  big  grey  wolf,  in  a  crevasse.  Miserably  thin  from 
starvation  the  wretched  dogs  no  longer  filled  their  harness. 
As  we  pulled  up  Haldane,  after  he  had  broken  into  a  deep, 
sheer- walled  crevasse,  his  harness  slipped  off  just  as  he 
reached  the  top.  It  was  just  possible  to  seize  hold  of  his 
hair  at  that  moment  and  to  land  him  safely,  otherwise  we 
should  have  lost  many  days'  rations. 
248 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

He  took  to  the  harness  once  more  but  soon  became 
uncertain  in  his  footsteps,  staggered  along  and  then  tottered 
and  fell.  Poor  brutes  !  that  was  the  way  they  all  gave 
in — pulling  till  they  dropped. 

We  camped  at  4  a.m.,  thinking  that  a  rest  would  revive 
Haldane.  Inside  the  tent  some  snow  was  thawed,  and  we 
drank  the  water  with  an  addition  of  a  little  primus  spirit. 
A  temperature  reading  showed   —  1°F. 

Outside,  the  hungry  huskies  moaned  unceasingly  until 
we  could  bear  to  hear  them  no  longer.  The  tent  was  struck 
and  we  set  off  once  more. 

Haldane  was  strapped  on  the  sledge  as  he  could  not 
walk.  He  had  not  eaten  the  food  we  had  given  him,  because 
his  jaws  seemed  too  weak  to  bite.  He  had  just  nursed  it 
between  his  paws  and  licked  it. 

Before  the  dogs  became  as  weak  as  this,  great  care  had 
to  be  taken  in  tethering  them  at  each  camp  so  as  to  prevent 
them  from  gnawing  the  wood  of  the  sledge,  the  straps  or, 
in  fact,  anything  at  all.  Every  time  we  were  ready  for  a 
fresh  start  they  seemed  to  regain  their  old  strength,  for 
they  struggled  and  fought  to  seize  any  scraps,  however 
useless,  left  on  the  ground. 

The  day's  march  was  completed  at  10.30  a.m.  and  fourteen 
and  a  half  miles  lay  behind. 

"  We  were  up  again  at  11.20  p.m.  Sky  clear  ;  fifteen-mile 
breeze  from  the  south-south-east  and  the  temperature  3°  F. 
By  midnight  there  was  a  thirty-mile  wind  and  low,  flying 
drift. 

^^  December  21. — The  night-march  was  a  miserable  one. 
The  only  thing  which  helped  to  relieve  it  was  that  for  a 
moment  Dixson  Island  was  miraged  up  in  the  north,  and  we 
felt  that  we  had  met  an  old  friend,  which  means  a  lot  in  this 
icy  desolation.  The  surface  was  furrowed  by  hard,  sharp 
sastrugi. 

"We  camped  at  9  a.m.  after  only  eleven  miles.  Haldane 
was  finished  off  before  we  retired. 

"  We  were  up  again  at  9  p.m.,  and  when  a  start  was  made 

249 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

at  11  P.M.  there  was  a  strong  south-south-east  wind  blow- 
ing, with  low  drift ;  temperature,  zero  Fahr. 

''December  22. — The  surface  of  hard,  polished  sastrugi 
caused  many  falls.  The  track  was  undulating,  rising  in  one 
case  several  hundred  feet  and  finally  falling  in  a  long  slope. 

*' Pavlova  gave  in  late  in  the  march  and  was  taken  on 
the  sledge. 

"Camped  at  6.40  a.m.  in  a  forty-mile  wind  with  low 
drift.  Distance  marched  was  twelve  miles  one  thousand 
four  hundred  yards. 

"Before  turning  in,  we  effected  sundry  repairs.  Mertz 
re-sphced  the  handle  of  the  shovel  which  had  broken  apart 
and  I  riveted  the  broken  spindle  of  the  sledge-meter.  The 
mechanism  of  the  latter  had  frozen  during  the  previous 
day's  halt,  and,  on  being  started,  its  spindle  had  broken  off 
short.  It  was  a  long  and  tedious  job  tapping  at  the  steel 
with  a  toy  hammer,  but  the  rivet  held  miraculously  for  the 
rest  of  the  journey. 

"Up  at  11.30  P.M.,  a  moderate  breeze  blowing,  overcast 
sky,  light  snow  falling." 

On  December  23  an  uphill  march  commenced  which 
was  rendered  very  heavy  by  the  depth  of  the  soft  snow. 
Pavlova  had  to  be  carried  on  the  sledge. 

Suddenly,  gaping  crevasses  appeared  dimly  through 
the  falling  snow  which  surrounded  us  like  a  blanket.  There 
was  nothing  to  do  but  camp,  though  it  was  only  4.30  a.m., 
and  we  had  covered  but  five  miles  one  thousand  two  hundred 
and  thirty  yards. 

Pavlova  was  killed  and  we  made  a  very  acceptable 
soup  from  her  bones.  In  view  of  the  dark  outlook,  our 
ration  of  food  had  to  be  still  further  cut  down.  We  had  no 
proper  sleep,  hunger  gnawing  at  us  all  the  time,  and  the 
question  of  food  was  for  ever  in  our  thoughts.  Dozing 
in  the  fur  bags,  we  dreamed  of  gorgeous  "  spreads  "  and 
dinner-parties  at  home.  Tramping  along  through  the  snow, 
we  racked  our  brains  thinking  of  how  to  make  the  most 
of  the  meagre  quantity  of  dogs'  meat  at  hand. 
250 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

The  supply  of  kerosene  for  the  primus  stove  promised 
to  be  ample,  for  none  of  it  had  been  lost  in  the  accident. 
We  found  that  it  was  worth  while  spending  some  time  in 
boiling  the  dogs'  meat  thoroughly.  Thus  a  tasty  soup 
was  prepared  as  well  as  a  supply  of  edible  meat  in  which 
the  muscular  tissue  and  the  gristle  were  reduced  to  the 
consistency  of  a  jelly.  The  paws  took  longest  of  all  to 
cook,  but,  treated  to  lengthy  stewing,  they  became  quite 
digestible. 

On  December  24  we  were  up  at  8  a.m.  just  as  the  sun 
commenced  to  gleam  through  clouds.  The  light  was  rather 
bad,  and  snow  fell  as  the  track  zigzagged  about  among 
many  crevasses  ;  but  suddenly  the  sun  broke  forth.  The 
sledge  was  crossing  a  surface  of  deep  snow  which  soon 
became  so  sticky  that  the  load  would  scarcely  move.  At 
last  a  halt  was  made  after  four  miles,  and  we  waited  for 
the  evening,  when  the  surface  was  expected  to  harden. 

A  small  prion  visited  us  but  went  off  in  a  moment.  It 
is  very  remarkable  how  far  some  Antarctic  sea-birds  may 
wander  inland,  apparently  at  such  a  great  distance  from 
anything  which  should  interest  them.  We  were  then  more 
than  one  hundred  miles  south  of  the  open  sea.  As  the  bird 
flew  away,  we  watched  it  until  it  disappeared  in  the  north, 
wishing  that  we  too  had  wings  to  cross  the  interminable 
plateau  ahead. 

Lying  in  the  sleeping-bag  that  day  I  dreamt  that  I 
visited  a  confectioner's  shop.  All  the  wares  that  were 
displayed  measured  feet  in  diameter.  I  purchased  an 
enormous  delicacy  just  as  one  would  buy  a  bun  under 
ordinary  circumstances.  I  remember  paying  the  money 
over  the  counter,  but  something  happened  before  I  received 
what  I  had  chosen.  When  I  realized  the  omission  I  was 
out  in  the  street,  and,  being  greatly  disappointed,  went 
back  to  the  shop,  but  found  the  door  shut  and  "  early 
closing  "  written  on  it. 

Though  a  good  daily  average  had  been  maintained 
on  the  march  whenever  conditions  were  at  all  favourable, 

251 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  continuance  of  bad  weather  and  the  undoubtedly 
weaker  state  in  which  we  found  ourselves  made  it  impera- 
tive to  dispense  with  all  but  the  barest  necessities.  Thus 
the  theodolite  was  the  only  instrument  retained,  and  the 
camera,  photographic  films  (exposed  and  unexposed), 
hypsometer,  thermometers,  rifle,  ammunition  and  other 
sundries  were  all  thrown  away.  The  frame  of  the  tent 
was  made  lighter  by  constructing  two  poles,  each  four  feet 
high,  from  the  telescopic  theodolite  legs,  the  heavier  pieces 
of  sledge-runner  being  discarded. 

'<  We  were  up  at  11  p.m.  on  December  24,  but  so  much 
time  was  absorbed  in  making  a  dog-stew  for  Christmas  that 
it  was  not  till  2.30  a.m.  that  we  got  under  way.  We  wished 
each  other  happier  Christmases  in  the  future,  and  divided 
two  scraps  of  biscuit  which  I  found  in  my  spare  kit-bag ; 
relics  of  better  days. 

The  surface  was  a  moderately  good  one  of  undulating, 
hard  sastrugi,  and,  as  the  course  had  been  altered  to  north- 
west, the  southerly  wind  helped  us  along.  The  sun  shone 
brightly,  and  only  for  the  wind  and  the  low  drift  we  might 
have  felt  tolerably  comfortable.  On  our  right,  down  within 
the  shallow  depression  of  the  Ninnis  Glacier,  the  low  outline 
of  Dixson  Island,  forty  miles  to  the  north,  could  be  seen 
miraged  up  on  the  horizon. 

The  tent  was  raised  at  9.30  a.m.  after  a  run  of  eleven 
miles  one  hundred  and  seventy-six  yards.  An  ounce  each 
of  butter  was  served  out  from  our  small  stock  to  give  a 
festive  touch  to  the  dog-stew. 

At  noon  I  took  an  observation  for  latitude,  and,  after 
taking  a  bearing  on  to  Dixson  Island,  computed  that  the 
distance  in  an  air-line  to  Winter  Quarters  was  one  hundred 
and  sixty  miles. 

"December  26. — Got  away  at  2  a.m.  ;  the  surface  undu- 
lating and  hummocky  with  occasional  beds  of  soft  snow. 
Sun  shining,  wind  ranged  between  thirty  and  forty  miles 
per  hour  with  much  low  drift ;  cold ;  camped  about  noon 
having  done  ten  miles  five  hundred  and  twenty-eight  yards. 
252 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

"  We  have  reached  the  western  side  of  the  Ninnis  Glacier 
Ahead  are  rising  slopes,  but  we  look  forward  to  assistance 
from  the  wind  in  the  ascent. 

*'  I  was  again  troubled  with  a  touch  of  snow-blindness, 
but  it  responded  to  the  usual  treatment. 

"At  11  P.M.  we  were  at  it  again,  but  what  with  preparing 
dog-stew,  packing  up  within  the  hmited  area  of  the  tent 
and  experimenting  with  a  sail,  it  was  five  hours  before  the 
march  commenced. 

"  The  sail  was  the  tent-cover,  attached  to  the  top  of  one 
ski  lashed  vertically  as  a  mast  and  secured  below  to  the 
other  ski,  lashed  across  the  sledge  as  a  boom." 

A  start  was  made  at  4  a.m.  on  the  27th  in  a  thirty-mile 
wind  acompanied  by  low  drift.  The  surface  was  smooth 
but  grew  unexpectedly  soft  at  intervals,  while  the  ascent 
soon  began  to  tell  on  us.  Though  the  work  was  laborious, 
notwithstanding  some  aid  from  the  sail,  the  bright  sunlight 
kept  up  our  spirits,  and,  whenever  a  halt  was  called  for  a 
few  minutes'  spell,  the  conversation  invariably  turned  upon 
the  subject  of  food  and  what  we  should  do  on  arrival  on 
board  the  Aurora. 

At  noon  the  sledge- meter  showed  nine  miles  one  thousand 
four  hundred  yards,  and  we  agreed  to  halt  and  pitch  camp. 

The  wind  had  fallen  off  considerably,  and  in  the  brilliant 
sunshine  it  was  comparatively  warm  in  the  tent.  The 
addition  of  the  heat  from  the  primus  stove,  kept  burning 
for  an  unusually  long  time  during  the  preparation  of  the 
meat,  caused  a  thaw  of  drift-snow  which  became  lodged 
on  the  lee  side  of  the  tent.  Thus  we  had  frequently  to  put 
up  with  an  unwelcome  drip.  Moisture  came  from  the 
floor  also,  as  there  was  no  floor-cloth,  and  the  sleeping-bags 
were  soon  very  wet  and  soggy.  As  soon  as  the  cooking 
was  finished,  the  tent  cooled  off  and  the  wet  walls  froze 
and  became  stiff  with  icy  cakes. 

At  this  time  we  were  eating  largely  of  the  dogs'  meat, 
to  which  was  added  one  or  two  ounces  of  chocolate  or 
raisins,  three  or  four  ounces  of  pemmican  and  biscuit  mixed 

253 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

together,  and,  as  a  beverage,  very  dilute  cocoa.  The  total 
weight  of  solid  food  consumed  by  each  man  per  day  was 
approximately  fourteen  ounces.  Our  small  supply  of 
butter  and  glaxo  was  saved  for  emergency,  while  a  few 
tea-bags  which  remained  were  boiled  over  and  over  again. 

The  march  commenced  on  December  28  at  3  a.m.  in  a 
thirty-mile  wind  accompanied  by  light  drift.  Overhead 
there  was  a  wild  sky  which  augured  badly  for  the  next 
few  days.  It  was  cold  work  raising  the  sail,  and  we  were 
glad  to  be  marching. 

Our  faithful  retainer  Ginger  could  walk  no  longer  and 
was  strapped  on  the  sledge.  She  was  the  last  of  the  dogs 
and  had  been  some  sort  of  a  help  until  a  few  days  before. 
We  were  sad  when  it  came  to  finishing  her  off. 

On  account  of  the  steep  up  grade  and  the  weight  of 
Ginger  on  the  sledge,  we  camped  at  7.15  a.m.  after  only  four 
miles  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  yards. 

We  had  breakfast  off  Ginger's  skull  and  brain.  I  can 
never  forget  the  occasion.  As  there  was  nothing  available 
to  divide  it,  the  skull  was  boiled  whole.  Then  the  right 
and  left  halves  were  drawn  for  by  the  old  and  well-estab- 
lished sledging  practice  of  "  shut-eye,"  after  which  we 
took  it  in  turns  eating  to  the  middle  line,  passing  the  skull 
from  one  to  the  other.  The  brain  was  afterwards  scooped 
out  with  a  wooden  spoon. 

On  sledging  journeys  it  is  usual  to  apportion  all  food- 
stuffs in  as  nearly  even  halves  as  possible.  Then  one  man 
turns  away  and  another,  pointing  to  a  heap,  asks"  Whose?" 
The  reply  from  the  one  not  looking  is  "  Yours  "  or  "  Mine  " 
as  the  case  may  be.  Thus  an  impartial  and  satisfactory 
division  of  the  rations  is  made. 

After  the  meal  I  went  on  cooking  more  meat  so  as  to 
have  a  supply  in  readiness  for  eating.  It  was  not  till 
2  P.M.  that  the  second  lot  was  finished.  The  task  was  very 
trying,  for  I  had  to  sit  up  on  the  floor  of  the  tent  for 
hours  in  a  cramped  position,  continually  attending  to  the 
cooker,  while  Mertz  in  his  sleeping-bag  was  just  accom- 
254 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

modated  within  the  hmited  space  which  remained.  The 
tent  was  too  small  either  to  lie  down  dm^ing  the  operation 
or  to  sit  up  comfortably  on  a  sleeping-bag. 

At  9.30  P.M.  Mertz  rose  to  take  a  turn  at  the  cooking, 
and  at  11  p.m.  I  joined  him  at  "  breakfast." 

At  this  time  a  kind  of  daily  cycle  was  noted  in  the  weather. 
It  was  always  calmest  between  4  p.m.  and  6  p.m.  During 
the  evening  hours  the  wind  increased  until  it  reached  a 
maximum  between  four  and  six  o'clock  next  morning, 
after  which  it  fell  off  gradually. 

We  were  away  at  2.30  a.m.  on  the  29th  in  a  thirty-mile 
wind  which  raised  a  light  drift.  The  sail  was  found  to  be 
of  great  assistance  over  a  surface  which  rose  in  terraces  of 
fifty  to  one  hundred  feet  in  height,  occurring  every  one  to 
one  and  a  half  miles.  This  march  lasted  for  six  hours, 
during  which  we  covered  seven  miles  five  hundred  and 
twenty-eight  yards. 

On  December  30  the  ascent  continued  and  the  wind 
was  still  in  the  "  thirties."  After  several  hours  we  over- 
topped the  last  terrace  and  stood  on  flat  ground — the 
crest  of  a  ridge. 

Tramping  over  the  plateau,  where  reigns  the  desolation 
of  the  outer  worlds,  in  solitude  at  once  ominous  and  weird, 
one  is  free  to  roam  in  imagination  through  the  wide  realm 
of  human  experience  to  the  bounds  of  the  great  Beyond. 
One  is  in  the  midst  of  infinities — the  infinity  of  the  dazzling 
white  plateau,  the  infinity  of  the  dome  above,  the  infinity 
of  the  time  past  since  these  things  had  birth,  and  the  infinity 
of  the  time  to  come  before  they  shall  have  fulfilled  the  Pur- 
pose for  which  they  were  created.  We,  in  the  midst  of  the 
illimitable,  could  feel  with  Marcus  Aurelius  that  "  Of  life,  the 
time  is  a  point." 

By  9  a.m.  we  had  accomplished  a  splendid  march  of 
fifteen  miles  three  hundred  and  fifty  yards,  but  the  satisfac- 
tion we  should  have  felt  at  making  such  an  inroad  on  the 

255 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

huge  task  before  us  was  damped  by  the  fact  that  I  suddenly 
became  aware  that  Mertz  was  not  as  cheerful  as  usual. 
I  was  at  a  loss  to  know  the  reason,  for  he  was  always  such 
a  bright  and  companionable  fellow. 

At  10.15  P.M.  the  sky  had  become  overcast,  snow  was 
faUing  and  a  strong  wind  was  blowing.  We  decided  to 
wait  for  belter  conditions. 

On  New  Year's  Eve  at  5.30  a.m.  the  wind  was  not  so 
strong,  so  we  got  up  and  prepared  for  the  start. 

Mertz  said  that  he  felt  the  dogs'  meat  was  not  doing 
him  much  good  and  suggested  that  we  should  give  it  up 
for  a  time  and  eat  a  small  ration  of  the  ordinary  sledging 
food,  of  which  we  had  still  some  days'  supply  carefully 
husbanded.  I  agreed  to  do  this  and  we  made  our  first 
experiment  on  that  day.  The  ration  tasted  very  sweet  com- 
pared with  dogs'  meat  and  was  so  scanty  in  amount  that 
it  left  one  painfully  empty. 

The  light  was  so  atrocious  for  marching  that,  after 
stumbling  along  for  two  and  a  half  miles,  we  were  obliged 
to  give  up  the  attempt  and  camp,  spending  the  day  in 
sleeping-bags. 

In  the  evening  at  9.30  p.m.  the  sun  appeared  for  a  brief 
moment  and  the  wind  subsided.  Another  stage  was  there- 
fore attempted  but  at  considerable  cost,  for  we  staggered 
along  in  the  bewildering  light,  continually  falling  over 
unseen  sastrugi.  The  surface  was  undulating  with  a 
tendency  to  down  grades.  Two  sets  of  sastrugi  were  found 
crossing  one  another,  and,  in  the  absence  of  the  sun,  we 
could  not  be  sure  of  the  course,  so  the  camp  was  pitched 
after  five  miles. 

''January  1, 1913. — Outside,  an  overcast  sky  and  falling 
snow.  Mertz  was  not  up  to  his  usual  form  and  we  decided 
not  to  attempt  blundering  along  in  the  bad  light,  believing 
that  the  rest  would  be  advantageous  to  him. 

"  He  did  not  complain  at  all  except  of  the  dampness  of 
his  sleeping-bag,  though  when  I  questioned  him  particularly 
he  admitted  that  he  had  pains  in  the  abdomen.  As  I  had 
256 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

a  continuous  gnawing  sensation  in  the  stomach,  I  took  it 
that  he  had  the  same,  possibly  more  acute. 

"After  New  Year's  Day  he  expressed  a  dishke  to  biscuit, 
which  seemed  rather  strange.  Then  he  suddenly  had  a 
desire  for  glaxo  and  our  small  store  was  made  over  to  him, 
I  taking  a  considerable  ration  of  the  dogs'  meat  in  exchange. 

"It  was  no  use,  however,  for  when  we  tried  to  cover  a 
few  more  miles  the  exertion  told  very  heavily  on  him,  and 
it  was  plain  that  he  was  in  a  more  serious  condition  than 
myself. 

''January  2. — The  same  abominable  weather.  We  eat 
only  a  few  ounces  of  chocolate  each  day. 

"  January  3. — In  the  evening  the  sky  broke  and  the  sun 
looked  through  the  clouds.  We  were  not  long  in  packing 
up  and  getting  on  the  way.  The  night  was  chilly  and 
Mertz  got  frost-bitten  fingers,  so  camp  was  pitched  after 
four  miles  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  thirty  yards. 

"  January  4. — The  sun  was  shining  and  we  had  intended 
rising  at  10  a.m.,  but  Mertz  was  not  well  and  thought  that 
the  rest  would  be  good  for  him.  I  spent  the  time  improving 
some  of  the  gear,  mending  Mertz's  clothing  and  cooking  a 
quantity  of  the  meat. 

"  January  5. — The  sky  was  overcast,  snow  was  falling, 
and  there  was  a  strong  wind.  Mertz  suggested  that  as  the 
conditions  were  so  bad  we  should  delay  another  day. 

"  Lying  in  the  damp  bags  was  wretched  and  was  not  doing 
either  of  us  any  good,  but  what  was  to  be  done  ?  Outside, 
the  conditions  were  abominable.  My  companion  was  evi- 
dently weaker  than  I,  and  it  was  apparently  quite  true  that  he 
was  not  making  much  of  the  dogs'  meat. 

"  January  6. — A  better  day  but  the  sky  remained  overcast. 
Mertz  agreed  to  try  another  stage." 

The  grade  was  slightly  downhill  and  the  wind  well 
behind.  Unfortunately  the  surface  was  slippery  and  irre- 
gular and  falls  were  frequent.  These  told  very  much  upon 
my  companion  until,  after  consistently  demurring,  he  at  last 
consented  to  ride  on  the  sledge.  With  the  wind  blowing 
VOL.  I  R  257 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

behind  us,  it  required  no  great  exertion  to  bring  the  load 
along,  though  it  would  often  pull  up  suddenly  against 
sastrugi.  After  we  had  covered  two  and  a  half  miles,  Mertz 
became  so  cold  through  inaction  in  the  wind  that  there  was 
nothing  to  do  but  pitch  the  tent. 

Mertz  appeared  to  be  depressed  and,  after  the  short 
meal,  sank  back  into  his  bag  without  saying  much.  Occa- 
sionally, during  the  day,  I  would  ask  him  how  he  felt,  or 
we  would  return  to  the  old  subject  of  food.  It  was  agreed 
that  on  our  arrival  on  board  the  Aurora  Mertz  was  to  make 
penguin  omelettes,  for  we  had  never  forgotten  the  excellence 
of  those  we  had  eaten  just  before  leaving  the  Hut. 

Reviewing  the  situation,  I  found  that  we  were  one 
hundred  miles  south-east  of  Winter  Quarters  where  food 
and  plenty  awaited  us.  At  the  time  we  had  still  ordinary 
rations  for  several  days.  How  short  a  distance  it  would 
seem  to  the  vigorous,  but  what  a  lengthy  journey  for  the 
weak  and  famished  ! 

The  skin  was  peeling  off  our  bodies  and  a  very  poor 
substitute  remained  which  burst  readily  and  rubbed  raw 
in  many  places.  One  day,  I  remember,  Mertz  ejaculated, 
"  Just  a  moment,"  and,  reaching  over,  lifted  from  my  ear 
a  perfect  skin-cast.  I  was  able  to  do  the  same  for  him. 
As  we  never  took  off  our  clothes,  the  peelings  of  hair  and 
skin  from  our  bodies  worked  down  into  our  under-trousers 
and  socks,  and  regular  clearances  were  made. 

During  the  evening  of  the  6th  I  made  the  following  note 
in  my  diary  : 

"  A  long  and  wearisome  night.  If  only  I  could  get  on  ; 
but  I  must  stop  with  Xavier.  He  does  not  appear  to  be 
improving  and  both  our  chances  are  going  now." 

"  January  7. — Up  at  8  a.m.,  it  having  been  arranged 
last  night  that  we  would  go  on  to-day  at  all  costs,  sledge- 
sailing,  with  Xavier  in  his  bag  on  the  sledge."  It  was  a 
sad  blow  to  me  to  find  that  Mertz  was  in  a  weak  state  and 
required  helping  in  and  out  of  his  bag.  He  needed  rest  for 
a  few  hours  at  least  before  he  could  think  of  travelling. 
258 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

"  I  have  to  turn  in  again  to  kill  time  and  also  to  keep  warm, 
for  I  feel  the  cold  very  much  now." 

"  At  10  A.M.  I  get  up  to  dress  Xavier  and  prepare  food, 
but  find  him  in  a  kind  of  fit."  Coming  roimd  a  few  minutes 
later,  he  exchanged  a  few  words  and  did  not  seem  to  realize 
that  anything  had  happened.  "...  Obviously  we  can't  go 
on  to-day.  It  is  a  good  day  though  the  light  is  bad,  the 
sun  just  gleaming  through  the  clouds.  This  is  terrible  ; 
I  don't  mind  for  myself  but  for  others.  ...  I  pray  to  God 
to  help  us." 

"  I  cook  some  thick  cocoa  for  Xavier  and  give  him 
beef-tea  ;  he  is  better  after  noon,  but  very  low — I  have 
to  lift  him  up  to  drink." 

During  the  afternoon  he  had  several  more  fits,  then 
became  delirious  and  talked  incoherently  until  midnight, 
when  he  appeared  to  fall  off  into  a  peaceful  slumber.  So 
I  toggled  up  the  sleeping-bag  and  retired  worn  out  into  my 
own.  After  a  couple  of  hours,  having  felt  no  movement 
from  my  companion,  I  stretched  out  an  arm  and  found  that 
he  was  stiff. 

My  comrade  had  been  accepted  into  "  the  peace  that 
passeth  all  understanding."  It  was  my  fervent  hope  that 
he  had  been  received  where  sterling  qualities  and  a  high 
mind  reap  their  due  reward.  In  his  life  we  loved  him  ; 
he  was  a  man  of  character,  generous  and  of  noble  parts. 

For  hours  I  lay  in  the  bag,  rolling  over  in  my  mind  all 
that  lay  behind  and  the  chance  of  the  future.  I  seemed 
to  stand  alone  on  the  wide  shores  of  the  world — and  what  a 
short  step  to  enter  the  unknown  future  ! 

My  physical  condition  was  such  that  I  felt  I  might 
collapse  in  a  moment.  The  gnawing  in  the  stomach  had 
developed  there  a  permanent  weakness,  so  that  it  was  not 
possible  to  hold  myself  up  in  certain  positions.  Several 
of  my  toes  commenced  to  blacken  and  fester  near  the  tips 
and  the  nails  worked  loose. 

Outside,  the  bowl  of  chaos  was  brimming  with  drift-snow 
and  I  wondered  how  I  would  manage  to  break  and  pitch 

259 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

camp  single-handed.  There  appeared  to  be  Httle  hope  of 
reaching  the  Hut.  It  was  easy  to  sleep  on  in  the  bag,  and 
the  weather  was  cruel  outside.  But  inaction  is  hard  to 
brook,  and  I  thought  of  Service's  lines  : 

Buck  up,  do  your  damndest  and  fight, 

It's  the  plugging  away  that  will  win  you  the  day. 

If  I  failed  to  reach  the  Hut  it  would  be  something  done  to 
reach  some  prominent  point  likely  to  catch  the  eye  of  a 
search  party,  where  a  cairn  might  be  erected  and  our  diaries 
cached.  And  so  I  commenced  to  modify  the  sledge  and 
camping  gear  to  meet  fresh  requirements. 

The  sky  remained  clouded,  but  the  wind  fell  off  to  a  calm 
which  lasted  for  several  hours.  I  took  the  opportunity 
to  set  to  work  on  the  sledge,  sawing  it  in  halves  with  a  pocket 
tool.  A  mast  was  made  out  of  one  of  the  rails  of  the  dis- 
carded half  of  the  sledge  and  a  spar  was  cut  from  the  other 
rail.  The  sledge-meter,  very  much  battered,  was  still 
serviceable.  Lastly,  the  load  was  cut  do-v\Ti  to  a  minimum 
by  the  elimination  of  all  but  the  barest  necessities. 

Late  on  the  evening  of  the  8th  I  took  the  body  of  Mertz, 
wrapped  up  in  his  sleeping-bag,  outside  the  tent,  piled 
snow  blocks  around  it  and  raised  a  rough  cross  made  of  the 
two  half -runners  of  the  sledge. 

On  January  9  the  weather  was  overcast  and  fairly 
thick  drift  was  flying  in  a  wind  reaching  about  fifty  miles 
an  hour.  As  certain  matters  still  required  attention  and 
my  chances  of  re-erecting  the  tent  were  rather  doubtful, 
if  I  had  decided  to  move  on,  the  start  was  delayed. 

"  I  read  the  Burial  Service  over  Xavier  this  afternoon. 
As  there  is  little  chance  of  my  reaching  human  aid  alive, 
I  greatly  regret  inability  at  the  moment  to  set  out  the  detail 
of  coastline  met  with  for  three  hundred  miles  travelled 
and  observations  of  glacier  and  ice-formations,  etc.  ;  the 
most  of  which  latter  are,  of  course,  committed  to  my  head. 

"  The  approximate  location  of  the  camp  is  latitude  68° 
2'  S.,  longitude  145°  9'  E.  This  is  dead  reckoning,  as  the 
260 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

theodolite  legs  have  been  out  of  action  for  some  time, 
splinted  together  to  form  tent-props.  I  believe  the  truth 
lies  nearer  latitude  67°  57'  S.,  longitude  145°  20'  E.,  as  the 
wind  must  have  drifted  us  to  the  north." 

During  the  afternoon  I  cut  up  Mertz's  burberry  jacket 
and  roughly  sewed  it  to  a  large  canvas  clothes-bag,  making 
a  sail  which  could  be  readily  set  or  furled,  so  as  to  save  delay 
in  starting  out  or  in  camping. 

January  10  was  an  impossible  day  for  travelling  on 
account  of  thick  drift  and  high  wind.  I  spent  part  of  the 
time  in  reckoning  up  the  amount  of  food  remaining  rmd 
in  cooking  the  rest  of  the  dogs'  meat ;  the  last  device  enabling 
me  to  leave  behind  some  of  the  kerosene,  of  whicii  there  was 
still  a  good  supply.  Late  in  the  afternoon  the  wind  fell  and 
the  sun  peered  amongst  the  clouds  just  as  I  was  in  the 
middle  of  a  long  job  riveting  and  lashing  the  broken  shovel. 

It  was  on  January  11 — a  beautiful,  calm  day  of  sun- 
shine— that  I  set  out  over  a  good  surface  with  a  slight 
down  grade.  From  the  start  my  feet  felt  lumpy  and  sore. 
They  had  become  so  painful  after  a  mile  of  walking  that  I 
decided  to  make  an  examination  of  them  on  the  spot,  sitting 
in  the  sun  on  the  sledge.  The  sight  of  my  feet  gave  me 
quite  a  shock,  for  the  thickened  skin  of  the  soles  had  separated 
in  each  case  as  a  complete  layer,  and  abundant  watery 
fluid  had  escaped  into  the  socks.  The  new  skin  underneath 
was  very  much  abraded  and  raw. 

I  did  what  appeared  to  be  the  best  thing  under  the 
circumstances :  smeared  the  new  skin  with  lanoline,  of 
which  there  was  a  good  store,  and  with  bandages  bound 
the  skin  soles  back  in  place,  as  they  were  comfortable  and 
soft  in  contact  with  the  raw  surfaces.  Outside  the  bandages 
I  wore  six  pairs  of  thick  woollen  socks,  fur  boots  and  a 
crampon  over-shoe  of  soft  leather.  Then  I  removed  most 
of  my  clothing  and  bathed  in  the  glorious  heat  of  the  sun. 
A  tinghng  sensation  seemed  to  spread  throughout  my  whole 
body,  and  I  felt  stronger  and  better. 

When  the  day  commenced  with  ideal  weather  I  thought 

261 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

I  would  cover  a  long  distance,  but  at  5.30  p.m.,  after  six 
and  a  quarter  miles,  I  felt  nerve-worn  and  had  to  camp, 
"  so  worn  that  had  it  not  been  a  delightful  evening,  I  should 
not  have  found  strength  to  erect  the  tent." 

Though  the  medical  outfit  was  limited,  there  were  a 
fair  number  of  bandages  and  on  camping  I  devoted  much 
time  to  tending  raw  patches  all  over  the  body,  festering 
fingers  and  inflamed  nostrils. 

High  wind  and  much  drift  put  travelling  out  of  the 
question  on  January  12,  and  in  any  case  my  feet  needed 
a  rest. 

"  January  13. — The  wind  subsided  and  the  snow  cleared 
off  at  noon.  The  afternoon  was  beautifully  fine.  Descended 
hard  ice-slopes  over  many  crevasses — almost  all  descent — 
but  surface  cut  my  feet  up ;  at  8  p.m.  camped,  having  done 
five  and  three-quarter  miles — painful  feet — on  camping 
find  feet  worse  than  ever;  things  look  bad  but  shall  per- 
severe. It  is  now  11  P.M.  and  the  glacier  is  firing  off  like 
artillery — appears  to  send  up  great  jets  of  imprisoned  air." 

During  the  march  Aurora  Peak  showed  up  to  the  west, 
about  twenty  miles  away,  across  the  Mertz  Glacier.  I 
felt  happy  at  thus  fixing  my  position,  and  at  the  sight  of  the 
far  plateau  which  led  onwards  to  Winter  Quarters. 

The  glacier  was  the  next  obstacle  to  advance.  To  the 
south-west  it  descended  from  the  plateau  in  immense  broken 
folds.  Pressing  northward  it  was  torn  into  the  jumbled 
crush  of  serac-ice,  sparkling  beneath  an  unclouded  sun. 
The  idea  of  diverging  to  the  west  and  rounding  the  ice-falls 
occurred  to  me,  but  the  detours  involved  other  difficulties, 
so  I  strove  to  pick  out  the  best  track  across  the  valley. 

A  high  wind  which  blew  on  the  morning  of  the  14th 
diminished  in  strength  by  noon  and  allowed  me  to  get  away. 
The  sun  was  so  warm  that  the  puckered  ice  underfoot  was 
covered  with  a  film  of  water  and  in  some  places  small 
trickles  ran  away  to  disappear  into  crevasses. 

Though  the  course  was  downhill  to  the  Mertz  Glacier, 
the  sledge  required  a  good  deal  of  pulling  owing  to  the  wet 
262 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

runners.  At  9  p.m.,  after  travelling  five  miles,  I  pitched 
camp  in  the  bed  ol'  the  glacier. 

Between  9.30  p.m.  and  11  p.m.  the  "cannonading" 
heard  on  the  previous  night  recommenced.  The  sounds, 
resembling  the  explosions  of  heavy  guns,  usually  started 
higher  up  the  glacier  and  ended  down  towards  the  sea. 
When  I  first  heard  them,  I  put  my  head  outside  the  tent  to 
see  what  was  going  on.  The  reports  came  at  random 
from  every  direction,  but  there  was  no  visible  evidence  as 
to  how  they  were  produced.  Without  a  doubt  they  had 
something  to  do  with  the  re -freezing  and  splitting  of  the 
ice  owing  to  the  evening  chill ;  but  the  sounds  seemed 
far  too  loud  to  be  explained  by  this  cause  alone. 

January  15— the  date  on  which  all  the  summer  sledging 
parties  were  due  at  the  Hut !  It  was  overcast  and  snowing 
early  in  the  day,  and  in  a  few  hours  the  sun  broke  out  and 
shone  warmly.  The  travelhng  was  so  heavy  over  a  soft 
snowy  surface,  partly  melting,  that  I  gave  up,  after  one 
mile,  and  camped. 

At  7  P.M.  the  surface  had  not  improved,  the  sky  was 
thickly  obscured  and  snow  fell.  At  10  p.m.  the  snow  was 
coming  down  heavily,  and,  since  there  were  many  crevasses 
in  the  vicinity,  I  resolved  to  wait. 

On  the  16th  at  2  a.m.  the  snow  was  as  thick  as  ever,  but 
at  5  A.M.  the  atmosphere  lightened  and  the  sun  appeared. 

Without  delay  I  broke  camp.  A  favourable  breeze 
sprang  up,  and  with  sail  set  I  managed  to  proceed  through 
the  snowy  "  deluge  "  in  short  stages.  The  snow  clung  in 
lumps  to  the  runners,  which  had  to  be  scraped  frequently. 
I  passed  some  broken  ridges  and  sank  into  several  holes 
leading  down  to  crevasses  out  of  which  it  was  possible  to 
scramble  easily. 

After  laboriously  toiling  up  one  long  slope,  I  was  just 
catching  my  breath  at  the  top  and  the  sledge  was  running 
easily  when  I  noticed  that  the  surface  beneath  my  feet  fell 
away  steeply  in  front.  I  suddenly  realized  that  I  was  on 
the  brink  of  a  great  blue  hole  like  a  quarry.     The  sledge 

263 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

was  following  of  its  own  accord  and  was  rapidly  gaining 
speed,  so  I  turned  and,  exerting  every  effort,  was  just  able 
to  hold  it  back  by  means  of  the  hauling-line  from  the  edge 
of  the  abyss.  I  should  think  that  there  must  have  been 
an  interval  of  quite  a  minute  during  which  I  held  my  ground 
without  being  able  to  make  it  budge.  Then  it  slowly  came 
my  way,  and  the  imminent  danger  was  past. 

The  day's  march  was  an  extremely  hard  five  miles. 
Before  turning  in  I  had  an  extra  supper  of  jelly  soup,  made 
by  boiling  down  some  of  the  dogs'  sinews,  strengthened 
with  a  little  pemmican.  The  acute  enjoyment  of  eating 
under  these  circumstances  compensates  in  a  slight  measure 
for  the  suffering  of  starvation. 

January  17  was  another  day  of  overcast  weather  and 
falling  snow.  Delay  meant  a  reduction  in  the  ration  which 
was  low  enough  already,  so  there  was  nothing  to  do  but 
go  on. 

When  I  got  away  at  8  a.m.  I  found  that  the  pulling 
was  easier  than  it  had  been  on  the  previous  day.  Never- 
theless I  covered  only  two  miles  and  had  to  consider  myself 
fortunate  in  not  winding  up  the  whole  story  then  and  there. 
This  is  what  happened,  following  the  account  in  my  diary  : 

"  Going  up  a  long,  fairly  steep  slope,  deeply  covered 
with  soft  snow,  broke  through  lid  of  crevasse  but  caught 
myself  at  thighs,  got  out,  turned  fifty  yards  to  the  north, 
then  attempted  to  cross  trend  of  crevasse,  there  being  no 
indication  of  it ;  a  few  moments  later  found  myself  dangling 
fourteen  feet  below  on  end  of  rope  in  crevasse — sledge 
creeping  to  mouth — had  time  to  say  to  myself,  '  so  this  is 
the  end,'  expecting  the  sledge  every  moment  to  crash  on 
my  head  and  all  to  go  to  the  unseen  bottom — then  thought 
of  the  food  uneaten  on  the  sledge ;  but  as  the  sledge  pulled 
up  without  letting  me  down,  thought  of  Providence  giving 
me  another  chance."  The  chance  was  very  small  considering 
my  weak  condition.  The  width  of  the  crevasse  was  about 
six  feet,  so  I  hung  freely  in  space,  turning  slowly  round. 

A  great  effort  brought  a  knot  in  the  rope  within  my 
264 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

grasp,  and,  after  a  moment's  rest,  I  was  able  to  draw  myself 
up  and  reach  another,  and,  at  length,  hauled  myself  on 
to  the  overhanging  snow-lid  into  which  the  rope  had  cut. 
Then,  when  I  was  carefully  climbing  out  on  to  the  surface, 
a  further  section  of  the  lid  gave  way,  precipitating  me  once 
more  to  the  full  length  of  the  rope. 

Exhausted,  weak  and  chilled  (for  my  hands  were  bare 
and  pounds  of  snow  had  got  inside  my  clothing)  I  hung 
with  the  firm  conviction  that  all  was  over  except  the  passing. 
Below  was  a  black  chasm ;  it  would  be  but  the  work  of  a 
moment  to  slip  from  the  harness,  then  all  the  pain  and 
toil  would  be  over.  It  was  a  rare  situation,  a  rare  tempta- 
tion— a  chance  to  quit  small  things  for  great — ^to  pass 
from  the  petty  exploration  of  a  planet  to  the  contemplation 
of  vaster  worlds  beyond.  But  there  was  all  eternity  for 
the  last  and,  at  its  longest,  the  present  would  be  but  short. 
I  felt  better  for  the  thought. 

My  strength  was  fast  ebbing  ;  in  a  few  minutes  it  would 
be  too  late.  It  was  the  occasion  for  a  supreme  attempt. 
New  power  seemed  to  come  as  I  addressed  myself  to  one  last 
tremendous  effort.  The  struggle  occupied  some  time,  but 
by  a  miracle  I  rose  slowly  to  the  surface.  This  time  I 
emerged  feet  first,  still  holding  on  to  the  rope,  and  pushed 
myself  out,  extended  at  full  length,  on  the  snow — on  solid 
ground.  Then  came  the  reaction,  and  I  could  do  nothing 
for  quite  an  hour. 

The  tent  was  erected  in  slow  stages  and  I  then  had  a 
little  food.  Later  on  I  lay  in  the  sleeping-bag,  thinking 
things  over.  It  was  a  time  when  the  mood  of  the  Persian 
philosopher  appealed  to  me  : 

Unborn  To-morrow  and  dead  Yesterday, 
Why  fret  about  them  if  To-day  be  sweet  ? 

I  was  confronted  with  this  problem :  whether  it  was 
better  to  enjoy  life  for  a  few  days,  sleeping  and  eating  my 
fill  until  the  provisions  gave  out,  or  to  "plug  on"  again 
in  hunger  with  the  prospect  of  plunging  at  any  moment 

265 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

into  eternity  without  the  great  luxury  and  pleasure  of  the 
food.  And  then  an  idea  presented  itself  which  greatly  im- 
proved my  prospects.  It  was  to  construct  a  ladder  from 
alpine  rope  ;  one  end  of  which  was  to  be  secured  to  the  bow 
of  the  sledge  and  the  other  carried  over  my  left  shoulder 
and  loosely  attached  to  the  sledge  harness.  Thus,  if  I  fell 
into  a  crevasse  again,  it  would  be  easy  for  me,  even  though 
weakened  by  starvation,  to  scramble  out  again  by  the 
ladder,  provided  the  sledge  was  not  also  engulphed. 

Notwithstanding  the  possibilities  of  the  rope  ladder, 
I  could  not  sleep  properly  at  all;  my  nerves  had  been 
so  over-taxed.  All  night  considerable  wind  and  drift 
continued. 

On  the  19th  it  was  overcast  and  light  snow  was  falling. 
I  resolved  "  to  go  ahead  and  leave  the  rest  to  Providence." 
As  they  wallowed  through  the  deep  snow  my  feet  and 
legs  kept  breaking  through  into  space.  Then  I  went  right 
under,  but  the  sledge  was  held  back  and  the  ladder  "  proved 
trumps."  A  few  minutes  later  I  was  down  again,  but  I 
emerged  again  without  much  exertion,  half-smolhered 
with  snow.  Faintness  overcame  me  and  I  stopped  to 
camp,  though  only  a  short  distance  had  been  covered. 

All  around  was  a  leaden  glare,  the  snow-clouds  "  cor- 
ralhng  "  me  in.  The  sun  had  not  shown  up  for  some  days 
and  1  was  eager  to  see  it  once  more,  not  only  that  it  might 
show  up  the  landscape  but  for  its  cheerful  influence  and 
life-giving  energy.  A  few  days  previously  my  condition  had 
been  improving,  but  now  it  was  going  back. 

During  the  night  of  the  18th  loud  booming  noises,  sharp 
cracks  and  muffled  growls  issued  from  the  neighbouring 
crevasses  and  kept  waking  me  up.  At  times  one  could 
feel  a  vibration  accompanying  the  growhng  sounds,  and  I 
concluded  that  the  ice  was  in  rapid  motion. 

The  sun  at  last  appeared  on  the  19th,  and  I  was  off  by 
8.30  A.M.  The  whole  surface  was  a  network  of  crevasses, 
some  very  wide.  Along  one  after  another  of  these  I  dragged 
the  sledge  until  a  spot  was  reached  where  the  snow-bridge 
26G 


MA\VSON   E.MEH(iIN(i   I-'HOAI    Ills   MAKKsllll-  1     lE.N 


IK   HALF  SLF.IXJK   ISKD  I.\   TIIK    LAST  STAOK  OF   MAWSOX'S  .TOIUNFY 


t 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

looked   to   be   firm.     Here   I   plunged   across,   risking   the 
consequences. 

After  three  hours'  marching  nothing  serious  had  hap- 
pened and  I  found  myself  on  safer  ground  with  a  "  pimply  " 
surface  visible  ahead,  close  under  the  slopes  of  the  highlands. 
Once  on  this  I  became  over-reliant,  and  in  consequence  sank 
several  times  into  narrow  fissures. 

At  1  P.M.  the  Mertz  Glacier  was  at  last  crossed  and  I  had 
reached  the  rising  hills  on  its  western  side.  Overlooking 
the  camp,  five  hundred  feet  above  the  glacier,  were  beetling, 
crevassed  crags,  but  I  could  trace  out  a  good  road,  free  from 
pitfalls,  leading  to  the  plateau,  at  an  elevation  of  three 
thousand  feet. 

To  lighten  my  load  for  the  climb  I  threw  away  alpine 
rope,  finnesko  crampons,  sundry  pairs  of  worn  crampons 
and  socks,  while  I  rubbed  a  composition  on  the  sledge- 
runners  which  prevented  them  from  sticking  to  wet  snow. 

January  20  was  a  wretched  day  ;  overcast,  with  wind 
and  light  drift.  In  desperation  I  got  away  at  2  p.m.  in  a 
wind  which  proved  to  be  of  considerable  assistance.  I 
could  see  nothing  of  my  surroundings ;  one  thing  was 
certain,  and  that  was  that  the  ascent  had  commenced  and 
every  foot  took  me  upward.  The  day's  work  amounted 
to  about  two  and  a  half  miles. 

On  the  21st  the  sun  shone  brightly  and  there  was  a 
good  following  wind.  Through  deep  snow  I  zigzagged  up 
for  three  miles  before  deciding  to  camp. 

Wind  and  drift  prevailed  early  on  the  22nd  but  fell 
away  towards  noon,  and  I  was  then  favoured  with  a  glorious 
sunny  day.  Away  to  the  north  was  a  splendid  view  of  the 
open  sea  ;  it  looked  so  beautiful  and  friendly  that  I  longed 
to  be  down  near  it.  Six  miles  had  been  covered  during  the 
day,  but  I  felt  very  weak  towards  the  end  on  account  of  the 
heavy  pulUng. 

During  the  early  hours  of  the  23rd  the  sun  was  visible, 
but  about  8  a.m.  the  clouds  sagged  low,  the  wind  rose  and 
everything  became  blotted  out  in  a  swirl  of  driving  snow. 

267 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

I  wandered  on  through  it  for  several  hours,  the  sledge 
capsizing  at  times  owing  to  the  strength  of  the  wind.  It 
was  not  possible  to  keep  an  accurate  course,  for  even  the 
wind  changed  direction  as  the  day  wore  on.  Underfoot 
there  was  soft  snow  which  I  found  comfortable  for  my  sore 
feet,  but  which  made  the  sledge  drag  heavily  at  times. 

When  camp  was  pitched  at  4  p.m.  I  reckoned  that  the 
distance  covered  in  a  straight  line  had  been  three  and  a 
half  miles. 

Erecting  the  tent  single-handed  in  the  high  wind  was  a 
task  which  required  much  patience  and  some  skill.  The 
poles  were  erected  first  and  then  the  tent  was  gathered 
up  in  the  proper  form  and  taken  to  the  windward  side  of 
the  legs  where  it  was  weighted  down.  The  flounce  on  the 
windward  side  was  got  into  position  and  piled  up  with 
snow  blocks.  Other  blocks  of  snow  had  previously  been 
placed  in  a  ring  round  the  legs  in  readiness  to  be  tumbled 
on  to  the  rest  of  the  flounce  when  the  tent  was  quickly 
slipped  over  the  apex  of  the  poles.  In  very  windy  weather 
it  was  often  as  much  as  two  hours  after  halting  before  I 
would  be  cosy  within  the  shelter  of  the  tent. 

High  wind  and  dense  driving  snow  persisted  through- 
out the  24th  and  I  made  five  and  a  half  miles,  sitting  on 
the  sledge  most  of  the  time  with  the  sail  up. 

The  blizzard  continued  on  the  25th,  but  after  the  trying 
experience  of  the  previous  two  days,  I  did  not  feel  well 
enough  to  go  on.  Outside,  the  snow  fell  in  "  torrents," 
piled  up  round  the  tent  and  pressed  in  until  it  was  no  bigger 
than  a  coffin,  of  which  it  reminded  me. 

I  passed  most  of  the  day  doctoring  myself,  attending 
to  raw  and  inflamed  places.  Tufts  of  my  beard  and  hair 
came  out,  and  the  snowy  floor  of  the  tent  was  strewn  with 
it  at  every  camp. 

"  January  26. — I  went  on  again  in  dense,  driving  snow. 
There  was  no  need  of  the  sail.  The  wind,  which  was  behind, 
caught  the  sledge  and  bundled  it  along  so  that,  though  over 
a  soft  surface  of  snow,  the  travelling  was  rapid.  The  snow 
268 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

was  in  large,  rounded  grains,  and  beat  on  the  tent  like  hail. 
Altogether  nine  miles  were  covered. 

"  January  27. — Blizzard-bound  again.  The  previous 
day's  exertions  were  too  much  for  me  to  undertake  the  same 
again  without  a  long  rest. 

"  January  28. — In  the  morning  the  wind  had  moderated 
very  much  but  the  sky  remained  overcast  and  snow  continued 
to  fall.  It  was  a  long  job  digging  the  tent  out.  Soon 
after  the  start  the  sun  gleamed  and  the  weather  improved. 
The  three-thousand-foot  crest  of  the  plateau  had  been  crossed 
and  I  was  bearing  down  rapidly  on  Commonwealth  Bay, 
the  vicinity  of  which  showed  up  as  a  darker  patch  on  the 
clouds  of  the  north-west  horizon. 

"  The  evening  was  fine  and  I  really  began  to  feel  that 
Winter  Quarters  were  approaching.  To  increase  my  ex- 
citement Madigan  Nunatak  came  into  view  for  a  time  in 
the  clear,  evening  light.  Distance  covered,  over  eight 
miles." 

The  calm  of  the  previous  evening  was  broken  again, 
and  I  started  on  the  morning  of  January  29  in  considerable 
drift  and  a  fairly  strong  wind.  After  going  five  miles  I  had 
miraculous  good  fortune. 

I  was  travelling  along  on  an  even  down  grade  and  was 
wondering  how  long  the  two  pounds  of  food  which  remained 
would  last,  when  something  dark  loomed  through  the  drift 
a  short  distance  away  to  the  right.  All  sorts  of  possi- 
bilities fled  through  my  mind  as  I  headed  the  sledge  for 
it.  The  unexpected  happened — it  was  a  cairn  of  snow 
erected  by  McLean,  Hodgeman  and  Hurley,  who  had  been 
out  searching  for  us.  On  the  top  of  the  mound  was  a  bag 
of  food,  left  on  the  chance  that  it  might  be  picked  up, 
while  in  a  tin  was  a  note  stating  the  bearing  and  distance 
of  the  mound  from  Aladdin's  Cave  (E.  30°  S.,  distance 
twenty-three  miles),  that  the  Ship  had  arrived  at  the  Hut 
and  was  waiting,  that  Amundsen  had  reached  the  Pole,  and 
that  Scott  was  remaining  another  year  in  Antarctica. 

It  was  rather  a  singular  fact  that  the  search  party  only 

269 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

left  this  mound  at  eight  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  that  very 
day  (January  29).  It  was  about  2  p.m.  when  I  found  it. 
Thus,  during  the  night  of  the  28th,  our  camps  had  been  only 
about  five  miles  apart. 

With  plenty  of  food,  I  speedily  felt  stimulated  and 
revived,  and  anticipated  reaching  the  Hut  in  a  day  or  two, 
for  there  was  then  not  more  than  twenty-three  miles  to 
cover.  Alas,  however,  there  was  to  be  another  delay.  I 
was  without  crampons — they  had  been  thrown  away  on 
the  western  side  of  Mertz  Glacier — and  in  the  strong  wind 
was  not  able  to  stand  up  on  the  slippery  ice  of  the  coastal 
slopes.  The  result  was  that  I  sat  on  the  sledge  and  ran 
along  with  the  wind,  nibbling  at  the  food  as  I  went.  The 
sledge  made  so  much  leeway  that  near  the  end  of  the  day, 
after  fourteen  miles,  I  reckoned  that  I  had  been  carried 
to  the  east  of  Aladdin's  Cave.  The  course  was  therefore 
changed  to  the  west,  but  the  wind  came  down  almost  broad- 
side-on  to  the  sledge,  and  it  was  swept  away.  The  only 
thing  to  do  was  to  camp. 

On  the  30th  I  cut  up  the  box  of  the  theodolite  and  into 
two  pieces  of  wood  stuck  as  many  screws  and  tacks  as  I 
could  procure  from  the  sledge-meter.  In  the  repair-bag 
there  were  still  a  few  ice-nails  which  at  this  time  were  of 
great  use.  Late  in  the  day  the  wind  fell  off,  and  I  started 
westward  over  the  ice-slopes  with  the  pieces  of  nail-studded 
wood  lashed  to  my  feet. 

After  six  miles  these  improvised  crampons  broke  up, 
and  the  increasing  wind  got  me  into  difficulties.  Finally, 
the  sledge  slipped  sideways  into  a  narrow  crevasse  and 
was  caught  by  the  boom  (which  crossed  from  side  to  side 
at  the  lower  part  of  the  mast).  I  was  not  strong  enough 
for  the  job  of  extricating  it  straight  away,  and  by  the  time 
I  had  got  it  safely  on  the  ice,  the  wind  had  increased  still 
more.     So  I  pitched  camp. 

The  blizzard  was  in  full  career  on  January  31  and  I 
spent  all  day  and  until  late  at  night  trying  to  make  the 
crampons  serviceable,  but  without  success. 
270 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

On  February  1  the  wind  and  drift  subsided  late  in  the 
afternoon,  and  I  clearly  saw  to  the  west  the  beacon  which 
marked  Aladdin's  Cave. 

At  7  P.M.  I  reached  this  haven  within  the  ice,  and  never 
again  was  I  to  have  the  ordeal  of  pitching  the  tent.  Inside 
the  cave  were  three  oranges  and  a  pineapple  which  had 
been  brought  from  the  Ship.  It  was  wonderful  once  more 
to  be  in  the  land  of  such  things ! 

I  waited  to  mend  one  of  the  crampons  and  then  started 
off  for  the  Hut ;  but  a  blizzard  had  commenced.  To 
descend  the  five  miles  of  steep  icy  slopes  with  my  miserable 
crampons,  in  the  weak  state  in  which  I  found  myself,  would 
only  have  been  as  a  last  resort.  So  I  camped  in  the  com- 
fortable cave  and  hoped  for  better  weather  next  day. 

The  high  wind,  rising  to  a  hurricane  at  times,  continued 
for  a  whole  week  with  dense  drift  until  the  8th.  I  spent  the 
long  hours  making  crampons  of  a  new  pattern,  eating  and 
sleeping.  Eventually  I  became  so  anxious  that  I  used  to  sit 
outside  the  cave  for  long  spells,  watching  for  a  lull  in  the 
wind. 

At  length  I  resolved  to  go  down  in  the  blizzard,  sitting 
on  the  sledge  as  long  as  possible,  blown  along  by  the  wind. 
I  was  making  preparations  for  a  start  when  the  wind  sud- 
denly decreased  and  my  opportunity  had  come. 

In  a  couple  of  hours  I  was  within  one  mile  and  a  half 
of  the  Hut.  There  was  no  sign  of  the  Ship  lying  in  the  offing, 
but  I  comforted  myself  with  the  thought  that  she  might 
be  still  at  the  anchorage  and  have  swung  inshore  so  as  to  be 
hidden  by  the  ice-chffs,  or  on  the  other  hand  that  Captain 
Davis  might  have  been  along  the  coast  to  the  east  searching 
there. 

But  even  as  I  gazed  about  seeking  for  a  clue,  a  speck 
on  the  north-west  horizon  caught  my  eye  and  my  hopes 
went  down.  It  looked  like  a  distant  ship  ;  it  might  well 
have  been  the  Aurora.  Well,  what  matter !  the  long 
journey  was  at  an  end — a  terrible  chapter  of  my  life  was 
finished  ! 

271 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Then  the  rocks  around  Winter  Quarters  began  to  come 
into  view,  part  of  the  basin  of  the  boat  harbour  appeared, 
and  lo  !  there  were  human  figures  !  They  almost  seemed 
unreal — I  was  in  a  dream — but  after  a  brief  moment  one 
of  them  saw  me  and  waved  an  arm,  I  replied,  there  was  a 
commotion  and  they  all  ran  towards  the  Hut.  Then  they 
were  lost,  for  the  crest  of  the  first  steep  slope  hid  them. 
It  almost  seemed  to  me  that  they  had  run  away  to 
hide. 

Minutes  passed,  and  I  slowly  went  along  with  the  sledge. 
Then  a  head  rose  over  the  brow  of  the  hill  and  there  was 
Bickerton,  breathless  after  a  long  run.  I  expect  he  con- 
sidered for  a  while  which  one  of  us  it  was.  Soon  we  had 
shaken  hands  and  he  knew  all  in  a  few  brief  words,  and  I 
learned  that  the  Ship  had  left  earlier  in  the  day.  Madigan, 
McLean,  Bage  and  Hodgeman  arrived,  and  then  a  new- 
comer— Jeff  ryes.  Five  men  had  remained  behind  to  make 
a  search  for  our  party,  and  Jeffryes  was  a  new  wireless 
operator  brought  down  by  Captain  Davis. 

We  were  soon  at  the  Hut  where  I  found  that  full  pre- 
parations had  been  made  for  wintering  a  second  year.  The 
weather  was  calm  and  the  Ship  was  no  distance  away  so  I 
decided  to  recall  her  by  wireless.  The  masts  at  the  Hut 
had  been  re-erected  during  the  summer,  and  on  board  the 
Aurora  Hannam  was  provided  with  a  wireless  receiving 
set.  Jeffryes  had  arranged  with  Hannam  to  call  up  at 
8,  9  and  10  p.m.  for  several  evenings  while  the  Aurora  was 
"  within  range  "  in  case  there  were  any  news  of  my  party. 
A  message  recalling  the  Ship  was  therefore  sent  off  and 
repeated  at  frequent  intervals  till  past  midnight. 

Next  morning  there  was  a  forty-mile  wind  when  we 
went  outside,  but  away  across  Commonwealth  Bay  to  the 
west  the  Aurora  could  be  seen  close  to  the  face  of  the  ice- 
cliffs.  She  had  returned  in  response  to  the  call  and  was 
steaming  up  and  down,  waiting  for  the  wind  to  moderate. 
I^We  immediately  set  to  work  getting  all  the  records, 
instruments  and  personal  gear  ready  to  be  taken  down 
272 


TOIL  AND  TRIBULATION 

to  the  boat  harbour  in  anticipation  of  cahii  weather  during 
the  day. 

The  wind  chose  to  continue  and  towards  evening  was 
in  the  sixties,  while  the  barometer  fell.  During  the  after- 
noon Hodgeman  went  across  to  the  western  ridge  and 
saw  that  the  Ship  was  still  in  the  Bay.  The  sea  was  so 
heavy  that  the  motor-boat  could  never  have  lived  through  it. 

That  night  Jeffryes  sent  another  message,  which  we 
learned  afterwards  was  not  received,  in  which  Captain 
Davis  was  given  the  option  of  remaining  until  calm  weather 
supervened  or  of  leaving  at  once  for  the  Western  Base. 
I  felt  that  the  decision  should  be  left  to  him,  as  he  could 
appreciate  exactly  the  situation  of  the  Western  Base  and 
what  the  Ship  could  be  expected  to  do  amid  the  ice  at  that 
season  of  the  year.  The  time  was  already  past  when, 
according  to  my  written  instructions  left  for  him  on  arrival 
at  Commonwealth  Bay,  the  Aurora  should  sail  west  to 
relieve  Wild  and  his  party. 

On  the  morning  of  the  10th  there  was  no  sign  of  the 
Ship  and  evidently  Captain  Davis  had  decided  to  wait  no 
longer,  knowing  that  further  delay  would  endanger  the 
chances  of  picking  up  the  eight  men  who  had  elected  to 
winter  on  the  shelf-ice  one  thousand  five  hundred  miles 
to  the  west.  At  such  a  critical  moment  determination, 
fearless  and  swift,  was  necessary,  and,  in  coming  to  his 
momentous  decision.  Captain  Davis  acted  well  and  for  the 
best  interests  of  the  Expedition. 

A  long  voyage  lay  before  the  Aurora  through  many 
miles  of  ice-strewn  sea,  swept  by  intermittent  blizzards 
and  shrouded  now  in  midnight  darkness.  We  still  fostered 
the  hope  that  the  vessel's  coal-supply  would  be  sufficient 
for  her  to  return  to  Adelie  Land  and  make  an  attempt  to 
pick  us  up.     But  it  was  not  to  be. 

The  long  Antarctic  winter  was  fast  approaching  and 
we  turned  to  meet  it  with  resolution,  knowing  that  if  the 
Aurora  failed  us  in  early  March,  that  the  early  summer  of 
the  same  year  would  bring  relief. 

VOL.  I  s  273 


CHAPTER  XIV 
THE  QUEST  OF  THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

By  R.  BAGE 

Send  me  your  strongest,  those  who  never  fail. 
I'm  the  BHzzard,  King  of  the  Southern  Trail ! 

Sledging  Song. 

ON  the  afternoon  of  November  10,  at  Aladdin's  Cave, 
after  a  convivial  hoosh,  Webb,  Hurley  and  I  said 
good-bye  to  Dr.  Mawson's  party  and  made  off  south 
for  the  eleven  and  three-quarter  mile  cave  where  our 
Supporting  Party,  Murphy,  Hunter  and  Laseron,  were  wait- 
ing for  us.  At  7  P.M.  we  started  almost  at  a  run  over  the 
smooth  ice,  to  the  accompaniment  of  hearty  cheers  from  Dr. 
Mawson,  Ninnis,  and  Mertz  ;  two  of  whom  we  were  never 
to  see  again. 

Half  a  mile  of  this  easy  going,  and  we  were  on  snow  for 
the  first  time  with  a  loaded  sledge.  Uphill  snow,  too,  and 
the  wind  rising,  so  it  was  no  small  relief  when  we  finally 
made  the  Cathedral  Grotto  at  11.30  p.m.,  and  found 
Murphy's  tent  pitched  alongside  it.  The  wind  by  this  time 
was  about  forty-five  miles  per  hour  and,  it  being  nearly 
dusk,  the  crevasses — a  five-mile  belt  —  had  been  fairly 
difficult  to  negotiate. 

We  soon  had  the  cave  clear  of  snow,  had  a  good  meal 
and  then  slept  the  sleep  of  the  just,  feeling  well  content  with 
the  first  day's  work — eleven  and  a  half  miles  from  home  at 
an  altitude  of  one  thousand  nine  hundred  feet.  We  were 
off  at  last  on  a  search  for  the  Magnetic  Pole. 

On  the  morrow  some  time  was  spent  in  rearranging  the 
loads.  Finally,  both  parties  moved  off  south  into  heavy 
274 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

wind  and  fairly  thick  drift.  What  with  the  ground  rising 
steadily,  the  pressure  of  the  wind  and  our  lack  of  condition, 
two  and  a  quarter  hours  of  solid  work  realized  only  two 
and  a  quarter  miles  ;   so  we  decided  to  camp. 

All  the  night  it  blew  hard,  between  seventy  and  eighty 
miles  per  hour,  and  next  day  it  was  still  blowing  and  drifting 
heavily.  Our  tent  was  a  good  deal  smaller  than  Murphy's, 
and,  as  Webb  and  Hurley  are  both  six-footers,  we  always 
had  to  put  all  gear  outside  when  the  sleeping-bags  were 
down.  This  is  really  a  good  thing  when  the  weather  is  bad, 
as  one  is  not  tempted  to  stay  in  the  bag  all  the  time. 

Early  in  the  afternoon  as  we  were  all  feeling  hungry 
and  had  been  in  bags  long  enough  to  feel  cold,  although 
the  weather  was  quite  warm  (10°F.),  we  rolled  bags,  and, 
when  our  frozen  burberrys  were  once  fairly  on,  quite  enjoyed 
ourselves.  After  a  boil-up  and  a  few  minutes'  "  run " 
round  in  the  drift  and  wind,  we  did  some  stitching  on 
our  light  drill  tent,  which  was  making  very  heavy  weather 
of  it,  although  pitched  close  under  the  lee  of  Murphy's 
strong  japara  tent.  A  little  reading,  some  shouted  un- 
intelligible conversation  with  the  other  tent,  another  boil-up, 
and,  last  but  not  least,  a  smoke,  found  us  quite  ready  for 
another  sleep. 

Next  day  (November  13),  the  wind  having  dropped  to 
thirty-five  miles  per  hour,  we  set  out  about  11a.m.  in  light 
drift.  The  sky  was  still  overcast,  so  the  light  was  very  trying. 
In  the  worst  fogs  at  home  one  can  at  any  rate  see  something 
of  the  ground  on  which  one  is  treading  ;  in  Adelie  Land, 
even  when  the  air  was  clear  of  snow,  it  was  easy  to  bump 
against  a  four-foot  sastruga  without  seeing  it.  It  always 
reminded  me  most  of  a  fog  at  sea  :  a  ship  creeping  "  o'er  the 
hueless,  viewless  deep." 

When  6  p.m.  arrived  we  had  only  covered  five  and  a 
half  miles,  but  were  all  thoroughly  exhausted  and  glad 
to  camp.  Lunch  had  been  rather  barbarously  served 
in  the  lee  of  the  sledge.  First  came  plasmon  biscuit, 
broken  with   the  ice-axe   into    pieces  small   enough  to  go 

275 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

into  the  mouth  through  the  funnel  of  a  burberry  helmet ; 
then  followed  two  ounces  of  chocolate,  frozen  rather  too  hard 
to  have  a  definite  taste ;  and  finally  a  luscious  morsel — ^two 
ounces  of  butter,  lovingly  thawed-out  in  the  mouth  to  get 
the  full  flavour.  Lunches  like  these  in  wind  and  drift 
are  uncomfortable  enough  for  every  one  to  be  eager  to  start 
again  as  soon  as  possible. 

By  nine  o'clock  that  night  the  wind  had  increased  to  a 
full  gale.  We  were  in  camp  all  the  14th  and  the  15th, 
the  wind  rising  to  eighty-five  miles  per  hour  with  very  heavy 
drift  during  the  small  hours  of  the  15th.  This  was  its 
maximum,  and  by  the  afternoon  it  was  down  to  about  seventy 
miles  per  hour  with  a  clear  sky  and  light  drift.  We  donned 
our  burberry s  (I  should  like  to  give  Hurley's  "  Ode  to  a 
Frozen  Burberry  ")  and  dug  out  our  sledges,  both  of  which 
were  completely  buried  in  a  ramp  forty  yards  long  ;  the 
shovel  projecting  nine  inches  above  the  surface. 

While  we  were  engaged  on  this  work,  I  overheard  the  follow- 
ing conversation  being  shouted  in  the  Supporting  Party's  tent : 

First  Voice.  I'm  hungry.  Who  will  go  out  and  get 
the  food-bag  ? 

Sleepy  Voice.  The  food-weights  *  are  in  the  cooker. 

First  Voice.  No  they're  not. 

Sleepy  Voice.  Saw  them  there  yesterday,  must  be 
somewhere  in  the  tent. 

First  Voice.     No  they're  not  .  .  .  I  ate  them  last  night. 

The  exercise,  a  good  hoosh  and  above  all  the  clear  sky 
made  us  take  a  less  morbid  view  of  the  fact  that  we  were 
six  days  out  from  the  Hut  and  only  nineteen  and  a  half 
miles  away. 

Early  on  the  16th  we  could  hear  above  the  roar  of  the 
wind  the  drift  still  hissing  against  the  tent,  but  it  had 
diminished  by  nine  o'clock  breakfast. 

*  Until  amounts  were  known  by  experience,  rations  were  weighed  by 
a  small  balance  whose  various  weights  were  small  caUco  bags  filled  with 
chocolate. 
276 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

By  common  consent  it  was  agreed  that  our  loads  were 
too  heavy  for  the  conditions  under  which  we  were  working. 
I  accordingly  decided  to  drop  one  hundred-pound  bag.  We 
had  already  saved  nearly  one  week's  food  for  three  men  and 
had  not  yet  worked  up  our  full  sledging  appetites.  The 
bag  was  raised  to  the  top  of  a  six-foot  snow  mound,  a 
thermograph  being  placed  alongside.  As  we  now  seemed 
to  be  on  plateau  snow,  I  thought  it  wise  to  leave  behind 
rny  heavy  boots  and  Swiss  crampons. 

By  4  P.M.  the  wind  had  decreased  to  a  light  breeze. 
Work  was  very  slow  on  a  steeper  up  grade,  and  at  six  o'clock 
clouds  came  up  quickly  from  the  south-east  and  snow 
began  to  fall,  so  we  camped  at  7.30  p.m.  thoroughly  tired 
out.  At  twenty-four  and  a  half  miles  the  altitude  was 
three  thousand  two  hundred  feet. 

The  snow  was  a  false  alarm.  It  ceased  at  9  p.m.  and  the 
wind  subsided  to  a  dead  calm ! ! 

Good  headway  was  being  made  against  a  strong  breeze 
next  day,  when  it  was  noticed  that  two  gallons  of  kerosene 
were  missing  off  the  supporters'  sledge.  Wliile  Murphy  and 
Laseron  went  back  two  miles  to  recover  them,  Webb  secured 
a  magnetic  declination  and  I  took  sun  observations  for  time 
and  azimuth. 

We  were  off  early  on  the  18th  and  for  the  first  time  were 
able  to  appreciate  the  "  scenery."  Glorious  sunshine  over- 
head and  all  around  brilliant  snow,  dappled  by  livid  shadows  ; 
very  different  from  the  smooth,  soft,  white  mantle  usually 
attributed  to  the  surface  of  Antarctica  by  those  in  the 
homeland.  Here  and  there,  indeed,  were  smooth  patches 
which  we  called  bowling-greens,  but  hard  and  slippery  as 
polished  marble,  with  much  the  same  translucent  appear- 
ance. Practically  all  the  country,  however,  was  a  jumbled 
mass  of  small,  hard  sastrugi,  averaging  perhaps  a  foot  in 
height,  with  an  occasional  gnarled  old  veteran  twice  as  high. 
To  either  side  the  snow  rolled  away  for  miles.  In  front, 
we  made  our  first  acquaintance  with  the  accursed  next 
ridge,    which   is   always   ahead    of    you    on    the    plateau. 

277 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Generally  we  passed  from  one  ridge  to  another  so  gradually 
that  we  could  never  say  for  certain  just  when  we  had  topped 
one  ;  still  the  next  ridge  was  always  there. 

The  weather  had  lately  been  colder  with  the  increased 
altitude.  The  temperature  in  daily  range  varied  from 
-10°  F.  to  9°  F.  It  was  so  hot  in  the  sun,  on  the  18th, 
that  lunching  inside  the  tent  was  unbearable.  We  preferred 
its  shadow  outside  in  the  breeze. 

Wearing  a  minimum  of  clothes,  we  marched  along  gaily 
during  the  afternoon.  The  country  changed  in  a  wonderful 
manner,  the  sastrugi  gradually  becoming  smaller  and  finally 
disappearing.  The  surface  was  so  soft  that  a  bamboo 
would  easily  penetrate  it  for  a  foot.  Evidently  it  was  fairly 
old  and  laid  down  in  calm  weather,  for  excavations  showed 
that  it  became  more  compact  without  any  hard  wind-swept 
layers  marking  successive  snowfalls. 

It  was  proved  that  we  were  commencing  a  descent  of 
one  thousand  five  hundred  feet  down  the  north  side  of 
a  valley  feeding  the  Mertz  Glacier.  In  order  to  explain  the 
surface,  smooth  and  unruffled  by  any  wind,  the  question 
arose  as  to  whether  it  is  possible  that  there  is  a  cushion  of 
dead  air  more  or  less  permanently  over  the  north  side  of 
this  depression. 

On  the  soft  surface  we  were  able  to  dispense  with  cram- 
pons. Hitherto,  it  had  been  impossible  to  haul  over  a 
slipper}^  surface  in  finnesko.  Now  we  felt  as  light  as  air 
and  were  vastly  cheered  when  some  one  calculated  that  the 
six  of  us  were  saving  I  don't  know  how  many  thousand 
foot-pounds  of  work  every  mile.  With  a  run  of  twelve 
miles  we  were  forty-two  miles  from  Winter  Quarters. 

Another  splendid  day  on  the  19th.  We  had  lunch  in  a 
curious  cup-shaped  hollow,  estimated  to  be  two  miles  wide 
and  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  deep.  Webb  obtained  here 
an  approximate  dip  of  88°44',*  a  very  promising  increase 
from  the  Hut  (87°27'). 

Snow-blindness    had  now  begim  to  make   itself  felt  for 
*  At  the  South  Magnetic  Pole  the  dip  is  90°. 
278 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  first  time.  I  for  one  had  my  first  experience  of  it  that 
afternoon.  During  the  halt  at  hmch  I  put  on  yellow  goggles 
in  place  of  the  smoked  ones  I  had  been  wearing,  and  in  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  the  change  of  colour  had  '  settled '  my  eyes 
for  the  time  being. 

The  afternoon  was  very  hot.  The  thermometer  stood 
at  10°  F.  at  4  p.m.,  but  the  still  air  made  it  almost  insupport- 
able. By  the  time  the  load  was  hauled  vip  out  of  the  basin, 
we  were  streaming  with  perspiration. 

Before  halting,  we  sighted  a  dark,  distant  ridge,  thirty 
miles  away,  and  the  course  was  corrected  by  its  bearing. 
Our  extravagant  hopes  of  finding  a  permanently  calm  region 
had  been  dwindling  for  the  last  few  miles,  as  a  hard  bottom, 
a  few  inches  under  the  surface,  had  become  evident.  They 
were  finally  dispelled  by  a  south-west  wind  springing  up 
during  the  night. 

As  every  one  was  beginning  to  feel  the  hard  work  after 
another  oppressive  afternoon  on  the  20th,  we  decided  to 
have  an  easy  march  next  day  and  to  build  our  first  depot. 
Of  course  we  had  hoped  to  have  been  farther  out  before 
sending  back  the  supporting  party,  but  the  weather  had 
settled  the  question. 

On  the  21st,  taking  things  as  easily  as  a  thirty- five  mile 
wind  would  permit,  we  pulled  on,  up  and  down  small  undula- 
tions till  4  P.M.  when  we  encountered  a  small  rise,  with  the 
next  ridge  a  considerable  distance  ahead.  The  depot  was  to 
be  built  here. 

Webb  at  once  proceeded  to  take  full  magnetic  declination, 
time  and  azimuth  observations,  Laseron  recording  for  him. 
Murphy  put  in  a  miserable  hour  over  the  primus  melting 
snow.  He  was  rather  snow-blind  and  his  eyes  must  have 
contributed  a  good  deal  of  water  to  the  pot.  The  water 
was  poured  into  food-bags  filled  with  snow,  which  were 
buried,  encircled  by  wire  slings,  in  holes.  Here  they  froze, 
making  excellent  holdfasts  for  the  depot  flag.  Depot  flags 
had  been  exercising  our  ingenuity  for  months  before  the 
start,  ordinary  forms  being  destroyed  by  the  wind  in  a  few 
280 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

hours.  Webb  had  finally  built  the  perfect  flag  of  the  wind- 
vane  type  :  a  V  of  pieces  of  blackened  Venesta  board  with 
light  struts  at  the  back  and  a  piece  of  aeroplane  tubing  at 
the  apex  which  slipped  over  the  bamboo  pole.  The  pole,  of 
two  bamboos,  stood  sixteen  feet  from  the  ground  and  was 
provided  with  two  sets  of  flexible  steel  stays.  Close  by, 
Plurley  and  Hunter  had  built  a  snow  mound  ten  feet  in  dia- 
diameter  and  ten  feet  in  height,  finished  off  with  a  capping 
of  snow  blocks  wrapped  in  black  bunting. 

Next  day  it  was  blowing  a  little  harder  and  the  sky  was 
overcast,  snow  falling  all  day.  What  bad  light  means  can 
be  gathered  from  the  fact  that  Laseron  on  crawling  out  of 
the  tent  in  the  morning  raised  an  alarm  that  our  tent  had 
been  blown  away  in  the  night.  It  turned  out  that  our  tent 
was  hidden  by  a  mound  which  he  could  not  see,  though  only 
about  ten  yards  from  it. 

I  hadbeen  given  the  optionof  relieving  the  supporting  party 
of  any  of  their  gear  I  coveted  and  I  used  it  freely.  The  sledge- 
meter  was  the  first  thing  commandeered,  ours,  made  by 
Correll,  having  developed  some  slight  complaint  in  its 
interior.  Their  cooker,  being  in  good  condition,  was  also 
taken.  We  all  cast  longing  eyes  at  the  roomy  wind-proof 
tent  but  finally  decided  that  it  was  too  heavy — forty  pounds 
as  against  our  own  of  twenty-six  pounds,  including  tent  and 
poles. 

At  7  P.M.  we  said  good-bye  to  our  supporters.  Hurley 
exposed  the  last  plate  of  his  big  reflex  camera,  which  they 
carried  back  to  the  Hut,  and  a  few  minutes  later  Webb, 
Hurley,  and  I  were  standing  alone  watching  three  black 
specks  disappearing  in  the  drift ;  a  stiff  wind  helping  them 
along  in  great  style.  We  were  left  to  our  own  resources 
now,  for  better  or  for  worse.  "  Weird  "  is  how  I  described 
my  feelings  in  the  diary. 

The  same  night  it  blew  a  hurricane  and  only  dropped 
to  sixty  miles  per  hour  during  the  23rd,  compelling  us  to 
remain  in  camp.  Not  an  ideal  birthday  for  Webb,  but  we 
made  the  most  of  it.     I  quote  from  my  diary  :    "  Turned 

281 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

out  and  rolled  bags  at  3  p.m.  for  lunch,  for  which  we  opened 
a  wee  tin  of  bacon  ration  brought  for  the  occasion.  Had 
some  extra  lumps  of  sugar  (collared  from  the  eleven-mile 
cave)  in  our  tea.  After  the  wine  had  been  round  {i.e.  after 
a  special  second  cup  of  tea),  I  gave  Eric  a  pair  of  stockings 
from  Murphy,  and  then  '  Hoyle  '  and  I  smoked  a  cigar  each 
which  Webb  produced.  Dinner  at  7  was  also  a  special 
affair  as  we  had  the  remains  of  the  bacon  ration  in  the  hoosh, 
with  great  effect.  Also  an  extra  strong  brew  of  cocoa 
boiled  quite  smooth.  Burberry s  on  and  a  stroll  outside 
in  the  wind  for  a  yard  or  two  to  get  up  a  circulation  ;  then 
into  bag  where  I  am  smoking  a  plebeian  pipe  which  is  very 
tame  after  the  glories  of  the  day,  especially  as  I  suspect 
my  tobacco  of  being  a  bit  damp." 

Such  was  the  first  of  the  two  "  auspicious  occasions  " 
we  had  on  the  journey. 

After  going  carefully  through  the  gear,  we  discarded  a 
pickaxe,  one  pair  of  big  spiked  boots  and  some  odd  clothing. 
We  also  decided,  as  the  probability  of  leisure  was  not  great, 
to  leave  our  reading  matter  behind.  It  was  with  regret  that 
I  added  my  little  Virginibus  Puer'isque  to  the  small 
pile  of  "  rejects."  The  load  now  amounted  to  seven  hundred 
and  forty-eight  pounds  in  all.  Not  many  days  after,  the 
floor-cloth  (eight  pounds)  was  left  behind,  as  the  japara  sail 
afforded  ample  protection  from  damp  in  the  low  tempera- 
tures of  the  plateau. 

The  dip-circle,  which  was  to  yield  the  most  important 
result  of  our  journey,  was  housed  after  much  thought  on  a 
conveniently  shaped  kerosene  tray  between  the  tins  of  oil. 
Four  light  leather  straps,  buckled  tightly,  made  a  solid  mass 
of  tray,  oil  tins,  and  dip-circle ;  very  safe,  and  easy  to  undo. 

My  orders  were  to  proceed  inland,  due  south,  taking 
magnetic,  geographical,  meteorological,  and  such  other 
observations  as  were  possible,  returning  to  the  Hut  not  later 
than  January  15.  Dr.  Mawson  had  left  it  to  my  discretion, 
in  the  event  of  any  great  change  occurring  in  the  declina- 
tion, to  go  either  true  or  magnetic  south. 
282 


^w 


2^ 


rt  pa 


2j     03 
1-1    f^ 


g- 
ir: 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

At  the  Hut  and  up  to  about  sixty  miles  south  of  it,  the 
dechnation  had  proved  fairly  constant,  but  now  at  the 
Southern  Cross  Depot,  as  we  had  christened  the  sixty-seven- 
mile  camp,  the  compass,  from  pointing  a  little  to  the  east 
of  south,  had  travelled  to  40°  east  of  south,  so  that  it  became 
obvious  that  there  was  considerable  magnetic  disturbance 
in  the  country  over  which  we  were  travelling.  Whether  we 
went  south  or  south-east  seemed  unlikely  to  affect  the  value 
of  geographical  and  other  information  we  might  gather, 
while  Webb  was  of  the  opinion  that  the  best  magnetic 
results  would  be  obtained  by  marching  directly  towards 
the  Magnetic  Pole,  particularly  if  there  were  disturbances 
over  the  intervening  area.  For  these  reasons  the  course  Avas 
maintained  magnetic  south. 

At  11  A.M.  on  Sunday,  November  24,  we  moved  off  to  the 
south-east  in  a  wind  of  fifty  miles  an  hour.  The  light  was 
bad,  and  steering  had  to  be  done  by  sastrugi  and  wind. 
However,  momentary  glimpses  of  the  sun  served  to  check 
the  course.  The  lunch  camp  was  five  miles  from  the  depot, 
and  a  good  mound  with  a  top  of  black  bunting  was  left 
there.  At  almost  every  halt,  thus  far  on  our  journey,  the 
snow  cut  for  pitching  the  tent  had  been  gathered  up  into  a 
mound  which,  in  addition  to  forming  a  landmark,  could  often 
be  used  as  a  back-mark  for  checking  the  course.  Our  depot 
thus  had  a  mound  four  miles  on  the  southern  and  five 
miles  on  the  northern  side  of  it.  It  was  not  marked  as 
well  as  I  had  hoped,  but  under  the  circumstances  we  could 
not  do  better.  Moreover,  at  intervals  during  the  day,  some 
very  distinctive  snow  ramps  had  appeared  in  the  valley, 
some  five  miles  to  the  north-east,  and  their  position  was 
fixed  relative  to  the  course. 

Our  hopes  for  a  good  afternoon  were  disappointed,  as 
the  wind  and  drift  came  up  again  as  strong  as  ever.  The 
surface,  too,  grew  worse  ;  nothing  but  sastrugi  eighteen 
inches  to  thirty  inches  high  and  very  close  together.  We 
were  marching  a  little  to  the  east  of  the  wind,  and  the 
sledge  was  continually  blown  sideways,  making  considerable 

283 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

leeway.  By  8.30  p.m.  it  was  blowing  sixty  miles  per  hour, 
so  we  halted,  thoroughly  tired  out,  having  hauled  our  one- 
third  of  a  ton  eight  and  three-quarter  miles. 

When  it  is  blowing  hard,  the  end  of  the  day's  march  is 
not  the  end  of  the  day's  work.  As  soon  as  a  camping  spot 
has  been  chosen,  the  sledge  is  pulled  round  head  to  wind. 
The  straps  round  the  load  are  loosened  carefully,  the  shovel 
and  tent  removed  and  the  straps  retightened.  One  man 
starts  breaking  out  chunks  of  snow,  experimenting  until  he 
finds  a  place  where  large  pieces  come  away  readily.  Lumps 
of  forty  pounds  are  the  handiest  and  quickest,  but  often 
only  smaller  ones  can  be  obtained.  These  are  arranged  in  a 
circle  round  the  tent-site,  while  the  man  with  the  tent  places 
it  on  the  ground  pointing  upwind,  the  bottom  of  the  poles 
being  just  where  the  middle  windward  leg  will  be,  and 
makes  a  hole  for  that  leg. 

A'V'lien  everything  is  ready,  all  three  catch  hold  of  the 
tent,  one  man  crawling  half  into  it,  gripping  hard  the  leather 
loop  on  the  windward  leg.  The  others  sort  out  and  grip 
their  two  side  legs.  "  All  ready  ?  Up  !  "  It  almost  takes 
one's  breath  away,  the  roar  and  the  flap  !  The  side  legs  are 
quickly  separated  as  the  tent  rises,  and  before  it  can  blow 
over,  the  leeward  legs  are  more  or  less  in  position,  taking  the 
strain.  The  centre  man  is  throwing  all  his  weight  on  to  the 
leather  loop,  while  the  other  two  outside  each  holds  down 
his  windward  pole  with  one  hand  and  with  the  other  pulls 
blocks  of  snow  on  to  the  skirt  to  windward.  Once  this  is 
done,  the  rest  is  simple  :  cutting  holes  in  just  the  right 
positions  for  the  other  legs,  pulling  out  the  skirt  and  making 
it  snug  all  round.  Then  in  goes  the  floor-cloth,  and,  by  the 
time  that  is  spread  out  properly,  the  primus  and  cooker 
are  passed  in.  The  cooker  is  dissected  and  the  two  water 
vessels  passed  out  to  be  filled  with  snow.  The  cook  will  have 
hard  work  to  get  the  primus  started  if  he  does  not  shield  the 
spirit  flame  from  the  wind,  which  blows  through  the  tent,  by 
putting  the  whole  lamp  inside  the  big  cooker  lid. 

In  come  the  pots  filled  with  lumps  of  snow.  The  food- 
284 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

tank  is  placed  just  outside  the  entrance,  and  the  proper 
food-bags  for  the  meal  are  passed  in  to  the  cook,  the  tank 
being  retied  to  keep  out  drift.  The  cooker  will  now  be 
going  at  full  pressure,  and  the  cook  is  ready  to  receive 
the  gear.  Sleeping-bags,  "  computation  bag,"  hypsometer, 
"  meat  block  "  (a  three-inch-square  paper  pad  on  which 
meteorological  notes  were  taken) ;  clothes-bag  opened, 
three  ditty-bags  passed  in  and  bag  retied  ;  a  final  temperature 
taken  and  aneroid  read  ;  sledge  anchored  securely  by  tow- 
rope  to  the  ice-axe,  and  a  final  look  round  to  see  all  gear  is 
safely  strapped  down  and  snow- tight. 

In  calm  weather,  camping  is  a  very  different  thing.  On 
a  fine  day,  half  an  hour  after  the  halt  would  usually  find  us 
carefully  scraping  the  last  of  the  hoosh  out  of  our  pannikins, 
ready  for  the  cocoa. 

At  the  seventy-six-mile  camp  we  tried  the  experiment  of  a 
break- wind.  The  tent  was  so  small  and  light  that  it  was 
necessary  to  protect  it  in  the  heavy  winds.  Hurley  and  I 
took  about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  to  build  the  first  one, 
but  later  we  improved,  getting  into  the  knack  of  hewing 
snow  with  a  sharp-pointed  shovel. 

That  night  in  bag  I  wrote  :  "  The  result  of  the  break- 
wind  is  that  for  once  we  have  the  wind  bluffed.  It  is 
blowing  seventy-five  miles  per  hour — a  full  hurricane — but 
all  the  viciousness  is  taken  out  of  the  flapping  and  there 
will  be  no  damage  done  to  the  tent  by  morning." 

The  wind  was  too  strong  for  travelling  early  in  the  day 
(November  25).  While  outside  we  suddenly  observed  two 
snow  petrels.  It  was  hard  to  realize  that  they  had  actually 
flown  seventy-six  miles  inland  to  a  height  of  two  thousand 
four  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  I  dashed  inside  for  the  fishing- 
line  ;  Hurley  got  out  the  camera.  They  were  a  beautiful 
sight,  hovering  with  outspread  wings  just  above  the  snow, 
tipping  it  with  their  feet  now  and  then,  to  poise  without  a 
flutter  in  a  sixty-five-mile  gale.  Hurley  secured  a  couple  of 
"  snaps  "  at  the  expense  of  badly  frost-bitten  hands.  Just 
as  I  arrived  with  the  line  hooked  and  baited,  the  birds  flew 

285 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

away  to  the  north-east ;   our  visions  of  fresh  meat  went  with 
them.     The  hne  was  always  ready  after  this. 

Towards  evening  the  wind  dropped  suddenly  to  twenty 
miles  per  hour.  Our  camp  was  stationed  on  the  southern 
side  of  the  large  valley  we  had  entered  on  the  18th,  and  we 
could  identify  the  ridge  crossed  on  that  date,  blue  and  dim, 
forty  miles  away  to  the  north.  To  the  north-east  could  be 
seen  a  distinct  dip  in  the  skyline,  indicating  the  bed  of  the 
valley,  on  whose  northern  side  the  dip  met  the  higher  skyline 
in  a  steep  bluff,  twenty-five  miles  off.  This  bluff  under  the 
glasses  was  of  heavily  crevassed,  blue  ice. 

The  wind  did  not  rise  again  much  imtil  10  p.m.,  when  we 
had  moved  on  seven  and  a  half  miles,  rising  about  three 
hundred  feet  over  several  ridges  and  practically  losing  our 
view  to  the  north. 

A  steady  breeze  on  the  26th,  and,  on  the  whole,  good 
light,  allowed  us  to  make  twelve  miles. 

Each  day,  now,  Webb  took  an  approximate  magnetic 
dip  and  declination  in  the  lee  of  the  break- wind.  This  was 
necessary  in  order  to  get  some  idea  of  local  disturbances. 
Also,  it  gave  us  some  vague  idea  as  to  the  direction  in  which 
lay  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.  For  instance,  at  the  eighty- 
three-and-three-quarter-mile  camp,  the  needle  showed  the 
Pole  to  be  18°  east  of  true  south,  while  at  our  lunch  camp  that 
day,  six  miles  farther  on,  it  was  given  as  50°  east  of  south. 
The  dip  was  so  great  that  our  prismatic  compass  would  not 
set  closer  than  about  15°,  but  the  long  compass  needle  of  the 
dip-circle,  though  of  course  sluggish,  continued  to  give 
excellent  results. 

Under  these  conditions  it  is  obvious  that  the  magnetic 
needle  is  quite  useless  for  steering  purposes.  The  sun  compass 
proved  itself  a  more  than  efficient  substitute.  On  a  snow- 
field  there  is  usually  a  total  absence  of  landmarks  of  any 
kind,  so  the  direction  of  wind,  sastrugi,  or  perhaps  a  low 
cloud  is  found  with  the  sun- compass,  frequently  checked, 
and  the  course  kept  accordingly.  On  camping  we  would 
generally  carefully  note  the  direction  in  which  the  sledge  was 
286 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

left,  in  case  the  next  day  proved  overcast.  Thus  we  would 
march  in  the  morning  by  the  wind's  direction  till  the  sun, 
gleaming  through  the  clouds  for  a  few  moments,  enabled  us 
to  use  the  compass  again. 

Sastrugi,  only  six  inches  high,  seen  on  the  26th,  showed 
the  effects  of  wind-erosion  exquisitely.  In  an  individual  case 
the  windward  end  of  a  sastruga  might  be  completely  under- 
cut for  six  or  nine  inches,  leaving  a  hard  crust,  sometimes 
only  one-eighth  of  an  inch  in  thickness  and  a  couple  of  inches 
wide.  This  would  sag  downwards  under  its  own  weight  in 
a  fine  curve  till  the  tip  rested  on  the  snow  beneath.  It  is 
marvellous  how  such  a  delicate  structure  can  withstand  the 
heavy  wind. 

November  27  proved  a  very  hard  day.  The  wind  kept 
up  sixty  miles  per  hour  all  the  time,  so  that,  after  taking  four 
hours  to  do  four  and  three-quarter  miles,  we  were  all 
thoroughly  exhausted.  It  was  not  a  great  run,  but  the 
century  was  hoisted — one  hundred  and  three-quarter  miles 
by  sledge-meter  ;  altitude  two  thousand  nine  hundred  feet. 
There  was  a  mild  celebration  that  night  over  a  square  of 
butter-scotch  and  half  an  ounce  of  chocolate,  besides  the 
regular  hoosh  and  cocoa. 

Next  day  the  light  was  very  bad  and  the  wind  fifty  miles 
per  hour.  Observations  were  therefore  made  inside  the 
tent.  Webb,  Hurley  and  the  instrument  occupied  all 
available  space,  while  I  spent  three  hours  digging  a  shaft 
eight  feet  deep  in  the  snow,  taking  temperatures  every  foot. 
It  appeared  that  the  mean  annual  temperature  of  the  snow 
was  approximately  -  16°  F. 

The  dip  was  88°  54' ;  certainly  rather  too  large  a  rise 
from  88°  20'  of  twenty  miles  back.  The  declination  had 
actually  changed  about  80°  in  the  last  ten  miles.  This 
one-hundred-mile  station  was  badly  disturbed.  From  the 
evidence,  it  is  possible  that  a  subsidiary  "pole  "  or  area  of 
almost  vertical  dip  may  exist  close  by  this  spot  to  the  west 
or  south-west. 

Going  straight  up  wind  into  a  "  blow  "  which  varied  from 

287 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

forty  to  fifty  miles  per  hour,  we  were  able  to  make  eight 
miles  after  the  previous  day's  rest.  At  lunch  a  hole  was 
dug  five  feet  square  and  two  feet  deep.  It  served  three 
purposes.  First,  it  gave  a  good  shelter  for  a  longitude 
observation ;  secondly,  with  the  mast,  yard  and  floor- 
cloth we  converted  it  into  a  shelter  snug  enough  to  house 
the  primus  and  to  lunch  comfortably  ;  and  thirdly,  a  mound 
was  left  as  a  back-mark  which  was  picked  up  on  the  return 
journey. 

By  experience  we  found  that  a  warm  lunch  and  a  rest 
enabled  one  to  "  peg  "  along  a  good  deal  farther  than 
would  otherwise  be  possible. 

The  "  scenery  "  in  the  afternoon  became  if  possible  more 
desolate — very  few  new  sastrugi,  the  surface  appearing 
generally  old  and  pitted.  In  some  places  it  was  rotten  and 
blown  away,  disclosing  coarse  granulated  substrata.  At  the  top 
of  one  ridge  the  snow  merged  into  neve  split  into  small 
crevasses,  nine  inches  wide  and  four  or  five  yards  apart. 
The  camp  was  pitched,  here,  at  11  p.m.  The  latitude  was 
68°  32'  S.,  and  we  saw  the  midnight  sun  for  the  first  time  that 
summer,  about  one-quarter  of  its  rim  remaining  above  the 
horizon. 

A  full  hurricane  came  up  and  kept  between  fifty  and 
sixty  miles  per  hour  all  day  on  the  30th.  Before  moving  off, 
Webb  found  that  the  magnetic  needle  had  "  waltzed " 
back  60°  since  the  one-hundred-mile  camp,  now  pointing  30° 
east  of  south.  Still,  to  allow  the  needle  to  make  up  its  mind, 
we  steered  into  the  wind  at  2  p.m.,  losing  the  neve  and 
meeting  very  rough  country.  By  6  p.m.,  with  four  miles  to 
our  credit,  we  were  nearly  played  out.  It  was  being  dis- 
cussed whether  we  should  go  on  when  the  discovery  was 
made  that  the  theodolite  legs  were  missing ;  probably 
having  slipped  out  in  one  of  the  numerous  capsizes  of  the 
sledge. 

The  solemn  rites  of  "  shut-eye  "  determined  that  Webb 
was  to  stay  and  make  camp  while  Hurley  and  I  retraced  our 
steps.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to  follow  the  trail,  for  on 
288 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

hard  snow  the  sledge  runners  leave  no  mark,  and  we  had  to 
watch  for  the  holes  of  the  crampon  spikes.  About  two 
and  a  half  miles  back,  the  legs  were  found,  and  there  only 
remained  a  hard  "  plug  "  against  the  wind  to  camp  and  hoosh. 

WTiile  we  were  lying  half-toggled  into  the  sleeping-bags, 
writing  our  diaries.  Hurley  spent  some  time  alternately 
imprecating  the  wind  and  invoking  it  for  a  calm  next  day. 
As  he  said,  once  behind  a  break-wind  one  could  safely  defy 
it,  but  on  the  march  one  is  much  more  humble. 

Whether  it  was  in  honour  of  Queen  Alexandra's  birth- 
day, or  whether  Hurley's  pious  efforts  of  the  evening  before 
had  taken  effect,  December  1  turned  out  a  good  day.  By 
noon,  the  wind  had  dropped  sufficiently  for  us  to  hoist  the 
Jack  and  Commonwealth  Ensign  for  the  occasion. 

After  four  miles  of  battling,  there  came  into  sight  a 
distinct  ridge,  ten  miles  to  the  west  and  south — quite  the 
most  definitely  rising  ground  observed  since  leaving  the 
coast.  In  one  place  was  a  patch  of  immense  crevasses,  easily 
visible  to  the  naked  eye  ;  in  another,  due  south,  were  black 
shadows,  and  towards  these  the  course  was  pointed. 

At  a  point  more  than  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  miles 
from  the  sea,  a  skua  gull  paid  an  afternoon  call,  alighting 
a  few  yards  from  the  track.  I  immediately  commenced  to 
stalk  it  with  a  fishing-line,  this  time  all  ready  and  baited 
with  pemmican.  However,  it  was  quite  contemptuous, 
flying  off  to  the  south- south-east  as  far  as  we  could  follow 
it.     Was  it  taking  a  short  cut  to  the  Ross  Sea  ? 

December  2  saw  us  through  "  Dead-Beat  Gully  "  to  a 
rise,  in  sight  of  the  shadows  towards  which  we  had  been 
steering.  Two  miles  away  they  appeared  like  the  edge  of 
the  moon  seen  through  a  large  telescope.  The  shadows 
were  due  to  large  mounds  of  snow  on  the  south  side  of  a 
steep  escarpment.  Three  main  prominences  were  cross- 
connected  with  regular  lines  of  hillocks,  giving  the  impres- 
sion of  a  subdivided  town-site.  The  low  evening  sun  threw 
everything  up  in  the  most  wonderful  relief. 

On  the  morning  of  the  3rd  we  were  in  a  valley  running 
VOL.  I  T  289 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

west-north-west  and  east- south- east.  The  southern  side 
rose  steeply  and  from  it  projected  three  large  mounds,  about 
two  hundred  feet  from  the  bottom  of  the  valley,  into  which 
they  fell  just  like  taihngs-heaps  from  a  mine.  They  were 
christened  "  The  Nodules." 

Going  due  south  uphill  over  neve  we  found  ourselves 
in  a  regular  network  of  crevasses.  They  were  about  ten 
feet  wide  and  well  bridged.  Most  noticeable  were  "  hedges  " 
of  ice  up  to  six  feet  in  height  on  either  side  of  the  crevasses 
which  ran  southward.  It  was  now  nearly  calm  and  in  every 
crack  and  chink  in  the  snow-bridges  beautiful  fern-like 
ice-crystals  were  seen.  These  must  have  been  just  forming, 
as  a  very  light  puff  of  wind  was  seen  to  destroy  many  of 
them. 

We  spent  three  hours  exploring  the  locality.  On  nearing 
the  top  of  the  ridge,  roped  together,  we  found  that  the 
crevasses  were  becoming  much  wider,  while  the  "  hedges  " 
were  disappearing.  The  centre  "  nodule  "  was  found  to  be 
immediately  north  or  to  the  leeward  of  the  intersection  of  two 
crevasses,  each  about  forty  feet  wide.  The  bridge  of  one 
crevasse  had  dropped  some  thirty  feet  for  a  length  of  eighty 
yards.  Doubtless,  an  eddy  from  this  hole  accounts  for  the 
deposit  of  snow  and,  by  accretions,  for  the  erection  of  the 
nodule.  Webb  went  down  at  the  end  of  the  alpine  rope  and 
found  the  bridge  below  quite  solid. 

For  about  half  a  mile  the  summit  of  the  slope  was  prac- 
tically level,  three  hundred  feet  above  the  bed  of  the  valley. 
The  surface  was  still  of  neve,  intersected  by  canals  forty, 
six:ty  and  eighty  feet  wide,  in  which  the  snow-bridge  was 
generally  four  or  five  feet  from  the  brink. 

On  the  south-west  horizon,  perhaps  twenty  miles  away, 
was  a  salient  crest  streaked  by  three  dark  vertical  bars  ; 
evidently  another  crevassed  area. 

Returning  to  the  sledge,  we  toggled-on  and  worked  it  up 
over  the  top  of  the  ridge,  much  regretting  that  time  would 
not  allow  us  to  examine  the  other  two  large  "  nodules." 
Hurley  was  in  the  lead,  lengthening  his  line  by  thirty  feet  of 
290 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

alpine  rope,  but  even  then  all  three  of  us  and  the  sledge  were 
often  on  the  lid  of  a  crevasse.  Luckily,  the  lids  were  fairly 
sound,  and  none  of  us  went  in  beyond  the  waist.  Finally, 
the  trail  emerged  on  to  ordinary  sastrugi  once  more,  where 
a  halt  was  made  for  lunch.  We  were  all  glad  to  have  seen 
the  place,  but  I  think  none  of  us  has  any  wish  to  see 
another  like  it. 

That  night,  after  following  the  magnetic  needle  towards 
the  south-east,  we  were  fairly  on  the  plateau  at  one  hundred 
and  forty  miles,  with  an  altitude  of  four  thousand  four 
hundred  feet.  The  dip,  however,  had  steadily  decreased, 
standing  now  at  88°  30".  There  was  some  consolation  in  the 
hope  that  a  big,  sudden  rise  was  stored  up  for  us  somewhere 
along  the  way  ahead. 

December  4  and  5  were  fine  days,  giving  only  twenty-two 
miles,  as  we  met  with  a  rough  surface ;  a  large  quantity  of 
very  hard,  razor-backed  sastrugi,  generally  about  two  feet 
high,  like  groined  vaulting  inverted,  on  a  small  scale.  Sledge 
and  sledge-meter  both  had  a  very  rough  passage.  The 
sledge,  for  instance,  balances  itself  on  the  top  of  a  sastruga 
for  a  moment,  with  an  ominous  bend  in  the  runners,  crashes 
down  the  slope  and  jams  its  bow  into  the  next  one,  from 
which  it  has  to  be  lifted  clear. 

During  this  run  the  needle  again  misbehaved  itself, 
changing  its  direction  some  85°  in  ten  miles,  but  by  the 
night  of  the  5th  we  were  getting  past  the  disturbed  locality 
and  the  dip  had  increased  considerably. 

For  the  first  time  on  the  trip  the  wind  veered  round 
to  the  south-east.  Snow  had  fallen  overnight  (December  5) 
and  had  drifted  in  long  ramps  diagonally  across  the  sastrugi. 
In  two  and  a  half  hours  we  covered  two  and  a  quarter  miles, 
blindly  blundering  in  an  uncertain  light  among  crests  and 
troughs  and  through  piles  of  soft,  new  snow.  Then  we 
stopped ;  Webb  filling  in  the  afternoon  with  a  full  set  of  dip 
observations. 

That  night  the  break- wind  played  its  one  possible  trick. 
Waking  on  the  Stb,  we  found  that  the  heavy  snowfall,  with 

291 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

only  a  moderate  wind,  had  drifted  us  up.  Of  course  Hurley 
and  I,  who  slept  on  the  '  outsides,'  had  known  it  most  of  the 
night.  Before  we  could  extricate  ourselves  from  the  bags 
Webb  had  to  turn  out  from  the  middle  to  dig  away  the  drift 
which  was  weighing  down  the  walls  of  the  tent  on  top  of  us. 

It  was  hopeless  weather  for  travelling.  In  the  after- 
noon a  snow  cave  was  dug,  seven  feet  deep  and  enlarged  to 
seven  feet  square  at  the  bottom.  The  whole  was  covered 
with  mast,  yard  and  sail.  It  was  very  snug  from  the  outward 
aspect,  but  we  soon  found  that  there  were  two  objections 
to  the  "  Sarcophagus,"  as  it  was  named.  There  was  very 
little  light  except  a  ghastly  blue  half-tone  filtering  through 
the  snow,  and  the  place  was  not  over  warm,  surrounded  by 
walls  at  a  much  lower  temperature  than  that  of  the  surface. 

Webb  commenced  a  declination  "  quick-run,"  consisting 
of  half-hourly  observations  of  the  direction  in  which  the 
compass  was  pointing.  In  ordinary  latitudes,  during  the 
day,  the  compass  needle  moves  over  a  few  minutes  of  arc, 
but  here,  being  so  close  to  the  Magnetic  Pole,  its  movement 
is  greatly  magnified,  the  range  being  about  5°  on  this  occasion. 
Webb  carried  on  readings  till  midnight,  and  at  4  a.m., 
December  9,  I  turned  out,  being  reUeved  at  8  a.m.  by 
Hurley,  who  carried  on  until  the  twenty-four  hours  were  com- 
pleted. This  observation  should  be  especially  valuable 
when  it  is  compared  with  continuous  magnetic  records 
obtained  at  the  same  time  at  Winter  Quarters  and  by  the 
Scott  expedition  at  McMurdo  Sound. 

It  was  not  till  1.30  p.m.  on  December  10  that  the  sixty- 
mile  wind  had  subsided  sufficiently  for  us  to  get  away. 
Every  yard  of  our  quota  of  seven  miles  was  hard  going.  A 
fine  example  of  a  typical  old  sastruga  was  passed  on  the  way. 
In  order  to  secure  a  photograph  of  it.  Hurley  had  to  waste 
eighteen  films  before  he  could  persuade  one  to  pull  into  place 
correctly.  The  film-packs  had  been  carefully  kept  in  an  air- 
tight tin,  but  the  cold  was  too  much  for  them.  The  tags 
which  should  pull  each  film  round  from  the  back  to  the 
front  of  the  pack  usually  tore  away  with  a  small  piece  of  film. 
292 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

In  fact,  out  of  one  hundred  and  twenty  films  only  forty-five 
exposures  were  made. 

On  the  11th  a  good  deal  of  "  piecrust  "  cut  down  the 
day's  march  to  eight  and  a  half  miles.  Sledge  runners  are 
usually  supported  by  this  surface,  but  one's  feet  break 
through  in  a  most  annoying  and  tiring  manner.  The  drift 
eased  off  for  a  few  hours  and  we  managed  to  dry  some  of  our 
gear.  At  the  Sarcophagus,  things  which  had  all  been  wet 
enough  before  became  saturated  with  drift  which  turned  to 
ice.  Felt  mitts  are  perhaps  the  worst  in  this  respect,  and 
it  is  no  exaggeration  to  say  that  you  could  easily  brain  a  man 
with  one  after  it  had  been  worn  in  drift  for  a  couple  of  days. 

That  night  I  decided  that  one  more  day  must  see  us  at 
our  depot.  Allowing  three  days'  grace  for  contingencies, 
there  were  thirty-one  days  for  us  to  attain  our  farthest 
southerly  point  and  back  to  the  Hut. 

On  the  12th  we  planned  to  reach  a  spot  for  the  depot,  two 
hundred  miles  out,  and  by  11.30  p.m.  came  on  a  fine  site  at 
one  hundred  and  ninety-nine  and  three-quarter  miles ;  altitude 
four  thousand  eight  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  latitude  69°  33-1" 
south  ;  longitude  140°  20'  east.  Everything  possible  was 
left  behind,  the  sledge-decking  being  even  cut  away,  until 
only  three  hght  bamboo  slats  remained.  A  pile,  including 
ten  days'  food  and  one  gallon  of  kerosene,  was  placed  on  a 
small  mound  to  prevent  it  being  drifted  over.  A  few  yards 
distant  rose  a  solid  nine-foot  cairn  surmounted  by  a  black 
canvas-and-wire  flag,  six  feet  higher,  well  stayed  with  steel 
wire. 

I  took  on  food  for  seventeen  days,  three  days  more  than 
I  intended  to  be  out,  partly  so  that  we  could  keep  on  longer 
if  we  found  we  could  make  very  fast  time,  and  also  as  a  safe- 
guard against  thick  weather  when  returning  to  the  depot. 

Late  in  the  evening  we  set  off  against  a  stiff  breeze.  The 
sledge  ran  lightly  for  three  and  a  half  miles,  and  we  camped. 
The  depot  showed  up  well  in  the  north-west  as  a  bright 
golden  spot  in  the  low  midnight  sun. 

Next   day  the  piecrust  was   so  bad  that,   despite  the 

293 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

lessened  load,  we  only  covered  twelve  miles.  The  surface 
was  smoothly  polished,  and  we  either  crashed  through  it 
from  four  inches  to  a  foot  or  else  slipped  and  came  down 
heavily  on  knees,  elbow,  or  head.  New  fmnesko  were 
largely  responsible  for  such  an  accident. 

At  11  P.M.  a  remarkable  ramp,  five  chains  long,  was 
passed.  On  its  windward  side  was  a  tangled  cluster  of 
large  sastrugi.  They  made  one  imagine  that  the  wind, 
infuriated  at  finding  a  block  of  snow  impeding  its  progress, 
had  run  amok  with  a  giant  gouge,  endeavouring  to  pare  it 
down.  Every  now  and  then,  the  gouge,  missing  its  aim,  had 
taken  great  lateral  scoops  from  the  surface,  leaving  trenches 
two  and  three  feet  deep. 

In  bags  that  night  we  had  a  talk  (not  the  first  by  any 
means)  over  our  prospects.  Up  to  the  one  hundred-and- 
seventy -four-mile  camp,  four  hundred  miles  seemed  dimly 
possible,  but  now  we  saw  we  would  be  lucky  to  reach  three 
hundred  miles.  Moreover,  the  dip  at  this  spot  was  89°  11', 
practically  what  it  had  been  ever  since  one  hundred  and  fifty 
miles.  Sixty- five  miles  for  nothing  !  How  far  for  the  other 
forty-nine  minutes  which  were  needed  for  a  vertical  dip  and 
the  South  Magnetic  Pole  ?  This  problem  was  insoluble,  so 
each  toggled  himself  into  his  bag  in  a  rather  depressed  state 
of  mind. 

December  16  was  a  glorious  day  ;  only  a  fifteen-mile  wind, 
and  for  ten  miles  an  improved  surface.  There  was  no  drift, 
consequently  opportunity  was  taken  to  turn  the  sleep- 
ing bags  inside  out.  They  needed  it,  too.  The  upper  parts 
were  not  so  bad  as  they  had  been  propped  open  occasion- 
ally, but  the  lower  halves  were  coated  with  solid  ice. 
For  the  first  time  for  weeks  we  did  not  wear  burberrys, 
as  the  weather  was  so  warm.  Fourteen  miles  was  the  total 
work,  the  previous  day's  being  twelve. 

All  three  of  us  were  having  trouble  with  snow-blindness  ; 
the  "  zinc  and  cocaine  "  tabloids  being  in  great  demand. 

Latitude  70°  south  was  passed  on  the  17th  and  we  were 
another  fourteen  miles  to  the  good.  The  dip  was  on  the 
294 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

increase — 89°  25'  and  the  declination  swung  to  40°  east  of 
the  magnetic  meridian.  At  two  hundred  and  fifty-six  miles 
the  altitude  was  five  thousand  five  hundred  feet. 

The  temperature  was  getting  lower ;  the  minimum 
being  -21°  F.  on  the  night  of  the  17th,  rising  to  a  maximum 
of  3°  F.  on  the  following  day. 

There  was  dead  calm  and  a  regular  heat  wave  on  De- 
cember 19.  As  the  sun  rose  higher  and  higher,  the  tent 
became  absolutely  oppressive.  The  rime  coating  the  walls 
inside  thawed  and  water  actually  trickled  into  our  finnesko. 
Usually  we  awoke  to  find  them  frozen  hard,  just  as  we  had 
shaped  them  on  the  previous  night,  but  on  this  particular 
morning  they  were  pathetically  limp  and  wet.  The  tem- 
perature inside  the  tent  was  66°  F.,  heated,  of  course,  by  the 
sun's  rays  which  raised  our  black  bulb  thermometer  to  105°  F. 
We  were  not  used  to  this  sort  of  thing  and  struggled  out 
hurriedly  for  a  breath  of  fresh  air. 

Once  into  harness,  we  began  to  feel  the  effects  of  exer- 
tion. By  degrees  we  got  rid  of  our  clothing,  but  unfortunately 
soon  came  to  bedrock  in  tJiat  respect,  as  the  underclothing 
was  sewn  on  and  immovable.  At  lunch  time,  with  the 
thermometer  at  -  2°  F.  in  the  shade,  we  reluctantly  dressed 
knowing  how  soon  we  would  cool  off.  About  9  p.m.  clouds 
moved  over  rapidly  from  the  south-east  and  the  landscape 
faded  into  the  blank,  shadowless  nothing  of  an  overcast  day. 
The  camp  was  pitched  at  two  hundred  and  eighty-three 
miles  amidst  a  jumble  of  ramps  and  sastrugi.  The  dip  had 
seen  fit  to  rise  to  89°  35'. 

In  the  morning  the  wind  was  doing  thirty  miles  per  hour, 
which  certainly  seemed  to  be  the  normal  thing.  It  fell  to  a 
nice  sailing  breeze,  but,  at  the  time,  we  were  not  very 
appreciative  of  anything  as  the  course  was  uphill.  Again, 
it  was  to  be  the  last  day's  run,  so  we  were  "  all  out  "  when 
the  halt  came  after  a  good  fifteen  miles— the  longest  day's 
march  on  the  outward  journey.  Nevertheless,  Webb  un- 
packed the  theodolite  after  hoosh  and  took  an  altitude  of 
the  sun  at  midnight. 

295 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

On  December  21  the  load  on  the  sledge  was  stripped 
down  to  tent,  dip-ch'cle,  theodolite,  cooker  and  a  little  food. 
For  two  and  a  half  miles  we  went  south-east  over  rising 
ground  until  the  sledge-meter  showed  three  hundred  and 
one  miles. 

While  Hurley  and  I  pitched  the  tent,  Webb  built  a  break- 
wind  for  his  instrument  fifty  yards  away.  Then  followed  a 
long  set  of  magnetic  observations.  About  5  p.m.  the  mag- 
netic work  was  interrupted ;  the  theodolite  replacing  the 
dip-circle  on  the  legs,  while  I  took  a  longitude  shot.  I  was 
seeing  double,  being  slightly  snow-blind,  and  had  some  diffi- 
culty in  choosing  the  correct  combination  from  the  assort- 
ment of  suns  and  cross-wires  visible  in  the  telescope.  Setting 
the  vertical  and  horizontal  wires  simultaneously  on  the  sun 
was  beyond  me  ;  Webb  taking  the  observations  for  the  true 
meridian,  which  also  checked  my  longitude  shot. 

Magnetic  work  under  these  conditions  is  an  extremely 
uncomfortable  operation.  Even  a  light  wind  will  eddy 
round  the  break- wind,  and  it  is  wind  which  makes  low  tem- 
peratures formidable.  Nearly  all  the  work  has  to  be  done 
with  bare  fingers  or  thin  instrument -gloves,  and  the  time 
taken  is  far  greater  than  in  temperate  climates,  owing  to  the 
fingers  constantly  "  going  "  and  because  of  the  necessity  of 
continually  freeing  the  instrument  from  the  condensed 
moisture  of  the  breath.  Considering  that  the  temperature  was 
- 12°  F.  when  he  had  finished  his  four  hours'  work,  it  maybe 
imagined  that  Webb  was  ready  for  his  hot  tea.  The  dip  proved 
to  be  89°  43-5',  that  is,  sixteen  and  a  half  minutes  from  the  ver- 
tical. The  altitude  was  just  over  five  thousand  nine  hundred 
feet,  in  latitude  70°  36*5'  south  and  longitude  148°  10'  east. 

After  lunch  the  Union  Jack  and  the  Commonwealth 
Ensign  were  hoisted  and  three  cheers  given  for  the  King- 
willing  but  rather  lonesome  away  out  there  !  We  searched 
the  horizon  with  glasses  but  could  see  nothing  save  snow, 
undulatmg  in  endless  sastrugi.  To  the  south-east  the 
horizon  was  limited  by  our  old  enemy,  "  the  next  ridge," 
some  two  miles  away.  We  wondered  what  could  be  beyond, 
296 


w  *r" 


111  I 


■T.     C 


^^'"^^I 


SASTRUGI  FURROWED  BY  THE  MIGHTY   ^VI^fDS  OF  THE  PLATEAU 
250  MILES  S.S.E.  OF  WINTER  QUARTERS,  ADELIE  LAND 


Kituj  George  V  L/ind  Htirh-j 

UNDER  REEFED  SAIL.     SOUTHERN  PAI'.TY  itlo  MILES  S.S.E.  OF  WINTER 

QUARTERS,  ADELIE  LAND 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

although  we  knew  it  was  only  the  same  featureless  repetition, 
since  one  hundred  and  seventy- five  miles  on  the  same  course 
would  bring  us  to  the  spot  where  David,  Mawson  and  Mackay 
had  stood  in  1909. 

After  Hurley  had  taken  a  photograph  of  the  camp,  the 
tent  was  struck  and  the  sledge  repacked.  At  last  the  sail 
was  rigged,  we  gave  a  final  glance  back  and  turned  on  the 
homeward  trail. 

My  diary  of  that  night  sums  up  :  "  We  have  now  been 
exactly  six  weeks  on  the  tramp  and  somehow  feel  rather  sad 
at  turning  back,  even  though  it  has  not  been  quite  a  Sunday 
school  picnic  all  along.  It  is  a  great  disappointment  not  to 
see  a  dip  of  90°,  but  the  time  is  too  short  with  this  '  climate.' 
It  was  higher  than  we  expected  to  get,  after  the  unsatis- 
factory dips  obtained  near  the  two-hundred-mile  depot. 
The  rate  of  increase  since  that  spot  has  been  fairly  uniform 
and  indicates  that  90°  might  be  reached  in  another  fifty  to 
sixty  miles,  if  the  same  rate  held,  and  that  means  at  least 
another  week.  It's  no  good  thinking  about  it  for  '  orders 
are  orders.'  We'll  have  our  work  cut  out  to  get  back  as  it 
is.  Twenty-five  days  till  we  are  overdue.  Certainly  we  have 
twenty-three  days'  food,  eight  days'  with  us,  ten  days'  at 
two  hundred  miles,  and  five  days'  at  sixty-seven  miles,  so 
with  luck  we 'should  not  go  hungry,  but  Webb  wants  to  get 
five  more  full  sets  of  dips  if  possible  on  the  way  back,  and 
this  means  two  and  a  half  days." 

That  night  the  minimum  thermometer  registered  its 
lowest  at  —25°  F.  It  was  December  21  and  Midsummer 
Day,  so  we  concluded  that  the  spot  would  be  a  very  chilly 
one  in  the  winter. 

At  this  juncture  we  were  very  short  of  finnesko.  The 
new  ones  we  had  worn  since  the  two-hundred-mile  camp 
had  moulted  badly  and  were  now  almost  "  bald."  The 
stitching  wears  through  as  soon  as  the  hair  comes  off  and 
frequent  mending  is  necessary. 

We  rose  earlier  than  usual  on  the  22nd,  so  as  to  get 
more  advantage  from  the  wind,  which  each  evening  had 

297 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

always  tended  to  die  down  somewhat.  With  forty-two 
square  feet  of  sail,  the  twenty-mile  wind  was  too  much  for 
us,  the  sledge  capsizing  on  the  smallest  pretext.  Instead 
of  hanging  the  yard  from  the  top  of  the  mast,  we  placed  it 
across  the  load,  reversing  the  sail  and  hooking  the  clews 
over  the  top  of  the  mast.  Three  or  four  pieces  of  lampwick 
at  intervals  served  as  reefing- points  by  which  the  area  of 
the  sail  could  be  quickly  cut  down  by  bunching  the  upper 
part  as  much  as  was  necessary. 

During  the  day  we  frequently  saw  our  tracks  in  patches 
of  snow  left  during  a  previous  snowfall,  but  they  were  much 
eroded,  although  only  three  days  old.  After  sledging  in 
Adelie  Land  it  is  hard  to  realize  that  on  certain  parts  of  the 
Ross  Barrier  tracks  a  year  old  may  remain  visible. 

After  passing  the  two-hundred-and-eighty-three-mile 
mound,  the  sledge-meter  became  very  sickly.  Spoke  after 
spoke  had  parted  and  we  saw  that  nothing  we  could  do 
would  make  it  last  very  much  longer.  As  we  intended  in 
one  place  to  make  a  cross-country  run  of  seventy  miles,  so  as  to 
cut  off  the  detour  to  the  "  Nodules,"  the  meter  was  carried 
on  the  sledge.  We  had  now  the  mounds  to  check 
distances. 

On  December  23  we  were  lucky  enough  to  catch  sight 
of  the  two-hundred-and-sixty-nine-mile  mound  and  later 
the  one  at  two  hundred  and  sixty-one  miles,  though  there 
was  a  good  deal  of  drift.  The  day's  run  was  twenty  and  a 
half  miles. 

A  thing  which  helped  us  unexpectedly  was  that,  now 
with  the  wind  behind,  we  found  it  unnecessary  to  wear 
the  stiff,  heavy,  frozen,  burberry  trousers.  Thick  pyjama 
trousers  took  their  place  in  all  except  the  worst  weather. 

At  our  old  two-hundred-and-forty-nine-mile  camp, 
Webb  took  a  complete  set  of  magnetic  observations  and 
another  time-shot  for  watch-rate.  It  was  late  when  these 
were  over,  so  we  did  only  two  and  a  half  miles  more,  halting 
for  Christmas  Eve,  well  content  with  a  run  of  fourteen  miles 
in  addition  to  a  set  of  observations. 
298 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

On  Christmas  Day  the  country  was  very  rough,  making 
saiHng  difficult.  Still,  eighteen  and  a  half  miles  were  left 
behind.  The  wind  was  practically  along  the  sastrugi  and 
the  course  was  diagonal  to  both.  As  the  sledge  strikes  each 
sastruga,  it  skids  northwards  along  it  to  the  discomfort  of 
the  wheelers  and  the  disgust  of  the  leader. 

For  Christmas  dinner  that  night  we  had  to  content 
ourselves  with  revising  the  menu  for  the  meal  which  was  to 
celebrate  the  two-hundred-mile  depot.  But  now  it  was  all 
pretty  well  mapped  out,  having  been  matured  in  its  finer 
details  for  several  days  on  the  march.  Hors  d'oeuvre, 
soup,  meat,  pudding,  sweets  and  wine  were  all  designed, 
and  estimates  were  out.  Would  we  pick  up  the  depot  soon 
enough  to  justify  an  "  auspicious  occasion  "  ? 

Next  day  the  wind  was  due  south  at  thirty  miles  per 
hour.  Dodging  big  ramps  and  overturning  on  sastrugi,  at 
the  same  time  dragging  well  upwind  of  the  course  to  save 
leeway,  twelve  miles  went  by  without  the  two-hundred-and- 
fifteen-mile  mound  coming  into  sight.  Finally,  a  search  with 
the  glasses  through  falling  snow  revealed  it  a  good  two  miles 
back.  As  we  particularly  wanted  some  photos  of  the 
ramps  at  this  camp,  we  made  across  to  it  and  had  lunch 
there.  Hurley  exposing  the  last  of  the  films. 

At  two  hundred  and  nine  miles  "  Lot's  Wife  "  appeared 
—a  tall,  thin  mound  which  Hurley  had  erected  during  a 
lunch-camp  on  the  way  out. 

On  the  27th,  with  a  thirty-five-mile  wind  and  a  good 
deal  of  drift,  we  did  not  see  the  two-hundred-and-three-mile 
mound  until  we  almost  ran  into  it.  By  three  o'clock  the 
great  event  occurred — ^the  depot  was  found  !  We  deter- 
mined to  hold  the  Christmas  feast.  After  a  cup  of  tea  and 
a  bit  of  biscuit,  the  rest  of  the  lunch  ration  was  put  aside. 

Webb  set  up  his  instrument  in  the  lee  of  the  big  mound  and 
commenced  a  set  of  observations  ;  I  sorted  out  gear  from  the 
depot  and  rearranged  the  sledge  load;  Hurley  was  busy 
in  the  tent  concocting  all  kinds  of  dishes.  As  the  table- 
ware was  limited  to  three  mugs  and  the  Nansen  cooker,  we 

299 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

had  to  come  in  to  deal  with  each  course  the  moment  it  was 
ready.  Aiming  at  a  really  high-class  meal,  Hurley  had 
started  by  actually  cleaning  out  the  cooker. 

The  absence  of  reindeer-hair  and  other  oddments  made 
everything  taste  quite  strange,  though  the  basis  was  still 
the  same  old  ration  with  a  few  remaining  "  perks."  After 
the  "  raisin  gliders,"  soup  and  a  good  stiff  hoosh,  Webb 
finished  his  observations  while  I  recorded  for  him.  It  is 
wonderful  what  sledging  does  for  the  appetite.  For  the 
first  week  of  the  journey,  the  unaccustomed  ration  was  too 
much  for  us  ;  but  now  when  Hurley  announced  "  Pudding  !  " 
we  were  all  still  ravenous.  It  was  a  fine  example  of  ye 
goode  olde  English  plum-pudding,  made  from  biscuit  grated 
with  the  Bonsa-saw,  fat  picked  out  of  the  pemmican,  raisins 
and  glaxo-and-sugar,  all  boiled  in  an  old  food-bag. 

This  pudding  was  so  filling  that  we  could  hardly  struggle 
through  a  savoury,  "  Angels  on  runners,"  and  cocoa.  There 
was  a  general  recovery  when  the  "  wine  "  was  produced, 
made  from  stewed  raisins  and  primus  alcohol;  and  "The 
King  "  was  toasted  with  much  gusto.  At  the  first  sip,  to  say 
the  least,  we  were  disappointed.  The  rule  of  "  no  heel  taps  " 
nearly  settled  us,  and  quite  a  long  interval  and  cigars,  saved 
up  for  the  occasion  by  Webb,  were  necessary  before  we 
could  get  courage  enough  to  drink  to  the  Other  Sledging 
Parties  and  Our  Supporting  Party. 

The  sun  was  low  in  the  south  when,  cigars  out  and  con- 
versation lagging,  we  finally  toggled  in  for  the  finest  sleep  of 
the  whole  journey. 

The  cook,  under  a  doubtful  inspiration,  broke  forth,  later 
on,  into  a  Christmas  Carol : 

I've  dined  in  many  places  but  never  such  as  these — 
It's  Hke  the  Gates  of  Heaven  when  you  find  you've  lost  the  keys. 
I've  dined  with  kings  and  emperors,  perhaps  you  scarce  beheve  ; 
And  even  they  do  funny  things  when  round  comes  Clmstmas  Eve. 
I've  feasted  with  iguanas  on  a  lonely  desert  isle  ; 
Once  in  the  shado  of  a  wattle  by  a  maiden's  winsome  smile. 
I've  "  grubbed  "  at  a  thi'eepenny  hash-house,  I've  been  at  a 
counter-lunch, 
300 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

Reclined  at  a  slap-up  cafe  where  only  the  "  swankers  "  munch. 
In  short,  I've  dined  from  Horn  to  Cape  and  up  Alaska-way 
But  the  finest,  funniest  dinner  of  all  was  on  that  Xmas  Day. 

For  the  first  ten  miles  on  the  afternoon  of  the  28th,  the 
sail  was  reefed  down  to  prevent  the  sledge  overrunning  us 
on  smooth  patches.  Not  far  past  the  one-hundred-and- 
ninety-mile  mound,  which  was  missed  in  the  drift,  we 
picked  up  some  of  the  outward  tracks — a  bas-relief  of 
three  footsteps  and  a  yard  of  sledge-meter  track,  raised  half 
an  inch  and  undercut  by  the  wind.  It  was  not  very  much, 
but  quite  a  comfort  when  one  is  navigating  in  blinding 
weather. 

At  11.30  P.M.  we  had  marched  twenty-one  miles,  and 
both  light  and  surface  were  improving,  so  I  proposed  making 
a  long  run  of  it.  Hurley  and  Webb  eagerly  agreed,  and  we 
had  a  preparatory  hoosh.  Ten  miles  scudded  by  mono- 
tonously without  a  sign  of  the  mounds  around  the  one- 
hundred-and-seventy-mile  camp.  As  we  were  in  the 
vicinity  of  a  point  where  we  had  determined  to  diverge 
from  our  outward  track,  a  course  was  laid  direct  for  the 
one-hundred-and-thirteen-mile  mark.  The  sledge-meter, 
which  had  been  affixed,  made  its  presence  evident  from 
time  to  time  by  ringing  like  a  cash  register,  as  still  another 
broken  spoke  struck  the  forks.  We  would  halt  for 
a  moment  and  extract  the  remains.  Out  of  the  original 
thirty-six  wire  spokes,  only  twelve  wire  and  one  wooden  one 
remained.  At  11.30  a.m.  on  December  29,  a  halt  was 
called  and  the  sledge-meter  was  then  lying  over  on  its  side 
with  a  helpless  expression.  It  indicated  twenty-two  miles, 
making,  so  we  thought,  a  total  of  forty-three  miles  in  the 
twenty-two  and  a  quarter  hours  since  leaving  the  depot. 
Observations  for  position  next  day  proved  that  in  its  dying 
effort  it  exaggerated  the  truth  ;  the  total  run  being  41*6  miles. 

We  were  now  well  ahead  of  schedule  time,  there  being 
four  and  a  half  days'  surplus  food ;  above  what  was  probably 
required  to  reach  the  sixty-seven-and-a-half-mile  depot.  It 
was  decided  to  hold  three  days  of  this  and  to  use  one  and  a 

301 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

half  days'  food  as  a  bonus  during  the  coming  week,  as  long 
as  we  were  ahead  of  our  necessary  distance.  The  sledging 
ration  is  quite  enough  to  live  on,  but  for  the  whole  of  the 
journey  we  had  felt  that  we  could  have  done  more  distance  on 
a  slightly  larger  ration.  This  may  be  partly  explained  by 
our  comparatively  high  altitude. 

Next  morning  the  sledge-meter  was  cut  away  and 
stuck  in  the  snow.  It  looked  very  forlorn  sitting  askew  in  its 
forks,  with  a  pair  of  worn-out  finnesko  hanging  over  it. 

After  twelve  miles  with  a  favourable  wind,  Webb  took 
more  observations ;  Hurley  and  I  recording  by  turns. 
There  were  several  small  holes  in  the  tent  which  needed 
mending,  and  I  experimented  with  adhesive  plaster  from 
the  medical  kit  with  great  success.  Heated  over  a  fusee 
and  pressed  hard  down  between  the  bottoms  of  mugs, 
held  outside  and  inside,  the  patches  adhered  well  and  made 
a  permanent  job. 

Early  on  December  31,  1912,  snow  was  falHng.  The 
light  gave  Hurley  an  attack  of  snow-blindness  and  a  miser- 
able day.  Crampons  were  worn  to  give  some  security  to 
the  foothold  on  the  uneven  track.  The  position,  after  a 
trudge  of  fifteen  miles,  was  estimated  as  five  miles  east  of 
the  one-hundred-and-twenty -three-mile  mound. 

On  New  Year's  Day,  1913,  the  wind  was  fresher  and  the 
surface  improved.  Estimation  placed  us  to  the  north  of  one 
hundred  and  thirteen  miles,  but  we  were  not  hopeful  in  the 
light  falling  snow  of  seeing  a  mound.  Soon,  however,  the 
snow  ceased,  and  Webb  made  out  a  hillock  two  miles  ahead. 
It  was  identified  as  the  one  at  one  hundred  and  nine 
miles. 

It  had  been  my  turn  to  be  snowblind.  I  was  so  bad 
that  the  only  thing  to  do  was  to  camp  or  ride  on  the  sledge. 
The  trail  changed  here  to  straight  downwind,  so  Webb  and 
Hurley  undertook  the  job,  hauling  the  sledge  with  me  as  a 
passenger  for  three  and  a  half  miles  to  the  one -hundred -and - 
five-mile  mound.  It  must  have  been  a  trying  finish  to  a  run 
of  twenty  miles. 
302 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

In  spite  of  the  spell,  which  was  a  sleepless  one,  I  was  no 
better  in  the  morning  and  again  had  to  ride.  The  others 
pulled  away  for  five  miles  with  a  good  helping  wind,  but  in  a 
provoking  light.  The  camp  was  made  where  the  one-hundred- 
mile-mound  was  judged  to  be.  We  spent  longer  than  usual 
over  lunch,  hoping  that  the  clouds  would  clear.  At  last  we 
moved  on,  or  rather,  /  was  moved  on.  After  two  miles  the 
surface  became  heavier.  My  eyes  were  better  now  on 
account  of  the  rest  and  a  snow  "  poultice  "  Webb  had 
invented.  I  harnessed-in  for  five  miles  over  light,  un- 
packed snow,  with  piecrust  underneath.  The  day's  work 
was  twelve  miles. 

The  snow-clouds  broke  at  noon  on  January  3,  and  a 
reliable  latitude  was  obtained.  It  agreed  with  our  reckoning. 
Persevering  over  the  same  trying  surface  as  on  the  previous 
day,  we  sighted  the  ninety-mile-mound  in  the  rear  as  a  rift 
broke  in  the  sky.  We  must  have  passed  a  few  hundred 
yards  from  it. 

We  were  still  eleven  miles  from  the  depot,  so  at  breakfast 
on  the  4th  the  rations  were  reduced  by  one-half  to  give 
plenty  of  time  to  locate  our  goal.  On  the  4th  the  sky  was 
clear,  but  surface  drift  prevented  us  from  seeing  any  mounds 
till,  in  the  afternoon,  the  ramps  near  the  sixty-seven-mile 
depot  were  discovered  in  fitful  glimpses.  They  bore  too 
much  to  the  north,  so  we  altered  the  course  correspondingly 
to  the  west,  camping  in  rising  wind  and  drift,  with  great 
hopes  for  the  morrow. 

A  densely  overcast  sky  on  the  5th  :  light  snow  falling  ! 
We  moved  on  two  miles,  but  not  being  able  to  see  one 
hundred  yards,  camped  again ;  then  walking  as  far  as 
seemed  safe  in  various  directions.  One  could  do  nothing 
but  wait  for  clear  weather.  The  clouds  lightened  at  6  p.m. 
and  again  at  9  p.m.,  when  altitudes  of  the  sun  were  secured, 
which  placed  us  four  miles  south  of  the  depot. 

With  only  one  chronometer  watch,  one  has  to  rely 
entirely  on  dead  reckoning  for  longitude,  the  rate  of  a  single 
watch  being  very  variable.     The  longitude  obtained  on  this 

303 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

occasion  from  our  latest  known  rate  moved  us  several  miles 
to  the  east  of  the  depot,  so  I  concluded  that  our  distances 
since  the  camp  at  ninety  miles  had  been  overestimated,  and 
that  we  were  probably  to  the  south-east  of  it.  Accordingly, 
we  shifted  four  miles  to  the  north-west,  but  by  this  time  it 
had  again  clouded  over  and  nothing  could  be  seen. 

On  the  6th  the  sky  was  still  overcast,  but  a  lucky  peep 
at  noon  aligned  us  on  the  exact  latitude  of  the  depot.  We 
walked  east  and  west,  but  it  snowed  persistently  and  every- 
thing was  invisible. 

It  is  weary  work  waiting  in  the  tent  for  weather  to 
improve.  During  this  time  Hurley  amused  himself  and  us  by 
composing  a  Christmas  carol  on  the  Christmas  dinner  ;  a 
fragment  from  which  has  already  appeared.  I  whiled  away 
a  whole  afternoon,  cutting  vip  the  remains  of  two  cigars 
which  had  refused  to  draw.  Sliced  up  with  a  pair  of 
scissors  and  mixed  with  a  few  of  Hurley's  cigarettes,  they 
made  very  good  smoking  tobacco. 

On  the  7th  the  sky  was  immovable,  and  we  trekked  four 
miles  due  east,  camped  once  more  and  walked  about  without 
finding  our  goal. 

I  now  decided  that  if  the  weather  did  not  improve  by  the 
morning,  we  should  have  to  dash  for  the  north.  It  was  a 
risk,  but  matters  were  coming  to  a  serious  pass.  On  broach- 
ing the  subject  to  Webb  and  Hurley,  they  unconditionally 
agreed  with  me. 

At  3  A.M.  rhe  sky  cleared  rapidly  and  we  turned  out 
and  saw  the  ramps  plainly  to  the  east.  Webb  set  up  the 
theodolite  while  Hurley  and  I  paced  out  a  half-mile  base-line 
to  find  out  the  intervening  distance.  Just  as  we  got  to  the 
end  of  it,  however,  the  clouds  came  over  again  and  the 
ramps  faded. 

There  was  only  one  thing  for  it  now,  and  that  was  to 
make  a  break  for  the  coast.  Of  food,  there  was  one  full 
day's  ration  with  enough  pemmican  for  half  a  hoosh,  six 
lumps  of  sugar  and  nine  raisins,  rather  the  worse  for  wear, 
oil  for  two  days,  and,  last  but  not  least,  a  pint  of  alcohol. 
304 


iriiLEV   IX   SI 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

After  four  days  on  half-rations  we  felt  fairly  fit,  thanks  no 
doubt  to  the  good  meals  of  the  previous  week. 

There  were  sixty-seven  miles  to  go,  and  in  case  we  did 
not  happen  on  the  narrow  descent  to  the  Hut,  the  food  was 
apportioned  to  last  for  five  days.  Everjrthing  unessential 
was  stripped  off  the  sledge,  including  dip-circle,  thermometers, 
hypsometer,  camera,  spare  clothing  and  most  of  the  medical 
and  repair  kits. 

At  7  A.M.  we  set  off  on  the  final  stage  of  the  journey. 
The  sky  was  densely  overcast  and  snow  was  falling,  but 
there  was  a  strong  wind  almost  behind.  We  would  march 
for  an  hour  by  my  wrist-watch,  halt  for  five  minutes  and  on 
again  till  all  agreed  that  we  had  covered  ten  miles  ;  when  it 
was  lunch  time.  Each  man's  share  of  this  consisted  of  one- 
third  of  a  biscuit,  one-third  of  an  ounce  of  butter  and  a 
drink  made  of  a  spoonful  of  glaxo-and-sugar  and  one  of 
absolute  alcohol,  mixed  in  a  mug  of  lukewarm  water.  We 
could  not  afford  oil  enough  to  do  much  more  than  thaw  the 
water,  but  the  alcohol  warmed  us  splendidly,  enabling  us 
to  get  a  good  rest. 

After  an  hour's  spell  we  started  again,  luckily  seeing 
just  enough  of  the  sun  to  check  the  course.  The  wind  grew 
stronger  in  the  afternoon  and  several  times  dense  fog-banks 
drove  down  on  us.  Meeting  one  steep  rise,  we  sidled  round 
it  for  what  seemed  hours,  but  my  chief  memory  of  that 
afternoon  was  of  the  clouds  of  the  northern  horizon.  They 
were  a  deep  bluish-grey  colour — a  typical  "  water-sky"  — 
but  I  have  never  seen  clouds  moving  so  fast.  It  was  like 
trying  to  steer  by  one  particular  phase  in  a  kaleidoscope. 
When  all  were  satisfied  that  twenty  miles  had  been  covered 
we  camped. 

Dinner  consisted  of  a  very  watery  hoosh,  followed  up 
by  a  mug  of  alcohol  and  water.  We  were  all  very  thankful 
for  the  forethought  of  Dr.  Mawson  in  providing  absolute 
alcohol  for  lighting  the  primus,  instead  of  methylated 
spirit. 

Breakfast  on  the  9th  was  of  about  the  same  consistency 
VOL.  I  u  305 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

as  dinner  on  the  night  before,  except  that  cocoa  replaced 
the  alcohol.  In  fact,  breakfast  was  possibly  even  more 
watery,  as  I  was  in  charge  of  the  food-bag  and  surrepti- 
tiously decided  to  make  the  rations  last  six  days  instead  of 
five. 

This  was  the  worst  day's  march  of  the  journey.  The 
wind  was  booming  along  at  sixty  miles  per  hour  with  dense 
drift  and  falling  snow.  What  made  it  worse  was  that  it 
came  from  the  south-east,  forcing  us  to  pull  partly  across  it. 
I  was  the  upwind  wheeler  and  had  to  hitch  on  to  the  side  of 
the  sledge  to  reduce  the  leeway  as  much  as  possible.  The 
sledge  was  being  continually  jammed  into  big,  old,  invisible 
sastrugi  and  we  fell  about  in  the  wind  until  crampons 
became  absolutely  necessary. 

At  4  P.M.  we  were  disgusted  to  find  that  the  wind  had 
veered  to  south-by-east.  So  for  possibly  several  hours  we 
had  been  doing  Heaven  only  knows  how  many  times  the 
amount  of  work  necessary,  and  for  any  time  up  to  four  hours 
might  have  been  marching  three  points  off  our  course. 
Being  blown  straight  downwind,  the  sledge  made  rapid 
progress,  and  about  6  p.m.  a  halt  was  called  for  lunch.  This 
was  over  almost  as  soon  as  it  was  begun,  but  we  had  a  good 
rest,  sheltering  ourselves  with  the  floor-cloth  from  the  wind 
which  blew  through  the  tent. 

Off  again,  we  "  plugged  "  away  until  midnight  when  we 
were  much  surprised  to  find  the  usual  snow  surface  merging 
into  blue  ice.  The  tent  was  pitched  on  the  latter,  snow 
being  procured  from  the  bridge  of  a  crevasse  as  we  had  no 
pick  :  even  the  ice-axe  having  been  left  behind. 

Turning  out  on  the  morning  of  the  10th,  we  were  de- 
lighted to  find  the  sky  clearing  and  the  wind  moderating. 
And  then,  far  away  on  the  northern  horizon  a  beautiful 
line  of  blue  sea  dotted  with  bergs  ! 

We  now  officially  considered  ourselves  to  be  twenty - 
seven  miles  from  the  Hut.  As  we  should  not  have  met  blue 
ice  on  the  proper  course  till  we  were  only  thirteen  miles  out, 
it  was  thought  that  we  had  edged  a  long  way  to  the  east 
306 


THE  SOUTH  MAGNETIC  POLE 

the  day  before.  When  a  start  was  made,  we  manoeuvred 
to  the  west  in  looking  for  a  crossing-place  at  each  crevasse. 

It  was  not  long  before  the  bergs  on  the  horizon  were 
noticeably  enlarging,  and  at  last  we  realized  that  in  reality 
it  was  only  a  few  miles  to  them.  Suddenly  the  grade  in- 
creased, the  ice  becoming  much  lacerated  ;  and  we  had  some 
trouble  getting  the  sledge  along.  Hurley  was  snow-bhnd 
and  had  one  eye  covered.  He  looked  very  comical  feeling 
his  way  over  the  crevasses,  but  he  probably  did  not  feel 
over-humorous. 

I  was  in  the  lead,  and  suddenly  coming  over  a  ridge 
above  a  steep  ice-fall,  I  caught  sight  of  the  Mackellar  Islets 
and  the  old  "  Piano  "  berg.  Just  at  the  same  instant  the 
spur  of  ice  on  which  I  was  standing  collapsed,  and  down  I 
went  into  a  crevasse.  The  others  quickly  had  me  out,  and, 
as  soon  as  I  was  in  the  upper  air,  I  gave  them  the  news  : 
"  There  are  the  Islands  !  "  Being  twenty  feet  farther  back 
on  the  rope  they  had  not  yet  seen  them. 

We  were  now  able  to  place  ourselves  about  three  miles 
west  of  Aladdin's  Cave.  The  last  camp  must  have  been 
thirteen  miles  from  the  Hut,  and  we  had  really  done  twenty- 
seven  miles  each  day  instead  of  our  conservative  twenty. 

We  tried  to  work  along  to  the  east,  but  the  ice  was  too 
much  broken,  so  the  camp  was  made  on  a  patch  of  snow. 
In  view  of  our  good  fortune,  I  produced  that  evening's 
ration  of  hoosh  in  addition  to  our  usual  lunch.  Even  this 
meagre  spree  went  against  Hurley's  feelings,  for,  being 
snow-blind,  he  had  not  been  able  to  see  the  islands  and 
positively  would  not  believe  that  we  were  nearly  home. 

After  lunch  it  was  necessary  to  retrace  our  way  upwind 
to  get  out  of  the  rough  country.  About  midnight,  Webb 
recognized  Aladdin's  Cave.  Hurley  and  I  had  a  competition 
as  to  who  should  see  it  first,  for  I  was  also  getting  a  little 
blind  again.  We  had  a  dead-heat  at  one  hundred  and  fifty 
yards. 

The  first  thing  to  arrest  our  attention  was  a  tin  of  dog 
biscuits.     These  kept  things  going  till  we  dug  out  a  food- 

307 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

tank  from  which  was  rapidly  extracted  a  week's  supply  of 
chocolate.  After  that  we  proceeded  in  a  happier  frame  of 
mind  to  open  up  the  cave  and  have  a  meal. 

The  journey  of  more  than  six  hundred  miles  was  now 
practically  over.  After  a  carousal  lasting  till  5  p.m.  on 
the  11th,  we  went  down  hill,  arriving  just  after  dinner  and 
finding  all  well. 

We  three  had  never  thought  the  Hut  quite  such  a  fine 
place,  nor  have  we  ever  since. 


308 


Adelie  Land  fOJlKELL  0\  THE  EDGE  OF   A  RAVINE   IN  THE   ICE-SHEET 


~  9 


CHAPTER  XV 
EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

By  C.  T.  MADIGAN 

Harnessed  and  girt  in  his  canvas  bands, 
Toggled  and  roped  to  his  load  ; 
With  helmeted  head  and  bemittened  hands, 
This  for  his  spur  and  his  goad  : 

"  Out  in  the  dereUct  fastnesses  bare 
Some  whit  of  truth  may  be  won." 
Be  it  a  will  o'  the  wisp,  he  will  fare 
Forth  to  the  rising  sun. 

The  Sledge  Horse 

THE  Eastern  Coastal  party  consisted  of  Dr.  A.  L. 
McLean,  P.  E.  Correll  and  myself.  For  weeks  all 
preparations  had  been  made  ;  the  decking  put  on 
the  sledge,  runners  polished,  cooker-  and  instrument-boxes 
attached,  mast  erected,  spar  and  sail  rigged,  instruments 
and  clothing  collected,  tent  strengthened — all  the  im- 
pedimenta of  a  sledge  journey  arranged  and  rearranged,  and 
still  the  blizzard  raged  on.  Would  we  never  get  away  ? 
November  arrived,  and  still  the  wind  kept  up  daily  averages 
of  over  fifty  miles  per  hour,  with  scarce  a  day  without  drifting 
snow. 

At  last  it  was  decided  that  a  start  must  soon  be  made 
even  though  it  ended  in  failure,  so  that  we  received  orders 
to  set  out  on  November  6,  or  the  first  possible  day  after  it. 
Friday  November  8  broke,  a  clear  driftless  day,  and 
Murphy's  party  left  early  in  the  morning.  By  noon.  Still- 
well's  party  (Stillwell,  Hodgeman  and  Close),  and  we,  were 

309 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

ready  to  start.  The  former  were  bound  on  a  short  journey 
to  the  near  east  and  were  to  support  us  until  we  parted 
company. 

All  was  bustle  and  excitement.  Every  one  turned  out  to 
see  us  off.  Breaking  an  empty  sauce-bottle  over  the  bow 
of  our  sledge,  we  christened  it  the  M.H.S.  Championship 
(Man-Hauled  Sledge).  The  name  was  no  boastful  prevision 
of  mighty  deeds,  as,  at  the  Hut,  a  "  Championship "  was 
understood  to  mean  some  careless  action  usually  occasioning 
damage  to  property,  while  our  party  included  several  noted 
"  champions." 

Mertz  harnessed  a  dog-team  to  the  sledge  and  helped  us 
up  the  first  steep  slope.  With  hearty  handshakes  and  a 
generous  cheer  from  the  other  fellows,  we  started  off  and 
were  at  last  away,  after  many  months  of  hibernation  in  the 
Hut,  to  chance  the  hurricanes  and  drifting  snow  and  to  push 
towards  the  unknown  regions  to  the  east. 

At  the  steepest  part  of  the  rise  we  dismissed  our  helpers 
and  said  good-bye.  McLean  and  Correll  joined  me  on  the 
sledge  and  we  continued  on  to  Aladdin's  Cave. 

As  we  mounted  the  glacier  the  wind  increased,  carrying 
surface  drift  which  obscured  the  view  to  within  one  hundred 
yards.  It  was  this  which  made  us  pass  the  Cave  on  the 
eastern  side  and  pull  up  on  a  well-known  patch  of  snow  in  a 
depression  to  the  south  of  our  goal.  It  was  not  long  before  a 
momentary  clearing  of  the  drift  showed  Aladdin's  Cave 
with  its  piles  of  food-tanks,  kerosene,  dog  biscuit  and  pemmi- 
can,  and,  to  our  dismay,  a  burberry-clad  figure  moving  about 
among  the  accumulation.  IMurphy's  party  were  in  posses- 
sion when  we  expected  them  to  be  on  the  way  south  to  an- 
other cave— the  Cathedral  Grotto— eleven  and  three-quarter 
miles  from  the  Hut.  Of  course  the  rising  wind  and  drift 
had  stopped  them. 

It  was  then  5  p.m.,  so  we  did  not  wait  to  discuss  the 
evident  proposition  as  to  which  of  the  three  parties  should 
occupy  the  Cave,  but  climbed  down  into  it  at  once  and 
boiled  up  hoosh  and  tea.  Borrowing  tobacco  from  the 
310 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

supporting  parties,  we  reclined'at^ease,  and  then  in  that  hazy 
atmosphere  so  dear  to  smokers,  its  hmpid  bhie  enhanced 
by  the  pale  azure  of  the  ice,  we  introduced  the  subject  of 
occupation  as  if  it  were  a  sudden  afterthought. 

It  was  soon  decided  to  enlarge  the  Cave  to  accommodate 
five  men,  the  other  four  consenting  to  squeeze  into  Stillwell's 
big  tent.  McLean  volunteered  to  join  Stillwell's  party  in 
the  tent,  while  Correll  and  I  were  to  stay  in  the  Cave  with 
Murphy  and  company. 

I  went  outside  and  selected  ten  weeks'  provisions  from 
the  pile  of  food-tanks  and  piled  them  beside  the  sledge. 
McLean  attended  to  the  thermograph  which  Bage  and  I 
had  installed  in  the  autumn.  Meanwhile,  in  a  fifty-mile 
wind,  Stillwell  and  his  men  erected  the  tent.  Hunter  and 
Laseron  started  with  picks  and  shovels  to  enlarge  the  Cave, 
and,  working  in  relays,  we  had  soon  expanded  it  to  eight 
feet  by  seven  feet. 

The  men  from  the  tent  came  down  to  "  high  dinner  "  at 
eight  o'clock.  They  reported  weather  conditions  unim- 
proved and  the  temperature  -  3°  F. 

Early  next  morning  I  dug  my  way  out  and  found  that  the 
surface  drift  had  increased  with  a  wind  of  fifty-five  miles  per 
hour.     It  was  obviously  impossible  to  start. 

After  breakfast  it  was  arranged  that  those  outside  should 
have  their  meals  separately,  digging  down  at  intervals  to 
let  us  know  the  state  of  the  weather.  It  was  not  pleasant 
for  us,  congested  as  we  were  in  the  Cave,  to  have  visitors 
sliding  down  through  the  opening  with  a  small  avalanche 
of  snow  in  their  train.  Further,  to  increase  their  own  dis- 
comfort, they  arrived  covered  in  snow,  and  what  they  were 
unable  to  shake  off  thawed  and  wet  them,  subsequently 
freezing  again  to  the  consistency  of  a  starched  collar. 

The  opening  was,  therefore,  kept  partly  closed  with  a 
food-tank.  The  result  was  that  a  good  deal  of  snow  came 
in,  while  the  hole  diminished  in  size.  For  a  man  to  try  to 
crawl  out  in  stiff  burberrys  appeared  as  futile  as  for  a 
porcupine  to  try  to  go  backwards  up  a  canvas  hose. 

311 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  day  passed  slowly  in  our  impatience.  We  took 
turns  at  reading  The  Virginian,  warmed  by  a  primus 
stove  which  in  a  land  of  plenty  we  could  afford  to  keep 
going.  Later  in  the  afternoon  the  smokers  found  that 
a  match  would  not  strike,  and  the  primus  went  out.  Then 
the  man  reading  said  that  he  felt  unwell  and  could  not  see  the 
words.  Soon  several  others  commented  on  feeling  "  queer," 
and  two  in  the  sleeping-bags  had  fallen  into  a  drowsy 
slumber.  On  this  evidence  even  the  famous  Watson  would 
have  "  dropped  to  it,"  but  it  was  some  time  before  it  dawned 
on  us  that  the  oxygen  had  given  out.  Then  there  was  a 
rush  for  shovels.  The  snow,  ice  and  food-tank  were  tightly 
wedged,  at  the  mouth  of  the  entrance,  and  it  took  some  exer- 
tion to  perforate  through  to  the  outside  air  with  an  ice-axe. 
At  once  every  one  speedily  recovered.  Later,  another  party 
had  a  worse  experience,  not  forgetting  to  leave  a  warning 
note  behind  them.      We  should  have  done  the  same. 

The  weather  was  no  better  by  the  evening,  and  during 
the  night  the  minimum  thermometer  registered  —12°  F. 

At  six  o'clock  on  Sunday  morning,  November  10, 
McLean  dug  down  to  us  with  the  news  that  the  wind  had 
abated  to  thirty  miles  per  hour  with  light  surface  drift. 

We  hurried  through  breakfast,  rolled  up  the  bags  and 
started  packing  the  sledge.  Three  100-lb.  food-tanks,  one 
50-lb.  bag  opened  for  ready  use,  and  four  gallons  of  kerosene 
were  selected.  Still  well  took  for  us  a  50-lb.  food-tank,  a 
56-lb.  tin  of  wholemeal  biscuits,  and  a  gallon  of  kerosene. 
With  the  350  lbs.  of  food,  45  lbs.  of  kerosene,  three  sleeping- 
bags  of  10  lbs.  each,  a  tent  of  40  lbs.,  36  lbs.  of  clothing  and 
personal  gear  for  three  men,  a  cooker,  primus,  pick,  shovel, 
ice-axe,  alpine  rope,  dip- circle,  theodolite,  tripod,  smaller 
instruments  such  as  aneroid,  barometer  and  thermometer, 
tools,  medical  outfit  and  sledge-fittings,  our  total  load 
amounted  to  nearly  800  lbs.,  and  Stillwell's  was  about  the 
same. 

All  were  ready  at  9  a.m.,  and,  shaking  hands  with  Murphy's 
party,  who  set  off  due  south,  we  steered  with  Stillwell  to 
312 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

the  south-east.  The  preliminary  instructions  were  to  pro- 
ceed south-east  from  the  Cave  to  a  distance  of  eighteen 
miles  and  there  await  the  arrival  of  Dr.  Mawson  and 
his  party,  who  were  to  overtake  us  with  their  dog- 
teams. 

The  first  few  miles  gave  a  gradual  rise  of  one  hundred 
feet  per  mile,  so  that,  with  a  heavy  load  against  wind  and 
drift,  travelling  was  very  slow.  The  wind  now  dropped  to 
almost  calm,  and  the  drift  cleared.  In  the  afternoon 
progress  was  hampered  by  crevasses,  which  were  very 
frequent,  running  east  and  west  and  from  one  to  twenty  feet 
in  width.  The  wider  ones  were  covered  with  firm  snow- 
bridges  ;  the  snow  in  places  having  formed  into  granular  and 
even  solid  ice.  AVhat  caused  most  delay  were  the  detours 
of  several  hundreds  of  yards  which  had  to  be  made  to 
find  a  safe  crossing  over  a  long,  wide  crevasse.  At  6.30  p.m. 
we  pitched  camp,  having  only  made  five  miles  from  the 
Cave. 

We  got  away  at  9  a.m.  the  next  morning.  Throughout 
the  whole  journey  we  thought  over  the  same  mysterious 
problem  as  confronted  many  another  sledger  :  Where  did 
the  time  go  to  in  the  mornings  ?  Despite  all  our  efforts  we 
could  not  cut  down  the  interval  from  "  rise  and  shine  "  to 
the  start  below  two  hours. 

Early  that  day  we  had  our  first  experience  of  the 
treacherous  crevasse.  Correll  went  down  a  fissure  about 
three  feet  wide.  I  had  jumped  across  it,  thinking  the 
bridge  looked  thin,  but  Correll  stepped  on  it  and  went 
through.  He  dropped  vertically  down  the  full  length  of  his 
harness — six  feet.  McLean  and  I  soon  had  him  out.  The 
icy  walls  fell  sheer  for  about  sixty  feet,  where  snow  could 
be  seen  in  the  blue  depths.  Our  respect  for  crevasses 
rapidly  increased  after  this,  and  we  took  greater  precautions, 
shuddering  to  think  of  the  light-hearted  way  we  had  trudged 
over  the  wider  ones. 

At  twelve  miles,  blue,  wind-swept  ice  gave  place  to  an 
almost  flat  snow  surface.     Meanwhile  the  sky  had   rapidly 

313 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

clouded  over,  and  the  outlook  was  threatening.  The  light 
became  worse,  and  the  sastrugi  indistinguishable.  Such  a 
phenomenon  always  occurs  on  what  we  came  to  call  a 
"  snow-blind  day."  On  these  days  the  sky  is  covered  with  a 
white,  even  pall  of  cloud,  and  cloud  and  plateau  seem  as  one. 
One  walks  into  a  deep  trench  or  a  sastruga  two  feet  high 
without  noticing  it.  The  world  seems  one  huge,  white  void, 
and  the  only  difference  between  it  and  the  pitch-dark  night 
is  that  the  one  is  white  and  the  other  black. 

Light  snow  commenced  at  2.30  p.m.,  the  wind  rising  to 
forty-five  miles  per  hour  with  heavy  drift.  Thirteen  miles 
out  we  pitched  camp. 

This,  the  first  "  snow-blind  day  "  claimed  McLean  for 
its  victim.  By  the  time  we  were  under  cover  of  the  tent,  his 
eyes  were  very  sore,  aching  with  a  throbbing  pain.  At  his 
request  I  placed  a  zinc-cocaine  tablet  in  each  eye.  He  spent 
the  rest  of  the  day  in  the  darkness  of  his  sleeping-bag  and 
had  his  eyes  bandaged  all  next  day.  Up  till  then  we  had 
not  worn  goggles,  but  were  careful  afterwards  to  use  them 
on  the  trying,  overcast  days. 

For  four  and  a  half  days  the  weather  was  too  bad  to 
travel.  On  the  141h  the  wind  increased  and  became  steady 
at  sixty  miles  per  hour,  accompanied  by  dense  drifting 
snow.  We  found  it  very  monotonous  lying  in  the  tent.  As 
always  happens  during  heavy  drifts,  the  temperature  outside 
was  high,  on  this  day  averaging  about  12°  F. ;  inside  the 
tent  it  was  above  freezing-point,  and  the  accompanying 
thaw  was  most  unpleasant. 

Stillwell's  party  had  pitched  their  tent  about  ten  paces 
to  the  leeward  side  of  ours,  of  which  stratagem  they  con- 
tinually reminded  us.  Going  outside  for  food  to  supply  our 
two  small  meals  per  day  was  an  operation  fraught  with  much 
discomfort  to  all.  This  is  what  used  to  happen.  The  man 
on  whom  the  duty  fell  had  to  insinuate  himself  into  a  bundle 
of  wet  burberrys,  and,  as  soon  as  he  was  outside,  they  froze 
stiff.  When,  after  a  while,  he  signified  his  intention  of  coming 
in,  the  other  two  would  collect  everything  to  one  end  of  the 
314 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

tent  and  roll  up  the  floor-cloth.  Plastered  with  snow,  he 
entered,  and,  despite  every  precaution,  in  removing  burberrys 
and  brushing  himself  he  would  scatter  snow  about  and  increase 
the  general  wetness.  On  these  excursions  we  would  visit  Still- 
well's  tent  and  be  hospitably,  if  somewhat  gingerly,  admitted ; 
the  inmates  drawing  back  and  pulUng  away  their  sleeping- 
bags  as  from  one  with  a  fell  disease.  As  a  supporting 
party  they  were  good  company,  among  other  things,  supply- 
ing us  with  tobacco  ad  libitum.  When  we  parted,  five  days 
after,  we  missed  them  very  much. 

During  the  night  the  wind  blew  harder  than  ever— that 
terrible  wind,  laden  with  snow,  that  blows  for  ever  across 
the  vast,  mysterious  plateau,  the  "wind  that  shrills  all 
night  in  a  waste  land,  where  no  one  comes  or  hath  come 
since  the  making  of  the  world."  In  the  early  hours  of  the 
morning  it  reached  eighty  miles  per  hour. 

Not  till  9  next  morning  did  the  sky  clear  and  the 
drift  diminish.  Considering  that  it  had  taken  us  eight  days 
to  do  thirteen  miles,  we  decided  to  move  on  the  16th  at  any 
cost. 

Our  library  consisted  of  An  Anthology  of  Australian 
Verse,  Thackeray's  Vanity  Fair  and  Hints  to  Travellers  in 
two  volumes.  McLean  spent  much  of  the  iime  reading 
the  Anthology  and  I  started  Vanity  Fair.  The  latter 
beguiled  many  weary  hours  in  that  tent  during  the  journey. 
I  read  a  good  deal  aloud  and  McLean  read  it  afterwards. 
Correll  used  to  pass  the  days  of  confinement  arranging 
rations  and  costs  for  cycling  tours  and  designing  wonderful 
stoves  and  cooking  utensils  ;  all  on  the  sledging,  "  cut 
down  weight  "  principle. 

On  the  16th  we  were  off  at  9  a.m.  Avith  a  blue  sky  above 
and  a  "  beam  "  wind  of  thirty-five  miles  per  hour.  Up  a 
gentle  slope  over  small  sastrugi  the  going  was  heavy.  We 
went  back  to  help  Stillwell's  party  occasionally,  as  we  were 
moving  a  little  faster. 

Just  after  lunch  I  saw  a  small  black  spot  on  the  horizon 
to  the  south.     Was  it  a  man  ?     How  could  Dr.  Mawson 

315 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

have  got  there  ?  We  stopped  and  saw  that  Stillwell  had 
noticed  it  too.  Field-glasses  showed  it  to  be  a  man  approach- 
ing, about  one  and  a  half  miles  away.  We  left  our  sledges 
in  a  body  to  meet  him,  imagining  all  kinds  of  wonderful 
things  such  as  the  possibility  of  it  being  a  member  of  Wild's 
party — ^we  did  not  know  where  Wild  had  been  landed.  All 
the  theories  vanished  when  the  figure  assumed  the  well- 
known  form  of  Dr.  Mawson.  He  had  made  a  little  more 
south  than  we,  and  his  sledges  were  just  out  of  sight,  about 
two  miles  away. 

Soon  Mertz  and  Ninnis  came  into  view  with  a  dog-team, 
which  was  harnessed  on  to  one  sledge.  All  hands  pulled 
the  other  sledge,  and  we  came  up  fifteen  minutes  later  with 
Dr.  Mawson's  camp  at  eighteen  and  a  quarter  miles.  In 
the  good  Australian  way  we  sat  round  a  large  pot  of  tea  and 
after  several  cups  put  up  our  two  tents. 

It  was  a  happy  evening  with  the  three  tents  grouped 
together  and  the  dogs  securely  picketed  on  the  great  plateau, 
forming  the  only  spot  on  the  limitless  plain.  Every  one 
was  excited  at  the  prospect  of  the  weeks  ahead ;  the 
mystery  and  charm  of  the  "  unknown  "  had  taken  a  strange 
hold  on  us. 

Ninnis  and  Mertz  came  into  our  tent  for  a  short  talk 

before  turning  in.     Mertz  sang  the   old   German    student 

song  : 

Studio  auf  einer  Reis' 
Immer  sich  zu  helfen  weis 
Imrner  fort  durcli's  Dick  imd  Diinn 
Schlendert  es  durch's  Leben  bin. 

We  were  nearly  all  University  graduates.  We  knew  that 
this  would  be  our  last  evening  together  till  all  were  safely 
back  at  the  Hut.  No  thought  was  farther  from  our  minds 
than  that  it  was  the  last  evening  we  would  ever  spend  with 
two  companions,  who  had  been  our  dear  comrades  for  just 
a  year. 

Before  turning  into  sleeping-bags,  a  messenger  brought 
me  dispatches  from  the  general's  tent — a  letter  on  the 
316 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

plateau.  This  proved  to  be  the  instructions  to  the 
Eastern  Coastal  Party.  Arriving  back  at  the  Hut  by- 
January  15,  we  were  to  ascertain  as  much  as  possible  of 
the  coast  lying  east  of  the  Mertz  Glacier,  investigating  its 
broad  features  and  carrying  out  the  following  scientific 
work:  magnetic,  biological  and  geological  observations, 
the  character,  especially  the  nature  and  size  of  the  grains 
of  ice  or  snow  surfaces,  details  of  sastrugi,  topographical 
features,  heights  and  distances,  and  meteorology. 

On  Sunday,  November  17,  we  moved  on  together  to  the 
east  with  the  wind  at  fifteen  miles  an  hour,  the  temperature 
being  9°  F.  The  sun  shone  strongly  soon  after  the  start, 
and  with  four  miles  to  our  credit  a  tent  was  run  up  at  1  p.m., 
and  all  lunched  together  on  tea,  biscuit,  butter  and  choco- 
late. Up  to  this  time  we  had  had  only  three  al  fresco 
lunches,  but,  as  the  weather  seemed  to  be  much  milder  and 
the  benefit  of  tea  and  a  rest  by  the  way  were  so  great,  we 
decided  to  use  the  tent  in  future,  and  did  so  throughout  the 
journey. 

In  the  afternoon.  Dr.  Mawson's  party  forged  ahead,  the 
dogs  romping  along  on  a  downhill  grade.  We  took  the  bit 
in  our  teeth  as  we  saw  them  sitting  on  their  sledges,  grow- 
ing smaller  and  smaller  in  front  of  us.  We  came  up  with 
them  again  as  they  had  waited  to  exchange  a  few  more 
words  at  a  point  on  the  track  where  a  long  extent  of  coast 
to  the  east  came  into  view. 

Here  we  bade  a  final  adieu  to  Dr.  Mawson,  Mertz  and 
Ninnis.  The  surface  was  on  the  down  grade  towards  the 
east,  and  with  a  cheer  and  farewell  wave  they  started  off, 
Mertz  walking  rapidly  ahead,  followed  by  Ninnis  and  Dr. 
Mawson  with  their  sledges  and  teams.  They  were  soon 
lost  to  view  behind  the  rolling  undulations. 

A  mile  farther  on  we  pitched  camp  at  8  p.m.  in  a  slight 
depression  just  out  of  sight  of  the  sea.  Every  one  slept 
soundly  after  a  good  day's  pulling. 

November  18  was  a  bright  dazzling  day,  the  sky  dotted 
with  fleecv  alto-cumulus.     At  6  a.m.  we  were  out  to  find 

317 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

Still  well's  party  moving  in  their  tent.  There  was  a  rush 
for  shovels  to  fill  the  cookers  with  snow  and  a  race  to  boil 
hoosh. 

At  this  camp  we  tallied  up  the  provisions,  with  the 
intention  of  taking  what  we  might  require  from  Stillwell 
and  proceeding  independently  of  him,  as  he  was  likely  to 
leave  us  any  day.  There  were  fifty-nine  days  to  go  until 
January  15,  1913,  the  latest  date  of  arrival  back  at  the  Hut, 
for  which  eight  weeks'  rations  were  considered  to  be  sufficient. 
There  were  seven  weeks'  food  on  the  sledge,  so  Stillwell 
handed  over  another  fifty-pound  bag  as  well  as  an  odd 
five  pounds  of  wholemeal  biscuit.  The  total  amount  of 
kerosene  was  five  gallons,  with  a  bottle  of  methylated 
spirit. 

Shortly  after  eight  o'clock  we  caught  sight  of  Dr.Mawson's 
camp,  and  set  sail  to  make  up  the  interval.  This  v/e  did 
literally  as  there  was  a  light  westerly  breeze — ^the  only  west 
wind  we  encountered  during  the  whole  journey. 

The  sledge  was  provided  with  a  bamboo  mast,  seven  feet 
high,  stepped  behind  the  cooker-box  and  stayed  fore  and  aft 
with  wire.  The  yard  was  a  bamboo  of  six  feet,  slung  from 
the  top  of  the  mast,  its  height  being  varied  by  altering  the 
length  of  the  slings.  The  bamboo  was  threaded  through 
canvas  leads  in  the  floor-cloth  which  provided  a  spread  of 
thirty  square  feet  of  sail.  It  was  often  such  an  ample  area 
that  it  had  to  be  reefed  from  below. 

With  the  grade  sloping  gently  down  and  the  wind 
freshening,  the  pace  became  so  hot  that  the  sledge  often 
overran  us.  A  spurious  "Epic  of  the  East"  (see  Adelie 
Blizzard)  records  it : 

Crowd  on  the  sail — 
Let  her  speed  full  and  free  "  on  the  run  " 
Over  knife-edge  and  glaze,  marble  polish  and  pulverized  chalk 
The  finnesko  ghde  in  the  race,  and  there's  no  time  for  talk.^ 
Up  hill,  down  dale, 
It's  all  in  the  game  and  the  fun. 

We  rapidly  neared  Dr.  Mawson's  camp,  but  when  we  were 
within  a  few  miles  of  it,  the  other  party  started  in  a  south- 
318 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

easterly  direction  and  were  soon  lost  to  sight.  Our  course 
was  due  east. 

At  thirty-three  and  a  half  miles  the  sea  was  in  sight, 
some  fine  flat-topped  bergs  floating  in  the  nearest  bay. 
Suddenly  a  dark,  rocky  nunatak  sprang  into  view  on  our 
left.  It  was  a  sudden  contrast  after  ten  days  of  unchanging 
whiteness,  and  we  felt  very  anxious  to  visit  this  new  find. 
As  it  was  in  Stillwell's  limited  territory  we  left  it  to  him. 

According  to  the  rhymester  it  was : 

A  rock  by  the  way — 
A  spot  in  the  circle  of  white — 
A  grey,  craggy  spur  plunging  stark  thi'ough  the  deep-spHutered  ice. 
A  trifle  !    you  say,  but  a  glow  of  warm  land  may  suffice 
To  brighten  a  day 
Prolonged  to  a  midsummer  night. 

After  leaving  Aladdin's  Cave,  our  sledge-meter  had  worked 
quite  satisfactorily.  Just  before  noon,  the  casting  attaching 
the  recording-dial  to  the  forks  broke — ^the  first  of  a  series 
of  break-downs.  Correll  bound  it  up  with  copper  wire  and 
splints  borrowed  from  the  medical  outfit. 

The  wind  died  away  and  the  sail  was  of  little  use.  In 
addition  to  this,  we  met  with  a  slight  up  grade  on  the  eastern 
side  of  the  depression,  our  rate  diminishing  accordingly.  At 
7  P.M.  the  tent  was  pitched  in  dead  calm,  after  a  day's  run  of 
fifteen  miles  with  a  full  load  of  almost  eight  hundred  pounds 
— a  record  which  remained  unbroken  with  us  till  near  the 
end  of  the  outward  journey.  Looking  back,  the  nunatak 
and  bergs  were  still  visible. 

Both  parties  were  under  way  at  8  a.m.  next  day 
(November  19)  on  a  calm  and  sunny  morning.  The  course 
by  sun-compass  was  set  due  east. 

At  noon  I  took  a  latitude  "  shot  "  with  the  three-inch 
Cary  theodolite.  This  little  instrument  proved  very  satis- 
factory and  was  easily  handled  in  the  cold.  In  latitude 
67°15'  south,  forty-six  and  a  half  miles  east  of  the  Hut, 
we  were  once  more  on  level  country  with  a  high  rise  to  the 
north-east  and  another  shallow  gully  in  front. 

319 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

A  fog  which  had  been  moving  along  the  sea-front  in  an 
opaque  wall  drifted  over  the  land  and  enveloped  us. 
Beautiful  crystals  of  ice  in  the  form  of  rosettes  and  small 
fern-fronds  were  deposited  on  the  cordage  of  the  sail  and 
mast.  One  moment  the  mists  would  clear,  and  the  next, 
we  could  not  see  more  than  a  few  hundred  yards. 

We  now  parted  with  Stillwell,  Hodgeman  and  Close, 
who  turned  off  to  a  rising  knoll — ^Mount  Hunt — visible  in 
the  north-east,  and  disappeared  in  the  fog. 

After  the  halt  at  noon  the  sastrugi  became  much  larger 
and  softer.  The  fog  cleared  at  2  p.m.  and  the  sun  came  out 
and  shone  very  fiercely.  A  very  inquisitive  skua  gull — ^the 
first  sign  of  life  we  had  seen  thus  far — flew  around  the  tent 
and  settled  on  the  snow  near  by.  In  the  calm,  the  heat  was 
excessive  and  great  thirst  attacked  us  all  the  afternoon, 
which  I  attempted  to  assuage  at  every  halt  by  holding  snow 
in  my  hands  and  licking  the  drops  of  water  off  my  knuckles — 
a  cold  and  unsatisfactory  expedient.  We  travelled  without 
burberrys — at  that  time  quite  a  novel  sensation — wearing 
only  fleece  suits  and  light  woollen  undergarments.  Correll 
pulled  for  the  greater  part  of  the  afternoon  in  underclothing 
alone. 

At  forty-nine  and  a  half  miles  a  new  and  wonderful 
panorama  opened  before  us.  The  sea  lay  just  below, 
sweeping  as  a  narrow  gulf  into  the  great,  flat  plain  of  de- 
bouching glacier-tongue  which  ebbed  away  north  into 
the  foggy  horizon.  A  small  ice-capped  island  was  set  like 
a  pearl  in  the  amethyst  water.  To  the  east,  the  glacier  seemed 
to  fuse  with  the  blue  line  of  the  hinterland.  Southward,  the 
snowy  slope  rose  quickly,  and  the  far  distance  was  unseen. 

We  marched  for  three-quarters  of  a  mile  to  where  a  steep 
down  grade  commenced.  Here  I  made  a  sketch  and  took 
a  round  of  angles  to  all  prominent  features,  and  the  con- 
spicuous, jutting,  seaward  points  of  the  glacier.  McLean 
and  Correll  were  busy  making  a  snow  cairn,  six  feet  high,  to 
serve  as  a  back-sight  for  angles  to  be  taken  at  a  higher 
eminence  southward. 
320 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

We  set  out  for  the  latter,  and  after  going  one  and  a  half 
miles  it  was  late  enough  to  camp.  During  the  day  we  had 
all  got  very  sunburnt,  and  our  faces  were  flushed  and 
smarting  painfully.  After  the  long  winter  at  the  Hut  the 
skin  had  become  more  delicate  than  usual. 

Under  a  clear  sky,  the  wind  came  down  during  the 
night  at  forty-five  miles  per  hour,  lashing  surface  drift  against 
the  walls  of  the  tent.  It  was  not  till  ten  o'clock  that  the 
sledge  started,  breaking  a  heavy  trail  in  snow  which  became 
more  and  more  like  brittle  piecrust.  There  was  at  first  a 
slight  descent,  and  then  we  strained  up  the  eminence  to  the 
south  over  high  sastrugi  running  almost  north  and  south. 
Capsizes  became  frequent,  and  to  extricate  the  heavy  sledge 
from  some  of  the  deep  furrows  it  was  necessary  to  unload 
the  food-bags.  The  drift  running  over  the  ground  was 
troublesome  when  we  sat  down  for  a  rest,  but,  in  marching, 
our  heads  were  just  clear  of  it. 

It  was  a  long  laborious  day,  and  the  four  miles  indicated 
by  the  inexorable  sledge-meter  seemed  a  miserable  result. 
However,  near  the  top  of  the  hill  there  was  a  rich  reward.  A 
small  nunatak  slanted  like  a  steel-blue  shadow  on  the  side 
of  a  white  peak  to  the  south-west.  There  was  great  excite- 
ment, and  the  sledge  slid  along  its  tracks  with  new  life.  It 
was  rock  without  a  doubt,  and  there  was  no  one  to  dispute 
it  with  us.  While  speculating  wildly  as  to  its  distance,  we 
came  unexpectedly  to  the  summit  of  the  hill. 

The  wind  had  subsided,  the  sky  was  clear  and  the  sun 
stood  low  in  the  south-west.  Our  view  had  widened  to  a 
noble  outlook.  The  sea,  a  delicate  turquoise-blue,  lay  in 
the  foreground  of  the  low,  white,  northern  ice-cliffs.  Away  to 
the  east  was  the  dim  suggestion  of  land  across  the  bed  of 
the  glacier,  about  which  circled  the  southerly  highlands  of 
the  plateau,  buried  at  times  in  the  haze  of  distance.  Due 
south,  twenty  miles  away,  projecting  from  the  glacier,  was 
another  island  of  rock.  The  nunatak  first  seen,  not  many 
miles  to  the  south-west,  was  a  snowy  mountain  streaked 
with  sprouting  rock,  rising  solitary  in  an  indentation  of  the 
VOL.  I  X  321 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

land.  We  honoured  our  Ship  by  calHng  it  Aurora  Peak, 
while  our  camp  stood  on  what  was  thenceforth  to  be  Mount 
Murchison. 

It  was  obvious  that  this  was  the  place  for  our  first  depot. 
I  had  decided,  too,  to  make  it  the  first  magnetic  station  and 
the  point  from  which  to  visit  and  explore  Aurora  Peak. 
None  of  us  made  any  demur  over  a  short  halt.  Correll  had 
strained  his  back  during  the  day  from  pulling  too  hard,  and 
was  troubled  with  a  bleeding  nose.  My  face  was  very  sore 
from  sunburn,  with  one  eye  swollen  and  almost  closed,  and 
McLean's  eyes  had  not  yet  recovered  from  their  first  attack 
of  snow-blindness. 

November  21  was  a  day  in  camp.  Most  of  the  morning  I 
spent  trying,  with  Correll's  help,  to  get  the  declination 
needle  to  set.  Its  pivot  had  been  destroyed  in  transit  and 
Correll  had  replaced  it  by  a  gramophone  needle,  which  was 
found  too  insensitive.  There  was  nothing  to  do  but  use  the 
three-inch  theodolite,  which,  setting  to  one  degree,  would 
give  a  good  result,  with  a  mean  of  thirty-two  settings,  for  a 
region  with  such  variable  magnetic  declination.  A  latitude 
"  shot  "  was  made  at  noon,  and  in  the  afternoon  I  took  a  set 
of  dip  determinations.  These,  with  a  panoramic  sketch 
from  the  camp,  a  round  of  angles  to  conspicuous  points  and 
an  observation  at  5.30  p.m.  for  time  and  azimuth  completed 
the  day's  work.     Correll  did  the  recording. 

Meanwhile,  IMcLean  had  built  an  eight-feet  snow  mound, 
erected  a  depot  flag  upon  it  and  taken  several  photographs. 

The  next  day  was  devoted  to  an  excursion  to  Aurora 
Peak.  The  weather  was,  to  our  surprise,  quite  clear  and 
calm.  Armed  with  the  paraphernalia  for  a  day's  tour,  we 
set  off  down  the  slope.  Correll  put  the  primus  stove  and 
the  inner  pot  of  the  cooker  in  the  ready  food-bag,  McLean 
slung  on  his  camera  and  the  aneroid  barometer,  while  I  took 
my  riick-sack  with  the  rations,  as  well  as  field-glasses  and 
an  ice-axe.  In  case  of  crevasses,  we  attached  ourselves  to 
an  alpine  rope  in  long  procession.  According  to  the  "  Epic  " 
it  was  something  like  this  : 
322 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

We  saddled  up,  adventure-bent ; 
Locked  up  the  house — I  mean  the  tent — 
Took  "  grub  "  enough  for  thiee  young  men 
With  appetites  to  equal  ten. 
A  day's  outing  across  the  vale. 
Aurora  Peak  !     What  ho  !     All  hail ! 

We  waltzed  a'down  the  silvered  slope, 
Connected  by  an  Alpine  rope  ; 
"  Madi  "  in  front  with  ice-axe  armed, 
For  fear  that  we  should  feel  alarmed. 
Glad  was  the  hour,  and — what  a  lark  ! 
Explorers  three  ?     "  Save  the  mark  !  " 

The  mystery  of  the  nimatak  was  about  to  be  solved. 
Apparently  it  rose  from  the  level  of  the  glacier,  as  our  descent 
showed  its  eastern  flank  more  clearly  outlined.  It  was  three 
miles  to  the  bottom  of  the  gully,  and  the  aneroid  barometer 
registered  one  thousand  one  hundred  and  ninety  feet.  The 
surface  was  soft  and  yielding  to  finnesko  crampons,  which 
sank  through  in  places  till  the  snow  gripped  the  knees. 

Ascending  on  the  other  side  we  crossed  a  small  crevasse 
and  the  peak  towered  above  us.  The  northern  side  ter- 
minated in  a  perpendicular  face  of  ice,  below  which  a  deep 
basin  had  been  "  scalloped  "  away  ;  evidently  kept  clear 
by  eddies  of  wind.  In  it  lay  broken  fragments  of  the  over- 
hanging cliff.  The  rock  was  a  wide,  outcropping  band 
curving  steeply  to  the  summit  on  the  eastern  aspect. 

After  a  stiff  climb  we  hurried  eagerly  to  the  rock  as  if 
it  were  a  mine  of  inexhaustible  treasure.  The  boulders  were 
all  weathered  a  bright  red  and  were  much  pitted  where 
ferruginous  minerals  were  leached  out.  The  rock  was  a 
highly  quartzose  gneiss,  with  black  bands  of  schist  running 
through  it.  Moss  and  lichens  were  plentiful,  and  McLean 
collected  specimens. 

The  rocky  strip  was  eighty  feet  wide  and  three  hundred 
feet  high,  so,  making  a  cache  of  the  primus,  provisions 
and  burberrys,  we  followed  it  up  till  it  became  so  steep  that 
it  was  necessary  to  change  to  the  snow.  This  was  in  the 
form  of  hard  neve  with  patches  of  ice.  I  went  first,  cutting 
steps  with  the  ice-axe,  and  the  others  followed  on  the  rope. 

323 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  last  ten  of  more  than  one  hundred  steps  were  in  an  almost 
vertical  face,  which  gave  a  somewhat  precarious  foothold. 

At  11.30  A.M.  we  stood  on  the  summit  at  an  altitude  of 
one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  feet,  while  across  the 
valley  to  the  north-east  rose  Mount  Murchison,  one  hundred 
and  fourteen  feet  higher.  The  top  of  the  ridge  was  quite  a 
knife-edge,  with  barely  space  for  standing.  It  ran  mainly 
north  and  south,  dipping  in  the  centre,  to  curve  away  sharply 
westward  to  a  higher  eminence.  At  the  bend  was  an 
inaccessible  patch  of  rock.  The  surrounding  view  was 
much  the  same  at  that  on  Mount  Murchison. 

The  Union  Jack  and  the  Australian  flag  were  erected 
on  a  bamboo,  and  photographs  taken.  At  the  same  time, 
low,  threatening  clouds  rapidly  emerged  from  the  south- 
east, covering  the  sun  and  creating  the  "  snow-blind  "  light. 
This  was  rather  alarming  as  the  climb  had  been  difficult 
enough  under  a  clear  sky,  and  the  descent  was  certainly 
much  more  difficult.  So  we  hastily  ate  some  chocolate  and 
discussed  the  best  way  down. 

Prospecting  to  the  north,  in  search  of  a  long  snow  ramp 
which  appeared  to  run  away  in  that  direction,  we  scrambled 
down  to  the  edge  of  a  wide  snowy  crevasse  full  of  blue 
chinks. 

Turning  back,  we  considered  the  chances  of  sliding  down 
a  steep  scoured  hollow  to  the  west  and  finally  decided  to 
descend  by  the  track  we  had  cut. 

McLean  started  off  first  down  the  steps  and  was  out  of 
sight  in  a  few  moments.  AVhen  the  rope  tightened,  Correll 
followed  him  and  then  I  came  last.  It  was  very  ticklish 
work  feeling  for  the  steps  below  with  one's  feet,  and,  as  we 
signalled  to  one  another  in  turn  after  moving  a  step,  it  took 
more  than  an  hour  to  reach  a  safe  position  on  the  rocks. 
With  every  step  I  drove  my  axe  into  the  ice,  so  that  if  the 
others  had  fallen  there  would  still  have  been  a  last  chance. 

There  was  no  time  to  be  wasted  ;  light  snow  was  falling 
with  the  prospect  of  becoming  thicker.  In  the  gully  the 
snowfall  became  heavy,  limiting  the  view  to  within  a  few 
324 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

hundred  yards.  We  advanced  up  the  hill  in  what  seemed 
to  be  the  steepest  direction,  but  circled  half-way  round 
it  before  finding  out  that  the  course  was  wrong.  Aim- 
lessly trying  to  place  the  broad  flat  summit  I  came  across 
tracks  in  the  snow,  which  were  then  carefully  followed  and  led 
to  the  tent.  The  wind  was  rising  outside  and  the  hoosh  in 
steaming  mugs  was  eaten  with  extra  relish  in  our  snug 
retreat. 

Specimens  were  labelled  to  be  depoted  and  provisions 
were  arranged  for  the  rest  of  the  journey.  It  was  evident 
that  we  had  superfluous  clothing,  and  so  the  weight  of  the 
kit-bags  was  scrupulously  cut  down.  By  the  time  we  crawled 
into  sleeping-bags,  everything  dispensable  was  piled  along- 
side the  depot-flag. 

We  slept  the  sleep  of  the  weary  and  did  not  hear  the 
flapping  tent  nor  the  hissing  drift.  At  6  a.m.  the  wind 
was  doing  forty  miles  per  hour  and  the  air  was  filled  with 
snow.  It  must  have  been  a  new  climate,  for  by  noon  the 
sun  had  unexpectedly  broken  through,  the  wind  was 
becoming  gusty  and  the  drift  trailed  like  scud  over  the 
surface. 

With  six  weeks'  food  we  set  off  on  a  new  trail  after  lunch. 
The  way  to  the  eastern  glacier — Mertz  Glacier — issued 
through  the  mouth  of  the  gully,  which  ran  in  an  easterly 
direction  between  Aurora  Peak  and  Mount  Murchison.  On 
Mount  Murchison  ice-falls  and  crevasses  began  a  short 
distance  east  of  our  first  line  of  descent,  but  yet  I  thought  a 
slight  deviation  to  the  east  of  south  would  bring  us  safely 
into  the  valley,  and,  at  the  same  time,  cut  off  a  mile.  Alas  ! 
it  proved  to  be  one  of  those  "  best-laid  schemes." 

The  load  commenced  to  glide  so  quickly  as  we  were 
leaving  the  crest  of  the  mountain  that  Correll  and  McLean 
unhitched  from  the  hauling  line  and  attached  them- 
selves by  the  alpine  rope  to  the  rear  of  the  sledge,  braking 
its  progress.  I  remained  harnessed  in  front  keeping  the 
direction.  For  two  miles  we  were  going  downhill  at  a 
running  pace  and  then  the  slope  became  suddenly  steeper 

325 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

and  the  sledge  overtook  me.  I  had  expected  crevasses,  in 
view  of  which  I  did  not  hke  all  the  loose  rope  behind  me. 
Looking  romid,  I  shouted  to  the  others  to  hold  back  the  sledge, 
proceeding  a  few  steps  while  doing  so.  The  bow  of  the 
sledge  was  almost  at  my  feet,  w^hen — ^^vhizz  !  I  was  dropping 
down  through  space.  The  length  of  the  hauling  rope  w^as 
twenty-four  feet,  and  I  was  at  the  end  of  it.  I  cannot  say 
that  "  my  past  life  flashed  before  me."  I  just  had  time 
to  think  "  Now  for  the  jerk — ^^vill  my  harness  hold  ?  "  w^hen 
there  was  a  wrench,  and  I  was  hanging  breathless  over  the 
blue  depth.  Then  the  most  anxious  moment  came — I  con- 
tinued to  descend.  A  glance  showed  me  that  the  crevasse 
was  only  four  feet  wude,  so  the  sledge  could  not  follow  me, 
and  I  knew  with  a  thankful  heart  that  I  was  safe.  I  only 
descended  about  two  feet  more,  and  then  stopped.  I  knew 
my  companions  had  pulled  up  the  sledge  and  would  be 
anchoring  it  with  the  ice-axe. 

I  had  a  few  moments  in  which  to  take  in  my  surround- 
ings. Opposite  to  me  was  a  vertical  wall  of  ice,  and  below  a 
beautiful  blue,  darkening  to  black  in  that  unseen  chasm. 
On  either  hand  the  rift  of  the  crevasse  extended,  and  above 
was  the  small  hole  in  the  snow  bridge  through  which  I  had 
shot. 

Soon  I  heard  McLean  calling,  "  Are  you  all  right  ?  " 
And  I  answered  in  what  he  and  Correll  thought  an  alarmingly 
distant  voice.  They  started  enlarging  the  hole  to  pull  me 
out,  until  lumps  of  snow  began  to  fall  and  I  had  to  yell  for 
mercy.  Then  I  felt  they  w^ere  hauling,  and  slowly  I  rose  to 
daylight. 

The  crevasse  ran  westward  along  the  gully,  forcing  us 
to  make  a  detour  through  a  maze  of  smaller  cracks.  We 
had  to  retreat  up  the  hill  in  one  place,  throwing  off  half  the 
load  and  carrying  it  on  in  relays.  There  was  a  blistering 
sun  and  the  work  was  hard.  At  last  the  sledge  came  to  a 
clear  run  and  tobogganed  into  the  snow-filled  valley,  turning 
eastward  towards  its  outlet. 

At  the  evening  camp  the  sledge-meter  indicated  that  our 
326 


i'Jf 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

distance  eastward  of  the  Hut  was  sixty  miles,  one  thousand 
two  hundred  yards.  The  northern  face  of  the  gully  was 
very  broken  and  great  sentinel  pillars  of  ice  stood  out  among 
the  yawning  caves,  some  of  them  leaning  like  the  tower  of 
Pisa,  others  having  fallen  and  rolled  in  shattered  blocks. 
Filling  the  vision  to  the  south-west  was  Aurora  Peak,  in 
crisp  silhouette  against  a  glorious  radiant  of  cirrus  cloud. 

Reviewing  the  day  through  our  peaceful  smoke-rings,  I 
was  rather  comforted  by  the  fact  that  the  fall  into  the 
crevasse  had  thoroughly  tested  my  harness.  Correll  ex- 
pressed himself  as  perfectly  satisfied  with  his  test.  McLean 
seemed  to  feel  somewhat  out  of  it,  being  the  only  one  without 
a  crevasse  experience  ;  which  happy  state  he  maintained 
until  the  end,  apparently  somewhat  to  his  disappointment. 

On  the  24th  we  broke  camp  at  9  a.m.,  continuing  down 
the  gully  towards  the  glacier.  A  lofty  wall  of  rocks,  set 
within  a  frame  of  ice,  was  observed  on  our  left,  one  mile 
away.  To  it  we  diverged  and  found  it  to  be  gneiss  similar 
to  that  of  Aurora  Peak.     Several  photos  were  taken. 

The  land  was  at  our  back  and  the  margin  of  the  glacier 
had  been  crossed.  Only  too  soon  we  were  in  the  midst  of 
terribly  crevassed  ground,  through  which  one  could  only 
thread  a  slow  and  zig-zag  course.  The  blue  ice  was  riven 
in  every  direction  by  gaping  quarries  and  rose  smooth  and 
slippery  on  the  ridges  which  broke  the  surface  into  long 
waves.  Shod  with  crampons,  the  rear  of  the  sledge  secured 
by  a  tail-rope,  we  had  a  trying  afternoon  guiding  the  load 
along  the  narrow  ridges  of  ice  with  precipices  on  either  hand. 
Fortunately  the  wind  was  not  above  twenty  miles  per  hour. 
As  the  frivolous  "  Epic  "  had  it  : 

Odds  fish  !    the  solid  sea  is  sorely  rent, 
And  all  around  we're  pent 
With  quarries,  chasms,  pits,  depressions  vast. 
Their  snow-lids  overcast. 

A  devious  track,  all  curved  and  serpentine 
Round  snow-Hds  superfine. 
On  jutting  brinks  and  precipices  sheer 
Precariously  we  steer. 

327 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

We  pushed  on  to  find  a  place  in  which  to  camp,  as  there 
was  scarcely  safe  standing-room  for  a  primus  stove.  At 
seventy  miles  the  broken  ice  gave  way  to  a  level  expanse  of 
hard  sastrugi  dotted  all  over  with  small  mounds  of  ice 
about  four  feet  high.  After  hoosh,  a  friendly  little  Wilson 
petrel  came  flying  from  the  northern  sea  to  our  tent.  We 
considered  it  to  be  a  good  omen. 

Next  day  the  icy  mounds  disappeared,  to  be  replaced  by 
a  fine,  flat  surface,  and  the  day's  march  amounted  to  eleven 
and  a  quarter  miles. 

At  11  A.M.  four  snow  petrels  visited  us,  circling  round  in 
great  curiosity.  It  is  a  cheerful  thing  to  see  these  birds  amid 
the  lone,  inhospitable  ice. 

We  were  taking  in  the  surroundings  from  our  position 
off  the  land  scanning  the  far  coast  to  the  south  for  rock  and 
turning  round  to  admire  the  bold  contours  of  Aurora  Peak 
and  Mount  Murchison  at  our  back.  Occasionally  there  were 
areas  of  rubbly  snow,  blue  ice  and  crevasses  completely  filled 
with  snow,  of  prodigious  dimensions,  two  hundred  to  three 
hundred  yards  wide  and  running  as  far  as  the  eye  could 
travel.  The  snow  filling  them  was  perfectly  firm,  but, 
almost  always  along  the  windward  edge,  probing  with  an 
ice-axe  would  disclose  a  fissure.  This  part  of  the  Mertz 
Glacier  was  apparently  afloat.- 

The  lucky  Wilson  petrel  came  again  in  the  evening.  At 
this  stage  the  daily  temperatures  ranged  between  10°  F. 
and  near  freezing-point.  The  greater  part  of  Novem- 
ber 26  was  passed  in  the  tent,  within  another  zone  of 
crevasses.  The  overcast  sky  made  the  light  so  bad  that 
it  became  dangerous  to  go  ahead.  At  5.30  p.m.  we 
started,  and  managed  to  do  five  and  a  half  miles  before 
8  P.M. 

It  was  rather  an  eventful  day,  when  across  the  un- 
dulating sastrugi  there  appeared  a  series  of  shallow  valleys 
running  eastward.  As  the  valleys  approached  closer,  the 
ground  sloped  down  to  meet  them,  their  sides  becoming 
steeper,  buckled  and  broken.  Proceeding  ahead  on^an 
328 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

easterly  course,  our  march  came  to  an  abrupt  termination 
on  an  ice-bluff. 

In  front  lay  a  perfectly  flat  snow-covered  plain — the 
sea-ice.  In  point  of  fact  we  had  arrived  at  the  eastern  side 
of  the  MerlJz  Glacier  and  were  about  fifteen  miles  north  of 
the  mainland.  Old  sea-ice,  deeply  covered  in  snow,  lay 
ahead  for  miles,  and  the  hazy,  blue  coast  sank  below  the 
horizon  in  the  south-east,  running  for  a  time  parallel  to  the 
course  we  were  about  to  take.  It  was  some  time  before  we 
realized  all  this,  but  at  noon  on  the  following  day  there 
came  the  first  reminder  of  the  proximity  of  sea-water. 

An  Adelie  penguin,  skiing  on  its  breast  from  the  north, 
surprised  us  suddenly  by  a  loud  croak  at  the  rear  of  the 
sledge.  As  astonished  as  we  were,  it  stopped  and  stared,  and 
then  in  sudden  terror  made  off.  But  before  starting  on  its  long 
trek  to  the  land,  it  had  to  be  captured  and  photographed. 

To  the  south  the  coast  was  marked  by  two  faces  of  rock 
and  a  short,  dark  spur  protruding  from  beneath  the  ice-cap. 
As  our  friendly  penguin  had  made  off  in  that  direction, 
we  elected  to  call  the  place  Penguin  Point,  intending  to 
touch  there  on  the  return  journey.  During  the  afternoon 
magnetic  dips  and  a  round  of  angles  to  the  prominences  of 
the  mainland  were  taken. 

The  next  evidence  on  the  sea-ice  question  came  in  the 
shape  of  a  line  of  broken  slabs  of  ice  to  the  north,  sticking 
out  of  the  snow  like  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  graveyard. 
At  one  hundred  and  fifteen  miles  the  line  was  so  close  that 
we  left  the  sledge  to  investigate  it,  finding  a  depression  ten 
feet  deep,  through  which  wound  a  glistening  riband  of 
sea-water.  It  reminded  one  of  a  creek  in  flat,  Australian 
country,  and  the  illusion  was  sustained  by  a  dark  skua  gull — 
in  its  slow  flight  much  like  a  crow.  It  was  a  fissure  in  old 
thick  sea-ice. 

Sunday,  and  the  first  day  of  December,  brought  good 
weather  and  a  clear  view  of  the  mainland.  A  bay  opened 
to  the  east  of  Penguin  Point,  from  which  the  coast  trended 
to  the  south-east.     Across  a  crack  in  the  sea-ice  we  could 

329 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

just  distinguish  a  low  indented  line  like  the  glacier -tongue, 
we  had  already  crossed.  It  might  have  been  a  long  pro- 
montory of  land  for  all  we  knew.  Behind  it  was  a  continuous 
ice-blink  and  on  our  left,  to  the  north,  a  deep  blue  "  water 
sky."  It  seemed  worth  while  continuing  on  an  easterly 
course  approximately  parallel  with  the  coast. 

We  were  faced  by  another  glacier-tongue  ;  a  fact  which 
remained  unproven  for  a  week  at  least.  From  the  sea-ice 
on  to  the  glacier — ^the  Ninnis  Glacier — there  was  a  gentle  rise 
to  a  prominent  knoll  of  one  hundred  and  seventy  feet. 
Here  our  distance  from  the  Hut  amounted  to  one  hundred 
and  fifty-two  miles,  and  the  spot  was  reckoned  a  good 
situation  for  the  last  depot. 

In  taking  magnetic  observations,  it  was  interesting  to 
find  that  the  "  dip  "  amounted  to  87°  44',  while  the  de- 
cHnation,  which  had  varied  towards  the  west,  swung  at  this 
our  most  northerly  station  a  few  degrees  to  the  east.  We 
were  curving  round  the  South  Magnetic  Pole.  IMany  points 
on  the  coast  were  fixed  from  an  adjoining  hill  to  which 
Correll  and  I  trudged  through  sandy  snow,  while  McLean 
stayed  behind  erecting  the  depot-mound,  placing  a  food-bag, 
kerosene  tin,  black  cloth  and  miner's  pick  on  the  top. 

With  four  weeks'  provisions  we  made  a  new  start  to 
cross  the  Ninnis  Glacier  on  December  3,  changing  course  to 
E.  30°  N.,  in  great  wonderment  as  to  what  lay  ahead.  In 
this  new  land  interest  never  flagged.  One  never  could 
foresee  what  the  morrow  would  bring  forth. 

Across  rolHng  "  downs "  of  soft,  billowy  snow  we 
floundered  for  twenty-four  miles,  on  the  two  following  days. 
Not  a  wind-ripple  could  be  seen.  We  were  evidently  in  a 
region  of  comparative  calms,  which  was  a  remarkable  thing, 
considering  that  the  windiest  spot  in  the  world  was  less  than 
two  hundred'miles  away. 

After  several  sunny  days  jMcLean  and  I  had  very  badly 
cracked  lips.  It  had  been  often  remarked  at  the  Hut  that 
the  standard  of  humour  greatly  depreciated  during  the  winter 
and  this  caused  McLean  and  me  many  a  physical  pang  while 
330 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

sledging,  as  we  would  laugh  at  the  least  provocation  and 
open  all  the  cracks  in  our  Hps.  Eating  hard  plasmon  biscuits 
was  a  painful  pleasure.  Correll,  who  was  immune  from  this 
affliction,  tanned  to  the  rich  hue  of  the  "  nut-brown  maiden." 

On  December  5,  at  the  top  of  a  rise,  we  were  suddenly 
confronted  with  a  new  vision—"  Thalassa  !  "  was  our  cry, 
"  the  sea  !  "  but  a  very  different  sea  from  that  which  brought 
such  joy  to  the  hearts  of  the  wandering  Greeks.  Unfolded 
to  the  horizon  was  a  plain  of  pack-ice,  thickly  studded  with 
bergs  and  intersected  by  black  leads  of  open  water.  In  the 
north-east  was  a  patch  of  open  sea  and  above  it,  round  to 
the  north,  lowering  banks  of  steel-blue  cloud.  We  had 
come  to  the  eastern  side  of  Ninnis  Glacier. 

At  this  point  any  analogy  which  could  possibly  have 
been  found  with  Wilkes's  coasthne  ceased.  It  seems 
probable  that  he  charted  as  land  the  limits  of  the  pack-ice 
in  1840. 

The  excitement  of  exploring  this  new  realm  was  to  be 
deferred.  Even  as  we  raised  the  tent,  the  wind  commenced 
to  whistle  and  the  air  became  surcharged  with  snow.  Three 
skua  gulls  squatted  a  few  yards  away,  squawking  at  our 
approach,  and  a  few  snow  petrels  sailed  by  in  the  gathering 
blizzard. 

Through  the  6th,  7th  and  8th  and  most  of  the  9th  it 
raged,  during  which  time  we  came  definitely  to  the  conclusion 
that  as  social  entertainers  we  were  complete  failures.  We 
exhausted  all  the  reserve  topics  of  conversation,  discussed 
our  Universities,  sports,  friends  and  homes.  We  each 
described  the  scenery  we  liked  best ;  notable  always  for  the 
sunny  weather  and  perfect  calm.  McLean  sailed  again  in 
Sydney  Harbour,  Correll  cycled  and  ran  his  races,  I  wandered 
in  the  South  Australian  hills  or  rowed  in  the  "  eights,"  while 
the  snow  swished  round  the  tent  and  the  wind  roared  over 
the  wastes  of  ice. 

Avoiding  a  few  crevasses  on  the  drop  to  sea-level  on 
December  10,  the  sledge  was  manoeuvred  over  a  tide-crack 
between  glacier  and  sea-ice.     The  latter  was  traversed  by 

331 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

frequent  pressure-ridges  ;  hummocks  and  broken  pinnacles 
being  numerous. 

The  next  six  days  out  on  the  broken  sea-ice  were  full  of 
incident.  The  weather  was  gloriously  sunny  till  the  13th, 
during  which  time  the  sledge  had  to  be  dragged  through  a 
forest  of  pinnacles  and  over  areas  of  soft,  sticky  slush  which 
made  the  runners  execrable  for  hours.  Ponds  of  open 
water,  by  which  basked  a  few  Weddell  seals,  became  a 
familiar  sight.  We  tried  to  maintain  a  south-easterly  course 
for  the  coast,  but  miles  were  wasted  in  the  tortuous  maze 
of  ice — "  a  wildering  Theban  ruin  of  hummock  and  serrac." 

The  sledge-meter  broke  down  and  gave  the  ingenious 
Correll  a  proposition  which  he  ably  solved.  McLean  and  I 
had  a  chronic  weakness  of  the  eyes  from  the  continual  glare. 
Looking  at  the  other  two  fellows  with  their  long  [protruding 
goggles  made  me  think  of  Banquo's  ghost :  *'  Thou  hast 
no  speculation  in  those  eyes  that  thou  dost  glare  with." 

I  had  noticed  that  some  of  the  tide-cracks  had  opened 
widely  and,  when  a  blizzard  blew  on  December  13,  the 
thought  was  a  skeleton  in  my  brain  cupboard. 

On  the  15th  an  Emperor  penguin  was  seen  sunning  him- 
self by  a  pool  of  water,  so  we  decided  to  kill  the  bird  and 
carry  some  meat  in  case  of  emergency.  McLean  found  the 
stomach  full  of  fish  and  myriads  of  cestodes  in  the  intestines. 

By  dint  of  hard  toil  over  cracks,  ridges  and  jagged, 
broken  blocks,  we  came,  by  diverging  to  the  south-west,  to 
the  junction  between  shifting  pack  and  fast  bay-ice,  and 
even  there,  we  afterwards  shuddered  to  find,  it  was  at  least 
forty-five  miles,  as  the  penguin  skis,  to  the  land. 

It  was  a  fine  flat  surface  on  which  the  sledge  ran,  and  the 
miles  commenced  to  fly  by,  comparatively  speaking.  Except 
for  an  occasional  deep  rift,  whose  bottom  plumbed  to  the 
sea- water,  the  going  was  excellent.  Each  day  the  broken 
ice  on  our  left  receded,  the  mainland  to  the  south  grew 
closer  and  traces  of  rock  became  discernible  on  the  low, 
fractured  cliffs. 

On  December  17  a  huge  rocky  bluff — Horn  Bluff — stood 
332 


KiiKj  (li'iMuje  V  Ldiirl 

MADIGAN,    CORRELL    AXI)    .McLEAX    CAMPED    BELOW    THE    CLIFFS    OF     HORX 

BLUFF  (1000   FEET  IX  HEIGHT).      COLUMXAR  DOLERITE   IS   SEEN   SUR.MOUNTIXti 

A  SEDIMENTARY  SERIES  PARTLY  BURIED  IX  THE  TALUS-SLOPE 


EASTWARD  OVER  THE  SEA-ICE 

out  from  the  shore.  It  had  a  ram-shaped  bow  Hke  a 
Dreadnought  battleship  and,  adjoining  it,  there  were  smaller 
outcrops  of  rock  on  the  seaward  ice-cliffs.  On  its  eastern 
side  was  a  wide  bay  with  a  well-defined  cape — Cape  Fresh- 
field — at  the  eastern  extremity  about  thirty  miles  away. 

The  Bluff  was  a  place  worth  exploring.  At  a  distance  of 
more  than  fifteen  miles,  the  spot  suggested  all  kinds  of 
possibilities,  and  in  council  we  argued  that  it  was  useless  to 
go  much  farther  east,  as  to  touch  at  the  land  would  mean 
a  detour  on  the  homeward  track  and  time  would  have  to 
be  allowed  for  that. 

At  a  point  two  hundred  and  seventy  miles  from  the  Hut, 
in  latitude  68°  18'  S.,  longitude  150°  12'  E.,  we  erected  our 
"  farthest  east  "  camp  on  December  18,  after  a  day's  tramp 
of  eighteen  miles.  Here,  magnetic  "  dips  "  and  other 
observations  were  made  throughout  the  morning  of  the  19th. 
It  was  densely  overcast,  with  sago  snow  falling,  but  by 
3  P.M.  of  the  same  day  the  clouds  had  magically  cleared  and 
the  first  stage  of  the  homeward  journey  had  commenced. 


333 


CHAPTER  XVI 
HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

By  C.  T.  IVIADIGAN 

What  thrill  of  grandeur  ours 
When  first  we  viewed  the  column'd  fell  ! 
What  idle,  hlting  verse  can  tell 

Of  giant  fluted  towers, 
O'er-canopied  with  immemorial  snow 
And  riven  by  a  glacier's  azure  flow  ? 

AS  we  neared  Horn  Bluff,  on  the  first  stage  of  our 
homeward  march,  the  upper  layers  of  snow  were 
observed  to  disappear,  and  the  underlying  ice 
became  thinner  ;  in  corrugated  sapphire  plains  with  blue 
reaches  of  sparkling  water.  Cracks  bridged  with  flimsy  snow 
continually  let  one  through  into  the  water.  ^IcLean  and  I 
both  soaked  our  feet  and  once  I  was  immersed  to  the  thighs, 
having  to  stop  and  put  on  dry  socks  and  finnesko.  It  was 
a  chilly  process  allowing  the  trousers  to  dry  on  me. 

The  mountain,  pushing  out  as  a  great  promontory  from 
the  coast  amid  the  fast  sea- ice,  towered  up  higher  as  our 
sledge  approached  its  foot.  A  great  shadow  was  cast  on 
the  ice,  and,  when  more  than  a  mile  away,  we  left  the  warm 
sunshine. 

Awed  and  amazed,  we  beheld  the  lone  vastness  of  it  all 
and  were  mute.  Rising  out  of  the  flat  wilderness  over 
which  we  had  travelled  was  a  mammoth  vertical  barrier  of 
rock  rearing  its  head  to  the  skies  above.  The  whole  face 
for  five  miles  was  one  magnificent  series  of  organ-pipes. 
The  deep  shade  was  heightened  by  the  icy  glare  beyond  it. 
334 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

Here  was  indeed  a  Cathedral  of  Nature,  where  the  "  still, 
small  voice  "  spoke  amid  an  ineffable  calm. 

Far  up  the  face  of  the  cliff  snow  petrels  fluttered  like 
white  butterflies.  It  was  stirring  to  think  that  these  majestic 
heights  had  gazed  out  across  the  wastes  of  snow  and  ice  for 
countless  ages,  and  never  before  had  the  voices  of  human 
beings  echoed  in  the  great  stillness  nor  human  eyes  surveyed 
the  wondrous  scene. 

From  the  base  of  the  organ-pipes  sloped  a  mass  of  debris ; 
broken  blocks  of  rock  of  every  size  tumbling  steeply  to  the 
splintered  hummocks  of  the  sea-ice. 

Standing  out  from  the  top  of  this  talus-slope  were 
several  white  "  beacons,"  up  to  which  we  scrambled  when  the 
tent  was  pitched.  This  was  a  tedious  task  as  the  stones 
were  ready  to  slide  down  at  the  least  touch,  and  often  we 
were  carried  down  several  yards  by  a  general  movement. 
Wearing  soft  finnesko,  we  ran  the  risk  of  getting  a  crushed 
foot  among  the  large  boulders.  Amongst  the  rubble  were 
beds  of  clay,  and  streams  of  thaw- water  trickled  down  to  the 
surface  of  a  frozen  lake. 

After  rising  two  hundred  feet,  we  stood  beneath  the 
beacons  which  loomed  above  to  a  height  of  one  hundred  and 
twenty-eight  feet.  The  organ-pipes  were  basaltic*  in  char- 
acter but,  to  my  great  joy,  I  found  the  beacons  were  of 
sedimentary  rock.  After  a  casual  examination,  the  details 
were  left  till  the  morrow. 

That  night  we  had  a  small  celebration  on  raisins, 
chocolate  and  apple-rings,  besides  the  ordinary  fare  of  hoosh, 
biscuit  and  cocoa.  Several  times  we  were  awakened  by  the 
crash  of  falling  stones.  Snow  petrels  had  been  seen  coming 
home  to  their  nests  in  the  beacons,  which  were  weathered 
out  into  small  caves  and  crannies.  From  the  camp  we 
could  hear  their  harsh  cries. 

The  scene  in  the  morning  sun  was  a  brilliant  one.  The 
great  columnar  rampart  ran  almost  north  and  south  and  the 

*  To  be  exact  the  igneous  rock  was  a  very  thick  sill  of  dolerite. 

335 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

tent  was  on  its  eastern  side.     So  what  was  in  dark  shadow 
on  the  day  before  was  now  radiantly  illumined. 

Correll  remained  behind  on  the  sea-ice  with  a  theodolite 
to  take  heights  of  the  various  strata.  McLean  and  I, 
armed  with  aneroid,  glasses,  riick-sack,  geological  hammer 
(ice-axe)  and  camera,  set  out  for  the  foot  of  the  talus-slope. 

The  beacons  were  found  to  be  part  of  a  horizontal, 
stratified  series  of  sandstones  underlying  the  igneous  rock. 
There  were  bands  of  coarse  gravel  and  fine  examples  of 
stream-bedding  interspersed  with  seams  of  carbonaceous 
shale  and  poor  coal.  Among  the  debris  were  several  pieces 
of  sandstone  marked  by  black,  fossilized  plant-remains. 
The  summits  of  the  beacons  were  platforms  of  very  hard 
rock,  baked  by  the  volcanic  overflow.  The  columns,  roughly 
hexagonal  and  weathered  to  a  dull-red,  stood  above  in 
sheer  perpendicular  lines  of  six  hundred  and  sixty  feet  in 
altitude. 

After  taking  a  dozen  photographs  of  geological  and  general 
interest  and  stuffing  the  sack  and  our  pockets  with  specimens, 
we  picked  a  track  down  the  shelving  talus  to  a  lake  of  fresh 
water  which  was  covered  with  a  superficial  crust  of  ice 
beneath  which  the  water  ran.  The  surface  was  easily 
broken  and  we  fetched  the  aluminium  cover  of  the  cooker, 
filling  it  with  three  gallons  of  water,  thus  saving  kerosene 
for  almost  a  day. 

After  McLean  had  collected  samples  of  soil,  lichens,  algae 
and  moss,  and  all  the  treasures  had  been  labelled,  we  lunched 
and  harnessed-up  once  more  for  the  homeward  trail. 

For  four  miles  we  ran  parallel  to  the  one-thousand-foot 
wall  of  Horn  Bluff  meeting  several  boulders  stranded  on 
the  ice,  as  well  as  the  fragile  shell  of  a  tiny  sea-urchin.  The 
promontory  was  domed  with  snow  and  ice,  more  than  one 
thousand  two  hundred  feet  above  sea-level.  From  it 
streamed  a  blue  glacier  overflowing  through  a  rift  in  the 
face.  Five  miles  on  our  way,  the  sledge  passed  from  friction- 
less  ice  to  rippled  snow  and  with  a  march  of  seven  miles, 
following  lunch,  we  pitched  camp. 
336 


y 


'/:■ 


M 


jdsXm. 


King  George  V  Land  McLc 

AN  OUTCROP  OF  A  SEDIMENTARY  FORMATION  CONTAINING  BANDS 
OF    COAL    PROJECTING    THROUGH    THE    TALUS    SLOPE    BELOW  THE 
COLUMNAR  DOLERITE  AT  HORN  BLUFF 


Kififi  Ueorije  V  Lund 

THE  FACE  OF  A  GRANITE  OUTCROP  NEAR  PENGUIN  POINT. 
BASE  IS  A  TIDE  CRACK  AND  ICE  FOOT 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

Every  one  was  tired  that  night,  and  our  prayer  to  the 
Sleep  Merchant  in  the  book  of  Australian  verse  was  for : 

Twenty  gallons  of  balmy  sleep, 
Dreamless,  and  deep,  and  mild. 
Of  the  excellent  brand  you  used  to  keep 
When  I  was  a  httle  child. 

For  three  days,  December  22,  23  and  24,  the  wind  soughed 
at  thirty  miles  per  hour  and  the  sky  was  a  compact  nimbus, 
unveiling  the  sun  at  rare  moments.  Through  a  mist  of 
snow  we  steered  on  a  north-west  course  towards  the  one- 
hundred-and-fifty-two  mile  depot.  The  wind  was  from  the 
south-east  true,  and  this  information,  with  hints  from  the  sun- 
compass,  gave  us  the  direction.  With  the  sail  set,  on  a  flat 
surface,  among  ghostly  bergs  and  over  narrow  leads  we  ran 
for  forty-seven  miles  with  scarce  a  clear  view  of  what  lay 
around.  The  bergs  had  long  ramps  of  snow  leading  close 
up  to  their  summits  on  the  windward  side  and  in  many  cases 
the  intervals  between  these  ramps  and  the  bergs  were 
occupied  by  deep  moats. 

One  day  we  were  making  four  knots  an  hour  under  all 
canvas  through  thick  drift.  Suddenly,  after  a  gradual 
ascent,  I  was  on  the  edge  of  a  moat,  thirty  feet  deep.  I 
shouted  to  the  others  and,  just  in  time,  the  sledge  was  slewed 
round  on  the  very  brink. 

We  pushed  on  blindly  : 

The  toil  of  it  none  may  share  ; 
By  yourself  must  the  way  be  won 
Through  fervid  or  frozen  air 
Till  the  overland  journey's  done. 

Christmas  Day  !  The  day  that  ever  reminds  one  of  the 
sweet  story  of  old,  the  lessons  of  childhood,  the  joys  of  Santa 
Claus — the  day  on  which  the  thoughts  of  the  wildest  wanderer 
turn  to  home  and  peace  and  love.  All  the  world  was  cheer- 
ful ;  the  sun  was  bright,  the  air  was  calm.  It  was  the  home- 
trail,  provisions  were  in  plenty,  the  sledge  was  light  and  our 
hearts  lighter. 
VOL.  I  y  337 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

The  eastern  edge  of  Ninnis  Glacier  was  near,  and,  leaving 
the  sea-ice,  we  were  soon  straining  up  the  first  slope,  backed 
by  a  line  of  ridges  trending  north-east  and  south-west,  with 
shallow  valleys  intervening.  On  the  wind-swept  crests 
there  were  a  few  crevasses  well  packed  with  snow. 

It  was  a  day's  work  of  twelve  miles  and  we  felt  ready  for 
Christmas  dinner.  McLean  was  cook  and  had  put  some  apple- 
rings  to  soak  in  the  cooker  after  the  boil-up  at  lunch. 
Beyond  this  and  the  fact  that  he  took  some  penguin-meat 
into  the  tent,  he  kept  his  plans  in  the  deepest  mystery. 
Correll  and  I  were  kept  outside  making  things  snug  and 
taking  the  meteorological  observations,  until  the  word  came 
to  enter.  When  at  last  we  scrambled  in,  a  delicious  smell 
diffused  through  the  tent,  and  there  was  a  sound  of  frying 
inside  the  cooker-pot.  We  were  presented  with  a  menu 
which  read  : 

"  Peace  on  earth,  good  will  to  men," 

Xmas  1912  Kjng  George  V.  Land 

200  miles  east  of  Winter  Quarters. 

MENU  DU  DINER 

Hors  d'oeuvre 

Biscuit  de  plasmon  Ration  du  lard  glace 

Entrie 

Monsieur  I'Empereur  Pingouin  fricasse 

Pi^ce  de  Resistance 

Pemmican  naturel  a  I'Antarctique 

Dessert 

Hotch-potch  de  pommes  et  de  raisins 

Chocolat  au  sucre  glaxone 

Liqueur  bien  ancienne  de  I'Ecosse 

Cigarettes  Tabac 

The  hors  d'oeuvre  of  bacon  ration  was  a  welcome  surprise. 
McLean  had  carried  the  tin  unknown  to  us  up  till  this 
moment.  The  penguin,  fried  in  lumps  of  fat  taken  from 
the  pemmican,  and  a  little  butter,  was  dehcious.  In  the 
same  pot  the  hoosh  was  boiled  and  for  once  we  noted 
an  added  piquancy.  Next  followed  the  plum-pudding — a 
dense  mixture  of  powdered  biscuit,  glaxo,  sugar,  raisins  and 
338 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

apple-rings,  surpassing  the  finest,  flaming,  holly-decked, 
Christmas  creation. 

Then  came  the  toasts.  McLean  produced  the  whisky 
from  the  medical  kit  and  served  it  out,  much  diluted,  in 
three  mugs.  There  was  not  three  ounces  in  all,  but  it 
flavoured  the  water. 

I  was  asked  to  call  "  The  King."  McLean  proposed 
"  The  Other  Sledgers  "  in  a  noble  speech,  wishing  them  ever}- 
success  ;  and  then  there  were  a  few  drops  left  to  drink  to 
"  Ourselves,"  whom  Correll  eulogized  to  our  complete  satis- 
faction. We  then  drew  on  the  meagre  supply  of  cigarettes 
and  lay  on  our  bags,  feeling  as  comfortable  as  the  daintiest 
epicure  after  a  twelve-course  dinner,  drinking  his  coffee  and 
smoking  his  cigar. 

We  talked  till  twelve  o'clock,  and  then  went  outside 
to  look  at  the  midnight  sun,  shining  brightly  just  above 
the  southern  horizon.  Turning  in,  we  were  once  more  at 
home  in  our  dreams. 

By  a  latitude  shot  at  noon  on  Boxing  Day,  I  found  that 
our  position  was  not  as  far  north  as  expected.  The  follow- 
ing wind  had  been  probably  slightly  east  of  south-east  and 
too  much  westing  had  been  made.  From  a  tangle  of  broken 
ridges  whose  surface  was  often  granular,  half-consolidated 
ice,  the  end  of  the  day  opened  up  a  lilac  plain  of  sea-ice 
ahead.  We  were  once  more  on  the  western  side  of  Ninnis 
Glacier  and  the  familiar  coast  of  Penguin  Point,  partly 
hidden  by  an  iceberg,  sprang  into  view.  The  depot  hill  to 
the  north-west  could  be  recognized,  twenty  miles  away, 
across  a  wide  bay.  By  hoosh-time  we  had  found  a  secure 
path  to  the  sea-ice,  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet  below. 

The  wind  sprang  up  opportunely  on  the  morning  of  the 
27th,  and  the  sun  was  serene  in  a  blue  sky.  Up  went  the 
sail  and  with  a  feather-weight  load  we  strode  off  for  the  depot 
eighteen  miles  distant.  Three  wide  rifts  in  the  sea-ice  exer- 
cised our  ingenuity  during  the  day's  march,  but  by  the  time 
the  sun  was  in  the  south-west  the  sledge  was  sawing  through 
the  sandy  snow  of  the  depot  hill.     It  was  unfortunate  that 

839 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

the  food  of  this  depot  had  been  cached  so  far  out  of  our 
westerly  course,  as  the  time  expended  in  recovering  it  might 
have  been  profitably  given  to  a  survey  of  the  mainland 
east  of  Penguin  Point.  At  6.20  p.m.,  after  eighteen  and  a 
quarter  miles,  the  food-bag  was  sighted  on  the  mound, 
and  that  night  the  dinner  at  our  one-hundred-and-fifty-two- 
mile  depot  was  marked  by  some  special  innovations. 

Penguin  Point,  thirty  miles  away,  bore  W.  15°  S.,  and 
next  day  we  made  a  bid  for  it  by  a  march  of  sixteen  miles. 
There  was  eleven  days'  ration  on  the  sledge  to  take  us  to 
Mount  Murchison,  ninety  miles  away  ;  consequently  the 
circuitous  route  to  the  land  was  held  to  be  a  safe  "proposi- 
tion." 

Many  rock  faces  became  visible,  and  I  was  able  to  fix 
numerous  prominent  points  with  the  theodolite. 

At  three  miles  off  the  coast,  the  surface  became  broken 
by  ridges,  small  bergs  and  high,  narrow  cupolas  of  ice 
surrounded  by  deep  moats.  One  of  these  was  very  striking. 
It  rose  out  of  a  wind-raked  hollow  to  a  height  of  fifty  feet; 
just  the  shape  of  an  ancient  Athenian  helmet.  McLean 
took  a  photograph. 

As  at  Horn  Bluff,  the  ice  became  thinner  and  freer  of 
snow  as  we  drew  near  the  Point.  The  rocky  wall  under 
which  the  tent  was  raised  proved  to  be  three  hundred  feet 
high,  jutting  out  from  beneath  the  slopes  of  ice.  From 
here  the  coast  ran  almost  south  on  one  side  and  north-west 
on  the  other.  On  either  hand  there  were  dark  faces  corniced 
with  snow. 

The  next  day  was  devoted  to  exploration.  Adehe  pen- 
guins  waddled  about  the  tide-crack  over  which  we  crossed 
to  examine  the  rock,  which  was  of  coarse-grained  granite, 
presenting  great,  vertical  faces.  Hundreds  of  snow  petrels 
flew  about  and  some  stray  skua  gulls  were  seen. 

Near  the  camp,  on  thick  ice,  were  several  large  blocks  of 
granite  which  had  floated  out  from  the  shore  and  lay  each 
in  its  pool  of  thaw-water,  covered  with  serpulae  and    lace 
coral. 
340 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

Correll,  our  Izaak  Walton,  had  brought  a  fishing-Hne 
and  some  pengum-meat.  He  stopped  near  the  camp  fishing 
while  McLean  and  I  continued  down  the  coast,  examining 
the  outcrops.  The  type  of  granite  remained  unchanged  in 
the  numerous  exposures. 

I  had  noticed  a  continuous  rustling  sound  for  some  time 
and  found  at  length  that  it  was  caused  by  little  streams  of 
ice-crystals  running  down  the  steep  slopes  in  cascades, 
finally  pouring  out  in  piles  on  the  sea-ice.  The  partial 
thaw  in  the  sunlight  causes  the  semi-solid  ice  to  break  up 
into  separate  grains.  Sometimes  whole  areas  of  the  surface, 
in  delicate  equilibrium,  would  suddenly  flow  rapidly  away. 

For  three  miles  we  walked,  and  as  the  next  four  miles  of 
visible  coast  presented  no  extensive  outcrops,  we  turned 
back  for  lunch. 

During  the  afternoon,  on  the  summit  of  the  Point,  it 
was  found  that  an  uneven  rocky  area,  about  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  wide,  ran  backwards  to  the  ice-falls  of  the  plateau. 
The  surface  was  very  broken  and  weathered,  covered  in 
patches  by  abundant  lichens  and  mosses.  Fossicking  round 
in  the  gravel,  Correll  happened  on  some  tiny  insect-hke 
mites  living  amongst  the  moss  or  on  the  moist  under  side  of 
slabs  of  stone.  This  set  us  all  insect-hunting.  Alcohol  was 
brought  in  a  small  bottle  from  the  tent,  and  into  this  they 
were  swept  in  myriads  with  a  camel's-hair  brush.  From 
the  vantage-point  of  a  high  rock  in  the  neighbourhood  the 
long  tongue  of  Mertz  Glacier  could  be  seen  running  away  to 
the  north. 

At  8.30  A.M.,  on  New  Year's  Eve,  we  set  off  for  another 
line  of  rocks  about  four  miles  away  to  the  west.  There  were 
two  masses  forming  an  angle  in  the  ice-front  and  consisting 
of  two  main  ridges  rising  to  a  height  of  two  hundred  and 
fifty  feet,  running  back  into  the  ice-cap  for  a  mile,  and  divided 
by  a  small  glacier. 

This  region  was  soon  found  to  be  a  perfect  menagerie 
of  fife.  Seals  lay  about  dozing  peacefully  by  the  narrow 
lanes  of  water.     Adelie  penguins  strutted  in  procession  up 

341 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

and  down  the  little  glacier.  To  reach  his  rookery,  a  penguin 
would  leap  four  feet  on  to  a  ledge  of  the  ice-foot,  painfully 
pad  up  the  glassy  slope  and  then  awkwardly  scale  the  rocks 
until  he  came  to  a  level  of  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet.  Here 
he  took  over  the  care  of  a  chick  or  an  egg,  while  the  other 
bird  went  to  fish.  Skua  gulls  flew  about,  continually 
molesting  the  rookeries.  One  area  of  the  rocks  was  covered 
by  a  luxuriant  growth  of  green  moss  covering  guano  and 
littered  skeletons — the  site  of  a  deserted  rookery. 

Correll  and  1  went  up  to  where  the  ridges  converged, 
selecting  numerous  specimens  of  rock  and  mineral  and 
finding  thousands  of  small  red  mites  in  the  moist  gravel. 
Down  on  the  southern  ridge  we  happened  on  a  Wilson  petrel 
with  feathered  nestlings.  At  this  point  McLean  came  along 
from  the  west  with  the  news  of  silver-grey  petrels  and  Cape 
pigeons  nesting  in  hundreds.  He  had  secured  tw^o  of  each 
species  and  several  eggs.  This  was  indeed  a  discovery,  as 
the  eggs  of  the  former  birds  had  never  before  been  found. 
Quite  close  to  us  were  many  snow  petrels  in  all  kinds  of 
unexpected  crevices.  The  light  was  too  dull  for  photo- 
graphing, but,  while  I  took  magnetic  "  dips  "  on  the 
following  morning,  McLean  visited  the  silver-grey  petrels 
and  Cape  pigeons  and  secured  a  few  "  snaps." 

The  last  thing  we  did  before  leaving  the  mainland  was 
to  kill  two  penguins  and  cut  off  their  breasts  and  this  meat 
was,  later,  to  serve  us  in  good  stead. 

Crossing  the  Mertz  Glacier  at  any  time  would  have  been 
an  unpleasant  undertaking,  but  to  go  straight  to  Mount 
Murchison  (the  site  of  our  first  depot  on  the  outward 
journey)  from  Penguin  Point  meant  spanning  it  in  a  long 
oblique  line.  It  was  preferable  to  travel  quickly  and  safely 
over  the  sea-ice  on  a  north-westerly  course,  which,  plotted 
on  the  chart,  intersected  our  old  one-hundred-mile  camp  on 
the  eastern  margin  of  the  glacier ;  then  to  cross  by  the 
route  we  already  knew. 

By  January  2  we  had  thrown  Penguin  Point  five  miles 
behind,  and  a  spell  of  unsettled  weather  commenced  ;  in 
342 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

front  lay  a  stretch  of  fourteen  miles  over  a  good  surface. 
The  wind  was  behind  us,  blowing  between  thirty  and  forty 
miles  per  hour,  and  from  an  overcast  sky  light  snow  was 
f  alhng.  Fortunately  there  were  fleeting  glimpses  of  the  sun, 
by  which  the  course  could  be  adjusted.  Towards  evening 
the  snow  had  thickened,  but  thanks  to  the  splendid  assist- 
ance afforded  by  a  sail,  the  white  jutting  spurs  of  the  edge 
of  Mertz  Glacier  were  dimly  visible. 

A  blizzard  took  possession  of  the  next  day  till  7  p.m., 
when  we  all  sallied  out  and  found  the  identical  gully  in 
which  was  the  one-hundred-mile  camp  of  the  outward 
journey.  The  light  was  still  bad  and  the  sky  overcast,  so 
the  start  was  postponed  till  next  morning. 

There  was  food  for  five  days  on  a  slightly  reduced  ration 
and  the  depot  on  Mount  Murchison  was  forty  miles  away. 

Once  we  had  left  the  sea-ice  and  stood  on  the  glacier, 
Aurora  Peak  with  its  black  crest  showed  through  the 
glasses.  Once  there,  the  crevasses  we  most  dreaded  would 
be  over  and  the  depot  easily  found. 

A  good  fourteen  and  a  quarter  miles  slipped  by  on 
January  4 — a  fine  day.  On  January  5  the  "  plot  began  to 
thicken."  The  clouds  hung  above  like  a  blanket,  sprinkling 
light  snow.  The  light  was  atrocious,  and  a  few  open  rents 
gave  warning  of  the  western  zone  of  pitfalls.  All  the  while 
there  was  a  shifting  spectral  chaos  of  whiteness  which  seemed 
to  benumb  the  faculties  and  destroy  one's  sense  of  reality. 
We  decided  to  wait  for  a  change  in  the  weather. 

During  the  night  the  snow  ceased,  and  by  lunch  time 
on  the  6th  the  sledge-meter  recorded  ten  miles.  The  strange 
thing  was  that  the  firm  sastrugi  present  on  the  outward 
journey  were  now  covered  inches  in  snow,  which  became 
deeper  as  we  marched  westward. 

It  was  now  a  frequent  occurrence  for  one  of  us  to  pitch 
forward  with  his  feet  down  a  hidden  crevasse,  sometimes  going 
through  to  the  waist.  The  travelling  was  most  nerve- 
racking.  When  a  foot  went  through  the  crust  of  snow,  it  was 
impossible  to  tell  on  which  side  of  the  crevasse  one  happened 

343 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

to  be,  or  in  what  direction  it  ran.     The  only  thing  to  do  was 
to  go  ahead  and  trust  in  Providence. 

At  last  we  landed  the  sledge  on  a  narrow  ridge  of  hard 
snow,  surrounded  by  blue,  gaping  pits  in  a  pallid  eternity 
of  white.  It  was  only  when  the  tent  was  pitched  that  a 
wide  quarry  was  noticed  a  few  yards  away  from  the  door. 

It  was  now  fourteen  miles  to  the  top  of  Mount 
Murchison  and  we  had  only  two  more  days'  rations  and  one 
and  a  half  pounds  of  penguin-meat. 

On  January  7th  the  light  was  worse  than  ever  and  snow 
fell.  It  was  only  six  miles  across  the  broken  country  between 
us  and  the  gully  between  Mt.  Murchison  and  Aurora  Peak, 
where  one  could  travel  with  some  surety.  A  sharp  look-out 
was  kept,  and  towards  11  p.m.  a  rim  of  clear  sky  overtopped 
the  southern  horizon.  We  knew  the  sun  would  curve  round 
into  it  at  midnight,  so  all  was  made  ready  for  marching. 

When  the  sun's  disc  emerged  into  the  rift  there  was 
light ;  but  dim,  cold  and  fleeting.  The  smallest  irregularity 
on  the  surface  threw  a  shadow  hundreds  of  yards  long.  The 
plain  around  was  a  bluish-grey  checquer-board  of  light 
and  shade;  ahead,  sharp  and  clear  against  the  leaden  sky, 
stood  beautiful  Aurora  Peak,  swathed  in  lustrous  gold — 
the  chariot  of  the  goddess  herself.  The  awful  splendour  of 
the  scene  tended  to  depress  one  and  make  the  task  more 
trying.  I  have  never  felt  more  nervous  than  I  did  in  that 
ghostly  light  in  the  tense  silence,  surrounded  by  the  hidden 
horror  of  fathomless  depths.  All  was  covered  with  a  uniform 
layer  of  snow,  growing  deeper  and  heavier  at  every  step. 
I  was  ahead  and  went  through  eight  times  in  about  four 
miles.  The  danger  lay  in  getting  the  sledge  and  one, 
two,  or  all  of  us  on  a  weak  snow-bridge  at  the  same  time.  As 
long  as  the  sledge  did  not  go  down  we  were  comparatively  safe. 

At  1.30  A.M.  the  sun  was  obscured  and  the  light  waned 
to  dead  white.  Still  we  went  on,  as  the  entrance  of  the 
gully  between  Aurora  Peak  and  Mount  Murchison  was  near 
at  hand  and  we  had  a  mind  to  get  over  the  danger-zone 
before  a  snowstorm  commenced. 
344 


O     >H 


t3   H 
^2;  H 


H  o 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

By  5.30  A.M.  we  breathed  freely  on  "  terra  firma,"  even 
though  one  sunk  through  a  foot  of  snow  to  feel  it.  It  had 
taken  six  hours  to  do  the  last  five  and  three-quarter  miles, 
and,  being  tired  out  with  the  strain  on  muscles  and  nerves, 
we  raised  the  tent,  had  a  meal,  and  then  slept  till  noon  on 
the  8th.  It  was  eight  miles  to  the  depot,  five  miles  up  the 
gully  and  three  miles  to  the  summit  of  Mount  Murchison  ;  and 
no  one  doubted  for  a  moment  that  it  could  not  be  done  in  a 
single  day's  march. 

Advancing  up  the  gully  after  lunch,  we  found  that  the 
surface  became  softer,  and  we  were  soon  sinking  to  the  knees 
at  every  step.  The  runners,  too,  sank  till  the  decking 
rested  on  the  snow,  and  it  was  as  much  as  we  could  do  to 
shift  the  sledge,  with  a  series  of  jerks  at  every  step.  At 
6  P.M.  matters  became  desperate.  We  resolved  to  make  a 
depot  of  everything  unnecessary,  and  to  relay  it  up  the 
mountain  afterwards. 

The  sledge-meter,  clogged  with  snow  and  almost  sub- 
merged, was  taken  off  and  stood  up  on  end  to  mark  a  depot, 
whilst  a  pile  was  made  of  the  dip-circle,  theodolite  and 
tripod,  pick,  alpine  rope,  ice-axe,  all  the  mineral  and 
biological  specimens  and  excess  clothing. 

Even  thus  lightened,  we  could  scarcely  move  the  sledge, 
struggling  on,  sinking  to  the  thighs  in  the  flocculent  deluge. 
Snow  now  began  to  fall  so  thickly  that  it  was  impossible  to 
see  ahead. 

At  7  P.M.  we  finished  up  the  last  scraps  of  pemmican  and 
cocoa.  Biscuit,  sugar  and  glaxo  had  given  out  at  the  noon 
meal.  There  still  remained  one  and  a  half  pounds  of  penguin- 
meat,  several  infusions  of  tea  and  plenty  of  kerosene  for  the 
primus. 

We  staggered  on  till  10.30  p.m.,  when  the  weather  became 
so  dense  that  the  sides  of  the  gully  were  invisible.  Tired 
out,  we  camped  and  had  some  tea.  In  eight  hours  we  had 
only  made  four  and  a  half  miles,  and  there  was  still  the 
worst  part  to  come. 

In  our  exhausted  state  we  slept  till  11  p.m.  of  January  9, 

345 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

awaking  to  find  the  sky  densely  overcast  and  a  light  fog  in 
the  air.  During  a  rift  which  opened  for  a  few  minutes 
there  was  a  short  gUmpse  of  the  rock  on  Aurora  Peak. 
Shredding  half  the  penguin-meat,  we  boiled  it  up  and  found 
the  stew  and  broth  excellent. 

At  1.30  A.M.  we  started  to  struggle  up  the  gully  once 
more,  wading  along  in  a  most  helpless  fashion,  with  breathing 
spells  every  ten  yards  or  less.  Snow  began  to  fall  in  such 
volume  that  at  last  it  was  impossible  to  keep  our  direction 
with  any  certainty.  The  only  thing  to  do  was  to  throw  up 
the  tent  as  a  shelter  and  wait.  This  we  did  till  4.30  a.m.  ; 
but  there  must  have  been  a  cloud-burst,  for  the  heavy  flakes 
toppled  on  to  the  tent  like  tropical  rain.  We  got  into 
sleeping-bags,  and  tried  to  be  patient  and  to  forget  that 
we  were  hungry. 

Apparently,  during  our  seven  weeks'  absence,  the  local 
precipitation  had  been  almost  continual,  and  snow  now  lay 
over  this  region  in  stupendous  amount.  Even  when  one 
sank  three  feet,  it  was  not  on  to  the  firm  sastrugi  over  which 
we  had  travelled  out  of  the  valley  on  the  outward  journey, 
for  these  lay  still  deeper.  It  was  hoped  that  the  "  snow- 
dump  "  did  not  continue  over  the  fifty  miles  to  the  Hut, 
but  we  argued  that  on  the  windy  pleatau  this  could  scarcely 
be  possible. 

It  was  evident  that  without  any  more  food,  through  this 
bottomless,  yielding  snow,  we  could  never  haul  the  sledge 
up  to  the  depot,  a  rise  of  one  thousand  two  hundred  feet 
in  three  miles.  One  of  us  must  go  up  and  bring  food  back, 
and  I  decided  to  do  so  as  soon  as  the  weather  cleared. 

We  found  the  wait  for  clearer  weather  long  and  trying 
with  empty  stomachs.  As  the  tobacco-supply  still  held  out, 
McLean  and  I  found  great  solace  in  our  pipes.  All  through 
the  rest  of  the  day  and  till  5  p.m.  of  the  next,  January  10, 
there  was  not  a  rift  in  the  opaque  wall  of  flakes.  Then  to 
our  intense  relief  the  snow  stopped,  the  clouds  rolled  to  the 
north,  and,  in  swift  transformation — a  cloudless  sky  with 
bright  sunshine  !  With  the  rest  of  the  penguin-meat — a 
346 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

bare  half-pound— we  had  another  thin  broth.  Somewhat 
fortified,  I  took  the  food-bag  and  shovel,  and  left  the  tent 
at  5.30  A.M. 

Often  sinking  to  the  thighs,  I  felt  faint  at  the  first 
exertion.  The  tent  scarcely  seemed  to  recede  as  I  toiled 
onwards  towards  the  first  steep  slope.  The  heavy  mantle  of 
snow  had  so  altered  the  contours  of  the  side  of  the  gully 
that  I  was  not  sure  of  the  direction  of  the  top  of  the  mountain. 

Resting  every  hundred  yards,  I  floundered  on  hour  after 
hour,  until,  on  arriving  at  a  high  point,  I  saw  a  little  shining 
mound  standing  up  on  a  higher  point,  a  good  mile  to  the 
east.  After  seven  hours'  wading  I  reached  it  and  found 
that  it  was  the  depot. 

Two  feet  of  the  original  eight-foot  mound  projected  above 
the  surface,  with  the  bamboo  pole  and  a  wire-and-canvas 
flag  rising  another  eighteen  inches.  On  this,  a  high  isolated 
mountain  summit,  six  feet  of  snow  had  actually  accumu- 
lated.    How  thankful  I  was  that  I  had  brought  a  shovel  ! 

At  seven  feet  I  "  bottomed  "  on  the  hard  snow,  without 
result.  Then,  running  a  tunnel  in  the  most  probable 
direction,  I  struck  with  the  shovel  the  kerosene  tin  which 
was  on  the  top  of  the  food-bag.  On  opening  the  bag,  the 
first  items  to  appear  were  sugar,  butter  and  biscuits  ;  the 
next  quarter  of  an  hour  I  shall  not  forget ! 

I  made  a  swag  of  five  days'  provisions,  and,  taking  a 
direct  route,  attacked  the  three  miles  downhill  in  lengths  of 
one  hundred  and  fifty  yards.  Coming  in  sight  of  the  tent, 
I  called  to  my  companions  to  thaw  some  water  for  a  drink. 
So  slow  was  progress  that  I  could  speak  to  them  a  quarter 
of  an  hour  before  reaching  the  tent.  I  had  been  away 
eleven  and  a  half  hours,  covering  about  seven  miles  in  all. 

McLean  and  Correll  were  getting  anxious  about  me. 
They  said  that  they  had  felt  the  cold  and  were  unable  to 
sleep.  Soon  I  had  produced  the  pemmican  and  biscuit, 
and  a  scalding  hoosh  was  made.  The  other  two  had  had 
only  a  mug  of  penguin  broth  each  in  three  days,  and  I 
had  only  broken  my  fast  a  few  hours  before  them. 

347 


THE  HOME  OF  THE  BLIZZARD 

After  the  meal,  McLean  and  Correll  started  back  to  the 
cache,  two  miles  down  the  gully,  to  select  some  of  the 
geological  and  biological  specimens  and  to  fetch  a  few 
articles  of  clothing.  The  instruments,  the  greater  part  of 
the  collection  of  rocks,  crampons,  sledge-meter  and  other 
odds  and  ends  were  all  left  behind.  Coming  back  with  the 
loads  slung  like  swags  they  found  that  by  walking  in  their 
old  footsteps  they  made  fair  progress. 

By  8  P.M.  all  had  rested,  every  unnecessary  fitting  had 
been  stripped  off  the  sledge  and  the  climb  to  the  depot 
commenced.  I  went  ahead  in  my  old  trail,  Correll  also 
making  use  of  it ;  while  McLean  broke  a  track  for  himself. 
The  work  was  slow  and  heavy  ;  nearly  six  hours  were  spent 
doing  those  three  miles. 

It  was  a  lovely  evening ;  the  yellow  sun  drifting  through 
orange  cloudlets  behind  Aurora  Peak.  We  were  in  a  more 
appreciative  mood  than  on  the  last  midnight  march,  exult- 
ing in  the  knowledge  of  ten  days'  provisions  at  hand  and 
fifty-three  miles  to  go  to  reach  the  Hut. 

In  the  manner  of  the  climate,  a  few  wisps  of  misty  rack 
came  sailing  from  the  south-east,  the  wind  rose,  snow 
commenced  to  fall  and  a  blizzard  held  sway  for  almost 
three  days.  It  was  just  as  well  that  we  had  found  that 
depot  when  we  did. 

The  fifty-three  miles  to  the  Hut  melted  away  in  the 
pleasures  of  anticipation.  The  first  two  miles,  on  the 
morning  of  January  14,  gave  us  some  strenuous  work,  but 
they  were  luxurious  in  comparison  with  what  we  expected; 
soon,  however,  the  surface  rapidly  and  permanently  improved. 
A  forty-mile  wind  from  the  south-east  was  a  distinct  help, 
and  by  the  end  of  the  day  we  had  come  in  sight  of  the 
nunatak  first  seen  after  leaving  the  Hut  (Madigan  Nunatak). 

In  two  days  forty  miles  lay  behind.  Down  the  blue 
ice-slopes  in  slippery  finnesko,  and  Aladdin's  Cave  hove  in 
sight.  We  tumbled  in,  to  be  assailed  by  a  wonderful  odour 
which  brought  back  orchards,  shops,  people — a  breath  of 
civilization.  In  the  centre  of  the  floor  was  a  pile  of  oranges 
348 


HORN  BLUFF  AND  PENGUIN  POINT 

surmounted  by  two  luscious  pineapples.  The  Ship  was  in  ! 
There  was  a  bundle  of  letters— Bage  was  back  from  the  south 
—Wild  had  been  landed  one  thousand  five  hundred  miles 
to  the  west— Amundsen  had  reached  the  Pole  !  Scott  was 
remaining  in  the  Antarctic  for  another  year.  How  we 
shouted  and  read  all  together  ! 


PRINTED  AT 
THE  BALLANTYNE  PRESS 
LONDON    &    EDINBURGH 


CALIF  ACAD  OF  SCIENCES  LIBRARY 


3    1853    00093    6786 


