Theory of Heat (James Clerk Maxwell, 1872)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of Maxwell's textbook of heat (https://archive.org/details/theoryofheat00maxwuoft). James Clerk Maxwell (1831-1879) - his textbook of heat: kinetic theory and thermodynamics.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

TEXT-BOOKS   OF   SCIENCE. 


PHOTOGRAPHY.  By  Captain  W.  DE  WIVELESLIE  AENEY, 

C.B.  F.R.S.  Director  of  Science  in  the  Science  and  Art  Department.  With 
105  Illustrations.  Price  3$.  6d. 

The    STRENGTH   of  MATERIALS    and  STRUG- 

TURES  ;  the  Strength  of  Materials  as  depending  on  their  quality  and  as 
ascertained  by  Testing  Apparatus  ;  the  Strength  of  Structures  as  depending 
on  their  form  and  arrangement,  and  on  the  materials  of  which  they  are  corn- 
posed.  By  Sir  J.  ANDERSON,  C.E.&c.  With  66  Illustrations.  Price  3,9.  6d. 

ELEMENTS  of  ASTRONOMY.  By  Sir  R.  S.  BALL,  LL.  D. 

F.R.S.     With  130  Illustrations.     Price  6s.  6d. 

RAILWAY  APPLIANCES.     A  Description  of  Details  of 

Railway  Construction  subsequent  to  the  completion  of  Earthworks  and 
Structures,  including  a  short  Notice  of  Railwav  Rolling  Stock.  By  Sir 
JOHN  WOLFE  BARRY,  K.C.B.  F.R.S.  With  218  Illustrations.  Price4j.6^. 

SYSTEMATIC  MINERALOGY.     By  HILARY  BATTRR- 

MAN,  F.G.S.  Associate  of  the  Royal  School  of  Mines.  With  373  Illustrations. 
Price  6s. 

DESCRIPTIVE  MINERALOGY.     By  HILARY  BAUER- 
MAN,  F.G.S.  &c.    With  236  Illustrations.     Price  6s. 

METALS,  their  PROPERTIES  and  TREATMENT. 

Bv  A.  K.  HUNTINGTON  and  W.  G.  McMiLLAN.  With  122  Illustrations. 
Price  -JS.  6d. 

PRACTICAL  PHYSICS.    By   R.   T.  GLAZEHROOK,  M.A. 

F.R.S.  and  W.  N.  SHAW,  M.A.     With  134  Illustrations.     Price  7*.  6d. 

PHYSICAL    OPTICS.      By  R.  T.   GLAZEBROOK,    M.A. 

F.R.S.  Fellow  and  Lecturer  of  Trin.  Coll.  Demonstrator  of  Physics  at  the 
Cavendish  Laboratory,  Cambridge.  With  183  Illustrations.  Price  6s. 

The  ART  of  ELECTRO -METALLURGY,  including-  all 

known   Processes  of  Electro-Deposition.       By   G.  GORE,   LL.D.    F.R.S. 

With  56  Illustrations.     Price  6s. 

ALGEBRA    and    TRIGONOMETRY.      By    WILLIAM 

NATHANIEL  GRIFFIN,  B.D.  Price  is.  M.  NOTES  ON,  with  SOLU- 
TIONS of  the  more  difficult  QUESTIONS.  Price  3j.  6<t. 

The    STEAM    ENGINE.     Bv    GEOROE   C.   V.    HOLMFS, 

Whitworth  Scholar :  Secretary  of  the  Institution  of  Naval  Architects.  With 
212  Illustrations.  Price  6s. 

ELECTRICITY  and    MAGNETISM.     By    FLEEMING 

jHNKiN.F.R.SS.  L.  &  E.    With  177  Illustrations.    Price  3*.  6d 


LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.   39  Paternoster  Row,  London 
New  York  and  Bombay. 


TEXT-BOOKS  OF  SCIENCE. 


By  Dr.  OTTO  WILHKLM  THOM£  and  A.  W.  BENNETT'  M.A.  B.Sc.  F.L.S. 
Wit 


THEORY  of  HEAT.  ByJ.  CLERK  MAXWELL,  M.A.  LL.D. 

Edin.  F.R.SS.  L.  &  E.  With  Corrections  and  Additions  by  LORD 
RAVLEIGH,  Sec.R.S.  With  38  Illustrations.  Price  4$.  6d. 

TECHNICAL    ARITHMETIC     and    MENSURA- 

TION.   By  CHARLES  W.  MERRIFIBLD,  F.R.S.    Price  3*.  6d.  KEY,  3*.  €>d. 

INTRODUCTION  to  the  STUDY  of  INO  RGANIC 

CHEMISTRY.  By  WILLIAM  ALLEN  MILLER,  M.D  LL.D  F.R.S.  With 
72  Illustrations.  Price  3*.  6d. 

TELEGRAPHY.      By  Sir  W.  H.  PREECE,  K.C.B.  F.R.S. 

V.-P.Inst.C.E.  and  Sir  J.  SIVEWRIGHT,  M.A.  K.C.M.G.  With  267  Illustra- 
tions.  Price  6s. 

The  STUDY  of  ROOKS,  an  ELEMENTARY  Text- 
Book  of  PETROLOGY.  By  FRANK  RUTLBY,  F.G.S.  With  6  Plates  and 
88  Illustrations.  Price  45.  6d. 

WORKSHOP  APPLIANCES,  including  Descriptions  of 

some  of  the  Gauging  and  Measuring  Instruments — Hand-Cutting  Tools, 
Lathes,  Drilling,  Planing,  and  other  Machine  Tools  used  by  Engineers. 
By  C.  P.  B.  SHELLEY,  M.I.C.E.  With  323  Illustrations.  Price  $s. 

STRUCTURAL  and  PHYSIOLOGICAL  BOTANY. 

y  Dr.  OTTO  WILHELM  THOM£  and  A.  W 
'ith  600  Illustrations  and  Map.     Price  6s . 

QUANTITATIVE    CHEMICAL    ANALYSIS.     By 

T.  E.  THORPE,  F.R.S.  Ph.D.     With  88  Illustrations.    Price  4*.  64. 

QUALITATIVE     CHEMICAL     ANALYSIS    and 

LABORATORY  PRACTICE.  By  T.  E.  THORPE,  Ph.D.  F.R.S.  and 
M.  M.  PATTISON  MUIR,  M.A.  and  F.R.S.E.  With  Plate  of  Spectra  and 
57  Illustrations.  Price  35.  6d. 

INTRODUCTION   to  the  STUDY  of  CHEMICAL 

PHILOSOPHY;  the  PRINCIPLES  of  THEORETICAL  and  SYSTE- 
MATIC CHEMISTRY.  By  WILLIAM  A.  TILDEN,  D.Sc.  London, 
F.R.S.  With  5  Illustrations.  With  or  without  Answers  to  Problems,  4$.  6d. 

The    ELEMENTS    of    MACHINE    DESIGN.     By 

W.  CAWTHORNE  UNWIN,  F.R.S. 
Part  I.    General  Principles,  Fastenings,  and  Transmissive  Machinery.     With 

304  Diagrams  &c.     Price  6s. 
Part  II.    Chieiiy  on  Engine  Details.     With  174  Illustrations.     Price  4^.  6d. 

PRELIMINARY  SURVEY  and  ESTIMATES.     By 

THEODORE  GRAHAM  GRIBBLE,  Civil  Engineer.  Including  Elementary 
Astronomy,  Route  Surveying,  Tacheometry,  Curve-ranging,  Graphic  Men- 
suration, Estimates,  Hydrography,  and  Instruments.  With  133  Illustrations, 
Quantity  Diagrams,  and  a  Manual  of  the  Slide-Rule.  Price  js.  6d. 

PLANE  and  SOLID  GEOMETRY.    By  H.  W.  WATSON, 

M.A.  formerly  Fellow  of  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     Price  3.1.  6d. 

LONGMANS,  GREEN,  &  CO.  39  Paternoster  Row,  London 

New  York  and  Bombay 


TEXT-BOOKS    OF    SCIENCE 


ADAPTED     FOR     THE    USB    OF 


ARTISANS  AND   STUDENTS    IN   PUBLIC   AND    SCIENCE    SCHOOLS 


THEORY    OF  HEAT 


THEORY    OF    HEAT 


BY 


J.  CLERK    MAXWELL,  M.A. 

LL.D.  EDIN.,  F.R.SS.  L  &  E. 

Honorary  Fellow  of  Trinity  College 

Professor  of  Experimental  Physics  iti  the  University  of  Cambridge 


WITH    CORRECTIONS    AND    ADDITIONS,  BY 

LORD    RAYLEIGH,    M.A,  D.C.L.,  LL.D. 

Secretary  of  the  Royal  Society,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the 

Royal  Institution,  and  late  Professor  of  Experimental  Physics 

in  the  University  of  Cambridge 


NEW    IMPRESSION 


LONGMANS,  GREEN,  AN£  CO. 

39'  PATERNOSTER     ROW,    LONDON 

NEW    YORK    AND    BOMBAY 

1899 


rights    reserved 


PREFACE. 


THE  AIM  of  this  book  is  to  exhibit  the  scientific 
connexion  of  the  various  steps  by  which  our  know- 
ledge of  the  phenomena  of  heat  has  been  extended. 
The  first  of  these  steps  is  the  invention  of  the  thermo- 
meter, by  which  the  registration  and  comparison 
of  temperatures  is  rendered  possible.  The  second 
step  is  the  measurement  of  quantities  of  heat,  or 
Calorimetry.  The  whole  science  of  heat  is  founded 
on  Thermometry  and  Calorimetry,  and  when  these 
operations  are  understood  we  may  proceed  to  the 
third  step,  which  is  the  investigation  of  those  relations 
between  the  thermal  and  the  mechanical  properties  of 
substances  which  form  the  subject  of  Thermodynamics. 
The  whole  of  this  part  of  the  subject  depends  on  the 
consideration  of  the  Intrinsic  Energy  of  a  system  of 
bodies,  as  depending  on  the  temperature  and  physical 
state,  as  well  as  the  form,  motion,  and  relative  position 
of  these  bodies.  Of  this  energy,  however,  only  a 
part  is  available  for  the  purpose  of  producing  me- 
chanical work,  and  though  the  energy  itself  is  inde- 
structible, the  available  part  is  liable  to  diminution  by 
the  action  of  certain  natural  processes,  such  as  con- 


vi  Preface. 

duction  and  radiation  of  heat,  friction,  and  viscosity. 
These  processes,  by  which  energy  *s  rendered  unavail- 
able as  a  source  of  work,  are  classed  together  under 
the  name  of  the  Dissipation  of  Energy,  and  form  the 
subjects  of  the  next  division  of  the  book.  The  last 
chapter  is  devoted  to  the  explanation  of  various 
phenomena  by  means  of  the  hypothesis  that  bodies 
consist  of  molecules,  the  motion  of  which  constitutes 
the  heat  of  those  bodies. 

In  order  to  bring  the  treatment  of  these  subjects 
within  the  limits  of  this  text-book,  it  has  been  found 
necessary  to  omit  everything  which  is  not  an  essential 
part  of  the  intellectual  process  by  which  the  doctrines 
of  heat  have  been  developed,  or  which  does  not 
materially  assist  the  student  in  forming  his  own  judg- 
ment on  these  doctrines. 

For  this  reason,  no  account  is  given  of  several  very 
important  experiments,  and  many  illustrations  of  the 
theory  of  heat  by  means  of  natural  phenomena  are 
omitted.  The  student,  however,  will  find  this  part  of 
the  subject  treated  at  greater  length  in  several  excel- 
lent works  on  the  same  subject  which  have  lately 
appeared. 

A  full  account  of  the  most  important  experiments 
on  the  effects  of  heat  will  be  found  in  Dixon's 
'Treatise  on  Heat'  (Hodges  &  Smith,  1849). 

Professor  Balfour  Stewart's  treatise  contains  all  that 
is  necessary  to  be  known  in  order  to  make  experi- 
ments on  heat.  The  student  may  be  also  referred  to 
Deschanel's  'Natural  Philosophy,'  Part  Untranslated 
by  Professor  Everett,  who  has  added  a  chapter  on 
Thermodynamics;  to  Professor  Rankine's  work  on  the 
Steam  Engine,  in  which  he  will  find  the  first  systematic 


Preface.  vii 

treatise  on  thermodynamics ;  to  Professor  Tait's  '  Ther- 
modynamics/ which  contains  an  historical  sketch  of 
the  subject,  as  well  as  the  mathematical  investigations  ; 
and  to  Professor  Tyndall's  work  on  '  Heat  as  a  Mode 
of  Motion/  in  which  the  doctrines  of  the  science  are 
forcibly  impressed  on  the  mind  by  well-chosen  illus- 
trative experiments.  The  original  memoirs  of  Pro- 
fessor Clausius,  one  of  the  founders  of  the  modern 
science  of  Thermodynamics,  have  been  edited  in 
English  by  Professor  Hirst. 


NOTE  BY  LORD  RAY  LEIGH. 

In  the  tenth  edition,  printed  in  1891,  only  such 
corrections  and  additions  were  introduced  as  seemed 
really  called  for.  It  is  believed  that  they  would  have 
commended  themselves  to  the  Author,  and,  indeed, 
they  are  in  great  measure  derived  from  his  later 
writings.  In  all  cases  the  authorship  of  an  addition 
is  indicated  by  the  signature  '  R./  and  by  enclosure 
within  square  brackets. 


CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER  I 

INTRODUCTION. 

?AGK 

Meaning  of  the  word  Temperature 1 

The  Mercurial  Thermometer 5 

Heat  as  a  Quantity 6 

Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction  and  Radiation  .         .         .         .10 
The  three  Physical  States  of  Bodies if 

CHAPTER  II. 
THERMOMETRY,    OR   THE   REGISTRATION   OF   TEMPERATURE. 

Definition  of  Higher  and  Lower  Temperature  ,         .         .       32 

Temperatures  ol  Reference 34 

Different  Thermometric  Scales •       37 

Construction  of  a  Thermometer          ......       40 

The  Air  Thermometer       . 46 

Other  Methods  of  Ascertaining  Temperatures     .         .         .         .51 

CHAPTER  IIL 
CALORIMETRY,    OR   THE    MEASUREMENT   OF    HEAl. 

Selection  of  a  Unit  of  Heat 54 

All  Heat  is  of  the  same  Kind 56 

Ice  Calorimeters 58 

Bunsen's  Calorimeter         ........  6l 

Method  of  Mixture 63 

Definitions  of  Thermal  Capacity  and  Specific  Heat      ...  65 

Latent  Heat  of  Steam 69 


Contents. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

ELEMENTARY    DYNAMICAL    PRINCIPLES. 

PAGE 

Measurement  of  Quantities         . 74 

The  Units  of  Length,  Mass,  and  Time,  and  their  Derived  Units.       76 

Measurement  of  Force -  .         -83 

Work  and  Energy 87 

Principle  of  the  Conservation  of  Energy 92 

CHAPTER  V. 
MEASUREMENT   OF   INTERNAL   FORCES   AND   THEIR   EFFECTS. 

Longitudinal  Pressure  and  Tension 94 

Definition  of  a  Fluid. — Hydrostatic  Pressure       .         •         «         •       95 

Work  done  by  a  Piston  on  a  Fluid IOI 

Watt's  Indicator  and  the  Indicator  Diagram       .         .         .  -      .102 
Elasticity  of  a  Fluid 107 

CHAPTER   VI. 

LINES    OF    EQUAL   TEMPERATURE   ON   THE    INDICATOR 
DIAGRAM. 

Relation  between  Volume,  Pressure,  and  Temperature         .         .     108 
Isothermal  Lines  of  a  Gas          .         .         .         .         .         .         .110 

Isothermal  Lines  of  a  Vapour  in  Contact  with  its  Liquid     .  113 

Steam  Line  and  Water  Line      .         .         .         .         .         .  117 

Continuity  of  the  Liquid  and  Gaseous  States.— Experiments  of 

Cagniard  de  la  Tour  and  Andrews      .         .         .         .         .     118 

CHAPTER  VII. 
ADIABATIC   LINES. 

Properties  of  a  Substance  when  heat  is  prevented  from  entering  or 

leaving  it .         .127 

The  Adiabatic  Lines  are  Steeper  than  the  Isothermals         .         .130 
Diagram  showing  the  Effects  of  Heat  on  Water.         .         .  134 


Contents.  xi 

CHAPTER   VIII. 

HEAT    ENGINES. 

PA  ci 

Caniot's  Engine 13^ 

Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics        .         .         .         .         .  153 

Carnot's  Function  and  Thomson's  Absolute  Scale  of  Temperature  155 

Maximum  Efficiency  of  a  Heat  Engine 158 

Thermodynamic  Scale  of  Temperature 160 

Entropy   .         .         .         .         .         .         .         •         •         •         .162 

Fictitious  Thermal  Lines 164 

CHAPTER   IX. 

RELATIONS    BETWEEN    THE    PHYSICAL    PROPERTIES 
OF    A    SUBSTANCE. 

Four  Thermodynamic  Relations 165 

The  two  Modes  of  Defining  Specific  Heat           .         .         .         .169 
The  two  Modes  of  Defining  Elasticity 171 

CHAPTER  X. 
LATENT     HEAT. 

Relation  between  the  Latent  Heat  and  the  Alteration  of  the  Volume 

of  the  Substance  during  a  Change  of  State  .          .         .         -173 
Lowering  of  the  Freezing  Point  by  Pressure       .         .         .         .176 

CHAPTER   XI. 
THERMODYNAMICS    OF    GASES. 

Cooling  by  Expansion 180 

Calculation  of  the  Specific  1 1  eat  of  Air 183 

CHAPTER   XII. 
ON   THE    INTRINSIC   ENERGY   OF   A   SYSTEM    OF    BODIES. 

Intrinsic  Energy  defined   .         . 185 

Available  Energy 187 

Dissipation  of  Energy       .••••(••••     192 

Mechanical  and  Thermal  Analogies    .         .         .         .         .         .193 

Prof.  Gibbs'  Thermodynamic  Model 195 


xii  Contents. 


CHAPTER  XIIL 

ON    FREE   EXPANSION. 

PAGE 

Theory  of  a  Fluid  rushing  through  a  Porous  Plug  .  .  .  209 
Determination  of  the  Dynamical  Equivalent  of  Heat  .  .  .211 
Determination  of  the  Absolute  Scale  of  Temperature  .  .  .  213 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
DETERMINATION    OF   HEIGHTS    BY   THE    BAROMETER. 

Principle  of  the  Barometer 217 

The  Barometer  in  a  Diving  Bell         .         .         .         .         «         .218 
Height  of  the  '  Homogeneous  Atmosphere '        .         .         .  220 

Height  of  a  Mountain  found  by  the  Barometer   ....     221 

CHAPTER  XV. 

ON   THE   PROPAGATION   OF   WAVES   OF   LONGITUDINAL 
DISTURBANCE. 

Waves  of  Permanent  Type 223 

Velocity  of  Sound t         .         .    228 

CHAPTER  XVI. 
ON   RADIATION. 

Definition  of  Radiation te        »  230 

Interference •         •         .  234 

Different  Kinds  of  Radiation     .         .         .         .         ,         0         •  237 

Prevost's  Theory  of  Exchanges  .......  240 

Rate  of  Cooling «...  246 

Effects  of  Radiation  on  Thermometers        «        .        »        •        ,  248 


Contents.  xiii 


CHAPTER   XVII. 

ON    CONVECTION    CURRENTS. 

PAr.E 
How  they  are  Produced 250 

Joule's  Determination  of  the  Point  of  Maximum  Density  of  Water     252 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 
ON    THE    DIFFUSION    OF    HEAT    BY    CONDUCTION. 

Conduction  through  a  Plate       .......  253 

Different  Measures  of  Conductivity    ......  255 

Conduction  in  a  Solid        ........  255 

Sketch  of  Fourier's  Theory 259 

Harmonic  Distributions  of  Temperature 263 

Steady  and  Periodic  Flow  of  Heat     ......  265 

Determination  of  the  Thermal  Conductivity  of  Bodies          .  268 

Applications  of  the  Theory        .......  272 


CHAPTER   XIX. 
ON    THE    DIFFUSION    OF    FLUIDS. 

Coefficient  of  Diffusion 277 

Researches  of  Graham  and  Loschmidt 278 

CHAPTER   XX. 
ON  CAPILLARITY. 

Superficial  Energy  and  Superficial  Tension         .         .         .         .281 

Rise  of  a  Liquid  in  a  Tube        .         .         .         .         .         .         .     288 

Evaporstion  and  Condensation  as  Affected  by  Capillarity  .         .     289 

Table  of  Superficial  Tension 295 

[Superficial  Viscosity] 298 


xiv  Contents. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

ON   ELASTICITY  AND  VISCOSITY. 

PAGE 

BiflTeient  Kinds  of  Stress  and  Strain »  3O1 

Coefficient  of  Viscosity 3°4 

CHAPTER  XXII. 
MOLECULAR  THEORY   OF  THE  CONSTITUTION   OF   BODIES. 

Kinetic  and  Potential  Energy 3°S 

Evidence  that  Heat  is  the  Kinetic  Energy  of  the  Molecules  of  a 

Body         .         .- 310 

Kinetic  Theory  of  Gases .312 

Deduction  of  the  Laws  of  Gases 321 

Equilibrium  of  a  Vertical  Column 329 

Diffusion,  Viscosity,  and  Conduction          .         •         .         •         •  331 

Evaporation  and  Condensation .         .         .         •         •         .         .  333 

Electrolysis 335 

Kadiation 336 

Limitation  of  the  Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics     .         .         .  338 

The  Properties  of  Molecules      •••«•»•  340 

INDEX 345 


A  TREATISE 

ON 

HEAT 


CHAPTER   I. 

INTRODUCTION. 

THE  DISTINCTION  between  hot  bodies  and  cold  ones  is 
familiar  to  all,  and  is  associated  in  our  minds  with  the 
difference  of  the  sensations  which  we  experience  in  touching 
various  substances,  according  as  they  are  hot  or  cold.  The 
intensity  of  these  sensations  is  susceptible  of  degrees,  so  that 
we  may  estimate  one  body  to  be  hotter  or  colder  than 
another  by  the  touch.  The  words  hot,  warm,  cool,  cold, 
are  associated  in  our  minds  with  a  series  of  sensations  which 
we  suppose  to  indicate  a  corresponding  series  of  states  of 
an  object  with  respect  to  heat. 

We  use  these  words,  therefore,  as  the  names  of  these 
states  of  the  object,  or,  in  scientific  language,  they  are  the 
names  of  Temperatures,  the  word  hot  indicating  a  high 
temperature,  cold  a  low  temperature,  and  the  intermediate 
terms  intermediate  temperatures,  while  the  word  temperature 
itself  is  a  general  term  intended  to  apply  to  any  one  of  these 
states  of  the  object. 

Since  the  state  of  a  body  may  vary  continuously  from 
cold  to  hot,  we  must  admit  the  existence  of  an  indefinite 
number  of  intermediate  states,  which  we  call  intermediate 

B 


2  Introduction. 

temperatures.  We  may  give  names  to  any  number  of 
particular  degrees  of  temperature,  and  express  any  other 
temperature  by  its  relative  place  among  these  degrees. 

The  temperature  of  a  body,  therefore,  is  a  quantity  which 
indicates  how  hot  or  how  cold  the  body  is. 

When  we  say  that  the  temperature  of  one  body  is  higher 
or  lower  than  that  of  another,  we  mean  that  the  first  body  is 
hotter  or  colder  than  the  second,  but  we  also  imply  that  we 
refer  the  state  of  both  bodies  to  a  certain  scale  of  tempe- 
ratures. By  the  use,  therefore,  of  the  word  temperature, 
we  fix  in  our  minds  the  conviction  that  it  is  possible,  not 
only  to  feel,  but  to  measure,  how  hot  a  body  is.  „ 

Words  of  this  kind,  which  express  the  same  things  as 
the  words  of  primitive  language,  but  express  them  in  a  way 
susceptible  of  accurate  numerical  statement,  are  called 
scientific l  terms,  because  they  contribute  to  the  growth  of 
science. 

We  might  suppose  that  a  person  who  has  carefully  cul- 
tivated his  senses  would  be  able  by  simply  touching  an 
object  to  assign  its  place  in  a  scale  of  temperatures,  but  it  is 
found  by  experiment  that  the  estimate  formed  of  temperature 
by  the  touch  depends  upon  a  great  variety  of  circumstances, 
some  of  these  relating  to  the  texture  or  consistency  of  the 
object,  and  some  to  the  temperature  of  the  hand  or  the 
state  of  health  of  the  person  who  makes  the  estimate. 

For  instance,  if  the  temperature  of  a  piece  of  wood  were 
the  same  as  that  of  a  piece  of  iron,  and  much  higher  than 
that  of  the  hand,  we  should  estimate  the  iron  to  be  hotter 
than  the  wood,  because  it  parts  with  its  heat  more  readily  to 
the  hand,  whereas  if  their  temperatures  were  equal,  and 
much  lower  than  that  of  the  hand,  we  should  estimate  the 
iron  to  be  colder  than  the  wood. 

There  is  another  common  experiment,  in  which  we  place 
one  hand  in  hot  water  and  the  other  in  cold  for  a  sufficient 

1  '  Scientifick,  adj.    Producing  demonstrative.knowledge. ' —  Johnson 'j 


Temperature.  3 

time.  If  we  then  clip  both  hands  in  the  same  basin  of 
lukewarm  water  alternately,  or  even  at  once,  it  will  appear 
cold  to  the  warmed  hand  and  hot  to  the  cooled  hand. 

In  fact,  our  sensations  of  every  kind  depend  upon  so 
many  variable  conditions,  that  for  all  scientific  purposes  we 
prefer  to  form  our  estimate  of  the  state  of  bodies  from  their 
observed  action  on  some  apparatus  whose  conditions  are 
more  simple  and  less  variable  than  those  of  our  own  senses. 

The  properties  of  most  substances  vary  when  their  tem- 
perature varies.  Some  of  these  variations  are  abrupt,  and 
serve  to  indicate  particular  temperatures  as  points  of  re- 
ference; others  are  continuous,  and  serve  to  measure  other 
temperatures  by  comparison  with  the  temperatures  of  refer- 
ence. 

For  instance,  the  temperature  at  which  ice  melts  is  found 
to  be  always  the  same  under  ordinary  circumstances,  though, 
as  we  shall  see,  it  is  slightly  altered  by  change  of  pressure. 
The  temperature  of  steam  which  issues  from  boiling  water 
is  also  constant  when  the  pressure  is  constant. 

These  two  phenomena  therefore — the  melting  of  ice  and 
the  boiling  of  water — indicate  in  a  visible  manner  two  tempe- 
ratures which  we  may  use  as  points  of  reference,  the  position 
of  which  depends  on  the  properties  of  water  and  not  on  the 
conditions  of  our  senses. 

Other  changes  of  state  which  take  place  at  temperatures 
more  or  less  definite,  such  as  the  melting  of  wax  or  of 
lead,  and  the  boiling  of  liquids  of  definite  composition,  are 
occasionally  used  to  indicate  when  these  temperatures  are 
attained,  but  the  melting  of  ice  and  the  boiling  of  pure 
water  at  a  standard  pressure  remain  the  most  important 
temperatures  of  reference  in  modern  science. 

These  phenomena  of  change  of  state  serve  to  indicate 
only  a  certain  number  of  particular  temperatures.  In 
order  to  measure  temperatures  in  general,  we  must  avail 
ourselves  of  some  property  of  a  substance  which  alters 
continuously  with  the  temperature. 

B2 


4  Introduction. 

The  volume  of  most  substances  increases  continuously 
as  the  temperature  rises,  the  pressure  remaining  constant. 
There  are  exceptions  to  this  rule,  and  the  dilatations  of 
different  substances  are  not  in  general  in  the  same  propor- 
tion ;  but  any  substance  in  which  an  increase  of  temperature, 
however  small,  produces  an  increase  of  volume  may  be  used 
to  indicate  changes  of  temperature. 

For  instance,  mercury  and  glass  both  expand  when  heated, 
but  the  dilatation  of  mercury  is  greater  than  that  of  glass. 
Hence  if  a  cold  glass  vessel  be  filled  with  cold  mercury,  and 
if  the  vessel  and  the  mercury  in  it  are  then  equally  heated, 
the  glass  vessel  will  expand,  but  the  mercury  will  expand 
more,  so  that  the  vessel  will  no  longer  contain  the  mercury. 
If  the  vessel  be  provided  with  a  long  neck,  the  mercury 
forced  out  of  the  vessel  will  rise  in  the  neck,  and  if  the  neck 
is  a  narrow  tube  finely  graduated,  the  amount  of  mercury 
forced  out  of  the  vessel  may  be  accurately  measured.. 

This  is  the  principle  of  the  common  mercurial  thermo- 
meter, the  construction  of  which  will  be  afterwards  more 
minutely  described.  At  present  we  consider  it  simply  as  an 
instrument  the  indications  of  which  vary  when  the  tempe- 
rature varies,  but  are  always  the  same  when  the  temperature 
of  the  instrument  is  the  same. 

The  dilatation  of  other  liquids,  as  well  as  that  of  solids  and 
of  gases,  may  be  used  for  thermometric  purposes,  and  the 
thermo-electric  properties  of  metals,  and  the  variation  of  their 
electric  resistance  with  temperature,  are  also  employed  in 
researches  on  heat.  We  must  first,  however,  study  the  theory 
of  temperature  in  itself  before  we  examine  the  properties  of 
different  substances  as  related  to  temperature,  and  for  this 
purpose  we  shall  use  the  particular  mercurial  thermometer 
just  described. 


The  Thermometer. 


THE   MERCURIAL  THERMOMETER. 

This  thermometer  consists  of  a  glass  tube  terminating  in 
a  bulb,  the  bulb  and  part  of  the  tube  being  rilled  with 
mercury,  and  the  rest  of  the  tube  being  empty.  "We  shall 
suppose  the  tube  to  be  graduated  in  any  manner  so  that  the 
height  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube  may  be  observed  and 
recorded.  We  shall  not,  however,  assume  either  that  the 
tube  is  of  uniform  section  or  that  the  degrees  are  of  equal 
size,  so  that  the  scale  of  this  primitive  thermometer  must  be 
regarded  as  completely  arbitrary.  By  means  of  our  thermo- 
meter we  can  ascertain  whether  one  temperature  is  higher  or 
lower  than  another,  or  equal  to  it,  but  we  cannot  assert  that 
the  difference  between  two  temperatures,  A  and  B,  is  greater 
or  less  than  the  difference  between  two  other  temperatures, 
c  and  D. 

We  shall  suppose  that  in  every  observation  the  temperature 
of  the  mercury  and  the  glass  is  equal  and  uniform  over  the 
whole  thermometer.  The  reading  of  the  scale  will  then 
depend  on  the  temperature  of  the  thermometer,  and,  since 
we  have  not  yet  established  any  more  perfect  thermometric 
scale,  we  shall  call  this  reading  provisionally  '  the  temperature 
by  the  arbitrary  scale  of  the  thermometer.' 

The  reading  of  a  thermometer  indicates  primarily  its  own 
temperature,  but  if  we  bring  the  thermometer  into  intimate 
contact  with  another  substance,  as  for  instance  if  we  plunge 
it  into  a  liquid  for  a  sufficient  time,  we  find  that  the  reading 
of  the  thermometer  becomes  higher  or  lower  according  as 
the  liquid  is  hotter  or  colder  than  the  thermometer,  and  that 
if  we  leave  the  thermometer  in  contact  with  the  substance  for 
a  sufficient  time  the  reading  becomes  stationary.  Let  us 
call  this  ultimate  reading  '  the  temperature  of  the  substance.' 
We  shall  find  as  we  go  on  that  we  have  a  right  to  do  so. 

Let  us  now  take  a  vessel  of  water  which  we  shall  suppose 
to  be  at  the  temperature  of  the  air,  so  that  if  left  to  itself  it 


6  Introduction. 

would  remain  at  the  same  temperature.  Take  another 
smaller  vessel  of  thin  sheet  copper  or  tin  plate,  and  fill  it 
with  water,  oil,  or  any  other  liquid,  and  immerse  it  in  the 
larger  vessel  of  water  for  a  certain  time.  Then,  if  by  means 
of  our  thermometer  we  register  the  temperatures  of  the 
liquids  in  the  two  vessels  before  and  after  the  immersion  of 
the  copper  vessel,  we  find  that  if  they  are  originally  at  the 
same  temperature  the  temperature  of  both  remains  the  same, 
but  that  if  one  is  at  a  higher  temperature  than  the  other,  that 
which  has  the  higher  temperature  becomes  colder  and  that 
which  has  the  lower  temperature  becomes  hotter,  so  that  if 
they  continue  in  contact  for  a  sufficient  time  they  arrive  at 
last  at  the  same  temperature,  after  which  no  change  of  tem- 
perature takes  place. 

The  loss  of  temperature  by  the  hot  body  is  not  in  general 
equal  to  the  gain  of  temperature  by  the  cold  body,  but  it  is 
manifest  that  the  two  simultaneous  phenomena  are'  due  to 
one  cause,  and  this  cause  may  be  described  as  the  passage 
of  Heat  from  the  hot  body  to  the  cold  one. 

As  this  is  the  first  time  \\e  have  used  the  word  Heat,  let  us 
examine  what  we  mean  by  it. 

We  find  the  cooling  of  a  hot  body  and  the  heating  cf 
.1  cold  body  happening  simultaneously  as  parts  of  the  same 
phenomenon,  and  we  describe  this  phenomenon  as  the  pas- 
sage of  heat  from  the  hot  body  to  the  cold  one.  Heat,  then, 
is  something  which  may  be  transferred  from  one  body  to 
another,  so  as  to  diminish  the  quantity  of  heat  in  the  first 
and  increase  that  in  the  second  by  the  same  amount. 
When  heat  is  communicated  to  a  body,  the  temperature 
of  the  body  is  generally  increased,  but  sometimes  other 
effects  are  produced,  such  as  change  of  state.  When  heat 
leaves  a  body,  there  is  either  a  fall  of  temperature  or  a 
change  of  state.  If  no  heat  enters  or  leaves  a  body,  and 
if  no  changes  of  state  or  mechanical  actions  take  place 
in  the  body,  the  temperature  of  the  body  will  remain 
constant. 


Heat  as  a  Quantity.  7 

Heat,  therefore,  may  pass  out  of  one  body  into  another 
just  as  water  may  be  poured  from  one  vessel  into  another,, 
and  it  may  be  retained  in  a  body  for  any  time,  just  as  water 
may  be  kept  in  a  vessel.  We  have  therefore  a  right  to  speak 
of  heat  as  of  a  measurable  quantity ^  and  to  treat  it  mathema- 
tically like  other  measurable  quantities  so  long  as  it  continues 
to  exist  as  heat.  We  shall  find,  however,  that  we  have  no 
right  to  treat  heat  as  a  substance,  for  it  may  be  transformed 
into  something  which  is  not  heat,  and  is  certainly  not  a 
substance  at  all,  namely,  mechanical  work. 

We  must  remember,  therefore,  that  though  we  admit  heat 
to  the  title  of  a  measurable  quantity,  we  must  not  give  it 
rank  as  a  substance,  but  must  hold  our  minds  in  suspense 
till  we  have  further  evidence  as  to  the  nature  of  heat. 

Such  evidence  is  furnished  by  experiments  on  friction,  in 
which  mechanical  work,  instead  of  being  transmitted  from 
one  part  of  a  machine  to  another,  is  apparently  lost,  while 
at  the  same  time,  and  in  the  same  place,  heat  is  generated, 
the  amount  of  heat  being  in  an  exact  proportion  to  the 
amount  of  work  lost.  We  have,  therefore,  reason  to  believe 
that  heat  is  of  the  same  nature  as  mechanical  work,  that  is, 
it  is  one  of  the  forms  of  Energy. 

In  the  eighteenth  century,  when  many  new  facts  were 
being  discovered  relating  to  the  action  of  heat  on  bodies, 
and  when  at  the  same  time  great  progress  was  being  made 
in  the  knowledge  of  the  chemical  action  of  substances,  the 
word  Caloric  was  introduced  to  signify  heat  as  a  measurable 
quantity.  So  long  as  the  word  denoted  nothing  more  than 
this,  it  might  be  usefully  employed,  but  the  form  of  the  word 
accommodated  itself  to  the  tendency  of  the  chemists  of  that 
time  to  seek  for  new  '  imponderable  substances,'  so  that 
the  word  caloric  came  to  connote1  not  merely  heat,  but  heat 
as  an  indestructible  imponderable  fluid,  insinuating  itself 
into  the  pores  of  bodies,  dilating  and  dissolving  them,  and 

1  'A  connotative  term  is  one  which  denotes  a  subject  and  implies  an 
attribute.'— Milfs  Logic,  book  i.  chap.  ii.  §  5. 


8  Introduction. 

ultimately  vaporising  them,  combining  with  bodies  in  definite 
quantities,  and  so  becoming  latent,  ajid  reappearing  when 
these  bodies  alter  their  condition.  In  fact,  the  word  caloric, 
when  once  introduced,  soon  came  to  imply  the  recognised 
existence  of  something  material,  though  probably  of  a  more 
subtle  nature  than  the  then  newly  discovered  gases.  Caloric 
resembled  these  gases  in  being  invisible  and  in  its  property 
of  becoming  fixed  in  solid  bodies.  It  differed  from  them 
because  its  weight  could  not  be  detected  by  the  finest 
balances,  but  there  was  no  doubt  in  the  minds  of  many 
eminent  men  that  caloric  was  a  fluid  pervading  all  bodies, 
probably  the  cause  of  all  repulsion,  and  possibly  even  of  tha 
extension  of  bodies  in  space. 

Since  ideas  of  this  kind  have  always  been  connected 
with  the  word  caloric,  and  the  word  itself  has  been  in  no 
slight  degree  the  means  of  embodying  and  propagating 
these  ideas,  and  since  all  these  ideas  are  now  known  to  be 
false,  we  shall  avoid  as  much  as  possible  the  use  of  the 
word  caloric  in  treating  of  heat.  We  shall  find  it  useful, 
however,  when  we  wish  to  refer  to  the  erroneous  theory 
which  supposes  heat  to  be  a  substance,  to  call  it  the 
'  Caloric  Theory  of  Heat.' 

The  word  heat,  though  a  primitive  word  and  not  a 
scientific  term,  will  be  found  sufficiently  free  from  ambiguity 
when  we  use  it  to  express  a  measurable  quantity,  because  it 
will  be  associated  with  words  expressive  of  quantity,  indi- 
cating how  much  heat  we  are  speaking  o£ 

We  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  word  heat  as  an  abstract 
term  signifying  the  property  of  hot  things,  and  when  we 
might  say  a  certain  heat,  as  the  heat  of  new  milk,  we  shall 
always  use  the  more  scientific  word  temperature,  and  speak 
of  the  temperature  of  new  milk. 

We  shall  never  use  the  word  heat  to  denote  the  sensation 
of  heat.  In  fact,  it  is  never  so  used  in  ordinary  language, 
which  has  no  names  for  sensations,  unless,  when  the  sensation 
itself  is  of  more  importance  to  us  than  its  physical  cause,  as 


Measurement  cf  Heat.  9 

in  the  case  of  pain,  &c.     The  only  name  we  have  for  this 
sensation  is  '  the  sensation  of  heat.' 

When  we  require  an  adjective  to  denote  that  a  phe- 
nomenon is  related  to  heat  we  shall  call  it  a  thermal 
phenomenon,  as,  for  instance,  we  shall  speak  of  the  thermal 
conductivity  of  a  substance  or  of  thermal  radiation  to  dis- 
tinguish the  conduction  and  radiation  of  heat  from  the 
conduction  of  electricity  or  the  radiation  of  light.  The 
science  of  heat  has  been  called  (by  Dr.  Whewell  and  others) 
Thermotics,  and  the  theory  of  heat  as  a  form  of  energy  is 
called  Thermodynamics.  In  the  same  way  the  theory  of  the 
equilibrium  of  heat  might  be  called  Thermostatics,  and  that 
of  the  motion  of  heat  Thermokinematics. 

,  The  instrument  by  which  the  temperature  of  bodies  is 
registered  is  called  a  Thermometer  or  measurer  of  warmth, 
and  the  method  of  constructing  and  using  thermometers  may 
be  called  Thermometry. 

The  instrument  by  which  quantities  of  heat  are  measured 
is  called  a  Calorimeter,  probably  because  it  was  invented  at 
a  time  when  heat  was  called  Caloric.  The  name,  however, 
is  now  well  established,  and  is  a  convenient  one,  as  its  form 
is  sufficiently  distinct  from  that  of  the  word  Thermometer. 
The  method  of  measuring  heat  may  be  called  Calorimetry. 
A  certain  quantity  of  heat,  with  which  all  other  quantities 
are  compared,  is  called  a  Thermal  Unit.  This  is  the  quantity 
of  heat  required  to  produce  a  particular  effect,  such  as  to 
melt  a  pound  of  ice,  or  to  raise  a  pound  of  water  from  one 
defined  temperature  to  another  defined  temperature.  A  par- 
ticular thermal  unit  has  been  called  by  some  authors  a  Calorie. 
We  have  now  obtained  two  of  the  fundamental  ideas 
of  the  science  of  heat — the  idea  of  temperature,  or  the 

\  property  of  a  body  considered  with  reference  to  its  power  of 
heating  other  bodies  ;  and  the  idea  of  heat  as  a  measurable 

Vy  quantity,  which  may  be  transferred  from  hotter  bodies  to 
colder  ones.  We  shall  consider  the  further  development  of 
these  ideas  in  the  chapters  on  Thermometry  and  Calorimetry, 


IO  Introduction. 

but  we  must  first  direct  our  attention  to  the  process  by  which 
heat  is  transferred  from  one  body  to  another. 

This  process  is  called  the  Diffusion  of  Heat.  The  diffusion 
of  heat  invariably  transfers  heat  from  a  hotter  body  to  a  colder 
one,  so  as  to  cool  the  hotter  body  and  warm  the  colder  body. 
This  process  would  go  on  till  all  bodies  were  brought  to  the 
same  temperature  if  it  were  not  for  certain  other  processes 
by  which  the  temperatures  of  bodies  are  changed  hide-, 
pendently  of  any  exchange  of  heat  with  other  bodies,  as,  for 
instance,  when  combustion  or  any  other  chemical  process 
takes  place,  or  when  any  change  occurs  in  the  form,  structure, 
or  physical  state  of  the  body. 

The  changes  of  temperature  of  a  body  arising  from  other 
causes  than  the  transfer  of  heat  from  other  bodies  will  be 
considered  when  we  come  to  describe  the  different  physical 
states  of  bodies.  We  are  at  present  concerned  only  with 
the  passage  of  heat  into  the  body  or  out  of  it,  and  this 
always  takes  place  by  diffusion,  and  is  always  from  a  hotter 
to  a  colder  body. 

Three  processes  of  diffusion  of  heat  are  commonly  recog- 
nised—^-Conduction,  Convection,  and  Radiation. 

Conduction  is  the  flow  of  heat  through  an  unequally  heated 
body  from  places  of  higher  to  places  of  lower  temperature. 

Convection  is  the  motion  of  the  hot  body  itself  carrying  its 
heat  with  it.  If  by  this  motion  it  is  brought  near  bodies  colder 
than  itself  it  will  warm  them  faster  than  if  it  had  not  been 
moved  nearer  to  them.  The  term  convection  is  applied  to 
those  processes  by  which  the  diffusion  of  heat  is  rendered 
more  rapid  by  the  motion  of  the  hot  substance  from  one 
place  to  another,  though  the  ultimate  transfer  of  heat  may 
still  take  place  by  conduction. 

In  Radiation,  the  hotter  bod>  loses  heat,  and  the  colder 
body  receives  heat  by  means  of  a  process  occurring  in  some 
intervening  medium  which  does  not  itself  become  thereby  hot. 

In  each  of  these  three  processes  of  diffusion  of  heat  the 
lemoeratures  of  the  bodies  between  which  the  process  takes 


Diffusion  of  Ifcat.  II 

place  tend  to  become  equal.  We  shall  not  at  present  discuss 
the  convection  of  heat,  because  it  is  not  a  purely  thermal 
phenomenon,  since  it  depends  on  a  hot  substance  being 
carried  from  one  place  to  another,  either  by  human  effort, 
as  when  a  hot  iron  is  taken  out  of  the  fire  and  put  into  the 
tea-urn,  or  by  some  natural  property  of  the  heated  substance, 
as  when  water,  heated  by  contact  with  the  bottom  of  a 
kettle  placed  on  the  fire,  expands  as  it  becomes  warmed, 
and  forms  an  ascending  current,  making  way  for  colder  and 
therefore  denser  water  to  descend  and  take  its  place.  In 
every  such  case  of  convection  the  ultimate  and  only  direct 
transfer  of  heat  is  due  to  conduction,  and  the  only  effect  of 
the  motion  of  the  hot  substance  is  to  bring  the  unequally 
heated  portions  nearer  to  each  other,  so  as  to  facilitate  the 
exchange  of  heat.  We  shall  accept  the  conduction  of  heat 
as  a  fact,  without  at  present  attempting  to  form  any  theory 
of  the  details  of  the  process  by  which  it  takes  place.  We 
do  not  even  assert  that  in  the  diffusion  of  heat  by  conduc- 
tion the  transfer  of  heat  is  entirely  from  the  hotter  to  the 
colder  body.  All  that  we  assert  is,  that  the  amount  of  heat 
transferred  from  the  hotter  to  the  colder  body  is  invariably 
greater  than  the  amount,  if  any,  transferred  from  the  colder 
to  the  hotter. 

ON   CONDUCTION". 

In  the  experiments  which  we  have  described,  heat  passes 
from  one  body  into  another  through  an  intervening  sub- 
stance, as  from  a  vessel  of  water  through  the  glass  bulb  of  a 
thermometer  into  the  mercury  inside  the  bulb. 

This  process,  by  which  heat  passes  from  hotter  to  colder 
parts  of  a  body,  is  called  the  conduction  of  heat.  When 
heat  is  passing  through  a  body  by  conduction,  the  tem- 
perature of  the  body  must  be  greater  in  the  parts  from 
which  the  heat  comes  than  in  those  to  which  it  tends, 
and  the  quantity  of  heat  which  passes  through  any  thin 
layer  of  the  substance  depends  on  the  difference  of  the 


1 2  Introduction. 

temperatures  of  the  opposite  sides  of  the  layer.  For  instance, 
if  we  put  a  silver  spoon  into  a  cup  of  hot  tea,  the  part 
of  the  spoon  in  the  tea  soon  becomes  heated,  while  the 
part  just  out  of  the  tea  is  comparatively  cool.  On  ac- 
count of  this  inequality  of  temperature,  heat  immediately 
FlG- '•  begins  to  flow  along  the  metal  from 

A  to  B.  The  heat  first  warms  B  a 
little,  and  so  makes  B  warmer  than 
c,  and  then  the  heat  flows  on  from 
B  to  c,  and  in  this  way  the  very 
end  of  the  spoon  will  in  course  of 
time  become  warm  to  the  touch. 
The  essential  requisite  to  the  con- 
duction of  heat  is,  that  in  every  part  of  its  course  the  heat 
must  pass  from  hotter  to  colder  parts  of  the  body.  No 
heat  can  be  conducted  as  far  as  E  till  A  has  been  made 
hotter  than  B,  B  than  c,  c  than  D,  and  D  than  E.  -  To  do 
this  requires  a  certain  amount  of  heat  to  be  expended  in 
warming  in  succession  all  these  intermediate  parts  of  the 
spoon,  so  that  for  some  time  after  the  spoon  is  placed  in 
the  cup  no  alteration  of  temperature  can  be  perceived  at 
the  end  of  the  spoon. 

Hence  we  may  define  conduction  as  the  passage  of  heat 
through  a  body  depending  on  inequality  of  temperature  in 
adjacent  parts  of  the  body. 

When  any  part  of  a  body  is  heated  by  conduction,  the 
parts  of  the  body  through  which  the  heat  comes  to  it  must 
be  hotter  than  itself,  and  the  parts  higher  up  the  stream  of 
heat  still  hotter. 

If  we  now  try  the  experiment  of  the  spoon  in  the  teacup 
with  a  German  silver  spoon  along  with  the  silver  one,  we 
shall  find  that  the  end  of  the  silver  spoon  becomes  hot  long 
before  that  of  the  German  silver  one  ;  and  if  we  also  put  in  a 
bone  or  horn  spoon,  we  shall  not  be  able  to  perceive  any 
warmth  at  the  end  of  it,  however  long  we  wait. 
This  shows  that  silver  conducts  heat  quicker  than  German 


Radiation.  1 3 

silver,  and  German  silver  quicker  than  bone  or  horn.  The 
reason  why  the  end  of  the  spoon  never  gets  as  hot  as  the 
tea  is,  that  the  intermediate  parts  of  the  spoon  are  cooling, 
partly  by  giving  their  heat  to  the  air  in  contact  with  them, 
and  partly  by  radiation  out  into  space. 

To  show  that  the  first  effect  of  heat  on  the  thermometer 
Is  to  warm  the  material  of  which  the  bulb  is  composed,  and 
that  the  heat  cannot  reach  the  fluid  inside  till  the  bulb  has 
been  warmed,  take  a  thermometer  with  a  large  bulb,  watch 
the  fluid  in  the  tube,  and  dash  a  little  hot  water  over  the 
bulb.  The  fluid  will  fall  in  the  tube  before  it  begins  to 
rise,  showing  that  the  bulb  began  to  expand  before  the  fluid 
expanded. 

ON    RADIATION. 

On  a  calm  day  in  winter  we  feel  the  sun's  rays  warm  even 
when  water  is  freezing  and  ice  is  hard  and  dry. 

If  we  make  use  of  a  thermometer,  we  find  that  if  the 
sun's  rays  fall  on  it,  it  indicates  a  temperature  far  above 
freezing,  while  the  air  immediately  surrounding  the  bulb  is 
at  a  temperature  below  freezing.  The  heat,  therefore,  which 
we  feel,  and  to  which  the  thermometer  also  responds,  is  not 
conveyed  to  it  by  conduction  through  the  air,  for  the  air 
is  cold,  and  a  cold  body  cannot  make  a  body  warmer  than 
itself  by  conduction.  The  mode  in  which  the  heat  reaches 
the  body  which  it  warms,  without  warming  the  air  through 
which  it  passes,  is  called  radiation.  Substances  which 
admit  of  radiation  taking  place  through  them  are  called 
Diathermanous.  Those  which  do  not  allow  heat  to  pass 
through  them  without  becoming  themselves  hot  are  called 
Athermanous.  That  which  passes  through  the  medium 
during  this  process  is  generally  called  Radiant  Heat, 
though  as  long  as  it  is  radiant  it  possesses  none  of  the 
properties  which  distinguish  heat  from  other  forms  of  energy, 
since  the  temperature  of  the  body  through  which  it  passes, 


14  Introduction. 

and  the  other  physical  properties  of  the  body,  are  in  no  way 
affected  by  the  passage  of  the  radiation,  provided  the  body 
is  perfectly  diathermanous.  If  the  body  is  not  perfectly 
diathermanous  it  stops  more  or  less  of  the  radiation,  and 
becomes  heated  itself,  instead  of  transmitting  the  whole 
radiation  to  bodies  beyond  it. 

The  distinguishing  characteristic  of  radiant  heat  is,  that 
it  travels  in  rays  like  light,  whence  the  name  radiant.  These 
rays  have  all  the  physical  properties  of  rays  of  light,  and  are 
capable  of  reflexion,  refraction,  interference,  and  polarisation. 
They  may  be  divided  into  different  kinds  by  the  prism,  as 
light  is  divided  into  its  component  colours,  and  some  of  the 
heat-rays  are  identical  with  the  rays  of  light,  while  other 
kinds  of  heat-rays  make  no  impression  on  our  eyes.  For  in- 
stance, if  we  take  a  glass  convex  lens,  and  place  it  in  the  sun's 
rays,  a  body  placed  at  the  focus  where  a  small  image  of  the 
sun  is  formed  will  be  intensely  heated,  while  the  lens  itself 
and  the  air  through  which  the  rays  pass  remain  quite  cold. 
If  we  allow  the  rays  before  they  reach  the  focus  to  fall  on  the 
surface  of  water,  so  that  the  rays  meet  in  a  focus  in  the  inte- 
rior of  the  water,  then  if  the  water  is  quite  clear  at  the  focus 
it  will  remain  tranquil,  but  if  we  make  the  focus  fall  upon  a 
mote  in  the  water,  the  rays  will  be  stopped,  the  mote  will  be 
heated  and  will  cause  the  water  next  it  to  expand,  and  so  an 
upward  current  will  be  produced,  and  the  mote  will  begin  to 
rise  in  the  water.  This  shows  that  it  is  only  when  the  radia- 
tion is  stopped  that  it  has  any  effect  in  heating  what  it  falls  on. 
By  means  of  any  regular  concave  piece  of  metal,  such  as 
the  scale  of  a  balance,  pressed  when  hot  against  a  clear 
sheet  of  ice,  first  on  one  side  and  then  on  the  other,  it  is  easy 
to  make  a  lens  of  ice  which  may  be  used  on  a  sunny  day  as 
a  burning  glass ;  but  this  experiment,  which  was  formerly 
in  great  repute,  is  far  inferior  in  interest  to  one  invented  by 
Professor  Tyndall,  in  which  the  heat,  instead  of  being  con- 
centrated by  ice,  is  concentrated  in  ice.  Take  a  clear  block 
of  ice  and  make  a  flat  surface  on  it,  parallel  to  the  original 


Radiation.  1 5 

surface  of  the  lake,  or  to  the  layers  of  bubbles  generally 
found  in  large  blocks ;  then  let  the  converging  rays  of  the 
sun  from  an  ordinary  burning  glass  fall  on  this  surface,  and 
come  to  a  focus  within  the  ice.  The  ice,  not  being  per- 
fectly diathermanous,  will  be  warmed  by  the  rays,  but  much 
more  at  the  focus  than  anywhere  else.  Thus  the  ice  will 
begin  to  melt  at  the  focus  in  the  interior  of  its  substance, 
and,  as  it  does  so,  the  portions  which  melt  first  are  regu- 
larly formed  crystals,  and  so  we  see  in  the  path  of  the  beam 
a  number  of  six-rayed  stars,  which  are  hollows  cut  out  of 
the  ice  and  containing  water.  This  water,  however,  does  not 
quite  fill  them,  because  the  water  is  of  less  bulk  than  the  ice 
of  which  it  was  made,  so  that  parts  of  the  stars  are  empty. 

Experiments  on  the  heating  effects  of  radiation  show 
that  not  only  the  sun  but  all  hot  bodies  emit  radiation.  When 
the  body  is  hot  enough,  its  radiations  become  visible,  and 
the  body  is  said  to  be  red  hot.  When  it  is  still  hotter  it 
sends  forth  not  only  red  rays,  but  rays  of  every  colour,  and 
it  is  then  said  to  be  white  hot.  When  a  body  is  too  cold  to 
shine  visibly,  it  still  shines  with  invisible  heating  rays,  which 
can  be  perceived  by  a  sufficiently  delicate  thermometer,  and 
it  does  not  appear  that  any  body  can  be  so  cold  as  not  to 
send  forth  radiations.  The  reason  why  all  bodies  do  not 
appear  to  shine  is,  that  our  eyes  are  sensitive  only  to  parti- 
cular kinds  of  rays,  and  we  only  see  by  means  of  rays  of 
these  kinds,  coming  from  some  very  hot  body,  either  directly 
or  after  reflexion  or  scattering  at  the  surface  of  other  bodies. 

We  shall  see  that  the  phrases  radiation  of  heat  and  radiant 
heat  are  not  quite  scientifically  correct,  and  must  be  used 
with  caution.1  Heat  is  certainly  communicated  from  one  body 
to  another  by  a  process  which  we  call  radiation,  which  takes 
place  in  the  region  between  the  two  bodies.  We  have  no 

n  It  is  interesting  to  note  Newton's  language  in  the  sixth  query  appended 
to  his  '  Opticks.'  '  Do  not  black  bodies  conceive  heat  more  easily  from 
light  than  those  of  other  colours  do,  by  reason  that  the  light  falling  on  them 
is  not  reflected  outwards,  but  enters  the  bodies,  and  'is  often  reflected  and 
refracted  within  them,  until  it  be  stifled  and  lost  ? ' — R.] 


1 6  Introduction. 

right,  however,  to  speak  of  this  process  of  radiation  as  heat 
We  have  defined  heat  as  it  exists  in  hot  bodies,  and  we  have 
seen  that  all  heat  is  of  the  same  kind.  But  the  radiation 
between  bodies  differs  from  heat  as  we  have  defined  it — ist, 
in  not  making  the  body  hot  through  which  it  passes  ;  2nd> 
in  being  of  many  different  kinds,  Hence  we  shall  generally 
speak  of  radiation,  and  when  we  speak  of  radiant  heat  we 
do  not  mean  to  imply  the  existence  of  a  new  kind  of  heat, 
but  to  consider  radiation  in  its  thermal  aspect. 

ON   THE  DIFFERENT   PHYSICAL   STATES   OF   BODIES. 

Bodies  are  found  to  behave  in  different  ways  under  the 
action  of  forces.  If  we  cause  a  longitudinal  pressure  to  act 
on  a  body  in  one  direction  by  means  of  a  pair  of  pincers  or 
a  vice,  the  body  being  free  to  move  in  all  other  directions, 
we  find  that  if  the  body  is  a  piece  of  cold  iron  there  is  very 
little  effect  produced,  unless  the  pressure  be  very  great ;  if 
the  body  is  a  piece  of  india-rubber,  it  is  compressed  in  the 
direction  of  its  length  and  bulges  out  at  the  sides,  but  it 
soon  comes  into  a  state  of  equilibrium,  in  which  it  continues 
to  support  the  pressure  ;  but  if  we  substitute  water  for  the 
india-rubber  wre  cannot  perform  the  experiment,  for  the 
water  flows  away  laterally,  and  the  jaws  of  the  pincers  come 
together  without  having  exerted  any  appreciable  pressure. 

Bodies  which  can  sustain  a  longitudinal  pressure,  however 
small  that  pressure  may  be,  without  being  supported  by  a 
lateral  pressure,  are  called  solid  bodies.  Those  which 
cannot  do  so  are  called  fluids.  We  shall  see  that  in  a  fluid 
at  rest  the  pressure  at  any  point  must  be  equal  in  all  direc- 
tions, and  this  pressure  is  called  the  pressure  of  the  fluid. 

There  are  two  great  classes  of  fluids.  If  we  put  into  a 
closed  vessel  a  small  quantity  of  a  fluid  of  the  first  class,  such 
as  water,  it  will  partly  fill  the  vessel,  and  the  rest  of  the  vessel 
may  either  be  empty  or  may  contain  a  different  fluid.  Fluids 
having  this  property  are  called  liquids.  Water  is  a  liquid, 
and  if  we  put  a  little  water  into  a  bottle  the  water  will  lie  at 


Solids,  Liquids,  and  Gases.  17 

the  bottom  of  the  bottle,  and  will  be  separated  by  a  distinct 
surface  from  the  air  or  the  gaseous  water-substance  above  it. 

If,  on  the  contrary,  the  fluid  which  we  put  into  the  closed 
vessel  be  one  of  the  second  class,  then,  however  small  a 
portion  we  introduce,  it  will  expand  and  fill  the  vessel,  or  at 
least  as  much  of  it  as  is  not  occupied  by  a  liquid. 

Fluids  having  this  property  are  called  gases.  Air  is  a 
gas,  and  if  we  first  exhaust  the  air  from  a  vessel  and  then 
introduce  the  smallest  quantity  of  air,  the  air  will  immediately 
expand  till  it  fills  the  whole  vessel  so  that  there  is  as  much 
air  in  a  cubic  inch  in  one  part  of  the  vessel  as  in  another. 

Hence  a  gas  cannot,  like  a  liquid,  be  kept  in  an  open- 
mouthed  vessel. 

The  distinction,  therefore,  between  a  gas  and  a  liquid  is 
that,  however  large  the  space  may  be  into  which  a  portion  of 
gas  is  introduced,  the  gas  will  expand  and  exert  pressure  on 
every  part  of  its  boundary,  whereas  a  liquid  will  not  expand 
more  than  a  very  small  fraction  of  its  bulk,  even  when  the 
pressure  is  reduced  to  zero  ;  and  some  liquids  can  even 
sustain  a  hydrostatic  tension,  or  negative  pressure,  without 
their  parts  being  separated. 

The  three  principal  states  in  which  bodies  are  found  are, 
therefore,  the  solid,  the  liquid,  and  the  gaseous  states. 

Most  substances  are  capable  of  existing  in  all  these  states, 
as,  for  instance,  water  exists  in  the  forms  of  ice,  water,  and 
steam.  A  few  solids,  such  as  carbon,  have  not  yet  been 
melted ;  and  a  few  gases,  such  as  oxygen^Jiydrogen,  and 
nitrogen,  have  not  yet  been  liquefied  or  solidified,  but  these 
may  be  considered  as  exceptional  cases,  arising  from  the  J% 
limited  range  of  temperature  and  pressure  which  we  can 
command  in  our  experiments.1 

The  ordinary  effects  of  heat  in  modifying  the  physical 
state  of  bodies  may  be  thus  described,  We  may  take  water 

[*  In  consequence  of  the  experiments  of  Pictet  and  Cailletet,  the  excep- 
tions referred  to  in  the  text  must  now  be  removed.  Considerable  quantities 
of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  have  been  prepared  in  the  liquid  state. — R.] 

C 


1 8  Introduction. 

as  a  familiar  example,  and  explain,  when  it  is  necessary,  the 
different  phenomena  of  other  bodies.* 

At  the  lowest  temperatures  at  which  it  has  been  observed 
water  exists  in  the  solid  form  as  ice.  When  heat  is  com- 
municated to  very  cold  ice,  or  to  any  other  solid  body  not 
at  its  melting  temperature — 

1.  The  temperature  rises. 

2.  The  body  generally  expands  (the  only  exception  among 
solid  bodies,  as  far  as  I  am  aware,  is  the  iodide  of  silver, 
which  has  been  found  by  M.  Fizeau  to  contract  as  the 
temperature  rises). 

3.  The  rigidity  of  the  body,  or  its  resistance  to  change  of 
form,    generally  diminishes.      This   phenomenon   is    more 
apparent  in  some  bodies  than  in  others.     It  is  very  con- 
spicuous in  iron,  which  when  heated  but  not  melted  becomes 
soft  and  easily  forged.     The  consistency  of  glass,  resins,  fats, 
and  frozen  oils  alters  very  much  with  change  of  temperature. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  is  believed  that  steel  wire  is  stiffer  at 
100°  C.  than  at  o°  C.,    and  it  has  been  shown  by  Joule  and 
Thomson   that    the   longitudinal  elasticity    of   caoutchouc 
increases   with   the  temperature  between   certain  limits  of 
temperature.     When  ice  is  very  near  its  melting  point  it 
becomes  very  soft 

4.  A  great  many  solid  bodies  are  constantly  in  a  state  of 
evaporation  or  transformation  into  the  gaseous  state  at  their 
free  surface.     Camphor,  iodine,  and  carbonate  of  ammonia 
are  well-known  examples  of  this.     These  solid  bodies,  if  not 
kept  in  stoppered  bottles,  gradually  disappear  by  evapora- 
tion, and  the  vapour  which  escapes  from  them    may  be 
recognised  by  its  smell  and  by  its  chemical  action.     Ice, 
too,  is   continually  passing  into  a  state  of  vapour  at  its 
surface,   and  in  a  dry  climate    during  a  long  frost  large 
pieces  of  ice  become  smaller  and  at  last  disappear. 

There  are  other  solid  bodies  which  do  not  seem  to  lose 
any  of  their  substance  in  this  way;  at  least,  we  cannot 
detect  any  loss.  It  is  probable,  however,  that  those  solid 


Fusion.  19 

bodies  which  can  be  detected  by  their  smell  are  evaporating 
with  extreme  slowness.  Thus  iron  and  copper  have  each  a 
well-known  smell.  This,  however,  may  arise  from  chemical 
action  at  the  surface,  which  sets  free  hydrogen  or  some 
other  gas  combined  with  a  very  small  quantity  of  the 
metal. 

FUSION. 

When  the  temperature  of  a  solid  body  is  raised  to  a 
sufficient  height  it  begins  to  melt  into  a  liquid.  Suppose  a 
small  portion  of  the  solid  to  be  melted,  and  that  no  more  heat 
is  applied  till  the  temperature  of  the  remaining  solid  and  of 
the  liquid  has  become  equalised ;  if  a  little  more  heat  is  then 
applied  and  the  temperature  again  equalised  there  will  be 
more  liquid  matter  and  less  solid  matter,  but  since  the  liquid 
and  the  solid  are  at  the  same  temperature,  that  temperature 
must  still  be  the  melting  temperature. 

Hence,  if  the  partly  melted  mass  be  kept  well  mixed 
together,  so  that  the  solid  and  fluid  parts  are  at  the  same 
temperature,  that  temperature  must  be  the  melting  tempera- 
ture of  the  solid,  and  no  rise  of  temperature  will  follow  from 
the  addition  of  heat  till  the  whole  of  the  solid  has  been  con- 
verted into  liquid. 

The  heat  which  is  required  to  melt  a  certain  quantity  of 
a  solid  at  the  melting  point  into  a  liquid  at  the  same 
temperature  is  called  the  latent  heat  of  fusion.  ^/e  r 

It  is  called  latent  heat",  because  the  application  of  this 
heat  to  the  body  does  not  raise  its  temperature  or  warm  the 
body. 

Those,  therefore,  who  maintained  heat  to  be  a  substance 
supposed  that  it  existed  in  the  fluid  in  a  concealed  or  latent 
state,  and  in  this  way  they  distinguished  it  from  the  heat 
which,  when  applied  to  a  body,  makes  it  hotter,  or  raises  the 
temperature.  This  they  called  sensible  heat.  A  body,  there- 
fore, was  said  to  possess  so  much  heat.  Part  of  this  heat  was 
called  sensible  heat,  and  to  it  was  ascribed  the  temperature 

c2 


2O  Introduction. 

of  the  body.  The  other  part  was  called  latent  heat,  and 
to  it  was  ascribed  the  liquid  or  gaseous  form  of  the  body. 

The  fact  that  a  certain  quantity  of  heat  must  be  applied 
to  a  pound  of  melting  ice  to  convert  it  into  water  is  all  that 
we  mean  in  this  treatise  when  we  speak  of  this  quantity 
of  heat  as  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  of  a  pound  of  water. 

We  make  no  assertion  as  to  the  state  in  which  the  heat 
exists  in  the  water.  We  do  not  even  assert  that  the  heat 
communicated  to  the  ice  is  still  in  existence  as  heat. 

Besides  the  change  from  solid  to  liquid,  there  is  generally 
a  change  of  volume  in  the  act  of  fusion.  The  water  formed 
from  the  ice  is  of  smaller  bulk  than  the  ice,  as  is  shown  by 
ice  floating  in  water,  so  that  the  total  volume  of  the  ice  and 
water  diminishes  as  the  melting  goes  on. 

On  the  other  hand,  many  substances  expand  in  the  act  of 
fusion,  so  that  the  solid  parts  sink  in  the  fluid.  During  the 
fusion  of  the  mass  the  volume  in  these  cases  increases. 

It  has  been  shown  by  Prof.  J.  Thomson,1  from  the 
principles  of  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat,  that  if  pressure  is 
applied  to  a  mixture  of  ice  and  water,  it  will  not  only  compress 
both  the  ice  and  the  water,  but  some  of  the  ice  will  be 
melted  at  the  same  time,  so  that  the  total  compression  will 
be  increased  by  the  contraction  of  bulk  due  to  this  melting 
The  heat  required  to  melt  this  ice  being  taken  from  the  rest 
of  the  mass,  the  temperature  of  the  whole  will  diminish. 

Hence  the  melting  point  is  lowered  by  pressure  in  the 
case  of  ice.  This  deduction  from  theory  was  experimentally 
verified  by  Sir  W.  Thomson. 

If  the  substance  had  been  one  of  those  which  expand  in 
melting,  the  effect  of  pressure  would  be  to  solidify  some  of 
the  mixture,  and  to  raise  the  temperature  of  fusion.  Most  of 
the  substances  of  which  the  crust  of  the  earth  is  composed 
expand  in  the  act  of  melting.  Hence  their  melting  points 
will  rise  under  great  pressure.  If  the  earth  were  throughout 

1  Transactions  of  th(  Jloyal  Solely  of  Edinburgh,  1849. 


Fusion.  2 1 

in  a  state  of  fusion,  when  the  external  parts  began  to  solidify 
they  wouU  sink  in  the  molten  mass,  and  when  they  had 
sunk  to  a  great  depth  they  would  remain  solid  under  the 
enormous  pressure  even  at  a  temperature  greatly  above  the 
point  of  fusion  of  the  same  rock  at  the  surface.  It  does  not 
follow,  therefore,  that  in  the  interior  of  the  earth  the  matter 
is  in  a  liquid  state,  even  if  the  temperature  is  far  above  that 
of  the  fusion  of  rocks  in  our  furnaces. 

It  has  been  shown  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  that  if  the  earth,  as 
a  whole,  were  not  more  rigid  than  a  ball  of  glass  of  equal  size, 
the  attraction  of  the  moon  and  sun  would  pull  it  out  of  shape, 
and  raise  tides  on  the  surface,  so  that  the  solid  earth  would 
rise  and  fall  as  the  sea  does,  only  not  quite  so  much.  It  is 
true  that  this  motion  would  be  so  smooth  and  regular  that 
we  should  not  be  able  to  perceive  it  in  a  direct  way,  but  its 
effect  would  be  to  diminish  the  apparent  rise  of  the  tides  of 
the  ocean,  so  as  to  make  them  much  smaller  than  they 
actually  are. 

It  appears,  therefore,  from  what  we  know  of  the  tides  of 
the  ocean,  that  the  earth  as  a  whole  is  more  rigid  than  glass, 
and  therefore  that  no  very  large  portion  of  its  interior  can 
be  liquid.  The  effect  of  pressure  on  the  melting  point  of 
bodies  enables  us  to  reconcile  this  conclusion  with  the 
observed  increase  of  temperature  as  we  descend  in  the 
earth's  crust,  and  the  deductions  as  to  the  interior  tempera- 
ture founded  on  this  fact  by  the  aid  of  the  theory  of  the 
conduction  of  heat. 

EFFECT   OF    HEAT   ON    LIQUIDS. 

When  heat  is  applied  to  a  liquid  its  effects  are — 
i.  To  warm  the  liquid.  The  quantity  of  heat  required  to 
raise  the  liquid  one  degree  is  generally  greater  than  that 
required  to  raise  the  substance  in  the  solid  form  one  degree, 
and  in  general  it  requires  more  heat  at  high  than  at  low 
temperatures  to  warm  the  liquid  one  degree. 

3.  To   alter  its  volume.     Most  liquids  expand  as  their 


22  Introduction. 

temperature  rises,  but  water  contracts  from  o°  C.  to  4C  C., 
and  then  expands,  slowly  at  first,  «but  afterwards  more 
rapidly. 

3.  To  alter  its  physical  state.     Liquids,  such  as  oil,  tar, 
&c.,   which  are  sluggish  in   their  motion,  are  said   to  be 
viscous.     When  they   are   heated  their  viscosity  generally 
diminishes  and  they  become  more  mobile.     This  is  the  case 
even  with  water,  as  appears  by  the  experiments  of  M.  O.  E 
Meyer. 

When  sulphur  is  heated,  the  melted  sulphur  undergoes 
several  remarkable  changes  as  its  temperature  rises,  being 
mobile  when  first  melted,  then  becoming  remarkably  viscous 
at  a  higher  temperature,  and  again  becoming  mobile  when 
still  more  heated. 

4.  To  convert  the  liquid  or  solid  into  gas    When  a  liquid 
or  a  solid  body  is  placed  in  a  vessel  the  rest  of  which  is 
empty,  it  gives  off  part  of  its  own  substance  in  the  form  of 
gas.     This  process  is  called  evaporation,  and  the  gas  given 
off  is  commonly  called  the  vapour  of  the  solid  or  liquid  sub- 
stance.    The  process  of  evaporation  goes  on  till  the  density 
of  the  vapour  in  the  vessel  has  reached  a  value  which  de- 
pends only  on  the  temperature. 

If  in  any  way,  as  by  the  motion  of  a  piston,  the  vessel  be 
made  larger,  then  more  vapour  will  be  formed  till  the  density 
is  the  same  as  before.  If  the  piston  be  pushed  in,  and  the 
vessel  made  smaller,  some  of  the  vapour  is  condensed  into 
the  liquid  state,  but  the  density  of  the  remainder  of  the 
vapour  still  remains  the  same. 

If  the  remainder  of  the  vessel,  instead  of  containing 
nothing  but  the  vapour  of  the  liquid,  contains  any  quantity 
of  air  or  some  other  gas  not  capable  of  chemical  action  on 
the  liquid,  then  exactly  the  same  quantity  of  vapour  will  be 
formed,  but  the  time  required  for  the  vapour  to  reach  the 
further  parts  of  the  vessel  will  be  greater,  as  it  has  to 
diffuse  itself  through  the  air  in  the  vessel  by  a  kind  of 
percolation. 

These  laws  of  evaporation  were  discovered  by  Daltoru 


Evaporation.  23 

The  conversion  of  the  liquid  into  vapour  requires  an 
amount  of '  latent  heat '  which  is  generally  much  greater 
than  the  latent  heat  of  fusion  of  the  same  substance. 

In  all  substances,  the  density,  pressure,  and  temperature 
are  so  connected  that  if  we  know  any  two  of  them  the  value 
of  the  third  is  determinate.  Now  in  the  case  of  vapours  in 
contact  with  their  own  liquids  or  solids,  there  is  for  each 
temperature  a  corresponding  density,  which  is  the  greatest 
density  which  the  vapour  can  have  at  that  temperature, 
without  being  condensed  into  the  liquid  or  solid  form. 

Hence  for  each  temperature  there  is  also  a  maximum 
pressure  which  the  vapour  can  exert. 

A  vapour  which  is  at  the  greatest  density  and  pressuie 
corresponding  to  its  temperature  is  called  a  satuxatcd  vapour. 
It  is  then  just  at  the  point  of  condensation,  and  the  slightest 
increase  of  pressure  or  decrease  of  temperature  will  cause 
some  of  the  vapour  to  be  condensed.  Professor  Rankine 
restricts  the  use  of  the  word  vapour  by  itself  to  the  case  of  a 
saturated  vapour,  and  when  the  vapour  is  not  at  the  point  of 
condensation  he  calls  it  superheated  vapour,  or  simply  gas. 

BOILING. 

When  a  liquid  in  an  open  vessel  is  heated  to  a  tempera- 
ture such  that  the  pressure  of  its  vapour  at  that  tempera- 
ture is  greater  than  the  pressure  at  a  point  in  the  interior 
of  the  liquid,  the  liquid  will  begin  to  evaporate  at  that 
point,  so  that  a  bubble  of  vapour  will  be  formed  there. 
This  process,  in  which  bubbles  of  vapour  are  formed  in 
the  interior  of  the  liquid,  is  called  boiling  or  ebullition. 

When  water  is  heated  in  the  ordinary  way  by  applying 
heat  to  the  bottom  of  a  vessel,  the  lowest  layer  of  the  water 
becomes  hot  first,  and  by  its  expansion  it  becomes  lighter 
than  the  colder  water  above,  and  gradually  rises,  so  that  a 
gentle  circulation  of  water  is  kept  up,  and  the  whole  water 
is  gradually  warmed,  though  the  lowest  layer  is  always  the 
hottest.  As  the  temperature  increases,  the  absorbed  air, 


24  Introduction. 

which  is  generally  found  in  ordinary  water,  is  expelled,  and 
rises  in  small  bubbles  without  noise.  *At  last  the  water  in 
contact  with  the  heated  metal  becomes  so  hot  that,  in  spite 
of  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  on  the  surface  of  the 
water,  the  additional  pressure  due  to  the  water  in  the 
vessel,  and  the  cohesion  of  the  water  itself,  some  of  the 
water  at  the  bottom  is  transformed  into  steam,  forming  a 
bubble  adhering  to  the  bottom  of  the  vessel.  As  soon  as  a 
bubble  is  formed,  evaporation  goes  on  rapidly  from  the  water 
all  round  it,  so  that  it  soon  grows  large,  and  rises  from  the 
bottom.  If  the  upper  part  of  the  water  into  which  the 
bubble  rises  is  still  below  the  boiling  temperature,  the 
bubble  is  condensed,  and  its  sides  come  together  with  a 
sharp  rattling  noise,  called  simmering.  But  the  rise  of  the 
bubbles  stirs  the  water  about  much  more  vigorously  than 
the  mere  expansion  of  the  water,  so  that  the  water,  is  soon 
heated  throughout,  and  brought  to  the  boil,  and  then  the 
bubbles  enlarge  rapidly  during  their  whole  ascent,  and 
burst  into  the  air,  throwing  the  water  about,  and  making 
the  well-known  softer  and  more  rolling  noise  of  boiling. 

The  steam,  as  it  bursts  out  of  the  bubbles,  is  an  invisible 
gas,  but  when  it  comes  into  the  colder  air  it  is  cooled  below 
its  condensing  point,  and  part  of  it  is  formed  into  a  cloud 
consisting  of  small  drops  of  water  which  float  in  the  air. 
As  the  cloud  of  drops  disperses  itself  and  mixes  with  dry 
air  the  quantity  of  water  in  each  cubic  foot  diminishes  as 
the  volume  of  any  part  of  the  cloud  increases.  The  little' 
drops  of  water  begin  to  evaporate  as  soon  as  there  is  suffi- 
cient room  for  the  vapour  to  be  formed  at  the  temperature 
of  the  atmosphere,  and  so  the  cloud  vanishes  again  into 
thin  air. 

The  temperature  to  which  water  must  be  heated  before  it 
boils  depends,  in  the  first  place,  on  the  pressure  of  the 
atmosphere,  so  that  the  greater  the  pressure,  the  higher  the 
boiling  temperature.  But  the  temperature  requires  to  be 
raised  above  that  at  which  the  pressure  of  steam  is  equal  to 


Boiling.  2  5 

that  of  the  atmosphere,  for  in  order  to  form  bubbles  the 
pressuie  of  the  steam  has  to  overcome  not  only  the  pressure 
due  to  the  atmosphere  and  a  certain  depth  of  water,  but  that 
cohesion  between  the  parts  of  the  water  of  which  the  effects 
are  visible  in  the  tenacity  of  bubbles  and  drops.  Hence  it 
is  possible  to  heat  water  20°  F.  above  its  boiling  point  with- 
out ebullition.  If  a  small  quantity  of  metal-filings  are  now 
thrown  into  the  water,  a  little  air  will  be  carried  down  on 
the  surface  of  the  filings,  and  the  process  of  evaporation  u  ill 
take  place  at  the  interface  between  this  air  and  the  hot  water 
with  such  rapidity  as  to  produce  a  violent  boiling,  almost 
amounting  to  an  explosion. 

If  a  current  of  steam  from  a  boiler  is  passed  into  a  vessel 
of  cold  water,  we  have  first  the  condensation  of  steam, 
accompanied  with  a  very  loud  simmering  or  rattling  noise,  and 
a  rapid  heating  of  the  water.  When  the  water  is  sufficiently 
heated,  the  steam  is  not  condensed,  but  escapes  in  bubbles, 
and  the  water  is  now  boiling. 

As  an  instance  of  a  different  kind,  let  us  suppose  that 
the  water  is  not  pure,  but  contains  some  salt,  such  as 
common  salt,  or  sulphate  of  soda,  or  any  other  substance 
which  tends  to  combine  with  water,  and  from  which  the 
water  must  separate  before  it  can  evaporate.  Water  con- 
taining such  substances  in  solution  requires  to  be  brought 
to  a  temperature  higher  than  the  boiling  point  of  pure 
water  before  it  will  boil.  Wrater,  on  the  other  hand,  con- 
taining air  or  carbonic  acid,  will  boil  at  a  lower  temperature 
than  pure  water  till  the  gas  is  expelled. 

If  steam  at  100°  C.  is  passed  into  a  vessel  containing  a 
strong  solution  of  one  of  the  salts  we  have  mentioned, 
which  has  a  tendency  to  combine  with  water,  the  conden- 
sation of  the  steam  will  be  promoted  by  this  tendency, 
and  will  go  on  even  after  the  solution  has  been  heated  far 
above  the  ordinary  boiling  point,  so  that  by  passing  steam 
at  100°  C.  into  a  strong  solution  of  nitrate  of  soda,  Mr.  Peter 
Spence  !  has  heated  it  up  to  i2i°'i  C. 

1   Transactions  of  the  British  Association,  1869,  p.  75. 


26  Introduction. 

If  water  at  a  temperature  below  100°  C.  be  placed  in  a 
vessel,  and  if  by  means  of  an  air-pumjtwe  reduce  the  pres- 
sure of  the  air  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  evaporation  goes 
on  and  the  surface  of  the  water  becomes  colder  than  the 
interior  parts.  If  we  go  on  working  the  air-pump,  the 
pressure  is  reduced  to  that  of  vapour  of  the  temperature  of  the 
interior  of  the  fluid.  The  water  then  begins  to  boil,  exactly 
as  in  the  ordinary  way,  and  as  it  boils  the  temperature 
rapidly  falls,  the  heat  being  expended  in  evaporating  the 
water. 

This  experiment  may  be  performed  without  an  air-pump 
in  the  following  way  :  Boil  water  in  a  flask  over  a  gas- 
flame  or  spirit-lamp,  and  while  it  is  boiling  briskly  cork  the 
flask,  and  remove  it  from  the  flame.  The  boiling  will  soon 
cease,  but  if  we  now  dash  a  little  cold  water  over  the  flask, 
some  of  the  steam  in  the  upper  part  will  be  condensed,  the 
pressure  of  the  remainder  will  be  diminished,  and  the  water 
will  begin  to  boil  again.  The  experiment  may  be  made 
more  striking  by  plunging  the  flask  entirely  under  cold 
water.  The  steam  will  be  condensed  as  before,  but  the 
water,  though  it  is  cooled  more  rapidly  than  when  the  cold 
water  was  merely  poured  on  the  flask,  retains  its  heat  longer 
than  the  steam,  and  continues  to  boil  for  some  time. 


Laivs  of  Gases.  27 


ON   THE   GASEOUS    STATE. 

The  distinguishing  property  of  gases  is  their  power  of 
indefinite  expansion.  As  the  pressure  is  diminished  the 
volume  of  the  gas  not  only  increases,  but  before  the  pressure 
has  been  reduced  to  zero  the  volume  of  the  gas  has  become 
greater  than  that  of  any  vessel  we  can  put  it  in. 

This  is  the  property  without  which  a  substance  cannot 
be  called  a  gas,  but  it  is  found  that  actual  gases  fulfil  with 
greater  or  less  degrees  of  accuracy  certain  numerical  laws, 
which  are  commonly  referred  to  as  the  '  Gaseous  Laws.' 

LAW   OF   BOYLE. 

The  first  of  these  laws  expresses  the  relation  between  the 
pressure  and  the  density  of  a  gas,  the  temperature  being 
constant,  and  is  usually  stated  thus  :  '  The  volume  of  a 
portion  of  gas  varies  inversely  as  the  pressure.' 

This  law  was  discovered  by  Robert  Boyle,  and  published 
by  him  in  1662,  in  an  appendix  to  his  'New  Experiments, 
Physico-mechariical,  &c.,  touching  the  Spring  of  the  Air.' 

Mariotte,  about  1676,  in  his  treatise  *  De  la  Nature  de 
1'Air,'  enunciated  the  same  law,  and  carefully  verified  it,  and  it 
is  generally  referred  to  by  Continental  writers  as  Marietta's 
law. 

This  law  may  also  be  stated  thus  : 

The  pressure  of  a  gas  is  proportional  to  its  density. 

Another  statement  of  the  same  law  has  been  proposed  by 
Professor  Rankine,  which  I  think  places  the  law  in  a  very 
clear  light 

If  we  take  a  closed  and  exhausted  vessel,  and  introduce 
into  it  one  grain  of  air,  this  air  will,  as  we  know,  exert  a 
certain  pressure  on  every  square  inch  of  the  surface  of  the 
vessel.  If  we  now  introduce  a  second  grain  of  air,  then  this 
second  grain  will  exert  exactly  the  same  pressure  on  the 
sides  of  the  vessel  that  it  would  have  exerted  if  the  first  grain 


28  Introduction. 

had  not  been  there  before  it,  so  that  the  pressure  will  now 
be  doubled.  Hence  we  may  state,  a"s  the  property  of  a 
perfect  gas,  that  any  portion  of  it  exerts  the  same  pressure 
against  the  sides  of  a  vessel  as  if  the  other  portions  had  not 
been  there. 

Dalton  extended  this  law  to  mixtures  of  gases  of  different 
kinds. 

We  have  already  seen  that  if  several  different  portions  of 
the  same  gas  are  placed  together  in  a  vessel,  the  pressure  on 
any  part  of  the  sides  of  the  vessel  is  the  sum  of  the  pres- 
sures which  each  portion  would  exert  if  placed  by  itself  in 
the  vessel. 

Dalton's  law  asserts  that  the  same  is  true  for  portions  of 
different  gases  placed  in  the  same  vessel,  and  that  the 
pressure  of  the  mixture  is  the  sum  of  the  pressures  due  to  the 
several  portions  of  gas,  if  introduced  separately  into  the 
vessel  and  brought  to  the  same  temperature. 

This  law  of  Dalton  is  sometimes  stated  as  if  portions  of 
gas  of  different  kinds  behave  to  each  other  in  a  different 
manner  from  portions  of  gas  of  the  same  kind,  and  we  are 
told  that  when  gases  of  different  kinds  are  placed  in  the 
same  vessel,  each  acts  as  if  the  other  were  a  vacuum. 

This  statement,  properly  understood,  is  correct,  but  it 
seems  to  convey  the  impression  that  if  the  gases  had  been 
of  the  same  kind  some  other  result  would  have  happened, 
whereas  there  is  no  difference  between  the  two  cases. 

Another  law  established  by  Dalton  is  that  the  maximum 
density  of  a  vapour  in  contact  with  its  liquid  is  not  affected 
by  the  presence  of  other  gases.  It  has  been  shown  by 
M.  Regnault  that  when  the  vapour  of  the  substance  has  a 
tendency  to  combine  with  the  gas,  the  maximum  density 
attainable  by  the  vapour  is  somewhat  increased. 

Before  the  time  of  Dalton  it  was  supposed  that  the  cause 
of  evaporation  was  the  tendency  of  water  to  combine  with 
air,  and  that  the  water  was  dissolved  in  the  air  just  as  salt  is 
dissolved  in  water. 


Get ses  and  Vapours.  29 

Dalton  showed  that  the  vapour  of  water  is  a  gas,  which 
just  at  the  surface  of  the  water  has  a  certain  maximum 
density,  and  which  will  gradually  diffuse  itself  through  the 
space  above,  whether  filled  with  air  or  not,  till  if  the  space  is 
limited,  the  density  of  the  vapour  is  a  maximum  throughout, 
or,  if  the  space  is  large  enough,  till  the  water  is  all  dried  up. 

The  presence  of  air  is  so  far  from  being  essential  to  this 
process  that  the  more  air  there  is,  the  slower  it  goes  on, 
because  the  vapour  has  to  penetrate  through  the  air  by  the 
slow  process  of  diffusion. 

The  phenomenon  discovered  by  Regnault  that  the  density 
of  vapour  is  slightly  increased  by  the  presence  of  a  gas 
which  has  a  tendency  to  combine  with  it,  is  the  only  instance 
in  which  there  is  any  truth  in  the  doctrine  of  a  liquid  being 
held  in  solution  by  a  gas. 

The  law  of  Boyle  is  not  perfectly  fulfilled  by  any  actual 
gas.  It  is  very  nearly  fulfilled  by  those  gases  which  we  are 
not  able  to  condense  into  liquids,  and  among  other  gases  it 
is  most  nearly  fulfilled  when  their  temperature  is  much  above 
their  point  of  condensation. 

When  a  gas  is  near  its  point  of  condensation  its  density 
increases  more  rapidly  than  the  pressure.  When  it  is 
actually  at  the  point  of  condensation  the  slightest  increase  of 
pressure  condenses  the  whole  of  it  into  a  liquid,  and  in  the 
liquid  form  the  density  increases  very  slowly  with  the 
pressure. 

LAW   OF    CHARLES. 

The  second  law  of  gases  was  discovered  by  Charles,1  but 
is  commonly  referred  to  as  that  of  Gay-Lussac  or  of  Dalton.2 
It  may  be  stated  thus  : 

1  Professor  of  Physics  at  the  Conservatoire  des  Arts  et  Metiers,  Pans. 
Born  1746.     Died  1823.     Celebrated  as  having  first  employed  hydrogen 
in  balloons. 

2  Dalton,  in  1801,  first  published  this  law.     Gay-Lussac  published 
it,  in  1802,  independently  of  Dalton.     In  his  memoir,  however  (Ann. 


3<3  Introduction. 

The  volume  of  a  gas  'inder  constant  pressure  expands 
when  raised  from  the  freezing  to  the  boiling  temperature  by 
the  same  fraction  of  itself,  whatever  be  the  nature  of  the  gas. 

It  has  been  found  by  the  careful  experiments  of  M. 
Regnault,  M.  Rudberg,  Prof.  B.  Stewart,  and  others  that  the 
volume  of  air  at  constant  pressure  expands  from  i  to  i'3665 
between  o°  C.  and  100°  C.  Hence  30  cubic  inches  of 
air  at  o°  C.  would  expand  to  about  41  cubic  inches  at 
100°  C. 

If  we  admit  the  truth  of  Boyle's  law  at  all  temperatures, 
and  if  the  law  of  Charles  is  found  to  be  true  for  a  particular 
pressure,  say  that  of  the  atmosphere,  then  it  is  easy  to  show 
that  the  law  of  Charles  must  be  true  for  every  other  pressure. 
For  if  we  call  the  volume  v  and  the  pressure  P,  then  we 
may  call  the  product  of  the  numerical  value  of  the  volume 
and  pressure  v  P,  and  Boyle's  law  asserts  that  this  pro- 
duct is  constant,  provided  the  temperature  is  constant.  If 
then  we  are  further  informed  that  when  p  has  a  given 
value  v  is  increased  from  i  to  1*3665  when  the  temperature 
rises  from  the  freezing  point  to  the  boiling  point,  the  product 
v  P  will  be  increased  in  the  same  proportion  at  that  particular 
pressure.  But  v  p  we  know  by  Boyle's  law  does  not  depend  on 
the  particular  pressure,  but  remains  the  same  for  all  pressures 
when  the  temperature  remains  the  same.  Hence,  whatever 
be  the  pressure,  the  product  v  P  will  be  increased  in  the 
proportion  of  i  to  1*3665  when  the  temperature  rises  from 
o°  C.  to  100°  C. 

The  law  of  the  equality  of  the  dilatation  of  gases,  which,  as 
originally  stated,  applied  only  to  the  dilatation  from  o°  C. 
to  1 00°  C.,  has  been  found  to  be  true  for  all  other  tempera- 
tures for  which  it  has  hitherto  been  tested. 


de  Chimle,  xliii.  p.  157  [1802]),  he  states  that  Citizen  Charles  had 
remarked,  fifteen  years  before  the  date  of  his  memoir,  the  equality  of 
the  dilatation  of  the  principal  gases  ;  but,  as  Charles  never  published 
these  results,  he  had  become  acquainted  with  them  by  mere  chance. 


The  Gaseous  State.  31 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  gases  are  distinguished  from 
other  forms  of  matter,  not  only  by  their  power  of  indefinite 
expansion  so  as  to  fill  any  vessel,  however  large,  and  by  the 
great  effect  which  heat  has  in  dilating  them,  but  by  the 
uniformity  and  simplicity  of  the  laws  which  regulate  these 
changes.  In  the  solid  and  liquid  states  the  effect  of  a 
given  change  of  pressure  or  of  temperature  in  changing  the 
volume  of  the  body  is  different  for  every  different  substance. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  we  take  equal  volumes  of  any  two 
gases,  measured  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure, 
their  volumes  will  remain  equal  if  we  afterwards  bring  them 
both  to  any  other  temperature  and  pressure,  and  this 
although  the  two  gases  differ  altogether  in  chemical  nature 
and  in  density,  provided  they  are  both  in  the  perfectly  gaseous 
condition. 

This  is  only  one  of  many  remarkable  properties  which 
point  out  the  gaseous  state  of  matter  as  that  in  which  its 
physical  properties  are  least  complicated. 

In  our  description  of  the  physical  properties  of  bodies  as 
related  to  heat  we  have  begun  with  solid  bodies,  as  those 
which  we  can  most  easily  handle,  and  have  gone  on  to 
liquids,  which  we  can  keep  in  open  vessels,  and  have  now 
come  to  gases,  which  will  escape  from  open  vessels,  and 
which  are  generally  invisible.  This  is  the  order  which  is 
most  natural  in  our  first  study  of  these  different  states.  But 
assoon  as  we  have  been  made  familiar  with  the  most  prominent 
features  of  these  different  conditions  of  matter,  the  most 
scientific  course  of  study  is  in  the  reverse  order,  beginning 
with  gases,  on  account  of  the  greater  simplicity  of  their  laws, 
then  advancing  to  liquids,  the  more  complex  laws  of  which 
are  much  more  impe-rfectly  known,  and  concluding  with 
the  little  that  has  been  hitherto  discovered  about  the  con- 
stitution of  solid  bodies. 


32  Thcrmomctry. 


CHAPTER  II. 

ON   THERMOMETRY,  OR   THE   THEORY   OF   TEMPERATURE. 

Definition  of  Temperature. — The  temperature  of  a  body 
is  its  thermal  state  considered  with  reference  to  its  power  of 
commujiicating  heat  to  other  bodies. 

Definition  of  Higher  and  Lower  Temperature. — If  when 
two  bodies  are  placed  in  thermal  communication,  one  of  the 
bo  dies  loses  /teat,  and  the  other  gains  heat,  that  body  which  gives 
cut  heat  is  said  to  have  a  higher  temperature  than  that  which 
receives  heat  from  it. 

Cor.  If  when  two  bodies  are  placed  in  thermal  communica  • 
tion.  neither  of  them  loses  or  gains  heat,  the  two  bodies  are 
said  to  have  equal  temperatures  or  the  same  temperature.  TJie 
two  bodies  are  then  said  to  be  in  thermal  equilibrium.  We 
have  here  a  means  of  comparing  the  temperature  of  any 
two  bodies,  so  as  to  determine  which  has  the  higher 
temperature,  and  a  test  of  the  equality  of  temperature 
which  is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  bodies  tested. 
But  we  have  no  means  of  estimating  numerically  the  differ- 
ence between  two  temperatures,  so  as  to  be  able  to  assert 
that  a  certain  temperature  is  exactly  halfway  between  two 
other  temperatures. 

Law  of  Equal  Temperatures. — Bodies  whose  temperature* 
are  equal  to  that  of  the  same  body  have  themselves  equal  tem- 
peratures. This  law  is  not  a  truism,  but  expresses  the  fact 
that  if  a  piece  of  iron  when  plunged  into  a  vessel  of  water 
is  in  thermal  equilibrium  with  the  water,  and  if  the  same 
piece  of  iron,  without  altering  its  temperature,  is  transferred 
to  a  vessel  of  oil,  and  is  found  to  be  also  in  thermal  equi- 
librium with  the  oil,  then  if  the  oil  and  water  were  put 
into  the  same  vessel  they  would  themselves  be  in  thermal 


Comparison  of  Temperatures.  33 

equilibrium,  and  the  same  would  be  true  of  any  other  three 
substances. 

This  law,  therefore,  expresses  much  more  than  Euclid's 
axiom  that  '  Things  which  are  equal  to  the  same  thing  are 
equal  to  one  another/  and  is  the  foundation  of  the  whole 
science  of  thermometry.  For  if  we  take  a  thermometer, 
such  as  we  have  already  described,  and  bring  it  into  in- 
timate contact  with  different  bodies,  by  plunging  it  into 
liquids,  or  inserting  it  into  holes  made  in  solid  bodies,  we 
find  that  the  mercury  in  the  tube  rises  or  falls  till  it  has 
reached  a  certain  point  at  which  it  remains  stationary.  We 
then  know  that  the  thermometer  is  neither  becoming  hotter 
nor  colder,  but  is  in  thermal  equilibrium  with  the  surround- 
ing body.  It  follows  from  this,  by  the  law  of  equal  tem- 
peratures, that  the  temperature  of  the  body  is  the  same  as 
that  of  the  thermometer,  and  the  temperature  of  the  thermo- 
meter itself  is  known  from  the  height  at  which  the  mer- 
cury stands  in  the  tube. 

Hence'  the  reading,  as  it  is  called,  of  the  thermometer — 
that  is,  the  number  of  degrees  indicated  on  the  scale  by  the 
top  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube — informs  us  of  the  tem- 
perature of  the  surrounding  substance,  as  well  as  of  that  of 
the  mercury  in  the  thermometer.  In  this  way  the  thermo- 
meter may  be  used  to  compare  the  temperature  of  any 
two  bodies  at  the  same  time  or  at  different  times,  so  as 
to  ascertain  whether  the  temperature  of  one  of  them  is 
higher  or  lower  than  that  of  the  other.  We  may  compare 
in  this  way  the  temperatures  of  the  air  on  different  days  ; 
we  may  ascertain  that  water  boils  at  a  lower  temperature  at 
the  top  of  a  mountain  than  it  does  at  the  sea-shore,  and  that 
ice  melts  at  the  same  temperature  in  all  parts  of  the  world. 

For  this  purpose  it  would  be  necessary  to  carry  the  same 
thermometer  to  different  places,  and  to  preserve  it  with 
great  care,  for  if  it  were  destroyed  and  a  new  one  made, 
we  should  have  no  certainty  that  the  same  temperature  is 
indicated  by  the  same  reading  in  the  two  thermometers. 

D 


34  Tlicrmomctry. 

Thus  the  observations  of  temperature  recorded  during 
sixteen  years  by  Rinieri l  at  Florence  lost  their  scientific 
value  after  the  suppression  of  the  Accademia  del  Cimento, 
and  the  supposed  destruction  of  the  thermometers  with 
which  the  observations  were  made.  But  when  Antinori  in 
1829  discovered  a  number  of  the  very  thermometers  used 
in  the  ancient  observations,  Libri2  was  able  to  compare  them 
with  Reaumur's  scale,  and  thus  to  show  that  the  climate  of 
Florence  has  not  been  rendered  sensibly  colder  in  winter 
by  the  clearing  of  the  woods  of  the  Apennines. 

In  the  construction  of  artificial  standards  for  the  measure- 
ment of  quantities  of  any  kind  it  is  desirable  to  have  the 
means  of  comparing  the  standards  together,  either  directly, 
or  by  means  of  some  natural  object  or  phenomenon  which 
is  easily  accessible  and  not  liable  to  change.  Both  methods 
are  used  in  the  preparation  of  thermometers. 

We  have  already  noticed  two  natural  phenomena  which 
take  place  at  definite  temperatures— the  melting  of  ice  and 
the  boiling  of  water.  The  advantage  of  employing  these 
temperatures  to  determine  two  points  on  the  scale  of  the 
thermometer  was  pointed  out  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton  ('  Scala 
Graduum  Caloris,'  Phil.  Trans.  1701). 

The  first  of  these  points  of  reference  is  commonly  called 
the  Freezing  Point.  To  determine  it,  the  thermometer  is 
placed  in  a  vessel  filled  with  pounded  ice  or  snow  thoroughly 
moistened  with  water.  If  the  atmospheric  temperature  be 
above  the  freezing  point,  the  melting  of  the  ice  will  ensure 
the  presence  of  water  in  .the  vessel.  As  long  as  every  part 
of  the  vessel  contains  a  mixture  of  water  and  ice  its  tem- 
perature remains  uniform,  for  if  heat  enters  the  vessel  it 
can  only  melt  some  of  the  ice,  and  if  heat  escapes  from 
the  vessel  some  of  the  water  will  freeze,  but  the  mixture  can 
be  made  neither  hotter  nor  colder  till  all  the  ice  is  melted 
or  all  the  water  frozen. 

1  Pupil  of  Galileo  ;  died  1647. 

2  Annales  de  Chimie  et  de  Physique,  xlv.  (1830). 


Temperatures  of  Reference. 


35 


FIG.  a. 


The  thermometer  is  completely  immersed  in  the  mixture 
of  ice  and  water  for  a  sufficient  time,  so  that  the  mercury 
has  time  to  reach  its  stationary  point.  The  position  of  the 
top  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube  is 
then  recorded  by  making  a  scratch 
on  the  glass  tube.  We  shall  call 
this  mark  the  Freezing  Point.  It 
may  be  determined  in  this  way  with 
extreme  accuracy,  for,  as  we  shall 
see  afterwards,  the  temperature  of 
melting  ice  is  very  nearly  the  same 
under  very  different  pressures. 

The    other    point   of  reference  is 
called  the  Boiling  Point.     The  tem- 
perature at  which   water  boils   de- 
pends on  the  pressure  of  the  atmo- 
sphere.    The  greater  the  pressure  of 
the  air  on  the  surface  of  the  water,  jj 
the   higher    is   the    temperature   to  t 
which  the    water    must    be   raised 
before  it  begins  to  boil. 

To  determine  the  Boiling  Point,  the  stem  of  the  thermo- 
meter is  passed  through  a  hole  in  the  lid  of  a  tall  vessel, 
in  the  lower  part  of  which  water  is  made  to  boil  briskly,  so 
that  the  whole  of  the  upper  part,  where  the  thermometer  is 
placed,  is  filled  with  steam.  When  the  thermometer  has 
acquired  the  temperature  of  the  current  of  steam  the  stem 
is  drawn  up  through  the  hole  in  the  lid  of  the  vessel  till  the 
top  of  the  column  of  mercury  becomes  visible.  A  scratch 
is  then  made  on  the  tube  to  indicate  the  boiling  point 

In  careful  determinations  of  the  boiling  point  no  part  of 
the  thermometer  is  allowed  to  dip  into  the  boiling  water, 
because  it  has  been  found  by  Gay-Lussac  that  the  temperature 
of  the  water  is  not  always  the  same,  but  that  it  boils  at 
different  temperatures  in  different  kinds  of  vessels.  It  has 
been  shown,  however,  by  Rudberg  that  the  temperature  of 

D  2 


"~ 


3<5 


Thmnomctry. 


FIG.  3. 


the  steam  which  escapes  from  boiling  water  is  the  same  in 
every  kind  of  vessel,  and  depends  only  on  the  pressure  at 
the  surface  of  the  water.  Hence  the  thermometer  is  not 
dipped  in  the  water,  but  suspended  in  the  issuing  steam.  To 
ensure  that  the  temperature  of  the  steam  shall  be  the  same 
when  it  reaches  the  thermometer  as  when  it  issues  from  the 
boiling  water,  the  sides  of  the  vessel  are  sometimes  protected 
by  what  is  called  a  steam-jacket.  A  current  of  steam  is 

made  to  play  over  the  out- 
side of  the  sides  of  the 
vessel.  The  vessel  is  thus 
raised  to  the  same  tempe- 
rature as  the  steam  itself,  so 
that  the  steam  cannot  be 
cooled  during  its  passage 
•  from  the  boiling  water  to 
the  thermometer. 

For  instance,  if  we  take 
any  tall  narrow  vessel,  as 

a  coffee-pot,  and  cover  its  mouth  and  part  of  its  sides 
with  a  wider  vessel  turned  upside  down,  taking  care  that 
there  shall  be  plenty  of  room  for  the  steam  to  escape,  then 
if  we  boil  a  small  quantity  of  water  in  the  coffee-pot,  aHhermo- 
meter  placed  in  the  steam  above  will  be  raised  to  the 
exact  temperature  of  the  boiling  point  of  water  corresponding 
to  the  state  of  the  barometer  at  the  time. 

To  mark  the  level  of  the  mercury  on  the  tube  of  the 
thermometer  without  cooling  it,  we  must  draw  it  up  through 
a  cork  or  a  plug  of  india-rubber  in  the  steam-jacket  through 
which  the  steam  passes  till  we  can  just  see  the  top  of  the 
column  of  mercury.  A  mark  must  then  be  scratched  on  the 
glass  to  register  the  boiling  point.  This  experiment  of 
exposing  a  thermometer  to  the  steam  of  boiling  water  is  an 
important  one,  for  it  not  only  supplies  a  means  of  gradu- 
ating thermometers,  and  testing  them  when  they  have  been 
graduated,  but,  since  the  temperature  at  which  water  boils 


Scale  of  the  Thermometer.  37 

depends  on  the  pressure  of  the  air,  we  may  determine  the 
pressure  of  the  air  by  boiling  water  when  we  are  not  able  to 
measure  it  by  means  of  the  appropriate  instrument,  the 
barometer. 

We  have  now  obtained  two  points  of  reference  marked  by 
scratches  on  the  tube  of  the  thermometer — the  freezing  point 
and  the  boiling  point.  We  shall  suppose  for  the  present 
that  when  the  boiling  point  was  marked  the  barometer 
happened  to  indicate  the  standard  pressure  of  29-905 
inches  of  mercury  at  oc  C.  at  the  level  of  the  sea  in  the 
latitude  of  London.  In  this  case  the  boiling  point  is 
the  standard  boiling  point.  In  any  other  case  it  must  be 
corrected. 

Our  thermometer  will  now  agree  with  any  other  properly 
constructed  thermometer  at  these  two  temperatures. 

In  order  to  indicate  other  temperatures,  we  must  construct 
a  scale — that  is,  a  series  of  marks — either  on  the  tube  itself  or 
on  a  convenient  part  of  the  apparatus  close  to  the  tube  and 
well  fastened  to  it. 

For  this  purpose,  having  settled  what  values  we  are  to  give 
to  the  freezing  and  the  boiling  points,  we  divide  the  space 
between  those  points  into  as  many  equal  parts  as  there  are 
degrees  between  them,  and  continue  the  series  of  equal  divi- 
sions up  and  down  the  scale  as  far  as  the  tube  of  the  thermo- 
meter extends. 

Three  different  ways  of  doing  this  are  still  in  use,  and, 
as  we  often  find  temperatures  stated  according  to  a 
different  scale  from  that  which  we  adopt  ourselves,  it  is 
necessary  to  know  the  principles  on  which  these  scales  are 
formed. 

The  Centigrade  scale  was  introduced  by  Celsius.1  In  it 
the  freezing  point  is  marked  o°  and  called  zero,  and  the 
boiling  point  is  marked  100°. 

The  obvious  simplicity  of  this  mode  of  dividing  the  space 
between  the  points  of  reference  into  ico  equal  parts  and 
1  Professor  of  Astronomy  in  the  University  of  Upsala. 


38  Thcrmometry. 

calling  each  of  these  a  degree,  and  reckoning  all  temperatures 
in  degrees  from  the  freezing  point,  caused  it  to  be  very 
generally  adopted,  along  with  the  French  decimal  system  of 
measurement,  by  scientific  men,  especially  on  the  Continent 
of  Europe.  It  is  true  that  the  advantage  of  the  decimal 
system  is  not  so  great  in  the  measurement  of  temperatures  as 
in  other  cases,  as  it  merely  makes  it  easier  to  remember  the 
freezing  and  boiling  temperatures,  but  the  graduation  is  not 
too  fine  for  the  roughest  purposes,  while  for  accurate 
measurements  the  degrees  may  be  subdivided  into  tenths  and 
hundredths. 

The  other  two  scales  are  called  by  the  names  of  those  who 
introduced  them. 

Fahrenheit,  of  Dantzig,  about  1714,  first  constructed 
thermometers  comparable  with  each  other.  In  Fahrenheit's 
scale  the  freezing  point  is  marked  32°,  and  the  boiling  point 
212°,  the  space  between  being  divided  into  180  equal  parts, 
and  the  graduation  extended  above  and  below  the  points  of 
reference.  A  point  32  degrees  below  the  freezing  point  is 
called  zero,  or  o°,  and  temperatures  below  this  are  indicated 
by  the  number  of  degrees  below  zero. 

This  scale  is  very  generally  used  in  English-speaking 
countries  for  purposes  of  ordinary  life,  and  also  for  those  of 
science,  though  the  Centigrade  scale  is  coming  into  use 
among  those  who  wish  their  results  to  be  readily  followed  by 
foreigners. 

The  only  advantages  which  can  be  ascribed  to  Fahrenheit's 
scale,  besides  its  early  introduction,  its  general  diffusion,  and 
its  actual  employment  by  so  many  of  our  countrymen,  are 
that  mercury  expands  almost  exactly  one  ten-thousandth  of 
its  volume  at  142°  F.  for  every  degree  of  Fahrenheit's  scale, 
and  that  the  coldest  temperature  which  we  can  get  by 
mixing  snow  and  salt  is  near  the  zero  of  Fahrenheit's 
scale. 

To  compare  temperatures  given  in  Fahrenheit's  scale  with 
temperatures  given  in  the  Centigrade  scale  we  have  only  to 


Tlicrmomctric  Scales.  39 

remember  thato0  Centigrade  is  32°  Fahrenheit,  and  that  five 
degrees  Centigrade  are  equal  to  nine  of  Fahrenheit. 

The  third  thermometric  scale  is  that  of  Reaumur.  In  this 
scale  the  freezing  point  is  marked  o°  and  the  boiling  point 
80°.  I  am  not  aware  of  any  advantage  of  this  scale.  It  is 
used  to  some  extent  on  the  Continent  of  Europe  for  medical 
and  domestic  purposes.  Four  degrees  of  Re'aumur  corre- 
spond to  five  Centigrade  and  to  nine  of  Fahrenheit. 

The  existence  of  these  three  thermometric  scales  furnishes 
an  example  of  the  inconvenience  of  the  want  of  uniformity  in 
systems  of  measurement.  The  whole  of  what  we  have  said 
about  the  comparison  of  the  different  scales  might  have 
been  omitted  if  any  one  of  these  scales  had  been  adopted  by 
all  who  use  thermometers.  Instead  of  spending  our  time  in 
describing  the  arbitrary  proposals  of  different  men,  we  should 
have  gone  on  to  investigate  the  laws  of  heat  and  the  pro- 
perties of  bodies. 

We  shall  afterwards  have  occasion  to  use  a  scale  differing 
in  its  zero-point  from  any  of  those  we  have  considered,  but 
when  we  do  so  we  shall  bring  forward  reasons  for  its  adoption 
depending  on  the  nature  of  things  and  not  on  the  predilec- 
tions of  men. 

If  two  thermometers  are  constructed  of  the  same  kind  of 
glass,  with  tubes  of  uniform  bore,  and  are  filled  with  the  same 
liquid  and  then  graduated  in  the  same  way,  they  may  be  con- 
sidered for  ordinary  purposes  as  comparable  instruments; 
so  that  though  they  may  never  have  been  actually  com- 
pared together,  yet  in  ascertaining  the  temperature  of  any- 
thing there  will  be  very  little  difference  whether  we  use  the 
one  thermometer  or  the  other. 

But  if  we  desire  great  accuracy  in  the  measurement  of 
temperature,  so  that  the  observations  made  by  different 
observers  with  different  instruments  may  be  strictly  com- 
parable, the  only  satisfactory  method  is  by  agreeing  to 
choose  one  thermometer  as  a  standard  and  comparing  all  the 
others  with  it. 


4O  Thcnnomctry. 

All  thermometers  ought  to  be  made  with  tubes  of  as 
uniform  bore  as  can  be  found ;  but  for  a^tandard  thermometer 
the  bore  should  be  calibrated— that  is  to  say,  its  size  should  be 
measured  at  short  intervals  all  along  its  length. 

For  this  purpose,  before  the  bulb  is  blown,  a  small  quantity 
of  mercury  is  introduced  into  the  tube  and  moved  along  the 
tube  by  forcing  air* into  the  tube  behind  it.  This  is  done  by 
squeezing  the  air  out  of  a  small  india-rubber  ball  which  is 
fastened  to  the  end  of  the  tube. 

If  the  length  of  the  column  of  mercury  remains  exactly 
the  same  as  it  passes  along  the  tube,  the  bore  of  the  tube 
must  be  uniform  ;  but  even  in  the  best  tubes  there  is  always 
some  want  of  uniformity. 

But  if  we  introduce  a  short  column  of  mercury  into  the 
tube,  then  mark  both  ends  of  the  column,  and  move  it  on  its 
own  length,  till  one  end  comes  exactly  to  the  mark  where 
the  other  end  was  originally,  then  mark  the  other  end,  and 
move  it  on  again,  we  shall  have  a  series  of  marks  on  the  tube 
such  that  the  capacity  of  the  tube  between  any  two  consecu- 
tive marks  will  be  the  same,  being  equal  to  that  of  the 
column  of  mercury. 

By  this  method,  which  was  invented  by  Gay-Lussac,  a 
number  of  divisions  may  be  marked  on  the  tube,  each  of 
which  contains  the  same  volume,  and  though  they  will  pro- 
bably not  correspond  to  degrees  when  the  tube  is  made  up 
into  a  thermometer,  it  will  be  easy  to  convert  the  reading  of 
this  instrument  into  degrees  by  multiplying  it  by  a  proper 
factor,  and  in  the  use  of  a  standard  instrument  this  trouble  is 
readily  undertaken  for  the  sake  of  accuracy. 

The  tube  having  been  prepared  in  this  way,  one  end  is 
heated  till  it  is  melted,  and  it  is  blown  into  a  bulb  by  forcing 
air  in  at  the  other  end  of  the  tube.  In  order  to  avoid 
introducing  moisture  into  the  tube,  this  is  done,  not  by  the 
mouth,  but  by  means  of  a  hollow  india-rubber  ball,  which  is 
fastened  to  the  end  of  the  tube. 


FIG.  4- 


Construction  of  a  TJicnnoinctcr.  4* 

The  tube  of  a  thermometer  is  generally  so  narrow  that 
mercury  will  not  enter  it,  for  a  reason  which  we  shall  explain 
when  we  come  to  the  properties  of  liquids.  Hence  the 
following  method  is  adopted  to  fill  the  thermometer.  By 
rolling  paper  round  the  open  end  of 
the  tube,  and  making  the  tube  thus 
formed  project  a  little  beyond  the 
glass  tube,  a  cavity  is  formed,  into 
which  a  little  mercury  is  poured. 
The  mercury,  however,  will  not  run 
clown  the  tube  of  the  thermometer, 
partly  because  the  bulb  and  tube  are 
already  full  of  air,  and  partly  because 
the  mercury  requires  a  certain  pres- 
sure from  without  to  enter  so  narrow 
a  tube.  The  bulb  is  therefore  gently 
heated  so  as  to  cause  the  air  to  ex- 
pand, and  some  of  the  air  escapes 
through  the  mercury.  When  the  bulb 
cools,  the  pressure  of  the  air  in  the 
bulb  becomes  less  than  the  pressure 
of  the  air  outside,  and  the  difference 
of  these  pressures  is  sufficient  to 
make  the  mercury  enter  the  tube, 
when  it  runs  down  and  partially  fills 
the  bulb. 

In  order  to  get  rid  of  the  remainder  of  the  air,  and  of  any 
moisture  in  the  thermometer,  the  bulb  is  gradually  heated 
till  the  mercury  boils.  The  air  and  steam  escape  along 
with  the  vapour  of  mercury,  and  as  the  boiling  continues  the 
last  remains  of  air  are  expelled  through  the  mercury  at  the 
top  of  the  tube.  When  the  boiling  ceases,  the  mercury  runs 
back  into  the  tube,  which  is  thus  perfectly  filled  with  mercury. 

While  the  thermometer  is  still  hotter  than  any  temperature 
at  which  it  will  afterwards  be  used,  and  while  the  mercury  or 


4  2  Thcrmomctry . 

its  vapour  completely  fills  it,  a  blowpipe  flame  is  made  to 
play  on  the  top  of  the  tube,  so  as  to  melt  it  and  close  the  end 
of  the  tube.  The  tube,  thus  closed  with  its  own  substance, 
is  said  to  be  '  hermetically  sealed.' l 

There  is' now  nothing  in  the  tube  but  mercury,  and  when 
the  mercury  contracts  so  as  to  leave  a  space  above  it,  this 
space  is  either  empty  of  all  gross  matter,  or  contains  only 
the  vapour  of  mercury.  If,  in  spite  of  all  our  precautions, 
there  is  still  some  air  in  the  tube,  this  can  easily  be  ascertained 
by  inverting  the  thermometer  and  letting  some  of  the  mer- 
cury glide  towards  the  end  of  the  tube.  If  the  instrument 
is  perfect,  it  will  reach  the  end  of  the  tube  and  completely 
fill  it.  If  there  is  air  in  the  tube  the  air  will  form  an  elastic 
cushion,  which  will  prevent  the  mercury  from  reaching  the 
end  of  the  tube,  and  will  be  seen  in  the  form  of  a  small 
bubble. 

We  have  next  to  determine  the  freezing  and  boiling  points, 
as  has  been  already  described,  but  certain  precautions  have 
still  to  be  observed.  In  the  first  place,  glass  is  a  substance 
in  which  internal  changes  go  on  for  some  time  after  it 
has  been  strongly  heated,  or  exposed  to  intense  forces. 
In  fact,  glass  is  in  some  degree  a  plastic  body.  It  is 
found  that  after  a  thermometer  has  been  filled  and  sealed 
the  capacity  of  the  bulb  diminishes  slightly,  and  that  this 
change  is  comparatively  rapid  at  first,  and  only  gradually 
becomes  insensible  as  the  bulb  approaches  its  ultimate  con- 
dition. It  causes  the  freezing  point  to  rise  in  the  tube  to 
o°'3  or  o°'5,  and  if,  after  the  displacement  of  the  zero,  the 
mercury  be  again  boiled,  the  zero  returns  to  its  old  place 
and  gradually  rises  again. 

This  change  of  the  zero-point  was  discovered  by  M. 
Flaugergues.2  It  may  be  considered  complete  in  from  four  to 

1  '  From  Hermes  or  Mercury,  the  imagined  inventor  of  chemistry.' — 
Johnson  s  Diet. 
'  Ann.  de  C hi mie  d  de  Physique >  xxi.  p.  333  (1822). 


Comparison  of  Tlicriiioinctcrs.  43 

six  months.1  In  Order  to  avoid  the  error  which  it  would 
introduce  into  the  scale,  the  instrument  should,  if  possible, 
have  its  zero  determined  some  months  after  it  has  been 
filled,  and  since  even  the  determination  of  the  boiling  point 
of  water  produces  a  slight  depression  of  the  freezing  point 
(that  is,  an  expansion  of  the  bulb),  the  freezing  point  should 
not  be  determined  after  the  boiling  point,  but  rather 
before  it. 

When  the  boiling  point  is  determined,  the  barometer  is 
probably  not  at  the  standard  height.  The  mark  made  on 
the  thermometer  must,  in  graduating  it,  be  considered  to 
represent,  not  the  standard  boiling  point,  but  the  boiling 
point  corresponding  to  the  observed  height  of  the  baro- 
meter, which  may  be  found  from  the  tables. 

To  construct  a  thermometer  in  this  elaborate  way  is  by 
no  means  an  easy  task,  and  even  when  two  thermometers  have 
been  constructed  with  the  utmost  care,  their  readings  at 
points  distant  from  the  freezing  and  boiling  points  may  not 
agree,  on  account  of  differences  in  the  law  of  'expansion  of 
the  glass  of  the  two  thermometers.  These  differences,  how- 
ever, are  small,  for  all  thermometers  are  made  of  the  same 
description  of  glass. 

But  since  the  main  object  of  thermometry  is  that  all 
thermometers  shall  be  strictly  comparable,  and  since  thermo- 
meters are  easily  carried  from  one  place  to  another,  the 
best  method  of  obtaining  this  object  is  by  comparing  all 
thermometers  either  directly  or  indirectly  with  a  single 
standard  thermometer.  For  this  purpose,  the  thermometers, 
after  being  properly  graduated,  are  all  placed  along  with  the 
standard  thermometer  in  a  vessel,  the  temperature  of  which 
can  be  maintained  uniform  for  a  considerable  time.  Each 
thermometer  is  then  compared  with  the  standard  thermometer. 

1  Dr.  Joule,  however,  finds  that  the  rise  of  the  freezing  point  of  a 
delicate  thermometer  has  been  going  on  for  twenty-six  years,  though  the 
changes  are  now  exceedingly  minute. — Phil.  Soc.  Manchester,  Feb.  22, 
1870. 


44  Thcrmometry. 

A  table  of  corrections  is  made  for  each  thermometer 
by  entering  the  reading  of  that  thermometer,  along  with 
the  correction  which  must  be  applied  to  that  reading  to 
reduce  it  to  the  reading  of  the  standard  thermometer. 
This  is  called  the  proper  correction  for  that  reading.  If 
it  is  positive  it  must  be  added  to  the  reading,  and  if  negative 
it  must  be  subtracted  from  it. 

By  bringing  the  vessel  to  various  temperatures,  the  cor- 
rections at  these  temperatures  for  each  thermometer  are 
ascertained,  and  the  series  of  corrections  belonging  to  each 
thermometer  is  made  out  and  preserved  along  with  that 
thermometer. 

Any  thermometer  may  be  sent  to  the  Observatory  at 
Kew,  and  will  be  returned  with  a  list  of  corrections,  by  the 
application  of  which,  observations  made  with  that  thermo- 
meter become  strictly  comparable  with  those  made. by  the 
standard  thermometer  at  Kew,  or  with  any  other  thermometer 
similarly  corrected.  The  charge  for  making  the  comparison 
is  very  small  compared  with  the  expense  of  making  an 
original  standard  thermometer,  and  the  scientific  value  of 
observations  made  with  a  thermometer  thus  compared  is 
greater  than  that  of  observations  made  with  the  most  elabo- 
rately prepared  thermometer  which  has  not  been  compared 
with  some  existing  and  known  standard  instrument. 

I  have  described  at  considerable  length  the  processes  by 
which  the  thermometric  scale  is  constructed,  and  those  by 
which  copies  of  it  are  multiplied,  because  the  practical 
establishment  of  such  a  scale  is  an  admirable  instance  of 
the  method  by  which  we  must  proceed  in  the  scientific 
observation  of  a  phenomenon  such  as  temperature,  which,  for 
the  present,  we  regard  rather  as  a  quality ',  capable  of  greater 
or  less  intensity,  than  as  a  quantity  which  may  be  added  to 
or  subtracted  from  other  quantities  of  the  same  kind. 

A  temperature,  so  far  as  we  have  yet  gone  in  the  science 
of  heat,  is  not  considered  as  capable  of  being  added  to 
another  temperature  so  as  to  form  a  temperature  which  is 


Temperature  considered  as  a  Quality.  45 

the  sum  of  its  components.  When  we  are  able  to  attach  a 
distinct  meaning  to  such  an  operation,  and  determine  its 
result,  our  conception  of  temperature  will  be  raised  to  the 
rank  of  a  quantity.  For  the  present,  however,  we  must  be 
content  to  regard  temperature  as  a  quality  of  bodies,  and  be 
satisfied  to  know  that  the  temperatures  of  all  bodies  can  be 
referred  to  their  proper  places  in  the  same  scale. 

For  instance,  we  have  a  right  to  say  that  the  temperatures 
of  freezing  and  boiling  differ  by  180°  Fahrenheit ;  but  we 
have  as  yet  no  right  to  say  that  this  difference  is  the  same 
as  that  between  the  temperatures  300°  and  480°  on  the 
same  scale.  Still  less  can  we  assert  that  a  temperature  of 

^  244°  F.  =  3©^2° 

is  equal  tO""the  sum  of  the  temperatures  of  freezing  and 
boiling.  In  the  same  way,  if  we  had  nothing  by  which  to 
measure  time  except  the  succession  of  our  own  thoughts, 
we  might  be  able  to  refer  each  event  \\Sdiin  our  own  ex- 
perience to  its  proper  chronological  place^in  a  series,  but 
we  should  have  no  means  of  comparing  theViterval  of  time 
between  one  pair  of  events  with  that  betweenv  another  pair, 
unless  it  happened  that  one  of  these  pairs  was  included 
within  the  other  pair,  in  which  case  the  interval  between  the 
first  pair  must  be  the  smallest.  It  is  only  by  observation  of 
the  uniform  or  periodic  motions  of  bodies,  and  by  ascertain- 
ing the  conditions  under  which  certain  motions  are  always 
accomplished  in  the  same  time,  that  we  have  been  enabled 
to  measure  time,  first  by  days  and  years,  as  indicated  by 
the  heavenly  motions,  and  then  by  hours,  minutes,  and 
seconds,  as  indicated  by  the  pendulums  of  our  clocks,  till 
we  are  now  able,  not  only  to  calculate  the  time  of  vibration 
of  different  kinds  of  light,  but  to  compare  the  time  of  vibra- 
tion of  a  molecule  of  hydrogen  set  in  motion  by  an  electric 
discharge  through  a  glass  tube,  with  the  time  of  vibration  \ 
of  another  molecule  of  hydrogen  in  the  sun,  forming  part  of 
some  great  eruption  of  rosy  clouds,  and  with  the  time  of 
vibration  of  another  molecule  in  Sirius  which  has  not 


46  Thcrmometry. 

transmitted  its  vibrations  to  our  earth,  but  has  simply 
prevented  vibrations  arising  in  the  body  of  that  star  from 
reaching  us. 

In   a   subsequent  chapter  \ve  shall  consider  the  further 
progress  of  our  knowledge  of  Temperature  as  a  Quantity. 


ON   THE   AIR   THERMOMETER. 

The  original  thermometer  invented  by  Galileo  was  an 
air  thermometer.  It  consisted  of  a  glass  bulb  with  a  long 
neck.  The  air  in  the  bulb  was  heated,  and  then  the  neck 
was  plunged  into  a  coloured  liquid.  As  the  air  in  the  bulb 
cooled,  the  liquid  rose  in  the  neck,  and  the  higher  the 
liquid  the  lower  the  temperature  of  the  air  in  the  bulb. 
By  putting  the  bulb  into  the  mouth  of  a  patient,  and  noting 
the  point  to  which  the  liquid  was  driven  down  in  the  tube,  a 
physician  might  estimate  whether  the  ailment  was  of  the 
nature  of  a  fever  or  not.  Such  a  thermometer  has  several 
obvious  merits.  It  is  easily  constructed,  and  gives  larger 
indications  for  the  same  change  of  temperature  than  a  thermo- 
meter containing  any  liquid  as  the  thermometric  sub- 
stance. Besides  this,  the  air  requires  less  heat  to  warm  it 
than  an  equal  bulk  of  any  liquid,  so  that  the  air  thermo- 
meter is  very  rapid  in  its  indications.  The  great  incon- 
venience of  the  instrument  as  a  means  of  measuring  tem- 
perature is,  that  the  height  of  the  liquid  in  the  tube  depends 
on  the  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  as  well  as  on  the  tem- 
perature of  the  air  in  the  bulb.  J  The  air  thermometer  cannot 
therefore  of  itself  tell  us  anything  about  temperature.  We 
must  consult  the  barometer  at  the  same  time,  in  order  to 
correct  the  reading  of  the  air  thermometer.  Hence  the  air 
thermometer,  to  be  of  any  scientific  value,  must  be  used 
along  with  the  barometer,  and  its  readings  are  of  no  use 
till  after  a  process  of  calculation  has  been  gone  through.  ) 
This  puts  it  at  a  great  disadvantage  compared  with  the 
mercurial  thermometer  as  a  means  of  ascertaining  tempera' 


The  A  ir  Thermometer.  47 

tares.  But  if  the  researches  on  which  we  are  engaged  are 
of  so  important  a  nature  that  we  are  willing  to  undergo  the 
labour  of  double  observations  and  numerous  calculations, 
then  the  advantages  of  the  air  thermometer  may  again  pre- 
ponderate. 

We  have  seen  that  in  fixing  a  scale  of  temperature  after 
marking  on  our  thermometer  two  temperatures  of  reference 
and  filling  up  the  interval  with  equal  divisions,  two  thermo- 
meters containing  different  liquids  will  not  in  general  agree 
except  at  the  temperatures  of  reference. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  could  secure  a  constant  pressure 
in  the  air  thermometer,  then  if  we  exchange  the  air  for  any 
other  gas,  all  the  readings  will  be  exactly  the  same  provided 
the  reading  at  one  of  the  temperatures  of  reference  is  the 
same.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  scale  of  temperatures 
as  indicated  by  an  air  thermometer  has  this  advantage  over 
the  scale  indicated  by  mercury  or  any  other  liquid  or  solid, 
that  whereas  no  two  liquid  or  solid  substances  can  be  made  to 
agree  in  their  expansion  throughout  the  scale,  all  the  gases 
agree  with  one  another.  In  the  absence  of  any  better 
reasons  for  choosing  a  scale,  the  agreement  of  so  many 
substances  is  a  reason  why  the  scale  of  temperatures  fur- 
nished by  the  expansion  of  gases  should  be  considered  as  of 
great  scientific  value.  In  the  course  of  our  study  we 
shall  find  that  there  are  scientific  reasons  of  a  much  higher 
order  which  enable  us  to  fix  on  a  scale  of  temperature, 
based  not  on  a  probability  of  this  kind,  but  on  a  more  inti- 
mate knowledge  of  the  properties  of  heat.  This  scale,  so 
far  as  it  has  been  investigated,  is  found  to  agree  very  closely 
with  that  of  the  air  thermometer. 

There  is  another  reason,  of  a  practical  kind,  in  favour  of 
the  use  of  air  as  a  thermometric  substance,  namely,  that  air 
remains  in  the  gaseous  state  at  the  lowest  as  well  as  the 
highest  temperatures  which  we  can  produce,1  and  there  are 
no  indications  in  either  case  of  its  approaching  to  a  change 
of  state.  Hence  air,  or  one  of  the  permanent  gases,  is  oi 
[J  See  note  to  p.  17. — R.  ] 


48  Thcnnomctry, 

the  greatest  use  in  estimating  temperatures  lying  far  outside 
of  the  temperatures  of  reference,  sucji,  for  instance,  as  the 
freezing  point  of  mercury  or  the  melting  point  of  silver. 

We  shall  consider  the  practical  method  of  using  air  as  a 
thermomecric  substance  when  we  come  to  Gasometry.  In 
the  meantime  let  us  consider  the  air  thermometer  in  its 
simplest  form,  that  of  a  long  tube  of  uniform  bore  closed  at 
one  end,  and  containing  air  or  some  other  gas  which  is 
s  eparated  from  the  outer  air  by  a  short  column  of  mercury, 
oil,  or  some  other  liquid  which  is 
capable  of  moving  freely  along  the 
tube,  while  at  the  same  time  it  pre- 
vents all  communication  between  the 
confined  air  and  the  atmosphere. 
We  shall  also  suppose  that  the  pres- 
sure acting  on  the  confined  air  is  in 
some  way  maintained  constant  dur- 
ing the  course  of  the  experiments 
we  are  going  to  describe. 

The  air  thermometer  is  first  sur- 
rounded with  ice  and  ice-cold  water. 
Let  us  suppose  that  the  upper  surface 
-370-9  Mer-  of  the  air  now  stands  at  the  point 

cury  ireezes. 

marked '  Freezing.'  The  thermometer 
is  then  surrounded  with  the  steam 
rising  from  water  boiling  under  an 
atmospheric  pressure  of  29-905  inches 
of  mercury.  Let  the  surface  of  the 
enclosed  air  now  stand  at  the  point 
marked  'Boiling.'  In  this  way,  the 
two  temperatures  of  reference  are  to 
be  marked  on  the  tube. 

To    complete  the    scale   of   the 

thermometer  we  must  divide  the  distance  between  boiling  and 
freezing  into  a  selected  number  of  equal  parts,  and  carry 
this  graduation  up  and  down  the  tube  beyond  the  freezing 
and  boiling  points  with  degrees  of  the  same  length. 


FIG.  5. 
AIR  THERMOMETER. 

Tin  melts 
233° 

- 

4SX' 

V 

•o 
Z  « 

jtn 

rC  -H 

•H 

C  ~rt 

p 

f 

100° 

- 

212°  Boiling. 

0° 

_ 

32°  Freezing. 
o° 

r* 

- 

-37°  '9  Mer- 
cury  freezes. 

Nntterer's 
observed 
-140° 

- 

lowest 
temperature. 

-220° 

-273° 

- 

-460° 

A  bsolute  Zero.  49 

Of  course,  if  we  carry  the  graduation  far  enough  down 
the  tube,  we  shall  at  last  come  to  the  bottom  of  the  tube. 
What  will  be  the  reading  at  that  point?  and  what  is  meant 
by  It? 

To  determine  the  reading  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube  is  a 
very  simple  matter.  We  know  that  the  distance  of  the 
freezing  point  from  the  bottom  of  the  tube  is  to  the  distance 
of  the  boiling  point  from  the  bottom  in  the  proportion  of 
i  to  i '3665,  since  this  is  the  dilatation  of  air  between  the 
freezing  and  the  boiling  temperatures.  Hence  it  follows,  by 
an  easy  arithmetical  calculation,  that  if,  as  in  Fahrenheit's 
scale,  the  freezing  point  is  marked  32°,  and  the  boiling 
point  212°,  the  bottom  of  the  tube  must  be  marked 
—  459°'i3.  If,  as  in  the  Centigrade  scale,  the  freezing  point 
is  marked  o°,  and  the  boiling  point  100°,  the  bottom  of  the 
tube  will  be  marked  —  272°'S5.  This,  then,  is  the  reading  at 
the  bottom  of  the  scale. 

The  other  question,  What  is  meant  by  this  reading  ? 
requires  a  more  careful  consideration.  We  have  begun  by 
denning  the  measure  of  the  temperature  as  the  reading 
of  the  scale  of  our  thermometer  when  it  is  exposed  to  that 
temperature.  Now  if  the  reading  could  be  observed  at  the 
bottom  of  the  tube,  it  would  imply  that  the  volume  of  the 
air  had  been  reduced  to  nothing.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to 
say  that  we  have  no  expectation  of  ever  observing  such  a 
reading.  If  it  were  possible  to  abstract  from  a  substance  all 
the  heat  it  contains,  it  would  probably  still  remain  an 
extended  substance,  and  would  occupy  a  certain  volume. 
Such  an  abstraction  of  all  its  heat  from  a  body  has  never 
been  effected,  so  that  we  know  nothing  about  the  tem- 
perature which  would  be  indicated  by  an  air  thermometer 
placed  in  contact  with  a  body  absolutely  devoid  of  heat. 
This  much  we  are  sure  of,  however,  that  the  reading  would 
be  above  —  459°'i3  F. 

It  is  exceedingly  convenient,  especially  in  dealing  with 
questions  relating  to  gases,  to  reckon  temperatures,  not  from 


5O  Thermometry. 

the  freezing  point,  or  from  Fahrenheit's  zero,  but  from  the 
bottom  of  the  tube  of  the  air  thermometer. 

This  point  is  then  called  the  absolute  zero  of  the  air 
thermometer,  and  temperatures  reckoned  from  it  are  called 
absolute  temperatures.  It  is  probable  that  the  dilatation  of 
a  perfect  gas  is  a  little  less  than  1*3665.  If  we  suppose  it 
1-366,  then  absolute  zero  will  be  —460°  on  Fahrenheit's 
scale,  or  —  273°^-  Centigrade. 

If  we  add  460°  to  the  ordinary  reading  on  Fahrenheit's 
scale,  we  shall  obtain  the  absolute  temperature  in  Fahren- 
heit's degrees. 

If  we  add  273°^  to  the  Centigrade  reading,  we  shall  obtain 
the  absolute  temperature  in  Centigrade  degrees. 

We  shall  often  have  occasion  to  speak  of  absolute 
temperature  by  the  air  thermometer.  When  we  do  so  we 
mean  nothing  more  than  what  we  have  just  said—  namely, 
temperature  reckoned  from  the  bottom  of  the  tube"  of  the  air 
thermometer.  We  assert  nothing  as  to  the  state  of  a  body 
deprived  of  all  its  heat,  about  which  we  have  no  experimental 
knowledge. 

One  of  the  most  important  applications  of  the  conception 
of  absolute  temperature  is  to  simplify  the  expression  of  the 
two  laws  discovered  respectively  by  Boyle  and  by  Charles. 
The  laws  may  be  combined  into  the  statement  that  the 
prodtict  of  the  volume  and  pressure  of  any  gas  is  proportional 
to  the  absolute  temperature. 

For  instance,  if  we  have  to  measure  quantities  of  a  gas  by 
their  volumes  under  various  conditions  as  to  temperature 
and  pressure,  we  can  reduce  these  volumes  to  what  they 
would  be  at  some  standard  temperature  and  pressure. 

Thus  if  v,  P,  T  be  the  actual  volume,  pressure,  and  absolute 
temperature,  and  V0  the  volume  at  the  standard  pressure  PO, 
and  the  standard  temperature  TO,  then 


_  v0  p0 


I 


Absolute  Temperatures.  51 

If  we  have  only  to  compare  the  relative  quantities  of  the 
gas  in  different  measurements  in  the  same  series  of  experi- 
ments, we  may  suppose  PO  and  TO  both  unity,  and  use  the 

V  T>  T 

quantity    — -  without  always  multiplying  it  by  — ° ,  which  is 

^o 
a  constant  quantity.1 

The  great  scientific  importance  of  the  scale  of  temperature 
as  determined  by  means  of  the  air  or  gas  thermometer  arises 
from  the  fact,  established  by  the  experiments  of  Joule  and 
Thomson,  that  the  scale  of  temperature  derived  from  the 
expansion  of  the  more  permanent  gases  is  almost  exactly  the 
same  as  that  founded  upon  purely  thermodynamic  considera- 
tions, which  are  independent  of  the  peculiar  properties  of  the 
thermometric  body.  This  agreement  has  been  experimentally 
verified  only  within  a  range  of  temperature  between  o°  C. 
and  100°  C.  If,  however,  we  accept  the  molecular  theory  of 
gases,  the  volume  of  a  perfect  gas  ought  to  be  exactly  pro- 
portional to  the  absolute  temperature  on  the  thermodynamic 
scale,  and  it  is  probable  that  as  the  temperature  rises  the 
properties  of  real  gases  approximate  to  those  of  the  theo- 
retically perfect  gas. 

All  the  thermometers  which  we  have  considered  have 
been  constructed  on  the  principle  of  measuring  the  expansion 
of  a  substance  as  the  temperature  rises.  In  certain  cases  it  is 
convenient  to  estimate  the  temperature  of  a  substance  by  the 
heat  which  it  gives  out  as  it  cools  to  a  standard  temperature. 
Thus  if  a  piece  of  platinum  heated  in  a  furnace  is  dropped 
into  water,  we  may  form  an  estimate  of  the  temperature  of 
the  furnace  by  the  amount  of  heat  communicated  to  the 
water.  Some  have  supposed  that  this  method  of  estimating 
temperatures  is  more  scientific  than  that  founded  on  expan- 
sion. It  would  be  so  if  the  same  quantity  of  heat  always 
caused  the  same  rise  of  temperature,  whatever  the  original 

1  For  a  full  account  of  the  methods  of  measuring  gases  the  student  is 
referred  to  Bunsen's  Gasometry,  translated  by  Roscoe. 

£  2 


52  Thcrmomciry. 

temperature  of  the  body.  But  the  specific  heat  of  most 
substances  increases  as  the  temperature  rises,  and  it  in- 
creases in  different  degrees  for  different  substances,  so  that 
this  method  cannot  furnish  an  absolute  scale  of  temperature. 
It  is  only  in  the  case  of  gases  that  the  specific  heat  of  a  given 
mass  of  the  substance  remains  the  same  at  all  temperatures. 

There  are  two  methods  of  estimating  temperature  which 
are  founded  on  the  electrical  properties  of  bodies.  We 
cannot,  within  the  limits  of  this  treatise,  enter  into  the 
theory  of  these  methods,  but  must  refer  the  student  to  works 
on  electricity.  One  of  these  methods  depends  on  the  fact 
that  in  a  conducting  circuit  formed  of  two  different  metals, 
if  one  of  the  junctions  be  warmer  than  the  other,  there  will 
be  an  electromotive  force  which  will  produce  a  current  of 
electricity  in  the  circuit,  and  this  may  be  measured  by 
means  of  a  galvanometer.  In  this  way  very  minute  differences 
of  temperature  between  the  ends  of  a  piece  of  metal  may  be 
detected.  Thus  if  a  piece  of  iron  wire  is  soldered  at  both 
ends  to  a  copper  wire,  and  if  one  of  the  junctions  is  at  a  place 
where  we  cannot  introduce  an  ordinary  thermometer,  we  may 
ascertain  its  temperature  by  placing  the  other  junction  in  a 
vessel  of  water  and  adjusting  the  temperature  of  the  water 
till  no  current  passes.  The  temperature  of  the  watei  will 
then  be  equal  to  that  of  the  inaccessible  junction. 

Electric  currents  excited  by  differences  of  temperature  in 
different  parts  of  a  metallic  circuit  are  called  thermo-electric 
currents.  An  arrangement  by  which  the  electromotive  forces 
arising  from  a  number  of  junctions  may  be  added  together 
is  called  a  thermopile,  and  is  used  in  experiments  on  the 
heating  effect  of  radiation,  because  it  is  more  sensitive  to 
changes  of  temperature  caused  by  small  quantities  of  heat 
than  any  other  instrument. 

Professor  Tait1  has  found  that  if  t\  and  /2  denote  the 
temperatures  of  the  hot  and  cold  junction  of  two  metals, 

1  Proceeding!  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  1870-71. 


Electrical  Thcrmometric  Methods.  5  3 

the  electromotive  force  of  the  circuit  formed  by  these  two 
metals  is  A  (/i  -  /)  [T  -  J  (t,  +  /,)], 

where  A  is  a  constant  depending  on  the  nature  of  the  metals, 
and  T  is  a  temperature  also  depending  on  the  metals, 
such  that  when  one  junction  is  as  much  hotter  than  T  as  the 
other  is  colder,  no  current  is  produced.  T  may  be  called  the 
neutral  temperature  for  the  two  metals.  For  copper  and 
iron  it  is  about  284°  C. 

The  other  method  of  estimating  the  temperature  of  a  place 
at  which  we  cannot  set  a  thermometer  is  founded  on  the  in- 
crease of  the  electric  resistance  of  metals  as  the  temperature 
rises.  This  method  has  been  successfully  employed  by  Mr. 
Siemens.1  Two  coils  of  the  same  kind  of  fine  platinum  wire 
are  prepared  so  as  to  have  equal  resistance.  Their  ends  are 
connected  with  long  thick  copper  wires,  so  that  the  coils  may 
be  placed  if  necessary  a  long  way  from  the  galvanometer. 
These  copper  terminals  are  also  adjusted  so  as  to  be  of  the 
same  resistance  for  both  coils.  The  resistance  of  the  termi- 
nals should  be  small  as  compared  with  that  of  the  coils.  One 
of  the  coils  is  then  sunk,  say  to  the  bottom  of  the  sea,  and 
the  other  is  placed  in  a  vessel  of  water,  the  temperature  of 
which  is  adjusted  till  the  resistance  of  both  coils  is  the  same. 
By  ascertaining  with  a  thermometer  the  temperature  of  the 
vessel  of  water,  that  of  the  bottom  of  the  sea  may  be  deduced. 

Mr.  Siemens  has  found  that  the  resistance  of  the  metals 
may  be  expressed  by  a  formula  of  the  form  2 

R  =  «  \/~r  +  (3  T  +  y, 

where  R  is  the  resistance,  T  the  absolute  temperature,  and 
a  /3  y  coefficients.  Of  these  a  is  the  largest,  and  the  re- 
sistance depending  on  it  increases  as  the  square  root  of  the 
absolute  temperature,  so  that  the  resistance  increases  more 

1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  April  27,  1871. 

[2  Callendar's  experiments  (Phil.  Afrfg.,  July  1891)  lead  him  to  prefer  the 


simple  parabolic  formula,  R/RO  =  i  +  a/  +  /3/2.  —  R.] 


54  Calor'unctry. 

slowly  as  the  temperature  rises.  The  second  term,  j3  T,  is 
proportional  to  the  temperature,  and  may  be  attributed  to 
the  expansion  of  the  substance.  The  third  term  is  con- 
stant. 


CHAPTER  III. 

CALORIMETRY. 

HAVING  explained  the  principles  of  Thcrmometry,  or  the 
method  of  ascertaining  temperatures,  we  are  able  to  under- 
stand what  we  may  call  Calorimetry,  or  the  method  of 
measuring  quantities  of  heat. 

When  heat  is  applied  to  a  body  it  produces  effects  of 
various  kinds.  In  most  cases  it  raises  the  temperature  of 
the  body  ;  it  generally  alters  its  volume  or  its  pressure,  and  in 
certain  cases  it  changes  the  state  of  the  body  from  solid  to 
liquid  or  from  liquid  to  gaseous. 

Any  effect  of  heat  may  be  used  as  a  means  of  measuring 
quantities  of  heat  by  applying  the  principle  that  when  two 
equal  portions  of  the  same  substance  in  the  same  state  are 
acted  on  by  heat  in  the  same  way  so  as  to  produce  the 
same  effect,  then  the  quantities  of  heat  are  equal. 

We  begin  by  choosing  a  standard  body,  and  defining  the 
standard  effect  of  heat  upon  it.  Thus  we  may  choose  a 
pound  of  ice  at  the  freezing  point  as  the  standard  body,  and 
we  may  define  as  the  unit  of  heat  that  quantity  of  heat  which 
must  be  applied  to  this  pound  of  ice  to  convert  it  into  a 
pound  of  water  still  at  the  freezing  point  This  is  an 
example  of  a  certain  change  of  state  being  used  to  define 
what  is  meant  by  a  quantity  of  heat.  This  unit  of  heat  was 
brought  into  actual  use  in  the  experiments  of  Lavoisier  and 
Laplace. 

In  this  system  a  quantity  of  heat  is.  measured  by  the 
number  of  pounds  (or  of  grammes)  of  ice  at  the  freezing 


The  Unit  of  Heat.  55 

point  which  that  quantity  of  heat  would  convert  into  water 
at  the  freezing  point. 

We  might  also  employ  a  different  system  of  measurement 
by  defining  a  quantity  of  heat  as  measured  by  the  number  of 
pounds  of  water  at  the  boiling  point  which  it  would  convert 
into  steam  at  the  same  temperature. 

This  method  is  frequently  used  in  determining  the  amount 
of  heat  generated  by  the  combustion  of  fuel. 

Neither  of  these  methods  requires  the  use  of  the  thermo- 
meter. 

Another  method,  depending  on  the  use  of  the  thermo- 
meter, is  to  define  as  the  unit  of  heat  that  quantity  of  heat 
which  if  applied  to  unit  of  mass  (one  pound  or  one  gramme) 
of  water  at  some  standard  temperature  (that  of  greatest 
density,  39°  F.  or  4°  C.,  or  occasionally  some  temperature 
more  convenient  for  laboratory  work,  such  as  62°  F.  or  1 5°  C.), 
will  raise  that  water  one  degree  (Fahrenheit  or  Centigrade) 
in  temperature. 

According  to  this  method  a  quantity  of  heat  is  measured 
by  the  quantity  of  water  at  a  standard  temperature  which  that 
quantity  of  heat  would  raise  one  degree. 

All  that  is  assumed  in  these  methods  of  measuring  heat  is 
that  if  it  takes  a  certain  quantity  of  heat  to  produce  a  certain 
effect  on  one  pound  of  water  in  a  certain  state,  then  to  produce 
the  same  effect  on  another  similar  pound  of  water  will 
require  as  much  heat,  so  that  twice  the  quantity  of  heat 
is  required  for  two  pounds,  three  times  for  three  pounds, 
and  so  on. 

We  have  no  right  to  assume  that  because  a  unit  of  heat 
raises  a  pound  of  water  at  39°  F.  one  degree,  therefore  tvypf 
units  of  heat  will  raise  the  same  pound  two  degrees  ;  for  ±e 
quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  the  water  from  40°  to  41° 
may  be  different  from  that  which  raised  it  from  39°  to  40°. 
Indeed,  it  has  been  found  by  experiment  that  more  heat 
is  required  to  raise  a  pound  of  water  one  degree  at  high 
temperatures  than  at  low  ones. 


56  Calorlmctry. 

But  if  we  measure  heat  according  to  either  of  the  methods 
already  described,  either  by  the  quantity  of  a  particular  kind 
of  matter  which  it  can  change  from  one  easily  observed  state 
to  another  without  altering  its  temperature,  or  by  the 
quantity  of  a  particular  kind  of  matter  which  it  can  raise 
from  one  given  temperature  to  another  given  temperature, 
we  may  treat -quantities  of  heat  as  mathematical  quantities, 
and  add  or  subtract  them  as  we  please. 

We  have,  however,  in  the  first  place  to  establish  that  the 
heat  which  by  entering  or  leaving  a  body  in  any  manner 
produces  a  given  change  in  it  is  a  quantity  strictly  com- 
parable with  that  which  melts  a  pound  of  ice,  and  differs 
from  it  only  by  being  so  many  times  greater  or  less. 

In  other  words,  we  have  to  show  that  heat  of  all  kinds, 
whether  coming  from  the  hand,  or  hot  water,  or  steam,  or  red- 
hot  iron,  or  a  flame,  or  the  sun,  or  from  any  other  source,  can 
be  measured  in  the  same  way,  and  that  the  quantity  of  each 
required  to  effect  any  given  change,  to  melt  a  pound  of  ice, 
to  boil  away  a  pound  of  water,  or  to  warm  the  water  from  one 
temperature  to  another,  is  the  same  from  whatever  source  the 
heat  comes. 

To  find  whether  these  effects  depend  on  anything  except 
the  quantity  of  heat  received — for  instance,  if  they  depend  in 
any  way  on  the  temperature  of  the  source  of  heat — suppose 
two  experiments  tried.  In  the  first  a  certain  quantity  of  heat 
(say  the  heat  emitted  by  a  candle  while  an  inch  of  candle  is 
consumed)  is  applied  directly  to  melt  ice.  In  the  second  the 
same  quantity  of  heat  is  applied  to  a  piece  of  iron  at  the 
freezing  point  so  as  to  warm  it,  and  then  the  heated  iron  is 
placed  in  ice  so  as  to  melt  a  certain  quantity  of  ice,  while  the 
iron  itself  is  cooled  to  its  original  temperature. 

If  the  quantity  of  ice  melted  depends  on  the  temperature 
of  the  source  from  .whence  the  heat  proceeds,  or  on  any 
other  circumstance  than  the  quantity  of  the  heat,  the  quan- 
tity melted  mil  differ  in  these  two  cases  ;  for  in  the  first  the 
heat  comes  directly  from  an  exceedingly  hot  flame,  and  in 


A II  Heat  is  of  the  same  kind.  5  7 

the  second  the  same  quantity  of  heat  comes  from  compara- 
tively cool  iron. 

It  is  found  by  experiment  that  no  such  difference  exists, 
and  therefore  heat,  considered  with  respect  to  its  power  of 
warming  things  and  changing  their  state,  is  a  quantity  strictly 
capable  of  measurement,  and  not  subject  to  any  variations 
in  quality  or  in  kind. 

Another  principle,  the  truth  of  which  is  established  by 
calorimetrical  experiments,  is,  that  if  a  body  in  a  given  state 
is  first  heated  so  as  to  make  it  pass  through  a  series  of  states 
defined-  by  the  temperature  and  the  volume  of  the  body 
in  each  state,  and  if  it  is  then  allowed  to  cool  so  as  to 
pass  in  reverse  order  through  exactly  the  same  series  of 
states,  then  the  quantity  of  heat  which  entered  it  during  the 
heating  process  is  equal  to  that  which  left  it  during  the 
cooling  process.  By  those  who  regarded  heat  as  a  sub- 
stance, and  called  it  Caloric,  this  principle  was  regarded 
as  self-evident,  and  was  generally  tacitly  assumed.  We  shall 
show,  however,  that  though  it  is  true  as  we  have  stated  it, 
yet,  if  the  series  of  states  during  the  process  of  heating  is 
different  from  that  during  the  process  of  cooling,  the  quan- 
tities of  heat  absorbed  and  emitted  may  be  different.  In 
fact  heat  may  be  generated  or  destroyed  by  certain  pro- 
cesses, and  this  shows  that  heat  is  not  a  substance.  By 
finding  what  it  is  produced  from,  and  what.it  is  reduced  to, 
we  may  hope  to  determine  the  nature  of  heat. 

In  most  of  the  cases  in  which  we  measure  quantities  of 
heat,  the  heat  which  we  measure  is  passing  out  of  one  body 
into  another,  one  of  these  bodies  being  the  calorimeter 
itself.  We  assume  that  the  quantity  of  heat  which  leaves 
the  one  body  is  equal  to  that  which  the  other  receives, 
provided,  ist,  that  neither  body  receives  or  parts  with  heat 
to  any  third  body;  and,  2ndly,  that  no  action  takes  place 
among  the  bodies  except  the  giving  and  receiving  of  heat. 

The  truth  of  this  assumption  may  be  established  ex- 
perimentally by  taking  a  number  of  bodies  at  different 


5  8  Calorimctry. 

temperatures,  and  determining  first  the  quantity  of  heat  re- 
quired to  be  given  to  or  taken  from  each  separately  to  bring 
it  to  a  certain  standard  temperature.  If  the  bodies  are 
now  brought  to  their  original  temperatures,  and  allowed  to 
exchange  heat  among  themselves  in  any  way,  then  the  total 
quantity  of  heat  required  to  be  given  to  the  system  to  bring 
it  to  the  standard  temperature  will  be  found  to  be  the  same 
as  that  which  would  be  deduced  from  the  results  in  the  first 
case. 

We  now  proceed  to  describe  the  experimental  methods 
by  which  these  results  may  be  verified,  and  by  which  quanti- 
ties of  heat  in  general  may  be  measured. 

In  some  of  the  earlier  experiments  of  Black  on  the  heat 
required  to  melt  ice  and  to  boil  water,  the  heat  was  applied 
by  means  of  a  flame,  and  as  the  supply  of  heat  was  assumed 
to  be  uniform,  the  quantities  of  heat  supplied  were  inferred 
to  be  proportional  to  the  time  during  which  the  "supply 
continued.  A  method  of  this  kind  is  obviously  very  im- 
perfect, and  in  order  to  make  it  at  all  accurate  would  nee:1, 
numerous  precautions  and  auxiliary  investigations  with 
respect  to  the  laws  of  the  production  of  heat  by  ,he  flame 
and  its  application  to  the  body  which  is  heated.  Another 
method,  also  depending  on  the  observation  of  time,  is  more 
worthy  of  confidence.  We  shall  describe  it  under  the  name 
of  the  Method  of.  Cooling. 

ICE    CALORIMETERS. 

Wilcke,  a  Swede,  was  the  first  who  employed  the  melting 
of  snow  to  measure  the  heat  given  off  by  bodies  in  cooling. 
The  principal  difficulty  in  this  method  is  to  ensure  that  all 
the  heat  given  off  by  the  body  is  employed  in  melting  the 
ice,  and  that  no  other  heat  reaches  the  ice  so  as  to  melt  it, 
or  escapes  from  the  water  so  as  to  freeze  it.  This  condition 
was  first  fulfilled  by  the  calorimeter  of  Laplace  and  La- 
voisier, of  which  the  description  is  given  in  the  Memoirs  of 


The  Ice  Calorimeter. 


59 


FIG.  6. 


the  French  Academy  of  Sciences  for  1780.  The  instrument 
itself  is  preserved  in  the  Conservatoire  des  Arts  et  Me'tiers 
at  Paris. 

This  apparatus,  which 
afterwards  received  the 
name  of  Calorimeter,  con- 
sists of  three  vessels,  one 
within  another. 

The  first  or  innermost 
vessel,  which  we  may  call 
the  receiver,  is  intended  to 
hold  the  body  from  which 
the  heat  to  be  measured 
escapes.  It  is  made  of 
thin  sheet  copper,  so  that 
the  heat  may  readily  pass 
into  the  second  vessel.  The 
second  vessel,  or  calorimeter  proper,  entirely  surrounds  the 
first  The  lower  part  of  the  space  between  the  two  vessels  is 
filled  with  broken  ice  at  the  freezing  (or  melting)  point,  and 
the  first  vessel  is  then  covered  by  means  of  a  lid,  which  is 
itself  a  vessel  full  of  broken  ice.  When  the  ice  melts  in  this 
vessel,  whether  in  the  lower  part  or  in  the  cover  of  the  first 
vessel,  the  water  trickles  down  and  passes  through  a  drainer, 
which  prevents  any  ice  from  escaping,  and  so  runs  out  into  a 
bottle  set  to  catch  it.  The  third  vessel,  which  we  may  call 
the  ice  jacket,  entirely  surrounds  the  second,  and  is  furnished, 
like  the  second,  with  an  upper  lid  to  cover  the  second.  Both 
the  vessel  and  the  lid  are  full  of  broken  ice  at  the  freezing 
point,  but  the  water  formed  by  the  melting  of  this  ice  is 
carried  off  to  a  vessel  distinct  from  that  which  contains  the 
water  from  the  calorimeter  proper. 

Now,  suppose  that  there  is  nothing  in  the  receiver,  and 
that  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding  air  is  above  the 
freezing  point.  Any  heat  which  enters  the  outer  vessel 
will  melt  some  of  the  ice  in  the  jacket,  and  will  not  pass  on, 


60  Caloriinctry. 

and  no  ice  will  be  melted  in  the  calorimeter.  As  long  as 
there  is  ice  in  the  jacket  and  in  the  calorimeter  the  tem- 
perature of  both  will  be  the  same,  that  is,  the  freezing  point, 
and  therefore,  by  the  law  of  equilibrium  of  heat,  no  heat 
will  pass  through  the  second  vessel  either  outwards  or 
inwards.  Hence,  if  any  ice  is  melted  in  the  calorimeter, 
the  heat  which  melts  it  must  come  from  the  receiver. 

Let  us  next  suppose  the  receiver  at  the  freezing  tempera- 
ture ;  let  the  two  lids  be  carefully  lifted  off  for  an  instant,  and 
a  body  at  some  higher  temperature  introduced  into  the  re- 
ceiver ;  then  let  the  lids  be  quickly  replaced.  Heat  will  pass 
from  the  body  through  the  sides  of  the  receiver  into  the 
calorimeter,  ice  will  be  melted,  and  the  body  will  be  cooled, 
and  this  process  will  go  on  till  the  body  is  cooled  to  the 
freezing  point,  after  which  there  will  be  no  more  ice 
melted.  ' 

If  we  measure  the  water  produced  by  the  melting  of  the 
ice,  we  may  .estimate  the  quantity  of  heat  which  escapes 
from  the  body  while  it  cools  from  its  original  temperature  to 
the  freezing  point.  The  receiver  is  at  the  freezing  point  at 
the  beginning  and  at  the  end  of  the  operation,  so  that  the 
heating  and  subsequent  cooling  of  the  receiver  does  not 
influence  the  result. 

Nothing  can  be  more  perfect  than  the  theory  and  design 
of  this  apparatus.  It  is  worthy  of  Laplace  and  of  Lavoisier, 
and  in  their  hands  it  furnished  good  results. 

The  chief  inconvenience  in  using  it  arises  from  the  fact 
that  the  water  adheres  to  the  broken  ice  instead  of  draining 
away  from  it  completely,  so  that  it  is  impossible  to  estimate 
accurately  how  much  ice  has  really  been  melted. 

To  avoid  this  source  of  uncertainty,  Sir  John  Herschel 
proposed  to  fill  the  interstices  of  the  ice  with  water  at  the 
freezing  point,  and  to  estimate  the  quantity  of  ice  melted  by 
the  contraction  which  the  volume  of  the  whole  undergoes, 
since,  as  we  shall  afterwards  see,  the  volume  of  the  water  is 
less  than  that  of  the  ice  from  which  it  was  formed.  I  am 


Lunscris  Calorimeter.  6 1 

not  aware  that  this  suggestion  was  ever  developed  into  an 
experimental  method. 

Bunsen,1  independently,  devised  a  calorimeter  founded  on 
the  same  principle,  but  in  the  use  of  which  the  sources 
of  error  are  eliminated,  and  the  physical  constants  deter- 
mined with  a  degree  of  precision  seldom  before  attained 
in  researches  of  this  kind. 

Bunsen's  calorimeter,  as  devised  by  its  author,  is  a  small 
instrument.  The  body  which  is  to  F,G  7 

give  off  the  heat  which  is  to  be 
measured  is  heated  in  a  test-tube 
placed  in  a  current  of  steam  of 
known  temperature.  It  is  then 
dropped,  as  quickly  as  may  be,  into 
the  test-tube  T  of  the  calorimeter, 
which  contains  water  at  o°  C.  The 
body  sinks  to  the  bottom  and  gives 
off  heat  to  the  water.  The  heated  water  does  not  rise  in  the 
tube,  for  the  effect  of  heat  on  water  between  o°  C.  and  4°  C. 
is  to  increase  its  density.  It  therefore  remains  surrounding 
the  body  at  the  bottom  of  the  tube,  and  its  heat  can  escape 
only  by  conduction  either  upwards  through  the  water,  or 
through  the  sides  of  the  tube,  which,  being  thin,  afford  a 
better  channel.  The  tube  is  surrounded  by  ice  at  o°  C.  in 
the  calorimeter,  c,  so  that  as  soon  as  any  part  of  the  water 
in  the  tube  is  raised  to  a  higher  temperature,  conduction 
takes  place  through  the  sides,  and  part  of  the  ice  is  melted. 
This  will  go  on  till  everything  within  the  tube  is  again 
reduced  to  o°  C.,  and  the  whole  quantity  of  ice  melted  by 
heat  from  within  is  an  accurate  measure  of  the  heat  which 
the  heated  body  gives  out  as  it  cools  to  o°  C. 

To  prevent  any  exchange  of  heat  between  the  calorimeter 
c  and  surrounding  bodies,  it  is  placed  in  a  vessel  s  filled  with 
snow  gathered  when  new  fallen  and  free  from  smoke.  This 

1  Pogg.  Ann.  Sept.  1870,  and  Phil.  Mag.  1871. 


62  Caloriinctry. 

substance,  unless  the  temperature  of  the  room  is  below  o°  C, 
soon  acquires  and  long  maintains  the  temperature  of  o°C. 

In  preparing  the  calorimeter,  it  is  filled  with  distilled  water, 
from  which  every  trace  of  air  must  be  expelled  by  a  careful 
process  of  boiling.  If  there  is  air  in  the  water,  the  process 
of  freezing  expels  it  and  produces  bubbles  of  air,  the  volume 
of  which  introduces  an  error  of  measurement.  The  lower 
part  of  the  calorimeter  contains  mercury,  and  communicates 
with  a  bent  tube  also  containing  mercury.  The  upper  part 
of  this  tube  is  bent  horizontally,  and  is  carefully  calibrated 
and  graduated.  As  the  mercury  and  the  vessel  are  always 
at  the  temperature  o°  C.,  they  are  of  constant  volume,  and 
any  changes  in  the  position  of  the  mercury  in  the  graduated 
tube  are  due  to  the  melting  of  ice  in  the  calorimeter,  and 
the  consequent  diminution  of  volume  of  the  mass  of  ice  and 
water  in  it. 

The  motions  of  the  extremity  of  the  column  of  mercury 
being  proportional  to  the  quantities  of  heat  emitted  from 
the  test-tube  into  the  calorimeter,  it  is  easy  to  see  how 
quantities  of  heat  may  be  compared.  In  fact,  Bunsen  has 
made  satisfactory  determinations  of  the  specific  heat  of  those 
rare  metals,  such  as  indium,  of  which  only  a  few  grammes 
have  been  obtained. 

To  prepare  the  calorimeter  for  use,  ice  must  be  formed 
in  the  calorimeter  round  the  test-tube.  For  this  purpose, 
Bunsen  causes  a  current  of  alcohol,  cooled  below  o°  C.  by  a 
freezing  mixture,  to  flow  to  the  bottom  of  the  test-tube  and 
up  along  its  sides.  In  this  way  the  greater  part  of  the  water 
in  the  calorimeter  is  soon  frozen.  When  the  apparatus  has 
been  left  for  a  sufficient  time  in  the  vessel  containing  snow, 
the  temperature  of  this  ice  rises  to  o°  C.,  and  the  apparatus 
is  ready  for  use.  A  great  many  experiments  may  be  made 
after  one  freezing  of  the  water.1 

*  See  Pogg.  Ann.  Sept.  1870,  or  Phil.  Meg.  1871. 


Experiments  for  the  Student.  63 


METHOD    OF   MIXTURE. 

The  second  calorimetric  method  is  usually  called  the 
Method  of  Mixture.  This  name  is  given  to  all  the  processes 
in  which  the  quantity  of  heat  which  escapes  from  one  body 
is  measured  by  the  increase  of  temperature  it  produces  in 
another  body  into  which  it  escapes.  The  most  perfect 
method  of  ensuring  that  all  the  heat  which  escapes  from  the 
one  body  passes  into  the  other  is  to  mix  them,  but  in  many 
cases  to  which  the  method  is  now  applied  this  cannot  be 
done. 

We  shall  illustrate  this  method  by  a  few  experiments, 
which  can  be  performed  by  the  student  without  any  special 
apparatus.  A  few  experiments  of  this  kind  actually  per- 
formed by  himself  will  give  the  student  a  more  intelligent 
interest  in  the  subject,  and  will  give  him  a  more  lively  faith 
in  the  exactness  and  uniformity  of  nature,  and  in  the  inac- 
curacy and  uncertainty  of  our  observations,  than  any  reading 
of  books,  or  even  witnessing  elaborate  experiments  performed 
by  professed  men  of  science. 

I  shall  suppose  the  student  to  have  a  thermometer,  the 
bulb  of  which  he  can  immerse  in  the  liquids  of  which  the 
temperature  is  to  be  measured,  and  I  shall  suppose  the 
graduation  of  the  thermometer  to  be  that  of  Fahrenheit,  as 
it  is  the  most  common  in  this  country. 

To  compare  the  effects  of  heat  on  water  and  on  lead,  take 
a  strip  of  sheet  lead,  weighing,  say,  one  pound,  and  roll  it 
into  the  form  of  a  loose  spiral,  so  that  when  it  is  dropped 
into  water  the  water  may  play  round  every  part  of  it  freely. 

Take  a  vessel  of  a  convenient  shape,  such  that  the  roll  of 
lead  when  placed  in  the  vessel  will  be  well  covered  with  a 
pound  of  water. 

Hang  up  the  lead  by  a  fine  string  and  dip  it  in  a  saucepan 
of  boiling  water,  and  continue  to  boil  it  till  it  is  thoroughly 
heated.  While  this  is  going  on  weigh  out  a  pound  of  cold 


64  CaloriiKctry. 

water  in  your  vessel,  and  ascertain  its  temperature  with 
the  thermometer.  Then  lift  the  roll  of  lead  out  of  the 
boiling  water,  hold  it  in  the  steam  till  the  water  is  drained 
off,  and  immerse  it  as  quickly  as  possible  in  the  cold  water 
in  the  vessel.  By  means  of  the  string  you  may  stir  it  about  in 
the  water  so  as  to  bring  it  in  contact  with  new  portions  of  the 
water,  and  to  prevent  it  from  giving  its  heat  directly  to  the 
sides  of  the  vessel. 

From  time  to  time  observe  the  temperature  of  the  water 
as  indicated  by  the  thermometer.  In  a  few  minutes  the 
temperature  of  the  water  will  cease  to  rise,  and  the  experi- 
ment may  then  be  stopped  and  the  calculation  begun. 

I  shall  suppose  (for  the  sake  of  fixing  our  ideas)  that  the 
temperature  of  the  water  before  the  hot  lead  was  put  in  was 
57°  F.,  and  that  the  final  temperature,  when  the  lead  ceased 
to  impart  heat  to  the  water,  was  62°  F.  If  we  take  as  our 
unit  of  heat  that  quantity  of  heat  which  would  raise  a  pound 
of  water  at  60°  F.  one  degree,  we  have  here  five  units  of  heat 
imparted  to  the  water  by  the  lead. 

Since  the  lead  was  for  some  time  in  boiling  water,  and 
was  afterwards  held  in  the  steam,  we  may  assume  its  original, 
temperature  to  be  212°  (this,  however,  should  be  tested  by  the 
thermometer).  During  the  experiment  the  lead  cooled  150° — 
from  212°  to  62° — and  gave  out,  as  we  have  seen,  five  units 
of  heat  to  the  water.  Hence  the  difference  of  the  heat  of  a 
pound  of  lead  at  212°  and  at  62°  is  five  units  ;  or  the  same 
quantity  of  heat  which  will  heat  a  pound  of  water  five  degrees 
from  57°  to  62°  will  heat  a  pound  of  lead  150  degrees  from 
62°  to  212°.  If  we  assume,  what  is  nearly  though  not 
exactly  true,  that  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to  heat  the 
lead  is  the  same  for  each  degree  of  rise  of  temperature,  then 
we  might  say  that  to  raise  a  pound  of  lead  five  degrees 
requires  only  one  thirtieth  part  of  the  heat  required  to  raise 
a  pound  of  water  five  degrees. 

We  have  thus  made  a  comparison  of  the  effects  of  heat  on 
lead  and  on  water.  We  have  found  that  the  same  quantity 


TJtermal  Capacity  of  a  Body.  6$ 

of  heat  would  raise  a  pound  of  lead  through  thirty  times  as 
many  degrees  as  it  would  raise  a  pound  of  water,  and  we 
have  inferred  that  to  produce  any  moderate  change  of 
temperature  on  a  pound  of  lead  requires  one-thirtieth  of  the 
'heat  required  to  produce  the  same  change  on  an  equal  weight 
of  water. 

This  comparison  is  expressed  in  scientific  language  by 
saying  that  the  capacity  cf  lead  for  heat  is  one-thirtieth  cf 
that  of  an  equal  weight  of  water. 

Water  is  generally  taken  as  a  standard  substance  with 
which  other  substances  are  compared,  and  the  fact  which  we 
have  stated  above  is  expressed  in  a  still  more  concise  manner 
by  saying  that  the  specific  heat  of  lead  is  J^-. 

The  fact  that  when  equal  weights  of  quicksilver  and  water 
are  mixed  together  the  resulting  temperature  is  not  the  mean  of 
the  temperatures  of  the  ingredients  was  known  to  Boerhaave 
and  Fahrenheit.  Dr.  Black,  however,  was  the  first  to  explain 
this  phenomenon  and  many  others  by  the  doctrine  which  he 
established,  that  the  effect  of  the  same  quantity  of  heat  in 
raising  the  temperature  of  the  body  depends  not  only  on  the 
amount  of  matter  in  the  body,  but  on  the  kind  of  matter  of 
which  it  is  formed.  Dr.  Irvine,  Black's  pupil  and  assistant,  • 
gave  to  this  property  of  bodies  the  name  of  Capacity  for 
Heat.  The  expression  Specific  Heat  was  afterwards  intro- 
duced by  Gadolin,  of  Abo,  in  1784. 

I  think  we  shall  secure  accuracy,  along  with  the  greatest 
conformity  to  established  custom,  by  defining  these  terms 
thus: 

DEFINITION   OF   THE   CAPACITY   OF   A   BODY. 

The  capacity  of  a  body  for  heat  is  the  number  of  units  of 
heat  required  to  raise  that  body  one  degree  of  temperature. 

We  may  speak  of  the  capacity  for  heat  of  a  particular 
thing,  such  as  a  copper  vessel,  in  which  case  the  capacity 
depends  on  the  weight  as  well  as  on  the  kind  of  matter. 

F 


66  Calorimetry. 

The  capacity  of  a  particular  thing  is   often  expressed  by 
stating  the  quantity  of  water  which  has  the  same  capacity. 

We  may  also  speak  of  the  capacity  for  heat  of  a  substance, 
such  as  copper,  in  which  case  we  refer  to  unit  of  mass  of  the 
substance. 

DEFINITION   OF   SPECIFIC   HEAT. 

The  Specific  Heat  of  a  body  is  the  ratio  of  the  quantity  of 
heat  required  to  raise  that  body  one  degree  to  the  quantity 
required  to  raise  an  equal  weight  of  water  one  degree. 

The  specific  heat  therefore  is  a  ratio  of  two  quantities  of 
the  same  kind,  and  is  expressed  by  the  same  number,  what- 
ever be  the  units  employed  by  the  observer,  and  whatever 
thertfiometric  scale  he  adopts. 

It  is  very  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  these  phrases 
mean  neither  more  nor  less  than  what  is  stated  in  these  defi- 
nitions. 

Irvine,  who  contributed  greatly  to  establish  the  fact  that 
the  quantity  of  heat  which  enters  or  leaves  a  body  depends 
on  its  capacity  for  heat  multiplied  by  the  number  of  degrees 
through  which  its  temperature  rises  or  falls,  went  on  to 
assume  that  the  whole  quantity  of  heat  in  a  body  is  equal  to 
its  capacity  multiplied  by  the  total  temperature  of  the  body, 
reckoned  from  a  point  which  he  called  the  absolute  zero. 
This  is  equivalent  to  the  assumption  that  the  capacity  of  the 
body  remains  the  same  from  the  given  temperature  down- 
wards to  this  absolute  zero.  The  truth  of  such  an  assump- 
tion could  never  be  proved  by  experiment,  and  its  falsehood 
is  easily  established  by  showing  that  the  specific  heat  of 
most  liquid  and  solid  substances  is  different  at  different 
temperatures. 

The  results  which  Irvine,  and  others  long  after  him, 
deduced  by  calculations  founded  on  this  assumption  are  not 
only  of  no  value,  but  are  shown  to  be  so  by  their  incon- 
sistency with  each  other. 

We  shall  now  return  to  the  consideration  of  the  experiment 


Specific  Heat  of  a  Substance.  67 

with  the  lead  and  water,  in  order  to  show  how  it  can  be 
made  more  accurate  by  attending  to  all  the  circumstances  of 
the  case.  I  have  purposely  avoided  doing  so  at  first,  as  my 
object  was  to  illustrate  the  meaning  of  '  Specific  Heat.' 

In  the  former  description  of  the  experiment  it  was 
assumed,  not  only  that  all  the  heat  which  escapes  from  the 
lead  enters  the  water  in  the  vessel,  but  that  it  remains  in 
the  water  till  the  conclusion  of  the  experiment,  when  the 
temperatures  of  the  lead  and  water  have  become  equalised. 

The  latter  part  of  this  assumption  cannot  be  quite  true, 
for  the  water  must  be  contained  in  a  vessel  of  some  kind, 
and  must  communicate  some  of  its  heat  to  this  vessel,  and 
also  must  lose  heat  at  its  upper  surface  by  evaporation,  &c. 

If  we  could  form  the  vessel  of  a  perfect  non-conductor  of 
heat,  this  loss  of  heat  from  the  water  would  not  occur ;  but 
no  substance  of  which  a  vessel  can  be  formed  can  be  con- 
sidered even  approximately  a  non-conductor  of  heat ;  and  if 
we  use  a  vessel  which  is  merely  a  slow  conductor  of  heat,  it  is 
very  difficult,  even  by  the  most  elaborate  calculations,  to 
determine  how  much  heat  is  taken  up  by  the  vessel  itself 
during  the  experiment. 

A  better  plan  is  to  use  a  vessel  which  is  a  very  good 
conductor  of  heat,  but  of  which  the  capacity  for  heat  is 
small,  such  as  a  thin  copper  or  silver  vessel,  and  to  prevent 
this  vessel  from  parting  rapidly  with  its  heat  by  polishing 
its  outer  surface,  and  not  allowing  it  to  touch  any  large 
mass  of  metal,  but  rather  giving  it  slender  supports  and 
placing  it  within  a  metal  vessel  having  its  inner  surface 
polished. 

In  this  way  we  shall  ensure  that  the  heat  shall  be  quickly 
distributed  between  the  water  and  the  vessel,  and  may  con- 
sider their  temperatures  at  all  times  nearly  equal,  while  the 
loss  of  heat  from  the  vessel  will  take  place  slowly  and  at  a 
rate  which  may  be  calculated  when  we  know  the  temperature 
of  the  vessel  and  of  the  air  outside. 

For  this  purpose,  if  we  intended  to  make  a  very  elaborate 


68  Calorimetry. 

experiment,  we  should  in  the  first  place  determine  the 
capacity  for  heat  of  the  vessel  by  a  separate  experiment,  and 
then  we  should  put  into  the  vessel  about  a  pound  of  warm 
water  and  determine  its  temperature  from  minute  to  minute, 
while  at  the  same  time  we  observe  with  another  thermometer 
the  temperature  of  the  air  in  the  room.  In  this  way  we  should 
obtain  a  set  of  observations  from  which  we  might  deduce  the 
rate  of  cooling  for  different  temperatures,  and  compute  the 
rate  of  cooling  when  the  vessel  is  one,  two,  three,  &c., 
degrees  hotter  than  the  air ;  and  then,  knowing  the  tempe- 
rature of  the  vessel  at  various  stages  of  the  experiment  for 
finding  the  specific  heat  of  lead,  we  should  be  able  to  calcu- 
late the  loss  of  heat  from  the  vessel  due  to  the  cooling  during 
the  continuance  of  the  experiment. 

But  a  much  simpler  method  of  getting  rid  of  these  diffi- 
culties is  by  the  method  of  making  two  experiments — the  first 
with  the  lead  which  we  have  described,  and  the  second  with 
hot  water,  in  which  we  endeavour  to  make  the  circumstances 
which  cause  the  loss  of  heat  as  similar  as  we  can  to  those  in 
the  case  of  the  lead. 

For  instance,  if  we  suppose  that  the  specific  gravity  of  lead 
is  about  eleven  times  that  of  water,  if  instead  of  a  pound  of 
lead  we  use  one-eleventh  of  a  pound  of  water,  the  bulk  of  the 
water  will  be  the  same  as  that  of  the  lead,  and  the  depth  of 
the  water  in  the  vessel  will  be  equally  increased  by  the  lead 
and  the  water. 

If  we  also  suppose  that  the  specific  heat  of  lead  is  one- 
thirtieth  of  that  of  water,  then  the  heat  given  out  by  a  pound 
of  lead  in  cooling  150°  will  be  equal  to  the  heat  given  out 
by  one-eleventh  of  a  pound  of  water  in  cooling  55°. 

Hence,  if  we  take  one-eleventh  of  a  pound  of  water  at  55° 
above  62°,  that  is  at  117°,  and  pour  it  into  the  vessel  with 
the  water  as  before  at  57°,  we  may  expect  that  the  level  of 
the  water  will  rise  as  much  as  when  the  hot  lead  was  put  in, 
and  that  the  temperature  will  also  rise,  to  about  the  same 
degree.  The  only  difference  between  the  experiments,  as 


Method  of  Double  Experiments.  69 

far  as  the  loss  of  heat  is  concerned,  is,  that  the  warm  water 
will  raise  the  temperature  of  the  cold  water  in  a  much 
shorter  time  than  the  hot  lead  did,  so  that  if  we  observe  the 
temperature  at  the  same  time  after  the  mixture  in  both 
cases,  the  loss  by  cooling  will  be  greater  with  the  warm  water 
than  with  the  hot  lead. 

In  this  way  we  may  get  rid  of  the  chief  part  of  the  diffi- 
culty of  many  experiments  of  comparison.  Instead  of 
making  one  experiment,  in  which  the  cooling  of  the  lead  is 
compared  with  the  heating  of  the  water  and  the  vessel, 
including  an  unknown  loss  of  heat  from  the  outside  of  the 
vessel,  we  make  two  experiments,  in  which  the  heating 
of  the  vessel  and  the  total  loss  of  heat  shall  be  as  nearly  as 
possible  the  same,  but  in  which  the  heat  is  furnished  in  the 
one  case  by  hot  lead,  and  in  the  other  by  warm  water. 
The  student  may  compare  this  method  with  the  method  of 
double  weighing  invented  by  Pere  Amiot,  but  commonly 
known  as  Borda's  method,  in  which  first  the  body  to  be 
weighed,  and  then  the  weights,  are  placed  in  the  same  scale, 
and  weighed  against  the  same  counterpoise. 

We  shall  illustrate  this  method  by  finding  the  effect  of  steam 
in  heating  water,  and  comparing  it  with  that  of  hot  water. 
Take  a  kettle,  and  make  the  lid  tight  with  a  little  flour  and 
water,  and  adapt  a  short  india-rubber  tube  to  the  spout,  and 
a  tin  or  glass  nozzle  to  the  tube.  Make  the  water  in  the  kettie 
boil,  and  when  the  steam  comes  freely  through  the  nozzle 
dip  it  in  cold  water,  and  you  will  satisfy  yourself  that  the 
steam  is  rapidly  condensed,  every  bubble  of  steam  as  it 
issues  collapsing  with  a  sharp  rattling  noise. 

Having  made  yourself  familiar  with  the  general  nature  of 
the  experiment  of  the  condensation  of  steam,  you  may 
proceed  to  measure  the  heat  given  out  to  the  water.  For 
this  purpose,  put  some  cold  water  in  your  vessel,  say  about 
three-quarters  of  a  pound.  Weigh  the  vessel  and  water 
carefully,  and  observe  the  temperature  of  the  water ;  then, 
while  the  steam  flows  freely  from  the  nozzle,  condense  steam 


70  Calorimetry. 

in  the  water  for  a  short  time,  and  remove  the  nozzle  ;  observe 
the  temperature  and  weigh  the  water  in  its  vessel  again, 
taking  note  of  the  time  of  the  experiment. 

Let  us  suppose  the  original  weight        .         .  5»°°°  grains 

Weight  after  the  condensation  of  steam         .  5, 100  grains 

Hence  the  weight  of  steam  condensed  is  100  grains 

Temperature  of  water  at  first       .         .          .  55°  F. 

Temperature  at  the  end  of  experiment          .  77°  F. 

Rise  of  temperature 22° 

Let  us  now  make  a  second  experiment,  as  like  the  first 
as  we  can,  only  differing  from  it  by  the  use  of  hot  water 
instead  of  steam  to  produce  the  rise  of  temperature. 

It  is  impossible  in  practice  to  ensure  that  everything  shall 
be  exactly  the  same,  but  after  a  few  trials  we  may  select  a 
method  which  will  nearly,  if  not  quite,  fulfil  the  conditions. 

Thus  it  is  easy  to  bring  the  vessel  and  cold  water  to  the 
same  weight  as  before,  namely,  5,000  grains  ;  but  we  shall 
suppose  the  temperature  now  to  be  56°  F.  instead  of  55°. 
We  now  pour  in  water  at  176°  F.  gradually,  so  as  to  make  this 
experiment  last  about  as  long  as  the  first,  and  we  find  that 
the  temperature  is  now  76°,  and  the  weight  6,000  grains. 
Hence  1,000  grains  of  water  cooling  100°  raise  the  vessel 
and  its  contents  2^,,  ^Oa 

Assuming  that  the  specific  heat  of  water  is  the  same  at 
all  temperatures,  which  is  nearly,  though  by  no  means 
exactly,  true,  the  quantity  of-  heat  given  out  by  the  water 
in  the  second  experiment  is  equal  to  what  would  raise 
100,000  grains  of  water  one  degree. 

In  the  experiment  with  the  steam  the  temperatures  were 
nearly  though  not  exactly  equal,  but  the  rise  of  temperature 
was  greater  in  the  proportion  of  22  to  20.  Hence  we  may 
conclude  that  the  quantity  of  heat  which  produced  this 
heating  effect  in  the  experiment  with  steam  was  greater  than 
in  the  experiment  with  water  in  the  same  proportion.  This 
makes  the  heat  given  out  by  the  steam  equal  to  that  which 
would  raise  no;ooo  grains  of  water  one  degree. 


Latent  Heat  of  Steam.  71 

This  was  done  by  the  condensation  and  subsequent 
cooling  of  100  grains  of  steam.  Let  us  begin  with  the  heat 
given  out  by  the  100  grains  of  water  at  212°  F.,  into  which 
the  steam  is  condensed.  It  is  cooled  from  212°  to  77°  or 
135°,  and  gives  out  therefore  an  amount  of  heat  which 
would  raise  13,500  grains  of  water  one  degree.  But  the 
whole  effect  was  110,000,  so  that  there  is  an  amount  of 
heat  which  would  raise  96,500  grains  of  water  one  degree, 
which  must  be  given  out  during  the  condensation  of  the 
steam,  and  before  the  cooling  begins.  Hence  each  grain 
of  steam  in  condensing  gives  out  as  much  heat  as  would 
raise  965  grains  of  water  i°  F.  or  536  grains  i°  Centi- 
grade. 

The  fact  that  steam  at  the  boiling  point  gives  out  a  large 
quantity  of  heat  when  it  is  condensed  into  water  which  is 
still  at  the  same  temperature,  and  the  converse  fact  that  in 
order  to  convert  water  at  the  boiling  temperature  into  steam 
of  the  same  temperature  a  large  quantity  of  heat  must 
be  communicated  to  it,  was  first  clearly  established  by 
Black  in  1757. 

He  expressed  it  by  saying  that  the  latent  heat  of  steam 
is  965°  F.,  and  this  form  of  expression  is  still  in  use,  and 
we  should  take  it  to  mean  neither  more  nor  less  than  what 
we  have  just  stated. 

Black,  however,  and  many  of  his  followers,  supposed  heat 
to  be  a  substance  which  when  it  makes  a  thing  hot  is 
sensible,  but  which  when  it  is  not  perceived  by  the  hand 
or  the  thermometer  still  exists  in  the  body  in  a  latent  or 
concealed  state.  Black  supposed  that  the  difference  between 
boiling  water  and  steam  is,  that  steam  contains  a  great  deal 
more  caloric  than  the  hot  water,  so  that  it  may  be  con- 
sidered a  compound  of  water  and  caloric ;  but,  since  this 
additional  caloric  produces  no  effect  on  the  temperature, 
but  lurks  concealed  in  the  steam  ready  to  appear  when  it  is 
condensed,  he  called  this  part  of  the  heat  latent  heat. 

In  considering  the  scientific  value  of  Black's  discovery  of 


72  Calorimetry. 

latent  heat,  and  of  his  mode  of  expressing  it,  we  should 
recollect  that  Black  himself  in  1754  was  the  discoverer  of  the 
fact  that  the  bubbles  formed  when  marble  is  put  into  an  acid 
consist  of  a  real  substance  different  from  air,  which,  when  free, 
is  similar  to  air  in  appearance,  but  when  fixed  may  exist  in 
liquids  and  in  solids.  This  substance,  which  we  now  call 
carbonic  acid,  Black  called  fixed  air,  and  tK's  was  the  first 
gaseous  body  distinctly  recognised  as  such.  Other  airs  or 
gases  were  afterwards  discovered,  and  the  impulse  given  to 
chemistry  was  so  great,  on  account  of  the  extension  of  the 
science  to  these  attenuated  bodies,  that  most  philosophers 
of  the  time  were  of  opinion  that  heat,  light,  electricity,  and 
magnetism,  if  not  the  vital  force  itself,  would  sooner  or  later 
be  added  to  the  list.  Observing,  however,  that  the  gases 
could  be  weighed,  while  the  presence  of  these  other  agents 
could  not  be  detected  by  the  balance,  those  who  admitted 
them  to  the  rank  of  substances  called  them  imponderable 
substances,  and  sometimes,  on  account  of  their  mobility, 
imponderable  fluids. 

The  analogy  between  the  free  and  fixed  states  of  carbonic 
acid  and  the  sensible  and  latent  states  of  heat  encouraged 
the  growth  of  materialistic  phrases  as  applied  to  heat ;  and 
it  is  evident  that  the  same  way  of  thinking  led  electricians  to 
the  notion  of  disguised  or  dissimulated  electricity,  a  notion 
which  survives  even  yet,  and  which  is  not  so  easily  stripped 
of  its  erroneous  connotation  as  the  phrase  *  latent  heat.' 

It  is  worthy  of  remark  that  Cavendish,  though  one  of  the 
greatest  chemical  discoverers  of  his  time,  would  not  accept 
the  phrase  'latent  heat.'  He  prefers  to  speak  of  the 
generation  of  heat  when  steam  is  condensed,  a  phrase 
inconsistent  with  the  notion  that  heat  is  matter,  and 
objects  to  Black's  term  as  relating  'to  an  hypothesis 
depending  on  the  supposition  that  the  heat  of  bodies  is 
owing  to  their  containing  more  or  less  of  a  substance 
called  the  matter  of  heat ;  and,  as  I  think  Sir  Isaac  Newton's 
opinion  that  heat  consists  in  the  internal  motion  of  the 


Latent  I  I  cat.  73 

particles  of  bodies  much  the  most  probable,  I  chose  to  use 
tne  expression,  "heat  is  generated." ' l 

We  shall  not  now  be  in  danger  of  any  error  if  we  use 
latent  heat  as  an  expression  meaning  neither  more  nor  less 
than  this  : 

DEFINITION. — Latent  heat  is  the  quantity  of  heat  which 
must  be  communicated  to  a  body  in  a  given  state  in  order 
to  convert  it  into  another  state  without  changing  its  tempera- 
ture. 

We  here  recognise  the  fact  that  heat  when  applied  to  a 
body  may  act  in  two  ways — by  changing  its  state,  or  by 
raising  its  temperature — and  that  in  certain  cases  it  may  act 
by  changing  the  state  without  increasing  the  temperature. 

The  most  important  cases  in  which  heat  is  thus  employed 
are — 

1.  The  conversion  of  solids  into  liquids.    This  is  called 
melting  or  fusion.     In  the  reverse  process  of  freezing  or 
solidification  heat  must  be  allowed  to  escape  from  the  body 
to  an  equal  amount. 

2.  The  conversion  of  liquids  (or  solids)  into  the  gaseous 
state.    This  is  called  evaporation,  and  its  reverse  condensa- 
tion. 

3.  When  a  gas  expands,  in  order  to  maintain  the  tem- 
perature constant,  heat  must  be  communicated  to  it,  and 
this,  when  properly  defined,  may  be  called  the  latent  heat  of 
expansion. 

4.  There  are  many  chemical  changes  during  which  heat  is 
generated  or  disappears. 

In  all  these  cases  the  quantity  of  heat  which  enters  or 
leaves  the  body  may  be  measured,  and  in  order  to  express 
the  result  of  this  measurement  in  a  convenient  form,  we 
may  call  it  the  latent  heat  required  for  a  given  change  in  the 
substance. 

We  must  carefully  remember  that  all  that  we  know  about 
heat  is  what  occurs  when  it  passes  from  one  body  to  another, 

1  Phil.  Trans.  1783,  quoted  by  Forbes.  Dissertation  VI.  Encyc.  Brit. 


74  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

and  that  we  must  not  assume  that  after  heat  has  entered 
a  substance  it  exists  in  the  form  of  heat  within  that 
substance.  That  we  have  no  right  to  make  such  an 
assumption  will  be  abundantly  shown  by  the  demonstration 
that  heat  may  be  transformed  into  and  may  be  produced 
from  something  which  is  not  heat. 

Regnault's  method  of  passing  large  quantities  of  the 
substance  through  the  calorimeter  will  be  described  in 
treating  of  the  properties  of  gases,  and  the  Method  oi 
Cooling  will  be  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Radiation. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

ELEMENTARY    DYNAMICAL   PRINCIPLES. 

IN  the  first  part  of  this  treatise  we  have  confined  ourselves 
to  the  explanation  of  the  method  of  ascertaining  the  tem- 
perature of  bodies,  which  we  call  thermometry,  and  the 
method  of  measuring  the  quantity  of  heat  which  enters  or 
leaves  a  body,  and  this  we  call  calorimetry.  Both  of  these 
are  required  in  order  to  study  the  effects  of  heat  upon  bodies; 
but  we  cannot  complete  this  study  without  making  measure- 
ments of  a  mechanical  kind,'  because  heat  and  mechanical 
force  may  act  on  the  same  body,  and  the  actual  result 
depends  on  both  actions.  I  propose,  therefore,  to  recall  to 
the  student's  memory  some  of  those  dynamical  principles 
which  he  ought  to  bring  with  him  to  the  study  of  heat,  and 
which  are  necessary  when  he  passes  from  purely  thermal 
phenomena,  such  as  we  have  considered,  to  phenomena  in- 
volving pressure,  expansion,  &c.,  and  which  will  enable  him 
afterwards  to  proceed  to  the  study  of  thermodynamics 
proper,  in  which  the  relations  of  thermal  phenomena  among 
themselves  are  deduced  from  purely  dynamical  principles. 
The  most  important  step  in  the  progress  of  every 


Measuremen  t  of  Quan  titles.  7  5 

science  is  the  measurement  of  quantities.  Those  whose 
curiosity  is  satisfied  with  observing  what  happens  have 
occasionally  done  service  by  directing  the  attention  of  others 
to  the  phenomena  they  have  seen  ;  but  it  is  to  those  who 
endeavour  to  find  out  how  much  there  is  of  anything  that 
we  owe  all  the  great  advances  in  our  knowledge. 

Thus  every  science  has  some  instrument  of  precision, 
which  may  be  taken  as  a  material  type  of  that  science  which 
it  has  advanced,  by  enabling  observers  to  express  their 
results  as  measured  quantities.  In  astronomy  we  have 
the  divided  circle,  in  chemistry  the  balance,  in  heat  the 
thermometer,  while  the  whole  system  of  civilised  life  may 
be  fitly  symbolised  by  a  foot  rule,  a  set  of  weights,  and  a 
clock.  I  shall,  therefoie,  make  a  few  remarks  on  the 
measurement  of  quantities. 

Every  quantity  is  expressed  by  a  phrase  consisting  of  two 
components,  one  of  these  being  the  name  of  a  number,  and 
the  other  the  name  of  a  thing  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
quantity  to  be  expressed,  but  of  a  certain  magnitude  agreed 
on  among  men  as  a  standard  or  unit. 

Thus  we  speak  of  two  days,  of  forty-eight  hours. 

Each  of  these  expressions  has  a  numerical  part  and  a 
denominational  part,  the  numerical  part  being  a  number, 
whole  or  fractional,  and  the  denominational  part  being  the 
name  of  the  thing,  which  is  to  be  taken  as  many  times  as  is 
indicated  by  the  number. 

If  the  numerical  part  is  the  number  one,  then  the  quantity 
is  the  standard  quantity  itself,  as  when  we  say  one  pound, 
or  one  inch,  or  one  day.  A  quantity  of  which  the  numerical 
part  is  unity  is  called  a  unit.  When  the  numerical  part  is 
some  other  number,  the  quantity  is  still  said  to  be  referred  to, 
or  to  be  expressed  in  terms  of  that  quantity  which  would  be 
denoted  if  the  number  were  one,  and  which  is  called  the  unit. 

In  all  cases  the  unit  is  a  quantity  of  the  same  kind  as  the 
quantity  which  is  expressed  by  means  of  it. 

In  many  cases  several  units  of  the  same  kind  are  in  use, 


j6  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

as  miles,  yards,  feet,  and  inches,  as  measures  of  length  ;  cubic 
yards,  gallons,  and  fluid  ounces,  as  measures  of  capacity ; 
besides  the  endless  variety  of  units  which  have  been  adopted 
by  different  nations,  and  by  different  districts  and  different 
trades  in  the  same  nation. 

When  a  quantity  given  in  terms  of  one  unit  has  to  be  ex- 
pressed in  terms  of  another,  we  find  the  number  of  times 
the  second  unit  is  contained  in  the  first,  and  multiply  this 
by  the  given  number. 

Hence  the  numerical  part  of  the  expression  of  the  same 
quantity  varies  inversely  as  the  unit  in  which  it  is  to  be  ex- 
pressed, as  in  the  example,  two  days  and  forty-eight  hours, 
which  mean  the  same  thing. 

There  are  many  quantities  which  can  be  defined  in  terms 
of  standard  quantities  of  a  different  kind.  In  this  case  we 
make  use  of  derived  units.  For  instance,  as  soon  as  we 
have  fixed  on  a  measure  of  length,  we  may  define  by  means 
of  it  not  only  all  lengths,  but  also  the  area  of  any  surface, 
and  the  content  of  any  space.  For  this  purpose,  if  the  foot 
is  the  unit  of  length,  we  construct,  by  Euclid  I.  46,  a  square 
whose  side  is  a  foot,  and  express  all  areas  in  terms  of  this 
square  foot,  and  by  constructing  a  cube  whose  edge  is 
a  foot  we  have  defined  a  cubic  foot  as  a  unit  of  capacity. 

We  also  express  velocities  in  miles  an  hour,  or  feet  in  a 
second,  &c. 

In  fact,  all  quantities  with  which  we  have  to  do  in  dynamics 
may  be  expressed  in  terms  of  units  derived  by  definition  from 
the  three  fundamental  units — of  Length,  Mass,  and  Time. 

STANDARD   OF   LENGTH. 

It  is  so  important  to  mankind  that  these  units  should  be 
well  defined  that  in  all  civilised  nations  they  are  defined  by 
the  State  with  reference  to  material  standards,  which  are  pre- 
served with  the  utmost  care.  For  instance,  in  this  country 
it  was  enacted  by  Parliament 1  '  that  the  straight  line  or 

1  18  &  19  Viet.  c.  72,  July  30,  1855. 


Units  of  Length.  77 

distance  between  the  centres  of  the  transverse  lines  in  the 
two  gold  plugs  in  the  bronze  bar  deposited  in  the  office 
of  the  Exchequer  shall  be  the  genuine  standard  yard 
at  62°  R,  and  if  lost  it  shall  be  replaced  by  means  of  its 
copies.' 

The  authorised  copies  here  referred  to  are  those  which  are 
preserved  at  the  Royal  Mint,  the  Royal  Society  of  London, 
the  Royal  Observatory  at  Greenwich,  and  the  New  Palace 
at  Westminster.  Other  copies  have  been  made  with  great 
care,  and  with  these  all  measures  of  length  must  be  com- 
pared. 

The  length  of  the  Parliamentary  standard  was  chosen  so 
as  to  be  as  nearly  as  possible  equal  to  that  of  the  best 
standard  yards  formerly  used  in  England.  The  State,  there- 
fore, endeavoured  to  maintain  the  standard  of  its  ancient 
magnitude,  and  by  its  authority  it  has  defined  the  actual 
magnitude  of  this  standard  with  all  the  precision  of  which 
modern  science  is  capable. 

The  metre  derives  its  authority  as  a  standard  from  a  law 
of  the  French  Republic  in  1795. 

It  is  defined  to  be  the  distance  between  the  ends  of  a  rod 
of  platinum  made  by  Borda,1  the  rod  being  at  the  tempera- 
ture of  melting  ice.  This  distance  was  chosen  without 
reference  to  any  former  measures  used  in  France.  It  was 
intended  to  be  a  universal  and  not  a  national  measure,  and 
was  derived  from  Delambre  and  Mechain's  measurement  of 
the  size  of  the  earth.  The  distance  measured  along  the 
earth's  surface  from  the  pole  to  the  equator  is  nearly  ten 
million  of  metres.  If,  however,  in  the  progress  of  geodesy,  a 
different  result  should  be  obtained  from  that  of  Delambre, 
the  metre  will  not  be  altered,  but  the  new  result  will  be 
expressed  in  the  old  metres.  The  authorised  standard  of 
length  is  therefore  not  the  terrestrial  globe,  but  Borda's 

1  Metre  conforme  &  la  loi  du  18  Germinal,  an  III.  Fresente  le 
4  Messidor,  an  VII. 


78  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

platinum  rod,  which  is  much  more  likely  to  be  accurately 
measured. 

The  value  of  the  French  system  of  measures  does  not 
depend  so  much  on  the  absolute  values  of  the  units  adopted 
as  on  the  fact  that  all  the  units  of  the  same  kind  are 
connected  together  by  a  decimal  system  of  multiplication 
and  division,  so  that  the  whole  system,  under  the  name  of 
the  metrical  system,  is  rapidly  gaining  ground  even  in 
countries  where  the  old  national  system  has  been  carefully 
defined. 

The  metre  is  39*37043  British  inches. 

STANDARD   OF   MASS. 

By  the  Act  above  cited  a  weight  of  platinum  marked 
'  P.  S,  1844,  i  lb.,'  deposited  in  the  office  of  the  Exchequer, 
1  shall  be  the  legal  and  genuine  standard  measure  of  weight, 
and  shall  be  and  be  denominated  the  Imperial  Standard 
Pound  Avoirdupois,  and  shall  be  deemed  to  be  the  only 
standard  measure  of  weight  from  which  all  other  weights  and 
other  measures  having  reference  to  weight  shall  be  derived, 
computed,  and  ascertained,  and  one  equal  seven-thousandth 
part  of  such  pound  avoirdupois  shall  be  a  grain,  and  five 
thousand  seven  hundred  and  sixty  ^uch  grains  shall  be  and 
be  deemed  to  be  a  pound  troy.  If  at  any  time  hereafter  the 
said  Imperial  Standard  Pound  Avoirdupois  be  lost  or  in  any 
manner  destroyed,  defaced,  or  otherwise  injured,  the  Com- 
missioners of  Her  Majesty's  Treasury  may  cause  the  same  to 
be  restored  by  reference  to  or  adoption  of  any  of  the  copies 
aforesaid,1  or  such  of  them  as  may  remain  available  for  that 
purpose/ 

The  construction  of  this  standard  was  entrusted  to  Pro- 
fessor W.  H.  Miller,  who  has  given  an  account  of  the 
methods  employed  in  a  paper,2  which  may  be  here  referred 
to  as  a  model  of  scientific  accuracy. 

1  In  the  same  places  as  the  Standards  of  Length. 
1  Phil.  Trans.  1856,  p.  753. 


Units  of  Mass.  79 

The  French  standard  of  mass  is  the  Kilogramme  des 
Archives,  made  of  platinum  by  Borda,  and  is  intended  to 
represent  the  mass  of  a  cubic  decimetre  of  distilled  water 
at  the  temperature  4°  C. 

The  actual  determination  of  the  density  of  water  is  an 
operation  which  requires  great  care,  and  the  differences 
between  the  results  obtained  by  the  most  skilful  observers, 
though  small,  are  a  thousand  times  greater  than  the  differ- 
ences of  the  results  of  a  comparison  of  standards  by  weighing 
them.  The  differences  of  the  values  of  the  density  of  water 
as  found  by  careful  observers  are  as  much  as  a  thousandth 
part  of  the  whole,  whereas  the  method  of  weighing  admits 
of  an  accuracy  of  within  one  part  in  five  millions. 

Hence  the  French  standards,  though  originally  formed 
to  represent  certain  natural  quantities,  must  be  now  con- 
sidered as  arbitrary  standards,  of  which  copies  are  to  be 
taken  by  direct  comparison.  The  French  or  metric  system 
has  the  advantage  of  a  uniform  application  of  the  decimal 
method,  and  it  is  also  in  many  cases  convenient  to  remember 
that  a  cubic  metre  of  water  is  a  tonne,  _a  cubic  decimetre  a 
kilogramme,  a  cubic  centimetre  a  gramme,  and  a  cubic 
millimetre  a  milligramme,  the  water  being  at  its  maximum 
density  or  at  about  4°  C. 

In  1826  the  British  standard  of  mass  was  defined  by 
saying  that  a  cubic  inch  of  water  at  62°  F.  contains  252-458 
grains,  and  though  this  is  no  longer  a  legal  definition,  we 
may  take  it  as  a  rough  statement  of  a  fact,  that  a  cubic  inch 
of  water  weighs  about  252*5  grains,  a  cubic  foot  about  1,000 
ounces  avoirdupois,  and  a  cubic  yard  about  three-quarters  of 
a  ton.  Of  these  estimates  the  second  is  the  furthest  from 
the  truth. 

Professor  Miller  has  compared  the  British  and  French 
standards,  and  finds  the  Kilogramme  des  Archives  equal  to 
I5432'34874  grains. 

From  these  legal  definitions  it  will  be  seen  that  what  is 
generally  called  a  standard  of  weight  is  a  certain  piece  of 


8o  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

platinum — that  is,  a  particular  body  the  quantity  of  matter  in 
which  is  taken  and  defined  by  the  State  to  be  a  pound  or  a 
kilogramme. 

The  weight  strictly  so  called — that  is,  the  tendency  of  thi? 
body  to  move  downwards — is  not  invariable,  for  it  depends 
on  the  part  of  the  world  where  it  is  placed,  its  weight  being 
greater  at  the  poles  than  at  the  equator,  and  greater  at  the 
level  of  the  sea  than  at  the  top  of  a  mountain. 

What  is  really  invariable  is  the  quantity  of  matter  in  the 
body,  or  what  is  called  in  scientific  language  the  mass  of  the 
body,  and  even  in  commercial  transactions  what  is  generally 
aimed  at  in  weighing  goods  is  to  estimate  the  quantity  of 
matter,  and  not  to  determine  the  force  with  which  they  tend 
downwards. 

In  fact,  the  only  occasions  in  common  life  in  which  it  is 
required  to  estimate  weight  considered  as  a  force  is  when  we 
have  to  determine  the  strength  required  to  lift  'or  carry 
things,  or  when  we  have  to  make  a  structure  strong  enough 
to  support  their  weight.  In  all  other  cases  the  word  weight 
must  be  understood  to  mean  the  quantity  of  the  thing  as 
determined  by  the  process  of  weighing  against  'standard 
weights! 

As  a  great  deal  of  confusion  prevails  on  this  subject  in 
ordinary  language,  and  still  greater  confusion  has  been 
introduced  into  books  on  mechanics  by  the  notion  that  a 
pound  is  a  certain  force,  instead  of  being,  as  we  have  seen,  a 
certain  piece  of  platinum,  or  a  piece  of  any  other  kind  of 
matter  equal  in  mass  to  the  piece  of  platinum,  I  have 
thought  it  worth  while  to  spend  some  time  in  defining 
accurately  what  is  meant  by  a  pound  and  a  kilogramme. 

ON  THE   UNIT  OF  TIME. 

All  nations  derive  their  measures  of  time  from  the 
apparent  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  motion  of 
rotation  of  the  earth  about  its  axis  is  very  nearly  indeed 
uniform,  and  the  measure  of  time  in  which  one  day  is  equal 


Unit  of  Time.  S I 

to  the  time  of  revolution  of  the  earth  about  Its  axis,  or  more 
exactly  to  the  interval  between  successive  transits  of  the  first 
point  of  Aries,  is  used  by  astronomers  under  the  name  of 
sidereal  time. 

Solar  time  is  that  which  is  given  by  a  sun-dial,  and  is 
not  uniform.  A  uniform  measure  of  time,  agreeing  with, 
solar  time  in  the  long  run,  is  called  mean  solar  time,  and  is 
that  which  is  given  by  a  correct  clock.  A  solar  day  is  longer 
than  a  sidereal  day.  In  all  physical  researches  mean  solar 
time  is  employed,  and  one  second  is  generally  taken  as  the 
unit  of  time. 

The  evidence  upon  which  we  form  the  conclusion  that 
two  different  portions  of  time  are  or  are  not  equal  can  only 
be  appreciated  by  those  who  have  mastered  the  principles 
of  dynamical  reasoning.  I  can  only  here  assert  that  the 
comparison,  for  example,  of  the  length  of  a  day  at  present 
with  the  length  of  a  day  3,000  years  ago  is  by  no  means 
an  unfruitful  enquiry,  and  that  the  relative  length  of  these 
days  may  be  determined  to  within  a  small  fraction  of  a 
second.  This  shows  that  time,  though  we  conceive  it 
merely  as  the  succession  of  our  states  of  consciousness,  is 
capable  of  measurement,  independently,  not  only  of  our 
mental  states,  but  of  any  particular  phenomenon  whatever. 

ON  MEASUREMENTS  FOUNDED    ON   THE   THREE 
FUNDAMENTAL   UNITS. 

In  the  measurement  of  quantities  differing  in  kind  from 
the  three  units,  we  may  either  adopt  a  new  unit  independently 
for  each  new  quantity,  or  we  may  endeavour  to  define  a  unit 
of  the  proper  kind  from  the  fundamental  units.  In  the  latter 
case  we  are  said  to  use  a  system  of  units.  For  instance,  if 
we  have  adopted  the  foot  as  a  unit  of  length,  the  systematic 
unit  of  capacity  is  the  cubic  foot. 

The  gallon,  which  is  a  legal  measure  in  this  country,  is 
unsystematic  considered  as  a  measure  of  capacity,  as  it 

o 


82  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

contains  the  awkward  number  of  277-274  cubic  inches.  The 
gallon,  however,  is  never  tested  by  a*  direct  measurement  of 
its  cubic  contents,  but  by  the  condition  that  it  must  contain 
ten  pounds  of  water  at  62°  F. 

DEFINITION  OF  DENSITY. — The  density  of  a  body  is 
measured  by  the  number  of  units  of  mass  in  unit  of  volume 
of  the  substance. 

For  instance,  if  the  foot  and  the  pound  be  taken  as 
fundamental  units,  then  the  density  of  anything  is  the 
number  of  pounds  in  a  cubic  foot.  The  density  of  water 
is  about  62-5  pounds  to  the  cubic  foot.  In  the  metric 
system,  the  density  of  water  is  one  tonne  to  the  stere,  one 
kilogramme  to  the  litre,  one  gramme  to  the  cubic  centi- 
metre, and  one  milligramme  to  the  cubic  millimetre. 

We  shall  sometimes  have  to  use  the  word  rarity,  to 
signify  the  inverse  of  density,  that  is,  the  volume  of  unit  of 
mass  of  a  substance. 

DEFINITION  OF  SPECIFIC  GRAVITY. — The  specific  gravity 
of  a  body  is  the  ratio  of  its  density  to  that  of  some  standard 
substance,  generally  water. 

Since  the  specific  gravity  of  a  body  is  the  ratio  of  two 
things  of  the  same  kind,  it  is  a  numerical  quantity,  and  has 
the  same  value,  whatever  national  units  are  employed  by 
those  who  determine  it.  Thus,  if  we  say  that  the  specific 
gravity  of  mercury  fs  about  13-5,  we  state  that  mercury 
is  about  thirteen  and  a  half  times  heavier  than  an  equal  bulk 
of  water,  and  this  fact  is  independent  of  the  way  in  which 
we  measure  either  the  mass  or  the  volume  of  the  liquids. 

DEFINITION  OF  UNIFORM  VELOCITY. — The  velocity  of  a 
body  moving  uniformly  is  measured  by  the  number  of  units  of 
Itngth  travelled  over  in  unit  of  time. 

Thus  we  speak  of  a  velocity  of  so  many  feet  or  metres 
per  second. 

DEFINITION  OF  MOMENTUM. — The  momentum  of  a  body  is 
measured  by  the  product  of  the  velocity  of  the  body  into  the 
number  of  units  of  mass  in  the  body 


Measurement  of  Force.  83 

DEFINITION  OF  FORCE. — Force  is  ivhatcrcr  changes  or 
tends  to  change  the  motion  of  a  body  by  altering  cither  its  direc- 
tion or  Us  magnitude ;  and  a  force  acting  on  a  body  is  measured 
by  the  momentum  it  produces  in  its  own  direction  in  unit 
of  time. 

The  unit  of  force  is  that  force  which  if  it  acted  on  unit  of 
mass  for  unit  of  time  would  produce  in  it  uniroflSlocity. 

For  the  British  unit  of  force  the  name  of  Poundal  has  been 
proposed  by  Prof.  James  Thomson.  It  is  that  force  which, 
if  it  acted  for  a  second  on  a  pound,  would  produce  in  it  a 
velocity  of  one  foot  per  second. 

In  the  centimetre-gramme-second  system,  adopted  by  the 
Committee  on  Units  of  the  British  Association,  the  unit  of 
force  is  the  Dyne.  A  dyne  acting  for  one  second  on  a 
gramme  would  give  it  a  velocity  of  one  centimetre  per 
second. 

The  weight  of  any  body  at  London,  acting  on  that  body 
for  a  second,  would  produce  in  it  a  velocity  of  32-1889  feet 
per  second.  Hence  the  weight  of  a  pound  at  London  is 
32-1889  poundals. 

At  Paris  the  velocity  of  a  body  after  foiling  freely  for  one 
second  is  980-868  centimes  per  second.  Hence  the  weight 
of  a  gramme  at  Paris  is  980*868  dynes. 

It  is  so  convenient,  especially  when  all  our  experiments 
are  conducted  in  the  same  place,  to  express  forces  in  terms 
of  the  weight  of  a  pound  or  a  gramme,  that  in  all  countries 
the  first  measurements  of  forces  were  made  in  this  way,  and 
a  force  was  described  as  a  force  of  so  many  pounds  weight 
or  grammes  weight.  It  was  only  after  the  measurements  of 
forces  made  by  persons  in  different  parts  of  the  world  had 
to  be  compared  that  it  was  found  that  the  weight  of  a 
pound  or  a  gramme  is  different  in  different  places,  and 
depends  on  the  intensity  of  gravitation,  or  the  attraction  of 
the  earth  ;  so  that  for  purposes  of  accurate  comparison  all 
forces  must  be  reduced  to  absolute  or  dynamical  measure 
as  explained  above.  We  shall  distinguish  the  measure  by 

G  3 


84  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

comparison  with  weight  as  the  gravitation  measure  of  force. 
To  reduce  forces  expressed  in  gravitation  measure  to  abso- 
lute measure,  we  must  multiply  the  number  denoting  the 
force  in  gravitation  measure  by  the  value  of  the  intensity  of 
gravity  expressed  in  the  same  metrical  system.  The  value 
of  the  intensity  of  gravity  is  a  very  important  number  in  all 
scientific  calculations,  and  it  is  generally  denoted  by  the 
letter  g.  The  number  g  may  be  defined  in  any  of  the 
following  ways,  which  are  all  equivalent : 

g  is  a  number  expressing  the  velocity  produced  in  a  falling 
body  in  unit  of  time.  ^^C 

g  is  a  number  expressing  twice  the  distance  through  which  a 
body  falls  in  unit  of  time.  ^££^ 

g  is  a  number  expressing  the  ^bright  of  unit  of  mass  in 
absolute  measure. 

The  value  of  g  is  generally  determined  at  any  place  by 
experiments  with  the  pendulum.  These  experiments  re- 
quire great  care,  and  the  description  of  them  does  not 
belong  to  our  present  subject.  The  value  of  g  may  be 
found  with  sufficient  accuracy  for  the  present  state  of  science 
by  means  of  the  formula, 

g—  G  (1  —  0-0025659  cos  2  X)   1 1  —  ( 2  —  ^    -  J  -  j 

In  this  formula,  G  is  the  intensity  of  gravity  a   the  mean 
level  of  the  sea  in  latitude  45°  : 
0=32 'i  703  poundals  to  the  pound,  or  9*80533  dynes  to  the 

gramme. 

X  is  the  latitude  of  the  place.  The  formula  shows  that  the 
force  of  gravity  at  the  level  of  the  sea  increases  from  the 
equator  to  the  poles.  The  last  factor  of  the  formula  ex- 
presses, according  to  the  calculations  of  Poisson,1  the 
effect  of  the  height  of  the  place  of  observation  above 
the  level  of  the  sea  in  diminishing  the  force  of  gravity. 
The  symbol  p  represents  the  mean  density  cf  the  whole 
earth,  which  is  probably  about  5^  times  that  of  water,  p' 
1  Traite  de  Mecaniqui,  t  ii  p.  629. 


Weight.  85 

represents  the  mean  density  of  the  ground  just  below  the 
place  of  observation,  which  may  be  taken  at  about  2^ 
times  the  density  of  water,  so  that  we  may  write 

2  —  --  —    =^'32    nearly. 

z  Is  the  height  of  the  place  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  in 
feet  or  metres,  and  r  is  the  radius  of  the  earth  : 

r  —  20,886,852  feet,  or  6,366,198  metres. 

For  rough  purposes  it  is  sufficient  to  remember  that  in 
Britain  the  intensity  of  gravity  is  about  32*2  poundals  to  the 
pound,  and  in  France  about  980  dynes  to  the  gramme. 

The  reason  why,  in  all  accurate  measurements,  we  have 
to  take  account  of  the  variation  of  the  intensity  of  gravity  in 
different  places  is,  that  the  absolute  value  of  any  force,  such 
as  the  pressure  of  air  of  a  given  density  and  temperature, 
depends  entirely  on  the  properties  of  air,  and  not  on 
the  force  of  gravity  at  the  place  of  observation.  If, 
therefore,  this  pressure  has  been  observed  in  gravitation 
measure,  that  is,  in  pounds  on  the  square  inch,  or  in  inches 
of  mercury,  or  in  any  way  in  which  the  weight  of  some 
substance  is  made  to  furnish  the  measure  of  the  pressure,  then 
the  results  so  obtained  will  be  true  only  as  long  as  the 
intensity  of  gravity  is  the  same,  and  will  not  be  true  without 
correction  at  a  place  in  a  different  latitude  from  the  place  of 
observation.  Hence  the  use  of  reducing  all  measures  of 
force  to  absolute  measure. 

In  a  rude  age,  before  the  invention  of  means  for 
overcoming  friction,  the  weight  of  bodies  formed  the  chief 
obstacle  to  setting  them  in  motion.  It  was  only  after 
some  progress  had  been  made  in  the  art  of  throwing 
missiles,  and  in  the  use  of  wheel-carriages  and  floating 
vessels,  that  men's  minds  became  practically  impressed 
with  the  idea  of  mass  as  distinguished  from  weight.  Ac- 
cordingly, while  almost  all  the  metaphysicians  who  dis- 
cussed the  qualities  of  matter  assigned  a  prominent  place  to 


86  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

weight  among  the  primary  qualities,  few  or  none  of  them 
perceived  that  the  sole  unalterable  property  of  matter  is  its 
mass.  At  the  revival  of  science  this  property  was  expressed 
by  the  phrase  '  the  inertia  of  matter;'  but  while  the  men  of 
science  understood  by  this  term  the  tendency  of  the  body 
to  persevere  in  its  state  of  motion  (or  rest),  and  considered 
it  a  measurable  quantity,  those  philosophers  who  were  un- 
acquainted with  science  understood  inertia  in  its  literal 
sense  as  a  quality — mere  want  of  activity  or  laziness. 

Even  to  this  day  those  who  are  not  practically  familiar 
with  the  free  motion  of  large  masses,  though  they  all  admit 
the  truth  of  dynamical  principles,  yet  feel  little  repugnance 
in  accepting  the  theory  known  as  Boscovich's — that  sub- 
stances are  composed  of  a  system  of  points,  which  are 
mere  centres  of  force,  attracting  or  repelling  each  other.  It 
is  probable  that  many  qualities  of  bodies  might  be  explained 
on  this  supposition,  but  no  arrangement  of  centres" of  force, 
however  complicated,  could  account  for  the  fact  that  a  body 
requires  a  certain  force  to  produce  in  it  a  certain  change 
of  motion,  which  fact  we  express  by  saying  that  the  body 
has  a  certain  measurable  mass.  No  part  of  this  mass  can 
be  due  to  the  existence  of  the  supposed  centres  of  force. 

I  therefore  recommend  to  the  student  that  he  should 
impress  his  mind  with  the  idea  of  mass  by  a  few  experiments, 
such  as  setting  in  motion  a  grindstone  or  a  well-balanced 
wheel,  and  then  endeavouring  to  stop  it,  twirling  a  long 
pole,  &c.,  till  he  comes  to  associate  a  set  of  acts  and  sensa- 
tions with  the  scientific  doctrines  of  dynamics,  and  he  will 
never  afterwards  be  in  any  danger  of  loose  ideas  on  these 
subjects.  He  should  also  read  Faraday's  essay  on  Mental 
Inertia,1  which  will  impress  him  with  the  proper  meta- 
phorical use  of  the  phrase  to  express,  not  laziness,  but 
habitude. 

1  Life,  by  Dr.  Bence  Jones,  vol.  i.  p.  268. 


Work.  87 


ON   WORK   AND    ENERGY. 

Work  is  done  when  resistance  is  overcome,  and  the  quantity 
of  work  done  is  measured  by  the  product  of  the  resisting 
force  and  the  distance  through  which  that  force  is  over- 
come. 

Thus,  if  one  pound  is  lifted  one  foot  high  in  opposition  to 
the  force  of  gravity,  a  certain  amount  of  work  is  done,  and 
this  quantity  is  known  among  engineers  as  a  foot-pound. 

If  a  body  whose  mass  is  twenty  pounds  is  lifted  ten  feer, 
this  might  be  done  by  taking  one  of  the  pounds  and  raising  it 
first  one  foot  and  then  another  till  it  had  risen  ten  feet,  and 
then  doing  the  same  with  each  of  the  remaining  pounds,  so 
that  the  quantity  of  work  called  a  foot-pound  is  performed 
200  times  in  raising  twenty  pounds  ten  feet.  Hence  the 
work  done  in  lifting  a  body  is  found  by  multiplying  the  weight 
of  the  body  in  pounds  by  the  height  in  feet.  The  result 
is  the  work  in  foot-pounds. 

The  foot-pound  is  a  gravitation  measure,  depending  on 
the  intensity  of  gravity  at  the  place.  To  reduce  it  to  absolute 
measure  we  must  multiply  the  number  of  foot-pounds  by  the 
intensity  of  gravity  at  the  p'ace  to  get  the  number  of  foot- 
poundals. 

The  work  done  when  we  raise  a  heavy  body  is  done  in 
overcoming  the  attraction  of  the  earth.  Work  is  also  done 
when  we  draw  asunder  two  magnets  which  attract  each 
other,  when  we  draw  out  an  elastic  cord,  when  we  compress 
air,  and,  in  general,  when  we  apply  force  to  anything  which 
moves  in  the  direction  of  the  force. 

There  is  one  case  of  the  application  of  force  to  a  moving 
body  which  is  of  great  importance,  namely,  when  the  force 
is  employed  in  changing  the  velocity  of  the  body. 

Suppose  a  body  whose  mass  is  M  (M  pounds  or  M  grammes) 
to  be  moving  in  a  certain  direction  with  a  velocity  which 
we  shall  call  v,  and  let  a  force,  which  we  shall  call  F,  be 


88  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

applied  to  the  body  in  the  direction  of  its  motion.  Let  us 
consider  the  effect  of  this  force  acting  on  the  body  foi  a 
very  small  time  T,  during  which  the  body  moves  through 
the  space  s,  and  at  the  end  of  which  its  velocity  is  v'. 

To  ascertain  the  magnitude  of  the  force  F,  let  us  consider 
the  momentum  which  it  produces  in  the  body,  and  the  time 
during  which  the  momentum  is  produced. 

The  momentum  of  the  beginning  of  the  time  T  was  MZ>, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  time  T  it  was  MZ/,  so  that  the  momentum 
produced  by  the  force  F  acting  for  the  time  T  is  MZ/—  MP. 

But  since  forces  are  measured  by  the  momentum  produced 
in  unit  of  time,  the  momentum  produced  by  F  in  one  unit 
of  time  is  F,  and  the  momentum  produced  by  F  in  T  units  of 
time  is  FT.     Since  the  two  values  are  equal, 
FT  —  M(Z/— i'). 

This  is  one  form  of  the  fundamental  equation  of  dynamics. 
If  we  define  the  impulse  of  a  force  as  the  average  value  of 
the  force  multiplied  by  the  time  during  which  it  acts,  then 
this  equation  may  be  expressed  in  words  by  saying  that 
the  impulse  of  a  force  is  equal  to  the  momentum  produced 
by  it. 

We  have  next  to  find  .$•,  the  space  described  by  the  body 
during  the  time  T.  If  the  velocity  had  been  uniform,  the 
space  described  would  have  been  the  product  of  the  time 
by  the  velocity.  When  the  velocity  is  not  uniform  the  time 
must  be  multiplied  by  the  mean  or  average  velocity  to  get 
the  space  described.  In  both  these  cases  in  which  average 
force  or  average  velocity  is  mentioned,  the  time  is  supposed 
to  be  subdivided  into  a  number  of  equal  parts,  and  the 
average  is  taken  of  the  force  or  of  the  velocity  for  all  these 
divisions  of  the  time.  In  the  present  case,  in  which  the 
time  considered  is  so  small  that  the  change  of  velocity  is  also 
small,  the  average  velocity  during  the  time  T  may  be  taken 
as  the  arithmetical  mean  of  the  velocities  at  he  beginning 
and  at  the  end  of  the  time,  or  J  (v  +  v'). 


Kinetic  Energy.  89 

Hence  the  space  described  is 

s  =  \(v  +  Z/)T. 

This  may  be  considered  as  a  kinematical  equation,  since 
it  depends  on  the  nature  of  motion  only,  and  not  on  that 
of  the  moving  body. 

If  we  multiply  together  these  two  equations  we  get 

FTS  = 
and  if  we  divide  by  T  we  find 

FS  = 

Now  FS  is  the  work  done  by  the  force  F  acting  on.  the 
body  while  it  moves  in  the  direction  of  F  through  a  space  s. 
If  we  also  denote  ^M^2,  the  mass  of  the  body  multiplied  by 
half  the  square  of  its  velocity,  by  the  expression  the  kinetic 
energy  of  the  body,  then  ±uv'2  will  be  the  kinetic  energy 
after  the  action  of  the  force  F  through  a  space  s. 

We  may  now  express  the  equation  in  words  by  saying 
that  the  work  done  by  the  force  F  in  setting  the  body  in 
motion  is  measured  by  the  increase  of  kinetic  energy  during 
the  time  that  the  force  acts. 

We  have  proved  that  this  is  true  when  the  interval  of  time 
during  which  the  force  acts  is  so  small  that  we  may  consider 
the  mean  velocity  during  that  time  as  equal  to  the  arithme- 
tical mean  of  the  velocities  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the 
time.  This  assumption,  which  is  exactly  true  when  the 
force  is  uniform,  is  approximately  true  in  every  case  when 
the  time  considered  is  small  enough. 

By  dividing  the  whole  time  of  action  of  the  force  into 
small  parts,  and  proving  that  in  each  of  these  the  work  done 
by  the  force  is  equal  to  the  increase  of  kinetic  energy  of  the 
body,  we  may,  by  adding  the  different  portions  of  the  work 
and  the  different  increments  of  energy,  arrive  at  the  result 
that  the  total  work  done  by  the  force  is  equal  to  the  total 
increase  of  kinetic  energy. 

If  the  force  acts  on  the  body  in  the  direction  opposite  to 
the  motion,  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  body  will  be  diminished 


yO  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

instead  of  increased,  and  the  force,  instead  of  doing  work  on 
the  body,  will  be  a  resistance  which  lie  body  in  its  motion 
overcomes.  Hence  a  moving  body  can  do  work  in  over- 
coming resistance  as  long  as  it  is  in  motion,  and  the  work 
done  by  the  moving  body  is  equal  to  the  diminution  of  its 
kinetic  energy,  till,  when  the  body  is  brought  to  rest,  the 
whole  work  it  has  done  is  equal  to  the  whole  kinetic  energy 
which  it  had  at  first. 

We  now  see  the  appropriateness  of  the  name  kinetic 
energy,  which  we  have  hitherto  used  merely  as  a  name  for 
the  product  ^Mx/2.  For  the  energy  of  a  body  may  be 
denned  as  the  capacity  which  it  has  of  doing  work,  and  is 
measured  by  the  quantity  of  work  which  it  can  do.  The 
kinetic  energy  of  a  body  is  the  energy  which  it  has  in 
virtue  of  being  in  motion,  and  we  have  just  shown  that  its 
value  may  be  found  by  multiplying  the  mass  of  the  body  by 
half  the  square  of  the  velocity. 

In  our  investigation  we  have,  for  the  sake  of  simplicity, 
supposed  the  force  to  act  in  the  same  direction  as  the 
motion.  To  make  the  proof  perfectly  general,  as  it  is  given 
in  treatises  on  dynamics,  we  have  only  to  resolve  the  actual 
force  into  two  parts,  one  in  the  direction  of  the  motion  and 
the  other  at  right  angles  to  it,  and  to  observe  that  the  part 
at  right  angles  to  the  motion  can  neither  do  any  work  on  the 
body  nor  change  the  velocity  or  the  kinetic  energy,  so  that 
the  whole  effect,  whether  of  work  or  of  alteration  of  kinetic 
energy,  depends  on  the  part  of  the  force  which  is  in  the 
direction  of  the  motion. 

The  student,  if  not  familiar  with  this  subject,  should  refer 
to  some  treatise  on  dynamics,  and  compare  the  investigation 
there  given  with  the  outline  of  the  reasoning  given  above. 
Our  object  at  present  is  to  fix  in  our  minds  what  is  meant 
by  Work  and  Energy. 

The  great  importance  of  giving  a  name  to  the  quantity 
which  we  call  Kinetic  Energy  seems  to  have  been  first  recog- 
nised by  Leibnitz,  who  gave  to  the  product  of  the  mass  by 


Kinetic  and  Potential  Energy.  9 1 

the  square  of  the  velocity  the  name  of  Vis  Viva,     This  is 
twice  the  kinetic  energy. 

Newton,  in  a  scholium  to  his  Third  Law  of  Motion,  has 
stated  the  relation  between  work  and  kinetic  energy  in  a 
manner  so  perfect  that  it  cannot  be  improved,  but  at  the 
same  time  with  so  little  apparent  effort  or  desire  to  attract 
attention  that  no  one  seems  to  have  been  struck  with  the 
great  importance  of  the  passage  till  it  was  pointed  out 
recently  by  Thomson  and  Tait. 

The  use  of  the  term  Energy,  in  a  scientific  sense,  to  express 
the  quantity  of  work  a  body  can  do,  was  introduced  by  Dr. 
Young  ('  Lectures  on  Natural  Philosophy,'  Lecture  VIII.). 

The  energy  of  a  system  of  bodies  acting  on  one  another 
with  forces  depending  on  their  relative  positions  is  due  partly 
to  their  motion,  and  partly  to  their  relative  position. 

That  part  which  is  due  to  their  motion  was  called  Actual 
Energy  by  Rankine,  and  Kinetic  Energy  by  Thomson  and 
Tait. 

That  part  which  is  due  to  their  relative  position  depends 
upon  the  work  which  the  various  forces  would  do  if  the 
bodies  were  to  yield  to  the  action  of  these  forces.  This  is 
called  the  Sum  of  the  Tensions  by  Helmholtz,  in  his  cele- 
brated memoir  on  the  '  Conservation  of  Force.' l  Thomson 
called  it  Statical  Energy,  and  Rankine  introduced  the  term 
Potential  Energy,  a  very  felicitous  name,  since  it  not  only 
signifies  the  energy  which  the  system  has  not  in  possession, 
but  only  has  the  power  to  acquire,  but  it  also  indicates  that 
it  is  to  be  found  from  what  is  called  (on  other  grounds)  the 
Potential  Function. 

Thus  when  a  heavy  body  has  been  lifted  to  a  certain 
height  above  the  earth's  surface,  the  system  of  two  bodies,  it 
and  the  earth,  have  potential  energy  equal  to  the  work 
which  would  be  done  if  the  heavy  body  were  allowed  to 
descend  till  it  is  stopped  by  the  surface  of  the  earth. 

If  the  body  were  allowed  to  fall  freely,  it  would  acquire 
1  Berlin,  1847.  Translated  in  Taylor's  Scientific  Memoirs,  Feb.  1853, 


f)2  Elementary  Dynamical  Principles. 

velocity,  and  the  kinetic  energy  acquired  would  be  exactly 
equal  to  the  potential  energy  lost  in  the  same  time. 

It  is  proved  in  treatises  on  dynamics  that  if,  in  any  system 
of  bodies,  the  force  which  acts  between  any  two  bodies  is  in 
the  line  joining  them,  and  depends  only  on  their  distance, 
and  not  on  the  way  in  which  they  are  moving  at  the  time, 
then  if  no  other  forces  act  on  the  system,  the  sum  of  the 
potential  and  kinetic  energy  of  all  the  bodies  of  the  system 
will  always  remain  the  same. 

This  principle  is  called  the  Principle  of  the  Conservation 
of  Energy ;  it  is  of  great  importance  in  all  branches  of  science, 
and  the  recent  advances  in  the  science  of  heat  have  been 
chiefly  due  to  the  application  of  this  principle. 

We  cannot  indeed  assume,  without  evidence  of  a  satis- 
factory nature,  that  the  mutual  action  between  any  two  parts 
of  a  real  body  must  always  be  in  the  line  joining  them,  and 
must  depend  only  on  their  distance.  We  know  that  this  is 
the  case  with  respect  to  the  attraction  of  bodies  at  a  distance, 
but  we  cannot  make  any  such  assumption  concerning  the 
internal  forces  of  bodies  of  whose  internal  constitution  we 
know  next  to  nothing. 

We  cannot  even  assert  that  all  energy  must  be  either 
potential  or  kinetic,  though  we  may  not  be  able  to  conceive 
any  other  form.  Nevertheless,  the  principle  has  been  de- 
monstrated by  dynamical  reasoning  to  be  absolutely  true  for 
systems  fulfilling  certain  conditions,  and  it  has  been  proved 
by  experiment  to  be  true  within  the  limits  of  error  of  obser- 
vation, in  cases  where  the  energy  takes  the  forms  of  heat, 
magnetisation,  electrification,  &c.,  so  that  the  following  state- 
ment is  one  which,  if  we  cannot  absolutely  affirm  its  neces- 
sary truth,  is  worthy  of  being  carefully  tested,  and  traced 
into  all  the  conclusions  which  are  implied  in  it 

GENERAL  STATEMENT  OF  THE  CONSERVATION  OF  ENERGY. 

'  The  total  energy  of  any  body  or  system  of  bodies  is  a 
quantity  which  can  neither  be  increased  nor  diminished  by  any 


Conservation  of  Energy.  93 

mutual  action  of  these  bodies,  though  it  may  be  transformed 
into  any  of  the  forms  of  which  energy  is  susceptible? 

If  by  the  application  of  mechanical  force,  heat,  or  any 
other  kind  of  action  to  a  body,  or  system  of  bodies,  it  is 
made  to  pass  through  any  series  of  changes,  and  at  last  to 
return  in  all  respects  to  its  original  state,  then  the  energy 
communicated  to  the  system  during  this  cycle  of  operations 
must  be  equal  to  the  energy  which  the  system  communicates 
to  other  bodies  during  the  cycle. 

For  the  system  is  in  all  respects  the  same  at  the  beginning 
and  at  the  end  of  the  cycle,  and  in  particular  it  has  the  same 
amount  of  energy  in  it ;  and  therefore,  since  no  internal 
action  of  the  system  can  either  produce  or  destroy  energy, 
the  quantity  of  energy  which  enters  the  system  must  be 
equal  to  that  which  leaves  it  during  the  cycle. 

The  reason  for  believing  heat  not  to  be  a  substance 
is  that  it  can  be  generated,  so  that  the  quantity  of  it  may 
be  increased  to  any  extent,  and  it  can  also  be  destroyed, 
though  this  operation  requires  certain  conditions  to  be 
fulfilled. 

The  reason  for  believing  heat  to  be  a  form  of  energy  is 
that  heat  may  be  generated  by  the  application  of  work,  and 
that  for  every  unit  of  heat  which  is  generated  a  certain 
quantity  of  mechanical  energy  disappears.  Besides,  work 
may  be  done  by  the  action  of  heat,  and  for  every  foot- 
pound of  work  so  done  a  certain  quantity  of  heat  is  put  out 
of  existence. 

Now  when  the  appearance  of  one  thing  is  strictly  con- 
nected with  the  disappearance  of  another,  so  that  the 
amount  which  exists  of  the  one  thing  depends  on  and  can 
be  calculated  from  the  amount  of  the  other  which  has  dis- 
appeared, we  conclude  that  the  one  has  been  formed  at  the 
expense  of  the  other,  and  that  they  are  both  forms  of  the 
same  thing. 

Hence  we  conclude  that  heat  is  energy  in  a  peculiar 
form.  The  reasons  for  believing  heat  as  it  exists  in  a  hot 


94  Stresses  and  Strains. 

body  to  be  in  the  form  of  kinetic  energy — that  is,  that  the 
particles  of  the  hot  body  are  in  actual  though  invisible 
motion — will  be  discussed  afterwards. 


CHAPTER  V. 

ON  THE  MEASUREMENT  OF  PRESSURE   AND    OTHER  INTERNAL 
FORCES,    AND    OF   THE    EFFECTS   WHICH    THEY   PRODUCE. 

EVERY  force  acts  between  two  bodies  or  parts  of  bodies. 
If  we  are  considering  a  particular  body  or  system  of  bodies, 
then  those  forces  which  act  between  bodies  belonging  to  this 
system  and  bodies  not  belonging  to  the  system  are  called 
External  Forces,  and  those  which  act  between  the  different 
parts  of  the  system  itself  are  called  Internal  Forces. 

If  we  now  suppose  the  system  to  be  divided  in  imagina- 
tion into  two  parts,  we  may  consider  the  forces  external  to 
one  of  the  parts  to  be,  first,  those  which  act  between  that 
part  and  bodies  external  to  the  system,  and,  second,  those 
which  act  between  the  two  parts  of  the  system.  The  com- 
bined effect  of  these  forces  is  known  by  the  actual  motion 
or  rest  of  the  part  to  which  they  are  applied,  so  that,  if  we 
know  the  resultant  of  the  external  forces  on  each  part,  we 
can  find  that  of  the  internal  forces  acting  between  the  two 
parts. 

Thus,  if  we  consider  a  pillar  supporting  a  statue,  and 
imagine  the  pillar  divided  into  two  parts  by  a  horizontal 
plane  at  any  distance  from  the  ground,  the  internal  force 
between  the  two  parts  of  the  pillar  may  be  found  by  con- 
sidering the  weight  of  the  statue  and  that  part  of  the  pillar 
which  is  above  the  plane.  The  lower  part  of  the  pillar 
•presses  on  the  upper  part  with  a  force  which  exactly  counter- 
balances this  weight.  This  force  is  called  a  Pressure. 
In  the  same  way  we  may  find  the  internal  force  acting 
through  any  horizontal  section  of  a  rope  which  supports  a 


Pressures  and  Tensions.  95 

heavy  body  to  be  a  Tension  equal  to  the  weight  of  the 
heavy  body  and  of  the  part  of  the  rope  below  the  imaginary 
section. 

The  internal  force  in  the  pillar  is  called  Longitudinal 
Pressure,  and  that  in  the  rope  is  called  Longitudinal  Tension. 
If  this  pressure  or  tension  is  uniform  over  the  whole  hori- 
zontal section,  the  amount  of  it  per  square  inch  can  be 
found  by  dividing  the  whole  force  by  the  number  of  square 
inches  in  the  section. 

The  internal  forces  in  a  body  are  called  Stresses,  and 
longitudinal  pressure  and  tension  are  examples  of  particular 
kinds  of  stress.  It  is  shown  in  treatises  on  Elasticity  that 
the  most  general  kind  of  stress  at  any  point  of  a  body  may 
be  represented  by  three  longitudinal  pressures  or  tensions  in 
directions  at  right  angles  to  each  other. 

For  instance,  a  brick  in  a  wall  may  support  a  vertical 
pressure  depending  on  the  height  of  the  wall  above  it,  and 
also  a  horizontal  pressure  in  the  direction  of  the  length  of 
the  wall,  depending  on  the  thrust  of  an  arch  abutting  against 
the  wall,  while  in  the  direction  perpendicular  to  the  face  of 
the  wall  the  pressure  is  that  of  the  atmosphere. 

In  solid  bodies,  such  as  a  brick,  these  three  pressures  may 
be  all  independent,  their  magnitude  being  limited  only  by 
the  strength  of  the  solid,  which  will  break  down  if  the  force 
applied  to  it  exceeds  a  certain  amount. 

In  fluids,  the  pressures  in  all  directions  must  be  equal, 
because  the  very  slightest  difference  between  the  pressures 
in  the  three  directions  is  sufficient  to  set  the  fluid  in  motion. 

The  subject  of  fluid  pressure  is  so  important  to  what 
follows  that  I  think  it  worth  while,  at  the  risk  of  repeating 
what  the  student  ought  to  know,  to  state  what  we  mean  by 
a  fluid,  and  to  show  from  the  definition  that  the  pressures  in 
all  directions  are  equal. 

DEFINITION  OF  A  FLUID. — A  fluid  is  a  body  the  contiguous 
parts  of  which  act  on  one  another  ivith  a  pressure  which  is 
perpendicular  to  the  interface  which  separates  those  parts. 


96  Stresses  and  Strains. 

Since  the  pressure  is  entirely  perpendicular  to  the  sur- 
face, there  can  be  no  friction  between  the  parts  of  a  fluid 
in  contact. 

Theorem. — The  pressures  in  any  two  directions  at  a  point 

of  a  fluid  are  equal.     For,  let  the  plane 

of  the  paper  be   that  of  the   two  given 

/Q          directions,  and  draw  an  isosceles  triangle 

JX^^x"     whose  sides  are  perpendicular  to  the  two 

f       Jx^X          directions  respectively,  and  consider  the 

^^  \  equilibrium  of  a  small  triangular  prism 

R  of  which  this  triangle  is  the  base.  Let 
P  Q  be  the  pressures  perpendicular  to  the  sides,  and  R 
that  perpendicular  to  the  base.  Then,  since  these  three 
forces  are  in  equilibrium,  and  since  R  makes  equal  angles 
with  P  and  Q,  p  and  Q  must  be  equal.  But  the  faces  on 
which  P  and  Q  act  are  also  equal ;  therefore  the  pressures 
referred  to  unit  of  area  on  these  faces  are  equal,  which  was 
to  be  proved. 

A  great  many  substances  may  be  found  which  perfectly 
fulfil  this  definition  of  a  fluid  when  they  are  at  rest,  and  they 
are  therefore  called  fluids.  But  no  existing  fluid  fulfils  the 
definition  when  it  is  in  motion.  In  a  fluid  in  motion  the 
pressures  at  a  point  may  be  greater  in  one  direction  than 
in  another,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  the  force  between 
two  parts  may  not  be  perpendicular  to  the  interface  which 
separates  those  parts. 

If  a  fluid  could  be  found  which  fulfilled  the  definition 
when  in  motion  as  well  as  when  at  rest,  it  would  be  called  a 
Perfect  Fluid.  All  actual  fluids  are  imperfect,  and  exhibit 
the  phenomenon  of  internal  friction  or  viscosity,  by  which 
their  motion  after  being  stirred  about  in  a  vessel  is  gradually 
stopped,  and  the  energy  of  the  motion  is  converted  into 
heat. 

The  degree  of  viscosity  varies  from  that  of  tar  to  that  of 
water,  or  ether,  or  hydrogen  gas,  but  no  actual  fluid  is  perfect 
in  the  sense  of  the  definition  when  in  motion. 


Pressure  in  a  Fluid.  97 

The  pressure  at  any  point  of  a  fluid  is  the  ratio  of  the 
whole  pressure  on  a  small  surface  to  the  area  of  that  surface 
when  the  area  of  the  surface  is  made  to  diminish  indefinitely, 
but  so  that  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  surface  always  coincides 
with  the  given  point. 

This  pressure  is  sometimes  called  hydrostatic  pressure,  to 
distinguish  it  from  longitudinal  pressure.  Both  kinds  of 
pressure  are  measured  by  the  number  of  units  of  force  in  the 
pressure  on  unit  of  area ;  for  instance,  in  pounds'  weight  on 
the  square  inch  or  square  foot,  and  in  kilogrammes'  weight 
on  the  square  metre.  Both  these  measures  are  gravitation 
measures,  and  must  be  multiplied  by  the  value  of  the  inten- 
sity of  gravity  to  reduce  them  to  absolute  measures. 

Pressures  are  also  measured  in  terms  of  the  height  of  a 
column  of  water  or  of  mercury,  which  would  produce  by  its 
weight  an  equal  pressure.  Thus  a  pressure  of  16  feet  of 
water  is  nearly  equal  to  1,000  pounds'  weight  on  the  square 
foot,  and  a  pressure  of  4  inches  of  water  is  more  nearly  equal 
to  10 1  grains'  weight  on  the  square  inch. 

In  the  metrical  system  the  pressure  of  water  on  a  surface 
at  an)  depth  is  expressed  by  the  product  of  the  depth  into 
the  area  of  the  surface.  If  we  employ  the  metre  as  the 
measure  of  length,  the  pressure  will  be  expressed  in  tonnes' 
weight,  but  if  we  use  the  decimetre,  centimetre,  or  millimetre, 
the  pressure  will  be  expressed  in  kilogrammes,  grammes, 
or  milligrammes  respectively,  in  gravitation  measure. 

The  density  of  mercury  at  o°  C  is  i3'596  times  that  of 
water  at  4°  C.  Hence  the  pressure  due  to  a  given  depth  of 
mercury  is  about  i3'6  times  that  of  an  equal  depth  of  water. 

The  Barometer.—  The  pressure  of  the  air  is  generally 
measured  by  means  of  the  mercurial  barometer.  This  baro- 
meter consists  of  a  glass  tube  closed  at  one  end  and  filled 
with  mercury,  from  which  all  air  and  moisture  are  expelled 
by  boiling  it  in  the  tube.  The  tube  is  then  placed  Avith  its 
open  end.  in  a  vessel  of  mercury,  and  its  closed  end  raised 
till  the  tube  is  vertical.  The  mercury  is  found  to  stand  at 

H 


98  Stresses  and  Strains. 

a  certain  level  in  the  tube,  the  height  of  which  above  the 
level  of  the  mercury  in  the  vessel  or  cistern  is  called  the 
height  of  the  barometer. 

The  surface  of  the  mercury  in  the  cistern  is  exposed  to 
the  pressure  of  the  air,  while  the  surface  of  the  mercury  in 
the  tube  is  exposed  only  to  the  pressure  of  whatever  is  in 
the  tube  above  it.  The  only  known  substance  which  can 
be  there  is  the  vapour  of  mercury,  the  pressure  of  which  at 
ordinary  temperatures  is  so  small  that  it  may  be  neglected, 
so  that  the  pressure  of  the  air  may  be  measured  by  that 
due  to  the  difference  of  level  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube 
and  in  the  cistern. 

The  pressure  of  the  atmosphere  is,  as  we  know,  very 
variable,  and  is  different  in  different  places ;  but  for  various 
purposes  it  is  convenient  to  use,  as  a  large  unit  of  pressure, 
a  pressure  not  very  different  from  the  average  atmospheric 
pressure  at  the  mean  level  of  the  sea.  This  unit  of  pressure 
is  called  an  atmosphere,  and  is  used  in  measuring  pressures 
in  steam-engines  and  boilers.  Its  exact  value  in  the  metrical 
system  is  the  pressure  due  to  a  depth  of  760  millimetres  of 
mercury  at  o°  C.  at  Paris,  where  the  force  of  gravity  is 
9'8o868  metres.  This  is  equal  to  1*033  kilogrammes'  weight 
on  the  square  centimetre.  In  absolute  measure  it  is  equal 
to  1,013,237,  the  gramme,  the  centimetre,  and  the  second 
being  the  fundamental  units. 

In  the  British  system  an  atmosphere  is  defined  as  the 
pressure  due  to  a  depth  of  29*905  inches  of  mercury  at 
32°  F.  at  London,  where  the  force  of  gravity  is  32*1889  feet, 
and  is,  roughly,  14!  pounds'  weight  on  the  square  inch.  It  is 
therefore  0-99968  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  metrical  system. 

ON   THE   ALTERATION   OF   THE    DIMENSIONS   AND-  VOLUME 
OF   BODIES    BY  MECHANICAL   FORCES   AND    BY   HEAT. 

We  have  seen  that  effects  of  the  same  kind  in  changing 
the  form  or  volume  of  bodies  are  produced  by  mechanical 
force  and  by  heat.  We  cannot  therefore  fully  understand 


Strains.  99 

the  effects  of  heat  alone  on  these  bodies  without  at  the  same 
time  considering  those  of  mechanical  force. 

We  have  first  to  explain,  from  a  purely  geometrical  point 
of  view,  the  various  kinds  of  change  of  form  of  which  a  body 
is  capable,  considering  only  those  cases  in  which  every  part 
of  the  body  undergoes  a  similar  change  of  form.  We  shall 
use  the  word  strain  to  express  generally  any  alteration  of 
form  of  a  body. 

Longitudinal  Strain. — Suppose  the  body  to  be  elongated 
or  compressed  in  one  direction  only,  so  that  if  two  points 
in  the  body  lie  in  a  line  parallel  to  this  direction,  their 
distance  will  be  increased  or  diminished  in  a  certain  ratio, 
but  if  the  line  joining  the  points  be  perpendicular  to  this 
direction  the  length  of  the  line  will  not  be  altered. 

This  is  called  longitudinal  extension  or  compression,  or 
more  generally  longitudinal  strain,  and  is  measured  by  the 
fraction  of  its  original  length  by  which  any  longitudinal  line 
in  the  body  is  elongated  or  contracted. 

General  Strain. — Such  an  alteration  of  the  form  of  the 
body  may  take  place  simultaneously  or  successively  in 
three  directions  at  right  angles  to  each  other.  This  system 
of  three  longitudinal  strains  is  shown  in  treatises  on  the 
motion  of  continuous  bodies  to  be  the  most  general  kind  of 
strain  of  which  a  body  is  capable. 

We  shall,  however,  only  consider  two  cases  in  particular. 

ist.  Isotropic  Strain. — When  the  strains  in  the  three 
rlirections  at  right  angles  to  each  other  are  all  equal,  the 
form  of  the  body  remains  similar  to  itself,  and  it  expands 
or  contracts  equally  in  all  directions,  as  most  solid  bodies  do 
when  heated. 

.  Since  each  of  the  three  longitudinal  strains  of  which  this 
strain  is  compounded  increases  the  volume  by  a  fraction 
of  itself  equal  to  the  value  of  the  longitudinal  strain,  it 
follows  that  when  each  of  the  strains  is  a  very  small  frac- 
tion, the  total  increment  of  volume  is  equal  to  the  original 
volume  multiplied  by  the  algebraical  sum  of  the  three  strains. 

H  2 


ioo  Stresses  and  Strains. 

The  ratio  of  the  increment  of  volume  to  the  original  volume  is 
called  the  voluminal  expansion  when  positive,  or  the  voluminal 
contraction  when  negative,  and  it  appears,  from  what  we  have 
said,  that  when  the  strains  are  small  the  voluminal  expansion 
is  equal  to  the  sum  of  the  longitudinal  extensions,  or,  when 
these  are  equal,  to  three  times  the  longitudinal  extension. 

2nd.  Shearing  Strain. — The  other  particular  case  is  when 
the  dimensions  of  the  body  are  extended  in  one  direction  in 
the  ratio  of  a  to  i,  and  contracted  in  a  perpendicular  direc- 
tion in  the  ratio  of  i  to  a.  In  this  case  there  is  no  altera- 
tion of  volume,  but  the  body  is  distorted. 

WORK   DONE    BY   A   STRESS   ON    A    BODY   WHOSE    FORM    IS 
CHANGING    OR   IS    UNDERGOING   A   STRAIN. 

We  shall  in  the  first  place  suppose  that  the  stress  con- 
tinues constant  during  the  change  of  form  which  we  consider. 
If  during  a  considerable  change  of  form  the  stress  undergoes 
considerable  change,  we  may  divide  the  whole  operation  into 
parts,  during  each  of  which  we  may  regard  the  stress  as 
constant,  and  find  the  total  work  by  summation. 

The  general  rule  is  that,  if  the  stress  and  the  strain  are  of 
the  same  type,  the  work  done  on  unit  of  volume  during  any 
strain  is  the  product  of  the  strain  into  the  average  value  of 
the  stress. 

If,  however,  the  stress  be  of  a  type  conjugate  to  the  strain, 
no  work  is  done. 

Thus,  if  the  stress  be  a  longitudinal  one,  we  must  multiply 
die  average  value  of  the  stress  by  the  longitudinal  strain  in 
the  same  direction,  and  the  result  is  not  affected  by  the 
magnitude  of  the  longitudinal  strains  in  directions  at  right 
angles  to  the  stress. 

If  the  stress  be  a  hydrostatic  pressure,  we  must  multiply 
the  average  value  of  this  pressure  by  the  voluminal  com- 
pression to  find  the  work  done  on  the  body  per  unit  of 
volume,  and  the  result  is  not  affected  by  any  strain  of  dis- 
tortion which  does  not  change  the  volume  of  the  body. 


Work  done  on  a  Fluid.  101 

Hence  the  work  done  by  external  forces  on  a  fluid  when 
its  volume  is  diminished  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the 
average  pressure  into  the  diminution  of  volume,  and  if 
the  fluid  expands  and  overcomes  the  resistance  of  external 
forces,  the  work  done  by  the  fluid  is  measured  by  the  pro- 
duct of  the  increase  of  volume,  into  the  average  pressure 
during  that  increase. 

The  consideration  of  the  work  gained  or  lost  during  the 
change  of  volume  of  a  fluid  is  so  important  that  we  shall 
calculate  it  from  the  beginning. 

WORK   DONE    BY   A    PISTON    ON    A    FLUID. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  fluid  is  in  communication  with  a 
cylinder  in  which  a  piston  is  free  FIG.  9. 

to  slide. 

Let  the  area  of  the  face  of  the 
piston  be  denoted  by  A. 

Let  the  pressure  of  the  fluid 
be  denoted  by/  on  unit  of  area. 

Then  the  whole  pressure  of  the  fluid  on  the  face  of  the 
piston  will  be  A/,  and  if  P  is  the  external  force  which  keeps 
the  piston  in  equilibrium,  P  =  A/.  Now  let  the  piston  be 
pressed  inwards  against  the  fluid  through  a  distance  x. 
The  volume  of  the  cylinder  occupied  by  the  fluid  will  be 
diminished  by  a  volume  v  =  A.V,  because  the  volume  of  a 
cylinder  is  equal  to  the  area  of  its  base  multiplied  by  its 
height. 

If  the  force  P  continues  uniform,  or  if  P  is  the  average 
value  of  the  external  force  during  this  motion,  the  work 
done  by  the  external  force  will  be  w  =  p.r. 

If  we  put  for  P  its  value  in  terms  of/,  the  pressure  of  the 
fluid  per  unit  of  area,  this  becomes 


w  = 

and  if  we  remember  that  AX  is  equal  to  v,  this  becomes 
w  =  v/, 


IO2  Stresses  and  Strains. 

or  the  work  done  by  the  piston  against  the  fluid  is  equal  to 
the  diminution  of  the  volume  of  the  fluid  multiplied  by  the 
average  value  of  the  hydrostatic  pressure. 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  result  is  independent  of  the 
area  of  the  piston,  and  of  the  form  and  capacity  of  the 
vessel  with  which  the  cylinder  communicates. 

If,  for  convenience,  we  suppose  that  the  area  of  the  piston 
is  unity,  then  putting  A  =  i  we  shall  have  P  =/  and  v  =  x, 
so  that  the  linear  distance  travelled  by  the  piston  is  nu-- 
merically  equal  to  the  volume  displaced. 


ON    INDICATOR   DIAGRAMS. 

I    shall    now    describe    a 
method  of  studying  the  action 
TJ  of  a  fluid  of  variable  volume, 

which  was  invented  by  James 
Watt,  as  a  practical  method  of 
determining  the  work  done  by 
the  steam-engine,  and  of  which 
the  construction  has  been 
gradually  perfected,  till  it  is 

„        now  capable  of  tracing  every 

part  of  the  action  of  the  steam 
in  the  most  rapidly  working  engines. 

At  present,  however,  I  shall  use  this  method  as  a  means 
of  explaining  and  representing  to  the  eye  the  working  of  a 
fluid.  This  use  of  the  indicator  diagram,  which  was  intro- 
duced by  Clapeyron,  has  been  greatly  developed  by  Rankine 
in  his  work  on  the  steam-engine. 

Let  o  v  be  a  horizontal  straight  line,  and  o/  a  vertical 
line.  On  o  v  (which  we  shall  call  the  line  of  volumes)  take 
distances  o  a,  o  £,  o  c  to  represent  the  volume  occupied  by 
the  fluid  at  different  times,  and  at  a  b  c  erect  perpendiculars 
a  A,  b  B,  c  c,  representing,  on  a  convenient  scale,  the  pressure 
of  the  fluid  at  these  different  times. 


Indicator  Diagram.  103 

(For  instance,  we  may  suppose  that,  in  the  scale  of  volumes, 
one  inch,  measured  horizontally,  represents  a  volume  equal 
to  a  cubic  foot ;  and  that  in  the  scale  of  pressures,  one  inch, 
measured  vertically,  represents  a  pressure  of  1,000  pounds' 
weight  on  the  square  foot.) 

Let  us  now  suppose  that  the  volume  increases  from  o  a 
to  o  I',  while  the  pressure  remains  constant,  so  that  a  A  —  b  B. 

Then  the  increase  of  volume  is  measured  by  a  b;  and  the 
pressure  which  is  overcome  by  the  expansion  of  the  fluid  by 
a  A  or  If  B,  so  that  the  work  done  by  the  fluid  is  represented 
by  the  product  of  these  quantities,  or  a  b.a  A,  that  is,  the 
area  of  the  rectangle  A  a  b  B. 

On  the  scale  which  we  have  assumed,  every  square  inch 
of  the  area  of  the  figure  A  L  b  a  represents  1,000  foot-pounds 
of  work. 

We  have  supposed  the  pressure  to  remain  constant  during 
the  change  of  volume.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  but  if  the 
pressure  changes  from  b  B  to  c  c,  while  the  volume  changes 
from  o  b  to  or,  then  if  we  take  b  c  small  enough,  we  may 
suppose  the  pressure  to  change  uniformly  from  the  one 
value  to  the  other,  so  that  we  may  take  the  mean  value  of 
the  pressure  to  be  J(B  b  +  c  c\  Multiplying  this  by  b  c, 
we  get  ^(B  b  +  c  c}  b  c,  which  is  the  well-known  expression 
for  the  area  of  the  strip  B  c  c  b,  supposing  B  c  a  straight 
line. 

The  work  done  by  the  fluid  is  therefore  still  equal  to  the 
area  enclosed  by  B  c,  the  two  vertical  lines  from  its  extre- 
mities, and  the  horizontal  line  o  v. 

In  general,  if  the  volume  and  pressure  of  the  fluid  are  made 
to  vary  in  any  manner  whatever,  and  if  a  point  P  be  made  at 
the  same  time  to  move  so  that  its  horizontal  distance  from  the 
line  o  p  represents  the  volume  which  the  fluid  occupies  at 
that  instant,  while  its  vertical  distance  from  o  v  represents 
the  hydrostatic  pressure  of  the  fluid  at  the  same  instant,  and 
if,  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  path  traced  by  P,  vertical 
lines  be  drawn  to  meet  o  Z',  then,  if  the  path  of  p  does  not" 


104 


Stresses  and  Strains. 


intersect  itself,  the  area  between  these  boundaries  represents 
the  work  done  by  the  fluid  against^  external  forces,  if  it 
lies  on  the  right-hand  side  of  the  path  of  the  tracing 
point.  If  the  area  lies  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  path,  it 
represents  the  work  done  by  the  external  forces  on  the 
fluid. 

If  the  path  of  P  returns  into  itself  so  as  to  form  a  loop  or 

FIG.  IT. 


Richards's  Indicator. 

closed  figure,  then  the  vertical  lines  at  the  beginning  and  end 
of  the  path  will  coincide,  so  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  draw 
them,  and  the  work  will  be  represented  by  the  area  of  the 
loop  itself.  If  P  in  its  circuit  goes  round  the  loop  in  the 
direction  of  the  hands  of  a  watch,  then  the  area  represents 
the  work  done  by  the  fluid  against  external  forces  ;  but  if  P 
goes  round  the  loop  in  the  opposite  direction,  the  area  of 


A  ction  of  the  Indicator.  105 

Ihe  loop  represents  the  work  done  by  the  external  forces  on 
the  fluid. 

In  the  indicator  as  constructed  by  Watt  and  improved  by 
McNaught  and  Richards,  the  steam  or  other  fluid  is  put  in 
connection  with  a  small  cylinder  containing  a  piston.  When 
the  fluid  presses  this  piston  and  raises  it,  the  piston  presses 
against  a  spiral  spring,  so  constructed  that  the  distance 
through  which  the  spring  is  compressed  is  proportional 
to  the  pressure  on  the  piston.  In  this  way  the  height  of  the 
piston  of  the  indicator  is  at  all  times  a  measure  of  the  pressure 
of  the  fluid. 

The  piston  also  carries  a  pencil,  the  point  of  which  presses 
lightly  against  a  sheet  of  paper  which  is  wrapped  round  a 
vertical  cylinder  capable  of  turning  round  its  axis. 

This  cylinder  is  connected  with  the  working  piston  of  the 
engine,  or  with  some  part  of  the  engine  which  moves  along 
with  the  piston,  in  such  a  way  that  the  angle  through  which 
the  cylinder  turns  is  always  proportional  to  the  distance 
through  which  the  working  piston  has  moved. 

If  the  indicator  is  not  connected  with  the  steam  pipe, 
the  cylinder  will  turn  beneath  the  point  of  the  pencil,  and 
a  horizontal  line  will  be  drawn  on  the  paper.  This  line 
corresponds  to  o  v,  and  is  called  the  line  of  no  pressure. 

But  if  the  steam  be  admitted  below  the  indicator  piston, 
the  pencil  will  move  up  and  down,  while  the  paper  moves 
horizontally  beneath  it,  and  the  combined  motion  will  trace 
out  a  line  on  the  paper,  which  is  called  an  indicator  diagram. 

When  the  engine  works  regularly,  so  that  each  stroke  is 
similar  to  the  last,  the  pencil  will  trace  out  the  same  curve 
at  every  stroke,  and  by  examining  this  curve  we  may  learn 
much  about  the  action  of  the  engine.  In  particular,  the  area 
of  the  curve  represents  the  amount  of  work  done  by  the 
steam  at  each  stroke  of  the  engine.  /\ 

If  the  indicator  had  been  connected  with  a  pump,  in 
which  the  external  forces  do  work  on  the  fluid,  the  tracing 
point  would  move  in  the  opposite  direction  round  the 


Io6  Stresses  and  Strains. 

diagram,  and  its  area  would  indicate  the  amount  of  work 
done  on  the  fluid  during  the  stroke. 

Hitherto  we  have  confined  our  attention  to  the  work  done 
by  the  pressure  on  the  piston,  and  have  not  been  concerned 
with  the  cause  of  the  alteration  of  volume  of  the  fluid.  The 
increase  of  volume  may,  for  anything  we  know,  arise  from 
an  additional  supply  being  introduced  into  the  cylinder,  as 
when  steam  is  introduced  from  the  boiler,  and  the  dimi- 
nution of  volume  may  arise  from  the  escape  of  the  fluid 
from  the  cylinder. 

As  we  are  now  going  to  use  the  diagram  for  the  purpose 
of  explaining  the  properties  of  bodies  when  acted  on  by  heat 
and  by  mechanical  force,  we  shall  suppose  that  the  body, 
whether  fluid  or  partly  solid,  is  placed  in  a  cylinder  with 
one  end  closed,  and  that  its  volume  is  measured  by  the 
distance  of  the  piston  from  the  closed  end  of  the  cylinder. 

If  at  any  instant  the  volume 

p  FlG'  "•  of  the  body  is  v  and  its  pres- 

E  v  sure/,  we  represent  this  fact 

by  means  of  the  point  p  in  the 

\  diagram,    drawing  o   L  along 

\  the  line  of  volumes  to  reprc- 

\  sent  vt  and  L  p  vertical  to  re- 


M  L 


present  /. 

In  this  way  the  position  of 
a  point  in  the  diagram  may  be 
made  to  indicate  the  volume 
and  the  pressure  of  a  body  at 
any  instant. 

Now  let  the  pressure  be  increased,  the  temperature  re- 
maining the  same,  then  the  volume  of  the  fluid  will  be 
diminished.  (It  is  manifest  that  an  increase  of  pressure  can 
never  produce  an  increase  of  volume,  for  in  that  case  the 
force  would  produce  a  motion  in  the  contrary  direction  to 
that  in  which  it  acts,  and  we  should  have  a  source  of  inex- 
haustible energy.) 


Elasticity.  107 

Let  the  pressure,  therefore,  increase  from  o  F  to  o  G,  and 
let  the  consequent  diminution  of  volume  be  from  o  L  to 
o  M,  and  complete  the  rectangle  o  G  Q  M. 

Then  the  point  p  indicates  the  original  and  Q  the  final 
condition  of  the  fluid  with  respect  to  pressure  and  volume, 
and  all  the  intermediate  states  of  the  fluid  will  be  repre- 
sented by  points  in  a  line,  straight  or  curved,  which  joins  p 
and  Q. 

The  work  done  by  the  pressure  on  the  fluid  is  represented 
by  the  area  of  the  figure  p  Q  M  L,  which  is  on  the  left  hand 
of  the  tracing  point  as  it  moves  along  p  Q. 

If  p  F  and  Q  M  intersect  in  R,  then  p  R  represents  the 
actual  diminution  of  volume,  and  R  Q  the  actual  increase  of 
pressure.  The  actual  volume  is  represented  by  F  p,  so  that 
the  voluminal  compression  is  represented  by  the  ratio  of  P  R 
to  F  P. 

DEFINITION  OF  THE  ELASTICITY  OF  A  FLUID.  —  The 
elasticity  of  a  fluid  under  any  given  conditions  is  the  i  a/to 
of  any  small  increase  of  pressure  to  the  voluminal  compression 
hereby  produced. 

Since  the  voluminal  compression  is  a  numerical  quantity, 
the  elasticity  is  a  quantity  of  the  same  kind  as  a  pressure. 

To  express  the  elasticity  of  the  fluid  by  means  of  the 
diagram,  join  p  Q  by  a  straight  line,  and  produce  it  till  it 
meets  the  vertical  line  op  in  E;  then  F  E  is  a  pressure  equal 
to  the  elasticity  of  the  fluid  in  the  state  represented  by  pr 
.and  under  conditions  which  cause  its  state  to  vary  in  3 
manner  represented  by  the  line  P  Q. 

For  it  is  plain  that  F  E  is  to  R  Q  in  the  ratio  of  p  F  to  p  R, 

R  o        increment  of  pressure         ,    A.  . 
or  F  E  =  — -^= — -  -- — - —  —  =  elasticity. 

p  R       voluminal  compression 

P  F 

Hence  if  the  relation  between  the  volume  and  the  pies- 
sure  of  a  fluid  under  certain  conditions,  as  for  instance  at  a 
given  temperature,  is  represented  by  a  curve  traced  out  by  p, 
the  elasticity  of  the  fluid  when  in  the  state  represented  by  p 


io8  Isothermal  Curves. 

may  be  found  by  drawing  p  E  a  tangent  to  the  curve  at  P, 
and  p  F  a  horizontal  line.  The  portion  F  E  of  the  vertical 
line  op  cut  off  between  these  lines  represents,  on  the  scale 
of  pressures,  the  elasticity  of  the  fluid. 

We  have  hitherto  supposed  that  the  temperature  of  the 
body  remains  the  same  during  its  compression  from  the 
volume  P  F  to  the  volume  Q  G.  This  is  the  most  common 
supposition  when  the  elasticity  of  a  fluid  is  to  be  measured. 
But  in  most  bodies  a  compression  produces  a  rise  of  tempe- 
rature, and  if  the  heat  is  not  allowed  to  escape,  the  effect  of 
this  will  be  to  make  the  increment  of  pressure  greater  than 
in  the  case  of  constant  temperature.  Hence  every  substance 
has  two  elasticities,  one  corresponding  to  constant  tempera- 
ture, and  the  other  corresponding  to  the  case  where  no  heat 
is  allowed  to  escape.  The  first  value  is  applicable  to  stresses 
and  strains  which  are  long  continued,  so  that  the  substance 
acquires  the  temperature  of  surrounding  bodies/  The 
second  value  is  applicable  to  the  case  of  rapidly  changing 
forces,  as  in  the  case  of  the  vibrations  of  bodies  which 
produce  sounds,  in  which  there  is  not  time  for  the  tempe- 
rature to  be  equalised  by  conduction.  The  elasticity  in 
these  cases  is  always  greater  than  in  the  case  of  uniform 
temperature. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

ON  LINES   OF   EQUAL  TEMPERATURE,  OR   ISOTHERMAL   LINES 
ON    THE    INDICATOR   DIAGRAM. 

IF  the  pressure  is  made  to  vary  while  the  temperature  re- 
mains constant,  the  volume  will  diminish  as  the  pressure 
increases,  and  the  point  p  will  trace  out  a  line  in  the  diagram 
which  is  called  a  line  of  equal  temperature,  or  an  isothermal 
line.  By  means  of  this  line  we  can  show  the  whole  behaviour 


Their  Construction.  109 

of  the  substance  under  various  pressures  at  that  particular 
temperature. 

By  making  experiments  on  the  substance  at  other  tern* 
peratures,  and  drawing  the  isothermal  lines  belonging  to 
these  temperatures,  we  can  express  all  the  relations  between 
the  pressure,  volume,  and  temperature  of  the  substance. 

In  the  diagram,  each  isothermal  line  should  be  marked 
with  the  temperature  to  which  it  corresponds  in  degrees, 
and  the  lines  should  be  drawn  for  every  degree,  or  for  every 
ten  or  every  hundred  degrees,  according  to  the  purpose  for 
which  the  diagram  is  intended. 

When  the  volume  and  the  pressure  are  known,  the 
temperature  is  a  determinate  quantity,  and  it  is  easy  to  see 
ho\v  from  any  two  of  these  three  quantities  we  can  deter- 
mine the  third.  Thus  if  the  curved  lines  in  the  diagram 
are  the  lines  of  equal  temperature,  the  temperature  cor- 
responding to  each  being  indicated  by  the  numeral  at  the 
end  of  the  line,  we  can  solve  three  problems  by  means  of 
this  diagram. 

1.  Given  the  pressure  and  the  volume,  to  find  the  tempe- 
rature. 

Lay  off  o  L  on  the  line  of  volumes  to  represent  the  given 
volume,  and  o  F  on  the  line  of  pressures  to  represent  the 
given  pressure,  then  draw  F  p  horizontal  and  L  p  vertical,  to 
determine  the  point  P.  If  the  point  p  falls  on  one  of  the 
lines  of  equal  temperature,  the  numeral  attached  to  that  line 
indicates  the  temperature.  If  the  point  p  falls  between  two 
of  the  lines,  we  must  estimate  its  distance  from  the  two 
nearest  lines,  and  then  as  the  sum  of  these  distances  is  to  the 
distance  from  the  lower  line  of  temperature,  so  is  the  dif- 
ference of  temperature  of  the  two  lines  to  the  excess  of  the 
true  temperature  above  that  of  the  lower  line. 

2.  Given  the  volume  and  temperature  to  find  the  pres- 
sure. 

Lay  off  o  L  to  represent  the  volume  and  draw  L  p  vertical, 
and  let  P  be  the  point  where  this  line  cuts  the  line  of  the 


no 


Isothermal  Curves. 

temperature.      Then   L  p   represents    the    required 
pressure. 

3.  Given    the    pressure    and   temperature,   to   find    the 
volume. 

FIG.  13. 

OS 


Lay  off  o  F  to  represent  the  pressure  and  draw  F  r  hori- 
zontal till  it  meets  the  line  of  the  given  temperature  in  p, 
then  F  P  represents  the  required  volume. 


ON   THE   FORM    OF  THE    ISOTHERMAL    CURVES    IN    DIFFERENT 
CASES. 

The  Gaseous  State. 

If  the  substance  is  in  the  gaseous  state,  then  it  is  easy  to 
draw  the  isothermal  curves  by  taking  account  of  the  laws  of 
Boyle  and  Charles. 

By  Boyle's  law  the  product  of  the  volume  and  the  pres- 


Their  Cliaractcristics.  1 1 1 

sure  is  always  the  same  for  the  same  temperature.  Hence, 
in  the  curve,  the  area  of  the  rectangle  o  L  p  F  will  be  the 
same  provided  p  be  a  point  in  the  same  isothermal  curve. 

The  curve  which  has  this  property  is  known  in  geometry 
by  the  name  of  the  rectangular  hyperbola,  the  lines  o  v  and 
o/  being  the  asymptotes  of  the  hyperbolas  in  fig.  13.  The 
asymptotes  are  lines  such  that  a  point  travelling  along  the 
curve  in  either  direction  continually  approaches  one  or 
other  of  the  asymptotes,  but  never  reaches  it.  The  physical 
interpretation  of  this  is  that  if  a  gas  fulfils  Boyle's  lav/,  and 
if  the  temperature  remain  the  same — 

1.  Suppose  we  travel  along  the  curve  in  the  direction 
leading,  toward  o  /,  that  is  to  say,  suppose  the  pressure 
is  gradually   increased,  then   the   volume   will   continually 
diminish,  but  always  slower  and  slower;  for,  however  much 
we  increase  the  pressure,  we  can  never  reduce  the  volume  to 
nothing,  so  that  the  isothermal  line  will  never  reach  the  line 
o/,  though  it  continually  approaches  it.     At  the  same  time, 
if  Boyle's  law  is  fulfilled  we  can  always,  by  doubling  the 
pressure,  reduce  the  volume  to  one  half,  so  that  by  a  suffi- 
cient increase  of  pressure  the  volume  may  be  reduced  till  it 
is  smaller  than  any  prescribed  quantity. 

2.  Suppose  we   travel  in  the  other  direction  along  the 
curve,  that  is  to  say,  suppose  we  increase  the  volume  of  the 
vessel  which  contains  the  gas,  then  the  point  p  approaches 
nearer  and  nearer  to  the  line  o  v,  but  never  actually  reaches 
it.     This  shows  that  the  gas  will  always  expand  so  as  to  fill 
the  vessel,  and  press  upon  it  with  a  force  represented  by  the 
distance  from  o  v,  and  this  pressure,  though  it  diminishes  as 
the  vessel  is   enlarged,  will  never  be  reduced  to  nothing, 
however  large  the  vessel  may  become. 

Elasticity  of  a  Perfect  Gas. — Another  property  of  the 
hyperbola  is  that  if  p  E  be  drawn  a  tangent  to  the  curve 
at  P  till  it  meets  the  asymptote,  F  E  =  o  F.  Now  F  E 
represents  the  elasticity  of  the  substance,  and  o  F  the  pres- 
sure. Hence  the  elasticity  of  a  perfect  gas  is  numerically 


H2  IsotJicrmal  Curves. 

equal  to  the  pressure,  when  the  temperature  is  supposed  to 
remain  constant  during  the  compression. 

The  Liquid  Slate. 

In  most  liquids,  the  compression  produced  by  the  pres- 
sures which  we  are  able  to  apply  is  exceedingly  small.  In 
the  case  of  water,  for  example,  under  ordinary  circumstances 
as  to  temperature,  the  application  of  a  pressure  equal  to  one 
atmosphere  produces  a  compression  of  about  46  millionth 
parts  of  the  volume,  or  o'oooo46.  Hence  in  drawing  an 
indicator  diagram  for  a  liquid  we  must  represent  changes  of 
volume  on  a  much  larger  scale  than  in  the  case  of  gases,  if 
the  diagram  is  to  have  any  visible  features  at  all.  The 
most  convenient  way  is  to  suppose  the  line  o  L  to  represent, 
not  the  whole  volume,  but  the  excess  of  the  volume  above  a 
thousand  or  a  million  of  the  units  we  employ. 

It  is  manifest  that  the  relation  between  the  pressure  and 
the  volume  of  any  substance  must  be  such  that  no  pressure, 
however  great,  can  reduce  the  volume  to  nothing.  Hence 
the  isothermal  lines  cannot  be  straight  lines,  for  a  straight 
line,  however  slightly  inclined  to  the  line  of  no  volumes  o  F, 
and  however  distant  from  it,  must  cut  that  line  somewhere. 
The  limited  range  of  pressures  which  we  are  able  to  produce 
does  not  in  some  cases  cause  sufficient  change  of  volume  to 
indicate  the  curvature  of  the  isothermal  lines.  We  may 
suppose  that  for  the  small  portion  we  are  able  to  observe 
they  are  nearly  straight  lines. 

The  expansion  due  to  an  increase  of  temperature  is  also 
much  smaller  in  the  case  of  liquids  than  in  the  case  of 
gases. 

If,  therefore,  we  were  to  draw  the  indicator  diagram  of  a 
liquid  on  the  same  scale  as  that  of  a  gas,  the  isothermal 
lines  would  consist  of  a  number  of  lines  very  close  together, 
nearly  vertical,  but  very  slightly  inclined  towards  the  line  o  F. 

If,  however,  we  retain  the  scale  of  pressures  and  greatly 
magnify  the  scale  of  volumes,  the  isothermal  lines  will  be 


Saturated  Vapour.  113 

more  inclined  to  the  vertical  and  wider  apart,  but  still  very 
nearly  straight  lines.  Liquids,  however,  which  are  near  the 
critical  point  described  at  the  end  of  this  chapter  are  more 
compressible  than  even  a  gas. 

The  Solid  State. 

In  solid  bodies  the  compressibility  anJ  the  expansion  by 
heat  are  in  general  smaller  than  in  liquids.  Their  indicator 
diagrams  will  therefore  have  the  same  general  characteristics 
as  those  of  liquids. 


INDICATOR   DIAGRAM   OF   A   SUBSTANCE   PART   OF   WHICH 
IS   LIQUID   AND   PART  VAPOUR. 

Let  us  suppose  that  a  pound  of  water  is  placed  in  a  vessel 
and  brought  to  a  given  temperature,  say  212°  F.,  and  that 
by  means  of  a  piston  the  capacity  of  the  vessel  is  made 
larger  or  smaller,  the  temperature  remaining  the  same.  If 
we  suppose  the  vessel  to  be  originally  very  large,  say  100  cubic 
feet,  and  to  be  maintained  at  212°  F.,  then  the  whole  of  the 
water  will  be  converted  into  steam,  which  will  fill  the  vessel 
and  will  exert  on  it  a  pressure  of  about  575  pounds'  weight 
on  the  square  foot.  If  we  now  press  down  the  piston,  and 
so  cause  the  capacity  of  the  vessel  to  diminish,  the  pressure 
will  increase  nearly  in  the  same  proportion  as  the  volume 
diminishes,  so  that  the  product  of  the  numbers  representing 
the  pressure  and  volume  will  be  nearly  constant.  When, 
however,  the  volume  is  considerably  diminished,  this  product 
begins  to  diminish,  that  is  to  say,  the  pressure  does  not  in- 
crease so  fast  as  it  ought  to  do  by  Boyle's  law  if  the  steam 
were  a  perfect  gas.  In  the  diagram,  fig.  14,  p.  114,  the 
relations  between  the  pressure  and  volume  of  steam  at  212° 
are  indicated  by  the  curve  a  b.  The  pressure  in  atmo- 
spheres is  marked  on  the  right  hand  of  the  diagram,  and  the 
volume  of  one  pound,  in  cubic  feet,  at  the  bottom. 

When  the  volume  is  diminished  to  26*36  cubic  feet  the 

i 


ri4 


Isothermal  Curves. 

Fro, 


Isothermals  for  Steam  and  Water. 


Water  and  Steam.  1 1 5 

pressure  is  2,116  lb.,  so  that  the  product  of  the  volume 
and  pressure,  instead  of  57,500,  is  now  reduced  to  55,770. 
This  departure  from  the  law  of  Boyle,  though  not  very  large, 
is  quite  decided.  The  pressure  and  volume  of  the  steam  in 
this  state  are  indicated  by  the  point  b  in  the  diagram. 

If  we  ROW  diminish  the  volume  and  still  maintain  the 
same  temperature,  the  pressure  will  no  longer  increase,  but 
part  of  the  steam  will  be  converted  into  water ;  and  as  the 
volume  continues  to  diminish,  more  and  more  of  the  steam 
will  be  condensed  into  the  liquid  form,  while  the  pressure 
remains  exactly  the  same,  namely,  2,116  pounds'  weight  on 
the  square  foot,  or  one  atmosphere.  This  is  indicated  by 
the  horizontal  line  b  c  in  the  diagram. 

This  pressure  will  continue  the  same  till  all  the  steam  is 
condensed  into  water  at  212°,  the  volume  of  which  will  be 
o-o 1 6  of  a  cubic  foot,  a  quantity  too  small  to  be  represented 
clearly  in  the  diagram. 

As  soon  as  the  volume,  therefore,  is  reduced  to  this  value 
there  will  be  no  more  steam  to  condense,  and  any  further 
reduction  of  volume  is  resisted  by  the  elasticity  of  water, 
which,  as  we  have  seen,  is  very  large  compared  with  that  of 
a  gas. 

We  are  now  able  to  trace  the  isothermal  line  for  water 
corresponding  to  the  temperature  212°.  When  vis  very 
great  the  curve  is  nearly  of  the  form  of  an  hyperbola  for 
which  v  P  =  57,500.  As  v  diminishes,  the  curve  falls  slightly 
below  the  hyperbola,  so  that  when  v  =  26*36,  v  p  =  55,770. 
Here,  however,  the  line  suddenly  and  completely  alters  its 
character,  and  becomes  the  horizontal  straight  line  b  c,  for 
which  p  =  2,116,  and  this  straight  line  extends  from 
v  =  26*36  to  v  =  0*016,  when  another  equally  sudden 
change  takes  place,  and  the  line,  from  being  exactly  horizon- 
tal, becomes  nearly  but  not  quite  vertical,  nearly  in  the 
direction  c  p,  for  the  pressure  must  be  increased  beyond 
the  limits  of  our  experimental  methods  long  before  any 

very  considerable  change  is  made  in  the  volume  of  the  water. 

il 


1 1 6  Isothermal  Curves. 

The  isothermal  line  in  a  case  of  this  kind  consists  of  three 
parts.  In  the  first  part,  ab,  it  resembles  the  isothermal  lines  of  a 
perfect  gas,  but  as  the  volume  diminishes  the  pressure  begins 
to  be  somewhat  less  than  it  should  be  by  Boyle's  law.  This 
however,  is  only  when  the  line  approaches  the  second  part 
of  its  course,  be,  in  which  it  is  accurately  horizontal.  This  part 
corresponds  to  a  state  in  which  the  substance  exists  partly 
in  the  liquid  and  partly  in  the  gaseous  state,  and  it  extends 
from  the  volume  of  the  gas  to  the  volume  of  the  liquid  at 
the  same  temperature  and  pressure.  The  third  part  of  the 
isothermal  line  is  that  corresponding  to  the  liquid  state  of 
the  substance,  and  it  may  be  considered  as  a  line  which  on 
the  scale  of  our  diagrams  would  be  very  nearly  vertical, 
and  so  near  to  the  line  c  p  that  it  cannot  be  distinguished 
from  it. 

In  the  diagram,  fig.  14,  the  isothermal  line  of  water  for 
the  temperature  212°  F.,  the  ordinary  boiling  point,  is  re- 
presented by  a  b  c p,  and  that  for  302°  F.  by  d  efp. 

At  the  temperature  of  302°  F.  the  pressure  at  which  con- 
densation takes  place  is  much  greater,  being  9,966  pounds' 
weight  on  the  square  foot;  and  the  volume  to  which  the 
steam  is  reduced  before  condensation  begins  is  much 
smaller,  being  6*153  cubic  feet.  This  is  indicated  by  the 
point  e.  At  this  point  the  product  v  p  is  61,321,  which  is 
considerably  less  than  65,209,  its  value  when  the  volume  is 
very  great. 

At  this  point  condensation  begins  and  goes  on  till  the 
whole  steam  is  condensed  into  water  at  302°  F.,  the  volume 
of  which  is  ofoi66  cubic  feet.  This  volume  is  somewhat 
greater  than  the  volume  of  the  same  water  at  212°  F. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  as  the  temperature  rises  the 
pressure  at  which  condensation  occurs  is  greater.  It  also 
appears  that  the  diminution  of  volume  when  condensation 
takes  place  is  less  than  at  low  temperatures,  and  this  for 
two  reasons.  The  first  is,  that  the  steam  must  be  reduced 
to  a  smaller  volume  before  condensation  begins;  and  the 


Steam  Line  and  Water  Line.  1 17 

second  is,  that  the  volume  of  the  liquid  when  condensed  is 
greater. 

The  dotted  line  in  the  diagram  indicates  the  pressures 
and  the  volumes  at  which  condensation  begins  at  the 
various  temperatures  marked  on  the  horizontal  parts  of  the 
isothermal  lines. 

When  the  pressure  and  volume  are  those  indicated  by 
points  above  or  on  the  right  hand  of  this  curve  the  whole 
substance  is  in  the  gaseous  state.  We  may  call  this  line  the 
steam  line.  It  is  not  an  isothermal  line. 

If  the  scale  cf  the  diagram  had  been  large  enough  to  have 
represented  the  volume  of  the  condensed  water,  we  should 
have  had  another  dotted  line  near  the  line  o/,  such  that  for 
points  on  the  left  hand  of  this  line  the  whole  substance  is  in 
the  liquid  state.  We  may  call  this  the  water  line.  For 
conditions  of  pressure  and  volume  indicated  by  points 
between  the  two  dotted  lines,  the  substance  is  partly  in  the 
liquid  and  partly  in  the  gaseous  state.  If  we  draw  a  hori- 
zontal line  through  the  given  point  till  it  meets  the  two 
dotted  lines,  then  the  weight  of  steam  is  to  the  weight  of 
water  as  the  segment  between  the  point  and  the  water  line 
is  to  the  segment  between  the  point  and  the  steam  line.  In 
the  lower  part  of  the  diagram  for  carbonic  acid,  fig.  15, 
p.  120,  the  isothermal  lines  are  seen  to  consist  of  a  curved 
portion  on  the  right  hand  representing  the  gaseous 
state,  a  horizontal  portion  representing  the  process  of  con- 
densation, and  a  nearly  vertical  portion  representing 
the  liquid  state.  The  right-hand  branch  of  the  dotted 
line,  which  we  must  here  call  the  gas  line,  corresponds 
to  the  steam  line  ;  and  the  left-hand  branch,  or  liquid  line, 
corresponds  to  the  water  line,  which  was  not  distinguish- 
able in  fig.  14. 

Since  these  two  lines,  which  we  have  called  the  steam  line 
and  the  water  line,  continually  approach  each  other  as  the 
temperature  is  raised,  the  question  naturally  arises,  Do  they 
ever  meet  ?  The  peculiarity  of  the  conditions  indicated  by 


1 1 8  IsotJicrmal  Curves. 

points  between  these  lines  is  that  the  liquid  and  its  vapour 
can  exist  together  under  the  same  conditions  as  to  tempera- 
lure  and  pressure  without  the  vapour  being  liquefied  or  the 
liquid  evaporated.  Outside  of  this  region  the  substance 
must  be  either  all  vapour  or  all  liquid. 

If  the  two  lines  meet,  then  at  the  pressure  indicated  by 
the  point  of  meeting  there  is  no  temperature  at  which  the 
substance  can  exist  partly  as  a  liquid  and  partly  as  a  vapour, 
but  the  substance  must  either  be  entirely  converted  from 
the  state  of  vapour  into  the  state  of  liquid  at  once  and  with- 
out condensation,  or,  since  in  this  case  the  liquid  and  the 
vapour  have  the  same  density,  it  may  be  suspected  that  the 
distinctions  we  have  been  accustomed  to  draw  between 
liquids  and  vapours  have  lost  their  meaning. 

The  answer  to  this  question  has  been  to  a  great  extent 
supplied  by  a  series  of  very  interesting  researches. 

In  1822  M.  Cagniard  de  la  Tour »  observed  the  effect  of 
a  high  temperature  upon  liquids  enclosed  in  glass  tubes  of  a 
capacity  not  much  greater  than  that  of  the  liquid  itself,  lie 
found  that  when  the  temperature  was  raised  to  a  certain 
point,  the  substance,  which  till  then  was  partly  liquid  and 
partly  gaseous,  suddenly  became  uniform  in  appearance 
throughout,  without  any  visible  surface  of  separation,  or  any 
evidence  that  the  substance  in  the  tube  was  partly  in  one 
state  and  partly  in  another. 

He  concluded  that  at  this  temperature  the  whole  became 
gaseous.  The  true  conclusion,  as  Dr.  Andrews  has  shown,  is 
that  the  properties  of  the  liquid  and  those  of  the  vapour 
continually  approach  to  similarity,  and  that,  above  a  certain 
temperature,  the  properties  of  the  liquid  are  not  separated 
from  those  of  the  vapour  by  any  apparent  distinction  be- 
tween them. 

In  1823,  the  year  following  the  researches  of  Cagniard 
de  la  Tour,  Faraday  succeeded  in  liquefying  several  bodies 
hitherto  known  only  in  the  gaseous  form,  by  pressure  alone, 

1  Annales  de  Ckimie,  2mt  serie,  xxi.  et  xxii. 


Carbonic  Acid.  1 19 

and  in  1826  he  greatly  extended  our  knowledge  of  the 
effects  of  temperature  and  pressure  on  gases.  He  considers 
that  above  a  certain  temperature,  which,  in  the  language  of 
Dr.  Andrews,  we  may  call  the  critical  temperature  for  the 
substance,  no  amount  of  pressure  will  produce  the  pheno- 
menon which  we  call  condensation,  and  he  supposes  that  the 
temperature  of  166°  F.  below  zero  is  probably  above  the 
critical  temperature  for  oxygen,  hydrogen,  and  nitrogen. 

Dr.  Andrews  has  examined  carbonic  acid  under  varied 
conditions  cf  temperature  and  pressure,  in  order  to  ascertain 
the  relations  of  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states,  and  has 
arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states 
are  only  widely  separated  forms  of  the  same  condition  of 
matter,  and  may  be  made  to  pass  one  into  the  other  with- 
out any  interruption  or  breach  of  continuity.1 

Carbonic  acid  is  a  substance  which  at  ordinary  tempera- 
tures and  pressures  is  known  as  a  gas.  The  measurements 
of  Regnault  and  others  show  that  as  the  pressure  increases 
the  volume  diminishes  faster  than  that  of  a  gas  which  obeys 
the  law  of  Boyle,  and  that  as  the  temperature  rises  the  ex- 
pansion is  greater  than  that  assigned  by  the  law  of  Charles. 

The  isothermal  lines  of  the  diagram  of  carbonic  acid  at 
ordinary  temperatures  and  pressures  are  therefore  somewhat 
flatter  and  also  somewhat  wider  apart  than  those  of  the 
more  perfect  gases. 

The  diagram  (p.  120)  for  carbonic  acid  is  taken  from  Dr. 
Andrews's  paper,  with  the  exception  of  the  dotted  line 
showing  the  region  within  which  the  substance  can  exist 
as  a  liquid  in  presence  of  its  vapour.  The  base  line  of  the 
diagram  corresponds,  not  to  zero  pressure,  but  to  a  pressure 
of  47  atmospheres. 

The  lowest  of  the  isothermal  lines  is  that  of  13°'!  C.  or 
55-6  F. 

This  line  shows  that  at  a  pressure  of  about  47  atmospheres 
condensation  occurs.  The  substance  is  seen  to  become 

1  Phil.  Trans.  1869,  p.  575. 


120 


Isothermal  Curves. 

FIG.  15. 


Isothermals  of  Carbonic  Acid. 


Experiments  of  Andrews.  121 

• 

separated  into  two  distinct  portions,  the  upper  portion  being 
in  the  state  of  vapour  or  gas,  and  the  lower  in  the  state  of 
liquid.  The  upper  surface  of  the  liquid  can  be  distinctly 
seen,  and  where  this  surface  is  close  to  the  sides  of  the  glass 
containing  the  substance  it  is  seen  to  be  curved,  as  the 
surface  of  water  is  in  small  tubes. 

As  the  volume  is  diminished,  more  of  the  substance  is 
liquefied,  till  at  last  the  whole  is  compressed  into  the  liquid 
form. 

I  have  described  this  isothermal  line  at  greater  length, 
that  the  student  may  compare  the  properties  of  carbonic  acid 
at  55°-6  F.  with  those  of  water  at  212°  F. 

1.  The  steam  before  condensation  begins  has  properties 
agreeing  nearly,  though  not  quite,  with  those  of  a  perfect  gas. 
In  carbonic  acid  the  volume  just  before  liquefaction  com- 
mences is  little  more  than  three-fifths  of  that  of  a  perfect 
gas  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure.  The  corresponding 
isothermal  lines  for   air  are  given  in  the  diagram,  and   it 
will  be  seen  how  much  the  carbonic  acid  isothermal  has 
fallen  below  that  of  air  before  liquefaction  begins. 

2.  The  steam  when  condensed  into  water  occupies  less 
than  the  sixteen-hundredth  part  of  the  volume  of  the  steam. 
The  liquid  carbonic  acid,  on  the  other  hand,  occupies  nearly 
a  fifth  part  of  its  volume  just  before  condensation.     We  are 
therefore  able  to  draw  the  dotted  line  of  complete  conden- 
sation in  this  diagram,  though  in  the  case  of  water  it  would 
have  required  a  microscope  to  distinguish  it  from  the  line  of 
no  volume. 

3.  The  steam  when  condensed  into  water  at  2 12°  has 
properties  not  differing  greatly  from  those  of  cold  water. 
Its  dilatability  by  heat  and  its  compressibility  by  pressure 
are  probably  somewhat  greater  than  when  cold,  but  not 
enough  to  be  noticed  when  the  measurements  are  not  very 
precise. 

Liquid  carbonic  acid,  as  was  first  observed  by  Thilorier, 
dilates  as  the  temperature  rises  to  a  greater  degree  than  even 


122  Isothermal  Curves. 

a  gas,  and,  as  Dr.  Andrews  has  shown,  it  yields  to  pressure 
much  more  than  any  ordinary  liquid.  ..From  Dr.  Andrews's 
experiments  it  also  appears  that  its  compressibility  dimi- 
nishes as  the  pressure  increases.  These  results  are  apparent 
even  in  the  diagram.  It  is,  therefore,  far  more  compressible 
than  any  ordinary  liquid,  and  it  appears  from  the  experi- 
ments of  Andrews  that  its  compressibility  diminishes  as  the 
volume  is  reduced. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  behaviour  of  liquid  carbonic 
acid  under  the  action  of  heat  and  pressure  is  very  different 
from  that  of  ordinary  liquids,  and  in  some  respects  approaches 
to  that  of  a  gas. 

If  we  examine  the  next  of  the  isothermals  of  the  diagram, 
that  for  2i°'5  C.  or  7o°7  F.,  the  approximation  between  the 
liquid  and  the  gaseous  states  is  still  more  apparent.  Here 
condensation  takes  place  at  about  60  atmospheres  of  pres- 
sure, and  the  liquid  occupies  nearly  a  third  of  the  volume  of 
the  gas.  The  exceedingly  dense  gas  is  approaching  in  its 
properties  to  the  exceedingly  light  liquid.  Still  there  is  a 
distinct  separation  between  the  gaseous  and  liquid  states, 
though  we  are  approaching  the  critical  temperature.  This 
critical  temperature  has  been  determined  by  Dr.  Andrews  to 
be  30° -9 2  C.  or  Sy0-;  F.  At  this  temperature,  and  at  a 
pressure  of  from  73  to  75  atmospheres,  carbonic  acid  appears 
to  be  in  the  critical  condition.  No  separation  into  liquid  and 
vapour  can  be  detected,  but  at  the  same  time  very  small 
variations  of  pressure  or  of  temperature  produce  such  great 
variations  of  density  that  flickering  movements  are  observed 
in  the  tube  *  resembling  in  an  exaggerated  form  the  appear- 
ances exhibited  during  the  mixture  of  liquids  of  different 
densities,  or  when  columns  of  heated  air  ascend  through 
colder  strata.' 

The  isothermal  line  for  31°-!  C.  or  88°  F.  passes  above 
this  critical  point.  During  the  whole  compression  the  sub- 
stance is  never  in  two  distinct  conditions  in  different  parts  of 
the  tube.  When  the  pressure  is  less  than  73  atmospheres 
the  isothermal  line,  though  greatly  flatter  than  that  of  a  perfect 


Continuity  of  the  Liquid  and  Gaseous  States.      123 

gas,  resembles  it  in  general  features.  From  73  to  75  atmo- 
spheres the  volume  diminishes  very  rapidly,  but  by  no  means 
suddenly,  and  above  this  pressure  the  volume  diminishes 
more  gradually  than  in  the  case  of  a  perfect  gas,  but  still 
more  rapidly  than  in  most  liquids. 

In  the  isothermals  for  32°'5  C.  or  900>5  F.  and  for  35°'5  C. 
or  95°'9  F.  we  can  still  observe  a  slight  increase  of  compres- 
sibility near  the  same  part  of  the  diagram,  but  in  the 
isothermal  line  for  48°  i  C.  or  n8°'6  F.  the  curve  is  con- 
cave upwards  throughout  its  whole  course,  and  differs  from 
the  corresponding  isothermal  line  for  a  perfect  gas  only  by 
being  somewhat  flatter,  showing  that  for  all  ordinary  pres- 
sures the  Volume  is  somewhat  less  than  that  assigned  by 
Boyle's  law. 

Still  at  the  temperature  of  uS^C  F.  carbonic  acid  has  all 
the  properties  of  a  gas,  and  the  effects  of  heat  and  pressure  on 
it  differ  from  their  effects  on  a  perfect  gas  only  by  quantities 
requiring  careful  experiments  to  detect  them. 

We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  any  phenomenon 
similar  to  condensation  would  occur,  however  great  a 
pressure  were  applied  to  carbonic  acid  at  this  temperature. 

In  fact,  by  a  proper  management  we  can  convert  car- 
bonic acid  gas  into  a  liquid  without  any  sudden  change 
of  state. 

If  we  begin  with  carbonic  acid  gas  at  50°  F.  we  may  first 
heat  it  till  its  temperature  is  above  88°  F.,  the  critical  point. 
We  then  gradually  increase  the  pressure  to,  say,  100  atmo- 
spheres. During  this  process  no  sign  of  liquefaction  occurs. 
Finally  we  cool  the  substance,  still  under  the  pressure  of 
100  atmospheres,  to  50°  F.  During  this  process  no  sudden 
change  of  state  can  be  observed,  but  carbonic  acid  at  50°  F. 
and  under  a  pressure  of  100  atmospheres  has  all  the  pro- 
perties of  a  liquid.  At  the  temperature  of  50°  F.  we  cannot 
convert  carbonic  acid  gas  into  a  liquid  without  a  sudden 
condensation,  but  by  this  process,  in  which  the  pressure  is 
applied  at  a  high  temperature,  we  have  caused  the  substance 
to  pass  from  an  undoubtedly  gaseous  to  an  undoubtedly 


124  Isothermal  Curves. 

liquid  state  without  at  any  time  undergoing  an  abrupt  change 
similar  to  ordinary  liquefaction. 

I  have  described  the  experiments  of  Dr.  Andrews  on  car- 
bonic acid  at  greater  length  because  they  furnish  the  most 
complete  view  hitherto  given  of  the  relation  between  the 
liquid  and  the  gaseous  state,  and  of  the  mode  in  which  the 
properties  of  a  gas  may  be  continuously  and  imperceptibly 
changed  into  those  of  a  liquid. 

The  critical  temperatures  of  most  ordinary  liquids  are 
much  higher  than  that  of  carbonic  acid,  and  their  pressure 
in  the  critical  state  is  very  great,  so  that  experiments  on  the 
critical  state  of  ordinary  liquids  are  difficult  and  dangerous. 
M.  Cagniard  de  la  Tour  estimated  the  temperature  and  pres- 
sure of  the  critical  state  to  be  : 

Temperature  Pressure 

Fahr.  (Atmospheres) 

Eiher       . 369° -5  37'5 

Alcohol 497° '5  119-0 

Bisulphide  of  Carbon         .         .         .  504°  -5  66-5 

Water 773°-o 

In  the  case  of  water  the  critical  temperature  was  so 
high  that  the  water  began  to  dissolve  the  glass  tube  which 
contained  it. 

The  critical  temperature  of  what  are  called  the  permanent 
gases  is  probably  exceedingly  low,  so  that  we  cannot  by  any 
known  method  produce  a  degree  of  cold  sufficient,  even 
when  applied  along  with  enormous  pressure,  to  condense 
them  into  the  liquid  state. 

It  has  been  suggested!  ;by  Professor  James  Thomson  }  that 
the  isothermal  curves  for  temperatures  below  the  critical 
temperature  are  only  apparently,  and  not  really,  discon- 
tinuous, and  that  their  true  form  is  somewhat  similar  in  its 
general  features  to  the  curve  ABCDEFGHK. 

The  peculiarity  of  this  curve  is,  that  between  the  pressures 
indicated  by  the  horizontal  lines  B  F  and  D  H,  any  horizon- 
tal line  such  as  c  E  G  cuts  the  curve  in  three  different 
points.  The  literal  interpretation  of  this  geometrical  cir- 

Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society,  1871,  No.  130. 


Retardation  of  Boiling  and  of  Condensation.     125 


cumstance  would  be  that  the  fluid  at  this  pressure,  and  at 
the  temperature  of  the  isothermal  line,  is  capable  of  existing 
in  three  different  states.  One  of  these,  indicated  by  c, 
evidently  corresponds  to  the  liquid  state.  Another,  indi- 
cated by  G,  corresponds  to  the  gaseous  state.  At  the  inter- 
mediate point  E  the  slope  of  the  curve  indicates  that  the 
volume  and  the  pressure  increase  and  diminish  together. 


No  substance  having  this  property  can  exist  in  stable  equili- 
brium, for  the  very  slightest  disturbance  would  make  it  rush 
into  the  liquid  or  the  gaseous  state.  We  may  therefore 
confine  our  attention  to  the  points  c  and  G. 

According  to  the  theory  of  exchanges,  as  explained  at  p.  303, 
when  the  liquid  is  in  contact  with  its  vapour  the  rate  of  evapo- 
ration depends  on  the  temperature  of  the  liquid,  and  the  rate 
of  condensation  on  the  density  of  the  vapour.  Hence  for 
every  temperature  there  is  a  determinate  vapour-density,  and 
therefore  a  determinate  pressure,  represented  by  the  horizon- 
tal line  CG,1  at  which  the  evaporation  exactly  balances  the  con- 

[l  The  precise  position  of  the  horizontal  line  C  G  is  determined  by  the 
condition  that  it  cuts  off  equal  areas  from  the  curve  above  and  below. 
Maxwell,  Nature,  xi.  p.  357,  1875. — R.] 


126  Isothermal  Curves. 

densation.  At  the  pressure  indicated  by  this  horizontal  line 
the  liquid  will  be  in  equilibrium  with  its  vapour.  At  all  greater 
pressures  the  vapour,  if  in  contact  with  the  liquid,  will  be  con- 
densed ;  and  at  all  smaller  pressures  the  liquid,  if  in  contact 
with  its  vapour,  will  evaporate.  Hence  the  isothermal  line,  as 
deduced  from  experiments  of  the  ordinary  kind,  will  consist  of 
the  curve  A  B  c,  the  straight  line  c  G,  and  the  curve  G  K. 

But  it  has  been  pointed  out  by  Prof.  J.  Thomson  that 
by  suitable  contrivances  we  may  detect  the  existence  of 
other  parts  of  the  isothermal  curve.  We  know  that  th2 
portion  of  the  curve  corresponding  to  the  liquid  state  ex- 
tends beyond  the  point  c;  for  if  the  liquid  is  carefully  freed 
from  air  and  other  impurities,  and  is  not  in  contact  with 
anything  but  the  sides  of  a  vessel  to  which  it  closely  ad- 
heres, the  pressure  may  be  reduced  considerably  below  that 
indicated  by  the  point  c,  till  at  last,  at  some  point  between 
c  and  D,  the  phenomenon  of  boiling  with  bumping  com- 
mences, as  described  at  p.  25. 

Let  us  next  consider  the  substance  wholly  in  the  state  of 
vapour,  as  indicated  by  the  point  K,  and  let  it  be  kept  at  the 
same  temperature  and  gradually  compressed  till  it  is  in  the 
state  indicated  by  the  point  G.  If  there  are  any  drops  of 
the  liquid  in  the  vessel,  or  if  the  vessel  is  capable  of  being 
wetted  by  the  liquid,  condensation  will  now  begin.  But  if 
there  are  no  facilities  for  condensation,  the  pressure  may  be 
increased  and  the  volume  diminished  till  the  state  of  the 
vapour  is  that  which  is  represented  by  the  point  F.  At  this 
point  condensation  must  take  place  if  it  has  not  begun 
before.1 

The  existence  of  this  variability  in  the  circumstances  of 
condensation,  though  seemingly  probable,  is  not  as  yet 
established  by  experiment,  like  that  of  the  variability  in  the 
circumstances  of  evaporation.  Prof.  J.  Thomson  suggests 
that  by  investigating  the  condensation  produced  by  the 
rapid  expansion  of  vapour  in  a  vessel  provided  with  a 

1  See  the  chapter  on  Capillarity. 


Adiabatic  Curves.  127 

steam-jacket,  the   existence  of  this  part  of  the  isothermal 
curve  might  be  established. 

The  state  of  things,  however,  represented  by  the  portion 
of  the  isothermal  curve  D  E  F,  can  never  be  realised  in  a 
homogeneous  mass,  for  the  substance  is  then  in  an  essentially 
unstable  condition,  since  the  pressure  increases  with  the 
volume.  We  cannot,  therefore,  expect  any  experimental 
evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  part  of  the  curve,  unless,  as 
Prof.  J.  Thomson  suggests,  this  state  of  things  may  exist 
in  some  part  of  the  thin  superficial  stratum  of  transition 
from  a  liquid  to  its  own  gas,  in  which  the  phenomena  of 
capillarity  take  place. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

ON  THE   PROPERTIES   OF  A   SUBSTANCE   WHEN   HEAT 
IS  PREVENTED    FROM    ENTERING   OR   LEAVING   IT. 

HITHERTO  we  have  considered  the  properties  of  substance 
only  with  respect  to  the  volume  occupied  by  a  pound  of  the 
substance,  the  pressure  acting  on  every  square  foot  or  inch, 
and  the  temperature  of  the  substance,  which  we  have  assumed 
to  be  uniform.  We  suppose  the  temperature  measured  by  a 
thermometer,  and  when,  in  order  to  change  the  state  of  the 
body,  heat  must  be  supplied  to  it  or  taken  from  it,  \ve  have 
supposed  this  to  be  done  without  paying  any  attention  to 
the  quantity  of  heat  required  in  each  case.  For  the  actual 
measurements  of  such  quantities  of  heat  we  must  employ  the 
processes  described  in  our  chapter  on  Calorimetry,  or  others 
equivalent  to  them.  Before  entering  on  these  considerations, 
however,  we  shall  examine  the  very  important  case  in  which 
the  changes  which  take  place  are  effected  without  any 
passage  of  heat  either  into  the  substance  from  without  or  out 
of  the  substance  into  other  bodies. 

For  the  sake  of  associating  the  statement  of  scientific  facts 


128  Adiabatic  Curves. 

with  mental  images  which  are  easily  formed,  and  which  pre- 
serve the  statements  in  a  form  always  ready  for  use,  we  shall 
suppose  that  the  substance  is  contained  in  a  cylinder  fitted 
with  a  piston,  and  that  both  the  cylinder  and  the  piston  are 
absolutely  impermeable  to  heat,  so  that  not  only  is  heat 
prevented  from  getting  out  or  in  by  passing  completely 
through  the  cylinder  or  piston,  but  no  heat  can  pass  between 
the  enclosed  substance  and  the  matter  of  the  cylinder  or 
piston  itself. 

No  substance  in  nature  is  absolutely  impermeable  to  heat, 
so  that  the  image  we  have  formed  can  never  be  fully  realised ; 
but  it  is  always  possible  to  ascertain,  in  each  particular  case, 
that  heat  has  not  entered  or  left  the  substance,  though  the 
methods  by  which  this  is  done  and  the  arrangements  by 
which  the  condition  is  fulfilled  are  complicated.  In  the 
present  discussion  it  would  only  distract  our  attention  from 
the  most  important  facts  to  describe  the  details  of  physical 
experiments.  We  therefore  reserve  any  description  of  actual 
experimental  methods  till  we  can  explain  them  in  connexion 
with  the  principles  on  which  they  are  founded.  In  explain- 
ing these  principles  we  make  use  of  the  most  suitable  illus- 
trations, without  assuming  that  they  are  physically  possible. 

We  therefore  suppose  the  substance  placed  in  a  cylinder, 
and  its  volume  and  pressure  regulated  and  measured  by  a 
piston,  and  we  suppose  that  during  the  changes  of  volume 
and  pressure  of  the  substance  no  heat  either  enters  it  or 
leaves  it. 

In  order  to  represent  the  relation  between  the  volume  and 
the  pressure,  we  suppose  a  curve  traced  on  the  indicator 
diagram  during  the  motion  of  the  piston,  exactly  as  in  the 
case  of  the  isothermal  lines  formerly  described.  The  only 
difference  is  that  whereas  in  the  case  of  the  isothermal 
lines  the  substance  was  maintained  always  at  one  and  the 
same  temperature,  in  the  present  case  no  heat  is  allowed 
to  enter  or  leave  the  substance,  which,  as  we  shall  see,  is 
a  condition  of  quite  a  different  kind. 


Their  Definition.  1 29 

The  line  drawn  on  the  indicator  diagram  in  the  latter  case 
has  been  named  by  Professor  Rankine  an  Adiabatic  line, 
because  it  is  defined  by  the  condition  that  heat  is  not  allowed 
to  pass  through  (cJta/Sa/mr)  the  vessel  which  confines  the 
substance. 

Since  the  properties  of  the  substance  under  this  condition 
are  completely  defined  by  its  adiabatic  lines,  it  will  assist  us 
in  understanding  these  properties  if  we  associate  them  with 
the  corresponding  features  of  the  adiabatic  lines. 

The  first  thing  to  be  observed  is  that  as  the  volume  dimi- 
nishes the  pressure  invariably  increases.  In  fact,  if  under  any 
circumstances  the  pressure  were  to  dimmish  as  the  volume 
diminishes,  the  substance  would  be  in  an  unstable  state,  and 
would  either  collapse  or  explode  till  it  attained  a  condition 
in  which  the  pressure  increased  as  the  volume  diminished. 

Hence  the  adiabatic  lines  slope  downwards  from  left  to 
right  in  the  indicator  diagram  as  we  have  drawn  it. 

If  the  pressure  be  continually  increased,  up  to  the  greatest 
pressure  which  we  can  produce,  the  volume  continually 
diminishes,  but  always  slower  and  slower,  so  that  we  cannot 
tell  whether  there  is  or  is  not  a  limiting  volume  such  that  no 
pressure,  however  great,  can  compress  the  substance  to  a 
smaller  volume. 

We  cannot,  in  fact,  trace  the  lines  upward  beyond  a 
certain  distance,  and  therefore  we  cannot  assert  anything  of 
the  upper  part  of  their  course,  except  that  they  cannot  recede 
from  the  line  of  pressures,  because  in  that  case  the  volume 
would  increase  on  account  of  an  increase  of  pressure. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  we  suppose  the  piston  to  be  drawn 
out  so  as  to  allow  the  volume  to  increase,  the  pressure  will 
diminish. 

If  the  substance  is  in  the  gaseous  form,  or  assumes  that 
form  during  the  process,  the  substance  will  continue  to  exert 
pressure  on  the  piston  even  though  the  volume  is  enormously 
increased,  and  we  have  no  experimental  reason  to  believe 
that  the  pressure  would  be  reduced  to  nothing,  however  much 

K 


130  Adiabatic  Curves. 

the  volume  were  increased.  For  gaseous  bodies,  therefoie. 
the  lines  extend  indefinitely  in  "the  direction  of  the  line  of 
volumes,  continually  approaching  but  never  reaching  it. 

With  respect  to  substances  which  are  not  originally  in  the 
gaseous  form,  some  of  them,  when  the  pressure  is  sufficiently 
diminished,  are  known  to  assume  that  form,  and  it  is  plausibly 
argued  that  we  have  no  evidence  that  any  substance,  however 
solid  and  however  cold,  if  entirely  free  from  external  pres- 
sure, would  not  sooner  or  later  become  dissipated  through 
space  by  a  kind  of  evaporation. 

The  smell  by  which  such  metals  as  iron  and  copper  may 
be  recognised  is  adduced  as  an  indication  that  bodies, 
apparently  very  fixed,  are  continually  throwing  off  portions 
of  themselves  in  some  very  attenuated  form,  and  if  in  these 
cases  we  have  no  means  of  detecting  the  effluvium  except  by 
the  smell,  in  other  cases  we  may  be  deprived  of  this  evidence 
by  the  circumstance  that  the  effluvium  does  not  affect  our 
sense  of  smell  at  all. 

Be  this  as  it  may,  there  are  many  substances  the  pressure 
of  which  seems  to  cease  entirely  when  the  volume  has 
FIG.  17.  reached  a  certain  value.     Be- 

yond this   the  piessure,  if  it 
exists,  is  far  too  small  to  be 
measured.     The  lines  of  such 
substances  may  without  sen- 
sible error  be  considered  as 
meeting  the  line  of  volumes 
within  the  limits  of  the  diagram. 
The  next  thing  to  be  observed  about  the  adiabatic  lines  is 
that  where  they  cross  the  isothermal  lines  they  are  always 
inclined  at  a  greater  angle  to  the  horizontal  line  than  the 
isothermal  lines. 

In  other  words,  to  diminish  the  volume  of  a  substance  by 
a  given  amount  requires  a  greater  increase  of  pressure  when 
the  substance  is  prevented  from  gaining  or  losing  heat  than 
when  it  is  kept  at  a  constant  temperature. 


Their  Relation  to  the  Isothermals.  131 

This  is  an  illustration  of  the  general  principle  that  when 
the  state  of  a  body  is  changed  in  any  way  by  the  application 
of  force  in  any  form,  and  if  in  one  case  the  body  is  subjected 
to  some  constraint,  while  in  another  case  it  is  free  from  this 
constraint  but  similarly  circumstanced  in  all  other  respects, 
then  if  during  the  change  the  body  takes  advantage  of  this 
freedom,  less  force  will  be  required  to  produce  the  change 
than  when  the  body  is  subjected  to  constraint. 

In  the  case  before  us  we  may  suppose  the  condition  of 
constant  temperature  to  be  obtained  by  making  the  cylinder 
of  a  substance  which  is  a  perfect  conductor  of  heat,  and 
surrounding  it  with  a  very  large  bath  of  a  fluid  which  is  also  a 
perfect  conductor  of  heat,  and  which  has  so  great  a  capacity 
for  heat  that  all  the  heat  it  receives  from  or  gives  off  to  the  sub- 
stance in  the  cylinder  does  not  sensibly  alter  its  temperature. 

The  cylinder  in  this  case  is  capable  of  constraining  the 
substance  itself,  because  it  cannot  get  through  the  sides  of 
the  cylinder;  but  it  is  not  capable  of  constraining  the  heat  of 
the  substance,  which  can  pass  freely  out  or  in  through  the 
walls  of  the  cylinder. 

If  we  now  suppose  the  walls  of  the  cylinder  to  become 
perfect  non-conductors  of  heat,  everything  remains  the  same, 
except  that  the  heat  is  no  longer  free  to  pass  into  or  out  of 
the  cylinder. 

If  in  the  first  case  the  motion  of  the  piston  gives  rise  to 
any  motion  of  the  heat  through  the  walls,  then  in  the 
second  case,  when  this  motion  is  prevented,  more  force  will 
be  required  to  produce  a  given  motion  of  the  cylinder  on 
account  of  the  greater  constraint  of  the  system  on  which  the 
force  acts. 

From  this  we  may  deduce  the  effect  which  the  compression 
of  a  substance  has  on  its  temperature  when  heat  is  prevented 
from  entering  or  leaving  the  substance. 

We  have  seen  that  in  every  case  the  pressure  increases 
more  than  it  does  when  the  temperature  remains  constant,  or 
if  the  increase  of  pressure  be  supposed  given,  the  diminution 


Adiabatlc  Curves. 

FIG  i? 


Illilll  1  l\\\\\\\ 
1  v\\\A\\ 

i  in  i  I V\  \A  \\\\v 


•      111        \        *      *       \       \       il 

\\\\\\\\\ 

V\\\\\\vS 

i       '*       \     '  V       \       »      U      \       N      \  \ 
I      \    l\      \      \    \\    \    \    \ 


\      \       \  V  \  X  \  \          \          \  X.  >» 

:      i        j\         \    \     \         ?        \        \       <  \       \        \         V 
:      \         \\          \    \      \        --\         x          \-\\\          ^v 

\  \  \  \\\\^$ 

i  i   I    \\     \\    \  \N     \    \\  \    v^ 

N- 


\     X""-^      *-N.                ••-.T:-— —  _ 
***--.^      ""•• —  " "    ~~~~-=»«.  ^.^ 


Thermal  Lines  for  Air 

Isothermals 

Adiabatics 


Effect  of  Pressure  on  Temperature.  133 

of  volume  is  less  when  the  heat  is  confined.  Hence  the 
volume  after  the  pressure  is  applied  is  greater  when  the  heat 
is  confined  than  when  the  temperature  is  constant. 

Far  the  greater  number  of  substances  expand  when  their 
temperature  is  raised,  so  that  for  the  same  pressure  a  greater 
volume  corresponds  to  a  higher  temperature.  In  these  sub- 
stances, therefore,  compression  produces  a  rise  of  temperature 
if  heat  is  not  allowed  to  escape ;  but  if  the  walls  of  the 
cylinder  permit  the  passage  of  heat,  as  soon  as  the  tempe- 
rature has  begun  to  rise  heat  will  begin  to  flow  out,  so  that 
if  the  compression  is  effected  slowly  the  principal  thermal 
effect  of  the  compression  will  be  to  make  the  substance  part 
with  some  of  its  heat.  The  isothermal  and  adiabatic  lines 
of  air  are  given  in  fig.  18,  p.  132.  The  adiabatic  lines  are 
more  inclined  to  the  horizontal  than  the  isothermal  lines. 

There  are,  however,  certain  substances  which  contract 
instead  of  expanding  when  their  temperature  is  raised. 
When  pressure  is  applied  to  these  substances  the  compression 
produced  is,  as  in  the  former  case,  less  when  heat  is  pre- 
vented from  passing  than  when  the  temperature  is  maintained 
constant.  The  volume  after  the  application  of  pressure  is 
therefore,  as  before,  greater  than  when  the  temperature  is  con- 
stant ;  but  since  in  these  substances  an  increase  of  volume 
indicates  a  fall  of  temperature,  it  follows  that,  instead  of  being 
heated,  they  are  cooled  by  compression,  and  that,  if  the  walls 
of  the  cylinder  permit  the  passage  of  heat,  heat  will  flow  in 
from  without  to  restore  the  equilibrium  of  temperature. 

During  a  change  of  state,  when,  at  a  given  pressure,  the 
volume  alters  considerably  without  change  of  temperature,  as 
successive  portions  of  the  substance  pass  from  the  one  state 
to  the  other,  the  isothermal  lines  are,  as  we  have  already 
remarked,  horizontal.  The  adiabatic  lines,  however,  are 
inclined  downwards  from  left  to  right.  Any  increase  of 
pressure  will  cause  a  portion  of  the  substance  to  pass  into 
that  one  of  the  two  states  in  which  its  volume  is  least.  In 
so  doing  it  will  give  out  heat  if,  as  in  the  case  of  a  liquid  and 
its  vapour,  the  substance  gives  out  heat  in  passing  into  the 


134  Adiabatic  Curves. 

denser  state ;  but  if,  as  in  the  case  of  ice  and  water,  the  ice 
requires  heat  to  melt  it  into  the  denser  form  of  water,  then 
an  increase  of  pressure  will  cause  some  of  the  ice  to  melt, 
and  the  mixture  will  become  colder. 

The  isothermal  and  adiabatic  lines  for  steam  in  presence 
of  water  are  given  in  fig.  19,  p.  135.  The  isothermal  lines 
are  here  horizontal. 

The  steam  line  v  v,  which  indicates  the  volume  of  one 
pound  of  saturated  steam,  is  also  drawn  on  the  diagram.  Its 
inclination  to  the  horizontal  line  is  less  than  that  of  the 
adiabatic  lines.  Hence  when  no  heat  is  allowed  to  escape, 
an  increase  of  pressure  causes  some  of  the  water  to  become 
steam,  and  a  diminution  of  pressure  causes  some  of  the 
s,team  to  be  condensed  into  water.  This  was  first  shown  by 
Clausius  and  Rankine. 

By  means  of  diagrams  of  the  isothermal  and  adiabatic 
lines  the  thermal  properties  of  a  substance  can  be  com- 
pletely defined,  as  we  shall  show  in  the  subsequent  chapters. 
As  a  scientific  method,  «this  mode  of  representing  the  pro- 
perties of  the  substance  is  by  far  the  best,  but  in  order  to 
interpret  the  diagrams,  some  knowledge  of  thermodynamics 
is  required.  As  a  mere  aid  to  the  student  in  remembering 
the  properties  of  a  substance,  the  following  mode  cf  tracing 
the  changes  of  volume  and  temperature  at  a  constant  pres- 
sure may  be  found  useful,  though  it  is  quite  destitute  of 
those  scientific  merits  which  render  the  indicator  diagrams 
so  valuable  in  the  investigation  of  physical  phenomena. 

The  diagram  on  p.  137  represents  the  effect  of  the  appli- 
cation of  heat  to  a  pound  of  ice  at  o°  F.  The  quantity  of 
heat  applied  to  the  ice  is  indicated  by  the  distance  measured 
along  the  base  line  marked  'units  of  heat.'  The  volume 
of  the  substance  is  indicated  by  the  length  ot  the  per- 
pendicular from  the  base  line  cut  off  by  the  'line  of 
volume,'  and  the  temperature  is  indicated  by  the  length 
cut  off  by  the  dotted  '  line  of  temperature.' 

The. specific  heat  of  ice  is  about  0*5,  so  that  it  requires 
1 6  units  of  heat  to  raise  its  temperature  from  o°  F.  to  32°  F. 

The  SDCCific  eravitv  of  ice  at  12°  F.  is.  arrnrrlina  tn 


Adiabatlc  Curves. 


*>2 


A» 


y  FIG.  19. 


I    \    \       \\X 


Thennal  Lines  of  Steam  and  Water. 

Isothermals 

Adiabatics  — -  —  -  -  — 

Steam  Line  V  v 


T  3  5  Diagram  of  Effects  of  Heat. 

0-91674,  so  that  its  volume,  as  compared  with  water  at  39°'!, 
is  i '0908. 

The  ice  now  begins  to  melt,  the  temperature  remains 
constant  at  32°  R,  but  the  volume  of  ice  diminishes  and 
the  volume  of  water  increases,  as  is  represented  by  the 
line  marked  'volume  of  ice.'  The  latent  heat  of  ice  is 
144°  R,  so  that  the  process  of  melting  goes  on  till  144  units 
of  heat  have  been  applied  to  the  substance,  and  the  whole 
is  converted  into  water  at  32°  F. 

The  volume  of  the  water  at  32°  F.  is,  according  to 
M.  Despretz,  i '00012  7.  Its  specific  heat  is  at  this  tem- 
perature a  very  little  greater  than  unity  ;  it  is  exactly  unity 
at  39°'!  F.,  and  as  the  temperature  rises  the  specific  heat 
increases,  so  that  to  heat  the  water  from  32°  F.  to  212°  F. 
requires  182  units  instead  of  180.  The  volume  of  the 
water  diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises  from  32°  F.  to 
39°-i  R,  where  it  is  exactly  i.  It  then  expands,  slowly  at 
first,  but  more  rapidly  as  the  temperature  rises,  till  at  212°  F 
the  volume  of  the  water  is  1-04315. 

If  we  continue  to  apply  heat  to  the  water,  the  pressure 
being  still  that  of  the  atmosphere,  the  water  begins  to  boil. 
For  every  unit  of  heat,  one  nine  hundred  and  sixty-fifth 
part  of  the  pound  of  water  is  boiled  away  and  is  converted 
into  steam,  the  volume  of  which  is  about  1,700  times  that  of 
the  water  from  which  it  was  formed.  The  diagram  might  be 
extended  on  a  larger  sheet  of  paper  to  represent  the  whole 
process  of  boiling  the  water  away.  This  process  would  re- 
quire 965  units  of  heat,  so  that  the  whole  length  of  the  base 
line  from  o  would  be  11*07  inches.  At  this  point  the  water 
would  be  all  boiled  away,  and  the  steam  would  occupy  a 
volume  of  1,700  times  that  of  the  water.  The  vertical  line 
on  the  diagram  which  would  represent  the  volume  of  the 
steam  would  be  3,400  inches,  or  more  than  286  feet  long. 
The  temperature  would  be  still  212°  F.  If  we  continue  to 
apply  heat  to  the  steam,  still  at  the  atmospheric  pressure, 
its  temperature  will  rise  in  a  perfectly  uniform  manner  at 


Diagram  of  Effects  of  Heat. 


'37 


FIG.  20. 


138  Heat  Engines. 

the  rate  of  2xo8  degrees  for  every  unit  of  heat,  the  specific 
heat  of  steam  being  0-4805. 

The  volume  of  the  superheated  steam  also  increases  in  a 
regular  manner,  being  proportional  to  its  absolute  tempe- 
rature reckoned  from  —460°  F. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

ON    HEAT   ENGINES. 

HITHERTO  the  only  use  we  have  made  of  the  indicator 
diagram  is  to  explain  the  relation  between  the  volume  and  the 
pressure  of  a  substance  placed  in  certain  thermal  conditions. 
The  condition  that  the  temperature  is  constant  gave  us  the 
isothermal  lines,  and  the  condition  that  no  communication 
of  heat  takes  place  gave  us  the  adiabatic  lines.  "\Ve  have 
now  to  consider  the  application  of  the  same  method  to  the 
measurements  of  quantities  of  heat  and  quantities  of  me- 
chanical work. 

At  p.  102  it  was  shown  that  if  the  pencil  of  the  indicator 
moves  from  B  to  c,  this  shows  that  the  volume  of  the  sub- 
stance has  increased  from  o  b  to  o  c,  under  a  pressure  which 
was  originally  B  b  and  finally  c  c. 

The  work  done  by  the  pressure  of  the  substance  against 
the  piston  during  this  motion  is  represented  by  the  area 
B  c  c  £,  and  since  the  volume  increases  during  the  process, 
it  is  the  substance  which  does  the  work  on  the  piston, 
and  not  the  piston  which  does  the  work  on  the  substance. 

In  heat  engines  of  ordinary  construction,  such  as  steam 
engines  and  air  engines,  the  form  of  the  path  described  by 
the  pencil  depends  on  the  mechanical  arrangements  of  the 
engine,  such  as  the  opening  and  shutting  of  the  valves  which 
admit  or  carry  off  the  steam. 

For  the  purposes  of  scientific  illustration,  and  for  obtaining 
clear  views  of  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat,  we  shall  describe 


Canto? s  Engine. 


139 


the  working  of  an  engine  of  a  species  entirely  imaginary — 
one  which  it  is  impossible  to  construct,  but  very  easy  to 
understand. 

This  engine  was  invented  and  described  by  Sadi  Carnot, 
in  his  *  Re'flexions  sur  la  Puissance  motrice  du  Feu,'  pub- 
lished in  1824.  It  is  called  Carnot's  Reversible  Engine  for 
reasons  which  we  shall  explain. 

All  the  arrangements  connected  with  this  engine  are  con- 
trived for  the  sake  of  being  explained,  and  are  not  intended 
to  represent  anything  in  the  working  of  real  engines. 

Carnot  himself  was  a  believer  in  the  material  nature  of 
heat,  and  was  in  consequence  led  to  an  erroneous  statement 
of  the  quantities  of  heat  which  must  enter  and  leave  the 
engine.  As  our  object  is  to  understand  the  theory  of  heat, 
and  not  to  give  an  historical  account  of  the  theory,  we  shall 
avail  ourselves  of  the  important  step  which  Carnot  made, 
while  we  avoid  the  error  into  which  he  fell. 

FIG.  21. 


T 
B 

COLD 


Let  D  be  the  working  substance,  which  may  be  any  sulx 
stance  whatever  which  is  in  any  way  affected  by  heat,  but, 
for  the  sake  of  precision,  we  shall  suppose  it  to  be  either  air 
or  steam,  or  partly  steam  and  partly  condensed  water  at  the 
same  temperature. 

The  working  substance  is  contained  in  a  cylinder  fitted 
with  a  piston.  The  walls  of  the  cylinder  and  the  pistou  are 


140 


Heat  Engines. 


FIG.  23. 


supposed  to  be  perfect  non-conductors  of  beat,  but'  the 
bottom  of  the  cylinder  is  a  perfect  conductor  of  heat,  and  has 
so  small  a  capacity  for  heat  that  the  amount  of  heat  required 
to  raise  its  temperature  may  be  left  out  of  account.  All  the 
communication  of  heat  between  the  working  substance  and 
things  outside  the  cylinder  is  supposed  to  take  place 
through  this  conducting  bottom,  and  the  quantities  of  heat 
are  supposed  to  be  measured  as  they  pass  through. 

A  and  B  are  two  bodies  the  temperatures  of  which  are 
maintained  uniform.  A  is  kept  always  hot,  at  a  temperature 
s,  and  B  is  kept  always  cold,  at  a  temperature  T.  c  is  a 
stand  to  set  the  cylinder  on,  the  upper  surface  of  which  is  :i 
perfect  non-conductor  of  heat. 

Let  us  suppose  that  the  working  substance  is  at  the  tem- 
perature T  of  the  cold  body  B,  and  that  its  volume  and 
pressure  are  represented  in  the  in- 
dicator  diagram  by  o  a  and  a  A,  the 
point  A  being  on  the  isothermal  line 
A  D  corresponding  to  the  lower  tem- 
perature T. 

First  Operation. — We   now   place 
the  cylinder  on  the  non-conducting 
stand  c,  so  that  no  heat  can  escape, 
and  we  then  force  the  piston  down, 
so  as  to  diminish  the  volume  of  the 
substance.     As  no  heat  can  escape, 
the  temperature  rises,  and  the  rela- 
—  tion  between  volume  and  pressure 
at  any  instant  will  be  expressed  by 
the  pencil  tracing  the  adiabatic  line  A  B. 

We  continue  this  process  till  the  temperature  has  risen  to 
s,  that  of  the  hot  body  A.  During  this  process  we  have  ex- 
pended an  amount  of  work  on  the  substance  which  is  re- 
presented by  the  area  A  B  b  a.  If  work  is  reckoned  negative 
when  it  is  spent  on  the  substance,  we  must  regard  that 
employed  in  this  first  operation  as  negative. 


Car  no? s  Four  Operations.  141 

Second  Operation. — We  now  transfer  the  cylinder  to  the 
hot  body  A,  and  allow  the  piston  gradually  to  rise.  The 
immediate  effect  of  the  expansion  of  the  substance  is  to 
make  its  temperature  fall,  but  as  soon  as  the  temperature 
begins  to  fall,  heat  flows  in  from  the  hot  body  A  through  the 
perfectly  conducting  bottom,  and  keeps  the  temperature  from 
falling  below  the  temperature  s. 

The  substance  will  therefore  expand  at  the  temperature  s, 
and  the  pencil  will  trace  out  the  line  B  c,  which  is  part  of  the 
isothermal  line  corresponding  to  the  upper  temperature  s. 

During  this  process  the  substance  is  doing  work  by  its 
pressure  on  the  piston.  The  amount  of  this  work  is  re- 
presented by  the  area  B  c  c  b,  and  it  is  to  be  reckoned 
positive. 

At  the  same  time  a  certain  amount  of  heat,  which  we  shall 
call  H,  has  passed  from  the  hot  body  A  into  the  working 
substance. 

Third  Operation. — The  cylinder  is  now  transferred  from  the 
hot  body  A  to  the  non-conducting  body  c,  and  the  piston  is 
allowed  to  rise.  The  indicating  pencil  will  trace  out  the 
adiabatic  line  c  D,  since  there  is  no  communication  of  heat, 
and  the  temperature  will  fall  during  the  process.  When 
the  temperature  has  fallen  to  T,  that  of  the  cold  body, 
let  the  operation  be  stopped.  The  pencil  will  then  have 
arrived  at  D,  a  point  on  the  isothermal  line  for  the  lower 
temperature  T. 

The  work  done  by  the  substance  during  this  process  is 
represented 'by  the  area  c  D  d  c>  and  is  positive. 

Fourth  Operation. — The  cylinder  is  placed  on  the  cold 
body  B.  It  has  the  same  temperature  as  B,  so  that  there  is  no 
transfer  of  heat.  But  as  soon  as  we  begin  to  press  down  the 
piston  heat  flows  from  the  working  substance  into  B,  so  that 
the  temperature  remains  sensibly  equal  to  T  during  the 
operation.  The  piston  must  be  forced  down  till  it  has 
reached  the  point  at  which  it  was  at  the  beginning  of  the 
first  operation,  and,  since  the  temperature  is  also  the  same, 


142  Heat  Engines. 

the  pressure  will  be  the  same  as  at  first.  The  working 
substance,  therefore,  after  these  four  operations,  has  returned 
exactly  to  its  original  state  as  regards  volume,  pressure,  and 
temperature. 

During  the  fourth  operation,  in  which  the  pencil  traces  the 
portion  D  A  of  the  isothermal  line  for  the  lower  temperature, 
the  piston  does  work  on  the  substance,  the  amount  of  which 
is  to  be  reckoned  negative,  and  which  is  represented  by  the 
area  D  A  a  d. 

At  the  same  time  a  certain  amount  of  heat,  which  we  shall 
denote  by  //,  has  flowed  from  the  working  substance  into  the 
cold  body  B. 

DEFINITION  OF  A  CYCLE. — A  series  of  operations  by  which 
the  substance  is  finally  brought  to  the  same  state  in  all  respects 
as  at  first  is  called  a  Cycle  of  operatiotis. 

Total  Work  done  during  the  Cycle. — When  the  piston  is 
rising  the  substance  is  giving  out  work ;  this  is  the  "case  in 
the  second  and  third  operations.  When  the  piston  is  sinking  it 
is  performing  work  on  the  substance  which  is  to  be  reckoned 
negative.  Hence,  to  find  the  work  performed  by  the  substance 
we  must  subtract  the  area  D  A  B  b  d>  representing  the  negative 
work,  from  the  positive  work,  B  c  D  d  b.  The  remainder, 
A  B  c  D,  represents  the  useful  work  performed  by  the  sub- 
stance during  the  cycle  of  operations.  If  we  have  any  diffi- 
culty in  understanding  how  this  amount  of  work  can  be 
obtained  in  a  useful  form  during  the  working  of  the  engine, 
we  have  only  to  suppose  that  the  piston  when  it  rises  is 
employed  in  lifting  weights,  and  that  a  portion  Of  the  weight 
lifted  is  employed  to  force  the  piston  down  again.  As  the 
pressure  cf  the  substance  is  less  when  the  piston  is  sinking 
than  when  it  is  rising,  it  is  plain  that  the  engine  can  raise  a 
greater  weight  than  that  which  is  required  to  complete  the 
•  cycle  of  operations,  so  that  on  the  whole  there  is  a  balance 
of  useful  work. 

Tratisference  of  Heat  during  the  Cycle. — It  is  only  in  the 
second  and  fourth  operations  that  there  is  any  transfer  of 


Comparison  of  Thermal  and  Mechanical  Effects.   143 

heat,  for  in  the  first  and  third  the  heat  is  confined  by  the 
non-conducting  stand. 

In  the  second  operation  a  quantity  of  heat  represented  by 
H  passes  from  the  hot  body  A  into  the  working  substance  at 
the  upper  temperature  s,  and  in  the  fourth  operation  a 
quantity  of  heat  represented  by  h  passes  from  the  working 
substance  into  the  cold  body  B  at  the  lower  temperature  T. 

The  working  substance  is  left  after  the  cycle  of  operations 
in  precisely  the  same  state  as  it  was  at  first,  so  that  the  whole 
physical  result  of  the  cycle  is — 

1.  A  quantity,  H,  of  heat  taken  from  A  at  the  temperature  s. 

2.  The  performance   by  the  substance  of  a  quantity  of 
work  represented  by  A  B  c  D. 

3.  A  quantity,  //,  of  heat  communicated  to  B  at  the  tem- 
perature T. 

APPLICATION    OF   THE    PRINCIPLE    OF   THE    CONSERVATION 
OF   ENERGY. 

It  has  long  been  thought  by  those  who  study  natural 
forces  that  in  all  observed  actions  among  bodies  the  work 
which  is  done  is  merely  transferred  from  one  body  in  which 
there  is  a  store  of  energy  into  another,  so  as  to  increase  the 
store  of  energy  in  the  latter  body. 

The  word  energy  is  employed  to  denote  the  capacity 
which  a  body  has  of  performing  work,  whether  this  capacity 
arises  from  the  motion  of  the  body,  as  in  the  case  of  a  cannon- 
ball,  which  is  able  to  batter  down  a  wall  before  it  can  be 
stopped  ;  or  from  its  position,  as  in  the  case  of  the  weight  of  a 
clock  when  wound  up,  which  is  able  to  keep  the  clock  going 
for  a  week  ;  or  from  any  other  cause,  such  as  the  elasticity  of 
a  watch-spring,  the  magnetisation  of  a  compass  needle,  the 
chemical  properties  of  an  acid,  or  the  heat  of  a  hot  body. 

The  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  asserts  that  all 
these  different  forms  of  energy  can  be  measured  in  the  same 
way  that  mechanical  work  is  measured,  and  that  if  the  whole 
energy  of  any  system  were  measured  in  this  way  the  mutual 


144  Heat  Engines. 

action  of  the  parts  of  the  system  can  neither  increase  nor 
diminish  its  total  stock  of  energy. 

Hence  any  increase  or  diminution  of  energy  in  a  system 
must  be  traced  to  the  action  of  bodies  external  to  the 
system. 

The  belief  in  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy 
has  greatly  assisted  the  progress  of  physical  science,  especially 
since  1840.  The  numerous  investigations  which  have  been 
made  into  the  mechanical  value  of  various  forms  of  energy 
were  all  undertaken  by  men  who  believed  that  in  so  doing 
they  were  laying  a  foundation  fora  more  accurate  knowledge 
of  physical  actions  considered  as  forms  of  energy.  The  fact 
that  so  many  forms  of  energy  can  be  measured  on  the 
hypothesis  that  they  are  all  equivalent  to  mechanical  energy, 
and  that  measurements  conducted  by  different  methods  are 
consistent  with  each  other,  shows  that  the  doctrine  con- 
tains scientific  truth. 

To  estimate  its  truth  from  a  demonstrative  point  of  view 
we  must  consider,  as  we  have  always  to  do  in  making  such 
estimates,  what  is  involved  in  a  direct  contradiction  of  the 
doctrine.  If  the  doctrine  is  not  true,  then  it  is  possible  for 
the  parts  of  a  material  system,  by  their  mutual  action  alone, 
and  without  being  themselves  altered  in  any  permanent  way, 
either  to  do  work  on  external  bodies  or  to  have  work  done 
on  them  by  external  bodies.  Since  we  have  supposed  the 
system  after  a  cycle  of  operations  to  be  in  exactly  the  same 
state  as  at  first,  we  may  suppose  the  cycle  of  operations  to 
be  repeated  an  indefinite  number  of  times,  and  therefore  the 
system  is  capable  in  the  first  case  of  doing  an  indefinite 
quantity  of  work  without  anything  being  supplied  to  it,  and 
in  the  second  of  absorbing  an  indefinite  quantity  of  work 
without  showing  any  result. 

That  the  doctrine  of  the  conservation  of  energy  is  not 
self-evident  is  shown  by  the  repeated  attempts  to  discover 
a  perpetual  motive  power,  and  though  such  attempts  have 
been  long  considered  hopeless  by  scientific  men,  these  men 


Conservation  of  Energy.  145 

themselves  had  repeatedly  observed  the  apparent  loss  of 
energy  in  friction  and  other  natural  actions,  without  making 
any  attempt  or  even  showing  any  desire  to  ascertain  what 
becomes  of  this  energy. 

The  evidence,  however,  which  we  have  of  the  doctrine  is 
nearly  if  not  quite  as  complete  as  that  of  the  conservation  of 
matter — the  doctrine  that  in  natural  operations  the  quantity 
of  matter  in  a  system  always  remains  the  same  though  it  may 
change  its  form. 

No  good  evidence  has  been  brought  against  either  of  these 
doctrines,  and  they  are  as  certain  as  any  other  part  of  our 
knowledge  of  natural  things. 

The  great  merit  of  Carnot's  method  is  that  he  arranges  his 
operations  in  a  cycle,  so  as  to  leave  the  working  substance 
in  precisely  the  same  condition  as  he  found  it.  We  are 
therefore  sure  that  the  energy  remaining  in  the  working 
substance  is  the  same  in  amount  as  at  the  beginning  of  the 
cycle.  If  this  condition  is  not  fulfilled,  we  should  have  to 
discover  the  energy  required  to  change  the  substance  from 
its  original  to  its  final  state  before  we  could  make  any 
assertion  based  upon  the  conservation  of  energy. 

We  have  therefore  got  rid  of  the  consideration  of  the 
energy  residing  in  the  working  substance,  which  is  called  its 
intrinsic  energy ',  and  we  have  only  to  compare — 

1.  The  original  energy,  which  is  a  quantity  H  of  heat  at  the 
temperature  s  of  the  hot  body.   This  being  communicared  to 
the  working  substance,  we  get  for  the  resulting  energy — 

2.  A  quantity  of  work  done,  represented  by  A  B  c  D  ;  and 

3.  A  quantity  h  of  heat  at  the  temperature  T  of  the  cold 
body. 

The  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  tells  us  that 
the  energy  of  the  heat  H  at  the  temperature  s  exceeds  that 
of  the  heat  h  at  the  temperature  T  by  a  quantity  of  n?e- 
chanical  energy  represented  by  A  B  c  D,  which  can  be  eas\iy 
expressed  in  foot-pounds.  This  is  admitted  by  ail. 

Now  Carnot  believed  heat  to  be  a  material  substance, 
L 


146  Heat  Engines. 

called  caloric,  which  of  course  cannot  be  created  or  destroyed. 
He  therefore  concluded  that,  since  tke  quantity  of  heat  re- 
maining in  the  substance  is  the  same  as  at  first,  H,  the  quantity 
of  heat  communicated  to  it,  and  /*,  the  quantity  of  heat 
abstracted  from  it,  must  be  the  same. 

These  two  portions  of  heat,  however,  are,  as  Carnot 
observed,  in  different  conditions,  for  n  is  at  the  temperature 
of  the  hot  body,  and  //  at  that  of  the  cold  body,  and  Carnot 
concluded  that  the  work  of  the  engine  was  done  at  the 
expense  of  the  fall  of  temperature>  the  energy  of  any 
distribution  of  heat  being  greater  the  hotter  the  body  which 
contains  it. 

He  illustrated  this  theory  very  clearly  by  the  analogy  of  a 
water-mill.  When  water  drives  a  mill  the  water  which  enters 
the  mill  leaves  it  again  unchanged  in  quantity,  but  at  a  lower 
level.  Comparing  heat  with  water,  we  must  compare  heat 
at  high  temperature  with  water  at  a  high  level.  Water  tends 
to  flow  from  high  ground  to  low  ground,  just  as  heat  tends  to 
flow  from  hot  bodies  to  cold  ones.  A  water-mill  makes  use 
of  this  tendency  of  water,  and  a  heat  engine  makes  use  of  the 
corresponding  property  of  heat. 

The  measurement  of  quantities  of  heat,  especially  when  it 
has  to  be  done  in  an  engine  at  work,  is  an  operation  of  great 
difficulty,  and  it  was  not  till  1862  that  it  was  shown  experi- 
mentally by  Him  that  /i,  the  heat  emitted,  is  really  less  than 
H,  the  heat  received  by  the  engine.  But  it  is  easy  to  see 
that  the  assumption  that  H  is  equal  to  h  must  be  wrong. 

For  if  we  were  to  employ  the  engine  in  stirring  a  liquid, 
then  the  work  A  B  c  D  spent  in  this  way  would  generate  an 
amount  of  heat  which  we  may  denote  by  §  in  the  liquid. 

The  heat  H  at  the  high  temperature  has  therefore  been 
used,  and  we  find  instead  of  it  a  quantity  //  at  the  low 
temperature,  and  also  «£  at  the  temperature  of  the  liquid, 
whatever  it  is. 

teut  if  heat  is  material,  and  therefore  H  =  //,  then  h  +  <$ 
U  gieater  than  the  original  quantity  H,  and  heat  has  been 


Heat  is  not  a  Substance.  147 

created,    which   is   contrary    to   the    hypothesis   that   it   is 
material. 

Besides  this,  we  might  have  allowed  the  heat  H  to  pass 
from  the  hot  body  to  the  cold  body  by  conduction,  either 
directly  or  through  one  or  more  conducting  bodies,  and  in 
this  case  we  know  that  the  heat  received  by  the  cold  body 
would  be  equal  to  the  heat  taken  from  the  hot  body,  since 
conduction  does  not  alter  the  quantity  of  heat.  Hence  in 
this  case  H  =  /$,  but  no  work  is  done  during  the  transfer  of 
heat.  When,  in  addition  to  the  transfer  of  heat,  work  is  done 
by  the  engine,  there  ought  to  be  some  difference  in  the  final 
result,  but  there  will  be  no  difference  if  h  is  still  equal  to  n. 

The  hypothesis  of  caloric,  or  the  theory  that  heat  is  a  kind 
of  matter,  is  rendered  untenable,  first  by  the  proof  given  by 
Rumford,  and  more  completely  by  Davy,  that  heat  can  be 
generated  at  the  expense  of  mechanical  work  ;  and,  second, 
by  the  measurements  of  Him,  which  show  that  when  heat 
does  work  in  an  engine,  a  portion  of  the  heat  disappears. 

The  determination  of  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat  by 
Joule  enables  us  to  assert  that  the  heat  which  is  required  to 
raise  a  pound  of  water  from  39°  F.  to  40°  F.  is  mechanically 
equivalent  to  772  foot-pounds  of  work. 

It  is  to  be  observed  that  in  this  statement  nothing  is  said 
about  the  temperature  of  the  body  in  which  the  heat  exists. 
The  heat  which  raises  the  pound  of  water  from  39°  F.  to 
40°  F.  may  be  taken  from  a  vessel  of  cold  water  at  50°  F., 
from  a  red-hot  iron  heater  at  700°  F.,  or  from  the  sun  at  a 
temperature  far  above  any  experimental  determination,  and 
yet  the  heating  effect  of  the  heat  is  the  same  whatever  be  the 
source  from  which  it  flows.  When  heat  is  measured  as  a 
quantity,  no  regard  whatever  is  paid  to  the  temperature  of 
the  body  in  which  the  heat  exists,  any  more  than  to  the  size, 
weight,  or  pressure  of  that  body,  just  as  when  we  deter- 
mine the  weight  of  a  body  we  pay  no  attention  to  its  other 
properties. 

Hence  if  a  body  in  a  certain  state,  as  to  temperature,  &c., 

L2 


148  Heat  Engines. 

is  capable  of  heating  so  many  pounds  of  water  from  39°  F.  to 
40°  F.  before  it  is  itself  cooled  to  a  given  temperature,  say 
40°  F.,  then  if  that  body,  in  its  original  state,  is  stirred  about 
and  its  parts  rubbed  together  so  as  to  expend  772  foot-pounds 
of  work  in  the  process,  it  will  be  able  to  heat  one  pound 
more  of  water  from  39°  F.  to  40°  F.  before  it  is  cooled  to  the 
given  temperature. 

Carnot,  therefore,  was  wrong  in  supposing  that  the 
mechanical  energy  of  a  given  quantity  of  heat  is  greater 
when  it  exists  in  a  hot  body  than  when  it  exists  in  a  cold 
body.  We  now  know  that  its  mechanical  energy  is  exactly 
the  same  in  both  cases,  although  when  in  the  hot  body  it  is 
more  available  for  the  purpose  of  driving  an  engine. 

In  our  statement  of  the  four  operations  of  Carnot's  engine 
we  arranged  them  so  as  to  leave  the  result  in  a  state  in 
which  we  can  interpret  it  either  as  Carnot  did,  or  according 
to  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat.  Carnot  himself  began  with 
the  operation  which  we  have  placed  second,  the  expansion 
at  the  upper  temperature,  and  he  directs  us  to  continue  the 
fourth  operation,  compression  at  the  lower  temperature,  till 
exactly  as  much  heat  has  left  the  substance  as  entered  during 
the  expansion  at  the  upper  temperature.  The  result  of  this 
operation  would  be,  as  we  now  know,  to  expel  too  much 
heat,  so  that  after  the  substance  had  been  compressed  on 
the  non-conducting  stand  to  its  original  volume,  its  tempera- 
ture and  pressure  would  be  too  low.  It  is  easy  to  amend  the 
directions  for  the  extent  to  which  the  outflow  of  heat  is  to  be 
permitted,  but  it  is  still  easier  to  avoid  the  difficulty  by 
placing  this  operation  last,  as  we  have  done. 

We  are  now  able  to  state  precisely  the  relation  between  ^, 
the  quantity  of  heat  which  leaves  the  engine,  and  H,  the 
quantity  received  by  it.  H  is  exactly  equal  to  the  sum  of  h, 
and  the  heat  to  which  the  mechanical  work  represented  by 
A  B  c  D  is  equivalent. 

In  all  statements  connected  with  the  dynamical  theory  of 
heat  it  is  exceedingly  convenient  to  state  quantities  of  heat 


Heat  expressed  in  Foot-pounds.  149 

in  foot-pounds  at  once,  instead  of  first  expressing  them  in 
thermal  units  and  then  reducing  the  result  to  foot-pounds  by 
means  of  Joule's  equivalent  of  heat.  In  fact,  the  thermal 
unit  depends  for  its  definition  on  the  choice  of  a  standard 
substance  to  which  heat  is  to  be  applied,  on  the 
choice  of  a  standard  quantity  of  that  substance,  and 
on  the  choice  of  the  effect  to  be  produced  by  the  heat. 
According  as  we  choose  water  or  ice,  the  grain  or  the 
gramme,  the  Fahrenheit  or  the  Centigrade  scale  of  tempera- 
tures, we  obtain  different  thermal  units,  all  of  which  have 
been  used  in  different  important  researches.  By  expressing 
quantities  of  heat  in  foot-pounds  we  avoid  ambiguity,  and, 
especially  in  theoretical  reasonings  about  the  working  of 
engines,  we  save  a  great  deal  of  useless  phraseology. 

As  we  have  already  shown  how  an  area  on  the  indicator 
diagram  represents  a  quantity  of  work,  we  shall  have  no 
difficulty  in  understanding  that  it  may  also  be  taken  to  re- 
present a  quantity  of  heat  equivalent  to  the  same  quantity  of 
work,  that  is  the  same  number  of  foot-pounds  of  heat. 

We  may  therefore  express  the  relation  between  H  and  h 
still  more  concisely  thus  : 

The  quantity,  n,  of  heat  taken  into  the  engine  at  the 
upper  temperature  s  exceeds  the  quantity,  //,  of  heat  given 
out  by  the  engine  at  the  lower  temperature  T  by  a  quantity 
of  heat  represented  by  the  area  A  B  c  D  on  the  indicator 
diagram. 

This  quantity  of  heat  is,  as  we  have  already  shown,  con- 
verted into  mechanical  work  by  the  engine. 


ON   THE    REVERSED   ACTION   OF    CARNOT'S    ENGINE. 

The  peculiarity  of  Carnot's  engine  is,  that  whether  it  is 
receiving  heat  from  the  hot  body,  or  giving  it  out  to  the 
cold  body,  the  temperature  of  the  substance  in  the  engine 
differs  extremely  little  from  that  of  the  body  in  thermal 
communication  with  it.  By  supposing  the  conductivity  of 


150  Heat  Eng  incs. 

the  bottom  of  the  cylinder  to  be  sufficiently  great,  or  by 
supposing  the  motions  of  the  piston  to  be  sufficiently 
slow,  we  may  make  the  actual  difference  of  temperature 
which  causes  the  flow  of  heat  to  take  place  as  small  as  we 
please. 

If  we  reverse  the  motion  of  the  piston  when  the  substance 
is  in  thermal  communication  with  A  or  B,  the  first  effect  will 
be  to  alter  the  temperature  of  the  working  substance,  but 
an  exceedingly  small  alteration  of  temperature  will  be  suf- 
ficient to  reverse  the  flow  of  heat,  if  the  motion  is  slow 
enough. 

Now  let  us  suppose  the  engine  to  be  worked  backwards 
by  exactly  reversing  all  the  operations  already  described. 
Beginning  at  the  lower  temperature  and  volume  o  a,  let  it 
be  placed  on  the  cold  body  and  expand  from  volume  o  a  to 
o  d.  It  will  receive  from  the  cold  body  a  quantity  of  heat 
h.  Then  let  it  be  compressed  without  losing  heaf  to  o  c. 
It  will  then  have  the  upper  temperature  s.  Let  it  then  be 
placed  on  the  hot  body  and  compressed  to  volume  o  b.  It 
will  give  out  a  quantity  of  heat  H  to  the  hot  body.  Finally, 
let  it  be  allowed  to  expand  without  receiving  heat  to  volume 
o  a,  and  it  will  return  to  its  original  state.  The  only  difference 
between  the  direct  and  the  reverse  action  of  the  engine  is, 
that  in  the  direct  action  the  working  substance  must  be  a 
little  cooler  than  A  when  it  receives  its  heat,  and  a  little 
warmer  than  B  when  it  gives  it  out ;  whereas  in  the  reverse 
action  it  must  be  warmer  than  A  when  it  gives  out  heat,  and 
cooler  than  B  when  it  takes  heat  in.  But  by  working  the 
engine  sufficiently  slowly  these  differences  may  be  reduced 
within  any  limits  we  please  to  assign,  so  that  for  theo- 
retical purposes  we  may  regard  Carnot's  engine  as  strictly 
reversible. 

In  the  reverse  action  a  quantity  h  of  heat  is  taken  from 
the  cold  body  B,  and  a  greater  quantity  H  is  given  to  the 
hot  body  A,  this  being  done  at  the  expense  of  a  quantity  of 
work  measured  by  the  area  A  D  c  B,  which  also  measures 


Carnofs  Engine  Reversed,  151 

the  quantity  of  heat  into  which  this  work  is  transformed 
during  the  process. 

The  reverse  action  of  Caniot's  engine  shows  us  that  it  is 
possible  to  transfer  heat  from  a  cold  body  to  a  hot  one, 
but  that  this  operation  can  only  be  done  at  the  expense  of 
a  certain  quantity  of  mechanical  work. 

The  transference  of  heat  from  a  hot  body  to  a  cold  one 
may  be  effected  by  means  of  a  heat  engine,  in  which  case 
part  of  it  is  converted  into  mechanical  work,  or  it  may 
take  place  by  conduction,  which  goes  on  of  itself,  but 
without  any  conversion  of  heat  into  work.  It  appears, 
therefore,  that  heat  may  pass  from  hot  bodies  to  cold  ones 
in  two  different  ways.  One  of  these,  in  which  a  highly 
artificial  engine  is  made  use  of,  is  nearly,  but  not  quite 
completely,  reversible,  so  that  by  spending  the  work  we 
have  gained,  we  can  restore  almost  the  whole  of  the  heat 
from  the  cold  body  to  the  hot.  The  other  mode  of  trans- 
fer, which  takes  place  of  itself  whenever  a  hot  and  a  cold 
body  are  brought  near  each  other,  appears  to  be  irreversible, 
for  heat  never  passes  from  a  cold  body  to  a  hot  one  of 
itself,  but  only  when  the  operation  is  effected  by  the  artificial 
engine  at  the  expense  of  mechanical  work. 

We  now  come  to  an  important  principle,  which  is  en- 
tirely due  to  Carnot.  If  a  given  reversible  engine,  working 
between  the  upper  temperature  s  and  the  lower  tempera- 
ture T,  and  receiving  a  quantity  H  of  heat  at  the  upper 
temperature,  produces  a  quantity  -w  of  mechanical  work, 
then  no  other  engine,  whatever  be  its  construction,  can 
produce  a  greater  quantity  of  work,  when  supplied  with 
the  same  amount  of  heat,  and  working  between  the  same 
temperatures. 

DEFINITION  OF  EFFICIENCY. — If  H  is  the  supply  of  heat, 
and  w  the  work  done  by  an  engine,  both  measured  in  foot- 
pounds, then  the  fradion  -  is  called  the  Efficiency  of  the 
u 

engine. 


152  Heat  Engines. 

Carnot's  principle,  then,  is  that  the  efficiency  of  a  rever- 
sible engine  is  the  greatest  that  can  be  obtained' with  a  given 
range  of  temperature. 

For  suppose  a  certain  engine,  M,  has  a  greater  efficiency 
between  the  temperatures  s  and  T  than  a  reversible  engine 
N,  then  if  we  connect  the  two  engines,  so  that  M  by  its 
direct  action  drives  N  in  the  reverse  direction,  at  each  stroke 
of  the  compound  engine  N  will  take  from  the  cold  body 
B  the  heat  //,  and  by  the  expenditure  of  work  w  give  to  the 
hot  body  A  the  heat  H.  The  engine  M  will  receive  this 
heat  H,  and  by  hypothesis  will  do  more  work  while  trans- 
ferring it  to  B  than  is  required  to  drive  the  engine  N. 
Hence  at  every  stroke  there  will  be  an  excess  of  useful 
work  done  by  the  combined  engine. 

We  must  not  suppose,  however,  that  this  is  a  violation  of 
the  principle  of  conservation  of  energy,  for  if  M  does  more 
work  than  N  would  do,  it  converts  more  heat  in  to- work  in 
every  stroke,  and  therefore  M  restores  to  the  cold  body  a 
smaller  quantity  of  heat  than  N  takes  from  it.  Hence,  the 
legitimate  conclusion  from  the  hypothesis  is,  that  the  com- 
bined engine  will,  by  its  unaided  action,  convert  the  heat 
of  the  cold  body  B  into  mechanical  work,  and  that  this 
process  may  go  on  till  all  the  heat  in  the  system  is  converted 
into  work. 

This  is  manifestly  contrary  to  experience,  and  therefore 
we  must  admit  that  no  engine  can  have  an  efficiency  greater 
than  that  of  a  reversible  engine  working  between  the  same 
temperatures.  But  before  we  consider  the  results  of  Car- 
not's principle  we  must  endeavour  to  express  clearly  the 
law  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  reasoning. 

The  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  when  applied 
to  heat,  is  commonly  called  the  First  Law  of  Thermo- 
dynamics. It  may  be.  stated  thus  :  When  work  is  transformed 
into  heat,  or  heat  into  work,  the  quantity  of  work  is 
mechanically  equivalent  to  the  quantity  of  heat. 

The  application  of  the  law  involves  the  existence  of  the 
mechanical  equivalent  of  heat. 


First  and  Second  Laws  of  Thermodynamics.   153 

Carnot's  principle  is  not  deduced  from  this  law,  and 
indeed  Carnot's  own  statement  involved  a  violation  of  it. 
The  law  from  which  Carnot's  principle  is  deduced  has  been 
called  the  Second  Law  of  Thermodynamics. 

Admitting  heat  to  be  a  form  of  energy,  the  second  law 
asserts  that  it  is  impossible,  by  the  unaided  action  of  natural 
processes,  to  transform  any  part  of  the  heat  of  a  body  into 
mechanical  work,  except  by  allowing  heat  to  pass  from  that 
body  into  another  at  a  lower  temperature.  Clausius,  who 
first  stated  the  principle  of  Carnot  in  a  manner  consistent 
with  the  true  theory  of  heat,  expresses  this  law  as  follows: — • 

It  is  impossible  for  a  self-acting  machine,  unaided  by  any 
external  agency,  to  convey  heat  from  one  body  to  another 
at  a  higher  temperature. 

Thomson  gives  it  a  slightly  different  form : — 

It  is  impossible,  by  means  of  inanimate  material  agency, 
to  derive  mechanical  effect  from  any  portion  of  matter  by 
cooling  it  below  the  temperature  of  the  coldest  of  the  sur- 
rounding objects. 

By  comparing  together  these  statements,  the  student  will 
be  able  to  make  himself  master  of  the  fact  which  they  cm- 
body,  an  acquisition  which  will  be  of  much  greater  import- 
ance to  him  than  any  form  of  words  on  which  a  demon- 
stration may  be  more  or  less  compactly  constructed. 

Suppose  that  a  body  contains  energy  in  the  form  of  heat, 
what  are  the  conditions  under  which  this  energy  or  any 
part  of  it  may  be  removed  from  the  body?  If  heat  in  a 
body  consists  in  a  motion  of  its  parts,  and  if  we  were  able 
to  distinguish  these  parts,  and  to  guide  and  control  their 
motions  by  any  kind  of  mechanism,  then  by  arranging  our 
apparatus  so  as  to  lay  hold  of  every  moving  part  of  the 
body,  we  could,  by  a  suitable  train  of  mechanism,  transfer 
the  energy  of  the  moving  parts  of  the  heated  body  to  any 
other  body  in  the  form  of  ordinary  motion.  The  heated 
body  would  thus  be  rendered  perfectly  cold,  and  all  its 
thermal  energy  would  be  converted  into  the  visible  motion 
of  some  other  body. 


154  Heat  Engines. 

Now  this  supposition  involves  a  direct  contradiction  to 
the  second  law  of  thermodynamics,  but  is  consistent  with 
the  first  law.  The  second  law  is  therefore  equivalent  to  a 
denial  of  our  power  to  perform  the  operation  just  described, 
either  by  a  train  of  mechanism,  or  by  any  other  method  yet 
discovered.  Hence,  if  the  heat  of  a  body  consists  in  the 
motion  of  its  parts,  the  separate  parts  which  move  must 
be  so  small  or  so  impalpable  that  we  cannot  in  any  way  lay 
hold  of  them  to  stop  them. 

In  fact,  heat,  in  the  form  of  heat,  never  passes  out  of  a 
body  except  when  it  flows  by  conduction  or  radiation  into  a 
colder  body. 

There  are  several  processes  by  which  the  temperature  of 
a  body  may  be  lowered  without  removing  heat  from  it,  such 
as  expansion,  evaporation,  and  liquefaction,  and  certain 
chemical  and  electrical  processes.  Every  one  of  these, 
however,  is  a  reversible  process,  so  that  when  the-  body  is 
brought  back  by  any  series  of  operations  to  its  original  state, 
without  any  heat  being  allowed  to  enter  or  escape  during 
the  process,  the  temperature  will  be  the  same  as  before,  in 
virtue  of  the  reversal  of  the  processes  by  which  the  tempera- 
ture was  lowered.  But  if,  during  the  operations,  heat 
has  passed  from  hot  parts  of  the  system  to  cold  by  con- 
duction, or  if  anything  of  the  nature  of  friction  has  taken 
place,  then  to  bring  the  system  to  its  original  state  will 
require  the  expenditure  of  work,  and  the  removal  of  heat. 

We  must  now  return  to  the  important  result  demonstrated 
by  Carnot,  that  a  reversible  engine,  working  between  two 
given  temperatures,  and  receiving  at  the  higher  temperature 
a  given  quantity  of  heat,  performs  at  least  as  much  work 
as  any  other  engine  whatever  working  under  the  same 
conditions.  It  follows  from  this  that  all  reversible  engines, 
whatever  be  the  working  substance  employed,  have  the 
same  efficiency,  provided  they  work  between  the  same 
temperature  of  the  source  of  heat  A  and  the  same  tempera- 
ture of  the  refrigerator  B. 

Hence  Carnot  showed  that  if  we  choose  two  tempera- 


Carnofs  Function.  155 

cures  differing  very  slightly,  say  by  ^Vs  of  a  degree,  the 
efficiency  of  an  engine  working  between  these  temperatures 
will  depend  on  the  temperature  only,  and  not  on  the  sub- 
stance employed,  and  this  efficiency  divided  by  the  differ- 
ence of  temperatures  is  the  quantity  called  Carnofs function^ 
a  quantity  depending  on  the  temperature  only. 

Carnot,  of  course,  understood  the  temperature  to  be 
estimated  in  the  ordinary  way  by  means  of  a  thermometer 
of  a  selected  substance  graduated  according  to  one  of  the 
established  scales,  and  his  function  is  expressed  in  terms  of 
the  temperature  so  determined.  But  W.  Thomson,  in  1848, 
was  the  first  to  point  out  that  Carnot's  result  leads  to  a 
method  of  denning  temperature  which  is  much  more 
scientific  than  any  of  those  derived  from  the  behaviour  of 
one  selected  substance  or  class  of  substances,  and  which 
is  perfectly  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  substance 
employed  in  defining  it. 


THOMSON  S    ABSOLUTE    SCALE   OF   TEMPERATURE, 

Let  T  A  B  c  represent  the  isothermal  line  corresponding 
to  temperature  T  for  a  certain  substance.  For  the  sake  of 
distinctness  in  the  figure,  I  have  supposed  the  substance  to 
be  partly  in  the  liquid  and  partly  in  the  gaseous  state,  so 
that  the  isothermal  lines  are  horizontal,  and  easily  dis- 
tinguished from  the  adiabatic  lines,  which  slope  downwards 
to  the  right.  The  investigation,  however,  is  quite  indepen- 
dent of  any  such  restriction  as  to  the  nature  of  the  working 
substance.  When  the  volume  and  pressure  of  the  substance 
are  those  indicated  by  the  point  A,  let  heat  be  applied 
and  let  the  substance  expand,  always  at  the  temperature  T, 
till  a  quantity  of  heat  n  has  entered,  and  let  the  state  of 
the  substance  be  then  indicated  by  the  point  B.  Let 
the  process  go  on  till  another  equal  quantity,  H,  of  heat  lias 
entered,  and  let  c  indicate  the  resulting  state.  The  process 
may  be  carried  on  so  as  to  find  any  number  of  points  on 


Heat  Engines, 


tne  isothermal  line,  such  that  for  each  point  passed  during 
the  expansion  of  the  substance  a  quantity  H  of  heat  has  been 
communicated  to  it. 

Now  let  A  A'  A",  B  B'  B",  c  c;  c 


FIG.  23. 


"  be  adiabatic  lines  drawn 
c,  that  is,  lines 


through   A  B 


representing  the  relation  be- 
tween volume  and  pressure 
when  the  substance  is  allowed 
to  expand  without  receiving 
heat  from  without. 

Let  T7  A'  B'  c'  and  T"  A"  B"  c" 
be  isothermal  lines  corre- 
sponding to  the  temperatures 
T'  and  T". 

We  have  already  followed 
Carnot's  proof  that  in  a  re- 
versible engine,  working  from 
the  temperature  T  of  the  source  of  heat  to  the  temperature  T' 
of  the  refrigerator,  the  work  w  produced  by  the  quantity  of 
heat  H  drawn  from  the  source  depends  only  on  T  and  T'. 

Hence,  since  A  B  and  B  c  correspond  to  equal  quantities 
of  heat  H  received  from  the  source,  the  areas  A  B  B'  A'  and 
B  c  c'  B',  which  represent  the  corresponding  work  performed, 
must  be  equal. 

The  same  is  true  of  the  areas  cut  off  by  the  adiabatic  lines 
from  the  space  between  any  other  pair  of  isothermal  lines. 

Hence  if  a  series  of  adiabatic  lines  be  drawn  so  that  the 
points  at  which  they  cut  one  of  the  isothermal  lines  corre- 
spond to  successive  equal  additions  of  heat  to  the  substance 
at  that  temperature,  then  this  series  of  adiabatic  lines  will  cut 
off  a  series  of  equal  areas  from  the  strip  bounded  by  any  two 
isothermal  lines. 

Now  Thomson's  method  of  graduating  a  scale  of  tempera- 
ture is  equivalent  to  choosing  the  points  A  A'  A",  from  which 
to  draw  a  series  of  isothermal  lines,  so  that  the  area  A  B  B'  A' 
contained  between  two  consecutive  isothermals  T  and  T'  shall 


A  bsolute  Scale  of  Temperature.  157 

be  equal  to  the  area  A'  B'B''  A'' contained  between  any  other 
pair  of  consecutive  isothermals  T'  T". 

It  is  the  same  as  saying  that  the  number  of  degrees  between 
the  temperature  T  and  the  temperature  T"  is  to  be  reckoned 
proportional  to  the  area  A  B  B"  A". 

Of  course  two  things  remain  arbitrary,  the  standard  tem- 
perature which  is  to  be  reckoned  zero,  and  the  size  of  the 
degrees,  and  these  may  be  chosen  so  that  the  absolute  scale 
corresponds  with  one  of  the  ordinary  scales  at  the  two 
standard  temperatures,  but  as  soon  as  these  are  determined 
the  numerical  measure  of  every  other  temperature  is  settled, 
in  a  manner  independent  of  the  laws  of  expansion  of  any 
one  substance— by  a  method,  in  fact,  which  leads  to  the  same 
result  whatever  be  the  substance  employed. 

It  is  true  that  the  experiments  and  measurements  required 
to  graduate  a  thermometer  on  the  principle  here  pointed  out 
would  be  far  more  difficult  than  those  required  by  the 
ordinary  method  described  in  the  chapter  on  Thermometry. 
But  we  are  not,  in  this  chapter,  describing  convenient  methods 
or  good  working  engines.  Our  objects  are  intellectual, 
not  practical,  and  when  we  have  established  theoretically 
the  scientific  advantages  of  this  method  of  graduation,  we 
shall  be  better  able  to  understand  the  practical  methods  by 
which  it  can  be  realised. 

We  now  draw  the  series  of  isothermal  and  adiabatic  lines 
in  the  following  way  : 

A  particular  isothermal  line,  that  of  temperature  T,  is  cut 
by  the  adiabatic  lines,  so  that  the  expansion  of  the  substance 
between  consecutive  adiabatic  lines  corresponds  to  successive 
quantities  of  heat,  each  equal  to  H,  applied  to  the  substance. 
This  determines  the  series  of  adiabatic  lines. 

The  isothermal  lines  are  drawn  so  that  the  successive 
isothermals  cut  off  from  the  space  between  the  pair  of 
adiabatic  lines  A  A'  A"  and  B  B'  B"  equal  areas  ABB'  A', 
A'  B'  B"  A",  &c. 

The  isothermal  lines  so  determined  cut  off  equal  areas 


153 


Heat  Engines. 


from  every  other  pair  of  adiabatic  lines,  so  that  the  two 
systems  of  lines  are  such  that  all  the  quadrilaterals  formed 
by  two  pairs  of  consecutive  lines  are  equal  in  area. 

We  have  now  graduated  the  isothermals  on  the  diagram 
by  a  method  founded  on  Carnot's  principle  alone,  and  in- 
dependent of  the  nature  of  the  working  substance,  and  it  is 
easy  to  see  how  by  altering,  if  necessary,  the  interval  between 
the  lines  and  the  line  chosen  for  zero,  we  can  make  the 
graduation  agree,  at  the  two  standard  temperatures,  with 
the  ordinary  scale. 

EFFICIENCY  OF   A   HEAT   ENGINE. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  relation  between  the  heat  supplied 
to  an  engine  and  the  work  done  by  it  as  expressed  in  terms 
of  the  new  scale  of  temperature. 

If  the  temperature  of  the  source  of  heat  is  T,  and  if  H  is 
the  quantity  of  heat  supplied  to  the  engine  at  that  tempera- 
ture, then  the  work  done  by  this  heat  depends  entirely  on 
the  temperature  of  the  refrigerator.  Let  T"  be  the  tempera- 
ture of  the  refrigerator,  then  the  work  done  by  11  is  represented 
by  the  area  A  B  B"  A",  or,  since  all  the  areas  between  the 
isothermals  and  the  adiabatics  are  equal,  let  11  c  be  the  area 
of  one  of  the  quadrilaterals,  then  the  work  done  by  n  will  be 
H  c  (T  —  T").  The  quantity  c  depends  only  on  the  tem- 
perature T.  It  is  called  Carnot's  Function  of  the  tempera- 
ture. We  shall  find  a  simple  expression  for  it  at  page  160. 

This,  therefore,  is  a  complete  determination  of  the  work 
done  when  the  temperature  of  the  source  of  heat  is  T.  It 
depends  only  on  Carnot's  principle,  and  is  true  whether  we 
admit  the  first  law  of  thermodynamics  or  not. 

If  the  temperature  of  the  source  is  not  T,  but  T',  we  must 
consider  what  quantity  of  heat  is  represented  by  the  expan- 
sion A'  B'  along  the  isothermal  T'.  Calling  this  quantity  of 
heat  H',  the  work  done  by  an  engine  working  between  the 
temperatures  T'  and  T"  is 

W   =~    H  C  (T7  -  T"). 


Their  Efficiency.  159 

Now  Carnot  supposed  that  H'  =   u,  which  would  make 
the  efficiency  of  the  engine  simply   -  =  c  (T'  -  T"),  where  c 

H 

is  Carnot's  function,  a  constant  quantity  on  this  supposition. 
But  according  to  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat,  we  get  by  the 
first  law  of  thermodynamics 

H'  =  H   —  A  B  B'  A', 

the  heat  being  measured  as  mechanical  work,  or 

H'  =  H  —  H  c  (T  —  T'). 

On  this   theory,   therefore,  the  efficiency   of  the  engine 
working  between  T'  and  T"  is 

w__       H  c  (T7  —  T") 
H'  ~  H  —  H  c  (T  —  T7) 
T'  -  i" 


ON  ABSOLUTE   TEMPERATURE. 

We  have  now  obtained  a  method  of  expressing  differences 
of  temperature  in  such  a  way  that  the  difference  of  two 
temperatures  may  be  compared  with  the  difference  of  two 
other  temperatures.  But  we  are  able  to  go  a  step  farther 
than  this,  and  to  reckon  temperature  from  a  zero  point 
denned  on  thermodynamic  principles  independently  of  the 
properties  of  a  selected  substance.  We  must  carefully 
distinguish  between  what  we  are  doing  now  on  really  scientific 
principles  from  what  we  did  for  the  sake  of  convenience  in 
describing  the  air  thermometer.  Absolute  temperature  on 
the  air  thermometer  is  merely  a  convenient  expression  of  the 
laws  of  gases.  The  absolute  temperature  as  now  defined 
is  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  thermometric  substance. 
It  so  happens,  however,  that  the  difference  between  these 
two  scales  of  temperature  is  very  small.  The  reason  of  this 
will  be  explained  afterwards. 


160  Heat  Engines. 

It  is  plain  th^t  the  work  which  a  given  quantity  of  heat 
H  can  perform  in  an  engine  can  never  be  greater  than  the 
mechanical  equivalent  of  that  heat,  though  the  colder  the 
refrigerator  the  greater  proportion  of  heat  is  converted  into 
work.  It  is  plain,  therefore,  that  if  we  determine  T"  the 
temperature  of  the  refrigerator,  so  as  to  make  w  the  work 
mechanically  equivalent  to  H,  the  heat  received  by  the 
engine,  we  shall  obtain  an  expression  for  a  state  of  things  in 
which  the  engine  would  convert  the  whole  heat  into  work, 
and  no  body  can  possibly  be  at  a  lower  temperature  than 
the  value  thus  assigned  to  T". 

Putting  w  =  H',  we  find  T"  =  T  —  -. 

This  is  the  lowest  temperature  any  body  can  have.  Call- 
ing this  temperature  zero,  we  find 

T=P 

or  the  temperature   reckoned  from  absolute   zero   is   the 
reciprocal  of  Carnot's  function  c. 

We  have  therefore  arrived  at  a  complete  definition  of  the 
measure  of  temperature,  in  which  nothing  remains  to  be 
determined  except  the  size  of  the  degrees.  Hitherto  the 
size  of  the  degrees  has  been  chosen  so  as  to  be  equal  to  the 
mean  value  of  those  of  the  ordinary  scales.  To  convert  the 
ordinary  expressions  into  absolute  temperatures  we  must  add 
to  the  ordinary  expression  a  constant  number  of  degrees, 
which  may  be  called  the  absolute  temperature  of  the  zero  of 
the  scale.  There  is  also  a  correction  varying  at  different 
parts  of  the  scale,  which  is  never  very  great  when  the  tem- 
perature is  measured  by  the  air  thermometer.  We  may  now 
express  the  efficiency  of  a  reversible  heat  engine  in  terms  of 
the  absolute  temperature  s  of  the  source  of  heat,  and  the 
absolute  temperature  T  of  the  refrigerator.  If  H  is  the 
quantity  of  heat  supplied  to  the  engine,  and  w  is  the  quantity 
of  work  performed,  both  estimated  in  dynamical  measure, 
w  s  —  T 


Absolute  Temperature.  Ibl 

The  quantity  of  heat  which  is  given  out  to  the  refrigeiator 

at  temperature  T  is  h  =  H  —  w  =  H-  ,  whence 

»  s 

s"  "~  f      h  ~~  T" 

that  is,  in  a  reversible  engine  the  ratio  of  the  heat  received  to 
the  heat  rejected  is  that  of  the  numbers  expressing  on  an  abso- 
lute scale  the  temperatures  of  the  source  and  the  refrigerator. 

This  relation  furnishes  us  with  a  method  of  determining 
the  ratio  of  two  temperatures  on  the  absolute  scale.  It  is 
independent  of  the  nature  of  the  substance  employed  in  the 
reversible  engine,  and  is  therefore  a  perfect  method  con- 
sidered from  a  theoretical  point  of  view.  The  practical 
difficulties  of  fulfilling  the  required  conditions  and  making 
the  necessary  measurements  have  not  hitherto  been  over- 
come, so  that  the  comparison  of  the  absolute  scale  of  tem- 
perature with  the  ordinary  scale  must  be  made  in  a  different 
way.  (See  p.  213.) 

Let  us  now  return  to  the  diagram  fig.  23  (p.  156),  on  which 
we  have  traced  two  systems  of  lines,  the  isothermals  and 
the  adiabatics.  To  draw  an  isothermal  line  through  a  given 
point  requires  only  a  series  of  experiments  on  the  substance 
at  a  given  temperature,  as  shown  by  a  thermometer  of  any 
kind.  To  draw  a  series  of  these  lines  to  represent  succes- 
sive degrees  of  temperature  is  equivalent  to  fixing  a  scale  of 
temperature. 

Such  a  scale  might  be  defined  in  many  different  ways, 
each  of  which  depends  on  the  properties  of  some  selected 
substance.  For  instance,  the  scale  might  be  founded  on  the 
expansion  of  a  particular  substance  at  some  standard  pressure. 
In  this  case,  if  a  horizontal  line  is  drawn  to  represent  the 
standard  pressure,  then  the  isothermal  lines  of  the  selected 
substance  will  cut  this  line  at  equal  intervals.  If,  however, 
the  nature  of  the  substance  or  the  standard  pressure  be 
different,  the  thermometric  scale  will  be  in  general  different 
The  scale  might  also  be  founded  on  the  variation  of  pressure 


1 62  Thermodynamics. 

of  a  substance  confined  in  a  given  space,  as  in  the  case  of 
certain  applications  of  the  air  thermometer. 

It  has  also  been  proposed  to  define  temperature  so  that 
equal  increments  of  heat  applied  to  a  standard  substance 
will  produce  equal  increments  of  temperature.  This  method 
also  fails  to  give  results  consistent  for  all  substances,  because 
the  specific  heats  of  different  substances  are  not  in  the  same 
ratio  at  different  temperatures. 

The  only  method  which  is  certain  to  give  consistent  re- 
sults, whatever  be  the  substance  employed,  is  that  which  is 
founded  on  Carnot's  Function,  and  the  most  convenient 
form  in  which  this  method  can  be  applied  is  that  which  de- 
fines the  absolute  temperature  as  the  reciprocal  of  Carnot's 
Function.  We  shall  see  afterwards  how  a  companson  can 
be  made  between  the  absolute  temperature  on  the  thermo- 
dynamic  scale  and  the  temperature  as  indicated  by  a 
thermometer  of  a  particular  kind  of  gas.  (See  p.  213.) 

ON    ENTROPY. 

We  have  next  to  consider  the  series  of  adiabatic  lines  as 
indicating  a  series  of  degrees  of  another  property  of  the 
body,  expressed  as  a  measurable  quantity,  such  that  when 
there  is  no  communication  of  heat  this  quantity  remains 
constant,  but  when  heat  enters  or  leaves  the  body  the  quan- 
tity increases  or  diminishes. 

We  shall  adopt  the  name  given  by  Clausius  to  this  quan- 
tity, and  call  it  the  entropy  of  the  body.  Rankine,  in  whose 
investigations  this  quantity  also  plays  an  important  part,  calls 
it  the  thermodynamic  function.  This  term,  however,  is  not 
so  appropriate,  as  the  name  might  have  been  assigned  to  any 
one  of  several  important  quantities  in  thermodynamics. 

We  must  regard  the  entropy  of  a  body,  like  its  volume, 
pressure,  and  temperature,  as  a  distinct  physical  property  of 
the  body  depending  on  its  actual  state. 

The  proper  zero  of  entropy  is  that  of  the  body  when  entirely 
deprived  of  heai,  but  as  we  cannot  bring  the  body  into  this 
condition  it  is  more  convenient  to  reckon  entropy  from  a 
standard  state  defined  W  a  standard  temperature  and  pressure. 


Entropy.  163 

The  entropy  of  the  body  in  any  other  condition  is  then 
measured  thus.  Let  the  body  expand  (or  contract)  without 
communication  of  heat  till  it  reaches  the  standard  tempera- 
ture, the  value  of  which,  on  the  thermodynamic  scale,  is  T. 
Then  let  the  body  be  kept  at  the  standard  temperature  and 
brought  to  the  standard  pressure,  and  let  H  be  the  number 
of  units  of  heat  given  out  during  this  process.  Then  the 

TT 

entropy  of  the  body  in  its  original  state  is  —  . 

We  shall  use  the  symbol  </>  to  denote  the  entropy. 

If  the  body,  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  standard  state, 
requires  to  absorb  heat,  then  its  original  entropy  must  be 
reckoned  negative  with  respect  to  the  standard  state. 

When  heat  enters  a  body  at  the  temperature  0  and  causes 
the  entropy  to  increase  from  ^l  to  <£2,  the  amount  of  heat 
which  enters  the  body  is  ti(<p2  —  (j>i). 

The  entropy  of  a  body  in  a  given  state  is  proportional  to 
the  mass  of  the  body,  so  that  the  entropy  of  two  pounds  of 
water  is  double  that  of  one  pound  in  the  same  state. 

We  often,  however,  speak  of  the  entropy  of  a  substance, 
by  which  we  mean  the  entropy  of  unit  of  mass  of  that  sub- 
stance in  the  given  state. 

The  entropy  of  a  system  of  bodies  in  different  stales  is 
the  sum  of  'the  entropies  of  each  of  the  bodies. 

When  a  quantity,  H,  oft  heat  passes  from  a  body  at  tempera- 
ture 6l  to  a  body  at  temperature  02)  the  entropy  of  the  first  body 

is  diminished  by  --,  while  that  of  the  second  is  increased  by 
0| 

•-,  so  that  the  entropy  of  the  system  increases  by  H    *~  -. 


Now  it  is  the  condition  of  the  transfer  of  heat  that  il 
passes  from  the  hotter  to  the  colder  body,  and  therefore  0, 
must  be  greater  than  62. 

The  transference  of  heat,  therefore,  from  one  body  of  the 
system  to  another  always  increases  the  entropy  of  the  system. 

Clausius  expresses  this  by  saying  that  the  entropy  of  the 
system  always  tends  towards  a  maximum  value. 

H9 


164  Thermodynamics. 

The  heat  which  enters  the  body  during  any  very  small 
change  of  state  is  represented,  as  we  r^ave  seen,  by  0(02  —  0i)> 
where  6  is  the  mean  temperature  of  the  body  during  the 
process,  and  0!  and  </>2  represent  the  entropy  at  the  beginning 
and  the  end  of  the  process. 

If  we  suppose  the  two  isentropic  lines  </>,  and  </>2  to  be 
continued  in  the  direction  of  decreasing  temperatures  down 
to  the  temperature  T,  then  the  area  included  between  the 
two  isentropic  lines  between  the  temperatures  6  and  T  will 

be  (fl-T)^-^)- 

If  we  could  draw  the  isentropic  and  isothermal  lines  cor- 
rectly for  all  temperatures  down  to  the  absolute  zero  of  the 
thermodynamic  scale,  then  the  whole  area  included  between 
the  isentropic  lines  and  the  isothermals  for  0  and  zero  would 
be  0(<£2  —  00,  and  this  area  would  represent  the  heat  which 
enters  the  body  during  the  process. 

But  though  it  is  impossible  to  conjecture  the  properties 
of  a  body  at  absolute  zero  or  to  draw  on  a  diagram  the  true 
forms  of  the  thermal  lines  near  that  temperature,  it  is  easy, 
after  we  have  constructed  the  thermodynamic  diagram  foi 
that  part  of  the  field  which  is  known  by  observation, 
to  draw  lines  in  the  unknown  part  of  the  field,  by  means  of 
which  we  may  still  represent  quantities  of  heat  by  areas. 

If  the  known  part  of  the  field  is  bounded  by  the  isother- 
mal T,  and  if  we  draw  from  the  extremities  of  the  known 
parts  of  the  isentropic  lines  a  series  of  lines  of  any  form 
which  do  not  intersect  each  other,  and  if  we  draw  anothei 
line,  z  z',  so  that  the  space  included  between  this  line,  two 
neighbouring  isentropics  (j>l  and  02,  and  the  isothermal  line 
T  is  T(<^>2  —  ^j),  we  may,  in  calculating  quantities  of  heat,  treat 
the  line  z  z'  as  the  fictitious  isothermal  of  absolute  'zero,  and 
the  series  of  lines  as  a  fictitious  isentropic  series. 

For  the  area  between  the  two  isentropic  lines  from  tem- 
perature 0  to  temperature  T  is  (0— T)  (f2-0i).  This  area  is 
within  the  known  part  of  the  field.  The  continuation  of 
this  area  in  the  unknown  part  of  the  field  down  to  the  ficti- 
tious isothermal  of  absolute  zero  is  T>— >.  The  whole 


Fictitious  Thermal  L  incs.  165 

area  therefore  is  0(02— 0i  ),  and  it:  therefore  represents  the 
quantity  of  heat  absorbed  in  passing  at  the  temperature  0 
from  the  line  0t  to  the  line  02. 

The  whole  heat  absorbed  by  a  body  in  passing  from  a. 
state  A  to  a  state  B  through  a  definite  series  of  intermediate 
steps  represented  by 
Jhe  path  A  B,  may  be 
called  the  'heat  of 
the  path  A  B.'  By 
dividing  A  B  into  a 
sufficient  number  of 
small  parts,  and  con- 
sidering the  area  re- 
presenting the  heat 
absorbed  during  the 
passage  of  the  body 

over  each  of  these  divisions,  we  find  that  the  sum  of  these 
areas  is  the  area  included  by  the  path  AB,  the  isentropics 
through  A  and  B  including  their  fictitious  parts,  and  the  ficli 
tious  isothermal  of  absolute  zero. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ON   THE   RELATIONS    BETWEEN   THE    PHYSICAL 
PROPERTIES    OF   A   SUBSTANCE. 

LET  Tj  T!  and  T2  T2  represent  two  isothermal  lines  corre- 
sponding to  two  consecutive  degrees  of  temperature.  Let 
</>i  0i  and  02  02  represent  two  consecutive  adiabatic  lines. 
Let  A  BCD  be  the  quadrilateral  which  lies  between  both 
these  pairs  of  lines.  If  the  lines  are  drawn  close  enough  to 
each  other  we  may  treat  this  quadrilateral  as  a  parallelogram. 

The  area  of  this  parallelogram  is,  as  we  have  already 
shown,  equal  to  unity. 

Draw  horizontal  lines  through  A  and  D  to  meet  the  line 
E  c  produced  in  K  and  Q,  then,  since  the  parallelograms 
A  B  c  D  and  A  K  Q  D  stand  on  the  same  base  and  are  between 
the  same  parallels,  they  are  equal.  Now  draw  the  vertical 


1 66 


Thermodynamics. 


lines  A  k  and  K  P  to  meet  Q  D,  produced  if  necessary.  Then 
the  rectangle  A  K  P  k  is  equal  to  the  parallelogram  A  K  Q  D, 
because  they  stand  on  the  same  base  A  K,  and  are  between 
the  same  parallels  A  K  and  k  Q.  Hence  the  rectangle  A  K  p  k 
FIG.  24. 


is  also  equal  to  the  original  parallelogram  A  B  c  D.  If, 
therefore,  we  draw  A  K  from  A  horizontally  to  meet  the 
isothermal  T2,  and  A  k  vertically  to  meet  a  horizontal  line 
through  D,  we  shall  have  the  following  relation  : 


In  the  same  way,  if  the  horizontal  line  through  A  cuts  the 
adiabatic  line  </>2  m  L  and  the  verticals  through  D  and  B  in 
m  and  n,  and  if  the  vertical  line  through  A  cuts  the  isothermal 
line  T2  in  M,  the  adiabatic  line  02  in  N,  and  the  horizontal 
line  through  B  in  /,  we  shall  get  the  following  four  values  of 
the  area  of  A  BCD,  including  that  which  we  have  already 
investigated  : 


We  have  next  to  interpret  the  physical  meaning  of  the 
four  pairs  of  lines  which  enter  into  these  products. 

We.  must  remember  that  the  volume  of  the  substance  is 
measured  horizontally  to  the  right,  and  its  pressure  vertically 


Four  Therviodynamical  Relations*  1 67 

upwards ;  that  the  interval  between  the  isothermal  lines 
represents  one  degree  of  temperature,  the  graduation  of  the 
scale  being  as  much  subdivided  as  we  please  ;  and  that  the 
interval  between  the  adiabatic  lines  represents  the  addition 
of  a  quantity  of  heat  whose  numerical  value  is  T,  the 
absolute  temperature. 

(1)  A  K  represents  the  increase  of  volume  for  a  rise  of 
temperature  equal  to  one  degree,  the  pressure  being  main- 
tained  constant.      This    is    called    the   dilatability  of  the 
substance  per  unit  of  mass,  and  if  we  denote  the  dilatability 
per  unit  of  volume  by  o,  A  K  will  be  denoted  by  v  u. 

A  k  represents  the  diminution  of  pressure  corresponding 
to  the  addition  of  a  quantity  of  heat  represented  numerically 
by  T,  the  temperature  being  maintained  constant. 

If  the  pressure  is  increased  by  unity,  the  temperature 
remaining  constant,  the  quantity  of  heat  which  is  emitted  by 

the  substance  is  — .    Since AK.A/£=  i.  —  =T.AK. 
A  k  nk 

Hence  the  following  relation  between  the  dilatation  under 
constant  pressure  and  the  heat  developed  by  pressure. 

First  Thermo  dynamic  Relation. — If  the  pressure  of  a  sub- 
stance be  increased  by  unity  while  the  temperature  is  main- 
tained constant,  the  quantity  of  heat  emitted  by  the  sub- 
stance is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  absolute  temperature 
into  the  dilatation  for  one  degree  of  temperature  under 
constant  pressure. 

Hence,  if  the  temperature  is  maintained  constant,  those 
substances  which  increase  in  volume  as  the  temperature 
rises  give  out  heat  when  the  pressure  is  increased,  and 
those  which  contract  as  the  temperature  rises  absorb  heat 
when  the  pressure  is  increased. 

(2)  A  L  represents  the  increase  of  volume  under  constant 
pressure  when  a  quantity  of  heat  numerically  equal  to  T  is 
communicated  to  the  substance. 

A  /  represents  the  increase  of  pressure  required  to  raise 


1 6  8  Thermodynamics. 

the  substance  one  degree  of  temperature  when  no  heat  is 
allowed  to  escape. 

Second  Thermodynamic  Relation. — The  quantity  —    re- 

A  L 

presents  the  heat  which  must  be  communicated  to  the  sub- 
stance in  order  to  increase  its  volume  by  unity,  the  pressure 
being  constant.  This  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  ab- 
solute temperature  into  the  increase  of  pressure  required 
to  raise  the  temperature  one  degree  when  no  heat  is  allowed 
to  escape. 

(3)  A  M  represents  the  increase  of  pressure  corresponding 
to  a  rise  of  one  degree  of  temperature,  the  volume  being 
constant.     (We  may  suppose  the  substance  enclosed  in  a 
vessel  the  sides  of  which  are  perfectly  unyielding.) 

A  m  represents  the  increase  of  volume  produced  by  the 
communication  of  a  quantity  of  heat  numerically  equal  to 
T,  the  temperature  being  maintained  constant. 

The  heat  given  out  by  the  substance  when  the  volume  is 
diminished  by  unity,  the  temperature  being  maintained  con- 

T* 

slant,  is  therefore .     This  quantity  is  called  the  latent 

A  m 

heat  of  expansion. 

Since  A  M  .  A  m  =  i,  we  may  express  the  relation  between 

these  lines  thus  :  — ?—  =  T  .  A  M,  or,  in  words  : 
A  m 

Third  Thermodynamic  Relation. — The  lalent  heat  of  ex- 
pansion  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  absolute  temperature 
and  the  increment  of  pressure  per  degree  of  temperature  at 
constant  volume. 

(4)  A  N  represents  the  increase  of  the  pressure  when  a 
quantity,  T,  of  heat  is  communicated  to  the  substance,  the 
volume  being  constant. 

A  n  represents  the  diminution  of  volume  when  the  sub- 
stance, being  prevented  from  losing  heat,  is  compressed  till 
the  temperature  rises  one  degree.  Hence  : 


Specif  c  That.  1 69 


Fourth  Thermo  dynamic  Relation. •  represents  the 

A  n 

rise  of  temperature  due  to  a  diminution  of  the  volume 
by  unity,  no  heat  being  allowed  to  escape,  and  this  is  equal 
to  A  N,  the  increase  of  pressure  at  constant  volume  due  to 
a  quantity  of  heat,  numerically  equal  to  T,  communicated  to 
the  substance. 

We  have  thus  obtained  four  relations  among  the  physical 
properties  of  the  substance.  These  four  relations  are  not 
independent  of  each  other,  so  as  to  rank  as  separate  truths. 
Any  one  might  be  deduced  from  any  other.  The  equality 
of  the  products  A  K,  A  k,  &c.,  to  the  parallelogram  A  B  c  D 
and  to  each  other  is  a  merely  geometrical  truth,  and  does 
not  depend  upon  thermodynamical  principles.  What  we 
learn  from  thermodynamics  is  that  the  parallelogram  and 
the  four  products  are  each  equal  to  unity,  whatever  be  the 
nature  of  the  substance  or  its  condition  as  to  pressure  and 
temperature.1 

ON   THE  TWO   MODES   OF   MEASURING   SPECIFIC   HEAT. 

The  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  unit  of  mass  of  the 
substance  one  degree  of  temperature  is  called  the  specific 
heat  of  the  substance. 

1  These  four  relations  may  be  concisely  expressed  in  the  language  of 
the  Differential  Calculus  as  follows: 

^  _  dA  m 

d  Q  (p  const.)  dp  (e  const.)     ' 

dv  d  e 

d$(p  const.)    =         ^(<J>  const.)     ' 

*JL  <L*.  (rt 

dQ(v  const.)    "         d  v  (Q  const.)     '  &> 

dp^  _  dQ 

a  $  (v  const.)  d  v  (?  const.)     ' 

Here  v  denotes  the  volume. 
p  ,,  pressure. 
B  ,,  absolute  temperature. 

$>  ,,          thermodynamic  function,  or  entropy. 


i  /o  Thermodynamics. 

At  p.  66  this  quantity  of  heat  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
thermal  unit,  or  the  heat  required  to  raise  unit  of  mass  of 
water  one  degree.  To  reduce  this  to  dynamical  measure  we 
must  multiply  by  Joule's  mechanical  equivalent  of  the  thermal 
anit.  The  quantity  thus  found  is  no  longer  a  mere  ratio,  as 
at  p.  66,  but  depends  on  the  thermometric  scale  which  we 
select  and  also  on  the  unit  of  work. 

But  the  specific  heat  of  a  substance  depends  on  the  mode 
in  which  the  pressure  and  volume  of  the  substance  vary 
during  the  rise  of  temperature. 

There  are,  therefore,  an  indefinite  number  of  modes  of 
denning  the  specific  heat.  Two  only  of  these  are  of  any 
practical  importance.  The  first  method  is  to  suppose  the 
volume  to  remain  constant  during  the  rise  of  temperature. 
The  specific  heat  under  this  condition  is  called  the  specific 
heat  at  constant  volume.  We  shall  denote  it  by  KV. 

In  the  diagram  the  line  A  M  N  represents  the  different 
states  of  the  substance  when  the  volume  is  constant,  A  M 
represents  the  increase  of  pressure  due  to  a  rise  of  one 
degree  of  temperature,  and  A  N  that  due  to  the  application 
of  a  quantity  of  heat  numerically  equal  to  T.  Hence  to  find 
the  quantity  of  heat,  KV,  which  must  be  communicated  to 
the  substance  in  order  to  raise  its  temperature  one  degree, 
and  so  increase  the  pressure  by  A  M,  we  have 

A  N  :  A  M  : :  T  :  KT 

or  A  M 

K      —  T       A 

XWy       —       1        .        . 

A  N 

The  second  method  of  defining  specific  heat  is  to  suppose 
the  pressure  constant.  The  specific  heat  under  constant 
pressure  is  denoted  by  KP. 

The  line  A  L  K  in  the  diagram  represents  the  different  states 
of  the  substance  at  constant  pressure,  A  K  represents  the  in- 
crease of  volume  due  to  a  rise  of  one  degree  of  temperature, 
and  A  L  represents  the  increase  of  volume  due  to  a  quantity 
of  heat  numerically  equal  to  T.  Now  the  quantity  KP  of 
heat  raises  the  substance  one  degree,  and  therefore  increases 
the  volume  by  A  K. 


Relations  of  Specific  Heat  and  Elasticity.      171 
Hence 


A  L  :  A  K 

or 


(A  third  mode  of  defining  specific  heat  is  sometimes 
adopted  in  the  case  of  saturated  steam.  In  this  case  the 
steam  is  supposed  to  remain  at  the  point  of  saturation  as 
the  temperature  rises.  It  appears,  from  the  experiments  of 
M.  Regnault,  as  shown  in  the  diagram  at  p.  135,  that  heat 
leaves  the  saturated  steam  as  its  temperature  rises,  so  that 
its  specific  heat  is  negative,  a  result  pointed  out  by  Clausius 
and  Rankine.) 

ON   THE   TWO    MODES    OF   MEASURING    ELASTICITY. 

The  elasticity  of  a  substance  was  defined  at  p.  107  to 
be  the  ratio  of  the  increment  of  pressure  to  the  com- 
pression produced  by  it,  the  compression  being  defined 
to  be  the  ratio  of  the  diminution  of  volume  to  the  original 
volume. 

But  we  require  to  know  something  about  the  thermal 
conditions  under  which  tho  substance  is  placed  before  we 
can  assign  a  definite  value  to  the  elasticity.  The  only  two 
conditions  which  are  of  practical  importance  are,  first, 
when  the  temperature  remains  constant,  and,  second,  when 
there  is  no  communication  of  heat. 

(1)  The  elasticity  under  the  condition  that  the  temperature 
remains  constant  may  be  denoted  by  E$. 

In  this  case  the  relation  between  volume  and  pressure  is 
defined  by  the  isothermal  line  D  A.  The  increment  of 
pressure  is  k  A,  and  the  diminution  of  volume  is  ;//  A. 
Calling  the  volume  v,  the  elasticity  at  constant  tempera- 
ture  is 

E,  =  VA*  =  V.A«. 

Am  A  K 

(2)  The  elasticity  under  the  condition  that  heat  neither 
enters  nor  leaves  the  substance  is  denoted  by  E^. 

In  this  case  the  relation  between  volume  and  pressure  ia 


1  7  2  Thermodynamics. 

defined  by  the  adiabatic  line  A  B.  The  increment  of  pressure 
is  A  /,  and  the  decrement  of  volume  is  A  n.  Hence  the 
elasticity  when  no  heat  escapes  is 

E,  =  V.AJ-  =  V.^. 
A  H  A  L 

There  are  several  important  relations  among  these 
quantities.  In  the  first  place,  we  find  for  the  ratio  of  the 
specific  heats, 


A  L  A  L 


Ej 
" 


K  T<AJI  y      A  M         Eg 

'AN          '  A  K 

or  the  ratio  of  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure  to  that 
at  constant  volume  is  equal  to  the  ratio  of  the  elasticity 
when  no  heat  escapes  to  the  elasticity  at  constant  tempera- 
ture. This  relation  is  quite  independent  of  the  principles  of 
thermodynamics,  being  a  direct  consequence  of  the  defini- 
tions. 

The  ratio  of  KP  to  KV,  or  of  EQ  to  E$,is  commonly  denoted 
by  the  symbol  y  :  thus  KP  =  yKv,  and  E$  =  yE0. 

Let  us  next  determine  the  difference  between  the  two 
elasticities 

A  /.  A  0Z  —  A//.A/& 


—  Eg 


A  HI  .  A  11 


The  numerator  of  the  fraction  is  evidently,  by  the  geo- 
metry of  the  figure,  equal  to  the  parallelogram  A  B  c  D. 
Multiplying  by  KV,  we  find 

K,  (E,-  E.)  =TV.^1.AECD=T.V.A-*!., 

A  m    A  N  .  A  ;*  Am 

since  A  n  .  A  N  =  A  B  c  D,  as  we  have  shown. 
Since  KV  E^  =  KP  E6)  we  also  find 

Ee  (Kp  -  KT)   =  T  V  .  ±2E. 

A  tn 

These  relations  are  independent  of  the  principles  of 
thermodynamics. 


Latent  Heat.  173 

If  we  now  apply  the  thermodynamical  equation  A  in.  KM 
=  i,  each  of  these  quantities  becomes  equal  to 
T  v  .  (A  M)*. 

Now  A  M  is  the  increment  of  pressure  at  constant  volume 
per  degree  of  temperature,  a  very  important  quantity.  The 
results  therefore  may  be  written 

KT  (E^  -  E0)   =  T  V  A  Ma  =  E0  (Kp  -   KT). 


CHAPTER  X. 

ON   LATENT   HEAT. 

A  VERY  important  class  of  cases  is  that  in  which  the  sub- 
stance is  in  two  different  states  at  the  same  temperature  and 
pressure,  as  when  part  of  it  is  solid  and  part  liquid,  or  part 
solid  or  liquid  and  part  gaseous. 

In  such  cases  the  volume  occupied  by  the  substance  must 
be  considered  as  consisting  of  two  parts,  vl  being  that  of  the 
substance  in  the  first  state,  and  v2  that  of  the  substance  in 
the  second  state.  The  quantity  of  heat  necessary  to  convert 
unit  of  mass  of  the  substance  from  the  first  state  to  the 
second  without  altering  its  temperature  is  called  the  Latent 
Heat  of  the  substance,  and  is  denoted  by  L. 

During  this  process  the  volume  changes  from  vl  to  v^  at 
the  constant  pressure/. 

Let  P  s  be  an  isothermal  Flo%  a5> 

line,  which  in  this  case  is  hori- 
zontal, and  let  it  correspond  to  \  \ 
the  pressure  P  and  the  tempe- 
rature s. 

Let  Q  T  be  another  iso- 
thermal line  corresponding  to 
the  pressure  Q  and  the  tempe- 
rature T. 


\ \ 


\     "\ 


174  Latent  Heat. 

Let  B  A  and  c  D  be  adiabatic  lines  cutting  the  isothermals 
in  A  B  c  D. 

Then  the  substance,  in  expanding  at  the  temperature  s 
from  the  volume  p  B  to  the  volume  p  c,  will  absorb  a 

quantity  of  heat  equal  to  L  -         — ,  where  L  is  the  latent 

heat  at  temperature  s. 

When  the  substance  is  compressed  from  Q  D  to  Q  A  at 
temperature  T  it  will  give  out  a  quantity  of  heat  equal  to 

L'_A5_, 

where  the  accented  quantities  refer  to  the  temperature  T. 

The  quantity  of  work  done  by  an  engine  when  the  indi- 
cating point  describes  the  figure  A  B  c  D  on  the  diagram  is 
represented  by  the  area  of  this  figure,  and  if  the  temperatures 
s  and  T  are  so  near  each  other  that  we  may  neglect  the 
curvature  of  the  lines  A  B  and  c  D,  this  area  is 
\  (B  c  +  A  D)  P  Q. 

If  the  difference  of  pressures  P  Q  is  very  small,  B  c  =  A  D 
nearly,  so  that  we  may  write  the  area  thus  : 
B  c  (P  -  Q). 

But  we  may  calculate  the  work  in  another  way.  It  is 
equal  to  the  heat  absorbed  at  the  higher  temperature, 
multiplied  by  the  ratio  of  the  difference  of  the  temperatures 
to  the  higher  temperature.  This  is 

B  c  s  —  T 


Equating  the  two  values  of  the  work,  we  find  the  latent 
heat 


where  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  in  calculating  the  frac- 


P-Q 

S  —  T 

difference  of  the  temperatures  s  and  T  are  to  be  supposed 


tion "  the  difference  of  the  pressures  P  and  Q  and  the 


Latent  Heat.  175 

very  small.  In  fact,  this  fraction  is  that  which  in  the  lan- 
guage of  the  differential  calculus  would  be  denoted  by  — ? . 

The  student  may  deduce  the  equation  at  once  from  the 
third  thermodynamic  relation  at  p.  168. 

The  most  important  case  of  a  substance  in  two  different 
states  is  that  in  which  the  substance  is  partly  water  and 
partly  steam  at  the  same  temperature. 

The  pressure  of  steam  in  a  vessel  containing  water  at  the 
same  temperature  is  called  the  pressure  of  saturated  steam 
or  aqueous  vapour  at  that  temperature. 

The  value  of  this  pressure  has  been  determined  fora  great 
number  of  temperatures  as  measured  on  the  ordinary  scales. 
The  most  complete  determinations  of  this  kind  are  those  of 
Regnault.  Regnault  has  also  determined  L,  the  latent  heat 
of  unit  of  mass  of  steam,  for  many  different  temperatures. 

Hence,  if  we  also  knew  the  value  of  z>2  ~  z'i>  or  the 
difference  of  volume  between  unit  of  mass  of  water  and  the 
same  when  converted  into  steam,  we  should  have  all  the 
data  for  determining  s,  the  absolute  temperature  on  the 
thermodynamic  scale. 

Unfortunately  there  is  considerable  difficulty  in  ascer- 
taining the  volume  of  steam  at  the  point  of  saturation.  If 
we  place  a  known  weight  of  water  in  a  vessel,  the  capacity 
of  which  we  can  adjust,  and  determine  either  the  capacity 
corresponding  to  a  given  temperature  at  which  the  whole  is 
just  converted  into  steam,  or  the  temperature  corresponding 
to  a  given  capacity,  we  may  obtain  data  for  determining 
the  density  of  saturated  steam,  but  it  is  exceedingly  difficult 
to  observe  either  the  completion  of  the  evaporation  or  the 
beginning  of  the  condensation,  and  at  the  same  time  to 
avoid  other  causes  of  error.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  these 
difficulties  will  be  overcome,  and  then  our  knowledge  of  the 
other  properties  of  saturated  steam  will  enable  us  to  compare 
the  ordinary  scales  of  temperature  with  the  thermodynamic 
scale  through  a  range  extending  from  —30°  F.  to  432°  F. 

In  the  meantime  Clausius  and  Rankine  have  made  use  of 


176  Latent  Heat. 

the  formula  in  order  to  calculate  the  density  of  saturated 
steam,  assuming  that  the  absolute  temperature  is  equal  to  the 
temperature  reckoned  from  —460°  of  Fahrenheit's  scab. 

The  same  principle  enables  us  to  establish  relations 
between  the  physical  properties  of  a  substance  at  the  point 
at  which  it  changes  from  the  solid  to  the  liquid  state. 

The  temperature  of  melting  ice  was  always  supposed  to  be 
absolutely  constant  till  it  was  pointed  out  by  Professor  James 
Thomson  l  that  it  follows  from  Carnot's  principle  that  the 
melting  point  must  be  lowered  when  the  pressure  increases  ; 
for  if  vl  is  the  volume  of  a  pound  of  ice,  and  z>2  that  of  a 
pound  of  water,  both  being  at  32°  F.,  we  know  that  the 
volume  of  the  ice  is  greater  than  that  of  the  water.  Hence 
if  s  be  the  melting  point  at  pressure  P,  and  T  the  melting 
point  at  pressure  Q,  we  have,  as  at  p.  1  74, 

^  =  K-».)r 

If  we  make  P  =  //,  the  pressure  of  one  atmosphere,  and 
5  =  32°  F.,  then  the  melting  temperature  at  pressure  Q  is 


Now  the  volume  of  a  pound  of  ice  at  32°  F.  is  0-0174 
cubic  feet  =  vlt  and  that  of  a  pound  of  water  at  the  same 
temperature  is  o-oi6  cubic  feet  =  v%.  s,  the  absolute  tempe- 
rature, corresponding  to  32°  F.,  is  492°.  L,  the  latent  heat 
required  to  convert  a  pound  of  ice  into  a  pound  of  water, 
=  142  thermal  units  =  142  x  772  foot-pounds.  Hence  T, 
the  temperature  of  melting,  corresponding  to  a  pressure  of 
Q  pounds  weight  per  square  foot,  is 

T  =  32°  —  o°-ooooo63  x  (Q  —  /i). 

If  the  pressure  be  that  of  n  atmospheres,  each  atmosphere 
being  2,116  pounds  weight  per  square  foot, 


1  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  voL  *vi.  p.  575, 
January  2,  1849. 


Freezing  Point  altered  by  Pressure.  177 

Hence  the  melting  point  of  ice  is  lowered  by  about  the 
seventy-fifth  part  of  a  degree  of  Fahrenheit  for  every 
additional  atmosphere  of  pressure.  This  result  of  theory 
was  verified  by  the  direct  experiments  of  Professor  W. 
Thomson.1 

Professor  J.  Thomson  has  also  pointed  out  the  importance 
of  the  unique  condition  as  to  temperature  and  pressure  under 
which  water  or  any  other  substance  can  permanently  exist 
in  the  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  forms  in  the  same  vessel. 
This  can  only  be  at  the  freezing  temperature  corresponding 
to  the  pressure  of  vapour  at  this  freezing  point.  He  calls 
this  the  triple  point,  because  three  thermal  lines  meet  in  it — 
(i)  the  steam  line,  which  divides  the  liquid  from  the  gaseous 
state ;  (2)  the  ice  line,  which  divides  the  liquid  from  the  solid 
state ;  (3)  the  hoar-frost  line,  which  divides  the  solid  from  the 
gaseous  state. 

Whenever  the  volume  of  the  substance  is,  like  that  of 
water,  less  in  the  liquid  than  in  the  solid  state,  the  effect  of 
pressure  on  a  vessel  containing  the  substance  partly  in  a 
liquid  and  partly  in  a  solid  state  is  to  cause  some  of  the 
solid  portion  to  melt,  and  to  lower  the  temperature  of  the 
whole  to  the  melting  point  corresponding  to  the  pressure. 
If,  on  the  contrary,  the  volume  of  the  substance  is  greater  in 
the  liquid  than  in  the  solid  state,  the  effect  of  pressure  is  to 
solidify  some  of  the  liquid  part,  and  to  raise  the  temperature 
to  the  melting  point  corresponding  to  the  pressure.  To 
determine  at  once  whether  the  volume  of  the  substance  is 
greater  in  the  liquid  or  the  solid  state,  we  have  only  to 
observe  whether  solid  portions  of  the  substance  sink  or  swim 
in  the  melted  substance.  If,  like  ice  in  water,  they  swim, 
the  volume  is  greater  in  the  solid  state,  and  pressure  causes 
melting  and  lowers  the  melting  point.  If,  like  sulphur,  wax, 
and  most  kinds  of  stone,  the  solid  substance  sinks  in  the 
liquid,  then  pressure  causes  solidification  and  raises  the 
melting  point. 

1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh^  1850. 
N 


178       Application  of  Thermodynamics  to  Gases. 

When  two  pieces  of  ice  at  the  melting  point  are  pressed 
together,  the  pressure  causes  melting  to  take  place  at  the 
portions  of  the  surface  in  contact.  The  water  so  formed 
escapes  out  of  the  way  and  the  temperature  is  lowered. 
Hence  as  soon  as  the  pressure  diminishes  the  two  parts  are 
frozen  together  with  ice  at  a  temperature  below  32°.  This 
phenomenon  is  called  Regelation. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  temperature  of  the  earth  increases 
as  we  descend,  so  that  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  boring  it  is 
considerably  hotter  than  at  the  surface.  We  shall  see  that, 
unless  we  suppose  the  present  state  of  things  to  be  of  no 
great  antiquity,  this  increase  of  temperature  must  go  on  to 
much  greater  depths  than  any  of  our  borings.  It  is  easy  on 
this  supposition  to  calculate  at  what  depth  the  temperature 
would  be  equal  to  that  at  which  most  kinds  of  stone  melt  in 
our  furnaces,  and  it  has  been  sometimes  asserted  that  at  this 
depth  we  should  find  everything  in  a  state  of  fusion.  But 
we  must  recollect  that  at  such  depths  there  is  an  enormous 
pressure,  and  therefore  rocks  which  in  our  furnaces  would 
be  melted  at  a  certain  temperature  may  remain  solid  even  at 
much  greater  temperatures  in  the  heart  of  the  eartli. 


CHAPTER  XL 

ON    THE  APPLICATION   OF  THE   PRINCIPLES   OF 
THERMODYNAMICS  TO    GASES, 

THE  physical  properties  of  bodies  in  the  gaseous  state  are 
more  simple  than  when  they  are  in  any  other  state.  The 
relations  of  the  volume,  pressure,  and  temperature  are 
then  more  or  less  accurately  represented  by  the  laws  of 
Boyle  and  Charles,  which  we  shall  speak  of,  for  brevity,  as 


Thermodynamics  of  Gases.  \  79 

the  '  gaseous  laws.'  We  may  express  them  in  the  following 
form : 

Let  v  denote  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass,  p  the  pressure, 
/  the  temperature  measured  by  an  air  thermometer  and 
reckoned  from  the  absolute  zero  of  that  instrument,  then 

the  quantity  —^-remains  constant  for  the  same  gas. 

We  here  use  the  symbol  /  to  denote  the  absolute  tempera- 
lure  as  measured  by  the  air  thermometer,  reserving  the 
symbol  6  to  denote  the  temperature  according  to  the 
absolute  thermodynamic  scale. 

We  have  no  right  to  assume  without  proof  that  these  two 
quantities  are  the  same,  although  we  shall  be  able  to  show 
by  experiment  that  the  one  is  nearly  equal  to  the  other. 

It  is  probable  that  when  the  volume  and  the  temperature 
are  sufficiently  great  all  gases  fulfil  with  great  accuracy  the 
gaseous  laws  ;  but  when,  by  compression  and  cooling,  the 
gas  is  brought  near  to  its  point  of  condensation  into  the 

liquid  form,   the  quantity  ^p  becomes  less  than  it  is  for 

the  perfectly  gaseous  state,  and  the  substance,  though  still 
apparently  gaseous,  no  longer  fulfils  with  accuracy  the 
gaseous  laws.  (See  pp.  116,  119.) 

The  specific  heat  of  a  gas  can  be  determined  only  by  a 
course  of  experiments  involving  considerable  difficulty  and 
requiring  great  delicacy  in  the  measurements.  The  gas 
must  be  enclosed  in  a  vessel,  and  the  density  of  the 
gas  itself  is  so  small  that  its  capacity  for  heat  forms  but 
a  small  part  of  the  total  capacity  of  the  apparatus.  Any 
error,  therefore,  in  the  determination  of  the  capacity  either 
of  the  vessel  itself  or  of  the  vessel  with  the  gas  in  it  will 
produce  a  much  larger  error  in  the  calculated  specific  heat  of 
the  gas. 

Hence  the  determinations  of  the  specific  heat  of  gases 
were  generally  very  inaccurate,  till  M.  Regnault  brought 
all  the  resources  of  his  experimental  skill  to  bear  on  the 

N  2 


i  So         Application  of  Thermodynamics  to  Gases. 

investigation,  and,  by  making  the  gas  pass  in  a  continuous 
current  and  in  large  quantities  through  the  tube  of  his  calori- 
meter, deduced  results  which  cannot  be  far  from  the  truth. 

These  results,  however,  were  not  published  till  1853,  but  in 
the  meantime  Rankine,  by  the  application  of  the  principles 
of  thermodynamics  to  facts  already  known,  determined 
theoretically  a  value  of  the  specific  heat  of  air,  which  he 
published  in  1850.  The  value  which  he  obtained  differed 
from  that  which  was  then  received  as  the  best  result  of  direct 
experiment,*  but  when  Rcgnault's  result  was  published  it 
agreed  exactly  with  Rankine's  calculation. 

We  must  now  explain  the  principle  which  Rankine 
applied.  When  a  gas  is  compressed  while  the  temperature 
remains  constant,  the  product  of  the  volume  and  pressure 
remains  constant.  Hence,  as  we  have  shown,  the  elasticity 
of  the  gas  at  constant  temperature  is  numerically  equal  to  its 
pressure. 

But  if  the  vessel  in  which  the  gas  is  contained  is  incapable 
of  receiving  heat  from  the  gas,  or  of  communicating  heat  to 
it,  then  when  compression  takes  place  the  temperature  will 
rise,  and  the  pressure  will  be  greater  than  it  was  in  the 
former  case.  The  elasticity,  therefore,  will  be  greater  in  the 
case  of  no  thermal  communication  than  in  the  case  of 
constant  temperature. 

To  determine  the  elasticity  under  these  circumstances  in 
this  way  would  be  impossible,  because  we  cannot  obtain  a 
vessel  which  will  not  allow  heat  to  escape  from  the  gas 
within  it.  If,  however,  the  compression  is  effected  rapidly, 
ihere  will  be  very  little  time  for  the  heat  to  escape,  but 
then  there  will  be  very  little  time  to  measure  the  pressure 
in  the  ordinary  way.  It  is  possible,  however,  after  com- 
pressing air  into  a  large  vessel  at  a  known  temperature,  to 
open  an  aperture  of  considerable  size  for  a  time  which  is 
sufficient  to  allow  the  air  to  rush  out  till  the  pressure  is  the 
same  within  and  without  the  vessel,  but  not  sufficient  to 
allow  much  heat  to  be  absorbed  by  the  air  from  the  sides  of 


Cooling  of  Air  by  Expansion.  1  8  1 

the  vessel.  When  the  aperture  is  closed  the  air  is  somewhat 
cooler  than  before,  and  though  it  receives  heat  from  the 
sides  of  the  vessel  so  fast  that  its  temperature  in  the  cooled 
state  cannot  be  accurately  observed  with  a  thermometer,  the 
amount  of  cooling  may  be  calculated  by  observing  the 
pressure  of  the  air  within  the  vessel  after  its  temperature  has 
become  equal  to  that  of  the  atmosphere.  Since  at  the 
moment  of  closing  the  aperture  the  air  within  was  cooler  than 
the  air  without,  while  its  pressure  was  the  same,  it  follows 
that  when  the  temperature  within  has  risen  so  as  to  be 
equal  to  that  of  the  atmosphere  its  pressure  will  be  greater. 

Let  /i  be  the  original  pressure  of  the  air  compressed  in  a 
vessel  whose  volume  is  v;  let  its  temperature  be  T,  equal  to 
that  of  the  atmosphere. 

Part  of  the  air  is  then  allowed  to  escape,  till  the  pressure 
within  the  vessel  is  P,  equal  to  that  of  the  atmosphere  ;  let 
the  temperature  of  the  air  remaining  within  the  vessel  be  /. 
Now  let  the  aperture  be  closed,  and  let  the  temperature  of 
the  air  within  become  again  T,  equal  to  that  of  the  atmosphere, 
and  let  its  pressure  be  then/.2. 

To  determine  /,  the  absolute  temperature  of  the  air  when 
cooled,  we  have,  since  the  volume  of  the  enclosed  air 
is  constant,  the  proportion 

p  :  A  :  :  t  :  T, 

or 


This  gives  the  cooling  effect  of  expansion  from  the 
pressure  pv  to  the  pressure  P.  To  determine  the  corre- 
sponding change  of  volume  we  must  calculate  the  volume 
originally  occupied  by  the  air  which  remains  in  the  vessel. 

At  the  end  of  the  experiment  it  occupies  a  volume  v,  at  a 
pressure  /2  and  a  temperature  T.  At  the  beginning  of  the 
experiment  its  pressure  was  /t  and  its  temperature  T  : 

hence  the  volume  which  it  then  occupied  was  v  £?  =  v,  and 

P\ 


1  32         Application  of  Thermodynamics  to  Gases. 

a  sudden  increase  of  volume  in  the  ratio  of  /2  toA  corre- 
sponds to  a  diminution  of  pressure  fjjom  /j  to  P.  Since  /a 
is  greater  tharc/p,  the  ratio  of  the  pressures  is  greater  than 
the  ratio  of  the  volumes. 

The  elasticity  of  the  air  under  the  condition  of  no  thermal 
communication  is  the  value  of  the  quantity 


when  the  expansion  is  very  small,  or  when  /j   is  very  little 
greater  than  p. 

But  we  know  that  the  elasticity  at  constant  temperature 
is  numerically  equal  to  the  pressure  (see  p.  in).  Hence  we 
find  for  the  value  of  y,  the  ratio  of  the  two  elasticities, 

_/!    -   P 

P\  —A 
or,  more  exactly, 

_  log  /i  -  log? 
log/,  -  log// 

Although  this  method  of  determining  the  elasticity  in  the 
case  of  no  thermal  communication  is  a  practicable  one,  it  is 
by  no  means  the  most  perfect  method.  It  is  difficult,  for 
instance,  to  arrange  the  experiment  so  that  the  pressure 
may  be  completely  equalised  at  the  time  the  aperture  is 
closed,  while  at  the  same  time  no  sensible  portion  of  heat 
has  been  communicated  to  the  air  from  the  sides  of  the 
vessel.  It  is  also  necessary  to  ensure  that  no  air  has  en- 
tered from  without,  and  that  the  motion  within  the  vessel  has 
subsided  before  the  aperture  is  closed. 

But  the  velocity  of  sound  in  air  depends,  as  we  shall  after- 
wards show,  on  the  relation  between  the  variations  of  its 
density  and  its  pressure  during  the  rapid  condensations  and 
rarefactions  which  occur  during  the  propagation  of  sound.  As 
these  changes  of  pressure  and  density  succeed  one  another 
several  hundred,  or  even  several  thousand,  times  in  a  second, 
the  heat  developed  by  compression  in  one  part  of  the  air  has  no 


Ratio  of  Elasticities.  183 

time  to  travel  by  conduction  to  parts  cooled  by  expansion, 
even  if  air  were  as  good  a  conductor  of  heat  as  copper  is. 
But  we  know  that  air  is  really  a  very  bad  conductor  of  heat, 
so  that  in  the  propagation  of  sound  we  may  be  quite  certain 
that  the  changes  of  volume  take  place  without  any  appreci- 
able communication  of  heat,  and  therefore  the  elasticity,  as 
deduced  from  measurements  of  the  velocity  of  sound,  is 
that  corresponding  to  the  condition  of  no  thermal  communi- 
cation. 

The  ratio  of  the  elasticities  of  air,  as  deduced  from  experi- 
ments on  the  velocity  of  sound,  is 

y  --  i  '408. 

This  is  also,  as  we  have  shown,  the  ratio  of  the  specific 
heat  at  constant  pressure  to  the  specific  heat  at  constant 
volume. 

These  relations  were  pointed  out  by  Laplace,  long  before 
the  recent  development  of  thermodynamics. 

We  now  proceed,  following  Rankine,  to  apply  the  thermo- 
dynamical  equation  of  p.  173  : 

E0  (KP  —  KV)  =  T  v  (A  M)3. 

In  the  case  of  a  fluid  fulfilling  the  gaseous  laws,  and 
also  such  that  the  absolute  zero  of  its  thermometric  scale 
coincides  with  the  absolute  zero  of  the  thermodynamic  scale, 
we  have 


and 
Hence 


P  -   KT  =   --  =  R, 


a  constant  quantity. 

Now    at    the    freezing  temperature,    which    is    492°-6 
on  Fahrenheit's  scale  from    absolute  zero,  /  v  =  26,214 


1 84         Application  of  Thermodynamics  to  Gases. 

foot-pounds  by  Regnault's  experiments  on  air,  so  that  R 
is  53 '2 1  foot-pounds  per  degree  of  Fahrenheit. 

This  is  the  work  done  by  one  pound  of  air  in  expanding 
under  constant  pressure  while  the  temperature  is  raised  one 
degree  Fahrenheit. 

Now  KY  is  the  mechanical  equivalent  of  the  heat  required 
to  raise  one  pound  of  air  one  degree  Fahrenheit  without 
any  change  of  volume,  and  KP  is  the  mechanical  equivalent 
of  the  heat  required  to  produce  the  same  change  of  tempera- 
ture when  the  gas  expands  under  constant  pressure,  so  that 
KP  —  KV  represents  the  additional  heat  required  for  the  ex- 
pansion. The  equation,  therefore,  shows  that  this  additional 
heat  is  mechanically  equivalent  to  the  work  done  by  the 
air  during  its  expansion.  This,  it  must  be  remembered, 
is  not  a  self-evident  truth,  because  the  air  is  in  a  different 
condition  at  the  end  of  the  operation  from  that  in  which 
it  was  at  the  beginning.  It  is  a  consequence  of  the  fact, 
discovered  experimentally  by  Joule  (p.  2 1 6),  that  no  change 
of  temperature  occurs  when  air  expands  without  doing 
external  work. 

We  have  now  obtained,  in  dynamical  measure,  the  differ- 
ence between  the  two  specific  heats  of  air. 

We  also  know  the  ratio  of  KP  to  KT  to  be  1-408.      Hence 

KT  =  T^^-  =  !30'4  foot-pounds  per  degree  Fahrenheit, 

and 

Kp  =  KT  +  53-21  =  183-6  foot-pounds  per  degree  Fah. 

Now  the  specific  heat  of  water  at  its  maximum  density  is 
Joule's  equivalent  of  heat :  for  one  pound  it  is  772  foot- 
pounds per  degree  Fahrenheit. 

Hence  if  Cp  is  the  specific  heat  of  air  at  constant  pressure 
referred  to  that  of  water  as  unity, 

Cp  =  ^  =  0-2378. 
This  calculation  was  published  by  Rankine  in  1850. 


Energy.  185 

The  value  of  the  specific  heat  of  air,  determined  directly 
from  experiment  by  M.  Regnault  and  published  in  1853,  is 
cp  =  0-2379. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

ON   THE    INTRINSIC   ENERGY   OF   A   SYSTEM    OF    BODIES. 

THE  energy  of  a  body  is  its  capacity  for  doing  work,  and 
is  measured  by  the  amount  of  work  which  it  can  be  made 
to  do.  The  Intrinsic  energy  of  a  body  is  the  work  which  it 
can  do  in  virtue  of  its  actual  condition,  without  any  supply 
of  energy  from  without. 

Thus  a  body  may  do  work  by  expanding  and  overcoming 
pressure,  or  it  may  give  out  heat,  and  this  heat  may  be 
converted  into  work  in  whole  or  in  part.  If  we  possessed  a. 
perfect  reversible  engine,  and  a  refrigerator  at  the  absolute 
zero  of  temperature,  we  might  convert  the  whole  of  the  heat 
which  escapes  from  the  body  into  mechanical  work.  As  we 
cannot  obtain  a  refrigerator  absolutely  cold,  it  is  impossible, 
even  by  means  of  perfect  engines,  to  convert  all  the  heat 
into  mechanical  work.  We  know,  however,  from  Joule's 
experiments,  the  mechanical  value  of  any  quantity  of  heat, 
so  that  if  we  know  the  work  done  by  expansion,  and  the 
quantity  of  heat  given  out  by  the  body  during  any  alteration 
of  its  condition,  we  can  calculate  the  energy  which  has  been 
expended  by  the  body  during  the  alteration. 

As  we  cannot  in  any  case  deprive  a  body  of  all  its  heat, 
and  as  we  cannot,  in  the  case  of  bodies  which  assume  the 
gaseous  form,  increase  the  volume  of  the  containing  vessel 
sufficiently  to  obtain  all  the  mechanical  energy  of  the  ex- 
pansive force,  we  cannot  determine  experimentally  the  whole 
energy  of  the  body.  It  is  sufficient,  however,  for  all 
practical  purposes  to  know  how  much  the  energy  exceeds 
or  falls  short  of  the  energy  of  the  body  in  a  certain  definite 


1 86 


Energy,  Entropy,  and  Dissipation. 


condition — for  instance,  at  a  standard  temperature  and  a 
standard  pressure. 

In  all  questions  about  the  mutuaf  action  of  bodies  we  are 
concerned  with  the  difference  between  the  energy  of  each 
body  in  different  states,  and  not  with  its  absolute  value,  so 
that  the  method  of  comparing  the  energy  of  the  body  at 
any  time  with  its  energy  at  the  standard  temperature  and 
pressure  is  sufficient  for  our  purpose.  If  the  body  in  its 
actual  state  has  less  energy  than  when  it  is  in  the  standard 
state,  the  expression  for  the  relative  energy  will  be  nega- 
tive. This,  however,  does  not  imply  that  the  energy  of 
a  body  can  ever  be  really  negative,  for  this  is  impossible. 
It  only  shows  that  in  the  standard  state  it  has  more  energy 
than  in  the  actual  state. 

Let  us  compare  the  energy  of  a  substance  in  two  different 
states.  Let  the  two  states  be  indicated  in  the  diagram  by- 
the  points  A  and  B,  and  let  the  intermediate  states  through 
which  it  passes  be  indicated  by  the  line,  straight  or  curved, 
which  is  drawn  from  A  to  B. 

The  work  of  the  path,  or  the  work  which  the  body  does 
while  passing  from  the  state  A  to  the  state  B  along  the  path 

A  B,  is  represented,  as  we 
have  shown  at  p.  103,  by 
the  area  included  between 
the  path  A  B,  the  line  of 
equal  volume,  B£,  the  line 
of  zero  pressure,  b  a,  and 
the  line  of  equal  volume, 
a  A,  and  it  is  to  be  reckoned 
positive  when  this  area  is 
described  in  the  direction 
of  the  hands  of  a  watch. 

The  heat  of  the  path,  or 
the  heat  absorbed  by  the 

CL  6  Z  ..... 

body    during    its    passage 
along  A  B,  is  represented  by  the  area  included  between  the 


FIG.  26. 


Available  Energy.  187 

path  A  B,  the  isentropic  B/3,  the  fictitious  zero  isothermal  /3a, 
and  the  isentropic  a  A.  (See  page  164  ) 

This  area  is  to  be  reckoned  positive  when  it  lies  on  the 
right  hand  of  A  B.  In  the  figure,  in  which  it  lies  on  the  left 
hand  of  AB,  it  must  be  reckoned  negative,  or,  in  other  words, 
it  represents  heat  given  out  by  the  body. 

The  sum  of  the  work  done  and  of  heat  given  out  by  the 
body,  both  in  dynamical  measure,  is  the  whole  energy  given 
out  by  the  body  during  its  passage  from  the  state  A  to  the 
state  B.  It  is  represented  by  the  whole  area  aAapB&a,  and 
this  area,  therefore,  represents  the  diminution  of  the  energy 
of  the  body,  which  is  evidently  independent  of  the  form  of 
the  path  between  A  and  B.  Now  this  area  is  the  difference 
between  the  areas  AazaA  and  B/3z/;E,  which  are  bounded 
by  the  line  of  zero  pressure,  the  fictitious  line  of  zero  tempe- 
rature, and  the  lines  of  equal  volume  and  of  equal  entropy. 

If  we  suppose  the  fictitious  line  of  zero  temperature  joined 
to  the  line  of  zero  pressure  by  a  line  of  any  form,  /3z,  we 
may  consider  the  area  bounded  by  these  lines  and  by  the 
lines  of  equal  volume  and  of  equal  entropy  through  A  as 
representing  that  part  of  the  energy  of  the  body  in  the 
state  A  the  variations  of  whicli  we  are  dealing  with,  for  if 
the  body  passes  into  the  state  B,  by  doing  work  and  giving 
out  heat,  the  energy  given  out  is  represented  by  the  excess 
of  the  area  AazaA  above  B/3z/'B,  and  this,  therefore,  re- 
presents the  excess  of  the  energy  in  the  state  A  above  that 
in  the  state  B. 

Hence,  in  discussing  the  variations  of  the  energy,  we  may 
consider  them  represented  by  the  variations  of  the  area 
AuzaA,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  we  may  suppose  the 
energy  to  be  represented  by  this  area  together  with  an 
unknown  constant. 

AVAILABLE   ENERGY. 

The  sum  of  the  work  done  by  the  body  and  the  dynamical 
equivalent  of  the  heat  which  it  gives  out  during  its  passage 


FIG.  ?6a. 


188          Energy,  Entropy,  and  Dissipation. 

from  the  state  A  to  the  state  B  is,  as  we  have  seen,  the 
same  whatever  be  the  path  by  which  the  body  passes  from 
the  state  A  to  the  state  B.  If,  however,  we  suppose  that 
the  body  is  surrounded  by  a  medium,  the  temperature  of 

which  is  maintained  con- 
stant, so  that  the  body  can 
give  out  heat  only  when  its 
temperature  is  higher  than 
that  of  the  medium,  and 
can  take  in  heat  only  when 
its  temperature  is  lower 
than  that  of  the  medium, 
then  these  conditions  will 
confine  the  path  within 
certain  limits. 

Draw  the  isothermal  TT  , 
representing  the  constant  temperature  of  the  surrounding 
medium.  Then  since  the  temperature  of  the  body  at  A  and 
at  all  points  above  the  line  T  T7  is  higher  than  that  of  the 
medium,  the  body  cannot  receive  heat  from  the  medium. 
Hence  its  entropy  cannot  increase,  and  the  path  cannot  rise 
above  the  adiabatic  or  isentropic  A  «,  drawn  through  A. 

Again,  when  the  body  gives  out  heat  to  the  medium,  its 
temperature  must  be  higher  than  that  of  the  medium. 
Hence  the  path  must  be  above  the  isothermal  T  T'. 

The  path  formed  by  the  isentropic  A  T  and  the  isothermal 
T  B  is  therefore  the  limiting  form  of  the  path,  and  is  that 
wherein  the  work  done  by  the  body  is  a  maximum,  and  the 
heat  given  out  by  it  a  minimum. 

If  we  denote  the  energy  of  the  body  in  the  state  A  by  e, 
and  its  entropy  by  </>,  and  the  energy  and  entropy  of  the 
body  at  the  temperature  and  pressure  of  the  surrounding 
medium  (represented  by  B)  by  eQ  and  </>0,  then  the  total 
energy  given  out  as  work  and  heat  during  the  passage  from 
the  state  A  to  the  state  B  is  e— e. 


Available  Energy,  189 

The  amount  of  heat  which  the  body  gives  out  during  the 
process  cannot  be  less  than  that  corresponding  to  the  path 
AT  B,  which  is 


where  T  is  the  absolute   temperature  of  the  surrounding 
medium. 

The  amount  of  work  done  by  the  body  during  the  process 
cannot,  therefore,  be  greater  than 


This,  therefore,  is  the  part  of  the  energy  which  is  available 
for  mechanical  purposes  under  the  circumstances  in  which 
the  body  is  placed,  namely,  when  surrounded  by  a  medium 
at  temperature  T  and  pressure  P. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  greater  the  original  entropy, 
the  smaller  is  the  available  energy  of  the  body.1 

If  the  system  under  consideration  consists  of  a  number  of 
bodies  at  different  pressures  and  temperatures  contained 
within  a  vessel  from  which  neither  matter  nor  heat  can 
escape,  then  the  amount  of  energy  converted  into  work  will 
be  greatest  when  the  system  is  reduced  to  thermal  and 
mechanical  equilibrium  by  the  following  process. 

i  st.  Let  each  of  the  bodies  be  brought  to  the  same  tem- 
perature by  expansion  or  compression  without  communica- 
tion of  heat. 

2nd.  The  bodies  being  now  at  the  same  temperature,  let 
those  which  exert  the  greatest  pressure  be  allowed  to  expand 

1  In  former  editions  of  this  book  the  meaning  of  the  term  Entropy, 
as  introduced  by  Clausius,  was  erroneously  stated  to  be  that  part  of  the 
energy  which  cannot,  be  converted  into  work.  The  book  then  proceeded 
to  use  the  term  as  equivalent  to  the  available  energy  ;  thus  introducing 
great  confusion  into  the  language  of  thermodynamics.  In  this  edition 
1  have  endeavoured  to  use  the  word  Entropy  according  to  its  original 
definition  by  Clausius. 


190          Energy,  Entropy,  and  Dissipation. 

and  to  compress  those  which  exert  less  pressure,  till  the 
pressures  of  all  the  bodies  in  the  vessel  are  equal,  the  process 
being  conducted  so  slowly  that  the  temperatures  of  all  the 
bodies  remain  sensibly  equal  to  each  other  throughout  the 
process. 

During  the  first  part  of  this  process,  in  which  there  is  no 
communication  of  heat  between  the  bodies,  the  entropy  of 
each  body  remains  constant.  During  the  second  part,  the 
bodies  are  all  at  the  same  temperature,  and  therefore  the  com- 
munication of  heat  from  one  body  to  another  diminishes 
the  entropy  of  the  one  body  as  much  as  it  increases  that  of 
the  other,  so  that  the  sum  of  the  entropy  remains  constant. 
Hence  the  total  entropy  of  the  system  remains  the  same 
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  the  process.  The  work 
done  against  mechanical  resistances  during  the  establishment 
of  thermal  and  mechanical  equilibrium  is  greater  when  the 
process  is  conducted  in  this  way  than  when  conduction  of 
heat  is  allowed  to  take  place  between  bodies  at  sensibly 
different  temperatures. 

Hence  the  final  state  of  the  system  is  determined  by  the 
following  conditions  : 

Let  n  be  the  number  of  bodies  forming  the  system. 

Let  m{  .  .  .  mn  be  the  masses  of  these  bodies, 
v\   .  .  .  z>n  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass  of  each, 
<7>!   .  .  .  <^>n  the  entropy  of  unit  of  mass  of  each, 
el    .  .  .  <?n  the  energy  of  unit  of  mass  of  each, 
P\   •  •  -A  the  pressure  of  each, 
6l   .  .  .  0n  the  temperature  of  each. 

The  volume  of  the  whole  is 


and  since  the  system  is  contained  in  a  vessel  of  volume  v, 

*Z(mv)  =  v 
during  the  whole  process 


Available  Energy.  191 

The  entropy  of  the  whoie  is 

>«1   ^l    +    .   .   .    +    Wn  <£n   =    £(///0)    =    $. 

When  there  is  no  communication  of  heat  except  between 
bodies  of  equal  temperature,  $  remains  constant.  When 
there  is  communication  of  heat  between  bodies  of  different 
temperatme,  <b  increases. 

In  tLe  final  state  of  the  system 

/i  =/2  .  .  .        =  A  =  p 

et «  4, . . .      =  ea  =  e 

There  are  therefore  ti  —  i  conditions  with  respect  to 
pressure,  and  n  —  i  conditions  with  respect  to  temperature, 
together  with  one  condition  with  respect  to  volume  and  one 
with  respect  to  entropy,  or,  in  all,  2  n  conditions  to  be  satis- 
fied by  the  n  bodies  ;  and  since  the  state  of  eacli  body  is  a 
function  of  two  variables,  the  conditions  are  necessary  and 
sufficient  to  determine  the  final  state  of  each  of  the  n  bodies. 

The  work  done  against  resistances  external  to  the  system 
may  be  determined  by  comparing  the  total  energy  at  the 
beginning  of  the  process  with  the  final  energy ;  for,  since  no 
heat  is  allowed  to  escape,  any  diminution  of  energy  must 
arise  from  work  being  done. 

The  total  energy  is 

I.(mc)  =  E. 

If  E  be  the  original  and  E'  the  final  value  of  this  quantity, 
the  energy  available  to  produce  mechanical  work  is 

E  -  E'. 

If  during  any  part  of  the  process  by  which  the  system 
reaches  its  final  state  of  thermal  and  mechanical  equilibrium 
there  takes  place  a  communication  of  a  quantity  H  of  heat 
from  a  body  at  temperature  Ot  to  a  body  at  temperature  02» 
the  increase  of  the  total  entropy  of  the  system  arising  from 
the  communication  is,  as  we  have  shown  (at  p.  163), 


192          Energy,  Entropy,  and  Dissipation. 

and  the  final  entropy,  instead  of  being  equal  to  the  original 
entropy  <£,  becomes 


This  increase  of  the  final  entropy  involves  a  corresponding 
increase  in  the  final  temperature  and  the  final  energy. 

If  the  rise  of  the  final  temperature  is  small,  then,  since  the 
volume  is  constant,  the  increase  of  the  final  energy  is 

e  (*'  -  <&)  =  KG  f-  -  -Y 
Vft      V 

and  the  available  energy  is  therefore  diminished  by  this 
quantity  on  account  of  the  passage  of  the  quantity  H  of 
heat  from  a  body  at  temperature  0:  to  a  body  at  tem- 
perature Oz. 

Processes  of  this  kind,  by  which,  while  the  total  energy 
remains  the  same,  the  available  energy  is  diminished,  are 
instances  of  what  Sir  W.  Thomson  has  called  the  Dissipa- 
tion of  Energy.  The  doctrine  of  the  dissipation  of  energy 
is  closely  connected  with  that  of  the  growth  of  entropy,  but 
is  by  no  means  identical  with  it. 

The  increment  of  the  total  entropy  of  a  system  arising 
from  the  communication  of  a  given  amount  of  heat,  H,  from 
a  body  at  one  given  temperature,  6lt  to  another  given  tem- 
perature, 62,  is,  as  we  have  seen, 


a  quantity  completely  determined  by  the  state  of  the  system 
when  this  communication  takes  place. 

The  energy  dissipated  or  rendered  unavailable  as  a  source 
of  mechanical  work  is 


into  which  a  new  factor,  0,  enters,  and  this  factor  denotes 


Dissipation  of  Energy.  193 

the  final  temperature  of  the  system  when  it  has  reached  the 
state  of  thermal  and  mechanical  equilibrium.  0,  therefore, 
since  it  depends  on  the  final  state  of  the  system,  can 
only  be  calculated  when  we  know  not  only  the  relations 
between  the  thermodynamic  variables  for  all  the  bodies,  but 
the  volume  which  they  occupy  in  their  final  state. 

The  calculation  of  the  amount  of  energy  dissipated  during 
any  process  is  therefore  much  more  difficult  than  that  of  the 
increase  of  the  total  entropy. 

If  the  system  is  allowed  to  reach  its  final  state  of  thermal 
and  mechanical  equilibrium,  in  such  a  manner  that  no  ex- 
ternal work  is  done,  and  no  heat  is  allowed  to  leave  or  enter 
the  system,  the  condition  is  that  the  final  energy  is  equal  to 
the  original  energy. 

Combining  this  with  the  other  conditions,  that  the  volume  is 
unchanged,  and  that  the  final  state  with  respect  to  pressure 
and  temperature  is  common-  to  all  the  bodies,  we  may  deter- 
mine the  final  value  of  the  temperature,  pressure,  and  total 
entropy. 

The  total  entropy  will  now  have  the  maximum  value  con- 
sistent with  the  original  state  of  the  system.  The  dissipation 
of  the  available  energy  will  be  complete. 

MECHANICAL   AND    THERMAL    ANALOGIES. 

In  studying  thermodynamics  we  may  find  considerable 
Assistance  from  a  comparison  between  the  thermal  and  the 
mechanical  phenomena. 

We  have  to  do  with  energy  in  two  forms,  work  and  heat. 
When  energy  is  being  transferred  from  one  body  to  another 
we  can  always  tell  whether  the  first  body  is  doing  mechanical 
work  on  the  second  or  communicating  heat  to  it.  Work  is 
done  by  motion  against  resistance.  Heat  is  communicated 
from  a  hotter  to  a  colder  body. 

But  as  soon  as  the  energy  has  entered  the  second  body, 
o 


194          Mechanical  and  Thermal  Analogies. 

we  can  no  longer  distinguish  by  any  legitimate  process 
whether  it  is  in  the  form  of  work  or  of  heat.  In  fact  we  may 
remove  it  from  the  body  under  either  of  these  forms. 

If  a  fluid  at  a  pressure  /  increases  in  volume  from  v  to  ?/, 
it  performs  work  against  external  resistance,  the  amount  cf 
which  work  is 

p  (v'  -  v)  =  w. 

If  a  body  at  temperature  ft  increases  in  entropy  from  0  to 
p't  an  amount  of  heat  must  have  entered  it  represented  by 


If  both  these  processes  take  place,  and  if  the  energy  of 
the  body  is  thereby  changed  from  E  to  E',  then 

E'  -  E  =  H  —  w  =  6  (<p'  —  <f,)  —  p  (v1  -  v). 

Here  then  we  have  two  sets  of  quantities,  one  relating  to 
work,  the  other  to  heat. 

w  v  p 

H  0  0 

Of  these  quantities  Work  and  Heat  are  simply  two  forms 
of  Energy. 

The  volume  is  a  quantity  such  that  without  a  change  of 
its  value  no  work  can  be  done.  The  amount  of  work  done, 
however,  is  measured,  not  by  the  change  of  volume  alone, 
but  by  that  change  multiplied  by  another  quantity  —  the 
pressure. 

In  the  same  A  way  the  entropy  is  a  quantity  such  that 
without  a  change  in  its  value  no  heat  can  enter  or  leave  the 
body.  The  amount  of  this  heat,  however,  is  not  measured 
by  the  change  of  entropy,  but  by  that  change  multiplied  by 
another  'quantity  —  the  absolute  temperature. 

Again,  the  pressure  is  a  quantity  such  that  its  equality  in 
two  communicating  vessels  determines  their  mechanical 


Mechanical  and  Thermal  Analogies.  195 

equilibrium,  while  its  excess  in  either  determines  a  flow  of 
fluid  from  that  vessel  to  the  other. 

In  like  manner  the  temperature  is  a  quantity  such  that  its 
equality  in  two  bodies  in  contact  determines  their  thermal 
equilibrium,  while  its  excess  in  either  determines  a  flow  of 
heat  from  that  body  to  the  other. 

If  we  regard  the  energy  of  a  body  as  determined  by  its 
volume  and  its  entropy,  then  the  pressure  may  be  defined  as 
the  rate  at  which  the  energy  diminishes  with  increase  of 
volume,  while  the  entropy  remains  constant. 

The  temperature  may  in  like  manner  be  defined  as  (he 
rate  at  which  the  energy  increases  with  increase  of  entropy, 
the  volume  remaining  constant. 

REPRESENTATION  OF   THE    PROPERTIES    OF    A    SUBSTANCE    PA- 
MEANS    OF   A   SURFACE. 

Professor  J.  Willard  Gibbs,  of  Yale  College,  U.S.,  to  whom 
we  are  indebted  for  a  careful  examination  of  the  different 
methods  of  representing  thermodynamic  relations  by  plane 
diagrams,  has  introduced  an  exceedingly  valuable  method  of 
studying  the  properties  of  a  substance  by  means  of  a  surface.1 

According  to  this  method,  the  volume,  entropy,  and 
energy  of  the  body  in  a  given  state  are  represented  by -the 
three  rectangular  coordinates  of  a  point  in  the  surface,  and 
this  point  on  the  surface  is  said  to  correspond  to  the  given 
state  of  the  body.  We  shall  suppose  the  volume  measured 
towards  the  east  from  the  meridian  plane  corresponding  to 
no  volume,  the  entropy  measured  towards  the  north  from  a 
vertical  plane  perpendicular  to  the  meridian,  whose  position 
is  entirely  arbitrary,  and  the  energy  measured  downwards 
from  the  horizontal  plane  of  no  energy,  the  position  of  which 
maybe  considered  as: arbitrary,  because  we  cannot  measure 
the  whole  energy  existing  in  a  body. 

1    Transactions  of  the  AcadcDiy  of  Sciences  of  Connecticut,  vol.  ii. 

O  2 


196  Thermodynamic  Surface. 

The  section  of  this  surface  by  a  vertical  plane  perpen- 
dicular to  the  meridian  represents  the  relation  between 
volume  and  energy  when  the  entropy  is  constant,  that  is, 
when  no  heat  enters  or  leaves  the  body. 

If  the  pressure  is  positive,  then  the  body,  by  expanding, 
would  do  work  against  external  resistance,  and  its  intrinsic 
energy  would  diminish.  The  rate  at  which  the  energy 
diminishes  as  the  volume  increases  is  represented  by  the 
tangent  of  the  angle  which  the  curve  of  section  makes  with 
the  horizon. 

The  pressure  is  therefore  represented  by  the  tangent  of 
the  angle  of  slope  of  the  curve  of  section.  The  pressure  is 
positive  when  the  curve  slopes  downwards  towards  the  west. 
When  the  slope  of  the  curve  is  towards  the  east  the  corre- 
sponding pressure  is  negative. 

A  tension  or  negative  pressure  cannot  exist  in  a  gas.  It 
may,  however,  exist  in  a  liquid,  such  as  mercury.  Thus,  if 
a  barometer  tube  is  well  filled  with  clean  mercury,  and 
then  placed  in  a  vertical  position,  with  its  closed  end 
uppermost,  the  mercury  sometimes  does  not  fall  in  the 
tube  to  the  point  corresponding  to  the  atmospheric  pres- 
sure, but  remains  suspended  in  the  tube,  so  as  to  fill  it 
completely. 

The  pressure  in  this  case  is  negative  in  that  part  of  the 
mercury  which  is  above  the  level  of  the  orlinary  barometric 
column. 

In  solid  bodies,  as  we  know,  tensions  of  considerable 
magnitude  may  exist. 

Hence  in  our  thermodynamic  model  the  pressure  of  the 
substance  is  indicated  by  the  tangent  of  the  slope  of  the 
curve  of  constant  entropy,  and  is  reckoned  positive  when 
the  energy  diminishes  as  the  volume  increases. 

The  section  of  the  surface,  by' a  vertical  plane  parallel  to 
the  meridian  is  a  curve  of  constant  volume.  In  this  curve 
the  temperature  is  represented  by  the  rate  at  which  the 


Representation  of  Pressure  and  Temperature.  197 

energy  increases  as  the  entropy  increases,  that  is  to  say,  by 
the  tangent  of  the  slope  of  the  curve. 

Since  the  temperature,  reckoned  from  absolute  zero,  is  an 
essentially  positive  quantity,  the  curve  of  constant  volume 
must  be  such  that  the  entropy  and  energy  always  increase 
together. 

To  ascertain  the  pressure  and  temperature  of  the  substance 
in  a  given  state,  we  may  draw  a  tangent  plane  to  the  cor- 
responding point  of  the  surface.  The  normal  to  this  plane 
through  the  origin  will  cut  a  horizontal  plane  at  unit  of  dis- 
tance above  the  origin  at  a  point  whose  coordinates  represent 
the  pressure  and  temperature,  the  pressure  being  represented 
by  the  coordinate  drawn  towards  the  west,  and  the  tempera- 
ture by  the  coordinate  drawn  towards  the  north. 

The  pressure  and  temperature  are  thus  represented  by 
the  direction  of  this  normal,  and  if,  at  any  two  points 
of  the  surface,  the  directions  of  the  normals  are  parallel, 
then  in  the  two  states  of  the  substance  corresponding  to 
these  two  points  the  pressure  and  temperature  must  be  the 
same. 

If  we  wish  to  trace  out  on  a  model  of  the  surface  a  series 
of  lines  of  equal  pressure,  we  have  only  to  place  it  in  the 
sunshine  and  to  turn  it  so  that  the  sun's  rays  are  parallel  to 
the  plane  of  volume  and  energy,  and  make  an  angle  with  the 
line  of  volume  whose  tangent  is  proportional  to  the  pressure. 
Then,  if  we  trace  on  the  surface  the  boundary  of  light  and 
siiadow,  the  pressure  at  all  points  of  this  line  will  be  the 
same. 

In  like  manner,  if  we  place  the  model  so  that  the  sun's 
rays  are  parallel  to  the  plane  of  entropy  and  energy,  the 
boundary  of  light  and  shadow  will  be  a  line  such  that  the 
temperature  is  the  same  at  every  point,  and  proportional  to 
the  tangent  of  the  angle  which  the  sun's  rays  make  with  the 
line  of  entropy. 

In  this  way  we  may  trace  out  on  the  model  two  series  of 


198  Thermodynamic  Model. 

Vines :  lines  of  equal  pressure,  which  Professor  Gibbs  calls 
Isopiestics ;  and  lines  of  equal  temperature,  or  Isothermals. 

Besides  these,  we  may  trace  the  three  systems  of  plane  sec- 
lions  parallel  to  the  coordinate  planes,  the  isometrics  or  lines 
of  equal  volume,  the  isentropics  or  lines  of  equal  entropy, 
which  we  formerly  called,  after  Rankine,  adiabatics,  and 
the  isenergics  or  lines  of  equal  energy. 

The  network  formed  by  these  five  systems  of  lines  will, 
form  a  complete  representation  of  the  relations  between  the 
five  quantities,  volume,  entropy,  energy,  pressure,  and  tem- 
perature, for  all  states  of  the  body. 

The  body  itself  need  not  be  homogeneous  either  in 
chemical  nature  or  in  physical  state.  All  that  is  necessary 
is  that  the  whole  should  be  at  the  same  pressure  and  the 
same  temperature. 

By  means  of  this  model  Professor  Gibbs  has  solved  several 
important  problems  relating  to  the  thermodynamic  relations 
between  two  portions  of  a  substance,  in  different  physical 
states,  but  at  the  same  pressure  and  temperature. 

Let  a  substance  be  capable  of  existing  in  two  different 
states,  say  liquid  and  gaseous,  at  the  same  temperature  and 
pressure.  We  wish  to  determine  whether  the  substance  will 
tend  of  itself  to  pass  from  one  of  these  states  to  the  other. 

Let  the  substance  be  placed  in  a  cylinder,  under  a  piston, 
and  surrounded  by  a  medium  at  the  given  temperature  and 
pressure,  the  extent  of  this  medium  being  so  great  that  its 
pressure  and  temperature  are  not  sensibly  altered  by  the 
changes  of  volume  of  the  working  substance,  or  by  the 
heat  which  that  body  gives  out  or  takes  in. 

The  two  physical  states  which  are  to  be  compared  are  re- 
presented by  two  points  on  the  surface  of  the  model ;  and 
since  the  pressure  and  temperature  are  the  same,  the  tangent 
planes  at  these  points  are  either  coincident  or  parallel. 

The  surface  representing  the  thermodynamic  properties  of 
the  surrounding  medium  must  be  supposed  to  be  constructed 


FIG. 


Equilibrium  bctivccn  Two  Physical  States.     190 

en  a  scale  proportional  to  the  amount  of  this  medium  ;  and 
as  we  assume  that  there  is  a  very  great  mass  of  this  medium, 
the  scale  of  the  surface  will  be  so  great  that  we  may  regard 
the  portion  of  the  surface  with  which  we  have  to  do  as 
sensibly  plane ;  and  since  its  pressure  and  temperature  are 
those  of  the  working  substance  in  the  given  state,  this  plane 
surface  is  parallel  to  the 
tangent  plane  at  the 
given  point  of  the  sur- 
face of  the  model. 

Let  A  B  c  be  three 
points  of  the  model  at 
which  the  tangentplanes 
are  parallel,  the  energy 
being  reckoned  down- 
wards. 

Let  A  a  a  be  the  tangent  plane  at  A,  and  let  us  consider  it 
as  part  of  the  model  representing  the  external  medium,  this 
model  being  so  placed  that  volume,  entropy,  and  energy 
are  reckoned  in  the  opposite  directions  from  those  in  the 
model  of  the  working  substance. 

Now  let  us  suppose  the  substance  to  pass  fiom  the  state  A 
to  the  state  B,  passing  through  the  series  of  states  repre- 
sented by  the  points  on  the  isothermal  line  joining  the  points 
of  equal  temperature  A  and  B. 

Then  since  the  working  substance  and  the  external  medium 
are  always  at  the  same  temperature,  the  entropy  lost  by  the 
one  is  equal  to  that  gained  by  the  other. 

Also  the  one  gains  in  volume  what  is  lost  by  the  other. 

Hence,  during  the  passage  of  the  working  substance  from 
the  state  A  to  the  state  B,  the  state  of  the  external  medium 
is  always  represented  by  a  point  in  the  tangent  plane  in  the 
same  vertical  line  as  the  point  representing  the  state  of  the 
working  substance. 

For  the  same  horizontal  motion  which  represents  a  gain  of 


2OO  Thermcdynamic  Model. 

volume  or  entropy  of  the  one  substance  represents  an  equal 
loss  of  volume  or  entropy  in  the  other. 

Hence,  when  the  state  of  the  working  substance  is  repre- 
sented by  the  point  B,  that  of  the  external  medium  will  be 
represented  by  the  point  a,  where  the  vertical  line  through 
B  meets  the  tangent  plane  through  A. 

Now  the  energy  is  reckoned  downwards  for  the  working 
substance  and  upwards  for  the  external  medium.  Hence, 
drawing  A  K  horizontal,  K  B  represents  the  gain  in  energy  of 
the  working  substance,  and  K  a  the  loss  of  energy  of  the 
external  medium. 

v\       The  line  B  a,  or  the  vertical  height  of  the  tangent  plane 

g>   above  the  point  B,  represents  the  gain  of  energy  in  the  whole 

^      system,  consisting  of  the  working  substance  and  the  external 

medium,  during  the  passage  from  the  state  A  to  the  state  B. 

l>ut  the  energy  of  the  system  can  be  increased  only  by  doing 

work  on  it. 

But  if  the  system  can  of  itself  pass  from  one  state  to 
another,  the  work  required  to  produce  the  corresponding 
changes  of  configuration  must  be  drawn  from  the  energy  of 
the  system,  and  the  energy  must  therefore  diminish. 

The  fact,  therefore,  that  in  the  case  before  us  the  energy 
increases,  shows  that  the  passage  from  the  state  A  to  the 
state  B  in  presence  of  a  medium  of  constant  temperature 
and  pressure,  cannot  be  effected  without  the  expenditure  of 
work  by  some  external  agent. 

The  working  substance,  therefore,  cannot  of  itself  pass 
from  the  state  A  to  the  state  B,  if  B  lies  below  the  plane 
which  touches  the  surface  at  A. 

!We  have  supposed  the  substance  to  pass  from  A  to  B  by  a 
process  during  which  it  is  always  at  the  same  temperature 
as  the  external  medium.  In  this  case  the  entropy  of  the 
system  remains  constant. 

If,  however,  the  communication  of  heat  between  the  sub- 
stances occurs  when  they  are  not  at  the  same  temperature, 


Condition  of  Stability.  201 

the  entropy  of  the  system  will  increase;  and  if  in  the  figure 
the  gain  of  entropy  of  the  working  substance  is  represented 
by  the  horizontal  component  of  A  B,  the  loss  of  entropy  of 
the  external  medium  will  be  represented  by  a  smaller 
quantity,  such  as  the  horizontal  component  of  A  a.  Hence 
a'  will  be  to  the  left  of  a,  and  therefore  higher.  The  gain 
of  entropy  of  the  system  will  therefore  be  represented  by  the 
horizontal  part  of  a  a'. 

Now  since  temperature  is  essentially  positive,  a  gain  of 
entropy  at  a  given  volume  always  implies  a  gain  of  energy. 
Hence  the  gain  of  energy  is  greater  when  there  is  a  gain  of 
entropy  than  when  the  entropy  remains  constant. 

There  is,  therefore,  no  method  by  which  the  change  from 
A  to  B  can  be  effected  without  a  gain  of  energy,  and  this 
implies  the  expenditure  of  work  by  an  external  agent. 

If,  therefore,  the  tangent  plane  at  A  is  everywhere  above 
the  thermodynamic  surface,  the  condition  of  the  working 
substance  represented  by  the  point  A  is  essentially  stable, 
and  the  substance  cannot  of  itself  pass  into  any  other  state 
while  exposed  to  the  same  external  influences  of  pressure 
and  temperature. 

This  will  be  the  case  if  the  surface  is  convexo-convex 
upwards. 

If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  surface,  as  at  the  point  B,  is 
either  concave  upwards  in  all  directions,  or  concave  in 
one  direction  and  convex  in  another,  it  will  be  possible  to 
draw  on  the  surface  a  line  from  the  point  of  contact  lying 
entirely  above  the  tangent  plane,  and  therefore  representing 
a  series  of  states  through  which  the  substance  can  pass  of 
itself. 

In  this  case  the  point  of  contact  represents  a  state  of  the 
substance  which,  if  physically  possible  for  an  instant,  is 
essentially  unstable,  and  cannot  be  permanent. 

There  is  a  third  case,  however,  in  which  the  surface,  as 
at  the  woint  C,  is  convexo-convex,  so  that  a  line  drawn  OD 


2O2  Thcnnodynainic  Model. 

the  surface  from  the  point  of  contact  must  lie  below  the 
tangent  plane ;  but  the  tangent  plane,  if  produced  far  enough, 
cuts  the  surface  at  c,  so  that  the  point  A  lies  above  the 
tangent  plane.  In  this  case  the  substance  cannot  pass 
through  any  continuous  series  of  states  from  c  to  A,  because 
any  line  drawn  on  the  surface  from  c  to  A  begins  by  dipping 
below  the  tangent  plane.  But  if  a  quantity,  however  small, 
of  the  substance  in  the  state  A  is  in  physical  contact  with 
the  rest  of  the  substance  in  the  state  c,  minute  portions  will 
pass  at  once  from  the  state  c  to  the  state  A  without  passing 
through  the  intermediate  states. 

The  energy  set  at  liberty  by  this  transformation  will 
accelerate  the  subsequent  rate  of  transformation,  so  that  the 
process  will  be  of  the  nature  of  an  explosion. 

Instances  of  such  a  process  occur  when  a  liquid  not  in 
presence  of  its  vapour  is  heated  above  its  boiling  point,  and 
also  when  a  liquid  is  cooled  below  its  freezing  point/or  when 
a  solution  of  a  salt,  or  of  a  gas,  becomes  supersaturated. 

In  the  first  of  these  cases  the  contact  of  the  smallest 
quantity  of  vapour  will  produce  an  explosive  evaporation ; 
in  the  second,  the  contact  of  ice  will  produce  explosive 
freezing ;  in  the  third,  a  crystal  of  the  salt  will  produce  ex- 
plosive crystallization ;  and  in  the  fourth,  a  bubble  of  any 
gas  will  produce  explosive  effervescence. 

Finally,  when  the  tangent  plane  touches  the  surface  at 
two  or  more  points,  and  is  above  the  surface  everywhere 
else,  portions  of  the  substance  in  states  corresponding  to  the 
points  of  contact  can  exist  in  presence  of  each  other,  and 
the  substance  can  pass  freely  from  one  state  to  another  in 
either  direction. 

The  state  of  the  whole  body  when  part  is  in  one  physical 
state  and  part  in  another  is  represented  by  a  point  in  the 
£4raight  line  joining  the  centre  of  gravity  of  two  masses  equal 
respectively  to  the  masses  of  the  substance  in  the  two  states, 
and  placed  at  the  points  of  the  model  corresponding  to  these 
states. 


Primitive  and  Secondary  Surfaces.  203 

Hence,  in  addition  to  the  surface  already  considered,  which 
\ve  may  call  the  primitive  surface,  and  which  represents  the 
properties  of  the  substance  when  homogeneous,  all  the  points 
of  the  line  joining  the  two  points  of  contact  of  the  same 
tangent  plane  belong  to  a  secondary  surface,  which  repre- 
sents the  properties  of  the  substance  when  part  is  in  one 
state  and  part  in  another. 

To  trace  out  this  secondary  surface  we  may  suppose  the 
doubly  tangent  plane  to  be  made  to  roll  upon  the  surface, 
always  touching  it  at  two  points  called  the  node-couple. 

The  two  points  of  contact  will  thus  trace  out  two  curves 
such  that  a  point  in  the  one  corresponds  to  a  point  in  the 
other.  These  two  curves  are  called  in  geometry  the  node- 
couple  curves. 

The  secondary  surface  is  generated  by  a  line  which  moves 
so  as  always  to  join  corresponding  points  of  contact.  It  is 
a  developable  surface,  being  the  envelope  of  the  rolling 
tangent  plane. 

To  construct  it,  spread  a  film  of  grease  on  a  sheet  of  glass 
and  cause  the  sheet  of  glass  to  roll  without  slipping  on  the 
model,  always  touching  it  in  two  points  at  least. 

The  grease  vri'll  be  partly  transferred  from  the  glass  to  the 
model  at  the  points  of  contact,  and  there  will  be  traces  on 
the  model  of  the  node-couple  curves,  and  on  the  glass  of 
corresponding  plane  curves. 

If  we  now  copy  on  paper  the  curve  traced  out  on  the 
glass  and  cut  it  out,  we  may  bend  the  paper  so  that  the  cut 
edges  shall  coincide  with  the  two  node-couple  curves,  and 
the  paper  between  these  curves  will  form  the  derived  sur 
face  representing  the  state  of  the  body  when  part  is  in  one 
physical  state  and  part  in  another. 

There  is  one  position  of  the  tangent  plane  in  which  it 
touches  the  primitive  surface  in  three  points.  These  points 
represent  the  solid,  liquid,  and  gaseous  states  of  the  sub- 
stance when  the  temperature  and  the  pressure  are  such  that 
the  three  states  can  exist  together  in  equilibrium. 


2O4  Thcrmodynamic  Model. 

The  plane  triangle,  of  which  these  points  are  the  angle*?, 
represents  all  possible  mixtures  of  these  three  states.  For 
instance,  if  there  are  s  grammes  in  the  solid  state,  L  grammes 
in  the  liquid  state,  and  v  grammes  in  the  state  of  vapour, 
this  condition  of  the  substance  will  be  represented  by  a 
point  in  the  triangle  which  is  the  centre  of  gravity  of  masses 
s,  L,  and  v  placed  at  the  corresponding  angular  points. 

From  this  position  of  the  tangent  plane  it  may  roll  on  the 
primitive  surface  in  three  directions  so  as  in  each  case  to  touch 
it  at  two  points.  We  thus  obtain  three  sheets  of  the  derived 
surface,  the  first  connecting  the  solid  and  liquid  states,  the 
second  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states,  and  the  third  the  gas- 
eous and  solid  states.  These  three  developable  surfaces, 
together  with  the  plane  triangle  s  LV,  constitute  what  Pro 
fessor  Gibbs  calls  the  Surface  of  Dissipated  Energy. 

Of  the  three  developable  surfaces  the  first  and  third,  those 
which  connect  the  solid  state  with  the  liquid  and'  gaseous, 
have  been  experimentally  investigated  only  to  a"  short  dis- 
tance from  the  triangle  s  L  v ;  but  the  sheet  which  connects 
the  liquid  and  gaseous  states  has  been  thoroughly  explored. 

The  experiments  of  Cagniard  de  la  Tour  and  the  numeri- 
cal determinations  of  Andrews  show  that  the  curves  traced 
out  by  the  two  points  of  contact  of  the  doubly  tangent  plane 
unite  in  a  point  which  represents  what  Andrews  calls  the 
critical  state.  At  this  point  the  two  points  of  contact  of  the 
rolling  tangent  plane  coalesce,  and  if  the  plane  continues  to 
roll  on  the  surface  it  will  touch  it  at  one  point  only. 

If  the  primitive  surface  forms  a  continuous  sheet  beneath 
die  surface  of  dissipated  energy,  it  cannot  be  at  all  points 
FJG  afc  convexo-convex  upwards.     For 

let  A  D  be  the  line  joining  two 
corresponding  points  of  contact 
of  the  doubly  tangent  plane,  and 

B  let  A  B  c  D  be  the  section  of  the 

primitive  surface  by  a  vertical  plane  through  AD,  then  it  is 


Condition  of  Instability.  205 

rranifest  that  the  curve  A  B  c  D  must  in  some  part  of  its 
course  be  concave  upwards. 

Now  a  point  on  the  primitive  surface  at  which  either  of  its 
principal  curvatures  is  concave  upwards,  represents  a  state 
of  the  body  which  is  essentially  unstable.  Part  of  the 
primitive  surface,  therefore,  if  it  is  continuous,  must  repre- 
sent states  of  the  body  essentially  unstable.  If,  therefore, 
the  primitive  surface  is  continuous,  there  must  be  a  region 
representing  states  essentially  unstable,  because  one  or  both 
of  the  principal  curvatures  is  concave  upwards.  This  region 
is  bounded  by  what  is  called  in  geometry  the  spinode  curve. 
Beyond  this  curve  the  surface  is  convexo-convex,  but  the 
tangent  plane  still  cuts  the  surface  at  some  more  or  less 
distant  point  till  we  come  to  the  curve  of  the  node-couple, 
at  which  the  tangent  plane  touches  the  surface  at  two  points. 
Beyond  this  the  tangent  plane  lies  entirely  above  the  surface, 
and  the  corresponding  state  of  the  body  is  essentially  stable. 

The  region  between  the  spinode  curve  and  the  node- 
couple  curve  represents  states  of  the  body  which,  though 
stable  when  the  whole  substance  is  homogeneous,  are  liable 
to  sudden  change  if  a  portion  of  the  same  substance  La 
another  state  is  present. 

Since  every  vertical  section  through  two  corresponding 
points  of  contact  must  cut  the  spinode  curve  at  the  points 
of  inflexion  B  and  c,  the  chord  A  D  of  the  node-couple  curve 
and  the  chord  B  c  of  the  spinode  curve  must  coincide  at  the 
critical  point,  so  that  at  this  point  the  spinode  curve  and  the 
two  branches  of  the  node-couple  curve  coalesce  and  have  a 
common  tangent.  This  point  is  called  in  geometry  the 
tac nodal  point. 

Note. — For  these  geometrical  names  I  am  indebted  to  Professor 
Cayley. 


2o6  Thermodyuatnic  Model. 

1HERMAL    LINES   ON    THE    THERMODYNAM1C    SURFACE. 
(FiG.  ztd.) 

o  Origin. 

o  v  Axis  of  volume, 

o  0  Axis  of  entropy, 

o  e  Axis  of  energy. 

P!  .  .  .  P6  Isopiestics  or  lines  of  equal  pressure. 

Of  these  Pt  represents  a  negative  pressure,  or,  in  other 
words,  a  tension,  such  as  may  exist  in  solids  and  in  some 
liquids. 

T,  .  .  .  T6     Isothermals,  or  lines  of  equal  temperature. 

The  curves  T3  and  T4  have  branches  in  the  form  of  closed 
loops. 

K  G  H  c.  To  the  right  of  this  line  the  substance  is  gaseous 
and  absolutely  stable.  To  the  left  of  FG  it  may  condense 
into  the  solid  state,  and  to  the  left  of  GHC  it  may  Condense 
into  the  liquid  state. 

c  K  L  M  N.  Below  this  line  the  substance  is  liquid  and 
absolutely  stable.  To  the  right  of  L  KG  it  may  evaporate,  to 
the  left  of  L  M  N  it  may  solidify. 

Q  R  s  E.  To  the  left  of  this  line  the  substance  is  solid  and 
absolutely  stable.  To  the  right  of  s  R  Q  it  may  melt,  and 
above  s  E  it  may  evaporate. 

c  is  the  critical  point  of  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states. 

Below  this  point  there  is  no  discontinuity  of  states. 

c  is  called  in  geometry  the  tacnodal  point. 

The  curves  F  o,  G  H  c  K  L,  L  M  N,  Q  R  s,  and  s  E  are 
branches  of  what  is  called  in  geometry  the  node-couple 
curve. 

The  curves  xcx  and  YY  are  branches  of  the  spinode 
curve. 

Above  this  curve  the  substance  is  absolutely  unstable. 
Between  it  and  the  node-couple  curve  the  substance  is  stable, 
but  only  if  homogeneous. 


Thermal  L  incs  on  the  Model. 

FIG.  26<£ 
Thermodynaniic  Surface. 


207 


208  Thermodynamic  Model. 

The  plane  triangle  SLG  represents  that  state  of  uniform 
pressure  and  temperature  at  which  the  substance  can  be 
partly  solid,  partly  liquid,  and  partly  gaseous. 

The  straight  lines  represent  states  of  uniform  pressure  and 
temperature  in  which  two  different  states  are  in  equilibrium 

s  G  and  E  F  between  solid  and  gaseous. 
G  L  and  K  H  between  liquid  and  gaseous, 
s  L,  R  M,  and  Q  N  between  solid  and  liquid, 

The  surface  of  dissipated  energy  consists  of  the  plane 
triangle  SLG  and  the  three  developable  surfaces  of  which 
the  generating  lines  are  those  above  mentioned.  This  sur- 
face lies  above  the  primitive  thermodynamic  surface  and 
touches  it  along  the  node-couple  curve. 


Free  Expansion. 


209 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

ON    FREE     EXPANSION. 

Tfieory  of  a  Fluid  in  which  no  External  Work  is 
during  a  CJiange  of  Pressure. 

LET  a  fluid  be  forced  through  a  small  hole,  or  one  or  more 
narrow  tubes,  or  a  porous  plug,  and  let  the  work  done  by 
the  pressure  from  behind  be  entirely  employed  in  over- 
coming the  resistance  of  the  fluid,  so  that  when  the  fluid, 
after  passing  through  the  plug,  has  arrived  at  a  certain  point 
its  velocity  is  very  small.  Let  us  also  suppose  that  no  heat 
enters  or  leaves  the  fluid,  and  that  no  sound  or  other 
vibration,  the  energy  of  winch  is  comparable  with  that 
which  would  sensibly  alter  the  temperature  of  the  fluid, 
escapes  from  the  apparatus. 

We  also  suppose  that  the  motion  is  steady — that  is,  that 
the  same  quantity  of  the  fluid  enters  and  issues  from  the 
apparatus  in  every  second. 

During  the  passage  of  unit  of  mass  through  the  apparatus, 
if  P  and  v  are  its  pressure  and  volume  at  the 
section  A  before  reaching  the  plug,  and  /,  v 
the  same  at  the  section  B  after  passing  through 
it,  the  work  done  in  forcing  the  fluid  through 
the  section  A  is  P  v,  and  the  work  done  by  the 
fluid  in  issuing  through  the  section  B  is/  v,  so 
that  the  amount  of  work  communicated  to  the 
fluid  in  passing  through  the  plug  is  P  v  —  p  v. 

Hence,  ifE  is  the  energy  of  unit  of  mass  of 
the  fluid  while  entering  at  the  section  A,  and  e  the  energy  of 
unit  of  mass  issuing  at  the  section  B, 

e  —  E  —  PV—  /  z/, 
or 

EfPV  =  ff/Z>      .      .      .  (l) 

P 


FIG.  27. 
B  ' 


210 


Free  Expansion. 


FIG.  28. 


That  is  to  say,  the  sum  of  the  intrinsic  energy  and  the 
product  of  the  volume  and  the  pressure  remains  the  same 
after  passing  through  the  plug,  provided  no  heat  is  lost  or 
gained  from  external  sources. 

Now  the  intrinsic  energy  E  is  indicated  on  the  diagram 

by  the  area  between  A  «  an 
adiabatic  line,  A  a  a  vertical 
line,  and  a  b  v  the  line  of  no 
pressure,  and  p  v  is  represent- 
ed by  the  rectangle  A/  o  a. 
Hence  the  area  included  by 
«  A/  o  v,  the  lines  A  a  and  o  v 
being  produced  till  they  meet, 
represents  the  quantity  which 
remains  the  same  after  passing 
through  the  plug.  Hence  in 
the  figure  the  area  kpqv.  is 
equal  to  the  area  contained 
between  BR  and  the  two  adiabatic  lines  R  a  and  B  ft. 

We  shall  next  examine  the  relations  between  the  different 
properties  of  the  substance,  in  order  to  determine  the  rise  of 
temperature  corresponding  to  a  passage  through  the  plug 
from  a  pressure  P  to  a  pressure  /,  and  we  shall  first  suppose 
that  P  is  not  much  greater  than  p. 

Let  A  c  be  an  isothermal  line  through  A,  cutting  q  B  in  c, 
and  let  us  suppose  that  the  passage  ot  the  substance  from 
the  state  represented  by  A  to  the  state  represented  by  B  is 
effected  by  a  passage  along  the  isothermal  line  A  c,  followed 
by  an  increase  of  volume  from  c  to  B.  The  smaller  the 
distance  A  B,  the  less  will  the  results  of  this  process  differ 
from  those  of  the  actual  passage  from  A  to  B,  in  whatever 
manner  this  is  really  effected. 

In  passing  from  A  to  c,  at  the  constant  temperature  d,  the 
pressure  diminishes  from  p  to/.  The  heat  absorbed  during 
this  process  is,  by  the  first  thermodynamic  relation  (p.  167), 

(p  -/)  v0o, 


Free  Expansion.  2 1  r 

where  a  is  the  dilatation  of  unit  of  volume  at  constant  pres- 
sure per  degree  of  temperature. 

In  passing  from  c  to  B  the  substance  expands  at  constant 
pressure,  and  its  temperature  rises  from  6  to  0  +  T. 

The  heat  required  to  produce  this  rise  of  temperature  is 


v/here  KP  denotes  the  specific  heat  of  the  substance  at  con- 
stant pressure. 

The  whole  heat  absorbed  by  the  substance  during  the 
passage  from  A  to  B  is  therefore 

(P  —  p}  V  0  a  +   Kp  r, 

and  this  is  the  value  of  the  area  between  A  B  and  the  two 
adiabatic  lines  A  a,  B  /3. 

Now  this  is  equal  to  the  area  Ap  q  B  or  (p  —  /)  v. 

Hence  we  have  the  equation 

where  KP  denotes  the  specific  heat  of  unit  of  mass  at  con- 
stant pressure,  expressed  in  dynamical  measure ; 

r,  the  rise  of  temperature  after  passing  through  the  plug  ; 

P  —  /,  the  small  difference  of  pressure  on  the  two  sides  of 
the  plug ; 

v,  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass  (when  p  —  /  is  so  great  as 
to  cause  considerable  alteration  of  volume,  this  quantity 
must  be  treated  differently); 

Q,  the  temperature  on  the  absolute  dynamical  scale  ; 

0,  the  dilatation  of  unit  of  volume  at  constant  pressure 
per  degree  of  temperature. 

There  are  two  cases  in  which  observations  of  the  rise  (or 
fall)  of  temperature  may  be  applied  to  determine  quantities 
of  great  importance  in  the  science  of  heat. 

1.  To  Determine  ike  Dynamical  Equivalent  of  Heat. — The 
first  case  is  that  in  which  the  substance  is  a  liquid  such  as 
water  or  mercury,  the  volume  of  which  is  but  slightly  affected 
either  by  pressure  or  by  temperature.     In  this  case  v  will 

p  2 


2 1 2  Free  Expansion. 

vary  so  little  that  the  effect  of  its  variation  may  be  taken 
into  account  as  a  correction  required  only  in  calculations  of 
great  accuracy.  The  dilatation  a  is  also  very  small,  so  much 
so  that  the  product  6  a,  though  not  to  be  absolutely  neglected, 
may  be  found  with  sufficient  accuracy  without  a  very  accurate 
knowledge  of  the  absolute  value  of  0. 

If  we  suppose  the  pressure  to  be  due  to  a  depth  of  fluid 
equal  to  H  on  one  side  of  the  plug  and  h  on  the  other,  then 

(P  _p)  =  (H  -//),£ 

where  p  is  the  density,  and  g  is  the  numerical  measure  of  the 
force  of  gravity.  Now 

v  p  =  i, 
so  that  equation  (2)  becomes 

KP  r  =  g  (H  -  h)  (i  -  d  «), 

an  equation  from  which  we  can  determine  KP  when  we  know 
r  the  rise  of  temperature,  and  H  —  //  the  difference  of  level 
of  the  liquid,  a  its  coefficient  of  dilatation  by  heat,  and 
(within  a  moderate  degree  of  exactness)  6  the  absolute  tem- 
perature in  terms  of  the  degrees  of  the  same  thermometer 
which  is  used  to  determine  r. 

The  quantity  KP  is  the  specific  heat  at  constant  pressure, 
that  is  the  quantity  of  heat  which  will  raise  unit  of  mass  of 
the  substance  one  degree  of  the  thermometer.  It  is  ex- 
pressed here  in  dynamical  measure  or  foot-poundals. 

If  the  specific  heat  is  to  be  expressed  in  gravitation 
measure,  as  in  foot-pounds,  we  must  divide  by  g,  the  intensity 
of  gravity.  If  the  specific  heat  is  to  be  expressed  in  terms 
of  the  specific  heat  of  a  standaid  substance,  as,  for  instance, 
water  at  its  maximum  density,  we  must  divide  by  j,  the 
specific  heat  of  this  substance. 

We  have  already  shown  how  by  a  direct  experiment  to 
compare  the  specific  heat  of  any  substance  with  that  of 
water.  If  the  specific  heat  expressed  in  this  way  is  denoted 
by  cp,  while  KP  is  the  same  quantity  expressed  in  dynamical 


Dynamical  Equivalent  of  Heat.  213 

measure,    then   the   dynamical   equivalent   of  the   thermal 
unit  is 


The  quantity  j  is  called  Joule's  Mechanical  Equivalent 
of  Heat,  because  Joule  was  the  first  to  determine  its  value 
by  an  accurate  method.  It  may  be  defined  as  the  specific 
heat,  in  dynamical  measure,  of  water  at  its  maximum 
density. 

It  is  equal  to  772  foot-pounds  at  Manchester  per  pound 
of  water.  If  we  alter  the  standard  of  mass,  we  at  the  same 
time  alter  the  unit  of  work  in  the  same  proportion,  so  that 
we  must  still  express  j  by  the  same  number.  Hence  we 
may  express  Joule's  result  by  saying  that  the  work  done  by 
any  quantity  of  water  in  falling  772  feet  at  Manchester  is 
capable  of  raising  that  water  one  degree  Fahrenheit.  If  we 
wish  to  render  the  definition  independent  of  the  value  of 
gravity  at  a  particular  place,  we  have  only  to  calculate  the 
velocity  of  a  body  after  falling  772  feet  at  Manchester.  The 
energy  corresponding  to  this  velocity  in  any  mass  of  water 
is  capable  when  converted  into  heat  of  raising  the  water  one 
degree  Fahrenheit. 

There  are  considerable  difficulties  in  obtaining  the  value  of 
j  by  this  method,  even  with  mercury,  for  which  a  pressure 
of  25  feet  gives  a  rise  of  one  degree  Fahrenheit. 

2.   To  reduce  Temperatures  to  the  Thermodynamic  Scale. 

The  most  important  application  of  the  method  is  to 
Ascertain  the  temperature,  0,  on  the  thermodynamic  scale, 
which  corresponds  to  the  reading,  /,  registered  by  any  ordi- 
nary thermometer,  e.g.  a  centigrade  thermometer. 

The  substance  employed  is  air,  or  any  other  gas  which 
satisfies  approximately  the  gaseous  laws  expressed  in  the 
equation 

vp  =  PO/O  (T  +  «<A 
where  z/0,  /0,  are  the  volume  and  pressure  at  the  zero  of  the 


214  P"ree  Expansion. 

thermometer,  and  a0  is  the  voluminal  dilatation  per  degree 
at  that  temperature. 

The  voluminal  dilatation, «,  at  the  temperature  /  is  therefore 

a=         CT° 

I  +  a/ 

so  that  the  expression  for  Kpr  becomes 


This  expression  is  strictly  true  only  for  a  very  small 
variation  of  the  pressure.  When,  as  in  the  experiments  oi 
Joule  and  Thomson,  p  is  several  times  /,  we  must  ascertain 
the  effect  of  the  gradual  diminution  of  pressure  by  the  process 
described  at  p.  221,  which  is  applicable  in  this  case,  because 
the  variation  of  temperature  is  found  to  be  small.  The 

result  is  that  instead  of  ^~L  we  must  write  logt.  -,  where 

/  / 

p 

the  logarithm  is  Napierian,  or  2-3026  log  -  ,  where  the  log- 
arithm is  taken  from  the  common  tables.     Hence  we. find 


"o        «o*;o/o    '  logp  -  log/ 

an  expression  which  gives  the  temperature,  ft,  on  the  thermo- 
dynamic  scale  corresponding  to  the  reading,  t,  of  an  ordinary 
thermometer,  the  degrees  of  the  thermodynamic  scale  being 
equal  to  those  of  the  thermometer  near  the  temperature  of 
the  experiment. 

In  the  case  of  most  of  the  gases  examined  by  Joule 
and  Thomson  there  was  a  slight  cooling  effect  on  the  gas 
passing  through  the  'plug.  In  other  words,  r  was  negative, 
and  the  absolute  temperature  was  therefore  higher  than 
that  indicated  by  .  the  gaseous  thermometer.  The  ratio, 
therefore,  in  which  the  gas  expanded  between  two  standard 


Determination  of  A  bsolute  Temperature.       215 

temperatures  was  greater  than  the  true  ratio  of  these  tem- 
peratures on  the  thermodynamic  scale.  The  cooling  effect 
was  much  greater  with  carbonic  acid  than  with  oxygen, 
nitrogen,  or  air,  as  was  to  be  expected,  because  we  know 
from  the  experiments  of  Rcgnault  that  the  dilatation  of 
carbonic  acid  is  greater  than  that  of  air  or  its  constituents. 
It  was  also  found,  for  all  these  gases,  that  the  cooling  effect 
was  less  at  high  temperatures,  which  shows  that  as  the 
temperature  rises  the  dilatation  of  the  gas  is  more  and 
more  accurately  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature 
of  the  thermodynamic  scale. 

The  only  gas  which  exhibited  a  contrary  effect  was 
hydrogen,  in  which  there  was  a  slight  heating  effect  after 
passing  the  plug. 

The  result  of  the  experiments  of  Joule  and  Thomson 
was  to  show  that  the  temperature  of  melting  ice  is 
273°7  on  tne  thermodynamic  scale,  the  degrees  being 
such  that  there  are  100  of  them  between  this  temperature 
and  that  of  the  vapour  of  boiling  water  at  the  standard 
pressure. 

The  absolute  zero  of  the  thermodynamic  scale  is  there- 
fore —  273°7  Centigrade,  or  — 46o°'66  Fahrenheit. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that,  in  the  more  perfect  gases,  the 
cooling  effect  due  to  expansion  is  almost  exactly  balanced 
by  the  heating  effect  due  to  the  work  done  by  the  expansion 
when  this 'work  is  wholly  spent  in  generating  heat  in  the 
gas.  This  result  had  been  already  obtained,  although  by  a 
method  not  admitting  of  such  great  accuracy,  by  Joule,1  who 
showed  that  the  intrinsic  energy  of  a  gas  is  the  same  at 
the  same  temperature,  whatever  be  the  volume  which  it 
occupies. 

To  test  this,  he  compressed  air  into  a  vessel  till  it  con- 
tained about  22  atmospheres,  and  exhausted  the  air  from 
another  vessel.  These  vessels  were  then  connected  by 

1  Phil.  Mag.  May  1845. 


2i6    •  Free  Expansion. 

means  of  a  pipe  closed  by  a  stopcock,  and  the  whole  placed 
in  a  vessel  of  water. 

After  a  sufficient  time  the  water  was  thoroughly  stirred, 
and  its  temperature  taken  by  means  of  a  delicate  thermo- 
meter. The  stopcock  was  then  opened  by  means  of  a-proper 
key,  and  the  air  allowed  to  pass  from  the  full  into  the  empty 
vessel  till  equilibrium  was  established  between  the  two. 
Lastly  the  water  was  again  stirred  and  its  temperature 
carefully  noted. 

From  a  number  of  experiments  of  this  kind,  carefully 
corrected  for  all  sources  of  error,  Joule  was  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  110  change  of  temperature  occurs  when  air 
is  allowed  to  expand  in  such  a  manner  as  not  to  dwelop 
mechanical  power. 

This  result,  as  has  been  shown  by  the  more  accurate 
experiments  aftenvards  made  by  Joule  and  W.  Thojnson,  is 
not  quite  correct,  for  there  is  a  slight  cooling  effect.  This 
effect,  however,  is  very  small  in  the  case  of  permanent  gases, 
and  diminishes  when  the  gas,  by  rise  of  temperature  or 
diminution  of  pressure,  approaches  nearer  to  the  condition 
of  a  perfect  gas. 

We  may  however  assert,  as  the  result  of  these  experiments, 
that  the  amount  of  heat  absorbed  by  a  gas  expanding  at 
uniform  temperature  is  nearly,  though  not  exactly,  the  thermal 
equivalent  of  the  mechanical  work  done  by  the  gas  during 
the  expansion.  In  fact,  we  know  that  in  the  case  of  air  the 
heat  absorbed  is  a  little  greater  and  in  hydrogen  a  very  little 
less  than  this  quantity. 

This  is  a  very  important  property  of  gases.  If  we  reverse 
the  process,  we  find  that  the  heat  developed  by  compressing 
air  at  constant  temperature  is  the  thermal  equivalent  of  the 
work  done  in  compressing  it. 

Phis  is  by  no  means  a  self-evident  proposition.  In  fact, 
it  is  not  true  in  the  case  of  substances  which  are  not  in  the 
gaseous  state,  and  even  in  the  case  of  the  more  imperfect 
gases  it  deviates  from  the  truth.  Hence  the  calculation  of 


Measurement  of  Heights  by  the  Barometer.        2 1 7 

the  dynamical  equivalent  of  heat,  which  Mayer  founded  on 
this  proposition,  at  a  time  when  its  truth  had  not  been 
experimentally  proved,  cannot  be  regarded  as  legitimate. 


CHAPTER    XIV. 

ON  THE  DETERMINATION  OF  HEIGHTS  BY  THE  BAROMETER. 

THE  barometer  is  an  instrument  by  means  of  which  the 
pressure  of  the  air  at  a  particular  place  may  be  measured. 
In  the  mercurial  barometer,  which  is  the  most  perfect  form  of 
the  instrument,  the  pressure  of  the  air  on  the  free  surface  of 
the  mercury  in  the  cistern  is  equal  to  that  of  a  column  of 
mercury  whose  height  is  the  difference  between  the  level  of 
the  mercury  in  the  cistern,  which  sustains  the  pressure  of  the 
air,  and  that  of  the  mercury  in  the  tube,  which  has  no  air 
above  it.  The  pressure  of  the  air  is  often  expressed  in  terms 
of  the  height  of  this  column.  Thus  we  speak  of  a  pressure 
of  30  inches  of  mercury,  or  of  a  pressure  of  760  millimetres  of 
mercury. 

To  express  a  pressure  in  absolute  measure  we  must 
consider  the  force  exerted  against  unit  of  area.  For  this 
purpose  we  must  mid  the  weight  of  a  column  of  mercury  of 
the  given  height  standing  on  unit  of  area  as  base. 

If  h  is  the  height  of  the  column,  then,  since  its  section  is 
unity,  its  volume  is  expressed  by  h. 

To  find  the  mass  of  mercury  contained  in  this  volume  we 
must  multiply  the  volume  by  the  density  of  mercury.  If  this 
density  is  denoted  by  p,  the  mass  of  the  column  is  p  h.  The 
pressure,  which  we  have  to  find,  is  the  force  with  which  this 
mass  is  drawn  downwards  by  the  earth's  attraction.  If  g 
denotes  the  force  of  the  earth's  attraction  on  unit  of  mass, 
then  the  force  on  the  column  will  be  g^  h.  The  pressure 


2 1 8       Measurement  of  Heights  by  the  Barometer. 

therefore  of  a  column  of  mercury  of  height  h  is  expressed 
by 

g  P  ", 

where  h  is  the  height  of  the  column,  p  the  density  of  mercury, 
and  g  the  intensity  of  gravity  at  the  place.  The  density  of 
mercury  diminishes  as  the  temperature  increases.  It  is  usual 
to  reduce  all  pressures  measured  in  this  way  to  the  height  of 
a  column  of  mercury  at  the  freezing  temperature  of  water. 

If  two  barometers  at  the  same  place  are  kept  at  different 
temperatures,  the  heights  of  the  barometers  are  in  the  pro- 
portion of  the  volumes  of  mercury  at  the  two  temperatures. 

The  intensity  of  gravitation  varies  at  different  places,  being 
less  at  the  equator  than  at  the  poles,  and  less  at  the  top  of  a 
mountain  than  at  the  level  of  the  sea. 

It  is  usual  to  reduce  observed  barometric  heights  to  the 
height  of  a  column  of  mercury  at  the  freezing  point  and  at 
the  level  of  the  sea  in  latitude  45°,  which  would  produce  the 
same  pressure. 

if  there  were  no  tides  or  winds,  and  if  the  sea  and  the  air 
were  perfectly  calm  in  the  whole  region  between  two  places, 
then  the  actual  pressure  of  the  air  at  the  level  of  the  sea 
must  be  the  same  in  these  two  places ;  for  the  surface  of 
the  sea  is  everywhere  perpendicular  to  the  force  of  gravity. 
If,  therefore,  the  pressure  on  its  surface  were  different  in 
two  places,  water  would  How  from  the  place  of  greater  pres- 
sure to  the  place  of  less  pressure  till  equilibrium  ensued. 

Hence,  if  in  calm  weather  the  barometer  is  found  to  stand 
at  a  different  height  in  two  different  places  at  the  level  of 
the  sea,  the  reason  must  be  that  gravity  is  more  intense  at 
the  place  where  the  barometer  is  low. 

Let  us  next  consider  the  method  of  finding  the  depth 
below  the  level  of  the  sea  by  means  of  a  barometer  carried 
down  in  a  diving  bell. 

If  D  is  the  depth  of  the  surface  of  the  water  in  the  diving 
bell  below  the  surface  of  the  sea,  and  if/  is  the  pressuie  of 
the  atmosphere  on  the  surface  of  the  sea,  then  the  pressure 


Barometer  in  a  Diving  Bell.  219 

of  the  air  in  the  diving  bell  must  exceed  that  on  the  surface 
of  the  sea  by  the  pressure  due  to  a  column  of  water  of  depth 
D.  If  a  is  the  density  of  sea- water,  the  pressure  due  to  a 
column  of  depth  D  is  g  a  D. 

Let  the  height  of  the  barometer  at  the  surface  of  the  sea 
be  observed,  and  let  us  suppose  that  in  the  diving  bell  it  is 
found  to  be  higher  by  a  height  //,  then  the  additional  pres- 
sure indicated  by  this  rise  is  g  p  //,  where  p  is  the  density  of 
mercury.  Hence 

g  a  D  =  g  p  h, 
or 

D  =  ?-  A  =   S  h, 

a 

where  s  =  "-  =  J6™?  <*  ™***l  =  soecific  gravity  of 
o  density  of  water 

mercury. 

The  depth  below  the  surface  of  the  sea  is  therefore  equal 
to  the  product  of  the  rise  of  the  barometer  multiplied  by  the 
specific  gravity  of  mercury.  If  the  water  is  salt  we  must 
divide  this  result  by  the  specific  gravity  of  the  salt  water  at 
the  place  of  observation. 

The  calculation  of  depths  under  water  by  this  method  is 
comparatively  easy,  because  the  density  of  the  water  is  not 
very  different  at  different  depths.  It  is  only  at  great  depths 
that  the  compression  of  the  water  would  sensibly  affect  the 
result. 

If  the  density  of  air  had  been  as  uniform  as  that  of  water, 
the  measurement  of  heights  in  the  atmosphere  would  have 
been  as  easy.  For  instance,  if  the  density  of  air  had  been 
equal  to  a  at  all  pressures,  then,  neglecting  the  variation  of 
gravity  with  height  above  the  earth,  we  should  find  the 
height  «£  of  the  atmosphere  thus  :  Let  //  be  the  height  of 
the  barometer,  and  p  the  density  of  mercury,  then  the  piessure 
indicated  by  the  barometer  is 

P  =  g  P  & 


22O       Measurement  of  Heights  by  the  Barometer. 

If  <%  is  the  height  of  an  atmosphere  of  density  <r,   it 
produces  a  pressure 

p  =  g  °& 
Hence 


This  is  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  above  the  place  on 
\\\Q  false  supposition  that  its  density  is  the  same  at  all  heights 
AS  it  is  at  that  place.  This  height  is  generally  referred  to  as 
the  height  of  the  atmosphere  supposed  of  uniform  density,  or 
more  briefly  and  technically  as  the  height  of  the  homogeneous 
atmosphere. 

Let  us  for  a  moment  consider  what  this  height  (which 
evidently  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  real  height  of  the 
atmosphere)  really  represents.  From  the  equation 

/  =  g  °  •$, 

remembering  that  a  the  density  of  air  is  the  same  thing  as 
the  reciprocal  of  v  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass,  \ve  get 


or  $  is   simply  the  product  p   v  expressed  in   gravitation 
measure  instead  of  absolute  measure. 

Now,  by  Boyle's  law  the  product  of  the  pressure  and 
the  volume  at  a  constant  temperature  is  constant,  and  by 
Charles's  law  this  product  is  proportional  to  the  absolute 
temperature.  For  dry  air  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice, 
and  when  g  =  32*2, 

$  =  A!L  =  26,214  feet, 
g 

or  somewhat  less  than  five  statute  miles. 

It  is  well  known  that  Mr.  Glaisher  has  ascended  in  a 
balloon  to  the  height  of  seven  miles.  This  balloon  was 
supported  by  the  air,  and  though  the  air  at  this  great  height 
was  more  than  three  times  rarer  than  at  the  earth's  surface,  it 
was  possible  to  breathe  in  it.  Hence  it  is  certain  that  the 


Height  of  a  Mountain.  221 

atmosphere  must  extend  above  the  height  ^?,  which  we  have 
deduced  from  our  false  assumption  that  the  density  is 
uniform. 

But  though  the  density  of  the  atmosphere  is  by  no  means 
uniform  through  great  ranges  of  height,  yet  if  we  confine 
ourselves  to  a  very  small  range,  say  the  millionth  part  of  «£  — 
that  is,  about  0*026  feet,  or  less  than  the  third  of  an  inch — the 
density  will  only  vary  one-millionth  part  of  itself  from  the 
top  to  the  bottom  of  this  range,  so  that  we  may  suppose  the 
pressure  at  the  bottom  to  exceed  that  at  the  top  by  exactly 
one-millionth. 

Let  us  now  apply  this  method  to  determine  the  height  of 
a  mountain  by  the  following  imaginary  process,  too  laborious 
to  be  recommended,  .except  for  the  purpose  of  explaining 
the  practical  method  : 

We  shall  suppose  that  we  begin  at  the  top  of  the  mountain, 
and  that,  besides  our  barometer,  we  have  one  thermometer 
to  determine  the  temperature  of  the  mercury,  and  another  to 
determine  the  temperature  of  the  air.  We  are  also  provided 
with  a  hygrometer,  to  determine  the  quantity  of  aqueous 
vapour  in  the  air,  so  that  by  the  thermometer  and  hygrometer 
we  can  calculate  «£,  the  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmo- 
sphere, at  every  station  of  our  path. 

On  the  top  of  the  mountain,  then,  we  observe  the  height  of 
the  barometer  to  be/.  We  now  descend  the  mountain  till 
we  observe  the  mercury  in  the  barometer  to  rise  by  one- 
millionth  part  of  its  own  height.  The  height  of  the  baro- 
meter at  this  first  station  is 

p^  ==  (roooooi)/. 

The  distance  we  have  descended  is  one-millionth  of  $> 
the  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmosphere  for  the  observed 
temperature  at  the  first  stage  of  the  descent.  Since  it  is 
at  present  impossible  to  measure  pressures,  &c.,  to  one- 
millionth  of  their  value,  it  does  not  matter  whether  $  be 


222       Measurement  of  Heights  by  the  Barometer. 

measured  at  the  top  of  the  mountain  or  one-third  of  an  inch 
lower  down. 

Now  let  us  descend  another  stage,  till  the  pressure  again 
increases  one-millionth  of  itself,  so  that  if  /2  is  tne  nevv 
pressure, 

/?2  =  ( i  'ooooo  i)-/i, 

and  the  second  descent  is  through  a  height  equal  to  the 
millionth  of  £2,  the  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmosphere 
in  the  second  stage. 

If  we  go  on  in  this  way  n  times,  till  we  at  last  reach  the 
bottom  of  the  mountain,  and  if  /„  is  the  pressure  at  the 
bottom, 

/„  =  ( i -ooooo i  )/*„_! 

=    ( I  '00000 1  J'/n.g 

=  (roooooi)"/, 
and  the  whole  vertical  height  will  be 

h  =  — 


T,000,OOO 

If  we  assume  that  the  temperature  and  humidity  are  the 
same  at  all  heights  between  the  top  and  the  bottom,  then 
Jgj,  =  £2  =  &c.  =  £M  =  £,  and  the  height  of  the  mountain 
will  be 


1,000,000 

If  we  know  ;/,  the  number  of  stages,  we  can  determine 
the  height  of  the  mountain  in  this  way.  But  it  is  easy  to 
find  «  without  going  through  the  laborious  process  of 
descending  by  distances  of  the  third  of  an  inch,  for  since 
pn  =  P  is  the  pressure  at  the  bottom,  and  /  that  at  the  top, 
we  have  the  equation 

P    =    (I'OOOOOl)"/. 

Taking  the  logarithm  of  both  sides  of  this  equation,  we 
get 


Waves.  223 

log  P  =  n  log  ( i -ooooo i )  -|-  log/*, 

i 

n  -  logP  ~  log^. 
log  (I'oooooi)' 

Now  log  i 'ooooo T  =  0-0000004342942648. 
Substituting  this  value  in  the  expression  for  //,  we  get 


h  =  ~       -  log  r, 

•434294      / 

where  the  logarithms  are  the  common  logarithms  to  base  10, 
or 

//  =  2-302585  £  log  - 

For  dry  air  at  the  temperature  of  melting  ice  $  =  26,214 
feet  :  hence 

//  =  log-    x  |  60360  +  (6  -  32°)  (122-68) j 

gives  the  height  in  feet  for  a  temperature  0  on  Fahrenheit's 
scale. 

For  rough  purposes,  the  difference  of  the  logarithms  of  the 
heights  of  the  barometer  multiplied  by  10,000  gives  the 
difference  of  the  heights  in  fathoms  of  six  feet. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

ON    THE    PROPAGATION    OF    WAVES. 

THE  following  method  of  investigating  the  conditions  of  the 
propagation  of  waves  is  due  to  Prof.  Rankine.1  It  involves 
only  elementary  principles  and  operations,  but  leads  to 
results  which  have  been  hitherto  obtained  only  by  opera- 
tions involving  the  higher  branches  of  mathematics. 

1  Phil.   Trans.  1869:  'On  the  Thermodynamic  Theory  of  Waves  of 
Finite  Longitudinal  Disturbance.' 


224  Waves. 

The  kind  of  waves  to  which  the  investigation  applies  are 
those  in  which  the  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  substance  is 
along  straight  lines  parallel  to  the  direction  in  which  the 
wave  is  propagated,  and  the  wave  is  denned  to  be  one 
which  is  propagated  with  constant  velocity,  and  the  type  of 
which  does  not  alter  during  its  propagation. 

In  other  words,  if  we  observe  what  goes  on  in  the 
substance  at  a  given  place  when  the  wave  passes  that  place, 
and  if  we  suddenly  transport  ourselves  a  certain  distance 
forward  in  the  direction  of  propagation  of  the  wave,  then 
after  a  certain  time  we  shall  observe  exactly  the  same  things 
occurring  in  the  same  order  in  the  new  place,  when  the  wave 
reaches  it.  If  we  travel  with  the  velocity  of  the  wave,  we 
shall  therefore  observe  no  change  in  the  appearance  pre- 
sented by  the  wave  as  it  travels  along  with  us.  This  is  the 
characteristic  of  a  wave  of  permanent  type. 

We  shall  first  consider  the  quantity  of  the  substance 
which  passes  in  unit  of  time  through  unit  of  area  of  a  plane 
which  we  shall  suppose  fixed,  and  perpendicular  to  the 
direction  of  motion. 

Let  u  be  the  velocity  of  the  substance,  which  we  shall 
suppose  to  be  uniform,  then  in  unit  of  time  a  portion  of  the 
substance  whose  length  is  u  passes  through  any  section 
of  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  direction  of  motion.  Hence 
the  volume  which  passes  through  unit  of  area  is  represented 
by  u. 

Now  let  Q  be  the  quantity  of  the  substance  which  passes 
through,  and  let  v  be  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass  of  the 
substance,  then  the  whole  volume  is  Q  vt  and  this,  by  what 
we  have  said,  is  equal  to  u,  the  velocity  of  the  substance. 
If  the  plane,  instead  of  being  fixed,  is  moving  forwards  with 
a  velocity  u,  the  quantity  which  passes  through  it  will 
depend,  not  on  the  absolute  velocity,  u,  of  the  substance, 
but  on  the  relative  velocity,  u  —  u,  and  if  Q  is  the  quantity 
which  passes  through  the  plane  from  right  to  left, 

Q  j>  =   U    —  U      . (l) 


Waves  of  Longitudinal  Displacement.  225 

Let  A  be  an  imaginary  plane  moving  from  left  to  right 
with  velocity  u,  and  let  this  be  the  velocity  of  propagation 


FIG. 


of  the  wave,  then,  as  the  plane  A  travels  along,  the  values  of 
u  and  all  other  quantities  belonging  to  the  wave  at  the 
plane  A  remain  the  same.  If;/j  is  the  absolute  velocity  of 
the  substance  at  A,  v\  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass,  and/t  the 
pressure,  all  these  quantities  will  be  constant,  and 

Ql  Vl  =  u  -  ul (2) 

If  B  be  another  plane,  travelling  with  the  same  velo- 
city u,  and  if  Q2  «a  ^2  /a  be  the  corresponding  values 
at  B, 

Q2  P2  =   U   -    #a       , (3) 

The  distance  between  the  planes  A  and  B  remains  in- 
variable, because  they  travel  with  the  same  velocity.  Also 
the  quantity  of  the  substance  intercepted  between  them 
remains  the  same,  because  the  density  of  the  substance  at 
corresponding  parts  of  the  wave  remains  the  same  as  the 
wave  travels  along.  Hence  the  quantity  of  matter  which 
enters  the  space  between  A  and  B  at  A  must  be  equal  to 
that  which  leaves  it  at  B,  or 

Qi  =  Q2  =  Q  (say) (4) 

Hence 

«i  =  u  -  Q  z>i     w2  =  u  -  Q  z'a      .     .     (5) 

so  that  when  we  know  u  and  Q  and  the  volume  of  unit  of 
mass,  we  can  find  u\  and  ?/2. 

Let  us  next  consider  the  forces  acting  on  the  matter  con- 
tained between  A  and  B.  If /i  is  the  pressure  at  A, 

Q 


226  Wares. 

that  at  B,  the  force  arising  from  these  pressures  tending  to 
increase  the  momentum  from  left  to  tight  is/2  —  Pv 

This  is  the  momentum  generated  in  unit  of  time  by  the 
external  pressures  on  the  portion  of  the  substance  between 
A  and  B. 

Now  we  must  recollect  that,  though  corresponding  points 
of  the  substance  in  this  interval  arc  always  moving  in  the 
same  way,  the  matter  itself  between  A  and  B  is  continually 
changing,  a  quantity  Q  entering  at  A,  and  an  equal  quantity 
Q  leaving  at  B. 

Now  the  portion  Q  which  enters  at  A  has  a  velocity  uly 
and  therefore  a  momentum  Q  ult  and  that  which  issues  at 
B  has  a  velocity  «2,  and  therefore  a  momentum  Q  u2. 

Hence  the  momentum  of  the  entering  fluid  exceeds  that 
of  the  issuing  fluid  by 

Q(WI  —  *'2)- 

The  only  way  in  which  this  momentum  can  be  produced 
is  by  the  action  of  the  external  pressures  p\  and/2;  for  the 
mutual  actions  of  the  parts  of  the  substance  cannot  alter  the 
momentum  of  the  whole.  Hence  we  find 

P\  -A  =  Q("i  -  »2) (6) 

Substituting  the  values  of  ul  and  uz  from  equation  (5),  \ve 
find 

/i-A==Q2(^2-^i) (7) 

Hence 

A +Q2z>i=A  +  Q2^ (8) 

Now  the  only  restriction  on  the  position  of  the  plane  B  is 

that  it  must  remain   at  a  constant  distance  behind  A,  and 

whatever  be   the   distance   between  A  and   B,  the  above 

equation  is  always  true. 

Hence  the  quantity  /  -f-  Q2  v  must   continue  constant 

during  the  whole  process  involved  in  the  passage  of  the 

wave.     Calling  this  quantity  p,  we  have 

/  =  P  -  Q*  0      .........       (9 


Waves  of  Permanent  Type.  227 

or  the  pressure  is  equal  to  a  constant  pressure,  P,  diminished 
by  a  quantity  proportional  to  the  volume  v. 

This  relation  between  pressure  and  volume  is  not  fulfilled 
in  the  case  of  any  actual  substance.  In  all  substances  it  is 
true  that  as  the  volume  diminishes  the  pressure  increases, 
but  the  increase  of  pressure  is  never  strictly  proportional  to 
the  diminution  of  volume.  As  soon  as  the  diminution  of 
volume  becomes  considerable,  the  pressure  begins  to  in- 
crease in  a  greater  ratio  than  the  volume  diminishes. 

But  if  we  consider  only  small  changes  of  volume  and 
pressure,  we  may  make  use  of  our  former  definition  of  elas- 
ticity at  p.  107 — namely,  the  ratio  of  the  number  expressing 
the  increment  of  pressure  to  that  expressing  the  voluminal 
compression,  or,  calling  the  elasticity  E, 

E  =  v  ^     __  ^    =  v  Q2  by  equation  (7)    (10) 

where  v  is  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass,  and  since  v\  and  ?>2 
are  very  nearly  equal,  we  may  take  either  for  the  value  of  v. 
Again,  if  v  is  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass  in  those  parts  of  the 
substance  which  are  not  disturbed  by  the  wave,  and  for 
which,  therefore,  u  =  6, 

u  =  Q  v (i  i) 

Hence  we  find 

U2  =  Q*  V*  =  E  V (l2> 

which  shows  that  the  square  of  the  velocity  of  propagation 
of  a  wave  of  longitudinal  displacement  in  any  substance  is 
equal  to  the  product  of  the  elasticity  and  the  volume  of  unit 
of  mass. 

In  calculating  the  elasticity  we  must  take  into  account  the 
conditions  under  which  the  compression  of  the  substance 
actually  takes  place.  If,  as  in  the  case  of  sound-waves,  it  is 
very  sudden,  so  that  any  heat  which  is  developed  cannot  be 
conducted  away,  then  we  must  calculate  the  elasticity  on  the 
supposition  that  no  heat  is  allowed  to  escape. 

In  the  case  of  air  or  any  other  gas  the  elasticity  at  constant 
Q  2 


228  Waves. 

temperature  is  numerically  equal  to  the  pressure.  If  we 
denote,  as  usual,  the  ratio  of  the  specific  heat  at  constant 
pressure  to  that  at  constant  volume  by  the  symbol  y,  the 
elasticity  when  no  heat  escapes  is 

E*=y/>    ..........     (13) 

Hence,  if  u  is  the  velocity  of  sound, 

U2  =  y/z/  ..........     (14) 

We  know  that  when  the  temperature  is  the  same  the 
product  p  v  remains  constant  Hence,  the  velocity  of  sound 
is  the  same  for  the  same  temperature,  whatever  be  the 
pressure  of  the  air. 

If  <%  is  the  height  of  the  atmosphere  supposed  homo- 
geneous —  that  is  to  say,  the  height  of  a  column  of  the 
same  density  as  the  actual  density,  the  weight  of  which 
would  produce  a  pressure  equal  to  the  actual  pressure  —  then, 
if  the  section  of  the  column  is  unity,  its  volume  is  <£,  and  if 
m  is  its  mass,  «£>  —  m  v. 

Also  the  weight  of  this  column  is/  =  m  g,  where  g  is  the 
force  of  gravity. 

Hence 


and 

u2  =  g  7  <£• 

The  velocity  of  sound  may  be  compared  with  that  ot  a 
body  falling  a  certain  distance  under  the  action  of  gravity. 
For  if  v  is  the  velocity  of  a  body  falling  through  a  height  j, 

V*  =    2  g  S. 

If  we  make  v  —  u,  then  s  =  J  y  <$. 

At  the  temperature  of  melting  ice  <$  =  26,214  feet  if  the 
force  of  gravity  is  32-2. 

At  the  same  temperature  the  velocity  of  sound  in  air  is 
1,090  feet  per  second  by  experiment. 

The  square  of  this  is  1,188,100,  whereas  the  square  of 
the  velocity  due  to  half  the  height  o/'  the  homogeneous 


Velocity  of  Sound.  229 

atmosphere  is  843,821.  Hence  by  means  of  the  known 
velocity  of  sound  we  can  determine  y,  the  ratio  of  1,188,100 
to  843,821,  to  be  1-408. 

The  height  of  the  homogeneous  atmosphere  is  proportional 
to  the  temperature  reckoned  from  absolute  zero.  Hence  the 
velocity  of  sound  is  proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the 
absolute  temperature.  In  several  of  the  more  perfect  gases 
the  value  of  y  seems  to  be  nearly  the  same  as  in  air.  Hence 
in  those  gases  the  velocity  of  sound  is  inversely  as  the  square 
root  of  their  specific  gravity  compared  with  air. 

This  investigation  would  be  perfectly  accurate,  however 
great  the  changes  of  pressure  and  density  due  to  the  passage 
of  the  sound-wave,  provided  the  substance  is  such  that  in  the 
actual  changes  of  pressure  and  volume  the  quantity 


remains  constant,  Q  being  the  velocity  of  propagation.  In 
all  substances,  as  we  have  seen,  we  may,  when  the  values  of 
p  and  v  are  always  very  near  their  mean  values,  assume  a 
value  of  Q  which  shall  approximately  satisfy  this  condition  ; 
but  in  the  case  of  very  violent  sounds  and  other  disturbances 
of  the  air  the  changes  of/  and  v  may  be  so  great  that  this 
approximation  ceases  to  be  near  the  truth.  To  understand 
what  takes  place  in  these  cases  we  must  remember  that  the 
changes  of/  and  v  are  not  proportional  to  each  other,  for  iit 
almost  all  substances/  increases  faster  for  a  given  diminution 
of  v  as/  increases  and  v  diminishes. 

Hence  Q,  which  represents  the  mass  of  the  substance 
traversed  by  the  wave,  will  be  greater  in  those  parts  of  the 
wave  where  the  pressure  is  great  than  in  those  parts  where 
the  pressure  is  small;  that  is,  the  condensed  portions  of  the 
wave  will  travel  faster  than  the  rarefied  portions.  The  result 
of  this  will  be  that  if  the  wave  originally  consists  of  a  gradual 
condensation  followed  by  a  gradual  rarefaction,  the  conden- 
sation will  become  more  sudden  and  the  rarefaction  more 
gradual  as  the  wave  advances  through  the  air,  in  the  same 


230  Radiation. 

way  and  for  nearly  the  same  reason  as  the  waves  of  the  sea 
on  coming  into  shallow  water  become  steeper  in  front  and 
more  gently  sloping  behind,  till  at  last  they  curl  over  on  the 
shore. 

FIG.  30. 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

ON    RADIATION. 

WE  have  already  noticed  some  of  the  phenomena  of  radia- 
tion, and  have  shown  that  they  do  not  properly  belong  to  the 
science  of  Heat,  and  that  they  should  rather  be  treated, 
along  with  sound  and  light,  as  a  branch  of  the  great  science 
of  Radiation. 

The  phenomenon  of  radiation  consists  in  the  transmis- 
sion of  energy  from  one  body  to  another  by  propagation 
through  the  intervening  medium,  in  such  a  way  that  the 
progress  of  the  radiation  may  be  traced,  after  it  has  left  the 
first  body  and  before  it  reaches  the  second,  travelling  through 
the  medium  with  a  certain  velocity,  and  leaving  the  medium 
behind  it  in  the  condition  in  which  it  found  it. 

We  have  already  considered  one  instance  of  radiation  in 
the  case  of  waves  of  sound.  In  this  case  the  energy  com- 
municated to  the  air  by  a  vibrating  body  is  propagated 
through  the  air,  and  may  finally  set  some  other  body,  as  the 
drum  of  the  ear,  in  motion.  During  the  propagation  of  the 
sound  this  energy  exists  in  the  portion  of  air  through  which 
it  is  travelling,  partly  in  the  form  of  motion  of  the  air  to  and 


Radiation.  231 

fro,  and  partly  in  the  form  of  condensation  and  rarefaction. 
The  energy  due  to  sound  in  the  air  is  distinct  from  heat,  be- 
cause it  is  propagated  in  a  definite  direction,  so  that  in  a 
certain  time  it  will  have  entirely  left  the  portion  of  air  under 
consideration,  and  will  be  found  in  another  portion  of  air  to 
which  it  has  tiavelled.  Now  heat  never  passes  out  of  a  hot 
body  except  to  enter  a  colder  body,  so  that  the  energy  of 
sound-waves,  or  any  other  form  of  energy  which  is  propa- 
gated so  as  to  pass  wholly  out  of  one  portion  of  the  medium 
and  into  another,  cannot  be  called  heat. 

There  are,  however,  important  thermal  effects  produced 
by  radiation,  so  that  we  cannot  understand  the  science  of  heat 
without  studying  some  of  the  phenomena  of  radiation. 

When  a  body  is  raised  to  a  very  high  temperature  it 
becomes  visible  in  the  dark,  and  is  sakl  to  shine,  or  to  emit 
light.  The  velocity  of  propagation  of  the  light  emitted  by 
the  sun  and  by  very  hot  bodies  has  been  approximately  mea- 
sured, and  is  estimated  to  be  between  180,000  and  192,000 
miles  per  second,  or  about  900,000  times  faster  than  sound 
in  air. 

The  time  taken  by  the  light  in  passing  from  one  place  to 
another  within  the  limited  range  which  we  have  at  our  com- 
mand in  a  laboratory  is  exceedingly  short,  and  it  is  only  by 
means  of  the  most  refined  experimental  methods  that  it  has 
been  measured.  It  is  certain,  however,  that  there  is  an 
interval  of  time  between  the  emission  of  light  by  one  body 
and  its  reception  by  another,  and  that  during  this  time  the 
energy  transmitted  from  the  one  body  to  the  other  has 
existed  in  some  form  in  the  intervening  medium. 

The  opinions  with  regard  to  the  relation  between  light 
and  heat  have  suffered  several  alternations,  according  as 
these  agents  were  regarded  as  substances  or  as  accidents. 
At  one  time  light  was  regarded  as  a  substance  projected 
from  the  luminous  body,  which,  if  the  luminous  body 
were  hot,  might  itself  become  hot  like  any  other  substance. 
Heat  was  thus  regarded  as  an  accident  of  the  substance  light. 


232  Radiation. 

When  the  progress  of  science  had  rendered  the  measure- 
ment of  quantities  of  heat  as  accurate  as  the  measurement 
of  quantities  of  gases,  heat,  under  the  name  of  caloric,  was 
placed  in  the  list  of  substances.  Afterwards,  the  independent 
progress  of  optics  led  to  the  rejection  of  the  corpuscular 
theory  of  light,  and  the  establishment  of  the  undulatory 
theory,  according  to  which  light  is  a  wave-like  motion  of  a 
medium  already  existing.  The  caloric  theory  of  heat,  how- 
ever, still  prevailed  even  after  the  corpuscular  theory  of 
light  was  rejected,  so  that  heat  and  light  seemed  almost  to 
have  exchanged  places. 

When  the  caloric  theory  of  heat  was  at  length  demon- 
strated to  be  false,  the  grounds  of  the  argument  were  quite 
independent  of  those  which  had  been  used  in  the  case  of 
light. 

We  shall  therefore  consider  the  nature  of  radiation, 
whether  of  light  or  heat,  in  an  independent  manner,  and 
show  why  we  believe  that  what  is  called  radiant  heat  is  the 
same  thing  as  what  is  called  light,  only  perceived  by  us 
through  a  different  channel.  The  same  radiation  which 
when  we  become  aware  of  it  by  the  eye  we  call  light,  when 
we  detect  it  by  a  thermometer  or  by  the  sensation  of  heat 
we  call  radiant  heat. 

In  the  first  place,  radiant  heat  agrees  with  light  in  always 
moving  in  straight  lines  through  any  uniform  medium.  It  is 
not,  therefore,  propagated  by  diffusion,  as  in  the  case  of  the 
conduction  of  heat,  where  the  heat  always  travels  from  hotter 
to  colder  parts  of  the  medium  in  whatever  direction  this 
condition  may  lead  it. 

The  medium  through  which  radiant  heat  passes  is  not 
heated  if  perfectly  diathermanous,  any  more  than  a  per- 
fectly transparent  medium  through  which  light  passes  is 
rendered  luminous.  But  if  any  impurity  or  defect  of  trans- 
parency causes  the  medium  to  become  visible  when  light 
passes  through  it,  it  will  also  cause  it  to  become  hot  and  to 
Btop  part  of  the  heat  when  traversed  by  radiant  heat 


L  ight  and  Heat.  233 

In  the  next  place,  radiant  heat  is  reflected  from  the 
polished  surfaces  of  bodies  according  to  the  same  laws  as 
light.  A  concave  mirror  collects  the  rays  of  the  sun  into  a 
brilliantly  luminous  focus.  If  these  collected  rays  fall  on  a 
piece  of  wood,  they  will  set  it  en  fire.  If  the  luminous  rays 
are  collected  by  means  of  a  convex  lens,  similar  heating 
effects  are  produced,  showing  that  radiant  heat  is  refracted 
when  it  passes  from  one  transparent  medium  to  another. 

When  light  is  refracted  through  a  prism,  so  as  to  change 
its  direction  through  a  considerable  angle  of  deviation,  it  is 
separated  into  a  series  of  kinds  of  light  which  are  easily 
distinguished  from  each  other  by  their  various  colours. 
The  radiant  heat  which  is  refracted  through  the  prism  is  also 
spread  out  through  a  considerable  angular  range,  which  shows 
that  it  also  consists  of  radiations  of  various  kinds.  The 
luminosity  of  the  different  radiations  is  evidently  not  in  the 
same  proportion  as  their  heating  effects.  For  the  blue  and 
green  rays  have  very  little  heating  power  compared  with  the 
extreme  red,  which  are  much  less  luminous,  and  the  heating 
rays  are  found  far  beyond  the  end  of  the  red,  where  no  light 
at  all  is  visible. 

There  are  other  methods  of  separating  the  different  kinds 
of  light,  which  are  sometimes  more  convenient  than  the  use 
of  a  prism.  Many  substances  are  more  transparent  to 
one  kind  of  light  than  another,  and  are  therefore  called 
coloured  media.  Such  media  absorb  certain  rays  and 
transmit  others.  If  the  light  transmitted  by  a  stratum  of  a 
coloured  medium  afterwards  passes  through  another  stratum 
of  the  same  medium,  it  will  be  much  less  diminished  in 
intensity  lhan  at  first.  For  the  kind  of  light  which  is  most 
absorbed  by  the  medium  has  been  already  removed,  and 
what  is  transmitted  by  the  first  stratum  is  that  which  can  pass 
most  readily  through  the  second.  Thus  a  very  thin  stratum 
of  a  solution  of  bichromate  of  potash  cuts  off  the  whole  of 
the  spectrum  from  the  middle  of  the  green  to  the  violet,  but 
the  remainder  of  the  light,  consisting  of  the  red,  orange, 


Radiation. 

yellow,  and  part  of  the  green,  is  very  slightly  diminished  in 
intensity  by  passing  through  another  stratum  of  the  same 
medium. 

If,  however,  the  second  stratum  be  of  a  different  medium, 
which  absorbs  most  of  the  rays  which  the  first  transmits,  it 
will  cut  off  nearly  the  whole  light,  ihough  it  may  be  itself 
very  transparent  for  other  rays  absorbed  by  the  first  medium. 
Thus  a  stratum  of  sulphate  of  copper  absorbs  nearly  all  the 
rays  transmitted  by  the  bichromate  of  potash,  except  a  few 
of  the  green  rays. 

Melloni  found  that  different  substances  absorb  different 
kinds  of  radiant  heat,  and  that  the  heat  sifted  by  a  screen 
of  any  substance  will  pass  in  greater  proportion  through 
a  screen  of  the  same  substance  than  unsifted  heat,  while  it 
may  be  stopped  in  greater  proportion  than  unsifted  heat  by 
a  screen  of  a  different  substance. 

These  remarks  may  illustrate  the  general  similarity'between 
light  and  radiant  heat.  We  must  next  consider  the  reasons 
which  induce  us  to  regard  light  as  depending  on  a  particular 
kind  of  motion  in  the  medium  through  which  it  is  pro- 
pagated. These  reasons  are  principally  derived  from  the 
phenomena  of  the  interference  of  light.  They  are  explained 
more  at  large  in  treatises  on  light,  because  it  is  much  easier 
to  observe  these  phenomena  by  the  eye  than  by  any  kind 
of  thermometer.  We  shall  therefore  be  as  brief  as  possible. 

There  are  various  methods  by  which  a  beam  of  light  from 
a  small  luminous  object  may  be  divided  into  two  portions, 
which,  after  travelling  by  slightly  different  paths,  finally  fall 
on  a  white  screen.  Where  the  two  portions  of  light  overlap 
each  other  on  the  screen,  a  series  of  long  narrow  stripes  may 
be  seen,  alternately  lighter  and  darker  than  the  average 
brightness  of  the  screen  near  them,  and  when  white  light  is 
used,  these  stripes  are  bordered  with  colours.  By  using  light 
of  one  kind  only,  such  as  that  obtained  from  the  salted  wick 
ot'  a  spirit-lamp,  a  greater  number  of  bands  or  fringes  may 
bt  seen,  and  a  greater  difference  of  brightness  between  the 


///  tcrfcrcnce.  235 

light  and  the  dark  bands.  If  we  stop  either  of  the  portions 
of  light  into  which  the  original  beam  was  divided,  the  whole 
system  of  bands  disappears,  showing  that  they  are  due, 
not  to  either  of  the  portions  alone,  but  to  both  united. 

If  we  now  fix  our  attention  on  one  of  the  dark  bands,  and 
then  cut  oft"  one  of  the  partial  beams  of  light,  we  shall 
observe  that  instead  of  appearing  darker  it  becomes  actually 
brighter,  and  if  we  again  allow  the  light  to  fall  on  the  screen 
it  becomes  dark  again.  Hence  it  is  possible  to  produce 
darkness  by  the  addition  of  two  portions  of  light  If  light 
is  a  substance,  there  cannot  be  another  substance  which 
when  added  to  it  shall  produce  darkness.  We  are  therefore 
compelled  to  admit  that  light  is  not  a  substance. 

Now  is  there  any  other  instance  in  which  the  addition  of 
two  apparently  similar  things  diminishes  the  result  ?  We 
know  by  experiments  with  musical  instruments  that  a  com- 
bination of  two  sounds  may  produce  less  audible  effect  than 
either  separately,  and  it  can  be  shown  that  this  takes  place 
when  the  one  is  half  a  wave-length  in  advance  of  the  other. 
Here  the  mutual  annihilation  of  the  sounds  arises  from  the 
fact  that  a  motion  of  the  air  towards  the  ear  is  the  exact 
opposite  of  a  motion  away  from  the  ear,  and  if  the  two  in- 
struments are  so  arranged  that  the  motions  which  they  tend 
to  produce  in  the  air  near  the  ear  are  in  opposite  direc- 
tions and  of  equal  magnitude,  the  result  will  be  no  motion 
at  all.  Now  there  is  nothing  absurd  in  one  motion  being 
the  exact  opposite  of  another,  though  the  supposition  that 
one  substance  is  the  exact  opposite  of  another  substance,  as 
in  some  forms  of  the  Two-Fluid  theory  of  Electricity,  is  an 
absurdity. 

We  may  show  the  interference  of  waves  in  a  visible 
manner  by  dippmg  a  two-pronged  fork  into  water  or  mercury. 
The  waves  which  diverge  from  the  two  centres  where  the 
prongs,  enter  or  leave  the  fluid  are  seen  to  produce  a 
greater  disturbance  when  they  exactly  coincide  than  when 
one  gets  ahead  of  the  other. 


236  Radiation. 

Now  it  is  found,  by  measuring  the  positions  of  the  bright 
and  dark  bands  on  the  screen,  tnat  the  difference  of  the 
distances -travelled  by  the  two  portions  of  light  is  for  the 
bright  bands  always  an  exact  multiple  of  a  certain  very 
small  distance  which  we  shall  call  a  wave-length,  whereas 
for  the  dark  bands  it  is  intermediate  between  two  multi- 
ples of  the  wave-length,  being  \,  ij,  2^,  £c.,  times  that 
length. 

We  therefore  conclude  that  whatever  exists  or  takes 
place  at  a  certain  point  in  a  ray  of  light,  then,  at  the  same 
instant,  at  a  point  at  \  or  \\  of  the  wave-length  in  advance, 
something  exactly  the  opposite  exists  or  takes  place,  so  ti^i 
in  going  along  a  ray  we  find  an  alternation  of  conditions 
which  we  may  call  positive  and  negative. 

In  the  ordinary  statement  of  the  theory  of  undulations 
these  conditions  are  described  as  motion  of  the  medium  in 
opposite  directions.  The  essential  character  of  the  theory 
would  remain  the  same  if  we  were  to  substitute  for  ordinary 
motion  to  and  fro  any  other  succession  of  oppositely 
directed  conditions.  Professor  Rankine  has  suggested  op- 
posite rotations  of  molecules  about  their  axes,  and  I  have 
suggested  oppositely  directed  magnetizations  and  electro- 
motive forces  \  but  the  adoption  of  either  of  these  hypotheses 
would  in  no  way  alter  the  essential  character  of  the  undula- 
tory  theory. 

Now  it  is  found  that  if  a  very  narrow  thermo-electric  pile 
be  placed  in  the  position  of  the  screen,  and  moved  so  that 
sometimes  a  bright  band  and  sometimes  a  dark  one  falls  on 
the  pile,  the  galvanometer  indicates  that  the  pile  receives 
more  heat  when  in  the  bright  than  when  in  the  dark  band, 
and  that  when  one  portion  of  the  beam  is  cut  off  the  heat  in 
the  dark  band  is  increased.  Hence  in  the  interference  of 
radiations  the  heating  effect  obeys  the  same  laws  as  the 
luminous  effect. 

Indeed,  it  has  been  found  that  even  when  the  source 
of  radiation  is  a  hot  body  which  emits  no  luminous  rays, 


Polarisation.  237 

the  phenomena  of  interference  can  be  traced,  showing 
that  two  rays  of  dark  heat  can  interfere  no  less  than  two 
rays  of  light.  Hence  all  that  we  have  said  about  the  waves 
of  light  is  applicable  to  the  heat-radiation,  which  is  therefore 
a  series  of  waves. 

It  is  also  known  in  the  case  of  light  that  after  passing 
through  a  plate  cut  from  a  crystal  of  tourmaline  parallel  to 
its  axis  the  transmitted  beam  cannot  pass  through  a  second 
similarly  cut  plate  of  tourmaline  whose  axis  is  perpendicular 
to  that  of  the  first,  though  it  can  pass  through  it  when  the  axis 
is  in  any  other  position.  Such  a  beam  of  light,  which  has 
different  properties  according  as  the  second  plate  is  turned 
into  different  positions  round  the  beam  as  an  axis,  is  called 
a  polarized  beam.  There  are  many  other  ways  of  polarizing 
a  beam  of  light,  but  the  result  is  always  of  the  same  kind. 
Now  this  property  of  polarized  light  shows  that  the  motion 
which  constitutes  light  cannot  be  in  the  direction  of  the 
ray,  for  then  there  could  be  no  difference  between  different 
sides  of  the  ray.  The  motion  must  be  transverse  to  the 
direction  of  the  ray,  so  that  we  may  now  describe  a  ray  of 
polarized  light  as  a  condition  of  disturbance  in  a  direction 
at  right  angles  to  the  ray  propagated  through  a  medium,  so 
that  the  disturbance  is  in  opposite  directions  at  every  half 
wave-length  measured  along  the  ray.  Since  Principal  J.  D. 
Forbes  showed  that  a  ray  of  dark  heat  can  be  polarized,  we 
can  make  the  same  assertion  about  the  heat  radiation. 

Let  us  now  consider  the  consequences  of  admitting  that 
what  we  call  radiation,  whether  of  heat,  light,  or  invisible 
rays  which  act  on  chemical  preparations,  is  of  the  nature  of 
a  transverse  undulation  in  a  medium. 

A  transverse  undulation  is  completely  denned  when  we 
know — 

1.  Its  wave-length,  or  the  distance  between  two  places  in 
which  the  disturbance  is  in  the  same  phase. 

2.  Its  amplitude,  or  the  greatest  extent  of  the  disturb- 
ance. 


233 


Radiation. 


3.  The  plane  in  which  the  direction  of  the  disturbance 
lies. 

4.  The  phase  of  the  wave  at  a  particular  point. 

5.  The  velocity  of  propagation  through  the  medium. 
When  we  know  these  particulars  about  an  undulation,  it 

is  completely  denned,  and  cannot  be  altered  in  any  way 
without  changing  some  of  these  specifications. 

Now  by  passing  a  beam  consisting  of  any  assemblage  of 
undulations  through  a  prism,  we  can  separate  it  into  portions 
according  to  their  wave-lengths,  and  we  can  select  rays  of  a 
particular  wave-length  for  examination.  Of  these  we  may,  by 
means  of  a  plate  of  tourmaline,  select  those  whose  plane  of 
polarization  is  the  principal  plane  of  the  tourmaline,  but  this 
is  unnecessary  for  oar  purpose.  We  have  now  got  rays  of  a 
definite  wave-length.  Their  velocity  of  propagation  depends 
only  on  the  nature  of  the  ray  and  of  the  medium,  so^that  we 
cannot  alter  it  at  pleasure,  and  the  phase  changes  so  rapidly 
(billions  of  times  in  a  second)  that  it  cannot  be  directly 
observed.  Hence  the  only  variable  quantity  remaining  is 
the  amplitude  of  the  disturbance,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
intensity  of  the  ray. 

Now  the  ray  may  be  observed  in  various  ways.  We  may, 
if  it  excites  the  sensation  of  sight,  receive  it  in  to  our  eye.  If 
it  affects  chemical  compounds,  we  may  observe  its  effect  on 
them,  or  we  may  receive  the  ray  on  a  thermo-electric  pile 
and  determine  its  heating  effect. 

But  all  these  effects,  being  effects  of  one  and  the  same 
thing,  must  rise  and  fall  together.  A  ray  of  specified  wave- 
length and  specified  plane  of  polarization  cannot  be  a 
combination  of  several  different  things,  such  as  a  light-ray,  a 
heat-ray,  and  an  actinic  ray.  It  must  be  one  and  the  same 
thing,  which  has  luminous,  thermal,  and  actinic  effects,  and 
everything  which  increases  one  of  these  effects  must  increase 
the  others  also. 

The  chief  reason  why  so  much  that  has  been  written  on 
this  subject  is  tainted  with  the  notion  that  heat  is  one  thing 


Light  and  Heat.  239 

and  light  is  another  seems  to  be  that  the  arrangements 
for  operating  on  radiations  of  a  selected  wave-length  are 
troublesome,  and  when  mixed  radiations  are  employed,  in 
which  the -luminous  and  the  thermal  effects  are  in  different 
proportions,  anything  which  alters  the  proportion  of  the 
different  radiations  in  the  mixture  alters  also  the  proportion 
of  the  resulting  thermal  and  luminous  effect,  as  indeed  it 
generally  alters  the  colour  of  the  mixed  light. 

We  have  seen  that  the  existence  of  these  radiations  may 
be  detected  in  various  ways — by  photographic  preparations, 
by  the  eye,  and  by  the  thermometer.  There  can  be  no 
doubt,  however,  as  to  which  of  these  methods  gives  the  true 
measure  of  the  energy  transmitted  by  the  radiation.  This 
is  exactly  measured  by  the  heating  effect  of  the  ray  when 
completely  absorbed  by  any  substance. 

When  the  wave-length  is  greater  than  812  millionths  of  a 
millimetre  no  luminous  effect  is  produced  on  the  eye,  though 
the  effect  on  the  thermometer  may  be  very  great.  When 
the  wave-length  is  650  millionths  of  a  millimetre  the  ray  is 
visible  as  a  red  light,  and  a  considerable  heating  effect  is 
observed.  But  when  the  wave-length  is  500  millionths  of  a 
millimetre,  the  ray,  which  is  seen  as  a  brilliant  green,  has 
much  less  heating  effect  than  the  dark  or  the  red  rays,  and 
it  is  difficult  to  obtain  strong  thermal  effects  with  rays  of 
smaller  wave-lengths,  even  when  concentrated. 

But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  photographic  effect  of  the 
radiation  on  salts  of  silver,  which  is  very  feeble  in  the  red 
rays,  and  even  in  the  green  rays,  becomes  more  powerful 
the  smaller  the  wave-length,  till  for  rays  whose  wave-length 
is  400,  which  have  a  feeble  violet  luminosity  and  a  still 
feebler  thermal  effect,  the  photographic  effect  is  very 
powerful;  and  even  far  beyond  the  visible  spectrum,  for  wave- 
lengths of  less  than  200  millionths  of  a  millimetre,  which 
are  quite  invisible  to  our  eyes  and  quite  undiscoverable  by 
our  thermometers,  the  photographic  effect  is  still  observed. 
This  shows  that  neither  the  luminous  nor  the  photographic 


240  Radiation. 

effect  is  in  any  way  proportional  to  the  energy  of  the  radia- 
tion when  different  kinds  of  radiation  are  concerned.  It 
is  probable  that  when  the  radiation  produces  the  photo- 
graphic effect  it  is  not  by  its  energy  doing  wor-k  on  the 
chemical  compound,  but  rather  by  a  well-timed  vibration  of 
the  molecules  dislodging  them  from  the  position  of  almost 
indifferent  equilibrium  into  which  they  had  been  thrown  by 
previous  chemical  manipulations,  and  enabling  them  to  rush 
together  according  to  their  more  permanent  affinities,  so  as 
to  form  stabler  compounds.  In  cases  of  this  kind  the  effect 
is  no  more  a  dynamical  measure  of  the  cause  than  the  effect 
of  the  fall  of  a  tree  is  a  measure  of  the  energy  of  the  wind 
which  uprooted  it. 

It  is  true  that  in  many  cases  the  amount  of  the  radiation 
may  be  very  accurately  estimated  by  means  of  its  chemical 
effects,  even  when  these  chemical  effects  tend  to  diminish 
the  intrinsic  energy  of  the  system.  But  by  estimating  the 
heating  effect  of  a  radiation  which  is  entirely  absorbed  by 
the  heated  body  we  obtain  a  true  measure  of  the  energy  of 
the  radiation.  It  is  found  that  a  surface  thickly  coated 
with  lampblack  absorbs  nearly  the  whole  of  every  kind  of 
radiation  which  falls  on  it.  Hence  surfaces  of  this  kind  are 
of  great  value  in  the  thermal  study  of  radiation. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  conditions  which  determine 
the  amount  and  quality  of  the  radiation  from  a  heated  body. 
We  must  bear  in  mind  that  temperature  is  a  property  of 
hot  bodies  and  not  of  radiations,  and  that  qualities  such  as 
wave-lengths,  &c.,  belong  to  radiations,  but  not  to  the  heat 
which  produces  them  or  is  produced  by  them. 

ON  PREVOST'S  THEORY  OF  EXCHANGES. 

When  a  system  of  bodies  at  different  temperatures  is  left 
to  itself,  the  transfer  of  heat  which  takes  place  always  has 
the  effect  of  rendering  the  temperatures  of  the  different 
bodies  more  nearly  equal,  and  this  character  of  the  transfer 


Theory  of  Exchanges.  241 

of  heat,  that  it  passes  from  hotter  to  colder  bodies,  is  the 
same  whether  it  is  by  radiation  or  by  conduction  that  the 
transfer  takes  place. 

Let  us  consider  a  number  of  bodies,  all  at  the  same 
temperature,  placed  in  a  chamber  the  walls  of  which  are 
maintained  at  that  temperature,  and  through  which  no  heat 
can  pass  by  radiation  (suppose  the  walls  of  metal,  for 
instance).  No  change  of  temperature  will  occur  in  any  of 
these  bodies.  They  will  be  in  thermal  equilibrium  with 
each  other  and  with  the  walls  of  the  chamber.  This  is  a 
consequence  of  the  definition  of  equal  temperature  at  p.  32. 

Now  if  any  one  of  these  bodies  had  been  taken  out  of 
the  chamber  and  placed  among  colder  bodies  there  would 
be  a  transfer  of  heat  by  radiation  from  the  hot  body  to  the 
colder  ones ;  or  if  a  colder  body  had  been  introduced  into 
the  chamber  it  would  immediately  begin  to  receive  heat  by 
radiation  from  the  hotter  bodies  round  it.  But  the  cold 
body  has  no  power  of  acting  directly  on  the  hot  bodies  at  a 
distance,  so  as  to  cause  them  to  begin  to  emit  radiations, 
nor  has  the  hot  chamber  any  power  to  stop  the  radiation  of 
any  one  of  the  hot  bodies  placed  within  it.  We  therefore 
conclude  with  Prevost  that  a  hot  body  is  always  emitting 
radiations,  even  when  no  colder  body  is  there  to  receive 
them,  and  that  the  reason  why  there  is  no  change  of  tem- 
perature when  a  body  is  placed  in  a  chamber  of  the  same 
temperature  is  that  it  receives  from  the  radiation  of  the  walls 
of  the  chamber  exactly  as  much  heat  as  it  loses  by  radiation 
towards  these  walls. 

If  this  is  the  true  explanation  of  the  thermal  equilibrium 
of  radiation,  it  follows  that  if  two  bodies  have  the  same 
temperature  the  radiation  emitted  by  the  first  and  absorbed 
by  the  second  is  equal  in  amount  to  the  radiation  emitted 
by  the  second  and  absorbed  by  the  first  during  the  same 
iime 

The  higher  the  temperature  of  a  body,  the  greater  its 
radiation  is  found  to  be,  so  that  when  the  temperatures  of  the 

R 


242  Radiation 

bodies  are  unequal  the  hotter  bodies  will  emit  more  radia- 
tion than  they  receive  from  the  colder  bodies,  and  therefore, 
on  the  whole,  heat  will  be  lost  by  the  hotter  and  gained  by 
the  colder  bodies  till  thermal  equilibrium  is  attained.  We 
shall  return  to  the  comparison  of  the  radiation  at  different 
temperatures  after  we  have  examined  the  relations  between 
the  radiation  of  different  bodies  at  the  same  temperature. 

The  application  of  the  theory  of  exchanges  has  at  various 
times  been  extended  to  the  phenomena  of  heat  as  they 
were  successively  investigated  Fourier  has  considered  the 
law  of  radiation  as  depending  on  the  angle  which  the  ray 
makes  with  the  surface,  and  Leslie  has  investigated  its 
relation  to  the  state  6f  polish  of  the  surface ;  but  it  is  in 
recent  times,  and  chiefly  by  the  researches  of  B.  Stewart, 
Kirchhoff,  and  De  la  Provostaye,  that  the  theory  of  ex- 
changes has  been  shown  to  be  applicable,  not  only  to  the 
total  amount  of  the  radiation,  but  to  every  distinction  in 
quality  of  which  the  radiation  is  capable. 

For,  by  placing  between  two  bodies  of  the  same  tempera- 
ture a  contrivance  ouch  as  that  already  noticed  at  p.  238,  so 
that  only  radiations  of  a  determinate  wave-length  and  in  a 
determinate  plane  can  pass  from  the  one  body  to  the  other, 
we  reduce  the  general  proposition  about  thermal  equilibrium 
to  a  proposition  about  this  particular  kind  of  radiation.  We 
may  therefore  transform  it  into  the  following  more  definite 
proposition. 

If  two  bodies  are  at  the  same  temperature,  the  radiation 
emitted  by  the  first  and  absorbed  by  the  second  agrees  with 
the  radiation  emitted  by  the  second  and  absorbed  by  the 
first,  not  only  in  its  total  heating  effect,  but  in  the  intensity, 
wave-length,  and  plane  of  polarization  of  every  component 
part  of  either  radiation.  And  the  law  that  the  amount  of 
radiation  increases  with  the  temperature  must  be  true,  not 
only  for  the  whole  radiation,  but  for  all  the  component  parts 
of  it  when  analysed  according  to  their  wave-lengths  and 
planes  of  polarization. 


and  Absorption.  243 

The  consequences  of  these  two  propositions^  applying  as 
they  do  to  every  kind  of  radiation,  whether  detected  by  its 
thermal  or  by  its  luminous  effects,  are  so  numerous  and 
varied  that  we  cannot  attempt  any  full  enumeration  of  them 
in  this  treatise.  We  must  confine  ourselves  to  a  few  ex- 
amples. 

When  a  radiation  falls  on  a  body,  part  of  it  is  reflected, 
and  part  enters  the  body.  The  latter  part  again  may  either 
be  wholly  absorbed  by  the  body  or  partly  absorbed  and 
partly  transmitted. 

Now  lampblack  reflects  hardly  any  of  the  radiation  which 
falls  on  it,  and  it  transmits  none.  Nearly  the  whole  is 
absorbed. 

Polished  silver  reflects  nearly  the  whole  of  the  radiation 
which  falls  i  pon  it,  absorbing  only  about  a  fortieth  part,  and 
transmitting  none. 

Rock  salt  reflects  less  than  a  twelfth  part  of  the  radiation 
which  falls  on  it;  it  absorbs  hardly  any,  and  transmits  ninety- 
two  per  cent. 

These  three  substances,  therefore,  may  be  taken  as  types  of 
absorption,  reflexion,  and  transmission  respectively. 

Let  us  suppose  that  these  properties  have  been  observed 
in  these  substances  at  the  temperature,  say,  of  212°  F.,  and 
Set  them  be  placed  at  this  temperature  within  a  chamber 
whose  walls  are  at  the  same  temperature.  Then  the  amount 
of  the  radiation  from  the  lampblack  which  is  absorbed  by 
the  other  two  substances  is,  as  we  have  seen,  very  small. 
Now  the  lampblack  absorbs  the  whole  of  the  radiation  from 
the  silver  or  the  salt.  Hence  the  radiation  from  these 
substances  must  also  be  small,  or,  more  precisely — 

The  radiation  of  a  substance  at  a  given  temperature  is  to 
(he  radiation  of  lampblack  at  that  temperature  as  the  amount 
of  radiation  absorbed  by  the  substance  at  that  temperature  is  to 
the  whole  radiation  which  falls  upon  it. 

Hence  a  body  whose  surface  is  made  of  polished  silver 
will  emit  a  much  smaller  amount  of  radiation  than  one 

R  2 


244      •  Radiation 

whose  surface  is  of  lampblack.  The  brighter  the  surface  of 
a  silver  teapot,  the  longer  will  it  retain  the  heat  of  the  tea ; 
and  if  on  the  surface  of  a  metal  plate  some  parts  are  polished, 
others  rough,  and  others  blackened,  when  the  plate  is  made 
red  hot  the  blackened  parts  will  appear  brightest,  the  rough 
parts  not  so  bright,  and  the  polished  parts  darkest.  This  is 
well  seen  when  melted  lead  is  made  red  hot.  When  part 
of  the  dross  is  removed,  the  polished  surface  of  the  melted 
metal,  thougli  really  hotter  than  the  dross,  appears  of  a  less 
brilliant  red. 

A  piece  of  glass  when  taken  red  hot  out  of  the  fire  appears 
of  a  very  faint  red  compared  with  a  piece  of  iron  taken  from 
the  same  part  of  the  fire,  though  the  glass  is  really  hotter 
than  the  iron,  because  it  does  not  throw  off  its  heat  so  fast. 

Air  or  any  other  transparent  gas,  even  when  raised  to  a 
heat  at  which  opaque  bodies  appear  white  hot,  emits  so  little 
light  that  its  luminosity  can  hardly  be  observed  in  the 
dark,  at  least  when  the  thickness  of  the  heated  air  is  not 
very  great. 

Again,  when  a  substance  at  a  given  temperature  absorbs 
certain  kinds  of  radiation  and  transmits  others,  it  emits  at 
that  temperature  only  those  kinds  of  radiation  which  it 
absorbs.  A  very  remarkable  instance  of  this  is  observed  in 
the  vapour  of  sodium.  This  substance  when  heated  emits 
rays  of  two  definite  kinds,  whose  wave-lengths  are  0-00059053 
and  0-00058989  millimetre  respectively.  These  rays  are 
visible,  and  may  be  seen  in  the  form  of  two  bright  lines  by 
directing  a  spectroscope  upon  a  flame  in  which  any  com- 
pound of  sodium  is  present. 

Now  if  the  light  emitted  from  an  intensely  heated  solid 
body,  such  as  a  piece  of  lime  in  the  oxyhydrogen  light,  be 
transmitted  through  sodium-vapour  at  a  temperature  lower 
than  that  of  the  lime,  and  then  analysed  by  the  spectro- 
scope, two  dark  lines  are  seen,  corresponding  to  the  two 
bright  ones  formerly  observed,  showing  that  sodium-vapour 
absorbs  the  same  definite  kinds  of  light  which  it  radiates. 


as  depending  on  Temperature.  245 

If  the  temperature  of  the  sodium-vapour  is  raised,  say  by 
nsing  a  Bunsen's  burner  instead  of  a  spirit-lamp  to  produce 
it,  or  if  the  temperature  of  the  lime  is  lowered  till  it  is 
the  same  as  that  of  the  vapour,  the  dark  lines  disappear, 
because  the  sodium-vapour  now  radiates  exactly  as  much 
light  as  it  absorbs  from  the  light  of  the  lime-ball  at  the 
same  temperature.  If  the  sodium-flame  is  hotter  than  the 
lime-ball  the  lines  appear  bright. 

This  is  an  illustration  of  KirchhofFs  principle,  that  the 
radiation  of  every  kind  increases  as  the  temperature  rises. 

In  performing  this  experiment  we  suppose  the  light  from 
the  lime-ball  to  pass  through  the  sodium-flame  before  it 
reaches  the  slit  of  the  spectroscope.  If,  however,  the  flame 
is  interposed  between  the  slit  and  the  eye,  or  the  screen  on 
which  the  spectrum  is  projected,  the  dark  lines  may  be  seen 
distinctly,  even  when  the  temperature  of  the  sodium-flame  is 
higher  than  that  of  the  lime-ball.  For  in  the  parts  of  the 
spectrum  near  the  lines  the  light  is  now  compounded  of  the 
analysed  light  of  the  lime-ball  and  the  direct  light  of  the 
sodium-flame,  while  at  the  lines  themselves  the  light  of  the 
spectrum  of  the  lime-ball  is  cut  off,  and  only  the  direct  light 
of  the  sodium-flame  remains,  so  that  the  lines  appear  darker 
than  the  rest  of  the  field. 

It  does  not  belong  to  the  scope  of  this  treatise  to  attempt 
to  go  over  the  immense  field  of  research  which  has  been 
opened  up  by  the  application  of  the  spectroscope  to  dis- 
tinguish different  incandescent  vapours,  and  which  has  led 
to  a  great  increase  of  our  knowledge  of  the  heavenly 
bodies. 

If  the  thickness  of  a  medium,  such  as  sodium -vapour, 
which  radiates  and  absorbs  definite  kinds  of  light,  be  very 
great,  the  whole  bsing  at  a  high  temperature,  the  light 
emitted  will  be  of  exactly  the  same  composition  as  that 
emitted  from  lampblack  at  the  same  temperature.  For, 
tnougii  some  kinds  of  radiation  are  much  more  feebly 
emitted  by  the  substance  than  others,  these  are  also  so 


246  Radiation. 

feebly  absorbed  that  they  can  reach  the  surface  from  im- 
mense depths,  whereas  the  rays  which  are  so  copiously 
radiated  are  also  so  rapidly  absorbed  that  it  is  only  from 
places  very  near  the  surface  that  they  can  escape  out  of  the 
medium.  Hence  both  the  depth  and  the  density  of  an 
incandescent  gas  cause  its  radiation  to  assume  more  and 
more  of  the  character  of  a  continuous  spectrum. 

When  the  temperature  of  a  substance  is  gradually  raised, 
not  only  does  the  intensity  of  every  particular  kind  of  radia- 
tion increase,  but  new  kinds  of  radiation  are  produced. 
"Rodies  of  low  temperature  emit  only  rays  of  great  wave- 
length. As  the  temperature  rises  these  rays  are  more 
copiously  emitted,  but  at  the  same  time  other  rays  of 
smaller  wave-length  make  their  appearance.  When  the  tem- 
perature has  risen  to  a  certain  point,  part  of  the  radiation  is 
luminous  and  of  a  red  colour,  the  luminous  rays  of  greatest 
wave-length  being  red.  As  the  temperature  rises,  the  other 
luminous  rays  appear  in  the  order  of  the  spectrum,  but  every 
rise  of  temperature  increases  the  intensity  of  all  the  rays 
which  have  already  made  their  appearance.  A  white-hot 
body  emits  more  red  rays  than  a  red-hot  body,  and  more 
non-luminous  rays  than  any  non-luminous  body. 

The  total  thermal  value  of  the  radiation  at  any  tempera- 
ture, depending  as  it  does  upon  the  amount  of  all  the  different 
kinds  of  rays  of  which  it  is  composed,  is  not  likely  to  be  a 
simple  function  of  the  temperature.  Nevertheless,  Dulong 
and  Petit  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  formula  which  expresses 
the  facts  observed  by  them  with  tolerable  exactness.  It  is 
of  the  form 

R  =  mae, 

where  R  is  the  total  loss  of  heat  in  unit  of  time  by  radia- 
tion from  unit  of  area  of  the  surface  of  the  substance  at  the 
temperature  0,  m  is  a  constant  quantity  depending  only  on 
the  substance  and  the  nature  of  its  surface,  and  a  is  a 
numerical  quantity  which,  when  0  expresses  the  temperature 
on  the  Centigrade  scale,  is  1*0077. 


Total  Quantity  of  Radiation.  247 

If  the  body  is  placed  in  a  chamber  devoid  of  air,  whose 
walls  are  at  the  temperature  /,  then  the  heat  radiated  from 
the  walls  to  the  body  and  absorbed  by  it  will  be 

r  —  maf, 
so  that  the  actual  loss  of  heat  will  be 

R  —  r  =  m  a*  —  m  ae. 

The  constancy  of  the  amount  of  radiation  between  the  same 
surfaces  at  the  same  temperatures  affords  a  very  convenient 
method  of  comparing  quantities  of  heat.  This  method  was 
referred  to  in  our  chapter  on  Calorimetry  (p.  74),  under  the 
name  of  the  Method  of  Cooling. 

The  substance  to  be  examined  is  heated  and  put  into  a 
thin  copper  vessel,  the  outer  surface  of  which  is  blackened. 
or  at  least  is  preserved  in  the  same  state  of  roughness  or  of 
polish  throughout  the  experiments.  This  vessel  is  placed 
in  a  larger  copper  vessel  so  as  not  to  touch  it,  and  the  outer 
vessel  is  placed  in  a  bath  of  water  kept  at  a  constant  tem- 
perature. The  temperature  of  the  substance  in  the  smaller 
vessel  is  observed  from  time  to  time,  or,  still  better,  the  times 
are  observed  at  which  the  reading  of  a  thermometer  im- 
mersed in  the  substance  is  an  exact  number  of  degrees.  In 
this  way  the  time  of  cooling,  say  from  100°  to  90°,  from  90° 
to  80°,  is  registered,  the  temperature  of  the  outer  vessel  being 
kept  always  the  same. 

Suppose  that  this  observation  of  the  time  of  cooling  is 
made  first  when  the  vessel  is  filled  with  water,  and  then 
when  some  other  substance  is  put  into  it.  The  rate  at  which 
heat  escapes  by  radiation  is  the  same  for  the  same  tempera- 
ture in  both  experiments.  The  quantity  of  heat  which 
escapes  during  the  cooling,  say  from  100°  to  90°,  in  the  two 
experiments,  is  proportional  to  the  time  of  cooling.  Hence 
the  capacity  of  the  vessel  and  its  contents  in  the  first  experi- 
ment is  to  its  capacity  in  the  second  experiment  as  the  time 
of  cooling  from  100°  to  90°  in  the  first  experiment  is  to  the 
time  of  cooling  from  100°  to  90°  in  the  second  experiment. 


248  Radiation 

The  method  of  cooling  is  very  convenient  in  certain  cases, 
but  it  is  necessary  to  keep  the  temperature  of  the  whole  of 
the  substance  in  the  inner  vessel  as  nearly  uniform  as  possible, 
so  that  the  method  must  be  restricted  to  liquids  which  we 
can  stir,  and  to  solids  whose  conductivity  is  great,  and 
which  may  be  cut  in  pieces  and  immersed  in  a  liquid. 

The  method  of  cooling  has  been  found  very  applicable  to 
the  measurement  of  the  quantity  of  heat  conducted  through 
a  substance.  (See  the  chapter  on  Conduction.) 


EFFECT   OF    RADIATION   ON   THERMOMETERS. 

On  account  of  the  radiation  passing  in  all  directions  through 
the  atmosphere,  it  is  a  very  difficult  thing  to  determine  the 
true  temperature  of  the  air  in  any  place  out  of  doors  by 
means  of  a  thermometer. 

If.  the  sun  shines  on  the  thermometer,  the  reading  is  of 
course  too  high ;  but  if  we  put  it  in  the  shade,  it  may  be  too 
low,  because  the  thermometer  may  be  emitting  more  radia- 
tion than  it  receives  from  the  clear  sky.  The  ground,  walls 
of  houses,  clouds,  and  the  various  devices  for  shielding  the 
thermometer  from  radiation,  may  all  become  sources  of 
error,  by  causing  an  unknown  amount  of  radiation  on  the 
bulb.  For  rough  purposes  the  effects  of  radiation  may  be 
greatly  removed  by  giving  the  bulb  a  surface  of  polished 
silver,  of  which,  as  we  have  seen,  the  absorption  is  only  a 
fortieth  of  that  of  lampblack. 

A  method  described  by  Dr.  Joule  in  a  communication  to 
the  Philosophical  Society  of  Manchester,  November  26,  1867, 
seems  the  only  one  free  from  all  objections.  The  thermo- 
meter is  placed  in  a  long  vertical  copper  tube  open  at  both 
ends,  but  with  a  cap  to  close  the  lower  end,  which  may  be 
removed  or  put  on  without  warming  it  by  the  hand.  What- 
ever radiation  affects  the  thermometer  must  be  between  it 
and  the  inside  of  the  tube,  and  if  these  are  of  the  same 


as  affecting  Thermometers.  249 

temperature,  the  radiation  will  have  no  effect  on  the  observed 
reading  of  the  thermometer.  Hence,  if  we  can  be  sure  that 
the  copper  tube  and  the  air  within  it  are  at  the  temperature 
of  the  atmosphere,  and  that  the  theirnometer  is  in  thermal 
equilibrium,  the  thermometer  reading  will  be  the  true  tem- 
perature. 

Now,  if  the  air  within  the  tube  is  of  the  same  temperature 
as  the  air  outside,  it  will  be  of  the  same  density,  and  it  will 
therefore  be  in  statical  equilibrium  with  it.  If  it  is  warmer 
it  will  be  lighter,  and  an  upward  current  will  be  formed  in 
the  tube  when  the  cap  is  removed.  If  it  is  colder,  a  down- 
ward current  will  be  formed. 

To  detect  these  currents  a  spiral  wire  is  suspended  in  the 
tube  by  a  fine  fibre,  so  that  an  upward  or  downward  current 
causes  the  spiral  to  twist  the  fibre,  and  any  motion  of  the 
spiral  is  made  apparent  by  means  of  a  small  mirror  attached 
to  it. 

To  vary  the  temperature  of  the  copper  tube,  it  is  enclosed 
in  a  wider  tube,  so  that  water  may  be  placed  in  the  space 
between  the  tubes,  and  by  pouring  in  warmer  or  cooler  water 
the  temperature  may  be  adjusted  till  there  is  no  current. 

We  then  know  that  the  air  is  of  the  same  temperature 
within  the  tube  as  it  is  without.  But  we  know  that  the 
tube  is  also  of  the  same  temperature  as  the  air,  for  if  it 
were  not  it  would  heat  or  cool  the  air  and  produce  a  cur- 
rent. Finally,  we  know  that  the  thermometer,  if  stationary, 
is  at  the  temperature  of  the  atmosphere ;  for  the  air  in  contact 
with  it,  and  the  sides  of  the  tube,  which  alone  can  exchange 
radiations  with  it,  have  the  same  temperature  as  the  atmo- 
sphere. 


250  Convection* 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

ON   CONVECTION   CURRENTS. 

WHEN  the  application  of  heat  to  a  fluid  causes  it  to  expand 
or  to  contract,  it  is  thereby  rendered  rarer  or  denser  than  the 
neighbouring  parts  of  the  fluid  ;  and  if  the  fluid  is  at  the 
same  time  acted  on  by  gravity,  it  tends  to  form  an  upward 
or  downward  current  of  the  heated  fluid,  which  is  of  course 
accompanied  with  a  current  of  the  more  remote  parts  of  the 
fluid  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  fluid  is  thus  made  to 
circulate,  fresh  portions  of  fluid  are  brought  into  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  the  source  of  heat,  and  these  when  heated 
travel,  carrying  their  heat  with  them  into  other  regions. 
Such  currents,  caused  by  the  application  of  heat,  and  carry- 
ing this  heat  with  them,  are  called  convection  currents. 
They  play  a  most  important  part  in  natural  phenomena,  by 
causing  a  much  more  rapid  diffusion  of  heat  than  would 
take  place  by  conduction  alone  in  the  same  medium  if  re- 
strained from  moving.  The  actual  diffusion  of  heat  from 
one  part  of  the  fluid  to  another  takes  place,  of  course,  by 
onduction  ;  but,  on  account  of  the  motion  of  the  fluid,  the 
isothermal  surfaces  are  so  extended,  and  in  some  cases  con- 
torted, that  their  areas  are  greatly  increased  while  the  dis- 
tances between  them  are  diminished,  so  that  true  conduction 
goes  on  much  more  rapidly  than  if  the  medium  were  at 
rest. 

Convection  currents  depend  on  changes  of  density  in  a 
fluid  acted  on  by  gravity.  If  the  action  of  heat  does  not 
produce  a  change  of  density,  as  in  the  case  of  water  at  a 
temperature  of  about  39°  F.,  no  convection  current  will  be 
produced.  If  the  fluid  is  not  acted  on  by  gravity,  as  would 


Production  of  Currents.  2  5 1 

"be  the  case  if  the  fluid  were  removed  to  a  sufficient  distance 
from  the  earth  and  other  great  bodies,  no  convection  cur- 
rents would  be  formed.  As  this  condition  is  not  easily 
realised,  we  may  take  the  case  of  a  vessel  containing  fluid, 
and  descending  according  to  the  law  of  motion  of  a  body 
falling  freely.  The  pressure  in  this  fluid  will  be  the  same 
in  every  part,  and  a  change  of  density  in  any  part  of  the 
fluid  will  not  occasion  convection  currents. 

When  we  wish  to  avoid  the  formation  of  convection 
currents  we  must  arrange  matters  so  that  during  the  whole 
course  of  the  experiment  the  density  of  each  horizontal 
stratum  is  the  same  throughout,  and  that  the  density  increases 
with  the  depth.  If,  for  instance,  we  are  studying  the  con- 
duction of  heat  in  a  fluid  which  expands  when  heated,  we 
must  make  the  heat  flow  downwards  through  the  fluid.  It 
we  wish  to  determine  the  law  of  diffusion  of  fluids  we  must 
place  the  denser  fluid  underneath  the  rarer  one. 

Convection  currents  are  produced  by  changes  of  density 
arising  from  other  causes.  Thus  if  a  crystal  of  a  soluble 
salt  be  suspended  in  a  vessel  of  water,  the  water  in  contact 
with  the  crystal  will  dissolve  a  portion  of  it,  and,  becoming 
denser,  will  begin  to  sink,  and  its  place  will  be  supplied  by 
fresh  water.  Thus  a  convection  current  will  be  formed,  a 
solution  of  the  salt  will  descend  from  the  crystal,  and  this 
will  cause  an  upward  current  of  purer  water,  and  a  circula- 
tion will  be  kept  up  till  either  the  crystal  is  entirely  dissolved, 
or  the  liquid  has  become  saturated  with  the  salt  up  to  the 
level  of  the  top  of  the  crystal.  In  this  case  it  is  the  salt 
which  is  carried  through  the  liquid  by  convection. 

A  convection  current  may  be  produced  in  which  electricity 
is  the  thing  carried.  If  a  conductor  terminating  in  a  fine 
point  is  strongly  electrified,  the  particles  of  air  near  the  point 
will  be  charged  with  electricity,  and  then  urged  from  the 
point  towards  any  surface  oppositely  electrified.  A  current 
of  electrified  air  is  thus  formed,  which  diffuses  itself  about 
the  room,  and  generally  reaches  the  walls,  where  the  electrified 


252 


Connection 


Fio.  31. 


air  clings  to  the  oppositely  electrified  wall,  and  is  sometimes 
not  discharged  for  a  long  time. 

The  method  of  determining  by  convection  currents  the 
temperature  at  which  water  has  its  maximum  density  seems 
to  have  been  first  employed  by  Hope.  He  cooled  the 
middle  part  of  a  tall  vessel  of  water  by  surrounding  this  part 
of  the  vessel  with  a  freezing  mixture.  As  long  as  the  tempe^ 
rature  is  above  40°  R  the  cooled  water  descends,  and  causes 
a  fall  of  temperature  in  a  thermometer  placed  in  the  lower 
part  of  the  vessel.  Another  thermometer,  placed  in  the 
upper  part  of  the  vessel,  remains  stationary.  But  when  the 
temperature  is  below  39°  F.  the  water  cooled  by  the  freezing 
mixture  becomes  lighter  and  ascends,  causing  the  upper 
thermometer  to  fall,  while  the  lower  one  remains  sta- 
tionary. 

The  investigation  of  the  maximum  density  of  water  has 
been  greatly  improved  by  Joule,  who  also 
made  use  of  convection  currents.  He  em- 
ployed a  vessel  consisting  of  two  vertical 
cylinders,  each  4^  feet  high  and  6  inches 
diameter,  connected  below  by  a  wide  tube 
with  a  cock,  and  above  by  an  open  trough 
or  channel.  The  whole  was  filled  with  water 
up  to  such  a  level  that  the  water  could  flow 
freely  through  the  channel.  A  glass  specific 
gravity  bead  which  would  just  float  in  water 
was  placed  in  the  channel,  and  served  to 
indicate  any  motion  of  the  water  in  the 
channel.  The  very  smallest  difference  of 
density  between  the  portions  of  water  in  the 
two  columns  was  sufficient  to  produce  a 
current,  and  to  move  the  bead  in  the 
channel. 

The  cock  in  the  connecting  tube  being 
closed,  the  temperature  of  the  water  in  the  two  tubes  was 
adjusted,  the  water  well  mixed  in  each  tube  by  stirring, 


Maximum  Density  of  Water.  253 

and  when  it  had  come  to  rest  the  temperature  of  each 
column  was  observed,  and  the  cock  was  opened.  If  a  cur- 
rent was  then  observed  in  the  channel,  it  indicated  that 
the  water  in  the  tube  towards  which  the  current  flowed  was 
the  denser.  By  finding  a  pair  of  different  temperatures 
at  which  the  density  is  exactly  the  same,  we  may  be  sure 
that  one  of  them  is  below  and  the  other  above  the  tempe- 
rature of  maximum  density;  and  by  obtaining  a  series  of 
such  pairs  of  temperatures  of  which  the  difference  is  smaller 
and  smaller,  Dr.  Joule  determined  the  temperature  of  maxi- 
mum density  to  be  39°'!  F.  within  a  very  small  fraction  of  a 
degree. 


CHAPTER   XVIII. 

ON    THE    DIFFUSION    OF    HEAT    BY    CONDUCTION. 

WHENEVER  different  parts  of  a  body  are  at  different  tem- 
peratures, heat  flows  from  the  hotter  parts   to  the  neigh- 
bouring colder  parts.     To  obtain  an  FJG 
exact  notion  of  conduction,  let   us 
consider  a   large  boiler  with  a  flat 
bottom,  whose  thickness  is  c.    The 
fire    maintains    the    lower    surface 
at    the    temperature    T,    and    heat 
flows   upwards    through    the    boiler 
plate  to  the  upper  surface,  which  is 
in  contact  with  the  water  at  the  lower  temperature,  s. 

Let  us  now  restrict  ourselves  to  the  consideration  of  a 
rectangular  portion  of  the  boiler  plate,  whose  length  is  a, 
its  breadth  £,  and  its  thickness  c. 

The  things  to  be  considered  are  the  dimensions  of  this 
portion  of  the  body,  and  the  nature  of  ihe  material  of  which 
it  is  made,  the  temperatures  of  its  upper  and  lower  surfaces, 
and  the  flow  of  heat  through  it  as  determined  by  these 


254  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 

conditions.  In  the  first  place  it  is  found  that  when  the 
difference  of  the  temperatures  s  and  T  is  not  so  great  as  to 
make  a  sensible  difference  between  the  properties  of  the 
substance  at  these  two  temperatures,  the  flow  of  heat  is 
exactly  proportional  to  the  difference  of  temperatures,  other 
things  being  the  same. 

Let  us  suppose  that  when  a,  b,  and  c  are  each  equal  to 
the  unit  of  length,  and  when  T  is  one  degree  above  s,  the 
steady  flow  of  heat  is  such  that  the  quantity  which  enters 
the  lower  surface  or  leaves  the  upper  surface  in  the  unit  of 
time  is  k,  then  k  is  defined  as  the  specific  thermal  con- 
ductivity of  the  substance.  To  find  H,  the  quantity  of  heat 
which  flows  in  a  time  /  through-  the  portion  of  boiler  plate 
whose  area  is  a  b,  and  whose  thickness  is  c,  when  the  lower 
surface  is  kept  at  a  temperature  T,  and  the  upper  at  a 
temperature  s,  till  the  flow  has  become  steady,  divide  the 
plate  into  c  horizontal  layers,  the  thickness  of  each  layer 
being  unity,  and  divide  each  layer  into  a  b  cubes,  the  sides 
of  each  cube  being  unity. 

Since  the  flow  of  heat  is  steady,  the  difference  of  tem- 
perature of  the  upper  and  lower  faces  of  each  cube  will 

be    —   (T  —  s).     The  flow  of  heat  through  each  cube  will 

be    —    (T  — s)  in  unit  of  time.      Now,  in  each  layer  there 

are  a  b  such  cubes,  and  the  flow  goes  on  for  /  units  of  time, 
so  that  we  obtain  for  the  whole  heat  conducted  in  time  / 

H  =  lAil    (T-S), 

where  a  b  is  the  area  and  c  the  thickness  of  the  plate,  /  the 
time,  T  —  s  the  difference  of  temperature  which  causes  the 
flow,  and  k  the  specific  thermal  conductivity  of  the  sub- 
stance of  the  plate. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  heat  conducted  is  directly 
proportional  to  the  area  of  the  plate,  to  the  time,  to  the  differ- 


Measures  of  Conductivity.  255 

cnce  of  temperature,  and  to  the  conductivity,  and  inversely 
proportional  to  the  thickness  of  the  plate. 

ON    THE    DIMENSIONS    OF    /£,    THE    SPECIFIC    THERMAL 

CONDUCTIVITY. 

• 

From  the  equation  we  find 


a  b  t  (T-  s) 

Hence  if  [L]  be  the  unit  of  length,  [T]  the  unit  of  time, 
[H]  the  unit  of  heat,  and  [©]  the  unit  of  temperature,  the 

dimensions  of  k  will  be      LJ —    m 

The  further  discussion  of  the  dimensions  of  k  will  depend 
on  the  mode  of  measuring  heat  and  temperature. 

(1)  If  heat   is   measured   as   energy,  its   dimensions  are 

— ^—    ,  and  those  of  k  become      3— ^-    .    This  may  be 

called  the  dynamical  measure  of  the  conductivity. 

(2)  If  heat  is  measured  in  thermal  units,  such  that  each 
thermal  unit  is  capable  of  raising  unit  of  mass  of  a  standard 
substance  through  one  degree  of  temperature,  the  dimen- 
sions of  H  are  [M  ©],  and  those  of  k  will  be  \—    j .     This 

may  be  called  the  calorimetric  measure  of  the  conductivity. 

(3)  If  we  take  as  the  unit  of  heat  that  which  will  raise  unit 
of  volume  of  the  substance  itself  one  degree,  the  dimensions 

of  H  are  [LS©  ],  and  those  of  k  are          .  1 .     This  may   be 

called  the  thermometric  measure  of  the  conductivity. 

In  order  to  obtain  a  distinct  conception  of  the  flow  of 
heat  through  a  solid  body,  let  us  suppose  that  at  a  given 
instant  we  know  the  temperature  of  ever}'  point  of  the  body. 
If  we  now  suppose  a  surface  or  interface  to  be  described 
wirhin  the  body  such  that  at  every  point  of  this  interface  the 
temperature  has  a  given  value  T°,  we  may  call  this  interface 


256  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduct  ion. 

the  isothermal  interface  of  T°.  (Of  course,  when  we  suppose 
this  interface  to  exist  in  the  body,  we,  do  not  conceive  the 
body  to  be  altered  in  any  way  by  this  supposition,  as  if  the 
body  were  really  cut  in  two  by  it.)  This  isothermal  interface 
separates  those  parts  of  the  body  which  are  hotter  than 
the  temperature  T°  from  those  whicft  are  colder  than  this 
temperature. 

Let  us  now  suppose  the  isothermal  interfaces  drawn  for 
every  exact  degree  of  temperature,  from  that  of  the  hottest 
part  of  the  body  to  that  of  the  coldest  part.  These  interfaces 
may  be  curved  in  any  way,  but  no  two  different  interfaces 
can  meet  each  other,  because  no  part  of  the  body  can  at 
the  same  time  have  two  different  temperatures.  The  body 
will  therefore  be  divided  into  layers  or  shells  by  these  inter- 
faces, and  the  space  between  two  isothermal  surfaces  differing 
by  one  degree  of  temperature  will  be  in  the  form  of  a  thin 
shell,  whose  thickness  may  vary  from  one  part  to  another. 

At  every  point  of  this  shell  there  is  a  flow  of  heat  from 
the  hotter  surface  to  the  colder  surface  through  the  substance 
of  the  shell. 

The  direction  of  this  flow  is  perpendicular  to  the  surface 
of  the  shell,  and  the  rate  of  flow  is  greater  the  thinner  the 
shell  is  at  the  place,  and  the  greater  its  conductivity. 

If  we  draw  a  line  perpendicular  to  the  surface  of  the  shell, 
and  of  length  unity,  then  if  c  is  the  thickness  of  the  shell, 
and  if  the  neighbouring  shells  are  of  nearly  the  same  thick- 
ness, this  line  will  cut  a  number  of  shells  equal  to  -  .  This, 

then,  is  the  difference  of  temperature  between  two  points  in 
the  body  at  unit  of  distance,  measured  in  the  direction  of 
the  flow  of  heat,  and  therefore  the  flow  of  heat  along  this 

line  is  measured  by    — ,  where  k  is  the  conductivity. 

We  can  now  imagine,  with  the  help  of  the  isothermal  inter- 
faces, the  state  of  the  body  at  a  given  instant.  Wherever 
tnere  is  inequality  of  temperature  between  neighbouring 


Conduction  in  a  Solid.  257 

parts  of  the  body  a  flow  of  heat  is  going  on.  This  flow  is 
everywhere  perpendicular  to  the  isothermal  interfaces,  and 
the  flow  through  unit  of  area  of  one  of  these  interfaces  in  unit 
of  time  is  equal  to  the  conductivity  divided  by  the  distance 
between  two  consecutive  isothermal  interfaces. 

The  knowledge  of  the  actual  thermal  state  of  the  body, 
and  of  the  law  of  conduction  of  heat,  thus  enables  us  ti 
determine  the  flow  of  he  it  at  every  part  of  the  body.  If  the 
flow  of  heat  is  such  that  the  amount  of  heat  which  flows  into 
any  portion  of  the  body  is  exactly  equal  to  that  which  flows 
out  of  it,  then  the  thermal  state  of  this  portion  of  the  body 
will  remain  the  same  as  long  as  the  flow  of  heat  fulfils  this 
condition. 

If  this  condition  is  fulfilled  for  every  part  of  the  body,  the 
temperature  at  any  point  will  not  alter  with  the  time,  the 
system  of  isothermal  interfaces  will  continue  the  same,  and 
the  flow  of  heat  will  go  on  without  alteration,  being  always 
the  same  at  the  same  part  of  the  body. 

This  state  of  things  is  referred  to  as  the  state  of  steady  flow 
of  heat.  It  cannot  exist  unless  heat  is  steadily  supplied  to 
the  hotter  parts  of  the  surface  of  the  body,  from  some  source 
external  to  the  body,  and  an  equal  quantity  removed  from 
the  colder  parts  of  the  surface  by  some  cooling  medium,  o? 
by  radiation. 

The  state  of  steady  flow  of  heat  requires  the  fulfilment  at 
every  part  of  the  body  of  a  certain  condition,  similar  to  that 
which  is  fulfilled  in  the  flow  of  an  incompressible  fluid. 

When  this  condition  is  not  fulfilled,  the  quantity  of  heat 
which  enters  any  portion  of  the  body  may  be  greater  or  less 
than  that  which  escapes  from  it.  In  the  one  case  heat  will 
accumulate,  and  the  portion  of  the  body  will  rise  in  tempe- 
rature. In  the  other  case  the  heat  of  the  portion  will 
diminish,  and  it  will  fall  in  temperature.  The  amount  of 
this  rise  or  fall  of  temperature  will  be  measured  numerically 
by  the  gain  or  loss  of  heat,  divided  by  the  capacity  for  heat 
of  the  portion  considered. 

S 


2  5  3  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction, 

If  the  portion  considered  is  unit  of  volume,  and  if  we 
measure  heat  as  in  the  third  method  given  at  p.  255  by  the 
quantity  required  to  raise  unit  of  volume  of  the  substance, 
in  its  actual  state,  one  degree,  then  the  rise  of  temperature 
of  this  portion  will  be  numerically  equal  to  the  total  flow 
of  heat  into  it. 

We  are  now  able,  by  means  of  a  thorough  knowledge  of 
the  thermal  state  of  the  body  at  a  given  instant,  to  determine 
the  rate  at  which  the  temperature  of  every  part  must  be 
changing,  and  therefore  we  are  able  to  predict  its  state  in 
the  succeeding  instant.  Knowing  this,  we  can  predict  its 
state  in  the  next  instant  following,  and  so  on. 

The  only  parts  of  the  body  to  which  this  method  does  not 
apply  are  those  parts  of  its  surface  to  which  heat  is  supplied, 
or  from  which  heat  is  abstracted,  by  agencies  external  to  the 
body.  If  we  know  either  the  rate  at  which  heat  is  supplied 
or  abstracted  at  every  part  of  the  surface,  or  the  actual  tem- 
perature of  every  part  of  the  surface  during  the  whole  time, 
either  of  these  conditions,  together  with  the  original  thermal 
state  of  the  body,  will  afford  sufficient  data  for  calculating 
the  temperature  of  every  point  during  all  time  to  come. 

The  discussion  of  this  problem  is  the  subject  of  the  great 
work  of  Joseph  Fourier,  Theoric  de  la  Chaleur.  It  is  not 
possible  in  a  treatise  of  the  size  and  scope  of  this  book  to 
reproduce,  or  even  to  explain,  the  powerful  analytical  methods 
employed  by  Fourier  to  express  the  varied  conditions,  as  to 
the  form  of  its  surface  and  its  original  thermal  state,  to  which 
the  body  may  be  subjected.  These  methods  belong,  rather, 
to  the  general  theory  of  the  application  of  mathematics  to 
physics;  for  in  every  branch  of  physics,  when  the  investiga- 
tion turns  upon  the  expression  of  arbitrary  conditions,  we 
have  to  follow  the  method  which  Fourier  first  pointed  out 
in  his  'Theory  of  Heat.' 

I  shall  only  mention  one  or  two  of  the  results  given  by 
Fourier,  in  which  the  intricacies  arising  from  the  arbitrary 
conditions  of  the  problem  are  avoided. 


SkctcJi  of  Fourier's  Theory.  259 

The  first  of  these  is  the  case  in  which  the  solid  is  supposed 
of  infinite  extent,  and  of  the  same  conductivity  in  every  part. 

The  temperature  of  every  point  of  this  body  at  a  given 
time  is  supposed  to  be  known,  and  it  is  required  to  deter- 
mine the  temperature  of  any  given  point  P  after  a  time  t  has 
elapsed. 

Fourier  has  given  a  complete  solution  of  this  problem,  of 
which  we  may  obtain  some  idea  by  means  of  the  following 
considerations.  Let  k  be  the  conductivity,  measured  by  the 
third  method,  in  which  the  unit  of  heat  adopted  is  that 
which  will  raise  unit  of  volume  of  the  substance  one  degree  ; 
then  if  we  make 

k  t  =  «*, 

u  will  be  a  line  the  length  of  which  will  be  proportional 
to  the  square  root  of  the  time. 

Let  Q  be  any  point  in  the  body,  and  let  its  distance  from 
p  be  r.  Let  the  original  temperature  of  Q  be  6.  Now  take 

r* 

a  quantity  of  matter  proportional  to  e  &*  and  of  the 
temperature  t),  and  mix  it  with  portions  of  matter  taken 
from  every  other  part  of  the  body,  the  temperature  of  each 
portion  being  the  original  temperature  of  that  point,  and 

__r* 

the  quantity  of  each  portion  being  proportional  to  e  *kt- 
The  mean  temperature  of  all  such  portions  will  be  the 
temperature  of  the  point  P  after  a  time  t. 

In  other  words,  the  temperature  of  p  after  a  time  /  may 
be  regarded  as  in  some  sense  the  mean  of  the  original 
temperatures  of  all  parts  of  the  body.  In  taking  this  mean, 
however,  different  parts  are  allowed  different  weights,  de- 
pending on  their  distance  from  p,  the  parts  near  p  having 
more  influence  on  the  result  than  those  at  a  greater  dis- 
tance. 

The  mathematical  formula  which  indicates  the  weight  to 
be  given  to  the  temperature  of  each  part  in  taking  the 
mean  is  a  very  important  one.  It  occurs  in  several 


260  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction 

branches   of  physics,   particularly  in  the  theory  of  errors 
and  in  that  of  the  motions  of  systems  of  molecules. 

It  follows  from  this  result  that,  in  calculating  the  tem- 
perature of  the  point  P,  we  must  take  into  account  the 
temperature  of  every  other  point  Q,  however  distant,  and 
however  short  the  time  may  be  during  which  the  propaga- 
tion of  heat  has  been  going  on.  Hence,  in  a  strict  sense, 
the  influence  of  a  heated  part  of  the  body  extends  to  the 
most  distant  parts  of  the  body  in  an  incalculably  short  time, 
so  that  it  is  impossible  to  assign  to  the  propagation  of  heat 
a  definite  velocity.  The  velocity  of  propagation  of  thermal 
effects  depends  entirely  on  the  magnitude  of  the  effect 
which  we  are  able  to  recognise ;  and  if  there  were  no  limit 
to  the  sensibility  of  our  instruments,  there  would  be  no 
limit  to  the  rapidity  with  which  we  could  detect  the  in- 
fluence of  heat  applied  to  distant  parts  of  the  body.  But 
while  this  influence  on  distant  points  can  be  expressed 
mathematically  from  the  first  instant,  its  numerical  value  is 
excessively  small  until,  by  the  lapse  of  time,  the  line  a  has 
grown  so  as  to  be  comparable  with  r,  the  distance  of  P  from 
Q.  If  we  take  this  into  consideration,  and  remember  that  it 
is  only  when  the  changes  of  temperature  are  comparable  with 
the  original  differences  of  temperature  that  we  can  detect 
them  with  our  instruments,  we  shall  see  that  the  sensible 
propagation  of  heat,  so  far  from  being  instantaneous,  is  an 
excessively  slow  process,  and  that  the  time  required  to 
produce  a  similar  change  of  temperature  in  two  similar 
systems  of  different  dimensions  is  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  linear  dimensions  For  instance,  if  a  red-hot 
ball  of  four  inches  diameter  firjd  into  a  sandbank  has  in  an 
hour  raised  the  temperature  of  the  sand  six  inches  from  its 
centre  10°  F.,  then  a  red-hot  ball  of  eight  inches  diameter 
would  take  four  hours  to  raise  the  temperature  of  the  sand 
twelve  inches  from  its  centre  by  the  same  number  of  degrees. 

This  result,  which  is  very  important  in  practical  questions 
about  the  time  of  cooling  or  heating  of  bodies  of  any  form, 


/;/  an  Infinite  Solid.  261 

may  be  deduced  directly  from  the  consideration  of  the 
dimensions  of  the  quantity  k — namely,  the  square  of  a  length 
divided  by  a  time.  It  follows  from  this  that  if  in  two  un- 
equally heated  systems  of  similar  form  but  different  dimen- 
sions the  conductivity  and  the  temperature  are  the  same  at 
corresponding  points  at  first,  then  the  process  of  diffusion  of 
heat  will  go  on  at  different  rates  in  the  two  systems,  so  that 
if  for  each  system  the  time  be  taken  proportional  to  the 
square  of  the  linear  dimensions,  the  temperatures  of  corre- 
sponding points  will  still  be  the  same  in  both  systems. 

The  method  just  described  affords  a  complete  determina- 
tion of  the  temperature  of  any  point  of  a  homogeneous 
infinite  solid  at  any  future  time,  the  temperature  of  every 
point  of  the  solid  being  given  at  the  instant  from  which  we 
begin  to  count  the  time.  But  when  we  attempt  to  deduce 
from  a  knowledge  of  the  present  thermal  state  of  the  body 
what  must  have  been  its  state  at  some  past  time,  we  find 
that  the  method  ceases  to  be  applicable. 

To  make  this  attempt,  we  have  only  to  make  /,  the 
symbol  of  the  time,  a  negative  quantity  in  the  expressions 
given  by  Fourier.  If  we  adopt  the  method  of  taking  the 
mean  of  the  temperatures  of  all  the  particles  of  the  solid,  each 
particle  having  a  certain  weight  assigned  to  it  in  taking  the 
mean,  we  find  that  this  weight,  according  to  the  formula,  is 
greater  for  the  distant  particles  than  for  the  neighbouring  ones, 
a  result  sufficiently  startling  in  itself.  But  when  we  find 
that,  in  order  to  obtain  the  mean,  after  taking  the  sum  of 
the  temperatures  multiplied  by  their  proper  factors,  we  have 
to  divide  by  a  quantity  involving  the  square  root  of  /, 
the  time,  we  are  assured  that  when  /  is  taken  negative  the 
operation  is  simply  impossible,  and  devoid  of  any  physical 
meaning,  for  the  square  root  of  a  negative  quantity,  though 
it  may  be  interpreted  with  reference  to  some  geometrical 
operations,  is  absolutely  without  meaning  with  reference  to 
time. 

It    appears,    therefore,    that   Fourier's   solution    of   this 


262 


Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 


problem,  though  complete  considered  with  reference  to  future 
time,  fails  when  we  attempt  to  discover  the  state  of  the 
body  in  past  time. 

In  the  diagram  fig.  33  the  curves  show  the  distribution  of 

FIG.  33- 


SCALE    or  TEMPERA  TURE 


temperature  in  an  infinite  mass  at  different  times,  after  ihe 
sudden  introduction  of  a  hot  horizontal  stratum  in  the 
midst  of  the  infinite  solid.  The  temperature  is  indicated  by 
the  horizontal  distance  to  the  right  of  the  vertical  line,  and 


Harmonic  Distribution  of  Temperature.        263 

the  hot  stratum  is  supposed  to  have  been  introduced  at  tne 
middle  of  the  figure. 

The  curves  indicate  the  temperatures  of  the  various  strata 
one  hour,  four  hours,  and  sixteen  hours  after  the  intro- 
duction of  the  hot  stratum.  The  gradual  diffusion  of  the 
heat  is  evident,  and  also  the  diminishing  rate  of  diffusion  as 
its  extent  increases. 

The  problem  of  the  diffusion  of  heat  in  an  infinite  solid 
does  not  present  those  difficulties  which  occur  in  problems 
relating  to  a  solid  of  definite  shape.  These  difficulties 
arise  from  the  conditions  to  which  the  surface  of  the  solid 
may  be  subjected,  as,  for  instance,  the  temperature  may  be 
given  over  part  of  the  surface,  the  quantity  of  heat  supplied 
to  another  part  may  be  given,  or  we  may  only  know  that 
the  surface  is  exposed  to  air  of  a  certain  temperature. 

The  method  by  which  Fourier  was  enabled  to  solve  many 
questions  of  this  kind  depends  on  the  discovery  of  har- 
monic distributions  of  heat. 

Suppose  the  temperatures  of  the  different  parts  of  the  body 
to  be  so  adjusted  that  when  the  body  is  left  to  itself  under 
the  given  conditions  relating  to  the  surface,  the  tempera- 
tures of  all  the  parts  converge  to  the  final  temperature, 
their  differences  from  the  final  temperature  always  preserv- 
ing the  same  proportion  during  the  process ;  then  this 
distribution  of  temperature  is  called  an  harmonic  dis- 
tribution. If  we  suppose  the  final  temperature  to  be  taken 
as  zero,  then  the  temperatures  in  the  harmonic  distribution 
diminish  in  a  geometrical  progression  as  the  times  increase 
in  arithmetical  progression,  the  ratio  of  cooling  being  the 
same  for  all  parts  of  the  body. 

In  each  of  the  cases  investigated  by  Fourier  there  may 
be  an  infinite  series  of  harmonic  distributions.  One  of 
these,  which  has  the  slowest  rate  of  diminution,  may  be 
called  the  fundamental  harmonic;  the  rates  of  diminution 
of  the  others  are  proportional  to  the  squares  of  the  natural 
numbers. 


264  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 

If  the  body  is  originally  heated  in  any  arbitrary  manner, 
Fourier  shows  how  to  express  the  original  temperature  as  the 
sum  of  a  series  of  harmonic  distributions.  When  the  body 
is  left  to  itself  the  part  depending  on  the  higher  harmonics 
rapidly  dies  away,  so  that  after  a  certain  time  the  distribu- 
tion of  heat  continually  approximates  to  that  due  to  the 
fundamental  harmonic,  which  therefore  represents  the  law 
of  cooling  of  a  body  after  the  process  of  diffusion  of  heat 
has  gone  on  for  a  long  time. 

Sir  William  Thomson  has  shown,  in  a  paper  published  in 
the  *  Cambridge  and  Dublin  Mathematical  Journal '  in  1844, 
how  to  deduce,  in  certain  cases,  the  thermal  state  of  a  body 
in  past  time  from  its  observed  condition  at  present. 

For  this  purpose,  the  present  distribution  of  temperature 
must  be  expressed  (as  it  always  may  be)  as  the  sum  of  a 
series  of  harmonic  distributions.  Each  of  these  harmonic 
distributions  is  such  that  the  difference  of  the  temperature  of 
any  point  from  the  final  temperature  diminishes  in  a  geo- 
metrical progression  as  the  time  increases  in  arithmetical 
progression,  the  ratio  of  the  geometrical  progression  being 
the  greater  the  higher  the  degree  of  the  harmonic. 

If  we  now  make  /  negative,  and  trace  the  history  of  the 
distribution  of  temperature  up  the  stream  of  time,  we  shall 
find  each  harmonic  increasing  as  we  go  backwards,  and  the 
higher  harmonics  increasing  faster  than  the  lower  ones. 

If  the  present  distribution  of  temperature  is  such  that  it 
may  be  expressed  in  a  finite  series  of  harmonics,  the  distri- 
bution of  temperature  at  any  previous  time  maybe  calculated; 
but  if '(as  is  generally  the  case)  the  series  of  harmonics  is 
infinite,  then  the  temperature  can  be  calculated  only  when 
this  series  is  convergent.  For  present  and  future  time  it  is 
always  convergent,  but  for  past  time  it  becomes  ultimately 
divergent  when  the  time  is  taken  at  a  sufficiently  remote 
epoch.  The  negative  value  of  /,  for  which  the  series  becomes 
ultimately  divergent,  indicates  a  certain  date  in  past  time 
such  that  the  present  state  of  things  cannot  be  deduced  from 


Steady  and  Periodic  Flow  of  Pleat.  265 

any  distribution  of  temperature  occurring  previously  to  that 
date,  and  becoming  diffused  by  ordinary  conduction.  Some 
other  event  besides  ordinary  conduction  must  have  occurred 
since  that  date  in  order  to  produce  the  present  state  of  things. 

This  is  only  one  of  the  cases  in  which  a  consideration  of 
the  dissipation  of  energy  leads  to  the  determination  of  a 
superior  limit  to  the  antiquity  of  the  observed  order  ot 
things. 

A  very  important  class  of  problems  is  that  in  which  there 
is  a  steady  flow  of  heat  into  the  body  at  one  point  of 
its  surface,  and  out  of  it  at  another  part.  There  is  a 
certain  distribution  of  temperature  in  all  such  cases,  which 
if  once  established  will  not  afterwards  change :  this  is 
called  the  permanent  distribution.  If  the  original  distri- 
bution differs  from  this,  the  effect  of  the  diffusion  of  heat  will 
be  to  cause  the  distribution  of  temperature  to  approximate 
without  limit  to  this  permanent  distribution.  Questions 
relating  to  the  permanent  distribution  of  temperature  and 
the  steady  flow  of  heat  are  in  general  less,  difficult  than 
those  in  which  this  state  is  not  established. 

Another  important  class  of  problems  is  that  in  which  heat 
is  supplied  to  a  portion  of  the  surface  in  a  periodic  manner, 
as  in  the  case  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  which  receives  and 
emits  heat  according  to  the  periods  of  day  and  night,  and 
the  longer  periods  of  summer  and  winter. 

The  effect  of  such  periodic  changes  of  temperature  at  the 
surface  is  to  produce  waves  of  heat,  which  descend  into  the 
earth  and  gradually  die  away.  The  length  of  these  waves  is 
proportional  to  the  square  root  of  the  periodic  time.  If  we 
examine  the  wave  at  a  depth  such  that  the  greatest  heat 
occurs  when  it  is  coldest  at  the  surface,  then  the  extent  of 
the  variation  of  temperature  at  this  depth  is  only  -^  of  its 
value  at  the  surface.  In  the  rocks  of  this  country  this  depth 
is  about  25  feet  for  the  annual  variations. 

In  the  diagram  fig.  34  the  distribution  of  temperature  in 
the  different  strata  is  represented  at  two  different  times.  It 


266 


Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 


we  suppose  tlie  figure  to  represent  the  diurnal  variation  of 
temperature,  then  the  curves  indicate  the  temperatures  at 


FIG.  34. 


0.125 


0.25 


0-373 


TEMPERATURES 


Pi       L     I    - 


,       .    *I5    , 


2  A.M.  and  8  A.M.       If  we  suppose  it  to  represent  the  annual 
variation,  then  the  curves  correspond  to  January  and  ApriL 


Underground  Temperature.  267 

Since  the  depth  of  the  wave  varies  as  the  square  root  of  the 
periodic  time,  the  wave-length  of  the  annual  variation  of 
temperature  will  be  about  nineteen  times  the  depth  of  those 
of  the  diurnal  variation.  At  a  depth  of  about  50  feet  the 
variation  of  annual  temperature  is  about  a  year  in  arrear. 

The  actual  variation  of  temperature  at  the  surface  does 
not  follow  the  law  which  gives  a  simple  harmonic  wave,  but, 
however  complicated  the  actual  variation  may  bt,  Fourier 
shows  how  to  decompose  it  into  a  number  of  harmonic 
waves  of  which  it  is  the  sum.  As  we  descend  into  the  earth 
these  waves  die  away,  the  shortest  most  rapidly,  so  that  we 
lose  the  irregularities  of  the  diurnal  variation  in  a  few  inches, 
and  the  diurnal  variation  itself  in  a  few  feet  The  annual 
variation  can  be  traced  to  a  much  greater  depth  ;  but  at 
depths  of  50  feet  and  upwards  the  temperature  is  ?ensibly 
constant  throughout  the  year,  the  variation  being  less  than 
the  five-hundredth  part  of  that  at  the  surface. 

But  if  we  compare  the  mean  temperatures  at  different 
depths,  we  find  that  as  we  descend  the  mean  temperature 
rises,  and  that  after  we  have  passed  through  the  upper  strata, 
in  which  the  periodic  variations  of  temperature  are  observed, 
this  increase  of  temperature  goes  on  as  we  descend  to  the 
greatest  depths  known  to  man.  In  this  country  the  rate  of 
increase  of  temperature  appears  to  be  about  i°  F.  for  50 
feet  of  descent. 

The  fact  that  the  strata  of  the  earth  are  hotter  below  than 
above  shows  that  heat  must  be  flowing  through  them  from 
below  upwards.  The  amount  of  heat  which  thus  flows 
upwards  in  a  year  through  a  square  foot  of  the  surface  can 
easily  be  found  if  we  know  the  conductivity  of  the  substance 
through  which  it  passes.  For  several  kinds  of  rock  the 
conductivity  has  been  ascertained  by  means  of  experiments 
made  upon  detached  portions  of  the  rock  in  the  laboratory. 
But  a  still  more  satisfactory  method,  where  it  can  be  employed, 
is  to  make  a  register  of  the  temperature  at  different  depths 
throughout  the  year,  and  from  this  to  determine  the  length 


268  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 

of  the  annual  wave  of  temperature,  or  its  rate  of  decay. 
From  either  of  these  data  the  conductivity  of  the  substance 
of  the  earth  may  be  found  without  removing  the  rocks  from 
their  bed. 

By  observations  of  this  kind  made  at  different  points  of 
the  earth's  surface  we  might  determine  the  quantity  of  heat 
which  flows  out  of  the  earth  in  a  year.  This  can  be  done 
only  rcuglily  at  present,  on  account  of  the  small  number  of 
places  at  which  such  observations  have  been  made,  but  we 
know  enough  to  be  certain  that  a  great  quantity  of  heat 
escapes  from  the  earth  every  year.  It  is  not  probable  that 
any  great  proportion  of  this  heat  is  generated  by  chemical 
action  within  the  earth.  We  must  therefore  conclude  that 
there  is  less  heat  in  the  earth  now  than  in  former  periods  of 
its  existence,  and  that  its  internal  parts  were  formerly  very 
much  hotter  than  they  are  now. 

In  this  way  Sir  W.  Thomson  has  calculated  that,  if  no 
change  has  occurred  in  the  order  of  things,  it  cannot  have 
been  more  than  200,000,000  years  since  the  earth  was  in 
the  condition  of  a  mass  of  molten  matter,  on  which  a  solid 
crust  was  just  beginning  to  form. 


ON   THE    DETERMINATION    OF   THE   THERMAL   CONDUCTIVITY 
OF    BODIES. 

The  most  obvious  method  of  determining  the  conduc- 
tivity of  a  substance  is  to  form  it  into  a  plate  of  uniform 
thickness,  to  bring  one  of  its  surfaces  to  a  known  tempera- 
ture and  the  other  to  a  known  lower  temperature,  and  to 
determine  the  quantity  of  heat  which  passes  through  the 
plate  in  a  given  time. 

For  instance,  if  we  could  bring  one  surface  to  the  tem- 
perature of  boiling  water  by  a  current  of  steam,  and  keep 
the  other  at  the  freezing  temperature  by  means  of  ice,  we 
might  measure  the  heat  transmitted  either  by  the  quantity 
of  steam  condensed,  or  by  the  quantity  of  ice  melted. 


Measurement  of  Conductivity.  269 

The  chief  difficulty  in  this  method  is  that  the  surface  of 
the  plate  does  not  acquire  the  temperature  of  the  steam  01 
the  ice  with  which  it  is  in  contact,  and  that  it  is  difficult  to 
ascertain  its  real  temperature  with  the  accuracy  necessary 
for  a  determination  of  this  kind. 

Most  of  the  actual  determinations  of  conductivity  have 
been  made  in  a  more  indirect  way — by  observing  the  per- 
manent distribution  of  temperature  in  a  bar,  one  end  of 
which  is  maintained  at  a  high  temperature,  while  the  rest 
of  its  surface  is  exposed  to  the  cooling  effects  of  the  atmo- 
sphere. 

The  temperatures  of  a  series  of  points  in  the  bar  are 
ascertained  by  means  of  thermometers  inserted  into  holes 
drilled  in  it,  and  brought  into  thermal  connexion  with  its 
substance  by  means  of  fluid  metal  surrounding  the  bulbs. 

In  this  way  the  rate  of  diminution  of  temperature  with 
the  distance  can  be  ascertained  at  various  points  on  the  bar. 

To  determine  the  conductivity,  we  must  compare  the 
rate  of  variation  of  temperature  with  the  flow  of  heat  which 
is  due  to  it.  It  is  in  the  determination  of  this  flow  of  heat 
that  the  indirectness  of  the  method  consists.  The  most 
trustworthy  method  of  determining  the  flow  of  heat  is  that 
employed  by  Principal  Forbes  in  his  experiments  on  the 
conduction  of  heat  in  an  iron  bar.1  He  took  a  bar  of  exactly 
the  same  section  and  material  as  the  experimental  bar,  and, 
after  heating  it  uniformly,  allowed  it  to  cool  in  air  of  the 
same  temperature  as  that  surrounding  the  experimental  bar. 
By  observing  the  temperature  of  the  cooling  bar  at  frequent 
intervals  of  time,  he  ascertained  the  quantity  of  heat  which 
escaped  from  the  sides  of  the  bar,  this  heat  being  measured 
in  terms  of  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  unit  of 
volume  of  the  bar  one  degree.  This  loss  of  heat  depended 
of  course  on  the  temperature  of  the  bar  at  the  time,  and  a 
table  was  formed  showing  the  loss  from  a  linear  foot  of  the 
bar  in  a  minute  at  any  temperature. 

1   Trans.  Roy.  Sec.  Edinb.  1 86 1-2. 


2/0  Diffusion  of  Heat  by  Conduction. 

Now,  in  the  experimental  bar  the  temperature  of  every 
part  was  known,  and  therefore  the  loss  of  heat  from  any 
given  portion  of  the  bar  could  be  found  by  making  use  of 
the  table.  To  determine  the  flow  of  heat  across  any  par- 
ticular section,  it  was  necessary  to  sum  up  the  loss  of  heat 
from  all  parts  of  the  bar  beyond  this  section,  and  when  this 
was  done,  by  comparing  the  flow  of  heat  across  the  section 
with  the  rate  of  diminution  of  temperature  per  linear  foot 
in  the  curve  of  temperature,  the  conductivity  of  the  bar 
for  the  temperature  of  the  section  was  ascertained.  Prin- 
cipal Forbes  found  that  the  thermal  conductivity  of  iron 
decreases  as  the  temperature  increases. 

The  conductivity  thus  determined  is  expressed  in  terms 
of  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to  raise  unit  of  volume  of 
the  substance  one  degree.  If  we  wisli  to  express  it  in  the 
ordinary  way  in  terms  of  the  thermal  unit  as  defined  with 
reference  to  water  at  its  maximum  density,  we  must 
multiply  our  result  by  the  specific  heat  of  the  substance, 
and  by  its  density  ;  for  the  quantity  of  heat  required  to 
raise  unit  of  mass  of  the  substance  one  degree  is  its  specific 
heat,  and  the  number  of  units  of  mass  in  unit  of  volume  is 
the  density  of  the  substance. 

As  long  as  we  are  occupied  with  questions  relating  to  the 
diffusion  of  heat  and  the  waves  of  temperature  in  a  single 
substance,  the  quantity  on  which  the  phenomena  depend 
is  the  thermometric  conductivity  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
substance  itself;  but  whenever  we  have  to  do  with  the 
effects  of  the  flow  of  heat  upon  other  bodies,  as  in  the  case 
of  boiler  plates,  steam-condensers,  &c.,  we  must  use  a 
definite  thermal  unit,  and  express  the  calorimetric  con- 
ductivity in  terms  of  it.  It  has  been  shown  by  Professor 
Tyndall  that  the  wave  of  temperature  travels  faster  in  bis- 
muth than  in  iron,  though  the  conductivity  of  bismuth  is 
much  less  than  that  of  iron.  The  reason  is  that  the 
thermal  capacity  of  the  iron  is  much  greater  than  that  of  an 
equal  volume  of  bismuth. 


Conductivity  of  various  Substances.  271 

Forbes  was  the  first  to  remark  that  the  order  in  which 
the  metals  follow  one  another  in  respect  of  thermal  con- 
ductivity is  nearly  the  same  as  their  order  as  regards  electric 
conductivity.  This  remark  is  an  important  one  as  regards 
certain  metals,  but  it  must  not  be  pushed  too  far;  for 
there  are  substances  which  are  almost  perfect  insulators  of 
electricity,  whereas  it  is  impossible  to  find  a  substance 
which  will  not  transmit  heat. 

The  electric  conductivity  of  metals  diminishes  as  the 
temperature  rises.  The  thermal  conductivity  of  iron  also 
diminishes,  but  in  a  smaller  ratio,  as  the  temperature  rises, 

Professor  Tait  has  given  reasons  for  believing  that  the 
thermal  conductivity  of  metals  may  be  inversely  proportional 
to  their  absolute  temperature. 

The  electric  conductivity  of  most  non-metallic  substances, 
and  of  all  electrolytes  and  dielectrics,  increases  as  the  tem- 
perature rises.  We  have  not  sufficient  data  to  determine 
whether  this  is  the  case  as  regards  their  thermal  conduc- 
tivity. According  to  the  molecular  theory  of  Chapter  XXII. 
the  thermal  conductivity  of  gases  increases  as  the  tempera- 
ture rises. 

ON   THE   CONDUCTIVITY   OF    FLUIDS. 

It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  the  thermal  conductivity  of 
fluids,  because  the  variation  of  temperature  which  is  part  of 
the  phenomenon  produces  a  variation  of  density,  and  unless 
the  surfaces  of  equal  temperature  are  horizontal,  and  the  upper 
strata  are  the  warmest,  currents  will  be  produced  in  the  fluid 
which  will  entirely  mask  the  phenomena  of  true  conduction. 

Another  difficulty  arises  from  the  fact  that  most  fluids 
have  a  very  small  conductivity  compared  with  solid  bodies.1 
Hence  the  sides  of  the  vessel  containing  the  fluid  are  often 
the  principal  channel  for  the  conduction  of  heat. 

In  the  case  of  gaseous  fluids  the  difficulty  is  increased  by 
the  greater  mobility  of  their  parts,  and  by  the  great  variation 

[l  The  conductivity  of  water  is  about  '0014  of  that  of  copper. — R.] 


272  Diffusion  of  Heal  by  Conduction. 

of  density  with  change  of  temperature.  Their  conductivity 
is  extremely  small,  and  the  mass  of  tha^gas  is  generally  small 
compared  with  that  of  the  vessel  in  which  it  is  contained. 
Besides  this,  the  effect  of  direct  radiation  from  the  source 
of  heat  through  the  gas  on  the  thermometer  produces  a 
heating  effect  which  may,  in  some  cases,  completely  mask 
the  effect  of  true  conduction.  For  all  these  reasons,  the 
determination  of  the  thermal  conductivity  of  a  gas  is  an 
investigation  of  extreme  difficulty.  (See  Appendix.) 


APPLICATIONS    OF   THE   THEORY. 

The  great  thermal  conductivity  of  the  metals,  especially 
of  copper,  furnishes  the  means  of  producing  many  thermal 
effects  in  a  convenient  manner.  For  instance,  in  order 
to  maintain  a  body  at  a  high  temperature  by  means  of  a 
source  of  heat  at  some  distance  from  it,  a  thick  rod  of  copper 
may  be  used  to  conduct  the  heat  from  the  source  to  the 
body  we  wish  to  heat ;  and  when  it  is  desired  to  warm  the 
air  of  a  room  by  means  of  a  hot  pipe  of  small  dimensions, 
the  effect  may  be  greatly  increased  by  attaching  copper 
plates  to  the  pipe,  which  become  hot  by  conduction,  and 
expose  a  great  heating  surface  to  the  air. 

To  ensure  an  exact  equality  of  temperature  in  all  the 
parts  of  a  body,  it  may  be  placed  in  a  closed  chamber  formed 
of  thick  sheet  copper.  If  the  temperature  is  not  quite 
uniform  outside  this  chamber,  any  difference  of  temperature 
between  one  part  of  the  outer  surface  and  another  will 
produce  such  a  flow  ol  heat  in  the  substance  of  the  copper 
that  the  temperature  of  the  inner  surface  will  be  very  nearly 
uniform.  To  maintain  the  chamber  at  a  uniform  high  tem- 
perature by  means  of  a  flame,  as  is  sometimes  necessary,  it 
may  be  placed  in  a  larger  copper  chamber,  and  so  suspended 
by  strings  or  supported  on  legs  that  very  little  heat  can 
pass  by  direct  conduction  from  the  outer  to  the  inner  wail. 
Thus  we  have  first  an  outer  highly  conducting  shell  of  copper  j 


Chamber  of  Uniform  Temper  at  tire.  273 

next  a  slowly  conducting  shell  of  air,  which,  however,  tends 
to  equalize  the  temperature  by  convection  ;  then  another 
highly  conducting  shell  of  copper;  and  lastly  the  inner 
chamber.  The  whole  arrangement  facilitates  the  flow  of 
heat  parallel  to  the  walls  of  the  chambers,  and  checks  its 
flow  perpendicular  to  the  walls.  Now  differences  of  tempe- 
rature within  the  chamber  must  arise  from  the  passage  of 
heat  from  without  to  within,  or  in  the  reverse  direction,  and 
the  flow  of  heat  along  the  successive  envelopes  tends  only 
to  equalize  the  temperature.  Hence,  by  the  arrangement  of 
successive  shells,  alternately  of  highly  conducting  and  slowly 
conducting  matter,  and  still  more  if  the  slowly  conducting 
matter  is  fluid,  an  almost  complete  uniformity  of  temperature 
may  be  maintained  within  the  inner  chamber,  even  when  the 
outer  chamber  has  all  the  heat  applied  to  it  at  one  point. 

This  arrangement  was   employed   by  M.   Fizeau  in  his 
researches  on  the  dilatation  of  bodies  by  heat. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

OX    THE   DIFFUSION    OF    FLUIDS. 

THERE  are  many  liquids  which,  when  they  are  intermingled 
by  being  stirred  together,  remain  mixed,  and,  though  their 
densities  are  different,  they  do  not  separate  from  each  other 
as  oil  and  water  do.  When  liquids  which  are  capable  of 
being  permanently  mixed  are  placed  in  contact  with  each 
other,  the  process  of  mixture  goes  on  in  a  slow  and  gradual 
manner,  and  continues  till  the  composition  of  the  mixture  is 
the  same  in  every  part. 

Thus  if  we  put  a  strong  solution  of  any  salt  in  the  lo\ver 
part  of  a  tall  glass  jar,  we  may,  by  pouring  water  in  a  gentle 
stream  on  a  small  wooden  float,  fill  up  the  jar  with  water 
without  disturbing  the  solution.  The  process  of  diffusion 
will  then  go  on  between  the  water  and  the  solution,  and  will 

T 


274  Diffusion  of  Matter. 

continue  for  weeks  or  months,  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  salt  and  the  height  of  the  jar. 

If  the  solution  of  the  salt  is  strongly  coloured,  as  in  the 
case  of  sulphate  of  copper,  bichromate  of  potash,  &c.,  we 
may  trace  the  process  of  diffusion  by  the  gradual  rise  of  the 
colour  into  the  upper  part  of  the  jar,  and  the  weakening  of 
the  colour  in  the  lower  part.  A  more  exact  method  is  that 
employed  by  Sir  William  Thomson,  "of  placing  a  number  of 
glass  bubbles  or  beads  in  the  jar,  whose  specific  gravities 
are  intermediate  between  that  of  the  strong  solution  and 
that  of  water.  At  first  the  beads  all  float  in  the  surface  of 
separation  between  the  two  liquids,  but  as  diffusion  goes  on 
they  separate  from  each  other,  and  indicate  by  their  positions 
the  specific  gravity  of  the  mixture  at  various  depths.  It  is 
necessary  to  expel  the  air  very  thoroughly  from  both  liquids 
by  boiling  before  commencing  this  experiment.  If  this  is 
not  done,  air  separates  from  the  liquids,  and  attaches  itself 
in  the  form  of  small  bubbles  to  the  specific  gravity  beads,  so 
that  they  no  longer  indicate  the  true  specific  gravity  of  the 
fluid  in  which  they  float.  In  order  to  determine  the  strength 
of  the  solution  at  any  point,  as  indicated  by  one  of  the 
beads,  we  have  only  to  measure  the  amount  of  the  salt 
which  must  be  added  to  a  known  quantity  of  pure  water,  in 
order  to  make  the  bead  swim  in  the  mixture. 

Voit  has  investigated  the  process  of  diffusion  of  a  solution 
of  sugar  by  passing  a  ray  of  plane  polarized  light  horizontally 
through  the  liquid  at  various  depths.  The  solution  of  sugar 
causes,  the  plane  of  polarization  to  rotate  through  a  certain 
angle,  and  from  this  angle  the  percentage  of  sugar  in  any 
given  stratum  of  the  fluid  can  be  determined  without  disturb- 
ing the  vessel. 

There  are  many  pairs  of  liquids  which  do  not  diffuse  into 
each  other,  and  there  are  others  in  which  the  diffusion,  after 
going  on  for  some  time,  stops  as  soon  as  a  certain  small 
proportion  of  the  heavier  liquid  has  become  mixed  with  the 
lighter,  and  a  small  proportion  of  the  lighter  has  become 
mixed  with  the  heavier. 


Lais,  of  Diffusion.  275 

In  the  case  of  gases,  however,  there  is  no  such  limitation. 
Every  gas  diffuses  into  every  other  gas,  so  that,  however 
different  the  specific  gravities  of  two  gases  may  be,  it  is 
impossible  to  keep  them  from  mixing  if  they  are  placed  in 
the  same  vessel,  even  when  the  denser  gas  is  placed  below 
the  rarer. 

[Since  the  distinction  between  gases  and  liquids  is  not 
absolute,  we  may  infer  that  the  latter,  as  well  as  the  former, 
will  mix  in  all  proportions  if  the  temperature  be  high  enough. 
Even  short  of  the  critical  temperatures,  heat  is  found  to 
promote  solubility. 

If  two  liquids  which  do  not  sensibly  mix — e.g.,  bisulphide 
of  carbon  and  water — are  in  equilibrium  in  a  closed  vessel, 
every  cubic  inch  of  the  space  not  occupied  by  liquid  con- 
tains as  much  of  the  vapour  of  each  constituent  as  if  the 
other  had  been  absent,  and  the  resultant  pressure  is  the 
sum  of  those  due  (at  the  actual  temperature)  to  the  separate 
constituents.  The  boiling-point — that  is,  the  temperature  at 
which  a  bubble  at  the  interface  of  the  two  liquids  will 
acquire  the  atmospheric  pressure — is  thus  lower  for  the 
association  of  the  two  liquids  than  for  either  of  them 
separately. 

If  the  liquids  mix  in  some  proportions,  but  not  in  others, 
the  result  of  shaking  them  together  will  depend  upon  the 
proportions  taken.  Thus,  in  the  case  of  ether  and  water, 
if  the  ether  be  more  than  T\jth,  and  the  water  more  than 
T^O th,  there  will  be  separation  into  two  layers,  each  of 
definite  composition  (at  a  given  temperature),  but  the 
relative  amounts  of  the  two  layers  will  depend  upon  the 
proportion  originally  chosen.  If,  however,  the  original 
proportion  be  more  extreme  in  either  direction  than  those 
above  specified,  there  will  be  no  separation  into  two  layers 
— that  is,  the  composition  will  be  uniform  throughout. 

The  relation  between  the  percentage  composition  of  the 
vapour  and  that  of  the  liquid  can  only  be  fully  determined 
by  special  experiment,  but  its  general  character  may  be 

T  2 


276  Diffusion  of  Matter. 

sketched  beforehand.  Let  us  trace  the  course  of  things 
as  the  proportion  of  ether  increases.*  At  first,  when  the 
percentage  of  ether  in  the  liquid  is  infinitesimal,  so  is 
the  percentage  in  the  vapour.  Both  increase  up  to  the 
point  at  which  the  liquid  begins  to  separate  into  two 
layers.  From  this  point  onwards  the  composition  of  the 
vapour  remains  constant,  until  from  deficiency  of  water  the 
second  point  is  reached  where  the  liquid  forms  one  mixture 
only.  At  this  stage  the  vapour  becomes  richer  in  ether, 
until,  finally,  water  disappears  simultaneously  from  liquid 
and  vapour. 

In  the  case  of  alcohol  and  water,  which  mix  in  all  pro- 
portions, the  vapour  and  liquid  become  continuously  richer 
together. 

With  the  aid  of  a  third  liquid — e.g.,  alcohol — two  others, 
ether  and  water,  may  be  mixed  in  proportions  that  would 
not  otherwise  be  possible.  The  theory  of  such  ternary 
combinations  has  been  given  by  Sir  G.  Stokes  (*  Proc.  Roy. 
Soc.,'  vol.  xlix.  p.  174,  1891). — R.] 

The  fact  of  the  diffusion  of  gases  was  first  remarked  by 
Priestley.  The  laws  of  the  phenomena  were  first  investigated 
by  Graham.  The  rate  at  which  the  diffusion  of  any  substance 
goes  on  is  in  every  case  proportional  to  the  rate  of  variation 
of  the  strength  of  that  substance  in  the  fluid  as  we  pass 
along  the  line  in  which  the  diffusion  takes  place.  Each 
substance  in  the  mixture  flows  from  places  where  it  exists  in 
greater  quantity  to  places  where  it  is  less  abundant. 

The  law  of  diffusion  of  matter  is  therefore  of  exactly  the 
same  form  as  that  of  the  diffusion  of  heat  by  conduction, 
and  we  can  at  once  apply  all  that  we  know  about  the  con- 
duction of  heat  to  assist  us  in  understanding  the  phenomena 
of  the  diffusion  of  matter. 

To  fix  our  ideas,  let  us  suppose  the  fluid  to  be  contained 
in  a  vessel  with  vertical  sides,  and  let  us  consider  a  horizontal 
stratum  of  the  fluid  of  thickness  c.  Let  the  composition  of 
the  fluid  at  the  upper  surface  of  this  stratum  be  denoted  by 


Law  of  Diffusion.  277 

A,  and  that  of  the  fluid  at  the  lower  surface  of  the  stratum 
by  B. 

The  effect  of  the  diffusion  which  goes  on  in  the  stratum 
will  be  the  same  as  if  a  certain  volume  of  fluid  of  composition 
A  had  passed  downwards  through  the  stratum  while  an  equal 
volume  of  fluid  of  composition  B  had  passed  upwards  through 
the  stratum  at  the  same  time. 

Let  d  be  the  thickness  of  the  stratum  which  either  of  these 
equal  volumes  of  fluid  would  form  in  the  vessel,  then  d  is 
evidently  proportional : — 

ist.  To  the  time  of  diffusion. 

2nd.  Inversely  to  the  thickness  of  the  stratum  through 
which  the  diffusion  takes  place. 

3rd.  To  a  coefficient  depending  on  the  nature  of  the 
interdiffusing  substances.  Hence  if  /  is  the  time  of  dif- 
fusion and  k  the  coefficient  of  diffusion, 

d  =  k*  or  £=^. 

c  t 

We  thus  find  that  the  dimensions  of  £,  the  coefficient  of 
diffusion,  are  equal  to  the  square  of  a  length  divided  by 
a  time. 

Hence,  in  the  experiment  with  the  jar,  the  vertical 
distance  between  strata  of  corresponding  densities,  as  indi- 
cated by  the  beads  which  float  in  them,  varies  as  the  square 
root  of  the  time  from  the  beginning  of  the  diffusion. 

When  the  mixture  of  two  liquids  or  gases  is  effected  in  a 
more  rapid  manner  by  agitation  or  stirring,  the  only  effect 
of  the  mechanical  disturbance  is  to  increase  the  area  of  the 
surfaces  through  which  diffusion  takes  place.  Instead  of 
the  surface  of  separation  being  a  single  horizontal  plane,  it 
becomes  a  surface  of  many  convolutions,  and  of  great 
extent,  and  in  order  to  effect  a  complete  mixture  the  dif- 
hision  has  to  extend  only  over  the  distance  between  the 
successive  convolutions  of  this  surface  instead  of  over  half 
the  depth  of  the  vessel.  • 


278  Diffusion  of  Matter. 

Since  the  time  required  for  diffusion  varies  as  the  square 
of  the  distance  through  which  the  diffusion  takes  place,  it 
is  easy  to  see  that  by  stirring  the  solution  in  a  jar  along 
with  the  water  above  it,  a  complete  mixture  may  be  effected 
in  a  few  seconds,  which  would  have  required  months  if  the 
jar  had  been  left  undisturbed.  That  the  mixture  effected 
by  stirring  is  not  instantaneous  may  be  easily  seen  by 
observing  that  during  the  operation  the  fluid  appears  to 
be  full  of  streaks,  which  cause  it  to  lose  its  transparency. 
This  arises  from  the  different  indices  of  refraction  of  different 
portions  of  the  mixture,  which  have  been  brought  near  each 
other  by  stirring.  The  surfaces  of  separation  are  so  drawn 
out  and  convoluted  that  the  whole  mass  has  a  woolly 
appearance,  for  no  ray  of  light  can  pass  without  being 
turned  many  times  out  of  its  path. 

The  same  appearance  may  also  be  observed  when  we 
mix  hot  water  with  cold,  and  even  when  very  hot  air  is 
mixed  with  cold  air.  This  shows  that  what  is  called  the 
equalization  of  temperature  by  convection  currents  really 
takes  place  by  conduction  between  portions  of  the  substance 
brought  near  each  other  by  the  currents. 

If  we  observe  the  process  of  diffusion  with  our  most 
powerful  microscopes,  we  cannot  follow  the  motion  of  any 
individual  portions  of  the  fluids.  We  cannot  point  out  one 
place  in  which  the  lower  fluid  is  ascending,  and  another  in 
which  the  upper  fluid  is  descending.  There  are  no  currents 
visible  to  us,  and  the  motion  of  the  material  substances  goes 
on  as  imperceptibly  as  the  conduction  of  heat  or  of  elec- 
tricity. Hence  the  motion  which  constitutes  diffusion 
must  be  distinguished  from  those  motions  of  fluids  which 
we  can  trace  by  means  of  floating  motes.  It  may  be  de- 
scribed as  a  motion  of  the  fluids,  not  in  mass,  but  by  mole- 
cules. 

We  have  not  hitherto  taken  any  notice  of  molecular 
theories,  because  we  wish  to  draw  a  distinction  between 
that  part  of  our  subject  which  depends  only  on  the 


'Molecular  Motion.  2/y 

universal  axioms  of  dynamics,  combined  with  observa- 
tions of  the  properties  of  bodies,  and  the  part  which  en- 
deavours to  arrive  at  an  explanation  of  these  properties  by 
attributing  certain  motions  to  minute  portions  of  matter 
which  are  as  yet  invisible  to  us. 

The  description  of  diffusion  as  a  molecular  motion  is 
one  which  we  shall  justify  when  we  come  to  treat  of 
molecular  science.  At  present,  however,  we  shall  use  the 
phrase  '  molecular  motion '  as  a  convenient  mode  of  de- 
scribing the  transference  of  a  fluid  when  the  motion  of 
sensible  portions  of  the  fluid  cannot  be  directly  observed. 

Graham  observed  that  the  diffusion  both  of  liquids  and 
gases  takes  place  through  porous  solid  bodies,  such  as 
plaster  of  Paris  and  pressed  plumbago,  at  a  rate  not  very  much 
less  than  when  no  such  body  is  interposed,  and  this  even 
when  the  solid  division  is  amply  sufficient  to  check  all 
ordinary  currents,  and  even  to  support  considerable  differ- 
ences of  pressure  on  its  opposite  sides. 

By  taking  advantage  of  the  different  velocities  with  which 
different  liquids  and  gases  pass  through  such  substances, 
he  was  enabled  to  effect  many  important  analyses  and 
to  arrive  at  new  views  of  the  constitution  of  various 
bodies. 

But  there  is  another  class  of  cases  in  which  a  liquid  or 
gas  can  pass  through  a  diaphragm  which  is  not  in  the 
ordinary  sense  porous.  For  instance,  when  carbonic  acid 
gas  is  confined  in  a  soap-bubble,  it  gradually  escapes.  The 
liquid  absorbs  the  gas  at  its  inner  surface,  where  it  has  the 
greatest  density ;  and  on  the  outside,  where  the  density  of 
the  carbonic  acid  is  less,  the  gas  diffuses  out  into  the  atmo- 
sphere. During  the  passage  of  the  gas  through  the  film  it  is 
in  the  state  of  solution  in  water.  It  is  also  found  that  hydrogen 
and  other  gases  can  pass  through  a  layer  of  caoutchouc. 
The  ratios  in  which  different  gases  pass  through  this  substance 
are  different  from  the  ratios  in  which  they  percolate  through 
porous  plugs.  Graham  shows  that  the  chemical  relations 


280  Diffusion  of  Matter. 

between  the  gases  and  the  caoutchouc  determine  these 
ratios,  and  that  it  is  not  through  pores  in  the  ordinary  sense 
that  the  motion  takes  place. 

According  to  Graham's  theory,  the  caoutchouc  is  a  colloid 
substance — that  is,  one  which  is  capable  of  being  united,  in  a 
temporary  and  very  loose  manner,  with  various  proportions 
of  other  substances,  just  as  glue  will  form  a  jelly  with 
various  proportions  of  water.  Another  class  of  substances, 
which  Graham  calls  crystalloid,  are  distinguished  from  these 
by  being  always  of  definite  composition,  and  not  admitting 
of  these  temporary  associations.  When  a  colloid  substance 
has  in  different  parts  of  its  mass  different  proportions  of 
water,  alcohol,  or  solutions  of  crystalloid  bodies,  diffusion 
takes  place  through  the  colloid  substance,  although  no  part 
of  it  can  be  shown  to  be  in  a  liquid  state. 

On  the  other  hand,  a  solution  of  a  colloid  substance  is 
almost  incapable  of  diffusion  through  a  porous  solid,  or 
through  another  colloid  substance.  Thus,  if  a  solution  of 
gum  in"  water  containing  salt  be  placed  in  contact  with  a 
solid  jelly  of  gelatine  containing  alcohol,  salt  and  water 
will  be  diffused  into  the  gelatine,  and  alcohol  will  be  diffused 
into  the  gum,  but  there  will  be  no  mixture  of  the  gum  and 
the  gelatine. 

There  are  certain  metals  whose  relation  to  certain  gases 
Graham  explained  by  this  theory.  For  instance,  hydrogen 
can  be  made  to  pass  through  iron  and  palladium  at  a  high 
temperature,  and  carbonic  oxide  can  be  made  to  pass 
through  iron.  The  gases  form  colloidal  unions  with  the 
metals,  and  are  diffused  through  them  just  as  water  is  diffused 
through  a  jelly. 

Graham  made  many  determinations  of  the  relative  diffu- 
sibility  of  different  salts.  Accurate  determinations  of  the 
coefficient  of  diffusion  of-  liquids  and  gases  are  very  much 
wanted,  as  they  furnish  important  data  for  the  molecular 
theory  of  these  bodies.  The  most  valuable  determinations 
of  this  kind  are  those  of  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  between 


Capillarity.  281 

pairs  of  simple  gases  made  by  Professor  J.  Loschmidt  of 
Vienna.1 

He  has  determined  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  in  squama 
metres  per  hour  for  ten  pairs  of  the  most  important  gases. 
\Ve  shall  consider  these  results  when  we  come  to  the  mole- 
cular theory  of  gases. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

CAPILLARITY. 

WE  have  hitherto  considered  the  energy  of  a  body  as 
depending  only  on  its  temperature  and  its  volume.  The 
whole  of  the  energy  of  gases,  and  the  most  important  part  of 
the  energy  of  liquids,  may  be  expressed  in  this  way,  but  a 
very  important  part  of  the  energy  of  a  solid  body  may 
depend  on  the  form  which  it  is  compelled  to  assume  as 
well  as  on  its  volume.  We  shall  return  to  this  subject 
when  treating  of  Elasticity  and  Viscosity,  but  we  shall  con- 
sider at  present  that  part  of  the  energy  of  a  liquid  which 
depends  on  the  nature  and  extent  of  its  surface. 

In  many  cases  two  substances  when  placed  in  contact  do 
not  diffuse  into  each  other,  and  when  we  attempt  to  mix 
them  they  separate  from  each  other  when  left  to  themselves. 
Thus,  if  we  mix  water  with  alcohol  the  liquids  diffuse  into 
each  other.  If  we  now  attempt  to  mix  oil  with  the  alcohol 
and  water,  the  two  liquids  separate  from  each  other  of  them- 
selves, and  in  the  act  of  separation  sufficient  force  is  brought 
into  play  to  set  in  motion  considerable  masses  of  the  fluids, 
especially  when,  as  in  Plateau's  experiments,  the  mixture  of 
alcohol  and  water  is  of  the  same  density  as  the  oil. 

*  Experimental -Untersuchungen  iiber  die  Diffusion  von  Gasen  ohne 
porose  Scheidewande.  Sitzb.  d.  k.  Akad.  d.  Wissensch.  Bd.  Ixi. 
[March  and  July  1870.)  (See  Appendix.) 


282  Capillarity. 

The  work  required  to  produce  these  motions  must  be 
derived  from  the  system  itself,  as  no  work  is  done  on  it  by 
external  agency. 

The  system  of  two  fluids  must  therefore  have  more 
energy  when  the  fluids  are  mixed  than  when  they  are  sepa- 
rated. 

Now  the  only  difference  between  these  two  states  is  one 
of  arrangement ;  a  greater  number  of  particles  of  either  fluid 
being  close  to  the  surface  of  separation  when  the  fluids  are 
mixed  than  when  they  are  separate. 

We  therefore  conclude  that  the  energy  of  a  particle  of 
either  fluid  is  greater  when  it  is  very  close  to  the  surface 
of  that  fluid  than  when  it  is  at  a  greater  distance  from  the 
surface.  It  is  probable  that  it  is  only  within  a  distance  of 
a  thousandth  of  a  millimetre  or  less  from  the  surface  that  this 
increase  of  energy  is  sensible. 

One  effect  of  this  will  be  that  the  particles  near  the  sur- 
face will  be  drawn  inwards  towards  the  mass  of  their  own 
fluid  ;  but  as  this  force  acts  equally  on  all  the  surface  par- 
ticles, it  will  only  increase  the  internal  pressure  by  a  constant 
quantity,  and  no  visible  effect  will  be  produced. 

We  may  calculate  the  whole  energy  of  the  system  of  two 
fluids  if  we  know  their  arrangement.  Each  fluid  occupies 
the  same  total  volume  in  whatever  way  it  is  arranged  ;  and 
if  the  energy  of  every  particle  were  the  same,  the  total  energy- 
would  not  depend  on  the  arrangement. 

Since,  however,  the  particles  in  a  very  thin  stratum  close 
to  the  surface  of  separation  have  greater  energy  than  those 
in  the  interior  of  the  fluid  mass,  the  excess  of  energy  due  to 
this  cause  will  be  proportional  to  the  total  area  of  the  sur- 
face of  separation. 

Hence  the  energy  of  the  system  consists  of  two  parts  :  the 
first  depends  on  the  volume,  temperature,  &c.,  of  the  fluids, 
and  is  unaffected  by  the  form  of  their  surface.  The  second 
is  proportional  to  the  area  of  the  surface  separating  the 
two  fluids. 


Capillarity.  283 

It  is  on  this  second  part  of  the  energy  that  the  phenomena 
of  what  is  called  capillary  attraction  depend. 

In  the  case  of  a  soap-bubble  the  energy  is  greater  the 
greater  the  extent  of  surface  exposed  to  air.  The  amount  of 
this  energy  for  a  soap-bubble  at  ordinary  temperatures  is, 
according  to  Plateau,  about  5-6  gramme-metres  per  square 
metre  in  gravitation  units.  This  is  the  amount  of  work 
required  to  blow  a  soap-bubble  whose  superficial  extent  is 
one  square  metre.  As  the  soap-bubble  has  two  surfaces 
exposed  to  air,  the  energy  of  a  single  surface  is  only  2 '8 
gramme-metres  per  square  metre. 

We  shall  call  this  the  superficial  energy  of  the  soap- 
bubble.  It  is  measured  by  the  energy  in  unit  of  surface, 
and  its  dimensions  when  expressed  in  dynamical  measure 
are  therefore  : 


or  it  is  of  one  dimension  as  regards  mass,  and  of  two  dimen- 
sions inversely  as  regards  time,  and  it  is  independent  of  the 
unit  of  length.  Superficial  energy  depends  on  the  nature 
of  both  the  media  of  which  the  surface  is  a  boundary. 
The  media  must  be  such  as  do  not  mix  with  each  other, 
otherwise  diffusion  occurs,  and  the  surface  of  separation 
becomes  indefinite  ;  but  there  is  a  coefficient  of  superficial 
energy  for  every  surface  which  separates  two  liquids  which 
do  not  mix — a  liquid  and  a  gas,  or  its  own  vapour ;  and  for 
the  surface  which  separates  a  liquid  and  a  solid,  whether  it 
dissolves  the  solid  or  not.  There  is  also  a  coefficient  of 
superficial  energy  for  the  surface  separating  a  gas  and  a 
solid,  or  two  solids  ;  but  as  any  two  gases  diffuse  into  each 
other,  they  can  have  no  surface  of  separation. 

Superficial  Tension. 

When  the  area  of  the  surface  is  increased  in  any  way,  work 
must  be  done  ;  and  when  the  surface  is  allowed  to  contract, 


284 


Capillarity. 


it  does  work  on  other  bodies.  Hence  it  acts  like  a  stretched 
sheet  of  india-rubber,  and  exerts  a  tension  of  the  same  kind. 
The  only  difference  is,  that  the  tension  in  the  sheet  of 
india-rubber  depends  on  the  amount  of  stretching,  and  may 
be  greater  in  one  direction  than  in  a  direction  at  right 
angles  to  it,  whereas  the  tension  in  the  soap-bubble  remains 
the  same  however  much  the  film  is  extended,  and  the  tension 
at  any  point  is  the  same  in  all  directions. 

If  we  draw  a  straight  line,  P  Q,  across  the  surface  A  B  D  c, 
and  if  the  whole  tension  exerted  by 
the  surface  across  the  line  P  Q  is 
F,  then  the  superficial  tension  is 
measured  by  the  tension  across  unit 
of  length  of  the  line  P  Q  ;  or,  since  F 
is  the  tension  across  the  whole  line, 
if  T  is  the  superficial  tension  across 
unit  of  length, 

F  =  T  .  p  Q. 

Now  let  us  suppose  that  the  lines  A  B  and  c  D  were 
originally  in  contact,  and  that  the  surface  A  B  D  c  was 
produced  by  drawing  c  D  away  from  A  B  by  the  action  of 
the  force  F. 

If  we  suppose  A  B  and  B  c  to  be  rods  wet  with  soapsuds, 
placed  between  two  parallel  rods  A  c  and  B  D  and  then 
drawn  asunder,  the  soap  film  A  B  D  c  will  be  formed.  If  s 
is  the  superficial  energy  of  the  film  per  unit  of  area,  then 
the  work  done  in  drawing  it  out  will  be  s  .  A  B  .  A  c.  But  if 
F  is  the  force  required  to  draw  A  B  from  c  D,  the  same  work 
may  be  written  F.AC,  or,  putting  for  F  its  value  in  terms  of 
T,  and  equating  the  two  expressions  for  the  work, 


AB  .  AC  =  T 

or     =  T 


PQ 
AB 


AC 
AC. 


Hence 

s  =  T, 

or  the  numerical  value  of  the  superficial  energy  per  unit 
of  area  is  equal  to  that  of  the  superficial  tension  per  unit  of 


Superficial  Tension.  285 

length.  This  quantity  is  usually  called  the  Coefficient  of 
Capillarity,  because  it  was  first  considered  with  reference  to 
the  ascent  of  liquids  in  capillary  tubes.  These  tubes  de- 
rived their  name  from  the  smallness  of  their  bore,  which 
would  only  admit  a  hair  (capilla).  I  have  used  the  phrases 
*  superficial  energy '  and  '  superficial  tension  because  I  think 
they  help  us  to  direct  our  attention  to  the  facts,  and  to 
understand  the  various  phenomena  of  liquid  surfaces  better 
than  a  name  which  is  purely  technical,  and  which  has 
already  done  a  great  deal  of  harm  when  used  without  being 
understood.  If  by  the  help  of  this  treatise,  or  otherwise,  any- 
one has  obtained  a  clear  conception  of  the  real  phenomena 
called  Capillary  Attraction  and  Capillarity,  he  may  use 
these  words  quite  freely.  The  theory  as  we  shall  state  it 
does  not  differ  essentially  from  that  originally  given  by 
Laplace,  though  by  the  free  use  of  the  idea  of  superficial 
tension  we  avoid  some  of  the  mathematical  operations 
which  are  required  to  deduce  the  phenomena  from  the 
hypothesis  of  molecular  attractions. 

We  shall  now  suppose  that  the  superficial  tension  is 
known  for  the  surfaces  which  bound  every  pair  of  the 
media  with  which  we  have  to  do.  For  instance,  we  may 
denote  by  T^  the  superficial  tension' of  the  surface  which 
separates  the  medium  a  from  the  medium  b. 

Let  there  be  three  fluid  media,  a,  b,  c,  and  let  the  surface  of 
separation  between  a  and  b  meet  the  surface  of  separation 
between  b  and  c  along  a  line  of  any  form  having  continuous 
curvature.  Let  o  be  a  point  in  this  line,  and  let  the  plane 
of  the  paper  represent  a  section  perpendicular  to  the  line. 

The  three  tensions  iab,  T6c,  and  TM  must  be  in  equili- 
brium along  this  line,  and  since  we  know  these  tensions, 
we  can  easily  determine  the  angles  which  they  make  with 
each  other.  In  fact,  if  we  construct  a  triangle  ABC  having 
lines  proportional  to  these  tensions  for  its  sides,  the  exterior 
angles  of  this  triangle  will  be  equal  to  the  angles  formed  by 
the  three  surfaces  of  separation  which  meet  in  a  line. 


236 


Capillarity. 


By  trigonometry,  if  A  B  c  are  the  angles  of  the  edges 
formed  by  the  media  a  b  c,  then 


•be       _ 


sm  A 


sm  B 


sin  c 


It  appears  from  this  that  whenever  three  fluid  media  are 
»n   contact   and  in   equilibrium,  the  angles  between  their 

FIG  36. 


_  c 


surfaces  of  separation  depend  only  on  the  values  of  the 
superficial  tensions  of  these  three  surfaces,  and  are  there- 
fore always  the  same  for  the  same  three  fluids. 

But  it  is  not  always  possible  to  construct  a  triangle  with 
three  given  lines  as  its  sides.  If  any  one  of  the  lines  is 
greater  than  the  sum  of  the  other  two,  the  triangle  cannot  be 
formed.  For  the  same  reason,  if  any  one  of  the  three  super- 
ficial tensions  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  other  two,  the 
three  fluids  cannot  be  in  equilibrium  in  contact. 

For  instance,  if  the  tension  of  the  surface  separating  air 
and  water  is  greater  than  the  sum  of  the  tensions  of  the 
surfaces  separating  air  and  oil,  and  oil  and  water,  then  a 
drop  of  oil  cannot  be  in  equilibrium  on  the  surface  of  water. 
The  edge  of  the  drop,  where  the  oil  meets  the  air  and  the 
water,  becomes  thinner  and  thinner ;  but  even  when  the 
angle  is  reduced  to  the  thinnest  edge,  the  tension  of  the  free 


Angles  of  Contact  of  Three  Fluids.  287 

surface  of  the  water  exceeds  the  tensions  of  the  two  surfaces 
of  the  oil,  so  that  the  oil  is  drawn  out  thinner  and  thinner, 
till  it  covers  a  vast  expanse  of  water.  In  fact,  the  process 
may  go  on  till  the  oil  becomes  so  thin,  and  contains  so 
small  a  number  of  molecules  in  its  thickness,  that  it  no 
longer  has  the  properties  of  the  liquid  in  mass. 

[There  is  no  case  known  in  which  the  triangle  of  tensions 
is  possible.  The  liquid  of  intermediate  tension  always 
spreads  upon  the  interface  of  the  liquids  of  greatest  and 
least  tensions.  When  a  drop  of  oil  stands  upon  water,  it 
is  because  the  surface  of  the  water  is  already  coated  with  a 
thin  skin  of  oil.  At  one  time  the  case  of  mercury,  water 
and  air  was  regarded  as  an  exception  to  the  above  rule,  laid 
down  by  Marangoni.  But  the  surface  of  all  ordinary 
mercury  is  greasy,  and  it  has  been  shown  by  Quincke  that 
mercury  may  be  prepared  so  clean  that  a  drop  of  water  will 
spread  upon  it,  instead  of,  as  usual,  standing  as  a  drop  upon 
the  surface. — R.] 

When  a  solid  body  is  in  contact  with  two  fluids,  then  if 
the  tension  of  the  surface  separating  the  solid  from  the  first 
fluid  exceeds  the  sum  of  the  tensions  of  the  other  two  sur- 
faces, the  first  fluid  will  gather  itself  up  into  a  drop,  and 
the  second  will  spread  over  the  surface.  If  one  of  the 
fluids  is  air,  and  the  other  a  liquid,  then  the  liquid,  if  it 
corresponds  to  the  first  fluid  mentioned  above,  will  stand 
in  drops  without  wetting  the  surface  ;  but  if  it  corresponds 
to  the  second,  it  will  spread  itself  over  the  whole  surface, 
and  wet  the  solid. 

When  the  tension  of  the  surface  separating  the  two  fluids 
is  greater  than  the  difference  of  the  tensions  of  the  surfaces 
s^oorating  them  from  the  solid,  then  the  surface  of  separation 
of  the  two  fluids  will  be  inclined  at  a  finite  angle  to  the 
surface  of  the  solid.  Thus,  if  a  and  b  are  the  two  fluids,  and  c 
the  solid,  then  to  find  the  angle  of  contact  P  o  Q  we  must 
make  P  o  =  T.,S,  and  o  Q  —  T6c  —  iac.  This  angle  is  called 
the  angle  of  capillarity. 


288 


Capillarity 


ON    THE    RISE   OF   A   LIQUID   IN   A   TUBE. 


FIG  37. 


Let  a  be  a  liquid  in  a  tube  of  a  substance  ^,  whose  radius 
is  r.  Let  the  fluid  b  be  air  or  any 
other  fluid.  Let  a  be.  the  angle  of  ca- 
pillarity. The  circumference  of  the 
tube  is  2  TT  r.  All  round  this  circum- 
ference there  is  a  tension  Tai  acting  at 
an  angle. inclined  a  to  the  vertical,  and 
therefore  the  whole  vertical  force  is 
2  TT  r  iab  cos  a. 

If  this   force  raises  the  liquid  to  a 
height  A,  then,  neglecting  the  weight  of 
the  sides  of  the  hollow  portion  x  Y  z, 
the  weight  of  fluid  supported  is 
TT  P  g  r1  h. 

Equating   this   force   to   the   weight 
which  it  supports,  we  find 

h  =  2  T«*  cos  a. 
pgr 

Hence  the  height  to  which  the  fluid  is  drawn  up  is 
inversely  as  the  radius  of  the  tube. 

A  liquid  is  drawn  up  in  the  same  way  in  the  space  be- 
tween two  parallel  plates  separated  by  a  distance  d.  If  we 
now  suppose  fig.  38  to  represent  a  section  of  the  film  or  liquid, 
the  horizontal  breadth  of  which  is  /,  then  the  surface-tension 
of  the  liquid  on  the  line  which  bounds  the  wet  and  dry 
parts  of  each  plate  is  T  /,  and  this  force  acts  at  an  angle  u 
with  the  vertical.  The  whole  force,  therefore,  arising  from 
the  surface-tension,  and  tending  to  raise  the  liquid,  is 

2  T  /  cos  o. 

The  weight  of  the  liquid  raised  is 
P  g  h  I  d. 


in  Relation  to  Evaporation  and  Condensation.     289 

Equating  the  force  to  the  weight  which  it  supports,  we 
find 


T  COS  ft 


FIG.  38. 


This  expression  differs  from  that  for  the  height  in  a 
cylindrical  tube  only  by  the  substitution  of  d,  the  distance 
between  the  parallel  plates,  for  r,  the  radius  of  the  tube. 
Hence  the  height  to  which  a  liquid  will  ascend  between 
two  plates  is  equal  to  the  height  to  which  it  rises  in  a  tube 
whose  radius  is  equal  to  the  distance  between  the  plates, 
or  whose  diameter  is  twice  that  distance. 

A  remarkable  application  of  the  principles  of  thermo- 
dynamics to  capillary  phenomena  has  recently  been  made 
by  Sir  W.  Thomson.1  Let  a  fine  tube  be 
placed  in  a  liquid,  and  let  the  whole  be 
placed  in  a  vessel  from  which  air  is  ex- 
hausted, so  that  the  whole  space  above 
the  liquid  becomes  filled  with  its  vapour 
and  nothing  else. 

Let  the  permanent  level  of  the  liquid 
be  at  A  in  the  small  tube,  and  at  B  in  the 
vessel,  and  let  us  suppose  the  tempera- 
ture the  same  throughout  the  apparatus. 

There  is  a  state  of  equilibrium  between 
the  liquid  and  its  vapour,  both  at  A  and  at 
B  ;  otherwise  evaporation  or  condensation 
would  occur,  and  the  permanent  state 
would  not  exist. 

Now  the  pressure  of  the  vapour  at  B  exceeds  that  at  A  by 
the  pressure  due  to  a  column  of  the  vapour  of  the  height 

A  B. 

It  follows  that  the  vapour  is  in  equilibrium  with  the 
liquid  at  a  lower  pressure  where  the  surface  of  the  liquid  is 
concave,  as  at  A,  than  where  it  is  plane,  as  at  B. 

Now  let  the  lower  end  of  the  tube  be  closed,  and  let 

1  Proceedings  of  the  Royal  Society  of  Edinburgh,  Feb.  7,  1870. 
U 


290  Capillarity. 

some  of  the  liquid  be  taken  out  of  it,  so  that  the  liquid  in 
the  tube  does  not  reach  up  to  the  point  A. 

Then  vapour  will  condense  inside  the  tube,  owing  to  the 
concavity  of  its  surface,  and  this  will  go  on  till  it  is  filled 
with  liquid  up  to  the  level  A,  the  same  as  if  it  had  been 
open  at  the  bottom. 

Hence,  if  at  any  point  of  a  concave  liquid  surface  r  and 
r'  are  the  principal  radii  of  curvature  of  the  surface,  and  if 
the  pressure  of  vapour  in  equilibrium  with  a  plane  surface 
of  its  liquid  at  the  given  temperature  is  *&,  and  if  /  is  the 
pressure  of  equilibrium  of  the  vapour  in  contact  with  the 
curved  surface, 


T  a    f  I     .     I   \ 

—  ^ _  4.          J 

(J-a  \r        r'  J 


where  .?  is  the  density  of  the  vapour,  and  p  that  of  the  liquid. 
If  h  is  the  height  to  which  the  liquid  would  rise  in  virtue 
of  the  curvature  of  its  surface  in  a  capillary  tube,  and  if  JQ 
is  the  height  of  a  homogeneous  atmosphere  of  the  vapour, 


Sir  W.  Thomson  has  calculated  that  in  a  tube  whose 
radius  is  about  a  thousandth  of  a  millimetre,  and  in  which 
water  would  rise  about  thirteen  metres  above  the  plane 
level,  the  equilibrium  pressure  of  aqueous  vapour  would  be 
less  than  that  on  a  plane  surface  of  water  by  about  a  thou- 
sandth of  its  own  amount. 

He  thinks  it  probable  that  the  moisture  which  vegetable 
substances,  such  as  cotton,  cloth,  &c.,  acquire  from  air  at 
temperatures  far  above  the  dew  point  may  be  explained  by 
the  condensation  of  water  in  the  narrow  tubes  and  cells  of 
the  vegetable  structure. 

In  the  case  of  a  spherical  bubble  of  steam  in  water,  the 
increase  or  diminution  of  the  diameter  depends  on  the 
temperature  and  pressure  of  the  vapour  within  ;  and  the 
condition  that  ebullition  may  take  place  is  that  the  pres- 


Conditions  of  Boiling.  291 

sure  of  saturated  vapour  at  the  temperature  of  the  liquid 
must  exceed  the  actual  pressure  of  the  liquid  by  a  pressure 
equal  to  that  of  a  column  of  the  liquid  of  the  height  to 
which  it  would  ascend  in  a  tube  whose  section  is  equal  to 
that  of  the  bubbles. 

If  the  liquid  contains  any  gas  in  solution,  or  any  liquid 
more  volatile  than  itself,  or  if  air  or  steam  is  made  to 
bubble  up  through  the  liquid,  then  bubbles  will  be  formed 
of  a  visible  diameter,  and  the  ebullition  will  be  kept  up  by 
evaporation  at  the  surface  of  these  bubbles.  But  if,  by  long 
boiling  or  otherwise,  the  liquid  is  deprived  of  any  substance 
more  volatile  than  itself,  and  if  the  sides  of  the  vessel  in  which 
it  is  contained  are  such  that  the  liquid  adheres  closely  to 
them,  so  that  bubbles,  if  formed  at  the  surface  of  the  vessel, 
will  rather  collect  into  a  spherical  form  that  spread  along 
the  surface,  then  the  temperature  of  the  liquid  may  be 
raised  far  above  the  boiling  point,  and  when  boiling  at 
last  occurs,  it  goes  on  in  an  almost  explosive  manner, 
and  the  liquid  '  bumps  '  violently  on  the  bottom  of  the 
vessel. 

The  highest  temperature  to  which  water  may  be  raised 
under  the  atmospheric  pressure  without  ebullition  cannot  be 
said  to  be  accurately  known,  for  every  improvement  in  the 
arrangements  for  getting  rid  of  condensed  air,  &c.,  has  made 
it  possible  to  raise  liquid  water  to  a  higher  temperature. 
In  an  experiment  due  to  Dufour,  the  water,  instead  of  being 
allowed  to  touch  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  is  dropped  into  a 
mixture  of  linseed  oil  and  oil  of  cloves,  which  has  nearly 
the  same  density  as  itself.  By  this  means,  drops  of  liquid 
water  may  sometimes  be  observed  swimming  in  the  mixture 
at  a  temperature  of  356°  F.  The  pressure  of  aqueous 
vapour  is  at  this  temperature  nearly  ten  atmospheres,  or 
about  147  pounds  weight  on  the  square  inch.  Hence  the 
cohesion  of  the  water  must  be  able  to  support  at  least  132 
pounds  weight  on  the  square  inch. 

[According  to  Laplace's  theory,  the  cohesion  of  a  liquid  is 
u  2 


292  Capillarity. 

measured  by  the  internal  pressure  K,  due  to  the  mutual 
attraction  of  its  parts.  This  quantity  has  been  estimated, 
in  the  first  instance  by  Young,  at  the  enormous  figure  of 
20,000  atmospheres.  The  relation  between  K  and  T,  the 
surface-tension,  may  be  illustrated  by  considering  the  pres- 
sure /  in  the  interior  of  a  small  spherical  cavity  of  radius  r. 
So  long  as  r  is  not  very  small,  p  is  given  by  the  usual 
formula, 

t=T> 

and  it  increases  as  r  diminishes.  If  the  above  law  held 
good  without  limit,  p  would  become  infinite.  In  this  case 
the  initiation  of  a  bubble  of  steam  in  a  boiling  liquid  would 
be  opposed  by  infinite  force.  In  reality  the  law  changes  as 
soon  as  r  falls  below  the  range  of  the  cohesive  forces,  and 
the  ultimate  value  of/  is  not  infinite,  but  equal  to  Kr  which 
may  thus  be  regarded  as  the  pressure,  due  to  the  cohesive 
forces,  within  an  infinitely  small  cavity. 

The  above  argument  shows  that  the  range  of  the  forces 
must  be  of  the  order  of  magnitude  K/T,  a  conclusion  first 
drawn  by  Young. 

In  the  experiments  of  Berthelot  water  was  subjected  to 
an  actual  tension  estimated  at  50  atmospheres. 

The  connexion  of  the  capillary  quantities  with  the 
latent  heat  of  evaporation  has  been  pointed  out  by  Water- 
ston.1  As  was  first  shown  by  Dupre,  the  work  required  to 
divide  a  unit  of  volume  of  liquid  into  very  small  parts,  and 
to  separate  these  parts  to  such  distances  that  they  no  longer 
act  sensibly  upon  one  another,  is  measured  by  K.  This  is 
substantially  what  occurs  during  evaporation,  so  that  K 
represents  the  work  equivalent  to  the  latent  heat  of  evapo- 
ration of  unit  volume.  A  calculation  on  this  basis  led 
Dupre  to  the  conclusion  that  in  the  case  of  water  K  is 
about  25,000  atmospheres. — R.] 

We  may  also  apply  Sir  W.  Thomson's  principle  to  the 

i  Phil.  Mag.  xv.  p.  i,  1858. 


Formation  of  Fog.  293 

case  of  evaporation  from  a  small  drop.  In  this  case  the 
surface  of  the  liquid  is  convex,  so  that  if  r  is  the  radius  of 
the  drop, 

/  =  w  +  T_?_.l. 

p  —  ff     r 

Here  ™  is  the  pressure  of  saturated  vapour  corresponding 
to  the  temperature  when  the  surface  of  the  liquid  is  plane, 
and  p  is  the  pressure  of  vapour  required  to  prevent  the 
drop  from  evaporating.  A  small  drop  will  therefore  evapo- 
rate in  air  containing  so  much  moisture  that  condensation 
would  take  place  on  a  flat  surface. 

Hence,  if  a  vapour  free  from  suspended  particles,  and 
not  in  contact  with  any  solid  body  except  such  as  are 
warmer  than  itself,  is  cooled  by  expansion,  it  is  probable 
that  the  suggestion  of  Prof.  J.  Thomson  at  p.  126  might 
be  verified,  and  that  the  vapour  might  be  cooled  below  its 
ordinary  point  of  condensation  without  liquefaction,  for  the 
first  effect  of  condensation  would  be  to  produce  excessively 
small  drops,  and  these,  as  we  have  seen,  would  not  tend  to 
increase  unless  the  vapour  surrounding  them  were  more 
than  saturated. 

[By  a  series  of  beautiful  experiments  Aitken  has  shown 
that  when  ordinary  moist  air  is  cooled  so  as  to  form  fog, 
each  aqueous  spherule  founds  itself  upon  a  minute  particle 
of  foreign  matter  suspended  as  dust.  When  the  air  is 
nearly  freed  from  dust  by  filtration  through  cotton  wool,  or 
otherwise,  expansion  produces  a  fine  rain,  consisting  of  com- 
paratively few  spheres  of  large  diameter.  The  passage  of  a 
single  electric  spark  between  platinum  points  is  sufficient 
to  re-charge  the  air  with  nuclei,  so  that  on  repeating  the 
experiment  the  previous  rain  is  replaced  by  a  dense  fog 
containing  innumerable  fine  particles. — R.] 

The  formation  of  cloud  in  vapour  often  appears  very 
sudden,  as  if  it  had  been  at  first  retarded  by  some  cause  of 
this  kind,  so  that  when  at  last  the  cloud  is  formed  conden- 
sation occurs  with  great  rapidity,  reminding  us  of  the  con- 


294  Capillarity. 

verse  phenomenon  of  the  rapid  boiling  of  an  overheated 
liquid. 

The  drops  in  a  cloud,  for  the  same  reason,  cannot  remain 
of  the  same  size,  even  if  they  are  not  jostled  against  each 
other,  for  the  smaller  drops  will  evaporate,  while  the  larger 
ones  are  increased  by  condensation,  so  that  visible  drops 
will  be  formed  by  pure  condensation  without  any  necessity 
for  the  coalescence  of  smaller  drops. 

Up  to  this  point  we  have  not  considered  the  effect  of 
heat  on  the  superficial  tension  of  liquids.  In  all  liquids  on 
which  experiments  have  been  made  the  superficial  tension 
diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises,  being  greatest  at  the 
freezing  point  of  the  substance,  and  vanishing  altogether  at 
the  critical  point  where  the  liquid  and  gaseous  states  become 
continuous. 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  phenomenon  is  intimately 
related  to  the  apparent  discontinuity  of  the  liquid  and 
gaseous  states,  and  that  it  must  be  studied  in  connexion 
with  the  conditions  of  evaporation  and  the  phenomenon 
called  latent  heat.  Much  light  will  probably  be  thrown  on 
all  these  subjects  by  investigations  which  as  yet  can  hardly 
be  said  to  be  begun. 

Sir  W.  Thomson  has  applied  the  principles  of  thermo- 
dynamics to  the  case  of  a  film  of  water  extended  by  a  force 
applied  to  it,  and  has  shown  that  in  order  to  maintain  the 
temperature  of  the  film  constant  an  amount  of  heat  must 
be  supplied  to  it  nearly  equal  in  dynamical  measure  to  half 
the  work  done  in  stretching  the  film. 

In  fact,  the  third  thermodynamical  relation  (p.  168)  may 
be  applied  at  once  to  the  case  by  making  the  following 
substitutions:  for  'pressure'  put 'superficial  tension,' and 
for  '  volume '  put  '  area.' 

We  thus  find  that  the  latent  heat  of  extension  of  unit  of 
area  is  equal  to  the  product  of  the  absolute  temperature 
and  the  decrement  of  superficial  tension  per  degree  of  tem- 
perature. At  ordinary  temperatures  it  appears  from  experi- 


Table  of  Tensions. 


295 


ment  that  this  product  is  about  half  the  superficial  ten- 
sion. Hence  the  latent  heat  of  extension  in  dynamical 
measure  is  about  half  the  work  spent  in  producing  the  ex- 
tension. 

The  student  may  also  adapt  the  investigation  of  latent 
heat  as  given  at  p.  173  to  the  case  of  the  extension  of  a 
liquid  film. 

The  following  table,  taken  from  the  memoir  of  M.  Quincke, 
gives  the  superficial  tension  of  different  liquids  in  contact 
with  air,  water,  and  mercury.  The  tension  is  measured  in 
grammes  weight  per  linear  metre,  and  the  temperature  is 

20°   C. 

Table  of  Superficial  Tension  at  20°  C. 


Liquid 

Sp.  gravity 

Tension  of  surface  separating 
'    the  liquid  from 

Air 

Water     |    Mercury 

Water 

I'O 

8-253 

o             42-58 

Mercury     . 

I3-5432 

55^3 

42-58          o 

Bisulphide  of  Carbon 

1*2687 

3-274 

4-256        37-97 

Chloroform 

I  -4878 

3-I2O 

3'OIQ        4071 

Alcohol      . 

07906 

2-599 

4071 

Olive  Oil    . 

0-9136 

3-760 

2-096        34-19 

Turpentine 

0-8867 

3-030 

I-I77        25-54 

Petroleum  . 

0-7977 

3-233 

2-834        2894 

Hydrochloric  Acid 

I-I 

7'15 

-     i  38-41 

Solution  of  Hyposulphite  of 

i 

Soda       .... 

1-1248 

7-903 

—      '  45'11 

It  appears  from  this  table  that  water  has  the  greatest 
superficial  tension  of  all  ordinary  liquids.  For  this  reason 
it  is  very  difficult  to  preserve  a  surface  of  pure  water.  It  is 
sufficient  to  touch  any  part  of  the  surface  of  pure  water 
with  a  greased  rod  to  reduce  its  tension  considerably.  The 
smallest  quantity  of  any  kind  of  oil  immediately  spreads 
itself  over  the  surface,  and  completely  alters  the  superficial 
tension.  Hence  the  importance  in  all  experiments  on  super- 
ficial tension  of  having  the  vessel  thoroughly  clean.  This 


296  Capillarity. 

has  been  well  pointed  out  by  Mr.  Tomlinson  in  his  researches 
on  the  'cohesion  figures  of  liquids.' 

[It  seems  doubtful  whether  the  tension  of  water  is  really 
so  high  as  that  recorded  in  the  table.  Observations  upon 
very  clean  surfaces,  in  which  the  tension  was  determined 
from  its  effect  upon  the  propagation  of  ripples,  gave  y'4.1 

A  convenient  test  for  ascertaining  whether  a  water  sur- 
face is  moderately  clean  is  afforded  by  camphor.  If  a 
wineglass,  after  thorough  rinsing  under  a  tap,  be  allowed  to 
fill  with  water,  the  surface  will  probably  be  clean  enough  for 
the  experiment.  In  this  case  small  fragments  of  camphor 
scraped  off  with  a  penknife,  and  allowed  to  fall  upon  the 
surface,  will  at  once  assume  vigorous  movements,  principally 
of  rotation.  If  now  the  surface  of  the  water  be  touched 
with  the  finger,  the  motion  of  the  camphor  fragments  will 
probably  be  arrested  in  consequence  of  the  grease  com- 
municated to  the  water.  The  movements  upon  a  clean 
surface  are  due  to  the  gradual  solution  of  the  camphor,  and 
to  the  fact  that  the  solution  has  a  smaller  tension  than  pure 
water.  In  consequence,  the  part  of  the  surface  immediately 
surrounding  a  fragment  is  constantly  being  drawn  outwards, 
while  the  radial  outflow  of  the  camphor  tends  to  be  com- 
pensated by  the  entrance  of  fresh  material  into  solution. 
If  this  action  took  place  with  perfect  symmetry,  the  frag- 
ment would  remain  at  rest ;  but  in  consequence  of  irregu- 
larities of  outline,  the  strength,  and  therefore  the  tension, 
of  the  surface  is  not  the  same  on  all  sides,  and  there  remain 
residual  forces  competent  to  set  these  small  masses  into 
rotation. 

The  vigorous  movement  of  camphor  fragments  does  not 
require  an  absolutely  clean  surface,  and  in  fact  we  may 
experimentally  determine  the  amount  of  any  kind  of  oil 
necessary  to  stop  them.  In  one  trial  it  appeared  that  about 
•8  milligram  of  olive  oil  was  required  upon  a  circular  water 

1  '  On  the  Tension  of  Water  Surfaces,  clean  and  contaminated,  Phil, 
Mag.  Nov.  1890. 


Camphor  Movements.  297 

surface  84  cm.  in  diameter.  If  from  these  data  we  calculate 
the  thickness  of  the  oil  film  upon  the  supposition  that  its 
density  is  the  same  ('9)  as  usual,  we  find  i'6xio~7  cm. 
Allowing  a  little  for  the  imperfect  purity  of  the  surface 
before  the  addition  of  the  oil,  we  may  conclude  that  an  oily 
film  2  millionths  of  a  millimetre  in  thickness  suffices  to 
arrest  the  camphor  movements. 

If  the  oily  film  be  less  than  the  above,  the  tension  of  the 
contaminated  surface,  though  reduced,  is  still  sufficient  to 
overcome  that  of  the  camphor  solution  which  may  be 
supposed  to  have  developed  itself  round  the  fragment,  and 
thus  the  action  continues.  But  if  the  grease  be  present  in 
such  quantity  that  the  tension  of  the  contaminated  surface 
is  less  than  that  of  a  saturated  solution  of  camphor,  it  is  no 
longer  possible  for  the  latter  to  spread  along  the  surface, 
and  then  the  movements  cease. 

If  we  call  the  tension  of  a  clean  surface  100,  that  of  a 
saturated  solution  of  camphor  is  72.  A  surface  upon  which 
there  is  an' excess  of  olive  oil  has  a  tension  of  54,  while  that 
of  a  solution  of  soap  is  only  about  34. 

As  a  check  upon  the  correctness  of  the  explanation  just 
given,  we  may  compare  the  behaviour  of  camphor  fragments 
upon  surfaces  greased  with  different  materials,  but  of  the 
same  tension  ;  and  the  easiest  way  to  secure  the  desired 
equality  of  tensions  is  to  use  different  parts  of  the  same 
surface.  A  line  of  dust,  such  as  sulphur  or  lycopodium,  is 
distributed  upon  the  surface  of  water  in  a  large  flat  dish, 
so  as  to  divide  it  into  equal  parts.  If  a  small  chip  of  wood 
greased,  for  example,  with  olive  oil  be  allowed  to  touch  one 
part  of  the  surface,  the  line  of  dust  is  repelled  by  the  ex- 
pansion of  that  part,  but  the  effect  may  be  compensated  by 
a  slight  greasing  uf  the  other  side  with  oil  of  cassia.  By 
careful  alternate  additions  the  line  of  dust  may  be  kept 
central,  while  the  two  halves  become  increasingly  greased 
wiih  the  two  sorts  of  oil.  At  every  stage  of  this  process, 
so  long  as  the  surface  is  at  rest,  the  tension  of  all  parts  is 


298  Capillarity. 

necessarily  the  same.  Experiments  of  this  kind  with  a 
large  variety  of  oils  showed  that  the  effect  upon  camphor 
of  the  different  parts  of  the  surface  was  indistinguishable, 
in  spite  of  the  different  sorts  of  grease  in  operation. 

There  is  an  important  difference  in  the  mechanical  be- 
haviour of  clean  and  contaminated  surfaces.  In  the  case 
of  the  former  no  force  opposes  the  expansion  of  one  part 
of  the  surface  and  the  contraction  of  another.  But  if  there 
is  a  film  of  grease,  the  thickness  of  the  film  is  increased  by 
any  contraction  and  diminished  by  any  expansion.  These 
differences  of  thickness  entail  corresponding  differences 
of  surface-tension,  so  that  if  a  greasy  surface  be  moved  in 
such  a  way  as  to  expand  or  contract  any  part,  forces  are 
called  into  play  tending  to  restore  the  original  situation. 
This  is  the  origin  of  the  '  superficial  viscosity '  of  Plateau, 
which  is  thus  a  property  of  contaminated,  and  not  of  clean, 
surfaces.  By  suitable  methods  water  may  be  prepared 
devoid  of  superficial  viscosity.1 

A  like  explanation,  first  correctly  given  by  O.  Reynolds, 
applies  to  the  effect  of  oil  upon  waves.  The  ordinary 
propagation  of  waves  imposes  upon  the  surface  periodic 
local  expansions  and  contractions.  To  these  a  greasy  surface 
offers  opposition.  It  is  to  be  understood  that  the  calming 
effect  of  oil  applies  in  the  first  instance  only  to  small  waves 
and  ripples,  but  it  appears  to  be  by  means  of  these  that  the 
crests  of  the  large  waves  are  driven  forward  and  rendered 
dangerous. 

We  have  seen  that  the  tension  of  a  greasy  surface  in- 
creases under  extension.  The  same  principle  applies  to  ,i 
soap  film.  If  a  film  be  horizontal  and  at  rest,  all  parts  must 
exercise  the  same  tension  ;  and  the  fact  that  such  a  film  may 
exhibit  various  colours  at  different  parts  shows  that  the 
tension  may  be  the  same  in  spite  of  great  relative  alterations 
of  thickness.  Again,  in  this  position  no  force  opposes  the 
substitution  of  a  thin  for  a  thick  part  at  any  place,  provided 
1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.t  vol.  xlviii.  p.  127. 


Tension  of  Soap  Films.  299 

there  be  no  extension  or  contraction  of  either.  If,  however, 
the  film  be  raised  from  the  horizontal  to  the  vertical  position, 
it  is  observed  that,  as  shown  by  the  colour,  the  thick  parts 
find  their  way  to  the  bottom  and  the  thin  parts  to  the  top. 
The  result  is  attained  by  an  actual  transfer  of  parts,  and 
not  by  a  thickening  of  those  which  may  accidentally  find 
themselves  at  the  bottom,  and  a  thinning  of  those  acciden- 
tally at  the  top.  After  a  short  time  all  is  sensibly  at  rest, 
and  this  proves,  contrary  to  what  is  often  asserted,  that  the 
tension  of  the  film  is  greater  above  than  below.  Were  it 
not  so,  the  intermediate  parts  of  the  film,  being  under  the 
influence  of  gravity  alone,  would  fall  sixteen  feet  in  the  first 
second  of  time.  The  stability  of  the  film  requires  that  the 
tension  be  not  absolutely  constant,  but  liable  to  augment 
under  extension.  If  the  central  parts  of  a  vertical  film  were 
suddenly  displaced  downwards,  an  increase  of  tension  above, 
and  a  decrease  below,  would  be  called  into  play,  and  the 
original  condition  would  be  restored. 

The  greatly  diminished  tension  of  soapy  water  is  doubt- 
less due  to  a  film  upon  the  surface.  This  film  is  evolved 
from  the  interior,  and  is  probably  capable  of  reabsorp- 
tion.  It  has  been  proved  by  Dupre  and  the  present  writer 
that  at  the  very  first  moment  of  their  formation  surfaces 
of  soapy  water  have  hardly  less  tension  than  those  of  pure 
water.— R.] 

When  one  of  the  liquids  is  soluble  in  the  other,  the  effects 
of  superficial  tension  are  very  remarkable.  For  instance,  if 
a  drop  of  alcohol  be  placed  on  the  surface  of  a  thin  layer  of 
water,  the  tension  is  immediately  reduced  to  2'6,  where  the 
alcohol  is  pure,  and  varies  from  this  value  to  8*25,  where  the 
water  is  pure.  The  result  is  that  the  equilibrium  of  the  sur- 
face is  destroyed,  and  the  superficial  film  of  the  liquid  is 
set  in  motion  from  the  alcohol  towards  the  water,  and  if 
the  water  is  shallow  this  motion  of  the  surface  will  drag 
the  whole  of  the  water  with  it,  so  as  to  lay  bare  part  of  the 
bottom  of  the  vessel.  A  dimple  may  be  formed  on  the 


30O  Capillarity. 

surface  of  water  by  bringing  a  drop  of  ether  close  to  the  sur- 
face. The  vapour  of  the  ether  condensed  on  the  surface 
of  the  water  is  sufficient  to  cause  the  outward  current 
mentioned  above. 

Wine  contains  alcohol  and  water,  and  when  it  is  exposed  to 
the  air  the  alcohol  evaporates  faster  than  the  water,  so  that 
the  superficial  layer  becomes  weaker.  When  the  wine  is  in  a 
deep  vessel,  the  strength  is  rapidly  equalized  by  diffusion  ; 
but  in  the  case  of  the  thin  layer  of  wine  which  adheres  to 
the  sides  of  a  wineglass,  the  liquid  rapidly  becomes  more 
watery.  This  increases  the  superficial  tension  at  the  sides 
of  the  glass,  and  causes  the  surface  to  be  dragged  from  the 
strong  wine  to  the  weak.  The  watery  portion  is  always 
uppermost,  and  creeps  up  the  sides  of  the  glass,  dragging  the 
stronger  wine  after  it  till  the  quantity  of  the  fluid  becomes  so 
great  that  the  different  portions  mix,  and  the  drop  runs  down 
the  side. 

This  phenomenon,  known  as  the  tears  of  strong  wine,  was 
first  explained  on  these  principles  by  Professor  James  Thom- 
son. It  is  probable  that  it  is  referred  to  in  Proverbs  xxiii. 
31,  as  an  indication  of  the  strength  of  the  wine.  The  motion 
ceases  in  a  stoppered  bottle  as  soon  as  enough  of  vapour  of 
alcohol  has  been  formed  in  the  bottle  to  be  in  equilibrium 
with  the  liquid  alcohol  in  the  wine. 

The  fatty  oils  have  a  greater  superficial  tension  than  tur- 
pentine, benzol,  or  ether.  Hence  if  there  is  a  greasy  spot  on 
a  piece  of  cloth,  and  if  one  side  of  it  is  wetted  with  one  of 
these  substances,  the  tension  is  greatest  on  the  side  of  the 
grease,  and  the  portions  consisting  of  mixtures  of  benzol  and 
. grease  move  from  the  benzol  towards  the  grease. 

If  in  order  to  cleanse  the  grease-spot  we  begin  by  wetting 
the  middle  of  the  spot  with  benzol,  we  drive  away  the  grease 
into  the  clean  part  of  the  cloth.  The  benzol  should  there- 
fore be  applied  first  in  a  ring  all  round  the  spot,  and  gradu- 
ally brought  nearer  to  the  centre  of  the  spot,  and  a  fibrous 
substance,  such  as  blotting-paper,  should  be  placed  in  contact 


Grease  Spots.  301 

with  the  cloth,  so  that  when  the  grease  is  chased  by  the 
benzol  to  the  middle  of  the  spot  it  may  make  its  escape  into 
the  blotting-paper,  instead  of  remaining  in  globules  on  the 
surface,  ready  to  return  into  the  cloth  when  the  benzol 
evaporates. 

Another  very  effectual  method  of  getting  rid  of  grease- 
spots  is  founded  on  the  fact  that  the  superficial  tension  of  a 
substance  always  diminishes  as  the  temperature  rises.  If, 
therefore,  the  temperature  is  different  at  different  parts  of  a 
greasy  cloth,  the  grease  tends  to  move  from  the  hot  parts  to 
the  cold.  We  therefore  apply  a  hot  iron  to  one  side  of  the 
cloth,  and  blotting-paper  to  the  other,  and  the  grease  is 
driven  into  the  blotting-paper.  If  there  is  blotting-paper  on 
both  sides  it  will  be  found  that  the  grease  is  driven  mainly 
into  that  on  the  opposite  side  from  the  hot  iron. 


CHAPTER   XXL 

ON    ELASTICITY   AND    VISCOSITY. 

On  Stresses  and  Strains. 

WHEN  the  form  of  a  connected  system  is  altered  in  any 
way,  the  alteration  of  form  is  called  a  Strain.  The  force 
or  system  of  forces  by  which  this  strain  is  produced  or 
maintained  is  called  the  Stress  corresponding  to  the  strain. 
There  are  different  kinds  of  strains,  and  different  kinds  of 
stresses  corresponding  to  them. 

The  only  case  which  we  have  hitherto  considered  is  that 
in  which  the  three  longitudinal  stresses  are  equal.  This 
kind  of  stress  is  called  Hydrostatic  Pressure,  and  is  the 
only  kind  which  can  exist  in  a  fluid  at  rest.  The  pressure 
ii  the  same  in  whatever  direction  it  is  estimated. 


302  Stresses  and  Strains. 

A  very  important  kind  of  stress  is  called  Shearing  Stress  : 
it  is  compounded  of  two  equal  longi-  FIG.  39. 

tudinal  stresses,  one  being  a  tension 
and   the  other  a  pressure  acting  at          N. 
right  angles  to  each  other.     When  a 
pair  of  scissors  is  employed  to  cut     | 
anything,  the  two  blades  produce  a     ) 

shearing  stress  in  the   material  be-    * 

twcen    them,  tending  to  make   one  / 

portion  slide  over  the  other. 

We  have  now  to  consider  the  properties  of  bodies  when 
acted  on  by  this  kind  of  stress. 

A  body  which  when  subjected  to  a  stress  experiences  no 
strain  would,  if  it  existed,  be  called  a  Perfectly  Rigid  Body. 
There  are  no  such  bodies,  and  this  definition  is  given  only  to 
indicate  what  is  meant  by  perfect  rigidity. 

A  body  which  when  subjected  to  a  given  stress  at  a  given 
temperature  experiences  a  strain  of  definite  amount,  which 
does  not  increase  when  the  stress  is  prolonged,  and  which 
disappears  completely  when  the  stress  is  removed,  is  called 
a  Perfectly  Elastic  Body. 

Gases  and  liquids,  and  perhaps  most  solids,  are  perfectly 
elastic  as  regards  stress  uniform  in  all  directions,  but  no  aru'b- 
stance  which  has  yet  been  tried  is  perfectly  elastic  as  regards 
shearing  stress,  except  perhaps  for  exceedingly  small  values 
of  the  stress. 

Now  suppose  that  stresses  of  the  same  kind,  but  of  con- 
tinually increasing  magnitude,  are  applied  to  a  body  in 
succession.  As  long  as  the  body  returns  to  its  original 
form  when  the  stress  is  removed  it  is  said  to  be  perfectly 
elastic. 

If  the  form  of  the  body  is  found  to  be  permanently  altered 
when  the  stress  exceeds  a  certain  value,  the  body  is  said 
to  be  soft,  or  plastic,  and  the  state  of  the  body  when  the 
alteration  is  just  going  to  take  place  is  called  the  Limit  of 
Perfect  Elasticity. 


Definition  of  Solidity.  303 

If  the  stress  be  increased  till  the  body  breaks  or  gives  way 
altogether,  the  value  of  the  stress  is  called  the  Strength  of 
the  body  for  that  kind  of  stress. 

If  breaking  takes  place  before  there  is  any  permanent 
alteration  of  form,  the  body  is  said  to  be  Brittle. 

Lf  the  stress,  when  it  is  maintained  constant,  causes 
a  strain  or  displacement  in  the  body  which  increases 
continually  with  the  time,  the  substance  is  said  to  be 
Viscous. 

When  this  continuous  alteration  of  form  is  only  produced 
by  stresses  exceeding  a  certain  value,  the  substance  is  called 
a  solid,  however  soft  it  may  be.  When  the  very  smallest 
stress,  if  continued  long  enough,  will  cause  a  constantly 
increasing  change  of  form,  the  body  must  be  regarded  as 
a  viscous  fluid,  however  hard  it  may  be. 

Thus,  a  tallow  candle  is  much  softer  than  a  stick  of 
sealing-wax;  but  if  the  candle  and  the  stick  of  sealing-wax 
are  laid  horizontally  between  two  supports,  the  sealing-wax 
will  in  a  few  weeks  in  summer  bend  with  its  own  weight, 
while  the  candle  remains  straight.  The  candle  is  therefore 
a  soft  solid,  and  the  sealing-wax  a  very  viscous  fluid. 

What  is  required  to  alter  the  form  of  a  soft  solid  is  a 
sufficient  force,  and  this,  when  applied,  produces  its  effect 
at  once.  In  the  case  of  a  viscous  fluid  it  is  time  which  is 
required,  and  if  enough  time  is  given,  the  very  smallest 
force  will  produce  a  sensible  effect,  such  as  would  require  a 
very  large  force  if  suddenly  applied. 

Thus  a  block  of  pitch  may  be  so  hard  that  you  cannot 
make  a  dint  in  it  by  striking  it  with  your  knuckles  ;  and 
yet  it  will,  in  the  course  of  time,  flatten  itself  out  by  its 
own  weight,  and  glide  down  hill  like  a  stream  of  water. 

A  glass  fibre  was  found  by  M.  F.  Kohlrausch  1  to  be- 
come more  and  more  twisted  when  constantly  acted  on  by 
the  small  twisting  force  arising  from  the  action  of  the  earth 
on  a  little  magnet  suspended  by  the  fibre.  I  have  found  slow 

'   i  Pogg.  1863. 


304  Viscosity. 

changes  in  the  torsion  of  a  steel  wire  going  on  for  many  days 
after  it  had  received  a  slight  permanent  twist,  and  Sir  W. 
Thomson  !  has  investigated  the  viscosity  of  other  metals. 

There  are  instances  of  viscosity  among  very  hard  bodies. 
Returning  to  our  former  example,  pitch  :  we  may  mix  it  in 
various  proportions  with  tar  so  as  to  form  a  continuous 
series  of  compounds  passing  from  the  apparently  solid 
condition  of  pitch  to  the  apparently  fluid  condition  of  tar, 
which  may  be  taken  as  a  type  of  a  viscous  fluid.  By 
mixing  the  tar  with  turpentine  the  viscosity  may  be  still 
further  reduced,  and  so  we  may  form  a  series  of  fluids  of 
diminishing  viscosity  till  we  arrive  at  the  most  mobile  fluids, 
such  as  ether. 

DEFINITION    OF    THE   COEFFICIENT    OF   VISCOSITY. 

Consider  a  stratum  of  the  substance  of  thickness  c,  con 
tained  between  the  horizontal  fixed  plane  FlG>  40 

A  B  and   the  plane  c  D,  which  is  moving    c — o 

horizontally   from    c   towards   D,    with  the 

velocity  v.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  substance 
between  the  two  planes  is  also  in  motion,  the  stratum  in 
contact  with  c  D  moving  with  velocity  v,  while  the  velocity 
of  any  intermediate  stratum  is  proportional   to  its  height 
above  A  B. 

The  substance  between  the  planes  is  undergoing  shearing 
strain,  and  the  rate  at  which  this  strain  is  increasing  is  measured 
by  the  velocity  v  of  the  upper  plane,  divided  by  the  distance 

TT 

c  between  the  planes,  or  -. 

The  stress  F  is  a  shearing  stress,  and  is  measured  by  the 
horizontal  force  exerted  by  the  substance  on  unit  of  area 
of  either  of  the  planes,  and  acting  from  A  to  B  on  the  lower 
plane,  and  from  D  to  c  on  the  upper. 

The  ratio  of  this  force  to  the  rate  of  increase  of  the  shear- 

1  Proc.  Roy.  Soc.  May  18,  1865. 


Dimensions  of  Viscosity.  305 

ing  stress  is  called  the  coefficient  of  viscosity,  and  is  denoted 
by  the  symbol  p.     We  may  therefore  write  F  =  p  -. 

If  R  is  the  amount  of.  this  force  on  a  rectangular  area  of 
length  a  and  breadth  />, 


and  R  c 

^:  =  7«T 

If  v,  <7,  /',  and  <r  are  each  unity,  then  /j.  =  R. 

Definition.  —  The  viscosity  of  a  substance  is  measured  by 
the  tangential  force  on  the  unit  of  area  of  either  of  two  hori- 
zontal planes  at  the  unit  of  distance  apart,  one  of  which  is 
fixed,  while  the  other  moves  with  the  unit  of  velocity,  the 
space  between  being  filled  with  the  viscous  substance. 

The  dimensions  of  //  may  be  easily  determined.  If  R  is  the 
moving  force  which  would  generate  a  certain  velocity  v  in  the 

mass  M  in  the  time  /,  then  R  =  —  —  ,    and  it  = 


t  v  a  b 

Here  a,  b,  c  are  lines,  and  v  and  v  are  velocities,  so  that 
the  dimensions  of  /j.  are  [M  L"1  T"1],  where  M,  L,  and  T  are  the 
units  of  mass,  length,  and  time. 

When  we  wish  to  express  the  absolute  forces  called  into 
play  by  the  viscosity  of  a  substance,  we  must  use  the  ordi- 
nary unit  of  mass  (a  pound,  a  grain,  or  a  gramme)  ;  but  if  we 
wish  only  to  investigate  the  motion  of  the  viscous  substance, 
it  is  convenient  to  take  as  our  unit  of  mass  that  of  unit  of 
volume  of  the  substance  itself.  If  p  is  the  density  of  the 
substance,  or  the  mass  of  unit  of  volume,  the  viscosity  \> 
measured  in  this  kinematic  way  is  related  to  //,  its  value  by 
the  former,  or  dynamical  method,  by  the  equation  /n  =  v  />. 

The  dimensions  of  r,  the  kinematic  viscosity,  are  [L-  T"1  1. 

Investigations  of  the  value  of  viscosity  have  been  made, 
for  solids  by  Sir  W.  Thomson  ;  for  liquids  by  Poiseuille, 

X 


306  Vis  cos  itj'. 

Graham,  O.  E.  Meyer,  and  Helmholtz  ;  and  for  gases  by 
Graham,  Stokes,  O.  E.  Meyer,  and  myself. 

I  find  the  value  of  n  for  air  at  0°  Centigrade  to  be 

H  =  '0001878  (i  +  '00366$), 

the  centimetre,  gramme,  and  second  being  units. 

[Recent  observers  have  found  lower  numbers  for  the  vis- 
cosity of  air.  The  value  for  o°  C.  would  seem  to  be  about 
•000168. 

For  water  at  o°  C.,  //  =  *oidi. 

In  the  case  of  liquids  the  viscosity  diminishes  as  me  tem- 
perature rises. 

The  kinematic  measure,  r,  of  the  viscosity  is  /*,./  in  the 
case  of  water  than  in  the  case  of  air. — R.] 

In  British  measure,  using   the  foot,  the  grain,  and   the 
second,  and  Fahrenheit's  thermometer,  this  becomes 
p  —  '000179  (461  +  0). 

The  viscosity  v  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  tempera- 
ture, and  independent  of  the  pressure,  being  the  same  for  a 
pressure  of  half  an  inch  as  for  a  pressure  of  thirty  inches  of 
mercury.  The  significance  of  this  remarkable  result  will  be 
seen  when  we  come  to  the  molecular  theory  of  gases. 

The  kinematic  measure,  »-,  of  the  viscosity  is  found  by 
dividing  \i  by  the  density.  It  is  therefore  directly  propor- 
tional to  the  square  of  the  absolute  temperature,  and  in- 
versely proportional  to  the  pressure. 

The  value  of  p.  for  hydrogen  is  less  than  half  that  for 
air.  Oxygen,  on  the  ocher  hand,  has  a  viscosity  greater  than 
that  of  air.  That  of  carbonic  acid  is  less  than  that  of  air. 

It  appears,  from  the  calculations  of  Professor  Stokes, 
combined  with  the  value  of  the  viscosity  of  air  given  above, 
that  a  drop  of  water  falling  through  air  one  thousand  times 
rarer  than  itself  (which  we  may  suppose  to  be  the  case 
at  the  ordinary  height  of  a  cloud)  would  fall  about  TS0 
of  an  inch  in  a  second  if  its  diameter  were  the  thousandth 
part  of  an  inch.  If  the  diameter  of  the  drop  were  only  one 


Subsidence  of  Clouds.  307 

ten-thousandth  of  an  inch  the  rate  at  which  it  would  make 
its  way  through  the  air  would  be  a  hundred  times  smaller, 
or  half  an  inch  in  a  minute.  If  a  cloud  is  formed  of  little 
drops  of  water  of  this  size,  their  motion  through  the  air 
would  be  so  slow  that  it  would  escape  observation,  and  the 
motion  of  the  cloud,  so  far  as  it  can  be  observed,  would  be 
the  same  as  that  of  the  air  in  that  place.  In  fact,  the 
settling  down  through  the  air  of  any  very  small  particles, 
such  as  the  fine  spray  of  waves  or  waterfalls,  and  all  kinds 
of  dust  and  smoke,  is  a  very  slow  process,  and  the  time  of 
settling  down  through  a  given  distance  varies  inversely  as 
the  square  of  the  dimensions  of  the  particles,  their  density 
and  figure  being  the  same.  If,  however,  a  cloud  of  fine 
dust  contains  so  many  particles  that  the  mass  of  a  cubic 
foot  of  dusty  air  is  sensibly  greater  than  that  of  a  cubic 
foot  of  pure  air,  the  dusty  air  will  descend  in  mass  below 
the  level  of  the  pure  air  like  a  fluid  of  greater  density,  so 
that  a  room  may  have  its  lower  half,  filled  with  dusty  air 
separated  by  a  level  surface  from  the  pure  air  above. 

There  are  some  kinds  of  fogs  the  mean  density  of  which 
is  greater  than  that  of  the  purer  air  in  the  neighbourhood, 
and  these  lie  like  lakes  in  hollows,  and  pour  down  valleys 
like  streams.  On  the  other  hand,  the  mean  density  of  a 
cloud  may  be  less  than  that  of  the  surrounding  air,  and  it 
will  then  ascend. 

In  the  case  of  smoke,  both  the  air  and  the  sooty  particles 
are  heated  by  the  fire  before  they  escape  into  the  atmo- 
sphere, but,  independently  of  this  kind  of  heating,  if  the  sun 
shines  on  a  cloud  of  dust  or  smoke,  the  particles  absorb 
heat,  which  they  communicate  to  the  air  round  them,  and 
thus,  though  the  particles  themselves  remain  much  denser 
than  the  air  in  the  neighbourhood,  they  may  cause  the  cloud 
which  they  form  to  appropriate  so  much  of  the  sun's  heat 
that  it  becomes  lighter  as  a  whole  than  the  surrounding  pure 
air,  and  so  rises. 

In  the  case  of  a  cloud  of  watery  particles,  besides  this 
x  2 


308  Molecular  Theory. 

kind  of  action,  there  is  another,  depending  on  the  evapora- 
tion from  the  surface  of  the  little  drops.  The  vapour  of 
water  is  much  rarer  than  air.  and  damp  air  is  lighter  than 
dry  air  at  the  same  temperature  and  pressure.  Hence  the 
little  drops  make  the  air  of  the  cloud  damp,  and  if  the 
mean  density  of  the  cloud  is  by  this  means  made  less  than 
that  of  the  surrounding  air,  the  cloud  will  ascend. 


CHAPTER   XXII. 

ON   THE   MOLECULAR   THEORY   OF   THE   CONSTITUTION   OF 
BODIES. 

WE  have  already  shown  that  heat  is  a  form  of  energy — that 
when  a  body  is  hot  it  possesses  a  store  of  energy,  part  at 
least  of  which  can  afterwards  be  exhibited  in  the  form  of 
visible  work. 

Now  energy  is  known  to  us  in  two  forms.  One  of  these 
is  Kinetic  Energy,  the  energy  of  motion.  A  body  in  motion 
has  kinetic  energy,  which  it  must  communicate  to  some 
other  body  during  the  process  of  bringing  it  to  rest.  This 
is  the  fundamental  form  of  energy.  When  we  have  acquired 
the  notion  of  matter  in  motion,  and  know  what  is  meant  by 
the  energy  of  that  motion,  we  are  unable  to  conceive  that 
any  possible  addition  to  our  knowledge  could  explain  the 
energy  of  motion,  or  give  us  a  more  perfect  knowledge  of  it 
than  we  have  already. 

There  is  another  form  of  energy  which  a  body  may  have, 
which  depends,  not  on  its  own  state,  but  on  its  position 
with  respect  to  other  bodies.  This  is  called  Potential 
Energy.  The  leaden  weight  of  a  clock,  when  it  is  wound 
up,  has  potential  energy,  which  it  loses  as  it  descends.  It 
is  spent  in  driving  the  clock.  This  energy  depends,  not  on 
the  piece  of  lead  considered  in  itself,  but  on  the  position  of 


Is  Heat  Motion  ?  309 


the  lead  with  respect  to  another  body  —  the  earth  — 
attracts  it. 

In  a  watch,  the  mainspring,  when  wound  up,  has  poten- 
tial energy,  which  it  spends  in  driving  the  wheels  of  the 
watch.  This  energy  arises  from  the  coiling  up  of  the 
spring,  which  alters  the  relative  position  of  its  parts.  In 
both  cases,  until  the  clock  or  watch  is  set  agoing,  the 
existence  of  potential  energy,  whether  in  the  clock-weight 
or  in  the  watch-spring,  is  not  accompanied  with  any  visible 
motion.  We  must  therefore  admit  that  potential  energy  can 
exist  in  a  body  or  system  all  whose  parts  are  at  rest. 

It  is  to  be  observed,  however,  that  the  progress  of  science 
is  continually  opening  up  new  views  of  the  forms  and 
relations  of  different  kinds  of  potential  energy,  and  that 
men  of  science,  so  far  from  feeling  that  their  knowledge  of 
potential  energy  is  perfect  in  kind,  and  incapable  of  essential 
change,  are  always  endeavouring  to  explain  the  different 
forms  of  potential  energy  ;  and  if  these  explanations  are  in 
any  case  condemned,  it  is  because  they  fail  to  give  a  suffi- 
cient reason  for  the  fact,  and  not  because  the  fact  requires 
no  explanation. 

We  have  now  to  determine  to  which  of  these  forms  of 
energy  heat,  as  it  exists  in  hot  bodies,  is  to  be  referred.  Is 
a  hot  body,  like  a  coiled-up  watch-spring,  devoid  of  motion 
at  present,  but  capable  of  exciting  motion  under  proper 
conditions  ?  or  is  it  like  a  fly-wheel,  which  derives  all  its 
tremendous  power  from  the  visible  motion  with  which  it  is 
animated  ? 

It  is  manifest  that  a  body  may  be  hot  without  any  motion 
being  visible,  either  of  the  body  as  a  whole,  or  of  its  parts 
relatively  to  each  other.  If,  therefore,  the  body  is  hot 
in  virtue  of  motion,  the  motion  must  be  carried  on  by  parts 
of  the  body  too  minute  to  be  seen  separately,  and  within 
limits  so  narrow  that  we  cannot  detect  the  absence  of  any 
part  from  its  original  place. 
The  evidence  for  a  state  of  motion,  the  velocity  of  which 


3 TO  Molecular  TJieory. 

must,  far  surpass  that  of  a  railway  train,  existing  in  bodies 
which  we  can  place  under  the  strongest  microscope,  and  in 
which  we  can  detect  nothing  but  the  most  perfect  repose, 
must  be  of  a  very  cogent  nature  before  we  can  admit  that 
heat  is  essentially  motion. 

Let  us  therefore  consider  the  alternative  hypothesis — that 
the  energy  of  a  hot  body  is  potential  energy,  or,  in  other 
words,  that  the  hot  body  is  in  a  state  of  rest,  but  that  this 
state  of  rest  depends  on  the  antagonism  of  forces  which 
are  in  equilibrium  as  long  as  all  surrounding  bodies  are 
of  the  same  temperature,  but  which  as  soon  as  this  equi- 
librium is  destroyed  are  capable  of  setting  bodies  in 
motion.  With  respect  to  a  theory  of  this  kind,  it  is  to  be 
observed  that  potential  energy  depends  essentially  on  the 
relative  position  of  the  parts  of  the  system  in  which  it  exists, 
and  that  potential  energy  cannot  be  transformed  in  any 
way  without  some  change  of  the  relative  position  of  these 
parts.  In  every  transformation  of  potential  energy,  therefore, 
motion  of  some  kind  is  involved. 

Now  we  know  that  whenever  one  body  of  a  system  is 
hotter  than  another,  heat  is  transferred  from  the  hotter  to 
the  colder  body,  either  by  conduction  or  by  radiation.  Let 
us  suppose  that  the  transfer  takes  place  by  radiation. 
Whatever  theory  we  adopt  about  the  kind  of  motion  which 
constitutes  radiation,  it  is  manifest  that  radiation  consists  of 
motion  of  some  kind,  either  the  projection  of  the  particles 
of  a  substance  called  caloric  across  the  intervening  space,  or 
a  wave-like  motion  propagated  through  a  medium  filling  that 
space.  In  either  case,  during  the  interval  between  the  time 
when  the  heat  leaves  the  hot  body  and  the  time  when  it 
reaches  the  cold  body,  its  energy  exists  in  the  intervening 
space  in  the  form  of  the  motion  of  matter. 

Hence,  whether  we  consider  the  radiation  of  heat  as 
effected  by  the  projection  of  material  caloric,  or  by  the 
undulations  of  an  intervening  medium,  the  outer  surface  of 
a  hot  body  must  be  in  a  state  of  motion,  provided  any  cold 


Molecular  Motion.  3 1 1 

body  is  in  its  neighbourhood  to  receive  the  radiations  »vhich 
it  emits.  But  we  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  pre- 
sence of  a  cold  body  is  essential  to  the  radiation  of  heat  by 
a  hot  one.  Whatever  be  the  mode  in  which  the  hot  body 
shoots  forth  its  heat,  it  must  depend  on  the  state  of  the  hot 
body  alone,  and  not  on  the  existence  of  a  cold  body  at  a 
distance,  so  that  even  if  all  the  bodies  in  a  closed  region 
were  equally  hot,  every  one  of  them  would  be  radiating 
neat ;  and  the  reason  why  each  body  remains  of  the  same 
temperature  is,  that  it  receives  from  the  other  bodies  exactly 
as  much  heat  as  it  emits.  This,  in  fact,  is  the  foundation  of 
Prevost's  Theory  of  Exchanges.  \Ve  must  therefore  admit 
that  at  every  part  of  the  surface  of  a  hot  body  there  is  a 
radiation  of  heat,  and  therefore  a  state  of  motion  of  the 
superficial  parts  of  the  body.  Now  this  motion  is  certainly 
invisible  to  us  by  any  direct  mode  of  observation,  and 
therefore  the  mere  fact  of  a  body  appearing  to  be  at  rest 
cannot  be  taken  as  a  demonstration  that  its  parts  may 
not  be  in  a  state  of  motion. 

Hence  part,  at  least,  of  the  energy  of  a  hot  body  must  be 
energy  arising  from  the  motion  of  its  parts,  or  kinetic  energy. 

The  conclusion  at  which  we  shall  arrive,  that  a  very 
considerable  part  of  the  energy  of  a  hot  body  is  in  the  form 
of  motion,  will  become  more  eviuent  when  we  consider  the 
thermal  energy  of  gases. 

Every  hot  body,  therefore,  is  in  motion.  We  have  next 
to  enquire  into  the  nature  of  this  motion.  It  is  evidently 
iiOt  a  motion  of  the  whole  body  in  one  direction,  for  how- 
ever small  we  make  the  body  by  mechanical  processes,  each 
visible  particle  remains  apparently  in  the  same  place,  how- 
ever hot  it  is.  The  motion  which  we  call  heat  must  there- 
fore be  a  motion  of  parts  too  small  to  be  observed  separately  ; 
the  motions  of  different  parts  at  the  same  instant  must  be 
in  different  directions ;  and  the  motion  of  any  one  part  must, 
at  least  in  solid  bodies,  be  such  that,  however  fast  it  moves, 
it  never  reaches  a  sensible  distance  from  the  point  from 
which  it  started. 


312  Molecular  Theory. 

We  have  now  arrived  at  the  conception  of  a  body  as 
consisting  of  a  great  many  small  parts,  each  of  which  is  in 
motion.  We  shall  call  any  one  of  these  parts  a  molecule  of 
the  substance.  A  molecule  may  therefore  be  defined  as  a 
small  mass  of  matter  the  parts  of  which  do  not  part  com- 
pany during  the  excursions  which  the  molecule  makes  when 
the  body  to  which  it  belongs  is  hot. 

The  doctrine  that  visible  bodies  consist  of  a  determinate 
number  of  molecules  is  called  the  molecular  theory  of  matter. 
The  opposite  doctrine  is  that,  however  small  the  parts  may 
)>e  into  which  we  divide  a  body,  each  part  retains  all  the 
properties  of  the  substance.  This  is  the  theory  of  the 
infinite  divisibility  of  bodies.  We  do  not  assert  that  there 
is  an  absolute  limit  to  the  divisibility  of  matter  :  what  \ve 
assert  is,  that  after  we  have  divided  a  body  into  a  certain 
finite  number  of  constituent  parts  called  molecules,  then 
any  further  division  of  these  molecules  will  deprive  them 
of  the  properties  which  give  rise  to  the  phenomena  ob- 
served in  the  substance. 

The  opinion  that  the  observed  properties  of  visible  bodies 
apparently  at  rest  are  due  to  the  action  of  invisible  mole- 
cules in  rapid  motion  is  to  be  found  in  Lucretius. 

Daniel  Bernoulli  was  the  first  to  suggest  that  the  pressure 
of  air  is  due  to  the  impact  of  its  particles  on  the  sides  of 
the  vessel  containing  it ;  but  he  made  very  little  progress  in 
the  theory  which  he  suggested. 

Lesage  and  Prevost  of  Geneva,  and  aftenvards  Herapath 
in  his  '  Mathematical  Physics/  made  several  important  appli- 
cations of  the  theory. 

Dr.  Joule  in  1848  explained  the  pressure  of  gases  by  the 
impact  of  their  molecules,  and  calculated  the  velocity  which 
they  must  have  to  produce  the  observed  pressure. 

Kronig  also  directed  attention  to  this  explanation  of  the 
phenomena  of  gases. 

It  is  to  Professor  Clausius,  however,  that  we  owe  the  recent 
development  of  the  dynamical  theory  of  gases.  Since  he 


Solids,  Fluids,  and  Gases.  313 

took  up  the  subject  a  great  advance  has  been  made  by 
many  enquirers.  I  shall  now  endeavour  to  give  a  sketch  of 
the  present  state  of  the  theory. 

All  bodies  consist  of  a  finite  number  of  small  parts  called 
molecules.  Every  molecule  consists  of  a  definite  quantity 
of  matter,  which  is  exactly  the  same  for  all  the  molecules  of 
the  same  substance.  The  mode  in  which  the  molecule  is 
bound  together  is  also  the  same  for  all  molecules  of  the 
same  substance.  A  molecule  may  consist  of  several  distinct 
portions  of  matter  held  together  by  chemical  bonds,  and 
may  be  set  in  vibration,  rotation,  or  any  other  kind  of 
relative  motion,  but  so  long  as  the  different  portions  do 
not  part  company,  but  travel  together  in  the  excursions 
made  by  the  molecule,  our  theory  calls  the  whole  connected 
mass  a  single  molecule. 

The  molecules  of  all  bodies  are  in  a  state  of  continual 
agitation.  The  hotter  a  body  is,  the  more  violently  are  its 
molecules  agitated.  In  solid  bodies,  a  molecule,  though  in 
continual  motion,  never  gets  beyond  a  certain  very  small 
distance  from  its  original  position  in  the  body.  The  path 
which  it  describes  is  confined  within  a  very  small  region 
of  space. 

In  fluids,  on  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  such  restriction 
to  the  excursions  of  a  molecule.  It  is  true  that  the  mole- 
cule generally  can  travel  but  a  very  small  distance  before 
its  path  is  disturbed  by  an  encounter  with  some  other  mole- 
cule ;  but  after  this  encounter  there  is  nothing  which  deter- 
mines the  molecule  rather  to  return  towards  the  place  from 
whence  it  came  than  to  push  its  way  into  new  regions. 
Hence  in  fluids  the  path  of  a  molecule  is  not  confined 
within  a  limited  region,  as  in  the  case  of  solids,  but  may 
penetrate  to  any  part  of  the  space  occupied  by  the  fluid. 

The  actual  phenomena  of  diffusion  both  in  liquids  and 
in  gases  furnish  the  strongest  evidence  that  these  bodies 
consist  of  molecules  in  a  state  of  continual  agitation. 

But    when  we  apply   the  methods  of  dynamics    to    the 


3  r  4  Mokculat    Theory. 

investigation  of  the  properties  of  a  system  consisting  of  a 
great  number  of  small  bodies  in  motion  the  resemblance 
of  such  a  system  to  a  gaseous  body  becomes  still  more 
apparent. 

I  shall  endeavour  to  give  some  account  of  what  is  known 
of  such  a  system,  avoiding  all  unnecessary  mathematical 
calculations. 

ON   THE    KINETIC   THEORY    OF    OASES. 

A  gaseous  body  is  supposed  to  consist  of  a  great  number 
of  molecules  moving  with  great  velocity.  During  the  greater 
part  of  their  course  these  molecules  are  not  acted  on  by  any 
sensible  force,  and  therefore  move  in  straight  lines  with 
uniform  velocity.  When  two  molecules  come  within  a 
certain  distance  of  each  other,  a  mutual  action  takes  place 
between  them,  which  may  be  compared  to  the  collision  of 
two  billiard  balls.  Each  molecule  has  its  course  changed, 
and  starts  on  a  new  path.  I  have  concluded  from  some 
experiments  of  my  own  that  the  collision  between  two  hard 
spherical  balls  is  not  an  accurate  representation  of  what 
takes  place  during  the  encounter  of  two  molecules.  A 
better  representation  of  such  an  encounter  will  be  obtained 
by  supposing  the  molecules  to  act  on  one  another  in  a  more 
gradual  manner,  so  that  the  action  between  them  goes  on  for 
a  finite  time,  during  which  the  centres  of  the  molecules  first 
approach  each  other  and  then  separate. 

We  shall  refer  to  this  mutual  action  as  an  Encounter 
between  two  molecules,  and  we  shall  call  the  course  of  a 
molecule  between  one  encounter  and  another  the  Free  Path 
of  the  molecule.  In  ordinary  gases  the  free  motion  of  a 
molecule  takes  up  much  more  time  than  that  occupied  by  an 
encounter.  As  the  density  of  the  gas  increases,  the  free  path 
diminishes,  and  in  liquids  no  part  of  the  course  of  a  molecule 
can  be  spoken  of  as  its  free  path. 

In  an  encounter  between  two  molecules  we  know  that, 
since  the  force  of  the  impact  acts  between  the  two  bodies, 


Statistical  Method.  3  \  5 

ihe  motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the  two  molecules 
remains  the  same  after  the  encounter  as  it  was  before.  We 
also  know  by  the  principle  of  the  conservation  of  energy  that 
the  velocity  of  each  molecule  relatively  to  the  centre  of 
gravity  remains  the  same  in  magnitude,  and  is  only  changed 
in  direction. 

Let  us  next  suppose  a  number  of  molecules  in  motion 
contained  in  a  vessel  whose  sides  arc  such  that  if  any 
energy  is  communicated  to  the  vessel  by  the  encounters  of 
molecules  against  its  sides,  the  vessel  communicates  as 
much  energy  to  other  molecules  during  their  encounters 
with  it,  so  as  to  preserve  the  total  energy  of  the  enclosed 
system.  The  first  thing  we  must  notice  about  this  moving 
system  is  that  even  if  all  the  molecules  have  the  same  velo- 
city originally,  their  encounters  will  produce  an  inequality 
of  velocity,  and  that  this  distribution  of  velocity  will  go  on 
continually.  Every  molecule  will  then  change  both  its 
direction  and  its  velocity  at  every  encounter;  and,  as  we 
are  not  supposed  to  keep  a  record  of  the  exact  particulars 
of  every  encounter,  these  changes  of  motion  must  appear  to 
us  very  irregular  if  we  follow  the  course  of  a  single  molecule. 
If,  however,  we  adopt  a  statistical  view  of  the  system,  and 
distribute  the  molecules  into  groups,  according  to  the 
velocity  with  which  at  a  given  instant  they  happen  to  be 
moving,  we  shall  observe  a  regularity  of  a  new  kind  in  the 
proportions  of  the  whole  number  of  molecules  which  fall  into 
each  of  these  groups. 

And  here  I  wish  to  point  out  that,  in  adopting  this 
statistical  method  of  considering  the  average  number  of 
groups  of  molecules  selected  according  to  their  velocities,  we 
have  abandoned  the  strict  kinetic  method  of  tracing  the 
exact  circumstances  of  each  individual  molecule  in  all  its 
encounters.  It  is  therefore  possible  that  we  may  arrive  at 
results  which,  though  they  fairly  represent  the  facts  as  long 
as  we  are  supposed  to  deal  with  a  gas  in  mass,  would  cease 
to  be  applicable  if  our  faculties  and  instruments  were  so 


316  Molecular  Tlicory. 

sharpened  that  we  could  detect  and  lay  hold  of  each  mole- 
cule and  trace  it  through  all  its  course. 

For  the  same  reason,  a  theory  of  the  effects  of  education 
deduced  from  a  study  of  the  returns  of  registrars,  in  which  no 
names  of  individuals  are  given,  might  be  found  not  to  be 
applicable  to  the  experience  of  a  schoolmaster  who  is  able 
to  trace  the  progress  of  each  individual  pupil. 

The  distribution  of  the  molecules  according  to  their  veloci- 
ties is  found  to  be  of  exactly  the  same  mathematical  form  as 
the  distribution  of  observations  according  to  the  magnitude  oi 
their  errors,  as  described  in  the  theory  of  errors  of  observation. 
The  distribution  of  bullet-holes  in  a  target  according  to  their 
distances  from  the  point  aimed  at  is  found  to  be  of  the  same 
form,  provided  a  great  many  shots  are  fired  by  persons  of 
the  same  degree  of  skill. 

We  have  already  met  with  the  same  form  in  the  case  of 
heat  diffused  from  a  hot  stratum  by  conduction.  VVhenever 
in  physical  phenomena  some  cause  exists  over  which  we 
have  no  control,  and  which  produces  a  scattering  of  the 
particles  of  matter,  a  deviation  of  observations  from  the  truth, 
or  a  diffusion  of  velocity  or  of  heat,  mathematical  expressions 
of  this  exponential  form  are  sure  to  make  their  appearance. 

It  appears  then  that  of  the  molecules  composing  the 
system  some  are  moving  very  slowly,  a  very  few  are  moving 
with  enormous  velocities,  and  the  greater  number  with  inter- 
mediate velocities.  To  compare  one  such  system  with 
another,  the  best  method  is  to  take  the  mean  of  the  squares 
of  all  the  velocities.  This  quantity  is  called  the  Mean  Square 
of  the  velocity.  The  square  root  of  this  quantity  is  called 
the  Velocity  of  Mean  Square. 

DISTRIBUTION1    QF    KINETIC    ENERGY    BETWEEN   TWO 
DIFFERENT   SETS    OF    MOLECULES. 

If  two  sets  of  molecules  whose  mass  is  different  are  in 
motion  in  the  same  vessel,  they  will  by  their  encounters 


Internal  Kinetic  Energy.  317 

exchange  energy  with  each  other  till  the  average  kinetic 
energy  of  a  single  molecule  of  either  set  is  the  same.  This 
follows  from  the  same  investigation  which  determines  the 
law  of  distribution  of  velocities  in  a  single  set  of  molecules. 

Hence  if  the  mass  of  a  molecule  of  one  kind  is  MJ,  and 
that  of  a  molecule  of  the  other  kind  is  M2,  and  if  their  average 
velocities  of  agitation  are  vl  and  v.2,  then 

M,V,2   =  M2V.22 (l) 

The  quantity  \  M  v2  is  called  the  average  kinetic  energy 
of  agitation  of  a  single  molecule.  We  shall  return  to  this 
result  when  we  come  to  Gay-Lussac's  Law  of  the  Volumes 
of  Gases. 

INTERNAL    KINETIC    ENEKGV    OF    A    MOLECULE. 

If  a  molecule  were  a  mathematical  point  endowed  with 
inertia  and  with  attractive  and  repulsive  forces,  the  only 
kinetic  energy  it  could  possess  is  that  of  translation  as  a 
whole.  But  if  it  be  a  body  having  parts  and  magnitude, 
these  parts  may  have  motions  of  rotation  or  of  vibration 
relative  to  each  other,  independent  of  the  motion  of  the 
centre  of  gravity  of  the  molecule.  We  must  therefore  admit 
that  part  of  the  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule  may  depend  on 
the  relative  motions  of  its  parts.  -We  call  this  the  Internal 
energy,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  energy  due  to  the  trans- 
lation of  the  molecule  as  a  whole.  The  ratio  of  the  internal 
energy  to  the  energy  of  agitation  may  be  different  in 
different  gases. 

DEFINITION    OF    THE    VELOCITY    OF    A    GAS. 

It  is  evident  that  if  a  gas  consists  of  a  great  number  of 
molecules  moving  about  in  all  directions  we  cannot  identify 
the  velocity  of  any  one  of  these  molecules  with  what  we  are 
accustomed  to  consider  as  the  velocity  of  the  gas  itself. 
Let  us  consider  the  case  of  a  gas  which  has  remained  in  a 
fixed  vessel  for  a  sufficient  time  to  arrive  at  the  normal 


3 1 8  Molecular  Theory. 

distribution  of  velocities.  This  gas,  according  to  the  ordi- 
nary notions,  is  at  rest,  though  the  molecules  of  which  it  is 
composed  may  be  flying  about  in  all  directions. 

Now  consider  any  plane  area  of  an  imaginary  surface 
described  within  the  vessel.  This  surface  does  not  interfere 
with  the  motion  of  the  molecules.  Some  molecules  pass 
through  the  surface  in  one  direction,  and  others  in  the 
opposite  direction  ;  but  it  is  evident,  since  the  gas  does  not 
tend  to  accumulate  on  one  side  rather  than  on  the  other, 
that  exactly  the  same  number  of  molecules  pass  in  the  one 
direction  as  in  the  other.  If,  therefore,  a  gas  is  at  rest,  as 
many  molecules  pass  through  a  fixed  surface  in  the  one 
direction  as  in  the  other  in  the  same  time. 

Jt  is  evident  that  if  the  vessel,  instead  of  being  at  rest,  had 
been  in  a  state  of  uniform  motion,  an  equal  number  of  mole- 
cules would  pass  in  both  directions  through  any  surface 
fixed  with  respect  to  the  vessel.  Hence  we  find  that  if  a 
gas  is  in  motion,  and  if  the  velocity  of  a  surface  coincides  in 
direction  and  magnitude  with  that  of  the  gas,  the  same 
number  of  molecules  will  pass  through  that  surface  in  the 
positive  direction  as  in  the  negative. 

This  leads  to  the  following  definition  of  the  velocity  of  a 
gas  : 

If  we  determine  the  motion  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  all 
the  molecules  within  a  very  small  region  surrounding  a  point 
in  a  gas,  then  the  velocity  of  the  gas  within  that  region  is 
defined  as  the  velocity  of  the -centre  of  gravity  of  all  the  mole- 
cules within  that  region. 

This  is  what  is  meant  by  the  motion  of  a  gas  in  common 
language.  Besides  this  motion,  there  are  two  other  kinds  of 
motion  considered  in  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  The  first  is 
*he  motion  of  agitation  of  the  molecules.  This  is  the  hitherto 
invisible  motion  of  the  molecule  considered  as  a  whole. 
Its  course  consists  of  broken  portions,  called  free  paths, 
interrupted  by  the  encounters  between  different  molecules. 

The   second    is    the   internal   motion   of  each  molecule, 


Pressure  of  a  Gas.  319 

consisting  partly  of  rotation  and  partly  of  vibrations  among 
the  component  parts  of  the  molecule. 

The  velocity  of  the  centre  of  gravity  of  a  molecule  is  the 
resultant  of  the  velocity  of  the  gas  and  the  velocity  of  agita- 
tion of  the  individual  molecule  at  the  given  instant.  The 
velocity  of  a  constituent  part  of  a  molecule  is  the  resultant 
of  the  velocity  of  its  centre  of  gravity  and  the  velocity  of 
the  constituent  part  relatively  to  the  centre  of  gravity  of  the 
molecule. 

THEORY    OF    THE    PRESSURE    OF    A    GAS. 

Let  us  consider  two  portions  of  a  gas  separated  by  a  plane 
surface  which  moves  with  the  same  velocity  as 
J' 4I'        the  gas.     We  have  seen  that  in  this  case  the 
number  of  molecules    which  pass   through  the 
plane  in  opposite  directions  is  the  same.  • 

Each  molecule  in  crossing  the  plane  from 
the  region  A  to  the  region  B  enters  the  second 
region  in  precisely  the  same  state  as  it  leaves  the  first.  It 
therefore  carries  over  into  the  region  B,  not  only  its  mass, 
but  its  momentum  and  its  kinetic  energy.  Hence,  if  we 
consider  the  quantity  of  momentum  in  a  given  direction 
existing  at  any  instant  in  the  particles  in  the  region  B,  this 
quantity  will  be  altered  whenever  a  molecule  crosses  the 
boundary,  carrying  its  momentum  along  with  it. 

Now  let  us  consider  all  the  molecules  whose  velocity 
differs  by  less  than  a  certain  quantity,  c,  from  a  given  velocity 
the  components  of  which  are  u  in  the  direction  perpen- 
dicular to  the  plane  from  A  towards  B,  and  v  and  w  in  two 
other  directions  parallel  to  the  plane.  Let  there  be  N 
molecules  whose  velocity  is  within  these  limits  in  every  unit 
of  volume,  and  let  the  mass  of  each  of  these  be  M. 

Then  the  number  of  these  molecules  which  will  cross  unit 
of  area  of  the  plane  from  A  to  B  in  unit  of  time  is 

N  U 


320  Molecular  Theory. 

The  momentum  of  each  of  these  molecules  resolved  in 
the  direction  A  B  is  M  u. 

Hence  the  momentum  in  this  direction  communicated  to 
the  region  B  in  unit  of  time  is 

M  N  it"*. 

Since  this  bombardment  of  the  region  B  does  not  pro- 
duce motion  of  the  gas,  a  pressure  must  be  exerted  on 
the  gas  by  the  sides  of  the  vessel,  and  the  amount  of  this 
pressure  for  every  unit  of  area  must  be  M  N  u-. 

The  region  A  loses  positive  momentum  at  the  same  rate, 
and  in  order  to  preserve  equilibrium  there  must  be  a  pressure 
equal  to  M  N  u2  on  every  unit  of  area  of  the  surface  of  the 
region  A. 

Hitherto  we  have  considered  only  one  group  of  molecules, 
whose  velocities  lie  between  given  limits.  In  every  such 
group  that  which  determines  the  pressure  in  the  direction  A  B 
(»n  the  surface  separating  A  from  B  is  a  quantity  of  the  form 
M  N  7/2,  where  N  is  the  number  of  molecules  in  the  group,  and 
u  is  the  velocity  of  each  molecule  resolved  in  the  direction 
A  B.  The  other  components  of  the  velocity  do  not  influence 
the  pressure  in  this  direction. 

To  find  the  whole  pressure,  we  must  find  the  sum  of  all 
such  expressions  as  M  N  u2  for  all  the  groups  of  molecules 
in  the  system.  We  may  write  this  result  /  =  M  N  u2,  where 
N  now  signifies  the  total  number  of  molecules  in  unit  of 
volume,  and  it*  denotes  the  mean  value  of  11*  for  all  these 
molecules.  Now  if  v2  is  the  square  of  the  velocity  without 
regard  to  direction,  v2  =,u2  +  y*  -\-  w-t  where  u  v  w  are  the 
components  in  three  directions  at  right  angles.  Hence  if 
&2,  z'2,  and  w2  denote  the  mean  square  of  these  components, 
and  v2  the  mean  square  of  the  resultant,  v2  =  u"2  +  v2  +  w1. 
When,  as  in  every  gas  at  rest,  the  pressure  is  equal  in  all 
directions,  u2  =  v*  =  ?£/2,  and  therefore  v2  =  3  w2. 

Hence  the  pressure  of  a  gas  is 

/  =      MNV2 (2) 


Velocity  of  Molecular  Motion.  3 1  \ 

where  M  is  the  mass  of  each  molecule,  N  is  the  number  of 
molecules  in  unit  of  volume  and  v  is  the  mean  square  of 
the  velocity. 

In  this  expression  there  are  two  quantities  which  have 
never  been  directly  measured — the  mass  of  a  single  molecule, 
and  the  number  of  molecules  in  unit  of  volume.  But  we 
have  here  to  do  with  the  product  of  these  quantities,  which 
is  evidently  the  mass  of  the  substance  in  unit  of  volume,  or  in 
other  words,  its  density.  Hence  we  may  write  the  expression 

/  =  ipv* .     (3) 

where  p  is  the  density  of  the  gas. 

It  is  easy  from  this  expression  to  determine,  as  was  first 
done  by  Joule,  the  mean  square  of  the  velocity  of  the 
molecules  of  a  gas,  for 

v*  =  3f (4) 

where  /  is  the  pressure,  and  p  the  density,  which  must  of 
course  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the  same  fundamental  units. 
For  instance,  under  the  atmospheric  pressure  of  2116-4 
pounds  weight  on  the  square  foot,  and  at  the  temperature  of 
melting  ice,  the  density  of  hydrogen  is  0*005592  pounds  in 

a  cubic  foot.    Hence  •£  =  378470  in  gravitation  units,  and 

P 
if  the  intensity  of  gravity  where  this  relation  was  observed 

was  32*2,  we  have  v2  =  36560000,0^  taking  the  square  root 
of  this  quantity,  v  =  6046  feet  per  second, 

This  is  the  velocity  of  mean  square  for  the  molecules  of 
hydrogen  at  32°  F.  and  at  the  atmospheric  pressure. 

LAW    OF    BOYLE. 

Two  bodies  are  said  to  be  of  the  same  temperature 
when  there  is  no  more  tendency  for  heat  to  pass  from  the 
first  to  the  second  than  in  the  reverse  direction.  In  the 
kinetic  theory  of  heat,  as  we  have  seen,  this  thermal  equili- 

Y 


322  Molecular  Theory. 

brium  is  established  when  there  is  a  certain  relation  between 
the  velocities  of  agitation  of  the  molecules  of  the  two  bodies. 
Hence  the  temperature  of  a  gas  must  depend  on  the  velocity 
of  agitation  of  its^molecules,  and  this  velocity  must  be  the 
same  at  the  same  temperature,  whatever  be  the  density. 

In  the  expression  p  =  £  p  v2,  the  quantity  v2  depends 
only  on  the  temperature  as  long  as  the  gas  remains  the 
same.  Hence  when  the  density  p  varies,  the  pressure  / 
must  vary  in  the  same  proportion.  This  is  Boyle's  law, 
which  is  now  raised  from  the  rank  of  an  experimental  fact 
to  that  of  a  deduction  from  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases. 

If  v  denotes  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass,  we  may  write  this 
expression 

pv  =  \V (5) 

Now/  v  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature,  as 
measured  by  a  thermometer,  of  the  particular  gas  under 
consideration.  Hence  v2,  the  mean  square  of  the  velocity  of 
agitation,  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature  mea- 
sured in  this  way. 

[In  the  preceding  calculation  of  the  pressure  of  a  gas 
it  is  assumed  that  the  time  during  which  the  particles 
are  subject  to  one  another's  influence  is  negligeable  in  com- 
parison with  the  time  during  which  they  are  free.  By  means 
of  the  equation  of  virial,  established  by  Clausius,  it  is  possible 
greatly  to  extend  the  generality  of  the  investigation. 

When  an  attraction  or  repulsion  exists  between  two  points, 
half  the  product  of  the  stress  into  the  distance  between  the 
two  points  is  called  the  Virial  of  the  stress,  and  is  reckoned 
positive  when  the  stress  is  an  attraction,  and  negative  when 
it  is  a  repulsion.  The  virial  of  a  system  is  the  sum  of  the 
virial  of  the  stresses  which  exist  in  it. 

As  applied  to  a  system  of  moving  particles,  the  equation 
may  be  written 

%%  m  v2  =  $  /  v  4-  iS  2  (R  r). 

The  left-hand  member  denotes  the  kinetic  energy. 


Virial.  323 

On  the  right  hand,  in  the  first  term,  p  is  the  external 
pressure  on  unit  of  area,  and  v  is  the  volume  of  the  vessel. 

The  second  term  represents  the  virial  arising  from  the 
action  between  every  pair  of  particles.  R  is  the  attraction 
between  the  particles,  and  r  the  distance  between  them, 
The  double  sign  of  summation  is  used  because  every  pair  o/ 
points  must  be  taken  into  account,  those  between  which 
there  is  no  stress  contributing,  of  course,  nothing  to  the 
virial. 

A  general  idea  of  the  manner  in  which  virial  acts  in  oppo- 
sition to  kinetic  energy  may  be  obtained  from  the  very 
simple  case  of  two  equal  masses  m  revolving  in  circular 
paths  about  their  centre  of  gravity.  If  p  be  the  radius 
of  the  circular  path,  r  =  2  p,  \  2,  2  (R  r)  =  R  p,  ^  3  in  v2 
=  m  v2,  so  that  the  equation  expresses  the  ordinary  law  of 
centrifugal  force, 

m  v2/,o  =  R. 

In  gases  the  virial  is  very  small  compared  with  the  kinetic 
energy.  Hence,  if  the  kinetic  energy  is  constant,  the  pro- 
duct of  the  pressure  and  the  volume  remains  constant.  This 
is  ''Ae  case  for  a  gas  at  constant  temperature. 

In  liquids  and  in  highly  compressed  gas  the  virial  becomes 
important,  and  if  we  assume  that  the  temperature  is  still 
measured  by  the  mean  kinetic  energy  of  a  molecule,  we 
obtain  the  means  of  determining  it  by  observing  the  devia- 
tion of  the  product  of  the  pressure  and  volume  from  the 
constant  value  given  by  Boyle's  law. 

It  appears  by  Dr.  Andrews'  experiments  that  when  the 
volume  of  carbonic  acid  is  diminished,  the  temperature 
remaining  constant,  the  product  of  the  volume  and  pressure 
at  first  diminishes,  the  rate  of  diminution  becoming  more  and 
more  rapid  as  the  density  increases.  Now,  the  virial  depends 
upon  the  number  of  pairs  of  molecules  which  are  at  a  given 
;nstant  acting  upon  one  another,  and  this  number  in  unit 
of  volume  is  proportional  to  the  square  of  the  density. 

Y  2 


324  Molecular  Theory. 

Hence  the  part  of  the  pressure  depending  on  the  virial 
increases  as  the  square  of  the  density,  and  since  in  the  case 
of  carbonic  acid  it  diminishes  the  pressure,  it  must  be  of 
the  positive  sign,  that  is,  it  must  arise  from  attraction  between 
the  molecules. 

But  if  the  volume  is  still  further  diminished,  at  a  certain 
point  liquefaction  begins,  and  from  this  point  till  the  gas  is 
all  liquefied  no  increase  of  pressure  takes  place.  As  soon, 
however,  as  the  whole  substance  is  in  the  liquid  condition, 
any  further  diminution  of  volume  produces  a  great  rise  of 
pressure,  so  that  the  product  of  pressure  and  volume  in- 
creases rapidly.  This  indicates  negative  virial,  and  shows 
that  the  molecules  are  now  acting  upon  each  other  by 
repulsion. 

This  is  what  takes  place  in  carbonic  acid  below  the  tem- 
perature of  30-9°  C.  Above  that  temperature  there  is  first 
a  positive  and  then  a  negative  virial,  but  no  sudden  lique- 
faction. Similar  phenomena  occur  in  all  the  liquefiable 
gases. 

We  have  thus  evidence  that  the  molecules  of  gases  attract 
each  other  at  a  certain  small  distance,  but  when  they  are 
brought  still  nearer  they  repel  each  other.  This  is  quite  in 
accordance  with  Boscovttch's  theory  of  atoms  as  massive 
centres  of  force,  the  force  being  a  function  of  the  distance, 
and  changing  from  attractive  to  repulsive,  and  back  again 
several  times,  as  the  distance  diminishes.  If  we  suppose 
that  when  the  force  begins  to  be  repulsive  it  increases  very 
rapidly  as  the  distance  diminishes,  so  as  to  become  enor- 
mous if  the  distance  is  less  by  a  very  small  quantity  than 
that  at  which  the  force  first  begins  to  lie  repulsive,  the 
phenomena  will  be  precisely  the  same  as  those  of  smooth 
elastic  spheres.1 

Van  der  Waals,  to  whom  we  owe  these  applications,  has 
shown,  further,  how  to  take  into  account  the  action  of  mutual 
forces  such  as  those  treated  by  Laplace  in  his  theory  of 
1  .Maxwell,  Nature,  vol.  x.  p.  477,  1874. 


Law  of  Gay-Lussac.  325 

capillarity.  The  range  of  these  forces  is  supposed  to  be 
very  small  in  comparison  with  the  dimensions  of  ordinary 
bodies,  but  large  in  comparison  with  the  molecular  dis- 
tances. The  effect  of  such  forces  in  the  virial  equation  is 
to  cause  the  addition  to  p,  the  pressure  exercised  by  the 
walls  of  the  containing  vessel,  of  Laplace's  intrinsic  pressure 
K,  which  prevails  in  the  interior  of  the  liquid  in  consequence 
of  these  forces.— R.] 

LAW    OF   GAY-LUSSAC. 

Let  us  next  consider  two  different  gases  in  thermal  equi- 
librium. We  have  already  stated  that  if  M[  M2  are  the 
masses  of  individual  molecules  of  these  gases,  and  vl  v2 
their  respective  velocities  of  agitation,_  it  is  necessary  for 
thermal  equilibrium  that  M,  v,2  =  M2  v.22  by  equation  (i). 

If  the  pressures  of  these  gases  are  /,  and  /2,  and  the 
number  of  molecules  in  unit  of  volume  NI  and  N2,  then,  by 
equation  (2), 

p\~^  M,  N!  v,2  and  A  =  i  M2  N2  V22- 

If  the  pressures  of  the  two  gases  are  equal, 
M,  N!  Vj2  =  M2  N2  v22. 

If  their  temperatures  are  equal, 

MI  V  =  M2  v22. 

Dividing  the  terms  of  the  first  of  these  equations  by  those 
of  the  second,  we  find 

N]  =  N2 (6) 

or  when  two  gases  are  at  the  same  pressure  and  tempera- 
ture, the  number  of  molecules  in  unit  of  volume  is  the  same  in 
both  gases. 

If  we  put  p,  =  M!  N,  and  p2  =  M2  N2  for  the  densities  of 
the  two  gases,  then,  since  Nt  =  N2,  we  get 

/j;    :  p2    -    M!   :  M2 (7) 


326  Molecular  Theory. 

or  the  densities  of  two  gases  at  the  same  temperature  and 
pressure  are  proportional  to  the  masses  of  their  individual 
molecules. 

These  two  equivalent  propositions  are  the  expression  of 
a  very  important  law  established  by  Gay-Lussac,  that  the 
densities  of  gases  are  proportional  to  their  molecular 
weights. 

[In  a  subsequent  publication  the  author  recognised  the 
insufficiency  of  this  proof.  'If  the  system  is  a  gas  or  a 
mixture  of  gases  not  acted  on  by  external  forces,  the  theorem 
that  the  average  kinetic  energy  for  a  single  molecule  is 
the  same  for  molecules  of  different  gases  is  not  sufficient 
to  establish  the  condition  of  equilibrium  of  temperature 
'between  gases  of  different  kinds,  such  as  oxygen  and 
nitrogen,  because  when  the  gases  are  mixed  we  have  no 
means  of  ascertaining  the  temperature  of  the  oxygen  and 
of  the  nitrogen  separately.  We  can  only  ascertain  the 
temperature  of  the  mixture  by  putting  a  thermometer 
into  it.' ' 

The  law  of  the  equality  of  kinetic  energies  was  stated  by 
Waterston  in  a  memoir  communicated  to  the  Royal  Society 
in  1845. — R.] 

The  proportion  by  weight  in  which  different  substances 
combine  to  form  chemical  compounds  depends,  according  to 
Dalton's  atomic  theory,  on  the  weights  of  their  molecules, 
and  it  is  one  of  the  most  important  researches  in  chemistry 
to  determine  the  proportions  of  the  weights  of  the  molecules 
from  the  proportions  in  which  they  enter  into  combination. 
Gay-Lussac  discovered  that  in  the  case  of  gases  the  volumes 
of  the  combining  quantities  of  diffeient  gases  always  stand 
in  a  simple  ratio  to  each  other.  This  law  of  volumes  has 
now  been  raised  from  the  rank  of  an  empirical  fact  to  that  of 
a  deduction  from  our  theory,  and  we  may  now  assert,  as  a 
dynamical  proposition,  that  the  weights  of  the  molecules  of 

1  Camb.  Trans.  1879. 


Law  of  Charles.  327 

gases  (that  is,  those  small  portions  which  do  not  part  com- 
pany during  their  motion)  are  proportional  to  the  densities 
of  these  gases  at  standard  temperature  and  pressure. 

LAW    OF    CHARLES. 

We  must  next  consider  the  effect  of  changes  of  temperature 
on  different  gases.  Since  at  all  temperatures,  when  there  is 
thermal  equilibrium, 

M,  V  =  M2v22; 

and  since  the  absolute  temperature,  as  measured  by  a  g«u 
thermometer,  is  proportional  to  Vj2  when  the  gas  is  of  the 
first  kind,  and  to  V22  when  the  gas  is  of  the  second  kind;  it 
follows,  since  v,2  is  itself  proportional  to  v22,  that  the 
absolute  temperatures,  as  measured  by  the  two  thermometers, 
are  proportional,  and  if  they  agree  at  any  one  temperature 
(as  the  freezing  point),  they  agree  throughout.  This  is 
the  law  of  the  equal  dilatation  of  gases  discovered  by 
Charles. 

KINETIC    ENERGY    OF   A    MOLECULE. 

The  mean  kinetic  energy  of  agitation  of  a  molecule  is  tho 
product  of  its  mass  by  half  the  mean  square  of  its  velocity,  or 

i  M  vX 

This  is  the  energy  due  to  the  motion  of  the  molecule  as  a 
whole,  but  its  parts  may  be  in  a  state  of  relative  motion.  If 
we  assume,  with  Clausius,  that  the  energy  due  to  this 
internal  motion  of  the  parts  of  the  molecule  tends  towards  a 
value  having  a  constant  ratio  to  the  energy  of  agitation,  the 
whole  energy  will  be  proportional  to  the  energy  of  agitation, 
and  may  be  written 

i  ft  M  V*, 

where  p  is  a  factor,  always  greater  than  unity,  and  probably 
equal  to  1^634  for  air  and  several  of  the  more  perfect  gases. 
For  steam  it  may  be  as  much  as  2-19,  but  this  is  verv 
uncertain. 


328  Molecular  Theory. 

To  find  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  substance  contained  in 
unit  of  volume,  we  have  only  to  multiply  by  the  number  of 
molecules,  and  we  obtain 

T  =  -|/3M  Nv2 (8) 

Comparing  this  with  the  equation  (2)  which  determines 
the  pressure,  we  get 

TT  =  i/3/ (9) 

or  the  energy  in  unit  of  volume  is  numerically  equal  to  the 
pressure  on  unit  of  area  multiplied  by  £  ft. 

The  energy  in  unit  of  mass  is  found  by  multiplying  this 
by  v,  the  volume  of  unit  of  mass  : 

Tln  =  8  ftpv (ro) 

SPECIFIC    HEAT    AT   CONSTANT    VOLUME. 

Since  the  product  /  v  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  tem- 
perature, the  energy  is  proportional  to  the  temperature. 

The  specific  heat  is  measured  dynamically  by  the  increase 
of  energy  corresponding  to  a  rise  of  one  degree  of  temperature. 
Hence 


KT    =  § 


To  express  the  specific  heat  in  ordinary  thermal  units,  we 
must  divide  this  by  j,  the  specific  heat  of  water  (Joule's 
equivalent).  It  follows  from  this  expression  that  for  any 
one  gas  the  specific  heat  of  unit  of  mass  at  constant  volume 

is  the  same  for  all  pressures  and  temperatures,  because  £—. 

remains  constant.  For  different  gases  the  specific  heat  at 
constant  volume  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  specific 
gravity,  and  directly  proportional  to  ft. 

Since  fi  is  nearly  the  same  for  several  gases,  the  specific 
heat  of  these  gases  is  inversely  proportional  to  their  specific 
gravity  referred  to  air,  or,  since  the  specific  gravity  is  pro- 
portional to  their  molecular  weight,  the  specific  heat  multi- 
plied by  the  molecular  weight  is  the  same  for  all  these  gases. 


Law  of  Did 01  jg  and  Petit.  329 

This  is  the  law  of  Dulong  and  Petit.  It  would  be  accu- 
rate for  all  gases  if  the  value  of  ft  were  the  same  in  every 
case. 

It  has  been  shown  at  p.  183  that  the  difference  of  the  two 

specific  heats  is  £ —     Hence  their  ratio,  y,  is 

y  =  -375  +  '     and    ft    =  |  y-L, 
If  u.is  the  velocity  of  sound  in  a  gas,  we  have,  as  at  p.  228, 

u2  =  y  p  v (12) 

The  mean  square  of  the  velocity  of  agitation  is 

v»  =  3/i' ('3) 

Hence  u  =A/^  v,  or,  if  y  =  1*408.  as  in  air  and  several 
V   3 

other  gases, 

u  =  '6858  v   or  v  =  1*458  u    .     .     (14) 

These  are  the  relations  between  the  velocity  of  sound  and 
the  velocity  of  mean  square  of  agitation  in  any  gas  for  which 
y  =  1-408. 

The  nature  of  this  book  admits  only  of  a  brief  account  of 
some  other  results  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases.  Two  of 
these  are  independent  of  the  nature  of  the  action  between 
the  molecules  during  their  encounters. 

The  first  of  these  relates  to  the  equilibrium  of  a  mixture  of 
gases  acted  on  by  gravity.  The  result  of  our  theory  is  that 
the  final  distribution  of  any  number  of  kinds  of  gas  in  a 
vertical  vessel  is  such  that  the  density  of  each  gas  at  a 
given  height  is  the  same  as  if  all  the  other  gases  had  been 
removed,  leaving  it  alone  in  the  vessel. 

This  is  exactly  the  mode  of  distribution  which  Dal  ton 
supposed  to  exist  in  a  mixed  atmosphere  in  equilibrium,  the 
law  of  diminution  of  density  of  each  constituent  gas  being 
the  same  as  if  no  other  gases  were  present. 

In  our  atmosphere  the  continual  disturbances  caused  by 
winds  carry  portions  of  the  mixed  gases  from  one  stratum 


330  Molecular  TJicory. 

to  another,  so  that  the  proportion  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen  at 
different  heights  is  much  more  imiforte  than  if  these  gases 
hud  been  allowed  to  take  their  places  by  diffusion  during  a 
dead  calm. 

The  second  result  of  our  theory  relatss  to  the  thermal  equi- 
librium of  a  vertical  column.  We  find  that  if  a  vertical 
column  of  a  gas  were  left  to  itself,  till  by  the  conduction 
of  heat  it  had  attained  a  condition  of  thermal  equilibrium, 
the  temperature  would  be  the  same  throughout,  or,  in  other 
words,  gravity  produces  no  effect  in  making  the  bottom  of 
the  column  hotter  or  colder  than  the  top. 

This  result  is  important  in  the  theory  of  thermodynamics, 
for  it  proves  that  gravity  has  no  influence  in  altering  the 
conditions  of  thermal  equilibrium  in  any  substance,  whether 
gaseous  or  not.  For  if  two  vertical  columns  of  different 
substances  stand  on  the  same  perfectly  conducting  horizontal 
plate,  the  temperature  of  the  bottom  of  each  column  will  be 
the  same  ;  and  if  each  column  is  in  thermal  equilibrium  of 
itself,  the  temperatures  at  all  equal  heights  must  be  the  same. 
In  fact,  if  the  temperatures  of  the  tops  of  the  two  columns 
were  different,  we  might  drive  an  engine  with  this  difference  of 
temperature,  and  the  refuse  heat  would  pass  down  the  colder 
column,  through  the  conducting  plate,  and  up  the  warmer 
column;  and  this  would  go  on  till  all  the  heat  was  converted 
into  work,  contrary  to  the  second  law  of  thermodynamics. 

Cut  we  know  that  if  one  of  the  columns  is  gaseous,  its 
temperature  is  uniform.  Hence  that  of  the  other  must  be 
uniform,  whatever  its  material. 

This  result  is  by  no  means  applicable  to  the  case  of  our 
atmosphere.  Setting  aside  the  enormous  direct  effect  of 
the  sun's  radiation  in  disturbing  thermal  equilibrium^  the 
effect  of  winds  in  carrying  large  masses  of  air  from  one 
height  to  another  tends  to  produce  a  distribution  of  tem- 
perature of  a  quite  different  kind,  the  temperature  at  any 
height  being  such  that  a  mas:;  of  air,  brought  from  one  height 
to  another  without  gaming  or  losing  heat,  would  always  nnd 


Diffusion,  Conduction,  and  Viscosity.  331 

itself  at  the  temperature  of  the  surrounding  air.  In  this 
condition  of  what  Sir  William  Thomson  has  called  the  Con 
vective  equilibrium  of  heat,  it  is  not  the  temperature  which 
is  constant,  but  the  quantity  </>,  which  determines  the  adia- 
batic  curves. 

In  the  convective  equilibrium  of  temperature,  the  abso- 
lute temperature  is  proportional  to  the  pressure  raised  to 

the  power  ^^ — ,  or  crzo. 
7 

The  extreme  slowness  of  the  conduction  of  heat  in  air, 
compared  with  the  rapidity  with  which  large  masses  of  air 
are  carried  from  one  height  to  another  by  the  winds,  causes 
the  temperature  of  the  different  strata  of  the  atmosphere  to 
depend  far  more  on  this  condition  of  convective  equilibrium 
than  on  true  thermal  equilibrium. 

We  now  proceed  to  those  phenomena  of  gases  which, 
according  to  the  kinetic  theory,  depend  upon  the  particular 
nature  of  the  action  which  takes  place  when  the  molecules 
encounter  each  other,  and  on  the  frequency  of  these 
encounters. 

There  are  three  phenomena  of  this  kind  of  which  the 
kinetic  theory  takes  account — the  diffusion  of  gases,  the 
viscosity  of  gases,  and  the  conduction  of  heat  through  a  gas. 

We  have  already  described  the  known  facts  about  the 
interdiffusion  of  two  different  gases.  It  is  only  when  the 
gases  are  chemically  different  that  we  can  trace  the  process 
of  diffusion,  but  on  the  molecular  theory  diffusion  is  always 
going  on,  even  in  a  single  gas  ;  only  it  is  impossible  to  trace 
the  progress  of  the  molecules,  because  we  cannot  tell  one 
from  another. 

The  relation  between  diffusion  and  viscosity  may  be 
explained  as  follows  :  Consider  the  case  of  motion  of  a  mass 
of  gas,  which  has  already  been  described  in  Chapter  XXL,  in 
which  the  different  horizontal  layers  of  the  gas  slide  over 
each  other.  In  diffusion  the  molecules  pass,  some  of  them 
upwards  and  some  of  them  downwards,  through  any 


332  Molecular  Theory. 

horizontal  plane.  If  the  medium  has  different  properties  of 
any  kind  above  and  below  this  plane,  then  this  interchange 
of  molecules  will  tend  to  assimilate  the  properties  of  the  two 
portions  of  the  medium. 

In  the  case  of  ordinary  diffusion,  the  proportions  of  the 
two  diffusing  substances  are  different  above  and  below,  and 
vary  in  the  different  horizontal  layers  according  to  their 
height.  In  the  case  of  internal  friction,  the  mean  horizontal 
momentum  is  different  in  the  different  layers,  and  when  the 
molecules  pass  through  the  plane,  carrying  their  momentum 
with  them,  this  exchange  of  momentum  between  the  upper 
and  lower  parts  of  the  medium  constitutes  a  force  tending  to 
equalize  their  velocity,  and  this  is  the  phenomenon  actually 
observed  in  the  motion  of  viscous  fluids. 

The  coefficient  of  viscosity,  when  measured  in  the  kine- 
matic way,  represents  the  rate  at  which  the  equalization  of 
velocity  goes  on  by  the  exchange  of  the  momentum  of  the 
molecules,  just  as  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  represents  the 
rate  at  which  the  equalization  of  chemical  composition  goes 
on  bv  the  exchange  of  the  molecules  themselves. 

It  appears  from  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  that  if  D  is 
the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of  the  gas  into  itself,  and  v  the 
viscosity  measured  kinematically, 

v  =  0-6479  D 05) 

D=  1-5435  * (16) 

The  conduction  of  heat  in  a  gas,  according  to  the  kinetic 
theory,  is  simply  the  diffusion  of  the  energy  of  the  molecules 
by  their  moving  about  in  the  medium  and  carrying  their 
energy  with  them  till  they  encounter  other  molecules,  when 
the  energy  is  redistributed.  The  relation  of  the  conduc- 
tivity K,  measured  thermometrically,  to  the  viscosity  v, 
measured  kinematically,  is 

«=j5-* ('7) 

It  appears,  therefore,  that  diffusion,  viscosity,  and  conduc- 


Evaporation  and  Condensation.  333 

tivity  in  gases  are  related  to  each  other  in  a  very  simple 
way,  being  the  rate  of  equalization  of  three  properties  of  the 
medium — the  proportion  of  its  ingredients,  its  velocity,  and 
its  temperature.  The  equalization  is  effected  by  the  same 
agency  in  each  case — namely,  the  agitation  of  the  molecules. 
In  each  case,  if  the  density  remains  the  same,  the  rate  of 
equalization  is  proportional  to  the  absolute  temperature; 
and  if  the  temperature  remains  the  same,  the  rate  of  equal- 
ization is  inversely  proportional  to  the  density.  Hence, 
if  we  consider  the  temperature  and  the  pressure  as  denning 
the  state  of  the  gas,  the  quantities  D,  v,  and  K  vary  directly 
as  the  square  of  the  absolute  temperature  and  inversely  as 
the  pressure. 

MOLECULAR  THEORY  OF  EVAPORATION  AND  CONDENSATION. 

The  mathematical  difficulties  arising  in  the  investigation 
of  the  motions  of  molecules  are  so  great  that  it  is  not  to  be 
wondered  at  that  most  of  the  numerical  results  are  confined 
to  the  phenomena  of  gases.  The  general  character,  however, 
of  the  explanation  of  many  other  phenomena  by  the  mole- 
cular theory  has  been  pointed  out  by  Clausius  and  others. 

We  have  seen  that  in  the  case  of  a  gas  some  of  the  mole- 
cules have  a  much  greater  velocity  than  others,  so  that  it  is 
only  to  the  average  velocity  of  all  the  molecules  that  we  can 
ascribe  a  definite  value.  It  is  probable  that  this  is  also  true 
of  the  motions  of  the  molecules  of  a  liquid,  so  that,  though 
the  average  velocity  may  be  much  smaller  than  in  the  vapour 
of  that  liquid,  some  of  the  molecules  in  the  liquid  may  have 
velocities  equal  to  or  greater  than  the  average  velocity  in 
the  vapour.  If  any  of  the  molecules  at  the  surface  of  the 
liquid  have  such  velocities,  and  if  they  are  moving  from  the 
liquid,  they  will  escape  from  those  forces  which  retain  the 
other  molecules  as  constituents  of  the  liquid,  and  will  fly 
about  as  vapour  in  the  space  outside  the  liquid.  This  is 
the  molecular  theory  of  evaporation.  At  the  same  time,  a 
molecule  of  the  vapour  striking  the  liquid  may  become 


534 


Molecular  Tlicory. 


entangled  among  the  molecules  of  the  liquid,  and  may  thug 
become  part  of  the  liquid.  This  is  the  molecular  explanation 
of  condensation.  The  number  of  molecules  which  pass  from 
the  liquid  to  the  vapour  depends  on  the  temperature  of  the 
liquid.  The  number  of  molecules  which  pass  from  the 
vapour  to  the  liquid  depends  upon  the  density  of  the  vapour 
as  well  as  its  temperature.  If  the  temperature  of  the  vapour 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  liquid,  evaporation  will  take  place 
as  long  as  more  molecules  are  evaporated  than  condensed ; 
but  when  the  density  of  the  vapour  has  increased  to  such  a 
value  that  as  many  molecules  are  condensed  as  evaporated, 
then  the  vapour  has  attained  its  maximum  density.  It  is 
then  said  to  be  saturated,  and  it  is  commonly  supposed  that 
evaporation  ceases.  According  to  the  molecular  theory, 
however,  evaporation  is  still  going  on  as  fast  as  ever ;  only, 
condensation  is  also  going  on  at  an  equal  rate,  since  the 
proportions  of  liquid  and'of  gas  remain  unchanged. 

A  similar  explanation  applies  to  cases  in  which  the  vapour 
or  gas  is  absorbed  by  a  liquid  of  a  different  kind,  as  when 
oxygen  or  carbonic  acid  is  absorbed  by  water  or  alcohol.  In 
such  cases  a  '  movable  equilibrium '  is  attained  when  the 
liquid  has  absorbed  a  quantity  of  the  gas  whose  volume  at 
the  density  of  the  unabsorbed  gas  is  a  certain  multiple  or 
fraction  of  the  volume  of  the  liquid  ;  or,  in  other  words,  the 
density  of  the  gas  in  the  liquid  and  outside  the  liquid  stand 
in  a  certain  numerical  ratio  to  each  other.  This  subject  is 
treated  very  fully  in  Bunsen's  '  Gasometry.' 

The  amount  of  vapour  of  a  liquid  diffused  into  a  gas  of  a 
different  kind  is  generally  independent  of  the  nature  of  the 
gas,  except  when  the  gas  acts  chemically  on  the  vapour. 

Dr.  Andrews  has  shown  ('Proc.  R.S.'  1875)  that  by  mix- 
ing nitrogen  with  carbonic  acid,  the  critical  temperature  is 
Cowered,  and  that  Dalton's  law  of  the  density  of  mixed 
vapours  only  holds  at  low  pressures  and  at  temperatures 
greatly  above  their  critical  points. 


Electrolysis.  335 

MOLECULAR    THEORY    OF    ELECTROLYSIS. 

A  very  interesting  part  of  molecular  science  which  has  not 
been  thoroughly  worked  out,  but  which  hardly  belongs  to  a 
treatise  on  Heat,  is  the  theory  of  electrolysis.  Here  an 
electromotive  force  acting  on  a  liquid  electrolyte  causes, 
the  molecules  of  one  of  its  components  to  be  urged  in  one 
direction,  while  those  of  the  other  component  are  urged  in 
the  opposite  direction.  Now  these  components  are  joined 
together  in  pairs  by  chemical  forces  of  great  power,  so  that 
we  might  expect  that  no  electrolytic  effect  could  take  place 
unless  the  electromotive  force  were  so  strong  as  to  be  able 
to  tear  these  couples  asunder.  But,  according  to  Clausius,  in 
the  dance  of  molecules  which  is  always  going  on,  some  of  the 
linked  pairs  of  molecules  acquire  such  velocities  that  when 
they  have  an  encounter  with  a  pair  also  in  violent  motion 
the  molecules  composing  one  or  both  of  the  pairs  are  torn 
asunder,  and  wander  about  seeking  new  partners.  If  the 
temperature  is  so  high  that  the  general  agitation  is  so  violent 
that  more  pairs  of  molecules  are  torn  asunder  than  can  pair 
again  in  an  equal  time,  we  have  the  phenomenon  of 
Dissociation,  studied  by  M.  Ste.-Claire  Deville.  If,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  separated  molecules  can  always  find  partners 
before  they  are  ejected  from  the  system,  the  composition  of 
the  system  remains  apparently  the  same. 

Now  Professor  Clausius  considers  that  it  is  during  these 
temporary  separations  that  the  electromotive  force  comes 
into  play  as  a  directing  power,  causing  the  molecules  of 
one  component  to  move  on  the  whole  one  way,  and  those 
of  the  other  the  opposite  way.  Thus  the  component  mole- 
cules are  always  changing  partners,  even  when  no  electro- 
motive force  is  in  action,  and  the  only  effect  of  this  force  is  to 
give  direction  to  those  movements  which  are  already  going  on. 

Professor  VViedcmann,  who  has  also  taken  this  view  of 
electrolysis,  compares  the  phenomenon  with  that  of  diffusion, 
and  shows  that  the  electric  conductivity  of  an  electrolyte  may 


336  Molecular  Theory. 

be  considered  as  depending  on  the  coefficient  of  diffusion  of 
the  components  through  each  other. 

MOLECULAR    THEORY    OF    RADIATION. 

The  phenomena  already  described  are  explained  on  the 
molecular  theory  by  the  motion  of  agitation  of  the  molecules, 
a  motion  which  is  exceedingly  irregular,  the  intervals  between 
successive  encounters  and  the  velocities  of  a  molecule 
during  successive  free  paths  not  being  subject  to  any  law 
which  we  can  express.  The  internal  motion  of  a  single 
molecule  is  of  a  very  different  kind.  'If  the  parts  of  the 
molecule  are  capable  of  relative  motion  without  being 
altogether  torn  asunder,  this  relative  motion  will  be  some 
kind  of  vibration.  The  small  vibrations  of  a  connected  sys- 
tem may  be  resolved  into  a  number  of  simple  vibrations,  the 
law  of  each  of  which  is  similar  to  that  of  a  pendulum.  It  is 
probable  that  in  gases  the  molecules  may  execute  many  of 
such  vibrations  in  the  interval  between  successive  encounters. 
At  each  encounter  the  whole  molecule  is  roughly  shaken. 
During  its  free  path  it  vibrates  according  to  its  own  laws, 
the  amplitudes  of  the  different  simple  vibrations  being  deter- 
mined by  the  nature  of  the  collision,  but  their  periods 
depending  only  on  the  constitution  of  the  molecule  itself. 
If  the  molecule  is  capable  of  communicating  these  vibrations 
to  the  medium  in  which  radiations  are  propagated,  it  will 
send  forth  radiations  of  certain  definite  kinds,  and  if  these 
belong  to  the  luminous  part  of  the  spectrum,  they  will  be 
visible  as  light  of  definite  refrangibility.  This,  then,  is  the 
explanation,  on  the  molecular  theory,  of  the  bright  lines 
observed  in  the  spectra  of  incandescent  gases.  They  repre- 
sent the  disturbance  communicated  to  the  luminiferous 
medium  by  molecules  vibrating  in  a  regular  and  periodic 
manner  during  their  free  paths.  If  the  free  path  is  long, 
the  molecule,  by  "communicating  its  vibrations  to  the  ether, 
will  cease  to  vibrate  till  it  encounters  some  other  molecule. 

By  raising  the  temperature  we  increase  the  velocity  of 


Radiation,  337 

the  motion  of  agitation  and  the  force  of  each  encounter. 
The  higher  the  temperature  the  greater  will  be  the  ampli- 
tude of  tlit  internal  vibrations  of  all  kinds,  and  the  more 
likelihood  will  there  be  that  vibrations  of  short  period  will 
be  excited,  as  well  as  those  fundamental  vibrations  which 
are  most  easily  produced.  By  increasing  the  density  we 
diminish  the  length  of  the  free  path  of  each  molecule,  and 
thus  allow  less  time  for  the  vibrations  excited  at  each 
encounter  to  subside,  and,  since  each  fresh  encounter  dis- 
turbs the  regularity  of  the  series  of  vibrations,  the  radiation 
will  no  longer  be  capable  of  complete  resolution  into  a 
series  of  vibrations  of  regular  periods,  but  will  be  analysed 
into  a  spectrum  showing  the  bright  bands  due  to  the  regular 
vibrations,  along  with  a  ground  of  diffused  light,  forming  a 
continuous  spectrum  due  to  the  irregular  motion  introduced 
at  each  encounter. 

Hence  when  a  gas  is  rare  the  bright  lines  of  its  spectrum 
are  narrow  and  distinct,  and  the  spaces  between  them  are 
dark.  As  the  density  of  the  gas  increases,  the  bright  lines 
become  broader  and  the  spaces  between  them  more 
luminous. 

There  is  another  reason  for  the  broadening  of  the  bright 
lines  and  the  luminosity  of  the  whole  spectrum  in  dense 
gases,  which  we  have  already  stated  at  p.  245.  There  is 
this  difference,  however,  between  the  effect  there  mentioned 
and  that  described  here.  At  p.  245  the  light  from  a 
certain  stratum  of  incandescent  gas  was  supposed  to  pene- 
trate through  other  strata,  which  absorbed  the  brighter  rays 
faster  than  the  less  luminous  ones.  This  effect  depends 
only  on  the  total  quantity  of  gas  through  which  the  rays 
pass,  and  will  be  the  same  whether  it  is  a  mile  of  gas  at 
thirty  inches  pressure,  or  thirty  miles  at  one  inch  pressure. 
The  effect  which  we  are  now  considering  depends  on  the 
absolute  density,  so  that  it  is  by  no  means  the  same  whether 
a  stratum  containing  a  given  quantity  of  gas  is  one  mile  or 
thirty  miles  thick. 

z 


338  Molecular  Theory. 

When  the  gas  is  so  far  condensed  that  it  assumes  the 
liquid  or  solid  form,  then,  as  the  molecules  have  no  free 
path,  they  have  no  regular  vibrations,  and  no  bright  lines 
are  commonly  observed  in  incandescent  liquids  or  solids. 
Mr.  Huggins,  however,  has  observed  bright  lines  in  the 
spectrum  of  incandescent  erbia  and  lime,  which  appear  to 
be  due  to  the  solid  matter,  and  not  to  its  vapour. 

LIMITATION    OF   THE   SECOND    LAW   OF   THERMODYNAMICS. 

Before  I  conclude,  I  wish  to  direct  attention  to  an  aspect 
of  the  molecular  theory  which  deserves  consideration. 

One  of  the  best  established  facts  in  thermodynamics  is 
that  it  is  impossible  in  a  system  enclosed  in  an  envelope 
which  permits  neither  change  of  volume  nor  passage  of  heat, 
and  in  which  both  the  temperature  and  the  pressure  are  every- 
where the  same,  to  produce  any  inequality  of  temperature  or 
of  pressure  without  the  expenditure  of  work.  This  is  the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics,  and  it  is  undoubtedly  true 
as  long  as  we  can  deal  with  bodies  only  in  mass,  and  have 
no  power  of  perceiving  or  handling  the  separate  molecules 
of  which  they  are  made  up.  But  if  we  conceive  a  being 
whose  faculties  are  so  sharpened  that  he  can  follow  every 
molecule  in  its  course,  such  a  being,  whose  attributes  are  still 
as  essentially  finite  as  our  own,  would  be  able  to  do  what  is 
at  present  impossible  to  us.  For  we  have  seen  that  the 
molecules  in  a  vessel  full  of  air  at  uniform  temperature  are 
moving  with  velocities  by  no  means  uniform,  though  the 
mean  velocity  of  any  great  number  of  them,  arbitrarily 
selected,  is  almost  exactly  uniform.  Now  let  us  suppose 
that  such  a  vessel  is  divided  into  two  portions,  A  and  B,  by 
a  division  in  which  there  is  a  small  hole,  and  that  a  being, 
who  can  see  the  individual  molecules,  opens  and  closes  this 
hole,  so  as  to  allow  only  the  swifter  molecules  to  pass 
from  A  to  B,  and  only  the  slower  ones  to  pass  from  p  to  A. 
He  will  thus,  without  expenditure  of  work,  raise  the  tern- 


Statistical  Knowledge  of  Bodies.  3  39 

perature  of  B  and  lower  that  of  A,  in  contradiction  to  the 
second  law  of  thermodynamics. 

This  is  only  one  of  the  instances  in  which  conclusions 
which  we  have  drawn  from  our  experience  of  bodies  con- 
sisting of  an  immense  number  of  molecules  may  be  found 
not  to  be  applicable  to  the  more  delicate  observations  and 
experiments  which  we  may  suppose  made  by  one  who  can 
perceive  and  handle  the  individual  molecules  which  we  deal 
with  only  in  large  masses. 

In  dealing  with  masses  of  matter,  while  we  do  not  perceive 
the  individual  molecules,  we  are  compelled  to  adopt  what  I 
have  described  as  the  statistical  method  of  calculation,  and 
to  abandon  the  strict  dynamical  method,  in  which  we  follow 
every  motion  by  the  calculus. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  enquire  how  far  those  ideas 
about  the  nature  and  methods  of  science  which  have  been 
derived  from  examples  of  scientific  investigation  in  which 
the  dynamical  method  is  followed  are  applicable  to  our 
actual  knowledge  of  concrete  things,  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
is  of  an  essentially  statistical  nature,  because  no  one  has 
yet  discovered  any  practical  method  of  tracing  the  path 
of  a  molecule,  or  of  identifying  it  at  different  times. 

I  do  not  think,  however,  that  the  perfect  identity  which 
we  observe  between  different  portions  of  the  same  kind  of 
matter  can  be  explained  on  the  statistical  principle  of  the 
stability  of  the  averages  of  large  numbers  of  quantities 
each  of  which  may  differ  from  the  mean.  For  if  of  the 
molecules  of  some  substance  such  as  hydrogen,  some  were 
of  sensibly  greater  mass  than  others,  we  have  the  means 
of  producing  a  separation  between  molecules  of  different 
masses,  and  in  this  way  we  should  be  able  to  produce  two 
kinds  of  hydrogen,  one  of  which  would  be  somewhat  denser 
than  the  other.  As  this  cannot  be  done,  we  must  admit  that 
the  equality  which  we  assert  to  exist  between  the  molecules 
of  hydrogen  applies  to  each  individual  molecule,  and  not 
merely  to  the  average  of  groups  of  millions  of  molecules. 

z  2 


Molecular  Theory. 


NATURE  AND    ORIGIN    OF   Jv^OLECULES. 

We  have  thus  been  led  by  our  study  of  visible  things  to  a 
theory  that  they  are  made  up  of  a  finite  number  of  parts  or 
molecules,  each  of  which  has  a  definite  mass,  and  possesses 
other  properties.  The  molecules  of  the  same  substance  are 
all  exactly  alike,  but  different  from  those  of  other  substances. 
There  is  not  a  regular  gradation  in  the  mass  of  molecules 
from  that  of  hydrogen,  which  is  the  least  of  those  known  to 
us,  to  that  of  bismuth  ;  but  they  all  fall  into  a  limited 
number  of  classes  or  species,  the  individuals  of  each 
species  being  exactly  similar  to  each  other,  and  no  inter- 
mediate links  are  found  to  connect  one  species  with 
another  by  a  uniform  gradation. 

We  are  here  reminded  of  certain  speculations  concerning 
the  relations  between  the  species  of  living  things.  We  find 
that  in  these  also  the  individuals  are  naturally  grouped  into 
specie?,  and  that  intermediate  links  between  the  species  are 
wanting.  But  in  each  species  variations  occur,  and  there  is 
a  perpetual  generation  and  destruction  of  the  individuals  of 
which  the  species  consist 

Hence  it  is  possible  to  frame  a  theory  to  account  for  the 
present  state  of  things  by  means  of  generation,  variation, 
and  discriminative  destruction. 

In  the  case  of  the  molecules,  however,  each  individual  is 
permanent  ;  there  is  no  generation  or  destruction,  and  no 
variation,  or  rather  no  difference,  between  the  individuals  of 
each  species. 

Hence  the  kind  of  speculation  with  which  we  have 
become  so  familiar  under  the  name  of  theories  of  evolution 
is  quite  inapplicable  to  the  case  of  molecules. 

It  is  true  that  Descartes,  whose  inventiveness  knew  no 
bounds,  has  given  a  theory  of  the  evolution  of  molecules. 
He  supposes  that  the  molecules  with  which  the  heavens 
are  nearly  filled  have  received  a  spherical  form  from  the 
long-continued  grinding  of  their  projecting  parts,  so  that, 


Equality  and  Permanence  of  Molecules.         34 1 

like  marbles  in  a  mill,  they  have  'rubbed  each  other's  angles 
down.'  The  result  of  this  attrition  forms  the  finest  kind  of 
molecules,  with  which  the  interstices  between  the  globular 
molecules  are  filled.  But,  besides  these,  he  describes  another 
elongated  kind  of  molecules,  the  particula  striata,  which 
have  received  their  form  from  their  often  threading  the 
interstices  between  three  spheres  in  contact.  They  have  thus 
acquired  three  longitudinal  ridges,  and,  since  some  of  them 
during  their  passage  are  rotating  on  their  axes,  these  ridges 
are  not  in  general  parallel  to  the  axis,  but  are  twisted  like 
the  threads  of  a  screw.  By  means  of  these  little  screws 
he  most  ingeniously  attempts  to  explain  the  phenomena  of 
magnetism. 

But  it  is  evident  that  his  molecules  are  very  different  from 
ours.  His  seem  to  be  produced  by  some  general  break-up 
of  his  solid  space,  and  to  be  ground  down  in  the  course  of 
ages,  and,  though  their  relative  magnitude  is  in  some  degree 
determinate,  there  is  nothing  to  determine  the  absolute 
magnitude  of  any  of  them. 

Our  molecules,  on  the  other  hand,  are  unalterable  by  any 
of  the  processes  which  go  on  in  the  present  state  of  things, 
and  every  individual  of  each  species  is  of  exactly  the  same 
magnitude,  as  though  they  had  all  been  cast  in  the  same 
mould,  like  bullets,  and  not  merely  selected  and  grouped 
according  to  their  size,  like  small  shot. 

The  individuals  of  each  species  also  agree  in  the  nature  of 
the  light  which  they  emit — that  is,  in  their  natural  periods  of 
vibration.  They  are  therefore  like  tuning-forks  all  tuned  to 
concert  pitch,  or  like  watches  regulated  to  solar  time. 

In  speculating  on  the  cause  of  this  equality  we  are  debarred 
from  imagining  any  cause  of  equalization,  on  account  of  the 
immutability  of  each  individual  molecule.  It  is  difficult,  on  the 
other  hand,  to  conceive  of  selection  and  elimination  of  inter- 
mediate varieties,  for  where  can  these  eliminated  molecules 
have  gone  to  if,  as  we  have  reason  to  believe,  the  hydrogen, 
&c.,  of  the  fixed  stars  is  composed  of  molecules  identical  in 


342  Molecular  Theory. 

all  respects  with  our  own  ?  The  time  required  to  eliminate 
from  the  whole  of  the  visible  universe  *every  molecule  whose 
mass  differs  from  that  of  some  one  of  our  so-called  elements, 
by  processes  similar  to  Graham's  method  of  dialysis,  which 
is  the  only  method  we  can  conceive  of  at  present,  would 
exceed  the  utmost  limits  ever  demanded  by  evolutionists 
as  many  times  as  these  exceed  the  period  of  vibration  of  a 
molecule. 

But  if  we  suppose  the  molecules  to  be  made  at  all,  or  if 
we  suppose  them  to  consist  of  something  previously  made, 
why  should  we  expect  any  irregularity  to  exist  among  them  ? 
If  they  are,  as  we  believe,  the  only  material  things  which 
still  remain  in  the  precise  condition  in  which  they  first 
began  to  exist,  why  should  we  not  rather  look  for  some 
indication  of  that  spirit  of  order,  our  scientific  confidence 
in  which  is  never  shaken  by  the  difficulty  which  we  expe- 
rience in  tracing  it  in  the  complex  arrangements  of  visible 
things,  and  of  which  our  moral  estimation  is  shown  in  all 
our  attempts  to  think  and  speak  the  truth,  and  to  ascertain 
the  exact  principles  of  distributive  justice  ? 


APPENDIX. 

Table  of  the  Coefficients  of  Interdiffusion  of  Gases,  from   the  Memoir  oj 
Professor  Loschmidt  (see  p.  279),  in  square  centimetres  per  second, 

D 

Carbonic  acid          .         .     Air ....  '1423 

Hydrogen          .         .  '5614 

—  Oxygen    .         .         .  "1409 

—  Marsh  gas          .         .  -1586 

—  Carbonic  oxide .         .  "1406 

—  Nitrous  oxide    .         .  "0982 
Oxygen          .         .         .     Hydrogen          .         .  7214 

—  Carbonic  oxide .         .  -1802 
Carbonic  oxide        .         .     Hydrogen         .         .  -6422 
Sulphurous  acid      .         .     Hydrogen         .         .  -4800 


Appendix.  343 

Professor  J.  Stefan,  also  of  Vienna,  has  undertaken  a  series  of  very 
delicate  experiments  to  determine  thethermal  conductivity  cf  air  and  other 
gases.  He  finds  the  thermometric  conductivity,  K,  of  air  0*256  square 
centimetres  per  second.  The  rate  of  propagation  of  thermal  effects  in 
still  air  is  therefore  intermediate  between  the  rate  in  iron,  for  which 
K  =  0-183,  and  m  copper,  for  which  /c=i'O77.  Stefan  finds  it  inter- 
mediate between  iron  and  zinc. 

The  calorimetric  conductivity,  k,  is  0-00005 5 8  for  air,  or  about  20,000 
times  less  than  that  of  copper,  and  3, 360  times  less  than  that  of  iron. 
As  calculated  from  the  coefficient  of  viscosity  by  the  writer 
£  =  0-000054. 

Stefan  has  also  found  that  the  calorimetric  conductivity  is  inde- 
pendent of  the  pressure,  and  that  it  is  seven  times  greater  for  hy- 
drogen than  for  air.  Both  these  results  had  been  predicted  by  the 
molecular  theory.  See  Maxwell  '  On  the  Dynamical  Theory  of  GaseV 
Phil.  Trans.  1867,  p.  S8. 


INDEX. 


ABSOLUTE,  temperature,  51, 159,  Thom- 
son's scale  of,  155  ;  zero,  215 

Absorption  of  heat,  243 

Adiabatic  lines,  129,  135 

Air,  thermometer,  46;  velocity  of  sound 
in,  182 

Aitken  on  the  formation  of  fogs,  293 

Amiot's  method  of  double  weighing,  69 

Andrews'  experiments  on  gases,  118,  323 

Athermanous  bodies,  13 

Atmosphere,  height  of,  220 ;  homo- 
geneous, 220,  229 

Available  energy,  187 


BAROMETER,      97  ;     determination    of 

heights  by,  217 

Bernoulli  on  the  pressure  of  gases,  312 
Bismuth,  conductivity  of,  270 
Black's  experiments  on  latent  heat,  58 
Boiling,  23  ;  point  of  a  thermometer,  33  ; 

conditions  of,  291 
Borda's  method  of  weighing,  69 
Boscovich's  theory,  86,  324 
Boyle's  law,  27,  30 
Bumping  of  liquids  on  boiling,  126,  129, 

291 
Bunsen's  calorimeter,   61  ;    Gasometry, 

334 


CAGNIARD  de  la  Tour,  experiments  of, 
1 18,  204 

Cailletet's  experiments  on  the  liquefac- 
tion ot  gases,  17 

Caloric,  57 

Calorie,  7,  9 

Calorimeter,  7  ;  ice,  58 

Calorimetry,  7 

Capacity  of  a  body  for  heat,  65 

Capillarity,  281  ;  angle  of,  288  ;  coeffi- 
cient of,  283  ;  Laplace's  theory  of,  292  ; 


its  connection  with   latent  heat,   293 ; 

with  thermodynamics,  290 
Capillary  attraction,  285 
Carnot's  function,    15^,    162;    principle, 

153  ;  reversible  engine,  139 
Celsius  degrees.  37 
Centigrade  scale,  37 
Chamber  of  uniform  temperature,   272 
Charles,  law  of,  29,  327 
Clapeyron,    introduction    of     indicator 

diagram  by,  102 
Clausius'  statement  of  Carnot's   princi- 

p'e,  153  ;  on  entropy,  162  ;  development 

of  the  mechanical  theory  of  gases,  312 
Clouds,  subsidence  of,  307 
Cohesion  figures,  286 
Colloids,  280 

Condensation,  theory  of,  333 
Conduction,  10,  n,  253  ;  in  a  solid,  257 
Conductivity,    dvnamical    measure    of, 

255 ;     electrical,     271 ;    influence    of 

temperature  on,  271 

Conservation  of  force,  91  ;  of  energy,  92 
Convection,  10,  12  ;  currents,  250 
Convective  equilibrium  of  heat,  250 
Cooling,  method  of,  58 ;  rate  of,  68 
Critical  state,  204 
Crystalloids,  280 
Currents,  convection,  251 
Curves,  adiabatic,  135 
Cycle,  definition  of,  142 


DALTON'S  law,  28 

Delambre   and  Mechain's  measurement 

of  the  size  of  the  earth,  77 
Density  of  a  body,    82  ;    maximum,  of 

water,  252 
Descartes'    theory    of  the   evolution   of 

molecules,  340 
Diagram  of  the  effects  of  heat  on  water, 

137  ;  indicator,  102 
Dialysis,  342 


346 


Index. 


Diathermanous  bodies,  13 

Dielectrics,    electrical  conductivity   of, 

271 
Diffusion,  of  heat,  10  ;  by  conduction, 

253  ;  of  liquids,  273  ;  of  gases,  276 
Dilatability,  167 
Dissipation  of  energy,  192,  204 
Distribution  of  temperature,  harmonic, 

263 

Dufour's  experiments  on  boiling,  291 
Dulong  andPetit's  law,  329  ;  formula,  246 
Dynamical  measure  of  conductivity,  255 ; 

equivalent  of  heat,  206 
Dyne,  83 

EFFICIENCY  of  an  engine,  157,  158 

Elasticity,  301 ;  of  a  fluid,  107  ;  modes 
of  measuring  171  ;  per'ect,  302 

Electrolysis,  molecular  theory  of,  335 

Electrolytes,  electrical  conductivity  of, 
271 

Energy,  87,  91  ;  available,  192  ;  dis-ipa- 
tion  of,  193  ;  potential,  308  ;  super- 
ficial, 283 

Engine,  efficiency  of  an,  157,  158  ;  heat, 
J38 

Entropy,  162,  187,  189 

Exchanges,  Prevost's  theory  of,  240,  311 

Expansion,  free,  209 

External  forces,  94 

Evaporation,  theory  of,  333 

FAHRENHEIT  degrees,  38 

Faraday,  liquefaction  of  gases  by,  119  ; 
on  mental  inertia,  86 

Fictitious  thermal  lines,  176 

Flaugergues,  discovered  the  change  in 
zero  of  a  thermometer,  42 

Flow  of  heat,  periodic,  265  ;  steady,  257 

Fluids,  16 ;  conductivity  of,  271  ;  defi- 
nition of,  95  ;  diffusion  of,  273  ;  elasti- 
city of,  107  ;  perfect,  96 

Fogs,  Aitken  on  the  formation  of,  307 

Foot-pound,  87 

Forbes,  polarisation  of  heat,  237 ;  on 
conductivity  for  heat,  269 

Force,  83  ;  conservation  of,  91  ;  gravita- 
tion measure  of,  84 

Forces,  external  and  internal,  94 

Fourier's  theory  of  heat,  259 

Free  expansion,  209 

Freezing  point  of  a  thermometer,  deter- 
mination of,  33  ;  *  ariation  in,  44 

French  standard  of  mass,  79 

Function,  Carnot's,  155  •  potential,  91 

Fundamental  units,  76 

Fusion,  19 


GAOOLIN,  on  specific  heat,  65 
Galileo,    inventor   of  the    air  thermo- 
meter, 46 


Gallon,  a  legal  measure,  81 

Gas,  formation  of,  22 

Gaseous  state,  27 

Gases,   16  ;    Faraday's   liquefaction  of, 

119  ;  perfect,  in 
Gay  Lnssac's  law,  29,  325  ;  observations 

on  boiling,  35 

Gibbs*  thermodynamic  model,  195 
Graham,  on  dialysis,  342  ;  on  the  laws  of 

the  diffusion  of  gases,  276 
Gramme,  79 
Gravitation  measure,  87 
Gravity,  intensity  of,  84 
(j  rea^.  spc  ts,  removal  of,  300 


HARMONIC  distribution  of  temperature, 
263 

Heat,  capacity  of  bodies  for,  65  ;  engines, 
138  ;  its  effects  on  liquids,  21  ;  invi- 
sible, 15  ;  and  light,  233  ;  latent,  19, 
173 ;  periodic  flow  of,  265 ;  as  a 
quantity,  7  ;  radiant,  true  meaning  of 
the  term,  15  ;  rays,  14  ;  not  a  sub- 
stance, 57  ;  specific,  65 

Heights,  determination  of,  by  the 
barometer,  217 

Helmholtz  on  the  conservation  of  force, 
91 

Hermetical  sealing,  42 

Hirn's  experiments  on  the  steam  engine, 
146 

Homogeneous  atmosphere,  220 

Hydrostatic  pressure,  30 


ICE,  calorimeter,  58  ;  influence  of  pres- 
sure on  the  melting  point  of,  176 

Indicator  diagram,  102 

Inertia,  Faraday  on  mental,  86 

Instability,  conditions  of,  205 

Interference  of  light,  235  ;  of  heat,  236 

Internal  forces,  94 

Intrinsic  energy  of  a  system  of  bodies, 
185 

Iodide  of  silver,  anomalous  expansion 
of,  18 

Iron,  conductivity  of,  271 

Isenergetic  lines,  198 

Isentropic  lines,  164 

Isopiestic  lines,  198 

Isothermal  curves,  no;  lines,  108 ;  for 
steam  and  water,  114 

Isotropic  strains,  99 

JOULE,  mechanical  equivalent  of  heat, 
147,  213  ;  determination  of  the  maxi- 
mum density  of  water,  252  ;  explana- 
tion of  the  pressure  of  gases,  315 


KEW  standard  thermometer,  44 
Kilogramme  des  Archives,  79 


Index. 


347 


Kinetic  energy,  87,  91 ;    of  a  molecule, 
_3T7i  329  '.  theory  of  gases,  314 
Kirchhoff  s  principle,  295 
Kronig,  explanation  of  the  property  of 
gases,  312 

LAPLACE,  theory  of  capillarity,  292  ;  and 

Lavoisier  s  calorimeter,  59 
Latent  heat,  19,  73,  173;  determination 

of,  71  ;  its  connection  with  capillarity, 

292 
Law,  of  Boyle,  321  ;  of  Charles,  29  ;  of 

Dalton,  29  ;  of  Duloi  g  and  Petit,  329  ; 

of  Gay  Lussac,  29,  325 
Length,  standard  of,  76 
Light,  interference  of,  235 
Lines,  adiabatic,  135  ;  of  equal  tempera- 
ture, 108 

Liquefaction  of  gases,  17 
Longitudinal   stress,   99 ;    displacement 

waves  of,  225 

MASS,  standard  of,  78,  79 
Maximum  density  of  water,  253 
Mayer's  calculation  of   the  dynamical 

equivalent  of  heat,  216 
Measurement     of    quantities,     75;    of 

heights  by  the  barometer,  217 
Melloni's  discoveries    in    radiant  heat, 

234 
Method  of  cooling,  74,  247  ;  of  mixture, 

63 

Metre,  its  origin,  77 
Milligramme,  79 
Mixture,  method  of,  63 
Molecular  motion,  279,  311  ;  theory,    08 
Molecules,  nature  and  origin  of,  340 
Momentum,  82 
Motion,  molecular,  279,  311 


NEWTON,  Sir  Isaac,  determination  of 
the  fixed  points  of  a  thermometer,  34  ; 
on  the  relation  between  work  and 
kinetic  energy,  91 

Node-couple,  203 


PARLIAMENTARY  standard  of  length,  77 
Parttftua.stria.ta,  341 

Perfect  gas,  in 

Periodic  flow  of  heat,  265 

Pictet's  experiments  on  the  liquefaction 

of  gases,  17 

Polarisation  of  heat,  237 
Potential  energy,  91,  308 
Pound,  standard,  78 
Poundal,  83 
Pressure,  94 ;    longitudinal.   95 ;    in  a 

fluid,  97 

Prevost's  theory  of  exchanges,  240,  311 
Propagation  of  waves,  223 


RADIANT  heat,  13  ;  true  meaning  of  the 
term,  15 

Radiation,  10,  13,  230;  as  depending  on 
temperature,  245  ;  its  effects  on  ther- 
mometers, 248  ;  molecular  theory  of. 
33° 

Radius  of  the  earth,  85 

Rankine,  on  entroi  y,  162  ;  on  the  propa- 
gation of  waves,  223 

Rarity  the  converse  of  density,  82 

Rate  of  cooling,  68 

Reading  of  a  thermometer,  32 

Reaumur  scale,  39 

Kegelation,  176 

Regnault,  on  vapours,  28 ;  on  latent 
heat,  175;  on  the  expansion  of  gases, 
215 

Reversible  engine,  Carnot's,  139 

Reynolds,  Prof.  Osborne,  effects  of  oil 
en  waves,  298 

Richards's  indicator,  104 

Rigidity  of  a  body  affected  by  tempera- 
ture, 18 


SATURATED  vapour,  23 

Scale  of  thermometer,  37 

Scientific  terms  defined,  5 

Sensible  heat,  20 

Shearing  strains,  100  ;  stresses,  302 

Siemens'  electrical  thermometer,  53 

Simmering,  24 

Soap  bubbles,  energy  of,  283 

Solids,  16. 

Sound,  velocity  of,  in  air,  182,  229 

Specific  heat,  65  ;  modes  of  measuring, 

169  ;  at  constant  volume,   328  ;  ther- 
mal conductivity,  255 
Spinode  curve,  204 

Stability  of  a  system,  conditions  of,  201 
Standard      thermometer,      Kew,      44 ; 

French,  of  mass,  79 ;  of  length,   77  ; 

pound, 78 
Statical  energy,  91 
Steady  flow  of  heat,  257,  265 
Steam  engine,  Hirn's  experiments,  146 
Strains,  99  ;  isotropic,  49  ;  shearing,  100, 

301 

Stresses,  95,  301,  302 
Subsidence  of  clouds,  307 
Superficial  energy  of  a  soap  bubble,  283  ; 

tension,  283  ;  table  of,  295 
Surface  tension,    283 ;    thermodynamic, 

196 


TACNODAL  point,  204 

Tait,  Professor,  on  thermo-electromotive 
force,  53  ;  on  thermal  conductivity,  271 

Tears  of  wine,  300 

Temperature,  4  ;  absolute,  51 ;  Thom- 
son's scale  of,  155  ;  chamber  of  uniform, 
272 ;  its  effect  on  rigidity,  18  ;  in- 
fluence on  conductivity,  271 ;  on 


348 


Index. 


radiation,  245  ;  harmonic  distribution 
of,  263;  measured  by  elearicity,  50; 
lines  of  equal,  io3 ;  underground, 
267 ;  uniform,  272 

Tension,  95  ;  surface,  283 

Theorie  de  la  Chaleur^  Fourier's^  258 

'\  heory,  of  exchanges,  Prevast's,  280, 
311  ;  of  heat,  Fourier's,  258  ;  of  mo- 
lecular radiation,  336 

Thermal,  use  of  the  word,  9  ;  conduc- 
tivity, 255  ;  determination  of,  268  :  and 
electrical  conductivity,  order  of,  271  ; 
unit,  9 

Thermodynamic  surface,  195,  206 

Thermodynamics,  9 ;  first  and  second 
laws  of,  152  ;  Thomson's  application 
of  capillarity  to,  296 

Thermo  e'ectric  current,  52 

Thermokinematics,  9 

Thermometer,  air,  46  ;  change  of  zero 
point,  42  ;  Galileo  inventor  of  the,  46  ; 
mercurial,  5  ;  Newton's  determination 
of  fixed  points,  34  ;  reading  of  a,  32  ; 
scales,  37;  .viemens'  electrical,  50; 
standard,  at  Kew,  44 

1  hermometric  measure  of  conductivity, 
255 

Thermometry,  30 

Thermostatics,  9 

Thermotics,  9 

Thomson's  absolute  scale  of  temperature, 
155  ;  application  of  thermodynamics 
to  capillarity,  289 ;  on  viscosity,  304 

Thomson,  James,  on  the  influence  of 
pressure  on  the  freezing  po'.ntof  water, 
176 

Time,  unit  of,  80 

Tomlinson,  Charles,  on  cohesion  figures, 
296 

Tonne,  79 


Tourmaline,  its  action  on  light,  237 

Transparent  bodies,  233 

Troy  pound,  78 

Tyndall,  Professor,  on  conductivity,  293 


UNDERGROUND  temperature,  267 
Undulating  theory,  232 
Uniform  temperature,  272 
Unit,  thermal,  9  ;  of  time,  80 

VAN  DER  WAALS,  application    of  the' 

virial,  325 

Vapour,  true  meaning  of,  23  - 
Velocity,  uniform,  82  ;   of  sound,    182, 

229  ;  of  a  gas,  definition  of,  318 ;  of 

molecular  motion,  390 
Virial,  322 
Vis  vi\a,  91 
Viscosity,    301 ;  coefficient  of,  304  ;   of 

metals,  303 
Viscous  bodies,  303 
Voit's  determination  of  diffusion,  274 

WATERSTON  on  capillarity  and  latent 
heat,  292 

Watt's  indicator  diagram,  105 

Waves,  propagation  of,  223  ;  of  perma- 
nent type,  227 

Wilcke,  meas  rement  of  heat  on  bodies 
cooling,  58 

Willard  Gibbs'  representation  of  the  pro- 
perties of  a  body  by  a  surface,  195 

Wine,  tears  of,  300 

Work,  87 

Zero  point  of  a  thermometer,  change  in, 
42  ;  determination  of,  33;  absolute,  rj 


PRINTED  BY 

SPQTTISWOODE    AND    CO.,    NEW-STREET    SQUAIUS 
LONDON 


B 
O   O 


TO 


, 

-I  ^ 

^^:  Q): 

«i 

•HI       *H; 

JO;I 
oi 

s  ^1 

5      J! 

4    i= 


University  of  Toroito 
Ulrary 


DO  NOT 

REMOVE 

THE 

CARD 

FROM 

THIS 

POCKET 


Acme  Library  Card  Pocket 
LOWE-MARTIN  CO.  LIMITED
