McClellan's Own Story (George B. McClellan, 1887)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1887 first edition (https://archive.org/details/mcclellansownst00primgoog). The Union general's posthumous defense of his Civil War command — Antietam, the Peninsula, and his feud with Lincoln, in his own words.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


:e& 


yi?-Ojr,:N>r.o*'r:-?,r:iftr7f 


^, 


9 


•  •  • 


•  • 


»•     « 


•  -•' 


•  t 


'..• . 


:..• 

•••••. 


.•  • 


f 


V  ■ 


»  ■ 


i». 


I 


•  I. 


c/^ 


7  r--- 


McCLELLAFS  OWI  STOR\ 


THE  WAR  FOR  THE  UNION 


TIIK    SOLDIERS   l¥IIO    FOVOIIT    IT 


THE    CIVILIANS    WHO    DIRECTED    IT 


AND 


HIS    RELATIO:VS   TO    IT    AND    TO   THEHI 


'1       ^       » 


IIY 


GEORQE    B.    McCLELLAN 

LATE   MAJOR-OENERAL  COMMANDING   THE  ARMIES 


New  York 
CHARLES    L.  WEBSTKU  &-  COMPANY 

1887 


\ 


»  >  ' 


2.>0265 


Copyright,  1886, 

By  ELLEN   M.   McCLELLAN, 

As  Executrix  of  the  last  will  and  testament  of  Geo.  U.  McCIellan,  deceased. 

{All  rights  reserrted.) 


•  •    ■ 


•  •  • 


•  • 


••  •• 

;  • 


•     • 


H.  J.    HEWITT,    FRINTBR   AND   SLKCTROTVTKR, 
97  ROSE   ST.,  N.  Y. 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Biographical  Sketch  of  George  Brinton  McClellan i 

Introduction  by  the  Author 27 

CHAPTER  I. 

Causes  of  the  war — Principles  of  the  Union — State-rights  and 
secession  —  Slavery' — Immediate  and  gradual  emancipation — 
Douglas  and  Lincoln — War  imminent — The  South  responsi- 
ble— A  slander  refuted — McClellan  always  for  the  Union — 
Enters  the  service — Made  major-general  of  volunteers  in 
Ohio 2g-4i 

CHAPTER   II. 

Beginning  of  the  war  in  the  West — Apathy  at  Washington — 
Value  of  State  governments — Incidents  in  organizing  Western 
army — Kentucky— Campaign  in  Western  Virginia — McClel- 
lan called   to  Washington 42-s6 

CHAPTER  III. 

Private   letters  of  General  McClellan  to    his  wife,   June    21  to 

July  21,  1861 57-65 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Arrival  at  Washington — Reception  by  Gen.  Scott  and  the  Pre- 
sident— Condition  of  the  capital — Takes  command  of  the 
Division  of  the  Potomac — State  of  the  army — Numbers,  in- 
crease, and  position  of  troops ,.,,...,.      66-8x 

•  •  • 

111 


IV  cox  TENTS. 


PAGE 

CHAPTER  V. 


Private  letters,  July  27  to  Sept.  30,  1861 82-92 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  defence  of  Washington — Growth  of  an  army — Foresight  of 
the  magnitude  of  the  war — Memorandum  to  the  President — 
Letter  to  Secretary  Cameron. 93-107 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Organization  of  the  army — What  an  army  is — Infantry,  artiller}-, 
cavalry,  engineer  troops — The  siaflf  and  its  departments — 
Details  of  the  creation  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac   108-135 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

Various  generals — Scott,  Halleck,  Hunter,  Sumner,  Franklin, 
Porter,  Sedgwick,  and  others — Blenker's  brigade — Scenes  in 
his  command — The  Hungarian  Klapka — The  French  prison- 
ers— Events  in  Maryland 136-148 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Conspiracy  of  the  politicians — Edwin  M.  Stanton — Interview  at 
the  President's  office — Salmon  P.  Chase — Relations  with  Mr. 
Lincoln — Anecdotes — President's  military  orders — Reduction 
of  army 149-166 

CHAPTER  X. 
Private  letters,  Oct.   i,   1S61.  to  March  12,  1862 167-179 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Events  in  and  around  Washington — Ball's  Bluff— Harper's  Ferry 

^Stanton's  trick — Enemy's  batteries  on  the  Potomac 180-197 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Review  of  the  situation — McClellan  succeeds  Scott  in  command 
of  all  the  armies — Their  condition ;  general  disorganization  ; 
no  plan  for  the  war — McC!ellan*s  plans  for  the  whole  war — 
Simultaneous  movements  throughout  the  country — Orders  to 


CONTEXTS.  V 

rAGE 

Bumside  for  North  Carolina  expedition ;  to  Halleck  and 
Buell  for  operations  in  the  West  ;  to  Butler  for  the  New 
Orleans  expedition  —  lialleck  and  Grant— Correspondence 
of  McClellan  and  Grant 19S-221 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Ev'acuation  of  Manassas — Army  corps — McClellan  removed  from 
chief  command — Presfdcni's  military  orders — Plan  of  ad- 
vance on  Richmond — Derangement  of  all  plans  by  the  ad- 
ministration   222-242 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Letters  and   despatches  relating  to   subjects  treated  in  the  fore- 
going and  following  chapters 243-252 


CHAPTER   XV. 

The  Peninsular  campaign — Landing  at  Fortress  Monroe — That 
place  removed  from  his  command — Secretary-  Stanton  stops 
all  recruiting — Advance  on  Richmond — Columns  under  fire 
— First  corps  withdrawn  from  the  army 253-261 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Effects  of  reduction  of  the  army — Overthrow  of  the  campaign — 

New  campaign  with  reduced  army — Siege  of  Yorktown....  262-290 


CHAPTER  XVH. 

Despatches  and  letters  relating  to  subjects  treated  in  the  fore- 
going and  following  chapters 291-305 


CHAPTER  XVIH. 
Private  letters,  April  i  to  May  5,  1862 306-318 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Confederate    retreat — Pursuit   towards    Williamsburg — Battle    of 

Williamsburg — The  horse  Dan  Webster 3^9-333 


VI  CONTENTS. 


PAGB 

CHAPTER  XX. 


Advance  from  Williamsburg — Franklin's  movement — Alarm  of 
prisoners  in  Williamsburg — Plan  of  the  campaign — Orders 
to  move  towards  north  of  Richmond — Fatal  to  the  campaign 
— Movements  on  this  line 334-351 


CHAPTER   XXI. 
Private  letters,  May  6  to  May  18,  1862 352-359 

CHAPTER  XXH. 

White  House — The  Chickahominy  river — Bridges — Battle  of  Han- 
over Court-Housc — Porter's  victory — Neglect  at  Washington 
— McDowell's  retention  useless 360-376 

CHAPTER  XXHI. 

Operations  on  the  Chickahominy — Battle  of  Fair  Oaks — Mc- 
Dowell's corps  is  coming — Still  stretching  the  right  wing — 
Floods  of  the  Chickahominy — Movement  on  Old  Tavern...  377-393 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 
Private  letters,  May  20  to  June  26,  1862 394^409 

CHAPTER   XXV. 

Bcgmning  of  the  Seven  Days — McDowell  coming,  but  not  yet — 
McClcllan  resolves  on  flank  movement  to  the  James  river — 
Preparations — Battle  of  Gaines's  Mill — The  movement  goes 
on — MdClellan  charges  Stanton  with  intent  to  sacrifice  the 
arm^ 410-425 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Continuation  of  the  Seven  Days'  battles — Allen's  field — Savage's 
Station — White  Oak  Swamp— Charles  City  cross-roads — Glen- 
dale — Malvern  Hill — The  army  at  Harrison's  Landing 426-440 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 
Private  letters,  June  26  to  Aug.  23,  1862 44i-47X 


•  • 


COJ\rT£xVTS,  vu 

CHAPTER  XXVUI. 

Letters  of  Gen.  Halleck  and  Gen.  Burnsidc — Correspondence 
with  Secretary  Stanion — His  professions  of  devotion — The 
truth 472-480 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

The  army  at  Harrison's  Bar — Indecision  at  Washington — The 
Harrison's  Bar  letter — Army  ordered  home — Protests  of 
McClellan — On  the  bank  of  the  James  river  the  fate  of  the 
Union  should  be  decided — Transportation  not  provided — 
Withdrawal   of  the  army — Transfer  to  front  of  Washington.  4S 1-507 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

The  army  reaches  Alexandria ;  sent  forward  to  Pope — Pope's 
campaign — McClellan's  work  at  Alexandria — The  last  man 
sent  forward — Stanton's  ironical  order  —  McCIelLm  com- 
mands a  hundred  men — Halleck  in  despair — McClellan's 
volunteer  services 50S-527 

CHAPTER  XXXI. 
Private  letters,  Aug.  24  to  Sept.  2,  1862 528-533 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Recalled  to  save  the  capital — Pope  defeated — The  President  ap- 
peals to  McClellan — He  accepts  command — Alarm  in  Wash- 
ington—  Enthusiasm  of  the  army — The  capital  safe — The 
order  of  Sept.  2  —  Hallcck's  testimony — Stormy  cabinet 
meeting 534-548 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Maryland  invaded — McClellan  not  to  command  in  the  field — 
Halleck  declines  advice  about  Harper's  Ferry — The  North  in 
danger — McClellan  assumes  command — The  halter  around 
his  neck — McClellan  unrestrained — Marching,  and  reorgan- 
izing the  army  on  the  march — Harper's  Ferry  lost — Mc- 
Clellan relieves  it,  but  Miles  surrenders — Franklin's  victory 
at  Crampton's  Gap 549-565 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 
Private  letters,  Sept.  2  to  Sept.  14,  1862 566-571 


VI II  CONTENTS, 

PAGE 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Entering  Frederick — The  lost  despatch — Advance — The  battle  of 

South  Mountain — Gen.  Scott  hails  McClcllan 572-583 

CHAPTER   XXXVI. 

Antietam — Pursuit  from  South  Mountain — Position  of  the  enemy 
— The  battle — Burnside's  failure — His  contradictory  state- 
ments— Letters  of  Col.  Sackett 584-61 1 

CHAPTER  XXXVH. 
Private  letters,  Sept.  15  to  Oct.  i,  1862 612-617 

CHAPTER   XXXVIII. 

After  the  battle — The  position  reviewed — Condition  of  the  army 
— Reorganization  and  supply — Visit  of  the  President — He 
approves  McClellan's  course — Details  of  supplies  needed 
and  not  received — Shoes,  clothing,  blankets,  tents,  horses — 
Dates  of  receipt  of  supplies — Plans  of  advance  into  Virginia.  618-644 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

Crossing  the  Potomac — The  march  of  a  great  army— Overtaking 
the  enemy — Another  battle  imminent — Removed  from  the 
command  —  Burnside  brings  the  order — Farewells  to  the 
army 645-653 

CHAPTER   XL. 
Private  letters,  Oct.  I  to  Nov.  10,  1862 654-661 

Index 663-678 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


fACE 

1.  Steel    plaie :  Portrait  of  Gen   Geo.  B.  McCIellan :  from  a  photo- 

graph taken  in  1S85 Frontispiece 

2.  Statuette,  by  J.  A.   BailU* :  Gen.  McCIellan  on  horseback xi 

3.  Map  of  the  Peninsular 255 

4.  McCIellan  Reconnoitring  at  Yorktown.    Drawn  by  A.  R.  Waud       271 

5.  Plan  of  the  Siege  of  Yorktown 273 

6.  Dan   Webster :    Gen.   McClellan's  favorite   war-horse.      From   a 

photogiaph     329 

7.  Gen.  Mc(*Iellan  at  the  White  House  :  Drawn  by  A.  R.  W^aud 361 

8.  Gen.  McCIellan,  Gen.  Morell.  Prince  de  Juinville,  Comte  de  Paris, 

Col.  Colburn,  and  Col.  Sweitzer,  at  Gen.  Morell's  headquar- 
ters.    From  a  photograph  by  Brady 413 

9.  McCIellan  posting  the  batteries  at  Malvern  Hill.     Drawn  by  A. 

R.  Waud         435 

10.  Fac-simile  of  despatch.  Gen.  McCIellan  to  Gen.  Halleck.     From 

McClellan's  original  despatch-book   522-523 

11.  Map  of  the  Battle  of  Antietam 585 

12.  The   Bumside    Bridge  over  the   Antietam.     From   a   photograph 

taken  in  1862. 5S9 

13.  McCIellan  at  Antietam.     Drawn  by  A.  R.  Waud 599 

14.  McClellan's   Farewell   to  the  Armv  of  the  Potomac.     Drawn  -bv 

A.  R.  Waud 649 


Note. — Mr.  A.  R.  Waud  accompanied  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  while  under  McClellanU 
command,  and  the  illustrations  dra«  n  by  him  are  from  his  original  sketches  made  on  the  spot 
ill  1S62. 

a  ix 


•     •  •     • 
•     •     •  • 


»     •  • 

•     •• 


•  • 


•  • 


•  • 


•   • 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH 


.  r 


■  T 


\V.  C.    PRIME,  LL.D. 


\.:i-\ir 


I  V 


^  -  •        . 


THt 


LIFE,  SERVICES.  AND  CHARACTER 


OF 


OEORQE    B.    IVICCLELLAN. 


George  Brinton  McClellan,  son  of  George  McClellan,  M.D.,  and 
Elizabeth  Brinton  McClellan,  was  born  in  Philadelphia,  Pcnn.,  Dec.  3, 
1826.  His  school  education  was  in  that  city;  in  1841  and  1842  in  the  pre> 
paratory  school  attached  to  the  University  of  Pennsylvania.  He  entered 
the  Military  Academy  at  West  Point  in  1842,  graduating  in  1846,  when  he 
was  assigned  to  the  Corps  of  Engineers  as  second  lieutenant.  In  Sept.  of 
the  same  year  he  went  with  the  army  to  Mexico,  where  he  served  with  dis- 
tinction during  the  war.  He  was  breveted  first  T.^utenant  for  gallantry  at 
Contreras  and  Churubusco,  captain  for  Chapultepec. 

At  the  close  of  the  Mexican  war  he  commanded  the  engineer  com- 
pany and  brought  it  to  West  Point,  where  he  served  with  it,  acting  also  as 
assistant  instructor  of  practical  engineering  until  185 1.  In  that  year  he 
superintended  the  construction  of  Fort  Delaware.  In  1852  he  accompa- 
nied Capt.  R.  B.  Marcy  on  the  Red  river  exploring  expedition.  In  1853 
and  1854  he  was  on  duty  in  Washington  Territory  and  Oregon,  as  an 
engineer  officer,  exploring  a  proposed  route  for  the  Pacific  Railroad. 

In  the  spring  of  1855  the  government  sent  a  commission  of  army 
officers  to  Europe,  instructed  to  obtain  and  report  information  on  military 
service  in  general,  and  the  practical  working  of  changes  then  recently 
made  in  military  systems. 

The  commission  was  specially  instructed  to  give  attention  to  the 
organization  of  armies,  transports  for  men  and  horses,  embarking  and 
disembarking  them,  hospitals  and  ambulances,  clothing  and  camp  equip- 
age, arms  and  ammunition,  fortifications  and  sea-coast  defences,  engineer- 
ing operations  of  a  siege  in  all  its  branches,  siege-trains,  bridge-trains, 
boats,  wagons — in  short,  to  study  and  report  on  the  whole  art  of  war  in 
Europe.  As  the  Crimean  war  was  then  in  progress,  and  the  British  and 
French  forces  were  besieging  Sebastopol,  this  was  an  important  point  for 
the  objects  of  the  commission,  which  consisted  of  three  officers — Maj.  R. 


•  ••• 
••.    • 

•  ••  :«^ 
•  •  •  •  • 
••  •  ••  •.  • 


•     :  "•      • 


•••  •     • 

•    •  •     • 


•  •     •    •  • 


2\        ••  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 


•_  ■  • 


•,  •;•.  •*  Delafield,  Maj.  A.  Mordecai,  and  Capt.  G.  B.  McClellan.  They  proceed- 
*  •*•  *  ed  to  Europe  in  the  spring  of  1855,  amply  accredited  to  American  repre- 

'  *  sentatives  and  the  several  governments  on  whose  courtesy  they  would  have 

to  depend  for  opportunities  of  study  and  observation. 

The  British  government  extended  to  them  every  possible  courtesy. 
From  the  French  and  the  Russian  they  could  obtain  no  facilities.  They 
were  received  in  the  Crimea  with  soldierly  kindness  by  Gen.  Simpson,  who 
had  succeeded  Lord  Raglan  in  command  of  the  British  forces.  Here  they 
had  ample  opportunity  for  the  study  of  military  operations  on  a  grand 
scale.  Leaving  the  Crimea  in  Nov.,  they  pursued  their  duties  in  various 
European  states.  The  list  of  military  posts  and  fortresses  which  they 
examined  is  very  long,  abounding  in  names  illustrious  in  the  history  of 
wars.  McClellan's  Report  on  the  arms,  equipments,  and  organization  of 
*'  the  three  arms  "  was,  says  a  distinguished  soldier,  "a  model  of  concise- 
ness and  accurate  information,  and  added  to  his  already  brilliant  reputa- 
tion." It  may  be  noted  as  an  interesting  fact  that  the  Secretary  of  War 
who  issued  the  elaborate  instructions  to  this  commission,  and  selected  its 
members  for  their  special  ability  and  fitness,  was  Jefferson  Davis.  Five 
years  later,  when  he  was  at  the  head  of  a  political  and  military  rebellion, 
one  of  the  commissioners  utilized  his  experience  and  information  in  organ- 
izing and  leading  the  armies  of  the  Union  for  its  suppression. 

In  Jan  ,  1857,  McClellan,  then  captain  in  the  ist  Cavalry,  resigned  his 
commission  and  accepted  employment,  first  as  chief-engineer,  afterward  as 
vice-president,  of  the  Illinois  Central  Railroad  Company.  Later  he  became 
president  of  the  Eastern  Division  of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Railroad 
Company. 

On  the  22d  May,  i860,  he  married  Ellen  Mary  Marcy,  daughter  of 
Capt.  (afterward  Gen.)  Randolph  B.  Marcy,  and  established  his  residence 
at  Cincinnati,  O.,  where  he  was  occupied  in  his  business  when  the  civil  war 
began,  and  he  offered  his  services  to  his  country. 

No  volunteer  in  the  army  made  greater  personal  sacrifices.  He  was 
in  the  enjoyment  of  a  large  income  ;  his  prospects  in  life  were  brilliant. 
Like  all  soldiers  of  the  old  army,  he  had  led  a  wandering  life,  with  no  one 
place  to  call  a  home.  He  had  now  for  the  first  time  made  for  himself  a 
place  of  rest  with  his  young  wife,  in  which  they  were  gathering  those  per- 
sonal belongings  which  go  so  far  to  make  life  happy  and  rest  delightful. 
The  sacrifices  of  the  soldier's  wife  are  as  great,  often  greater,  than  those  of 
the  husband.  McClellan's  wife  was  a  soldier's  daughter.  The  spirit  of 
obedience  to  the  call  of  duty  ruled  them  both  alike.  No  words  can  fitly 
express  the  perfectness  of  that  love  which  was  the  light  of  both  their  lives. 
It  was  expressed  in  a  few  lines  of  his  letters  which  I  have  suffered  to 
appear  in  this  volume,  in  a  thousand  passages  and  words  which  are 
omitted. 

His  life  from  April,  1861,  to  Nov.,  1862,  forms  the  subject  of  this  nar- 
rative, which  I  have  entitled  **  McClellan's  Own  Story." 

He  was  commissioned  major-general  of  volunteers  in  Ohio  on  the  23d 
April,  1861. 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  3 

Oa  the  14th  Kaj  he  was  mode  major-general  in.  the  United  States 
inny  and  placed  in  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Ohio. 

On  the  26th  Maj  he  issued  a  proclamation  to  the  L'nion  men  of  West- 
em  Virginii,  and  an  address  to  his  soldiers  whom  he  led  to  what  has  been 
known  as  the  Western  Virginia  campaign.  On  the  22d  July,  having  freed 
Western  Virginia  from  secessionists  and  preserved  its  people  10  the  L'nion, 
he  was  summoned  to  Washington,  and,  arriving  there  oa  the  26th,  was 
assigned  to  command  the  Division  of  the  Potomac. 

He  found  Washington  in  a  perilous  condition.  Tlie  defeat  at  Bull 
Run  had  demoralized  the  administration  and  the  arm  v.  No  one  had 
formed  anj,  the  most  vague^  idea  of  what  was  to  be  done  or  how  to 
do  anything.  Up  to  this  time  the  administration  had  shared  with  the 
people  of  the  North  and  an  nnconsidering  press  the  opinion  that  the  rebel- 
lion was  but  a  mob,  to  be  scattered  in  one  or  two  free  fights  by  impetuous 
onsets  of  patriotic  men.  Now  the  shout,  "On  to  Richmond,"  had  been 
suddenly  and  appallingly  hushed.  Paralysis  had  fo. lowed.  Not  even 
Scott  or  >Cc[>owell.  or  any  military  adviser  of  the  administration  and 
people,  had  thought  of  making  ordinary  milirary  provision  for  the  defence 
of  Washington  against  an  enemy  whose  shell  might  at  any  m<>ment  shat- 
ter the  dome  of  the  Capitol.  Ihe  military  condition  of  the  whole  country. 
Western  Virginia  alone  excepted,  was  chaotic. 

Probably  there  were  other  men  in  .\merica  as  well  fitted  by  natural 
ability  and  education  for  the  great  Wiirk  in  hand,  but  they  did  not  appear. 
Xo  other  one  has  been  indicated  as  the  proper  man  for  the  occasion.  That 
occasion  demanded  a  calm  foresight  of  the  vast  needs  of  the  country  in  the 
coming,  the  then  present,  peril,  the  ability  to  provide  for  every  one  of 
tliem,  and — the  expression  is  homely  but  precise — the  staying  power  to 
make  the  provisitDn  perfectly,  calmly,  completely,  unmoved  by  the  cries, 
however  honest  and  anxious,  of  an  alarmed  people,  et^ually  unmoved 
by  the  criticisms  of  the  envious  and   the  clamors  of  the  unprincipled. 

If  the  wisdom  which  sought  the  able^st  military  adviire  in  that  moment 
of  alarm  had  been  displayed  throughout  the  war  by  entrusting  tj  military 
knowledge  and  abilirv  the  conduct  of  campaigns  and  the  direction  and 
execution  of  the  work  of  war,  the  expense  of  treasure  and  bloo<l  would 
have  been  vastly  less,  and  the  end  would  have  been  much  more  speedy. 
Instead  of  this^  after  McClellan  had  assuretl  the  safety  of  the  capital. 
and  the  alarm  of  the  civilians  had  subsided,  they  assumed  the  direction, 
interfered  with  and  delayed  military  preparations,  and  undertook  the 
specific  management  of  campaigns  and  armies,  while  they  took  care  that 
the  delays  and  defeats  which  they  caused  should  be  charged  on  soldiers  in 
the  ield. 

We  who  were  then  living  can  with  ?he  utmost  dificulty  carry  oar 
minds  bock  to  the  conditions  ander  which  McClellan  was  called  to  save 
the  capital  and  roantry.  It  is  impossible  for  the  present  generation  to 
realize  the  blindness  of  the  people  or  appreciate  the  prevision  of  the  yosn^ 
genenl.  We  now  look  back  to  .ill  that  which  he  foresaw,  foretold,  and 
provided  for.  So  iaceose  had  been  popular  feeling  chat  it  was  regarded 
3 


4  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

as  treason  to  think  or  say  that  secession  was  in  great  strength,  that  the 
South  would  not  be  easily  conquered. 

lie  was  alone  in  the  clear  atmosphere,  above  the  scene  of  physical  and 
political  warfare,  and  saw  what  others  could  not  or  would  not  sec.  Mr. 
Lincoln  probably  came  nearer  to  accepting  his  views  than  any  one  else. 
From  this  lime  on  the  President  reposed  confidence  in  him  ;  and  there  is 
small  reason  for  doubt  that,  but  for  the  interference  of  politicians,  Lincoln 
and  McClellan  would  have  brought  the  war  to  an  end  in  the  summer  of 
1S62.  But  Mr.  Lincoln  soon  had  two  wars  on  his  hands.  He  was  at  the 
head  of  the  Union  and  at  the  head  of  a  political  party.  Both  were  threat- 
ened with  division.  He  desired  to  save  both,  probably  believing  that  the 
unity  of  his  party  was  essential  to  the  saving  of  the  country.  In  this  view 
can  be  explained  much  which  is  otherwise  inexplicable  in  his  dealings 
with  the  general,  to  whom  up  to  the  very  last  he  gave  the  most  frank  and 
full  private  assurances  of  his  confidence. 

The  "  staying**  powers  of  McClcUan  were  the  salvation  of  the  Union. 
Alone  in  his  outlook,  he  was  alone  in  the  execution  of  his  great  work. 
The  fortification  of  Washington  accomplished,  and  a  sufficient  force 
organized  and  disciplined  for  its  defence,  he  directed  his  labors  to  the 
next  great  need — an  army.  The  people,  the  sovereigns,  had  not  the  remot- 
est conception  of  the  meaning  of  the  word  "army."  Very  few  sol- 
diers in  this  country  had  grasped  the  idea.  No  one  but  McClellan  had 
observed  that  the  able  and  educated  soldiers  of  the  South  had  long  been 
organizing  that  vast  machine  which,  once  created,  moves  with  irresistible 
force  over  all  obstacles  until  met  by  another  machine  of  like  construction 
and  greater  power,  or  which  is  handled  with  greater  skill.  The  Army  of 
the  Potomac  grew  like  a  vast  engine  constructed  by  a  master-mind.  Its 
history  is  the  reward  of  the  constructor,  ample,  and  the  only  reward  he 
ever  received. 

There  was  one  characteristic  of  McClellan's  mind  which  some  would 
regard  as  a  defect,  and  which  certainly  placed  him  .at  a  disadvantage  in 
his  relations  with  the  men  in  Washington.  He  was  slow  to  suspect  evil 
of  any  man.  This  trait  was  exhibited  in  his  private  life,  and  he  never 
wholly  lost  it.  The  philosophic  reader  will  find  interest  in  the  indications 
afforded  in  his  letters  of  his  gradual  awakening  to  the  controlling  presence 
in  Washington  of  a  class  of  men  known  as  politicians.  Soldiers,  accus- 
tomed to  honest  service  for  definite  purposes,  imbued  with  high  principles 
of  honor,  can  with  diflSculty  recognize  the  existence  of  men  in  public  life 
who  are  willing  to  manage  public  interests  for  private  or  party  gain. 

He  knew  the  past  history  of  his  country  by  heart.  He  remembered 
the  illustrious  names  and  records  of  men  whose  high  ambition  had  been 
to  serve  the  people  as  statesmen,  whom  no  one  had  ever  thought  to  charge 
with  personal  or  party  motive  in  any  of  their  acts  as  trustees  and  represen- 
tatives of  the  people.  Was  the  day  of  such  American  senators  and  repre- 
sentatives gone  by  ?  Was  legislation  henceforth  to  be  for  the  perpetuation 
of  hold  on  office,  for  the  success  of  party,  with  the  mere  pretence  of  good 
to  country  ?    Now  that   the  general   trust  of  governmental  powers  had 


BIOGRAPHICAL   SKETCH,  5 

become  a  specific  trust  of  blood  to  be  poured  out  and  treasure  to  le 
exp>ended  for  the  sal\*ation  of  the  Union,  it  did  not  occur  to  him  that  any 
of  the  trustees  could  dream  of  using  that  treasure  and  blood  for  personal 
ad\'antage.     When  men  professed  honest  patriotism  he  believed  them. 

Xor  do  the  people  themselves,  in  times  uf  excitement,  yield  readily 
to  the  belief  that  among  their  leaders  are  some  who  are  not  honest  and 
patriotic.  But  in  calm  retrospect  they  are  generally  more  wise.  It  would 
not  be  difficult  already  to  make  a  catalogue  uf  names  of  men  who  were 
prominent  in  Washington  and  elsewhere  during  the  war,  who  secured  for 
the  time  the  reputation  of  patriotic  leaders  of  opinion  and  directors  of 
events,  whose  memories  have  been  allowed,  as  they  deserved,  to  rot. 

All  our  history  demonstrates  how  such  men  abound,  and  secure 
influence  and  power  at  every  seat  of  government,  municipal  and  genera!, 
wherever  patronage  is  to  be  distributed  and  money  to  be  expended. 
They  are  very  ignorant  indeed  who  imagine  that,  in  the  greatest  oppor- 
tunity for  such  men  ever  afforded  in  America,  there  were  none  of  them 
at  the  front.     They  were  legion. 

The  historj'  of  the  war  is  inextricably  involved  in  the  history  of  party 
politics.  No  one  can  understand  the  former  without  knowledge  of  the 
latter.  Nor  can  the  great  services  of  McCiellan  be  in  any  way  estimated, 
his  marvellous  steadfastness  in  duty,  his  herculean  work  in  Washington, 
and  his  brilliant  career  at  the  head  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  without 
giving  full  value  to  the  fact  that  from  a  short  time  after  his  arrival  in 
W^ashington  politicians  formed  an  enemy  in  his  rear  often  more  formid- 
able to  him  and  his  army  than  the  enemy  in  their  front  toward  whom 
alone  the  eyes  of  the  people  were  then  directed. 

The  Republican  party  which  re-elected  Mr.  Lincoln  in  1S64  was  not 
the  same  party,  either  in  principles  or  in  voters,  which  had  elected  him  in 
i860.  The  Democratic  party  of  later  years  is  not  in  any  aspect  the  party 
of  Mr.  Buchanan's  time.  Old  issues  were  dead,  annihilated  by  the  fire 
on  Fort  Sumter.  The  Republican  party-machiner>*  existed,  the  machine 
politicians  held  it  in  hand,  and  ardent  partisans  throughout  the  country 
kept  up  a  semblance  of  party  distinction  by  denouncing  all  opponents  as 
sympathizers  with  secession  and  traitors.  But  in  the  early  summer  of 
1S61  there  was  but  one  party  in  the  North,  the  party  of  the  Union  and 
Constitution.  Here  and  there  was  a  Southern  sympathizer  whose  utter- 
ances furnished  material  for  newspapers  and  orators  to  grow  wild  about, 
but  the  number  of  these  was  insignificant.  The  entire  body  of  the  North- 
em  people  were  united  in  one  sentiment.  And  this  enthusiastic  unani- 
mity was  the  more  wonderful  because  there  had  been  a  very  widespread 
sjTnpathy  in  the  North  with  the  doctrine  of  secession,  on  which  the 
leaders  of  the  South  had  based  much  expectation.  This  sympathy  was 
not  in  one  political  party  alone.  Startling  as  the  statement  may  be  to 
some,  the  fact  is  easily  demonstrated  that  there  had  been  as  many  if  not 
more  secessionists  among  Northern  Republicans  than  Democrats.  There 
is  no  more  trustworthy  indication  of  a  man's  political  opinions  than  the 
doctrines   taught   by   the  newspaper  he  takes  reg^ularly  and   reads   reli- 


6  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

giously.  One  powerful  Northern  journal  taught  that  the  right  of  secession 
was  as  clear  as  the  rights  asserted  in  the  Declaration  of  Independence, 
that  a  Union  pinned  together  by  bayonets  was  not  worth  having,  that  the 
erring  sisters  ought  to  be  let  go.  This  journal  claimed  and  had  200,000 
subscribers,  which  implies  at  least  a  half  million  regular  naders,  a  lar^c 
part  of  whom  accepted  the  doctrine  of  secession.  There  was  a  body  of 
men  in  the  North,  of  considerable  numbers,  known  as  the  Abolitionists, 
who  had  steadily  advocated  disunion,  their  motto  being,  '*  The  Consti- 
tution of  the  United  States  is  a  league  with  death  and  a  covenant  with 
hell."  Many  of  them  were  voters  with  the  Republican  party.  It  is  there- 
fore unquestionable  that  a  considerable  portion  of  the  Republican  party 
had  been  indoctrinated  into  a  belief  not  only  of  the  right  but  of  the  de- 
sirableness of  the  secession  of  the  Southern  States.  That  a  considerable 
portion  of  the  Democrats  had  held  the  same  views  no  one  doubts.  But 
the  challenge  to  arms  was  accepted  by  Republicans  and  Democrats  with 
one  voice  and  act.  All  sympathy  with  secession  vanished,  and  it  would 
be  absurd  now  to  deny  that  there  were  as  many  Democrats  as  Republicans 
among  the  volunteer  soldiery  of  the  war. 

The  people  and  the  army  thought  of  one  subject  only — the  suppres- 
sion of  the  rebellion,  while  politicians,  Democrats  as  well  as  Rcpubli> 
cans,  looked  to  the  spoils  of  present  power  and  the  means  of  confirming 
that  power  in  future  elections. 

Congress,  at  the  moment  of  McClellan's  arrival  in  Washington,  as 
if  to  instruct  him  in  his  duty,  expressed  the  unanimous  sentiment  of  the 
North  in  a  resolution  which  decl.-'red  "that  the  present  deplorable  civil 
war  has  been  forced  upon  the  country  by  the  disunionists  of  the  Southern 
States,  now  in  revolt  against  the  constitutional  government,  and  in  arms 
around  the  capital  ;  that  in  this  national  emergency  Congress,  banishin^^ 
all  feeling  of  mere  passion  or  resentment,  will  recollect  only  its  duty  to  its 
country ;  that  this  war  is  not  waged,  on  our  part,  in  any  spirit  of  oppres- 
sion, nor  for  any  purpose  of  conquest  or  subjugation,  nor  purpose  of  over- 
throwing or  interfering  with  the  rights  or  established  institutions  of  those 
States,  but  to  defend  and  maintain  the  supremacy  of  the  Constitution  and 
to  preserve  the  Union,  with  all  the  dignity,  equality,  and  rights  of  the 
several  States  unimpaired  ;  and  as  soon  as  these  objects  are  accomplished 
the  war  ought  to  cease." 

McClellan  accepted  this  instruction.  It  expressed  his  own  views  and 
those  of  every  lover  of  his  country  in  the  North. 

But  if  this  purpose  were  achieved  in  this  way  the  Southern  States, 
kept  in  the  Union  by  a  strong  hand,  would  reappear  in  future  elections 
as  a  solid  South  against  the  machine  politicians  who  had  gained  power 
in  i860.  If  the  white  vote  could  be  suppressed  and  the  slaves  be  freed 
with  the  immediate  right  of  suffrage,  their  vote  might  be  controlled  and 
a  solid  South  secured  for  those  who  had  given  them  the  right  of  voting. 
But  how  could  the  people  be  led  to  favor  this  policy  ? 

Various  schemes  were  devised  to  accomplish  the  desired  end.  For 
a  time   efforts  were  made  to  induce  the  North  to  adopt  a  policy  which 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  7 

Mr.  Chase  formulated  in  an  inier\iew  with  Mr.  Wade  of  the  Senate  and 
Mr.  .Ashley  of  ihe  House,  Dec.  11,  i56j. 

Mr.  Chase  said  (Warden,  p.  390)  that  a  State  attempting  to  secede,  the 
State  grovemment  being  placed  in  hostility  to  the  Federal  government, 
**the  State  organization  was  forfeited,  and  it  lapsed  into  the  condition 
of  a  Territory''  ;  that  **  we  could  organize  territorial  courts,  and,  as  soon 
as  it  became  necessary,  a  territorial  government";  that  ** those  States 
could  not  properly  be  considered  as  States  in  the  Union,  but  must  be 
readmitted  from  time  to  time  as  Congress  should  pro\ide."  Mr.  Wade 
and  Mr.  Ashley  were  understood  to  concur  in  this  doctrine ;  and.  as 
matter  of  fact,  it  was  given  out  as  sound  doctrine  and  \%*as  widely 
advocated  in  newspapers  and  at  war-meetings  engineered  by  politicians 
in  various  parts  of  the  North. 

Mr.  Chase  was  too  good  a  lawyer  not  to  recognize  the  absurdity  rf 
the  doctrine  as  American  law.  It  was  pure  secession  doctrine  at  bot- 
tom, and  subversive  of  ihe  whole  system  of  government  in  all  the  Stales. 
The  firmness  of  conservative  Republicans,  and  the  adherence  of  Mr. 
Lincoln  to  the  dtirtrine  of  the  Congressional  resolution,  kept  a  large  por- 
tion of  the  people  fi'om  accepting  it.  Perhaps  the  greatest  service  which 
Mr.  Lincoln  rendered  his  country  w.\s  in  tlie  sagacious  manner  in  which 
he  prevented  this  revolutionary  doctrine  from  becoming  the  avowei 
policy-  of  a  party.  Its  success  would  have  been  more  fatal  to  the  Con 
stitution  than  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Southern  Confederacy. 

The  abolition  of  slavenk*  as  **  a  war  measure  "  was  proposed  and  advo- 
cated at  the  same  time.  This  was  more  popular.  But  neither  Mr.  Lincoln 
nor  any  military  authority  could  perceive  its  practical  use  as  a  weapon  of 
war,  and,  altiiough  a  tremendous  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  on  the 
President,  he  steadily  refused  to  issue  "a  bull  against  a  comet."  The 
political  position  was  therefore  complicated.  The  process  of  coalition,  by 
which  politicians  who  had  been  Democrats  as  well  as  Republicans  came 
together  and  formed  the  radical  wing  of  the  Republican  party,  is  worthy 
the  study  of  ever)-  one  interested  in  the  histor)-  of  popular  government.  A 
powerful  combination  was  formed.  It  had  no  leader,  for  too  many  of  its 
members  were  **everj-man  for  himself,"  while  each  was  seeking  one  or 
another  personal  benefit.  Its  common  purpose  was  to  manage  the  war  in 
such  way  as  to  secure  control  of  the  countr}*  in  the  elections  in  1S64  and 
afterwards. 

There  was  a  body  of  noble,  conserv^ative,  and  patriotic  men  in  the 
old  Republican  party  strong  enough  to  interpose  many  obstacles  in  the  way 
of  the  radicals.  The  latter  adopted  the  customary-  tactics  of  unscrupulous 
partisans  in  this  countni\  and  visited  on  all  who  opposed  them  storms  of 
foul  epithets  and  charges  of  sympathy  with  the  rebellion.  Mr.  Lincoln 
was  alternately  praised  and  vilified.  But  no  one  of  the  radical  coalition 
was  his  friend  or  desired  his  continuance  at  the  head  of  the  party.  Some 
old  Democratic  politicians,  recognizing  good  prospects  of  its  success, 
joined  the  radical  party.  Congress  in  time  yielded  to  its  control.  .\  com- 
mittee called  The  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War  was  created,  to 


8  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

• 

be  the  machine  of  partisan  politics,  in  control  of  the  most  nnscmpulous 
leaders  of  the  combination,  who  used  it  to  good  effect  in  the  deception  of 
the  confiding  people  of  thf  country. 

It  is  profoundly  interesting,  and  there  is  something  grotesque  in  it 
also,  to  observe  how  the  shrewd  and  far-seeing  Lincoln  kept  the  headship 
of  both  elements,  conservative  and  radical,  prevented  their  often-threat- 
ened division  into  two  parties,  defeated  each  of  the  rival  candidates  for  his 
office,  and  finally  compelled  his  own  renomi nation  and  their  support  in  his 
re-election. 

To  secure  for  their  purposes  the  leader  of  the  armies  had  been  one  of 
the  first  and  most  important  objects  of  the  radicals.  If  a  victor  he  was 
morally  certain  to  become  the  idol  of  the  people.  *'  What  can  we  make 
out  of  McClellan?"  was  the  question  of  all  ;  *' What  can  I  make  out  of 
McClellan?"  was  the  question  of  each.  Thus  in  that  marvellous  apoca- 
13'pse,  his  private  diary,  Mr.  Chase  writes  (Warden,  p.  500)  that  a  friend 
said  to  him,  '*  Col.  Key  often  expressed  his  regret  that  McClellan  had  not 
conferred  with  me  and  acUd  in  concert  vnth  fm.  I  replied  that  I  thought 
if  he  had  that  the  rebellion  would  be  ended  now."  •*!...  was  quite 
willing  he  should  repeat  to  McClellan  what  I  had  said?'  Undoubtedly  had 
McClellan  attached  himself  to  Mr.  Chase,  or  any  other  Presidential  candi- 
date, in  the  manner  suggested,  he  would  have  been  supported  by  a  power- 
ful political  combination.  But  the  bargains  of  politics  were  foreign  to  his 
work  and  nature.  He  was  creating  an  army  and  using  it  for  the  people, 
not  for  himself ;  certainly  not  for  Mr.  Chase  or  any  other  aspirant  to 
position. 

The  success  of  McClellan  in  1862  would  have  been  doubly  fatal  to 
the  politicians.  The  old  Union  would  have  been  restored  and  the  general 
would  command  the  political  situation.  Therefore  McClellan  must  not  be 
successful.  His  popularity  must  be  destroyed.  Whatever  of  falsehood 
could  be  invented  must  be  published  concerning  him.  His  successes 
must  be  decried.  Above  all,  he  must  not  be  allowed  to  win  a  decisive 
victory.  Neither  a  quick  ending  of  the  war  nor  a  victorious  campaign  by 
McClellan  would  enure  to  party  success. 

The  argument  of  personal  rivalry  and  party  requirement  was  pressed 
on  Mr.  Lincoln  without  success.  However  loyal  McClellan  was  to  his 
country,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  said  he  urged  his  removal  because 
•'  he  was  not  loyal  to  the  administration." 

As  it  began  to  be  evident  that  Mr.  Lincoln  would  not  adopt  the  radi- 
cal policy,  nor  discharge  McClellan  and  appoint  some  general  suited  to 
radical  purposes,  nor  manage  war  matters  with  special  regard  to  future 
partisan  considerations,  it  became  important  to  gain  the  War  Department, 
and  place  in  it  a  secretary'  who  would  do  what  the  President  would  not. 
Thus  the  course  of  the  war  could  be  controlled,  generals  could  be  driven 
with  reins,  the  President  himself  could  be  deceived,  misled,  to  some 
extent  managed. 

Mr.  Edwin  M.  Stanton  was  selected,  and  Mr.  Chase,  with  great  adroit- 
ness, described  by  himself,  induced  Mr.  Lincoln  to  appoint  him  as  sue- 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SHETCff.  9 

cessor  iz>  Mr.  Canscros.  The  rcliirlocs  e:=:o;ioa  wltb  wiich  Mr.  Cbxse 
recorifd  :*.c  s-cct55  of  th:?  schezne  iadini:**  ihe  view  Sw  hii  of  ;:5 
vicil  -ziT-r-rLiiicc  i:>  :he  radical  ciase. 

Mr.  Siintoa  was  a  jawr^r  of  =:>i«raie  ab:I:::es.  a  ssaa  of  p<c=!lir 
m*EtaI  r:-r.5!::crl:3.  Wfih::;:  =.val  principle  or  sens*  of  rers^nau  h:a:r. 
he  was  «-,iaI!T  readr  :o  c>-i~.re  fr-:-ni  :=  p-^Iir  r-:M:::s  aai  ic-  t^irar  rri- 
rare  fr-easshir-.  ai^i  was  tlerefrre  ez::ae-ilT  suitci  to  ;be  r-r7':>5e5  i:r 
which  he  was  selecieid  bj  the-  =en  w::h  whim  he  had  forraei  a  secrt: 
alliasce.  Bai  he  was  as  uairustwonbj  i=  tha:  as  ia  oiber  assoclarlons. 
aci  ax  ihe  verr  momea:  wht3  Mr.  CLise,  cca*i:=^  ia  his.  w-is  larnir-ia^ 
to  brlnz  him  inio  the  cariaei,  he  betrarei  Mr.  Chase's  c^niieares  a!:d 
defeased  his  plaas.  for  his  owa  purposes.  Tha«se  who  kaew  him  we  '  wiere 
ia  ihe  hibi;  of  desrribiaz  h:ai  as  one  of  those  who  •'ilwaTrs  kick  c.wti  ;he 
ladder  bv  which  ther  hare  c!i:a^-ei.*"  His  aaibitica  was  uatouadei  and 
his  self-rtMaace  abso'.at-r.  He  did  aot  dc;«taJ.  as  do  ordiaarr  p:i;::c'ias, 
on  a  liTiier  or  smaller  body  of  followers  aai  r-y.iiicii  depea-diais.  No  oae 
shared  his  aspiratioas.  aad  aoae  were  to  claim  g:aii:ude  or  reward  ia  his 
successes. 

A".  limes  of  great  popular  exciiea^eat  aad  naiioaa]  -^^vSl  tria^  ia:o 
view  remarkable  characicrs.  Noae  more  remarkable  than  his  appears  ia 
the  hisiirrof  the  civil  war;  a:ae  wiil  be  a  more  iaicresiia^  subiect  :o 
the  stsdeat  of  hnman  nature.  Wiih  cp'prnnnity  to  achieve  creaiaess  aai 
wia  a  ;-e:-pIe*s  gratitude  such  as  few  others  had.  he  used  ii  in  such  war 
thai  in  the  ca^m  retrosp-eci  of  a  ^quarter  of  a  century  his  countrymen  !o:>k 
at  him  with  s:'!TOwful  shame,  and  few  name  him  with  respect,  except  here 
aad  there  a  survivor  of  the  a!!iance  whDse  purposes  he  served.  He  was 
supposed  to  be  energetic,  bat  he  was  only  spasmodic,  aad  in  his  spasms 
of  impulsive  judgment  and  action  committed  errors  cosi^.y  beyond  al'  mea- 
surement ia  the  money  of  the  treasury  aad  the  lives  of  soldiers  Himself 
honest  in  money  matters,  a  host  of  plunderers  iai:ened  without  check  on 
the  money  provided  by  the  people  aad  scaiitred  in  his  ia:provicen:  and 
reckless  management  of  the  department.  With  the  men  aad  means 
lavishly  placed  at  his  disposal  by  the  people,  a  NVar  Secretary  of  souad 
sense,  cool  discretion,  honest  purpose,  and  the  good  judgment  to  accept 
military  advice  and  instruction  for  military  oj>erations,  would  have  con- 
ducted the  war  at  an  expense  of  hundreds  where  it  was  thousands  of  mil- 
lions. But  Mr.  Stanton's  errors  of  self- reliance  were  aggravated  by  the 
fact  that  he  not  only  had  no  military  knowledge,  but  by  his  peculiar  dispo- 
sition was  incapacitated  to  receive  military  instruction.  A  very  foolish 
letter  which  he  published  revealed  his  ignorance  of  the  simplest  principles 
on  which  success  in  war  depends.  His  suspension  of  all  recruiting  at  the 
moment  of  opening  active  operations  in  the  field  was  a  blunder  unparal- 
leled in  military  history,  as  well  as  a  crime.  His  inability  to  receive  mii- 
tary  instruction  has  singular  illustration  m  a  letter,  recently  made  public* 

*  L^tcT  to  Rcr.  H.  Djer,  dated  May  i3,  i563.  read  in  the  Honse  of  Rqprescstatires 
June  8, 1SS6. 


lO  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

■ 

which  he  wrote  to  a  friend  a  few  weeks  after  the  siege  of  Yorktown. 
When  McClellan  entered  on  the  Peninsular  campaign  his  entire  plan 
of  campaign  rested  on  his  purpose  to  throw  the  ist  corps  in  rear  of 
Yorktown,  turn  that  fortified  position,  and  clear  the  way  for  a  rapid  ad- 
vance to  Richmond.  The  withdrawal  of  the  ist  corps  from  his  army 
at  the  very  instant  it  was  to  have  been  thus  utilized  defeated  the  plan 
of  campaign,  rendered  necessary  the  siege  of  Yorktown  and  the  adop- 
tion of  a  new  plan  with  a  reduced  army.  Innumerable  letters  and  de- 
spatches besides  those  given  in  McClellan's  narrative  made  these  facts 
clear  to  all,  excepting  the  War  Department.  Mr.  Stanton  wrote  in  this 
private  letter  to  a  confidential  friend:  **The  force  retained  from  his 
[McClellan's]  expedition  was  not  needed^  and  could  not  have  been  employed 
by  him  " ./ 

One  of  his  co-secretaries  says  that  his  hostility  to  McClellan  began 
when  he  entered  the  cabinet.  He  was,  indeed,  but  one  of  the  organized 
enemy  in  the  rear  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  their  commander,  but 
he  was  the  executive  of  their  plots  as  well  as  of  h's  own.  Professing 
always  devoted  personal  attachment  to  and  admiration  of  the  general,  he 
opened  his  private  correspondence  with  his  wife  ;  circulated  with  vindic- 
tive malice  falsehoods  and  slanders,  petty  and  great,  to  his  injury  ;  mis* 
represented  him  to,  and  sought  to  embroil  him  wiih,  the  President  ;  and 
deliberately  planned  and  executed  the  defeat  of  the  Peninsular  campaign. 
The  accusation  is  most  grave  and  terrible ;  but  it  was  made  to  him  in  per- 
son by  the  general  of  the  army,  and  his  reception  of  it  was  a  confession 
of  its  awful  truth.  For  at  midnight,  June  27-28,  when  McClellan  found 
his  army  in  the  toils  into  which  Mr.  Stanton  had  led  them  and  there  aban- 
doned them,  the  general,  anticipating  his  own  possible  death  with  thou- 
sands of  the  men  he  loved,  sent  a  despatch  to  the  secretary  the  like  of 
which  was  never  sent  by  commander  in  the  field  to  superior  at  home. 
Every  line  was  weighty,  every  word  solemn.  It  was  the  free  outpouring 
of  a  great  soul  conscious  of  the  approach  of  death.  There  are  no  era- 
sures in  the  original  draft  which  lies  before  me.  It  concluded  with  this 
denunciation  :  *'  If  I  save  this  army  now,  I  tell  you  plainly  that  I  owe  no 
thanks  to  you  or  to  any  other  persons  in  Washington.  You  have  done  your 
best  to  sacrifice  this  army** 

The  secretary  received  the  accusation  in  silence  which  was  the  con- 
fession of  its  truth.  If  it  were  not  true,  McClellan  deserved,  and  would 
have  received,  quick  punishment  for  the  gross  insubordination,  and  the 
country  would  have  justified  any  imposed  penalty.  If  Mr.  Stanton  had 
dared  dispute  its  truth  and  appeal  on  the  facts  to  the  honest  judgment  of 
a  court-martial  or  the  countr}%  he  would,  of  course,  have  done  so.  Not 
only  did  he  fail  to  resent  it,  but  he  kept  the  despatch  secret  ;  and  when, 
some  time  later,  it  was  laid  before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the 
War,  the  concluding  sentences  above  quoted  were  suppressed  !  It  appears 
thus  mutilated  in  that  mass  of  worthless  because  falsified  and  untrust- 
worthy rubbish  which  forms  a  large  part  of  the  printed  report  of  that  com- 
mittee.    The  secretary's  personal  reply  to  the  general  was  the  afTcctionnte 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  II 

letter  of  Juir  3  professing  his  devotion.  His  practical  reply  was  to  go 
with  Mr.  Chase  to  the  Presideot  and  urge  the  sending  of  Gen.  Pope  to 
supersede  McClellan. 

The  soldiers  of  the  Union  went  into  the  field  everrwhere  with  a  mind 
of  this  sort  to  use  them  as  it  nould.  If  conscience  ever  asserted  itself  in 
that  strange  mind,  always  alternating  in  passionate  emotions  of  anger  and 
fear,  the  set  faces  of  a  ha!f-million  dead  soldiers  must  have  haunted  it 
waking  and  sleeping. 

While  politicians  were  plotting  McClellan  was  working.  It  is  impos- 
sible to  over-estimate  the  laborious  character  of  the  general's  life.  His 
whole  soul  was  in  his  work  :  his  every  energy  and  thought  was  given  to  it. 
He  was  always,  whi'e  in  Washington  and  while  in  the  fie!d.  in  the  habit  of 
seeing  personalh%  as  f-ir  as  possible,  to  the  execution  of  important  orders. 
Out  of  countless  illustrations  of  this  whfch  might  l>e  given,  let  one  suffice. 
The  lieutenant-colonel  of  that  superb  regiment,  the  ist  Conn,  .\nillcry, 
wrote  to  me  from  the  works  befor-  Yorktown  that,  a  little  after  midnight 
the  previous  rainy  night,  ivhile  the  men  were  at  work  in  the  trenches, 
McClellan  rode  up,  attended  by  a  single  orderly,  sprang  from  his  horse, 
inspected  the  work,  gave  s-^me  directions,  rem^un:ed.  and  rode  away. 
About  three  a.m.  he  reappeared  as  before,  approved  the  work,  gave  fur- 
ther directions,  and  vanifhed.  My  correspondent  met  him  at  his  head- 
quarters before  seven  a.m.,  an  J  a! so  met  there  a  friend,  whose  regiment 
was  stationed  some  miles  away,  who  told  him  that  the  general  had  sur- 
prised them  by  a  visit  and  inspection  at  about  two  .a.m.  The  S'Jdiers 
soon  learned  not  to  be  surprised  at  his  appearance  among  them  anywhere, 
at  any  hour  of  day  or  night. 

He  made  Washington  secure,  he  created  the  .Armv  of  the  Potomac, 
he  gathered  the  vast  material  for  a  war.  Called  to  the  chief  command,  he 
brought  order  out  of  chaos  in  all  the  armies  ;  he  organized  the  first  and 
only  plan  for  the  war  in  all  the  countr)- ;  he  sent  successful  expeditions. 
Willi  detailed  orders,  to  North  Carolina,  New  Orleans,  and  elsewhere,  in 
pursunnce  of  his  comprehensive  scheme,  in  which  concerted  action  every- 
where was  to  be  in  direct  relation  to  the  chief  act — the  taking  of  Rich- 
mond. On  this  plan  the  war  went  on  after  his  retirement.  When  he  wa« 
ready  to  wield  the  vast  power  he  had  created,  he  left  Washington  at  the 
head  of  the  .\rmy  of  the  Potomac  to  strike  the  decisive  blow  at  Rich- 
mend.  In<^tantly  the  oi>erations  of  the  enemy  in  the  rear  began.  He  was 
removed  from  the  command-in-ch:ef.  and  no  successor  appointed.  All 
his  comprehensive  plan  was  shattered.  The  War  Secretari',  succeeding 
practically  to  the  command,  n^^t'lected  even  to  carry  out  his  ord'-rs  for 
the  completion  of  the  defences  of  Washington.  The  subsequent  defeat  of 
Pope  was  dircct!y  chargeable  to  this  neglect,  and  other  like  neglects  led 
to  other  disasters. 

When  he  reached  the  Peninsula  and  met  the  enemy  his  army  was  sud- 
denly reduced  by  the  withdrawa'  of  one-third  of  its  force.  He  had  planned 
to  turn  Yorktown  ;  he  now  went  over  it.  The  counfy  rang  with  the  pre- 
cjncerted  outcry  which  the  politicians  raised.     The  siege   of  Yorktown 


12  BIOGRAPHICAL   SKETCH, 

was  denounced  as  slow.  It  occupied  less  tban  twenty  days,  and  has  no 
parallel  for  swiftness  in  the  history  of  the  war. 

The  plan  of  campaign  having  been  overturned  by  the  reduction  of  the 
army,  the  general  formed  a  new  plan  and  advanced  rapidly  on  it.  Again 
the  War  Department  interfered  and  defeated  it,  ordering  him  to  stretch 
his  right  to  the  north  of  Richmond  to  effect  the  junction  of  McDowell's 
corps,  now  promised,  but  to  come  overland.  Again  and  again  McDowell 
was  coming,  but  never  came.  His  advance  was  within  sound  of  McClel- 
lan*s  cannon  when  he  was  finally  withdrawn.  Assuredly  if  the  Secretary 
had  deliberately  planned  the  destruction  of  the  army  he  would  have  given 
precisely  the  orders  he  did,  and  would  have  handled  the  ist  corps  exactly 
as  he  did  handle  it.  No  trap  could  have  been  belter  set  by  an  enemy. 
Only  the  consummate  generalship  of  McClcIlan  and  the  heroism  of  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  successful  battles  of  the  Seven  Days  saved  it 
from  the  fate  to  which  it  had  been  consigned. 

The  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  recalled  to  Washington  instead  of 
being  icinforccd  on  the  banks  of  the  James.  All  the  lives  and  all  the 
agonies  of  the  country  which  were  expended  in  regaining  that  same  posi- 
tion two  years  afterwards  were  wasted  for  the  only  purpose  of  getting  rid 
of  McClellan. 

There  are  many  open  questions  in  regard  to  the  treatment  which 
McClellan  received  from  the  power  behind  the  throne  in  Washington, 
which  will  be  answered  only  when  more  such  records  as  Mr.  Chase's 
private  diary  shall  be  discovered  and  published.  Why  was  Gen.  Halleck 
authorized  to  assure  McClellan  that  he  was  recalled  to  Washington  to  take 
command  of  the  combined  forces,  his  own  army  and  Gen.  Pope's?  Was 
there  then,  and  continuously  afterward,  in  the  minds  of  Mr.  Stanton  and  his 
associates,  a  fear  of  McClellan  and  the  army?  The  charge  was  not  infre- 
quently made  that  he  intended  to  seize  the  government.  The  devotion  of 
the  army  to  him,  with  their  indignation  at  his  and  their  treatment  by  the 
War  Department,  nii^hi  arouse  apprehension  in  minds  not  noted  for  per- 
sonal courage.  It  is  no  secret  thiit  this  fear  prevailed  in  the  War  Depart- 
ment after  Sept.  2,  and  especially  when  the  final  order  was  sent  relieving 
McClellan.  Possibly  such  apprehension  had  something  to  do  with  the 
holding  out  to  the  general  the  idea  that  he  was  to  command  the  combined 
forces,  and  with  the  adoption  of  the  plan  of  withdrawing  the  army  from  his 
command  instead  of  relieving  him.  That  the  President  had  no  part  in  this 
ultimate  purpose  can  hardly  be  doubted.  He  honestly  desired  to  see  an 
army  always  between  Washington  and  the  enemy,  nor  did  he  or  Mr.  Stanton 
learn  till  years  afterward,  when  Grant  was  south  of  Richmond,  the  military 
truth  which  McClellan  reiterated,  that  the  true  defence  of  Washington 
was  on  the  bank  of  the  James  river. 

It  is  hardly  worth  while  now  to  say  that  if  any  such  fears  prevailed 
among  the  men  in  Washington  it  was  because  they  could  not  realize  the 
possible  existence  of  such  an  upright,  pure,  and  unselfish  servant  of  his 
country  as  McClellan.  He  entertained  no  thought  of  anything  to  be 
done  by  him  except  duty.     Absolutely  obedient  to  orders,  he  accepted  as 


SJC'ijAL47'j:zjSAZ   SJT^.  rSJi',  I^ 


his  «rork  whircvtr  Lis  sur-exiors  <«  beione  kiai.  I:  was  sk*:  u  I  ibe  faze 
G»:  it  rc'-i-rrr  ie:*- -fi  ca  his  xsssiULini:  pcwex  j::ii  «Lcr«riSLr-g  ::  w-,:iK 
o-x  crdcrs  :''j:,  s?ag.r>:  h^  life  :cr  ihc  i*eor.'.e,  be  lei  :b<  .&r=iv  ::>  Soi::ii 
Ma--Li:n  iJii  A-::e:x=i. 

There  .*  z.o  p^issA^t  .z  ibe  ii'sronr  ci  xny  xtAn  w;;c  bjis  crtr  I;v^ 
mc^ic  siiitling  -^  lie  coi.:raisis  it  presezts  liAa  the  storr  o:  McCitl.iss 
recall  and  :e:;ira  lo  Wasi.:iit:a.  Tie  c.-^izianier  mi:»  had  :Vr  =::n:iis 
been  ibe  t  ct.=i  ofi  pcCincal  .nrr^jes^  hitaed  ia  ererr  eaon  :o  seree  kis 
cr=atry.  crit^re-i  a«:ai::st  h.s  ---^nieai  aad  protesi  kiiber  asd  :h.:ber  bj 
i^^rant  ani  i=>:3iical  s-r<  ::r5,  ibe  ge-cral  lor-.a^  aai  lovti  *y  a  ^meai 
army  aov  n:n:\x:d  izzzn.  L:*  ccmriaiid,  sit,  or  puc^-d  to  and  :.o,  vrith  a 
line  group  of  s^as  c  Seers  ani  a  fea-  »-o;i-ded  vc-urans  ajv^uad  hm  in  his 
ten!,  lisiea.ag  ia  azia.<:r  r<:To::d  words  to  the  soaad  o:  disiir.t  cann^-a  ir.ag 
on  his  o  d  ircops,  aad  was  tvea  coa2peI.e^i  to  ask  the  jvasswcri  for  the 
ni^t  frca3  the  railitair  g-><ra:r  of  the  sraall  c::r  ia  whose  c^uisxins  his 
tent  was  piicaed.  His  perscoil  eaeaiies  had  :rl-a:pbed.  Tkc  wj^r  was 
DOW  to  be  Terr  long  aaj  ^-err  b'.ooKiT.  Ther  had  edfecicd  hSs  d.>*:raoe- 
But  a  few  hours  clianged  the  scrse.  The  dcfeaioi  arasr  of  the  L'aij^a  wis 
rashi:.^  hrr:ieward  la  bukez  aiasses*  Aa  exultant  enemy  was  m Arching 
oa  the  capital.  The  War  Sccretarr  aad  the  n^miaal  geaeial-.a-chiet. 
the  trustees  of  the  Union  aad  ihe  militarr  heads  of  the  sqaad  of  p,*I;tic  ans 
who  had  brouiiit  about  the  disasier,  had  ordered  the  arse~al  to  be  erupiied 
aad  abaadoncd — it  was  said  also,  to  be  buraed.  Frightened  at  t;:e  awful 
catastrophe  ibey  had  cuuscd.  the  poI:t:ciaas  disappeared  from  sight  ad 
were  not  setra  or  heaxd  by  the  r-eo.  le  agaia  until,  with  recv>\*ered  ^re.Tt>, 
in  assured  safety,  they  reop-eaed  ih?ir  attack  ca  the  general  toward  whon:, 
for  the  lime. all  eyes  in  the  iar.d  we:e  d;recied  as  the  only  possible  SAvioar 
of  his  couatry. 

The  pei^p.e.  in  the  person  of  their  President,  who  alone  in  Washington 
preserved  S':»und  judgment  ar.d  a  serene  mind,  went  to  the  lately  insui:eJ 
an  J  displaced  genera!,  and.  with  tears  not  unfitting  the  occasion  (for  his 
tears  weie  the  emotion  of  a  betrayed  and  outraged  nation^  asked  him  to 
forget  his  wrongs  and  save  the  country.  Tiie  falsehoKxi  was  at:orT\-ard 
circulated  that  he  hesitated  and  sought  to  rcake  conditions.  He  accepted 
the  new  resi'-j-nsib:  iiy  inst..ni:y.  for  e\-ery  second  was  of  priceless  value. 
He  saved  ihe  arsenal  which  cowardice  would  h.«ve  destroyed.  The  wild 
scene  of  joy  with  which  the  army  received  him  can  never  be  the  subieci 
of  the  artist's  pencil,  for  it  was  in  the  darkness  of  night,  among  ih.^  Vir- 
ginia forests,  when  the  good  horse  of  the  general,  accompanied  l^y  one 
faithful  aide,  the  gallant  Colbarn,  brought  him  at  ihat  tremendous  pace 
the  soldiers  knew,  to  meet  them  retreating,  gloomy  as  the  black  night  that 
lay  on  the  hills  around  them.  But  the  wild  shout  of  welcome  that  rolled 
from  company  to  company  and  corps  to  corps  was  prophetic  of  South 
Mountain  and  Antietam. 

Who  shall  sav  that  the  soldiers  of  the  .\rmv  of  the  Potomac  did  not 
know  that  man,  and  that  he  did  not  merit  their  admiring  lo\'e  ? 

He  gathered  them  in  his  hand.     He  made  a  new  army  of  the  defeated. 


14  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

disorganized,  and  decimated  regiments  of  his  own  army  and  the  Army  of 
Virginia,  reorganized  it  and  supplied  its  pressing  needs  as  it  marched, 
followed  and  overtook  the  exultant  enemy,  flushed  with  success,  in  Mary- 
land, and  in  fifteen  days  after  that  night  of  disastrous  retreat  led  his 
heroic  troops  to  the  victorious  fields  of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam. 

It  is  one  of  the  settled  truths  of  history  that  constant  reiteration  of  a 
statement,  however  untrue,  will  impress  many  minds  with  its  truthfulness. 
The  impatience  of  the  people  afforded  to  the  enemies  of  McClellan  the 
opportunity  to  represent  him  as  constitutionally  slow.  There  are  not  a 
few  who  believe  it.  There  was  no  foundation  for  the  slur ;  and  any  one 
who  studies  dates  and  informs  himself  of  the  actual  time  occupied  by  him 
in  any  of  his  work  will  be  surprised  at  the  currency  which  such  a  criticism 
obtained.  He  was  calm  and  cool  in  judgment,  never  impulsive,  but 
always  as  rapid  in  action  as  the  circumstances  required.  If  campaigns 
are  to  be  compared,  it  is  well  to  note  that  in  the  West  Virginia  and  the 
Maryland  campaigns  he  was  his  own  master  and  director,  while  the 
Peninsular  campaign  was  actually  three  several  campaigns,  so  made  by 
the  interference  of  the  War  Department,  and  all  three  subject  to  that  con- 
stant interference. 

The  order  of  Aug.  30  had  removed  McClellan  from  the  command  of 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  The  order  of  Sept.  2  had  only  placed  him  in 
command  of  the  fortifications  of  Washington.  The  history  of  this  order 
is  sufficiently  discussed  in  a  note  on  page  538,  etc.  He  had,  for  the  safety 
of  the  country  and  the  preservation  of  the  Union,  assumed  command  and 
fought  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam  with  *'a  halter  around 
his  neck."  No  change  was  made  in  his  command  after  the  battle  of 
Antietam.  The  entire  confidence  with  which  he  had  received  the  orders 
of  the  President  on  the  morning  of  Sept.  2  was  characteristic.  When 
asked  afterward  why  he  did  not  on  that  occasion  ask  written  orders,  he 
replied,  with  a  smile,  **  It  was  no  time  for  writing,  and  in  fact  I  never 
thought  of  it." 

The  President  fully  approved  of  his  determination  not  to  lead  the 
army  on  an  offensive  campaign  into  Virginia  without  shoes,  clothing,  and 
supplies,  and  without  horses  for  cavalry  and  transportation.  The  table 
which  will  be  found  on  pages  632,  633  of  this  volume  demonstrates 
beyond  cavil  both  the  necessities  of  the  troops  and  the  dates  at  which 
they  were  supplied.  Without  supplies,  cavalry,  or  transportation,  no 
general  would  have  moved  an  hour  sooner  than  he  did.  When  ready 
he  moved  with  his  accustomed  rapidity  and  skill.  The  movement 
accomplished  his  purpose.  He  had  placed  the  enemy  at  a  fatal  disadvan- 
tage. If  he  were  brought  to  battle  there  was  no  reasonable  doubt  that 
McClellan  had  so  divided  him  that  he  would  be  beaten  in  detail.  If  he 
declined  battle  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  the  inside  track  in  a  race 
to  Richmond.  In  either  event  McClellan  was  about  to  win  another  and 
a  decisive  victory. 

Some  one  reported  to  the  politicians  in  Washington  the  imminent 
danger  of  a  great  Union  victory  by  the  army  under  McClellan.     Perhaps 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  1 5 

when  time  reveals  correspondence  it  will  be  known  who  sent  the  intelli- 
gence. McClellan's  despatches  had  communicated  facts,  not  expecta- 
tions. There  was  no  visible  reason  for  interfering  with  him  at  this 
moment.  But  the  final  pressure  now  brought  to  bear  on  the  President 
was  successful.  He  issued  a  discretionary  order  to  Gen.  Halleck.  who 
made  haste  to  exercise  the  discretion  at  once,  and  Nov.  5,  1862,  McCicIIan 
was  ordered  to  turn  over  the  command  to  Burnside  and  go  to  Trenton, 
N.  J.  He  lies  there  now  on  a  hill  overlooking  the  Delaware.  But  he 
never  received  there,  or  elsewhere,  order,  thanks,  or  any  recognition  from 
the  government  of  his  country. 

Nor  did  he  ever  expect  or  desire  it.  To  him,  as  to  all  pure  minds, 
the  ample  compensation  for  labor  and  self-sacrifice  was  in  the  conscious- 
ness of  duty  done.  He  held  himself  in  readiness  to  serve  the  cause 
should  his  services  be  needed,  but  they  were  not  sought. 

In  1864  the  political  elements  were  still  in  a  chaotic  condition.  Two 
parties  had  been  evolved  from  the  exciting  conditions  caused  by  the  war 
and  the  ambitions  of  politicians.  The  great  body  of  conservative  men 
were  practically  unattached  to  either.  The  Democratic  party  nominated 
him  for  the  Presidency.  His  reluctant  acceptance  of  the  nomination  was 
a  new  service,  not  his  smallest,  to  the  Republic,  concentrating  the  con- 
servative element  in  the  country  on  a  platform  which  he  made  for  himself 
in  his  letter  of  acceptance,  placing  his  supporters  firmly  on  the  principle 
of  supporting  the  war  and  prosecuting  it  vigorously  till  the  Union  and 
Constitution  should  be  established  in  safety.  How  many  votes  he  received 
will  never  be  known,  for  the  **  count  "was  in  the  hands  of  those  who 
had  not  scrupled  to  defeat  him  in  battles  with  the  enemies  of  the  Union. 
The  scidiers*  votes  were  effectually  disposed  of  by  the  Secretary  of  War. 

He  had  not  expected  to  be  elected,  and  the  result  was  a  great  relief 
to  him.  His  earnest  desire  had  always  been  to  regain  the  enjoyments  of 
home  life,  of  which  he  had  had  so  brief  an  experience. 

He  resigned  his  commission  as  major-general  in  the  army  on  the  day 
of  the  Presidential  election,  Nov.  8,  1864,  and  immediately  sought  work 
as  a  civilian  for  the  support  of  his  family. 

But  the  bitterness  of  political  enmity  followed  him  into  private  life. 
His  eminent  abilities  made  his  services  desirable  to  many  great  cor- 
porations, and  he  was  offered  one  and  another  position  of  honorable 
employment,  such  as  he  desired.  In  each  case  he  ascertained  that  the 
offer  \«ras  made  by  a  majority  over  a  minority  who  had  strong  prejudices 
against  him  and  opposed  his  appointment.  Acceptance  was  impossible 
to  him  under  such  circumstances.  In  Jan.,  1865,  he  went  to  Europe  with 
his  family.  His  reasons  were  sad  enough,  expressed  to  me  in  a  sentence 
I  well  remember:  '*I  cannot  find  a  place  to  earn  my  living  here,  and  I 
am  going  to  stay  abroad  till  I  am  forgotten,  then  come  back  and  find 
work,  which  I  may  get  when  these  animosities  have  cooled  down." 

But  the  people  would  not  forget  him.  In  1868,  when  it  was  rumored 
that  he  was  coming  home,  soldiers  and  citizens  proposed  to  receive  him 
with  honors.     He  wrote  emphatically  protesting  against  any  such  demon- 


1 6  BIOGRAPHICAL   SKETCH. 

stration,  and  after  his  return  insisted  on  declining  it.  The  demand  of  his 
old  comrades  and  friends  became  so  pressing  that  he  at  la:st  consented  t« 
receive  a  procession  on  a  designated  evening  a  few  days  in  advance,  pro- 
vided it  should  be  spontaneous,  without  previous  advertisement  in  news- 
papers. He  expected  a  few  hundred  old  soldiers  and  friends,  and  an 
affair  of  a  few  minutes.  Instead  he  received  the  most  impressive  ovation 
which  has  ever  been  given  to  a  private  citizen  of  this  country,  perhaps  not 
excepting  those  in  times  of  the  highest  political  excitement.  The  vast 
and  broad  procession  of  men  who  honored  him  passed  hour  after  hour  in 
front  of  the  balcony  on  which  he  stood,  while  fifty  or  a  hundred  thousand 
crowded  the  street  and  square  to  witness  and  share  in  the  demonstration. 
At  midnight  that  night  he  said  to  me  :  '*  Well,  it  is  over  now,  and  I  hope 
I  can  be  quiet  hereafter.'*  But  an  American  with  such  a  hold  on  the 
hearts  of  people  cannot  be  quiet. 

There  was  no  man  in  America,  up  to  the  day  of  his  death,  to  whom  so 
many  of  his  fellow-citizens  were  attached  by  ties  of  affection  and  respect.' 
There  was  what  men  call  a  magnetism  about  him  which  won  all  hearts.  To 
politicians  such  a  man,  honest  and  unapproachable,  is  always  a  subject 
of  apprehension.  Party  politicians.  Democrats  as  well  as  Republicans, 
feared  him  as  a  possible  rival  or  opponent.  He  received  no  favors 
from  either,  and  to  his  death  owed  no  gratitude  to  either  part)'  or  any  of 
their  leaders.  He  was  as  carefully  neglected  by  one  as  by  the  other,  ex- 
cept when  his  great  personal  influence  was  wanted  in  a  political  campaign. 

He  established  his  residence,  known  as  Maywood,  on  Orange  Moun- 
tain, in  New  Jersey,  where  he  built  a  house,  and  brought  around  him 
treasures  of  literature  and  art,  memorials  of  faithful  friends,  of  far  travel, 
of  scenes  in  his  life  which  were  pleasant  to  remember.  Conspicuous  in 
his  own  room  was  a  shining  mass  of  the  long  black  hair  of  the  horse  Dan 
Webster,  faithful  among  the  faithful  on  a  score  of  battle-fields. 

In  1877  he  was  elected  Governor  of  New  Jersey.  Had  it  been  possi- 
ble for  Democratic  party  politicians  to  control  the  nomination  he  would 
not  have  been  selected.  His  administration  was  eminently  successful, 
rich  in  benefit  to  the  educational,  industrial,  and  judicial  systems  of  the 
State,  and  wholly  free  from  partisanship.  And  here  it  may  be  aJded  that 
his  experience  had  taught  him  to  recognize  the  party  politician  whenever 
he  came  in  contact  with  one,  and  to  estimate  him  at  his  precise  worth.  He 
had  accepted  the  governorship,  urged  on  him,  as  an  opportunity  of  doing 
good  service  to  his  State  ;  but  he  was  glad  when  the  end  of  his  term  of 
office  came.  He  had  resolved  to  pass  the  remainder  of  his  life  as  a  pri- 
vate citizen.  During  its  later  years  he  went  abroad  several  times,  to 
Europe,  Egypt,  and  the  Holy  Land,  enjoying  travel  and  study  and  the 
pleasure  of  warm  social  intercourse  with  many  of  the  most  distinguished 
soldiers,  statesmen,  and  scholars  of  various  countries,  who  were  his  cor- 
respondents and  friends.  His  ample  knowledge  of  modern  languages 
made  him  at  home  in  all  countries,  and  enabled  him  to  accumulate  stores 
of  information.  He  was  thoroughly  familiar  with  the  progress  of  political 
as  well  as  military  thought  and  events  in  Europe  and  at  home. 


BIOCKAFHICAL   SKETCH,  I  7 

In  the  autumn  cf  i555  he  bad  sevenl  severe  attacks  cf  pain  in  the 
regien  of  the  heart.  After  one  of  these  he  Tielied  to  the  advice  of  h:s 
excellent  phv>:c:an  and  remained  at  home,  resting:  for  some  cay*.  On 
the  aftem-jo-.  of  Oct.  2?  he  drove  out  w::h  his  daughter,  ar.d  passed  the 
evening  in  pheasant  conversarr  yn  with  his  fami'y.  Towards  tlcven  o"cI*>:k, 
after  th-j  eveniig  prayers  wh'ch  were  the  family  cus:om.  he  went  to  his 
workinir-rcim,  wrote  for  a  i:r:t:  time,  and  then  went  to  ltd.  takir.;.  as  be 
generally  did.  a  b«»k.  which  he  read  for  a  while.  A  sharp  atta:k  of  the 
same  acute  rain  suddcniv  seized  him.  The  phvsician  summ.ont'd  to  his 
sidv  2in:::r:i<tcred  remedies,  but  the  ajony  continued.  He  left  his  l>ed  for 
a  lar^c  ci  a:r  in  which  he  sat.  No  expression  of  sutferir.,:  escaped  him. 
On  the  CT.trary.  he  spoke  on'.y  cheerfully  and  ^^leasjint'.y  10  the  >er\-ants 
whom  he  was  -orry  \y  ca'l  up.  and  to  his  wife  and  dau*:hte:.  t.^  w:i/»ni  he 
once  in  a  while  addrtS5ed  a  Vri^rht  word  of  aifectiv^n.  About  three  o'clock 
in  the  mrrnir.*:  he  1  ^<^ked  towards  Mrs,  McClellan  and  said  in  a  I  ^%v  vc^tce 
to  the  ;hys:c:an.  "T-.H  her  1  am  be::er  n  .'W."  The  next  mom^ent  his  head 
rested  on  the  chair-back  and  the  pood  soldier  was  >;:  ^ne.  The  rewards 
which  are  withheld  here,  whether  by  reason  of  the  malice  of  enemies  or 
the  neiilcct  of  friends,  are  cf  no  account  there. 

His  funeral  was.  in  accordance  with  his  own  wi^hes  often  expressed, 
that  of  a  rrlvjie  citizen.  His  body  was  brouviht  to  New  York  to  my 
house,  in  wh.ch  he  had  always  been  at  home.  \Miile  thousands  of 
citizens  felltd  the  neichb*>r:nj;  streets,  he  lay  life-like,  and  around  him 
stood  a  iru-jp  of  great  men.  The  commanders  of  the  oprosing  armies 
which  had  met  at  Yorktown  and  in  the  Peninsular  campaign  were  both 
there — one  living:,  the  other  dead.  Strong  men.  generals,  old  soldiers  of 
manr  battle  fields,  his  comrades  and  his  foes,  looked  at  his  calm  face.  I 
have  never  seen,  never  exrect  to  see  again,  such  a  scene,  s^^^  many  stout 
men  in  tears.     Such  eyes  shed  tears  only  for  the  great  and  gv.K>d. 

Then  followed  the  simple  ser\-ices  in  the  Madison  Square  Presbyte- 
rian Church,  of  which  he  had  been  a  member  until  he  became  a  ruling 
elder  in  the  church  at  Orange.  From  the  cliurch  he  was  carried  to  Tren- 
ton.^ Great  throng  awaited  the  anri\-al  of  the  train  at  the  station  and 
crowded  the  streets  through  which  the  procession  passed  for  two  miles,' 
Thousands  of  silent  mourners  were  assembled  in  the  cemeter>-.  His  grave 
was  in  his  pri\-ate  plot,  on  a  hill  overlooking  the  flow  of  the  Delaware.  .\ 
clergyman,  one  who  loved  him.  said  the  last  words  of  faith  and  hope  as  he 
was  laid  in  the  grave.     So  we  buried  him. 

Most  public  men  live  two  lives — the  one  that  which  the  people  see, 
the  other  ihat  which  none  see  unless  it  be  a  few  intimate  friends  and  com- 
panions of  hours  of  freedom.  McClellan,  the  soldier  and  patriot,  is  well 
known  to  the  people,  has  been  diversely  judged  by  them  according  to  the 
amount  of  correct  information  they  have  received,  and  according  to  those 
prejudices  of  political  and  other  associations  which  affect  all  our  opinions 
of  public  men  of  our  own  time. 

Whatever  be  their  judgment  of  the  soldier  and  statesman,  few  if  any 


1 8  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

outside  of  the  circle  of  his  intimate  friends  have  had  any  idea  of  the  real 
man.  Public  men  are  too  often  measured  by  the  familiar  standards  of 
public  life.  He  was  a  man  such  as  we  seldom  know.  His  experiences  in 
life  were  varied.  Educated  as  a  soldier,  he  had  devoted  his  life  to  his 
profession,  and  was  one  of  the  most  accomplished  military  scholars  of  the 
world.  His  military  library  was  large,  in  various  languages,  always 
increasing,  every  book  thoroughly  studied.  He  continued  these  studies 
faithfully  to  his  death.  Military  operations  in  every  part  of  the  world 
commanded  his  close  observation.  He  supplied  himself  with  maps  and 
all  information  in  current  literature,  followed  movements  of  armies,  kept 
himself  familiar  with  ever}^  phase  of  campaigns,  whether  in  Europe,  in 
Afghanistan,  in  Egypt,  or  in  South  Africa. 

While  this  was  his  professional  study,  he  occupied  himself  with 
almost  equally  thorough  study  of  subjects  very  remote  from  military 
matters.  He  was  a  general  student  of  the  literature  of  ihe  world.  He 
read  freely  most  of  the  languages  of  Europe,  and  kept  up  with  the  pro- 
gress of  thought  and  discussion  in  history,  philosophy,  and  art.  He  was 
especially  interested  in  archxolog}',  and,  having  all  his  life  retained  and 
used  his  knowledge  of  ancient  languages,  found  abundant  delight  in  read- 
ing archxologic  publications  and  in  following  the  work  of  explorers.  In 
all  departments  of  scholarly  reading  he  was  constant  and  unwearying,  and 
he  never  forgot  what  he  had  once  learned.  Fitted  by  his  attainments  for 
the  society  of  the  learned,  he  had  the  marked  characteristic  of  the  true  scho- 
lar— the  desire  to  know  more,  and  therefore  the  habit  of  seeking  instead 
of  offering  information.  Few  suspected  his  mastery  of  subjects  on  which 
he  only  asked  questions  when  thrown  in  contact  with  recognized  masters. 
In  general  conversation  he  more  frequently  sought  information  than  gave 
it;  but  when  drawn  out  to  give  it  his  expression  was  concise,  vigorous, 
clear.  His  extended  knowledge  of  ancient  and  modern  languages  made 
him  master  of  his  own.  His  public  papers  are  models  of  pure  st)'le. 
His  habit  of  writing  was  swift,  and  he  never  hesitated  for  the  precise  word 
to  express  the  exact  shade  of  meaning  he  intended.  His  despatch-books, 
containing  the  autograph  originals  of  his  despatches  during  the  war,  are 
marvels,  since,  with  whatever  haste  he  wrote,  he  wrote  without  erasure  or 
alteration  on  subjects  where  each  word  was  of  vital  importance. 

That  his  life  was  one  of  constant  occupation  may  be  judged  from 
what  has  been  said.  He  had  no  idle  hours — for  those  cannot  be  called 
idle  which  were  given  to  social  duties  and  the  enjojrments  of  that  home  life 
whose  beauty  and  happiness  were  perfect.  His  wife  and  children  were 
his  companions,  and  a  perpetual  sunshine  was  in  the  household.  He  was 
full  of  cheer,  life,  vigor,  always  ready  for  whatever  would  make  any  one 
of  them  happy. 

And  this  leads  me  to  say  that  of  all  men  T  have  ever  known  McClellan 
was  the  most  unselfish.  Neither  in  his  public  life  nor  in  his  private  life 
did  he  ever  seek  anything  for  himself.  He  was  constantly  doing  some- 
thing for  some  one  else;  always  seeking  to  do  good,  confer  pleasure, 
relieve  sorrow,  gratify  a  whim,  do  something  for  another.     He  had  his  own 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  ig 

amusements,  but  in  those  he  sought  the  good  of  others.  He  had  devoted 
a  great  deal  of  attention  to  ceramic  art,  and  had  collected  many  fine 
examples.  He  was  an  excellent  judge  of  genuineness  of  specimens.  But 
his  love  of  **  old  china  *'  was  not  for  mere  pleasure — it  was  for  historical 
and  industrial  considerations  ;  and  New  Jersey  owes  him  a  vastly  larger 
debt  than  she  knows  for  the  great  advance  made  in  her  potter}'  produc- 
tions through  his  special  personal  efforts  while  and  after  he  was  governor 
of  that  State.  In  his  elegant  home,  with  ample  table  furniture  of  old 
historic  porcelains,  gathered  with  admirable  judgment  and  taste  in  his 
European  trips,  he  was  especially  proud  of,  and  fond  of  using  and  show- 
ing, beautiful  services  made  at  Trenton  in  potteries  which  he  often  visited, 
and  to  whose  advancement  he  had,  while  governor  and  afterward,  directed 
earnest  attention. 

The  personal  aflfection  which  existed  between  McClellan  and  the  sol- 
diers of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  historical.  It  grew  with  years  on  both 
sides.  On  his  it  was  a  marked  trait  of  his  character.  He  would  make 
great  sacrifices  of  his  own  pleasure  and  comfort  to  render  a  service  to  any 
one  of  them.  They  were  a  vast  family,  and  not  a  few  of  them  came  to  him 
for  aid  in  distress.     None  came  in  vain. 

His  charity  was  abundant.  He  sympathized  with  every  one  who  was 
in  trouble  or  sorrow  ;  and  his  sympathy  was  practical  and  useful,  for  his 
person  and  his  purse  were  devoted  to  its  uses.  An  Irish  servant  in  a  New 
York  house  saw  her  brother's  name  in  the  list  of  killed  at  Antietam, 
and  started  off  forthwith  to  find  his  grave.  When  she  came  back  she  told 
her  story  to  the  family.  She  found  her  way  to  the  battle-field,  and  after  a 
while  to  the  graves  where  some  one  told  her  the  men  of  her  brother's  regi- 
ment were  buried.  It  was  a  lonesome  place  above  ground  then,  for  the 
army  had  moved  away.  She  was  searching  among  the  graves  for  a  familiar 
name  on  the  stakes,  when  she  saw,  riding  down  the  road  which  passed  at 
some  distance  from  the  burial  place,  what  she  called  a  lot  of  soldiers  on 
horseback.  When  they  came  abreast  of  her  the  leader,  who  was  a  little 
in  advance,  called  a  halt,  sprang  to  the  ground,  and  walked  across  the 
open  field  to  her.  *'  What  are  you  looking  for,  my  good  woman  ?'*  he  said. 
She  told  him.  ''What  was  your  brother's  regiment?"  She  answered. 
•*  You  are  only  one  of  thousands  who  want  to  know  to-day  where  their 
dead  are  lying  here,"  he  said.  *'  I  hope  you  will  find  your  brother's 
grave.  Don't  mourn  too  much  for  him.  He  died  a  soldier's  death.** 
Then,  turning,  he  called,  "Orderly!"  A  soldier  came.  "Stay  with  this 
woman  and  help  her  find  her  brother's  grave.  Report  to  me  this  even- 
ing." And  he  went  back,  remounted,  and  the  company  rode  on  at  a  gal- 
lop. After  a  while  the  orderly  found  the  grave,  and  she  knelt  there  and 
prayed.  Then  she  asked  the  soldier:  **Who  was  that  gentleman  that 
told  you  to  help  me?"  "That?"  said  the  orderly.  "Why,  didn't  you 
know  him?  That  was  '  Little  Mac'  "God  bless  him!  I  said,"  was 
the  end  of  her  story.  Innumerable  like  prayers  of  grateful  souls  of 
men  and  women,  with  those  words,  "God  bless  him!"  have  "battered 
the  gates  of  heaven." 

4 


20  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH. 

It  is  surely  unnecessary  to  say  that  he  was  a  gentleman  in  every  sense 
of  the  word.  In  social  life  he  was  perfectly  simple  in  his  manner,  wholly 
unaffected,  always  genial,  having  rare  conversational  powers  with  all 
classes  of  persons,  devoutly  respectful  to  ladies.  This  deference  to  the 
female  sex  was  a  marked  characteristic.  I  note  an  illustration  of  it  which 
I  find  in  many  of  his  private  letters,  some  in  this  volume.  When  at  the 
head  of  the  army,  and  occupying  a  position  only  second  to  the  President, 
he  received  thousands  of  visitors  who  came  from  mere  curiosity,  intro- 
duced by  senators  or  others,  to  see  the  young  general.  In  mentioning 
such  visits  he  invariably  says  that  he  "was  presented  to  the  ladies" — 
never  uses  what  would  have  been  a  perfectly  correct  expression  under  the 
circumstances  :  **  the  ladies  were  presented  to  me." 

In  person  McClellan  was  five  feet  nine  inches  tall,  with  great  breadth 
of  Shoulders  and  solid,  not  superfluous,  muscle.  He  measured  forty-five 
inches  around  the  chest.  His  physical  strength  in  his  younger  life  was 
very  great.  He  seldom  exerted  it  in  later  years.  He  contracted  disease  in 
the  Mexican  war  which  never  wholly  left  him,  and  which  doubtless  some- 
what impaired  his  strength.  But  in  1863  I  have  seen  him  bend  a  quarter- 
dollar  over  the  end  of  his  thumb  by  pressure  between  the  first  and  second 
finger  of  his  hand.  That  same  evening  we  were  sitting  together,  three, 
one  of  whom  was  a  distingui*«hed  officer  who  weighed  over  two  hundred 
and  fifty.  **  They  tell  me,  general,"  said  I,  **that  McClellan  can  throw 
you  over  his  head."  *'  So  they  say,"  was  the  somewhat  uncertain  response. 
McClellan  sprang  from  his  chair  and  crossed  the  room  rapidly  with  hands 
stretched  out  to  seize  the  giant.  *'  Let  me  alone,  general  !  "  he  exclaimed 
— *'  let  me  alone  !  He  can  do  it — he  has  done  it.  He  can  toss  me  in  his 
arms  like  a  baby.*'  To  the  very  last  day  of  his  life  his  step  was  quick, 
firm,  elastic,  the  expression  of  that  uniform  cheerfulness,  buoyancy,  and 
enjoyment  of  life  which  he  possessed  and  which  he  always  communicated 
to  those  around  him.  I  think  I  shall  be  understood  in  saying  that  his  phy- 
sical bearing  was  such  that  of  all  men  he  was  the  very  last  with  whom 
those  who  knew  him  could  connect  any  thought  of  death. 

I  have  left  to  the  last  to  speak  of  the  controlling  feature  of  McClel- 
lan's  character  and  life.  His  religion  was  deep,  earnest,  practical ;  not 
vague  or  ill-defined  to  himself  or  others,  not  obtrusive,  but  outspoken 
when  occasion  required,  and,  when  outspoken,  frank  and  hearty.  For  it 
was  part  and  parcel  of  his  soul.  I  must  use  brief  words,  and  I  seek  to 
make  them  distinct,  in  defining  his  creed,  which  was  clear  as  crystal, 
more  steadfast  than  the  hills — the  faith  once  delivered  to  the  saints  in  its 
pure  simplicity.  With  his  intellectual  powers,  which  were  of  the  highest, 
and  with  his  heart,  which  was  supremely  gentle,  as  trustful  all  his  life  as 
any  child's,  he  was  servant  and  follower  of  Jesus  Christ,  in  whom  he 
believed  as  God,  of  God. 

In  all  his  life,  public  and  private,  every  purpose  was  formed,  every 
act  done  in  the  light  of  that  faith.  It  was  this  which  not  only  produced  in 
him  that  stainless  purity  of  walk  and  conversation  which  all  who  knew  him 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH,  21 

recognized,  but  also  gave  him  strength  for  all  the  great  works  of  a  great 
life.  It  was  this  which  created  that  magnetic  power  so  often  spoken  of, 
won  to  him  that  marvellous  devotion  of  his  soldiers,  made  all  who  knew 
him  regard  him  with  affection,  those  who  knew  him  best  love  him  most. 

Out  of  the  private  correspondence  which  lias  come  into  my  hands  I 
have  selected,  and  venture  to  make  public  here,  two  letters.  These,  better 
than  anything  I  can  say,  will  serve  to  open,  for  those  who  only  knew  him 
as  a  public  man,  a  view  of  that  inner  life — his  real  life — which  he  lived 
among  his  familiar  friends  : 

•*  New  York,  Aug.  i8,  1879. 

•'My  dear  General:  Passing  through  South  Street  I  saw  a  magni- 
ficent yacht-like  ship,  apparently  new,  called  the  Gen.  McCUllan.  You 
have  probably  seen  her.  If  not,  she  deserves  a  visit.  I  am  sure  you  are' 
tired  of  being  governor  or  anything  else,  for.  no  matter  what  the  title  be, 
the  result  is  always  the  same — work,  work  unceasingly.  Now,  suppose 
we  gather  our  household  gods  and  sail  away  in  this  good  ship,  until  we 
come  to  *  the  land  where  it  is  always  afternoon  *  ?  This  would  be  better 
than  Orange  Mountain  or  the  salt  sea  of  Long  Island. 

"  With  kind  regards  to  Mrs.  McClellan,  believe  me,  yours, 

*•  S.  L.  M.  Barlow. 

•*  Gen.  McClellan." 

Or-\xge.  Sept.  3.  1879. 

My  dear  Sam  :  Your  welcome  note  of  the  iSth  Aug.  reached  me  when 
on  the  point  of  starting  off  for  a  trip  from  home.  I  was  very  glad  to  see 
(hose  **  leaning-back  "  characters  once  more. 

Some  few  years  ago  I  saw — near  Mr.  Al sop's  office — a  ship  named  for 
me,  probably  the  same  you  saw  the  other  day.  I  fancy,  Sam,  that  we  will 
never  reach  that  *'  land  where  it  is  always  afternoon  '*  in  any  ship  built 
by  mortal  hands.  Our  fate  is  to  work,  and  still  to  work,  as  long  as  there 
is  any  work  left  in  us  ;  and  I  do  not  doubt  that  it  is  best.  For  1  can't  help 
thinking  that,  when  we  reach  that  other  and  far  better  land,  we  shall  still 
have  work  to  do  throughout  the  long  ages,  only  we  will  then  see,  as  we 
go  on,  that  it  is  all  done  for  the  Master  and  under  His  own  eye  ;  and  we 
will  like  it,  and  never  grow  weary  of  it,  as  we  often  do  here  when  we  don't 
clearly  see  to  what  end  we  are  working,  and  our  work  brings  us  in  contact 
with  all  sorts  of  men  and  things  not  pleasant  to  rub  against.  I  suppose 
that  the  more  wc  work  here  the  better  we  shall  be  trained  for  that  other 
work,  which,  after  all,  is  the  great  end  towards  which  we  move,  or  ought 
to  be  moving. 

Well,  I  did  not  start  out  to  sermonize,  but  somehow  or  other  your 
letter  started  my  thoughts  in  that  direction.  I  icould  like  to  take  the 
"belongings"  and  sail  for  that  quiet  land  ;  but  we  will  have  to  wail  some 
little  time  yet,  and  I  suppose  each  one  will  reach  it  alone,  and  the  first 
arrived  wait  for  the  others. 

I  hear  that  Elsie  is  to  leave  you  in  October.  Is  it  possible  that  time 
can  fly  so  rapidly  ?  Before  many  years  May  will  perhaps  leave  us  :  and 
just  now  we  are  getting  ready  10  send  Max  to  boarding-school — an  awful 
business,  as  you  can  tell  from  your  own  experience  in  sending  Pete  to 
Dr.  Coit's.  i  think  this  scattering  of  children  is  the  worst  wrench  we 
get  down  here  ;  but  there  is  nothing  to  be  done  but  do  the  best  for 
them  as  we  understand  it,  and  to  thank  God  that  they  don't  and  can't  feel 
it  as  we  do. 

What  changes  since  we  first  crossed  the  Atlantic  together — how  many 
years  ago  ?    What  a  mess  in  politics  !     I  am  tr\ing  to  take  the  least  pos- 


22  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

sible  interest  in  such  matters,  as  the  only  way  to  keep  one's  temper.  Mrs. 
McClellan  unites  with  me  in  love  to  Mrs.  Barlow,  Elsie,  and  yourself. 
And  I  am  always  your  friend, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan. 
S.  L.  M.  B. 

In  editing  this  volume  for  the  press  I  have  tried  to  do  that  which  my 
friend  would  approve.  The  discretion  which  he  gave  me  was  ample.  I 
have  exercised  it  by  omissions,  not  by  changes.  Of  course  his  work  was 
unfinished  when  he  left  it.  Living  prepared  for  the  call  whenever  it  might 
come,  serving  God  as  he  had  served  his  country,  always  ready  for  what- 
ever command  he  might  receive,  it  is  nevertheless  certain  that,  when  the 
order  came  to  go  to  duty  in  another  life,  he  was  not  expecting  it. 

In  writing  his  memoirs  he  had  made  no  haste  to  complete  them.  Pro- 
babh'  had  he  lived  to  extreme  old  age  there  would  still  have  been  much  to 
be  written.  For  years  after  the  civil  war  he  declined  to  wriie  anything 
about  it.  He  had  no  anxieties  for  himself  and  his  own  reputation.  An 
abiding  faith  in  time  and  the  calm  judgment  of  his  country  kept  him  from 
any  care  about  the  misstatements,  misrepresentations,  and  falsehoods  of 
which  he,  more  perhaps  than  any  American  who  had  lived  before  him, 
excepting  Washington,  had  been  made  the  subject.  Besides,  he  always 
gave  less  thought  to  himself  and  his  own  reputation  than  any  man  I  ever 
knew  or  heard  of.  He  was  a  man  of  very  deep  feeling,  with  the  passions 
of  all  ardent  souls  ;  but  so  absolute  had  become  his  habitual  self-control 
and  subjection  of  all  passionate  resentment,  so  complete  the  self-abne- 
gation which  characterized  him,  I  can  affirm  with  certainty  that  he  always 
felt  more  sorrow  for  the  man  who  maligned  him  than  for  himself.  Once 
when  I  showed  him  a  slander,  a  pure  fabrication,  which  had  been  pub- 
lished on  the  authority  of  Gen.  Burnside,  he  read  it,  laid  down  the  maga- 
zine with  a  quiet  laugh,  said,  "Poor  Burn!  he  didn't  know  what  he 
was  saying,"  and,  after  a  few  kindly  words  about  his  old  friend,  dropped 
the  subject.  In  vain  was  he  urged  to  publish  the  demonstrations  he  pos- 
sessed of  the  falsehood  of  this  and  similar  attacks. 

His  happiness  in  life  consisted  in  what  he  was  always  doing  for 
others,  without  thought  of  self.  As  he  had  never  sought  position,  com- 
mand, or  promotion,  so  he  never  asked  his  countrymen  to  give  him  honor 
or  thanks. 

It  was  only  when  I  urged  on  him  that  his  children  had  a  right  to  pos- 
sess his  own  story  that  he  took  the  subject  into  consideration.  Afterward, 
while  in  Europe,  he  began  to  write  out  personal  reminiscences,  which  from 
time  to  time  he  continued  afier  his  return  to  America.  A  fire  destroyed 
all  his  manuscript.  In  1881  he  resumed  the  work.  He  did  not  labor  at  it 
continuously,  with  intent  to  produce  a  book,  but  wrote  as  the  humor  seized 
him. 

His  Report,  made  in  1863,  but  held  back  by  the  War  Department  for 
some  months,  had  been  full,  accurate,  and  exhaustive.  It  was  published 
in  1S64.  No  statement  in  it  has  ever  been  controverted.  This  Report  did 
not  include  any  accounts  of  his  personal  relations  to  the  civilians  who 


BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH.  23 

directed  the  course  of  political  events  and  misdirected  military  operations 
during  the  first  two  years  of  the  war.  These  accounts  he  wrote,  accom- 
panying them  with  letters,  despatches,  documents — whatever  might  throw 
light  on  history.  He  rewrote  and  extended  a  large  part  of  the  military 
history  which  his  Report  had  given  in  brief,  and  from  time  to  time  inserted 
pages  of  manuscript  here  and  there  in  those  parts  of  it  which  he  had  not 
rewritten.  Thus  as  years  passed  he  was  extending  and  annotating  a  his- 
tor>',  at  all  times  complete  in  itself  as  a  narrative ;  and,  however  long  he 
had  lived,  would  probably  have  enriched  it  from  year  to  year  with  more 
and  more  of  interesting  material.  His  sudden  death  interrupted  the  pro- 
gress of  his  work.  When  I  came  to  examine  the  collected  and  arranged 
papers  which  he  entrusted  to  me,  verbally  while  living,  and  by  his  last 
will,  I  found  not  only  the  narrative  which  I  have  styled  McClellan's 
Own  Story,  but  sufficient  illustrative  and  explanatory  documents,  letters, 
and  despatches  to  form  several  volumes. 

He  had  not  written  with  reference  to  publication.  It  was  expressly 
for  his  children  that  he  was  preparing  his  memoirs,  and  there  was  a  great 
deal  in  them  which  was  intended  solely  for  their  eyes.  A  century  hence 
every  word,  perhaps,  might  be  interesting  to  those  who  enjoy  personal 
memoirs,  but,  as  a  matter  of  course,  it  has  been  my  duty  to  withhold  such 
portions  as  I  think  he  would  not  have  published  now.  I  have  exercised 
my  discretion  in  reserving  for  future  publication  much  of  the  material  he 
had  arranged,  which  would  now  be  valuable,  and  doubtless  acceptable, 
but  would  have  extended  this  volume  to  a  series  of  two  or  three.  All  the 
foot-notes  in  the  volume  are  mine. 

•  Another  class  of  material  came  into  my  hands.  McClellan  had  been 
married  only  a  few  months  before  the  outbreak  of  the  war.  Not  the  least 
sacrifice  which  he  made  in  entering  the  service  was  the  breaking  up  of 
the  home — his  first  home — in  which  he  had  found  the  first  happiness  of  a 
laborious  life.  Sometimes  during  his  public  service  Mrs.  McClellan  was 
able  to  be  with  him,  especially  while  he  was  in  Washington.  When  they 
were  separated  he  found  his  only  rest  and  refreshment  in  writing  to  her. 
To  no  other  person  in  the  world  did  he  open  his  whole  soul.  The  per- 
fection of  their  love,  the  absolute  confidence  which  he  reposed,  and 
wisely  reposed,  in  her,  made  his  letters  not  only  graphic  accounts  of  daily 
events,  great  and  small,  but  an  exposure  of  his  inmost  feelings.  I  found 
among  his  papers  some  extracts  from  these  letters,  which  he  had  made  to 
aid  him  in  writing  his  memoirs  ;  but  the  letters  were  supposed  to  have 
vanished  in  the  fire.  When  they  were  discovered,  carefully  sealed  for  the 
one  only  person  to  whom  they  belonged,  I  asked  for  fuller  extracts.  I 
confess  that  I  hesitated  very  much  about  giving  any  part  of  these  letters, 
written  in  the  most  sacred  confidence  of  life,  to  the  public  eye.  Others 
advised  that,  as  he  belonged  to  his  country,  and  innumerable  citizens  and 
soldiers  loved  him  with  devout  affection,  they  could  well  be  allowed,  had 
indeed  a  right,  to  read  portions  of  these  letters  which  reveal  McClellan 
the  man,  as  his  narrative  sho^vs  McClellan  the  soldier. 

By  far  the  larger  portion  of  the  letters,  and  of  every  letter,  belongs 


24  BIOGRAPHICAL  SKETCH, 

to  that  confidence  which  not  even  death  affects.  In  determining  what 
parts  may  and  what  may  not  be  published  I  have  been  influenced  by  the 
wish  to  present  to  his  fellow-citizens  who  honored  him,  and  his  soldiers 
who  loved  him,  some  of  that  view  of  his  character  which  those  nearest  to 
him  always  had  ;  and  I  have  done  this  with  the  guiding  trust  that  he  will 
approve  what  I  have  done  when  I  again  meet  him. 

W.  C.  Primb. 
August  io,  i886b 


MCCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY 


November  8,  i88l. 

The  labor  of  years  in  the  preparation  of  my  memoirs  having 
been  destroyed  by  fire^  it  remains  to  recommence  the  tedious  work 
and  replace  the  loss  as  best  I  may.  Fortunately  my  original  papers 
are  preserved.  I  have  no  present  intention  of  publishing  anything 
during  my  lifetime ^  but  desire  to  leave ^  for  the  use  of  my  children^ 
my  own  account  of  the  great  events  in  which  it  was  my  fortune  to 
take  part.  Therefore^  should  I  live  to  complete  my  work,  it  will 
probably  be  found  too  voluminous  for  publication,  and  I  anticipate 
the  necessity  of  a  judicious  pruning  to  fit  it  for  the  public  use, 

I  have  thus  far  abstained  from  any  public  reply  to  the  various 
criticisms  and  misrepresentations  of  which  I  have  been  the  subject^ 
and  shall  probably  preserve  the  same  attitude  during  the  remainder 
of  my  life.  Certainly,  up  to  within  a  brief  period,  party  feeling 
has  run  so  high  that  the  pathway  for  the  truth  has  been  well-nigh 
closed,  and  too  many  have  preferred  to  accept  blindly  whatever 
was  most  agreeable  to  their  prejudices,  rather  than  to  examine 
facts. 

Moreover,  during  the  civil  war  I  never  sought  rank  nor  com- 
mand.  Whatever  of  that  nature  came  to  me  came  by  force  of  cir- 
cumstances and  with  no  effort  of  my  oivn.  In  the  performance  of 
the  duties  thus  thrown  upon  me,  I  can  with  a  clear  conscience  say 
that  I  never  thought  of  myself  or  of  my  own  interests,  but  that  I 
steadily  pursued  the  course  which  commended  itself  to  me  as  best 
serving  the  true  interests  of  my  country,  and  of  the  gallant  troops 
whom  I  had  the  honor  to  command, 

I  have,  therefore,  been  able  to  maintain  a  calm  front  under 
abuse,  and — while  far  from  claiming  immunity  from  error — have 
remained  satisfied  with  the  conviction  that,  after  my  death  at  least, 
my  countrymen  will  recognize  the  fact  that  I  loyally  sensed  my 
country  in  its  darkest  hour ;  and  that  others,  who  during  their 
lifetimes  have  been  more  favored  than  myself,  would  probably  have 
done  no  better,  under  the  circumstances  which  surrounded  me,  wheny 
twice  at  least,  I  saved  the  capital,  once  created  and  once  reorgan-- 
ized  a  great  army. 


McCLELLAN'S   OWN    STORY. 


CHAPTER   I. 


Causes  of  the  war — Principles  of  the  Union — State-rights  and  secession 
— Slavery — Immediate  and  gradual  emancipation — Dougla<%  and  Lin- 
coln— War  imminent — The  South  responsible — A  slander  refuted^ 
McClellan  always  for  the  Union — Enters  the  service — Made  major- 
general  of  volunteers  in  Ohio. 

When  the  occurrences  at  Fort  Sumter  in  April,  1861,  aroused 
the  nation  to  some  appreciation  of  the  gravity  of  the  situation, 
I  was  engaged  in  civil  life  as  president  of  the  Eastern  Division 
of  the  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Railroad,  having  resigned  my  com- 
mission as  a  captain  of  cavalry  in  January,  1857.  My  residence 
was  then  in  Cincinnati,  and  the  fact  that  I  had  been  in  the  army 
threw  me  in  contact  with  the  leading  men  of  the  State.  My  old 
army  associations  had  placed  me  in  intimate  relations  with  many 
Southern  men,  and  I  had  travelled  much  in  the  South,  so  that  I 
was,  perhaps,  better  prepared  to  weigh  the  situation  than  the  ma- 
jority of  Northern  men.  So  strongly  was  I  convinced  that  war 
would  ensue  that  when,  in  the  autumn  of  i860,  I  leased  a  house 
in  Cincinnati  for  the  term  of  three  years,  I  insisted  upon  a  clause 
in  the  lease  releasing  me  from  the  obligation  in  the  event  of  war. 

The  general  current  of  events  during  the  winter,  and  many 
special  instances  of  outrage  or  insult  offered  to  unoffending 
Northern  travellers  in  the  Southwest  (coming  to  my  knowledge 
as  a  railway  official),  reduced  this  impression  to  a  certainty  in 
my  mind,  even  before  the  firing  upon  Sumter. 

After  all  that  has  been  said  and  written  upon  the  subject,  I 

suppose  none  now  doubt  that  slavery  was  the  real  knot  of  the 

question  and  the  underlying  cause  of  the  war.     It  is  now  easy 

to  perceive  how  the  war  might  have  been  avoided  if  for  two  or 

•9 


30  McCLELLAN'S  0  WN  STOR  Y. 

three  generations  back  all  the  men  of  both  sections  had  been 
eminently  wise,  calm,  unselfish,  and  patriotic.  But  with  men  as 
they  are,  it  would  be  difficult  indeed  to  indicate  how  a  perma- 
nent pacific  solution  could  have  been  reached.  It  is  no  doubt 
true  that  events  were  precipitated,  perhaps  rendered  inevitable, 
by  the  violent  course  of  a  comparatively  small  number  of  men, 
on  both  sides  of  the  line,  during  the  thirty  years  preceding  the 
war. 

But  it  is  the  distinct  lesson  of  history  that  this  is  always  so ; 
that  the  great  crises  in  the  world's  history  are  induced  by  the 
words  and  actions  of  a  few  earnest  or  violent  men,  who  stir  up 
the  masses  and  induce  them  blindly  to  follow  their  lead,  whether 
for  good  or  evil.  As  a  rule  the  masses  of  civilized  men,  if  left  to 
themselves,  are  not  prone  to  disturb  the  existing  order  of  things 
or  to  resort  to  violent  measures,  unless  suffering  under  intense 
evils  which  come  home  to  each  man  individually  and  affect 
either  his  personal  safety  or  personal  possessions  and  prosperity ; 
and  even  in  such  cases  spontaneous  uprisings  of  the  masses  are 
rare. 

In  our  own  case  the  people  of  the  two  sections  did  not  under- 
stand each  other  before  the  war,  and  probably  neither  section 
regarded  the  other  as  seriously  in  earnest.  The  wide  difference 
existing  in  social  organization  and  habits  had  much  to  do  with 
this. 

In  the  South  the  habit  of  carrying,  and  using  on  slight  pro- 
vocation, deadly  weapons,  the  sparse  settlement  of  the  country, 
the  idle  and  reckless  habits  of  the  majority  of  the  illiterate 
whites,  the  self-assertion  natural  to  the  dominant  race  in  a  slave- 
holding  country,  all  conspired  to  impress  them  with  an  ill-found- 
ed assumption  of  superior  worth  and  courage  over  the  indus- 
trious, peaceful,  law-abiding  Northerners.  On  the  other  hand, 
the  men  of  the  North  had  become  somewhat  habituated  to  the 
boastful  assertions  too  common  among  the  Southerners,  and  had 
learned  to  believe  that  no  real  purpose  of  using  force  lay  con- 
cealed beneath  their  violent  language.  Both  were  mistaken. 
The  Southerner,  with  all  his  gasconading,  was  earnest  in  his 
intention  to  fight  to  the  last  for  slavery  and  the  right  of  seces- 
sion. The  peaceful  Northerner,  unaccustomed  to  personal  war- 
fare and  prone  to  submit  his  disputes  to  the  regular  ordeal  of 
law,  was  ready  to  lay  down  his  life  for  the  cause  of  the  Union. 


STATE  RIGHTS  AND  SECESSION,  3 1 

More  gallant  foes  never  met  on  the  field  of  battle  than  these 
men  of  the  same  race,  who  had  so  long  lived  under  the  ample 
folds  of  the  same  flag  ;  more  desperate  battles  were  never  fought 
than  those  now  about  to  occur.  The  military  virtues  of  patriot- 
ism, patience,  endurance,  self-abnegation,  and  heroism  were  about 
to  receive  their  most  striking  illustrations. 

In  judging  the  motives  of  men  at  this  great  crisis  it  must  be 
remembered  that  the  vast  majority  of  Southern  men  had  been 
educated  in  the  doctrine  of  secession  and  of  extreme  State-rights 
— which  is,  that  allegiance  was  due  first  to  the  State,  next  to  the 
general  government,  and  that  the  State  when  it  entered  the 
Union  retained  the  right  to  withdraw  at  will ;  while  in  the 
North  the  doctrine  was  generally  held  that  allegiance  to  the 
general  government  was  paramount  and  the  Union  indissolu- 
ble. The  masses  on  each  side  were  honest  in  their  belief  as 
to  the  justice  of  their  cause.  Their  honesty  and  sincerity  were 
proved  by  the  sacrifices  they  made,  by  the  earnestness  with  which 
so  many  devout  Christians  on  both  sides  confidently  relied  upon 
the  aid  of  God  in  their  hour  of  trial,  and  by  the  readiness  with 
which  so  many  brave  men  laid  down  their  lives  on  the  field  of 
battle. 

When  the  generation  which  took  part  in  this  contest  shall 
have  passed  away,  and  the  question  can  be  regarded  in  the  cold 
light  of  dispassionate  historical  and  philosophical  inquiry,  it  will 
be  clearly  seen  that  in  this  case  also  history  has  repeated  itself, 
and  that  the  truth  lay  midway  between  the  extreme  positions  as- 
sumed by  the  controlling  spirits  at  the  time.  The  right  of  seces- 
sion would  virtually  have  carried  us  back  to  the  old  Confederacy, 
which  proved  so  weak  from  lack  of  cohesion  between  its  parts 
and  of  the  necessary  force  in  the  executive.  The  tendency  of 
Northern  Republicans  was  towards  a  centralized  power,  under 
which  the  autocracy  of  the  States  would  disappear. 

It  is  impossible  for  any  government  to  recognize  the  right  of 
secession  unless  its  assertion  is  supported  by  such  overwhelming 
force  as  to  render  opposition  entirely  hopeless,  and  thus  practi- 
cally convert  rebellion  into  successful  revolution.  There  can  be 
no  stability,  no  protection  of  person  and  property,  no  good  gov- 
ernment, no  power  to  put  down  disorder  at  home  or  to  resist 
oppression  from  without,  under  any  other  principle. 

On  the  other  hand,  in  a  country  so  vast  as  ours,  with  such 


32  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

great  differences  of  topography  and  of  climate,  with  a  popula- 
tion so  numerous  and  derived  from  such  a  variety  of  sources, 
and,  in  consequence  of  all  this,  such  diversities  of  habits,  local 
laws,  and  material  interests,  it  is  impossible  for  a  centralized 
government  to  legislate  satisfactorily  for  all  the  domestic  con- 
cerns of  the  various  parts  of  the  Union. 

The  only  safe  policy  is  that  the  general  government  be  strictly 
confined  to  the  general  powers  and  duties  vested  in  it  by  the  old 
Constitution,  while  the  individual  States  preserve  all  the  sovereign 
rights  and  powers  retained  by  them  when  the  constitutional  com- 
pact was  formed. 

As  a  corollary  from  this  I  am  convinced  that  no  State  can  be 
deprived  of  any  of  these  retained  rights,  powers,  and  duties  with- 
out its  own  consent ;  and  that  the  power  of  amending  the  Consti- 
tution was  intended  to  apply  only  to  amendments  affecting  the 
manner  of  carrying  into  effect  the  original  provisions  of  the  Con- 
stitution, but  not  to  enable  the  general  government  to  seize  new 
power  at  the  expense  of  any  unwilling  State. 

A  strict  adherence  in  practice  to  this  theory  presents,  in  my 
opinion,  the  only  possibility  of  the  permanent  maintenance  of 
our  Union  throughout  the  long  years  of  the  future. 

The  old  Southern  doctrine  of  extreme  State-rights,  including 
that  of  secession,  would  reduce  the  Union  to  a  mere  rope  of 
sand,  and  would  completely  paralyze  the  general  government, 
rendering  it  an  object  of  just  contempt  at  home  and  abroad. 

The  doctrine  of  centralization,  if  carried  to  its  legitimate 
conclusions,  in  substituting  the  legislation  of  the  general  govern- 
ment for  that  of  the  States  in  regard  to  the  local  and  domestic 
affairs  of  the  people,  would  soon  cause  so  much  discontent  and 
suffering  as  to  result  in  a  resort  to  secession  as  the  only  practical 
remedy.  And  in  this  case  the  Union  could  only  be  maintained 
by  the  superior  force  of  a  strong  military  central  government, 
thus  rendering  the  Union  valueless  for  its  great  object  of  secur- 
ing the  liberties  of  the  people. 

In  the  course  of  my  narrative  the  fact  will  appear — a  fact  well 
known  to  all  who  intelligently  followed  the  events  of  the  time — 
that,  at  the  beginning  of  the  great  civil  war,  the  general  govern- 
ment was  powerless,  both  in  the  East  and  West,  to  maintain  its 
rights  and  vindicate  its  authority,  and  that  the  means  to  accom- 
plish these  vital  ends  were  furnished  by  the  individual  States, 


SLAVERY.  33 

acting  in  their  capacity  as  sovereigns.  The  history  of  that  period 
is  the  best  possible  vindication  of  the  Northern  doctrine  of  State- 
rights. 

And  no  impartial  observer  of  the  events  of  the  war  can  fail  to 
see  that  all  the  subsequent  violations  of  the  Constitution  and  of 
the  rights  of  the  loyal  States,  by  the  general  government,  were 
not  only  wholly  unnecessary  but  positively  pernicious  at  the  time. 
The  safety  of  the  republic  at  no  time  during  the  war  required  or 
justified  any  departure  from  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution. 
That  great  instrument  was  broad  enough  to  cover  even  the  neces- 
sities of  that  most  eventful  period.  The  loyalty  of  the  great 
masses  of  the  Northern  people  was  so  marked  and  so  strong  that 
they  could  be  trusted  far  more  than  most  of  the  selfish  servants 
whom  a  minority  had  placed  in  power.  The  happiest  condition 
of  affairs  for  us  would  no  doubt  be  found  in  a  return  to  the  situa- 
tion before  the  w^r,  when  the  action  of  the  general  government, 
being  strictly  confined  to  its  legitimate  purposes,  was  so  little  felt 
by  individual  citizens  that  they  almost  forgot  its  existence,  and 
were  almost  unaware  that  there  was  any  other  government  in  the 
land  than  those  of  the  States  and  municipalities. 

Soon  after  my  arrival  in  Washington  in  1861  I  had  several 
interviews  with  prominent  abolitionists — of  whom  Senator  Sum- 
ner was  one — on  the  subject  of  slavery.  I  invariably  took  the 
ground  that  I  was  thoroughly  opposed  to  slavery,  regarding  it  as 
a  great  evil,  especially  to  the  whites  of  the  South,  but  that  in  my 
opinion  no  sweeping  measure  of  emancipation  should  be  carried 
out,  unless  accompanied  by  arrangements  providing  for  the  new 
relations  between  employers  and  employed,  carefully  guarding 
the  rights  and  interests  of  both  ;  and  that  were  such  a  measure 
framed  to  my  satisfaction  I  would  cordially  support  it.  Mr. 
Sumner  replied — others  also  agreed  with  him — that  such  points 
did  not  concern  us,  and  that  all  that  must  be  left  to  take  care  of 
itself.  My  reply  was  that  no  real  statesman  could  ever  contem- 
plate so  sweeping  and  serious  a  measure  as  sudden  and  general 
emancipation  without  looking  to  the  future  and  providing  for  its 
consequences ;  that  four  and  a  half  millions  of  uneducated  slaves 
should  not  suddenly  be  manumitted  without  due  precautions 
taken  both  to  protect  them  and  to  guard  against  them ;  that 
just  there  was  the  point  where  we  differed  radically  and  probably 
irreconcilably. 


34  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

My  own  view  was  that  emancipation  should  be  accomplished 
gradually,  and  that  the  negroes  should  be  fitted  for  it  by  certain 
preparatory  steps  in  the  way  of  education,  recognition  of  the 
rights  of  family  and  marriage,  prohibition  against  selling  them 
without  their  own  consent,  the  freedom  of  those  born  after  a 
certain  date,  etc.  I  was  always  prepared  to  make  it  one  of  the 
essential  conditions  of  peace  that  slavery  should  be  abolished 
within  a  fixed  and  reasonable  period.  Had  the  arrangements  of 
the  terms  of  peace  been  in  my  hands  I  should  certainly  have 
insisted  on  this. 

During  the  autumn  of  1861,  after  arriving  in  Washington,  I 
discontinued  the  practice  of  returning  fugitive  slaves  to  their 
owners. 

In  Western  Virginia,  after  Pegram's  surrender,  when  I  had 
been  directed  to  parole  the  prisoners,  I  collected  the  large  num- 
ber of  negro  slaves  captured  with  their  masters,  and  gave  them 
their  choice  as  to  returning  with  the  latter,  remaining  in  camp 
under  pay  as  laborers,  or  going  North.  With  one  or  two  excep- 
tions they  decided  to  return  with  their  masters.  From  that  time 
forward  I  never  returned  a  negro  slave  to  his  master,  although 
many  such  requisitions  were  made  on  me.  I  followed  the  prin- 
ciple that  there  could  be  no  slave  in  my  camp. 

On  the  Peninsula  I  not  only  received  all  negroes  who  came  to 
the  camps,  but  (especially  when  on  the  James  river) frequently 
sent  out  parties  to  bring  in  negroes,  because  I  required  them  for 
certain  work  around  the  camps  and  depots  too  severe  for  white 
men  in  that  climate.  They  were  employed  upon  police  work, 
loading  and  unloading  transports,  etc.,  and  sometimes  upon  en- 
trenchments. They  were  fed  and  received  some  small  wages. 
As  a  rule  much  strictness  was  necessary  to  make  them  work ; 
they  supposed  that  in  leaving  their  masters  they  left  all  labor 
behind  them,  and  that  they  would  be  clothed,  fed,  and  allowed 
to  live  in  idleness  in  the  North.  That  was  their  only  idea  of  lib- 
erty. It  was  very  clear  that  they  were  entirely  unfit  for  sudden 
emancipation  and  the  reception  of  the  electoral  franchise,  and 
should  have  been  gradually  prepared  for  it. 

While  on  this  subject  I  must  say  that,  although  I  was  a  strong 
Democrat  of  the  Stephen  A.  Douglas  school,  I  had  no  personal 
political  ambition.  I  knew  nothing  about  "practical  politics," 
had  never  even  voted  except  for  Douglas,  and  during  the  whole 


McCLELLAN'S  POLITICS,  35 

period  of  my  command  I  never  did  or  wrote  anything,  or  ab- 
stained from  doing  or  writing  anything,  in  view  of  its  political 
effect  upon  myself.  My  ambition  was  fully  gratified  by  the  pos- 
session of  the  command  of  the  army,  and,  so  long  as  I  held  that, 
nothing  would  have  induced  me  to  give  it  up  for  the  Presidency. 
Whenever  I  wrote  anything  of  a  political  nature  it  was  only  with 
the  hope  of  doing  something  towards  the  maintenance  of  those 
political  principles  which  I  honestly  thought  should  control  the 
conduct  of  the  war.  In  fact,  I  sacrificed  my  own  interests  rather 
than  acquiesce  in  what  I  thought  wrong  or  impolitic.  The  Pre- 
sident and  his  advisers  made  a  great  mistake  in  supposing  that  I 
desired  political  advancement. 

Many  of  the  Democratic  leaders  did  me  great  harm  by  us- 
ing my  name  for  party  purposes  without  my  knowledge  or  con- 
sent ;  and,  without  intending  it,  probably  did  more  than  my 
armed  enemies  in  the  way  of  ruining  my  military  career  by 
giving  the  administration  some  reason  to  suppose  that  in  the 
event  of  military  success  I  might  prove  a  dangerous  political 
rival. 

Regarding,  as  I  did,  the  restoration  of  the  Union  and  preser- 
vation of  the  national  life  to  be  the  great  object  of  the  war,  I 
would,  no  doubt,  have  acquiesced  in  any  honorable  measure  ab- 
solutely necessary  to  bring  about  the  desired  result,  even  to  the 
forcible  and  general  abolition  of  slavery,  if  found  to  be  a  mili- 
tary necessity.  I  recognized  the  fact  that  as  the  Confederate 
States  had  chosen  to  resort  to  the  arbitrament  of  arms,  they  must 
abide  by  the  logical  consequences  of  the  stern  laws  of  war.  But, 
as  I  always  believed  that  we  should  fight  to  bring  them  back  into 
the  Union,  and  should  treat  them  as  members  of  the  Union 
when  so  brought  back,  I  held  that  it  was  a  matter  of  sound  policy 
to  do  nothing  likely  to  render  ultimate  reconciliation  and  har- 
mony impossible,  unless  such  a  course  were  imperative  to  secure 
military  success.  Nor  do  I  now  believe  that  my  ideas  were  quix- 
otic or  imprafcticable. 

Since  the  war  I  have  met  many  of  my  late  antagonists,  and 
have  found  none  who  entertained  any  personal  enmity  against 
me.  While  acknowledging,  with  Lee  and  other  of  their  generals, 
that  they  feared  me  more  than  any  of  the  -Northern  generals,  and 
that  I  had  struck  them  harder  blows  when  in  the  full  prime  of 
their  strength,  they  have  all  said  that  I  fought  them  like  a  gen- 


36  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

tleman  and  iii  an  honorable  way,  and  that  they  felt  nothing  but 
respect  for  me. 

I  remember  very  well,  when  riding  over  the  field  of  Soutli 
Mountain,  that,  passing  by  a  severely  wounded  Confederate  offi- 
cer, I  dismounted  and  spoke  with  him,  asking  whether  I  could  do 
anything  to  relieve  him.  He  was  a  lieutenant-colonel  of  a  South 
Carolina  regiment,  and  asked  me  if  I  was  Gen.  McClellan  ;  and 
when  I  said  that  I  was  Gen.  McClellan,  he  grasped  my  hand 
and  told  me  that  he  was  perfectly  willing  to  be  wounded  and 
a  prisoner  for  the  sake  of  taking  by  the  hand  one  whom  all  the 
Confederates  so  honored  and  admired.  Such  things  happened 
to  me  not  unfrequently,  and  I  confess  that  it  gave  me  no  little 
pleasure  to  find  that  my  antagonists  shared  the  feelings  of  my 
own  men  for  me. 

To  revert  to  politics  for  a  moment :  When  residing  in  Chicago 
I  knew  Mr.  Stephen  A.  Douglas  quite  well.  During  his  cam- 
paign for  the  senatorship  against  Mr.  Lincoln  they  were  on  one 
occasion  to  hold  a  joint  discussion  at  Bloomington,  and,  as  my 
business  called  me  in  that  direction,  I  invited  Mr.  Douglas  to 
accompany  me  in  my  private  car.  We  started  late  in  the  even- 
ing, and  Mr.  Douglas  brought  with  him  a  number  of  his  political 
henchmen,  with  whom  he  was  up  all  night.  We  reached  Bloom- 
ington early  in  the  afternoon  of  the  next  day,  and  about  half  an 
hour  before  arriving  I  warned  Mr.  Douglas,  who  had  continued 
his  amusements  up  to  that  time,  not  having  slept  at  all.  I  dread- 
ed a  failure  in  the  discussion  about  to  take  place,  for  the  Little 
Giant  certainly  had  had  no  opportunity  of  thinking  of  the  sub- 
ject of  the  debate,  and  did  not  seem  to  be  in  fit  condition  to  carry 
it  on.  Not  that  he  was  intoxicated,  but  looking  unkempt  and 
sleepy.  He,  however,  retired  to  my  private  cabin,  and  soon 
emerged  perfectly  fresh  and  ready  for  the  work  before  him  ; 
so  much  so  that  I  thought  his  speech  of  that  day  his  best  dur- 
ing the  campaign. 

Mr.  Lincoln  entertained  a  very  high  respect  for  Mr.  Douglas's 
powers,  and  no  doubt  had  the  latter  survived  he  would  have 
exercised  a  great  and  most  favorable  influence  upon  Mr.  Lin- 
coln, as  well  as  upon  the  Democratic  party  of  the  North.  His 
death  was  a  severe  blow  to  the  country.  He  would,  in  all  pro- 
bability, have  been  able  to  control  the  more  flighty  leaders  of  the 
Northwestern  Democracy,  and  have  kept  the  party  in  the  eye::  of 


CAUSE  OF  THE   WAR.  37 

the  world,  as  its  masses  really  were,  united  in  a  hearty  support  of 
the  war. 

While  giving  due  weight  to  all  said  or  done  by  the  ultra  aboli- 
tionists of  the  North,  I  hold  the  South  directly  accountable  for 
the  war.  If  the  election  of  Mr.  Lincoln  meant  a  more  deter- 
mined attack  upon  slavery,  they  of  the  South  were  responsible 
for  the  result,  in  consequence  of  their  desertion  of  Mr.  Douglas 
and  the  resulting  rupture  of  the  Democratic  party.  Even  after 
that,  if  they  had  chosen  to  draw  near  the  Northern  Democrats 
again,  seeking  their  remedy  and  protection  within  the  Union,  the 
Constitution,  and  the  laws,  they  would  have  retained  the  right 
on  their  side.  If  left  to  their  own  cool  judgment  it  is  pro- 
bable that  the  majority  of  the  Southern  whites  would  have  real- 
ized that  slavery  could  not  exist  much  longer,  and  that  their  wis- 
est course  was  to  recognize  that  fact,  consent  that  it  should  not 
be  extended  beyond  its  existing  limits,  and  provide  for  its  gradual 
extinction.  But,  for  various  reasons,  more  reckless  counsels  pre- 
vailed. The  Southern  States  rallied  to  the  support  of  their  pecu- 
liar institution,  declared  it  to  be  a  holy  ordinance,  demanded 
that  it  might  be  extended  over  the  Territories,  and  bitterly  op- 
posed the  idea  that  general  manumission  should  be  provided 
for  in  any  form.  Thus  a  state  of  feeling  arose,  more  particu- 
larly in  the  South,  which  could  only  be  quieted  by  the  drastic 
methods  of  war. 

In  the  early  part  of  1 861,  as  has  already  been  stated,  it  be- 
came almost  impossible  for  any  Northern  man  to  travel  in  the 
Southwest  without  being  subjected  to  gross  insults  or  to  per- 
sonal maltreatment ;  this  conduct  soon  produced  a  counter  irri- 
tation, and,  as  for  myself,  I  confess  that  ere  long  I  came  to  the 
conclusion  that  there  was  but  one  way  to  put  an  end  to  such 
proceedings,  and  that  the  sooner  we  entered  upon  that  way  the 
better  it  would  be.  When  Sumter  was  fired  upon  there  was  no 
longer  room  for  discussion,  and  the  question  was  narrowed  to  the 
issue  of  the  life  of  the  Union  and  the  honor  of  the  flag.  For 
men  who  thought  as  I  did  there  was  but  one  course  open. 

It  was  clear  that,  even  if  a  peaceable  separation  were  ar- 
ranged, we  would  soon  come  to  blows  on  some  secondary  issue, 
such  as  boundaries,  the  division  of  public  property,  the  slavery 
question  on  the  borders,  the  free  navigation  of  the  Mississippi, 
the  territorial  domain,  etc.,  etc.,  and  in  that  view  it  was  better 


38  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

to  throw  everything  else  to  one  side  and  fight  upon  the  main 
underlying  issue — the  preservation  of  the  Union  and  the  obser- 
vance of  the  laws  of  the  general  government. 

It  is  perhaps  hardly  worth  while  to  notice  here  any  of  those 
unfounded  slanders  which  some  papers  uttered  concerning  me — 
that  is,  the  statement  that  at  the  outbreak  of  the  war  I  entertained 
offers  to  enter  the  Southern  service.  1  need  only  say  that  there 
was  not  the  shadow  of  a  foundation  for  this.  The  leading  men 
on  the  Southern  side  knew  perfectly  well  that  of  all  men  I  would 
be  the  last  to  waver  in  my  allegiance  to  the  general  government 
and  its  flag. 

At  no  period,  either  before  or  after  the  war  broke  out,  did  any 
one  suggest  to  me,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  the  idea  of  my 
taking  part  with  the  South.  No  one  ever  made  me  any  -offer  to 
join  the  rebel  service  ;  no  one  ever  suggested  the  possibility  of 
my  dreaming  of  espousing  that  side.  I  never,  in  any  manner,  in- 
timated to  any  one  that  it  would  be  possible  for  me  to  take  any 
other  side  than  that  of  the  general  government  and  the  Union, 
nor  did  such  a  thought  ever  pass  through  my  mind.  I  always 
stated  distinctly  that,  should  the  apprehended  crisis  arrive,  I 
should  stand  by  the  Union  and  the  general  government.  I  make 
this  record  because  there  have  been  people  so  foolish  as  to 
believe  the  statements  made  by  radical  newspapers  to  the  effect 
that  I  had  offered  my  services  to  the  secessionists.  Those 
papers  must  have  known  their  statements  to  be  entirely  false 
and  void  of  foundation,  when  they  made  them  for  the  sole  pur- 
pose of  serving  party  political  ends.        * 

The  secession  of  South  Carolina,  Dec.  20,  i860,  was  closely 
followed  by  that  of  six  other  States,  and  on  the  8th  of 'Feb., 
1 86 1,  the  Southern  Confederacy  was  formally  proclaimed  and  its 
president  elected.  But,  without  even  awaiting  the  organization 
of  the  new  Confederate  government,  the  seceding  States  seized 
all  the  unprotected  United  States  arsenals  and  fortifications  *with- 
in  their  limits,  together  with  all  the  arms,  stores,  and  munitions  of 
war  they  contained.  Forts  Moultrie  and  Sumter  in  Charleston 
harbor,  Fort  Pickens  at  Pensacola,  and  the  fortresses  at  Key 
West  and  Tortugas  in  Florida  were  about  the  only  forts  within 
the  seceded  States  which  remained  in  the  possession  of  the  gene- 
ral government. 

How  soon  the  work  of  organizing  and  instructing  troops  be- 


HOkTHEkN  AND  BOUTHtRN  PkEPARA  TIOXS         39 

gan  in  the  South  will  appear  from  the  fact  that  as  early  ab  the 
9th  of  Jan.,  1 86 1,  an  expedition  for  the  relief  of  Fort  Sumter  was 
turned  back  by  the  fire  of  the  Southern  batteries  near  the  en- 
trance of  Charleston  harbor.  About  the  same  time  the  navy- 
yard  at  Pensacola  was  occupied  by  an  armed  force  under  Bragg, 
and  the  works  at  the  mouth  of  the  Mississippi  garrisoned. 

In  brief,  at  least  from  the  beginning  of  Jan.,  1861,  and  pro- 
bably in  many  cases  yet  earlier,  the  work  of  organizing,  arming, 
and  instructing  troops  began  throughout  the  seceded  States,  and 
not  improbably  in  such  of  the  slaveholding  States  also  as  had  not 
yet  formally  joined  the  movement  of  secession.  As  early  as  Feb. 
18,  Gen.  Twiggs  surrendered  the  forces  under  his  command  in 
Texas. 

Meanwhile  neither  the  general  government  nor  the  Northern 
States  were  doing  anything  to  counteract  this  movement  and 
meet  the  impending  storm.  Not  only  were  there  no  additional 
troops  raised,  no  steps  taken  to  organize  and  arm  the  militia 
and  volunteers,  but,  so  far  as  the  general  government  was  con- 
cerned, the  authorities  seemed  to  dread  even  the  semblance  of 
a  movement  to  reinforce  the  few  forts  still  in  their  possession. 
The  little  regular  army,  scattered  over  the  vast  area  of  the  West, 
was  left  without  orders,  and  not  even  concentrated  for  self-de- 
fence, much  less  brought  in  where  its  services  might  be  available 
against  the  active  forces  of  the  secessionists,  as  common  pru- 
dence would  have  suggested,  as  early  as  the  passage  of  the  South 
Carolina  ordinance  of  secession. 

Such  was  the  condition  of  affairs  when  Fort  Sumter  surren- 
dered on  the  14th  of  April,  1861.  The  general  government  and 
the  Northern  States  were  utterly  unprepared  for  war ;  not  a 
man  enlisted,  not  a  musket  procured,  not  a  cartridge  made,  not 
a  piece  of  clothing  or  equipment  provided,  beyond  those  main- 
tained during  a  state  of  profound  and  apparently  permanent 
peace.  The  Southern  States  for  nearly  four  months  had  been 
actively  preparing  for  the  eventuality  they  intended  to  force  on, 
and  had  made  no  little  headway  in  the  collection  of  material, 
the  organization  and  instruction  of  troops. 

Moreover,  on  the  breaking-out  of  hostilities  they  possessed 
another  and  very  considerable  advantage  over  the  Northerners  : 
that  is  to  say,  one  of  the  results  of  the  peculiar  institution  of  the 
South  was  that  the  class  of  slaveholders,  the  highly   educated 


40  McCLELlAN'S  OlVX  STORY, 

whites,  had  always  composed  an  aristocracy,  which  furnished  the 
social  and  political  leaders  to  whom  the  poor  whites  were,  as 
a  rule,  accustomed  to  defer,  so  that  when  the  time  arrived  to 
raise  troops  the  aristocratic  class  furnished  officers  always  accus- 
tomed to  control,  and  the  poor  whites  furnished  the  mass  of  the 
private  soldiers,  always  habituated  to  that  deference  to  their 
leaders  which  under  the  new  circumstances  rapidly  passed  into 
obedience.  Discipline  was  thus  very  easily  established  among 
them. 

Among  the  Northern  men  there  was  little  difficulty  in  estab- 
lishing discipline  when  the  officers  were  intelligent  gentlemen ; 
but,  in  the  early  part  of  the  war  particularly,  it  occurred  that  the 
officers  were  sometimes  inferior  in  intelligence  and  education  to 
the  soldiers,  and  in  these  cases  the  establishment  of  discipline 
presented  far  greater  difficulties. 

Here  let  me  say  that,  given  good  officers,  there  are  no  men  in 
the  world  who  admit  of  a  more  thorough  and  effective  discipline 
than  the  native-born  Americans  of  the  North.  Their  intelligence 
soon  shows  them  the  absolute  necessity  of  discipline  in  an  army, 
and  its  advantages  to  all  concerned  ;  but  the  kind  of  discipline 
best  adapted  to  them  differs  materially  from  that  required  by 
other  races.  Their  fighting  qualities  are  second  to  none  in  the 
world. 

When  the  catastrophe  occurred — the  firing  upon  Fort  Sum- 
ter— the  excitement  in  Cincinnati  and  along  the  Ohio  river  was 
naturally  intense.  The  formation  of  regiments  began  at  once, 
and  all  who  had  military  knowledge  or  experience  were  eagerly 
sought  for,  myself  among  others.  I  did  what  I  could  in  the  way 
of  giving  advice  to  those  who  sought  it,  and  in  allaying  the  ex- 
citement in  Cincinnati.  About  this  time  I  received  telegrams 
from  friends  in  New  York  informing  me  that  the  governor  of 
that  State  desired  to  avail  himself  of  my  services ;  another  from 
Gen.  Robert  Patterson,  offering  me  the  position  of  chief-en- 
gineer of  the  command  of  militia  then  organizing  under  his 
orders ;  and  one  from  Gov.  Curtin,  of  Pennsylvania,  offering  me 
the  command  of  the  Pennsylvania  Reserves,  afterwards  given  to 
McCall.  I  promptly  arranged  my  business  affairs  so  as  to  admit 
of  a  short  absence,  and  started  for  Pennsylvania  to  see  what 
was  best  to  be  done.  At  the  request  of  several  gentlemen  of 
Cincinnati  I  stopped  at  Columbus  to  give  Gov.  Dennison  some 


COAfMAND  m  OHIO,  4 1 

information  about  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Cincinnati,  intend- 
ing to  remain  only  a  few  hours  and  then  proceed  to  Harrisburg. 
According  to  the  then  existing  laws  of  Ohio  the  command  of 
the  militia  and  volunteers  called  out  must  be  given  to  general 
officers  of  the  existing  militia  establishment.  The  legislature  be- 
ing in  session,  the  governor  caused  to  be  presented  a  bill  permit- 
ting him  to  appoint,  as  major-general  commanding,  any  resident 
of  the  State.  This  was  intended  for  my  benefit,  was  passed  by 
both  houses  in  a  few  hours,  and  the  appointment  offered  to  me 
the  same  day,  the  23d  of  April,  1861.  I  at  once  accepted  and 
without  an  hour's  delay  entered  upon  the  performance  of  my 
duties,  abandoning  my  intended  trip  to  the  East. 


CHAPTER  11. 

Beginning  of  the  war  in  the  West — Apathy  at  Washington— Value  of 
State  governments — Incidents  in  organizing  Western  army— Ken- 
tucky— Campaign  in  Western  Virginia — McClellan  called  to  Wash- 
ington. 

At  the  time  of  my  appointment  in  Ohio  we  were  cut  off  from 
direct  communication  with  Washington  in  consequence  of  the 
unfortunate  occurrences  in  Baltimore,  and  the  attention  of  the 
national  authorities  was  confined  exclusively  to  the  task  of  re- 
lieving the  capital  from  danger  and  of  securing  its  communica- 
tions with  the  loyal  States.  We  in  the  West  were  therefore  left 
for  a  long  time  without  orders,  advice,  money,  or  supplies  of  any 
kind,  and  it  was  clear  that  the  different  States  must  take  care  of 
themselves  and  provide  their  own  means  of  defence. 

At  this  critical  juncture  the  value  and  vitality  of  the  State 
governments  was  fully  tested.  Fortunately  they  proved  equal  to 
the  emergency  and  saved  the  country.  Any  one  who  coolly  and 
dispassionately  reviews  the  occurrences  of  that  exciting  period 
must  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that,  in  a  country  so  large  as  ours, 
the  safety  of  the  nation  imperatively  demands  the  entire  pre- 
servation of  the  rights  and  autonomy  of  the  several  States  as 
secured  by  the  original  Constitution  ;  of  course  with  the  proviso 
that  the  vexed  question  of  the  right  of  secession  has  been  for 
ever  settled  in  the  negative  by  the  result  of  the  civil  war.  The 
Eastern  States  were  to  a  certain  extent  provided  with  arms,  the 
material  of  war,  and  some  tolerably  organized  and  instructed 
militia  regiments.     Their  prompt  action  saved  the  capital. 

The  Western  States  were  almost  entirely  without  the  means 
of  defence,  but  the  governors  (cordially  supported  by  the  legis- 
latures) at  once  took  steps  to  obtain  by  purchase  and  by  con- 
tract, at  home  and  abroad,  the  requisite  arms,  ammunition, 
clothing,  camp  equipage,  etc.  The  supplies  thus  provided  were 
often  inferior  in  quality  and  insufficient  in  quantity,  but  they 
answered  the  purpose  until  better  arrangements  could  be  made. 

4« 


THE  WE^T  tJXPREPAIiED.  43 

In  addition  to  the  Ohio  volunteers  called  for  by  the  genera, 
government,  the  governor  placed  under  my  command  twelve  or 
thirteen  regiments  of  State  troops ;  and  for  several  weeks  I 
remained  at  Columbus,  without  a  staff,  working  night  and  day 
at  the  organization  of  the  entire  Ohio  contingent. 

The  condition  of  affairs  in  the  West  was  not  satisfactory  or 
reassuring.  We  were  entirely  unprepared  for  war.  It  was  al- 
ready clear  that  Missouri  was  likely  to  be  the  scene  of  a  serious 
struggle,  and  the  attitude  of  Kentucky  was  very  doubtful.  The 
secessionists  were  gathering  forces  in  Tennessee  and  upon  the 
Mississippi  river,  as  well  as  in  Western  Virginia,  and  many  well- 
informed  persons  felt  great  anxiety  in  respect  to  the  loyalty  of 
large  numbers  of  the  inhabitants  of  southern  Illinois,  Indiana, 
and  Ohio.  In  brief,  our  situation  was  difficult.  We  were  sur- 
rounded by  possible,  or  even  probable,  dangers ;  were  without 
organization,  arms,  supplies,  money,  officers.  We  had  no  idea 
of  the  policy  which  the  general  government  intended  to  pur- 
sue ;  we  had  no  "  head "  to  direct  affairs.  It  fell  to  me,  per- 
haps more  than  to  any  one  person,  to  supply  these  pressing 
wants,  and  at  this  distance  I  may  say  that  the  task  was  not  un- 
satisfactorily performed. 

My  civil  career  ended  at  this  time,  for  from  the  evening 
when  I  received  the  appointment  as  major-general  of  the  Ohio 
Volunteers  all  my  thoughts  and  efforts  were  directed  to  my 
military  duties.  I  never  again  went  to  the  office  of  the  Ohio 
and  Mississippi  Railroad,  unless  it  may  have  been  for  a  few 
minutes  when  my  advice  was  needed  on  matters  of  importance. 
The  owners  of  the  road  refused  to  accept  my  resignation  for 
many  months,  until  it  was  certain  that  I  was  inextricably  in- 
volved in  military  affairs  ;  but  I  drew  no  pay  from  them  after  I 
ceased  to  do  the  duty.  The  salary  I  gave  up  to  re-enter  the 
military  service  was  ten  thousand  dollars  per  annum. 

On  the  night  of  my  appointment  as  major-general  in  Ohio 
I  wrote  a  letter  to  Gen.  Scott  (probably  directed  to  the  adju- 
tant-general) informing  him  of  the  fact,  reporting  for  orders, 
giving  all  the  •details  I  possessed  in  regard  to  my  command,  the 
arms,  etc.,  at  my  disposal,  and  asking  for  staff  officers  to  assist 
me.  This  was  sent  by  a  special  messenger,  there  being  then  no 
mail  communication  with  Washington.  Within  a  few  days  I  sent 
by  similar  means  another  letter  to  the  general,  suggesting  that 


44  McCLELLAN'S  OWI^  STORY. 

the  Western  States  between  the  Alleghanies  and  the  Mississippi 
he  placed  under  one  head  ;  stating  that  I  intended  bringing  all 
the  Ohio  troops  into  one  camp  of  instruction  (Camp  Dennison); 
asking  for  arms,  funds,  etc.  ;  urging  the  necessity  of  artillery  and 
cavalry  ;  renewing  the  request  for  staff  officers  ;  suggesting  a 
plan,  or  rather  plans,  of  Western  campaigns.  It  is  possible  that 
some  of  the  ideas  here  mentioned  as  being  in  the  second  leuei: 
may  have  been  in  the  first,  or  in  another  letter  written  soon 
after ;  for  about  this  time  I  wrote  several  letters  to  the  head- 
quarters at  Washington.  One  movement  that  I  suggested  was 
in  connection  with  the  operations  of  the  Eastern  army  then 
being  assembled  around  Washington  ;  a  movement  up  the  val- 
ley of  the  Great  Kanawha,  and  across  the  mountains  upon  Rich- 
mond or  upon  Staunton,  as  circumstances  might  render  advisable. 
Another  was  a  movement  upon  Nashville,  and  thence,  in  combi- 
nation with  the  Eastern  army,  upon  Chattanooga,  Atlanta,  Mont- 
gomery, Savannah,  etc.,  etc.  The  importance  of  Eastern  Ten- 
nessee, and  of  the  railroad  from  Memphis  through  Chattanooga 
and  Knoxville,  was  very  early  impressed  upon  my  mind,  and  at 
a  very  early  date  brought  before  the  Washington  authorities. 
Fortunately,  or  unfortunately,  they  were  too  busy  to  think  of 
the  West,  and  these  letters  received  little  or  no  attention,  so  that 
we  were  allowed  to  go  on  pretty  much  as  we  pleased,  with  such 
means  as  the  States  could  get  possession  of. 

On  the  13th  of  May,  1861,  I  received  the  order,  dated  May 
3,  forming  the  Department  of  the  Ohio — consisting  of  the  States 
of  Ohio,  Indiana,  and  Illinois — and  giving  the  command  to  me. 
A  short  time  afterwards  were  added  to  the  department  a  small 
portion  of  Western  Pennsylvania  and  that  part  of  Western  Vir- 
ginia north  of  the  Great  Kanawha  and  west  of  the  Greenbfiar 
rivers.     I  was  still  left  without  a  single  instructed  staff  officer. 

Capt.  (afterwards  Maj.-Gen.)  Gordon  Granger,  U.  S.  Mount- 
ed Rifles,  was  sent  to  Ohio  to  muster  in  volunteers.  I  appoint- 
.ed  him  division  inspector,  and  repeatedly  applied  for  him  as" 
a  member  of  my  staff ;  but  these  requests  were  constantly 
refused,  and  he  was  not  permitted  to  retain  the  post  of  inspec- 
tor. During  the  short  time  he  was  with  ttie  he  rendered  remark- 
able services.  Capt.  Lawrence  Williams,  loth  U.  S.  Infantry, 
was  soon  after  ordered  to  Ohio  as  a  mustering  officer,  and  my 
application   for  him  as  an  aide-de-camp  was  granted.     He  con- 


OUGAiVl/.ATlO.V  IX  THE  WE^T.  45 

tinued  with  me  during  tlij  Western  Virginia  campaign,  and  until 
a  short  period  after  my  arrival  in  Washington,  when  with  great 
difficulty  I  procured  for  him  the  appointment  of  major  in  the 
6th  U.  S.  Cavalry.  This  much-abused  officer  always  served 
me  faithfully,  and  exhibited  great  gallantry  in  action.  I  was 
and  am  fully  satisfied  that  he  always  behaved  with  thorough 
loyalty. 

Soon  after  this  Gen.  Harney  and  Col.  McKinstry  lent  me 
Capt.  Dickerson,  A.  A.  Q.  M.  After  much  difficulty  I  succeed- 
ed in  retaining  him,  and  he  proved  to  be  a  most  valuable  officer. 
Capt.  Burns,  A.  C.  S.,  happened  to  pass  through  Cincinnati  un- 
employed, so  that  1  detained  him,  and  at  last  kept  him  perma- 
nently. Both  this  officer  and  Capt.  Dickerson  were  more  tjian 
once  ordered  away  from  me  to  less  important  functions,  and  it 
was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  I  finally  retained  them.  At 
a  subsequent  period,  but  before  the  Western  Virginia  campaign, 
Maj.  Seth  Williams  was  assigned  to  duty  as  adjutant-general  of 
the  department,  Maj.  R.  B.  Marcy  as  paymaster  (subsequently 
assigned  by  me  as  chief  of  staff  and  inspector-general),  Capt 
Kingsbury  as  chief  of  ordnance. 

During  the  first  organization  of  the  department  my  great  diffi- 
culty was  encountered  from  the  unwillingness  of  the  Washington 
authorities  to  give  me  dny  staff  officers.  I  do  not  think  they  had 
an  idea  beyond  their  own  safety,  and  consequently  that  of  W^ash- 
ington  ;  except  the  Blairs,  who  were  naturally  much  interested  in 
the  State  of  Missouri,  and  Mr.  Chase.  As  will  be  seen  hereafter, 
Kentucky  and  West  Virginia  received  a  very  small  share  of  the 
attention  of  the  functionaries  in  Washington. 

In  the  course  of  May  and  June  I  made  several  tours  of  in- 
spection through  my  command.  Cairo  was  visited  at  an  early 
day,  and  after  a  thorough  inspection  I  gave  the  necessary  orders 
for  its  defence,  as  well  as  that  of  Bird's  Point,  which  I  also  visit- 
ed. Cairo  was  then  under  the  immediate  command  of  Brig.-Gen. 
Prentiss,  and,  considering  all  the  circumstances,  the  troops  were 
in  a  remarkably  satisfactory  condition.  The  artillery,  especially, 
had  made  very  good  progress  under  the  instruction  of  Col.  Wag- 
ner, a  Hungarian  officer,  whom  I  had  sent  there  for  that  object. 
I  inspected  also  at  Springfield  (III ),  Chicago,  several  points  on 
the  Illinois  Central  Railroad,  several  times  at  Indianapolis,  Cleve- 
land, and  Columbus.     Maj.  Marcy  also  inspected  the  points  left 


46  McCLELLAN'S  OlVJ^  SToJiY, 

unexamined  by  me.  In  connection  with  Gov.  Dennison  I  had 
several  meetings  with  the  governors  of  the  Northwestern  States 
for  the  purpose  of  urging  on  military  preparations. 

During  the  period  that  elapsed  from  my  assignment  to  the 
command  in  Ohio  until  I  commenced  sending  troops  to  West 
Virginia,  my  time  was  fully  occupied  in  expediting  the  organiza- 
tion and  instruction  of  the  troops,  and  in  endeavoring  to  provide 
for  their  food,  armament,  and  equipment.  The  difficulties  aris- 
ing from  the  apathy  and  contracted  views  of  the  authorities  at 
Washington  were  very  great,  and  could  never  have  been  over- 
come but  for  the  zeal  and  intelligence  of  the  governors  of  the 
Western  States,  foremost  among  whom  was  Gov.  Dennison,  of 
Ohio.  It  seemed  that  the  Washington  people  had  quite  for- 
gotten the  existence  of  the  West ;  certain  it  is  that  for  a  long- 
time we  were  left  entirely  to  our  own  resources,  and  it  fre- 
quently became  necessary  to  assume  responsibilities  not  at  all 
in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  proprieties  of  a  well-regulated 
service. 

Gen.  Scott  and  the  other  military  authorities  all  this  time 
refused  to  ^llow  the  organization  of  cavalry  and  artillery  for  my 
command,  being  clear  that  neither  of  these  arms  of  service  would 
be  needed  !  With  the  exception  of  the  '"  Michigan  Battery  " 
(Capt.  Loomis),  which  was  authorized  by  Gen.  Wool  during  the 
time  when  communication  with  Washington  was  cut  off,  there 
was  no  battery  in  the  United  States  service  at  my  disposal  for 
a  long  time.  Upon  my  recommendation  the  governors  of  the 
States  organized  State  batteries  on  their  own  responsibility. 
Finally  three  companies  of  the  4th  U.  S.  Artillery,  serving 
as  infantry,  arrived  at  Cincinnati  en  route  to  the  East  from 
Fort  Randall.  I  at  length  received  permission  to  retain  them, 
and  sent  Capt.  (afterwards  Maj.-Gen.)  George  Getty,  the  com- 
mander of  one  of  them,  to  Washington,  with  a  letter  for  the 
general  commanding,  in  which  I  repeated  my  wants  in  regard 
to  artillery,  and  urged  that  the  three  companies  should  at  once 
be  mounted.  The  result  was  a  tardy  and  reluctant  consent  that 
one  of  them,  Capt.  (afterwards  Gen.)  A.  P.  Howie's,  should  be 
mounted.  But  Gen.  Scott  expressed  to  Capt.  Getty  no  little  in- 
dignation that  I  should  presume  to  make  such  a  request,  and, 
among  other  things,  said  :  "  I  know  more  about  artillery  than 
Gen.  McClellan  does,  and  it  is  not  for  him  to  teach  me."     So 


c/;:axts  good  luck.  47 

tedious  were  the  movements  of  the  Ordnance  Bureau  that  Capt 
Howe's  battery  was  not  mounted  until  after  I  left  for  West  Vir- 
ginia,  and  joined  me  there  in  a  perfectly  raw  condition.  Cav- 
alr)-  was  absolutely  refused,  but  the  governors  of  the  States  com- 
plied with  my  request  and  organized  a  few  companies,  which 
were  finally  mustered  into  tlic  United  States  service  and  proved 
very  usefuL 

Soon  after  Gen.  Patterson  commenced  his  operations  in  the 
vicinity  of  Williamsport  (when  on  the  cars  returning  from  Indi- 
ana|>olis,  where  I  went  to  inspect  some  regiments  of  Indiana 
troops)  I  received  from  him  a  telegraphic  despatch  stating  that 
he  had  largely  superior  forces  in  front  of  him,  that  he  was  in  a 
critical  condition  and  wanted  assistance.  I  at  once  telegraphed 
and  wrote  to  Gen.  Scott  what  Gen.  Patterson  stated,  and  sug- 
gesting that  I  should  move  out,  with  all  my  disposable  force,  by 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  to  Piedmont  and  beyond,  and 
thus,  in  connection  with  Gen.  Patterson,  clear  out  the  Shenan- 
doah Valley.  The  reply  to  this  was  in  substance,  and  as  nearly 
as  I  remember  in  these  ver)-  words  :  that  **  the  region  beyond 
Piedmont  is  not  within  Gen.  McClellan*s  command.  When  his 
opinion  is  desired  about  matters  there  it  will  be  asked  for." 
After  this  encouraging  reply  I  very  carefully  abstained  from 
unnecessar)-  communication  with  Washington.  It  may  be  re- 
marked that  my  suggestion  was  not  uncalled  for,  but  directly 
induced  by  Gen.  Patterson's  official  despatch  to  me ;  and,  fur- 
ther, that  if  my  suggestion  had  been  adopted  the  result  would 
have  been  that  no  *'  Bull  Run  No.  i  '*  would  have  been  fought. 

I  think  it  was  during  my  absence  on  this  st\\  trip  (to  Indian- 
apolis) that  Grant  came  to  Cincinnati  to  ask  me,  as  an  old  ac- 
quaintance, to  give  him  employment,  or  a  place  on  my  staff. 
Marcy  or  Seth  Williams  saw  him  and  told  him  that  if  he  would 
await  my  return,  doubtless  I  would  do  something  for  him  ;  but 
before  I  got  back  he  was  telegraphed  that  he  could  have  a  regi- 
ment in  Illinois,  and  at  once  returned  thither,  so  that  I  did  not 
see  him.  This  was  his  good  luck  ;  for  had  I  been  there  I  would 
no  doubt  have  given  him  a  place  on  my  staflF,  and  he  would 
probably  have  remained  with  me  and  shared  my  fate. 

Shortly  before  West  Virginia  was  placed  under  my  command 
(May  24)  I  received  two  identical  despatches  from  Gen.  Scott  and 
the  Secretar)*  of  War  (Mr.  Cameron)  stating  that  it  was  under- 


48  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

stood  that  the  rebels  were  collecting  troops  in  that  region,  and 
asking  me  whether  I  could  do  anything  to  protect  the  Union  men 
against  them.  I  immediately  replied  that,  if  they  desired  it,  I 
would  clear  West  Virginia  of  the  rebels.  I  received  no  reply 
whatever  to  this  despatch,  nor  did  I  afterwards  receive  any  other 
despatch  or  order  from  Washington  that  could  be  construed  into 
an  order  or  permission  to  operate  in  West  Virginia.  The  move- 
ments that  were  subsequently  made  were  initiated  and  conducted 
entirely  on  my  own  responsibility  and  of  my  own  volition. 

A  few  weeks  before  I  took  the  field  in  West  Virginia,  and 
while  my  headquarters  were  in  Cincinnati,  I  received  one  morn- 
ing a  telegram  from  Samuel  Gill,  an  old  graduate  of  West  Point, 
and  at  that  time  superintendent  of  the  Louisville  and  Lexington 
Railroad,  stating  that  S.  B.  Buckner  (afterwards  the  rebel  gene- 
ral) wished  to  see  me,  and  asking  when  I  would  be  at  home. 
I  replied  that  I  would  see  him  that  night.  Accordingly  the  two 
(Buckner  and  Gill)  reached  my  house  about  ten  o'clock  that 
evening.  I  received  them  alone,  and  we  spent  the  night  in  con- 
versation about  the  condition  of  affairs  in  Kentucky.  Buckner 
was  at  that  time  the  commandant  of  the  "  State  Guards,"  a  militia 
organization  in  Kentucky,  but  neither  numerous  nor  efficient. 
It  was,  however,  the  only  organization  existing  there,  and  Buck- 
ner was  in  close  relations  with  Gov.  McGoffin — was,  in  fact,  his 
military  adviser.  Buckner  brought  me  no  letter  or  other  cre- 
dentials from  the  governor,  nor  did  he  assume  to  be  author- 
ized to  make  any  arrangement  in  his  name.  The  object  of 
the  interview  was  simply  that  we,  as  old  friends,  should  com- 
pare views  and  see  if  we  could  do  any  good  ;  thus  I  under- 
stood it.  Buckner's  main  purpose  seemed  to  be  to  ascertain 
what  I  should  do  in  the  event  that  Kentucky  should  be  invad- 
ed by  the  secession  forces  then  collecting  under  Gen.  Pillow  at 
various  points  in  Tennessee  near  the  Kentucky  line.  Buckner 
was  very  anxious  that  the  Ohio  and  other  Federal  forces  should 
respect  the  neutrality  of  Kentucky,  and  stated  that  he  would  do 
his  best  to  preserve  it,  and  drive  Pillow  out  should  he  cross  the 
boundary-line.  I  could  assent  to  this  only  to  the  extent  that 
I  should  be  satisfied  if  the  Kentuckians  would  immediately 
drive  out  any  rebel  force  that  mi^ht  invade  Kentucky,  and  con- 
tinued, almost  in  these  very  words :  "  You  had  better  be  very 
qui(  k  about  it,  Simon,  for  if  I  learn  that  the  rebels  are  in  Ken- 


TEXXESSEE,  49 

tucky  I  will,  with  or  without  orders,  drive  them  out  without 
delay." 

I  expressly  told  Buckner  that  I  had  no  power  to  guarantee 
the  neutrality  of  Kentucky,  and  that,  although  my  command  did 
not  extend  over  it,  I  would  not  tolerate  the  presence  of  rebel 
troops  in  that  State.  Not  many  days  afterwards  I  accidentally 
met  Buckner  again  at  Cairo,  and  had  a  conversation  with  him  in 
the  presence  of  John  M.  Douglass,  of  Chicago.  Buckner  had 
then  just  returned  from  a  visit  to  Pillow,  and  he  clearly  showed 
by  his  conversation  that  he  understood  my  determination  at  the 
first  interview  just  as  I  have  related  it  above.  Among  other 
things  he  said  that  he  found  Pillow  (with  whom  he  had  had  seri- 
ous personal  quarrels  before)  sitting  on  a  log ;  and,  referring  to 
his  (Pillow's)  purpose  of  entering  Kentucky,  said  to  him  that  "if 
he  did  McClellan  would  be  after  him  "  ;  to  which,  he  said,  Pil- 
low replied,  "He  is  the  very  person  I  want  to  meet."  It  may 
be  remarked  that  Gen.  Pillow  had  reason  to  be  inimical  to  mc. 
Buckner's  letter  to  Gov.  McGoffin,  subsequently  published,  stal- 
ing that  in  our  first  interview  I  had  agreed  to  respect  the  neu- 
trality of  Kentucky,  gave  an  incorrect  account  of  the  case,  which 
was  as  I  have  stated  it. 

Before  the  necessity  arose  for  action  in  West  Virginia  my 
views  were  turned  towards  Tennessee  ;  for  from  the  beginning  I 
saw  the  great  importance  of  aiding  the  loyal  men  in  the  moun- 
tainous portion  of  that  State,  of  holding  the  railways  there,  and 
of  occupying  in  force  the  great  projecting  bastion  formed  by 
that  district.  I  was  satisfied  that  a  firm  hold  there  in  force,  and 
with  secure  communications  to  the  Ohio  river,  would  soon  render 
the  occupation  of  Richmond  and  Eastern  Virginia  impossible  to 
the  secessionists.  Unhappily  the  state  of  affairs  brought  about 
by  the  first  Bull  Run  rendered  it  impossible  to  act  upon  this 
theory  when  the  direction  of  military  movements  came  into  my 
hands,  nor  did  any  of  my  subordinates  in  the  West  seize  the  im- 
portance of  the  idea,  frequently  as  I  presented  it  to  them.  Had 
not  the  general  direction  of  the  war  been  taken  from  my  hands 
at  the  time  I  was  about  inaugurating  the  Peninsular  campaign,  I 
shcjid  then  have  carried  out  the  movement  upon  East  Ten- 
nessee and  Atlanta. 

The  plan  of  operations  which  Gen.  Scott  soon  imparted  to 
me  confidentially  was  to  occupy  the  summer  and  early  fall  in  the 


50  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

equipment,  discipline,  and  instruction  of  the  three-years  troops, 
who  were  to  be  collected  in  numerous  small  camps  of  instruction, 
and  to  form  in  the  fall  "  an  iron  band  of  sixty  thousand  troops  " 
to  be  placed  under  my  command,  who  were  to  move  down  the 
valley  of  the  Mississippi  by  roads  parallel  with  that  stream,  their 
supplies  following  in  boats  on  the  river.  I  think  that  subsequent 
events  proved  that  the  occupation  of  the  central  mountain  region 
at  an  early  period  of  the  war  would  have  produced  more  rapid 
and  decisive  results  than  any  movement  down  the  Mississippi. 

While  engaged  in  pushing  forward  the  preparations  of  the 
troops,  and  doing  all  in  my  power  to  preserve  the  peace  in  Ken- 
tucky, events  occurred  which  made  it  necessary  for  me  to  direct 
my  attention  more  particularly  to  West  Virginia. 

It  may  be  repeated  here  that  my  movements  in  West  Virginia 
were,  from  first  to  last,  undertaken  upon  my  own  authority  and 
of  my  own  volition,  and  without  any  advice,  orders,  or  instruc- 
tions from  Washington  or  elsewhere. 

The  proclamations  I  addressed  to  the  inhabitants  of  West 
Virginia  and  to  my  troops  were  also  entirely  of  my  own  volition. 
I  had  received  no  ihtimation  of  the  policy  intended  to  be  pursued 
by  the  general  government,  and  had  no  time  to  seek  for  instruc- 
tions. When,  on  the  afternoon  of  May  26,  I  received  at  Camp 
Dennison  confirmation  of  the  movement  of  the  secessionists  to 
destroy  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  and  at  once  ordered 
by  telegraph  Kelly's  and  other  regiments  to  remove  from  Wheel- 
ing and  Parkersburg  along  the  two  branches  of  that  railway,  I 
wrote  the  proclamation  and  address  of  May  26  to  the  inhabi- 
tants of  West  Virginia  and  my  troops,  in  my  dining-room  at  Cin- 
cinnati, in  the  utmost  haste,  with  the  ladies  of  my  family  con- 
versing in  the  room,  and  without  consulting  any  one.  They  were 
at  once  despatched  by  telegraph  to  Wheeling  and  Parkersburg, 
there  to  be  printed. 

PROCLAMATION. 

Headquarters,  Department  of  the  Ohio, 

May  26,  1 86 1. 

To  the  Union  Men  of  Western   Virginia : 

Virginians  :  The  general  government  has  long  enough  en- 
dured the  machinations  of  a  few  factious  rebels  in  your  midst. 
Armed  traitors  have  in  vain  endeavored  to  deter  you  from  ex- 


WESTERN   VIRGINIA   PROCLAMATION.  5 1 

pressing  your  loyalty  at  the  polls.  Having  failed  in  this  infamous 
attempt  to  deprive  you  of  the  exercise  of  your  dearest  rights,  they 
now  seek  to  inaugurate  a  reign  of  terror,  and  thus  force  you  to 
yield  to  their  schemes  and  submit  to  the  yoke  of  the  traitorous 
conspiracy  dignified  by  the  name  of  the  Southern  Confederacy. 
They  are  destroying  the  property  of  citizens  of  your  State  and 
ruining  your  magnificent  railways.  The  general  government  has 
heretofore  carefully  abstained  from  sending  troops  across  the 
Ohio,  or  even  from  posting  them  along  its  banks,  although  fre- 
quently urged  to  do  so  by  many  of  your  prominent  citizens.  It 
determined  to  await  the  result  of  the  late  election,  desirous  that 
no  one  might  be  able  to  say  that  the  slightest  effort  had  been 
made  from  this  side  to  influence  the  free  expression  of  your 
opinions,  although  the  many  agencies  brought  to  bear  upon 
you  by  the  rebels  were  well  known.  You  have  now  shown, 
under  the  most  adverse  circumstances,  that  the  great  mass  of 
the  people  of  Western  Virginia  are  true  and  loyal  to  that  bene- 
ficent government  under  which  we  and  our  fathers  have  lived,  so 
long.  As  soon  as  the  result  of  the  election  was  known  the  trai- 
tors commenced  their  work  of  destruction.  The  general  govern- 
ment cannot  close  its  ears  to  the  demand  you  have  made  for  as- 
sistance. I  have  ordered  troops  to  cross  the  Ohio  river.  They 
come  as  your  friends  and  brothers  ;  as  enemies,  only  to  the  armed 
rebels  who  are  preying  upon  you.  Your  homes,  your  families, 
and  your  property  are  safe  under  our  protection.  All  your  rights 
shall  be  religiously  respected,  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been 
said  by  the  traitors  to  induce  you  to  believe  that  our  advent 
among  you  will  be  signalized  by  interference  with  your  slaves. 
Understand  one  thing  clearly  :  not  only  will  we  abstain  from  all 
such  interference,  but  we  will,  on  the  contrary,  with  an  iron  hand 
crush  any  attempt  at  insurrection  on  their  part.  Now  that  we 
are  in  your  midst,  I  call  upon  you  to  fly  to  arms  and  support  the 
general  government.  Sever  the  connection  that  binds  you  to 
traitors  ;  proclaim  to  the  world  that  the  faith  and  loyalty  so  long 
boasted  by  the  Old  Dominion  are  still  preserved  in  Western  Vir- 
ginia, and  that  you  remain  true  to  the  stars  and  stripes. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 
Maj\-Gen,  U.  S.  A.,  commanding  Dept 


ADDRESS. 

Headquarters,  Department  of  the  Ohio, 
Cincinnati,  May  26,  1861. 

Soldiers  :  You  are  ordered  to  cross  the  frontier  and  enter 
upon  the  soil  of  Virginia. 

Your  mission  is  to  restore  peace  and  confidence,  to  protect 
the  majesty  of  the  law,  and  to  rescue  our  brethren  from  the  grasp 

6 


52  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

of  armed  traitors.  You  are  to  act  in  concert  with  Virginia 
troops  and  to  support  their  advance.  I  place  under  the  safe- 
guard of  your  honor  the  persons  and  property  of  the  Virgin- 
ians. I  know  that  you  will  respect  their  feelings  and  all  their 
rights. 

Preserve  the  strictest  discipline ;  remember  that  each  one  of 
you  holds  in  his  keeping  the  honor  of  Ohio  and  the  Union.  If 
you  are  called  upon  to  overcome  armed  opposition  I  know  that 
your  courage  is  equal  to  the  task  ;  but  remember  that  your  only 
foes  are  the  armed  traitors,  and  show  mercy  even  to  them  when 
they  are  in  your  power,  for  many  of  them  are  misguided.  When, 
under  your  protection,  the  loyal  men  of  Western  Virginia  have 
been  enabled  to  organize  and  arm,  they  can  protect  themselves, 
and  you  can  then  return  to  your  homes  with  the  proud  satisfac- 
tion of  having  saved  a  gallant  people  from  destruction. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 
Maj.'Gen.  U.  S.  A.^  Commanding. 

I,  of  course,  sent  copies  to  the  President,  with  a  letter  explain- 
ing the  necessity  of  my  prompt  action  without  waiting  to  consult 
with  him.  To  this  letter  I  never  received  any  reply  or  acknow- 
ledgment ;  nor  did  the  President,  or  any  of  his  civil  or  mili- 
tary advisers,  ever  inform  me  whether  they  approved  or  disap- 
proved the  course  I  had  taken.  I  must  give  to  the  Washington 
functionaries  at  least  this  much  credit — viz.,  that  although  they 
gave  me  no  assistance  or  orders  towards  initiating  the  campaign, 
they  never  interfered  with  me  after  its  commencement.  And 
when  they  saw  me  in  a  fair  way  toward  success  they  were  much 
more  ready  to  listen  to  my  requisitions  for  supplies.  But  I  must 
claim  the  credit,  if  credit  there  be,  of  having  begun  and  carried 
on  and  finished  this  short  campaign  on  my  own  resources  and 
against  every  possible  disadvantage. 

During  my  whole  career  in  West  Virginia,  as  well  as  before  I 
went  there,  I  was  kept  in  complete  ignorance  of  the  intentions  of 
the  Washington  people  in  regard  to  movements  in  the  East. 

As  I  write  this  (Nov.,  1883)  I  propose  omitting  for  the  pre- 
sent the  story  of  the  West  Virginia  campaign,  but  intend  sup- 
plying it  when  my  history  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  com- 
pleted. 

By  the  middle  of  July  I  had  obtained  complete  possession  of 
the  country  west  of  the  mountains  and  north  of  the  Kanawha, 
holding  also  the  lower  portion  of  the  last-named  valley,  where 


fVEST   VIRGINIA    CAMPAIGN,  53 

Gen.  J.  D.  Cox  had  been  checked  in  his  advance.  I  held  the 
Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  as  far  as  Cumberland,  and  covered 
all  the  roads  leading  into  West  Virginia  from  the  Potomac  as  far 
south  as  those  uniting  about  eighteen  miles  south  of  Beverly,  and 
held  the  country  north  of  the  Kanawha  by  garrisons  and  moving 
columns. 

The  time  of  the  three-months  regiments  was  now  rapidly  ex- 
piring, and  my  movements  were  stopped  for  a  time  by  the  neces- 
sity of  reorganizing  them  and  getting  up  the  three-years  regi- 
ments. 

My  advance  into  West  Virginia  had  been  without  orders  and 
entirely  of  my  own  volition,  to  meet  the  necessities  of  the  case, 
and  all  I  knew  about  the  movements  in  front  of  Washington  was 
derived  from  the  newspapers  and  private  sources ;  I  received  no 
official  information  of  McDowell's  intended  movements,  and  had 
no  communication  from  headquarters  on  the  subject  until  Gen. 
McDowell  was  actually  in  contact  with  the  enemy.  Consequent- 
ly the  projects  I  formed  for  operations,  as  soon  as  my  command 
should  be  reorganized,  were  utterly  independent  of  the  state  of 
affairs  at  Washington  and  based  entirely  upon  my  views  of  the 
condition  of  affairs  in  the  West. 

I  pushed  the  reorganization  with  the  utmost  energy,  and  pre- 
pared a  light  column  of  five  Ohio  regiments  and  the  incomplete 
ist  Virginia,  with  which  I  intended  to  march  on  the  2 2d  or  23d 
of  July,  via  Suttonsville,  Somersville,  and  the  Dogwood  Ridge,  to 
strike  the  Kanawha  near  Fayetteville  Court- House,  and  there  cut 
off  the  troops  under  Gens.  Floyd  and  Wise,  who  were  then  in 
front  of  Cox,  at  and  below  Charleston. 

Having  entirely  cleared  the  Kanawha  valley  of  Confederates, 
I  intended  to  secure  my  left  flank  by  the  line  of  the  Upper  Kana- 
wha and  New  river,  and  to  move  upon  Wytheville,  in  order  to  cut 
the  line  of  railroad  from  Memphis  to  Lynchburg  and  to  hold  the 
country  from  New  river  to  Abingdon.  The  objects  I  had  in 
view  were  to  cut  the  great  east  and  west  line  of  railroad,  so 
as  to  deprive  the  Confederates  of  its  use,  and  thence  to  employ 
the  very  circuitous  route  by  Atlanta  ;  and  to  rally  the  Union  men 
of  the  mountain  region,  to  arm  and  embody  them,  and  at  least 
hold  my  own  in  that  mountain  region  until  prepared  to  advance 
in  whatever  direction  might  prove  ])est  for  the  general  good.  In 
a  letter  to  Gen.  Scott  from  Buckhannon,  dated  July  6,  I  stated 


54 


McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 


my  desire  to  move  on  Wytheville  after  clearing  the  country  north 
of  the  Kanawha. 

Had  my  designs  been  carried  out  Gen.  Lee's  attempt  to  re- 
cover West  Virginia  would  have  been  made  (if  at  all  attempted) 
under  very  different  auspices,  and  with  much  more  decisive  re- 
sults in  our  favor.  I  am  confident  that  I  should  have  been  in 
possession  of  Wytheville  and  the  mountain  region  south  of  it  in 
a  very  few  weeks. 

In  this  brief  campaign  the  telegraph  was  for  the  first  time, 
I  think,  constructed  as  the  army  advanced,  and  proved  of  very 
great  use  to  us ;  it  caused  a  very  great  saving  of  time  and  horse- 
flesh. 

On  the  evening  of  July  21,  1861,  I  first  received  intelligence 
of  the  advance  of  Gen.  McDowell  and  the  battle  of  Bull  Run.  I 
had  received  no  intimation  whatever  in  regard  to  the  projected 
operations  in  the  East,  although  I  might  have  aided  them  very 
materially  had  I  been  asked  to  do  so.  The  first  telegram  I 
received  from  Gen.  Scott,  early  in  the  evening  of  the  21st,  was  to 
the  effect  that  McDowell  was  gaining  a  grand  victory,  had  taken 
four  redoubts  on  the  enemy's  left,  and  would  soon  defeat  them 
utterly.  Then  came  a  despatch  not  quite  so  favorable  ;  finally  a 
telegram  stating  that  McDowell  was  utterly  defeated,  his  army 
routed  and,  as  a  mere  mob,  streaming  towards  Washington.  The 
despatch  closed  with  a  question  as  to  whether  I  could  do  any- 
thing across  the  mountains  to  relieve  McDowell  and  Washing- 
ton. 

I  did  not  then  know  that  Gen.  Joe  Johnston  had  left  Win- 
chester and  joined  Beauregard,  supposing  that  Gen.  Patterson 
had  retained  him  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  Therefore,  after 
a  half-hour's  consideration,  I  proposed  that  I  should  move  via 
Romney,  unite  with  Patterson,  and  operate  against  Johnston  in 
the  Shenandoah  Valley.  I  offered,  however,  to  move  on  Staun- 
ton, if  they  preferred  that  movement  in  Washington,  provided  the 
three-months  men  (of  whom  my  army  was  mainly  composed) 
would  consent  to  remain  a  few  weeks  longer.  No  reply  ever 
came  to  these  propositions  ;  and  it  may  here  be  stated  thaynone 
of  the  three-months  men  would  consent  to  remain  beyond  the 
termination  of  their  enlistments,  to  move  either  towards  the  Gau- 
ley  or  eastward.  For  the  Gauley  movement  I  had,  however, 
enough  three-years  men  disposable. 


TREATMENT  OF  PRISONERS,  55 

On  the  next  day,  the  2 2d  of  July,  I  received  a  despatch  from 
the  adjutant-general  stating  that  the  condition  of  public  affairs 
rendered  my  immediate  presence  in  Washington  necessary,  and 
directing  me  to  turn  over  my  command  to  the  next  in  rank,  who 
happened  to  be  Gen.  Rosecrans. 

I  started  next  morning  at  daylight,  rode  on  horseback  sixty 
miles  to  the  nearest  railway  station,  and  took  the  cars  to  Wheel- 
ing, where  I  found  my  wife  awaiting  me,  and  then  proceeded  to 
Washington,  which  I  reached  on  the  26th  of  July,  1861. 

Immediately  after  the  affair  of  Rich  Mountain  I  was  in- 
structed by  Gen.  Scott  to  release  upon  parole  all  the  prisoners  I 
had  taken,  with  the  exception  of  such  as  had  left  the  United 
States  service  with  the  evident  intention  of  joining  that  of  the 
secessionists. 

Col.  John  Pegram  and  a  surgeon  (Dr.  Campbell)  were  the 
only  ones  who  came  under  the  latter  category  ;  and  the  order 
was  promptly  carried  out  in  regard  to  the  others.  From  the 
moment  the  prisoners  came  into  my  hands  they  were  treated  with 
the  utmost  kindness.  The  private  baggage  of  the  officers  was 
restored  to  them  whenever  it  could  be  found.  The  men,  most 
of  whom  were  starving  when  they  surrendered,  were  at  once  fed  ; 
the  same  care  was  extended  to  their  wounded  as  to  our  own.  All 
of  them  were  unanimous  in  their  gratitude  for  the  treatment  they 
received.  The  slaves  taken  in  attendance  upon  officers  were 
allowed  their  choice  whether  to  go  North,  remain  with  us,  or 
return  to  their  masters.  Nearly  all  chose  the  latter  alternative. 
Among  the  prisoners  was  an  entire  company  composed  of  stu- 
dents of  the  William  and  Mary  University,  commanded  by  the 
president.  Many  of  these  were  mere  boys,  among  whom  some 
were  severely  wounded.  These  last  I  sent  home  to  their  parents, 
without  awaiting  orders  from  Washington.  It  was  a  singular  fact 
that  the  wounded  preferred  the  attendance  of  our  surgeons  to 
that  of  their  own,  saying  that  the  former  were  more  kind  and 
attentive  to  them.  I  mention  thus  particularly  my  treatment 
of  these  prisoners  for  the  reason  that  they  were  the  first  in  con- 
siderable numbers  taken  during .  the  war,  and  that  the  course 
I  pursued  ought  to  have  been  reciprocated  by  the  secessionists. 
Their  treatment  of  our  officers  and  men  captured  so  soon  after- 
wards at  Bull  Run  is,  therefore,  without  excuse.  Whatever  hard- 
ships prisoners   afterwards   suffered   on  either   side,  the   blame 


56  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

of  the  initiation  of  ill-treatment  must  fall  on  the  rebels  and 
not  on  us. 

The  successor  of  Gen.  Garnett,  Gen.  Jackson  (formerly  U.  S. 
Minister  at  Vienna),  sent  a  flag  of  truce  to  thank  me  for  the  kind- 
ness I  had  extended  to  their  wounded  and  unwounded  officers 
and  men.  On  subsequent  occasions  I  received  proofs  of  their 
appreciation  of  my  course.  Application  was  also  made  to  me, 
under  a  flag,  for  the  body  of  Gen.  Garnett,  which  I  agreed  to 
deliver  up  ;  but  before  my  orders  in  the  case  could  reach  Graf- 
ton the  corpse  had  been  taken  East  by  the  father  of  his  late 
wife. 

The  successes  just  achieved  in  West  Virginia  by  the  troops 
under  my  command  created  great  excitement  through  the  loyal 
States.  They  were  the  only  ones  of  importance  achieved  up  to 
that  time  by  the  Union  arms,  and,  since  public  attention  had  not 
been  especially  directed  to  that  quarter,  the  people  were  all  the 
more  dazzled  by  the  rapidity  and  brilliancy  of  the  results.  Al- 
though the  telegram  ordering  me  to  the  East  contained  no  men- 
tion of  the  purpose  in  view,  it  was  easy,  under  the  circumstances, 
to  divine  it.  I  fully  realized  the  importance  and  difficulty  of  the 
task  to  be  imposed  upon  me,  and  naturally  felt  gratified  by  the 
proof  of  confidence  the  order  afforded.  Yet  I  felt  great  regret 
at  leaving  the  West,  for  I  should  have  been  very  glad  to  carry  out 
the  Kanawha  and  Wytheville  movement,  and  thereby  quiet  affairs 
in  that  region  before  giving  up  the  command. 

It  would  probably  have  been  better  for  me  personally  had 
my  promotion  been  delayed  a  year  or  more.  Yet  I  do  not  know 
who  could  have  organized  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  as  I  did ; 
and  I  have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that,  during  the  war,  I 
never  sought  any  commission  or  duty,  but  simply  did  my  best  in 
whatever  position  my  superiors  chose  to  place  me. 


CHAPTER  III. 

Private  Letters  of  Gen.  McClellan  to  his  Wife. 

\June  21  to  July  21,  1861.] 

Marietta^  June  21,  1861. — I  must  snatch  a  few  moments  to 
write  you.  We  got  off  at  11.30  yesterday  morning,  and  had  a 
continual  ovation  all  along  the  road.  At  every  station  where  we 
stopped  crowds  had  assembled  to  see  the  **  young  general " : 
gray-headed  old  men  and  women,  mothers  holding  up  their 
children  to  take  my  hand,  girls,  boys,  all  sorts,  cheering  and 
crying,  God  bless  you  !  I  never  went  through  such  a  scene  in  my 
life,  and  never  expect  to  go  through  such  another  one.  Vou 
would  have  been  surprised  at  the  excitement.  At  Chillicothc 
the  ladies  had  prepared  a  dinner,  and  I  had  to  be  trotted 
through.  They  gave  me  about  twenty  beautiful  bouquets  and 
almost  killed  me  with  kindness.  The  trouble  will  be  to  fill  their 
expectations,  they  seem  to  be  so  high.  I  could  hear  them  say, 
"  He  is  our  own  general "  ;  "  Look  at  him,  how  young  he  is  " ; 
''He  will  thrash  them";  "He'll  do,"  etc.,  etc.  ad  infini- 
turn.  .  .  . 

We  reached  here  about  three  in  the  morning,  and  at  once 
went  on  board  the  boat,  where  I  got  about  three  hours*  sleep 
until  we  reached  Parkersburg.  I  have  been  hard  at  work  all 
day,  for  I  found  everything  in  great  confusion.  Came  up  here 
in  a  boat  about  an  hour  ago,  and  shall  go  back  to  Parkersburg 
in  two  or  three  hours.  .  .  .  We  start  from  Parkersburg  at  six 
in  the  morning.  With  me  go  McCook's  regiment  (9th  Ohio), 
Mack's  comi)any  (4th  U.  S.  Artillery),  the  Sturgess  Rifle  Co.,  a 
battery  of  six  guns  (Loomis's),  and  one  company  of  cavalry 
(Barker's  Illinois).  Two  Indiana  regiments  leave  in  the  morn- 
ing just  after  us.  I  shall  have  five  additional  regiments  at  Oraf- 
ton  to-morrow  afternoon.  I  shall  have  some  eighteen  regiments, 
two  batteries,  two  companies  of  cavalry  at  my  disposal — enough 
to  thrash  anything  I  find.     I  think  the  danger  has  been  greatly 

exaggerated,  and  anticipate  little  or  no  chance  of  winning  laurels. 

57 


5S  iicCLELLAN'S  OH^.V  ^TORV. 

-  .  ,  A  ternblc  storm  is  passing  over  us  now ;  thunder  and  light- 
sing  terrible  in  the  extreme.  .  .  . 

Grafton^  Sunday^  yune  23,  1861. —  ...  We  did  not  reach 
here  until  about  two  in  the  morning,  and  I  was  tired  out.  .  .  . 
Everything  here  needs  the  hand  of  the  master  and  is  getting  it 
fast  I  shall  hardly  be  able  to  move  from  here  for  a  couple 
of  days.  .  .  .  The  weather  is  delightful  here :  we  are  well  up  in 
the  hills  and  have  the  mountain  air.  .  .  . 

Grafton^  yum  26,  1861. —  ...  I  am  detained  here  by  want 
of  supplies  now  on  the  way,  and  which  I  hope  to  receive  soon. 
...  It  is  very  difficult  to  learn  anything  definite  about  our 
friends  in  front  of  us.  Sometimes  I  am  half- inclined  to  doubt 
whether  there  are  many  of  them ;  then  again  it  looks  as  if  there 
were  a  good  many.  We  shall  soon  see,  however.  I  am  pretty 
well  tired  out  and  shall  be  very  glad  to  get  on  the  march. 

What  a  row  the  papers  have  raised  about  the  Buckner  letter  I 
B.  has  represented  a  personal  interview  as  an  official  treaty.  .  .  . 

Captain  Howe  is  at  Clarksburg — Guentler  with  him.  Mack 
is  here  with  us.  ...  I  don't  know  exactly  when  I  shall  be  able 
to  leave  here ;  certainly  not  before  to-morrow,  and  perhaps  not 
until  next  day.  .  .  . 

Graftotiy  June  27. —  ...  I  shall  be  after  the  gentlemen  pretty 
shortly.  You  must  be  under  no  apprehensions  as  to  me  or  the 
result.  I  never  worked  so  hard  in  my  life  before ;  even  take  my 
meaU  in  my  own  room.  .  .  . 

Grafton^  yune  29. —  ...  I  am  bothered  half  to  death  by 
delays  in  getting  up  supplies.  Unless  where  I  am  in  person, 
cverythinj(  %vm\x\s  to  go  wrong.  ...  I  expect  in  the  course  of  an 
hour  or  two  to  g<H  to  Clarksburg — will  probably  march  twelve 
inilfh  thrric  <»  to-day— with  Howe*s  battery,  Mack's  and  the  Chi- 
<  ;ij4<;  <  ornpaniffH,  and  one  company  of  cavalry.  I  shall  have  a  tele- 
j^raph  liru*  built  lo  follow  us  up.  Look  on  the  maps  and  find 
Hu<  khaniion  ancj  Hrvcrly  ;  that  is  the  direction  of  my  march.  I 
hopo  to  (hruhh  \\\v  infatttotiH  Hcamps  before  a  week  is  over.  All  I 
liar  is  (hat  J  w<>n'l  1  ati  h  ihcin.  .  .  .  What  a  strange  performance 
that  ol  Hu«  kiifi'ji  wan  !  Korliinalely  1  have  secured  the  testi- 
moiiy  ol  (iill  and  Dou^lattn  (prcHcnt  at  the  Cairo  interview)  that 


PRIVA  TE  LE TTERS,  59 

Buckner  has  entirely  misrepresented  me.  It  has  annoyed  me 
much,  but  I  hope  to  do  such  work  here  as  will  set  criticism  at 
defiance.  .  .  . 

Clarksburg^  yune  30. —  .  .  .  Again  great  delays  here;  will 
certainly  get  off  by  four  a.m.  to-morrow,  and  make  a  long  march, 
probably  twenty-eight  miles.  After  the  next  march  I  shall  have 
a  large  tent,  borrowed  from  the  Chicago  Rifles ;  your  father  and 
I  will  take  that,  make  it  reception-room,  sleeping-apartment, 
mess-room,  etc.  .  .  .  One  thing  takes  up  a  great  deal  of  time, 
yet  I  cannot  avoid  it :  crowds  of  the  country-people  who  have 
heard  of  me  and  read  my  proclamations  come  in  from  all  di- 
rections to  thank  me,  shake  me  by  the  hand,  and  look  at  their 
"  liberator,"  "  the  general  "  !  Of  course  I  have  to  see  them 
and  talk  to  them.  Well,  it  is  a  proud  and  glorious  thing  to  see 
a  whole  people  here,  simple  and  unsophisticated,  looking  up  to 
me  as  their  deliverer  from  tyranny. 

Camp  14  miles  south  of  Clarksburg^  7^^  2. —  .  .  .  We  start 
in  a  few  moments  to  Buckhannon.  I  haVe  with  me  two  regi- 
ments, a  battery,  two  cavalry  companies,  three  detached  compa- 
nies. Had  several  heavy  rains  yesterday.  Rosecrans  is  at  Buck- 
hannon. I  doubt  whether  the  rebels  will  fight ;  it  is  possible  they 
may,  but  I  begin  to  think  that  my  successes  will  be  due  to  man- 
oeuvres, and  that  I  shall  have  no  brilliant  victories  to  record.  1 
would  be  glad  to  clear  them  out  of  West  Virginia  and  liberate  the 
country  without  bloodshed,  if  possible.  The  people  are  rejoiced 
to  "see  us. 

Buckhannon,  yuly  3. —  .  .  .  We  had  a  pleasant  march  of  six- 
teen miles  yesterday  through  a  beautiful  mountain  region  :  mag- 
nificent timber,  lovely  valleys  running  up  from  the  main  valley ; 
the  people  all  out,  waving  their  handkerchiefs  and  giving  me 
plenty  of  bouquets  and  kind  words.  .  .  . 

We  nearly  froze  to  death  last  night.  I  retired,  as  I  thought, 
at  about  midnight,  intending  to  have  a  good  night's  sleep. 
About  half  an  hour  after  I  shut  up  my  tent  a  colonel  in 
command  of  a  detachment  some  fifteen  miles  distant  came 
to  report,  so  I  received  him  in  bed,  and  fell  asleep  about  six 
times  during  the  three  hours  I  was  talking  with  him.     Finally, 


6o  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

however,  he. left,  and  I  alternately  slept  and  froze  until  seven 
o'clock.  This  morning  I  sent  Bates  on  an  expedition  and  raked 
up  a  couple  of  horse-blankets,  by  the  aid  of  which  I  hope  here- 
after to  be  reasonably  comfortable. 

I  hope  to  get  the  trains  up  to-morrow  and  make  a  final  start 
during  the  day.  We  have  a  good  many  to  deal  with.  I  ordered 
the  Guthrie  Grays  to  Philippi  this  p.m.  to  resist  a  stampede  at- 
tack that  Gen.  Morris  feared. 

Buckhannon^  yuly  5,  1861. —  .  .  .  Yesterday  was  a  very  busy 
day  with  me,  reviewing  troops  all  the  morning  and  giving  orders 
all  day  and  pretty  much  all  night.  ...  I  realize  now^the  dread- 
ful responsibility  on  me — the  lives  of  my  men,  tnc  ici)uUuiun  of 
the  country,  and  the  success  of  our  cau.?c.  I'he  enemy  are  in 
front,  and  I  shall  probably  move  forward  to-morrow,  but  not 
come  in  contact  with  them  until  about  the  next  day.  I  shall 
feel  my  way  and  be  very  cautious,  tor  1  recognize  the  fact  that 
everything  requires  success  in  first  operations.  Vou  need  not  be 
at  all  alarmed  as  to  the  result ;  God  is  on  our  side.  This  is  a 
beautiful  country  in  which  we  now  are — a  lovely  valley  surround- 
ed by  mountains,  well  cultivated.  The  people  hail  our  parties 
as  deliverers  wherever  they  go,  and  we  meet  with  perfect  ova- 
tions. Yesterday  was  very  hot,  and  my  head  almost  roasted  as  I 
stood  bareheaded  while  the  troops  passed  by  in  review.  We 
have  a  nice  little  camp  of  our  own  here  :  Mack's  and  Steele's 
companies,  Howe's  battery  next,  two  companies  of  cavalry,  and 
two  well-behaved  Virginia  companies.  When  we  next  go  into 
camp  we  shall  have  the  German  regiment  (9th  Ohio)  with  us  in 
camp.  I  intend  having  a  picked  brigade  with  me  all  the  time. 
's  regiment  is  on  the  march  up  from  Clarksburg ;  they  sig- 
nalized their  entrance  into  the  country  by  breaking  into  and  rob- 
bing a  grocery-store  at  Webster  !  The  Guthrie  Grays  are  at  Phi- 
lippi ;  they  leave  there  to-day,  and  will  be  here  to-morrow  night, 
following  us  up  in  reserve,  or  perhaps  overtaking  us  before  we 
meet  the  enemy.  .  .  . 

Buckhannoriy  July  7,  1861. — I  have  been  obliged  to  inflict 
some  severe  punishments,  and  I  presume  the  i)apers  of  the 
Western  Reserve  will  be  hard  down  on  me  for  disgracing  some 
of  their  friends  guilty  of  the  small  crime  of  burglary,     I  believe 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  6 1 

the  army  is  beginning  to  comprehend  that  they  have  a  master 
over  them  who  is  stem  in  punishing  and  means  what  he  says.  I 
fear  I  shall  have  to  have  some  of  them  shot  or  hung ;  that  may 
convince  some  of  the  particular  individuals  concerned  that  they 
are  not  in  the  right*  track  exactly.  ...  I  have  not  told  you  about 
our  camp  at  this  place.  It  is  in  a  large  grass-field  on  a  hill  a  lit- 
tle out  of  town,  a  beautiful  grove  near  by.  Your  father  and  I 
share  the  same  tent,  a  very  large  round  one,  pitched  under  a 
tree.  Seth  has  one  near  by — an  office  ;  Lawrence  Williams  an- 
other as  office  and  mess-tent.  Marcy,  the  two  Williamses,  Judge 
Key,  and  Lander  mess  with  me.  Poe  and  the  rest  of  the  young- 
sters are  in  tents  near  by.  ...  I  had  a  very  complimentary 
despatch  from  Gen.  Scott  last  night.  He  said  he  was  "  charmed 
with  my  energy,  movements,  and  success."  Pretty  well  for  the 
old  man.     I  hope  to  deserve  more  of  him  in  the  future. 

Move  at  six  to-morrow  morning  to  overtake  advanced  guard, 
which  consists  of  three  regiments,  a.  battery,  and  one  company 
of  cavalry.  I  take  up  headquarters  escort  and  four  regiments 
infantry ;  three  more  follow  next  day.  The  large  supply-train  up 
and  ready  to  move.     Brig.-Gen.  Garnett  in  command  of  enemy. 

July  lo,  Roqring  Creek. — We  have  occupied  the  important 
position  on  this  line  without  loss.  The  enemy  are  in  sight,  and  I 
am  about  sending  out  a  strong  armed  reconnoissance  to  feel  him 
and  see  what  he  is.  I  have  been  looking  at  their  camps  with  my 
glass  ;  they  are  strongly  entrenched,  but  I  think  I  can  come  the 
Cerro  Gordo  over  them. 

Telegram — Rich  Mountain^  y^^y  12,  1861. — Have  met  with 
complete  success  ;  captured  the  enemy's  entire  camp,  guns,  tents, 
wagons,  etc.  Many  prisoners,  among  whom  several  officers. 
Enemy's  loss  severe,  ours  very  small.  No  officers  lost  on  our 
side.     I  turned  the  position.     All  well. 

^uiy  12,  Beverly. — Have  gained  a  decided  victory  at  small 
cost,  and  move  on  to  Huttonsville  to-morrow  in  hope  of  seizing 
the  mountain-pass  near  that  point  before  it  is  occupied  in  force 
by  the  enemy.  If  that  can  be  done  I  can  soon  clear  up  the  rest 
of  the  business  to  be  done  out  here,  and  return  to  see  you  for 
^  time  at  least,  ,  ,  , 


62  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

I  had  an  afifecting  interview  to-day  with  a  poor  woman  whom 
we  liberated  from  prison,  where  she  had  been  confined  for  three 
weeks  by  these  scoundrels  merely  because  she  was  a  Union 
woman.  I  enclose  a  flower  from  a  bouquet  the  poor  thing 
gave  me. 

Telegram — July  13, 1861. — Success  complete.  Enemy  routed. 
Lost  everything  he  had — guns,  tents,  wagons,  etc.  Pegram  was 
in  command.  We  lost  but  10  killed  and  35  wounded.  Garnett 
has  abandoned  his  camp  between  this  and  Philippi,  and  is  in  full 
retreat  into  Eastern  Virginia.  I  hope  still  to  cut  him  off.  All 
well. 

July  13,  Huttonstnlle. — Since  you  last  heard  from  me  I  re- 
ceived from  Pegram  a  proposition  to  surrender,  which  I  granted. 
L.  Williams  went  out  with  an  escort  of  cavalry  and  received  him. 
He  surrendered,  with  another  colonel,  some  25  officers,  and  560 
men.  ...  I  do  not  think  the  enemy  in  front  of  us  in  the  Cheat 
Mountain  pass,  but  that  they  have  fallen  back  in  hot  haste.  If 
they  have,  I  will  drive  them  out  to-morrow  and  occupy  the  pass. 
...  It  now  appears  we  killed  nearly  200  ;  took  almost  900.  .  .  . 

The  valley  in  which  we  are  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  I  ever 
saw,  and  I  am  more  than  ever  inclined  to  make  my  headquarters 
at  Beverly  and  have  you  with  me.  Beverly  is  a  quiet,  old-fash- 
ioned town,  in  a  lovely  valley  ;  a  beautiful  stream  running  by  it 
— a  perfectly  pastoral  scene,  such  as  the  old  painters  dreamed  of 
but  never  realized.  ...  I  find  that  the  prisoners  are  beyond 
measure  astonished  at  my  humanity  towards  them.  The  bearer 
of  the  flag  from  Pegram  reached  me  about  five  this  morning. 
He  had  been  two  days  without  food.  I  at  once  gave  him  some 
breakfast,  and  shortly  after  gave  him  a  drink  of  whiskey ;  as  he 
drank  it  he  said  :  "  I  thank  you,  general ;  I  drink  that  I  may 
never  again  be  in  rebellion  against  the  general  government." 

July  14,  1861. — I  have  released  the  doctor  this  morning  of 
whom  I  told  you.  Also  sent  a  lieutenant  to  carry  back  the  body 
of  his  captain.  Also  those  poor  young  boys  of  good  family  who 
had  lost  their  limbs.  I  have  tried  to  temper  justice  with  mercy. 
I  think  these  men  will  do  me  no  harm,  but  that  some  mothers 
and  sisters  and  wives  will  bless  the  name  of  your  husband.  .  .  , 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  63 

Started  this  morning  with  a  strong  advanced  guard,  supported 
by  two  regiments,  to  test  the  question  as  to  whether  the  rebels 
were  really  fortified  in  the  Cheat  Mountain  pass.  I  went  pre- 
pared for  another  fight,  but  found  that  they  had  scampered. 
We  picked  up  some  of  their  plunder,  but  they  have  undoubtedly 
gone  at  least  to  Staunton.  The  pass  was  strong,  and  they  might 
have  given  us  an  immense  deal  of  trouble.  I  went  with  a  few 
men  to  Cheat  river,  the  other  side  of  the  mountain.  ...  I  have 
made  a  very  clear  sweep  of  it.  Never  was  more  complete  suc- 
cess gained  with  smaller  sacrifice  of  life.  Our  prisoners  will 
exceed  one  thousand. 

On  my  return  I  found  a  telegram  from  Gen.  Scott,  sent 
before  he  had  received  information  as  to  the  full  results  of 
my  victory.     It  was  : 

"  The  general-in-chief,  and  what  is  more  the  cabinet,  includ- 
ing the  President,  are  charmed  with  your  activity,  valor,  and 
consequent  success.  We  do  not  doubt  that  you  will  in  due 
time  sweep  the  rebels  from  West  Virginia,  but  do  not  mean  to 
precipitate  you,  as  you  are  fast  enough. 

"  WiNFiELD  Scott." 

.  .  .  Our  ride  to-day  was  magnificent ;  some  of  the  most 
splendid  mountain  views  I  ever  beheld.  The  mountain  we 
crossed  is  fully  three  thousand  feet  above  its  base,  and  the 
lovely  little  valleys,  the  cleared  farms,  the  long  ranges  of  moun- 
tains in  the  distance,  all  made  a  varied  scene  that  I  cannot 
describe  to  you.  At  the  mountain-top  was  a  pretty  little  farm, 
neat  as  neat  could  be.  A  very  old  couple  lived  there,  the  old 
lady  as  rosy  and  cheerful  as  a  cricket.  It  is  sad  that  war  should 
visit  even  such  sequestered  spots  as  that. 

Monday  evening. — After  closing  my  letter  last  night  a  cou- 
rier arrived  with  the  news  that  the  troops  I  had  sent  in  pursuit  of 
Garnett  had  caught  him,  routed  his  army,  captured  his  baggage, 
one  gun,  taken  several  prisoners,  and  >that  Garnett  himself  lay 
dead  on  the  field  of  battle !  Such  is  the  fate  of  traitors :  one 
of  their  leaders  a  prisoner,  the  other  killed ;  their  armies  anni- 
hilated, their  cause  crushed  in  this  region.  .  .  .  You  ask  what 
my  plans  are.  Why,  don't  you  know  that  my  movements  de- 
pend much  on  those  of  Monsieur  TEnnemi  ?    I  expect  to  hear 


64  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

in  a  few  hours  of-  the  final  extermination  of  the  remnants  of 
Gamett's  army.  Then  I  am  almost  hourly  awaiting  news  of 
Cox*s  success  in  the  Kanawha.  Should  Cox  not  be  prompt 
enough  I  will  go  down  there  myself  and  bring  the  matter  to 
a  close. 

West  Virginia  being  cleared  of  the  enemy,  I  have  then  to 
reorganize  and  consolidate  the  army.  The  time  of  the  three- 
months  men  is  about  expiring,  and  they  form  so  large  portion 
of  my  force  that  some  delay  will  ensue.  .  .  . 

Telegram — July  15,  Huttonsville. — Gamett  and  whole  concern 
have  retreated.  None  nearer  than  Staunton.  Crossed  Cheat 
Mountain  to-day  and  returned. 

July  18,  Beverly, — I  am  awaiting  news  from  the  Kanawha 
which  will  determine  my  movements.  I  do  not  see  now  but 
that  I  can  leave  here  in  a  couple  of  days ;  but  do  not  count 
upon  it,  as  there  are  so  many  chances  in  war. 

July  19,  1 86 1. — I  enclose  Bulletin  No.  5,  printed  with  our 
portable  press.  You  see  we  have  carried  civilization  with  us  in 
the  shape  of  the  printing-press  and  the  telegraph — institutions 
decidedly  neglected  in  this  part  of  the  world  heretofore,  and,  I 
fear,  not  likely  to  be  paying  institutions  in  this  vicinity  after  we 
go.  The  good  people  here  read  but  little  and  have  but  few 
ideas.  Gen.  Scott  is  decidedly  flattering  to  me.  I  received  from 
him  yesterday  a  despatch  beginning,  "  Your  suggestion  in  respect 
to  Staunton  would  be  admirable,  like  your  other  conceptions 
and  acts."  I  value  that  old  man's  praise  very  highly,  and  wrote 
him  a  short  note  last  night  telling  him  so.  I  enclose  some  scraps 
clipped  off  a  dirty  rebel  flag  captured  at  Rich  Mountain.  .  .  . 

Am  engaged  now  in  arranging  to  march  home  the  three- 
months  men  to  be  reorganized,  and  in  clearing  up  matters  gene- 
rally. ...  I  suppose  McDowell  drove  the  enemy  from  Manassas 
Junction  yesterday  ;  if  so  the  way  will  be  pretty  well  cleared  for 
the  present.  If  any  decided  movement  is  made  towards  Rich- 
mond I  shall  feel  sure  that  they  cannot  intend  to  trouble  my 
people  here. 

July  21,  Beverly, —  .  .  .  Were  you  satisfied  with  the  result? 


PKIVATE   LETTERS.  65 

Nine  guns  Liken,  cwelve  c  ji-.ts,  I.X5  oi  prirjonersv  and  all  this 
doce  wiih  5*3  I:  trie  loss  on  oar  sice  !  We  to  and  vestenliT  some 
more  ipins  abandoned  by  Gamett,  brinzin^  the  number  taken 
np  to  nine.  .  .  .  G^zi.  Cox  has  been  badly  checked  in  the 
Kanawha :  one  wounded  colonel  { Newton)  taken  prisoner,  tw  > 
ethers  and  a  lieatcnant-vioLonel  » Neif>  captured  while  amusinz 
themselves  by  an  insane  expedition  in  advance  ot  the  pi»-k- 
ets — served  them  nght !  Cox  lost  more  men  in  getting  a  de- 
tachment thrashed  than  I  did  in  rjuting  two  armies.  The 
conse'^uence  is,  I  shall  move  down  with  a  heavy  column  to 
take  Mr.  Wise  in  rear,  and  hope  either  to  drive  him  out  with- 
out a  battle  or  to  catch  him  with  his  whole  force.  It  is  ab- 
solutely necessary  for  me  to  go  in  person  :  I  have  no  one  to 
whom  I  can  entrust  the  operation.  More  than  that,  I  don't 
feel  sure  that  the  men  will  light  very  well  under  any  one  but 
mvself  :  thev  have  c«?nndence  in  me  and  will  do  an^thinj^  that 
I  put  them  at.  I  lose  about  fourteen  regiments  now  whose  term 
of  service  is  about  expiring,  and  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  have  as 
yet  found  but  few  whc'se  patriotism  is  sufficient  to  induce  thexn 
to  remain  beyond  their  time.  I  expect  to  get  away  fn^m  here 
by  day  after  to-morrow  it  latest.  The  march  to  the  Kanawha 
will  require  about  seven  days.  I  hope  to  be  able  to  start  for 
Cincinnati  in  about  two  weeks  fn^m  to-morp3w.  I  expect  the 
Guthrie  Gravs  here  to-dav.  and  will  take  them  with  me  to  the 
Kanawha. 


CHAPTER   IV. 

Arrival  at  Washington — Reception  by  Gen.  Scott  and  the  President — 
Condition  of  the  capital — Takes  command  of  the  Division  of  the 
Potomac — State  of  the  army  —  Numbers,  increase,  and  position  of 
troops. 

I  REACHED  Washington  late  in  the  afternoon  of  Friday, 
July  26.  I  called  on  Gen.  Scott  that  evening,  and  next  morn- 
ing reported  to  the  adjutant-general,  who  instructed  me  to  call 
upon  the  President,  by  whom  I  was  received  cordially  and  in- 
formed that  he  had  placed  me  in  command  of  Washington  and 
all  the  troops  in  its  vicinity.  He  directed  me  to  return  to  the 
W^hite  House  at  one  o'clock  to  be  present  at  a  cabinet  meeting. 
I  called  again  on  Gen.  Scott,  then  commanding  the  army  of 
the  United  States,  and,  after  conversing  with  him  for  some  time 
on  the  state  of  affairs,  casually  remarked  that  I  must  take  my 
leave,  as  the  President  had  desired  me  to  attend  a  cabinet  meet- 
ing at  one  o'clock.  Upon  this  the  general  became  quite  indig- 
nant and  said  that  it  was  highly  improper  that  I  should  receive 
such  an  invitation  to  his  exclusion,  and  insisted  upon  keeping 
me  until  too  late  to  attend  the  meeting.  He  then  instructed  me 
to  ride  around  the  city  immediately  and  send  stragglers  back  to 
their  regiments.  The  general  appeared  to  know  and  think  very 
little  about  the  defensive  condition  of  the  city  and  its  approach- 
es, and  was  more  concerned  about  the  disorganized  condition 
of  the  stragglers  in  the  city  itself.  I  explained  to  the  Presi- 
dent later  in  the  day  the  cause  of  my  apparent  lack  of  courtesy, 
at  which  he  seemed  more  amused  than  otherwise.  ' 

After  leaving  the  general  I  rode  around  the  outskirts  of  the 
city  on  the  Maryland  side  towards  Tcnnallytown,  Seventh  Street, 
etc.,  and  examined  some  of  the  camps,  but  did  not  devote  myself 
individually  to  the  police  work  of  picking  up  drunken  stragglers. 
I  found  no  preparations  whatever  for  defence,  not  even  to  the 
extent  of  putting  the  troops  in  military  positions.  Not  a  regi- 
ment was  properly  encamped,  not  a  single  avenue  of  approach 
guarded.     All  was  chaos,  and  the  streets,  hotels,  and  bar-rooms 

66 


CONDITION  OF   WASHINGTON,  67 

were  filled  with  drunken  officers  and  men  absent  from  their 
regiments  without  leave — a  perfect  pandemonium.  Many  had 
even  gone  to  their  homes,  their  flight  from  Bull  Run  often  ter- 
minating in  New  York,  or  even  in  New  Hampshire  and  Maine. 
There  was  really  nothing  to  prevent  a  small  cavalry  force  from 
riding  into  the  city.  A  determined  attack  would  doubtless  have 
carried  Arlington  Heights  and  placed  the  city  at  the  mercy  of 
a  battery  of  rifled  guns.  If  the  secessionists  attached  any  value 
to  the  possession  of  Washington,  they  committed  their  greatest 
error  in  not  following  up  the  victory  of  Bull  Run.* 

On  the  25th  had  been  issued  the  order  constituting  the 
Division  of  the  Potomac  and  assigning  me  to  its  command. 
The  division  consisted  of  the  Department  of  Northeast  Vir- 
ginia, under  McDowell,  which  comprised  all  the  troops  in  front 
of  Washington  on  the  Pennsylvania  bank  of  the  river,  and  the 
Department  of  Washington,  under  Mansfield,  which  comprised 
all  the  troops  in  Washington  and  its  vicinity  on  the  Maryland 
side.  Neither  of  these  officers  seemed  pleased  with  the  new 
arrangement,  more  particularly  Mansfield. 

On  the  27th  I  assumed  command  and  lost  no  time  in  ac- 
quainting myself  with  the  situation  and  applying  the  proper 
remedies.     On  the  next  day,  Sunday,  I  rode  along  the  lines  on 

♦The  defenceless  condition  of  Washington  on  this  very  day  was  de- 
scribed by  Mr.  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  afterwards  Secretary  of  War  in  Mr. 
Lincoln's  cabinet,  in  a  private  letter,  historic  and  prophetic,  to  ex-Presi- 
dent Buchanan,  as  follows : 

••Washington,  July  26,  1861. 

•'  Dear  Sir  :  .  .  .  The  dreadful  disaster  of  Sunday  can  scarcely  be 
mentioned.  The  imbecility  of  this  administration  culminated  in  that  catas- 
trophe ;  an  irretrievable  misfortune  and  national  disgrace  never  to  be  for- 
^iTOtten  ar^tobe  added  to  the  ruin  of  all  peaceful  pursuits  and  national 
bankruptcy  as  the  result  of  Lincoln's  *  running  the  machine '  for  five 
months.  ...  It  is  not  unlikely  that  some  change  in  the  War  and  Navy 
Departments  may  take  place,  but  none  beyond  those  two  departments 
until  Jeff  Davis  turns  out  the  whole  concern.  The  capture  of  Washington 
seems  now  to  be  inevitable  ;  during  the  whole  of  Monday  and  Tuesday  it 
might  have  been  taken  without  any  resistance.  The  rout,  overthrow,  and 
demoralization  of  the  whole  army  is  complete.  Even  now  I  doubt  whether 
any  serious  opposition  to  the  entrance  of  the  Confederate  forces  could  be 
offered.  While  Lincoln,  Scott,  and  the  cabinet  are  disputing  who  is  to 
blame,  the  city  is  unguarded  and  the  enemy  at  hand.  Gen.  McClellan 
reached  here  last  evening.  But  if  he  had  th5  ability  of  Caesar,  Alexander, 
or  Napoleon,  what  can  he  accomplish?  Will  not  Scoit*s  jealous}',  cabi- 
net intrigues,  and  Republican  interference  thwart  him  at  every  step?  .  .  . 
••Yours  truly,  Edwin  M.  Stanton." 


68  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

the  Virginia  side,  beginning  at  Gen.  W.  T.  Sherman's  position 
opposite  Georgetown.  I  found  Sherman  somewhat  nervous.  He 
attempted  to  dissuade  me  from  passing  outside  of  his  pickets, 
believing  the  enemy  to  be  close  at  hand.  As  that  was  precise- 
ly what  I  wanted  to  know,  however,  I  did  ride  some  distance 
beyond  the  pickets  and  found  no  enemy. 

The  condition  of  things  on  the  Virginia  side  was  not  much 
better  than  on  the  other.  The  troops  were  on  the  river-banks 
or  on  the  high  ground  immediately  overlooking  them.  Few  were 
in  condition  to  fight,  and  but  little  had  been  done  in  the  way  of 
entrenching  the  approaches. 

Fort  Ellsworth,  near  Alexandria ;  Forts  Runyon  and  Allan, 
at  the  end  of  the  Long  Bridge ;  Fort  Corcoran,  at  the  head 
of  Aqueduct  Bridge,  with  one  or  two  small  adjacent  batteries, 
comprised  all  the  works  completed  on  the  south  side.  A  small 
battery  at  the  Maryland  end  of  the  Chain  Bridge  was  the  only 
one  on  the  Washington  side  of  the  river.  Two  or  three  small 
entrenchments  had  just  been  commenced  on  Arlington  Heights. 
These  detached  works  simply  covered  some  of  the  principal 
direct  approaches  from  the  Virginia  side,  but  in  no  sense  formed 
part  of  any  general  defensive  line. 

The  condition  of  affairs  which  thus  presented  itself  to  me 
upon  assuming  command  was  one  of  extreme  difficulty  and 
fraught  with  great  danger.  The  defeated  army  of  McDowell 
could  not  properly  be  called  an  army — it  was  only  a  collection 
of  undisciplined,  ill-officered,  and  uninstructed  men,  who  were, 
as  a  rule,  much  demoralized  by  defeat  and  ready  to  run  at  the 
first  shot.  Positions  from  which  the  city  could  be  commanded 
by  the  enemy's  guns  were  open  for  their  occupation.  The  troops 
were  as  insufficient  in  number  as  in  quality.  The  period  of 
service  of  many  regiments  had  expired,  or  would  do  so  in  a  few 
days.  There  was  so  little  discipline  that  officers  and  men  left 
their  camps  at  th^ir  own  will,  and,  as  I  have  already  stated,  the 
city  was  full  of  drunken  men  in  uniform.  The  executive  w.is 
demoralized  ;  an  attack  by  the  enemy  was  expected  from  hour  to 
hour  ;  material  of  war  did  not  exist  in  anything  like  sufficient 
quantities  ;  and,  lastly,  I  was  not  supreme  and  unhampered,  but 
often  thwarted  by  the  lieutenant-general. 

I  may  be  permitted  to  say  that  my  arrival  was  hailed  with 
delight  by  all,  except,  perhaps,  the  two  generals  whom  I  super- 


SAFETY  OF  THE  CAPITAL.  69 

seded ;  and  that  the  executive  and  the  country  soon  passed  from 
a  state  of  abject  despair  to  confidence,  as  will  appear  from  the 
newspapers  of  the  time. 

The  first  and  most  pressing  demand  upon  me  was  the  imme- 
diate safety  of  the  capital  and  the  government.  This  was  pro- 
vided for  by  at  once  exacting  the  most  rigid  discipline  and 
order ;  by  arresting  all  ignorant  officers  and  men,  and  sending 
them  back  to  their  regiments  ;  by  instituting  and  enforcing  strict 
rules  in  regard  to  permission  for  leaving  the  camps ;  by  prohibit- 
ing civilians  and  others  not  on  duty  from  crossing  the  river  or 
visiting  the  camps  without  permits  from  headquarters  ;  by  organ- 
izing permanent  brigades  under  regular  officers,  and  by  placing 
the  troops  in  good  defensive  positions.  I  threw  them  further  out 
from  the  city,  so  as  to  have  space  in  rear  for  manoeuvring,  and 
selected  positions  which  commanded  the  various  avenues  of  ap- 
proach to  the  city  and  enabled  the  different  brigades  to  afford 
reciprocal  support 

I  lost  no  time  in  acquiring  an  accurate  knowledge  of  the 
ground  in  all  directions,  and  by  frequent  visits  to  the  troops 
made  them  personally  acquainted  with  me,  while  I  learned  all 
about  them,  their  condition  and  their  needs,  and  thus  soon 
succeeded  in  inspiring  full  confidence  and  a  good  morale  in 
place  of  the  lamentable  state  of  affairs  which  existed  on  my 
arrival. 

Thus  I  passed  long  days  in  the  saddle  and  my  nights  in  the 
office — a  very  fatiguing  life,  but  one  which  made  my  power  felt 
evervwhere  and  bv  everv  one.  There  were  about  one  thousand 
regular  infantry  with  McDowell  at  Arlington.  These,  with  a 
regular  battery  and  a  squadron  of  regular  cavalry,  I  at  once 
brought  to  the  city  and  employed  as  a  provost-guard,  with  the 
most  satisfactory  results.  It  was  through  their  discipline,  steadi- 
ness, and  devotion  that  order  was  so  promptly  established.  The 
following  order  explains  itself : 

General  Order  No.  2. 

Headquarters,  Division  of  the  Potomac, 

Washington,  July  30,  1861. 

The  general  commanding  the  division  has  with  much  regret 
observed  that  large  numbers  of  officers  and  men  stationed  in  the 
vicinity  of  Washington  are  in  the  habit  of  frequenting  the  streets 


70  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

and  hotels  of  the  city.  This  practice  is  eminently  prejudicial  to 
good  order  and  military  discipline,  iind  must  at  once  be  discon- 
tinued. The  time  and  services  of  all  persons  connected  witJi  this 
division  should  be  devoted  to  their  appropriate  duties  with  their 
respective  commands.  It  is  therefore  directed  that  hereafter  no 
officer  or  soldier  be  allowed  to  absent  himself  from  his  camp  and 
visit  Washington  except  for  the  performance  of  some  public  duty 
or  for  the  transaction  of  important  private  business,  for  which 
purpose  written  permits  will  be  given  by  the  commanders  of  bri- 
gades. The  permit  will  state  the  object  of  the  visit.  Brigade 
commanders  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  strict  execution  of 
this  order.  Col.  Andrew  Porter,  of  the  i6th  U.  S.  Infantry, 
is  detached  for  temporary  duty  as  provost-marshal  in  Washing- 
ton, and  will  be  obeyed  and  respected  accordingly.  Col.  Porter 
will  report  in  person  at  these  headquarters  for  instructions. 
By  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan. 

(Signed)  S.  Williams, 

Asst.  Adjt,-Gen, 

The  effect  of  all  this  was  that  on  the  4th  of  August  I  was  able 
to  write  to  one  of  my  family  :  "  I  have  Washington  perfectly 
quiet  now  ;  you  would  not  know  that  there  was  a  regiment  here. 
I  have  restored  order  very  completely  already." 

In  re-arranging  the  posts  and  organization  of  the  troops  I 
brought  over  to  the  Washington  side  of  the  river  those  regiments 
which  had  been  most  shaken  and  demoralized  by  the  defeat  of 
Bull  Run,  and  retained  them  there,  with  the  newly  arriving  regi- 
ments, until  in  fit  condition  to  be  trusted  on  the  side  towards  the 
enemy.  My  report  (made  in  1863)  gives  in  sufficient  detail  the 
measures  taken  to  expedite  the  instruction,  discipline,  and  equip- 
ment of  the  new  regiments  on  the  Washington  side  before  assign- 
ing them  to  brigades  in  front  of  the  enemy.  I  also  proceeded  at 
once  to  reorganize  the  various  staff  departments  on  a  footing 
commensurate  with  the  actual  and  future  condition  of  affairs,  and 
used  every  effort  to  hasten  the  arrival  of  new  regiments,  as  well 
as  the  manufacture  and  purchase  of  war  material  of  all  kinds. 

Fortunately  I  had  some  excellent  officers  at  my  disposal  and 
at  once  made  use  of  them.  ^ 

At  this  period  I  committed  one  of  my  greatest  errors — that  was 
in  retaining  Gen.  McDowell  on  duty  with  the  troops  under  my 
command.  I  knew  that  he  had  been  a  close  student  of  military 
affairs,  and  thought  that  he  possessed  sufficient  ability  to  be  use- 
ful in  a  subordinate  capacity.     Moreover,  I  pitied  him  extremely, 


GENERAL  Mc DO  WELL,  7 1 

and  thought  that  circumstances  had  as  much  to  do  with  his 
failure  at  Bull  Run  as  any  want  of  ability  and  energy  on  his  part. 
I  knew  that  if  I  sent  him  away  he  would  be  ruined  for  life,  and 
desired  to  give  him  an  opportunity  to  retrieve  his  military  repu- 
tation. I  therefore  left  him  in  the  nominal  command  on  the  Vir- 
ginia side  of  the  river  until  the  order  forming  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  was  issued  ;  he  doing  some  little  bureau  work  and  re- 
taining a  large  staff,  while  I  performed  the  real  military  labor 
demanded  by  the  occasion.  I  was  sadly  deceived.  He  never 
appreciated  my  motives,  and  felt  no  gratitude  for  my  forbearance 
and  kindness.  Subsequent  events  proved  that,  although  in  some 
respects  a  very  good  bureau  officer  and  a  fair  disciplinarian  and 
drill-officer  for  a  school  of  instruction,  he  lacked  the  qualities 
necessary  for  a  commander  in  the  field.  After  Pope's  campaign 
it  was  not  safe  for  McDowell  to  visit  the  camps  of  his  troops ; 
the  men  declared  that  they  would  kill  him.  I  have  long  been 
convinced  that  he  intrigued  against  me  to  the  utmost  of  his 
power.  His  conduct  towards  Fitz-John  Porter  on  the  second 
Bull  Run  campaign,  his  testimony  in  the  latter's  trial,  and  sub- 
sequent rehearing  in  1880,  show  what  manner  of  man  he  was. 
In  all  human  probability  I  should  have  been  spared  an  infinite 
amount  of  trouble  had  I  relieved  him  upon  reaching  Washington, 
and  allowed  him  to  sink  at  once  into  obscurity. 

When  I  resumed  command  it  was  clear  that  a  prompt  advance 
was  wholly  impracticable  ;  for,  as  I  have  already  stated,  the  mass 
of  the  troops  placed  under  me  were  utterly  demoralized  and 
destitute  of  organization,  instruction,  discipline,  artillery,  cavalry, 
transportation.  I  repeat  that  it  was  not  worthy  to  be  called  an 
army.  The  request  to  bring  with  me,  or  cause  to  follow,  a  few 
of  the  victorious  regiments  from  West  Virginia  was  denied.  As 
it  was,  nothing  remained  but  to  create  an  army  and  material  as 
rapidly  as  possible  from  the  very  foundation. 

The  result  of  the  first  Bull  Run  had  changed  the  conditions 
of  the  problem  and  complicated  them  exceedingly.  In  West 
Virginia  I  had  raw  troops  against  raw  troops ;  my  opponents 
had  all  the  advantages  of  knowledge  of  the  ground,  strong  posi- 
tions, and  a  country  peculiarly  adapted  to  the  defensive.  Yet  I 
did  not  hesitate  to  attack,  and  gained  complete  success.  I  felt 
that  against  troops  who  had  never  been  under  fire  and  were  not 
particularly  well  commanded  the  offensive  offered  great  advan- 


72  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

tages,  and  also  felt  entire  confidence  in  my  ability  to  handle  my 
men,  many  of  whom  had  attained  a  certain  rough  kind  of  dis- 
cipline at  Camp  Dennison.  But  at  Washington  everything  was 
different.  The  enemy  not  only  had  all  the  advantages  of  posi- 
tion, of  entrenchments,  of  the  morale  resulting  from  success, 
but  his  discipline  and  drill  were  far  better  than  our  own.  It 
would  have  been  madness  to  renew  the  attempt  until  a  com- 
plete change  was  made,  for  all  the  advantages  of  a  sudden 
movement  had  been  lost.  The  problem  now  was  to  attack  vic- 
torious and  finely  drilled  troops  in  entrenchment.  I  knew  that 
this  could  be  done  only  by  well-organized  and  well-drilled  troops, 
well  supplied  with  artillery  and  other  arms  of  service  ;  the  future 
of  the  war  proved  the  correctness  of  this  view.  I  had,  therefore, 
no  choice  but  to  create  a  real  army  and  its  material  out  of 
nothing.  The  contest  had  already  assumed  such  a  phase  that 
large  masses  were  necessary  to  decide  it.  To  use  such  masses 
they  must  be  organized  and  instructed.  Perhaps  even  then  a 
few  thousand  regulars  would  have  decided  the  war.  But  we 
had  them  not ! 

Let  those  who  criticise  me  for  the  delay  in  creating  an  army 
and  its  material  point  out  an  instance  when  so  much  has  been 
done  with   the  same  means  in  so  short  a  time. 

Not  only  was  it  necessary  to  organize,  discipline,  and  drill 
the  troops,  but  the  immense  labor  of  constructing  the  fortifica- 
tions required  to  secure  the  city  in  the  absence  of  the  army  was 
also  to  be  performed  by  the  troops.  Not  only  did  this  consume 
much  time  and  greatly  retard  the  preparation  of  the  army  for  the 
field,  but  it  tied  down  the  troops  to  the  line  of  the  defences,  and 
rendered  it  impossible  to  take  up  a  more  advanced  position  until 
the  works  were  finished. 

Before  my  arrival  no  one  had  contemplated  the  complete  for- 
tification of  the  city.  I  at  once  conceived  the  idea  and  carried  it 
into  effect ;  for  I  saw  immediately  that  the  safety  of  the  capital 
would  always  be  a  great  clog  on  the  movements  of  the  army,  un- 
less its  security  were  amply  guaranteed  by  strong  entrenchments. 
I  cannot  speak  in  too  high  terms  of  the  cheerfulness,  zeal,  and 
activity  with  which  these  raw  troops  performed  this  arduous  and 
disagreeable  labor.  They  gave  thus  early  an  earnest  of  what 
might  be  expected  from  them  under  more  trying  circumstances. 

The  system  adopted  was  that  of  detached  earthworks.     The 


^zjlv  cf  sC'£njJZdT7jjr± 


s^ 


AX 


»-•— '-ST— 


O • 


«.  \.>—  .. 


_•_: 


L'ltir-  5   ir^'i   M:iZ2.:c  a   HIL?   Ttri   hiLi    zj   scricz 
■-■ii  a-zc^c  fT'.i"    r^T.r^.es  ^cir  17.     Tz::*  wis  ri-*  iiy 


■"■» 


*d  13.  fizr  ::C'im«:a.  iz.d 


iiji  ::r::s  ,iin^:t  -^'-"^  »*  is — -rim,  meri  Ttrir  -c  -*t*-ns  ;c  pr±- 
vimzi^  lis  z<.z~z-iZL»z^  zz  Af  r  C.ZC.  Hilars  iz.*i  ize  i^iciori- 

PicrcLic  2z*i   -ri-iie-i  iz  z-c  JlZkt-z  the  Gt^sz  tiT-k  21  rie 


tttk^^t  •►rr  mcc*  ::=.  p-istjcc  zn  rie  ^LirrLiz^d  ace.  izc  Siiiks'^ 


zz*  ziJLi  — i  frriii.     Iji  the  izsei^jzi  cc  12.7  prsciae  zi:':m,<mi  I 

xz  :^  s  rzi^i.     Ti'i-se  Tt:.;  -rir±  ::z  rie  Ltsi  a^iTisxisrt  ir*  r>:c  j-t 
r^ciT-Tid.  irc  :iie   zders   ire  rrw.     Szci   is   riey  its,  i2>3ai 

Ovb.  -Cw   w^.'i  *..    .^JL*.    -L-^J  -Ca^t  .  ...i.^'-C  *  — :.  • — ^i— .    -Hey  •^-^l-v.    j^r 


74  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

selves  or  each  other.  But  one  battery  of  artillery  ready  ;  the 
others  are  refitting.  The  three  companies  of  cavalry  are  a  good 
deal  run  down.  One  New  York  regiment  (Quimby's)  is  in  a 
state  of  utter  demoralization  and  asking  to  be  discharged.  In 
another  (Bruin's)  all  the  field  officers  tendered  their  resignation. 
An  inspection  of  Quimby's,  made  by  Major  Wadsworth,  seems  to 
show  that  we  have  but  one  ultimatum — to  dissolve  it  as  worthless. 
I  shall  be  at  your  headquarters  this  p.m." 

On  the  2d  of  August  I  received  from  Col.  F.  J.  Porter,  who 
had  been  on  duty  with  Gen.  Patterson,  and  continued  with  his 
successor.  Gen.  Banks,  a  letter  from  Sandy  Hook,  under  date  of 
the  I  St  of  Aug.,  from  which  I  give  the  following  extract : 

"  That  the  government  should  not  suffer  by  my  withdrawal 
from  this  command,  on  the  arrival  of  Gen.  Banks  I  consented  to 
remain,  and  had  myself  assigned  to  the  position  of  acting  in- 
spector-general, in  order  to  accomplish  what  no  one  else  here  can 
— a  reorganization  of  this  demoralized  force.  I  think  within  a 
week  I  shall  have  placed  it  in  excellent  order  for  brigade  com- 
manders to  perfect.  My  occupation  will  then  be  gone,  unless 
this  force  is  to  take  the  initiative  and  enter  on  an  active  cam- 
paign. If  to  be  active,  with  confidence  reposed  in  me,  I  can  be 
of  much  use  and  render  the  country  essential  services.  But  can 
I  do  so  in  other  positions  and  more  satisfactory  to  myself  ? 
Should  the  campaign  turn  out  as  the  last,  the  odium  which  has 
been  thrown  unjustly  upon  Patterson  will  be  reflected  upon  me 
and  his  other  advisers.  Time  and  orders  from  high  authority 
will  show  he  was  right,  and  the  country  should  be  thankful.  But 
I  cannot  bear  another  such,  and  see  my  companions,  my  juniors, 
rising  to  distinction  and  position,  while  I  must  plod  alway  in  a 
beaten  and  sandy  track.  ..." 

Every  one  in  Washington  realized  the  imminent  danger  of  its 
capture,  and  none  dreamed  of  a  renewal  of  the  attack  upon 
Manassas  under  the  circumstances  and  with  the  means  at  hand. 
They  were  but  too  well  satisfied  with  the  assurance  that  the  mea- 
sures I  took  would  secure  order  and  preserve  the  capital  from 
insult  or  capture.  A  new  advance  made  soon  after  the  first 
would,  if  unsuccessful,'  have  been  certainly  followed  by  the 
prompt  occupation  of  Washington  by  the  enemy.  Until  the 
new  army  was  in  such  condition  as  to  make  success  certain,  it 
would  have  been  unpardonable  folly  to  advance  without  leaving 
Washington  so  well  entrenched  and  garrisoned  as  to  afford  a  safe 
retreat  to  the  entire  army  if  repulsed.     This  was  impracticable 


METHOD  OF  MAKING  RETURNS,  75 

when  I  assumed  command,  and  the  Confederates,  while  receiv- 
ing large  accessions  of  force,  lost  no  time  in  constructing  strong 
entrenchments  at  Centreville,  Manassas,  etc. 

There  was  so  much  misunderstanding  and  there  were  so  many 
misrepresentations  during  the  war  as  to  the  effective  strength  of 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  that  it  is  necessary  to  explain  briefly 
the  manner  in  which  the  returns  were  made  up. 

They  showed — 

ist.   The  number  of  officers  and  men  "  present  for  duty." 

2d.    The  number  of  officers  and  men  "  present  sick." 

3d.    The  number  of  officers  and  men  "  present  in  arrest." 

4th.  The  total  present,  this  being  the  sum  of  the  three  pre- 
ceding items. 

5th.  The  number  absent. 

6th.  The  total  present  and  absent,  made  up  by  taking  the 
sum  of  items  4th  and  5th. 

It  is,  of  course,  clear  that  the  first  item  comprises  all  the  offi- 
cers and  men  who  are  effective  for  the  immediate  work  of  the 
army,  yet — either  through  ignorance,  or  to  injure  me  by  exagger- 
ating the  force  at  my  disposal — often  the  "  total  present,"  often 
the  "  aggregate  present  and  absent,"  was  given,  by  those  occupy- 
ing official  positions,  as  the  effective  strength  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  In  the  latter  case  this  sometimes  involved  an  exag-v 
geration  of  over  sixty  per  cent.  ;  as,  for  example,  on  July  10, 
1862,  the  total  present  for  duty  was  89,549,  while  the  aggregate 
present  and  absent  was  144,886. 

Nor,  as  our  returns  were  made  during  the  first  two  years  of 
the  war,  were  the  numbers  given  as  "  present  for  duty  "  by  any 
means  a  true  measure  of  the  effective  force,  because  one  of  the 
instructions  for  making  out  the  returns  was  that  "  all  officers  and 
enlisted  men  present  on  extra  or  daily  duty  will  be  borne  in  the 
column  of  *  present  for  duty.'  "  Therefore  there  were  includ- 
ed among  the  "  present  for  duty  "  all  camp,  train,  and  special 
guards,  all  men  detailed  for  duty  as  teamsters,  laborers,  and  other- 
wise, in  the  headquarters,  commissary,  engineer,  medical,  and 
ordnance  departments  ;  all  orderlies,  cooks,  officers'  servants — in 
short,  those  who  form  no  part  of  the  fighting  strength  of  an  army, 
and  who  in  every  European  and  other  service,  except  our  own, 
are  borne  in  a  separate  column  as  present  on  special  extra  or 
daily  duty,  so  that  the  column  of  "  present  for  duty  "  then  gives 


76  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

the  actual  available  fighting  force.  After  careful  study,  and  with 
ample  means  to  reach  accurate  results,  Gen.  A.  A.  Humphreys 
estimates  the  number  of  extra-duty  officers  and  men,  not  includ- 
ing camp-guards,  orderlies,  cooks,  etc.,  etc.,  who  were  not  in  the 
ranks  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at  all  on  the  20th  of  June, 
1862,  to  be  from  17,000  to  18,000  out  of  105,000,  or  about  one- 
sixth.  This  is,  doubtless,  very  near  the  truth,  and  not  above  it  ; 
so  that,  as  the  Confederates  reported  only  the  officers  and  men  in 
ranks  as  present  for  duty,  there  must  always  be  deducted  from 
the  "  present  for  duty  "  strength  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
during  the  first  two  years  of  the  war  about  one-sixth  to  make  a 
fair  comparison  with  the  enemy.  But,  allowing  for  camp-guards 
and  officers'  servants,  etc.,  a  deduction  of  one-fifth  at  least  should 
be  made. 

On  the  I  St  of  Aug.,  1861,  I  had,  according  to  the  returns, 
less  than  50,000  infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  650  artillerists  with  30 
guns,  present.  Bearing  in  mind  what  has  just  been  stated,  and 
making  the  proper  deduction  for  the  sick,  in  arrest,  and  on  extra 
duty,  it  appears  that  there  were  certainly  not  more  than  37,000 
infantry  in  the  ranks.  The  term  of  service  of  many  of  these 
regiments  was  about  expiring,  and  they  were  gradually  replaced 
by  perfectly  raw  new  regiments.  On  the  19th  of  Aug.  I  had 
less  than  42,000  effectiv^e  of  all  arms,  such  as  they  were  ;  and  the 
most  necessary  defences  still  required  about  a  week  to  enable 
them  to  resist  assaults  with  tolerable  certainty.  On  the  20th  of 
Aug.  I  had  80  guns  and  less  than  1,200  cavalry.  On  the  25th 
of  Aug.  I  had  about  50,000  effective  of  all  arms  and  perhaps 
100  guns.  The  return  for  Aug.  31,  1861,  shows  that,  exclud- 
ing Gen.  Dix's  command,  there  was  an  "  aggregate  present "  of 
76,415  of  all  arms.  This  comprised  Banks's  command  near  Har- 
per's Ferry  and  above,  and  Stone's  corps  of  observation  at  Pooles- 
ville.  It  included  the  sick,  those  under  arrest,  and  all  extra-duty 
men.  Making  the  proper  deduction  on  these  accounts,  the  effec- 
tive force,  including  Banks's  and  Stone's,  is  reduced  to  58,680 
officers  and  men  of  all  arms  ;  many  of  these  being  still  unfit  for 
service  through  lack  of  discipline  and  instruction,  unserviceable 
arms,  etc.  This  is  just  about  the  number  of  effectives  reported 
by  the  Confederates  as  composing  Johnston's  command. 

After  providing,  even   very  insufficiently,  for  watching   the 
Potomac  and  guarding  the  communication  with  Baltimore,  there 


NUMBERS  OF  THE  ARMY. 


77 


would  not  have  been  left  more  than  45,000  effectives  for  the  gar- 
rison of  Washington  and  active  operation.  Certainly  not  10,000 
of  these  troops  were  in  any  condition  to  make  an  offensive  move- 
ment, nor  were  they  sufficient  in  numbers  to  furnish  an  active 
column  which  would  give  the  slightest  hope  of  success  after  mak- 
ing even  a  small  provision  for  the  safety  of  the  capital. 

On  the  15  th  of  Oct.,  1861,  the  troops  under  my 

command  "  present  for  duty  "  numbered    .         .  133,200 

Of  these  there  were  unarmed  and  unequipped 


12,000 


Deduct  one-sixth  for  extra-duty  men,  etc., 

Total  effectives,  without  regard  to  instruction, 

Gen.  Dix  was  charged  with  the  defence  of  Bal- 
timore, occupation  of  the  east  shore,  gar- 
rison of  Fort  Delaware,  the  communica- 
tions to  Philadelphia,  and  the  immediate 
approaches  to  Baltimore,  including  An- 
napolis. In  view  of  the  strong  secessionist 
feeling  in  his  district  it  would  have  been 
dangerous  to  leave  him  with  less  than 

The  upper  Potomac,  from  Washington  to  Cum- 
berland, a  distance  of  more  than  one  hun- 
dred and  sixty  miles  by  the  river,  could  not 
safely  be  watched  and  guarded  by  less  than 

The  lower  Potomac,  the  south  part  of  Mary- 
land, and  communication  with  Baltimore 
required  at  least 

For  the  garrison  of  Washington  and  its  de- 
fences, and  securing  the  flanks  and  com- 
munication of  the  main  army  during  its 
advance  on  Manassas,  a  very  moderate  esti- 
mate would  have  been         .... 

Leaving  for  the  active  column 


121,200 
20,200 


101,000 


10,000 


15,000 


S,ooo 


30,000       60,000 


41,000 


In  estimating  the  force  of  the  above  detachments  it  must  be 
remembered  that  I  was  obliged  to  regard  the  apprehensions  of 
the  administration  and  the  state  of  feeling  in  Maryland,  as  well 
as  the  purely  military  considerations.     I  was  not  then  in  com- 


78  McCLELLAy'S  OWN  STORY. 

mand  of  all  the  armies  of  the  United  States,  far  less  free  to  dis- 
regard the  administration.  Had  I  been  chief  of  the  state  the 
conditions  of  the  problem  would  have  been  very  different.  In 
that  cai>e^  with  the  discipline,  instruction,  and  armament  suffi- 
ciently advanced — which  was  not  the  fact — I  would  not  have 
heiuiaiiN)  tt>  throw  Ranks  on  Winchester  with  15,000  men,  to  act 
t>n  the  \ci\  d^nk  of  the  enemy  at  Manassas,  and,  reducing  the 
^[arniion  ivf  WaiJhin^^c^  to  10,000  men,  advance  on  Manassas 
v)d)  ^cvc>citD  iQc^  ;  thai  wivuld  have  been  the  best  that  could  have 
Wesi  t<loiQ«f;  a3>d  in  ihai  ex^e^nt  10,000  must  have  watched  the  line 
€>4  9^  iVwH^oaa^,  kvivis^^  5«>«ooo  available  for  the  attack  on  Man- 

Oat  y^  zi\^  'i*J  cViL  idbe  **iMtwciit  Ux  doty  **  were  .  .  147*695 
I>(etdb<ct  «uckjun»Kii  and  unequipped,  ....      13,410 

»54.2S5 
Ikdluct  o«H>sixth  fojr  extra  duty,  etc,     ....      22,360 


111,925 
Deduct  garrisons  and  corps  of  deserters,         .        .        .     6ot,.cco 

Leaving  available  for  active  operatioosy  .        .        .        .     51.925 

On  the  4th  ot  Nv>Y.  the  "^  present  for  duty  ^  wete   .        .    152.745 
IXxiuci  unarmed  and  une^uippedL  ....       8l7c6 

m>c^i2 

Deduct  one-iixth  for  extra-duty  men,  etc.^      .        .        .      t|,ccx 


120^^ 


Garrisons,,  etc.^ 


Fo»r  active^  operatio«VN  oJftcer^  and  men  o£  all  arms,.        .     ^— J5 

V'p^  5«.>  cb:e  bc^iaaia^^  o«  Noveoaber^  aad  still  Uicer.  imizxr  of 
Z-iti'  Lofaacrx  wece  L3.>ixlJfejijeat:l>'  <irilled  aad  discipIiaeiL  ami  chey 
were  c*,»^  4.  C',»a;>iiijt;rrj.>i!e  excefrt:  artaevi  wttht  ujosenrtceable  weajxra^ 
F^i^  vX  •^<  .,-ivaIr>-  were  c^^oapIjeCelV  anasevL  and  mscns:  at  die  vol- 
uaoexf  cA'^oIry  were  >cili  very  inelfeciettC  Tile  artiilenr  nuntbenftf 
^i'jJ'  ^uiteN  >uc  niajTv  ot  tJic  boirtecises  wece  sdli  ectdreiy  .miic  ^n 
take  the  iciii     Tronr^A^ctatiua  wa:>  soli  lackia^  ^^^  any  cxcemieti 


/ 


FOSJTJON  OF  TJtOOPS.  79 

Od  the  I  St  of  !>«;.  ibtrrt  irert  ^  presenl  for  dutj  *"         .    169^52 
Of  the*e  there  -were  imeq nipped  and  unarmed,  at  leatt        5.000 

164^52 
l>tjduci  extra-dut}' men,  eic^ 27,600 

ij6,i>52 

3  hiducn  garriscmE,  elc^  as  before, 60,000 

J  c»T  active  operatkmE, 76.^^52 

C>n  the  TTth  of  Au§^  vhai  I  asHumed  command  of  the 
I  division  of  the  PoiomaL,  GeiL  Bankfc  had  jut»l  been  relieved  by 
GeiL  DJK  in  the  command  of  the  l>epartment  of  Mjar}'J[and,  and 
iii  hk.  turn  TeheAed  GetL  Patterbon — vhowr  term  uf  her  vice  ex- 
jiired  on  that  ^sr^ — in  the  cumnDiand  of  the  lieparianenl  of  the 
Shtamndoah-  C>n  the  itil  of  Aug.  OeiL  Bankfc'b  headcjuarlerb 
were  at  Sandy  Hoc4.,  in  the  immediate  A*icinity  of  Harper's 
Jeny.  In  consequence  of  the  e-xpLration  of  benice  of  the  turet> 
month*,  regiments  this  command  Trat  in  a  Kiaie  of  diborganisa' 
tion  for  the  moment. 

A^  the  geograj/hical  ]>h'ision  of  the  Potomac  extended  along 
thai  rher  bomeipi-hat  be}ond  the  Monocacy ,  and  it  fell  within 
my  ]jro\'ince  to  guard  that  part  of  the  river,  witiiin  two  or  tiiree 
davf  after  atisuming  command  1  organized  a  brigade  of  four 
Tegimentb.  under  Gen.  C.  P.  Stone,  and  ordered  iiim  to  the 
vicmrt}-  of  PooieF%-ilk  to  observe  and  guard  the  Potomac  be^ 
Tveen  the  Great  Jalib  and  the  iimitt  of  Geii.  Bankt't  command. 
^  ►r  the  ud  of  Aug.  the  i>even  regimemb  of  the  Pennej'ivania 
Ivetiemt  Corpfc,  then  arrived,  wtje  organiztid  at  a  brigade  under 
(Ten.  G.  A  McCall,  and  ordered  to  I'ennaDjtown  to  guaid  the 
mniortam  roads  naeeting  at  that  point,  and  to  observe  the  river 
lit.  tar  at  the  Gri^ai  Falk.  At  thit  place  the  brigade  wab  in 
jiosrtion  to  sujipori  Stone  and  the  troo]>b  at  the  Chain  lijidge, 
and,  iL  case  of  nectssfiity,  would  Tajiidh  move  by  the  Aqueduct 
liridgt  to  fiujipon  the  troopfc  at  Port  Corcoran  and  Arlmgton 
Heights.  On  the  ist  the  two  Tegimentfe  at  ttie  Chain  liriQge 
Avert  ])iaced  under  the  command  of  Col  TST.  p.  Smith,  and  wtti*- 
in  three  da3'^fc  iufc  command  wat;  increased  to  iour  regimentt.  of 
infaniry.,  one  batten-,  and  one  company  uf  ca\-airy.  Al  the  ^sa^H: 
time  Couch  B  brigade  w^&  posted  at  the  1  oil-Gate  on  the  Se\- 
endi  Btreei  Tuad,  wiias  1^  Milkhouse  Ford  and  ISlagdm*^  liLill 


CHAPTER  V. 

Peivate  Letters- 
\JuIy  27  ic  Seft.  30,   1 861.] 

July  27,  1 86 1,  Washin^ten^  D.  C, — I  have  been  assigned  to 
the  command  of  a  division  composed  of  the  departments  of 
northeastern  Virginia  (that  under  McDowell)  and  that  of  Wash- 
ington (now  under  Mansfield).  Neither  of  them  like  it  much, 
especially  Mansfield ;  but  I  think  they  must  ere  long  become 
accustomed  to  it,  as  there  is  no  help  for  it.  ...  I  find  myself 
in  a  new  and  strange  position  here :  President,  cabinet,  Gen. 
Scott,  and  all  deferring  to  me.     By  some  strange  operation  of 

magic    I   seem   to   haye   he^nmy   the   power  d^  th<*  Inn^ 

I  see  already  the  main  causes  of  our  recent  failure ;  I  am 
sure  that  I  can  remedy  these,  and  am  confident  that  I  can  lead 
these  armies  of  men  to  victory  once  more.  I  start  to-morrow 
very  early  on  a  tour  through  the  lines  on  the  other  side  of  the 
river.  It  will  occupy  me  all  day  long,  and  a  rather  fatiguing 
ride  it  will  be,  but  I  will  be  able  to  make  up  my  mind  as  to  the 
state  of  things.  Refused  invitations  to  dine  to-day  from  Gen. 
Scott  and  four  secretaries ;  had  too  many  things  to  attend  to.  .  .  . 
I  will  endeavor  to  enclose  with  this  the  "  thanks  of  Congress," 
which  please  preserve.  I  feel  very  proud  of  it.  Gen.  Scott 
objected  to  it  on  the  ground  that  it  ought  to  be  accompanied 
by  a  gold  medal.  I  cheerfully  acquiesce  in  the  thanks  by  them- 
selves, hoping  to  win  the  medal  by  some  other  action,  and  the 
sword  by  some  other  fait  ctdclat, 

July  30,  Washington. —  .  .  .  Had  to  work  until  nearly  three 
this  morning.  ...  I  am  getting  my  ideas  pretty  well  arranged  in 
regard  to  the  strength  of  my  army ;  it  will  be  a  very  large  one.' 
I  have  been  employed  in  trying  to  get  the  right  kind  of  general 
officers.  .  .  .  Have  been  working  this  morning  at  a  bill  allowing 
me  to  appoint  as  many  aides  as  I  please  from  civil  life  and  from 
the  army.  .  .  . 

I  went  to  the  Senate  to  get  it  through,  and  was  quite  over- 

S2 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  8 


«- 


whelmed  l)y  the  congratulations  I  received  and  the  respect  with 
which  I  was  treated.  1  suppose  half  a  dozen  of  the  oldest  made 
the  remark  1  am  becoming  so  much  used  to  :  "  Why,  how  young 
you  l(X)k,  and  yet  an  old  soldier  !  "  It  seems  to  strike  every- 
body that  I  am  very  young.  They  give  me  my  way  in  every- 
thing, full  swing  and  unbounded  confidence.  All  tell  me  that  I 
nrn  \\y\i\  |-«^cpf^nca^u»  fpf  the  fate  of  the  nation^  and  that  all  its 
resources  shall  be  placed  at  my  disposal.  It  is  an  immense  task 
that  I  have  on  my  nanas,  but  1  believe  1  can  accomplish  it.  .  .  . 
When  I  was  in  the  Senate  chamber  to-day  and  found  those  old 
men  flocking  around  me  ;  when  I  afterwards  stood  in  the  library, 
looking  over  the  Capitol  of  our  great  nation,  and  saw  the  crowd 
gathering  around  to  stare  at  me,  I  began  to  feel  how  great  the 
task  committed  to  me.  Oh !  how  sincerely  I  pray  t^  God  that 
I  may  be  endowed  with  the  wisdom  and  courage  necessary  to 
accomplish  the  work.  Who  would  have  thought,  when  we  were 
married,  that "  I  should  so  soon  be  called  upon  to  save  my  - 
country  ? 

Aug,  2. — Rode  over  the  river,  looked  at  some  of  the  works, 
and  inspected  three  or  four  regiments  ;  worked  at  organizing 
brigades — ^just  got  through  with  that.  I  handed  to  the  President 
to-night  a  carefully  considered  plan  for  conducting  the  war  on 
a  large  scale.  ...  I  shall  carry  this  thing  on  e/t  grand  and  ••^ 
crush  the  rebels  in  one  campaign.  I  flatter  myself  that  Beau- 
regard has  gained  his  last  victory.  We  need  success  and  must 
have  it.     I  will  leave  nothing  undone  to  gain  it.     Gen.  Scott  has 

been  trying  to  work  a  traverse  to  have made  inspector-gene- 

•al  of  my  army  and  of  the   army.     I   respectfully  declined    the 

vor.  .  .  . 

I  have  on  the  staff  Seth  Williams  as  adjutant-general ;  Barnard 

'lief-engineer ;  Van  Vliet,  chief-quartermaster ;  H.F.Clarke, 

-commissary ;  Barry,  chief  of  artillery ;  Meade   will   be  se- 

■  )pographer ;  Dr.  Tripler,  medical  director.     I  have  applied 

vingsbury   as   chief   of   ordnance,  and   for  Armstrong  and 

jitzer  as  aides-de-camp.     I  dine  with  the  President  to-morrow, 

.Here  I  presume  I  shall  meet  Prince  Napoleon.  .  .  .  You  would 

laugh  if  you  could  see  the  scores  of  (jueer  letters  I  receive  in 

these  days.     I  am  sorry  to  say  I  do  not  answer  any  of  them ;  I 

do  no  writing  myself,  e.\cept  to   you.  ...  I  was  in  the  saddle 
8 


78  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

mand  of  all  the  armies  of  the  United  States,  far  less  free  to  dis- 
regard the  administration.  Had  I  been  chief  of  the  state  the 
conditions  of  the  problem  would  have  been  very  different.  In 
that  case,  with  the  discipline,  instruction,  and  armament  suffi- 
ciently advanced — which  was  not  the  fact — I  would  not  have 
hesitated  to  throw  Banks  on  Winchester  with  1,5,000  men,  to  act 
on  the  left  flank  of  the  enemy  at  Manassas,  and,  reducing  the 
garrison  of  Washington  to  10,000  men,  advance  on  Manassas 
with  60,000  men  ;  that  would  have  been  the  best  that  could  have 
been  done,  and  in  that  event  10,000  must  have  watched  the  line 
of  the  Occoquan,  leaving  50,000  available  for  the  attack  on  Man- 
assas. 

On  the  27th  of  Oct.  the  "present  for  duty  "  were  .  .  147,695 
Deduct  unarmed  and  unequipped,  .        .        .         .13,410 

134,285 
Deduct  one-sixth  for  extra  duty,  etc.,      ....      22,360 


111,925 
Deduct  garrisons  and  corps  of  deserters,         .        .        .      60,000 

Leaving  available  for  active  operations,  .         .        .         .51,925 

On  the  4th  of  Nov.  the  "  present  for  duty  "  were    .         .    152,748 
Deduct  unarmed  and  unequipped,  ....        8,706 

144,042 
Deduct  one-sixth  for  extra-duty  men,  etc.,      .         .         .      24,007 

120,035 
Garrisons,  etc., 60,000 

For  active  operations,  officers  and  men  of  all  arms,         .      60,035 

Up  to  the  beginning  of  November,  and  still  later,  many  of 
the  infantry  were  insufficiently  drilled  and  disciplined,  and  they 
were  to  a  considerable  extent  armed  with  unserviceable  weapons. 
Few  of  the  cavalry  were  completely  armed,  and  most  of  the  vol- 
unteer cavalry  were  still  very  inefficient.  The  artillery  numbered 
228  guns,  but  many  of  the  batteries  were  still  entirely  unfit  to 
take  the  field.  Transportation  was  still  lacking  for  any  extended 
movements. 


( 


POSITION  OF  TROOPS,  79 

On  the  I  St  of  Dec.  there  were  "  present  for  duty  "         .    169,452 
Of  these  there  were  unequipped  and  unarmed,  at  least       5,000 

164,452 
Deduct  extra-duty  men,  etc., 27,600 

13M52 
Deduct  garrisons,  etc.,  as  before, 60,000 

For  active  operations, 76,852 

On  the  27th  of  Aug.,  when  I  assumed  command  of  the 
Division  of  the  Potomac,  Gen.  Banks  had  just  been  relieved  by 
Cien.  Dix  in  the  command  of  the  Department  of  Maryland,  and 
in  his  turn  relieved  Gen.  Patterson — whose  term  of  service  ex- 
pired on  that  day — in  the  command  of  the  Department  of  the 
Shenandoah.  On  the  ist  of  Aug.  Gen.  Banks's  headquarters 
were  at  Sandy  Hook,  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Harper's 
P'erry.  In  consequence  of  the  expiration  of  service  of  the  three- 
months  regiments  this  command  was  in  a  state  of  disorganiza- 
tion for  the  moment. 

As  the  geographical  Division  of  the  Potomac  extended  along 
that  river  somewhat  beyond  the  Monocacy,  and  it  fell  within 
my  province  to  guard  that  part  of  the  river,  within  two  or  three 
days  after  assuming  command  I  organized  a  brigade  of  four 
regiments,  under  Gen.  C.  P.  Stone,  and  ordered  him  to  the 
vicinity  of  Poolesville  to  observe  ^and  guard  the  Potomac  be- 
tween the  Great  Falls  and  the  limits  of  Gen.  Banks's  command. 
On  the  2d  of  Aug.  the  seven  regiments  of  the  Pennsylvania 
Reserve  Corps,  then  arrived,  were  organized  as  a  brigade  under 
(ien.  G.  A.  McCall,  and  ordered  to  Tennallytown  to  guard  the 
important  roads  meeting  at  that  point,  and  to  observe  the  river 
as  far  as  the  Great  Falls.  At  this  place  the  brigade  was  in 
j)osition  to  support  Stone  and  the  troops  at  the  Chain  Bridge, 
and,  in  case  of  necessity,  would  rapidly  move  by  the  Aqueduct 
Bridge  to  support  the  troops  at  Fort  Corcoran  and  Arlington 
Heights.  On  the  ist  the  two  regiments  at  the  Chain  Bridge 
were  placed  under  the  command  of  Col.  W.  F.  Smith,  and  with- 
in three  days  his  command  was  increased  to  four  regiments  of 
infantry,  one  battery,  and  one  company  of  cavalry.  At  the  same 
time  Couch's  brigade  was  posted  at  the  Toll-Gate  on  the  Sev- 
enth Street  road,  where  the  Milkhouse  Ford  and  Blagden's  Mill 


8o  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STOHY. 

roads  intersect  it.  Hooker's  brigade  was  posted  on  the  Bla- 
densburg  road,  near  the  position  afterwards  entrenched.  Gen. 
W.  T.  Sherman's  brigade,  reinforced  by  three  regiments  of  in- 
fantry, with  one  battery  and  one  company  of  regular  cavalry, 
occupied  Fort  Corcoran,  at  the  head  of  the  Georgetown  Aque- 
duct Bridge.  Gens.  Hunter's  and  Keyes's  brigades  held  the 
Arlington  Heights.  Col.  Richardson's  brigade  was  posted  in 
advance  of  the  Long  Bridge,  with  one  regiment  in  Fort  Run- 
yon.  Near  this  were  a  couple  of  light  batteries  under  Col.  H. 
J.  Hunt,  ready  to  move  whenever  required.  Col.  Blenker's  bri- 
gade was  in  advance  of  Roach's  Mills,  in  the  valley  of  Four- 
Mile  Run.  Gens.  Franklin's  and  Heintzelman's  brigades  were 
in  front  of  Alexandria,  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Seminary.  Kear- 
ny's brigade  was  at  Cloud's  Mills,  on  the  Annandale  turnpike. 
One  regiment  was  stationed  at  Fort  Ellsworth,  immediately  in 
front  of  Alexandria. 

I  had  thus  provided  against  all  eventualities  as  well  as  the 
means  in  my  possession  permitted.  If  the  enemy  confined  him- 
self to  a  direct  advance  the  probable  points  of  attack^^were  held 
by  eight  brigades,  so  posted  that  they  could  render  mutual  as- 
sistance, if  all  were  not  simultaneously  assailed  in  force,  while 
the  brigades  of  McCall,  Couch,  and  Hooker  could  move  by 
good  roads  to  support  them ;  Hooker  having  about  five  miles 
to  march  to  the  Long  Bridge,  Couch  about  six  to  the  Long 
Bridge,  the  Aqueduct,  or  to  the  Chain  Bridge,  and  McCall  hav- 
ing a  little  over  three  miles  to  the  Chain  Bridge  or  the  Aque- 
duct, or  about  six  miles  to  the  Long  Bridge. 

If  the  enemy  crossed  the  Potomac  for  the  purpose  of  attack- 
ing on  the  Maryland  side,  Stone  was  in  position  to  fall  back  on 
McCall  or  Couch  after  retarding  their  passage  of  the  river;  so 
that  there  would  have  been  four  brigades,  with  good  communi- 
cation to  either  flank,  in  readiness  to  oppose  them,  while  troops 
could  have  been  brought  from  the  Virginia  side  to  their  support. 

In  the  city  were  the  few  regulars  acting  as  a  provost-guard, 
and  ready  to  be  thrown  wherever  their  services  might  be  re- 
quired. 

On  the  5  th  of  Aug.  the  first  three  regiments  of  the  Ex- 
celsior Brigade  and  the  79th  New  York  were  formed  into  a 
provisional  brigade  and  posted  in  the  suburbs  of  Washington ; 
they  were  soon  moved  south  of  the  Anacostia  to  the  vicinity  of 


FORMATION  OF  DIVISIONS.  8 1 

Uniontown.  On  the  7th  McCall  received  a  battery  of  regular 
artillery ;  and  on  the  9th  Kearny  and  Sherman  each  received 
another  company  of  volunteer  cavalry,  and  on  the  same  day 
King's  brigade  of  three  regiments  was  formed,  and  posted  on 
Meridian  Hill.  Three  days  afterwards  it  was  increased  by  two 
regiments.  On  the  loth  a  battery  was  sent  to  Stone,  and  a 
second  one  to  McCall,  who  received  another  regiment  on  the 
1 2th. 

The  formation  of  divisions  was  thus : 

Aug.  24,  1861  :  McDowell's  division,  consisting  of  Keyes's 
and  Wadsworth's  brigades.     King's  brigade  was  added  on  Oct.  5. 

About  the  same  date — i.e,^  within  two  or  three  days  after  the 
formation  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac — the  troops  under  Gen. 
Banks  were  organized  as  a  division. 

Aug.  28,  1861 :  Franklin's  division,  consisting  of  Kearny's 
and  Franklin's  old  brigade.      A  third  brigade  added   Sept.   4. 

Aug.  30,  1861  :  F.  J.  Porter's  division,  consisting  of  two  bri- 
gades.    A  third  brigade  added  Sept.  27. 

Sept.  12,  1861  :  Stone's  division,  consisting  of  two  brigades, 
Lander's  and  Peck's.  Baker's  brigade  was  added  towards  the 
end  of  the  month  or  early  in  October. 

Sept.  14,  1861  :  Buell's  division,  consisting  of  Couch's  and 
Graham's  brigades.     A  third  brigade  added  early  in  October. 

Sept.  16,  1 86 1  :  McCall's  division  ;  on  the  25th  of  that  month 
he  received  the  last  two  regiments  of  the  Pennsylvania  Reserves, 
so  that  his  division  consisted  of  thirteen  regiments  in  three  bri- 
gades, under  Meade,  J.  F.  Re)molds,  and  Ord. 

Sept.  28,  1861  :  W.  F.  Smith's  division,  consisting  of  the  Ver- 
mont brigade  (afterwards  Brooks's),  J.  J.  Stevens's  and  Han- 
cock's brigades. 

Oct.  5,  1 86 1  :  Heintzelman's  division,  consisting  of  Richard- 
son's, Sedgwick's,  and  Jameson's  brigades. 

Oct.  II,  1861  ;  Hooker's  division,  consisting  of  his  own  (after- 
wards Naglee's)  brigade  and  Sickles's  brigade.  In  November 
a  third  brigade  (Starr's  New  Jersey)  was  added. 

Oct.  12,  1861  :  Blenker's  division,  consisting  of  Stahl's  and 
Steinwehr's  brigades.  A  third  brigade  added  during  the  winter. 

Nov.  25,  1861  :  Sumner's  division,  consisting  of  Howard's, 
Meagher's,  and  French's  brigades. 

Dec.  6,  18*61 :  Casey's  division,  consisting  of  three  brigades. 


88  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Providence  is  aiding  me  by  heavy  rains,  which  are  swelling  the 
Potomac,  which  may  be  impassable  for  a  week  ;  if  so  we  are 
saved.  If  Beauregard  comes  down  upon  us  soon  I  have  every- 
thing ready  to  make  a  manoeuvre  which  will  be  decisive.  Give 
me  two  weeks  and  I  will  defy  Beauregard ;  in  a  week  the  chances 
will  be  at  least  even. 

Aug.  1 8. — My  command  is  at  last  extended,  so  that  I  take 
in  Banks  in  the  Shenandoah  and  Dix  at  Baltimore.  .  .  .  The 
true  reason  why  I  did  not  bring  you  here  was  that  I  did  not  deem 
it  safe.  We  may  have  to  fight  a  battle  under  the  defences  of 
Washington  within  a  week,  and  I  did  not  care  to  have  you  ex- 
posed to  the  chances.  If  Beauregard  does  not  attack  within  two 
days  he  has  lost  every  chance  of  success.  If  by  the  time  you 
receive  this  letter  you  have  not  heard  of  a  battle  through  the  tele- 
graph you  may  be  easy  and  contented. 

Aug.  19. —  ...  If  this  week  passes  without  a  battle,  and 
reinforcements  come  in,  I  shall  feel  sure  that  the  dangerous  point 
.s  turned. 

6  P.M. — I  have  been  inspecting  the  defences  over  the  river  and 
find  them  quite  strong.  We  are  becoming  stronger  in  our  posi- 
tion every  day,  and  I  hope  for  large  reinforcements  this  week. 

Aug.  20. —  ...  If  Beauregard  does  not  attack  this  week  he 
is  foolish.  He  has  given  me  infinite  advantages,  and  you  may  be 
sure  I  have  not  neglected  the  opportunity.  Every  day  adds  to 
the  strength  of  my  defences,  to  the  perfection  of  the  organiza- 
tion, and  some  little  to  our  forces.  I  have  now  about  80  field- 
guns  (there  were  but  49  at  Bull  Run),  and  by  Saturday  will  have 
112.  There  were  only  some  400  cavalry  at  Bull  Run;  I  now 
have  about  1,200,  and  by  the  close  of  the  week  will  have  some 
3,000.  I  am  gaining  rapidly  in  every  way.  I  can  now  defend 
Washington  with  almost  perfect  certainty.  When  I  came  here  it 
could  have  been  taken  with  the  utmost  ease.  In  a  week  I  ought 
to  be  perfectly  safe  and  be  prepared  to  defend  all  Maryland  ;  in 
another  week  to  advance  our  position. 

.  .  .  The  men  were  very  enthusiastic  and  looked  well.  My 
old  State  will  come  out  handsomely.  I  have  been  much  vexed 
to-night  by  sundry  troublesome  things ;  the  only  comfort  has  been 


PRIVATE  LETTERS  89 

your  father's  arrival,  which  is  a  great  relief  to  me.     I  like  to  see 
that  cool,  steady  head  near  me. 

Au^^.  23. —  .  .  .  Yesterday  I  rode  to  Alexandria  and  re- 
viewed four  brigades — that  is,  seventeen  regiments.  .  .  .  Beau- 
regard has  missed  his  chance,  and  I  have  gained  what  I  most 
needed — time  !  .  .  . 

I  do  not  live  at  all ;  merely  exist,  worked  and  worried  half  to 
death.  I  have  no  privacy,  no  leisure,  no  relaxation,  except  in 
reading  your  letters  and  writing  to  you.  We  take  our  meals  at 
Wormley's,  a  colored  gentleman  who  keeps  a  restaurant  just 
around  the  corner  in  I  Street.  I  take  breakfast  there  pretty 
regularly ;  sometimes  have  it  sent  over  here.  As  to  dinner,  it 
takes  its  chances,  and  generally  gets  no  chance  at  all,  as  it  is  often 
ten  o'clock  when  I  get  back  from  my  ride,  and  I  have  nothing  to 
eat  all  day.  ... 

Aug.  25. — Yesterday  started  at  nine  a.m.,  rode  over  Long 
Bridge  and  reviewed  Richardson's  brigade,  then  v/ent  three  miles 
further  and  at  twelve  reviewed  Blenker's  brigade  at  Roach's 
Mills,  then  rode  some  ten  miles  looking  for  a  position  in  which 
to  fight  a  battle  to  cover  Alexandria  should  it  be  attacked.  I 
found  one  which  satisfies  me  entirely.  I  then  returned  to  Fort 
Runyon,  near  the  head  of  Long  Bridge,  and  reviewed  the  21st 
New  York,  after  which  reviewed  four  batteries  of  light  artillery. 
.  .  .  This  morning  telegram  from  other  side  announcing  enemy 
advancing  in  force.  Started  off  aides  and  put  the  wires  at  work  ; 
when  fairly  started  alarm  proved  false.  .  .  .  Friend  Beauregard 
has  allowed  the  chance  to  escape  him.  I  have  now  some  65,000 
effective  men  ;  will  have  75,000  by  end  of  week.  Last  week  he 
( ertainly  had  double  our  force.  I  feel  sure  that  the  dangerous 
moment  has  passed. 

2(ith. —  .  .  .  Reviewed  Sherman's  command  (seven  regiments) 
near  Fort  Corcoran ;  then  McDowell's  (eight  regiments)  at  the 
race-course  ;  then  rode  to  the  ground  in  front  of  Alexandria — 
twelve  hours  in  saddle. 

Aug.  31. — Drove  out  yesterday  as  far  as  McCall's  camp,  and 
to-day  down  over  the  river  for  ^everal  hours.     Have  not  yet  yen- 


96  McCLELLAM'S  OWN  STORV. 

tured  on  horseback  again  ;  may  try  it  to-morrow.  .  .  .  Our  de- 
fences are  becoming  very  strong  now,  and  the  army  is  increas- 
ing in  efficiency  and  numbers  quite  rapidly.  I  think  Beaure- 
gard has  abandoned  the  idea  of  crossing  the  river  above  us, 
and  I  learned  to-day  again  that  my  movements  had  entirely  dis- 
concerted their  plans  and  that  they  did  not  know  what  to  do. 
They  are  suffering  much  from  sickness,  and  I  fancy  are  not 
in  the  best  possible  condition.  If  they  venture  to  attack  us  here 
they  will  have  an  awful  time  of  it.  I  do  not  think  they  will 
dare  to  attack.  We  are  now  ready  for  them.  The  news  from 
every  quarter  to-night  is  favorable.     All  goes  well. 

Sept  4,  1 86 1. — I  took  an  early  dinner,  and  then  mounted  the 
bay,  Sturgis's  horse,  and  rode  to  McCall's  camp  at  Tennallytown. 
Sweitzer  and  Colburn  went  with  me,  as  usual  when  hard  riding  is 
expected ;  also  the  ordinary  escort  of  a  sergeant  and  ten  dra- 
goons. .  .  .  Learned  that  the  firing  at  Great  Falls  amounted  to 
little,  and  that  the  orders  I  had  before  given  to  send  another  regi- 
ment and  another  battery  were  sufficient.  Then  rode  to  Little 
Falls  (Chain  Bridge)  and  went  along  the  whole  picket-line. 

Sept,  — . —  .  .  .  Had  my  dinner  just  after  writing  the  above, 
and  then  rode  to  review  a  brigade  and  32  guns  away  over  beyond 
the  Capitol.  Just  as  I  got  through  Seth  rode  up  with  a  message 
to  the  effect  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  near  Smith  (W.  F.)  I 
rode  rapidly  home,  changed  my  horse,  and  rode  out  to  Smith's 
camp.  I  determined  at  once  to  throw  Smith  across  the  river,  and 
went  over  with  his  brigade  myself  till  I  saw  him  in  position,  and 
then  came  back  at  1.30  pretty  well  tired  out. 

Sept,  6. — Rode  along  pickets  from  Corcoran  to  Chain  Bridge. 
Found  everything  in  good  condition  and  ready  for  a  battle.  If 
B.  attacks  now  he  will  inevitably  be  defeated  with  terrible  loss. 
...  I  feel  now  perfectly  secure  against  an  attack ;  the  next  thing 
will  be  to  attack  him. 

Sept.  8. — What  a  shame  that  any  one  should  spread  such  a 
wicked  rumor  in  regard  to  my  being  killed  !  I  beg  to  assure  you 
that  I  have  not  been  killed  a  single  time  since  I  reached  Wash- 
ington.    So  don't  believe  any  such  absurd  rumors.     How  lucky 


Private  letters.  qi 

that  you  did  not  hear  the  report  until  after  you  received  the  tele- 
gram! I  had  another  bouquet  this  morning,  one  from  the  "  Lady 
President."  Mr.  Lincoln  came  this  morning  to  ask  me  to  par- 
don a  man  that  I  had  ordered  to  be  shot,  suggesting  that  I  could 
give  as  a  reason  in  the  order  that  it  was  by  request  of  the  "  Lady 
President." 

Sept,  — . — Inspected  works  from  Corcoran  to  Albany ;  re- 
viewed McDowell's  division  and  another  brigade  ;  condition  of 
troops  excellent.  Received  proceedings  of  court-martial  sentenc- 
ing a  dozen  men  to  death  ;  too  severe  and  unjust. 

Sept.  27. —  .  .  .  He  (the  President)  sent  a  carriage  for  me  to 
meet  him  and  the  cabinet  at  Gen.  Scott's  office.  Before  we  got 
through  the  general  "  raised  a  row  with  me."  I  kept  cool.  In 
the  course  of  the  conversation  he  very  strongly  intimated  that  we 
were  no  longer  friends.  I  said  nothing,  merely  looked  at  him 
and  bowed.  He  tried  to  avoid  me  when  we  left,  but  I  walked 
square  up  to  him,  looked  him  fully  in  the  eye,  extended  my  hand, 
and  said,  "  Good-morning,  Gen.  Scott."  He  had  to  take  my  hand, 
and  so  we  parted.  As  he  threw  down  the  glove  and  I  took  it  up, 
I  presume  war  is  declared.  So  be  it.  I  have  one  strong  point — 
that  I  do  not  care  one  iota  for  my  present  position. 

Sept.  — . — I  started  early  in  the  day  to  be  present  at  the  pre- 
sentation of  colors  to  McCall's  division  by  Gov.  Curtin.  It  was 
long  and  fatiguing.  I  then  rode  over  the  Chain  Bridge  and  back 
by  Fort  Corcoran.  When  I  returned  I  had  a  great  deal  of  tedious 
work  to  do  and  fell  asleep  in  the  midst  of  it.  This  morning  I 
have  had  a  siege  with  the  Sanitary  Committee,  and  don't  think  I 
will  ride  out  to-day.  How  did  you  learn  that  Buckner  and  Smith 
have  joined  the  rebel  army  ?  I  can  hardly  believe  it.  You  have 
no  idea  how  the  men  brighten  up  now  when  I  go  among  them. 
I  can  see  every  eye  glisten.  Yesterday  they  nearly  pulled  me  to 
pieces  in  one  regiment.  You  never  heard  such  yelling.  Did  I 
tell  you  that  Lawrence  Williams  has  been  promoted  and  leaves 
my  staff  1  I  do  not  in  the  least  doubt  his  loyalty.  I  enclose  a 
card  just  received  from  "  A.  Lincoln  "  ;  it  shows  too  much  defer- 
ence to  be  seen  outside. 

No  date. — The  enemy  were  stampeded  this  morning,  and  while 


92  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

they  were  in  terror  I  rapidly  occupied  all  their  positions  and  had 
the  satisfaction  of  going  out  with  our  advance  and  seeing  the  last 
of  their  cavalry. 

No  date  {Sept.  30?) — A  most  unhappy  thing  occurred  last 
night  among  some  of  W.  F.  Smith's  raw  regiments.  They  three 
times  mistook  each  other  for  the  enemy  and  fired  into  each 
other.  At  least  six  were  killed  and  several  wounded,  besides  two 
horses  were  killed.  It  is  dangerous  to  make  night-marches  on 
that  account ;  but  Smith's  march  was  delayed  by  causes  I  could 
not  foresee,  and  it  was  necessary  to  advance  at  all  hazards.  The 
manoeuvring  in  advance  by  our  flanks  alarmed  the  enemy,  whose 
centre  at  Munson's  and  Upton's  was  much  advanced.  As  soon 
as  our  pickets  informed  me  that  he  had  fallen  back  I  rushed  for- 
ward and  seized  those  very  important  points.  We  now  hold  them 
in  strength  and  have  at  once  proceeded  to  fortify  them.  The 
moral  effect  of  this  advance  will  be  great,  and  it  will  have  a  bad 
influence  on  the  troops  of  the  enemy.  They  can  no  longer  say 
that  they  are  flaunting  their  dirty  little  flag  in  my  face,  and  I  hope 
they  have  taken  their  last  look  at  Washington.  .  .  . 


CHAPTER  VI. 

The  defence  of  Washington— Growth  of  an  array — Foresight  of  the  magni« 
tude  of  the  war — Memorandum  to  the  President — Letter  to  Secretary 
Cameron. 

Reference  to  any  good  map  will  show  that  Washington  is 
situated  on  the  point  of  confluence  of  the  main  Potomac  with  the 
Anacostia,  or  eastern  branch  thereof.  The  ground  occupied  by 
the  city  is  low,  though  by  no  means  flat,  and  is  commanded  from 
all  directions  by  heights  within  the  easy  range  of  even  modem 
field-artillery. 

Moral  and  political  considerations  alike  rendered  it  necessary 
to  retain  the  seat  of  government  in  Washington,  although  its 
situation  was  the  most  unfavorable  that  could  be  conceived 
under  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  So  far  as  military  opera- 
tions were  concerned,  it  would  have  been  well  could  the  capi- 
tal have  been  removed  to  New  York  ;  but  this  was  impossible. 
The  defence  of  the  capital,  containing,  as  it  did,  the  execu- 
tive and  legislative,  the  archives  of  the  government,  the  public 
buildings,  the  honor  and  prestige  of  the  nation,  and,  as  time 
moved  on,  vast  amounts  of  military  supplies,  was  a  matter  of 
vital  importance,  and  it  was  necessary  to  protect  it  not  only 
from  capture,  but  also  against  insult.  To  accomplish  this  with- 
out fortifications  would  have  required  an  army  of  great  strength, 
so  large  as  to  detract  fatally  from  the  efficiency  of  the  active 
armies.  It  was,  therefore,  absolutely  necessary  to  resort  to  for- 
tifications, and  circumstances  required  that  they  should  be  of  a 
temporary  nature. 

As  I  have  already  stated,  I  found  the  capital  entirely  de- 
fenceless, and  at  once  determined  upon  the  system  to  be  pur- 
sued. 

During  the  months  of  August  and  September  the  work  of 
organization  and  fortification  proceeded  as  rapidly  as  circum- 
stances permitted.  Naturally  there  were  frequent  reports  as  to 
the  movements  of  the  enemy  in  advance  ;  sometimes  of  intended, 

93 


94  McCLELLAM'S  OWN  STOkY, 

crossings  below  Alexandria,  sometimes  above  the  city.  In  the 
early  part  of  August,  when  we  were  so  entirely  open  to  attack, 
these  reports  gave  me  no  little  uneasiness.  And  even  after  we 
had  reached  a  point  of  comparative  security,  so  far  as  the  safety 
of  Washington  was  concerned,  the  probable  effects  of  an  inroad 
in  any  form  into  Maryland  rendered  it  necessary  to  be  constant- 
ly on  the  alert  and  take  every  precaution  to  prevent  a  crossing 
of  the  river.  As  soon  as  Gen.  Banks  came  under  my  command, 
Aug.  20,  186 1,  I  directed  him  to  cross  to  the  eastern  bank  of 
the  Monocacy,  leaving  one  regiment  to  observe  the  Potomac 
above  Harper's  Ferry,  and  another  to  watch  it  from  the  latter 
place  to  the  mouth  of  the  Monocacy,  and  to  put  his  main  body 
not  far  from  Hyattstown  ;  thus  placing  him  in  position  to  oppose 
any  attempt  at  crossing  the  river  above  Harper's  Ferry,  while  his 
junction  with  the  force  at  Washington  would  be  secure  of  the  ene- 
my's crossing  below  the  Monocacy.  In  his  former  position,  at 
Sandy  Hook,  he  was  too  far  from  Washington.  He  was  ordered 
to  move  his  surplus  and  heavy  stores  from  Frederick  to  Balti- 
more or  Washington,  and  his  surplus  transportation  to  the  latter 
place ;  to  oppose  any  passage  of  the  Potomac  by  the  enemy,  pro- 
vided it  would  not  involve  his  separation  from  the  main  army ; 
also  to  support  Stone  when  necessary,  and,  if  forced  back  by 
superior  numbers,  to  retreat  on  Rockville.  He  was  also  in- 
structed to  protect  the  railroad  as  well  as  practicable  without 
making  too  heavy  detachments. 

Up  to  this  period,  and  until  about  the  beginning  of  Septem- 
ber, there  was  reason  to  apprehend  some  attack  of  the  enemy  ; 
at  all  events,  reports  to  that  effect  frequently  arrived,  and  we 
were  not  for  some  time  in  condition  to  offer  successful  resist- 
ance. 

It  must  never  be  forgotten  that  at  this  period  the  spirit  of 
secession  was  active  and  bitter  in  many  parts  of  Maryland. 
Baltimore  had  given  too  full  proof  of  the  feeling  of  a  large 
part  of  its  inhabitants  of  all  classes ;  in  the  northern  and  west- 
ern counties  there  were  many  secessionists,  though  the  Union 
party  was  also  strong  ;  but  in  the  southern  and  southeastern 
counties  the  Union  people  were  very  few.  In  this  condition 
of  afifairs,  with  our  communications  and  lines  of  supply  all  pass- 
ing through  Maryland,  it  was  too  dangerous  to  even  allow  small 
portions  of  the  enemy  to  cross  the  river,  and  it  was  therefore 


POSITION  OF  FORCES.  95 

necessary  to  employ  much  larger  numbers  of  troops  on  the  fron- 
tier, on  the  line  of  communication,  and  in  observation  through 
the  State  than  would  have  been  the  case  if  Pennsylvania,  for 
example,  had  been  the  frontier  State. 

Before  the  middle  of  August  Gen.  Smith's  pickets  were  thrown 
across  the  river  at  the  Chain  Bridge.  On  the  3d  of  Sept.,  while 
reviewing  troops  east  of  the  Capitol,  I  received  despatches  to 
the  effect  that  the  enemy  had  appeared  in  force  opposite  the 
Chain  Bridge  and  towards  Great  Falls  ;  also  that  they  were  pro- 
bably on  the  point  of  advancing  along  their  whole  line.  After 
giving  the  necessary  orders  at  other  points  I  rode  to  Gen. 
Smith's  headquarters  at  the  Chain  Bridge,  and  determined  to 
move  his  brigade  across  the  river  during  the  night  and  to  en- 
trench a  position  on  the  Virginia  side  as  the  surest  method  of 
saving  the  bridge.  I  ordered  up  King's  brigade  and  a  battery 
to  support  him,  and  directed  the  cavalry  and  reserve  artillery 
and  other  troops  in  the  city  to  be  held  in  readiness  to  move 
up  if  necessary.  McCall  was  also  ordered  to  send  an  addi- 
tional regiment  and  two  more  guns  to  Great  Falls,  and  to  hold 
the  rest  of  his  command  in  readiness  to  move  either  towards 
Great  Falls  or  the  Chain  Bridge,  as  circumstances  might  require. 
Early  during  the  night  Smith  crossed  and  at  once  commenced 
the  construction  of  Forts  Maury  and  Ethan  Allen — positions 
which  I  had  already  examined. 

On  the  28th  of  Sept.  Smith's  division  marched  out  to  Falls 
Church,  which  movement,  in  t:onnection  with  an  advance  of  a 
part  of  Franklin's  division  on  the  Leesburg  pike,  of  McDowell's 
on  Ball's  cross-roads  and  Upton's  Hill,  and  of  Porter's  on  Hall's 
Hill,  determined  the  evacuation  of  Munson's,  Upton's,  and  Tay- 
lor's hills  by  the  enemy's  outposts,  who  had  now  seen  the  last  of 
Washington  until  Early's  raid  in  1864. 

Taylor's,  Perkins's,  Upton's,  and  Munson's  hills  were  occupied 
by  a  brigade  of  McDowell's  division,  who  at  once  commenced 
work  upon  the  necessary  fortifications.  The  occupation  of  this 
point  was  of  great  importance,  as  it  gave  ample  room  in  rear  for 
moving  the  troops  in  any  direction,  and,  in  the  event  of  my  decid- 
ing to  attack  Centreville,  would  enable  me  to  reach  that  place  in 
one  march  from  the  outposts.  Immediately  after  the  occupation 
of  this  new  position  the  camp  of  Porter's  division  was  moved 
forward  to  Hall's  and  Munson's  hills,  in  easy  supporting  dis- 


96  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

tance  ;  a  few  days  later  Smith's  division  was  moved  to  Marshall's 
Hill.  To  support  this  movement  McCall's  division  was,  on  the 
9th  of  Oct.,  brought  to  the  Virginia  side  to  Langley's,  and  a  few 
days  later  to  Prospect  Hill.  He  was  replaced  at  Tennallytown 
by  a  brigade  of  BuelFs  division. 

On  the  5th  of  Oct.  Heintzelman's  division  was  formed,  and 
posted  at  Fort  Lyon,  south  of  Alexandria,  forming  the  left  of 
our  lin^  on  the  Virginia  side.  During  the  months  of  September 
and  October  Sickles's  brigade,  posted  on  the  south  side  of  the 
eastern  branch,  sent  frequent  reconnoissances  into  lower  Mary- 
land. 

Early  in  November  Hooker's  division  was  organized  and 
moved  to  the  vicinity  of  Budd's  Ferry  to  observe  the  enemy, 
who  were  active  in  that  direction,  and  to  prevent,  as  far  as 
possible,  the  crossing  of  the  river  by  emissaries  of  the  enemy. 
So  that  early  in  November  the  positions  of  the  command  were 
as  follows  : 

On  the  right  McCall's  division  at  Prospect  Hill ;  Smith's 
division  at  Mackall's  Hill,  holding  Lewinsville  by  an  advanced 
guard  ;  Porter's  division  at  Minor's  and  Hall's  hills ;  McDowell 
at  Arlington,  with  one  brigade  at  Munson's  Hill,  etc.;  Blenker's 
division  at  Hunter's  Chapel  ;  Franklin  at  the  Theological  Semi- 
nary ;  Heintzelman  at  Fort  Lyon.  There  were  thus  on  the  Vir- 
ginia side  seven  divisions,  so  posted  as  to  cover  every  avenue  of 
approach,  and  able  to  afford  assistance  to  every  point  that  could 
be  attacked,  and,  moreover,  in  position  to  advance  on  Centre- 
ville  if  necessary.  On  the  north  of  Washington,  Buell's  division 
held  Tennallytown  and  the  other  important  points  (supported 
by  Casey's  provisional  brigades),  the  reserve  artillery  and  the 
cavalry  depots  ;  while  Stone's  division  at  Poolesville,  and  Banks's 
division  at  Darnestown,  observed  the  upper  river  and  were  in 
position  to  retire  upon  Washington  if  attacked  by  superior  forces. 
Hooker  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Budd's  Ferry.  By  the  30th  of 
Sept.  several  of  the  principal  works  were  pretty  well  advanced, 
but  a  great  deal  still  remained  to  be  done  to  complete  the 
system. 

I  shall  refer  elsewhere  to  the  inconveniences  resulting  from 
the  position  of  Washington  and  the  nature  of  the  frontier  formed 
by  the  Potomac  ;  in  this  place  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  as  the 
Potomac  is  often  fordable,  and  many  of  the  inhabitants  on  the 


THE  REGULAR  ARMY.  97 

Maryland  side  were  favorable  to  the  enemy,  it  was  a  very  neces- 
sary and  difficult  task  to  guard  it  properly. 

In  view  of  its  exposed  position  and  immense  political  import- 
ance it  was  impossible  to  allow  Washington  to  be  endangered  ; 
so  that  a  garrison  was  always  necessary,  and  all  that  could  be 
done  was  to  make  the  fortifications  so  strong  that  a  compara- 
tively small  garrison  would  suffice.  After  the  experience  of  the 
first  Bull  Run  the  executive  would  never  consent  to  leave  Wash- 
ington without  a  large  garrison. 

At  this  juncture  it  would  have  been  wise  to  adopt  a  definite 
policy  with  regard  to  the  regular  army — viz.,  either  virtually 
break  it  up,  as  a  temporary  measure,  and  distribute  its  members 
among  the  staff  and  regiments  of  the  volunteer  organization,  thus 
giving  the  volunteers  all  possible  benefit  from  the  discipline  and 
instruction  of  the  regulars,  or  to  fill  the  regular  regiments  to  their 
full  capacity  and  employ  them  as  a  reserve  at  critical  junctures. 
I  could  not  secure  the  adoption  of  either  plan,  and  a  middle 
course  was  followed  which  resulted  less  favorably  than  either  of 
the  plans  indicated  ;  but  it  must  be  said  that,  even  as  things  were, 
the  regulars  were  in  every  way  of  immense  benefit  to  the  service. 
As  a  general  rule  the  officers  (and,  of  course,  the  non-commis- 
sioned officers)  of  the  volunteer  regiments  were  entirely  ignorant 
of  their  duties,  and  many  were  unfitted,  from  their  education, 
moral  character,  or  mental  deficiences,  for  ever  acquiring  the 
requisite  efficiency. 

These  latter  were  weeded  out  by  courts-martial  and  boards 
of  examination,  while  the  others  were  instructed  pari  passu  as 
they  instructed  their  men.  The  small  number  of  regular  officers 
available  rendered  it  impossible  to  furnish  all  the  staff  officers 
from  among  them  ;  so  that  a  regiment  was  very  fortunate  if  its 
colonel  was  a  regular  officer,  and  a  brigade  was  lucky  to  have 
a  regular  as  its  commander.  The  generals  were  usually,  and 
colonels  always,  obliged  to  appoint  their  staff  officers  from  civil 
life,  and  instruct  them  as  best  they  could.  It  speaks  wonders  for 
the  intelligence  and  military  aptitude  of  our  people  that  so  much 
was  well  done  in  this  way  on  both  sides.  Many  of  these  raw 
civilians,  who  were  men  of  pride,  intelligence,  and  education,  soon 
became  excellent  officers ;  though  these  very  men  most  keenly 
regretted  their  lack  of  a  good  military  education  in  early  life. 

The  frequent  reviews  I  held  at  Washington  were  not  at  all  for 


98  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

the  benefit  of  the  public,  nor  yet  for  the  purpose  of  examining 
the  individual  condition  of  the  men,  although  I  did  much  of  that 
even  on  these  occasions — for  a  general  with  a  quick  eye  can  see 
things  when  riding  at  a  gallop  which  would  seem  impossible  to 
a  civilian.  But  they  were  to  accustom  the  regiments  to  move 
together  and  see  each  other,  to  give  the  troops  an  idea  of  their 
own  strength,  to  infuse  esprit  dc  corps  and  mutual  emulation, 
and  to  acquaint  myself  with  the  capacity  of  the  general  officers. 
These  reviews  also  had  a  good  effect  in  accustoming  the  troops 
to  see  me,  although  they  saw  so  much  of  me  in  their  camps  and 
on  the  picket-lines  that  this  was  of  minor  importance.  With  new 
troops  frequent  reviews  are  of  the  greatest  utility  and  produce 
the  most  excellent  effect.  Those  I  held  did  much  towards  mak- 
ing the  Army  of  the  Potomac  what  it  became. 

Some  persons,  who  ought  to  have  known  better,  have  sup- 
posed that  in  organizing  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  I  set  too 
high  a  model  before  me  and  consumed  unnecessary  time  in  striv- 
ing to  form  an  army  of  regulars.  This  was  an  unjustifiable  error 
on  their  part.  I  should,  of  course,  have  been  glad  to  bring  that 
army  to  the  condition  of  regulars,  but  no  one  knew  better  than 
myself  that,  with  the  means  at  my  command,  that  would  have 
been  impossible  within  any  reasonable  or  permissible  time. 

What  I  strove  for  and  accomplished  was  to  bring  about  such 
a  condition  of  discipline  and  instruction  that  the  army  could  be 
handled  on  the  march  and  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  that  orders 
could  be  reasonably  well  carried  out.  No  one  cognizant  of  the 
circumstances  and  possessed  of  any  knowledge  of  military  affairs 
can  honestly  believe  that  I  bestowed  unnecessary  time  and  labor 
upon  the  organization  and  instruction  of  that  army  whose  cour- 
age, discipline,  and  efficiency  finally  brought  the  war  to  a  close. 

In  spite  of  all  the  clamor  to  the  contrary,  the  time  spent  in  the 
camps  of  instruction  in  front  of  Washington  was  well  bestowed, 
and  produced  the  most  important  and  valuable  results.  Not  a 
day  of  it  was  wasted.  The  fortifications  then  erected,  both  di- 
rectly and  indirectly,  saved  the  capital  more  than  once  in  the 
course  of  the  war,  and  enabled  the  army  to  manoeuvre  freely  and 
independently.  The  organization  and  discipline  then  acquired, 
and  so  much  improved  during  the  campaign  of  the  Peninsula 
which  converted  the  men  into  veterans,  enabled  the  army  to  pass 
gloriously  through  the  many  sanguinary  conflicts  and  harassing 


MUTINY.  99 

campaigns  that  proved  necessary  to  terminate  the  war.  They 
learned  to  gain  victories  and  to  withstand  defeat.  No  other  army 
we  possessed  could  have  met  and  defeated  the  Confederate  Army 
of  Northern  Virginia.  And,  with  all  the  courage,  energy,  and 
intelligence  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  it  probably  would  not 
have  been  equal  to  that  most  difficult  task  without  the  advantage 
it  enjoyed  during  its  sojourn  in  the  camps  around  Washington. 
Early  in  August  more  or  less  trouble  and  discontent  appeared 
among  some  of  the  regiments  in  relation  to  their  term  of  service. 
In  fact,  many  of  those  who  enlisted  during  the  first  excitement 
had  no  expectation  of  engaging  for  a  long  war,  and,  when  they 
found  the  three-months  regiments  returning  home  in  large  num- 
bers, became  much  dissatisfied.  In  two  cases  this  culminated 
in  open  mutiny  on  the  part  of  large  numbers  of  the  officers  and 
men.  In  the  case  of  one  regiment  I  brought  them  to  order  by 
directing  the  transportation  of  sixty-three  of  the  number  as  pri- 
soners to  the  Dry  Tortugas,  to  labor  there  during  the  remainder 
of  the  war.  In  the  case  of  the  other  the  following  order  was 
issued : 


Special  Order  No.  27. 

Headquarters,  Division  of  the  Potomac, 
Washington,  Aug.  14,  1861. 

The  general  commanding  this  division  learns  with  the  utmost 
pain  that  decided  insubordination,  if  not  open  mutiny,  has  been 
displayed  by  a  large  portion  of  the  79th  regiment  of  N.  Y. 
Volunteers.  The  general  commanding  does  not  desire,  at  this 
time,  to  enter  into  any  statement  of  the  alleged  grievances  of  this 
regiment,  further  than  to  say  that  he  has  examined  into  them 
and  finds  that  they  are  frivolous  and  unfounded.  This  conduct 
is  disgraceful  in  the  extreme,  both  as  soldiers  and  citizens,  to  all 
concerned  in  it.  Those  who  have  participated  in  this  shameful 
affair  have  utterly  disgraced  themselves ;  they  are  unworthy  of 
the  sympathy  of  their  fellow-soldiers,  and  in  acting  such  a  part 
at  a  time  when  the  services  of  every  true  man  are  required  by  the 
nation  they  have  rendered  themselves  liable  to  the  suspicion  that 
motives  of  the  basest  cowardice  have  controlled  their  conduct. 
This  regiment  has  chosen  to  make  the  issue,  and  the  command- 
ing general  is  prepared  to  meet  it.  The  regiment  is  ordered  to 
return  at  once  to  its  duty.  All  members  of  the  regiment,  whether 
officers  or  privates,  who  do  not  forthwith,  on  this  order  being 
read  to  them,  return  to  duty  will  be  required  to  lay  down  their 
arms  and  will  be  placed  in  arrest,  and,  refusing  to  do  so,  they 


lOO  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

will  be  fired  upon.     Of  those  who  obey  the  order  and  return  to 
their  duty  the  mutinous  ringleaders  will  alone  be  punished. 

The  regiment  will  be  deprived  of  its  colors,  which  will  not 
be  returned  until  its  members  have  shown  by  their  conduct  in 
camp  that  they  have  learned  the  first  duty  of  soldiers — obe- 
dience— and  have  proved  on  the  field  of  battle  that  they  are  not 
wanting  in  courage.  A  copy  of  this  order,  with  the  names  of  the 
officers  and  men  implicated,  will  be  sent  to  the  governor  of  New 
York,  to  be  filed  among  the  State  archives. 

(Signed)  Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj\'Gen.  Commanding. 

The  execution  of  this  order  was  entrusted  to  Col.  A.  Porter, 
who  took  with  him  a  battalion,  a  squadron,  and  a  battery  of 
regulars.  They  were  drawn  up  in  front  of  the  mutineers,  who 
promptly  submitted.  The  ringleaders  were  placed  in  irons  and 
the  rest  marched  over  to  the  Virginia  side.  In  the  course  of  a 
couple  of  months  I  was  able  to  return  their  colors  to  this  regi- 
ment as  a  reward  for  good  conduct  in  camp  and  in  several  skir- 
mishes. The  regiment  afterwards  accompanied  Sherman's  expe- 
dition to  Carolina  and  did  good  service.  I  think  the  trouble 
arose  rather  from  poor  officers  than  from  the  men. 

As  an  additional  means  of  preserving  discipline,  and  to  guard 
the  camps  from  the  presence  of  spies,  the  following  order  was 
issued : 

General  Order  No.  4. 

Headquarters,  Division  of  the  Potomac, 

Washington,  Aug.  16,  1861. 

All  passes,  safe-conducts,  and  permits  heretofore  given  to 
enter  or  go  beyond  the  lines  of  the  United  States  army  on  the 
Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac  are  to  be  deemed  revoked,  and 
all  such  passes  will  emanate  only  from  the  War  Department,  the 
headquarters  of  the  United  States  army  or  of  this  division,  or 
from  the  provost-marshal  at  Washington.  Similar  passes  will 
be  required  to  cross  the  river  by  bridge  or  boat  into  Virginia. 
A  strict  military  surveillance  will  be  exercised  within  the  lines 
of  the  army  on  the  northern  side  of  the  Potomac,  and  upon 
all  the  avenues  of  every  kind,  by  land  and  water,  leading  to  and 
from  the  city  of  Washington,  as  well  over  persons  holding  passes 
as  all  others.  Passes  will  not  be  required  at  or  within  the  lines 
of  the  army  north  of  the  Potomac,  but  disloyal  or  suspected  per- 
sons will  be  liable  to  arrest  and  detention  until  discharged  by 
competent  authority  ;  and  contraband  articles  will  be  seized. 

Officers  and  soldiers  of  the  army  will  obtain  passes  as  here- 


MEMORANDUM.  lOI 

tofore  ordered.  All  complaints  of  improper  seizures  or  searci\e5> 
made,  or  purporting  to  be  made,  under  military  authority  will  Tie 
received  by  the  proper  brigade  commanders  or  provost-marshals, 
who  will  at  once  investigate  the  same,  and  in  each  instance  make 
report  to  these  headquarters. 

By  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan. 

(Signed)  S.  Williams, 

Asst  Adjt.'Gen, 

In  describing  the  steps  taken  toward  the  creation  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  it  will  be  well  to  begin  with  the  Memorandum  of 
Aug.  2,  1 86 1,  submitted  to  the  President  at  his  request.  In  my 
Report  the  date  is  erroneously  given  as  of  the  4th.  This  paper 
was  necessarily  prepared  in  great  haste,  as  my  time  was  fully  oc- 
cupied both  by  day  and  night  with  the  incessant  labors  incident 
to  my  assumption  of  the  command  and  the  dangerous  condition 
of  affairs. 

MEMORANDUM. 

The  object  of  the  present  war  differs  from  those  in  which 
nations  are  usually  engaged,  mainly  in  this  :  that  the  purpose  of 
ordinary  war  is  to  conquer  a  peace  and  make  a  treaty  on  advan- 
tageous terms  ;  in  this  contest  it  has  become  necessary  to  crush 
a  population  sufficiently  numerous,  intelligent,  and  warlike  to 
constitute  a  nation.  We  have  not  only  to  defeat  their  armed 
and  organized  forces  in  the  field,  but  to  display  such  an  over- 
whelming strength  as  will  convince  all  our  antagonists,  especially 
those  of  the  governing,  aristocratic  class,  of  the  utter  impossibil- 
ity of  resistance.  Our  late  reverses  make  this  course  imperative. 
Had  we  been  successful  in  the  recent  battle  (Manassas)  it  is  pos- 
sible that  we  might  have  been  spared  the  labor  and  expense  of  a 
great  effort  ;  now  we  have  no  alternative.  Their  success  will 
enable  the  political  leaders  of  the  rebels  to  convince  the  mass  of 
their  people  that  we  are  inferior  to  them  in  force  and  courage, 
and  to  command  all  their  resources.  The  contest  began  with  a 
class,  now  it  is  with  a  ^  people ;  our  military  success  can  alone 
restore  the  former  issue. 

By  thoroughly  defeating  their  armies,  taking  their  strong 
places,  and  pursuing  a  rigidly  protective  policy  as  to  private 
property  and  unarmed  persons,  and  a  lenient  course  as  to  pri- 
vate soldiers,  we  may  well  hope  for  a  permanent  restoration  of  a 
peaceful  Union.  But  in  the  first  instance  the  authority  of  the 
government  must  be  supported  by  overwhelming  physical  force. 

Our  foreign  relations  and  financial  credit  also  imperatively 
demand  that  the  military  action  of  the  government  should  be 
prompt  and  irresistible. 


•  '» 


.  •  •    • 


>  • 


• 


•.     •  • 


•  •    • 


• 


•     • 


I02         :\':\''AfcCLELLAJ\rS  OWN  STORY. 

•        •  • 

.•  •/•*•.*•  Xl^t  rebels  have  chosen  Virginia  as  their  battle-field,  and  it 
•..\Wems  proper  for  us  to  make  the  first  great  struggle  there.     But 
while  thus  directing  our  main  efforts,  it  is  necessary  to  diminish 
the   resistance  there  offered  us  by  movements  on  other  points 
both  by  land  and  water. 

Without  entering  at  present  into  details,  I  would  advise  that 
a  strong  movement  be  made  on  the  Mississippi,  and  that  the 
rebels  be  driven  out  of  Missouri. 

As  soon  as  it  becomes  perfectly  clear  that  Kentucky  is  cor- 
dially united  with  us,  I  would  advise  a  movement  through  that 
State  into  Eastern  Tennessee  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  the 
Union  men  of  that  region  and  of  seizing  the  railroads  leading 
from  Memphis  to  the  East. 

The  possession  of  those  roads  by  us,  in  connection  with  the 
movement  on  the  Mississippi,  would  go  far  towards  determining 
the  evacuation  of  Virginia  by  the  rebels.  In  the  meantime  all 
the  passes  into  Western  Virginia  from  the  East  should  be  securely 
guarded,  but  I  would  advise  no  movement  from  that  quarter 
towards  Richmond,  unless  the  political  condition  of  Kentucky 
renders  it  impossible  or  inexpedient  for  us  to  make  the  move- 
ment upon  Eastern  Tennessee  through  that  State.  Every  effort 
should,  however,  be  made  to  organize,  equip,  and  arm  as  many 
troops  as  possible  in  Western  Virginia,  in  order  to  render  the 
Ohio  and  Indiana  regiments  available  for  other  operations. 

At  as  early  a  day  as  practicable  it  would  be  well  to  protect 
and  reopen  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad.  Baltimore  and 
Fort  Monroe  should  be  occupied  by  garrisons  sufficient  to  retain 
them  in  our  possession. 

The  importance  of  Harper's  Ferry  and  the  line  of  the  Poto- 
mac in  the  direction  of  Leesburg  will  be  very  materially  dimin- 
ished so  soon  as  our  force  in  this  vicinity  becomes  organized, 
strong,  and  efficient,  because  no  capable  general  will  cross  the 
river  north  of  this  city  when  we  have  a  strong  army  here  ready 
to  cut  off  his  retreat. 

To  revert  to  the  West,  it  is  probable  that  no  very  large  addi- 
tions to  the  troops  now  in  Missouri  will  be  necessary  to  secure 
that  State. 

I  presume  that  the  force  required  for  the  movement  down  the 
Mississippi  will  be  determined  by  its  commander  and  the  Presi- 
dent. If  Kentucky  assumes  the  right  position  not  more  than 
20,000  will  be  needed,  together  with  those  that  can  be  raised  in 
that  State  and  Eastern  Tennessee  to  secure  the  latter  region  and 
its  railroads,  as  well  as  ultimately  to  occupy  Nashville. 

The  Western  Virginia  troops,  with  not  more  than  five  to  ten 
thousand  from  Ohio  and  Indiana,  should,  under  proper  manage- 
ment, suffice  for  its  protection. 

When  we  have  reorganized  our  main  army  here  10,000  men 
^ught  to  be  enough  to  protect  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad 


MEMORANDUM.  IO3 

and  the  Potomac ;  5,000  will  garrison  Baltimore,  3,000  Fort 
Monroe,  and  not  more  than  20,000  will  be  necessary  at  the 
utmost  for  the  defence  of  Washington. 

For  the  main  army  of  operations  I  urge  the  following  com- 
position : 

250  regiments  of  infantry,  say,        ....  225,000  men. 

100  field-batteries,  600  guns,           ....  15,000    " 

28  regiments  of  cavalry, 25,500    " 

5  regiments  engineer  troops,       ....  7,500    " 


Total, 273,000 


« 


The  force  must  be  supplied  with  the  necessary  engineer  and 
pontoon  trains,  and  with  transportation  for  everything  save  tents. 
Its  general  line  of  operations  should  be  so  directed  that  water- 
transportation  can  be  availed  of  from  point  to  point  by  means  of 
the  ocean  and  the  rivers  emptying  into  it.  An  essential  feature 
of  the  plan  of  operations  will  be  the  employment  of  a  strong 
naval  force  to  protect  the  movement  of  a  fleet  of  transports 
intended  to  convey  a  considerable  body  of  troops  from  point 
to  point  of  the  enemy's  sea-coast,  thus  either  creating  diver- 
sions and  rendering  it  necessary  for  them  to  detach  largely  from 
their  main  body  in  order  to  protect  such  of  their  cities  as  may 
be  threatened,  or  else  landing  and  forming  establishments  on 
their  coast  at  any  favorable  places  that  opportunity  might  ofifer. 
This  naval  force  should  also  co-operate  with  the  main  army  in 
its  efforts  to  seize  the  important  seaboard  towns  of  the  rebels. 

It  cannot  be  ignored  that  the  construction  of  railroads  has 
introduced  a  new  and  very  important  element  into  war,  by  the 
great  facilities  thus  given  for  concentrating  at  particular  posi- 
tions large  masses  of  troops  from  remote  sections,  and  by  creat- 
ing new  strategic  points  and  lines  of  operations. 

It  is  intended  to  overcome  this  difficulty  by  the  partial  ope- 
rations suggested,  and  such  other  as  the  particular  case  may 
require.  We  must  endeavor  to  seize  places  on  the  railways  in 
the  rear  of  the  enemy's  points  of  concentration,  and  we  must 
threaten  their  seaboard  cities,  in  order  that  each  State  may  be 
forced,  by  the  necessity  of  its  own  defence,  to  diminish  its  contin- 
gent to  the  Confederate  army. 

The  proposed  movement  down  the  Mississippi  will  produce 
important  results  in  this  connection.  That  advance  and  the 
progress  of  the  main  army  at  the  East  will  materially  assist 
each  other  by  diminishing  the  resistance  to  be  encountered 
by  each. 

The  tendency  of  the  Mississippi  movement  upon  all  questions 
connected  with  cotton  is  too  well  understood  by  the  President 
and  cabinet  to  need  any  illustration  from  me. 

There  is  another  independent  movement  that  has  often  been 


I04  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

suggested  and  which  has  always  recommended  itself  to  my 
judgment.  I  refer  to  a  movement  from  Kansas  and  Nebraska 
through  the  Indian  Territory  upon  Red  river  and  Western  Texas 
for  the  purpose  of  protecting  and  developing  the  latent  Union 
and  free-State  sentiment  well  known  to  predominate  in  Western 
Texas,  and  which,  like  a  similar  sentiment  in  Western  Virginia, 
will,  iJf  protected,  ultimately  organize  that  section  into  a  free 
State.  How  far  it  will  be  possible  to  support  this  movement  by  an 
advance  through  New  Mexico  from  California  is  a  matter  which 
I  have  not  sufficiently  examined  to  be  able  to  express  a  decided 
opinion.  If  at  all  practicable,  it  is  eminently  desirable,  as  bring- 
ing into  play  the  resources  and  warlike  qualities  of  the  Pacific 
States,  as  well  as  identifying  them  with  our  cause  and  connecting 
the  bond  of  union  between  them  and  the  general  government. 

If  it  is  not  departing  too  far  from  my  province,  I  will  venture 
to  suggest  the  policy  of  an  ultimate  alliance  and  cordial  under- 
standing with  Mexico  ;  their  sympathies  and  interests  are  with 
us,  their  antipathies  exclusively  against  our  enemies  and  their 
institutions.  I  think  it  would  not  be  difficult  to  obtain  from  the 
Mexican  government  the  right  to  use,  at  least  during  the  present 
contest,  the  road  from  Guaymas  to  New  Mexico  ;  this  conces- 
sion would  very  materially  reduce  the  obstacles  of  the  column 
moving  from  the  Pacific.  A  similar  permission  to  use  their  terri- 
tory for  the  passage  of  troops  between  the  Panuco  and  the  Rio 
Grande  would  enable  us  to  throw  a  column  of  troops  by  a  good 
road  from  Tampico,  or  some  of  the  small  harbors  north  of  it, 
upon  and  across  the  Rio  Grande,  without  risk  and  scarcely  firing 
a  shot. 

To  what  extent,  if  any,  it  would  be  desirable  to  take  into  ser- 
vice and  employ  Mexican  soldiers  is  a  question  entirely  political, 
on  which  I  do  not  venture  to  offer  an  opinion. 

The  force  I  have  recommended  is  large  ;  the  expense  is  great. 
It  is  possible  that  a  smaller  force  might  accomplish  the  object  in 
view,  but  I  understand  it  to  be  the  purpose  of  this  great  nation  to 
re-establish  the  power  of  its  government  and  restore  peace  to  its 
citizens  in  the  shortest  possible  time. 

The  question  to  be  decided  is  simply  this  :  Shall  we  crush  the 
rebellion  at  one  blow,  terminate  the  war  in  one  campaign,  or  shall 
we  leave  it  as  a  legacy  for  our  descendants  ? 

When  the  extent  of  the  possible  line  of  operations  is  con- 
sidered, the  force  asked  for  for  the  main  army  under  my  com- 
mand cannot  be  regarded  as  unduly  large ;  every  mile  we 
advance  carries  us  further  from  our  base  of  operations  and 
renders  detachments  necessary  to  cover  our  communications, 
while  the  enemy  will  be  constantly  concentrating  as  he  falls 
back.  I  propose,  with  the  force  which  I  have  requested,  not 
only  to  drive  the  enemy  out  of  Virginia  and  occupy  Richmond, 
but  to  occupy  Charleston,  Savannah,  Montgomery,    Pensacola, 


RETROSPECTIVE.  IO5 

Mobile,  and  New  Orleans ;  in  other  words,  to  move  into  the 
heart  of  the  enemy's  country  and  crush  the  rebellion  in  its 
very  heart. 

By  seizing  and  repairing  the  railroads  as  we  advance  the  diffi- 
culties of  transportation  will  be  materially  diminished.  It  is  per- 
haps unnecessary  to  state  that,  in  addition  to  the  forces  named  in 
this  memorandum,  strong  reserves  should  be  formed,  ready  to 
supply  any  losses  that  may  occur. 

In  conclusion,  I  would  submit  that  the  exigencies  of  the 
treasury  may  be  lessened  by  making  only  partial  payments  to 
our  troops  when  in  the  enemy's  country,  and  by  giving  the  obli- 
gations of  the  United  States  for  such  supplies  as  may  there  be 
obtained. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.-Gen, 

In  the  light  of  the  experience  of  the  twenty-two  years  which 
have  elapsed  since  this  Memorandum  was  so  hastily  prepared, 
and  after  full  consideration  of  all  the  events  of  the  long  and 
bloody  war  which  followed  it,  I  still  hold  to  the  soundness  of  the 
views  it  expressed.  Had  the  measures  recommended  been  car- 
ried into  effect  the  war  would  have  been  closed  in  less  than  one- 
half  the  time  and  with  infinite  saving  of  blood  and  treasure.  So 
far  as  I  know,  it  was  the  first  general  plan  of  operations  proposed 
upon  a  scale  adequate  to  the  case.  It  recognized  the  importance 
of  railways  as  a  new  element  in  strategy  ;  it  emphasized  the  vital 
importance  of  the  railway  system  leading  from  Memphis  to  the 
East ;  it  marked  out  the  advantages  to  be  derived  from  coast 
expeditions  ;  it  stated  the  part  to  be  played  upon  the  Mississippi ; 
it  foreshadowed  the  marches  upon  Atlanta  and  the  sea-coast ;  it 
called  for  a  force  which  the  future  proved  to  be  fully  within  our 
means,  and  which  would  have  crushed  the  rebellion  in  one  or  two 
campaigns. 

In  this  connection  I  would  refer  to  the  letters  written  by  me 
to  Gen.  Scott  from  Columbus  in  April  and  May  of  1861. 

The  following  was  received  Sept.  7  and  answered  Sept.  8 : 

"  General  :  It  is  evident  that  we  are  or.  the  eve  of  a  great 
battle — one  that  may  decide  the  fate  of  the  country.  Its  success 
must  depend  on  you  and  the  means  that  may  be  placed  at  your 
disposal.  Impressed  with  this  belief,  and  anxious  to  aid  you 
with  all  the  power  of  my  department,  I  will  be  glad  if  you  will 
inform  me  how  I  can  do  so.     Very  truly  yours, 

7th  Sept.,  1861.  Simon  Cameron. 

Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 


I06  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Washington,  Sept.  8,  1861. 

Hon.  Simon  Catnerony  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir  :  Your  note  of  to-day  is  received.  I  concur  in  your 
views  as  to  the  exigency  of  the  present  occasion.  I  appreciate 
and  cordially  thank  you  for  your  offers  of  support,  and  will  avail 
myself  of  them  to  the  fullest  extent  demanded  by  the  interests  of 
the  country.  The  force  of  all  arms  within  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  Washington  is  nearly  85,000  men.  The  effective  portion  of 
this  force  is  more  than  sufficient  to  resist  with  certain  success  any 
attacks  on  our  works  upon  the  other  side  of  the  river.  By  calling 
in  the  commands  of  Gens.  Banks  and  Stone  it  will  probably  be 
sufficient  to  defend  the  city  of  Washington  from  whatever  direc- 
tion it  may  be  assailed.  It  is  well  understood  that,  although  the 
ultimate  design  of  the  enemy  is  to  possess  himself  of  the  city  of 
Washington,  his  first  efforts  will  be  directed  towards  Baltimore, 
with  the  intention  of  cutting  our  line  of  communication  and  sup- 
plies, as  well  as  to  arouse  an  insurrection  in  Maryland.  To 
accomplish  this  he  will  no  doubt  show  a  certain  portion  of  his 
force  in  front  of  our  positions  on  the  other  side  of  the  Potomac, 
in  order  to  engage  our  attention  there  and  induce  us  to  leave  a 
large  portion  of  our  force  for  the  defence  of  those  positions.  He 
will  probably  also  make  demonstrations  in  the  vicinity  of  Acquia 
Creek,  Mathias  Point,  and  the  Occoquan,  in  order  still  further  to 
induce  us  to  disseminate  our  forces.  His  main  and  real  move- 
ment will  doubtless  be  to  cross  the  Potomac  between  Washington 
and  Point  of  Rocks,  probably  not  far  from  Seneca  Mills,  and  most 
likely  at  more  points  than  one.  His  hope  will  be  so  to  engage 
our  attention  by  the  diversions  already  named  as  to  enable  him 
to  move  with  a  large  force  direct  and  unopposed  on  Baltimore. 
I  see  no  reason  to  doubt  the  possibility  of  his  attempting  this 
with  a  column  of  at  least  100,000  effective  troops.  If  he  has  only 
130,000  under  arms,  he  can  make  all  the  diversions  I  have  men- 
tioned with  his  raw  and  badly  organized  troops,  leaving  100,000 
effective  men  for  his  real  movement.  As  I  am  now  situated  I 
can  by  no  possibility  bring  to  bear  against  this  column  more  than 
70,000,  and  probably  not  over  60,000,  effective  troops. 

In  regard  to  the  composition  of  our  active  army,  it  must  be 
borne  in  mind  that  the  very  important  arms  of  cavalry  and  artil- 
lery had  been  almost  entirely  neglected  until  I  assumed  command 
of  this  army,  and  that  consequently  the  troops  of  these  arms, 
although  greatly  increased  in  numbers,  are  coniparatively  raw 
and  inexperienced,  most  of  the  cavalry  not  being  yet  armed  or 
equipped.  In  making  the  foregoing  estimate  of  numbers  I  have 
reduced  the  enemy's  force  below  what  is  regarded  by  the  War 
Department  and  other  official  circles  as  its  real  strength,  and 
have  taken  the  reverse  course  as  to  our  own.      Our  situation. 


LETTER    TO  MR.  CAMERON.  107 

then,  is  simply  this  :  if  the  commander-in-chief  of  the  enemy 
follows  the  simplest  dictates  of  the  military  art  we  must  meet 
him  with  greatly  inferior  forces.  To  render  success  possible  the 
divisions  of  our  army  must  be  more  ably  led  and  commanded 
than  those  of  the  enemy.  The  fate  of  the  nation  and  the  suc- 
cess of  the  cause  in  which  we  are  engaged  must  be  mainly 
decided  by  the  issue  of  the  next  battle  to  be  fought  by  the 
army  now  under  my  command.  I  therefore  feel  that  the  inte- 
rests of  the  nation  demand  that  the  ablest  soldiers  in  the  service 
should  be  on  duty  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  that,  con- 
tenting ourselves  with  remaining  on  the  defensive  for  the  present 
at  ali  other  points,  this  army  should  at  once  be  reinforced  by 
all  the  effective  troops  that  the  East  and  West  and  North  can 
furnish.  In  view  of  these  facts  I  respectfully  urge  that  all  the 
available  troops  in  Ohio,  Indiana,  Michigan,  Wisconsin,  and  at 
least  ten  thousand  Illinois  troops  (there  being  fifteen  thousand 
there  unarmed),  and  all  those  of  the  Eastern  and  Northern  States, 
be  at  once  directed  to  report  to  me  for  duty.  I  beg  leave  to 
repeat  the  opinion  I  have  heretofore  expressed  :  that  the  Ariny 
of  the  Potomac  should  number  not  less  than  three  hundred  thou- 
sand men  in  order  to  insure  complete  success  and  an  early  termi- 
nation of  the  war.  I  also  request  that  Brig.-Gens.  Don  Carlos 
Buell  and  J.  F.  Reynolds — both  appointed  upon  my  recommenda- 
tion and  for  the  purpose  of  serving  with  me — be  at  once  assigned 
to  duty  with  this  army  ;  also  that  no  general  officer  appointed 
upon  my  recommendation  shall  be  assigned  away  from  this  army 
without  my  consent  ;  that  I  shall  have  full  control  of  all  officers 
and  troops  within  this  department ;  and  that  no  one,  whatever 
his  rank  may  be,  shall  give  any  orders  respecting  my  command 
without  my  being  first  consulted.  Otherwise  it  is  evident  that 
I  cannot  be  responsible  for  the  success  of  our  arms. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.    U.  S.  A. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Organization  of  the  army — What  an  army  is — Infantry,  artillery,  cavalry, 
engineer  troops — The  staflf  and  its  departments — Details  of  the  crea- 
tion of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

The  organized  armies  of  modem  times  consist  of  two  well- 
defined  parts  :  the  fighting  force,  or  "  line,"  and  "  the  staff," 
which  directs,  inspects,  and  supplies  the  former.  The  line  is 
made  up  of  infantry,  artillery,  cavalry,  and  engineer  troops. 

As  INFANTRY  Can  move  wherever  a  man  can  set  his  foot,  can 
fight  on  all  kinds  of  ground,  gives  the  most  destructive  fire  of  all 
the  arms,  and  is  the  least  expensive  and  most  easily  instructed, 
it  constitutes  the  great  bulk  of  all  large  armies,  and  is  decidedly 
the  most  important. 

With  equally  good  generals,  that  army  which  has  the  best 
infantry  is  pretty  sure  to  win,  for  no  reasonable  superiority  in 
the  other  arms  of  service  can  compensate  for  marked  inferiority 
in  the  infantry. 

The  essential  qualities  of  good  infantry  are  :  the  ability  to 
make  long  marches,  with  their  full  equipment,  without  strag- 
gling ;  accuracy  of  fire  ;  confidence  in  their  ability  to  use  the 
bayonet — for  this  will  prevent  their  breaking  upon  the  very  near 
approach  of  a  hostile  line — coolness,  intelligence,  determination, 
and  mutual  confidence  in  attacking  or  receiving  an  attack  ;  the 
ability  to  reform  rapidly  after  a  successful  attack,  and  to  rally 
when  driven  back,  either  after  a  repulsed  attack  or  when  obliged 
to  retreat  from  a  defensive  position  ;  the  power  of  enduring  fa- 
tigue, exposure,  and  hunger. 

Next  in  importance  is  the  artillery,  whose  work  it  is  to 
open  the  way  for,  and  cover  the  movements  of,  the  other  arms  by 
destroying  the  enemy's  defences  at  long  range,  silencing  his  artil- 
lery, and  demoralizing  his  infantry  ;  or,  at  short  ranges,  to  crush 
them  by  a  rapid  fire  of  case  and  shrapnel.  It  is  also  a  part  of  its 
duty  to  cover  the^ retreat  of  beaten  infantry,  and  to  assist  in  the 
operations  of  detached  bodies  of  cavalry. 

io8 


AI^MY  ORGANIZATION,  lOg 

There  is  thus  heavy  artillery,  whose  business  it  is  to  handle 
siege-guns  and  those  used  in  permanent  defences,  and  field-artil- 
lery, who  accompany  an  army  in  the  field.  Field-artillery  is 
made  up  of  three  kinds — viz.,  the  mounted  batteries,  whose  can- 
noneers usually  march  on  foot,  but  during  rapid  movements  ride 
upon  the  carriages  and  caissons,  and  which  serve  with  the  regi- 
ment, division,  and  army  corps  ;  the  horse-batteries,  whose  can- 
noneers are  provided  with  saddle-horses,  and  which  are  especially 
intended  for  service  with  the  cavalry  ;  and  the  batteries  of  posi- 
tion, consisting  of  the  heaviest  field-guns,  intended  especially  for 
action  against  the  enemy's  material  defences. 

The  field-guns,  at  the  period  of  which  I  write,  were  generally 
provided  in  the  ratio  of  at  least  two  and  a  half  guns  to  each 
thousand  infantry,  and  three  or  four  guns  to  each  thousand 
cavalry,  the  exact  proportion  depending  somewhat  on  the  na- 
ture of  the  field  of  war  and  the  quality  of  the  troops.  With 
raw  troops  a  somewhat  larger  proportion  is  necessary  than  with 
veterans. 

The  technical  information  necessary  for  the  artillery  officers 
and  men  renders  it  difficult  to  improvise  thoroughly  efficient 
artillery. 

The  CAVALRY  is  an  indispensable  part  of  every  army.  It  not 
only  takes  part,  as  occasion  demands,  in  general  battles,  but,  with 
a  due  proportion  of  horse-artillery,  is  capable  of  independent 
action,  even  at  long  distances  from  the  main  body  of  the  army. 
Upon  it  devolves  to  a  great  extent  the  duty  of  observing  and  dis- 
covering the  positions,  movements,  and  strength  of  the  enemy,  as 
well  as  masking  those  of  its  own  army.  It  is  capable  of  making 
extensive  inroads  into  the  enemy's  country,  and  is  usually  em- 
ployed to  threaten  and  attack  his  communications,  supply-trains, 
etc.  The  modern  improvements  in  firearms  have  certainly  af- 
fected the  employment  of  cavalry  on  the  field  of  battle  against 
infantry  and  artillery,  but  have  not  lessened  the  importance  of  its 
other  duties.  Nor  is  it  probable  that  the  number  of  these  arms 
will  in  the  future  be  materially  diminished.  The  employment  of 
breech-loading  small  arms  has  added  -very  much  to  the  strength 
of  cavalry,  and  it  is  certain  that  in  future  wars  large  bodies  of 
cavalry  will  be  employed  as  mounted  infantry.  That  is,  they  will 
use  their  horses  to  move  rapidly  to  the  point  of  action,  and  fight 
on  foot.     Under  ordinary  circumstances  it  has  usually  been  re- 


no  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

garded  as  advisable  to  furnish  cavalry  to  the  extent  of  one-sixth 
to  one-eighth  of  the  infantry  force. 

To  render  cavalry  efficient  it  is  necessary  that  the  officers  and 
men  should  be  of  a  superior  order  of  intelligence,  and  that  they 
should  fully  understand  the  care  of  their  horses,  which  should 
be  active  and  enduring.  Officers  and  men  should  be  excellent 
horsemen,  skilful  in  the  use  of  their  weapons,  and  thoroughly 
instructed  in  the  work  of  reconnoissance.  It  is  really  much 
more  difficult  to  form  reliable  cavalry  at  short  notice  than  to 
instruct  artillery  and  infantry. 

It  is  the  duty  of  engineer  troops  to  conduct  siege  opera- 
tions ;  to  supervise  and  construct  temporary  defences  and  the 
works  for  their  attack  ;  to  construct,  repair,  and  destroy  bridges 
of  all  kinds,  fords,  roads,  etc.  The  repair  and  destruction  of  rail- 
ways should  also  be  under  their  direction.  The  performance  of 
these  duties  requires  a  superior  order  of  men,  skilled  in  some 
mechanical  trade,  and  needs  careful  instruction.  In  ordinary 
cases  the  engineer  troops  should  number  about  one-fortieth  of 
the  infantry. 

To  direct  the  movements  and  supply  the  wants  of  the  com- 
batants is  the  business  of  the  staff,  which  in  modern  armies  is 
a  complicated  and  extensive  organization.     It  includes  : 

isi.    TIu  Adjutant-Generar s  Department. 

This  department  issues,  in  the  name  of  the  commander,  all 
orders  relating  to  the  discipline,  instruction,  movements,  and 
supply  of  the  troops,  whether  directly  to  the  fighting  organiza- 
tion or  to  the  other  staff  corps ;  and  through  it  pass  to  the 
commander  all  written  reports  on  such  subjects.  It  has  direct 
charge  of  all  returns  relating  to  the  force  and  condition  of  the 
command,  and  to  it  all  such  returns  are  directed. 

2d,  The  Inspector-GeneraV s  Department. 

To  this  department  is  committed  the  work  of  ascertaining  by 
rigid  and  careful  inspection  the  exact  condition  of  the  various 
elements  comprising  the  command ;  verifying  returns  and  re- 
ports ;  ascertaining  the  exact  state  of  discipline,  instruction, 
morale y  and  general  efficiency  ;  the  number  present  for  duty  ; 
the  observation  of  sanitary  rules  ;  the  quantity  and  condition 
of  transportation,  arms,  ammunition,  equipment,  clothing,  food, 


ARMY  ORGANIZA TION.  Ill 

medical  stores,  etc.  As  so  much  depends  upon  the  faithful  and 
intelligent  discharge  of  these  very  important  duties,  it  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  that  the  officers  of  this  corps  should  be  tho- 
roughly instructed  soldiers  of  long  experience,  the  highest  integ- 
rity, the  greatest  intelligence,  with  great  industry  and  method  in 
the  performance  of  these  duties. 

3^.  AideS'de-Camp, 

These  constitute  the  personal  staff  of  the  general  to  whom 
they  are  attached.  They  carry  his  orders  and  watch  over  their 
execution.  They  should  be  thorough  soldiers,  of  great  activity, 
intelligence,  and  devotion. 

4M.  The  Engineers, 

In  our  service  the  conduct  of  reconnoissances  falls  chiefly 
upon  them  ;  the  selection  of  positions,  especially  for  defence ; 
the  conduct  of  all  siege  operations,  and  the  construction  of  all 
field-works,  temporary  defences,  bridges,  roads,  etc. 

On  the  part  of  these  officers  the  most  thorough  knowledge  of 
the  highest  branches  of  the  profession,  accurate  judgment  of 
ground,  and  great  intelligence  are  required.  They  cannot  suc- 
cessfully be  improvised. 

5M.   The  Quartermaster  s  Department, 

Upon  this  department  devolves  the  purchase  of  horses  for  all 
military  purposes,  the  providing  of  all  means  of  transportation, 
ambulances,  litters,  the  supply  of  clothing,  camp  equipage,  cook- 
ing utensils,  the  forage  for  animals,  the  conduct  of  supply-trains, 
and,  in  fact,  providing  all  material  that  is  not  especially  assigned 
to  some  other  department. 

dth.   The  Commissary  Department, 

It  is  the  duty  of  this  department  to  provide  and  have  ready 
for  issue  at  the  proper  time  and  place  all  articles  of  food  required 
by  the  army.  The  task  of  this  department  is  often  very  difficult 
and  of  the  greatest  possible  importance,  for  upon  its  proper  per- 
formance the  success  of  the  army  depends. 

7M.   The  Medical  Department, 
Upon  this  department  devolves  the  general  charge  of  the 


1 1  2  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

sanitary  condition  of  troops  in  camps  and  on  the  march ;  the 
care  of  the  sick  and  wounded  ;  the  use  of  ambulances  and  lit- 
ters ;  the  providing  of  medical  stores  and  comforts  ;  the  installa- 
tion and  direction  of  all  military  hospitals. 

8M.   The  Ordnance  Corps, 

This  corps  furnishes  all  arms,  ammunition,  artillery  carriages 
and  harness,  cavalry  equipment,  and  makes  in  the  field  all  re- 
pairs which  cannot  be  executed  by  the  armorers  and  mechanics 
of  the  regiments  of  the  line. 

^th.   The  Pay  Department 
Its  duty  is  to  pay  the  troops  at  proper  times. 

joth.   The  Department  of  Military  Justice, 

It  has  the  supervision  of  all  proceedings  by  court-martial, 
military  commission,  etc. 

wth.   The  Signal  Corps, 

It  is  in  charge  of  the  various  systems  of  communicating 
intelligence  by  signals,  telegraph,  balloons,  etc. 

In  large  armies,  with  numerous  staff  corps  charged  with  such 
manifold  and  important  duties,  it  has  been  found  necessary  to 
establish  the  position  of  chief  of  staff,  who  might  supervise 
and  co-ordinate  the  various  branches,  and  thus  relieve  the  com- 
manding general  from  a  multiplicity  of  detail.  This  office, 
found  in  all  European  armies,  had  never  been  established  in 
our  own.  I  soon  found  it  necessary  for  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac. The  officer  holding  such  a  confidential  relation  with  his 
commander  should  always  be  a  man  possessing  the  latter's  entire 
confidence.  I  therefore  selected  for  this  place  Col.  R.  B.  Marcy, 
inspector-general  of  the  army,  whose  rank  was  also  superior  to 
that  of  all  the  staff  officers  on  duty  with  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac. 

My  orders  for  the  movements  and  fighting  of  the  troops 
were  generally  issued  through  the  chief  of  staff. 

One  of  my  earliest  measures  was  the  formation  of  perma- 
nent BRIGADES  of  infantry.  The  new  levies  of  infantry,  upon 
their  arrival  in  Washington,  were  formed  into  provisional  bri- 
gades and  placed  in  camps  in  the  suburbs  on   the   Maryland 


GEN,   SCOTT S   VIEWS.  1 13 

side  of  the  river,  for  equipment,  instruction,  and  discipline.  As 
soon  as  regiments  were  in  fit  condition  for  transfer  to  the  forces 
across  the  Potomac  they  were  assigned  to  the  brigades  serv- 
ing there.  Brig.-Gen.  F.  J.  Porter  was  at  first  assigned  to  the 
charge  of  the  provisional  brigades.  Brig.-Gen.  A.  E.  Bumside 
was  the  next  officer  assigned  this  duty,  from  which,  however, 
he  was  soon  relieved  by  Brig.-Gen.  Casey,  who  continued  in 
charge  of  the  newly  arriving  regiments  until  the  Army  of  the  Po- 
tomac departed  for  the  Peninsula,  in  March,  1862.  The  newly 
arriving  artillery  troops  reported  to  Brig.-Gen.  William  F.  Bar- 
ry, the  chief  of  artillery,  and  the  cavalry  to  Brig.-Gen.  George 
Stoneman,  the  chief  of  cavalry,  and  were  also  retained  on  the 
Maryland  side  until  their  equipment  and  armament  were  essen- 
tially completed  and  some  rudimentary  instruction  obtained. 

A  few  days  after  reaching  Washington  Gen.  Scott  asked 
me  what  I  intended  to  do  in  the  way  of  organization.  I  re- 
plied that  I  wished  the  force  under  my  command  to  be  organ- 
ized as  and  denominated  an  army  instead  of  a  geographical 
division ;  that  I  should  first  form  brigades,  then  divisions,  and, 
when  in  the  field,  army  corps.  My  reason  for  postponing  the 
formation  of  the  latter  was  that  with  untried  general  officers  it 
would  be  too  dangerous  an  experiment  to  appoint  any  to  such 
high  and  important  commands  without  first  proving  them  in 
actual  campaign  and  in  battle. 

He  objected  to  all  I  proposed,  save  the  brigade  formation, 
saying  that  under  our  system  and  regulations  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  administer  the  affairs  of  an  "army,"  and  that  the 
retention  of  the  system  and  nomenclature  of  geographical  divi- 
sions and  departments  was  an  absolute  necessity  ;  he  also  object- 
ed to  the  formation  of  divisions  as  unnecessary,  for  the  reason 
that  in  Mexico  he  had  only  brigades. 

I  called  to  his  attention  the  fact  that,  all  the  world  over,  fight- 
ing forces  were  organized  as  armies ;  that  I  had  done  so  in  West 
Virginia ;  and  that  his  force  in  Mexico  was  a  very  small  affair 
in  comparison  with  that  soon  to  be  collected  in  front  of  Wash- 
ington. He  did  not  change  his  views.  So  I  quietly  went  to 
work  in  my  own  way.  The  result  was  that  on  the  20th  of  Aug. 
the  order  constituting  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  issued ; 
and  in  addition  to  the  two  departments  originally  under  my 
command,  the  troops  in  the  Shenandoah,  Maryland,  and  Dela- 


1 1 4  McCLELLAN'S  O  WN  STOR  Y, 

ware  were  also  included  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  the  old 
departments  being  broken  up  and  merged  in  the  newly  created 
army.  .Thus  I  had  command  of  all  the  troops  on  the  line  of 
the  Potomac  and  as  far  to  the  rear  as  Baltimore  and  Fort 
Delaware. 

During  the  first  days  of  August  I  procured  the  passage 
of  an  act  authorizing  the  appointment  of  additional  aides-de- 
camp to  general  officers ;  these  might  be  taken  from  civil  life 
or  from  the  army,  and  were  to  be  of  no  higher  grade  than  that 
of  colonel.  I  used  this  law  not  only  to  furnish  the  requisite 
number  of  actual  aides-de-camp,  but  also  to  give  additional 
pay  and  rank  in  the  regular  army  to  officers  whose  duty  made 
such  a  step  necessary.  For  instance,  I  gave  to  Maj.  Barry,  chief 
of  artillery,  and  to  Maj.  H.  J.  Hunt,  commanding  the  reserve 
artillery,  the  grade  of  colonel ;  to  Van  Vliet  and  Clarke  the 
same.  When  the  organization  of  the  brigades  was  well  estab- 
lished, and  the  troops  somewhat  disciplined  and  instructed, 
divisions  of  three  brigades  each  were  gradually  formed. 

I  intended  to  compose  each  division  of  three  infantry  bri- 
gades of  four  regiments  each,  four  batteries,  and  one  regiment 
of  cavalry,  which  would  have  given  a  nominal  strength  of  12,000 
infantry,  1,000  cavalry,  and  24  guns,  or  an  effective  of  about 
10,000  infantry,  700  cavalry,  and  24  guns.  It  was  determined  to 
collect  whatever  regular  infantry  could  be  obtained  to  form  the 
nucleus  of  a  reserve.  The  measures  taken  for  recruiting  these 
regiments  were  so  insufficient  and  the  results  so  meagre  that 
as  late  as  the  30th  of  April,  1862,  there  were  only  4,600  men 
in  the  71  companies,  regular  infantry,  on  duty  with  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac.  These,  together  with  the  5th  and  loth  N.  Y. 
Volunteers,  finally  formed  part  of  the  5th  corps  as  a  division 
under  Brig.-Gen.  Sykes,  3d  U.  S.  Infantry. 

The  creation  of  an  adequate  artillery  establishment  for  an 
army  of  so  large  proportions  was  a  formidable  undertakings  and 
had  it  not  been  that  the  country  possessed  in  the  regular  service 
a  body  of  accomplished  and  energetic  artillery  officers,  the  task 
would  have  been  almost  hopeless. 

The  charge  of  organizing  this  most  important  arm  was  con- 
fided to  Maj.  (afterwards  Brig.-Gen.)  William  F.  Barry,  chief  of 
artillery,  whose  industry  and  zeal  achieved  the  best  results  The 
following  principles  were  adopted  as  the  basis  of  organization : 


ARM  Y  ORGAN IZA  TION.  \  \  5 

1.  That  the  proportion  of  artillery  should  be  in  the  proportion 
of  at  least  two  and  one-half  pieces^o  1,000  iiiejv*^  be  expanded, 
if  possible,  to  three  pieces  to  1,000  men. 

2.  That  the  proportion  of  rifled  guns  should  be  restricted  to 
the  system  of  the  United  States  ordnance  department ;  and  of 
Parrott  and  the  "  smooth-bores  "  (with  the  exception  of  a  few 
howitzers  for  special  service)  to  be  exclusively  the  12-pounder 
gun,  of  the  model  of  1857,  variously  called  the  "  gun-howitzer," 
the  **  light  twelve-pounder,"  or  the  "  Napoleon." 

3.  That  each  field-battery  should,  if  practicable,  be  composed 
of  six  guns,  and  none  to  be  less  than  four  guns,  and  in  all  cases 
the  guns  of  each  battery  should  be  of  uniform  calibre. 

4.  That  the  field-batteries  were  to  be  assigned  to  divisions,  and 
not  to  brigades,  and  in  the  proportion  of  four  to  each  division, 
of  which  one  was  to  be  a  battery  of  regulars,  the* remainder  of 
volunteers,  the  captain  of  the  regular  battery  to  be  the  com- 
mandant of  artillery  of  the  division.  In  the  event  of  several  divi- 
sions constituting  an  army  corps,  at  least  one-half  of  the  divi- 
sional artillery  was  to  constitute  the  reserve  artillery  of  the  corps. 

5.  That  the  artillery  reserve  of  the  whole  army  should  consist 
of  100  guns,  and  should  comprise,  besides  a  sufficient  number  of 
light  "  mounted  batteries,"  all  the  guns  of  position,  and,  until  the 
cavalry  were  massed,  all  the  horse-artillery. 

6.  That  the  amount  of  ammunition  to  accompany  field-bat- 
teries was  not  to  be  less  than  400  rounds  per  gun. 

7.  A  siege-train  of  50  pieces.  This  was  subsequently  ex- 
panded, for  special  service  at  the  siege  of  Yorktown,  to  very 
nearly  100  pieces,  and  comprised  the  unusual  calibres  and  enor- 
mously heavy  weight  of  metal  of  two  200-pounders,  five  100- 
pounders,  and  ten  13-inch  sea-coast  mortars. 

As  has  been  before  stated,  the  whole  of  the  field-artillery  of  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac,  July  28,  1861,  was  comprised  of  9  imper- 
fectly equipped  batteries  of  30  guns,  650  men,  and  400  horses. 
In  March,  1862,  when  the  whole  army  took  the  field,  it  consisted 
of  92  batteries  of  520  guns,  12,500  men,  and  11,000  horses,  fully 
equipped  and  in  readiness  for  active  field  service ;  of  the  whole 
force  30  batteries  were  regulars  and  62  batteries  volunteers. 
During  the  short  period  of  seven  months  all  of  this  immense 
amount  of  material  was  manufactured  or  purchased,  and  issued 
by  the  ordnance  department  and  placed  in  the  hands  of  the  artil- 


I  t6  AffCrK/./.MX'S  OlliV  S7Vf^)\ 

lory  tnmps  nftcr  their  arrival  in  Washington,  Al>out  one-fourth 
of  all  the  volunteer  hatterien  Imnighl  with  them  from  their 
r\^«*|»ortive  State?*  a  few  guns  anvl  earriagcs,  but  they  were  nearly 
all  of  !*ueh  iHHviliar  ealihrc  as  U^  lAek  uniformity  with  the  more 
u^oilern  and  nu^re  servietMhlc  or\ltum^  with  which  the  other  bat- 
t\  tio^  Nvetv  anuixl,  ami  they  therefore  had  to  be  withdrawn  and 
h  pla\  \hI  bv  motx^  suitable  tuatcriAt  While  about  one-sixth  came 
^U(»|vhvHl  N\ah  ho^^Ys  ami  hAmc^s^  less  thjm  one-tenth  were  appa- 
tvt\tly  tullv  e\^ui|»|H\l  Kmt  st^rxk^  when  they  reported;  and  every 
vMve  e\vt\  v^  thi»v  K\|uirt\l  th^f  $up|4y  of  many  deficiencies  of 
n^atvnaK  x^uvl  xvry  cvtt^xx'  in^ruction  in  the  theory  and  practice 
\^t  theiv  v^vv^>i^l  Amv 

Vhv'  v^^vvAt^^^v^  vy\  tN<^  IVttin^uU  by  die  Army  of  rf»e  Fotomjc 
o>mm\^^v\\^  >fc  ^*^  A  tV^U  ik^l-.xrttlktT  fvwe'  ot'  49  Kitteries  of  ^74 
pms  r>>  ^.^^  w^>^  be  ^Kk>i  the  ftekJkirtilleTT  ot  Frakiia's 
tihiXNN^  >>^  Mv  tVi^v^^ji  v\vr|\Sv  w^k^  KXflKd  a  tev  days  bctbce 
rho  t\<v^XT.^'^  yS{  \  vs?:itv^«tJt.  Ntt  w-jss  skX  d^s«mhiried  £raan  as 
;  rpnsfvv^  tyNt:  >*c^tw  *:jfcvx  jstbcr  tSie  KkStae  cc  Wi^HB^KC^  and 

h*»mV'*vx  ^*  ^^'^'^A  >fc^^  iic«flfted  aa  Jhtsie.  a  le^  ^cis  Wiser  ose 

>H^l^-!^**^!k^    'X'^   s*tx  rmv*^  >iit«i  Ae  aewr  iK  die  fiamsok  ac 

WV**   t;^'^''  >fcvtv  ^'^  ;mfixx   is{^>r  vjn^ncscsit  iRiiiuingcr  :k^- 
\i;-'.v^wx  ***v^>^>  y»^  >iitK>»fe  ^x^.^^  :^skwr  »sc  joil  ^imk  jnacrii^ainr 

>,ss*.  >vv\  *^ir.  >  ^'^  V  :^^<v>^^^^      ?il4*rx  ^  »t  ^^aUnaagr.  iftriW 


V 


.,xvsN  -  NX  ^^**^  ^'b^^  mi^"  w*v:  t<!:iipwsg^  4iii£  jffiBxnst  i  nayiJit 


ARM  y  ORGANIZA  TION,  \  I  7 

Gen.  Hunt  retained  the  position  of  chief  of  artillery  until 
the  close  of  the  war.  I  regarded  hira  as  the  best  living  com- 
mander of  field-artillery.  He  was  a  man  of  the  utmost  coolness 
in  danger,  thoroughly  versed  in  his  profession,  an  admirable 
organizer,  a  soldier  of  a  very  high  order.  As  I  write  this  (July, 
1882)  Hunt  is  likely  to  be  retired  as  a  colonel — a  man  whose 
services  in  any  other  army  would  have  been  rewarded  by  titles, 
high  rank,  and  ample  pension.  He  is  one  of  the  most  marked 
instances  within  my  knowledge  of  the  highest  merit  and  services 
passed  over  unacknowledged  and  unrewarded. 

Hunt's  merits  consisted  not  only  in  organizing  his  command 
to  the  best  advantage,  but  in  using  it  on  the  field  of  battle  with 
the  utmost  skill  and  power.  The  services  of  this  most  distin- 
guished officer  in  reorganizing  and  refitting  the  batteries  prior  to 
and  after  Antietam,  his  gallant  and  skilful  conduct  on  that  field, 
at  Malvern,  and  in  fact  during  the  whole  Peninsular  campaign, 
merit  the  highest  encomiums  in  my  power  to  bestow. 

The  country  in  which  operations  were  to  be  conducted  was  so 
obstructed  by  forests  as  to  present  few  favorable  opportunities  for 
the  employment  of  long-range  artillery.  I  therefore  desired  to 
compose  the  artillery  two-thirds  of  the  Napoleon  gun — ^a  light  12- 
pounder — and  one-third  of  rifled  guns.  But  the  facilities  for  the 
construction  of  army  guns  were  so  limited,  while  those  for  iron 
guns  were  comparatively  so  great,  that  in  the  first  armament  it 
was  impossible  to  observe  these  proportions,  so  that  when  the 
army  took  the  field  less  than  one-third  were  Napoleon  guns,  and 
it  was  only  during  the  reorganization  for  the  Antietam  campaign 
that  it  was  possible  to  approach  the  proportions  originally  fixed 
upon.  Our  experience  in  battle  proved  the  correctness  of  these 
views.  The  shrapnel  and  canister  from  the  Napoleons  was  always 
most  destructive  to  the  hostile  infantry  at  close  range.  We  sel- 
dom saw  the  enemy  at  long  range  in  large  bodies. 

On  the  20th  of  Aug.,  186 1,  I  had  80  guns.  The  returns  of 
Oct.  15  show  that  there  were  27  batteries  of  divisional  artillery. 
Of  these  17  were  regulars  and  10  volunteers,  and,  as  several  had 
only  4  guns,  there  were  not  more  than  140  guns  in  all,  and  of 
these  the  rifled  guns  comj>osed  a  good  deal  more  than  two-thirds. 

Including  Banks  and  Dix,  there  were  33  batteries,  of  which  19 
regulars  'and  14  volunteers,  making  not  over  168  guns  in  all,  tx)  a 
force  of  143,647  present  on  Oct.  15,  and  out  of  these  guns  must 


Il8  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

be  provided  those  required  for  the  garrisons  of  Washington  and 
Baltimore,  and  the  defences  of  the  line  of  the  Potomac. 

In  regard  to  the  140  guns,  they  belonged  to  a  force  of  about 
120,000  men,  and  out  of  the  number  would  come  those  required 
for  the  garrison  of  Washington  and  the  defences  of  the  Potomac. 

It  was  not  until  after  this  date  that  artillery  material  and 
equipment  flowed  in  with  any  considerable  rapidity,  so  that,  even 
disregarding  the  question  of  instruction,  it  was  not  until  after  the 
season  for  active  operations  had  passed  that  a  sufficient  number 
of  equipped  batteries  were  disposable  to  finish  the  requisite 
reserve  and  divisional  artillery.  The  mass  of  the  artillery  was  not 
in  condition  to  move  until  the  following  April,  and  even  then 
several  of  the  volunteer  batteries  were  deficient  in  instruction. 

The  difficulties  attending  the  organization  of  a  suitable  cav- 
alry FORCE  were  very  great,  and  it  cannot  be  said  that  they  were 
ever  satisfactorily  overcome. 

The  newly  arriving  regiments  reported  to  Gen.  Stoneman,  the 
chief  of  cavalry,  and,  as  with  the  artillery  and  infantry,  were,  as 
far  as  circumstances  would  permit,  retained  for  a  certain  time  on 
the  north  bank  of  the  Potonjac.  There  was  at  first  a  total  lack 
of  equipment  for  the  cavalry,  and  it  was  very  long  before  this 
difficulty  was  removed.  So  great  was  the  lack  of  cavalry  arms 
that  I  was  obliged  to  organize  Rush's  regiment  (6th  Penn.)  as 
lancers,  it  being  impossible  to  provide  other  weapons. 

Many  of  the  officers  and  men  were  quite  ignorant  of  the 
management  of  horses,  and  could  not  even  ride  well.  More- 
over, there  was  too  little  appreciation  on  the  part  of  the  govern- 
ment of  the  necessity  and  advantages  of  that  arm  of  service. 
With  the  cavalry,  as  with  the  other  arms  of  service,  every  effort 
was  made  to  weed  out  inefficient  and  incompetent  officers  by 
means  of  courts-martial  and  boards  of  examination. 

As  rapidly  as  possible  every  cavalry  soldier  was  armed  with  a 
sabre  and  revolver,  and  at  least  two  squadrons  in  each  regiment 
with  the  carbine.* 

It  was  intended  to  assign  at  least  one  regiment  of  cavalry  to 
each  infantry  division  so  long  as  the  division  organization  was 
the  highest,  and,  when  army  corps  should  be  formed,  to  attach 

*  On  the  margin  of  his  manuscript  Gen  McClellan  has  written,  **  Here 
uotc  experience  in  West  Virginia." 


ARM  Y  ORGAN IZA  TION,  1 1 9 

a  strong  brigade  of  cavalry  to  its  headquarters,  leaving  with  the 
division  only  enough  for  the  necessary  duty  ;  also  to  form  a  gene- 
ral cavalry  reserve.  On  the  15th  of  Oct.  there  were  serving  with 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  including  General  Banks's  command, 
one  regiment  and  two  companies  of  regular  cavalry,  and  eleven 
regiments  of  volunteer  cavalry.  When  the  army  took  the  field 
there  were  on  its  rolls  four  regiments  and  two  companies  of  regu- 
lar cavalry,  eighteen  regiments  and  five  companies  of  volunteer 
cavalry,  besides  four  regiments  yet  unprovided  with  horses. 

Of  these  there  went  to  the  Peninsula  the  regulars  and  four 
regiments  and  five  companies  of  volunteers,  making  eight  regi- 
ments and  seven  companies  ;  and  there  remained  with  Gen.  Banks 
and  at  Washington  twenty-one  regiments,  besides  the  four  unpro- 
vided with  horses.  Circumstances  beyond  my  control  rendered 
it  impossible  for  me  to  carry  out  my  views  as  to  the  cavalry,  and 
it  was  entirely  against  my  wishes  and  judgment  that  I  was  left  in 
the  field  with  so  small  a  force  of  this  arm.  Of  the  field  force  one 
regiment  of  regulars  were  necessarily  employed  on  provost  duty, 
and  two  companies  of  regulars  and  one  of  volunteers  at  head- 
quarters, leaving  only  three  regiments  of  regulars  and  four  regi- 
ments and  four  companies  of  volunteers,  certainly  not  over  four 
thousand  men  at  most,  to  do  all  the  cavalry  and  mounted  orderly 
duty  for  the  army  of  eleven  divisions — a  force  so  ridiculously 
insufficient,  less  than  one-fourth  of  what  it  should  have  been,  as 
to  render  it  strange  that  the  enemy  contented  themselves  with 
riding  around  our  lines  only  once  on  the  Peninsula. 

As  there  were  but  three  weak  companies  of  engineer  troops 
available,  I  did  the  best  in  my  power  to  supply  the  deficiency  by 
detailing  as  volunteer  engineer  troops  the  15th  and  50th  N.  Y. 
Volunteers,  which  comprised  an  unusual  number  of  sailors  and 
mechanics  in  their  ranks.  These  were  formed  into  an  engineer 
brigade,  and  placed  under  the  command,  first  of  Col.  B.  S.  Alex- 
ander, U.  S.  Corps  of  Engineers,  and  finally  under  that  of  Col. 
D.  V.  Woodbury,  of  the  same  corps.  These  regiments  rendered 
good  service  as  engineer  troops,  and  at  length  became  admirable 
pontoniers,  as  their  services  under  fire  more  than  once  testified. 

We  had  no  bridge  trains  whatever,  for  the  remains  of  the 
India-rubber  pontoon  trains  constructed  for  the  Mexican  war 
were  of  no  possible  use.  Therefore  I  gave  directions  for  the  con- 
struction of  trains  on   the  model  of  the  latest   French   bridge. 


120  McCLELLAN'S  OPP"//  STORV. 

Capt.  Duane,  commanding  the  battalion  of  regular  engineer 
troops,  was  charged  with  this  duty,  as  well  as  the  preparation 
of  the  other  engineer  trains.  Capt.  Duane  performed  this  duty, 
as  he  did  all  that  was  assigned  to  him,  in  the  most  satisfactory 
manner.  He  on  all  occasions  proved  himself  an  admirable  sol- 
dier and  most  excellent  engineer. 

As  already  stated,  I  found  it  necessary  to  create  the  office  of 
CHIEF  OF  STAFF,  and  Selected  Col.  R.  B.  Marcy  for  the  place. 

One  of  the  greatest  defects  in  our  military  system  is  the  lack 
of  a  thoroughly  instructed  staff  corps,  from  which  should  be 
furnished  chief  of  staff  of  armies,  army  corps  and  divisions,  adju- 
tant-general, and  aides-de-camp  and  recruiting  officers.  Perhaps 
the  greatest  difficulty  that  I  encountered  in  the  work  of  creating 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  arose  from  the  scarcity  of  thoroughly 
instructed  staff  officers,  and  I  must  frankly  state  that  every  day  I 
myself  felt  the  di.sadvantages  under  which  I  personally  labored 
from  the  want  of  that  thorough  theoretical  and  practical  educa- 
tion received  by  the  officers  of  the  German  general  staff. 

Under  our  system  of  government,  and  in  the  circumstances 
which  surround  us,  it  is  perhaps  impossible,  certainly  very  im- 
probable, that  this  most  vital  point  can  ever  be  satisfactorily 
covered.  Political  and  personal  considerations  now  control  so 
completely  the  appointment  to  places  in  the  various  branches 
of  the  staff  that  the  chances  are  against  their  being  filled  by  the 
most  competent  men.  In  fact,  judging  from  the  experience  of 
the  past  few  years,  it  is  almost  a  certainty  that  incompetent  men 
will  be  selected  for  these  most  important  positions.  Inefficiency 
and  waste  must  surely  result  from  our  present  system,  even  in 
times  of  peace  ;  but  in  the  event  of  our  being  thrown  into  col- 
lision with  a  well-organized  European  army,  the  results  will  be 
disastrous.  Should  we  ever  have  a  Secretary  of  War  who  under- 
stands his  business  and  possesses  the  full  support  of  the  admin- 
istration and  of  Congress,  the  work  may  be  done.  But  even  if 
commenced  in  the  right  way,  the  danger  would  be  that  in  the 
course  of  time  presidents  would  appoint  to  the  corps  political 
or  personal  favorites,  unless  the  law  so  hedged  in  the  corps  that 
appointments  could  only  be  made  upon  the  recommendation  of 
the  chief  of  the  corps  and  a  board  of  its  officers  after  a  proper 
test  of  their  qualifications.  I  am  very  sure  that  every  general 
officer  who  served  in  the  late  war  will  agree  with  me  that  his 


V 


THE  STAFF.  121 

labors  would  have  been  immensely  lightened  and  the  efficiency 
of  his  command  very  much  increased  if  he  could  have  had  a 
competent  staff  at  his  disposal. 

In  comparison  with  the  difficulties  of  the  work  that  fell  to 
my  lot  the  task  of  a  general  officer  of  the  German  army  seems 
mere  child's  play.  None  of  the  officers  at  my  disposal  had  ever 
seen  large  armies  or  the  operations  of  war  on  a  grand  scale. 
Those  who  came  from  West  Point  had  a  good  education,  so  far 
as  the  theory  of  war  was  concerned.  That  was  a  great  advan- 
tage, but  by  no  means  all  that  was  required.  Those  whom  I 
selected  were  usually  comparatively  young  men,  and,  under  my 
direction,  soon  grasped  the  situation  ;  but  one  very  great  obsta- 
cle arose  from  the  incompetence  of  many  of  the  permanent  heads 
of  departments,  who  found  it  very  difficult  to  get  out  of  the  ruts 
in  which  they  had  been  accustomed  to  move.  To  pass  suddenly 
from  the  small  scale  on  which  the  affairs  of  an  army  of  10,000 
men  in  time  of  peace  had  been  conducted,  to  that  required  for 
an  army  of  half  a  million  in  the  midst  of  a  desperate  war,  was  no 
easy  task. 

I  have  dwelt  somewhat  at  length  on  this  subject  in  order  to 
accentuate  the  difficulties  of  the  position,  and  to  show  that  the 
time  consumed  in  organizing  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  far 
from  unreasonable. 

During  the  war  many  improvements  were  made  in  the  details 
of  the  administration  of  the  staff  corps  ;  but  unfortunately  no 
change  whatever  has  been  made  in  the  organization  of  the  va- 
rious departments,  and  their  only  gain  by  the  war  is  in  the 
personal  experience  of  the  officers  who  served  therein.  When 
they  have  passed  away  there  will  be  little  or  no  trace  left  of  the 
experience  of  the  war. 

Our  own  experience,  and  that  of  other  armies,  agree  in 
determining  the  necessity  for  an  efficient  and  able  staff.  To 
obtain  this  our  staff  establishment  should  be  based  on  correct 
principles,  and  extended  to  be  adequate  to  the  necessities  of  the 
service,  and  should  include  a  system  of  staff  and  line  education. 

Moreover,  the  officers  of  the  staff  should  be  required  occa- 
sionally to  serve  with  troops  as  officers  of  the  line,  and  when  the 
turn  of  each  comes  for  promotion  it  should  be  determined  not 
only  whether  he  is  fit  for  promotion,  but  whether  he  is  fit  to 
remain  in  the  corps. 


122 


McCLellan's  own  STOHV. 


2. 


[The  following  memorandum  by  Gen.  McClellan  was  found 
lying  among  his  manuscript  at  this  point :] 

General  Staff  Corps. — Abolish  the  adjutant-general  and  in- 
spector-general's departments,  and  merge  their  functions  in  those 
of  the  general  staff  corps.  Make  the  chief  of  the  general  staff 
a  major-general,  and  let  the  corps  be  composed  somewhat  as 
follows,  viz.  : 

I.  The  major-general. 

One  brigadier-general,  to  perform  the  present  duties  of 
adjutant-general. 

One  brigadier-general,  to  perform  the  present  duties  of 
inspector-general,  etc. 

One  colonel,  assistant  to  the  chief. 

One  colonel,  in  charge  of   the  department  of  military 
inspection  (maps),  statistics,  etc. 

Two  colonels,  inspection  duty. 

Two  colonels,  assistant  adjutant-generals. 

Two  colonels,  aides-de-camp. 

One  lieutenant-colonel,  assistant  to  chief. 

One  lieutenant-colonel,  military  statistics. 

Two  lieutenant-colonels,  inspection  duty. 

Four  lieutenant-colonels,  assistant  adjutant-generals. 

Three  lieutenant-colonels,  aides-de-camp. 

Four  majors,  inspection  duty. 

Eight  majors,  assistant  adjutant-generals. 

One  major,  statistics. 

Six  majors,  aides-de-camp. 

Four  captains,  assistant  to  chief. 

Four  captains,  military  statistics. 

Eight  captains,  military  inspection. 

Eight  captains,  assistant  adjutant-generals. 

Six  aides,  general  duty. 


8.^ 


II. < 


19- 


30.^ 


The  affairs  of  the  adjutant-general's  department,  while 
I  commanded  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  were  conducted  by 
Brig.-Gen.  S.  Williams,  assisted  by  Lieut.-Col.  James  A.  Hardie, 
aide-de-camp.  Their  management  of  the  department  during  the 
organization  of  the  army  in  the  fall  and  winter  of  1861  and  dur- 
ing its  subsequent  operations  in  the  field  was  excellent. 

They  were,  during  the  entire  period,  assisted  by  Capt.  Rich- 
ard B.  Irwin,  aide-de-camp,  and  during  the  organization  of  the 
army  by  the  following-named  officers  :  Capts.  Joseph  Kirkland, 
Arthur  McClellan,  M.  T.  McMahon,  William  P.  Mason,  and 
William  F.  Diddle,  aides-de-camp. 


yiCLELLAS-S  STAFF.  1  23 

Mt  personal  siAFF,  whcn  we  embarked  for  the  PeDmsula, 
consisted  of  CoL  Thomas  NL  Key,  addition^  aide-de-camp ; 
CoL  £.  H.  Wright,  additional  aide-de-camp  azid  major  6th 
U.  S.  Cavalry :  CoL  T.  T.  Gantt,  additional  aide-de-camp ;  CoL 
J.  J.  Astor,  Jr^  volunteer  aide-de-camp :  Lieut. -Cc^  A-  V.  Col- 
bom,  additional  aide-de-camp  and  captain  adjutant-general's 
department :  Lieut--CoL  N.  B.  Sweitxer,  additional  aide-de-camp 
and  captain  ist  U.  S.  Cavalry ;  LieuL-CoL  Edward  McFL  Hud- 
son, additional  aide-de-camp  and  captain  14th  U.  S.  Infantry : 
Lieut- -CoL  Paul  Von  Radowitz,  additional  aide-de-camp :  Maj. 
H-  Von  Hammerstein,  additional  aide-de-camp :  Maj.  W.  \V. 
RusselL  f.  S.  Marine  Corps ;  Maj.  F.  Le  Compte,  of  the  Swiss 
army,  volunteer  aide-de-camp ;  Capts.  Joseph  Kirkland,  .\nhur 
McClellan,  L.  P.  dOrieans,  R.  d'Orleans,  M.  T.  McMahon,  WA- 
iiam  P.  Mason,  Jr.,  William  F.  Biddie,  and  E.  K.  Raymor.d, 
additional  aides-de-camp. 

Of  these  officers,  CoL  Gantt  performed  the  d'jty  of  j"-dge- 
advocate-general ;  iMaj.  Le  Compte  was  a  spectator;  Capts.  Kirk- 
land, McClellan,  Mc^Lahon,  Mason,  and  Biddle  were  on  duty 
in  the  adjutant-general's  office;  Capt.  Raymond  with  the  chief 
of  Stan  ;  Capt-  McMahon  was  assigned  to  the  personal  staff  of 
Brig. -Gen.  Franklin,  and  Capts.  Kirkland  and  Mason  to  thai  of 
Brig.-G€n-  F.  J.  Porter,  daring  the  siege  of  Vorktown.  They 
remained  snb5e':iuently  with  those  general  officers.  Maj,  I^ 
Compte  left  the  army  during  the  siege  of  Vorktown :  Cols. 
Gantt  and  Astor,  Maj.  RusselL  Capts.  L.  P.  d'Orleans,  R.  c'fir- 
leans,  and  Raymond  at  the  close  of  the  Peninsular  campaign. 

To  this  number  I  am  tempted  to  add  the  Prince  de  Join- 
ville,  w^o  constantly  accompanied  n^  through  the  trying  cam- 
paign of  the  Peninsxila,  and  frequently  rendered  important  ser- 
viccsc 

Soon  after  we  reached  the  Chickahominv  I  took  as  one  of  mr 
aides  Lieut.  G.  A.  Custer,  fth  U.  S.  Cavalry,  as  a  reward  for  an 
act  of  daring  gallantry.  This  was  the  beginning  of  the  distin- 
guished career  of  one  of  the  most  gallant  soldiers  of  the  army 
and  an  admirable  cavalrv  leader.  Before  the  termination  of  the 
Peninsular  campaign  Capts.  W.  S.  Abert  and  Charles  R.  LowelL 
of  the  6th  L'.  $.  Cavalry,  joined  my  stan  as  aides-de-camp,  and 
remained  with  me  until  I  was  relieved  from  the  command  of  the 
Army  of  the  PbComac     AH  of  tlicsc  C:f^citT&  served  me  with  great 


124  McCLeLLAN'S  oivj^  ^tory. 

gallantry  and  devotion  ;  they  were  ever  ready  to  execute  any  ser- 
vice, no  matter  how  dangerous,  difficult,  or  fatiguing. 

The  duties  of  the  inspector-general's  department,  dur- 
ing the  whole  period  of  my  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac, were  performed  by  Col.  D.  B.  Sackett,  assisted  by  Majs.  N. 
H.  Davis  and  Roger  Jones,  of  the  inspector-general's  corps. 
The  value  of  the  services  rendered  by  these  officers  merits  all 
the  commendation  that  I  can  bestow.  No  duty  was  ever  slighted 
by  them  and  no  labor  too  great  for  them.  Their  reports  were 
always  full,  satisfactory,  and  thoroughly  to  be  relied  upon.  Nor 
did  they  confine  themselves  to  the  mere  routine  work  of  their 
duties,  but  on  the  field  of  battle  rendered  most  valuable  services 
as  aides-de-camp  under  heavy  fire. 

When  I  assumed  command  of  the  Division  of  the  Potomac  I 
found  Maj.  J.  G.  Barnard,  U.  S.  Engineers — subsequently  briga- 
dier-general of  volunteers — occupying  the  position  of  chief-engi- 
neer of  McDowell's  command.  I  continued  him  in  the  same 
office,  and  at  once  gave  the  necessary  instructions  for  the  com- 
pletion of  the  defences  of  the  capital  and  for  the  entire  reor- 
ganization of  the  department. 

Under  his  direction  the  entire  system  of  defences  was  carried 
into  execution.  This  was  completed  before  the  army  departed 
for  Fort  Monroe,  and  is  a  sufficient  evidence  of  the  skill  of  the 
engineers  and  the  diligent  labor  of  the  troops. 

The  engineer  department  presented  the  following  organ- 
ization when  the  army  moved  for  the  Peninsula : 

Brig.-Gen.  J.  G.  Barnard,  chief-engineer ;  First  Lieut.  H.  C. 
Abbott,  topographical  engineers,  aide-de-camp.  Brigade  vol- 
unteer engineers,  Brig.-Gen.  Woodbury  commanding  :  15th  N.  Y. 
Volunteers,  Col.  McLeod  Murphy  ;  50th  N.  Y.  Volunteers,  Col. 
C.  B.  Stewart.  Battalion,  three  companies  U.  S.  Engineers,  Capt. 
J.  C.  Duane  commanding ;  companies  respectively  commanded 
by  First  Lieuts.  C.  B.  Reese,  C.  E.  Cross,  and  O.  E.  Babcock,  U.  S. 
Engineers.  The  chief-engineer  was  ably  assisted  in  his  duties 
by  Lieut.-Col.  B.  S.  Alexander  and  First  Lieuts.  C.  R.  Comstock, 
M.  D.  McAlester,  and  Merrill,  U.  S.  Engineers.  Capt.  C.  S.  Stuart 
and  Second  Lieut.  F.  U.  Farquhar,  U.  S.  Engineers,  joined  after 
the  army  arrived  at  Fort  Monroe. 

The  necessary  bridge  equipage  for  the  operations  of  a  large 
army  had  been  collected,  consisting  of  bateaux,  with  the  anchors 


AJ^A/y  ORGANIZATION,  I25 

and   flooring  material  (French   model),  trestles,  and  engineers* 
tools,  with  the  necessary  wagons  for  their  transportation. 

The  small  number  of  officers  of  this  corps  available  rendered 
it  impracticable  to  detail  engineers  permanently  at  the  headquar- 
ters of  corps  and  divisions.  The  companies  of  regular  engi- 
neers never  had  their  proper  number  of  officers,  and  it  was  nec- 
essary, as  a  rule,  to  follow  the  principle  of  detailing  engineer 
officers  temporarily  whenever  their  services  were  required.  Con- 
stantly during  the  construction  of  the  defences  of  Washington, 
and  during  the  subsequent  campaigns,  we  suffered  great  inconve- 
nience and  delay  from  the  want  of  a  sufficient  number  of  officers 
of  engineers. 

To  the  corps  of  topographical  engineers  was  entrusted 
the  collection  of  topographical  information  and  the  preparation 
of  campaign  maps.  Until  a  short  time  previous  to  the  depar- 
ture of  the  army  for  Fort  Monroe,  Lieut.-Col.  John  W.  Macomb 
was  in  charge  of  this  department  and  prepared  a  large  amount 
of  valuable  material.  He  was  succeeded  by  Brig.-Gen.  A.  A. 
Humphreys,  who  retained  the  position  throughout  the  Peninsu- 
lar campaign.  These  officers  were  assisted  by  Lieuts.  O.  G. 
Wagner,  N.  Bowen,  John  M.  Wilson,  and  James  H.  Wilson, 
topographical  engineers.  This  number,  although  the  greatest 
available,  was  so  small  that  much  of  the  duty  of  the  depart- 
ment devolved  upon  parties  furnished  by  Prof.  Bache,  Superin- 
tendent of  the  Coast  Survey,  and  other  gentlemen  from  civil  life. 

Owing  to  the  entire  absence  of  reliable  topographical  maps, 
the  labors  of  this  corps  were  difficult  and  arduous  in  the  extreme. 
Notwithstanding  the  energy  and  ability  displayed  by  Gen.  Hum- 
phreys, Lieut.-Col.  Macomb,  and  their  subordinates,  who  fre- 
quently obtained  the  necessary  information  under  fire,  the 
movements  of  the  army  were  sometimes  unavoidably  delayed 
by  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  knowledge  of  the  country  in  ad- 
vance. The  result  of  their  labors  was  the  preparation  of  an 
excellent  series  of  maps,  which  were  invaluable  to  the  armies 
afterwards  traversing  the  same  ground. 

During  the  campaign  it  was  impossible  to  draw  a  distinct 
line  of  demarcation  between  the  duties  of  the  two  corps  of  engi- 
neers, so  that  the  labors  of  reconnoissances  of  roads,  of  lines  of 
entrenchments,  of  fields  for  battle,  and  of  the  position  of  the 
enemy,  as  well  as  the  construction  of  siege  and  defensive  works, 


126  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

were  habitually  performed  by  details  from  either  corps,  as  the 
convenience  of  the  service  demanded. 

I  desire  to  express  my  high  appreciation  of  the  skill,  gal- 
lantry, and  devotion  displayed  by  the  officers  of  both  corps  of 
engineers  under  the  most  trying  circumstances. 

During  the  Maryland  campaign  I  united  the  two  corps  under 
Capt.  J.  C.  Duane,  U.  S.  Engineers,  and  found  great  advan- 
tages from  the  arrangement.  The  permanent  union  of  the  two 
corps,  since  made,  was  no  doubt  a  wise  measure. 

Surgeon  Charles  S.  Tripler  and  Surgeon  Jonathan  Letterman 
in  turn  performed  the  duties  of  medical  director  of  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  the  former  from  Aug.  12,  1861,  until  July  i,  1862, 
and  the  latter  after  that  date.  The  difficulties  to  be  overcome 
in  organizing  and  making  effective  the  medical  department 
were  very  great,  arising  principally  from  the  inexperience  of  the 
regimental  medical  officers,  many  of  whom  were  physicians  taken 
suddenly  from  civil  life,  who,  according  to  Surgeon  Tripler, 
"had  to  be  instructed  in  their  duties  from  the  very  alphabet," 
and  from  the  ignorance  of  the  line  officers  as  to  their  relations 
with  the  medical  officers,  which  gave  rise  to  confusion  and  con- 
flict of  authority.  Boards  of  examination  were  instituted,  by 
which  many  ignorant  officers  were  removed  ;  and  by  the  suc- 
cessive exertions  of  Surgeons  Tripler  and  Letterman  the  medi- 
cal corps  was  brought  to  a  very  high  degree  of  efficiency.  With 
regard  to  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  army  while  on  the  Poto- 
mac, Dr.  Tripler  said  that  the  records  showed  a  constantly 
increasing  immunity  from  disease.  "In  Oct.  and  Nov.,  1861, 
with  an  army  averaging  130,000  men,  we  had  7,932  cases 
of  fever  of  all  sorts ;  of  these  about  1,000  were  reported 
as  cases  of  typhoid  fever.  I  know  that  errors  of  diagnosis 
were  frequently  committed,  and  therefore  this  must  be  con- 
sidered as  the  limit  of  typhoid  cases.  If  any  army  in  the 
world  can  show  such  a  record  as  this  I  do  not  know  when  or 
where  it  was  assembled."  From  Sept.,  1861,  to  Feb.,  1862, 
while  the  army  was  increasing,  the  number  of  sick  decreased 
from  7  per  cent,  to  6.18  per  cent.  Of  these  the  men  sick  in 
the  regimental  and  general  hospitals  were  less  than  one-half ; 
the  remainder  were  slight  cases,  under  treatment  in  quarters. 
"  During  this  time,  so  far  as  rumor  was  concerned,  the  army 
was  being  decimated  by  disease  every  month.**    Of  the  sani- 


HEALTH  OF   THE  ARMY.  I  27 

tary  condition  of  the  army  during  the  Peninsular  campaign,  up 
to  its  arrival  at  Harrison's  Landing,  Dr.  Tripler  says  :  "  Dur- 
ing this  campaign  the  army  was  favored  with  excellent  health. 
No  epidemic  disease  appeared.  Those  scourges  of  modem  ar- 
mies, dysentery,  typhus,  cholera,  were  almost  unknown.  We 
had  some  typhoid  fever  and  more  malarial  fevers,  but  even 
these  never  prevailed  to  such  an  extent  as  to  create  any  alarm. 
The  sick-reports  were  sometimes  larger  than  we  cared  to  have 
them  ;  but  the  great  majority  of  the  cases  reported  were  such 
as  did  not  threaten  life  or  permanent  disability.  I  regret  that 
I  have  not  before  me  the  retained  copies  of  the  monthly  reports, 
so  that  I  might  give  accurate  statistics.  I  have  endeavored  to 
recover  them,  but  have  been  unsuccessful.  My  recollection  is 
that  the  whole  sick-report  never  exceeded  eight  per  cent,  of  the 
force,  and  this  including  all  sorts  of  cases,  the  trivial  as  well  as 
the  severe.  The  Army  of  the  Potomac  must  be  conceded  to 
have  been  the  most  healthy  army  in  the  service  of  the  United 
States." 

The  service,  labors,  and  privations  of  the  troops  during  the 
Seven  Days'  Battles  had,  of  course,  a  great  effect  on  the  health 
of  the  army  after  it  reached  Harrison's  Landing,  increasing  the 
number  of  sick  to  about  twenty  per  cent,  of  the  whole  force? 

The  nature  of  the  military  operations  had  also  unavoidably 
placed  the  medical  department  in  a  very  unsatisfactory  condi- 
tion. Supplies  had  been  almost  entirely  exhausted  or  neces- 
sarily abandoned  ;  hospital  tents  abandoned  or  destroyed  ;  and 
the  medical  officers  were  deficient  in  numbers  and  broken  down 
by  fatigue. 

All  the  remarkable  energy  and  ability  of  Surgeon  Letterman 
were  required  to  restore  the  efficiency  of  his  department ;  but 
before  we  left  Harrison's  Landing  he  had  succeeded  in  fitting 
it  out  thoroughly  with  the  supplies  it  required,  and  the  health 
of  the  army  was  vastly  improved  by  the  sanitary  measures  which 
were  enforced  at  his  suggestion. 

The  great  haste  with  which  the  army  was  removed  from  the 
Peninsula  made  it  necessary  to  leave  at  Fort  Monroe,  to  be  for- 
warded afterwards,  nearly  all  the  baggage  and  transportation, 
including  medical  stores  and  ambulances,  all  the  vessels  being 
required  to  transport  the  troops  themselves  and  their  ammuni- 
tion.   When  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  returned  to  Washington 


128  McCLELLAN'S  OIVN  STORY. 

after  Gen.  Pope's  campaign,  and  the  medical  department  came 
once  more  under  Surgeon  Letterman's  control,  he  found  it  in  a 
deplorable  condition.  The  officers  were  worn  out  by  the  labors 
they  had  performed,  and  the  few  supplies  that  had  been  brought 
from  the  Peninsula  had  been  exhausted  or  abandoned,  so  that 
the  work  of  reorganization  and  resupplying  had  to  be  again  per- 
formed, and  this  while  the  army  was  moving  rapidly  and  almost 
in  the  face  of  the  enemy.  That  it  was  successfully  accom- 
plished is  shown  by  the  care  and  attention  which  the  wounded 
received  after  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam. 

Among  the  improvements  introduced  into  his  department  by 
Surgeon  Letterman,  the  principal  are  the  organization  of  an  am- 
bulance corps,  the  system  of  field-hospitals,  and  the  method  of 
supplying  by  brigades,  all  of  which  were  instituted  during  the 
Maryland  campaign,  and  found  so  efficient  that  they  remained 
unchanged  until  the  close  of  the  war,  and  were  to  a  great  extent 
adopted  by  the  other  armies  of  the  United  States. 

On  assuming  command  of  the  troops  in  and  around  Wash- 
ington I  appointed  Capt.  S.  Van  Vliet,  assistant  quartermaster 
(afterwards  brigadier-general),  chief  quartermaster  to  my 
command,  and  gave  him  the  necessary  instructions  for  organiz- 
ing his  department  and  collecting  the  supplies  requisite  for  the 
large  army  then  called  for. 

The  disaster  at  Manassas  had  but  recently  occurred,  and  the 
army  was  quite  destitute  of  quartermaster's  stores.  Gen.  Van 
Vliet,  with  great  energy  and  zeal,  set  himself  about  the  task  of 
furnishing  the  supplies  immediately  necessary,  and  preparing  to 
obtain  the  still  larger  amounts  which  would  be  required  by  the 
new  troops  which  were  moving  in  large  numbers  towards  the 
capital.  The  principal  depot  for  supplies  in  the  city  of  Wash- 
ington was  under  charge  of  Col.  D.  H.  Rucker,  assistant  quarter- 
master, who  ably  performed  his  duties.  Lieut.-Col.  R.  Ingalls, 
assistant  quartermaster,  was  placed  in  charge  of  the  department 
on  the  south  side  of  the  Potomac.  I  directed  a  large  depot  for 
transportation  to  be  established  at  Perryville,  on  the  left  bank 
of  the  Susquehanna,  a  point  equally  accessible  by  rail  and  water. 
Capt.  C.  G.  Sawtelle,  assistant  quartermaster,  was  detailed  to 
organize  the  camp,  and  performed  his  duties  to  my  entire  satis- 
faction. Capt.  J.  J.  Dana,  assistant  quartermaster,  had  imme- 
diate charge  of  the  transportation  in  and  about  Washington,  as 


ARMY  ORGANIZATION. 


129 


well  as  of  the  large  number  of  horses  purchased  for  the  use  of 
the  artillery  and  cavalry.  The  principal  difficulties  which  Gen. 
Van  Vliet  had  to  encounter  arose  from  the  inexperience  of  the 
majority  of  the  officers  of  his  department  in  the  new  regiments 
and  brigades. 

The  necessity  of  attending  personally  to  minor  details  ren- 
dered his  duties  arduous  and  harassing  in  the  extreme.  All 
obstacles,  however,  were  surmounted  by  the  untiring  industry 
of  the  chief  quartermaster  and  his  immediate  subordinates,  and 
when  the  army  was  prepared  to  move  the  organization  of  th^ 
department  was  found  to  be  admirable. 

When  it  was  determined  to  move  the  army  to  the  Peninsula 
the  duties  of  providing  water  transportation  were  devolved  by 
the  Secretary  of  War  upon  his  assistant,  the  Hon.  John  Tucker. 
The  vessels  were  ordered  to  Alexandria,  and  Lieut.-Col.  Ingalls 
was  placed  in  immediate  charge  of  the  embarkation  of  the  troops, 
transportation,  and  material  of  every  description.  Operations  of 
this  nature,  on  so  extensive  a  scale,  had  no  parallel  in  the  history 
of  our  country. 

The  arrangements  of  Lieut.-Col.  Ingalls  were  perfected  with 
remarkable  skill  and  energy,  and  the  army  and  its  material  were 
embarked  and  transported  to  Fortress  Monroe  in  a  very  short 
space  of  time  and  entirely  without  loss. 

During  the  operations  on  the  Peninsula,  until  the  arrival  of 
troops  at  Harrison's  Landing,  Gen.  Van  Vliet  retained  the  posi- 
tion of  chief  quartermaster,  and  maintained  the  thorough  organi- 
zation and  efficiency  of  his  department.  The  principal  depots 
of  supplies  were  under  the  immediate  charge  of  Lieut. -Cols. 
Ingalls  and  Sawtelle. 

On  the  loth  of  July,  1862,  Gen.  Van  Vliet  having  requested 
to  be  relieved  from  duty  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  I 
appointed  Lieut.-Col.  Ingalls  chief  quartermaster,  and  he  con- 
tinued to  discharge  the  duties  of  that  office  during  the  remain- 
der of  the  Peninsular  and  the  Maryland  campaigns  in  a  manner 
which  fully  sustained  the  high  reputation  he  had  previously 
acquired. 

The  immense  amount  of  labor  accomplished,  often  under  the 
most  difficult  circumstances,  the  admirable  system  under  which 
the  duties  of  the  department  were  performed,  and  the  entire  suc- 
cess which  attended  the  efforts  to  supply  sq  large  an  army,  reflect 


130  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY, 

the  highest  credit  upon  the  officers  upon  whom  these  onerous 
duties  devolved. 

On  the  ist  of  Aug.,  1861,  Col.  H.  F.  Clarke,  commissary  of 
subsistence,  joined  my  staff,  and  at  once  entered  upon  his  duties 
as  CHIEF  COMMISSARY  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  In  order  to 
realize  the  responsibilities  pertaining  to  this  office,  as  well  as  to 
form  a  proper  estimate  of  the  vast  amount  of  labor  which  must 
necessarily  devolve  upon  its  occupant,  it  is  only  necessary  to  con- 
sider the  unprepared  state  of  the  country  to  engage  in  a  war  of 
such  magnitude,  and  the  lack  of  practical  knowledge  on  the  part 
of  the  officers  with  reference  to  supplying  and  subsisting  a  large, 
and  at  that  time  unorganized,  army.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the 
existence  of  these  great  obstacles,  the  manner  in  which  the  duties 
of  the  commissary  department  were  discharged  was  such  as  to 
merit  and  call  forth  the  commendation  of  the  entire  army. 

During  the  stay  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  the  vicinity 
of  Washington,  prior  to  the  Peninsular  campaign,  its  subsistence 
was  drawn  chiefly  from  the  depots  which  had  been  established 
by  the  commissary  department  at  Washington,  Alexandria,  Forts 
Corcoran  and  Runyon.  In  the  important  task  of  designating  and 
establishing  depots  of  supplies  Col.  Clarke  was  ably  seconded  by 
his  assistants,  Col.  Amos  Beckwith,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  A.;  Lieut.-Col. 
C;eorge  Bell,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  A.;  Lieut.-Col.  A.  P.  Porter,  C.  S., 
U.  S.  A.;  Capt.  Thomas  Wilson,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  A.;  Capt.  Brown- 
ell  Granger,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  Volunteers  ;  Capt.  W.  H.  Bell,  C.  S., 
U.  S.  A.;  Capt.  J.  H.  Woodward,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  Volunteers;  and 
Capt.  W.  R.  Murphy,  C.  S.,  U.  S.  Volunteers. 

A  full  knowledge  of  the  highly  creditable  manner  in  which 
each  and  all  of  the  above-mentioned  officers  discharged  their 
duties  was  given  in  the  detailed  report  of  Col.  Clarke.  The 
remarks  and  suggestions  contained  in  his  report  afford  valuable 
rules  for  the  future  guidance  of  the  subsistence  department  in 
supplying  armies  in  the  field.  The  success  of  the  subsistence 
department  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  in  ^  great  measure 
attributable  to  the  fact  that  the  subsistence  department  at  Wash- 
ington made  ample  provision  for  sending  supplies  to  the  Penin- 
sula, and  that  it  always  exercised  the  most  intelligent  foresight. 
It  moreover  gave  its  advice  and  countenance  to  the  officers 
charged  with  its  duties  and  reputation  in  the  field,  and  those 
officers,  I  am  happy  to  say,  worked  with  it  and  together  in  per- 


/lA'MV  ORGANIZATION,  131 

feet  harmony  for  the  public  good.  During  the  entire  period  that 
I  was  in  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  there  was  no 
instance  within  my  knowledge  where  the  troops  were  with- 
out their  rations  from  any  fault  of  the  officers  of  this  depart- 
ment. 

I  am  quite  within  bounds  when  I  say  that  no  one  could  have 
performed  his  vitally  important  duties  more  satisfactorily  than 
did  Gen.  Clarke.  He  never  caused  me  the  slightest  anxiety,  and 
I  soon  learned  that  he  would  always  carry  out  my  wishes,  were 
it  in  the  power  of  man  to  do  so.  A  stranger  to  all  petty  intrigue, 
a  brave  and  able  officer,  a  modest  man  intent  only  upon  the 
proper  performance  of  his  duty,  he  has  never  received  the  reward 
and  appreciation  his  invaluable  services  merited.  He  held  the 
post  of  chief-commissary  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  until  the 
close  of  the  war,  discharging  his  duty  to  the  entire  satisfaction 
of  its  successive  commanders.  Yet  he  was  overslaughed  in  favor 
of  an  inferior  who  had  never  held  a  post  of  great  importance,  and 
whose  only  claim  was  the  personal  friendship  of  the  President 
who  committed  the  injustice.  As  I  write  (Sept.,  1882)  he  has 
just  received  the  grade  of  colonel  in  the  ordinary  course  of  pro- 
motion, and  will  ere  long  be  retired  with  that  grade,  his  only 
reward  having  been  the  empty  brevet  of  major-general. 

The  ORDNANCE  DEPARTMENT,  that  vcry  important  branch 
of  the  service,  was  placed  under  the  charge  of  Capt.  C.  P.  Kings- 
bury, ordnance  corps,  colonel  and  aide-de-camp.  Great  diffi- 
culty existed  in  the  proper  organization  of  the  department  for  the 
want  of  a  sufficient  number  of  suitable  officers  to  perform  the 
duties  at  the  various  headquarters  and  depots  of  supply.  But 
far  greater  obstacles  had  to  be  surmounted,  from  the  fact  that 
the  supply  of  small  arms  was  totally  inade(iuate  to  the  demands 
of  a  large  army,  and  a  vast  proportion  of  those  furnished  were 
of  such  inferior  quality  as  to  be  unsatisfactory  to  the  troops  and 
condemned  by  their  officers.  The  supply  of  artillery  was  more 
abundant,  but  of  great  variety.  Rifled  ordnance  was  just  coming 
into  use  for  the  first  time  in  this  country,  and  the  description 
of  gun  and  kind  of  projectile  which  would  prove  most  effective, 
and  should,  therefore,  be  adopted,  was  a  mere  matter  of  theory. 
To  obviate  these  difficulties  large  quantities  of  small  arms  of  for- 
eign manufacture  were  contracted  for ;  private  enterprise  in  the 
construction  of  arms  and  ammunition  was  encouraged;  and  by 


IZ 


132  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

the  time  the  army  was  ordered  to  move  to  the  Peninsula  the 
amount  of  ordnance  and  ordnance  stores  was  ample. 

But  it  was  not  until  the  close  of  1861,  too  late  for  active 
operations,  that  the  infantry  were  reasonably  well  provided  with 
serviceable  arms ;  and  even  after  that  the  calibres  were  too 
numerous,  and  many  arms  really  unfit  for  service.  The  artillery 
material,  likewise,  arrived  in  insufficient  quantities  until  the  early 
part  of  1862.  I  mention  these  facts,  not  as  in  any  way  reflecting 
upon  the  ordnance  department,  which  accomplished  all  that  was 
in  the  power  of  men  to  do,  but  as  showing  the  actual  difficulties 
of  the  situation.  Much  also  had  been  done  to  bring  the  qual- 
ity, both  of  arms  and  ammunition,  up  to  the  proper  standard. 
Boards  of  officers  were  in  session  continually  during  the  autumn 
and  winter  of  1861  to  test  the  relative  merits  of  new  arms  and 
projectiles. 

The  reports  of  these  boards,  confirmed  by  subsequent  expe- 
rience in  the  field,  have  done  much  to  establish  the  respective 
claims  of  different  inventors  and  manufacturers.  During  the 
campaigns  of  the  Peninsula  and  Maryland  the  officers  connected 
with  the  department  were  zealous  and  energetic,  and  kept  the 
troops  well  supplied,  notwithstanding  the  perplexing  and  arduous 
nature  of  their  duties.  One  great  source  of  perplexity  was  the 
fact  that  it  had  been  necessary  to  issue  arms  of  all  varieties  and 
calibres,  giving  an  equal  diversity  in  the  kinds  of  ammunition 
required.  Untiring  watchfulness  was  therefore  incumbent  upon 
the  officers  in  charge  to  prevent  confusion  and  improper  distri- 
bution of  cartridges.  Col.  Kingsbury  discharged  the  duties  of 
his  office  with  great  efficiency  until  July,  1862,  when  his  health 
required  that  he  should  be  relieved.  First  Lieut.  Thomas  G. 
Baylor,  ordnance  corps,  succeeded  him,  and  performed  his  duty 
during  the  remainder  of  the  Peninsular  and  Maryland  campaigns 
with  marked  ability  and  success. 

Immediately  after  I  was  placed  in  command  of  the  Division 
of  the  Potomac  I  appointed  Col.  Andrew  Porter,  i6th  Regiment 
Infantry,  provost-marshal  of  Washington.  All  the  available 
regular  infantry,  a  battery,  and  a  squadron  of  cavalry  were  placed 
under  his  command,  and  by  his  energetic  action  he  soon  correct- 
ed the  serious  evils  which  existed,  and  restored  order  in  the  city. 

When  the  army  was  about  to  take  the  field  Gen.  Porter  was 
aT)nointed  provost-marshal-general  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac, 


AKMY  ORGANIZATION.  133 

and  held  that  most  important  position  until  the  end  of  the  Pen- 
insular campaign,  when  sickness,  contracted  in  the  untiring  dis- 
charge of  his  duties,  compelled  him  to  ask  to  be  relieved  from 
the  position  he  had  so  ably  and  energetically  filled. 

The  provost  marshal-general's  department  had  the  charge  of  a 
class  of  duties  which  had  not  before,  in  our  service,  been  defined 
and  grouped  under  the  management  of  a  special  department. 
The  following  subjects  indicate  the  sphere  of  this  department : 

Suppression  of  marauding  and  depredations,  and  of  all  brawls 
and  disturbances,  preservation  of  good  order,  and  suppression  of 
disturbances  beyond  the  limits  of  the  camps. 

Prevention  of  straggling  on  the  march. 

Suppression  of  gambling-houses,  drinking-houses  or  bar-rooms, 
and  brothels. 

Regulation  of  hotels,  taverns,  markets,  and  places  of  public 
amusement. 

Searches,  seizures,  and  arrests.  Execution  of  sentences  of 
general  courts-martial  involving  imprisonment  or  capital  punish- 
ment. Enforcement  of  orders  prohibiting  the  sale  of  intoxicating 
liquors,  whether  by  tradesmen  or  sutlers,  and  of  orders  respecting 
passes. 

Deserters  from  the  enemy. 

Prisoners  of  war  taken  from  the  enemy. 

Countersigning  safeguards. 

Passes  to  citizens  within  the  lines  and  for  purposes  of  trade. 

Complaints  of  citizens  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  soldiers. 

Gen.  Porter  was  assisted  by  the  following  named  officers  : 

Maj.  W.  H.  Wood,  17th  U.  S.  Infantry  ;  Capt.  James  McMillan, 
acting  assistant  adjutant-general,  2d  U.  S.  Infantry ;  Capt.  VV.  T. 
Gentry,  17th  U.  S.  Infantry;  Capt.  J.  W.  Forsyth,  i8th  U.  S. 
Infantry;  Lieut.  J.  W.  Jones,  12th  U.  S.  Infantry;  Lieut.  C.  F. 
Trowbridge,  i6th  U.  S.  Infantry  ;  and  Lieut.  C.  D.  Mehaffey,  1st 
U.  S.  Infantry. 

The  provost-guard  was  composed  of  the  2d  U.  S.  Cavalry, 
Maj.  Pleasonton,  and  a  battalion  of  the  8th  and  17th  U.  S.  Infan- 
try, Maj.  Willard.  After  Gen.  Porter  was  relieved  Maj.  Wood 
was  in  charge  of  this  department  until  after  the  battle  of  Antie- 
tam,  when  Brig.-Gen.  Patrick  was  appointed  provost-marshal- 
general. 

When  the  army  took  the  field,  for  the  purpose  of  securing 


134  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

order  and  regularity  in  the  camp  of  headquarters,  and  facilitating 
its  movements,  the  office  of  commandant  of  general  head- 
quarters was  created,  and  assigned  to  Maj.  G.  O.  Haller,  7th 
U.  S.  Infantry.  Six  companies  of  infantry  were  placed  under 
his  orders  for  guard  and  police  duty. 

From  Aug.,  1861,  the  position  of  judge-advocate  was  held 
by  Col.  Thomas  T.  Gantt,  aide-de-camp,  until  compelled  by  ill- 
health  to  retire,  at  Harrison's  Landing,  in  Aug.,  1862.  His 
reviews  of  the  decisions  of  courts-martial  during  this  period 
were  of  great  utility  in  correcting  the  practice  in  military  courts, 
diffusing  true  notions  of  discipline  and  subordination,  and  set- 
ting before  the  army  a  high  standard  of  soldierly  honor.  Upon 
the  retirement  of  Col.  Gantt  the  duties  of  judge-advocate  were 
ably  performed  by  Col.  Thomas  M.  Key,  aide-de-camp. 

The  method  of  conveying  intelligence  and  orders  invented 
and  introduced  into  the  service  by  Maj.  Albert  J.  Myer,  signal 
officer  U.  S.  Army,  was  first  practically  tested  in  large  operations 
during  the  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Under 
the  direction  of  Maj.  Myer  a  signal  corps  was  formed  by 
detailing  officers  and  men  from  the  different  regiments  of  volun- 
teers, and  instructing  them  in  the  use  of  the  flags  by  day  and 
torches  by  night. 

The  chief  signal  officer  was  indefatigable  in  his  exertions  to 
render  his  corps  effective,  and  it  soon  became  available  for 
service  in  every  division  of  the  army.  In  addition  to  the  flags 
and  torches  Maj.  Myer  introduced  a  portable  insulated  telegraph- 
wire,  which  could  be  readily  laid  from  point  to  point,  and  which 
could  be  used  under  the  same  general  system.  In  front  of  Wash- 
ington and  on  the  lower  Potomac,  at  any  point  within  our  lines 
not  reached  by  the  military  telegraph,  the  great  usefulness  of  this 
system  of  signals  was  made  manifest.  But  it  was  not  until  after 
the  arrival  of  the  army  upon  the  Peninsula,  and  during  the  siege 
and  battles  of  that  and  the  Maryland  campaigns,  that  the  great 
benefits  to  be  derived  from  it  on  the  field  and  under  fire  were 
fully  appreciated. 

There  was  scarcely  any  action  or  skirmish  in  which  the  signal 
corps  did  not  render  important  services.  Often  under  heavy  fire 
of  artillery,  and  not  unfrequently  while  exposed  to  musketry,  the 
officers  and  men  of  this  corps  gave  information  of  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy,  and  transmitted  directions  for  the  evolu- 


A^MV  ORGANIZATION,  135 

tions  of  our  own  troops.  The  weak  point  in  the  signal  corps  as 
then  t  onstituted  was  that  its  officers  were  not  trained  soldiers, 
and  therefore  their  judgment  could  not  always  be  relied  upon. 

The  TELEGRAPHIC  OPERATIONS  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
were  superintended  by  Maj.  Thomas  J.  Eckert,  and  under  the 
immediate  direction  of  Mr.  Caldwell,  who  was,  with  a  corps  of 
operators,  attached  to  my  headquarters  during  the  entire  cam- 
paigns upon  the   Peninsula  and  in  Maryland. 

The  services  of  this  corps  were  arduous  and  efficient.  Under 
the  admirable  arrangements  of  Maj.  Eckert  they  were  constantly 
provided  with  all  the  material  for  constructing  new  lines,  which 
were  rapidly  established  whenever  the  army  changed  position, 
and  it  was  not  unfrequently  the  case  that  the  operatives  worked 
under  fire  from  the  enemy's  guns  ;  yet  they  invariably  performed 
all  the  duties  required  of  them  with  great  alacrity  and  cheerful- 
ness, and  it  was  seldom  that  I  was  without  the  means  of  direct 
telegraphic  communication  with  the  War  Department  and  with 
the  corps  commanders. 

From  the  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  up  to 
Nov.  I,  1862,  including  the  Peninsular  and  Maryland  campaigns, 
upwards  of  twelve  hundred  (1,200)  miles  of  military  telegraph 
line  had  been  constructed  in  connection  with  the  operations  of 
the  army,  and  the  number  of  operatives  and  builders  employed 
was  about  two  hundred  (200). 

To  Prof.  Lowe,  the  intelligent  and  enterprising  aeronaut,  who 
had  the  management  of  the  balloons,  I  was  indebted  for  infor- 
mation obtained  during  his  ascensions.  In  a  clear  atmosphere, 
and  in  a  country  not  too  much  obstructed  by  woods,  balloon 
reconnoissances  made  by  intelligent  officers  are  often  of  consid- 
erable value. 

I  more  than  once  took  occasion  to  recommend  the  members 
of  my  staff,  both  general  and  personal,  for  promotion  and  reward. 
I  once  more  record  their  names  in  the  history  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  as  gallant  soldiers,  to  whom  their  country  owes 
a  debt  of  gratitude,  still  unpaid,  for  the  courage,  ability,  and 
untiring  zeal  they  displayed  during  the  eventful  campaigns  in 
which  they  bore  so  prominent  a  part. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

Various  generals — Scott,  Halleck,  Hunter,  Sumner,  Franklin,  Porter, 
Sedgwick,  and  others — Blenker's  brigade — Scenes  in  his  command — 
The  Hungarian  Klapka — The  French  prisoners — Events  in  Maryland. 

It  is  a  great  mistake  to  suppose  that  I  had  the  cordial  support 
of  Gen.  Scott ;  the  contrary  was  too  much  the  case.  While  in  the 
West  I  failed  to  obtain  from  him  the  assistance  needed,  and  when 
I  reached  Washington  I  soon  found  that  he  was  unnecessarily 
jealous  of  me.  On  the  very  day  of  my  arrival  he  interfered,  as 
already  described,  to  prevent  my  keeping  an  appointment  with 
the  President,  because  he  was  not  invited  to  be  present.  He 
directed  me  to  ride  around  the  streets  of  Washington  and  see 
that  the  drunken  men  were  picked  up,  which  I  naturally  did  not 
do  !  He  opposed  the  bill  for  increasing  the  number  of  aides,  on 
the  ground  that  he  had  only  two  in  Mexico.  Soon  after  assum- 
ing the  command  I  saw  the  absolute  necessity  of  giving  a  name 
to  the  mass  of  troops  under  my  command,  in  order  to  inspire 
them  with  esprit  de  corps ;  I  therefore  proposed  to  call  my 
command  "  The  Army  of  the  Potomac."  Gen.  Scott  objected 
most  strenuously  to  this  step,  saying  that  the  routine  of  service 
could  be  carried  on  only  under  the  "  department "  system,  etc. 
I  persisted,  and  finally  had  my  own  way  in  the  matter  in  spite 
of  the  opposition.  I  also  told  him  that  I  proposed  to  organize 
brigades  at  first;  then,  when  that  organization  was  fairly  estab- 
lished, to  form  divisions  ;  and  finally,  after  everything  was  well 
arranged  and  I  could  be  sure  of  selecting  the  right  commanders — 
probably  after  having  been  in  the  field  for  a  time — to  form  army 
corps. 

The  general  objected  to  this  also,  insisting  that  no  higher 
organization  than  that  of  brigade  was  necessary  ;  that  it  was 
impossible  to  organize  the  troops  under  my  command  as  an 
army  !  Consequently,  when  the  proper  time  arrived,  I  organized 
the  divisions  without  further  discussion  of  the  matter. 

Gen.  Scott  was  no  longer  himself  when  the  war  broke  out. 

The  weight  of  years  and  great  bodily  suflfering  pressed  heavily 

upon  him,  and  really  rendered  him  incapable  of  performing  the 

136 


STANTON  AND  HALLECK,  I37 

duties  of  his  station.  For  some  time  before  he  retired  he  was 
simply  an  obstacle,  and  a  very  serious  one,  in  the  way  of  active 
work.  He  did  not  wish  me  to  succeed  him  as  general-in-chief, 
but  desired  that  place  for  Halleck,  and  long  withheld  his  retire- 
ment that  Halleck  might  arrive  East  and  fall  heir  to  his  place. 

Speaking  of  Halleck,  a  day  or  two  before  he  arrived  in  Wash- 
ington Stanton  came  to  caution  me  against  trusting  Halleck, 
who  was,  he  said,  probably  the  greatest  scoundrel  and  most 
barefaced  villain  in  America ;  he  said  that  he  was  totally  des- 
titute of  principle,  and  that  in  the  Almaden  Quicksilver  case  he 
had  convicted  Halleck  of  perjury  in  open  court.  When  Halleck 
arrived  he  came  to  caution  me  against  Stanton,  repeating  almost 
precisely  the  same  words  that  Stanton  had  employed. 

I  made  a  note  of  this  fact  soon  after  its  occurrence,  and 
lately,  Dec.  4,  1883,  I  saw  for  the  first  time,  on  page  833,  vol. 
viii.,  series  i,  "Official  Records  of  the  War  of  the  Rebellion," 
Gen.  E.  A.  Hitchcock's  letter  to  Halleck,  in  which  the  former 
transmits  a  message  from  Stanton  on  the  very  same  subject. 
This  IS  eminently  characteristic  of  Stanton,  who  would  say  one 
thing  to  a  man's  face  and  just  the  reverse  behind  his  back.* 

Of  all  men  whom  I  have  encountered  in  high  position  Hal- 
leck was  the  most  hopelessly  stupid.  It  was  more  difficult  to  get 
an  idea  through  his  head  than  can  be  conceived  by  any  one  who 
never  made  the  attempt.  I  do  not  think  he  ever  had  a  correct 
military  idea  from  beginning  to  end. 

I  left  .Gen.  Hunter  in  nominal  command  of  his  brigade, 
because  he  bore  an  excellent  reputation  in  the  old  army  and 
had  been  wounded ;  I  have  never  met  him  personally.  He  did 
not  assume  command  of  the  brigade,  for  as  soon  as  he  recovered 
from  his  wound  the  President  appointed  him  major-general  of 
volunteers,  that  he  might  go  to  Illinois  and,  in  the  words  of 
Mr.  Lincoln,  "  be  a  sort  of  father  to  them  out  there." 

♦The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  letter  of  Gen.  E.  A.  Hitchcock 
to  Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  dated  Washington,  March  22,  1862  : 

"  I  then  bid  the  secretary  (Stanton)  good-evening  and  left  him,  but  he 
called  me  back,  and  added  that  if  I  was  going  to  write  to  you  he  wished 
to  convey  his  respects,  and  his  future  confidence  in  your  ability  and 
patriotism,  explaining  that  he  had  been  employed  against  you  in  the  mine 
case  in  California,  and  that  his  partner  had  some  difficulty  or  controversy 
with  you  of  a  somewhat  personal  nature,  but  that,  for  his  part,  he  had 
taken  no  interest  in  it,  and  had  never  had  any  other  than  the  highest 
respect  for  you,  and  he  hoped  you  would  not  imagine  that  he  ever  had." 


13S  M.<^L^U^4\'S  OirX  STOIiY. 

Hcint#clman  al^^o  n^ceived  a  brigade ;  he,  too,  had  been 
wwundixl  At  BwU  Run^  ai^d  bore  a  good  reputation  in  the  old 
«n>^\\     He  w.^:s  a  vx^rv  brave  man  and  an  excellent  officer. 

\\\  1\  ShenwAH  was  almost  immediately  taken  from  me  to 
♦i\N>wjvi5^y  R<>bert  Anderson  to  Kentucky.  I  had  a  high  opin- 
i^vft  t\f  h«u  and  jxuted  from  him  with  regret 

I'i^iill^^^  Ke^nay  received  a  brigade;  but,  though  he  stood 
^r^  jfes  j^  iretKkJurk;ibhr  daring  man  and  good  cavalry  captain  in 
tt()[fC  M^xtjcJ^  war^  1  had  not  sufficient  confidence  in  his  brains 
t^^  ^i;>c  hhm  ooie  of  the  first  divisions.  I  have  since  sometimes 
tt^y<H^lkl:  til^c  I  would  have  done  well  had  I  given  him  command 
Qfc  t;!^  cavalry. 

S^imjQ^r  was  in  California  when  I  assumed  coaunand;  he 
iseCujm^d  not  long  before  we  took  the  field,  and  at  once  received 
a  (iivu>ioBL  He  was  an  old  and  tried  officer  ;  perfectly  hoDCst ; 
3^  brave  as  a  man  could  be ;  conscientious  and  laborious.  In 
many  respects  he  was  a  model  soldier.  He  was  a  man  for  whom 
1  had  a  very  high  regard,  and  for  his  memory  I  have  the  great- 
est respect.  He  was  a  very  valuable  man,  aiui  his  soldierly 
example  was  of  the  highest  value  in  a  new  army.  A  natioo  is 
fortunate  that  j>ossesses  many  such  soldiers  as  was  Edwin  V. 
Sumner, 

Franklin  was  one  of  the  best  officers  I  had ;  rery  powerfuL 
He  was  a  man  not  only  of  excellent  judgment,  bat  of  a  remark- 
ably high  order  of  intellectual  ability.  He  was  often  badly 
treated,  and  seklom  re^eivtfd  the  credit  he  deserved.  His  mo- 
ral character  was  of  the  highest,  and  he  was  in  all  respects  an 
admirable  corps  commander  ;  more  than  that,  he  would  have 
commandeii  an  armv  well  The  onlv  reason  whv  I  ^id  not  send 
him  to  relieve  Sherman^  instead  of  BueU,  was  that  I  cooM  not 
spare  such  a  man  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

lUenker  I  found,  and  retained,  rn  command  of  the  CJermans. 
Born  in  Bavaria,  it  was  said  he  had  served  in  Greece  as  a  non- 
commissioned officer,  and  subsequendy  as  a  colonel  or  general 
officer  in  the  revolutionary  army  of  Baden  in  ES43.  He  was  in 
many  respects  an  excellent  si:)ldier  ;  had  his  command  in  excel- 
lent di'iily  was  very  fond  of  display,  but  did  not,  or  could  not, 
always  restrain  his  men  from  plundering.  Had  he  remained 
with  me  I  think  that  he  and  his  division  would  have  done  ijood 
service,  and  that   they   would  have  hti^n  kept  under  good  dis- 


t40  mcCLellan*s  own  story. 

reputation  in  the  Mexican  war,  and  I  found  him  to  be  an  admir- 
able soldier  in  every  regard. 

To  Sedgwick  I  gave  a  brigade.  Not  knowing  him  well,  I 
did  not  at  first  appreciate  his  high  qualities,  but  soon  discov- 
ered them  and  gave  him  the  first  vacant  division — that  origi- 
nally commanded  by  Stone.  He  was  one  of  the  best  and  most 
modest  soldiers  we  had.  Possessing  excellent  ability  and  judg- 
ment, the  highest  bravery,  great  skill  in  handling  troops,  won- 
derful powers  in  instructing  and  disciplining  men,  as  well  as  in 
gaining  their  love,  respect,  and  confidence,  he  was  withal  so  mod- 
est and  unobtrusive  that  it  was  necessary  to  be  thrown  closely 
in  contact  with  him  to  appreciate  him.  He  was  thoroughly  un- 
selfish, honest,  and  true  as  steel.  His  conduct  during  the  battle 
of  Chancellorsville  in  storming  the  works  on  Marie's  Heights, 
and  afterwards  holding  his  own  against  tremendous  odds,  was 
a  remarkable  and  most  brilliant  feat  of  arms. 

Hancock  received  a  brigade  early  in  the  formation  of  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  a  man  of  the  most  chivalrous 
courage,  and  of  a  superb  presence,  especially  in  action ;  he  liad 
a  wonderfully  quick  and  correct  eye  for  ground  and  for  hand- 
ling troops ;  his  judgment  was  good,  and  it  would  be  difficult 
to  find  a  better  corps  commander. 

John  Reynolds  was  commandant  of  the  corps  of  cadets  when 
the  war  broke  out.  He  gained  a  high  reputation  in  the  Mexican 
war  as  an  officer  of  light  artillery,  and  was  among  the  first  whom 
I  caused  to  be  appointed  brigadier-general.  He  was  a  splendid 
soldier  and  performed  admirably  every  duty  assigned  to  him. 
Constantly  improving,  he  was,  when  killed  at  Gettysburg,  with 
Meade  and  Sedgwick,  the  best  officer  then  with  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac.  He  was  remarkably  brave  and  intelligent,  an 
honest,  true  gentleman. 

Meade  was  also  one  of  my  early  appointments  as  brigadier- 
general.  He  was  an  excellent  officer ;  cool,  brave,  and  intelli- 
gent ;  he  always  did  his  duty  admirably,  and  was  an  honest 
man.  As  commander  of  an  army  he  was  far  superior  to  either 
Hooker  or  Burnside. 

Col.  Ingalls  was,  in  my  experience,  unequalled  as  a  chief- 
quartermaster  in  the  field. 

When  first  assigned  to  the  command  in  the  Department  of 
the  Ohio,  I  applied  for  Fitz-John  Porter  as  my  adjutant-gene- 


BLENKER^S  CAMP,  I4I 

ral,  but  he  was  already  on  duty  with  Gen.  Patterson  in  the 
same  capacity,  and  could  not  be  spared.  Soon  afterwards  I 
obtained  Maj.  Seth  Williams,  who  had  been  on  duty  with  Gen. 
Harney  at  St.  Louis,  and  he  remained  with  me  as  my  adjutant- 
general  until  I  was  finally  relieved  from  the  command  of  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac.  I  never  met  with  a  better  bureau  officer, 
perhaps  never  with  so  good  a  one.  He  thoroughly  understood 
the  working  of  the  adjutant-general's  department,  was  indefa- 
tigable in  the  performance  of  his  duty,  made  many  and  valu- 
able suggestions  as  to  the  system  of  returns,  reports,  etc.,  and 
thus  exerted  a  great  influence  in  bringing  about  the  excellent 
organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  was  thoroughly 
honest  and  a  gentleman  ;  he  was,  if  anything,  too  modest,  for 
he  would  probably  have  accomplished  more  had  he  possessed 
more  self-reliance.  He  won  universal  regard  by  his  kind  and 
considerate  manner  towards  those  with  whom  he  was  officially 
brought  in  contact.  I  never  knew  a  more  laborious  and  con- 
scientious man. 

During  the  autumn  of  1861,  as  already  stated,  I  spent  my 
days  chiefly  in  the  saddle,  rarely  returning  from  my  rides  until 
late  at  night.  Most  of  the  night  and  the  morning  hours  were 
given  up  to  office-work. 

Of  course  I  rode  everywhere  and  saw  everything.  Not  an 
entrenchment  was  commenced  unless  I  had  at  least  approved 
its  site  ;  many  I  located  myself.  Not  a  camp  that  I  did  not 
examine,  not  a  picket-line  that  I  did  not  visit  and  cross,  so 
that  almost  every  man  in  the  army  saw  me  at  one  time  or 
another,  and  most  of  them  became  familiar  with  my  face.  And 
there  was  no  part  of  the  ground  near  Washington  that  I  did 
not  know  thoroughly. 

The  most  entertaining  of  my  duties  were  those  which  some- 
times led  me  to  Blenker's  camp,  whither  Franklin  was  always 
glad  to  accompany  me  to  see  the  "  circus,"  or  "  opera,"  as  he 
usually  called  the  performance.  As  soon  as  we  were  sighted 
Blenker  would  have  the  "  officer's  call "  blown  to  assemble  his 
polyglot  collection,  with  their  uniform  as  varied  and  brilliant 
as  the  colors  of  the  rainbow.  Wrapped  in  his  scarlet-lined 
cloak,  his  group  of  officers  ranged  around  him,  he  would  re- 
ceive us  with  the  most  formal  and  polished  courtesy.  Being 
a  very  handsoipe  and  soldierly-looking  man  himself,  and  there 


142  McCLELLAN'S  OIVN  STORY. 

being  many  equally  so  among  his  surroundings,  the  tableau  was 
always  very  effective,  and  presented  a  striking  contrast  to  the 
matter-of-fact  way  in  which  things  were  managed  in  the  other 
divisions. 

In  a  few  minutes  he  would  shout,  "  Ordinanz  numero  eins  /  * 
whereupon  champagne  would  be  brought  in  great  profusion, 
the  bands  would  play,  sometimes  songs  be  sung.  It  was  said, 
I  know  not  how  truly,  that  Blenker  had  been  a  non-commis- 
sioned officer  in  the  German  contingent  serving  under  King 
Otho  of  Greece. 

His  division  was  very  peculiar.  So  far  as  "  the  pride,  pomp, 
and  circumstance  of  glorious  war  "  were  concerned,  it  certainly 
outshone  all  the  others.  Their  drill  and  bearing  were  also 
excellent ;  for  all  the  officers,  and  probably  all  the  men,  had 
served  in  Europe.  I  have  always  regretted  that  the  division 
was  finally  taken  from  me  and  sent  to  Fremont.  The  officers 
and  n^n  were  all  strongly  attached  to  me ;  I  could  control 
them  as  no  one  else  could,  and  they  would  have  done  good 
service  had  they  remained  in  Sumner's  corps.  The  regiments 
were  all  foreign  and  mostly  of  Germans  ;  but  the  most  remark- 
able of  all  was  the  Garibaldi  regiment.  Its  colonel,  D'Utassy, 
was  a  Hungarian,  and  was  said  to  have  been  a  rider  in  Fran- 
coni's  Circus,  and  terminated  his  public  American  career  in 
the  Albany  Penitentiary.  His  men  were  from  all  known  and 
unknown  lands,  from  all  possible  and  impossible  armies  :  Zou- 
aves from  Algiers,  men  of  the  "  Foreign  Legion,"  Zephyrs,  Cos- 
sacks, Garibaldians  of  the  deepest  dye,  English  deserters.  Se- 
poys, Turcos,  Croats,  Swiss,  beer  drinkers  from  Bavaria,  stout 
men  from  North  Germany,  and  no  doubt  Chinese,  Esquimaux, 
and  detachments  from  the  army  of  the  Grand  Duchess  of 
Gerolstein. 

Such  a  mixture  was  probably  never  before  seen  under  any 
flag,  unless,  perhaps,  in  such  bands  as  Hoik's  Jagers  of  the 
Thirty  Years'  War  or  the  free  lances  of  the  middle  ages. 

I  well  remember  that  in  returning  one  night  from  beyond 
the  picket-lines  I  encountered  an  outpost  of  the  Garibaldians. 
In  reply  to  their  challenge  I  tried  English,  French,  Spanish, 
Italian,  German,  Indian,  a  little  Russian  and  Turkish;*  all  in 

*  It  is  proper  to  say  that  this  is  doubtless  a  simple  statement  of  fact. 


FOREIGN  OFFICERS.  1 43 

vain,  for  nothing  at  my  disposal  made  the  slightest  impression 
upon  them,  and  I  inferred  that  they  were  perhaps  gipsies  or 
Esquimaux  or  Chinese. 

Mr.  Seward's  policy  of  making  ours  "  a  people's  war,"  as  he 
expressed  it,  by  drumming  up  officers  from  all  parts  of  the  world, 
sometimes  produced  strange  results  and  brought  us  rare  speci- 
mens of  the  class  vulgarly  known  as  "  hard  cases."  Most  of  the 
officers  thus  obtained  had  left  their  own  armies  for  the  armies* 
good,  although  there  were  admirable  and  honorable  exceptions, 
such  as  Stahl,  Willich,  Rosencranz,  Cesnola,  and  some  others. 
Few  were  of  the  slightest  use  to  us,  and  I  think  the  reason  why 
the  German  regiments  so  seldom  turned  out  well  was  that  their 
officers  were  so  often  men  without  character. 

Soon  after  Gen.  Scott  retired  I  received  a  letter  from  the 
Hungarian  Klapka  informing  me  that  he  had  been  approached 
by  some  of  Mr.  Seward's  agents  to  get  him  into  our  army,  and 
saying  that  he  thought  it  best  to  come  to  a  direct  understanding 
with  myself  as  to  terms,  etc.  He  said  that  he  would  require 
a  bonus  of  $100,000  in  cash  and  a  salary  of  $25,000  per  annum ; 
that  on  his  first  arrival  he  would  consent  to  serve  as  my  chief 
of  staff  for  a  short  time  until  he  acquired  the  language,  and  that 
he  would  then  take  my  place  of  general  commanding-in-chief. 
He  failed  to  state  what  provision  he  would  make  for  me,  that 
probably  to  depend  upon  the  impression  I  made  upon  him. 

I  immediately  took  the  letter  to  Mr.  Lincoln,  who  was  made 
very  angry  by  it,  and,  taking  possession  of  the  letter,  said  that 
he  would  see  that  I  should  not  be  troubled  in  that  way  again. 

Cluseret — afterwards  Minister  of  War  under  the  Commune — 
brought  me  a  letter  of  introduction  from  Garibaldi,  recommend- 
ing him  in  the  highest  terms  as  a  soldier,  man  of  honor,  etc.  I 
did  not  like  his  appearance  and  declined  his  services ;  but  with- 
out my  knowledge  or  consent  Stanton  appointed  him  a  colonel 
on  my  staff.  I  still  declined  to  have  anything  to  do  with  him, 
and  he  was  sent  to  the  Mountain  Department,  as  chief  of  staff,  I 
think. 

On  the  recommendation  of  the  Prussian  minister  I  took  upon 

Gen.  McClellan  was  able  to  converse  freely  in  most  of  the  languages 
named,  including  two  dialects  of  North  American  Indian,  and  had  suffi- 
cient practical  knowledge  of  all  of  them  (as  well  as  others)  to  make  him 
independent  of  an  interpreter.  W.  C.  P. 


144  McCLELLAN'S  OW.V  STORY, 

my  staff,  as.  aides-de-camp,  two  German  officers  whose  subse- 
quent histories  were  peculiar  and  suggestive.  One  was  a  member 
of  a  very  noble  family,  whose  father  had  held  high  official  rank 
in  his  native  land,  the  son  having  been  a  lieutenant  in  the  Guard 
Cavalry.  He  was  one  of  the  handsomest  young  fellows  I  have 
ever  seen,  polished  to  the  last  degree,  and  a  splendid  soldier.  He 
remained  with  me  during  my  command,  and  always  performed 
difficult  and  dangerous  duties  in  the  best  possible  manner.  He 
remained  with  the  army  on  staff-duty  after  I  was  relieved. 

Being  in  Germany  when  the  Austro-Prussian  war  broke  out, 
I  determined  to  call  upon  the  War  Minister  and  advise  him  to 
recall  the  officer  in  question,  as  an  admirable  soldier  whose 
experience  in  our  war  would  be  valuable  ;  for  I  had  been  led 
to  believe  that  his  original  separation  from  his  own  army  had 
been  caused  by  some  trivial  breach  of  discipline.  Within  a 
few  days  I  learned  that  he  had  been  dismissed  our  service.  The 
last  I  heard  of  this  poor  fellow — for  one  cannot  help  feeling 
sorry  for  the  waste  of  such  excellent  gifts — was  that  he  made 
his  living  as  croupier  in  a  gambling-den. 

The  other  was  of  an  old  military  family  ;  his  father  had  been 
a  general,  and  I  had  met  his  brothers  and  cousins  as  officers  in 
the  Austrian  army.  He  also  was  an  admirable  and  most  use- 
ful aide  in  difficult  times.  After  I  left  the  field  he  became 
lieutenant-colonel,  and  probably  colonel,  of  a  regiment,  and  did 
good  service.  At  the  close  of  the  war,  failing  to  be  retained, 
he  enlisted  in  a  regular  cavalry  regiment,  hoping  to  be  examined 
and  promoted  to  a  commission  ;  but  his  habits  were  against  him. 
At  last,  in  carrying  the  mail  during  the  winter  between  the  posts 
on  the  plains,  his  feet  were  frozen  and,  I  think,  amputated. 
Finally  his  family  sent  for  him,  and  he  returned  home  to  die. 

Of  a  different  order  were  the  French  princes  who  formed 
part  of  my  military  family  from  Sept.  20,  1861,  to  the  close  of 
the  Seven  Days.  They  served  as  captains,  declining  any  higher 
rank,  though  they  had  fully  earned  promotion  before  the  close 
of  their  connection  with  the  army.  They  served  precisely  as  the 
other  aides,  taking  their  full  share  of  all  duty,  whether  agreeable 
or  disagreeable,  dangerous  or  the  reverse.  They  were  fine  young 
fellows  and  good  soldiers,  and  deserved  high  credit  in  every 
way. 

Their  uncle,  the  Prince  de  Joinville,  who  accompanied  them 


THE  FRENCH  PRINCES,  \  45 

as  a  Mentor,  held  no  official  position,  but  our  relations  were 
always  confidential  and  most  agreeable.  The  Due  de  Chartres 
had  received  a  military  education  at  the  military  school  at  Turin; 
the  Comte  de  Paris  had  only  received  instruction  in  military 
matters  from  his  tutors.  They  had  their  separate  establishment, 
being  accompanied  by  a  physician  and  a  captain  of  chasseurs-h- 
pied.  The  latter  was  an  immense  man,  who  could  never,  under 
any  circumstances,  be  persuaded  to  mount  a  horse  :  he  always 
made  the  march  on  foot. 

Their  little  establishment  was  usually  the  jolliest  in  camp, 
and  it  was  often  a  great  relief  to  me,  when  burdened  with  care, 
to  listen  to  the  laughter  and  gayety  that  resounded  from  their 
tents.  They  managed  their  affairs  so  well  that  they  were  re- 
spected and  liked  by  all  with  whom  they  came  in  contact.  The 
Prince  de  Joinville  sketched  admirably  and  possessed  a  most 
keen  sense  of  the  ridiculous,  so  that  his  sketch-book  was  an 
inexhaustible  source  of  amusement,  because  everything  ludicrous 
that  struck  his  fancy  on  the  march  was  sure  to  find  a  place  there. 
He  was  a  man  of  far  more  than  ordinary  ability  and  of  excellent 
judgment.  His  deafness  was,  of  course,  a  disadvantage  to  him, 
but  his  admirable  qualities  were  so  marked  that  I  became  warm- 
ly attached  to  him,  as,  in  fact,  I  did  to  all  the  three,  and  I  have 
good   reason  to  know  that  the  feeling  was  mutual. 

Whatever  may  have  been  the  peculiarities  of  Louis  Philippe 
during  his  later  life,  it  is  very  certain  that  in  his  youth,  as  the 
Due  de  Chartres,  he  was  a  brave,  dashing,  and  excellent  soldier. 
His  sons,  especially  the  Dues  d'Orl^ans,  d'Aumale,  Montpensier, 
and  the  Prince  de  Joinville,  showed  the  same  characteristics  in 
Algiers  and  elsewhere ;  and  I  may  be  permitted  to  say  that  my 
personal  experience  with  the  three  members  of  the  family  who 
ser\'ed  with  me  was  such  that  there  could  be  no  doubt  as  to  their 
courage,  energy,  and  military  spirit.  The  course  pursued  by  the 
Prince  de  Joinville  and  the  Due  de  Chartres  during  the  fatal 
invasion  of  France  by  the  Germans  was  in  perfect  harmony  with 
this.  Both  sought  service,  under  assumed  names,  in  the  darkest 
and  most  dangerous  hours  of  their  country's  trial.  The  duke 
served  for  some  months  as  Capt.  Robert  le  Fort,  and  under  that 
name,  his  identity  being  known  to  few  if  any  beyond  his  closest 
personal  friends,  gained  promotion  and  distinction  by  his  gal- 
lantry and  intelligence. 


1 46  McCLELLAN'S  O  iVN  STOR  V. 

Should  the  Comte  de  Paris  ever  reach  the  throne  of  France — 
as  is  more  than  probable — I  am  sure  that  he  will  prove  to  be  a 
wise,  honest,  and  firm  constitutional  king,  and  that  the  honor  and 
prosperity  of  France  will  be  safer  in  his  hands  and  those  of  his 
soldierly  family  than  for  many  years  past. 

Information  from  various  sources  received  in  Aug.  and  Sept., 
1 86 1,  convinced  the  government  that  there  was  serious  danger  of 
the  secession  of  Maryland. 

The  secessionists  possessed  about  two-thirds  of  each  branch 
of  the  State  legislature,  and  the  general  government  had  what  it 
regarded  as  good  reasons  tor  believing  that  a  secret,  extra,  and 
illegal  session  of  the  legislature  was  about  to  be  convened  at 
Frederick  on  the  17th  of  Sept.  in  order  to  pass  an  ordinance  of 
secession.  It  was  understood  that  this  action  was  to  be  sup- 
ported by  an  advance  of  the  Southern  army  across  the  Potomac 
— an  advance  which  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  not  yet  in  a 
condition  to  desire.  Even  an  abortive  attempt  to  carry  out  this 
design  would  have  involved  great  civil  confusion  and  military 
inconvenience.  It  was  impossible  to  permit  the  secession  of 
Maryland,  intervening,  as  it  did,  between  the  capital  and  the 
loyal  States,  and  commanding  all  our  lines  of  supply  and  rein- 
forcement. I  do  not  know  how  the  government  obtained  the 
information  on  which  they  reached  their  conclusions.  I  do 
not  know  how  reliable  it  was.  I  only  know  that  at  the  time  it 
seemed  more  than  probable,  and  that  ordinary  prudence  required 
that  it  should  be  regarded  as  certain.  So  that  when  I  received 
the  orders  for  the  arrest  of  the  most  active  members  of  the  legis- 
lature, for  the  purpose  of  preventing  the  intended  meeting  and 
the  passage  of  the  act  of  secession,  I  gave  that  order  a  most  full 
and  hearty  support  as  a  measure  of  undoubted  military  necessity. 

On  the  loth  of  Sept.  Hon.  Simon  Cameron,  Secretary  of  War, 
instructed  Gen.  Banks  to  prevent  the  passage  of  any  act  of  seces- 
sion by  the  Maryland  legislature,  directing  him  to  arrest  all  or 
any  number  of  the  members,  if  necessary,  but  in  any  event  to  do 
the  work  effectively. 

On  the  same  day  the  Secretary  of  War  instructed  Gen.  Dix  to 
arrest  six  conspicuous  and  active  secessionists  of  Baltimore,  three 
of  whom  were  members  of  the  legislature.  They  were  to  be  sent 
to  Fort  Monroe,  their  papers  seized  and  examined.  A  special 
agent  was  sent  to  take  immediate  charge  of  the  arrests. 


MARYLAND  LEGISLATURE.  1 47 

On  the  loth  of  Sept.  Gen.  Dix  sent  to  Secretar)*  Seward  and 
myself  marked  lists  of  the  legislature.  In  his  letters  he  strongly 
approved  of  the  intended  arrests,  and  advised  that  those  arrested 
should  be  sent  to  New  York  harbor  by  a  special  steamer. 

The  total  number  of  arrests  made  was  about  sixteen,  and  the 
result  was  the  thorough  upsetting  of  whatever  plans  the  seces- 
sionists of  Mar}land  may  have  entertained.  It  is  needless  to  say 
that  the  arrested  parties  were  ultimately  released,  and  were  kindly 
treated  while  imprisoned.  Their  arrest  was  a  military  necessit}-, 
and  they  had  no  cause  of  complaint.  In  fact,  they  might  with 
justice  have  received  much  more  severe  treatment  than  they  did. 

On  the  28th  of  Oct  I  received  from  the  chief  of  the  Secret 
Ser>'ice  a  report  in  reference  to  the  elections  to  be  held  in  Mary- 
land, on  the  6th  of  Nov.,  for  governor,  members  of  the  State  legis- 
lature, etc.  In  this  report  he  states  that  he  had  information  of  a 
general  apprehension  among  the  Union  citizens  of  the  southern 
part  of  the  State  of  a  serious  interference  with  their  rights  of  suf- 
frage by  the  disunion  citizens  of  that  district  on  the  occasion  of 
the  election  ;  that  it  was  said  that  several  hundred  persons,  who 
had  left  that  part  of  Mar}'land  with  the  avowed  purpose  of  aid- 
ing the  secessionist  cause  by  taking  up  arms  or  otherwise,  had 
recently  returned  to  their  homes,  as  was  supposed,  for  the  pur- 
pose of  controlling  the  State  election  ;  also,  that  it  had  been 
reported  to  him  that  a  large  quantity  of  arms  were  concealed 
in  a  designated  locality  for  use  in  endeavoring  to  control  the 
election  bv  the  disunionists. 

I  laid  this  report  immediately  before  the  President,  who 
caused  the  following  endorsement  (also  issued  separately  in  the 
form  of  an  order)  to  be  made  upon  it : 


4t 
« 

*  It 

4t 


Department  of  St.\te, 

Washington,  Oct.  28,  1861. 

Maj.'Gen.   G€org€  B.  McCUllan^  etc.,  etc,^  etc,  : 

The  President  desires  that  Gen.  McClellan  will  direct  such 
disposition  of  the  military  force  as  will  guard  effectually  against 
invasion  of  the  peace  and  order  of  Mar}-land  during  the  election,, 
and  for  this  purpose  he  is  authorized  to  suspend  the  habeas  cor- 
pus and  make  arrests  of  traitors  and  their  confederates  in  his 
discretion. 

"(Signed)  William  H.  Seward." 

To  carry  out  these  instructions  the  necessary  ordecs  were 


148  McCLEL LAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

issued  to  Gens.  Banks,  Stone,  and  Hooker.  I  give  a  copy  of 
the  order  issued  to  Gen.  Banks ;  the  others  were  the  same, 
mutatis  mutandis: 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Oct.  29,  1 86 1. 

To  Maj.-Gen.   N,  P,   Banks ^   Commanding  Division  at  Muddy 

Branchy  Md,  : 

General  :  There  is  an  apprehension  among  Union  citizens  in 
many  parts  of  Maryland  of  an  attempt  at  interference  with  the 
rights  of  suffrage  by  disunion  citizens  on  the  occasion  of  the  elec- 
tion to  take  place  on  the  6th  of  Nov.  next.  In  order  to  prevent 
this  the  major-general  commanding  directs  that  you  send  detach- 
ments of  a  sufficient  number  of  men  to  the  different  points  in 
your  vicinity  where  the  elections  are  to  be  held,  to  protect  the 
Union  voters  and  see  that  no  disunionists  are  allowed  to  intimi- 
date them  or  in  any  way  interfere  with  their  rights.  He  also 
desires  you  to  arrest  and  hold  in  confinement  till  after  the  elec- 
tion all  disunionists  who  are  known  to  have  returned  from  Vir- 
ginia recently  and  who  show  themselves  at  the  polls,  and  to  guard 
effectually  against  any  invasion  of  the  peace  and  order  of  the 
election. 

For  the  purpose  of  carrying  out  these  instructions  you  are 
authorized  to  suspend  the  habeas  corpus.     Gen.  Stone  has  received 
similar  instructions  to  these.     You  will  please  confer  with  him  as 
to  the  particular  points  that  each  shall  take  control  of. 
I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

R.  B.  Marcv,  Chief  of  Staff 


CHAPTER  IX 

Conspiracv  of  the  politicians —Edwin  M.  Stanton — Tnierview  at  the 
President's  office — Salmon  P.  Chase — Relations  with  Mr.  Lincoln — 
Anecdotes — President's  military  orders — Reduction  at  armv. 

I  HAVE  already  stated  in  a  general  wav  what  occurred 
between  myself  and  some  of  the  radical  leaders  shortly  after 
I  reached  Washington.  Tkey  then  saw  clearly  that  it  would 
not  be  possible  to  maJce  a  party  tool  of  me,  and  soon  concluded 
that  it  was  their  policy  to  ruin  me  if  possible. 

It  had  been  clearly  stated  by  Congress  and  the  general 
government  that  the  s  Je  object  of  the  war  was  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  Union  and  the  prevention  of  the  seces-sit^n  of  the 
Southern  States.*  We  fought  to  keep  them  in  the  Union,  and 
the  practically  unanimous  sentiment  of  the  army,  as  well  as  of 
the  moss  of  the  people,  was  at  that  time  stron:^ly  in  favor  of 
confining  the  war  to  that  object.  Although  the  Free-Soil  ele- 
ment was  strong  in  the  North,  the  Abolitionists  proper  were 
weak,  and  a  declaration  of  their  true  purposes  would  have 
seriously  interfered  with  the  progress  of  the  war.  A  clear  indi- 
cation of  the  correctness  of  this  statement  lies  in  the  fact  that 
the  executive  never  disowned  my  proclamation  to  the  West  Vir- 
ginians nor  the  policy  I  pursued  in  reference  to  Kentucky. 

The  real  object  of  the  radical  leaders  was  not  the  restoration 
of  the  Union,  but  the  permanent  ascendency  of  their  party,  and 
to  this  they  were  ready  to  sacrifice  the  Union,  if  necessary. 

*  A  few  davs  before  the  arrival  of  McClellan  in  Washington  Congress 
had  stated  the  purposes  of  the  war  in  a  resolution  : 

'*That  the  present  deplorable  civil  war  has  been  forced  upon  the 
country  by  the  disunionists  of  the  Southern  States,  now  in  revolt  against 
the  constitutional  government,  and  in  arms  around  the  capital ;  that  in 
this  national  emergency  Congress,  banishing  all  feeling  of  mere  passif>n 
or  resentment,  will  recollect  only  its  duty  to  its  country ;  that  this  war  is 
not  waged,  on  our  part,  in  any  spirit  of  oppression,  nor  for  any  purpose  of 
conquest  or  subjuflcation,  nor  purpose  of  overthrowing  or  interfering  with 
the  rijrhts  or  established  institutions  of  those  States,  but  to  defend  and 
maintain  the  supremacv  of  the  Constitution  and  to  preserve  the  Union, 
with  ail  the  dignity,  equality,  and  rights  of  the  several  States  unimpaired : 
and  as  soon  as  these  objects  are  accomplisiied  the  war  ought  to  cease." 

t«9 


150  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

They  committed  a  grave  error  in  supposing  me  to  be  politi- 
cally ambitious  and  in  thinking  that  I  looked  forward  to  military 
success  as  a  means  of  reaching  the  presidential  chair.  At  the 
same  time  they  knew  that  if  I  achieved  marked  success  my 
influence  would  necessarily  be  very  great  throughout  the  coun- 
try— an  influence  which  I  should  certainly  have  used  for  the 
good  of  the  whole  country,  and  not  for  that  of  any  party  at  the 
nation's  expense. 

They  therefore  determined  to  ruin  me  in  any  event  and  by 
any  means  :  first  by  endeavoring  to  force  me  into  premature 
movements,  knowing  that  a  failure  would  probably  end  my  mili- 
tary career ;  afterwards  by  withholding  the  means  necessary  to 
achieve  success. 

That  they  were  not  honest  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  having 
failed  to  force  me  to  advance  at  a  time  when  an  advance  would 
have  been  madness,  they  withheld  the  means  of  success  when  I 
was  in  contact  with  the  enemy,  and  finally  relieved  me  from 
command  when  the  game  was  in  my  hands-  They  determined 
that  I  should  not  succeed,  and  carried  out  their  determinations 
only  too  well  and  at  a  fearful  sacrifice  of  blood,  time,  and 
treasure.  In  the  East  alone  it  is  quite  safe  to  say  that  we 
unnecessarily  lost  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  million  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  prisoners  in  consequence  of  my  being  withdrawn 
from  the  Peninsula  and  not  properly  supported.  Taking  both 
East  and  West,  and  counting  the  losses  also  by  disease,  I  do  not 
doubt  that  more  than  half  a  million  of  men  were  sacrificed 
unnecessarily  for  the  sake  of  insuring  the  success  of  a  politi- 
cal party. 

I  do  not  base  my  assertions  as  to  the  motives  of  the  radical 
leaders  upon  mere  surmises,  but  upon  facts  that  have  frequently 
come  to  my  knowledge  during  the  war  and  since.  For  instance, 
Maj.  Charles  Davies,  once  professor  of  mathematics  at  West 
Point,  told  me,  and  at  a  different  time  told  Gen.  Jos.  E.  John- 
ston, the  following  story  : 

He  said  that  during  the  very  early  part  of  the  Peninsular 
campaign  he  was  one  of  a  commission  sent  from  New  York  to 
urge  more  vigorous  action  in  supporting  me.  They  called  upon 
the  President,  and  found  Mr.  Stanton  with  him.  In  reply  to 
their  statement  of  the  purpose  of  their  visit  Mr.  Stanton  stated 
that  the  great  end  and  aim  of  the  war  was  to  abolish  slavery. 


EDWIN  M,    STANTON.  151 

To  end  the  war  before  the  nation  was  ready  for  that  would  be  a 
failure.  The  war  must  be  prolonged,  and  conducted  so  as  to 
achieve  that  That  the  people  of  the  North  were  not  yet  ready 
to  accept  that  view,  and  thai  it  would  not  answer  to  permit  me 
to  succeed  until  the  people  had  been  worked  up  to  the  proper 
pitch  on  that  question.  That  the  war  would  not  be  finished 
until  that  result  was  reached,  and  that,  therefore,  it  was  not 
their  policy  to  strengthen  Gen.  McClellan  so  as  to  insure  his 
success. 

I  have  heard,  from  the  best  authority,  many  instances  in 
which  the  same  views  were  expressed  by  other  prominent  radi- 
cal leaders.  Under  date  of  .April  7,  1862,  Gen.  Franklin,  in  a 
letter  informing  me  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  with- 
holding of  McDowell's  corps,  of  which  his  division  formed  part, 
writes  :  "  McDowell  told  me  that  it  was  intended  as  a  blow  at 
vou.  That  Stanton  had  said  that  vou  intended  t'>  work  bv 
strategy  and  not  by  fighting  ;  that  all  of  the  opponents  of  the 
policy  of  the  administration  centred  around  you — in  other 
words,  that  you  had  political  aspirations.  There  was  no  friend 
of  yours  present  to  contradict  these  statements,  of  course." 

As  a  further  proof  that  the  administration  did  not  intend  the 
Peninsular  campaign  to  be  successful  may  be  cited  the  fact  that 
on  the  3d  of  April,  1862,  ten  days  after  I  left  Washington  to 
assume  command  in  the  field,  there  was  issued  General  Order 
No.  2^T^,  closing  all  the  recruiting  depots  for  the  volunteers  and 
stopping  all  recruiting.  It  is  hardly  credible  that  the  members 
of  the  administration  were  ignorant  of  the  fact  that  an  army  in 
the  field  must  meet  with  some  los.ses  under  the  most  favorable 
circumstances,  and  that  to  stop  all  supplies  of  men  at  such  a 
juncture  is  the  most  unpardonable  of  follies. 

From  the  light  that  has  since  been  thrown  on  Stanton's 
character  I  am  satisfied  that  from  an  earlv  date  he  was  in 
this  treasonable  conspiracy,  and  that  his  course  in  ingratiat- 
ing himself  with  me,  and  pretending  to  be  my  friend  before 
he  was  in  office,  was  only  a  part  of  his  long  system  of  treacher}'. 

Judge  Black's  papers  in  the  Galaxy  showed  the  character  of 
the  man  ;  and  it  is  somewhat  singular  that  the  judge  began  the 
papers  for  the  purpose  of  vindicating  Stanton,  but  that  as  he 
proceeded  he  became  enlightened  as  to  what  the  man  really  was. 

I  had  never  seen   Mr.  Stanton,  and  probably  had  not  even 


152  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

heard  of  him,  before  reaching  Washington  in  1861.  Not  many 
weeks  after  arriving  I  was  introduced  to  him  as  a  safe  adviser  on 
legal  points.  From  that  moment  he  did  his  best  to  ingratiate 
himself  with  me,  and  professed  the  warmest  friendship  and  devo- 
tion. I  had  no  reason  to  suspect  his  sincerity,  and  therefore 
believed  him  to  be  what  he  professed.  The  most  disagreeable 
thing  about  him  was  the  extreme  virulence  with  which  he  abused 
the  President,  the  administration,  and  the  Republican  party. 
He  carried  this  to  such  an  extent  that  I  was  often  shocked  by  it. 

He  never  spoke  of  the  President  in  any  other  way  than  as 
the  "  original  gorilla,"  and  often  said  that  Du  Chaillu  was  a  fool 
to  wander  all  the  way  to  Africa  in  search  of  what  he  could  so 
easily  have  found  at  Springfield,  Illinois.  Nothing  could  be  more 
bitter  than  his  words  and  manner  always  were  when  speaking  of 
the  administration  and  the  Republican  party.  He  never  gave 
them  credit  for  honesty  or  patriotism,  and  very  seldom  for  any 
ability. 

At  some  time  during  the  autumn  of  1861  Secretary  Cameron 
made  quite  an  abolition  speech  to  some  newly  arrived  regiment. 
Next  day  Stanton  urged  me  to  arrest  him  for  inciting  to  insubor- 
dination. He  often  advocated  the  propriety  of  my  seizing  the 
government  and  taking  affairs  into  my  own  hands. 

As  he  always  expressed  himself  in  favor  of  putting  down  the 
rebellion  at  any  cost,  I  always  regarded  these  extreme  views  as 
the  ebullitions  of  an  intense  and  patriotic  nature,  and  sometimes 
wasted  more  or  less  time  in  endeavoring  to  bring  him  to  more 
moderate  views,  never  dreaming  that  all  the  while  this  man  was 
in  close  communication  with  the  very  men  whom  he  so  violently 
abused.  His  purpose  was  to  endeavor  to  climb  upon  my  shoul- 
ders and  then  throw  mc  down. 

Several  weeks  before  Mr.  Cameron  was  finally  removed  from 
the  War  Department  it  came  to  my  knowledge  that  a  committee 
of  New  York  bankers  were  urging  upon  Secretary  Chase  the 
removal  of  Mr.  Cameron.  I  interfered,  and  by  my  action  with 
the  President  no  doubt  saved  him.  The  fact  is  that,  so  far  as 
purely  military  matters  were  concerned,  Mr.  Cameron  had  not  at 
all  interfered  with  me,  but  gave  me  full  support.  He,  so  far  as  I 
knew,  occupied  himself  solely  with  contracts  and  political  affairs. 
The  only  difficulty  I  ever  had  with  him — and  I  do  not  think  that 
this  point  had  arisen  before  the  time  in  question,  at  all  events 


EDWIN  M.    STANTON.  I  53 

to  a  very  considerable  degree — was  that  I  could  not  always  dis- 
pose of  arms  and  supplies  as  I  thought  the  good  of  the  service 
demanded.  For  instance,  it  often  happened,  especially  toward 
the  close  of  his  administration,  that  when  a  shipment  of  unusu- 
ally good  arms  arrived  from  Europe,  and  I  wished  them  for  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac,  I  found  that  they  had  been  promised  to 
some  political  friend  who  might  be  engaged  in  raising  a  pros- 
pective regiment  in  some  remote  State,  and  I  could  not  get 
them.  So  with  regard  to  other  articles  of  equipment,  and  to 
batteries  and  regiments  which  I  desired  for  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  As  I  had  no  idea  who  might  be  selected  in  Mr.  Came- 
ron's place,  and  as  he  supported  me  in  purely  military  matters,  I 
objected  to  his  removal  and  saved  him.  He  was  made  aware  of 
this  at  the  time. 

Finally,  one  day  when  I  returned  to  my  house  from  my  day's 
work  and  was  dressing  for  dinner,  a  lady  of  my  family  told  me 
that  Col.  Key,  one  of  my  aides,  had  just  been  there  to  inform  me 
that  Mr.  Cameron  had  resigned  and  that  Mr.  Stanton  was  ap- 
pointed in  his  place.  This  was  the  first  intimation  that  I  had  of 
the  matter.  Before  I  had  finished  my  toilet  Mr.  Stanton's  card 
came  up,  and  as  soon  as  possible  I  went  down  to  see  him.  He 
told  me  that  he  had  been  appointed  Secretary  of  War,  and  that 
his  name  had  been  sent  to  the  Senate  for  confirmation,  and  that 
he  had  called  to  confer  with  me  as  to  his  acceptance.  He  said 
that  acceptance  would  involve  very  great  personal  sacrifices  on 
his  part,  and  that  the  only  possible  inducement  would  be  that  he 
might  have  it  in  his  power  to  aid  me  in  the  work  of  putting  down 
the  rebellion  ;  that  he  was  willing  to  devote  all  his  time,  intellect, 
and  energy  to  my  assistance,  and  that  together  we  could  soon 
bring  the  war  to  an  end.  If  I  wished  him  to  accept  he  would 
do  so,  but  only  on  my  account  ;  that  he  had  come  to  know  my 
wishes  and  determine  accordingly.  I  told  him  that  I  hoped  he 
would  accept  the  position. 

Soon  after  Mr.  Stanton  became  Secretary  of  War  it  became 
clear  that,  without  any  reason  known  to  me,  our  relations  had 
completely  changed.  Instead  of  using  his  new  position  to  assist 
me  he  threw  every  obstacle  in  my  way,  and  did  all  in  his  power 
to  create  difficulty  and  distrust  between  the  President  and  myself. 
I  soon  found  it  impossible  to  gain  access  to  him.  Before  hL' 
was  in  office  he  constantly  ran  after  me  and  professed  the  most 


154  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

ardent  friendship  ;  as  soon  as  he  became  Secretary  of  War  his 
whole  manner  changed,  and  I  could  no  longer  find  the  oppor- 
tunity to  transact  even  the  ordinary  current  business  of  the  office 
with  him.  It  is  now  very  clear  to  me  that,  far  from  being,  as  he 
had  always  represented  himself  to  me,  in  direct  and  violent  oppo- 
sition to  the  radicals,  he  was  really  in  secret  alliance  with  them, 
and  that  he  and  they  were  alike  unwilling  that  I  should  be  suc- 
cessful. No  other  theory  can  possibly  account  for  his  and  their 
course,  and  on  that  theory  everything  becomes  clear  and  easily 
explained. 

Had  I  been  successful  in  my  first  campaign  the  rebellion 
would  perhaps  have  been  terminated  without  the  immediate  abo- 
lition of  slavery.  To  gain  their  ends  with  the  President  they 
played  upon  his  apprehensions  for  the  safety  of  Washington — 
growing  out  of  his  complete  ignorance  of  war — as  well  as  upon 
his  personal  aspirations.  1  believe  that  the  leaders  of  the  radical 
branch  of  the  Republican  party  preferred  political  control  in  one 
section  of  a  divided  country  to  being  in  the  minority  in  a  restored 
Union. 

Not  only  did  these  people  desire  the  abolition  of  slavery,  but 
its  abolition  in  such  a  manner  and  under  such  circumstances  that 
the  slaves  would  at  once  be  endowed  with  the  electoral  franchise, 
while  the  intelligent  white  man  of  the  South  should  be  deprived 
of  it,  and  permanent  control  thus  be  secured  through  the  votes  of 
the  ignorant  slaves,  composing  so  large  a  portion  of  the  popula- 
tion of  the  seceded  States. 

Influenced  by  these  motives,  they  succeeded  but  too  well  in 
sowing  the  seeds  of  distrust  in  Mr.  Lincoln's  mind,  so  that,  even 
before  I  actually  commenced  the  Peninsular  campaign,  I  had 
lost  that  cordial  support  of  the  executive  which  was  necessary  to 
attain  success.  It  may  be  said  that  under  these  circumstances 
it  was  my  duty  to  resign  my  command.  But  I  had  become 
warmly  attached  to  the  soldiers,  who  already  had  learned  to  love 
me  well  ;  all  my  pride  was  wrapped  up  in  the  army  that  I  had 
created,  and  1  knew  of  no  commander  at  all  likely  to  be  assigned 
to  it  in  my  place  who  would  be  competent  to  conduct  its  opera- 
tions. 

Nor  did  I  at  that  time  fully  realize  the  length  to  which  these 
men  were  prepared  to  go  in  carrying  out  their  schemes.  For 
instance,   I   did  not  suspect,  until  the  orders  reached  me,  that 


COMMENCEMENT  OF  DIFFICULTIES.  I  55 

Fort  Monroe  and  the  ist  corps  would  be  withdrawn  from  my 
control  ;  and  when  those  orders  arrived  they  found  me  too  far 
committed  to  permit  me  to  withdraw  with  honor.  With  the 
troops  under  fire  it  did  not  become  me  to  offer  my  resigna- 
tion. 

The  difficulties  of  my  position  in  Washington  commenced 
when  I  was  first  confined  to  my  bed  with  typhoid  fever  in 
December  and  January  (1861  and  1862)  for  some  three  weeks, 
and  culminated  soon  after  Mr.  Stanton  became  Secretary  of  War. 
Up  to  this  time  there  had  been  no  serious  difficulty  ;  there  were 
slight  murmurs  of  impatience  at  the  delay  in  moving,  but  all 
sensible  and  well-informed  men  saw  the  impossibility  of  enter- 
ing upon  a  campaign  at  that  season,  and  no  party  was  as  yet 
openly  formed  against  me. 

My  malady  was  supposed  to  be  more  serious  than  it  really 
was ;  for,  although  very  weak  and  ill,  my  strong  constitution 
enabled  me  to  retain  a  clear  intellect  during  the  most  trying 
part  of  the  illness,  so  that  I  daily  transacted  business  and  gave 
the  necessary  orders,  never  for  a  moment  abandoning  the  direc- 
tion of  affairs.  As  is  often  the  case  with  such  diseases,  I  some- 
times passed  days  and  nights  without  sleeping,  and  it  more  than 
once  happened  that  the  President  called  while  I  was  asleep  after 
such  intervals  of  wakefulness,  and,  being  denied  admittance,  his 
anxiety  induced  him  to  think  that  my  disease  was  very  acute 
and  would  terminate  fatally.  The  radical  leaders  skilfully  availed 
themselves  of  the  state  of  affairs  to  drive  in  an  entering  wedge. 
They  represented  to  the  President  that  as  I  kept  my  own  counsels 
and  was  not  in  the  habit  of  consulting  or  advising  with  others, 
but  acted  entirely  on  my  own  judgment,  no  one  but  myself 
knew  the  exact  condition  of  the  army,  its  state  of  prepara- 
tion, or  the  designs  I  had  in  view  ;  that,  should  my  malady 
terminate  suddenly  and  fatally,  great  confusion  would  ensue, 
and  that  it  was  necessary  to  provide  against  such  an  emer- 
gency by  causing  a  secret  examination  to  be  made  immedi- 
ately. My  first  inkling  of  this  came  through  Mr.  Stanton,  not 
yet  Secretary  of  War,  who  said  to  me  :  "  They  are  counting  on 
your  death,  and  are  already  dividing  among  themselves  your  mili- 
tary goods  and  chattels." 

The  fact  was  that,  although  I  was  in  the  habit  of  acting  solely 
on  my  own  judgment,  and  never  told  more  of  my  intentions  than 


156  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

was  absolutely  necessary,  I  always  consulted  freely  with  the  chiefs 
of  the  staff  departments,  each  of  whom  knew  the  exact  condition 
of  affairs  in  his  own  department  and  could  give  to  any  properly 
authorized  person  all  necessary  explanations.  So  that  a  secret 
examination  was  not  only  unnecessary,  but  could  not  produce  as 
good  results  as  the  honest,  direct  way  of  coming  to  me  and  direct- 
ing me  to  instruct  my  staff  to  explain  the  state  of  affairs  to  the 
President  or  Secretary  of  War.  Gens.  McDowell,  Franklin,  and, 
I  think,  Meigs  were  entrusted  by  the  President  with  this  busi- 
ness. 

McDowell,  who  was  probably  at  the  bottom  of  the  affair, 
undertook  it  con  amore,  hoping  to  succeed  me  in  command. 
Franklin  was  unwilling  to  touch  it,  and  simply  acted  under 
orders.  This  information  reached  me  when  the  crisis  of  my 
malady  was  over,  and  learning — also  through  Mr.  Stanton — that 
a  grand  conclave  was  to  assemble  without  my  knowledge,  I  mus- 
tered strength  enough  on  Sunday  morning  (Jan.  12,  1862)  to  be 
driven  to  the  White  House,  where  my  unexpected  appearance 
caused  very  much  the  effect  of  a  shell  in  a  powder-magazine.  It 
was  very  clear  from  the  manner  of  those  I  met  there  that  there 
was  something  of  which  they  were  ashamed. 

I  made  no  allusion  to  what  I  knew,  nor  was  anything  said  to 
me  on  the  subject.  But  I  took  advantage  of  the  occasion  to 
explain  to  the  President  in  a  general  and  casual  way  what  my 
intentions  were  ;  and  before  I  left  he  told  me  that  there  was  to  be 
a  meeting  at  the  White  House  next  day,  and  invited  me  to  attend, 
but  made  no  reference  to  the  object  of  the  meeting.  At  the 
designated  hour  I  went  to  the  President's  office  and  there  met 
a  party  consisting  of  the  President,  Secretaries  Seward,  Chase, 
and  Blair,  Gens.  McDowell,  Franklin,  and  Meigs.  I  do  not  think 
that  the  Secretary  of  War  (Mr.  Cameron)  was  present.  I  sat  by 
Secretary  Blair  and  Gen.  Meigs,  and  entered  into  conversation 
with  them  upon  topics  of  general  interest  having  no  possible 
bearing  upon  any  subject  that  could  be  brought  before  the  meet- 
ing. Meanwhile  there  was  a  good  deal  of  whispering  among  the 
others,  in  which  I  do  not  think  Franklin  took  any  special  part. 
Finally  McDowell  said  he  wished  to  explain  to  me  the  part  he 
had  in  the  examination,  which  had  commenced,  into  the  state  of 
the  army. 

Exactly  what  he  said  has  escaped  my  memory,  except  that  he 


SALMON  P,    CHASE.  I  57 

disclaimed  any  purpose  hostile  to  me,  and  based  what  had  been 
done  on  the  ground  of  the  supposed  critical  nature  of  my  ill- 
ness. I  stopped  the  explanation  by  saying  that  as  I  was  now 
again  restored  to  health  the  case  had  changed,  and  that,  as  the 
examination  must  now  cease,  further  explanations  were  unneces- 
sary. Franklin  then  said  a  few  words  clearing  himself  of  any 
improper  motives,  which  was  needless,  as  I  could  not  suspect  him 
of  anything  wrong.  I  then  quietly  resumed  my  conversation  with 
Blair  and  Meigs,  awaiting  further  developments. 

The  whispering  then  recommenced,  especially  between  the 
President  and  Secretary  Chase  ;  when  at  length  the  latter  (Chase) 
spoke  aloud,  for  the  benefit  of  all  assembled,  in  a  very  excited 
tone  and  manner,  saying  that  he  understood  the  purpose  of  the 
meeting  to  be  that  Gen.  McClellan  should  then  and  there  explain 
his  military  plans  in  detail,  that  they  might  be  submitted  to  the 
approval  or  disapproval  of  the  gentlemen  present.  The  uncalled- 
for  violence  of  his  manner  surprised  me,  but  I  determined  to 
avail  myself  of  it  by  keeping  perfectly  cool  myself,  and  contented 
myself  with  remarking — what  was  entirely  true — that  the  purpose 
he  expressed  was  entirely  new  to  me  ;  that  I  did  not  recognize  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  as  in  any  manner  my  official  superior, 
and  that  I  denied  his  right  to  question  me  upon  the  military 
affairs  committed  to  my  charge  ;  that  in  the  President  and  Sec- 
retary of  War  alone  did  I  recognize  the  right  to  interrogate  me. 
I  then  quietly  resumed  my  conversation  with  Blair  and  Meigs, 
taking  no  turther  notice  of  Mr.  Chase. 

I  must  again  state  that  this  meeting  had  been  arranged  when 
I  was  supposed  to  be  too  ill  to  attend,  and  that  the  original  and 
real  purpose  was  not  as  Mr.  Chase  stated  it,  but  "  to  dispose 
of  the  military  goods  and  chattels  "  of  the  sick  man  so  inoppor- 
tunely restored  to  life.  Mr.  Chase's  disappointment  at  this  sud- 
den frustration  of  his  schemes  accounts,  I  suppose,  for  his  anger. 
In  another  connection  I  have  already  stated  that  some  weeks 
before  the  date  of  this  meeting  I  had  given  Mr.  Chase  a  sketch 
of  the  proposed  Urbana  movement,  and  that  he  was  much  pleased 
with  it.  Here  I  need  only  say  in  addition  that  I  did  thi^entire- 
ly  of  my  own  volition,  for  the  purpose  indicated,  and  that  Mr. 
Swinton  is  entirely  mistaken  in  stating  that  it  was  by  direction 
of  the  President.  Mr.  Chase  knew  at  the  time  that  the  Presi- 
dent had  no  knowledge  of  my  intention  of  talking  to  him  about 


158  McCLELLAN*S  OWX  STOKY. 

my  plans.  At  this  previous  interview  Mr.  Chase  seemed  very 
grateful  for  the  confidence  I  reposed  in  him  and  for  my  thought- 
fulness  in  thus  seeking  to  relieve  his  mind  in  his  troubles.  I  pre- 
sume the  after-thought,  and  the  object  of  the  intrigues,  cut  short 
by  my  recovery,  was  to  take  advantage  of  this  plan  by  having  it 
carried  into  effect  by  McDowell.  In  no  other  way  can  I  account 
for  the  uncalled-for  irritation  displayed.  This  impression  is 
strengthened  by  other  circumstances  which  will  appear  as  I 
proceed  with  my  story. 

To  return  to  the  meeting.  After  I  had  thus  disposed  of  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  he  resumed  his  whispering  with  the 
President,  who,  after  the  lapse  of  some  minutes,  said  :  "  Well, 
Gen.  McClellan,  I  think  you  had  better  tell  us  what  your  plans 
are" — or  words  to  that  effect. 

To  this  I  replied,  in  substance,  that  if  the  President  had  con- 
fidence in  me  it  was  not  right  or  necessary  to  entrust  my  designs 
to  the  judgment  of  others,  but  that  if  his  confidence  was  so  slight 
as  to  require  my  opinions  to  be  fortified  by  those  of  other  persons 
it  would  be  wiser  to  replace  me  by  some  one  fully  possessing  his 
confidence  ;  that  no  general  commanding  an  army  would  willingly 
submit  his  plans  to  the  judgment  of  such  an  assembly,  in  which 
some  were  incompetent  to  form  a  valuable  opinion,  and  others 
incapable  of  keeping  a  secret,  so  that  anything  made  known  to 
them  would  soon  spread  over  Washington  and  become  known  to 
the  enemy.  I  also  reminded  the  President  that  he  and  the  Sec- 
retary of  the  Treasury  knew  in  general  terms  what  my  designs 
were.  Finally,  I  declined  giving  any  further  information  to  the 
meeting,  unless  the  President  gave  me  the  order  in  writing  and 
assumed  the  responsibility  of  the  results. 

This  was  probably  an  unexpected  denouement.  The  President 
was  not  willing  to  assume  the  responsibility ;  and,  after  a  little 
more  whispering  between  him  and  Mr.  Chase,  Mr.  Seward  arose, 
buttoned  his  coat,  and  laughingly  said,  "  Well,  Mr.  President,  I 
think  the  meeting  had  better  break  up.  I  don't  see  thjit  we  are 
likely  to  make  much  out  of  Gen.  McClellan."  With  that  the 
meeting  adjourned.  I  do  not  think  that  Mr.  Seward  took  any 
special  part  in  the  affair,  and  believe  that  he  was  on  my  side. 
Mr.  Chase  still  continued  his  whispered  conversation  with  the 
President.  I  waited  until  that  had  ceased,  then  walked  up  to  the 
President,  begged  him  not  to  allow  himself  to  be  acted  upon  by 


STANTON   WAR  SECRETARY.  I  59 

improper  influences,  but  still  to  trust  me,  and  said  that  if  he 
would  leave  military  affairs  to  me  I  would  be  responsible  that  1 
would  bring  matters  to  a  successful  issue  and  free  him  from  all 
his  troubles. 

The  radicals  never  again  lost  their  influence  with  the  Presi- 
dent, and  henceforth  directed  all  their  efforts  to  prevent  my 
achieving  success.  After  this  time  Secretary  Chase  worked  with 
iliem  and  became  my  enemy. 

One  of  their  next  steps  was  to  secure  the  removal  of  Mr. 
Cameron,  in  order  to  replace  him  by  Mr.  Stanton,  who,  while  pre- 
tending to  be  my  friend,  was  secretly  allied  with  them,  and  no 
doubt  made  use  of  his  pretended  friendship  for  me  to  secure 
his  appointment ;  for  I  have  no  reason  to  doubt  the  sincerity  of 
the  President's  assertion  that  he  had  appointed  him  because 
he  thought  it  would  be  agreeable  to  me.* 

*  Note  by  the  Editor, — The  question  will  naturally  be  asked.  How 
came  it  about  that  Mr  Edwin  M.  Stanton,  then  a  pronounced  and  violent 
opponent  of  the  President  and  the  administration,  knew  of  this  secret  pro- 
ceeding, which  was  concealed  from  all  but  a  few  confidential  friends  of  the 
President  and  three  soldiers  under  orders  of  secrecy?  Also,  how  came  it, 
that  a  few  days  after  this  Mr.  Stanton  was  brought  into  Mr.  Lincoln's  cabi- 
net ?  These  questions  were  unanswerable  until  the  publication  of  the  pri- 
vate papers  of  Secretary  Chase,  which  shed  ample  light  on  them.  Why  Mr. 
Stanton  revealed  Mr.  Chase's  secret  to  McClelian,  aiid  enabled  the  latter  to 
defeat  the  plot,  can  be  conjectured.  Willing  to  be  made  War  Secretary  by 
Mr.  Chase's  intrigues,  he  may  not  have  been  so  willing  to  have  McDowell, 
or  any  other  general  closely  allied  to  Mr.  Chase,  placed  in  command  of  the 
army. 

On  the  very  day  on  which  Gen.  McClelian  made  use  of  Mr.  Stanton's 
information,  and  left  his  bed  to  visit  the  President,  Mr.  Chase  devoted 
himself  to  concentrating  the  plans  for  bringing  Mr.  Stanton  into  the  cabi- 
net. He  regarded  it  as  a  matter  of  the  highest  importance,  and  his 
account,  in  his  private  diary  for  that  day,  of  his  method  of  using  Secretary 
Cameron  and  Seward  to  accomplish  his  end  forms  a  very  extraordinary 
intermingling  of  piety  and  politics,  as  follows  (see  Warden's  **  Account, 
etc.,  of  S.  P.  Chase,"  p.  400) : 

**  January  12,  1862. — At  church  this  morning.  Wished  much  to  join 
in  communion,  biit  felt  myself  too  subject  to  temptation  to  sin.  After 
church  went  to  see  Cameron  by  appointment ;  but  being  obliged  to  meet 
the  President,  etc.,  at  one,  could  only  excuse  myself.  At  President's 
found  Gens.  McDowell,  Franklin,  and  Meigs,  and  Seward  and  Blair. 
Meigs  decided  against  dividing  forces  and  in  favor  of  battle  in  front. 
President  said  McCIellan's  health  was  much  improved,  and  thought  it 
best  to  adjourn  until  to-morrow,  and  have  all  then  present  attend  with 
McC.  at  three.      Home,  and  talk  and  reading.     Dinner.     Cameron  came 


l60  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

My  relations  with  Mr.  Lincoln  were  generally  very  pleasant, 
and  I  seldom  had  trouble  with  him  when  we  could  meet  face  to 
face.  The  difficulty  always  arose  behind  my  back.  I  believe 
that  he  liKed  me  personally,  and  certainly  he  was  always  much 
influenced  by  me  when  we  were  together.  During  the  early  part 
of  my  command  in  Washington  he  often  consulted  with  me  before 
taking  important  steps  or  appointing  general  officers. 

He  appointed  Hunter  a  major-general  without  consulting  m^ 
and  a  day  or  two  afterwards  explained  that  he  did  so  "  because 
the  people  of  Illinois  seemed  to  want  somebody  to  be  a  sort  of 
father  to  them,  and  he  thought  Hunter  would  answer  that  pur- 
pose." 

in.  .  .  .  We  talked  of  his  going  to  Russia,  and  Stanton  as  successor,  and 
he  proposed  I  sh  )uld  again  t^ee  the  President. 

"  I  first  proposed  seeing  Seward,  to  wiiich  he  assented.  .  .  .  He  and  I 
drove  to  Willard's,  where  1  left  him,  and  went  myself  to  Seward's.  I  told 
hiin  at  once  what  was  in  my  mind — tliat  I  thought  the  President  and  Came- 
ron were  both  willing  that  C.  should  go  to  Russia.  He  seemed  to  receive 
the  matter  as  new,  except  so  far  as  suggested  by  me  last  night.  Wanted 
to  know  who  would  succeed  ( -ameron.  I  said  Holt  and  Stanton  had  been 
named  ;  that  I  feared  Holt  might  embarrass  us  on  the  sl.ivery  question,  and 
might  not  prove  quite  equal  to  the  emerg  ncy ;  that  Stanton  was  a  good 
lawyer  and  full  of  energy,  but  1  could  not,  of  course,  judge  him  as  an 
executive  officer  as  well  as  he  (S)  could,  for  he  knew  him  when  he  was  in 
Buchanan's  cabinet.  Seward  replied  that  he  saw  much  of  him  then  ;  that 
he  was  of  greai  force,  full  of  expedients,  and  thoroughly  loyal. 

**  Finally  he  agreed  to  the  whole  thing,  and  promis^^d  to  go  with  me  to 
talk  with  the  President  about  it  to- morrow.  Just  at  this  point  Cameron 
came  in  with  a  letter  from  the  President  proposing  his  nomination  to 
Russia  in  the  morning!  He  was  quite  offended,  supposing  the  letter 
intended  as  a  dismissal,  and  therefore  discourteous.  We  both  assured 
him  it'conld  not  be  so.  .  .  .  We  went  off  together,  I  taking  him  to  his  house. 

"  Before  parting  I  told  him  what  had  pa  sed  between  me  and  Seward 
concerning  Stanton,  with  which  he  was  gratified.  I  advised  him  to  go 
to  the  President  in  the  morning,  express  his  thanks  for  the  consideration 
with  which  his  wishes,  made  known  through  me  as  well  as  by  himself 
orally,  had  been  treated,  and  tell  him  frankly  how  desirable  it  was  to  him 
that  his  successor  should  be  a  Pennsylvanian  and  should  be  Stanton. 

•*  1  said  I  thought  that  his  wish,  supported,  as  it  would  be,  by  Seward 
and  myself,  would  certainly  be  gratified,  and  told  him  that  the  President 
had  already  mentioned  Stanton  in  a  way  which  indicated  that  no  objection 
on  his  part  would  be  made.  1  said  also  that  if  he  wished  I  would  see 
Seward,  and  would  go  to  the  President,  after  he  had  left  him,  Mnd  urge  the 
point.  He  asked,  why  not  come  in  when  we  (he)  should  be  tliere,  and  1 
assented  to  this.     We  parted,  and  I  came  home. 

**  A  day  which  may  have— and  seemingly  must  have — great  bearing  on 
affairs.  Oh  !  that  my  heart  and  life  were  so  pure  and  right  before  God 
that  I  might  not  hurt  our  great  cause. 

'*I  fear  Mr.  Seward  may  think  Cameron's  coming  into  his  house  pre- 
arranged, and  that  I  was  not  dealing  frankly.  I  feel  satisfied,  however, 
that  1  have  acted  right  and  with  ju<:t  deference  to  all  concerned,  and  have 
in  no  respect  deviated  from  the  truth." 


MR,  LINCOLN,  l6l 

When  he  appointed,  as  general  officers,  some  of  the  released 
prisoners  from  the  first  Bull  Run,  he  afterwards  explained  to  me 
that  he  did  it  as  a  recompense  for  their  sufferings,  unaware,  no 
doubt,  that  in  other  armies  they  would  have  been  brought  before 
some  tribunal  to  explain  their  capture. 

Soon  after  arriving  in  Washington  the  President  one  day 
sent  for  me  to  ask  my  opinion  of  Hooker,  who  was  urged  for 
appointment  as  a  brigadier-general  of  volunteers,  and  stated 
that  he  wished  me  to  regard  the  conversation  as  strictly  confi- 
dential. I  told  him  that  Hooker  had  been  a  good  soldier  in 
Mexico,  but  that  common  report  stated  that  he  had  fallen  in 
California ;  but  that  I  had  no  personal  knowledge  of  this,  and 
I  advised  him  to  consult  with  officers  who  were  in  California 
with  Hooker.  He,  however,  gave  him  the  appointment  a  few 
days  later.  Remembering  that  this  conversation  was  sought  by 
the  President  and  that  he  desired  me  to  regard  it  as  confiden- 
tial, it  was  with  no  little  surprise  that  I  learned,  after  Antietam, 
that  Hooker  had  been  informed  of  the  conversation,  except  of 
its  confidential  nature  and  that  it  was  sought  by  the  President. 

As  before  stated,  when  Stanton  was  made  Secretary  of  War 
I  knew  nothing  of  the  matter  until  the  nomination  had  already 
gone  to  the  Senate.  Next  day  the  President  came  to  my  house 
to  apologize  for  not  consulting  me  on  the  subject.  He  said  that 
he  knew  Stanton  to  be  a  friend  of  mine  and  assumed  that  I 
would  be  glad  to  have  him  Secretary  of  War,  and  that  he  feared 
that  if  he  told  me  beforehand  "  some  of  those  fellows  "  would 
say  that  I  had  dragooned  him  into  it. 

The  evening  before  the  order  appeared  finally  relieving  me 
from  the  comniand  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  the  elder  Mr. 
Frank  Blair  drove  to  the  Soldiers'  Home  to  dissuade  the  Presi- 
dent from  relieving  me,  rumors  being  current  that  such  a  thing 
was  in  contemplation.  After  a  long  conversation  Mr.  Blair  left 
with  the  distinct  understanding  that  I  was  not  to  be  relieved. 
Next  morning  the  order  appeared  in  the  papers,  and  when  Mr. 
Blair  met  the  President  in  the  course  of  the  day  the  latter  said  : 
"  Well,  Mr.  Blair,  I  was  obliged  to  play  shut-pan  with  you  last 
night."     Mr.  Blair  was  my  authority  for  this. 

Officially  my  association  with  the  President  was  very  close 
until  the  severe  attack  of  illness  in  December,  1861.  I  was 
often  sent  for  to  attend  formal  and  informal  cabinet  meetings, 


1 62  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

and  at  all  hours  whenever  the  President  desired  to  consult  with 
me  on  any  subject ;  and  he  often  came  to  my  house,  frequently 
late  at  night,  to  learn  the  last  news  before  retiring.  His  fame  as 
a  narrator  of  anecdotes  was  fully  deserved,  and  he  always  had 
something  apropos  on  the  spur  of  the  moment. 

Late  one  night,  when  he  was  at  my  house,  I  received  a  tele- 
gram from  an  officer  commanding  a  regiment  on  the  upper 
Potomac.  The  despatch  related  some  very  desperate  fighting 
that  had  been  done  during  the  day,  describing  in  magniloquent 
terms  the  severe  nature  of  the  contest,  fierce  bayonet-charges, 
etc.,  and  terminated  with  a  very  small  list  of  killed  and  wounded, 
quite  out  of  proportion  with  his  description  of  the  struggle. 

The  President  quietly  listened  to  my  reading  of  the  tele- 
gram, and  then  said  that  it  reminded  him  of  a  notorious  liar, 
who  attained  such  a  reputation  as  an  exaggerator  that  he  finally 
instructed  his  servant  to  stop  him,  when  his  tongue  was  running 
too  rapidly,  by  pulling  his  coat  or  touching  his  feet.  One  day 
the  master  was  relating  wonders  he  had  seen  in  Europe,  and 
described  a  building  which  was  about  a  mile  long  and  a  half- 
mile  high.  Just  then  the  servant's  heel  came  down  on  the  nar- 
rator's toes,  and  he  stopped  abruptly.  One  of  the  listeners 
asked  how  broad  this  remarkable  building  might  be  ;  the  nar- 
rator modestly  replied,  "  About  a  foot !  ^ 

I  think  he  enjoyed  these  things  quite  as  much  as  his  lis- 
teners. 

Long  before  the  war,  when  vice-president  of  the  Illinois  Cen- 
tral Railroad  Company,  I  knew  Mr.  Lincoln,  for  he  was  one  of 
the  counsel  of  the  company.  More  than  once  I  have  been  with 
him  in  out-of-the-way  county-seats  where  some  important  case 
was  being  tried,  and,  in  the  lack  of  sleeping  accommodations, 
have  spent  the  night  in  front  of  a  stove  listening  to  the  unceas- 
ing flow  of  anecdotes  from  his  lips.  He  was  never  at  a  loss,  and 
I  could  never  quite  make  up  my  mind  how  many  of  them  he 
had  really  heard  before,  and  how  many  he  invented  on  the  spur 
of  the  moment.  His  stories  were  seldom  refined,  but  were  al- 
ways to  the  point. 

The  President  ignored  all  questions  of  weather,  state  of 
roads,  and  preparation,  and  gave  orders  impossible  of  execu- 
tion. About  the  middle  of  Feb.,  1862,  the  President  having 
reluctantly  consented  to  abandon  his  plan  of  operation  for  that 


THE  PRESIDENT'S   WAR  ORDERS,  1 63 

suggested  by  me,  preparations  were  begun  for  the  collection  of 
the  necessary  water  transportation.  On  the  27th  of  that  month 
Mr.  John  Tucker,  of  Philadelphia,  Assistant  Secretary  of  War, 
was  placed  in  charge  of  the  procuring  of  the  requisite  steamers, 
etc.,  and  performed  his  task  with  wonderful  skill  and  energy. 
The  President's  War  Order  of  March  8,  1862,  "  that  any  move- 
ment as  aforesaid,  en  route  for  a  new  base  of  operations,  which 
may  be  ordered  by  the  geiieral-in-chief,  and  which  may  be  in- 
tended to  move  upon  the  Chesapeake  Bay,  shall  begin  to  move 
upon  the  bay  as  early  as  the  i8th  March  instant,  and  the 
general-in-chief  shall  be  responsible  that  it  moves  as  early  as 
that  day,'*  was  extraordinary,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  fur- 
nishing of  transports  was  in  no  manner  under  my  control,  and 
that  the  beginning  of  the  movement  must  necessarily  depend 
upon  their  arrival. 

NVhen  the  operation  by  the  lower  Chesapeake  was  finally 
decided  upon  and  approved  by  the  corps  commanders,  it  was 
distinctly  understood  that  the  movement  would  be  made  by 
the  complete  four  corps,  consisting  of  twelve  divisions,  plus  the 
reserve  artillery,  engineer  brigade,  regular  infantry  and  cavalry, 
and  several  cavalry  regiments  not  assigned  to  the  corps,  and 
that  I  was  authorized  to  form  a  division  of  10,000  men  from  the 
troops  in  and  near  Fort  Monroe  and  attach  it  to  the  active  army. 
Moreover,  we  were  assured  of  the  active  co-operation  of  the 
navy  in  reducing  the  batteries  at  Yorktown  and  Gloucester. 

As  my  story  progresses  it  will  appear  that  I  was  deprived 
of  five  out  of  the  thirteen  infantry  divisions,  with  their  batteries, 
and  of  nine  regiments  of  cavalry,  and  that  I  never  received  the 
co-operation  of  the  navy  in  reducing  the  batteries  at  Yorktown 
and  Gloucester. 

On  the  15th  of  March  the  aggregate  present  and  absent 
under  my  command  was  about  233,578,  taking  as  a  basis  the 
return  of  March  i  ;  the  number  present  for  duty,  including  all 
extra-duty  men,  guards,  etc.,  etc.,  was  203,213.  Of  these  I  pur- 
posed to  leave  behind,  in  Baltimore,  Washington,  and  the  Shen- 
andoah, an  aggregate  of  66,552,  brought  up  by  new  arrivals  to 
about  77,401  at  the  close  of  March,  or,  deducting  Gen.  Dix's 
command,  65,621,  equal  to  about  57,091  present  for  duty,  with 
the  convalescent  hospitals  at  hand  to  draw  upon. 

Now,  the  estimate  made  of  the  necessary  garrison  of  Wash* 

>3 


164  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

ington  by  the  chiefs  of  engineers  and  artillery  on  the  24th  of 
Oct.,  1 86 1,  was  a  little  less  than  34,000  men,  including  reserves, 
so  that  a  force  of  a  little  over  23,000  men  would  have  been  left 
for  the  Shenandoah  Valley — much  more  than  enough  under  the 
circumstances,  if  properly  handled. 

I  thus  expected  to  take  with  me  to  the  Peninsula  a  force  of 
146,122  present  for  duty,  to  be  increased  by  a  division  of  10,000 
formed  from  the  troops  at  Fort  Monroe — a  total  of  about  156,- 
000  men. 

But  the  ist  corps,  Blenker's  division,  the  expected  Fort  Mon- 
roe division,  the  cavalry,  etc.  (afterwards  taken  away),  amounted 
to  about  63,000  for  duty,  and  reduced  my  paper  force  to  93,000, 
which,  in  consequence  of  leaving  behind  many  men  unfit  for  the 
field,  was  actually  reduced  to  85,000,  not  much  more  than  one- 
half  of  what  I  expected.  Making  the  proper  deduction  for  extra- 
duty  men,  etc.,  there  remained  only  about  70,000  effectives. 

Moreover,  on  the  second  day  after  I  left  Washington  an  order 
was  issued  breaking  up  all  the  recruiting  rendezvous  for  volun- 
teers, and  thus  abruptly  stopping  all  recruiting  at  the  very  time  it 
was  most  necessary. 

I  will  anticipate  somewhat  the  sequence  of  events,  and  state 
the  manner  in  which  these  reductions  of  force  were  accom- 
plished. 

A  few  days  before  sailing  for  Fort  Monroe  I  met  the  Presi- 
dent, by  his  appointment,  on  a  steamer  at  Alexandria.  He 
informed  me  that  he  was  most  strongly  pressed  to  remove  Blen- 
i:er*s  German  division  from  my  command  and  assign  it  to  Fre- 
mont, who  had  just  been  placed  in  command  of  the  Mountain 
Department.  He  suggested  several  reasons  against  the  proposed 
removal  of  the  division,  to  all  of  which  I  assented.  He  then  said 
that  he  had  promised  to  talk  to  me  about  it,  that  he  had  fulfilled 
his  promise,  and  that  he  would  not  deprive  me  of  the  division. 

On  the  31st  of  March,  a  few  hours  before  I  sailed,  I  was. 
^uch  surprised  by  the  receipt  of  the  following  letter: 

"  Executive  Mansion,  Washington,  March  31,  1862. 

^*  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  My  dear  Sir  :  This  morning  I  felt  constrained  to  order 
Blenker's  division  to  Fremont ;  and  I  write  this  to  assure  you 
that  I  did  so  with  great  pain,  understanding  that  you  would  wish 


THE  PRESIDEI/T'S   IVAR  ORDERS.  1 65, 

it  otherwise.  If  you  could  know  the  full  pressure  of  the  case 
1  am  confident  that  you  would  justify  it,  even  beyond  a  mere 
acknowledgment  that  the  commander-in-chief  may  order  what  he 
pleases.  Yours  very  truly, 

"  A.  Lincoln." 


To  this  it  might  be  replied  that  the  commander-in-chief  has 
no  right  to  order  what  he  pleases  ;  he  can  only  order  what  he  is 
convinced  is  right.  And  the  President  had  already  assured  me 
that  he  knew  this  thing  to  be  wrong,  and  had  informed  me  that 
the  pressure  was  only  a  political  one  to  swell  Fremont's  com- 
mand. 

I  replied  that  I  regretted  the  order  and  could  ill-afford  to 
lose  10,000  troops  who  had  been  counted  upon  in  arranging  the 
plan  of  campaign.  In  a  conversation  the  same  day  I  repeated 
this,  and  added  my  regret  that  any  other  than  military  considera- 
tions and  necessities  had  been  allowed  to  govern  his  decision. 

He  then  assured  me  that  he  would  allow  no  other  troops  to 
be  withdrawn  from  my  command. 

Before  I  left  for  the  field  Fort  Monroe  and  its  dependencies 
had  been  placed  under  my  command,  and  I  was  authorized  to 
form  a  division  of  10,000  men  from  the  troops  stationed  there 
and  add  it  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  placing  it  under  Mans- 
field. I  arrived  at  Fort  Monroe  on  the  afternoon  of  the  2d  of 
April,  and  on  the  3d  received  a  telegraphic  order  withdrawing 
Fort  Monroe  from  my  command  and  forbidding  me  to  remove 
any  of  Gen.  Ord's  troops  without  his  sanction.  No  reason  has 
ever  been  given  for  this  step,  and  I  was  thus  not  only  deprived 
of  10,000  more  troops,  but  also  of  the  control  of  my  immediate 
base  of  operations  and  supplies. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  5  th,  the  right  and  left  wings  of  the 
army  being  under  fire  from  Yorktown  and  the  works  on  the  line 
of  the  Warwick,  I  received  the  following  telegram : 


"Adjutant-General's  Office,  April  4,  1862. 

"  Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  By  direction  of  the  President,  General  McDowell's  army 
corps  has  been  detached  from  the  forces  under  your  immediate 
command,  and  the  general  is  ordered  to  report  to  the  Secretary 
of  War.     Letter  by  mail. 

" L.  Thomas,  Adjutant-General'' 


1 66  AfcCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

In  addition  to  the  forces  already  enumerated,  at  least  nine 
regiments  of  cavalry  were  withheld  from  me,  and  the  order  of 
April  3,  discontinuing  recruiting  for  the  volunteers,  rendered  it 
impossible  for  me  to  make  good  the  inevitable  losses  from  disease 
and  battle. 

The  effect  of  these  changes  will  appear  as  1  resume  the  nar- 
rative of  events. 


v. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Private  Letters, 
[Ocf.  I.  1861,  to  March  12,  1862.] 

Oct,  — ,  1 86 1. — Yesterday  rode   to  Chain   Bridge,  thence  to 
Upton's    Hill,  and  did   not  get  back  until  after   dark.  ...    I 
can't  tell  you  how  disgusted  I  am  becoming  with  these  wretched  a 
politicians. 

Oct.  — . —  .  .  .  The  enemy  made  some  demonstrations  up 
the  river  this  morning,  which  prevented  me  from  crossing  the 
river  until  1.30  ;  then  I  rode  to  Munson's  Hill,  etc.,  and  found 
everything  going  on  well.  We  shall  be  ready  by  to-morrow  to 
fight  a  battle  there,  if  the  enemy  should  choose  to  attack  ;  and 
I  don't  think  they  will  care  to  run  the  risk.  I  presume  I 
shall  have  to  go  after  them  when  I  get  ready  ;  but  this  getting 
ready  is  slow  work  with  such  an  administration.  1  wish  I  were 
well  out  of  it.  .  .  .  We  almost  expected  a  little  row  up  the  river 
yesterday,  but  it  amounted  to  nothing.  The  enemy  fired  112 
shots  with  artillery  at  our  people  at  Great  Falls,  slightly  grazing 
one  man's  arm  and  wounding  a  horse  slightly.  Fine  shooting 
that !  They  must  learn  to  do  better  if  they  hope  to  accomplish 
anything.  Some  of  our  men  have  been  behaving  most  atro- 
ciously lately  in  burning  houses  ;  some  eighteen  have  been 
burned  in  the  last  two  or  thre.e  days.  I  will  issue  an  order 
to-day  informing  them  that  I  will  hang  or  shoot  any  found  guilty 
of  it,  as  well  as  any  guards  who  permit  it.  Such  things  disgrace 
us  and  our  cause.  Our  new  position  in  advance  is  a  fine  one. 
It  throws  our  camps  into  a  fine,  healthy  country,  with  excel- 
lent drill-grounds  and  everything  fresh  and  clean — an  infinite 
improvement  over  our  old  places,  where  the  men  had  been  stuck 
down  close  to  the  river  for  months.  It  removes  them  also  further 
from  the  city,  so  they  will  be  less  liable  to  temptation. 

Oct,  2  {?) —  .  .  .  Gen.  Gibson's  funeral  takes  place  this  mom- 

X67 


y 


1 68  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

ing.  I  am  becoming  daily  more  disgusted  with  this  administra- 
tion— perfectly  sick  of  it.  If  I  could  with  honor  resign  I  would 
quit  the  whole  concern  to-morrow  ;  but  so  long  as  I  can  be  of 
any  real  use  to  the  nation  in  its  trouble  I  will  make  the  sacrifice. 
No  one  seems  able  to  comprehend  my  real  feeling — that  I  have 
no  ambitious  feelings  to  gratify,  and  only  wish  to  serve  my  coun- 
try in  its  trouble,  and,  when  this  weary  war  is  over,  to  return  to 
my  wife.  .  .  . 

Oct.  6. —  ...  I  am  quite  sure  that  we  shall  spend  some  time 
here  together  after  your  recovery.  Preparations  are  slow,  and 
I  have  an  infinite  deal  to  do  before  my  army  is  really  ready  to 
fight  a  great  battle.  Washington  may  now  be  looked  upon  as 
quite  safe.  They  cannot  attack  it  in  front.  My  flanks  are  also 
safe>  or  soon  will  be.  Then  I  shall  take  my  own  time  to  make 
an  army  that  will  be  sure  of  success.  .  .  .  Gen.  Scott  did  try  to 
send  some  of  my  troops  to  Kentucky,  but  did  not  succeed.  They 
shall  not  take  any  from  here,  if  I  can  help  it.  The  real  fight- 
ing must  be  here  :  that  in  Kentucky  will  be  a  mere  bagatelle. 
You  need  not  be  at  all  alarmed  by  any  apprehensions  you  hear 
expressed.  I  have  endeavored  to  treat  Gen.  Scott  with  the 
utmost  respect,  but  it  is  of  no  avail.  ...  I  do  not  expect  to 
fight  a  battle  near  Washington  ;  probably  none  will  be  fought 
until  I  advance,  and  that  I  will  not  do  until  I  am  fully  ready. 
My  plans  depend  upon  circumstances.  So  soon  as  I  feel  that 
my  army  is  well  organized  and  well  disciplined,  and  strong 
enough,  I  will  advance  and  force  the  rebels  to  a  battle  in  a  field 
of  my  own  selection. 

^  A  long  time  must  yet  elapse  before  I  can  do  this,  and  I 
expect  all  the  newspapers  to  abuse  me  for  delay  ;  but  I  will 
not  mind  that. 

No  date. —  ...  I  tnust  ride  much  every  day,  for  my  army 
covers  much  space.  It  is  necessary  for  me  to  see  as  much  as 
I  can  every  day,  and,  more  than  that,  to  let  the  men  see  me  and 
gain  confidence  in  me.  ...  I  started  out  about  three  this  after- 
noon and  returned  at  ten  ;  rode  down  to  the  vicinity  of  Alex- 
andria, and  on  my  return  {en  route)  received  a  despatch  to  the 
effect  that  the  rebels  at  6.30  this  morning  were  breaking  up 
their  camps  at  Manassas  —whether  to  attack  or  retreat  I  do  not 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  1 69 

yet  know.  If  they  attack  they  will  in  all  probability  be  beaten, 
and  the  attack  ought  to  take  place  to-morrow.  I  have  made 
every  possible  preparation  and  feel  ready  for  them.  .  .  . 

Oct,  9. —  ...  I  have  a  long  ride  to  take  to-day ;  will  proba- 
bly advance  our  right  some  three  or  four  miles  by  way  of  getting 
more  elbow-room  and  crowding  G.  W.  up  a  trifle.  The  more 
room  I  get  the  more  I  want,  until  by  and  by  I  suppose  I  shall 
be  so  insatiable  as  to  think  I  cannot  do  with  less  than  the  whole 
State  of  Virginia.  The  storm  has  entirely  changed  the  weather, 
and  I  am  afraid  may  affect  the  health  of  the  men  for  a  few 
days ;  for  it  is  now  cold  and  wet.  The  review  of  yesterday 
passed  off  very  well ;  it  was  a  superb  display,  by  far  the  fin- 
est ever  seen  on  this  continent,  and  rarely  equalled  anywhere. 
There  were  104  guns  in  the  review  (a  number  greater  than  Lau- 
riston's  famous  battery  at  Wagram)  and  5,500  cavalry.  The 
ground  was  wet,  so  I  did  not  venture  to  let  them  pass  at  a  trot 
or  gallop  ;  they  passed  only  at  a  walk.  ...  I  was  tired  out  last 
night.  My  horse  was  young  and  wild,  and  nearly  pulled  m^ 
arm  off.  The  cheering  of  the  men  made  him  perfectly  frantic, 
and,  as  I  had  to  keep  my  cap  in  my  right  hand,  I  had  only  my 
left  to  manage  him. 

Oct,  (10  ?). — I  have  just  time  to  write  a  very  few  lines  before 
starting  out.  Yesterday  I  threw  forward  our  right  some  four 
miles,  but  the  enemy  were  not  accommodating  enough  to  give 
us  a  chance  at  them,  so  I  took  up  a  new  position  there  and 
reinforced  it  by  sending  McCall  over  to  that  side.  I  am  now 
going  over  again  to  satisfy  myself  as  to  the  state  of  affairs, 
and  perhaps  edge  up  another  mile  or  so,  according  to  circum- 
stances. When  I  returned  yesterday,  after  a  long  ride,  I  was 
obliged  to  attend  a  meeting  of  the  cabinet  at  eight  p.m.,  and  was 
bored  and  annoyed.  There  are  some  of  the  greatest  geese  in 
the  cabinet  I  have  ever  seen — enough  to  tax  the  patience  of 
Job.  ... 

Oct,  (11  ?). —  .  .  .  I  rode  all  over  our  new  positions  yesterday 
to  make  some  little  changes  and  correct  errors,  as  well  as  to 
learn  the  ground  more  thoroughly  myself.  It  rained  most  of 
the  day,  which  did  not  add  to  the  pleasure  of  the  trip.     Secesh 


I  70  McCLELLAN'S  O  WN  STOR  V. 

keeps  quiet,  wonderfully  so.  I  presume  he  wants  to  draw  m } 
on  to  Manassas  to  repeat  the  Bull  Run  operation ;  but  I  sha'n't 
go  until  ready.  I  may  occupy  Vienna  in  a  few  days,  especially 
if  he  does  not  show  himself  in  force  ;  but  I  am  very  well  con- 
tented with  our  present  positions,  as  places  where  we  can  drill 
and  discipline  the  troops  to  great  advantage.  We  have  the  men 
now  in  a  fine  open  country,  high  and  healthy,  good  clean  fresh 
and  green  camp-grounds,  and  the  morale  of  an  advance. 

Oct.  14. — What  do  you  think  I  received  as  a  present  yester- 
day ?  Some  poor  woman  away  up  in  the  middle  of  New  York 
sent  me  half  a  dozen  pair  of  woollen  socks — I  beg  pardon,  I  see 
it  is  from  Pennsylvania,  not  New  York.     I  enclose  the  note. 

Oct,  16. —  .  .  .  Just  received  a  telegram  to  the  effect  that  the 
rebels  had  attacked  a  small  force  we  have  in  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
had  been  handsomely  repulsed  with  the  loss  of  quite  a  number 
of  men  and  one  gun.  ...  In  front  of  us  the  enemy  remain 
quiet,  with  the  exception  of  occasional  picket-firing. 

Oct.  — . —  ...  I  am  firmly  determined  to  force  the  issue  with 
Gen.  Scott.  A  very  few  days  will  determine  whether  his  policy 
or  mine  is  to  prevail.  He  is  for  inaction  and  the  defensive  ;  he 
endeavors  to  cripple  me  in  every  way  ;  yet  I  see  that  the  news- 
papers begin  to  accuse  me  of  want  of  energy.  He  has  even  com- 
plained to  the  War  Department  of  my  making  the  advance  of 
the  last  few  days.     Hereafter  the  truth  will  be  shown. 

Oct.  16. — I  have  just  been  interrupted  here  by  the  President 
and  Secretary  Seward,  who  had  nothing  very  particular  to  say, 
except  some  stories  to  tell,  which  were,  as  usual,  very  perti- 
nent, and  some  pretty  good.  I  never  in  my  life  met  any  one 
so  full  of  anecdote  as  our  friend.  He  is  never  at  a  loss  for  a 
story  apropos  of  any  known  subject  or  incident. 

Oct.  19. — Gen.  Scott  proposes  to  retire  in  favor  of  Halleck. 
The  President  and  cabinet  have  determined  to  accept  his  retire- 
ment, but  not  in  favor  of  Halleck.  .  .  .  The  enemy  have  fallen 
back  on  Manassas,  probably  to  draw  me  into  the  old  error.  I 
hope  to  make  them  abandon  Leesburg  to-morrow. 


PRIVA  TE  LE  TTERS,  I  7 1 

Oct,  20  or  21. —  ...  I  yesterd.iy  advanced  a  division  to 
Dranrsville,  some  ten  miles  beyond  its  old  place,  and  feel 
obliged  to  take  advantage  of  the  opportunity  to  make  numerous 
rjconnoissances  to  obtain  information  as  to  the  country,  which 
is  very  beautiful  at  Dranesville,  where  I  was  yesterday.  The 
weather  is  delightful.  The  enemy  has  fallen  back  to  Centre- 
ville  and  Manassas,  expecting  us  to  attack  there.  My  object  in 
moving  to  Dranesville  yesterday  and  remaining  there  to-day  was 
to  force  them  to  evacuate  Leesburg,  which  I  think  they  did  last 
night. 

Oct,  24. — Have  ridden  more  than  forty  miles  to-day,  and  have 
been  perfectly  run  down  ever  since  I  returned. 

Oct.  25. —  .  .  .  How  weary  I  am  of  all  this  business !  Care 
after  care,  blunder  after  blunder,  trick  upon  trick.  I  am  well- 
nigh  tired  of  the  world,  and,  were  it  not  for  you,  would  be  fully 
so.  That  affair  of  Leesburg  on  Monday  last  was  a  horrible 
butchery.  The  men  fought  nobly,  but  were  penned  up  by  a 
vastly  superior  force  in  a  place  where  they  had  no  retreat.  The 
whole  thing  took  place  some  forty  miles  from  here,  without  my 
orders  or  knowledge.  It  was  entirely  unauthorized  by  me,  and 
I  am  in  no  manner  responsible  for  it. 

Col.  Baker,  who  was  killed,  was  in  command,  and  violated 
all  military  rules  and  precautions.  Instead  of  meeting  the  ene- 
my with  double  their  force  and  a  good  ferry  behind  him,  he 
was  outnumbered  three  to  one  and  had  no  means  of  retreat. 
Cogswell  is  a  prisoner  ;  he  behaved  very  handsomely.  Ray- 
mond Lee  is  also  taken.  I  found  things  in  great  confusion  when 
I  arrived  there.  In  a  very  short  time  order  and  confidence  were 
restored.  During  the  night  I  withdrew  everything  and  every- 
body to  this  side  ot  the  river,  which,  in  truth,  they  should  never 
have  left. 

Oct.  26,  1. 15  A.M.— For  the  last  three  hours  I  have  been  at 
Montgomery  Blair's,  talking  with  Senators  Wade,  Trumbull,  and 
Chandler  about  war  matters.  They  will  make  a  desperate  effort 
to-morrow  to  have  Gen.  Scott  retired  at  once ;  until  that  is 
accomplished  I  can  effect  but  little  good.  He  is  ever  in  my  way, 
and  I  am  sure  does  not  desire  effective  action.     I  want  to  get 


172  McCLELLAN'S  O  WN  STOR  Y. 

through  with  the  war  as  rapidly  as  possible.  ...  I  go  out  soon 
after  breakfast  to  review  Porter's  division,  about  five  miles  from 
here. 

Oct.  30. — I  know  you  will  be  astonished,  but  it  is  true,  that 
I  went  this  evening  to  a  fandango.  The  regulars  just  in  from 
Utah  gave  a  little  soiree  to  the  other  regulars ;  music,  a  little 
dancing,  and  some  supper.  I  went  there  intending  to  remain 
ten  minutes,  and  did  stay  fully  an  hour  and  a  half.  I  met  Mrs. 
Andrew  Porter,  Mrs.  Palmer  and  her  mother,  Mrs.  Hancock,  and 
several  other  army  ladies.  It  was  very  pleasant  to  get  among  old 
acquaintances  once  more. 

Oct,  31. —  .  .  .  You  remember  my  wounded  friend  Col. 
Kelly,  whom  we  met  at  Wheeling?  He  has  just  done  a  very 
pretty  thing  at  Romney — thrashed  the  enemy  severely,  taken  all 
their  guns,  etc.  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  it.  .  .  .  "  Our  George  " 
they  have  taken  it  into  their  heads  to  call  me.  I  ought  to  take 
good  care  of  these  men,  for  I  believe  they  love  me  from  the 
bottom  of  their  hearts ;  I  can  see  it  in  their  faces  when  I  pass 
among  them.  I  presume  the  Scott  war  will  culminate  this  week. 
Whatever  it  may  be,  I  will  try  to  do  my  duty  to  the  army  and  to 
the  country,  with  God's  help  and  a  single  eye  to  the  right.  I 
hope  that  I  may  succeed.  I  appreciate  all  the  difficulties  in  my 
path  :  the  impatience  of  the  people,  the  venality  and  bad  faith  of 
the  politicians,  the  gross  neglect  that  has  occurred  in  obtaining 
arms,  clothing,  etc. ;  and,  above  all,  I  feel  in  my  inmost  soul  how 
small  is  my  ability  in  comparison  with  the  gigantic  dimensions  of 
the  task,  and  that,  even  if  I  had  the  greatest  intellect  that  was 
ever  given  to  man,  the  result  remains  in  the  hands  of  God.  I 
do  not  feel  that  I  am  an  instrument  worthy  of  the  great  task,  but 
I  do  feel  that  I  did  not  seek  it.  It  was  thrust  upon  me.  I  was 
called  to  it ;  my  previous  life  seems  to  have  been  unwittingly 
directed  to  this  great  end  ;  and  I  know  that  God  can  accomplish 
the  greatest  results  with  the  weakest  instruments — therein  lies 
my  hope.  I  feel,  too,  that,  much  as  we  in  the  North  have  erred, 
the  rebels  have  been  far  worse  than  we. 

No  date. — I  have  just  returned  from  a  ride  over  the  river, 
where  I  went  pretty  late,  to  seek  refuge  in  Fitz  Porter's  camp. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  I  73 

You  would  have  laughed  if  you  could  have  seen  me  dodge  off. 
I  quietly  told  the  duke  to  get  our  horses  saddled,  and  then  we 
slipped  off  without  escort  or  orderlies,  and  trotted  away  for  Fitz- 
John*s  camp,  where  we  had  a  quiet  talk  over  the  camp-fire.  .  .  . 
I  saw  yesterday  Gen.  Scott's  letter  asking  to  be  placed  on  the 
retired  list  and  saying  nothing  about  Hallcck.  The  offer  was 
to  be  accepted  last  night,  and  they  propose  to  make  me  at  onct- 
commander-in-chief  of  the  army.  I  cannot  get  up  any  especial 
feeling  about  it.  I  feel  the  vast  responsibility  it  imposes  upon 
me.  I  feel  a  sense  of  relief  at  the  prospect  of  having  my  own 
way  untrammelled,  but  I  cannot  discover  in  my  own  heart  one 
symptom  of  gratifTed  vanity  or  ambition. 

No7'.  2,  1.30  A.M. — I  have  been  at  work,  with  scarcely  one 
minute's  rest,  ever  since  I  arose  yesterday  morning — nearly  eight- 
'een  hours.  I  find  "  the  army  "  just  about  as  much  disorganized 
as  was  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  when  I  assumed  command  ; 
everything  at  sixes  and  sevens ;  no  system,  no  order,  perfect 
chaos.  I  can  and  will  reduce  it  to  order.  I  will  soon  have  it 
working  smoothly. 

Nov.  3. — I  have  already  been  up  once  this  morning — that  was 
at  four  o'clock  to  escort  Gen.  Scott  to  the  depot.  It  was  pitch- 
dark  and  a  pouring  rain  ;  but  with  most  of  my  staff  and  a 
sc^uadron  of  cavalry  I  saw  the  old  man  off.  He  was  very  polite 
to  me ;  sent  various  kind  messages  to  you  and  the  baby  ;  so  we 
parted.  The  old  man  said  that  his  sensations  were  very  peculiar 
in  leaving  Washington  and  active  life.  I  can  easily  understand 
them  ;  and  it  may  be  that  at  some  distant  day  I,  too,  shall  totter 
away  from  Washington,  a  worn-out  soldier,  with  naught  to  do 
but  make  my  peace  with  God.  The  sight  of  this  morning  was  a 
lesson  to  me  which  I  hope  not  soon  to  forget.  I  saw  there  the 
end  of  a  long,  active,  and  ambitious  life,  the  end  of  the  career  of 
the  first  soldier  of  his  nation  ;  and  it  was  a  feeble  old  man  scarce 
able  to  walk  ;  hardly  any  one  there  to  see  him  off  but  his  suc- 
cessor. Should  I  ever  become  vainglorious  and  ambitious,  re- 
mind me  of  that  spectacle.  I  pray  every  night  and  every 
morning  that  I  may  become  neither  vain  nor  ambitious,  that  I 
may  be  neither  depressed  by  disaster  nor  elated  by  success,  and 
that  I  may  keep  one  single  object  in  view — the  good  of  my 


174  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

country.  At  last  I  am  the  "  major-general  commanding  the 
army.**  I  do  not  feel  in  the  least  elated,  for  I  do  feel  the 
responsibility  of  the  position.  And  I  feel  the  need  of  some 
support.     I  trust  that  God  will  aid  me. 

Noz\  — . —  ...  A  deputation  of  thirty  waited  on  me  and 
presented  me  with  that  sword  from  the  city  of  Philadelphia.  It 
is  certainly  a  very  fine  one.  I  listened  meekly  to  a  speech  and 
replied  in  my  usual  way — /.^.,  in  very  few  words.  I  then  had  a 
collation — I  abominate  the  word,  it  is  so  steamboaty — in  the  back 
parlor.  Wormley  did  himself  credit  on  the  occasion,  and  got  it 
up  very  well  indeed.  The  President  came  in  during  the  proceed- 
ings. .  .  .  After  that  I  came  back  and  received  quite  a  number 
of  congratulatory  calls  ;  then  went  to  dine  with  Andrew  Porter, 
where  I  had  a  very  pleasant  time — Andrew  and  his  wife,  her 
brother,  her  sister-in-law,  Seth,  and  myself.  « 

Nov,  7. — I  am  very  glad  to  learn  that  my  order  changed  Gen. 
Scott*s  feelings  entirely,  and  that  he  now  says  I  am  the  best 
man  and  the  best  general  that  ever  existed. 

No  date. — Yesterday  I  was  so  busily  engaged  in  getting 
Halleck  off  to  Missouri  and  Buell  to  Kentucky  that  I  had  but 
little  time  to  look  about  me. 

Nov.  10. — Yesterday  worked  at  the  office  until  noon  and  then 
started  to  review  Porter*s  division.  Got  soaked  and  had  a  chill : 
all  right  this  morning.  Before  breakfast  the  President  and 
Seward  came  in. 

No-i'.  II,  1.30  A.M. — Went  to  Chase's  at  eight  p.m.  to  meet 
some  New  York  financiers  ;  left  them  in  good  spirits.  Have 
just  finished  Halleck's  instructions. 

Nov.  — ,  1 86 1. — You  will  have  heard  the  glorious  news  from 
Port  Royal.  Our  navy  has  covered  itself  with  glory  and  cannot 
receive  too  much  credit.  The  thing  was  superbly  done  and  the 
chivalry  well  thrashed.  They  left  in  such  haste  that  officers  for- 
got even  to  carry  away  their  swords.  But  one  white  man  was 
found  in  Beaufort,  and  he  drunk  !     The  negroes  came  flocking 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  I  75 

donni  to  the  river  with  their  bundles  in  their  hands,  readv  to  take 
passage.  There  is  something  inexpressibly  moiiirtful  to  me  in 
that — those  poor,  helpless,  ignorant  beings,  with  the  wide  world 
and  its  uncertainties  before  them ;  the  poor  serf,  with  his  little 
bundle,  readv  to  launch  his  boat  on  the  wide  ocean  of  life  he 
knows  so  little  of.  When  I  think  of  some  of  the  features  of 
slavery  I  cannot  help  shuddering.  Just  think  for  one  moment, 
and  try  to  realize  that  at  the  will  of  some  brutal  master  you  and 
I  might  be  separated  for  ever  I  It  is  horrible  ;  and  when  the  day 
of  adjustment  comes  I  will,  if  successful,  throw  my  sword  into 
the  scale  to  force  an  improvement  in  the  condition  of  these  poor 
blacks.  I  do  think  that  some  of  the  rights  of  humanity  ought 
to  be  secured  to  the  negroes.  There  should  be  no  power  to 
separate  families,  and  the  right  of  marriage  ought  to  be  secured 
to  them.    .    .   . 

Nov,  12. — Last  night  the  German  division  gave  a  grand  torch- 
light procession  and  serenade.  What  little  I  saw  of  it  was  very 
fine,  but  I  had  to  attend  a  pseudo  cabinet  meeting  while  it  was 
in  progress,  so  that  I  saw  by  no  means  the  whole  of  it.  Quite  a 
party  came  here  to  see  the  performance. 

Noi\  17. —  ...  I  find  that  to-dav  is  not  to  be  a  dav  of  rest 
for  me.  This  unfortunate  affair  of  Mason  and  Slidell  has  come 
up,  and  I  shall  be  obliged  to  devote  the  day  to  endeavoring  to 
get  our  government  to  take  the  only  prompt  and  honorable 
course  of  avoiding  a  war  with  England  and  France.  ...  It  is 
/^  sickening  in  the  extreme,  and  makes  me  feel  heavy  at  heart, 
when  I  see  the  weakness  and  unfitness  of  the  poor  beings  who 
control  the  destinies  of  this  great  country.  How  I  wish  that 
God  had  permitted  me  to  live  quietly  and  unknown  with  you ! 
But  His  will  b  *  done !  I  will  do  my  best,  tr}'  to  preserve  an 
honest  mind,  do  mv  dutv  as  best  I  mav,  and  will  ever  continue 
to  pray  that  He  will  give  me  that  wisdom,  courage,  and  strength 
that  are  so  necessary  to  me  now,  and  so  little  of  which  I  possess. 
The  outside  world  envy  me,  no  doubt.  They  do  not  know 
the  weight  of  care  that  presses  on  me.  ...  I  will  try  again  to 
write  a  few  lines  before  I  go  to  Stanton's  to  ascertain  what  the 
law  of  nations  is  on  this  Slidell  and  Mason  seizure.  ...  I  went 
to  the  White  House  shortly  after  tea.     I  then  went  to  the  Prince 


r 


176  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

de  Joinville's.  We  Went  up-stairs  and  had  a  long,  confidential 
talk  upon  politics.  The  prince  is  a  noble  character,  one  whom 
I  shall  be  glad  to  have  you  know  well.  He  bears  adversity  so 
well  and  so  uncomplainingly.  I  admire  him  more  than  almost 
any  one  I  have  ever  met  with.  He  is  true  as  steel ;  like  all  deaf 
men,  very  reflective  ;  says  but  little,  and  that  always  to  the  point. 
.  .  .  After  I  left  the  prince's  I  went  to  Seward's,  where  I  found 
the  President  again.  .  .  .  The  President  is  honest  and  means 
well.  As  I  parted  from  him  on  Seward's  steps  he  said  that  it 
had  been  suggested  to  him  that  it  was  no  more  safe  for  me  than 
for  him  to  walk  out  at  night  v/ithout  some  attendant.  I  told 
him  that  I  felt  no  fear  ;  that  no  one  would  take  the  trouble  to 
interfere  with  me.  On  which  he  deigned  to  remark  that  they 
would  probably  give  more  for  my  scalp  at  Richmond  than  for 
his.   ... 

NaiK  —  . —  ...  Went  to  the  Prince  de  Joinville's,  where  I 
found  Barry,  Dahlgren,  and  the  family.  If  it  would  at  all  com- 
fort you  I  might  do  what  I  have  never  done — carry  a  pistol  in 
my  pocket,  especially  as  I  received  two  days  since  a  lamb-like 
present  of  four  revolvers  of  different  sizes,  bringing  my  private 
armory  up  to  something  like  eleven  pistols  of  various  dimen- 
sions.    What  more  can  be  asked  of  any  one  ? 

Nov,  —  . — Some  infatuated  individual  sent  me,  a  day  or  two 
ago,  a  "  McClellan  Polka."  What  in  the  world  did  he  expect  me 
to  do  with  it  ?     Not  to  whistle  or  dance  it,  I  hope. 

N'ozK  — .  —  ...  I  have  been  at  work  all  day  nearly  on  a  let- 
ter to  the  Secretary  of  War  (Cameron)  in  regard  to  future  mili- 
tary operations.  I  have  not  been  at  home  for  some  three  hours, 
'nut  am  concealed  at  Stanton's  to  dodge  all  enemies  in  shape  of 
**  browsing  "  Presidents,  etc.  ... 

I  A.M. — I  am  pretty  thoroughly  tired  out.  The  paper  is  a 
very  important  one,  as  it  is  intended  to  place  on  record  that  I 
have  left  nothing  undone  to  make  this  army  what  it  ought  to  be, 
and  that  the  necessity  for  delay  has  not  been  my  fault.  I  have 
a  set  of  men  to  deal  with  unscrupulous  and  false  ;  if  possible 
they  will  throw  whatever  blame  there  is  on  my  shoulders,  and  I 
do  not  intend  to  be  sacrificed  by  such  people.  I  still  trust  that 
the  all-wise  Creator  does  not  intend  our  destruction,  and  that  in 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  I  77 

His  own  good  time  He  will  free  the  nation  from  the  men  who 
curse  it,  and  will  restore  us  to  His  favor.  I  know  that  as  a 
nation  we  have  grievously  sinned  ;  but  I  trust  there  is  a  limit  to 
His  wrath,  and  that  ere  long  we  will  begin  to  experience  His 

mercy I  cannot  guess  at  my  movements,  for  they  are  not 

within  my  control.  I  cannot  move  without  more  means,  and  I 
do  not  possess  the  power  to  control  those  means. 

The  people  think  me  all-powerful.  Never  was  there  a  greater 
mistake.  I  am  thwarted  and  deceived  by  these  incapables  at 
every  turn. 

I  am  doing  all  I  can  to  get  ready  to  move  before  winter  sets 
in,  but  it  now  begins  to  look  as  if  we  were  condemned  to  a  win- 
ter of  inactivity.  If  it  is  so  the  fault  will  not  be  mine  ;  there 
will  be  that  consolation  for  my  conscience,  even  if  the  world  at 
large  never  knows  it.   .  .   . 

I  have  one  great  comfort  in  all  this — that  is,  that  I  did  not 
seek  this  position,  as  you  well  know  ;  and  I  still  trust  that  God 
will  support  me  and  bear  me  out.  He  could  not  have  placed  me 
here  for  nothing.   .  .   . 

A'l^T'.  25. —  ...  After  dinner  yesterday  rode  over  the  river. 
I  came  back  after  dark  in  a  driving  snow-storm.  ...  It  has 
cleared  off  since  last  night,  and  is  quite  cold  to-day.  It  was  a 
very  disagreeable  ride  last  night — dark  as  pitch,  roads  bad,  and 
the  snow  driving  hard 

Nov.  27. —  .  .  .  Went  to  a  grave  consultation  at  Secretary 
Chase's  in  regard  to  the  reopening  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Railroad.   .  .   . 

After  the  review  of  the  regulars  I  went  dow^n  to  the  river 
to  see  the  volunteer  pontoniers  throw  a  bridge-train.  I  went 
through  the  usual  routine  of  being  presented  to  an  infinite  num- 
ber of  ladies.  Made  a  close  inspection  of  the  camp  and  of  the 
men,  and  then  returned. 

Nov.  30,  1 86 1. — I  was  hard  at  work  until  half-past  four, 
when  I  came  back  to  dinner.  Gen.  Banks  dined  with  me. 
When  he  left  I  had  several  business  calls.  At  eight  all  the 
officers  of  the  4th  Infantry,  just  returned  from  California,  came 
to  pay  their  respects.  When  they  left  I  went  to  Com.  Goldsbo- 
rough,  where  he,  Fox,   Prof.  Bache,  and   myself   remained   in 


178  McCLELLAN  S  OWN  STORY. 

serious  consultation  about  naval  and  military  movements  until 
after  midnight. 

Sandy  Hooky  near  Harper's  Ferry^  Monday  a.m.,  Feb,  27, 
1862. —  .  .  .  Here  I  still  am.  I  crossed  the  river  as  soon  as 
the  bridge  was  finished,  and  watched  the  troops  pass.  It  was 
a  magnificent  spectacle,  one  of  the  grandest  I  ever  saw.  As 
soon  as  my  horse  and  escort  got  over  I  rode  out  to  the  line  of 
pickets  and  saw  for  myself  that  everything  was  right  and  ready 
for  an  attack.  The  position  is  a  superb  one.  I  got  over  about 
12  guns  and  8,000  infantry  before  dark  ;  also  a  squadron  of  cav- 
alry. I  heard  in  the  afternoon  a  rumor  that  G.  W.  Smith  was 
expected  at  Winchester  with  15,000  men.  Although  I  did  not 
fully  credit  it,  I  nevertheless  took  all  the  military  precautions 
necessary,  and  felt  perfectly  secure  during  the  night.  The  ene- 
my are  not  now  in  sight,  but  I  have  sent  out  cavalry  patrols  that 
may  bring  in  intelligence  of  value.  It  was  after  dark  and 
raining  hard  when  I  recrossed  the  bridge.  The  narrow  road 
was  so  completely  blocked  up  that  it  was  a  very  difficult  matter 
to  make  one's  way  among  the  wagons.  It  rained  hard  and  was 
very  cold  during  the  night.  .  .  .  Slept  in  a  car ;  I  was  up  most 
of  the  night,  telegraphing,  etc.  This  morning  it  is  blowing  a 
hurricane,  but  the  bridge  stands  well  thus  far.  Burns's  brigade 
came  up  during  the  night.  I  left  them  in  the  cars  and  crossed 
them  this  morning  early.  The  wagons  have  gone  over ;  a  regi- 
ment of  cavalry  is  now  crossing,  another  battery  will  follow,  and 
I  will  have  everything  well  cleared  up  before  the  arrival  of  Aber- 
crombie*s  brigade,  which  should  be  here  by  two  o'clock.  I  will 
get  it  over  before  dark,  also  the  heavy  artillery  and  regular  cav- 
alry, if  it  arrives.  I  hope  to  be  able  to  occupy  Charleston  to- 
morrow and  get  Lander  to  Martinsburg.  It  will  then  require 
but  a  short  time  to  finish  matters  here.  The  roads  on  the  other 
side  are  good  ;  the  country  more  open  than  near  Washington. 
You  have  no  idea  how  the  wind  is  howling  now — a  perfect  tor- 
nado ;  it  makes  the  crossing  of  the  river  very  difficult,  and  inter- 
feres with  everything.     I  am  an.xious  about  our  bridge.  .  .  . 

Fairfax  Couri-Housey  March  11,  1862. —  .  .  .  None  of  our 
wagons  came  up  until  after  I  rode  out  this  morning,  so  we  got 
along  as  best  we  could  last  night.     Some  one  lent  me  some  blan- 


PRIVATE  LETTERS. 


179 


kets,  and  somebody  else  a  cot,  so  I  was  very  well  off.  To-night 
I  have  my  own  bed.  I  started  at  about  nine  this  morning  and 
rode  first  to  Centreville.  We  found  there  quite  a  formidable 
series  of  works,  which  would  have  been  somewhat  uncomfort- 
able for  new  troops  to  carry  by  storm.  Thence  I  rode  over  hor- 
rid roads  to  the  celebrated  Manassas,  which  we  found  also 
abandoned.  Thence  to  the  battle-field  of  last  July,  and  over 
pretty  much  the  whole  of  it.  Thence  home  via  Stone  Bridge 
and  Centreville,  reaching  here  about  half-past  eight.  I  rode 
Kentuck  to-day,  and  as  he  was  fretful  he  fatigued  me  very 
much,  so  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  go  to  Washington 
to-night,  notwithstanding  your  father's  pressing  telegram.  I 
regret  that  the  rascals  are  after  me  again.  I  had  been  foolish 
enough  to  hope  that  when  I  went  into  the  field  they  would  give 
me  some  rest,  but  it  seems  otherwise.  Perhaps  I  should  have 
expected  it.  If  I  can  get  out  of  this  scrape  you  will  never 
catch  me  in  the  power  of  such  a  set  again.  The  idea  of  per- 
secuting a  man  behind  his  back !  I  suppose  they  are  now 
relieved  from  the  pressure  of  their  fears  by  the  retreat  of  the 
enemy,  and  that  they  will  increase  in  virulence.  Well,  enough 
of  that ;  it  is  bad  enough  for  me  to  be  bothered  in  that  way 
without  annoying  you  with  it.  The  country  which  we  passed 
to-day  was  very  desolate.  I  think  Manassas  is  the  most  deso- 
late and  forbidding  spot  I  ever  beheld.  They  have  not  de- 
stroyed many  of  their  winter-quarters,  which  are  very  well 
built  and  comfortable — far  more  so  than  I  expected  to  see 
them.  From  the  great  number  of  camps  scattered  about  it  is 
evident  that  they  had  a  very  large  force  here.  They  must 
have  left  in  a  great  hurry,  for  they  abandoned  a  great  deal 
of  baggage,  tents,  stores,  ammunition,  caissons,  wagons,  etc. 
It  seems  that  the  order  was  given  very  suddenly.  They  left 
on  Sunday,  except  a  rear-guard.  It  is  said  by  "  intelligent 
contrabands*'  and  others  that  the  men  were  very  much  dis- 
gusted and  disheartened.  .  .  . 
14 


CHAPTER   XI 

Events  in  and  around  Washington — Ball's  Bluff— Harper's   Ferry — Stan- 
ton's trick — Enemy's  batteries  on  the  Potomac. 

On  the  9th  of  Oct.  McCall's  division  marched  from  Tennally- 
town  to  Langley,  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac.  This 
addition  to  the  forces  already  there  enabled  me  to  push  recon- 
noissances  more  actively;  and  as  it  was  particularly  desirable 
to  obtain,  accurate  information  in  regard  to  the  topography  of 
the  country  in  front  of  our  right,  Gen.  McCall  was  ordered  to 
move  on  the  19th  as  far  as  Dranesville  to  cover  the  work  of 
the  topographical  engineers  directed  to  prepare  maps  of  that 
region.  On  the  20th  Gen.  Smith  pushed  out  strong  parties  to 
Freedom  Hill,  Vienna,  Flint  Hill,  Peacock  Hill,  etc.,  with  a 
similar  object. 

From  his  destination  Gen.  McCall  sent  the  following 
despatch  : 

"Dranesville,  Oct.  19,  1861,  6.30  p.m. 
"  To  Gen.  McCkUan : 

"  I  arrived  here  this  morning.  All  is  quiet.  No  enemy  seen. 
Country  for  one  mile  beyond  Difficult  creek  broken  and  woody. 
Bad  country  to  manoeuvre.  Nothing  but  skirmishing  could  be 
done  by  infantry.  Artillery  could  not  leave  the  road.  One  mile 
beyond  Difficult  creek  the  country  becomes  open  ;  some  pretty 
battle-fields.  Country  high.  I  shall  bivouac  here  to-night. 
Park  is  with  me. 

"(Signed)  Geo.  A.  McCall." 

He  remained  near  Dranesville  during  the  whole  of  the  20th, 
covering  the  operations  of  the  topographical  engineers.  On  the 
morning  of  the  21st  he  sent  me  the  following  despatch  : 

"  Camp  near  Dranesville,  Va., 
Oct.  21,  1861,  6.30  a.m. 
^^  MajrGen.  Geo,  B,  McClellan : 

"  General  :  In  a  couple  of  hours  we  shall  have  completed  the 
plane-table  survey  to  the  ground  I  first  occupied  one  and  one- 

t8o 


BALLS  BLUFF.  l8l 

half  miles  in  front,  and,  by  odometer  or  by  observation,  all  the 
cross-roads  this  side  of  the  point  where  we  met  Gen.  Smith's  par- 
ties, from  the  Alexandria  pike  to  the  L.  and  H.  R.  R,,  and  the 
more  northern  ones  from  the  pike  to  the  river. 

"  On  the  return  march  the  plane-table  will  be  at  work  on  the 
Leesburg  and  Georgetown  pike,  and  the  side-roads  to  the  river 
will  be  examined.  .  .  . 

**  Very  respectfully, 

"Geo.  a.  McCall, 

''  Brig,'Genr 


On  the  1 2th  of  Oct  Gen.  Stone  telegraphed  that  he  thought 
the  enemy  were  entrenching  between  Conrad*s  Ferry  and  Lees- 
burg, iibout  one  mile  from  the  town.  In  the  morning  of  the 
13th  he  telegraphed  that  the  enemy  had  strengthened  their  force 
opposite  Harrison's  island  by  one  or  two  regiments  from  below, 
and  that  much  work  was  going  on  in  the  way  of  new  batteries 
and  lines,  and  strengthening  old  ones.  At  night  on  the  same 
day  he  telegraphed  that  work  had  been  done  at  Smart's  Hill, 
that  the  pickets  near  Mason's  island  were  largely  reinforced, 
and  that  he  anticipated  an  early  attempt  by  the  enemy  to  secure 
Mason's  or  Harrison's  island,  perhaps  both,  but  probably  the 
latter,  commanded,  as  it  was,  by  the  bluffs  on  their  side. 

On  the  15th  he  telegraphed  that  there  was  considerable 
movement  between  the  river  and  Leesburg — apparently  prepa- 
rations for  resistance  rather  than  attack.  On  the  iSth,  at  10.45 
P.M.,  he  telegraphed  that  the  enemy's  pickets  were  withdrawn 
from  most  of  the  posts  in  our  front ;  that  he  had  sent  an  officer 
over  the  river  within  two  miles  of  Leesburg  the  same  evening, 
and  that  he  should  push  the  reconnoissances  farther  the  follow* 
ing  day,  if  all  remained  favorable. 

Such  was  the  state  of  affairs  when,  on  the  morning  of  the 
20th,  I  received  the  following  telegram  from  Gen.  Banks's  head- 
quarters : 

"  Darnestown,  Oct.  20,  1861. 

"  Sir  :  The  signal  station  at  Sugar  Loaf  telegraphs  that  the 
enemy  have  moved  away  from  Leesburg.     All  quiet  here. 

"  R.    M.    COPELAND, 

Gen.  Marcy.  Assist  Ad;.- Gen** 


U  /-^ 


Whereupon  I  sent  to  Gen.  Stone,  at  Poolesville,  the  following 
telegram  : 


1 82  AfcCLELLAN'S  OWN  SfORY, 

Camp  Griffin,  Oct.  20,  1861. 

Gen.  McClellan  desires  me  to  inform  you  that  Gen.  McCall 
occupied  Dranesville  yesterday,  and  is  still  there.  Will  send  out 
heavy  reconnoissances  to-day  in  all  directions  from  that  point. 
The  general  desires  that  you  will  keep  a  good  look-out  upon 
Leesburg,  to  see  if  this  movement  has  the  effect  to  drive  them 
away.  Perhaps  a  slight  demonstration  on  your  part  would  have 
the  effect  to  move  them. 

A.  V.  COLBURN, 

Assist.  Adj. 'Gen. 
Brig.-Gen.  C.  P.  Stone,  Poolesinlle. 

Deeming  it  possible  that  Gen.  McCall's  movement  to  Dranes- 
ville, together  with  the  subsequent  reconnoissances,  might  have 
the  effect  of  inducing  the  enemy  to  abandon  Leesburg,  and  the 
despatch  from  Sugar  Loaf  appearing  to  confirm  this  view,  I 
wished  Gen.  Stone — who  had  only  a  line  of  pickets  on  the  river, 
the  mass  of  his  troops  being  out  of  sight  of,  and  beyond  range 
from,  the  Virginia  bank — to  make  some  display  of  an  intention 
to  cross,  and  also  to  watch  the  enemy  more  closely  than  usual. 
I  did  not  direct  him  to  cross,  nor  did  I  intend  that  he  should 
cross  the  river  in  force  for  the  purfK)se  of  fighting. 

The  above  despatch  was  sent  on  the  20th,  and  reached  Gen. 
Stone  as  early  as  eleven  a.m.  of  that  day.  I  expected  him  to 
accomplish  all  that  was  intended  on  the  same  day  ;  and  this  he 
did,  as  will  be  seen  from  the  following  despatch,  received  at  my 
headquarters  in  Washington  from  Poolesville  on  the  evening  of 
Oct.  20  : 

"  Made  a  feint  of  crossing  at  this  place  this  afternoon,  and 
at  the  same  time  started  a  reconnoitring  party  towards  Lees- 
burg from  Harrison's  island.  The  enemy's  pickets  retired  to 
entrenchments.  Report  of  reconnoitring  party  not  yet  received. 
I  have  means  of  crossing  one  hundred  and  twenty-five  men  once 
in  ten  minutes  at  each  of  two  points.     River  falling  slowly. 

*  C.  P.  Stone, 

Brig. 'Gen. 
Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 


it 


As  it  was  not  foreseen  or  expected  that  Gen.  McCall  would 
be  needed  to  co-operate  with  Gen.  Stone  in  any  way,  he  had  been 
directed  to  fall  back  from  Dranesville  to  his  original  camp,  near 
Prospect  Hill,  as  soon  as  the  required  reconnoissances  were  com- 
pleted. 


BALLS  BLUFF.  1 8; 

Accordingly  he  left  Dranesville,  on  his  return,  at  about  S.30 
A.M.  of  the  2 1  St,  reaching  his  old  camp  at  about  one  p.m. 

In  the  meantime  1  was  surprised  to  hear  from  Gen.  Stone 
that  a  portion  of  his  troops  were  engaged  on  the  Virginia  side 
of  the  river,  and  at  once  sent  instructions  to  Gen.  McCall  to 
remain  at  Dranesville,  \i  he  had  not  left  before  the  order  reached 
him. 

The  order  did  not  reach  him  until  his  return  to  his  camp  at 
Prospect  Hill.  He  was  then  ordered  to  rest  his  men,  and  hold 
his  division  in  readiness  to  return  to  Dranesville  at  a  moment's 
notice,  should  it  become  necessary*.  Similar  instructions  were 
given  to  other  divisions  during  the  afternoon. 

The  first  intimation  I  received  from  Gen.  Stone  of  the  real 
nature  of  his  movements  was  in  a  telegram,  as  follows: 

**  Edw.\rd*s  Ferry,  Oct.  21,  11. 10  a.m. 

**  The  enemy  have  been  engaged  opposite  Harrison's  island ; 
our  men  are  behaving  admirably. 

C.  P.  Sto.ve, 

Brig, 'Gin. 
Maj.-Gen.  McClellax. 


4« 


At  two  P.M.  Gen.  BanLs's  adjutant-general  sent  the  follow- 
ing: 


Ci 


DaRN'ESTOWN,  Oct.  21,   1861,  2  P.M. 

Gen.  Stone  safely  crossed  the  river  this  morning.  Some 
engagements  have  taken  place  on  the  other  side  of  the  river — 
how  important  is  not  known. 

R.  M.  COPELAND, 

AcU  Assist.  Adjt.'Gin. 
"Gen.  R.  B.  Marcy." 

Gen.  Stone  sent  the  following  despatches  : 

"  Edward's  Ferry,  Oct  21,  1861,  2  p.m. 

"  There  has  been  sharp  firing-  on  the  right  of  our  line,  and 
our  troops  appear  to  be  advancing  there  under  Baker.  The  left, 
under  Gorman,  has  advanced  its  skirmishers  nearly  one  mile, 
and,  if  the  movement  continues  successful,  will  turn  the  enemy's 
right. 

"  C.  P.  Stoxe, 

"  Brig.'Gcn. 
"  To  Maj.-Gen.  McClellax." 


%  I  MtCl.fiU.AS'S  OWX  STOKT. 


««  t», 


Ki>ward'>  Fckkt.  Oct  zu  r?6c  z.2si  p.jt 
:.  /'>»   \fnrry: 

\W  ,  r<K«i  :it  luiwards  Fernr  in  liar-bottcs — dn^ae  wtiich  \ve 
;i.^v»'  i.iiilt.  i.i))aoitv  torty-ftvtr  merk  each — ami  31  one  canal-boat, 
ainuitv  two  hundred  mea:  ac  Hjmsoa's  rsLHui  Ji  nmr  dar- 
:)oats  md  :our  rviw-baats.  There  is  a  road  from  Seneca  to 
Hdiv.ir»l\  I  erry.  and  trom  Edward*^  Firry  20  Leesburg  .  oiso 
i  nail  trora  opposite  Seneca,  to  die  Leesfcorj  rQad.  The  im)unt- 
cd  men  witi  be  heid  in  nadmeas.  Fxini^  pretty  heavy  on  our 
nght.  ... 

•^C  P.  5ro?rE, 

T!iis  was  in  rarfy  co  an  mqiiiiy  as  ca  Ins  means  of  t^risang 
lod  chc  rjad5*  .il^ti  «Iiip:tijT$  hrm  to  hofid  mounced  men  ready  cu 
ifansmit  ir;?-i.iettr  resorts. 


*  Edwaad's  Fexrt,  Oct  jr^  r36r,  4  p.m: 

**  Nearly  aH  my  force  i»  Jcro&>  the  riTcr.  Baker  on  the  right, 
Gorman  on  tae  left.     Rf^tit  sharply  engaged 

"^  C  P.  Sxosre, 
**  To  Gen.  McClzllaji.'' 

•*  Edwaxd's  FtEET,  Oct.  21,  i36t,  6  p.m: 

*•  Have  caller!  on  Eanks  for  a  brigade,  and  he  has  ordered  ap 
Han^iiroai.  I  th;nk  it  would  be  well  to  scad  op  a  (fivision  an 
file  ijther  tide  oC  the  river.     I  think  they  have  been  reiii forced 

•*€.  R  STO!rE, 

rSr  ur.^tir^  divirtion  oo  the  Virginia  side  (McCall's)  was 
4u>r«t  h.M^  »#rtvty  mtU:>»  ffom  the  scene  of  action,  so  that  it  could 
,W4  s.w-  ti-KrvfTu  Ncf/>fc  noon  of  the  22d— too  late  to  be  of  any 
4*i4v.*.-.  \tor.:4>vri',  it^  line  of  march  would  have  passed  not 
w^>^.^  ^»M»  .vU-vfTu  '>f  rivclvc  inilc^  from  the  enemy's  j)osition  at 
(^.♦►..-v.ni-.  n.*!  .1  w'»uld  thu^  have  been  exposed  to  be  cut  ofF, 
.»^j«^^  4.»p;.^»i>.4l  r»y  «  j^rftcfal  movement  of  the  Army  of  the 
K'f^uo.vM  aIvi.  :.  fNi-rt:  w.i*  nothing  to  justify,  according  to  the 
.u»,o.».M..»u  .*  \\>M  m»h:  {hy>YM)  in  my  possession.  The 
.•»,!.».  I    .v.l    »Im  Miy  <t:Ml  i<>  hvifik*  mecmed  best  adapted  to  the 


BALLS  BLUFF,  1 85 

"Edward's  Ferry,  Oct.  21,  1861,  6.45  p.m. 

"  To  Maj.Gen,  McClellan : 

"  Col  Baker  has  been  killed  at  the  head  of  his  brigade.     I  go 
to  the  right  at  once. 

"C.  P.  Stone, 

''Brig.-Genr 

Gen.  Stone  was  evidently  misinformed,  as  Col.  Baker  had  only 
one  battalion  of  his  brigade  with  him. 

"  Edward's  Ferry,  Oct.  21,  1861,  9.30  p.m. 

"  To  Gen,  McClellan  : 

"I  am  occupied  in  preventing  further  disaster,  and  try  to 
get  into  a  position  to  redeem.  We  have  lost  some  of  our  best 
commanders — Baker  dead,  Coggswell  a  prisoner  or  secreted. 
The  wounded  are  being  carefully  and  rapidly  removed,  and 
Gorman's  wing  is  being  cautiously  withdrawn.  Any  advance 
from  Dranesville  must  be  made  cautiously.  All  was  reported 
going  well  up  to  Baker's  death,  but  in  the  confusion  following 
that  the  right  wing  was  outflanked.  In  a  few  hours  I  shall,, 
unless  a  night-attack  is  made,  be  in  the  same  position  as  last 
night,  save  the  loss  of  many  good  men. 

"  C.  P.  Stone, 

''£ng.'Gen:' 


Although  not  fully  informed  of  the  state  of  affairs,  I  had, 
during  the  afternoon,  as  a  precautionary  measure,  ordered  Gen. 
Banks  to  send  one  brigade  10  the  support  of  the  troops  at  Harri- 
son's island,  and  to  move  with  the  other  two  to  Seneca  Mills, 
ready  to  support  Gen.  Stone,  if  necessary.  The  9.30  p.m.  de- 
spatch of  Gen.  Stone  did  not  give  me  entire  understanding  of 
the  state  of  the  case. 

Aware  of  the  difficulties  and  perhaps  fatal  consequences  of 
attempting  to  recross  such  a  river  as  the  Potomac  after  a  repulse, 
and  from  these  telegrams  supposing  his  whole  force  to  be  on  the 
Virginia  side,  I  sent  the  following  telegram  : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  Potomac, 

Oct.  21,  1861,  10.30  P.M. 

To  Gen.  C.  P.  Stone^  Edward's  Ferry  : 

Entrench  yourself  on  the  Virginia  side  and  await  reinforce- 
ments, if  necessary. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Jfa/\'Gen.  Commanding, 


l86  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Shortly  after  the  following: 

To  Gen,  C  P,  Stone  : 

Hold  your  position  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac  at 
all  hazards.  Gen.  Banks  will  support  you,  with  one  brigade  at 
Harrison's  island  and  the  other  two  at  Seneca.  Lander  will  be 
with  you  at  daylight. 

Geo.  B.  McClfxlan, 

Maj.-Gen.  Commanding. 

P.S.  Change  the  disposition  of  Gen.  Banks's  division,  if  you 
think  it  necessary,  so  as  to  send  two  "brigades  to  Harrison's 
island  instead  of  one. 

About  the  same  time  I  sent  the  following  : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Oct.  21,   1861,   10.45  P.M. 

To  Gen,  N.  P.  Banks  : 

Push  forward  your  command  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  put 
as  many  men  over  the  river  to  reinforce  Gen.  Stone  as  you  can 
before  daylight.  Gen.  Sione  is  directed  to  hold  his  command  on 
the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac  at  all  hazards,  and  informed  that 
you  will  support  him.  You  will  assume  command  when  you  join 
Gen.  Stone. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  Commanding. 

The  following  despatches  were  next  received  : 

"Edward's  Ferry,  Oct.  21,  11  p.m. 

"  To  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  We  hold  the  ground  half  a  mile  back  of  Edward's  Ferry  on 
Virginia  shore.  Harrison's  island  has  parts  of  thirteen  com- 
panies, only  seven  hundred  (700)  men,  and  will  soon  be  rein- 
forced by  one  hundred  fresh  men,  besides  what  support  Hamil- 
ton brings.  I  cover  the  shore  opposite  this  with  guns,  and  am 
disposing  others  to  help  the  defence  of  Harrison's.  I  thi^ik  the 
men  will  fight  well.     Entrenchments  ordered  this  morning. 

"C.  P.  Stone, 

"  Brig.-Gen.'' 

"Headquarters,  Seneca  Mills, 

Oct.    21,   II    P.M. 

"  To  Gen.  McClellan : 

"  Arrived  here  at  nine  and  a  half  o'clock.     Gen.  Stone  tele- 


BALLS  BLL'FF,  iSj 

graphs  tor  whote  division  rmmedi-iijlv.     CoL  Baker  is  killtitL  and 
s*Daie  crouble  exists  on  his  ngiiL     We  go  at  once. 

"X.   P.  Baxrs. 

Hoimlton's  bnirade  arrived  at  midniijiitu  and  Gen.  Bonks  with 
the  remainder  ot  his  division  reached  Edward's  Ferry  at  three 
A.1L  oc  the  2 2d.  He  found  Gen.  Stone  on  the  Maryland  side,  and 
reported  that  he  ascertained  that  at  no  time  had  more  than  one- 
third  of  his  i  Gen.  Stone's)  troops  crossed.  Assuming  command, 
and  consulting  with  the  generals  present,  he  telegraph-d  me  the 
facts,  and  received  a  reply  directing  him  to  send  over  men  enough 
to  hold  the  opposite  side,  with  orders  to  entrench  themselves: 
all  oi  which  was  ^o^'^  During  the  afternoon  there  was  a  skir- 
mish^ in  the  course  of  which  Gen.  Lander  was  wounded. 

Meanwhile  Gen.  Bonks  had  collected  all  the  canal-boots  to 
be  touni  in  order  to  increase  the  means  of  transportation.  I 
reached  Edward's  Ferry  during  the  evening  of  the  2 2d  and 
assumeti  command.  Passing  through  Pooles'ville.  I  first  learned 
the  actual  condition  of  onairs  and  the  details  of  what  had 
occurred,  and  sent  the  following: 

POOLESVILLE.  OcL  22,  5.3O    P.M. 
T(J  Pradlint  Uncoln,  : 

From  what  I  learn  here  the  affair  of  vesterdav  was  a  more 
serious  disoster  than  I  had  supposed.  Our  loss  in  prisoners  and 
killed  was  severe.     I  leave  at  once  for  Edward's  Ferry. 

Geo.  B.  McClellax. 

The  following  extract  from  the  eT.-idence  of  Gen.  Stone  before 
the  *"  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War  **  on  the  5th  of  Jan.. 
1 36 2.  will  throw  further  light  on  this  occurrence : 

Gen.  Stone  says  he  received  the  order  from  my  headquarters 
to  make  a  slight  demonstration  at  about  eleven  o'clock  -\.«.  on  the 
2cth.  and  that,  in  obedience  to  that  order,  he  made  the  demon- 
stration on  the  evenin^i  of  the  same  dar. 

In  regard  to  the  reconnoissance  on  the  21st,  which  resulted  in 
the  battle  of  Boll's  Bluff,  he  was  asked  the  following  questions : 

Question,  "^Did  this  reconnoissonce  originate  with  yourself,  or 
had  you  orders  from  the  general-in-chief  to  make  it  ?  ** 


l88  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

To  which  he  replied :  "  It  originated  with  myself — the  recon- 
noissance." 

Question,  "The  order  did  not  proceed  from  Gen.  McClel- 
lan?" 

Answer,  "  I  was  directed  the  day  before  to  make  a  demon- 
stration ;  that  demonstration  was  made  the  day  previous." 

Question,  "  Did  you  receive  an  order  from  the  general-in- 
chief  to  make  the  reconnoissance  ? " 

Answer.  "  No,  sir." 

Making  a  personal  examination  on  the  23d,  I  found  that  the 
position  on  the  Virginia  side  at  Edward's  Ferry  was  not  a  ten- 
able one,  but  did  not  think  it  wise  to  withdraw  the  troops  by 
daylight.  I  therefore  caused  more  artillery  to  be  placed  in  posi- 
tion on  the  Maryland  side  to  cover  the  approaches  to  the  ground 
held  by  us,  and  crossed  the  few  additional  troops  that  the  high 
wind  permitted  us  to  get  over,  so  as  to  be  as  secure  as  possible 
against  any  attack  during  the  day. 

Up  to  six  o'clock  I  kept  my  intention  secret,  all  supposing 
that  I  intended  to  advance  on  Leesburg.  My  object  was  not  to 
discourage  the  command  in  the  event  of  their  being  attacked. 
At  six  o'clock  I  sent  to  Gen.  Stone,  then  on  the  Virginia  side 
of  the  river,  the  detailed  instructions  for  the  withdrawal  of  the 
troops  during  the  night.  Before  nightfall  all  the  precautions 
were  taken  to  secure  an  orderly  and  quiet  passage  of  the  troops 
and  guns. 

The  movement  was  commenced  soon  after  dark,  under  the 
personal  supervision  of  Gen.  Stone,  who  received  the  order  for 
the  withdrawal  at  7.15  p.m.  By  four  a.m.  of  the  24th  everything 
had  reached  the  Maryland  shore  in  safety.  A  few  days  after- 
wards I  received  information,  which  seemed  to  be  authentic,  to 
the  effect  that  large  bodies  of  the  enemy  had  been  ordered  from 
Manassas  to  Leesburg  to  cut  off  our  troops  on  the  Virginia  side. 
Their  timely  withdrawal  probably  prevented  a  still  more  serious 
disaster.  Gen.  Stone's  report  of  this  battle  and  his  testimony 
before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War  furnish  fur- 
ther details. 

Gen.  Banks's  division  deserves  great  credit  for  its  rapid  night- 
march  to  the  relief  of  General  Stone.  On  the  24th  the  total 
loss  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  was  reported  as  680,  with 
stragglers  constantly  coming  in. 


BALL'S  BLUFF,  1 89 

The  true  story  ot  the  affair  of  Ball's  Biuff  is,  in  brief,  as  fol- 


lows : 


One  of  Gen.  Stone's  officers,  Capt.  Philbnck,  of  the  15th 
Mass.,  thought  that  he  had  discovered  a  camp  of  the  enemy 
about  one  mile  bevond  Harrison's  island  in  the  direction  of 
Leesburg.  Having  completed  the  feint  of  crossing  made  in  the 
course  of  the  2Dth,  GeiL  Stone  at  10.30  p.m.  of  the  same  day 
issued  his  orders  for  the  surprise  of  the  supposed  camp  at  day- 
break of  the  21st.  CoL  Devens,  of  the  15th  Mass,,  was  entrusted 
with  the  dut>-,  with  four  companies  of  his  regimenL  CoL  Lee,  of 
the  20th  Mass.,  was  directed  to  replace  CoL  I>evens  in  Harrison's 
island  wiih  four  companies  of  his  own  regiment,  one  of  which 
was  to  pass  over  to  the  Virginia  shore  and  hold  the  heights  there 
to  cover  CoL  Devens's  return.  CoL  De\-ens  was  directed  to 
"attack  the  camp  at  daybreak,  and,  having  routed,  to  pursue 
them  as  far  as  he  deems  prudent,  and  to  destroy  the  camp,  if 
practicable,  before  returning."  ''  He  will  make  all  the  obser\a- 
tions  possible  on  the  countr>%  will,  under  all  circumstances,  keep 
his  command  well  in  hand,  and  not  sacrifice  this  to  any  supposed 
advantages  of  rapid  pursuit  Having  accomplished  this  duty, 
CoL  Devens  will  return  to  his  present  position,  unless  he  shall  see 
one  on  the  Virginia  side  near  the  river  which  he  can  undoubtedly 
hold  until  reinforced,  and  one  which  can  be  successfully  held 
against  largely  superior  numbers.  In  which  case  he  will  hold  on 
and  report" 

In  obedience  to  these  orders  Col.  Devens  crossed  about  mid- 
night with  five  companies  (instead  of  four),  numbering  about  300 
men,  and  halted  until  daybreak  in  an  open  field  near  the  bluffs 
bordering  the  shore.  While  there  he  was  joined  by  CoL  Lee  with 
100  men  of  the  20th  Mass.,  who  halted  here  to  cover  his  return. 

At  daybreak  he  advanced  about  a  mile  towards  Leesburg,  and 
then  discovered  that  the  supposed  camp  did  not  e.xist.  After 
examining  the  vicinity  and  discovering  no  traces  of  the  enemy, 
he  determined  not  to  return  at  once,  but  at  about  half-past  six 
A.M.  sent  a  non-commissioned  officer  to  report  to  Gen.  Stone 
that  he  thought  he  could  remain  where  he  was  until  reinforced. 
At  about  seven  o'clock  a  company  of  hostile  riflemen  were  ob- 
ser\'ed  on  the  right,  and  a  slight  skirmish  ensued.  A  company  of 
cavalry  being  soon  observed  on  the  left,  the  skirmishers  were 
drawn  back  to  the  woods,  and,  after  waiting  half  an  hour  for 


I  go  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

attack,  the  command  was  withdrawn  to  the  position  held  by  Col. 
Lee ;  but,  after  again  scouting  the  woods.  Col.  Devens  returned 
to  his  advanced  position.  About  eight  o'clock  the  messenger 
returned  from  Gen.  Stone  with  orders  for  Col.  Devens  to  remain 
where  he  was,  and  that  he  would  be  reinforced.  The  messenger 
was  again  sent  back  to  report  the  skirmish  that  had  taken  place. 
Col.  Devens  then  threw  out  skirmishers  and  awaited  reinforce- 
ments. At  about  ten  o'clock  the  messenger  again  returned  with 
the  information  that  Col.  Baker  would  soon  arrive  with  his  bri- 
gade and  take  command.  Between  nine  and  eleven  Col.  Devens 
was  joined  by  Lieut.-Col.  Learned  with  the  remainder  of  the 
15th,  bringing  up  his  command  to  28  officers  and  625  men. 

About  midday  Col.  Devens  learned  that  the  enemy  were 
gathering  on  his  left,  and  about  half-past  twelve  or  one  he  was 
strongly  attacked  ;  and  as  he  was  in  great  danger  of  being  out- 
flanked, and  no  reinforcements  had  arrived,  at  about  a  quarter- 
past  two  he  fell  back  to  the  bluff,  where  he  found  Col.  Baker, 
who  directed  him  to  take  the  right  of  the  position  he  proposed  to 
occupy ;  the  centre  and  left  being  composed  of  about  300  men  of 
the  20th  Mass.,  under  Col.  Lee,  and  a  battalion  of  the  California 
regiment  about  600  strong.  Two  howitzers  and  a  6-pounder 
were  also  in  line. 

At  about  three  o'clock  the  enemy  attacked  in  force,  the 
weight  of  his  attack  being  on  our  centre  and  left.  At  about 
four  our  artillery  was  silenced,  and  Col.  Devens  was  ordered  to 
send  two  of  his  companies  to  support  the  left  of  our  line ;  shortly 
after  he  learned  that  Col.  Baker  had  been  killed.  Col.  Coggswell 
then  assumed  command,  and,  after  a  vain  attempt  to  cut  his  way 
through  to  Edward's  Ferry,  was  obliged  to  give  the  order  to 
retreat  to  the  river-bank  and  direct  the  men  to  save  themselves 
as  best  they  could. 

I  have  gone  thus  much  into  detail  because  at  the  time  I  was 
much  criticised  and  blamed  for  this  unfortunate  affair,  while  I 
was  in  no  sense  responsible  for  it. 

Early  in  1862  it  was  determined  to  attempt  the  reopening  of 
the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  as  far  eastward  from  Cumber- 
land as  circumstances  would  justify. 

Gen.  F.  W.  Lander  was  ordered  to  cover  this  operation  from 
Cumberland  towards  Hancock,  and  on  the  5th  of  Jan.  reached 
Hancock  en  route  to  his  destination.     He  found  Jackson  on  the 


GENERAL  LANDER,  1 91 

opposite  bank  of  the  Potomac,  tearing  up  rails,  etc.  Shortly 
after  his  arrival  Lander  was  summoned  by  Jackson  to  surrender ; 
this,  of  course,  was  a  mere  act  of  bravado,  for  it  is  not  probable 
that  Jackson  had  the  slightest  intention  of  crossing  the  river. 
The  enemy  fired  a  few  shells  into  Hancock,  doing  little  or  no 
damage.  Gen.  Banks  sent  reinforcements  to  Hancock  under 
Gen.  Williams,  who  remained  in  that  vicinity  for  some  time. 
Jackson  now  moved  towards  Bloomery  Gap  and  Romney,  whither 
Lander  was  ordered  to  go.  The  force  at  Romney  being  insuffi- 
cient to  hold  the  place  and  its  communications.  Lander  was 
instructed  to  fall  back  to  the  mouth  of  Patterson's  creek,  where 
he  awaited  the  arrival  of  reinforcements  now  on  the  way  to  him. 

Finding  it  difficult  to  procure  supplies,  and  not  venturing  to 
attack  Lander  in  his  position,  Jackson  fell  back  from  Romney  to 
Unger's  Store  with  the  mass  of  his  force  about  the  23d  of  Jan. 
About  the  5th  of  Feb.  Lander  obliged  him  to  evacuate  Romney 
entirely. 

Lander  now  moved  his  headquarters  to  the  Paw  Paw  Tunnel, 
from  which  position  he  covered  the  reconstruction  of  the  Balti- 
more and  Ohio  Railroad,  which  was  reopened  from  the  west  to 
Hancock  on  the  14th  of  Feb.  On  the  13th  he  made  a  very  dash- 
ing attack  upon  a  party  of  the  enemy  at  Bloomery  Gap,  taking 
several  prisoners  and  dispersing  the  rest. 

Notwithstanding  the  severe  illness  from  which  he  suffered. 
Lander  remained  at  Paw  Paw,  covering  the  railroad  and  keeping 
the  country  clear  of  the  enemy,  until  the  28th  of  Feb.,  when  he 
was  ordered  to  move  to  Bunker  Hill  to  co-operate  with  Gen. 
Banks,  then  at  Charlestown,  covering  the  rebuilding  of  the  rail- 
road as  he  advanced.  While  engaged  in  preparing  to  execute 
this  order  his  disease  assumed  a  more  violent  form,  and  on  the 
2d  of  March  this  gallant  officer  breathed  his  last.  On  some 
occasions  during  this  brief  campaign  I  was  obliged  to  check 
Lander  rather  abruptly  for  attempting  to  assume  control  over 
troops  not  under  his  command,  and  for  endeavoring  to  initiate 
some  very  rash  movements  when  the  great  risk  could  not  be  coun- 
terbalanced by  the  very  faint  chances  of  success.  These  errors 
arose  partly  from  inexperience,  and  also,  no  doubt,  from  the 
effects  of  the  malady  which  so  soon  terminated  his  life. 

These  occurrences  did  not  change  my  feeling  towards  him, 
and  I  doubt  whether  they  influenced  his  for  me. 


192  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

I  had  often  observed  to  the  President  and  to  members  of  the 
cabinet  that  the  reconstruction  of  this  railway  could  not  be  under- 
taken until  we  were  in  a  condition  to  fight  a  battle  to  secure  it. 
I  regarded  the  possession  of  Winchester  and  Strasburg  as  neces- 
sary to  cover  the  railway  in  the  rear,  and  it  was  not  till  the  month 
of  February  that  I  felt  prepared  to  accomplish  this  very  desirable 
but  not  vital  purpose. 

The  whole  of  Banks's  division  and  two  brigades  of  Sedgwick's 
division  were  thrown  across  the  river  at  Harper's  Ferry,  leaving 
one  brigade  of  Sedgwick's  division  to  observe  and  guard  the 
Potomac  from  Great  Falls  to  the  mouth  of  the  Monocacy.  A 
sufficient  number  of  troops  of  all  arms  were  held  in  readiness 
in  the  vicinity  of  Washington,  either  to  march  via  Leesburg  or 
to  move  by  rail  to  Harper's  Ferry,  should  this  become  necessary 
in  carrying  out  the  objects  in  view. 

The  subjoined  Notes  from  a  communication  subsequently 
addressed  to  the  War  Department  will  sufficiently  explain  the 
conduct  of  these  operations: 

NOTES. 

When  I  started  for  Harper's  Ferry  I  plainly  stated  to  the 
President  and  Secretary  of  War  that  the  chief  object  of  the  ope- 
ration would  be  to  open  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  by 
crossing  the  river  in  force  at  Harper's  Ferry  ;  that  I  had  col- 
lected the  material  for  making  a  permanent  bridge  by  means  of 
canal-boats  ;  that,  from  the  nature  of  the  river,  it  was  doubtful 
whether  such  a  bridge  could  be  constructed  ;  that  if  it  could 
not  I  would  at  least  occupy  the  ground  in  front  of  Harper's 
Ferry,  in  order  to  cover  the  rebuilding  of  the  railroad  bridge ; 
and  finally,  when  the  communications  were  perfectly  secure, 
move  on  Winchester. 

When  I  arrived  at  the  place  I  found  the  bateau  bridge 
nearly  completed  ;  the  holding-ground  proved  better  than  had 
been  anticipated  ;  the  weather  was  favorable,  there  being  no 
wind.  I  at  once  crossed  over  the  two  brigades  which  had 
arrived,  and  took  steps  to  hurry  up  the  other  two,  belonging 
respectively  to  Banks's  and  Sedgwick's  divisions.  The  difficulty 
of  crossing  supplies  had  not  then  become  apparent.  That  night 
I  telegraphed  for  a  regiment  of  regular  cavalry  and  four  bat- 
teries of  heavy  artillery  to  come  up  the  next  day  (Thursday), 
besides  directing  Keyes's  division  of  infantry  to  be  moved  up 
on  Friday. 

Next  morning  the  attempt  was  made  to  pass  the  canal-boats 


HARPEUrS  FERRY,  1 93 

through  the  lift-lock,  in  order  to  commence  at  once  the  con- 
struction of  a  permanent  bridge.  It  was  then  found  for  the 
first  time  that  the  lock  was  too  small  to  permit  the  passage  of 
the  boats,  it  having  been  built  for  a  class  of  boats  running  on 
the  Shenandoah  canal,  and  too  narrow  by  some  four  or  six 
inches  for  the  canal-boats.  The  lift-locks,  above  and  below, 
are  all  large  enough  for  the  ordinarj'  boats.  1  had  seen  them  at 
Edward's  Ferrj-  thus  used.  It  had  always  been  represented  to 
the  engineers  by  the  military  railroad  employees  and  others  that 
the  lock  ivas  large  enough,  and,  the  difference  being  too  small 
to  be  detected  by  the  eye,  no  one  had  thought  of  measuring  it  or 
suspected  any  difficulty  I  thus  suddenly  found  myself  unable 
to  build  the  permanent  bridge.  A  violent  gale  had  arisen,  which 
threatened  the  safety  of  our  only  means  of  communication  ;  the 
narrow  approach  to  the  bridge  was  so  crowded  and  clogged  with 
wagons  that  it  was  very  clear  ihat,  under  existing  circumstances, 
nothing  more  could  be  done  than  to  cross  over  the  baggage 
and  supplies  of  the  two  brigades.  Of  these,  instead  of  being 
able  to  cross  both  during  the  morning,  the  last  arrived  only  in 
time  to  go  over  just  before  dark.  It  was  evident  that  the  troops 
under  orders  would  only  be  in  the  way,  should  they  arrive,  and 
that  it  would  not  be  {)ossible  to  subsist  them  for  a  rapid  march 
on  Winchester.  It  was  therefore  deemed  necessarv  to  counter- 
mand  the  order,  content  ourselves  with  covering  the  reopen- 
ing of  the  railroad  for  the  present,  and  in  the  meantime  use 
every  exertion  to  establish,  as  promptly  as  possible,  depots  of 
forage  and  subsistence  on  the  Virginia  side  to  supply  the  troops 
and  enable  them  to  move  on  Winchester  independently  of  the 
bridge.  The  next  day  (Friday)  I  sent  a  strong  reconnoissance 
to  Charlestown,  and,  under  its  protection,  went  there  myself. 
I  then  determined  to  hold  that  place,  and  to  move  the  troops 
composing  Lander's  and  Williams's  commands  at  once  on  Mar- 
tinsburg  and  Bunker  Hill,  thus  effectually  covering  the  recon- 
struction of  the  railroad. 

Having  done  this,  and  taken  all  the  steps  in  my  power 
to  insure  the  rapid  transmission  of  supplies  over  the  river,  I 
returned  to  this  city,  well  satisfied  with  what  had  been  accom- 
plished. While  up  the  river  I  learned  that  the  President  was 
dissatisfied  with  the  state  of  affairs  ;  but,  on  my  return  here, 
understood  from  the  Secretar)-  of  War  that  upon  learning  the 
whole  state  of  the  case  the  President  was  fully  satisfied.  I  con- 
tented myself,  therefore,  with  giving  to  the  secretarj'  a  brief 
statement,  about  as  I  have  written  it  here ;  he  did  not  even 
require  that  much  of  me.  He  was  busy ;  I  troubled  him  as 
little  as  possible,  and  immediately  went  to  work  at  other  impor- 
tant affairs. 

The   design   aimed   at  was  entirely  accomplished,  and   the 


196  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

sented  to  him  (and  he  certainly  conveyed  to  me  the  distinct 
impression  that  he  regarded  these  representations  as  well  found- 
ed) that  my  plan  of  campaign  (which  was  to  leave  Washington 
under  the  protection  of  a  sufficient  garrison,  its  numerous 
well-built  and  well-armed  fortifications,  and  the  command  of 
Banks,  then  in  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  and  to  throw  the  whole 
active  army  suddenly  by  water  from  Annapolis  and  Alexandria 
to  the  forts  on  James  river,  and  thence  by  the  shortest  route 
upon  Richmond)  was  conceived  with  the  traitorous  intent  of 
removing  its  defenders  from  Washington,  and  thus  giving  over 
to  the  enemy  the  capital  and  the  government,  thus  left  defence- 
less. 

It  is  difficult  to  understand  that  a  man  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  intel- 
ligence could  give  ear  to  such  abominable  nonsense.  I  was 
seated  when  he  said  this,  concluding  with  the  remark  that  it  did 
look  to  him  much  like  treason.  Upon  this  I  arose,  and,  in  a 
manner  perhaps  not  altogether  decorous  towards  the  chief  magis- 
trate, desired  that  he  should  retract  the  expression,  telling  him 
that  I  could  permit  no  one  to  couple  the  word  treason  with  my 
name.  He  was  much  agitated,  and  at  once  disclaimed  any  idea 
of  considering  me  a  traitor,  and  said  that  he  merely  repeated 
what  others  had  said,  and  that  he  did  not  believe  a  word  of 
it.  I  suggested  caution  in  the  use  of  language,  and  again  said 
that  I  would  permit  no  doubt  to  be  thrown  upon  my  intentions  ; 
whereupon  he  again  apologized  and  disclaimed  any  purpose  of 
impugning  my  motives.     . 

I  then  informed  him  that  I  had  called  a  meeting  of  the  gene- 
rals of  division  for  that  day  with  reference  to  the  proposed  attack 
upon  the  enemy's  Potomac  batteries,  and  suggested  that  my  plan 
should  be  laid  before  them  in  order  that  he  might  be  satisfied. 
This  was  done,  and  I  heard  no  more  of  treason  in  that  con- 
nection. 

Before  leaving  this  subject  I  will  call  attention  to  the  fact 
that  my  official  report  contained  the  statement  that  the  secretary 
had  assured  me  of  the  President's  approval  of  my  action  when  I 
returned  from  the  upper  Potomac,  and  that  this  assertion  was 
never  denied.  Moreover,  no  other  statement  made  in  the  memo- 
randum was  ever  denied  or  objected  to  either  by  the  President  or 
the  secretary  ;  and  that  memorandum  shows  very  clearly  that 
there  was  no  ground  of  dissatisfaction  with  my  conduct,  but  that 


BA  TTERIES  ON  THE  PO  TOM  A  C  1 9  7 

I  did  precisely  what  I  told  them  I  should  do  under  given  cir- 
cumstances. 

In  my  official  report  I  have  given  all  necessary  information 
as  to  the  reasons  which  prevented  an  attack  upon  the  enemy's 
batteries  on  the  Potomac.  I  will  here  repeat  only  that  careful 
reconnoissances  and  a  full  consideration  of  the  matter  led  to  the 
inevitable  conclusion  that  although  we  might,  at  a  greater  or  less 
sacrifice  of  life,  carry  and  destroy  any  particular  battery,  we 
could  prevent  the  construction  of  permanent  batteries  and  the 
employment  of  rifled  field-batteries  only  by  a  general  movement 
of  the  army  to  drive  the  enemy  entirely  behind  the  Rappahan- 
nock and  Rapidan,  after  a  general  action  ;  and  that  it  would 
then  be  necessary  to  hold  the  lines  of  those  rivers  in  force  or 
continue  the  campaign  by  the  overland  route. 

I  did  not  regard  the  inconvenience  resulting  from  the  pre- 
sence of  the  enemy's  batteries  on  the  Potomac  as  sufficiently 
great  to  justify  the  direct  efforts  necessary  to  dislodge  them, 
especially  since  it  was  absolutely  certain  that  they  would  evacu- 
ate all  their  positions  as  soon  as  they  became  aware  of  the  move- 
ment to  the  James  and  York  rivers. 

It  was  therefore  with  the  greatest  reluctance  that  I  made  the 
arrangements  required  to  carry  out  the  positive  orders  of  the 
government,  and  it  was  with  great  satisfaction  that  I  found 
myself  relieved  from  the  necessity  of  making  what  I  knew  to  be 
a  false  and  unnecessary  movement. 

When  the  enemy  abandoned  his  position  on  the  8th  and  9th 
of  March,  the  roads  were  still  in  such  a  condition  as  to  make  the 
proposed  movement  upon  the  batteries  impracticable.  Before 
this  time  I  had  strongly  and  repeatedly  urged  upon  the  Navy 
Department  the  propriety  of  hastening  the  completion  of  the 
MonitoKy  that  she  might  be  sent  to  the  Potomac  to  try  her  hand 
upon  the  batteries  on  its  banks.  As  the  reason  for  this  I  urged 
that  it  was  well  to  try  her  qualities  under  fire,  when  necessary 
repairs  and  alterations  could  readily  be  made,  rather  than  to 
send  her  immediately  to  New  Orleans,  as  had  been  intended. 
It  is  a  little  singular  that  the  effect  of  my  urgency  was  to  hasten 
her  completion,  so  that  she  arrived  in  Hampton  Roads  in  season 
to  check  the  operations  of  the  Merrimac, 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Review  of  the  situation — McClellan  succeeds  Scott  in  command  of  all  the 
armies — ^Their  condition  ;  general  disorganization  ;  no  plan  for  the 
war — McClellan's  plans  for  the  whole  war — Simultaneous  movements 
throughout  the  country — Orders  to  Burnside  for  North  Carolina  expe- 
dition ;  to  Halleck  and  Buell  for  operations  in  the  West ;  to  Butler 
for  the  New  Orleans  expedition — Halleck  and  Grant— Correspon- 
dence of  McClellan  and  Grant. 

I  DO  not  know  that  any  one  worthy  of  attention  has  ques- 
tioned the  manner  in  which  was  performed  the  task  of  convert- 
ing the  unorganized,  defeated,  and  dispirited  remains  of  Mc- 
Dowell's Bull  Run  command  into  the  Army  of  the  Potomac — 
an  army  which  so  long  bore  on  its  bayonets  the  life  and  honor 
of  the  nation. 

Everything  was  to  be  done.  An  army  was  to  be  created 
ah  initio — out  of  nothing.  Raw  material  there  was,  but  it  was 
completely  raw,  and  was  to  be  fashioned  into  shape.  Private 
soldiers,  non-commissioned  officers,  officers,  regiments,  brigades, 
divisions,  army  corps,  armies,  with  all  their  staff  corps,  were  to 
be  organized  and  instructed,  not  merely  on  paper,  but  in  effec- 
tive reality. 

Small  arms,  field-guns,  siege  and  garrison  artillery,  ammuni- 
tion, equipments,  camp-equipage,  bridges,  ambulances,  baggage 
and  supply  trains,  tents,  clothing — all  these  wonderful  instru- 
ments and  impedimenta  of  a  modem  army  were  to  be  fabricat- 
ed ;  and  not  only  fabricated,  but  so  made  that  it  would  be  pos- 
sible to  use  them  :  so  strong  as  to  withstand  a  heavy  strain,  so 
light  that  they  could  be  handled.  It  added  to  the  difficulty  of 
the  task  that  no  army  approaching  in  magnitude  that  now  re- 
quired had  ever  existed  on  this  continent,  so  that  our  own  expe- 
rience was  not  of  much  avail  in  the  crisis  so  suddenly  upon  us. 

In  fact,  one  of  the  greatest  obstacles  I  encountered  at  this 
time  was  the  difficulty  of  drawing  some  of  the  heads  of  depart- 
ments out  of  the  old  ruts,  and  convincing  them  that  what  was 

eminently  appropriate  for  five  or  ten  thousand  men  was  often 

198 


WORK  TO  BE  DONE.  \  99 

an  absurdity  or  impossibility  for  ten  or  twenty  times  those  num- 
bers. Besides  all  this — and  going  on  pari  passu  with  it  all — was 
the  irresistible  and  pressing  necessity  of  so  fortifying  Washing- 
ion  as  to  provide  for  its  immediate  and  future  safety ;  so  that 
the  active  army  of  operations  should  not  necessarily  be  tied 
down  to  it  as  its  base  of  operations  and  be  unable  to  uncover 
it  without  endangering  its  security. 

More  yet  than  this,  the  work  was  to  be  done  in  the  face  of  a 
victorious  enemy,  whose  outposts  were  within  rifle-shot  of  our 
own  and  in  sight  of  the  capital ;  the  only  communications  of 
the  army  and  the  government  passing,  as  far  as  to  the  Sus- 
quehanna, through  a  people  of  very  doubtful  loyalty. 

Moreover,  the  government  was  utterly  ignorant  of  military 
affairs  and  incapable  of  judging  the  necessities  of  the  situation ; 
too  often  actuated  by  mere  motives  of  partisan  expediency  in- 
stead of  patriotic  resolve.  The  people,  also,  were  ignorant  of 
war,  and  sure  to  be  urged  to  clamorous  and  senseless  impatience 
by  a  partisan  press. 

Finally,  I  was  not  only  unsupported,  but  sometimes  thwarted 
by  Gen.  Scott,  whose  views  often  differed  from  my  own.  Under 
these  circumstances  I  had  only  my  own  unwavering  sense  of 
right  to  sustain  me.  In  spite  of  all  threats  and  clamors  I 
quietly  persevered  in  the  course  I  knew  to  be  necessary  for 
the  safety  of  the  nation,  regardless  of  the  result  to  my  per- 
sonal fortunes. 

The  work  was  accomplished,  and  I  know  of  no  case  in  his- 
tory where  so  great  a  task  was  so  thoroughly  performed  in  so 
brief  a  period. 

It  certainly  was  not  till  late  in  Nov.,  1861,  that  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  was  in  any  condition  to  move,  nor  even  then  were 
they  capable  of  assaulting  entrenched  positions.  By  that  time 
the  roads  had  ceased  to  be  practicable  for  the  movement  of 
armies,  and  the  experience  of  subsequent  years  proved  that 
no  large  operations  could  be  advantageously  conducted  in  that 
region  during  the  winter  season. 

Any  success  gained  at  that  time  in  front  of  Washington  could 
not  have  been  followed  up,  and  a  victory  would  have  given  us 
the  barren  possession  of  the  field  of  battle,  with  a  longer  and 
more  difficult  line  of  supply  during  the  rest  of  the  winter.  If 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  been  in  condition  to  move  before 


200  McCLELLAirS  OWN  STORY, 

winter,  such  an  operation  would  not  have  accorded  with  the 
general  plan  I  had  determined  uf>on  after  succeeding  Gen. 
Scott  as  general  in  command  of  the  armies. 

On  Nov.  I,  1 86 1,  the  following  private  letter  was  received 
from  the  President: 

"  Private, 

"Executive  Mansion, 
Nov.  I,  1861. 
^^  Maj.-Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan  : 

"  My  dear  Sir  :  Lieut.-Gen.  Scott  having  been,  upon  his  own 
application,  placed  on  the  list  of  retired  officers,  with  his  advice, 
and  the  concurrence  of  the  entire  cabinet,  I  have  designated  you 
to  command  the  whole  army.  You  will,  therefore,  assume  this 
enlarged  duty  at  once,  conferring  with  me  so  far  as  necessary. 

"Yours  truly, 

"A.  Lincoln. 

"  P.S.  For  the  present  let  Gen.  Wool's  command  be  excepted. 

"A.  L." 

Immediately  after  succeeding  Gen.  Scott  in  the  chief  com- 
mand of  all  the  armies  of  the  United  States  I  arranged  in  my 
own  mind  the  general  plans  for  the  operations  of  the  ensuing  year. 
I  soon  ascertained  that  more  remained  to  be  done  in  the  West 
than  in  the  East  to  bring  the  armies  to  a  state  of  efficiency,  and  to 
that  end  did  all  in  my  power  during  the  autumn  and  winter. 

Until  my  own  sphere  of  command  and  responsibility  was 
extended  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  all  the  armies,  I 
supposed  that  some  general  plan  of  operations  existed,  but  now 
learned  that  there  was  none  such,  and  that  utter  disorganization 
and  want  of  preparation  pervaded  the  Western  armies.  I  had 
supposed  that  they  were  nearly,  if  not  quite,  in  condition  to  act, 
but  found  that  I  was  mistaken. 

Even  if  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  been  in  condition  to 
undertake  a  campaign  in  the  autumn  of  186 1,  the  backward  state 
of  affairs  in  the  West  would  have  made  it  unwise  to  do  so ;  for  on 
no  sound  military  principle  could  it  be  regarded  as  proper  to 
operate  on  one  line  alone  while  all  was  quiescent  on  the  others, 
as  such  a  course  would  have  enabled  the  enemy  to  concentrate 
everything  on  the  one  active  army.  Again,  if,  within  a  week  or 
two  of  the  first  Bull  Run,  it  had  been  possible  to  advance  and 
defeat  the  Confederate  army  at  Manassas,  the  moral  efifect  might 


GEN.  W.  7\  SHERMAN.  20I 

have  justified  the  attempt,  even  were  it  impossible  to  follow  up 
the  victory  ;  but  after  the  lapse  of  some  months  it  would  have 
been  foolish  to  advance  unless  prepared  to  follow  up  a  victory 
and  enter  upon  a  campaign  productive  of  definite  results. 

Early  in  Sept.,  1861,  Gens.  W.  T.  Sherman  and  G.  H.  Thomas 
had  been  taken  from  my  command  and  ordered  to  report  to  Gen. 
Robert  Anderson,  just  placed  in  command  of  Kentucky.  Before 
many  weeks  Anderson  was  relieved,  in  consequence  of  failing 
health,  and  Sherman  succeeded  to  his  duties. 

In  October  he  became  very  much  depressed  and  took  an 
exceedingly  gloomy  view  of  the  situation.  He  called  for  200,000 
men — a  force  entirely  out  of  the  power  of  the  government  to  sui>- 
j)ly  at  that  time.  On  the  2d  of  Nov.  he  requested  me  to  order 
Halleck,  Buell,  Stevens,  and  some  officers  of  experience  to  Ken- 
tucky, stating  that  the  importance  of  his  department  was  beyond 
all  estimate. 

On  the  3d,  after  giving  in  detail  the  position  of  the  troops, 
about  25,000,  he  says  :  "  Our  forces  are  too  small  to  do  good 
and  too  large  to  sacrifice." 

On  the  4th  he  telegraphed  to  me  :  "  The  publication  of  Adj.- 
Gen.  Thomas's  report  impairs  my  influence.  I  insist  upon  being 
relieved  to  your  army,  my  old  brigade.     Please  answer." 

On  the  6th  he  telegraphed  me  :  "...  If  Simon  Buckner 
crosses  Green  river  by  the  practicable  fords,  of  which  there 
are  many  at  wide  marks,  may  get  in  McCook*s  rear.  Look  at 
map  between  camp  and  Louisville.  Two  roads,  one  by  Bards- 
town  and  other  by  mouth  of  Salt  river.  The  great  danger  is  in 
stripping  Ohio  and  Indiana  of  troops  and  putting  them  on  this 
side  with  no  retreat.  The  enemy  also  threatens  the  lower  river 
at  Owensboro,  where  I  have  nothing  but  unorganized  volun- 
teers." 

I  have  not  a  copy  of  the  telegram,  but  my  memory  is  clear 
that  he  also  asked  permission  to  fall  back  across  the  Ohio  to 
prevent  being  cut  off. 

I  knew  the  condition  of  affairs-well  enough  to  be  satisfied  not 
only  that  there  was  no  danger  that  the  enemy  would  cross  the 
Ohio  river,  but  also  that,  if  he  were  mad  enough  to  do  so,  he 
would  never  get  back,  and  believed  that  the  State  could  be  held 
with  the  troops  then  in  it.  Therefore  I  gladly  and  promptly 
accjuiesced  in  Sherman's  request  to  be  relieved,  and  .sent  Buell 


202  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

to  replace  him,  ordering  Sherman  to  report  to  Halleck  for  duty. 
On  Biiell's  arrival  he  found  a  complete  state  of  disorganization  ; 
not  only  so,  but  that  nothing  was  being  done  to  mend  the  matter, 
and  no  steps  being  taken  to  prepare  the  troops  for  the  field.  A 
total  lack  of  system  prevailed,  and  everything  was  allowed  to  run 
on  as  best  it  could.  The  new  commander  at  once  made  himself 
felt,  and  justified  the  propriety  of  his  appointment  by  the  skill 
and  energy  with  which  he  devoted  himself  to  the  task  of  bring- 
ing order  and  efficiency  out  of  chaos  and  helplessness.  Buell 
found  no  difficulty  in  holding  his  own  in  Kentucky,  and  drove 
the  enemy  out  of  Kentucky  and  out  of  the  capital  of  Tennessee 
as  soon  as  he  had  received  and  organized  the  reinforcements, 
which  were  provided  as  rapidly  as  possible,  and  which  Sherman 
would  have  received  in  due  course ;  and,  having  accomplished 
the  first  part  of  his  task,  still  found  means  to  rescue  Grant  and 
Sherman  from  defeat  at  Shiloh  with  the  army  he  had  so  recently 
created. 

In  my  letters  ot  instruction  to  Gen.  Buell,  Nov.  7  and  12, 
1 86 1  (hereafter  given),  I  advised  his  remaining  on  the  defen- 
sive for  the  moment,  on  the  direct  line  to  Nashville,  and  that  he 
should  throw  the  mass  of  his  forces,  by  rapid  marches  via  Cum- 
berland Gap  or  Walker's  Gap,  on  Knoxville,  in  order  to  occupy 
the  railroad  at  that  point  to  prevent  its  use  by  the  Confederates, 
and  to  rally  to  us  the  loyal  citizens  of  that  region.  Buell  found 
it  impossible  to  carry  out  these  instructions,  on  account  of  the 
unprepared  condition  of  the  troops,  the  state  of  the  roads,  and 
lack  of  means  of  transportation. 

About  the  same  time  I  sent  Halleck  to  Missouri  to  relieve 
Gen.  Fremont  in  the  command  of  that  department.  I  instructed 
him  to  fortify  and  garrison  some  important  points  in  the  interior, 
and  to  concentrate  the  mass  of  his  troops  on  or  near  the  Missis- 
sippi for  such  ulterior  operations  as  might  prove  necessary. 

I  determined  to  expedite  the  preparations  of  the  Western 
armies  as  much  as  possible  during  the  winter,  and  as  early  as 
practicable  in  the  spring  throw  them  forward  ;  commencing  their 
advance  so  much  earlier  than  that  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
as  to  engage  all  the  Confederate  Western  forces  on  their  own 
ground,  and  thus  prevent  them  from  reinforcing  their  army  in 
front  of  Richmond. 

As  early  as  the  beginning  of  Dec,  1861,  I  had  determined  not 


NORTH  CAROLINA  COAST. 


203 


to  follow  the  line  of  operations  leading  by  land  from  Washing- 
ton to  Richmond,  but  to  conduct  a  sufficient  force  bv  water  to 
Urbana,  and  thence  by  a  rapid  march  to  West  Point,  hoping  thus 
to  cut  off  the  garrison  of  Yorktown  and  all  the  Confederates  in 
the  Peninsula ;  then,  using  the  James  river  as  a  line  of  supply,  to 
move  the  entire  Army  of  the  Potomac  across  that  river  to  the 
rear  of  Richmond. 

In  pursuance  of  this  plan  I  did  not  propose  disturbing  the 
Confederate  forces  at  Manassas  and  Centreville,  but,  while  steadi- 
ly pushing  forward  the  fortifications  of  Washington  and  the  in- 
struction and  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  I 
desired  to  hold  them  there  to  the  last  moment,  and  especially 
until  the  Urbana  movement  was  well  in  process  of  execution. 

There  was  no  possible  military  reason  for  disturbing  them, 
and  it  best  answered  my  purposes  to  keep  them  where  they  were. 
I  was  not  apprehensive  of  any  attack  by  them  after  the  first  few 
weeks.  Their  presence  served  to  keep  my  men  on  the  qui  vive. 
The  skirmishes  which  necessarily  occurred  gave  experience  of 
fire  and  taught  watchfulness.  They  covered  no  ground  in  front 
of  Richmond  furnishing  supplies  needed  by  either  party.  They 
had  the  longest  and  most  difficult  line  of  supply  that  they  could 
have. 

Early  in  December  this  plan  was  so  far  matured  that,  finding 
Secretary  Chase  seriously  troubled  in  his  financial  operations  by 
the  uncertainty  as  to  military  operations,  I  went  one  day  to  his 
private  office  in  the  Treasury  building  and  of  my  own  volition 
confidentially  laid  my  plans  before  him.  He  was  delighted,  said 
it  was  a  most  brilliant  conception,  and  thanked  me  most  cordially 
for  the  confidence  I  had  thus  reposed  in  him. 

Meanwhile  the  preparations  for  operations  on  the  lower  At- 
lantic and  Gulf  coasts  were  progressing  slowjy  but  satisfactorily. 
Early  in  January  Gen.  Burnside  received  his  final  instructions  for 
the  expedition  to  the  coast  of  North  Carolina.  The  general  pur- 
poses of  this  expedition  were  to  control  the  navigation  of  the 
sounds  on  the  North  Carolina  coast,  thus  cutting  off  the  supplies 
of  Norfolk  by  water,  and  at  the  same  time  covering  the  left  flank 
of  the  main  army  when  operating  against  Richmond  by  the  line 
of  James  river,  the  reduction  of  New  Berne,  Beaufort,  and 
Wilmington,  which  would  give  us  the  double  advantage  of  pre- 
venting  blockade-running  at  those  points   and  of   enabling   us 


204  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

to  threaten  or  attack  the  railways  near  the  coast,  upon  which 
Richmond  largely  depended  for  supplies.  All  of  these  objects 
were  promptly  accomplished  except  the  capture  of  Wilmington. 
Had  I  remained  in  chief  command  I  should  have  proceeded  to 
its  capture  as  soon  as  practicable  after  the  fall  of  Fort  Macon, 
which  took  place  April  26,  1862. 

Towards  the  end  of  Feb.,  1862,  I  also  gave  Gen.  Butler  his 
final  instructions  for  the  capture  of  New  Orleans.  This  was 
accomplished,  chiefly  by  the  gallant  action  of  the  naval  forces, 
about  the  ist  of  May.  Gen.  Butler  was  ordered  to  secure  all  the 
approaches  to  New  Orleans  and  open  his  communications  with 
the  column  coming  down  the  Mississippi.  This  being  accom- 
plished, Mobile,  Pensacola,  Galveston,  etc.,  were  to  be  attacked 
and  occupied  in  turn. 

About  the  middle  of  February  I  instructed  Gen.  T.  W.  Sher- 
man to  undertake  the  siege  of  Fort  Pulaski  and  to  occupy  Fer- 
nandina,  also  directing  him  to  study  the  problem  of  the  reduc- 
tion of  Charleston  and  its  defences. 

By  means  of  these  various  expeditions,  carried  out  to  their 
legitimate  consequences,  I  hoped,  without  the  employment  of  any 
very  large  land  force,  to  occupy  the  important  harbors  on  the 
coast,  in  order  to  reduce  blockade-running  to  a  minimum,  and 
thus  essentially  cut  off  the  very  valuable  assistance  the  Confede- 
rates, in  return  for  their  cotton,  received  from  abroad  in  the 
way  of  arms,  ammunition,  clothing,  and  other  necessary  supplies 
which  their  own  country  produced  either  not  at  all  or  in  wholly 
insufficient  quantities.  In  addition  to  this  most  vital  purpose, 
the  possession  of  these  important  points  on  the  coast  would 
enable  us  to  interfere  seriously  with  the  use  of  all  railroads  near 
the  sea,  give  us  new  bases  of  operation  from  which  either  to 
make  independent  expeditions  inland  or  to  furnish  new  and  short 
lines  of  supply  to  any  main  army  moving  parallel  with  the  coast, 
while  at  the  same  time  considerable  numbers  of  the  Confederate 
forces  were  occupied  in  watching  them. 

The  following  letters,  and  a  subsequent  paper  addressed  to 
the  Secretary  of  War,  sufficiently  indicate  the  nature  of  those 
combinations  : 


COAST  EXPEDITION.  205 

TO   THE   SECRETARY   OF   WAR. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Washington,  Sept.  6,  186 1. 

Sir  :  I  have  the  honor  to  suggest  the  following  proposition, 
with  the  request  that  the  necessary  authority  be  at  once  given  me 
to  carry  it  out :  To  organize  a  force  of  two  brigades  of  five  regi- 
ments each,  of  New  England  men,  for  the  general  service,  but 
particularly  adapted  to  coast  service  ;  the  officers  and  men  to  be 
sufficiently  conversant  with  boat-service  to  manage  steamers,  sail- 
ing-vessels, launches,  barges,  surf-boats,  floating  batteries,  etc. 
To  charter  or  buy  for  the  command  a  sufficient  number  of  pro- 
pellers or  tug-boats  for  transportation  of  men  and  supplies,  the 
machinery  of  which  should  be  amply  protected  by  timber  ;  the 
vessels  to  have  permanent,  experienced  officers  from  the  mer- 
chant service,  but  to  be  manned  by  details  from  the  command. 
A  naval  officer  to  be  attached  to  the  staff  of  the  commanding 
officer.  The  flank  companies  of  each  regiment  to  be  armed  with 
Dahlgren  boat-guns,  and  carbines  with  waterproof  cartridges ; 
the  other  companies  to  have  such  arms  as  I  may  hereafter  desig- 
nate ;  to  be  uniformed  and  equipped  as  the  Rhode  Island  regi- 
ments are.  Launches  and  floating  batteries  with  timber  para- 
pets of  sufficient  capacity  to  land  or  bring  into  action  the  entire 
force. 

The  entire  management  and  organization  of  the  force  to  be 
under  my  control,  and  to  form  an  integral  part  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac. 

The  immediate  object  of  this  force  is  for  operations  in  the 
inlets  of  Chesapeake  bay  and  the  Potomac.  By  enabling  me  thus 
to  land  troops  at  points  where  they  arc  needed,  this  force  can 
also  be  used  in  conjunction  with  a  naval  force  operating  against 
points  on  the  sea-coast.  This  coast  division  to  be  commanded 
by  a  general  officer  of  my  selection  ;  the  regiments  to  be  organ- 
ized as  other  land  forces ;  the  disbursements  for  vessels,  etc.,  to 
be  made  by  the  proper  department  of  the  army  upon  the  requi- 
sitions of  the  general  commanding  the  division,  with  my  approval. 

I  think  the  entire  force  can  be  organized  in  thirty  days  ;  and 
by  no  means  the  least  of  the  advantages  of  this  proposition  is  the 
fact  that  it  will  call  into  the  service  a  class  of  men  who  would 
not  otherwise  enter  the  army. 

You  will  immediately  perceive  that  the  object  of  this  force  is 
to  follow  along  the  coast  and  up  the  inlets  and  rivers  the  move- 
ments of  the  main  army  when  it  advances. 

I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

MaJ.'Gen.  Commanding. 
Hon.  Simon  Cameron, 

Secretary  of  War. 


206  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Owing  chiefly  to  the  difficulty  in  procuring  the  requisite  ves- 
sels and  adapting  them  to  the  special  purposes  contemplated,  this 
expedition  was  not  ready  for  service  until  Jan.,  1862.  Then  in 
the  chief  command,  I  deemed  it  best  to  send  it  to  North  Caro- 
lina, with  the  design  indicated  in  the  following  letter  : 

TO  GEN.  BURNSIDE. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  Jan.  7,  1862. 

General  :  In  accordance  with  verbal  instructions  heretofore 
given  you,  you  will,  after  uniting  with  Flag-officer  Goldsborough 
at  Fort  Monroe,  proceed  under  his  convoy  to  Hatteras  inlet, 
where  you  will,  in  connection  with  him,  take  the  most  prompt 
measures  for  crossing  the  fleet  over  the  Bulkhead  into  the  waters 
of  the  sound.  Under  the  accompanying  general  order  constitut- 
ing the  Department  of  North  Carolina,  you  will  assume  command 
of  the  garrison  at  Hatteras  inlet,  and  make  such  dispositions  in 
regard  to  that  place  as  your  ulterior  operations  may  render  nec- 
essary, always  being  careful  to  provide  for  the  safety  of  that  very 
important  station  in  any  contingency. 

Your  first  point  of  attack  will  be  Roanoke  island  and  its 
dependencies.  It  is  presumed  that  the  navy  can  reduce  the 
batteries  on  the  marshes  and  cover  the  landing  of  your  troops  on 
the  main  island,  by  which,  in  connection  with  a  rapid  movement 
of  the  gunboats  to  the  northern  extremity  as  soon  as  the  marsh- 
battery  is  reduced,  it  may  be  hoped  to  capture  the  entire  garrison 
of  the  place.  Having  occupied  the  island  and  its  dependencies, 
you  will  at  once  proceed  to  the  erection  of  the  batteries  and 
defences  necessary  to  hold  the  position  with  a  small  force. 
Should  the  flag-officer  require  any  assistance  in  seizing  or  hold- 
ing the  debouches  of  the  canal  from  Norfolk,  you  will  please 
afford  it  to  him. 

The  commodore  and  yourself  having  completed  your  arrange- 
ments in  regard  to  Roanoke  island  and  the  waters  north  of  it,  you 
will  please  at  once  make  a  descent  on  New  Berne,  having  gained 
possession  of  which  and  the  railroad  passing  through  it,  you  will 
at  once  throw  a  sufficient  force  upon  Beaufort  and  take  the  steps 
necessary  to  reduce  Fort  Macon  and  open  that  port.  When  you 
seize  New  Berne  you  will  endeavor  to  seize  the  railroad  as  far  west 
as  Goldsborough,  should  circumstances  favor  such  a  movement. 
The  temper  of  the  people,  the  rebel  force  at  hand,  etc.,  will  go 
far  towards  determining  the  question  as  to  how  far  west  the  rail- 
road can  be  safely  occupied  and  held.  Should  circumstances 
render  it  advisable  to  seize  and  hold  Raleigh,  the  main  north  and 
south  line  of  railroad  passing  through  Goldsborough  should  be  so 
effectually  destroyed  for  considerable  distances  north  and  south 


ORDERS  TO  GEN.  HALLECK.  207 

of  that  point  as  to  render  it  impossible  for  the  rebels  to  use  it  to 
your  disadvantage.  A  great  point  would  be  gained,  in  any  event, 
by  the  effectual  destruction  of  the  Wilmington  and  Weldon  Rail- 
road. 

I  would  advise  great  caution  in  moving  so  far  into  the  interior 
as  upon  Raleigh.  Having  accomplished  the  objects  mentioned, 
the  next  point  of  interest  would  probably  be  Wilmington,  the 
reduction  of  which  may  require  that  additional  means  shall  be 
afforded  you.  I  would  urge  great  caution  in  regard  to  proclama- 
tions. In  no  case  would  I  go  beyond  a  moderate  joint  proclama- 
tion with  the  naval  commander,  which  should  say  as  little  as  pos- 
sible about  politics  or  the  negro  ;  merely  state  that  the  true  issue 
for  which  we  are  fighting  is  the  preservation  of  the  Union  and 
upholding  the  laws  of  the  general  government,  and  stating  that 
all  who  conduct  themselves  properly  will,  as  far  as  possible,  be 
protected  in  their  persons  and  property. 

You  will  please  report  your  operations  as  often  as  an  oppor- 
tunity offers  itself. 

With  my  best  wishes  for  your  success,  I  am,  etc.,  etc., 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 
Maj.  -  Gen.  Commanding-in-  Chief. 
Brig.-Gen.  A.  E.  Burnside, 

Commanding  Expedition. 

The  following  letters  of  instruction  were  sent  to  Gens.  Hal- 
leck,  Buell,  Sherman,  and  Butler ;  and  I  also  communicated  ver- 
bally to  these  officers  my  views  in  full  regarding  the  field  of 
operations  assigned  to  each,  and  gave  them  their  instructions  as 
much  in  detail  as  was  necessary  at  that  time : 

TO  GEN.  HALLECK. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  D.  C.,  Nov.  ii,  1861. 

General  :  In  assigning  you  to  the  command  of  the  Depart- 
ment of  Missouri  it  is  probably  unnecessary  for  me  to  state  that 
I  have  entrusted  to  you  a  duty  which  requires  the  utmost  tact 
and  decision. 

You  have  not  merely  the  ordinary  duties  of  a  military  com- 
mander to  perform,  but  the  far  more  difficult  task  of  reducing 
chaos  to  order,  of  changing  probably  the  majority  of  tYit  person- 
nel of  the  staff  of  the  department,  and  of  reducing  to  a  point  of 
economy  consistent  with  the  interests  and  necessities  of  the 
State  a  system  of  reckless  expenditure  and  fraud  perhaps  un- 
heard of  before  in  the  history  of  the  world. 

You  will  find  in  your  department  many  general  and   staff 


^^  JtcCL£ZZAX^S  OarX  STOJtr. 

i^iX'i'T^  ivKiiiai^  illejpl  o:)!imiisscoQS  snd.  appemfmenrs  not  lecog- 
i5i?-£  re  J^i?c:?ifcd  l>y  die  PnjsBdertt  or  Secretarr  of  Wan     Yoa 

mit  liirjts;  JJk  coo;  iiifonii  these  ggncLemien  of  the  nfrrTfry  o€  their 
jpiTcaTCiitfac  xid  5ce  chat  no  par  or  alLi^rances  are  esaed  to 
duni:  nazL  ioch  time  as  coaxDzisaoas  mar  be  authorized  bT  the 
f^SKu5CT£  cr  SecretiTT  ot  War. 

kf  X15  ct  them  give  the  sl^fetcst  tnrabfe^  jotL  wiR  at  once 
jrcesc  rtent  >md  send  them,,,  ^maier  gaanL  oat  ot  the  rimfrs-  of 
ijwar  i&partmeitt.  infonanxg  them  that  if  thev  return,  thev  wiU  be 
gfaced  in  close  conanemenc  Yoa  wiH  pfea^  eTamrnt*  into  the 
GegTjIity  at  the  organLjacbaa  of  the  troops  serroxg  ni  the  depart- 
ment: When  yoa  tad  any  iHt^aL  anasiiL  or  improper  organ fxa- 
tionsv  von  will  py^  to  the  o&nas  and  merr  an  oppornmiDr  to 
enter  the  legal  militarr  establishment  imder  general  laws  and 
orders  from  the  War  EVepartmexiC^  reporting  m  taEL  do  tiiese 
headquarters  any  olficer  or  orgzixizarson.  thar  may  decline. 

Yoa  will  please  caose  competent  ami  reliable  sta^  oficers  Go 
examine  all  existing  contracts  immediatefy^  ami  saspend  aH  pay- 
ments upon  them  tmril  yoa  receive  the  report  in  each,  caaei 
Where  there  is  the  slightest  doabt  as  to  the  propriety  of  the 
contract  yoa  will  be  good  enoagh  to  refer  the  miirrrr.  with.  fnH 
explanaciua.  to  these  headquartersw  scatrng  m.  eack  case  what 
would  be  a  fair  ccmpensatiDa  for  the  serrices  or  mansrials 
rendered  under  the  contract.  Dtscommae  at  once  the  recep- 
tion ot  macerivil  or  services  under  any  doabtf^il  contnct.  Arrest 
and  brin-^  co  prompt  cnal  ail  otficers  who  have  in  amr  wa:w"  ^jo^ 
lated  their  duty  co  die  gfjvemmenc  In  regard  tu  the  polirical 
condicc  oj:  afairsv  yoa  will  please  labor  00  impress  tipcn  the 
iohabi exits  or  M:r>sciiri  jsxd  the  adjacent  States  diat  we  are 
fighting  >i.'Ieiy  if'>r  the  integrity  of  the  Union,  zo  uphold  the 
power  N>f  OUT  national  government,  and  to  restore  20  die  nation 
the  blessings  ef  peace  .md  good  order. 

With  respect  tx>  m;utary  operanonsv  it  is  probable,  from  the 
best  ixrformatn.^n  in  my  possession,  that  the  interests  oi  die  gov- 
eminent  will  be  best  served  by  t'jrtifytng  and  hoitimg  m  conside- 
rable strength  R  jtla^  Sedaiia^  and  other  interior  pomts.  keeping 
strong  patxois  constantly  moving  from  the  termmai  stations,  and 
concen  crating  ±e  mass  ot  the  troops  on  or  near  the  Mississippu 
prepared  tor  such  ulterior  operations  as  the  public  mterests  may 
demand 

I  would  be  ;iiad  t»j  have  vou  make  as  soon  as  possible  a  Der- 
sonal  inspecdon  ot  oil  die  important  points  in  your  department, 
and  report  the  result  to  me.  I  cannot  too  strrjngly  -mpress  upon 
yoa  the  absolute  necessity  of  keeping  me  constandy  advijjed  of 
the  strengdi,  c»;ndidon,  and  locadon  of  your  troops*  o^gether  with 
ail  facts  that  will  enable  me  to  maintain  that  ^snerai  direction  of 
the  armies  <n  the  United  States  which  it  is  my  purpose  to  exer- 
cise.    L  trast  to  you  to  mainrain  thorough  organizadon,  disci- 


ORDERS  TO  GEN,  BUELU  2O9 

pHne,  and  economy  throughout  your  department  Please  infonn 
me  as  soon  as  possible  of  eventhing  relating  to  the  gunboats  now 
in  process  of  construction,  as  well  as  those  completed. 

The  militia  force  authorized  to  be  raised  by  the  State  of  Mis- 
souri for  its  defence  will  be  under  your  orders. 
I  am,  general,  etc.,  etc., 

George  B.  McClellax, 
Maj.'Gen.  Commanding  U.  S,  A, 

Maj.-Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck,  U.  S.  A., 

Commanding  Department  of  Missouri. 

TO  GEN.  BUELL. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  Nov.  7,  1861. 

General  :  In  giving  you  instructions  for  your  guidance  in 
command  of  the  Department  of  the  Ohio  I  do  not  design  to 
fetter  you.  I  merely  wish  to  express  plainly  the  general  ideas 
which  occur  to  me  in  relation  to  the  conduct  of  operations  there. 
That  portion  of  Kentucky  west  of  the  Cumberland  river  is  by  its 
position  so  closely  related  to  the  States  of  Illinois  and  Missouri 
that  it  has  seemed  best  to  attach  it  to  the  Department  of  Mis- 
souri. Your  operations  there,  in  Kentucky,  will  be  confined  to 
that  portion  of  the  State  east  of  the  Cumberland  river.  I  trust 
I  need  not  repeat  to  you  that  I  regard  the  importance  of  the  ter- 
ritory committed  to  your  care  as  second  only  to  that  occupied 

bv  the  armv  under  mv  immediate  command.     It  is  absolutely 

...  ^ 

necessar}'  that  we  shall  hold  all  the  State  of  Kentucky ;  not  only 
that,  but  that  the  majority  of  its  inhabitants  shall  be  warmly  in 
favor  of  our  cause,  it  being  that  which  best  subserves  their  inte- 
rests. It  is  possible  that  the  conduct  of  our  political  affairs  in 
Kentucky  is  more  important  than  that  of  our  military  operations. 
I  certainly  cannot  overestimate  the  importance  of  the  former. 
You  will  please  constantly  to  bear  in  mind  the  precise  issue  for 
which  we  are  nzhting ;  that  issue  is  the  preser\-ation  of  the  L'nion 
and  the  restoration  of  the  full  authority  of  the  general  govern- 
ment over  all  portions  of  our  territory.  We  shall  most  readily 
suppress  this  rebellion  and  restore  the  authority  of  the  govern- 
ment by  religio'jsly  respecting  the  constitutional  rights  of  all.  I 
know  that  1  express  the  feelings  and  opinion  of  the  President 
when  I  say  that  we  are  fighting  only  to  preserve  the  integrity  of 
the  Union  and  the  constitutional  authority  of  the  general  gov- 
emmem. 

The  inhabitants  of  Kentucky  may  rely  upon  it  that  their 
domestic  institutions  will  in  no  manner  be  interfered  with,  and 
that  they  will  receive  at  our  hands  every  constitutional  protec- 
tion. I  have  only  to  repeat  that  you  will  in  all  respects  care- 
fully regard  the  local  institutions  of  the  region  in  which   you 


2IO  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

command,  allowing  nothing  but  the  dictates  of  military  necessity 
to  cause  you  to  depart  from  the  spirit  of  these  instructions. 

So  much  in  regard  to  political  considerations.  The  military 
problem  would  be  a  simple  one  could  it  be  entirely  separated 
from  political  influences ;  such  is  not  the  case.  Were  the  popu- 
lation among  which  you  are  to  operate  wholly  or  generally  hos- 
tile, it  is  probable  that  Nashville  should  be  your  first  and  princi- 
pal objective  point.  It  so  happens  that  a  large  majority  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Eastern  Tennessee  are  in  favor  of  the  Union ;  it 
therefore  seems  proper  that  you  should  remain  on  the  defensive 
on  the  line  from  Louisville  to  Nashville,  while  you  throw  the 
mass  of  your  forces,  by  rapid  marches  by  Cumberland  Gap  or 
Walker's  Gap,  on  Knoxville,  in  order  to  occupy  the  railroad  at 
that  point,  and  thus  enable  the  loyal  citizens  of  Eastern  Tennes- 
see to  rise,  while  you  at  the  same  time  cut  off  the  railway  com- 
munication between  Eastern  Virginia  and  the  Mississippi.  It  will 
be  prudent  to  fortify  the  pass  before  leaving  it  in  your  rear. 

Brig.-Gen.  D.  C.  Buell. 

TO  GEN.  BUELL. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  Nov.  12,  1861. 

General:  Upon  assuming  command  of  the  department  I 
will  be  glad  to  have  you  make  as  soon  as  possible  a  careful 
report  of  the  condition  and  situation  of  your  troops,  and  of  the 
military  and  political  condition  of  your  command.  The  main 
point  to  which  I  desire  to  call  your  attention  is  the  necessity  of 
entering  Eastern  Tennessee  as  soon  as  it  can  be  done  with  rea- 
sonable chances  of  success,  and  I  hope  that  you  will,  with  the 
least  possible  delay,  organize  a  column  for  that  purpose,  suffi- 
ciently guarding  at  the  same  time  the  main  avenues  by  which 
the  rebels  may  invade  Kentucky.  Our  conversations  on  the  sub- 
ject of  military  operations  have  been  so  full,  and  my  confidence 
in  your  judgment  is  so  great,  that  I  will  not  dwell  further  upon 
the  subject,  except  to  urge  upon  you  the  necessity  of  keeping 
me  fully  informed  as  to  the  state  of  affairs,  both  military  and 
political,  and  your  movements.  In  regard  to  political  matters, 
bear  in  mind  that  we  are  fighting  only  to  preserve  the  integrity  of 
the  Union  and  to  uphold  the  power  o|  the  general  government ; 
as  far  as  military  necessity  will  permit,  religiously  respect  the 
constitutional  rights  of  all.  Preserve  the  strictest  discipline 
among  the  troops,  and,  while  employing  the  utmost  energy  in 
military  movements,  be  careful  so  to  treat  the  unarmed  inhabi- 
tants as  to  contract,  not  widen,  the  breach  existing  between  us 
and  the  rebels. 

I  mean  by  this  that  it  is  the  desire  of  the  government  to 
avoid  unnecessary  irritation  by  causeless  arrests  and  persecution 


ORDERS   TO   GEiW   SHERMAN.  21  T 

of  individuals.  Where  there  is  good  reason  to  believe  that  per- 
sons are  actually  giving  aid,  romfort,  or  information  to  the  ene- 
my, it  is,  of  course,  necessary  to  arrest  them ;  but  I  have  always 
found  that  it  is  the  tendency  of  subordinates  to  make  vexatious 
arrests  on  mere  suspicion.  You  will  find  it  well  to  direct  that 
no  arrest  shall  be  made  except  by  your  order  or  that  of  your 
generals,  unless  in  extraordinary  cases,  always  holding  the  party 
making  the  arrest  responsible  for  the  propriety  of  his  course.  It 
should  be  our  constant  aim  to  make  it  apparent  to  all  that  their 
property,  their  comfort,  and  their  personal  safety  will  be  best  pre- 
served by  adhering  to  the  cause  of  the  Union. 

If  the  military  suggestions  I  have  made  in  this  letter  prove  to 
have  been  founded  on  erroneous  data,  you  are,  of  course,  per- 
fectly free  to  change  the  plans  of  operations. 

Brig.-Gen.  D.  C.  Buell, 

Commanding  Department  of  the  Ohio, 

TO  GEN.  T.  W.  SHERMAN. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  Feb.  14,  1862. 

General  :  Your  despatches  in  regard  to  the  occupation  of 
Dafuskie  island,  etc.,  were  received  to-day.  I  saw  also  to-day, 
for  the  first  time,  your  recjuisition  for  a  siege-train  for  Savannah. 

After  giving  the  subject  all  the  consideration  in  my  power 
I  am  forced  to  the  conclusion  that,  under  present  circumstances, 
the  siege  and  capture  of  Savannah  do  not  promise  results  com- 
mensurate with  the  sacrifices  necessary.  When  I  learned  that  it 
was  possible  for  the  gunboats  to  reach  the  Savannah  river  above 
Fort  Pulaski,  two  operations  suggested  themselves  to  my  mind  as 
its  immediate  results  : 

First,  The  capture  of  Savannah  by  a  coup  de  main^  the 
result  of  an  instantaneous  advance  and  attack  by  the  army  and 
navy. 

The  time  for  this  has  passed,  and  your  letter  indicates  that 
you  are  not  accountable  for  tVie  failure  to  seize  the  propitious 
moment,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  you  perceived  its  advantages. 

Second.  To  isolate  Fort  Pulaski,  cut  off  its  supplies,  and  at 
least  facilitate  its  reduction  by  a  bombardment. 

Although  we  have  a  long  delay  to  deplore,  the  second  course 
still  remains  open  to  us ;  and  I  strongly  advise  the  close  blockade 
of  Pulaski,  and  its  bombardment  as  soon  as  the  1 3-inch  mortars 
and  heavy  guns  reach  you.  I  am  confident  you  can  thus  reduce 
it.  With  Pulaski  you  gain  all  that  is  really  essential :  you  obtain 
complete  control  of  the  harbor,  you  relieve  the  blockading  fleet, 
and  render  the  main  body  of  your  force  disposable  for  other 
operations. 

I  do  not  consider  the  possession  of  Savannah  worth  a  siege 


212  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

after  Pulaski  is  in  our  hands.  But  the  possession  of  Pulaski  is 
of  the  first  importance.  The  expedition  to  Fernandina  is  well, 
and  I  shall  be  glad  to  learn  that  it  is  ours. 

But,  after  all,  the  greatest  moral  effect  would  be  produced  by 
the  reduction  of  Charleston  and  its  defences.  There  the  rebel- 
lion had  its  birth  ;  there  the  unnatural  hatred  of  our  government 
is  most  intense ;  there  is  the  centre  of  the  boasted  power  and 
courage  of  the  rebels. 

To  gain  Fort  Sumter  and  hold  Charleston  is  a  task  well 
worthy  of  our  greatest  efforts  and  considerable  sacrifices.  That 
is  the  problem  I  would  be  glad  to  have  you  study.  Some  time 
must  elapse  before  we  can  be  in  all  respects  ready  to  accomplish 
that  purpose.  Fleets  are  en  route  and  armies  in  motion  which 
have  certain  preliminary  objects  to  accomplish  before  we  are 
ready  to  take  Charleston  in  hand.  But  the  time  will  before  long 
arrive  when  I  shall  be  prepared  to  make  that  movement.  In  the 
meantime  it  is  my  advice  and  wish  that  no  attempt  be  made 
upon  Savannah,  unless  it  can  be  carried  with  certainty  by  a  coup 
de  main. 

Please  concentrate  your  attention  and  forces  upon  Pulaski 
and  Fernandina.  St.  Augustine  might  as  well  be  taken  by  way 
of  an  interlude  while  awaiting  the  preparations  for  Charleston. 
Success  attends  us  everywhere  at  present. 

Very  truly  yours, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen,  Commanding, 
Gen.  T.  W.  Sherman, 

Commanding  at  Port  Royaly  etc. 

TO  GEN.  BUTLER. 

Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
Washington,  Feb.  23,  1862. 

General  :  You  are  assigned  to  the  command  of  the  land 
forces  destined  to  co-operate  with  the  navy  in  the  attacks  upon 
New  Orleans.  You  will  use  every  means  to  keep  your  destina- 
tion a  profound  secret,  even  from  your  staff  officers,  with  the 
exception  of  your  chief  of  staff  and  Lieut.  Weitzell,  of  the  engi- 
neers. The  force  at  your  disposal  will  consist  of  the  first  thirteen 
regiments  named  in  your  memorandum  handed  to  me  in  person, 
the  2ist  Indiana,  4th  Wisconsin,  and  6th  Michigan  (old  and  good 
regiments  from  Baltimore). 

The  2 1  St  Indiana,  4th  Wisconsin,  and  6th  Michigan  will  await 
your  orders  at  Fort  Monroe. 

Two  companies  of  the  21st  Indiana  are  well  drilled  as  heavy 
artillery.  The  cavalry  force  already  en  route  for  Ship  island  will 
be  sufficient  for  your  purposes. 

After  full  consultation  with  officers  well  acquainted  with  thq 


ORDERS   TO   GEN.   BUTLER.  213 

country  in  which  it  is  proposed  to  operate,  I  have  arrived  at  the 
conclusion  that  two  (2)  light  batteries  fully  equipped,  and  one 
(i)  without  horses,  will  be  all  that  are  necessary. 

This  will  make  your  force  about  14,400  infantry,  275  cavalry, 
580  artillery  ;  total,  15,255  men.  The  commanding  general  of 
the  Department  of  Key  West  is  authorized  to  loan  you,  tem- 
porarily, two  regiments.  Fort  Pickens  can  probably  give  you 
another,  which  will  bring  your  force  to  nearly   18,000. 

The  object  of  your  expedition  is  one  of  vital  importance — the 
capture  of  New  ()rleans.  The  route  selected  is  up  the  Missis- 
sippi river,  and  the  first  obstacle  to  be  encountered  (perhaps  the 
only  one)  is  in  the  resistance  offered  by  Forts  St.  Philip  and 
Jackson.  It  is  expected  that  the  navy  can  reduce  these  works  ; 
in  that  case  you  will,  after  their  capture,  leave  a  sufficient  garri- 
son in  them  to  render  them  i)erfectly  secure ;  and  it  is  recom- 
mended that,  on  the  upward  passage,  a  few  heavy  guns  and  some 
troops  be  left  at  the  pilot  station  (at  the  forks  of  the  river)  to 
cover  a  retreat  in  the  event  of  a  disaster.  These  troops  and  guns 
will,  of  course,  be  removed  as  soon  as  the  forts  are  captured. 

Should  the  navy  fail  to  reduce  the  works  you  will  land  your 
forces  and  siege-train,  and  endeavor  to  breach  the  works,  silence 
their  fire,  and  carry  them  by  assault. 

The  next  resistance  will  be  near  the  English  Bend,  where 
there  are  some  earthen  batteries.  Here  it  may  be  necessary  for 
you  to  land  your  troops  and  co-operate  with  the  naval  attack, 
although  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  navy  unassisted  can 
accomplish  the  result.  If  these  works  are  taken  the  city  of  New 
Orleans  necessarily  falls.  In  that  event  it  will  probably  be  best 
to  occupy  Algiers  with  the  mass  of  your  troops,  also  the  eastern 
bank  of  the  river  above  the  city.  It  may  be  necessary  to  place 
some  troops  ///  the  city  to  preserve  order  ;  but  if  there  appears  to 
be  sufficient  Union  sentiment  to  control  the  city,  it  may  be  best 
for  purposes  of  discipline  to  keep  your  men  out  of  the  city. 

After  obtaining  possession  of  New  Orleans  it  will  be  neces- 
sary to  reduce  all  the  works  guarding  its  approaches  from  the 
east,  and  particularly  to  gain  the  Manchac  pass. 

Baton  Rouge,  Berwick  bay,  and  Fort  Livingston  will  next 
claim  your  attention. 

A  feint  on  Galveston  may  facilitate  the  objects  we  have  in 
view.  I  need  not  call  your  attention  to  the  necessity  of  gaining 
possession  of  all  the  rolling  stock  you  can  on  the  different  rail- 
ways, and  of  obtaining  control  of  the  roads  themselves.  The 
occupation  of  Baton  Rouge  by  a  combined  naval  and  land  force 
should  be  accomplished  as  soon  as  possible  after  you  have  gained 
New  Orleans.  Then  endeavor  to  open  your  communication  with 
the  northern  column  by  the  Mississippi,  always  bearing  in  mind 
the  necessity  of  occupying  Jackson,  Mississippi,  as  soon  as  you 
can  safely  do  so,  either  after  or  before  you  have  effected  the 


214  McCLELLAN'S  OP^N  SIOKY. 

junction.  Allow  nothing  to  divert  you  from  obtaining  full 
possession  of  ail  the  approaches  to  New  Orleans.  When  that 
object  is  accomplished  to  its  fullest  extent  it  will  be  necessary  to 
make  a  combined  attack  on  Mobile,  in  order  to  gain  possession 
of  the  harbor  and  works,  as  well  as  to  control  the  railway  ter- 
minus at  the  city.  In  regard  to  this  I  will  send  more  detailed 
instructions  as  the  operations  of  the  northern  column  develop 
themselves. 

I  may  briefly  state  that  the  general  objects  of  the  expedition 
are,  firsts  the  reduction  of  New  Orleans  and  all  its  approaches  ; 
then  Mobile  and  its  defences ;  then  Pensacola,  Galveston,  etc. 
It  is  probable  that  by  the  time  New  Orleans  is  reduced  it  will  be 
in  the  power  of  the  government  to  reinforce  the  land  forces 
sufficiently  to  accomplish  all  these  objects.  In  the  meantime 
you  will  please  give  all  the  assistance  in  your  power  to  the  army 
and  navy  commanders  in  your  vicinity,  never  losing  sight  of  the 
fact  that  the  great  object  to  be  achieved  is  the  capture  and  firm 
retention  of  New  Orleans. 
1  am,  etc., 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 
Maj.-Gen,  Commanding  U,  S.  Army, 

Maj.-Gen.  B.  F.  Butler, 

U.  S,  Voiunteers. 

The  plan  indicated  in  the  above  letters  comprehended  in  its 
scope  the  operations  of  all  the  armies  of  the  Union,  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  as  well.  It  was  my  intention,  for  reasons  easy  to  be 
seen,  that  its  various  parts  should  be  carried  out  simultaneously, 
or  nearly  so,  and  in  co-operation  along  the  whole  line.  If  this 
j)lan  was  wise — and  events  have  failed  to  prove  that  it  was  not — 
then  it  is  unnecessary  to  defend  any  delay  which  would  have 
enabled  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  perform  its  share  in  the 
execution  of  the  whole  work. 

The  operations  in  the  West  began  early  in  February,  and  soon 
resulted  in  the  capture  of  Forts  Henry  and  Donelson  and  the 
capture  of  Nashville.  Shiloh  took  place  on  the  6th  and  7th  of 
April.     It  was  not  until  May  21   that  Corinth  was  evacuated. 

I  have  already  alluded  to  the  very  unsatisfactory  condition  in 
which  Buell  found  his  command,  but  he  very  soon  satisfied  him- 
self that  there  was  no  apprehension  of  a  dangerous  offensive 
movement  by  the  enemy,  arid  steadily  went  to  work  to  organize 
and  discipline  his  troops.  I  gave  him  all  the  support  and  assist- 
ance in  my  power,  sending  him  as  much  in  the  way  of  troops, 
arms,  and  supplies  as  the  resources  of  the  government  and  the 


GENERAL  BUELL.  21  5 

necessities  of  other  points  permitted.  He  displayed  very  high 
qualities  as  an  organizer,  and  mastered  the  strategical  ques- 
tions with  marked  ability;  and  I  am  satisfied  that  one  of  the  very 
best  things  I  did  when  in  command  was  sending  him  to  Ken- 
tucky. 

About  the  time  he  went  there,  and  for  some  months  thereafter, 
immense  pressure  was  brought  to  bear  upon  the  government  to  do 
something  at  once  for  the  relief  of  the  Union  men  in  P^ast  Ten- 
nessee. I  was  fully  impressed  by  the  necessity  for  doing  this, 
and  constantly  urged  Buell  to  send  a  column  to  that  region,  even 
at  the  expense  of  remaining  temporarily  on  the  defensive  in  front 
of  Bowling  Green.  But  Buell  found  it  impossible  to  do  so,  in 
consequence  of  the  disorganization  which  prevailed,  the  lack  of 
transportation  and  supplies,  and  the  impracticable  condition  of  the 
roads  in  the  fall  and  winter.  My  confidence  in  Buell's  judgment 
and  knowledge  of  the  circumstances  was  such  that  1  reluctantly 
acquiesced.  I  still  regret  that  it  was  impossible  to  carry  out  this 
intention,  for  the  effect  of  the  occupation  of  Knoxville  at  that 
time  would  have  been  of  the  first  importance.  But  I  have  no 
doubt  as  to  the  propriety  of  Buell's  decision.  He  was  so  true 
and  loyal  a  soldier  that  no  mere  obstacles  would  have  deterred 
him  from  carrying  out  my  clearly  expressed  wishes.  He  was  the 
best  judge  as  to  the  possibility  of  the  expedition,  and  I  have  no 
doubt  that  he  was  right.  Before  the  close  of  November  Buell 
and  I  discussed  the  propriety  of  a  movement  up  the  Cumberland 
and  Tennessee  rivers,  and  concluded  that  it  should  form  a  neces- 
sary part  of  the  plan  of  offensive  operations.  This  was  so  self- 
evident  a  proposition  that  I  had  long  thought  of  it,  but  I  am  not 
sure  whether  the  actual  suggestion  to  carry  it  practically  into 
effect  came  first  from  Buell  or  myself — very  likely  from  Buell ; 
certainly  it  did  not  originate  with  Halleck  or  any  of  his  surround- 
ings. I  will  for  the  moment  leave  this  subject,  simply  stating 
that  by  the  26th  of  Feb.  Nashville  was  in  our  hands,  and  by  the 
3d  of  March  Columbus,  Kentucky.  In  the  course  of  these  ope- 
rations Halleck  delivered  himself  of  several  prophetic  statements 
in  regard  to  "  good  strategy,"  each  of  which  proved  to  be  ridicu- 
lous. 

On  the  morning  of  Sunday,  March  2,  1862,  desiring  to  give 
orders  for  the  further  movements  of  Buell's  and  Halleck's  com- 
mands, I  went  to  the  military  telegraph-office — then  in  the  head- 


2  lb  McCLELLAN'S  OIVN  STOI^Y. 

quarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  at  the  comer  of  Pennsyl- 
vania avenue  and  Jackson  square — and  caused  communication  to 
be  cut  off  from  all  wires  except  those  leading  to  Halleck's  head- 
quarters at  St.  Louis  and  Buell's  at  Nashville.  I  then  called 
Buell  and  Halleck  to  their  respective  offices,  and  asked  for  a  full 
report  of  the  condition  of  affairs,  number,  position,  and  condi- 
tion of  their  troops,  that  of  the  enemy,  etc.  Buell  promptly 
gave  me  the  information  needed.  Halleck  replied  the  same 
day  : 

"...  I  have  had  no  communication  with  Gen.  Grant  for 
more  than  a  week.  He  left  his  command  without  my  authority 
and  went  to  Nashville.  His  army  seems  to  be  as  much  demoral- 
ized by  the  victory  of  Fort  Donelson  as  was  that  of  the  Potomac 
by  the  defeat  of  Bull  Run.  It  is  hard  to  censure  a  successful 
general  immediately  after  a  victory,  but  I  think  he  richly  deserves 
it.  I  can  get  no  returns,  no  reports,  no  information  of  any  kind 
from  him.  Satisfied  with  his  victory,  he  sits  down  and  enjoys  it 
without  any  regard  to  the  future.  I  am  worn  out  and  tired  with 
this  neglect  and  inefficiency.  C.  F.  Smith  is  almost  the  only 
officer  equal  to  the  emergency." 

To  this  I  replied  : 

Your  despatch  of  last  evening  received.  The  success  of  our 
cause  demands  that  proceedings  such  as  Grant's  should  be  at 
once  checked.  Generals  must  observe  discipline  as  well  as  pri- 
vate soldiers.  Do  not  hesitate  to  arrest  him  at  once,  if  the  good 
of  the  service  requires  it,  and  i)lace  C.  F.  Smith  in  command. 
You  are  at  liberty  to  regard  this  as  a  positive  order,  if  it  will 
smooth  your  way.  I  appreciate  the  difficulties  you  have  to 
encounter,  and  will  be  glad  to  relieve  you  from  trouble  as  far 
as  possible. 

On  the  4th  Halleck  telegraphed  me : 

"  A  rumor  has  just  reached  me  that  since  the  taking  of  Fort 
Donelson  Grant  has  resumed  his  former  bad  habits.  If  so,  it 
will  account  for  his  repeated  neglect  of  my  often-repeated  orders. 
I  do  not  deem  it  advisable  to  arrest  him  at  present,  but  have 
placed  Gen.  Smith  in  command  of  the  expedition  up  the  Ten- 
nessee.    I  think  Smith  will  restore  order  and  discipline.  .  .  ." 

On  the  6th  Halleck  telegraphed  to  Grant : 

"  Gen.  McClellan  directs  that  you  report  to  me  daily  the  num- 


GRANT  AND  HALLECI^.  1 1  7 

ber  and  position  of  the  forces  under  your  command.  Your 
neglect  of  repeated  orders  to  report  the  strength  of  your  command 
has  created  great  dissatisfaction  and  seriously  interfered  with  mili- 
tary plans.  Your  going  to  Nashville  without  authority,  and  when 
your  presence  with  your  troops  was  of  the  greatest  importance, 
was  a  matter  of  serious  complaint  at  Washington,  so  much  so 
that  I  was  advised  to  arrest  you  on  your  return." 

On  the  31st  of  March  Halleck  informed  Grant : 


"  Gen.  McClellan  directed  me  to  place  Gen.  Smith  in  com- 
mand of  the  expedition  until  you  were  ordered  to  join  it." 


On  the  loth  of  March  the  adjutant-general  of  the  army,  by 
direction  of  the  President,  required  from  Halleck  a  report  as  to 
Grant's  unauthorized  visit  to  Nashville  and  as  to  his  general  con- 
duct. On  the  15th  Halleck  replied  that  Grant  had  gone  to  Nash- 
ville to  communicate  with  Buell,  that  his  motives  were  proper, 
and  advised  that  no  further  proceedings  be  had  in  the  case. 

Now  to  the  story  which  prompts  me  to  insert  these  despatches. 
More  than  a  year  after  the  events  in  question  Franklin  wrote  to 
me  that  on  meeting  Grant  at  Memphis,  or  some  such  point  on 
the  Mississippi,  Grant  asked  what  had  made  me  hostile  to  him. 
Franklin  replied  that  he  knew  that  I  was  not  hostile  but  very 
friendly  to  him.  Grant  then  said  that  that  could  not  be  so,  for, 
without  any  reason,  I  had  ordered  Halleck  to  relieve  him  from 
command  and  arrest  him  soon  after  Fort  Donelson,  and  that 
Halleck  had  interfered  to  save  him.  I  took  no  steps  to  unde- 
ceive Grant,  trusting  to  time  to  elucidate  the  question. 

In  the  latter  part  of  1866,  while  I  was  in  Europe,  Gen.  Grant, 
through  one  of  his  staff,  communicated  with  Gen.  Marcy  in  regard 
to  papers  missing  from  the  files  of  the  office  of  general-in-chief 
during  my  tenure  of  the  place. 

In  searching  my  papers  Gen.  Marcy  found  my  retained  coi)y 
of  the  despatch  of  March  2  from  Halleck  in  which  he  reports 
Grant's  unauthorized  absence,  etc.  This  he  forwarded  to  Gen. 
Grant,  who  was  thus  for  the  first  time  informed  of  the  truth. 
This  despatch  and  my  reply  had,  with  many  others,  disappeared 
from  the  files  in  the  office.  So  with  regard  to  my  correspon- 
dence as  general-in-chief. 

The  military  telegraph-office  was  first  established  by  me,  and 
was  located,  as  already  stated,  in  the  headquarters  of  the  Army 


n  I  j>  mcClellan's  owi^  stor  y. 

of  the  Potomac.  While  I  was  absent  from  Washington  for  a 
couple  of  days  in  March  the  Secretary  of  War,  without  any  inti- 
mation to  me,  caused  the  entire  office,  with  all  the  telegraphic 
records,  to  be  removed  to  the  War  Department. 

I  was  relieved  from  the  general  command  of  the  army  while 
with  the  front  near  Manassas  (March  ii),  and  never  re-entered 
the  office  of  commanding  general  in  the  War  Department.  All 
the  papers  there  were  taken  possession  of  by  the  Secretary  of 
War,  and  he  and  Halleck  are  alone  responsible  for  any  gaps  in 
the  files. 

Some  one  abstracted  the  telegrams  above  alluded  to.  As  to 
Halleck*s  conduct  with  regard  to  Grant,  no  comment  by  me  is 
necessary.     The  facts  speak  for  themselves. 

[In  this  connection  see  "  Personal  Memoirs  of  U.  S.  Grant," 
vol.  i.  pp.  324-8  ;  also.  North  American  Review^  Dec,  1885. 
The  following  correspondence  between  Gens.  Grant  and  McClel- 
lan  is  appended  by  the  editor  :] 

Hotel  Byron,  Villeneuve,  Nov.  24,  1866. 
Gen,  U,  S.  Grants  Commanding  U.  S.  Army  : 

General  :  In  a  letter  received  yesterday  from  Gen.  Marcy 
he  says :  "  I  had  a  note  yesterday  from  a  member  of  Gen.  Grant's 
staff,  in  which  he  says  it  has  been  officially  reported  to  the  gene- 
ral that  he  (McClellan)  had  retained  in  his  possession  certain 
records  pertaining  to  the  headquarters  of  the  army  which  were 
loaned  to  him  while  preparing  his  report  in  1862-3.'* 

I  desire  to  state  that  I  have  not  knowingly  retained  or  caused 
to  be  withheld  any  document  whatever,  whether  important  or 
unimportant,  belonging  to  the  headquarters  of  the  army  or  to 
any  other  department  of  the  government. 

When  my  report  was  completed  I  caused  all  the  original  sub- 
ordinate reports  and  all  other  documents  belonging  to  the  gov- 
ernment to  be  boxed  up,  and  sent  them  to  the  adjutant-general 
of  the  army  in  Washington,  I  think  at  the  same  time  with  my 
report.  My  recollection  is  that  they  were  sent  by  the  hands 
of  my  aide-de-camp,  Capt.  A.  McClellan.  I  do  not  think  it  pos- 
sible that  any  document  can  have  been  overlooked,  because  in 
examining  my  papers  subsequently  my  attention  would  in  all 
probability  have  been  attracted  to  it,  and,  as  a  matter  of  course, 
I  would  at  once  have  forwarded  it  to  Washington.  I  shall  be 
under  especial  obligations  to  you,  general,  if  you  will  cause  me 
to  be  informed  what  documents  are  alluded  to  in  the  report 
referred  to,  also  by  whom  the  report  was  made  to  you. 

To  such  a  general  statement  as  that  made  to  Gen.  Marcy — 


CRANT  AND  HALLEClC.  219 

at  least  as  it  has  reached  me — I  can  only  return  a  general  reply, 
as  I  have  already  done. 

Desiring  the  favor  of  an  early  reply,  directed  to  the  care  of 
"  Messrs.  J.  S.  Morgan  &  Co.,  22  Old  Broad  Street,  London," 
I  am,  general,  very  truly  yours, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan. 

"  Headquarters,  Armies  of  the  U.  S., 

"  Washington,  D.  C,  Dec.  10,   1866. 

"  Dear  General  :  I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  receipt 
of  your  letter  of  the  24th  of  Nov.  In  reply  1  enclose  you  copies 
of  all  letters  addressed  to  Gen.  Marcy  on  the  subject  of  papers 
supposed  to  be  in  your  possession.  These  letters  contain  a  full 
explanation  to  yours,  and,  as  you  will  see,  do  not  imply  an  inten- 
tion on  your  part  to  withhold  any  paper  properly  belonging  to 
the  headquarters  of  the  army. 

"Trusting  that  this  letter,  with  enclosures,  will  relieve  you  of 
any  misapprehension  you  may  have  felt  from  Gen.  Marcy's  let- 
ter, and  with  the  assurance  that  the  general  kindly  offered  to 
furnish  anything  we  might  want  from  papers  retained  in  your 
possession,  I  remain,  very  truly  yours, 

"U.  S.  Grant. 

"  To  Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan." 

Vevav,  Switzerland, 
Dec.  26,  1866. 

My  dear  General  :  Yours  of  the  loth  inst.  reached  me  yes- 
terday, and  I  now  fully  understand  what  is  wanted. 

When  called  to  the  command  of  the  United  States  armies  in 
1 86 1  I  left  unchanged  the  organization  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac and  its  headquarters,  and  in  no  manner  merged  them  with 
those  of  the  headquarters  of  the  United  States  army — the  staff 
for  each  being  distinct,  except  with  regard  to  my  personal  aides- 
de-camp.  Thus  Gen.  Marcy,  the  chief  of  staff  of  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  had  nothing  to  do  with  the  headquarters  of  the 
army  of  the  United  States.  Gen.  S.  Williams  was  adjutant-gene- 
ral of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  while  Gen.  L.  Thomas  was  my 
adjutant-general  in  my  capacity  as  commander  of  the  United 
States  army,  etc.  The  papers  and  records  of  the  two  offices  were 
entirely  distinct.  I  had  in  the  War  Department  building  two 
rooms  for  my  office  as  commanding  general  of  the  United  States 
army,  and  thither  Gen.  Thomas  brought  to  me  all  papers  and 
matters  requiring  my  action,  received  my  orders  thereon,  carried 
back  the  papers  to  his  own  office,  where  they  should  be  found, 
together  with  the  orders  and  letters  issued  by  him  thereon  in 
conformity  with  my  instructions.  You  will  the  more  readily 
comprehend   the   state  of  affairs  when   I  remind  you  that  my 


2  50  McCLELLAN'S  OIV/^  STORY, 

predecessor,  Gen.  Scott,  had  an  office — first  in  New  York,  after- 
wards in  Washington — entirely  distinct  from  that  of  the  adjutant- 
general  of  the  United  States  army,  where  he  had  his  own  adju- 
tant-general and  entirely  distinct  records  ;  the  adjutant-general 
of  the  United  States  army  being  then  simply  the  adjutant-gene- 
ral of  the  Secretary  of  War.  I  changed  the  arrangement,  dis- 
pensed with  the  machinery  of  a  separate  office,  and  merged  all 
the  routine  service  and  records  of  the  command-in-chief  with 
those  of  the  adjutant-general's  office.  The  only  papers,  to  the 
best  of  my  recollection,  kept  in  my  office  were  the  retained 
copies  of  my  own  letters  on  subjects  of  an  important  nature 
requiring  more  or  less  secrecy,  such  as  letters  of  instruction  in 
regard  to  military  movements.  As  the  telegraph  was  much  used, 
these  letters  were  not  numerous.  Col.  A.  V.  Colburn  had  charge 
of  these  letters,  and  I  am  not  sure  whether  they  were  copied  into 
books  or  simply  filed.  I  kept  nothing  for  myself  but  the  original 
rough  'drafts,  either  in  my  own  handwriting  or  that  of  the  aides  to 
whom  they  were  dictated.  All  written  reports  re<eived  went 
finally  to  the  adjutant-general's  office  or  that  of  the  Secretary  of 
War  ;  none  were  retained  in  my  office,  which  was,  after  all,  sim- 
ply a  place  for  the  transaction  of  business,  and  not  a  place  of 
record.  When  I  left  Washington  in  March,  1862,  to  accompany 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  on  its  march  towards  Manassas,  I  was 
still  the  commanding  general  of  the  United  States  army,  had  no 
reason  whatever  to  suppose  that  any  change  was  contemplated 
by  the  President,  left  at  a  few  hours'  notice,  and  expected  to 
return  in  a  few  days,  preparatory  to  the  final  movement  to  the 
Peninsula.  I  therefore  made  no  special  arrangements  in  regard 
to  my  office  in  the  War  Department,  and  left  everything  as  it 
hapj)ened  to  be,  all  my  personal  aides  accompanying  me.  'i'wo 
or  three  days  after,  while  at  Fairfax  Court-House,  1,  to  my  com- 
plete surprise,  received  throu^^h  the  ntivspapers  the  orders  reliev- 
ing me  from  the  command  of  the  United  States  army,  and  never 
afterwards  entered  the  office  in  Washington.  I  was  informed 
that  it  was  immediately  taken  possession  of  by  the  War  Depart- 
ment for  its  own  uses,  and  have  no  knowledge  of  what  disposi- 
tion was  made  of  the  papers,  etc.,  found  there,  further  than  that 
it  was  about  the  same  time  stated  to  me  that  the  War  Depart- 
ment had  taken  possession  of  everything  in  the  office,  as  the 
functions  of  commanding  general  were  assumed  by  the  secretary. 
All  telegraphic  despatches  of  any  importance  were  sent  and  re- 
ceived in  cipher,  and  were  handed  to  me  translated  ;  the  work 
of  deciphering,  and  the  reverse,  being  executed  in  the  telegraph- 
office.  My  recollection  is  that  the  cipher  copies,  at  least,  were 
recorded  in  books,  which  were  kept  in  the  chief  telegraph-office ; 
these  books  were  never  in  my  personal  possession.  This  chief 
office,  originally  organized  under  my  direction,  was  in  the  build- 
ing occupied  as  the  headquarters  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac, 


GRAl^T  AXD  HALLECk\  11\ 

on  Pennsylvania  avenue  and  Jackson  square.  Soon  after  the 
accession  of  the  present  Secretary  of  War  to  office,  and  during 
kiiy  absence  from  the  city  on  duty  for  two  or  three  days,  the 
entire  establishment,  with  all  its  records,  apparatus,  and  per- 
sonnel, was  removed  to  the  War  Department  building,  without  my 
knowledge,  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War  ;  and  from  that 
time  1  ceased  to  have  the  slightest  control  over  it.  When  I 
returned  to  the  city  1  found  the  removal  accomplished,  which 
was  the  first  intimation  I  had  of  it.  In  that  office  should  be 
found  copies  of  all  the  messages  that  passed  through  it.  With 
regard  to  the  books  containing  the  original  duplicates  of  my  mes- 
sages sent,  1  have  now  no  means  of  knowing  what  ones  were  left 
in  my  War  Dei>artment  office  when  it  passed  from  my  posses- 
sion. 1  do  not  think  there  are  any  in  my  possession  (among 
my  papers  in  the  United  States)  except  that  sent  to  you  by 
Gen.  Marcy.  As  that  was  simply  my  private  memorandum,  1 
would  be  glad  to  have  it  returned  to  Gen.  Marcy  when  you  have 
done  with  it.  I  was  not  aware  that  the  telegrams  of  Feb.  and 
March,  1862,  from  Gen.  Halleck  were  among  my  papers.  I  have 
re(| nested  Gen.  Marcy  to  forward  to  you  whatever  copies  of  tele- 
grams, etc.,  he  may  find.  From  his  letter  to  me  I  think  that  he 
has  examined  all  my  papers,  for  all  that  T  know  of  are  at  Orange. 
I  will  do  my  best  to  aid  him  in  making  a  thorough  search.  When 
J  return  to  the  United  States — probably  in  the  course  of  a  few 
months — I  will  most  cheerfully  aid  you,  in  any  possible  way,  to 
carry  out  your  wishes;  but  I  am  at  present  inclined  to  think  that 
a  close  search  in  Washington  will  be  productive  of  much  better 
results  than  one  conducted  elsewhere. 

I  must  apologize  for  inflicting  so  long  a  letter  upon  you,  and 
am,  my  dear  general, 

Sincerely  your  friend, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan. 

Gen.  U.  S.  Grant, 

Commanding  U.  S,  Armies, 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Evacuation  of  Manassas — Army  corps — McClellan  removed  from  chief 
command — President's  military  orders — Plan  of  advance  on  Rich- 
mond— Derangement  of  all  plans  by  the  administration. 

The  organization  of  army  corps  directed  by  the  President's 
order  of  March  8,  1862,  was  the  work  of  the  President  and  Sec- 
retary of  War,  probably  urged  by  McDowell.  It  was  issued 
without  consulting  me  and  against  my  judgment,  for  from  the 
beginning  it  had  been  my  intention  to  postpone  the  formation 
of  army  corps  until  service  in  the  field  had  indicated  what  gene- 
ral officers  were  best  fitted  to  exercise  those  most  important  com- 
mands. The  mistakes  of  an  incompetent  division  commander 
may  be  rectified,  but  those  of  a  corps  commander  are  likely  to 
be  fatal.  The  President  designated  the  senior  general  officers  to 
command  the  corps.  The  day  after  this  order  was  issued  we 
received  information,  that  seemed  reliable,  of  the  evacuation  of 
Manassas.  The  President  and  Secretary  were  with  me  at  the 
time,  and  fully  approved  my  determination  of  going  to  Porter's 
headtjuarters,  where  I  could  receive  information  more  readily 
and  be  better  prepared  to  act  as  circumstances  might  require, 
whether  to  move  in  pursuit  or  not.  I  at  once  sent  Averill 
with  a  brigade  of  cavalry  to  verify  the  news  and  do  what  he 
could  against  the  enemy's  rear-guard  ;  but  (ien.  Johnston  had, 
as  usual,  masked  his  retreat  so  well  that  nothing  could  be 
effected. 

In  the  course  of  the  evening  I  determined  to  move  the  whole 
army  forward,  partly  with  the  hope  that  1  might  be  able  to  take 
advantage  of  some  accident  and  bring  Johnston  to  battle  under 
favorable  circumstances,  but  also  to  break  up  the  camps,  give 
the  troops  a  little  experience  in  marching  and  bivouac  before 
finally  leaving  the  old  base  of  supplies,  to  test  the  transporta- 
tion arrangements  and  get  rid  of  impedimenta^  and  thus  prepare 
things  for  the  movement  to  the  Peninsula.  It  also  seemed  pro- 
bable that  this  advance,  in  connection  with  the  recent  move  on 
Harper's  Ferry  and  Charleston,  would  tend  to  make  Johnston 


829 


ARMY  CORPS,  223 

more  uncertain  as  to  my  real  intentions.     In  the  course  of  the 
evening  I  telegraphed  to  the  Secretary  of  War: 

"  In  the  arrangements  for  the  advance  of  to-morrow  it  is 
impossible  to  carry  into  effect  the  arrangements  for  the  forma- 
tion of  army  corps.  I  am  obliged  to  take  groups  as  I  find  them, 
and  to  move  them  by  divisions.  I  respectfully  ask  a  suspension 
of  the  order  directing  it  until  the  present  movement  be  over." 

To  this  the  secretary  made  the  following  singular  reply  : 

"  I  think  it  is  the  duty  of  every  officer  to  obey  the  Presi- 
dent's orders.  Nor  can  I  see  any  reason  why  you  should  not 
obey  them  in  the  present  instance  ;  I  must  therefore  decline 
to  suspend  them." 

To  this  I  at  once  replied  at  one  a.m.: 

"  You  have  entirely  misunderstood  me,  and  the  idea  I  in- 
tended to  convey  was  simply  that  I  could  not,  under  the  pres- 
sure of  the  new  aspect  of  affairs,  immediately  carry  out  the 
President's  order  as  to  the  formation  of  army  corps.  It  is  abso- 
lutely necessary  that  I  should  at  once  move  divisions  as  they 
stand.  If  you  require  me  to  suspend  movements  until  army 
corps  can  be  formed,  I  will  do  so,  but  I  regard  it  as  a  military 
necessity  that  the  divisions  should  move  to  the  front  at  once 
without  waiting  for  the  formation  of  army  corps.  If  it  is  your 
order  to  wait  until  the  corps  can  be  formed,  I  will,  of  course, 
wait.  I  will  comply  with  the  President's  order  as  soon  as  pos- 
sible. I  intended  to  do  so  to-morrow,  but  circumstances  have 
changed.  If  you  desire  it  I  will  at  once  countermand  all  the 
orders  I  have  given  for  an  advance  until  the  formation  of  army 
corj)s  is  completed.  I  have  only  to  add  that  the  order  I  have 
given  to-night  to  advance  early  in  the  morning  was  dictated 
solely  by  the  present  condition  of  affairs.  If  the  leave  to  sus- 
pend the  order  be  granted  there  will  be  no  unreasonable  delay 
in  the  formation  of  army  corps.  I  await  your  reply  here,  that, 
if  you  so  direct,  I  may  countermand  my  orders  at  once.  Please 
reply  at  once." 

To  this  the  secretary  replied  : 

"  I  do  not  understand  the  President's  order  as  restraining 
you  from  any  military  movement,  by  divisions  or  otherwise,  that 
circumstances  in  your  judgment  may  render  expedient,  and  I 
certainly  do  not  wish  to  delay  or  change  any  movement  what- 


224  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

ever  that  you  have  made  or  desire  to  make.  I  only  wish  to 
avoid  giving  any  sanction  to  a  suspension  of  a  policy  which  the 
President  has  ordered  to  be  pursued  ;  but  if  you  think  that  the 
terms  of  the  order  as  it  stands  would  operate  to  retard  or  in  any 
way  restrain  movements  that  circumstances  require  to  be  made 
before  the  army  corj)s  are  formed,  I  will  assume  the  responsi- 
bility of  suspending  the  order  for  that  purpose,  and  authorize 
you  to  make  any  movement,  by  division  or  otherwise,  to  your 
own  judgment,  without  stopping  to  form  the  army  corps.  My 
desire  is  that  you  should  exercise  every  power  that  you  think 
present  circumstances  require  to  be  exercised  without  delay,  but 
I  want  that  you  and  I  should  not  seem  to  be  desirous  of  oppos- 
ing any  order  of  the  President  without  necessity.  I  say,  there- 
fore, move  just  as  you  think  best  now,  and  let  the  other  matter 
stand  until  it  can  be  done  without  impeding  movements." 

To  this  I  replied  at  2.40  a.m.: 

Your  reply  received.  The  troops  are  in  motion.  I  thank 
you  for  your  despatch  :  it  relieves  me  much,  and  you  will  be 
convinced  that  I  have  not  asked  too  much  of  you. 

It  was  only  by  throwing  the  responsibility  of  delay  upon  the 
secretary  that  he  withdrew  his  quite  unnecessary  opposition. 
My  order  for  the  formation  of  the  corps  was  given  on  the  13th, 
as  soon  as  circumstances  permitted. 

McDowell  was  very  anxious  to  have  the  reserve  artillery,  the 
cavalry,  and  the  regular  infantry  attached  to  his  corps  ;  for- 
tunately, I  kept  them  by  themselves,  or  1  should,  no  doubt,  have 
lost  them  as  well  as  McDowell's  own  corps. 

On  the  loth  I  reached  Fairfax  Court-House  and  established 
headquarters  there.  It  was  now  evident,  from  the  information 
received,  that  it  would  be  impossible  to  reach  the  enemy  within 
a  reasonable  distance  from  Washington.  The  various  divisions 
were  therefore  halted  where  they  stood,  at  convenient  distances 
from  headquarters,  and  the  preparations  pushed  for  embarking 
for  the  Peninsula.  I  threw  forward  Sumner  with  two  divisions 
and  Stoneman  with  a  cavalry  command  to  proceed  as  far  as  the 
Rapidan  and  Rappahannock,  to  secure  the  crossings  and  still 
further  deceive  the  enemy  as  to  my  intentions. 

While  here  I  learned  through  the  public  newspapers  that  I 
was  displaced  in  the  command  of  the  United  States  armies.  It 
may  be  well  to  state  that  no  one  in  authority  had  ever  expressed 


REMOVAL  FROM  CHIEF  COMMAND.  225 

to  me  the  slightest  disapprobation  of  my  action  in  that  capacity, 
nor  had  I  received  any  information  of  a  purpose  to  change  my 
position. 

President's  War  Order^  No,  3. 

"  Executive  Mansion,  Washington, 
"  March  11,  1862. 

"  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  having  personally  taken  the  field  at  the 
head  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  until  otherwise  ordered  he  is 
relieved  from  the  command  of  the  other  military  departments,  he 
retaining  command  of  the  Department  of  the  Potomac. 

"  Ordered^ further^  That  the  departments  now  under  the  respec- 
tive commands  of  Gens.  Halleck  and  Hunter,  together  with  so 
much  of  that  under  Gen.  Buell  as  lies  west  of  a  north  and  south 
line  indefinitely  drawn  through  Knoxville,  Tennessee,  be  consoli- 
dated and  designated  the  Department  of  the  Mississippi ;  and 
that,  until  otherwise  ordered,  Maj.-Gen.  Halleck  have  command 
of  said  department. 

"  Ordered,  also.  That  the  country  west  of  the  Dejjartment  of 
the  Potomac  and  east  of  the  Department  of  the  Mississii)pi  be  a 
military  department  to  be  called  the  Mountain  Department,  and 
that  the  same  be  commanded  by  Maj.-Gen.  Fremont. 

"  That  all  the  commanders  of  departments,  after  the  receipt  of 
this  order  by  them,  respectively  report  severally  and  directly  to 
the  Secretary  of  War,  and  that  prompt,  full,  and  frequent  reports 
will  be  expected  of  all  and  each  of  them. 

"Abraham  Lincoln." 

The  intelligence  took  me  entirely  by  surprise,  and  the  order 
proved  to  be  one  of  the  steps  taken  to  tie  my  hands  in  order 
to  secure  the  failure  of  the  approaching  campaign.  Elsewhere  I 
state  the  effect  of  this  change  in  altering  the  condition  of  affairs, 
and  breaking  that  unity  of  action  which  it  was  my  purpose  to 
enforce  in  the  operations  of  the  different  armies  in  the  field,  as 
well  as  its  effect  upon  operations  in  Virginia. 

Though  unaware  of  the  President's  intention  to  remove  me 
from  the  position  of  general-in-chief,  I  cheerfully  acceded  to  the 
disposition  he  saw  fit  to  make  of  my  services,  and  so  informed 
him  in  a  note  on  the  12th  of  March  : 

Unofficial. 

Fairfax  Court-House, 
March  12,  1862. 
His  Excellency  A.  Lincoln,  President : 

My  pear  Sir  ;    I  have  just  seen  Gov,  Dennison,  who  ha§ 


226  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

detailed   to   me  the  conversation   he   held  with   you   yesterday 
and  to-day. 

I  beg  to  say  that  I  cordially  endorse  all  he  has  said  to  you  in 
my  behalf,  and  that  I  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  the  officisd  con- 
fidence and  kind  personal  feelings  you  entertain  for  me. 

I  believe  I  said  to  you  some  weeks  since,  in  connection  with 
some  Western  matters,  that  no  feeling  of  self-interest  or  ambition 
should  ever  prevent  me  from  devoting  myself  to  your  service.  I 
am  glad  to  have  the  opportunity  to  prove  it,  and  you  will  find 
that,  under  present  circumstances,  I  shall  work  just  as  cheerfully 
as  before,  and  that  no  consideration  of  self  will  in  any  man- 
ner interfere  with  the  discharge  of  my  public  duties.  Again 
thanking  you  for  the  official  and  personal  kindness  you  have  so 
often  evinced  towards  me, 

I  am,  most  sincerely  your  friend, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan. 


While  at  Fairfax  Court-House  an  order  arrived  assigning  Gen. 
Wadsworth  to  the  command  of  Washington.  The  secretary  had 
spoken  to  me  on  the  subject  some  days  before,  whereupon  I 
objected  to  the  selection  for  the  reason  that  Gen.  Wadsworth 
was  not  a  soldier  by  training.  I  said  that  one  of  the  very  best 
soldiers  in  the  army  was  necessary  for  the  command  of  Washing- 
ton, which  was  next  in  importance  to  the  command  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac — an  officer  fully  posted  in  all  the  details  of  the 
profession  ;  and  that,  much  as  I  should  dislike  sparing  him,  I 
would  give  up  P'ranklin  for  the  place.  The  secretary  replied 
that  Wadsworth  had  been  selected  because  it  was  necessary,  for 
political  reasons,  to  conciliate  the  agricultural  interests  of  New 
York,  and  that  it  was  useless  to  discuss  the  matter,  because  it 
would  in  no  event  be  changed. 

When  Gen.  Wadsworth  parted  from  me  at  Fairfax  he  pro- 
fessed the  greatest  devotion  and  friendship  for  me,  but  at  once 
became  an  enemy,  probably  because  Stanton  informed  him  of  the 
objections  I  had  made  to  his  appointment,  without  giving  him  the 
real  grounds  of  my  opposition. 

My  memorandum  of  Aug.  2,  1861,  shows  that  even  then  I 
regarded  Virginia  as  the  most  important  portion  of  the  immense 
theatre  of  operations.  Gen.  Scott  differed  from  me,  and  thought 
the  valley  of  the  Mississippi  more  vital.  While  fully  recognizing 
the  importance  and  necessity  of  operations  in  the  valley  of  the 
Mississippi,  Tennessee,  and  Cumberland  rivers,  and  of  coast  expe- 


V 


PLANS  A GA INS T  RICHMOND.  22  7 

ditions,  I  always  held  the  eastern  line  to  be  the  true  theatre  of 
decisive  operations. 

If  I  had  been  retained  in  chief  command,  untrammelled  as 
to  time  and  means,  I  should,  in  the  early  spring  of  1862,  have 
pushed  with  all  energy  the  operations  against  Wilmington, 
Charleston,  and  New  Orleans,  as  well  as  in  the  Mississippi, 
Tennessee,  and  Cumberland  valleys,  and  against  the  Knox- 
ville  and  Lynchburg  Railroad,  via  Cumberland  Gap,  and  early 
in  May  have  thrown  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  the  James 
river  with  a  strength  of  over  150,000  for  duty.  I  intended  to 
transport  by  water  to  Urbana,  on  the  lower  Rappahannock,  four 
divisions  of  infantry  with  their  batteries,  the  regular  infantry,  one 
bridge-train,  a  few  squadrons  of  cavalry,  and  a  small  number  of 
wagons  ;  with  them  to  push  by  a  forced  march  to  the  vicinity 
of  West  Point,  and  then  cross  the  Mattapony  and  Pamunkey 
rivers,  thus  compelling  the  evacuation  of  Yorktown,  and  per- 
haps cutting  off  Magruder's  force  in  the  Peninsula.  Meanwhile 
the  reserve  artillery,  the  remaining  cavalry,  bridge-trains,  and 
necessary  wagons  were  to  be  concentrated  in  the  vicinity  of 
Point  Lookout,  and,  simultaneously  with  the  landing  at  Urbana, 
ferried  across  the  Potomac  on  North  river  ferry-boats,  marched 
to  the  Rappahannock — the  movement  covered  by  an  infantry 
force  near  Heathsville — then  ferried  over  the  Rappahannock 
and  moved  rapidly  to  unite  with  the  force  first  landed.  Prior 
to  the  evacuation  of  Yorktown  the  remaining  portions  of  the 
army  would  have  been  landed  at  Urbana,  and,  subsequently 
to  that,  at  West  Point  or  on  the  James,  as  circumstances 
required. 

As  soon  as  the  leading  divisions  of  infantry  crossed  the 
Pamunkey  they  would  have  moved  on  Richmond,  covered  by 
cavalry  on  both  flanks.  My  letters  of  Feb.  3  and  March  19, 
1862,  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  show  that,  under  certain  circum- 
stances, I  contemplated  crossing  the  James  river  and  attacking 
Richmond  from  the  south. 

The  fears  of  the  administration  and  their  inability  to  compre- 
hend the  merits  of  the  scheme,  or  else  the  determination  that  I 
should  not  succeed  in  the  approaching  campaign,  induced  them 
to  prohibit  me  from  carrying  out  the  Urbana  movement.  They 
gave  me  the  choice  between  the  direct  overland  route  via  Manas- 
sas, and  the  route  with  F«rk  Monroe  as  a  base.     Of  course  I 


ifc\t\\<\\  iho  Uner,  My  reiH>rt  gives  all  the  most  important  cor- 
k^!^)xm>aJ^»\\^  ^>n  this  ^ubjei  I,  and  the  arguments  I  used  in  support 
sM!  iW  i^Un  i>t  camjvAign  which  commended  itself  to  my  judg- 

tcl  we  hcr^  call  attention  to  the  President's  orders  of  Jan.  27 
^kI  Jaa  3;!^  i$6j^  and  his  letter  to  me  of  Feb.  3,  answered  in 
wuac  oi  the  same  day  to  the  Secretary  of  War : 

FrcsitkfU*s  G^/icrtMl  War  Order y  No.  i. 


44 


Executive  Mansiok, 
Washington,  Jan.  27,  1862. 

"'  Ordered^  That  the  2  2d  day  of  Feb.,  1862,  be  the  day  for  a 
general  movement  of  the  land  and  naval  forces  of  the  United 
States  against  the  insurgent  forces^  That  esj>ecially  the  army 
at  and  about  Fortress  Monroe,  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  the 
.\ruw  of  Western  Virginia,  the  army  near  Munfordvilie,  Ken- 
tucky, the  army  and  flotilla  at  Cairo>  and  a  naval  force  in  the 
iluU  oi  Mexico  be  ready  to  move  on  that  day. 

**  That  all  other  forces^  both  land  and  navaL  with  their 
rvNpcciive  commanders  obey  existing  orders  for  the  time^  and 
be  HMdy  to  obey  additional  orders  when  duly  given. 

**  That  the  heads  of  departments^  and  especially  the  Secre- 
taries of  War  and  <*i  the  Navy,  with  all  their  subordinatesv  and 
the  i;cneral-in-chiet\  with  all  other  commanders  and  subordinates 
\>i  \.\.w\X  and  naval  forces,  will  severally  be  held  to  their  strict  and 
full  responsibilities  tor  prompt  execution  of  this  order. 

"'^  Abraham  Llj^col^.'' 
The  order  ct       a.  31,  iS6^.  was  as  follows  : 

I^rtsidcnfs  Sl^\'iiii    I  War  Orucr,  Nu.  i. 

"*  EXECCTIVB    MaJCSIO!*^ 

•^  Washington,  Jan.  ji^  1862. 

''  Ordert'tL  That  all  the  dis{}osabIe  force  of  the  Army  of  the 
Fotomac»  after  providing  safely  for  the  defence  of  Washingtijin, 
be  formed  into  an  expedition  for  the  immediate  object  of  seizinij 

,  and  occupying  a  point  upon  the  railroad  south  westward  of  what 

is  known  as  Manassas  Junction,  ail  details  to  be  in  the  discretion 
of  the  commander-in-chief,  and  the  expedition  to  move  before  or 

I  on  the  2^d  day  oi  Feb.  next. 

I  1  a>ked  his  ex«:ellency  whether  this  order  was  to  be  regarded 

'  as  final,  or  whether  L  could  be  permitted  to  submit  in  writing  my 


mi:,  uxcolx's  plan.  22g 

objections  to  his  y>lan  and  my  reasons  for  preferring  my  own. 
I'trmission  was  accc»rded,  and  1  lherefc»re  jirepared  the  letter  to 
ihc  Sec.retan'  of  War  which  is  given  below. 

Before  this  had  been  submitted  to  the  President  he  addressed 
me  the  foDowing  note  ; 

**Washjnc.tux,  Feb.  5,  1862. 

**  My  i>EAR  Sir  :  Yon  and  I  have  distinct  and  different  plans 
for  a  movement  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  :  yc»urs  to  l>c  done 
1  y  the  Chesajrtjake,  up  the  Rajij*ahannock  to  Urban  a,  and  ac.rc»ss 
iiind  to  the  terminus  of  the  railroad  on  the  Vc»rk  river  ;  mine  to 
move  directly  to  a  ]»ciiDt  on  the  railroad  sc»uthwesl  of  Manassas. 

**  If  yf»u  will  give  sat isf actor}'  answers  to  the  fc»]lowing  ques- 
tions 1  shall  c»adly  yield  my  }»lan  to  yc»urs  : 

**  1st.  Does  not  your  }»lan  involve  a  greatly  larger  e\j»enditurc 
of  /?*/«/•  and   money  than  miner 

**  rd.  AVherein  is  a  licloTy  more  certain  l»y  yctur  j'lan  than 
niTir  r 

"*  ^d.  "V^"herrin  is  a  i-iciori-  more  7uiluabk  by  your  j*lan  than 
minr  ? 

**4:h.  In  fact,  would  it  ncrt  be  /a:^  valuable  in  this:  that  it 
w-.»Ljd  break  no  irre^at  line  of  tlje  enemv's  communicjitions.  while 
iLirjr  wcti.)..!? 

"*5ih.  It;  cast-  c4  disaster  woitld  not  a  retreat  be  more  diffi- 
v':il\  by  }c»l:t  ]»iim  than  mine? 

**Yourf  truly, 

'"AjliLAHAM    L3XC'»LX. 

**  Mai.-GtTi.  McCt  .1.1.1. AX.*' 

T'best  q'jestions  were  f^nl^tantiaily  answered  by  ii)t  foUc/m-ing 
iL-r.t:  cc  ihe  szjzie  date  to  the  Secjeiary  of  War : 

Wiij^ivciox,  Feb.  5.  1S62. 

Sit  :  I  a5i  yccT  induigetic*  for  rbe  foBowing  jAiqierK.  renoered 
'■f  cessijy  :  y  ■;  .rcunsiaTtces. 

]  i.?vs-.-zjri  cufTTiTTtg.tid  'A  the  mxijH"  in  the  Txaniiy  of  Washjr^- 
:i:i  :>r  >ijr:.rii.v.  1l':t  rr,  1S6:.  ?aL  cs:.t^  after  lie  lianJt  <A  Bl^jI 

1  f:'~rjc  3i:  arrLx  -:.  ccmnniOid — ^  laoie  c-aDecncni  of  reri- 
rDtrti  ccwtrzLig  ic  i^t  :.^.ks  r«f  the  Pccoanac,  i^oczie  Tutrf^cllT 
riw,  oth'trs  iLisTijrr^i  :  i   the  retcez.!  dcfear 

Nrcr.-r.g  :c  iry  ■:::c:?4eqi]eDc:e  had  bocD  dune  ti:;  *ec.iT£  the 
sT'.ri-tcZ;  i.Tcr:.i'/'rts  :•  ^jte  <-^7craj  "ry  n^eazt*  oc  ^t^.tfi^sivt  were*  : 
i>:cr  r.g  w'r^:t^.zr  r^i  ititirL  unoenikei:  10  <34!fe:irfi  iht  iTis^ti  i_ 


230  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

The  troops  were  not  only  undisciplined,  undrilled,  and  dis- 
pirited ;  they  were  not  even  placed  in  military  positions.  The 
city  was  almost  in  a  condition  to  have  been  taken  by  a  dash  of  a 
regiment  of  cavalry. 

Without  one  day's  delay  I  undertook  the  difficult  task  as- 
signed to  me.  That  task  the  honorable  secretary  knows  was 
given  to  me  without  solicitation  or  foreknowledge.  How  far  I 
have  accomplished  it  will  best  be  shown  by  the  past  and  the 
present. 

The  capital  is  secure  against  attack  ;  the  extensive  fortifica- 
tions erected  by  the  labor  of  our  troops  enable  a  small  garrison 
to  hold  it  against  a  numerous  army;  the  enemy  have  been  held  in 
check  ;  the  State  of  Maryland  is  securely  in  our  possession,  the 
detached  counties  of  Virginia  are  again  within  the  pale  of  our 
laws,  and  ail  apprehension  of  trouble  in  Delaware  is  at  an  end ; 
the  enemy  are  confined  to  the  positions  they  occupied  before  the 
disaster  of  the  21st  July.  More  than  all  this,  I  have  now  under 
my  command  a  well-drilled  and  reliable  army,  to  which  the  des- 
tinies of  the  country  may  be  confidently  committed.  This  army 
is  young  and  untried  in  battle,  but  it  is  animated  by  the  highest 
spirit  and  is  capable  of  great  deeds. 

That  so  much  has  been  accomplished  and  such  an  army 
created  in  so  short  a  time  from  nothing  will  hereafter  be  regard- 
ed as  one  of  the  highest  glories  of  the  administration  and  the 
nation. 

Many  weeks — I  may  say  many  months — ago  this  Army  of  the 
Potomac  was  fully  in  condition  to  repel  any  attack ;  but  there  is 
a  vast  difference  between  that  and  the  efficiency  required  to 
enable  troops  to  attack  successfully  an  army  elated  by  victory 
and  entrenched  in  a  position  long  since  selected,  studied,  and 
fortified. 

In  the  earliest  papers  I  submitted  to  the  President  I  asked  for 
an  effective  and  movable  force  far  exceeding  the  aggregate  now 
on  the  banks  of  the  Potomac.  I  have  not  the  force  I  asked 
for. 

Even  when  in  a  subordinate  position  I  always  looked  beyond 
the  operations  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  I  was  never  satis- 
fied in  my  own  mind  with  a  barren  victory,  but  looked  to  com- 
bined and  decisive  operations. 

When  I  was  placed  in  command  of  the  armies  of  the  United 
States  I  immediately  turned  my  attention  to  the  whole  field  of 
operations,  regarding  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  as  only  one, 
while  the  most  important,  of  the  masses  under  my  command. 

I  confess  that  I  did  not  then  appreciate  the  total  absence  of 
a  general  plan  which  had  before  existed,  nor  did  I  know  that 
utter  disorganization  and  want  of  preparation  pervaded  the  West- 
em  armies. 

I  took  it  for  granted  that  they  were  nearly,  if  not  quite,  in 


McCLELLAN'S  PLAINS.  23  I 

condition  to  move  towards  the  fulfilment  of  my  plans.     1  acknow- 
ledge that  I  made  a  great  mistake. 

1  sent  at  once,  with  the  approval  of  the  executive,  officers  I 
considered  competent  to  command  in  Kentucky  and  Missouri. 
Their  instructions  looked  to  prompt  movements.  I  soon  found 
that  the  labor  of  creation  and  organization  had  to  be  performed 
there ;  transportation,  arms,  clothing,  artillery,  disci[)line — all 
were  wanting.     These  things  re(}uired  time  to  procure  them. 

The  generals  in  command  have  done  their  work  most  credi- 
tably, but  we  are  still  delayed.  I  had  hoped  that  a  general  ad- 
vance could  be  made  during  the  good  weather  of  December  ;  I 
was  mistaken. 

My  wish  was  to  gain  possession  of  the  Eastern  Tennessee 
Railroad  as  a  preliminary  movement,  then  to  follow  it  up  imme- 
diately by  an  attack  on  Nashville  and  Richmond,  as  nearly  at  the 
same  time  as  possible. 

I  have  ever  regarded  our  true  policy  as  being  that  of  fully 
preparing  ourselves,  and  then  seeking  for  the  most  decisive 
results.  1  do  not  wish  to  waste  life  in  useless  battles,  but  prefer 
to  strike  at  the  heart. 

Two  bases  of  operations  seem  to  present  themselves  for  the 
advance  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

ist.  That  of  Washington — its  present  position — involving  a 
direct  attack  upon  the  entrenched  positions  of  the  enemy  at 
Centreville,  Manassas,  etc.,  or  else  a  movement  to  turn  one  or 
both  flanks  of  those  positions,  or  a  combination  of  the  two 
plans. 

The  relative  force  of  the  two  armies  will  not  justify  an  attack 
on  both  flanks  ;  an  attack  on  his  left  flank  alone  involves  a  long 
line  of  wagon  communication,  and  cannot  prevent  him  from  col- 
lecting for  the  decisive  battle  all  the  detachments  now  on  his 
extreme  right  and  left. 

Should  we  attack  his  right  flank  by  the  line  of  the  Occocpian, 
and  a  crossing  of  the  Potomac  below  that  river  and  near  his 
batteries,  we  could  perhaps  prevent  the  junction  of  the  enemy's 
right  with  his  centre  (we  might  destroy  the  former) ;  we  would 
remove  the  obstructions  to  the  navigation  of  the  Potomac,  reduce 
the  length  of  wagon  transportation  by  establishing  new  depots  at 
the  nearest  points  of  the  Potomac,  and  strike  more  directly  his 
main  railway  communication. 

The  fords  of  the  Occoquan  below  the  mouth  of  the  Bull  Run 
are  watched  by  the  rebels  ;  batteries  are  said  to  be  placed  on  the 
heights  in  the  rear  (concealed  by  the  woods),  and  the  arrange- 
ment of  his  troops  is  such  that  he  can  oppose  some  considerable 
resistance  to  a  passage  of  that  stream.  Information  has  just  been 
received  to  the  effect  that  the  enemy  are  entrenching  a  line  of 
heights  extending  from  the  vicinity  of  Sangster's  (Union  Mills) 
towards  Evansport.      Early  in  January  Spriggs's  ford  was  occu- 


232  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

pied  by  General  Rhodes  with  3,600  men  and  eight  (8)  guns ; 
there  are  string  reasons  for  believing  that  Davis's  ford  is  occu- 
pied. These  circumstances  indicate  or  prove  that  the  enemy 
anticipates  the  movement  in  question,  and  is  prepared  to  resist  it. 
Assuming  for  the  present  that  this  operation  is  determined  upon, 
it  may  be  well  to  examine  briefly  its  probable  progress.  In  the 
present  state  of  affairs  our  column  (for  the  movement  of  so  large 
a  force  must  be  made  in  several  columns,  at  least  ^v^  or  six)  can 
reach  the  Accotink  without  danger ;  during  the  march  thence  to 
the  Occoquan  our  right  flank  becomes  exposed  to  an  attack  from 
Fairfax  Station,  Sangster's,  and  Union  Mills.  This  danger  must 
be  met  by  occupying  in  some  force  either  the  two  first-named 
places,  or,  better,  the  point  of  junction  of  the  roads  leading  thence 
to  the  village  of  Occoquan  ;  this  occupation  must  be  continued 
so  long  as  we  continue  to  draw  supplies  by  the  roads  from  this 
city,  or  until  a  battle  is  won. 

The  crossing  of  the  Occoquan  should  be  made  at  all  the  fords 
from  Wolf's  Run  to  the  mouth,  the  points  of  crossing  not  being 
necessarily  confined  to  the  fords  themselves.  Should  the  enemy 
occupy  this  line  in  force  we  must,  with  what  assistance  the 
flotilla  can  afford,  endeavor  to  force  the  passage  near  the  mouth, 
thus  forcing  the  enemy  to  abandon  the  whole  line  or  be  taken  in 
flank  himself. 

Having  gained  the  line  of  the  Occoquan,  it  would  be  neces- 
sary to  throw  a  column  by  the  shortest  route  to  Dumfries,  partly 
to  force  the  enemy  to  abandon  his  batteries  on  the  Potomac, 
partly  to  cover  our  left  flank  against  an  attackjrom  the  direction 
of  Acquia,  and,  lastly,  to  establish  our  communications  with  the 
river  by  the  best  roads,  and  thus  give  us  new  depots.  The  enemy 
would  by  this  time  have  occupied  the  line  of  the  Occoquan  above 
Bull  Run,  holding  Brentsville  in  force,  and  perhaps  extending  his 
lines  somewhat  further  to  the  southwest. 

Our  next  step  would  then  be  to  prevent  the  enemy  from  cross- 
ing the  Occoquan  between  Bull  Run  and  Broad  Run,  to  fall  upon 
our  right  flank  while  moving  on  Brentsville.  This  might  be 
effected  by  occupying  Bacon  Race  church  and  the  cross-roads 
near  the  mouth  of  Bull  Run,  or  still  more  effectually  by  moving 
to  the  fords  themselves  and  preventing  him  from  debouching  on 
our  side. 

These  operations  would  possibly  be  resisted,  and  it  would 
require  some  time  to  effect  them,  as,  nearly  at  the  same  time  as 
pojssible,  we  should  gain  the  fords  necessary  to  our  purposes  above 
Broad  Run.  Having  secured  our  right  flank,  it  would  become 
necessary  to  carry  Brentsville  at  any  cost,  for  we  could  not  leave 
it  between  the  right  flank  and  the  main  body.  The  final  move- 
ment on  the  railroad  must  be  determined  by  circumstances  exist- 
ing at  the  time. 

This  brief  sketch  brings  out  in  bold  relief  the  great  advan- 


AtcCLELLAN'S  PLANS.  2^^ 

tage  possessed  by  the  enemy  in  the  strong  central  position  he 
occupies,  with  roads  diverging  in  every  direction,  and  a  strong 
line  of  defence  enabling  him  to  remain  on  the  defensive,  with  a 
small  force  on  one  flank,  while  he  concentrates  everything  on  the 
other  for  a  decisive  action. 

Should  we  place  a  portion  of  our  force  in  front  of  Centre- 
ville,  while  the  rest  crosses  the  Occoquan,  we  commit  the  error  of 
dividing  our  army  by  a  very  difficult  obstacle,  and  by  a  distance 
too  great  to  enable  the  two  parts  to  support  each  other,  should 
either  be  attacked  by  the  masses  of  the  enemy  while  the  other  is 
held  in  check. 

I  should  perhaps  have  dwelt  more  decidedly  on  the  fact  that 
the  force  left  near  Sangster's  must  be  allowed  to  remain  some- 
where on  that  side  of  the  Occoquan  until  the  decisive  battle  is 
over,  so  as  to  cover  our  retreat  in  the  event  of  disaster,  unless  it 
should  be  decided  to  select  and  entrench  a  new  base  somewhere 
near  Dumfries — a  proceeding  involving  much  time. 

After  the  passage  of  the  Occoquan  by  the  main  army  this 
covering  force  could  be  drawn  into  a  more  central  and  less 
exposed  position — say  Brimstone  Hill  or  nearer  the  Occoquan. 
In  this  latitude  the  weather  will  for  a  considerable  period  be  very 
uncertain,  and  a  movement  commenced  in  force  on  roads  in 
tolerably  firm  condition  will  be  liable,  almost  certain,  to  be  much 
delayed  by  rains  and  snow.  It  will,  therefore,  be  next  to  impos- 
sible to  surprise  the  enemy  or  take  him  at  a  disadvantage  by 
rapid  manoeuvres.  Our  slow  progress  will  enable  him  to  divine 
our  purposes  and  take  his  measures  accordingly.  The  probabil- 
ity is,  from  the  best  information  we  possess,  that  the  enemy  has 
improved  the  roads  leading  to  his  lines  of  defence,  while  we  have 
to  work  as  we  advance. 

Bearing  in  mind  what  has  been  said,  and  the  present  unprece- 
dented and  impassable  condition  of  the  roads,  it  will  be  evident 
that  no  precise  period  can  be  fixed  upon  for  the  movement  on 
this  line.  Nor  can  its  duration  be  closely  calculated  ;  it  seems 
certain  that  many  weeks  may  elapse  before  it  is  possible  to  com- 
mence the  march.  Assuming  the  success  of  this  operation,  and 
the  defeat  of  the  enemy  as  certain,  the  question  at  once  arises  as 
to  the  importance  of  the  results  gained.  I  think  these  results 
would  be  confined  to  the  possession  of  the  field  of  battle,  the 
evacuation  of  the  line  of  the  upper  Potomac  by  the  enemy,  and 
the  moral  effect  of  the  victory — important  results,  it  is  true,  but 
not  decisive  of  the  war,  nor  securing  the  destruction  of  the 
enemy's  main  army,  for  he  could  fall  back  upon  other  positions 
and  fight  us  again  and  again,  should  the  condition  of  his  troops 
permit.  If  he  is  in  no  condition  to  fight  us  again  out  of  the 
range  of  the  entrenchments  at  Richmond,  we  would  find  it  a  very 
difficult  and  tedious  matter  to  follow  him  up  there,  for  he  would 
destroy  his  railroad  bridges  and  otherwise  impede  our  progress 


234  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

through  a  region  where  the  roads  are  as  bad  as  they  well  can  be, 
and  we  would  probably  find  ourselves  forced  at  last  to  change 
the  whole  theatre  of  war,  or  to  seek  a  shorter  land  route  to  Rich- 
mond, with  a  smaller  available  force  and  at  an  expenditure  of 
much  more  time,  than  were  we  to  adopt  the  short  line  at  once. 
We  would  also  have  forced  the  enemy  to  concentrate  his  forces 
and  perfect  his  defensive  measures  at  the  very  points  where  it  is 
desirable  to  strike  him  when  least  prepared. 

2d.  The  second  base  of  operations  available  for  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  is  that  of  the  lower  Chesapeake  bay,  which  affords 
the  shortest  possible  land  route  to  Richmond  and  strikes  direct- 
ly at  the  heart  of  the  enemy's  power  in  the  east. 

The  roads  in  that  region  are  passable  at  all  seasons  of  the 
year. 

The  country  now  alluded  to  is  much  more  favorable  for 
offensive  operations  than  that  in  front  of  Washington  (which  is 
very  unfavorable):  much  more  level,  more  cleared  land,  the  woods 
less  dense,  the  soil  more  sandy,  and  the  spring  some  two  or  three 
weeks  earlier.  A  movement  in  force  on  that  line  obliges  the 
enemy  to  abandon  his  entrenched  position  at  Manassas,  in  order 
to  hasten  to  cover  Richmond  and  Norfolk.  He  must  do  this  ; 
for  should  he  permit  us  to  occupy  Richmond  his  destruction  can 
be  averted  only  by  entirely  defeating  us  in  a  battle  in  which  he 
must  be  the  assailant.  This  movement,  if  successful,  gives  us  the 
capital,  the  communications,  the  supplies  of  the  rebels  ;  Norfolk 
would  fall  ;  all  the  waters  of  the  Chesapeake  would  be  ours  ;  all 
Virginia  would  be  in  our  power,  and  the  enemy  forced  to  abandon 
Tennessee  and  North  Carolina.  The  alternative  presented  to  the 
enemy  would  be,  to  beat  us  in  a  position  selected  by  ourselves, 
disj)erse,  or  pass  beneath  the  Caudine  Forks. 

Should  we  be  beaten  in  a  battle  we  have  a  perfectly  secure 
retreat  down  the  Peninsula  upon  Fort  Monroe,  with  our  flanks 
perfectly  covered  by  the  fleet. 

During  the  whole  movement  our  left  flank  is  covered  by  the 
water.  Our  right  is  secure,  for  the  reason  that  the  enemy  is  too 
distant  to  reach  us  in  time  ;  he  can  only  oppose  us  in  front. 
We  bring  our  fleet  into  full  play. 

After  a  successful  battle  our  position  would  be — Bumside 
forming  our  left ;  Norfolk  held  securely ;  our  centre  connecting 
Bumside  with  Buell,  both  by  Raleigh  and  Lynchburg ;  Buell  in 
Eastern  Tennessee  and  North  Alabama ;  Halleck  at  Nashville 
and  Memphis. 

The  next  movement  would  be  to  connect  with  Sheniian  on 
the  left  by  reducing  Wilmington  and  Charleston  ;  to  advance 
our  centre  into  South  Carolina  and  Georgia ;  to  push  Buell  either 
towards  Montgomery  or  to  unite  with  the  main  army  in  Cteorgia ; 
to  throw  Halleck  southward  to  meet  the  naval  expedition  from 
New  Orleans. 


McCLELLAN'S  PLANS,  235 

We  should  then  be  in  a  condition  to  reduce  at  our  leisure  all 
the  Southern  seaports  ;  to  occupy  all  the  avenues  of  communica- 
tion ;  to  use  the  great  outlet  of  the  Mississippi ;  to  re-establish 
our  government  and  arms  in  Arkansas,  Louisiana,  and  Texas ;  to 
force  the  slaves  to  labor  for  our  subsistence  instead  of  that  of 
the  rebels  ;  to  bid  defiance  to  all  foreign  interference.  Such  is 
the  object  1  have  ever  had  in  view ;  this  is  the  general  plan 
which  I  hope  to  accomplish. 

For  many  long  months  1  have  labored  to  prepare  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac  to  play  its  part  in  the  programme  ;  from  the  day 
when  1  was  placed  in  command  of  all  our  armies  I  have  exerted 
myself  to  place  all  the  other  armies  in  such  a  condition  that  they, 
too,  could  perform  their  allotted  duties. 

Should  it  be  determined  to  operate  from  the  lower  Chesa- 
peake, the  point  of  landing  which  promises  the  most  brilliant 
result  is  Urbana,  on  the  lower  Rappahannock.  This  point  is 
easily  reached  by  vessels  of  heavy  draught ;  it  is  neither  occupied 
nor  observed  by  the  enemy ;  it  is  but  one  march  from  West 
Point,  the  key  of  that  region,  and  thence  but  two  marches  to 
Richmond.  A  rapid  movement  from  Urbana  would  probably 
cut  off  Magruder  in  the  Peninsula  and  enable  us  to  occupy 
Richmond  before  it  could  be  strongly  reinforced.  Should  we 
fail  in  that  we  could,  with  the  co-operation  of  the  navy,  cross  the 
James  and  throw  ourselves  in  rear  of  Richmond,  thus  forcing  the 
enemy  to  come  out  and  attack  us,  fur  his  position  would  be 
untenable  with  us  on  the  southern  bank  of  the  river. 

Should  circumstances  render  it  not  advisable  to  land  at 
Urbana  we  can  use  Mobjack  bay  ;  or,  the  worst  coming  to 
the  worst,  we  can  take  Fort  Monroe  as  a  base  and  operate  with 
complete  security,  although  with  less  celerity  and  brilliancy  of 
results,  up  the  Peninsula. 

To  reach  whatever  point  may  be  selected  as  a  base,  a  large 
amount  of  cheap  water  transportation  must  be  collected,  consist- 
ing mainly  of  canal-boats,  barges,  wood-boats,  schooners,  etc., 
towed  by  small  steamers,  all  of  a  very  different  character  from 
those  required  for  all  previous  expeditions.  This  can  certainly 
be  accomplished  within  thirty  days  from  the  time  the  order  is 
given.  I  propose,  as  the  best  possible  plan  that  can,  in  my  judg- 
ment, be  adopted,  to  select  Urbana  as  a  landing-place  for  the 
first  detachments  ;  to  transport  by  water  four  divisions  of  in- 
fantry with  their  batteries,  the  regular  infantry,  a  few  wagons,  one 
bridge-train,  and  a  few  squadrons  of  cavalry,  making  the  vicinity 
of  Hooker's  position  the  place  of  embarkation  for  as  many  as 
possible  ;  to  move  the  regular  cavalry  and  reserve  artillery,  the 
remaining  bridge-trains  and  wagons,  to  a  point  somewhere  near 
Cape  Lookout,  then  ferry  them  over  the  river  by  means  of  North 
river  ferry-boats,  march  them  over  to  the  Rappahannock  (cover- 
ing the  movement  by  an  infantry  force  near  Heathsville),  and 


236  McCLELLAN'S  OlVM  STORY. 

to  cross  the  Rappahannock  in  a  similar  way.  The  expense  and 
difficulty  of  the  movement  will  then  be  very  much  diminished 
(a  saving  of  transportation  of  about  10,000  horses)  and  the  result 
none  the  less  certain. 

The  concentration  of  the  cavalry,  etc.,  on  the  lower  counties 
of  Maryland  can  be  effected  without  exciting  suspicion,  and  the 
movement  made  without  delay  from  that  cause. 

This  movement,  if  adopted,  will  not  at  all  expose  the  city  of 
Washington  to  danger. 

The  total  force  to  be  thrown  upon  the  new  line  would  be, 
according  to  circumstances,  from  110,000  to  140,000.  I  hope  to 
use  the  latter  number  by  bringing  fresh  troops  into  Washington 
and  still  leaving  it  quite  safe.  I  fully  realize  that  in  all  projects 
offered  time  will  probably  be  the  most  valuable  consideration. 
It  is  my  decided  opinion  that,  in  that  point  of  view,  the  second 
plan  should  be  adopted.  It  is  possible,  nay,  highly  probable, 
that  the  weather  and  state  of  the  roads  may  be  such  as  to  delay 
the  direct  movement  from  Washington,  with  its  unsatisfactory 
results  and  great  risks,  far  beyond  the  time  required  to  complete 
the  second  plan.  In  the  first  case  we  can  ^^n  no  definite  time  for 
an  advance.  The  roads  have  gone  from  bad  to  worse.  Nothing 
like  their  present  condition  was  ever  known  here  before  ;  they 
are  impassable  at  present.  We  are  entirely  at  the  mercy  of  the 
weather.  It  is  by  no  means  certain  that  we  can  beat  them  at 
Manassas.  On  the  other  line  I  regard  success  as  certain  by  all 
the  chances  of  war.  We  demoralize  the  enemy  by  forcing  him 
to  abandon  his  prepared  position  for  one  which  we  have  chosen, 
in  which  all  is  in  our  favor,  and  where  success  must  produce 
immense  results. 

My  judgment,  as  a  general,  is  clearly  in  favor  of  this  project. 
Nothing  is  certain  in  war,  but  all  the  chances  are  in  favor  of 
this  movement.  So  much  am  1  in  favor  of  the  southern  line  of 
operations  that  I  would  prefer  the  move  from  Fortress  Monroe 
as  a  base,  as  a  certain  though  less  brilliant  movement  than  that 
from  Urbana,  to  an  attack  upon  Manassas. 

I  know  that  his  excellency  the  President,  you,  and  I  all  agree 
in  our  wishes ;  and  that  these  wishes  are,  to  bring  this  war  to  a 
close  as  promptly  as  the  means  in  our  possession  will  permit.  I 
believe  that  the  mass  of  the  people  have  entire  confidence  in  us — 
I  am  sure  of  it.  Let  us,  then,  look  only  to  the  great  result  to  be 
accomplished,  and  disregard  everything  else. 

I  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen,  Commanding. 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 

This  letter  must  have  produced  some  effect  upon  the  mind  of 


TRA  iVSPOR  TS.  237 

the  President,  since  the  execution  of  his  order  was  not  required, 
iUtiiuugh  it  was  not  revoked  as  (ormally  as  it  had  been  issued. 
Many  verbal  conferences  ensued,  in  which,  among  other  things, 
it  was  determined  to  collect  as  many  canal-boats  as  possible, 
with  a  view  to  employ  them  largely  in  the  transportation  of  the 
army  to  the  lower  Chesapeake.  The  idea  was  at  one  time  enter- 
tained by  the  President  to  use  them  in  forming  a  bridge  across 
the  Potomac  near  Liveri)ool  Point,  in  order  to  throw  the  army 
over  at  that  point ;  but  this  was  subseciuently  abandoned.  It  was 
also  found  by  experience  that  it  would  recpiire  much  time  to  pre- 
pare the  canal-boats  for  use  in  transportation  to  the  extent  that 
had  been  anticipated. 

Finally,  on  the  27th  of  Feb.,  1862,  the  Secretary  of  War,  by 
the  authority  of  the  President,  instructed  Mr.  John  Tucker, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War,  to  procure  at  once  the  necessary 
steamers  and  sailing  craft  to  transport  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac to  its  new  field  of  operations. 

The  following  extract  from  the  report  of  Mr.  Tucker,  dated 
April  5,  will  show  the  nature  and  progress  of  this  well-executed 
service  : 


"  I  was  called  to  Washington  by  telegraph,  on  17th  Jan.  last, 
by  Assistant  Secretary  of  War  Thomas  A.  Scott.  1  was  informed 
that  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  wished  to  see  me.  From  him  I  learned 
that  he  desired  to  know  if  transportation  on  smooth  water  could 
be  obtained  to  move  at  one  time,  for  a  short  distance,  about 
50,000  troops,  10,000  horses,  1,000  wagons,  13  batteries,  and  the 
usual  equipment  of  such  an  anny.  He  frankly  stated  to  me  that 
he  had  always  supposed  such  a  movement  entirely  feasible  until 
two  experienced  (piartermasters  had  recently  reported  it  imprac- 
ticable, in  their  judgment.  A  few  days  afterwards  I  re]>orted 
to  Gen.  McClellan  that  I  was  entirely  confident  the  transports 
could  be  commanded,  and  stated  the  mode  by  which  his  ol)ject 
could  be  accomplished.  A  week  or  two  afterwards  I  had  the 
honor  of  an  interview  with  the  President  and  Gen.  McClellan, 
when  the  subject  was  further  discussed,  and  especially  as  to  the 
time  required. 

**  I  expressed  the  opinion  that  as  the  movement  of  the  horses 
and  wagons  would  have  to  be  made  chiefly  by  schooners  and 
barges,  that  as  each  schooner  would  require  to  be  properly  fitted 
for  the  protection  of  the  horses,  and  furnished  with  a  supply  of 
water  and  forage,  and  each  transport  for  the  troops  provided 
with  water,  I  did  not  deem  it  pnident  to  assume  that  such  an 


23S  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

expedition  could  start  within  thirty  days  from  the  time  the  order 
was  given. 

"  The  President  and  Gen.  McClellan  both  urgently  stated  the 
vast  importance  of  an  earlier  movement.  I  replied  that  if  favor- 
able winds  prevailed,  and  there  was  great  despatch  in  loading, 
the  time  might  be  materially  diminished. 

"  On  the  14th  Feb.  you  (Secretary  of  War)  advertised  for 
transports  of  various  descriptions,  inviting  bids  on  the  27th  Feb. 
I  was  informed  that  the  proposed  movement  by  water  was  de- 
cided upon.  That  evening  the  quartermaster-general  was  in- 
formed of  the  decision.  Directions  were  given  to  secure  the 
transportation  ;  any  assistance  was  tendered.  He  promptly  de- 
tailed to  this  duty  two  most  efficient  assistants  in  his  department. 
Col.  Rufus  Ingalls  was  stationed  at  Annapolis,  where  it  was  then 
proposed  to  embark  the  troops,  and  Capt.  Henry  C.  Hodges  was 
directed  to  meet  me  in  Philadelphia  to  attend  to  chartering 
the  vessels.  With  these  arrangements  I  left  Washington  on  the 
28th  Feb. 

"  I  beg  to  hand  herewith  a  statement,  prepared  by  Capt. 
Hodges,  of  the  vessels  chartered,  which  exhibits  the  prices  paid 
and  parties  from  whom  they  were  taken  : 


113  steamers,  at  an  average  price  per  day,       $215   10 

188  schooners,    "  "  "  24  45 

88  barges,  "  "  "  14  27 


"  In  thirty-seven  days  from  the  time  I  received  the  order  in 
Washington  (and  most  of  it  was  accomplished  in  thirty  days), 
these  vessels  transported  from  Perryville,  Alexandria,  and  Wash- 
ington to  Fort  Monroe  (the  place  of  departure  having  been 
changed,  which  caused  delay)  121,500  men,  14,592  animals,  1,150 
wagons,  44  batteries,  74  ambulances,  besides  pontoon  bridges, 
telegraph  materials,  and  the  enormous  quantity  of  equipage,  etc., 
required  for  an  army  of  such  magnitude.  The  only  loss  of  which 
I  have  heard  is  eight  mules  and  nine  barges,  which  latter  went 
ashore  in  a  gale  within  a  few  miles  of  Fort  Monroe,  the  cargoes 
being  saved.  With  this  trifling  exception  not  the  slightest  acci- 
dent has  occurred,  to  my  knowledge. 

**  I  respectfully,  but  confidently,  submit  that,  for  economy 
and  celerity  of  movement,  this  expedition  is  without  a  parallel  on 
record. 


"John  Tucker, 
Assistant  Secretary  of  War.' 


The  same- order  which  confined  my  command  to  the  Depart- 


DEFENCE   OF   THE   CAPITAL,  239 

ment  of  the  Potomac  placed  Buell  under  Halleck,  and  created 
the  Mountain  Department,  extending  from  the  western  limits  of 
the  Department  of  the  Potomac  to  the  eastern  boundary  of  Hal- 
leck's  command.* 

The  Department  of  the  Potomac  then  included  all  that  part 
of  Virginia  east  of  the  Alleghanies  and  north  of  the  James  river, 
with  the  exception  of  Fortress  Monroe  and  the  country  within 
sixty  miles  thereof  ;  also  the  District  of  Columbia  and  the  States 
of  Maryland,  Delaware,  Pennsylvania,  and  New  Jersey.  During 
the  latter  part  of  March,  as  I  have  already  stated,  Fortress  Monroe 
and  its  dependencies  were  added  to  my  command  (but  the  order 
was  countermanded  on  the  3d  of  April).  Thus,  when  about  to 
start  for  the  Peninsula  it  was  my  duty  to  provide  for  the  security 
of  Washington  and  the  Shenandoah  Valley,  and  all  operations  in 
that  region  were  under  my  direction. 

It  was  very  clear  to  me  that  the  enemy  did  not  abandon  their 
positions  on  the  Potomac  and  near  Manassas  without  some  good 
reason.  I  knew  that  they  could  not  intend  to  return  immediate- 
ly, that  they  would  never  undertake  the  assault  of  the  works 
around  Washington,  and  that  from  the  moment  the  operations 
by  the  lower  Chesapeake  Were  developed  they  would  be  tied 
down  to  the  vicinity  of  Richmond  so  long  as  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  remained  anywhere  near  the  James  river.  All  they 
could  attempt  would  be  a  raid  in  the  Shenandoah.     I   therefore 

*  The  following  memoranda  were  found  lying  with  the  manuscript  at 
this  point  : 

Memoranda. — On  the  sih  of  March  there  were  no  transports  of 
importance  at  Annapolis,  some  at  Perryville  and  Washington,  and  many 
engaged  and  fitting  up  in  New  York. 

On  March  12  ihere  were  at  Alexandria  transports  for  15,000  infantry 
and  one  squadron,  but  they  were  not  coaled  or  ready  to  receive  the  troops. 
The  pontoon  trains  and  engineers'  tools  were  loaded  up. 

March  17  the  leading  division — Hamilton's — embarked. 

March  20  there  were  eight  to  ten  horse-transports  at  the  wharves  of 
Alexandria  and  as  many  more  at  anchor.  Artillery-transports  ready  at  the 
wharves. 

March  21 — Porter's  artillery  in  Alexandria,  but  no  sufficient  accommo- 
dation for  the  horses  and  no  arrangement  of  vessels  for  infantry  and 
artillery. 

March  22 — Porter's  division  moved  off  in  splendid  style  and  well  pro- 
vided ;  reached  Fortress  Monroe  on  the  23d. 

March  23 — Only  150  horses  fit  for  artillery  in  Alexandria  depot ;  300 
expected  next  day. 

March  24 — Many  new  regiments  arriving  from  the  North.  No  ad- 
ditional transportation.     Hunt  and  Averill  can  embark. 


240  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

regarded  a  full  garrison  for  Washington  and  20,000  men  for 
the  Shenandoah  as  more  than  enough  under  existing  circum- 
stances. 

The  instructions  I  gave  on  the  i6th  of  March  were  to  the 
effect  that  Manassas  Junction  should  be  strongly  entrenched, 
using  the  enemy's  works  as  far  as  possible,  and  that  Gen.  Banks 
should  put  the  mass  of  his  forces  there,  with  grand  guards  at 
Warrenton  or  Warrenton  Junction,  and,  if  possible,  as  far  out  as 
the  Rappahannock ;  the  country  to  be  thoroughly  scouted  by 
cavalry,  the  railway  from  Washington  to  Manassas  and  thence  to 
Strasburg  to  be  at  once  repaired  and  put  in  running  order,  all 
the  bridges  to  be  protected  by  block-houses  ;  as  soon  as  the 
railway  was  in  operation  a  brigade  of  infantry  with  two  batteries 
to  be  strongly  entrenched  at  or  near  the  point  where  the  railroad 
crosses  the  Shenandoah  ;  Chester  Gaj)  to  be  also  occupied  by  an 
infantry  detachment  well  entrenched  ;  two  regiments  of  cavalry 
to  be  added  to  this  brigade  to  scour  the  valley  thoroughly. 
Under  this  arrangement  the  immediate  approaches  to  Washing- 
ton would  be  covered  by  a  strong  force  well  entrenched,  and 
able  to  fall  back  upon  the  city  if  overpowered  ;  while  if  the 
enemy  advanced  down  the  Shenandoah  the  force  entrenched  at 
Strasburg  would  be  able  to  hold  him  in  check  until  assistance 
could  reach  them  by  rail  from  Manassas.  If  these  measures  had 
been  carried  into  effect  Jackson's  subsequent  advance  down  the 
Shenandoah  would  have  been  impracticable  ;  but,  unfortunately, 
as  soon  as  I  started  for  the  Peninsula  this  region  was  with- 
drawn from  my  command,  and  my  instructions  were  wholly 
disregarded. 

Again,  with  Manassas  entrenched  as  I  directed.  Pope  would 
have  had  a  secure  base  of  oi)erations  from  which  to  manoeuvre, 
and  the  result  of  his  campaign  might  have  been  very  different. 
Certainly,  if  I  had  resumed  command  at  Manassas  instead  of 
within  the  defences  of  Washington,  Lee  would  not  have  ven- 
tured to  cross  the  Potomac. 

On  the  ist  of  April,  in  view  of  what  had  occurred  meanwhile, 
I  temporarily  changed  the  arrangements  to  the  extent  of  leaving 
Banks  in  the  Shenandoah.  I  placed  Abercrombie  in  command 
at  Warrenton  and  Manassas,  under  Banks's  general  orders,  with 
7,780  men  at  the  former  and  10,859  men  at  the  latter  place,  and 
18,000  men  in  Washington,  so  that  if  Abercrombie  was  obliged  tO 


REDUCED  FORCES.  24 1 

retire  upon  Washington  there  would  be  concentrated  there  36,639 
men,  besides  1,350  on  the  lower  Potomac  and  35,467  under 
Banks  in  the  Shenandoah. 

In  the  event  of  an  advance  of  the  enemy  in  force  in  the  Shen- 
andoah Valley,  Banks  could  have  withdrawn  to  his  aid  at  least 
10,000  men  from  Abercrombie's  command,  or,  in  the  reverse  case, 
could  have  gone  to  the  latter's  assistance  with  at  least  30,000 
men,  leaving  his  Strasburg  entrenchments  well  guarded.  Had  I 
remained  in  command  I  would  have  seen  to  it  that  the  entrench- 
ments referred  to  were  promptly  executed. 

To  say  that  the  force  I  left  behind  me  was,  under  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case,  insufficient  is  an  untruth  which  proves  either 
complete  ignorance  or  wilful  malevolence.  The  quality  of  the 
troops  I  left  was  amply  good  for  the  purposes  in  view. 

The  administration  actually  retained  about  134,000  for  the 
defence  of  Washington,  leaving  me  but  85,000  for  operations. 

Gen.  Wadsworth  received  clear  instructions  as  to  his  duties. 
On  the  4th  of  April  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah  was  formed 
into  a  department  under  Gen.  Banks,  while  the  Department  of 
the  Rappahannock  was  constituted  for  McDowell.  This  depart- 
ment embraced  "  that  portion  of  Virginia  east  of  the  Blue  Ridge 
and  west  of  the  Potomac  and  the  Fredericksburg  and  Rich- 
mond Railroad,  including  the  District  of  Columbia  and  the 
country  between  the  Potomac  and  the  Patuxent." 

Thus,  instead  of  operating  with  an  army  ot  156,000  men 
under  my  immediate  command,  with  control  of  all  the  forces, 
supi)lies,  and  operations  from  the  Atlantic  to  the  Alleghanies  and 
from  the  North  Carolina  line  to  New  York,  I  was  reduced  to 
85,000  men  and  a  little  strip  of  ground  bounded  on  the  west  by 
the  railroad  from  Fredericksburg  to  Richmond,  on  the  south  by 
the  James  from  Richmond  to  the  mouth  of  the  Appomattox,  on 
the  east  by  a  curved  line  running  from  the  mouth  of  the  Appo- 
mattox to  a  point  on  the  Chickahominy  between  Long's  and  Bot- 
tom's bridges,  thence  to  the  White  House  on  the  Pamunkey, 
thence  through  King  and  Queen  Court-House  to  a  point  on  the 
Rappahannock  about  ten  miles  above  Urbana,  and  thence  to  the 
mouth  of  the  Potomac,  the  northern  boundary  being  the  Poto- 
mac from  the  mouth  of  Acquia  creek  downward.  My  bases  of 
operations  at  Washington  and  Fortress  Monroe  were  both  re- 
moved from  my  control,  and  I  remained  simply  with  my  85,000 


242  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

men,  and  not  even    the  ground  they  occupied   until  I   passed 
beyond  White  House. 

Add  to  this  consideration  that  I  had  now  only  too  good  rea- 
son to  feel  assured  that  the  administration,  and  especially  the 
Secretary  of  War,  were  inimical  to  me  and  did  not  desire  my  suc- 
cess, and  some  conception  may  be  formed  of  the  weight  upon  my 
mind  at  a  time  when  whatever  hopefulness  and  vigor  I  possessed 
were  fully  needed  to  overcome  the  difficulties  in  my  path. 


\ 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Letters  and  despatches  relating  to  subjects  treated  in  the  foregoing  and 

foliovring  chapters. 

HALLECK  TO  McCLELLAN. 


St.  Louis,  March  lo,  8  p.m. 

Gen.  McClellan  :  Reserves  intended  for  Gen.  Curtis  will 
now  be  drawn  in  as  rapidly  as  possible  and  sent  to  the  Tennessee 
river.  I  purpose  going  there  in  a  few  days.  That  is  now  the 
great  strategic  line  of  the  Western  campaign,  and  I  am  surprised 
that  Gen.  Buell  should  hesitate  to  reinforce  me.  He  was  too  late 
at  Fort  Donelson,  as  Gen.  Hunter  has  been  in  Arkansas.  I  am 
obliged  to  make  my  calculations  independent  of  both.  Believe 
me,  general,  you  make  a  serious  mistake  in  having  three  inde- 
pendent commands  in  the  West.  There  never  will  and  never 
can  be  any  co-operation  at  the  critical  moment ;  all  military  his- 
tory proves  it.  You  will  regret  your  decision  against  me  on  this 
point.  Your  friendship  for  individuals  has  influenced  your  judg- 
ment Be  it  so.  I  shall  soon  fight  a  great  battle  on  the  Tennes- 
see river,  unsupported  it  seems ;  but  if  successful  it  will  settle 
the  campaign  in  the  West. 

"  H.  W.  Halleck, 


By  the  time  this  reached  me  I  was  no  longer  the  general-in- 
chief.  It  may  suffice  to  say  that  I  had  never  been  intimate  with 
Buell,  and  that  my  friendship  for  him  grew  out  of  my  admiration 
for  his  excellent  character  and  high  soldierly  qualities.  I  regard- 
ed him  as  a  far  better  soldier  than  Halleck,  and  the  subsequent 
course  of  events  did  not  modify  my  views.  If  I  had  placed  any 
one  in  command  of  all  the  operations  in  the  West  it  would  have 
been  Buell  and  not  Halleck.  I  could  not  then  place  Buell  in 
that  position,  and  was  consequently  obliged  to  do  the  best  I 
could  with  a  divided  command. 

BURiVSIDE  TO  McCLELLAN. 

Unofficial  letter. 

Roanoke  Island,  jftarch  5,  i84ff. 
My  dear  Mac.  :  My  official  report  will  be  short  to-day,  as 


244  MfCn^JLLjjrs  c^m^jt  ^t&mt^ 

f*^/W\^  <4  \m)Q0^^z:txarjs:  hsa  tnasssQic^  moot  aedt  fbefli     Ic  »  Sss:  (So 

ff¥^.  t/p  vkf  fj'jvi^^tiensi&l^  to  j«:;a  ckot  ve  aare  wrmmi^  <sxl  :&£:  axsi:^ 
;rm.mntnt(«'>ft^  »»!tr  -wi^p^j^lea  Baling  armr«£  Muse  onaht  iobus:  m  «if"- 

p'/vi^l'/ie.  All!  Ritrur/*  it»ir%ax&  »  ims  6ii6affd,lkiM  <of  PjcriK-'ii.  saxA 
h^ti  ^4  F-viCitr^i  ;  aoiwf  I  ferj^  !!is-  ^  t&en  alt  4Qiqi  5*o«fiffd  i>HiBtiiCTrygr. 
ka^in^  0>i.  Haoiikkiei^  wish  uliree  ttrpmewa^  m  fD^imi&zr&S  'Cif  !i^ 

r^lif'yA)  5i<r9r  hcTM: ;  lya'tt  I  aon  smq^  sosrer  •<>€  iffi,  2»  ve  czssmA  csDoiHsSte 
i^^ypi^  mii'yfe  filusr^  owe  ^'^jd  dzj  in  t&e  vedL  B^t  ve  sirt  gtmrvg 
t^i^vt/i!  tfp  ^tfjfTSs^  30»  tlutt  ve  don^t  miml  da^rsoL  H'ov  v<:  hzrc 
^^.M^fA  "w'^h  w»  Ikile  k>9»  Q^  lift  is  to  me  a  niiirftck:.     I  icdi 

iMrm^  ^Mt  de^f  here  I  came  very  near  mowing  upoa  [iEc- 
phhj^  fmikm%  my  hesAf\u2LTXer%  there^  and  ntsbing  s<o«iBe  colmmss 
is^  !/>  ^yism  1^  f/fidgr^  c>^  the  Biack  \%'ater«  Ncrtt^war^  and  Mesi- 
]|^ir»^  3ff»4  then  r?t^  whh  my  entire  fci^ce  apon  W'tMoa  and  Gas- 
8/yAi.  1^9 1  it  i«  a  mk^r  mfjfvt:  with  my  5»nall  force,  and  josir  orders 
*r<*r  fl/'y  ^fM  %ff  New  Heme.  The  same  mo%'e  can  be  made  after  we 
^ei  StTW  Heme  it(  we  succeed),  if  3rou  will  send  me  men  enough 
— ^i^r  fU/^i^Ae  the  f<f>r<;e.  I  feel  *are  that  I  can  cut  the  enemy's 
r^/mwmifjUP'/ti^  at  Weldvn  and  Gaston  with  an  additional  force 
fA  eif*::n  two  ffrptnenVn.  In  case  you  decide  to  send  them  you 
mm^.  fit  A  h^r^ftate  t/>  send  any  division  you  like,  as  I  am  quite 
wi%n%  in  wrfv^r  under  any  other  officer.  You  know,  Mac,  what 
I  tf:^n%^  mA  th^t  'u  |>ea#  c  and  quietness  at  home.  If  I  succeed 
m  ^-fkur^  S'r»  l^rm<c  and  Fort  Macon  I  shall  at  once  return  t«» 
<h)^  phf.f%  Huhr^^  otherwise  ordered  by  you.  I  shall  send  oflF 
M^syAh*':i  iwiii  yrry  ^Mm,  U  wc  mo%'e  in  the  interior  we  will 
f^-^/*!!  ff^ff''  ^nuftn*t — %^y  150 — and  teams.  Please  let  me  know 
^»lJJ/  **  to  ynnt  w\%\w,\  and  I'll  follow  them  out  to  the  letter. 

''  li!  m*ni  \**z  a  gr^at  j^ratifiralion  to  you  to  see  all  your  plans 
»♦,'  i*\\  \fntH  tA  fh'r  7ii%i\y  <^«i'  rccd.  Hold  on,  old  fellow,  and  don't 
Vi  A)^t.  yMUfr4u%  driver  yo<i.  You  know  old  Davy  Crockett's 
ivy}.vi(  *  S'**  ^'i'^''  y'^iV"  riKht,  then  go  ahead.*  ...  I  have  two 
\/'^*^'*'\  v'jx  ^*i  SiHiu  ihc-  hrtnnfr%  over  the  Trent  at  New  Berne  and 
^^  i  vf  *!f  W^^hit*i(UfU,  iUf'  r*i'*ijlt  of  which  I  hoped  to  report  by 
'f»'*  *f^j^<yl,  h^i^.  ^h^.  h^f\  w^i^iU^f  \\'d%  doubtless  delayed  them. 

**  yff*if  old  fri<ffid, 

"  BURXSIDE." 


^AMK  TO  SAME. 

'/tf.ffi'hfl 

^  **  Ni  w  WvMSV.y  March  15,  1862. 

"  iVt  V  hii^k  Mi^'       Wt'vt*  ijol  Nt.'w  Berne,  and  I  hope  to  have 


4 


**  Pve  foDowed  r'^JrT  mstmction?  10  the  kfner,  and  iuivt  suc- 
cetfded. 

*•  YouH  comt  om  all  rigiii.  Yoc  know  my  faith  m  ym. 
Hoj>e  yonli  sacm  wij>t  tbem  c»ni.  ...  If  I  had  4C,ooc  men  like 
these  i  ccmld  do  almost  aurthing. 

*'YouT  cud  friend. 


SAME  TO  SAME. 

Urwfidal. 

**  Xrw  Berke,  May  5,  iS6r. 

**Mv  T>EAii  Mac:  We're  now  ie  a  state  of  'stand  stilL' 
Fon  MacoE  has  t»een  reduced,  and  I  am  cirderini:  Parke  nj)  to 
thif  jilace  vkh  hif^  men.  We  have  mcire  sickness  thar  I  like  to 
acknowledge  ;  but  we  are  imjiroving,  and  are  not  weak  now.  If 
VDU  want  us  t:»  do  arrthing  wilhir  our  strength  well  do  it. 
Don':  fal]  to  command  me.  .  .  .  When  you  start  the  retels 
from  Yorktown  please  ie:  me  know  at  c»nce,  and  I'L  give  them 
a  kick  in  the  fink  tha:  will  make  them  see  stars. 

**  Stick  to  them,  old  fcDow,  and  don't  aDow  the  j»oliticians  to 
get  you  into  a  controver?}'.  You  have  acted  wisely,  and  yc»u*l] 
come  om  all  right.  In  Gc»d  is  c»ut  misL  Tell  me  what  to  do, 
and  I'll  try  to  do  it.  .  .  .  Ycu  know  as  well  as  I  that  it  is  easier 
to  turn  a  fiank  than  force  a  front.     God  bless  von  \ 

**  Your  old  friend, 

**BnLKSii«L'* 

MEMORANDA. 

Supposing  Bumside's  force  1  ^,000 : 

In  e^ent  of  mcnement  on  fillegii'le *},  etc  would  jfroliabhr 
have  to  leEve  at  least  ^.ddc  id  New  Beme,  i,ood  as  raDwav 
guards,  i.odc  Beaufcirt  and  Fc«rt  Macon,  50c  Harteras  Inlet, 
i.oDc  Roanckc — K^oz  in  alL  lexrving  not  cif^er  6,00c  c^r  6.5 oc 
for  act:^  e  ojteratic»ns  :  toe-  small  to  do  much  good.  "While  ly 
operating  on  Goidsborc>iigh  would  have  to  leave,  say,  i.oor  ai 
Roancke.  5DC  Beaufort,  3,00c  New  Berne,  leaving  12,500  avail- 
able  in  the  held. 

]  wc»uld  therefore  think  that  a  catrtions  vet  iKild  advance  on 
Gc»jdsborough  as  soon  as  tranf^iortatian  arrives  would  produce 
£  lietter  cf  ect  than  anvthrng  ck«  tial  can  be  done,  and  would 
have  the  effect  to  neutralize  a  large  portiaai  df  the  enemy's  f^»rcc. 

G-  B.  McCixiXAK. 

*T1ic  word  rescanbleF  W^inaii, 


246  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

BARNARD  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"Washington,  March  19,  1862, 

2.30    P.M. 

"  Dear  General  :  Fox  didn't  like  the  propeller  plan ;  thinks 
the  channel  could  not  be  effectually  obstructed  in  that  way.  I 
told  him  you  and  I  both  objected  to  the  other  (landing  plan), 
which  I  consider  an  exact  parallel  to  the  expedition  of  Hooker*s 
to  capture  the  Potomac  batteries,  and  where  he  would  have  got 
captured  himself  ;  or,  more  truly,  to  the  las.t  plan,  to  make  a 
campaign  merely  to  take  batteries  as  preliminary  to  a  campaign. 
I  just  saw  Stanton,  and  was  most  gratified  by  what  he  said.  It 
was  :  *  Gen.  McClellan  has  no  firmer  friend  than  myself  ;  but  I 
may  not  be  where  I  am  long.'  *  I  think  Gen.  McClellan  ought 
not  to  move  till  he  is  fuily  ready.* 

"  I  told  him  that  the  Mystic  would  be  in  Hampton  Roads  in 
ten  days,  and  then  we  could  certainly  control  the  Merritnac  and 
have  a  big  steamer  or  two  for  Yorktown.  He  repeated  :  *  He 
ought  not  to  put  a  man  afloat  till  he  is  ready.' 

"In  great  haste, 

"J.  G.  Barnard. 

"Gen.  McClellan." 

SAME  TO  SAME. 

"  Steamship  Minnesota^  3  p.m., 
"  Thursday,  March  20,  1862. 
"  Gen,  G.  B.  McClellan  : 

"  Dear  General  :  Woodbury  left  day  before  yesterday.  I 
wonder  I  did  not  hear  of  him  yesterday  in  town.  I  had  an  inter- 
view with  Gen.  Wool  this  morning.  He  was  very  friendly,  and 
said  he  would  do  everything  ;  but  it  is  a  great  drawback,  this 
having  two  commanders.  For  instance,  there  are  several  bridges 
over  Back  river  that  ought  to  be  rebuilt.  General  Wool  said  that 
he  was  going  out  to-day  to  direct  one  on  the  principal  road  to 
be  rebuilt,  but  Houston  told  me  that  they  expected  Hamilton's 
division  to  do  such  thini^s.  Now,  Hamilton  is  perfectly  igno- 
rant of  localities,  and  his  division  in  the  confusion  of  arrival. 
If  Wool's  force  is  to  co-operate  it  is  a  great  misfortune  that  it 
can't  be  ordered  what  to  do.  That  letter  expressing  readiness  to 
do  everything  amounts  to  nothing.  Houston  is  here  getting  in- 
formation, but  I  have  not  had  time  to  see  what  he  has  done. 

"  Now  for  Goldsborough.  He  is  very  much  in  favor  of  rein- 
forcing Burnside  and  taking  Norfolk  from  the  Chowan  and  Cur- 
rituck ;  but  if  this  is  not  done  his  ideas  are  essentially  coincident 
with  yours — landing  on  Back  bay  or  York  river  or  the  Poquosin, 
at  the  same  time  with  an  advance  from  here,  carrying  Yorktown, 
then  marching  on  Richmond,  and  then  taking  Norfolk. 


GEX,  BARXAIiiyS  LETTERS.  247 

**  He  is  opposed  and  pronounces  impracticable  the  operation 
proposed  by  Fox  on  Sewell's  Point,  and  also  considers  any  opera- 
tion on  Norfolk /><?/»  h^re  impracticable  while  the  Merritnac  is 
extant  He  says  he  is  responsible  to  the  country  for  keeping 
down  the  M^rrimaCy  and  has  perfect  confidence  that  he  can  do 
it,  but  cannot  spare  from  here  anything  except  the  following  : 

**  Victoria — two  eight-inch  guns  and  one  thirty-two-f)ound 
Parrott  ; 

Anacosiia,  Fr^^born,  Island  Belle — Potomac  fleet ; 
Octoroon — not  yet  arrived  ;  Fox  calls  her  a  regular  gunboat 
of  four  guns  ; 

"  Currituck — merchant  steamer  like  the  Potomac  gunboats,  I 
suppose  ; 

**  Daylight — merchant  steamer  like  the  Potomac  gunboats,  I 
suppose  ;  and  two  regular  gunboats — the  Chocorua,  not  yet  ar- 
rived, and  the  Penobscot^  here — these  two  carrying  each  two 
eleven-inch  guns. 

"  He  says  he  can't  furnish  vessels  to  attack  Yorktown  simul- 
taneously, but  he  thinks  what  you  propose  is  easily  done  ;  that 
the  vessels  he  mentions  are  fully  adequate  to  cover  a  landing, 
and  that,  with  a  landing  and  an  advance  from  here,  Yorktown 
will  fall. 

"  He  recommends — and  it  may  be  a  good  idea — a  landing  in 
the  Severn  simultaneously,  taking  Gloucester  in  the  rear,  and 
from  there  battering  Yorktown.  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  taken, 
the  small  gunboats,  regular  and  irregular,  will  be  enough  to  com- 
mand the  navigation  of  the  York  river.  He  thinks,  and  Gen. 
Wool  thinks,  that  the  whole  attention  of  the  enemy  is  concen- 
trated on  Norfolk  ;  that  they  are  reinforcing  that  place  and 
increasing  their  batteries  day  and  night,  and  that  Magruder  is 
not  reinforced.  Wool  thinks  that  some  troops  passed  over  from 
north  to  south  side  of  James  river  recently  to  reinforce  Huger. 

"  This  is  all  I  can  write  now.  I  must  stay  a  little  longer  to 
get  some  definite  information  about  the  places  where  we  propose 
to  land  There  are  20,000  available  men  (nearly)  here  now  (in- 
cluding Wool's,  Mansfield's,  etc.),  and  20,000  men  for  the  land- 
ing ought  to  be  enough  for  the  first  operations 

"  Very  truly  yours, 

"  J.  G.  Barnard." 


BARNARD  TO  COLBURN,  A.  A.  G. 

"  Washington,  March  23,  10  p.m. 

"  CoL  A.  V.  Colburn,  A,  A,  G.  : 

"  I  have  endeavored  to  get  some  plan  arranged  and  means 
procured  for  the  most  important  part  of  our  enterprise — viz.,  a 
landing.     The  only  means  we  have  now  are  the  bateaux.     These 


248  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

I  had  intended  to  go  with  Capt.  Duane's  command  and  with 
McDowell's  corps.  I  learned  to-day  that  the  Annapolis  bateaux 
had  been  ordered  to  Fortress  Monroe.  The  trestles  or  the  india- 
rubber  or  the  canvas  boats  will  answer  for  crossing  the  creeks, 
and  all  the  bateaux  should  be  with  the  landing  corps — McDow- 
ell's. To-day  I  had  a  consultation  with  McDowell,  and  it  was 
decided  to  place  the  whole  matter  of  providing  means  of  landing 
under  Gen.  Woodbury,  and  to  put  temporarily  Capt.  Duane  under 
his  command ;  to  have  the  necessary  scows,  canal-boats,  etc.,  pre- 
pared immediately ;  and  the  bateaux  are  to  form  an  essential  part 
of  the  means.  The  orders  have  been  issued  by  Gen.  McDowell 
for  that  purpose.  Unless  the  arrangements  are  made  now  it  is 
out  of  the  question  to  think  of  landing  any  considerable  force  as 
a  tactical  or  strategical  operation.  One  company  of  Duane's 
command  might  go  with  the  land  forces  to  put  down  trestle- 
bridges — perhaps  two  companies ;  but  he  himself  and  all  the 
bateaux  should  go  with  McDowell,  and  Woodbury  will  fur- 
nish the  additional  men  necessary  and  see  to  the  getting-up  of 
arrangements.     Answer  as  soon  as  possible. 

"  J.  G.  Barnard." 


SAME  TO  SAME. 

"  Washington,  March  24,  1862. 

"  CoL  A.  V.  Colburn,  A.  A,  G. : 

**  The  general's  telegram  received.  Gen.  Woodbury  will  go  to 
headquarters  to-day  and  concert  matters  so  that  there  shall  be  no 
misunderstanding.  The  streams  on  the  Peninsula  are  narrow 
where  crossed  by  thj  road — forty  to  eighty  feet  wide — and  the 
Newport  News  road  requires  no  bridges.  It  is  desirable  to 
know — for  the  constant  uncertainty  about  this  has  embarrassed 
us — whether  Capt.  Duane  or  any  portion  of  his  command  is  to 
leave  before  McDowell's  corps  ;  if  so,  how  much  of  it,  and 
when.     Let  me  know  when  to  join  headquarters.  .  .  . 

"J.  G.  Barnard, 

*'^  Brig.'Gen.^  etc." 


McCLELLAN  TO  FOX. 

Fairfax  Court-House,  March  12. 

Hon.  G.  O.  Fox  J  Assist.  Sec.  Navy  : 

Can  I  rely  on  the  Monitor  to  keep  the  Merrimac  in  check,  so 
that  I  can  take  Fortress  Monroe  as  a  base  of  operation  ? 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen. 


VARIOUS  LETTERS,  249 

FOX  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"Washington,  March  13. 
"  Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  The  Monitor  is  more  than  a  match  for  the  Merrimac^  but 
she  might  be  disabled  in  the  next  encounter.  I  cannot  advise  so 
great  dependence  to  be  placed  upon  her.  Burnside  and  Golds- 
borough  are  very  strong  for  the  Chowan  river  route  to  Norfolk, 
and  I  brought  up  maps,  explanations,  etc.  It  turns  everything, 
and  is  only  twenty-seven  miles  to  Norfolk  by  two  good  roads. 
Burnside  will  have  New  Berne  this  week.  The  Merrimac  must 
go  into  dock  for  repairs.  The  Monitor  may,  and  I  think  will, 
destroy  the  Merrimac  in  the  next  fight ;  but  this  is  hope,  not 
certainty. 

"  G.  O.  Fox, 
^^  Assist.  Sec.  Navy, 

"  P.  S. — In  my  opinion  the  Merrimac  does  not  intend  to  pass 
by  Fort  Monroe.  I  am  also  of  the  opinion  that  we  shall  take  her 
if  she  does  so  pass.  I  think  the  above  is  sure  enough  to  make 
any  movement  upon. 

"  G.  O.  Fox, 
^^  Assist.  Sec,  Navy," 

WISE  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"Washington,  March  13. 
Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  In  reply  to  your  telegram  I  am  clearly  of  opinion  that  the 
Monitor  will  be  fully  able  to  hold  the  Merrimac  in  check  should 
she  attempt  to  pass  Fortress  Monroe. 

"  H.  A.  Wise." 

WOOL  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"Fort  Monroe,  March  12. 
"  Gen.  McClellan  :  > 

"  It  is  thought  the  Monitor  is  a  match  for  the  Merrimac, 
The  former  has  two  guns,  the  latter  eight.  The  Afonitor  is 
our  chief  dependence.  If  any  accident  should  befall  her  New- 
port News  would  be  taken,  probably  depending  on  the  land 
force. 

"It  is  said  Magruder  has  from  15,000  to  18,000  men  extend- 
ing from  James  river  to  Yorktown.  I  have  almost  12,500  effec- 
tive troops,  including  the  garrison  of  Fortress  Monroe,  and  only 
about  no  regulars  artillery.  I  do  not  believe  the  channel  could 
be  blocked  between  Sewell's  Point  and  Craney  island  without 


.^^o 


MpCLELLAJTS  OUTY  STQUr. 


•  rs^r  r;^km^  Sewetl'-i  battery,  caosi^mg  of  troiSL  25  to  ja  gnns^ 
r^^^mX  ot  which  are  lo-incii. 


heint: 


^  TO  McCI.RT.rW, 


"'F'JKT  Lrox.  iLiTch  15. 
• '7#rw.  AfcCIdiloM: 

"  Allow  me  to  recaomieBxi  to  vocl  :o  jare  x  coniDic^ 
made,  by  the  engmmsL  Jt  tiie  ^aaezny  >  iRjrks  ir  C^mrcrr-ILc  nas, 
■\t.mas<as.  wim  j.  mrmrar  iq  acts:  :i^  ^i'S^  ^xei'— ■■■..^  -r^rr  -«al 
jc  mmiir  co  yoor  prenttiirr 


DESNEOX  rn  ^-^  ^  :  ^x 


WarrT  =j 


*  Hjlw     ISC  \^iSL  '3K:   rt^saasTL     ^Eir   ^  'CT^  nnca:   •r"""**^^ 


"  V     HiZiikrSX. 


MirJLZ]ll.i>  r*:    lAJ^T^ 


}im%^ 


'tns^i. 


<jgtJ^i«fc>^ 


;4l3ea-    IL 


r» 


OBC:    :trur> 


il:i       ■III  iiiiiBP^r 


-.V 


•    t 


,.,t. 


,    X    >UXL£J 


VARIOUS  LETTERS. 


251 


McCLELLAN  TO  TUCKER. 

Fairfax  Court-House, 
March  13,  10.30  p.m. 

Hon,  John  Tucker^  Assist.  Sec.  of  War  : 

.  .  .  What  transports  are  certainly  on  hand  at  Alexandria 
and  Washington  for  troops,  horses,  and  guns,  and  how  many  of 
each  kind  ?  I  cannot  make  my  arrangements  for  details  of  move- 
ment until  I  know  exactly  what  is  on  hand.  It  is  absolutely 
necessary  that  I  should  be  kept  constantly  informed.  I  wish  to 
move  so  that  the  men  can  move  directly  on  board  ship. 

G.  B.  McClellan,  Maj.'Gen. 

McCLELLAN  TO  VAN  VLIET. 

Fairfax  Court-House, 
March  13,  10.50  p.m. 
Gen.  Van  Vliet  : 

Arrange  to  send  to  Fort  Monroe  at  once  the  wagons  and 
horses  at  Perryville  and  Annapolis.  Send  to  same  destination 
rations  as  promptly  as  practicable  for  my  140,000  men  and 
forage  for  my  15,000  animals.  See  Shiras  about  the  rations.  A 
quartermaster  should  be  sent  to  Fort  Monroe  to  receive  these 
stores  and  keep  them  separate.  They  should  all  be  landed  at 
once.  Please  inform  me  to-night  what  transports  are  on  hand, 
and  keep  me  informed  as  fast  as  they  arrive.  I  will  make  it  Col. 
Astor's  business  to  keep  the  run  of  it,  so  that  I  may  be  con- 
stantly posted. 

G.  B.  McClellan. 

McCLELLAN  TO  McDOWELL. 

Fairfax  Court-House, 
March   13,  11.30  p.m. 
Maj.'Gen.  McDowell,  Washini^ton  : 

Please  make  your  arrangements  to  go  to  Fort  Monroe  very 
soon  to  receive  troops,  stores,  etc.  Try  to  complete  your  staff 
arrangements  at  once.  I  shall,  of  course,  wish  to  see  you  before 
you  go.  I  am  perfectly  willing  that  you  should  have  Ingalls 
and  Beckwith,  merely  remembering  the  special  duty  Ingalls  is 
doing.  See  Heintzelman  about  Richardson.  He  will  explain  to 
the  President. 

G.  B.  McClellan. 

McCLELLAN  TO  STANTON. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

March  16,  1862. 

//on.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Sec.  of  War : 

Sir  :  In  order  to  carry  out  the  proposed  object  of  this  army 


252  McCZELLAN'S  OIVJ^  STORY, 

it  has  now  become  necessary  that  its  commander  .should  have 
the  entire  control  of  affairs  around  Fortress  Monroe.  I  would 
respectfully  suggest  that  the  simplest  method  of  effecting  this 
would  be  to  merge  the  Department  of  Virginia  with  that  of  the 
Potomac,  the  name  of  which  might  properly  be  changed  to  that 
of  the  Department  of  the  Chesapeake.  In  carrying  this  into 
effect  I  would  respectfully  suggest  that  the  present  commander 
of  the  Department  of  Virginia  be  assigned  to  some  other  com- 
mand. 

Gen.  Mansfield  can  take  temporary  charge  of  Fortress  Mon- 
roe and  its  dependencies  until  the  army  arrive  there. 
1  am,  very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan. 

McCLELLAN  TO  HEINTZELMAN. 

Seminary,  March  28. 

Sri^.'Gen,  Hdntzelmany  Fort  Monroe  : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  morning  received  only  last  night. 
I  hope  the  movement  on  Big  Bethel  was  well  considered  in  \\sm 
of  my  wish  not  to  prematurely  develop  our  plan  to  the  enemy. 
If  the  destruction  of  their  batteries,  and  your  subsequent  return, 
confirms  the  idea  that  we  are  after  Norfolk,  all  is  well,  except  the 
mere  fact  of  falling  back.  If  this  reaches  you  in  time  it  would 
be  well  to  hold  the  position  of  Big  Bethel,  if  its  occupation  by 
the  enemy  can  give  us  any  trouble.  You,  on  the  ground,  can 
best  judge  of  this. 

G.  B.  McClellax^ 

Mtij.'Gen.  Commanding. 

McCLELLAN  TO  BLENKER. 


Headquarters,  Army  or  Potomac, 

'^Steamer  Commodore^  March  29,   1S62. 

"  Gen.  L.  Blenker^  Warrenton  Junction  : 

*^'  The  commanding  general  desires  that  you  will  hold  your 
division  in  readiness  to  move  at  short  notice  to  Alexandria  for 
embarkation.  It  is  his  design  to  have  your  command  join  the 
active  army  the  moment  it  can  be  spared  from  the  service  upon 
which  it  is  now  employed.  He  is  anxious  to  afiPord  your  division 
an  opportunity  to  meet  the  enemy,  feeling  well  assured  that  it 
will  prove  itself  conspicuous  for  valor  on  the  battle-field  and 
fully  realize  the  high  anticipations  he  had  formed  with  respect 
to  your  command. 

"  S.  Williams,  A  A  G.** 


'^  .   1 


rror   ctti  -im- 

"tm    sriTf.    n     ^  im:ii>vru    atL*2imoi    i-    ii-;.:?friJTir    drr-.u-.i     u     lit 
-^TTiyii-»  jr-  nij.i*>  n    nir  i.i?s%i:iTiii3i.  aiiL  iii    Tnu.:i    rrjruii:    i.Tu^r?- 
wirrt    j.^-eiL      Tiir-   vr^    mr  i  sni^u    iiy%iau;^   amnii:   n:.nA.       }i 
ra..::   i    iii*v    in    iirrjailr  ^^rJ.Lr.t    trtX  v»'t    luu    iir    miiiu:^  n;.Liv  n 
ar»'   vj.i:u      Tiii-  t.-^-  nut   n    nir  ^ciur;    difh  *utit:-    aiu    uuva\<- 
Tscrruiiiir    niLirrurrri    i^iti   mr  nuv.=:!nvjnir   ii    rn*.  :jjtv   i-^o^   n    tiu 

iiiiim  iniu:r  irr:.  tm  juuiiusiis-  ir   tiu  ^(;mu    iiiiiii^  ^iiin^ir  ui*- 

Tnr  tii:!' lu  niiiiSnirrr:- T/trn  uiiisi  ii  i)ltr.::  inMaprtinmr-a  murni,- 
luji  ai*int  nir  ivn  ir  m>'  iieunn»rnmi  :.nuiiT~,  I  at  nn  VAxnr  v 
vni-i  -jroinr  tiis-  lUir  luw  ittrji  t-  :iiu-l  jui'  tiurri  rvj'iaiii'*  snruiu 
in  -vimti  niiTtiiu  rniarx't- L  vnn  "tit:  :.(ili-:::uii  aiu  UTraii^inti'n  n 
T:ii)jii;iTuiiiUL:a  aiiL  T^niir-Jiria  mmm;*iinTi  ii  Tii^run  ir  c.ir  mvt  utvl 
adiaiieii  :iunir:fc=;^  1'  i-  imi  ti:a"  tiu  r.i:n«r.LurmL:>  v.-^rf.'  m  )v\- 
-i-r  i)f  iir  :iTTT-:r  niai?:  tiaii  ninv^' -i^.  lur  tu:»*  7*rscv:>>ir:£  liu 
nt=umia])ti  up'.'aiiuiai  ii  nitt!T;nnc  m  iiuir  nvi  ^rrruiiu.  vmr-.i 
niKV  intfv  iitTTi:::!!'-  %"iil  tiuv  naj.  iiti!ir*  ii  ^rifiL  ^iiitu>  am. 
L*-  tie"  iHUul'*  :::miiii::Lr.L  1  tuiiiHis^v*  naniiiaipr*  tiu*'  iiui  nuiir*. 
II  "imu  II  ::ini:n^u:::  niui?r  aiu.  ai.nuanr  tiu»nb-xii*-'i>  tiifiTmcnp- 
vm  tiu  42TiimiL  n  "tiu  nn::iTiKS  n  urrtvri  njtjiTa:ini>%  \ljri"rr.rvfir: 
tiu  vniu  lemiu.  a:  uias;  vi^iri  Uniial"  ii  tiuir  Tivrrr  aiu  :u'.u»r 
Ii  ::<::iiitK  milium,  mu  -niius^  ±  -ei  vaun  ~nu  lu^r^iti^^  v^r^i  ir^ir- 
iuie  11  li-  tiuv  -Hiiaum  ii;>~i±i=re^L  tiu  rmiiliicsii:^  "r«(uirr**.L  xr  n^-ri 
arv'  •'uiiu  II  Tiuir  mTiimantm.  T'luv  Tin:i»'  iinuw  TuriT!  n  "tiu 
•  ninir"  iiiai  "nu  iiiaimncnsr  m  vnnrti  "huv  "tad  ;jitfc¥4:r(  :iu!r 
i'v:?-,  :niut  4!v^i  in  a::::irTaii  ;r  .ntuiliuiijiu  iuscrutrun  n  ^mih- 
ir  u::::aunt5  ir  :nu  ^nmiL  mit  titar  iscinii£i»  iv  lumuurs  v^iti 


^54  M^CIFfl4X^S  OMT.y  SDC^MK. 

m 

ithn^tsj  nlfTiiTS  ridiciilcuishr  Tuapmra:^  If  a  la^ro  irere  xs^fid 
Wft>  XTTT  iikcily  X4>  be :  '^  1  dxumo.  Taassa..  'bjn  I  gagss  £^0111  £ 

n  ncta^dhi*^  Fwr:  3£«*ix]cr?i^  sit  3^  jc^tsniiinii  re  "nic  -2f»  -snE  imctfir 
i^^t^Mt*  5i£SutK!tc  >a:^gifct  xrnxu  :ne  xrrx, 

«tvisc^>i  t>,»ifli  X^t«^*cr:  Xrr»^  niaci^  janiiltsl  -m^sft  :tte:  Jinnee 
ti^i^-^v  Ji^  ^>a»>5>Aj5^  i;^:;^,^^^'!:  "W^irnMrjL  Ljur::-&nisiir  "n  :nit  HIhIt- 
>K<4k>    H.*iJ5j<;.   ^•^3Ci^^  J:   :m:^   :3if  muir  dt^  ±niiE  TiriiiwTii  tn 

>ii<i^  ^>jtfi  ^j^A"'ttuc»AT.  :>^  iht  i^t^'.r:  :auc  anaiv   ir  Inse:  rnrRgtmjs^ 

liiVt^i:  rotfc  i*iA"ivp>4iit:  it  :att  !fc«»pun:  ^k::^^  ^maL  ^micit  nn^aecE  nnw 
^10^  :ffe>i^ui*,-iac  3friai;!i,  inii  :iiiir:  x  inscnn^l  au  iti>cn":ti  n  x 
uiaf'.ii    ra  iiu   Hiuhwiw   Hiiuse    n  rear  n  Tjrkcuwn. 

-V^r  -4i»t  Jmit:  Miinm*:  :inTv«'2iit2ir  tss  it?inds:iL  ip%ni  no:.-  ^sr 
liKfcfiaua  iRii>  'St  miui^Tirnxe:  the  ips^nrnuii  7v  itr^aicnim;:  :tni  Z5r 
f;^^j>  a  nut^  "D  "tic  -r^Jiit-3ox*  mrcs:  rr  rijur  Tiiitis-  iQum  ir 
^irit:fi%¥n,    n   irrltir  ix  'xtm  ill  :tie  tsxrrcatiatri    irm&inip?-  rt:2:t:rnai 

OBwn  ;    if  i»5<t.  immid  iie  nmiinoit  if  icErurs  it  :titt  awmicnr  -en- 

rrvcr  it  thc  "miuih  n  Ttitt  i«:Tem.  tmi  :tiniw  r  ipun  'V::5C  Pjint: 
3tir  Tan^rv)OTT5'  irrrvm  na  ijowrr,  nut  iitt  ^rtsssurri  n  :tit:  -Uinnms- 
txanun    nr  i  -Quvcfntrrn:  iras-  ^   iOTiUs^  xnu    inrtrisaniLuic.  'n-i   Z 


^ 


256  McCLELLAN'S  OWJ^  STORY. 

ports  arrived,  and  then  determined  to  hold  the  ist  corps  to  the 
last,  and  land  it  as  a  unit  whenever  the  state  of  affairs  promised 
the  best  results.  A  few  hours  after  I  had  determined  to  act 
upon  this  determination  McDowell  telegraphed  me  from  Wash- 
ington, suggesting  that  the  troops  should  be  embarked  by  divi- 
sions, according  to  convenience,  instead  of  awaiting  the  arrival  of 
sufficient  transports  to  move  his  whole  corps.  Soon  after  this  I 
was  more  than  once  informed  that  Gen.  McDowell  and  others  in 
Washington  had  instanced  this  decision  to  embark  the  troops  by 
divisions  as  a  proof  that  I  had  disobeyed  the  President's  order  as 
to  the  formation  of  army  corps,  and  that  I  intended  to  throw 
obstacles  in  the  way  of  its  fulfilment. 

Considerable  delay  occurred  in  the  arrival  of  the  sailing  trans- 
ports for  horses,  in  consequence  of  an  order  being  given,  without 
my  knowledge,  for  the  steamers  to  come  to  Alexandria  without 
them. 

The  first  division  which  had  embarked  was  Hamilton's, 
formerly  Heintzelman's,  of  the  3d  corps,  which  sailed  on  the 
17th  of  March;  it  was  followed  by  Gen.  F.  J.  Porter's  division 
Df  the  same  corps  on  the  2 2d  of  March.  Gen.  Heintzelman 
accompanied  Porter's  division,  and  was  instructed  to  get  his 
corps  in  condition  for  an  advance  without  delay.  He  was  also 
ordered  to  encamp  his  two  divisions  some  three  or  four  miles  out 
from  Fort  Monroe,  in  good  defensive  position,  and  to  push  out 
strong  reconnoissances  to  ascertain  the  position  and  the  strength 
of  the  enemy,  without  going  so  far  out  as  to  destroy  the  impres- 
sion that  our  movements  might  be  intended  against  Norfolk. 

On  the  27  th  he  sent  Porter  towards  Big  Bethel  and  Howard's 
bridge,  and  Smith  towards  Young's  Mill,  on  the  James  river 
road. 

Porter  occupied  Big  Bethel  and  pushed  one  brigade  four 
miles  further,  sending  skirmishers  on  to  Howard's  bridge,  where 
they  saw  entrenchments  occupied.  Deserters  reported  Magruder 
at  the  place  with  800  men.  Smith  went  as  far  as  Watt's  Creek, 
where  he  found  no  entrenchments,  and  gained  information  that 
the  enemy  held  Young's  Mill  in  strong  force.  Both  divisions 
returned  to  their  camps  after  completing  the  reconnoissance. 
Heintzelman  reported  that,  from  the  best  information,  Magru- 
der had  from  15,000  to  20,000  men,  and  gave  not  the  slightest 
indication  that  he  thought  he  could  take  or  invest  Yorktown. 


ADVANCE    TOWARD  RICHMOND.  '257 

On  the  3d  of  April  there  were  of  my  command  in  the  vicin- 
ity of  Fort  Monroe  the  3d  Penn.  Cavalry,  the  2d,  5th,  and  a 
part  of  the  ist  U.  S.  Cavalry,  a  part  of  the  reserve  artillery, 
two  divisions  each  of  the  3d  and  4th  corps  ready  to  move,  one 
division  of  the  2d  corps,  Sykes's  brigade  of  U.  S.  Infantry. 
Casey *s  division  of  the  4th  corps  was  at  Newport  News,  but 
totally  unprovided  with  transportation.  Richardson's  division 
of  the  2d  corps  and  Hooker's  of  the  3d  had  not  yet  arrived. 
The  troops  ready  to  advance  numbered  about  53,000  men  and 
100  guns — less  than  45,000  effectives.  The  amount  of  wagon- 
transportation  arrived  was  altogether  insufficient  for  a  long  move- 
ment, and  it  became  necessary  to  advance  in  order  to  establish 
new  depots  on  the  shore  more  to  the  front.  It  was  evident  that 
to  await  any  considerable  accession  of  force  and  transportation 
would  involve  a  delay  of  many  days  ;  I  therefore  determined  to 
advance  on  the  4th  of  April. 

The  following  telegram  of  April  3  to  Mr.  Stanton  requires  no 
explanation  : 

I  expect  to  move  from  here  to-morrow  morning  on  Yorktown, 
where  a  force  of  some  15,000  of  the  rebels  are  in  an  entrenched 
position,  and  I  think  it  quite  probable  they  will  attempt  to  resist 
us.  No  appearance  of  the  Mcrrimac  as  yet.  Commodore  Golds- 
borough  is  quite  confident  he  can  sink  her  when  she  comes  out. 

Before  I  left  Washington  an  order  had  been  issued  by  the 
War  Department  placing  Fort  Monroe  and  its  dependencies 
under  my  control,  and  authorizing  me  to  draw  from  the  troops 
under  Gen.  Wool  a  division  of  about  10,000  men,  which  was  to 
be  assigned  to  the  ist  corps. 

During  the  night  of  the  3d  I  received  a  telegram  from  the 
adjutant-general  of  the  army  stating  that,  by  the  President's 
order,  I  was  deprived  of  all  control  over  Gen.  Wool  and  the 
troops  under  his  command,  and  forbidden  to  detach  any  of  his 
troops  without  his  sanction. 

This  order  left  me  without  any  base  of  operations  under  my 
own  control. 

On  my  arrival  at  Fortress  Monroe  I  was  informed  that  the 
enemy  had  been  very  active  for  some  days  past  in  crossing  troops 
over  the  James  river  on  the  line  of  communication  between  York- 
town  and  Norfolk.     Reports  were  conflicting  as  to  the  direction 


258  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

of  this  movement,  but  in  any  event  it  seemed  proper  under  the 
circumstances  to  move  on  Yorktown  as  promptly  as  possible  with 
the  troops  in  hand,  in  order  to  invest  the  place  before  further 
reinforcements  and  supplies  could  reach  it. 

On  the  same  day,  on  the  very  eve  of  the  advance  of  the  Army 
W  the  Potomac  into  the  enemy's  country,  with  the  certainty  of 
heavy  losses  by  battle  and  disease,  was  issued  the  order  putting 
a  complete  stop  to  the  recruiting  service  for  the  volunteers  and 
breaking  up  all  the  recruiting  stations  : 

General  Order  No.  33. 

"  Adjutant-General's  Office,  U.  S.  A., 
"Washington,  April  3,  1862. 

"  III.  The  recruiting  service  for  volunteers  will  be  discon- 
tinued in  every  State  from  this  date.  The  officers  detached  on 
the  Volunteer  Recruiting  Service  will  join  their  regiments  with- 
out delay,  taking  with  them  the  parties  and  recruits  at  their  re- 
spective stations. 

"  The  superintendents  of  the  Volunteer  Recruiting  Service 
will  disband  their  parties  and  close  their  offices,  after  having 
taken  the  necessary  steps  to  carry  out  these  orders.  The  public 
property  belonging  to  the  Volunteer  Recruiting  Service  will  be 
sold  to  the  best  advantage  possible,  and  the  proceeds  credited  to 
the  fund  for  collecting,  drilling,  and  organizing  volunteers. 
"  By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

"  L.  Thomas, 
''Adj. -Gen.  U.  S.  A." 

Common  sense  and  the  experience  of  all  wars  prove  that 

when  an  army  takes  the  field  every  possible  effort  should  be 

I    made  at  home  to  collect  recruits  and  establish  depots,  whence 

J    the  inevitable  daily  losses  may  be  made  good  with   instructed 

I    men  as  fast  as  they  occur,  so  that  the  fighting  force  may  be  kept 

\  up  to  their  normal  strength.     Failure  to  do  this  proves  either  a 

\  desire  for  the  failure  of  the  campaign  or  entire  incompetence. 

\ Between  the  horns  of  this  dilemma  the  friends  of  Mr.  Stanton 

Vust  take  their  choice. 

During  the  preceding  autumn  I  advocated  a  system  of  draft- 
ing, but  was  not  listened  to.  Had  it  been  adopted  at  that  time, 
when  recruiting  was  rapid  and  easy,  it  could  have  been  estab- 
lished and  well  regulated  without  difficulty  and  without  any 
shock  to  the  country.  The  system  as  finally  adopted  was  as 
bad  as  bad  could  be,  and  cannot  be  defended.     It  was  unneces* 


kECRUITING  STOPPED.  ^59 

sary  to  disturb  all  the  relations  of  society  and  the  business  inte- 
rests of  the  country,  and  the  numbers  called  out  were  absurdly 
large. 

The  numbers  of  troops  on  foot  in  April,  1862,  in  the  various 
parts  of  the  country,  were  ample  for  the  suppression  of  the  rebel- 
lion, if  they  had  been  properly  handled  and  their  numbers  made 
good  by  a  constant  stream  of  recruits  poured  into  the  old  regi- 
ments, so  as  to  keep  them  always  at  their  full  strength.  Instead 
of  this,  spasmodic  calls  for  large  numbers  of  men  were  made,  and 
the  general  rule  was  to  organize  them  into  new  regiments,  offen 
allowing  the  invaluable  old  regiments  to  die  out.  This  system 
was  infinitely  more  expensive,  but  gave  the  opportunity  to  pro- 
mote personal  or  political  favorites.  The  new  regiments  required 
a  long  time  to  make  them  serviceable,  while  the  same  men  placed 
in  the  old  regiments,  under  experienced  officers  and  surrounded 
by  veterans,  would  in  a  few  days  become  efficient  soldiers. 
Another  grave  defect  of  this  system  was  the  destructive  effects 
on  the  esprit  de  corps  of  the  old  officers  and  men — an  invaluable 
adjunct  in  war. 

Out  of  these  wholesale  drafts  grew  the  system  of  substitutes 
and  bounties,  which  cost  so  many  unnecessary  millions  to  the 
country,  and  so  seriously  affected  the  quality  of  the  troops  in  the 
latter  years  of  the  war. 

Never  in  the  whole  history  of  nations  was  anything  more 
absurdly  and  recklessly  managed  than  the  whole  system  of  re- 
cruiting, drafting,  and  organization  under  the  regime  of  Secretary 
Stanton.  When  his  actions  are  coolly  criticised,  apart  from  the 
influence  of  party  feeling,  his  administration  will  be  regarded  as 
unparalleled  in  history  for  blunders  and  ignorant  self-assertion. 
He  unnecessarily  prolonged  the  war  at  least  two  years,  and  at 
least  tripled  its  cost  in  blood  and  treasure. 

The  movement  was  made  by  the  two  roads  already  men- 
tioned :  the  two  divisions  of  the  4th  corps  from  Newport  News 
via  Warwick  Court-House  ;  the  two  divisions  of  the  3d,  sup- 
ported by  Sedgwick's  division  of  the  2d  corps,  Sykes*s  brigade, 
and  the  reserve  artillery,  by  the  road  from  Hampton  and  Big 
Bethel  to  Yorktown.  The  advance  on  Big  Bethel  would  turn 
the  works  at  Young's  Mill  and  open  the  way  for  the  4th  corps ; 
while,  in  turn,  the  advance  of  the  latter  corps  on  Warwick  Court- 
House  would  turn  the  works  at  Howard's  bridge  and  Ship  Point, 

»9 


26o  AfcCLELLAN'S  OIVAT  STOKY, 

and  open  the  road  of  the  right  column  to  the  immediate  vicinity 
of  Yorktown. 

Smith's  division  (4th  corps)  encamped  on  the  4th  of  April  at 
Young's  Mill,  with  one  brigade  in  advance  on  the  road  from  Big 
Bethel  to  Warwick  ;  Couch's  division  on  Fisher's  creek. 

Porter,  on  the  same  day,  occupied  Cockletown  with  Morell's 
division  and  a  battery,  his  pickets  a  mile  in  advance  near  Pavis's 
house ;  the  other  brigades  of  the  division  less  than  two  miles  in 
rear  of  Morell.  Averill's  cavalry  found  the  Ship  Point  batteries 
abandoned.  They  were  strong  and  well  constructed,  with  deep 
wet  ditches  ;  they  had  platforms  and  magazine  for  siege-guns,  all 
the  guns  withdrawn  ;  there  were  excellent  quarters  for  three  regi- 
ments of  ten  companies  each.  Hamilton's  division  encamped 
about  two  miles  in  rear  of  Howard's  creek.  The  reserve  cav- 
alry, artillery,  and  infantry  bivouacked  with  headquarters  at  Big 
Bethel.  Gen.  Heintzelman  learned  during  the  evening  that  there 
were  no  batteries  between  Porter  and  Yorktown  ;  that  Yorktown 
was  strongly  fortified  ;  that  its  garrison  until  recently  consisted 
of  10,000  men,  but  was  then  increased  to  20,000  or  25,000  ; 
that  there  were  more  troops  at  Williamsburg,  and  batteries  about 
two  miles  south  of  it,  and  that  reinforcements  were  said  to  have 
come  from  Richmond.  Gen.  Heintzelman  concluded  that  the 
enemy  had  no  idea  of  abandoning  Yorktown.  During  the  same 
afternoon  Gen.  Keyes,  commanding  the  left  column,  received 
information  that  from  5,000  to  8,000  of  the  enemy  were  strongly 
entrenched  at  Lee's  Mill.  Still  ignorant  of  the  true  course  of  the 
Warwick  and  of  its  relations  to  the  entrenchments  at  Lee's  Mill, 
and  alive  to  the  necessity  of  preventing  further  reinforcements  to 
the  garrison  at  Yorktown,  I,  on  the  evening  of  the  4th,  ordered 
the  movements  for  the  5  th    as  follows  : 

Smith's  division  to  move  at  six  a.m.  via  Warwick  Court-House 
to  the  Halfway  House  on  the  Yorktown  and  Williamsburg  road  ; 
Couch's  division  to  move  at  the  same  hour  and  close  up  on 
Smith  at  the  Halfway  House  ;  any  positions  of  the  enemy  met 
with  on  the  way  to  be  carried  by  assault  without  delay  ;  on 
reaching  the  Halfway  House  the  corps  to  occupy  the  narrow 
dividing  ridge  at  that  point,  so  as  to  prevent  the  escape  or  rein- 
forcement of  the  garrison  of  Yorktown. 

Porter's  division  to  close  up  on  its  advanced  guard  at  six 
A.M.,  and  move  forward  to  an  intersection  of   roads  about  two 


ADVANCE  MOVEMENTS.  26 1 

and  three-quarter  miles  from  Yorktown,  there  to  halt  and  send 
out  reconnoitring  parties,  to  cover  the  reconnoissances  of  the 
engineer  officers,  etc. 

Hamilton's  division  to  move  at  the  same  hour  and  close  up 
on  Porter.  Sedgwick,  temporarily  attached  to  headquarters,  to 
move  with  the  reserves  to  Dr.  Pavis's  house,  where  the  road  to 
Lee*s  Mill  diverged,  and  there  await  orders. 

If  Heintzelman  found  it  possible  to  assault  the  works  at  York- 
town  immediately,  the  reserves  were  in  position  to  support  him  ; 
if  he  found  an  assault  impracticable,  and  Keyes  needed  assist- 
ance in  carrying  out  his  orders,  the  reserves  were  in  position  to 
move  at  once  to  his  support.  If  Keyes  had  succeeded  in  passing 
Lee's  Mill  and  reaching  the  Halfway  House,  I  should  at  once 
have  gone  to  his  support  with  all  the  reserves  and  one  of  Heintz- 
elman's  divisions,  thus  holding  the  key-point  of  the  operation 
with  four  divisions  of  infantry,  the  brigade  of  regulars,  the  cav- 
alry and  artillery  reserves. 

In  consequence  of  the  heavy  rains  the  roads  were  very  bad 
and  the  troops  moved  with  difficulty,  so  that  little  of  Keyes's 
artillery  and  none  of  the  ammunition,  forage,  and  provision  trains 
could  be  brought  up.  Heintzelman  early  in  the  day  came  under 
the  artillery-fire  of  the  works  of  Yorktown,  and  soon  saw  that  an 
assault  was  impracticable.  Keyes  also  found  himself  brought  to 
a  halt  by  the  artillcry-fire  of  the  Lee's  Mill  works,  and  discov- 
ered that  they  were  covered  by  the  Warwick  river,  rendering 
any  attempt  at  assault  utterly  out  of  the  (juestion. 

It  was  at  this  moment,  with  the  leading  division  of  each 
column  under  a  hot  artillery-fire,  and  the  skirmishers  of  the  3d 
corps  engaged,  being  myself  with  Porter's  division,  that  I  received 
the  telegram  informing  me  of  the  withdrawal  of  the  ist  corps 
(McDowell's)  from  my  command: 

"  Adjutant-Genkral's  Office, 
'*  April  4,  1862. 
"  GcfL  McClellan  : 

**  By  directions  of  the  President  Gen.  McDowell's  army  corps 
has  been  detached  from  the  force  under  your  immediate  com- 
mand, and  the  general  is  ordered  to  report  to  the  Secretary  of 
War  ;  letter  by  mail. 

**  L.  Thomas, 

"  Adj.-Genr 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

Effects   of  reduction  of  the   army — Overthrow    of    ihe    campaign — Neiv 
campaign  with  reduced  array — Siege  of  Yorktown. 

Soon  after  receiving  the  telegram  I  sent  the  following  to  the 
Secretary  of  War,  dated  April  5  : 

The  enemy  are  in  large  force  along  our  front,  and  apparently 
intend  making  a  determined  resistance.  A  reconnoissance  just 
made  by  Gen.  Barnard  shows  that  their  line  of  works  extends 
across  the  entire  Peninsula  from  Yorktown  to  Warwick  river. 
Many  of  them  are  formidable.  Deserters  say  that  they  are  being 
reinforced  daily  from  Richmond  and  from  Norfolk.  Under  the 
circumstances  I  beg  that  you  will  reconsider  the  order  detaching 
the  ist  corps  from  my  command. 

In  my  deliberate  judgment  the  success  of  our  cause  will  be 
imperilled  by  so  greatly  reducing  my  force  when  it  is  actually 
under  the  fire  of  the  enemy  and  active  operations  have  com- 
menced. Two  of  my  divisions  have  been  under  fire  of  artillery 
during  most  of  the  day.  I  am  now  of  the  opinion  that  I  shall 
have  to  fight  all  the  available  force  of  the  rebels  not  far  from 
here.  Do  not  force  me  to  do  so  with  diminished  ranks  ;  but 
whatever  your  de  Ision  may  be,  I  will  leave  nothing  undone  to 
obtain  success. 

If  you  cannot  leave  me  the  whole  of  the  ist  corps,  I  urgently 
ask,  as  a  military  necessity,  that  I  may  not  lose  Franklin  and  his 
division. 

On  the  same  day,  at  ten  p.m.,  I  sent  the  following  to  Sec- 
retary Stanton  : 

Since  Gen.  Woodbury's  brigade  of  volunteer  engineer  troops 
was  only  temporarily  attached  to  the  ist  corps  for  special  service, 
and  is  much  needed  here,  I  have  directed  Gen.  Woodbury  to 
bring  it  here  at  once.     Their  services  are  indispensable. 

The  following  letter  was  written  during  the  evening  of  April  5  : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  Potomac, 
Camp    near    Yorktown,  April  5,   1862. 

Brig, 'Gen.  L.  Thomas ^  Adj. -Gen,  U.  S.  A. : 

General  :  I  have  now  a  distinct  knowledge  of  the  general 
position  of  the  enemy  in  my  front.     His  left  is  in  Yorktown  ;  his 

a6a 


EFFECTS  OF  REDUCTION  OF  ARMY.  263 

line  thence  extends  along  and  in  rear  of  the  Warwick  river  to  its 
mouth.  That  stream  is  an  obstacle  of  great  magnitude.  It  is 
fordable  at  only  one  point  (so  far  as  I  yet  know)  below  its  head, 
which  is  near  Yorktown  ;  is  for  several  miles  unfordable,  and 
has  generally  a  very  marshy  valley.  His  batteries  and  entrench- 
ments render  this  line  an  exceedingly  formidable  one,  entirely 
too  much  so  (so  far  as  I  now  understand  it)  to  be  carried  by  a 
simple  assault.  I  shall  employ  to-morrow  in  reconnoissances, 
repairing  roads,  establishing  a  depot  at  Ship's  Point,  and  in 
bringing  up  supplies. 

Porter,  the  head  of  the  right  column,  has  moved  as  close 
upon  the  town  as  the  enemy's  guns  will  permit ;  he  is  encamped, 
there,  supported  by  Hamilton's  division.  Porter  has  been  under 
fire  all  the  afternoon.  But  five  men  killed.  His  rifled  field- 
guns  and  sharpshooters  have  caused  some  loss  to  the  enemy. 
Keyes,  with  two  divisions,  is  in  front  of  Lee's  Mill,  where  the 
road  from  Newp(5rt  News  to  Williamsburg  crosses  Warwick  river. 
He  has  been  engaged  in  an  artillery  combat  of  several  hours' 
duration,  losing  some  five  killed.  At  Lee's  Mill  we  have  a 
causeway  covered  by  formidable  batteries.  The  information 
obtained  at  Fort  Monroe  in  regard  to  the  topography  of  the 
country  and  the  position  and  strength  of  the  enemy  has  been 
unreliable.  He  is  in  strong  force  and  very  strong  position.  If 
the  reconnoissances  of  to-morrow  verify  the  observations  of 
to-day,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  use  much  heavy  artillery  before 
we  can  force  their  lines  and  isolate  the  garrison  of  Yorktown. 
I  omitted  to  state  that  I  hold  the  reserves  in  a  central  position 
until  I  can  learn  more  of  the  condition  of  affairs.  The  present 
aspect  of  affairs  renders  it  exceedingly  unfortunate  that  the  ist 
corps  has  been  detached  from  my  command.  It  is  no  longer  in 
my  power  to  make  a  movement  from  the  Severn  river  upon 
Gloucester  and  West  Point.  I  am  reduced  to  a  front  attack 
upon  a  very  strong  line.  I  still  hope  that  the  order  detaching 
the  I  St  corps  may  be  reconsidered.  I  do  not  feel  that  without 
it  I  have  force  sufficient  to  accomplish  the  objects  I  have  pro- 
posed in  this  campaign  with  that  certainty,  rapidity,  and  com- 
pleteness which  I  had  hoped  to  obtain.  The  departments  will, 
I  trust,  realize  that  more  caution  will  be  needed  on  my  part 
after  having  been  so  unexpectedly  deprived  of  so  very  large  a 
portion  of  my  force  when  actually  having  my  troops  under  fire. 
I  have  frankly  stated  what  I  now  consider  to  be  the  strength  of 
the  enemy's  position  ;  the  reconnoissances  of  to-morrow  may 
modify  my  opinion.  Whatever  the  facts  may  be,  I  shall  make 
the  best  use  I  can  of  the  force  at  my  disposal,  determined  to  gain 
my  point  as  completely  and  as  rapidly  as  may  be. 
Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

MaJ.-Gen.  Commanding, 


264  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

P.  S.  All  my  movements  up  to  this  evening  were  predicated 
upon  the  expectation  that  no  more  troops  would  be  detached 
from  my  command.  I  have  involved  my  troops  in  actual  con- 
flict upon  that  supposition,  and  calculating  upon  the  prompt 
arrival  of  the  ist  corps  as  a  part  of  the  programme.  It  has  just 
occurred  to  me  to  say  that  the  maps  of  the  Peninsula  I  sent  to 
the  President  and  secretary  are  perfectly  unreliable  ;  the  roads 
are  wrong,  and  the  Warwick  river  crosses  the  Newport  News 
and  Williamsburg  road  some  three  miles  above  Warwick  Court- 
House,  which  latter  place  is  about  one  mile  from  the  road. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen, 

This,  then,  was  the  situation  in  which  I  found  myself  on  the 
evening  of  April  5  :  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  had  informed  me 
that  it  was  not  in  his  power  to  control  the  navigation  of  the 
James  river  so  as  to  enable  me  to  use  it  as  a  line  of  supply,  or 
to  cross  it,  or  even  to  cover  my  left  flank  ;  nor  could  he,  as  he 
thought,  furnish  any  vessels  to  attack  the  batteries  of  Yorktown 
and  Gloucester,  or  to  run  by  them  in  the  dark  and  thus  cut  off 
the  supplies  of  the  enemy  by  water  and  control  their  land-com- 
munication. I  was  thus  deprived  of  the  co-operation  of  the 
navy  and  left  to  my  own  resources. 

I  had  been  deprived  of  five  infantry  divisions,  and  out  of  the 
four  left  to  me  there  were  present  at  the  front  five  divisions  of 
volunteer  regiments,  the  weak  brigade  of  regulars.  Hunt's  artil- 
lery reserve,  and  a  small  cavalry  force. 

Owing  to  the  lack  of  wagons  Casey  did  not  reach  Young's 
Mill  until  the  i6th.  Richardson's  division  reached  the  front 
on  the  same  day.  Hooker's  division  commenced  arriving  at 
Ship's  Point  on  the  loth.  The  roads  were  so  bad  and  wagons 
so  few  that  it  was  with  the  utmost  difficulty  supplies  could  be 
brought  up,  and  the  field-artillery  moved  with  great  difficulty. 
Even  the  headciuarters  wagons  could  not  get  up,  and  I  slept  in 
a  deserted  hut  with  my  saddle-blanket  for  a  bed. 

My  telegram  of  April  7  to  the  President  shows  that  only 
53,000  men  had  joined  me,  so  that  I  had  not  more  than  44,000 
effectives,  and  found  myself  in  front  of  a  position  which  ap- 
parently could  not  be  carried  by  assault.  The  force  was  too 
small  to  attempt  any  movement  to  turn  Gloucester  without  the 
assistance  of  the  navy,  and  I  was  obliged  to  abandon  the  plan 
of  rapid  turning  mr  vements  which  I  had  intended  to  carry  out. 


WASHINGTON  INTERFERENCE,  265 

All  that  could  be  done  was  to  halt  where  we  were,  and  by 
close  reconnoissances  ascertain  whether  there  were  any  weak 
points  which  we  could  assault,  or,  failing  in  that,  determine 
what  could  be  effected  with  the  aid  of  siege-artillery  to  cover 
the  attack. 

Next  day,  April  6,  I  sent  the  following  telegram  to  his 
excellency  the  President  : 

The  order  forming  new  departments,  if  rigidly  enforced, 
deprives  me  of  the  power  of  ordering  up  wagons  and  troops 
absolutely  necessary  to  enable  me  to  advance  to  Richmond.  I 
have  by  no  means  the  transportation  I  must  have  to  move  my 
army  even  a  few  miles.  I  respectfully  request  I  may  not  be 
placed  in  this  position,  but  that  my  orders  for  wagons,  trains, 
and  ammunition,  and  other  material  that  I  have  prepared  and 
necessarily  left  behind  me,  as  well  as  Woodbury's  brigade,  may 
at  once  be  complied  with.  The  enemy  is  strong  in  my  front,  and 
1  have  a  most  serious  task  before  me,  in  the  fulfilment  of  which 
I  need  all  the  aid  the  government  can  give  me.  1  again  repeat 
the  urgent  request  that  Gen.  Franklin  and  his  division  may  be 
restored  to  my  command. 

I  received  the  following  reply  from  Secretary  Stanton  : 

"The  President  directs  me  to  say  that  your  despatch  to  him 
has  been  received.  Gen.  Sumner's  corps  is  on  the  road  to  you 
and  will  go  forward  as  fast  as  possible.  Franklin's  division  is 
now  on  the  advance  towards  Manassas.  There  is  no  means  of 
transportation  hv*re  to  send  it  forward  in  time  to  be  of  service  in 
your  present  operations.  Telegraph  frequently,  and  all  in  the 
power  of  the  government  shall  be  done  to  sustain  you  as  occasion 
may  require." 

And  this  from  the  President  : 

"Yours  of  eleven  a.m.  to-day  received.  Secretary  of  War 
informs  me  that  the  forwarding  of  transportation,  ammunition, 
and  Woodbury's  brigade  under  your  order  has  not  and  will  not 
be  interfered  with.  You  now  have  over  one  hundred  thousand 
troops  with  you,  independent  of  Gen.  Wool's  command.  I  think 
you  had  better  break  the  enemy's  line  from  Yorktown  to  War- 
wick river  at  once.  This  will  probably  use  time  as  advantageous- 
ly as  you  can. 

"A.  Lincoln, 

"  P  resident'* 


266  Mcclellan's  own  story. 

To  this  I  replied,  April  7,  to  the  President : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  received.  In  reply  I  have  the 
honor  to  state  that  my  entire  force  for  duty  only  amounts  to 
about  eighty-five  thousand  (85,000)  men.  Gen.  Wool's  com- 
mand, as  you  will  observe  from  the  accompanying  order,  has 
been  taken  out  of  my  control,  although,  he  has  most  cheerfully 
co-operated  with  me.  The  only  use  that  can  be  made  of  his 
command  is  to  protect  my  communications  in  rear  of  this  point. 
At  this  time  only  fifty-three  thousand  (53,000)  men  have  joined 
me,  but  they  are  coming  up  as  rapidly  as  my  means  of  transpor- 
tation will  permit.  Please  refer  to  my  despatch  to  the  Secretary 
of  War  of  to-night  for  the  details  of  our  present  situation. 

I  find  on  the  back  of  my  retained  copy  of  this  despatch  the 
following  memorandum  made  at  the  time  by  myself  • 

Return  of  March  31,  1862,  shows  men  present  for  duty      171,602 

Deduct  I  St  corps,  infantry  and  artillery,          .  32,119 

"       Blenker, 8,616 

Banks, 21,739 

Wadsworth, 19,318 

Cavalry  of  ist  corps,  etc.,    .         .         .  1,600 

"        "  Blenker,     ....  800 

Van  Alen  and  Wyndham,    .         .         .  1,600 

85J92         85,792 


u 


85,810 


Officers,  about  3,900. 

Total  absent  from  whole  command,  23,796. 

As  this  memorandum  was  a  calculation  to  ascertain  only  the 
number  of  troops  left  under  my  command,  it  did  not  take  into 
consideration  all  the  troops  left  behind  which  did  not  compose 
parts  of  the  total  of  171,602  for  duty.  My  letters  of  April  i, 
show  that  many  more  were  left  in  addition  to  those  mentioned 
in  this  memorandum. 

The  telegram  referred  to  in  my  despatch  to  the  President  was 
the  following,  of  April  7,  to  Secretary  Stanton  : 

Your  telegram  of  yesterday  arrived  here  while  I  was  absent 
examining  the  enemy's  right,  which  I  did  pretty  closely.  .  .  . 
The  whole  line  of  the  Warwick,  which  really  heads  within  a 
mile  of  Yorktown,  is  strongly  defended  by  detached  redoubts 
and  other  fortifications,  armed  with  heavy  and  light  guns.  The 
approaches,  except  at  Yorktown,  are  covered  by  the  Warwick, 
over  which  there  is  but  one,  or  at  most  two,  passages,  both  of 


REDUCTION  OF  FORCE.  267 

which  are  covered  by  strong  batteries.  It  will  be  necessary  to 
resort  to  the  use  of  heavy  guns  and  some  siege  operations  before 
we  assault.  All  the  prisoners  state  that  Gen.  J.  £.  Johnston 
arrived  at  Yorktown  yesterday  with  strong  reinforcements.  It 
seems  clear  that  I  shall  have  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  on  my 
hands — probably  not  less  than  (100,000)  one  hundred  thousand 
men,  and  possibly  more.  In  consequence  of  the  loss  of  Blenker's 
division  and  the  ist  corps  my  force  is  possibly  less  than  that  of 
the  enemy,  while  they  have  all  the  advantage  of  position. 

I  am  under  great  obligations  to  you  for  the  offer  that  the 
whole  force  and  material  of  the  government  will  be  as  fully  and 
as  speedily  under  my  command  as  heretofore,  or  as  if  the  new 
departments  had  not  been  created. 

Since  my  arrangements  were  made  for  this  campaign  at  least 
(50,000)  fifty  thousand  men  have  been  taken  from  ray  command. 
Since  my  despatch  of  the  5th  instant  five  divisions  have  been  in 
close  observation  of  the  enemy,  and  frequently  exchanging  shots. 
When  my  present  command  all  joins  I  shall  have  about  (85,000) 
eighty-five  thousand  men  for  duty,  from  which  a  large  force  must 
be  taken  for  guards,  scouts,  etc.  With  this  army  I  could  assault 
the  enemy's  works,  and  perhaps  carry  them.  But  were  I  in  pos- 
session of  their  entrenchments,  and  assailed  by  double  my  num- 
bers, I  should  have  no  fears  as  to  the  result. 

Under  the  circumstances  that  have  been  developed  since  we 
arrived  here,  I  feel  fully  impressed  with  the  conviction  that  here 
is  to  be  fought  the  great  battle  that  is  to  decide  the  existing  con- 
test. I  shall,  of  course,  commence  the  attack  as  soon  as  I  can 
get  up  my  siege  train,  and  shall  do  all  in  my  power  to  carry  the 
enemy's  works ;  but  to  do  this  with  a  reasonable  degree  of  cer- 
tainty requires,  in  my  judgment,  that  I  should,  if  possible,  have 
at  least  the  whole  of  the  ist  corps  to  land  upon  the  Severn  river 
and  attack  Gloucester  in  the  rear. 

My  present  strength  will  not  admit  of  a  detachment  sufficient 
for  this  purpose  without  materially  impairing  the  efficiency  of 
this  column.  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  thinks  the  works  Jtoo 
strong  for  his  available  vessels  unless  I  can  turn  Gloucester.  I 
send  by  mail  copies  of  his  letter  and  one  of  the  commander  of 
the  gunboats  here. 

Gen.  Keyes,  commanding  4th  army  corps,  after  the  examina- 
tion of  the  enemy's  defences  on  the  left,  addressed  the  following 
letter  to  the  Hon.  Ira  Harris,  U.  S.  Senate,  and  gave  me  a  copy. 
It  describes  the  situation  at  that  time  in  some  respects  so  well 
that  I  introduce  it  here : 

"  Headquarters,  4TH  Corps, 
"Warwick  Court-House,  Va.,  April  7,  1862. 

"  My  dear  Senator  :  The  plan  of  campaign  on  this  line  was 


20 


268  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY, 

made  with  the  distinct  understanding  that/i7»r  army  corps  should 
be  employed,  and  that  the  navy  should  co-operate  in  the  taking 
of  Yorktown,  and  also  (as  I  understood  it)  support  us  on  our  left 
by  moving  gunboats  up  James  river. 

"To-day  I  have  learned  that  the«ist  corps,  which  by  the 
President's  order  was  to  embrace  four  divisions,  and  one  division 
(Blenker's)  of  the  2d  corps,  have  been  withdrawn  altogether  from 
this  line  of  operations  and  from  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  At 
the  same  time,  as  I  am  informed,  the  navy  has  not  the  means  to 
attack  Yorktown,  and  is  afraid  to  send  gunboats  up  James  river 
for  fear  of  the  Merrimac, 

"  The  above  plan  of  campaign  was  adopted  unanimously  by 
Maj.-Gen.  McDowell  and  Brig.- Gens.  Sumner,  Heintzelman,  and 
Keyes,  and  was  concurred  in  by  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan,  who  first 
proposed  Urbana  as  our  base. 

This  army  being  reduced  by  forty-five  thousand  troops, 
some  of  them  among  the  best  in  the  service,  and  without  the 
support  of  the  navy,  the  plan  to  which  we  are  reduced  bears 
scarcely  any  resemblance  to  the  one  I  voted  for. 

"I  command  the  James  river  column,  and  I  left  my  camp 
near  Newport  News  the  morning  of  the  4th  instant.  I  only  suc- 
ceeded in  getting  my  artillery  ashore  the  afternoon  of  the  day 
before,  and  one  of  my  divisions  had  not  all  arrived  in  camp  the 
day  I  left,  and  for  the  want  of  transportation  has  not  yet  joined 
me.  So  you  will  observe  that  not  a  day  was  lost  in  the  advance, 
and  in  fact  we  marched  so  quickly  and  so  rapidly  that  many  of 
our  animals  were  twenty-four  and  forty-eight  hours  without  a 
ration  of  forage.  But,  notwithstanding  the  rapidity  of  our  ad- 
vance, we  were  stopped  by  a  line  of  defence  nine  or  ten  miles 
long,  strongly  fortified  by  breastworks,  erected  nearly  the  whole 
distance  behind  a  stream  or  succession  of  ponds,  nowhere  ford- 
able,  one  terminus  being  Yorktown  and  the  other  ending  in  the 
James  river,  which  is  commanded  by  the  enemy's  gunboats. 
Yorktown  is  fortified  all  around  with  bastioned  works,  and  on 
the  water-side  it  and  Gloucester  are  so  strong  that  the  navy  are 
afraid  to  attack  either. 

"  The  approaches  on  one  side  are  generally  through  low, 
swampy,  or  thickly  wooded  ground,  over  roads  which  we  are 
obliged  to  repair  or  to  make  before  we  can  get  forward  our  car- 
riages. The  enemy  is  in  great  force,  and  is  constantly  receiving 
reinforcements  from  the  two  rivers.  The  line  in  front  of  us  is 
therefore  one  of  the  strongest  ever  opposed  to  an  invading  force 
in  any  country. 

"  You  will,  then,  ask  why  I  advocated  such  a  line  for  our  ope- 
rations ?     My  reasons  are  few  but,  I  think,  good. 

"  With  proper  assistance  from  the  navy  we  could  take  York- 
town,  and  then  with  gunboats  on  both  rivers  we  could  beat  any 
force  opposed  to  us  on  Warwick  river,  because  the  shot  and  shell 


LETTER  OF  GEN.  KEYES,  269 

from  the  gunboats  would  nearly  overlap  across  the  Peninsula  ;  so 
that  if  the  enemy  should  retreat — and  retreat  he  must — he  would 
have  a  long  way  to  go  without  rail  or  steam  transportation,  and 
every  soul  of  his  army  must  fall  into  our  hands  or  be  destroyed. 
Another  reason  for  my  supporting  the  new  base  and  plan 
was  that  this  line,  it  was  expected,  would  furnish  w^ter-transpor- 
tation  nearly  to  Richmond. 

"  Now,  supposing  we  succeed  in  breaking  through  the  line  in 
front  of  us,  what  can  we  do  next  ?  The  roads  are  very  bad,  and 
if  the  enemy  retains  command  of  James  river,  and  we  do  not 
first  reduce  Yorktown,  it  would  be  impossible  for  us  to  subsist 
this  army  three  marches  beyond  where  it  is  now.  As  the  roads 
are  at  present,  it  is  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  we  can  subsist  * 
it  in  the  position  it  now  occupies. 

"  You  will  see,  therefore,  by  what  I  have  said,  that  the  force 
originally  intended  for  the  capture  of  Richmond  should  be  all 
sent  forward.  If  I  thought  the  four  army  corps  necessary  when 
I  supposed  the  navy  would  co-operate,  and  when  I  judged  of  the 
obstacles  to  be  encountered  by  what  I  learned  from  maps  and 
the  opinions  of  officers  long  stationed  at  Fort  Monroe,  and  from 
ail  other  sources,  how  much  more  should  I  think  the  full  comple- 
ment of  troops  requisite  now  that  the  navy  cannot  co-operate, 
and  now  that  the  strength  of  the  enemy's  lines  and  the  number 
of  his  guns  and  men  prove  to  be  almost  immeasurably  greater 
than  I  had  been  led  to  expect  !  The  line  in  front  of  us,  in  the 
opinion  of  all  the  military  men  here  who  are  at  all  competent  to 
judge,  is  one  of  the  strongest  in  the  world,  and  the  force  of  the 
enemy  capable  of  being  increased  beyond  the  numbers  we  now 
have  to  oppose  to  him.  Independently  of  the  strength  of  the 
lines  in  front  of  us,  and  of  the  force  of  the  enemy  behind  them, 
we  cannot  advance  until  we  get  command  of  either  York  river  or 
James  river.  The  efficient  co-operation  of  the  navy  is,  therefore, 
absolutely  essential,  and  so  I  considered  it  when  I  voted  to 
change  our  base  from  the  Potomac  to  Fort  Monroe. 

"  An  iron-clad  boat  must  attack  Yorktown  ;  and  if  several 
strong  gunboats  could  be  sent  up  James  river  also,  our  success 
will  be  certain  and  complete,  and  the  rebellion  will  soon  be  put 
down. 

**  On  the  other  hand,  we  must  butt  against  the  enemy's  works 
with  heavy  artillery  and  a  great  waste  of  time,  life,  and  material. 

"  If  we  break  through  and  advance,  both  our  flanks  will  be 
assailed  from  two  great  water-courses  in  the  hands  of  the  enemy  ; 
our  supplies  would  give  out,  and  the  enemy,  equal,  if  not  supe- 
rior, in  numbers,  would,  with  the  other  advantages,  beat  and 
destroy  this  army. 

"  The  greatest  master  of  the  art  of  war  has  said  that  *  if  you 
would  invade  a  country  successfully,  you  must  have  one  line  of 
operations  and  one  army,  under  one  general.'     But  what  is  our 


•;«jiiditt</fi '  'J'iH.-  IsrtuV.-  yf  Vif^iiiUi  it  tiia<k  t^  fjj>BmJlvtit  tbt  com- 
njsniii,  n»  v**^  ^  whull)',  <jf  iifAHi^  w,  ^eiktaalt^  viz.:  Jremum, 
Jlai»i9%*,  M':1^<w«ill,  M Vol,  A^uf&bkW,  aud  Mc^jMiaa,  l»esid«s  the 

^*  'J'Jk-  ipr4istt  b^tk  <if  lU;  »'af  it  lo  coiat:  gff  here.  If  wc  win 
ft  Uk-  r**i>^lhinj  will  W  '.-rutifat^d.  If  wtr  k*e  it  like  conw;qiHa>ces 
mtW  \j*:  iiivf*;  iiurnbk  tliau  J  ^-are  t*>  fciftrtdOL  Tilt  plau  if  cam> 
Vstl|Cf'  J  vui«:<j  (vf^  if  <..«jri«d  «^ul  irith  tbe  inta&s  proposed,  wil] 
',*rniimiy  t»u*^'^»sv6.  if  iiov  part  'X  the  m^san  prcipoted  are  with- 
iHi^itl  uf  Vin^irrt^,  I  4^9eso  it  due  tc»  fsji>eif  to  fay  that  otu  sttODe» 
wiU  i^  uti*>erUtkj- 

*'  It  it  ng  'd<>ui^  a|^<3ead»ie  to  the  commander  of  the  ist  corps 
tv  iiitive  a  tuepaxaie  departmeot,  aiad,  a»  this  letter  a<ivc»cat<es  his 
t*i^ufiL  v^  <^>»D.  %(UilWUMn\  tAfrnmrndf  it  is  proper  to  state  that  I 
nfij  i<vt  «it  4KJi  uUSueoM^d  i/y  pertional  regard  or  dislike  to  asj  of 
f»r  *ei>y/ft  iio  rank.  If  f  were  to  credit  all  the  opinioas  whSdi 
have  i^^tico  po'jred  into  m)r  earb,  I  must  believe  that,  in  regard  to 
my  yf*AA:fi^  Utyc  c//mnum<i^  I  tm^  much  to  Gen.  McLknrell  and 
fiothii»|^  to  fien,  M^X^MUn,  But  I  have  disregarded  all  such  offi- 
4r>/yMMM,  and  I  have  fr^^m  last  July  to  the  present  day  supported 
</en.  M//.VIIan  and  ol>eyed  all  his  orders  with  as  hearty  a  good- 
wiJJ  at  tl^/ugh  he  had  l/een  my  brother  or  the  friend  to  whom  I 
f/wr4  u^M,  I  shall  continue  to  do  so  to  the  last  and  so  long  as 
he  is  my  ';//mmander^  and  I  am  not  desirous  to  displace  him,  and 
W4/uM  nai  i(  I  could.  He  left  Washington  with  the  understand- 
h^^  that  he  was  Ut  execute  a  definite  plan  of  campaign  with  cer- 
tain pres/ribed  means,  The  plan  was  good  and  the  means  suf- 
fix i^nt,  AUt\,  without  modification,  the  enterprise  was  certain  of 
§miitt^%.  liut,  with  the  reduction  of  force  and  means,  the  plan  is 
eiitjri'ly  '  hangc'd,  and  is  now  a  ba<i  plan,  with  means  insufficient 
for  '<'ftaiii  %imi*%%, 

"|>ono(  look  upon  thiK  communication  as  the  offspring  of 
iU*tn^oii*U*nt  y,  I  rM'vi'r  deKpond  ;  and  when  you  see  me  working 
Ihi'  ihntU'ki  ytm  luny  l>if  Htire  that  fortune  is  frowning  upon  mc 
f  liih  w</rhM|/  mftf  to  my  utmoHt. 

'*  i*ititi,i  t^JM/w  fhin  If'ttrr  to  the  President,  and  I  should  like 
iti>jf  ijj.if  Mr  *)iuiiiim  Hhoiild'  know  its  contents.  Do  me  the 
h*fh*/i  i'i  wHii  in  MM'  lid  soon  an  you  can,  and  believe  me,  with 

"  V'/«M  MM»i»l  olM«ftient  servant, 

"K.  I).  Keyes, 
''/fff^,  (icpi,  Commanding  /^h  Army  Corps, 

i).«  M  •  •.'jii/«/jM>.iiH  «♦»  Mf  (h<*  6th  and  7th  and  following  days, 
i".i'«i  w'H'  yh.n  v)|/iM  ami  with  Nomc  loss,  confirmed  the 
•  iit|  M     .vn.   i/.ju^iij  nti  \\ii    »jih.     1  verified  all  these  reconnois- 


272  McCLELLA,N'S  OWN  STORY, 

sances  in  person,  going  everywhere  beyond  our  lines  of  pickets, 
and  resuming  my  old  trade  of  reconnoitring  officer,  so  anxious 
was  I  to  find  a  practicable  point  of  attack.  In  fact,  during  the 
^hole  siege  I  exposed  myself  more  in  this  way  than  was  proper 
for  a  general  commanding  an  army ;  but  I  had  had  far  more 
personal  experience  in  sieges  than  any  of  those  under  my  com- 
mand, and  trusted  more  to  my  own  knowledge  and  experience 
than  I  then  could  to  theirs. 

It  was  found  that  the  Warwick  valley  headed  within  two  thou- 
sand yards  of  the  enceinte  of  Yorktown,  and  within  half  that  dis- 
tance of  the  White  Redoubt,  or  Fort  Magruder,  a  strong  work, 
essentially  a  part  of  the  main  works  at  Yorktown,  which  wpre  so 
strong — having  ditches  from  eight  to  ten  feet  deep,  and  more 
than  fifteen  feet  wide  at  the  top — ^and  so  heavily  armed  with  siege 
and  garrison  guns,  as  to  render  an  assault  hopeless.  The  inter- 
val between  Yorktown  and  the  Warwick  was  occupied  by  strong 
works,  and  all  the  open  ground  in  front,  as  well  as  the  direct 
approaches  to  the  town  itself,  so  thoroughly  swept  by  the  direct 
fire  of  more  than  fifty  guns  of  the  heaviest  calibres  then  known 
as  to  render  it  an  act  of  madness  to  assault  without  first  silencing 
the  fire  of  the  enemy's  artillery.  From  its  head  to  Lee's  Mill  the 
Warwick  was  flooded  by  means  of  artificial  inundations,  which 
rendered  it  unfordable.  The  dams  constructed  for  this  purpose 
were  all  covered  by  strong  works  so  situated  as  to  be  unassailable 
until  their  artillery-fire  was  reduced.  Below  Lee*s  Mill  the  river 
was  a  tidal  stream,  not  fordable  at  any  stage  of  the  tide.  That 
portion,  moreover,  was  controlled  by  the  fire  of  the  Confederate 
gunboats  in  the  James  river.  The  valley  of  the  Warwick  was 
generally  low  and  swampy,  the  approaches  to  the  dams  were 
through  dense  forests  and  deep  swamps,  and  every  precaution 
had  been  taken  by  the  enemy,  in  the  way  of  felling  timber  and 
constructing  works,  to  make  a  crossing  as  difficult  as  possible. 

In  his  report  of  the  6th  of  May,  immediately  after  the 
occupation  of  Yorktown,  Gen.  Barnard,  chief-engineer  of  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac,  says : 

"They  (referring  to  the  groups  of  works  covering  the  War- 
wick) are  far  more  extensive  than  may  be  supposed,  from  the 
mention  of  them  I  make,  and  every  kind  of  obstruction  which  the 
country  affords,  such  as  abattis,  marsh,  inundation,  etc.,  was  skil- 
fully  used.     The   line   is   certainly   one   of  the   most   extensive 


274  MeCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

known  to  modem  times.  The  country  on  both  sides  the  War- 
wick from  near  Yorktown  down  is  a  dense  forest  with  few  clear- 
ings. It  was  swampy,  and  the  roads  impassable  during  the  heavy 
rains  we  have  constantly  had,  except  where  our  own  labors  h^d 
corduroyed  them.  If  we  could  have  broken  the  enemy's  line 
across  the  isthmus  we  could  have  invested  Yorktown,  and  it 
must,  with  its  garrison,  have  soon  fallen  into  our  hands.  It  was 
not  deemed  practicable,  considering  the  strength  of  that  line  and 
the  difficulty  of  handling  our  forces  (owing  to  the  impracticable 
character  of  the  country),  to  do  so.  If  we  could  take  Yorktown 
or.  drive  the  enemy  out  of  that  place,  the  enemy's  line  was  no 
longer  tenable.  This  we  could  do  by  siege  operations.  It  was 
deemed  too  hazardous  to  attempt  the  reduction  of  the  place  by 
assault.  The  operations  of  the  siege  required  extensive  prepara- 
tions. 

"  I  regret  that  there  is  not  time  and  means  to  prepare  a  com- 
plete plan  of  this  enormous  system  of  defences.  They  should 
form  part  of  the  record  of  the  operations  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac.  The  forcing  of  such  a  line  with  so  little  loss  is  in  itself 
an  exploit,  less  brilliant,  perhaps,  but  more  worthy  of  study,  than 
would  have  been  a  murderous  assault,  even  had  it  proved  suc- 
cessful." 

I  need  only  add  to  this  that  Gen.  Barnard  never  expressed  to 
me  any  opinion  that  an  assault  was  practicable  upon  any  part  of 
the  enemy's  defences.  From  his  first  reconnoissances  he  was 
decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  the  use  of  heavy  guns  was  neces- 
sary. More  than  this,  I  never,  at  the  time,  heard  of  any  contrary 
opinion  from  any  one,  and,  so  far  as  I  know,  there  was  entire 
unanimity  on  the  part  of  the  general  officers  and  chiefs  of  staff 
departments  that  the  course  pursued  was  the  only  one  prac- 
ticable under  the  circumstances. 

From  Lee's  Mill  a  line  of  works  extended  to  the  enemy's  rear 
to  Skiff's  creek,  so  that  if  we  had  forced  the  passage  of  the  War- 
wick below  that  point  we  would  have  found  a  new  line  of 
defence  in  front  of  us,  completely  covering  the  enemy's  com- 
munications. 

During  the  progress  of  these  reconnoissances  every  effort  was 
made  to  bring  up  supplies  and  ammunition.  A  violent  storm 
beginning  on  the  6th,  and  continuing  without  cessation  for  three 
or  four  days,  almost  entirely  interrupted  the  water-communica- 
tion between  Fortress  Monroe  and  Ship  Point,  and  made  the 
already  bad  roads  terrible  beyond  description.  In  those  days 
I  more  than  once  thought  of  a  reply  made  to  me  by  an  old  gen- 


BAD  ROADS,  275 

eral  of  Cossacks,  who  had  served  in  all  the  Russian  campaigns 
against  Napoleon.  I  had  asked  how  the  roads  were  in  those 
days,  to  which  he  replied  :  "  My  son,  the  roads  are  always  bad 
in  war." 

It  was  not  until  the  loth  that  we  were  able  to  establish  a  new 
depot  on  Cheeseman's  creek,  which  shortened  the  haul  about 
three  miles.  The  rains  continued  almost  incessantly,  and  it  was 
necessary  not  only  to  detail  large  working  parties  to  unload  sup- 
plies, but  details  of  some  thousands  of  men  were  required  to 
corduroy  the  roads,  as  the  only  means  of  enabling  us  to  get  up 
supplies. 

As  illustrating  the  condition  of  things,  I  insert  the  following 
despatch  from  Mr.  John  Tucker,  Assistant  Secretary  of  War,  dat- 
ed near  Yorktown,  April  10,  to  Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary 
of  War : 

"  I  reached  Gen.  McClellan's  headquarters  at  seven  this  even- 
ing, having  had  an  accident  to  the  steamer  on  the  way  from 
Fortress  Monroe  to  Ship  Point.  I  was  five  hours  on  horseback 
(making  about  five  miles),  the  roads  being  almost  impassable  and 
so  entirely  occupied  with  army  wagons  I  frequently  had  to  leave 
the  road  and  take  to  the  woods.  The  severe  storm  at  Fortress 
Monroe  prevented  transports  from  leaving  for  several  days.  The 
facilities  for  landing  at  Ship  Point  are  very  poor,  and  for  several 
days  it  must  have  been  next  to  impossible  to  move  artillery  over 
such  roads.  I  learn  that  twelve  thousand  men  are  engaged  in 
repairing  and  building  new  roads.  The  difficulties  of  transpor- 
tation have  been  so  great  that  some  of  the  cavalry  horses  had 
to  be  sent  back  to  keep  them  from  starving.  I  will  report  my 
observations  of  army  movements  to-morrow,  but  I  see  an  earnest 
determination  to  lose  no  time  in  attacking  the  enemy. 

"John  Tucker, 
"  Assistant  Secretary  of  War!* 

The  following  telegram  was  sent  as  indicated,  on  April  10,  to 
Brig-Gen.  Thomas,  adjutant-general  : 

I  examined  the  works  on  enemy's  left  very  carefully  to-day. 
They  are  very  strong,  the  approaches  difficult ;  enemy  in  force 
and  confident.  Water-batteries  at  York  and  Gloucester  said  to 
be  much  increased  ;  have  not  seen  them  myself.  Have  not  yet 
received  reports  of  engineer  officers.  I  go  to-morrow  to  examine 
our  left.  Sharp  firing  on  our  right  for  some  time  to-day  while  I 
was  there ;  no  harm  done,  although  their  shells  burst  handsomely. 
21 


yyO  M^i'i^n 4N'H  OWN  HTOHY. 

Aoi  u«i*)yU»u  ^\\\i\}\\i^^  fMHM  '^\\\\)  I'oiiM,  repairing  roadK,  getting 

|i  ^t.l,4Mtl  M'/w  mImm^I  it-rtain  llml  Wr  iiiunt  uhc  mortarK  and 
\m.^s^  |;(ioa  rii.x|y  lii-hML:  lUnaiilUiig  The*  navul  ofticcrK  urge  an 
«»Mti>  (i  )n  K<M  Mf'  (iliMM  i-'ulL-r  i  I  think  (hi*y  ure  right,  but  am  now 
i»M)  v^wii^  iM  «MUMm(  H,  iMiU'iiti  Mi*w  <  in  iimHtant CH  come  to  my 
^M*mh'*t|jtw      till  filrttli   will  hi!  prtitrurtcil  in  c:onHC([ucncc  of  the 

iIihummUdm  Mr  my  ^<**^ 

ih»i  r^thmlhii  >H*u  »»oni  \\\  lltMi.  K,  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of 
\Vt^^^  >m   \|^mI  rt  J 

Wt-^O^v^  h^MUIv^i  huninji  hoiU'lly  lant  twenty-eight  hours; 
^NVt^>U  A\\s\  \\\\\\\\  \\\  rtxMul  ioiulilion;  very  little  tiring  to-day. 
^>>.HS^^>s^J^«»^^^vv>  \\\\\\^  \s\\\\\\\\\\k\  under  diHadvantagoous  circum- 
i^^^^s>v>»  \<>^s  ?iMhUNv^»  hvu  <um\«hI  Mi^st  «>f  Kii  hardju>n*s  divi- 
M^NSS  >\\  MsN\\  iSs^^t  \  ^  iUNnot  move  it  tr\>m  then*  in  present  con- 
\^^^^^NSS  vs^  SnMvU  \\\\\\\  \  ^\\  mo«v  wc^iixmji.  I  neeil  more  force  to 
svM^v  Hhv  ^\\^\\<  WW  \\\\\\\\\^^\\^\. 

\\\  ^\\^  \w\\  \     \\\\\\\\^^  >s\s  \\\^  oi 

\\vm>N>^^  ^td\  v^\>sud\<oi  xSMMUvy  ^^>^r^^^  with  w^ater;  fwads 
U'Ud^ls  \\  y*^  >N^tU  th»^  ^^m.vxi  d^tSixxdu  tH^t  I  oa«  supi^y  the 
^H\^N\\N>  \\>  t^v  >>^M^\*^  .^^  m\\\\o^>xo  d<sAl  'iN?  >ii\vri  tM\  the  ivvAds;. 
S  ^ss^N^^^   \-^Hsd  ^u^v  ^^v^^^\  ^md  wn^d  uvsW^A^t^     R<\\M\?Kvissjuftces 

\  iX.    ,v.v%    i^vf       -?w»•*•»i»v^♦    J^^^*-    t»xN    ••■-»»    x^<^^i'   tit\;fT^-ut^ 


LETTER  FROM  THE  PRESIDENT.  277 

to  be  left  for  the  defence  of  Washington  and  Manassas  Junction, 
and  part  of  this  even  was  to  go  to  Gen.  Hooker's  old  position. 
Gen.  Banks's  corps,  once  designed  for  Manassas  Junction,  was 
diverted  and  tied  up  on  the  line  of  Winchester  and  Strasburg, 
and  could  not  leave  it  without  again  exposing  the  upper  Potomac 
and  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad.  This  presented,  or  would 
present  when  McDowell  and  Sumner  should  be  gone,  a  great 
temptation  to  the  enemy  to  turn  back  from  the  Rappahannock 
and  sack  Washington.  My  implicit  order  that  Washington  should, 
by  the  judgment  of  all  the  commanders  of  army  corps,  be  left 
entirely  secure,  had  been  neglected.  It  was  precisely  this  that 
drove  me  to  detain  McDowell. 

**  I  do  not  forget  that  I  was  satisfied  innth  your  arrangement  to 
leave  Banks  at  Manassas  Junction  ;  but  when  that  arrangement 
was  broken  up,  and  nothing  was  substituted  for  it,  of  course  I 
was  constrained  to  substitute  something  for  it  myself.  And  allow 
me  to  ask.  Do  you  really  think  I  should  permit  the  line  from 
Richmond  via  Manassas  Junction  to  this  city  to  be  entirely 
open,  except  what  resistance  could  be  presented  by  less  than 
20,000  unorganized  troops  ?  This  is  a  question  which  the  coun- 
try will  not  allow  me  to  evade. 

**  There  is  a  curious  mystery  about  the  number  of  troops  now 
with  you.  W'hen  I  telegraphed  you  on  the  6th,  saying  you  had 
over  a  hundred  thousand  with  you,  I  had  just  obtained  from  the 
Secretary  of  W^ar  a  statement,  taken,  as  he  said,  from  your  own 
returns,  making  108,000  then  with  you  and  en  route  to  you.  You 
now  say  you  will  have  but  85,000  when  all  en  route  to  you  shall 
have  reached  you.  How  can  the  discrepancy  of  23,000  be  ac- 
counted for? 

"  As  to  Gen.  Wool's  command,  I  understand  it  is  doing  for 
you  precisely  what  a  like  number  of  your  own  would  have  to  do 
if  that  command  was  away. 

"  I  supp>ose  the  whole  force  which  has  gone  forward  for  you  is 
with  you  by  this  time.  And  if  so,  I  think  it  is  the  precise  time 
for  you  to  strike  a  blow.  By  delay  the  enemy  will  relatively  gain 
upon  you — that  is,  he  will  gain  faster  by  fortifications  and  rein- 
forcements than  you  can  by  reinforcements  alone.  And  once 
more  let  me  tell  you,  it  is  indispensable  to  you  that  you  strike  a 
blow.  I  am  powerless  to  help  this.  You  will  do  me  the  justice 
to  remember  I  always  insisted  that  going  down  the  bay  in  search 
of  a  field,  instead  of  fighting  at  or  near  Manassas,  was  only  shift- 
ing, and  not  surmounting,  a  difficulty ;  that  we  would  find  the 
same  enemy  and  the  same  or  equal  entrenchments  at  either 
place.  The  country  will  not  fail  to  note,  is  now  noting,  that  the 
present  hesitation  to  move  upon  an  entrenched  enemy  is  but  the 
story  of  Manassas  repeated. 

"  I  beg  to  assure  you  that  I  have  never  written  you  or  spwken 
to  you  in  greater  kindness  of  feeling  than  now,  nor  with  a  fuller 


278  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

purpose  to  sustain  you,  so  far  as,  in  my  most  anxious  judgment, 
I  consistently  can.     But  you  must  act. 

Yours  very  truly, 

"A.  Lincoln." 

The  portions  of  this  letter  referring  to  the  arrangements  for 
the  defence  of  Washington  and  the  Shenandoah  have  already  been 
fully  answered  and  need  not  be  alluded  to  again  in  this  place. 

As  regards  the  discrepancy  of  23,000  men,  it  is  sufficient  to 
say  that  my  estimate  was  made  from  the  actual  latest  returns  of 
the  men  present  for  duty,  and  was  correct.  I  have  no  doubt 
that  the  number  furnished  the  President  was  the  aggregate  pre- 
sent and  absent — a  convenient  mistake  not  unfrequently  made 
by  the  Secretary  of  War. 

The  number  I  gave  was  correct ;  that  furnished  the  President 
was  incorrect. 

In  regard  to  the  employment  of  Wool's  command,  the  authori- 
ties in  Washington  failed  to  perceive  the  irony  of  my  remark  in 
my  telegram  of  April  7,  to  the  effect  that  the  only  use  that 
could  be  made  of  his  command  was  to  protect  my  communica- 
tions in  rear  of  the  point  I  then  occupied.  There  were  no  com- 
munications to  protect  beyond  Ship  Point,  and  there  was  no 
possibility  of  the  roads  to  Fortress  Monroe  being  troubled  by  the 
enemy.  Wool's  troops  were  of  no  possible  use  to  me  beyond 
holding  Fortress  Monroe,  and  would  have  been  of  very  great 
use  if  the  surplus  had  been  incorporated  with  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac. 

The  whole  force  sent  forward  had  not  joined  me  at  the 
date  of  this  letter ;  it  was  not  until  seven  days  later  that  Casey, 
Hooker,  and  Richardson  reached  the  front  line ;  they  could  not 
be  brought  up  earlier,  I  have  already  shown  the  impossibility 
of  attacking  earlier  or  otherwise  than  we  actually  did. 

When  in  front  of  Sebastopol  in  1855  I  asked  Gen.  Martim- 
prey,  chief  of  staff  of  the  French  army  in  the  Crimea,  how  he 
found  that  the  cable  worked  which  connected  the  Crimean  with 
the  European  lines  of  telegraph.  He  said  that  it  worked  admi- 
rably from  the  Crimea  to  Paris,  but  very  badly  in  the  opposite 
direction  ;  and  by  way  of  explanation  related  the  following  anec- 
dote :  He  said  that  immediately  after  the  failure  of  the  assault 
of  June,  1855,  the  emperor  telegraphed  Pelissier  to  renew  the 
assault   immediately.      Pelissier  replied   that   it  was  impossible 


I  MP  A  TIENCE.  2  79 

without  certain  preliminary  preparations  which  required  several 
weeks.  The  emperor  repeated  the  peremptory  order  to  attack 
at  once.  Pe Ussier  repeated  his  reply.  After  one  or  two  more 
interchanges  of  similar  messages  Pelissier  telegraphed:  ^I  will 
not  renew  the  attack  until  ready ;  if  you  wish  it  done,  come  and 
do  it  yourself."     That  ended  the  matter. 

Referring  for  a  moment  to  the  President's  despatch  of  April 
6,  it  is  well  to  recall  the  facts  that  at  that  time,  instead  of  100,000 
men,  I  had — after  deducting  guards  and  working  parties — much 
less  than  40,000  for  attack,  and  that  the  portion  of  the  enemy's 
lines  which  he  thought  I  had  better  break  through  at  once  was 
about  the  strongest  of  the  whole,  except,  perhaps,  the  town  itself. 

The  impatience  displayed  at  that  time,  after  so  greatly  reduc- 
ing my  force,  is  in  remarkable  contrast  with  the  patience  which 
permitted  Grant  to  occupy  months  in  front  of  the  lines  of  Peters- 
burg, tar  inferior  in  strength  to  those  of  Yorktown. 

On  the  2 2d  of  March  I  had  prepared  the  following  : 

COXFIDENTIAL  MEMORANDUM. 

For  the  operations  against  Yorktown,  Richmond,  etc,  where 
we  will  probably  find  extensive  earthworks  heavily  garrisoned,  we 
shall  require  the  means  of  overwhelming  them  by  a  vertical  fire  of 
shells. 

I  should  therefore  be  glad  to  have  disposable  at  Fortress 
Monroe  : 

I.   I  St.  20  10- inch  mortars  complete. 
2d.  20  8-inch  mortars  complete. 
II.  20  8-inch  siege-howitzers. 

III.  20  4 J- inch  wrought-iron  siege-guns. 

IV.  40  20- pounder  Parrotts. 
V.           —  24-pounder  siege-guns. 

The  2o-pounder  Parrotts  with  the  batteries  will,  of  course,  be 
counted  as  available. 

I  do  not  know  the  number  of  4j~inch  guns  available  ;  if  not 
so  many  as  I  have  indicated,  something  else  should  be  substituted. 
I  wish  Gen.  Barry  and  Col.  Kingsbury  to  consult  with  Gen. 
Marcy,  to  make  such  suggestions  as  occur  to  them,  and  ascertain 
at  once  to  what  extent  this  memorandum  can  be  filled.  It  is 
possible  we  cannot  count  upon  the  navy  to  reduce  Yorktown  by 
their  independent  efforts;  we  must  therefore  be  prepared  to  do  it 
by  our  own  means.  There  are  said  to  be  at  Yorktown  from  27 
to  32  heavy  guns,  at  Gloucester  14  Columbiads.  The  probable 
armament  of  Yorktown,  when  exterior  guns  are  drawn  in,  will  be 


iSo  MfCtELlAN'S  OIVN  STORY. 

ix\w\\  40  to  50  heavy  guns,  from  24-pounders  to  8-inch  and  per- 
ha|>s  lo-inch  Columbiads," 

Before  leaving  Washington  I  detailed  Col.  Robert  Tyler's  ist 
Conn,  regiment  as  heavy  artillery,  and  placed  the  siege-train  in 
their  charge ;  it  will  be  seen,  as  the  narrative  proceeds,  how 
admirably  this  splendid  regiment  performed  their  most  important 
duties  at  all  times  and  under  the  most  trying  circumstances. 

As  soon  as  it  became  clear  that  no  aid  was  to  be  had  from  the 
navy,  and  that  we  must  reduce  Yorktown  by  a  front  attack,  I 
took  steps  to  increase  the  number  of  heavy  guns  and  mortars  to 
the  extent  shown  by  the  statement  of  batteries  given  hereafter. 
The  number  of  officers  of  the  corps  of  engineers  and  of  the 
topographical  engineers  at  my  disposal  was  so  small  that  it  was 
necessary  to  supplement  them  by  civilian  employees  kindly  fur- 
nished by  Prof.  Bache,  of  the  U.  S.  Coast  Survey,  and  by  details 
from  the  line.  These  civilian  employees  vied  with  the  officers  of 
the  army  in  the  courage,  devotion,  and  intelligence  with  which 
they  performed  the  dangerous  and  important  duties  devolving 
upon  them.  There  were  but  twelve  officers  of  the  engineers,  in- 
cluding four  on  duty  with  the  three  companies  of  engineer  troops, 
and  six  of  the  topographical  engineers.  These  officers  at  once 
proceeded  to  ascertain  by  close  reconnoissances  the  nature  and 
strength  of  the  enemy's  defences  and  the  character  of  the  ground, 
in  order  to  determine  the  points  of  attack  and  the  nature  of  the 
necessary  works  of  attack.  Meanwhile  the  troops  were  occupied 
in  constructing  roads  to  the  depots.  Gen.  Sumner  reached  the 
front  on  the  9th  of  April,  and  was  placed  in  command  of  the  left 
wing,  consisting  of  his  own  and  the  4th  corps.  He  was  in  front 
of  the  line  of  the  Warwick,  while  the  3d  corps  was  charged  with 
the  operations  against  Yorktown  itself.  The  following  despatch 
to  Secretary  Stanton  shows  the  condition  of  affairs  at  its  date, 
April  1 1  : 

The  recoimoissances  of  to-day  prove  that  it  is  necessary  to 
invest  and  attack  Gloucester  Point.  Give  me  Franklin's  and 
McCairs  divisions  under  command  of  Franklin,  and  I  w^ill  at 
once  undertake  it.  If  circumstances  of  which  I  am  not  aware 
make  it  impossible  for  you  to  send  me  two  divisions  to  carry  out 
the  final  plan  of  campaign,  I  will  run  the  risk  and  hold  myself 
responsible  for  the  results  if  you  will  give  me  Franklin's  division. 


LETTER  OF  F,  P.  BLAIR.  28 1 

If  you  still  confide  in  my  judgment  I  entreat  that  you  will  grant 
this  request.  The  fate  of  our  cause  depends  upon  it.  Although 
willing,  under  the  pressure  of  necessity,  to  carry  this  through 
with  Franklin  alone,  I  wish  it  to  be  distinctly  understood  that 
I  think  two  divisions  necessary.  Franklin  and  his  division  are 
indispensable  to  me.  Gen.  Barnard  concurs  in  this  view.  I  have 
determined  upon  the  point  of  attack,  and  am  at  this  moment 
engaged  in  fixing  the  position  of  the  batteries. 

The  same  day  the  following  reached  me  : 

"  By  direction  of  the  President,  Franklin's  division  has  been 
ordered  to  march  back  to  Alexandria  and  immediately  embark 
for  Fortress  Monroe. 

"  L.  Thomas, 

''Adj\-Gtnr 

I  replied  to  the  secretary :  "  I  am.  delighted  with  Franklin's 
orders,  and  beg  to  thank  you." 

I  insert  the  following  letter  from  my  venerable  friend,  Francis 
P.  Blair,  as  an  indication  of  the  state  of  feeling  at  the  time  : 

"Washington,  April  12,  1862. 
''  Maj.-Gen.  G,  B,  McCUllan: 

"  My  dear  Sir  :  There  is  a  prodigious  cry  of  *  On  to  Rich- 
mond I '  among  the  carpet-knights  of  our  city,  who  will  not  shed 
their  blood  to  get  there.  I  am  one  of  those  who  wish  to  see  you 
lead  a  triumph  in  the  capital  of  the  Old  Dominion,  but  am  not  so 
eager  as  to  hazard  it  by  hurrying  on  too  fast.  The  veterans  of 
Waterloo  filled  the  trenches  of  Gen.  Jackson  at  New  Orleans 
with  their  bodies  and  their  blood.  If  you  can  accomplish  your 
object  of  reaching  Richmond  by  a  slower  process  than  storming 
redoubts  and  batteries  in  earthworks,  the  country  will  applaud 
the  achievement  which  gives  success  to  its  arms  with  greatest 
parsimony  of  the  blood  of  its  children.  The  envious  Charles 
Lee  denounced  his  superior,  W^ashington,  as  gifted  too  much 
with  that  *  rascally  virtue  prudetue.'  Exert  it  and  deser\'e  his 
fame.  Your  friend, 

"  F.  P.  Blair, 

"  Silver  Springs." 


My  retained  copy  of  the  following  letter  is  not  dated,  but  it 
must  have  been  written  somewhere  about  the  20th  of  April : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
before  yorktown. 

Hon.  E,  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Sir:  I  received  to-day  a  note  from  Assistant  Secretary  Watson 


282  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY,  ^ 

enclosing  an  extract  from  a  letter  the  author  of  which  is  not 
mentioned.  I  send  a  copy  of  the  extract  with  this.  I  hope 
that  a  copy  has  also  been  sent  to  Gen.  McDowell,  whom  it 
concerns  more  nearly,  perhaps,  than.it  does  me. 

At  the  risk  of  being  thought  obtrusive  I  will  venture  upon 
some  remarks  which  perhaps  my  position  does  not  justify  me  in 
making,  but  which  I  beg  to  assure  you  are  induced  solely  by  my 
intense  desire  for  the  success  of  the  government  in  this  struggle. 

You  will,  I  hope,  pardon  me  if  I  allude  to  the  past,  not  in  a 
captious  spirit,  but  merely  so  far  as  may  be  necessary  to  explain 
my  own  course  and  my  views  as  to  the  future. 

From  the  beginning  I  had  intended,  so  far  as  I  might  have 
the  power  to  carry  out  my  own  views,  to  abandon  the  line  of 
Manassas  as  the  line  of  advance.  I  ever  regarded  it  as  an 
improper  one  ;  my  wish  was  to  adopt  a  new  line,  based  upon 
the  waters  of  the  lower  Chesapeake.  I  always  expected  to  meet 
with  strong  opposition  on  this  line,  the  strongest  that  the  rebels 
could  offer,  but  I  was  well  aware  that  upon  overcoming  this 
opposition  the  result  would  be  decisive  and  pregnant  with  great 
results. 

Circumstances,  among  which  I  will  now  only  mention  the 
uncertainty  as  to  the  power  of  the  MerrimaCy  have  compelled 
me  to  adopt  the  present  line,  as  probably  safer,  though  far  less 
brilliant,  than  that  by  Urbana.  When  the  movement  was  com- 
menced I  counted  upon  an  active  and  disposable  force  of  nearly 
150,000  men,  and  intended  to  throw  a  strong  column  upon  West 
Point  either  by  York  river  or,  if  that  proved  impracticable,  by  a 
march  from  the  mouth  of  the  Severn,  expecting  to  turn  in  that 
manner  all  the  defences  of  the  Peninsula.  Circumstances  have 
proved  that  I  was  right,  and  that  my  intended  movements  would 
have  produced  the  desired  results. 

After  the  transfer  of  troops  had  commenced  from  Alexandria 
to  Fort  Monroe,  but  before  I  started  in  person,  the  division  of 
Blenker  was  detached  from  my  command — a  loss  of  near  10,000 
men.  As  soon  as  the  mass  of  my  troops  were  fairly  started  I 
embarked  myself.  Upon  reaching  Fort  Monroe  I  learned  that 
the  rebels  were  being  rapidly  reinforced  from  Norfolk  and  Rich- 
mond. I  therefore  determined  to  lose  no  time  in  making  the 
effort  to  invest  Yorktown,  without  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  the 
divisions  of  Hooker  and  Richardson  and  the  1st  corps,  intend- 
ing to  employ  the  ist  corps  in  mass  to  move  upon  West  Point, 
reinforcing  it  as  circumstances  might  render  necessary. 

•  The  advance  was  made  on  the  morning  of  the  second  day 
after  I  reached  Fort  Monroe.  When  the  troops  reached  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  Yorktown  the  true  nature  of  the  enemy*s 
position  was  for  the  first  time  developed.  While  my  men  were 
under  fire  I  learned  that  the  ist  corps  was  removed  from  my 
command.     No  warning  had  been  given  me  of  this,  nor  was  any 


LETTER  TO  SECRETARY  STANTON.  283 

reason  then  assigned.  I  should  also  have  mentioned  that  the 
evening  before  I  left  Fort  Monroe  I  received  a  telegraphic 
despatch  from  the  War  Department  informing  me  that  the 
order  placing  Fort  Monroe  and  its  dependent  troops  under 
my  command  was  rescinded.  No  reason  was  given  for  this, 
nor  has  it  been  to  this  day.  I  confess  that  I  have  ^o  right  to 
know  the  reason.  This  order  deprived  me  of  the  support  of 
another  division  which  I  had  been  authorized  to  form  for  active 
operations  from  among  the  troops  near  Fort  Monroe. 

Thus  when  I  came  under  fire  I  found  myself  weaker  by  five 
divisions  than  I  had  expected  when  the  movement  commenced. 
It  is  more  than  probable  that  no  general  was  ever  placed  in  such 
a  position  before. 

Finding  myself  thus  unexpectedly  weakened,  and  with  a 
powerful  enemy  strongly  entrenched  in  my  front,  I  was  com- 
pelled to  change  my  plans  and  become  cautious.  Could  I  have 
retained  my  original  force  I  confidently  believe  that  I  would  now 
have  been  in  front  of  Richmond  instead  of  where  I  now  am. 
The  probability  is  that  that  city  would  now  have  been  in  our 
possession. 

But  the  question  now  is  in  regard  to  the  present  and  the 
future  rather  than  the  past. 

The  enemy,  by  the  destruction  of  the  bridges  of  the  Rappa- 
hannock, has  deprived  himself  of  the  means  of  a  rapid  advance 
on  Washington.  Lee  will  never  venture  upon  a  bold  movement 
on  a  large  scale. 

The  troops  I  left  for  the  defence  of  Washington,  as  I  fully 
explained  to  you  in  the  letter  I  wrote  the  day  I  sailed,  are  ample 
for  its  protection. 

Our  true  policy  is  to  concentrate  our  troops  on  the  fewest 
possible  lines  of  attack  ;  we  have  now  too  many,  and  an  enter- 
prising enemy  could  strike  us  a  severe  blow. 

I  have  every  reason  to  believe  that  the  main  portion  of  the 
rebel  forces  are  in  my  front.  They  are  not  "  drawing  off  "  their 
troops  from  Yorktown. 

Ciive  me  McCall's  division  and  I  will  undertake  a  movement 
on  West  Point  which  will  shake  them  out  of  Yorktown.  As  it  is, 
I  will  win,  but  I  must  not  be  blamed  if  success  is  delayed.  I  do 
not  feel  that  I  am  answerable  for  the  delay  of  victory. 

I  do  not  feel  authorized  to  venture  upon  any  suggestions  as 
to  the  disposition  of  the  troops  in  other  departments,  but  content 
myself  with  stating  the  least  that  I  regard  as  essential  to  prompt 
success  here.  If  circumstances  render  it  impossible  to  give  what 
I  ask,  I  still  feel  sure  of  success,  but  more  time  will  be  required 
to  achieve  the  result. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  Commanding. 


284  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

The  affair  known  as  the  one-gun  battery  is  explained  by  the 
following  instructions  and  statement : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  Winfield  Scott,  April  15,  1862. 

Brig.'Gm.  *IV.  F.  Smithy  Commanding  Division : 

Sir  :  You  will  please  advance  to-morrow  morning  to  stop  the 
work  now  being  carried  on  by  the  enemy  near  and  in  rear  of  the 
"  one-gun  battery."  This  can  probably  be  most  readily  accom- 
plished by  throwing  sharpshooters  well  for\i*ard  to  the  edge  of 
the  stream,  leaving  in  front  of  the  work  a  clear  interval  through 
which  four  to  six  guns  can  shell  the  working  parties  and  adja- 
cent woods.  Your  flank  towards  Lee's  Mill  should  be  carefully 
watched,  also  towards  Wynn's  Mill,  communicating  with  Gen. 
Gorman,  who  will  have  orders  to  prevent  an  attack  upon  your 
right  flank  from  Wynn's  Mill.  It  is  probable  that  by  placing 
your  guns  near  the  burned  chimneys,  as  well  under  cover  as 
possible,  they  will  accomplish  the  result. 

If  the  enemy  are  driven  entirely  away,  advance  cautiously  a 
few  skirmishers  across  the  dam  to  penetrate  the  woods  and  ascer- 
tain whether  there  is  any  clearing  near  at  hand  where  you  can 
hold  your  own.  In  this  event  cross  over  and  send  for  immediate 
assistance,  which  will  be  promptly  afforded.  If  you  find  the 
position  across  the  stream  dangerous  and  untenable,  cut  the 
dam. 

In  any  event  exercise  the  utmost  caution  before  crossing  the 
stream.  The  great  object  is  to  stop  the  work,  and  merely  to 
take  advantage  after  that  of  any  opportunity  that  may  offer  itself 
to  push  the  advantage.  I  should  prefer  stopping  the  work  and 
attacking  when  our  preparations  elsewhere  are  more  advanced. 
I  would  prefer  making  the  attack  at  the  one-gun  battery  a  part 
of  a  more  general  plan  involving  the  use  of  batteries  against 
Lee's  Mill  and  other  contiguous  points.  From  the  statement  of 
Capt.  Hope  (had  since  I  wrote  the  foregoing)  I  imagine  a  posi- 
tion can  be  found  on  the  road  at  a  distance  of  some  twelve 
hundred  yards,  whence  their  works  can  be  shelled  with  10- 
pound  Parrotts  and  probably  spherical  case  from  the  Napo- 
leon guns.  I  would  be  glad  to  learn  that  the  work  is  stopped 
and  the  enemy  taught  a  lesson. 

Please  inform  Gen.  Gorman  of  your  instructions,  and  inform 
me  as  early  as  possible  of  your  arrangements. 

Very  truly  yours, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj,  -  Gen.  Commanding. 

P.S.  I  send  this  direct  to  you  for  the  reason  that  it  is  too  late 
to  communicate  it  through  the  commander  of  the  4th  army  corps 


THE  OXE-GCX  BA  TTER  K  285 

and  give  lime  10  execute  the  movement  at  a  sufficiently  early 
hour. 

Upon  reflection  I  think  it  will,  under  present  circumstances, 
be  wiser  to  confine  the  operation  to  forcing  the  enemy  to  discon- 
tinue work. 

In  compliance  with  these  instructions  Gen.  Smith  placed  two 
brigades  and  three  batteries  on  his  left  to  guard  against  any 
attack  from  Lee's  Mill,  and  commenced  operations  with  his 
remaining  brigade  and  batter^-.  He  posted  Mott's  batter}"  op- 
posite the  dam  at  a  distance  of  about  eleven  hundred  yards 
from  the  works,  sent  in  one  regiment  through  the  woods  on  the 
right  with  instructions  to  open  fire  on  any  working  parties  they 
might  observe,  another  regiment  on  the  left  with  similar  orders, 
and  held  the  remaining  three  regiments  in  reserve.  As  soon  as 
our  infdntr\-  opened  fire  the  enemy  replied  with  shell,  upon  which 
Mott  opened  and  kept  up  a  sharp  fire  for  about  an  hour  until 
he  silenced  the  enemy. 

About  three  o'clock  Gen,  Smith  had  placed  eighteen  guns  in 
position  about  five  hundred  yards  from  the  works,  supported 
on  either  flank  by  Brooks's  Vermont  brigade,  Hancock's  being 
brought  up  in  support.  Our  guns  then  opened,  the  enemy 
replying  for  some  time  with  rapidity  ;  when  their  fire  slack- 
ened Smith  ordered  four  companies  of  the  3d  Vermont  to  cross 
the  dam  and  feel  the  enemy.  On  arriving  at  the  crest  of  the 
work  ihev  were  met  bv  the  enemv  in  force,  who  had  lain  se- 
creted,  and  were  forced  to  retire  with  a  loss  of  about  20  killed 
and  wounded,  after  having  held  the  work  for  some  minutes. 

Later  in  the  day,  after  I  had  left  the  ground,  another  recon- 
noissance  was  made,  under  cover  of  the  artiller>'-fire,  by  the  4th 
Vermont  on  the  right,  the  5th  and  6th  on  the  left,  but  it  was 
found  impracticable  to  push  further  than  to  the  dam,  which 
ground  was  held.  During  the  night  strong  entrenchments  were 
thrown  up,  on  the  right  for  four  guns  within  three  hundred  yards 
of  the  work,  on  the  left  one  with  eight  embrasures,  and  in  the 
centre  one  with  four  embrasures,  the  last  two  within  five  hun- 
dred yards'  range.  This  reconnoissance  was  conducted  with  skill 
and  great  gallantr\\  the  Vermont  troops  thus  early  giving  earnest 
of  the  high  qualities  they  so  often  displayed  during  all  the 
war. 

The  losses  in  killed,  wounded,  and  missing  amounted  to  about 


286  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

150.  The  objects  of  the  operation  were  completely  achieved : 
we  prevented  further  work  at  this  point,  prevented  the  enemy 
from  using  the  crossing,  and  ascertained  that  the  line  could  not 
be  broken  there  without  further  preparation  in  the  way  of  artil- 
lery, etc. 

The  general  plan  of  operations  determined  upon  was  to 
establish  batteries  of  heavy  guns  and  mortars  bearing  upon 
Yorktown  and  Gloucester,  their  water-batteries,  a  line  of  works 
between  Yorktown  and  the  Warwick  river,  Wynn's  Mill,  and 
the  "  one-gun  battery "  about  a  mile  lower  down  the  War- 
wick. 

The  general  order  regulating  the  details  of  the  siege  opera- 
tions, as  well  as  the  instructions  issued  by  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter, 
who,  on  the  26th  of  April,  was  assigned  to  duty  as  director  of  the 
siege,  are  for  the  present  omitted.  I  issued  all  orders  relating 
to  the  siege  through  him,  making  him  commandant  of  the  siege 
operations,  and  at  the  same  time  chief  of  staff  for  that  especial 
work.  Under  the  circumstances  of  the  case  some  such  arrange- 
ment was  necessary  to  relieve  me  of  too  much  personal  labor,  and 
it  worked  admirably. 

Ground  was  broken  on  the  night  of  the  17th  of  April  upon 
batteries  i,  2,  and  3,  it  being  only  at  that  date  that  the  neces- 
sary roads  and  bridges  were  completed  and  the  requisite  mate- 
rial collected.  The  first  parallel  was  commenced  on  the  morn- 
ing of  the  25th. 

The  work  was  pushed  with  so  much  energy  that  by  the  night 
of  May  3  all  the  batteries  were  completed  and  nearly  all  armed  ; 
the  armament  would  have  been  completed  on  the  night  of  the 
5th,  and  fire  opened  the  next  morning. 

In  all  sixteen  batteries  were  constructed,  their  full  armament 
being  two  200-pounder  rifled  guns,  twelve  loo-pounder  rifled, 
ten  13-inch  mortars,  twenty-five  lo-inch  mortars,  seven  8-inch 
mortars,  twelve  4j-inch  rifled  siege-guns,  twelve  30-pounder 
rifled  guns,  thirty-two  20-pounder  rifled  guns,  and  two  8-inch 
siege-howitzers,  being  114  heavy  guns  and  mortars  in  all. 

In  order  to  conceal  our  purposes  and  complete  the  work  with 
the  least  possible  exposure,  none  of  the  batteries  were  opened, 
except  No.  I,  which  on  the  30th  of  April  opened  with  excellent 
effect  upon  the  wharves  of  Yorktown  and  Gloucester,  in  order 
to  prevent  the  landing  of  supplies  and  men. 


PLAN  OF  ASSAULT.  287 

It  was  intended  to  open  with  all  the  114  guns  and  mortars  at 
once,  in  order  to  create  the  greatest  possible  moral  and  physical 
effect. 

Towards  the  close  of  the  siege  it  was  apparent  that  the  works 
at  Gloucester  could  not  be  carried  by  assault  from  the  rear  with- 
out some  preliminary  work  in  the  way  of  reducing  the  fire  of 
their  batteries  on  the  land  side — 2i  matter  requiring  a  good  deal 
of  time,  and  force  greater  than  a  single  division. 

With  the  force  at  my  disposal  it  was  impossible  to  reinforce 
Franklin  for  that  purpose,  and  I  determined,  late  on  the  2d  of 
May,  to  disembark  that  division  and  move  it  to  the  front,  in  order 
to  employ  all  my  force  in  the  assault  about  to  be  given,  and  thus 
render  the  result  as  sure  as  human  foresight  could  make  it.  On 
the  3d,  then,  Franklin's  division  was  disembarked,  and  was  to 
have  moved  to  the  front  on  the  4th. 

As  soon  as  the  fire  of  the  water-batteries  was  silenced  the 
gunboats,  reinforced  by  the  Galena  under  the  gallant  John  Rodg- 
ers,  were  to  run  by  and  take  up  a  position  in  rear,  whence  they 
could  get  a  nearer  fire  on  the  defences  and  control  the  road 
leading  from  Yorktown  to  Williamsburg. 

When  this  was  effected,  the  artillery  of  the  land  defences 
silenced,  and  the  garrison  demoralized  by  the  shell-fire,  the 
columns  of  assault  were  to  advance  from  the  nearest  cover. 

The  principal  assault  was  to  have  been  upon  the  line  between 
the  Warwick  and  Yorktown,  a  column  being  ready  to  assault  the 
latter  if  the  effect  of  the  batteries  justified  it.  The  enfilading  and 
two  counter  batteries  were  prepared  against  Wynn's  Mill,  which, 
with  the  dam  next  above  it,  would  also  have  been  assaulted  at 
the  same  time  with  the  main  attack. 

The  counter  batteries  against  Wynn's  Mill  enfiladed  the 
lines  stretching  thence  towards  the  "  one-gun  "  battery,  against 
which  latter  a  mortar  battery  was  also  prepared  ;  under  cover  of 
these  and  the  fire  of  the  field-batteries  an  assault  was  also  to  be 
made  on  the  "  one-gun  "  battery.  Under  cover  of  the  field-guns 
of  the  4th  corps  a  feint  was  to  be  made  upon  Lee's  Mill,  to  be 
converted  into  a  real  attack  if  the  effect  of  the  operations  at  other 
points  opened  the  way  thereto. 

The  fire  of  our  batteries  would  probably  have  enabled  us 
to  assault  about  noon.  As  the  enemy  were  practically  with- 
out bomb-proof  shelters,  the  fire  of  our  forty-two  mortars,  ten 


288  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

of  which  were  13-inch  and  twenty-five  lo-inch,  should  in  five 
or  six  hours  have  blown  up  their  magazines  and  rendered  the 
works  untenable  for  the  garrisons.  As  many  of  their  guns,  all  in 
the  water-batteries,  were  en  barbette,  the  fire  of  our  seventy-two 
heavy  guns  should  in  the  same  space  of  time  have  dismounted 
most  of  their  guns  ;  and  as  the  mortars  could  well  continue  their 
fire  until  the  assaulting  columns  had  reached  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  works,  the  success  of  the  assault,  with  very  little 
loss,  was  reasonably  certain. 

In  order  to  diminish  the  risk  to  the  gunboats  as  much  as 
possible,  I  proposed  to  Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  and  to  Capt. 
Smith,  commanding  the  gunboats,  that  the  gunboats  and  the 
Galena  should  run  the  batteries  the  night  after  we  opened  fire. 
If  the  effect  of  our  fire  had  equalled  our  expectations  so  as  to 
justify  an  assault  during  the  first  day's  firing,  I  am  very  sure  that 
Capt.  Smith  would  have  run  by  the  batteries  in  broad  daylight, 
without  awaiting  the  cover  of  darkness.  I  have  no  doubt  what- 
ever that  at  the  latest  the  dawn  of  the  second  day  would  have 
seen  the  gunboats  in  the  rear  of  the  defences,  and  the  assault 
delivered  with  entire  success  and  without  any  heavy  loss  on  our 
side. 

Gen.  Johnston  told  me  in  Washington,  during  the  winter  of 
1882  and  1883,  that  one  of  his  strong  objections  to  holding  York- 
town  was  his  apprehension  that  the  gunboats  would  force  the  bat- 
teries at  night  and  thus  render  the  position  untenable.  Other 
Confederate  general  officers  serving  there  have  told  me  that  in 
their  opinion,  at  the  time,  the  gunboats  could  easily  have  effected 
this  on  any  dark  night. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  May  it  was  iound  that 
the  enemy  had  during  the  night  evacuated  all  his  positions,  very 
wisely  preferring  to  avoid  the  experiment  of  withstanding  a  bom- 
bardment and  assault.  We  captured  in  the  works,  including 
Gloucester,  seventy-seven  guns  and  mortars,  supplied  with  the 
ordinary  complements,  and  seventy-six  rounds  of  ammunition  to 
each. 

The  captured  pieces  were  as  follows  :  one  lo-inch  Columbiad, 
thirteen  9-inch  Dahlgren  guns,  sixteen  8-inch  Columbiads,  two 
7-inch  heavy  guns,  one  6^-inch  rifle,  one  4i-inch  rifle,  one 
2-^ -inch  rifle,  two  rifled  32-pounders,  one  8-inch  siege-howitzer, 
three  64-pounders,  eight  42-pounders,  seventeen  32-pounders,  four 


STRENGTH  OF   YORK  TOWN,  289 

24-pounders,  one  42-pound  carronade,  two  8-inch  mortars,  two 
i2-pounders,  one  6-pounder. 

They  had  evidently  removed  such  guns  as  they  could,  prob- 
ably light  guns. 

I  have  been  much  criticised  for  not  assaulting  Yorktown  im- 
mediately. Perhaps  the  point  has  been  made  clear  enough,  but 
at  the  risk  of  repetition  I  will  say  something  more  on  the  subject. 

Before  starting  from  Fortress  Monroe  the  best  information  in 
our  possession  clearly  indicated  that  the  Warwick  river  ran  nearly 
parallel  with  the  James,  instead  of  heading  at  Yorktown,  and  it 
seemed  certain  that  the  road  from  Newport  News  to  Williams- 
burg did  not  cross  that  stream,  at  least  any  important  branch  of 
it,  and  that  it  presented  no  obstacle  to  an  advance.  Upon  these 
data  were  predicated  the  orders  of  April  4  (for  the  march  of  the 
next  day,  the  5th),  according  to  which  Heintzelman  was  to  move 
into  position  close  to  Yorktown,  while  Keyes  was  to  take  up  a 
position  in  rear  of  Yorktown  at  the  Halfway  House ;  Keyes  was 
also  ordered  to  attack  and  carry  whatever  he  found  in  front  of 
him.  Now,  let  it  be  observed  that  at  all  points  (on  the  right, 
centre,  and  left)  we  found  the  enemy's  works  fully  garrisoned  and 
provided  with  artillery,  and  that  Keyes  and  his  general  officers 
reported  that  they  found  the  position  in  their  front  so  strong  and 
so  well  provided  with  troops  and  artillery  that  it  was  impossible 
to  assault  with  any  hope  of  success.  The  same  state  of  things 
was  clearly  the  case  in  front  of  the  right  column,  where  I  was. 
Now,  it  is  very  certain  that  the  only  thing  to  be  done  was  to 
make  close  reconnoissances  of  the  enemy's  position,  in  order  to 
discover  a  vulnerable  point.  This  course  was  followed,  and  the 
unanimous  opinion  of  all  was  that  certain  preliminary  siege  ope- 
rations were  necessary.  I  assert  without  fear  of  contradiction 
that  no  one  at  that  time  thought  an  assault  possible  ;  moreover, 
that  when  we  saw  the  works  abandoned  by  the  enemy  it  re- 
mained the  conviction  of  all  that,  with  the  raw  troops  we  had, 
an  assault  would  have  resulted  in  simply  an  useless  butchery 
with  no  hope  of  success.  The  statements  made  long  afterwards 
by  such  men  as  Barnard  were  simply  ex-post-facto  opinions,  got- 
ten up  for  political  purposes,  and  never  could  have  been  really 
entertained  by  them.  The  only  fault  to  be  found  with  the  ope- 
rations at  Yorktown  is  in  regard  to  the  slowness  with  which 
some  of  the  engineer  officers  operated.     I  was  often  obliged  to 


290  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

make  jusjt  such  reconnoissances  as  I  did  at  Vera  Cruz  (when  a 
brevet  second  lieutenant  of  engineers)  to  expedite  matters.  Had 
Duane  been  chief-engineer,  operations  would  have  progressed 
much  more  rapidly.  The  co-operation  of  the  navy  amounted  to 
little  or  nothing. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Despatches  and  letters  relating  to  subjects  treated  in  the  foregoing  and 

following  chapters. 

"  April  6,  Sunday,  4  p.m. 

**  My  dear  General  :  I  have  received  your  favor  of  this 
date  by  Col.  Key,  and  hasten  to  say  that  I  have  already  written 
you — via  Shipping  Point — in  reply,  giving  my  reason  for  not  hav- 
ing joined  you.  The  time  you  proposed  to  proceed  with  me  had 
elapsed,  and  particularly  the  difficulties  of  my  leaving  my  vessel 
owing  to  the  want  of  officers  of  experience  to  take  care  of  her. 

**  I  have  explained  in  my  note  of  to-day,  and  have  repeated  to 
Col.  Key,  the  greatly  increased  strength  of  the  fortifications  as 
seen  from  this  position.  The  forts  at  Gloucester  are  very  formid- 
able indeed,  and  the  water-batteries  of  Yorktown  have  evidently 
been  increased  in  dimensions  within  a  few  days,  as  indicated  by 
the  new  earth. 

*'  As  I  pointed  out  to  you  in  our  interview,  the  works  to  be 
most  apprehended  (though  they  all  are  too  formidable  for  our 
vessels,  or  three  or  four  times  their  numbers  and  class)  are  the 
guns  in  mask  about  one-quarter  to  one-half  of  a  mile  this  side 
of  Yorktown,  which  position  I  point  out  to  Col.  Key. 

"  The  enemy  are  still  on  Gloucester  Point — how  strong  I  can- 
not say.  So  long  as  he  holds  that  formidable  work  (or,  indeed, 
upper  and  lower  work)  we  surely  cannot  command  the  York 
river.  All  the  gunboats  of  the  navy  would  fail  to  take  it,  but 
would  be  destroyed  in  the  attempt.  Yet  I  will  not  hesitate  to 
try  the  experiment,  if  required  to  do  so,  with  this  force,  however 
inadequate. 

**  I  have  explained  to  Col.  Key  that  if  you  turn  the  masked 
work,  which  I  fired  on  to-day  and  received  its  fire  in  return,  the 
guns  would  command  the  next  water-battery,  which  is  about  one- 
fifth  of  a  mile  from  it  towards  Yorktown,  as  it  appears  from  this 
ship. 

**  With  those  two  batteries  carried,  this  force  might  approach 
near  enough  to  shell  Yorktown  at  long  range,  but  nothing  more. 
These  vessels  of  this  class  are  not  calculated  for  closer  or  heavier 
work. 

"  As  I  could  not  go  in  time  to  reach  you  to-day,  as  requested, 
I  sent,  after  despatching  my  letter  to  you,  the  second  in  rank, 
Lieut.-Com.  Clitz,  to  confer  with  you.     And  now,  with  Col.  Key, 

33  agi 


292  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY. 

I  proceed  to  Wormsley's  creek   to  meet  you  or  Gen.  Heintzel- 
man. 

"Very  truly  yours, 

"  J.  F.  MiSSROOM, 

"  Com. 
"To  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 

^^Wachusetty  April  10,  1862. 

"  My  dear  General  :  Enclosed  is  the  report  upon  the 
landing  from  this  part  of  the  river  at  *  Sand-Box,'  where  it  was 
intended  to  land  troops.  Capt.  Nicholson  says  he  found  a  good 
picket-guard  house  for  cavalry,  stables,  etc.,  within  the  Box, 
and  some  cattle  near  Too's  Point.  A  steamer  also  penetrated 
a  mile  up  Back  creek  to-day — which  is  within  the  Sand-Box,  and 
whose  entrance  is  to  the  eastward  of  Too's  Point,  as  shown  by 
the  chart,  and  over  which  is  good  eight  feet — to  within  one  and 
a  half  miles  of  Wormsley's  creek. 

"  It  has  been  observed  to-day  that  large  numbers  of  infantry 
have  been  transported  from  Yorktown  to  Gloucester  Point.  And 
this  afternoon  a  number  of  what  seemed  to  be  laborers  with 
entrenching  tools  went  to  the  same  point ;  we  conclude  either 
to  strengthen  the  works  there  or  to  throw  up  works  opposite  to 
and  within  long  rifle-range  of  this  anchorage.  I  have  been 
expecting  some  such  movement,  and  wondering  why  they  did 
not  try  it  from  some  point  back  from  the  beach  so  far  that 
our  guns  (shell)  could  not  reach  them.  It  cannot  be  prevented 
by  us. 

"Very  truly  yours, 

"  J.  F.  MiSSROOM. 

"To  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 

"  April  ii,  6  a.m. 

"The  enemy  very  busy  last  night  between  Yorktown  and 
Gloucester  Point.  Schooners  observed  to  be  going  continually. 
Enemy  may  have  notice  of  intention  to  land  troops  at  Severn  and 
are  fortifying  its  entrance.     Ten  schooners  now  in  sight. 

"J.  F.  MiSSROOM. 

"  To  Maj.-Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan." 

Headquarters,  Army  of  Potomac, 
near  Yorktown,  April  8,  1862. 

My  dear  Flag-Officer  :  Your  kind  letter  received.  From 
the  information  received  thus  far  I  am  inclined  to  think  that  the 
"  masked  battery  "  on  the  river-bank  below  Yorktown  is  not  in 
existence,  but  that  the  gun  fired  upon  Missroom  was  upon  the 
advanced  bastion  of  the  place  itself.  Porter  thinks  that  he  has 
found  a  place  from  which  we  can  enfilade  their  water-batteries. 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES, 


293 


I  go  there  in  a  few  minutes  to  look  at  it.  Should  it  prove  to  be 
so,  we  can  enable  the  gunboats  to  take  an  effective  part  in  the 
contest.  The  weather  is  infamous  (has  been  raining  hard  for  the 
last  eighteen  hours,  and  still  continues),  the  roads  are  horrid,  and 
we  have  the  devil's  own  time  about  supplies. 

I  have  made  strong  representations  as  to  the  withdrawal  of 
the  I  St  corps,  which  has  forced  me  to  abandon  the  turning  move- 
ment, and  hope  that  the  President  may  be  induced  to  change  his 
order.  .  .  .  The  position  of  the  enemy  is  immensely  strong,  but 
we  are  learning  more  of  it  every  hour.  Our  men  behave  splen- 
didly— brave  and  patient  as  men  can  be.  .  .  . 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj,  -  Gen.  Commanding, 

Flag-Officer  L.  M.  Goldsborough,  Minnesota, 

"Washington,  April  16. 
"  To  Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  Good  for  the  first  lick  !  Hurrah  for  Smith  and  the  one-gun 
battery  !  Let  us  have  Yorktown,  with  Magruder  and  his  gang, 
before  the  ist  of  May,  and  the  job  will  be  over. 

"Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  War,'' 

"  U.  S.  Steamer  JVachusett, 

"York  River,  April  17,  1862. 

"My  dear  General:  In  accordance  with  your  request  to 
have  shell  thrown  into  Yorktown  yesterday,  the  Sebago  (side- 
wheel)  was  ordered  on  that  service,  she  being  the  only  vessel  here 
provided  with  a  long-range  rifle. 

"Her  fire  was  returned  by  two  guns  of  equal  range  from 
the  enemy  with  surprising  accuracy.  One  shell  passed  directly 
between  the  *  smoke-stack  *  and  mainmast,  a  few  feet  above  her 
deck,  and  another  within  a  few  feet  of  the  wheel-house,  throwing 
the  water  over  the  vessel,  and  both  within  a  short  distance  of  her 
boilers  and  machinery,  which  are  altogether  exposed.  Had  she 
been  crippled  the  attempt  to  withdraw  her  might,  and  probably 
would,  have  caused  the  sacrifice  of  other  vessels  also. 

"The  Sebago  is  the  vessel  capable  of  rendering  the  most 
important  service  in  covering  the  landing  of  troops,  and  I  submit 
whether  it  would  not  be  advisable  to  defer  any  attempt  to  throw 
shell  in  Yorktown  till  night,  while  she  can  operate  on  Gloucester 
with  impunity  at  any  time.  She  draws  six  feet  of  water.  A  sin- 
gle shot  in  the  midship  section  of  that  vessel  especially,  or  indeed 
of  either  of  these  gunboats,  disables  if  it  do  not  destroy  her. 

"  Would  it  not  be  possible  for  your  cannon  to  dismount  those 
two  rifles  with  which  the  enemy  fired  at  the  Sebago  yesterday  ? 


294  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

They  will  inflict  much  damage  on  our  people  when  Gloucester  is 
held  by  them,  as  well  as  on  our  vessels. 

"The  Sebago  threw  shells  into  Gloucester  last  night  three 
several  times.  I  am  advised  that  another  light-draught  steamer, 
similar  to  the  Sebago^  is  to  come  here.  We  cannot  have  the 
accuracy  of  fire  from  a  vessel  that  the  enemy  exhibited  yester- 
day. 

"  Many  thanks  for  the  loan  of  fuses. 

"  I  am,  very  truly,  your  obedient  servant, 

"  J.  F.  MissROOM,  Com, 
"To  Maj.-Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan." 


"  Washington,  April  i8. 
"  To  Gen,  G.  B,  McCleUan  : 

"  Your  despatch  of  this  morning  received  and  communicated 
to  the  President.  He  directs  me  to  ask  you  whether  the  indica- 
tions do  not  show  that  they  are  inclined  to  take  the  offensive. 
Banks  has  moved  to  Mount  Jackson  yesterday,  and  to  New  Mar- 
ket to-day  ;  has  taken  some  locomotives  and  prisoners. 

"  Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  War,'' 


Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

April  1 8,  lo  P.M. 
Hon.  E,  M,  Stanton^  Secretary  of  War : 

Despatch  received.  I  cannot  hope  such  good-fortune  as  that 
the  enemy  will  take  the  offensive.  I  am  perfectly  prepared  for 
any  attack  the  enemy  may  make.  He  will  do  nothing  more  than 
sorties.  I  beg  that  the  President  will  be  satisfied  that  the  enemy 
cannot  gain  anything  by  attacking  me  ;  the  more  he  does  attack 
the  better  I  shall  be  contented.  All  is  well.  I  am  glad  to  hear 
of  Banks's  good-fortune. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen. 

Confidential, 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

April  1 8,  11.30  p.m. 
His  Excellency  the  President  : 

If  compatible  with  your  impressions  as  to  the  security  of 
the  capital,  and  not  interfering  with  operations  of  which  I  am 
ignorant,  I  would  be  glad  to  have  McCalFs  division,  so  as  to  be 
enabled  to  make  a  strong  attack  upon  West  Point  to  turn  the 
position  of  the  enemy.  After  all  that  I  have  heard  of  things 
which  have  occurred  since  I  left  Washington  and  before,  I  would 


X 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES,  295 

prefer  that  Gen.  McDowell  should  not  again  be  assigned  to  duty 
with  me. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.-Gen.  Commanding. 


"Washington,  April  27,  1862. 
"  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan : 

**  I  am  rejoiced  to  learn  that  your  operations  are  progressing 
so  rapidly  and  with  so  much  spirit  and  success,  and  congratulate 
you,  and  the  officers  and  soldiers  engaged,  upon  the  brilliant 
affair  mentioned  in  your  telegram,  repeating  the  assurance  that 
everything  in  the  power  of  the  department  is  at  your  service.  I 
hope  soon  to  congratulate  you  upon  a  splendid  victory  that  shall 
be  the  finishing  stroke  of  the  war  in  every  quarter.  The  work 
goes  bravely  on. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

''  Secretary  of  IFar/' 

"Washington,  May  i,  2  p.m. 
"  Maj.'Gen.  G,  B,  McClellan  : 

"Your  call  for  Parrott  guns  from  Washington  alarms  mc, 
chiefly  because  it  aims  indefinite  procrastination.  Is  anything  to 
be  done.^ 

"  A.  Lincoln, 

''Prestden/r 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  I,  9.30  P.M. 
His  Excellency  the  President : 

I  asked  for  the  Parrott  guns  from  Washington  for  the  reason 
that  some  expected  had  been  two  weeks,  nearly,  on  the  way  and 
could  not  be  heard  from.  They  arrived  last  night.  My  arrange- 
ments had  been  made  for  them,  and  I  thought  time  might  be 
saved  by  getting  others  from  Washington.  My  object  was  to 
hasten,  not  procrastinate.  All  is  being  done  that  human  labor 
can  accomplish. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj\'Gen. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

May  3,  1862. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton^  Secretary  of  War : 

I  regret  to  learn  that  Col.  Campbell,  5th  Penn.  Cavalry,  has 
been  placed  in  arrest  by  Maj.-Gen.  McDowell  for  endeavoring  to 
comply  with  my  positive  order  to  him  to  report  with  his  regiment 
for  duty  at  this  place.     This  regiment  was  never  assigned  to  Gen. 


296  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

McDowell's  army  corps,  but  was  detailed  by  me  to  Gen.  Keyes's 
corps.  I,  of  course,  expected  it  to  follow  me  as  soon  as  transpor- 
tation could  be  provided,  and  am  not  a  little  surprised  to  learn 
that  my  instructions  have  been  interfered  with  and  my  force 
diminished  by  the  action  of  the  commanding  officer  of  the  De- 
partment of  the  Rappahannock,  in  violation  of  G.  O.  No.  29, 
War  Department,  adjutant-general's  office,  March  22,  1862.  Un- 
der these  circumstances  I  beg  the  immediate  interposition  of 
the  War  Department  to  relieve  from  arrest  a  meritorious  officer, 
against  whom  there  appears  to  be  no  complaint  save  that  of 
obedience  to  the  orders  of  his  rightful  superior.  I  also  ask  that 
the  regiment,  as  well  as  the  ist  N.  J.,  Col.  Wyndham,  may  be 
permitted  to  join  the  army  under  my  command  without  further 
delay. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj\'Gen,  Commanding, 


IVachusett,  York  River, 
"April  22,  1862. 

"  My  dear  General  :  The  carriage  on  board  the  Sebago  is 
weak.  Two  carriage-makers  are  coming  to  us  from  Washington  ; 
I  fear  not  in  time.  I  am  promised,  if  she  comes  in  time,  a 
steamer  with  loo-pounder  rifle. 

"  The  Corwin  has  no  battery  but  a  20-pounder  and  two  sixes, 
being  only  a  surveying-craft. 

"  When  you  commence  attack  the  loo-pounder  rifle  can  assist 
from  the  beginning.  But  I  fear  our  stock  of  ammunition,  espe- 
ciallv  shell  and  *  thirty '  fuses,  will  fail  us  soon. 

I  have  failed  to  get  what  I  have  asked  for  from  Hampton 
Roads.  Can  you  loan  us  some  loo-pounder  shell  and  some  more 
*  thirty'  fuses  for  the  Sebago  1  She  has  only  about  thirty-six 
fuses  of  that  kind  now.  Our  stock  at  Hampton  Roads  was  sent 
to  North  Carolina. 

"  Please  see  the  despatch  I  have  just  sent  to  Com.  Poor.  I 
sent  a  steamer  to  land  your  mortars  at  two  a.m.,  with  tackle. 

"  I  ought  to  see  you  once  more  before  you  open  fire  on  York- 
town,  to  have  a  clear  understanding.  Say  when  I  shall  go  to  you, 
and  I  will  do  so  any  time,  at  any  day,  after  four  p.m. 

"  The  enemy's  troops  showing  themselves  now  near  spot  last 
driven  from,  abreast  anchorage. 

"  Yours  very  truly, 

"  J.  F.  Missroom. 

"  To  Maj.-Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan." 

"  We  got  eleven-inch  shell  into  Yorktown  and  Gloucester  last 
night. 

"  J.  F.  Missroom." 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES.  297 

"  Fortress  Monroe,  May  4. 
"  Maj.'Gen,  McCUllan : 

**  With  my  whole  heart  I  do  most  cordially  congratulate  you  on 
your  brilliant  and  important  achievement.  The  gunboats  shall 
accompany  you  up  York  river. 

"  L.  M.  GOLDSBOROUGH, 

"  Flag-Officerr 

"  Washington,  May  4,  1862. 
"  Maj.-Gen.  McClcUan : 

"  Accept  my  cordial  congratulations  upon  the  success  at  York- 
town,  and  I  am  rejoiced  to  hear  that  your  forces  are  in  active 
pursuit.  Please  favor  me  with  the  details  as  far  as  they  are 
acquired,  and  I  hope  soon  to  hear  your  arrival  at  Richmond. 

"Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  Warr 

"Fort  Monroe,  May  5,  1862. 
"  Maj.'Gen,  McClellan  : 

"The  Secretary  of  War  telegraphs  me  to  inform  him  how 
many  transports  of  all  descriptions  I  can  command.  Please 
place  at  my  disposal  all  you  can  release,  except  such  as  are 
required  for  the  transportation  of  stores.  .  .  . 

"John  Tucker, 
"  Assistant  Secretary  of  IVar" 


"  Camp  near  Yorktown,  May  5. 

"  y.  Tucker,  Assistant  Secretary  of  War^  Fortress  Monroe : 

"In  reply  to  a  part  of  your  despatch  which  the  time  for 
the  departure  of  the  boat  did  not  admit  of  answering,  and  in 
the  absence  of  Gen.  McClellan  to  the  front,  I  have  to  inform  you 
that  the  general  has  ordered  all  the  available  transports  to  carry 
troops  to  West  Point,  and  a  part  of  them  have  started  for  Cheese- 
man's  creek.  Your  despatch  will  be  laid  before  the  general  this 
evening. 

"  R.  B.  Marcy, 

'' Chief  of  Staff r 

Near  Williamsburg,  May  5,  11.45  ^ •^'• 

Hon,  E.  M.  Stanton,  Secretary  of  War : 

Mr.  Tucker's  telegram  relating  to  the  vessels  was  received 
after  Franklin's  division  had  embarked  and  on  the  way  to  West 
Point.  Another  division  goes  in  the  morning,  and  the  last  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  support  the  first.  This  movement  is  of 
the  greatest  importance.     I  will  release  the  vessels  just  as  soon 


298  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

as  the  troops  are  landed.     Nothing  new  except  what  I  told  you 
in  my  last  despatch. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen,  Commanding. 

P.  S.  Some  of  the  main  works  of  the  enemy  are  in  our  pos- 
session, and  I  am  pushing  troops  forward,  but  the  roads  are  hor- 
rible. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  Commanding. 

Williamsburg,  May  6,  3  p.m. 

A  portion  of  the  army  has  left  for  the  upper  York,  and  it 
would  be  destruction  to  deprive  me  of  the  water-transportation 
now.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  that  I  should  complete  the 
movement  now  commenced,  or  the  consequences  will  be  fatal. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.  -  Gen.  Commanding. 
Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  Winfield  Scott,  May  4,  1862. 

Brig. 'Gen.  Heintzelmany  Commanding  ^d  Corps  : 

I  have  received  information  from  Gen.  Smith  that  the  enemy 
are  still  in  front  of  him  in  some  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry. 
Gen.  Stoneman  has  been  ordered  to  move  as  rapidly  as  possible 
to  the  Halfway  House,  and  to  take  possession  of  the  cross-road 
near  that  place,  to  cut  off  this  command,  and  also  to  send  a 
strong  reconnoissance  towards  Blen's  wharf. 

I  wish  Hooker  to  follow  this  movement  with  the  utmost 
rapidity.  When  he  reaches  the  point  where  the  road  branches 
off  near  the  Halfway  House,  to  leave  a  portion  of  his  force 
there,  and  with  the  rest  to  gain  the  Lee's  Mill  and  Williamsburg 
road,  so  as  to  support  Stoneman  and  aid  him  in  cutting  off  the 
retreat  of  the  enemy.  The  division  should  move  simply  with  its 
ambulances  and  some  reserve  ammunition,  with  not  more  than 
two  days'  rations.  Should  further  information  from  Smith  ren- 
der it  necessary  to  move  Kearny's  division  also,  I  would  be  glad 
to  have  you  take  control  of  th^  entire  movement.  Smith  is  in 
possession  of  their  works,  and  the  enemy  referred  to  are  some 
distance  in  rear  of  them — how  far  I  do  not  yet  know. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.  -  Gen.  Commanding. 

"  May  4,  1862. 
"  Co/.  A.  V.  Colburn  : 

**  Sir  :  Smith  has  reported  that  the  enemy  is  in  some  force  in 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES,  299 

his  front.  Keyes  has  advanced  two  brigades  and  a  regiment  of 
horse,  with  three  batteries.  They  have  seen  no  enemy,  but  have 
had  a  few  men  injured  by  the  bursting  of  shells  left  by  the 
enemy. 

"  I  leave  immediately  to  take  command  on  the  left.  Tele- 
graph me  at  Smith's,  with  duplicates  for  me  at  Keyes's  head- 
quarters. 

"  Very  respectfully, 

"  E.  O.  Sumner, 
" Brig. 'Gen,  Commanding  the  Left  Wing'' 

"Two  MILES  BEYOND  YORKTOWN. 

"  Gen,  Marcyy  Chief  of  Staff : 

"  Gen.  Stoneman  has  met  the  enemy  about  three  miles  beyond 
the  Halfway  House,  and  has  sent  back  for  the  infantry  to  sup- 
port him.     Two  brigades  are  ahead  of  me. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  S.  V.  Heintzelman, 
^^ Brig, 'Gen.  Commanding  ^d  Corps** 

"  Headquarters,  3D  Corps,  in  sight  of  Williamsburg, 

"6  P.M.,  Sunday,  May  4,  1862. 
"  Gen.  R.  B.  Marcy : 

**  I  have  just  arrived  here,  and  find  Gens.  Sumner  and  Smith 
here.  We  will  soon  have  three  divisions,  and  are  preparing  to 
attack  the  rebels,  who  are  entrenched  in  our  front  with  two 
pieces  of  artillery,  a  regiment  or  so  of  cavalry,  four  or  ^\q^  regi- 
ments of  infantry.  Our  cavalry  have  been  repulsed  with  a  loss 
of  near  40  men  and  horses  killed  and  wounded.  We  will  soon 
carry  the  works.  The  infantry  are  only  halting  a  moment  to 
take  a  bite  and  rest. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  S.  V.  Heintzelman, 

"  Brig.'Gcn:* 

The  following  is  a  fragment  of  a  letter  of  instructions  sent  to 
Gen.  Sumner  on  the  morning  of  the  4th,  when  he  went  to  assume 
command  on  the  left ;  and  the  condition  of  affairs  then  was  that 
the  enemy's  infantry  and  cavalry  were  reported  by  Smith  to  be 
about  one  and  one-half  miles  in  his  front  in  force.  I  had 
ordered  Stoneman,  supported  by  Hooker,  to  gain  the  Half- 
way House  by  a  rapid  march,  and  thus  cut  off  the  retreat 
of  this  force  in  front  of  Smith.  Sumner  was  ordered  to  repair 
the  bridges  over  the  Warwick,  etc.,  as  quickly  as  possible,  and 
then  to 


300  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

"Cross  the  stream  with  the  5th  Cavalry,  Smith's  and  Couch's 
divisions,  and  Casey's  if  necessary.  It  is  possible  that  Sedgwick's 
and  Richardson's  divisions  may  be  needed  to  reinforce  the  right. 
Please  hold  them  subject  to  the  general's  orders  for  that  purpose. 
Should  you  be  informed  that  they  are  not  needed  here  you  will 
be  at  liberty  to  substitute  one  of  them  for  Couch's  or  Casey's 
division.  It  is  hoped  to  get  Stoneman's  command  in  rear  of  the 
enemy  before  you  attack.  Watch  the  enemy  closely  with  your 
cavalry,  and  should  he  retreat  attack  him  without  further  instruc- 
tions. The  gunboats  have  gone  up  the  York  river,  and  Frank- 
lin's, and  perhaps  one  other  division,  will  follow  up  to-day.  As 
soon  as  the  bridges  are  finished  you  can  cross  your  command 
and  bring  them  into  position,  but  do  not  attack  unless  the  enemy 
retreat  or  you  receive  orders  from  me. 

"A.  V.  COLBURN, 

It  is  unnecessary  to  say  that  the  object  of  forbidding  an 
attack  unless  the  enemy  retreated  was  to  enable  Stoneman  to  get 
in  their  rear  and  thus  cut  off  the  entire  conunand. 

After  the  orders  to  Stoneman,  Sumner,  and  Heintzelman  had 
been  issued  and  were  being  carried  out  I  received  the  following : 

"Headquarters,  Smith's  Division,  May  4. 
"  G^n.  McClellan  : 

"  Gen.  Hancock  is  in  front,  and,  from  what  I  have  learned, 
presume  it  is  nothing  but  the  rear-guard.  I  will  obey  his  orders 
as  far  as  engaging  them  is  concerned.  The  enemy  is  one  and  a 
half  miles  in  front,  and  it  is  probably  nothing  but  cavalry  cover- 
ing the  retreat. 

"  W.  F.  Smith, 

''Brig,-Genr 

"  Headquarters,  Smith's  Division, 
"  May  5,  10.30  P.M. 
"  Gen,  McClellan : 

"  There  is  a  direct  road  from  here  to  Williamsburg  behind  the 
big  fort.  If  you  send  a  good  man  to  command,  and  these  men 
don't  leave  to-night,  we  can  capture  them  all  in  the  morning  and 
be  at  Williamsburg  by  eight  o'clock.  If  they  don't  leave  to-night 
they  will  give  us  a  big  fight  in  the  morning,  and  we  shall  whip 
them. 

"  Don't  risk  yourself  any  more,  or  your  commanders,  and 
don't  send  Richardson  to  command  this  column.  As  far  as  I 
can  see  it  is  open  country  for  cavalry,  but  the  rain  has  made  the 
ground  soft.     I  have  more  troops — or  shall  have  with  Brooks — 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES,  30I 

than  I  need  to  defend  myself,  but  it  is  my  earnest  opinion  that 
your  advance  up  the  James  should  be  this  way. 

"  W.  F.  Smith." 
On  the  back  of  a  pencil-sketch  of  the  ground  is  the  following: 


« '\ 


Two  companies  garrison  each  fort.  Fort  Magruder  is  the 
far  one  from  here — one  and  a  quarter  miles ;  second  fort  occu- 
pied ;  third  fort,  near  York,  is  yet  unfinished.  TUey  seem  to  be 
quiet  now.  Please  order  Brooks  and  Ayres  to  me  in  the  morn- 
ing at  daylight.     I  have  plenty  of  troops,  but  wish  our  own. 

"  W.  F.  S." 


"  Mount  Zion  Church, 
"Mays,  3  P.M. 
"  Gen.  McClellan  : 

"  Owing  to  delays  in  the  troops  coming  forward,  I  have  come 
down  here  to  hasten  their  march,  by  direction  of  Gen.  Sumner. 
Within  the  last  thirty  minutes  he  has  sent  me  two  messengers  to 
say  that  the  enemy  was  gaining  ground  on  him.  I  fear  nothing 
except  a  panic  amongst  our  troops,  for  I  am  certain  we  are  vastly 
superior  in  strength  to  the  enemy.  I  went  myself  with  a  brigade 
of  my  corps,  which  took  possession  of  two  works  on  the  left  of 
the  enemy.  I  convinced  myself  that  the  enemy  commenced  his 
audacious  attack  upon  us  to  cover  a  retreat,  but,  finding  that  he 
forces  us  back,  he  may  convert  his  feint  into  something  more 
serious  than  was  at  first  intended.  It  may  be  advisable,  if  you 
have  troops  to  spare,  to  set  some  of  them  in  motion  for  this 
point ;  but,  above  all,  come  yourself. 

"  The  rear  of  Gen.  Kearny  has  just  passed  this  point  on  his 
way  to  reinforce  Gen.  Hooker,  and  the  head  of  his  column  has 
probably  reached  the  scene  of  action ;  and  the  firing  has  ceased 
for  the  last  ten  minutes. 

"  I  write  this  note  because  the  badness  of  the  road,  prevent- 
ing the  rapid  concentration  of  troops,  makes  me  anxious  to  take 
precaution  against  the  possibility  of  reverses.  As  the  roads  must 
soon  become  absolutely  impassable  for  supplies,  our  troops  must 
starve  unless  you  can  send  provisions  by  boats  to  skirt  the  shore, 
and  to  be  put  ashore  in  small  boats.  Our  position  is  accessible 
to  York  river.  The  men  can  live  on  bread  and  bacon. 
"  In  haste,  your  obedient  servant, 

"E.  D.  Keyes, 

^^  Brig, -Gen,  4M  Corps, 

"  P.  S.  An  officer  from  Gen.  Hooker's  division  reports  this 
moment  that  three  of  his  batteries  have  been  taken  by  the  pieces 
miring  and  the  horses  being  killed.  This  officer  reports  that  the 
men  are  exhausted  for  want  of  proper  food." 


302  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

"In  front  of  Williamsburg, 

"May  5,  1862,  11.20  a.m. 
"  Capt  Chauncey  McKeever^  A,  A,  G. : 

"  I  have  had  a  hard  contest  all  the  morning,  but  do  not 
despair  of  success.  My  men  are  hard  at  work,  but  a  good  deal 
exhausted.  It  is  reported  to  me  that  my  communication  with 
you  by  the  Yorktown  road  is  clear  of  the  enemy.  Batteries, 
cavalry,  and  infantry  can  take  front  by  the  side  of  mine  to  whip 
the  enemy.      • 

"  Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

"  Hooker, 

"  Brig,'Genr 

"  May  5,  late  at  night. 

"  Mv  dear  General  :  I  did  the  best  I  could  after  getting  your 
order,  which  was  after  dark  some  time.  I  sent  a  brigade  (Martin- 
dale's)  to  occupy  the  front  of  York.  The  roads  were  horrible 
and  blocked  up  by  wagons,  so  that  they  were  impassable.  The 
brigade  reached  York.  I  sent  some  of  Hunt's  batteries ;  they 
got  there  and  halted.  The  remainder  I  kept  ready  to  march 
at  two  o'clock,  or  as  soon  as  light  enough.  All  are  rested  and 
fresh.  Sykes's  and  my  other  brigades  are  in  camp,  also  Blake. 
Franklin,  I  think,  got  off.  I  hope  you  have  got  order  out  of 
chaos.  Capt.  Norton  says  Ingalls  told  him  he  had  received  an 
order  from  the  secretary  to  fit  out  a  sea  expedition,  which  would 
derange  his  plans  considerably.  A  telegram  can  always  reach  me 
from  York.  We  are  ready  to  move  quickly.  I  have  directed 
Martindale  to  camp  at  York. 

"  Yours  ever, 

"F.  J.  Porter." 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Williamsburg,  May  7,  1862,  12.30  p.m. 

Gen.  R.  B.  Marcy,  Chief  of  Staff,  Camp  IVinfield  Scott  : 

General  :  Headquarters  will  be  moved  at  once  to  this 
place  ;  wagons  light.  Porter  will  complete  his  embarkation  as 
rapidly  as  possible  and  join  Franklin.  The  artillery  of  the  divi- 
sions Franklin,  Sedgwick,  and  Porter  will  proceed  by  water  with 
the  least  possible  delay  to  join  their  divisions,  also  Franklin's 
cavalry  and  as  many  wagons  as  possible.  Hunt's  heavy  bat- 
teries will  move  to  Brick  House  landing  by  water.  I  will  give 
orders  in  regard  to  the  rest  of  Hunt's  batteries,  the  regular  infan- 
try, Roach's  and  Gregg's  cavalry  shortly. 

Please  send  me  last  news  from  Franklin,  and,  if  necessary, 
send  a  fast  special  boat  to  learn  state  of  affairs,  and  communi- 
cate on  return  with  signal  party  at  Queen's  creek,  as  well  as  via 
Yorktown  by  telegraph.     The  orders  for  Sumner  and  Richard- 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES.  303 

son  will  be  given  to- day  ;  in  the  meantime  let  neither  embark 
without  special  orders  from  me  :  this  is  imperative. 

How  soon  can  the  artillery  of  Franklin,  Sedgwick,  and  Por- 
ter be  embarked  ?  How  soon  Franklin's  cavalry  ?  How  soon 
will  transports  be  ready  for  the  regular  infantry  and  Richard- 
son ?  How  soon  can  water-transportation  be  furnished  for 
Duane  and  his  train  ?  For  Woodbury  and  his  trains  ?  How 
soon  for  Gregg  and  Rush  ?  How  many  wagons  has  Van  Vliet 
in  reserve  for  general  purposes  ?  If  you  send  steamer  to  Frank- 
lin, inform  him  that  Stoneman  was  some  fourteen  miles  from 
here  a  couple  of  hours  ago,  and  will  try  to  communicate  with 
him  via  Hockaday's  Spring  this  evening.  I  start  Smith's  divi- 
sion this  evening,  and  hope  to  get  most  of  the  column  in  mo- 
tion by  the  morning.  Will  move  in  person  to-morrow  morning. 
Would  like  to  have  a  gunboat  examine  Moody's  wharf,  to  see 
whether  burned. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.  -  Gen,  Comma  tiding, 

"Brick  House  Point,  May  6,  1862. 

**  Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan  : 

I  am  landing  at  Brick  House  Point.  It  is,  however,  a  bad 
landing  ;  the  water  shoal  for  a  long  distance  out — a  quarter  of  a 
mile  from  shore.  One  brigade  is  landed.  The  enemy  is  said  to 
be  in  force  on  the  road,  watching  this  point  ;  I  do  not  believe  it, 
however.  I  hope  to  get  the  artillery  and  two  other  brigades  off 
before  morning. 

"  W.  B.  Franklin, 

"  Brig.-Genr 

"  Brick  House,  May  7,  a.m. 

"  Gen.  G.  B,  McClellan  : 

"  All  of  my  division  has  landed  except  the  cavalry.  The 
night  passed  with  nothing  unusual  except  the  killing  of  one 
picket.  We  have  two  prisoners,  taken  when  we  first  arrived  ; 
they  belong  to  a  Texan  regiment,  are  very  intelligent,  but  lie, 
I  think.  I  send  them  to  Yorktown  by  the  Spaulding.  Dana's 
brigade  is  here  and  will  be  landed  this  morning.  The  indica- 
tions are  that  the  enemy  is  in  the  vicinity. 

"  W.  B.  Franklin, 

"  Brig.-Gen." 

"Brick  House,  May  7,  1862. 

"  Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan  : 

"  The  road  from  Brick  House  Point  to  the  main  road  is  not 
as  laid  down  on  the  photographic  or  C.  S.  maps.     The  right 


304  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

flank  and  rear  are  surrounded  by  a  creek,  and  the  left  flank  has 
another  creek,  leaving  a  small  opening  through  which  the  road 
winds.  I  have  ordered  an  examination  to  determine  more  accu- 
rately these  points,  but  it  is  a  slow  business  on  account  of  want 
of  cavalry.  I  still  think  it  may  be  an  open  question  between 
this  point  and  West  Point. 

"W.  B.  Franklin, 

''Brig.-Genr 


Headquarters,  Franklin's  Division, 
"  Brick  House,  May  7,  1862. 

"  Gen.  R.  B.  Marcy,   Chief  of  Staff: 

"  General  :  I  have  the  honor  to  report  that  this  morning, 
about  seven  o'clock,  our  pickets  were  driven  in  on  our  left  flank, 
and  that  after  skirmishing  for  about  two  hours  the  action  became 
quite  sharp  at  the  right  extremity  of  that  flank.  Our  reserves 
were  driven  in  several  times,  but  returned  to  their  position  each 
time  with  ardor.  Finally  we  held  the  position  which  we  had 
taken  in  the  morning,  and  at  several  points  of  the  line  advanced 
our  position. 

**  Wherever  we  advanced  the  enemy  was  found  in  rifle-pits. 
The  day  has  been  a  success,  and  but  for  the  extreme  want  of 
forage  and  provisions,  owing  to  the  deficiency  of  transportation 
and  the  difficulty  of  landing,  we  might  have  followed  it  up.  As 
it  is,  I  congratulate  myself  that  we  have  maintained  our  position. 
Gen.  Newton's  command  was  most  severely  engaged,  and  his 
conduct  and  that  of  Gen.  Slocum,  who  had  charge  respectively 
of  the  left  and  right  wings,  was  admirable.  All  of  the  officers 
and  men  behaved  admirably,  and  with  transportation  and  forage 
we  could  move  on  to-morrow. 

"  I  respectfully  request  that  instructions  may  be  given  to  send 
up  forage  and  transportation  immediately,  as  we  are  entirely  tied 
down  for  want  of  them.  Gen.  Sedgwick's  infantry  has  arrived. 
The  killed  and  wounded  amount  to  nearly  a  hundred.  A  more 
detailed  report  will  be  given  as  soon  as  possible. 

"Very  respectfully, 

"W.  B.  Franklin, 

"  Brig.'Genr 

Camp  19  miles  from  Williamsburg, 
May  II,  1862. 

Hon,  E.  M.  Stanton^  Secretary  of  War^  Fortress  Monroe: 

Without  waiting  for  further  official  reports  which  have  not 
yet  reached  me,  I  wish  to  bear  testimony  to  the  splendid  conduct 
of  Hooker's  and  Kearny's  divisions,  under  command  of  Gen. 
Heintzelman,  in  the  battle  of  Williamsburg.  Their  bearing  was 
worthy  of  veterans.     Hooker's  division  for  hours  gallantly  with- 


LETTERS  AND  DESPATCHES,  305 

stood  the  attack  of  greatly  superior  numbers,  with  very  heavy 
loss.  Kearny's  arrived  in  time  to  restore  the  fortunes  of  the  day, 
and  came  most  gallantly  into  action.  I  shall  probably  have  occa- 
sion to  call  attention  to  other  commands,  and  do  not  wish  to  do 
injustice  to  them  by  mentioning  them  now.  If  I  had  had  the  full 
information  I  now  have  in  regard  to  the  troops  above-named 
when  I  first  telegraphed,  they  would  have  been  specially  men- 
tioned and  commended.  I  spoke  only  of  what  I  knew  at  the 
time,  and  shall  rejoice  to  do  full  justice  to  all  engaged. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.  -  Gen,  Commanding, 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 


Private  Letters. 


[Apri/  I  io  May  5.  1862.] 

Steamer  ^^  Commodore "  April  i,  1862,  Potomac  River,  4.15 
P.M. — As  soon  as  possible  after  reaching  Alexandria  I  got  the 
Commodore  under  way  and  "  put  off."  I  did  not  feel  safe  until 
I  could  fairly  see  Alexandria  behind  us.  I  have  brought  a  tug 
with  us  to  take  back  despatches  from  Budd*s  Ferry,  where  I 
shall  stop  a  few  hours  for  the  purpose  of  winding  up  everything. 
I  found  that  if  I  remained  at  Alexandria  I  would  be  annoyed 
very  much,  and  perhaps  be  sent  for  from  Washington.  .  .  . 
Officially  speaking,  I  feel  very  glad  to  get  away  from  that  sink 
of  iniquity.  .  .  . 

8  P.M. — I  have  just  returned  from  a  trip  in  one  of  the  naval 
vessels  with  Capt.  Seymour  to  take  a  look  at  the  rebel  batteries 
(recently  abandoned)  at  Shipping  Point,  etc.  They  were  pretty 
formidable,  and  it  would  have  given  us  no  little  trouble  to  take 
possession  of  them  had  they  held  firm.  It  makes  only  the  more 
evident  the  propriety  of  my  movements,  by  which  Manassas  was 
forced  to  be  evacuated  and  these  batteries  with  it.  The  trip 
was  quite  interesting.  .  .  . 

Steamer  "  Commodore"  April  3,  Hampton  Roads,  1.30  p.m. — 
...  I  have  been  up  to  my  eyes  in  business  since  my  arrival. 
We  reached  here  about  four  yesterday  p.m.;  ran  into  the  wharf 
and  unloaded  the  horses,  then  went  out  and  anchored.  Marcy 
and  I  at  once  took  a  tug  and  ran  out  to  the  flag-ship  Minne- 
sota to  see  Goldsborough,  where  we  remained  until  about  nine, 
taking  tea  with  him. 

On  our  return  we  found  Gen.  Heintzelman,  soon  followed 
by  Porter  and  Smith,  all  of  whom  remained  here  all  night.  I 
sat  up  very  late  arranging  movements,  and  had  my  hands  full. 
I  have  been  hard  at  work  all  the  morning,  and  not  yet  on  shore. 
Dine  with  Gen.  Wool  to-day  at  four,  and  go  thence  to  our  camp. 

306 


PRIVATE  LETTERS, 


307 


We  move  to-morrow  a.m.  Three  divisions  take  the  direct  road 
to  Vorktown,  and  will  encamp  at  Howard's  Bridge.  Two  take 
the  James  River  road  and  go  to  Young's  Mill.  The  reserve 
goes  to  Big  Bethel,  where  my  headquarters  will  be  to-morrow 
night. 

My  great  trouble  is  in  the  want  of  wagons — a  terrible  draw- 
back ;  but  I  cannot  wait  for  them.  I  hope  to  get  possession, 
before  to-morrow  night,  of  a  new  landing-place  some  seven 
or  eight  miles  from  Yorktown,  which  will  help  us  very  much. 
It  is  probable  that  we  shall  have  some  fighting  to-morrow  ;  not 
serious,  but  we  may  have  the  opportunity  of  drubbing  Magruder. 
The  harbor  here  is  very  crowded ;  facilities  for  landing  are  bad. 
I  hope  to  get  possession  of  Yorktown  day  after  to-morrow. 
Shall  then  arrange  to  make  the  York  river  my  line  of  supplies. 
The  great  battle  will  be  (I  think)  near  Richmond,  as  I  have 
always  hoped  and  thought.  I  see  my  way  very  clearly,  and, 
with  my  trains  once  ready,  will  move  rapidly.  .  .  . 

Telegram — Great  Bethel^  April  \^  1862,  6  p.m. — My  advanced 
guard  five  miles  from  Yorktown.  Some  slight  skirmishing  to- 
day. Our  people  driving  rebels.  Hope  to  invest  Yorktown 
to-morrow.     All  well  and  in  good  spirits. 

Big  Bethel^  April  5,  2  a.m. —  .  .  .  Have  just  got  through  with 
the  orders  for  to-morrow  ;  have  been  working  very  hard,  and 
have  sent  off  officers  and  orderlies  in  every  direction.  I  feel  sure 
of  to-morrow.  I  have,  I  think,  provided  against  every  contin- 
gency, and  shall  have  the  men  well  in  hand  if  we  fight  to-morrow. 
...  I  saw  yesterday  a  wonderfully  cool  performance.  Three 
of  our  men  had  gone  close  down  to  the  enemy's  position  after 
a  sheep,  which  they  killed,  skinned,  and  started  off  with.  They 
were,  of  course,  fired  at  frequently,  and  in  the  course  of  their 
travels  a  12-pound  shot  struck  directly  by  them.  They  qui- 
etly picked  up  the  shot,  held  on  to  the  sheep,  and  brought 
the  shot  to  me,  yet  warm.  I  never  saw  so  cool  and  gallant 
a  set  of  men  ;  they  do  not  seem  to  know  what  fear  is. 

Near  Yorktmvn^  April  6,  i  a.m. —  ...  I  find  the  enemy  in 
strong  force  and  in  a  very  strong  position,  but  will  drive  him 
out.     Fitz-John  is  in  the  advance  on  the  right,  Baldy  on  the 

«3 


308  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

left ;  they  are  doing  splendidly.  Their  divisions  have  been 
under  fire  all  the  afternoon;  have  lost. only  about  five  killed 
in  each,  and  have  punished  secesh  badly.  Thus  far  it  has  been 
altogether  an  artillery  affair. 

While  listening  this  p.m.  to  the  sound  of  the  guns  I  received 
an  order  detaching  McDowell's  corps  from  my  command.  It 
is  the  most  infamous  thing  that  history  has  recorded.  I  have 
made  such  representations  as  will  probably  induce  a  revoca- 
tion of  the  order,  or  at  least  save  Franklin  to  me.  The  idea 
of  depriving  a  general  of  35,000  troops  when  actually  under 
fire  \ 

To-morrow  night  I  can  tell  you  exactly  what  I  intend  doing. 
We  have  no  baggage  to-night,  our  wagons  being  detained  by  the 
bad  roads.  I  have  taken  possession  of  a  hut  in  a  deserted 
secesh  camp ;  found  a  table  therein,  and  sleep  on  a  horse- 
blanket,  if  I  find  time  to  "  retire."  Colbum  is  copying  a  long 
letter ;  Seth,  standing  by  the  fire,  looking  very  sleepy.  He 
wakes  up  and  sends  his  kindest  regards,  in  which  Colburn  asks 
to  participate.  I  am  sorry  to  say  that  your  father  is  snoring 
loudly  in  a  comer. 

April  6,  1.40  P.M. —  .  .  .  Did  not  get  to  bed  until  3.30,  and 
then  my  bed  was  a  rather  rough  one,  as  our  wagons  did  not 
arrive.  Things  quiet  to-day  ;  very  little  firing  ;  our  people  are 
pushing  their  reconnoissances  and  getting  up  supplies.  I  shall 
take  the  place,  but  may  be  some  time  in  effecting  it.  .  .  . 

April  8,  8  A.M. — Raining  hard  all  night,  and  still  continues 
to  do  so.  Am  now  encamped  about  five  miles  from  Yorktown  ; 
have  been  here  two  or  three  days.  Have  now  visited  both  the 
right  and  left,  and,  in  spite  of  the  heavy  rain,  must  ride  to  Ship 
Point  and  our  right  immediately  after  breakfast.  All  I  care 
for  about  the  rain  is  the  health  and  comfort  of  the  men.  They 
are  more  fond  of  me  than  ever ;  more  enthusiastic  than  I 
deserve ;  wherever  I  go  it  seems  to  inspire  the  fullest  confi- 
dence. .  .  . 

I  have  raised  an  awful  row  about  McDowell's  corps.  The 
President  very  coolly  telegraphed  me  yesterday  that  he  thought 
I  had  better  break  the  enemy's  lines  at  once !  I  was  much 
tempted  to  reply  that  he  had  better  come  and  do  it  himself. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  309 

April  9,  near  Yorkiown,  8  a.m. —  .  .  .  Last  night  returned 
late  and  was  fully  occupied  with  reports  of  reconnoissances, 
etc.,  until  very  late. 

It  rained  nearly  every  moment  yesterday,  all  the  night  before, 
all  last  night,  but  has  now  stopped,  though  likely  to  commence 
again  at  any  moment.  It  is  execrable  weather;  everything  knee- 
deep  in  mud  ;  roads  infamous  :  but  we  will  get  through  it.  I 
have  had  great  difficulty  in  arranging  about  supplies — so  few 
wagons  and  such  bad  roads.  Rode  down  to  Ship  Point  yester- 
day morning.  .  .  . 

9  A.M. — Interrupted  and  unable  to  finish.  Have  been  both- 
ered all  the  evening,  but  am  getting  things  straightened  out. 
.  .  .  Start  for  the  Point  in  a  few  minutes.  .  .  . 

April  10,  10  P.M. — Have  had  a  pretty  long  ride  to-day.  Sec- 
retary Fox  spent  last  night  with  me.  As  soon  as  he  had  gone  I 
rode  to  Porter's  camp,  thence  to  the  river-bank  to  meet  Capt. 
Missroom,  commanding  the  gunboats.  Have  had  an  excellent 
view  of  the  water  defences  of  Yorktown,  as  well  as  of  Glouces- 
ter. The  enemy  is  very  strong  and  is  adding  to  his  works  and 
the  number  of  his  men.  I  could  see  them  coming  in  on  schoon- 
ers. But  as  my  heavy  guns  are  not  yet  landed,  and  the  navy 
do  not  feel  strong  enough  to  go  at  them,  I  can  only  hurry  for- 
ward our  preparations  and  trust  that  the  more  they  have  the 
more  I  shall  catch.  .  .  . 

Yesterday  I  also  spent  on  the  right,  taking,  under  cover  of  the 
heavy  rain,  a  pretty  good  look  at  the  ground  in  front  of  York  and 
its  defences.  I  got  back  about  dark,  pretty  wet  and  tired  out. 
.  .  .  To-morrow  we  move  headquarters  to  a  much  better  and 
more  convenient  camp  further  to  the  front.  .  .  .  The  present 
camp  is  a  little  too  far  from  the  scene  of  the  most  important 
operations. 

April  II. — I  am  just  recovering  from  a  terrible  scare.  Early 
this  morning  I  was  awakened  by  a  despatch  from  Fitz- John's 
headquarters  stating  that  Fitz  had  made  an  ascension  in  the 
balloon  this  morning,  and  that  the  balloon  had  broken  away 
and  come  to  the  ground  some  three  miles  southwest,  which  would 
be  within  the  enemy's  lines.  You  can  imagine  how  I  felt.  I  at 
once  sent  off  to  the  various  pickets  to  find  out  what  they  knew  and 


3IO  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

try  to  do  something  to  save  him,  but  the  order  had  no  sooner 
gone  than  in  walks  Mr.  Fitz  just  as  cool  as  usual.  He  had 
luckily  come  down  near  my  own  camp  after  actually  passing  over 
that  of  the  enemy.  You  may  rest  assured  of  one  thing :  you 
won't  catch  me  in  the  confounded  balloon,  nor  will  I  allow  any 
other  generals  to  go  up  in  it.  .  .  . 

Don't  ^orry  about  the  wretches  ;  they  have  done  nearly  their 
worst,  and  can't  do  much  more.  I  am  sure  that  I  will  win  in  the 
end,  in  spite  of  all  their  rascality.  History  will  present  a  sad 
record  of  these  traitors  who  are  willing  to  sacrifice  the  country 
and  its  army  for  personal  spite  and  personal  aims.  The  people 
will  soon  understand  the  whole  matter. 

April  14,  II  P.M.,  Camp  Winfield  Scott, —  ...  I  believe  I 
now  know  who  instigated  the  attack  upon  me  and  the  country. 
.  .  .  So  Fox  told  you  all  about  our  troubles.  They  were  severe 
for  some  time,  but  we  are  pretty  well  over  the  worst  of  them.  .  .  . 
I  do  not  expect  to  lose  many  men,  but  to  do  the  work  mainly 
with  artillery,  and  so  avoid  much  loss  of  life.  Several  brave 
fellows  have  already  gone  to  their  long  home,  but  not  a  large 
number. 

I  can't  tell  you  how  soon  I  will  attack,  as  it  will  depend  upon 
the  rapidity  with  which  certain  preliminary  work  can  be  done  and 
the  heavy  guns  brought  up.  I  do  not  fear  a  repulse.  I  shall 
not  quit  the  camps  until  I  do  so  to  continue  the  march  on 
Richmond.  If  I  am  repulsed  once,  will  try  it  again,  and  keep 
it  up  until  we  succeed.  But  I  do  not  anticipate  a  repulse ;  am 
confident  of  success.  ...  I  received  to-day  a  very  kind  letter 
from  old  Mr.  Blair,  which  I  enclose  for  you  to  keep  for  me.  .  .  . 
Remained  at  home  this  morning,  doing  office-work,  but  rode  out 
all  the  afternoon;  rode  to  the  front  and  took  another  look  at 
secesh.  .  .  . 

• 

8.30  A.M.,  15M. — Am  about  starting  for  the  gunboats,  which 
are  anchored  near  here,  to  take  a  better  look  at  the  opposite 
shore.  ...  It  is  raining  a  little  this  morning — not  much  more 
than  a  drizzle.  .  .  . 

April  18,  1. 15  A.M. —  .  .  .  About  a  half-hour  ago  the  accus- 
tomed intermittent  sound  of  artillery  was  varied  in  its  monotony 


PRI VA  TE  LE  TTERS,  3 1  I 

by  a  very  heavy  and  continued  rattle  of  musketry,  with  the  ac- 
companiment of  a  very  respectable  firing  of  artillery.  I  started 
at  once  for  the  telegraph-office,  and  endeavored  in  vain  for  some 
ten  or  fifteen  minutes  to  arouse  the  operators  at  the  stations  in 
the  direction  of  the  firing.  So  I  ordered  twenty  of  the  escort 
to  saddle  up,  and  started  off  Hudson,  Sweitzer,  and  the  Due  de 
Chartres  to  learn  the  state  of  the  case.  The  firing  has  ceased 
now  for  some  minutes,  and  I  am  still  ignorant  as  to  its  where- 
abouts and  cause.  Of  course  I  must  remain  up  until  I  know 
what  it  is.  I  had  had  Arthur,  Wright,  Hammerstein,  Radowitz, 
and  the  Comte  de  Paris,  as  well  as  Colburn,  also  up,  with  some 
of  the  escort  ready  to  move  or  carry  orders,  as  the  case  may 
be,  but  just  now  told  them  to  lie  down  until  I  sent  for  them.  It 
is  a  beautiful  moonlight  night,  clear  and  pleasant — aliuost  too 
much  so  for  sleeping.  .  .  .  Poor  Wagner,  of  the  Topogs,  lost  an 
arm  this  afternoon  by  the  bursting  of  a  shell ;  he  is  doing  well, 
however. 

Merrill  was  severely  but  not  dangerously  wounded  in  the  arm 
yesterday.  In  Smith's  affair  yesterday  we  lost,  I  fear,  nearly 
200  killed  and  wounded.  The  object  I  proposed  had  been  fully 
accomplished  with  the  loss  of  about  20,  when,  after  I  left  the 
ground,  a  movement  was  made  in  direct  violation  of  my  orders, 
by  which  the  remainder  of  the  loss  was  uselessly  incurred.  I 
do  not  yet  know  the  details  nor  who  is  responsible.  We  have 
a  severe  task  before  us,  but  we  will  gain  a  brilliant  success.  .  .  . 
Colburn  is  my  stand-by — so  true  and  faithful.  Many  of  my  aides 
are  excellent.  No  general  ever  labored  under  greater  disadvan- 
tages, but  I  will  carry  it  through  in  spite  of  everything.  I  hope 
Franklin  will  be  here  to-morrow  or  nex^  day.  I  will  then  invest 
Gloucester  and  attack  it  at  the  same  time  I  do  York.  When  the 
Galena  arrives  I  will  cause  it  to  pass  the  batteries,  take  them  in 
reverse,  and  cut  off  the  enemy's  communications  by  York  river. 
As  I  write  I  hear  our  guns  constantly  sounding  and  the  bursting 
of  shells  in  Secession. 

9  P.M. — The  firing  of  last  night  was  caused  by  the  attempt  of 
a  part  of  the  enemy  to  cross  the  stream  in  Smith's  front.  They 
were  repulsed  at  once  ;  tried  it  later,  and  were  again  driven  back. 

April  19,  10.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  To-day  it  has  been  very  quiet  ; 
our  batteries  have  merely  fired  enough  to  keep  the  enemy  en- 


312  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

tirely  silent  at  his  works  in  front  of  Smith  and  at  Wynn's  Mill. 
Last  night  we  commenced  a  battery,  at  Farnholdt's  house,  for 
five  loo-pounder  Parrotts  and  one  200-pounder  Parrott ;  also 
one  for  fifteen  heavy  guns  about  two  thousand  yards  from  the 
enemy's  main  defences;  another  for  six  and  one  for  five  close  by. 
Another  for  six  was  armed  to-day,  and  kept  down  the  enemy's 
fire  at  Wynn's  Mill.  To-morrow  evening  we  commence  batteries 
for  thirteen  mortars.  About  Monday  night  we  will  construct  the 
first  parallel  and  several  other  batteries  in  exposed  positions,  leav- 
ing those  already  commenced  to  cover  the  work  and  render  it 
more  safe.  We  shall  soon  be  raining  down  a  terrible  tempest 
on  this  devoted  place.  To-day  the  enemy  sent  a  flag  of  truce 
to  Smith,  asking  a  suspension  of  hostilities  to  bury  the  killed  of 
the  1 6th.  The  officer  who  met  with  Sweitzer  acknowledged  that 
their  loss  was  very  severe  and  the  bearing  of  our  men  admirable. 
I  received  to-day  a  letter  from  Burnside,  which  I  enclose.  .  .  . 

Franklin  arrived  yesterday  and  spent  the  night  in  my  tent. 
He  is  at  Ship  Point  to-night ;  I  expect  his  division  to-morrow. 
.  .  .  Don't  be  at  all  discouraged  ;  all  is  going  well.  I  know 
exactly  what  I  am  about.  I  can't  go  "  with  a  rush  "  over  strong 
posts.  I  must  use  heavy  guns  and  silence  their  fire ;  all  that 
takes  much  time,  and  I  have  not  been  longer  than  the  usual 
time  for  such  things — much  less  than  the  usual,  in  truth.  .  .  . 

I  can't  tell  you  when  Yorktown  is  to  be  attacked,  for  it 
depends  on  circumstances  that  I  cannot  control.  It  shall  be 
attacked  the  first  moment  I  can  do  it  successfully.  But  I  don't 
intend  to  hurry  it ;  I  cannot  afford  to  fail.  I  may  have  the 
opportunity  of  carrying  the  place  next  week,  or  may  be  delayed 
a  couple  of  weeks ;  mfich,  of  course,  depends  on  the  rapid- 
ity with  which  the  heavy  guns  and  ammunition  arrive.     Never 

mind  what  such  people  as say  ;  they  are  beneath  contempt. 

...  I  will  put  in  a  leaf  of  holly  from  the  bower  some  of  the 
men  have  made  in  front  of  my  tent  to-day.  They  have  made 
quite  an  artistic  thing  of  it — holly  and  pine  ;  it  adds  much,  too, 
to  my  comfort,  as  it  renders  the  tent  more  private  and  cool. 

April  20,  7.30  A.M. —  ...  It  has  been  raining  more  or  less 
all  night,  and  if  it  were  not  for  the  men  I  would  enjoy  the  rain, 
for  I  rather  like  to  hear  it  patter  on  the  tent. 

I  have  a  fire  in  my  stove  this  morning,  so  it  is  quite  com- 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  3 13 

fortable.  My  tent  is  the  same  the  aides  use  for  an  office  ;  it  has 
a  floor  of  pine  boughs — a  carpet  of  boughs,  I  suppose  I  ought  to 
say — a  table  in  the  middle,  a  desk  in  one  corner,  my  bed  in  an- 
other, my  saddle  in  another,  a  wood-pile,  etc.,  in  the  last.  I  have 
a  splendid  two-legged  washstand  which  Charles's  mechanical 
ingenuity  devised.  Then  I  have  a  clothes-rack,  consisting  of  a 
sapling  with  the  stumps  of  the  branches  projecting.  So  you  see 
I  am  living  quite  en  pritue, 

April  21. — Yesterday  was  rather  unpleasant;  rained  a  good 
deal.  To-day  about  the  same  ;  not  raining  much  yet,  but  a  kind 
of  drizzle.  Had  a  letter  yesterday  from  Francis  B.  Cutting,  of 
New  York,  hoping  that  I  would  not  allow  these  treacherous 
hounds  to  drive  me  from  my  path.     Have  just  replied  to  it. 

April  22,  1 1. 15  P.M. —  .  .  .  The  enemy  has  been  blazing 
away  a  good  deal  to-day,  but  hurt  nothing,  however  ;  he  tried  his 
best  at  a  skirmish  with  some  of  Smith's  men  this  morning,  but 
was  repulsed  with  loss.  It  is  said  that  some  of  his  troops  were 
blacks.  I  do  not,  however,  give  full  credit  to  this.  It  seems 
too  improbable  to  be  true.  The  navy  have  been  firing  this  morn- 
ing at  long  range. 

April  23,  7  A.M. —  .  .  .  Some  few  shots  fired  already,  but  not 
many  :  secesh  don't  mean  to  get  up  very  early.  I  am  rather 
anxious  to  hear  the  result  of  last  night's  work  ;  for  I  am  in  hopes 
that  I  can  get  all  the  batteries  that  have  been  commenced  well 
aimed  to-night,  so  that  the  first  parallel  may  be  commenced  at 
once.  The  weather  has  cleared  off  beautifully  again,  so  that  I 
am  in  strong  hopes  we  shall  have  no  more  rain  for  some  time. 
You  have  no  idea  of  the  effect  of  a  couple  of  days'  rain  in  this 
country ;  roads,  camps,  etc.,  become  impassable.  .  .  . 

11.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  Have  been  working  hard  all  day,  but  not 
in  the  saddle  ;  it  has  been  head-work  in  my  tent  to-day.  I  am 
getting  on  splendidly  with  my  "  slow  preparations."  The  prince 
is  delighted  and  thinks  my  work  gigantic.  I  do  believe  that  I 
am  avoiding  the  fault  of  the  Allies  at  Sebastopol,  and  quietly  pre- 
paring the  way  for  great  success.  I  have  brought  forty  heavy 
guns  in  battery ;  to-morrow  night  I  hope  to  have  twelve  new  guns 
and  {\\^  to  ten  heavy  mortars  in  battery.     I  begin  in  the  morning 


314  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

the  redoubts  to  cover  the  flank  of  the  first  parallel,  which  will  be 
constructed  to-morrow  night.  I  will  not  open  fire*unless  the 
enemy  annoys  us,  hoping  to  get  all  the  guns  in  battery  and  the 
trenches  well  advanced  before  meeting  with  serious  opposition. 
We  have  done  much  more  than  they  suspect.  Have  ordered  a 
forced  reconnoissance  of  a  dangerous  point  in  the  morning ;  it 
may  cost  several  lives,  but  I  have  taken  all  possible  precautions, 
and  hope  to  gain  the  information  necessary  with  but  little  loss. 
There  is  no  other  choice  than  to  run  the  risk.  .  .  .  Everything  is 
as  quiet  now  as  if  there  were  no  enemy  within  a  hundred  miles  of 
us.  The  Galena^  under  Rodgers,  will  be  here  by  day  after  to- 
morrow. 

April  26. — Again  raining,  and  has  been  all  the  morning. 
Grover  carried  a  redoubt  of  the  rebels  most  handsomely  this 
morning.  It  was  one  from  Vhich  they  had  it  in  their  power  to 
annoy  the  left  of  our  parallels,  and  it  was  an  object  to  get  rid 
of  it.  The  work  was  handsomely  done ;  the  work  carried  by 
assault,  and  then  so  much  destroyed  that  it  can  be  of  no  further 
use  to  the  rebels.  Fifteen  prisoners  were  taken  in  the  affair. 
We  lost  three  killed,  one  mortally  and  about  ten  others  slightly 
wounded  ;  have  not  all  the  details  yet.  We  got  eight  immense 
mortars  up  by  water  last  night ;  but  a  canal-boat  loaded  with 
empty  shells  ran  aground  in  sight  of  secesh,  who  has  been  blaz- 
ing away  at  them  ;  sent  one  shot  through.  He  has  stopped  firing 
now,  probably  because  he  cannot  see  on  account  of  the  rain. 
To-night  we  complete  the  first  parallel,  which  will  be  nearly  four 
thousand  yards  long — an  immense  work.  From  the  manner  in 
which  our  men  pitched  into  the  little  redoubt  this  morning  it  is 
clear  that  the  morale  is  on  our  side.  The  men  found  quite  a 
deep  and  broad  ditch  in  front  of  the  affair,  but  over  it  they  went 
without  a  moment's  hesitation  ! 

April  27,  midnight, —  .  .  .  Was  engaged  with  Barnard,  Por- 
ter, etc.,  until  about  one,  when  I  rode  to  the  trenches.  Then,  of 
course,  had  to  walk  ;  a  good  deal  was  muddy,  so  it  was  tiresome. 
Went  over  the  whole  extent  and  saw  everything  with  care.  The 
enemy  have  fired  a  good  deal  to-day,  but  the  men  are  now  so  well 
covered  that  no  one  has  been  hurt  to-day.  Commenced  to-day 
batteries  for  fifteen  lo-inch  mortars,  and  to-night  another  battery 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  315 

for  heavy  guns  ;  another  for  ten  mortars  to-morrow  morning  ;  an 
extension  of  the  parallel  on  the  left  commenced  to-night.  By 
to-morrow  night  the  parallel  shall  be  finished  in  all  its  details,  as 
well  as  the  two  covering  redoubts  on  the  left.  Some  time  day 
after  to-morrow  I  hope  to  have  thirty-five  mortars  in  battery. 
To-morrow  night  will  open  a  tuyau  in  advance  leading  to  a  new 
gun-battery  fast  getting  ready  to  blow  secesh  up.  He  will  have 
a  bad  time  of  it  when  we  open.  Have  news  this  evening  via 
Richmond  that  New  Orleans  is  in  our  possession.  I  presume  it 
is  true.  So  the  work  goes  bravely  on.  .  .  .  Yesterday  made  Fitz 
Porter  "  Director  of  the  Siege*' — a  novel  title,  but  made  necessary 
by  the  circumstances  of  the  case.  I  give  all  my  orders  relating 
to  the  siege  through  him,  making  him  at  the  same  time  comman- 
dant of  the  siege  operations  and  a  chief  of  staff  for  that  portion 
of  the  work.  This  new  arrangement  will  save  me  much  tiouble, 
and  relieve  my  mind  greatly,  and  save  much  time.  In  going  over 
the  line  of  trenches  yesterday  I  found  so  many  blunders  com- 
mitted that  I  was  very  thankful  to  put  Pprter  on  duty  at  once. 
.  .  .  The  good  fellow  (Colburn)  never  leaves  me  ;  wherever  I 
ride  he  sticks  close  after  me.  He  is  one  of  the  very  best  men 
I  ever  knew,  so  thoroughly  honest  and  reliable.  His  judgment 
is  excellent  and  he  is  perfectly  untiring.  Day  and  night  are  about 
the  same  to  him,  and  he  will  start  out  on  a  long  ride  at  midnight 
in  a  pitch-dark  or  rainy  night  with  as  much  good-humor  as  at 
midday.  "  Kentuck  "  (horse)  is  still  at  Fort  Monroe  sick  ;  will 
rejoin  in  a  few  days,  I  hope.  Marsh  is  with  him,  and  I  am  some- 
times half-wicked  enough  to  suspect  that  Marsh  finds  Fort  Mon- 
roe more  comfortable  than  camp  would  be. 

April  28,  11.45  J'-W- —  •  •  •  Rocie  out  this  p.m.,  and  went  over 
most  of  the  ground  from  right  to  left.  Commenced  some  new 
work  still  more  to  the  front  to-night ;  as  it  was  exposed  and  dan- 
gerous, and  required  noiseless  and  rapid  working,  I  as  usual  gave 
it  to  the  regulars  to  do.  Have  this  moment  heard  that  although 
the  rebels  have  been  firing  a  great  deal  (there  goes  another  gun), 
they  have  wounded  but  one  man  ;  the  men  should  be  well  cov- 
ered by  this  time,  so  I  fancy  the  work  is  safe.  I  have  also  (there 
goes  another  gun)  ordered  a  lot  of  rifle-pits  for  sharpshooters 
to  be  pushed  out  well  to  the  front ;  we  will,  I  hope,  gain  a 
good  deal  of  ground  to-night.     Am  getting  on  nicely.     Will  have 


If. 


316  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

some  more  batteries  ready  for  their  guns  by  to-morrow  p.m.,  and 
will  very  shortly  be  able  to  open  on  secesh.  He  tried  to  annoy 
one  of  our  working  parties  this  morning  with  a  couple  of  guns  ; 
I  sent  out  a  field-battery  and  silenced  him  after  four  rounds. 

8  A.M. — Colburn  came  back  from  the  trenches  after  midnight, 
and  reported  all  going  on  well ;  the  regulars  had  covered  them- 
selves well  by  that  time,  and  the  fire  of  the  enemy  had  only 
wounded  one  man,  and  that  not  badly.  Clitz  was  in  command 
of  the  working  party  last  night.  To-day  weather  good  ;  will  not 
rain.  Hope  to  make  good  progress  this  morning.  Good  deal 
of  firing  going  on  now. 

April  30,  A.M. — Had  a  quiet  night ;  very  little  firing  ;  drove 
them  out  of  an  orchard  whence  they  had  been  annoying  us,  and 
pushed  them  still  further  in  towards  their  works.  A  good  deal 
of  firing  on  their  part  yesterday  ;  did  very  little  harm,  killing 
some  three  and  wounding  four  or  five  of  our  people.  Scarcely 
a  gun  fired  to-day  as  yet ;  we  are  working  like  horses  and  will 
soon  be  ready  to  open.  It  will  be  a  tremendous  affair  when  we 
do  begin,  and  will,  I  hope,  make  short  work  of  it.  .  .  .  Have 
put  the  regulars  on  the  exposed  portions  of  the  work,  they  work 
so  much  better.  A  raw,  disagreeable  day ;  I  fear  it  will  rain — 
unless  it  snows ;  wind  from  east.   .   .   . 

10.30  P.M. — After  I  got  through  my  morning  work  went  down 
to  see  the  opening  of  Battery  No.  i.  It  worked  handsomely  ; 
drove  all  the  rebel  schooners  away  from  the  wharf,  and  made  a 
general  scatteration.  The  effect  was  excellent.  Shall  not  open 
the  general  fire  for  some  four  days — I  hope  on  Monday  a.m. 

Next  mortiing  (May  i). — Another  wet,  drizzly,  uncomfortable 
sort  of  a  day.  Good  deal  of  firing  during  the  night.  I  shall  be 
very  glad  when  we  are  really  ready  to  open  fire,  and  then  finish 
this  confounded  affair.  I  am  tired  of  public  life  ;  and  even  now, 
when  I  am  doing  the  best  I  can  for  my  country  in  the  field,  I 
know  that  my  enemies  are  pursuing  me  more  remorselessly  than 
ever,  and  *'  kind  friends  "  are  constantly  making  themselves 
agreeable  by  informing  me  of  the  pleasant  predicament  in  which 
I  am — the  rebels  on  one  side,  and  the  abolitionists  and  other 
scoundrels  on  the  other.  I  believe  in  my  heart  and  conscience, 
however,  that  I  am  walking  on  the  ridge  between  the  two  gulfs, 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  317 

and  that  all  I  have  to  do  is  to  try  to  keep  the  path  of  honor  and 
truth,  and  that  God  will  bring  me  safely  through.  At  all  events 
I  am  willing  to  leave  the  matter  in  His  hands,  and  will  be  con- 
tent with  the  decision  of  the  Almighty. 

May  3,  12.30  A.M. — After  the  hot  firing  of  to-day  everything 
is  so  unusually  still  that  I  am  a  little  suspicious  that  our  friends 
may  intend  a  sortie  ;  so  I  have  taken  all  the  steps  necessary  to 
be  ready  for  them,  and  am  sitting  up  for  a  while  to  await  devel- 
opments. I  feel  much  better  satisfied  when  they  are  firing  than 
when  they  are  silent.  To-day  they  have  wasted  about  a  thousand 
rounds  and  have  done  us  no  harm  worth  speaking  of,  except 
(Irish)  bursting  one  of  their  own  guns.  We  are  now  nearly 
ready  to  open  ;  shall  begin,  I  think,  on  Monday  morning,  cer- 
tainly by  Tuesday.  If  all  works  well  it  is  not  impossible  that  we 
shall  have  Yorktown  by  Wednesday  or  Thursday.  The  task  is 
a  difficult  one,  yet  I  am  sure  we  have  taken  the  right  way  to 
accomplish  our  purpose,  and  that  we  will  soon  win.  I  fear  that 
we  are  to  have  another  storm  to-night.  We  want  no  more  rain, 
but  will  make  the  best  of  it  if  it  comes.  Had  plenty  of  work  to 
do  at  home  all  the  morning,  and  in  the  afternoon  rode  down  to 
"  Shield's  House "  to  meet  the  new  commander  of  the  flotilla, 
Capt.  Smith.  ...  I  don't  half  like  the  perfect  quietness  which 
reigns  now.  I  have  given  orders  to  take  advantage  of  it  and 
push  our  approaches  as  far  forward  as  possible.  It  don't  seem 
natural.  It  looks  like  a  sortie  or  an  evacuation.  If  either,  I  hop)e 
it  may  be  the  former.  I  do  not  want  these  rascals  to  get  away 
from  me  without  a  sound  drubbing,  which  they  richly  deserve 
X  and  will  be  sure  to  get  if  they  remain.  ...  I  feel  that  the  fate 
of  a  nation  depends  upon  me,  and  I  feel  that  I  have  not  one 
single  friend  at  the  seat  of  government.  Any  day  may  bring  an 
order  relieving  me  from  command.  If  they  will  simply  let  me 
alone  I  feel  sure  of  success ;  but  will  they  do  it  ? 

May  5,  9.30  A.M. —  .  .  .  You  will  have  learned  ere  this  that 
Yorktown  is  ours.  It  is  a  place  of  immense  strength,  and  was 
very  heavily  armed.  It  so  happened  that  our  preparation  for  the 
attack  was  equally  formidable,  so  that  Lee,  Johnston,  and  Davis 
confessed  that  they  could  not  hold  the  place.  They  evacuated 
it  in  a  great  hurry,  leaving  their  heavy  guns,  baggage,  etc.    I  sent 


4  I  M  Mfil^lU/^'S  0 IVN  STOR  Y. 

\\\c  Mivaliy  <«nor  ihc^in  iit  luuc,  ami  our  advance  is  now  engaged 
mih  iIkih  ill  \Villirt»««iluifg,  The  weather  is  infamous;  it  has 
\\KiiiW  \s\\\\\\\^  <ill  night,  and  i:i  iitiU  raining  heavily  ;  no  signs  of 
<tlop|tiniJi  i  i»><idn  <i\vful.  I  hope  to  get  to  West  Point  to-day, 
^llhiuigh  \\\^  weaiher  has  delayed  us  terribly.  It  could  not  well 
ho  >vv^r^i^)  \\\\\  we  will  get  through  nevertheless.  The  villains 
()iiei  Ciih)  have  scallered  torpedoes  everywhere — by  springs,  wells, 
etv.  It  is  the  most  murderous  and  barbarous  thing  I  ever 
heard  of. 


CHAPTER   XIX. 

Confederate  retreat — Pursuit  towards  Williamsburg — Battle  of  Williams- 
burg— The  horse  Dan  Webster. 

It  appears  that  Gen.  Johnston,  the  Confederate  commander, 
regarded  the  position  of  Yorktown  and  the  Warwick  as  easily 
held  against  a  simple  assault,  but  as  untenable  against  siege  ope- 
rations,  or  when  we  could  pass  up  the  York  or  James  rivers  ; 
therefore  he  withdrew  as  soon  as  satisfied  that  we  were  on  the 
point  of  using  our  heavy  guns. 

He  directed  the  movement  to  commence  at  dusk  on  the  4th 
of  May,  Magruder*s  command  to  move  by  the  Lee's  Mill  road, 
to  halt  at  the  junction  of  roads  on  the  Yorktown  side  of  Wil 
liamsburg.  and  occupy  the  line  of  fortifications ;  Longstreet's 
division  to  follow  Magruder's ;  D.  H.  Hill's  and  G.  W.  Smith's 
divisions  to  march  by  the  Yorktown  road.  Longstreet,  Hill,  and 
Smith  were  to  pass  through  Williamsburg,  Smith  halting  on  the 
Barhamsville  road  far  enough  out  to  leave  room  for  the  other 
troops  between  himself  and  the  town.  It  was  expected  that 
Magruder  and  Hill  would  clear  the  way  to  enable  Longstreet 
and  Smith  to  start  at  nine  p.m.,  so  that  the  whole  army  could 
reach  Williamsburg  soon  after  midnight;  but  it  was  sunrise  of 
the  5  th  before  Smith's  road  was  clear,  and  his  rear  reached 
the  fortifications  near  Williamsburg  about  noon.  He  found 
that  the  fortifications  were  unoccupied;  and  as  skirmishing  was 
taking  place  about  two  miles  back,  he  halted  a  small  body  whom 
he  found  between  the  works  and  Williamsburg,  and  reported  the 
state  of  affairs  to  Gen.  Johnston,  who  ordered  back  McLaws's 
brigade  and  Stuart's  cavalry. 

Early  in  the  morning  of  the  4th  of  May,  the  moment  I  learned 
that  our  troops  were  in  possession  of  Yorktown  and  the  line  of 
the  Warwick,  I  ordered  Gen.  Stoneman  in  pursuit  with  all  the 
available  force  of  cavalr)'  and  horse-artillery,  supported  by  infan- 
tr)',  on  both  the  Lee's  Mill  and  Yorktown  roads  to  Williamsburg. 

3W 


320  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

The  next,  and  by  far  the  most  important,  step  wis  to  throw 
Franklin's  division,  supported  promptly  and  strongly,  as  rapidly 
as  possible  up  the  York  river  by  water,  to  land  on  its  right  bank 
opposite  West  Point,  in  order  to  take  in  reverse  whatever  works 
might  exist  between  that  point  and  Yorktown,  and  to  cut  off,  if 
possible,  the  enemy's  trains  and  troops  still  south  of  the  mouth  of 
the  Pamunkey. 

While  keeping  steadily  in  view  Stoneman's  operations  and  his 
proper  support,  I  at  once  turned  my  attention  to  expediting  the 
movement  up  the  York  river  by  water.  The  weather  was  so  bad 
and  the  wharf  facilities  at  Yorktown  so  deficient  that  it  was  very 
difficult  to  bring  order  out  of  chaos,  and  Franklin's  division  did 
not  reach  its  destination  until  the  6th  of  May. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th,  then,  Stoneman  moved  out  of 
Yorktown  with  four  batteries  of  horse-artillery,  the  ist  and  6th 
U.  S.  Cavalry,  the  8th  111.  Cavalry,  and  Barker's  squadron  of 
111.  cavalry.  Hooker's  division  was  ordered  to  move  as  rap- 
idly as  possible  by  the  same  road  in  support,  and  Heintzelman 
was  ordered  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  to  follow  with  Kearny's 
division  if  necessary. 

Smith  having  reported  the  enemy's  infantry  and  cavalry  in 
force  about  one  and  a  half  miles  in  rear  of  Lee's  Mill,  Stoneman 
was  ordered  to  cut  off  their  retreat  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Half- 
way House.  At  the  same  time  Sumner,  in  command  of  the  left, 
was  ordered  to  restore  the  bridges  over  the  Warwick  and  place 
Smith's  and  Couch's  divisions  of  the  4th  corps,  and  Casey's  if 
necessary,  in  front  of  the  reported  hostile  force,  endeavoring  to 
hold  them  where  Xhey  were  until  Stoneman  could  gain  their  line 
of  retreat ;  but  attacking  if  they  fell  back.  His  pursuit  was  to 
be  by  the  Lee's  Mill  road,  with  Smith  leading.  The  remaining 
divisions — those  of  Porter,  Sedgwick,  Richardson,  and  Sykes — 
were  held  in  readiness  to  support  either  Keyes,  Heintzelman,  or 
Franklin,  as  might  prove  most  advantageous.  Stoneman  was 
thus  ordered  not  only  to  pursue  and  harass  the  enemy's  rear- 
guard, but  also  to  endeavor  to  cut  off  those  on  the  Lee's 
Mill  road  in  front  of  Sumner. 

About  six  miles  from  Yorktown  Stoneman  came  upon  the 
enemy's  pickets ;  two  miles  further  on  he  came  up  with  their 
rear-guard,  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  posted  on  the  further  bank 
of  a  difficult  ravine.     Gibson's  battery  soon  drove  them  out  of 


WILLIAM  SB  URG.  3  2  I 

this  position.  At  this  point  he  sent  Gen.  Emory,  with  Benson's 
battery,  the  3d  Penn.,  and  Barker's  squadron,  across  to  the 
Lee's  Mill  road  to  cut  off  the  force  in  front  of  Sumner,  who 
was  supposed  to  be  advancing  by  that  road.  With  the  remainder 
of  his  force  Stoneman  pushed  on  as  rapidly  as  safety  permitted 
to  occupy  the  junction  of  the  Yorktown  and  Lee's  Mill  roads, 
about  two  miles  south  of  Williamsburg.  Before  detaching  Emo- 
ry, Stoneman  had  communicated  with  Sumner's  advanced  guard, 
and  had  also  learned  that  Hooker  was  close  behind  on  the  York- 
town  road.  Gen.  P.  St.  G.  Cooke,  commanding  the  advanced 
guard,  consisting  of  a  section  of  Gibson's  battery  and  a  part  of 
the  1st  U.  S.  Cavalr)',  upon  debouching  from  the  wood  found 
himself  at  the  junction  of  the  two  roads  immediately  in  front 
of  a  strong  earthwork  (Fort  Magruder)  flanked  by  redoubts, 
and  in  presence  of  a  strong  rear-guard,  consisting  of  a  regi- 
ment of  cavalry,  one  battery,  and  three  regiments  of  infantry. 
With  his  small  force  Cooke  made  immediate  dispositions  to 
attack,  and  Stoneman  hastened  up  the  remainder  of  the  ist 
Cavalry  and  of  Gibson's  battery. 

The  cleared  ground  available  for  the  operations  of  cavalry 
and  artillery  was  here  so  limited  that  only  about  three  hundred 
cavalry  and  one  battery  could  be  brought  into  action.  Foresee- 
ing that  he  must  soon  retreat  unless  promptly  supported  by  the 
infantry — some  two  miles  in  rear  at  last  accounts — Stoneman 
formed  the  remainder  of  his  force  in  a  clearing  half  a  mile 
in  rear,  in  order  to  cover  the  withdrawal  of  his  advanced 
guard  when  that  became  necessary,  and  sent  to  hurry  up  the 
infantry.  With  great  difficulty,  so  deep  was  the  mud  and  so 
thick  the  abattis,  Gibson  got  his  battery  in  position,  and  Col. 
W.  A.  Grier  formed  his  regiment  (ist  U.  S.)  to  support  it. 
Meanwhile  the  enemy,  strongly  reinforced  from  his  main  body, 
had  thrown  himself  into  the  abandoned  works,  and  several  regi- 
ments of  infantry  were  seen  moving  in  a  direction  threatening 
to  turn  Stoneman's  right,  on  which  he  directed  Maj.  L.  Williams, 
commanding  the  6th  U.  S.  Cavalry,  to  make  a  demonstration 
through  the  woods  on  the  right  in  order  to  check  the  enemy 
until  the  infantry  could  arrive. 

The  fire  of  Fort  Magruder  upon  Cooke's  command  was  pro- 
ducing serious  effects,  and  the  6th  Cavalry  had  come  upon  a 
strong  force  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  and  was  saved  from  destruc- 


32  2  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

tion  by  a  gallant  charge  made  by  Capt.  Saunders,  commanding 
the  rear  squadron,  during  the  withdrawal  of  the  regiment. 

Col.  Grier  had  made  two  brilliant  charges ;  men  and  horses 
were  falling  rapidly,  and  the  enemy  was  receiving  reinforcements 
every  moment.  After  having  held  the  position  for  about  three- 
quarters  of  an  hour  Stoneman  learned  that  Hooker  could  not 
get  up  for  two  hours.  Under  these  circumstances,  having  done 
all  in  his  power  to  hold  his  position,  he  fell  back  upon  the  clear- 
ing already  occupied  by  his  reserves,  prepared  to  hold  it  to  the 
utmost.  He  at  least  held  the  enemy  to  their  works,  and  gave  us 
the  opportunity  of  fighting  the  battle  of  the  next  day. 

As  already  stated,  Gen.  Emory  was  detached  at  the  Halfway 
House,  and  on  reaching  the  Lee's  Mill  road  encountered  an 
equal  force  of  the  enemy,  whom  he  drove  back  on  the  Lee's  Mill 
road,  whence  they  escaped  by  a  circuitous  route  along  the  banks 
of  the  James.  Their  escape  was  accounted  for  by  the  fact  that 
Emory  could  not  follow  them  without  abandoning  the  road  he 
was  ordered  to  hgld,  and  leaving  his  battery  there  unprotected, 
as  he  had  no  infantry.  Smith's  advance  reached  Skiff's  creek  at 
about  11.30,  to  find  the  bridge  in  fiames  and  the  road  impassable. 
He  therefore,  by  direction  of  Gen.  Sumner,  moved  across  to  the 
Yorktown  road,  and,  following  it,  reached  Stoneman 's  position  at 
about  5.30  o'clock.  Gen.  Sumner  arriving  with  him  and  assum- 
ing command  of  all  the  troops  at  the  front. 

Hooker's  division  had  encountered  Smith's  filing  into  the 
Yorktown  road,  and  was  obliged  to  halt  for  some  three  or  four 
hours  until  it  had  passed.  Subsequently,  on  its  arrival  at  Chesa- 
peake Church,  Gen.  Heintzelman  turned  it  off  by  a  cross-road 
into  the  Lee's  Mill  road,  thus  changing  places  with  Smith. 
Marching  part  of  the  night,  he  came  in  sight  of  Fort  Magruder 
early  on  the  5  th.  As  soon  as  Smith  reached  the  front  his  divi- 
sion was  deployed  and  directed  by  Gen.  Sumner  to  attack  the 
works  in  front  of  him  ;  but  confusion  arising  in  the  dense  for- 
est, and  darkness  coming  on,  the  attempt  was  deferred  to  the  next 
day. 

The  troops  bivouacked  in  the  woods,  and  a  heavy  rain  began, 
which  lasted  till  the  morning  of  the  6th,  and  made  the  roads, 
already  terribly  cut  up  by  the  enemy's  troops  and  trains,  almost 
impassable.  Early  in  the  evening  of  the  4th  I  learned  that 
Smith  had  reached  the  front,  and  that  at  six  p.m.  two  more  divi- 


PURSUIT  OF  THE  ENEMY,  323 

sions  would  soon  be  ready,  and  were  only  waiting  to  rest  the 
men  and  let  them  take  a  little  food  before  attacking  ;  and  that 
the  works  would  soon  be  carried,  as  they  were  then  reported  .to 
be  held  only  by  a  rear-guard  of  a  regiment  of  cavalry,  two  guns, 
and  four  or  five  regiments  of  infantry. 

I  therefore  pushed  with  redoubled  energy  the  arrangements 
to  throw  a  force  by  water  to  the  mouth  of  the  Pamunkey,  and 
had  not  the  slightest  reason  to  suppose  that  my  presence  was  at 
all  necessary  at  the  front. 

The  position  is  about  four  miles  in  extent,  the  right  resting 
on  College  creek,  and  the  left  on  Queen's  creek  ;  nearly  three- 
fourths  of  its  front  being  covered  by  tributaries  of  these  two 
creeks,  upon  which  there  are  ponds. 

The  ground  between  the  heads  of  the  boundary  streams  is  a 
cultivated  plain,  across  which  a  line  of  detached  works  had  been 
constructed,  consisting  of  Fort  Magruder,  a  large  work  in  the 
centre  with  a  bastion  front,  and  twelve  other  redoubts  and  epaul- 
ments  for  field-guns. 

The  parapet  of  Fort  Magruder  is  about  six  feet  high  and 
nine  feet  thick  ;  the  ditch  nine  feet  wide  and  nine  feet  deep, 
filled  with  water.  The  length  of  the  interior  crest  is  about  six 
hundred  yards.  The  redoubts  have  strong  profiles,  but  are  of 
small  dimensions,  having  faces  of  about  forty  yards.  The  woods 
in  front  of  the  position  were  felled,  and  the  open  ground  in  front 
of  the  works  was  dotted  with  numerous  rifle-pits. 

The  roads  leading  from  the  lower  part  of  the  Peninsula 
towards  Williamsburg,  one  along  the  York  river  (the  Yorktown 
road)  and  the  other  along  the  James  (the  Lee's  Mill  road),  unite 
between  the  heads  of  the  tributary  streams  a  short  distance  in 
front  of  Fort  Magruder,  by  which  they  are  commanded,  and 
debouch  from  the  woods  just  before  uniting.  A  branch  from 
the  James  river  road  leaves  it  about  one  and  three-fourths  of  a 
mile  below  Fort  Magruder  and  unites  with  the  road  from  Allen's 
landing  to  Williamsburg,  which  crosses  the  tributary  of  College 
creek  over  a  dam  at  the  outlet  of  the  pond,  and  passes  just  in 
rear  of  the  line  of  works,  being  commanded  by  the  three  re- 
doubts on  the  right  of  the  line.  At  about  the  same  distance 
from  Fort  Magruder  a  branch  leaves  the  York  river  road  and 
crosses  the  tributary  of  Queen's  creek  on  a  dam,  and,  passing 

over  the  position  and  through  the  woods  in  its  rear,  finally  enters 

34 


324  McCLELLAATS  OWN  STORY. 

Williamsburg.  This  road  was  commanded  by  redoubts  on  the 
left  of  the  line  of  works. 

On  the  morning  of  the  5th  the  position  of  our  troops  was 
as  follows :  On  the  extreme  left,  Emory,  holding  the  road  to 
Allen's  farm  ;  next,  on  his  right.  Hooker's  division  ;  next,  in 
the  centre,  Stoneman,  holding  the  main  road ;  on  his  right 
Smith's  division.  Kearny,  Couch,  and  Casey  were  still  in  rear, 
having  bivouacked  where  the  night  overtook  them.  Couch  and 
Casey  were  ordered  to  march  at  daylight  to  support  Smith  ; 
at  about  nine  o'clock  Kearny  was  ordered  up  in  support  of 
Hooker. 

The  battle  of  Williamsburg  was  an  accident,  brought  about 
by  the  rapid  pursuit  of  our  troops.  The  enemy  were  very 
anxious  to  get  beyond  West  Point  before  we  could  reach  it  by 
water.  Late  in  the  afternoon  of  the  4th  Gen.  G.  W.  Smith  was 
ordered  to  march  at  2.30  a.m.  of  the  5th,  and  place  his  position 
north  of  Barhamsville  to  check  any  attempt  on  the  Confederate 
line  of  retreat  from  the  upper  York  river.  Longstreet  and  Hill 
were  to  follow  Smith  on  the  Barhamsville  road  for  about  six 
miles,  and  then  turn  off  at  the  Burned  Tavern  and  take  the 
Charles  City  road  to  Richmond  via  Long  bridge.  Magruder  was 
to  move  by  New  Kent  Court-House  and  Bottom  bridge.  From 
Barhamsville  Smith  was  to  follow  Magruder.  Smith  commanded 
the  troops  on  the  New  Kent  Court-House  road,  Longstreet  those 
on  the  Charles  City  road.  The  rain  made  the  roads  so  bad  that 
when  we  caught  up  with  their  rear-guard  they  were  forced  to 
reinforce  it  from  their  main  body,  and  hold  the  works  as  long 
as  possible,  in  order  to  enable  their  trains  to  escape. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the. 4th  Longstreet's  division,  six  bri- 
gades, had  halted  near  Williamsburg,  four  brigades  at  or  in  rear 
of  the  line  of  works,  two  brigades,  Wilcox  and  Colston,  on  the 
Richmond  side.  About  seven  next  morning  Wilcox  was  ordered 
to  return  to  the  line  of  works  and  report  to  Gen.  Anderson.  Wil- 
cox was  placed  on  the  right  and  about  one  thousand  yards  in 
front  of  Fort  Magruder,  and  at  the  time  held  the  right  of  the 
Confederate  line,  posted  in  the  pine-woods  with  occasional  clear- 
ings. He  supposed  that  there  was  nothing  but  cavalry  in  his 
front,  but,  sending  two  companies  into  the  woods,  they  captured 
three  of  our  infantry  soldiers  ;  whereupon  he  sent  in  a  Missis- 
sippi regiment,  deployed  as  skirmishers,  with  orders  to  advance 


BATTLE  OF  WILLIAMSBURG.  325 

until  forced  to  halt,  and  to  find  out  what  was  in  front  Up  to 
this  time  there  had  been  merely  a  dropping  fire  of  skirmishers, 
giving  the  impression  that  the  woods  were  held  by  dismounted 
cavalry  ;  but  now  heavy  firing  followed,  and  the  report  came 
back  to  Wilcox  that  three  United  States  brigades  were  there  in 
position.  These  brigades  composed  Hooker's  division.  And  all 
this  must  have  taken  place  between  nine  and  ten  a.m. 

Wilcox  immediately  sent  for  reinforcements,  and  the  rest  of 
Longstreet's  division  gradually  came  up  to  his  support,  mostly 
being  placed  on  his  right,  Gen.  Richard  Anderson  finally  tak- 
ing command.  Early  in  the  afternoon,  being  apprehensive  for 
his  right,  Anderson  again  attacked,  took  five  guns  of  Webber's 
battery,  and  brought  Hooker  to  a  standstill,  inflicting  heavy 
losses. 

Between  three  and  four  o'clock  Kearny  reached  the  front 
He  had  received  the  order  to  advance  at  nine  o'clock,  but,  from 
the  condition  of  the  roads  and  their  being  blocked  with  troops, 
with  all  his  energy  and  exertions  he  was  unable  to  reach  Hooker 
until  the  time  mentioned.  He  at  once  relieved  Hooker's  ex- 
hausted troops,  and,  promptly  attacking,  drove  back  the  enemy 
at  every  point.  Hooker's  losses  were  severe,  and  when  I  next 
saw  him,  a  day  or  two  afterwards,  he  was  much  depressed  and 
thought  that  he  had  accomplished  nothing,  so  much  so  that  I 
felt  it  necessary  to  encourage  him.  It  was  not  until  some  time 
afterwards  that  he  came  to  the  conclusion  that  he  had  accom- 
plished a  brilliant  feat  of  arms. 

Emory  had  been  left  to  guard  the  road  leading  to  Allen's 
farm,  near  the  James.  Being  informed  on  the  morning  of  the 
5th  that  the  enemy's  right  could  be  turned,  he  called  upon  Gen. 
Heintzelman  for  infantry  to  enable  him  to  make  the  attempt. 
Late  in  the  afternoon  one  of  Kearny's  brigades  and  two  bat- 
teries were  sent  to  him  for  that  purpose,  "but  that  was  found 
impracticable  from  the  nature  of  the  locality,  the  lateness  of  the 
evening,  and  the  want  of  a  guide." 

While  all  this  was  going  on  on  our  left  Sumner  reconnoitred 
the  position  in  the  centre  and  on  our  right.  Finding  that  one 
of  the  redoubts  on  the  Confederate  left  was  unoccupied,  he, 
at  about  eleven  o'clock,  ordered  Hancock's  brigade,  of  Smith's 
division,  to  cross  by  a  dam  at  the  foot  of  one  of  the  large  ponds 
and  take  possession  of  it.     This  he  did  with  five  regiments  of 


3^6  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

the  division,  and,  finding  the  next  redoubt  also  unoccupied,  he 
promptly  seized  it,  and  sent  for  reinforcements  to  enable  him 
to  advance  further  and  take  the  next  redoubt,  which  command- 
ed the  plain  between  his  position  and  Fort  Magruder,  and  would 
have  enabled  him  to  take  in  reverse  and  cut  the  communica- 
tion of  the  troops  engaged  with  Gens.  Hooker  and  Kearny. 

The  enemy  soon  began  to  show  himself  in  strength  before 
him,  and,  as  his  rear  and  right  flank  were  somewhat  exposed,  he 
repeated  his  request  for  reinforcements  Gen.  Smith  was  twice 
ordered  to  join  him  with  the  rest  of  his  division,  but  each  time 
the  order  was  countermanded  at  the  moment  of  execution.  Gen. 
Sumner  not  being  willing  to  weaken  the  centre.  At  length,  in 
reply  to  Gen.  Hancock's  repeated  messages  for  more  troops. 
Gen.  Sumner  sent  him  an  order  to  fall  back  to  his  first  posi- 
tion, the  execution  of  which  Gen.  Hancock  deferred  as  long  as 
possible,  being  unwilling  to  give  up  the  advantage  already 
gained,  and  fearing  to  expose  his  command  by  such  a  move- 
ment. 

As  the  head  of  Couch's  division  did  not  arrive  until  one 
o'clock,  it  was  entirely  proper  for  Gen.  Sumner  to  hesitate  about 
weakening  his  centre  until  that  hour.  The  remaining  brigades 
of  Couch  followed  the  first  immediately,  Casey  arriving  early 
in  the  afternoon.  Couch's  ist  brigade,  Peck's,  was  deployed  on 
Hooker's  right,  and  promptly  repulsed  the  attack  made  upon  it, 
thus  affording  Hooker  sensible  relief.  Soon  after  it  was  relieved 
by  the  other  two  brigades,  who  remained  undisturbed. 

As  already  stated,  as  soon  as  our  troops  were  in  possession  of 
the  enemy's  works,  on  the  morning  of  the  4th,  I  gave  the  neces- 
sary orders  for  the  pursuit,  and,  when  all  that  was  accomplished, 
drove  into  Yorktown  in  an  ambulance.  The  enemy  had  made 
a  free  distribution  of  torpedoes  in  the  roads,  within  the  works, 
and  in  places  where  our  men  would  be  apt  to  go — for  instance, 
near  wells  and  springs,  telegraph-offices,  and  store-houses — s  • 
that  some  of  our  men  were  killed.  To  place  mines  or  torpedoes 
in  the  path  of  assaulting  columns  is  admissible  under  the  cus- 
toms of  war,  but  such  use  of  them  as  was  made  here  is  bar- 
barous in  the  extreme.  When  I  entered  Yorktown  our  progress 
was  much  delayed  by  the  caution  made  necessary  by  the  pre- 
sence of  these  torpedoes.  I  at  once  ordered  that  they  should 
be  discovered  and  removed  by  the  Confederate  prisoners.     They 


"  THAT  DEVIL  DAXr  327 

objected  very  strenuously,  but  were  forced  to  do  the  work.  After 
Williamsburg  one  of  the  Confederate  surgeons,  sent  in  to  ofifer 
to  take  care  of  their  wounded  in  our  hands,  told  me  that  these 
torpedoes  were  planted  at  the  close  of  the  evacuation,  and  men- 
tioned the  name  of  an  officer  whom  he  saw  engaged  in  this 
work. 

As  soon  as  we  had  possession  of  Yorktown  the  gunboats 
started  up  the  York  river  to  ascertain  whether  the  transports 
with  Franklin's  division  could  safely  ascend,  and  to  capture  any 
of  the  enemy's  transports  they  could  find. 

If  the  condition  of  affairs  near  Williamsburg  justified  it,  I 
intended  going  to  West  Point  by  water  myself.  Early  on  the 
5th  I  sent  Col.  Sweitzer  and  Maj.  Hammersiein,  of  my  staff,  to 
the  front,  to  keep  me  informed  of  the  condition  of  affairs  and 
the  progress  of  events.  I  went  to  Yorktown  to  expedite  the 
movement  by  water,  and  to  provide  for  the  transportation  of 
supplies  to  the  troops  in  advance. 

Until  about  one  p.m.  I  learned  nothing  indicating  that  the 
affair  at  Williamsburg  was  more  than  a  simple  attack  upon  a 
rear-guard,  but  at  that  hour  I  received  intelligence  that  the 
state  of  the  contest  was  unfavorable  and  that  my  presence  was 
urgently  required.  Sedgwick's  division  was  then  held  ready  to 
embark  in  support  of  Franklin.  But  I  ordered  him  to  move 
beyond  Yorktown  a  short  distance,  ready  to  move  to  the  front 
if  ordered.  Porter  and  Richardson  were  also  instructed  to  be 
ready  to  obey  whatever  orders  they  might  receive. 

I  returned  at  once  to  my  camp  to  give  these  and  other  nec- 
essary orders,  and,  remaining  there  only  a  few  minutes,  started 
with  half  a  dozen  aides  and  a  few  orderlies  for  the  front.  The 
distance  was  more  than  fourteen  miles,  over  terrible  roads,  much 
obstructed  by  trains ;  but  as  I  had  my  most  trustworthy  horse, 
Dan  Webster,  I  made  better  progress  than  was  agreeable  to  the 
escort,  most  of  whom  had  been  left  behind  when  I  reached  the 
field  of  battle. 

Dan  was  one  of  those  horses  that  could  trot  all  day  long  at 
a  very  rapid  gait  which  kept  all  other  horses  at  a  gallop.  I 
think  it  was  on  this  ride  that  he  earned  from  the  aides  the 
title  of  "  that  Devil  Dan " — a  name  which  he  justified  on 
many  another  long  and  desperate  ride  before  I  gave  up  the 
command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 


328  McCLELLAN'S  OIVAT  STORY, 

Dan  was  the  best  horse  I  ever  had ;  he  never  was  ill  for  an 
hour,  never  fatigued,  never  disturbed  under  fire,  and  never  lost 
his  equanimity  or  his  dignity,  except  on  one  occasion.  That 
was  when  we  abandoned  the  position  at  Harrison's  Bar  un- 
der the  orders  to  return  to  Washington.  From  a  very  natural 
feeling  I  remained  there  until  all  the  trains  and  troops  had  left, 
and,  sending  forward  all  the  escort  and  staff,  remained  alone  in 
the  works  for  a  little  time,  my  mind  full  of  the  fatal  conse- 
quences of  the  order  I  was  forced  to  carry  into  execution.  At 
length  I  mounted  and  rode  out  to  join  the  escort ;  as  I  passed 
through  the  abandoned  works  Dan,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life, 
gave  vent  to  his  feelings  by  a  series  of  most  vicious  plunges  and 
^ kicks.  It  was  possible  that  the  flies,  who  had  enjoyed  a  whole 
army  to  feed  upon,  concentrated  all  their  energies  upon  Dan ; 
but  I  have  always  more  than  suspected  that,  in  his  quiet  way, 
Dan  understood  the  condition  of  affairs  much  better  than  the 
authorities  at  Washington,  and  merely  wished  to  inform  me  in 
his  own  impressive  manner  that  he  fully  agreed  with  my  views 
as  to  the  folly  of  abandoning  the  position,  and  that  he,  at  least, 
had  full  confidence  in  his  master. 

Dan  and  I  never  quarrelled,  and  the  dear  old  fellow  sur- 
vived the  war  for  many  years,  dying  at  a  ripe  old  age  in  1879. 
No  matter  how  long  we  might  be  parted — once  for  nearly  four 
years — he  always  recognized  me  the  moment  we  met  again, 
and  in  his  own  way  showed  his  pleasure  at  seeing  me.  Even 
on  the  day  of  his  death,  which  was  a  painless  one  from  old 
age,  whenever  I  entered  his  stall  he  tried  to  rise  and  greet 
me,  but,  unable  to  do  that,  would  lean  his  head  against  me  and 
lick  my  hand.  No  soldier  ever  had  a  more  faithful  or  better 
horse  than  I  had  in  Dan  Webster. 

Riding  through  mud  and  water,  often  obliged  to  turn  into 
the  woods,  but  never  slackening  the  pace  when  the  road  permit- 
ted, I  reached  the  front  between  four  and  five  o'clock.  I  found 
everything  in  a  state  of  chaos  and  depression.  Even  the  pri- 
vate soldiers  saw  clearly  that,  with  force  enough  in  hand  to  gain 
a  victory,  we,  the  pursuers,  were  on  the  defensive  and  content 
with  repulsing  attacks,  and  that  there  was  no  plan  of  action, 
•  no  directing  head.  The  front  line  was  formed  along  the  nearer 
edge  of  the  woods,  and  the  rest  massed  inactive  in  the  clear- 
ings.    The  troops  were  weary  and  discouraged  ;    but  my  pre- 


m^Wt  •»  fi«  o»1«  <»  f*»iilc*rtM  kMt  conftdt^ncc,  and,  as  they  recognized 
me  iWMinu;  fA\M\y  thmu^h  ihcir  ranks,  their  wild  and  joyful 
f  hf^^rpi  i«>ld  the  *>n«tty,  ^n  well  a«  our  own  people,  that  some- 
thinn  iirtMMiAl  hA<l  <>«**  ^rnnl,  and  that  the  period  of  uncertainty 
nfs^  irt^^«  u^^  w^n  at  aw  cnd> 

i  a<  i^^*^  iC^lh^'^tHl  ihc  gt^ncral  oflSccrs  around  me,  called 
nfVyrt  i?»i^  f^  ^  tVhKrf  *Ut^Hii<?nt  of  avoirs,  and  promptly  made 
np  f&\  i^i^t^  ^i»  ^H  whai  9(h<>uUl  be  done  This  occurred  in  the 
>»4t^n^,  vVw^  ^N  lh<^  Whiuak^^r  House,  I  found  that,  owing 
>^  ^t<*Wr^^  m^^Ax  ^NMM^nt  ^h^re  was  no  dinect  communication 
%^  1 V  '4>^nN  niiix^s^M^^is  \^nxkr  Hcinuelman  on  our  left ;  the 
5rtvyi^  ¥**<¥M^  iWf^  i>N^l  x>C  out  ctmtw  were  on  the  hither  edge 
^  fV  >♦^vSNl^  iiv^^f^w^^^^  M^iwt^  W5  and  the  enemy,  and  no 
v*^''  Hv^^^%  >^^1^W<i  ^W  <>^(w^^  m^Mt*  in  the  wood^  aad»  if  so, 
ifif,  >«^i)^i(^  ^>,\N  lU^NX^kn  ^-iixk  i^iJi  ttiMs^jj-iykMTCHi  brigade,  uras 
\¥<^  ^  ^>M,\s*j(NNjj^  s^i  iW  a>kandAft<sJ  ^icvw^  osn  the  cnemy^s  Wt ; 
vsNift^  vJi!  5*2w^^\  tv^N^^yU^  >iri^?*^k^  >rasi  in  hiie  <-«  out  ligist 
vv^^w  W  'I'^^'V^  -i^^i^^  0-^^>»rx^?i  ^^x^i^akisn  ina:i;§«e^  rn  rear;  tiro  c« 

^^v^>.s"^^^'M^    i\Tlh    )4v^»^^;v)mi^^      l«>i:   ih^in   teaxT  ^rnu:  l^epm 

x^^^s^NMM.  ^-«^»^/^.  ^Vf»>^Mi\^  «4  ,-in*v  ^>>r  "^J?^-;  ^hiC  ^  Heii^  "rht  fcxn  of 
W   /^'^l  ^^<    Us4U,..   )   ^rvi^-^rw;  >^mi:h.  wh^   *«>  ^-^.hiitjiu:   ii«;:e  a 

H\^^^s.  ;ii>i»>«t^M>  Nihy^vvHv^  4tv  t^^juht>^  irc^tinv^rc  ^*:  >imnr.> 
Yl,\.fvto»>  ^>  >ifVv>\  «v  4i\i  1\;4U,  /i  >imiiV. V  *'/iUimr  siar»c  Z 
^<Vl^»^v,   4)u    *\^\\f'\    1/    4Uhiilv,r;     |ivi^     Ih;     *t'^\Art^    am:    ^It.    Ittt^ 

a^,.  ^-f.i4i^%i4iv*^uN  i4    4:*v   4Mf    -iMilt.»'>   ^i^    ^xi-t;.Mulv  aTnn«  xur 


GEX.   HANCOCK'.  33  I 

I  therefore  returned  to  the  Whittaker  House,  quickly  gave 
orders  for  the  proj>er  posting  of  the  troops  in  the  centre,  and 
started  rapidly  for  Hancock's  jiosition.  A  little  before  reaching 
the  dam  by  which  he  had  crossed  1  met  the  column  of  prison- 
ers whom  he  had  just  taken. 

Before  Gens,  Smith  and  Naglee  could  reach  the  field  of  Gen. 
Hancock's  operations,  although  they  moved  with  great  rapidity, 
he  had  been  confronted  by  a  superior  force.  Feigning  to  retreat 
slowly,  he  awaited  their  onset,  and  then  turned  up>on  them,  and, 
after  some  terrific  volleys  of  rausketr\*,  he  charged  them  with 
the  bayonet,  routing  and  dispersing  their  whole  force,  killing, 
wounding,  and  capturing  from  500  to  600  men,  he  himself  los- 
ing only  31   men. 

This  was  one  of  the  most  brilliant  engagements  of  the  war, 
and  Gen.  Hancock  merited  the  highest  praise  for  the  soldierly 
qualities  dis])layed  and  his  perfect  appreciation  of  the  vital 
importance  of  his  }X)sition, 

Hancock's  command  consisted  of  the  5th  Wis.,  6th  Me^ 
and  49ih  Penn.  regiments  of  volunteers  of  his  own  brigade, 
and  the  7th  Me.  and  30th  N.  Y.  of  Davidson's  brigade. 
Keeping  on  to  Hancock's  brigade,  I  remained  there  long 
enough  to  thank  them  for  their  gallant  conduct,  to  appre- 
ciate the  imj»ortance  of  the  position  and  the  value  of  the  suc- 
cess gained,  I  sent  some  of  the  approaching  reinforcements 
to  occupy  a  dangerous  mass  of  woods  on  the  right,  and,  there 
being  no  indication  of  any  new  attack  by  the  enemy,  I  left 
as  soon  as  Smith  arrived  with  sufficient  troops  to  render  the 
position  perfectly  secure.  By  the  time  Smith's  trooj>s  all  arrived 
and  were  properly  posted  it  was  too  dark  to  attempt  any  new 
operations  until  the  next  morning. 

It  was  raining  heavily  and  nearly  dark  when  I  retnmed  to 
the  AVhittaker  House,  so  that  nothing  more  could  be  done  than 
to  arrange  for  security  during  the  night  and  a  prompt  resump- 
tion of  of^erations  in  the  morning.  All  the  troops  slept  on  the 
muddy  field,  in  the  rain,  with  what  protection  tlicir  sbdter-tents 
gave  them,  and  many  without  food.  I  was  not  much  better  off, 
for,  with  the  exception  of  a  piece  of  biscuit  for  breakfast  on 
the  morning  of  the  6th,  I  had  nothing  to  cat  from  the  early 
morning  of  the  5th  until  late  in  the  day  on  the  6th.  The  night 
was  a  horrible  one.     The  little  Whiltajker  House  was  crowded 

»5 


332  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

with  several  general  officers  and  their  staffs,  so  that  sleep  or 
rest  was  impossible.  It  rained  hard,  and  I  passed  much  of  the 
evening  among  the  men,  by  way  of  encouraging  them,  who 
think  little  of  hardship  when  their  general  shares  it  with  them. 

It  was  unfortunate  that  the  absolute  necessity  of  expediting 
the  movement  of  troops  and  supplies  up  the  York  river  detained 
me  so  long  at  Yorktown,  and  that  I  did  not  receive  earlier  infor- 
mation of  the  necessity  for  my  presence  at  the  front.  All  the 
reports,  up  to  those  that  took  me  so  rapidly  to  the  field, 
represented  the  affair  as  simply  one  against  an  ordinary  rear- 
guard, and  with  good  reason  I  expected  every  moment  to  learn 
that  the  enemy  was  defeated  and  his  works  occupied,  as  the 
troops  on  the  field  of  battle  were  more  than  enough  for  the 
purpose.  Could  I  have  arrived  at  one  o'clock  it  is  very  certain 
that  Smith,  supported  by  Couch  and  afterwards  by  Casey,  would 
have  at  once  debouched  from  Hancock's  ground,  and  have  cut 
off  the  retreat  of  the  greater  part  of  the  troops  engaged  against 
Hooker.  Up  to  the  time  of  Couch's  arrival  it  would  probably 
have  been  imprudent  to  move  the  whole  of  Smith's  division  in 
support  of  Hancock,  but  the  moment  the  head  of  Couch's 
column  appeared  near  the  front  it  was  proper  to  push  Smith 
forward  as  rapidly  as  possible.  In  fact.  Hooker's  repulse  was 
of  no  consequence,  except  for  the  loss  of  life  it  involved,  and 
his  falling  back  somewhat  would  only  facilitate  the  decisive 
advance  by  our  right.  When  I  reached  the  field  the  command- 
ing generals  gave  me  the  impression  that,  far  from  our  having 
a  simple  rear-guard  to  deal  with,  the  enemy  was  present  in  very 
heavy  force.  Therefore,  to  guard  against  all  eventualities,  I 
sent  back  orders  to  Porter  to  occupy  Yorktown,  and  to  Sedg- 
wick and  Richardson  to  advance  by  land  in  the  morning. 

During  the  night  Heintzelman  reported  to  me  that  Hooker's 
division  had  suffered  so  much  that  it  could  not  be  relied  on  for 
the  next  day,  and  that  Kearny  could  do  no  more  than  hold  his 
own  unless  reinforced.  But,  after  fully  considering  the  state  of 
affairs  during  the  evening,  I  was  so  confident  of  the  advantage  to 
be  derived  from  Smith's  possession  of  the  decisive  point  that  I 
determined  to  carry  on  our  operations  with  the  force  then  in 
hand,  even  were  the  enemy  superior  in  numbers.  If  the  enemy 
held  their  ground  and  were  not  superior  in  numbers,  it  was  cer- 
tain that  an  advance  by  Smith  and  Casey,  with  the  cavalry,  direct 


WILLIAMSBURG  OCCUPIED.  2>oi 

on  Williamsburg,  supported  by  Couch  as  the  centre  was  cleared, 
would  cut  off  all  the  troops  in  front  of  Heintzelman.  Even  if 
the  enemy  proved  to  be  superior  in  numbers  this  advance -would 
no  doubt  cause  them  to  withdraw  their  right  and  thus  enable 
Hooker  and  Kearny  to  come  into  line  on  Smith's  left,  and  I 
could  perfectly  well  hold  my  own  and  keep  the  enemy  in  posi- 
tion while  the  movement  to  West  Point  was  being  carried  out. 
Therefore,  during  the  night,  I  countermanded  the  orders  to  Sedg- 
wick and  Richardson,  and  directed  them  to  return  to  Yorktown 
and,  together  with  Porter,  embark  as  rapidly  as  possible  in  sup- 
port of  Franklin. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  it  was  found  that  the  enemy 
had  abandoned  his  positions  during  the  night ;  we  at  once  occu- 
pied them  and  the  town  of  Williamsburg,  which  was  filled  with 
the  enemy's  wounded,  for  whose  assistance  eighteen  of  the  Con- 
federate surgeons  were  sent  by  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston,  the  Con- 
federate commander. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

Advance  from  Williamsburg — Franklin's  movement — Alarm  of  prisoners 
in  Williamsburg — Plan  of  the  campaign — Orders  to  move  towards 
north  of  Richmond — Fatal  to  the  campaign — Movements  on  this  line. 

It  became  clear  that  we  had  been  opposed  by  only  a  portion 
of  the  Confederate  army,  at  first  by  a  single  rear-guard,  which 
was  subsequently  considerably  reinforced  by  troops  brought  back 
during  the  first  night  and  the  next  day  to  hold  the  works  as  long 
as  possible  and  enable  their  trains  to  escape.  Longstreet's  and 
D.  H.  Hill's  divisions,  more  than  half  their  army,  were  engaged. 
Their  losses  were  heavy,  and  we  captured  eight  guns  and  many 
caissons  and  wagons,  which  the  deep  mud  prevented  them  from 
carrying  off. 

Wilcox's  Confederate  brigade,  having  received  no  orders, 
found  itself  at  half-past  ten  p.m.  of  the  5th  entirely  alone,  and 
moved  back  beyond  Williamsburg,  being  the  last  to  leave  the 
field.  It  has  been  stated  that  G.  W.  Smith  had  been  ordered 
to  move  at  half-past  two  a.m.  of  the  5th  and  take  a  position 
north  of  Barhamsville.  He  moved  at  the  hour  designated,  just 
as  a  heavy  rain  commenced.  The  roads  soon  became  axle-deep 
in  mud,  and  extraordinary  efforts  were  required  to  get  the  wagons 
along.  Late  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  head  of  the  column  had 
nearly  reached  Barhamsville,  Smith  received  an  order  from  Gen. 
Johnston  to  suspend  the  movement,  as  a  heavy  attack  had  been 
made  on  the  fortifications  at  Williamsburg,  in  which  Longstreet's 
and  D.  H.  Hill's  divisions  had  been  engaged.  On  the  two  fol- 
lowing days  Gen.  Johnston,  learning  of  Franklin's  disembarka- 
tion at  Brick  House,  concentrated  the  greater  part  of  his  army 
near  Barhamsville. 

It  has  already  been  stated  that  Franklin's  division  was  dis- 
embarked on  the  3d  of  May  to  take  part  in  the  approaching 
assault  of  Yorktown.  Gen.  Franklin  passed  the  night  of  the  3d 
at  general  headquarters,  his  division  remaining  at  Cheeseman's 
landing.     As  soon  as  the  evacuation  was  known  I  instructed  him 

to  re-embark  his  division  immediately  and  bring  it  by  water  to 

334 


FRAXKLIX^S  ADVANCE.  335 

Yorktown,  where  he  would  receive  further  orders.  He  at  once 
returned  to  it  and  commenced  the  work,  which  he  carried  on 
with  all  possible  speed,  completing  it  about  one  o'clock  on 
the  5th.  The  embarkation  was  much  delayed  by  the  atrocious 
weather  ;  by  the  facts  that  all  the  ordinary  means  for  loading  and 
unloading  were  fully  occupied  with  putting  supplies  ashore  for 
the  rest  of  the  army,  so  that  Gen.  Franklin  was  obliged  to  impro- 
vise his  own  means ;  that  fosage  and  provision  for  several  days 
had  to  be  reloaded  ;  but  most  of  all  by  the  difficulty  of  re-embark- 
ing the  artillery,  all  the  carriages  of  which  had  to  be  unlinibered 
and  floated  out  on  rafts  and  then  hoisted  upon  the  transports. 
Gen.  Franklin's  letter  explains  this  subject  in  detail,  and  I  need 
only  say  that  the  delay  was  unavoidable  and  that  Gen.  Franklin 
did  not  lose  an  unnecessary  moment  in  carrying  his  order  into 
effect  : 

"Hartford,  Feb.  8,  1884. 
"  Gen.  G.  B.  McCUUan,  New  York  : 

"  My  dear  General  :  It  so  happens  that  I  have  just  had 
a  correspondence  with  Howard  about  the  West  Point  landing  in 
May,  1862,  and,  as  it  covers  the  greater  part  of  the  ground  indi- 
cated in  your  letter  of  the  5th  inst.,  I  enclose  it  with  this. 

"  The  long  time  taken  to  re-embark  my  division  at  Poquosin, 
or  Cheeseman's  creek,  was  due — 

I  St.  To  the  weather,  which,  you  will  remember,  was  atro- 


« 


cious 


2d.  To  the  fact  that  such  landing  facilities  as  were  at  hand 
were  fully  occupied  with  getting  supplies  ashore  for  the  army  at 
Yorktown,  leaving  me  to  my  own  crude  devices  for  getting  things 
aboard  ;  and, 

"  3d.  To  the  absolute  necessity  there  was  for  unlimbering  all 
artillery  vehicles,  in  order  to  pack  them  in  the  limited  deck- 
space  of  the  transports  that  were  available. 

"This  loading  the  artiller>'  was  the  great  cause  of  delay. 
Getting  the  carriages  on  to  the  transports  was  a  tedious  and 
exasperatingly  slow  process.  They  had  to  be  floated  on  rafts 
from  the  shore  to  the  transports  and  then  lifted  several  feet  to 
the  deck.  I  do  not  now  remember  how  the  horses  were  got 
aboard,  but  I  know  that  everything  was  done  as  quickly  as  it 
could  be  done. 

"  Then,  too,  the  provisions  and  forage  for  several  days  had 
to  be  reloaded  in  the  infantry  transports — a  tedious  process 
under  the  circumstances.  Towing  the  artillery  transports  was  a 
very  slow  process.  These  transports  were  each  made  of  two  canal 
barges  placed  about  as  far  apart  as  the  width  of  beam  of  a  single 


336  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

barge,  the  whole  space  being  decked  over,  thus.     They  had  been 

so  arranged  for  the  landing 
that  it  was  contemplated  I  was 
to  make  when  I  first  arrived. 
They  made  excellent  transports 
for  a  short  run  in  smooth 
water,  but  they  would  not 
steer  and  were  heart-break- 
ing to  tow.  So  we  finally  started  for  Yorktown,  when  another 
unlooked-for  delay  occurred  by  the  grounding  of  many  of  the 
transports,  which  were  of  all  draughts  of  water.  I  stayed  by 
until  I  saw  that  all  would  get  off,  and  then  started  for  Yorktown, 
where  I  met  you  in  the  afternoon  and  received  my  instructions. 
Of  course,  after  arriving  at  West  Point,  the  landing  was  slow, 
although  not  nearly  so  slow  as  the  loading.  The  infantry  and 
artillery  were  got  off  during  the  night,  and  a  line  was  formed 
which  was  rectified  and  strengthened  after  daylight.  I  returned 
to  my  headquarters  boat  to  hurry  off  the  transports,  which  were 
very  slow  in  moving,  and  while  I  was  engaged  in  this  business 
an  attack  was  made  on  Newton's  brigade.  I  hurried  ashore  and 
found  that  a  sharp  attack  had  been  made,  by  Hampton's  brigade, 
I  think.  They  drove  Newton  out  of  the  woods  at  first,  but  the 
brigade  soon  retook  its  position,  driving  the  enemy  back  ;  and  as 
the  gunboats  were  in  position  to  shell  the  woods  in  front  of  our 
line,  a  few  shots  from  them  drove  the  enemy  off  and  ended  the 
fight.  Both  lines,  however,  remained  within  musket-shot  of  each 
other  until  well  on  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  transports  returned, 
bringing  Sedgwick's  division,  I  think  it  was.  As  my  orders  only 
directed  me  to  hold  my  position,  and  as  my  right  flank  was 
necessarily  in  the  air  and  ought  to  have  been  turned  by  the 
enemy,  I  was  in  no  condition  to  have  advanced  into  the  interior, 
and,  in  fact,  under  your  orders  I  had  no  business  to  make  the 
attempt. 

"  Truly  your  friend, 

"Wm.  B.  Franklin." 

The  flotilla  experienced  great  difficulty  in  reaching  Yorktown, 
which  it  effected  about  four  o'clock  on  the  5th.  Meanwhile  Gen. 
Franklin,  when  the  greatest  difficulties  had  been  overcome,  pre- 
ceded it,  and  must  have  reached  Yorktown  before  one  o'clock, 
where  he  received  his  final  instructions  from  me. 

When  the  flotilla  arrived  Gen.  Franklin  visited  Com.  Miss- 
room  on  his  flagship  and  informed  him  that  he  was  ready  to 
start.  The  commodore  replied  that  he  would  not  consent  to 
go  up  the  river  on  a  night  as  dark  as  that  approaching  (it  was 
then  raining  in  torrents),  and   the  joint  expedition,  therefore, 


PRANKLlN  AT  WEST  POINT.  337 

waited  until  next  morning.  The  commodore  was  entirely  cor- 
rect in  this  decision  to  await  the  morning,  for  I  have  not  the 
slightest  doubt  that  the  result  of  an  effort  to  move  on  such  a 
night  would  have  been  the  loss  of  many  transports  and  lives,  and 
the  disorganization  of  the  whole  expedition. 

The  flotilla  started  at  daybreak  of  the  6th  ;  the  infantry  trans- 
ports arrived  off  West  Point  about  noon,  and  the  landing  com- 
menced at  once.  The  artillery  transports  did  not  arrive  until 
nearly  night,  and  were  unloaded  without  wharves  during  the 
night  and  early  in  the  morning  of  the  7th.  The  process  of 
landing  was  necessarily  slow,  but  not  so  much  so  as  that  of 
loading  up. 

At  about  seven  a.m.  of  the  7th  the  pickets  of  Newton's 
brigade,  forming  the  left  of  the  line,  were  driven  in,  but  soon 
regained  the  ground. 

Skirmishing  continued  for  a  couple  of  hours,  when  a  sharp 
attack  was  made  by  Whiting's  division  ;  this  was  repulsed,  and 
everything  then  became  quiet,  our  people  having  regained  their 
original  positions,  and  at  some  points  having  made  considerable 
advances. 

Franklin's  orders  were  simply  to  hold  his  position  until  rein- 
forced sufficiently  to  justify  an  advance.  That  this  was  a  wise 
decision  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  G.  W.  Smith  witnessed  the  dis- 
embarkation, and,  refraining  from  opposing  it,  suggested  to  Gen. 
Johnston  to  take  measures  to  cut  him  off  if  he  advanced  beyond 
the  protection  of  the  gunboats.  G.  W.  Smith's  entire  division, 
much  stronger  than  Franklin's,  was  in  his  front,  and  soon  after 
the  greater  part  of  the  Confederate  army,  ready  to  overwhelm 
Franklin  had  he  advanced. 

By  the  time  Sedgwick's  division  was  in  position  to  support 
him,  the  morning  of  the  8th,  the  enemy's  rear  had  passed  on 
towards  Richmond ;  but  Franklin's  movement  had  fully  served 
its  purpose  in  clearing  our  front  to  the  banks  of  the  Chicka- 
horainy. 

On  my  way  into  Williamsburg  on  the  morning  of  the  6th  I 
passed  a  cluster  of  barracks,  and,  seeing  some  men  lying  in  them, 
I  dismounted  to  see  who  they  were.  They  were  filled  with  our 
own  and  the  enemy's  wounded.  The  first  man  I  spoke  to  was 
one  of  ours.  I  asked  him  who  the  men  around  him  were.  '*  Oh  ! 
that's  a  secesh  ;  that  i$  one  of  our  men ;  that's  a  secesh,"  and  so 


338  McCLELLAX'S  Ol^.V  STOKV. 

on.  In  reply  to  my  question  as  to  how  they  had  been  treated 
by  the  enemy  he  said  :  "Just  like  their  own  men."  Here  were 
these  poor  fellows  lying  together  in  perfect  amity  who  had  met 
in  mortal  combat  the  day  before. 

The  College  and  other  large  buildings  in  Williamsburg  were 
crowded  with  wounded,  almost  all  Confederates.  While  in  one 
of  the  larger  hospitals  one  of  my  aides  came  to  me  and  said  that 
a  wounded  Confederate  desired  to  speak  to  me.  I  went  there 
and  found  a  wounded  private  soldier  belonging  to  a  Virginia 
regiment,  an  intelligent,  honest-looking  man,  who  said  that  he 
had  been  deputed  by  his  comrades  to  beg  me  to  spare  their 
lives.  I  told  him  that  I  did  not  understand  him,  whereupon  he 
repeated  his  petition,  and  I  again  said  that  I  could  not  imagine 
what  he  meant.  He  then  said  that  they  had  been  told  that  we 
Northern  men  had  come  down  there  to  destroy  and  slay,  and 
that  our  intention  was  to  kill  all  the  prisoners,  wounded  and 
unwounded  alike ;  but  that  they  had  been  told  that  I  had 
treated  kindly  the  prisoners  I  had  taken  in  West  Virginia  the 
year  before,  and  thought  that  perhaps  I  might  be  induced  to 
spare  their  lives.  I  then  relieved  his  mind  by  telling  him  that, 
although  I  was  perhaps  the  most  brutal  among  the  Northern 
generals,  I  would  treat  them  precisely  as  I  did  my  own  wounded. 

The  poor  fellows  stretched  on  the  floor  around  him  followed 
the  conversation  with  keen  interest,  and  I  saw  by  the  expression 
of  their  faces  that  they  felt  much  relieved  when  my  final  answer 
came.  I  was  told,  after  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks,  that  when  the 
Confederates  were  for  a  time  in  possession  of  the  camp  of  Casey's 
division  Gen.  Roger  Pryor  went  around  among  the  wounded, 
giving  them  whiskey  and  water,  and  that  he  told  them  it  was  a 
repayment  of  the  kindness  with  which  their  wounded  were  treated 
at  Williamsburg. 

During  the  forenoon  of  the  6th  Confederate  surgeons  came  in 
(as  before  stated),  under  a  flag  of  truce,  to  offer  their  services  in 
tending  their  own  wounded.  I  entertained  them  as  well  as  could 
be  done  without  baggage  or  supplies,  and  found  them  to  be  very 
agreeable  gentlemen.     Their  services  were  not  needed. 

Having  gained  possession  of  Williamsburg,  the  first  thing  to 
be  done  was  to  get  up  supplies  for  the  troops,  to  care  for  the 
wounded,  to  hasten  supports  to  Franklin  by  water,  and  to  force 
the  pursuit  by  land  in  order  to  open  direct  communication  with 


STONEMAN'S  PURSUIT.  339 

Franklin,  or  to  bring  the  enemy  to  battle  if  he  halted  south 
of  the  mouth  of  the  Pamunkey.  The  frightful  condition  of  the 
roads  rendered  the  supply  question  very  difficult,  but  by  repair- 
ing the  nearest  landings  on  the  York  river,  and  by  the  energy 
of  the  quartermaster's  department,  that  task  was  soon  accom- 
plished. 

So  great  were  the  difficulties  of  land-transportation  that  even 
the  headquarters  wagons  did  not  reach  Williamsburg  until  the 
forenoon  of  the  9th,  up  to  which  time  I  was  absolutely  without 
baggage  of  any  kind.  Sedgwick's  division  reached  Franklin  dur- 
ing the  7th  ;  one  brigade  of  Porter's  division  got  off  from  York- 
town  by  water  on  the  afternoon  of  the  7th,  the  rest  on  the  8th, 
without  cavalry  or  artillery  ;  two  brigades  of  Richardson's  divi- 
sion got  off  on  the  nth,  the  remaining  brigade  on  the  12th.  The 
regular  infantry,  Duane's  engineer  battalion,  and  the  light  bat- 
teries of  the  reserve  artillery  marched  from  Yorktown  on  the  8th. 

Immediately  upon  our  arrival  in  Williamsburg  Gen.  Averill 
was  sent  forward  with  a  cavalry  force  to  push  the  enemy's  rear- 
guard. He  found  several  guns  abandoned,  and  captured  a  num- 
ber of  stragglers.  But  the  roads  were  so  bad  and  his  supplies  so 
scanty  that  he  was  obliged  to  return  after  marching  a  few  miles. 
On  the  next  day,  the  7th,  Stoneman  moved  with  the  advanced 
guard,  consisting  of  the  cavalry,  horse-batteries,  and  two  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  the  2d  R.  I.  and  the  98th   Penn. 

At  ten  A.M.  his  artillery  and  cavalry  had  reached  a  point  only 
two  and  a  half  to  three  miles  from  Williamsburg  ;  the  infantry 
had  not  yet  joined  him.  At  half-past  one  p.m.  he  had  come  up 
with  the  enemy's  rear-guard,  at  about  six  miles  from  Williams- 
burg, and  while  here  he  heard  heavy  firing  in  the  direction  of 
Franklin's  position.  Stoneman's  infantry  joined  him  here,  com- 
ing up  at  the  double-quick. 

He  encamped  for  the  night  at  a  church  about  ten  miles  from 
Williamsburg,  having  been  delayed  by  the  condition  of  the  roads 
and  the  necessity  of  procuring  and  cooking  meat  for  the  infan- 
try, who  were  almost  in  a  famished  condition. 

At  nine  a.m.  of  the  8th  he  had  reached  a  point  fourteen  miles 
from  Williamsburg.  At  half-past  three  p.m.  he  reached  with  his 
main  body  Hockaday's  Springs,  about  six  miles  and  a  half  from 
Franklin's  position,  and  there  learned  that  his  advanced  guard 
had  communicated  with  Franklin's  pickets. 


340  AfcCLELLAN'S  OWN  SlV/iV. 

Stoneman  learned  here  that  a  Confederate  force  of  ten  regi- 
ments of  infantry,  one  battery,  and  some  cavalry  had  encamped 
the  night  before  at  Hockaday*s  Springs,  and  left  that  morning 
via  Diascund  Bridge,  and  that  the  enemy  were  in  full  retreat 
upon  the  Chickahominy.  He  sent  cavalry  in  pursuit  to  harass 
the  enemy  until  dark.  This  detachment  found  the  enemy  at 
dark  strongly  posted  at  New  Kent  Court-House,  and,  in  accord- 
ance with  instructions,  then  returned  to  the  main  body  of  the 
advanced  guard. 

On  the  9th  Stoneman  occupied  and  held  the  junction  of  the 
West  Point  and  Williamsburg  roads,  about  three  miles  from  New 
Kent  Court-House.  The  occupation  of  this  place  occurred  as 
the  result  of  a  brisk  skirmish  in  which  a  portion  of  the  6th  U.  S. 
Cavalry,  under  Maj.  Williams,  and  Robinson's  battery  took  part ; 
one  squadron  of  the  6th,  under  the  personal  command  of  Maj. 
Williams,  made  two  very  handsome  charges. 

On  the  loth  Stoneman  sent  Farnsworth's  8th  111.  Cavalry 
some  six  miles  beyond  New  Kent  Court-House,  and  with  his 
main  body  moved  to  Cumberland,  leaving  New  Kent  Court- 
House  occupied  by  two  New  Jersey  regiments  and  four  guns 
from  Franklin's  division. 

On  the  nth  he  sent  Maj.  Williams  with  six  companies  of 
cavalry  to  occupy  the  railroad-crossing  at  White  House  and 
scout  the  surrounding  country.  He  was  again  delayed  on  the 
nth  by  the  necessity  of  awaiting  provisions  from  P'ranklin. 
Stoneman  says :  "  The  men  have  had  no  sugar  or  coffee  since 
leaving  Williamsburg,  and  but  a  very  limited  amount  of  hard 
bread  and  pork.  We  have  lived  principally  on  fresh  meat, 
sometimes  without  salt,  for  the  past  week  ;  but  I  have  not  heard 
a  complaint  or  murmur.*' 

D.  R.  Jones's  division  constituted  the  rear-guard  of  the  ene- 
my. It  consisted  of  ten  regiments  of  infantry,  sixteen  pieces  of 
artillery,  and  the  ist  Va.  Cavalry.  The  rear  of  the  rear-guard 
consisted  of  one  regiment  of  infantry,  three  pieces  of  artillery, 
and  three  squadrons,  with  which  they  would  check  us  at  every 
difficult  place  and  then  leave.  Owing  to  the  peculiar  nature  of 
the  country,  admirably  adapted  for  the  operations  of  an  active 
and  vigorous  rear-guard,  which  we  had  in  our  front,  we  could 
get  but  one  chance  to  attack  him  and  make  it  tell — this  at 
Slatesville^  from  which  he  was  driven  with  loss.      Three   miles 


MOVEMENT  OE  ARhfY,  34  I 

from  Slatesville,  at  New  Kent  Court-House,  the  whole  division 
was  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle,  and  I  thought  it  expedient  to 
retain  with  me  the  New  Jersey  brigade  (two  regiments  and  four 
guns)  and  Farnsworth*s  cavalry. 

As  soon  as  a  reasonable  amount  of  supplies  were  received  and 
the  roads  improved  somewhat  I  resumed  the  movement  by  land 
from  Williamsburg.  Smith's  division  marched  on  the  afternoon 
of  the  8th,  Couch,  Casey,  and  Kearny  on  the  morning  of  the  9th. 
The  reserves  came  up  to  Williamsburg  on  the  morning  of  the  same 
day.  During  the  night  of  the  9th  headquarters  were  four  miles  in 
front  of  Williamsburg  with  the  regulars,  the  other  four  divisions 
just  mentioned  in  advance,  Hooker  still  at  Williamsburg. 

On  the  evening  of  the  loth  headquarters  were  at  Roper's 
Church,  nineteen  miles  beyond  Williamsburg,  in  easy  communi- 
cation with  Franklin ;  the  regulars,  Smith,  Couch,  Casey,  and 
Kearny  near  headquarters.  We  now  began  to  draw  supplies 
from  Elthan. 

Headquarters  remained  at  Roper's  Church  until  the  morning 
of  the  13th,  while  the  troops  were  moving  in  such  a  manner  that 
at  the  close  of  that  day  the  disposition  was  as  follows :  head- 
(juarters,  with  the  divisions  of  Porter,  Franklin,  Sykes  (regulars), 
and  the  artillery  reserves,  at  Cumberland,  now  a  temporary  depot ; 
Couch  and  Casey  at  New  Kent  Court-House  ;  Hooker  and  Kear- 
ny near  Roper's  Church  ;  Richardson  and  Sedgwick  near  El- 
than. Gen.  Van  Alen  was  left,  with  a  small  force,  as  military 
governor  of  Yorktown  ;  Col.  Campbell  with  his  regiment,  the  5th 
Pa.  Cavalry,  at  Williamsburg. 

On  the  14th  and  15th  it  rained  heavily  and  continuously,  and 
somewhat  on  the  i6th.  On  the  15th  and  i6th  the  divisions  of 
Porter,  Franklin,  and  Smith  were  with  great  difficulty  advanced 
to  White  House.  The  roads  were  so  bad,  narrow,  and  infrequent 
as  to  render  the  movements  of  large  masses  very  slow  and  diffi- 
cult ;  so  much  so  that  in  the  movement  to  White  House  on  the 
15th  and  1 6th  it  required  forty-eight  hours  to  move  two  divisions 
and  their  trains  five  miles. 

On  the  1 6th  headquarters  advanced  to  White  House  ;  and  on 
that  day  and  the  next  Sykes  and  the  reserve  artillery  moved  up 
to  the  same  point  with  no  little  difficulty,  and  a  permanent  depot 
was  established.  The  weather  changed  on  the  night  of  the  i6th, 
80  that  the  17th  and  i8th  were  clear,  warm  days. 


34^  McCLELLAN'S  OWN^  STORY, 

The  17th  and  i8th  were  occupied,  while  the  roads  were  dry- 
ing, in  closing  up  all  the  troops  and  trains,  with  the  final  pre- 
parations to  advance,  and  in  numerous  and  extensive  reconnois- 
sances  pushed  in  all  directions. 

It  was  at  this  moment,  May  18,  1862,  that,  in  consequence 
of  my  earnest  representations,  the  President  authorized  me  to 
organize  two  provisional  army  corps,  the  5th  and  6th,  which 
soon  became  permanent  corps,  and  the  organization  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  was  now  as  follows  : 

2d  Corps — Gen.  Sumner.      Consisting  of  the   divisions   Sedg- 
wick and  Richardson. 
3d  Corps — Gen.    Heintzelman.      Consisting    of    the    divisions 

Kearny  and  Hooker. 

4th  Corps — Gen.  Keyes.      Consisting  of  the  divisions  Couch  and 

Casey. 

5th  Corps — Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter.      Consisting  of  the  divisions 

Morell,  Sykes,  and  Hunt's  reserve  artillery. 

6th  Corps — Gen.  Franklin.      Consisting  of  the  divisions  W.  F. 

Smith  and  Slocum. 

The  organization  of  the  cavalry  remained  unchanged,  and,  as 
no  new  regiments  were  assigned  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
except  Col.  Campbell's,  which  remained  at  Williamsburg,  we  suf- 
fered very  much  during  the  subsequent  operations  from  the  glar- 
ing deficiency  of  the  cavalry  force  in  point  of  numbers. 

On  the  1 8th  of  May  headquarters  were  at  White  House  ;  the 
advanced  guard  held  the  country  nearly  to  the  Chickahominy 
and  well  to  the  north  of  the  railway.  The  5th  and  6th  corps 
were  at  White  House  ;  the  2d,  3d,  and  4th  corps  were  near  New 
Kent  Court-House. 

The  enemy  had  withdrawn  across  the  Chickahominy,  having 
his  main  force  between  New  bridge  and  Richmond.  Bottom's, 
Long,  and  Jones's  bridges  were  merely  watched  by  small  cavalry 
patrols,  and  there  were  no  indications  even  of  this  with  regard 
to  the  last  two. 

The  necessity  of  following  the  enemy  until  he  was  fairly 
across  the  Chickahominy,  and  the  question  of  supplies,  had  natu- 
rally brought  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  into  the  positions  just 
described,  for  the  James  river  was  not  open  until  the  12th,  when 
the  Merrimac  was  destroyed. 

The  question  was  now  to  be  decided  as  to  the  ultimate  line 
of  operations  of  the  army. 


THE   JAMES  RIVER.  343 

Two  courses  were  to  be  considered :  first,  to  abandon  the 
line  of  the  York,  cross  the  Chickahominy  in  the  lower  part  of  its 
course,  gain  the  James,  and  adopt  that  as  the  line  of  supply  ; 
second,  to  use  the  railroad  from  West  Point  to  Richmond  as  the 
line  of  supply,  which  would  oblige  us  to  cross  the  Chickahominy 
somewhere  north  of  White  Oak  Swamp.  The  array  was  perfectly 
placed  to  adopt  either  course. 

Masking  the  movement  by  the  advanced  guard,  the  army 
could  easily  have  crossed  the  Chickahominy  by  Jones's  bridge, 
and  at  Coles's  ferry  and  Barret's  ferry  by  pontoon  bridges,  while 
the  advanced  guard,  and  probably  one  or  two  corps,  could  have 
followed  the  movement  by  Long  bridge  and  under  cover  of  the 
White  Oak  Swamp,  and  the  army  would  have  been  concentrated 
at  Malvern  Hill,  ready  either  to  advance  upon  Richmond  by  the 
roads  near  the  left  bank  of  the  James,  or  to  cross  that  river  and 
place  itself  between  Richmond  and  Petersburg. 

With  all  the  aid  of  the  gunboats  and  water-transportation 
I  am  sure  that  I  could  have  occupied  Petersburg  and  placed  the 
army  in  position  between  that  place  and  Richmond,  so  that  the 
enemy  would  have  been  obliged  to  abandon  his  capital  or  to 
come  out  to  attack  in  a  position  of  my  own  choosing,  where, 
with  the  whole  army  concentrated,  success  would  not  have 
been  doubtful  and  Richmond  would  have  been  the  prize  of 
victory. 

Moreover,  the  water  line  of  transportation  would  have  insured 
the  prompt  and  safe  arrival  of  the  ist  corps,  or  such  other  rein- 
forcements as  might  have  been  sent  to  me. 

It  is  needless  to  state  that  the  army  was  well  placed  to  fol- 
low the  second  line  of  operations  indicated. 

Up  to  the  1 8th  my  repeated  and  urgent  demands  for  rein- 
forcements by  water  had  been  met  in  such  a  way  as  to  render  it 
probable  that  if  the  ist  corps  were  ordered  up  to  my  support 
at  all,  the  overland  route  would  be  selected  by  the  authorities 
in  Washington.  Among  other  despatches  calling  for  reinforce- 
ments I  sent  the  following : 

Camp  at  Cumberland,  May  14,  1862. 

I  have  more  than  twice  telegraphed  to  the  Secretary  of  War, 
stating  that,  in  my  opinion,  the  enemy  were  concentrating  all 
their  available  force  to  fight  this  army  in  front  of  Richmond,  and 


344 


McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY. 


that  such  ought  to  be  their  policy.  I  have  received  no  reply 
whatever  to  any  of  these  telegrams.  I  beg  leave  to  repeat  their 
substance  to  your  excellency,  and  to  ask  that  kind  consideration 
which  you  have  ever  accorded  to  my  representations  and  views. 
All  my  information  from  every  source  accessible  to  me  estc^b- 
lishes  the  fixed  purpose  of  the  rebels  to  defend  Richmond  against 
this  army  by  offering  us  battle  with  all  the  troops  they  can  col- 
lect from  east,  west,  and  south,  and  my  own  opinion  is  con- 
firmed by  that  of  all  my  commanders  whom  I  have  been  able 
to  consult. 

Casualties,  sickness,  garrisons,  and  guards  have  much  weak- 
ened my  force,  and  will  continue  to  do  so.  I  cannot  bring 
into  actual  battle  against  the  enemy  more  than  80,000  men 
at  the  utmost,  and  with  them  I  must  attack  in  position,  probably 
entrenched,  a  much  larger  force,  perhaps  double  my  numbers. 
It  is  possible  that  Richmond  may  be  abandoned  without  a  serious 
struggle  ;  but  the  enemy  are  actually  in  great  strength  between 
here  and  there,  and  it  would  be  unwise,  and  even  insane,  for  me 
to  calculate  upon  anything  but  a  stubborn  and  desperate  resist- 
ance. If  they  should  abandon  Richmond  it  may  well  be  that 
it  is  done  with  the  purpose  of  making  the  stand  at  some  place  in 
Virginia  south  or  west  of  there,  and  we  should  be  in  condition 
to  press  them  without  delay.  The  Confederate  leaders  must 
employ  their  utmost  efforts  against  this  army  in  Virginia,  and 
they  will  be  supported  by  the  whole  body  of  their  military  offi- 
cers, among  whom  there  may  be  said  to  be  no  Union  feeling, 
as  there  is  also  very  little  among  the  higher  class  of  citizens  in 
the  seceding  States. 

I  have  found  no  fighting  men  left  in  this  Peninsula.  All  are 
in  the  ranks  of  the  opposing  foe. 

Even  if  more  troops  than  I  now  have  should  prove  unneces- 
sary for  purposes  of  military  occupation,  our  greatest  display  of 
imposing  force  in  the  capital  of  the  rebel  government  will  have 
the  best  moral  effect.  I  most  respectfully  and  earnestly  urge 
upon  your  excellency  that  the  opportunity  has  come  for  striking 
a  fatal  blow  at  the  enemies  of  the  Constitution,  and  I  beg  that 
you  will  cause  this  army  to  be  reinforced  without  delay  by  all  the 
disposable  troops  of  the  government.  I  ask  for  every  man  that 
the  War  Department  can  send  me.  Sent  by  water  they  will  soon 
reach  me.  Any  commander  of  the  reinforcements  whom  your 
excellency  may  designate  will  be  acceptable  to  me,  whatever 
expression  I  may  have  heretofore  addressed  to  you  on  that 
subject. 

I  will  fight  the  enemy,  whatever  their  force  may  be,  with  what- 
ever force  I  may  have  ;  and  I  firmly  believe  that  we  shall  beat 
them,  but  our  triumph  should  be  made  decisive  and  complete. 
The  soldiers  of  this  army  love  their  government,  and  will  fight 
well  in  its  support.     You  may  rely  upon  them.     They  have  con- 


STANTON'S  FATAL  ORDER. 


345 


fidence  in  me  as  their  general,  and  in  you  as  their  President. 
Strong  reinforcements  will  at  least  save  the  lives  of  many  of 
them.  The  greater  our  force  the  more  perfect  will  be  our  com- 
binations and  the  less  our  loss. 

For  obvious  reasons  I  beg  you  to  give  immediate  considera- 
tion to  this  communication,  and  to  inform  me  fully  at  the  earliest 
moment  of  your  final  determination. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Major-  General. 

His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States, 

To  which,  on  the  i8th  of  May,  I  received  this  reply : 

"Washington,  May  i8,  2  p.m. 

"  General  :  Your  despatch  to  the  President,  asking  rein- 
forcements, has  been  received  and  carefully  considered. 

"  The  President  is  not  willing  to  uncover  the  capital  entirely  ; 
and  it  is  believed  that,  even  if  this  were  prudent,  it  would  require 
more  time  to  effect  a  junction  between  your  army  and  that  of  the 
Rappahannock  by  the  way  of  the  Potomac  and  York  river  than 
by  a  land  march.  In  order,  therefore,  to  increase  the  strength  of 
the  attack  upon  Richmond  at  the  earliest  moment.  Gen.  Mc- 
Dowell has  been  ordered  to  march  upon  that  city  by  the  short- 
est route. 

"He  is  ordered,  keeping  himself  always  in  position  to  save 
the  capital  from  all  possible  attack,  so  to  operate  as  to  put  his 
left  wing  in  communication  with  your  right  wing,  and  you  are 
instructed  to  co-operate  so  as  to  establish  this  communication  as 
soon  as  possible,  by  extending  your  right  wing  to  the  north  of 
Richmond. 

"  It  is  believed  that  this  communication  can  be  safely  estab- 
lished either  north  or  south  of  the  Pamunkey  river. 

"  In  any  event  you  will  be  able  to  prevent  the  main  body  of 
the  enemy's  forces  from  leaving  Richmond  and  falling  in  over- 
whelming force  upon  Gen.  McDowell.  He  will  move  with  be- 
tween thirty-five  (35)  and  forty  thousand  (40,000)  men. 

"  A  copy  of  the  instructions  to  Gen.  McDowell  are  with  this. 
The  specific  task  assigned  to  his  command  has  been  to  provide 
against  any  danger  to  the  capital  of  the  nation. 

"  At  your  earnest  call  for  reinforcements  he  is  sent  forward 
to  co-operate  in  the  reduction  of  Richmond,  but  charged,  in 
attempting  this,  not  to  uncover  the  city  of  Washington,  and  you 
will  give  no  order,  either  before  or  after  your  junction,  which  can 
put  him  out  of  position  to  cover  this  city.  You  and  he  will  com- 
municate with  each  other,  by  telegraph  or  otherwise,  as  frequently 


346  McCLELLAN\S  OWN  STORY. 

as  may  be  necessary  for  sufficient  co-operation.  When  Gen. 
McDowell  is  in  position  on  your  right  his  supplies  must  be 
drawn  from  West  Point,  and  you  will  instruct  your  staff-officers 
to  be  prepared  to  supply  him  by  that  route. 

"  The  President  desires  that  Gen.  McDowell  retain  the  com- 
mand of  the  Department  of  the  Rappahannock  and  of  the  forces 
with  which   he  moves  forward. 

**  By  order  of  the  President. 

"  Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  War, 

"  Maj.-Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan." 

This  order  rendered  it  impossible  for  me  to  use  the  James 
river  as  a  line  of  operations,  forced  me  to  establish  our  depots 
on  the  Pamunkey,  and  to  approach  Richmond  from  the  north. 

Herein  lay  the  failure  of  the  campaign. 

The  order  obliged  me  to  extend  and  expose  my  right  in  order 
to  secure  the  junction.  As  it  was  impossible  to  get  at  Richmond 
and  the  enemy's  army  covering  it  without  crossing  the  Chicka- 
hominy,  I  was  obliged  to  divide  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  into 
two  parts,  separated  by  that  stream.  As  the  order  for  Gen. 
McDowell's  advance  was  soon  suspended,  I  incurred  great  risk, 
of  which  the  enemy  finally  took  advantage  and  frustrated  the 
plan  of  campaign. 

Had  Gen.  McDowell  joined  me  by  water  I  could  have 
approached  Richmond  by  the  James,  and  thus  have  avoided 
the  delays  and  losses  incurred  in  bridging  the  Chickahominy, 
and  could  have  had  the  army  united  in  one  body  instead  of 
being  necessarily  divided  by  that  stream. 

McDowell's  movement  by  water  would  not  have  jeopardized 
Washington  in  the  slightest  degree.  There  were  troops  enough 
without  him  to  hold  the  works  against  anything  that  the  enemy 
could  have  sent  against  them,  and  the  more  they  sent  the  easier 
would  my  task  have  been  in  front  of  Richmond.  But  Jackson's 
movement  was  merely  a  feint,  and  if  McDowell  had  joined  me 
on  the  James  the  enemy  would  have  drawn  in  every  available 
man  from  every  quarter  to  make  head  against  me.  A  little  of 
the  nerve  at  Washington  which  the  Romans  displayed  during 
the  campaign  against  Hannibal  would  have  settled  the  fate  of 
Richmond  in  very  few^  weeks. 

The  following  telegram  was  received  at  headquarters,  Army 
of  the  Potomac,  May  24,  1862  : 


Mc DO  IV ELL   COMING,  347 

**  HEADgUARTERS,    DEPARTMENT    OF    RAPPAHANNOCK, 

OPPOSITE  Fredericksburg,  May  22,  1862. 
''Maj.-Gtn.  G.  B,  McClcllan: 

"  1  have  received  the  orders  of  the  President  to  move  with 
the  army  under  my  command  and  co-operate  with  yours  in  the 
reduction  of  Richmond,  and  also  a  copy  of  his  instructions  to 
you  in  relation  to  that  co-oi)eration.  Maj.-Gen.  Shields  will  join 
me  to-day. 

"  As  far  (soon)  as  the  necessary  preparations  for  the  march 
can  be  completed,  which  I  think  will  be  by  the  twenty-fourth 
(24th)  inst.,  we  shall  set  forth  as  (in)  the  general  direction 
ordered.  There  is  in  front  of  us  to  impede  our  advance  the 
secession  Army  of  the  Rappahannock,  so  called,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Joseph  R.  Anderson,  of  the  Tredegar  Iron-Works. 

*' His  force  is  from  12,000  to  15,000  men,  mostly  South 
Carolina  and  Georgia  trooi)s.  We  shall  engage  this  force  on 
our  first  day*s  march,  as  they  are  within  from  six  to  eight 
miles  of  us,  posted  on  and  to  the  right  and  left  of  the  Frede- 
ricksburg and  Richmond  Railroad,  and  in  a  position  of  con- 
siderable strength.  It  is  my  purpose  to  try  and  turn  this  posi- 
tion by  throwing  a  force  on  their  left  flank,  and  cut  off  their 
opportunity  of  receiving  any  reinforcements  from  the  direction 
of  Gordonsville,  and  at  the  same  time  endeavor  to  save  the  rail- 
road bridges.  If  this  can  be  done  another  channel  of  supply 
can  be  had  for  the  forces  going  against  Richmond  that  cannot 
fail  to  give  great  relief  to  the  quartermaster's  and  commissary 
departments  of  your  army,  and  thus  facilitate  your  operations. 
We  cannot  rely  on  this  at  first,  because  they  now  occupy  the 
line,  and,  I  am  told,  are  prepared  to  destroy  the  bridges  if  they 
are  forced  to  fall  back.  I  beg  to  ask  to  what  extent  can  I  rely 
on  co-operation  from  you  in  my  present  movement  in  the  way 
of  your  cutting  off  the  retreat  of  the  enemy  upon  Richmond, 
where  they  would  add  12,000  to  the  forces  against  you,  and 
in  saving  the  railroad  bridge  across  the  Pamunkey,  and  to  what 
point  on  the  Pamunkey  can  you  extend  your  right  to  join  me,  and 
to  what  point  can  you  cause  supplies  to  be  placed  for  my  com- 
mand, and  by  what  date  can  I  count  on  finding  them  ready  for 
me?  I  shall  recjuire  subsistence  for  thirty-eight  thousand  (38,000) 
men,  and  forage  for  eleven  thousand  (11,000)  animals. 

'*  Irwin  McDowell, 

*'^  Maj.-Gen  y 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  instructions  to  Gen.  McDowell: 


War  Department, 
Washington,  May  17,  1862. 

"  General  :  Upon  being  joined  by  Gen,  Shields*^  division 


348  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

you  will  move  upon  Richmond  by  the  general  route  of  the  Rich- 
mond and  Fredericksburg  Railroad,  co-operating  with  the  forces 
under  Gen.  McClellan,  now  threatening  Richmond  from  the  line 
of  the  Pamunkey  and  York  rivers. 

"While  seeking  to  establish  as  soon  as  possible  a  commu- 
nication between  your  left  wing  and  the  right  wing  of  Gen. 
McClellan,  you  will  hold  yourself  always  in  such  position  as  to 
cover  the  capital  of  the  nation  against  a  sudden  dash  of  any 
large  body  of  the  rebel  forces. 

"Gen.  McClellan  will  be  furnished  with  a  copy  of  these 
instructions,  and  will  be  directed  to  hold  himself  in  readiness 
to  establish  communication  with  your  left  wing,  and  to  prevent 
the  main  body  of  the  enemy's  army  from  leaving  Richmond  and 
throwing  itself  upon  your  column  before  a  junction  of  the  two 
armies  is  effected. 

"  A  copy  of  his  instructions  in  regard  to  the  employment  of 
your  force  is  annexed. 

"  By  order  of  the  President. 

"  Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  War, 

"  Gen.  McDowell, 

"  Commanding  Department  of  Rappahannock^ 

Having  some  doubts,  from  the  wording  of  the  foregoing 
orders,  as  to  the  extent  of  my  authority  over  the  troops  of  Gen. 
McDowell,  and  as  to  the  time  when  I  might  anticipate  his 
arrival,  on  the  21st  of  May  I  sent  this  despatch  to  President 
Lincoln  : 

May  2\y.  1862,  II  P.M. 

Your  despatch  of  yesterday  respecting  our  situation  and  the 
batteries  of  Fort  Darling  was  received  while  I  was  absent  with 
the  advance,  where  I  have  been  all  this  day.  I  have  communi- 
cated personally  with  Capt.  Goldsborough,  and  by  letter  with 
Capt.  Smith.  The  vessels  can  do  nothing  without  co-operation 
on  land,  which  I  will  not  be  in  condition  to  afford  for  several  days. 
Circumstances  must  determine  the  propriety  of  a  land-attack. 

It  rained  again  last  night,  and  rain  on  this  soil  soon  makes 
the  roads  incredibly  bad  for  army  transportation.  I  personally 
crossed  the  Chickahominy  to-day  at  Bottom's  bridge  ford,  and 
went  a  mile  beyond,  the  enemy  being  about  half  a  mile  in  front. 
I  have  three  regiments  on  the  other  bank  guarding  the  rebuild- 
ing of  the  bridge.  Keyes's  corps  is  on  the  New  Kent  road, 
near  Bottom's  bridge.  Heintzelman  is  on  the  same  road,  within 
supporting  distance.  Sumner  is  on  the  railroad,  connecting  right 
with  left.  Stoneman,  with  advanced  guard,  is  within  one  mile  of 
New  bridge.     P'ranklin,  with  two  divisions,  is  about  two  miles 


hicD6WELLS  CORPS  COMING,  349 

this  side  of  Stoneman.  Porter's  division,  with  the  reserves  of 
infantry  and  artillery,  is  within  supporting  distance.  Head- 
quarters will  probably  be  at  Cold  Harbor  to-morrow,  one  mile 
this  side  of  Franklin.  All  the  bridges  over  the  Chickahominy 
are  destroyed.  The  enemy  are  in  force  on  every  road  leading  to 
Richmond,  within  a  mile  or  two  west  of  the  stream.  Their  main 
body  is  on  the  road  from  New  bridge,  encamped  along  it  for 
four  or  ^\^  miles,  spreading  over  the  open  ground  on  both  sides. 
Johnson's  headquarters  are  about  two  miles  beyond  the  bridge. 

All  accounts  report  their  numbers  as  greatly  exceeding  our 
own.  The  position  of  the  rebel  forces,  the  declaration  of  the 
Confederate  authorities,  the  resolutions  of  the  Virginia  legisla- 
ture, the  action  of  the  city  government,  the  conduct  of  the  citi- 
zens, and  all  other  sources  of  information  accessible  to  me,  give 
positive  assurance  that  our  approach  to  Richmond  involves  a 
desperate  battle  between  the  opposing  armies. 

All  our  divisions  are  moving  towards  the  foe.  I  shall  ad- 
vance steadily  and  carefully,  and  attack  them  according  to  my 
best  judgment,  and  in  such  manner  as  to  employ  my  greatest 
force. 

I  regret  the  state  of  things  as  to  Gen.  McDowell's  command. 
We  must  beat  the  enemy  in  front  of  Richmond.  One  division 
added  to  this  army  for  that  efifort  would  do  more  to  protect 
Washington  than  his  whole  force  can  possibly  do  anywhere  else 
in  the  field.  The  rebels  are  concentrating  from  all  points  for 
the  two  battles  at  Richmond  and  Corinth.  I  would  still,  most 
respectfully,  suggest  the  policy  of  our  concentrating  here  by 
movements  on  water.  I  have  heard  nothing  as  to  the  proba- 
bilities of  the  contemplated  junction  of  McDowell's  force  with 
mine.  I  have  no  idea  when  he  can  start,  what  are  his  means 
of  transportation,  or  when  he  may  be  expected  to  reach  this 
vicinity.  I  fear  there  is  little  hope  that  he  can  join  me  over- 
land in  time  for  the  coming  battle.  Delays  on  my  part  will  be 
dangerous.  I  fear  sickness  and  demoralization.  This  region  is 
unhealthy  for  Northern  men,  and,  unless  kept  moving,  I  fear  that 
our  soldiers  may  become  discouraged.  At  present  our  numbers 
are  weakening  from  disease,  but  our  men  remain  in  good  heart. 

I  regret  also  the  configuration  of  the  Department  of  the  Rap- 
pahannock. It  includes  a  portion  even  of  the  city  of  Richmond. 
I  think  that  my  own  department  should  embrace  the  entire  field 
of  military  operations  designed  for  the  capture  and  occupation  of 
that  city. 

Again,  I  agree  with  your  excellency  that  one  bad  general  is 
better  than  two  good  ones. 

I  am  not  sure  that  I  fully  comprehend  your  orders  of  the 
17th  instant  addressed  to  myself  and  Gen.  McDowell.  If  a 
junction  is  effected  before  we  occupy  Richmond  it  must  neces- 
sarily be  east  of  the  railroad  to  Fredericksburg  and  within  my 


;^5  )  MiCLELLAX'S  OIVN  STORY. 

department.  This  fact,  my  superior  rank,  and  the  express  lan- 
guage of  the  sixty-second  Article  of  War  will  place  his  command 
under  my  orders,  unless  it  is  otherwise  specially  directed  by  your 
excellency  ;  and  I  consider  that  he  will  be  under  my  command, 
except  that  I  am  not  to  detach  any  portion  of  his  forces,  or  give 
any  orders  which  can  put  him  out  of  |)Osition  to  cover  Washing- 
ton. If  I  err  in  my  construction  1  desire  to  be  at  once  set  right. 
Frankness  cf)mpels  me  to  say,  anxious  as  1  am  for  an  increase  of 
force,  that  the  march  of  McI)oweirs  column  upon  Richmond  by 
the  shortest  route  will,  in  my  opinion,  uncover  Washington,  as  to 
any  interposition  by  it,  as  completely  as  its  movement  by  water. 
The  enemy  cannot  advance  by  Fredericksburg  on  Washington. 

Should  they  attempt  a  movement  which  to  me  seems  utterly 
improbable,  their  route  would  be  by  Gordonsville  and  Manassas. 
I  desire  that  the  extent  of  my  authority  over  McDowell  may  be 
clearly  defined,  lest  misunderstandings  and  conflicting  views  may 
produce  some  of  those  injurious  results  which  a  divided  com- 
mand has  so  often  caused.  I  would  respectfully  suggest  that 
this  danger  can  only  be  surely  guarded  against  by  explicitly 
placing  Gen.  McDowell  under  my  orders  in  the  ordinary  way, 
and  holding  me  strictly  responsible  for  the  closest  observance 
of  your  instructions.  I  hope,  Mr.  President,  that  it  is  not  neces- 
sary for  me  to  assure  you  that  your  instructions  would  be  ob- 
served in  the  utmost  good  faith,  and  that  I  have  no  personal 
feelings  which  could  influence  me  to  disregard  them  in  any  par- 
ticular. 

I  believe  that  there  is  a  great  struggle  before  this  army,  but 
I  am  neither  dismayed  nor  discouraged.  I  wish  to  strengthen  its 
force  as  much  as  I  can,  but  in  any  event  I  shall  fight  it  with  all 
the  skill,  caution,  and  determination  that  I  possess,  and  I  trust 
that  the  result  may  either  obtain  for  me  the  permanent  con- 
fidence of  my  government  or  that  it  may  close  my  career. 

George  H.  McClei.lan, 

Maj.-Gcn,  Commanding. 
His  Excellency  Abraham  Lincoln, 

President  of  the  United  States. 

On  the  24th   I  received  the  following  reply  : 

"May  24,  1862  (from  Washington,  24th). 

I  left  Gen.  McDowell's  camp  at  dark  last  evening.  Shields's 
command  is  there,  but  it  is  so  worn  that  he  cannot  move  before 
Monday  morning,  the  twenty-sixth  (26th).  We  have  so  thinned 
our  line  to  get  troops  for  other  |)laces  that  it  was  broken  yester- 
day at  Front  Royal,  with  a  probable  loss  to  us  of  one  (i)  regi- 
ment infantry,  two  (2)  companies  cavalry,  putting  Gen.  Bmks  in 
some  peril. 


AfcDOWELL  NOT  COMING,  35 1 


U    r\ 


The  enemy's  forces,  under  Gen.  Anderson,  now  opposing 
Gen.  McDowell's  advance  have,  as  their  line  of  supply  and 
retreat,  the  road  to  Richmond. 

**  If,  in  conjunction  with  McDowell's  movement  against  An- 
derson, you  could  send  a  force  from  your  right  to  cut  off  the 
enemy's  supplies  from  Richmond,  preserve  the  railroad  bridges 
across  the  two  (2)  forks  of  the  Pamunkey,  and  intercept  the 
enemy's  retreat,  you  will  prevent  the  army  now  opposed  to  you 
from  receiving  an  accession  of  numbers  of  nearly  fifteen  thou- 
sand (15,000)  men  ;  and  if  you  succeed  in  saving  the  bridges 
you  will  secure  a  line  of  railroad  for  supplies  in  addition  to  the 
one  you  now  have.  Can  you  not  do  this  almost  as  well  as  not 
while  you  are  building  the  Chickahominy  bridges  ?  McDowell 
and  Shields  both  say  they  can,  and  positively  will,  move  Monday 
morning.     /  wish  you  to  move  cautiously  and  safely. 

"  You  will  have  command  of  McDowell,  after  he  joins  you, 
precisely  as  you  indicated  in  your  long  despatch  to  us  of  the 
twenty-first  (21st). 

"A.  Lincoln, 

"  P reside ntr 

This  information,  that  McDowell's  corps  would  march  for 
Fredericksburg  on  the  following  Monday  (the  26th),  and  that 
he  would  be  under  my  command,  as  indicated  in  my  telegram 
of  the  2 1  St,  was  cheering  news,  and  I  now  felt  confident  that  we 
would  on  his  arrival  be  sufiiciently  strong  to  overpower  the  large 
army  confronting  us. 

At  a  later  hour  on  the  same  day  I  received  the  following  : 

"  May  24,  1862  (from  Washington,  4  p.m.) 

"  In  consequence  of  Gen.  Banks's  critical  position  I  have 
been  compelled  to  suspend  Gen.  McDowell's  movements  to  join 
you.  The  enemy  are  making  a  desperate  push  upon  Harper's 
Ferry,  5ind  we  are  trying  to  throw  Gen.  Fremont's  force  and 
part  of  Gen.  McDowell's  in  their  rear. 

"A.  Lincoln, 

"  P resident:' 
"  Maj.-Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan." 

From  which  it  will  be  seen  that  I  could  not  expect  Gen. 
McDowell  to  join  me  in  time  to  participate  in  immediate  opera- 
tions in  front  of  Richmond,  and  on  the  same  evening  I  replied  to 
the  President  that  I  would  make  my  calculations  accordingly. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Private  Letters. 

[Maj^  6  io  May  i8,  1862.] 

Williamsburg^  May  6,  1862. — I  telegraphed  you  this  morn- 
ing that  we  had  gained  a  battle.  Every  hour  its  importance  is 
proved  to  be  greater.  On  Sunday  I  sent  Stoneman  in  pursuit 
with  the  cavalry  and  four  batteries  of  horse-artillery.  He  was 
supported  by  the  divisions  of  Hooker,  Smith,  Couch,  Casey,  and 
Kearny,  most  of  which  arrived  on  the  ground  only  yesterday. 
Unfortunately  I  did  not  go  with  the  advance  myself,  being 
obliged  to  remain  to  get  Franklin  and  Sedgwick  started  up  the 
river  for  West  Point.  Yesterday  I  received  pressing  private  mes- 
sages from  Smith  and  others  begging  me  to  go  to  the  front.  I 
started  with  half  a  dozen  aides  and  some  fifteen  orderlies,  and 
found  things  in  a  bad  state.  Hancock  was  engaged  with  a  vastly 
inferior  force  some  two  miles  from  any  support.  Hooker  fought 
nearly  all  day  without  assistance,  and  the  mass  of  the  troops  were 
crowded  together  where  they  were  useless.  I  found  everybody 
discouraged,  officers  and  men ;  our  troops  in  wrong  positions, 
on  the  wrong  side  of  the  woods  ;  no  system,  no  co-operation, 
no  orders  given,  roads  blocked  up.  As  soon  as  I  came  upon 
the  field  the  men  cheered  like  fiends,  and  I  saw  at  once  that 
I  could  save  the  day.  I  immediately  reinforced  Hancock  and 
arranged  to  support  Hooker,  advanced  the  whole  line  across 
the  woods,  filled  up  the  gaps,  and  got  evt-ry thing  in  hand  for 
whatever  might  occur.  The  result  was  that  the  enemy  saw  that 
he  was  gone  if  he  remained  in  his  position,  and  scampered  during 
the  night.  His  works  were  very  strong,  but  his  loss  was  very 
heavy.  The  roads  are  in  such  condition  that  it  is  impossible  to 
pursue  except  with  a  few  cavalry.  It  is  with  the  utmost  difficulty 
that  I  can  feed  the  men,  many  of  whom  have  had  nothing  to  eat 
for  twenty-four  hours  and  more.  I  had  no  dinner  yesterday,  no 
supper ;  a  cracker  for  breakfast,  and  no  dinner  yet.     I  have  no 

baggage ;  was  out  in  the  rain  all  day  and  until  late  at  night ;  slept 

35a 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  353 

in  my  clothes  and  boots,  and  could  not  even  wash  my  face  and 
hands.  I,  however,  expect  ray  ambulance  up  pretty  soon,  when  I 
hope  for  better  things.  I  have  been  through  the  hospitals,  where 
are  many  of  our  own  men  and  of  the  rebels.  One  Virginian  sent 
for  me  this  morning  and  told  me  that  I  was  the  only  general  from 
whom  they  expected  any  humanity.  I  corrected  this  mistake. 
This  is  a  beautiful  little  town  ;  several  very  old  houses  and 
churches,  pretty  gardens.  I  have  taken  possession  of  a  very 
fine  house  which  Joe  Johnston  occupied  as  his  headquarters. 
It  has  a  lovely  flower-garden  and  conservatory.  If  you  were 
here  I  should  be  much  inclined  to  spend  some  weeks  here.  G.  W. 
was  one  of  the  whipped  community,  also  Joe  Johnston,  Cadmus 
Wilcox,  A.  P.  Hill,  D.  H.  Hill,  Longstreet,  Jeb  Stuart,  Early 
(badly  wounded)  ;  and  many  others  that  we  know.  We  have  all 
their  wounded ;  eight  guns  so  far.  In  short,  we  have  given  them 
a  tremendous  thrashing,  and  I  am  not  at  all  ashamed  of  the  con- 
duct of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

Telegram — Williamsburg^  May  6,  1862,  11  p.m. — The  battle 
of  Williamsburg  has  proved  a  brilliant  victory.  None  of  your 
friends  injured,  though  our  loss  considerable.  That  of  the  ene- 
my severe.  The  Quaker  army  is  doing  very  well.  Hancock 
was  superb  yesterday. 

Williamsburg y  May  6,  midnight, —  .  .  .  Am  very  tired  ;  had 
but  little  sleep  last  night,  and  have  not  had  my  clothes  off ; 
besides,  was  pretty  well  wet  last  night.  I  have  not  a  particle  of 
baggage  with  me  ;  nothing  but  a  buffalo-robe  and  horse-blanket, 
not  even  a  hair-brush  or  tooth-brush.  .  .  . 

Monday^  i  p.m.  (8M). —  ...  I  hope  to  get  Smith's  division 
off  this  afternoon,  followed  by  others  in  the  morning.  Stoneman 
is  some  fifteen  miles  in  advance,  and  will,  I  hope,  communicate 
with  Franklin  to-night,  although  I  am  not  yet  sure  that  the  enemy 
may  not  still  be  between  the  two.  I  shall  start  to-morrow  morn- 
ing and  overtake  Smith.  I  have  ordered  up  headquarters  and 
the  accompanying  paraphernalia  at  once,  so  I  hope  to  get  within 
a  few  miles  of  my  tooth-brush  in  a  day  or  two.  It  is  not  very 
pleasant,  this  going  entirely  without  baggage,  but  it  could  not  be 
helped,    I  find  that  the  results  of  my  operations  are  beginning  to 


-> 


354  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

be  apparent.  The  rebels  are  evacuating  Norfolk,  I  learn.  Your 
two  letters  of  Sunday  and  Monday  reached  me  last  night.  It 
would  have  been  easy  for  me  to  have  sacrificed  10,000  lives  in 
taking  Yorktown,  and  I  presume  the  world  would  have  thought 
it  more  brilliant.  I  am  content  with  what  I  have  done.  The 
battle  of  Williamsburg  was  more  bloody.  Had  I  reached  the  field 
three  hours  earlier  I  could  have  gained  far  greater  results  and 
have  saved  a  thousand  lives.  It  is,  perhaps,  well  as  it  is,  for 
officers  and  men  feel  that  I  saved  the  day.    .   .    . 

I  don't  know  where  the  next  battle  will  occur;  I  presume 
on  the  line  of  the  Chickahominy,  or  it  may  be  to-morrow  in 
effecting  a  junction  with  Franklin.  It  may  suit  the  views  of 
the  masses  better,  as  being  more  bloody.  /  hope  not,  and  will 
make  it  as  little  so  as  possible.    .   .    . 

Williamslyurgy  May  9,  2  p.m. —  ...  I  have  moved  four 
divisions  already.  The  reserves  have  arrived.  My  wagons 
have  arrived,  and  in  an  hour  or  two  I  will  move  myself.  .  .  . 
I  rather  think  that  we  have  a  very  severe  battle  to  fight  before 
reaching  Richmond,  but  the  men  are  just  in  the  humor  for  it. 
.    .    .    Carpet-bag  has  at  last  arrived. 

Camp  No.  i.  May  9,  8.30  p.m. — We  are  fairly  started  on  the 
march  again  ;  my  camp  is  only  about  four  miles  from  Williams- 
burg. The  road  was  so  much  blocked  up  with  wagons  that  I  did 
not  start  till  late.  Smith,  Couch,  Casey,  and  Kearny  are  all  in 
front  of  me,  the  regulars  close  by.  To-morrow  headquarters 
start  at  ^\t^  a.m.,  and  will  pass  all  but  Smith,  encamping  with  or 
just  in  rear  of  him.  I  hope  to  see  Franklin  to-morrow  night  and 
learn  more  of  the  enemy.  .  .  .  The  secesh  prisoners  strongly 
])rotested  against  being  obliged  to  remove  the  torpedoes  at  York- 
town,  but  without  avail,  for  they  had  to  do  it.  I  think  they  may 
be  more  careful  next  time.  I  heard  this  afternoon  from  Stone- 
man  that  they  (secesh)  had  murdered  some  of  our  men  after  they 
were  taken  prisoners.  I  have  given  orders  to  hold  all  their  people 
we  have  responsible  for  it.  If  it  is  confirmed  to-morrow  I  will 
send  a  flag  to  Joe  Johnston  and  quietly  inform  him  that  I  will 
hang  two  of  his  officers  for  every  one  of  our  men  thus  murdered  ; 
and  I  will  carry  the  threat  into  execution.  I  will  pay  them  in 
their  own  coin,  if  they  wish  to  carry  on  war  in  that  manner.     \ 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  355 

hope  there  is  some  mistake  about  the  murders,  for  I  do  not  wish 
to  make  reprisals.     It  is  a  sad  business  at  best.   .    .   . 

May  10,  Saturday^  11.45  P-M.,  camp  19  miles  from  Wil- 
liamsburg.—  .  .  .  Am  encamped  now  at  an  old  wooden  church, 
and  am  in  easy  communication  with  Franklin,  Porter,  etc.  Fitz 
came  over  to  see  me  this  afternoon,  and  I  go  over  to  see  him  and 
Franklin  to-morrow.  To-morrow  being  Sunday,  I  give  the  men 
a  rest,  merely  closing  up  some  of  the  troops  in  rear.  I  begin  to 
find  some  Union  sentiment  in  this  country.  ...  I  expect  to  fight 
a  very  severe  battle  on  the  Chickahominy,  but  feel  no  doubt  as 
to  the  result.  I  saw  the  effect  of  my  presence  the  other  day  in 
front  of  Williamsburg.  The  men  behaved  superbly,  and  will  do 
better,  if  possible,  next  time.  To-morrow  I  will  get  up  supplies, 
reorganize,  arrange  details,  and  get  ready  for  the  great  fight,  feel- 
ing that  I  shall  lose  nothing  by  respecting  Sunday  as  far  as  I  can. 
Secesh  is  gathering  all  he  can  in  front  of  me.  So  much  the  bet- 
ter. I  have  implicit  confidence  in  my  men,  and  they  have  in  me. 
What  more  can  I  ask  ?  .  .  . 

Sunday y  8  a.m.  {same  letter  as  last). —  ...  As  I  told  you  last 
night,  I  am  giving  my  men  some  rest  to-day.  They  need  it 
much,  for  they  have  for  some  time  been  living  on  long  marches, 
short  rations,  and  rainy  bivouacs.  .  .  .  My  cavalry  were  within 
six  miles  of  the  upper  Chickahominy  yesterday.  Norfolk  is  in 
our  possession,  the  result  of  my  movements.  .  .  . 

May  1 2,  Monday  p.m.  {same  letter). —  .  .  .  While  I  write  the 
2d  Dragoons*  band  is  serenading,  and  about  fifty  others  are  play- 
ing tattoo  at  various  distances — a  grand  sound  in  this  lovely ' 
moonlight  night.  My  camp  is  at  an  old  frame  church  in  a  grove. 
I  differ  from  most  of  the  generals  in  preferring  a  tent  to  a  house. 
I  hope  not  to  sleep  in  a  house  again  until  I  see  you.  .  .  .  Are 
you  satisfied  now  with  my  bloodless  victories  ?  Even  the  Aboli- 
tionists seem  to  be  coming  round ;  judging,  at  least,  from  the  very 
handsome  resolutions  offered  by  Mr.  Lovejoy  in  the  House.  I 
look  upon  that  resolution  as  one  of  the  most  complimentary 
I  know  of,  and  that,  too,  offered  by  my  bitterest  persecutors. 
But  the  union  of  civic  merit  with  military  success  is  what  pleases 

me  most ;  to  have  it  recognized  that  I  have  saved  the  lives  of  my 

27 


356  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

men  and  won  success  by  my  own  efiforts  is  to  me  the  height  of 
glory.  I  hope  that  the  result  in  front  of  Richmond  will  cause 
still  greater  satisfaction  to  the  country.  I  still  hope  that  the 
God  who  has  been  so  good  to  me  will  continue  to  smile  upon  our 
cause,  and  enable  me  to  bring  this  war  to  a  speedy  close,  so  that 
I  may  at  last  have  the  rest  I  want  so  much.  ...  I  do  need  rest. 
You  know  I  have  had  but  little  in  my  life.  But  the  will  of  God 
be  done !  What  is  given  me  to  do  I  will  try  to  do  with  all  my 
might.  ...  I  think  one  more  battle  here  will  finish  the  work.  I 
expect  a  great  one,  but  feel  that  confidence  in  my  men  and  that 
trust  in  God  which  makes  me  very  sanguine  as  to  the  result. 
They  will  fight  me  in  front  of  Richmond,  I  am  confident.  Defeat 
there  is  certain  destruction  to  them,  and  I  think  will  prove  the 
ruin  of  their  wretched  cause.  They  are  concentrating  everything 
for  the  last  death-struggle.  My  government,  alas!  is  not  giving 
me  any  aid.  But  I  will  do  the  best  I  can  with  what  I  have,  and 
trust  to  God's  mercy  and  the  courage  of  my  men  for  the  result. 
.  .  .  We  march  in  the  morning  to  Cumberland,  gradually  draw- 
ing nearer  to  Richmond. 

May  15,  Cumberland^  2.30  p.m. — Another  wet,  horrid  day  !  It 
rained  a  little  yesterday  morning,  more  in  the  afternoon,  much 
during  the  night,  and  has  been  amusing  itself  in  the  same  manner 
very  persistently  all  day.  I  had  expected  to  move  headquarters 
to  White  House  to-day  ;  but  this  weather  has  put  the  roads  in 
such  condition  that  I  cannot  do  more  than  get  Franklin  and  Por- 
ter there  to-day.  Headquarters  cavalry  and  Hunt  will  move 
there  to-morrow ;  perhaps  one  or  two  other  divisions  as  well. 
We  had  quite  a  visitation  yesterday  in  the  shape  of  Secretary 
Seward,  Gideon  Welles,  Mr.  Bates,  F.  Seward,  Dahlgren,  Mrs. 
Goldsborough  and  one  of  her  daughters,  Mrs.  F.  Seward,  and 
some  other  ladies  whose  names  I  did  not  catch.  I  went  on 
board  their  boat ;  then  had  some  ambulances  harnessed  up  and 
took  them  around  camps.  We  are  just  about  twenty-five  miles 
from  Richmond  here,  the  advance  considerably  nearer.  I  don't 
yet  know  what  to  make -of  the  rebels.  I  do  not  see  how  they  can 
possibly  abandon  Virginia  and  Richmond  without  a  battle ;  nor 
do  I  understand  why  they  abandoned  and  destroygd  Norfolk  and 
the  MerrimaCy  unless  they  also  intended  to  ^andoitNUl  of  Vir- 
ginia.    There  is  a  puzzle  there  somewhere  which  will  SBon  be 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  357 

• 
solved.  ...  I  am  heartily  tired  of  this  life  I  am  leading — always 
some  little  absurd  thing  being  done  by  those  gentry  in  Washing- 
ton. I  am  every  day  more  and  more  tired  of  public  life,  and 
earnestly  pray  that  I  may  soon  be  able  to  throw  down  my  sword 
and  live  once  more  as  a  private  gentleman.  ...  I  confess  I  find 
it  difficult  to  judge  whether  the  war  will  soon  be  at  an  end  or 
not.  I  think  that  the  blows  the  rebels  are  now  receiving  and 
have  lately  received  ought  to  break  them  up ;  but  one  can  do 
no  more  than  speculate.  Yes,  I  can  imagine  peace  and  quietness 
reigning  once  more  in  this  land  of  ours.  It  is  just  that  I  am 
fighting  for !  .  .  .  Still  raining  hard  and  dismally  ;  an  awful  time 
for  the  men  ;  the  only  comfort  is  that  they  all  have  plenty  to 
eat. 

9  P.M.  (same  day). —  .  .  .  Have  received  to-day  the  official 
copy  of  the  resolutions  of  the  House.  I  learn  that  the  Aboli- 
tionists begin  to  think  that  I  am  not  such  a  wretch  after  all,  or 
else  that  it  is  best  to  say  so. 

It  was  all  a  humbug  about  my  being  struck  by  a  piece  of  a 
shell  at  Williamsburg.     That  reminds  me  of  a  joke  some  of  the 

youngsters  played  upon  at  Yorktown.     They  sent  him  to 

see  an  immense  "  shell "  that  had  fallen  in  our  headquarters 
camp.     He  found  a  large  oyster-sYitW.  .  .  . 

I  send  you  a  photograph  which  I  have  just  received  from 
Gen.  Blume,  chief  of  artillery  in  the  Prussian  army.  I  knew  him 
abroad,  and  the  old  gentleman  writes  to  me  occasionally. 

Telegram — May  16,  1862,  White  House. — Have  just  arrived 
over  horrid  roads.  No  further  movement  possible  until  they 
improve.  This  house  is  where  Washington's  courtship  took 
])lace  and  where  he  resided  when  first  married.  I  do  not  per*  • 
mit  it  to  be  occupied  by  any  one,  nor  the  grounds  around.  It  h 
a  beautiful  spot  directly  on  the  banks  of  the  Pamunkey.  All  well 
and  in  fine  spirits.  Hope  to  get  our  baggage  up  bywater,  other- 
wise will  fare  badly  to-night. 

May  16,  11.30  P.M.,  White  House. —  ...  I  rode  over  a  horrid 
road  to  this  place  this  morning ;  spent  some  time  at  Washington's 
house,  or  at  least  his  wife's,  and  afterwards  rode  to  the  front,  vis- 
iting in  the  course  of  my  ride  the  old  church  (St.  Peter's)  where 
he  was  married.     It  is  ati  old  brick  church  with  a  rather  preten- 


358  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

m 

tious  tower,  more  remarkable  for  its  situation  than  for  anything 
else  The  situation  is  very  fine,  on  a  commanding  hill.  A  tab- 
let in  the  interior  records  the  death  of  some  one  in  1690.  As 
I  happened  to  be  there  alone  for  a  few  moments,  I  could  not 
help  kneeling  at  the  chancel  and  praying  that  I  might  serve  my 
country  as  truly  as  he  did.  .  .  . 

May  17,  8.30  A.M.  (same  ietUr), —  .  .  .  We  have  a  change  in 
the  weather.  It  is  clear  and  very  hot,  so  I  presume  the  roads 
will  improve  much  to-day.  I  am  pushing  on  the  advanced 
guard  and  reconnoissances  in  various  directions.  We  gain 
some  ground  every  day  ;  but  our  progress  has  been  slow  on 
account  of  the  execrable  nature  of  the  roads,  as  well  as  their 
extreme  narrowness  and  fewness  in  number,  making  it  a  very 
difficult  matter  to  move  large  masses  of  men  with  any  rapidity 
or  convenience.  I  expect  to  have  our  advanced  parties  near 
enough  to  Bottom's  bridge  to-day  to  ascertain  whether  the 
enemy  is  there  in  much  force  or  not,  and  by  to-morrow  or  next 
day  to  obtain  similar  information  about  the  other  bridges — all  of 
which,  by  the  bye,  are  burned,  I  believe.  But  the  river  is  ford- 
able,  so  the  difficulty  is  not  insuperable  by  any  means.  It  is  very 
difficult  to  divine  whether  secesh  will  fight  a  great  battle  in  front 
of  Richmond  or  not ;  I  still  think  they  ought  to,  but  there  are 
some  circumstances  which  look  somewhat  as  if  they  would  evacu- 
ate. Time  only  will  show,  and  the  trial  cannot  be  long  deferred. 
I  am  very  sorry  that  we  could  not  have  advanced  more  rapidly  ; 
my  only  consolation  is  that  it  has  been  impossible.  Just  think 
of  its  requiring  forty-eight  hours  to  move  two  divisions  with 
their  trains  fi\Q  miles!  Nothing  could  be  much  worse  than  that. 
The  fastest  way  to  move  is  never  to  move  in  wet  weather. 

Midnight —  ...  I  am  now  at  this  present  moment  involved 
in  a  great  many  different  orders  for  parties  to  move  out  at  day- 
break on  reconnoissances.  .  .  . 

May  iS,  Sunday f  6  p.m.,  IVAite  House. —  .  .  .  We  leave  here 
in  the  morning.  Porter  and  Franklin  march  at  four  and  eight 
A.M.,  headquarters  at  seven.  We  will  go  to  Tunstall's,  or  per- 
haps a  little  beyond  it,  and  will  now  soon  close  up  on  the  Chicka- 
hominy  and  find  out  what  secesh  is  doing.  I  think  he  will  fight 
us  there,  or  between  that  and  Richmond ;   and  if  he  is  badly 


,  PRIVATE  LETTERS,  359 

thrashed  (as  I  trust  he  will  be),  incline  to  believe  that  he  will 
begin  to  zxy  peccavi  and  say  that  he  has  enough  of  it,  especially 
if  Halleck  beats  him  at  Corinth.  .  .  . 

Midnight  {same  letter). —  ...  I  start  early  in  the  morning. 
•  .  .  Those  hounds  in  Washington  are  after  me  again. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

White  House — ^The  Chickahominy  river — Bridges — Battle  of  Hanover 
Courf-House — Porter's  victory — Neglect  at  Washington— McDowell's 
retention  useless. 

White  House  was  a  very  fine  plantation  belonging  to  Mrs. 
Gen.  Lee.  It  was  the  residence  of  Mrs.  Custis  when  she  was 
married  to  Washington.  The  ceremony  took  place  in  St.  Peter's 
Church,  a  lonely  old  building  beautifully  placed  on  a  command- 
ing hill.  I  observed  within  it  a  tablet  commemorating  a  death 
which  took  place  in  1690.  Finding  one's  self,  alone  within  that 
historic  building,  it  was  a  natural  impulse  to  invoke  the  aid  of 
God  to  enable  me  to  serve  the  country  as  unselfishly  and  truly 
as  did  the  great  man  who  had  often  worshipped  there. 

The  residence  at  White  House  was  not  the  original  building 
of  the  time  of  Washington — that  had  been  destroyed  by  fire  ;  but 
the  existing  one  was  constructed  on  the  same  foundations. 

I  neither  occupied  it  myself  nor  permitted  any  others  to  do 
so,  but  placed  a  guard  to  preserve  it.  For  this  natural  act  of 
respect  for  the  memory  of  the  greatest  man  our  country  has  pro- 
duced I  was  most  violently  attacked  and  maligned  by  the  ex- 
treme radicals.  I  am  willing  that  posterity  shall  judge  between 
them  and  myself. 

'  On  the  19th  headquarters  and  the  5th  and  6th  corps  ad- 
vanced to  Tunstall's  Station,  six  miles  from  White  House.  The 
rain  recommenced  on  this  day,  and  through  it  I  rode  to  Bot- 
tom's bridge  and  made  a  short  reconnoissance.  The  enemy  were 
there,  but  not  in  great  force.  The  advanced  guard  was  near 
New  bridge. 

The  camp  at  Tunstall's  was  the  most  beautiful  we  occupied 
during  the  campaign.  Headquarters  were  on  the  summit  of  a 
hill,  commanding  a  superb  view  in  all  directions  The  country 
was  highly  cultivated,  being  covered  with  fine  plantations.  To- 
wards Richmond  large  masses  of  troops  were  bivouacked,  while 
towards  the  Pamunkey  there  were  no  signs  of  an  army.     The 

contrast  between  war  and  peace  was  vivid  and  most  impressive. 

360 


* 


WHITE  HOUSE.  36 1 

Al  night  when  the  countless  bivouac-fires  were  lighted  the  scene 
was  grand  and  brilliant  beyond  description.  But  he  must  have 
been  devoid  of  feeling  who  could  regard  this  magnificent  spec- 
tacle without  a  sentiment  of  most  sincere  regret  that  human  mad- 
ness and  folly  should  have  made  it  necessary  to  march  armies 
through  this  fair  and  peaceful  land.  The  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac was  mainly  composed  of  good  men,  who  took  up  arms  from 
the  noblest  motives ;  and  I  doubt  whether  any  troops  ever  did  so 
little  needless  damage  in  a  hostile  country.     But  at  best  a  large 


MoOlellan  at 


army  leaves  a  wide  swath  in  its  rear,  and  cannot  move  without 
leaving  the  marks  of  its  passage. 

On  the  20th  it  again  rained  heavily.  On  the  evening  of  the 
2ist  the  army  was  posted  as  follows  : 

The  advanced  guard  within  a  mile  of  New  bridge ;  the  6th 
corps  three  miles  from  New  bridge,  with  the  5th  corps  at 
supporting  distance  in  its  rear ;  the  2d  corps  on  the  railway, 
about  three  miles  from  the  Chickahominy,  connecting  the  right 


362  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

with  the  left ;  the  4th  corps  on  the  New  Kent  road,  near  Bot- 
tom's bridge,  having  three  regiments  across  the  stream  cover- 
ing the  rebuilding  of  the  bridge ;  the  3d  corps  within  easy  sup- 
porting distance  of  the  4th  corps. 

On  the  2 2d  headquarters  were  advanced  to  Cold  Harbor,  and 
on  the  26th  the  railway  was  in  operation  as  far  as  the  Chicka- 
hominy,  and  the  railway  bridge  across  the  stream  nearly  com- 
pleted. 

The  Chickahominy  river  rises  some  fifteen  miles  to  the  north- 
ward of  Richmond,  and  unites  with  the  James  about  forty  miles 
below  that  city.  Our  operations  embraced  the  part  of  the  river 
between  Meadow's  and  Bottom's  bridges,  covering  the  approaches 
to  Richmond  from  the  east.  In  this  vicinity  the  river,  in  its 
ordinary  stage,  is  about  forty  feet  wide,  fringed  with  a  dense 
growth  of  heavy  forest  trees,  and  bordered  by  low,  marshy  bot- 
tom-lands varying  from  half  a  mile  to  a  mile  in  width. 

Within  the  limits  above-mentioned  the  firm  ground  lying 
abave  high-water  mark  seldom  approaches  the  river  on  either 
bank,  and  no  place  was  found,  within  this  section,  where  the 
high  ground  came  near  the  stream  on  both  banks. 

It  was  subject  to  frequent,  sudden,  and  great  variations  in  the 
volume  of  water,  and  a  single  violent  rain-storm  of  brief  dura- 
tion would  cause  a  rise  of  water  which  overflowed  the  bottom- 
lands on  both  sides,  and  for  many  days  made  the  river  absolutely 
impassable  without  bridges. 

When  our  light  troops  approached  the  river  on  the  20th  of 
May  it  was  found  that  all  the  bridges  had  been  destroyed  by 
the  enemy  on  our  approach,  except  that  at  Mechanicsville,  and 
it  became  necessary  not  only  to  rebuild  the  old  bridges,  but 
also  to  construct  several  additional  ones.  The  west  bank  of 
the  river,  opposite  New,  Mechanicsville,  and  Meadow  bridges, 
was  bordered  by  high  bluffs,  which  afforded  the  enemy  com- 
manding positions  on  which  to  establish  his  batteries,  to  enfilade 
the  approaches  by  the  principal  roads  leading  to  Richmond  on 
our  right,  and  to  prevent  the  reconstruction  of  these  impor- 
tant bridges.  We  were  thus  obliged  to  select  other  less  ex- 
posed points  for  our  crossings. 

Had  the  ist  corps  effected  its  promised  junction  we  might 
have  turned  the  head-waters  of  the  Chickahominy  and  attacked 
Richmond  from  the  north  and  northwest,  while  we  preserved  our 


McDowell  expected,  363 

line  of  supply  from  West  Point ;  but  with  the  force  actually  at 
my  disposal  such  an  attempt  would  simply  have  exposed  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  to  destruction  in  detail,  and  the  total  loss 
of  its  communications.  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  say  that  the 
country  in  which  we  operated  could  supply  nothing  for  the  wants 
of  the  army,  and  that  were  our  communications  with  the  depots 
cut  and  held  by  the  enemy  nothing  but  starvation  awaited  us. 

When  we  arrived  opposite  Bottom's  bridge  on  the  20th  the 
enemy  was  there  in  only  small  force,  and,  as  it  was  of  the  utmost 
importance  to  secure  a  lodgment  on  the  right  bank  before  he 
could  concentrate  his  forces  and  resist  the  passage  of  the  stream, 
I  ordered  Casey's  division  of  the  4th  corps  to  ford  the  river  at 
once  and  occupy  the  heights  on  the  further  bank.  This  was 
promptly  done,  and  reconnoissances  were  immediately  pushed 
forward,  while  instant  steps  were  taken  to  rebuild  the  bridge. 
The  troops  were  directed  to  throw  up  defences  to  secure  our 
left  flank,  and  the  3d  corps  was  moved  up  in  support. 

Meanwhile  our  centre  and  right  were  advanced  to  -the  river, 
and  on  the  24th  Mechanicsville  was  carried,  the  enemy  being 
driven  out  by  our  artillery  and  forced  across  the  bridge,  which 
they  destroyed.  Gen.  Naglee,  of  Casey's  division  of  the  4th 
corps,  on  the  same  day  dislodged  a  force  of  the  enemy  from  the 
vicinity  of  Seven  Pines,  and  the  advance  of  our  left  secured  a 
strong  position  near  that  place.  All  the  information  obtained 
from  negroes,  deserters,  prisoners,  and  spies  indicated  that  the 
enemy  occupied  in  force  all  the  approaches  to  Richmond  from 
the  east,  and  that  he  intended  to  dispute  every  step  of  our 
advance  beyond  the  Chickahominy  on  our  left,  and  to  resist  the 
passage  of  the  stream  opposite  our  right.  That  their  army  was 
superior  to  ours  in  numbers  seemed  certain.  Strong  entrench- 
ments had  been  constructed  around  the  city.  Up  to  this  time  I 
had  every  reason  to  expect  that  McDowell  would  commence  his 
march  from  Fredericksburg  on  the  morning  of  the  26th,  and  it 
was  only  during  the  evening  of  the  24th  that  I  received  from 
the  President  the  telegram,  already  given,  announcing  the  sus- 
pension of  his  movement. 

So  far,  then,  as  immediate  operations  were  concerned,  it  only 
remained  for  me  to  make  the  best  use  of  the  forces  at  my  dis- 
posal, and  to  avail  myself  of  all  possible  artificial  auxiliaries,  to 

compensate  as  far  as  possible  for  the  inadequacy  of  numbers. 

28 


364  McCLRLLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

I  concurred  fully  with  the  President  in  his  injunction,  contained 
in  his  telegram  of  the  24th,  that  it  was  necessary,  with  my  limited 
force,  to  move  "  cautiously  and  safely." 

In  view  of  the  peculiar  character  of  the  Chickahominy,  and 
the  liability  to  sudden  inundations,  it  became  necessary  to  con- 
struct eleven  bridges,  all  long  and  difficult,  with  extensive  log- 
way  approaches,  and  often  built  under  fire. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  the  order  for  the  co-operation  of 
McDowell  was  only  suspended,  not  revoked ;  and,  therefore,  I 
could  not  abandon  the  northern  approach  and  my  communica- 
tions with  West  Point.  To  cover  these  communications,  and  be 
prepared  to  effect  the  junction  with  the  ist  corps  when  it  ad- 
vanced, it  was  necessary  to  retain  a  portion  of  the  army  on  the 
left  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  and  I  could  not  make  any  serious 
movement  with  the  forces  on  the  right  bank  until  the  commu- 
nications between  the  two  parts  of  the  army  were  firmly  and 
securely  established  by  strong  and  sufficiently  numerous  bridges. 

As  the  entrenchments  around  Richmond  were  strong  and 
heavily  garrisoned,  it  would  have  been  an  act  of  madness  and 
folly  had  I  temporarily  abandoned  my  communications  and 
thrown  the  entire  army  across  the  stream,  trusting  to  the  chan- 
ces of  carrying  the  place  by  assault  before  the  troops  had  ex- 
hausted the  supplies  carried  with  them. 

I  was  not  responsible  for  the  fact  that  I  was  obliged  to  select 
a  faulty  and  dangerous  plan  as  the  least  objectionable  of  those 
from  which  I  could  choose. 

On  the  24th  a  very  spirited  and  successful  reconnoissance 
took  place  near  New  bridge,  which  first  brought  Lieut,  (after- 
wards Gen.)  Custer  to  my  notice.  His  commanding  officers 
commended  him  highly  for  his  conduct,  and  I  sent  for  him  to 
thank  him.  He  was  then  a  slim,  long-haired  boy,  carelessly 
dressed.  I  thanked  him  for  his  gallantry,  and  asked  what 
I  could  do  for  him.  He  replied  very  modestly  that  he  had 
nothing  to  ask,  and  evidently  did  not  suppose  that  he  had  done 
anything  to  deserve  extraordinary  reward.  I  then  asked  if  he 
would  like  to  serve  on  my  personal  staff  as  an  aide-de-camp. 
Upon  this  he  brightened  up,  and  assured  me  that  he  would  re- 
gard such  service  as  the  most  gratifying  he  could  perform  ;  and 
I  at  once  gave  the  necessary  orders.  He  continued  on  my  staff 
until  I  was  relieved  from  the  command. 


GEN,    CUSTER,  365 

In  those  days  Custer  was  simply  a  reckless,  gallant  boy,  unde- 
terred by  fatigue,  unconscious  of  fear ;  but  his  head  was  always 
clear  in  danger,  and  he  always  brought  me  clear  and  intelligible 
reports  of  what  he  saw  when  under  the  heaviest  fire.  I  became 
much  attached  to  him.  In  the  later  days  of  the  war,  when  he 
commanded  cavalry  troops,  he  displayed  a  degree  of  prudence 
and  good  sense,  in  conducting  the  most  dangerous  expeditions, 
that  surprised  many  who  thought  they  knew  him  well. 

In  the  battle  of  the  Rosebud,  against  the  Sioux,  where  he  lost 
his  life  and  the  whole  of  his  immediate  command  was  destroyed, 
no  one  survived  to  tell  the  story  of  the  disaster.  On  that  fatal 
day  he  simply  repeated  the  tactics  that  he  had  so  often  success- 
fully used  against  large  bodies  of  Indians ;  and  it  is  probable 
that  he  was  deceived  as  to  the  strength  and  fighting  capacity 
of  his  opponents,  and  that,  from  his  want  of  knowledge  of  the 
details  of  the  ground  where  the  tragedy  occurred,  he  was  sud- 
denly surrounded  by  overwhelming  masses  of  well-armed  war- 
riors, against  whom  the  heroic  efforts  of  his  command  wasted 
themselves  in  vain. 

Those  who  accused  him  of  reckless  rashness  would,  perhaps, 
have  been  the  first  to  accuse  him  of  timidity  if  he  had  not  at- 
tacked, and  thus  allowed  the  enemy  to  escape  unhurt.  He  died 
as  he  had  lived,  a  gallant  soldier ;  and  his  whole  career  was  such 
as  to  force  me  to  believe  that  he  had  good  reasons  for  acting  as 
he  did. 

With  the  exception  of  the  25th,  it  rained  heavily  every  day 
from  the  2 2d  to  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks,  and  during  the  day  and 
night  of  the  30th  an  unusually  violent  storm  occurred,  accom- 
panied by  torrents  of  rain.  The  valley  of  the  Chickahominy  was 
flooded  more  than  ever ;  all  work  on  the  bridges  was  suspended, 
and  they  became  well-nigh  impracticable. 

The  enemy  seized  the  occasion  and  determined  to  attack  the 
part  of  the  army  that  had  crossed  the  Chickahominy,  when  it 
would  be  very  difficult  or  impossible  to  support  it.  Exposure 
and  fatigue  had  brought  upon  me  a  violent  attack  of  illness, 
which  confined  me  to  my  bed  on  the  30th  and  the  morning  of 
the  31st.  I  left  my  bed  to  go  to  the  field  of  battle  as  soon  as 
I  was  satisfied  of  the  importance  of  the  crisis.  Two  corps,  the 
3d  and  the  4th,  were  across  the  Chickahominy,  three  on  the 
left  bank. 


366  McCLELLA.V'S  OIVN  STORY. 

The  4th  corps  was  in  position  near  Fair  Oaks  and  Seven 
Pines.  Kearny's  division  of  the  3d  corps  was  on  and  near 
the  railroad  in  advance  of  Savage's  Station.  Hooker's  division 
was  on  the  left,  near  White  Oak  Swamp.  The  2d  corps  was  on 
the  left  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  at  and  near  the  Grapevine 
bridge,  in  position  to  support  either  wing  of  the  array. 

The  5  th  and  the  6th  corps  were  also  on  the  left  bank,  be- 
tween Mechanicsville  and  New  bridge. 

Having  been  informed  late  on  the  24th  that  McDowell's 
advance  was  suspended,  I  caused  work  upon  the  bridges  to  be 
commenced  immediately  and  pushed  forward  with  the  greatest 
vigor ;  but  heavy  rains  continued  to  fall  from  day  to  day,  which 
flooded  the  valley  and  raised  the  water  to  a  greater  height  than 
had  been  known  for  twenty  years. 

The  bridges  first  made,  together  with  their  approaches,  which 
were  not  arranged  for  such  unprecedented  high  water,  were  car- 
ried away  or  rendered  impassable.  It  thus  became  necessary, 
with  immense  labor,  to  build  others  much  larger,  more  elevated 
and  stable.  Our  men  worked  in  the  water,  exposed  to  the  fire 
of  the  enemy  from  the  opposite  bank. 

On  the  25  th  of  May  I  received  the  following  telegram  : 

"  Your  despatch  received.  Gen.  Banks  was  at  Strasburg  with 
about  six  thousand  (6,000)  men,  Shields  having  been  taken  from 
him  to  swell  a  column  for  McDowell  to  aid  you  at  Richmond, 
and  the  rest  of  his  force  scattered  at  various  places.  On  the 
23d  a  rebel  force  of  from  7,000  to  10,000  fell  upon  one  regi- 
ment and  two  companies  guarding  the  bridge  at  Front  Royal, 
destroying  it  entirely  ;  crossed  the  Shenandoah,  and  on  the  24th 
— yesterday — pushed  on  to  get  north  of  Banks  on  the  road  to 
Winchester.  (Jen.  Banks  ran  a  race  with  them,  beating  them  into 
Winchester  yesterday  evening.  This  morning  a  battle  ensued 
between  the  two  forces,  in  which  Gen.  Banks  was  beaten  back 
into  full  retreat  towards  Martinsburg,  and  probably  is  broken 
up  into  a  total  rout.  Geary,  on  the  Manassas  Gap  Railroad, 
just  now  reports  that  Jackson  is  now  near  Front  Royal  with 
10,000  troops,  following  up  and  supporting,  as  I  understand,  the 
force  now  pursuing  Banks.  Also,  that  another  force  of  10,000 
is  near  Orleans,  following  on  in  the  same  direction.  Stripped 
bare,  as  we  are  here,  I  will  do  all  we  can  to  prevent  them  cross- 
ing the  Potomac  at  Harper's  Ferry  or  above.  McDowell  has 
about  20,000  of  his  forces  moving  back  to  the  vicinity  of  Front 
Royal,  and  Fremont,  who  was  at  Franklin,  is  moving  to  Har- 
risonburg ;  both  these  movements  intended  to  get  in  the  ene- 
aiy's  rear. 


SCARE  AT   WASHINGTON,  367 

"One  more  of  McDowell's  brigades  is  ordered  through  here 
to  Harper's  Ferry ;  the  rest  of  his  forces  remain  for  the  present 
at  Fredericksburg.  We  are  sending  such  regiments  and  dribs 
from  here  and  Baltimore  as  we  can  spare  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
supplying  their  places  in  some  sort,  calling  in  militia  from  the 
adjacent  States.  We  also  have  eighteen  cannon  on  the  road 
to  Harper's  Ferry,  of  which  arm  there  is  not  a  single  one  at 
that  point.     This  is  now  our  situation. 

"  If  McDowell's  force  was  now  beyond  our  reach  we  should 
be  entirely  helpless.  Apprehensions  of  something  like  this,  and 
no  unwillingness  to  sustain  you,  has  always  been  my  reason  for 
withholding  McDowell's  forces  from  you. 

"  Please  understand  this,  and  do  the  best  you  can  with  the 
forces  you  have. 

"A.  Lincoln, 

"  Presidentr 

On  the  25th  the  following  was  also  received  : 

"  The  enemy  is  moving  north  in  sufficient  force  to  drive 
Gen.  Banks  before  him  ;  precisely  in  what  force  we  cannot  tell. 
He  is  also  threatening  Leesburg,  and  Geary  on  the  Manassas 
Gap  Railroad,  from  both  north  and  south  ;  in  precisely  what 
force  we  cannot  tell.  I  think  the  movement  is  a  general  and 
concerted  one,  such  as  would  not  be  if  he  was  acting  upon  the 
purpose  of  a  very  desperate  defence  of  Richmond.  I  think  the 
time  is  near  when  you  must  either  attack  Richmond  or  give  up 
the  job  and  come  to  the  defence  of  Washington.  Let  me  hear 
from  you  instantly. 

"  A.  Lincoln, 

"  Presidentr 

To  which  I  replied  as  follows  : 

Telegram  received.  Independently  of  it,  the  time  is  very 
near  when  I  shall  attack  Richmond.  The  object  of  the  move- 
ment is  probably  to  prevent  reinforcements  being  sent  to  me. 
All  the  information  obtained  from  balloons,  deserters,  prisoners, 
and  contrabands  agrees  in  the  statement  that  the  mass  of  the 
rebel  troops  are  still  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  Richmond, 
ready  to  defend  it.  I  have  no  knowledge  of  Banks's  position 
and  force,  nor  what  there  is  at  Manassas  ;  therefore  cannot  form 
a  definite  opinion  as  to  the  force  against  him. 

I  have  two  corps  across  Chickahominy,  within  six  miles  of 
Richmond  ;  the  others  on  this  side  at  other  crossings  within 
same  distance,  and  ready  to  cross  when  bridges  are  completed. 

On  the  26th  I  received  the  following : 

"We  have  Gen.  Banks's  official  report.     He  has  saved  his 


368  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

army  and  baggage,  and  has  made  a  safe  retreat  to  the  river,  and 
is  probably  safe  at  Williamsport.  He  reports  the  attacking  force 
at  fifteen  thousand  (15,000). 

"A.  Lincoln, 

"  President:* 


Also  the  following : 

"  Can  you  not  cut  the  Acquia  Creek  Railroad  ?  Also,  what 
impression  have  you  as  to  entrenched  works  for  you  to  contend 
with  in  front  of  Richmond  ?  Can  you  get  near  enough  to  throw 
shells  into  the  city? 

"  A.  Lincoln, 

"  President:' 

On  the  same  day  I  sent  the  following  : 


Have  cut  the  Virginia  Central  Road  in  three  places  between 
Hanover  Court-House  and  the  Chickahominy.  Will  try  to  cut 
the  other.  I  do  not  think  Richmond  entrenchments  formidable ; 
but  am  not  certain.  Hope  very  soon  to  be  within  shelling  dis- 
tance. Have  railroad  in  operation  from  White  House  to  Chicka- 
hominy. Hope  to  have  Chickahominy  bridge  repaired  to-night. 
Nothing  of  interest  to-day. 

The  interruption  of  the  railroad  here  referred  to  was  effected 
by  the  command  of  Brig.-Gen.  Stoneman,  and  was  intended  to 
prevent  the  enemy  from  drawing  supplies  by  that  route  or  from 
sending  reinforcements  to  Anderson  or  Jackson.  At  ten  a.m. 
I  telegraphed  to  the  President  : 

I  am  glad  to  know  affairs  are  not  so  bad  as  might  have 
been.  I  would  earnestly  call  your  attention  to  my  instructions 
to  Gen.  Banks  of  March  16,  to  Gen.  Wadsworth  of  same  date, 
and  to  my  letter  of  April  i  to  the  adjutant-general.  I  cannot 
but  think  that  a  prompt  return  to  the  principles  there  laid  down 
would  relieve  all  probability  of  danger.  I  will  forward  copies 
by  mail.  I  beg  to  urge  the  importance  of  Manassas  and  Front 
Royal  in  contradistinction  to  Fredericksburg. 

On  the  same  day  I  received  intelligence  that  a  very  con- 
siderable force  of  the  enemy  was  in  the  vicinity  of  Hanover 
Court- House,  to  the  right  and  rear  of  our  army,  thus  threaten- 
ing  our  communications,  and  in  a  position  either  to  reinforce 


McDowell.  369 

Jackson  or  to  impede  McDowelKs  junction,  should  he  finally 
move  to  unite  with  us.  On  the  same  day  I  also  received  infor- 
mation from  Gen.  McDowell,  through  the  Secretary  of  War, 
that  the  enemy  had  fallen  back  from  Fredericksburg  towards 
Richmond,  and  that  Gen.  McDowell's  advance  was  eight  miles 
south  of  the  Rap{>ahannock. 

« 

**  Washington,  May  26,  1862. 
^  Gtn,  McCUUan  : 

<4 


Following  despatch  received  late  last  night : 


<i  < 


Falmouth^  2^ih — To  Hon,  E,  M.  SianUm  :  I  have  just  ex- 
amined a  lieutenant,  three  sergeants,  and  a  corporal  who  came 
in  from  the  army  as  deserters  this  morning.  They  are,  with  the 
exception  of  one  Frenchman,  from  the  North,  pressed  into  ser- 
vice. They  are  all  men  of  fine  intelligence.  The  lieutenant 
and  the  sergeants,  who  came  from  the  same  battery,  are  {>ositive 
the  army  has  fallen  back  to  Richmond.  The  first  order  was 
to  go  at  1.30  P.M.  to  Hanover  Junction,  they  having  heard  of 
McClellan's  right  wing  being  at  Hanover  Court-House  and  hav- 
ing destroyed  the  railroad  to  Gordonsville  at  that  place,  which 
made  them  fear  for  their  communications. 

"  *  This  was  suddenly  revoked,  and  an  order  was  read  on 
parade  directing  the  command  back  to  Richmond  to  take  part  in 
the  great  battle  now  about  to  take  place  there.  Two  other  men 
thought  that  the  force  was  going  to  join  Jackson,  who  was  going 
to  get  in  the  rear  of  my  army,  and  was  going  into  Maryland. 
This  was  only  surmise ;  the  order  for  Richmond  was  written 
and  published.  My  advance  is  eight  miles  beyond  Fredericks- 
burg. I  hope  soon  to  be  able  to  tell  you  more  precisely  where 
the  enemy  is.  One  thing  is  certain  :  that,  whether  they  left  here 
to  join  Jackson  or  not,  they  have  not  done  so  yet,  and  that  all 
the  grand  masses  Geary  reports  must  have  come  from  some 
other  place  than  here.  They  left  here  by  stealth,  and  with  dread 
of  being  attacked.  They  went  at  night,  and  for  a  distance  by 
railroad.  They  thought  1  had  sixty  thousand  men. — (Signed) 
Irwin  McDowell.' 

•*E.  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  Warr 

It  was  thus  imperative  to  dislodge  or  defeat  this  force,  inde- 
pendently even  of  the  wishes  of  the  President  as  expressed  in 
his  telegram  of  the  26th.  I  entrusted  this  task  to  Brig.-Gen. 
Fitz-John  Porter,  commanding  the  5th  corps,  with  orders  to 
move  at  daybreak  on  the  27th. 


370  MtCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Through  a  heavy  rain  and  over  bad  roads  that  officer  moved 
his  command  as  follows  : 

Brig.-Gen.  W.  H.  Emory  led  the  advance  with  the  sth  and 
6th  regiments  U.  S.  Cavalry  and  Benson's  horse-battery  of  the  2d 
U.  S.  Artillery,  taking  the  road  from  New  bridge  via  Mechanics- 
ville  to  Hanover  Court-House. 

Gen.  Moreirs  division,  composed  of  the  brigades  of  Martin- 
dale,  Butterfield,  and  McQuade,  with  Berdan's  regiment  of  sharp- 
shooters and  three  batteries  under  Capt.  Charles  Griffin,  5th 
U.  S.  Artillery,  followed  on  the  same  road. 

Col.  G.  K.  Warren,  commanding  a  provisional  brigade  com- 
posed of  the  5th  and  13th  N.  Y.,  the  ist  Conn.  Artillery  acting 
as  infantry,  the  6th  Penn.  Cavalry,  and  Weeden's  R.  I.  Battery, 
moved  from  his  station  at  Old  Church  by  a  road  running  to 
Hanover  Court-House,  parallel  to  the  Pamunkey. 

After  a  fatiguing  march  of  fourteen  miles  through  the  mud 
and  rain.  Gen.  Emory  at  noon  reached  a  point  about  two  miles 
from  Hanover  Court-House,  where  the  road  forks  to  Ashland, 
and  found  a  portion  of  the  enemy  formed  in  line  across  the  Han- 
over Court-House  road. 

Gen.  Emory  had,  before  this,  been  joined  by  the  25th  N.  Y. 
(of  Martindale's  brigade)  and  Berdan's  sharpshooters  ;  these 
regiments  were  deployed  with  a  section  of  Benson's  battery,  and 
advanced  slowly  towards  the  enemy  until  reinforced  by  Gen. 
Butterfield  with  four  regiments  of  his  brigade,  when  the  enemy 
was  charged  and  quickly  routed,  one  of  his  guns  being  captured 
by  the  17th  N.  Y.,  under  Col.  Lansing,  after  having  been  dis- 
abled by  the  fire  of  Benson's  battery.  The  firing  here  lasted 
about  an  hour.  The  cavalry  and  Benson's  battery  were  immedi- 
ately ordered  in  pursuit,  followed  by  Morell's  infantry  and  artil- 
lery, with  the  exception  of  Martindale's  brigade.  Warren's  bri- 
gade, having  been  delayed  by  repairing  bridges,  etc.,  now  arrived, 
too  late  to  participate  in  this  affair  ;  a  portion  of  this  command 
was  sent  to  the  Pamunkey  to  destroy  bridges,  and  captured  quite  a 
number  of  prisoners ;  the  remainder  followed  Morell's  division.  In 
the  meantime  Gen.  Martindale,  with  the  few  remaining  regiments 
of  his  brigade  and  a  section  of  artillery,  advanced  on  the  Ashland 
road,  and  found  a  force  of  the  enemy's  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artil- 
lery in  position  near  Beake's  Station  on  the  Virginia  Central  Rail- 
road ;  he  soon  forced  them  to  retire  towards  Ashland. 


HANOVER  COURT-HOUSE.  37 1 

The  25th  N.  Y.  having  been  ordered  to  rejoin  hira,  Gen.  Mar- 
tindale  was  directed  to  form  his  brigade  and  move  up  the  railroad 
to  rejoin  the  rest  of  the  command  at  Hanover  Court-House. 

He  sent  one  regiment  up  the  railroad,  but  remained  with  the 
2d  Me.,  afterwards  joined  by  the  25  th  N.  Y.,  to  guard  the  rear 
of  the  main  column. 

The  enemy  soon  returned  to  attack  Gen.  Martindale,  who  at 
once  formed  the  2d  Me.,  25th  N.  Y.,  and  a  portion  of  the  44th 
N.  Y.,  with  one  section  of  Martin's  batter)',  on  the  New  bridge 
road,  facing  his  own  position  of  the  morning,  and  then  held  his 
ground  for  an  hour  against  large  odds  until  reinforced. 

Gen.  Porter  was  at  Hanover  Court-House,  near  the  head  of 
his  column,  when  he  learned  that  the  rear  had  been  attacked 
by  a  large  force.  He  at  once  faced  the  whole  column  about, 
recalled  the  cavalry  sent  in  pursuit  towards  Ashland,  moved 
the  13th  and  14th  N.  Y.  and  Griffin's  battery  direct  to  Martin- 
dale's  assistance,  pushed  the  9th  Mass.  and  62d  Penn.,  of  Mc- 
Quade's  brigade,  through  the  woods  on  the  right  (our  origi- 
nal left),  and  attacked  the  flank  of  the  enemy,  while  Butterfield, 
with  the  83d  Penn.  and  i6th  Mich.,  hastened  towards  the  scene 
of  action  by  the  railroad  and  through  the  woods,  further  to 
the  right,  and  completed  the  rout  of  the  enemy.  During  the 
remainder  of  this  and  the  following  day  our  cavalry  was  active 
in  the  pursuit,  taking  a  number  of  prisoners. 

Capt.  Harrison,  of  the  5th  U.  S.  Cavalry,  with  a  single  com- 
pany, brought  in  as  prisoners  two  entire  companies  of  infantry 
with  their  arms  and  ammunition.  A  part  of  Rush's  lancers  also 
captured  an  entire  company  with  their  arms. 

The  immediate  results  of  these  affairs  were  some  200  of  the 
enemy's  dead  buried  by  our  troops,  730  prisoners  sent  to  the 
rear,  one  12-pound  howitzer,  one  caisson,  a  large  number  of 
small  arms,  and  2  railroad  trains  captured. 

Our  loss  amounted  to  53  killed,  344  wounded  and  missing. 

Their  camp  at  Hanover  Court-House  was  taken  and  de- 
stroyed. 

Having  reason  to  believe  that  Gen.  Anderson,  with  a  strong 
force,  was  still  at  Ashland,  I  ordered  Gen.  Sykes's  division  of 
regulars  to  move  on  the  28th  from  New  bridge  towards  Hanover 
Court-House,  to  be  in  position  to  support  Gen.  Porter.  They 
reached  a  point  within  three  miles  of  Hanover  Court-House,  and 


372  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

remained  there  until  the  evening  of  the  29th,  when  they  returned 
to  their  original  camp. 

On  the  28th  Gen.  Stoneman*s  command  of  cavalry,  horse- 
artillery,  and  two  regiments  of  infantry  were  also  placed  under 
Gen.  Porter's  orders. 

On  the  same  day  I  visited  Hanover  Court-House,  whence  I 
sent  the  following  despatch  to  the  Secretary  of  War  : 

May  28,  2  P.M. 

Porter's  action  of  yesterday  was  truly  a  glorious  victory  ;  too 
much  credit  cannot  be  given  to  his  magnificent  division  and  its 
accomplished  leader.  The  rout  of  the  rebels  was  complete  ;  not 
a  defeat,  but  a  complete  rout.  Prisoners  are  constantly  com- 
ing in  ;  two  companies  have  this  moment  arrived  with  excel- 
lent arms. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  enemy  are  concentrating  every- 
thing on  Richmond.  I  will  do  my  best  to  cut  off  Jackson,  but 
am  doubtful  whether  I  can. 

It  is  the  policy  and  duty  of  the  government  to  send  me  by 
water  all  the  well-drilled  troops  available.  I  am  confident  that 
Washington  is  in  no  danger.  Engines  and  cars  in  large  numbers 
have  been  sent  up  to  bring  down  Jackson's  command. 

I  may  not  be  able  to  cut  them  off,  but  will  try  ;  we  have  cut 
all  but  the  Fredericksburg  and  Richmond  Railroad.  The  real 
issue  is  in  the  battle  about  to  be  fought  in  front  of  Richmond. 
All  our  available  troops  should  be  collected  here — not  raw  regi- 
ments, but  the  well-drilled  troops.  It  cannot  be  ignored  that 
a  desperate  battle  is  before  us  ;  if  any  regiments  of  good  troops 
remain  unemployed  it  will  be  an  irreparable  fault  committed. 

Having  ascertained  the  state  of  affairs,  instructions  were 
given  for  the  operations  of  the  following  day. 

On  the  28th  a  party  under  Maj.  Williams,  6th  U.  S.  Cavalry, 
destroyed  the  common  road  bridges  over  the  Pamunkey,  and 
Virginia  Central  Railroad  bridge  over  the  South  Anna. 

On  the  29th  he  destroyed  the  Fredericksburg  and  Richmond 
Railroad  bridge  over  the  South  Anna,  and  the  turnpike  bridge 
over  the  same  stream. 

On  the  same  day,  and  mainly  to  cover  the  movement  of  Maj. 
Williams,  (Jen.  Emory  moved  a  column  of  cavalry  towards  Ash- 
land from  Hanover  Court-House.  The  advance  of  this  column, 
under  Capt.  Chambliss,  5th  U.  S.  Cavalry,  entered  Ashland,  driv- 
ing out  a  party  of  the  enemy,  destroyed  the  railroad  bridge  over 
Stony  creek,  broke  up  the  railroad  and  telegraph. 


HANOVER  COURT-HOUSE.  373 

Another  column  of  all  arms,  under  Col.  Warren,  was  sent 
on  the  same  day  by  the  direct  road  to  Ashland,  and  entered  it 
shortly  after  Gen.  Emory's  column  had  retired,  capturing  a  small 
party  there. 

Gen.  Stoneman  on  the  same  day  moved  on  Ashland  by 
Leach's  Station,  covering  well  the  movements  of  the  other  col- 
umns. 

The  objects  of  the  expedition  having  been  accomplished, 
and  it  being  certain  that  the  ist  corps  would  not  join  us  at 
once,  Gen.  Porter  withdrew  his  command  to  their  camps  with 
the  main  army  on  the  evening  of  the  29th. 

On  the  night  of  the  27th  and  28th  I  sent  the  following 
despatch  to  the  Secretary  of  War: 

Porter  has  gained  two  complete  victories  over  superior  forces, 
yet  I  feel  obliged  to  move  in  the  morning  with  reinforcements 
to  secure  the  complete  destruction  of  the  rebels  in  that  quarter. 
In  doing  so  I  run  some  risk  here,  but  I  cannot  help  it.  The  ene- 
my are  even  in  greater  force  than  I  had  supposed.  I  will  do  all 
that  quick  movements  can  accomplish,  but  you  must  send  me  all 
the  troops  you  can,  and  leave  to  me  full  latitude  as  to  choice  of 
commanders.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  to  destroy  the  rebels 
near  Hanover  Court-House  before  I  can  advance. 

In  reply  to  which  I  received  the  following  from  the  Presi- 
dent : 

"Washington,  May  28,  1862. 

"  I  am  very  glad  of  Gen.  F.  J.  Porter's  victory  ;  still,  if  it  was 
a  total  rout  of  the  enemy,  I  am  puzzled  to  know  why  the  Rich- 
mond and  Fredericksburg  Railroad  was  not  seized  again,  as  you 
say  you  have  all  the  railroads  but  the  Richmond  and  Fredericks- 
burg. I  am  puzzled  to  see  how,  lacking  that,  you  can  have  any, 
except  the  scrap  from  Richmond  to  West  Point.  The  scrap  of 
the  Virginia  Central  from  Richmond  to  Hanover  Junction,  with- 
out more,  is  simply  nothing.  That  the  whole  of  the  enemy  is 
concentrating  on  Richmond  I  think  cannot  be  certainly  known 
to  you  or  me.  Saxton,  at  Harper's  Ferry,  informs  us  that  large 
forces,  supposed  to  be  Jackson's  and  E well's,  forced  his  advance 
from  Charlestown  to-day.  Gen.  King  telegraphs  us  from  Frede- 
ricksburg that  contrabands  give  certain  information  that  15,000 
left  Hanover  Junction  Monday  morning  to  reinforce  Jackson. 
I  am  painfully  impressed  with  the  importance  of  the  struggle 
before  you,  and  shall  aid  you  all  I  can  consistently  with  my 
view  of  due  regard  to  all  points." 


374  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

In  regard  to  this  telegram  of  the  President  it  may  be  re- 
marked that  it  would  have  been  dangerous  and  foolish  in  the 
extreme  to  leave  Porter  at  Ashland  and  Hanover  Court-House 
to  hold  the  railways.  I  knew  that  McDowell  would  not  advance 
for  some  time,  if  at  all.  I  could  not  reinforce  Porter  sufficiently 
to  enable  him  to  remain  in  his  advanced  position  without  draw- 
ing so  largely  from  the  main  army  as  to  endanger  its  safety  and 
reduce  it  to  inaction.  Moreover,  there  was  no  object  in  running 
this  risk.  I  had  broken  the  direct  line  of  communication  be- 
tween Richmond  and  Jackson  ;  had  cleared  the  front  of  Freder- 
icksburg, so  that  McDowell  could  advance  unopposed,  and  had 
relieved  my  own  right  flank  and  rear  from  immediate  danger. 

At  6  P.M.  of  the  29th  I  telegraphed  the  Secretary  of  War : 

Gen.  Porter  has  gained  information  that  Gen.  Anderson  left 
his  position  in  vicinity  of  Fredericksburg  at  four  a.m.  Sunday 
with  the  following  troops:  ist  S.  C,  Col.  Hamilton  ;  one  battal- 
ion S.  C.  Rifles,  34th  and  38th  N.  C,  45th  Ga.,  12th,  13th,  and 
14th  S.  C,  3d  La.,  two  batteries  of  four  guns  each — namely, 
Letcher's  Va.  and  Mcintosh's  S.  C.  batteries.  Gen.  Anderson 
and  his  command  passed  Ashland  yesterday  evening  en  route  for 
Richmond,  leaving  men  behind  to  destroy  bridges  over  the  tele- 
graph road  which  they  travelled.  This  information  is  reliable. 
It  is  also  positively  certain  that  Branch's  command  was  from 
Gordonsville,  bound  for  Richmond,  whither  they  have  now  gone. 

It  may  be  regarded  as  positive,  I  think,  that  there  is  no  rebel 
force  between  Fredericksburg  and  Junction. 

The  following  was  also  sent  on  the  same  day  by  Gen.  Marcy  : 

"  A  detachment  from  Gen.  F.  J.  Porter's  command,  under 
Maj.  Williams,  6th  Cavalry,  destroyed  the  South  Anna  railroad 
bridge  at  about  nine  a.m.  to-day ;  a  large  quantity  of  Confederate 
public  property  was  also  destroyed  at  Ashland  this  morning." 

In  reply  to  which  the  following  was  received  from  the  Pre- 
sident : 

"  Your  despatch  as  to  the  South  Anna  and  Ashland  being 
seized  by  our  forces  this  morning  is  received.  Understanding 
these  points  to  be  on  the  Richmond  and  Fredericksburg  Rail- 
road, I  heartily  congratulate  the  country,  and  thank  Gen.  Mc- 
Clellan  and  his  army  for  their  seizure." 

On  the  30th  I  sent  the  following  to  Secretary  Stanton : 


McDowells  wa  y  clear,  375 

From  the  tone  of  your  despatches  and  the  President's  I  do 
not  think  that  you  at  all  appreciate  the  value  and  magnitude 
of  Porter's  victory.  It  has  entirely  relieved  my  right  flank, 
which  was  seriously  threatened  ;  routed  and  demoralized  a  con- 
siderable portion  of  the  rebel  forces ;  taken  over  750  prison- 
ers ;  killed  and  wounded  large  numbers ;  one  gun,  many  small 
arms,  and  much  baggage  taken.  It  was  one  of  the  handsomest 
things  in  the  war,  both  in  itself  and  in  its  results.  Porter  has 
returned,  and  my  army  is  again  well  in  hand.  Another  day 
will  make  the  probable  field  of  battle  passable  for  artillery.  It  is 
quite  certain  that  there  is  nothing  in  front  of  McDowell  at 
Fredericksburg.  I  regard  the  burning  of  South  Anna  bridges  as 
the  least  important  result  of  Porter's  movement. 

The  results  of  this  brilliant  operation  of  Gen.  Porter  were  the 
dispersal  of  Gen.  Branch's  division  and  the  clearing  of  our  right 
flank  and  rear.  It  was  rendered  impossible  for  the  enemy  to 
communicate  by  rail  with  Fredericksburg,  or  with  Jackson  via 
Gordonsville,  except  by  the  very  circuitous  route  of  Lynchburg, 
and  the  road  was  left  entirely  open  for  the  advance  of  McDowell 
had  he  been  permitted  to  join  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  His 
withdrawal  towards  Front  Royal  was,  in  my  judgment,  a  serious 
and  fatal  error ;  he  could  do  no  good  in  that  direction,  while, 
had  he  been  permitted  to  carry  out  the  orders  of  May  17,  the 
united  forces  would  have  driven  the  enemy  within  the  imme- 
diate entrenchments  of  Richmond  before  Jackson  could  have 
returned  to  its  succor,  and  probably  would  have  gained  posses- 
sion promptly  of  that  place. 

It  is  very  clear  that  the  arrangements  I  directed  in  March 
and  on  the  ist  of  April  for  the  defence  of  Washington  and  the 
Shenandoah  would  have  proved  ampli^  to  check  Jackson  without 
delaying  the  advance  of  McDowell.  The  total  disregard  of  these 
instructions  led  to  the  actual  condition  of  affairs. 

On  the  25th  of  May  McDowell's  advance  was  eight  miles 
beyond  Fredericksburg.  If  he  had  marched  on  the  26th,  as 
first  ordered,  he  would  have  found  no  enemy  in  his  front  until 
he  reached  the  South  Anna,  on  the  27th  or  early  on  the  28th. 
For  his  telegram  of  the  25th  shows  that  they  had  hastily  fallen 
back  during  the  night  of  the  24th  and  25th,  and  Porter  fbund 
them  at  Hanover  Court- House  and  Ashland  on  the  27th  ;  so 
that,  as  things  were.  Porter's  division  alone  would  have  insured 
McDowell's  junction  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  without  the 
slightest  difficulty. 


376  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Had  McDowell  advanced,  however,  my  own  movements  would 
naturally  have  been  modified. 

I  would  have  placed  the  3d  corps  in  position  to  hold  Bot- 
tom's bridge  and  the  railroad  bridge,  and  to  guard  our  left  and 
communications  with  West  Point.  The  4th  corps  would  have 
been  placed  near  New  Cold  Harbor,  with  one  division  a  couple 
of  miles  to  the  westward  to  watch  the  crossings  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy  from  Grapevine  bridge  to  Beaver  Dam  creek,  ready  to 
support  either  the  4th  or  the  2d  corps,  as  might  be  necessary. 

The  2d  corps  near  Mechanicsville,  to  hold  the  crossing  oppo- 
site thereto  and  that  at  Meadow  bridge,  and  prepared  to  move 
instantly  to  the  support  of  the  5th  and  6th  corps. 

The  6th  corps  through  Atlee's  Station  to  the  Fredericksburg 
and  Richmond  turnpike,  to  occupy  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad 
and  Winston's  bridge,  and,  leaving  a  sufficient  force  to  hold  that 
point,  to  move  either  direct  upon  the  line  of  the  Fredericksburg 
and  Richmond  Railroad  south  of  Ashland,  or  to  support  the  5th 
corps  in  the  direction  of  Hanover  Court-House,  as  circumstances 
might  have  required. 

The  5th  corps  would  have  followed  the  line  of  march  which 
Morell's  division  pursued  on  the  27th,  sending  a  detached  bri- 
gade direct  from  Old  Church  to  Hanover  Court-House;  and  hav- 
ing reached  the  Central  Railroad  and  the  Fredericksburg  turn- 
pike about  four  miles  south  of  Hanover  Court-House,  the  mass 
of  the  corps  would  either  have  moved  on  Hanover  Court-House 
or  in  conjunction  with  the  6th  corps  on  Ashland,  as  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  might  have  required.  Thus  our  old  posi- 
tions would  have  been  securely  held,  McDowell's  junction  would 
have  been  secured  in  spite  of  any  movements  of  the  enemy,  and 
the  chances  would  have  been  in  favor  of  our  destroying  any  force 
of  the  enemy  between  the  Chickahominy  and  the  South  Anna. 

The  moment  these  objects  were  accomplished  the  5th  and 
6th  corps  would  have  returned  to  the  vicinity  of  Mechanics- 
ville. It  would  then  have  been  easy  for  McDowell  to  advance 
by  the  Fredericksburg  turnpike  far  enough  to  turn  the  bat- 
teries covering  the  Mechanicsville  crossings,  so  that  the  two 
armies  could  unite  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  and 
the  capture  of  Richmond  could  have  been  accomplished  long 
before  Jackson  could  return  to  reinforce  the  garrison. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Operations  on  the  Chickahominy— Battle  of  Fair  Oaks— McDowell's 
corps  is  coming — Still  stretching  the  right  wing — Floods  of  the 
Chickahominy — Movement  on  Old  Tavern. 

On  the  20th  of  May  a  reconnoissance  had  been  ordered  on 
the  south  side  of  the  Chickahominy  towards  James  river.  This 
was  accomplished  by  Brig.-Gen.  H.  M.  Naglee,  who  crossed  his 
brigade  near  Bottom's  bridge  and  pushed  forward  to  within 
two  miles  of  James  river  without  serious  resistance  or  finding 
the  enemy  in  force.  The  rest  of  the  4th  corps,  commanded 
by  Gen.  E.  D.  Keyes,  crossed  the  Chickahominy  on  the  23d 
of  May. 

On  the  24th,  25th,  and  26th  a  very  gallant  reconnoissance 
was  pushed  by  Gen.  Naglee,  with  his  brigade,  beyond  the  Seven 
Pines,  and  on  the  25th  the  4th  corps  was  ordered  to  take  up  and 
fortify  a  position  in  the  vicinity  of  the  Seven  Pines.  The  order 
was  at  once  obeyed,  a  strong  line  of  rifle-pits  opened,  and  an 
abatis  constructed  a  little  in  the  rear  of  the  point  where  the  nine- 
mile  road  comes  into  the  Williamsburg  road. 

On  the  same  day  Gen.  Heintzelman  was  ordered  to  cross  with 
his  corps  (the  3d)  and  take  a  position  two  miles  in  advance  of 
Bottom's  bridge,  watching  the  crossing  of  White  Oak  Swamp,  and 
covering  the  left  and  the  rear  of  the  left  wing  of  the  army.  Being 
the  senior  officer  on  that  side  of  the  river,  he  was  placed  in  com- 
mand of  both  corps  and  ordered  to  hold  the  Seven  Pines  at  all 
hazards,  but  not  to  withdraw  the  troops  from  the  crossings  of 
White  Oak  Swamp  unless  in  an  emergency. 

On  the  28th  Gen.  Keyes  was  ordered  to  advance  Casey's  divi- 
sion to  Fair  Oaks,  on  the  Williamsburg  road,  some  three-quarters 
of  a  mile  in  front  of  the  Seven  Pines,  leaving  Gen.  Couch's  divi- 
sion at  the  line  of  rifle-pits.  A  new  line  of  rifle-pits  and  a  small 
redoubt  for  six  field-guns  were  commenced,  and  much  of  the 
timber  in  front  of  this  line  was  felled  on  the  two  days  following. 
The  picket-line  was  established,  reaching  from  the  Chickahominy 
to  W^hite  Oak  Swamp. 

377 


378  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

On  the  30th  Gen.  Heintzelman,  representing  that  the  advance 
had  met  with  strong  opposition  in  taking  up  their  position,  and 
that  he  considered  the  point  a  critical  one,  requested  and  ob- 
tained authority  to  make  such  a  disposition  of  his  troops  as  he 
saw  fit  to  meet  the  emergency.  He  immediately  advanced  two 
brigades  of  Kearny's  division  about  three-fourths  of  a  mile  in 
front  of  Savage's  Station,  thus  placing  them  within  supporting 
distance  of  Casey's  division,  which  held  the  advance  of  the 
4th  corps. 

On  the  30th  the  troops  on  the  south  side  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy  were  in  position  as  follows :  Casey's  division  on  the 
right  of  the  Williamsburg  road,  at  right  angles  to  it,  the  centre 
at  Fair  Oaks  ;  Couch's  division  at  the  Seven  Pines  ;  Kearny's 
division  on  the  railroad,  from  near  Savage's  Station  towards  the 
bridge  ;  Hooker's  division  on  the  borders  of  White  Oak  Swamp. 
Constant  skirmishing  had  been  kept  up  between  our  pickets  and 
those  of  the  enemy.  While  these  lines  were  being  taken  up  and 
strengthened  large  bodies  of  Confederate  troops  were  seen  imme- 
diately to  the  front  and  right  of  Casey's  position. 

During  the  day  and  night  of  the  30th  of  May  a  very  violent 
storm  occurred.  The  rain  falling  in  torrents  rendered  work 
on  the  rifle-pits  and  bridges  impracticable,  made  the  roads 
almost  impassable,  and  threatened  the  destruction  of  the  bridges 
over  the  Chickahominy. 

The  enemy,  perceiving  the  unfavorable  position  in  which  we 
were  placed,  and  the  possibility  of  destroying  that  part  of  our 
army  which  was  apparently  cut  off  from  the  main  body  by  the 
rapidly  rising  stream,  threw  an  overwhelming  force  (grand  divi- 
sions of  Gens.  D.  H.  Hill,  Huger,  Longstreet,  and  G.  W.  Smith) 
upon  the  position  occupied  by  Casey's  division. 

It  appears  from  the  official  reports  of  Gen.  Keyes  and  his 
subordinate  commanders  that  at  ten  o'clock  a.m.  on  the  31st  of 
May  an  aide-de-camp  of  Gen.  J.  E.  Johnston  was  captured  by 
Gen.  Naglee's  pickets.  But  little  information  as  to  the  move- 
ments of  the  enemy  was  obtained  from  him,  but  his  presence 
so  near  our  lines  excited  suspicion  and  caused  increased  vigi- 
lance, and  the  troops  were  ordered  by  Gen.  Keyes  to  be  under 
arms  at  eleven  o'clock.  Between  eleven  and  twelve  o'clock  it 
was  reported  to  Gen.  Casey  that  the  enemy  were  approaching 
in  considerable  force  on  the  Williamsburg  road.     At  this  time 


FAIR  OAKS,  379 

Casey's  division  was  disposed  as  follows :  Naglee's  brigade 
extending  from  the  Williamsburg  road  to  the  Gamett  field, 
having  one  regiment  across  the  railroad  ;  Gen.  Wessells's  bri- 
gade in  the  rifle-pits,  and  Gen.  Palmer's  in  the  rear  of  Gen. 
Wessells's ;  one  battery  of  artillery  in  advance  with  Gen.  Naglee  ; 
one  battery  in  rear  of  rifle-pits  to  the  right  of  the  redoubt ;  one 
battery  in  rear  of  the  redoubt,  and  another  battery  unharnessed 
in  the  redoubt.  Gen.  Couch's  division,  holding  the  second  line, 
had  Gen.  Abercrombie's  brigade  on  the  right,  along  the  nine- 
mile  road,  with  two  regiments  and  one  battery  across  the  rail- 
road near  Fair  Oaks  Station ;  Gen.  Peck's  brigade  on  the  right 
and  Gen.  Devens's  in  the  centre. 

On  the  approach  of  the  enemy  Gen.  Casey  sent  forward  one 
of  Gen.  Palmer's  regiments  to  support  the  picket-line  ;  but  this 
regiment  gave  way  without  making  much,  if  any,  resistance. 
Heavy  firing  at  once  commenced,  and  the  pickets  were  driven 
in.  Gen.  Keyes  ordered  Gen.  Couch  to  move  Gen.  Peck's  bri- 
gade to  occupy  the  ground  on  the  left  of  the  Williamsburg  road, 
which  had  not  before  been  occupied  by  our  forces,  and  thus  to 
support  Gen.  Casey's  left,  where  the  first  attack  was  the  most 
severe.  The  enemy  now  came  on  in  heavy  force,  attacking  Gen. 
Casey  simultaneously  in  front  and  on  both  flanks.  Gen.  Keyes 
sent  to  Gen.  Heintzelman  for  reinforcements,  but  the  messenger 
was  delayed,  so  that  orders  were  not  sent  to  Gens.  Kearny  and 
Hooker  until  nearly  three  o'clock,  and  it  was  nearly  five  p.m. 
when  Gens.  Jameson's  and  Berry's  brigades  of  Gen.  Kearny's 
division  arrived  on  the  field.  Gen.  Bimey  was  ordered  up  the 
railroad,  but  by  Gen.  Kearny's  order  halted  his  brigade  before 
arriving  at  the  scene  of  action.  Orders  were  also  despatched 
for  Gen.  Hooker  to  move  up  from  White  Oak  Swamp,  and  he 
arrived  after  dark  at  Savage's  Station. 

As  soon  as  the  firing  was  heard  at  headquarters  orders  were 
sent  to  Gen.  Sumner  to  get  his  command  under  arms  and  be 
ready  to  move  at  a  moment's  warning.  His  corps,  consisting  of 
Gens.  Richardson's  and  Sedgwick's  divisions,  was  encamped  on 
the  north  side  of  the  Chickahominy  some  six  miles  above  Bot- 
tom's bridge.  Each  division  had  thrown  a  bridge  over  the 
stream  opposite  to  its  own  position. 

At  one  o'clock  Gen.  Sumner  moved  the  two  divisions  to  their 
respective  bridges,  with  instructions  to  halt  and  await  further 

"9 


380  AfcCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

orders.  At  two  o'clock  orders  were  sent  from  headquarters  to 
cross  these  divisions  without  delay  and  push  them  rapidly  to 
Gen.  Heintzelman's  support.  This  order  was  received  and  com- 
municated at  half-past  two,  and  the  passage  was  immediately 
commenced.  In  the  meantime  Gen.  Naglee's  brigade,  with  the 
batteries  of  Gen.  Casey's  division,  which  Gen.  Naglee  directed, 
struggled  gallantly  to  maintain  the  redoubt  and  rifle-pits  against 
the  overwhelming  masses  of  the  enemy.  They  were  reinforced 
by  a  regiment  from  Gen.  Peck's  brigade.  The  artillery,  under 
command  of  Col.  G.  D.  Bailey,  ist  N.  Y.  Artillery,  and  after- 
wards of  Gen.  Naglee,  did  good  execution  on  the  advancing 
column.  The  left  of  this  position  was,  however,  soon  turned, 
and  a  sharp  cross-fire  opened  upon  the  gunners  and  men  in  the 
rifle-pits.  Col.  Bailey,  Maj.  Van  Valkenberg,  and  Adj.  Ramsey, 
of  the  same  regiment,  were  killed ;  some  of  the  guns  in  the 
redoubt  were  taken,  and  the  whole  line  was  driven  back  upon  the 
position  occupied  by  Gen.  Couch.  The  brigades  of  Gens.  Wes- 
sells  and  Palmer,  with  the  reinforcements  which  had  been  sent 
them  from  Gen.  Couch,  had  also  been  driven  from  the  field  with 
heavy  loss,  and  the  whole  position  occupied  by  Gen.  Casey's 
division  was  taken  by  the  enemy. 

Previous  to  this  time  Gen.  Keyes  ordered  Gen.  Couch  to 
advance  two  regiments  to  relieve  the  pressure  upon  Gen.  Casey's 
right  flank.  In  making  this  movement  Gen.  Couch  discovered 
large  masses  of  the  enemy  pushing  towards  our  right  and  cross- 
ing the  railroad,  as  well  as  a  heavy  column  which  had  been  held 
in  reserve  and  which  was  now  making  its  way  towards  Fair  Oaks 
station.  Gen.  Couch  at  once  engaged  this  column  with  two  regi- 
ments ;  but,  though  reinforced  by  two  additional  regiments,  he 
was  overpowered,  and  the  enemy  pushed  between  him  and  the 
main  body  of  his  division.  With  these  four  regiments  and  one 
battery  Gen.  Couch  fell  back  about  half  a  mile  towards  the 
Grapevine  bridge,  where,  hearing  that  Gen.  Sumner  had  crossed, 
he  formed  line  of  battle  facing  Fair  Oaks  Station  and  prepared 
to  hold  the  position. 

Gens.  Berry's  and  Jameson's  brigades  had  by  this  time  arrived 
in  front  of  the  Seven  Pines.  Gen.  Berry  was  ordered  to  take 
possession  of  the  woods  on  the  left  and  push  forward  so  as  to 
have  a  flank- fire  on  the  enemy's  lines.  This  movement  was 
executed  brilliantly.  Gen.  Berry  pushing  his  regiments  forward 


FAIR  OAKS.  38  i 

through  the  woods  until  their  rifles  commanded  the  left  of  the 
camp  and  works  occupied  by  Gen.  Casey's  division  in  the  morn- 
ing. Their  fire  on  the  pursuing  columns  of  the  enemy  was  very 
destructive,  and  assisted  materially  in  checking  the  pursuit  in 
that  part  of  the  field.  He  held  his  position  in  these  woods 
against  several  attacks  of  superior  numbers,  and  after  dark, 
being  cut  off  by  the  enemy  from  the  main  body,  he  fell  back 
towards  White  Oak  Swamp,  and  by  a  circuit  brought  his  men 
into  our  lines  in  good  order. 

Gen.  Jameson,  with  two  regiments  (the  other  two  of  his  bri- 
gade having  been  detached — one  to  Gen.  Peck  and  one  to  Gen. 
Birney),  moved  rapidly  to  the  front  on  the  left  of  the  Williams- 
burg road,  and  succeeded  for  a  time  in  keeping  the  abatis  clear 
of  the  enemy.  But  large  numbers  of  the  enemy  pressing  past 
the  right  of  his  line,  he  too  was  forced  to  retreat  through  the 
woods  towards  White  Oak  Swamp,  and  in  that  way  gained  camp 
under  cover  of  night. 

Brig. -Gen.  Devens,  who  had  held  the  centre  of  Gen.  Couch's 
division,  had  made  repeated  and  gallant  efforts  to  regain  por- 
tions of  the  ground  lost  in  front,  but  each  time  was  driven  back^ 
and  finally  withdrew  behind  the  rifle-pits  near  Seven  Pines. 

Meantime  Gen.  Sumner  had  arrived  with  the  advance  of  his 
corps,  Gen.  Sedgwick's  division,  at  the  point  held  by  Gen.  Couch 
with  four  regiments  and  one  battery.  The  roads  leading  from 
the  bridge  were  so  miry  that  it  was  only  by  the  greatest  exertion 
Gen.  Sedgwick  had  been  able  to  get  one  of  his  batteries  to  the 
front. 

The  leading  regiment  (ist  Minn.,  Col.  Sully)  was  immediately 
deployed  to  the  right  of  Couch  to  protect  the  flank,  and  the  rest 
of  the  division  formed  in  line  of  battle,  Kirby's  battery  near  the 
centre  in  an  angle  of  the  woods.  One  of  Gen.  Couch's  regi- 
ments was  sent  to  open  communication  with  Gen.  Heintzelman. 
No  sooner  were  these  dispositions  made  than  the  enemy  came  in 
strong  force  and  opened  a  heavy  fire  along  the  line.  He  made 
several  charges,  but  was  each  time  repulsed  with  great  loss  by  the 
steady  fire  of  the  infantry  and  the  splendid  practice  of  the  bat- 
tery. After  sustaining  the  enemy's  fire  for  a  considerable  time 
Gen.  Sumner  ordered  five  regiments  (the  34th  N.  Y.,  Col.  Sinter ; 
82d  N.  Y.,  Lieut.-Col.  Hudson;  15th  Mass.,  Lieut. -CoL  Kimball; 
20th  Mass.,  Col.  Lee ;    7th  Mich.,  Maj.  Richardson — ^the  three 


382  McCLELLAN'S  0  WN  STOR  Y, 

former  of  Gen.  Gorman's  brigade,  the  two  latter  of  Gen.  Dana's 
brigade)  to  advance  and  charge  with  the  bayonet.  This  charge 
was  executed  in  the  most  brilliant  manner.  Our  troops,  spring- 
ing over  two  fences  which  were  between  them  and  the  enemy, 
rushed  upon  his  lines  and  drove  him  in  confusion  from  that  part 
of  the  field.     Darkness  now  ended  the  battle  for  that  day. 

During  the  night  dispositions  were  made  for  its  early  renewal. 
Gen.  Couch's  division,  and  so  much  of  Gen.  Casey's  as  could  be 
collected  together,  with  Gen.  Kearny's,  occupied  the  rifle-pits 
near  Seven  Pines.  Gen.  Peck,  in  falling  back  on  the  left,  had 
succeeded  late  in  the  afternoon  in  rallying  a  considerable  number 
of  stragglers,  and  was  taking  them  once  more  into  the  action, 
when  he  was  ordered  back  to  the  entrenched  camp  by  Gen. 
Kearny.  Gen.  Hooker  brought  up  his  division  about  dark,  hav- 
ing been  delayed  by  the  heaviness  of  the  roads  and  the  throng  of 
fugitives  from  the  field,  through  whom  the  colonel  of  the  leading 
regiment  (Starr)  reports  he  "  was  obliged  to  force  his  way  with 
the  bayonet."  This  division  bivouacked  for  the  night  in  rear  of 
the  right  of  the  rifle-pits  on  the  other  side  of  the  railroad.  Gen. 
Richardson's  division  also  came  upon  the  field  about  sunset.  He 
had  attempted  the  passage  of  the  Chickahominy  by  the  bridge 
opposite  his  own  camp,  but  it  was  so  far  destroyed  that  he  was 
forced  to  move  Gens.  Howard  and  Meagher's  brigades,  with  all 
his  artillery,  around  by  Gen.  Sedgwick's  bridge,  while  Gen. 
French's  brigade  with  the  utmost  difficulty  crossed  by  the 
other.  Gen.  Sedgwick's  division,  with  the  regiments  under 
Gen.  Couch,  held  about  the  same  position  as  when  the  fight 
ceased,  and  Gen.  Richardson  on  his  arrival  was  ordered  to 
place  his  division  on  the  left  to  connect  with  Gen.  Kearny. 
Gen.  French's  brigade  was  posted  along  the  railroad,  and  Gens. 
Howard's  and  Meagher's  brigades  in  second  and  third  lines.  All 
his  artillery  had  been  left  behind,  it  being  impossible  to  move  it 
forward  through  the  deep  mud  as  rapidly  as  the  infantry  pushed 
towards  the  field,  but  during  the  night  the  three  batteries  of  the 
division  were  brought  to  the  front. 

About  five  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  ist  of  June  skir- 
mishers and  some  cavalry  of  the  enemy  were  discovered  in  front 
of  Gen.  Richardson's  division.  Capt.  Pettit's  battery  (B,  ist 
N.  Y.),  having  come  upon  the  ground,  threw  a  few  shells  among 
them,  when  they  dispersed.     There  was  a  wide  interval  between 


FAIR  OAKS.  383 

Gen.  Richardson  and  Gen.  Kearny.  To  close  this  Gen.  Rich- 
ardson's line  was  extended  to  the  left  and  his  first  line  moved 
over  the  railroad.  Scarcely  had  they  gained  the  position  when 
the  enemy,  appearing  in  large  force  from  the  woods  in  front, 
opened  a  heavy  fire  of  musketry  at  short  range  along  the  whole 
line.  He  approached  very  rapidly,  with  columns  of  attack  formed 
on  two  roads  which  crossed  the  railroad.  These  columns  were 
supported  by  infantry  in  line  of  battle  on  each  side,  cutting  Gen. 
French's  line.  He  threw  out  no  skirmishers,  but  appeared  deter- 
mined to  carry  all  before  him  by  one  crushing  blow.  For  nearly 
an  hour  the  first  line  of  Gen.  Richardson's  division  stood  and 
returned  the  fire,  the  lines  of  the  enemy  being  reinforced  and 
relieved  time  after  time,  till  finally  Gen.  Howard  was  ordered 
with  his  brigade  to  go  to  Gen.  French's  assistance.  He  led  his 
men  gallantly  to  the  front,  and  in  a  few  minutes  the  fire  of  the 
enemy  ceased  and  his  whole  line  fell  back  on  that  part  of  the 
field.  On  the  opening  of  the  firing  in  the  morning  Gen.  Hooker 
pushed  forward  on  the  railroad  with  two  regiments  (5th  and  6th 
N.  J.),  followed  by  Gen.  Sickles's  brigade.  It  was  found  impos- 
sible to  move  the  artillery  of  this  division  from  its  position  on 
account  of  the  mud.  On  coming  near  the  woods,  which  were 
held  by  the  enemy  in  force.  Gen.  Hooker  found  Gen.  Bimey's  bri- 
gade. Col.  J.  Hobart  Ward  in  command,  in  line  of  battle.  He  sent 
back  to  hasten  Gen.  Sickles's  brigade,  but  ascertained  that  it  had 
been  turned  off  to  the  left  by  Gen.  Heintzelman  to  meet  a  column 
advancing  in  that  direction.  He  at  once  made  the  attack  with  the 
two  New  Jersey  regiments,  calling  upon  Col.  Ward  to  support 
him  with  Gen.  Bimey's  brigade.  This  was  well  done,  our  troops 
advancing  into  the  woods  under  a  heavy  fire,  and  pushing  the 
enemy  before  them  for  more  than  an  hour  of  hard  fighting.  A 
charge  with  the  bayonet  was  then  ordered  by  Gen  Hooker  with 
the  5th  and  6th  N.  J.,  3d  Me.,  and  38th  and  40th  N.  Y.,  and  the 
enemy  fled  in  confusion,  throwing  down  arms  and  even  clothing 
in  his  flight.  Gen.  Sickles,  having  been  ordered  to  the  left, 
formed  line  of  battle  on  both  sides  of  the  Williamsburg  road  and 
advanced  under  a  sharp  fire  from  the  enemy,  deployed  in  the 
woods  in  front  of  him.  After  a  brisk  interchange  of  musketry- 
fire  while  crossing  the  open  ground,  the  Excelsior  Brigade  dashed 
into  the  timber  with  the  bayonet  and  put  the  enemy  to  flight. 
On  the  right  the  enemy  opened  fire  after  half  an  hour's  cessa- 


384  McCLELLAX'S  OWN  STORY. 

tion,  which  was  promptly  responded  to  by  Gen.  Richardson's 
division.  Again  the  most  vigorous  efforts  were  made  to  break 
our  line,  and  again  they  were  frustrated  by  the  steady  courage  of 
our  troops.  In  about  an  hour  Gen.  Richardson's  whole  line 
advanced,  pouring  in  their  fire  at  close  range,  which  threw  the 
line  of  the  enemy  back  in  some  confusion.  This  was  followed 
up  by  a  bayonet-charge,  led  by  Gen.  French  in  person,  with  the 
57th  and  66th  N.  Y.,  supported  by  two  regiments  sent  by  Gen. 
Heintzelman,  the  71st  and  73d  N.  Y.,  which  turned  the  confu- 
sion of  the  enemy  into  precipitate  flight.  One  gun  captured 
the  previous  day  was  retaken. 

Our  troops  pushed  forward  as  far  as  the  lines  held  by  them 
on  the  31st  before  the  attack.  On  the  battle-field  there  were 
found  many  of  our  own  and  the  Confederate  wounded,  arms, 
caissons,  wagons,  subsistence  stores,  and  forage,  abandoned  by 
the  enemy  in  his  rout.  The  state  of  the  roads  and  impossibility 
of  manoeuvring  artillery  prevented  further  pursuit.  On  the  next 
morning  a  reconnoissance  was  sent  forward,  which  pressed  back 
the  pickets  of  the  enemy  to  within  five  miles  of  Richmond  ;  but 
again  the  impossibility  of  forcing  even  a  few  batteries  forward 
precluded  our  holding  permanently  this  position.  The  lines 
held  previous  to  the  battle  were  therefore  resumed. 

On  the  31st,  when  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks  commenced,  we 
had  two  of  our  bridges  nearly  completed  ;  but  the  rising  waters 
flooded  the  log-way  approaches  and  made  them  almost  impass- 
able, so  that  It  was  only  by  the  greatest  efforts  that  Gen.  Sumner 
crossed  his  corps  and  participated  in  that  hard-fought  engage- 
ment. The  bridges  became  totally  useless  after  this  corps  had 
passed,  and  others  on  a  more  permanent  plan  were  commenced. 

On  my  way  to  headquarters,  after  the  battle  of  Fair  Oaks, 
I  attempted  to  cross  the  bridge  where  Gen.  Sumner  had  taken 
over  his  corps  on  the  day  previous.  At  the  time  Gen.  Sumner 
crossed  this  was  the  only  available  bridge  above  Bottom's 
bridge.  I  found  the  approach  from  the  right  bank  for  some 
four  hundred  yards  submerged  to  the  depth  of  several  feet, 
and,  on  reaching  the  place  where  the  bridge  had  been,  I  found 
a  great  part  of  it  carried  away,  so  that  I  could  not  get  my  horse 
over,  and  was  obliged  to  send  him  to  Bottom's  bridge,  six  miles 
below,  as  the  only  practicable  crossing. 

The   approaches   to   New  and    Mechanicsville  bridges  were 


McDO  WELL  A  GA  IN  PROMISED,  385 

also  overflowed,  and  both  of  them  were  enfiladed  by  the  ene- 
my's batteries  established  upon  commanding  heights  on  the 
opposite  side.  These  batteries  were  supported  by  strong  forces 
of  the  enemy,  having  numerous  rifle-pits  in  their  front,  which 
would  have  made  it  necessary,  even  had  the  approaches  been 
in  the  best  possible  condition,  to  have  fought  a  sanguinary  bat- 
tle, with  but  little  prospect  of  success,  before  a  passage  could 
have  been  secured. 

The  only  available  means,  therefore,  of  uniting  our  forces 
at  Fair  Oaks  for  an  advance  on  Richmond  soon  after  the  bat- 
tle was  to  march  the  troops  from  Mechanicsville  and  other  points  j 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Chickahominy  down  to  Bottom's  bridge, 
and  thence  over  the  Williamsburg  road  to  the  position  near  Fair 
Oaks,  a  distance  of  about  twenty-three  miles.  In  the  condition 
of  the  roads  at  that  time  this  march  could  not  have  been  made 
with  artillery  in  less  than  two  days,  by  which  time  the  enemy 
would  have  been  secure  within  his  entrenchments  around  Rich- 
mond. In  short,  the  idea  of  uniting  the  two  wings  of  the  army 
in  time  to  make  a  vigorous  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  with  the  pros- 
pect of  overtaking  him  before  he  reached  Richmond,  only  five 
miles  distant  from  the  field  of  battle,  is  simply  absurd,  and  was, 
I  presume,  never  for  a  moment  seriously  entertained  by  any  one 
connected  with  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  An  advance  involv- 
ing the  separation  of  the  two  wings  by  the  impassable  Chicka- 
hominy would  have  exposed  each  to  defeat  in  detail.  There- 
fore I  held  the  position  already  gained,  and  completed  our 
crossings  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

In  the  meantime  the  troops  at  Fair  Oaks  were  directed  to 
strengthen  their  positions  by  a  strong  line  of  entrenchments, 
which  protected  them  while  the  bridges  were  being  built,  gave 
security  to  the  trains,  liberated  a  larger  fighting  force,  and 
offered  a  safer  retreat  in  the  event  of  disaster. 

On  June  2  the  Secretary  of  War  telegraphed:  "The  indica- 
tions are  that  Fremont  or  McDowell  will  fight  Jackson  to-day, 
and  as  soon  as  he  is  disposed  of  another  large  body  of  troops 
will  be  at  your  service." 

On  the  3d  the  President  telegraphed  :  "  With  these  continu- 
ous rains  I  am  very  anxious  about  the  Chickahominy — so  close 
in  your  rear,  and  crossing  your  line  of  communication.  Please 
look  to  it." 


386  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

To  which  I  replied :  "  Your  despatch  of  five  p.m.  just  re- 
ceived. As  the  Chickahominy  has  been  almost  the  only  obsta- 
cle in  my  way  for  several  days,  your  excellency  may  rest  assured 
that  it  has  not  been  overlooked.  Every  effort  has  been  made, 
and  will  continue  to  be,  to  perfect  the  communications  across 
it." 

My  views  of  the  condition  of  our  army  on  the  4th  were 
explained  to  the  President  as  follows : 

Terrible  rain-storm  during  the  night  and  morning ;  not  yet 
cleared  off.  Chickahominy  flooded  ;  bridges  in  bad  condition. 
Are  still  hard  at  work  at  them.  I  have  taken  every  possible 
step  to  insure  the  security  of  the  corps  on  the  right  bank,  but  I 
cannot  reinforce  them  here  until  my  bridges  are  all  safe,  as  my 
force  is  too  small  to  insure  my  right  and  rear,  should  the  enemy 
attack  in  that  direction,  as  they  may  probably  attempt.  I  have 
to  be  very  cautious  now.  Our  loss  in  the  late  battle  will  probably 
exceed  (5,000)  five  thousand.  I  have  not  yet  full  returns.  On 
account  of  the  effect  it  might  have  on  our  own  men  and  the 
enemy,  I  request  that  you  will  regard  this  information  as  con- 
fidential for  a  few  days.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  loss  of  the 
enemy  was  very  considerably  greater ;  they  were  terribly  pun- 
ished. I  mention  these  facts  •  now  merely  to  show  you  that  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  has  had  serious  work,  and  that  no  child's 
play  is  before  it. 

You  must  make  your  calculations  on  the  supposition  that 
I  have  been  correct  from  the  beginning  in  asserting  that  the 
serious  opposition  was  to  be  made  here. 

And  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on  the  same  day  : 

June  4. — Please  inform  me  at  once  what  reinforcements, 
if  any,  I  can  count  upon  having  at  Fortress  Monroe  or  White 
House  within  the  next  three  days,  and  when  each  regiment  may 
be  expected  to  arrive.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  I 
should  know  this  immediately.  The  losses  in  the  battle  of  the 
31st  and  ist  will  amount  to  (7,000)  seven  thousand.  Regard 
this  as  confidential  for  the  present. 

If  I  can  have  five  new  regiments  for  Fort  Monroe  and  its 
dependencies,  I  can  draw  three  more  old  regiments  from  there 
safely.  I  can  well  dispose  of  four  more  raw  regiments  on  my 
communications.  I  can  well  dispose  of  from  fifteen  to  twenty 
well-drilled  regiments  among  the  old  brigades  in  bringing  them 
up  to  their  original  effective  strength.  Recruits  are  especially 
necessary  for  the  regular  and  volunteer  batteries  of  artillery,  as 
well  as  for  the  regular  and  volunteer  regiments  of  infantry. 
After  the  losses  in  our  last  battle  I  trust  that  I  will  no  longer 


REINFORCEMENTS  PROMISED,  387 

be  regarded  as  an  alarmist.     I  believe  we  have  at  least  one  more 
desperate  battle  to  fight. 

On  the  5  th  the  Secretary  telegraphed  me  : 

"  I  will  send  you  ^\^  (5)  new  regiments  as  fast  as  transporta- 
tion can  take  them  ;  the  first  to  start  to-morrow  from  Baltimore. 
I  intend  sending  you  a  part  of  McDowell's  force  as  soon  as 
it  can  return  from  its  trip  to  Front  Royal,  probably  as  many 
as  you  want.  The  order  to  ship  the  new  regiments  to  Fort 
Monroe  has  already  been  given.  I  suppose  that  they  may  be 
sent  directly  to  the  fort.  Please  advise  me  if  this  be  as  you 
desire." 

On  the  7th  of  June  I  telegraphed  as  follows  : 

In  reply  to  your  despatch  of  two  p.m.  to-day,  I  have  the 
honor  to  state  that  the  Chickahominy  river  has  risen  so  as  to 
flood  the  entire  bottoms  to  the  depth  of  three  and  four  feet.  I 
am  pushing  forward  the  bridges  in  spite  of  this,  and  the  men 
are  working  night  and  day,  up  to  their  waists  in  water,  to  com- 
plete them. 

The  whole  face  of  the  country  is  a  perfect  bog,  entirely 
impassable  for  artillery,  or  even  cavalry,  except  directly  in  the 
narrow  roads,  which  renders  any  general  movement,  either  of 
this  or  the  rebel  army,  entirely  out  of  the  question  until  we  have 
more  favorable  weather. 

I  am  glad  to  learn  that  you  are  pressing  forward  reinforce- 
ments so  vigorously. 

I  shall  be  in  perfect  readiness  to  move  forward  and  take 
Richmond  the  moment  McCall  reaches  here  and  the  ground 
will  admit  the  passage  of  artillery.  I  have  advanced  my  pickets 
about  a  mile  to-day,  driving  off  the  rebel  pickets  and  securing 
a  very  advantageous  position. 

The  rebels  have  several  batteries  established,  commanding 
the  debouches  from  two  of  our  bridges,  and  fire  upon  our  work- 
ing parties  continually  ;  but  as  yet  they  have  killed  but  very  few 
of  our  men. 

• 

As  I  did  not  think  it  probable  that  any  reinforcements  would 
be  sent  me  in  time  for  the  advance  on  Richmond,  I  stated  in  the 
foregoing  despatch  that  I  should  be  ready  to  move  when  Gen. 
McCall's  division  joined  me  ;  but  I  did  not  intend  to  be  under- 
stood by  this  that  no  more  reinforcements  were  wanted,  as  will 
be  seen  from  the  following  despatch  : 

June  10. — I  have  again  information  that  Beauregard  has  ar- 


TTie  ierszrtnxexxt  Innes  siunzici  xmft  be  .^iloipcd:  to  mterfwer  ^^vrrtir 
me:  wvl  Crtsi,  ykcX^.,  isasCL  lil  other  rroopH  ^eat  to  me.  shoukt 
be  piaceri  <:!nTfipietehr  ji  xmr  <iispci9sL  to  .io  ^Pitti  rhgnr  ^  L  t±aiik 
besic:  En  no  ittseir  wosr  ^lazc  tineT'  be  ciT  .laietaiice  to  rfw-  E 
rfaerctDre  rcnnesr  :liar  C  rnaar  naare  ^aiuie  sad:  mil  ccmtxnL  TlBe 
sCLke  ir  issHe  is  too  ^xax  to  ;iUow^  peissBai  caHwieranoiis  to  be 
entenametL;  ^tdil  iaaocir  tixsKt  L  oESEre 


(In  tiie  2odr  E  tfirt^  iiuiad:  to  tiie 


TTiere  is  Tor  tire  s&^sres^  rcasoic  to  stmpoae  thar  the  eneiinr 
intenrts  ^racnazizn^  Ebchmomi: :  he  is  tinibr  incresBHX^  his  de- 
fences. E  imt  hmt  erervwOBte  iiE  toice;.  joak.  <t7^tt  reeumims- 
sanre  oqs£s  nany  ibrca.  jer  E  JUt  lOiigsd:  to  fieei  m^-  ^^sor,  wmt 
by-  fooc  JX  wnaterer-  ^:ose^  so  .^car  jse  the  »TfdiirrTitTeg  nt  cfaae 
couniiy :  b^r  ro-gnoiTDir  m^sr  the  'iwvnHive  ^^vorks  ujttiriu^  tiKr 
ijosinon:  on  rhis^  nKXe  or  dse  CIni±ahDiiEiiiv^  :^oiiidt  be  (xxmiieted^ 
E  jm  forced  to  this  jv  hev^  'imxnoncr  nr  mimhrr^  io  thar  E  laaqr 
bmrg  the  jrparest  tiossihie  mnnhecs   nxo  jcnoa:  Ji&t  igcmethe 

JEEB^  icrrmsr  :he 


•?«kr^~««itt—«^  M«^ 


.W  the  inmrxiBazos  E  conidL  liiuiin.  jiegiuiia  to  the  2uir  a£ 
rtme.  rrgiirnmi^  the  .uuftancais  of  (1«l  racksDit  led:  to 
lief  thar  he  ^i3s  ir  t^tirdDiisTnlie.  -TOere  he  ^wssb.  receivTii^ 
fortymrnts  froiiL  ELidnnDmi  tts  LynL.iihur^  mrt  :icziin£oiE:  !xir 
^what  lis  onrposes  "»ere  mr  lor  jopesr  uxni  the  iaie  ioecimfL 
^▼nen  i  rnmrsc  iniir^  ■  er  v  TTrpfTriiFfiL  bur  Jt  shsoiciotis  iiiLieaz=- 
ince.  vas  irouipit  rr  bv  lur^ours  front  the  ixcecnoir  or  Has- 
over  Cjitrr-3oiis€i  3e  ir  irsr  igitm  "har  lie  ^was  air  ^fscaped:  m^ 
^omiT -Toni  CjL  ^waiev^s^  ^iarriancL  rrgimmc.  camnrcd:  3X  F! 
RovoL  >ut  inailT  zonte^Kft  ismseif  to  be  x  ^ieaerter  from:  Fa 
ii)ii>  zonrmamL  ▼nick  he  \&x  near  tlerdonsFtile  ott  the  zrasL. 
Jackson  -  tn?aps  ^wrre  thisE.  is  he  ^auL  jm^uu^  to  Freftrrrck's 
F^aiL  liott^  the  V^rmna.  CjiLui  RiiiiroacL  tijr  the  jiiriKjae  if 
ixtaciacc^  "nv  rrajr  on  the  ^th.  I  iirinrtiuietT  aefffwrrTTpfi 
trtLscr  "te^rot^  to  Troceed  ikms:  the  raxIroaiL  jmi  laccrtanK 


tnicn  ot  the  ^cxc^nestc  TTbct  ^w«e  nrahieL  huweyci>  to 
^xjvomi  Horwver  Oourt-3bnse.  where  ther  im.utmte*etL  the 
mv  <  :>tcKtiOs  inu  ^»cre  forced  to  mm  bai^L  -vithonr  ibcamms^ 
tht;  dtistreu  momtanon.  On  that  oar  T  ^csst  the  foilownz^ 
dc^f^^itcb  :t?  >e*:refarr  Sfiantoit: 


'i^m  •4* — V  'f^irr  7ec?ttiar  c:oe 'Jt  icacftimi  las  use  TccnrreEt 
rh\>i«  :»u:  >:iKittv.      !*?h;  -jartT  -staces^  that  he  ieft   Taocson;.  What- 


MR,  STANTON'S  AFFECTIOI^,  389 

detaining  the  forces  here  from  you.     I  am  urging  as  fast  as  pos- 
sible the  new  levies. 

"  Be  assured,  general,  that  there  never  has  been  a  moment 
when  my  desire  has  been  otherwise  than  to  aid  you  with  my 
whole  heart,  mind,  and  strength,  since  the  hour  we  first  met ; 
and  whatever  others  may  say  for  their  own  purposes,  you  have 
never  had,  and  never  can  have,  any  one  more  truly  your  friend, 
or  more  anxious  to  support  you,  or  more  joyful  than  I  shall  be  at 
the  success  which  I  have  no  doubt  will  soon  be  achieved  by  your 


arms." 


On  the  1 2th  and  13th  Gen.  McCall's  division  arrived. 

On  the  13th  of  June  two  squadrons  of  the  5th  U.  S.  Cavalry, 
under  the  command  of  Capt.  Royall,  stationed  near  Hanover  Old 
Church,  were  attacked  and  overpowered  by  a  force  of  the  enemy's 
cavalry  numbering  about  1,500  men,  with  four  guns.  They 
pushed  on  towards  our  depots,  but  at  some  distance  from  our 
main  body,  and,  though  pursued  very  cleverly,  made  the  circuit 
of  the  army,  repassing  the  Chickahominy  at  Long  bridge.  The 
burning  of  two  schooners  laden  with  forage  and  fourteen  govern- 
ment wagons,  the  destruction  of  some  sutlers'  stores,  the  killing 
of  several  of  the  guard  and  teamsters  at  Garlick's  landing,  some 
little  damage  done  at  Tunstall's  Station,  and  a  little  edat^  were 
the  precise  results  of  this  expedition. 

On  the  14th  I  telegraphed  to  the  Secretary  of  War : 

Jun€  14,  midnight, — All  quiet  in  every  direction.  The  stam- 
pede of  last  night  has  passed  away.  Weather  now  very  favor- 
able. I  hope  two  days  more  will  make  the  ground  practicable. 
I  shall  advance  as  soon  as  the  bridges  are  completed  and  the 
ground  fit  for  artillery  to  move.  At  the  same  time  I  would  be 
glad  to  have  whatever  troops  can  be  sent  to  me.  I  can  use 
several  new  regiments  to  advantage. 

It  ought  to  be  distinctly  understood  that  McDowell  and  his 
troops  are  completely  under  my  control.  I  received  a  telegram 
from  him  requesting  that  McCall's  division  might  be  placed  so  as 
to  join  him  immediately  on  his  arrival. 

That  request  does  not  breathe  the  proper  spirit.  Whatever 
troops  come  to  me  must  be  disposed  of  so  as  to  do  the  most  good. 
I  do  not  feel  that,  in  such  circumstances  as  those  in  which  I  am 
now  placed.  Gen.  McDowell  should  wish  the  general  interests  to 
be  sacrificed  for  the  purpose  of  increasing  his  command. 

If  I  cannot  fully  control  all  his  troops  I  want  none  of  them, 
but  would  prefer  to  fight  the  battle  with  what  I  have,  and  let 
others  be  responsible  for  the  results. 


390  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

The  department  lines  should  not  be  allowed  to  interfere  with 
me ;  but  Gen.  McD.,  and  all  other  troops  sent  to  me,  should 
be  placed  completely  at  my  disposal,  to  do  with  them  as  I  think 
best.  In  no  other  way  can  they  be  of  assistance  to  me.  I 
therefore  request  that  I  may  have  entire  and  full  control.  The 
stake  at  issue  is  too  great  to  allow  personal  considerations  to  be 
entertained  ;  you  know  that  I  have  none. 

On  the  2oth  I  telegraphed  to  the  President : 

There  is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  suppose  that  the  enemy 
intends  evacuating  Richmond  ;  he  is  daily  increasing  his  de- 
fences. I  find  him  everywhere  in  force,  and  every  reconnois- 
sance  costs  many  lives,  yet  I  am  obliged  to  feel  my  way,  foot 
by  foot,  at  whatever  cost,  so  great  are  the  difficulties  of  the 
country ;  by  to-morrow  night  the  defensive  works  covering  our 
position  on  this  side  of  the  Chickahominy  should  be  completed. 
I  am  forced  to  this  by  my  inferiority  in  numbers,  so  that  I  may 
bring  the  greatest  possible  numbers  into  action  and  secure  the 
army  against  the  consequences  of  unforeseen  disaster. 

All  the  information  I  could  obtain,  previous  to  the  24th  of 
June,  regarding  the  movements  of  Gen.  Jackson  led  to  the  be- 
lief that  he  was  at  Gordonsville,  where  he  was  receiving  rein- 
forcements from  Richmond  via  Lynchburg  and  Staunton;  but 
what  his  purposes  were  did  not  appear  until  the  date  specified, 
when  a  young  man,  very  intelligent  but  of  suspicious  appear- 
ance, was  brought  in  by  our  scouts  from  the  direction  of  Han- 
over Court-House.  He  at  first  stated  that  he  was  an  escaped  pri- 
soner from  Col.  Kenley's  Maryland  regiment,  captured  at  Front 
Royal,  but  finally  confessed  himself  to  be  a  deserter  from  Jack- 
son's command,  which  he  left  near  Gordonsville  on  the  21st. 
Jackson's  troops  were  then,  as  he  said,  moving  to  Frederick's 
Hall,  along  the  Virginia  Central  Railroad,  for  the  purpose  of 
attacking  my  rear  on  the  28th.  I  immediately  despatched  two 
trusty  negroes  to  proceed  along  the  railroad  and  ascertain  the 
truth  of  the  statement.  They  were  unable,  however,  to  get 
beyond  Hanover  Court-House,  where  they  encountered  the  ene- 
my's pickets,  and  were  forced  to  turn  back  without  obtaining 
the  desired  information.  On  that  day  I  sent  the  following 
despatch  to  Secretary  Stanton  : 

June  24. — A  very  peculiar  case  of  desertion  has  just  occurred 
from  the  enemy.     The  party  states  that  he  left  Jackson,  Whit- 


STONEWALL  JACKSON.  391 

ing,  and  Ewell  (fifteen  brigades)  at  Gordonsville  on  the  21st; 
that  they  were  moving  to  Frederick's  Hall,  and  that  it  was  in- 
tended to  attack  my  rear  on  the  28th.  I  would  be  glad  to  learn, 
at  your  earliest  convenience,  the  most  exact  information  you  have 
as  to  the  position  and  movements  of  Jackson,  as  well  as  the 
sources  from  which  your  information  is  derived,  that  I  may  the 
better  compare  it  with  what  I  have. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen. 

The  following  is  his  reply : 

^^June  25. — We  have  no  definite  information  as  to  the  num- 
bers or  position  of  Jackson's  force.  Gen.  King  yesterday  re- 
ported a  deserter's  statement  that  Jackson's  force  was,  nine  days 
ago,  40,000  men.  Some  reports  place  10,000  rebels  under  Jack- 
son at  Gordonsville  ;  others,  that  his  force  is  at  Port  Republic, 
Harrisonburg,  and  Luray.  Fremont  yesterday  reported  rumors 
that  Western  Virginia  was  threatened,  and  Gen.  Kelley  that 
Ewell  was  advancing  to  New  creek,  where  Fremont  has  his 
depots.  The  last  telegram  from  Fremont  contradicts  this  ru- 
mor. The  last  telegram  from  Banks  says  the  enemy's  pickets 
are  strong  in  advance  at  Luray  ;  the  people  decline  to  give  any 
information  as  to  his  whereabouts.  Within  the  last  two  (2) 
days  the  evidence  is  strong  that  for  some  purpose  the  enemy  is 
circulating  rumors  of  Jackson's  advance  in  various  directions, 
with  a  view  to  conceal  the  real  point  of  attack.  Neither  Mc- 
Dowell, who  is  at  Manassas,  nor  Banks  and  Fremont,  who 
are  at  Middletown,  appear  to  have  any  accurate  knowledge  of 
the  subject.  A  letter  transmitted  to  the  department  yesterday, 
purported  to  be  dated  Gordonsville  on  the  fourteenth  (14th) 
instant,  stated  that  the  actual  attack  was  designed  for  Washing- 
ton and  Baltimore  as  soon  as  you  attacked  Richmond,  but  that 
■the  report  was  to  be  circulated  that  Jackson  had  gone  to  Rich- 
mond, in  order  to  mislead.  This  letter  looked  very  much  like 
a  blind,  and  induces  me  to  suspect  that  Jackson's  real  movement 
now  is  towards  Richmond.  It  came  from  Alexandria,  and  is 
certainly  designed,  like  the  numerous  rumors  put  afioat,  to  mis- 
lead. I  think,  therefore,  that  while  the  warning  of  the  deserter 
to  you  may  also  be  a  blind,  that  it  could  not  safely  be  disre- 
garded. I  will  transmit  to  you  any  further  information  on  this 
subject  that  may  be  received  here." 

On  the  25th,  our  bridges  and  entrenchments  being  at  last 
completed,  an  advance  of  our  picket-line  of  the  left  was  ordered, 
preparatory  to  a  general  forward  movement. 

Immediately  in  front  of  the  most  advanced  redoubt  on  the 


392  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

Williamsburg  road  was  a  large,  open  field ;  beyond  that  a 
swampy  belt  of  timber,  some  five  hundred  yards  wide,  which 
had  been  disputed  ground  for  many  days.  Further  in  advance 
was  an  open  field,  crossed  by  the  Williamsburg  road  and  the 
railroad,  and  commanded  by  a  redoubt  and  rifie-pits  of  the 
enemy. 

It  was  decided  to  push  our  lines  to  the  other  side  of  these 
woods,  in  order  to  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  nature  of  the 
ground,  and  to  place  Gens.  Heintzelman  and  Sumner  in  posi- 
tion to  support  the  attack  intended  to  be  made  on  the  Old 
Tavern,  on  the  26th  or  27th,  by  Gen.  Franklin,  by  assailing  that 
position  in  the  rear. 

Between  eight  and  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  25th 
the  advance  was  begun  by  Gen.  Heintzelman's  corps.  The  ene- 
my were  found  to  be  in  strong  force  all  along  the  line,  and  con- 
tested the  advance  stubbornly,  but  by  sunset  our  object  was 
accomplished. 

The  following  telegram  was  sent  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on 
the  same  day : 

25M,  6.15  P.M. — I  have  just  returned  from  the  field,  and 
found  your  despatch  in  regard  to  Jackson. 

Several  contrabands  just  in  give  information  confirming  sup- 
^sition  that  Jackson's  advance  is  at  or  near  Hanover  Court- 
Alouse,  and  that  Beauregard  arrived  with  strong  reinforcements 
/in  Richmond  yesterday. 

/  I  incline  to  think  that  Jackson  will  attack  my  right  and  rear. 
/  The  rebel  force  is  stated  at  two  hundred  thousand,  including 
I  Jackson  and  Beauregard.  I  shall  have  to  contend  against  vastly 
I  superior  odds  if  these  reports  be  true.  But  this  army  will  do 
I  all  in  the  power  of  men  to  hold  their  position  and  repulse  any 
V^  attack. 

I  regret  my  great  inferiority  in  numbers,  but  feel  that  I  am 
in  no  way  responsible  for  it,  as  I  have  not  failed  to  represent 
repeatedly  the  necessity  of  reinforcements ;  that  this  was  the 
decisive  point,  and  that  all  the  available  means  of  the  govern- 
ment should  be  concentrated  here.  I  will  do  all  that  a  general 
can  do  with  the  splendid  army  I  have  the  honor  to  command, 
and,  if  it  is  destroyed  by  overwhelming  numbers,  can  at  least 
die  with  it  and  share  its  fate. 

But  if  the  result  of  the  action,  which  will  probably  occur 
to-morrow  or  within  a  short  time,  is  a  disaster,  the  responsi- 
bility cannot  be  thrown  on  my  shoulders ;  it  must  rest  where  it 
belongs. 


JACKSON  APPROACHING.  393 

Since  I  commenced  this  I  have  received  additional  intelli- 
gence confirming  the  supposition  in  regard  to  Jackson's  move- 
ments and  Beauregard's  arrival.  I  shall  probably  be  attacked 
to-morrow,  and  now  go  to  the  other  side  of  the  Chickahorainy 
to  arrange  for  the  defence  on  that  side. 

I  feel  that  there  is  no  use  in  my  again  asking  for  rein- 
forcements. 


CHAPTER   XXIV. 

Private  Letters. 

[May  20  to  June  36,   1 862.] 

May  20,  12.30  A.M.,  Tunstalfs  Station. —  ...  I  moved  head- 
quarters and  four  divisions  here  to-day,  about  six  miles  from  the 
White  House.  I  rode  myself  to  Bottom's  bridge  in  the  rain, 
and  made  a  short  reconnoissance  of  it.  Found  the  enemy  there, 
though  not  in  great  force.  The  engineers  will  make  a  close 
examination  to-morrow  morning,  driving  the  enemy's  pickets. 
The  advanced  guard  also  is  near  New  bridge.  We  are  gradu- 
ally drawing  near  the  rascals.  I  think  they  intend  to  fight  us 
in  front  of  Richmond  ;  if  they  do  it  will  be  a  decisive  battle. 
Our  camp  here  is  one  of  the  most  beautiful  I  ever  saw.  The 
country  is  lovely,  and  the  view  from  the  high  hill  on  which  are 
headquarters  is  really  magnificent.  This  evening,  when  the 
bivouac-fires  were  lighted,  the  scene  was  grand  beyond  descrip- 
tion. There  are  some  very  fine  plantations  in  this  vicinity. 
What  fools  their  owners  are  to  submit  themselves  to  the  neces- 
sity of  being  overrun  and  devastated !  An  army  leaves  a  wide 
swath  in  its  rear,  but  my  men  are  generally  behaving  .very  well. 

May  21,  1.30  A.M.,  Tunstalfs  Station. —  .  .  .  Headquarters 
will  move  to-morrow  some  seven  or  eight  miles  more  to  the 
front  .  . 

Wednesday  morning  {same  letter). —  .  .  .  Porter's  troops  have 
been  marching  past  for  a  couple  of  hours,  and  the  rumbling  of 
wagons  has  been  going  on  for  some  time.  .  .  . 

A  little  later. — I  have  just  learned  that  some  of  our  troops 
have  succeeded  in  crossing  the  Chickahominy  at  Bottom's 
bridge.  .  .  . 

May  22,   6.30  P.M.,  camp  near  Chickahominy* —  ...  I   have 

391 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  395 

just  returned  from  a  ride  to  the  front,  where  I  have  taken  a 
good  look  at  the  rebel  lines.  I  suppose  I  must  have  ridden 
some  thiity  miles  or  less  to-day. 

Some  one  just  brought  me  a  bouquet  of  wild  white  flowers— 
a  negro  at  that.  I  clutched  it  most  eagerly,  as  reminding  me  of 
one  who  two  years  ago  became  my  wife.  It  is  on  the  table  in 
front  of  me  as  I  write ;  in  a  tin  tumbler,  to  be  sure,  but  none 
the  less  pure  and  white. 

May  23,  P.M.  {continuation  of  same  letter), — Soon  after  I 
finished  the  last  page  I  was  taken  quite  sick,  and  continued  so 
most  of  the  night.  I  have  remained  in  my  tent  all  day,  feeling 
quite  miserable,  but  will  be  all  right  and  able  to  ride  out  in  the 
morning.  .  .  .  The  occurrences  of  the  ne.xt  few  days  are  quite 
uncertain.  I  have  secured  one  passage  of  the  Chickahominy, 
and  hope  to  get  two  more  to-morrow.  I  have  been  within  six 
miles  of  the  rebel  capital,  and  our  balloonists  have  been  watch- 
ing it  all  day.  The  intentions  of  the  enemy  are  still  doubtful. 
I  go  on  prepared  to  fight  a  hard  battle,  but  I  confess  that  the 
indications  are  not  now  that  he  will  fight.  Unless  he  has  some 
deep-laid  scheme  that  I  do  not  fathom,  he  is  giving  up  great 
advantages  in  not  opposing  me  on  the  line  of  the  Chickahominy. 
He  could  give  me  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  make  it  cost  me 
hundreds  or  thousands  of  lives.  .  .  .  God  knows  that  I  am  sick 
of  this  civil  war,  although  no  feeling  of  the  kind  unsteadies  my 
hand  or  ever  makes  me  hesitate  or  waver.  It  is  a  cruel  necessity. 
I  am  very  glad  that  the  President  has  come  out  as  he  did  about 
Hunter's  order.  ...  If  I  succeed  in  getting  the  two  additional 
passages  of  the  river  to-morrow  I  will  move  next  day.  In  fact, 
I  hope  to  have  a  strong  advanced  guard  within  a  couple  of  miles 
of  Richmond  to-morrow  evening.  Then  I  shall  be  able  to  ex- 
amine the  enemy's  position  and  arrange  for  the  battle.  I  will  not 
fight  on  Sunday  if  I  can  help  it.  If  I  am  obliged  to  do  so  I  will 
still  have  faith  that  God  will  defend  the  right,  and  trust  that  we 
have  the  right  on  our  side.  How  freely  I  shall  breathe  when  my 
long  task  of  months  is  over  and  Richmond  is  ours  !  I  know  the 
uncertainty  of  all  human  events.  I  know  that  God  may  even 
now  deem  best  to  crush  all  the  high  hopes  of  the  nation  and  this 
army.     I  will  do  the  best  I  can  to  insure  success,  and  will  do  my 

best  to  be  contented,  with  whatever  result  God  sees  fit  to  ter- 

30 


396  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY. 

minate  our  efforts.  I  am  here  on  the  eve  of  one  of  the  great 
historic  battles  of  the  world — one  of  those  crises  in  a  nation's 
life  that  occur  but  seldom.  Far  more  than  my  fate  is  involved 
in  the  issue.  I  have  done  the  best  I  could ;  I  have  tried  to  serve 
my  country  honestly  and  faithfully.  All  I  can  now  do  is  to  com- 
mit myself  to  the  hands  of  God  and  pray  that  the  country  may 
not  be  punished  for  my  sins  and  shortcomings. 

n  P.M. —  .  .  .  Have  had  some  skirmishes  and  cannonading 
to-day.     Successful  in  all. 

May  25,  Sunday y  3.30  p.m.,  Cold  Harbor, —  .  .  .  Have  been 
rather  under  the  weather  the  last  three  days.  Had  to  ride  out 
in  the  rain  yesterday,  and  was  kept  up  very  late  last  night,  so  I 
was  not  so  well  as  I  might  have  been  this  morning.  ...  It 
cleared  off  about  sunset  yesterday,  and  to-day  has  been  bright 
and  pleasant,  drying  up  the  roads  rapidly.  They  have  been  so 
cut  and  bad  as  to  prevent  any  movements  in  force  or  with 
rapidity.  Fortunately  the  ground  dries  rapidly  here,  and  will 
soon  be  in  such  condition  that  we  can  move  anywhere.  I  have 
this  moment  received  a  despatch  from  the  President,  who  is  ter- 
ribly scared  about  Washington,  and  talks  about  the  necessity  of 
my  returning  in  order  to»  save  it.  Heaven  save  a  country  gov- 
erned by  such  counsels !  I  must  reply  to  his  telegram,  and  finish 
this  by  and  by.  ...  I  feel  much  better  this  afternoon — quite 
myself  again.  ...  If  I  should  find  Washington  life  as  bad  after 
the  war  as  it  was  when  I  was  there,  I  don't  think  I  could  be 
induced  to  remain  in  the  army  after  peace. 

10  P.M.  {same  letter^. — It  seems,  from  some  later  despatches 
I  have  received,  that  Banks  has  been  soundly  thrashed,  and 
that  they  are  terribly  alarmed  in  Washington.  A  scare  will  do 
them  good,  and  may  bring  them  to  their  senses.  ...  I  have  a 
fire  in  my  tent  to-night. 

May  26,  8  p.m.,  camp  near  Ne7v  bridge. —  .  .  .  We  broke  up 
the  last  camp  about  two  and  moved  to  this  place,  which  is  quite 
on  the  banks  of  the  Chickahominy  and  very  near  New  bridge. 
It,  of  course,  commenced  raining  about  an  hour  after  we  started  ; 
but  as  it  was  not  a  very  heavy  rain,  we  got  on  very  well.  ...  I 
have  been  troubled  by  the  old  Mexican  complaint,  brought  on, 
I  suppose,  by  exposure  to  the  wet,  but  I  am  really  substantially 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  397 

well  again.  .  .  .  Fitz  starts  off  in  the  morning  on  a  trip  that  will 
take  a  day  to  go  and  one  to  return  ;  the  object  being  to  cut  off 
and  disperse  a  force  of  the  enemy  threatening  my  right  and  rear, 
also  to  destroy  the  railroad  bridges.  When  this  is  done  I  will 
feel  very  comfortable  in  that  direction,  and  shall  be  quite  ready 
to  attack.  My  men  are  in  such  excellent  condition  and  such 
good  spirits  that  I  cannot  doubt  the  result.  The  people  here 
have  not  much  Union  feeling,  but  are  becoming  heartily  tired  of 
the  war,  especially  as  they  now  feel  its  evils  in  their  midst — a 
fate  from  which  I  pray  that  God  may  deliver  our  own  Northern 
States.  My  camp  is  about  four  and  a  half  to  five  miles  from 
Richmond.  .  .  .  Had  the  instructions  I  left  for  Banks  and 
Wadsworth  been  complied  with  we  should  have  been  spared  the 
shame  of  Banks's  stampede.  ...  I  feared  last  night  that  I  would 
be  ordered  back  for  the  defence  of  Washington  ! 

May  27,  11.45  P-M. —  ...  I  sent  Fitz- John  out  this  morning 
to  "  pick  up  "  a  large  force  of  the  enemy  who  were  threaten- 
ing my  right  and  rear,  also  to  bum  the  bridges  of  the  two 
railways  of  the  South  Anna.  The  old  fellow  has  done  splen- 
didly. Thrashed  13,000  badly,  and  I  am  momentarily  expect- 
ing to  hear  the  details  of  his  second  attack.  We  are  getting  on 
splendidly.  I  am  quietly  clearing  out  everything  that  could 
threaten  my  rear  and  communications,  providing  against  the 
contingency  of  disaster,  and  so  arranging  as  to  make  my  whole 
force  available  in  the  approaching  battle.  The  only  fear  is  that 
Joe's  heart  may  fail  him.  .  .  . 

Nav  brid^e^  May  29,  8  p.m. —  ...  I  rode  some  forty-odd 
miles  yesterday,  got  wet,  had  nothing  to  eat  all  day,  and  returned 
to  camp  about  two  o'clock  this  morning,  noble  old  Dan  tak- 
ing me  through  most  splendidly.  Found  myself  quite  sick  this 
morning — my  old  Mexican  enemy.  I  had  been  fighting  against 
it  for  several  days  with  more  or  less  success.  But  this  morning 
I  gave  up  and  sent  for  the  doctor,  in  whose  hands  I  placed 
myself.  .  .  .  Feel  a  great  deal  better  to-night ;  the  pain  gone 
and  my  head  clearer.  .  .  .  Fitz  did  his  work  nobly,  as  I  ex- 
pected. I  rode  to  his  battle-field  yesterday  and  several  miles 
beyond  it.  The  railroad  bridge  across  the  South  Anna  was 
burned   yesterday  and  today,  thus  effectually  cutting  off  rail- 


398  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

road  communication  between  Richmond  and  the  North.  Law- 
rence Williams  arranged  both  affairs  very  handsomely.  The 
country  around  Hanover  Court-House  is  very  beautiful.  .  .  . 

Juru  2,  8  P.M.,  New  bridge. — It  has  been  impossible  for  me 
to  write  to  you  for  the  last  two  or  three  days.  I  was  quite  sick 
on  Friday  and  Saturday  ;  on  the  last  day  rose  from  my  bed  and 
went  to  the  field  of  battle  ;  remained  on  horseback  most  of  the 
time  until  Sunday  evening.  I  came  back  perfectly  worn  out  and 
exhausted  ;  lay  down  at  once,  and,  though  I  could  not  sleep- 
much  I  got  some  rest.  I  think  to-night  will  bring  me  quite  up 
again  ;  I  am  not  anxious.  The  Chickahominy  is  now  falling, 
and  I  hope  we  can  complete  the  bridges  to-morrow.  I  can  do 
nothing  more  until  that  is  accomplished.  The  enemy  attacked 
on  Saturday  and  Sunday  with  great  ferocity  and  determination  ; 
their  first  attack  alone  was  successful.  Casey's  division  broke. 
As  the  other  divisions  came  up  they  checked  the  enemy,  and  we 
gradually  got  the  better  of  him ;  he  was  badly  handled  before 
night.  On  Sunday  morning  he  renewed  the  attack  and  was 
everywhere  repulsed  in  disorder  and  with  heavy  loss.  We  had 
regained  all  the  ground  lost,  and  more,  last  night ;  to-day  we  are 
considerably  in  advance  of  the  field  of  battle.  It  is  certain  that 
we  have  gained  a  glorious  victory  ;  I  only  regret  that  the  rascals 
were  smart  enough  to  attack  when  the  condition  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy was  such  that  I  could  not  throw  over  the  rest  of  the 
troops  to  follow  up  the  success ;  but  the  weather  now  seems 
settled,  and  I  hope  the  river  will  be  low  enough  to-morrow  to 
enable  me  to  cross.  I  am  tired  of  the  sickening  sight  of  the 
battle-field,  with  its  mangled  corpses  and  poor  suffering  wound- 
ed !  Victory  has  no  charms  for  me  when  purchased  at  such  cost. 
I  shall  be  only  too  glad  when  all  is  over  and  I  can  return  where 
I  best  love  to  be.  .  .  .  Your  father  is  quite  well ;  so  are  all  the 
staff.  I  don't  think  any  of  your  friends  were  hurt  in  the  battle  ; 
several  colonels  killed  and  some  wounded. 

June  3,  lo  a.m.,  Ne^v  bridge. —  .  .  .  There  has  been  some 
heavy  cannonading  within  the  last  hour,  and  I  learned  that  the 
enemy  were  advancing  on  Sumner.  I  am  awaiting  further  news 
before  going  to  the  front ;  in  the  meantime  working  hard  at 
the  bridges  over  the  confounded  Chickahominy.     We  may  have 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  399 

another  fight  at  any  hour  now ;  I  can't  tell  when  or  where.  I 
expect  some  5,500  troops  from  Fortress  Monroe  to-night,  which 
will  go  some  ways  towards  replacing  my  losses ;  hope  that  one 
regiment  arrived  last  night.  If  the  enemy  will  give  me  time  to 
get  these  fresh  troops  in  line  I  will  be  obliged  to  them  exceed- 
ingly ;  I  am  none  too  strong,  I  can  assure  you.  But  all  will  go 
well.  .  .  . 

June  5,  9  A.M.  ( Thursday),  New  bridge, — We  have  had  a  ter- 
rible time  during  the  last  few  days  :  torrents  of  rain  constantly 
falling ;  ground  a  sea  of  mud  ;  the  Chickahominy  a  booming 
river  ;  bridges  swept  away  ;  the  railroad  pretty  much  used  up — 
in  short,  about  all  the  troubles  that  armies  fall  heir  to,  except 
defeat  !  '  But  I  am  so  grateful  that  God  gave  us  the  victory  that 
I  will  not  complain  of  minor  evils.  The  enemy  must  have  been 
very  badly  whipped  not  to  have  renewed  his  attack  under  the 
very  favorable  circumstances  of  the  last  few  days. 

p.Bf. — Have  been,  as  usual,  interrupted.  .  .  .  The  enemy  has 
opened  from  two  or  three  batteries,  and  is  blazing  away  upon  our 
working  parties  at  the  bridges  ;  some  of  our  heavy  batteries  have 
opened  upon  him,  and  will,  I  hope,  soon  silence  them.  I  feel 
much  better  to-day,  and  if  secesh  will  permit  me  to  remain  quiet 
until  to-morrow  morning  I  am  sure  that  I  shall  be  quite  well. 
My  head  feels  clearer  to-day,  and  I  feel  generally  better,  though 
somewhat  weak.  My  report  of  the  battle  (telegraphic)  was  in- 
correctly printed  in  some  respects  in  the  papers,  and,  of  course, 
raises  a  tempest  in  a  teapot.  I  never  saw  so  much  selfishness 
and  petty  feeling  in  my  life  as  I  have  seen  developed  during  this 
unhappy  war.  .  .  .  This  camp-life  in  the  mud  is  becoming  tedi- 
ous ;  yet  here  I  am  tied  up,  the  confounded  river  running  like 
mad,  and  no  present  chance  of  crossing  the  rest  of  the  troops, 
although  we  are  doing  all  that  can  be  done.  .  .  .  The  artillery 
still  keeps  up  its  firing.     I  must  send  again  for  news.  .  .  . 

June  6. —  .  .  .  The  bad  weather  still  continues,  horrid  in  the 
■extreme.  ...  It  seems  that  Joe  Johnston  was  seriously,  if  not 
dangerously,  wounded  in  the  last  battle.  I  had  occasion  to  write 
him  some  letters  to-day  which  ought  to  be  answered,  so  I  can 
probably  tell  by  the  reply  how  it  really  is.  ...  I  am  receiving 


400  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

reinforcements  now  which  will  soon  repair  our  losses  and  enable 
me  to  act  with  freedom  of  motion.  .  .  . 

lo  P.M. —  .  .  .  Have  been,  as  usual,  very  quiet  to-day,  lying 
down  almost  all  the  time,  and  leaving  my  tent  scarcely  at  all. 
...  It  has  at  last  cleared  up,  and  for  some  days,  I  think.  .  .  . 
It  is  now  quite  certain  that  Joe  Johnston  was  severely  wounded 
last  Saturday — now  said  to  be  in  the  shoulder  by  a  rifle-ball.  I 
think  there  is  very  little  doubt  that  it  is  so.  That  places  Smith, 
G.  W.,  in  command.  I  have  drawn  nine  regiments  from  Fort 
Monroe — the  first  use  I  made  of  the  command  given  me  of  that 
place  ;  the  last  of  them  will  be  up  to-morrow.  These  will  go  far 
towards  filling  our  ranks.  The  losses  in  the  late  battle  were 
about  5,500 ;  of  course  we  have  lost  many  by  disease.  I  am  pro- 
mised either  McCall's  or  King's  division  in  a  very  few  days.  If 
I  learn  to-morrow  that  they  will  surely  be  here  in  three  or  four, 
days  I  will  wait  for  them,  as  it  would  make  the  result  certain  and 
less  bloody.  I  can't  afford  to  have  any  more  men  killed  than 
can  be  avoided.  .  .  . 

June  7,  8.30  A.M.  (same  letter). —  .  .  .  The  sun  is  struggling 
very  hard  this  morning  with  the  clouds ;  thus  far  the  latter  has 
rather  the  better  of  him,  but  I  hope  the  old  fellow  will  persevere 
and  beat  them  out  in  an  hour  or  two.  I  presume  the  mystery  of 
the  two  telegraphic  messages  has  been  cleared  up  before  this.  I 
said  that  tione  of  your  acquaintances  were  killed.  The  operator 
must  have  been  unmanned  by  excitement,  for  my  official  de- 
spatches were  terribly  bungled  in  many  ways.  One  of  the  two 
similar  despatches  must  have  been  sent  on  the  operator's  own 
account.  I  think  I  sent  you  but  two  altogether  that  day.  Did 
not  that  solution  occur  to  you  ? 

June  8,  1862. — Gen.  Prim  and  staff,  some  nine  or  ten  in 
number,  have  arrived.  They  went  direct  to  the  battle-field  from 
the  railway,  so  I  will  be  spared  until  evening,  when  I  shall  be  in 
for  it.  How  Charles  will  make  out  I  cannot  imagine.  It  is  a 
terrible  nuisance  to  take  care  of  these  parties  in  camp.  They 
always  come  entirely  unprovided,  and  it  puts  every  one  to  great 
inconvenience  to  take  care  of  them.  I  had  sense  enough,  when  I 
went  to  the  Crimea,  to  take  tents,  messing  apparatus,  servants,. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  4OI 

horses,  etc.,  so  that  I  was  perfectly  independent.     But  none  of 
these  foreigners  seem  to  follow  so  good  an  example.  .  .  . 

I  had  occasion  day  before  yesterday  to  send  a  letter  to  Joe 
Johnston  in  reply  to  a  request  of  us  for  permission  to  send  in 
and  get  the  bodies  of  a  couple  of  generals  and  half  a  dozen 
colonels  supposed  to  be  killed.  An  answer  came  yesterday 
apologizing  for  the  delay  in  replying  to  my  communication 
(which  involved  other  matters),  and  also  apologizing  for  some  of 
his  people  firing  at  Sweitzer,  who  carried  the  flag  of  truce.  Well, 
whom  do  you  think  the  letter  came  from  ?  From  no  one  else 
than  A.  P.  Hill,  major-general  commanding  the  Light  Division. 
...  I  hope  we  shall  have  clear  weather  for  a  few  days,  so  that 
it  will  be  possible  to  move  and  use  artillery,  as  well  as  to  get  it 
over  the  river.  You  have  no  idea  of  the  state  of  the  ground 
now ;  just  as  much  as  a  horse  can  do  to  make  his  way !  We  have 
pretty  quiet  times ;  a  little  artillery-firing  and  picket-skirmishing 
by  way  of  breaking  the  monotony — voil<i  tout !  I  suppose  both 
sides  are  gathering  for  the  great  battle.  I  have  received  ten 
regiments  since  the  battle,  nine  of  which  from  Fort  Monroe, 
one  from  Baltimore ;  and  one  from  Washington  will  arrive  to- 
night. I  am  also  promised  McCall's  division  at  once.  If  the 
promise  is  kept  I  shall  be  quite  strong  again.  .  .  .  Am  much 
better  to-day — quite  myself. 

June  9. —  ...  A  large  dose  of  Spaniards  yesterday.  Gen. 
Prim  and  staff  arrived  and  are  quartered  on  us,  some  seven  in 
all — a  rather  inconvenient  addition  to  the  mess.  On  the  other 
hand,  however,  they  are  very  gentlemanly  and  a  very  nice  set  of 
people.  Gen.  Prim  speaks  only  French  and  Spanish.  He  is 
a  dark-faced,  black-haired,  bright,  young-looking  man  of  forty- 
five.  I  like  him  much.  His  chief  of  staff.  Gen.  Milans,  is  a  per- 
fect old  trump,  who  speaks  English  and  looks  for  all  the  world 
like  a  French  marquis  of  the  stage.  His  hair  and  beard  are  iron 
gray  ;  his  moustache  of  the  most  approved  pattern  of  the  Span- 
ish cavaliers  of  old  ;  a  cane  suspended  to  his  button-hole ;  red 
pants  tucked  in  high  boots ;  a  loose  green  coat  covered  with 
silver  embroidery ;  the  funniest  little  hat  imaginable — on  the 
whole  a  most  peculiar  picture,  such  as  I  never  saw  before.  They 
are  delighted  with  what  they  have  seen  (I  hear  the  funny  little 
fellow's  voice  now :  "  G*d-momin*,  sir ;   hope  yo'  well  **),  fully 


402  McCL£LLAN*S  OIVN  STORY. 

appreciate  the  great  difficulties  under  which  we  have  been  labor* 
ing,  and  will  do  much,  I  think,  towards  giving  a  just  idea  in 
Europe  of  the  difficulties  we  have  to  contend  against  in  this 
most  singular  of  all  campaigns.  ...  I  had  a  telegram  from 
McDowell  last  evening  stating  that  he  was  ordered  down  here 
with  his  command,  and  assuring  me  that  he  received  the  order 
with  great  satisfaction.  The  secretary  and  President  are  becom- 
ing quite  amiable  of  late  ;  I  am  afraid  that  I  am  a  little  cross  to 
them,  and  that  I  do  not  quite  appreciate  their  sincerity  and  good 
feeling.  "  Timeo  Danaos  et  dona  ferentesy  How  glad  I  will  be 
to  get  rid  of  the  whole  lot !  I  had  another  letter  from  our  friend 
A.  P.  H.  yesterday  in  reply  to  mine  to  Joe  Johnston  ;  so  I  am 
now  confident  that  Joe  is  badly  wounded.  In  my  reply  sent  this 
morning  I  ignore  Hill  entirely,  and  address  mine  to  the  "  Com- 
manding General,  etc.,"  so  G.  W.  will  have  to  come  out  this 
time.  I  hope  to  arrange  for  a  general  exchange  of  prisoners, 
and  thus  relieve  our  poor  fellows  who  have  been  so  long  con- 
fined. I  must  do  secesh  the  justice  to  say  that  they  now  treat 
our  wounded  and  prisoners  as  well  as  they  can.  .  .  . 

June  10,  7.30  A.M. —  ...  It  is  again  raining  hard,  and  has 
been  for  several  hours !  I  feel  almost  discouraged — that  is,  I 
would  do  so  did  I  not  feel  that  it  must  all  be  for  the  best,  and 
that  God  has  some  great  purpose  in  view  through  all  this.  It  is 
certain  that  there  has  not  been  for  years  and  years  such  a  season ; 
it  does  not  come  by  chance.  I  am  quite  checked  by  it.  First, 
the  Chickahominy  is  so  swollen  and  the  valley  so  covered  with 
water  that  I  cannot  establish  safe  communications  over  it ;  then, 
again,  the  ground  is  so  muddy  that  we  cannot  use  our  artillery : 
the  guns  sink  up  to  their  axle-trees.  I  regret  all  this  extremely, 
but  take  comfort  from  the  thought  that  God  will  not  leave  so 
great  a  struggle  as  this  to  mere  chance.  If  He  ever  interferes 
with  the  destinies  of  men  and  nations,  this  would  seem  to  be  a  fit 
occasion  for  it.  So  whenever  I  feel  discouraged  by  adverse  cir- 
cumstances I  do  my  best  to  fall  back  on  this  great  source  of  con- 
fidence, and  always  find  that  it  gives  me  strength  to  bear  up 
against  anything  that  may  occur.  I  do  not  see  how  any  one  can 
fill  such  a  position  as  I  do  without  being  constantly  forced  to 
think  of  higher  things  and  the  Supreme  Being.  The  great 
responsibility,  the   feeling  of   personal  weakness  and  incompe- 


PRIVATE  LETTERS. 


403 


tency,  of  entire  dependence  on  the  will  of  God,  the  thousand 
circumstances  entirely  beyond  our  control  that  may  defeat  our 
best-laid  plans,  the  sight  of  poor  human  suffering — all  these 
things  will  force  the  mind  to  seek  rest  above.  ...  I  feel  quite 
well  to-day,  by  far  better  than  at  any  time  before.  I  think  that 
if  I  can  stand  the  test  of  this  rainy  day  all  must  be  right.  I 
will  not  go  out  while  it  rains,  if  I  can  help  it.  .  .  .  The  Span- 
iards are  still  here,  and  I  fear  will  remain  some  time,  unless  this 
rain  drives  them  off.  Prim  is  very  well,  but  it  is  a  nuisance  to 
be  obliged  to  be  polite  when  one's  head  is  full  of  more  impor- 
tant things.  .  .  .  Still  raining  very  hard.  I  don't  know  what 
will  become  of  us ! 

Juru  II,  New  bridge,  a.m. —  .  .  .  Am  very  well  to-day,  and 
the  weather  is  good.  .  .  .  Will  start  in  half  an  hour  or  so  for  the 
other  side  of  the  river.  It  threatens  rain  again,  so  that  I  do  not 
believe  I  can  make  the  entire  tour — probably  only  on  Smith  and 
Sumner ;  do  the  rest  to-morrow.  Besides,  I  do  not  care  to  ride 
too  far  to-day,  as  I  have  not  been  on  horseback  before  since 
the  day  of  the  battle.  I  must  be  careful,  for  it  would  be  utter 
destruction  to  this  army  were  I  to  be  disabled  so  as  not  to  be 
able  to  take  command. 

Bumside  left  yesterday ;  thinks  there  is  a  great  deal  of  Union 
feeling  in  North  Carolina,  and  that  our  gaining  possession  of 
Richmond  will  at  once  bring  North  Carolina  back  into  the 
Union.  ...  I  half-doubt  whether  there  is  much  Union  feeling 
south  of  North  Carolina.  .  .  .  McCall's  division  has  commenced 
arriving ;  some  of  them  reached  the  White  House  last  night. 
This  relieves  me  very  much. 

June  12,  8  A.M.,  New  bridge. —  .  .  .  Am  about  to  break  up 
this  camp  and  move  over  the  Chickahominy  to  Dr.  Trent's 
house  ;  to  the  vicinity,  at  least,  for  I  abominate  houses  when  on 
the  field.  In  addition  have  to  take  a  farewell  ride  some  seven 
or  eight  miles  up  this  side  of  the  river  to  look  again  at  the 
ground  and  give  the  last  instructions  to  Porter  and  Franklin  for 
their  guidance  on  this  side  of  the  river.  I  took  quite  a  ride  yes- 
terday, the  first  since  the  battle,  and  got  through  with  it  nicely. 
I  am  about  as  nearly  well  now  as  I  expect  to  be  in  this  climate  ; 
bright  and  strong  enough  to  fight  a  much  better  battle  than  any 


404  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

yet.     I  had  a  wonderful  telegram  from  the  Secretary  of  War  last 
night ;  he  declares  that  he  is  and  ever  has  been  my  best  friend ! 

Jutu  14,  camp  at  Dr,  Trent's^  Saturday  a.m. —  .  .  .  Your 
letters  reached  me  yesterday  morning  just  as  I  was  starting  out 
on  a  hot  ride  around  the  lines.  Did  not  return  until  late,  and 
then  they  got  up  a  stampede  on  the  other  side  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy  which  kept  me  busy  until  bed-time.  Some  of  the  enemy's 
cavalry  got  in  to  the  railroad,  cut  the  telegraph-wires,  and  burned 
some  wagons.  I  do  not  know  particulars  yet,  but  the  cavalry 
and  some  infantry  are  out  after  them,  and  will,  I  hope,  repay 
secesh  for  his  impudence.  As  it  is,  the  telegraph  is  broken  and 
may  not  be  re-established  for  several  hours.  ...  It  is  terribly 
hot,  so  much  so  that  one  can  hardly  exist.  I  was  up  before  six 
this  morning,  and  even  then  found  it  overpowering ;  the  sun 
bakes  down.  I  have  the  best  possible  place  for  ^  camp,  right 
on  the  summit  of  a  high  hill,  under  the  shade  of  a  couple  of  large 
walnut-trees,  but  the  trouble  this  morning  is  that  no  air  whatever 
is  stirring.  Am  quite  well  now  ;  took  a  long  ride  in  the  hot  sun 
yesterday  and  did  not  feel  it  very  much  ;  am  not  quite  strong 
yet,  and  have  to  be  a  little  careful.  .  .  .  Yesterday  morning 
secesh  commenced  a  very  warm  fire  of  artillery  quite  early,  but 
killed  only  one  man.  By  and  by,  however.  Smith  got  some 
of  his  sharpshooters  near  their  guns,  drove  off  the  gunners  and 
kept  them  off  all  day,  so  that  there  was  no  more  firing.  There 
has  been  none  to-day.  I  learn  that  the  enemy  moved  away 
their  guns  during  the  night ;  this  is  probably  true.  A  couple 
of  days  more  of  this  weather  will  dry  the  roads  and  fields  so  as 
to  render  them  practicable  and  enable  me  to  try  it  again.  I 
am  heartily  tired  of  inactivity,  and  shall  be  only  too  glad  to 
settle  this  matter,  have  the  battle,  and  get  through  with  our 
work.  .  .  .  Senator  Rice  was  here  this  morning.  .  .  . 

• 

June  15,  10.15  P.M.,  Camp  Lincoln. —  .  .  .  We  have  had 
several  skirmishes.  The  rebels  have  attacked  our  pickets  on 
several  points,  but  were  everywhere  beaten  back  with  the  loss  of 
several  killed  and  a  respectable  number  of  prisoners.  .  .  . 

The  worst  interruption  of  all  was  a  "  party  "  of  ladies  and 

gentlemen   that  had   no  more  sense   than   to   insist  upon 

coming  up  here,  Senator and  a  lot  of  others.     All  of  whom 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  405 

I  was  really  glad  to  see,  although  this  was  no  place  for  them. 
I  am  sorry  to  say  that  when  I  heard  of  their  arrival  I  "  swore  '* 
a  little  internally,  and  sent  Russell  flying  out  of  my  tent,  declar- 
ing  that   I   would   not  see  any  of  them.     But  soon  after>vards 

Senator came  here,  and  he  was  so  kind  and  friendly  that 

I  was  at  once  mollifled.  I  talked  with  him  some  time,  and  he 
went  back  to  Van  Vliet's  tent.  I  then  gave  to  Averill  my 
orders  for  a  surprise-party  to-morrow,  to  repay  secesh  for  his 
raid  of  day  before  yesterday.     Then  went  over  to  call  on  Mrs. 

.     There  I  was  in  for  it.     I  was  presented  to  all  the  ladies^ 

listened  to  Mrs. 's  version  of  her  trip  to  Richmond,  and  very 

rapidly  beat  a  retreat,  giving  business  as  an  excuse.  Charles 
got  up  a  lunch  for  the  party,  a  rainstorm  coming  on  in  the 
meanwhile.  When  they  were  nearly  through  I  took  Averill 
over  and  talked  with  them  for  a  while.  Then  they  adjourned 
to  my  tent.  The  two  dear  old  mesdames  were  just  as  good  as 
they  could  be  ;  can  I  say  more  ?  When  they  left  they  asked 
me  to  give  them  sprigs  from  the  bower  in  front  of  my  tent,  so 
I  send  you  one,  too.  ...  I  do  not  think  our  rain  of  to-day 
will  do  much  harm.  \  The  chances  now  are  that  I  will  make 
the  first  advance  on  Tuesday  or  Wednesday.  By  that  time  I 
think  the  ground  will  be  fit  for  the  movements  of  artillery  and 
that  all  our  bridges  will  be  completed.  I  think  the  rebels  will 
make  a  desperate  fight,  but  I  feel  sure  that  we  will  gain  our 
point.  Look  on  the  maps  I  sent  you  a  day  or  two  ago,  and 
find  "  Old  Tavern,"  on  the  road  from  New  bridge  to  Richmond; 
it  is  in  that  vicinity  that  the  next  battle  will  be  fought.  I 
think  that  they  see  it  in  that  light,  and  that  they  are  fully  pre- 
pared to  make  a  desperate  resistance.  I  shall  make  the  first 
battle  mainly  an  artillery  combat.  As  soon  as  I  gain  posses- 
sion of  the  **  Old  Tavern  "  I  will  push  them  in  upon  Richmond 
and  behind  their  works  ;  then  I  will  bring  up  my  heavy  guns^ 
shell  the  city,  and  carry  it  by  assault.  I  speak  very  confidently, 
but  if  you  could  see  the  faces  of  the  troops  as  I  ride  among 
them  you  would  share  my  confidence.  They  will  do  anything 
I  tell  them  to  do.  xl  could  not  help  laughing  when,  on  the 
day  of  the  last  battle,  I  was  riding  along  in  front,  a  man  jumped 
out  in  an  interval  of  the  cheering  and  addressed  me  quite  famil- 
iarly, saying :  "  Halloo,  George !  how  are  you  ?  You  are  the 
only  one  of  the  whole  crowd  of  generals  that  is  worth  a .'* 


4o6  AfcCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

I  won't  fill  up  the  last  word,  but  the  whole  command  shouted, 
"That's  so  !  "...  I  think  there  is  scarcely  a  man  in  this  whole 
army  who  would  not  give  his  life  for  me,  and  willingly  do 
whatever  I  ask.  I  have  tried  them  more  than  once,  and  when- 
ever I  am  near  they  never  fail  me.  The  next  battle  will  doubt- 
less be  a  desperate  one,  but  I  think  that  I  can  so  use  our 
artillery  as  to  make  the  loss  of  life  on  our  side  comparatively 
small.  .  •  . 


June  17,  4  P.M. — The  weather  yesterday  and  to-day  has  been 
splendid.  It  is  clear  and  bright,  but  a  delightfully  cool  breeze 
has  been  blowing  constantly.  The  roads  and  fields  are  drying 
beautifully.  The  river  is  falling  rapidly  ;  our  bridges  are  nearly 
finished,  and  we  shall  soon  be  on  the  move. 


Camp  at  Trent's  House y  June  21,  1862,  10  a.m. —  .  .  .  We 
have  had  good  weather  for  the  last  few  days,  and  have  been 
improving  it  as  best  we  could.  Both  parties  are  active,  but  the 
nature  of  the  country  is  such  as  to  make  our  progress  difficult  in 
the  extreme.  I  hope  to  knock  secesh  out  of  Old  Tavern  and  its 
vicinity  within  a  couple  of  days ;  shall  try  it,  at  all  events.  ...  I 
see  the  Abolitionists  have  got  a  new  dodge  in  my  behalf — the 
White  House  business!  In  the  first  place,  I  never  saw  Col.  Lee 
in  my  life,  and,  of  course,  never  made  any  arrangement  with 
him.  The  house  was  guarded  simply  from  motives  of  respect 
for  the  memory  of  Washington,  which  I  thought  would  be  appre- 
ciated by  every  honest  person  in  the  country.  The  adjacent 
property  has  been  freely  used  for  all  necessary  purposes.  The 
house  has  never  been  needed  for  a  hospital,  and  would  not  ac- 
commodate over  thirty  or  forty  persons  anyhow.  The  "  spring  " 
alluded  to  is  one  of  a  great  many.  There  are  plenty  there,  and 
this  one  is  prohibited  only  because  access  to  it  brings  people  too 
near  the  house.  I  was  not  even  sure  that  it  was  guarded,  and  do 
not  even  now  know  whether  it  is  anything  more  than  the  guard 
placed  over  all  springs  near  camps  to  prevent  them  from  being 
misused  by  the  men.  So  you  have  the  truth  of  the  White  House 
story,  all  of  which  was  in  the  possession  of  the  secretary  some 
ten  days  ago.  I  yesterday  sent  Tripler  down  to  investigate  the 
whole  matter,  and  when   I   receive  his  report  will  nail  the  lie 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  407 

to  the  counter.     wrote  a  letter  to  the  secretary,  in  which 

he  repeats  the  spring  story  as  of  his  own  knowledge ;  that  is,  he 
asserts  it  as  a  fact !  One  thing  is  certain :  I  will  some  day  or 
other  repay  some  of  these  people  with  interest,  and  make  them 
feel  ashamed  of  themselves,  if  there  is  such  a  thing  in  their  com- 
position, which  I  rather  doubt.  I  can't  tell  you  how  sick  I  am  of 
this  kind  of  life.  I  suppose  it  is  the  "  cross  "  that  it  is  my  lot  to 
bear,  and  that  I  should  not  repine.  I  know  it  is  wrong,  and  I  do 
my  best  to  bear  everything  contentedly  ;  but  sometimes  the  old, 
impatient  spirit  will  break  out  and  I  lose  my  temper.  But  I  will 
keep  on  trying  to  do  my  best.  .  .  . 

Jufu  22,  Sunday^  3  p.m. —  ...  By  an  arrival  from  Washing- 
ton to-day  I  learn  that  Stanton  and  Chase  have  fallen  out ;  that 
McDowell  has  deserted  his  friend  C.  and  taken  to  S.!  Alas! 
poor  country  that  should  have  such  rulers.  I  tremble  for  my 
country  when  I  think  of  these  things  ;  but  still  can  trust  that 
God  in  His  infinite  wisdom  will  not  punish  us  as  we  deserve, 
but  will  in  His  own  good  time  bring  order  out  of  chaos  and 
restore  peace  to  this  unhappy  country.  His  will  be  done,  what- 
ever it  may  be !  I  am  as  anxious  as  any  human  being  can  be  to- 
finish  this  war.  ,  Yet  when  I  see  such  insane  folly  behind  me  I 
feel  that  the  final  salvation  of  the  country  demands  the  utmost 
prudence  on  my  part,  and  that  I  must  not  run  the  slightest  risk 
of  disaster,  for  if  anything  happened  to  this  army  our  cause 
would  be  lost.  I  got  up  some  heavy  guns  to-day,  and  hope 
to  give  secesh  a  preliminary  pounding  to-morrow  and  to  make 
one  good  step  next  day.  The  rascals  are  very  strong,  and  out- 
number me  very  considerably  ;  they  are  well  -entrenched  also, 
and  have  all  the  advantages  of  position,  so  I  must  be  prudent ; 
but  I  will  yet  succeed,  notwithstanding  all  they  do  and  leave 
undone  in  Washington  to  prevent  it.  I  would  not  have  on  my 
conscience  what  those  men  have  for  all  the  world.  I  am  sorry 
that  I  shall  lose  the  dear  old  Prince  de  Joinville  in  a  few  days  ; 
he  is  obliged  to  return  to  Europe.  Gen.  Prim  has  sent  me  his 
photograph.  .  .  . 

It  is  quite  hot  this  afternoon.  ...  It  is  almost  time  for  our 
evening  skirmish.  Secesh  has  been  very  quiet  to-day ;  scarcely 
fired  a  shot.  I  am  very  glad  of  it,  as  it  has  enabled  me  to  give 
my  men  a  good,  quiet  rest  for  Sunday. 


408  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY, 

.June  23,  3  P.M. — I  am  delighted  that  you  are  so  much  pleased 
at  Orange.  It  must  be  a  lovely  place  from  your  description. 
Will  the  doctor  invite  me  to  pay  you  a  visit  there,  do  you  think  ? 
How  do  you  occupy  yourself?  Or  are  you  contented  just  to 
rest  and  be  quiet  ?  That  is  my  idea  of  happiness  now — rest  with 
you  and  the  baby.  We  have  had  rather  an  exciting  day  of  it. 
The  enemy  has  been  making  some  rather  mysterious  movements, 
and  I  have  taken  advantage  of  them  to  push  forward  our  pickets 
considerably  on  the  left.  I  don't  yet  know  exactly  what  it  means, 
but  so  far  it  has  been  of  advantage  to  us,  and  you  may  be  sure 
that  I  won't  be  caught  in  any  trap.  We  have  had  a  sharp  thun- 
der-shower this  afternoon,  and  it  will  be  of  benefit  by  cooling 
and  clearing  the  air.  There  has  not  been  rain  enough  to  do 
any  harm  yet. 

10.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  You  may  be  sure  that  no  man  in  this  army 
is  so  anxious  as  its  general  to  finish  the  campaign.  Every  poor 
fellow  that  is  killed  or  wounded  almost  haunts  me !  My  only 
consolation  is  that  I  have  honestly  done  my  best  to  save  as  many 
lives  as  possible,  and  that  many  others  might  have  done  less 
towards  it. 

I  have  had  a  rather  anxious  day,  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
being  mysterious ;  but  I  have  gained  something,  and  am  ready  for 
any  eventuality,  I  think.  I  have  a  kind  of  presentiment  that  to- 
morrow will  bring  forth  something — what^  I  do  not  know.  We 
will  see  when  the  time  arrives.  I  expect  to  be  able  to  take  a 
decisive  step  in  advance  day  after  to-morrow,  and,  if  I  succeed, 
will  gain  a  couple  of  miles  towards  Richmond.  It  now  looks  to 
me  as  if  the  operations  would  resolve  themselves  into  a  series  of 
partial  attacks  rather  than  a  general  battle. 

24///,  10  A.M. — I  was  interrupted  just  here  by  some  stampede 
telegrams  that  kept  me  up  until  1.30  or  2  this  morning.  In  the 
meantime  a  terrible  storm  came  up  and  blew  this  unhappy  sheet 
into  the  mud  and  rain.  I  send  it  as  it  is,  however,  as  a  slight 
specimen  of  the  "  sacred  soil,"  also  because  I  am  about  starting 
out  on  a  ride,  from  which  I  am  not  likely  to  return  before  the 
mail  leaves  camp.  Nothing  of  interest  this  morning  ;  all  quiet ; 
weather  cloudy,  and  may  rain  to-day  again. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  409 

Telegram — June  26,  1862. —  .  .  .  Did  not  write  yesterday ; 
was  on  the  battle-field  all  day.  Have  been  up  and  in  the  saddle 
all  night,  and  do  not  expect' to  be  able  to  write  more  than  a  line 
to-day.  Will  probably  be  up  all  night  again.  .  .  .  Our  afiFair 
yesterday  perfectly  successful. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

Beginning  of  the  Seven  Days — McDowell  coming,  but  not  yet — Mc* 
Clellan  resolves  on  flank  movement  to  the  James  river — Prepara- 
tions— Battle  of  Gaines's  Mill — The  movement  goes  on — McClellan 
charges  Stanton  with  intent  to  sacrifice  the  annj. 

On  the  26th,  the  day  upon  which  I  had  decided  as  the  time 
for  our  final  advance,  the  enemy  attacked  our  right  in  strong: 
force,  and  turned  my  attention  to  the  protection  of  our  com- 
munications and  depots  of  supply. 

The  event  was  a  bitter  confirmation  of  the  military  judg- 
ment which  had  been  reiterated  to  my  superiors  from  the  incep- 
tion and  through  the  progress  of  the  Peninsular  campaign. 

I  notified  the  Secretary  of  War  in  the  following  despatch  : 

12  M. — I  have  just  heard  that  our  advanced  cavalry  pickets 
on  the  left  bank  of  Chickahominy  are  being  driven  in.  It  is 
probably  Jackson's  advanced  guard.  If  this  be  true  you  may^ 
not  hear  from  me  for  some  days,  as  my  communications  will 
probably  be  cut  off.  The  case  is  perhaps  a  difficult  one,  but  I 
shall  resort  to  desperate  measures,  and  will  do  my  best  to  out- 
manoeuvre, outwit,  and  outfight  the  enemy.  Do  not  believe 
reports  of  disaster,  and  do  not  be  discouraged  if  you  learn  that 
my  communications  are  cut  off,  and  even  Yorktown  in  possession 
of  the  enemy.  Hope  for  the  best,  and  I  will  not  deceive  the 
hopes  you  formerly  placed  in  me. 

On  the  same  day  I  received  the  following  despatches  from 
the  Secretary  of  War  : 

**  6  P.M. — Arrangements  are  being  made  as  rapidly  as  possible 
to  send  you  five  thousand  (5,000)  men  as  fast  as  they  can  be 
brought  from  Manassas  to  Alexandria  and  embarked,  which  can 
be  done  sooner  than  to  wait  for  transportation  at  Fredericksburg. 
They  will  be  followed  by  more,  if  needed.  McDowell,  Banks, 
and  Fremont's  force  will  be  consolidated  as  the  Army  of  Virginia, 
and  will  operate  promptly  in  your  aid  by  land.  Nothing  will  be 
spared  to  sustain  you,  and  I  have  undoubting  faith  in  your  suc- 
cess.    Keep  me  advised  fully  of  your  condition." 

**  11.20  P.M. — Your  telegram  of  6.15   has  just  been  received. 

410 


PRRPARA  TIONS  ON  JAMES  RIVER,  4 1 1 

The  circumstances  that  have  hitherto  rendered  it  impossible  for 
the  government  to  send  you  any  more  reinforcements  than  has 
been  done,  have  been  so  distinctly  stated  to  you  by  the  President 
that  it  is  needless  for  me  to  repeat  them. 

"  Every  effort  has  been  made  by  the  President  and  myself  to 
strengthen  you.  King's  division  has  reached  Falmouth  ;  Shields's 
division  and  Ricketts's  division  are  at  Manassas.  The  President 
designs  to  send  a  part  of  that  force  to  aid  you  as  speedily  as  it 
can  be  done.'* 

The  following  was  sent  at  2.30  p.m.: 

Your  despatch  and  that  of  the  President  received.  Jackson 
is  driving  in  my  pickets,  etc.,  on  the  other  side  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  where  reinforcements  ought  to 
go,  as  I  am  yet  unable  to  predict  result  of  approaching  battle. 
It  will  probably  be  better  that  they  should  go  to  Fort  Monroe, 
and  thence  according  to  state  of  afifairs  when  they  arrive. 

It  is  not  probable  that  I  can  maintain  telegraphic  com- 
munication more  than  an  hour  or  two  longer. 

But  5,000  of  the  reinforcements  spoken  of  in  these  communi- 
cations came  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  these  reached 
us  at  Harrison's  Bar  after  the  Seven  Days. 

In  anticipation  of  a  speedy  advance  on  Richmond,  to  provide 
for  the  contingency  of  our  communications  with  the  depot  at  the 
White  House  being  severed  by  the  enemy,  and  at  the  same  time 
to  be  prepared  for  a  change  of  the  base  of  our  operations  to 
James  river,  if  circumstances  should  render  it  advisable,  I  had 
made  arrangements  more  than  a  week  previous  (on  the  i8th)  to 
have  transports  with  supplies  of  provisions  and  forage,  under  a 
convoy  of  gunboats,  sent  up  James  river.  They  reached  Har- 
rison's Landing  in  time  to  be  available  for  the  army  on  its  arrival 
at  that  point.  Events  soon  proved  this  change  of  base  to  be, 
though  most  hazardous  and  difficult,  the  only  prudent   course. 

Early  on  the  25th  Gen.  Porter  was  instructed  to  send  out 
reconnoitring  parties  towards  Hanover  Court-House  to  discover 
the  position  and  force  of  the  enemy,  and  to  destroy  the  bridges 
on  the  Tolopotamy  as  far  as  possible. 

Up  to  the  26th  of  June  the  operations  against  Richmond 
had  been  conducted  along  the  roads  leading  to  it  from  the  east 
and  northeast.      The  superiority  of  the  James  river  route,  as 

a  line  of  attack  and  supply,  is  too  obvious  to  need  exposition. 

31 


412  MfCLELLAX'S  OIVX  STORY 

My  own  opinion  on  that  subject  had  been  earljr  giTOL 
4lih!«i|mtion  of  all  ho|>e  of  the  co-operation  by  land  of 
MrhowcirH  forces,  deemed  to  be  occupied  in  the  defence  of 
WaHhitigton,  thuir  inability  to  hold  or  defeat  Jackson,  diirlourd 
HU  opportunity  to  the  enemy,  and  a  new  danger  to  mj  li^t, 
Miul  to  t!)c  long  line  of  supplies  from  the  White  House  to  the 
('lui'k«ihoiniiiy,  and  forced  an  immediate  change  of  base 
thi*  IViiiiisuta.  To  that  end,  from  the  evening  of  the  26th, 
ciu*i>;y  of  the  army  was  bent. 

Sui  h  a  change  of  base,  in  the  presence  of  a  powerful  enemj, 
in  oiu*  of  the  most  difficult  undertakings  in  war,  but  I  was  coii- 
lidciit  ill  the  valor  and  discipline  of  my  brave  army,  and  knew 
that  it  could  be  trusted  e4|ually  to  retreat  or  advance,  and  to 
fight  the  HcricH  of  battles  now  inevitable,  whether  retreating  from 
victoricH  or  inarching  through  defeats  ;  and,  in  short,  I  had  no 
d<>ul>i  whatever  of  its  ability,  even  against  superior  numbers,  to 
tight  its  way  through  to  the  James,  and  get  a  position  whence  a 
Muc^^cNshtl  advance  upon  Rithinond  would  be  again  possible. 
Thcii  superb  conduct  through  the  next  seven  days  justified  mj 
faith. 

()ii  the  name  day  (••dth)  K^t\:\\.  Van  Vliet,  chief-quartermaster 
of  the  A I  HIV  (»l  llic  Potomac,  l)y  my  orders  telegraphed  to  CoL 
lii^.ttU,  ipi.iMeiiiiastcr  at  the  White  House,  as  follows: 

**  Kmi  ihr  K  .IIS  111  I  he  last  moment,  and  load  them  with  provi- 
ttioii^  intl  iMiMMMiiiioti.  l.o.ul  every  wagon  you  have  with  sub- 
^:ul.  III  *■,  iMit  ii ml  them  it»  Savage's  Station  by  way  of  Bottom's 
hnif,'*  h  v«»n  nf ''I'ligcd  to  ahaiulon  White  House  bum  every- 
ihiii,'  Hill  yitti  •  iiiiitit  (;e(  nti.  Vou  tiuist  throw  all  our  supplies 
ii|>  ill'  I  MiH  .4  ii\ti  .1 «  simii  a>^  possii>le,  and  accompany  them 
yi,.iis  li    rtiili    ill   >«im    hiMe.      It  will   l)e  of  vast  importance  to 

•  .1  it.ii  ,1.  it*  |M'i  4  iiii  lames  liver  without  delay,  if  we  abandon 

>\i».»-  il  .I.'  I  will  keep  \iiu  advised  of  everv  movement  so 
I'.M,.    ..   •),■    „ii.^  wiiik  .    iiici   that  you  must  exercise  your  own 

\\\  ill   .■    '  ..mill  iimI'1  wcic  nlvM-il.     Oil  the  26th  orders  wcrc 
.III    I  .     ill    III-     «>>i|'i    I  oiiiiii.ntJeis  on    ihe  right   bank  of   the 

I  III*  I-  ill •»,  !.•  !•>    |>ii|>.iitil  hi  M'tui  .Is  manv  troops  as  they 

I  •iii-i  |..i  '.It  ilt>  h  ll.M\iiif.;  tl.i\  ui  ilie  IcU  bank  of  the  river. 
1  f  u  I  I  iiiMh.  I  .  i«.ii  ill  .ii ti«  iit'iis  In  Iiold  i.»eii.  Slocum's  divi- 
..»-4u  ill   I    tl»»»         '•>  -iivliu.iK   .»i   ihe   -v^h,  and,  if  heavy  firing 


414  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

should  at  that  time  be  heard  in  the  direction  of  Gen.  Porter,  to 
move  at  once  to  his  assistance  without  further  orders. 

At  noon  on  the  26th  the  approach  of  the  enemy,  who  had 
crossed  above  Meadow  bridge,  was  discovered  by  the  advanced 
pickets  at  that  point,  and  at  12.30  p.m.  they  were  attacked  and 
driven  in.  All  the  pickets  were  now  called  in,  and  the  regiment 
and  battery  at  Mechanicsville  withdrawn. 

Meade's  brigade  was  ordered  up  as  a  reserve  in  rear  of  the 
line,  and  shortly  after  Martindale's  and  Griffin's  brigades,  of 
Morell's  division,  were  moved  forward  and  deployed  on  the  right 
of  McCall's  division,  towards  Shady  Grove  church,  to  cover  that 
flank.  Neither  of  these  three  brigades,  however,  were  warmly 
engaged,  though  two  of  Griffin's  regiments  relieved  a  portion  of 
Reynolds's  line  just  at  the  close  of  the  action. 

The  position  of  our  troops  was  a  strong  one,  extending  along 
the  left  bank  of  Beaver  Dam  creek,  the  left  resting  on  the  Chicka- 
hominy  and  the  right  in  thick  woods  beyond  the  upper  road  from 
Mechanicsville  to  Cold  Harbor  The  lower  or  river  road  crossed 
the  creek  at  Ellison's  Mill.  Seymour's  brigade  held  the  left  of 
the  line  from  the  Chickahominy  to  beyond  the  mill,  partly  in 
woods  and  partly  in  clear  ground,  and  Reynolds's  the  right,  prin- 
cipally in  the  woods  and  covering  the  upper  road.  The  artillery 
occupied  positions  commanding  the  roads  and  the  open  ground 
across  the  creek. 

Timber  had  been  felled,  rifle-pits  dug,  and  the  position  gene- 
rally prepared  with  a  care  that  greatly  contributed  to  the  success 
of  the  day.  The  passage  of  the  creek  was  difficult  along  the 
whole  front,  and  impracticable  for  artillery,  except  by  the  two 
roads  where  the  main  efforts  of  the  enemy  were  directed. 

At  three  p.m.  he  formed  his  line  of  battle,  rapidly  advanced 
his  skirmishers,  and  soon  attacked  our  whole  line,  making  at  the 
same  time  a  determined  attempt  to  force  the  passage  of  the 
upper  road,  which  was  successfully  resisted  by  Gen.  Reynolds. 
After  a  severe  struggle  he  was  forced  to  retire  with  very  heavy 
loss. 

A  rapid  artillery-fire,  with  desultory  skirmishing,  was  main- 
tained along  the  whole  front,  while  the  enemy  massed  his  troops 
for  another  effort  at  the  lower  road  about  two  hours  later,  which 
was  likewise  repulsed  by  Gen.  Seymour  with  heavy  slaughter. 

The  firing  ceased  and  the  enemy  retired  about  nine  p.m.,  the 


THE  SEVEN  DA  YS,  4 1 5 

action  having  lasted  six  hours,  with  entire  success  to  our  arms. 
But  few,  if  any,  of  Jackson's  troops  were  engaged  on  this  day. 
The  portion  of  the  enemy  encountered  were  chiefly  from  the 
troops  on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  who  crossed  near  Meadow 
bridge  and  at  Mechanicsville. 

The  information  in  my  possession  soon  after  the  close  of  this 
action  convinced  me  that  Jackson  was  really  approaching  in  large 
force.  The  position  on  Beaver  Dam  creek,  although  so  success- 
fully defended,  had  its  right  flank  too  much  in  the  air  and  was 
too  far  from  the  main  army  to  make  it  available  to  retain  it 
longer.  I  therefore  determined  to  send  the  heavy  guns  at 
Hogan's  and  Gaines's  houses  over  the  Chickahominy  during  the 
night,  with  as  many  of  the  wagons  of  the  5th  corps  as  possible, 
and  to  withdraw  the  corps  itself  to  a  position  stretching  around 
the  bridges,  where  its  flanks  would  be  reasonably  secure  and  it 
would  be  within  supporting  distance  of  the  main  army.  Gen. 
Porter  carried  out  my  orders  to  that  effect. 

It  was  not  advisable  at  that  time,  even  had  it  been  practi- 
cable, to  withdraw  the  5th  corps  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy. Such  a  movement  would  have  exposed  the  rear  of  the 
army,  placed  as  between  two  fires,  and  enabled  Jackson's  fresh 
troops  to  interrupt  the  movement  to  James  river  by  crossing  the 
Chickahominy  in  the  vicinity  of  Jones's  bridge  before  we  could 
reach  Malvern  Hill  with  our  trains.  I  determined  then  to  resist 
Jackson  with  the  5th  corps,  reinforced  by  all  our  disposable 
troops  in  the  new  position  near  the  bridge-heads,  in  order  to 
cover  the  withdrawal  of  the  trains  and  heavy  guns,  and  to  give 
time  for  the  arrangements  to  secure  the  adoption  of  the  James 
river  as  our  line  of  supplies  in  lieu  of  the  Pamunkey. 

The  greater  part  of  the  heavy  guns  and  wagons  having  been 
removed  to  the  right  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  the  delicate^ 
operation  of  withdrawing  the  troops   from   Beaver  Dam  creek  . 
was  commenced  shortly  before  daylight  and   successfully  exe- 
cuted. 

Meade's  and  Griffin's  brigades  were  the  first  to  leave  the 
ground.  Seymour's  brigade  covered  the  rear,  with  the  horse- 
batteries  of  Capts.  Robertson  and  Tidball ;  but  the  withdrawal 
was  so  skilful  and  gradual,  and  the  repulse  of  the  preceding  day 
so  complete,  that,  although  the  enemy  followed  the  retreat  closely 
and  some  skirmishing  occurred,  he  did  not  appear  in  front  of  the 


4r6  MtCLBLLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

new  line  in  force  till  about  noon  of  the  37th,  when  we  were  pre- 
pared to  receive  him. 

About  this  time  Gen.  Porter,  believing  that  Gen.  Stoneman 
would  be  cut  off  from  him,  sent  him  orders  to  fall  back  on  the 
White  House  and  afterwards  rejoin  the  army  as  best  he  could. 

On  the  morning  of  the  z/th  of  June,  during  the  withdrawal  of 
his  troops  from  MechanicsviUe  to  the  selected  position  already 
mentioned,  Gen.  Porter  telegraphed  as  follows : 

"  I  hope  to  do  without  aid,  though  I  request  that  Franklin  or 
some  other  command  be  held  ready  to  reinforce  me.  The  enemy 
are  so  close  that  I  expect  to  be  hard  pressed  in  front.  I  hope  to 
have  a  portion  in  position  to  cover  the  retreat.  This  is  a  deli- 
cate movement,  but,  relying  on  the  good  qualities  of  the  com- 
manders of  divisions  and  brigades,  I  expect  to  get  back  and  hold 
the  new  line." 

This  shows  how  closely   Porter's  retreat  was  followed. 

Notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  used  during  the  entire  night 
to  remove  the  heavy  guns  and  wagons,  some  of  the  siege-guns 
were  still  in  position  at  Gaines's  house  after  sunrise,  and  were 
finally  hauled  off  by  hand.  The  new  position  of  the  5th  corps 
was  about  an  arc  of  a  circle,  covering  the  approaches  to  the 
bridges  which  connected  our  right  wing  with  the  troops  on  the 
opposite  side  of  the  river. 

Morell's  division  held  the  left  of  the  line  in  a  strip  of  woods 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Gaines's  Mill  stream,  resting  its  left  flank 
on  the  descent  to  the  Chickahominy,  which  was  swept  by  our 
artillery  on  both  sides  of  the  river,  and  extending  into  open 
ground  on  the  right  towards  New  Cold  Harbor.  In  this  line 
Gen.  Butterfield's  brigade  held  the  extreme  left ;  Gen.  Martin- 
dale's  joined  his  right,  and  Gen.  Griffin,  still  further  to  the 
right,  joined  the  left  of  Gen.  Sykes's  division,  which,  partly  in 
woods  and  partly  in  open  ground,  extended  in  rear  of  Cold 
Harbor. 

Each  brigade  had  in  reserve  two  of  its  own  regiments ; 
McCall's  division,  having  been  engaged  on  the  day  before,  was 
formed  in  a  second  line  in  rear  of  the  first ;  Meade's  brigade 
on  the  left,  near  the  Chickahominy  ;  Reynolds's  brigade  on  the 
right,  covering  the  approaches  from  Cold  Harbor  and  Despatch 
Station  to   Sumner's  bridge,  and   Seymour's  in   reserve  to  the 


THE  SEVEN  DAYS.  417 

second  line  still  further  in  rear.  Gen.  P.  St.  G.  Cooke,  with 
five  companies  of  the  5  th  Regular  Cavalry,  two  squadrons  of 
the  ist  Regular  Cavalry,  and  three  squadrons  of  the  ist  Penn. 
Cavalry  (lancers),  were  posted  behind  a  hill  in  rear  of  the  posi- 
tion, and  near  the  Chickahominy,  to  aid  in  watching  the  left  flank 
and  defending  the  slope  to  the  river. 

The  troops  were  all  in  position  by  noon,  with  the  artillery 
on  the  commanding  ground,  and  in  the  intervals  between  the 
divisions  and  brigades.  Besides  the  division  batteries  there 
were  Robertson's  and  Tidball's  horse-batteries  from  the  artil- 
lery reserve ;  the  latter  posted  on  the  right  of  Sykes's  division, 
and  the  former  on  the  extreme  left  of  the  line,  in  the  valley  of 
the  Chickahominy. 

Shortly  after  noon  the  enemy  was  discovered  approaching 
in  force,  and  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  entire  position 
was  to  be  attacked.  His  skirmishers  advanced  rapidly,  and 
soon  the  fire  became  heavy  along  our  whole  front.  At  two  p.m. 
Gen.  Porter  asked  for  reinforcements.  Slocum's  division  of  the 
6th  corps  was  ordered  to  cross  to  the  left  bank  of  the  river  by 
Alexander's  bridge,  and  proceed  to  his  support. 

Gen.  Porter's  first  call  for  reinforcements,  through  Gen.  Bar- 
nard, did  not  reach  me,  nor  his  demand  for  more  axes  through 
the  same  officer.  By  three  p.m.  the  engagement  had  become  so 
severe,  and  the  enemy  were  so  greatly  superior  in  numbers,  that 
the  entire  second  line  and  reserves  had  been  moved  forward 
to  sustain  the  first  line  against  repeated  and  desperate  assaults 
along  the  whole  front. 

At  3.30  Slocum's  division  reached  the  field,  and  was  imme- 
diately brought  into  action  at  the  weak  points  of  our  line. 

On  the  left  the  contest  was  for  the  strip  of  woods  running 
almost  at  right  angles  to  the  Chickahominy,  in  front  of  Adams's 
house,  or  between  that  and.  Gaines's  house.  The  enemy  several 
times  charged  up  to  this  wood,  but  were  each  time  driven  back 
with  heavy  loss.  The  regulars  of  Sykes's  division,  on  the  right, 
also  repulsed  several  strong  attacks. 

But  our  own  loss  under  the  tremendous  fire  of  such  greatly 
superior  numbers  was  very  severe,  and  the  troops,  most  of  whom 
had  been  under  arms  more  than  two  days,  were  rapidly  becom- 
ing exhausted  by  the  masses  of  fresh  men  constantly  brought 
against  them. 


41  8  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

When  Gen.  Slocum's  division  arrived  on  the  ground  it 
increased  Gen.  Porter's  force  to  some  35,000,  who  were  proba- 
bly contending  against  about  70,000  of  the  enemy.  The  line 
was  severely  pressed  in  several  points ;  and  as  its  being  pierced 
at  any  one  would  have  been  fatal,  it  was  unavoidable  for  Gen. 
Porter,  who  was  required  to  hold  his  position  until  night,  to 
divide  Slocum's  division,  and  send  parts  of  it,  even  single  regi- 
ments, to  the  points  most  threatened. 

About  five  P.M.,  Gen.  Porter  having  reported  his  position  as 
critical,  French's  and  Meagher's  brigades,  of  Richardson's  divi- 
sion (3d  corps),  were  ordered  to  cross  to  his  support.  The 
enemy  attacked  again  in  great  force  at  six  p.m.,  but  failed  to 
break  our  lines,  though  our  loss  was  very  heavy. 

About  seven  p.m.  they  threw  fresh  troops  against  Gen.  Porter 
with  still  greater  fury,  and  finally  gained  the  woods  held  by  our 
left.  This  reverse,  aided  by  the  confusion  that  followed  an 
unsuccessful  charge  by  five  companies  of  the  5th  Cavalry,  and 
followed,  as  it  was,  by  more  determined  assaults  on  the  remain- 
der of  our  lines,  now  outflanked,  caused  a  general  retreat  from 
our  position  to  the  hill  in  rear  overlooking  the  bridge. 

French's  and  Meagher's  brigades  now  appeared,  driving 
before  them  the  stragglers  who  were  thronging  towards  the 
bridge. 

These  brigades  advanced  boldly  to  the  front,  and  by  their 
example,  as  well  as  by  the  steadiness  of  their  bearing,  reani- 
mated our  own  troops  and  warned  the  enemy  that  reinforce- 
ments had  arrived.  It  was  now  dusk.  The  enemy,  already 
repulsed  several  times  with  terrible  slaughter,  and  hearing  the 
shouts  of  the  fresh  troops,  failed  to  follow  up  their  advantage. 
This  gave  an  opportunity  to  rally  our  men  behind  the  brigades 
of  Gens.  French  and  Meagher,  and  they  again  advanced  up  the 
hill,  ready  to  repulse  another  attack.  During  the  night  our 
thin  and  exhausted  regiments  were  all  withdrawn  in  safety,  and 
by  the  following  morning  all  had  reached  the  other  side  of  the 
stream.  The  regular  infantry  formed  the  rear-guard,  and  about 
six  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  28th  crossed  the  river,  destroy- 
ing the  bridge  behind  them. 

Although  we  were  finally  forced  from  our  first  line  after  the 
enemy  had  been  repeatedly  driven  back,  yet  the  objects  sought 
for   had   been   obtained.     The   enemy   was   held   at   bay.     Our 


THE  SEVEN  DAYS.  419 

siege-guns  and  material  were  saved,  and  the  right  wing  had 
now  joined  the  main  body  of  the  army. 

The  number  of  guns  captured  by  the  enemy  at  this  battle 
was  twenty-two,  three  of  which  were  lost  by  being  run  off  the 
bridge  during  the  final  withdrawal. 

Great  credit  is  due  for  the  efficiency  and  bravery  with  which 
this  important  arm  of  the  service  (the  artillery)  was  fought,  and 
it  was  not  until  the  last  successful  charge  of  the  enemy  that  the 
cannoneers  were  driven  from  their  pieces  or  struck  down  and 
the  guns  captured.  Dietrich's,  Kauerhem's,  and  Grimm's  batter- 
ies took  position  during  the  engagement  in  the  front  of  Gen. 
Smith's  line  on  the  right  bank  of  the  stream,  and,  with  a  battery 
of  siege-guns  served  by  the  ist  Conn.  Artillery,  helped  to  drive 
back  the  enemy  in  front  of  Gen.  Porter. 

So  threatening  were  the  movements  of  the  enemy  on  both 
banks  of  the  Chickahominy  that  it  was  impossible  to  decide 
until  the  afternoon  where  the  real  attack  would  be  made.  Large 
forces  of  infantry  were  seen  during  the  day  near  the  Old  Tavern, 
on  Franklin's  right,  and  threatening  demonstrations  were  fre- 
quently made  along  the  entire  line  on  this  side  of  the  river, 
which  rendered  it  necessary  to  hold  a  considerable  force  in  posi- 
tion to  meet  them. 

On  the  26th  a  circular  had  been  sent  to  the  corps  command- 
ers on  the  right  bank  of  the  river,  asking  them  how  many  of  their 
troops  could  be  spared  to  reinforce  Gen.  Porter  after  retaining 
sufficient  to  hold  their  positions  for  twenty-four  hours. 

Gen.  Heintzelman  replied : 

"  I  think  I  can  hold  the  entrenchments  with  four  brigades  for 
twenty-four  hours.  That  would  leave  two  brigades  disposable 
for  service  on  the  other  side  of  the  river,  but  the  men  are  so 
tired  and  worn  out  that  I  fear  they  would  not  be  in  a  condition 
to  fight  after  making  a  march  of  any  distance.  .  .  ." 

Telegrams  from  Gen.  Heintzelman  on  the  25th  and  26th  had 
indicated  that  the  enemy  was  in  large  force  in  front  of  Gens. 
Hooker  and  Kearny,  and  on  the  Charles  City  road  (Longstreet, 
Hill,  and  Huger),  and  Gen.  Heintzelman  expressed  the  opinion 
on  the  night  of  the  25th  that  he  could  not  hold  his  advanced 
position  without  reinforcements. 

Gen.  Keyes  telegraphed : 

3« 


420  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

"  As  to  how  many  men  will  be  able  to  hold  this  position  for 
twenty-four  hours,  I  must  answer,  All  I  have,  if  the  enemy  is  as 
strong  as  ever  in  front,  it  having  at  all  times  appeared  to  me  that 
our  forces  on  this  flank  are  small  enough." 

On  the  morning  of  the  27th  the  following  despatch  was  sent 
to  Gen.  Sumner  :  "  Gen.  Smith  just  reports  that  *  six  or  eight 
regiments  have  moved  down  to  the  woods  in  front  of  Gen.  Sum- 
ner.* "  At  eleven  o'clock  a.m.  Gen.  Sumner  telegraphed  :  **  The 
enemy  threatens  an  attack  on  my  right  near  Smith."  At  12.30 
P.M.  he  telegraphed :  "  Sharp  shelling  on  both  sides."  At  2.45 
P.M.:  "  Sharp  musketry-firing  in  front  of  Burns.  We  are  replying 
with  artillery  and  infantry.  The  man  on  the  look-out  reports 
some  troops  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  about  opposite  my  right 
and  Smith's  left ;  the  number  cannot  be  made  out." 

In  accordance  with  orders  given  on  the  night  of  the  26th, 
Gen.  Slocum's  division  commenced  crossing  the  river,  to  support 
Gen.  Porter,  soon  after  daybreak  on  the  morning  of  the  27th  ; 
but,  as  the  firing  in  front  of  Gen.  Porter  ceased,  the  movement 
was  suspended.  At  two  p.m.  Gen.  Porter  called  for  reinforce- 
ments. I  ordered  them  at  once,  and  at  3.25  p.m.  sent  him  the 
following  : 

"  Slocum  is  now  crossing  Alexander's  bridge  with  his  whole 
command.  Enemy  has  commenced  an  infantry  attack  on  Smith's 
left.  I  have  ordered  down  Sumner's  and  Heintzelman's  re- 
serves, and  you  can  count  on  the  whole  of  Slocum's.  Go  on 
as  you  have  begun." 

During  the  day  the  following  despatches  were  received,  which 
will  show  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy  : 

Gen.  Franklin  telegraphed  :  "  Gen.  Smith  thinks  the  enemy 
are  massing  heavy  columns  in  the  clearings  to  the  right  of  James 
Garnett's  house  and  on  the  other  side  of  the  river  opposite 
it.  Three  regiments  are  reported  to  be  moving  from  Sumner's 
to  Smith's  front.  The  arrangements  are  very  good  made  by 
Smith." 

Afterwards  he  telegraphed  :  "  The  enemy  has  begun  an  at- 
tack on  Smith's  left  with  infantry.  I  know  no  details."  After- 
wards the  following  :  "  The  enemy  has  opened  on  Smith  from  a 


THE   SEVEN  DAYS.  42  I 

battery  of  three  pieces  to  the  right  of  the  White  House.  Our 
shells  are  bursting  well,  and  Smith  thinks  Sumner  will  soon  have 
a  cross-fire  upon  them  that  will  silence  them." 

Afterwards  (at  5.50  p.m.)  the  following  was  sent  to  Gen. 
Keyes  :  "  Please  send  one  brigade  of  Couch's  division  to  these 
headquarters  without  a  moment's  delay.  A  staff  officer  will  be 
here  to  direct  the  brigade  where  to  go." 

Subsequently  the  following  was  sent  to  Gens.  Sumner  and 
Franklin  :  "  Is  there  any  sign  of  the  enemy  being  in  force  in 
your  front  ?  Can  you  spare  any  more  force  to  be  sent  to  Gen. 
Porter  ?     Answer  at  once." 

At  5.15  P.M.  the  following  was  received  from  Gen.  Franklin  : 
"  I  do  not  think  it  prudent  to  take  any  more  troops  from  here  at 
present." 

Gen.  Sumner  replied  :  "  If  the  general  desires  to  trust  the 
defence  of  my  position  to  my  front  line  alone,  I  can  send  French 
with  three  regiments  and  Meagher,  with  his  brigade,  to  the  right ; 
everything  is  so  uncertain  that  I  think  it  would  be  hazardous  to 
do  it." 

These  two  brigades  were  sent  to  reinforce  Gen.  Porter,  as  has 
been  observed. 

At  5.25  P.M.  I  sent  the  following  to  Gen.  Franklin : 


Porter  is  hard  pressed  ;  it  is  not  a  question  of  prudence,  but 
of  possibilities.  Can  you  possibly  maintain  your  position  until 
dark  with  two  brigades?  I  have  ordered  eight  regiments  of 
Sumner's  to  support  Porter ;  one  brigade  of  Couch's  to  this 
place. 

Heintzelman's  reserve  to  go  in  rear  of  Sumner.  If  possible, 
send  a  brigade  to  support  Porter.  It  should  follow  the  regiments 
ordered  from  Sumner. 


At  7.35  P.M.  the  following  was  sent  to  Gen.  Sumner  :  "  If  it  is 
j)Ossible,  send  another  brigade  to  reinforce  Gen.  Smith;  it  is  said 
three  heavy  columns  of  infantry  are  moving  on  him." 

From  the  foregoing  despatches  it  will  be  seen  that  all  dispos- 
able troops  were  sent  from  the  right  bank  of  the  river  to  rein- 
force Gen.  Porter,  and  that  the  corps  commanders  were  left  with 
smaller  forces  to  hold  their  positions  than  they  deemed  adequate. 
To  have  done  more,  even  though  Porter's  reverse  had  been  pre- 


422  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

vented,  would  have  had  the  still  more  disastrous  result  of  imper- 
illing the  whole  movement  across  the  Peninsula. 

The  operations  of  this  day  proved  the  numerical  superiority 
of  the  enemy,  and  made  it  evident  that  while  he  had  a  large  army 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  which  had  already  turned 
our  right  and  was  in  position  to  intercept  the  communications 
with  our  depot  at  the  White  House,  he  was  also  in  large  force 
between  our  army  and  Richmond.    I  therefore  effected  a  junction 

* 

of  our  forces. 

This  might  probably  have  been  executed  on  either  side  of  the 
Chickahominy,  and  if  the  concentration  had  been  effected  on  the 
left  bank  it  is  possible  we  might,  with  our  entire  force,  have  de- 
feated the  enemy  there  ;  but  at  that  time  they  held  the  roads  lead- 
ing to  the  White  House,  so  that  it  would  have  been  impossible  to 
have  sent  forward  supply-trains  in  advance  of  the  army  in  that 
direction,  and  the  guarding  of  those  trains  would  have  seriously 
embarrassed  our  operations  in  the  battle  we  would  have  been 
compelled  to  fight,  if  concentrated  on  that  bank  of  the  river. 
Moreover,  we  would  at  once  have  been  followed  by  the  enemy's 
forces  upon  the  Richmond  side  of  the  river  operating  upon  our 
rear ;  and  if,  in  the  chances  of  war,  we  had  been  ourselves  de- 
feated in  the  effort,  we  would  have  been  forced  to  fall  back  to 
the  White  House,  and  probably  to  Fort  Monroe  ;  and,  as  both 
our  flanks  and  rear  would  then  have  been  entirely  exposed,  our 
entire  supply-train,  if  not  the  greater  part  of  the  army  itself, 
might  have  been  lost. 

The  movements  of  the  enemy  showed  that  they  expected 
this,  and,  as  they  themselves  acknowledged,  they  were  prepared 
to  cut  off  our  retreat  in  that  direction. 

I  therefore  concentrated  all  our  forces  on  the  right  bank  of 
the  river. 

During  the  night  of  the  26th  and  morning  of  the  27th  all 
our  wagons,  heavy  guns,  etc.,  were  gathered  there. 

It  may  be  asked  why,  after  the  concentration  of  our  forces 
on  the  right  bank  of  the  Chickahominy,  with  a  large  part  of  the 
enemy  drawn  away  from  Richmond  upon  the  opposite  side,  I  did 
not,  instead  of  striking  for  James  river,  fifteen  miles  below  that 
place,  at  once  march  directly  on  Richmond. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  at  this  juncture  the  enemy  was 
on  our  rear,  and  there  was  every  reason  to  believe  that  he  would 


THE   SEVEN  DAYS.  423 

sever  our  communications  with  the  supply-depot  at  the  White 
House. 

We  had  on  hand  but  a  limited  amount  of  rations,  and  if  we 
had  advanced  directly  on  Richmond  it  would  have  required 
considerable  time  to  carry  the  strong  works  around  that  place, 
during  which  our  men  would  have  been  destitute  of  food ;  and 
even  if  Richmond  had  fallen  before  our  arms  the  enemy  could 
still  have  occupied  our  supply  communications  between  that 
place  and  the  gunboats,  and  turned  the  disaster  into  victory. 
If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  enemy  had  concentrated  all  his  forces 
at  Richmond  during  the  progress  of  our  attack,  and  we  had  been 
defeated,  we  must  in  all  probability  have  lost  our  trains  before 
reaching  the  flotilla. 

The  battles  which  continued  day  after  day  in  the  progress 
of  our  flank  movement  to  the  James,  with  the  exception  of  the 
one  at  Gaines's  Mill,  were  successes  to  our  arms,  and  the  closing 
engagement  at  Malvern  Hill  was  the  most  decisive  of  all. 

On  the  evening  of  the  27th  of  June  I  assembled  the  corps 
commanders  at  my  headquarters,  and  informed  them  of  the  plan, 
its  reasons,  and  my  chr)ice  of  route  and  method  of  execution. 

Gen.  Keyes  was  directed  to  move  his  corps,  with  its  artillery 
and  baggage,  across  the  White  Oak  Swamp  bridge,  and  to  seize 
strong  positions  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  swamp,  to  cover  the 
passage  of  the  other  troops  and  trains. 

This  order  was  executed  on  the  28th  by  noon.  Before  day- 
break on  the  28th  I  went  to  Savage's  Station,  and  remained  there 
during  the  day  and  night,  directing  the  withdrawal  of  the  trains 
and  supplies  of  the  army. 

Orders  were  given  to  the  different  commanders  to  load  their 
wagons  with  ammunition  and  provisions,  and  the  necessary  bag- 
gage of  the  officers  and  men,  and  to  destroy  all  property  which 
could  not  be  transported  with  the  army.  Orders  were  also 
given  to  leave  with  those  of  the  sick  and  wounded  who  could 
not  be  transported  a  proper  complement  of  surgeons  and  atten- 
dants, with  a  bountiful  supply  of  rations  and   medical    stores. 

The  large  herd  of  2,500  beef  cattle  was,  by  the  chief  com- 
missary, Col.  Clark,  transferred  to  the  James  river  without  loss. 

On  the  morning  of  the  28th,  while  Gen.  Franklin  was  with- 
drawing his  command  from  Golding's  farm,  the  enemy  opened 
upon  Gen.  Smith's  division  from  Gamett's  Hill,  from  the  valley 


McCLELLAN  TO  STANTON,  425 

If  we  have  lost  the  day  we  have  yet  preserved  our  honor,  and 
no  one  need  blush  for  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  I  have  lost 
this  battle  because  my  force  was  too  small. 

I  again  repeat  that  I  am  not  responsible  for  this,  and  I  say 
it  with  the  earnestness  of  a  general  who  feels  in  his  heart  the 
loss  of  every  brave  man  who  has  been  needlessly  sacrificed 
to-day.  I  still  hope  to  retrieve  our  fortunes  ;  but  to  do  this  the 
government  must  view  the  matter  in  the  same  earnest  light  that 
I  do.  You  must  send  me  very  large  reinforcements,  and  send 
them  at  once.  I  shall  draw  back  to  this  side  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy,  and  think  I  can  withdraw  all  our  material.  Please 
understand  that  in  this  battle  we  have  lost  nothing  but  men, 
and  those  the  best  we  have. 

In  addition  to  what  I  have  already  said,  I  only  wish  to  say 
to  the  President  that  I  think  he  is  wrong  in  regarding  me  as 
ungenerous  when  I  said  that  my  force  was  too  weak.  I  merely 
intimated  a  truth  which  to-day  has  been  too  plainly  proved. 
If,  at  this  instant,  I  could  dispose  of  ten  thousand  (10,'boo)  fresh 
men,  I  could  gain  the  victory  to-morrow. 

I  know  that  a  few  thousand  more  men  would  have  changed 
this  battle  from  a  defeat  to  a  victory.  As  it  is,  the  government 
must  not  and  cannot  hold  me  responsible  for  the  result. 

I  feel  too  earnestly  to-night.  I  have  seen  too  many  dead  and 
wounded  comrades  to  feel  otherwise  than  that  the  government 
has  not  sustained  this  army.  If  you  do  not  do  so  now  the  game 
is  lost. 

If  I  save  this  army  now,  I  tell  you  plainly  that  I  owe  no 
thanks  to  you  or  to  any  other  persons  in  Washington. 

You  have  done  your  best  to  sacrifice  this  army. 

G.  B.  McClellan. 


CHAPTER  XXVL 

Cootinuadon  of  the  Seven  Days*  battles — Allen's  field — Savage's  Station^ 
White  Oak  Swamp — Charles  City  cross-roads — Glendale — Malvern 
Hill — The  army  at  Harrison's  Landing. 

The  headquarters  camp  at  Savage's  Station  was  broken  up 
early  on  the  morning  of  the  29th  and  moved  across  White  Oak 
Swamp.  As  the  essential  part  of  this  day's  operation  was  the 
passage  of  the  trains  across  the  swamp,  and  their  protection 
against  attack  from  the  direction  of  New  Market  and  Rich- 
mondy  as  well  as  the  immediate  and  secure  establishment  of  our 
communications  with  the  gunboats,  I  passed  the  day  in  examin- 
ing the  ground,  directing  the  posting  of  troops,  and  securing  the 
uninterrupted  movement  of  the  trains. 

In  the  afternoon  I  instructed  Gen.  Keyes  to  move  during  the 
night  to  James  river  and  occupy  a  defensive  position  near  Mal- 
vern Hill,  to  secure  our  extreme  left  flank. 

Gen.  F.  J.  Porter  was  ordered  to  follow  him  and  prolong  the 
line  towards  the  right.  The  trains  were  to  be  pushed  on  towards 
James  river  in  rear  of  these  corps,  and  placed  under  the  protec- 
tion of  the  gunboats  as  they  arrived. 

A  sharp  skirmish  with  the  enemy's  cavalry  early  this  day  on 
the  Quaker  road  showed  that  his  efforts  were  ahorA  to  be  directed 
towards  impeding  our  progress  to  the  river,  and  rendered  my  pre- 
sence in  that  quarter  necessary. 

The  difficulty  was  not  at  all  with  the  movement  of  the  troops, 
but  with  the  immense  trains,  that  were  to  be  moved  virtually  by 
a  single  road  and  required  the  whole  army  for  their  protection. 
With  the  exception  of  the  cavalry  affair  on  the  Quaker  road,  we 
were  not  troubled  during  this  day  south  of  the  swamp,  but  there 
was  severe  fighting  north  of  it. 

Gen.  Sumner  vacated  his  works  at  Fair  Oaks  on  June  29, 
at  daylight,  and  marched  his  command  to  Orchard  Station,  halt- 
ing at  Allen's  field,  between  Orchard  and  Savage's  Stations. 

The  divisions  of  Richardson  and  Sedgwick  were  formed  on 

426 


THE  SEVEN  DAYS.  427 

« 
the  right  of  the  railroad,  facing  towards  Richmond,  Richardson 
holding  the  right,  and  Sedgwick  joining  the  right  of  Heintzel- 
man's  corps.  The  first  line  of  Richardson's  division  was  held  by 
Gen.  French,  Gen.  Caldwell  supporting  in  the  second.  A  log 
building  in  front  of  Richardson's  division  was  held  by  Col. 
Brooks  with  one  regiment  (53d  Penn.  Volunteers),  with  Haz- 
zard's  battery  on  an  elevated  piece  of  ground  a  little  in  rear  of 
Col.  Brooks's  command. 

At  nine  a.m.  the  enemy  commenced  a  furious  attack  on  the 
right  of  Gen.  Sedgwick,  but  were  repulsed.  The  left  of  Gen. 
Richardson  was  next  attacked,  the  enemy  attempting  in  vain  to 
carry  the  position  of  Col.  Brooks.  Capt  Hazzard's  battery,  and 
Pettit's  battery,  which  afterwards  replaced  it,  were  served  with 
great  effect,  while  the  53d  Penn.  kept  up  a  steady  fire  on  the 
advancing  enemy,  compelling  them  at  last  to  retire  in  disorder. 
The  enemy  renewed  the  attack  three  times,  but  were  as  often 
repulsed. 

Gen.  Slocum  arrived  at  Savage's  Station  at  an  early  hour 
on  the  29th,  and  was  ordered  to  cross  White  Oak  Swamp  and 
relieve  Gen.  Keyes's  corps.  As  soon  as  Gen.  Keyes  was  thus 
relieved  he  moved  towards  James  river,  which  he  reached  in 
safety,  with  all  his  artillery  and  baggage,  early  on  the  morning 
of  the  30th,  and  took  up  a  position  below  Turkey  creek  bridge. 

During  the  morning  Gen.  Franklin  heard  that  the  enemy, 
after  having  repaired  the  bridges,  was  crossing  the  Chickaho- 
miny  in  large  force  and  advancing  towards  Savage's  Station. 
He  communicated  this  information  to  Gen.  Sumner,  at  Allen's 
farm,  and  moved  Smith's  division  to  Savage's  Station.  A  little 
after  noon  Gen.  Sumner  united  his  forces  with  those  of  Gen. 
Franklin  and  assumed  command. 

I  had  ordered  Gen.  Heintzelman,  with  his  corps,  to  hold  the 
Williamsburg  road  until  dark,  at  a  point  where  were  several  field- 
works,  and  a  skirt  of  timber  between  these  works  and  the  rail- 
road. 

Through  a  misunderstanding  of  his  orders,  and  being  con- 
vinced that  the  troops  of  Sumner  and  Franklin  at  Savage's  Sta- 
tion were  ample  for  the  purpose  in  view,  Heintzelman  withdrew 
his  troops  during  the  afternoon,  crossed  the  swamp  at  Brackett's 
ford,  and  reached  the  Charles  City  road  with  the  rear  of  his 
column  at  ten  p.m. 


THE  SEVEN  DAYS,  429 

manders  within  reach  instructions  for  posting  their  troops.  I 
found  that,  notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  of  my  personal  staff 
and  other  officers,  the  roads  were  blocked  by  wagons,  and  there 
was  great  difficulty  in  keeping  the  trains  in  motion. 

The  engineer  officers  whom  I  had  sent  forward  on  the  28th 
to  reconnoitre  the  roads  had  neither  returned  nor  sent  me  any 
reports  or  guides.  Gens.  Keyes  and  Porter  had  been  delayed — 
one  by  losing  the  road,  and  the  other  by  repairing  an  old  road — 
and  had  not  been  able  to  send  any  information.  We  then  knew 
of  but  one  road  for  the  movement  of  the  troops  and  our  im- 
mense trains. 

It  was  therefore  necessary  to  post  the  troops  in  advance  of 
this  road  as  well  as  our  limited  knowledge  of  the  ground  per- 
mitted, so  as  to  cover  the  movement  of  the  trains  in  the  rear. 

I  then  examined  the  whole  line  from  the  swamp  to  the  left, 
giving  final  instructions  for  the  posting  of  the  troops  and  the 
obstruction  of  the  roads  towards  Richmond,  and  all  corps  com- 
manders were  directed  to  hold  their  positions  until  the  trains 
had  passed,  after  which  a  more  concentrated  position  was  to 
be  taken  up  near  James  river. 

Our  force  was  too  small  to  occupy  and  hold  the  entire  line 
from  the  White  Oak  Swamp  to  the  river,  exposed,  as  it  was,  to 
be  taken  in  reverse  by  a  movement  across  the  lower  part  of  the 
swamp,  or  across  the  Chickahominy  below  the  swamp.  More- 
over, the  troops  were  then  greatly  exhausted,  and  required  rest 
in  a  more  secure  position. 

I  extended  my  examinations  of  the  country  as  far  as  Hax- 
all's,  looking  at  all  the  approaches  to  Malvern,  which  position  I 
perceived  to  be  the  key  to  our  operations  in  this  quarter,  and 
was  thus  enabled  to  expedite  very  considerably  the  passage  of 
the  trains  and  to  rectify  the  positions  of  the  troops. 

Everything  being  then  quiet,  I  sent  aids  to  the  different  corps 
commanders  to  inform  them  what  I  had  done  on  the  left,  and 
to  bring  me  information  of  the  condition  of  affairs  on  the  right. 
I  returned  from  Malvern  to  Haxall's,  and,  having  made  arrange- 
ments for  instant  communication  from  Malvern  by  signals,  went 
on  board  of  Com.  Rodgers's  gunboat,  lying  near,  to  confer  with 
him  in  reference  to  the  condition  of  our  supply-vessels  and  the 
state  of  things  on  the  river.  It  was  his  opinion  that  it  would 
be  necessary  for  the  army  to  fall  back  to  a  position  below  City 


430  MtCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Point,  as  the  channel  there  was  so  near  the  southern  shore  that 
it  would  not  be  possible  to  bring  up  the  transports,  should  the 
enemy  occupy  it.  Harrison's  Landing  was,  in  his  opinion,  the 
nearest  suitable  point.  Upon  the  termination  of  this  interview 
I  returned  to  Malvern  Hill,  and  remained  there  until  shortly 
before  daylight. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  Gen.  Sumner  was  ordered  to 
march  with  Sedgwick's  division  to  Glendale  ("  Nelson's  farm  "). 
Gen.  McCall's  division  (Pennsylvania  reserves)  was  halted  dur- 
ing the  morning  on  the  New  Market  road,  just  in  advance  of 
the  point  where  the  road  turns  off  to  Quaker  church.  This 
line  was  formed  perpendicularly  to  the  New  Market  road, 
with  Meade's  brigade  on  the  right,  Seymour's  on'  the  left,  and 
Reynolds's  brigade,  commanded  by  Col,  S.  G.  Simmons,  of  the 
5th  Penn.,  in  reserve ;  Randall's  regular  battery  on  the  right, 
Kern's  and  Cooper's  batteries  opposite  the  centre,  and  Die- 
trich's and  Kauerhem's  batteries  of  the  artillery  reserve  on  the 
left — all  in  front  of  the  infantry  line.  The  country  in  Gen, 
McCall's  front  was  an  open  field,  intersected  towards  the  right 
by  the  New  Market  road  and  a  small  strip  of  timber  parallel 
to  it ;  the  open  front  was  about  eight  hundred  yards,  its  depth 
about  one  thousand  yards. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  Gen.  Heintzelman  ordered  the 
bridge  at  Brackett's  ford  to  be  destroyed,  and  trees  to  be  felled 
across  that  road  and  the  Charles  City  road.  Gen.  Slocum's 
division  was  to  extend  to  the  Charles  City  road  ;  Gen,  Kear- 
ny's left  to  connect  with  Gen.  Slocum's  left ;  Gen.  McCall's 
position  was  to  the  left  of  the  Long  bridge  road,  in  connection 
with  Gen.  Kearny's  left ;  Gen.  Hooker  was  on  the  left  of  Gen. 
McCall.  Between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  the  enemy  opened  a 
fierce  cannonade  upon  the  divisions  of  Smith  and  Richardson 
and  Naglee's  brigade  at  White  Oak  Swamp  bridge.  This  artil- 
lery-fire was  continued  by  the  enemy  through  the  day,  and  he 
crossed  some  infantry  below  our  posilion.  Richardson's  divi- 
sion suffered  severely.  Captain  Ayres  directed  our  artillery  with 
great  effect.  Capt.  Hazzard's  battery,  after  losing  many  can- 
noneers, and  Capt.  Hazzard  being  mortally  wounded,  was  con>- 
pelled  to  retire.  It  was  replaced  by  Pettit's  battery,  which  par- 
tially silenced  the  enemy's  guns. 

Gen.  Franklin  held  his  position  until  after  dark,  repeatedly. 


THE   SEVEN  DAYS.  43  I 

driving  back  the  enemy  in  their  attempts  to  cross  the  White 
Oak  Swamp. 

At  two  o'clock  in  the  day  the  enemy  were  reported  advanc- 
ing in  force  by  the  Charles  City  road,  and  at  half-past  two 
o'clock  the  attack  was  made  down  the  road  on  Gen.  Slocum's 
left,  but  was  checked  by  his  artillery.  After  this  the  enemy, 
in  large  force,  comprising  the  divisions  of  Longstreet  and  A.  P. 
Hill,  attacked  Gen.  McCall,  whose  division,  after  severe  fight- 
ing, was  compelled  to  retire. 

Gen.  McCall,  in  his  report  of  the  battle,  says : 

"  About  half-past  two  my  pickets  were  driven  in  by  a  strong 
advance,  after  some  skirmishing,  without  loss  on  our  part. 

"  At  three  o'clock  the  enemy  sent  forward  a  regiment  on  the 
left  centre  and  another  on  the  right  centre  to  feel  for  a  weak 
point.  They  were  under  cover  of  a  shower  of  shells  and  boldly 
advanced,  but  were  both  driven  back — on  the  left  by  the  12th 
regiment,  and  on  the  right  by  the  7th  regiment. 

"  For  nearly  two  hours  the  battle  raged  hotly  here.  .  .  . 
At  last  the  enemy  was  compelled  to  retire  before  the  well- 
directed  musketry-fire  of  the  reserves.  The  German  batteries 
were  driven  to  the  rear,  but  I  rode  up  and  sent  them  back.  It 
was,  however,  of  little  avail,  and  they  were  soon  after  abandoned 
by  the  cannoneers.  .  .  . 

"  The  batteries  in  front  of  the  centre  were  boldly  charged 
upon,  but  the  enemy  was  speedily  forced  back.  .  .  . 

"  Soon  after  this  a  most  determined  charge  was  made  on 
Randall's  battery  by  a  full  brigade,  advancing  in  wedge-shape, 
without  order,  but  in  perfect  recklessness.  Somewhat  similar 
charges  had,  I  have  stated,  been  previously  made  on  Cooper's 
and  Kern's  batteries  by  single  regiments,  without  success,  they 
having  recoiled  before  the  storm  of  canister  hurled  against  them. 
A  like  result  was  anticipated  by  Randall's  battery,  and  the  4th 
regiment  was  requested  not  to  fire  until  the  battery  had  done 
with  them. 

**  Its  gallant  commander  did  not  doubt  his  ability  to  repel  the 
attack,  and  his  guns  did,  indeed,  mow  down  the  advancing  host ; 
but  still  the  gaps  were  closed,  and  the  enemy  came  in  upon  a  run 
to  the  very  muzzles  of  his  guns. 

"  It  was  a  perfect  torrent  of  men,  and  they  were  in  his  battery 
before  the  guns  could  be  removed.  Two  guns  that  were,  indeed, 
successfully  limbered  had  their  horses  killed  and  wounded,  and 
were  overturned  on  the  spot,  and  the  enemy,  dashing  past,  drove 
the  greater  part  of  the  4th  regiment  before  them. 

*  The  left  company  (B),  nevertheless,  stood  its  ground,  with 
its  captain,  Fred.  A.  Conrad,  as  did  likewise  certain  men  of  other 


432  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

companies.     I  had  ridden  into  the  regiment  and  endeavored  to 
check  them,  but  with  only  partial  success.  .  .  . 

"  There  was  no  running.  But  my  division,  reduced  by  the 
previous  battles  to  less  than  six  thousand  (6,000),  had  to  contend 
with  the  divisions  of  Longstreet  and  A.  P.  Hill,  considered  two 
of  the  strongest  and  best  among  many  of  the  Confederate  army, 
numbering  that  day  18,000  or  20,000  men,  and  it  was  reluctantly 
compelled  to  give  way  before  heavier  force  accumulated  upon 
them.  .  .  ." 

Gen.  Heintzelman  states  that  about  five  o'clock  p.m.  Gen. 
McCairs  division  was  attacked  in  large  force,  evidently  the  prin- 
cipal attack ;  that  in  less  than  an  hour  the  division  gave  way, 
and  adds : 

"Gen.  Hooker,  being  on  his  left,  by  moving  to  his  right 
repulsed  the  rebels  in  the  handsomest  manner  with  great  slaugh- 
ter. Gen.  Sumner,  who  was  with  Gen.  Sedgwick  iii  McCall's 
rear,  also  greatly  aided  with  his  artillery  and  infantry  in  driv- 
ing back  the  enemy.  They  now  renewed  their  attack  with  vig- 
or on  Gen.  Kearny*s  left,  and  were  again  repulsed  with  heavy 
loss.  .  .  . 

"  This  attack  commenced  about  four  p.m.,  and  was  pushed  by 
heavy  masses  with  the  utmost  determination  and  vigor.  Capt. 
Thompson's  battery,  directed  with  great  precision,  firing  double 
charges,  swept  them  back.  The  whole  open  space,  two  hundred 
paces  wide,  was  filled  with  the  enemy  ;  each  repulse  brought 
fresh  troops.  The  third  attack  was  only  repulsed  by  the  rapid 
volleys  and  determined  charge  of  the  63d  Penn.,  Col.  Hays,  and 
half  of  the  37th  N.  Y.  Volunteers." 

Gen.  McCall's  troops  soon  began  to  emerge  from  the  woods 
into  the  open  field.  Several  batteries  were  in  position  and  began 
to  fire  into  the  woods  over  the  heads  of  our  men  in  front.  Capt. 
De  Russy's  battery  was  placed  on  the  right  of  Gen.  Sumner's 
artillery,  with  orders  to  shell  the  woods.  Gen.  Burns's  brigade 
was  then  advanced  to  meet  the  enemy,  and  soon  drove  him  back. 
Other  troops  began  to  return  from  the  White  Oak  Swamp.  Lat^ 
in  the  day,  at  the  call  of  Gen.  Kearny,  Gen.  Taylor's  ist  N.  J. 
brigade,  Slocum's  division,  was  sent  to  occupy  a  portion  of  Gen. 
McCall's  deserted  position,  a  battery  accompanying  the  brigade. 
They  soon  drove  back  the  enemy,  who  shortly  after  gave  up  the 
attack,  contenting  themselves  with  keeping  up  a  desultory  firing 
till  late  at  night.  Between  twelve  and  one  o'clock  at  night  Gen. 
Heintzelman  commenced  to  withdraw  his  corps,  and  soon  after 


THE  SEVEN  DAYS,  433 

daylight  both  of  his  divisions,  with  Gen.  Slocum's  division  and  a 
portion  of  Gen.  Sumner's  command,  reached  Malvern  Hill. 

On  the  ipoming  of  the  30th  Gen.  Sumner,  in  obedience  to 
orders,  had  moved  promptly  to  Glendale,  and  upon  a  call  from 
Gen.  Franklin  for  reinforcements  sent  him  two  brigades,  which 
returned  in  time  to  participate  and  render  good  service  in  the 
battle  near  Glendale.     Gen.  Sumner  says  of  this  battle : 

"  The  battle  of  Glendale  was  the  most  severe  action  since  the 
battle  of  Fair  Oaks.  About  three  o'clock  p.m.  the  action  com- 
menced, and  after  a  furious  contest,  lasting  till  after  dark,  the 
enemy  was  routed  at  all  points  and  driven  from  the  field." 

The  rear  of  the  supply-trains  and  the  reserve  artillery  of  the 
army  reached  Malvern  Hill  about  four  p.m.  At  about  this  time 
the  enemy  began  to  appear  in  Gen.  Porter's  front,  and  at  five 
o'clock  advanced  in  large  force  against  his  left  flank,  posting 
artillery  under  cover  of  a  skirt  of  timber,  with  a  view  to  engage 
our  force  on  Malvern  Hill,  while  with  his  infantry  and  some  artil- 
lery he  attacked  Col.  Warren's  brigade.  A  concentrated  fire  of 
about  thirty  guns  was  brought'  to  bear  on  the  enemy,  which,  with 
the  infantry-fire  of  Col.  Warren's  command,  compelled  him  to 
retreat,  leaving  two  guns  in  the  hands  of  Col.  Warren.  The  gun- 
boats rendered  most  efficient  aid  at  this  time,  and  helped  to  drive 
back  the  enemy. 

It  was  very  late  at  night  before  my  aides  returned  to  give  me 
the  results  of  the  day's  fighting  along  the  whole  line  and  the  true 
position  of  affairs.  While  waiting  to  hear  from  Gen.  Franklin, 
before  sending  orders  to  Gens.  Sumner  and  Heintzelman,  I 
received  a  message  from  the  latter  that  Gen.  Franklin  was  fall- 
ing back ;  whereupon  I  sent  Col.  Colburn,  of  my  staff,  with  orders 
to  verify  this,  and,  if  it  were  true,  to  order  in  Gens.  Sumner  and 
Heintzelman  at  once.  He  had  not  gone  far  when  he  met  two 
officers  sent  from  Gen.  Franklin's  headquarters  with  the  informa- 
tion that  he  was  falling  back.  Orders  were  then  sent  to  Gens. 
Sumner  and  Heintzelman  to  fall  back  also,  and  definite  instruc- 
tions were  given  as  to  the  movement  which  was  to  commence  on 
the  right.  The  orders  met  these  troops  already  en  route  to  Mal- 
vern. Instructions  were  also  sent  to  Gen.  Franklin  as  to  the 
route  he  was  to  follow. 

Gen.  Barnard  then  received  full  instructions  for  posting  the 
troops  as  they  arrived. 


434  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

I  then  returned  to  Haxall's,  and  again  left  for  Malvern  soon 
after  daybreak.  Accompanied  by  several  general  officers,  I  once 
more  made  the  entire  circuit  of  the  position,  and  then  returned 
to  Haxairs,  whence  I  went  with  Com.  Rodgers  to  select  the  final 
location  for  the  army  and  its  depots.  I  returned  to  Malvern 
before  the  serious  fighting  commenced,  and  after  riding  along 
the  lines,  and  seeing  most  cause  to  feel  anxious  about  the  right, 
remained  in  that  vicinity. 

The  position  selected  for  resisting  the  further  advance  of  the 
enemy  on  the  ist  of  July  was  with  the  left  and  centre  of  our 
lines  resting  on  Malvern  Hill,  while  the  right  curved  backwards 
through  a  wooded  country  towards  a  point  below  Haxall's,  on 
James  river.  Malvern  Hill  is  an  elevated  plateau  about  a  mile 
and  a  half  by  three-fourths  of  a  mile  in  area,  well  cleared  of  tim- 
ber, and  with  several  converging  roads  running  over  it.  In  front 
are  numerous  defensible  ravines,  and  the  ground  slopes  gradually 
towards  the  north  and  east  to  the  woodland,  giving  clear  ranges 
for  artillery  in  those  directions.  Towards  the  northwest  the 
plateau  falls  off  more  abruptly  into  a  ravine  which  extends  to 
James  river.  From  the  position  of  the  enemy  his  most  obvious 
lines  of  attack  would  come  from  the  direction  of  Richmond  and 
White  Oak  Swamp,  and  would  almost  of  necessity  strike  us  upon 
our  left  wing.  Here,  therefore,  the  lines  were  strengthened  by 
massing  the  troops  and  collecting  the  principal  part  of  the  artil- 
lery. Porter's  corps  held  the  left  of  the  line  (Sykes's  division  on 
the  left,  Morell's  on  the  right),  with  the  artillery  of  his  two 
divisions  advantageously  posted,  and  the  artillery  of  the  reserve 
so  disposed  on  the  high  ground  that  a  concentrated  fire  of  some 
sixty  guns  could  be  brought  to  bear  on  any  point  in  his  front  or 
left.  Col.  Tyler  also  had,  with  great  exertion,  succeeded  in  get- 
ting ten  of  his  siege-guns  in  position  on  the  highest  point  of 
the  hill. 

Couch's  division  was  placed  on  the  right  of  Porter ;  next 
came  Kearny  and  Hooker ;  next  Sedgwick  and  Richardson  ; 
next  Smith  and  Slocum  ;  then  the  remainder  of  Keyes's  corps, 
extending  by  a  backward  curve  nearly  to  the  river.  The  Penn- 
sylvania reserve  corps  was  held  in  reserve,  and  station«d  behind 
Porter's  and  Couch's  position.  One  brigade  of  Porter's  was 
thrown  to  the  left  on  the  low  ground  to  protect  that  flank  from 
any  movement  direct  from  the  Richmond  road.     The  line  was 


436  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

very  strong  along  the  whole  front  of  the  open  plateau,  but  from 
thence  to  the  extreme  right  the  troops  were  more  deployed.  This 
formation  was  imperative,  as  an  attack  would  probably  be  made 
upon  our  left.  The  right  was  rendered  as  secure  as  possible  by 
slashing  the  timber  and  by  barricading  the  roads.  Com.  Rodg- 
ers,  commanding  the  flotilla  on  James  river,  placed  his  gunboats 
so  as  to  protect  our  flank  and  to  command  the  approaches  from 
Richmond. 

Between  nine  and  ten  a.m.  the  enemy  commenced  feeling 
along  our  whole  left  wing,  with  his  artillery  and  skirmishers,  as 
far  to  the  right  as  Hooker's  division. 

About  two  o'clock  a  column  of  the  enemy  was  observed 
moving  towards  our  right,  within  the  skirt  of  woods  in  front 
of  Heintzelman's  corps,  but  beyond  the  range  of  our  artillery. 
Arrangements  were  at  once  made  to  meet  the  anticipated  attack 
in  that  quarter ;  but,  though  the  column  was  long,  occupying 
more  than  two  hours  in  passing,  it  disappeared  and  was  not 
again  heard  of.  The  presumption  is  that  it  retired  by  the  rear, 
and  participated  in  the  attack  afterwards  made  on  our  left. 

About  three  p.m.  a  heavy  fire  of  artillery  9pened  on  Kearny's 
left  and  Couch's  division,  speedily  followed  up  by  a  brisk  attack 
of  infantry  on  Couch's  front.  The  artillery  was  replied  to  with 
good  effect  by  our  own,  and  the  infantry  of  Couch's  division 
remained  lying  on  the  ground  until  the  advancing  column  was 
within  short  musket-range,  when  they  sprang  to  their  feet  and 
poured  in  a  deadly  volley  which  entirely  broke  the  attacking 
force  and  drove  them  in  disorder  back  over  their  own  ground. 
This  advantage  was  followed  up  until  we  had  advanced  the 
right  of  our  line  some  seven  or  eight  hundred  yards,  and  rested 
upon  a  thick  clump  of  trees,  giving  us  a  stronger  position  and  a 
better  fire. 

Shortly  after  four  o'clock  the  firing  ceased  along  the  whole 
front,  but  no  disposition  was  evinced  on  the  part  of  the  enemy 
to  withdraw  from  the  field.  Caldwell's  brigade,  having  been 
detached  from  Richardson's  division,  was  stationed  upon  Couch's 
right  by  Gen.  Porter,  to  whom  he  had  been  ordered  to  report. 
The  whole  line  was  surveyed  by  the  general,  and  everything 
held  in  readiness  to  meet  the  coming  attack.  At  six  o'clock 
the  enemy  suddenly  opened  upon  Couch  and  Porter  with  the 
whole  strength  of   his  artillery,  and  at  once  began  pushing  for- 


MALVERN  HILL,  437 

ward  his  columns  of  attack  to  carry  the  hill.  Brigade  after 
brigade,  formed  under  cover  of  the  woods,  started  at  a  run  to 
cross  the  open  space  and  charge  our  batteries,  but  the  heavy  fire 
of  our  guns,  with  the  cool  and  steady  volleys  of  our  infantry, 
in  every  case  sent  them  reeling  back  to  shelter  and  covered 
the  ground  with  their  dead  and  wounded.  In  several  instances 
our  infantry  withheld  their  fire  until  the  attacking  column, 
which  rushed  through  the  storm  of  canister  and  shell  from  our 
artillery,  had  reached  within  a  few  yards  of  our  lines.  They 
then  poured  in  a  single  volley  and  dashed  forward  with  the 
bayonet,  capturing  prisoners  and  colors,  and  driving  the  routed 
columns  in  confusion  from  the  field. 

About  seven  o'clock,  as  fresh  troops  were  accumulating  in 
front  of  Porter  and  Couch,  Meagher  and  Sickles  were  sent  with 
their  brigades,  as  soon  as  it  was  considered  prudent  to  withdraw 
any  portion  of  Sumner's  and  Heintzelman's  troops,  to  rein- 
force that  part  of  the  line  and  hold  the  position.  These  bri- 
gades relieved  such  regiments  of  Porter's  corps  and  Couch's 
division  as  had  expended  their  ammuniti  >n,  and  batteries  from 
the  reserve  were  pushed  forward  to  replace  those  whose  boxes 
were  empty.  Until  dark  the  enemy  persisted  in  his  efforts  to 
take  the  position  so  tenaciously  defended ;  but,  despite  his 
vastly  superior  numbers,  his  repeated  and  desperate  attacks 
were  repulsed  with  fearful  loss,  and  darkness  ended  the  battle 
of  Malvern  Hill,  though  it  was  not  until  after  nine  o'clock  that 
the  artillery  ceased  its  fire.     The  result  was  complete  victory. 

During  the  whole  battle  Com.  Rodgers  added  greatly  to  the 
discomfiture  of  the  enemy  by  throwing  shell  among  his  reserves 
and  advancing  columns. 

It  was  necessary  to  fall  back  still  further,  in  order  to  reach 
a  point  where  our  supplies  could  be  brought  to  us  with  certainty. 
As  before  stated,  in  the  opinion  of  Com.  Rodgers,  commanding 
the  gunboat  flotilla,  this  could  only  be  done  below  City  Point  ; 
concurring  in  his  opinion,  I  selected  Harrison's  Bar  as  the  new 
position  of  the  army.  The  exhaustion  of  our  supplies  of  food, 
forage,  and  ammunition  made  it  imperative  to  reach  the  trans- 
ports immediately. 

The  greater  portion  of  the  transportation  of  the  army  having 
been  started  for  Harrison's  Landing  during  the  night  of  the  30th 
of  June  and   ist  of  July,  the  order  for   the  movement  of  the 


438  McCLELLAX'S  OWN  STOKY, 

troops  was  at  once  issued  upon  the  final  repulse  of  the  enemy 
at  Malvern  Hill.  The  order  prescribed  a  movement  by  the  left 
and  rear,  Gen.  Keyes's  corps  to  cover  the  manoeuvre.  It  was 
not  carried  out  in  detail  as  regards  the  divisions  on  the  left,  the 
roads  being  somewhat  blocked  by  the  rear  of  our  trains.  Por- 
ter and  Couch  were  not  able  to  move  out  as  early  as  had  been 
anticipated,  and  Porter  found  it  necessary  to  place  a  rear- 
guard between  his  command  and  the  enemy.  Col.  Averill,  of 
the  3d  Penn.  Cavalry,  was  entrusted  with  this  delicate  duty. 
He  had  under  his  command  his  own  regiment  and  Lieut. -Col. 
Buchanan's  brigade  of  regular  infantry  and  one  battery.  By  a 
judicious  use  of  the  resources  at  his  command  he  deceived  the 
enemy  so  as  to  cover  the  withdrawal  of  the  left  wing  without 
being  attacked,  remaining  himself  on  the  previous  day's  battle- 
field until  about  seven  o'clock  of  the  2d  of  July.  Meantime 
Gen.  Keyes,  having  received  his  orders,  commenced  vigorous 
preparations  for  covering  the  movement  of  the  entire  army  and 
protecting  the  trains.  It  being  evident  that  the  immense  num- 
ber of  wagons  and  artillery-carriages  pertaining  to  the  army 
could  not  move  with  celerity  along  a  single  road.  Gen.  Keyes 
took  advantage  of  every  accident  of  the  ground  to  open  new 
avenues  and  to  facilitate  the  movement.  He  made  preparations 
for  obstructing  the  roads  after  the  army  had  passed,  so  as  to 
prevent  any  rapid  pursuit,  destroying  effectually  Turkey  bridge, 
on  the  main  road,  and  rendering  other  roads  and  approaches 
temporarily  impassable  by  felling  trees  across  them.  He  kept 
the  trains  well  closed  up,  and  directed  the  march  so  that  the 
troops  could  move  on  each  side  of  the  roads,  not  obstructing  the 
passage,  but  being  in  good  position  to  repel  an  attack  from  any 
quarter.  His  dispositions  were  so  successful  that,  to  use  his  own 
words,  "  I  do  not  think  more  vehicles  or  more  public  property 
were  abandoned  on  the  march  from  Turkey  bridge  than  would 
have  been  left,  in  the  same  state  of  the  roads,  if  the  army  had 
been  moving  towards  the  enemy  instead  of  away  from  him.  And 
when  it  is  understood  that  the  carriages  and  teams  belonging  to 
this  army,  stretched  out  in  one  line,  would  extend  not  far  from 
forty  miles,  the  energy  and  caution  necessary  for  their  safe  with- 
drawal from  the  presence  of  an  enemy  vastly  superior  in  num- 
bers will  be  appreciated."  The  last  of  the  wagons  did  not 
reach  the  site  selected  at  Harrison's  Bar  until  after  dark  on  the 


HARRISON'S  LANDING.  439 

3d  of  July,  and  the  rear-guard  did  not  move  into  their  camp 
until  everything  was  secure.  The  enemy  followed  up  with  a 
small  force,  and  on  the  3d  threw  a  few  shells  at  the  rear-guard, 
but  were  quickly  dispersed  by  our  batteries  and  the  fire  of  the 
gunboats. 

Great  credit  must  be  awarded  to  Gen.  Keyes  for  the  skill  and 
energy  which  characterized  his  performance  of  the  important 
and  delicate  duties  entrusted  to  his  charge. 

High  praise  is  also  due  to  the  officers  and  men  of  the  ist 
Conn.  Artillery,  Col.  Tyler,  for  the  manner  in  which  they  with- 
drew all  the  heavy  guns  during  the  Seven  Days  and  from  Mal- 
vern Hill.  Owing  to  the  crowded  state  of  the  roads  the  teams 
-could  not  be  brought  within  a  couple  of  miles  of  the  position, 
but  these  energetic  soldiers  removed  the  guns  by  hand  for  that 
distance,  leaving  nothing  behind. 

So  long  as  life  lasts  the  survivors  of  those  glorious  days  will 
remember  with  quickened  pulse  the  attitude  of  that  army  when 
it  reached  the  goal  for  which  it  had  striven  with  such  trans- 
cendent heroism.  Exhausted,  depleted  in  numbers,  bleeding  at 
every  pore,  but  still  proud  and  defiant,  and  strong  in  the  con- 
sciousness of  a  great  feat  of  arms  heroically  accomplished,  it 
stood  ready  to  renew  the  struggle  with  undiminished  ardor  when- 
ever its  commander  should  give  the  word.  It  was  one  of  those 
magnificent  episodes  which  dignify  a  nation's  history  and  are  fit 
subjects  for  the  grandest  efforts  of  the  poet  and  the  painter.* 

This  movement  was  now  successfully  accomplished,  and  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac  was  at  last  in  position  on  its  true  line  of 
operations,  with  its  trains  intact,  no  guns  lost  save  those  taken  in 
battle  when  the  artillerists  had  proved  their  heroism  and  devo- 
tion by  standing  to  their  guns  until  the  enemy's  infantry  were  in 
their  midst. 

During  the  Seven  Days  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  consisted 
of  143  regiments  of  infantry,  55  batteries,  and  less  than  8  regi- 
ments of  cavalry  all  told.     The  opposing  Confederate  army  con- 

♦  In  the  evening,  before  his  sudden  death  in  the  night,  Gen.  McClel- 
lan  had  been  occupied  in  preparing,  from  his  memoirs,  an  article  for  the 
Century  Magazine.  Among  the  manuscript,  which  we  found  next  morn- 
ing lying  as  he  left  it,  the  paragrnph  above,  commencing  with  the  words, 
"  So  long  as  life  lasts,"  appeared  to  be  the  last  work  of  his  pen.  The  last 
words  he  wrote  were  thus  this  final  expression  of  his  admiration  for  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac.     I  have  thought  tit  to  insert  them  here. 

W.  C.  P. 


440  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

sisted  of  187  regiments  of  infantry,  79  batteries,  and  14  regiments 
of  cavalry.  The  losses  of  the  two  armies  from  June  25  to  July  2 
were  : 

Killed,    Wounded.    AfisHng.     Total. 

Confederate  Army,         2,823     13,703       3,223     19,749 
Army  of  the  Potomac,    1,734      8,062       6,053     15,849 

The  Confederate  losses  in  killed  and  wounded  alone  were  greater 
than  the  total  losses  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  killed, 
wounded,  and  missing. 

No  praise  can  be  too  great  for  the  officers  and  men  who 
passed  through  these  seven  days  of  battle,  enduring  fatigue  with- 
out a  murmur,  successfully  meeting  and  repelling  every  attack 
made  upon  them,  always  in  the  right  place  at  the  right  time,  and 
emerging  from  the  fiery  ordeal  a  compact  army  of  veterans,  equal 
to  any  task  that  brave  and  disciplined  men  can  be  called  upon 
to  undertake.  They  needed  now  only  a  few  days  of  well-earned 
repose,  a  renewal  of  ammunition  and  supplies,  and  reinforce- 
ments to  fill  the  gaps  made  in  their  ranks  by  so  many  desperate 
encounters,  to  be  prepared  to  advance  again,  with  entire  con- 
fidence, to  meet  their  worthy  antagonists  in  other  battles.  It 
was,  however,  decided  by  the  authorities  at  Washington,  against 
my  earnest  remonstrances,  to  abandon  the  position  on  the  James, 
and  the  campaign.  The  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  accordingly 
withdrawn. 

It  was  not  until  two  years  later  that  it  again  found  itself  under 
its  last  commander  at  substantially  the  same  point  on  the  bank 
of  the  James.  It  was  as  evident  in  1862  as  in  1865  that  there 
was  the  true  defence  of  Washington,  and  that  it  was  on  the  banks 
of  the  James  that  the  fate  of  the  Union  was  to  be  decided 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

"Private  Letters. 
[Junt  26  to  Aug,  23, 1862.] 

June  26,  2  P.M.,  Trenfs, —  .  .  .  Yesterday  I  wished  to  advance 
our  picket-line,  and  met  with  a  good  deal  of  opposition.  We 
succeeded  fully,  however,  and  gained  the  point  with  but  little 
loss.  The  enemy  fought  pretty  hard,  but  our  men  did  better. 
I  was  out  there  all  day  taking  a  personal  direction  of  affairs,  and 
remained  until  about  5.30  p.m.,  when  I  returned  to  camp,  and  met 
on  my  way  the  news  that  Stonewall  Jackson  was  on  his  way  to 
attack  my  right  and  rear.  I  rode  over  to  Porter's  soon  after  I 
reached  camp,  and  returned  about  2.30  a.m.  At  three  I  started 
off  again  and  went  to  the  front,  where  an  attack  was  expected  by 
some.  Finding  all  quiet,  I  rode  all  along  the  lines  and  returned 
here.  You  may  imagine  that  I  am  rather  tired  out.  I  think  that 
Jackson  will  attempt  to  attack  our  rear.  .  .  . 

Have  just  received  the  positive  information  that  Jackson  is 
tn  route  to  take  us  in  rear.  You  probably  will  not  hear  for 
some  days ;  but  do  not  be  at  all  worried.  .  .  . 

Gen.  McClellan's  headquarters^  June  26,  1862 — Telegram,  in 
cipher^  care  of  Mr.  Eckert,  who  will  regard  it  as  private  and 
strictly  confidential^  and  forward  it  privately  to  my  wife. — Dear 
Nell  :  I  may  not  be  able  to  telegraph  or  write  to  you  for  some 
days.  There  will  be  a  great  stampede,  but  do  not  be  alarmed. 
There  will  be  severe  fighting  in  a  day  or  two,  but  you  may  be 
sure  that  your  husband  will  not  disgrace  you,  and  I  am  confident 
that  God  will  smile  upon  my  efforts  and  give  our  arms  success. 
You  will  hear  that  we  are  pursued,  annihilated,  etc.  Do  not 
believe  it,  but  trust  that  success  will  crown  our  efforts.  I  tell 
you  this,  darling,  only  to  guard  against  the  agony  you  would  feel 
if  you  trusted  the  newspaper  reports 

Telegram — June  27,  1.15  p.m. — Heavy  firing  in  all  directions. 

44* 


442  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

So  far  we  have  repulsed  them  everywhere.  I  expect  wire  to  be 
cut  any  moment.  All  well  and  very  busy.  Cannot  write  to- 
day. 

Telegram — McCUllan' s  Headquarters^  June  27. — Have  had 
a  terrible  fight  against  vastly  superior  numbers.  Have  generally 
held  our  own,  and  we  may  thank  God  that  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac has  not  lost  its  honor.  It  is  impossible  as  yet  to  tell  what 
the  result  is.  I  am  well,  but  tired  out ;  no  sleep  for  two  nights, 
and  none  to-night.     God  bless  you  ! 

Telegram — McClellan's  HeadquarterSy  June  28. — We  are  all 
well  to-night.  I  fear  your  uncle  has  been  seriously  hurt  in  the 
terrible  fight  of  yesterday.  They  have  outnumbered  us  every- 
where, but  we  have  not  lost  our  honor.  This  army  has  acted 
magnificently.  I  thank  my  friends  in  Washington  for  our  re- 
pulse. 

June  29,  3  P.M.,  in  the  field, — I  send  you  only  a  line  to  say 
that  I  still  think  God  is  with  us.  We  have  fought  a  terrible 
battle  against  overwhelming  numbers.  We  held  our  own,  and 
history  will  show  that  I  have  done  all  that  man  can  do.  .  .  . 

Jufie  30,  7  P.M.,  Turkey  bridge. — Well,  but  worn  out ;  no  sleep 
for  many  days.  We  have  been  fighting  for  many  days,  and  are 
still  at  it.  .  .  .  We  have  fought  every  day  for  five  days.  .  .  . 

July  I,  HaxalVs  Plantation. —  .  .  .  The  whole  army  is  here  ; 
worn  out  and  war-worn,  after  a  week  of  daily  battles.  I  have  still 
very  great  confidence  in  them,  and  they  in  me.  The  dear  fel- 
lows cheer  me  as  of  old  as  they  march  to  certain  death,  and  I 
feel  prouder  of  them  than  ever. 

July  2,  .  .  .  Berkley y  James  river. —  ...  I  have  only  energy 
enough  left  to  scrawl  you  a  few  lines  to  say  that  I  have  the  whole . 
army  here,  with  all  its  material  and  guns.  We  are  all  worn  out 
and  haggard.  .  .  .  My  men  need  repose,  and  I  hope  will  be 
allowed  to  enjoy  it  to-morrow.  .  .  .  Your  poor  uncle  was  killed 
at  the  battle  of  Gaines's  Mills  on  Friday  last.  We  are  well,  but 
very  tired.  .  .  . 


PRIVATE  LETTERS, 


443 


July  2,  II  P.M. — I  will  now  take  a  few  moments  from  the  rest 
which  1  really  need,  and  write  at  least  a  few  words.  .  .  .  We  have 
had  a  terrible  time.  On  Wednesday  the  serious  work  commenced. 
I  commenced  driving  the  enemy  on  our  left,  and,  by  hard  fight- 
ing, gained  my  point.  Before  that  affair  was  over  I  received  news 
that  Jackson  was  probably  about  to  attack  my  right.  I  gal- 
loped back  to  camp,  took  a  fresh  horse,  and  went  over  to  Por- 
ter's camp,  where  I  remained  all  night  making  the  best  arrange- 
ments I  could,  and  returned  about  daybreak  to  look  out  for  the 
left.  On  Thursday  afternoon  Jackson  began  his  attack  on  Mc- 
Call,  who  was  supported  by  Porter.  Jackson  being  repulsed,  I 
went  over  there  in  the  afternoon  and  remained  until  two  or  three 
A.M.  I  was  satisfied  that  Jackson  would  have  force  enough  next 
morning  to  turn  Porter's  right,  so  I  removed  all  the  wagons, 
heavy  guns,  etc.,  during  the  night,  and  caused  Porter  to  fall 
back  to  a  point  nearer  the  force  on  the  other  side  of  the  Chicka- 
hominy.  This  was  most  handsomely  effected,  all  our  material 
being  saved.  The  next  day  Porter  was  attacked  in  his  new  posi- 
tion by  the  whole  force  of  Jackson,  Longstreet,  Ewell,  Hill,  and 
Whiting.  I  sent  what  supports  I  could,  but  was  at  the  same 
time  attacked  on  my  own  front,  and  could  only  spare  seven 
brigades.  With  these  we  held  our  own  at  all  points  after  most 
desperate  fighting.  It  was  on  this  day  that  your  poor  uncle 
[Col.  Rossell]  was  killed,  gallantly  leading  his  regiment.  He 
was  struck  in  the  breast,  and  died  in  a  few  hours.  Clitz  fell 
that  day  also.  John  Reynolds  was  taken  prisoner.  I  was 
forced  that  night  to  withdraw  Porter's  force  to  my  side  of  the 
Chickahominy,  and  therefrom  to  make  a  very  dangerous  and 
difficult  movement  to  reach  the  James  river.  I  must  say  good- 
night now,  for  I  am  very  tired,  and  may  require  all  my  ener- 
gies to-morrow. 

July  4,  Berkley, —  .  .  .  You  will  understand  before  this 
reaches  you  the  glorious  yet  fearful  events  which  have  prevent- 
ed me  from  writing.  We  have  fine  weather  to-day,  which  is 
drying  the  ground  rapidly.  I  was  quite  stampeded  yesterday 
just  before  your  father  left.  A  report  came  to  me  that  the  ene- 
my were  advancing  in  overwhelming  numbers,  and  that  none 
of  my  orders  for  placing  the  troops  in  position  and  reorganiz- 
ing them  had  been  carried  out.     I  at  once  rode  through  the 

34 


444  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

camps,  clear  in  front  of  them,  to  let  them  see  that  there  was 
no  danger.  They  began  to  cheer  as  usual,  and  called  out  that 
they  were  all  right  and  would  fall  to  the  last  man  "  for  Little 
Mac " !  I  saw  where  the  trouble  was,  halted  all  the  commands, 
looked  at  the  ground,  and  made  up  my  mind  what  the  true  posi- 
tion was.  Started  Smith  at  a  double-quick  to  seize  the  key- 
point,  followed  by  a  battery  of  horse-artillery  at  a  gallop.  They 
went  up  most  beautifully,  opened  on  the  enemy,  drove  him  off 
after  eighteen  rounds,  and  finally  held  the  place.  I  pushed  Slo- 
cum's  division  up  in  support,  hurried  off  Heintzelman's  corps 
to  take  its  position  on  Franklin's  left,  supported  by  Keyes  still 
further  to  the  left,  and  came  back  to  camp  a  little  before  dark 
with  a  light  heart  for  the  first  time  in  many  days.  I  am  ready 
for  an  attack  now ;  give  me  twenty-four  hours  even,  and  I  will 
defy  all  secession.  The  movement  has  been  a  magnificent  one  ; 
I  have  saved  all  our  material,  have  fought  every  day  for  a  week, 
and  marched  every  night.  You  can't  tell  how  nervous  I  became ; 
everything  seemed  like  the  opening  of  artillery,  and  I  had  no 
rest,  no  peace,  except  when  in  front  with  my  men.  The  duties 
of  my  position  are  such  as  often  to  make  it  necessary  for  me  to 
remain  in  the  rear.     It  is  an  awful  thing. 

I  have  re-established  the  playing  of  bands,  beating  the  calls, 
etc.,  by  way  of  keeping  the  men  in  good  spirits,  and  have  or- 
dered the  national  salute  to  be  fired  to-day  at  noon  from  the 
camp  of  each  corps.  I  have  some  more  official  letters  to  write, 
so  I  must  close  this,  and  must  soon  start  to  ride  around  the 
lines. 

« 

July  — ,  Monday^  7.30  a.m. — I  have  had  a  good,  refreshing 
night's  sleep.  .  .  .  We  are  to  have  another  very  hot  day ;  it 
is  already  apparent.  I  am  writing  in  my  shirt-sleeves  and  with 
tent-walls  raised,  etc.  .  .  .  Our  army  has  not  been  repulsed  ; 
we  fought  every  day  against  greatly  superior  numbers,  and 
were  obliged  to  retire  at  night  to  new  positions  that  we  could 
hold  against  fresh  troops.  The  army  behaved  magnificently ; 
nothing  could  have  been  finer  than  its  conduct.  .  .  . 

July  8. —  .  .  .  The  day  is  insufferably  hot,  intense,  so  much 
so  that  I  have  suspended  all  work  on  the  part  of  the  men.  I 
have   written  a  strong,  frank  letter  to   the   President,  which   I 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  445 

send  by  your  father.  If  he  acts  upon  it  the  country  will  be 
saved.  I  will  send  you  a  copy  to-morrow,  as  well  as  of  the 
other  important  letters  which  I  wish  you  to  keep  as  my  record. 
They  will  show,  with  the  others  you  have,  that  I  was  true  to 
my  country,  that  I  understood  the  state  of  affairs  long  ago,  and 
that  had  my  advice  been  followed  we  should  not  have  been  in 
our  present  difficulties.  ...  I  have  done  the  best  I  could.  God 
has  disposed  of  events  as  to  Him  seemed  best.  I  submit  to 
His  decrees  with  perfect  cheerfulness,  and  as  sure  as  He  rules 
I  believe  that  all  will  yet  be  for  the  best.  .  .  . 

i!//V////^yi/.— Everything  is  quiet  now;  none  awake  save  the 
sentinels.  I  am  alone  with  you  and  the  Almighty,  whose  good 
and  powerful  hand  has  saved  me  and  my  army.  The  terrible 
moments  I  have  undergone  of  late  I  regard  as  a  part  of  the 
cross  I  have  to  bear,  and,  with  God's  help,  will  endure  to  the 
end  when  my  task  is  finished.  I  place  myself  in  His  hands, 
and  with  a  sincere  heart  say  His  will  be  done.  Oh !  how 
ardently  I  pray  for  rest.  Rest  with  you.  I  care  not  where, 
only  that  I  may  be  alone  with  you.  We  are  to  have  service 
at  headquarters  to-morrow  morning,  and  I  will  endeavor  to 
have  it  every  Sunday  hereafter.* 

July  9,  9.30  P.M.,  Berkley. — I  telegraphed  you   briefly  this 

*  The  following  order  will  be  read  with  interest  in  this  connection  : 

Central  Orders^  No,  7. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Washington,  Sept.  6,  1861. 

The  major-general  commanding  desires  and  requests  that  in  future 
there  may  be  a  more  perfect  respect  for  the  Sabbath  on  the  part  of  his 
command. 

We  are  fighting  in  a  holy  cause,  and  should  endeavor  to  deserve  the 
benign  favor  of  the  Crea'or. 

Unless  in  the  case  of  an  attack  by  the  enemy,  or  some  other  extreme 
military  necessity,  it  is  commended  to  commanding  officers  that  all  work 
shall  be  suspended  on  the  Sabbath  ;  that  no  unnecessary  movements  shall 
be  made  on  that  day  ;  that  the  men  shall,  as  far  as  possible,  be  permitted 
to  rest  from  their  labors  ;  that  they  shall  attend  divine  service  after  the 
customary  Sunday  morning  inspection,  and  that  officers  and  men  shall 
alike  use  their  influence  to  insure  the  utmost  decorum  and  quiet  on  that 
day.  The  general  commanding  regards  this  as  no  idle  form  ;  one  day's 
rest  in  seven  is  necessary  to  men  and  animals ;  more  than  this,  the  obser- 
vance of  the  holy  day  of  the  God  of  Mercy  and  of  Battles  is  our  sacred 
duty. 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Maf.'Gen*  Commanding, 


446  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

afternoon  that  I  thought  Secesh  had  retired.  This  opinion 
seems  to  be  fully  confirmed,  at  least  to  the  extent  of  his  having 
fallen  back  a  certain  distance.  He  is  not  within  six  or  seven 
miles  of  us  even  with  his  cavalry,  and  considerably  further 
with  his  infantry.  I  am  not  sorry,  on  the  whole,  that  he  has 
gone,  for  the  reason  that  it  will  enable  my  men  to  rest  tran- 
quilly— ^just  what  they  need.  I  do  not  expect  to  receive  many 
reinforcements  for  some  time.  Even  Bumside*s  men  are  halted 
at  Fortress  Monroe  by  order  of  the  President.  His  excellency 
was  here  yesterday  and  left  this  morning.  He  found  the  army 
anything  but  demoralized  or  dispirited ;  in  excellent  spirits.  I 
do  not  know  to  what  extent  he  has  profited  by  his  visit  ;  not 
much,  I  fear.  I  will  enclose  with  this  a  copy  of  a  letter  I 
handed  him,  which  I  would  be  glad  to  have  you  preserve  care- 
fully as  a  very  important  record.  .  .  .  My  camp  is  now  imme- 
diately on  the  banks  of  the  James  river,  in  the  woods.  .  .  . 

7  A.M.  (loM). —  .  .  .  Rose  a  little  before  six.  ...  I  do  not 
know  what  paltry  trick  the  administration  will  play  next.  .  .  . 
I  have  honestly  done  the  best  /  could.  I  shall  leave  it  to  others 
to  decide  whether  that  was  the  best  that  could  have  been  done, 
and,  if  they  find  any  one  who  can  do  better,  am  perfectly  will- 
ing to  step  aside  and  give  way.  I  would  not  for  worlds  go 
through  that  horrid  work  again,  when,  with  ray  heart  full  of 
care,  I  had  to  meet  everybody  with  a  cheerful  smile  and  look 
as  light-hearted  as  though  nothing  were  at  stake.  .  .  . 

Telegram — Berkley,  July  lo,  1862. — We  are  all  very  well  and 
in  good  spirits.  Secesh  has  gone  off  and  left  us  for  the  present. 
Clitz  is  certainly  in  Richmond,  recovering  from  his  wounds.  If 
properly  supported  I  will  yet  take  Richmond.  Am  not  in  the 
least  discouraged  ;  am  in  better  health  than  for  many  months. 
Your  father  returned  to  Washington  two  days  ago. 

July  12.— I  am  sure  that  God  will  bring  us  together  again 
in  this  world  ;  but,  whether  so  or  not,  we  will  try  so  to  live  that 
we  may  be  reunited  in  that  world  where  we  can  be  happy  for 
ever  and  never  again  be  parted.  ...  In  this  weary  world  I 
have  seen  but  little  happiness  save  what  I  have  enjoyed  with 
you.     How  very  happy  our  first  year  of  married  life  was,  when 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  447 

we  were  together !  So  the  baby  has  more  teeth  !  I  suppose 
when  I  come  back  I  shall  find  her  handling  a  knife  and  fork. 
When  will  she  begin  to  say  a  word  or  two  ?  I  hope  she  will 
not  begin  to  do  much  before  I  come  home.  I  want  to  have  the 
fun  and  satisfaction  of  watching  her  progress  in  life  and  the 
development  of  her  accomplishments.  ...  I  enclose  with  this 
a  letter  from  Stanton  and  my  reply,  which  I  want  you  to  pre- 
serve very  carefully  with  my  other  "archives,"  as  it  may  be 
important.  .  .  . 

J^^y  i3»  Sunday^  7.45  a.m. — I  have  ordered  all  labor  sus- 
pended to-day  to  give  the  men  a  chance  to  think  of  all  they 
have  gone  through.  We  are  to  have  service  to-day  by  the 
chaplain  of  Gregg's  regiment  Penn.  cavalry.  Next  Sunday  I 
think  I  will  invite  Mr.  Neal  to  preach  for  us,  provided  there  is 
any  attendance  to-day. 

I  enclose  this  in  an  envelope  with  some  letters  I  send  you  ; 
one  from  Bishop  Mcllvaine,  which  will  gratify  you,  I  know  ; 
another  from  some  poor  fellow  in  Indiana  who  has  named  his 
child  after  me.  If  you  choose  to  send  out  some  little  present 
to  it,  well  and  good. 

1.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  Had  service  this  morning  by  the  chaplain  of 
Gregg's  regiment,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Egan,  an  Episcopal  clergyman 
of  Philadelphia.  .  .  .  There  never  was  such  an  army  ;  but  there 
have  been  plenty  of  better  generals.  When  I  spoke  about  being 
repulsed  I  meant  our  failure  to  take  Richmond.  In  no  battle 
were  we  repulsed.  We  always  at  least  held  our  own  on  the  field, 
if  we  did  not  beat  them.  ...  I  still  hope  to  get  to  Richmond  this, 
summer,  unless  the  government  commits  some  extraordinarily 
idiotic  act ;  but  I  have  no  faith  in  the  administration,  and  shall 
cut  loose  from  public  life  the  very  moment  my  country  can  dis- 
pense with  my  services.  Don't  be  alarmed  about  the  climate. 
It  is  not  at  all  bad  yet,  and  we  are  resting  splendidly.  The  men 
look  better  every  day.  So  you  want  to  know  how  I  feel  about 
Stanton,  and  what  I  think  of  him  now  ?  I  will  tell  you  with  the 
most  perfect  frankness.  I  think  ...  I  may  do  the  man  injus- 
tice. God  grant  that  I  may  be  wrong !  For  I  hate  to  think  that 
humanity  can  sink  so  low.  But  my  opinion  is  just  as  I  have  told 
you.  He  has  deceived  me  once  ;  he  never  will  again.  Are  you 
satisfied  now,  lady  mine  t    I  ever  will  hereafter  trust  your  judg- 


448  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

raent  about  men.  Your  woman's  tact  and  your  pure  heart  make 
you  a  better  judge  than  my  dull  apprehension.  I  remember 
what  you  thought  of  Stanton  when  you  first  saw  him.  I  thought 
you  were  wrong.  I  now  know  you  were  right.  Enough  of  the 
creature  ! 

Since  I  reached  here  I  have  received  about  8,500  or  9,000 
fresh  troops.  My  losses  in  the  battles  will  not  be  over  12,000. 
Burnside  has  8,000  (about)  at  Fortress  Monroe,  where  he  was 
detained  by  order  of  the  President.  He  has  been  in  Washington 
and  will  probably  be  here  himself  to-night,  when  I  will  know 
the  views  of  the  President.  The  probability  is  that  I  will  attack 
again  very  soon — as  soon  as  some  losses  are  supplied.  I  also 
wish  first  to  get  off  all  the  sick  and  wounded. 

11.30  P.M. — Have  just  been  at  work  dictating  my  report  of 
the  recent  operations  ;  got  as  far  as  bringing  Porter  back  across 

the  Chickahominy.  .  .  .  Please  reply  to  Mr. and  say  that  I 

thank  him  and  feel  deeply  grateful  for  his  trust  and  kind  feeling, 
and  that  I  am  glad  to  say  that  there  is  no  reason  for  despon- 
dency on  account  of  my  present  position.  I  flatter  myself  that 
this  army  is  a  greater  thorn  in  the  side  of  the  rebellion  than  ever, 
and  I  most  certainly  (with  God's  blessing)  intend  to  take  Rich- 
mond with  it.  ...  I  trust  that  we  have  passed  through  our 
darkest  time,  and  that  God  will  smile  upon  us  and  give  us 
victory.  .  .  . 

J^iy  i5»  7.30  A.M. —  ...  I  was  amused  at  a  couple  of  tele- 
grams yesterday  urging  me  to  the  offensive — as  if  I  were  unwill- 
ing to  take  it  myself  !  It  is  so  easy  for  people  to  give  advice — 
it  costs  nothing !  But  it  is  a  little  more  difficult  for  poor  me  to 
create  men  and  means,  and  to  wipe  out  by  mere  wishes  the  forces 
of  the  enemy.     I  confess  that  I  sometimes  become  provoked. 

...  I  had  quite  an  adventure  in  a  small  way  last  night  that 
was  rather  ludicrous.  I  yesterday  sent  a  flag  of  truce  after  some 
wounded  men,  Sweitzer  going  on  the  boat.  Well,  it  appears 
that  he  and  the  doctor  on  board,  between  them,  allowed  a  young 
English  nobleman  to  come  down  with  them,  and  Raymond  was 
discreet  enough  to  bring  him  up  to  headquarters,  and  was 
apparently  quite  proud  of  his  prize  ;  wished  me  to  see  him. 
Upon  inquiry  I  found  that  he  came  from  Richmond,  had  no 
papers  or  passports,  save  a  pass  from  the   secesh  Secretary  of 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  449 

War,  and  acknowledged  that  he  had  surreptitiously  slipped  into 
Richmond  a  couple  of  weeks  ago.  This  was  a  pretty  kettle  of 
fish.  I  did  not  like  to  hang  the  young  rascal  for  a  spy,  for  fear 
of  getting  up  a  row  with  England.  I  determined  he  should  not 
go  through ;  so  I  this  morning  sent  him  back  to  Secessia,  and  told 
him  to  try  it  again  at  his  peril.  The  young  man  was  exceedingly 
disgusted,  and  has^  I  presume,  by  this  time  come  to  the  conclu- 
sion that  the  fact  of  being  an  Englishman  is  not  everywhere  a 
sufficient  passport. 

Juiy  17,  A.M. — Gens.  Dix  and  Bumside  are  both  here.  .  .  . 
Bumside  is  very  well,  and,  if  the  President  permits,  will  bring  me 
large  (respectably)  reinforcements.  .  .  .  Am  quite  well  to-day  ; 
a  little  disgusted  at  the  stupidity  of  the  people  in  Washington. 
You  need  not  be  at  all  alarmed  as  to  my  being  deceived  by  them. 
I  know  that  they  are  ready  to  sacrifice  me  at  any  moment.  I 
shall  not  be  at  all  surprised  to  have  some  other  general  made 
commander  of  the  whole  army,  or  even  to  be  superseded  here. 

7  P.M. — .  .  .  You  ask  me  when  I  expect  to  reach  Richmond 
and  whether  I  shall  act  on  the  offensive  this  summer.  I  am  at 
the  mercy  of  the  government.  After  the  first  9,000  or  10,000  men 
sent  to  me  they  have  withheld  all  further  reinforcements.  Bum- 
side  is  halted  at  Fortress  Monroe.  With  his  own  troops  and 
those  of  Hunter  he  can  bring  me  some  20,000  troops ;  but  I 
have  no  idea  of  the  intentions  of  the  government.  If  I  am  rein- 
forced to  that  extent  I  will  try  it  again  with  the  least  possible 
delay.  I  am  not  at  all  in  favor  of  baking  on  the  banks  of  this 
river,  but  am  anxious  to  bring  matters  to  an  issue.  .  .  .  You 
need  not  be  at  all  alarmed  lest  any  of  these  people  flatter  me 
into  the  belief  that  they  are  my  friends.  It's  mighty  little 
flattery  or  comfort  I  get  out  of  any  of  them  in  these  days,  I 
assure  you.  .  .  . 

So  you  like  my  letter  to  the  President  ?  I  feel  that  I  did  my 
duty  in  writing  it,  though  I  apprehend  it  will  do  no  good  what- 
ever ;  but  it  clears  my  conscience  to  have  spoken  plainly  at  such 
a  time.  You  do  not  feel  one  bit  more  bitterly  towards  those  peo- 
ple than  I  do.  I  do  not  say  much  about  it,  but  I  fear  they  have 
done  all  that  cowardice  and  folly  can  do  to  ruin  our  poor  coun- 
try, and  the  blind  people  seem  not  to  see  it.  It  makes  my  blood 
boil  when  I  think  of  it.     I  cannot  resign  so  long  as  the  fate  of 


450  McCLELLAN'S  OIVN  STORY. 

the  Army  of  the  Potomac  is  entrusted  to  my  care.  I  owe  a  great 
duty  to  this  noble  set  of  men,  and  that  is  the  only  feeling  that 
retains  me.  I  fear  that  my  day  of  usefulness  to  the  country  is 
past — at  least  under  this  administration.  I  hope  and  trust  that 
God  will  watch  over,  guide,  and  protect  me.  I  accept  most 
resignedly  all  He  has  brought  upon  me.  Perhaps  I  have  really 
brought  it  on  myself  ;  for  while  striving  conscientiously  to  do  my 
best,  it  may  well  be  that  I  have  made  great  mistakes  that  my 
vanity  does  not  permit  me  to  perceive.  When  I  see  so  much 
5elf-blindness  around  me  I  cannot  arrogate  to  myself  greater 
clearness  of  vision  and  self-examination.  I  did  have  a  terrible 
time  during  that  week,  for  I  stood  alone,  without  any  one  to  help 
me.  I  felt  that  on  me  rested  everything,  and  I  felt  how  weak  a 
thing  poor,  mortal,  erring  man  is !  I  felt  it  sincerely,  and  shall 
never,  I  trust,  forget  the  lesson ;  it  will  last  me  to  my  dying 
day.  ...  I  am  very  well  now,  perfectly  well,  and  ready  for  any 
amount  of  fatigue  that  can  be  imagined. 

July  1 8,  7.45  A.M. —  .  .  .  We  are  to  have  another  very  hot 
day,  I  fancy ;  no  air  stirring,  and  the  atmosphere  close  and 
murky.  I  don't  at  all  wish  to  spend  the  summer  on  the 
banks  of  this  river ;  we  will  fry  or  bake  !  If  our  dear  govern- 
ment will  show  some  faint  indication  of  brains  or  courage  we 
can  finish  the  work  in  a  short  time.  ...  I  am  so  sorry  that  poor 
Prince  is  going  blind.  It  is  a  great  pity.  I  flattered  myself  that 
when  I  became  a  poor  blind  soldier,  a  second  Belisarius,  Prince 
would  probably  lead  me  about. 

9  P.M. — I  am  inclined  now  to  think  that  the  President  will 
make  Halleck  commander  of  the  army,  and  that  the  first  pretext 
will  be  seized  to  supersede  me  in  command  of  this  army.  Their 
game  seems  to  be  to  withhold  reinforcements,  and  then  to  relieve 
me  for  not  advancing,  well  knowing  that  I  have  not  the  means  to 
do  so.  If  they  supersede  me  in  the  command  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  I  will  resign  my  commission  at  once.  If  they  appoint 
Halleck  commanding  general  I  will  remain  in  command  of  this 
army  as  long  as  they  will  allow  me  to,  provided  the  army  is  in 
danger  and  likely  to  play  an  active  part.  I  cannot  remain  as  a 
subordinate  in  the  army  I  once  commanded  any  longer  than  the 
interests  of  my  own  Army  of  the  Potomac  require.  I  owe  no 
gratitude  to  any  but  my  own  soldiers  here  ;  none  to  the  govern- 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  45 1 

ment  or  to  the  country.  I  have  done  my  best  for  the  country  ; 
I  expect  nothing  in  return  ;  they  are  my  debtors,  not  I  theirs. 
...  If  things  come  to  pass  as  I  anticipate  I  shall  leave  the  ser- 
vice with  a  sad  heart  for  my  country,  but  a  light  one  for  myself. 
But  one  thing  keeps  me  at  my  work — love  for  my  country  and 
my  army.  Surely  no  general  had  ever  better  cause  to  love  his 
men  than  I  have  to  love  mine. 

Confidential — To    William    H,   Aspitiwally   Esq. — Berkley y  July 

19,  1862. 

My  dear  Mr.  Aspinwall:  I  again  find  myself  in  a  position 
such  that  I  may  ere  long  have  to  tax  your  friendship  for  me.  I 
have  reason  to  believe  that  Gen.  Halleck  is  to  be  made  com- 
mander-in-chief of  the  army,  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,  I  think  I 
detect  the  premonitory  symptoms  of  still  further  changes.  I  can 
get  no  replies  from  Washington  to  any  of  my  despatches.  Burn- 
side  and  his  troops  are  taken  out  of  my  hands.  I  receive  no  rein- 
forcements, and  no  hope  of  them  is  held  out  to  me.  The  game 
apparently  is  to  deprive  me  of  the  means  of  moving,  and  then  to 
cut  my  head  off  for  not  advancing.  In  other  words,  it  is  my 
opinion  that  I  will  be  removed  from  the  command  of  this  army 
in  a  short  time.  The  present  feeling  is,  I  think,  merely  a  con- 
tinuation of  the  inveterate  persecution  that  has  pursued  me  since 
I  landed  on  the  Peninsula — ^weakening  my  command  so  as  to  ren- 
der it  inadequate  to  accomplish  the  end  in  view,  and  then  to  hold 
me  responsible  for  the  result.  I  am  quite  weary  of  this.  If  I  am 
superseded  in  the  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  I  shall 
resign  my  commission  in  the  service,  feeling  that  I  can  no  longer 
be  of  use ;  on  the  contrary,  only  in  the  way. 

Looking  forward  to  that  event,  my  main  object  in  writing  to 
you  is  to  ask  you  to  be  kind  enough  to  cast  your  eyes  about  you 
to  see  whether  there  is  anything  I  can  do  in  New  York  to  earn  a 
respectable  support  for  my  family.  I  have  no  exaggerated  ideas 
or  expectations.  All  I  wish  is  some  comparatively  quiet  pursuit, 
for  I  really  need  rest.  Pretty  much  everything  I  had  has  been 
sacrificed  in  consequence  of  my  re-entering  the  service,  and  when 
I  leave  it  I  must  commence  anew  and  work  for  my  support. 
That  I  am  quite  willing  to  do. 

I'kfK^  that  I  need  not  apologize  for  troubling  you  in  regard 


I 


,j-,l  Mtltl'.t.UN-.'i  OlfJV  HTO/IY. 

Ill  llilx  iiifiMm  t'li'iiot-  ii'itnril  tliln  nx  <'iinriilunlial,  except  with 
Ml     \l-<»|>   I'liil    Ml     ttrittlHt. 

I  mil,  lilt  ilcnt  uii,  nw\  %\wv\\-\y  your  rrii-nd, 

liKO.  II.  McClellan. 

}-,\  *'\  \  M  .  WonI  WW  \\w  lu»»niul-sicainer  to  see  Oit« 

\i-Ht>'iih\  Ml'  i<  tl.iii\)i  \t'it  wi'U.  ...  I  sow  Ml  the  oAicers  and 
t»v»  i^«  1><VM>I,  ,*nil  (Hill  ^»  I  hvvv  titrw  >ii\  The  visii  soemed  to 
^\iN  tl\>w  ^  ),^■.^«  nI-'aI  iM  iJvV'^t^  Au,l  H  «\>hKI  h*\Tr  d.»nc  you  g.i3od 
\\\  *ti  lsi*W  (hi-  ^^^^M.  x«flvM>>^l  tyUo«>  l«ti^htcn^)  «]^  when  they 
*■*«  H\i'  \  »\"\>ti>  *Kh1\o*  (V  *«;>»  »-.;!  k:!o«- me,     1  fear 

»\»^>  •%»  *sll  N  *o»-.i  ,M  iwo  A»,)  •vvft^  *^■*^»c  ^.>  WW-  Wi^d  new 
»>SS\  '^  ws.viimS  i\fc'     \  V'^v  tVvU-wt  ^:;"tv  ;i;  :r^  «-."  like  M  me 

K  1  i-N-ii  ■•>'■'*..■■:•<  in^nnv.,  (US''.  «•."••;*.  >v- hl;;.-i.>««5iitr.  uii  Linjri. 
,*,.  ,  ,.,.*,  .'.f,  ,-  •  H  '■  »v  .►■■vv  *■?.-  A>-m;:j-j*il  J.-  'i«-  3,Tp«iher 
i,j...j,  ^-.  ,1..  'v.^^.s  V'.'i  ,>«wV'*-  «"»■•*•  ~-  •s'^  *•'  rou;:h  to 
v,s   >.■    ■ii-  ■■  •*■'  -V   vN    tv  n  hn>'-  }v".i-^  sK  Ivyjits  IT  *iUk  aa& 

,s.      w  I..  .1     (,s>"".*    .■»    ""N  w  $l:;m'.ir   fir  -iu    aliurii  w  ~ 

•  •1      ,,1.,    I  ,t,.     ,.x   ■■   ..1...1      •  ii.   »un   :;.--    i     .  s."vi    ih;  arnn 

^,>     ..       •..-v.    .     „,.     .„v    <t   V  tihiiiji',-.r.    ,iiu    :r-.i    ni   nac 

,1,.      1  ,   ',       .    ^.    .;,v    "      i'«r  "^     1    vi-  Mn-tv    rr^n;   anc 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  453 

shoulders  and  put  up  with  two.  Eh  bien !  it  is  all  for  the  best, 
I  doubt  not.  I  hope  Halleck  will  have  a  more  pleasant  time  in 
his  new  position  than  I  did  when  I  held  it.  This,  of  course,  fixes 
the  future  for  us.  I  cannot  remain  permanently  in  the  array 
after  this  slight.  I  must,  of  course,  stick  to  this  army  so  long 
as  I  am  necessary  to  it.  ...  I  have  tried  to  do  my  best,  honestly 
and  faithfully,  for  my  country.  That  I  have  to  a  certain  extent 
failed  I  do  not  believe  to  be  my  fault,  though  my  self-conceit 
probably  blinds  me  to  many  errors  that  others  see.  But  one  use- 
ful lesson  I  have  learned — to  despise  earthly  honors  and  popular 
favor  as  vanities.  I  am  content.  I  have  not  disgraced  my  name, 
nor  will  my  child  be  ashamed  of  her  father.  Thank  God  for 
that !  I  shall  try  to  get  something  to  do  which  will  make  you 
comfortable ;  and  it  will  be  most  pleasant  and  in  the  best  taste 
for  me  that  we  should  lead  hereafter  a  rather  quiet  and  retired 
life.  It  will  not  do  to  parade  the  tattered  remnants  of  my 
departed  honors  to  the  gaze  of  the  world.  Let  us  try  to  live 
for  each  other  and  our  child,  and  to  prepare  for  the  great  change 
that  sooner  or  later  must  overtake  us  all.  I  have  had  enough  of 
earthly  honors  and  place.  I  believe  I  can  give  up  all  and  retire 
to  privacy  once  more,  a  better  man  than  when  we  gave  up  our 
dear  little  home  with  wild  ideas  of  serving  the  country.  I  feel 
that  I  have  paid  all  that  I  owe  her.  I  am  sick  and  weary  of  all 
this  business.  I  am  tired  of  serving  fools.  God  help  my  coun- 
try !  He  alone  can  save  it.  It  is  grating  to  have  to  serve  under 
the  orders  of  a  man  whom  I  know  by  experience  to  be  my  infe- 
rior. But  so  let  it  be.  God's  will  be  done  !  All  will  turn  out 
for  the  best.  My  trust  is  in  God,  and  I  cheerfully  submit  to  His 
will.  ... 

July  22,  7.30  A.M. —  .  .  .  While  I  think  of  it,  be  very  careful 
what  you  telegraph,  and  tell  your  father  the  same  thing.  I  have 
the  proof  that  the  secretary  reads  all  my  private  telegrams.  If 
he  has  read  my  private  letters  to  you  also  his  ears  must  have 
tingled  somewhat.  I  am  about  doing  a  thing  to-day  which  will, 
I  suppose,  cause  the  abolitionists  and  my  other  friends  to  drive 
the  last  nail  in  my  official  coffin.  You  know  that  our  sick  and 
wounded  in  Richmond  are  suffering  terribly  for  want  of  proper 
food,  medicines,  and  hospital  supplies.  I  have  ordered  a  boat- 
load of  all  such  things — lemons,  tea,  sugar,  brandy,  underclothing, 


454 


MtCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 


lint,  bandages,  chloroform,  quinine,  ice,  etc.,  etc. — lo  be  sent  up 
to  Gen,  Lee  to-day,  to  be  used  at  his  discretion  for  the  sick  and 
wounded  of  both  armies.  I  know  he  would  not,  and  could  not, 
receive  them  for  our  men  alone,  therefore  I  can  only  do  it  in  the 
way  I  propose,  and  trust  to  his  honor  to  apply  them  properly — 
half  and  half.  I  presume  I  will  be  accused  now  of  double-dyed 
treason — giving  aid  and  comfort  to  the  enemy,  etc.  What  do 
you  think  of  it  ?  Am  I  right  or  wrong  >  ...  I  see  that  the  Pope 
bubble  is  likely  to  be  suddenly  collapsed.  Stonewall  Jackson  is 
after  him,  and  the  young  man  who  wanted  to  teach  me  the  art  of 
war  will  in  less  than  a  week  either  be  in  full  retreat  or  badly 
whipped.  He  will  begin  to  learn  the  value  of  "  entrenchments, 
lines  of  communication  and  of  retreat,  bases  of  supply,"  etc. 

July  22. — It  isa  lovely  afternoon,  bright  and  sunny,  a  pleasant 
breeze  blowing,  and  everything  charming  to  the  eye.  The  old 
river  looks  beautiful  to-day,  as  bright  as  when  John  Smith,  Esq., 
and  my  dusky  ancestress,  Madam  Pocahontas  Rolfe,  u^e  Pow- 
hatan, paddled  her  canoe  and  children  somewhere  in  this  vici- 
nity. If  it  were  not  for  the  accompaniments  and  present  sur- 
roundings it  would  delight  me  beyond  measure  to  have  you  here 
to  see  the  scenery  and  some  of  the  fine  old  residences  which 
stud  its  banks.  The  men  of  two  or  three  generations  ago  must 
have  lived  in  great  state  and  comfort  here.  I  suspect  they  had  a 
pretty  good  time,  interrupted  only  by  the  chills  and  fever,  bad 
luck  in  gambling  and  horse-racing,  and  the  trouble  of  providing 
for  their  woolly-headed  dependants. 

July  23. —  .  .  .  There  is  now  no  doubt  about  Halleck  being 
made  commander-in-chief.  The  other  change  will,  I  feel  sure, 
follow  in  a  very  few  days,  perhaps  a  week.  .  .  . 

Popularity,  Nell,  Is  a  humbug.  What  good  has  been  done  to 
me  or  to  the  country  by  my  "  popularity  "  in  the  North  ?  It  has 
not  prevented  my  enemies  from  withholding  all  support  from 
me  ;  it  did  not  hinder  them  from  almost  ruining  my  army  ;  it 
brings  me  not  a  man ;  it  will  not  be  worth  a  breath  of  air  to 
prevent  Halleck  being  put  in  my  place. 

July  24. —  .  .  .  Your  father  arrived  this  evening.  .  .  . 
Took  a  long  ride  in  the  sun  to-day.  .  .  .  Our  men  look  better 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  455 

than  ever  ;  like  real  veterans  now — tough,  brown,  and  fearless. 
.  .  I  hear  nothing  yet  from  Washington,  and  must  confess  that 
I  am  as  indifferent  as  possible  to  what  they  do.  If  they  rein- 
force me  I  am  ready  to  fight  harder  than  ever,  and  will  give 
Secesh  a  sharp  rub  for  his  capital.  If  they  make  it  necessary 
for  me  to  resign  I  am  quite  ready  to  do  so.  ...  I  presume  I 
shall  learn  something  to-morrow  about  the  destination  of  Burn- 
side.  I  can  then  enable  you  to  guess  how  matters  will  go.  I 
am  yet  in  complete  ignorance,  being  no  longer  taken  into  the 
confidence  of  the  "  powers  that  be."  .  .  .  You  ask  me  whether 
my  self-respect  will  permit  me  to  remain  longer  in  the  service 
after  Halleck's  appointment  ?  It  will  permit  me  to  remain  only 
so  long  as  the  welfare  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  demands — 
no  longer.  Don't  mind  these  things  ;  I  bide  my  time.  Whatever 
God  sends  me,  be  it  defeat  and  loss  of  rank,  or  be  it  success  and 
honor,  I  will  cheerfully  submit  to.     May  God  help  me  in  this  ! 

July  25. —  .  .  .  Started  out  early  in  the  morning  to  review 
Porter's  corps,  and  spent  several  hours  at  it  in  the  hot  sun. 
Then  I  went  to  visit  the  wounded  from  Richmond.  Then  I 
heard  that  Halleck  was  here,  and  was  obliged  to  return  to  see 
"  my  master."  I  think  Halleck  will  support  me  and  give  me  the 
means  to  take  Richmond.  ...  I  am  not  to  be  relieved  from  the 
command  of  this  army — at  least  that  does  not  seem  to  be  the 
present  intention.  .  .  . 

July  26,  9  P.M. —  .  .  .  From  nine  this  morning  until  6.30  this 
evening  I  have  been  among  the  sick  and  wounded.  More  than 
a  thousand  came  from  Richmond  last  night  and  were  in  the 
steamer.  I  saw  every  one  of  the  poor  fellows ;  talked  to  them 
all ;  heard  their  sorrows ;  tried  to  cheer  them  up,  and  feel 
that  I  have  done  my  duty  towards  them.  If  you  could  have 
seen  how  the  poor,  maimed,  brave  fellows,  some  at  the  point  of 
death,  brightened  up  when  they  saw  me  and  caught  my  hand,  it 
would  have  repaid  you  for  much  of  our  common  grief  and 
anxiety.  It  has  been  the  most  harrowing  day  I  ever  passed,  yet 
a  proud  one  for  me,  too.  I  realized  how  these  men  love  and 
respect  me,  and  I  trust  that  many  a  poor  fellow  will  sleep  more 
soundly  and  feel  more  happily  to-night  for  my  visit  to  them.  It 
makes  them  feel  that  they  are  not  forgotten  or  neglected  when 


456  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

their  general  comes  to  see  them  and  console  them.  My  men  love 
me  very  much.  What  a  terrible  responsibility  this  imposes  upon 
me  !  I  pray  that  God  will  give  me  strength  to  bear  it  and  the 
wisdom  to  do  what  is  best.  It  is  an  awful  load  that  is  imposed 
upon  me  by  the  trust  and  affection  of  these  poor  fellows.  .  .  . 

July  27. —  ...  I  can't  tell  you  how  glad  I  am  that  I  went 
to  see  all  those  poor  wounded  men  yesterday.  Another  batch 
will  come  to-night,  and  I  will,  if  possible,  go  to  see  all  of  them 
to-morrow  morning.  I  regard  it  as  a  duty  I  owe  the  poor  fel- 
lows— rather  a  hard  one  to  perform,  but  still  one  that  cannot 
be  neglected.  .  .  .  You  ask  me  whether  I  advised  the  Pre- 
sident to  appoint  Halleck.  The  letter  of  which  I  sent  you  a 
copy  is  all  that  ever  passed  on  the  subject,  either  directly  or 
indirectly  ;  not  another  word  than  is  there  written.  We  never 
conversed  on  the  subject ;  I  was  never  informed  of  his  views  or 
intentions,  and  even  now  have  not  been  officially  informed  of  the 
appointment.  I  only  know  it  through  the  newspapers.  In  all 
these  things  the  President  and  those  around  him  have  acted  so 
as  to  make  the  matter  as  offensive  as  possible.  .  .  .  Fitz  Porter 
has  stuck  through  it  all  most  nobly*.  He  is  all  that  I  thought 
him,  and  more.  Nothing  has  depressed  him  ;  he  is  always 
cheerful,  active,  and  ready. 

July  28,  9.15  A.M. —  .  .  .  Some  500  wounded  came  down 
last  night,  and  this  morning  I  am  going  out  to  the  boats  to  see 
them.  I  have  collected  an  armful  of  papers  to  give  the  poor 
fellows.   .   .   . 

9.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  Am  very  tired,  for  I  saw  and  talked  to 
every  one  of  the  wounded  men  to  day,  being  occupied  all  day 
at  it.  Between  the  closeness  of  the  cabins  and  being  on  my 
feet  so  long  I  am  quite  weary.    .    .    . 

I  enclose  with  this  some  "  Lines'*  a  poor  wounded  fellow 
handed  me  yesterday  and  begged  me  to  accept ;  they  were 
written  while  he  was  lying  wounded  and  under  fire.  I  don't 
know  that  the  poetry  possesses  any  peculiar  merit,  but  the 
incident  is  interesting.  My  friend  was  of  the  Hibernian  per- 
suasion. Queer  fellows  those  Irish  are.  There  is  a  vein  of 
humor  in  everything  they  do,  even  when  suffering  from  wounds 
and   sickness.     I    sometimes  can   hardly   keep   from    laughing 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  457 

when  talking  with  some  poor  fellow  who  is  desperately  wounded 
so  strangely  and  peculiarly  do  they  describe  things.  ...  I 
think  I  will  go  to  the  general  hospital  to-day  and  see  how 
those  poor  fellows  are  getting  on.  ...  I  am  still  "  on  my  back" 
awaiting  a  decision  from  Washington.  Burnside  is  still  kept 
from  me.  I  am  getting  no  reinforcements,  and  presume  that 
Burnside  will  be  ordered  to  Washington  the  first  thing  I 
know.  Then  I  shall  be  in  a  pretty  predicament — too  strong 
to  remain  here  and  too  weak  to  advance.   .   .   . 

P.M. — .  ...  I  hear  nothing  as  yet  from  Washington,  and 
begin  to  believe  that  they  intend  and  hope  that  I  and  my  army 
may  melt  away  under  the  hot  sun.  .  .  .  Secesh  is  very  quiet 
of  late — scarcely  even  a  cavalry  skirmish.  He  is  almost  too 
quiet  for  good,  and  must  be  after  some  mischief.  May  be  we 
will  have  a  visit  from  Merrimac  No.  2.  What  a  row  it  would 
create  among  the  transports !  I  am  in  hopes  that  I  will  receive 
orders  of  some  kind  from  Washington  this  evening.  I  am  get- 
ting dreadfully  tired  of  doing  nothing.  I  begin  to  feel  the  want 
of  a  little  quiet  excitement.  I  could  rest  at  home  away  from 
my  men,  but  the  idea  of  remaining  quietly  in  camp,  with  an 
army  about  me  and  an  active  enemy  at  some  mischief  or 
other,  is  a  very  different  thing. 

10.30  P.M. —  .  .  .  Nothing  to-night  from  Washington,  so  that 
I  am  yet  completely  in  the  dark  as  to  the  intentions  of  our  benign 
government. 

July  29. — What  do  you  think  I  have  been  doing  for  the  last 
half-hour  ?  Guess,  guess  ! !  I  have  been  sewing  on  buttons  and 
patching  my  woollen  shirts.  I  have  waited  in  vain  for  Charles 
to  do  anything  of  the  kind,  or  to  have  it  done,  and  have  been 
nearly  scratched  to  pieces  by  the  numberless  pins  that  were 
necessary  to  keep  myself  together.  So  I  dove  into  the  pocket  of 
my  carpet-bag,  and,  to  my  intense  delight,  found  a  needle  and  a 
spool  of  sewing-silk.  Off  came  my  shirt,  and  at  it  I  went  con 
amore.  I  was  so  delighted  with  the  result  of  that  operation  that 
I  pulled  out  of  my  trunk  a  clean  one  that  I  had  been  casting 
sheep's  eyes  at  but  found  too  ragged  to  wear.  That  I  fixed  up, 
and  I  am  now  as  grand  as  any  king,  with  two  shirts  to  my  name 
that  I  can  wear.  My  friend  Charles  has  no  idea  of  the  advan- 
tages of  mending  clothes,  and,  as  he  has  a  very  short  memory,  it 


458  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

is  not  of  much  use  to  tell  him.  So  you  see  "  how  the  mighty 
are  fallen** — the  general  of  a  hundred  thousand  men  sewing  on 
buttons  and  mending  his  own  clothes.  It  carried  me  back  to 
the  unhappy  days  of  my  miserable  bachelorhood.  Thank  Hea- 
ven that  that  epoch  of  my  existence  is  past  and  gone  !  ...  By 
the  way,  did  I  tell  you  of  that  gorgeous  smoking-cap  that  was 
sent  to  me  the  other  day  ?  I  must  take  the  first  opportunity 
to  send  it  home ;  it  is  entirely  too  magnificent  for  camp,  and  I 
fear  too  much  so  for  me  under  any  circumstances.  Should  I 
take  a  fancy  to  go  to  a  fancy-ball  as  the  Doge  of  Venice  or 
the  King  of  Persia,  it  might  make  a  first-rate  head-dress,  but 
would  hardly  do  for  anything  short  of  that.  We  might  make 
a  look  at  it  a  standing  reward  for  the  baby  whenever  she  is 
particularly  good.  I  have  no  doubt  it  would  make  her  open 
her  eyes. 

yuly  30,  10.15  P-^- — Another  day  elapsed  and  nothing  from 
Washington.  I  have  positive  information  to-day  that  the  com- 
mand of  this  army  was  pressed  upon  Burnside,  and  that  he  per- 
emptorily refused  it.  I  learn  that  Meigs  is  very  anxious  for  it ; 
much  good  may  it  do  him  !  I  still  think,  from  all  that  comes 
to  me,  that  the  chances  are  at  least  that  I  will  be  superseded. 
.  .  .  We  are  relieved  to-day  by  a  little  excitement.  The  gun- 
boats reported  that  six  rebel  gunboats  (including  Mr.  Merrimac 
No.  2)  were  on  the  way  down.  So  we  were  for  some  hours  con- 
siderably brightened  up  by  the  prospect  of  seeing  a  shindy ;  but 
it  turned  out  to  be  a  false  report.  ...  I  see,  among  other  lies, 
that  the  papers  say  that  the  enemy  drove  off  five  hundred  of 
our  beef  cattle  the  other  day — a  lie  out  of  whole  cloth.  ...  I 
am  sorry  to  say  that  I  learn  that  too  much  faith  must  not  be 
rested  in  Halleck.  I  hope  it  is  not  so,  but  will  be  very  careful 
how  far  I  trust  him,  or  any  other  man  in  these  days.  He  has 
done  me  no  good  yet. 

yuly  z\. — '.  .  .  This  morning  I  visited  the  general  hospital 
not  far  from  here,  and  went  through  it  all,  finding  the  patients 
comfortable  and  all  improving  in  health.  They  are  nearly  all  in 
hospital-tents  and  are  well  provided  for ;  in  truth,  they  are  about 
as  well  off  as  they  could  be  away  from  home,  and  many  of  them 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  459 

doubtless  better  off  than  they  would  be  there.  I  find  the  men 
more  contented  than  the  officers.  I  confess  that  the  men  enlist 
my  sjrmpathies  much  more  warmly  than  the  officers.  They  are 
so  patient  and  devoted.  They  have  generally  entered  the  ser- 
vice, too,  from  higher  and  more  unselfish  motives.  Poor  fellows ! 
I  can  never  willingly  break  the  link  that  unites  me  to  them,  and 
shall  always  be  very  proud  of  them  and  of  their  love  for  me, 
even  if  it  is  not  decreed  by  Providence  that  I  am  to  lead  them 
to  Richmond.  After  the  long  time  that  has  elapsed  without 
my  hearing  anything  from  Washington  I  can  hardly  hope  to 
learn  anything  by  to-day's  mail ;  but  I  assure  you  that  we  are 
all  becoming  very  impatient  at  the  long  delay  here,  so  unneces- 
sary, as  it  seems  to  us.  I  commenced  turning  over  a  new  leaf 
to-day  ;  that  is,  neither  writing  nor  telegraphing  to  Washington, 
and  have  about  determined  to  draw  back  into  my  shell  until  the 
oracle  deigns  to  speak.  I  have  said  all  I  well  can ;  I  have  told 
them  about  all  I  think  and  know  ;  have  pointed  out  to  them  what 
I  regard  as  the  general  effects  of  the  course  I  fear  they  are  likely 
to  adopt.  Words  can  no  further  go.  By  saying  more,  and  repeat- 
ing what  has  been  already  said,  I  should  only  render  myself 
ridiculous  and  a  bore.  So  I  will  be  silent,  and  if  they  send  me 
the  order  I  dread  (that  of  withdrawing  this  army)  I  will  make 
one  last,  desperate  appeal,  and  then  let  matters  take  their  course^ 
confident  that  I  have  honestly  endeavored  to  do  the  best  I  could,, 
although  I  may  not  have  done  as  well  as  others  could.  There  i$ 
a  great  consolation  in  feeling  that  one  has  tried  to  do  right  and 
not  been  actuated  by  selfish  motives.  Of  the  last  I  know  that  I 
am  free,  and  would  say  so  were  I  now  on  my  death-bed.  .  .  . 
Don't  feel  at  all  discouraged.  If  I  have  to  begin  the  world  anew 
and  work  as  hard  as  ever,  it  is  doubtless  all  for  the  best.  When 
I  return  to  civil  life  I  shall  have  the  consolation  of  knowing  that 
I  am  working  for  you  and  the  baby.  I  don't  know  what  rest  is^ 
and  probably  never  shall ;  but  as  long  as  God  gives  me  health 
and  strength,  and  my  mind  remains  clear,  it  is  better  that  I 
should  work.  I  am  not  so  fond  of  it  but  that  I  should  like  to 
rest ;  but  if  that  cannot  be,  I  will  do  my  best  and  try  to  do  my 
duty  ever.  ...  I  told  you  the  result  of  the  interview  with  Hal- 
leck;  thus  far  practically  nothing.  Not  a  word  have  I  heard 
from  Washington  since  his  return  there.  I  shall  not  write  or 
telegraph  another  word  until  I  hear  from  them,  unless  something 


460  McCLELLAirS  OWN  STORY. 

of  great  importance  occurs.  I  shall  stand  on  what  is  left  of 
my  dignity  now! 

I  A.M. —  ...  As  I  was  just  about  comfortably  asleep, 
about  three-quarters  of  an  hour  ago,  I  was  awakened  by  a  tre- 
mendous shelling.  The  rascals  opened  on  us  with  field-guns 
from  the  other  side  of  the  river,  and  kept  up  a  tremendous  fire. 
It  is  now  pretty  much  over,  but  still  going  on ;  no  shells  have 
burst  nearer  than  three  hundred  or  four  hundred  yards  from  my 
camp.  It  took  me  about  five  minutes  to  awaken  Marcy ;  he  did 
not  hear  a  single  shot.  .  .  .  Still  some  firing — now  heavy  again  ; 
gunboats  at  work — they  were  very  slow  in  getting  ready.  A 
queer  thing  this,  writing  a  letter  to  my  wife,  at  this  time  of  night, 
to  the  music  of  shells !  I  fear  they  must  have  done  some  harm. 
Now  they  are  quiet  again  ;  there  goes  a  whopper  from  the  gun- 
boats !     Queer  times  these ! 

1.30  A.M. — Pretty  quiet  now  ;  only  an  occasional  shot,  appa- 
rently from  the  gunboats — there  goes  one  !  Now  another  !  Marcy 
and  I  have  just  been  discussing  (another)  people  in  Washington, 
and  conclude  that  they  are  "a  mighty  trifling  set."  Indeed,  it  is 
evry  criminal  to  leave  me  thus  without  one  word  of  information 
as  to  their  plans  and  purposes.  If  any  lives  have  been  lost 
to-night  the  guilt  (another  shot)  is  on  their  shoulders,  for  I  told 
them  that  I  desired  to  occupy  with  Bumside's  troops  the  very 
point  whence  this  firing  has  come  to-night  (another  shot)  ;  but 
I  begin  to  believe  that  they  wish  this  army  to  be  destroyed.  ,  .  . 

2.45. — Tired  of  waiting  for  Hammerstein's  return  with  the 
news  of  the  damage  done.  .  .  .  Well,  he  has  just  returned.  It 
was  so  dark  that  no  one  could  tell  what  the  damage  was ;  one 
man  at  Fitz  Porter's  headquarters  had  his  leg  shot  off ;  no  ves- 
sels set  on  fire;  the  camps  all  quiet. 

Aug,  I,  midnight —  .  .  .  Everything  quiet  since  I  went  to 
bed  last  night ;  not  a  shot  fired.  We  had  ten  men  killed,  twelve 
wounded,  half  a  dozen  horses  killed  ;  vessels  not  hurt  a  bit. 
One  shell  did  fall  in  my  camp.  Fitz  Porter  caught  the  most  of 
the  storm,  but  had  only  one  man  killed.  This  afternoon  I  sent 
a  party  across  the  river  to  where  most  of  the  firing  came  from, 
to  cut  down  some  timber  that  obstructs  the  view  and  burn  some 
houses  that  the  enemy  had  been  using  as  observatories  and 
to   screen   their   pickets  ;    it  was  all   done  successfully  without 


\ 
* 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  46 1 

opposition.     It  turned  out,   as  I  supposed,   that  the  guns  used 
were  field-guns,  with  which  they  ran  away  as  soon  as  they  found 
the  gunboats  and  our  own  guns  were  getting  troublesome.  .  .  . 
I  had  a  very  friendly  letter  from  Halleck  this  morning.  .  .  . 

Aug.  2. — .  .  .  Circumstances  have  made  it  unavoidable  for 
me  to  send  out  two  important  expeditions  and  a  large  working 
party,  although  it  is  Sunday.  One  of  the  expeditions  goes  to 
Malvern,  the  other  on  the  south  side  of  the  James  river.  ...  I 
had  quite  an  interesting  visit  on  the  other  side  to-day.  The 
place  we  burned  up  yesterday  was  a  very  handsome  one.  It  was 
a  rather  hard  case  to  be  obliged  to  do  it,  but  it  could  not  be 
avoided.  .  .  . 

I  had  (as  usual)  not  a  single  word  from  Washington  to-day 
from  any  one,  nor  anything  from  Bumside.  If  the  latter  is 
really  under  orders  for  the  Rappahannock  there  is  something 
very  strange  in  his  failure  to  communicate  with  me,  not  even 
giving  me  the  slightest  hint  of  it ;  therefore  I  am  disposed  to 
discredit  Com.  Wilkes's  report,  and  to  think  that  he  must  be  mis- 
taken in  regard  to  it.  .  .  .  If  he  is  ordered  to  the  Rappahannock 
I  believe  that  this  army  will  be  withdrawn  from  here.  .  .  .  When 
you  contrast  the  policy  I  urge  in  my  letter  to  the  President  with 
that  of  Congress  and  of  Mr.  Pope,  you  can  readily  agree  with 
me  that  there  can  be  little  natural  confidence  between  the  gov- 
ernment and  myself.  We  are  the  antipodes  of  each  other ;  and 
it  is  more  than  probable  that  they  will  take  the  earliest  oppor- 
tunity to  relieve  me  from  command  and  get  me  out  of  sight.  I 
shall  endeavor  fo  pursue  the  plain  path  of  duty.  As  I  have  often 
told  you,  my  mind  is  prepared  to  endure  anything  that  a  man  of 
honor  can.  But  I  shall  consult  my  own  sense  of  right  and  my 
own  judgment,  not  deferring  to  that  of  others  when  my  own  con- 
victions are  strong.  There  are  some  things  to  which  I  cannot 
submit  and  to  which  nothing  can  induce  me  to  yield.  .  .  . 

7.30  A.M.,  Aug.  3  {sam€  letter). —  .  .  .  One  of  my  expeditions 
of  last  night  failed :  had  to  come  back  because  the  guides  lost 
the  way  ;  will  try  it  again  to-night  or  to-morrow.  The  other  one 
not  yet  heard  from,  but  has,  I  hope,  met  with  better  luck  than 
the  first.  .  .  .  Everything  quiet  during  the  night ;  no  firing  and 
no  stampede  of  any  kind.  .  .  . 


^ti'S  MtChftU.AN'f^  OfVU  SiTOKY. 

thf^khft  A  His  i*  ^'  y^  ^■^'  ■  '  '  '  '  ^^  oH  on  the  other  side 
(if  ltM»  Hvi^r  Mil  i\fny  yrMr.f/l^y,  where  I  had  a  hot  and  fatiguing 
liMMt|*  oil  fool,  lirpiidrin  K^ttirifC  a  little  damp  in  the  rain.  Our 
tMiMM|M|ti<»«  Oh  llmi  nu\e  of  the  river  were  quite  successful  I 
(ouihI  i\  MpliMulUI  position  to  cover  that  bank,  so  as  to  enable  us 
1(1  iHiM  Uu^  iiiitiy  If  nc<-ettfiary,  an  well  as  to  prevent  any  more 
iMUlh^llhl  tioivtuuU'M  liki?  Ihiit  of  last  week.  I  now  hold  the  other 
<tluMv  w^h  A  nvittiv'icut  number  of  troops  to  prevent  a  surprise. 
AwMU  wvMt  v»ut  with  three  squadrons,  met  and  thrashed  an 
vulOv  iviL^^^H'^^ti,  vU\>v\^  them  to  and  through  their  camp,  which 
hv'  V  M'Uttvsl  unt  IvMHurvly  destroyed,  thus  rendering  the  13th  Va. 
V  ^v^l^v  v'Vvv>v\t»»^^lv  utUAUufortable  last  night,  for  all  their  tentSy 
^»i\»\UK»u<.  v\vlk»»»^  utvnjiils*  wkI  baggage  were  effectually  burned 
\^\'  \W  h&v'it  "^v'HH'  (»«ts«.UK''rr^  und  sabred  a  respectable  number^ 
K^\»u^  v»»»U  Uv'  >Mv'u»kdv\l  himiMrtf.  The  5th  Regular  Cavalry  and 
\hif   \\\  k\ki\y  \^\\ii\\H  v^id  th<f  wv>rk.  .  .  . 

I  i  tv^  »'.  N*  I  N%ivl  vi  WK^tv  trom  Bumside  thb  evening.  He 
Kiw  Ihvu  v'ivivHxl  iv^  thv  Kstppahonnock^  and  hasv  I  presume,. 
^i'^iw^  N^'i  v'Ov^  >«v'id  ha>A'  I  heturd  on  that  subject  from  Wash- 
lu^uoi  \l\\W\  K  ^^^^  ^vx^t»  tv  show  the  cloven  foot  already.  .  .  . 
\  Uk\s  k  i.vis;^  V  \iK\hUvMi  v<mu  c\>xtight — d  couple  of  divisions  of 
»ui.pii»v  *uvl  sv'UK  Nvw  V  ivahv-  ^v^  trv  tw  catch  the  secesh  who 
ku    k»  VI  Jnv  Ml  Mill.     Si^all  'KH  hear  from  chem  before  to-morrow 

-  V  \i  Puuv  vi\in>  c  iiUKuiaviing.  has^  been  going  on  in  my 
iivMu  ill  V  »»K»;u{ii^  Mi.vJ;.vc  V  v.\nutiianvl  at  Malvern  :  they  are 
^\^\\  vt.uivtu^;    i^.iv  :>u'uv  vi>vUj»iv.     Have  riot  heard  details^  but 

\xki\   »uU^  vKU     n   '.iVU   viu<\«t\»t». 

^.^^  'K\i»  v4K«u»v  xlixvv>^iui  u  ditxtii^  jcf  uie  estemy :  cook 
vNv^ii  vMc  '>viiuitv\i  niM.HK'iN.  vilo-i  uki  wuuaued  severaL  The 
»iKtv\  vx\aj>s\i  iiKivi  vovvt  ^>4  I  -itiv:^  :\>>c.  Houlter  s- iispositioiis 
\kv4s  uiuu^i%^c,  ukI  ivvt^iu^  Hit  'fix:  'i>^  ;»revented  rompieie 
vuww  ^Vc  >a>c  i*>i  i^i^v  v'titxi  -UKi  ^Mcfvett  •.vuumie»i.  amon^ 
'•V  *;uivi  ^^v*  ^hvviN.  ^wi*.  tiiitit  -ix'  ^vmmand  "tere  ro-iughtL 
Vvvv>  ul  »>^a^^  vaviv  .0  iKn<  ^ui  -<H^u;u  %e  >e  -Utatise^L  I  <<Z2iI 
K*H  Vvvii'i  Viv^iv  ,iAi?v,  UKi  UU.V  "t:»ttjLi!^  u*  iriirtt .  vtil  ^cstd  tt 
'o;    uv    HAalvcvv  iiKi    lUOuiaiK'::    i   \  <2.%.      I    un    tow  stamnac:  ra 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  463 

Averill,  directing  him  to  take  post  to-night  near  Nelson's  farm. 
Will  send  in  again  as  soon  as  I  return  from  my  ride.  Excuse 
the  illegibility  of  this,  as  it  is  written  on  horseback,  and  the 
flies  trouble  Dan.  The  enemy  in  strong  force  at  New  Market. 
Better  send  a  special  despatch  to  Halleck  and  tell  him  that  I 
hate  to  give  up  this  position.  Secesh  is  under  cover,  and,  though 
he  is  in  strong  force,  I  can  beat  him  if  they  will  give  me  rein- 
forcements. Send  this  to  Nell  if  I  do  not  get  back  in  time  for 
mail. 

Aug,  7,  II  P.M. —  ...  I  have  been  so  situated  for  the  last 
two  days  that  I  could  not  write  to  you.  Spent  night  before  last 
at  Malvern,  and  had  no  means  of  writing.  I  came  in  from  there 
yesterday,  and  was  up  nearly  all  night  giving  orders  and  securing 
reports  in  regard  to  the  abandonment  of  the  position.  .  .  .  Was 
not  very  well  off  at  Malvern.  My  ambulance  lost  the  road,  came 
near  being  bagged  by  the  enemy,  and  did  not  make  its  appear- 
ance until  late  next  day,  so  I  had  nothing.  I  got  some  coffee 
and  some  bread  from  one  of  the  companies,  used  my  saddle- 
blanket  and  saddle  for  a  bed,  and  got  through  the  night  without 
mishap. 

Aug.  8,  Berkley. — I  can't  convey  any  idea  of  the  heat  to-day. 
It  has  been  intense ;  not  a  breath  of  air  stirring.  .  .  .  Received 
some  reports  from  Pleasonton  that  the  enemy  are  pressing  him 
hard  near  Malvern  Hill,  and  gave  the  necessary  orders.  ...  I  am 
in  strong  hopes  that  the  enemy  will  be  foolish  enough  to  drive 
Pleasonton  in  and  attack  me  in  this  position.  I  have  ordered  P. 
to  draw  them  on,  if  possible,  and  if  they  come  in  sight  will  try  to 
keep  my  men  concealed  and  do  my  best  to  induce  them  to  attack 
me.  Should  they  be  so  foolish  as  to  do  that  I  will  surely  beat 
them  and  follow  them  up  to  Richmond  ;  but  I  fear  they  are  too 
smart  for  that.  I  can  hardly  hope  for  so  much  good  luck.  If  it 
is  a  possible  thing  to  humbug  them  into  an  attack  I  will  do  it.  I 
will  issue  to-morrow  an  order  giving  my  comments  on  Mr.  John 
Pope.  I  will  strike  square  in  the  teeth  of  all  his  infamous 
orders,  and  give  directly  the  reverse  instructions  to  my  army: 
forbid  all  pillaging  and  stealing,  and  take  the  highest  Christian 
ground  for  the  conduct  of  the  war.  Let  the  government  gainsay 
it  if  they  dare.     I  am  willing  to  fall  in  such  a  cause.     I  will  not 


464  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

permit  this  army  to  degenerate  into  a  mob  of  thieves,  nor  will  I 
return  these  men  of  mine  to  their  families  as  a  set  of  wicked  and 
demoralized  robbers.  I  will  never  have  that  sin  on  my  con- 
science. ...  I  have  received  my  orders  from  Halleck  ;  I  can- 
not tell  you  what  they  are,  but  if  you  will  bear  in  mind  what  I 
have  already  written  to  you,  you  can  readily  guess  them  when 
I  say  that  they  are  as  bad  as  they  can  be,  and  that  I  regard  them 
as  almost  fatal  to  our  cause.  I  have  remonstrated  as  warmly  as 
I  know  how  to  do,  but  to  no  avail.  My  only  hope  is  that  I  can 
induce  the  enemy  to  attack  me.  I  shall,  of  course,  obey  the 
orders,  unless  the  enemy  give  me  a  very  good  opening,  which  I 
should  at  once  avail  myself  of.  I  have  learned  through  private 
sources  that  they  have  not  yet  determined  how  to  dispose  of  me 
personally.  Their  game  is  to  force  me  to  resign  ;  mine  will  be  to 
force  them  to  place  me  on  leave  of  absence,  so  that  when  they 
begin  to  reap  the  whirlwind  that  they  have  sown  I  may  still  be 
in  position  to  do  something  to  save  my  country.  With  all  their 
faults,  I  do  love  my  countrymen,  and  if  I  can  save  them  I  will 
yet  do  so.  .  .  . 

I  had  another  letter  from  Halleck  to-night.  I  strongly  bus- 
pect  him. 

Aug.  — . —  .  .  .  Shortly  after  that  a  wind-storm  set  in  with 
great  violence  ;  it  knocked  over  my  desk  and  broke  it.  The  desk 
fell  on  the  table  and  broke  one  leaf  off  ;  it  broke  my  "  monkey  ** 
(did  you  know  I  had  a  menagerie  ?),  *  scattered  my  papers  to 
the  four  corners  of  the — tent,  and  brought  all  the  orderlies  in 
with  a  terrific  rush.  Finally  they  righted  and  gathered  every- 
thing together,  so  that  I  am  now  comfortable  again,  except 
damages  and  the  flies.  The  gust  has  cooled  the  air,  however, 
so  we  are  gainers.  No  rain  has  fallen  here,  but  the  wind  is  from 
our  dear  old  North,  and  is  therefore  doubly  pleasant  to  me. 
The  fact  is,  I  don't  like  the  South  ;  it  is  entirely  too  hot  to  suit 
me,  and  I  am  sure  I  don't  envy  the  possessors  of  it  in  the  least. 
I  wish  you  could  see  what  a  business  I  am  doing,  as  I  write,  in 
the  way  of  spearing  flies ;  every  time,  nearly,  that  I  dip  the  pen 
in  the  inkstand  out  comes  a  defunct  fly.      I  am  so  glad  you 

*  In  the  Gulf  States  a  "  monkey  "  is  the  name  given  to  a  porous  pot*^ 
tery  jug  or  large  bottle  of  water,  which  hangs  by  a  cord  and  cools  the 
water  by  evaporation. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  465 

visited  that  hospital.  I  thank  you  for  it  from  the  bottom  of  my 
heart.  I  know  it  did  them  infinite  good,  and  I  am  sure  that 
you  will  never  meet  one  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  without 
a  kind  word  and  your  brightest  smile. 

Aug,  10,  8  A.M. —  .  .  .  Halleck  is  turning  out  just  like  the 
rest  of  the  herd.  The  affair  is  rapidly  developing  itself,  and  I 
see  more  clearly  every  day  their  settled  purpose  to  force  me  to 
resign.  I  am  trying  to  keep  my  temper.  I  have  no  idea  that 
I  will  be  with  this  army  more  than  two  \)r  three  weeks  longer; 
and  should  not  be  surprised  any  day  or  hour  to  get  my  "  walk- 
ing-papers." ... 

4.  P.M. —  .  .  .  The  absurdity  of  Halleck's  course  in  ordering 
the  army  away  from  here  is  that  it  cannot  possibly  reach  Wash- 
ington in  time  to  do  any  good,  but  will  necessarily  be  too  late. 
I  am  sorry  to  say  that  I  am  forced  to  the  conclusion  that  H.  is 
very  dull  and  very  incompetent.  Alas,  poor  country  !  I  hope 
to  be  ready  to-morrow  afternoon  to  move  forward  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Richmond.  I  will  try  to  catch  or  thrash  Longstreet,  and 
then,  if  the  chance  offers,  follow  in  to  Richmond  while  they  are 
lamming  away  at  Pope.  It  is  in  some  respects  a  desperate  step, 
but  it  is  the  best  I  can  do  for  the  nation  just  now,  and  I  would 
rather  even  be  defeated  than  retreat  without  an  effort  to  relieve 
Washington  in  the  only  way  at  all  possible.  If  I  fail,  why  well 
and  good.  I  will  fall  back.  If  I  win  I  shall  have  saved  my 
country,  and  will  then  gracefully  retire  to  private  life.  ...  I 
am  getting  the  sick  away  quite  rapidly  now,  but  they  are  in  large 
numbers,  and  it  is  at  best  a  slow  process.  The  heavy  baggage 
is  all  being  stored  on  board  ship,  so  that  in  whatever  direction 
we  move  we  will  be  comparatively  unencumbered.  I  shall  send 
off  all  that  I  have,  except  a  carpet-bag  and  pair  of  blankets, 
change  my  large  tent  for  a  "  wall-tent,**  and  go  about  as  light 
as  any  of  them.  I  half  apprehend  that  they  will  be  too  quick 
for  me  in  Washington,  and  relieve  me  before  I  have  the  chance 
of  making  the  dash.  If  so,  well  and  good.  I  am  satisfied  that 
the  dolts  in  Washington  are  bent  on  my  destruction,  if  it  is  pos- 
sible for  them  to  accomplish  it.  .  .  . 

Midnight. —  .  .  .  I  received  a  very  harsh  and  unjust  tele- 
gram from  Halleck  this  morning,  and  a  very  friendly  private 
letter  from  the  same  individual — blows  hot  and  cold.     I  replied 


466  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

to  his  telegram,  closing  by  quietly  remarking :  "  The  present 
moment  is  probably  not  the  proper  one  for  me  to  refer  to  the 
unnecessarily  harsh  and  unjust  tone  of  your  telegrams  of  late. 
It  will,  however,  make  no  difference  in  my  official  action." 
Under  the  circumstances  I  feel  compelled  to  give  up  the  idea 
of  my  intended  attack  upon  Richmond,  and  must  retrace  my 
steps.  Halleck  writes  that  all  the  forces  in  Virginia,  including 
Pope,  Bumside,  etc.,  are  to  be  placed  under  my  command  ;  I 
doubt  it.  They  are  committing  a  fatal  error  in  withdrawing  me 
trom  here,  and  the  filture  will  show  it.  I  think  the  result  of 
their  machination  will  be  that  Pope  will  be  badly  thrashed  within 
ten  days,  and  that  they  will  be  very  glad  to  turn  over  the  redemp- 
tion of  their  affairs  to  me.  .  .  . 

Aug,  II. — I  am  free  to  chat  with  you  for  a  few  minutes,  at 
least  until  the  impetuous  Hatter  rushes  in  and  asks  ''  the 
general  to  be  good  enough  to  come  to  breakfast."  Our  break- 
fasts are  not  very  splendid  or  tempting  just  now  ;  probably  a 
little  ham  or  beefsteak,  coffee,  bread  and  butter  ;  never  any  ice 
for  breakfast — that  is,  very  seldom,  if  ever ;  and  hot  as  blazes. 
In  this  climate  one  needs  cool  and  light  food,  fruit,  etc.;  but 
we  don't  get  much  of  that  sort  of  thing. 

.  .  .  Have  been  hard  at  work  all  day,  and  expect  to  keep  at 
it  until  I  get  this  army  away  from  Fortress  Monroe,  unless  my 
head  is  chopped  off  'in  the  meantime — a  circumstance  I  am  in 
the  daily  expectation  of  occurring,  and  can't  say  that  I  much 
dread.  ...  I  presume  Pope  is  having  his  hands  quite  full  to- 
day ;  is  probably  being  hard  pressed  by  Jackson.  I  cannot  help 
him  in  time,  as  I  have  not  the  means  of  transportation  ;  but  I 
foresee  that  the  government  will  try  to  throw  upon  me  the  blame 
of  their  own  delays  and  blunders.  So  be  it.  I  have  learned  to 
endure,  and  shall  continue  to  as  long  as  the  good  of  the  country 
requires  that  I  shall  do  so ;  but  not  one  moment  longer  than 
that. 

P.M. —  .  .  .  You  see  that  Halleck  has  done  otherwise  than 
to  reinforce  me ;  quite  the  reverse.  Bumside  is  at  Acquia,  I 
strongly  suspect  that  one  reason  for  their  not  imparting  their 
plans  to  me  is  that  they  have  very  few  to  impart ;  they  are  drift- 
ing, not  steering  the  poor  Ship  of  State,  and  I  fear  they  will  be 
wrecked  ere  long.  ...  If  they  do  read  our  letters  in  Washington 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  467 

they  must  feel  one  ear  tingle  occasionally !  .  .  .  You  need  not 
dread  any  engagement  at  present.  The  "powers"  won't  let 
me  go  after  the  enemy,  and  I  am  quite  sure  they  won't  be 
kind  enough  to  come  after  me.  It  is  scarcely  possible  that 
we  can  have  anything  more  than  a  mere  affair  of  rear-guards. 
I  don't  think  now  that  will  occur ;  so  make  your  mind  quite 
easy.  .  .  . 

Cherrystone  Inlet^  Aug,  14,  2  a.m. — Left  camp  yesterday 
morning  at  seven  o'clock  in  a  gunboat  to  go  to  the  telegraph- 
station  at  Jamestown  island,  so  that  I  could  talk  with  Halleck 
with  less  loss  of  time.  On  arriving  there  I  found  that  the  wires 
were  not  working  through,  and  went  straight  on  to  Fortress 
Monroe,  arriving  there  about  8.30  p.m.  There  I  ascertained 
that  the  cable  to  this  place  was  broken,  so  I  took  a  steamer 
and  came  over  here,  arriving  at  eleven  p.m.  Halleck  came  to 
the  Washington  office  about  one  and  a  half  or  two  hours  ago  ; 
I  have  sent  him  several  telegrams,  and  his  first  reply  is  just 
arriving  in  cipher.  I  presume  I  am  in  for  sitting  up  all  night. 
The  steamer  is  about  two  miles  from  here ;  came  that  distance 
in  a  row-boat.  This  is  an  abandoned  secesh  city,  consisting  of 
one  house  in  the  wilderness ;  so  I  am  not  likely  to  be  disturbed. 
Porter,  Ingalls,  Colbum,  and  Key  are  with  me.  They  are  all 
sound  asleep,  so  I  have  no  one  to  distract  my  attention.  I  must 
confess,  however,  that  as  I  went  to  bed  very  late  last  night,  and 
have  had  no  sleep  since  the  morning,  I  am  rather  sleepy  myself ; 
but  I  can't  just  now  indulge  in  the  luxury. 

3.30  A.M. —  .  .  .  We  have  just  got  back  to  the  steamer,  and 
I  am  getting  under  way  to  return  to  Fort  Monroe,  where  I  go 
direct  to  camp  in  a  fast  boat.  My  communication  with  Halleck 
was  unsatisfactory  in  the  extreme.  He  did  not  even  behave 
with  common  politeness ;  he.^  is  a  bien  mauvais  sujet — he  is  not 
a  gentleman.  ...  I  am  writing  by  a  dim  light,  and  confess 
that  I  am  very  tired  and  very  much  disgusted.  I  fear  that  I 
am  very  mad,  and  think  I  have  a  perfect  right  to  be  so.  .  .  . 
Every  day  convinces  me  more  and  more  that  it  is  the  in- 
tention of  Halleck  and  the  government  to  drive  me  off,  and 
I  begin  to  feel  that  I  cannot  preserve  my  self-respect  and 
remain  in  the  service  much  longer.  I  think  the  crisis  will  soon 
arrive.    .   .   . 


468  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

Berkley^  Aug.  14. — Returned  about  noon.  On  my  way  down 
I  stopped  at  the  site  of  the  old  settlement  of  Jamestown.  There 
is  nothing  left  of  it  but  the  brick  tower  of  the  church  and  the 
churchyard.  The  oldest  tombstone  I  could  decipher  was  of  1698. 
I  saw  one  of  a  poor  young  wife,  only  sixteen  years  and  eleven 
months.  I  plucked  a  couple  of  poor  little  flowers  from  the  site 
of  the  church  and  enclose  them  in  this,  only  to  show  you  that 
you  arc  sometimes  in  my  thoughts.  .  .  .  Porter's  corps  starts 
this  evening,  Franklin  in  the  morning,  the  remaining  three 
to-morrow  and  next  day.  Headquarters  will  remain  here  until 
nearly  the  last.  We  are  going,  not  to  Richmond,  but  to  Fort 
Monroe,  I  am  ashamed  to  say  !  ...  It  is  a  terrible  blow  to 
me,  but  1  have  done  all  that  could  be  done  to  prevent  it,  with- 
out success,  so  I  must  submit  as  best  I  can  and  carry  it  out. 
I  shall,  of  course,  conduct  the  march  to  Fortress  Monroe  and 
attend  to  the  embarkation  thence ;  my  mind  is  pretty  much 
made  up  to  try  hard  to  break  off  at  that  point. 

Aug*  17,  3  P.M.,  Barrett's  Ferry ^  Chickahominy, —  ...  I  have 
the  greater  part  of  the  army  now  over,  and  if  we  are  not  dis- 
turbed for  six  hours  more  all  will  be  well.  I  have  abandoned 
neither  men  nor  material,  and  the  "  retreat  **  has  been  conducted 
in  the  most  orderly  manner,  and  is  a  perfect  success,  so  far  as  so 
disgusting  an  operation  can  be.  I  learn  that  all  the  troops  in 
Virginia  are  to  be  placed  under  my  command.  Burnside  came 
down  to  assure  me  from  Halleck  that  he  (H.)  is  really  my  friend 
— quit  soit !  ...  I  hope  to  get  everything  over  to-night,  and 
will  be  at  my  old  headquarters  at  Williamsburg  to-morrow  even- 
ing ;  next  day  at  Yorktown.  If  all  is  then  quiet  I  will  go  thence 
by  water  to  Fortress  Monroe  and  complete  the  arrangements  for 
embarking.  ...  I  took  a  savage  satisfaction  in  being  the  last 
to  leave  my  camp  at  Berkley  yesterday  !   .   .   . 

Aug,  18,  P.M.,  Williamsburg, —  .  .  .  Am  pretty  well  tired 
out,  for  I  have  been  much  in  the  saddle  lately,  besides  having 
slept  very  little.  ...  I  crossed  the  Chickahominy  yesterday 
and  remained  there  to-day  until  all  the  troops  had  crossed  and 
moved  several  miles  in  advance.  When  I  left,  the  bridge  was 
taken  up  and  nothing  but  a  few  worthless  stragglers  left  behind. 
They  will  all  be  brought  over  to-night,  I  think ;  though,  so  far 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  469 

as  they  are  concerned  individually,  I  would  much  prefer  that 
secesh  should  capture  them  all.  I  have  made  a  remarkably  suc- 
cessful retreat ;  left  absolutely  nothing  behind.  Secesh  can't 
find  one  dollar's  worth  of  property  if  he  hunts  a  year  for  it.  I 
have  not  seen  the  enemy  since  we  started,  and  I  rather  doubt 
whether  he  knows  where  we  are  now.  ...  It  will  take  a  long 
time  to  embark  this  army  and  have  it  ready  for  action  on  the 
banks  of  the  Potomac.  .  .  .  The  men  all  know  that  I  am  not 
responsible.  I  have  remained  constantly  with  the  rear-guard  ; 
was  the  very  last  one  to  leave  our  camp  at  Berkley;  remained 
on  the  Chickahominy  until  the  bridge  was  removed,  and  still 
have  the  proud  satisfaction  of  hearing  the  cheers  of  the  men  as 
I  pass,  seeing  their  faces  brighten  up.  .  .  .  Strange  as  it  may 
seem,  they  have  not,  I  think,  lost  one  particle  of  confidence  in 
me,  and  love  me  just  as  much  as  ever.  Pleasonton  has  done 
splendidly.  I  placed  him  in  command  of  the  rear-guard  of  the 
main  column,  and  nothing  could  have  been  better  than  his  per- 
formance ;  he  is  really  a  fine  officer,  cool,  collected,  and  intelli- 
gent. ...  I  have  felt  every  moment  that  I  was  conducting  a 
false  movement,  and  which  was  altogether  against  my  own  judg- 
ment and  that  of  the  army.  I  have  done  it  without  demoralizing 
the  army.   .   .   . 

Fortress  Monroe,  Aug.  20,  a.m. — Arrived  here  yesterday 
afternoon.  The  "  retreat "  is  successfully  accomplished  and  the 
troops  have  commenced  embarking ;  a  good  many  have  left 
already. 

Aug.  21,  4  P.M.  {Fort  Monroe). — Have  just  returned  from  an 
examination  of  this  fort  and  the  Rip  Raps.  .  .  .  The  whole  of 
Porter's  corps  got  off  last  night.  Heintzelman  from  Yorktown 
to-day.  Franklin  commences  to  embark  here  and  at  Newport 
News  to-morrow.  Sumner  will  reach  here  to-morrow  and  com- 
mence embarking  as  soon  as  transports  are  ready,  probably  in  a 
couple  of  days.  I  do  not  know  what  they  intend  doing  with  me. 
I  still  think  they  will  place  me  on  the  shelf  or  do  something  dis- 
agreeable to  get  me  out  of  the  way.  I  shall  be  glad  of  any- 
thing that  severs  my  connection  with  such  a  set.  ...  I  have 
had  nothing  from  Washington  to-day.  As  they  do  not  see  fit 
to  give    me   any  information   either  as   to   their  intentions  or 


470  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

their  situation,  I  shall  ask  no  more  questions,  nor  will  I  make 
any  more  suggestions.  They  may  go  to  the  deuce  in  their  own 
way,  and  I  think  are  moving  in  that  direction  with  sufficient 
rapidity  to  gratify  secesh  exceedingly.  .  .  . 

Met  with  a  terrible  misfortune  to-day.  In  entering  the  ambu- 
lance I  tore  the  last  uniform  coat  I  had,  except  that  one  an  inch 
thick,  which  I  cannot  well  wear  in  this  hot  weather.  So  I  am  in 
citizen's  dress.  I  shall  be  in  a  terrible  predicament  for  citizen's 
clothes  when  I  come  home,  and  will  have  to  remain  perdu  in  the 
daytime  until  I  get  some  clothes  to  wear,  for  it  will  not  do  for  me 
to  appear  in  uniform. 

8  P.M. — Just  received  a  telegram  from  Halleck  stating  that 
Pope  and  Bumside  are  very  hard  pressed,  urging  me  to  push 
forward  reinforcements  and  to  come  myself  as  soon  as  I  possibly 
can!  I  am  going  to  the  Fortress  now  to  hurry  on  my  arrange- 
ments; shall  put  headquarters  on  board  a  vessel  to-morrow  morn- 
ing, and  probably  go  myself  in  a  fast  boat  to-morrow  afternoon. 
Now  they  are  in  trouble  they  seem  to  want  the  "  Quaker,"  the 
"procrastinator,"  the  "coward,"  and  the  "traitor"!  Bien^  my 
ambulance  is  ready  and  I  must  go. 

Aug.  22,  lo  A.M. —  ...  I  did  not  get  back  from  the  Fort 
until  some  time  after  midnight,  and  too  tired  to  write.  ...  I  shall 
go  to  the  Fort  pretty  soon,  and  as  soon  as  the  tents  are  dry  move 
everything  on  board  the  vessels,  so  that  I  shall  be  ready  to  start  at 
a  moment's  notice.  I  have  two  corps  off  and  away.  ...  I  think 
they  are  all  pretty  well  scared  in  Washington,  and  probably  with 
good  reason.  I  am  confident  that  the  disposition  to  be  made  of 
me  will  depend  entirely  upon  the  state  of  their  nerves  in  Wash- 
ington. If  they  feel  safe  there  I  will,  no  doubt,  be  shelved  ;  per- 
haps placed  in  command  here  vice  Gen.  Dix.  I  don't  care  what 
they  do ;  would  not  object  to  being  kept  here  for  a  while, 
because  I  could  soon  get  things  in  such  condition  that  I  could 
have  you  here  with  me.  .  .  .  Their  sending  for  me  to  go  to 
Washington  only  indicates  a  temporary  alarm.  If  they  are  at  all 
reassured  you  will  see  that  they  will  soon  get  rid  of  me.  I  shall 
be  only  too  happy  to  get  back  to  quiet  life  again  ;  for  I  am  truly 
and  heartily  sick  of  the  troubles  I  have  had,  and  am  not  fond  of 
being  a  target  for  the  abuse  and  slander  of  all  the  rascals  in  the 
country.     Well,  we  will  continue  to  trust  in  God  and  feel  certain 


PRJVA  TE  LE  TTERS,  4  7 1 

that  all  is  for  the  best.  It  is  often  difficult  to  understand  the 
ways  of  Providence;  but  I  have  faith  enough  to  believe  that 
nothing  is  done  without  some  great  purpose.  .  .  . 

Aug,  23,  9.30  P.M.,  Steamer  "  City  of  Hudson^ — I  am  off  at 
last  and  on  the  way  to  Acquia. 

We  are  pounding  along  up  the  Potomac  now,  and,  as  the 
boat  is  a  fast  one,  are  passing  everything  we  find.  .  .  .  We  will 
reach  Acquia  some  time  after  midnight.  Early  in  the  morning  I 
will  telegraph  to  Halleck  informing  him  of  my  arrival  and  asking 
for  orders.  I  have  no  idea  what  they  will  be,  nor  do  I  know 
what  has  been  happening  on  the  Rappahannock  yesterday  and 
to-day.  I  take  it  for  granted  that  my  orders  will  be  as  disagree- 
able as  it  is  possible  to  make  them,  unless  Pope  is  beaten,  in 
which  case  they  will  want  me  to  save  Washington  again.  No- 
thing but  their  fears  will  induce  them  to  give  me  any  command 
of  importance  or  to  treat  me  otherwise  than  with  discourtesy. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Letters  of  Gen.  Halleck  and  Gen.  Buroside— Correspondence  with  Sec- 
retary  Stanton — His  professions  of  devotion— The  truth. 

BURNSIDE  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"Old  Point,  July  15,  1862. 
"My  dear  Mac  :  I've  just  arrived  from  Washington  and  have 
not  time  to  get  ready  to  go  up  this  morning,  but  will  to-morrow. 
I've  much  to  say  to  you  and  am  very  anxious  to.  see  you.  .  .  . 
The  President  has  ordered  me  to  remain  here  for  the  present, 
and  when  I  asked  him  how  long  he  said  five  or  six  days.  I 
don't  know  what  it  means ;  but  I  do  know,  my  dear  Mac,  that 
you  have  lots  of  enemies.  But  you  must  keep  cool ;  don't  allow 
them  to  provoke  you  into  a  quarrel.  You  must  come  out  all 
right ;  I'll  tell  you  all  to-morrow. 

"Your  old  friend, 

"  Burn." 

BURNSIDE  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"  Fort  Monroe,  Aug.  2,  1862. 
"  Mv  DEAR  Mac  :  I'm  laid  up  with  a  lame  leg,  and  besides 
am  much  worried  at  the  decision  they  have  chosen  to  make  in 
regard  to  your  army.  From  the  moment  I  reached  Washington 
I  feared  it  would  be  so,  and  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  your 
engineers  had  much  to  do  with  bringing  about  the  determina- 
tion. When  the  conclusion  was  arrived  at  I  was  the  only  one 
who  advocated  your  forward  movement.  I  speak  now  as  if  a 
positive  decision  had  been  arrived  at,  which  I  do  not  know,  and 
you,  of  course,  do  ;  my  present  orders  indicate  it.  But  you  know 
what  they  are,  and  all  about  it,  so  I  will  accept  it  as  something 
that  is  ordered  for  the  best.  Let  us  continue  to  give  our  undi- 
vided support  to  the  cause,  and  all  will  be  well.  It  looks  dark 
sometimes,  but  a  just  God  will  order  everything  for  the  best. 

We  can't  expect  to  have  it  all  as  we  wish.     I'm  off  for  my  desti- 

47a 


HALLECK   TO  McCLELLAN,  473 

nation  and  will  write  you  a  long  letter  from  there.     The  troops 
are  nearly  all  embarked.     Good-by.     God  bless  you  ! 

"Your  old  friend, 

"  A.  E.  BURNSIDE." 


HALLECK  TO  McCLELLAN. 

Unofficial, 

"Washington,  July  30,  1862. 
"  Afaj\'Gen,  G.  B,  McClellany   Commanding^  etCy  Army  of  the 
Potomac  : 

"  My  dear  General  :  You  are  probably  aware  that  I  hold 
my  present  position  contrary  to  my  own  wishes,  and  that  I  did 
everything  in  my  power  to  avoid  coming  to  Washington.  But 
after  declining  several  invitations  from  the  President  I  received 
the  order  of  the  nth  instant,  which  left  me  no  option. 

"  I  have  always  had  strong  personal  objections  to  mingling 
in  the  politico-military  affairs  of  Washington.  I  never  liked  the 
place,  and  I  like  it  still  less  at  the  present  time.  But,  aside  from 
personal  feelings,  I  really  believed  that  I  could  be  much  more 
useful  in  the  West  than  here.  I  had  acquired  some  reputation 
there,  but  here  I  could  hope  for  none,  and  I  greatly  feared  that, 
whatever  I  might  do,  I  should  receive  more  abuse  than  thanks. 
There  seemed  to  be  a  disposition  in  the  public  press  here  to  cry 
down  any  one  who  attempted  to  serve  the  country  instead  of 
party.  This  was  particularly  the  case  with  you,  as  I  understand, 
and  I  could  not  doubt  that  it  would  be  in  a  few  weeks  the  case 
with  me.  Under  these  circumstances  I  could  not  see  how  I 
could  be  of  much  use  here.  Nevertheless,  being  ordered,  I  was 
obliged  to  come. 

"In  whatever  has  occurred  heretofore  you  have  had  my  full 
approbation  and  cordial  support.  There  was  no  one  in  the  army 
under  whom  I  could  serve  with  greater  pleasure.  And  I  now 
ask  of  you  that  same  support  and  co-operation,  and  that  same 
free  interchange  of  opinion,  as  in  former  days.  If  we  should 
disagree  in  opinion  I  know  that  we  will  do  so  honestly  and 
without  unkind  feelings.  The  country  demands  of  us  that  we 
act  together  and  with  cordiality.  I  believe  that  we  can  and  will 
do  so.  Indeed,  we  must  do  so  if  we  expect  to  put  down  this 
rebellion.     If  we  permit  personal  jealousies  to  interfere  for  a 


474  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Single  moment  with  our  operations  we  shall  not  only  injure  the 
cause  but  ruin  ourselves.  But  I  am  satisfied  that  neither  of  us 
will  do  this,  that  we  will  work  together  with  all  our  might  to 
bring  the  war  to  an  early  termination. 

"  I  have  written  to  you  frankly,  assuring  you  of  my  friendship 
and  confidence,  believing  that  my  letter  would  be  received  with 
the  same  kind  feelings  in  which  it  is  written. 

"Yours  truly, 

"  H.  W.  Halleck." 


HALLECK  TO  McCLELLAN. 

"  Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
"Washington,  Aug.  7,  1862. 
"  Afaj\-Gen,  McCUllan^  Berkley : 

"Mv  DEAR  General:  Your  private  letter  of  the  ist  instant 
was  received  a  day  or  two  ago,  but  I  have  been  too  busy  to 
answer  it  sooner. 

"  If  you  still  wish  it  I  will  order  Barnard  here ;  but  I  cannot 
give  you  another  engineer  officer  (unless  you  will  take  Benham), 
for  you  already  have  a  larger  proportion  than  any  one  else.  I 
had  most  of  the  time  in  the  West  only  two,  and  you,  with  no 
larger  force,  have  a  dozen  engineer  officers. 

"  I  fully  agree  with  you  in  regard  to  the  manner  in  which  the 
war  should  be  conducted,  and  I  believe  the  present  policy  of  the 
President  to  be  conservative.  I  think  some  of  Gen.  Pope's  orders 
very  injudicious,  and  have  so  advised  him  ;  but  as  I  understand 
they  were  shown  to  the  President  before  they  were  issued,  I  felt 
unwilling  to  ask  him  to  countermand  them.  An  oath  of  alle- 
'  giance  taken  through  force  is  not  binding,  and  to  put  over  the 
lines  those  who  do  not  take  it  is  only  adding  numbers  to  the 
rebel  army.  What  he  has  made  the  general  rule  should  only  be 
the  exceptions,  and  I  have  so  advised  him. 

"  I  deeply  regret  that  you  cannot  agree  with  me  as  to  the 
necessity  of  reuniting  the  old  Army  of  the  Potomac.  I,  how- 
ever, have  taken  the  responsibility  of  doing  so,  and  am  willing  to 
risk  my  reputation  on  it.  As  I  told  you  when  at  your  camp,  it  is 
my  intention  that  you  shall  command  all  the  troops  in  Virginia 
as  soon  as  we  can  get  them  together,  and  with  the  army  thus 
concentrated  I  am  certain  that  you  can  take  Richmond. 


STANTON   TO  McCLELLAN  475 

"  I  must  beg  of  you,  general,  to  hurry  along  this  movement ; 
your  reputation  as  well  as  mine  may  be  involved  in  its  rapid  exe- 
cution. I  cannot  regard  Pope  and  Burnside  as  safe  until  you 
reinforce  them.  Moreover,  I  wish  them  to  be  under  your  imme- 
diate command,  for  reasons  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  specify. 
As  things  now  are,  with  separate  commands,  there  will  be  no  con- 
cert of  action,  and  we  daily  risk  being  attacked  and  defeated  in 
detail. 

**I  would  write  you  more  fully,  but  nearly  all  my  time  is 
occupied  with  the  new  drafts  and  enlistments.  They  are  doing 
well,  but  several  weeks  must  elapse  before  we  can  get  the  troops 
into  the  field. 

*'  Bragg  seems  to  be  concentrating  a  large  force  against  Buell, 
and  the  latter  is  asking  for  reinforcements.  When  he  will  reach 
Chattanooga  is  a  problem  I  am  unable  to  solve.* 

"  Yours  truly, 

"  H.  W.  Halleck." 

SECRETARY  STANTON  TO  GEN.  McCLELLAN. 

Telegram;  Cipher. 

"  Headquarters,  Department  of  War, 
"Washington,  July  5,  1862,  2.20  p.m. 

^^  Maj,'Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan^  Commanding  Army  of  the  Potomac  : 

"  I  have  nominated  for  promotion  Gen.  E.  V.  Sumner  as  bre- 
vet major-general  of  the  regular  service  and  major-general  of 
volunteers  ;  Gens.  Heintzelman,  Keyes,  and  Porter  as  brevet 
brigadiers  in   the  regular  service  and  major-generals  of  volun- 

*Note  by  the  Editor.^ln  his  private  diary.  Aug.  15  (Warden,  p.  452), 
Mr.  Secretary  Chase  writes:  "Went  to  War  Department.  Stanton  said 
Halleck  had  sent  Burnside  to  James  river  to  act  as  second  in  command, 
or  as  adviser  of  McClellan — in  reality  to  control  him.** 

Writing  Sept.  2,  Mr.  Chase  (Schuckcrs,  p.  448)  says  that  he  saw  Gen. 
Halleck  on  his  return  from  visiting  McClellan,  and  proceeds:  "  I  cannot 
fix  the  date.  It  was  late  in  July.  He  unreservedly  condemned  McClel- 
lan's  whole  military  operations,  and  especially  the  conduct  of  the  engage- 
ment before  Richmond  and  the  subsequent  retreat  to  the  James."  "About 
this  time  I  saw  a  good  deal  of  Gen.  Pope.  ...  He  condemned  Gen. 
McClellan 's  conduct  more  and  in  stronger  terms  than  Gen.  Halleck.  and 
said  that  in  conversation  he  found  Hallrck  quite  agreed  with  him,  but 
averse  to  precipitate  action.*' 
36 


4/6  AIcCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

teers.  The  gallantry  of  every  officer  and  man  in  your  noble 
army  shall  be  suitably  acknowledged. 

"Gen.  Marcy  is  here  and  will  take  you  cheering  news. 

"  Be  assured  you  shall  have  the  support  of  this  department 
and  the  government  as  cordially  and  faithfully  as  was  ever  ren- 
dered by  man  to  man,  and  if  we  should  ever  live  to  see  each  other 
face  to  face  you  will  be  satisfied  that  you  have  never  had  from 
me  anything  but  the  most  confiding  integrity. 

"  Edwin  M.  Stanton, 

"  Secretary  of  Warr 

SECRETARY  STANTON  TO  GEN.  MARCY. 

"War  Department, 
"Washington  City,  D.  C,  July  5,  1862. 

"  Dear  General  :  I  have  to  hasten  to  the  country  on 
account  of  the  illness  of  one  of  my  children,  and  must  there- 
fore forego  the  pleasure  of  your  company. 

"  I  leave  a  brief  note  for  the  general,  having  intended  to  write 
him  at  large.  But  you  can  explain  to  him  much  that  I  would 
say. 

"  Yours  truly, 

"Edwin  M.  Stanton." 

The  following  is  the  "brief  note"  referred  to  in  the  fore- 
going : 

SECRETARY  STANTON  TO  GEN.  McCLELLAN. 

"War  Department, 
"  Washington  City,  D.  C,  July  5,  1862. 

"  Dear  General  :  I  have  had  a  talk  with  Gen.  Marcy,  and 
meant  to  have  written  you  by  him,  but  am  called  to  the  country, 
where  Mrs.  Stanton  is  with  her  children,  to  see  one  of  them  die. 

"  I  can  therefore  only  say,  my  dear  general,  in  this  brief 
moment,  that  there  is  no  cause  in  my  heart  or  conduct  for  the 
cloud  that  wicked  men  have  raised  between  us  for  their  own  base 
and  selfish  purposes.  No  man  had  ever  a  truer  friend  than  I 
have  been  to  you  and  shall  continue  to  be.  You  are  seldom 
absent  from  my  thoughts,  and  I  am  ready  to  make  any  sacrifice 


McCLELLAN  TO  STANTON.  477 

to  aid  you.  Time  allows  me  to  say  no  more  than  that  I  pray 
Almighty  God  to  deliver  you  and  your  army  from  all  peril  and 
lead  you  on  to  victory.* 

"  Yours  truly, 

"Edwin  M.  Stanton." 


GEN.  McCLELLAN  TO  SECRETARY  STANTON. 

Headquarters^  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  near  Harrison's  Landing,  Va.,  July  8,  1862. 

Dear  Sir  :  Your  letter  of  the  5th  instant  by  Gen.  Marcy 
has  made  a  deep  impression  on  my  mind.  Let  me,  in  the  first 
place,  express  my  sympathy  with  you  in  the  sickness  of  your 
child,  which  I  trust  may  not  prove  fatal. 

I  shall  be  better  understood  by  you,  and  our  friendly  rela- 
tions will  become  more  fixed,  if  I  am  permitted  to  recur  briefly 
to  the  past 

When  you  were  appointed  Secretary  of  War  I  considered  you 
my  intimate  friend  and  confidential  adviser.  Of  all  men  in  the 
nation  you  were  my  choice  for  that  position. 

It  was  the  unquestionable  prerogative  of  the  President  to 
determine  the  military  policy  of  the  administration  and  to  se- 
lect the  commanders  who  should  carry  out  the  measures  of  the 
government.  To  any  action  of  this  nature  I  could,  of  course, 
take  no  personal  exception. 

But  from  the  time  you  took  office  your  official  condifct 
towards  me  as  commander-in-chief  of  the  army  of  the  United 
States,  and  afterwards  as  commander  of  the  Army  of  the  Poto- 
mac, was  marked  by  repeated  acts  done  in  such  manner  as  to 
be  deeply  offensive  to  my  feelings  and  calculated  to  affect  me 
injuriously  in  public  estimation. 

After  commencing  the  present  campaign  your  concurrence 
in  the  withholding  of  a  large  portion  of  my  force,  so  essential 
to  the  success  of  my  plans,  led  me  to  believe  that  your  mind 
was  warped  by  a  bitter  personal  prejudice  against  me. 

Your  letter  compels  me  to  believe  that  I  have  been  mistaken 
in  regard  to  your  real  feelings  and  opinions,  and  that  your  con- 
duct, so  unaccountable  to  my  own  fallible  judgment,  must  have 

*  See  note  at  end  of  the  chapter. 


4/8  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

proceeded  from  views  and  motives  which  I  did  not  understand. 
I  have  made  this  frank  statement  because  I  thought  that  it 
would  best  accord  with  the  spirit  of  your  communication. 

It  is  with  a  feeling  of  great  relief  that  I  now  say  to  you  that 
I  shall  at  once  resume  on  my  part  the  same  cordial  confidence 
which  once  characterized  our  intercourse. 

You  have  more  than  once  told  me  that  together  we  could 
save  this  country.     It  is  yet  not  too  late  to  do  so. 

To  accomplish  this  there  must  be  between  us  the  most  entire 
harmony  of  thought  and  action,  and  such  I  offer  you. 

The  crisis  through  which  we  are  passing  is  a  terrible  one. 

I  have  briefly  given  in  a  confidential  letter  to  the  President 
my  views  (please  ask  to  see  it)  as  to  the  policy  which  ought  to 
govern  this  contest  on  our  part. 

You  and  I  during  last  summer  so  often  talked  over  the  whole 
subject  that  I  have  only  expressed  the  opinions  then  agreed  upon 
between  us. 

The  nation  will  support  no  other  policy.  None  other  will 
call  forth  its  energies  in  time  to  save  our  cause.  For  none  other 
will  our  armies  continue  to  fight. 

I  have  been  perfectly  frank  with  you.  Let  no  cloud  hereafter 
arise  between  us. 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen,  Commanding, 

Hon.  E.  M.  Stanton, 

Secretary  of  War, 

Note  by  the  Editor, — There  is  nO  more  sorrowful  page  in  the  stor)' 
of  men  and  of  peoples  than  this,  in  which  it  becomes  necessary,  for  the 
truth  of  history,  to  bring  together  the  evidence  of  a  war  secretary's  pri- 
vate treason  to  the  general  in  the  field,  fighting  his  country's  battles.  It 
is  unnecessary  to  draw  on  the  countless  sources  o^  private  evidence  which 
exist,  since  the  testimony  of  Secretaries  Chase  and  Welles,  and  Postmaster- 
General  Blair,  his  associates  in  Mr.  Lincoln's  cabinet,  suffice,  without 
extending  the  miserable  record  of  Mr.  Stanton's  falsehood  and  shame,  to 
show  his  continuous  personal  hostility  to  Gen.  McClellan  from  the  time 
of  his  entering  the  cabinet  in  January,  at  the  precise  date  of  writing  the 
above  telegram  and  letter  of  July  5,  and  during  the  rest  of  McClellan's 
campaigns. 

Mr.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy  in  the  cabinet  with  Mr. 
Stanton,  in  his  work,  "Lincoln  and  Seward,"  New  York,  1874,  says  : 


HOSTJUTY  OF  STANTON.  479 

(P.  igo)  "With  the  change  in  the  War  Department  in  Jan.,  1862, 
came  the  hosHHty  of  Secretary  Stanton  to  McCUllan^  then  generaUin-chief** 

(P.  191)  *'  This  unwise  letter  [the  Harrison's  Bar  letter]  and  the 
reverses  of  the  army,  with  the  eutive  hostility  of  Stanton,  brought  Hal- 
leck,  a  vastly  inferior  man,  to  Washington.  .  .  .  On  coming  to  Washing- 
ton, Pope,  who  was  ardent  and,  I  think,  courageous,  though  not  always 
discreet,  very  naturally  fell  into  the  views  of  Secretary  Stanton,  who 
improved  every  opportunity  to  denounce  McCieiian  and  his  hesitating  policy. 
Pope  also  reciprocated  the  commendations  bestowed  on  him  by  Halleck, 
by  uniting  with  Stanton  and  Gen.  Scott  in  advising  that  McClellan  should 
be  superseded  and  Halleck  placed  in  charge  of  military  affairs  at  Wash- 
ington. This,  combined  with  the  movements  and  the  disasters  before 
Richmond,  and  his  own  imprudent  letter,  enabled  Stanton  to  get  rid  of 
McClellan  at  headquarters. 

(P.  193)  *'  But  Pope  was  defeated,  and  the  army,  sadly  demoralized, 
came  retreating  to  the  Potomac.  The  War  Department,  and  especially 
Stanton  and  Halleck,  became  greatly  alarmed.  On  the  30th  August,  in 
the  midst  of  these  disasters,  and  before  the  result  had  reached  us,  though 
most  damaging  information  in  regard  to  McClellan,  who  lingered  at  Alex- 
andria,  was  current,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  Mr.  Chase,  called  upon 
me  with  a  protest,  signed  by  himself  and  Stanton,  denouncing  the  conduct 
of  McClellan  and  demanding  his  immediate  dismissal.  Two  other  mem- 
bers were  ready  to  append  their  names  after  mine.  I  declined  to  sign 
the  paper,  which  was  in  the  handwriting  of  Stanton ;  not  that  I  did  not 
disapprove  of  the  course  of  the  general,  but  because  the  combination  was 
improper  and  disrespectful  to  the  President.  ...  I  had  doubted  the  wis- 
dom of  recalling  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  Richmond,  therein  dif- 
fering from  Chase  and  Stanton.  The  object  in  bringing  that  army  back  to 
Washington^  in  order  to  start  a  new  march  overland  ana  regain  the  abandoned 
position^  I  did  not  understand,  unless  it  was  to  get  rid  of  McClellan,  .  .  . 
The  President  never  knew  of  this  paper,  but  was  not  unaware  of  the 
popular  feeling  against  that  officer,  in  which  he  sympathized,  and  of  the 
sentiments  of  the  members  of  the  cabinet,  aggravated  by  the  hostility 
and  strong  if  not  exaggerated  rumors  sent  out  by  the  Secretary  of  fVar, 
Both  Stanton  and  Halleck  were,  however,  filled  with  apprehensions 
beyond  others,  as  the  army  of  stragglers  and  broken  battalions,  on  the 
last  of  August  and  first  of  September,  came  rushing  toward  Washing- 
ton." 

Mr.  S.  P.  Chase,  Secretary  of  the  Treasur}'  in  the  same  cabinet,  writ- 
ing shortly  after  Sept.  2,  1862,  says  : 

"From  the  day  the  President  told  me  McClellan  was  beaten,  and  I 
saw  his  despatches  announcing  his  retreat  towards  the  Tames  river, 
1  never  entertained  a  doubt  of  the  necessity  of  withdrawmg  the  army 
altogether,  if  it  was  to  remain  under  his  command,  and  I  expressed  this 
opinion  at  once  to  the  President.  The  military  men  said  that  to  attempt 
to  withdraw  the  army  would  involve  the  loss  of  all  its  material,  ammu- 
nition, guns,  provisions,  and  stores." 

Mr.  Chase  then  refers  to  the  visit  of  Gen.  Marcy  at  Washington  (on 
which  occasion  Mr.  Stanton's  letter  of  July  5  was  written),  and  what  Gen. 
Marcy  had  said,  and  continues  : 

"The  danger  of  withdrawal  ;  the  impossibility  of  strengthening  the 
army  for  an  advance  on  Richmond  from  the  position  to  which  it  had 
retreated  ;    the    certainty    that    no    vigorous    effort    would   be  made  by 


4$o  MfCiFir4Ars  owx  snvtr. 


MsX^.^Um  W  iKM'XT^cxtt^)  K%Mir{^  amkIi  oe  dir  !«■«&,  to  reuievc  die  disa»- 
K«>ik  unv^  %m  It .  tW  ^ci$s»ftit  ^  oe  Tte  Vciss^  ds'dw-  cntiiY  mrmv — ccurvinced 
WKT^  Jimd  ,vw»»ms^  ^-kt  ^"9aar»  a*  ^4r«  :^ui:  tte  cjoniuand  of  the  Atidt  of 
tW  ^\*^^«Mic  >^>«Vi  ^t  ^T<*i  Ml  Miaie  iMfie  xxnrt  otfioer.  JTr  pfw^msed 
at  9^  ,^^4MK<«  »  iKmi  T'Mtc  9  Tke-  ^^stmcc^  mhA  ^tw  Miicbeill  ^e  command 
^  ^^  4itm^  Ml  t^.>«t  M  ^«sdm^!9rau  «^u£^  ,  ,  .  Ind  keea  placed  oDder 
IfV^v  Dm-  yStsia»d(«ft  «9B»  siic  ?ct9iutic  i?c  JK^i^luiip  SO  deosiv^  and 
9it«(  K>c  iia^l^r^M  «M  made  ))cn  ^tftnaimntg^aa-cteef*  ^Sc^ncbrrs'y  *-  Life, 
t^sv  >•*  :?v  y*.  OiMflr.*^  jt  ,»cn. 

A*re  y*J«r< 'st  i^coMC  Mt    v^ub»  sa?cs 

*  rVt  ^Sr^«it}tK  >iiB:j«cO:  |;a«9  ^r  mmnmBC  ic  :te  liriifcaiiaps 

«a>i  ^»W  r%v^  XV   4)ir  «fiB»c:t   <rc  Vjtsaui4!9jnt  ><   MrCrrl:a¥.     h. 


\4^.   >f  ^*    C^hfcW  WHM^ 


lA^   )hte<    4Ai^    >^t«r*ffv*   *»a    3<kr 

W  ^-iv^K^it-  ^k»at   ikr  ;vnniaat  m: 
^   4i<>    ;iK<   :«r«    .td?cv   a»ut  frrauiR 

:S«:.   *k  5i  i?"    , 


X 

•MOV  tivv^rvv.       -Ai*-,    r^^-iiji^  Xnre   Tt:»2fcf  sJ.ptL: 

•.*cs    v*^'vv\.     >    s:j*i\-'54»    JU^'N.    ai«u.    **a«jr«    joL   aitf.  miAEL    iw 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

The  army  at  Harrison's  Bar — Indecision  at  Washington — The  Harrison's 
Bar  letter — Army  ordered  home — Protests  of  McCIellan— On  the 
bank  of  the  James  river  the  fate  of  the  Union  should  be  decided — 
Transportation  not  provided — Withdrawal  of  ihe  army — Transfer  to 
front  of  Washington. 

When  the  troops  reached  the  James  the  first  want  of  the  men 
was  something  to  eat  and  drink,  and  the  next  a  bath  in  the  river. 
As  I  rode  among  the  men  they  would  cry  to  me  for  their  supper, 
and  upon  my  assuring  them  that  they  should  have  it  they  would 
give  their  usual  cheers  and  be  perfectly  content.  For  two  or 
three  days  after  we  reached  Harrison's  Bar  the  banks  of  the  river 
were  crowded  all  day  long  with  the  men  bathing. 

It  should  be  understood  that  in  time  of  action  every  army 
reduces  itself  into  two  of  unequal  strength — one,  the  fighting 
men,  who  stick  by  their  colors  as  long  as  life  and  strength  last, 
and  are  ever  ready  to  meet  the  enemy ;  the  other  consisting  of 
tKe  weaker  men,  and  those  prone  to  straggle,  and  those  not  too 
fond  of  unnecessary  combat.  The  better  the  discipline  of  the 
army,  the  larger  the  first  category,  and  ince  versa.  It  must  be 
confessed  that  the  contingent  of  stragglers  was  pretty  large  on 
our  arrival  at  the  James,  but  after  a  day  or  two  all  had  rejoined 
their  colors  and  were  ready  for  work  again. 

A  very  few  days  sufficed  to  give  the  men  the  necessary  rest, 

and  the  army  was   then   in   condition  to  make  any  movement 

justified  by  its  numbers,  and  was  in  an  admirable  position  for 

an   offensive  movement.     It  was  at   last  upon  its   true   line  of 

operations,  which  I  had  been  unable  to  adopt  at  an  earlier  day 

in  consequence  of  the  Secretary  of  War's  peremptory  order  of 

the  1 8th  of  May  requiring  the  right  wing  to  be  extended  to  the 

north  of   Richmond  in  order  to  establish   communication  with 

Gen.    McDowell.     Gen.    McDowell   was   then   under  orders  to 

advance  from  Fredericksburg,  but  never  came,  because,  in  spite 

of  his  earnest  protest,   these  orders  were  countermanded  from 

481 


482 


McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 


Washington,  and  he  was  sent  upon  a  fruitless  expedition  towards 
the  Shenandoah  instead  of  being  permitted  to  join  me,  as  he 
could  have  done,  at  the  time  of  the  affair  of  Hanover  Court- 
House. 

I  urged  in  vain  that  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  should  remain 
on  the  line  of  the  James,  and  that  it  should  resume  the  offensive 
as  soon  as  reinforced  to  the  full  extent  of  the  means  in  possession 
of  the  government.  Had  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  been  per- 
mitted to  remain  on  the  line  of  the  James  I  would  have  crossed 
to  the  south  bank  of  that  river,  and,  while  engaging  Lee's  atten- 
tion in  front  of  Malvern,  have  made  a  rapid  movement  in  force 
on  Petersburg,  having  gained  which  I  would  have  operated 
against  Richmond  and  its  communications  from  the  west,  hav- 
ing already  gained  those  from  the  south. 

Subsequent  events  proved  that  Lee  did  not  move  northward 
from  Richmond  with  his  army  until  assured  that  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  was  actually  on  its  way  to  Fort  Monroe,  and  they  also 
found  that,  so  long  as  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  on  the  James, 
Washington  and  Maryland  would  have  been  entirely  safe  under 
the  protection  of  the  fortifications  and  a  comparatively  small  part 
of  the  troops  then  in  that  vicinity  ;  so  that  Burnside's  troops  and 
a  large  part  of  the  Union  Army  of  Virginia  might,  with  entire  pro- 
priety, have  been  sent  by  water  to  join  the  army  under  my  com- 
mand, which — with  detachments  from  the  West — could  easily  have 
been  brought  up  to  more  than  100,000  men  disposable  on  the 
actual  field  of  battle. 

In  spite  of  my  most  pressing  and  oft-repeated  entreaties,  the 
order  was  insisted  upon  for  the  abandonment  of  the  Peninsula 
line  and  the  return  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  to  Washington 
in  order  to  support  Gen.  Pope,  who  was  in  no  danger  so  long  as 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  remained  on  the  James.  With  a  heavy 
heart  I  relinquished  the  position  gained  at  the  cost  of  so  much 
time  and  blood. 

As  an  evidence  of  my  good  faith  in  opposing  this  movement 
it  should  be  mentioned  that  Gen.  Halleck  had  assured  me,  ver- 
bally and  in  writing,  that  I  was  to  command  all  the  troops  in 
front  of  Washington,  including  those  of  Gens.  Burnside  and 
Pope — a  promise  which  was  not  carried  into  effect. 

On  the  ist  of  July  I  received  the  following  from  the  Presi- 
dent : 


1,1 
ii 


GEN,  BARNARiyS  VIEWS,  483 

"  It  is  impossible  to  reinforce  you  for  your  present  emergency. 
If  we  had  a  million  of  men  we  could  not  get  them  to  give  you 
in  time.  We  have  not  the  men  to  send.  If  you  are  not  strong 
enough  to  face  the  enemy  you  must  find  a  place  of  security  and 
wait,  rest,  and  repair. 

"  Maintain  your  ground  if  you  can,  but  save  the  army  at  all 
events,  even  if  you  fall  back  to  Fort  Monroe.  We  still  have 
strength  enough  in  the  country,  and  will  bring  it  out." 

In  a  despatch  from  the  President  to  me  on  the  2d  of  July  he 
says : 

"  If  you  think  you  are  not  strong  enough  to  take  Richmond 
just  now,  I  do  not  ask  you  to.  Try  just  now  to  save  the  army 
material  dind  personnel,  and  I  will  strengthen  it  for  the  offensive 
again  as  fast  as  I  can. 

"  The  governors  of  eighteen  (18)  States  offer  me  a  new  levy 
of  300,000,  which  I  accept." 

On  the  2d  of  July  the  following  was  received  from  Gen. 
Barnard : 

Private, 

"  Headquarters,  July  2,  1862. 

"Dear  General:  It  seems  to  me  the  only  salvation  is  for 
this  army  to  be  ready  promptly  to  reassume  the  offensive. 

"  For  this  we  must  immediately  push  our  forces  further  for- 
ward, or  we  are  bagged.  Besides  being  able  to  shell  us  out,  the 
enemy  will  entrench  us  in,  and,  shutting  us  up  here  with  a  small 
force,  be  off  for  Washington. 

"The  fresh  troops  (how  many?)  now  here  or  on  the  river 
ought  to  enable  us  to  push  out  at  once  and  to  assume  an  offen- 
sive as  soon  as  our  old  army  can  be  rested. 

"But  we  need  large  reinforcements.  The  state  of  affairs  is 
concealed  in  Washington  to  hide  their  own  blunders,  and  the 
country  will  not  respond  to  the  crisis  unless  it  is  known.  We 
need  200,000  more  men  to  fill  up  the  ranks  and  form  new  regi- 
ments. 

"  A  large  part  of  Halleck's  force,  all  that  can  be  withdrawn, 
should  come  from  the  West. 

"  There  is  no  use  in  writing.  Should  you  not  send  at  once 
an  officer  who  will  not  be  afraid  to  speak?  And  though  such 
a  messenger  does  not  open  his  lips  except  to  Lincoln  and 
Stanton,  the  public  will  soon  know  that  there  is  something  con- 
cealed.    It  should  be  done  by  all  means. 

"  To-day   we  must  get  ourselves  enough  out  to  save  being 


484  MfCLELLAN'S  0  WN  STOR K 

shut  in.  There  is  no  use  in  entrenching  a  line  of  no  real  utility, 
and  what  Duane  can  do  to-day  will  only  wear  out  his  men  for 
nothing. 

"  It  is  troops  alone  that  can  help  us  to-day.  By  to-morrow 
we  will  be  able  to  know  where  to  entrench. 

"  We  must  have  fresh  troops  immediately  in  large  numbers, 
and  I  would,  if  necessary,  abandon  Norfolk  and  New  Berne  to  get 
them,  and  all  the  useless  coast  of  South  Carolina  and  Georgia, 
holding  only   Fort   Pulaski. 

"  Pensacola  is  of  no  use,  but  I  suppose  may  be  held  with  few 
troops. 

"  Yours,  etc., 

"  J.  G.  Barnard." 

On  the  3d  of  July  the  following  was  received  from  the  Presi- 
dent : 


".  .  .  Yours  of  5.30  yesterday  is  just  received.  I  am  satisfied 
that  yourself,  officers,  and  men  have  done  the  best  you  could. 
All  accounts  say  better  fighting  was  never  done.  Ten  thousand 
thanks  for  it.  .  .  ." 

On  the  4th  I  sent  the  following  to  the  President : 

July  4,  1862. 

I  have  the  honor  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  despatch 
of  the  2d  instant. 

I  shall  make  a  stand  at  this  place,  and  endeavor  to  give  my 
men  the  repose  they  so  much  require. 

After  sending  my  communication  on  Tuesday  the  enemy 
attacked  the  left  of  our  lines,  and  a  fierce  battle  ensued,  lasting 
until  night ;  they  were  repulsed  with  great  slaughter.  Had  their 
attack  succeeded,  the  consequences  would  have  been  disastrous 
in  the  extreme.  This  closed  the  hard  fighting  which  had  con- 
tinued from  the  afternoon  of  the  26th  ultimo,  in  a  daily  series  of 
engagements  wholly  unparalleled  on  this  continent  for  determi- 
nation and  slaughter  on  both  sides. 

The  mutual  loss  in  killed  and  wounded  is  enormous ;  that 
of  the  enemy  certainly  greatest.  On  Tuesday  morning,  the  ist, 
our  army  commenced  its  movement  from  Haxall's  to  this  point, 
our  line  of  defence  there  being  too  extended  to  be  maintained  by 
our  weakened  forces.  Our  train  was  immense,  and  about  four 
P.M.  on  the  2d  a  heavy  storm  of  rain  began,  which  continued 
during  the  entire  day  and  until  the  forenoon  of  yesterday. 

The  roads  became  horrible.  Troops,  artillery,  and  wagons 
moved  on  steadily,  and  our  whole  army,  men  and  material,  was 
finally  brought  safe  into  this  camp. 


POSITION  OF  THE  ARMY,  4S5 

The  last  of  the  wagons  reached  here  at  noon  yesterday.  The 
exhaustion  was  very  great,  but  the  army  preserved  its  morali^ 
and  would  have  repelled  any  attack  which  the  enemy  was  in 
condition  to  make. 

We  now  occupy  a  line  of  heights  about  two  miles  from  the 
James,  a  plain  extending  from  there  to  the  river  ;  our  front  is 
about  three  miles  long.  These  heights  command  our  whole  posi- 
tion, and  must  be  maintained.  The  gunboats  can  render  valu- 
able support  upon  both  flanks.  If  the  enemy  attack  us  in  front 
we  must  hold  our  ground  as  we  best  may  and  at  whatever  cost. 

Our  positions  can  be  carried  only  by  overwhelming  numbers. 
The  spirit  of  the  army  is  excellent ;  stragglers  are  finding  their 
regiments,  and  the  soldiers  exhibit  the  best  results  of  discipline. 
Our  position  is  by  no  means  impregnable,  especially  as  a  morass 
extends  on  this  side  of  the  high  ground  from  our  centre  to  the 
James  on  our  right.  The  enemy  may  attack  in  vast  numbers, 
and  if  so  our  front  will  be  the  scene  of  a  desperate  battle,  which, 
if  lost,  will  be  decisive.  Our  army  is  fearfully  weakened  by 
killed,  wounded,  and  prisoners. 

I  cannot  now  approximate  to  any  statement  of  our  losses,  but 
we  were  not  beaten  in  any  conflict. 

The  enemy  were  unable,  by  their  utmost  efforts,  to  drive  us 
from  any  field.  Never  did  such  a  change  of  base,  involving 
a  retrograde  movement,  and  under  incessant  attacks  from  a  most 
determined  and  vastly  more  numerous  foe,  partake  so  little  of 
disorder.  We  have  lost  no  guns  except  25  on  the  field  of  battle, 
21  of  which  were  lost  by  the  giving  way  of  McCall's  division 
under  the  onset  of  superior  numbers. 

Our  communications  by  the  James  river  are  not  secure. 
There  are  points  where  the  enemy  can  establish  themselves  with 
cannon  or  musketry  and  command  the  river,  and  where  it  is  not 
certain  that  our  gunboats  can  drive  them  out.  In  case  of  this,  or 
in  case  our  front  is  broken,  I  will  still  make  every  effort  to  pre- 
serve at  least  the  personnel  of  the  army ;  and  the  events  of  the 
last  few  days  leave  no  question  that  the  troops  will  do  all  that 
their  country  can  ask.  Send  such  reinforcements  as  you  can ; 
I  will  do  what  I  can.  We  are  shipping  our  wounded  and  sick, 
and  landing  supplies.  The  Navy  Department  should  co-operate 
with  us  to  the  extent  of  its  resources.  Com.  Rodgers  is  doing 
all  in  his  power  in  the  kindest  and  most  efficient  manner. 

When  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  are  known  it  will  be 
acknowledged  by  all  competent  judges  that  the  movement  just 
completed  by  this  army  is  unparalleled  in  the  annals  of  war. 
Under  the  most  difficult  circumstances  we  have  preserved  our 
trains,  our  guns,  our  material,  and,  above  all,  our  honor. 

To  which  I  received  the  fcilowing  reply  from  the  Presi- 
dent : 


486 


McCLELLAATS  0  WN  STOR  Y. 


"  A  thousand  thanks  for  the  relief  your  two  despatches  of 
twelve  and  one  p.m.  yesterday  gave  me.  Be  assured  the  heroism 
and  skill  of  yourself,  officers,  and  men  is  and  for  ever  will  be 
appreciated. 

"If  you  can  hold  your  present  position  we  shall  hive  the 
enemy  yet." 

The  following  letter  was  received  from  his  Excellency  the 
President : 


"y«/y  4. — I  understand  your  position,  as  stated  in  your  let- 
ter, and  by  Gen.  Marcy.  To  reinforce  you  so  as  to  enable  you 
to  resume  the  offensive  within  a  month,  or  even  six  weeks,  is 
impossible.  In  addition  to  that  arrived  and  now  arriving  from 
the  Potomac  (about  10,000,  I  supp>ose),  and  about  10,000  I  hope 
you  will  have  from  Bumside  very  soon,  and  about  5,000  from 
Hunter  a  little  later,  I  do  not  see  how  I  can  send  you  another 
man  within  a  month.  Under  these  circumstances  the  defensive, 
for  the  present,  must  be  your  only  care.  Save  the  army  first, 
where  you  are  if  you  can,  and,  secondly,  by  removal  if  you 
must.  You,  on  the  ground,  must  be  the  judge  as  to  which  you 
will  attempt,  and  of  the  means  for  effecting  it.  I  but  give  it  as 
my  opinion  that,  with  the  aid  of  the  gunboats  and  the  reinforce- 
ments mentioned  above,  you  can  hold  your  present  position, 
provided,  and  so  long  as,  you  can  keep  the  James  river  open 
below  you.  If  you  are  not  tolerably  confident  you  can  keep  the 
James  river  open,  you  had  better  remove  as  soon  as  possible.  ,1 
do  not  remember  that  you  have  expressed  any  apprehension  as 
to  the  danger  of  having  your  communication  cut  on  the  river 
below  you,  yet  I  do  not  suppose  it  can  have  escaped  your  atten- 
tion. 

"  P.S.  If  at  any  time  you  feel  able  to  take  the  offensive,  you 
are  not  restrained  from  doing  so." 

The  following  telegram  was  sent  on  the  7th  to  the  President : 

As  boat  is  starting,  I  have  only  time  to  acknowledge  receipt 
of  despatch  by  Gen.  Marcy.  Enemy  have  not  attacked.  My 
position  is  very  strong,  and  daily  becoming  more  so.  If  not 
attacked  to-day  I  shall  laugh  at  them.  I  have  been  anxious 
about  my  communications.  Had  long  consultation  about  it  with 
Flag-Officer  Goldsborough  last  night  ;  he  is  confident  he  can 
keep  river  open.  He  should  have  all  gunboats  possible.  Will 
see  him  again  this  morning.  My  men  in  splendid  spirits,  and 
anxious  to  try  it  again. 

Alarm  yourself  as  little  as  possible  about  me,  and  don't  lose 
confidence  in  this  army. 


THE  HARRISON* S  BAR  LETTER,  487 

While  general-in-chief,  and  directing  the  operations  of  all 
our  armies  in  the  field,  I  had  become  deeply  impressed  with  the 
importance  of  adopting  and  carrying  out  certain  views  regarding 
the  conduct  of  the  war  which,  in  my  judgment,  were  essential  to 
its  objects  and  its  success. 

During  an  active  campaign  of  three  months  in  the  enemy's 
country  these  were  so  fully  confirmed  that  I  conceived  it  a  duty, 
in  the  critical  position  we  then  occupied,  not  to  withhold  a  can- 
did expression  of  the  more  important  of  these  views  from  the 
commander-in-chief,  whom  the  Constitution  places  at  the  head 
of  the  armies  and  navies,  as  well  as  of  the  government,  of  the 
nation. 

Mr.  Lincoln  visited  me  at  Harrison's  Bar.  I  handed  him 
myself,  on  board  of  the  steamer  in  which  he  came,  the  letter  of 
July  7,  1862.  He  read  it  in  my  presence,  but  made  no  com- 
ments upon  it,  merely  saying,  when  he  had  finished  it,  that  he 
was  obliged  to  me  for  it,  or  words  to  that  effect.  I  do  not 
think  that  he  alluded  further  to  it  during  his  visit,  or  at  any 
time  after  that. 


THE  HARRISON'S  BAR  LETTER. 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  near  Harrison's  Landing,  Va.,  July  7,  1862. 

Mr.  President:  You  have  been  fully  informed  that  the  rebel 
army  is  in  the  front,  with  the  purpose  of  overwhelming  us  by 
attacking  our  positions  or  reducing  us  by  blocking  our  river 
communications.  I  cannot  but  regard  our  condition  as  critical, 
and  I  earnestly  desire,  in  view  of  possible  contingencies,  to  lay 
before  your  excellency,  for  your  private  consideration,  my  gene- 
ral views  concerning  the  existing  state  of  the  rebellion,  although 
they  do  not  strictly  relate  to  the  situation  of  this  army  or  strictly 
come  within  the  scope  of  my  official  duties.  These  views  amount 
to  convictions,  and  are  deeply  impressed  upon  my  mind  and 
heart.  Our  cause  must  never  be  abandoned  ;  it  is  the  cause  of 
free  institutions  and  self-government.  The  Constitution  and  the 
Union  must  be  preserved,  whatever  may  be  the  cost  in  time, 
treasure,  and  blood.  If  secession  is  successful  other  dissolutions 
are  clearly  to  be  seen  in  the  future.  Let  neither  military  disas- 
ter, political  faction,  nor  foreign  war  shake  your  settled  purpose 
to  enforce  the  equal  operation  of  the  laws  of  the  United  States 
upon  the  people  of  every  State. 

The  time  has  come  when  the  government  must  determine 


488  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

upon  a  civil  and  military  policy  covering  the  whole  ground  of 
our  national  trouble. 

The  responsibility  of  determining,  declaring,  and  supporting 
such  civil  and  military  policy,  and  of  directing  the  whole  course 
of  national  affairs  in  regard  to  the  rebellion,  must  now  be  assumed 
and  exercised  by  you,  or  our  cause  will  be  lost.  The  Constitution 
gives  you  power  sufficient  even  for  the  present  terrible  exigency. 

This  rebellion  has  assumed  the  character  of  war  ;  as  such  it 
should  be  regarded,  and  it  should  be  conducted  upon  the  high- 
est principles  known  to  Christian  civilization.  It  should  not  be  a 
war  looking  to  the  subjugation  of  the  people  of  any  State  in  any 
event.  It  should  not  be  at  all  a  war  upon  population,  but  against 
armed  forces  and  political  organizations.  Neither  confiscation  of 
property,  political  executions  of  persons,  territorial  organization 
of  States,  or  forcible  abolition  of  slavery  should  be  contemplated 
for  a  moment.  In  prosecuting  the  war  all  private  property  and 
unarmed  persons  should  be  strictly  protected,  subject  only  to  the 
necessity  of  military  operations.  All  private  property  taken  for 
military  use  should  be  paid  or  receipted  for ;  pillage  and  waste 
should  be  treated  as  high  crimes  ;  all  unnecessary  trespass  stern- 
ly prohibited,  and  offensive  demeanor  by  the  military  towards 
citizens  promptly  rebuked.  Military  arrests  should  not  be  tole- 
rated, except  in  places  where  active  hostilities  exist,  and  oaths 
not  required  by  enactments  constitutionally  made  should  be  nei- 
ther demanded  nor  received.  Military  government  should  be 
confined  to  the  preservation  of  public  order  and  the  protection 
of  political  rights.  Military  power  should  not  be  allowed  to 
interfere  with  the  relations  of  servitude,  either  by  supporting  or 
impairing  the  authority  of  the  master,  except  for  repressing  dis- 
order, as  in  other  cases.  Slaves  contraband  under  the  act  of 
Congress,  seeking  military  protection,  should  receive  it.  The 
right  of  the  government  to  appropriate  permanently  to  its  own 
service  claims  to  slave  labor  should  be  asserted,  and  the  right 
of  the  owner  to  compensation  therefor  should  be  recognized. 

This  principle  might  be  extended,  upon  grounds  of  military 
necessity  and  security,  to  all  the  slaves  within  a  particular  State, 
thus  working  manumission  in  such  State ;  and  in  Missouri,  per- 
haps in  Western  Virginia  also,  and  possibly  even  in  Maryland,  the 
expediency  of  such  a  measure  is  only  a  question  of  time. 

A  system  of  policy  thus  constitutional  and  conservative,  and 
pervaded  by  the  influences  of  Christianity  and  freedom,  would 
receive  the  support  of  almost  all  truly  loyal  men,  would  deeply 
impress  the  rebel  masses  and  all  foreign  nations,  and  it  might  be 
humbly  hoped  that  it  would  commend  itself  to  the  favor  of  the 
Almighty. 

Unless  the  principles  governing  the  future  conduct  of  our 

struggle  shall  be  made  known  and  approved,  the  effort  to  obtain 

'  requisite  forces  will  be  almost  hopeless.     A  declaration  of  radical 


THE  HARRISON* S  BAR  LETTER,  489 

views,  especially  upon  slavery,  will  rapidly  disintegrate  our  pre- 
sent armies.  The  policy  of  the  government  must  be  supported 
by  concentrations  of  military  power.  The  national  forces  should 
not  be  dispersed  in  expeditions,  posts  of  occupation,  and  nume- 
rous armies,  but  should  be  mainly  collected  into  masses  and 
brought  to  bear  upon  the  armies  of  the  Confederate  States. 
Those  armies  thoroughly  defeated,  the  political  structure  which 
they  support  would  soon  cease  to  exist. 

In  carrying  out  any  system  of  policy  which  you  may  form  you 
will  require  a  commander-in-chief  of  the  army,  one  who  possesses 
your  confidence,  understands  your  views,  and  who  is  competent 
to  execute  your  orders  by  directing  the  military  forces  of  the 
nation  to  the  accomplishment  of  the  objects  by  you  proposed. 
I  do  not  ask  that  place  for  myself.  I  am  willing  to  serve  you 
in  such  position  as  you  may  assign  me,  and  I  will  do  so  as  faith- 
fully as  ever  subordinate  served  superior. 

I  may  be  on  the  brink  of  eternity  ;  and  as  I  hope  forgiveness 
from  my  Maker,  I  have  written  this  letter  with  sincerity  towards 
you  and  from  love  for  my  country.* 

Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj\'Gen.  Commanding, 
His  Excellency  A.  Lincoln, 

President, 

*  Note  by  thf  Editor. — It  has  been  frequently  intimated  that  this  letter 
was  written,  in  consultation  with  friends  at  the  North,  as  a  political  docu- 
ment. It  was  the  misfortune  of  McClellan  that  civilians  at  Washington, 
judging  him  in  their  own  lights,  could  not  conceive  it  possible  that  he  or 
any  man  could  render  honest,  unselfish  service  to  country  and  cause  without 
some  concealed  purpose  of  benefit  to  himself.  Pure  devotion  to  duty,  with- 
out thought  of  self,  is  incomprehensible  to  the  average  politician.  I  think 
it  proper  to  say.  therefore,  that  no  one  of  McClellan's  most  intimate  personal 
friends  at  the  North  knew  even  of  the  existence  of  this  letter  until  rumors 
about  it  came  from  members  of  Mr.  Lincoln's  cabinet.  None  of  them  saw 
it  until  after  the  general  was  finally  relieved  from  command.  Meantime  it 
had  been  discussed  thoroughly  by  those  to  whom  the  President  showed  it , 
and  it  cannot  be  doubted  that  a  general  inability  to  appreciate  the  sincere 
motives  in  which  it  was  written  did  much  to  determine  the  future  conduct 
of  the  administration  towards  McClellan.  Mr.  Chase,  with  startling  inno- 
cence of  mind,  avows  (Warden,  p.  440)  that  on  July  22  he  urged  Mr.  Lin- 
coin  to  remove  McClellan,  on  the  ground  '*that  I  did  not  regard  Gen. 
McClellan  as  hyal  to  the  administration,  although  I  did  not  question  his 
general  loyalty  to  the  country**  This  is  the  confession  of  a  motive  in  the 
conduct  of  a  great  war  which  is  universally  regarded  as  infamous.  It  is 
an* avowal  that  the  controlling  consideration  of  such  leaders  as  Mr.  Chase, 
in  the  use  of  the  blood  and  treasure  of  the  people,  was  the  supremacy  of 


490  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

I  telegraphed  the  President  on  the  nth:  "We  are  very  strong 
here  now,  so  far  as  defensive  is  concerned.  Hope  you  will  soon 
make  us  strong  enough  to  advance  and  try  it  again.  All  in  fine 
spirits." 

Telegrams  were  sent  to  the  President  on  the  12th,  17th,  and 
i8th: 

\2th, — I  am  more  and  more  convinced  that  this  army  ought 
not  to  be  withdrawn  from  here,  but  promptly  reinforced  and 
thrown  again  upon  Richmond.  If  we  have  a  little  more  than 
half  a  chance  we  can  take  it.  I  dread  the  effects  of  any  retreat 
upon  the  morale  of  the  men. 

17M. — I  have  consulted  fully  with  Gen.  Bumside,  and  would 
commend  to  your  favorable  consideration  the  general's  plan  for 
bringing  (7)  seven  additional  regiments  from  North  Carolina,  by 
leaving  New  Berne  to  the  care  of  the  gunboats.  It  appears  mani- 
festly to  be  our  policy  to  concentrate  here  everything  we  can  pos- 
sibly spare  from  less  important  points,  to  make  sure  of  crushing 
the  enemy  at  Richmond,  which  seems  clearly  to  be  the  most 
important  point  in  rebeldom.  Nothing  should  be  left  to  chance 
here.  I  would  recommend  that  Gen.  Bumside,  with  all  his 
troops,  be  ordered  to  this  army,  to  enable  it  to  assume  the  offen- 
sive as  soon  as  possible. 

18M. — Am  anxious  to  have  determination  of  government, 
that  no  time  may  be  lost  in  preparing  for  it.  Hours  are  very 
precious  now,  and  perfect  unity  of  action  necessary. 

The  following  was  telegraphed  to  Gen.  Halleck  on  the  28th : 

My  opinion  is  more  and  more  firm  that  here  is  the  defence  of 
Washington,  and  that  I  should  be  at  once  reinforced  by  all  avail- 
able troops  to  enable  me  to  advance.  Retreat  would  be  disas- 
trous to  the  army  and  the  cause.     I  am  confident  of  that. 

On  the  30th  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 

I  hope  that  it  may  soon  be  decided  what  is  to  be  done  by  this 
army,  and  that  the  decision  may  be  to  reinforce  it  at  once.  We 
are  losing  much  valuable  time,  and  that  at  a  moment  when  energy 
and  decision  are  sadly  needed. 

party,  and  not  tne  success  of  country.  Neither  ihe  President  nor  Gen. 
McClellan  had  any  such  impure  ideas.  And  it  is  beyond  doubt  that  the 
radical  difference  between  his  own  views  and  those  of  the  self-seeking  men 
who  surrounded  him  led  Mr.  Lincoln  to  the  despairing  state  of  mind  in 
which,  a  few  weeks  later,  he  desired  to  resign. 


HALLECK*S  ORDERS.  49 1 

About  half  an  hour  after  midnight  on  the  morning  of  Aug.  i 
the  enemy  brought  some  light  batteries  to  Coggins's  Point  and  the 
Coles  House,  on  the  right  bank  of  James  river  directly  opposite 
Harrison's  Landing,  and  opened  a  heavy  fire  upon  our  shipping 
and  encampments.  It  was  continued  rapidly  for  about  thirty 
minutes,  when  they  were  driven  back  by  the  fire  of  our  guns. 

To  prevent  another  demonstration  of  this  character,  and  to 
insure  a  debouch  on  the  south  bank  of  the  James,  it  became 
necessary  to  occupy  Coggins's  Point,  which  was  done  on  the  3d, 
and  the  enemy  driven  back  towards  Petersburg. 

On  the  I  St  of  Aug.  I  received  the  following  despatches  from 
Gen.  Halleck  : 

*'*^  Washington^  July  30,  1862,  8  p.m. — A  despatch  just  received 
from  Gen.  Pope  says  that  deserters  report  that  the  enemy  is 
moving  south  of  James  river,  and  that  the  force  in  Richmond  is 
very  small.  I  suggest  that  he  be  pressed  in  that  direction,  so  as 
to  ascertain  the  facts  of  the  case." 

"  Washington^  July  30,  1862,  8  p.m. — In  order  to  enable  you 
to  move  in  any  direction  it  is  necessary  to  relieve  you  of  your 
sick.  The  surgeon -general  has  therefore  been  directed  to  make 
arrangements  for  them  at  other  places,  and  the  quartermaster- 
general  to  provide  transportation.  I  hope  you  will  send  them 
away  as  quickly  as  possible,  and  advise  me  of  their  removal." 

It  is  clear  that  the  general-in-chief  attached  some  weight  to 
the  report  received  from  Gen.  Pope,  and  I  was  justified  in  sup- 
posing that  the  order  in  regard  to  removing  the  sick  contemplat- 
ed an  offensive  movement  rather  than  a  retreat,  as  I  had  no  other 
data  than  the  telegrams  just  given  from  which  to  form  an  opinion 
as  to  the  intentions  of  the  government.  The  following  telegram 
from  him  strengthened  me  in  that  belief : 

"  Washington,  July  31,  1862,  10  a.m. — Gen.  Pope  again  tele- 
graphs that  the  enemy  is  reported  to  be  evacuating  Richmond, 
and  falling  back  on  Danville  and  Lynchburg. 

"  H.  W.  Halleck, 

''Maj.'Genr 

In  occupying  Coggins's  Point  I  was  influenced  by  the  neces- 
sity of  possessing  a  secure  debouch  on  the  south  of  the  James, 

in  order  to  enable  me  to  move  on  the  communications  of  Rich- 

37 


492  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

mond  in  that  direction,  as  well  as  to  prevent  a  repetition  of  mid- 
night cannonades. 

To  carry  out  Gen.  Halleck's  first  order,  of  July  30,  it  was 
necessary  first  to  gain  (possession  of  Malvern  Hill,  which  was 
occupied  by  the  enemy,  apparently  in  some  little  force,  and  con- 
trolled the  direct  approach  to  Richmond.  Its  tempK>rary  occupa- 
tion at  least  was  equally  necessary  in  the  event  of  a  movement 
upK>n  Petersburg,  or  even  the  abandonment  of  the  Peninsula. 
Gen.  Hooker,  with  his  own  division  and  Pleasonton's  cavalry, 
was  therefore  directed  to  gain  possession  of  Malvern  Hill  on  the 
night  of  the  2d  of  Aug. 

He  failed  to  do  so  on  account  of  the  incompetency  of  guides. 

On  the  4th  Gen.  Hooker  was  reinforced  by  Gen.  Sedgwick's 
division,  and,  having  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  roads,  he  suc- 
ceeded in  turning  Malvern  Hill  and  driving  the  enemy  back 
towards  Richmond. 

The  following  is  my  report  of  this  affair  at  the  time: 

Malvern  Hill^  Aug,  5,  1862,  i  p.m. — Gen.  Hooker  at  5.30 
this  morning  attacked  a  very  considerable  force  of  infantry  and 
artillery  stationed  at  this  place,  and  carried  it  handsomely,  driv- 
ing the  enemy  towards  New  Market,  which  is  four  miles  distant, 
and  where  it  is  said  they  have  a  large  force.  We  have  captured 
100  prisoners,  killed  and  wounded  several,  with  a  loss  on  our  part 
of  only  three  killed  and  eleven  wounded  ;  among  the  latter  two 
officers. 

I  shall  probably  remain  here  to-night,  ready  to  act  as  circum- 
stances may  require  after  the  return  of  my  cavalry  reconnois- 
sances. 

The  mass  of  the  enemy  escaped  under  the  cover  of  a  dense 
fog  ;  but  our  cavalry  are  still  in  pursuit,  and  I  trust  may  succeed 
in  capturing  many  more. 

This  is  a  very  advantageous  position  to  cover  an  advance  on 
Richmond,  and  only  fourteen  and  three-quarter  miles  distant ; 
and  I  feel  confident  that,  with  reinforcements,  I  would  march 
this  army  there  in  ^y^  days. 

I  this  instant  learn  that  several  brigades  of  the  enemy  are 
four  miles  from  here  on  the  Quaker  road,  and  I  have  taken  steps 
to  prepare  to  meet  them. 

Gen.  Hooker's  dispositions  were  admirable,  and  his  officers 
and  men  displayed  their  usual  gallantry. 

On  the  same  day  I  telegraphed  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 

Our   troops   have   advanced    twelve   miles   in   one   direction 


HALLECK'S  ORDERS.  493 

and  seventeen  in  another  towards  Richmond  to-day.  We  have 
secured  a  strong  position  at  Coggins's  Point,  opposite  our  quar- 
termaster's depot,  which  will  effectually  prevent  the  rebels  from 
using  artillery  hereafter  against  our  camps. 

I  learn  this  evening  that  there  is  a  force  of  20,000  men  about 
six  miles  back  from  this  point,  on  the  south  bank  of  the  river ; 
what  their  object  is  I  do  not  know,  but  will  keep  a  sharp  lookout 
on  their  movements. 

I  am  sending  off  sick  as  rapidly  as  our  transports  will  take 
them.  I  am  also  doing  everything  in  my  power  to  carry  out 
your  orders  to  push  reconnoissances  towards  the  rebel  capital, 
and  hope  soon  to  find  out  whether  the  reports  regarding  the 
abandonment  of  that  place  are  true. 

To  the  despatch  of  one  p.m.,  Aug.  5,  the  following  answer 
was  received  Aug.  6  : 

"  I  have  no  reinforcements  to  send  you. 

"  H.  W.  Halleck, 

''Maj,'Genr 

And  soon  after  the  following,  also  from  Gen.  Halleck  : 

"  You  will  immediately  send  a  regiment  of  cavalry  and  seve- 
ral batteries  of  artillery  to  Bumside's  command  at  Acquia  creek. 
It  is  reported  that  Jackson  is  moving  north  with  a  very  large 
force." 

On  the  4th  I  had  received  Gen.  Halleck's  order  of  the  3d 
(which  appears  below),  directing  me  to  withdraw  the  army  to 
Acquia,  and  on  the  same  day  sent  an  earnest  protest  against  it. 

A  few  hours  before  this  Gen.  Hooker  had  informed  me  that 
his  cavalry  pickets  reported  large  bodies  of  the  enemy  advanc- 
ing and  driving  them  in,  and  that  he  would  probably  be  attacked 
at  daybreak.  Under  these  circumstances  I  had  determined  to 
support  him  ;  but  as  I  could  not  get  the  whole  army  in  position 
until  the  next  afternoon,  I  concluded,  upon  the  receipt  of  the 
above  telegram  from  the  general-in-chief,  to  withdraw  Gen. 
Hooker,  that  there  might  be  the  least  possible  delay  in  con- 
forming to  Gen.  Halleck's  orders.  I  therefore  sent  to  Gen. 
Hooker  : 

.  .  .  Under  advices  I  have  received  from  Washington,  I 
think  it  necessary  for  you  to  abandon  the  position  to-night,  get- 
ting everything  away  before  daylight. 


THE  ARMY  RECALLED,  495 

The  moment  I  received  the  instructions  for  removing  the  sick 
I  at  once  gave  the  necessary  directions  for  carrying  them  out. 

With  the  small  amount  of  transportation  at  hand  the  removal 
of  the  severe  cases  alone  would  necessarily  take  several  days, 
and,  in  the  meantime,  I  desired  information  to  determine  what  I 
should  do  with  the  others. 

The  order  required  me  to  send  them  away  as  quickly  as  pos- 
sible, and  to  notify  the  general-in-chief  when  they  were  removed. 

Previous  to  the  receipt  of  the  despatch  of  the  2d  of  Aug.,  not 
having  been  advised  of  what  the  army  under  my  command  was 
expected  to  do,  or  which  way  it  was  to  move,  if  it  moved  at  ail, 
I  sent  the  following  despatch  to  Gen.  Halleck : 

Berkley y  Aug.  3. — I  hear  of  sea-steamers  at  Fort  Monroe  ; 
are  they  for  removing  my  sick  ?  If  so,  to  what  extent  am  I 
required  to  go  in  sending  them  off }  There  are  not  many  who 
need  go. 

As  I  am  not  in  any  way  informed  of  the  intentions  of  the 
government  in  regard  to  this  army,  I  am  unable  to  judge  what 
proportion  of  the  sick  should  leave  here,  and  must  ask  for  specific 
orders. 

If  the  army  was  to  retreat  to  Fort  Monroe  it  was  important 
that  it  should  be  unencumbered  with  any  sick,  wounded,  or  other 
men  who  might  at  all  interfere  with  its  mobility ;  but  if  the  object 
was  to  operate  directly  on  Richmond  from  the  position  we  then 
occupied,  there  were  many  cases  of  slight  sickness  which  would 
speedily  be  cured  and  the  patients  returned  to  duty. 

As  the  service  of  every  man  would  be  important  in  the  event 
of  a  fon^'ard  offensive  movement,  I  considered  it  to  be  of  the 
utmost  consequence  that  I  should  know  what  was  to  be  done. 
It  was  to  ascertain  this  that  I  sent  the  despatch  of  eleven  p.m.  on 
the  3d,  before  receiving  the  following  telegram  from  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

• 

"  Washington^  Aug.  3,  1862,  7.45  p.m. — I  have  waited  most 
anxiously  to  learn  the  result  of  your  forced  reconnoissance 
towards  Richmond,  and  also  whether  all  your  sick  have  been 
sent  away,  and  I  can  get  no  answer  to  my  telegram. 

"  It  is  determined  to  withdraw  your  army  from  the  Peninsula 
to  Acquia  creek.  You  will  take  immediate  measures  to  effect 
this,  covering  the  movement  the  best  you  can. 


496  McCLELLA^rS  OWN  STORY. 

^  Its  real  object  and  withdrawal  should  be  concealed  even 
from  your  own  officers. 

^*Vour  material  and  transportation  should  be  removed  first. 
V^ou  will  assume  control  of  all  the  means  of  transportation  within 
your  reach,  and  apply  to  the  naval  forces  for  all  the  assistance 
the>'  can  render  you.  You  will  consult  freely  with  the  com- 
mander of  these  forces-  The  entire  execution  of  the  movement 
is  left  to  your  discretion  and  judgment 

"  You  will  leave  such  forces  as  you  may  deem  proper  at  Fort 
Monroe,  Norfolk,  and  other  places,  which  we  must  occupy." 


I  proceeded  to  obey  this  order  with  all  possible  rapidity, 
firmly  impressed,  however,  with  the  conviction  that  the  with- 
drawal of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  Harrison's  Landing, 
where  its  communications  had,  by  the  co-operation  of  the  gun- 
boats, been  rendered  perfectly  secure,  would  at  that  time  have 
the  most  disastrous  effect  upK>n  our  cause. 

I  did  not,  as  the  commander  of  that  army,  allow  the  occasion 
to  pass  without  distinctly  setting  forth  my  views  upon  the  sub- 
ject to  the  authorities  in  the  following  telegram  : 

Aufi^.  4. — Your  telegram  of  last  evening  is  received.  I  must 
confess  that  it  has  caused  me  the  greatest  pain  I  ever  experi- 
enced, for  I  am  convinced  that  the  order  to  withdraw  this 
army  to  Acquia  creek  will  prove  disastrous  to  our  cause. 

I  fear  it  will  be  a  fatal  blow. 

Several  days  are  necessary  to  complete  the  preparations  for 
so  important  a  movement  as  this  ;  and  while  they  are  in  progress 
I  beg  that  careful  consideration  may  be  given  to  my  statements. 

This  army  is  now  in  excellent  discipline  and  condition.  We 
hold  a  debouch  on  both  banks  of  the  James  river,  so  that  we  are 
free  to  act  in  any  direction,  and,  with  the  assistance  of  the  gun- 
boats, I  consider  our  communications  as  now  secure.  We  are 
twenty-five  miles  from  Richmond,  and  are  not  likely  to  meet  the 
enemy  in  force  sufficient  to  fight  a  battle  until  we  have  marched 
fifteen  to  eighteen  miles,  which  brings  us  practically  within  ten 
miles  of  Richmond.  Our  longest  line  of  land-transportation 
would  be  from  this  point  twenty-five  miles ;  but  with  the  aid  of 
the  gunboats  we  can  supply  the*  army  by  water,  during  its  ad- 
vance, certainly  to  within  twelve  miles  of  Richmond. 

At  Acquia  creek  we  would  be  seventy-five  miles  from  Rich- 
mond, with  land-transportation  all  the  way. 


ON  THE  BANKS  OF  THE  JAMES.  497 

From  here  to  Fort  Monroe  is  a  march  of  about  seventy  miles; 
for  I  regard  it  as  impracticable  to  withdraw  this  army  and  its 
material  except  by  land. 

The  result  of  the  movement  would  thus  be  a  march  of  one 
hundred  and  forty-five  miles  to  reach  a  point  now  only  twenty- 
five  miles  distant,  and  to  deprive  ourselves  entirely  of  the  power- 
ful aid  of  the  gunboats  and  water-transportation.  Add  to  this 
the  certain  demoralization  of  this  army  which  would  ensue,  the 
terribly  depressing  effect  upon  the  people  of  the  North,  and  the 
strong  probability  that  it  would  influence  foreign  powers  to 
recognize  our  adversaries,  and  there  appear  to  me  sufficient  rea- 
sons to  make  it  my  imperative  duty  to  urge,  in  the  strongest 
terms  afforded  by  our  language,  that  this  order  may  be  rescinded, 
and  that,  far  from  recalling  this  army,  it  be  promptly  reinforced 
to  enable  it  to  resume  the  offensive. 

It  may  be  said  that  there  are  no  reinforcements  available.  I 
point  to  Burnside*s  force,  to  that  of  Pope — not  necessary  to  main- 
tain a  strict  defensive  in  front  of  Washington  and  Harper's  Ferry 
— to  those  portions  of  the  Army  of  the  West  not  required  for  a 
strict  defensive  there.  Here,  directly  in  front  of  this  army,  is  the 
heart  of  the  rebellion  ;  it  is  here  that  all  our  resources  should  be 
collected  to  strike  the  blow  which  will  determine  the  fate  of  the 
nation.  All  points  of  secondary  importance  elsewhere  should  be 
abandoned  and  every  available  man  brought  here ;  a  decid- 
ed victory  here,  and  the  military  strength  of  the  rebellion  is 
crushed,  it  matters  not  what  partial  reverses  we  may  meet  with 
elsewhere. 

Here  is  the  true  defence  of  Washington  ;  it  is  here,  on  the 
banks  of  the  James,  that  the  fate  of  the  Union  should  be  de- 
cided. 

Clear  in  my  convictions  of  right,  strong  in  the  consciousness 
that  I  have  ever  been,  and  still  am,  actuated  solely  by  love  of 
my  country,  knowing  that  no  ambitious  or  selfish  motives  have 
influenced  me  from  the  commencement  of  this  war,  I  do  now 
what  I  never  did  in  my  life  before — I  entreat  that  this  order  may 
be  rescinded. 

If  my  counsel  does  not  prevail  I  will,  with  a  sad  heart,  obey 
your  orders  to  the  utmost  of  my  power,  directing  to  the  move- 
ment, which  I  clearly  foresee  will  be  one  of  the  utmost  delicacy 
and  difficulty,  whatever  skill  I  may  possess. 


49^  MfCLKLLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Whrttovcr  the  result  may  be — and  may  God  grant  that  I  am 
mistaken  in  my  forebodings — I  shall  at  least  have  the  internal 
srtiisfiU  lion  that  I  have  written  and  spoken  frankly,  and  have 
sought  to  do  the  best  in  my  power  to  avert  disaster  from  my 
country, 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj,-Gen.  Commamdimg. 
Maj.-Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  U,  S.  Army, 

Soon  after  sending  this  telegram  I  received  the  following  from 
Gen,  Hallei  k  in  reply  to  mine  of  eleven  p.m.  of  the  3d  : 

**  My  telegram  to  you  of  yesterday  will  satisfy  you  in  regard 
to  future  o|H*rations  ;  it  was  expected  that  you  would  have  sent 
off  your  sick,  as  directed,  i^-ithout  waiting  to  know  what  were 
or  would  l>e  the  intentions  of  the  govenmient  respecting  future 
movements. 

"  The  Tresident  expects  that  the  instructions  which  were  sent 
\\MI  yesterxlay,  with  his  appro\-aL  will  be  carried  out  with  all  pos- 
iiWe  vles^vAich  And  caution.  The  quartermaster-general  is  send- 
ing tv^  Fort  Monrvvf  all  the  transportation  he  can  collect.'" 


■t^ 


IV  which  :he  tollowin^:  is  my  reply : 

W^uT  :;r*;r^rA:n  v^f  >Trti:e:xljtv  -eceivev!.  ind  is  beinz  carriec  o-t 


^\n\^>i^^^   xx^^t^r  cvu.v:   ^Ji^-^  Trso^-ee  tr:e  Sici  :•  t^e  tzaae  jx^-  sar 
M\  ;:rf."rt^  :Vr  >rlr:^tru:  iK^c:  Jt  c\i7.ce  re  rcMcy  were  ij:l«cc- 

>vn:  .-c  ■.v'>i,^Tr>  -rrji:  .xt  "Sf  c^irrK»i  *a:  iZ  tie  Ti«seis  wrrndr  z^  mj 
V,^  ^  i.wi  I  tract;:  rr.s^  r:jf:r*i 


TRANSPORTS  WANTED.  499 

leave  to-morrow  morning.  The  number  still  to  be  shipped  is,  as 
nearly  as  can  be  ascertained,  5,700. 

The  embarkation  of  f\y^  batteries  of  artillery,  with  their 
horses,  wagons,  etc.,  required  most  of  our  available  boats, 
except  the  ferry-boats.  All  the  transports  that  can  ascend  to 
this  place  have  been  ordered  up :  they  will  be  here  to-morrow 
evening.  Col.  Ingalls  reports  to  me  that  there  are  no  transports 
now  available  for  cavalry,  and  will  not  be  for  two  or  three  days. 
As  soon  as  they  can  be  obtained  I  shall  send  oflf  the  ist  N.  Y. 
Cavalry. 

After  the  transports  with  sick  and  wounded  have  returned, 
including  some  heavy-draught  steamers  at  Fort  Monroe  that 
cannot  come  to  this  point,  we  can  transport  25,000  men  at  a 
time.  We  have  some  propellers  here,  but  they  are  laden  with 
commissary  supplies  and  are  not  available. 

The  transports  now  employed  in  transporting  sick  and  wound- 
ed will  carry  12,000  well  infantry  soldiers.  Those  at  Fort  Mon- 
roe, and  of  too  heavy  draught  to  come  here,  will  carry  8,000  or 
10,000  infantry.  Several  of  the  largest  steamers  have  been  used 
for  transporting  prisoners  of  war,  and  have  only  become  available 
for  the  sick  to-day. 

The  report  of  my  chief-quartermaster  upon  the  subject  is  as 
follows : 


Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
"Office  of  Chief-Quartermaster, 

"Harrison's  Landing,  August  7,  1862. 

"  General  :  I  have  the  honor  to  return  the  papers  herewith 
which  you  sent  me,  with  the  following  remarks : 

"  We  are  embarking  ^vt  batteries  of  artillery,  with  their 
horses,  baggage,  etc.,  which  requires  the  detailing  of  most  of  our 
available  boats,  except  the  ferry-boats.  The  medical  department 
has  ten  or  twelve  of  our  largest  transport  vessels,  which,  if  dis- 
posable, could  carry  12,000  men.  Besides,  there  are  some  heavy- 
draught  steamers  at  Fort  Monroe  that  cannot  come  to  this  point, 
but  which  can  carry  8,000  or  10,000  infantry. 

"  I  have  ordered  all  up  here  that  can  ascend  to  this  depot. 
They  will  be  here  to-morrow  evening.  As  it  now  is,  after  the 
details  already  made  we  cannot  transport  from  this  place  more 
than  5,000  infantry. 

"  There  are  no  transports  now  available  for  cavalry.  From 
and  after  to-morrow,  if  the  vessels  arrive,  I  could  transport 
10,000  infantry.  In  two  or  three  days  a  regiment  of  cavalry  can 
be  sent,  if  required.  If  you  wait,  and  ship  from  Yorktown  or 
Fort  Monroe  after  the  sick  and  wounded  transports  are  at 
my  disposal,  we  can  transport  25,000  at  a  time.     The  number 


500  McCMELLAX'S  OI^X  STORY. 

x\kXX  cjui  be  trjuu^|>curt^  is  contingent  on  circnmstznces  referred 
Kx 

*'  Mocjit  o»t  the  projHfUers  here  are  laden  with  conmussamr  or 
other  sup|\tie<^  and  most  ot  the  tugs  are  necessarr  to  tov  oa  sail- 
crafl  Also  Uden  with  supplies. 

**  1  juu^  very  respectfully,  your  most  obedient  serrant^ 

^Gen.  R.  R  Marcw 

On  the  9th  I  received  thb  despatch  from  Gen.  RaOerfc : 

^'  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  the  enemy  is  ma-ssntg  hs  forces  in 
front  of  Gensw  Pope  and  B;ims«ie«  and  that  he  e^qKcts  to  cnxsh. 
them  and  move  forward  to  the  Pocomac. 

**You  must  send  reinforcements  rnstantiy  to  Acqnia  creek. 

"'^  Considering  the  amocint  of  cransportanoa  at  yoor  dsposal^ 
your  delay  is  not  satxsfactory.  Yoa  mast  more  widi  all  possibje 
celerity/^ 

To  which  I  sent  tae  foiiowin^  teplj: 

Tele^am  of  yesterday  recetr^id.  The  barteraes  sent  to  Bora- 
Side  :'>x>k  th:e  !asc  avoLfaMe  mz5p«?r:  yesterday  im::niin^  Fnrrn  rfy 
have  sirtce  arrtvec  :v?  shir  cne  r^f^inicur  of  cavalry  ro-cay.  T^ 
sick,  are  betn;i  ;f!n>arkec  as  rartclv  js  Tossibie.  Tliere  has  been 
ato  utr^^vx^^^yjsiry  ce-ay.  as  ycti  issert — !icc  13.  Itcur'^ — bat  everr- 
cct::;^  hj::>  reerr  r^c  :s  betn^  pusaeti  js  n^icly  as  possable  to  camr 

r^e  :?uowt:iu:  rt^rcrt.  iiace  ^n  rie  same  <iry  by  die  o&rer 
:riea  ::i  >rhar^  :c  riic  mascrcrt:^  ^x::cses  rie  inhiscice  oi  the 
remars.  m  :ae  iescaxii  :c  ziie  -ceaenl-^n-^aiel  ±ar,  "*  conadiaimr 
t-ie  jjHConc  :i  rraa^Svcrtainca  ac  ycur  viisccsaL  your  delay  is  not 
>acs:acD,"ry  *: 

"  .ViXY    :f   ran   ?cr:M-kC. 
**  HAit:^sj>  s  L.V3  :?£>•.-.  V:r.;i:«:.^  Aag,  re  cidz. 

**  C-i,  I:i^aJiN  '2xt\n\i  ":iimscLt  jL  3as  rr'ritrsceti  me  :d  reiegnipfe. 
^-^  vi,>a  .^.^nctinmii  :zie  >cacif  ami  rapacir.  li  rie  :ransports  aow 
"ler^.  '?n  rie  ii^ac  :i  die  5vh  I  iesyacLiie':  -iieviai  steamers. 
vrn»::p*iilv  small  ;nesw  ind  sx  ^iiconersw  ^ich  ive  bacnsies  at 
tei'  '■    ii;r?<;-ar::iler:'.   icne    :i  v'ii»:a   aave  vet  returned. 

*  R.::«imiKc:i:n  s  inacc  riis  ncmin^  for  ransportantm  *ii  r.2cc 
:x'''XiT'  :u  Ao\;'i:^  jret:^.      A.1  :;ie  icriconers  riac  had  been  char- 


HALLECK'S  INJUSTICE,  50 1 

tered  for  carrying  horses  have   been  long  since  discharged  or 
changed  into  freight-vessels. 

**  A  large  proportion  of  the  steamers  now  here  are  still  loaded 
with  stores,  or  are  in  the  floating  hospital  service  engaged  in 
removing  the  sick.  To  transport  the  1,000  cavalry  to-day  will 
take  all  the  available  steamers  now  here  not  engaged  in  the  ser- 
vice of  the  harbor.  These  steamers  could  take  a  large  number 
of  infantry,  but  are  not  well  adapted  to  the  carrying  of  horses, 
and  much  space  is  thus  lost.  Several  steamers  are  expected 
here  to-day,  and  we  are  unloading  schooners  rapidly  ;  most  of 
these  are  not  chartered,  but  are  being  taken  for  the  service 
required,  at  same  rates  of  pay  as  other  chartered  schooners.  If 
you  could  cause  a  more  speedy  return  of  the  steamers  sent  away 
from  here  it  would  facilitate  matters. 

"  C.  G.  Sawtelle, 
"  Capt,  and  Assist  Quartermaster^  commanding  Depot** 

Our  wharf  facilities  at  Harrison's  Landing  were  very  limited, 
admitting  but  few  vessels  at  one  time.  These  were  continually 
in  use  as  long  as  there  were  disposable  vessels,  and  the  officers  of 
the  medical  and  quartermaster's  departments,  with  all  their  avail- 
able forces,  were  incessantly  occupied,  day  and  night,  in  embark- 
ing and  sending  off  the  sick  men,  troops,  and  material. 

Notwithstanding  the  repeated  representations  I  made  to  the 
general-in-chief  that  such  were  the  facts,  on  the  loth  I  received 
the  following  from  Gen.  Halleck  : 

"  The  enemy  is  crossing  the  Rapidan  in  large  force.  They 
are  fighting  Gen.  Pope  to-day ;  there  must  be  no  further  delay 
in  your  movements.  That  which  has  already  occurred  was 
entirely  unexpected  and  must  be  satisfactorily  explained.  Let 
not  a  moment's  time  be  lost,  and  telegraph  me  daily  what  pro- 
gress you  have  made  in  executing  the  order  to  transfer  your 
troops." 

To  which  I  sent  this  reply  : 

Your  despatch  of  to-day  is  received.  I  assure  you  again  that 
there  has  not  been  any  unnecessary  delay  in  carrying  out  your 
orders.  You  are  probably  laboring  under  some  great  mistake  as 
to  the  amount  of  transportation  available  here.  I  have  pushed 
matters  to  the  utmost  in  getting  oflF  our  sick  and  the  troops  you 
ordered  to  Bumside. 

Col.  Ingalls  has  more  than  cmce  informed  the  quartermaster- 
general  of  the  condition  of  our  water-transportation.     From  the 


502  McCLELLAN'S  OIVN  STORY. 

fact  that  you  directed  me  to  keep  the  order  secret  I  took  it  for 
granted  that  you  would  take  the  steps  necessary  to  provide  the 
requisite  transportation.  A  large  number  of  transports  for  all 
arms  of  service  and  for  wagons  should  at  once  be  sent  to 
Yorktown  and  Fort  Monroe.  I  shall  be  ready  to  move  the 
whole  army  by  land  the  moment  the  sick  are  disposed  of. 
You  may  be  sure  that  not  an  hour's  delay  will  occur  that  can 
be  avoided.  I  fear  you  do  not  realize  the  difficulty  of  the 
operation  proposed.  The  regiment  of  cavalry  for  Bumside  has 
been  in  course  of  embarkation  to-day  and  to-night.  Ten  steam- 
ers were  required  for  the  purpose.  1,258  sick  loaded  to-day  and 
to-night.  Our  means  exhausted,  except  one  vessel  returning  to 
Fort  Monroe  in  the  morning,  which  will  take  some  500  cases  of 
slight  sickness. 

The  present  moment  is  probably  not  the  proper  one  for  me 
to  refer  to  the  unnecessarily  harsh  and  unjust  tone  of  your  tele- 
grams of  late.  It  will,  however,  make  no  difference  in  my  official 
action. 

On  the  nth  this  report  was  made: 

The  embarkation  of  850  cavalry  and  one  brigade  of  infantry 
will  be  completed  by  two  o'clock  in  the  morning ;  500  sick  were 
embarked  to-day  ;  another  vessel  arrived  to-night,  and  600  more 
sick  are  now  being  embarked.  I  still  have  some  4,000  sick  to 
dispose  of.  You  have  been  grossly  misled  as  to  the  amount  of 
transportation  at  my  disposal.  Vessels  loaded  to  their  utmost 
capacity  with  stores,  and  others  indispensable  for  service  here, 
have  been  reported  to  you  as  available  for  carrying  sick  and  welL 
I  am  sending  off  all  that  can  be  unloaded  at  Fort  Monroe,  to  have 
them  return  here.  I  repeat  that  I  have  lost  no  time  in  carrying 
out  your  orders. 

On  the  1 2th  I  received  the  following  from  Gen.  Halleck: 

"  The  quartermaster-general  informs  me  that  nearly  every 
available  steam-vessel  in  the  country  is  now  under  your  control. 
...  It  was  supposed  that  8,000  or  10,000  of  your  men  could  be 
transported  daily.  In  addition  to  steamers  there  is  a  large  fleet 
of  sailing-vessels  which  could  be  used  as  transports.  The  bulk 
of  your  material  on  shore,  it  was  thought,  could  be  sent  to  Fort 
Monroe  covered  by  that  part  of  the  army  which  could  not  get 
water-transportation.  Such  were  the  'views  of  the  government 
here.  Perhaps  we  were  misinformed  as  to  the  facts;  if  so,  the 
delay  could  be  explained.  Nothing  in  my  telegram  was  inten- 
tionally harsh  or  unjust ;  but  the  delay  was  so  unexpected  that 
an  explanation  was  required.     There  has  been  and  is  the  most 


A    TELEGRAPHIC  INTER  VIE  IV,  503 

urgent  necessity  for  despatch,  and  not  a  single  moment  must  be 
lost  in  getting  additional  troops  in  front  of  Washington." 

I  telegraphed  the  following  reply  at  eleven  p.m.: 

Your  despatch  of  noon  to-day  received.  It  is  positively  the 
fact  that  no  more  men  could  have  embarked  hence  than  have 
gone,  and  that  no  unnecessary  delay  has  occurred.    .   .   . 

I  am  sure  that  you  have  been  misinformed  as  to  the  avail- 
ability of  vessels  on  hand.  We  cannot  use  heavily  loaded  supply- 
vessels  for  troops  or  animals  ;  and  such  constitute  the  mass  of 
those  here,  which  have  been  represented  to  you  as  capable  of 
transporting  this  army.    .    .    . 

There  shall  be  no  unnecessary  delay,  but  I  cannot  manufac- 
ture vessels.  I  state  these  difficulties  from  experience,  and  be- 
cause it  appears  to  me  that  we  have  been  lately  working  at  cross- 
purposes,  because  you  have  not  been  properly  informed  by  those 
around  you,  who  ought  to  know  the  inherent  difficulties  of  such 
an  undertaking.  It  is  not  possible  for  any  one  to  place  this  army 
w^here  you  wish  it,  ready  to  move,  in  less  than  a  month. 

If  Washington  is  in  danger  now  this  army  can  scarcely  arrive 
in  time  to  save  it ;  it  is  in  much  better  position  to  do  so  from 
here  than  from  Acquia. 

"  Our  material  can  only  be  saved  by  using  the  whole  army  to 
cover  it  if  we  are  pressed.  If  sensibly  weakened  by  detachments 
the  result  might  be  the  loss  of  much  material  and  many  men.  I 
will  be  at  the  telegraph-office  to-morrow  morning. 

It  will  be  seen  by  the  concluding  paragraph  of  the  foregoing 
despatch  that  in  order  to  have  a  more  direct,  speedy,  and  full 
explanation  of  the  condition  of  affairs  in  the  army  than  I  could 
by  sending  a  single  despatch  by  steamer  to  the  nearest  tele- 
graph-office at  Jamestown  island,  some  seventy  miles  distant, 
and  waiting  ten  hours  for  a  reply,  I  proposed  to  go  in  person 
to  the  office.     This  I  did. 

On  my  arrival  at  Jamestown  island  there  was  an  interrup- 
tion in  the  electric  current,  which  rendered  it  necessary  for  me 
to  continue  on  to  Fort  Monroe,  and  across  the  Chesapeake  bay 
to  Cherry  Stone  inlet,  on  the  "  Eastern  Shore,"  where  I  arrived 
late  in  the  evening,  and  immediately  sent  the  two  annexed 
despatches  : 

13///,  11.30  P.M. — Please  come  to  office  ;  wish  to  talk  to  you. 
W^hat  news  from  Pope  ? 

14///,  12.30  A.M. — Started  to  Jamestow^n  island  to  talk  with 


504 


McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY. 


\x>u  :  found  cable  broken  and  came  here.  Please  read  my  long 
tvlogram  [of  Aug.  1 2,  1 1  p.m.]  AU  quiet  at  camp.  Enemy  burned 
whar\*es  at  City  Point  yesterday.  No  rebel  pickets  within  eight 
^8)  miles  of  Cog|:ins*s  Point  yesterday. 

Richmond   nnsoners   state  that  lajge  force  with  guns  left 
Richmond  northward  on  Sunday. 

IV  whi\^h  the  fv>llowing  reply  was  received  : 


^M.40  A.M. — I  ha>^  n^ad  \xxir  despatch.  There  is  no  change 
v^t  ^^^4ns*  Vv>u  will  send  up  your  troops  as  rapidly  as  possible. 
There  t*  nv^  ditliculty  in  laxniing  them.  According  to  your  own 
46vv\xints  there  is  now  no  di&ruhy  in  withdrawing  jxmr  forces^ 
IV>  ^^  with  all  |x>ssibie  rapiditT* 

•"H.  W.  Halleck, 

l^vVt'  1  Had  ii:sae  to  decipher  ashi  x«pJy  to  this  desfotch,  the 
^"k^^rr:!^  v>femrv^  in  Wxsi::u^»>a  isfociaed  lue  tiiat  Gea.  Hal- 
>^^  )w8vi  ^xr^e  vXit  v'*  t^  o6ce  xszksaecia^^  after  wridn^  dds 
>,^^^^*^^K  ^^:>Kx::  jea^iry:  asiy  j^rTmttxtt  oc  ^se  fjcx  for 
w;fcr^:r^  fx^iT  J^TA  r;trrbeT  ^r^fcg-nvtrknr  as  ro  ^je  object  of  ■_ 


.X       .  «.    f**-         'Ax  .>  <■  >JBX 


:i  iTtf  r:i.i^»wzic  o 


aif^ 


'Ot;  -?sx; 


*-  \i 


^iir^^«o^:s  iJ2jC2X^ 


't    rfx"^      ».  V 


;  V*o    Vwv 


r^in-gLwrrar 


XN^iV.    « 


X       -X  ^   X     •  . 


%<  s."  :5^  Tcc  ^&5  :dx: 


r-ir-  cv-r 


fine    IT 


"tf^    TlXn  JL. 


MOVEMENT  TO  FORTRESS  MONROE,  505 

The  perversion  of  the  term  to  which  the  general-in-chief  saw 
fit  to  give  currency,  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  should 
have  been  here  rendered  impossible  by  the  despatches  which 
precede  this  of  the  14th,  which  show  that  the  movement  really 
began  immediately  after  the  receipt  of  the  order  of  Aug.  4.* 

After  the  commencement  of  the  movement  it  was  continued 
with  the  utmost  rapidity  until  all  the  troops  and  material  were 
en  route ^  both  by  land  and  water,  on  the  morning  of  the  i6th. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  of  that  day,  when  the  last  man  had  dis- 
appeared from  the  deserted  camps,  I  followed  with  my  personal 
staff  in  the  track  of  the  grand  Army  of  the  Potomac,  bidding 
farewell  to  the  scene  still  covered  with  the  marks  of  its  presence, 
and  to  be  for  ever  memorable  in  history  as  the  vicinity  of  its 
most  brilliant  exploits. 

Previous  to  the  departure  of  the  troops  I  had  directed  Capt. 
Duane,  of  the  engineer  corps,  to  proceed  to  Barrett's  Ferry, 
near  the  mouth  of  the  Chickahominy,  and  throw  across  the 
river  at  that  point  a  pontoon-bridge.  This  was  executed 
promptly  and  satisfactorily,  under  the  cover  of  gunboats,  and 
an  excellent  bridge  of  about  2,000  feet  in  length  was  ready  for 
the  first  arrival  of  troops.  The  greater  part  of  the  army,  with 
its  artillery,  wagon-trains,  etc.,  crossed  it  rapidly,  and  in  perfect 
order  and  safety,  so  that  on  the  night  of  the  17th  everything 
was  across  the  Chickahominy,  except  the  rear-guard,  which 
crossed  early  on  the  morning  of  the  i8th,  when  the  pontoon- 
bridge  w^as  immediately  removed. 

Gen.  Porter's  corps,  which  was  the  first  to  march  from  Har- 
rison's Landing,  had  been  pushed  forward  rapidly,  and  on  the 
1 6th  reached  Williamsburg,  where  I  had  directed  him  to  halt 
until  the  entire  army  was  across  the  Chickahominy. 

On  his  arrival  at  Williamsburg,  however,  he  received  an  inter- 
cepted letter,  which  led  to  the  belief  that  Gen.  Pope  would 
have  to  contend  against  a  very  heavy  force  then  in  his  front. 
Gen.  Porter,  therefore,  very  properly  took  the  responsibility  of 
continuing  his  march  directly  on  to  Newport  News,  which  place 
he  reached  on  the  morning  of  the  i8th  of  August,  having  marched 

•  In  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War,  Aug.  30,  1862,  Gen  Halleck 
said  :  **  It  will  be  seen  from  my  telegraphic  correspondence  that  Gen. 
McClellan  protested  against  the  movement,  and  that  it  was  not  actually 
commenced  till  the  14th  inst." 


5o6  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

his  corps  sixty  miles  in  the  short  period  of  three  days  and  one 
night,  halting  one  day  at  the  crossing  of  the  Chickahominy. 

The  embarkation  of  this  corps  commenced  as  soon  as  trans- 
ports were  ready,  and  on  the  20th  it  had  all  sailed  for  Acquia 
creek  from  Barrett's  Ferry. 

On  the  1 8th  and  19th  our  march  was  continued  to  Williams- 
burg and  Yorktown,  and  on  the  20th  the  remainder  of  the  army 
was  ready  to  embark  at  Yorktown,  Fortress  Monroe,  and  New- 
port News. 

From  the  commencement  to  the  termination  of  this  most 
arduous  campaign  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  always  evinced 
the  most  perfect  subordination,  zeal,  and  alacrity  in  the  per- 
formance of  all  the  duties  required  of  it. 

The  amount  of  severe  labor  accomplished  by  this  army  in  the 
construction  of  entrenchments,  roads,  bridges,  etc.,  was  enor- 
mous ;  yet  all  the  work  was  performed  with  the  most  gratifying 
cheerfulness  and  devotion  to  the  interests  of  the  service. 

During  the  campaign  ten  severely  contested  and  sanguinary 
battles  had  been  fought,  besides  numerous  smaller  engagements, 
in  which  the  troops  exhibited  the  most  determined  enthusiasm 
and  bravery.  They  submitted  to  exposure,  sickness,  and  even 
death,  without  a  murmur.  Indeed,  they  had  become  veterans  in 
their  country's  cause  and  richly  deserved  the  warm  commenda- 
tion of  the  government. 

It  was  in  view  of  these  facts  that  this  seemed  to  me  an  ap- 
propriate occasion  for  the  general-in-chief  to  give,  in  general 
orders,  some  appreciative  expression  of  the  services  of  the  army 
while  upon  the  Peninsula.  Accordingly,  on  the  i8th  I  sent  him 
the  following  despatch : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 

Aug.   18,   1862,   II   P.M. 

Please  say  a  kind  word  to  my  army  that  I  can  repeat  to  them 
in  general  orders  in  regard  to  their  conduct  at  Yorktown,  Wil- 
liamsburg, West  Point,  Hanover  Court-House,  and  on  the 
Chickahominy,  as  well  as  in  regard  to  the  Seven  Days  and  the 
recent  retreat. 

No  one  has  ever  said  anything  to  cheer  them  but  myself. 
Say  nothing  about  me.  Merely  give  my  men  and  officers  credit 
for  what  they  have  done.  It  will  do  you  much  good,  and  will 
strengthen  you  much  with  them,  if  you  issue  a  handsome  order 


r 


COME    YOURSELF.  507 

to  them  in  regard  to  what  they  have  accomplished     They  de- 
serve it. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen. 
Maj.-Gen.  Halleck, 

Washington,  D.  C. 

As  no  reply  was  received  to  this  communication,  and  no 
order  was  issued  by  the  general-in-chief,  I  conclude  that  the 
suggestion  did  not  meet  with  his  approbation. 

All  ikit  personnel  and  material  of  the  army  had  been  trans- 
ferred from  Harrison's  Landing  to  the  different  points  of  em- 
barkation in  the  very  brief  period  of  ^\^  days  without  the  slight- 
est loss  or  damage.  Porter's  troops  sailed  from  Newport  News 
on  the  19th  and  20th.  Heintzelman's  corps  sailed  from  York- 
town  on  the  2 1  St.  On  that  day  I  received  the  following  tele- 
gram from  the  general-in-chief  : 

"  Leave  such  garrisons  in  Fortress  Monroe,  Yorktown,  etc., 
as  you  may  deem  proper.  They  will  be  replaced  by  new  troops 
as  rapidly  as  possible. 

"  The  forces  of  Bumside  and  Pope  are  hard  pushed,  and 
require  aid  as  rapidly  as  you  can  send  it.     Come  yourself  as 
soon  as  you  can.  .  .  ." 
38 


CHAPTER   XXX. 

The  army  reaches  Alexandria ;  sent  forward  to  Pope — Pope's  campaign 
— McClellan's  work  at  Alexandria— The  last  man  sent  forward— 
Stanton's  ironical  order — McClellan  commands  a  hundred  men — 
Hal  leek  in  despair — McClellan's  volunteer  services. 

On  the  evening  of  Aug.  23  I  sailed  with  my  staflF  for  Acquia 
creek,  where  I  arrived  at  daylight  on  the  following  morning, 
reporting  to  Gen.  Halleck  as  follows : 

Acquia  creek,  Aug.  24,  1862. — I  have  reached  here,  and  re- 
spectfully report  for  orders. 

I  also  telegraphed  as  follows  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 

Morell's  scouts  report  Rappahannock  Station  burned  and 
abandoned  by  Pope  without  any  notice  to  Morell  or  Sykes.  This 
was  telegraphed  you  some  hours  ago.  Reynolds,  Reno,  and 
Stevens  are  supposed  to  be  with  Pope,  as  nothing  can  be  heard 
of  them  to-day.  Morell  and  Sykes  are  near  Morrisville  Post- 
office,  watching  the  lower  fords  of  Rappahannock,  with  no 
troops  between  there  and  Rappahannock  Station,  which  is  re- 
ported abandoned  by  Pope. 

Please  inform  me  immediately  exactly  where  Pope  is  and 
what  doing ;  until  I  know  that,  I  cannot  regulate  Porter's  move- 
ments. He  is  much  exposed  now,  and  decided  measures  should 
be  taken  at  once.  Until  I  know  what  my  command  and  posi- 
tion are  to  be,  and  whether  you  still  intend  to  place  me  in  the 
command  indicated  in  your  first  letter  to  me,  and  orally  through 
Gen.  Bumside  at  the  Chickahominy,  I  cannot  decide  where  I 
can  be  of  most  use.  If  your  determination  is  unchanged  I 
ought  to  go  to  Alexandria  at  once.  Please  define  my  position 
and  duties. 

To  which  I  received  the  following  reply  from  Gen.  Halleck : 

"  Aug.  24. — You  ask  me  for  information  which  I  cannot  give. 
I  do  not  know  either  where  Gen.  Pope  is  or  where  the  enemy 
in  force  is.  These  are  matters  which  I  have  all  day  been  most 
anxious  to  ascertain." 

On  the  26th  I  received  the  following  from  Gen.  Halleck : 

508 


ALEXANDRIA.  509 

**  There  is  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  is  moving  a  large 
force  into  the  Shenandoah  Valley.  Reconnoissances  will  soon 
determine.  Gen.  Heintzelman's  corps  was  ordered  to  report  to 
<ien.  Pope,  and  Kearny's  will  probably  be  sent  to-day  against 
the  enemy's  flank.  Don't  draw  any  troops  down  the  Rappahan- 
nock at  present ;  we  shall  probably  want  them  all  in  the  direction 
of  the  Shenandoah.  Perhaps  you  had  better  leave  Gen.  Bum- 
side  in  charge  at  Acquia  creek  and  come  to  Alexandria,  as  very 
great  irregularities  are  reported  there.  Gen.  Franklin's  corps 
will  march  as  soon  as  it  receives  transportation." 

On  receipt  of  this  I  immediately  sailed  for  Alexandria,  and 
reported  as  follows  to  Gen.  Halleck: 

Aug,  27,  8  A.M. — I  arrived  here  last  night,  and  have  taken 
measures  to  ascertain  the  state  of  affairs  here,  and  that  proper 
remedies  may  be  applied.  Just  received  a  rumor  that  railway 
bridge  over  Bull  Bun  was  burned  last  night. 

Ai4g.  27,  9.40  A.M. — The  town  is  quiet,  although  quite  full  of 
soldiers,  who  are  said  to  be  chiefly  convalescents. 

The  affairs  of  the  quartermaster's  department  are  reported  as 
going  on  well. 

It  is  said  that  the  Bull  Run  bridge  will  be  repaired  by  to-mor- 
row. The  disembarkation  of  Sumner's  corps  commenced  at 
Acquia  yesterday  afternoon.  I  found  that  he  could  reach  Rap- 
pahannock Station  earlier  that  way  than  from  here. 

On  the  same  day  I  received  the  following  from  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

^^  Aug.  27. — Telegrams  from  Gen.  Porter  to  Gen.  Bumside, 
just  received,  say  that  Banks  is  at  Fayetteville ;  McDowell,  Si- 
gel,  and  Ricketts  near  Warrenton ;  Reno  on  his  right.  Porter 
is  marching  on  Warrenton  Junction  to  reinforce  Pope.  Nothing 
said  of  Heintzelman.  Porter  reports  a  general  battle  imminent. 
Franklin's  corps  should  move  out  by  forced  marches,  carrying 
three  or  four  days'  provisions,  and  to  be  supplied,  as  far  as  pos- 
sible, by  railroad.  Perhaps  you  may  prefer  some  other  road  than 
to  Centreville.  Col.  Haupt  has  just  telegraphed  about  sending 
out  troops.  Please  see  him  and  give  him  your  directions. 
There  has  been  some  serious  neglect  to  guard  the  railroad, 
which  should  be  immediately  remedied." 

I  replied  as  follows  : 

Aug.  27,  10  A.M. — Telegram  this  moment  received.     I  have 


5IO  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

m 

sent  orders  to  Franklin  to  prepare  to  march  with  his  corps  at 
once,  and  to  repair  here  in  person  to  inform  me  as  to  his  means 
of  transportation. 

Kearny  was  yesterday  at  Rappahannock  Station ;  Porter  at 
Bealeton,  Kellip,  Barnell's,  etc.  Sumner  will  commence  reach- 
ing Falmouth  to-day.  Williams's  Mass.  Cavalry  will  be  mostly 
at  Falmouth  to-day. 

I  loaned  Burnside  my  personal  escort  (one  squadron  4th 
regulars),  to  scout  down  Rappahannock. 

I  have  sent  for  Couch's  division  to  come  at  once.  As  fast  as 
I  gain  any  information  I  will  forward  it,  although  you  may 
already  have  it. 

I  also  received  the  following  telegrams  from  Gen.  Halleck : 

''^  Aug.  27. — Direct  Gen.  Casey  to  furnish  you  about  5,000  of 
the  new  troops  under  his  command. 

"  Take  entire  direction  of  the  sending-out  of  the  troops  from 
Alexandria. 

"  Determine  questions  of  priority  in  transportation  and  the 
places  they  shall  occupy.  Pope's  headquarters  are  near  Warren- 
ton  Junction,  but  I  cannot  ascertain  the  present  position  of 
his  troops." 

^^  Aug.  27. — I  can  get  no  satisfactory  information  from  the 
front,  either  of  the  enemy  or  of  our  troops.  There  seems  to  have 
been  great  neglect  and  carelessness  about  Manassas.  Franklin's 
corps  should  march  in  that  direction  as  soon  as  possible.  A 
competent  officer  should  be  sent  out  to  take  direction  of  affairs 
in  that  vicinity." 

Upon  the  receipt  of  these  I  immediately  sent  the  following 
telegram  to  Gens.  Heintzelman  and  Porter : 

Alexandria,  Aug.  27,  1862,  10.30  a.m. — ^Where  are  you,  and 
what  is  state  of  affairs  ?  What  troops  in  your  front,  right,  and 
left  ?  Sumner  is  now  landing  at  Acquia.  Where  is  Pope's  left, 
and  what  of  enemy  ?  Enemy  burned  Bull  Run  bridge  last  night 
with  cavalry  force. 

Maj.-Gen.  Heintzelman,  Warrenton. 
Maj.-Gen.  Porter,  Bealeton. 

P.S.  If  these  general  officers  are  not  at  the  places  named, 
nearest  operator  will  please  have  message  forwarded. 

I  also  telegraphed  to  the  general-in-chief  the  following  de- 
spatches : 


POPE'S  CAMPAIGN,  5  I  I 

A^i'  27,  10.50  A.M. — I  have  sent  all  the  information  I  possess 
to  Burnside,  instructing  him  to  look  out  well  for  his  right  flank, 
between  the  Rappahannock  and  Potomac,  and  to  send  no  trains 
to  Porter  without  an  escort.  I  fear  the  cavalry  who  dashed  at 
Bull  Run  last  night  may  trouble  Burnside  a  little.  I  have  sent 
to  communicate  with  Porter  and  Heintzelman  via  Falmouth, 
and  hope  to  give  you  some  definite  information  in  a  few  hours. 
I  shall  land  the  next  cavalry  I  get  hold  of  here,  and  send  it  out 
to  keep  open  the  communication  between  Pope  and  Porter,  also 
to  watch  vicinity  of  Manassas.  Please  send  me  a  number  of 
copies  of  the  best  maps  of  present  field  of  operations.  I  can 
use  fifty  to  advantage. 

Aug,  27,  11.20  A.M. — In  view  of  Burnside's  despatch,  just 
received,  would  it  not  be  advisable  to  throw  the  mass  of  Sum- 
ner's corps  here,  to  move  out  with  Franklin  to  Centreville  or 
vicinity  ?  If  a  decisive  battle  is  fought  at  Warrenton,  a  disas- 
ter would  leave  any  troops  on  lower  Rappahannock  in  a  dan- 
gerous position. 

They  would  do  better  service  in  front  of  Washington. 

Alexandria,  Aug.  27,  12  m. — I  have  just  learned  through  Gen. 
Woodbury  that  it  was  stated  in  your  office  last  night  that  it 
was  very  strange  that,  with  (20,000)  twenty  thousand  men  here, 
I  did  not  prevent  the  raid  upon  Manassas.  This  induces  me  to 
ask  whether  your  remark  in  your  telegram  to-day,  that  there 
had  been  great  neglect  about  Manassas,  was  intended  to  apply 
to  me.  I  cannot  suppose  it  was,  knowing,  as  you  do,  that  I 
arrived  here  without  information  and  with  no  instructions  be- 
yond pushing  the  landing  of  my  troops.  The  bridge  was  burned 
before  my  arrival ;  I  knew  nothing  of  it  until  this  morning.  I 
ask  as  a  matter  of  justice  that  you  will  prevent  your  staflF  from 
making  statements  which  do  me  such  gross  injustice  at  a  time 
when  the  most  cordial  co-operation  is  required. 

Aug.  27,  12.5  p.m. — My  aide  has  just  returned  from  Gen. 
Franklin's  camp  ;  reports  that  Gens.  Franklin,  Smith,  and  Slo- 
cum  are  all  in  Washington.  He  gave  the  order  to  the  next  in 
rank  to  place  the  corps  in  readiness  to  move  at  once.  I  learn 
that  heavy  firing  has  been  heard  this  morning  at  Centreville, 
and  have  sent  to  ascertain  the  truth.  I  can  find  no  cavalry 
to  send  out  on  the  roads.  Are  the  works  garrisoned  and  ready 
for  defence  ? 

Aug.  27,  12.20  p.m. — What  bridges  exist  over  Bull  Run? 
Have  steps  been  taken  to  construct  bridges  for  the  advance 
of  troops  to  reinforce  Pope,  or  to  enable  him  to  retreat  if  in 
trouble  ? 


5  I  2  McCLELLAN'S  O  WN  STOR  Y. 

There  should  be  two  gunboats  at  Acquia  creek  at  once. 
Shall  I  push  the  rest  of  Sumner's  corps  here,  or  is  Pope  so 
strong  as  to  be  reasonably  certain  of  success?  I  have  sent  to 
inspect  the  works  near  here  and  their  garrisons. 

As  soon  as  I  can  find  Gen.  Casey,  or  some  other  command- 
ing officer,  I  will  see  to  the  railway,  etc.  It  would  be  well  to 
have  them  report  to  me,  as  I  do  not  know  where  they  are.  I 
am  trying  to  find  them,  and  will  lose  no  time  in  carrying  out 
your  orders.     Would  like  to  see  Burnside. 

Au^,  27,  1. 1 5  P.M. — Franklin's  artillery  have  no  horses,  ex- 
cept for  (4)  four  guns  without  caissons.  I  can  pick  up  no 
cavalry.  In  view  of  these  facts,  will  it  not  be  well  to  push 
Sumner's  corps  here  by  water  as  rapidly  as  possible,  to  make 
immediate  arrangements  for  placing  the  works  in  front  of  Wash- 
ington in  an  efficient  condition  of  defence?  I  have  no  means 
of  knowing  the  enemy's  force  between  Pope  and  ourselves. 

Can  Franklin,  without  his  artillery  or  cavalry,  effect  any  use- 
ful purpose  in  front  ? 

Should  not  Burnside  take  steps  at  once  to  evacuate  Fal- 
mouth and  Acquia,  at  the  same  time  covering  the  retreat  of 
any  of  Pope's  troops  who  may  fall  back  in  that  direction  ? 

I  do  not  see  that  we  have  force  enough  in  hand  to  form  a 
connection  with  Pope,  whose  exact  position  we  do  not  know. 
Are  we  safe  in  the  direction  of  the  valley  ? 

Aug.  27,  1.35  P.M. — I  learn  that  Taylor's  brigade,  sent  this 
morning  to  Bull  Run  bridge,  is  either  cut  to  pieces  or  cap- 
tured ;  that  the  force  against  them  had  many  guns  and  about 
{5,000)  five  thousand  infantry,  receiving  reinforcements  every 
minute  ;  also,  that  Gainesville  is  in  possession  of  the  enemy. 
Please  send  some  cavalry  out  towards  Dranesville  via  Chain 
bridge,  to  watch  Lewinsville  and  Dranesville,  and  go  as  far 
as  they  can.  If  you  will  give  me  even  one  squadron  of  good 
cavalry  here  I  will  ascertain  the  state  of  the  case.  I  think  our 
policy  now  is  to  make  these  works  perfectly  safe,  and  mobilize 
a  couple  of  orps  as  soon  as  possible,  but  not  to  advance  them 
until  they  can  have  their  artillery  and  cavalry.  I  have  sent  for 
Col.  Tyler  to  place  his  artillerymen  in  the  works. 

Is  Fort  Marcy  securely  held  ? 

Aug.  27,  2.30  P.M. — Sumner  has  been  ordered  to  send  here 
all  of  his  corps  that  are  within  reach.  Orders  have  been  sent 
to  Couch  to  come  here  from  Yorktown  with  the  least  possible 
delay.  But  one  squadron  of  my  cavalry  has  arrived  ;  that  will 
be  disembarked  at  once  and  sent  to  the  front. 

If  there  is  any  cavalry  in  Washington  it  should  be  ordered 
to  report  to  me  at  once. 


POPE'S  CAMPAIGN,  51 


«^ 


I  Still  think  that  we  should  first  provide  for  the  immediate 
defence  of  Washington  on  both  sides  of  the  Potomac. 

I  am  not  responsible  for  the  past,  and  cannot  be  for  the 
future  unless  I  receive  authority  to  dispose  of  the  available 
troops  according  to  my  judgment.  Please  inform  me  at  once 
what  my  position  is.     I  do  not  wish  to  act  in  the  dark. 

Aug.  27,  6  P.M. — I  have  just  received  the  copy  of  a  despatch 
from  Gen.  Pope  to  you,  dated  ten  a.m.  this  morning,  in  which  he 
sr.ys:  **  All  forces  now  sent  forward  should  be  sent  to  my  right 
ai  Gainesville." 

I  now  have  at  my  disposal  here  about  (10,000)  ten  thousand 
men  of  Franklin's  corps,  about  (2,800)  twenty-eight  hundred  of 
Gen.  Tyler's  brigade,  and  Col.  Tyler's  ist  Conn.  Artillery,  which 
I  recommend  should  be  held  in  hand  for  the  defence  of  Wash- 
ington. 

If  you  wish  me  to  order  any  part  of  this  force  to  the  front,  it 
is  in  readiness  to  march  at  a  moment's  notice  to  any  point  you 
may  indicate. 

In  view  of  the  existing  state  of  things  in  our  front,  I  have 
deemed  it  best  to  order  Gen.  Casey  to  hold  his  men  for  York- 
t(jwn  in  readiness  to  move,  but  not  to  send  them  off  till  further 
orders. 

On  the  28th  I  telegraphed  as  follows  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 

Aug.  28,  4.10  P.M. — Gen.  Franklin  is  with  nie  here.  I  will 
know  in  a  few  minutes  the  condition  of  artillery  and  cavalry. 

We  are  not  yet  in  condition  to  move  ;  may  be  by  to-morrow 
morning. 

Pope  must  cut  through  to-day  or  adopt  the  plan  I  suggested. 
I  have  ordered  troops  to  garrison  the  works  at  Upton's  Hill. 
They  must  be  held  at  any  cost.  As  soon  as  I  can  see  the  way  to 
spare  them  I  will  send  a  corps  of  good  troops  there.  It  is  the 
key  to  Washington,  which  cannot  be  seriously  menaced  as  long 
as  it  is  held. 

I  received  the  following  from  the  general-in-chief  : 

"  Aug.  28,  1862. — I  think  you  had  better  place  Sumner's 
corps,  as  it  arrives,  near  the  guns,  and  particularly  at  the  Chain 
bridge. 

"  The  principal  thing  to  be  feared  now  is  a  cavalry  raid  into 
this  city,  especially  in  the  night-time. 

"  Use  Cox's  and  Tyler's  brigades  and  the  new  troops  for  the 
same  object,  if  you  need  them. 

**  Porter  writes  to  Bumside  from  Bristoe,  9.30  a.m.  yesterday. 


514  MUCLEULAX^S  OWX  STORY. 

^at  Rope's  fcwccs  were  then  mcmag  oa  yLaaasas^  said  that  Bom* 
isde  wrj:ild  fooa  hear  of  rhem  bT  v3.t  oc  Alexandria. 

*  Geti.  Callain  has  goat  zo  Harper's  Ferrr,  and  I  hare  only  a 
«agle  Tti^lsLT  officer  for  datf  rn  me  office^ 

**  VS/OLic  iesid  sonie  o€  voor  officers  co-<faT  to  see  that  crcrv 

>  ^  ■» 

pcer,axitirjn  »  taken  at  the  forts  agarn«  a  raid,  also  at  the  bridge. 
Please  answer,  ** 

On  the  29th  the  foQowing  despatch  was  telegraphed  to  Gen. 
Halleck: 

>^«f,  2^  10.30  A  3t — Franklin's  corps  is  in  motion  ;  started 
aboat  (6>  six  a,3C  I  can  give  hrm  bat  two  squadrons  of  cavalry. 
I  propose  moving  Gen.  Cox  to  Upton's  Hill,  to  hold  that 
important  point  with  its  works,  and  to  posh  cavalry  scoots  to 
Vienna  tia  Freedom  Hill  and  Hunter's  Lane.  Cox  has  (2)  two 
sqxudrons  oi  cavalry.  Please  answer'at  once  whether  this  meets 
yoor  approvaL  I  have  directed  Woodbary,  with  the  engineer  bri- 
gade, to  hold  Fort  Lyon.  Sumner  detached  last  night  two  regi- 
ments to  vicinity  of  Forts  Ethan  Allen  and  Marcy.  Meagher's 
brigade  is  still  at  Acquia.  If  he  moves  in  support  of  Franklin 
ft  leaves  as  withoat  any  reliable  troops  in  and  near  WashingtocL 
Yet  Franklin  is  too  weak  alone.  What  shall  be  done  ?  No  more 
cavalry  arrived  ;  have  bat  i^)  three  squadrons.  Franklin  has 
bot  (40;  forty  rounds  of  ammunition,  and  no  wagons  to  move 
more,  I  do  not  think  Franklin  is  in  condition  to  accomplish 
mach  if  he  meets  with  serious  resistance.  I  should  not  have 
moved  him  but  for  your  pressing  order  of  last  nighL  What  have 
yoa  from  Vienna  and  Dranesville  ? 

To  which  the  following  is  a  reply  from  Gen.  Halleck  : 

**  Aidji;^,  29,  1 2  M. — Upton's  Hill  arrangement  all  right-  We 
must  send  wagons  and  ammunition  to  Franklin  as  fast  as  they 
arrive. 

**  Meagher's  brigade  ordered  up  yesterday.  Fitz-Hu^  Lee 
was,  it  Is  said  on  good  authority,  in  Alexandria  on  Sunday  last 
for  three  hours.     I  have  nothing  from  Dranesville." 

On  the  same  day  the  following  was  received  from  his  Excel- 
lency the  President : 

"  Washinf^tan,  Aug.  29,  1862,  2.30  p.m. — Wliat  news  from 
direction  of  Manassas  Junction  ?     What  generally  ? 

"A.    LiNXOLN. 

"  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 


FRANKUN'S  CORPS.  515 

To  which  I  replied  as  follows: 

Aug.  29,  1862,  2.45  P.M. — The  last  news  I  received  from  the 
direction  of  Manassas  was  from  stragglers,  to  the  effect  that  the 
enemy  were  evacuating  Centreville  and  retiring  towards  Tho- 
roughfare Gap.     This  by  no  means  reliable. 

I  am  clear  that  one  of  two  courses  should  be  adopted  :  ist,  to 
concentrate  all  our  available  forces  to  open  communications  with 
l^ope  ;  2d,  to  leave  Pope  to  get  out  of  his  scrape,  and  at  once  use 
all  our  means  to  make  the  capital  perfectly  safe. 

No  middle  ground  will  now  answer.  Tell  me  what  you  wish 
me  to  do,  and  I  will  do  all  in  my  power  to  accomplish  it.  I  wish 
to  know  what  my  orders  and  authority  are.  I  ask  for  nothing, 
but  will  obey  whatever  orders  you  give.  I  only  ask  a  prompt 
decision,  that  I  may  at  once  give  the  necessary  orders.  It  will 
not  do  to  delay  longer. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj,'Gen. 

A.  Lincoln,  President, 

And  copy  to  Gen.  Halleck. 
To  which  the  following  is  a  reply  : 

"  Washington^  Aug,  29,  1862,  4.10  p.m. — ^Yours  of  to-day  just 
received.  I  think  your  first  alternative,  to  wit,  "  to  concentrate 
all  our  available  forces  to  open  communication  with  Pope,"  is  the 
right  one,  but  I  wish  not  to  control.  That  I  now  leave  to  Gen. 
Halleck,  aided  by  your  counsels. 

"  A.  Lincoln. 

"  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 

It  had  been  officially  reported  to  me  from  Washington  that 
the  enemy,  in  strong  force,  was  moving  through  Vienna  in  the 
direction  of  the  Chain  bridge,  and  had  a  large  force  in  Vienna. 
This  report,  in  connection  with  the  despatch  of  the  general-in- 
chief  on  the  28th,  before  noted,  induced  me  to  direct  Franklin  to 
halt  his  command  near  Annandale  until  it  could  be  determined, 
by  reconnoissances  to  Vienna  and  towards  Manassas,  whether 
these  reports  were  true.  Gen.  Cox  was  ordered  to  send  his  small 
cavalry  force  from  Upton's  Hill  towards  Vienna  and  Dranesville 
in  one  direction,  and  towards  Fairfax  Court- House  in  the  other, 
and  Franklin  to  push  his  two  squadrons  as  far  towards  Manassas 
as  possible,  in  order  to  ascertain  the  true  position  of  the  enemy. 

With  the  enemy  in  force  at  Vienna  and  towards  Lewinsville, 
it  would  have  been  very  injudicious  to  have  pushed  Franklin's 


5l6  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

small  force  beyond  Annandale.  It  must  be  remembered  that  at 
that  time  we  were  cut  off  from  direct  communication  with  Gen. 
Pope  ;  that  the  enemy  was,  by  the  last  accounts,  at  Manassas  in 
strong  force,  and  that  Franklin  had  only  from  10,000  to  11,000 
men,  with  an  entirely  insufficient  force  of  cavalry  and  artillery. 

In  order  to  represent  this  condition  of  affairs  in  its  proper 
light  to  the  general-in-chief,  and  to  obtain  definite  instructions 
from  him,  I  telegraphed  to  him  as  follows  : 

Aug,  29,  12  M. — Have  ordered  most  of  the  (12th)  Twelfth 
Penn.  Cavalry  to  report  to  Gen.  Barnard  for  scouting  duty 
towards  Rockville,  Poolesville,  etc. 

If  you  apprehend  a  raid  of  cavalry  on  your  side  of  river,  I 
had  better  send  a  brigade  or  two  of  Sumner's  to  near  Tennally- 
town,  where,  with  two  or  three  old  regiments  in  Forts  Allen  and 
Marcy,  they  can  watch  both  Chain  bridge  and  Tennallytown. 

Would  it  meet  your  views  to  post  the  rest  of  Sumner's  corps- 
between  Arlington  and  Fort  Corcoran,  whence  they  can  either 
support  Cox,  Franklin,  or  Chain  bridge,  and  even  Tennallytown  ? 

Franklin  has  only  between  (10,000)  ten  thousand  and  (11,000) 
eleven  thousand  for  duty. 

How  far  do  you  wish  this  force  to  advance  ? 

Also  the  following  : 

Aug.  29,  I  P.M. — I  anxiously  await  reply  to  my  last  despatch 
in  regard  to  Sumner.     Wish  to  give  the  order  at  once. 

Please  authorize  me  to  attach  new  regiments  permanently  to 
my  old  brigades.  I  can  do  much  good  to  old  and  new  troops  in 
that  way.  I  shall  endeavor  to  hold  a  line  in  advance  of  Forts. 
Allen  and  Marcy,  at  least  with  strong  advanced  guards.  I  wish 
to  hold  the  line  through  Prospect  Hill,  Mackall's,  Minor's,  and 
Hall's  Hills.  This  will  give  us  timely  warning.  Shall  I  do  as 
seems  best  to  me  with  all  the  troops  in  this  vicinity,  including 
Franklin,  who  I  really  think  ought  not,  under  present  circum- 
stances, to  advance  beyond  Annandale  ? 

On  the  same  day  I  received  a  despatch  from  the  general-in- 
chief,  in  which  he  asks  me  why  I  halted  Franklin  in  Annandale, 
to  which  I  replied  as  follows  : 

Aug.  29,  10.30  A.M. — By  referring  to  my  telegrams  of  10.30 
A.M.,   12  M.,  and   I   P.M.,  together  with  your  reply  of  2.48  p.m., 
you  will    see  why    Franklin's   corps  halted  at  Annandale.     His. 
small  cavalry  force — all  I  had  to  give  him — was  ordered  to  push 
on  as  far  as  possible  towards  Manassas. 


FRANKLIYS  CORPS,  517 

It  was  not  safe  for  Franklin  to  move  beyond  Annandale, 
under  the  circumstances,  until  we    knew  what  was   at  Vienna. 

Gen.  Franklin  remained  here  until  about  one  p.m.,  endeavor- 
ing to  arrange  for  supplies  for  his  command.  I  am  responsible 
for  both  these  circumstances,  and  do  not  see  that  either  was  in 
disobedience  to  your  orders. 

Please  give  distinct  orders  in  reference  to  Franklin's  move- 
ments of  to-morrow.  I  have  sent  to  Col.  Haupt  to  push  out 
construction  and  supply  trains  as  soon  as  possible. 

Gen.  Tyler  to  furnish  the  necessary  guards. 

I  have  directed  Gen.  Banks's  supply-trains  to  start  out  to- 
night at  least  as  far  as  Annandale,  with  an  escort  from  Gen. 
Tyler. 

In  regard  to  to-morrow's  movements  I  desire  definite  instruc- 
tions, as  it  is  not  agreeable  to  me  to  be  accused  of  disobeying 
orders  when  I  have  simply  exercised  the  discretion  you  com- 
mitted to  me. 

On  the  same  evening  I  sent  the  following  despatches  to  Gen. 
Halleck  : 

Aui^,  29,  10  P.M. — Not  hearing  from  you,  I  have  sent  orders 
to  Gen.  Franklin  to  place  himself  in  communication  with  Gen. 
Poj)c  as  soon  as  possible,  and  at  the  same  time  cover  the  transit 
of   Pope's  supplies. 

Orders  have  been  given  for  railway  and  wagon  trains  to  move 
to  Poj)e  with  least  possible  delay. 

I  am  having  inspections  made  of  all  the  forts  around  the  city 
by  members  of  my  staff,  with  instructions  to  give  all  requisite 
orders. 

I  inspected  Worth  and  Ward  myself  this  evening;  found  them 
in  good  order. 

Reports,  so  far  as  heard  from,  are  favorable  as  to  condition  of 
works. 

Au^.  29,  10  P.M. — Your  despatch  received.  Franklin's  corps 
has  been  ordered  to  march  at  six  o'clock  to-morrow  morning. 
Sumner  has  about  14,000  infantry,  without  cavalry  or  artillery, 
here.  Cox*s  brigade  of  four  regiments  is  here,  with  two  bat- 
teries of  artillery.  Men  of  two  regiments,  much  fatigued,  came 
in  to-day.  Tyler's  brigade  of  three  new  regiments,  but  little 
drilled,  is  also  here  ;  all  these  troops  will  be  ordered  to  hold 
themselves  ready  to  march  to-morrow  morning,  and  all  except 
Franklin's  to  await  further  orders. 

If  you  wish  any  of  them  to  move  towards  Manassas,  please 
inform  me. 

Col.   Wagner,  2d  N.  Y.  Artillery,  has  just  come  in  from  the 


5l8  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

front.  He  reports  strong  infantry  and  cavalry  force  of  rebels 
near  Fairfax  Court-House ;  reports  rumors  from  various  sources 
that  Lee  and  Stuart,  with  large  forces,  are  at  Manassas  ;  that  the 
enemy,  with  120,000  men,  intend  advancing  on  the  forts  near 
Arlington' and  Chain  bridge,  with  a  view  of  attacking  Washington 
and  Baltimore. 

Gen.  Barnard  telegraphs  me  to-night  that  the  length  of  the 
line  of  fortifications  on  this  side  of  the  Potomac  requires  2,000 
additional  artillerymen,  and  additional  troops  to  defend  intervals, 
according  to  circumstances ;  at  all  events,  he  says  an  old  regi- 
ment should  be  added  to  the  force  at  Chain  bridge,  and  a  few 
regiments  distributed  along  the  lines  to  give  confidence  to  our 
new  troops.  I  agree  with  him  fully,  and  think  our  fortifications 
along  the  upper  part  of  our  line  on  this  side  the  river  very  unsafe 
with  their  present  garrisons,  and  the  movements  of  the  enemy 
seem  to  indicate  an  attack  upon  those  works. 

Aug,  30,  11.30  A.M. — Your  telegram  of  9  a.m.  received.  Ever 
since  Gen.  Franklin  received  notice  that  he  was  to  march  from 
Alexandria  he  has  been  endeavoring  to  get  transportation  from 
the  quartermaster  at  Alexandria,  but  he  has  uniformly  been  told 
that  there  was  none  disposable,  and  his  command  marched  with- 
out wagons.  After  the  departure  of  his  corps  he  procured  twenty 
wagons,  to  carry  some  extra  ammunition,  by  unloading  Banks's 
supply-train. 

Gen.  Sumner  endeavored,  by  application  upon  the  quarter- 
master's department,  to  get  wagons  to  carry  his  reserve  ammuni- 
tion, but  without  success,  and  was  obliged  to  march  with  what  he 
could  carry  in  his  cartridge-boxes. 

I  have  this  morning  directed  that  all  my  headquarters  wagons 
that  are  landed  be  at  once  loaded  with  ammunition  for  Sumner 
and  Franklin  ;  but  they  will  not  go  far  towards  supplying  the 
deficiency. 

Eighty-five  wagons  were  got  together  by  the  quartermasters 
last  night,  loaded  with  subsistence,  and  sent  forward  at  one  a.m. 
with  an  escort  via  Annandale.  Every  effort  has  been  made  to 
carry  out  your  orders  promptly.  The  great  difficulty  seems  to 
consist  in  the  fact  that  the  greater  part  of  the  transportation  on 
hand  at  Alexandria  and  Washington  has  been  needed  for  current 
supplies  of  the  garrisons.  Such  is  the  state  of  the  case  as  repre- 
sented to  me  by  the  quartermasters,  and  it  appears  to  be  true. 

I  take  it  for  granted  that  this  has  not  been  properly  explained 
to  you. 

On  the  morning  of  the  30th  heavy  artillery-firing  was  heard  in 
the  direction  of  Fairfax  Court-House,  which  I  reported  to  the 
general-in-chief  : 


VOLUNTEER  SERVICE,  5 19 

Aug.  30,  9.15  A.M. — Heavy  artillery  firing  is  now  in  progress 
in  direction  of  Fairfax  Court-House;  there  has  been  a  good  deal 
of  it  for  two  or  three  hours.  I  hear  it  so  distinctly  that  I  should 
judge  it  to  be  this  side  of  Fairfax.  Have  not  yet  been  able  to 
ascertain  the  cause.  It  seems  that  the  garrisons  in  the  works  on 
north  side  of  Potomac  are  altogether  too  small. 

At  eight  A.M.  the  following  was  sent  to  Gen.  J.  G.  Barnard  in 
Washington : 

Aug.  30,  8  A.M. — I  yesterday  sent  nearly  a  regiment  of  cav- 
alry to  report  to  you  for  scouting  on  north  bank  of  Potomac. 
Three  brigades  of  Sumner's  are  on  both  sides  of  Chain  bridge, 
and  thence  to  Tennallytown.  The  rest  of  this  corps  near  Arling- 
ton and  Corcoran.  I  have  nothing  in  hand  here  at  all — not  a 
man.  You  had  better  ask  for  some  more  raw  troops  on  north 
side. 

At  8.20  A.M.  the  following  was  sent  to  Gen.  Bumside  at 
Falmouth : 

Aug.  30,  8.20  A.M. — Telegram  of  midnight  received.  Use 
your  discretion  about  the  cavalry.  I  have  only  three  squadrons,, 
two  of  which  with  Franklin.  I  expect  some  to-day.  Do  not 
strip  yourself  of  anything.  Your  information  about  Pope  sub- 
stantially confirmed  from  this  side.  His  troops  are  at  Centre- 
ville.  Supplies  have  gone  to  him  by  rail  and  by  wagon.  Secesh 
has  missed  his  first  coup.  We  will  soon  see  what  his  second  is  to 
be. 

At  eleven  a.m.  the  following  telegram  was  sent  to  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

Aug.  30,  II  A.M. — Have  ordered  Sumner  to  leave  (i)  one 
brigade  in  vicinity  of  Chain  bridge,  and  to  move  the  rest  via 
Columbia  pike  on  Annandale  and  Fairfax  Court-House. 

Is  this  the  route  you  wish  them  to  take  ?  He  and  Franklin 
are  both  instructed  to  join  Pope  as  promptly  as  possible. 

Shall  Couch  move  out  also  when  he  arrives  ? 

On  the  same  day  I  received  the  following  from  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

*^Aug.  30,  1.45  P.M. — Ammunition,  and  particularly  for  artil- 
lery, must  be  immediately  sent  forward  to  Centreville  for  Gen. 
Pope.     It  must  be  done  with  all  possible  despatch." 


520  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

To  which  this  reply  was  made : 

Aug.  30,  2.10  P.M. — I  know  nothing  of  the  calibres  of  Pope's 
artillery.  All  I  can  do  is  to  direct  my  ordnance  officer  to  load 
up  all  the  wagons  sent  to  him.  I  have  already  sent  all  my  head- 
quarters wagons.  You  will  have  to  see  that  wagons  are  sent  from 
Washington.  I  can  do  nothing  more  than  give  the  order  that 
every  available  wagon  in  Alexandria  shall  be  loaded  at  once. 

The  order  to  the  brigade  of  Sumner  that  I  directed  to  remain 
near  Chain  bridge  and  Tennallytown  should  go  from  your  head- 
■quarters  to  save  time.  I  understand  you  to  intend  it  also  to 
move.  I  have  no  sharpshooters  except  the  guard  around  my 
camp.  I  have  sent  off  every  man  but  those,  and  will  now  send 
them  with  the  train,  as  you  direct.  I  will  also  send  my  only 
remaining  squadron  of  cavalry  with  Gen.  Sumner.  I  can  do«no 
more.  You  now  have  every  man  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac 
who  is  within  my  reach. 

The  War  Department  now  issued  the  following  order: 

"War  Department,  Aug.  30,  1862. 

"  The  following  are  the  commanders  of  the  armies  operating 
in  Virginia : 

"  Gen.  Bumside  commands  his  own  corps,  except  those  that 
have  been  temporarily  detached  and  assigned  to  Gen.  Pope. 

"  Gen.  McClellan  commands  that  portion  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  that  has  not  been  sent  forward  to  Gen.  Pope's  com- 
mand. 

"Gen.  Pope  commands  the  Army  of  Virginia  and  all  the 
forces  temporarily  attached  to  it. 

"All  the  forces  are  under  the  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  Hal- 
leck,  general-in-chief. 

"E.    D.    TOWNSEND, 

"  Assist.  Adj. 'Gen.** 

I  was  informed  by  Col.  Townsend  that  the  above  order  was 
published  by  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War.  The  following 
despatch  was  sent  to  Gen.  Barnard  at  Washington  the  same 
day  : 

Aug.  30,  3.20  P.M. — Your  telegram  to  Gen.  Williams  received. 
Of  course  everything  is  under  your  charge  as  usual.  Upon  arriv- 
ing here  and  finding  the  ^tate  of  things  uncertain  in  my  front,  I 
took  all  the  means  in  my  power  to  place  affairs  in  a  safe  con- 
dition. At  the  request  of  Gen.  Halleck  I  sent  some  of  my  staff 
officers  to  inspect  the  works.  I  have  placed  Tyler's  regiment  in 
garrison  near  here,  and  ordered  the  (14th)  Fourteenth  Mass.  to 


SENIOR  GENERAL   OFFICER.  52  I 

•duty  again  as  heavy  artillery.  I  have  merely  used  my  authority 
as  the  senior  general  officer  for  duty  to  assist  you,  having  failed 
to  find  you.  The  whole  of  Sumner's  corps  has  been  ordered  to 
the  front  by  Gen.  Halleck.  Couch's  division  will  take  the  same 
direction  as  soon  as  it  arrives.  I  am  now  sending  off  my  camp- 
guard  and  escort — the  last  1  can  do.  Tyler  will,  of  course,  be 
under  your  orders  so  long  as  he  remains  in  the  works. 

I  have  no  more  troops  to  give  you,  and,  as  I  have  no  com- 
mand nor  any  position,  1  shall  not  regard  it  as  my  duty  to  take 
any  further  steps  in  regard  to  the  works,  except  that  1  shall 
always  be  glad  to  confer  with  you  in  regard  to  any  point  about 
which  you  may  be  in  doubt.  1  shall  try  to  see  Gen.  Cox  at 
Upton's  Hill  to-day  or  to-morrow.  I  think  he  ranks  you,  but  his 
command  was  the  only  one  available  for  the  purpose. 

The  following  were  sent  to  Gen.  Halleck  the  same  after- 
noon : 

Aug,  30,  5.15  P.M. — Despatch  just  received  from  Gen.- Cox,  at 
Upton's  Hill,  reports  that  his  cavalry  have  been  to  Fairfax  Court- 
House,  Vienna,  Freedom  Hill,  and  Lewinsville,  and  found  all 
quiet  and  no  enemy  heard  of  in  immediate  neighborhood.  Has 
a  party  out  to  go  to  Dranesville,  if  practicable.  States  that  at 
four  P.M.  Lieut.-Col.  Fowler,  of  14th  Brooklyn,  passed  him 
in  an  ambulance,  wounded,  who  states  that  the  ^ghting  was 
north  of  Little  River  pike,  between  it  and  Thoroughfare  Gap. 
Longstreet  had  passed  through  the  Gap,  which  was  subsequently 
partially  obstructed  by  our  troops,  so  that  it  would  hardly  be 
practicable  as  a  retreat  for  artillery.  Reports  general  result  of 
fighting  in  our  favor,  but  cannot  give  particulars. 

Gen.  Cox  states  that  firing  at  four  p.m.  was  more  rapid  and 
continuous  than  before.     I  still  hear  it. 

Atfg.  30,  7.45*  P.M. — I  am  glad  to  report  the  arrival  of  Col. 
Gregg  with  about  (450)  four  hundred  and  fifty  of  his  regiment, 
the  (8th)  Eighth  Penn.  Cavalry.  Col.  Gregg  will  disembark 
during  the  night  and  lose  no  time  in  getting  his  men  ready  to 
man  h.  More  of  Gen.  Couch's  division  have  arrived.  I  have 
ordered  them  to  disembark  during  the  night.  Have  you  any 
special  orders  for  Gregg?  Couch's  infantry  are  almost  [too] 
good  to  use  as  railway  guards.  It  is  an  excellent  division  ot  vet- 
erans.    Will  you  permit  new  troops  to  be  used  for  the  purpose  ?. 

At  10.30  P.M.  the  following  telegram  was  sent  to  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

Aug,  30,  10.30  P..M. — I  have  sent  to  the  front  all  my  troops, 


^aa^  (^mttms  ^xm;  fit  lb  $fltoirmc> 


^"-^""^     PY^^    ^7^-^»._^,     ^^CC'     A-«^J<-0    y/>->-     '^'^ 


5» 


T  S  Xi  B  Gr  ^.A,  SC 


-^   A^V^     Ot^urU^    u^^i::::  *-«-  ^  «-^$3»*«--c. 


39  sn 


524  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

with  the  exception  of  Couch's  division,  and  have  given  the  orders 
necessary  to  insure  its  being  disposed  of  as  you  directed.  I 
hourly  expect  the  return  of  one  of  my  aides,  who  will  give 
authentic  news  from  the  field  of  battle. 

I  cannot  express  to  you  the  pain  and  mortification  I  have 
experienced  to-day  in  listening  to  the  distant  sound  of  the  firing 
of  my  men.  As  I  can  be  of  no  further  use  here,  I  respectfully 
ask  that,  if  there  is  a  probability  of  the  conflict  being  renewed 
to-morrow,  I  may  be  permitted  to  go  to  the  scene  of  battle  with 
my  staff,  merely  to  be  with  my  own  men,  if  nothing  more ;  they 
will  fight  none  the  worse  for  my  being  with  them.  If  it  is  not 
deemed  best  to  entrust  me  with  the  command  even  of  my  own 
army,  I  simply  ask  to  be  permitted  to  share  their  fate  on  the  field 
of  battle. 

Please  reply  to  this  to-night. 

I  have  been  engaged  for  the  last  few  hours  in  doing  what  I 
can  to  make  arrangements  for  the  wounded.  I  have  started  out 
all  the  ambulances  now  landed. 

As  I  have  sent  my  escort  to  the  front,  I  would  be  glad  to 
take  some  of  Gregg's  cavalry  with  me,  if  allowed  to  go. 

To  which,  on  the  following  day,  I  received  this  answer : 

*^  Aug,  31,  9.18  A.M. — I  have  just  seen  your  telegram  of  11.5 
last  night.  The  substance  was  stated  to  me  when  received,  but 
I  did  not  know  that  you  asked  for  a  reply  immediately.  I  can- 
not answer  without  seeing  the  President,  as  Gen.  Pope  is  in  com- 
mand, by  his  orders,  of  the  department. 

"  I  think  Couch's  division  should  go  forward  as  rapidly  as 
possible  and  find  the  battle-field." 

On  the  same  day  the  following  was  received  from  Gen.  Hal- 
leck : 

^^  Aug.  31,  12.45  P-M- — '^^^  subsistence  department  are  mak- 
ing Fairfax  Station  their  principal  depot.  It  should  be  well 
guarded.  The  officfer  in  charge  should  be  directed  to  secure  the 
depot  by  abatis  against  cavalry.  As  many  as  possible  of  the  new 
regiments  should  be  prepared  to  take  the  field.  Perhaps  some 
more  should  be  sent  to  the  vicinity  of  Chain  bridge." 

At  2.30  P.M.  the  following  despatch  was  telegraphed  to  Gen. 
Halleck  : 

Aug.  31,  2.30  P.M. — Maj.  Haller  is  at  Fairfax  Station  with 
my  provost  and  headquarters  guard  /and  other  troops.     I  have 


HALLECK  TIRED  OUT.  525 

requested  (4)  four  more  companies  to  be  sent  at  once,  and  the 
precautions  you  direct  to  be  taken. 

Under  the  War  Department  order  of  yesterday  I  have  no 
control  over  anything  except  my  staff,  some  one  hundred  men  in 
my  camp  here,  and  the  few  remaining  near  Fort  Monroe.  I  have 
no  control  over  the  new  regiments — do  not  know  where  they  are, 
or  anything  about  them,  except  those  near  here.  Their  com- 
manding officers  and  those  of  the  works  are  not  under  me. 

Where  I  have  seen  evils  existing  under  my  eye  I  have  cor- 
rected them.  I  think  it  is  the  business  of  Gen.  Casey  to  prepare 
the  new  regiments  for  the  field,  and  a  matter  between  him  and 
Gen.  Barnard  to  order  others  to  the  vicinity  of  Chain  bridge. 
Neither  of  them  is  under  my  command,  and  by  the  War  Depart- 
ment order  I  have  no  right  to  give  them  orders. 

To  which  the  following  was  the  answer  from  Gen.  Halleck : 

^^  Aug.  31,  10.7  P.M. — Since  receiving  your  despatch  relating 
to  command,  I  have  not  been  able  to  answer  any  not  of  absolute 
necessity.  I  have  not  seen  the  order  as  published,  but  will  write 
to  you  in  the  morning.  You  will  retain  the  command  of  every- 
thing in  this  vicinity  not  temporarily  belonging  to  Pope's  army  m 
the  field. 

''  I  beg  of  you  to  assist  me  in  this  crisis  with  your  ability  and 
experience.     I  am  entirely  tired  out" 

The  following  reply  was  sent  to  Gen.  Halleck  that  night : 

Aug.  31,  10.25  P-M- — I  ^^™  ready  to  afford  you  any  assistance 
in  my  power,  but  you  will  readily  perceive  how  difficult  an  unde- 
fined position  such  as  I  now  hold  must  be. 

At  what  hour  in  the  morning  can  I  see  you  alone,  either  at 
your  own  house  or  the  office? 

At  7.30  P.M.  the  following  was  sent  to  Gen.  Halleck : 

Atdg.  31,  7.30  P.M. — Having  been  informed  that  there  were 
some  twenty  thousand  stragglers  from  Pope's  army  between  this 
and  Centreville,  all  of  Gregg's  cavalry  have  been  sent  to  endeavor 
to  drive  them  back  to  their  regiments.  Two  hundred  of  8th  III. 
Cavalry  will  be  ready  in  the  morning,  and  two  hundred  and  fifty 
more  as  soon  as  disembarked.  The  armament  of  Forts  Buffalo 
and  Ramsay  is  very  incomplete. 

At  11.30  P.M.  I  telegraphed  the  following  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 
Aj^g^  31,  11.30  P.M. — The  squadron  of  2d  Regular  Cavalry 


526  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

that  I  sent  with  Gen.  Sumner  was  captured  to-day  about  two 
P.M.  some  three  miles  from  Fairfax  Court-House,  beyond  it  on 
the  Little  River  pike,  by  Fitz-Hugh  Lee  with  3,000  cavalry  and 
three  light  batteries. 

I  have  conversed  with  the  first  sergeant,  who  says  that  when 
he  last  saw  them  they  were  within  a  mile  of  Fairfax.  Pope  had 
no  troops  on  that  road,  this  squadron  getting  there  by  mistake. 
There  is  nothing  of  ours  on  the  right  of  Centreville  but  Sum- 
ner's corps.  There  was  much  artillery-firing  during  the  day.  A 
rebel  major  told  the  sergeant  that  the  rebels  had  driven  in  our 
entire  left  to-day.  He  says  the  road  is  filled  with  wagons  and 
stragglers  coming  towards  Alexandria. 

It  is  clear  from  the  sergeant's  account  that  we  were  badly 
beaten  yesterday,  and  that  Pope's  right  is  entirely  exposed. 

I  recommend  that  no  more  of  Couch's  division  be  sent  to  the 
front,  that  Bumside  be  brought  here  as  soon  as  practicable,  and 
that  everything  available  this  side  of  Fairfax  be  drawn  in  at  once, 
including  the  mass  of  the  troops  on  the  railroad.  I  apprehend 
that  the  enemy  will  or  have  by  this  time  occupied  Fairfax  Court- 
House  and  cut  off  Pope  entirely,  unless  he  falls  back  to-night 
via  Sangster's  and  Fairfax  Station. 

I  think  these  orders  should  be  sent  at  once.  I  have  no  con- 
fidence in  the  dispositions  made  as  I  gather  them.  To  speak 
frankly — and  the  occasion  requires  it — there  appears  to  be  a 
total  absence  of  brains,  and  I  fear  the  total  destruction  of  the 
army.  I  have  some  cavalry  here  that  can  carry  out  any  orders 
you  may  have  to  send.  The  occasion  is  grave,  and  demands 
grave  measures.  The  question  is  the  salvation  of  the  country. 
I  learn  that  our  loss  yesterday  amounted  to  15,000.  We  cannot 
afford  such  losses  without  an  object. 

It  is  my  deliberate  opinion  that  the  interests  of  the  nation 
demand  that  Pope  should  fall  back  to-night,  if  possible,  and  not 
one  moment  is  to  be  lost. 

I  will  use  all  the  cavalry  I  have  to  watch  our  right.  Please 
answer  at  once.  I  feel  confident  that  you  can  rely  upon  the 
information  I  give  you. 

I  shall  be  up  all  night,  and  ready  to  obey  any  orders  you  give 
me. 

To  which  this  reply  was  received  from  Gen.  Halleck : 

^^  Sept,  I,  1.30  A.M. — Bumside  was  ordered  up  very  early  yes- 
terday morning.  Retain  remainder  of  Couch's  forces,  and  make 
arrangements  to  stop  all  retreating  troops  in  line  of  works,  or 
where  you  can  best  establish  an  entire  line  of  defence.  My 
news  from  Pope  was  up  to  four  p.m.;  he  was  then  all  right.  I 
must  wait  for  more  definite  information  before  I  can  order  a 
retreat,  as  the  falling  back  on  the  line  of  works  must  necessarily 


THE    WORK  DONE,  527 

be  directed  in  case  of  a  serious  disaster.     Give  me  all  additional 
news  that  is  reliable. 

"  I  shall  be  up  all  night,  and  ready  to  act  as  circumstances 
may  require.  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  gravity  of  the  crisis,  and 
have  been  for  weeks." 

It  will  be  seen  from  what  has  preceded  that  I  lost  no  time  in 
moving  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  the  Peninsula  to  the  sup- 
port of  the  Army  of  Virginia  ;  that  I  spared  no  eflFort  to  hasten 
the  embarkation  of  the  troops  at  Fort  Monroe,  Newport  News, 
and  Yorktown,  remaining  at  Fort  Monroe  myself  until  the  mass 
of  the  army  had  sailed  ;  and  that  after  my  arrival  at  Alexandria 
I  left  nothing  in  my  power  undone  to  forward  supplies  and  rein- 
forcements to  Gen.  Pope.  I  sent  with  the  troops  that  moved  all 
the  cavalry  I  could  get  hold  of — even  my  personal  escort  was 
sent  out  upon  the  line  of  the  railway  as  a  guard,  with  the  provost 
and  camp-guard  at  headquarters — retaining  less  than  100  men, 
many  of  whom  were  orderlies,  invalids,  members  of  bands,  etc. 
All  the  headquarters  teams  that  arrived  were  sent  out  with  sup- 
plies and  ammunition,  none  being  retained  even  to  oiove  the 
headquarters  camp.  The  squadron  that  habitually  served  as  my 
personal  escort  was  left  at  Falmouth  with  Gen.  Bum  side,  as  he 
was  deficient  in  cavalry. 


CHAPTER  XXXL 


[Amf,  24  U  Stfi,  3,  186s.] 

Auf,  24,  SufuUr^y  9.30  A.M^  Ac^uia  creek, — ^We  reached  here 
during  the  night.  Sent  a  despatch  about  wl  to  Halleck,  inform- 
ing him  that  I  had  arriyed  here  and  awaited  orders ;  also  sent 
one  to  Bumside.  ...  I  have  no  reply  as  jet  to  mj  despatches, 
and  am  not  at  all  impatient.  I  learn  that  all  mj  troops  are 
ordered  to  Alexandria  for  embarkation,  so  I  presume  they  will 
be  merged  in  Pope's  army.  If  this  is  the  case  I  will  (if  I  find  it 
proper)  try  for  a  leave  of  absence.  ...  I  learn  nothing  whatever 
of  the  state  of  aflfairs,  not  even  whether  Pope  is  still  falling  back 
or  whether  there  has  been  any  fighting.  So  I  suppose  it  is  all 
ri^t.  I  fancy  that  Pope  is  in  retreat,  thou^  this  is  only  a 
guess  of  mine,  without  anything  to  base  it  on.  I  don't  see  how  I 
can  remain  in  the  service  if  placed  under  Pope  ;  it  would  be  too 
great  a  disgrace,  and  I  can  hardly  think  that  Halleck  would  per- 
mit it  to  be  offered  me.  ...  I  expect  Porter  and  Bumside  here 
in  a  few  minutes,  and  then  will  know  something  of  the  state  of 
affairs,  I  hope.  This  is  a  wretched  place,  utterly  unfit  for  the 
landing  and  supplying  of  a  large  body  of  troops.  They  have  at 
last  found  it  out,  though  H.  insisted  upon  it  that  there  were 
ample  facilities  here  for  all  purposes.  .  .  . 

12.15  P.M. — I  have  seen  Bumside  and  Porter,  and  gained 
some  information  from  them.  I  have  not  one  word  yet  from 
Washington,  and  am  quietly  waiting  here  for  something  to  turn 
up.  I  presume  they  are  discussing  me  now,  to  see  whether  they 
can  get  along  without  me.  .  .  .  They  will  suffer  a  terrible  defeat 
if  the  present  state  of  affairs  continues.  I  know  that  with  God's 
help  I  can  save  them.  .  .  . 

Aug.  25,  I  P.M. —  .  .  .  Was  at  Falmouth  pretty  much  all 
night.  .  .  . 

5a8 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  529 

^^i'  27,  A.M.,  Alexandria, — We  arrived  here  last  night. 
Rose  early ;  reported  to  Washington  that  I  had  arrived,  and  am 
waiting  for  something  to  turn  up.  It  seems  that  some  500  of 
the  enemy's  cavalry  made  a  dash  last  night  and  burned  the  Bull 
Run  railroad  bridge.  I  fear  this  will  cause  much  inconvenience, 
as  the  troops  in  front  are  mainly  dependent  on  the  railroad  for 
supplies.  My  troops  are  getting  pretty  well  into  position :  Por- 
ter between  Fredericksburg  and  the  Rappahannock  Station  ; 
Heintzelman  at  Rappahannock  Station;  Franklin  near  this 
place ;  Sumner  landing  at  Acquia  creek.  I  have  heard  nothing 
new  to-day,  and  don't  know  what  is  going  on  in  front ;  am  ter- 
ribly ignorant  of  the  state  of  affairs,  and  therefore  somewhat 
anxious  to  know.  ...  I  find  all  going  on  well  enough  here. 
Davis  has  just  returned  from  selecting  a  camp  for  headquar- 
ters ;  he  has  picked  out  a  place  between  the  Seminary  (our  old 
camp)  and  the  river,  about  one-half  or  three-quarters  of  a  mile 
from  the  Seminary.  I  shall  go  into  my  tent  this  time  and  not 
trouble  a  house.  With  the  exception  of  the  two  or  three  days  I 
passed  at  Williamsburg  on  our  upward  march,  and  one  night  at 
Fort  Monroe,  I  have  not  slept  in  a  house  since  I  left  you.  I 
know  nothing  definite  yet  in  regard  to  my  fate.  .  .  . 

10.30. — Have  been  again  interrupted  by  telegrams  requiring 
replies.  Halleck  is  in  a  disagreeable  situation  :  can  get  no  infor- 
mation from  the  front,  either  as  to  our  own  troops  or  the  enemy. 
I  shall  do  all  I  can  to  help  him  loyally  and  will  trouble  him  as 
little  as  possible,  but  render  all  the  assistance  in  my  power  with- 
out regard  to  myself  or  my  own  position.  .  .  .  Our  affairs  here 
are  much  tangled  up,  and  I  opine  that  in  a  day  or  two  your  old 
husband  will  be  called  upon  to  unravel  them.  In  the  meantime 
I  shall  be  very  patient,  do  to  the  best  of  my  ability  whatever  I 
am  called  upon  to  do,  and  wait  my  time.  I  hope  to  have  my 
part  of  the  work  pretty  well  straightened  out  to-day.  In  that 
case  I  shall  move  up  to  Washington  this  evening.  .  .  .  Have  just 
heard  that  it  is  probable  that  a  general  engagement  will  be  fought 
to-day  or  to-morrow  near  Warrenton.  ,  .  . 

Aug.  28,  9.30  A.M.,  steamer  "Ariel" — I  am  just  about  starting 
back  for  Alexandria.  I  came  up  here  (Washington)  last  night ; 
reached  Halleck's  house  about  midnight,  and  remained  talking 
with  him  until  three.  ...  I  have  a  great  deal  of  hard  work 


530  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

before  me  now,  but  will  do  my  best  to  perform  it  I  find  Hal- 
leck  well  disposed ;  he  has  had  much  to  contend  against  I  shall 
keep  as  clear  as  possible  of  the  President  and  cabinet ;  endeavor 
to  do  what  must  be  done  with  Halleck  alone ;  so  I  shall  get  on 
better.  Pope  is  in  a  bad  way ;  his  communication  with  Wash- 
ington cut  off,  and  I  have  not  yet  the  force  at  hand  to  relieve 
him.  He  has  nearly  all  the  troops  of  my  army  that  have  ar- 
rived.    I  hope  to  hear  better  news  when  I  reach  Alexandria. 

Aug,  29,  3  P.M. —  ...  I  was  awake  all  last  night,  and  have 
not  had  one  moment  until  now  to  write  to  you.  I  have  a  ter- 
rible task  on  my  hands  now — ^perfect  imbecility  to  correct.  No 
means  to  act  with,  no  authority,  yet  determined,  if  possible,  to 
save  the  country  and  the  capital.  I  find  the  soldiers  all  cling- 
ing to  me ;  yet  I  am  not  permitted  to  go  to  the  post  of  danger  ! 
Two  of  my  corps  will  either  save  Pope  or  be  sacrificed  for  the 
country.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  be  permitted  to  save 
the  capital  or  not  I  have  just  telegraphed  very  plainly  to  the 
President  and  Halleck  what  I  think  ought  to  be  done.  I  ex- 
pect merely  a  contemptuous  silence.  ...  I  am  heart-sick  with 
the  folly  and  ignorance  I  see  around  me.  God  grant  that  I  may 
never  pass  through  such  a  scene  again  !  .  .  . 

9.30  P.M. —  .  .  Late  yesterday  afternoon  a  violent  gale  arose 
and  blew  over  my  tent,  soaking  everything  I  had,  including  this 
note  and  myself.  ...  I  have  been  terribly  busy  since  reaching 
here ;  not  a  moment  have  I  had  to  myself.  I  found  everything 
in  the  most  terrible  confusion — apparently  inextricably  so  ;  but 
affairs  are  now  better.  The  works  on  this  side  of  the  river  are 
in  condition  for  defence.  ...  I  see  the  evening  paper  states 
that  I  have  been  placed  in  command  of  all  the  troops  in  Vir- 
ginia. This  is  not  so.  I  have  no  command  at  present — that  is 
to  say,  I  have  none  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  with  me,  and 
have  merely  "  turned  in  "  on  my  own  account  to  straighten  out 
whatever  I  catch  hold  of.  By  to-morrow  evening  I  hope  to 
have  the  works,  etc.,  in  fair  condition  of  defence.  .  .  .  Pope  has 
been  in  a  tight  place,  but  from  the  news  received  this  evening  I 
think  the  danger  is  pretty  much  over.  To-morrow  will  tell  the 
story.  I  am  terribly  crippled  by  the  want  of  cavalry.  None  of 
mine  have  arrived  except  three  small  squadrons.  I  hope  for 
more  to-night.     There  was  a  terrible  scare  in  Washington  last 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  53 1 

night.  A  rumor  got  out  that  Lee  was  advancing  rapidly  on  the 
Chain  bridge  with  150,000  men.  And  such  a  stampede  !  I  did 
not  get  five  minutes'  consecutive  sleep  all  night,  so  thick  were 
the  telegrams.  ...  I  have  seen  neither  the  President  nor  the 
secretary  since  I  arrived  here ;  have  been  only  once  to  Wash- 
ington, and  hope  to  see  very  little  of  the  place.  I  abominate 
it  terribly.  ...  I  have  no  faith  in  any  one  here,  and  expect  to 
be  turned  loose  the  moment  their  alarm  is  over.  I  expect  I 
got  into  a  row  with  Halleck  to-night.  He  sent  me  a  telegram 
I  did  not  like,  and  I  told  him  so  very  plainly.  He  is  not  a 
refined  person  at  all,  and  probably  says  rough  things  when  he 
don't  mean  them.  .  .  . 

^^g'  3o>  8  A.M. —  .  .  .  Was  awakened  last  night  by  a  few 
scattering  shots  that,  no  doubt,  came  from  some  of  those  very 
raw  troops  that  are  about  here.  Shall  start  soon  after  breakfast 
and  ride  to  Upton's  Hill,  thence  to  the  Chain  bridge  and  along 
the  line  of  forts.  I  want  to  see  all  on  this  side  of  the  river  to- 
day, if  I  can.  No  one  in  Washington  appears  to  know  the  condi- 
tion of  matters,  and  I  have  a  fancy  for  finding  them  out  for  my- 
self. If  I  once  get  matters  reasonably  straight  I  shall  not  trouble 
myself  much  more.  What  I  am  doing  now  is  rather  a  vol- 
unteer affair — not  exactly  my  business ;  but  you  know  that  I 
have  a  way  of  attending  to  most  other  things  than  my  own 
affairs.  .  .  . 

1.30  P.M.,  camp  near  Alexandria, —  ...  I  expected  to  start 
out  on  a  long  ride,  but  have  thus  far  been  detained  by  various 
matters  which  have  kept  me  very  busy.  .  .  .  There  has  been 
heavy  firing  going  on  all  day  long  somewhere  beyond  Bull  Run. 
I  have  sent  up  every  man  I  have,  pushed  everything,  and  am 
left  here  on  the  flat  of  my  back  without  any  command  whatever. 
It  is  dreadful  to  listen  to  this  cannonading  and  not  be  able  to 
take  any  part  in  it.     But  such  is  my  fate.  .  .  . 

9.15  P.M. —  ...  I  feel  too  blue  and  disgusted  to  write  any 
more  now,  so  I  will  smoke  a  cigar  and  try  to  get  into  a  better 
humor.  They  have  taken  all  my  troops  from  me !  I  have  even 
sent  off  my  personal  escort  and  camp-guard,  and  am  here  with 
a  few  orderlies  and  the  aides.  I  have  been  listening  to  the 
sound  of  a  great  battle  in  the  distance.  My  men  engaged  in 
it  and  I  away!     I  never  felt  worse  in  my  life. 


532  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Sunday  (31  J/),  9.30  a.m. —  .  .  .  There  was  a  severe  battle  yes- 
terday, and  almost  exactly  on  the  old  Bull  Run  battle-ground. 
Pope  sent  in  accounts  during  the  day  that  he  was  getting  on 
splendidly,  driving  the  enemy  all  day,  gaining  a  glorious  victory, 
etc.,  etc.  About  three  this  morning  Hammerstein  returned  from 
the  field  (where  I  had  sent  him  to  procure  information),  and  told 
me  that  we  were  badly  whipped,  McDowell's  and  Sigel's  corps 
broken,  the  corps  of  my  own  army  that  were  present  (Porter  and 
Heintzelman)  badly  cut  up  but  in  perfect  order.  Banks  was  not 
engaged.  Franklin  had  arrived  and  was  in  position  at  Centre- 
ville.  Sumner  must  have  got  up  by  this  time.  Couch's  division 
is  about  starting.  It  is  probable  that  the  enemy  are  too  much 
fatigued  to  renew  the  attack  this  morning,  perhaps  not  at  all  to- 
day ;  so  that  time  may  be  given  to  our  people  to  make  such 
arrangements  as  will  enable  them  to  hold  their  own.  I  tele- 
graphed last  evening  asking  permission  to  be  with  my  troops ; 
received  a  reply  about  half  an  hour  ago  from  Halleck  that  he 
would  have  to  consult  the  President  first !  If  they  refuse  to  let 
me  go  out  I  think  I  shall  feel  obliged  to  insist  upon  a  leave,  or 
something  of  the  kind,  the  moment  the  question  of  the  existing 
battle  is  settled.  I  feel  like  a  fool  here,  sucking  my  thumbs  and 
doing  nothing  but  what  ought  to  be  done  by  junior  officers.  I 
leave  it  all  in  the  hands  of  the  Almighty.  I  will  try  to  do  my 
best  in  the  position  that  may  be  assigned  to  me,  and  be  as  patient 
as  I  can.  .  .  . 

10.45. —  ...  I  feel  in  that  state  of  excitement  and  anxiety 
that  I  can  hardly  keep  still  for  a  moment.  I  learn  from  Ham- 
merstein that  the  men  in  front  are  all  anxious  for  me  to  be  with 
them.     It  is  too  cruel ! 

12.30  P.M. — A  short  time  since  I  saw  the  order  defining  com- 
mands. Mine  is  that  part  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  not  sent 
to  Pope.  As  all  is  sent  there,  I  am  left  in  command  of  nothing — 
a  command  I  feel  fully  competent  to  exercise,  and  to  which  I  can 
do  full  justice.     I  am  going  to  write  a  quiet,  moderate  letter  to 

Mr. presently,  explaining  to  him  the  exact  state  of  the  case, 

without  comment,  so  that  my  friends  in  New  York  may  know  all. 
.  .  .  Everything  is  too  uncertain  and  unsafe  around  Washington 
at  present  for  you  to  dream  of  going  there.  As  a  matter  of  self- 
respect,  I  cannot  go  there.  ...  I  do  not  regard  Washington  as 
safe  against  the  rebels.     If  I  can  quietly  slip  over  there  I  will 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  533 

send  your  silver  off.  There  is  an  order  forbidding  any  one 
going  there  without  permission  from  the  War  Department,  and 
I  do  not  care  to  ask  them  for  so  slight  a  favor  as  that.  .  .  . 

Sept,  I,  Washington^  2  p.m. — I  have  only  time  to  tell  you  that 
I  have  been  placed  in  command  of  Washington  and  all  the  garri- 
sons, etc.,  in  the  vicinity,  to  do  the  best  I  can  with  it.  The 
decisive  battle  will  be  fought  to-day  near  Fairfax  Court-House. 
My  headquarters  are  to  be  in  town.  If  the  squall  passes  over, 
and  Washington  is  a  safe  place,  you  shall  come  on  to  see  me,  if 
I  can't  get  off  to  see  you.  .  .  . 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

Recalled  to  save  the  capital — Pope  defeated — ^The  President  appeals  to- 
McClellan — He  accepts  command — Alarm  in  Washington — Enthu- 
siasm of  the  army — The  capital  safe — The  order  of  Sept.  2 — Hal- 
leck's  testimony — Stormy  cabinet  meeting. 

Late  at  night  of  Aug.  31, 1  think,  Maj.  Hammerstein — one  of 
my  aides,  whom  I  had  sent  to  the  front  to  bring  me  news  as  to 
the  real  state  of  affairs — returned,  bringing  a  despatch  from  Pope, 
which  was  to  be  sent  to  Halleck  by  telegraph.  The  information 
Hammerstein  brought  proved  that  Pope's  despatch  was  false 
throughout. 

On  the  I  St  of  Sept.  I  met  Gen.  Halleck  at  his  office  in  Wash- 
ington, who  by  verbal  order  directed  me  to  take  charge  of 
Washington  and  its  defences,  but  expressly  prohibited  me 
from  exercising  any  control  over  the  active  troops  under  Gen. 
Pope. 

At  this  interview  I  told  him  what  I  had  every  reason  to  know 
to  be  the  true  state  of  affairs.  He  doubted  the  accuracy  of  my 
information  and  believed  the  statements  of  Pope.  I  then  told 
him  that  he  ought  to  go  to  the  front  in  person  and  see  what  the 
true  condition  of  affairs  was.  He  said  that  he  was  so  much 
occupied  with  office-duty  that  it  was  impossible  for  him  to  leave. 
I  told  him  that  there  could  be  no  duty  so  important  for  the 
general-in-chief  of  the  armies  as  to  know  the  condition  of  the 
chief  army  of  the  country,  then  actually  fighting  for  the  defence 
of  the  capital,  and  that  his  first  duty  was  to  go  out  and  see  for 
himself  how  matters  stood,  and,  if  need  be,  assume  command  in 
person.  He  merely  repeated  his  reply,  and  I  urged  him  as 
strongly  as  possible  to  follow  my  advice.  He  still  refused,  and 
I  then  urged  him  to  send  out  his  chief  «)f  staff,  Gen.  Cullum,  who 
just  then  entered  the  room,  but  Cullum  said  that  he  could  not 
go.  Then  I  asked  that  Kelton,  his  adjutant-general,  might  be 
sent.  Kelton  cheerfully  offered  to  go,  and  it  was  determined 
that  he  should  start  immediately.     I  took  Kelton  to  one  side  and 

534 


RECALLED   TO  SAVE   THE  CAPITAL,  535 

advised  him  not  to  content  himself  with  merely  seeing  Pope,  but 
also  to  make  it  a  point  to  converse  freely  with  the  general  officers 
and  leam  their  individual  opinions.  Next  morning  while  I  was 
at  breakfast,  about  7  or  7.30  o'clock,  the  President  and  Gen.  Hal- 
leck  came  to  my  house. 

The  President  informed  me  that  Col.  Kelton  had  returned 
and  represented  the  condition  of  affairs  as  much  worse  than  I 
had  stated  to  Halleck  on  the  previous  day;  that  there  were 
30,000  stragglers  on  the  roads ;  that  the  army  was  entirely  de- 
feated and  falling  back  to  Washington  in  confusion.  He  then 
said  that  he  regarded  Washington  as  lost,  and  asked  me  if  I 
would,  under  the  circumstances,  as  a  favor  to  him,  resume  com- 
mand and  do  the  best  that  could  be  done. 

Without  one  moment's  hesitation,  and  without  making  any 
conditions  whatever,  I  at  once  said  that  I  would  accept  the  com- 
mand and  would  stake  my  life  that  I  would  save  the  city.  Both 
the  President  and  Halleck  again  asserted  that  it  was  impossible  to 
save  the  city,  and  I  repeated  my  firm  conviction  that  I  could  and 
would  save  it.  They  then  left,  the  President  verbally  placing  me 
in  entire  command  of  the  city  and  of  the  troops  falling  back 
upon  it  from  the  front. 

He  instructed  me  to  take  steps  at  once  to  stop  and  collect  the 
stragglers,  to  place  the  works  in  a  proper  state  of  defence,  and 
to  go  out  to  meet  and  take  command  of  the  army  when  it  ap- 
proached the  vicinity  of  the  works  ;  then  to  put  the  troops  in  the 
best  position  for  defence — committing  everything  to  my  hands. 
The  President  left  me  with  many  thanks  and  showing  much 
feeling. 

I  immediately  went  to  work,  collected  my  staff,  and  started 
them  in  all  directions  with  the  necessary  orders  to  the  different 
fortifications ;  some  to  the  front  with  orders  for  the  disposition 
of  such  corps  as  they  met,  others  to  see  to  the  prompt  forwarding 
of  ammunition  and  supplies  to  meet  the  retreating  troops. 

In  the  course  of  the  morning  I  signed  a  requisition  for  small 
arms  and  ammunition  upon  the  commandant  of  the  arsenal. 
After  a  time  it  was  brought  back  to  me  with  the  statement  that 
it  could  not  be  filled  for  the  reason  that  the  contents  of  the 
arsenal  were  all  being  put,  or  about  being  put,  on  board  ship  for 
transportation  to  New  York,  or  some  safe  place,  in  accordance 
with  the  orders  of  the  Secretary  of  War  and  general-in-chief,  in 


536  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

order  to  save  the  stores  from  the  enemy.  I  at  once  started  out 
and  succeeded  in  having  the  order  countermanded.  At  the  same 
time  there  was  a  war-steamer  anchored  off  the  White  House,  with 
steam  up,  ready  to  take  off  the  President,  cabinet,  etc.,  at  a 
moment's  notice. 

The  only  published  order  ever  issued  in  regard  to  the  extent 
of  my  command  after  my  interview  with  the  President  on  the 
morning  of  the  2d  was  the  following :  * 

"  War  Department,  Adjutant-General's  Office, 

"Washington,  Sept.  «,  1862. 

"  Maj.-Gcn.  McClellan  will  have  command  of  the  fortifications 
of  Washmgtoh  and  of  all  the  troops  for  the  defence  of  the  capitaL 
"  By  order  of  Maj.-Gen.  Halleck. 

"  E.  D.  TOWNSEND, 

''Assist  Adj.-Gtnr 

I  sent  an  aide  to  Gen.  Pope  with  the  following  letter : 

Headquarters,  Washington,  Sept.  2,  1862. 
Maj\'Gen,  John  Pope^  Commanding  Army  of  Virginia  : 

General  :  Gen.  Halleck  instructed  me  to  repeat  to  you  the 
order  he  sent  this  morning  to  withdraw  your  army  to  Washing- 
ton without  unnecessary  delay.  He  feared  that  his  messenger 
might  miss  you,  and  desired  to  take  this  double  precaution. 

In  order  to  bring  troops  upon  ground  with  which  they  are 
already  familiar,  it  would  be  best  to  move  Porter's  corps  upon 
Upton's  Hill,  that  it  may  occupy  Hall's  Hill,  etc.;  McDowell's  to 
Upton's  Hill ;  Franklin's  to  the  works  in  front  of  Alexandria ; 
Heintzelraan's  to  the  same  vicinity ;  Couch  to  Fort  Corcoran,  or, 
if  practicable,  to  the  Chain  bridge ;  Sumner  either  to  Fort  Albany 
or  to  Alexandria,  as  may  be  most  convenient. 

In  haste,  general,  very  truly  yours, 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  U,  S.  A. 

In  a  very  short  time  I  had  made  all  the  requisite  prepara- 
tions and  was  about  to  start  to  the  front  in  person  to  assume 
command  as  far  out  as  possible,  when  a  message  came  to  me 
from  Gen.  Halleck  informing  me  that  it  was  the  President's 
order  that  I  should  not  assume  command  until  the  troops  had 
reached  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  fortifications. 

*  See  note  A  at  end  of  this  chapter. 


JOY  OF  THE  ARMY.  537 

I  therefore  waited  until  the  afternoon,  when  I  rode  out  to  the 
most  advanced  of  the  detached  works  covering  the  capital. 

I  had  with  me  Colbum,  Key,  and  some  other  aides,  with 
a  small  cavalry  escort,  and  rode  at  once  to  Munson's  Hill. 
About  the  time  I  reached  there  the  infantry  of  King's  division 
of  McDowell's  corps  commenced  arriving,  and  I  halted  them 
and  ordered  them  into  position.  Very  soon — within  twenty 
minutes — a  regiment  of  cavalry  appeared,  marching  by  twos^ 
and  sandwiched  in  the  midst  were  Pope  and  McDowell  with 
their  staff  officers.  I  never  saw  a  more  helpless-looking  head- 
quarters. About  this  time  rather  heavy  artillery-firing  was  heard 
in  the  distance.  When  these  generals  rode  up  to  me  and  the 
ordinary  salutations  had  passed,  I  inquired  what  that  artillery- 
firing  was.  Pope  replied  that  it  was  no  doubt  that  of  the  enemy 
against  Sumner,  who  formed  the  rear-guard  and  was  to  march 
by  the  Vienna  and  Langley  road.  He  also  intimated  that 
Sumner  was  probably  in  a  dilemma.  He  could  give  me  no 
information  of  any  importance  in  relation  to  the  whereabouts 
of  the  different  corps,  except  in  a  most  indefinite  way ;  had 
evidently  not  troubled  his  head  in  the  slightest  about  the  move- 
ments of  his  army  in  retreat,  and  had  coolly  preceded  the  troops, 
leaving  them  to  get  out  of  the  scrape  as  best  they  could.  He 
and  McDowell  both  asked  my  permission  to  go  on  to  Wash- 
ington, to  which  I  assented,  remarking  at  the  same  time  that 
/  was  going  to  that  artillery-firing.  They  then  took  leave  and 
started  for  Washington.     I  have  never  since  seen  Pope. 

Immediately  I  despatched  all  my  aicfes  and  orderlies  with 
instructions  to  the  troops  coming  in  by  the  Alexandria  and 
Central  roads,  retaining  only  Colbum  with  me.  I  borrowed 
three  orderlies  from  some  cavalry  at  hand,  and,  accompanied 
by  them  and  Colbum,  started  across  country  as  rapidly  as  pos- 
sible to  reach  the  Langley  road.  By  the  time  I  reached  that 
road  the  firing  had  ceased,  with  the  exception  of  perhaps  a 
dropping  shot  occasionally.  It  was  after  dark — I  think  there 
was  moonlight — ^by  the  time  I  met  the  first  troops,  which  were, 
I  think,  of  Morell's  division,  5th  corps ;  Porter  had  gone  on  a 
little  while  before  to  make  arrangements  for  the  bivouac  of  his 
troops.  I  was  at  once  recognized  by  the  men,  upon  which  there 
was  great  cheering  and  excitement ;  but  when  I  came  to  the 
regular  division  (Sykes's)  the  scene  was  the  most  touching  I  had 


538  McCLELLAirS  OWN  STORY. 

up  to  that  time  experiencecL  The  cheers  in  front  had  attracted 
their  attention,  and  I  have  been  told  since  by  many  that  the  men 
at  once  pricked  up  their  ears  and  said  that  it  could  only  be 
for  "  Little  Mac."  As  soon  as  I  came  to  them  the  poor  fellows 
broke  through  all  restraints,  rushed  from  the  ranks  and  crowded 
around  me,  shouting,  yeUing,  shedding  tears,  thanking  God  that 
they  were  with  me  again,  and  begging  me  to  lead  them  back  to 
battle.  It  was  a  wonderful  scene,  and  proved  that  I  had  the 
hearts  of  these  men.* 

I  next  met  Sigel's  corps,  and  soon  satisfied  myself  that 
Sumner  was  pursuing  his  march  unmolested,  so  I  sent  on  to 
inform  him  that  I  was  in  command,  and  gave  him  instructions 
as  to  his  march.  I  then  returned  by  the  Chain  bridge  road, 
having  first  given  Sigel  his  orders  ;  and  at  a  little  house  beyond 
Langley  I  found  Porter,  with  whom  I  spent  some  time,  and  at 
length  reached  Washington  at  an  early  hour  in  the  morning. 
Before  the  day  broke  the  troops  were  all  in  pK>sition  to  repulse 
attack,  and  Washington  was  safe. 

•  Sec  note  B. 

A.  Note  by  the  Editor. — This  order  of  Sept.  2,  1862,  was  the  last  order 
•ever  issued  to  Gen.  McClellan  giving  him  any  command.  He  seems 
never  to  have  known  that  it  actually  appeared  in  two  forms  within  twenty- 
four  hours,  first  as  an  order  from  the  President  by  direction  of  the  Secre- 
tary of  War,  second  as  a  simple  order  of  Gen.  Halleck.  The  history  of  its 
origin  and  modification  is  obscure.  The  purposes  of  Secretary  Stanton 
and  Gen.  Halleck  in  its  issue  and  the  change  of  its  form  must  be  left  to 
conjecture,  with  what  light  can  be  thrown  on  it  from  the  events  of  the  time. 
When  these  events  are  seen  in  close  relation  every  honest  mind  must  be 
filled  with  amazement  at  the  duplicity  with  which  McClellan  was  sur- 
rounded. 

The  War  Department  had  occupied  itself  in  giving  out  what  Secretary 
Welles  called  ''exaggerated  rumors,"  but  which  were  pure  fabrications, 
designed  to  convince  the  public  that  McClellan  had  been  the  cause  of 
Pope's  defeat  by  delay  in  forwarding  reinforcements.  Mr.  Stanton  and 
Gen.  Halleck  had  assumed  the  responsibility  of  recalling  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  from  before  Richmond,  thus  releasing  the  enemy  to  fall  on  Pope. 
Every  military  and  common-sense  consideration  had  been  violated.  The 
paramount  purpose  was  to  take  the  army  away  from  McClellan.  since  they 
had  been  unable  to  persuade  Mr.  Lincoln  to  take  McClellan  from  the 
army.  McClellan  had  been  ordered  to  return,  for  the  purpose,  as  he  was 
told,  of  taking  the  command  of  all  the  forces  of  Pope  and  his  own  troops 
combined. 

Having  ordered  the  withdrawal  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  Halleck 


HALLECK'S  TESTIMONY,  539 

and  Stanton  had  made  the  fearful  error  of  not  providing  transportation  for 
it,  and,  when  aware  of  their  blunder,  threw  the  blame  on  McClellan.  He 
arrived  at  Alexandria  on  the  26th  Aug.,  under  Halleck's  direct  command, 
who  assumed  the  responsibility  of  everything,  and  declined  to  give  Mc- 
Clellan any  specific  position.  From  day  to  day  the  country  was  informed, 
by  telegrams  inspired  at  the  War  Department,  that  McClellan  was  delay* 
ing  the  advance  of  troops  to  Pope.  Meantime  McClellan,  doing  his  own 
work,  was  also  doing  Halleck's  work  for  him  as  a  pure  volunteer,  while 
the  latter  was  in  a  hopeless  condition  of  mind,  semi-paralyzed.  The  work 
done  by  McClellan  was  herculean,  in  sending  forward  his  own  troops, 
in  volunteer  inspection  and  adjustment  of  the  defences  of  Washington, 
in  aiding  and  advising  Halleck,  who  was  powerless.  The  despatches  in 
chapter  XXX.,  which  indicate  all  this,  are  but  a  small  portion  of  McClel- 
lan's  orders  and  despatches,  during  the  five  days  after  his  arrival  at  Alex- 
andria, which  he  left  as  part  of  his  memoirs.  I  have  exercised  the  dis- 
cretion given  me  and  reserved  the  remainder  of  these  for  future  publica- 
tion, leaving  here  only  such  and  so  many  as  will  outline  what  the  general 
did  from  Aug.  26  to  Aug.  31.  If  no  one  else  saw,  it  is  clear  from  Mr. 
Lincoln's  despatches  to  McClellan,  and  his  acts  on  Sept.  2,  that  he  saw 
and  knew  what  Halleck  did  not  do,  and  what  McClellan  was  doing,  in 
those  eventful  days. 

Gen.  Halleck  had  written  to  McClellan  on  the  Peninsula,  asking  frank 
co-operation.  McClellan  had  promised  it  heartily,  and  now  gave  it  gal- 
lantly. Ignoring  this,  and  seeking  with  others  to  throw  on  McClellan 
all  the  responsibilities  of  the  five  days.  Gen.  Halleck,  testifying  before  the 
Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War,  stated  that  McClellan  was  placed 
in  command  of  the  fortifications  of  Washington  and  all  the  troops  for  its 
defence  on  the  day  he  arrived  at  Alexandria^  and  that  the  order  of  Sept.  2 
was  only  the  reduction  to  writing  of  that  command.  The  following  is 
Halleck's  testimony: 

"On  his  [Gen.  McClellan's]  arrival  at  Alexandria  he  was  told  to  take 
immediate  command  of  all  the  troops  in  and  about  Washington,  in  addi- 
tion to  those  which  properly  belonged  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  Some 
days  after  he  had  been  verbally  directed  to  take  such  command  he  asked 
for  a  formal  order,  which  was  issued  from  the  adjutant-general's  office. 
The  order  issued  from  the  adjutant-general's  office  was  after  Gen.  Pope's 
army  commenced  falling  back,  and  was  dated  Sept.  2,  but  Gen.  McClellan 
had  been  in  command  ever  since  his  arrival  in  Alexandria.  He  arrived  at 
Alexandria  on  the  26th  of  Aug.  The  formal  order  was  issued  that  he 
might  have  no  difficulty  with  Gen.  Pope's  forces ;  that  they  might  not 
question  his  authority." 

That  this  testimony  of  Gen.  Halleck  was  distinctly  false  is  now  de- 
monstrated beyond  any  dispute  by  the  publication  of  his  own  correspond- 
ence with  McClellan  during  the  period  Aug.  26  to  Aug.  31,  and  by  other 
proofs.  It  is  charity  to  Gen.  Halleck  to  suppose  that  his  mind  and  mem- 
ory were  muddled  by  the  fearful  catastrophe  he  and  Secretary  Stanton 
had  brought  on  the  army  and  country,  so  that,  when  before  the  committee, 
he  had  forgotten  the  countless  facts  which  prove  his  statement  untrue. 
40 


540  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

From  the  26th  to  the  30th  Aug.  his  despatches  to  McCIellan  recog^nized  that 
officer  as  in  command  of  his  own  Army  of  the  Potomac.  On  the  24th 
McCIellan,  arrived  at  Acquia,  had  telegraphed  him  :  '*  Until  I  know  what 
my  command  and  position  are  to  be,  and  whether  you  still  intend  to  place 
me  in  the  command  indicated  in  your  first  letter  to  me,  and  orally  through 
Gen.  Burnside  at  the  Chickahominy,  I  cannot  decide  where  I  can  be  of 
most  use.  If  your  determination  is  unchanged  I  ought  to  go  to  Alex- 
andria at  once.  Please  define  my  position  and  duties."  Halleck  made  no 
reply  to  this  ;  and  from  what  followed  it  is  evident  that  he  had  no  inten- 
tion of  giving  McCIellan  any  command,  it  being  his  and  Mr.  Stanton's  plan 
to  order  all  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  piece  by  piece,  away  from 
McClellan*s  command,  and  discharge  him. 

On  the  27th  Halleck  telegraphed  McCIellan :  "  Take  entire  direction 
of  the  sending  out  troops  from  Alexandria." 

On  the  same  day  McCIellan  telegraphed  Halleck  :  "  Please  inform  me 
at  once  what  my  position  is.  I  do  not  wish  to  act  in  the  dark."  To  this 
Halleck  made  no  reply. 

On  the  29th  McCIellan  telegraphed  both  the  President  and  Gen.  Hal- 
leck :  '*  Tell  me  what  you  wish  me  to  do,  and  I  will  do  all  in  my  power 
to  accomplish  it.  I  wish  to  know  what  my  orders  and  authority  are. 
I  ask  for  nothing,  but  will  obey  whatever  orders  you  give.  I  only 
ask  a  prompt  decision."  To  this  he  received  no  reply,  except  that 
the  President,  replying  to  another  part  of  the  same  despatch,  said:  **  I 
wish  not  to  control.  That  I  leave  to  Gen.  Halleck,  aided  by  your  coun- 
sels." 

The  unexplained  and  embarrassing  position  in  which  Halleck  kept 
McCIellan  at  this  time  is  illustrated  by  many  despatches  which  are  omit- 
ted from  the  present  volume.  Thus,  on  the  29ih  of  Aug.  Gen.  S.  Wil- 
liams. A.  A.  G.  at  McClellan's  camp  near  Alexandria,  telegraphed  Brig.- 
Gen.  James  S.  Wadsworth,  military  governor  of  Washington  :  **  It  is  impor- 
tant that  these  headquarters  should  receive  the  countersign  issued  to  the 
guards  at  the  Long  bridge.  I  was  stopped  late  night  before  last,  return- 
ing to  camp,  and  compelled  to  go  to  your  office  foi  the  countersign. 
Lieut.-Col.  Colbum,  going  to  the  city  last  night  on  important  business 
requiring  despatch,  was  stopped  at  this  end  of  the  bridge  and  had  to  go 
back  to  Fort  Albany.  On  both  occasions  the  officers  of  the  guards,  though 
aware  of  our  positions,  said  they  had  no  discretion." 

On  the  30th,  Assist.  Adj.-Gen.  Williams  telegraphs  Gen.  Wadsworth  : 
*' In  the  absence  of  orders  defining  the  limits  of  his  command  Gen. 
McCIellan  issues  a  countersign  to-day  to  the  troops  of  the  Army  of  the 
Potomac  in  this  vicinity.  It  is  *  Malvern.*  If  yours  is  different  he  will  be 
obliged  to  you  to  communicate  it,  and  also  to  instruct  the  guards  at  the 
Long  bridge  to  recognize  ours.  Do  you  know  what  command  furnishes 
the  guard  for  the  Virginia  end  of  the  Long  bridge?" 

A  duplicate  of  the  first  part  of  this  same  despatch  was  sent  the  same 
day  to  Gen.  John  P.  Slough,  military  governor  of  Alexandria,  where  Gen. 
McClellan's  own  headquarters  then  were.     ObviouMy  McCIellan  was  not 


McCLELLAirs  COMMAND,  54 1 

at  this  time  "  in  command  of  all  the  troops  in  and  about  Washington,'' 
Gen.  Halleck*s  testimony  that  he  was  notwithstanding. 

On  the  30th  Gen.  McCIellan  telegraphed  Gen.  Barnard,  who  was  in 
command  of  the  military  defences  of  Washington:  *' I  have  no  more 
troops  to  give  you,  and,  as  I  have  no  command  nor  any  position,  I  shall 
not  regard  it  as  my  duty  to  take  any  further  steps  in  regard  to  the  works." 

On  the  same  day  McCIellan  telegraphed  Haileck  :  **  You  now  have 
every  man  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  who  is  within  my  reach."  This 
despatch  announced  to  Gen.  Halleck  and  Mr.  Stanton  the  completion  of 
their  purpose  in  recalling  the  Army  of  the  Potomac — namely,  to  remove 
it  from  McClellan's  command.  Their  response  was  now  prompt ;  and 
McCIellan  received  the  first  reply  to  his  repeated  requests  to  know  what 
his  position  was,  in  these  words  :  '*  Gen.  McCIellan  commands  that  por- 
tion of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  that  has  not  been  sent  forward  to  Gen. 
Pope's  command."  McClellan's  command  was  thus  reduced  to  less  than 
a  hundred  men,  many  of  whom  were  maimed  or  sick  soldiers,  around 
his  tent  at  Alexandria.  Secretary  Stanton  himself  issued  this  order, 
which  was,  of  course,  intended  to  be  insulting  to  McCIellan,  and  which 
was  received  with  much  exultation  in  Washington  by  those  who  had  de- 
sired McClellan's  dismissal.  At  this  moment  it  was  believed  in  Wash- 
ington that  Pope  was  victorious  and  McCIellan  finally  crushed.  Of  course, 
when  McClellan's  command  was  thus  defined  by  this  order,  in  terms  whose 
exactness  was  intended  to  be  contemptuous,  he  was  not  in  command  of 
any  fortifications  or  any  troops  for  the  defence  of  anything. 

On  the  night  of  the  30th  McCIellan  made  a  vain  appeal  to  Halleck  to 
be  allowed  to  go  to  the  front  and  be  with  his  troops  in  battle. 

On  the  afternoon  of  the  31st,  in  reply  to  an  order  from  Halleck,  Mc- 
CIellan telegraphed  him  :  '*  Under  the  War  Department  order  of  yesterday 
I  have  no  control  over  anything  except  my  staff,  some  one  hundred  men 
in  my  camp  here,  and  the  few  remaining  near  Fort  Monroe.  I  have  no 
control  over  the  new  regiments.  .  .  .  Their  commanding  officers,  and 
those  of  the  works,  are  not  under  me." 

At  ten  P.M.  of  the  31st  Halleck  replied  to  this  :  '*  I  have  not  seen  the 
order  as  published  "  (implying  that  he  had  seen  it  in  Stanton's  draft  form), 
and  adds:  "  You  will  retain  command  of  everything  in  this  vicinity  not 
temporarily  to  be  Pope's  army  in  the  field.  I  beg  of  you  to  assist  me  in 
this  crisis  with  your  ability  and  experience.     I  am  entirely  tired  out." 

This  indefinite  despatch  was  the  first  hint  of  any  order  placing  McCIel- 
lan in  command  of  the  fortifications.  On  the  same  day  McCIellan  had 
telegraphed  to  Gens.  Wadsworth,  Barnard,  and  Slough  :  *'  Gen.  McCIel- 
lan commands  so  few  troops  that  he  declines  issuing  a  countersign,  but 
he  will  be  obliged  if  you  will  furnish  him  daily  with  yours,  as  he  may 
have  occasion  to  send  to  Washington  during  the  night." 

At  10.25  P.M.,  on  receipt  of  HaIIeck*s  despairing  telegram,  McCIellan 
replied  :  "  I  am  ready  to  afford  you  any  assistance  in  my  power,  but  you 
will  readily  perceive  how  difficult  an  undefined  position  such  as  I  now 
hold  must  be.     At  what  hour  in  the  moming  can  I  see  yuu  alone?*' 


MR.  LINCOLN'S  TRUST,  543 

coin  then  intended  to  give  to  McClcllan  discretionary  powers  over  military 
matters,  and  neither  of  them  stopped  to  choose  words. 

Gen.  McCIellan  went  swiftly  to  work.  Gen.  Halleck  went  to  inform 
Secretary  Stanton  of  the  overthrow  of  their  plans  by  the  recall  of  McCIel- 
lan to  command. 

It  may  here  be  noted  that  Mr.  Chase  was  in  error  when,  on  Sept.  19, 
he  said  (Warden,  p.  480)  that  Halleck's  telegram  of  Aug.  31,  asking 
McCIellan  to  help  him,  **  announced  Halleck's  surrender  to  McCIellan.'* 
While  Mr.  Chase  was  right  enough  in  thus  confessing  the  existence  of  a 
war  against  McCIellan,  he  might  well  have  spared  his  criticisms,  since  it 
will  appear  in  the  progress  of  McClellan's  narrative  that  Halleck  main- 
tained the  war  with  much  vigorous  disregard  of  truth,  to  the  end  which 
was  sought.  The  events  of  Sept.  2,  which  must  be  pursued,  amply  attest 
his  position  in  the  conflict,  which  now  became  more  serious  when  the 
President  appeared  to  stand  firmly  for  McCIellan. 

Hitherto  no  one  has  appreciated  the  state  of  mind  of  Mr.  Lincoln  at 
this  appalling  moment,  when  he  realized  the  condition  into  which  he  and 
the  country  had  been  brought  by  the  conspiracy  of  Mr.  Stanton  and  his 
associate  politicians  against  the  army  and  its  commander.  Mr.  Lincoln 
was  a  sagacious  man.  He  knew  thoroughly  the  character  of  the  men  who 
were  around  him  ;  had  always  known  it.  He  had  felt  the  importance  of 
avoiding  an  open  rupture  with  Congress,  which  was  under  the  control  of 
the  extreme  radical  wing  of  the  party.  He  had  yielded  much  to  this  con- 
sideration. 

Now,  when  he  heard  from  Mr.  Stanton  and  Gen.  Halleck  that  the 
capital  was  lost,  and  that  they  had  issued  orders  for  the  abandonment  of 
the  arsenal  and  flight  of  the  administration,  he  scouted  their  attempts  to 
transfer  their  responsibility  for  the  catastrophe  to  McCIellan,  and  went  at 
once  to  the  general,  with  unbounded  confidence  in  him.  The  quiet  assur- 
ances he  received  from  the  man  who  had  never  deceived  him  relieved  his 
apprehensions  of  the  loss  of  the  capital,  and  he  went  away  better  prepared 
to  meet  his  cabinet,  who  were  expecting  the  enemy  around  and  in  the  city. 
He  still  shrank  from  an  open  rupture  with  Mr.  Chase,  Mr.  Stanton,  the 
majority  of  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War,  and  Congress 
which  had  become  subservient  to  their  leadership.  He  had  hitherto  pre- 
vented a  division  of  the  party,  which  was  always  imminent.  Doubtless 
his  avowed  principle  of  **  not  swapping  horses  while  crossing  a  stream  " 
influenced  him  to  his  present  determination  to  go  on  with  the  same  cabinet 
officers  in  council  and  the  same  general  in  command. 

But  when  he  left  McCIellan,  the  simple,  lo3ral  soldier  and  servant  of 
the  people,  he  had  to  face  men  of  a  very  different  character.  The  cabinet 
meeting  which  now  followed  was  in  many  respects  the  most  remarkable 
ever  held  in  Washington.  Mr.  Lincoln  entered  it  knowing  his  men.  He 
knew  that  Mr.  Chase  and  Mr.  Stanton  were  Presidential  candidates,  guid- 
ing, each  in  his  own  peculiar  way,  their  official  conduct  and  acts  as  his 
rivals  for  the  next  nomination.  He  was  perfectly  aware  that  in  this  criti- 
cal time  they  were  ready  to  throw  on  him  all  the  responsibility  of  the 


544  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

impending  ruin,  (he  loss  of  the  capital,  if  that  were  to  be,  the  end  of  the 
Union  itself  which  might  possibly  follow.  That  they  would  seek  to  save 
their  own  reputations  at  any  cost  to  his  was  a  matter  of  course  with  such 
men.  He  had  this  advantage  in  meeting  them,  that  McClellan's  confi- 
dence had  reassured  him,  while  (hey  were  still  in  a  state  of  wild  alarm. 

Believing  the  loss  of  Washington  and  Maryland  inevitable,  and  anti- 
cipating the  judgment  of  the  people  uf  the  North,  they  forgot  all  respect 
fur  their  chief  and  became  insolent  in  their  treatment  of  him.  Stanton 
reproached  him  with  giving;  personal  orders  to  McClellan,  creating  confu- 
sion, making  neither  Halleck  nor  McClellan  responsible,  and  then  dis- 
avowed any  responsibility  of  the  War  Department  for  the  position.  Chase 
told  him  that  any  engineer  officer  would  have  done  as  well  as  the  general 
he  had  selected,  and  boldly  added  that  by  placing  McClellan  in  command 
he  had  given  the  capital  to  the  enemy. 

It  was  plain  that  the  two  Presidential  candidates  in  the  cabinet  had 
determined  on  their  course — to  assure  the  country  that  Mr.  Lincoln  was 
alone  responsible  for  the  ruin  they  believed  inevitable. 

The  President  retained  his  dignity  and  maintained  at  first  a  calm  atti- 
tude. He  had  been  accustomed  for  months  to  the  nagging  policy  of  the 
secretaries ;  but  it  now  became  so  personal  and  bitter  that  he  was  at  last 
driven  to  the  exclamation,  never  before  or  since  uttered  by  a  President  of 
the  United  States,  that  he  would  gladly  resign  his  high  office. 

The  history  of  this  tempestuous  cabinet  meeting  forms  an  important 
part  of  the  history  of  the  war,  and  throws  strong  light  on  the  story  of 
McClellan  and  the  Army  of  the  Potomac. 

In  his  private  diary  (Warden,  p.  459)  Mr.  Chase  thus  describes  it : 

**  The  Secretar}'  of  War  came  in.  In  answer  to  some  inquiry  the  fact 
was  stated  by  the  President  or  the  secretary  that  McClellan  had  been 
placed  in  command  of  the  forces  to  defend  the  capital — or  rather,  to  use 
the  President's  own  words,  *  he  had  set  him  to  putting  these  troops  into 
the  fortifications  about  Washington,'  believing  that  he  could  do  that  thing 
better  than  any  other  man. 

**  I  remarked  that  this  could  be  done  equally  well  by  the  engineer  who 
constructed  the  forts.  .  .  . 

•*  The  Secretar}'  of  War  said  that  no  one  was  now  responsible  for  the 
defence  of  the  capital  ;  that  the  order  to  McClellan  was  g^iven  by  the 
President  direct  to  McClellan,  and  that  Gen.  Halleck  considered  himself 
relieved  from  responsibility,  although  he  acquiesced  and  approved  the 
order  ;  that  McClellan  could  now  shield  himself,  should  anything  go 
wrong,  under  Halleck,  while  Halleck  could  and  would  disclaim  all 
responsibility  for  the  order  given. 

**The  President  thought  Gen.  Halleck  as  much  responsible  as  before, 
and  repeated  that  the  whole  scope  of  the  order  was  simply  to  direct 
McClellan  to  put  the  troops  into  the  fortifications  and  command  them  for 
the  defence  of  Washington. 

**  I  remarked  .  .  .  that  I  could  not  but  feel  that  giving  command  to 
him  was  equivalent  to  giving  Washington  to  the  rebels.  This  and  more  I 
said.  .  .  . 

**  The  President  said  it  distressed  him  exceedingly  to  find  himself 
differing  on  such  a  point  from  the  Secretary  of  War  and  the  Secretary  of 
the  Treasury;  that  he  would  gladly  resign  his  place  ;  but  that  he  could  not 


THE  CABINET  MEETING.  545 

see  who  could   do  the   work   wanted  as  well  as  McClellan.     I   named 
Hooker,  or  Sumner,  or  Burnside,  either  of  whom  would  do  the  work  better." 

Mr.  Gideon  Welles,  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  in  his  book,  **  Lincoln 
and  Seward,"  New  York,  1874,  page  194,  says : 

"  At  the  stated  cabinet  meeting  on  Tuesday,  the  2d  of  Sept  ,  while  the 
whole  community  was  stirred  up  and  in  confusion,  and  affairs  were  grow- 
ing bevond  anything  that  had  previously  occurred,  Stanton  entered  the 
council-room  a  few  moments  in  advance  of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and  said,  with 
great  excitement,  he  had  just  learned  from  Gen.  Halleck  that  the  Presi- 
dent had  placed  McClellan  in  command  of  the  forces  in  Washington. 
The  information  was  surprising,  and,  in  view  of  the  prevailing  excitement 
against  that  officer,  alarming.  The  President  soon  came  in,  and,  ip  answer 
to  an  inquiry  from  Mr.  Chase,  confirmed  what  Stanton  had  stated.  Gene- 
ral regret  was  expressed,  and  Stanton,  with  some  feeling,  remarked  that 
no  order  to  that  effect  had  issued  from  the  War  Department.  The  Presi- 
dent, calmly  but  with  some  emphasis,  said  the  order  was  his,  and  he 
would  be  responsible  for  it  to  the  country.  .  .  .  Before  separating  the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury  expressed  his  apprehension  that  the  reinstate- 
ment  of  McClellan  would  prove  a  national  calamity." 

Mr.  Montgomery  Blair,  Postmaster-General,  in  private  letters,  from 
which,  now  in  the  hands  of  the  editor,  the  iollowing  extracts  are  taken, 
says : 

Under  date  April  22, 1870:  **  The  bitterness  of  Stanton  on  the  rein- 
statement of  McClellan  you  can  scarcely  conceive.  He  preferred  to  see 
the  capital  fall.  .  .  .  McClellan  was  bound  to  go  when  the  emergency  was 
past,  and  Halleck  and  Stanton  furnished  a  pretence.^' 


«» 


Under  date  April  3,  1879:  *' The  folly  and  disregard  of  public  inte- 
rests thus  exhibited  would  be  incredible  but  that  the  authors  of  this  intrigue, 
Messrs.  Stanton  and  Chase,  when  the  result  of  it  came,  and  I  proposed  the 
restoration  of  McClellan  to  command,  and  to  prevent  the  completion  of 
ruin  by  the  fall  of  this  capital,  actually  declared  that  they  would  prefer  the 
loss  of  the  capital  to  the  restoration  of  McClellan  to  command.  Yet  these  arc 
the  men  who  have  been  accounted  by  a  large  portion  of  our  countrymen  as 
the  civil  heroes  of  the  war,  whilst  McClellan,  who  saved  the  capital,  was 
dismissed.  .  .  ." 

Whatever  changes  of  mind  Mr.  Lincoln  subsequently  underwent  may 
with  probability  be  attributed  to  the  causes  already  indicated — his  personal 
confidence  in  McClellan  on  one  hand,  and  his  desire  to  avoid  a  rupture 
with  the  radical  wing  of  his  party  on  the  other  hand.  His  adherence  at 
this  moment  to  his  adopted  plan,  m  face  of  the  violence  of  the  secretaries, 
was  a  notable  exhibition  of  firmness. 

Meantime  McClellan,  heedless  of  the  renewed  war  in  his  rear,  devoted 
his  attention  to  the  enemy  in  front.  But  when,  acting  on  the  trust  imposed 
by  the  President,  he  was  about  to  go  out  to  meet  the  retreating  army,  Hal- 
leck stopped  him  with  the  information  that  the  President  had  limited  his 
command  to  the  fortifications.  Under  all  the  circumstances  we  may  take 
leave  to  doubt  whether  any  such  order  came  from  the  President.    It  was 


546  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

contradictor}'  to  the  spirit  of  the  morning  interview,  and  merciless  to  an 
army  pursued  by  a  victorious  enemy. 

At  some  time  during,  the  early  part  of  the  day  the  order  of  Sept.  2  was 
prepared  by  Gen.  Halleck  and  telegraphed  throughout  the  country  in  the 
following  form  : 

•*  Headquarters  of  the  Army, 

•*  Adjutant  General's  Office, 

*•  Washington,  Sept.  2,  1862. 

"  By  direction  of  the  President,  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  will  have  com- 
mand of  the  fortifications  of  Washington  and  of  all  the  troops  for  the 
defence  of  the  capital. 

••  By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

**E.  D.  Townsend. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  Mr.  Stanton  had  declared  with  '*  some 
feeling,"  as  Mr.  Welles  puts  it,  that  no  such  order  had  issued  from  the 
War  Department.  But  this  order  had  issued,  as  from  the  Secretary  of 
War. 

Later  hi  the  day,  and  of  course  after  Gen.  Halleck's  interview  with 
Sccretar}'  Stanton,  it  reappeared  in  the  form  following  : 


«( 


War  Department, 
"  Adjutant-General's  Office, 

**  Washington,  Sept.  2,  1862. 

"Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  will  have  command  of  the  fortifications  of 
Washington  and  of  all  the  troops  for  the  defence  of  the  capital. 

**  By  order  of  Maj.-Gen.  Halleck. 

**E,  D.  Townsend, 

••  A,  A:^Gen:* 

The  history  of  its  origin  and  modification  is  certainly  obscure.  Little 
light  is  thrown  on  it  by  the  following,  which  is  an  extract  from  an  official 
letter  from  the  adjutant-general's  office,  dated  March  i,  1886,  and  signed 
J.  C.  Kelton,  Assist.  Adj. -Gen.  Col.  Kelton  was  the  officer  on  Gen.  Hal- 
leck's staff  who  had  brought  the  intelligence  of  the  condition  of  Gen. 
Pope's  command  on  the  morning  of  Sept.  2.  It  is  therefore  clear  that 
the  first  draft  of  the  order  was  made  that  morning  ;  but  whether  before 
or  after  Gen.  Halleck  had  consulted  with  Mr.  Stanton  does  not  appear. 
Col.  Kelton  says  : 

"  It  appears  from  the  records  that  a  draft  of  General  Order  No.  122 
was  written  by  Col.  J.  C.  Kelton,  then  assistant  adjutant-general,  head- 
quarters of  the  army,  Sept.  2,  1862,  with  request  that  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend 
number  and  issue  the  same,  and  have  it  published  in  the  Stat,  The  gene- 
ral order  was  prepared  accordingly  by  Col.  E.  D.  Townsend,  Assist.  Adj.- 
Gen.,  and,  having  been  submitted  to  Gen.  Halleck,  was  the  same  day 
returned  by  Col.  Kelton  to  Col.  Townsend,  amended  ar  it  now  stands." 

Whether  McClellan,  when  he  received  Halleck's  message  forbidding 


RECEPTION  BY  THE  ARMY.  547 

him  to  go  beyond  the  fortifications,  recognized  an  intent  to  interfere 
between  him  and  the  President's  unlimited  trust  we  cannot  know.  He 
obeyed  the  instruction.  But  when  in  the  afternoon,  at  Upton's  Hill,  the 
farthest-out  fortification,  he  met  Pope  and  McDowell  leading  the  retreat 
into  Washington,  and  heard  the  sound  of  artillery-firing  on  the  Army  of 
the  Potomac,  abandoned  to  their  fate  without  a  commander,  he  left  the 
fortifications  and  the  orders  of  Gen.  Halleck  behind  him,  and  crossed 
country  to  the  sound  of  the  enemy's  cannon. 

From  that  time  he  acted  on  his  own  judgment,  as  seemed  to  him  best 
for  the  country,  and,  "  with  the  halter  around  his  neck,"  led  the  army  on 
the  swiftest  and  most  brilliant  campaign  in  its  histor>',  to  the  victories  of 
South  Mountain  and  Antietam. 

The  order  of  Sept.  2  remained  in  force  thereafter.  It  perhaps 
explains  some  differences  between  the  reports  of  officers  in  the  field  and 
those  in  Washington  in  regard  to  supplies,  as  all  horses,  ammunition, 
and  supplies  furnished  to  troops  in  and  around  Washington  could  pro- 
perly be  charged  and  reported  as  furnished  to  McCiellan*s  command. 

It  is  not  probable  that  Mr.  Lincoln's  attention  was  ever  called  to  the 
existence  of  this  order.  For  it  is  a  remarkable  fact  thar,  when  he  finally 
consented  to  displace  McClellan,  he  gave  the  order  that  he  **  be  relieved 
from  the  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  " — a  command  which 
Gen.  McClellan  had  not  held  by  any  authority  since  Aug.  30. 


B. — Capt.  William  H.  Powell,  of  the  4th  Regular  Infantry,  in  a  letter 
to  the  Cintury^  dated  Fort  Omaha,  Neb.,  March  12,  1885,  thus  describes 
this  scene  \Century^  January,  1886,  p.  473]  : 

"  About  four  o'clock  on  the  next  afiemoon,  from  a  prominent  point, 
we  descried  in  the  distance  the  dome  of  the  Capitol.  We  would  be  there  at 
least  in  time  to  defend  it.  Darkness  came  upon  us,  and  still  we  marched. 
As  the  night  wore  on  we  found  at  each  halt  that  it  was  more  and  more 
difficult  to  arouse  the  men  from  the  sleep  they  would  fall  into  apparently 
as  soon  as  they  touched  the  ground.  During  one  of  these  halts,  while 
Col.  Buchanan,  the  brigade  commander,  was  resting  a  little  off  the  road, 
some  distance  in  advance  of  the  bead  of  the  column,  it  being  starlight,  two 
horsemen  came  down  the  road  towards  us.  I  thought  I  observed  a  familiar 
form,  and,  turning  to  Col.  Buchanan,  said  : 

'* '  Colonel,  if  I  did  not  know  that  Gen.  McClellan  had  been  relieved 
of  all  command,  I  should  say  that  he  was  one  of  that  party,'  adding  imme- 
diately, *  I  do  really  believe  it  is  he  !' 

**  Nonsense  !'  said  the  colonel;  '  what  would  Gen.  McClellan  be  doing 
out  in  this  lonely  place,  at  this  time  of  night,  without  an  escort  ?' 

'*The  two  horsemen  passed  on  to  where  the  column  of  troops  was 
lying,  standing,  or  sitting,  as  pleased  each  individual,  and  were  lost  in  the 
shadowy  gloom.  But  a  few  moments  had  elapsed,  however,  when  Capt 
John  D.  Wilkins,  of  the  3d  Infantry  (now  colonel  of  the  5th),  came  running 
towards  Col.  Buchanan,  crpng  out : 

•*  •  Colonel  !  Colonel  !  Oen.  McClellan  is  here  ! ' 

'*  The  enlisted  men  caught  the  sound  Whoever  was  awake  aroused 
his  neighbor.  Eyes  were  rubbed,  and  those  tired  fellows,  as  the  news 
passed  down  the  column,  jumped  to  their  feet  and  sent  up  such  a  hurrah 
as  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  never  heard  before.     Shout  upon  shout 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Maryland  invaded — McClellan  not  to  command  in  the  field — Halleck 
declines  advice  about  Harper's  Ferry — The  North  in  danger — McClel- 
lan assumes  command — The  halter  around  his  neck — McClellan  unre- 
strained— Marching,  and  reorganizing  the  army  on  the  march — Har- 
per's Ferry  lost — McClellan  relieves  it.  but  Miles  surrenders — Frank- 
lin's victory  at  Crampton's  Gap. 

Next  day  I  rode  to  the  front  of  Alexandria,  and  was  engaged 
in  rectifying  the  positions  of  the  troops  and  giving  orders  nec- 
essary to  secure  the  issuing  of  the  necessary  supplies,  etc. 

On  the  3d  the  enemy  had  disappeared  from  the  front  of 
Washington,  and  the  information  which  I  received  induced  me 
to  believe  that  he  intended  to  cross  the  upper  Potomac  into 
Mar)iand.  This  materially  changed  the  aspect  of  afifairs  and 
enlarged  the  sphere  of  operations ;  for,  in  case  of  a  crossing 
in  force,  an  active  campaign  would  be  necessary  to  cover  Balti- 
more, prevent  the  invasion  of  Pennsylvania,  and  clear  Mary- 
land. 

I  therefore,  on  the  3d,  ordered  the  2d  and  12th  corps  to  Ten- 
nallytown,  and  the  9th  corps  to  a  point  on  the  Seventh  street 
road  near  Washington,  and  sent  such  cavalry  as  was  available  to 
the  fords  near  Poolesville,  to  watch  and  impede  the  enemy  in  any 
attempt  to  cross  in  that  vicinity. 

As  soon  as  this  was  done  I  reported  the  fact  to  Gen.  Halleck, 
who  asked  what  general  I  had  placed  in  command  of  those  three 
corps.  I  replied  that  I  had  made  no  such  detail,  as  I  should 
take  command  in  person  if  the  enemy  appeared  in  that  direction. 
He  then  said  that  my  command  included  only  the  defences  of 
Washington,  and  did  not  extend  to  any  active  column  that  might 
be  moved  out  beyond  the  line  of  works ;  that  no  decision  had 
yet  been  made  as  to  the  commander  of  the  active  army.  He 
repeated  the  same  thing  on  more  than  one  occasion  before  the 
final  advance  to  South  Mountain  and  Antietam  took  place. 

Before  I  went   to  the  front  Secretary  Seward  came  to  my 

S4> 


McCLELLAN  ASSUMES  COMMAND.  55  I 

Banks  was  left  in  command,  having  received  his  instructions 
from  me. 

As  the  time  had  now  arrived  for  the  army  to  advance,  and  I 
had  received  no  orders  to  take  command  of  it,  but  had  been 
expressly  told  that  the  assignment  of  a  commander  had  not  been 
decided,  I  determined  to  solve  the  question  for  myself,  and  when 
I  moved  out  from  Washington  with  my  staff  and  personal  escort 
I  left  my  card,  with  P.  P.  C.  written  upon  it,  at  the  White  House, 
War  Office,  and  Secretary  Seward's  house,  and  went  on  my  way. 

I  was  afterwards  accused  of  assuming  command  without 
authority,  for  nefarious  purposes,  and,  in  fact,  fought  the  bat- 
tles of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam  with  a  halter  around  my 
neck ;  for  if  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  had  been  defeated  and  I 
had  survived  I  would,  no  doubt,  have  been  tried  for  assuming 
authority  without  orders,  and,  in  the  state  of  feeling  which  so 
unjustly  condemned  the  innocent  and  most  meritorious  Gen. 
F.  J.  Porter,  I  would  probably  have  been  condemned  to  death. 
I  was  fully  aware  of  the  risk  I  ran,  but  the  path  of  duty  was 
clear  and  I  tried  to  follow  it. 

It  was  absolutely  necessary  that  Lee's  army  should  be  met, 
and,  in  the  state  of  affairs  I  have  briefly  described,  there  could 
be  no  hesitation  on  my  part  as  to  doing  it  promptly. 

Very  few  in  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  doubted  the  favorable 
result  of  the  next  collision  with  the  Confederate  army,  but  in 
other  quarters  not  a  little  doubt  prevailed,  and  the  desire  for 
very  rapid  movements,  so  loudly  expressed  after  the  result  was 
gained,  did  not  make  itself  heard  during  the  movements  preced- 
ing the  battles  ;  quite  the  contrary  was  the  case,  as  I  was  more 
than  once  cautioned  that  I  was  moving  too  rashly  and  exposing 
the  capital  to  an  attack  from  the  Virginia  side. 

As  is  well  known,  the  result  of  Gen.  Pope's  operations  had 
not  been  favorable,  and  when  I  finally  resumed  command  of  the 
troops  in  and  around  Washington  they  were  weary,  disheartened, 
their  organization  impaired,  their  clothing,  ammunition,  and  sup- 
plies in  a  pitiable  condition. 

The  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  thoroughly  exhausted  and 
depleted  by  its  desperate  fighting  and  severe  marches  in  the 
unhealthy  regions  of  the  Chickahominy  and  afterwards  during 
the  second  Bull  Run  campaign.  Its  trains,  administration  ser- 
vices, and  supplies  were  disorganized  or  lacking,  in  consequence 


552  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

of  the  rapidity  and  manner  of  its  removal  from  the  Peninsula, 
as  well  as  from  the  nature  of  its  operations  during  the  second 
Bull  Run  campaign.  In  the  departure  from  the  Peninsula, 
trains,  supplies,  cavalry,  and  artillery  were  often  necessarily  left 
at  Fort  Monroe  and  Yorktown  for  lack  of  vessels,  as  the  impor- 
tant point  was  to  move  the  infantry  divisions  as  rapidly  as  possi- 
ble to  the  support  of  Gen.  Pope.  The  divisions  of  the  Army  of 
Virginia  were  also  exhausted  and  weakened,  and  their  trains  and 
supplies  disorganized  and  deficient  by  the  movements  in  which 
,they  had  been  engaged.* 

Had  Gen.  Lee  remained  in  front  of  Washington  it  would  have 
been  the  part  of  wisdom  to  hold  our  own  army  quiet  until  its 
pressing  wants  were  fully  supplied,  its  organization  restored,  and 
its  ranks  filled  with  recruits— in  brief,  prepared  for  a  campaign. 
But  as  the  enemy  maintained  the  offensive  and  crossed  the  upper 
Potomac  to  threaten  or  invade  Pennsylvania,  it  became  necessary 
to  meet  him  at  any  cost,  notwithstanding  the  condition  of  the 
troops  ;  to  put  a  stop  to  the  invasion,  save  Baltimore  and  Wash- 
ington, and  throw  him  back  across  the  Potomac. 

Nothing  but  sheer  necessity  justified  the  advance  of  the  Army 
of  the  Potomac  to  South  Mountain  and  Antietam  in  its  then  con- 
dition, and  it  is  to  the  eternal  honor  of  the  brave  men  who  com- 
posed it  that  under  such  adverse  circumstances  they  gained  those 
victories ;  for  the  work  of  supply  and  reorganizatioh  was  continued 

♦  The  *'  Army  of  Virginia,"  which  had  been  under  the  command  of 
Gen.  Pope,  ceased  to  exist  on  the  2d  of  Sept.,  1862,  by  force  of  circum- 
stances, and,  so  far  as  appears,  without  any  order  issued.  The  following 
correspondence  is  the  only  known  record  : 

**  Arlington.  Sept.  5,  12.05  p.m. 
*  *  Maj,  -  Gen,  HalUck^  G^  n. 'in-Chief  : 

•*  I  have  just  received  an  order  from  Gen.  McClellan  to  have  my  com- 
mand in  readiness  to  march  with  three  days'  rations,  and  further  details  of 
the  march.  What  is  my  command,  and  where  is  it?  McClellan  has  scat- 
tered it  about  in  all  directions,  and  has  not  informed  me  of  the  position  of 
a  single  regiment.     Am  I  to  take  the  field,  and  under  McClellan's  orders  ? 

'*  J  NO.  Pope, 

**  Maj.'Genr 


**  Washington,  D.C.,  Sept.  5.  1862. 
**  Maj.'Gen.  Pope^  Arlington: 

'*  The  armies  of  the  Potomac   and  Virginia  being  consolidated,  you 
will  report  for  orders  to  the  Secretary  of  War. 

*'  H.  W.  Halleck, 

"  GcnMn-Chiefr 


MARYLAND  CAMPAIGN,  553 

as  best  we  might  while  on  the  march,  and  after  the  close  of  the 
battles  so  much  remained  to  be  done  to  place  the  army  in  condi- 
tion for  a  campaign  that  the  delay  which  ensued  was  absolutely 
unavoidable,  and  the  army  could  not  have  entered  upon  a  new 
campaign  one  day  earlier  than  it  did. 

The  purpose  of  advancing  from  Washington  was  simply  to 
meet  the  necessities  of  the  moment  by  frustrating  Lee's  invasion 
of  the  Northern  States,  and,  when  that  was  accomplished,  to  push 
with  the  utmost  rapidity  the ,  work  of  reorganization  and  supply, 
so  that  a  new  campaign  might  be  promptly  inaugurated  with  the 
army  in  condition  to  prosecute  it  to  a  successful  termination  with- 
out intermission. 

The  advance  from  Washington  was  covered  by  the  cavalry, 
under  Gen.  Pleasonton,  pushed  as  Tar  to  the  front  as  possible, 
and  soon  in  constant  contact  with  the  enemy's  cavalry,  with 
whom  several    well-conducted  and   successful   affairs   occurred. 

Partly  in  order  to  move  men  freely  and  rapidly,  partly  in 
consequence  of  the  lack  of  accurate  information  as  to  the  exact 
position  and  intention  of  Lee's  army,  the  troops  advanced  by 
three  main  roads :  that  near  the  Potomac  by  Offutt's  cross- 
roads and  the  mouth  of  the  Seneca,  that  by  Rockville  to  Frede- 
rick, and  that  by  Brookeville  and  Urbana  to  New  Market.  We 
were  then  in  condition  to  act  according  to  the  development  of 
the  enemy's  plans,  and  to  concentrate  rapidly  in  any  position.  If 
Lee  threatened  our  left  flank  by  moving  down  the  river  road  or 
by  crossing  the  Potomac  at  any  of  the  forks  from  Coon's  Ferry 
upward,  there  were  enough  troops  on  the  river  road  to  hold  him 
in  check  until  the  rest  of  the  army  could  move  over  to  support 
them  ;  if  Lee  took  up  a  position  behind  the  Seneca  near  Frede- 
rick, the  whole  army  could  be  rapidly  concentrated  in  that  direc-  ^ 
tion  to  attack  him  in  force;  if  he  moved  upon  Baltimore  the 
entire  army  could  rapidly  be  thrown  in  his  rear  and  his  retreat 
cut  off  ;  if  he  moved  by  Gettysburg  or  Chambersburg  upon  York 
or  Carlisle  we  were  equally  in  position  to  throw  ourselves  in  his 
rear. 

The  first  thing  was  to  gain  accurate  information  as  to  Lee's 
movements,  and  meanwhile  to  push  the  work  of  supply  and 
reorganization  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

Gen.  Lee  and  I  knew  each  other  well  in  the  days  before  the 
war.    We  had  served  together  in  Mexico  and  commanded  against 


554  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

each  other  in  the  Peninsula.  I  had  the  highest  respect  for  his 
ability  as  a  commander,  and  knew  that  he  was  not  a  general  to 
be  trifled  with  or  carelessly  afforded  an  opportunity  of  striking  a 
fatal  blow.  Each  of  us  naturally  regarded  his  own  army  as  the 
better,  but  each  entertained  the  highest  respect  for  the  endur- 
ance,  courage,  and  fighting  qualities  of  the  opposing  army  ;  and 
this  feeling  extended  to  the  officers  and  men.  It  was  perfectly 
natural  under  these  circumstances  that  both  of  us  shoufd  exer- 
cise a  certain  amount  of  caution  :  I  in  my  endeavors  to  ascertain 
Lee*s  strength,  position,  and  intentions  before  I  struck  the  final 
blow  ;  he  to  abstain  from  any  extended  movements  of  invasion, 
and  to  hold  his  army  well  in  hand  until  he  could  be  satisfied 
as  to  the  condition  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  after  its  second 
Bull  Run  campaign,  and  as  to  the  intentions  of  its  commander. 

The  right  wing,  consisting  of  the  ist  and  9th  corps,  under  the 
command  of  Maj.-Gen.  Burnside,  moved  on  Frederick ;  the  ist 
corps  x'ia  Brookeville,  Cooksville,  and  Ridgeville,  and  the  9th 
corps  r7(i  Damascus  and  New  Market. 

The  2d  and  12th  corps,  forming  the  centre,  under  the  com- 
mand of  Gen.  Sumner,  moved  on  Frederick  ;  the  former  via 
Clarksburg  and  Urbana,  the  1 2th  corps  on  a  lateral  road  between 
Urbana  and  New  Market,  thus  maintaining  the  communication 
with  the  right  wing  and  covering  the  direct  road  from  Frederick 
to  Washington.  The  6th  corps,  under  the  command  of  Gen. 
Franklin,  moved  to  Buckeystown  via  Damestown,  Dawsonville, 
and  Barnesville,  covering  the  road  from  the  mouth  of  the  Mono- 
cacy  to  Rockville,  and  being  in  a  position  to  connect  with  and 
support  the  centre,  should  it  have  been  necessary  (as  was  sup- 
posed) to  force  the  line  of  the  Monocacy. 

Couch's  division  moved  by  the  river  road,  covering  that 
approach,  watching  the  fords  of  the  Potomac,  and  ultimately 
following  and  supporting  the  6th  corps. 

The  following  extracts  from  telegrams  received  by  me  after 
my  departure  from  Washington  will  show  how  little  was  known 
there  about  the  enemy's  movements,  and  the  fears  which  were 
entertained  for  the  safety  of  the  capital.  On  the  9th  of  Sept. 
Gen.  Halleck  telegraphed  me  as  follows : 

*'  Until  we  can  get  better  advices  about  the  numbers  of  the 
enemy  at  Dranesville,   I  think  we  must  be  \"erT  cautious  about 


HALLECK  ANXIOUS.  555 

stripping  too  much  the  forts  on  the  Virginia  side.  It  may  be 
the  enemy's  object  to  draw  off  the  mass  of  our  forces  and  then 
attempt  to  attack  from  the  Virginia  side  of  the  Potomac.  Think 
of  this." 

Again,  on  the  nth  of  Sept.,  Gen.  Halleck  telegraphed  me  as 
follows : 

"  Why  not  order  forward  Keyes  or  Sigel  ?  I  think  the  main 
force  of  the  enemy  is  in  your  front.  More  troops  can  be  spared 
from  here." 

This  despatch,  as  published  by  the  Committee  on  the  Con- 
duct of  the  War,  and  furnished  by  the  general-in-chief,  reads  as 
follows : 

"  Why  not  order  forward  Porter's  corps  or  Sigel's  ?  If  the 
main  force  of  the  enemy  is  in  your  front,  more  troops  can  be 
spared  from  here." 

I  remark  that  the  original  despatch,  as  received  by  me  from 
the  telegraph  operator,  is  in  the  words  quoted  above :  "  /  think 
the  main  force  of  the  enemy"  etc. 

In  accordance  with  this  suggestion  I  asked,  on  the  same  day, 
that  all  the  troops  that  could  be  spared  should  at  once  be  sent  to 
reinforce  me  ;  but  none  came. 

On  the  1 2th  I  received  the  following  telegram  from  his  Excel- 
lency the  President :  "  Governor  Curtin  telegraphs  me  :  *  I  have 
advices  that  Jackson  is  crossing  the  Potomac  at  Williamsport, 
and  probably  the  whole  rebel  army  will  be  drawn  from  Mary- 
land.* "  The  President  adds :  "  Receiving  nothing  from  Har- 
per's Ferry  or  Martinsburg  to-day,  and  positive  information  from 
Wheeling  that  the  line  is  cut,  corroborates  the  idea  that  the 
enemy  is  recrossing  the  Potomac.  Please  do  not  let  him  get  off 
without  being  hurt." 

On  the  13th  Gen.  Halleck  telegraphed  as  follows:  "Until  you 
know  more  certainly  the  enemy's  force  south  of  the  Potomac  you 
are  wrong  in  thus  uncovering  the  capital.  I  am  of  the  opinion 
that  the  enemy  will  send  a  small  column  towards  Pennsylvania 
to  draw  your  forces  in  that  direction,  then  suddenly  move  on 
Washington  with  the  forces  south  of  the  Potomac  and  those  he 
may  cross  over."    Again,  on  the  14th,  Gen.  Halleck  telegraphed 

4« 


556  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

me  that  "  scouts  report  a  large  force  still  on  the  Virginia  side  of 
the  Potomac.     If  so  I  fear  you  are  exposing  your  left  and  rear." 
Again,  as  late  as  the  i6thy  after  we  had  the  most  positive  evi- 
dence that  Lee's  entire  army  was  in  front  of  us,  I  received  the 
following  from  him  : 

"  Yours  of  seven  a.m.  is  this  moment  received.  As  you  give 
me  no  information  in  regard  to  the  position  of  your  forces, 
except  that  at  Sharpsburg,  of  course  I  cannot  advise.  I  think, 
however,  you  will  find  that  the  whole  force  of  the  enemy  in  your 
front  has  crossed  the  river.  I  fear  now  more  than  ever  that  they 
will  recross  at  Harper's  Ferry  or  below,  and  turn  your  left,  thus 
cutting  you  off  from  Washington.  This  has  appeared  to  me  to 
be  a  part  of  their  plan,  and  hence  my  anxiety  on  the  subject. 
A  heavy  rain  might  prevent  it." 

The  importance  of  moving  with  all  due  caution,  so  as  not  to 
uncover  the  national  capital  until  the  enemy's  position  and  plans 
were  developed,  was,  I  believe,  fully  appreciated  by  me ;  and  as 
my  troops  extended  from  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad  to 
the  Potomac,  with  the  extreme  left  flank  moving  along  that 
stream,  and  with  strong  pickets  left  in  rear  to  watch  and  guard 
all  the  available  fords,  I  did  not  regard  my  left  or  rear  as  in 
any  degree  exposed.  But  it  appears  from  the  foregoing  tele- 
grams that  the  general-in-chief  was  of  a  different  opinion,  and 
that  my  movements  were,  in  his  judgment,  too  precipitate,  not 
only  for  the  safety  of  Washington,  but  also  for  the  security  of 
my  left  and  rear. 

The  precise  nature  of  these  daily  injunctions  against  a  pre- 
cipitate advance  may  now  be  perceived.  The  general-in-chief, 
in  his  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the 
War,  says  : 

"  In  respect  to  Gen.  McClellan  going  too  fast,  or  too  far  from 
Washinpjton,  there  can  be  found  no  such  telegram  from  me  to 
him.  He  has  mistaken  the  meaning  of  the  telegrams  I  sent 
him.  I  telegraphed  him  that  he  was  going  too  far,  not  from 
Washington,  but  from  the  Potomac,  leaving  Gen.  Lee  the  oppor- 
tunity to  come  down  the  Potomac  and  get  between  him  and 
Washington.  I  thought  Gen.  McClellan  should  keep  more  on 
the  Potomac,  and  press  forward  his  left  rather  than  his  right,  so 
as  the  more  readily  to  relieve  Harper's  Ferry." 

As  I  can  find  no  telegram  from  the  general-in-chief  recom- 


MARYLAND  CAMPAIGN,  557 

mending  me  to  keep  my  left  flank  nearer  the  Potomac,  I  am 
compelled  to  believe  that  when  he  gave  this  testimony  he  had 
forgotten  the  purport  of  the  telegrams  above  quoted,  and  had 
also  ceased  to  remember  the  fact,  well  known  to  him  at  the  time, 
that  my  left,  from  the  time  I  left  Washington,  always  rested  on 
the  Potomac,  and  that  my  centre  was  continually  in  position  to 
reinforce  the  left  or  right,  as  occasion  might  require.  Had  I 
advanced  my  left  flank  along  the  Potomac  more  rapidly  than  the 
other  columns  marched  upon  the  roads  to  the  right,  I  should 
have  thrown  that  flank  out  of  supporting  distance  of  the  other 
troops  and  greatly  exposed  it ;  and  if  I  had  marched  the  entire 
army  in  one  column  along  the  banks  of  the  river,  instead  of 
upon  five  different  parallel  roads,  the  column,  with  its  trains, 
would  have  extended  about  fifty  miles,  and  the  enemy  might 
have  defeated  the  advance  before  the  rear  could  have  reached 
the  scene  of  action.  Moreover,  such  a  movement  would  have 
uncovered  the  communications  with  Baltimore  and  Washington 
on  our  right,  and  exposed  our  left  and  rear. 

I  presume  it  will  be  admitted  by  every  military  man  that  it 
was  necessary  to  move  the  army  in  such  order  that  it  could  at 
any  time  be  concentrated  for  battle,  and  I  am  of  opinion  that 
this  object  could  not  have  been  accomplished  in  any  other  way 
than  the  one  employed.  Any  other  disposition  of  our  forces 
would  have  subjected  them  to  defeat  in  detached  fragments. 

On  the  loth  of  Sept.  I  received  from  my  scouts  information 
which  rendered  it  quite  probable  that  Gen.  Lee's  army  was  in 
the  vicinity  of  Frederick,  but  whether  his  intention  was  to  move 
towards  Baltimore  or  Pennsylvania  was  not  then  known. 

On  the  nth  I  ordered  Gen.  Bumside  to  push  a  strong  recon- 
noissance  across  the  National  Road  and  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio 
Railroad  towards  New  Market,  and,  if  he  learned  that  the  enemy 
had  moved  towards  Hagerstown,  to  press  on  rapidly  to  Frederick, 
keeping  his  troops  constantly  ready  to  meet  the  enemy  in  force. 
A  corresponding  movement  of  all  the  troops  in  the  centre  and 
on  the  left  wa^  ordered  in  the  direction  of  Urbana  and  Pooles- 
ville. 

On  the  1 2th  a  portion  of  the  right  wing  entered  Frederick, 
after  a  brisk  skirmish  at  the  outskirts  of  the  city  and  in  the 
streets.  On  the  13th  the  main  bodies  of  the  right  wing  and 
centre  passed  through  Frederick. 


HARPER'S  FERRY.  559 

^  There  is  no  way  for  Col.  Miles  to  join  you  at  present ;  his 
only  chance  is  to  defend  his  works  till  you  can  open  communica- 
tion with  him." 


It  seems  necessary,  for  a  distinct  understanding  of  this  mat- 
ter, to  state  that  I  was  directed  on  the  12th  to  assume  com- 
mand of  the  garrison  of  Harper's  Ferry  as  soon  as  I  should  open 
communications  with  that  place,  and  that  when  I  received  this 
order  all  communication  from  the  direction  in  which  I  was 
approaching  was  cut  off.  Up  to  that  time,  however.  Col.  Miles 
could,  in  my  opinion,  have  marched  his  command  into  Pennsyl- 
vania by  crossing  the  Potomac  at  Williamsport  or  above ;  and 
this  opinion  was  confirmed  by  the  fact  that  Col.  Davis  marched 
the  cavalry  part  of  Col.  Miles's  command  from  Harper's  Ferry 
on  the  14th,  taking  the  main  road  to  Hagerstown,  and  he  en- 
countered no  enemy  except  a  small  picket  near  the  mouth  of 
the  Antietam. 

Before  I  left  Washington,  and  when  there  certainly  could 
have  been  no  enemy  to  prevent  the  withdrawal  of  the  forces  of 
Col.  Miles,  I  recommended  to  the  proper  authorities  that  the 
garrison  of  Harper's  Ferry  should  be  withdrawn  via  Hagers- 
town, to  aid  in  covering  the  Cumberland  valley  ;  or  that,  taking 
up  the  pontoon  bridge  and  obstructing  the  railroad  bridge,  it 
should  fall  back  to  the  Maryland  Heights  and  there  hold  out 
to  the  last. 

In  this  position  it  ought  to  have  maintained  itself  for  many 
days.  It  was  not  deemed  proper  to  adopt  either  of  these  sug- 
gestions ;  and  when  the  matter  was  left  to  my  discretion  it  was 
too  late  for  me  to  do  anything  but  endeavor  to  relieve  the  gar- 
rison. I  accordingly  directed  artillery  to  be  fired  by  our  advance 
at  frequent  intervals  as  a  signal  that  relief  was  at  hand.  This 
was  done,  and,  as  I  afterwards  learned,  the  reports  of  the  cannon 
were  distinctly  heard  at  Harper's  Ferry.  It  was  confidently 
expected  that  Col.  Miles  would  hold  out  until  we  had  carried 
the  mountain-passes  and  were  in  condition  to  send  a  detachment 
to  his  relief.  The  left  was  therefore  ordered  to  move  through 
Crampton's  Pass  in  front  of  Burkittsville,  while  the  centre  and 
right  marched  upon  Turner's  Pass  in  front  of  Middletown. 

It  may  be  asked,  by  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  the 
topography  of  the  country  in  the  vicinity  of  Harper's  Ferry,  why 


560  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY,    , 

Franklin,  instead  of  marching  his  column  over  the  circuitous 
road  from  Jefferson  tna  Burkittsville  and  Brownsville,  was  not 
ordered  to  move  along  the  direct  turnpike  to  Knoxville,  and 
thence  up  the  river  to.  Harper's  Ferry. 

It  was  for  the  reason  that  I  had  received  information  that 
the  enemy  were  anticipating  our  approach  in  that  direction, 
and  had  established  batteries  on  the  south  side  of  the.  Potomac 
which  commanded  all  the  approaches  to  Knoxville.  Moreover, 
the  road  from  that  point  winds  directly  along  the  river-bank  at 
the  foot  of  a  precipitous  mountain,  where  there  was  no  oppor- 
tunity of  forming  in  line  of  battle,  and  where  the  enemy  could 
have  placed  batteries  on  both  sides  of  the  river  to  enfilade  our 
narrow  approaching  columns. 

The  approach  through  Crampton's  Pass,  which  debouches 
into  Pleasant  Valley  in  rear  of  Maryland  Heights,  was  the  only 
one  which  afforded  any  reasonable  prospect  of  carrying  that  for- 
midable position  ;  at  the  same  time  the  troops  upon  that  road 
were  in  better  relation  to  the  main  body  of  our  forces. 

On  the  morning  of  the  14th  a  verbal  message  reached  me 
from  Col.  Miles,  which  was  the  first  authentic  intelligence  I  had 
received  as  to  the  condition  of  things  at  Harper's  Ferry.  The 
messenger  informed  me  that  on  the  preceding  afternoon  Mary- 
land Heights  had  been  abandoned  by  our  troops  after  repelling 
an  attack  of  the  rebels,  and  that  Col.  Miles's  entire  force  was 
concentrated  at  Harper's  Ferry,  the  Maryland,  Loudon,  and 
Bolivar  Heights  having  been  abandoned  by  him  and  occupied 
by  the  enemy.  The  messenger  also  stated  that  there  was  no 
apparent  reason  for  the  abandonment  of  the  Maryland  Heights, 
and  that  Col.  Miles  instructed  him  to  say  that  he  could  hold  out 
with  certainty  two  days  longer. 

I  directed  him  to  make  his  way  back,  if  possible,  with  the 
information  that  I  was  approaching  rapidly  and  felt  confident  I 
could  relieve  the  place. 

On  the  same  afternoon  I  wrote  the  following  letter  to  Col. 
Miles,  and  despatched  three  copies  by  three  different  couriers  on 
different  routes.  I  did  not,  however,  learn  that  any  of  these 
men  succeeded  in  reaching  Harper's  Ferry : 

MiDDLETOWN,  Sept.   I4,  1862. 

Colonel  :  The   army   is   being  rapidly    concentrated  here. 


FRANKLIN* S  AD  VANCE.  56 1 

We  are  now  attacking  the  pass  on  the  Hagerstown  road  over  the 
Blue  Ridge.  A  column  is  about  attacking  the  Burkittsville  and 
Boonsborough  Pass.  You  may  count  on  our  making  every  effort 
to  relieve  you.  You  may  rely  upon  my  speedily  accomplishing 
that  object.  Hold  out  to  the  last  extremity.  If  it  is  possible, 
reoccupy  the  Maryland  Heights  with  your  whole  force.  If  you 
can  do  that  I  will  certainly  be  able  to  relieve  you.  As  the 
Catoctin  valley  is  in  our  possession,  you  can  safely  cross  the 
river  at  Berlin  or  its  vicinity,  so  far  as  opposition  on  this  side  of 
the  river  is  concerned.     Hold  out  to  the  last. 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Maj\'Gen,  Commanding, 
Col.  D.  S.  Mile& 

On  the  previous  day  I  had  sent  Gen.  Franklin  the  following 
instructions : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  near  Frederick,  Sept.  13,  1862,  6.20  p.m. 

General  :  I  have  now  full  information  as  to  movements  and 
intentions  of  the  enemy.  Jackson  has  crossed  the  upper  Poto- 
mac to  capture  the  garrison  at  Martinsburg  and  cut  off  Miles's 
retreat  towards  the  west.  A  division  on  the  south  side  of  the 
Potomac  was  to  carry  Loudon  Heights  and  cut  off  his  retreat  in 
that  direction.  McLaws,  with  his  own  command  and  the  division 
of  R.  H.  Anderson,  was  to  move  by  Boonsborough  and  Rohrers- 
ville  to  carry  the  Maryland  Heights.  The  signal  officers  inform 
me  that  he  is  now  in  Pleasant  Valley.  The  firing  shows  that 
Miles  still  holds  out.  Longstreet  was  to  move  to  Boonsborough, 
and  there  halt  with  the  reserve  corps ;  D.  H.  Hill  to  form  the 
rear-guard  ;  Stuart's  cavalry  to  bnng  up  stragglers,  etc.  We 
have  cleared  out  all  the  cavalry  this  side  of  the  mountains  and 
north  of  us.  The  last  I  heard,  from  Pleasonton  he  occupied 
Middletown,'  after  several  sharp  skirmishes.  A  division  of  Bum- 
side's  command  started  several  hours  ago  to  support  him.  The 
whole  of  Bumside's  command,  including  Hooker's  corps,  march 
this  evening  and  early  to-morrow  morning,  followed  by  the  corps 
of  Sumner  and  Banks,  and  Sykes's  division,  upon  Boonsborough 
to  carry  that  position.  Couch  has  been  ordered  to  concentrate 
his  division  and  join  you  as  rapidly  as  possible.  Without  wait- 
ing for  the  whole  of  that  division  to  join,  you  will  move  at 
daybreak  in  the  morning  by  Jefferson  and  Burkittsville  upon  the 
road  to  Rohrersville.  I  have  reliable  information  that  the  moun- 
tain-pass by  this  road  is  practicable  for  artillery  and  wagons.  If 
this  pass  is  not  occupied  by  the  enemy  in  force,  seize  it  as  soon 
as  practicable,  and  debouch  upon  Rohrersville  in  order  to  cut  off 
the  retreat  of  or  destroy  McLaws's  command.     If  you  find  this 


^  M^ISLLAJTS  OWM  STOmr. 


yam  hM  hy  die  tmamy  tm  \a^  ^o«ce;  msak/t  sK  jvar  liisposkiaBs 
U0f  tke  MUtfJk  9md  €^msmtWLt  at  alKas  kssif  as  boor  after  tou 
fcttar  %eircre  krw%  M  die  f»6tt»  oa  dbe  Hajgr«*E4ma  pdcc;.  wboe  die 
wum  t^Af  wVi  MXMk.  Hatrjag  ^^amtd  tbeposK  fosr  distr  viD 
ht  fmt  U/  €Mt  €M^  dtMKfff  or  ct|€Mie  McLzv^s  qimt  iiid  and 
fdieire  0>L  Mftesu  If  t<mi  c€ect  dbis  toqi  will  onkr  bim  to  join 
jroM  a(  <«r^  iridi  all  ta»  dimioaiiic  troofMy  first  destjovii^  die 
lffv%»  c^er  die  Pocoaac,  if  not  aifeadr  done ;  and.  leaving  a 
mttkutm  fpsthtm  to  pfrreac  dbe  caesr  bam  panang  the  ford, 
)r<Mi  irifl  tlien  rettmi  bf  iCokrcrsriOe  oa  the  direct  road  to  Boons- 
hf^^jfif^  if  the  flKoa  cofatam  has  not  socceeded  in  its  attack.  If 
if  haft  foccecdtd,  take  the  road  to  RohrermHe,  to  Shaipsbnxg 
jhhI  WilUaaMffiQprt,  in  order  either  to  cut  off  the  retreat  of  HiU 
and  L^wgpiktreet  Umzrd^  the  Potoaiac,  or  prerent  the  repassage 
of  Jmkifjfn.  Mf  i^^tneral  idea  is  to  cnt  the  enemj  in  two  and  b»t 
him  in  detaiL  I  beHere  I  bare  sediknentlj  explained  mj  inten- 
ticms.  I  ask  of  f  cm,  2t  this  important  moment,  aO  jonr  intellect 
and  the  tttmost  actiritf  that  a  general  can  exercise. 

^  Geo.  B.  McClellax, 

Maj.'Cen.  W.  B.  Fravkuv, 

Qnftmandif^  tik  Corps, 

Again,  on  the  14th,  I  sent  him  the  following : 

Headquarters^  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Frederick,  Sept.  14,  1862,  2  p.m. 

Your  despatch  of  12,50  just  received.  Send  back  to  hurry  up 
Couch.  Mass  your  troops  and  carry  Burkittsville  at  any  cost 
We  shall  have  strong  opposition  at  both  passes.  As  fast  as  the 
troops  come  up  I  will  hold  a  reserve  in  readiness  to  support  you. 
If  you  find  the  enemy  in  very  great  force  at  any  of  these  passes 
let  me  know  at  once,  and  amuse  them  as  best  you  can  so  as  to 
retain  them  there.  In  that  event  I  will  probably  throw  the  mass 
of  the  army  on  the  pass  in  front  of  here.  If  I  carry  that  it  will 
clear  the  way  for  you,  and  you  must  follow  the  enemy  as  rapidly 
as  possible. 

George  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  Commanding. 

Maj.-Gen.  Franklin. 

Gen.  Franklin  pushed  his  corps  rapidly  forward  towards 
Crampton's  Pass,  and  at  about  twelve  o'clock  on  the  14th  ar- 
rived at  Burkittsville,  immediately  in  rear  of  which  he  found  the 
enemy's  infantry  posted  in  force  on  both  sides  of  the  road,  with 
artillery  in  strong  positions  to  defend  the  approaches  to  the 


CRAMPTON*S  CAP,  56 


*» 


pass.  Slocum's  division  was  formed  upon  the  right  of  the  road 
leading  through  the  gap,  and  Smith's  upon  the  left.  A  line 
formed  of  Bartlett's  and  Torbert's  brigades,  supported  by  New- 
ton, whose  activity  was  conspicuous,  advanced  steadily  upon  the 
enemy  at  a  charge  on  the  right.  The  enemy  were  driven  from 
their  position  at  the  base  of  the  mountain,  where  they  were  pro- 
tected by  a  stone  wall,  steadily  forced  back  up  the  slope  until 
they  reached  the  position  of  their  battery  on  the  road,  well  up 
the  mountain.  There  they  made  a  stand.  They  were,  however, 
driven  back,  retiring  their  artillery  in  echelon,  until,  after  an 
action  of  three  hours,  the  crest  was  gained,  and  the  enemy  has- 
tily fled  down  the  mountain  on  the  other  side. 

On  the  left  of  the  road  Brooks's  and  Irvin's  brigades,  of 
Smith's  division,  formed  for  the  protection  of  Slocum's  flank, 
charged  up  the  mountain  in  the  same  steady  manner,  driving 
the  enemy  before  them  until  the  crest  was  carried.  400  prison- 
ers from  seventeen  different  organizations,  700  stand  of  arms,  i 
piece  of  artillery,  and  3  colors  were  captured  by  our  troops  in 
this  brilliant  action.  It  was  conducted  by  Gen.  Franklin  in  all 
its  details.  These  details  are  given  in  a  report  of  Gen.  Frank- 
lin, and  due  credit  awarded  to  the  gallant  officers  and  men  en- 
gaged. 

The  loss  in  Gen.  Franklin's  corps  was  115  killed,  416  wound- 
ed, and  2  missing.  The  enemy's  loss  was  about  the  same.  The 
enemy's  position  was  such  that  our  artillery  could  not  be  used 
with  any  effect.  The  close  of  the  action  found  Gen.  Franklin's 
advance  in  Pleasant  Valley  on  the  night  of  the  14th,  within  three 
and  a  half  miles  of  the  point  on  Maryland  Heights  where  he 
might,  on  the  same  night  or  on  the  morning  of  the  15  th,  have 
formed  a  junction  with  the  garrison  of  Harper's  Ferry  had  it  not 
been  previously  withdrawn  from  Maryland  Heights,  and  within 
six  miles  of  Harper's  Ferry. 

On  the  night  of  the  14th  the  fbllowing  despatch  was  sent  to 
Gen.  Franklin : 

Bolivar,  Sept.  15,  i  a.m. 
General  : 

•  ••••••• 

The  commanding  general  directs  that  you  occupy  with  your 
command  the  road  from  Rohrersville  to  Harper's  Ferry,  placing 
a  sufficient  force  at  Rohrersville  to  hold  that  position  m  case  it 


564  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

should  be  attacked  by  the  enemy  from  Boonsborough.  Endeavor 
to  open  communication  with  Col.  Miles  at  Harper's  Ferry,  at- 
tacking and  destroying  such  of  the  enemy  as  you  may  find  in 
Pleasant  Valley.  Should  you  succeed  in  opening  communica- 
tion with  Col.  Miles,  direct  him  to  join  you  with  his  whole  com- 
mand, with  all  the  guns  and  public  property  he  can  carry  with 
him.  The  remainder  of  the  guns  will  be  spiked  or  destroyed  ; 
the  rest  of  the  public  property  will  also  be  destroyed.  You  will 
then  proceed  to  Boonsborough — which  place  the  commanding 
general  intends  to  attack  to-morrow — and  join  the  main  body  of 
the  army  at  that  place.  Should  you  find,  however,  that  the  ene- 
my has  retreated  from  Boonsborough  towards  Sharpsburg,  you 
will  endeavor  to  fall  upon  him  and  cut  off  his  retreat. 
By  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan. 

Geo.  D.  Ruggles, 

CoL  and  A,  D.  C, 
Gen.  Franklin. 

On  the  15  th  the  following  were  received  from  Gen.  Franklin : 

"At  the  Foot  of  the  Mountain  in  Pleasant  Valley, 
"Three  Miles  from  Rohrersville, 
"  Sept.  15,  8.50  A.M. 

"  General  :  My  command  started  at  daylight  this  morning, 
and  I  am  waiting  to  have  it  closed  up  here.  Gen.  Couch  arrived 
about  ten  o'clock  last  night.  I  have  ordered  one  of  his  brigades 
and  one  battery  to  Rohrersville,  or  to  the  strongest  point  in  its 
vicinity.  The  enemy  is  drawn  up  in  line  of  battle  about  two 
miles  to  our  front — one  brigade  in  sight.  As  soon  as  I  am  sure 
that  Rohrersville  is  occupied  I  shall  move  forward  to  attack  the 
enemy.  This  may  be  two  hours  from  now.  If  Harper's  Ferry 
is  fallen — and  the  cessation  of  firing  makes  me  fear  that  it  has 
— it  is  my  opinion  that  I  should  be  strongly  reinforced. 

•  ••••••• 

"W.  B.  Franklin, 
^^  Maj.'Gen.  Commanding  6th  Corps. 

"  Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan. 

"  Sept.  15,  11  a.m. 

"  General  :  I  have  received  your  despatch  by  Capt.  O'Keefe. 
The  enemy  is  in  large  force  in  my  front,  in  two  lines  of  battle 
stretching  across  the  valley,  and  a  large  column  of  artillery  and 
infantry  on  the  right  of  the  valley  looking  towards  Harper's 
Ferry.  They  outnumber  me  two  to  one.  It  of  course  will  not 
answer  to  pursue  the  enemy  under  these  circumstances.  I  shall 
communicate  with  Burnside  as  soon  as  possible.  In  the  mean- 
time I  shall  wait  here  until  I  learn  what  is  the  prospect  of  rein- 


MILES  S  SURRENDER,  565 

forceraent.  I  have  not  the  force  to  justify  an  attack  on  the  force 
I  see  in  front.  I  have  had  a  very  close  view  of  it,  and  its  posi- 
tion is  very  strong. 

"  Respectfully,       , 

"W.  B.  Franklin, 

^^  Maj.'Gen, 
"  Maj.-Gen.  G.  B.  McClellan, 

"  Commanding** 

Col.  Miles  surrendered  Harper's  Ferry  at  eight  a.m.  on  the 
15th,  as  the  cessation  of  the  firing  indicated,  and  Gen.  Franklin 
was  ordered  to  remain  where  he  was,  to  watch  the  large  force  in 
front  of  him  and  protect  our  left  and  rear,  until  the  night  of 
the  1 6th,  when  he  was  ordered  to  join  the  main  body  of  the 
army  at  Keedysville,  after  sending  Couch's  division  to  Maryland 
Heights. 

While  the  events  which  have  just  been  described  were  taking 
place  at  Crampton's  Gap,  the  troops  of  the  centre  and  right  wing, 
which  had  united  at  Frederick  on  the  13th,  were  engaged  in  the 
contest  for  the  possession  of  Turner's  Gap. 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  567 

Sept.  5,11  A.M. —  .  .  .  Again  I  have  been  called  upon  to  save 
the  country.  The  case  is  desperate,  but  with  God's  help  I  will 
try  unselfishly  to  do  my  best,  and,  if  He  wills  it,  accomplish  the 
salvation  of  the  nation.  My  men  are  true  and  will  stand  by 
me  till  the  last.  I  still  hope  for  success,  and  will  leave  nothing 
undone  to  gain  it.  .  .  .  How  weary  I  am  of  this  struggle  against 
adversity!  But  one  thing  sustains  me — that  is,  my  trust  in  God. 
I  know  that  the  interests  at  stake  are  so  great  as  to  justify  His 
interference ;  not  for  me,  but  for  the  innocent  thousands,  mil- 
lions rather,  who  have  been  plunged  in  misery  by  no  fault  of 
theirs.  It  is  probable  that  our  communications  will  be  cut  off 
in  a  day  or  two,  but  don't  be  worried.  You  may  rest  assured 
that  I  am  doing  all  I  can  for  my  country,  and  that  no  shame 
shall  rest  upon  you,  wilfully  brought  upon  you  by  me.  .  .  .  My 
hands  are  full,  so  is  my  heart.  .  .  . 

S^pi'  5»  4  P-M- —  ...  It  makes  my  heart  bleed  to  see  the 
poor,  shattered  remnants  of  my  noble  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
poor  fellows !  and  to  see  how  they  love  me  even  now.  I  hear 
them  calling  out  to  me  as  I  ride  among  them,  ''George,  don't 
leave  us  again  !  "  "  They  sha'n't  take  you  away  from  us  again," 
etc.,  etc.  I  can  hardly  restrain  myself  when  I  see  how  fear- 
fully they  are  reduced  in  numbers,  and  realize  how  many  of 
them  lie  unburied  on  the  field  of  battle,  where  their  lives  were 
uselessly  sacrificed.  It  is  the  most  terrible  trial  I  ever  experi- 
enced.    Truly,  God  is  trying  me  in  the  fire.  .  .  . 

Telegram — Washington^  Sept,  7^  2.50  p.m. — ^We  are  all  well 
and  the  entire  army  is  now  united,  cheerful,  and  confident 
You  need  not  fear  the  result,  for  I  believe  that  God  will  give  us 
the  victory.  I  leave  here  this  afternoon  to  take  command  of  the 
troops  in  the  field.  The  feeling  of  the  government  towards  me,  I 
am  sure,  is  kind  and  trusting.  I  hope,  with  God's  blessing,  to 
justify  the  great  confidence  they  now  repose  in  me,  and  will  bury 
the  past  in  oblivion.  A  victory  now  and  we  will  soon  be  to- 
gether. I  send  short  letter  to-day.  God  bless  and  reward  your 
trust  in  Him,  and  all  will  be  well. 

Sept.  7,  2.30  P.M.,  Sunday, —  ...  I  leave  in  a  couple  of  hours 
to  take  command  of  the  army  in  the  field.     I  shall  go  to  Rock- 

\ 


568  McCLBLLA.yr'S,  OWN  STORY. 

villc  tonight  and  start  out  after  the  rebels  to-morrow.  I  shall 
have  nearly  loo^ooc  men,  old  and  new,  and  hope,  with  God's 
blessing,  to  gain  a  decisive  victory. 

^iept.  8,  camp  luar  Jtockmlle. —  .  .  .  You  don't  know  what  a 
task  has  been  imposed  upon  me !  I  have  been  obliged  to  do  the 
best  I  could  with  the  broken  and  discouraged  fragments  of  two 
armies  defeated  by  no  fault  of  mine.  Nothing  but  a  desire  to  do 
my  duty  could  have  induced  me  to  accept  the  command  under 
such  circumstances.  Not  feeling  at  all  sure  that  I  could  do  any- 
thingy  I  felt  that  under  die  circumstances  no  one  else  could  save 
the  country,  and  I  have  not  shrunk  from  the  terrible  task. 
McDowell's  own  men  would  have  killed  him  had  he  made  his 
appearance  among  them ;  even  his  staff  did  not  dare  to  go  among 
his  men.  I  can  afford  to  forgive  and  forget  him.  I  saw  Pope 
and  McDowell  for  a  few  moments  at  Upton's  Hill  when  I  rode 
out  to  meet  the  troops  and  assume  command.  I  have  not  seen 
diem  since ;  I  hope  never  to  lay  eyes  on  them  again.  Between 
them  they  are  responsible  for  the  lives  of  many  of  my  best  and 
bravest  men.  They  have  done  all  diey  could  (unintentionally,  I 
hope)  to  ruin  and  destroy  the  country.  I  can  never  forgive  them 
that.  Pope  has  been  foolish  enough  to  try  to  throw  the  blame  of 
his  defeat  on  the  Army  of  the  Potomac.  He  would  have  been 
wiser  to  have  accepted  his  defeat  without  complaint  I  will 
probably  move  some  four  or  five  miles  further  to  the  front  to- 
morrow, as  I  have  ordered  the  whole  army  forward.  I  expect  to 
fight  a  great  battle  and  to  do  my  best  at  it  I  do  not  think 
secesh  will  catch  me  very  badly. 

Tuesday  mortdng^  g.jo. —  ...  I  hope  to  learn  this  morning 
something  definite  as  to  the  movements  of  secesh,  to  be  enabled 
to  regulate  my  own.  I  hardly  exp>ect  to  equal  the  genius  of  Mr. 
Pope,  but  I  hope  to  waste  fewer  lives  and  to  accomplish  some- 
thing more  than  lame  defeat.  I  have  ordered  a  general  advance 
of  a  few  miles  to-day,  which  will  bring  us  on  the  line  of  the 
Seneca,  and  near  enough  to  secesh  to  ^n^  out  what  he  is  doing, 
and  take  measures  accordingly.  I  shall  follow  him  wherever  he 
goes  and  do  my  best  to  beat  him.  If  I  accomplish  that  the  cam- 
paign will  be  ended. 

9.30. —  .  .  .  The  fact  is,  that  commanding  such  an  army  as 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  569 

this,  picked  up  after  a  defeat,  is  no  very  easy  thing  ;  it  does  take 
a  great  deal  of  time  and  infinite  labor.  In  coming  to  Rockville 
we  arrived  about  midnight.  Yesterday  we  came  out  to  this 
camp,  which  is  about  a  half-mile  from  the  town.  I  am  still 
uncertain  whether  I  shall  move  headquarters  to-day,  or  on  which 
road,  as  that  depends  on  the  information  I  receive  as  to  the 
enemy.  I  probably  won't  go  more  than  four  or  five  miles  in  a 
central  direction.  ...  If  I  can  add  the  defeat  of  secesh  I  think 
I  ought  to  be  entitled  to  fall  back  into  private  life*  .  .  . 

Sept.  9,  camp  near  Rockville,  5  p.m. —  .  .  .  Am  going  out  in  a 
few  minutes  to  ride  over  to  the  camp  of  the  regulars,  whom  I 
have  not  been  to  see  for  a  long  time,  and  who  welcomed  me  so 
cordially  the  other  night,  brave  fellows  that  they  are. 

It  is  hard  to  get  accurate  news  from  the  front.  The  last 
reports  from  Pleasonton  are  that  the  enemy  have  110,000  on  this 
side  of  the  river.  I  have  not  so  many,  so  I  must  watch  them 
closely  and  try  to  catch  them  in  some  mistake,  which  I  hope  to 
do.  My  people  are  mostly  in  front  of  here,  some  six  to  ten 
miles  ;  moved  forward  to-day.  They  are,  I  think,  well  placed  to 
be  concentrated  wherever  it  may  be  necessary,  and  I  want  wno  a 
little  breathing-time  to  get  them  rested  and  in  good  order  for 
fighting.  Most  of  them  will  do  well  now  ;  a  few  days  will  con- 
firm this  still  further,  increase  my  cavalry  force,  and  put  me  in 
better  condition  generally.  I  think  my  present  positions  will 
check  the  advance  into  Pennsylvania  and  give  me  time  to  get 
some  reinforcements  that  I  need  very  much.  ...  I  have  this 
moment  learned  that,  in  addition  to  the  force  on  this  side  of  the 
river,  the  enemy  has  also  a  large  force  near  Leesburg,  so  McC. 
has  a  difficult  game  to  play,  but  will  do  his  best  and  try  to  do  his 
duty. 

Sept  II,  camp  near  Rockville, —  ...  I  have  just  time  before 
starting  to  say  good-by.  ...  I  am  quite  tired  this  morning,  as  I 
did  not  get  back  from  a  ride  to  Bumside's  until  three  a.m.;  the 
night  before  I  was  at  the  telegraph  office  sending  and  receiving 
despatches  until  the  same  hour,  and  how  it  will  be  to-night  is 
more  than  I  can  tell.  ... 

Sept.  12,  3  P.M.,  camp  near  Urbana. — As  our  wagons  are  not 


570  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

yet  up,  and  won't  be  for  a  couple  of  hours,  I  avail  myself  of  the 
"  advantages  of  the  situation  "  to  scrawl  a  few  lines  to  you.  .  .  , 
We  are  travelling  now  through  one  of  the  most  lovely  regions  I 
have  ever  seen,  quite  broken  with  lovely  valleys  in  all  directions, 
and  some  fine  mountains  in  the  distance.  From  all  I  can  gather 
secesh  is  skedaddling,  and  I  don't  think  I  can  catch  him  unless 
he  is  really  moving  into  Pennsylvania  ;  in  that  case  I  shall  catch 
him  before  he  has  made  much  headway  towards  the  interior.  I 
am  beginning  to  think  he  is  making  off  to  get  out  of  the  scrape 
by  recrossing  the  river  at  Williamsport,  in  which  case  my  only 
chance  of  bagging  him  will  be  to  cross  lower  down  and  cut  into 
his  communications  near  Winchester.  He  evidently  don't  want 
to  fight  me,  for  some  reason  or  other.  ...  I  have  never  injured 

,  therefore  I  am  not  called  upon  to  make  any  advances  to 

him,  as  the  professor  seems  to  think  I  ought.  As  for  ever  having 
any  friendly  relation  with  him,  it  is  simply  absurd.  .  .  . 

7.30  P.M. — My  tent  has  been  pitched  some  time.  I  have  given 
all  the  orders  necessary  for  to-morrow,  and  they  have  all  gone 
to  the  various  camps.  ...  I  believe  that  I  have  done  all  in 
my  power  and  that  the  arrangement  of  the  troops  is  good.  I 
learned  an  hour  or  two  ago,  through  the  signal,  that  our  troops 
were  entering  Frederick.  We  certainly  ought  to  be  there  in  re- 
spectable force  by  this  time.  My  only  apprehension  now  is  that 
secesh  will  arrange  to  get  back  across  the  Potomac  at  Williams- 
port  before  I  can  catch  him.  If  he  goes  to  Pennsylvania  I  think 
I  must  overhaul  him  before  long  and  give  him  a  good  lesson. 
If  he  does  go  to  Pennsylvania  I  feel  quite  confident  that  I  can 
so  arrange  things  that  the  chances  will  all  be  that  he  will  never 
return  ;  but  I  presume  he  is  smart  enough  to  know  that  and  to 
act  accordingly.  .  .  .  Interrupted  here  by  the  news  that  we  really 
have  Frederick.  Burnside  and  Pleasonton  both  there.  The  next 
trouble  is  to  save  the  garrison  of  Harper's  Ferry,  which  is,  I  fear, 
in  danger  of  being  captured  by  the  rebels.  They  were  not  placed 
under  my  orders  until  this  afternoon,  although  before  I  left  Wash- 
ington I  strongly  urged  that  they  should  be  withdrawn  at  once, 
as  I  feared  they  would  be  captured.  But  other  counsels  pre- 
vailed, and  I  am  rather  anxious  as  to  the  result.  If  they  are  not 
taken  by  this  time  I  think  I  can  save  them  ;  at  all  events,  nothing 
in  my  power  shall  be  left  undone  to  accomplish  this  result.  I 
feel  sure  of  one  thing  now,  and  that  is  that  my  men  will  fight 


PRIVA  TE  LE  TTERS.  5  7  I 

well.  .  .  .  The  moment  I  hear  that  Harper's  Ferry  is  safe  I  shall 
feel  quite  sure  of  the  result.  .  .  .  The  people  cheered  the  troops 
tremendously  when  they  entered  Frederick.  I  have  thus  far 
found  the  Union  sentiment  much  stronger  in  this  region  than  I 
had  expected.  People  are  disposed  to  be  very  kind  and  polite  to 
me  ;  invite  me  into  their  houses,  offer  me  dinner  and  various 
other  acts  of  kindness  that  are  quite  unknown  in  the  Peninsula. 

Sept.  14,  Frederick,  a.m. — I  have  only  time  to  say  good-morn- 
ing this  bright,  sunny  Sunday^  and  then  start  to  the  front  to  try 
to  relieve  Harper's  Ferry,  which  is  sorely  pressed  by  secesh.  It 
is  probable  that  we  shall  have  a  serious  engagement  to-day,  and 
perhaps  a  general  battle  ;  if  we  have  one  at  all  during  this  opera- 
tion it  ought  to  be  to-day  or  to-morrow.  I  feel  as  reasonably 
confident  of  success  as  any  one  well  can  who  trusts  in  a  higher 
power  and  does  not  know  what  its  decision  will  be.  I  can't 
describe  to  you  for  want  of  time  the  enthusiastic  reception  we 
met  with  yesterday  at  Frederick.  I  was  nearly  overwhelmed  and 
pulled  to  pieces.  I  enclose  with  this  a  little  flag  that  some  en- 
thusiastic lady  thrust  into  or  upon  Dan's  bridle.  As  to  flowers — 
they  came  in  crowds !  In  truth,  I  was  seldom  more  afifccted 
than  by  the  scenes  I  saw  yesterday  and  the  reception  I  met  with ; 

it  would  have  gratified  you  very  much.  ,  .  . 
42 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Entering  Frederick — The  lost  despatch — Advance — The  battle  of  South 

Mountain — Gen.  Scott  hails  McCleilan. 


In  riding  into  Frederick  I  passed  through  Sumner's  corps, 
which  I  had  not  seen  for  some  time.  The  men  and  officers  were 
so  enthusiastic  as  to  show  that  they  had  lost  none  of  their  old 
feeling.  During  the  march  (from  Washington  up)  I  was  much 
with  the  regulars,  generally  encamping  with  them.  I  never  can 
forget  their  constant  enthusiasm  ;  even  when  I  passed  through 
them  several  times  a  day  on  the  march  they  would  jump  up  (if 
at  a  rest)  and  begin  cheering  in  a  way  that  regulars  are  not  wont 
to  do.     Poor  fellows  ! 

Our  reception  at  Frederick  was  wonderful.  Men,  women, 
and  children  crowded  around  us,  weeping,  shouting,  and  pray- 
ing ;  they  clung  around  old  Dan's  neck  and  almost  suffocated 
the  old  fellow,  decking  him  out  with  flags.  The  houses  were  all 
decorated  with  flags,  and  it  was  a  general  scene  of  joy.  The 
secession  expedition  had  been  an  entire  failure  in  that  quarter  ; 
they  received  no  recruits  of  the  slightest  consequence  and  no 
free-will  offerings  of  any  kind. 

It  was  soon  ascertained  that  the  main  body  of  the  enemy's 
forces  had  marched  cut  of  the  city  on  the  two  previous  days, 
taking  the  roads  to  Boonsborough  and  Harper's  Ferry,  thereby 
rendering  it  necessary  to  force  the  passes  through  the  Catoctin 
and  South  Mountain  ridges,  and  gain  possession  of  Boons- 
borough  and  Rohrersville,  before  any  relief  could  be  extended 
to  Col.  Miles  at  Harper's  Ferry. 

On   the   13th  an  order  fell  into  my  hands  issued   by  Gen. 

Lee,  which   fully  disclosed  his   plans,  and  I   immediately  gave 

orders  for  a  rapid  and  \ngorous  forward  movement. 

The  following  is  a  copy  of  the  order  referred  to ; 

57a 


'rtJE  Lost  de spa  toil  575 

"  Headquarters,  Army  of  Northern  Virginia, 

Sept.  9,  1862. 
"  Special  Orders,  No.  191. 

"  The  army  will  resume  its  march  to-morrow,  taking  the 
Hagerstown  road.  Gen.  Jackson's  command  will  form  the 
advance,  and  after  passing  Middletown,  with  such  portion  as  he 
may  select,  will  take  the  route  towards  Sharpsburg,  cross  the 
Potomac  at  the  most  convenient  point,  and  by  Friday  night  take 
possession  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  capture  such  of 
the  enemy  as  may  be  at  Martinsburg,  and  intercept  such  as  may 
attempt  to  escape  from  Harper's  Ferry. 

"  Gen.  Longstreet's  command  will  pursue  the  same  road  as 
far  as  Boonsborough,  where  it  will  halt  with  the  reserve,  supply, 
and  baggage  trains  of  the  army. 

"  Gen.  McLaws,  with  his  own  division  and  that  of  Gen.  R.  H. 
Anderson,  will  follow  Gen.  Longstreet  ;  on  reaching  Middletown 
he  will  take  the  route  to  Harper's  Ferry,  and  by  P'riday  morning 
possess  himself  of  the  Maryland  Heights  and  endeavor  to  cap- 
ture the  enemy  at  Harper's  Ferry  and  vicinity. 

"Gen.  Walker,  with  his  division,  after  accomplishing  the 
object  in  which  he  is  now  engaged,  will  cross  the  Potomac  at 
Cheek's  ford,  ascend  its  right  bank  to  Lovettsville,  take  posses- 
sion ot  Loudon  Heights,  if  practicable,  by  Friday  morning  ; 
Keys's  ford  on  his  left,  and  the  road  between  the  end  of  the 
mountain  and  the  Potomac  on  his  right.  He  will,  as  far  as  prac- 
ticable, co-operate  with  Gen.  McLaws  and  Gen.  Jackson  in  inter- 
cepting the  retreat  of  the  enemy. 

"  Gen.  D.  H.  Hill's  division  will  form  the  rear-guard  of  the, 
army,  pursuing  the  road  taken  by  the  main  body.     The  reserve 
artillery,    ordnance   and   supply-trains,    etc.,  will    precede   Gen. 
Hill. 

"  Gen.  Stuart  will  detach  a  squadron  of  cavalry  to  accompany 
the  commands  of  Gens.  Longstreet,  Jackson,  and  McLaws,  and, 
with  the  main  body  of  the  cavalry,  will  cover  the  route  of  the 
army  and  bring  up  all  stragglers  that  may  have  been  left 
behind. 

"  The  commands  of  Gens.  Jackson,  McLaws,  and  Walker, 
after  accomplishing  the  objects  for  which  they  have  been  de- 
tached, will  join  the  main  body  of  the  army  at  Boonsborough  or 
Hagerstown. 

"  Each  regiment  on  the  march  will  habitually  carry  its  axes 
in  the  regimental  ordnance-wagons,  for  use  of  the  men  at  their 
encampments,  to  procure  wood,  etc. 

"  By  command  of  Gen.  R.  E.  Lee. 

"  R.  H.  Chilton, 

"  Assist  Ad/.-Gettt 

"  Maj.-Gen.  D.  H.  Hill, 

"  Commanding  Division^ 


/ 

574  McCLELLAN'S  OlVN  STORY. 

On  the  morning  of  the  13th  Gen.  Pleasonton  was  ordered  to 
send  Reynolds's  brigade  and  a  section  of  artillery  in  the 
direction  of  Gettysburg,  and  Rush's  regiment  towards  Jefferson 
to  communicate  with  Franklin,  to  whom  the  6th  U.  S.  Cavalry 
and  a  section  of  artillery  had  previously  been  sent,  and  to  pro- 
ceed with  the  remainder  of  his  force  in  the  direction  of  Middle- 
town  in  pursuit  of  the  enemy. 

After  skirmishing  with  the  enemy  all  the  morning,  and  driv- 
ing them  from  several  strong  positions,  he  reached  Turner's  Gap 
of  the  South  Mountain  in  the  afternoon,  and  found  the  enemy  in 
force  and  apparently  determined  to  defend  the  pass.  He  sent 
back  for  infantry  to  Gen.  Burn  side,  who  had  been  directed  to 
support  him,  and  proceeded  to  make  a  reconnoissance  of  the 
position. 

The  South  Mountain  is  at  this  point  about  one  thousand  feet 
in  height,  and  its  general  direction  is  from  northeast  to  south- 
west. The  national  road  from  Frederick  to  Hagerstown  crosses 
it  nearly  at  right  angles  through  Turner's  Gap,  a  depression 
which  is  some  four  hundred  feet  in  depth. 

The  mountain  on  the  north  side  of  the  turnpike  is  divided 
into  two  crests  or  ridges  by  a  narrow  valley,  which,  though  deep 
at  the  pass,  becomes  a  slight  depression  at  about  a  mile  to  the 
north.  There  are  two  country  roads — one  to  the  right  of  the 
turnpike  and  the  other  to  the  left — which  give  access  to  the 
crests  overlooking  the  main  road.  The  one  on  the  left,  called 
the  "  Old  Sharpsburg  road,"  is  nearly  parallel  to,  and  about  half 
a  mile  distant  from,  the  turnpike  until  it  reaches  the  crest  of  the 
mountain,  when  it  bends,  off  to  the  left.  The  other  road,  called 
the  "  Old  Hagerstown  road,"  passes  up  a  ravine  in  the  moun- 
tains about  a  mile  from  the  turnpike,  and,  bending  to  the  left 
over  and  along  the  first  crest,  enters  the  turnpike  at  the  Moun- 
tain House  near  the  summit  of  the  pass. 

On  the  night  of  the  13th  the  positions  of  the  different  corps 
were  as  follows : 

Reno's  corps  at  Middletown,  except  Rodman's  division  at 
Frederick. 

Hooker's  corps  on  the  Monocacy,  two  miles  from  Frederick. 

Sumner's  corps  near  Frederick. 

Banks's  corps  near  Frederick. 

Sykes's  division  near  Frederick. 


SUMNEH'S  CORPS,  575 

Franklin's  corps  at  Buckeystown. 

Couch's  division  at  Licksville. 

The  orders  from  headquarters  for  the  march  on  the  14th  were 
as  follows  : 

13th,  11.30  P.M. — Hooker  to  march  at  daylight  to  Middle- 
town. 

13th,  11.30  P.M. — Sykes  to  move  at  six  a.m.,  after  Hooker,  on 
the  Middletown  and  Hagerstown  road. 

14th,  I  a.m. — Artillery  reserve  to  follow  Sykes  closely. 

13th,  8.45  p.m. — Turner  to  move  at  seven  a.m. 

14th,  9  A.M. — Sumner  ordered  to  take  the  Shookstown  road 
to  Middletown.* 

♦  By  letter,  dated  Boston,  May  19,  1884,  Gen.  F.  A.  Walker  called 
the  attention  of  Gen.  McClellan  to  a  statement  made  by  the  Comte  de 
Paris  in  his  **  History  of  the  Civil  War  in  America/'  attributing  delay  in 
the  advance  from  Frederick  to  Gen.  Sumner  and  the  2d  corps.  The  fol- 
lowing reply,  which  I  find  among  the  papers  relating  to  South  Mountain, 
indicates  Gen.  McClellan's  intention  to  embody  its  substance  in  his  narra- 
tive when  he  should  reach  this  point  in  his  review  : 

32  Washington  Square,  N.  Y.,  May  21,  1884. 

Mv  DEAR  Sir  :  Yours  of  the  19th  has  just  reached  me. 

My  attention  was  never  called  to  the  point  in  question. 

Like  yourself,  I  am  fully  satisfied  as  to  the  candor  and  honesty  of  the 
Comte  de  Paris,  but  his  work  is  not  free  from  unintentional  errors,  of 
which  this  is  an  example. 

My  report  shows  that  at  8.45  p.m.  of  the  13th  the  2d  corps  was  ordered 
to  move  at  seven  a.m.  on  the  14th  by  the  direct  road  to  Middletown,  fol- 
lowing Sykes  at  an  hour's  interval. 

Hooker  did  not  move  as  promptly  as  ordered,  and  this  delayed  Sykes 
and  Sumner.  Therefore  at  nine  a.m.  I  ordered  Sumner  to  take  the  more 
circuitous  road  by  Shookstown,  that  his  march  might  be  free  from  encum- 
brance. 

The  2d  corps  made  its  march  and  arrived  on  the  field  as  rapidly  as  cir- 
cumstances permitted. 

I  was  never  dissatisfied  with  this  march  of  the  2d  corps,  and  never 
criticised  it  to  any  one. 

I  can  imagine  the  2d  corps  and  its  brave  old  commander  slow  in  get- 
ting <7M/  of  a  fight,  but  they  certainly  never  showed  any  hesitation  or  tar- 
diness in  getting  into  battle.  The  promptness  and  energy  with  which 
Sumner  moved  from  Grapevine  bridge  to  the  field  of  Fair  Oaks  is  simply 
one  example  of  the  manner  in  which  that  corps  always  acted  while  under 
my  command.  You  may  rest  assured  that  no  member  of  the  2d  corps  has 
its  honor  more  at  heart,  or  is  more  proud  of  its  uniformly  admirable  con- 
duct, whether  on  the  march  or  in  battle,  than  is  the  commander  under 
whom  it  first  served. 

In  my  account  of  Antietam  I  will  take  care  to  correct  the  error  of  the 
comte. 

And  am  always  your  friend, 

Geo.  B,  McClellan. 

Gen.  F.  A,  Walker. 


576  McCLELlAN'S  OWN  STORV, 

13th,  6.45  P.M. — Couch  ordered  to  move  to  Jefferson  with  his 
whole  division. 

On  the  14th  Gen.  Pleasonton  continued  his  reconnoissance. 
Gibson's  battery  and  afterwards  Benjamin's  battery  (of  Reno's 
corps)  were  placed  on  high  ground  to  the  left  of  the  turnpike, 
and  obtained  a  direct  fire  on  the  enemy's  position  in  the  Gap. 

Gen.  Cox's  division,  which  had  been  ordered  up  to  support 
Gen.  Pleasonton,  left  its  bivouac  near  Middletown  at  six  a.m. 
The  ist  brigade  reached  the  scene  of  action  about  nine  a.m.,  and 
was  sent  up  the  old  Sharpsburg  road  by  Gen.  Pleasonton  to  feel 
the  enemy  and  ascertain  if  he  held  the  crest  on  that  side  in 
strong  force.  This  was  soon  found  to  be  the  case ;  and  Gen. 
Cox  having  arrived  with  the  other  brigade,  and  information  hav- 
ing been  received  from  Gen.  Reno  that  the  column  would  be 
supported  by  the  whole  corps,  the  division  was  ordered  to  assault 
the  position.  Two  20-pounder  Parrotts  of  Simmons's  battery 
and  two  sections  of  McMuUan's  battery  were  left  in  the  rear  in 
position  near  the  turnpike,  where  they  did  good  service  during 
the  day  against  the  enemy's  batteries  in  the  Gap.  Scammon's 
brigade  was  deployed,  and,  well  covered  by  skirmishers,  moved 
up  the  slope  to  the  left  of  the  road  with  the  object  of  turning 
the  enemy's  right,  if  possible.  It  succeeded  in  gaining  the  crest 
and  establishing  itself  there,  in  spite  of  the  vigorous  efforts  of 
the  enemy,  who  was  posted  behind  stone  walls  and  in  the  edges 
of  timber,  and  the  fire  of  a  battery  which  poured  in  canister  and 
case-shot  on  the  regiment  on  the  right  of  the  brigade.  Col. 
Crook's  brigade  marched  in  columns  at  supporting  distance.  A 
section  of  McMuUan's  battery,  under  Lieut.  Croome  (killed  while 
serving  one  of  his  guns),  was  moved  up  with  great  difficulty,  and 
opened  with  canister  at  very  short  range  on  the  enemy's  infantry, 
by  whom  (after  having  done  considerable  execution)  it  was  soon 
silenced  and  forced  to  withdraw. 

One  regiment  of  Crook's  brigade  was  now  deployed  on 
Scammon's  left  and  the  other  two  in  his  rear,  and  they  several 
times  entered  the  first  line  and  relieved  the  regiments  in  front  of 
them  when  hard  pressed.  A  section  of  Sumner's  battery  was 
brought  up  and  placed  in  the  open  space  in  the  woods,  where 
it  did  good  service  during  the  rest  of  the  day. 

The  enemy  several  times  attempted  to  retake  the  crest, 
advancing  with  boldness,  but  were   each   time  repulsed.     They 


SOUTH  MOUNTAIN,  577 

then  withdrew  their  battery  to  a  point  more  to  the  right,  and 
formed  columns  on  both  our  flanks.  It  was  now  about  noon, 
and  a  lull  occurred  in  the  contest  which  lasted  about  two  hours, 
during  which  the  rest  of  the  corps  was  coming  up.  Gen.  Wil- 
cox's division  was  the  first  to  arrive.  When  he  reached  the  base 
of  the  mountain  Gen.  Cox  advised  him  to  consult  Gen.  Pleason- 
ton  as  to  a  position.  The  latter  indicated  that  on  the  right  after- 
wards taken  up  by  Gen.  Hooker.  Gen.  Wilcox  was  in  the  act 
of  moving  to  occupy  this  ground  when  he  received  an  order  from 
Gen.  Reno  to  move  up  the  old  Sharpsburg  road  and  take  a  posi- 
tion to  its  right  overlooking  the  turnpike.  Two  regiments  were 
detached  to  support  Cien.  Cox  at  his  request.  One  section  of 
Cooke's  battery  was  placed  in  position  near  the  turn  of  the  road 
(on  the  crest),  and  opened  fire  on  the  enemy's  batteries  across 
the  Gap.  The  division  was  proceeding  to  deploy  to  the  right  of 
the  road  when  the  enemy  suddenly  opened  (at  one  hundred  and 
fifty  yards)  with  a  battery  which  enfiladed  the  road  at  this  point, 
drove  off  Cooke's  cannoneers  with  their  limbers,  and  caused  a 
temporary  panic  in  which  the  guns  were  nearly  lost.  But  the 
79th  N.  Y.  and  17th  Mich,  promptly  rallied,  changed  front  under 
a  heavy  fire,  and  moved  out  to  protect  the  guns,  with  which  Capt. 
Cooke  had  remained.  Order  was  soon  restored,  and  the  division 
formed  in  line  on  the  right  of  Cox,  and  was  kept  concealed  as 
much  as  possible  under  the  hillside  until  the  whole  line  advanctcl. 
It  was  exposed  not  only  to  the  fire  of  the  battery  in  front,  but 
also  to  that  of  the  batteries  on  the  other  side  of  the  turnpike, 
and  lost  heavily. 

Shortly  before  this  time  Gens.  Bumside  and  Reno  arrived 
at  the  base  of  the  mountain,  and  the  former  directed  the  latter 
to  move  up  the  divisions  of  Gens.  Sturgis  and  Rodman  to  the 
crest  held  by  Cox  and  Wilcox,  and  to  move  upon  the  enemy's 
position  with  his  whole  force  as  soon  as  he  was  informed  that 
Gen.  Hooker  (who  had  just  been  directed  to  attack  on  the  right) 
was  well  advanced  up  the  mountain. 

Gen.  Reno  then  went  to  the  front  and  assumed  the  direction 
of  affairs,  the  positions  having  been  explained  to  him  by  Gen. 
Pleasonton.  Shortly  before  this  time  I  arrived  at  the  point  occu- 
pied by  Gen.  Bumside,  and  my  headquarters  were  located  there 
until  the  conclusion  of  the  action.  Gen.  Sturgis  had  left  his 
camp  at  one  p.m.,  and  reached  the  scene  of  action  about  3.30  p  m. 


578  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Clark's  battery,  of  his  division,  was  sent  to  assist  Cox's  left  by 
order  of  Gen.  Reno,  and  two  regiments  (2d  Md.  and  6th  N.  H.) 
were  detached  by  Gen.  Reno  and  sent  forward  a  short  distance 
on  the  left  of  the  turnpike.  His  division  was  formed  in  rear  of 
Wilcox's,  and  Rodman's  division  was  divided  ;  Col.  Fairchild's 
brigade  being  placed  on  the  extreme  left,  and  Col.  Harland's, 
under  Gen.  Rodman's  personal  supervision,  on  the  right. 

My  order  to  move  the  whole  line  forward  and  take  or  silence 
the  enemy's  batteries  in  front  was  executed  with  enthusiasm. 
The  enemy  made  a  desperate  resistance,  charging  our  advanc- 
ing lines  with  fierceness,  but  they  were  everywhere  routed,  and 
fled. 

Our  chief  loss  was  in  Wilcox's  division.  The  enemy's  bat- 
tery was  found  to  be  across  a  gorge  and  beyond  the  reach  of  our 
infantry  ;  but  its  position  was  made  untenable,  and  it  was  hastily 
removed  and  not  again  put  in  position  near  us.  But  the  bat- 
teries across  the  Gap  still  kept  up  a  fire  of  shot  anci  shell. 

Gen.  Wilcox  praises  very  highly  the  conduct  of  the  17th 
Mich,  in  this  advance — a  regiment  which  had  been  organized 
scarcely  a  month,  but  which  charged  the  advancing  enemy  in 
flank  in  a  manner  worthy  of  veteran  troops ;  and  also  that  of 
the  45th  Penn.,  which  bravely  met  them  in  front. 

Cooke's  battery  now  reopened  fire.  Sturgis's  division  was 
moved  to  the  front  of  Wilcox's,  occupying  the  new  ground 
gained  on  the  further  side  of  the  slope,  and  his  artillery  opened 
on  the  batteries  across  the  Gap.  The  enemy  made  an  effort  to 
turn  our  left  about  dark,  but  were  repulsed  by  Fairchild's  bri- 
gade and  Clark's  battery. 

At  about  seven  o'clock  the  enemy  made  another  effort  to 
regain  the  lost  ground,  attacking  along  Sturgis's  front  and  part 
of  Cox's.  A  lively  fire  was  kept  up  until  nearly  nine  o'clock, 
several  charges  being  made  by  the  enemy  and  repulsed  with 
slaughter,  and  we  finally  occupied  the  highest  part  of  the  moun- 
tain. 

Gen.  Reno  was  killed  just  before  sunset,  while  making  a 
reconnoissance  to  the  front,  and  the  command  of  the  corps 
devolved  upon  Gen.  Cox.  In  Gen.  Reno  the  nation  lost  one  of 
its  best  general  officers.  He  was  a  skilful  soldier,  a  brave  and 
honest  man. 

There  was  no  firing  after  ten  o'clock,  and  the  troops  slept  on 


SOUTH  MOUNTAIN,  579 

their  arms,  ready  to  renew  the  fight  at  daylight ;  but  the  enemy 
quietly  retired  from  our  front  during  the  night,  abandoning  their 
wounded,  and  leaving  their  dead  in  large  numbers  scattered  over 
the  field.  While  these  operations  were  progressing  on  the  left 
of  the  main  column,  the  right,  under  Gen.  Hooker,  was  actively 
engaged.  His  corps  left  the  Monocacy  early  in  the  morning, 
and  its  advance  reached  the  Catoctin  creek  about  one  p.m.  Gen. 
Hooker  then  went  forward  to  examine  the  ground. 

At  about  one  o'clock  Gen.  Meade's  division  was  ordered  to 
make  a  diversion  in  favor  of  Reno.  The  following  is  the  order 
sent : 

Sept.  14,  i  p.m. 

General  :  Gen.  Reno  requests  that  a  division  of  yours  may 
move  up  on  the  right  (north)  of  the  main  road.  Gen.  McClellan 
desires  you  to  comply  with  this  request,  holding  your  whole  corps 
in  readiness  to  support  the  movement,  and  taking  charge  of  it 
yourself. 

Sumner's  and  Banks's  corps  have  commenced  arriving.  Let 
Gen.  McClellan  be  informed  as  soon  as  you  commence  your 
movement. 

George  D.  Ruggles, 
CV?/.,  Asst.  Adj,'Gen,y  and  Aide-de-Camp, 

Maj.-Gen.  Hooker. 

Meade's  division  left  Catoctin  creek  about  two  o'clock,  and 
turned  off  to  the  right  from  the  main  road  on  the  old  Hagers- 
town  road  to  Mount  Tabor  church,  where  Gen.  Hooker  was, 
and  deployed  a  short  distance  in  advance,  its  right  resting  about 
one  and  a  half  miles  from  the  turnpike.  The  enemy  fired  a  few 
shots  from-  a  battery  on  the  mountain-side,  but  did  no  conside- 
rable damage.  Cooper's  battery,  "  B,"  ist  Penn.  Artillery,  was 
placed  in  position  on  high  ground  at  about  three  and  a  half 
o'clock,  and  fired  at  the  enemy  on  the  slope,  but  soon  ceased 
by  order  of  Gen.  Hooker,  and  the  position  of  our  lines  prevent- 
ed any  further  use  of  artillery  by  us  on  this  part  of  the  field. 
The  I  St  Mass.  Cavalry  was  sent  up  the  valley  to  the  right  to 
observe  the  movements,  if  any,  of  the  enemy  in  that  direction, 
and  one  regiment  of  Meade's  division  was  posted  to  watch  a 
road  coming  in  the  same  direction.  The  other  divisions  were 
deployed  as  they  came  up — Gen.  Hatch's  on  the  left,  and  Gen. 

Ricketts's,  which  arrived  at  five  p.m.,  in  the  rear.     Gen.  Gibbon's 

43 


580  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

brigade  was  detached  from  Hatch's  division  by  Gen.  Burnside, 
for  the  purpose  of  making  a  demonstration  on  the  enemy's  cen- 
tre, up  the  main  road,  as  soon  as  the  movements  on  the  right 
and  left  had  sufficiently  progressed.  The  ist  Penn.  Rifles,  of 
Gen.  Seymour's  brigade,  were  sent  forward  as  skirmishers  to  feel 
the  enemy,  and  it  was  found  that  he  was  in  force.  Meade  was 
then  directed  to  advance  his  division  to  the  right  of  the  road,  so 
as  to  outflank  them,  if  possible,  and  then  to  move  forward  and 
attack,  while  Hatch  was  directed  to  take  with  his  division  the 
crest  on  the  left  of  the  old  Hagerstown  road,  Ricketts's  division 
being  held  in  reserve.  Seymour's  brigade  was  sent  up  to  the 
top  of  the  slope,  on  the  right  of  the  ravine  through  which  the 
road  runs,  and  then  moved  along  the  summit  parallel  to  the 
road,  while  Col.  Gallagher's  and  Col.  Magilton's  brigades  moved 
in  the  same  direction  along  the  slope  and  in  the  ravine. 

The  ground  was  of  the  most  difficult  character  for  the  move- 
ment of  troops,  the  hillside  being  very  steep  and  rocky,  and 
obstructed  by  stone  walls  and  timber.  The  enemy  was  very 
soon  encountered,  and  in  a  short  time  the  action  became  gene- 
ral along  the  whole  front  of  the  division.  The  line  advanced 
steadily  up  the  mountain-side,  whjre  the  enemy  was  posted  be- 
hind trees  and  rocks,  from  which  he  was  gradually  dislodged. 
During  this  advance  Col.  Gallagher,  commanding  3d  brigade, 
was  severely  wounded,  and  the  command  devolved  upon  Lieut.- 
Col.  Robert  Anderson. 

Gen.  Meade,  having  reason  to  believe  that  the  enemy  was 
attempting  to  outflank  him  on  his  right,  applied  to  Gen.  Hooker 
for  reinforcements.  Gen.  Duryea's  brigade,  of  Ricketts's  divi- 
sion, was  ordered  up,  but  it  did  not  arrive  until  the  close  of  the 
action.  It  was  advanced  on  Seymour's  left,  but  only  one  regi- 
ment could  open  fire  before  the  enemy  retired  and  darkness 
intervened. 

Gen.  Meade  speaks  highly  of  Gen.  Seymour's  skill  in  hand- 
ling his  brigade  on  the  extreme  right,  securing  by  his  manoeu- 
vres the  great  object  of  the  movemfUt — the  outflanking  of  the 
enemy. 

While  Gen.  Meade  was  gallantly  driving  the  enemy  on  the 
right,  Gen.  Hatch's  division  was  engaged  in  a  severe  contest  for 
the  possession  of  the  crest  on  the  left  of  the  ravine.  It  moved 
up  the  mountain  in  the  following  order  :  Two  regiments  of  Gen. 


SOUTH  MOUNTAIN,  58 1 

Patrick's  brigade  deployed  as  skirmishers,  with  the  other  two 
regiments  of  the  same  brigade  supporting  them  ;  Col.  Phelps's 
brigade  in  line  of  battalions  in  mass  at  deploying  distance,  Gen. 
Doubleday's  brigade  in  the  same  order  bringing  up  the  rear. 
The  2ist  N.  Y.  having  gone  straight  up  the  slope,  instead  of 
around  to  the  right  as  directed,  the  2d  U.  S.  Sharpshooters  was 
sent  out  in  its  place.  Phelps's  and  Doubleday's  brigades  were 
dq)loyed  in  turn  as  they  reached  the  woods,  which  began  about 
half  up  the  mountain.  Gen.  Patrick  with  his  skirmishers  soon 
drew  the  fire  of  the  enemy,  and  found  him  strongly  posted  be- 
hind a  fence  which  bounded  the  cleared  space  on  the  top  of  the 
ridge,  having  on  his  front  the  woods  through  which  our  line  was 
advancing,  and  in  his  rear  a  cornfield  full  of  rocky  ledges,  which 
afforded  good  cover  to  fall  back  to  if  dislodged. 

Phelps's  brigade  gallantly  advanced,  under  a  hot  fire,  to  close 
quarters,  and,  after  ten  or  fifteen  minutes  of  heavy  firing  on  both 
sides  (in  which  Gen.  Hatch  was  wounded  while  urging  on  his 
men),  the  fence  was  carried  by  a  charge,  and  our  line  advanced 
a  few  yards  beyond  it,  somewhat  sheltered  by  the  slope  of  the 
hill. 

Doubleday's  brigade,  now  under  the  command  of  Lieut.-Col. 
Hoffmann  (Col.  Wainwright  having  been  wounded),  relieved 
Phelps,  and  continued  firing  for  an  hour  and  a  half ;  the  ene- 
my, behind  ledges  of  rocks  some  thirty  or  forty  paces  in  our 
front,  making  a  stubborn  resistance  and  attempting  to  charge 
on  the  least  cessation  of  our  fire.  About  dusk  Col.  Christian's 
brigade  of  Ricketts's  division  came  up  and  relieved  Doubleday's 
brigade,  which  fell  back  into  line  behind  Phelps's.  Christian's 
brigade  continued  the  action  for  thirty  or  forty  minutes,  when 
the  enemy  retired,  after  having  made  an  attempt  to  flank  us  on 
the  left,  which  was  repulsed  by  the  75th  N.  Y.  and  7th  Ind. 

The  remaining  brigade  of  Ricketts's  division  (Gen.  Hart- 
suff's)  was  moved  up  in  the  centre,  and  connected  Meade's  left 
with  Doubleday's  right.  We  now  had  possession  of  the  summit 
of  the  first  ridge,  which  commanded  the  turnpike  on  both  sides 
of  the  mountain,  and  the  troops  were  ordered  to  hold  their  posi- 
tions until  further  orders,  and  slept  on  their  arms. 

Late  in  the  afternoon  Gen.  Gibbon,  with  his  brigade  and 
one  section  of  Gibbon's  battery  ("B,"  4th  Artillery),  was  ordered 
to  move  up  the  main  road  on  the  enemy's  centre.     He  advanced 


582  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY 

2l  regiment  on  each  side  of  the  road,  preceded  by  skirmishers, 
and  followed  by  the  other  two  regiments  in  double  column  ;  the 
artillery  moving  on  the  road  until  within  range  of  the  enemy's 
guns,  which  were  firing  on  the  column  from  the  gorge. 

The  brigade  advanced  steadily,  driving  the  enemy  from  his 
positions  in  the  woods  and  behind  stone  walls,  until  they  reached 
a  point  well  up  towards  the  top  of  the  pass,  when  the  enemy, 
having  been  reinforced  by  three  regiments,  opened  a  heavy  fire 
on  the  front  and  on  both  flanks.  The  fight  continued  until  nine 
o'clock,  the  enemy  being  entirely  repulsed  ;  and  the  brigade, 
after  having  suffered  severely,  and  having  expended  all  its  ammu- 
nition, including  even  the  cartridges  of  the  dead  and  wounded, 
continued  to  hold  the  ground  it  had  so  gallantly  won  until  twelve 
o'clock,  when  it  was  relieved  by  Gen.  Gorman's  brigade,  of  Sedg- 
wick's division,  Sumner's  corps  (except  the  6th  Wis.,  which  re- 
mained on  the  field  all  night).  Gen.  Gibbon,  in  this  delicate 
movement,  handled  his  brigade  with  as  much  precision  and  cool- 
ness as  if  upon  parade,  and  the  bravery  of  his  troops  could  not 
be  excelled. 

The  2d  corps  (Sumner's)  and  the  12th  corps  (Williams's) 
reached  their  final  positions  shortly  after  dark.  Gen.  Richard- 
son's division  was  placed  near  Mount  Tabor  Church,  in  a  posi- 
tion to  support  our  right,  if  necessary;  the  12th  corps  and 
Sedgwick's  division  bivouacked  around  Bolivar,  in  a  position  to 
support  our  centre  and  left. 

Gen.  Sykes's  division  of  regulars  and  the  artillery  reserve 
halted  for  the  night  at  Middletown.  Thus  on  the  night  of  the 
14th  the  whole  army  was  massed  in  the  vicinity  of  the  field  of 
battle,  in  readiness  to  renew  the  action  the  next  day  or  to  move 
in  pursuit  of  the  enemy.  At  daylight  our  skirmishers  were  ad- 
vanced, and  it  was  found  that  he  had  retreated  during  the  night, 
leaving  his  dead  on  the  field  and  his  wounded  uncared  for. 

I  had  reached  the  front  at  Middletown  about  noon,  or  a  little 
before  noon,  and  while  there  received  the  messenger  from  Har- 
per's Ferry  by  whom  I  sent  the  despatch  to  Gen.  Miles  before 
mentioned.  Immediately  afterwards  I  rode  forward  to  a  point 
from  which  I  could  see  the  Gap  and  the  adjacent  ground.  About 
the  time  I  started  Reno  sent  back  a  message  desiring  that  a  divi- 
sion might  be  sent  to  the  rear  of  the  pass.  I  sent  the  order  to 
Hooker   to  move  at   once.     (Burnside  had  nothing  to  do  with 


SOUTH  MOUNTAIN,  583 

this.)  Marcy  went  with  him  and  remained  there  most  of  the 
day.  I  rather  think  that  he  really  deserved  most  of  the  credit 
for  directing  the  movement,  but,  with  his  usual  modesty,  he 
would  say  little  or  nothing  about  it. 

I  pushed  up  Sturgis  to  support  Cox,  and  hurried  up  Sumner 
to  be  ready  as  a  reserve.  Burnside  never  came  as  near  the  battle 
as  my  position.  Yet  it  was  his  command  that  was  in  action  !  He 
spent  the  night  in  the  same  house  that  I  did.  In  the  course  of 
the  evening,  when  I  had  prepared  the  telegram  to  the  President 
announcing  the  result  of  the  day,  I  showed  it  to  Burnside  before 
sending  it  off,  and  asked  if  it  was  satisfactory  to  him  ;  he  replied 
that  it  was  altogether  so.  Long  afterwards  it  seems  that  he  came 
to  the  conclusion  that  I  did  not  give  him  sufficient  credit ;  but 
he  never  said  a  word  to  me  on  the  subject. 

On  the  next  day  I  had  the  honor  to  receive  the  following  very 
kind  despatch  from  the  President : 

"War  Department, 
"Washington,  Sept.  15,  1862,  2.45  p.m. 

"  Your  despatch  of  to-day  received.  God  bless  you  and  all 
with  you  !     Destroy  the  rebel  army,  if  possible. 

"A.  Lincoln. 
"  To  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan." 

The  following  despatch  was  also  received  on  the  i6th  : 

"West  Point,  i6th,  1862. 
"(Received,  Frederick,  i6th,  1862,  10.40  a.m.) 

"  To  Maj\'Gen,  McCUllan : 

"  Bravo,  my  dear  general !     Twice  more  and  it's  done. 

"WiNFiELD  Scott." 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Antietam — Pursuit  from  South  Mountain — Position  of  the  enemy — The 
Battle — Burnside's  failure — His  contradictory  statements — Letters  of 
Col.  Sackett. 

On  the  night  of  the  battle  of  South  Mountain  orders  were 
given  to  the  corps  commanders  to  press  forward  their  pickets, 
at  early  dawn.  This  advance  revealed  the  fact  that  the  enemy 
had  left  his  positions,  and  an  immediate  pursuit  was  ordered  ; 
the  cavalry,  under  Gen.  Pleasonton,  and  the  three  corps  under 
Gens.  Sumner,  Hooker,  and  Mansfield  (the  latter  of  whom  had 
arrived  that  morning  and  assumed  command  of  the  12th  jWil- 
liams's]  corps),  by  the  national  turnpike  and  Boonsborough  ; 
the  corps  of  Gens.  Bumside  and  Porter  (the  latter  command  at 
that  time  consisting  of  but  one  weak  division,  Sykes*s)  by  the 
old  Sharpsburg  road  ;  and  Gen.  Franklin  to  move  into  Pleasant 
Valley,  occupy  Rohrersville  by  a  detachment,  and  endeavor  to 
relieve  Harper's  Ferry. 

Gens.  Bumside  and  Porter,  upon  reaching  the  road  from 
Boonsborough  to  Rohrersville,  were  to  reinforce  Franklin  or  ta 
move  on  Sharpsburg,  according  to  circumstances. 

Franklin  moved  towards  Brownsville  and  found  there  a  force 
of  the  enemy,  much  superior  in  numbers  to  his  own,  drawn  up 
in  a  strong  position  to  receive  him. 

At  this  time  the  cessation  of  firing  at  Harper's  Ferry  indi-^ 
cated  the  surrender  of  that  place. 

The  cavalry  overtook  the  enemy's  cavalry  in  Boonsborough, 
made  a  dashing  charge,  killing  and  wounding  a  number,  and 
capturing  250  prisoners  and  2  guns. 

Gen.  Richardson's  division  of  the  2d  corps,  pressing  the  rear- 
guard of  the  enemy  with  vigor,  passed  Boonsborough  and  Keedys- 
ville,  and  came  upon  the  main  body  of  the  enemy,  occupying  in 
large  force  a  strong  position  a  few  miles  beyond  the  latter  place. 

It  had  been  hoped  to  engage  the  enemy  on  the  15th.    Accord-^ 

ingly  instructions  were  given  that  if  the  enemy  were  overtaken  on 

584 


'Hi 

I 


k 


586  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

the  march  they  should  be  attacked  at  once ;  if  found  in  heavy 
force  and  in  position,  the  corps  in  advance  should  be  placed  in 
position  for  attack  and  await  my  arrival. 

Early  in  the  morning  I  had  directed  Burnside  to  put  his  corps 
in  motion  upon  the  old  Sharpsburg  road,  but  to  wait  with  me  for 
a  time  until  more  detailed  news  came  from  Franklin.  About 
eight  o'clock  he  begged  me  to  let  him  go,  saying  that  his  corps 
ha^  been  some  time  in  motion,  and  that  if  he  delayed  longer  he 
would  have  difficulty  in  overtaking  it;  so  I  let  him  go.  At  about 
midday  I  rode  to  the  point  where  Reno  was  killed  the  day  before, 
and  found  that  Bumside's  troops,  the  9th  corps,  had  not  stirred 
from  its  bivouac,  and  still  blocked  the  road  for  the  regular  divi- 
sion.    I  sent  for  Burnside  for  an  explanation,  but  he  could  not 

■ 

be  found.  He  subsequently  gave  as  an  excuse  the  fatigued  and 
hungry  condition  of  his  men. 

"  Headquarters,  Army  of  Potomac, 
"  Sept.  15,  12.30  P.M. 
"  Gen.  Burnside  : 

"  Gen.  McClellan  desires  you  to  let  Gen.  Porter's  go  on  past 
you,  if  necessary.  You  will  then  push  your  own  command  on  as 
rapidly  as  possible.  The  general  also  desires  to  know  the  reason 
for  your  delay  in  starting  this  morning. 

"  Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

"  Geo.  D.  Ruggles, 

"  CoL  and  A.  D,  Cr 

After  seeing  the  ground  where  Reno  fell,  and  passing  over 
Hooker's  battle-ground  of  the  previous  day,  I  went  rapidly  to 
the  front  by  the  main  road,  being  received  by  the  troops,  as  I 
passed  them,  with  the  wildest  enthusiasm.  Near  Keedysville  I 
met  Sumner,  who  told  me  that  the  enemy  were  in  position  in 
strong  force,  and  took  me  to  a  height  in  front  of  Keedysville 
whence  a  view  of  the  position  could  be  obtained.  We  were 
accompanied  by  a  numerous  staff  and  escort ;  but  no  sooner 
had  we  shown  ourselves  on  the  hill  than  the  enemy  opened 
upon  us  with  rifled  guns,  and,  as  his  firing  was  very  good,  the 
hill  was  soon  cleared  of  all  save  Fitz-John  Porter  and  myself. 
I  at  once  gave  orders  for  the  positions  of  the  bivouacs,  mass- 
ing the  army  so  that  it  could  be  handled  as  required.  I  ordered 
Burnside  to  the  left.  He  grumbled  that  his  troops  were  fatigued, 
but  I  started  him  off  anyhow. 


ANTIETAM.  587 

The  first  rapid  survey  of  the  enemy's  position  inclined  me 
to  attack  his  left,  but  the  day  was  far  gone. 

He  occupied  a  strong  position  on  the  heights,  on  the  west 
side  of  Antietam  creek,  displaying  a  large  force  of  infantry  and 
cavalry,  with  numerous  batteries  of  artillery,  which  opened  on 
our  columns  as  they  appeared  in  sight  on  the  Keedysville  road 
and  Sharpsburg  turnpike,  which  fire  was  returned  by  Capt.  Tid- 
ball's  light  battery,  2d  U.  S.  Artillery,  and  Pettit's  battery,  ist 
N.  Y.  Artillery. 

The  division  of  Gen.  Richardson,  following  close  on  the  heels 
of  the  retreating,  foe,  halted  and  deployed  near  Antietam  river, 
on  the  right  of  the  Sharpsburg  road.  Gen.  Sykes,  leading  on 
the  division  of  regulars  on  the  old  Sharpsburg  road,  came  up 
and  deployed  to  the  left  of  Gen.  Richardson,  on  the  left  of  the 
road. 

Antietam  creek,  in  this  vicinity,  is  crossed  by  four  stone 
bridges — the  upper  one  on  the  Keedysville  and  Williamsport 
road ;  the  second  on  the  Keedysville  and  Sharpsburg  turnpike, 
some  two  and  a  half  miles  below ;  the  third  about  a  mile  below 
the  second,  on  the  Rohrersville  and  Sharpsburg  road ;  arid  the 
fourth  near  the  mouth  of  Antietam  creek,  on  the  road  leading 
from  Harper's  Ferry  to  Sharpsburg,  some  three  miles  below  the 
third.  The  stream  is  sluggish,  with  few  and  difficult  fords. 
After  a  rapid  examination  of  the  position  I  found  that  it  was 
too  late  to  attack  that  day,  and  at  once  directed  the  placing  of 
the  batteries  in  position  in  the  centre,  and  indicated  the  bivouacs 
for  the  different  corps,  massing  them  near  and  on  both  sides  of 
the  Sharpsburg  turnpike.  The  corps  were  not  all  in  their  posi- 
tions until  the  next  morning  after  sunrise. 

On  the  morning  of  the  i6th  it  was  discovered  that  the  ene- 
my had  changed  the  position  of  his  batteries.  The  masses  of  his 
troops,  however,  were  still  concealed  behind  the  opposite  heights. 
Their  left  and  centre  were  upon  and  in  front  of  the  Sharpsburg 
and  Hagerstown  turnpike,  hidden  by  woods  and  irregularities  of 
the  ground  ;  their  extreme  left  resting  upon  a  wooded  eminence 
near  the  cross-roads  to  the  north  of  J.  Miller's  farm,  their  left 
resting  upon  the  Potomac.  Their  line  extended  south,  the  right 
resting  upon  the  hills  to  the  south  of  Sharpsburg,  near  Snavely's 
farm. 

The  bridge  over  the  Antietam  near  this  point  was  strongly 

44 


588  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

covered  by  riflerpen  protected  by  rifle-pits,  stone  fences,  etc., 
and  enfiladed  by  artillery.  The  ground  in  front  of  this  line 
consisted  of  undulating  hills,  their  crests  in  turn  commanded 
by  others  in  their  rear.  On  all  favorable  points  the  enemy's 
artillery  was  posted,  and  their  reserves,  hidden  from  view  by 
the  hills  on  which  their  line  of  battle  was  formed,  could  manoeu- 
vre uiiobserved  by  our  army,  and  from  the  shortness  of  their 
line  could  rapidly  reinforce  any  point  threatened  by  our  attack. 
Their  position,  stretching  across  the  angle  formed  by  the  Poto- 
mac and  Antietam,  their  flanks  and  rear  protected  by  these 
streams,  was  one  of  the  strongest  to  be  found  in  this  region  of 
country,  which  is  well  adapted  to  defensive  warfare. 

On  the  right,  near  Keedysville,  on  both  sides  of  the  Sharps- 
burg  turnpike,  were  Sumner's  and  Hooker's  corps.  In  advance, 
on  the  right  of  the  turnpike  and  near  the  Antietam  river,  Gen. 
Richardson's  division  of  Gen.  Sumner's  corps  was  posted.  Gen. 
Sykes's  division  of  Gen.  Porter's  corps  was  on  the  left  of  the 
turnpike  and  in  line  with  Gen.  Richardson,  protecting  the  bridge 
No.  2  over  the  Antietam.  The  left  of  the  line,  opposite  to  and 
some'  distance-  from  bridge  No.  3,  was  occupied  by  Gen.  Bum- 
side's  corps. 

Before  giving  Gen.  Hooker  his  orders  to  make  the  move- 
ment which  will  presently  be  described,  I  rode  to  the  left  of  the 
line  to  satisfy  myself  that  the  troops  were  properly  posted  there 
to  secure  our  left  flank  from  any  attack  made  along  the  left  bank 
of  the  Antietam,  as  well  as  to  enable  us  to  carry  bridge  No.  3. 

I  rode  along  the  whole  front,  generally  in  front  of  our  pick- 
ets, accompanied  by  Hunt,  Duane,  Colburn,  and  a  couple  of 
orderlies,  and  went  considerably  beyond  our  actual  and  even- 
tual left.  Our  small  party  drew  the  enemy's  fire  frequently, 
and  developed  the  position  of  most  of  his  batteries.  I  threw 
some  of  the  regulars  a  little  more  to  the  left,  and  observed  that 
our  extreme  left  was  not  well  placed  to  cover  the  position  against 
any  force  approaching  from  Harper's  Ferry  by  the  left  bank 
of  the  Antietam  ;  also  that  the  ground  near  **  Burnside's  bridge  " 
was  favorable  for  defence  on  our  side,  and  that  an  attack  across 
it  would  lead  to  favorable  results.  I  therefore  at  once  ordered 
Burnside  to  move  his  corps  nearer  the  bridge,  occupy  the  heights 
in  rear,  as  well  as  to  watch  the  approach  from  Harper's  Ferry 
just  spoken  of.     I  gave  this  order  at  midday  ;  it  was  near  night 


ANTIETAM.  589 

before  it  was  executed.  I  also  instructed  him  to  examine  all 
the  vicinity  of  the  bridge,  as  he  would  probably  be  ordered  to 
attack  there  next  morning. 

In  front  of  Gens.  Sumner's  and  Hooker's  corps,  near  Keedys- 
ville,  and  on  the  ridge  of  the  first  line  of  hills  overlooking  the 
Antietam,  and  between  the  turnpike  and  Fry's  house  on  the  right 
of  the  road,  were  placed  Capts.  Taft's,  Langner's,  Von  Kleizer's, 
and  Lieut.  Weaver's  batteries  of  20-pounder  Parrott  guns  ;    on 


THE  ANneTAM. 


the  crest  of  the  hill  in  the  rear  and  right  of  bridge  No.  3,  Capt, 
Weed's  3-inch  and  Lieut.  Benjamin's  20-pounder  batteries.  Gen. 
Franklin's  corps  and  Gen.  Couch's  division  held  a  position  in 
Pleasant  Valley  in  front  of  Brownsville,  with  a  strong  force  of  the 
enemy  in  their  front.  Gen.  Morell's  division  of  Porter's  corps 
was  en  route  from  Boonsborough,  and  Gen.  Humphreys's  divi- 
sion of  new  troops  en  route  from  Frederick,  Md.  About  day- 
light on  the  i6th  the  enemy  opened  a  heavy  fire  of  artillery  on 
our  guns  in  position,  which  was  promptly  returned ;   their  lire 


590  McCLELLAN' S  OWN  STORY. 

was  silenced  for  the  time,  but  was  frequently  renewed  during; 
the  day. 

It  was  afternoon  before  I  could  move  the  troops  to  their 
positions  for  attack,  being  compelled  to  spend  the  morning  ia 
reconnoitring  the  new  position  taken  up  by  the  enemy,  examin- 
ing the  ground,  finding  fords,  clearing  the  approaches,  and  hur- 
rying up  the  ammunition  and  supply-trains,  which  had  been 
delayed  by  the  rapid  march  of  the  troops  over  the  few  practi- 
cable approaches  from  Frederick.  These  had  been  crowded  by 
the  masses  of  infantry,  cavalry,  and  artillery  pressing  on  with 
the  hope  of  overtaking  the  enemy  before  he  could  form  to  resist 
an  attack.  Many  of  the  troops  were  out  of  rations  on  the  pre- 
vious day,  and  a  good  deal  of  their  ammunition  had  been  ex- 
pended in  the  severe  action  of  the  14th. 

My  plan  for  the  impending  general  engagement  was  to  attack 
the  enemy's  left  with  the  corps  of  Hooker  and  Mansfield,  sup* 
ported  by  Sumner's  and,  if  necessary,  by  Franklin's ;  and  as 
soon  as  matters  looked  favorably  there,  to  move  the  corps  of 
Bumside  against  the  enemy's  extreme  right,  upon  the  ridge  run- 
ning to  the  south  and  rear  of  Sharpsburg,  and,  having  carried 
their  position,  to  press  along  the  crest  towards  our  right ;  and 
whenever  either  of  these  flank  movements  should  be  successful^ 
to  advance  our  centre  with  all  the  forces  then  disposable. 

About  two  P.M.  Gen.  Hooker,  with  his  corps,  consisting  of 
Gens.  Ricketts's,  Meade's,  and  Doubleday's  divisions,  was  ordered 
to  cross  the  Antietam  at  a  ford,  and  at  bridge  No.  i,  a  short 
distance  above,  to  attack  and,  if  possible,  turn  the  enemy's  left. 
Gen.  Sumner  was  ordered  to  cross  the  corps  of  Gen.  Mansfield 
(the  12th)  during  the  night,  and  hold  his  own  (the  2d)  corps/ 
ready  to  cross  early  the  next  morning.  On  reaching  the  vicinity 
of  the  enemy's  left  a  sharp  contest  commenced  with  the  Pennsyl- 
vania reserves,  the  advance  of  Gen.  Hooker's  corps,  near  the 
house  of  D.  Miller.  The  enemy  was  driven  from  the  strip  of 
woods  where  he  was  first  met.  The  firing  lasted  until  after 
dark,  when  Gen.  Hooker's  corps  rested  on  their  arms  on  ground 
won  from  the  enemy. 

When  I  returned  to  the  right,  and  found  that  Hooker's  pre- 
parations were  not  yet  complete,  I  went  to  hurry  them  in  person. 
It  was  perhaps  half-past  three  to  four  o'clock  before  Hooker 
could  commence  crossing  and  get  fairly  in  motion  up  the  oppo- 


ANTIETAM.  59 1 

site  slopes.  I  accompanied  the  movement,  at  the  head  of  the 
column,  until  the  top  of  the  ridge  was  fairly  gained,  indicated 
the  new  direction  to  be  taken,  and  then  returned  to  headquar- 
ters— not  to  the  camp,  but  to  a  house  further  in  advance  (Fry's 
house),  where  I  passed  the  night. 

During  the  night  Gen.  Mansfield's  corps,  consisting  of  Gens. 
Williams's  and  Greene's  divisions,  crossed  the  Antietam  at  the 
same  ford  and  bridge  that  Gen.  Hooker's  troops  had  passed,  and 
bivouacked  on  the  farm  of  J.  Poffenberger,  al^out  a  mile  in  rear 
of  Gen.  Hooker's  position. 

At  daylight  on  the  17th  the  action  was  commenced  by  the 
skirmishers  of  the  Pennsylvania  reserves.  The  whole  of  Gen. 
Hooker's  corps  was  soon  engaged,  and  drove  the  enemy  from 
the  open  field  in  front  of  the  first  line  of  woods  into  a  second 
line  of  woods  beyond,  which  runs  to  the  eastward  of  and  nearly 
parallel  to  the  Sharpsburg  and  Hagerstown  turnpike.  This  con- 
test was  obstinate,  and  as  the  troops  advanced  the  opposition 
became  more  determined  and  the  number  of  the  enemy  greater. 
Gen.  Hooker  then  ordered  up  the  corps  of  Gen.  Mansfield, 
which  moved  promptly  toward  the  scene  of  action. 

The  first  division.  Gen.  Williams's,  was  deployed  to  the  right 
on  approaching  the  enemy ;  Gen.  Crawford's  brigade  on  the 
right,  its  right  resting  on  the  Hagerstown  turnpike ;  on  his  left 
Gen.  Gordon's  brigade.  The  second  division.  Gen.  Greene's, 
joining  the  left  of  Gordon's,  extended  as  far  as  the  burnt  build- 
ings to  the  north  and  east  of  the  white  church  on  the  turnpike. 
During  the  deployment  that  gallant  veteran.  Gen.  Mansfield,  fell 
mortally  wounded  while  examining  the  ground  in  front  of  his 
troops.  Gen.  Hartsuff,  of  Hooker's  corps,  was  severely  wounded 
while  bravely  pressing  forward  his  troops,  and-  was  taken  from 
the  field. 

The  command  of  the  12th  corps  fell  upon  Gen.  Williams. 
Five  regiments  of  the  first  division  of  this  corps  were  new  troops. 
One  brigade  of  the  second  division  was  sent  to  support  Gen. 
Doubleday. 

The  1 24th  Penn.  Volunteers  were  pushed  across  the  turnpike 
into  the  woods  beyond  J.  Miller's  house,  with  orders  to  hold  the 
position  as  long  as  possible. 

The  line  of  battle  of  this  corps  was  formed,  and  it  became 
engaged  about  seven  a.m.,  the  attack  being  opened  by  Knapp's 


592  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

(Penn.),  Cothran's  (N.  Y.),  and  Hampton's  (Pittsburgh)  batteries. 
To  meet  this  attack  the  enemy  had  pushed  a  strong  column  of 
troops  into  the  open  fields  in  front  of  the  turnpike,  while  he 
occupied  the  woods  on  the  west  of  the  turnpike  in  strong  force. 
The  woods  (as  was  found  by  subsequent  observation)  were  tra- 
versed by  outcropping  le(Jges  of  rock.  Several  hundred  yards 
to  the  right  and  rear  was  a  hill  which  commanded  the  debouch 
of  the  woods,  and  in  the  fields  between  was  a  long  line  of  stone 
fences,  continued  by  breastworks  of  rails,  which  covered  the  ene- 
my's infantry  frotn  our  musketry.  The  same  woods  formed  a 
screen  behind  which  his  movements  were  concealed,  and  his 
batteries  on  the  hill  and  the  rifle-works  covered  from  the  fire 
of  our  artillery  in  front. 

For  about  two  hours  the  battle  raged  with  varied  success, 
the  enemy  endeavoring  to  drive  our  troops  into  the  second  line 
of  wood,  and  ours  in  turn  to  get  possession  of  the  line  in  front. 

Our  troops  ultimately  succeeded  in  forcing  the  enemy  back 
into  the  woods  near  the  turnpike.  Gen.  Greene  with  his  two  bri- 
gades crossing  into  the  woods  to  the  left  of  the  Dunker  church. 
During  this  conflict  Gen.  Crawford,  commanding  ist  division 
after  Gen.  Williams  took  command  of  the  corps,  was  wounded 
and  left  the  field. 

Gen.  Greene  being  much  exposed  and  applying  for  reinforce- 
ments, the  13th  N.  J.,  27th  Ind.,  and  the  3d  Md.  were  sent  to  his 
support  with  a  section  of  Knapp's  battery. 

At  about  nine  o'clock  a.m.  Gen.  Sedgwick's  division  of  Gen. 
Sumner's  corps  arrived.  Crossing  the  ford  previously  mentioned, 
this  division  marched  in  three  columns  to  the  support  of  the 
attack  on  the  enemy's  left.  On  nearing  the  scene  of  action  the 
columns  were  halted,  faced  to  the  front,  and  established  by 
Gen.  Sumner  in  three  parallel  lines  by  brigade,  facing  toward 
the  south  and  west ;  Gen.  Gorman's  brigade  in  front,  Gen. 
Dana's  second,  and  Gen.  Howard's  third,  with  a  distance  between 
the  lines  of  some  seventy  paces.  The  division  was  then  put  in 
motion  and  moved  upon  the  field  of  battle,  under  fire  from  the 
enemy's  concealed  batteries  on  the  hill  beyond  the  roads.  Pass- 
ing diagonally  to  the  front  across  the  open  space,  and  to  the 
front  of  the  first  division  of  Gen.  Williams's  corps,  this  latter 
division  withdrew. 

Entering  the  woods  on  the  west  of  the  turnpike,  and  driving 


ANTIETAM,  593 

the  enemy  before  them,  the  first  line  was  met  by  a  heavy  fire  of 
musketry  and  shell  from  the  enemy's  breastworks  and  the  bat- 
teries on  the  hill  commanding  the  exit  from  the  woods.  Mean- 
time a  heavy  column  of  the  enemy  had  succeeded  in  crowding 
back  the  troops  of  Gen.  Greene's  division,  and  appeared  in  rear 
of  the  left  of  Sedgwick's  division.  By  command  of  Gen.  Sum- 
ner, Gen.  Howard  faced  the  third  line  to  the  rear  preparatory  to 
a  change  of  front  to  meet  the  column  advancing  on  the  left ;  but 
this  line,  now  suffering  from  a  destructive  fire  both  in  front  and 
on  its  left  which  it  was  unable  to  return,  gave  way  towards  the 
right  and  rear  in  considerable  confusion,  and  was  soon  followed 
by  the  first  and  second  lines. 

Gen.  Gorman's  brigade,  and  one  regiment  of  Gen.  Dana's, 
soon  rallied  and  checked  the  advance  of  the  enemy  on  the  right. 
The  second  and  third  lines  now  formed  on  the  left  of  Gen.  Gor- 
man's brigade  and  poured  a  destructive  fire  upon  the  enemy. 

During  Gen.  Sumner's  attack  he  ordered  Gen.  Williams  to 
support  him.  Brig.-Gen.  Gordon,  with  a  portion  of  his  brigade, 
moved  forward,  but  when  he  reached  the  woods  the  left  of  Gen. 
Sedgwick's  division  had  given  way  ;  and  finding  himself,  as  the 
smoke  cleared  up,  opposed  to  the  enemy  in  force  with  his  small 
command,  he  withdrew  to  the  rear  of  the  batteries  at  the  second 
line  of  woods.  As  Gen.  Gordon's  troops  unmasked  our  batteries 
on  the  left  they  opened  with  canister ;  the  batteries  of  Capt. 
Cothran,  ist  N.  Y.,  and  "I,"  ist  Artillery,  commanded  by  Lieut. 
Woodruff,  doing  good  service  Unable  to  withstand  this  deadly 
fire  in  front  and  the  musketry-fire  from  the  right,  the  enemy 
again  sought  shelter  in  the  woods  and  rocks  beyond  the  turn- 
pike. 

During  this  assault  Gens.  Sedgwick  and  Dana  were  seriously 
wounded  and  taken  from  the  field.  Gen.  Sedgwick,  though 
twice  wounded  and  faint  from  loss  of  blood,  retained  command 
of  his  division  for  more  than  an  hour  after  his  first  wound,  ani- 
mating his  command  by  his  presence. 

About  the  time  of  Gen.  Sedgwick's  advance  Gen.  Hooker^ 
while  urging  on  his  command,  was  severely  wounded  in  the  foot 
and  taken  from  the  field,  and  Gen.  Meade  was  placed  in  com- 
mand of  his  corps.  Gen.  Howard  assumed  command  after  Gen. 
Sedgwick  retired. 

The   repulse  of  the  enemy  offered  opportunity  to  rearrange 


594  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

the  lines  and  reorganize  the  commands  on  the  right,  now  more 
or  less  in  confusion.  The  batteries  of  the  Pennsylvania  reserve, 
on  high  ground  near  J.  Poffenberger's  house,  opened  fire  and 
checked  several  attempts  of  the  enemy  to  establish  batteries  in 
front  of  our  right,  to  turn  that  flank  and  enfilade  the  lines. 

While  the  conflict  was  so  obstinately  raging  on  the  right  Gen. 
French  was  pushing  his  division  against  the  enemy  still  further 
to  the  left.  This  division  crossed  the  Antietam  at  the  same  ford 
as  Gen.  Sedgwick,  and  immediately  in  his  rear.  Passing  over  the 
stream  in  three  columns,  the  division  marched  about  a  mile  from 
the  ford,  then,  facing  to  the  left,  moved  in  three  lines  towards  the 
enemy :  Gen.  Max  Weber's  brigade  in  front.  Col.  Dwight  Mor- 
ris's brigade  of  raw  tro6ps — undrilled,  and  moving  for  the  first 
time  under  fire — in  the  second,  and  Gen.  Kimball's  brigade  in  the 
third.  The  division  was  first  assailed  by  a  fire  of  artillery,  but 
steadily  advanced,  driving  in  the  enemy's  skirmishers,  and  en- 
countered the  infantry  in  some  force  at  the  group  of  houses  on 
Roulette's  farm.  Gen.  Weber's  brigade  gallantly  advanced  with 
an  unwavering  front  and  drove  the  enemy  from  their  position 
about  the  houses. 

While  Gen.  Weber  was  hotly  engaged  with  the  first  line  of  the 
enemy,  Gen.  French  received  orders  from  Gen.  Sumner,  his  corps 
commander,  to  push  on  with  renewed  vigor  to  make  a  diversion 
in  favor  of  the  attack  on  the  right.  Leaving  the  new  troops,  who 
had  been  thrown  into  some  confusion  from  their  march  through 
cornfields,  over  fences,  etc.,  to  form  as  a  reserve,  he  ordered  the 
brigade  of  Gen.  Kimball  to  the  front,  passing  to  the  left  of  Gen. 
Weber.  The  enemy  was  pressed  back  to  near  the  crest  of  the 
hill,  where  he  was  encountered  in  greater  strength  posted  in  a 
sunken  road  forming  a  natural  rifle-pit  running  in  a  northwest- 
erly direction.  In  a  cornfield  in  rear  of  this  road  were  also 
strong  bodies  of  the  enemy.  As  the  line  reached  the  crest  of 
the  hill  a  galling  fire  was  opened  on  it  from  the  sunken  road  and 
cornfield.  Here  a  terrific  fire  of  musketry  burst  from  both  lines, 
and  the  battle  raged  along  the  whole  line  with  great  slaughter. 

The  enemy  attempted  to  turn  the  left  of  the  line,  but  were 
met  by  the  7th  Va.  and  i32d  Penn.  Volunteers  and  repulsed. 
Foiled  in  this,  the  enemy  made  a  determined  assault  on  the  front, 
but  were  met  by  a  charge  from  our  lines  which  drove  them  back 
with  severe  loss,  leaving  in  our  hands  some  300  prisoners  and 


ANTIETAM.  595 

several  stands  of  colors.  The  enemy,  having  been  repulsed  by 
the  terrible  execution  of  the  batteries  and  the  musketry-fire  on 
the  extreme  right,  now  attempted  to  assist  the  attack  on  Gen. 
French's  division  by  assailing  him  on  his  right  and  endeavoring 
to  turn  this  flank ;  but  this  attack  was  met  and  checked  by  the 
14th  Ind.  and  8th  O.  Volunteers,  and  by  canister  from  Capt. 
Tompkins's  battery,  ist  R.  I.  Artillery.  Having  been  under 
an  almost  continuous  fire  for  nearly  four  hours,  and  the  ammu- 
nition nearly  expended,  this  division  now  took  position  imme- 
diately below  the  crest  of  the  heights  on  which  they  had  so 
gallantly  fought,  the  enemy  making  no  attempt  to  regain  their 
lost  ground. 

On  the  left  of  Gen.  French,  Gen.  Richardson's  division  was 
hotly  engaged.  Having  crossed  the  Antietam  about  9.30  a.m.  at 
the  ford  crossed  by  the  other  divisions  of  Sumner's  corps,  it 
moved  on  a  line  nearly  parallel  to  the  Antietam,  and  formed  in  a 
ravine  behind  the  high  grounds  overlooking  Roulette's  house; 
the  2d  (Irish)  brigade,  commanded  by  Gen.  Meagher,  on  the 
right ;  the  3d  brigade,  commanded  by  Gen.  Caldwell,  on  his  left, 
and  the  brigade  commanded  by  Col.  Brooks,  53d  Penn.  Volun- 
teers, in  support.  As  the  division  moved  forward  to  take  its 
position  on  the  field,  the  enemy  directed  a  fire  of  artillery  against 
it,  but,  owing  to  the  irregularities  of  the  ground,  did  but  little 
damage. 

Meagher's  brigade,  advancing  steadily,  soon  became  engaged 
with  the  enemy  posted  to  the  left  and  in  front  of  Roulette's 
house.  It  continued  to  advance  under  ac  heavy  fire  nearly  to  the 
crest  of  the  hill  overlooking  Piper's  house,  the  enemy  being  post- 
ed in  a  continuation  of  the  sunken  road  and  cornfield  before 
referred  to.  Here  the  brave  Irish  brigade  opened  upon  the 
enemy  a  terrific  musketry-fire. 

All  of  Gen.  Sumner's  corps  was  now  engaged — Gen.  Sedg- 
wick on  the  right.  Gen.  French  in  the  centre,  and  Gen.  Richard- 
son on  the  left.  The  Irish  brigade  sustained  its  well-earned 
reputation.  After  suffering  terribly  in  officers  and  men,  and 
strewing  the  ground  with  their  enemies  as  they  drove  them 
back,  their  ammunition  nearly  expended,  and  their  commander. 
Gen.  Meagher,  disabled  by  the  fall  of  his  horse  shot  under  him, 
this  brigade  was  ordered  to  give  place  to  Gen.  Caldwell's  brigade, 
which  advanced  to  a  short  distance  in  its  rear.     The  lines  were 


596  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

passed  by  the  Irish  brigade  breaking  by  company  to  the  rear,  and 
Gen.  Caldwell's  by  company  to  the  front,  as  steadily  as  on  drill. 
Col.  Brooks's  brigade  now  became  the  second  line. 

The  ground  over  which  Gens.  Richardson's  and  French's 
divisions  were  fighting  was  very  irregular,  intersected  by  nume- 
rous ravines,  hills  covered  with  growing  corn,  enclosed  by  stone 
walls,  behind  which  the  enemy  could  advance  unobserved  upon 
any  exposed  point  of  our  lines.  Taking  advantage  of  this,  the 
enemy  attempted  to  gain  the  right  of  Richardson's  position  in  a 
cornfield  near  Roulette's  house,  where  the  division  had  become 
separated  from  that  of  Gen.  French's.  A  change  of  froht  by  the 
5  2d  N.  Y.  and  2d  Del.  Volunteers,  of  Col.  Brooks's  brigade,, 
tinder  Col.  Frank,  and  the  attack  made  by  the  53d  Penn.  Volun- 
teers, sent  further  to  the  right  by  Col.  Brooks  to  close  this  gap  in 
the  line,  and  the  movement  of  the  13 2d  Penn.  and  7th  Va.  Vol- 
unteers, of  Gen.  French's  division,  before  referred  to,  drove  the 
enemy  from  the  cornfield  and  restored  the  line. 

The  brigade  of  Gen.  Caldwell,  with  determined  gallantry, 
pushed  the  enemy  back  opposite  the  left  and  centre  of  this 
division,  but,  sheltered  in  the  sunken  road,  they  still  held  our 
forces  on  the  right  of  Caldwell  in  check.  Col.  Barlow,  com- 
manding the  6 1  St  and  64th  N.  Y.  regiments,  of  Caldwell's  brigade, 
seeing  a  favorable  opportunity,  advanced  the  regiments  on  the 
left,  taking  the  line  in  the  sunken  road  in  flank,  and  compelled 
them  to  surrender,  capturing  over  300  prisoners  and  three  stands 
of  colors. 

The  whole  of  the  brigade,  with  the  57th  and  66th  N.  Y.  regi- 
ments, of  Col.  Brooks's  brigade,  who  had  moved  these  regiments 
into  the  first  line,  now  advanced  with  gallantry,  driving  the 
enemy  before  them  in  confusion  into  the  cornfield  beyond  the 
sunken  road.  The  left  of  the  division  was  now  well  advanced^ 
when  the  enemy,  concealed  by  an  intervening  ridge,  endeavored 
to  turn  its  left  and  rear. 

Col.  Cross,  5th  N.  H.,  by  a  change  of  front  to  the  left  and 
rear,  brought  his  regiment  facing  the  advancing  line.  Here  a 
spirited  contest  arose  to  gain  a  commanding  height,  the  two 
opposing  forces  moving  parallel  to  each  other,  giving  and  receiv- 
ing fire.  The  5th,  gaining  the  advantage,  faced  to  the  right  and 
delivered  its  volley.  The  enemy  staggered,  but  rallied  and 
advanced   desperately   at    a   charge.      Being    reinforced    by   the 


AN  TIE  T AM.  597 

8 1  St  Penn.,  these  regiments  met  the  advance  by  a  counter- 
charge. The  enemy  fled,  leaving  many  killed,  wounded,  and 
prisoners,  and  the  colors  of  the  4th  N.  C,  in  our  hands. 

Another  column  of  the  enemy,  advancing  under  shelter  of 
a  stone  wall  and  cornfield,  pressed  down  on  the  right  of  the 
division;  but  Col.  Barlow  again  advanced  the  6ist  and  64th 
N.  Y.  against  these  troops,  and,  with  the  attack  of  Kimball's 
brigade  on  the  right,  drove  them  from  this  position. 

Our  troops  on  the  left  of  this  part  of  the  line  having  driven 
the  enemy  far  back,  they,  with  reinforced  numbers,  made  a 
determined  attack  directly  in  front.  To  meet  this  Col.  Barlow 
brought  his  two  regiments  to  their  position  in  line,  and  drove  the 
enemy  through  the  cornfield  into  the  orchard  beyond,  under  a 
heavy  fire  of  musketry,  and  a  fire  of  canister  from  two  pieces  of 
artillery  in  the  orchard,  and  a  battery  further  to  the  right  throw- 
ing shell  and  case-shot.  This  advance  gave  us  possession  of 
Piper's  house,  the  strong  point  contended  for  by  the  enemy  at  this- 
part  of  the  line,  it  being  a  defensible  building  several  hundred 
yards  in  advance  of  the  sunken  road.  The  musketry-fire  at 
this  point  of  the  line  now  ceased.  Holding  Piper's  house.  Gen. 
Richardson  withdrew  the  line  a  little  way  to  the  crest  of  a  hill — 
a  more  advantageous  position.  Up  to  this  time  the  division  was 
without  artillery,  and  in  the  new  position  suffered  severely  from 
artillery- fire  which  could  not  be  replied  to.  A  section  of  Robert- 
son's horse-battery,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Vincent,  2d  Artillery,, 
now  arrived  on  the  ground  and  did  excellent  service.  Subse- 
quently a  battery  of  brass  guns,  commanded  by  Capt.  Graham,^ 
I  St  Artillery,  arrived,  and  was  posted  on  the  crest  of  the  hill,  and 
soon  silenced  the  two  guns  in  the  orchard.  A  heavy  fire  soon 
ensued  between  the  battery  further  to  the  right  and  our  own. 
Capt.  Graham's  battery  was  bravely  and  skilfully  served,  but,, 
unable  to  reach  the  enemy,  who  had  rifled  guns  of  greater  range 
than  our  smooth-bores,  retired  by  order  of  Gen.  Richardson,  to 
save  it  fro*n  useless  sacrifice  of  men  and  horses.  The  brave 
general  was  himself  mortally  wounded  while  personally  directing 
its  fire. 

Gen.  Hancock  was .  placed  in  command  of  the  division  after 
the  fall  of  Gen.  Richardson.  Gen.  Meagher's  brigade,  now  com- 
manded by  Col.  Burke,  of  the  63d  N.  Y.,  having  refilled  their 
cartridge-boxes,  was  again  ordered  forward,  and  took  position  in 


598  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

the  centre  of  the  line.  The  division  now  occupied  one  line  in 
close  proximity  to  the  enemy,  who  had  taken  up  a  position  in  the 
rear  of  Piper's  house.  Col.  Dwight  Morris,  with  the  14th  Conn, 
and  a  detachment  of  the  io8th  N.  Y.,  of  Gen.  French's  division, 
was  sent  by  Gen.  French  to  the  support  of  Gen.  Richardson's 
division.  This  command  was  now  placed  in  an  interval  in  the 
line  between  Gen.  Caldwell's  and  the  Irish  brigades. 

The  requirements  of  the  extended  line  of  battle  had  so 
engaged  the  artillery  that  the  application  of  Gen.  Hancock  for 
artillery  for  the  division  could  not  be  complied  with  immediately 
by  the  chief  of  artillery  or  the  corps  commanders  in  his  vicinity. 
Knowing  the  tried  courage  of  the  troops.  Gen.  Hancock  felt  con- 
fident that  he  could  hold  his  position,  although  suffering  from  the 
enemy's  artillery,  but  was  too  weak  to  attack,  as  the  great  length 
of  the  line  he  was  obliged  to  hold  prevented  him  from  forming 
more  than  one  line  of  battle,  and,  from  his  advanced  position, 
this  line  was  already  partly  enfiladed  by  the  batteries  of  the 
enemy  on  the  right,  which  were  protected  from  our  batteries 
opposite  them  by  the  woods  at  the  Dunker  church. 

Seeing  a  body  of  the  enemy  advancing  on  some  of  our  troops 
to  the  left  of  his  position.  Gen.  Hancock  obtained  Hexamer's 
battery  from  Gen.  Franklin's  corps,  which  assisted  materially 
in  frustrating  this  attack.  It  also  assisted  the  attack  of  the 
7th  Me.,  of  Franklin's  corps,  which,  without  other  aid,  made  an 
attack  against  the  enemy's  line,  and  drove  in  skirmishers  who 
were  annoying  our  artillery  and  troops  on  the  right.  Lieut. 
Woodruff,  with  battery  I,  2d  Artillery,  relieved  Capt.  Hexamer, 
whose  ammunition  was  expended.  The  enemy  at  one  time 
seemed  to  be  about  making  an  attack  in  force  upon  this  part 
of  the  line,  and  advanced  a  long  column  of  infantry  towards  this 
division  ;  but  on  nearing  the  position,  Gen.  Pleasonton  opening 
on  them  with  sixteen  guns,  they  halted,  gave  a  desultory  fire, 
and  retreated,  closing  the  operations  on  this  portion  of  the  field. 
I  return  to  the  incidents  occurring  still  further  to  the  right. 

Between  twelve  and  one  p.m.  Gen.  P'ranklin's  corps  arrived 
on  the  field  of  battle,  having  left  their  camp  near  Crampton's 
Pass  at  six  a.m.,  leaving  Gen.  Couch  with  orders  to  move  with 
his  division  to  occupy  Maryland  Heights.  Gen.  Smith's  division 
led  the  column,  followed  by  Gen.  Slocum's. 

It  was  first  intended  to  keep  this  corps  in  reserve  on  the  east 


ANTIETAM. 


599 


side  of  the  Antietara,  to  operate  on  either  flank  or  on  the  centre, 
as  circumstances  might  require ;  but  on  nearing  Keedysville 
the  strong  opposition  on  the  right,  developed  by  the  attacks 
of  Hooker  and  Sumner,  rendered  it  necessary  at  once  to  send 
this  corps  to  the  assistance  of  the  right  wing. 

On  nearing  the  field,  hearing  that  one  of  our  batteries — A, 
4th  U,  S.  Artillery,  commanded  by  Lieut.  Thomas,  who  occupied 
the  same  position  as  Lieut.  Woodruff's  battery  in  the  morning — 
was  hotly  engaged  without  supports,  Gen.  Smith  sent  two  regi- 
ments to  its  relief  from  Gen.  Hancock's  brigade.     On  inspecting 


the  ground  Gen.  Smith  ordered  the  other  regiments  of  Han- 
cock's brigade,  with  Frank's  and  Cowen's  batteries,  ist  N.  Y. 
Artillery,  to  the  threatened  position,  Lieut.  Thomas  and  Capt. 
Cothran,  commanding  batteries,  bravely  held  their  positions 
against  the  advancing  enemy,  handling  their  batteries  with  skill. 
Finding  the  enemy  still  advancing,  the  3d  brigade  of  Smith's 
division,  commanded  by  Col.  Irvin,  49th  Penn.  volunteers,  was 
ordered  up,  and  passed  through  Lieut.  Thomas's  battery,  charged 
upon  the  enemy,  and  drove  back  the  advance  until  abreast  of  the 


600  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Dunker  church.  As  the  right  of  the  brigade  came  opposite  the 
woods  it  received  a  destructive  fire,  which  checked  the  advance 
and  threw  the  brigade  somewhat  into  confusion.  It  formed  again 
behind  a  rise  of  ground  in  the  open  space  in  advance  of  the  bat- 
teries. 

Gen.  French  having  reported  to  Gen.  Franklin  that  his  am- 
munition was  nearly  expended,  that  officer  ordered  Gen.  Brooks, 
with  his  brigade,  to  reinforce  him.  Gen.  Brooks  formed  his  bri- 
gade on  the  right  of  Gen.  French,  where  they  remained  dur- 
ing the  remainder  of  the  day  and  night,  frequently  under  the 
fire  of  the  enemy's  artillery. 

It  was  soon  after  the  brigade  of  Col.  Irvin  had  fallen  back 
behind  the  rise  of  ground  that  the  7th  Me.,  by  order  of  Col. 
Irvin,  made  the  gallant  attack  already  referred  to. 

The  advance  of  Gen.  Franklin's  corps  was  opportune.  The 
attack  of  the  enemy  on  this  position,  but  for  the  timely  arrival 
of  his  corps,  must  have  been  disastrous,  had  it  succeeded  in 
piercing  the  line  between  Gens.  Sedgwick's  and  French's  divi- 
sions. 

Gen.  Franklin  ordered  two  brigades  of  Gen.  Slocum's  divi- 
sion. Gen.  Newton's  and  Col.  Torbert's,  to  form  in  column  to 
assault  the  woods  that  had  been  so  hotly  contested  before  by 
Gens.  Sumner  and  Hooker ;  Gen.  Bartlett's  brigade  was  or- 
dered to  form  as  a  reserve.  At  this  time  Gen.  Sumner,  having 
command  on  the  right,  directed  further  offensive  operations 
to  be  postponed,  as  the  repulse  of  this,  the  only  remaining 
corps  available  for  attack,  would  peril  the  safety  of  the  whole 
army. 

Gen.  Porter's  corps,  consisting  of  Gen.  Sykes's  division  of 
regulars  and  volunteers,  and  Gen.  Morell's  division  of  volun- 
teers, occupied  a  position  on  the  east  side  of  Antietam  creek, 
upon  the  main  turnpike  leading  to  Sharpsburg,  and  directly 
opposite  the  centre  of  the  enemy's  line.  This  corps  filled  the 
interval  between  the  right  wing  and  Gen.  Burnside's  command, 
and  guarded  the  main  approach  from  the  enemy's  position  to 
our  trains  of  supplies. 

It  was  necessary  to  watch  this  part  of  our  line  with  the 
utmost  vigilance,  lest  the  enemy  should  take  advantage  of  the 
first  exhibition  of  weakness  here  to  push  upon  us  a  vigorous 
assault  for  the  purpose  of  piercing  our  centre  and  turning  our 


ANTIETAM,  6oi 

rear,  as  well  as  to  capture  or  destroy  our  supply-trains.  Once 
having  penetrated  this  line,  the  enemy's  passage  to  our  rear 
could  have  met  with  but  feeble  resistance,  as  there  were  no 
reserves  to  reinforce  or  close  up  the  gap. 

Towards  the  middle  of  the  afternoon,  proceeding  to  the 
right,  I  found  that  Sumner's,  Hooker's,  and  Mansfield's  corps 
had  met  with  serious  losses.  Several  general  officers  had  been 
carried  from  the  field  severely  wounded,  and  the  aspect  of  affairs 
was  anything  but  promising.  At  the  risk  of  greatly  exposing 
our  centre,  I  ordered  two  brigades  from  Porter's  corps,  the  only 
available  troops,  to  reinforce  the  right.  Six  battalions  of  Sykes's 
regulars  had  been  thrown  across  the  Antietam  bridge  on  the 
main  road,  to  attack  and  drive  back  the  enemy's  sharpshooters, 
who  were  annoying  Pleasonton's  horse-batteries  in  advance  of 
the  bridge.  Warren's  brigade,  of  Porter's  corps,  was  detached 
to  hold  a  position  on  Bumside's  right  and  rear ;  so  that  Porter 
was  left  at  one  time  with  only  a  portion  of  Sykes's  division  and 
one  small  brigade  of  Morell's  division  (but  little  over  3,000 
men)  to  hold  his  important  position. 

Gen.  Sumner  expressed  the  most  decided  opinion  against 
another  attempt  during  that  day  to  assault  the  enemy's  position 
in  front,  as  portions  of  our  troops  were  so  much  scattered  and 
demoralized.  In  view  of  these  circumstances,  after  making 
changes  in  the  position  of  some  of  the  troops,  I  directed  the 
different  commanders  to  hold  their  positions,  and,  being  satis- 
fied that  this  could  be  done  without  the  assistance  of  the  two 
brigades  from  the  centre,  I  countermanded  the  order,  which  was 
in  course  of  execution. 

Gen.  Slocum's  division  replaced  a  portion  of  Gen.  Sumner's 
troops,  and  positions  were  selected  for  batteries  in  front  of  the 
woods.  The  enemy  opened  several  heavy  fires  of  artillery  on 
the  position  of  our  troops  after  this,  but  our  batteries  soon 
silenced  them. 

On  the  morning  of  the  17th  Gen.  Pleasonton,  with  his  cav- 
alry division  and  the  horse-batteries,  under  Capts.  Robertson, 
Tidball,  and  Lieut.  Haines,  of  the  2d  Artillery,  and  Capt.  Gibson, 
3d  Artillery,  was  ordered  to  advance  on  the  turnpike  towards 
Sharpsburg,  across  bridge  No.  2,  and  support  the  left  of  Gen. 
Sumner's  line.  The  bridge  being  covered  by  a  fire  of  artillery 
and  sharpshooters,   cavalry   skirmishers  were   thrown  out,  and 


602  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Capt  Tidbairs  battery  advanced  by  piece  and  drove  off  the 
sharpshooters  with  canister  sufficiently  to  establish  the  batteries 
above  mentioned,  which  opened  on  the  enemy  with  effect.  The 
firing  was  kept  up  for  about  two  hours,  when,  the  enemy's  fire 
slackening,  the  batteries  were  relieved  by  Randall's  and  Van 
Reed's  batteries,  U.  S.  Artillery.  About  three  o'clock  Tidball, 
Robertson,  and  Haines  returned  to  their  positions  on  the  west 
of  Antietam,  Capt.  Gibson  having  been  placed  in  position  on 
the  east  side  to  gu^rd  the  approaches  to  the  bridge.  These 
batteries  did  good  service,  concentrating  their  fire  on  the  col- 
umn of  the  enemy  about  to  attack  Gen.  Hancock's  position,  and 
compelling  it  to  find  shelter  behind  the  hills  in  rear. 

Gen.  Sykes's  division  had  been  in  position  since  the  15th,. 
exposed  to  the  enemy's  artillery  and  sharpshooters.  Gen.  Morell 
had  come  up  on  the  i6th,  and  relieved  Gen.  Richardson  on  the 
right  of  Gen.  Sykes.  Continually  under  the  vigilant  watch  of 
the  enemy,  this  corps  guarded  a  vital  point 

The  position  of  the  batteries  under  Gen.  Pleasonton  being 
one  of  great  exposure,  the  battalion  of  the  2d  and  loth  U.  S. 
Infantry,  under  Capt.  Pollard,  2d  Infantry,  was  sent  to  his  sup- 
port. Subsequently  four  battalions  of  regular  infantry,  under 
Capt.  Dryer,  4th  Infantry,  were  sent  across  to  assist  in  driving 
off  the  sharpshooters  of  the  enemy. 

The  battalion  of  the  2d  and  loth  Infantry,  advancing  far 
beyond  the  batteries,  compelled  the  cannoneers  of  a  battery  of 
the  enemy  to  abandon  their  guns.  Few  in  numbers,  and  unsup- 
ported, they  were  unable  to  bring  them  off.  The  heavy  loss 
of  this  small  body  of  men  attests  their  gallantry. 

The  troops  of  Gen  Bumside  held  the  left  of  the  line  opposite 
bridge  No.  3.  The  attack  on  the  right  was  to  have  been  sup- 
ported by  an  attack  on  the  left.  Preparatory  to  this  attack,  on 
the  evening  of  the  i6th.  Gen.  Burnside's  corps  was  moved  for- 
ward and  to  the  left,  and  took  up  a  position  nearer  the  bridge. 

I  visited  Gen.  Burnside's  position  on  the  i6th,  and,  after 
pointing  out  to  him  the  proper  dispositions  to  be  made  of  his 
troops  during  the  day  and  night,  informed  him  that  he  would 
probably  be  required  to  attack  the  enemy's  right  on  the  fol- 
lowing morning,  and  directed  him  to  make  careful  reconnois- 
sances. 

Gen.  Burnside's  corps,  consisting  of   the  divisions  of  Gens. 


ANTIETAM.  6o 


*% 


Cox,  Wilcox,  Rodman,  and  Sturgis,  was  posted  as  follows :  Col. 
Crook's  brigade.  Cox's  division,  on  the  right.  Gen.  Sturgis's 
division  immediately  in  rear ;  on  the  left  was  Gen.  Rodman's 
division,  with  Gen.  Scammon's  brigade,  Cox's  division,  in  sup- 
port. 

Gen.  Wilcox's  division  was  held  in  reserve.  The  corps 
bivouacked  in  position  on  the  night  of  the  i6th. 

Early  on  the  morning  of  the  17th  I  ordered  Gen.  Burnside 
to  form  his  troops  and  hold  them  in  readiness  to  assault  the 
bridge  in  his  front,  and  to  await  further  orders. 

At  eight  o'clock  an  order  was  sent  to  him  by  Lieut.  Wilson, 
topographical  engineers,  to  carry  the  bridge,  then  to  gain  posses- 
sion of  the  heights  beyond,  and  to  advance  along  their  crest 
upon  Sharpsburg  and  its  rear. 

After  some  time  had  elapsed,  not  hearing  from  him,  I  de- 
spatched an  aide  to  ascertain  what  had  been  done.  The  aide 
returned  with  the  information  that  but  little  progress  had  been 
made.  I  then  sent  him  back  with  an  order  to  Gen.  Burnside 
to  assault  the  bridge  at  once  and  carry  it  at  all  hazards.  The 
aide  returned  to  me  a  second  time  with  the  report  that  the  bridge 
was  still  in  the  possession  of  the  enemy.  Whereupon  I  directed 
Col.  Sackett,  inspector-general,  to  deliver  to  Gen.  Burnside  my 
positive  order  to  push  forward  his  troops  without  a  moment's 
delay,  and,  if  necessary,  to  carry  the  bridge  at  the  point  of  the 
bayonet ;  and  I  ordered  Col.  Sackett  to  remain  with  Gen.  Bum- 
side  and  see  that  the  order  was  executed  promptly. 

After  these  three  hours*  delay  the  bridge  was  carried  z\  one 
o'clock  by  a  brilliant  charge  of  the  51st  N.  Y.  and  51st  Penn. 
Volunteers.  Other  troops  were  then  thrown  over  and  the  oppo- 
site bank  occupied,  the  enemy  retreating  to  the  heights  beyond. 

A  halt  was  then  made  by  Gen.  Bumside's  advance  until 
three  p.m.  ;  upon  hearing  which  I  directed  one  of  my  aides, 
Col.  Key,  to  inform  Gen.  Burnside  that  I  desired  him  to  push 
forward  his  troops  with  the  utmost  vigor  and  carry  the  ene- 
my's position  on  the  heights  ;  that  the  movement  was  vital  to 
our  success  ;  that  this  was  a  time  when  we  must  not  stop  for 
loss  of  life,  if  a  great  object  could  thereby  be  accomplished  ; 
that  if,  in  his  judgment,  his  attack  would  fail,  to  inform  me  so 
at  once,  that  his  troops  might  be  withdrawn  and  used  elsewhere 

on  the  field.     He  replied  that  he  would  soon  advance,  and  would 
45 


604  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

go  up  the  hill  as  far  as  a  battery  of  the  enemy  on  the  left  would 
permit.  Upon  this  report  I  again  immediately  sent  Col.  Key 
to  Gen.  Burnside  with  orders  to  advance  at  once,  if  possible  to 
flank  the  battery,  or  storm  it  and  carry  the  heights  ;  repeating 
that  if  he  considered  the  movement  impracticable,  to  inform 
me,  so  that  his  troops  might  be  recalled.  The  advance  was 
then  gallantly  resumed,  the  enemy  driven  from  the  guns,  the 
heights  handsomely  carried,  and  a  portion  of  the  troops  even 
reached  the  outskirts  of  Sharpsburg.  By  this  time  it  was  nearly 
dark,  and  strong  reinforcements  just  then  reaching  the  enemy 
from  Harper's  Ferry  attacked  Gen.  Burnside's  troops  on  their  left 
flank,  and  forced  them  to  retire  to  a  lower  line  of  hills  nearer 
the  bridge. 

If  this  important  movement  had  been  consummated  two 
hours  earlier,  a  position  would  have  been  secured  upon  the 
heights  from  which  our  batteries  might  have  enfiladed  the  greater 
part  of  the  enemy's  line,  and  turned  their  right  and  rear.  Our 
victory  might  thus  have  been  much  more  decisive. 

The  ground  held  by  Burnside  beyond  the  bridge  was  so 
strong  that  he  ought  to  have  repulsed  the  attack  and  held  his 
own.     He  never  crossed  the  bridge  in  person  ! 

The  following  is  the  substance  of  Gen.  Burnside's  operations, 
as  given  in  his  report  : 

Col.  Crook's  brigade  was  ordered  to  storm  the  bridge.  This 
bridge,  No.  3,  is  a  stone  structure  of  three  arches,  with  stone 
parapets.  The  banks  of  the  stream  on  the  opposite  side  are 
precipitous,  and  command  the  eastern  approaches  to  the  bridge. 
On  the  hill-side  immediately  by  the  bridge  was  a  stone  fence 
running  parallel  to  the  stream.  The  turns  of  the  roadway  as  it 
wound  up  the  hill  were  covered  by  rifle-pits  and  breastworks  of 
rails,  etc.  These  works  and  the  woods  that  covered  the  slopes 
were  filled  with  the  enemy's  riflemen,  and  batteries  were  in  posi- 
tion to  enfilade  the  bridge  and  its  approaches. 

Gen.  Rodman  was  ordered  to  cross  the  ford  below  the  bridge. 
From  Col.  Crook's  position  it  was  found  impossible  to  carry  the 
bridge. 

Gen.  Sturgis  was  ordered  to  make  a  detail  from  his  division 
for  that  purpose.  He  sent  forward  the  2d  Md.  and  6th  N.  H. 
These  regiments  made  several  successive  attacks  in  the  most 
gallant  style,  but  were  driven  back. 


ANTIETAM.  605 

The  artillery  of  the  left  were  ordered  to  concentrate  their  fire 
on  the  woods  above  the  bridge.  Col.  Crook  brought  a  section 
of  Capt.  Simmons's  battery  to  a  position  to  command  the  bridge. 
The  51st  N.  Y.  and  51st  Penn.  were  then  ordered  to  assault  the 
bridge.  Taking  advantage  of  a  small  spur  of  the  hills  which 
ran  parallel  to  the  river,  they  moved  towards  the  bridge.  From 
the  crest  of  this  spur  they  rushed  with  bayonets  fixed  and  cleared 
the  bridge. 

The  division  followed  the  storming  party;  also  the  brigade 
of  Col.  Crook  as  support.  The  enemy  withdrew  to  still  higher 
ground  some  five  or  six  hundred  yards  beyond,  and  opened  a 
fire  of  artillery  on  the  troops  in  the  new  positions  on  the  crest 
of  the  hill  above  the  bridge. 

Gen.  Rodman's  division  succeeded  in  crossing  the  ford  after 
a  sharp  fire  of  musketry  and  artillery,  and  joined  on  the  left  of 
Sturgis  ;  Scammon's  brigade  crossing  as  support.  Gen.  Wilcox's 
division  was  ordered  across  to  take  position  on  Gen.  Sturgis's 
right. 

These  dispositions  being  completed  about  three  o'clock,  the 
command  moved  forward,  except  Sturgis's  division  left  in  reserve. 
Clark's  and  Darell's  batteries  accompanied  Rodman's  division, 
Cooke's  battery  with  Wilcox's  division,  and  a  section  of  Simmons's 
battery  with  Col.  Crook's  brigade.  A  section  of  Simmons's  bat- 
tery, and  Muhlenberg's  and  McMullan's  batteries,  were  in  posi- 
tion. The  order  for  the  advance  was  obeyed  by  the  troops  with 
alacrity.  Gen.  Wilcox's  division,  with  Crook  in  support,  moved 
up  on  both  sides  of  the  turnpike  leading  from  the  bridge  to 
Sharpsburg ;  Gen.  Rodman's  division,  supported  by  Scammon's 
brigade,  on  the  left  of  Gen.  Wilcox.  The  enemy  retreated  before 
the  advance  of  the  troops.  The  9th  N.  Y.,  of  Gen.  Rodman's 
division,  captured  one  of  the  enemy's  batteries  and  held  it  for 
some  time.  As  the  command  was  driving  the  enemy  to  the  main 
heights  on  the  left  of  the  town,  the  light  division  of  Gen.  A.  P. 
Hill  arrived  upon  the  field  of  battle  from  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
with  a  heavy  artillery- fire  made  a  strong  attack  on  the  extreme 
left.  To  meet  this  attack  the  left  division  diverged  from  the 
line  of  march  intended,  and  opened  a  gap  between  it  and  the 
right.  To  fill  up  this  it  was  necessary  to  order  the  troops  from 
the  second  line.  During  these  movements  Gen.  Rodman  was 
mortally  wounded.     Col.  Harland's  brigade,  of  Gen.  Rodman's 


6o6  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

division,  was  driven  back.  Col.  Scammon's  brigade,  by  a  change 
of  front  to  rear  on  his  right  flank,  saved  the  left  from  being 
driven  completely  in.  The  fresh  troops  of  the  enemy  pouring  in, 
and  the  accumulation  of  artillery  against  this  command,  destroy- 
ed all  hope  of  its  being  able  to  accomplish  anything  more. 

It  was  now  nearly  dark.  Gen.  Sturgis  was  ordered  forward 
to  support  the  left.  Notwithstanding  the  hard  work  in  tlie 
early  part  of  the  day,  his  division  moved  forward  with  spirit. 
With  its  assistance  the  enemy  were  checked  and  held  at  bay. 

The  command  was  ordered  to  fall  back  by  Gen.  Cox,  who 
commanded  on  the  field  the  troops  engaged  in  this  affair  beyond 
the  Antietam. 

Night  closed  the  long  and  desperately  contested  battle  of 
the  17th.  Nearly  two  hundred  thousand  men  and  five  hun- 
dred pieces  of  artillery  were  for  fourteen  hours  engaged  in  this 
memorable  battle.  We  had  attacked  the  enemy  in  a  position 
selected  by  the  experienced  engineer  then  in  person  directing 
their  operations.  We  had  driven  them  from  their  line  on  one 
flank,  and  secured  a  footing  within  it  on  the  other.  The  Army 
of  the  Potomac,  notwithstanding  the  moral  effect  incident  to 
previous  reverses,  had  achieved  a  victory  over  an  adversary  in- 
vested with  the  prestige  of  recent  success.  Our  soldiers  slept 
that  night  conquerors  on  a  field  won  by  their  valor  and  covered 
with  the  dead  and  wounded  of  the  enemy. 

Thirteen  guns,  39  colors,  upwards  of  15,000  stands  of  small 
arms,  and  more  than  6,000  prisoners  were  the  trophies  which 
attest  the  success  of  our  arms  in  the  battles  of  South  Moun- 
tain, Crampton's  Gap,  and  Antietam.  Not  a  single  gun  or  color 
was  lost  by  our  army  during  these  battles. 

When  I  was  on  the  right  on  the  afternoon  of  the  17th  1 
found  the  troops  a  good  deal  shaken — that  is,  some  of  them  who 
had  been  in  the  early  part  of  the  action.  Even  Sedgwick's  divi- 
sion commenced  giving  way  under  a  few  shots  from  a  battery 
that  suddenly  commenced  firing  from  an  unexpected  position. 
I  had  to  ride  in  and  rally  them  myself.  Sedgwick  had  been 
carried  off  very  severely  wounded.  The  death  of  Mansfield, 
the  wounding  of  Hooker,  Richardson,  and  Sedgwick,  were  irre- 
parable losses  in  that  part  of  the  field.  It  was  this  afternoon, 
when  I  was  on  the  right,  that  on  the  field  of  battle  I  gave  Han- 
cock a  division — that  of  Richardson,  who  was  mortally  wounded. 


BURNSIDES  FAILURE.  607 

Early  next  morning  (the  i8th)  Burnside  sent  to  ask  me  for  a 
fresh  division  to  enable  him  to  hold  his  own.  I  sent  word  that 
I  could  send  none  until  I  came  myself  to  see  the  state  of  affairs, 
and  in  a  few  minutes  rode  over  there  and  carefully  examined 
the  position.  Burnside  told  me  that  his  men  were  so  demoral- 
ized and  so  badly  beaten  the  day  before  that  were  they  attacked 
they  would  give  way.  I  told  him  1  could  see  no  evidences  of 
that,  but  that  I  would  lend  him  Morell's  division  for  a  short  time, 
though  1  would  probably  need  it  again  elsewhere  in  a  few  hours. 
1  instructed  him  to  place  one  brigade  on  some  heights  that  ran 
across  the  valley  on  our  left,  in  order  to  cover  the  left  flank,  the 
rest  on  the  heights  in  rear  of  the  bridge,  to  cover  the  retreat  of 
his  men,  should  that  prove  necessary.  The  division  was  accord- 
ingly sent  to  him,  and  towards  evening  I  learned  that  he  had 
thrown  it  across  the  river  and  withdrawn  his  own  men,  his  excuse 
to  me  being  that  he  could  not  trust  his  men  on  the  other  side  ! 
The  evening  before  he  was  at  my  headquarters,  and  told  some 
of  my  aides  that  his  men  were  badly  beaten. 

Long  afterwards  I  learned  from  Col.  Grif.  Stedman  (nth 
Conn,  regiment)  that  on  the  night  of  the  17th  he  was  with  his 
then  colonel  (Kingsbury),  who  was  mortally  wounded  and  lying 
in  a  house  on  our  side  of  the  bridge,  close  to  it.  Burnside  came 
by  and  gave  orders  for  the  wounded  to  be  removed  still  further 
to  the  rear,  stating  that  the  corps  were  entirely  defeated  and 
demoralized,  and  that  the  house  in  question  would  soon  be  occu- 
pied by  the  enemy.  As  Kingsbury  was  in  no  condition  to  be 
removed,  Stedman  determined  to  remain  with  him  and  share  his 
fate.  It  is  needless  to  say  that  the  house  was  not  occupied  by 
the  enemy,  and  that  Burnside  was  in  no  condition  to  know  the 
real  state  of  his  command,  as  he  had  not  been  with  it.  But  I 
have  mentioned  enough  to  show  what  his  real  opinions  and  state 
of  mind  were  on  the  evening  of  the  17  th  and  the  morning  of  the 
1 8th.  Yet  in  face  of  all  this  he  subsequently  testified  before  the 
Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War  that  he  had  on  the 
morning  of  the  iSth  asked  me  for  the  reinforcement  of  a  divi- 
sion to  enable  him  to  renew  the  attack,  stating  at  the  same  time 
that  his  men  were  in  superb  condition,  ready  for  any  work,  and 
that  I  had  committed  a  great  error  in  not  renewing  the  battle 
early  on  the  morning  of  the  iSth.  The  real  facts,  so  far  as 
Burnside  was  concerned,  were  as  I  have  given  them  above.     But 


6o8  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

although  his  men  were  not,  perhaps,  in  magnificent  condition, 
they  were  by  no  means  so  demoralized  as  he  represented  them 
to  be.  I  cannot,  from  my  long  acquaintance  with  Bumside, 
believe  that  he  would  deliberately  lie,  but  I  think  that  his 
weak  mind  was  turned ;  that  he  was  confused  in  action  ;  and 
that  subsequently  he  really  did  not  know  what  had  occurred, 
and  was  talked  by  his  staff  into  any  belief  they  chose. 

1  have  only  adverted  to  the  very  pernicious  effects  of  Bum- 
side's  inexcusable  delay  in  attacking  the  bridge  and  the  heights 
in  rear.  What  is  certain  is  that  if  Porter  or  Hancock  had  been 
in  his  place  the  town  of  Sharpsburg  would  have  been  ours. 
Hill  would  have  been  thrown  back  into  the  Potomac,  and  the 
battle  of  Antietam  would  have  been  very  decisive  in  its  results. 

[In  a  monograph  prepared  by  Gen.  William  B.  Franklin,  **  Ix 
Mfmorv  of  Gknerai  McClellan,"  that  distinguished  soldier 
thus  speaks  of  the  Maryland  campaign  and  its  results,  and  spe- 
ciallv  of  the  result  of  the  battle  of  Antietam  : 

**  Without  orders  placing  him  in  command  other  than  the 
verlul  re\juost  of  the  President,  and  without  orders  of  any  kind 
frvMU  any  one,  he  started  on  the  Maryland  campaign  to  find  the 
enemy,  who  had  been  so  foolish  as  to  invade  a  State  which  had 
rvMiuuntxi  true  to  the  Union.  The  victories  of  Turner's  and 
Cnunpiou^s  gaps  of  South  Mountain,  and  of  Antietam,  were  the 
results,  the  last  battle  followed  by  the  hurried  retreat  of  Gen. 
l.^v  Iwond  the  Potomac,  Hi5tor\-  will  some  dav  tell  whv  the 
CVnftxierate  army  was  not  driven  into  the  Potomac  instead  of 
aorv^ss  it.  It  will  show  that  its  escape  was  not  due  to  want  o« 
generalship  of  the  cv^mmanding  general,  nor  to  the  absence  of 
nevess,ir>*  orders  to  suK^rdinates^" 

.\t  the  rime  of  his  death  Gen.  McCIellaa  was  about  to  wrl:e  a 
ivnvler.sevl  avvoun:  of  the  ba:tle  of  Antie:ani  for  the  cVt.ra»7 
maj:a^:ne.  He  had  reviewed  :he  events  preceding  Soud:  Mouz.- 
ia:n  when  his  j>ea  m-as  arrested-  From  among  the  papers  fo-uni 
lvin»:  on  his  wririn^i-taMe,  where  he  had  lef:  ihem  fv^r  hcurs 

W,-,%  «...  ••  ,  ..•..•  .  

...v..    .»v.v     .V  ««v.  V       jb>    .ma.X.«JlL..    «v^     ^XT     »  .a..  ..>...  CVk    .^.     ..^.^     K  ..  .  ■.  ^^^^ 

%  .  .  • 


B  URN  SIDE'S  FAIL  URE,  609 

LETTERS  FROM  GEN.  SACKETT. 

"  Feb.  20,  1876. 

"  My  dear  General  :  In  reply  to  your  note  1  will  state 
that,  at  about  nine  o'clock  on  the  morning  of  the  battle  of  Antie- 
tam,  you  told  me  to  mount  my  horse  and  to  proceed  as  speedily 
as  possible  with  orders  directing  Gen.  Bumside  to  move  his 
troops  across  the  bridge  or  stream  in  his  front  at  once,  and  then 
to  push  them  forward  vigorously,  without  a  moment's  delay,  to 
secure  the  heights  beyond. 

"You  moreover  directed  me  to  remain  with  Gen.  Burnside 
until  1  saw  his  troops  well  under  way  up  the  heights  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Sharpsburg,  and  then  to  return  and  report  to  you. 

"  I  started  at  once,  as  fast  as  my  horse  could  carry  me.  I 
found  Gen.  Burnside  on  an  elevated  point  (near  the  position  of 
Lieut.  Benjamin's  20-pounder  battery)  commanding  an  extensive 
view  of  the  battle-field.  I  gave  him  your  orders,  which  seemed 
to  annoy  him  somewhat,  as  he  said  to  me  :  *  McClellan  appears 
to  think  I  am  not  trying  my  best  to  carry  this  bridge  ;  you  are 
the  third  or  fourth  one  who  has  been  to  me  this  morning  with 
similar  orders.'  I  told  him  I  knew  you  were  exceedingly  anx- 
ious, and  regarded  his  getting  across  the  stream  and  moving  on 
Sharpsburg  with  rapidity  and  vigor  at  once  as  of  vital  impor- 
tance to  a  complete  success. 

"  Gen.  Burnside  ordered  assaults  to  be  made  on  the  bridge, 
which  were  for  a  long  time  unsuccessful.*  I  had  been  at  his 
headquarters  for  fully  three  hours  when  Col.  Key  arrived  from 
your  headquarters  with  positive  orders  to  push  across  the  bridge 
and  to  move  rapidly  up  the  heights  ;  to  carry  the  bridge  at  the 
point  of  the  bayonet,  if  necessary,  and  not  stop  for  loss  of  life, 
as  sacrifices  must  be  made  in  favor  of  success. 

"As  soon  as  Col.  Key  had  gone  I  suggested  to  Gen.  Bum- 
side,  were  he  to  go  down  near  the  bridge,  his  presence  among 
the  troops  could  have  the  effect  to  encourage  and  stimulate  the 
men  to  renewed  efforts.  He  said  he  would,  and  immediately 
mounted  his  horse  and  rode  in  the  direction  of  the  bridge,  but 
soon  returned  saying  the  bridge  had  been  carried  and  the  troops 
were  crossing  over  as  rapidly  as  possible.  He  likewise  men- 
tioned at  this  time  that  Col.  Henry  Kingsbury  had  been  mortally 
wounded  in  the  assault  on  the  bridge. 

"  Gen.  Burnside  at  once  issued  instructions  for  the  move  in 
the  direction  of  Sharpsburg,  but  for  some  unaccountable  reason 
things  moved  slowly  and  there  was  a  long  delay  in  getting  the 
troops  in  motion. 

*  Col.  Key  again  returned  with  instructions  to  Gen.  Bumside 
to  push  forward  his  troops  rapidly  and  with  vigor,  to  secure  the 
heights,  as  every  moment  gained  was  of  the  utmost  importance 
to  our  success. 


6lO  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

"  I  remained  with  Gen.  Bumside  until  his  troops  were  well, 
and  seemingly  successfully,  under  way  up  the  heights — they  hav- 
ing gallantly  driven  the  enemy  from  the  field  for  fully  one-half 
the  distance  in  the  direction  of  Sharpsburg. 

"  Seeing  this,  and  everything  apparently  going  well,  I  returned 
to  headquarters,  where  I  found  Gen.  Fitz-John  Porter,  you  being 
away  temporarily  on  a  visit  to  the  right  of  the  battle-field.  It 
was  at  this  time  past  four  o'clock  in  the  afternoon. 

**  It  was  not  long  after  this  that  the  check  and  repulse  of 
Gen.  Burnside's  advance  was  witnessed. 

"Often  since  that  time  I  have  thought  what  a  serious  mis- 
fortune was  the  death  of  the  noble  and  energetic  Reno.  Had 
not  that  chivalric  soldier  fallen  at  South  Mountain,  Antietam 
certainly  would  have  been  in  its  results  a  very  different  affair. 
It  would  have  been  one  of  the  most,  if  not  the  most,  complete 
and  important  battle  of  the  war. 

"  I  am,  general,  very  truly  yours, 

"  D.  B.  Sackett, 
^^  Inspector- Gen,y  U,  S,  A, 

^  To  Gen.  Geo,  B.  McClellan." 

"  New  York  City,  March  9,  1876. 

'*  My  dear  General  :  I  will  state,  in  respect  to  a  conversa- 
tion had  in  my  presence  between  Gen.  Bumside  and  younelf, 
that  late  in  the  evening  of  the  day  of  the  battle  of  Antietam 'I 
was  with  you  in  your  tent  when  Gen.  Burnside  entered.  The 
position  occupied,  and  the  condition  of  his  command,  became 
at  once  the  topic  of  conversation  with  you  two. 

"  As  I  understood  the  matter,  Gen.  Burnside  desired  to  with- 
draw his  troops  to  the  left  bank  of  the  stream,  giving  as  a  reason 
for  the  move  the  dispirited  condition  of  his  men  ;  stating  fur- 
ther that  if  he  remained  in  his  present  position  and  an  attack 
was  made  by  the  enemy,  he  very  much  feared  the  result. 

"  You  replied  :  *  General,  your  troops  must  remain  where  they 
are  and  must  hold  their  ground.'  Gen.  Burnside  then  said  :  *  If 
I  am  to  hold  this  position  at  all  hazards  I  must  be  largely  rein- 
forced ' — and,  if  not  much  mistaken,  he  mentioned  the  number 
of  men  necessary  for  the  purpose  at  5,000. 

"  You  then  replied  (with  emphasis)  :  *  General,  I  expect  you 
to  hold  your  own,  and  with  the  force  now  under  your  command.' 

"  At  this  point  other  general  officers  arrived,  and  I  left  the 
tent  and  heard  nothing  more  of   the  conversation. 

"Afterward,  in  looking  over  Gen.  Bumside's  testimony  before 
the  Committee  on  the  Conduct  of  the  War,  I  was  a  good  deal 
surprised  to  read  : 

"  *  I  went  to  Gen.  McClellan's  tent,  and  in  course  of  conversa- 
tion I  expressed  the  same  opinion  (that  the  attack  might  be 
renewed  the  next  morning  at  five  o'clock),  and  told  him  that  if 


BURNSIDE*S  STA  FEMENTS.  6 1  I 

I  could  have  5,000  fresh  troops  to  pass  in  advance  of  my  line 
I  would  be  willing  to  commence  the  attack  on  the  next  morn- 
ing/ 

"  This  statement  brought  back  to  my  mind  vividly  that  even- 
ing's conversation  after  Antietam.  The  conversation  between 
Gen.  Burnside  and  yourself,  as  I  heard  it,  and  Gen.  Burnside*s 
testimony  before  the  committee,  differ  widely. 

"  I  may  be  mistaken,  but  it  has  always  appeared  to  me  that 
the  conversation  to  which  I  was  a  witness,  and  the  statement  made 
before  the  War  Committee,  must  have  referred  to  one  and  the 
same  matter — the  fighting  condition  of  Gen.  Burnside's  command 
on  the  night  after  the  battle  of  Antietam. 
"  I  am,  general,  very  truly  yours, 

"  D.  B.  Sackett, 

^^Inspector-Gen,  U,  S\  A, 

"  To  Gen.  Geo.  B.  McClellan." 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

Private  Letters. 
[Stpt.  15  to  Oct,  I,  1862.] 

Telegram — Headquarters^  Army  of  the  Potomac^  Sept,  15. — 
We  have  carried  the  heights  near  here  after  a  hard  engagement, 
and  gained  a  glorious  victory.     All  your  particular  friends  well. 

S/pt,  15,  Monday,  9.30  a.m.,  Bolivar, —  .  .  .  Just  sent  you  a 
telegram  informing  you  that  we  yesterday  gained  a  glorious  and 
complete  victory  ;  every  moment  adds  to  its  importance.  I  am 
pushing  everything  after  them  with  the  greatest  rapidity,  and 
expect  to  gain  great  results.  I  thank  God  most  humbly  for  His 
great  mercy.  How  glad  I  am  for  my  country  that  it  is  delivered 
from  immediate  peril !  I  am  about  starting  with  the  pursuit  and 
must  close  this.  ...  If  I  can  believe  one-tenth  of  what  is 
reported,  God  has  seldom  given  an  army  a  greater  victory  than 
this.  ...  / 

Telegram — Near  Sharpsburg,  Sept.  16,  1862,  7  a.m. — Have 
reached  thus  far,  and  have  no  doubt  delivered  Pennsylvania  and 
Maryland.     Army  in  excellent  spirits. 

Sept.  18,  8  A.M.,  camp  near  Sharpsburg. —  .  .  .  We  fought 
yesterday  a  terrible  battle  against  the  entire  rebel  army.  The 
battle  continued  fourteen  hours  and  was  terrific  ;  the  fighting  on 
both  sides  was  superb.  The  general  result  was  in  our  favor ; 
that  is  to  say,  we  gained  a  great  deal  of  ground  and  held  it.  It 
was  a  success,  but  whether  a  decided  victory  depends  upon  what 
occurs  to-day.  I  hope  that  God  has  given  us  a  great  success.  It 
is  all  in  His  hands,  and  there  I  am  content  to  leave  it.  The 
spectacle  yesterday  was  the  grandest  I  could  conceive  of ;  no- 
thing could  be  more  sublime.  Those  in  whose  judgment  I  rely 
tell  me  that  I  fought  the  battle  splendidly  and  that  it  was  a 

masterpiece  of  art.      I   am  well-nigh  tired  out  by  anxiety  and 

618 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  613 

want  of  sleep.  God  has  been  good  in  sparing  the  lives  of 
all  my  staff.  Gens.  Hooker,  Sedgwick,  Dana,  Richardson,  and 
Hartsuff,  and  several  other  general  officers,  wounded.  Mansfield 
is  dead,  I  fear,  but  am  not  certain.  I  just  learn  that  he  is  not 
mortally  wounded. 

Sept  20,  8  A.M.,  camp  near  Sharpsburg, —  .  .  .  Yesterday  the 
enemy  completed  his  evacuation  of  Maryland,  completely  beaten. 
We  got  many  prisoners,  muskets,  colors,  cannon,  etc.  His  loss  in 
killed  and  wounded  was  very  great ;  so  was  ours,  unfortunately. 

Gen.  Mansfield  was  killed  (or  rather  died  of  his  wounds). 
Gens.  Sedgwick,  Richardson,  Dana,  Brooks,  Hooker,  Weber, 
Rodman,  and  two  others  were  wounded  on  Wednesday.  Poor 
Henry  Kingsbury  died  of  his  wounds  the  day  after  the  battle. 
The  battle  lasted  fourteen  hours,  and  was,  without  doubt,  the 
most  severe  ever  fought  on  this  continent ;  and  few  more  des- 
perate were  ever  fought  anywhere. 

9  A.M. —  .  .  .  Am  glad  to  say  that  I  am  much  better  to-day  ; 
for,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  have  been  under  the  weather  since  the 
battle.  The  want  of  rest,  and  anxiety,  brought  on  my  old  disease. 
The  battle  of  Wednesday  was  a  terrible  one.  I  presume  the  loss 
will  prove  not  l?ss  than  10,000  on  each  side.  Our  victory  was 
complete,  and  the  disorganized  rebel  army  has  rapidly  returned 
to  Virginia,  its  dreams  of  "invading  Pennsylvania"  dissipated 
for  ever.  I  feel  some  little  pride  in  having,  with  a  beaten  and 
demoralized  army,  defeated  Lee  so  utterly  and  saved  the  North 
so  completely.  Well,  one  of  these  days  history  will,  I  trust,  do 
me  justice  in  deciding  that  it  was  not  my  fault  that  the  campaign 
of  the  Peninsula  was  not  successful.  .  .  .  Since  I  left  Washing- 
ton, Stanton  has  again  asserted  that  /,  not  Pope,  lost  the  battle 
of  Manassas  No.  2  !  ...  I  am  tired  of  fighting  against  such  dis- 
advantages, and  feel  that  it  is  now  time  for  the  country  to  come 
to  my  help  and  remove  these  difficulties  from  my  path.  If  my 
countrymen  will  not  open  their  eyes  and  assist  themselves  they 
must  pardon  me  if  I  decline  longer  to  pursue  the  thankless 
avocation  of  serving  them. 

Sept.  20,  9  P.M.,  camp  near  Sharpsburg. —  ...  I  feel  that  I 
have  done  all  that  can  be  asked  in  twice  saving  the  country.  If 
I  continue  in  its  service  I  have  at  least  the  right  to  demand 


6 14  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

a  guarantee  that  I  shall  not  be  interfered  with.  I  know  I  can- 
not have  that  assurance  so  long  as  Stanton  continues  in  the  posi- 
tion of  Secretary  of  War  and  Halleck  as  general- in-chief.  .  .  . 
I  can  retire  from  the  service  for  sufficient  reasons  without  leaving 
any  stain  upon  my  reputation.  I  feel  now  that  this  last  short 
campaign  is  a  sufficient  legacy  for  our  child,  so  far  as  honor 
is  concerned.  .  .  .  You  should  see  my  soldiers  now !  You  never 
saw  anything  like  their  enthusiasm.  It  surpasses  anything  you 
ever  imagined.  .  .  .  My  tent  is  filled  quite  to  overflowing  with 
trophies  in  the  way  of  captured  secesh  battle-flags.  We  have 
more  than  have  been  taken  in  all  battles  put  together,  and  all 
sorts  of  inscriptions  on  them.  .  .  . 

Sept,  21,  Sunday^  a.m. —  ...  Do  you  know  that  I  have  not 
heard  one  word  from  Halleck,  the  President,  nor  the  Secretary 
of  War  about  the  last  great  battle !  All,  except  fault-finding, 
that  1  have  had  since  leaving  Washington  was  one  from  the 
President  about  the  Sunday  battle,  in  which  he  says,  "  God  bless 
you  and  all  with  you ! "  That  is  all  I  have ;  but  plenty  from 
Halleck  couched  in  almost  insulting  language  and  prophesying 
disaster  !  I  telegraphed  him  last  night  that  I  regretted  the 
uniformly  fault-finding  tone  of  his  despatches,  and  that  he 
had  not  as  yet  found  leisure  to  notice  the  recent  achieve- 
ments of  my  army.  .  .  . 

Sept,  22,  9  A.M. —  ...  I  rode  out  on  the  battle-field  yester- 
day. The  burial  of  the  dead  is  by  this  time  completed  ;  and  a 
terrible  work  it  has  been,  for  the  slain  counted  by  thousands  on 
each  side.  ...  1  look  upon  this  campaign  as  substantially  end- 
ed, and  my  present  intention  is  to  seize  Harper's  Ferry  and  hold 
it  with  a  strong  force  ;  then  go  to  work  and  reorganize  the  army 
ready  for  another  campaign.  ...  I  shall  not  go  to  Washington, 
if  I  can  help  it,  but  will  try  to  reorganize  the  army  somewhere 
near  Harper's  Ferry  or  Frederick.  ...  It  may  be  that,  now  that 
the  government  is  pretty  well  over  their  scare,  they  will  begin 
again  with  their  persecutions  and  throw  me  overboard  again.  I 
don't  care  if  they  do.  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  knowing  that 
God  has,  in  His  mercy,  a  second  time  made  me  the  instrument 
for  saving  the  nation,  and  am  content  with  the  honor  that  has 
fallen  to  my  lot.     I  have  seen  enough  of  public  life.     No  motive 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  615 

• 

of  ambition  can  now  retain  me  in  the  service.  The  only  thing 
that  can  keep  me  there  will  be  the  conviction  that  my  country 
needs  my  services  and  that  circumstances  make  it  necessary  for 
me  to  render  them.  I  am  confident  that  the  poison  still  rankles 
in  the  veins  of  my  enemies  at  Washington,  and  that  so  long  as 
they  live  it  will  remain  there.  ...  I  have  received  no  papers  con- 
taining the  news  of  the  last  battle,  and  do  not  know  the  effect  it 
has  produced  on  the  Northern  mind.  I  trust  it  has  been  a  good 
one,  and  that  1  am  re-established  in  the  confidence  of  the  best 
people  of  the  nation.  .  .  .  Everything  quiet  to-day ;  not  a  shot 
fired  as  yet.  1  am  moving  troops  down  to  Harper's  Ferry, 
and  hope  to  occupy  it  to-morrow.  Then  I  will  have  the 
Potomac  clear.  .  .  . 

Sept.  23,  Tuesday,  8  a.m.,  Sharpsburg  camp, —  .  .  .  The 
weather  is  splendid,  though  I  should  like  a  little  rain  to  raise 
the  Potomac  slightly.  We  are  all  well.  I  am  entirely  well  now, 
and  rather  better  for  my  little  attack  of  illness.  .  .  . 

Sept,  25,  7.30  A.M. —  .  .  .  We  are  so  near  the  mountains 
that  it  is  quite  cold  at  night.  ...  I  think  the  health  of  our  men 
is  improving  much  :  they  look  a  great  deal  better  than  they  did 
on  the  Peninsula ;  eyes  look  brighter  and  faces  better.  .  .  .  My 
plans  are  not  easily  given,  for  I  really  do  not  know  whether  I  am 
to  do  as  I  choose  or  not.  I  shall  keep  on  doing  what  seems  best 
until  brought  up  with  a  round  turn.  My  own  judgment  is  to 
watch  the  line  of  the  Potomac  until  the  water  rises,  then  to  con- 
centrate everything  near  Harper's  Ferry,  reorganize  the  army  as 
promptly  as  possible,  and  then  if  secesh  remains  near  Winchester 
to  attack  him.  If  he  retires,  to  follow  him  up  and  attack  him 
near  Richmond.  ...  It  is  very  doubtful  whether  I  shall  remain 
in  the  service  after  the  rebels  have  left  this  vicinity.  The  Presi- 
dent's late  proclamation,  the  continuation  of  Stanton  and  Halleck 
in  office,  render  it  almost  impossible  for  me  to  retain  my  commis- 
sion and  self-respect  at  the  same  time.  ...  It  iV  a  mercy  of  God 
that  none  of  my  staff  have  been  hit,  considering  how  much  they 
have  been  exposed  to  danger.  They  have  had  plenty  of  horses 
killed,  sabres  hit,  clothes  cut,  etc.,  but  have  thus  far  escaped 
unhurt.  .  .  .  Am  going  on  a  visit  to  Harper's  Ferry  this  morn- 
ing. .  .  . 


6l6  MeCLELlAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Sept,  26,  10.30  P.M.,  Sharpsburg  camp, —  .  .  .  Pretty  well 
tired  out  by  a  long  ride  to  Harper's  Ferry  to-day.  I  rode  down 
in  my  ambulance,  but  when  there  took  a  long  and  fatiguing  ride 
on  horseback  over  the  Maryland  Heights  to  determine  upon  the 
question  of  its  defence.  I  did  not  have  time  to  go  over  the 
Virginia  side,  but  propose  doing  that  to-morrow.  Our  camp 
will  be  thrown  a  little  down  in  that  direction  to-morrow,  so  I 
shall  not  have  quite  so  far  to  travel  in  returning.  ...  It  is  so 
cool  this  evening  that  I  have  a  fire  in  front  of  my  tent  and  am 
sitting  in  my  overcoat.  .  \  . 

Sept,  29,  Sharpsburgy  a.m. —  ...  I  think  secesh  has  gone  to 
Winchester.  The  last  I  heard  last  night  was  to  that  effect.  If 
he  has  gone  there  I  will  be  able  to  arrange  my  troops  more  with 
a  view  to  comfort,  and,  if  it  will  only  rain  a  little  so  as  to  raise 
the  river,  will  feel  quite  justified  in  asking  for  a  short  leave.  .  .  . 
We  are  having  very  fine  weather.  .  .  .  Not  yet  even  have  I  a 
word  from  any  one  in  Washington  about  the  battle  of  the  Antie- 
tam,  and  nothing  in  regard  to  South  Mountain,  except  from  the 
President  in  the  following  :  "  Your  despatch  received.  God 
bless  you  and  all  with  you !  Can't  you  beat  them  some  more 
before  they  get  off?**     I  don't  look  for  any  thanks. 

P.M. — I  have  been  hard  at  work  all  day  upon  a  preliminary 
report  of  the  recent  battles,  and  find  that,  in  order  to  arrive  at 
anything  like  the  truth,  I  must  to-morrow  take  all  my  aides  to 
the  ground  and  talk  with  them  there.  I  would  really  prefer 
fighting  three  battles  to  writing  the  report  of  one.  You  can 
hardly  imagine  the  difficulties  of  such  a  task.  You  are  neces- 
sarily combating  the  amour  propre  of  every  officer  concerned 
when  you  say  one  word  in  commendation  of  anybody  else.  I 
ought  to  treat  Bumside  very  severely,  and  probably  will ;  yet  I 
hate  to  do  it.  He  is  very  slow ;  is  not  fit  to  command  more  than 
a  regiment.  If  I  treat  him  as  he  deserves  he  will  be  my  mortal 
enemy  hereafter.  If  I  do  not  praise  him  as  he  thinks  he  de- 
serves, and  as  I  know  he  does  not,  he  will  be  at  least  a  very 
lukewarm  friend.  I  mention  this  merely  as  an  instance  that 
you  will  comprehend. 

Oct,  I,  7.30  A.M. —  ...  A  cloudy  day.  If  it  does  not  rain 
I  think  I  will  go  to  Williamsport  and  Hagerstown  to-day,  to  see 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  617 

that  part  of  the  country  ;  for  there  is  no  telling  but  that  I  might 
have  to  fight  a  battle  there  one  of  these  days,  and  it  is  very 
convenient  to  know  the  ground.  In  this  last  battle  the  rebels 
possessed  an  immense  advantage  in  knowing  every  part  of  the 
ground,  while  I  knew  only  what  I  could  see  from  a  distance. 
...  1  rode  all  over  the  battle-field  again  yesterday,  so  as  to  be 
sure  that  I  understood  it  all  before  writing  my  report.  I  was 
but  the  more  impressed  with  the  great  difficulties  of  the  under- 
taking and  the  magnitude  of  the  success.  Did  I  tell  you  that 
our  losses  at  South  Mountain  and  Antietam  amounted  to  within 
one  or  two  hundred  of  15,000 ;  that  we  took  some  6,000  pri- 
soners, 39  colors,  14  guns,  14,500  small  arms,  etc.,  etc.?  Pretty 
fair  trophies  after  a  battle  so  stubbornly  contested.  .  .  .  Yester- 
day 1  received  at  last  a  telegram  from  Halleck  about  the  battle 
of  Antietam.  ...  I  don't  know  where  we  are  drifting,  but  do 
not  like  the  looks  of  things ;  time  will  show.  ...  1  do  not  yet 
know  what  are  the  military  plans  of  the  gigantic  intellects  at 
the  head  of  the  government.  .  .  . 


AFTER  AN  TIE  TAM,  6 1 9 

One  division  of  Sumner's  and  all  of  Hooker's  corps  on  the 
right  had,  after  fighting  most  valiantly  for  several  hours,  been 
overpowered  by  numbers,  driven  back  in  great  disorder,  and 
much  scattered,  so  that  they  were  for  the  time  somewhat  demo- 
ralized. 

In  Hooker's  corps,  according  to  the  return  made  by  Gen. 
Meade  commanding,  there  were  but  6,729  men  present  on  the 
1 8th  ;  whereas  on  the  morning  of  the  2  2d  there  were  13,093 
men  present  for  duty  in  the  same  corps,  showing  that  previous 
to  and  during  the  battle  6,364  men  were  separated  from  their 
command. 

Gen.  Meade,  in  an  official  communication  upon  this  subject, 
dated  Sept.  18,  1862,  says  : 

"  I  enclose  a  field  return  of  the  corps,  made  this  afternoon, 
which  I  desire  you  will  lay  before  the  commanding  general.  I 
am  satisfied  the  great  reduction  in  the  corps  since  the  recent 
engagements  is  not  due  solely  to  the  casualties  of  battle,  and 
that  a  considerable  number  of  men  are  still  in  the  re.ir,  some 
having  dropped  out  on  the  march,  and  many  dispersing  and 
leaving  yesterday  during  the  fight.  I  think  the  efficiency  of  the 
corps,  so  far  as  it  goes,  good.  To  resist  an  attack  in  our  pre- 
sent strong  position  I  think  they  may  be  depended  on,  and  I 
hope  they  will  perform  duty  in  case  we  make  an  attack,  though 
I  do  not  think  their  morale  is  as  good  for  an  offensive  as  a 
defensive  movement." 

One  division  of  Sumner's  corps  had  also  been  overpowered, 
and  was  a  good  deal  scattered  and  demoralized.  It  was  not 
deemed  by  its  corps  commander  in  proper  condition  to  attack 
the  enemy  vigorously  the  next  day. 

Some  of  the  new  troops  on  the  left,  although  many  of  them 
fought  well  during  the  battle  and  are  entitled  to  great  credit,* 
were,  at  the  close  of  the  action,  driven  back  and  their  morale 
impaired. 

On  the  morning  of  the  i8th  Gen.  Bumside,  as  before  stated, 
requested  me  to  send  him  another  division  to  assist  in  holding 
his  position  on  the  other  side  of  the  Antietam,  and  to  enable 
him  to  withdraw  his  corps  if  he  should  be  attacked  by  a  supe- 
rior force. 

A  large  number  of  our  heaviest  and  most  efficient  batteries 
had  consumed  all  their  ammunition  on  the  i6th  and  17th  and  it 

was  impossible  to  supply  them  until  late  on  the  following  day. 

46 


AFTER  AN  TIE  TAM.  621 

dark  and  carry  the  enemy's  batteries.  This  was  gallantly  done 
under  the  fire  of  the  enemy ;  several  guns,  caissons,  etc.,  were 
taken,  and  their  supports  driven  back  half  a  mile. 

The  information  obtained  during  the  progress  of  this  afifair 
indicated  that  the  mass  of  the  enemy  had  retreated  on  the 
Charlestown  and  Martinsburg  roads  towards  Winchester.  To 
verify  this,  and  to  ascertain  how  far  the  enemy  had  retired, 
Gen.  Porter  was  authorized  to  detach  from  his  corps,  on  the 
morning  of  the  20th,  a  reconnoitring  party  in  greater  force. 
This  detachment  crossed  the  river  and  advanced  about  a  mile, 
when  it  was  attacked  by  a  large  body  of  the  enemy  lying  in 
ambush  in  the  woods,  and  driven  back  across  the  river  with 
considerable  loss.  This  reconnoissance  showed  that  the  enemy 
was  still  in  force  on  the  Virginia  bank  of  the  Potomac,  pre- 
pared to  resist  our  further  advance. 

It  was  reported  to  me  on  the  19th  that  Gen.  Stuart  had 
made  his  appearance  at  Williamsport  with  some  4,000  cavalry 
and  six  pieces  of  artillery,  and  that  10,000  infantry  were  march- 
ing on  the  same  point  from  the  direction  of  Winchester.  I 
ordered  Gen.  Couch  to  march  at  once  with  his  division  and  a 
part  of  Pleason ton's  cavalry,  with  Franklin's  corps  within  sup- 
porting distance,  for  the  purpose  of  endeavoring  to  capture  this 
force.  Gen.  Couch  made  a  prompt  and  rapid  march  to  Williams- 
port,  and  attacked  the  enemy  vigorously,  but  they  made  their 
escape  across  the  river. 

I  despatched  the  following  telegraphic  report  to  the  general- 
in-chief : 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Sharpsburg,  Sept.  19,  1862. 

I  have  the  honor  to  report  that  Maryland  is  entirely  freed 
from  the  presence  of  the  enemy,  who  has  been  driven  across  the 
Potomac.  No  fears  need  now  be  entertained  for  the  safety  of 
Pennsylvania,     I  shall  at  once  occupy  Harper's  Ferry. 

G.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.-Gen,  Commanding. 

Maj.-Gen.  H.  W.  Halleck, 

Commanding  U.  S,  Army, 

On  the  following  day,  Sept.  20,  I  received  this  telegram  from 
Gen.  Halleck  : 


622  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

"  We  are  still  left  entirely  in  the  dark  in  regard  to  your 
own  movements  and  those  of  the  enemy.  This  should  not  be 
so.  You  should  keep  me  advised  of  both,  so  far  as  you  know 
them." 

To  which  I  answered  as  follows  : 

Sept.  20. — Your  telegram  of  to-day  is  received.  I  telegraphed 
you  yesterday  all  I  knew,  and  had  nothing  more  to*  inform  you  of 
until  this  evening.  Williams's  corps  (Banks's)  occupied  Mary- 
land Heights  at  one  p.m.  to-day.  The  rest  of  the  army  is  near 
here,  except  Couch's  division,  which  is  at  this  moment  engaged 
with  the  enemy  in  front  of  Williamsport;  the  enemy  is  retiring, 
via  Charlestown  and  Martinsburg,  on  Winchester.  He  last  night 
reoccupied  Williamsport  by  a  small  force,  but  will  be  out  of  it  by 
morning.    I  think  he  has  a  force  of  infantry  near  Shepherdstown. 

I  regret  that  you  find  it  necessary  to  couch  every  despatch 
I  have  the  honor  to  receive  from  you  in  a  spirit  of  fault-finding, 
and  that  you  have  not  yet  found  leisure  to  say  one  word  in  com- 
mendation of  the  recent  achievements  of  this  army,  or  even  to 
allude  to  them. 

I  have  abstained  from  giving  the  number  of  gims,  colors, 
small  arms,  prisoners,  etc.,  captured,  until  I  could  do  so  with 
some  accuracy,  I  hope  by  to-morrow  evening  to  be  able  to 
give   at   least  an  approximate  statement. 

On  the  same  day  I  telegraphed  as  follows  to  Gen.  Halleck  : 

Sept.  20. — As  the  rebel  army,  now  on  the  Virginia  side  of  the 
Potomac,  must  in  a  great  measure  be  dependent  for  supplies  of 
ammunition  and  provisions  upon  Richmond,  I  would  respectfully 
suggest  that  Gen.  Banks  be  directed  to  send  out  a  cavalry  force 
to  cut  their  supply  communication  opposite  Washington.  This 
would  seriously  embarrass  their  operations,  and  will  aid  this  army 
materially. 

Maryland  Heights  were  occupied  by  Gen.  Williams's  corps 
on  this  day,  and  on  the  2 2d  Gen.  Sumner  took  possession  of 
Harper's  Ferry. 

It  will  be  remembered  that  at  the  time  I  was  assigned  to  the 
command  of  the  forces  for  the  defence  of  the  national  capital, 
on  the  2d  day  of  Sept.,  1862,  the  greater  part  of  all  the  avail- 
able troops  were  suffering  under  the  disheartening  influences  of 
the  serious  defeat  they  had  encountered  during  the  brief  and  un- 
fortunate campaign  of  Gen.  Pope.     Their  numbers  were  greatly 


AFTER  ANTIETAM.  623 

reduced  by  casualties,  their  confidence  was  much  shaken,  and 
they  had  lost  something  of  that  esprit  de  corps  which  is  indis- 
pensable to  the  efficiency  of  an  army.  Moreover,  they  had 
left  behind,  lost,  or  worn  out  the  greater  part  of  their  clothing 
and  camp  equipage,  which  required  renewal  before  they  could 
be   in   proper  condition  to  take  the  field  again. 

The  intelligence  that  the  enemy  was  crossing  the  Potomac 
into  Maryland  was  received  in  Washington  on  the  4th  of  Sept., 
and  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  was  again  put  in  motion,  under 
my  direction,  on  the  following  day,  so  that  but  a  very  brief 
interval  of  time  was  allowed  to  reorganize  or  procure  supplies. 

The  sanguinary  battles  of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam, 
fought  by  this  army  a  few  days  afterwards,  with  the  reconnois- 
sances  immediately  following,  resulted  in  a  loss  to  us  of  ten  gen- 
eral officers,  many  regimental  and  company  officers,  and  a  large 
number  of  enlisted  men,  amounting  in  the  aggregate  to  (15,220) 
fifteen  thousand  two  hundred  and  twenty.  Two  army  corps  had 
been  badly  cut  up,  scattered,  and  somewhat  demoralized  in  the 
action  of  the  17th. 

In  Gen.  Sumner's  corps  alone,  41  commissioned  officers  and 
819  enlisted  men  had  been  killed  ;  4  general  officers,  89  other 
commissioned  officers,  and  3,708  enlisted  men  had  been  wounded, 
besides  548  missing  ;  making  the  aggregate  loss  of  this  splendid 
veteran  corps,  in  this  one  battle,  5,209. 

In  Gen.  Hooker's  corps  the  casualties  of  the  same  engage- 
ment amounted  to  2,619. 

The  entire  army  had  been  greatly  exhausted  by  unavoidable 
overwork,  fatiguing  marches,  hunger,  and  want  of  sleep  and  rest, 
previous  to  the  last  battle. 

When  the  enemy  recrossed  the  Potomac  into  Virginia  the 
means  of  transportation  at  my  disposal  were  inadequate  to  fur- 
nish a  single  day's  supply  of  subsistence  in  advance. 

Many  of  the  troops  were  new  levies,  some  of  whom  had 
fought  like  veterans,  but  the  morale  of  others  had  been  a  good 
deal  impaired  in  those  severely  contested  actions,  and  they 
required  time  to  recover,  as  well  as  to  acquire  the  necessary 
drill  and  discipline. 

Under  these  circumstances  I  did  not  feel  authorized  to  cross 
the  river  with  the  main  army,  over  a  very  deep  and  difficult  ford, 
in  pursuit  of  the  retreating  enemy,  known  to  be  in  strong  force 


624  McCLELLAirS  OIVJ^  STORY. 

on  the  south  bank,  and  thereby  place  that  stream,  which  was 
liable  at  any  time  to  rise  above  a  fording  stage,  between  my 
army  and  its  base  of  supply. 

I  telegraphed  on  the  2 2d  to  the  general-in-chief  as  follows : 

As  soon  as  the  exigencies  of  the  service  will  admit  of  it  this 
army  should  be  reorganized.  It  is  absolutely  necessary,  to  secure 
its  efficiency,  that  the  old  skeleton  regiments  should  be  filled  up 
at  once  and  officers  appointed  to  supply  the  numerous  existing 
vacancies.  There  are  instances  where  captains  are  command- 
ing regiments,  and  companies  are  without  a  single  commissioned 
officer. 

On  the  23d  the  following  was  telegraphed  to  the  general-in- 
chief  : 

From  several  different  sources  I  learn  that  Gen.  R.  E.  Lee  is 
still  opposite  to  my  position,  at  Leestown,  between  Shepherds- 
town  and  Martinsburg,  and  that  Gen.  Jackson  is  on  the  Opequan 
creek,  about  three  miles  from  its  mouth,  both  with  large  force. 
There  are  also  indications  of  heavy  reinforcements  moving  to- 
wards them  from  Winchester  and  Charlestown.  I  have,  there- 
fore, ordered  Gen.  Franklin  to  take  position  with  his  corps  at  the 
cross-roads  about  one  mile  northwest  of  Bakersville,  on  the 
Bakersville  and  Williamsport  road,  and  Gen.  Couch  to  establish 
his  division  near  Downsville,  leaving  sufficient  force  at  Williams- 
port  to  watch  and  guard  the  ford  at  that  place.  The  fact  of  the 
enemy  remaining  so  long  in  our  front,  and  the  indications  of  an 
advance  of  reinforcements,  seem  to  indicate  that  he  will  give  us 
another  battle  with  all  his  available  force. 

As  I  mentioned  to  you  before,  our  army  has  been  ver)'  much 
reduced  by  casualties  in  the  recent  battles,  and  in  my  judgment 
all  the  reinforcements  of  old  troops  that  can  possibly  be  dispensed 
with  around  Washington  and  other  places  should  be  instantly 
pushed  forward  by  rail  to  this  army.  A  defeat  at  this  juncture 
would  be  ruinous  to  our  cause.  I  cannot  think  it  possible  that 
the  enemy  will  bring  any  forces  to  bear  uf>on  Washington  till 
after  the  question  is  decided  here  ;  but  if  he  should,  troops  can 
soon  be  sent  back  from  this  army  by  rail  to  reinforce  the  garrison 
there. 

The  evidence  I  have  that  reinforcements  are  coming  to  the 
rebel  army  consists  in  the  fact  that  long  columns  of  dust  extend- 
ing from  Winchester  to  Charlestown,  and  from  Charlestown  in 
this  direction,  and  also  troops  moving  this  way,  were  seen  last 
evening.  This  is  corroborated  by  citizens.  Gen.  Sumner,  with 
his  corps  and  Williams's  (Banks's),  occupies  Harper's  Ferr>-  and 


AFTER  AN  TIE  TAM.  625 

the  surrounding  heights.     I  think  he  will  be  able  to  hold  his 
position  till  reinforcements  arrive. 

On  the  27th  I  made  the  following  report: 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Sept.  27,  1862,  10  A.M. 

All  the  information  in  my  possession  goes  to  prove  that  the 
main  body  of  the  enemy  is  concentrated  not  far  from  Martins- 
burg,  with  some  troops  at  Charlestown ;  not  many  in  Winches- 
ter. Their  movements  of  late  have  been  an  extension  towards 
our  right  and  beyond  it.  They  are  receiving  reinforcements  in 
Winchester,  mainly,  I  think,  of  conscripts — perhaps  entirely  so. 

This  army  is  not  now  in  condition  to  undertake  another  cam- 
paign nor  to  bring  on  another  battle,  unless  great  advantages 
are  offered  by  some  mistake  of  the  enemy,  or  pressing  military 
exigencies  render  it  necessary.  We  are  greatly  deficient  in  offi- 
cers. Many  of  the  old  regiments  are  reduced  to  mere  skeletons. 
The  new  regiments  need  instruction.  Not  a  day  should  be  lost 
in  filling  the  old  regiments — our  main  dependence — and  in  sup- 
plying vacancies  among  the  officers  by  promotion. 

My  present  purpose  is  to  hold  the  army  about  as  it  is  now, 
rendering  Harper's  Ferry  secure  and  watching  the  river  closely, 
intending  to  attack  the  enemy  should  he  attempt  to  cross  to  this 
side. 

Our  possession  of  Harper's  Ferry  gives  us  the  great  advantage 
of  a  secure  debouch,  but  we  cannot  avail  ourselves  of  it  until  the 
railroad  bridge  is  finished,  because  we  cannot  otherwise  supply  a 
greater  number  of  troops  than  we  now  have  on  the  Virginia  side 
at  that  point.  When  the  river  rises  so  that  the  enemy  cannot 
cross  in  force,  I  purpose  concentrating  the  army  somewhere  near 
Harper's  Ferry,  and  then  acting  according  to  circumstances — ^viz., 
moving  on  Winchester,  if  from  the  position  and  attitude  of  the 
enemy  we  are  likely  to  gain  a  great  advantage  by  doing  so,  or 
else  devoting  a  reasonable  time  to  the  organization  of  the  army 
and  instruction  of  the  new  troops,  preparatory  to  an  advance  on 
whatever  line  may  be  determined.  In  any  event  I  regard  it  as 
absolutely  necessary  to  send  new  regiments  at  once  to  the  old 
corps,  for  purposes  of  instruction,  and  that  the  old  regiments  be 
filled  at  once.  I  have  00  fears  as  to  an  attack  on  Washington  by 
the  line  of  Manassas.  Holding  Harper's  Ferry,  as  I  do,  they  will 
not  run  the  risk  of  an  attack  on  their  flank  and  rear  while  they 
have  the  garrison  of  Washington  in  their  front. 

I  rather  apprehend  a  renewal  of  the  attempt  in  Maryland, 
should  the  river  remain  low  for  a  great  length  of  time,  and 
should  they  receive  considerable  addition  to  their  force.  I 
would  be  glad  to  have  Peck's  division  as  soon  as  possible.  I 
am  surprised  that  Sigel's  men  should  have  been  sent  to  Western 


626  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

Virginia  without  my  knowledge.  The  last  I  heard  from  you  on 
the  subject  was  that  they  were  at  my  disposition.  In  the  last 
battles  the  enemy  was  undoubtedly  greatly  superior  to  us  in 
number,  and  it  was  only  by  very  hard  fighting  that  we  gained 
the  advantage  we  did.  As  it  was,  the  result  was  at  one  period 
very  doubtful,  and  we  had  all  we  could  do  to  win  the  day.  If 
the  enemy  receives  considerable  reinforcements  and  we  none, 
it  is  possible  that  I  may  have  too  much  on  my  hands  in  the  next 
battle.  My  own  view  of  the  proper  policy  to  be  pursued  is  to  retain 
in  Washington  merely  the  force  necessary  to  garrison  it,  and  to 
send  everything  else  available  to  reinforce  this  army.  The  rail- 
ways give  us  the  means  of  promptly  reinforcing  Washington, 
should  it  become  necessary.  If  I  am  reinforced  as  I  ask,  and 
am  allowed  to  take  my  own  course,  I  will  hold  myself  respon- 
sible /or  the  safety  of  Washington.  Several  persons  recently 
from  Richmond  say  that  there  are  no  troops  there  except  con- 
scripts, and  they  few  in  number.  I  hope  to  give  you  details  as 
to  late  battles  by  this  evening.  I  am  about  starting  again  for 
Harper's  Ferry. 

G.  B.  McClellan,  Maj.'Gen.  Commanding. 

Maj.-Gen.  Halleck, 

Gen,  'in-  Chiefs  Washington, 

The  work  of  reorganizing,  drilling,  and  supplying  the  army 
I  began  at  the  earliest  moment.  The  different  corps  were  sta- 
tioned along  the  river  in  the  best  positions  to  cover  and  guard 
the  fords.  The  great  extent  of  the  river-front  from  near  Wash- 
ington to  Cumberland  (some  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles), 
together  with  the  line  of  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  was 
to  be  carefully  watched  and  guarded,  to  prevent,  if  possible,  the 
enemy's  raids.  Reconnoissances  upon  the  Virginia  side  of  the 
river,  for  the  purpose  of  learning  the  enemy's  positions  and 
movements,  were  made  frequently,  so  that  our  cavalry,  which 
from  the  time  we  left  Washington  had  performed  the  most 
laborious  service,  and  had  from  the  commencement  been  defi- 
cient in  numbers,  was  found  totally  inadequate  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  army. 

This  overwork  had  broken  down  the  greater  part  of  the 
horses  ;  disease  had  appeared  among  them,  and  but  a  very  small 
portion  of  our  original  cavalry  force  was  fit  for  service. 

To  such  an  extent  had  this  arm  become  reduced  that  when 
Gen.  Stuart  made  his  raid  into  Pennsylvania  on  the  nth  of 
October  with  2,000  men,  I  could  only  mount  800  men  to  follow 
him. 


MR,  LINCOLN'S  CONFIDENCE.  627 

Harper's  Ferry  was  occupied  on  the  2  2d,  and,  in  order  to 
prevent  a  catastrophe  similar  to  the  one  which  had  happened 
to  Col.  Miles,  I  immediately  ordered  Maryland,  Bolivar,  and 
Loudon  Heights  to  be  strongly  fortified.  This  was  done  as  far 
as  the  time  and  means  at  our  disposal  permitted. 

The  main  army  of  the  enemy  during  this  time  remained  in 
the  vicinity  of  Martinsburg  and  Bunker  Hill,  and  occupied  itself 
in  drafting  and  coercing  every  able-bodied  citizen  into  the 
ranks,  forcibly  taking  their  property  where  it  was  not  volun- 
tarily offered,  burning  bridges,  and  destroying  railroads. 

On  the  first  day  of  October  his  Excellency  the  President  hon- 
ored the  Army  of  the  Potomac  with  a  visit,  and  remained  several 
days,  during  which  he  went  through  the  different  encampments, 
reviewed  the  troops,  and  went  over  the  battle-fields  of  South 
Mountain  and  Antietam.  I  had  the  opportunity  during  this 
visit  to  describe  to  him  the  operations  of  the  army  since  the 
time  it  left  Washington,  and  gave  him  my  reasons  for  not  fol- 
lowing the  enemy  after  he  crossed  the  Potomac. 

He  was  accompanied  by  Gen.  McClernand,  John  W.  Gar- 
rett, the  Secretary  of  State  of  Illinois,  and  others  whom  I  have 
forgotten.  During  the  visit  we  had  many  and  long  consulta- 
tions alone.  I  urged  him  to  follow  a  conservative  course,  and 
supposed  from  the  tenor  of  his  conversation  that  he  would 
do  so.  He  more  than  once  assured  me  that  he  was  fully  satis- 
fied with  my  whole  course  from  the  beginning ;  that  the  only 
fault  he  could  possibly  find  was  that  I  was  perhaps  too  prone 
to  be  sure  that  everything  was  ready  before  acting,  but  that 
my  actions  were  all  right  when  I  started.  I  said  to  him  that 
I  thought  a  few  experiments  with  those  who  acted  before  they 
were  ready  would  probably  convince  him  that  in  the  end  I  con- 
sumed less  time  than  they  did.  He  told  me  that  he  regarded 
me  as  the  only  general  in  the  service  capable  of  organizing  and 
commanding  a  large  army,  and  that  he  would  stand  by  me. 
We  parted  on  the  field  of  South  Mountain,  whither  I  had 
accompanied  him.  He  said  there  that  he  did  not  see  how  we 
ever  gained  that  field,  and  that  he  was  sure  that,  if  I  had 
defended  it,  Lee  could  never  have  carried  it. 

We  spent  some  time  on  the  battle-field  and  conversed  fully 
on  the  state  of  affairs.  He  told  me  that  he  was  entirely  satisfied 
with  me  and  with  all  that  I  had  done ;  that  he  would  stand  by 


628  MeCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

me  against  "  all  comers  " ;  that  he  wished  me  to  continue  my 
preparations  for  a  new  campaign,  not  to  stir  an  inch  until  fully 
ready,  and  when  ready  to  do  what  I  thought  best.  He  repeated 
that  he  was  entirely  satisfied  with  me  ;  that  I  should  be  let  alone ; 
that  he  would  stand  by  me.  I  have  no  doubt  that  he  meant 
exactly  what  he  said.  He  parted  from  me  with  the  utmost  cor- 
diality.    We  never  met  again  on  this  earth. 

He  had  hardly  reached  Washington  before  Cox's  division 
was  taken  from  me  and  the  order  oi  Oct.  6  reached  me !  A 
singular  commentary  on  the  uncertainty  of  human  affairs  I 

On  the  5th  of  Oct.  the  division  of  Gen.  Cox  (about  5,000 
men)  was  ordered  from  my  command  to  Western  Virginia. 

On  the  7  th  of  Oct.  I  received  the  following  telegram  from 
Gen.  Halleck  : 


"  Oct,  6. — I  am  instructed  to  telegraph  you  as  follows  :  The 
President  directs  that  you  cross  the  Potomac  and  give  battle  to 
the  enemy  or  drive  him  south.  Your  army  must  move  now 
while  the  roads  are  good.  If  you  cross  the  river  between  the 
enemy  and  Washington,  and  cover  the  latter  by  your  operation, 
you  can  be  reinforced  with  30,000  men.  If  you  move  up  the 
valley  of  the  Shenandoah  not  more  than  12,000  or  15,000  can 
be  sent  to  you.  The  President  advises  the  interior  line  between 
Washington  and  the  enemy,  but  does  not  order  it.  He  is  very 
desirous  that  your  army  move  as  soon  as  possible.  You  will 
immediately  report  what  line  you  adopt  and  when  you  intend 
to  cross  the  river ;  also  to  what  point  the  reinforcements  are  to 
be  sent.  It  is  necessary  that  the  plan  of  your  operations  be  posi- 
tively determined  on  before  orders  are  given  for  building  bridges 
and  repairing  railroads.  I  am  directed  to  add  that  the  Secretary 
of  War  and  the  general-in-chief  fully  concur  with  the  President 
in  these  instructions." 


On  the  loth  of  Oct.  Stuart  crossed  the  river  at  McCoy's  Ferry 
with  2,000  cavalry  and  a  battery  of  horse-artillery,  on  his  raid 
into  Maryland  and  Pennsylvania,  making  it  necessary  to  use  all 
our  cavalry  against  him.  This  exhausting  service  completely 
broke  down  nearly  all  of  our  cavalry  horses,  and  rendered  a 
remount  absolutely  indispensable  before  we  could  advance  on 
the  enemy. 

At  the  time  I  received  the  order  of  Oct.  6  to  cross  the  river 
and  attack  the  enemy  the  army  was  wholly  deficient   in  cavalry, 


SUPPUES  LA CKING.  blCj 

and  a  large  part  of  our  troops  were  in  want  of  shoes,  blankets, 
and  other  indispensable  articles  of  clothing,  notwithstanding  all 
the  efforts  that  had  been  made  since  the  battle  of  Antietam,  and 
even  prior  to  that  date,  to  refit  the  army  with  clothing  as  well  as 
horses.  I  at  once  consulted  with  Col.  Ingalls,  the  chief-quarter- 
master, who  believed  that  the  necessary  articles  could  be  supplied 
in  about  three  days.  Orders  were  immediately  issued  to  the 
different  commanders  who  had  not  already  sent  in  their  requisi- 
tions to  do  so  at  once,  and  all  the  necessary  steps  were  forthwith 
taken  by  me  to  insure  a  prompt  delivery  of  the  supplies.  The 
requisitions  were  forwarded  to  the  proper  department  at  Wash- 
ington, and  I  expected  that  the  articles  would  reach  our  depots 
during  the  three  days  specified  ;  but  day  after  day  elapsed,  and 
only  a  small  portion  of  the  clothing  arrived.  Corps  commanders, 
upon  receiving  notice  from  the  quartermasters  that  they  might 
expect  to  receive  their  supplies  at  certain  dates,  sent  the  trains 
for  them,  which,  after  waiting,  were  compelled  to  return  empty. 
Several  instances  occurred  where  these  trains  went  back  and 
forth  from  the  camps  to  the  depots  as  often  as  four  or  five  dif- 
ferent times,  without  receiving  their  supplies,  and  I  was  informed 
by  one  corps  commander  that  his  wagon-train  had  travelled  over 
one  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  to  and  from  the  depots,  before  he 
succeeded  in  obtaining  his  clothing. 

The  corps  of  Gen.  Franklin  did  not  get  its  clothing  until  after 
it  had  crossed  the  Potomac  and  was  moving  into  Virginia.  Gen. 
Reynolds's  corps  was  delayed  a  day  at  Berlin  to  complete  its  sup- 
plies, and  Gen.  Porter  only  completed  his  on  reaching  the  vicinity 
of  Harper's  Ferry. 

I  made  every  exertion  in  my  power,  and  my  quartermasters 
did  the  same,  to  have  these  supplies  hurried  forward  rapidly ; 
and  I  was  repeatedly  told  that  they  had  filled  the  requisitions  at 
Washington,  and  that  the  supplies  had  been  forwarded.  But 
they  did  not  come  to  us,  and  of  course  were  inaccessible  to  the 
army.  I  did  not  fail  to  make  frequent  representation  of  this 
condition  of  things  to  the  general-in  chief,  and  it  appears  that  he 
referred  the  matter  to  the  quartermaster-general,  who  constantly 
replied  that  the  supplies  had  been  promptly  ordered.  Notwith- 
standing this,  they  did  not  reach  our  depots. 

The  following  extracts  are  from  telegrams  upon  this  sub- 
ject : 


630  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

To  Gen.  Haileck,  Oct,  11. — We  have  been  making  every 
effort  to  get  supplies  of  clothing  for  this  army,  and  Col.  Ingalls 
has  received  advices  that  it  has  been  forwarded  by  railroad  ; 
but,  owing  to  bad  management  on  the  roads,  or  from  some  other 
cause,  it  comes  in  very  slowly,  and  it  will  take  a  much  longer 
time  than  was  anticipated  to  get  articles  that  are  absolutely  indis- 
pensable to  the  army,  unless  the  railroad  managers  forward  sup- 
plies more  rapidly. 

To  Gen,  Halleck^  Oct,  11. — I  am  compelled  again  to  call  your 
attention  to  the  great  deficiency  of  shoes,  and  other  indispens- 
able articles  of  clothing,  that  still  exists  in  some  of  the  corps  in 
this  army.  Upon  the  assurances  of  the  chief-quartermaster,  who 
based  his  calculation  upon  information  received  from  Washing- 
ton that  clothing  would  be  forwarded  at  certain  times,  corps 
commanders  sent  their  wagons  to  Hagerstown  and  Harper's 
Ferry  for  it.  It  did  not  arrive  as  promised,  and  has  not  yet 
arrived.  Unless  some  measures  are  taken  to  insure  the  prompt 
forwarding  of  these  supplies,  there  will  necessarily  be  a  cor- 
responding delay  in  getting  the  army  ready  to  move,  as  the  men 
cannot  march  without  shoes.  Everything  has  been  done  that 
can  be  done  at  these  headquarters  to  accomplish  the  desired 
result. 

To  Gen,  Halleck^  Oct.  15, — I  am  using  every  possible  exer- 
tion to  get  this  army  ready  to-move.  It  was  only  yesterday  that 
a  part  of  our  shoes  and  clothing  arrived  at  Hagerstown.  It  is 
being  issued  to  the  troops  as  rapidly  as  possible. 

To  Col.  Ingalls^  Oct.  15. — Gen.  Franklin  reports  that  there 
is  by  no  means  as  much  clothing  as  was  called  for  at  Hagers- 
town. I  think,  therefore,  you  had  better  have  additional  sup- 
plies, especially  of  shoes,  forwarded  to  Harper's  Ferry  as  soon  as 
possible. 

To  Col.  Ingalls^  Oct.  16. — Gen.  J.  F.  Reynolds  just  tele- 
graphs as  follows  :  "  My  quartermaster  reports  that  there  are  no 
shoes,  tents,  blankets,  or  knapsacks  at  Hagerstown.  He  was  able 
to  procure  only  a  complete  supply  of  overcoats  and  pants,  with 
a  few  socks,  drawers,  and  coats.  This  leaves  many  of  the  men 
yet  without  a  shoe.  My  requisitions  call  for  5,255  pairs  of 
shoes." 

Please  push  the  shoes  and  stockings  up  to  Harper's  Ferry  as 
fast  as  possible. 

From    Gen.   Sumner,  Oct.    7. — "I   h^ve   given   orders   upon 


SUPPLIES  LA  CKING,  63 1 

orders  about  the  clothing,  but  my  officers  can  get  nothing  from 
Washington,  and  some  staff  officers  there  had  the  impudence  to 
say  that  I  had  no  right  to  sign  requisitions." 


From  Col.  Itif^aUs^  Oct.  9. — "  You  did  right  in  sending  cloth- 
ing to  Harper's  Ferry.  You  will  not  be  able  to  send  too  much 
or  too  quickly.  We  want  blankets,  shoes,  canteens,  etc.,  very 
much." 


From  CoL  Ingaiis  to  Quartermaster  in  Philadelphia^  Oct.  10. — 
"Shipments  to  Hagerstown  must  be  made  direct  through,  to 
avoid  the  contemptible  delays  at  Harrisburg.  If  Col.  Crosman 
was  ordered  to  send  clothing,  I  hope  he  has  sent  it,  for  the  suf- 
fering and  impatience  are  excessive." 

From  Col.  Ingaiis^  Oct.  13. — "Has  the  clothing  arrived  yet? 
If  not,  do  you  know  where  it  is  ?  What  clothing  was  taken  by 
the  rebels  at  Chambersburg  ?  Did  they  capture  any  property 
that  was  en  route  to  you  ?  Have  we  not  got  clothing  at  Harris- 
burg ?  Send  an  agent  over  the  road  to  obtain  information  and 
hurry  up  the  supplies.     Reply  at  once.'' 


From  Gen.  Haiieck,  Oct.  13. — "  Your  telegram  in  regard  to 
supplies  has  been  referred  to  the  quartermaster-general,  and  he 
replies  that  everything  asked  for  had  been  sent  or  ordered.  The 
movement  of  your  reinforcements  by  railroads  has  probably  de- 
layed the  transportation  of  some  portion  of  them.  It  is  difficult 
to  supply  the  waste  of  horses.' 


t» 


From  F.  Loivry^  Capt.  and  Quartermaster^  Oct,  15. — "  I  have 
just  returned  from  Hagerstown,  where  I  have  been  for  the  cloth- 
ing for  the  corps.  There  was  nothing  there  but  overcoats,  trou- 
sers, and  a  few  uniform  coats  and  socks.  There  were  not  any 
shoes,  blankets,  shirts,  or  shelter-tents.  Will  you  please  tell  me 
where  and  when  the  balance  can  be  had?  Shall  I  send  to  Har- 
per's Ferry  for  them  to-morrow  ?  The  corps  surgeon  has  just 
made  a  requisition  for  forty-five  hospital-tents.  There  are  none 
at  Hagerstown.  Will  you  please  to  inform  me  if  I  can  get  them 
at  Harper's  Ferry  ?" 


From  Assist. -Quarter master  G.  W.  Weeks^  Oct.  15. — "I  want 
at  least  ten  thousand  (10,000)  suits  of  clothing  in  addition  to 
what  I  have  received.     It  should  be  here  now." 


632  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

From  A.  Bliss,  Capt.  and  Assist.-QuarUrmasUr,  Oct.  22. — "We 
have  bootees,  12,000  ;  greatcoats,  4,000  ;  drawers  and  shirts  are 
gone;  blankets  and  stockings  nearly  so;  15,000  each  of  these 
four  articles  are  wanted." 


from  Col.  Ingalls,  Oct.  34. — "  Please  send  to  Capt.  Bliss,  at 
Harper's  Ferry,  10,000  blankets,  la.ooo  caps,  5,000  overcoats, 
10,000  pairs  bootees,  a.ooo  pairs  artillery  and  cavalry  boots, 
15,000  pairs  stockings,  15,000  drawers,  and  15,000  pants.  The 
clothing  arrives  slowly.  Can  it  not  be  hurried  along  taster  ? 
May  I  ask  you  to  obtain  authority  for  this  shipment?" 


From  Capt.  Weeks,  Oct.  30. — "  Clothing  has  arrived  this  morn- 
ing. None  taken  by  rebels.  Shall  I  supply  Franklin,  and  retain 
portions  for  Porter  and  Reynolds  until  called  for  ? " 


The  following  statement,  taken  from  a  report  of  the  chief- 
quartermaster  with  the  army,  will  show  what  progress  was  made 
in  supplying  the  army  with  clothing  from  the  ist  of  Sept.  lo  the 
date  of  crossing  the  Potomac  on  the  31st  of  Oct.,  and  that  a 
greater  part  of  the  clothing  did  not  reach  our  depots  until  after 
the  14th  of  Oct. : 


Statement  of  clothing  and  equipage  received  at  the  different  depots  of 
the  Army  of  the  Potomac  from  Sept.  r,  1862,  lo  Oct.  31,  1862. 


Rtui.ed*[ 

1 

i. 

1 
t 

1 

2 
1 

8 

I 

1 
1 

- 

1 

1 

Fiom  Sepl..  1 
10  Ocl.  a    f 

r»mOcl..s(. 

to."" 

l,OOc 

6s.™ 

1.1<l« 

500 

6,«» 
<tfno 

3,«a 

.a.3.s 

i8,Si6 

6,d™ 

;E 

6,™ 
3.«™ 

:E 

T0..I 

97.7" 

3*  .J" 

"M.> 

,..^ 

6.JS- 

.a.,^ 

^i.^'  [33.869 

'•— 

3>.e.. 

13.100 

SUPPUES  LACKING.  633 

Statement  of  clothing  and  equipage  received,  etc. — Continued. 


^ 

I^dep«u. 

- 

I 

1 

A 

8 

1 

i 

1 

1 

1 

1 

■s 

_-3 

'TSTi'  \ 

?94 

■.OJO 

!,i« 

..™ 

« 

„„ 

..»0 

=.«» 

.,.,« 

„™ 

>ro,r;.n 

l.JW 

a,><>g 

u,o™ 

500 

»< 

7.o» 

■  >.o6o 

O.fOO 

7,000 

>.6l5 

i,S<H 

^.W 

I4.T7= 

..7" 

6,^ 

1.t<x> 

J»,S» 

N,6« 

Il.«aa 

•.414 

F«n.Oct..i[ 
loOci.31   t 

,.384 

.».! 

„.-.,.». 

...MS 

Toul 

3,9»» 

8,«JQ 

3^.70 

t.4SO 

10,904 

7.». 

».■■» 

44,060]  a™ 

S..900 

.6.<!;4 

Col.  Ingalls,  chief- quartermaster,  in  his  report  upon  this  sub- 
ject says ; 

"  There  was  great  delay  in  receiving  our  clothing.  The 
orders  were  promptly  given  by  me  and  approved  by  Gen.  Meigs, 
but  the  roads  were  slowto  transport,  particularly  the  Cumber- 
land Valley  Road. 

"  For  instance,  clothing  ordered  to  Hagerstown  on  the  7th 
Oct.  for  the  corps  of  Franklin,  Porter,  and  Reynolds  did  not 
arrive  there  until  about  the  i8th,  and  by  that  time,  of  course, 
there  were  increased  wants  and  changes  in  position  of  troops. 
The  clothing  of  Sumner  arrived  in  great  quantities  near  the  last 
of  Oct.,  almost  too  late  for  issue,  as  the  army  was  crossing  into 
Virginia.  We  finally  left  50,000  suits  at  Harper's  Y^rrj, partly 
en  the  cart  jutt  arrived,  and  partly  in  store." 

The  causes  of  the  reduction  of  our  cavalry  force  have  already 
been  recited.  The  difficulty  in  getting  new  supplies  from  the 
usual  sources  led  me  to  apply  for  and  obtain  authority  for  the 
cavalry  and  artillery  officers  to  purchase  their  own  horses.  The 
following  are  the  telegrams  and  letters  on  this  subject : 

To  Gen.  Halleek,  Oct.  ra. — "It  is  absolutely  necessary  that 
some  energetic  means  be  taken  to  supply  the  cavalry  of  this  army 
with  remount  horses.  The  present  rate  of  supply  is  (1,050)  ten 
hundred  and  fifty  per  week  for  the  entire  army  here  and  in  front 
of  Washington.  From  this  number  the  artillery  draw  for  their 
batteries." 


634  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

To  Gen.  Halieck,  Oct.  14. — "  With  my  small  cavalry  force  it  is 
impossible  for  me  to  watch  the  line  of  the  Potomac  properly,  or 
even  make  the  reconnoissances  that  are  necessary  for  our  move- 
ments. This  makes  it  necessary  for  me  to  weaken  my  line  very 
much  by  extending  the  infantry  to  guard  the  innumerable  fords. 
This  will  continue  until  the  river  rises,  and  it  will  be  next  to 
impossible  to  prevent  the  rebel  cavalry  raids.  My  cavalry  force, 
as  I  urged  this  morning,  should  be  largely  and  immediately 
increased,  under  any  hypothesis,  whether  to  guard  the  river  or 
advance  on  the  enemy,  or  both." 

The  following  was  received  Oct.  25,  1862,  from  Washington, 
4.50  P.M.: 

"  To  Maj.'Gen.  McCUllan  : 

**  I  have  just  received  your  despatch  about  sore-tongued  and 
fatigued  horses.  Will  you  pardon  me  for  asking  what  the  horses 
of  your  army  have  done  since  the  battle  of  Antietam  that  fatigues 
anything? 

"A.  Lincoln." 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Oct.  25,  6  P.M.,  1862. 
/fis  Excellency  the  President : 

In  reply  to  your  telegram  of  this  date  I  have  the  honor  to 
state  that  from  the  time  this  army  left  Washington  on  the  7th 
of  Sept.  my  cavalry  has  been  constantly  employed  in  making 
reconnoissances,  scouting,  and  picketing.  Since  the  battle  of 
Antietam  six  regiments  have  made  one  trip  of  two  hundred 
miles,  marching  fifty-five  miles  in  one  day  while  endeavoring  to 
reach  Stuart's  cavalry.  Gen.  Pleasonton  in  his  official  report  states 
that  he,  with  the  remainder  of  our  available  cavalry,  while  on 
Stuart's  track  marched  seventy-eight  miles  in  twenty-four  hours. 
Besides  these  two  remarkable  expeditions,  our  cavalry  has  been 
engaged  in  picketing  and  scouting  one  hundred  and  fifty  miles 
of  river-front  ever  since  the  battle  of  Antietam,  and  has  made 
repeated  reconnoissances  since  that  time,  engaging  the  enemy  on 
every  occasion.  Indeed,  it  has  performed  harder  service  since 
the  battle  than  before.  I  beg  you  will  also  consider  that  this 
same  cavalry  was  brought  from  the  Peninsula,  where  it  encoun- 
tered most  laborious  service,  and  was  at  the  commencement  of 
this  campaign  in  low  condition,  and  from  that  time  to  the  present 
it  has  had  no  time  to  recruit. 

If  any  instance  can  be  found  where  overworked  cavalry  has 
performed  more  labor  Ihan  mine  since  the  battle  of  Antietam,  I 
am  not  conscious  of  it. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen. 


HORSES  NEEDED,  635 

The  following  was  received  Oct.  24  from  Cherry  Run,  12  m.: 

"  To  CoL  A.  V,  Colburn : 

"  I  have  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  spies  and  guides  without 
payment.  Would  it  not  be  well  to  have  sent  to  my  acting  divi- 
sion quartermaster,  First  Lieut.  John  S.  Schutz,  five  hundred 
dollars  for  that  purpose.^  Col.  Williams  reports,  eleven  (11)  a.m. 
to-day  : 

*'  *  I  have  in  camp  267  horses  belonging  to  officers  apd  men. 
Of  these  128  are  positively  and  absolutely  unable  to  leave  the 
camp  from  the  following  causes — viz.,  sore  tongue,  grease  and 
consequent  lameness,  and  sore  backs.  For  example,  the  5th 
U.  S.  Cavalry  has  now  in  camp  70  horses.  Of  these  53  are  worth- 
less from  the  above  causes.  Out  of  139  horses,  the  remainder,  I 
do  not  believe  50  can  trot  eight  miles.  The  other  portion  of  my 
command,  now  absent  on  picket  duty,  has  horses  which  are  about 
in  the  same  condition,  as  no  selection,  unless  absolutely  neces- 
sary, has  been  made.  The  number  of  sore  back  horses  exceed- 
ingly small  ;  the  diseases  are  principally  grease,  sore  tongue. 
The  horses  which  are  still  sound  are  absolutely  broken  down 
from  fatigue  and  want  of  flesh.  I  will  also  remark  that  the  men 
of  my  command  are  much  in  want  of  clothing. 

"  *  Col.  Williams.' 

"  The  cavalry  should  therefore  be  changed,  I  think,  and  their 
number  increased  to  1,000,  with  one  battery  of  horse-artillery.  I 
would  respectfully  desire  to  have  Col.  Williams  in  command. 

**JoHN  Newton, 

"  Brig, -Gen,  Commanding,*^  / 

Col.  Colburn  telegraphed  from  Washington,  Oct.  25  : 

"  To  Gen.  McClellan  :  I  went  this  morning  to  see  Gen. 
Halleck,  and  spoke  to  him  about  the  bridges,  etc.,  and  also  about 
rebuilding  the  road  to  Winchester  and  prolonging  it  to  Stras- 
burg ;  also  about  the  forces  to  be  left  at  Harper's  Ferry,  and 
what  was  to  be  done  in  the  Shenandoah  provided  the  enemy  fell 
back.  The  only  answer  I  could  get  was  that  they  had  nothing 
to  do  with  the  present  campaign,  and  that  you  ought  to  be  able 
to  decide  in  the  premises.  There  was  no  use  of  trying  to  ex- 
plain matters  to  him,  because  he  would  not  listen  to  anything. 
When  I  spoke  to  him  about  the  cavalry  horses  he  said  that  that 
was  the  quartermaster's  business  and  he  had  nothing  to  do  with 
it     I  will  try  again,  but  think  it  no  use." 


The  following  is  an  extract  from  the  official  report  of  Col. 

Ingalls: 
47 


636  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY, 

"  Immediately  after  the  battle  of  Antietam  efforts  were  made 
to  supply  deficiencies  in  clothing  and  horses.  Large  requisitions 
were  prepared  and  sent  in.  The  artillery  and  cavalry  required 
large  numbers  to  cover  losses  sustained  in  battle,  on  the  march, 
and  by  diseases.  Both  of  these  arms  were  deficient  when  they 
left  Washington.  A  most  violent  and  destructive  disease  made 
its  appearance  at  this  time,  which  put  nearly  4,000  animals  out 
of  service.  Horses  reported  perfectly  well  one  day  would  be 
dead-lame  the  next,  and  it  was  difficult  to  foresee  where  it  would 
end  or  Arhat  number  would  cover  the  loss.  They  were  attacked 
in  thd  hoof  and  tongue.  No  one  seemed  able  to  account  for  the 
appearance  of  this  disease.  Animals  kept  at  rest  would  recover 
in  time,  but  could  not  be  worked.  I  made  application  to  send 
West  and  purchase  horses  at  once,  but  it  was  refused,  on  the 
ground  that  the  outstanding  contracts  provided  for  enough ;  but 
they  were  not  delivered  sufficiently  fast y  nor  in  sufficient  numbers, 
until  late  in  October  and  early  in  November.  I  was  authorized 
to  buy  2,500  late  in  October,  but  the  delivery  was  not  completed 
until  in  November,  after  we  had  reached  Warrenton." 


In  a  letter  from  Gen.  Meigs,  written  on  the  14th  of  Oct.  and 
addressed  to  the  general-in-chief,  it  is  stated :  "  There  have  been 
issued,  therefore,  to  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  since  the  battles 
in  front  of  Washington,  to  replace  losses,  (9,254)  nine  thousand 
two  hundred  and  fifty-four  horses." 

What  number  of  horses  were  sent  to  Gen.  Pope  before  his 
feturn  to  Washington  I  have  no  means  of  determining  ;  but  the 
following  statement,  made  upon  my  order,  by  the  chief-quarter- 
master with  the  army,  and  who  had  means  for  gaining  accurate 
information,  forces  upon  my  mind  the  conclusion  that  the  quar- 
termaster-general was  in  error  : 


"  Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
"Chief-Quartermaster's  Office,  Oct.  31,  1862. 

"  Horses  purchased  Sept.  6,  1862,  by  Col.  Ingalls,  chief- 
quartermaster,  and  issued  to  the  forces  under  the 
immediate  command  of  Maj.-Gen.  George  B.  Mc- 
Clellan 1,200 

"  Issued  and  turned  over  to  the  above  force  by  Capt.  J.  J. 

Dana,  assistant-quartermaster  (in  Washington) 2,261 

"  Issued   to  forces  at  and  near  Washington  which   have 

since  joined  the  command 352 

"  Total  purchased  by  Col.  Ingalls,  and  issued  and  turned 


HORSES  NEEDED.  63  y 

over  by  Capt.  Dana  to  the  forces  in  this  immediate 

command 3>8i3 

"  Issued  by  Capt.  J.  J.  Dana,  assistant-quartermaster,  to 

the  forces  in  the  vicinity  of  Washington ZjZ^Z 

**  Grand  total  purchased  by  Col.  R.  Ingalls,  chief-quar- 
termaster, and  issued  and  turned  over  by  Capt.  J.  J. 
Dana,  assistant-quartermaster,  to  the  entire  Army  of 
the  Potomac  and  the  forces  around  Washington...    7,176 

"  About  3,000  horses  have  been  turned  over  to  the  quarter- 
master's department  by  officers  as  unfit  for  service ;  nearly  1,500 
should  now  be  turned  over  also,  being  worn  out  and  diseased. 

"  Respectfully  submitted. 

"  Fred.  Myers, 
^^  Lieut, -Col,  and  Quartermaster,'* 

This  official  statement,  made  up  from  the  reports  of  the 
quartermasters  who  received  and  distributed  the  horses,  exhib- 
its the  true  state  of  the  case,  and  gives  the  total  number  of 
horses  received  by  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  and  the  troops 
around  Washington,  during  a  period  of  eight  weeks,  as  (7,176) 
seven  thousand  one  hundred  and  seventy-six,  or  (2,078)  two 
thousand  and  seventy-eight  less  than  the  number  stated  by  the 
quartermaster-general. 

Supposing  that  (1,500)  fifteen  hundred  were  issued  to  the 
army  under  Gen.  Pope  previous  to  its  return  to  Washington,  as 
Gen.  Meigs  states,  there  would  still  remain  (578)  five  hundred 
and  seventy-eight  horses  which  he  does  not  account  for. 

The  letter  of  the  general- in-chief  to  the  Secretary  of  War 
on  the  28th  of  Oct.,  and  the  letter  of  Gen.  Meigs  to  the  gene- 
ral-in-chief  on  the  14th  of  Oct.,  convey  the  impression  that,  upon 
my  repeated  applications  for  cavalry  and  artillery  horses  for  the 
Army  of  the  Potomac,  I  had  received  a  much  greater  number 
than  was  really  the  case. 

It  will  be  seen  from  Col.  Myers's  report  that'  of  all  the  horses 
alluded  to  by  Gen.  Meigs,  only  (3,813)  three  thousand  eight  hun- 
dred and  thirteen  came  to  the  army  with  which  I  was  ordered 
to  follow  and  attack  the  enemy.  Of  course  the  remainder  did 
not  in  the  slightest  degree  contribute  to  the  efficiency  of  the 
cavalry  or  artillery  of  the  army  with  which  I  was  to  cross  the 
river.  Neither  did  they  in  the  least  facilitate  any  preparations 
for  carrying  out  the  order  to  advance  upon  the  enemy,  as  the 
general-in-chief's  letter  might  seem  to  imply. 


638  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY, 

During  the  same  period  that  we  ii^ere  receiving  the  horses 
alluded  to  about  (3,000)  three  thousand  of  our  old  stock  were 
turned  into  the  quartermaster's  department,  and  1,500  more  re- 
ported as  in  such  condition  that  they  ought  to  be  turned  in  as 
unfit  for  service ;  thus  leaving  the  active  army  some  700  short 
of  the  number  required  to  make  good  existing  deficiencies,  to 
say  nothing  of  providing  remounts  for  men  whose  horses  had 
died  or  been  killed  during  the  campaign  and  those  previously 
dismounted.  Notwithstanding  all  the  efforts  made  to  obtain  a 
remount,  there  were,  after  deducting  the  force  engaged  in  pick- 
eting the  river,  but  about  a  thousand  serviceable  cavalry  horses 
on  the  2 1  St  day  of  Oct. 

In  a  letter  dated  Oct.  14,  1862,  the  general-in-chief  says: 
"  It  is  also  reported  to  me  that  the  number  of  animals  with 
your  army  in  the  field  is  about  31,000.  It  is  believed  that  your 
present  proportion  of  cavalry  and  of  animals  is  much  larger 
than  that  of  any  other  of  our  armies." 

What  number  of  animals  our  other  armies  had  I  am  not  pre- 
pared to  say,  but  military  men  in  European  armies  have  been 
of  the  opinion  that  an  army  to  be  efficient,  while  carrying  on 
active  operations  in  the  field,  should  have  a  cavalry  force  equal 
in  numbers  to  from  one-sixth  to  one-fourth  of  the  infantry  force. 
My  cavalry  did  not  amount  to  one-twentieth  part  of  the  army, 
and  hence  the  necessity  of  giving  every  one  of  my  cavalry  sol- 
diers a  serviceable  horse. 

Cavalry  may  be  said  to  constitute  the  anUnnce  of  an  army. 
It  scouts  all  the  roads  in  front,  on  the  flanks,  and  in  the  rear 
of  the  advancing  columns,  and  constantly  feels  the  enemy.  The 
amount  of  labor  falling  on  this  arm  during  the  Maryland  cam- 
paign was  excessive. 

To  persons  not  familiar  with  the  movements  of  troops,  and 
the  amount  of  transportation  required  for  a  large  army  march- 
ing away  from  water  or  railroad  communications,  the  number 
of  animals  mentioned  by  the  general-in-chief  may  have  appeared 
unnecessarily  large  ;  but  to  a  military  man  who  takes  the  trouble 
to  enter  into  an  accurate  and  detailed  computation  of  the  num- 
ber of  pounds  of  subsistence  and  forage  required  for  such  an 
army  as  that  of  the  Potomac,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  31,000 
animals  were  considerably  less  than  was  absolutely  necessary 
to  an  advance. 


THE  ARMY'S  NECESSITIES,  639 

As  we  were  required  to  move  through  a  country  which  could 
not  be  depended  upon  for  any  of  our  supplies,  it  became  neces- 
sary to  transport  everything  in  wagons  and  to  be  prepared  for 
all  emergencies.  I  did  not  consider  it  safe  to  leave  the  river 
without  subsistence  and  forage  for  ten  days. 

The  official  returns  of  that  date  show  the  aggregate  strength 
of  the  army  for  duty  to  have  been  about  1 10,000  men  of  all 
arms.  This  did  not  include  teamsters,  citizen  employees,  officers' 
servants,  etc.,  amounting  to  some  12,000,  which  gave  a  total  of 
122,000  men. 

The  subsistence  alone  of  this  army  for  ten  days  required  for 
its  transportation  1,830  wagons  at  2,000  pounds  to  the  wagon, 
and  10,980  animals. 

Our  cavalry  horses  at  that  time  amounted  to  5,046,  and  our 
artillery  horses  to  6,836. 

To  transport  full  forage  for  these  22,862  animals  for  ten  days 
required  17,832  additional  animals  ;  and  this  forage  would  only 
supply  the  entire  number  (40,694)  of  animals  with  a  small  frac- 
tion over  half-allowance  for  the  time  specified. 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  estimate  does  not  embrace  the 
animals  necessary  to  transport  quartermasters'  supplies,  baggage, 
camp  equipage,  ambulances,  reserve  ammunition,  forage  for 
officers'  horses,  etc.,  which  would  greatly  augment  the  necessary 
transportation. 

It  may  very  truly  be  said  that  we  did  make  the  march  with 
the  means  at  our  disposal  ;  but  it  will  be  remembered  that  we 
met  with  no  serious  opposition  from  the  enemy,  neither  did  we 
encounter  delays  from  any  other  cause.  The  roads  were  in 
excellent  condition,  and  the  troops  marched  with  the  most  com- 
mendable order  and  celerity. 

If  we  had  met  with  a  determined  resistance  from  the  enemy, 
and  our  progress  had  been  very  much  retarded  thereby,  we  would 
have  consumed  our  supplies  before  they  could  have  been  re- 
newed. A  proper  estimate  of  my  responsibilities  as  the  com- 
mander of  that  army  did  not  justify  me  in  basing  my  preparations 
for  the  expedition  upon  the  supposition 'that  I  was  to  have  an 
uninterrupted  march.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  my  duty  to  be 
prepared  for  all  emergencies ;  and  not  the  least  important  of  my 
responsibilities  was  the  duty  of  making  ample  provision  for  sup- 
plying my  men  and  animals  with  rations  and  forage. 


640  McCLELLAN'S  OWN  STORY. 

Knowing  the  solicitude  of  the  President  for  an  early  move- 
menty  and  sharing  with  him  fully  his  anxiety  for  prompt  action, 
on  the  2 1  St  of  October  I  telegraphed  to  the  general-in-chief  as 
follows : 


Oct.  21. — Since  the  receipt  of  the  President's  order  to  move 
on  the  enemy  I  have  been  making  every  exertion  to  get  this  army 
supplied  with  clothing  absolutely  necessary  for  marching. 

This,  I  am  happy  to  say,  is  now  nearly  accomplished.  I  have 
also,  during  the  same  tim  -,  repeatedly  urged  upon  you  the  impor- 
tance of  supplying  cavalry  and  artillery  horses  to  replace  those 
J)roken  down  by  hard  service,  and  steps  have  been  taken  to 
insure  a  prompt  delivery. 

Our  cavalry,  even  when  well  supplied  with  horses,  is  much 
inferior  in  number  to  that  of  the  enemy,  but  in  efficiency  has 
proved  itself  superior.  So  forcibly  has  this  been  impressed 
upon  our  old  regiments  by  repeated  successes  that  the  men  are 
fully  persuaded  that  they  are  equal  to  twice  their  number  of 
rebel  cavalry. 

Exclusive  of  the  cavalry  force  now  engaged  in  picketing  the 
river,  I  have  not  at  present  over  about  one  thousand  (1,000) 
horses  for  service.  Officers  have  been  sent  in  various  direc- 
tions to  purchase  horses,  and  I  expect  them  soon.  Without 
more  cavalry  horses  our  communications,  from  the  moment  we 
march,  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  the  large  cavalry  force  of  the 
enemy,  and  it  would  not  be  possible  for  us  to  cover  our  flanks 
properly,  or  to  obtain  the  necessary  information  of  the  position 
and  movements  of  the  enemy  in  such  a  way  as  to  insure  success. 
My  experience  has  shown  the  necessity  of  a  large  and  efficient 
cavalry  force. 

Under  the  foregoing  circumstances  I  beg  leave  to  ask 
whether  the  President  desires  me  to  march  on  the  enemy  at 
once  or  to  await  the  reception  of  the  new  horses,  every  pos- 
sible step  having  been  taken  to  insure  their  prompt  arrival. 

On  the  same  day  Gen.  Halleck  replied  as  follows  : 

''^  Oct.  21. — Your  telegram  of  twelve  m.  has  been  submitted 
to  the  President.  He  directs  me  to  say  that  he  has  no  change 
to   make  in  his  order  of  the  6th  instant. 

"If  you  have  not  been,  and  are  not  now,  in  condition  to 
obey  it,  you  will  be  able  to  show  such  want  of  ability.  The 
President  does  not  expect  impossibilities,  but  he  is  very  anx- 
ious that  all  this  good  weather  should  not  be  wasted  in  inac- 
tivity. Telegraph  when  you  will  move  and  on  what  lines  you 
propose  to  march." 


HALLECICS  OPINION.  64 1 

From  the  tenor  of  this  despatch  I  conceived  that  it  was  left 
for  my  judgment  to  decide  whether  or  not  it  was  possible  to 
move  with  safety  to  the  army  at  that  time ;  and  this  respon- 
sibility I  exercised  with  the  more  confidence  in  view  of  the 
strong  assurances  of  his  trust  in  me,  as  commander  of  that 
army,  with  which  the  President  had  seen  fit  to  honor  me  during 
his  last  visit. 

The  cavalry  requirements,  without  which  an  advance  would 
have  been  in  the  highest  degree  injudicious  and  unsafe,  were  still 
wanting. 

The  country  before  us  was  an  enemy's  country,  where  the 
inhabitants  furnished  to  the  enemy  every  possible  assistance; 
providing  food  fgr  men  and  forage  for  animals,  giving  all  infor- 
mation concerning  our  movements,  and  rendering  every  aid  in 
their  power  to  the  enemy's  cause. 

It  was  manifest  that  we  should  find  it,  as  we  subsequently 
did,  a  hostile  district,  where  we  could  derive  no  aid  from  the 
inhabitants  that  would  justify  dispensing  with  the  active  co-op- 
eration of  an  efficient  cavalry  force.  Accordingly  I  fixed  upon 
the  I  St  of  November  as  the  earliest  date  at  which  the  forward 
movement  could  well  be  commenced. 

The  general-in-chief,  in  a  letter  to  the  Secretary  of  War  on 
the  28th  of  Oct.,  says  :  "  In  my  opinion  there  has  been  no  such 
want  of  supplies  in  the  army  under  Gen.  McClellan  as  to  prevent 
his  compliance  with  the  orders  to  advance  against  the  enemy." 

Notwithstanding  this  opinion,  expressed  by  such  high  autho- 
rity, I  am  compelled  to  say  again  that  the  delay  in  the  reception 
of  necessary  supplies  up  to  that  date  had  left  the  army  in  a 
condition  totally  unfit  to  advance  against  the  enemy  ;  that  an 
advance  under  the  existing  circumstances  would,  in  my  judg- 
ment, have  been  attended  with  the  highest  degree  of  peril,  with 
great  suffering  and  sickness  among  the  men,  and  with  imminent 
danger  of  being  cut  off  from  our  supplies  by  the  superior  cavalry 
force  of  the  enemy,  and  with  no  reasonable  prospect  of  gaining 
any  advantage  over  him. 

I  dismiss  this  subject  with  the  remark  that  I  have  found  it 
impossible  to  resist  the  force  of  my  own  convictions  that  the 
commander  of  an  army  who,  from  the  time  of  its  organization, 
has  for  eighteen  months  been  in  constant  communication  with  its 
ofiicers  and  men,  the  greater  part  of  the  time  engaged  in  active 


642  McCLELLAN^S  OWN  STORY. 

service  in  the  field,  and  who  has  exercised  this  command  in 
many  battles,  must  certainly  be  considered  competent  to  deter- 
mine whether  his  army  is  in  proper  condition  to  advance  on  the 
enemy  or  not ;  and  he  must  necessarily  possess  greater  facilities 
for  forming  a  correct  judgment  in  regard  to  the  wants  of  his 
men  and  the  condition  of  his  supplies  than  the  general-in-chief 
in  his  office  at  Washington  City. 

The  movement  from  Washington  into  Maryland,  which  cul- 
minated in  the  battles  of  South  Mountain  and  Antietam,  was  not 
a  part  of  an  offensive  campaign,  with  the  object  of  the  invasion 
of  the  enemy's  territory  and  an  attack  upon  his  capital,  but  was 
defensive  in  its  purposes,  although  offensive  in  its  character,  and 
would  be  technically  called  a  "  defensive-offensive  campaign." 
It  was  undertaken  at  a  time  when  our  army  had  experienced 
severe  defeats,  and  its  object  was  to  preserve  the  national  capital 
and  Baltimore,  to  protect  Pennsylvania  from  invasion,  and  to 
drive  the  enemy  out  of  Maryland.  These  purposes  were  fully 
and  finally  accomplished  by  the  battle  of  Antietam,  which 
brought  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  into  what  might  be  termed 
an  accidental  position  on  the  upper  Potomac. 

Having  gained  the  immediate  object  of  the  campaign,  the 
first  thing  to  be  done  was  to  insure  Maryland  from  a  return  of 
the  enemy ;  the  second,  to  prepare  our  own  army — exhausted  by 
a  series  of  severe  battles,  destitute  to  a  great  extent  of  supplies, 
and  very  deficient  in  artillery  and  cavalry  horses — for  a  definite 
offensive  movement,  and  to  determine  upon  the  line  of  opera- 
tions for  a  further  advance.  At  the  time  of  the  battle  of  Antie- 
tam the  Potomac  was  very  low,  and  presented  a  comparatively 
weak  line  of  defence  unless  watched  by  large  masses  of  troops. 
The  reoccupation  of  Harper's  Ferry  and  the  disposition  of  troops 
above  that  point  rendered  the  line  of  the  Potomac  secure  against 
everything  except  cavalry  raids.  No  time  was  lost  in  placing  the 
army  in  proper  condition  for  an  advance,  and  the  circumstances 
which  caused  the  delay  after  the  battle  of  Antietam  have  been 
fully  enumerated. 

I  never  regarded  Harper's  Ferry  or  its  vicinity  as  a  proper 
base  of  operations  for  a  movement  upon  Richmond.  I  still  con- 
sidered the  line  of  the  Peninsula  as  the  true  approach,  but  for 
obvious  reasons  did  not  make  any  proposal  to  return  to  it. 

On  the  6th  of  Oct.,  as  stated  above,  I  was  ordered  by  the 


THE  LINE  OF  ADVANCE.  64 


'> 


President,  through  his  general-in-chief,  to  cross  the  Potomac  and 
give  battle  to  the  enemy  or  drive  him  south.  Two  lines  were 
presented  for  my  choice  ; 

I  St.  Up  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  in  which  case  I  was  to 
have  12,000  to  15,000  additional  troops. 

2d.  To  cross  between  the  enemy  and  Washington — that  is, 
east  of  the  Blue  Ridge — in  which  event  I  was  to  be  reinforced 
with  30,000  men. 

At  first  I  determined  to  adopt  the  line  of  the  Shenandoah, 
for  these  reasons  :  The  Harper's  Ferry  and  Winchester  Railroad, 
and  the  various  turnpikes  converging  upon  Winchester,  afforded 
superior  facilities  for  supplies.  Our  cavalry  being  weak,  this  line 
of  communication  could  be  more  easily  protected.  There  was 
no  advantage  in  interposing  at  that  time  the  Blue  Ridge  and  the 
Shenandoah  between  the  enemy  and  myself. 

At  the  period  in  question  the  Potomac  was  still  very  low, 
and  I  apprehended  that  if  I  crossed  the  river  below  Harper's 
Ferry  the  enemy  would  promptly  check  the  movement  by  re- 
crossing  into  Maryland,  at  the  same  time  covering  his  rear  by 
occupying  in  strong  force  the  passes  leading  through  the  Blue 
Ridge  from  the  southeast  into  the  Shenandoah  Valley. 

I  anticipated,  as  the  result  of  the  first  course,  that  Lee  would 
fight  me  near  Winchester,  if  he  could  do  so  under  favorable  cir- 
cumstances ;  or  else  that  he  would  abandon  the  lower  Shenan- 
doah, and  leave  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  free  to  act  upon  some 
other  line  of  operations. 

If  he  abandoned  the  Shenandoah  he  would  naturally  fall  back 
upon  his  railway  communications.  I  have  since  been  confirmed 
in  the  belief  that  if  I  had  crossed  the  Potomac  below  Harper's 
Ferry  in  the  early  part  of  October,  Gen.  Lee  would  have  re- 
crossed  into  Maryland. 

As  above  explained,  the  army  was  not  in  condition  to  move 
until  late  in  October  and  in  the  meantime  circumstances  had 
changed. 

The  period  had  arrived  when  a  sudden  and  great  rise  of  the 

Potomac  might  be  looked  for  at  any  moment ;  the  season  of  bad 

roads   and  difficult  movements  was   approaching,  which  would 

naturally  deter  the  enemy  from  exposing  himself  very  far  from 

his  base,  and  his  movements  all  appeared  to  indicate  a  falling 

back  from  the  river  towards  his  supplies.     Under  these  circum- 
48 


CHAPTER   XXXIX. 

Crossing  the  Potomac — The  march  of  a  great  army — Overtaking  the 
enemy — Another  battle  imminent — Removed  from  the  command — 
Burnside  brings  the  order — Farewells  to  the  army. 

On  the  25th  of  Oct.  the  pontoon-bridge  at  Berlin  was  con- 
structed, there  being  already  one  across  the  Potomac  and  an- 
other across  the  Shenandoah  at  Harper's  Ferry. 

On  the  26th  two  divisions  of  the  9th  corps  and  Pleasonton's 
brigade  of  cavalry  crossed  at  Berlin  and  occupied  Lovettsville. 

The  I  St,  6th,  and  9th  corps,  the  cavalry,  and  reserve  artillery 
crossed  at  Berlin  between  the  26th  of  Oct.  and  the  2d  of 
Nov. 

The  2d  and  5th  corps  crossed  at  Harper's  Ferry  between  the 
29th  of  Oct.  and  ist  of  Nov. 

Heavy  rains  delayed  the  movement  considerably  in  the  begin- 
ning, and  the  ist,  5th,  and  6th  corps  were  obliged  to  halt  at 
least  one  day  at  the  crossings  to  complete,  as  far  as  possible, 
the  necessary  supplies  that  could  not  be  procured  at  an  earlier 
period. 

The  plan  of  campaign  I  adopted  during  the  advance  was  to 
move  the  army  well  in  hand  parallel  to  the  Blue  Ridge,  taking 
Warrenton  as  the  point  of  direction  for  the  main  army  ;  seizing 
each  pass  on  the  Blue  Ridge  by  detachments  as  we  approached 
it,  and  guarding  them,  after  we  had  passed,  as  long  as  they 
would  enable  the  enemy  to  trouble  our  communications  with 
the  Potomac.  It  was  expected  that  we  would  unite  with  the 
nth  corps  and  Sickles's  division  near  Thoroughfare  Gap.  We 
depended  upon  Harper's  Ferry  and  Berlin  for  supplies  until  the 
Manassas  Gap  Railway  was  reached  ;  when  that  occurred  the 
passes  in  our  rear  were  to  be  abandoned  and  the  army  massed 
ready  for  action  or  movement  in  any  direction. 

It  was  my  intention,  if,  upon  reaching  Ashby's  or  any  other 

pass,  I  found  that  the  enemy  were  in  force  between  it  and  the 

645 


646  McCL£LLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

Potomac,  in  the  Valley  of  the  Shenandoah,  to  move  into  the 
valley  and  endeavor  to  gain  their  rear. 

I  hardly  hoped  to  accomplish  this,  but  did  expect  that  by 
striking  in  between  Culpeper  Court-House  and  Little  Washing- 
ton I  could  either  separate  their  army  and  beat  them  in  detail, 
or  else  force  them  to  concentrate  as  far  back  as  Gordonsville, 
and  thus  place  the  Army  of  the  Potomac  in  position  either  to 
adopt  the  Fredericksburg  line  of  advance  upon  Richmond  or 
to  be  removed  to  the  Peninsula  if,  as  I  apprehended,  it  were 
found  impossible  to  supply  it  by  the  Orange  and  Alexandria 
Railroad  beyond  Culpeper. 

On  the  27  th  of  Oct.  the  remaining  divisions  of  the  9th  corps 
crossed  at  Berlin,  and  Pleasonton's  cavalry  advanced  to  Purcell- 
ville.  The  concentration  of  the  6th  corps,  delayed  somewhat 
by  intelligence  as  to  the  movements  of  the  enemy  near  Hedges- 
ville,  etc.,  was  commenced  on  this  day,  and  the  ist  corps  was 
already  in  motion  for  Berlin. 

On  the  28th  the  ist  corps  and  the  general  headquarters 
reached  Berlin. 

On  the  29th  the  reserve  artillery  crossed  and  encamped  near 
Lovettsville.  Stoneman's  division,  temporarily  attached  to  the 
9th  corps,  occupied  Leesburg  ;  Averill's  cavalry  brigade  moved 
towards  Berlin  from  Hagerstown  ;  two  divisions  of  the  9th 
corps  moved  to  Wheatland,  and  one  to  Waterford.  The  2d 
corps  commenced  the  passage  of  the  Shenandoah  at  Harper's 
Ferry,  and  moved  into  the  valley  east  of  Loudon  Heights. 

On  the  30th  the  ist  corps  crossed  at  Berlin  and  encamped 
near  Lovettsville,  and  the  2d  corps  completed  the  passage  of 
the  Shenandoah.  The  5th  corps  commenced  its  march  from 
Sharpsburg  to  Harper's  Ferry. 

On  the  31st  the  2d  corps  moved  to  the  vicinity  of  Hills- 
borough ;  the  6th  corps  reached  Boonsborough  ;  the  5th  corps 
reached  Harper's  Ferry,  one  division  crossing  the  Shenandoah. 

On  the  ist  of  Nov.  the  ist  corps  moved  to  Purcellville  and 
Hamilton  ;  the  2d  corps  to  Wood  Grove  ;  the  5th  corps  to  Hills- 
borough ;  the  6th  corps  reached  Berlin,  one  division  crossing. 
Pleasonton's  cavalry  occupied  Philomont,  having  a  sharp  skir- 
mish there  and  at  Bloomfield. 

On  Nov.  2  the  2d  corps  occupied  Snicker's  Gap ;  the  5th 
corps,  Snickersville ;    the   6th    corps  crossed    the   Potomac    and 


THE  AD  VANCE,  647 

encamped  near  Wheatland ;  the  9th  corps  advanced  to  Bloom- 
field,  Union,  and  Philomont.  Pleasonton  drove  the  enemy  out 
of  Union.  Averill  was  ordered  to  join  Pleasonton.  The  enemy 
offered  no  serious  resistance  to  the  occupation  of  Snicker's  Gap, 
but  advanced  to  gain  possession  of  it  with  a  column  of  some 
5,000  to  6,000  infantry,  who  were  driven  back  by  a  few  rounds 
from  our  rifled  guns. 

On  the  3d  the  ist  corps  moved  to  Philomont,  Union,  Bloom- 
field,  etc.;  the  2d  corps  to  the  vicinity  of  Upperville  ;  the  5th 
corps  remained  at  Snicker's  Gap  ;  the  6th  corps  moved  to  Pur- 
cellville  ;  the  9th  corps  moved  towards  Upperville.  Pleasonton 
drove  the  enemy  out  of  Upperville  after  a  severe  fight. 

On  the  4th  the  2d  corps  took  possession  of  Ashby's  Gap  ;  the 
6th  corps  reached  Union  ;  the  9th  corps,  Upperville  ;  the  cavalry 
occupied  Piedmont.  On  the  5th  the  ist  corps  moved  to  Rec- 
tortown  and  White  Plains ;  one  division  of  the  2d  corps  to  the 
intersection  of  the  Paris  and  Piedmont  with  the  Upperville  and 
Barber's  road  ;  the  6th  corps  to  the  Aldie  pike,  east  of  Upper- 
ville ;  the  9th  corps  beyond  the  Manassas  Railroad,  between 
Piedmont  acnd  Salem,  with  a  brigade  at  Manassas  Gap.  The 
cavalry  under  Averill  had  a  skirmish  at  Manassas  Gap,  and  the 
brigade  of  Pleasonton  gained  a  handsome  victory  over  superior 
numbers  at  Barber's  cross-roads.  Bayard's  cavalry  had  some 
sharp  skirmishing  in  front  of  Salem. 

On  the  6th  the  ist  corps  advanced  to  Warrenton,  the  2d  corps 
to  Rectortown  ;  the  5th  corps  commenced  its  movement  from 
Snicker's  Gap  to  White  Plains  ;  the  9th  corps  to  Waterloo  and 
vicinity  on  the  Rappahannock  ;  the  nth  corps  was  at  New  Bal- 
timore, Thoroughfare  and  Hopewell's  Gaps  ;  Sickles's  division 
guarding  the  Orange  and  Alexandria  Railroad  from  Manassas 
Junction  towards  Warrenton  Junction  ;  the  cavalry  near  Flint 
Hill ;  Bayard  to  cut  off  what  there  might  be  in  Warrenton  and 
to  proceed  to  the  Rappahannock  Station. 

Nov.  7,  Gen.  Pleasonton  was  ordered  to  move  towards  Lit- 
tle Washington  and  Sperryville,  and  thence  towards  Culpeper 
Court-House. 

Nov.  8,  the  2d  corps  moved  half-way  to  Warrenton  ;  the 
5  th  corps  to  New  Baltimore. 

Nov.  9,  the  2d  and  5th  corps  reached  Warrenton  ;  the  0th 
corps  New  Baltimore. 


648  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

Late  on  the  night  of  the  7th  I  received  an  order  relieving  me 
from  the  command  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  directing 
me  to  turn  it  over  to  Gen.  Burnside,  which  I  at  once  did. 

I  had  already  given  the  orders  for  the  movements  of  the 
8th  an4  9th ;  these  orders  were  carried  into  effect  without 
change. 

The  position  in  which  I  left  the  army,  as  the  result  of  the 
orders  I  had  given,  was  as  follows  : 

The  I  St,  2d,  and  5  th  corps,  reserve  artillery,  and  general 
headquarters  at  Warrenton  ;  the  9th  corps  on  the  line  of  the 
Rappahannock,  in  the  vicinity  of  Waterloo ;  the  6th  corps  at 
New  Baltimore;  the  nth  corps  at  New  Baltimore,  Gainesville, 
and  Thoroughfare  Gap ;  Sickles's  division,  of  the  3d  corps,  on 
the  Orange  and  Alexandria  Railroad,  from  Manassas  Junction  to 
Warrenton  Junction  ;  Pleasonton  across  the  Rappahannock  at 
Amissville,  Jeiferson,  etc.,  with  his  pickets  at  Hazel  river,  facing 
Longstreet,  six  miles  from  Culpeper  Court- House  ;  Bayard  near 
Rappahannock  Station. 

The  army  was  thus  massed  near  Warrenton,  ready  to  act  in 
any  required  direction,  perfectly  in  hand,  and  in  admirable  con- 
dition and  spirits.  I  doubt  whether,  during  the  whole  period  that 
I  had  the  honor  to  command  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  it  was  in 
such  excellent  condition  to  fight  a  great  battle.  When  I  gave  up 
the  command  to  Gen.  Burnside  the  best  information  in  our  pos- 
session indicated  that  Longstreet  was  immediately  in  our  front 
near  Culpeper ;  Jackson,  with  one,  perhaps  both,  of  the  Hills, 
near  Chester  and  Thornton's  Gaps,  with  the  mass  of  their  force 
west  of  the  Blue  Ridge. 

The  reports  from  Gen.  Pleasonton  on  the  advance  indicated 
the  possibility  of  separating  the  two  wings  of  the  enemy's  forces, 
and  either  beating  Longstreet  separately  or  forcing  him  to  fall 
back  at  least  upon  Gordonsville  to  effect  his  junction  with  the 
rest  of  the  army. 

The  following  is  from  the  report  of  Gen.  Pleasonton  : 

"  At  this  time,  and  from  the  7th  instant,  my  advance  pickets 
were  at  Hazel  river,  within  six  miles  of  Culpeper,  besides  having 
my  flank  pickets  towards  Chester  and  Thornton's  Gaps  extended 
to  Gaines's  cross-roads  and  Newby's  cross-ronds,  with  nume- 
rous patrols  in  the  direction  of  Woodville,  Little  Washington, 
and  Sperryville. 


REMOVED  FROM  COMMAND.  65  I 

"  The  general-in-chief  is  authorized,  in  discretion,  to  issue  an 
order  substantially  as  the  above,  forthwith  or  so  soon  as  he  may 
deem  proper. 

"A.  Lincoln. 

"Nov.  5,  1862." 


When  we  broke  up  the  camps  on  the  upper  Potomac  and 
moved  in  advance,  the  army  was  in  fine  order  for  another  bat- 
tle ;  the  troops  in  the  best  of  spirits,  full  of  confidence  in  me, 
and  I  was  then,  I  believe,  capable  of  handling  an  army  in  the 
field  as  I  had  never  been  before.  I  felt  that  I  could  fight  a 
great  battle.  The  march  was  admirably  conducted,  and  is  wor- 
thy of  study.  In  the  course  of  the  7th  of  Nov.  I  heard  inci- 
dentally that  a  special  train  had  brought  out  from  Washing- 
ton Gen.  Buckingham,  who  had  left  the  railway  very  near  our 
camp,  and,  without  coming  to  see  me,  had  proceeded  through 
a  driving  snow-storm  several  miles  to  Bumside's  camp.  I  at 
once '  suspected  that  he  brought  the  order  relieving  me  from 
command,  but  kept  my  own  counsel.  Late  at  night  I  was  sit- 
ting alone  in  my  tent,  writing  to  my  wife.  All  the  staff  were 
asleep.  Suddenly  some  one  knocked  upon  the  tent-pole,  and, 
upon  my  invitation  to  enter,  there  appeared  Burnside  and 
Buckingham,  both  looking  very  solemn.  I  received  them  kind- 
ly and  commenced  conversation  upon  general  subjects  in  the 
most  unconcerned  manner  possible.  After  a  few  moments 
Buckingham  said  to  Burnside :  "  Well,  general,  I  think  we 
had  better  tell  Gen.  McClellan  the  object  of  our  visit."  I 
very  pleasantly  said  that  I  should  be  glad  to  learn  it.  Where- 
upon Buckingham  handed  me  the  two  orders  of  which  he  was 
the  bearer : 


« 


<t 


Headquarters  of  the  Army, 
"  Washington,  Nov.  5,  1862. 

MaJ.-Gen.  McClellan^  Commanding^  etc, : 

"  General  :  On  receipt  of  the  order  of  the  President,  sent 
herewith,   you    will   immediately   turn   over   your   command   to 
Maj.-Gen.  Burnside,  and  repair  to  Trenton,  N.  J.,  reporting  on 
your  arrival  at  that  place,  by  telegraph,  for  further  orders. 
"  Very  respectfully,  your  obedient  servant, 

"  H.  W.  Halleck, 

"  GenMn-Chie/r 

49 


652  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

General  Orders^  No,  182. 

"  War  Department, 
"  Adjutant-General's  Office, 
"Washington,  Nov.  5,  1862. 

"  By  direction  of  the  President  of  the  United  States,  it  is 
ordered  that  Maj.-Gen.  McClellan  be  relieved  from  the  command 
of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac,  and  that  Maj.-Gen.  Burnside  take 
the  command  of  that  army. 

"By  order  of  the  Secretary  of  War. 

"  E.  D.    TOWNSEND, 

''Assist,  Adj.-Gen:' 

I  saw  that  both — especially  Buckingham — were  watching  me 
most  intently  while  I  opened  and  read  the  orders.  1  read  the 
papers  with  a  smile,  immediately  turned  to  Burnside,  and  said  : 
"Well,  Burnside,   I  turn  the  command  over  to  you." 

They  soon  retired,  Burnside  having  begged  me  to  remain 
for  a  few  days  with  the  army,  and  I  having  consented  to  do  so, 
though   I  wished  to  leave  the  next  morning.  , 

Before  we  broke  up  from  the  Maryland  side  of  the  Potomac  I 
had  said  to  Burnside  that,  as  he  was  .second  in  rank  in  the  army, 
I  wished  him  to  be  as  near  me  as  possible  on  the  march,  and  that 
he  must  keep  himself  informed  of  the  condition  of  affairs.  I  took 
especial  pains  during  the  march  to  have  him  constantly  informed 
of  what  I  was  doing,  the  positions  of  the  various  corps,  etc.,  and 
he  ought  to  have  been -able  to  take  the  reins  in  his  hands  without 
a  day's  delay. 

The  order  depriving  me  of  the  command  created  an  immense 
deal  of  deep  feeling  in  the  army — so  much  so  that  many  were  in 
favor  of  my  refusing  to  obey  the  order,  and  of  marching  upon 
Washington  to  take  possession  of  the  government.  My  chief 
purpose  in  remaining  with  the  army  as  long  as  I  did  after  being 
relieved  was  to  calm  this  feeling,  in  which  I  succeeded. 

I  will  not  attempt  to  describe  my  own  feelings  nor  the  scenes 
attending  my  farewell  to  the  army.  They  are  beyond  my  powers 
of  description.  What  words,  in  truth,  could  convey  to  the  mind 
such  a  scene — thousands  of  brave  men,  who  under  my  very  eye 
had  changed  from  raw  recruits  to  veterans  of  many  fields,  shed- 
ding tears  like  children  in  their  ranks,  as  they  bade  good-by  to 
the  general  who  had  just  led  them  to  victory  after  the  defeats 
they  had  seen  under  another  leader  ?  Could  they  have  foreseen 
th'j  future  their  feelings  would  not  have  been  less  intense  I 


AIcCLELLAN'S  FARE  WELL,  653 

[The  following  was  McClellan's  farewell  to  the  army  :] 

Headquarters,  Army  of  the  Potomac, 
Camp  near  Rectortown,  Va.,  Nov.  7,  1862. 

Officers  and  Soldiers  of  the  Army  of  the  Potomac : 

An  order  of  the  President  devolves  upon  Maj.-Oen.  Burnside 
I  lie  command  of  this  army. 

In  parting  from  you  I  cannot  express  the  love  and  gratitude 
1  bear  to  you.  As  an  army  you  have  grown  up  under  my  care. 
In  you  I  have  never  found  doubt  or  coldness.  The  battles  you 
have  fought  under  my  command  will  proudly  live  in  our  nation's 
history.  The  glory  you  have  achieved,  our  mutual  perils  and 
fatigues,  the  graves  of  our  comrades  fallen  in  battle  and  by 
disease,  the  broken  forms  of  those  whom  wounds  and  sickness 
have  disabled — the  strongest  associations  which  can  exist  among 
men — unite  us  still  by  an  indissoluble  tie.  We  shall  ever  be  com- 
rades in  supporting  the  Constitution  of  our  country  and  the 
nationality  of  its  people. 

Geo.  B.  McClellan, 

Maj.'Gen.  U,  S.  Army, 


CHAPTER   XL. 

Private  Letters. 
[Oct.  I  to  iVov.  lo,  1862.] 

Oc/.  I,  Sharpsbur^^  7.30  p.m. —  .  .  .  Received  this  morning  a 
mysterious  despatch  from  which  I  inferred  that  the  President 
was  on  his  way  hither.  Went  to  Harper's  Ferry  and  found  him 
with  half  a  dozen  Western  officers.  He  remains  at  Harper's 
Ferry  to-night.  .  .  . 

Oct.  2,  A.M. —  ...  I  found  the  President  at  Gen.  Sumner's 
headquarters  at  Harper's  Ferry  ;  none  of  the  cabinet  were  with 
him,  merely  some  Western  officers,  such  as  McClernand  and 
others.  His  ostensible  purpose  is  to  see  the  troops  and  the  bat- 
tle-field ;  I  incline  to  think  that  the  real  purpose  of  his  visit  is  to 
push  me  into  a  premature  advance  into  Virginia.  I  may  be  mis- 
taken, but  think  not.  The  real  truth  is  that  my  army  is  not  fit 
to  advance.  The  old  regiments  are  reduced  to  mere  skeletons, 
and  are  completely  tired  out.  They  need  rest  and  filling  up. 
The  new  regiments  are  not  fit  for  the  field.  The  remains  of 
Pope's  army  are  pretty  well  broken  up  and  ought  not  to  be  made 
to  fight  for  some  little  time  yet.  Cavalry  and  artillery  horses 
are  broken  down.  So  it  goes.  These  people  don't  know  what 
an  army  requires,  and  therefore  act  stupidly.  .  .  . 

Oct.  3. —  ...  I  was  riding  with  the  President  all  yesterday 
afternoon,  and  expect  to  do  the  same  to-day.  He  seems  in  quite 
a  good-humor  ;  is  accompanied  only  by  Western  people. 

Oct.  4. —  .  .  .  The  President  is  still  here  and  goes  to  Frede- 
rick this  morning.  I  will  probably  accompany  him  as  far  as  the 
battle-field  of  South  Mountain,  so  that  my  day  will  be  pretty  well 
used  up. 

654 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  655 

Oct.  5. —  .  .  .  The  President  left  us  about  eleven  yestcnlay 
morning.  1  went  with  him  as  far  as  over  the  battle-field  of  South 
Mountain,  and  on  my  way  thither  was  (]uite  surprised  to  meet 
Mr.  Aspinwall  en  route  to  my  camp.  .  .  .  The  President  was  very 
kind  personally  ;  told  me  he  was  convinced  I  was  the  best  gene- 
ral in  the  country,  etc.,  etc.  He  was  very  affable,  and  I  really 
think  he  does  feel  very  kindly  towards  me  personally.  I  showed 
him  the  battle-fields,  and  am  sure  he  departed  with  a  more  vivid 
idea  of  the  great  diflliculty  of  the  task  we  had  accomplished. 
Mr.  Aspinwall  is  decidedly  of  the  opinion  that  it  is  my  duty 
to  submit  to  the  President's  proclamation  and  quietly  continue 
doing  my  duty  as  a  soldier.  I  presume  he  is  right,  and  am  at 
least  sure  that  he  is  honest  in  his  opinion.  I  shall  surely  give 
his  views  full  consideration.  He  is  of  the  opinion  that  the 
nation  cannot  stand  the  burdens  of  the  war  much  longer,  and 
that  a  speedy  solution  is  necessary.  In  this  he  is  no  doubt  cor- 
rect, and  I  hope  sincerely  that  another  successful  battle  may 
conclude  my  part  of  the  work. 

Oct.  — ,  1862,  Pleasant  Valley. — I  received  to-day  a  very 
handsome  series  of  resolutions  from  the  councils  of  Philadel- 
phia, thanking  me  for  the  last  campaign.  The  councils  pitch 
into  the  government  for  not  thanking  me,  most  beautifully.  The 
phrase  about  my  having  "  organized  victory  "  is  a  cut  at  Stanton, 
who  last  winter  issued  an  order  scouting  the  idea  of  "  organizing 
victory,"  and  rested  on  the  sword  of  (iideon  and  Donnybrook 
Fair.  I  believe  I  will  try  to  acknowledge  them  now,  so  I  can 
send  you  the  resolutions  to-morrow.  Pray  keep  them  for  May, 
with  the  thanks  of  Congress,  etc.  I  have  also  some  resolutions 
of  the  councils  of  Baltimore,  which  I  have  not  yet  replied  to, 
and  which  I  will  send  you  in  a  day  or  two. 

Oct.  25. —  ...  I  hope  my  bridge  at  Berlin  is  finished,  and  if 
so  I  can  cross  some  troops  to-day,  and  shall  be  all  ready  to 
march  the  moment  the  cavalry  is  ready,  which  will  be  shortly. 
I  don't  think  Lee  will  fight  us  nearer  than  Richmond.  I  expect 
no  fight  in  this  vicinity.  .  .  .  My  report  is  at  last  finished,  and 
will,  I  presume,  be  copied  to-day.  ...  I  see  that  there  is  much 
impatience  throughout  the  country  for  a  move.  I  am  just  as 
anxious  as  any  one,  but  am  crippled  by  want  of  horses.  ...  I 


<m^m 


656  McCLELLAN*S  OWN  STORY. 

sent  Bishop  Mcllvaine  over  to  Harper's  Ferry  in  my  ambulance. 
He  is  accompanied  by  the  Rev.  Mr.  Clements. 

Oct,  26. —  ...  I  move  a  respectable  number  of  troops  across 
the  Potomac  to-day,  the  beginning  of  the  general  movement, 
which  will,  however,  require  several  days  to  accomplish,  for  the 
cavalry  is  still  terribly  off.  Yesterday  a  telegram  received  from 
the  President  asking  what  my  "  cavalry  had  done  since  the  bat- 
tle of  Antietam  to  fatigue  anything."  It  was  one  of  those  little 
flings  that  I  can't  get  used  to  when  they  are  not  merited. 

Pleasant  Valley^  Oct.  — . — Since  about  three  this  morning  it 
has  been  blowing  a  perfect  gale  ;  several  tents  blown  over,  etc. 
The  bishop  preached  a  very  good  extempore  sermon  on  faith  ; 
a  very  impressive  one  it  was,  too.  Service  was  in  the  little  brick 
church  that  you  remember  just  beyond  the  camp  in  the  direc- 
tion of  Brownsville.  They  are  working  very  hard  to  tie  my  tent 
fast  with  ropes  ;  hope  they  will  succeed.  I  strongly  suspect  our 
chances  for  breakfast  are  decidedly  slim.  Your  father  and  I 
have  been  waiting  for  a  very  long  time,  and  affairs  don't  seem 
to  make  progress.  I  confess  that  I  am  becoming  hungry  and 
cross — very  hungry  and  rather  cross.  .  .  .  You  had  better  send 
me  two  uniform  frock-coats.  I  begin  to  present  a  terribly  pov- 
erty-stricken appearance.  Ah  !  Andrew  says  that  breakfast  will 
soon  be  ready — that  "  the  wittles  is  wery  slow  cooking  this  here 
windy  morning."  I  hope  his  estimate  of  time  will  not  be  out 
of  the  way  much. 

Pleasant  Valley^  Oct,  27. — I  commenced  the  crossing  yester- 
day.    I  returned  a  few  moments  ago  from  a  trip  to  the s  to 

say  good-by  to  the  bishop  and  to  present  your  album.  The  visit 
was  so  characteristic  that  I  can't  omit  telling  you  of  it.  I  found 
the  family  at  dinner  in  the  kitchen.  They  wanted  me  to  take 
some  dinner  in  the  dining-room,  but  I  insisted  upon  sitting 
down  with  them  in  the  kitchen,  which  delighted  them  beyond 
measure.  The  old  lady  went  nearly  frantic — "  to  think  of  Gen. 
McClellan  sitting  down  to  dinner  in  the  kitchen  just  like  any 
common  man,"  etc.,  etc.  I  got  a  little  more  than  I  bargained  for 
in  the  shape  of  "  the  guard  "  coming  in  before  I  got  through;  but 
I  kept  on.     The  guard  was  rather  more  put  out  than  I  was,  as  he 


PRIVATE  LETTERS.  657 

was  a  regular ;  but  he  could  not  get  out  of  the  scrape  without  a 
scene,  so  he  went  through  with  it.  The  album  created  a  terrific 
scene  of  delight.  More  "  O  mys "  were  expended  on  it  than  I 
have  heard  tor  a  couple  of  years  or  so.  The  old  lady  went  almost 
out  of  her  senses.  I  put  the  photographs  in  it  for  them,  and 
wrote  her  name,  with  your  regards,  on  one  of  the  blank  leaves. 
All  sorts  of  inquiries  were  made  about  you,  the  baby,  and  mam- 
ma, and  when  I  left  Mrs. wished  me  to  kiss  the  baby  for 

her  and  "  give  gold  love  "  to  you.  The  old  lady  said  that  "  she'd 
been  a  mind  to  send  to  me  for  some  beef,"  so  I  told  Bates  just 
now  to  get  a  good  large  piece  and  take  it  up  to  them.  They 
would  not  take  any  pay  from  the  bishop,  because  Col.  Hammond 
had  sent  more  money  to  pay  his  bill  than  they  thought  right,  so 
they  squared  accounts  and  cleared  their  consciences  by  refusing 
any  pay  from  the  bishop.  Some  artist  of  an  illustrated  paper 
had  been  there  taking  a  sketch  of  the  house,  and  left  them  a 
very  good  copy,  which  delighted  them  much.  I  gave  them  that 
copy  of  the  President  and  myself  which  you  sent  them,  so  that  I 
think  they  are  now  a  very  happy  family.  All  of  them  sent  very 
kind  messages  to  you,  which  you  can  consider  delivered. 

Oct.  — ,  Berlin. — ^\Ve  are  now  near  Berlin,  and  have  a  much 
better  camp  than  the  last  one.  My  tent  is  at  the  bottom  of  a 
wooded  ravine,  and  is  perfectly  sheltered  from  the  wind.  I  am 
as  comfortable  as  can  be  in  a  tent,  and  have  a  grass  carpet 
instead  of  the  dust  and  dirt  which  made  the  floor  of  my  last 
tent. 

Oct  30,  Berlin. —  ...  I  have  just  been  put  in  an  excellent 
humor  (?)  by  seeing  that,  instead  of  sending  the  drafted  men  to 
fill  the  old  regiments  (as  had  been  promised  me),  they  are  form- 
ing them  into  new  regiments.  Also  that,  in  face  of  the  great 
want  of  cavalry  with  this  army,  they  are  sending  the  new  cavalry 
regiments  from  Pennsylvania  to  Louisville  instead  of  hither  ! 
Blind  and  foolish  they  have  ever  been  in  Washington,  and  so, 
T  fear,  they  will  continue  to  the  end. 

Berlin,  Oct.  — . —  ...  It  will  not  do  for  me  to  visit  Washing- 
ton now.  The  tone  of  the  telegrams  I  receive  from  the  authori- 
ties is  such  as  to  show  that  they  will  take  advantage  of  anything 


658  McCLRLLAN'S  OWN  STOJiY. 

possible  to  do  me  all  the  harm  they  can,  and  if  I  went  down  I 
should  at  once  be  accused  of  purposely  delaying  the  movement. 
Moreover,  the  condition  of  things  is  such  that  1  ought  not  to 
leave  just  now.  The  army  is  in  the  midst  of  the  preliminary 
movements  for  the  main  march,  and  I  must  be  at  hand  in  this 
critical  moment  of  the  operation.  ...  If  you  could  know  the 
mean  character  of  the  despatches  I  receive  you  would  boil  over 
with  anger.  When  it  is  possible  to  misunderstand,  and  when  it 
is  not  possible ;  whenever  there  is  a  chance  of  a  wretched  innu- 
endo, then  it  comes.  But  the  good  of  the  country  requires  me 
to  submit  to  all  this. 

Berlin,  Oct.  31. —  ...  I  don't  expect  to  move  headquarters 
from  here  for  a  couple  of  days  ;  but  in  the  meanwhile  the  troops 
are  constantly  crossing  and  the  army  getting  into  position  for  the 
advance. 

Oct.  31. — If  you  can  get  to  a  comparatively  permanent  place 

you  had  better  write  to  Dr.  V to  send  the  sash  and  sabre  by 

express  to  you,  for  I  should  hate  to  lose  the  ugly,  rusty  old 
thing — that  is,  if  you  would  value  it  any  ;  and  perhaps  our  little 
child  might  value  it  after  you  and  I  are  dead  and  gone.     Miss 

and   two  Misses  were   at   camp   to-day.     Of  course 

there  was  a  general  row  among  the  youngsters,  and  I  came  in 
for  my  share  of  the  trouble  in  the  shape  of  a  visitation  for  an 
hour  or  so.  ...  I  had  a  long  visit  from  Mr.  Bancroft,  the  histo- 
rian,  to-day. 

Oct.  31  {after  midnight). —  .  .  .  From  the  despatches  just 
received  I  think  I  will  move  headquarters  over  the  river  to-mor- 
row. The  advance  is  getting  a  little  too  far  away  from  me,  and 
I  wish  to  have  everything  well  under  my  own  hands,  as  I  am 
responsible. 

Notf.  2,  Berlin. —  .  .  .  We  are  about  starting  to  Wheatland, 
some  eight  or  nine  miles  on  the  other  side  of  the  river.  .  .  . 
Pleasonton  had  considerable  skirmishing  yesterday  with  Stuart's 
cavalry.  They  exceed  ours  vastly  in  numbers.  There  may  be 
some  infantry  skirmishing  to-day,  but  nothing  serious. 

Al'ni).  4. —  .  .  .  Slept  under  a  tree  last  night,  sharing  what  I 


PRIVATE  LETTERS,  659 

had  in  the  way  of  a  bed  with  Gen.  Reynolds.  .  .  .  There  is  some 
prospect  of  a  fight  to-day,  but  cannot  tell  exactly  until  I  catch 
the  extreme  advance  a  couple  of  miles  further  on. 

NozK  4,  11.30  P.M.,  tuar  Muidleburg. —  .  .  .  We  are  in  the 
full  tide  of  success,  so  far  as  it  is  or  can  be  successful  to  advance 
without  a  battle.  .  .  .  To-morrow  night  I  hope  to  strike  the  rail- 
road and  telegraph  again  ;  no  telegraph  within  twenty-five  miles 
of  this.  .  .  . 


NoiK  5,  9  P.M.,  camp  near  Rectortaum. —  .  .  .  After  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  marching  and  skirmishing  we  have  worked 
our  way  thus  far  down  into  rebeldom.  We  have  had  delightful 
weather  for  marching  and  a  beautiful  country  to  travel  through. 
.  .  .  We  left  Berlin  on  Sunday  morning,  the  headquarters  stop- 
ping at  Wheatland  ;  but  I  heard  firing  and  rode  to  the  front,  going 
all  the  way  to  Snicker's  Gap  (to  the  top  of  the  mountain)  and 
spending  the  night  at  Snickersville.  Next  morning  1  rode  to 
me^t  the  train,  but  heard  some  more  firing,  and  rode  again  to- 
wards the  front,  and  spent  the  night  near  Bloomfield,  camp  be- 
ing some  miles  back.  At  Snickersvill^  I  got  a  bed  in  a  house  to 
sleep  in ;  at  Bloomfield  I  slept  under  a  tree  in  the  woods ;  so  that 
last  night  I  was  very  glad,  after  another  long  ride,  to  get  to  my 
tent  again.  .  .  .  Pleasonton  has  been  doing  very  well  again  ;  has 
had  some  skirmishing  pretty  much  every  day  ;  to-day  he  came 
across  Jeb  Stuart  and  thrashed  him  badly.  Jeb  outnumbered 
him  two  to  one,  but  was  well  whipped  ;  there  were  some  very 
pretty  charges  made.  .  .  . 

NoiK  6,  I  P.M.,  camp  near  Rectortaum. —  .  .  .  The  army  still 
advances,  but  the  machine  is  so  huge  and  complicated  that  it 
is  slow  in  its  motions. 

NazK  7,  2  P.M. —  .  .  .  Sumner  returned  last  night.  Howard 
returned  this  morning.  I  go  to  Warrenton  to-morrow.  Rey- 
nolds is  there  now,  Bumside  at  Waterloo,  Bayard  in  front. 
Pleasonton  and  Averill  are  trying  to  catch  Jeb  Stuart  again 
near  Flint  Hills.  Couch  is  here,  and  moves  to-morrow  towards 
Warrenton.  Porter  and  Franklin  are  at  White  Plains.  Porter 
moves  to-morrow  to  New  Baltimore,  thence  next  day  to  Warren- 


PKI I  'A  TE  LE  TTERS.  66 1 

spirits  entirely.  It  made  me  feel  very  badly  yesterday  when  I 
rode  among  them  and  saw  how  bright  and  cheerful  they  looked 
and  how  glad  they  were  to  see  me.  Poor  fellows  !  they  did  not 
know  the  change  that  had  occurred.  .  .  . 

Warrentofiy  Nov.  lo,  2  p.m. —  ...  I  am  very  well  and  taking 
leave  of  the  men.  I  did  not  know  before  how  much  they  loved 
me  nor  how  dear  they  were  to  me.  Gray-haired  men  came  to 
me  with  tears  streaming  down  their  cheeks.  I  never  before  had 
to  exercise  so  much  self-control.  The  scenes  of  to-day  repay 
me  for  all  that  I  have  endured. 


THE   END. 


INDEX. 


Abbott,  Lieut.  H.  C,  124. 

Abercrombie,  Gen.  J.  J.,  in  Virgi- 
nia, 240,  241  ;  Fair  Oaks,  379. 

Abert,  Capt.  W.  S.,  123. 

Acquia  creek,  Va.,  106,  493-496,  500, 
506,  508,  509,  529-531. 

Administration,  unfitness.  175,  176. 

Alexander,  Col.  B.  S.,  119,  124. 

Alexandria,  Va.,  80,  89,  96,  239,  509- 

527.  536. 

Allen's  Field,  Va. — see  Savage's  Sta- 
tion. 

Anderson.  Gen.  J.  R.,  347,  351,  371, 

374. 
Anderson,  Gen.  Richard,  at  Williams 
burg,    324,    325 ;    South  Mountain, 

561,  573. 

Anderson,  Lieut. -Col.  Robert,  580. 

Annandale,  Va.,  515-519. 

Antietam,  Md.,  battle  of,  584-613. 

Arlington  Heights,  Va.,  67,  68,  73,  80. 

Army,  Confederate,  discipline,  72  ;  en- 
trenchments, 75  ;  advantages,  253  ; 
at  Yorktown,  257,  260,  267,  272,  285- 
291,  311,  312,  319;  Williamsburg, 
324-326,  333 ;  West  Point.  337  ; 
Hanover  C.  H.,  369-372;  Fair 
Oaks,  378-384 ;  in  Union  rear,  390- 
393;  Gaines's  Mill,  416-418;  Sav- 
age's Station.  426-428  ;  Charles  City 
road,  431,  432;  Glendale,  430-433  ; 
Malvern  Hill.  436,  437;  Crampton's 
Gap.  562,  563 ;  .South  Mountain, 
572-579  ;  Antietam.  584-606. 

Army,  Union,  discipline,  demoralized, 
40,  68.  71,  87,  200. 

Army  of  Potomac,  under  McClellan, 
composition,  67  ;  reorganized,  69, 
70,  198;  deficient  in  officers,  73.97; 
force,  75-79,  85,  163;  divisions,  81, 
114  ;  mutinies.  86,  99;  results  of  re- 
views, 98.  Organization :  staff,  83. 
112,  114,  120-135;  brigades,  TI2, 
114;  divisions,  114;  artillery,  114- 
118;  cavalry.  118,  119;  engineers, 
119, 124, 125  ;  adj.-gen.*sdept..  122; 
personal  staff ,  123;  insp.-gen.'sdept.. 


124;  medical dept.,  126;  commissary 
dept  ,  130  ;  ordnance  dept.,  131  ; 
dept.  of  ju.stice,  134;  signal  corps, 
134  ;  telegraph  dept.,  135.  Medical 
record  of,  at  Washington,  126 ;  lack 
of  stores,  128;  provisioning,  130; 
artillery  plenty,  infantry  arms  need- 
ed, 131,  132.  In  Peninsula:  artil- 
lery, 116;  cavalry,  119;  engineer 
officers,  124 ;  troops  withdrawn,  155, 
163,  165,  261 ;  advance,  222,  228 ; 
route,  227  ;  transportation,  235,  237, 
251.  cost  238;  maps.  253,  264; 
Yorktown,  272-288 ;  lack  of  food, 
301,  3*^2,  340 ;  Williamsburg,  319- 
333  ;  in  pursuit,  338  ;  new  corps, 
organization,  342 ;  Mechanicsville, 
363 ;  Hanover  C.  H.,  368-376 ; 
Fair  Oaks,  377-384,  398  ;  Gaines's 
Mill,  410-421,  442  ;  Savage's  Sta- 
tion, 426-428  ;  White  Oak  Swamp, 
428,  430  ;  Charles  City  road,  431, 
432  ;  Glendale,  430,  433 ;  Malvern 
Hill,  433-437.  484  ;  Harrison's 
Landing,  444-468,  481-507  ;  to  Ac- 
quia creek,  464.  469-471,  493.  494- 
505.  With  Pope,  508-547  ;  Fairfax 
C.  H.,  518.  519,  526.  Maryland 
campaign :  exhausted,  551  ;  Cramp- 
ton's  Gap,  558-565 ;  South  Moun- 
tain, 572-583  ;  Antietam,  584-613; 
material  needed.  629-640,  Ingalls's, 
Meigs's,  and  Myers's  reports  633, 
636,637. 

Army  of  Virginia,  552. 

Army  corps,  formation,  222,  342. 

Army  organization  :  infantry,  108  ;  ar- 
tillery, 108  ;  cavalry,  109  ;  engi- 
neers, no;  staff,  1IC-112. 

Aspinwall,  W.  H.,  451,  655. 

Astor,  Jr.,  Col.  J.  J.,  123,  251. 

Averill,  Gen.  W.  W.,  at  Washington, 
222.  In  Peninsula,  239  ;  Yorktown, 
260  ;  Williamsburg,  339  ;  Malvern. 
4'^8  ;  White  Oak  Swamp,  494.  In 
Maryland  campaign,  647.  659. 

Ayres,  Capt.,  301,  430. 


663 


IXDF.X. 


66  ^ 


Chain  bridge,  Va.,  68,  79,  80,  90,  95, 
513, 515. 516-520,  524,  525, 531. 536. 

Chambliss,  Capt.,  372. 

Charlestown,  W.  Va.,  193-195,  621- 
624. 

Chartrcs,  Due  de,  145. 

Chase,  Sec.,  attitude  toward  McClel- 
lan.  157,  159,  203,  479,  480;  ex- 
tracts from  diary,  159,  160  ;  urges 
McClellan's  removal,  489 ;  errone- 
ous statement,  543  ;  report  of  cabi- 
net meeting,  544. 

Cheat  Mountain,  Va.,  63. 

Chickahominy   river,   Va.,    123,    241, 

337.  340-343,    346-351,   354,    355. 

358,  362-368,    376-379.    3ii2,    385- 

390,  393-399,    402-404,    410-429, 

443,  448,  468,  469,    505-508,    540, 

551- 
Christian,  Col.,  5S1. 

Clark,  Capt.,  578,  605. 

Clarke,  Gen.  H.  F.,  83,  114,  130,  131. 

Cluseret,  Gen.,  offers  services,  i.<3. 

Coast  expedition,  plans,  205,  206, 

Cockletown,  Va.,  260. 

Coggins's  Point,  Va.,  491,  493. 

Coggswell,  Col.,  171,  185,  1 90. 

Colburn,   Col.  A.  V.,  at  Washington, 

90.  123;  Vorktown,    308,  311,  315  ; 

Pope's  campaign,  537. 
Cold  Harbor — see  Gaines's  Mill. 
Colston,  Gen.,  324. 
Comstock,  Lieut.  C.  R.,  124. 
Confederacy, proclaimed, 38;  prepared, 

39- 
Congress,  Federal,  thanks  McClellan, 

82  ;  resolution  on  war,  149. 

Conrad,  Capt.  F.  A.,  431, 

CoiiNtitution,  power  of  amending,  32  ; 
violations,  33. 

Cooke,  Gen.  P.  St.  G..  321,  417. 

Cooke,  Capt.,  577,  578,  605. 

Co<)j>er,  Capt.,  430,  431. 

Corps,  organization,  222,  342.  Com- 
manders :  1st,  McDowell,  Hooker ; 
2d,  Sumner ;  3d,  Heintzelman  ;  4th, 
Kcyes  ;  5th,  Porter  ;  6th,  Franklin; 
9lh,  Burnside  ;  12th,  Banks,  Mans- 
field, Williams. 

Cothran,  Capt.,  592,  593,  599. 

Couch,  Gen.  D.  N  ,  79,  80,  81, 139;  at 
Vorktown,  i()0,  30J  ;  Williamsburg, 
320,  324,  326,  333 ;  in  pursuit,  341, 
352.  354  ;  Fair  Oaks.  377-381  : 
Gaines's  Mill,  421  ;  Malvern,  434, 
436,  437.  In  Pope's  campaign,  510, 
512,519,521,522,526,532,536.  In 
Maryland  cam|)aij:^n,  554  ;  Cramp- 
ton's  G«p,  561,  562,  564,  565  ;  South 


Mountain,  575,  576  ;  Antietam,  589, 

598,  ()20  ;  after  Antietam,  621,  622, 

624,  659. 
Cowen,  Capt.,  59(). 
Cox,  Gen.  J.  D.,  in  Kanawha  Valley, 

53.  64,  65  ;  Pope's  campaign,  513- 

517,  521 ;  South  Mountain,  576-578  ; 

Antietam,  603,  606  ;  withdrawn,  628. 
Crampton's  Gap,  Md.,  battle  of ,  558- 

565,  606,  608. 
Crawford,  Gen  S.  W.,  591,  592. 
Crook,  Col ,  576,  603-605. 
Croome,  Lieut.,  576. 
Cross,  Col ,  596. 
Cross,  Lieut.  C.  E.,  124. 
CuUum,  Gen.,  514. 
Custer,  Gen.  G.  A.,  123,  364,  365. 

"  Dan  Webster,"  327,  328. 

Dana,  Capt.  J.  J.,  128. 

Dana,  Gen.  N.  J.,  at  Fair  Oaks,  382  ; 

Antietam,  592,  593,  613. 
Darell,  Capt.,  iro^. 
Darnestown,  Va.,  96,  181,  183. 
Davies,  Maj.,  talk  with  Stanton,  150. 
Davis,  Maj.  N.  H.,  124. 
De  Chartres,  Due — see  Chartrcs. 
Defences  of  Washington,  68-70,  72- 

74. 
De  Joinville,  Prince — see  Joinville. 

Dennison,  Gov.,  40,  46,  225,  250. 

De  Paris,  Comte — see  Paris. 

Departments:  of  Potomac.  225,  238, 
252;  Maryland,  79;  Mis>i-sippi, 
225  ;  Missouri,  202;  Mountain.  225, 
239;  Rappahannock,  241  ;  Shenan- 
doah, 97,  241  ;  Virginia,  67,  252  ; 
Washington,  67. 

Dcvens.  Gen.  C,  at  Hall's  Bluff,  189, 
190;  Fair  Oaks,  379,  381. 

Dickcrson,  Capt.,  45. 

Dietrich,  Capt.,  419,  430. 

Divisions,  formation  of,  81. 

Dix,  Gen.  J.  A.,  79,  88,  146,  147,  270. 

D'Orleans,  Capt.  L.  P.,  123. 

D'Orleans,  Capt.  R.,123. 

Doublcday,  Gen.  A.,  581,  590,  591. 

Douglas,  Stephen  A.,  reminiscence  of, 

36. 
Dranesville,  Va.,  171,   180-185,  512, 

514,  5f5,  521,  654. 
Dryer,  Capt.,  602. 
Duane,  Capt.  J.  C,  120,  124,  126;  in 

Peninsula.  24S,  339,  505. 
D'Utassy,  Col  ,  142. 

Early,  Gen.  J.  A.,  353. 
Enrthworks  at  Washington,  72. 
,  Eckert,  Maj.  T.,  135. 


^/A 


r.vcEx 


RmA*-/    'xri»     V   H     kf    V  iUaiti  (inrv, 
Vir.   ji'^    '^t,  '>3<     H.mc^vr   .   H.. 

^r^.  ^.r^   ',^>  -:^ 
f^nr^nU^    V>      ■w'it.S^r -bf    ITT  1^*' 

f'/r»fA^  ll'infie,  Va.     f<>2,  1*5,  r^/>- 

/M,  *^',.  a^y/.  ^.  nf-^57,  ^4. 
i7^.  27*,  3f>,3  44^.,  4f'-  44->  y>'. 
4^1*  4^/5.  4y/  '/^»  y^ 

rV,i.  >/,,  i^r,  ',^,  '//,  fi^  ty.,  f$6, 
l'o,r,f,  '/H7.  »/,7.  y/^  y/2  y>4,  311, 

r*''.  vn.  rr,  n;.  34' ;  •"  pur-mit. 

1H^,  '$'2>  t/';  ''J'*  Tavrrri,  3'y2, 
4^';  ;  '/,Mr»'-;'5i  Mill,  412,  420,  421  ; 
''■Uf^U'U  '-H;ifi//fi,  427,  428  ;  White 
0,»t  H/ynrri|f,  42H,  4y>  433  ;  lk*rklcy, 
444  In  l'o|»*:'4  r  ;jm|/aij;n,  5'>>-5i7, 
^''*V    '''3^    'JV'.     W»    Maryland  cam- 

'jO-,  ;  S//tith  Motiniain,  574,  575  ; 
/ShiU'lutii,  «JH4,  ^H/;,  5y>,  5c;8,  fxx^; 
Mf»*'f  Afilii-fJim,  621.  624,  629,  637, 
On';.  '»'»'».  Mo»w>|(rtt|»h  on  McClcl- 
Iwn,  ^f'/H, 
I^M/l'fhk,   MH,   553,   554,   557,   571, 

17J«.  V/'l.  •;7^' 
rr^'moMl,  (irn,   |.  ('.,  3C>2.  22$,  270. 
Kmnli,  (iru.  W.  M.,  at    Washington, 

iHfii,     Hi;      Kttir    Oakn,     382-384; 

(lriJiir«»*i*  Mill,  41 H  ;  Savajjc'n St.it ion, 

lay.  4'4H  ;  Antiriam,  594-598,  rxx). 

<liihir«i'«»  Mill,  Vu,,  balllc  of,  4l(/-|2i. 


-    r„    TC    "ii:- 


<^hnmi.  r^ea.  '..  fT'V  ?*-   5^ 

'om.  'v.r.  VA 
' '/iil,  Tsunoe*.  -viur  'a  Ifi^^TaiL.  ^ 

Ooittcestfsr,    Vi.     263.    jfto,  J^T, 
2.4r>,  rt^   2i>r.  »>a,  SjC^ 

wia,  r^r-  241*.,  2?-    *V|^  »7.  3rj6'; 
V'iriirriwn,    23.^.    7c^  ^r;    Haaii- 

Gormaxi.   Geo.  W.   A.  a;  V'^ckswm, 

2«^;  Fair  Oakv  3^-  :  S--mi  Jfo«»- 

tain,  ;.^2  ;  Aaueum,  s^yx  593- 
GoT^nunexic.  j^cnexaL  acctarie  lowanl 

«ef:e»(on  axiid  cCTmfrraaon,  31,  32  ; 

lofe  ^jUcf.  powerie»  caiif  is  the 

war,  32  ;  anprepared,  3r> 
<'>yv€minent.     Sfafg^,.     NovthoB    aad 

5Joatbcm  raw^of,  31  ;  aid  of  X<irtb- 

era  ScaseA,  32.  42- 
f^aftoo,  W.  V'a..  57,  5*. 
Graham.  r>tn.  L.  P..  oi. 
Graham,  Cape.  597. 
Granger,  ^.apc.  B..  130. 
Granger,  fjtm.  G.,  appointed  inspector, 

rerfascd,  44. 
Grant,  f^n    C  S..  seeks  position  on 

McClellan'^   staff,    47  ;  cocnplaiDed 

of,  by  flalleck,  216;  letter.  219. 
Great  Falls,  McL,  79,  90,  95,  167. 
Greene,  Gen.  G.  S.,  591-593. 
Gregg.  Col.,  at  York  town,   302,  303  ; 

Pope's  campaign,  521,  524,  525 
Gricr,  Col.  W.  A-.  321,  322. 
GrifTin,  Gen.  C,  370,  414-416,  620. 
Grimm,  Capt..  419. 
Grover,  Gen.  G.,  314. 

Haines,  Lieut.,  601,  602. 

Halfway  House,  Va.,  254,  260,  261, 
289,  298,  299.  320,  322. 

Hall's  Hill,  Va.,  95.  96,  516,  536. 

Halleck,  Gen.  H.  W.,  accused  of  per- 
jury, warns  McClellan  against 
Stanton,  137 ;  desired  by  Scott  as 
his  successor,  170  ;  "strategy," 215  ; 
complains  of  Grant,  216,  217  ;  in 
Department  of  Missouri,  202.  207  ; 
in  Department  of  Mississippi,  225, 


INDEX. 


667 


234>  239 ;  complains  of  McClellan, 
243  ;  commander-in-chief,  450,  452; 
treatment  of  McClcllan,  467,  £04; 
asks  McClellan's  co-operation,  cor- 
dial feelings,  473  ;  agrees  with  Mc- 
Clellan,  474,  condemns  his  opera- 
tions 475  ;  charges  delay,  500,  501, 
responsibility  539 ;  refuses  to  thank 
army,  506,  507  ;  in  Pope's  campaign, 
508-547  ;  ignorant  ot  Pope's  posi- 
tion, 50S,  529 ;  charges  neglect  510  ; 
asks  MuOellan's  assistance,  525, 
541;  unable  to  go  to  front,  534; 
order  to  McClellan,  538,  546;  re- 
sponsible for  Pope's  defeat,  538  ; 
helpless,  539;  false  testimony,  539, 
542 ;  contemptuous  action,  550 ; 
anxious,  misquotes  despatch  of  iith 
Sept.,  '62,  555,  556;  extract  from 
testimony,  556  ;  fau)t-finding,  614, 
622  ;  shirks  responsibility,  635  ;  on 
supplies  to  army,  641  ;  refuses  funds, 
644  ;  order  of  removal,  651. 

Haller,  Maj.  G.  O..  134. 

Hamilton,  Gen.  C.  S.,  in  Peninsula, 
239,  246,  256  ;  Yorktown,  260,  261, 
263. 

Hampton,  Capt.,  592. 

Hancock,  Gen.  W.  S.,  81,  140;  at 
Yorktown,  285,  300 ;  Williamsburg, 
325,  326,  330,  331  ;  in  pursuit,  352  ; 
Savage's  Station,  428 ;  Antietam, 
597-599,  602,  606. 

Hanover  Court-House,  Va.,  battle  of, 
368-376. 

Hardie,  Lieut -Col.  J.  A.,  122. 

Harland,  Col.,  578.  605. 

Harper's  Ferry,  Va.,  94,  192 ;  (Md. 
campaign)  550,  555,  556,  558-565. 
570-573,  614,  622,  625,  627,  643, 
644-646. 

Harris,  Hon.  I.,  Keyes's  letter  to, 
267. 

Harrison,  Capt ,  371. 

Harrison's  Landing,  Va.,  430,  437, 
440-^68,  481-507. 

Hartsuff,  Gen.  G.  L,  581,  591,  613. 

Hatch,  Gen.  J.  P.,  579-581. 

Haupt,  Col.,  509,  517. 

Hazzard,  Capt..  427.  428,  430. 

Heintzelman,  Gen.  S.  P.,  80,  81,  96, 
138,  306.  In  Peninsula,  250-252; 
Yorktown,  260,  261,  289,  298,  299, 
304;  Williamsburg,  320,  322,  325, 
330.  332.  333  ;  in  pursuit,  348  ;  Fair 
Oaks,  377-384 ;  Old  Tavern,  392 ; 
Gaines's  Mill,  419,  420 ;  Savage's 
Station,  427;  Glendale,  430,  432; 
Malvern,  433,  436;  Berkley,  444; 


brevetted.  475.  In  Pope's  cam- 
paign, 509,  510,  529,  532,  536. 

Hexamer,  Capt. ,  598. 

Hill,  Gen.  A.  P.,  at  Williamsburg, 
353  ;  Seven  Days,  401,  402,  431, 
432  ;  Antietam,  605  ;  Shenandoah, 
648,  650. 

Hill,  Gen.  D.  H  ,  at  Yorktown,  319, 
324;  Williamsburg,  334,  353;  Fair 
Oaks,  378  ;  South  Mountain,  561, 
562,  573  ;  Shenandoah,  648,  650. 

Hitchcock,  Gen  £.  A.,  137. 

Hockaday's  Springs,  Va.,  339,  340. 

Hodges,  Capt.  H.  C,  238. 

Hoffmann,  Lieut.-Col  ,  581. 

Hooker,  Gen.  J.,  80,  81,  96,  i6i.  In 
Peninsula,  257 ;  Yorktown,  278, 
298,  299;  Williamsburg,  301,  302, 
304,  320-326,  332,  333  ;  in  pursuit, 
341, 352  ;  Fair  Oaks,  379,  382,  383  ; 
Glendale,  430,  432  ;  Malvern,  434, 
436,  462,  492,  493  In  Maryland 
campaign :    South    Mountain,    561, 

574.  575.  577.  579.  582  ;  Antietam, 

584,    583,    590,  591,  593,   599-601, 

606,  613,  619,  623. 
Howard,  Gen.  O.  O.,  81 ;  at  Fair  Oaks, 

382,  383  ;  Antietam.  592,  593. 
Howard's  bridge,  Va.,  254,  256,  259, 

307. 
Howe.  Capt.,  60. 

Hudson,  Lieut.  Col.  E.,  123,  381. 
Huger,  Gen.  B.,   378. 
Humphreys,  Gen.  A.  A.,  125,  589,620 
Hunt,  Gen.   H,  J.,  80,  114,  116,  117; 

in  Peninsula,  264,  302,  356. 
Hunter,  Gen.  D.,  80,  137,  225,  243. 
Huttonsville,  Va.,  61,  62.  64. 

Ingalls.  Lieut.-Col.  R.,  128,  129,  140, 

238,  251,  501 ;  report,  633,  636. 
Irvin,  Col.,  563,  599,  600. 
Irwin,  Capt.  R.  B  ,  122. 

Jackson,  Gen.  .Stonewall.  In  Peninsu- 
la, 240,  300-393  ;  Gaines's  Mill, 
415  ;  Glendale,  443 ;  Pope's  cam- 
paign, 454,  466 ;  South  Mountain, 
561,  562,  573  ;  after  Antietam,  624, 
648,  650. 

James  river,  Va.,  203,  227,  235,  268, 
269,   289,  343,  346,  411,  482,  485, 

486,  497. 

{ameson.  Gen.  C.  D.,  8r,  379-381. 
ohnston.  Gen.  J.,  in  Virginia,  54,  85, 
222,  force  76.      In  Peninsula,  267  ; 
Yorktown,  319.  333  ;  Williamsburg, 

334.  337.  353  ;  F»>r  Oaks,  399.  400, 
402. 


INDEX. 


669 


250  ;  7th  May,  302.  To  Tucker» 
13th  Mar,  251.  To  Van  Vliet,  13th 
Mar.,  251.  To  McDowell,  13th 
Mar.,  251.  To  Heintzelman.  28th 
Mar.,  252;  4th  May.  298.  To 
Blenker,  29th  Mar.,  292  To  Smith 
(W.  F.).  I5lh  Apr.,  284  To  Sum- 
ner, 4lh  May,  300.  To  Goldsbo- 
rough.  8th  Apr.,  292.  To  Adj.- 
Gen.,  9th  Apr.,  276;  lo  h  Apr.,  275. 

Lincoln  to  McClellan,6th  Apr, 

265  ;  9th  Apr  ,  276 ;  1st  May.  295  ; 
24th  May,  350;  25th  May.  366,  367; 
26th  May,  367,  368  ;  28th  May,  373. 

Stanton     to    McClellan,     i6th 

Apr,  293;  iSth  Apr.,  294;  27th 
Apr.,  295;  4th  May,  297;  iSthMay, 
345;  5th  June.  387;  nth  June,  388; 
23th  June,  391  To  Lincoln,  6th 
Apr.,  265. Adj. -Gen.  to  McClel- 
lan,  4th  Apr.,   261. Barnard  to 

McClellan,  19th,  20th  Mar.,  246, 
247.     To  Colburn.  23d  Mar.,  247 ; 

241  h  Mar.,  248. Blair  «F.  P.)  to 

McClellan,  12th  Apr.,  281. Den- 

nison  to  McClellan,  14th  Mar.,  250. 

Fox  to   McClellan,  13th  Mar., 

249. Franklin  to  McClellan,  6th, 

7th   May.   303,  304  ;  8th  Feb.,  '84, 

335. Goldsborough  to  McClellan, 

4th   May,   296.-= Heintzelman   to 

McClellan,  13th  Mar.,  250;  4th,  — 

May,  299. Hooker  to  McClellan, 

5th  May,  302. Keyes  to  McClel- 
lan. 4th,  5th  May,  300.  301.  To 
Sen.  Harris,  7th  Apr.,  267. Mc- 
Dowell to  McClellan.  22d  May,  347. 

To  Stanton,    26th   May,    369. 

Marcy  to  Tucker,  5  th  May.  297. 

Missroom  to  McClellan,  6th  Apr, 
291;    loth,   nth  Apr.,  292  ;    17th 

Apr.,  293;  22dApr,29(S. Porter 

(F.  J.)  10  McClellan,  5ih  May,  302. 

Smith   (W.   F.)  to   McClellan, 

4th,  5th  May,  300,  301. Sumner 

to   McClellan,   4th   May,    298. 

Tucker  to  McClellan,  5th  May,  297. 

To  Stanton,    loth    Apr.,   275. 

Wise  (H.  A.)  to   McClellan.    13th 

Mar.,  249. Wool  to  McClellan. 

I2th  Mar.,  249. 

Harrison's  Landings  1862:  Mc- 
Clell.m  to  Lincoln,  4th  July,  484  ; 
7lh  July,  487;  I2th,  17th,  i8th  July. 
490.  To  Stanton,  8th  July,  477. 
'\Ky  Halleck,  28th,  30th  July,  490; 
3d  Aug.,  494,  495  ;  4th  Aug.,  496 ; 
5th  Aug.,  492,  498  ;  7th  Aug..  498  ; 
loth  Aug.,  500,  501 ;   nth   Aug., 


502;  I2th,  13th,  14th  Aug.,  503, 
504;  i6th  Aug.,  504  ;  18th  Aug., 
506.     To  Aspinwall,  19th  July,  451. 

Lincoln  to   McClellan.  ist,  2d 

July,  483  ;  3d  July,  484  ;   4th  July, 

486 Halleck  to  McClellan,  30th, 

31st  July,  473,  491 ;  2d  A\ig.,  .<94  : 
3d  Aug.,  495  ;  4th  Aug.,  498;  6th 
Aug.,  493  ;  7th  Aug.,  474.  498  ;  9lh 
Aug..  500 ;  loth  Aug.,  501  ;  12th 
Aug.,  502;  14th  Aug..  504;  2ist 
Aug.,  5C7. Barnard  to  McClel- 
lan,   2d  July,  483. Burnsidc  to 

McClellan,  15th  July,  2d  Aug.,  472. 

Ingalls  to  Marcy.  7th  Aug.,  499. 

Sawtelle    to    McClellan,    loth 

Aug..  500. Stanton  to  McClel- 
lan, 5th  July,  475,  476. 

Alexandria^  1862  :  McClellan  to 
Halleck,  24th  Aug.,  508 ;  27th 
Aug.,  509-513;  28th  Aug.,  513;  29th 
Aug.,  514,  516.  517;  30th  Aug., 
518-521  ;  31st  Aug.,  524,  525.  To 
Barnard,  30th  Aug.,  519, 
To  Bumside,  30th  Aug., 
To  Heintzelman,  27th  Aug., 
To  Lincoln,  29th  Aug..  515. 
Pope,  2d  Sept.,  536  To  Porter, 
27th  Aug.,  510. Halleck  to  Mc- 
Clellan, 24th  Aug.,  5c8;  27th  Aug., 
509,  510;  28th  Aug.,  513;  29th 
Aug,    514;    30th   Aug.,  519;  31st 

Aug.,  524,  525  ;  1st  Sept.,  526. 

Lincoln  to  McClellan,   29th  Aug., 

5U.  515- 

Maryland  eamfaign^  1862 :  Mc- 
Clellan to  Halleck,  loth  Sept ,  558  ; 
19th  Sept.,  621 ;  20th  Sept.,  622  ; 
22d,  23d  Sept.,  624;  27th  Sept, 
625;  nth.  15th  Oct.,  630;  I2th 
Oct.,  633;  2ist  Oct.,  640.  To 
Bumside,  15th  Sept.,  586.  To 
Franklin.  13th,  14th  Sept.,  561, 
562  ;  icth  Sept.,  563  To  Hooker, 
14th  Sept.,  579  To  Ingalls,  15th, 
i6th  Oct.,  630.  To  Lincoln,  25th 
Oct.,  634.  To  D.  S.  Miles.  14th 
Sept.,  560.  To  army,  7th  Nov., 
653.      To  F.  A.  Walker,  21st  May. 

'84.  575. Halleck  to  McClellan, 

loth  Sept.,  559;  nth,  13th,  I4»h 
,  555;  i6ih  Sept.,  556;  20th 
,   622  :    7th  Oct.,   628  ;    13th 


521. 

5t9- 
510. 

To 


Sept 
Sept 
Oct, 
651. 


631  ;  2ist  Oct., 640;  5th  Nov.. 

— Lincoln  to  McClellan,  12th 
Sept ,  555  ;  15th  Sept ,  583  ;    25fh 

Oct.,  634. Colburn  to  McClellan. 

25th  Oct.,  635. Franklin  to  Mc- 
Clellan, ISth  Sept.,  564. IngalU 


670 


INDEX, 


to  McClellan,  9th  Oct.,  631.    To 

Quartermaster,   13th  Oct.,  631. 

Meade   to   McClellan,    i8ih   Sept., 

619. Newton   to   Colbum.   24th 

Oct..    635. Quartermasters    to 

McClellan,  15th,  22d,  24tb,  30th 
Oct ,  651,  632. Sackett  to  Mc- 
Clellan,   1876,     609-611. Scott 

(W.)    to    McClellan,     i6th    Sept., 

583. Sumner  to  McClellan,    7th 

Oct.,  630, 

Lewinsville,  Va.,  96,  512,  515,  521. 

Lincoln,  Pres.,  McClellan's  proclama- 
tion, 52 ;  solicits  a  pardon,  91  ; 
played  upon  by  radicals,  154  ;  ap- 
pointment of  Stanton  and  Hunter, 
159,  160';  apology  to  McClellan, 
161;  anecdotes,  162.  170;  imprac- 
ticable orders,  162 ;  promises  no 
withdrawals,  165  ;  solicitous  for 
McClellan,  176;  suggests  treason, 
196  ;  changes  departments,  225  ; 
orders  advance,  228,  not  insisted  on 
237 ;  plans,  229 ;  reasons  for  with- 
drawals, 276, 277;  misled  as  to  force, 
277.  278  ;  insists  on  advance,  277  ; 
advises  caution,  351,  364;  Mc- 
Dowell's withdrawal,  '*  attack  or 
give  up."  367  ;  doubts,  373  ;  con- 
gratulations 374,  583;  anxious,  385; 
thanks  army,  484,  486 ;  defers  to 
McClellan,  4S6 ;  visits  Harrison's 
Landing,  487;  requests  McClellan  to 
resume  command,  542  ;  trust  in  Mc- 
Clellan, 543,  545  ;  "I  would  gladly 
resign,"  treatment  by  cabinet  544, 
545 ;  visits  Maryland  battle-fields, 
confidence,  627  ;  withdraws  Cox, 
628;  orders  advance.  628,  640,  642; 
order  of  removal,  650. 

Long  bridge,  Va.,  68.  80,  89. 

Longstreet,  Gen.  J.,  at  Yorktown,  319, 
324  ;  Williamsburg,  333,  353  ;  Fair 
Oaks,  378;  Glendale,  431,  432; 
Pope's  campaign,  521;  South  Moun- 
tain, 561,  562,  573;  Culpeper,  648, 
650. 

Loudon  Hei^^hts,  Va  ,  560,  573,  627. 

Lovettsville,  Va.,  573.  645,  646. 

Lowe,  Prof.,  135. 

Lowell,  Capt.  C.  R.,  123 

McAlester,  Lieut.  M.  D.,  124. 

McCall,  Gen.  G.  A.,  at  Washington, 
'61,  79-81,  89-01,  95.  96,  ii^>.  169, 
180-184.  In  Peninsula,  388-391  ; 
Gaines's   .Mill,  414,  416  ;  Glendale, 

424.  430-432,  443. 
McClellan,  Capt.  A.,  122,  123,  311. 


McClellan,  Gen.  0.  B.,  sketch  of,  i- 
24;  certain  of  war,  29;  on  slavery  and 
emancipation,  33,  34 ;  treatment  of 
fugitive  and  captive  slaves,  "  prac- 
tical politics,"  34 ;  ambition  not 
political,  35,  85  ;  use  of  his  name, 
emancipation  a  military  necessity, 
enemy's  opinions,  35,  36 ;  loyalty, 
38 ;  offers  of  command,  40 ;  com- 
mand of  Ohio  troops,  41,  44;  per 
sonal  sacrifice,  43 ;  plans,  no  staff, 
44,  45  ;  conferences  with  governors, 
cavalry  and  artillery  refused,  hin- 
drances, 46  ;  Patterson  asks  help, 
Shenandoah  Valley  proposition,  47, 
54  ;  remarks  to  Buckner,  48,  49  ; 
relations  with  Lincoln,  160,  161, 
176,  with  Grant  217-219 

West  Virginia  campaign :  De- 
spatch ignored,  48  ;  proclamation, 
50  ;  address  to  troops,  5 1  ;  cam- 
paign delayed,  advance,  plans,  53  ; 
treatment  of  prisoners,  56,  62  ;  popu- 
lar enthusiasm,  57,  59,  60^  prepara- 
tions, 57  ;  fighting  doubtful,  his  de- 
sire, 59 ;  great  responsibility.  West- 
em  troops,  60  ;  complimented  by 
Scott,  Rich  Mountain,  61,  63,  64 ; 
Pegram  captured,  press  and  tele- 
graph, 64  ;  Kanawha  plans,  confi- 
dence of  troops,  short-term  troops, 
65  ;  summoned  to  Washington,  55. 

At  Washington,  1861 :  Takes 
command,  67,  82  ;  reorganizes,  69, 
71,  113,  198  ;  confidence,  provost- 
guard,  order  to  troops,  69 ;  order 
restored,  retains  McDowell,  Mc- 
Dowell's ingratitude,  70,  71  ;  ad- 
vance impracticable,  71,  199  ;  masses 
necessary,  tribute  to  troops,  72  ;  task 
in  creating  army,  fortifying.  72,  198, 
199  ;  garrison  in  Washington,  74 ; 
confident,  thanks  of  Congress, 
strength  of  army,  Senate's  recep- 
tion, 82  ;  submits  plan  to  Lincoln, 
83;  diners  at  White  House,  84; 
dispute  with  Scott,  hindrances.  84- 
87,  91,  170,  171,  199;  mutinies,  86, 
99  ;  duties,  87,  88  ;  ready  for  attack, 
88;  rumored  death,  90;  Lincoln 
and  cabinet,  91,  156;  affection  of 
troops,  91.  172  ;  regulars  and  volun- 
teers, reviews.  97  ;  instruction  not 
lost,  98  ;  Memorandum  to  Lincoln, 
loi  ;  no  cavalry  or  artillery,  106, 
118,  119;  reinforcements  needed, 
107  ;  staff,  1 12-135,  remarks  on  120, 
scheme  122 ;  engineers,  no  good 
maps,  125;  opinion  of  Halleck,  Hun- 


INDEX. 


671 


ter  137,  Heintzelman,  Sherman 
(W.  T.),  Kearny,  Sumner,  Frank- 
lin, Blenker  138,  Stahl,  Richardson. 
Stone,  Couch,  Porter  (F.  J ),  Buell 
139,  215,  243,  Sedgwick,  Hancock, 
Reynolds,  Meade,  Ingalls  140,  Wil 
Hams  (L.)  141,  Prussian  aides  144, 
French  princes  1^4-146,  Hooker 
161  ;  Blenker's  brigade,  141  ;  offers 
from  Cluseret  and  Klapka,  143; 
Maryland  election,  148  ;  not  a  par- 
ty tool,  149  ;  Cameron's  removal, 
152 ;  illness,  and  the  radicals,  155  ; 
submitting  plans,  158 ;  difficulties, 
responsibilities,  172,  173,  177  ;  pre- 
sent from  Philadelphia,  174  ;  per- 
secutions, 179;  Ball's  Bluff.  180- 
190 ;  at  Harper^s  Ferry,  192  ;  rea- 
sons for  not  attacking.  Monitor,  197; 
coast  expedition,  205  ;  orders  to  de- 
partment commanders.  207-212. 

Peninsular  campaign  :  l>eparture. 
306 ;  moves  army,  222,  259-261  ; 
staff,  123;  troops  withdrawn,  155, 
163-165.  257.  261,  282,  308 ;  effects 
of  reduction,  262-265,  283  ;  force, 
164.  241.  266,  279 ;  plans,  203,  227. 
254,  reasons  229-236,  defeated  by 
administration  227,  misrepresented 
256  ;  route  chosen,  227  ;  no  time  to 
form  corps,  223  ;  relieved  of  com- 
mand of  U.  S.  army,  220,  224.  225  ; 
objects  to  Wadsworth  226,  to  Lin- 
coln's plan  229-236 ;  Virginia  the 
principal  theatre,  226;  to  protect 
Washington  and  Shenandoah,  ene- 
my's movements,  239  ;  memoranda, 
239,  245,  266 ;  defences  of  capital, 
239-241  ;  Shenandoah  withdrawn, 
240  ;  administration  inimical,  242 ; 
Bumside's  reports,  243-245  ;  Bar- 
nard's reports,  246,  248  ;  orders  to 
commanders,  250-252,  298,  300 ;  re- 
ports of  commanders,  299-305  ; 
maps,  253.  264  ;  Wool  withdrawn, 
257 ;  recruiting  stopped,  drafting, 
258  ;  failure  of  naval  force,  264  ; 
transportation,  257,  265 ;  Keyes's 
letter,  268. At  Yorktown,  as- 
sault impracticable,  272,  274,  289  ; 
bad  roads,  275,  276,  308.  309.  313  ; 
Wool  useless,  278  ;  anecdote  of  Pe- 
lissier.  279  ;  artillery  needed,  279  ; 
civilian  aid,  280  ;  asks  for  Franklin. 
280.  281,  308,  for  McCall  2S3,  294  ; 
receives  Franklin,  281,  McCall  389, 
403 ;  ballooning,  309 ;  personal 
aims,  310;  Blair's  letter,  281,  310; 
responsibility  for  delay,  2S3  ;  "be- 


tween too  gulfs,"  316 ;  batteries 
planted,  286,  312,  314  ;  naval  opera- 
tions, 291-294,  296  ;  Cutting's  letter, 
313 ;  plan  of  assault,  2S6,  287  ;  city 
evacuated,  288,  317.  319,  torpedoes 
in  326.  354  ;  tribute  to  troops,  293, 
304 ;  Stanton's  congratulations,  293, 
295,  297 ;  Campbell's  arrest,  295  ; 
transports  asked  for.  297,  indispen- 
sable 298 At  Williamsbuig,  pur- 
suit, 319-325  ;  battle,  324-333  i 
goes  to  front,  327  ;  **  Devil  Dan," 
demoralization,  327,  328  ;  order  re- 
stored, 330,  352  ;  tribute  to  Han- 
cock, 331,  353 ;  enemy's  force,  332, 
334  ;  Franklin's  advance,  334,  trans- 
ports 335  :  treatment  of  wounded. 

results,    338,     354. Movements, 

341  ;  new  corps,  cavalry  deficient, 
342;  James  river  route,  343,  346, 
349 ;  reinforcements  needed,  343, 
344  ;  actual  force  deteimination  to 
^ght,  344;  McDowell  coming,  345, 
481  not  coming  351;  Stanton's  order, 
345.  results,  army  divided  346  ;  sick- 
ness, 349 ;  McDowell  subordinate, 
35O1  351.  389 ;  bloodless  battles, 
354 ;  respects  Sunday,  355.  445  ; 
House  resolutions,  355,  357;  confi- 
dent, 356 ;  respects  White  House. 
35 7t  360,  406 ;  speed  impossible, 
358  ;  harassed,  359  ;  bridges,  362, 
364,  366 ;  Mechanicsville,  363 ; 
faulty  plan,  364  ;  tribute  to  Custer, 
storms,  365,  388,  402  ;  illness.  365, 
395,  397  ;  Hanover  C.  H.,  368-371 ; 
reinforcements  needed.  373  ;  bridges 
destroyed,  371-375.  397.  fniits  375  ; 
way  clear  for  McDowell,  375,  482  ; 
contemplated  movements,  376  ;  Fair 
Oaks,  37^384,  398,  losses  386,  400; 
floods.  378,  384,  386,  387  ;  pursuit 
impossible,  McDowell  promised, 
385  ;  reinforcements  asked,  386, 
388,  promised  387,  3S8,  400,  401  ; 
Confederate  cavalry  raid,  389,  404  ; 
Jackson  in  rear,  390-393,  441.  force 
392  ;  responsibility  for  affairs.  392  ; 
Richmond  near,  395  ;  letter  to  John- 
ston, 401  ;  exchanges  401,  402  ;  af- 
fection   of    troops,    405. Seven 

Days:  reinforcements  promised,  410, 
late  411  ;  river  preparations.  41  r  ; 
change  of  base.  412  ;  Gaines's  Mill, 
4TO-421  ;  reasons  for  not  advancing, 
422  ;  movement  to  James,  423 ;  re- 
proachful letter  to  Stanton,  424, 
452 ;  Savage's  Station,  426-428 ; 
White  Oak  Swamp,  428, 430  ;  Glen- 


672 


INDEX. 


dale,  431-433,  McCairs  report  431 ; 
Malvern  Hill,  433-437,  484  ;  force 
and  losses.  439,  440,  448  ;  movement 
to  Hafri>oii*s  Landing,  437-439 ; 
tribute  to  troops,  439,  440,  444. 

At  Harrison's  Landing:  On  proper 
line,  439,  481,  490.  position  485  ; 
religious  services.  445,  447  ;  Burn- 
side  halted,  446,  449,  plan  490 ;  the 
English  nobleman,  448  ;  cannot  re- 
sign, 449 ;  Washington  schemes, 
449-451.  458,  464,  465,  467,  472  ; 
expects  to  be  superseded,  449,  461, 
46(3,  determination  450,  451,  453; 
Ilalleck  commander,  450.  452,  454, 
learned  through  papers  456  ;  letter 
to  Aspinwall,  451 ;  succors  Union 
piisoners,  453  ;  sick  and  wounded, 
455,  456 ;  tribute  to  Porter,  456  ; 
awaiting  orders,  457-459,  490 ;  a 
skirmi».h,  460;  Malvern  Hill  (2d), 
461-463.  492;  Pope's  orders,  463, 
47} ;  Stanton's  friendly  letters,  475, 
476,  reply  447,  477  ;  plans  opposed, 
ordered  to  Washington,  482  ;  Hal- 
leek's  promise,  466,  474,  4S2,  friend- 
ly letters  473,  474 ;  no  reinforce- 
ments, Barnard-s  views,  4S3  ;  Lin- 
coln's thanks,  484,  486  ;  as>i>tance 
promised,  486  ;  Lincoln's  visit,  Har- 
rison's Bar  letter,  444,446,  44q,  487; 
movement  to  Richmond.  491,  492, 
checked  493  ;  ordered  to  Acquia, 
464.  493,  495,  letter  on  496.  move- 
ment 4O9-471,  494-505;  no  delay. 
500-505  ;  tribute  to  Pleasonton,469 
to  army  459,  506. 

At  Alexandfia:  Despatches,  508- 
526  ;  wishes  position  defined,  508, 
513.  515.  540  ;  misstatements,  511  ; 
need  of  cavalry,  511,  512.  515,  531  ; 
proper  course,  Lincoln's  opmion, 
515  ;  Franklin  halted,  515,  reason 
510,  517  ;  Franklin  advanced,  517, 
518;  no  transportation.  Barnard's 
view,  518  ;  Fairfax  C.  H.,  518,  519; 
all  troops  sent.  520,  524,  531,  541  ; 
army  commanders.  520,  532  ;  asks 
to  go  to  front,  reply.  524.  532,  541  ; 
without  countersign.  540;  commands 
100  men,  525.  527,  531.  541  ;  a 
volunteer.  529-531,  539  ;  plans,  526; 
work  accomplished,  527,  539, 

At  Washington,  1862  :  In  com- 
mand. 533,  534,  order  536.  53S,  546; 
Lincoln's  request,  acceptance,  535. 
542,  566  ;  discredits  Pope's  reports, 
534,  542  ;  Halleck's  duty,  534  ;  the 
city   alarmed,  535  ;  Pope  and    Mc- 


Dowell in  retreat,  537,  568  ;  ride  to 
front,  joy  of  troops.  537,  547,  567  ; 
hostility  of  Halleck  and  Stanton, 
538-546  ;  charged  with  Pope's  de- 
feat, 538.  613 ;  to  command  Wash- 
ington only,  549. 

In  Mary  land  campaign  :  Seward*s 
visit,  550;  visits  Halleck,  result. 
550;  movements,  549,  550,  553. 
554,  reasons  for  557  ;  assumes  com- 
mand.  campaign  necessary,  551  ; 
army  disorganized.  55 1,  622  ;  tribute 
to  army,  552  ;  purpose  of  campaign. 
Gen.  Lee,  553,  642  ;  force,  568,  of 
enemy  569 ;  Halleck  anxious,  mis- 
quotes despatch,  555.  556  ;  Harper's 
Ferry  afiFair,  Crampton's  Gap,  558- 
565  ;   reception   at   Frederick,   571. 

572  ;  enemy's  movements,  570.  572, 

573  ;  Lee's  lost  despatch.  573 

South  Mountain,  572-583 ;  orders, 
an  historical  error,  tribute  to  2d 
corps,    575  ;  tribute   to  Reno,  578  ; 

Burnside's     action,    583. Antie- 

tam,  584-613 ;  orders,  584 ;  Bum- 
side's  conduct.  586,  6N03,  604,  607- 
611,  616  ;  positions,  587,  588  ;  Bum- 
side     bridge,     588,    602,    604 

Franklin's  monograph,  608  ;  Sack- 
ett's  letters,  609-611  ;  loss  and 
gain,  617,  623  ;  distrust  of  Stanton 
and  Halleck,  614  ;  plans,  tired  of 
service,  614,  615  ;  results  of  cam- 
paign, 606,  621  ;  will  incur  no  risks, 
why,  618,  619,  623,  624  ;  reinforce- 
ments, 620,  626  ;  enemy  retires,  620, 
622  ;  reorganization.  624-626  ;  ene- 
my's force,  626  ;  Lincoln's  visit, 
confidence,  627,  654;  Philadelphia 
resolutions,  655  ;  Cox  withdrawn, 
advance  ordered.  628  ;  supplies  and 
horses  needed,  629-639  ;  opposition, 
657,  658  ;  cavalry  inferior,  640,  641; 
date  and  line  of  advance,  641,  643  ; 
advance,  plans,  645-647,  656 ;  re- 
lieved from  command,  orders.  161, 
648,  651,  652,  660  ;  positions,  con- 
templated plan,  64S,  650  ;  feeling 
of  army,  660  ;  farewell,  652,  653, 
661. 

McDowell,  Gen.  I.,  at  Bull  Run,  re- 
treat, 54.  In  Washington  opera- 
tions, '61,  73,  8 T,  82,  89,  95,  96,  116, 
156;  retained  by  McClellan,  70: 
ingratitude,  71  ;  hated  by  troops. 
71,  56S;  withdrawn  from  McClel- 
lan, 155,  165,  261,  308;  aspirations, 
156,  158.  In  Department  of  Rap- 
pahannock, 241,  270.    In  Peninsular 


INDEX. 


673 


campaign,  248 ;  misrq>resents  Mc- 
Clellan,  256 ;  not  wanted  by  Mc- 
Clellan,  arrests  Col.  Campbell,  295; 
to  join  McClellan,  instructions,  347; 
force.  345,  347 ;  order  suspended, 
351.  481  ;  again  promised,  305,  410; 
must  be  subordinate,  389,  390.  In 
Pope's   campaign,    509,    532,    536, 

537.  54".  568. 
McLaws,  Gen.  L.,  at  Yorktown,  319; 

South  MounUin.  561,  572,  573 
McMahon,  Capt.  M.  T.,  12a,  123. 
McMillan,  Capt.  J.,  133. 
McMulIan,  Capt.,  576. 
McQuade,  Gen  ,  370,  371. 
Mack,  Capt.,  60. 
Mackall's  Hill,  Va.,  576. 
Macomb,  Lieut. -Col.  J.  W.,  125. 
Magilton,  Col.,  580. 
Magruder,   Gen.  J.  B.,   in  Peninsula, 

227,  235.  249,  256,  307,  319,  324. 
Mahan.  Prof.,  87. 
Malvern   Hill,   Va  ,   battles  of,  first, 

433-437.  484;  second,  461-463.  492. 
Manassas,  Va.,  74,  75.  78,   179,  194, 

222,  231,  236,  240,  510-515.  518,647. 
Mansfield,   Gen.   J.    K.    F..  67,  82  ; 

at  Antietam,    584,  590,  death   591, 

606,  613, 
Marcy,  Gen.  R.  B  ,  4s,  61,  217-221, 

279.  583. 
Martimprey,  Gen.,  view  of  telefrraph, 

278. 
Martmdale.  Gen.  J.  H.,  at  Yorktown, 

302 ;    Hanover  C.    H.,  370,   371 ; 

Gaines's  Mill,  414,  416. 
Martinsburg,  W.  Va ,  178,  193,  555, 

573.  621-625. 
Maryland,  secession  in,  94,  146,  147 ; 

members  of  legislature  arrested,  146, 

147. 
Maryland   campaign,  549-661 ;    Har- 

per'-s  Ferry,  Crampton's  Gap,  558- 

565;  South  Mountain,  572-583;  An- 

tietam,  584-613. 
Maryland  Heights,  Va.,  550,  559-561, 

563,  565.  573.  598.  616,  622.  627. 
Mason,  Jr ,  Capt.  W.  P.,  122.  123. 
Mason  and  Slidell  affair.  175. 
Meade,  Gen.   G.  G.,  81,  83,  140;  at 

Gaine<i's  Mill,  414-416  ;  Glendale, 

430;  South  Mountain,  579-581;  An- 

tietam,  590,  593,  619. 
Meagher,  Gen.  T.  F.,8i;  at  Fair  Oaks, 

382  ;  Gaines's  Mill,  418  ;  Malvern, 

437  ;  Pope's  campaign,  514;  Antie- 

tam.  595,  597. 
MechanicsviUe,   Va.,  battle  of,   363, 

414-416. 


Mehaffey,  Lieut.  C.  D.,  133. 

Meies,  Gren.  M.  C,  156,  157,  159; 
report  on  supplies,  636,  637. 

Memorandum  ( McClellan 's)  :  object  of 
the  war,  military  success,  loi  ;  sug- 
gestions for  campaign,  102,  104  ; 
troops  and  material  needed,  rail- 
roads, 103  ;  expenses,  105. 

Merrill,  Lieut.,  124,  311. 

MerrimaCy  197,  249,  257,  268,  282, 
342,  346. 

Middletown,  Md.,  559,  561,  573-575. 
582. 

Miles,   Col.    D.,   at   Harper's   Ferry, 

558-565. 
Minor's  Hill,  Va.,  96,  516. 
Missroom,  Com.  J.  F.,  291-293,  296, 

309.  336 

Monitor.  197,  249. 

Morell,  Gen.  G.  W.,  at  Yorktown, 
260;  Hanover  C.  H.,  370;  Gaines's 
Mill,  414;  Malvern,  434;  Pope's 
campaign,  508;  Antietam,  589,  600- 
602,  607. 

Morris,  Col.  D.,  594,  598. 

Mott,  Capt.,  285. 

Muhlenberg,  Capt.,  605. 

Munson's  Hill,   Va.,  73,  93,  95,  96, 

537 

Murphy,  Col.  McL.,  124. 

Murphy,  Capt   W.,  130. 

Myer,  Maj.  A.,  134. 

Myers,  Lieut. -("ol.  F.,  report  on  sup- 
plies, 636,  637. 

Naglee,  Gen.  H.  M.,  81;  at  Williams. 

burg.  331;  Fair  Oaks,  363,  377,  379, 

380  ;  White  Oak  Swamp,  428,  430. 
Napoleon,  Prince,  83-85. 
Navy  in  Peninsula,  247,  264,  269,  291- 

293,  296,  437. 
Neff,  Lieut. -Col.,  65. 
Negroes,  educated  to    emancipation, 

as  prisoners  offered  alternatives,  idea 

of  liberty,  34  ;  as  guides,  253. 
New  Berne,  N.  C,  203,  244,  245. 
New  Market,  Md.,  553,  554,  557. 
New  Market,  Va.,  426,  430. 
New  Bridge,  Va.,  348,  349,  360,  366, 

394-403. 
Newport  News,  Va.,  254,  259. 
Newton,  Gen.  J.,  at  West  Point,  Va., 

304.    336 ;  Crampton's  Gap,   563  ; 

Antietam,  600;  after  Antietam,  635. 
Newton,  Col.,  65. 
Nicholson,  Capt.  (navy),  292. 
Norfolk,  Va.,  203,  246,  247,  2^9,  252. 
North,   people  of,   ill-treated   in   the 

South,  29,  37 ;  loyalty,  30,  31,  33 ; 


674 


INDEX. 


enthusiastic  over  W.  Va.  campaign, 
56. 

Occoquan  river,  Va.,  106,  231-233. 
Old  Tavern,  Va.,  392,  405. 
Ord,  Gen.  O.  C,  81,  165. 
Osborn,  Capt.,  428. 

Palmer,  Gen.  I.  N.,  379.  380. 

Paris,  Comte  de,  145,  146,  311,  575. 

Parke,  Gen.  J.  G.,  244,  245. 

Patrick,  Gen.  M.  R.,  133,  581. 

Patterson,  Gen,  R.,  40.  47,  54,  74. 

Peck,  Gen.  J.  J.,  81;  at  Fair  Oaks. 
379.  380,  382 ;  Maryland,  625. 

Pegmm,  Col.  J.,  55,  62. 

Pelissier,  Gen .  A, ,  mes>age  to  French 
emperor,  279. 

Peninsular  campaign,  army  advanced, 
224;  route,  227;  transportation,  235. 
237,  251,  257,  cost  238;  reduced 
force.  241,  268  ;  naval  plans,  247, 
2(^>9,  force  247,  failure  264,  269; 
engineer  pl.ms,  247,  248  ;  delays, 
254,  256;  recruiting  stopped,  258; 
divided  authoriiy,  270.  Yorktown, 
strength  of  enemy,  267  ;  bad  roads, 
274-276,  302  ;  civilian  service,  280 ; 
"one  gun-battery,"  284.  285,  293; 
skirmishes,  311,  313-317;  batteries 
planted,  286,  312,  314;  plnn  of  as- 
sault, 287  ;  naval  operations,  291- 
293,  296  ;  city  evacuated,  artillery 
captured,  288.  Williamsburg,  319- 
333,  Hooker's  and  Hancocks  feats 
325,  331,  evacuated  333;  Frank- 
lin's advance,  334 ;  bad  roads,  339, 
341,  358  ;  Mechanicsville,  363 ; 
Hanover  C.  H.,  368-376  ;  Fair 
Oaks,  377-384,  398  ;  Gaines*s  Mill, 
410-421;  Savage's  S'ation,  426-428  ; 
White  Oak  Swamp,  428,  430;  Glen- 
dale,  430-433;  Malvern  Hill,  433- 

437.  484. 
Perkins's  Hill,  Va.,  95. 

Pettit,  Capt.,  at  Fair  Oaks,  382;  Sav 
age's  Station,  427,  428 ;  White  Oak 
Swamp,  430 :  Antietam,  587. 

Phelps,  Col.,  581. 

Pillow,  Gen.  G.  J.,  49. 

Pleasonton,  Gen.  A.,  133.  At  Mal- 
vern, 463,  492.  In  Maryland  cam- 
paign, 553  ;  South  Mountain,  561, 
574.  ?7^J.  577  ;  Antietam,  5S4.  598, 
601,  602;  after  Antietam,  621,  645- 
647 ;  report,  648,  650,  658,  659. 

Poolesville,    Md.,    79,   96,    181,    182. 

187  549.  557. 


Pollard,  Capt.,  602. 

Pope,  Gen.  J.,  in  Virginia,  454,  463, 
466,  479.  49'.  500,  501,  505.  507- 
547i  568 ;  condemns  McClellan's 
plans,  475. 

Porter,  Gen.  A.,   70,  100,   130,   132, 

133. 

Porter,  Gen.  F.  J.,  at  Washington, 
'61,  81,  95,  96,  113,  139.  In  Pe- 
ninsula, 239,  256,  306  ;  Yorktown, 
260,  261,  263,  286,  292,  302,  303. 
307,  309  ;  Williamsburg,  320,  327, 
332,  333 ;  in  pursuit,  339,  341,  349, 
355.  356  ;  Hanover  C.  H.,  368-376. 
397;  Gaines's  Mill,  411,  414-421  ; 
White  Oak  Swamp,  424,  426,  428  ; 
Malvern,  433,  434,  436,  437  ;  Glen- 
dale,  443  ;  Harrison's  Landing,  460, 
505  ;  brevetted,  475.  In  Pope's 
campaign,  508-511,  513.  528,  529, 
532,  536-538.  In  Maryland  cam- 
paign. 555  ;  Antietam,  584,  5S6, 
600,  601,  609 ;  after  Antietam,  620, 
621,  629,  633,  659. 

Port  Royal,  S.  C,  174. 

Potomac  river,  79,  93-96,  100,  194. 
196.    197.    229-333,   239-241,  549- 

557.  573. 
Prentiss,  Gen.  B.  M.,  45. 
Prim,  Gen.  J.,  visit  to  McClellan,  388, 

400,  401. 
Prospect  Hill,  Va  ,  96,  182,  516. 
Pryor,  Gen.  R.,   treatment  of  Union 

wounded,  338. 

Quimby,  Col.,  74. 

Radicals,  purpose  to  ruin  McClellan, 
object  of,  149,  150  ;  results  ot 
schemes,  150  ;  real  desires  of,  suc- 
cess. 154,  159;  hostility  to  McClel- 
lan,  155. 

Randall,  Capt.,  431,  602. 

Rappahannock  river,  Va.,  227,  229, 
235,236,  241,  461,  508-511. 

Raymond,  Capt.  E.  A.,  123. 

Rebellion,  cause  of,  how  avoidable, 
29 ;  precipitated  by  a  few  men, 
helped  by  misconceptions,  30 ;  sec- 
ondary causes,  37  ;  unnecessarily 
maintained,  aim  and  object,  150; 
Stanton's    reasDns    for    prolonging, 

151. 
Recruiting,  suspended,  151,  154,  168. 

258  ;  why  necessary,  259. 
Reese,  Lieut.  C.  B.,  124. 
Regiments,    Union.     U,  S.   infantry, 

1st  321,   2d  602,  2d  (sharpshooters) 


INDEX, 


675 


581,  8th  133,  loth  602.  17th  133  ; 
cavalry,  1st  257,  320.  321,  2d  133, 
257,  525.  5th  257,  300,  370.  371. 
462.  635.  6th  320,  321,  340.  370, 
574,  8th  320;  artillery,  ist  593,  597, 
2d  370,  587.  597,  598.  601,  3d  6oi. 

4»h  57.  581,  599.     5th  370. New 

York  infantry,  5th  114,  370,  9th 
605,  loth  114.  13th  370.  371,  14th 
371,  521,  15th  119,  124.  17th  370, 
2ist  89.  581,  25th  370,  371.  30th 
331,  34th  381,  37th  432.  38th  383, 
40th  383,  44th  371,  50th  119,  124, 
51st  603,  605,  52d  596.  57th  384, 
396,  6ist  596.  597.  63d  597.  64ih 
596,  597,  66th  384,  596.  69th  428, 
71st  384.  73d  384.  75th  581,  79th 
80.  86,  87,  99.  I03,  577,  82d  381, 
io8th  598 ;  axtillery,    ist  380.  382, 

587*.  593.  599.    2d  517. Penmyi- 

z/a/fta  infantry,  ist  580,  3d  321,  5th 
430,  6th  118,  45th  578,  49th  331. 
599,  51st  603.  605.  53d  427.  595, 
595.  62d  371.  63d  432.  8ist  597. 
83d  371.  98th  339,  124th  591.  I32d 
594.  596  ;  cavalry.  3d  257.  462,  5th 
341.   6th  370,    8th  521,    I2th  516; 

artillery,   ist  579. Massachusetts 

infantry,  9th  371,  14th  520,  15th 
1 89,  190,  381,  20th  189,  190,  381 ; 
cavalry,  ist  579. Michigan  infan- 
try, 6th  212.  7th  3S1,   i6th37i,  17th 

577.  578 Indiana  infantry,    7th 

581.    14th  595.    2ist2i2.    27th  592. 

Vew  Jersey  infantry.   1st  296, 

5th  383,  6th  383,  13th  592. Ver- 
mont infantry,    3d,   4th.   5th,    6th, 

285. Ohio  infantry,  8th  595,  9th 

57,   60. Rhode  Island  infantry, 

2d  339  ;  artillery,  ist  595. Mary- 
land infantry,  2d  578,  604,     3d  592. 

IVifconsin  infantry,    4th    212. 

6th  582. Neio  Hampshire  infan- 
try, 5th  596,  6th  578,  604. Dela- 
ware infantry,   2d    596. Illinois 

cavalry,  8th  340.  525. Minnesota 

infantry,  ist  381. Virginia  in- 
fantry,   7th   594,    596. Guthrie 

Grays,  60,  65.- Sturgiss  Rifle  Co. , 

57. 

Regiments.  Confederate.  South  Caro- 
lina infantry.   1st,  12th,   13th.   14th, 

374. Virginia  cavalry,    1st   340, 

15th  462. North  Carolina  infan- 
try,   4th  597.     34th.     38th  374. 

Georgia  infantry,  45th  374. Lou- 
isiana infantry,  3d  374. 

Reno,  Gen.  J.  L.,  in  N.  C,  244 ; 
Pope's      cimpaign,      50S  ;      South 

51 


,  Mountain.  574,  57^579.  582,  610, 
death  578. 

Returns  (army),  method  of  making,  75. 

Reynolds,  Gen.  J.  F.,  81,  107,  140; 
at  Gaines's  Mill,  414,  416 ;  Glen- 
dale,  430,  443  ;  Pope's  campaign, 
508  ;  South  Mountain,  574 ;  after 
Antietam.  629.  630,  633,  659. 

Rhodes,  Gen.  R.  £.,  232. 

Richardson,  Gen.  I.  B.,  80,  81.  89. 
139.  In  Peninsula,  257  ;  York- 
town,  264r  278,  300,  303,  320,  327, 
332.  333.  339  ;  Fair  Oaks,  379.  382- 
384 ;  Savage's  Station,  426-428 ; 
White  Oak  Swamp,  428,  430;  Mai. 
vem,  434,  436.  At  Antietam,  584, 
587,  588,  595-598,  602,  606,  613. 

Richardson,  Maj.,  381. 

Richmond,  Va.,  McClellan's  plan  for 
taking,  104,  227,  231.  233-236,  283, 
343,  482.  490,  496  ;  Goldsborough's 
plan,  246,  247;  Blair*i(F.  P.)  letter, 
281  ;  a  battle  there  certain,  307,  356. 

358,  367.  372.  390.  394  ;  enemy  re- 
treat to,  337,  369,  492  ;  Stanton's 
fatal  order,  345-348,  362,  364; 
McClellan's  protest.  349,  350  ;  Lin- 
coln's views,  351,  367,  368;  results 
of  Porter's  victories,  373-375  ;  im- 
mediate advance  to,  impracticable. 
385.  466 ;  advance  to,  from  Harri- 
son's Landing,  491-497. 

Rich  Mountain,  W.  Va.,  61-63. 

Ricketts,  Gen.  J.  B.,  in  Pope's  cam- 
paign, 509  ;  South  Mountain,  579- 
581  ;  Antietam,  590. 

Roach,  Col.,  302. 

Robertson,  Capt.,  at  Gaines's  Mill, 
415.  417  ;  Antietam.  601,  602. 

Robinson,  Capt.,  340. 

Rodgers.  Com.,  287;  at  Yorktown. 
314  ;  Malvern.  429,  434,  436,  437. 

Rodman,  Gen.  L  P..  at  South  Moun- 
tain, 577,  578 ;  Antietam.  603-605, 
613. 

Rohrersville.  Md.,  561-564.  572,  584. 

Rosecrans,  Gen.  W.  S.,  in  W.  Va. 
campaign.  59. 

Rossell,  Col..  443. 

Rucker,  Col.  p.  H..  128. 

Rush,  Col..  303.  574. 

Russell,  Maj.  W.  W.,  123. 

Sackett,  Gen.  D.  B.,  124,  603 ;  letters. 

6c  9-611. 
Sand-Box,  Va..  254.  252. 
Saunders,  Capt. ,  322. 
Savage's  Station,  Va.,  366,   378,  379, 

423.  424  ;  battle  of,  426-428. 


676 


INDEX. 


Sawtelle,  Capt.,  X28;  report  on  trans- 
ports, 500. 

S<^mmon,  Gen.  £.  P.,  at  South  Moun- 
tain, 576  ;  Antietam,  603,  605,  606. 

Scott,  Gen.  W.,  compliments  McClel- 
lan,  61,  63,  64,  82  ;  hinders  McCIel- 
lan,  84-86,  170,  171  ;  quarrels  with 
McClellan,  91  ;  objects  to  organiza- 
tion, 113,  136;  inability,  136;  Hal- 
leck  as  successor,  137,  170;  retires, 
leaves  Washington,  173,  200 ; 
changed  feelings,  174  ;  congratula- 
tions, 583. 

Sebago,  293.  294,  296. 

Secession,  consequences  of,  31. 

Sedgwick,  Gen.  J.,  81,  140,  192.  In 
Peninsula,  261  ;  Yorktown,  300, 
302-304;  Williamsburg,  320,  327, 
332,  333 ;  West  Point  (Va.),  336, 
337.339 ;  in  pursuit,  352;  Fair  Oaks, 
379.  381,  382  ;  Savage's  Station, 
426-428;  Glendale,  432  ;  Malvern, 
434,  492.  At  South  Mountain,  582; 
Antietam,  592,  593,  595,  600,  606, 
613. 

Senate  congratulates  McClellan,  82. 

Seneca  Mills,  Md.,  106. 

Seven  Pines,  Va, — see  Fair  Oaks. 

Seward,  Sec,  method  of  recruiting, 
143  ;  visits  McClellan,  549. 

Seymour,  Gen.  T.,  at  Gaines's  Mill, 
414-416 ;  Glendale,  430 ;  South 
Mountain,  580. 

Seymour,  Capt.  (navy),  306. 

Sharpsburg,  Md..  556,  562,  564,  573, 
584,  586,  587,  590,  608,  609,  620. 

Shenandoah  Valley,  Va,,  47,  54,  58, 
113,  239.  240,  5oq.  643. 

Sherman,  Gen.  T.  W.,  204,  211,  234. 

Sherman,  Gen.  W.  T.,  at  Washington, 
1861,  68, 80,  89,  138  ;    in  West,  201, 

,  202. 

Shields.  Gen.  J.,  347,  350.  351. 

Ship  Point,  Va.,  259,  260,  263,  264, 
274-278,  291.  306-309. 

Sickles,  Gen.  D.  E.,  81,  96  ;  at  Fair 
Oaks,  383;  Malvern,  437;  Mar>'- 
land  campaign,  645,  647. 

Sigel,  Gen.  F.,  in  Pope's  campaign,  ' 
509.  «;32,  538  ;  Maryland,  555  ;  in  , 
W.  Virginia.  625,  660.  | 

Simmons,  Capt.,  576,  605.  1 

Sinter,  Col.,  381.  I 

Slavery,  horrors  of,  175.  | 

Slaves,  captured,  how  treated  by  Mc- 
Clellan, 34. 

Slocum,    Gen.   H.  W.,   at   Williams- 
burg, 304  ;  Gaines's  Mill,  412,  417,  I 
41S  ;    Savage's   Station,   424,    427  ;  \ 


Glendale,  428,  430,  431,  433;  at 
Berkley,  444 ;  Pope's  campaign, 
511  ;  Crampton's  Gap,  563;  Antie- 
tam, 598,  600,  601. 

Slough,  Gen.  J.  P.,  540,  541. 

Smith,  Gen.  C.  F.,  216,  217. 

Smith,  Gen.  G.  W.,  169,  178  ;  at 
Yorktown,  319,  324 ;  West  Point 
(V«.),  334,  337  ;  Williamsburg,  353; 
Fair  Oaks,  378,  400,  402  ;  Virginia, 
660. 

Smith,  Gen.  W.  F.,  at  Washington, 
1861,  79,  90,  92,  95,  96  ;  Dranes- 
ville,  180.  In  Peninsula,  256,  306  ; 
Yorktown,  260,  284,  285,  298-301, 
303,  311,  312;  Williamsburg,  320. 
322,  324.  326,  331,  332  ;  in  pursuit, 
341.  352-354 ;  Gaines's  Mill,  420, 
421  ;  Savage's  Station,  427 ;  Mal- 
vern. 434  ;  Berkley,  444.  In  Pope's 
campaign,  511.  At  Crampton's  Gap, 
593  ;  Antietam,  598,  599. 

Smith,  Capt.  (navy),  288. 

South,  people  of,  on  State  rights  and 
secession,  31,  defence  of  31;  respon- 
sible for  war,  37  ;  habits  as  an  aid. 
40. 

South  Mountain,  Md.,  battle  of,  572- 
583,  606,  608. 

Staff,  difficulty  in  obtaining,  45  ;  re- 
marks on,  120  ;  list  of,  1 13-135. 

Stahl.  Gen.  J.,  81,  139,  143. 

Stanton,  Sec,  letter  on  Washington, 
67  ;  warns  McClellan  against  Hal- 
leck,  137  ;  duplicity  and  treachery, 
137,  151,  152,  193,  196  ;  hostility, 
478-480,  540,  541  ;  prolonging  the 
war,  accuses  McClellan  of  political 
aspirations,  151  ;  abuses  party  and 
administration,  urges  arrest  of  Came- 
ron, 152  ;  professes  friendship,  153  ; 
account  of,  by  Chase,  160  ;  assents  to 
delay,  246  ;  effects  of  policy,  259  ; 
offers  help,  265  ;  orders  sea  expedi- 
tion, 302 ;  fatal  order,  345  ;  affec- 
tion, 389  ;  Chase  and,  407  ;  friend- 
ly letters,  475.  476;  responsible  for 
Pope's  defeat.  538  ;  ironical  order, 
«;4i  ;  reproaches  Lincoln,  544  ;  pre- 
fers loss  of  capital,  545. 

Starr,  Gen.,  81. 

State-rights  and  secession,  doctrine  of, 

31.  32. 
Staunton,  Va.,  63. 
Stedman,  Col.  G.,  607. 
Steele,  Capt.,  60. 
Steinwehr,  Gen.  A.,  81. 
Stevens,  Gen.  J-  J.,  81,  508. 
Stone,   Gen.    C.    P.,    at   Washington, 


.  325  ;    in    pursuit.   348  ;     Fair    J^;-^"^*'  J^^j  ^^^  ^7'  ^^^^  ^^^^  ^^l 

s,  379-381.    384;   Old  Tavern,    ^^^^^{.^'^ll^^^  ^'^ 

;  Gaines  s  Mill.  420.  421  ;  Sav-  ,      515,  521.  531,  536.  54/.  5^8. 


INDEX.  677 

1861,  76,  79-81,  96,  106, 139  ;  Ball's  '  Tidball,  Capt.,  at  Gaines's  Mill.  415, 

Uluf!,    181-190;    extract  from  evi-       417;  Antietam.  587,  601,  602. 

dence,  187.  Tompkins.  Capt.,  595. 

Stoneman,  Gen.   G.,  113.     In  Penin-    Torbert.  Gen.  A.  T.,  563,  600. 

sula,  224;  Yorktown,  298-300;  Wil-    Townsend,  Col.  E.  D..  520,  536.  546. 

liamsburg,  319-322  ;  in  pursuit,  339,    Transportation,  to  Peninsula.  235,  237, 

340,     348,     352,     353,     368,    373 ;        238,   254,    256,   265 ;  in  Peninsula, 

Gaines's  Mill,  416.  301,  335,  336  ;  to  Acquia,  494-503. 

Stewart.  Col.  C.  B.,  124.  ,  Trent's,  Va.,  404-409. 

Stuart,  Capt.  C.  S.,  124.  '  Tripler.  Dr.,  83,  126,  127. 

Stuart,   Gen.  J.  E.   B.,  at  Yorktown,    Trowbridge.  Lieut.  C.  F.,  133. 

319 ;  Williamsburg,  353  ;  Manassas,    Tucker,  Assist.  Sec.  J.,  129,  163,  237. 

518 ;  South  Mountain,   561  ;  raids,        275. 

621,  626,  628,  658,  659.  Tunstall's,  Va.,  358,  360,  390,  394. 

Sturgis,  Gen.  S.  D.,  at  South   Moun-    Turner,  Gen.,  575. 

tain,  577,  578,  583  ;  Antietam,  603-   Turner's  Pass  -  see  South  Mountain. 

606.  ;  Twiggs,  Gen  D.  E.,  39. 

Sully,  Col.,  381.  I  Tyler,  Gen.  E.  B.,  513,  517. 

Sumner,  Sen.  C,  on  emancipation,  33.  ,  Tyler,  Col.   D.,   434,  439,   512,   513, 
Sumner,    Gen.    E.    V.,    81,    138.     In        520. 

Peninsula,    224,     265  ;    Yorktown, 

280,   298-302 ;  Williamsburg,    320-    Urbana  Va    227   220  2'^«;   2-^6  268 
322,  325  ;    in    pursuit,   348^    Fair    ^»^^a°*»  ^*-»  ^27,  229.  235,  230,  20». 

Oaks. 

392 

age's  Station,    426-428 ;   Glendale, 

430,  432,  433  ;  Malvern,  433,  437  ;  Van  Alen,  Gen.,  341. 

brevetted,  475.    In  Pope's  campaign.  Van  Reed,  Capt.,  602. 

509-513,    516-521,   529*    532,   536-  Van  Vliet,  Gen.  S.,  83,  114,  128,  129, 

538.     In  Maryland  campaign,  554  ;  303.                            *J    v 

Crampton's  Gap,  558  ;  South  Moun-  Vienna,  Va.,  514,  515,  517,  521. 

tain,  574,  575,  579,  582  ;  Antietam,  Vincent,  Lieut.,  597. 

584,  586,    588,590,    592-595,  599-  Von  Hammerstein,  Maj.  H.,  123,  311. 

601,  619,  623  ;  after  Antietam,  622,  Von  Kleizer,  Capt.,  589. 

624,  630.  659.  ,  Von   Radowitz,    Lieut.-Col.   P.,    123, 

Sumner,  Capt.,  576.  311. 

Sweitzer,    Lieut.-Col.    N.    B.,  83,  90,    Wadsworth,  Gen.  J.  S.,  226,  241,  540- 

123.  !    542. 

Sykes,   Gen.  G..   114.     In    Peninsula,    Wagner,  Lieut.  O.  G.,  125,  311. 
257 ;  Yorktown.  257,  302  ;   in   pur-    Wagner,  Col.,  45.  517. 
suit,  320,  341  ;  Hanover  C.  H.,  371;    Walker,  Gen.  W.  H.  T.,  573. 
Gaines's   Mill,  416,  417;  Malvern,    Ward,  Col.  J.  H.,  383. 
434.     In  Pope's  campaign,  508,  537.  1  Warren,   Col.   G.  K.,  at  Hanover  C. 
At  South  Mountain,  561.  574,  575,  |      H.,  370.   373  ;  Malvern,  433  ;  An- 
582  ;  Antietam,  584.  587,  588,  600-       tietam,  601. 

602.  Warrenton,  Va.,  240,  509-511,  529. 

Warwick  C.   H.,   Va.,  254,  259,  260, 

264. 

Warwick  river,  Va.,  261-266,  272,  274, 
289.  319. 

Washington,  D.  C.  isolated  from 
West,  42 ;  defenceless,  66 ;  accessi- 
ble after  Bull  Run,  67.  68,  73.  87  ; 
fortifications,  68 ;  order  restored, 
70 ;  earthworks,  72  ;  people  of,  and 
McClellan,  74  ;  positions  of  troops, 
79,  80  ;  prepared,  80,  169 ;  strength- 
ening; army,  artillery  at,  88  ;  force 


Taft.  Capt.,  589. 

Taylor,  Gen.  G.  W.,432,  512. 

Taylor's  Hill,  Va  ,  95. 

Telegraph,  with  army,  54  ;  miles  con- 
structed, 135. 

Tennallytown.  D.  C,  66,  79,  90,  516, 
519.  520. 

Tennessee,  State,  position  of,  plans 
for,  defeated.  49. 

Thomas,  Gen.  L.,  219. 

Thomas,  Lieut.,  590. 


Thoroughfare  Gap,  Va.,  515,  521.  at,  Aug.,  1861,  89,  Apr.,  1862,  241; 


6-8 


INDEX. 


removal  of  government*  93  ;  gar- 
rison necessary,  97  ;  enemy's  plans, 
106  ;  medical  recoid  of  troops,  126  ; 
provost-guards,  132  ;  plans,  239, 
240  ;  in  no  danger,  346,  372,  482, 
538.  625.  626 ;  alarm  at,  367,  396, 
530,  542  ;  considered  lost,  535. 

Weaver,  Lieut.,  589. 

Webber,  Capt.,  325. 

Weber,  Gen.  Max.  594,  613. 

Weed,  Capt.,  589. 

Welles,  Sec.,  on  Stanton,  478,  479, 
542 ;    report   of    cabinet    meeting, 

545. 
WesscUs,  Gen.  H.  W.,  379,  380. 

West  unprepared  for  war,  42,  43. 

West  Point,  Va.,  227,  235,  254,  262, 
282,  283,  294.  297.  304,  318.  337. 

West  Virginia  campaign,  48-65  ;  pro- 
clamation, 50  ;  delays,  58.  59  ;  beau- 
tiful country,  59,  62,  63 ;  Rich 
Mountain,  Gamett  killed,  63  ;  Couch 
checked,  plans,  65. 

White  House,  Va.,  341,  342.  356,  357, 
360. 

White  Oak  Swamp,  Va.,  366,  377- 
379.  381  ;  battles  at,  426-434. 

Whiting,  Gen.  W.  H.  C.  337. 

Wilcox,   Gen.    C,   at    Williamsburg, 

324.  325,  334,  353. 

Wilcox,  Gen.  O.  B.,  at  South  Moun- 
tain, 577,  578  ;  Antietam,  603,  605. 

Willard,  Maj.,  133. 

Williams,  Gen.  A.  S.,  193  ;  in  Mary- 
land campaign,  591,  592.  601,  622, 
624. 

Williams,  Maj.  L..  44,  45,  61,  62,  91  ; 


at  WUliamsbuig,    321;  in  pnisuit. 

340  ;  Hanover  C.  H.,  372.  374.  39®- 
Williams,   Gen.   S.,  45,   61,  83.  122, 

141,  219,  540. 
Williams,  Col.,  510. 
Williamsburg,    Va.,   260,    300,   318  ; 

battle  of,  319-333  ;  evacuated,  333, 

352. 
Williamsport,  Va.,  559,  562,  621,  622, 

624. 
Willich,  Col.,  143. 
Wilson,  Lieut.  J.  H.,  125. 
Wilson,  Lieut.  J.  M.,  125. 
Wilson,  Capt.  T..  130. 
Winchester,   Va.,   78,  192,   193,  195, 

570,  615,  616,  622,  624,  625. 
Wood,  Maj.  W.  H.,  33. 
Woodbury,  Gen.  D.  V.,  119,  124,246, 

248.  262,  5".  514. 
I  Woodruff,  Lieut.,  593,  598. 
Woodward,  Capt.  J.  H.,  13a 
I  Wool,  Gen.  J.  E.,  at  Fortress  Monroe, 

246.  247,  265,  266,   270,  277,  278, 

306. 
Wright,  Col.  E.  H.,  123,  311. 
Wyndham,  Col ,  296. 
'  Wynn's  Mill,  Va.,  284,  287,  312. 
'  Wytheville,  Va.,  53,  54. 

Vorktown,   Va.,    163,  165,  227,  246 
siege  of,  253-318 ;    defences,    260 
267,    268,   279,    309  ;   plans  for  as- 
sault,   286,    287  :   evacuated,    288  ; 
torpedoes,    318,   326 ;    Confederate 
retreat  from,  319. 

Young's  Mill,  Va.,  254,  256,  259,  260, 
264,  307. 


\