This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 
to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 
publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 

We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 



at |http : //books . google . com/ 



'^.. 



focj' -t . I( 



A-^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 






z-^' 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 




Digitized by 



Google 




ANCIENT INDIA 



AS DESCRIBED BY 

MEGASTHENES AND ARRIAN ; 

BEING 

A TRANSLATION OF THE FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIKA OF 

MEGASTHENES COLLECTED BY DR. SCHWANBECK, AND 

OF THE FIRST PART OF THE INDIKA OF ARRIAN, 

BY 

J. W. McCRINDLE, M.A.> ^' 

PRINCIPAIi OF THE GOVERNMENT COLLEGE. PATNA, 

MEMBER OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL OF THE; yNlvraSITT 

OP EDINBURGH, 

FELLOW OF THE UNIVERSITY OP CALCUTTA. 



WITH INTRODUCTION. NOTES, AND MAP OF ANCIENT 
INDIA. 



B^er^iniedtj (with additions) from the ^^ Indian 
Antiquary," 1876-77. 



THACKER, 


c u 1 t.a 

SftNK 


& Co. 


THACKER & Co. 




TEiJBNER & Co. 
1877. 





Digitized by 



Google 



BOMBAY : 

PEINTBD AT THE EDUCATION SOCIETY'S PRESS, BYCULLA. 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. 



The account of India written by Megas- 
thenes from his personal knowledge of the 
country is justly held to be almost invalu- 
able for the light which it throws upon the 
obscurity of early Indian history. Though, 
unfortunately, not extant in its original 
form, it has nevertheless been partially 
preserved by means of epitomes and quota- 
tions to be found scattered up and down 
the writings of various ancient authors, 
both Greek and Roman. Dr. Schwanbeck, 
of Bonn, rendered historical literature a good 
service by collecting and arranging in their 
proper order these detached fragments. 
The work thus reconstructed, and entitled 
MegastJienis Indica, has now been before 
the world for upwards of thirty years. It has 
not, however, so far as I know, been as yet 
translated, at least into our language, and 
hence it is but little known beyond the 
circles of the learned. The translation now 
oJBFered, which goes forth from the very birth- 
place of the original work, will therefore for 
the first time place it within the reach of the 
general public. ' 



Digitized by 



Google 



IV PKEFACB. 

A translation of the first part of the 
Indiha of Arrian has been subjoined, both 
because it gives in a connected form a 
general description of India, and because 
that description was based chiefly on the 
work of Megasthenes, 

The notes, which turn for the most part on 
points of history, geography, archaeology, 
and the identification of Greek proper 
names with their Sanskrit originals, sum up 
the views of the best and most recent 
authorities who have written on these sub- 
jects. This feature of the work will, I hope, 
recommend it to the attention of native 
scholars who may be pursuing, or at least 
be interested in, inquiries which relate to 
the history and antiquities of their own 
country. 

In the spelling of classical- proper names 
I have followed throughout the system of 
Grote, except only in translating from Latin, 
when the common orthography has been 
employed. 

In conclusion, I may inform my readers 
that I undertook the present work intending 
to follow it up with others of a similar kind, 
until the entire series of classical works re- 
lating to India should be translated into the 



Digitized by 



Google 



PREFACE. V 

language of its rulers. In furtherance of 
this design a translation of the short trea- 
tise called The Circumnavigation of the 
Erythrcean Sea, which gives an account of 
the ancient commerce of Egypt, Arabia, and 
India, is nearly ready for publication, and 
this will be followed by a translation of the 
narratives of the Makedonian Invasion of 
India as given by Arrian and Curtius in 
their respective Histories of Alexander. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. 



PAGE 

Introduction 3 

Frag. I. An Epitome of Megasthenes ... 30 

Frag. LB Concerning Dionysos 36 

Frag. II. Of the Boundaries of India, its 
general Character, and its 

Rivers 45 

Frag. III. Ofthe Boundaries of India ... 48 
Frag. IV. Of the Boundaries and Extent 

of India 48 

Frag. V. Of the Size of India 51 

Frag. VI. Of the Size of India 51 

Frag. VIL Of the Size of India 52 

Frag. YIII. Of the Size of India 52 

Frag. IX. Of the setting of the Bear, and 
shadows falling in contrary 

directions 52 

Frag. X. Of the setting of the Bear 53 

Frag. XI. Of the Fertility of India 54 

Frag. XII. Of some Wild Beasts of India.. 56 

Frag. XIII. Of Indian Apes 57 

Frag. XIII. B 57 

Frag. XIV. Of Winged Scorpions and Ser- 
pents 58 

Frag. XV. Of the Beasts of India, and the 

Eeed 58 

Frag. XV. B Of some Beasts of India 59 

Frag. XVI. Of the Boa-Constrictor 61 

Frag. XVII. Of the Electric Eel 61 

Frag. XVIII. Of Taproban§ 62 



Digitized by 



Google 



Vlll CONTENTS. 



PAGfK 



Frag. XIX. Of Marine Trees 6a 

Frag. XX. Of the Indus and the Ganges 63 

Frag. XX. B 63 

Frag. XXI. Of the River Silas 65 

Frag. XXII. Of the River Silas 66- 

Frag. XXIII. Of the River Silas 66 

Frag. XXIV. Of the Number of Indian 

Rivers 66 

Frag. XXV. Of the city P&taliputra 66 

Frag. XXVI. Of P&taUputra, and the Man- 
ners of the Indians 67 

Frag. XXVII. Of the Manners of the In- 
dians 69 

Frag. XXVII. B 7a 

Frag. XXVILO 73 

Frag. XXVII. D 7a 

Frag. XXVIII. Of the Suppers of the In- 
dians 74 

Frag. XXIX. Of Fabulous Tribes 74 

Frag. XXX. Of Fabulous Races 79 

Frag. XXX. B 82 

Frag. XXXI. Of the race of Men without 

Mouths 82 

Frag. XXXII. Of the seven Castes among 

the Indians 83 

Frag. XXXIII. Of the seven Castes among 

the Indians 83 

Frag. XXXrV. Of the Administration of 
Public Affairs — of the use 
of Horses and Elephants . 86 
Frag. XXXV. Of the use of Horses and 

Elephants 89 

Frag. XXXVI. Of Elephants 90 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. IX 



PA.GE 



Frag. XXXVII. Of Elephants 93 

Frag. XXXVII. B 93 

Frag. XXXVIII. Of the Diseases of Ele- 
phants , 93 

Frag. XXXIX. Of Gold-digging Ants 94 

Frag. XL. Of Gold-digging Ants 96 

Frag. XL.B 96 

Frag. XLI. Of the Indian Philosophers 97 
Frag. XLII. Of the Indian Philosophers 103 

Frag. XLII.B 104 

Frag. XLII.C 104 

Frag. XLIII. Of the Indian Philosophers 104 
Frag. XLIV. Of Kalanos and Mandanis. 106 
Frag. XLV. Of Kalanos and Man- 
danis 107 & 115 

Frag. XLVI. That the Indians had never 
been attacked by others, 
nor had themselves at- 
tacked others 107 

Frag. XL VII. That the Indians had never 
been attacked by others, 
nor had themselves at- 
tacked others 112 

Frag. XLVIIL Of Nabuchodrosor 112 

Frag. XLVHLB 112 

Frag. XLVIII.0 113 

Frag. XLVIIL D., 113 

Frag. XLIX. Of Nabukodrosor 113 

Frag. L. Of the Indian Races — of 

Dionysos — of Herakles — 
of Pearls — of the Pandai- 
an Land — of the Ancient 
History of the Indians ... 114 



Digitized by 



Google 



X CONTENTS. 

PAGE 

Frag. L.B Of Pearls 114 

Frag. LI. Of the Pandaian Land 114 

Frag. L. Of the Ancient History of the 

Indians 115 

Frag. LII. Of Elephants 117 

Frag. LIIL Of a White Elephant 118 

Frag. LIV. Of the Brahmans and their 

Philosophy 120 

Frag. LY. Of Kalanos and Mandanis 123 

Frag. LY. B 127 

Frag. LYI. List of the Indian Races 129 

Frag. LYLB 154 

Frag. LYII. Of Dionysos 157 

Frag. LYIII. Of Hercules and Pandeea 158 

Frag. LIX. Of the Beasts of India 159 

THE INDIKA. OF ARRIAN. 

Introduction 177 

Cap. 1. Of Indian Tribes west of the 

Indus 179 

„ II. Of the Boundaries of India ... 181 

„ ,111. Of the Size of India 184 

„ lY. Of the Indus and Ganges and 

their Tributaries 186 

„ Y. Of the Legendary History of 

India 194 

„ YI, Of the River Silas— of the 
Rains in India, and Inun- 
dations of the Rivers — of 
the Likeness beJfcween the 
Indians and the Ethio- 
pians 196 



Digitized by 



Google 



CONTENTS. XI 



PAGE 



Cap.VII.-IX. OfDionysosandHerakles ... 198 
„ X. Of Indian Cities, especially 

Palimbothra 204 

„ XI. XII. Of the seven Indian Castes ... 208 
„ XIII. Of the Indian mode of hunt- 
ing the Elephant 213 

XIV. Of the docility of the Elephant, 

its habits, diseases, &g. ... 215 
„ XY. Of Tigers, of Ants that dig 

for gold, and Serpents 217 

„ XVI. Of the Dress of the Indians, 
and how they equip them- 
selves for war, and manage 

their Horses 219 

„ XVII. Of the modes of Travelling in 
India— of Female Unchas- 
tity— of the Marriage Cus- 
toms of the Indians, and 
the nature of their Food. 
Concluding Eemark 221 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



TRANSLATION 

OF THE 

FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIEA 
OF MEGASTHENES. 



COLLECTED Br 



Dr. E. At SCHWANBECK : Bonn, 1846. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE FRAGMENTS OF THE INDIKA 
OF MEGASTHENflS. 



Introduction. 



The ancient Greeks, till even a comparatively 
late period in their history, possessed little, if any, 
real knowledge of India. It is indeed scarcely so 
much as mentioned by name in their greatest poets, 
whether epic, lyric, or dramatic. They must, how- 
ever, have known of its existence as early as the 
heroic times, for we find from Homer that they 
used even then articles of Indian merchandize, which 
went among them by names of Indian origin, such 
as kassiteros, tin, and elepkas, ivory.* But their 
conception of it, as we gather from the same source, 
was vague in the extreme. They imagined it to 
be an Eastern Ethiopia which stretched away to 
the uttermost verge of the world, and which, like 
the Ethiopia of the West, was inhabited by a race 
of men whose visages were scorched black by the 



* Kassiteros represents the Sanskrit hasUra, *tin,' a 
metal found in abundance in the islands, on the coast of 
India ; and elephas is undoubtedly connected with ibka, the 
Sanskrit name for the domestic elephant — its initial 
syllable being perhaps the Arabic article. 



Digitized by 



Google 



fierce rays of the sun.f Much lies in a name, and 
the error made by the Greeks in thus calling India 
E t h i o p ia led them into the further error of con- 
sidering as pertinent to both these countries 
narrations, whether of fact or fiction, which con- 
cerned but one of them exclusively. This explains 
why we find in Greek literature mention of peculiar 
or fabulous races, both of men and other animals, 
which existed apparently in duplicate, being repre- 
sented sometimes as located in India, and sometimes 
in Ethiopia or the countries thereto adjacent. J We 
can hardly wonder, when we consider the distant and 
sequestered situation of India, that the first con- 
ceptions which the Greeks had of it should have 
been of this nebulous character, but it seems some- 



t See Homer, Od. I. 23-24, where we read 

AlOioTTcs, To\ bixOa dcbaiarai, ttrxaroi avbpS>v, 
Ot yAv dvtrofuvov ^YTrepiovos ol d*dvi6vTos. . 

(The Ethiopians, who are divided into two, and live at the 
world's end— one part of them towards the setting sun, the 
other towards the rising.) Herodotos in several passages 
mentions the Eastern Ethiopians, bnt distinguishes them 
from the Indians (see particularly bk. vii. 70). Kt^sias, 
however, who wrote somewhat later than Herodotos, fre- 
quently calls the Indians by the name of Ethiopians, and 
the final discrimination between the two races was not made 
till the Makedonian invasion gave the Western world more 
correct views of India. Alexander himself, as we learn 
from Strabo, on first reaching the Indus mistook it for 
the NUe. 

X Instances in point are the Skiapodes, Eynamolgoi, ^ 
Fygmai6i, PsyUoi, Himantopodes, Stemophthahnoi, Ma- 
krobioi, and the Makrokephaloi, the Martikhora, and the 
Krokotta. 



Digitized by 



Google 



what remarkable that they should have learned 
hardly anything of importance regarding it from 
the expeditions which were successively under- 
taken against it by the Egyptians under Sesoatris, 
the Assyrians under Semiramis, and the Persians 
first under Kyros and afterwards under Dareios 
the son of Hystaspes.§ Perhaps, as Dr. Eobertson 
has observed, they disdained, through pride of 
their own superior enlightenment, to pay attention 
to the transactions of people whom they considered 
as barbarians, especially in countries far remote 
from their own. But, in whatever way the fact may 
be accounted for, India continued to be to the 
Greeks little better than a land of mystery and 
fable till the times of the Persian wars, when for 
the first time they became distinctly aware of its 
existence. The first historian who speaks clearly 
of it is Hekataios of Miletos (b.c. 549-486),|| 

§ HerodotoB mentions that Dareios, before invading 
India, sent Skylax the Karyandian on a voyage of discovery 
down the Indus, and that Skylax accordingly, setting ont 
from Kaspatyras and the Paktyikan district, reached the 
mouth of that river, whence he sailed through the Indian 
Ocean to the Red Sea, performing the whole voyage in 
thirty months. A little work still extant, which briefly de- 
scribes certain countries in Europe, Asia, and Africa, bears 
the name of this Skylax, but from internal evidence it has 
been inferred that it could not have been written before 
the reign of Philip of Makedonia, the father of Alexander 
the Great. 

II The following names pertaining to India occur in He- 
kataios :— the In&ibs ; the Opim, a race on the hanks of the 
Indus ; the Kalatiai, an Indicm race ; Kaspa/pyros, a Gan- 
daric city ; Argcmti, a city of IndUt; the Bkicvpodes, and 
probably the Pygmies, 



Digitized by 



Google 



6 



and fuller accounts are preserved in H e r o d o- 
t o 8^ and in the remains of K t e s i a s, who, having 
lived for some years in Persia as private physician 
to king Artaxerxes Mnemon, collected materials 
during his stay for a treatise on India, the first 
work on the subject written in the Greek lan- 
guage.* His descriptions were, unfortunately, 
vitiated by a large intermixture of fable, and it was 
left to the followers of Alexander to give to the 
Western world for the first time fairly accurate 
accounts of the country and its inhabitants. The 
great conqueror, it is well known, carried scientific 
men with him to chronicle his achievements, and 
describe the countries to which he might carry his 
arms, and some of his officers were also men of 
literary culture, who could wield the pen as well as 



% Herodotos mentions the river (Indus), the Paktyika/n 
district, the Gandarioif the Kalantiai or Kalatiai, and the 
Padmoi. Both Hek&taios and Herodotos agree in stating 
that there were sandy deserts in India. 

• " The few particulars appropriate to India, and con- 
sistent with truth, obtained by Ct^sias, are almost confined 
to something resembling a description of the cochineal 
plant, the fly, and the beautiful tint obtained from it, with 
a genuine picture of the monkey and the parrot ; the two 
animals he had doubtless seen in Persia, and flowered 
cottons emblazoned with the glowing colours of the modem 
chintK were probably as much coveted by the fair Persians 
in the harams of Susa and Ecbatana as they still are 
by the ladies of our own country ; . . . . but we are not 
bound to admit his fable of the Martichora, his pygmiee, 
his men with the heads of dogs, and feet reversed, his 
griffins, and his four-footed birds as big as wolves." — 
Vincent. 



Digitized by 



Google 



the sword. Hence the expedition produced quite a 
crop of narratives and memoirs relating tolndia, such 
as those of Baeto, Diognetos, Nearchos, 
Onesikritos, Aristoboulos, Kallisthe- 
n e s, and others. These works are all lost, but 
their substance is to be found condensed in Strabo, 
Pliny, and Arrian. Subsequent to these writers 
were some others, who made considerable additions 
to the stock of information regarding India, among 
whom may be mentioned Deimachos, who re- 
sided for a long time inPalibothra, whither he 
was sent on an embassy by Seleukos to Al 1 i t ro- 
c hades, the successor of Sandrakottos; 
PatroklSs, the admiral of Seleukos, who is 
called by Strabo the least mendacious of all writers 
concerning India ; Timosthenes, admiral of 
the fleet of Ptolemaios Philadelphos ; and Megas- 
thenes, who being sent by Seleukos Nikator on an 
embassy to Sandrakottos (Chandragupta),t the 
king of the Prasii, whose capital was Palibothra 
(Pataliputra, now Patn^), wrote a work on India of 
auch acknowledged worth ^at it formed the prin- 
cipal source whence succeeding writers drew their 
accounts of the country. This work, which appears 



t The discovery that the Sandrokottos of the Greeks 
was identical with the Chandragupta who figures in the 
Sanskrit annals and the Sanskrit drama was one of great 
moment, as it was the means of connecting Greek with 
Sanskrit literature, and of therehy supplying for the first 
time a date to early Indian history, which had not a single 
chronological landmark of its own. Dioddros distorts the 
name into Xandrames, and this again is distorted by Curtius 
into Agrammes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



8 



to have been entitled to 'IvbiKa, no longer exists, but 
it has been so often abridged and quoted by the 
ancient writers that we have a fair knowledge of 
its contents and their order of arrangement. Dr. 
Schwanbeck, with great industry and learning, has 
collected all the fragments that have been anywhere 
preserved, and has prefixed to the collection a Latin 
Introduction, wherein, after showing what know- 
ledge the Greeks had acquired of India before 
Megasthenes, he enters into an examination of 
those passages in ancient works from which we 
derive all the little we know of Megasthenes and 
his Indian mission. He then reviews his work on 
India, giving a summary of its contents, and, hav- 
ing estimated its value and authority, concludes 
with a notice of those authors who wrote on India 
after his time.;]; I have translated in the latter 
part of the sequel a few instructive passages from 
this Introduction, one particularly which success- 
fully vindicates Megasthenes from the charge of 
mendacity so frequently preferred against him. 
Meanwhile the foUowiig extracts, translated from 
C. Miiller's Preface to his edition of the Indiha, 
will place before the reader all the information that 
can be gleaned regarding Megasthenes and his 
embassy from a careful scrutiny and comparison of 
all the ancient texts which relate thereto. 
Justinus (XV. 4) says of Seleukos Nikator, 



X He ennmerates Eratosthenes, Hipparclios, Polemo, 
Mnaseos, Apolloddros, Agatharchidds, Alexander Polyhistor, 
Strabo, Marines of Tyre, and Ptolemy among the Greeks, 
and P. Terentius Varro of Atax, M. Vipsanins Agrippa, 
Pomponius Mela, Seneca, Pliny, and SoUnus among the 
Romans. 



Digitized by 



Google 



' He carried on many wars in the East after the 
division of the Makedouian kingdom between 
himself and the other successors of Alexander, 
first seizing Babylonia, and then reducing Bak- 
triane, his power being increased by the first suc- 
cess. Thereafter he passed into India, which 
had, since Alexander's death, killed its governors, 
thinking thereby to shake off from its neck the 
yoke of slavery. S^ ndrokottos had made it 
free : but when victory was gained he changed the 
name of freedom to that of bondage, for he him- 
self oppressed with servitude the very people 
which he had rescued from foreign dominion . . 
Sandrokottos, having thus gained the crown, 
held India at the time when Seleukos was laying 
the foundations of his future greatness. Seleukos 
came to an agreement with him, and, after set- 
tling affairs in the Bast, engaged in the war 
against Antigonos (302 B.C.).' 

" Besides Justinus, A p p i a n u s (Syr. c. 55) 
makes mention of the war which Seleukos had 
with Sandrokottos or Ohandragupta king 
of the Prasii, or, as they are called in the 
Indian language, . P r & c h y a s*: — * He (Seleu- 

• The adjective npa^iaKSs in ^Uarnis On the Nature of 
ArvmuJls, xvii. 39 (Megasthen. Fragm. 13. init,) bears a very 
close resemblance to the Indian word Prachyas (that 
is 'dwellers in the Bast'). The substantive would be II/»a|t- 
ot, and Schwanbeck {Megasthenis Indica, p. 82) thinks 
that this reading should probably be restored in Stephanus 
of Byzantium, where the MSS. exhibit Updaioi, a form 
intermediate between Upd^iKos and Upas. But they are 
called Upda-ioi by Strabo, Arrianus, and Plinius ; Upaiaioi 
in Plutarch {Alex. chap. 62), and frequently in jiElianus ; 
Jlpava-ioi. by Nioolaiis of Damascus, and in the Florile- 
gium of Stobaens, 37, 38 j Bpeiaioi and Bpaiaioi are the 



Digitized by 



Google 



10 



kos) crossed the Indus and waged war on 
Sandrokottos, king of the Indians who dwelt 
about it, until be made friends and entered 
into relations of marriage with him.* So also 
Strabo (xv. p. 724) : — * Seleukos Nikator gave to 
Sandrokottos' (sc. a large part of Ariane). Conf. 
p. 689 : — * The Indians afterwards held a large part 
of Ariane, (which they had received from the 
Makedonians), * entering into marriage relations 
with him, and receiving in return five hundred 
elephants' (of which Sandrakottos had nine thou- 
sand — Plinius, vi. 22-5) ; and Plutarch, Alex. 62 : — 
* For not long after, Androkottos, being king, 
presented Seleukos with five hundred elephants, 
and with six hundred thousand men attacked and 
subdued all India.' Phylarchos (Fragm. 28) in 
Athenaaus, p. 18 D., refers to some other wonder- 
ful enough presents as being sent to Seleukos by 
Sandrokottos. 

"Diodorus (lib. xx.), in setting forth the affairs 
of Seleukos, has not said a single word about 
the Indian war. But it would be strange that 
that expedition should be mentioned so incidentally 
by other historians, if it were true, as many recent 
writers have contended, that Seleukos in this war 
reached the middle of India as far as the Ganges 
and the town Palimbothr a, — nay, even advanc- 
ed as far as the mouths of the Granges, and there- 
fore left Alexander far behind him. This baseless 
theory has been well refuted by Lassen {De Pentap. 
Ind. 61), by A. G. Schlegel {Berliner Calender, 

MS. readings in Diodorus, xvii. 93; Pharrasii in 
Cnrtios, IX. ii. 3; PrsBsidsein Jostinas, XII. viii. 9. See 
note on Fragm. 13. 



Digitized by 



Google 



11 



1829, p. 31 ; yet see Benfey, Ersch. u. Giilher. EncycL 
V. Indien, p. 67), and quite recently by Sch wan- 
beck, in a work of great learning and value en- 
titled Megasthenis Indica (Bonn, 1846). In the first 
place, Schwanbeck (p. 13) mentions the passage 
of Justinus (I. ii. 10) where it is said that no one' 
had entered India but Seniiramis and Alexander ; 
whence it would appear that the expedition 
of Seleukos was considered so insignificant by 
Trogus as not even to be on a par with the Indian 
war of Alexander .f Then he says that Arrianus, 
if he had known of that remote expedition 
of Seleukos, would doubtless have spoken dif- 
ferently in his Ind/lha (c. 5. 4), where he says 
that Megasthenes did not travel over much of 
India, * but yet more than those who invaded it 
along with Alexander the son of Philip.' Kow in 
this passage the author could have compared Meg- 
asthenes much more suitably and easily with Seleu- 
kos. J I pass over other proofs of less moment, nor 

t Moreover, Schwanbeck calls attention (p. 14) to the 
words of Appianus (i. 1), where when he says, somewhat in- 
accurately, that Sandrakottos was king of the Indians aronnd 
the Iiidns {rS>v irepX tov 'Ivbov ^Ivba>v) he seems to mean 
that the war was carried on on the boundaries of India. But 
this is of no importance, for Appianus has tS>v ncpi avrhv 
'IvbS>v, * of the Indians a/i'ound it,* as Schwanbeck himself 
has written it (p. 13). 

X The following passage of the Indian comedy MudrA- 
r&kshasa seems to favour the Indian expedition : — " Mean- 
while Kusumapura {i.e. PfitaliputrA, Palimbothra) the city 
of Chandragupta and the king of the mountain regions, 
was invested on every side by the Kir^tas, Yavanas, Eambo- 
jas, Persians, Baktrians, and the rest." But '* that drama" 
(Schwanbeck, p. 18), "to follow the authority of Wilson, was 
written in the tenth century after Christ, — certainly ten cen- 
turies after Seleukos. When even the Indian historians have 
no authority in history, what proof can dramas give written 



Digitized by 



Google 



12 



indeed is it expedient to set forth in detail here all 
the reasons from which it is improbable of itself 
that the arms of Selenkos ever reached the region 
of the Ganges. Let us now examine the passage 
in Plinius which causes many to adopt contrary 
opinions. Plinius (Hist, Nat, vi. 21), after finding 
from Diognetos and Baeto the distances of the 
places from Portae CaspiaB to the Huphasis, the 
end of Alexander's march, thus proceeds : — * The 
other journeys made for Seleukos Nikator are as 
follows : — One hundred and sixty-eight miles to 
the Hesidrus, and to the river Jomanes as many 
(some copies ^dd five miles) ; from thence to 
the Ganges one hundred and twelve miles. One 
hundred and nineteen miles to the Rhodophas 
(others give three hundred and twenty-five miles 
for this distance). To the town Kalinipaxa 
one hundred and sixty-seven. Five hundred 
(others give two hundred and sixty-five miles), and 
from thence to the confluence of the Jomanes 
and Ganges six hundred and twenty-five miles 
(several add thirteen miles), and to the town Pa- 
limbothra four hundred and twenty-five. To 
the mouth of the Ganges six hundred and thirty- 
eight' (or seven hundred and thirty-eight, to 

after many centnries ? Yavanas, which was also iu later 
times the Indian name for the Greeks, was very anciently 
the name given to a certain nation which the Indisuis say 
dwelt on the north-western boundaries of India j and the 
same nation (Mann, x. 44) is also numbered with the 
Kambojas, the ^akas, the Paradas, the Pallavas, and the 
Kiratas as being corrupted among the Kshatriyas. (Conf . 
Lassen, Zeitschrift fiir d. Kunde des MorgenlAiides, III. 
p. 245.) These Yavanas are to be understood in this pas- 
sage also, where they are mentioned along with those tribes 
with which they are usually classed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



13 



follow Schwanbeck's correction), — that is, six 
thousand stadia, as Megasthenes puts it. 

" The ambiguous expression reK^wa Seleuco Nica- 
tori pm'ograta stmt, translated above as * the oth&i' 
jowrneys made for Seleukos Nikator/ according to 
Schwanbeck's opinion, contain a dative * of advan- 
tage,' and therefore can bear no other meaning. 
The reference is to the journeys of Megasthenes, 
Deimachos, and Patrokles, whom Seleukos had 
sent to explore the more remote regions of Asia, 
Nor is the statement of Plinius in a passage be- 
fore this more distinct. {' India,*) he says, 'was 
thrown open not only hy the arms of Alexander the 
Great, and the Mngs who were his successors, of 
whom Seleucus and Antiochus even travelled to the 
Hyrcanian and Caspian seas, Patrocles being com- 
mander of their fleet, hut all the Greek writers who 
stayed behind with the Indian kings (for instance, 
Megasthenes andDimiysius, sent by Philadelphus for 
that purpose) have given accounts of the military 
force of each nation* Schwanbeck thinks tjiat the 

words circumvectis etiam Seleuco et Antio- 

cho et Patrocle are properly meant to convey 
nothing but additional confirmation, and also 
an explanation how India was opened up by the 
arms of the kings who succeeded Alexander." 

" The following statements," continues Miiller, 
"contain all that is related about Megas- 
thenes: — 
" * Megasthenes the historian, who lived with Seleu- 
kos Nikator',— Clem. Alex. p. 132 Sylh. (Fragm. 42) ; 
* Megasthenes, who lived with Sibyrtios § the satrap 

§ Sibyrtios, according to Diodorus (XVIII. iii. 3), had 
gamed the satrapy of Arachosia in the third year of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



14 



of Arachosia, and who says that he often visited 
Sandrakottos, king of the Indians, * — Arrian, Exp, 
Alex. V. vi. 2 (Fragm. 2) ;— *To Sandrokottos, to 
whom Megasthenes came on an embassy,* — Strabo, 
XV. p. 702 (Fragm. 25) ;— * Megasthenes and Ddim- 
achos were sent on an embassy, the former to 
Sandrokottos ai Palimbothra, the other to 
Allitrochades his son ; and they left accounts 
of their sojourn in the country,* — Strabo, ii. p. 70' 
(Fragm. 29 note) ; Megasthenes says that he often 
visited Sandrokottos, the greatest king {maMraja : 
V, Bohlen, Alte Indien, I. p. 19) of the Indians, and 
Poros, still greater than he :* — Arrian, Ind, c. 5 
(Fragm. 24). Add the passage of Plinius, which 
Solinus {Polyhiator. c. 60) thus renders : — ' Megas- 
thenes remainedfor sotne time with the Indicm kings, 
and wrote a history of Indian affairs, that he might 
liand down to posterity a faithful axicount of all tliat 
he had witnessed. Biowysius, who was sent hy Phil- 
adelphus to put the truth to the test hy personal in- 
spection, wrote also as much.* 

''From these sources, then, we gather that 
Megasthenes 1 1 was the representative of Seleukos 

114th Olympiad (b.c. 323), and was firmly established in his 
satrapy by Antipater (Arrianns, Be Success. Alex. § 86, ed. 
Didot). He joined Enmen^s in 816 (Diod. zix. 14. 6), bnt 
being called to acconnt by him he songht safety in flight 
{ihid.XIK. xxiii. 4). After the defeat of EomenSs, Antigonos 
delivered to him the most troublesome of the Arg^spides 
(ibid. G. xlviii. 3). He must have afterwards joined Se- 
leukos. 

II Bohlen {Alte Indien, I. p. 68) says that Megasthenes 
was a Persian. No one gives this account of him but 
Annius Yiterbiensis, that forger, whom Bohlen appears to 
have followed. But it is evidently a Greek name. Strabo 
(v. p. 243: oomp. Yelleius Paterculns, i. 4) mentions a 
Megasthenes of Ghalkis, who is said to have founded 
Cumse in Italy along with Hippokl^ of Kumd. 



Digitized by 



Google 



15 



at the court of Sibyrtios, satrap of Arachosia, and 
that he was sent from thence as the king's ambas- 
sador toSandrokottos at Palimbothra, and 
that not once, but frequently — whether to convey 
to him the presents of Seleukos, or for some other 
cause. According to the statement of Arrianus, 
Megasthen^s also visited kingPoros, who was (Diod. 
xix. 14) already dead in 317 B.C. (Olymp. CXV. 4.) 
These events should not be referred to the period 
of Seleukos^ but they may very easily be placed 
in the reign of Alexander, as Bohlen (Alte JncZien, 
vol. I. p. 68) appears to have believed they should, 
when he says Megasthenes was one of the com- 
panions of Alexander. But the structure of the 
sentences does not admit of this conclusion. For 
Arrianas says, *It appears to me that Megas- 
thenes did not see much of India, but yet more 
than the companions of Alexander, for he says 
that he visited Sandrokottos, the greatest king 
of the Indians, and Poros, even greater than 
he {kol UoDptp €Ti TovTov ftcfow).' Wo should be 
disposed to say, then, that he made a journey on 
some occasion or other to Poros, if the obscurity 
of the language did not lead us to suspect it a 
corrupt reading. LaBsen (De Pentap, p. 44) thinks 
the mention of Poros a careless addition of a chance 
transcriber, but I prefer Schwanbeck's opinion, 
who thinks it should be written koX Hapov en tovt<o 
fi€(oviy * and who was even greater than Pdros.' If 
this correctien is admitted, everything fits well. 

" The time when he discharged his embassy or 
embassies, and iiow long he stayed in India, can- 
not be determined, but he was probably sent after 
the treaty had been struck and friendship had 



Digitized by 



Google 



16 



sprung up between the two kings. If, therefore, 
we make the reign of Saudrokottos extend to the 
year 288, Megasthenes would have set out for 
Palimbothra between 302 and 288. Clinton (F. H". 
vol. III. p. 482) thinks he came to the Indian 
king a little before B.C. 302.'* 

While the date of the visit of Megasthenes to India 
is thus uncertain, there is less doubt as to what 
were the parts of the country which he saw ; and 
on this point Schwanbeck thus writes (p. 21) : — 

" Both from what he himself says, and because 
he has enumerated more accurately than any of 
the companions of Alexander, or any other Greek, 
the rivers of K&bul and the Fanjab, it is clear tbat 
he had passed through these countries. Then, 
again, we know that he reached Pdtaliputra by 
travelling along the royal road. But he does not 
appear to have seen more of India than those 
parts of it, and he acknowledges himself that he 
knew the lower part of the country traversed b}- 
the Ganges only by hearsay and report. It is 
commonly supposed that he also spent some 
time in the Indian camp, and therefore in some 
part of the country, but where cannot now be 
known. This opinion, however, is based on a cor- 
rupt reading which the editions of Strabo exhibit. 
For in all the MSS. of Strabo (p. 709) is found 
this reading : — Tevofievovs b^ovv 'ev t^ 'SavbpoKOTTov 
crrpaTOirebf^ <j}rfa\v 6 MeyaaBevrji, reTTapciKOPra fivpid- 
da>v nXriBovs \bpvp,€POv, /ii^dc/itap rif/Jpoj/ Ibeip avtivey' 
fi€va K\€p,fAaTa 7r\(i6v<av ^ diaKoariav hpaxp-^v a^ia. 
•Megasthenes says that those who were in the 
camp of Sandrokottos saw,' &c. From this trans- 
lation that given by Guarini and Gregorio alone 



Digitized by 



Google 



17 



is different. They render thus : — * Megasthenes 
refert, quum in Sandrocotti castra venisset . . * 
vidisse/ * Megasthenes relates that when he had 
come into the camp of Sandrokottos, he saw/ 
&c. From this it appears that the translator had 
found written yevoficvos. But since that transla- 
tion is hardly equal in authority even to a single 
MS., and since the word yepo/icVovs can be changed 
more readily into the word yivoficvos than yfvSfie'- 
pos into y€POfi€Povs, there is no reason at all why 
we should depart from the reading of all the 
MSS., which Casaubon disturbed by a baseless 
conjecture, contending that yfvofievos should be 
substituted, — inasmuch as it is evident from Strabo 
and Arrianus (V. vi. 2) that Megasthenes had been 
sent to Sandrokottos, — which is an argument 
utterly futile. Nevertheless from the time of 
Casaubon the wrong reading ycvoficvos which he 
promulgated has held its ground." 

That Megasthenes paid more than one visit to 
India Schwanbeck is not at all inclined to believe. 
On this point he says (p. 23) — 

" That Megasthenes frequently visited India recent 
writers, all with one consent, following Bobertson, 
are wont to maintain ; nevertheless this opinion is far 
from being certain. For what Arrianus has said in 
his Exped. Alex. V. vi. 2, — lioWaKts hf Xeyct (Meya<r- 
Sevrfs) a<l>iit€(rdai 7rapa2avdpdKOTrov T6p*lvb&v fiaa-iXea, 
does not solve the question, for he might have meant 
by the words that Megasthenes during his em- 
bassy had frequent interviews with Chandragupta. 
Nor, if we look to the context, does any other 
explanation seem admissible ; and in fact no other 
writer besides has mentioned his making frequent 



Digitized by 



Google 



18 



risits, although occasion for making such men- 
tion was by no means wanting, and in the Indika 
itself of Megasthenes not the slightest indication 
of his having made numerous visits is to be found. 
But perhaps some may say that to this view is 
opposed the accurate knowledge which he pos- 
sessed on all Indian matters ; but this may equally 
well be accounted for by believing that he made a 
protracted stay at Pataliputra as by supposing 
that he frequently visited India. Robertson's 
conjecture appears, therefore, uncertain, not to 
say hardly credible." 

Regarding the veracity of Megasthenes, and his 
value as a writer, Schwanbeck writes (p. 69) to this 
effect : — 

" The ancient writers, whenever they judge of 
those who have written on Indian matters, are 
without doubt wont to reckon Megasthenes among 
those writers who are given to lying and least worthy 
of credit, and to rank him almost on a par with 
Ktesias. Arrianus alone has judged better of him, 
and delivers his opinion of him in these words : — 
* Regarding the Indians I shall set down in a 
special work all that is most credible for narration 
in the accounts penned by those who accompanied 
Alexander on his expedition, and by Nearchus, who 
navigated the great sea which washes the shores of 
India, and also by Megasthenes and Eratosthenes, 
who are both approved men (Soki^o avbpf) :' Arr. 
Exped. Alex. V. v. 

" The foremost amongst those who disparage 
him is Eratosthenes, and in open agreement with 
him are Strabo and Pliny. Others, among whom 
is Diodorus, by omitting certain particulars re- 



Digitized by 



Google 



19 



lated by Megasthenes, sufficiently show that they 
discredit that part of his narrative.^ 

% Regarding the manner in which Strabo, Arrianus, 
Diodoms, and'Plinius used the Indika of Megasthen^Sj 
Schwanbeck remarks : — " Strabo, and — not unlike to 
§trabo— Arrianus, who, however, gave a much less carefully 
considered account of India, abridged the descriptions of 
Megasthenes, yet in such a way that they wrote at once 
in an agreeable style and with strict regard to accuracy. 
But when Strabo designed not merely to instruct but also 
to delight his readers, he omitted whatever would be out of 
place in an entertaining narrative or picturesque descrip- 
tion, and avoided above all things aught that would look 
like a dry list of names. Now though this may not be a 
fault, stiU it is not to be denied that those particulars 
which he has omitted would have very greatly helped our 
knowledge of Ancient India. Nay, Strabo, in his eager- 
ness to be interesting, has gone so far that the topography 
of India is almost entirely a blajik in his pages. 

" Diodorus, however, in applying this principle of composi- 
tion has exceeded all bounds. For as he did not aim at 
writing learnedly for the instruction of others, but in a 
light, amusing style, so as to be read with deUght by the 
multitude, he selected for extract such parts as best suited 
this purpose. He has therefore omitted not only the most 
accurate narrations of fact, but also the fables which his 
readers might consider as incredible, and has been best 
pleased to describe instead that part of Indian life which 
tx5 the Greeks would appear singular and diverting. . . . 
Nevertheless his epitome is not without its value; for 
although we do not learn much that is new from its 
contents, still it has the advantage over all the others of 
being the most coherent, while at the same time it 
enables us to attribute with certainty an occasional passage 
to Megasthenes, which without its help we could but 
conjecture proceeded from his pen. 

" Since Strabo, Arrianus, andDiodoruB have directed their 
attention to relate nearly the same things, it has resulted 
that the greatest part of the Indika has been completely 
lost, and that of many passages, singularly enough, three 
epitomes are extant, to which occasionally a fourth is added 
by Plinius. 

"At a great distance from these writers, and especially from 
Diodorus, stands Plinius : whence it happens that he both 
differs most from that writer, and also best supplements his 
epitome. Where the narrative of Strabo and Arrianus is at 
once pleasing and instructive, and Diodorus charms us 
with a lively sketch, Pliny gives instead, in the baldest Ian- 



Digitized by 



Google 



20 



" Strabo (p. 70) says, * Generally speaking, the 
men who have hitherto written or the affairs of 
India were a set of liars, — D ^ i m a o h o s holds 
the first place in the list, Megasthenes comes 
next; while Onesikritos and Nearchos, 
with others of the same class, manage to stammer 
out a few words (of truth). Of this we became the 
more convinced whilst writing the history of 
Alexander. No faith whatever can be placed in 
Deimachos and Megasthenes. They coined the 
fables concerning men with ears large enough to 
sleep in, men without any mouths, without noses, 
with only one eye, with spider legs, and with fingers 
bent backward. They renewed Homer's fables con- 
cerning the battles of the cranes and pygmies, and 
asserted the latter to be three spans high. They 
told of ants digging for gold, and Pans with wedge- 
shaped heads, of serpents swallowing down oxen 
and stags, horns and all, — meantime, as Eratosthe- 
nes has observed, accusing each other of falsehood. 
Both of these men were sent as ambassadors to 
Palimbothra,— Megasthenes toSandrokottos, 
Deimachos toAmitrochades his son, — and 
such are the notes of their residence abroad, which, 
I know not why, they thought fit to leave. 

" When he adds, * Patrokles certainly does not re- 
semble them, nor do any other of the authorities 

gnage, an ill-digested ennmeration of names. With his 
usual wonderful diligence he has written this part, but 
more frequently still he writes with too little care and judg- 
ment,— a fact of which we have already seen numerous 
instances. In a careless way, as is usual, he commends 
authors, so that if you compared his accounts of Taprobane 
and the kingdom of the Prasii you would think that he had 
lived at different periods. He frequently commends Megas- 
thenes, but more frequently seems to transcribe him without 
acknowledgment."— pp. 5o-58. 



Digitized by 



Google 



21 



consulted by Eratosthenes contain such absurdities * 
we may well wonder, seeing that, of all the writers 
on India, Eratosthenes has chiefly followed Megas- 
thenes. Plinius (JSist. Nat. YI. xxi. 3) says : * India 
was opened up to our knowledge . . . even by other 
Greek writers, who, having resided with Indian 
kings, — as for instance Megasthen^s and Diony- 
sius, — made known the strength of the races which 
peopled the country. It is not, however, worth 
while to study their accounts with care, so con- 
flicting are they, and incredible.' 

" These same writers, however, seeing they have 
copied into their own pages a great part of his 
Indiha, cannot by any means have so entirely dis- 
trusted his veracity as one might easily infer they 
did from these judgments. And what of this, 
that Eratosthenes himself, who did not quote him 
sparingly, says in Strabo (p. 689) that "he sets down 
the breadth of India from the register of the 
Stathmi, which were received as authentic,' — a pas- 
sage which can have reference to Megasthenes alone. 
The fact is they find fault with only two parts of the 
narrative of Megasthenes, — the one in which he 
writes of the fabulous races of India, and the other 
where he gives an account of Herakl^s and the 
Indian Dionysus ; although it so happens that on 
other matters also they regarded the account given 
by others as true, rather than that of Megasthenes. 

" The Aryan Indians were from the remotest period 
surrounded on all sides by indigenous tribes in a 
state of barbarism, from whom they differed both 
in mind and disposition. They were most acutely 
sensible of this difference, and gave it a very point- 
ed expression. For as barbarians, even by the sanc- 



Digitized by 



Google 



'2-2 



tion of the gods themselves, are excluded from the 
Indian commonwealth, so they seem to have been 
currently regarded by the Indians as of a nature 
and disposition lower than their own, and bestial 
rather than human. A difference existing between 
minds is not easily perceived, but the Indians were 
quick to discern how unlike the barbarous tribes 
were to themselves in bodily figure ; and the 
divergence they exaggerated, making bad worse, 
and so framed to themselves a mental picture of 
these tribes beyond measure hideous. When 
reports in circulation regarding them had given 
fixity to this conception, the poets seized on it as 
a basis for further exaggeration, and embellished 
it with fables. Other races, and these even 
Indian, since they had originated in an intermix- 
ture of tribes, or since they did not sufficiently 
follow Indian manners, and especially the system 
of caste, so roused the common hatred of the 
Indians that they were reckoned in the same cate- 
gory with the barbarians, and represented as equal- 
ly hideous of aspect. Accordingly in the epic 
poems we see all Brahmanical India surrounded by 
races not at all real, but so imaginary that some- 
times it cannot be discovered how the fable origi- 
nated. 

" Forms still more wonderful you will find by 
bestowing a look at the gods of the Indians and 
their retinue, among whom particularly the at- 
tendants of Kuvera and Kartikeya are described 
in such a manner (conf. Mahdhh. ix. 2bbS etseq), 
that hardly anything which it is possible for the 
human imagination to invent seems omitted. 
These, however, the Indians now sufficiently dis- 



Digitized by 



Google 



23 



tinguibh from the fabulous races, since they 
neither believe that they live within the borders' 
of India, nor have any intercourse with the human 
race. These, therefore, the Greeks could not con- 
found with the races of India. 

" These races, however, might be more readily 
confounded with other creatures of the Indian ima- 
gination, who held a sort of intermediate place 
between demons and men, and whose number was 
legion. For the Rdkshasas and other 
Pisachas are said to have the same characteris- 
tics as the fabulous races, and the only diflFerence 
between them is that, while a single (evil) attribute 
only is ascribed to each race, many or all of these 
are assigned to the B^kshasas and the Pisachas. 
Altogether so slight is the distinction between 
the two that any strict lines of demarcation can 
hardly be drawn between them. For the Rakshasas, 
though described as very terrible beings, are never- 
theless believed to be human, and both to live on 
the earth and take part in Indian battles, so that 
an ordinary Indian could hardly define how the 
nature of a Bakshasa differs from that of a man. 
There is scarcely any one thing found to charac- 
terize the Hdkshasas which is not attributed 
to some race or other. Therefore, although the 
Greeks might have heard of these by report, — 
which cannot be proved for certain, — they could 
scarcely, by reason of that, have erred in describing 
the manners of the races according to the Indian 
conception. 

"That reports about these tribes should have 
. reached Greece is not to be wondered at. For fa- 
bles invented with some glow of poetic fervour have 



Digitized by 



Google 



24 



a remarkable facility in gaining a wide currency, 
which is all the greater in proportion to the 
boldness displayed in their invention. Those 
fables also in which the Indians have represented 
the lower animals as talking to each other have 
been diffused through almost every country in 
the world, in a way we cannot understand. Other 
fables found their way to the Greeks before even 
the name of India was known to them. In this 
class some fables even in Homer must be reck- 
oned,— a matter which, before the Vedas were 
better known, admitted only of probable conjec- 
ture, but could not be established by unquestion- 
able proofs. We perceive, moreover, that the fur- 
ther the epic poems of the Greeks depart from 
their original simplicity the more, for that very 
reason, do those fables creep into them ; while 
a very liberal u^e of them is made by the 
poets of a later age. It would be a great mistake 
to suppose that those fables only in which India 
is mentioned proceeded from India ; for a fable in 
becoming current carries along with it the name 
of the locality in which the scene of it is laid. An 
example will make this clear. The Indians sup- 
posed that towards the north, beyond the Hima- 
laya, dwelt the Uttarakuri, a people who en- 
joyed a long and happy life, to whom disease and 
care were unknown, and who revelled in every 
delight in a land all paradise. This fable made 
its way to the West, carrying with it the name of 
the locality to which it related, and so it came to 
pass that from the time of Hesiod the Greeks sup- 
posed that towards the north lived the Hyperbo- 
reans, whose very name was fashioned after some 



Digitized by 



Google 



25 



likeness to the Indian name. The reason why the 
Indians placed the seat of this happy people towards 
the north is manifest; but there was not the slightest 
reason which can be discovered why the ' Greeks 
should have done so.. Nay, the locality assigned 
to the Hyperboreans is not only out of harmony, 
but in direct conflict, with that conception of the 
world which the Greeks entertained. 

" The first knowledge of the mythical geography 
of the Indians dates from this period, when the 
Greeks were the unconscious recipients of Indian 
fables. Fresh knowledge was imparted by Sky- 
lax, who first gave a description of India ; and 
all writers from the time of Skylax, with not a 
single exception, mention those fabulous races, 
but in such a way that they are wont to speak of 
them as -Ethiopians ; by doing which they have 
incurred obloquy and the suspicion of dishonesty, 
especially K t e s i a s. This writer, however, is not 
at all untruthful when he says, in the conclu- 
sion of his 2Vl(i^/fcal.( 33), that *he omits many of 
these stories, and others still more marvellous, 
that he may not appear, to such as have not seen 
these, to be telling what is incredible ;' for he 
could have described many other fabulous races, 
as for example men with the heads of tigers (vyd- 
ghramuchds), others with the necks of snakes 
(vyalagrivds), others having horses' heads {turanga- 
vadands, aSvamuchds), others with feet like dogs 
(Svd^padds), others with four feet (chatushpadds) , 
others with three eyes (trinetrds), and others with 
six hundred. 

" Nor were the companions of Alexander able to 
disregard these fables, — in fact, scarcely any of 

D 



Digitized by 



Google 



26 



them doubted their truth. For, genemlly speaking, 
they were communicated to them by the Brah- 
mans, whose learning and wisdom they held in 
the utmost veneration. Why, then, should we be 
surprised that Megasthenes also, following exam- 
ples so high and numerous, should have handled 
those fables ? His account of them is to be found 
in Strabo711 ; Pliny, Hist. Nat vii. 2. 14-22; Solinus 
52.'' (Sch. p. 64.) 

Schwanbeck then examines the fables related by 
Megasthenes, and having shown that they were of 
Indian origin, thus proceeds (p. 74) : — 

" The relative veracity of Megasthenes, then, can- 
not be questioned, for he related truthfully both 
what he actually saw, and what was told him by 
others. If we therefore seek to know what re- 
liance is to be placed on any particular narrative, 
this other point must be considered, how far his 
informants were worthy of credit. But here no 
ground for suspicion exists ; for on those matters 
which did not come under his own observation 
he had his information from those Brahmans 
who were the rulers of the state, to whom he 
again and again appeals as his authorities. Ac- 
cordingly he was able not only to describe how 
the kingdom of the P r a s i i was governed, but 
also to give an estimate of the power of other 
nations and the strength of their armies. Hence 
we cannot wonder that Indian ideas are to be 
found in the books of Megasthenes mixed up with 
accounts of what he personally observed and with 
Greek ideas. 

*• Therefore to him, as to the companions of Al- 
exander, it cannot be objected that he told too 



Digitized by 



Google 



27 



much. That he did not tell too little to give an 
adequate account of Indian affairs to Greek 
readers we know. For he has described the 
country, its soil, climate, animals, and plants, its 
government and religion, the manners of its 
people and their arts, — in short, the whole of 
Indian life from the king to the remotest tribe ; 
and he has scanned every object with a mind 
sound and unprejudiced, without overlooking even 
trifling and minute circumstances. If we see any 
part omitted, a little only said about the religion 
and gods of the Indians, and nothing at all about 
their literature, we should reflect that we are not 
reading his veritable book, but only an epitome 
and some particular fragments that have survived 
the wreck of time." (p. 75.) 

** Of the slight mistakes into which he fell, some 
are of that kind into which even the most careful 
observer may be betrayed, as for instance his 
incorrectly stating that the V i p d s a pours its 
waters into the Ira vat i. Others had their 
origin in his misapprehension of the meaning of 
Indian words ; to which head must be referred his 
assertion that among the Indians laws were not 
written, but everything decided by memory. Be- 
sides he alleges that on those Brahmans who had 
thrice erred in making up the calendar silence for 
the rest of their lives was enjoined as a punishment. 
This passage, which has not yet been cleared up, 
I would explain by supposing that he had heard 
the Indian word mduniny a name which is applied 
both to a taciturn person and to any ascetic. 
Finally, some errors had their source in this, that 
he looked at Indian matters from a Greek's point 



Digitized by 



Google 



28 



of view, from which it resulted that he did not cor- 
rectly enumerate the castes, and gave a mistaken 
account of the Indian gods and other matters. 

" Notwithstanding, the work of Megasthenes — in 
so far as it is a part of Greek literature and of Greek 
and Roman learning — is, as it were, the culmina- 
tion of the knowledge which the ancients ever 
acquired of India : for although the geographical 
science of the Greeks attained afterwards a per- 
fect form, nevertheless the knowledge of India 
derived from the books of Megasthenes has only- 
approached perfect accuracy the more closely those 
who have written after him on India have followed 
his Indika. And it is not only on account of his 
own merit that Megasthenes is a writer of great 
importance, but also on this other ground, that 
while other writers have borrowed a great part of 
what they relate from him, he exercised a powerful 
influence on the whole sphere of Latin and 
Greek scientific knowledge. 

"Besides this authority which the Indika of 
Megasthenes holds in Greek literature, his remains 
have another value, since they hold not the last 
place among the sources whence we derive our 
knowledge of Indian antiquity. For as there 
now exists a knowledge of our own of ancient 
India, still on some points he increases the know- 
ledge which we have acquired from other sources, 
even though his narrative not seldom requires to 
be supplemented and corrected. Notwithstanding, 
it must be conceded that the new information we 
have learned from him is neither extremely great in 
amount nor weight. What is of greater importance 
than all that is new in what he has told us, is — that 



Digitized by 



Coogk 



29 



he has recalled a picture of the condition of India 
at a definite period, — a service of all the greater 
value, because Indian literature, always self -con- 
sistent, is wont to leave us in the greatest doubt 
if we seek to know what happened at any particular 
time." (pp. 76, 77.) 

It is yet an unsettled question whether the IndiJca 
was written in the Attic or the Ionic dialect.* 

* The following authorities are quoted by Schwanbeck 
(pp. 23, 24) to ^how that the Indika of Megasthen^s was 
^vided into four books: — Athen. IV. p. 153 — where 
the 2nd book is mentioned ; Clem. Alex. Strom. T. p. 132 
Sylb., where the 3rd book is mentioned ; Joseph, contra 
Apioriy I. 20, and Antiq. Jud. X. li. 1, where jbhe 4th book 
is mentioned— cf. G. Syncell. tom. I. p. 419, Bonn. The 
assignment of the fragments to their respective books was 
a matter of some difficulty, as the order of their connection 
varies in different authors. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 



FRAGMENT I., 

OR AN Epitome of Megasthenes. 

(Diod. II. 36-42.) 

(35.) ^India, which is in shape quadrilateral, 
has its eastern as well as its western side 
bounded by the great sea, but on the north- 
ern side it is divided by Mount Hemodos 
from that part of Skythia which is inhabited 
by those Skythians who are called the S a k a i, 
while the fourth or western side is bounded by 
the river palled the Indus, which is perhaps 
the largest of all rivers in the world after the 
Nile. * The extent of the whole country from 
east to west is said to be 28,000 stadia, and 
from north to south 32,000. * Being thus of 
such vast extent, it seems well-nigh to em- 
brace the whole of the northern tropic zone 
of the earth, and in fact at the extreme point of 
India the gnomon of the sundial may frequently 
be observed to cast no shadow, while the constel- 
lation of the Bear is by night invisible, and in 
the remotest parts even Arcturus disappears 
from view. Consistently with this, it is also 
stated that shadows there fall to the southward. 

* India has many huge mountains which abound 
in fruit-trees of every kind, and many vast 
plains of great fertility — more or less beautiful, 

* With Epit. 1, conf. Fragm. ii., iii. (in Ind. Ant. vol. V. 
p. 86, c. 2). 
^-» Conf. Fragm. iv. ' Conf. Fragm. ix. 



Digitized by 



Google 



31 



but all alike infcersecfced by a multitude of rivers. 
° The greater part of the soil, moreover, is under 
irrigation, and consequently bears two crops in 
the course of the year^ It teems at the same 
time with animals of all sorts, — ^beasts of the field 
and fowls of the air, — of all different degrees of 
strength and size. * It is prolific, besides, in ele- 
phants, which are of monstrous bulk, as its 
soil supplies food in unsparing profusion, mak- 
ing these animals for to exceed in strength 
those that are bred in L i by a. It results also 
that, since they are caught in great numbers by 
the Indians and trained for war, they are of 
great moment in turning the scale of victory. 

(36.) ' The inhabitants, in like manner, hav- 
ing abundant means of subsistence, exceed in 
consequence the ordinary stature, and are distin- 
guished by their proud bearing. They are also 
found to be well skilled in the arts, as might be 
expected of men who inhale a pure air and 
drink the very finest water. ® And while the 
soil bears on its surface all kinds of fruits 
which are known to cultivation, it has also 
underground numerous veins of all sorts of 
metals, for it contains much gold and silver, 
and copper and iron in no small quantity, and 
even tin and other metals, which are employed 
in making articles of use and ornament, as well 
as the implements and accoutrements of war. 

* In addition to cereals, there grows throughout 
8-* Conf. Fragm. xi. 



Digitized by 



Google 



32 



India much millet, which is kept well watered 
by the profusion of river-streams, and much 
pulse of different sorts, and rice also, and what 
is called bosjporum, as wgll as many other plants 
useful for food, of which most grow spon- 
taneously. ^° The soil yields, moreover, not a 
few other edible products fit for the subsistence 
of animals, about which it would be tedious to 
write. It is accordingly affirmed that famine 
has never visited India, and that there has 
never been a general scarcity in the supply of 
nourishing food. ^^ For, since there is a double 
rainfall in the course of each year, — one in the 
winter season, when the sowing of wheat takes 
place as in other countries, and the second 
at the time of the summer solstice, which is the 
proper season for sowing rice and hosporum^ as 
well as sesamum and millet — the inhabitants of 
India almost always gather in two harvests an- 
nually; and even should one of the sowings prove 
more or less abortive they are always sure of the 
other crop. ^*The fruits, moreover, of spon- 
taneous growth, and the esculent roots which 
grow in marshy places and are of varied sweet- 
ness, afford abundant sustenance for man. ^° The 
fact is, almost all the plains in the country 
have a moisture which is alike genial, whether 
it is derived from the rivers, or from the rains 
of the summer season, which are wont to fall 
every year at a stated period with surprising 
re^larity ; while the great heat which prevails . 



Digitized by 



Google 



33 



ripens the roots wMcli grow in tlie marshes, 
and especially those of the tall reeds. 

** But, farther, there are usages observed by 
the Indians which contribute to prevent the 
occurrence of faminje among them ; for whereas 
among other nations it is usual, in the contests 
xyi war, to ravage the soil, and thus to reduce 
it to an uncultivated waste, among the Indians, 
on the contrary, by whom husbandmen are re- 
garded as a clasa that is sacred and inviolable,' 
the tillers of the soil, even when battle is laging 
in their neighbourhood, are undisturbed by any 
sense of danger, for the combatants on either 
side in waging the conflict make carnage of 
each other, but a>Uow those engaged in hus* 
bandry to remain quite unmolested. Besides, 
they neither ravage an enemy's land with fire, 
nor cut down its trees. 

(37.) ^° India, again, possesses many rivers 
both large and navigable, which, having their 
sources in the mountains which stretch along 
the northern frontier, traverse the level country, 
and not a few of these, after uniting with each 
other, fall into the river called the Ganges. 
"Now this river, which at its source is 30 
stadia broad, flows from north to sonth, and 
empties its waters into the ocean forming the 
eastern boundary of the Gangaridai, a 
nation which possesses a vast force of the 
largest-sized elephants. ^' Owing to this, their 
country has never been conquered by any 



Digitized by 



Google 



34 



foreign king : for all other nations dread the 
overwhelming number and strength of these 
animals. .*' [Thus Alexander the Makedonian, 
after conquering all Asia, did not make war 
upon the Gangaridai,t as he did on all others ; 
for when he had arrived with all his troops at 
the river Ganges, and had subdued all the other 
Indians, he abandoned as hopeless an invasion 
of the Gangaridai when he learned that they 
possessed four thousand elephants well trained 
and equipped for war.] ^''Another river, about 
the same size as the Ganges, called the Indus, 
has its sources, like its rival, in the north, and 
falling into the ocean forms on its way the 
boundary of India ; in its passage through the 
vast stretch of level country it receives not a 
few tributary streams which are navigable, 
the most notable of them being the H u p a n is, 
the Hudaspes, and the Akesin^s. 
Besides these rivers there are a great many 
others of every description, which permeate the 
country, and supply water for the nurture of 
garden vegetables and crops of all sorts. '°Now 
to account for the rivers being so numerous, and 
the supply of water so superabundant, the 
native philosophers and proficients in natural 
science advance the following reasons : — They 

t Conf. Lassen, P&atwpot, 16. 
. «^ Conf. Fragm. xxi. in Ind. Ant. vol. V. p. 88, c. vi. 2-8. 

"-" Conf. Fragm. xx. in Ind. Ant. vol. V. p. 87, c. iv. 
2.18. 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 



say that the countries which surroand India — 
those of the Skjthians and Baktrians, and also 
of the Aryans — ^are more elevated than India, so 
that their waters, agreeably to natural law, flow 
down together from all sides to the plains 
beneath, where they gradually saturate the soil 
with moisture, and generate a multitude of 
rivers. 

■^ A peculiarity is found to exist in one of the 
rivers of India, — that called the S i 1 1 a s, which 
flows from a fountain bearing the same name. 
It difiers from all other rivers in this respeet, — 
that nothing cast into it will float, but every- 
thing, strange to say, sinks down to the bottom. 

(38.) *'It is said that India, being of enormous 
size when taken as a whole, is peopled by races 
both numerous and diverse, of which not even 
one was originally of foreign descent, but all were 
evidently indigenous ; *'and moreover that India 
neither received a colony from abroad, nor sent 
out a colony to any other nation. ** The legends . 
further inform us that in primitive times the 
inhabitants subsisted on such fruits as the earth 
yielded spontaneously, and were clothed with 
the skins of the beasts found in the country, 
as was the case with the Greeks ; and that, in 
like manner as with thenby the arts and other 
appliances which improve human life were gra- 
dually invented. Necessity herself teaching 

*» Conf. Fragm. xlvi. 



Digitized by 



Google 



36 



them to an animal at once docile and famished 
not only with hands ready to second all hia 
e£foi*ts, but also with reason and a keen intel- 
ligence. 

•* The men of greatest learning among the 
Indians tell certain legends, of which it may be 
proper to give a brief summary.^ They relate 
ihat in the most primitiye times, when the 
people of the country wotc still liring in vil- 
lages, Dionusos made his appearance com- 
ing from the regions lying to the west, and 
at the head of a considerable army. He over- 

X FaAGM. I. B. Diod. III. 68. 

Conceiving Dionuaoa. 
Now some, as I have already said, supposing 
that there were three individuals of this name, who 
lived in different agesy assign to eadi appropriate 
achievements. They say, then, that the most an- 
cient of them was I n d o s, and that as the country, 
with its genial temperature, produced^ spontane- 
ously the vine-tree in grea^ abundance, he was 
the first who crushed grapes and discovered the 
use of the properties of wine. In like manner he 
ascertained what culture was requisite for figs and 
other fruit trees, and transmitted this knowledge 
to after-times ; and, in a wcH^d, it was he who found 
out how these fruits should be gathered in, 
whence also he was called L § n a i o s. This same 
Dionusos, however, they call also Katapdg6n, 
since it is a custom among the Indians to nourish 
their beards with great care to the very end of 



Digitized by 



Google 



37 



ran the whole of India, as there was no great 
city capable of resisting his arms. " The heat, 
however, having become excessive, and the 
soldiers of Dionusos being aflflicted with a pes- 
tilence, the leader, who was remarkable for 
his sagacity, carried his troops away from the 
plains up to the hills. There the army, re- 
cruited by the cool breezes and the waters 
that flowed fresh from the fountains, recovered 
from sickness. *' The ^place among the moun- 
tains where Dionusos restored his ti'oops to 
health was called Mdros; from which cir« 



their life. Dionusos then, at the head of an army, 
marched to every part of the world, and taught 
mankind the planting of the vine, and how to 
crush grapes in the winepress, whence he was call- 
ed L d n a i o s. Having in like manner imparted 
to all a knowledge of his other inventions, he ob- 
tained after his departure from among men 
immortal honour from those who had benefited by 
his labours. It is further said that the place is 
pointed out in India even to this day where the 
god had been, and that cities are called by his 
name in the vernacular dialects, and that many 
other important evidences still exist of his having 
been bom in India, about which it would be tedi- 
ous to write. 



*» ei seqq. Conf. Fragm. Ivii. 

"-»• Conf. Fragm. 1. in Ind, Ant vol. V. p. 89, c. 
▼ii.— " He tella vm further," Ac. to c. yiii.— " on the principle 
of merit." 



Digitized by 



Google 



38 



cumstance, no doubt, tlie Greeks have trans- 
mitted to posterity the legend concerning the 
god, that Dionnsos was bred in his father* s 
thigh.^ *® Having after this turned his attention 
to the artificial propagation of useful plants, he 
communicated the secret to the Indians, and 
taught them the way to make wine, as well as 
other arts conducive to human well-being. *• He 
was, besides, the founder of large cities, which 
he formed by removing the villages to conve- 
nient sites, while he also showed the people how 
to worship the deity, and introduced laws and 
courts of justice. ^Having thus achieved alto- 
gether many great and noble works, he was re- 
-garded as a deity and gained immortal honours. 
It is related also of him that he led about with 
his army a great host of women, and employed, 
in marshalling his troops for battle, drums and 
cymbals, as the trumpet had not in his days been 
invented ; *^ and tha* after reigning over the 
whole of India for two and fifty years he died of 
old age, while his sons, succeeding to, the go- 
vernment, transmitted the sceptre in unlnroken 
succession to their posterity. *' At last, after 
many generations had come and gone, the so- 
vereignty, it is said, was dissolved, and demo- 
cratic governments were set up in the cities. 

(39.) ** Such, then, are the traditions regard- 
ing Dionnsos and his descendants current 

§ firjpQs. ** Conf . Fragm. K. 



Digitized by 



Google 



39 



amoDg the Indians who inhabit the hill-country. 
-** They further assert that H e r a k 1 ^ s|| also 
was bom among them. ** They assign to him* 
like the Greeks, the club and the lion's skin. 'He 
far surpassed other men in personal strength and 
prowess, and cleared sea and land of evil beasts. 
**Marrying many wives he begot many sons, but 
cme daughter only. The sons having' reached 
man's estate, he divided all India into equal por- 
tions for his children, whom he made kings in 
diflferent parts of his dominions. He provided 
similarly for his only daughter, whom he reared 
up and made a queen. ^ He was the founder, 
also, of no small number of cities, the most re- 
nowned and greatest of which he called P a 1 i- 
b o t h r a. He built therein many sumptuous 
palaces, and settled within its walls a numerous 
population. The city he fortified with trenches 
of notable dimensions, which were filled with 
water introduced firom the river. *' Herakl&si, 
accordingly, after his removal from among men, 
obtained immortal honour ; and his descendants, 
having reigned for many generations and sig- 
nalized themselves by great achievements, nei- 
ther made any expedition beyond the confines 
of India, nor sent out any colony abroad. *' At 



»*-M Conf. Fragm. 1. in Ind, Ant vol. V. pp. 89-90, c. 
▼iii., from " Btitthat Hercnles," &c. to " of his daughter.' 

II Apparently ^ i v a is meant, though his many wives and 
sons are unknown to Hindu mythology. — Ed. 

*• Conf. Fragm. xxv. 



Digitized by 



Google 



40 



last* however, after many years had gone, moBt 
of the cities adopted the democratic form ot 
government, though some retained the kingly 
nntil the invasion of the country by A 1 e x a n* 
der. ^ Of several remarkable customs existing 
among the Indians, there is one prescribed by 
their ancient philosophers which one may regard 
as traly admirable : for the law ordains that 
no one among them shall, under any cir* 
cumstancea, be a slave, but that, enjojring free* 
dom, they shall respect the equal right to it 
which all possess : for those, ihey tJumghty who 
have learned neither to domineer over nor to 
cringe to others will attain the life best adapted 
for all vicissitudes of lot : for it is but fi&ir and 
reasonable to institute laws which bind all 
equally, but allow property to be unevenly dis* 
tributed. 

(40.) The whole population of India is divided 
into seven castes, of which thej^ra^ is formed 
by the coUectivebody of the Philosopher s,^ 
which in point of number is inferior to the 
other classes, but in point of dignity preeminent 
over all. For the philosophers, being exempted 
from all public duties, are neither the masters 
nor the servants of others. *^ They are, however, 
engaged by private persons to offer the sacrifices 
due in lifetime, and to celebrate the obsequies of 

% ^CK6<rdft>oi, Strabo, Diod. 2o<f>i(rTai, Arr. 
*o.6» Conf . Fragm. xxxii. in Ind. Ant vol. V. pp. 91-92» 
cc. zi. and xii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



41 



tlbe dead : for they are believed to Tbe nrosl dcra^ 
to the gods, and to be the most conversant with 
matters pertaining to Hades. In requital of 
snch services they receive valuable gifts and 
privileges, ** To the people of India at large 
they also render great benefits, when, gathered 
together at the beginning of the year, they fore^ 
warn the assembled multitudes about dronghts 
and wet weather, and also about propitious 
winds, and diseases, and other topics capable of 
profiting the hearers. *^ Thus the people and the 
sovereign, learning beforehand what is to hap- 
pen, always make adequate provision against 
a coming deficiency,' and never fail to prepare 
beforehand what will help in a time of need. 
The philosopher who errs in his predictions 
incurs no other penalty than obloquy, and he 
then observes silence for the rest of his life. 

** The second caste consists of the Husband- 
men,* who appear to be far more numerous 
than the others. Being, moreover, exempted 
from fighting and other public services, they de- 
vote the whole of their time to tillage; nor 
would an enemy coming upon a husbandman 
at work on his land do him any harm, for men 
of this class, being regarded as public benefac- 
tors, are protected from all injury. The land, 
thus remaining unravaged, and producing heavy 
crops, supplies the inhabitants with all that is 

* rcwpyoi, ^trab. Arr. Diod. 



Digitized by 



Google 



42 



requisite to make life very enjoyable. ** The 
husbandmen themselves, with their wives and 
children, live in the country, and entirely avoid 
going into town. ** They pay a land-tribute to 
the king, because all India is the property of 
Uie crown, and no private person is permitted 
to own land. Besides the land-tribute, they 
pay into the royal treasury a fourth part of the 
produce of the soil. 

*' The third caste consists of the Neatherds 
and S hepberd s,t aiid in general of all herdsmen 
who neither settle in towns nor in villages, but 
live in tents. By hunting and trapping they 
clear the country of noxious birds and wild 
beasts. As they apply themselves eagerly and 
assiduously to this pursuit, they free India from 
the pests with which it abounds, — all sorts of 
wild beasts, and birds which devour the seeds 
sown by the husbandmen. J 

(41.) *' The fourth caste consists of the A r ib i- 
zans.§ Of these some are armourers, while 
others make the implements which husbandmen 
and others find usefdl in their different callings. 
This class i^ not only exempted from paying 



t BovKokoi Koi TToifieues Koi KaBokov navrcs oi vofie€^, 
Diod. Hoifievts koX Orjpevrait Strab. TIoifi€V€S re icai 
6ovk6\oi, Arr. 

t Shepherds and hnniers were not a caste of Hindis, 
but were probably tribes like the Abhirs or Ahirs, Dhan> 
gars, &c. — Ed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



43 



taxes, but even receives maintenance from the 
royal exchequer. 

*^ The fifth caste is the M i 1 i t a r y . || It is well 
organized and equipped for war, holds the second 
place in point of numbers, and gives itself up to 
idleness and amusement in the times of peace. 
The entire force — men-at-arms, war-horses, 
war-elephants, and all — ^are maintained at the 
king's expense. 

°^ The sMli caste consists of the Overseers. 
It is their province to inquire into and superin- 
tend all that goes on in India, and make report 
to the king,^ or, where there is not a king, to 
the magistrates. 

^^ The seventh caste consists of the Coun- 
cillors and Assessor s, — of those who de- 
liberate on public aflfe,irs. It is the smallest 
class, looking to number, but the most respected, 
on account of the high character and wisdom of 
its members ; '* for from their ranks the advisers 
of the king are taken, and the treasurers of the 
state, and the arbiters who settle disputes. The 
generals of the army also, and the chief magis- 
trates, usually belong to this class. 

** Such, then, are about the parts into which 
the body politic in India is divided. No one is 
allowed to marry out of his own caste, or to 

II noXe/xwrot, Strab. Arr. 

^ '^E<f>opoit Diod. Strab. 'EttiVkottoi, Arr. Is this the 
class of omcers referred to as sheriffs — mahAmatra—ia the 
Asoka inscriptions ? Conf . Ind. Ant, vol. V. pp. 267-8. — Ed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



44 



exercise any calling or art except hia own : for 
instance, a soldier cannot become a husbandman^ 
or an artizan a philosopher.* 

(42.) ** India possesses a vast number of huge 
elephants, which far surpass those found elsewhere 
both in strength and size. This animal does 
not cover the female in a peculiar way, as some 
affirm, but like horses and other quadrupeds. 
** The period of gestation is at shortest sixteen 
months, and at furthest eighteen.t Like mares^ 
they generally bring forth but one young one 
at a time, and thi» the dam suokles for six years. 
'* Most elephants live to be as old as an ex- 
tremely old man, but the most aged live twa 
hundred years. 

*' Among the Indians officers are appointed 
even for foreigners, whose duty is to see that 
no foreigner is wronged. Should any of them 
lose his health, they send physicians to attend 
him, and take care of him otherwise, and if he 
dies they bury him, and deliver over such pro- 
perty as be leaves tehis relatives, °' The judges 

* "It appears strange that Megasthends should have 
divided the people of India into seven castes . . . Herodotus,, 
however, had divided the people of Egypt into seven castes,, 
namely priests, soldiers, herdsmen, swineherds, tradesmen, 
interpreters, and steersmen ; and Megasthen^s may theref ore- 
have taken it for granted that there were seven castes in 
India. It is a curious fact that, from the time of Alexander's 
expedition to a comparatively recent date, geographers 
and others have continually drawn analogies between Egypt 
and India." — Wheeler's Hist, oflndiaj vol. III. p. 192, note 
**-*«. Conf. Fragm. xxxvi. 

t For some remarks on this point see Blochmann's tcanst* 
ktioa of the Atn-i-Akbari, p. 118. 



Digitized by 



Google 



45 



also decide cases in which foreigners are con- 
cerned, with the greatest care, and come down 
sharply on those who take unfair advantage of 
them. [What we have now said regarding 
India and its antiquities will snfiice for onr pre- 
sent purpose.] 

BOOK I. 
Fbagm. II. 

Arr. Eioped. Alex. V. 6. 2-11. 

Of the Boundaries of India, its General 
Character, and its Rivers. % 

According to Eratosthenes, and Megasthenes 
who lived with Siburtios the satrap of 
Arachosia, and who, as he himself tells us, 
often visited San d r ako 1 1 o s§ the king of the 
Indians, India forms the largest of the four parts 
into which Southern Asia is divided, while 
the smallest part is that region which is includ- 
ed between the Euphrates and our own sea. 
The two remaining parts, which are separated 
from the others by the Euphrates and the 
Indus, and lie between these rivers, are scarcely 
of sufficient size to be compared with India, 
even should they be taken both together. The 
same writers say that India is bounded on its 

t Conf. Epit. ad init 

§ The name of Chandragnpta is written by the Greeks 
Sandrokotfcos, Sandrakottas, Sandrakottos, Androkottos, 
and (best) Sandrokuptos. Cf . Schlegel, Bihh Ind, 1. 245.— 
Schwanbeck, p. 12, n. 6. 



Digitized by 



Google 



46 



eastern side, right onwards to the south, by the 
great ocean ; that its northern frontier is formed 
by the Kankasos range as far as the junction of 
that range with Tauros ; and that the boundary 
towards the west and the north-west, as far as 
the great ocean,^ is formed by the river Indus. 
A considerable portion of India consists of a 
level plain, and this, as they conjecture, has 
been formed from the alluvial deposits of the 
river, — inferring this from the fact that in other 
countries plains which are far away from the 
sea are generally formations of their respective 
rivers, so that in old times a country was even 
called by the name of its river. As an instance, 
there is the so-called plain of the H e rm o s — ^a 
river in Asia (Minor), which, flowing from the 
Mount of Mother DindymSn^, falls into the sea 
near the JEolian city of Smyrna. There is also 
the Lydian plain of the Kaiistros, named 
after that Lydian river ; and another, that of the 
K a 1 k o s, in Mysia ; and one also in Karia, — 
that of the M a i a n d r os, which extends even to 
Miletos, which is an Ionian city. [As for Egypt, 
both the historians Herodotus and Hekataios (or 
at any rate the author of the work on Egypt if 
he was other than Hekataios) alike agree in de« 
Glaring it to be the gift of the Nile, so that that 
country was perhaps even called after the river ; 
for in early times Aigyptos was the name of 
the river which now-a-days both the Egyptians 
and other nations call the N i 1 e, as the words 



Digitized by 



Google 



47 



of Homer clearly prove, when lie says that 
Menelaos stationed his ships at the month of 
the river Aigyptos. If, then, there is bnt a 
single river in each plain, and these rivers, 
though by no means large, are capable of 
forming, as they flow to the sea, much new land, 
by carrying down silt from the uplands, where 
their sources are, it would be unreasonable to 
reject the belief in the case of India that a great 
part of it is a level plain, and that this plain is 
formed from the silt deposited by the rivers, 
seeing that the Hermos, and the Kaustros, and 
the Kaikos, and the Maiandros, and all the many 
rivers of Asia which &Jlinto the Mediterranean, 
even if united, would not be fit to be compared 
in volume of water with an ordinary Indian 
river, and much less with the greatest of them 
all, the Ganges, with which neither the Egyp- 
tian 17 lie, nor the Danube which flows 
through Europe, can for a moment be compared. 
Nay, the whole of these if combined all into 
one are not equal even to the Indus, which is 
already a large river whejre it rises from its 
fountains, and which after receiving as tribu- 
taries fifteen rivers all greater than those of 
Asia, and bearing off from its rival the honour 
of giving name to the country, falls at last into 
the sea.''^ 



• fiftrafeo, XV. 1. 32, p. 700.— [All the rivers mentioned 
(the last of which is the Hnpanis) unite in one, the Indus.] 
They say that fifteen considerable rivers, in all, flow into it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



48 



Fkagm. III. 

Arr. Indica, II. 1. 7. 

Of the Boundaries of IncUa.f 

(See translation of Arrian.) 

Fragm. IV. 
Strabo, XV. i. 11,— p. 689. 
Of the Boundaries and Extent of India,^ 
India is bounded on the north by the extre- 
mities of T a u r o s, and from A r i a n a to the 

t Conf . Epit. 1, and for notes on the same see Indian 
Antiqua/ryy vol. V. p. 330. — Ed. 

X Conf. Epit. 1, 2. Pliny {Hist. Nat. VI. 21. 2) states that 
India extends from north to south 28,150 thousand paces. 
This number, though it is not exactly equal to 22,300 stadia, 
but to 22,800, nevertheless approaches the number given by 
Megasthends nearer than any other. From the numbers 
which both Arrian (Ind. iii. 8) and Strabo (pp. 68-69, 690) 
give, Diodorus differs remaikably, for he says the breadth 
extends to 28,000, and the length to 32,000 stadia. It 
would be rash to deny that Megasthen^s may also have 
indicated the larger numbers of Diodorus, for Arrian 
{Ind. iii. 7-8) adds to the number the words " where 
shortesif' aad" where na/rrowest ;" and Strabo (p. 689) 
has added to the expression of the breadth the words " at 
the shortest^* and, referring to Megasthen6s and Deima- 
choB, says distinctly ** who state that in some places the 
distance from the southern sea is 20,000 stoma, and in 
others 30,000 (pp. 68-69). There can be no doubt, however, 
that Megasthen^s regarded the smaller, and D^imachos 
the larger number as correct ; for the larger seemed to 
Arrian unworthy of mention, and Strabo (p. 690) says 
decidedly, " Megasthen^s and DSimachos incline to he 
more moderate in thevr estimate, for according to them 
the distance from the southern sea to Caucasus is over 
20,000 stadia : DHmachos, however, allows that the dis- 
tance in some places exceeds 30,000 stadia" ! by which he 
quite excludes Megasthen^s from this opinion. And at 

E. 72, where he mentions the 30,000 stadia of D^imachos, 
e does not say a word of Megasthenes. But it must be 
certain that 16,000 stadia is the only measure Megasthen^ 
gave of the breadtii of India. For not only Strabo (p. 689) 



Digitized by 



Google 



49 



Eastern Sea by the mountains which are variously 
called by the natives of these regions P a r a p a- 
m i s o s, and H em 6 d o s, and H i m a o s,§ and 
other names, but by the Macedonians Kaa- 
k as OS. II The boundao'y on the west is the 
river I n d n s, but the southern and eastern sides, 
which are both much greater than the others, 
runout into the Atlantic Ocean.^ The shape of 
the country is thus rhombo'idal, since each of 
the greater sides exceeds its opposite side by 
3000 stadia, which is the length of the pro- 
montory common to the south and the east 
coast, which projects equally in these two direc- 
tions. [The length of the western side, measured 
from the Kaukasian mountains to the southern 



and A man {Ind. iii. 7) have not qnoted a larger number 
from Megasthenes, but Hipparchos also (Strabo, p. 69),— 
•where lie shows that Patrokles is tmworthy of confidence, 
becanse he has given smaller dimensions for India than 
Megasthenes — only mentions the measure of 16,000 stadia ; 
where, for what Hipparchos wanted, the greatest number 
was the most suitable for his proof. — I think the numbers 
were augmented because Megasthenes regarded as Indian, 
Kabul and that part of Ariana which Chandragupta had 
taken from Seleukos ; and on the north the frontier nafions 
TJttarakuras, which he mentions elsewhere. What Megas- 
thenes said about^ the breadth of India remained fixed 
throughout the whole geography of the Greeks, so that not 
even Ptolemy, who says India extends 16,800 stadia, differs 
much from it. But his measure of length has either been 
rejected by all, for fear of opposing the ancient opinion 
that the torrid zone could not be inhabited, or (like Hip- 
parchos) erroneously carried much too far to the north.— 
Schwanbeck, pp. 29, 30, n. 24. 

§ Schmieder suggests I/xaos in Arrian. 
II i.e. The Himalayas. 

^ The world was anciently regarded as an island sur- 
rounded by the Atlantic Sea. 



Digitized by 



Google 



50 



sea along tbe coarse of tbe river Indns to its 
mouths, is said to bo 13,000 stadia, so that the 
eastern side opposite, with the addition of the 
3000 stadia of the promontory, will be some- 
where aboat 16,000 stadia. This is the breadth 
of India where it is both smallest and greatest.] 
The length from west to east as far as Pali* 
b o t h r a can bo stated with greater certainty^ 
for the royal road which leads to that city has 
been measured by schoeni, and is in length 10,000 
stadia.* The extent of the parts beyond can 
only be conjectured from the time taken to 
make voyages from the sea to Palibothra 
by the Ganges, and may be about 6000 stadia. 
The entire length, computed at the shortest, 
will be 16,000 stadia. This is the estimate of 
Eratosthenes, who says he derived it principally 
from the authoritative register of the stages 
on the Royal Roid. Herein Megasthenes agrees 

• All the texts read di<rfivpiav instead of fivpioav. In 
all the MSS. of Strabo also wo read (rxoiviois, and in 
Arrian, who extracts the same passage from Megasthenes, 
everywhere axoivois, Thongh there is nothing to blame 
in either lection, yet it is easier to change (rxoivois than 
axoiVLOis, for Strabo may have been snrprised to find the 
Greek schoenus in use also in India. The schoenus, how- 
ever, which with Eratosthenes i^ a measure of 40 stadia 
(Plin. Hist. Nat XII. 80), coincides precisely with the Indian 
y6jana of four kroias. I do not forget that usually double 
this length is assigned to the y^ja^nob, but also that it is 
shorter than the Hindus reckon it {As. Res. vol. V. p. 105), 
and also by the Chinese pilgrims {Foe-koite-ki, 87-86), and 
by Megasthenes himself, in Strabo (p. 708, Fragm. xxxiv. 3), 
from which it seems certain that ten stadia are equal to 
some Indian measure which cannot be a smaller one than 
the ftrdia.— Schw. p. 27, n. 23. 



Digitized by 



Google 



61 



with him. [Patrokles, however, makes the length 
less bj 1000 stadia.] Conf. Ait. Ind, iii. 1-5. 

FftAaM. V. 

Strabo, II. i. 7,— p. 69. 
Of the Size of India, 
Again, Hipparchos, in the 2nd volnme of his 
commsntary, charges Eratosthenes himself with 
throwing discredit on Patrokles for differing 
from M3gasthen^3 abont the length of India on 
its northern side, Megasthen^s making it 16,000 
stadia^ and Patrokles 1000 less. 

Fragm. VI. 
Strabo, XV. i. 12,— pp. 689-690. 
Of the Size of India. 
[From this, one can readily see' how the ac- 
connts of the other writers vary from one an- 
other. Thus Kt^sias says th^ India is not of 
less size than the rest of Asia ; On^sikritos 
regards it as the third part of the habitable 
world; and Nearchos says it takes one four 
months to traverse the plain only.] Megasthenfis 
and Deimachos incline to ba more moderate 
in their estimate, for according to them the 
distance from the Sonthern Sea to Kankasos 
is over 20,000 stadia. — [Deimachos, however, 
allows that the distance in soma places exceeds 
80,000 stadia. Of these notice has been taken 
in an earlier part of the work.] 



Digitized by 



Google 



52 



Feagm. VII. 

Strabo, II. i. 4,— pp. 68-69. 
Of the Size of India. 
Hipparclibs controverts this view, urging the 
futility of the proofs on which it rests. Patro- 
kl^s, he says, is unworthy of trust, opposed as 
lie is by two competent authorities, Deimachos 
and Megasthenes, who state that in some places 
the distance from the southern sea is 20,000 
stadia, and in others 30,000. Such, he says, is 
the account they give, and it agrees with the an- 
qient charts of the country. 

Fragm. VIII. 

Axr. Indica, III. 7-8. 
Of the Size of India. 
With Megasthenes the breadth of India is its 
extent from east to west, though this is called 
by others its length. His account is that the 
breadth at shortest is 16,000 stadia, and its 
length — ^by which he means its extent from 
north to south — is at the narrowest 22,300 
stadia. 

Fragm. IX. 

Strabo, II. i. 19,— p. 76. 

Of the setting of the Bear, and shadows falling 

in contrary directions. f 

Again, he [Eratosthenes] wished to show the 
ignorance of Deimachos, and his want of a 

t Oozif. Epit. 8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



63 



practical knowledge of such subjects, evidenced 
as it was by his thinking that India lay between 
the autumnal equinox and the winter tropic, 
and by his contradicting the assertion of Me- 
gasthen^s that in the southern parts of India 
the constellation of the Bear disappeared from 
view, and shadows fell in opposite directions, J — 
phenomena which he assures us are never seen 
in India, thereby exhibiting the sheerest igno- 
rance. He does not agree in this opinion, but 
accuses Deimachos of ignorance for asserting 
that the Bears do nowhere in India disappear 
from sight, nor shadows fall in opposite direc- 
tions, as Megasthenes supposed. 
Fragm. X. 

PHny, Hist. Nat VI. 22. 6. 
Of the Setting of the Bear. 
Next [to the P r a s i i] in the interior are the 
M o n e d e s and the S u a r i, to whom belongs 
Mount M a 1 e u s, on which shadows fall towards 
the north in winter, and in summer to the south, 
for six months alternately. § The Bears, Baeton 

X Conf. Diod. II. 35, PHn. Hist. Nat. VI. 22. 6. The 
writers of Alexander's time who affirmed similar things 
were Nearchos and Ondsikritos, and Baoto who exceeded 
all bounds. Conf. Lassen, Instit. Ling. Prac. Append, p. 2. 
— Schwanb. p. 29. 

§ " The Mandali would seem to be the same people as 
the Monedes of Pliny, who with the Saari, occupied 
the inland country to the south of the Palibothri. As this 
is the exact position of the country of the Miindas and Suars, 
I think it quite certain that they must be the same race as 
the Monedes and Suari of Pliny. In another passage 
Pliny mentions the Mandei and MaUi as occupying the 
country between the Calingsa q^d the Ganges. Amongst 
the Malli there was a mountain named Mallus, which 



Digitized by 



Google 



54 



says, in that part of the country are only once 
visible in the course of the year, and not for 
more than fifteen days. Megasthenes says that 
this takes place in many parts of India. 
Conf. SoUn, 52. 13 :— 
Beyond Palibothra is Mount Maleus, on 
which shadows fall in winter towards the north, 
and in summer towards the south, for six 
months alternately. The North Pole is visible in 
that part of the country once in the course of the 
year, and not for longer than fifteen days, as 
Baeton informs us, who allows that this occurs in 
many parts of India. 

Feagm. XI. 

Strabo, XV. i. 20,— p. 693. 

Of the Fertility of India,\\ 

Megasthenes indicates the fertility of India 

by the fact of the soil producing two crops every 

year both of fruits and grain. [Eratosthen& 

writes to the same effect, for he speaks of a 

woTdd seem to be the same as the famous monat Maletis of 
the Monedes and Suari. I think it highly probable that 
both names may be intended for the celebrated mount 
Mandar, to the south of Bhfegulpur, -which is fabled to have 
been used by the gods and demons at the churning of the 
ocean. The Mandei I would identify with the inhabitants 
of the Mahfinadi river, which is the Maoada of Ptolemy. 
The Malli or Malei would therefore be the same people as 
Ptolemy's MandaljB, who occupied the right bank of the 
Ganges to the south of Palibothra, or they may be the peo- 
ple of the Rajmah&l hi Us who are called Maler 

The Suari of Pliny are the Sabanw of Ptolemy, 

and both m&y be identified with the aboriginal l^avaras 
or Suars, a wild race of woodcutters who live in the jun- 
gles without any fixed habitation." — Cunningham's Anc, 
Oeog. of India, pp. 508-9. 
II Conf. Epit. 5, 9. 



Digitized by 



Google 



55 



winter and a summer sowing, which both hare 
rain : for a year, he says, is never fonnd to be 
without rain at both those seasons, whence en-> 
sues a great abnndance, since the soil is always 
productive. Much fruit is produced by trees ; 
and the roots of plants, particularly of tall reeds, 
are sweet both by nature and by coction, since the 
moisture by which they are nourished is heated 
by the rays of the sun, whether it has fallen 
from the clouds or been drawn from the rivers. 
Eratosthenes uses here a peculiar expression : 
for what is called by others the ripening of fruits 
and the juices of plants is called among the 
Indians coction, which is as effective in producing 
a good flavour as the coction by fire itself. To 
the heat of the water the same writer ascribes 
the wonderful flexibility of the branches of trees, 
from which wheels are made, as also the fact of 
there being trees on which wool grows. ^] 
Conf. Eratostli. op. Strabo. XV. i. 13,— p. 690 :— 
From the vapours arising from such vast 
rivers, and from the Etesian winds, as Eratos- 
thenes states, India is watered by the summer 
rains, and the plains are overflowed. During 
these rains, accordingly, flax* is sown and 
millet, also sesamum, rice, and ho8morum,f and 
in the winter time wheat, barley, pulse, and 
other esculent fruits unknown to us. 

% Conf. Herod. II. 86. " Vellerajue utfoliis depectant 
Unuia Seres f— Virgil, Geor. ii. 121. — Falconer. 
• \ivov, perhaps the \ivov t6 dnh htvhpiav o£ Arrian. 
t ^o<r/iopoj*— Strabo XV. i. 18. 



Digitized by 



Google 



56 



Fragm. XII. 
Strabo, XV. i. 37— p. 703. 
Of some Wild Beasts of India, 
According to Megasthen^s the largest tigers 
ftre found among the Praeii, being nearly 
twice the size of the lion, and so strong that a 
tame tiger led by four men having seized a mule 
by the hinder leg overpowered it and dragged 
it to him. *The monkeys are larger than the 
largest dogs ; they are white except in the face, 
which is black, though the contrary is observed 
elsewhere. Their tails are more than two cubits 
in length. They are very tame, and not of a 
malicious disposition : so that they neither at- 
tack man nor steal. ^Stones are dug up which 
are of the colour of frankincense, and sweeter 
than figs or honey. *In some parts of the coun- 
try there are serpents two cubits long which 
have membranous wings like bats. They fly 
about by night, when they let fall drops of urine 
or sweat, which blister the skin of persons not 
on their guard, with putrid sores. There are 
also winged scorpions of an extraordinary size. 
"Ebony grows there. There are also dogs of 
great strength and courage, which will not let 
go their hold till water is poured into their 
nostrils : they bite so eagerly that the eyes 
of some become distorted, and the eyes of others 
fall out. Both a lion and a bull were held fast 
by a dog. The bull was seized by the muzzle, 
and died before the dog could be taken off. 



Digitized by 



Google 



# 



57 



Fragm. XIII. t 

iElian, Hist. Anim. XVII. 39. Conf . Fragm. XII. 2. 
Of hidian A^es, 

In the country of the P r a x i i,§ who are an 
Indian people, Megasthenes says there are apes 
not inferior in size to the largest dogs. They 

I Peagm. XIII. B. 

iElian, Hist Anim. XVI. 10. 

Oflndmn Apes. 

Among the P r a s i i in India there is found, they say, a 
species of apes of human-like intelligence, and which are 
to appearance about the size of Hurkanian dogs. Nature 
has furnished them with forelocks, which one ignorant of 
the reality would take to be artificial. Their chin, like 
that of a satyr, turns upward, and their tail is like the 
potent one of the lion. Their body is white all over except 
the face and the tip of the tail, which are of a reddish 
colour. They are very intelligent, and naturally tame. 
They are bred in the woods, where also they Uve, subsist- 
ing on the fruits which they find growing wild on the 
hills. They resort in great numbers to the suburbs of 
L a t a g e, an Indian city, where they eat rice which has 
been laid down for them by the king's orders. In fact, 
every day a ready-prepared meal is set out for their use. 
It is said that when they have satisfied their appetite they 
retire in an orderly manner to their haunts in the woods, 
without injuring a single .thing that comes in their way. 

§ The PrAchyas {i.e. Easterns) are called by Strabo, Arrian, 
and Pliny Ilpocrtoi, Pra^ii ; by Plutarch {Alex. 62) Upaitrioi, 
a name often used by ^lian also ; by Nikolaiis Damas. 
(ap. Stob. Floril. 37, 38) Upavtrioi ; by Diodorus (xvii. 93) 
Bprja-ioi; by Ourtius (IX. 2, 3) Pha/rrasii ; by Justin (xii. 8, 9) 
Proesides. Megasthenes attempted to approximate more 
closely to the Sanskpt PrAckyafior here he uses JIpa^iaKos. 
And it appears that Upd^ioi should be substituted for 
Upda-Loi in Stephan. Bjrzant., since it comes between the 
words Upd^iKos and npaa-. — Schwanbeck, p. 82, not. 6. 



Digitized by 



Google 



58 



have tails five cubits long, hair grows on their 
forehead, and they have luxuriant beards hang- 
ing down their breast. Their face is entirely- 
white, and all the rest of the body black. They 
are tame and attached to man, and not malicious 
by nature like the apes of other countries. 

Fragm. XIV. 
- ^lian, Hist Anim, XVI. 41. Conf. Fragm. XII. 4. 
Of Winged Scorpions and Serpents, 
Megasthenes says there are winged scorpions 
in India of enormous size, which sting Europeans 
and natives alike. There are also serpents 
which are likewise winged. These do not go 
abi*oad during the day, but by night, when they 
let fall urine, which if it lights upon any one's 
skin at once raises putrid sores thereon. Such 
is the statement of Megasthenes. 

Fragm. XV. 

Strabo, XV. i. 56,— pp. 710-711. 
Of the Beasts of India, and the Eeed. 

He (Megasthenfe) says there are monkeys, 
rollers of rocks, which climb precipices whence 
they roll down stones upon their pursuers. 
•Most animals, he says, which are tame with us 
are wild in India, and he speaks of horses which 
are one-homed and have heads like those of 
deer ; 'and also of reeds some of which grow 
straight up to the height of thirty orguicey\\ while 

II The orguia was foar cubiU, or equal to 6 feet 1 inch. 



• 



Digitized by 



Google 



59 



others grow along the ground to the length of 
fifty. They vary in thickness from three to six 
cubits in diameter. 

Fragm. XV.B. 

^lian, Hist Anvm. XVI. 20. 21. Conf. Fragm. XV. 2. 1. 

Of some Beasts of Indio,, 

(20.) In certain districts of India (I speak of 
those which are most inland) they say there are in- 
accessible mountains infested by wild beasts, and 
which are also the haunts of animals like those of 
our own country except that they are wild ; for 
even sheep, they say, run wild there, as well as 
dogs and goats and oxen, which roam about at 
their own pleasure, being independent and free 
from the dominion of the herdsman. That their 
number is beyond calculation is stated not only 
by writers on India, but also by the learned men 
of the country, among whom the Brachmans 
deserve to be reckoned, whose testimony is to the 
same efPect. It is also said that there exists in 
India a one-homed animal, called by the natives 
the Kartazdn, It is of the size of a full-grown 
horse, and has a crest, and yellow hair soft as 
wool; It is furnished with very good legs and is 
very fleet. Its legs are jointless and formed like 
those of the elephant, and it has a tail .like a 
swine's. A horn sprouts out from between its 
eyebrows, and this is not straight, but curved 
into the most natural wreaths, and is of a black 
colour. It is said to be extremely sharp, this 
horn. The animal, as I learn, has a voice beyond 
all example loud-ringing and dissonant. It allows 
other animals to approach it, and is good- 



Digitized by 



Google 



60 



natured towards them, though they say that with 
its congeners it is rather quarrelsome. The males 
are reported to have a natural propensity not only 
to fight among themselves, by butting with 
their horns, but to display a like animosity 
against the female, and to be so obstinate in their 
quarrels that they will not desist till a worsted 
rival is killed outright. But, again, not only is 
every member of the body of this animal endued 
with great strength, but such is the potency of 
its horn that nothing can withstand it. It loves 
to feed in secluded pastures, and wanders about 
alone, but at the rutting season it seeks the 
society of the female, and is then gentle towards 
her, — nay, the two even feed in company. The 
season being over and the female pregnant, the 
Indi&n Kartazdn again becomes ferocious and seeks 
solitude. The foals, it is said, are taken when 
quite young to the king of the P r a s i i, and are 
set to fight each other at the great public spec- 
tacles. No full-grown specimen is remembered 
to have ever been caught. 

(21.) The traveller who crosses the mountains 
which skirt that frontier of India which is most 
inland meets, they say, with ravines which are 
clothed with very dense jungle, in a district called 
by the Indians K o r o u d a.1f These ravines are 
said to be the haunts of a peculiar kind of animal 
shaped lil^e a satyr, covered all over with shaggy 
hair, and having a tail like a horse's, depending 
from its rump. If these creatures are left un- 
molested, they keep within the coppices, living on 
the wild fruits ; but should they hear the hunter's 



T V. L. KoKovvba, 



Digitized by 



Google 



61 



halloo and the baying of the hounds they dart up 
the precipices with incredible speed, for they are 
habituated to climbing the mountains. They 
defend themselves by rolling down stones on 
their assailants, which often kill those they hit. 
The most difficult to catch are those which roll 
- the stones. Some are said to have been brought, 
though with difficulty and after long intervals, to 
the F r a s i i, but these were either suffering from 
diseases or were females heavy with young, the 
former being too weak to escape, and the latter 
being impeded by the burden of the womb. — Conf. 
PUn. Hist. If at. VII. 2. 17. 

Fragm. XVI. 

PUny, Hist. Nat VIII. 14. 1. 

Of the Boa-Constrictor. 

According to Megasthen^s, serpents in India 

grow to such a size that they swallow stags and 

bulls whole. 

Solinus, 52. 33. 
So huge are the serpents that they swallow stags 
whole, and other animals of equal size. 

Fragm. XVII. 

u3Elian, Hist. Anim. VIII. 7. 
Of the Electric Eel 

I learn from Megasthenes that there is in the 
Indian Sea a small kind of fish which is never 
seen when alive, as it always swims in deep 
water, and only floats on the surface after it is 
dead. Should any one touch it he becomes faint 
and swoons, — nay, even dies at last. 



Digitized by 



Google 



62 



Fragm. XVIII. 

Pliny, Hist Nat VI. 24. 1. 
Of Taprohane,* 
Megasthenes says that Taprobane is 
separated from the mairdcmd by a river ; that 
the inhabitants are called Palaiogonoi,t and 
that their country is more productive of gold 
and large pearls than India. 
Solin. 53. 3. 
Taprobane is separated from India by a 

* This island has been known by many names : — 

1. Lank a. — ^The only name it goes by in Sanskyit, and 
quite unknown to the Greeks and Romans. 

2. Simundu or Palesimundu. — Probably a Greek 
form of the Sanakyit PdU-Simanta. This name had gone 
out of use before the time of Ptolemy the Geographer. 

.3. Taprobane. — SupiKJsed to represent the Sanskrit 
TAmraparni (* red-leaved' or 'copper-coloured sand'), 
a slightly altered form of the P&U Tambapan9l, which 
is found in the inscription of Asoka on the Gim&r rock. 
Vide (mte, vol. V. p. 272. 

4. Salice (perhaps properly Saline), Serendivus, 
Sirlediba, Serendib, Zeilan, Ceylon. These are 
all considered to be derivatives from S i n a 1 a, the P&li 
form of Sinhala, *the abode of Hons.* The affix dih 
represents the Sanskpt cMpa, * an island.' 

t Lassen has tried to accoitnt for the name P&laiogonoi 
thus {Dissert, de insula Taproh. p. 9) :— " We must suppose 
that Megasthenes was acquainted with the Indian myth 
that the first iuhabitants of the island were said to have 
been B/Akshasas or giants, the sons of the progenitors of 
the world, whom he might not inaptly call Palaiogonoi." 
Against this it may be remarked that, by this unusual term 
and so uncommon, Megasthenes meant to name the nation, 
not describe it ; and next that Megasthenes is not in the 
habit of translating names, but of rendering them accord- 
ing to sound with some degree of paronomasia ; lastly, that, 
shortly after, we find the name of Taprobane and of its capital 
Ila\ai(nfJLOvvboSy quite like to IlaXaioyovot, Accordingly as 
Lassen explains HaXaifrifiovpdoSj the name of the capital, by 
the Sanskrit PAU-sim&fita (* head of the sacred doctrine'), 
I would also prefer to explain the name of the Palaiogonoi 
from the Sanskrit PdU-jands {i.e. ' men of the sacred doc- 
trine').— Schwanbeck, p. 38, n. 35. 



Digitized by 



Google 



03 



river flowing between : for one part of it abounds 
with wild beasts and elephants much larger than 
India breeds, and man cleums the other part. 

Fragm. XIX. 
Antigon. Caryst. 647. 
Of Marme Trees. 
Megasthen^s, the author of the IndiJca, men- 
tions that trees grow in the Indian Sea. 
Fragm. XX. 
Arr. Ind. 4. 2-13. 

Of the In&us and the Oanges.X 

See translation of Arrian, 

Fragm. XX.B. 
PUny. Hist. Nat. VI. 21. 9—22. 1. 

The Prinas§ and the Gain as (a tributary 
of the Ganges) are both navigable rivers. The 
tribes which dwell by the Ganges are the C a 1 i n- 
g 86,11 nearest the sea, and higher up the Mandei, 
also the Malli, among whom is Mount Mallus, 
the boundary of all that region being the Ganges. 
Some have asserted that this river, like the Nile, 
rises from unknown sources, and in a similar way 
waters the country it flows through, while others 
trace its source to the Skythian mountains. Nine- 
teen rivers are said to flow into it, of which, be- 

X Conf. Epit. 15-19, and Notes on Arrian, Ind. Ant. vol. 
V. pp. 331, 332. 

§ V. L. Pumas. 

II A great and widely difihsed tribe settled mainly be- 
tween the Mah&nadi and the God&vari. Their capital was 
Partualis (called by Ptolemy Kalligra), on the 
Mah&nadi, higher np tluui the site of Katak. The name is 

S reserved inKoringa, a great port at the month of the 
iod&var!. 



Digitized by 



Google 



64 



sides tho^e already mentioned, the Condochates,1[ 
Erannoboas, Oosoagus, and Sonus are navigable. 
According to other accounts, it bursts at once with 
thundering roar from its fountain, and tumbling 
down a steep and rocky channel lodges in a lake 
as soon as it reaches the level plain, whence it 
issues forth with a gentle current, being nowhere 
less than eight miles broad, while its mean 
breadth is a hundred stadia, and its least depth 
twenty fathoms.* 

Solin. 52. 6-7. 
In India the largest rivers are the Ganges 
and the I n d u s, — the Ganges, as some maintain, 
rising from uncertain sources, and, like the Nile, 

^ y. LL. Ganncam, Yamam. 

* " The Bh&girat! (which we shall here regard as the 
tme Ganges) firat comes to light near Gangotrl, in the terri- 
tory of Garhw&l, m lat. 30° 54', long. 79° 7", issuing from 
under a very low arch, at the base of a great snow-bed, 
estimated to be 300 feet thick, which lies between the lofty 
mountains termed St. Patrick, St. George, and the Pyramid, 
the two higher havinjp; elevations above the sea, respectively, 
of 22,798 and 22,654 feet, and the other, on the opposite side, 
having an elevation of 21,379. From the brow of this curious 
wall of snow, and immediately above the outlet of the 
stream, large and hoary icicles depend. They are formed 
by the freezing of the melted snow-water at me top of the 
bed ; for in the middle of the day the sun is powerful, and 
the vTater produced by its action fallB over this place in 
cascade, but is frozen at night .... At Stikbi the river 
m&y be said to break though the ' Him&laya Proper,' and 
the elevation of the waterway is here 7)606 feet. At 
DevprAg it is joined on the left side by tiie Alaknanda. . . 

From Devpr&g the united stream is now called the 

Ganges Its descent by the Dehra Dtaa. is rather 

rapid to Ha^dwftr .... sometimes called Gangddwftra, or 
* t^e gate of the Ganges,' being situate on its western or 
right bank at the southern base of the Siv&lik range, here 
intersected by a ravine or gorge by which the river, finally 
leavinif the mountainous region, conmiences its course over 
the plains of Hindustftn. The breadth of the river in the 
rainy season. . is represented to be a full xxuleJ* '^Thornton, 



Digitized by 



Google 



65 



oyerflowing its banks ; while others think that it 
rises in the Skythian mountains. In India there 
is also the Hupanis,t a very noble river, which 
formed the limit of Alexander's march, as tKe 
altars set up on its banks testify. The least 
breadth of the Ganges is eight miles, and the 
greatest twenty. Its depth where least is fully 
one hundred feet. 

Conf. Fragm. XXV. 1. 

" Some say that the least breadth is thirty stadia, 

but others only three; while Megasthenes says 

that the mean breadth is a hundred stadia, and 

its least depth twenty orguias. 

Fragm. XXI. 

Arr. Ind. 6. 2-8. 

Of the River Silaa.X 

See translation of Arrian. 

Fragm. XXII. 

Boissonade, Anecd. Orasc. I. p. 419. 

Of the River Silas, 

There is in India a river called the Silas, 

named after the fountain from which it flows, 

on which nothing will float that is thrown into 



t The same as the Hnphasis or j 

X Strab. 703, Diod. II. 37> and afterwards an anonymous 
writer whom Ruhnken (ad CalUmach. fraam. p. 448) has 
praised, and whose account may be read in Boisson. Anecd. 
QroBC. I. 419. The name is written StXXay in Diodorus, 
in Strabo StXtas, but best SiXo?, in the epitome of Strabo 
and in the Anecd. Qrosc. Bahr, 369, has collected the 
passages from Kt^sias. Lassen has also illustrated this 
fable {Zeitschrift. II. 63) from Indian literature :— " The 
Indians think that the river Silas is in the north, that it 
petrifies everything plunged in it, whence everything sinks 
and nothing swims." (Conf. MahdibhAr. II. 1858.) ^iU 
means * a stone.' — Schw. p. 37, n. 82. 



Digitized by 



Google 



66 



it, but everything sinks to the bottom, contrary 
to the nsual law. 

fragm. xxm. 

Strabo, XV. i. 38,— p. 708. 
Of the River Silas. 
(Megasthenes says) that in the monntainons 
country is a river, the S i 1 a s, on the waters of 
which nothing will float. Demokritos, who 
had travelled over a large part of Asia, disbe- 
lieves this, and so does Aristotle. 
Fragm. XXIY. 
Arr. Ind. 5. 2. 
Of fhe Number of Indian Bivers, 
See translation of Arrian. 

BOOK II. 
Fragm. XXV. 

Strab. XV. i. 35. 36,— p. 702. 
Of the city Pataliputra.% 
According to Megasthenes the mean breadth 
(of the Ganges) is 100 stadia, and its least depth 
20 fathoms. At the meeting of this river and 
another is situated Palibothra, a city eighty stadia 
in length and fifteen in breadth. It is of the shape 
of a parallelogram, and is girded with a wooden 
wall, pierced with loopholes for the dis- 
charge of arrows. It has a ditch in front for 
defence and for receiving the sewage of the city. 
The people in whose country this city is situated 
is the most distinguished in all India, and is called 
the Prasii. The king, in addition to his family 
§ Conf. Epit 36. 



Digitized by 



Google 



67 



name, must adopt the surname of Palibotliros, 
as Sandrakottos, for instance, did, to whom 
Megasthenes was sent on an embassy. [This 
custom also prevails among the Parthians, for 
all are called Araakai, though each has his own 
peculiar name, as Orodes, Phraates, or some 
other.] 

Then follow these words : — 

All the country beyond the Hupanis is allowed to ho very 
fertile, but little is accurately known regarding it. Partly 
from ignorance and the remoteness of its situation, every- 
thing about it is exaggerated or represented as marvellous : 
for instance, there are the stories of the gold-digging ants, 
of animals and men of peculiar shapes, and possessing 
wonderful faculties ; as the Seres, who, they say, are so 
long-lived that they attain an age beyond that of two 
hundred years. || They mention also an aristocratical fonn 
of government consisting of five thousand councillors, each 
of whom furnishes the state with an elephant. 

According to Megasthenes the largest tigers 
are found in the country of the Prasii, &c. (Cf. 
Fragm. XII.) 

Pragm. XXVI. 

Arr. Ind, 10. 
Of Fataliputra and the Manners of the Indians, 
It is farther said that the Indians do not 
rear monuments to the dead, but consider the 

II This was not the name of any particular nation, but 
was vaguely used to designate the inhabitants of the re- 
gion producing silk, of which S^r is the name in Chinese 
and in Japanese. The general opinion places this region 
(S6rica) in Eastern Mongolia and the north-east of China, 
but it has also been sought for in Eastern Turkest/ln, 
in the Himalaya towards the sources of the Ganges, in 
Assam, and even in Pegu. The name is first met with in 
Ktesias. 



Digitized by 



Google 



68 



virtues which men have displayed iu life, and 
the songs in which their praises are celebrated, 
sufficient to preserve their memory after death. 
But of their cities it is said that the number is 
so great that it cannot be stated with precision, 
but that such cities as are situated on the banks 
of rivers or on the sea-coast are built of wood 
instead of brick, being meant to last only for a 
time, — so destructive are the heavy rains which 
pour down, and the rivers also when they over- 
flow their banks and inundate the plains, — while 
those cities which stand on commanding situa- 
tions and lofty eminences are built of brick and 
mud; that the greatest city in India is that 
which is called Palimbothra, in the domi- 
nions of the Prasians, where the streams of 
the Erannoboas and the Ganges unite, — 
the Ganges being the greatest of all rivers, and 
the Erannoboas being perhaps the third largest 
of Indian rivers, though greater than the great- 
est rivers elsewhere ; but it is smaller than the 
Ganges where it falls into it. Megasthen^s 
informs us that this city stretched in the in- 
habited quarters to an extreme length on each 
side of eighty stadia, and that its breadth was 
fifteen stadia, and that a ditch encompassed it 
all round, which was six hundred feet in breadth 
and thirty cubits in depth, and that the wall 
was crowned with 670 towers and had four-and- 
sixty gates. The same writer tells us farther 
this remarkable fact about India, that all the 



Digitized by 



Google 



69 



Indians are free, and not one of them is a slave. 
The Lakedadmonians and the Indians are 
here so &>r in agreement. The Lakedaamonians, 
however, hold the H e 1 o t s as slaves, and these 
Helots do servile labour ; bnt the Indians do 
not even nse aliens as slaves, and much less a 
countryman of their own. 

fragm. xxvn. 

Strab. XV. i. 53-56— pp. 709-10. 
Of .the Manners of the Indians, 
The Indians all live frugally, especially when 
in camp. They dislike a great undisciplined 
multitude, and consequently they observe good 
order. Theft is of very rare occurrence. Me- 
gasthenSs says that those who were in the 
camp of Sandrakottos, wherein lay 400,000 
men, found that the theffcs reported on any one 
day did not exceed the value of two hundred 
drachmae, and this among a people who have 
no written laws, . but are ignorant of writing, 
and must therefore in all the business of life 
trust to memory. They live, nevertheless, hap- 
pily enough, being simple in their manners 
and firugal. They never drink wine except at 
sacrifices.^ Their beverage is a liquor com- 
posed from rice instead of barley, and their 
food is principally a rice-pottage.* The sim- 
plicity of their laws and their contracts is 

% This wine was probably Soma jtdce. 
* Oairy and rice, no donbt. 



Digitized by 



Google 



70 



proved by tlie fact that tliey seldom go to law. 
They have no suits about pledges or deposits, 
nor do they require either seals or witnesses, 
but make their deposits and confide in each 
other. Their houses and property they gene- 
rally leave unguarded. These things indicate 
that they possess good, sober sense ; but other 
things they do which one cannot approve : for 
instance, that they eat always alone, and that 
they have no fixed hours when meals are to be 
taken by all in common, but each one eats when 
he feels inclined. The contrary custom would 
be better for the ends of social and civil 
life. 

Their favourite mode of exercising the body 
is by friction, applied in various ways, but espe- 
cially by passing smooth ebony rollers over the 
skin. Their tombs are plain, and the mounds 
raised over the dead lowly. In contrast to the 
general simplicity of their style, they love finery 
and ornament. Their robes are worked in gold, 
and ornamented with precious stones, and they 
wear also flowered garments made of the finest 
muslin. Attendants walking behind hold up 
umbrellas over them : for they have a high regard 
for beauty, and avail themselves of every de- 
vice to improve their looks. Truth and virtue 
they hold alike in esteem. Hence they accord 
no special privileges to the old unless they 
possess superior wisdom. They marry many 
wives, whom they buy from their parents, giving 



Digitized by 



Google 



71 



in exchange a yoke of oxen. Some they marry 
hoping to find in them willing helpmates ; and 
others for pleasure and to fill their honses with 
children. The wives prostitute themselves un- 
less they are compelled to be chaste. No one 
wears a crown at a sacrifice or libation, and 
they do not stab the victim, but strangle it, so 
that nothing mutilated, but only what is entire, 
may be presented to the deity. 

A person convicted of bearing false witness 
suffers mutilation of his extremities. He who 
maims any one not only suffers in return the 
loss of the same limb, but his hand also is cut 
off". If he causes an artizan to lose his hand or 
his eye, he is put to death. The same writer 
says that none of the Indians employ slaves ; 
[but Onesikritos says that this was peculiar to 
that part of the country over which Musikanos 
ruled.] t 

The care of the king's person is entrusted to 
women, who also are bought from their pa- 
rents.! The guards and the rest of the soldiery 
attend outside the gates. A woman who kills 
the king when drunk becomes the wife of his 
successor. The sons succeed the father. The 
king may not sleep during the daytime, and 
by night he is obliged to change his couch from 



t His kingdom lay in Siudliu, along the banks of the 
Indus, -and lus capital was probably near Bakkar. 

X This was not unknown in native courts of later times. 
Conf . Idrisi'g: account of the Balhara king. 



Digitized by 



Google 



72 



time to time, with a view to defeat plots against 
his life.§ 

The king leaves his palace not only in time 
of war, but also for the purpose of judging causes. 
He then remains in court for the whole day, 
without allowing the business to be interrupted, 
even though the hour arrives when he must 
needs attend to his person, — that is, when he is 
to be rubbed with cylinders of wood. He con- 
tinues hearing cases while the friction, which is 
performed by four attendants, is still proceeding. 
Another purpose for which he leaves his palace 
is to offer sacrifice ; a third is to go to the 
chase, for which he departs in Bacchanalian 
fashion. Crowds of women surround him, and 
outside of this circle spearmen are ranged. The 
road is marked off with ropes, and it is death, 
for man and woman alike, to pass within the 
ropes. Men with drums and gongs lead the 
procession. The king hunts in the enclosures 
and shoots arrows from a platform. At his 
side stand two or three armed women. If he 
hunts in the open grounds he shoots from the 
back of an elephant. Of the women, some are 
in chariots, some on horses, and som^ even on 
elephants, and they are equipped with weapons 

§ ** The present king of Ava, who evidently belongs to 
the Indo-Chinese type, although he claims a Eshatriya 
origin, l0ads a life of seclnsion very similar to that of 
Sandrokottos. He changes his bedroom every night, as a 
safeguard against sudden treachery." (Wheeler*s Hist, of 
India, vol. III. p. 182, note.) 



Digitized by 



Google 



73 



of every kind, as if they were going on a cam- 
paign. || 

[These cnstoms are very strange when com- 
pared with onr own, bnt the following are still 
more so ; ] for Megasthen^ states that the 
tribes inhabiting the Kaukasos have intercourse 
with women in pnblic, and eat the bodies of 
their relatives,^ and that there are monkeys 
which roll down stones, Ac. (Fragm, XV, fol- 
lows, and then Fragm, XXIX,) 

feagm. xxvn. B. 

^lian. V. L. iv. 1. 
The Indians neither put out money at nsnry, 
nor know how to borrow. It is contrary to estab- 
lished usage for an Indian either to do or suffer a 
wrong, and therefore they neither make contracts 
nor require securities. Conf . Suid. F. Ivdoi, 

Fbagm. XXV1I.0. 

Nicol. Damasc. 44; Stob. 8erm, 42. 

Among the Indians one who is unable to recover 

a loan or a deposit has no remedy at law. All 

the creditor can do is to blame himself /or trusting 

a rogue, 

Fbagm. xxyii.D. 

Niool. Damasc. 44 ; Stob. Serm, 42, 
He who causes an artisan to lose his eye or his 
hand is put to death. If one is guilty of a very 
heinous offence the king orders his hair to be 

II In the drama of Bakv/ntaZd, B^ Dnshyanta is re- 
preeented as attended in the chase by Yavana women, yritix 
bows i»their hands, and wearing garlands of wild flowers. 

f Herodotxis (bk. iii. 38, 99, 101) has noted the exist- 
ence of both practices among certain Indian tribes. 



Digitized by 



Google 



74 



cropped, this being a puniBhment to the last de- 
gree infamous. 

Fragm. XXVIII. 

Athen. iv. p. 153. 

OS the Suppers of the IncUans, 

Me^rasthen^s, in the second book of his Inddlcay says that 

when the Indians are at supper a table is placed before 

each person, this being like a tripod. There is placed 

upon it a golden bowl, into which they first put rice, boifed 

as oUe would boil barley, and then they add many 'dainties 

prepared according to Indian receipts. 

Fbagm. XXIX* 

Strab. XV. i. 57— p. 711. 

Of fabulous tribes. 

But deviating into fables he says there are 
men five spans and even three spans in height, 
some of whom want the nose, having only two 
orifices above the mouth through which they ' 
breathe. * Against the men of three spans, war, 
as Homer has sung, is waged by the cranes, and 
also by partridges, which are as large as geese, f 

• Cf . Stxab. II. i. 9,— p. 70 :— D^imachos and Megas- 
thends are especially unworthy of credit. It is they who 
tell those stories about the men who sleep in their ears, 
the men without mouths, the men without nostrils, the 
men with one eye, the men with long legs, and the men 
with their toes turned backward. They renewed Homer's 
fable about the battle between the Cranes and the 
Pygmies, asserting that the latter were three spans in 
height. They told of the ants that dig for gold, of 
Fans with wedge-shaped heads, and of serpents swallow- 
ing down oxen and stags, horns and all, — ^the one author 
meanwhile accusing the other of falsehood, as Eratosthenes 
has remarked. 

t Ktdsias in his Indika mentions Pygmies as belonging 
to India. The Indians themselves considered them as be- 
longing to the race of the Eir&tsa, a barbarous people who 
inhabited woods and mountains and lived by hunting, and 
who were so diminutiYe that their name became a synonym 



Digitized by 



Google 



75 



These people collect and destroy the eggs of the 
cranes, for it is in their country the cranes lay 
their eggs^ and thus ihe eggs and the young 
cranes are not to be found anywhere else. 
Frequently a crane escapes having the brazen 
point of a weapon in Us hody, &oni wounds re- 
ceived in that country. ' Equally absurd is 
the account given of the E n 6t o k o i t a i,;( 



for dwarf. They were thougM to fight with vnltures and 
eagles. As they were of Mongolian origin, the Indians 
represented them with the distinctiye features of that race, 
but with their repnlsiveness exaggerated. Hence Megas- 
thenSs spoke of tiie Amukteres, men without noses, who 
had merely breathing-holes above the month. The Kirfitae 
are no doubt identical with the Scyrites (V. L. Syrictes) of 
Plinius and the Kirrhadai of the Perwlus Ma/ris ErythrcBt. 
X The Endtokoitai are caUed in Sanskrit JToma^prdva- 
romds, and are frequently referred to in the great epio 
poems — e.g. MahAhh. II. 1170, 1875. The opinion was 
universally prevalent among the Indians that barbarous 
tribes had large ears : thus not only are the KarnaprAva- 
rcumds mentioned, but also Ka/rmkAst LamhakamdLS,Mahd' 
kamds H.e. long or large eared)*, IJsMrakcvrnAs (i.e. camel- 
eared), OshtFiafccwTtAs {i.e. having the ears close to the Ups), 
FdmkamAs {i.e. having hands for ears). Schwanb. GQ. 
*' It is easy,** says Wheeler {Hist. Ind. vol. HI. p. 179), 
**for any one conversant with India to point out the 
origin of many of the so-called fables. The ants are not 
as big as foxes, but they are very extraordinary excavators. 
The stories of men pallia^ up trees, and usmg them as 
clubs, are common enough m the MahdibMrataj especially 
in the legends of the exploits of Bhima. Men do not 
have ears hanging down to their feet, but both men and 
women will occasionally elongate their ears after a very 
extraordinary fashion by thrusting articles through the 
lobe. «... If there was one story more than another 
which excited the wrath of Strabo, it was that of a 
people whose ears hung down to their feet. Yet the story 
IS still current in Hindust&n. BAbu Johari D&s says : — 
' An old woman once told me that her husband, a sepoy 
in the British army, had seen a people who slept on one ear, 
and covered themselves with the other.' {Domestic Mori' 
nersand Customs of the Hindus, BanAras, 1860.V* The story 
may be referred to the Himalayas. Fitch, who travelled 



Digitized by 



Google 



76 



of the wild men, and of other monsters. * The 
wild men conld not be bronght to Sandrakottos, 
for they refased to take food and died. Their 
heels are in front, and the instep and toes are 
turned backwards.§ * Some wwe bronght to the 
ccmrt who had no moaths and were tame. Thej 
dwell near the sonrces of the Ganges, and subsist 
on the sayour of roasted flesh and the perfumes 
of fruits and flowers, haying instead of mouths 
orifices through which they breathe. They are 
distressed with things of eyil smelly and ^ hence 
it is with diflGk5ulty they keep their hold on life^ 
especially in a camp. Referring ta the other 
monstrosities, the philosophers told him of the 
Okupedes, a people who in running conld leaye 
the horse behind ;|| 'of the Enoiokoitai, 
who had ears reaching down to their feet, so that 
they could sleep in then>, and were se strong that 
they could pull up trees and I^reak a bowstring, 
* Of others the M O'n omma t oi, who haye the 

in India aboot 1585, says that a people m Bhatda had ears 
a span long.'' 

§ These wild men are mentioned both by Stasias and 
Baeto. They were called Antipodes on account of the 
peculiar structure of their foot, and were reckoned among 
Ethiopian races, though they are often referred to in the 
Indian epics under the name FaSchAdangulajas, of which 
the ^i(r6obaxTv\oi of Megasthoids is an exact transla- 
tion. Vide Schwanb. 68. 

II ' Okupedes' is a transliteration into Gk^ek, with a slight 

change, of the Sanskrit Eka^padas, {* having one foot*), the 
name of a tribe of the Kirfttes noted for swiftness of foot, the 
quality indicated by the Greek term. The Monepodes are 
mentioned by Ktesias, who confounded them with the 
Skiapodes, the men who covered themselves with the shadow 
of their foot. 



Digitized by 



Google 



77 



ears of a dog, their one eye set in the middle of 
their forehead, the hair standing erect, and their 
breasts shaggy ; % of the Amnktdres also, a 
people without nostrils, who devour everything, 
eat raw meat, and are short-lived, and die before 
old age supervenes.* The upper part of the 
mouth protrudes far over the lower lip. ® With 
regard to the Hyperboreans, wHo live a 
thousand years, they give the same account as 
Simonid^s, Pindaros, and other mythological 
writers. t ^^ The story told by TimagenSs, that 

% What Megasthenda here mentions as the characteris- 
tios of a single tribe are by the Indians attribnted to several. 
The one-eyed men they are wont to call SkdksJids or eka- 
vilo-chomds — the men with hair standing erect, urdhvakeia, 
Indian Oycldpes even are mentioned nnder the name of 
LalM&kshdSt i.e. having one eye in the forehead: vide 
Schwanb. 70. 

• " That the Astorm are mentioned in the Indian books 
we cannot show so well as in the case of the Amukterea, 
whom Megasthends describes as iray^ayovs^ afAO(f>ay6vSf 
^o\iyoxpovi6vs. Nevertheless the verv words of the de- 
scription are a proof that he followed the narratives of the 
Indians, for the words nafw^ayoy, Ac by which he has 
described the Amnkt^res, are very rarely nsed in Oreek, 
and are translations of Indian words." Schwanb. 69. 

t Pindar, who locates the Hyperboreans somewhere about 
the months of the Ister, thns sings of them: — 

" Bnt who with ventarons conrse through wave or waste 
To Hyperborean haunts and wilds uutracedj 

E'er found his wondrous way ? 
There Perseus pressed amain, 

And 'midst the feast eutered their strange abode, 
Where hecatombs of asses shun 

To soothe the radiant god 
Astounded he beheld. Their rude solemnities, 

Their barbarous shouts, Apollo's heart delight : 
Laughing the rampant brute he sees 

Insult the solemn rite. 
Still their sights, their customs strange, 
Scare not the * Muse,' while all around 



Digitized by 



Google 



78 



showers fall of drops of copper, which are swept 
together, is a fable. ** Megasthen^s states — 
what is more open to belief, since the same is 

The dancing virgias range. 
And melting lyres and piercing pipes resonud. 

With braids of golden bays entwined 

Their soft resplendent locks they bind, 
And feast in bliss the genial honr : 

Nor f onl disease, nor wasting age. 

Visit the sacred race ; nor wars they wage, 
Nor toil for wealth or power." 
(10th Pythian ode, 11. 4& to 69, A. Moore's metrical ver- 
sion.) 

Megasthen^s had the penetration to perceive that the 
Greek fable of the Hyperboreans had an Indian source in 
the fables regarding the JJbta/rakv/rus. This word means 
literally the * Knru of the North/ * * The historic origin, ' ' says 
P. V. de Saint-Martin, "of the Sanskrit appellation TJUa- 
rakn/ru is unknown, but its acceptation never varies. In 
all the documents of Upavedic literature, in the §rreat poems, 
in the Pur&nas, — wherever, in short, the word is found, — it 
pertains to the domain of poetic and mythological geogra- 
phy, nttarakuru is situated in the uttermost regions of 
the north at the foot of the mountains which surround 
Mount M^ru, far beyond the habitable worlds It is the 
abode of demigods and holy Bishis whose lives extend to 
several thousands of years. All access to it is forbidden 
to mortals. Like the Hyperborean region of Western my- 
thologists, this too eiyoys the happy privilege of an eternal 
spring, equally exempt from excess of cold and excess of 
heat, and there the sorrows of the soul and the pains of 

the body are alike unknown It is clear enough 

that this land of the blest is not of our world. 

" In their intercourse with the Indians after the expedi- 
tion of Alexander, the Greeks became acquainted with 
these fictions of Br&hmaijic poetry, as well as with a good 
many other stories which made them look upon India as a 
land of prodigies. MegasthenSs, like Ktesias before him, 
had collected a great number of such stories, and either 
from his memoirs or from contemporary narratives, such 
as that of DMmachos, the fable of the Uttarakurus had 
spread to the West, since, from what Pliny tells us (vi. 
17, p. 316) one Amdm^tus had composed a treatise re- 
gardmg them analogous to that of Hecataaus regarding the 
Hyperboreans. It is certainly from this treatise of Amd- 
metus that Pliny borrows the two lines which he devotes 
to his Attacorse, * that a girdle of mountains warmed with 



Digitized by 



Google 



79 



the case in Iberia J — that the rivers carry down 
gold dust, and that a part of this is paid by 
way of tribute to the king. 

Fragm. XXX. 

Plin. Hist, Nat. VII. ii. 14-22. 

Of fabulous races. 

According to MegasthenSs, on a mountain called 

N u 1 o § there live men whose feet are turned 

thestm sheltered tliem from the blasts of noxious winds, and 
that they eigoyed, like the Hyperboreans, an eternal spring.' 
* Gens homiunm Attacomm, apricis ab omni noxio ai&ata 
seclusa coUibns, eadem, qua Hyperborei degunt, tem- 
perie.' (Plin. loc. cit. Ammianns Marcellinns, xxiii. 6, 64.) 
Wagner transfers this description to the Sires in general, 
(of whom the Attacoroe of Pliny form part), and some 
modern critics (Mannert, vol. IV. p. 250, 1875 ; Forhiger 
Handh. d'&r alien Qeogr. vol. II. p. 472, 1844) have be- 
lieved they could see in it a reference to the great wall 
of China.) We see from a host of examples besides this, that 
the poetic fables and popular legends of India had taken, 
in passing into the Greek narratives, an appearance of 
reaHty, and a sort of historical consistency." {E*tvde sur 
la Q^ographie Orecque et Latine de Vlnde, pp. 413-414.) 
The same author (p. 412) says, " Among the peoples of 
Sirica, Ptolemy reckons the OUorocorrhce. a name which 
in Pliny is written Attacoraa, and which Ammianns Mar- 
cellinns, who copies Ptolemy, distorts into Opnrocarra. 
There is no difficulty in recognizing under this name the 
Uttarakum of Sanskrit books." 

Schwanbeck (p. 70) quotes Lassen, who writes somewhat 
to the same effect « — " Uttarakum is a part of Sirica, and 
as the first accounts of India came to the West from the 
Seres, perhaps a part of the description of the peaceful 
happy life of the Seres is to be explained from the Indian 
stories of the Uttarakum. The story of the long life of the 
Sires may be similarly explained, especially when Megas- 
thenls reckons the life attained by the Hyperboreans at 
1000 years. The MahAhhdrata (Vl. 264) says that the 
Uttarakums live 1000 or 10,000 years. We conclude from 
this that Megasthenis also wrote of the Uttarakums, and 
that he not improper^ rendered their name by that of 
the Hyperboreans. — Zeitschr. II. 67. 

X Not Spain, but the country between the Black Sea 
and the Caspian, now called Georgia. 

§ V. L. milo. 



Digitized by 



Google 



80 



backward, and who have eight toes on each foot ; 
• while on many of the mountains there lives a 
race of men having heads like those of dogs, who 
are clothed with the skins of wild beasts, whose 
speech is barking, and who, being armed with 
claws, live by banting and fowling. || [•* Kt^sias 
asserts on his own authority that the number of 
these men was upwards of 120,000, and that 
there is a race in India whose females bear off- 
spring but once in the course of their life, and 
that their children become at once grey-haired.] 



' Megasthends speaks of a race of men among 
the Nomadic Indians who instead of nostrils 
have merely orifices, whose legs are contorted like 
snakes, and who are called Scyritaa. He 
speaks also of a race living on the very confines 
of India on the east, near the source of the Gran- 
ges, the A s t o m i, who have no mouth ; who 
cover their body, which is all over hairy, with the 
soft down found upon* the leaves of trees ; and 
who live merely by breathing, and the perfume 
inhaled by the nostrils. They eat nothing, and 
they drink nothing. They require merely a 
variety of odours of roots and of flowers and of 
wild apples. The apples they carry with them 
when they go on a distant journey, that they 
may always have something to smell. Too 
strong an odour would readily kill them. 

{I Called by Kt^siaa KvwKcc^aXoi, and in Sanskyit tfwui. 
muchAs or iSvdimichAs. 



Digitized by 



Google 



81 



* Beyond tlie A s t o m i, in tlie remotest pari 
of the monntaias, the Trispithami and the 
Pygmies are said to hare their abode. They 
are each three spans in height — that is, not more 
than seven-and- twenty inches. Their climate is 
aalubrions and they enjoy a perpetual springs 
under shelter of a barrier of mountains which rise 
t>n the north. They are the same whom Homer 
mentions as being harassed by the attacks of 
the cramps. *The story about them is — that 
mounted on the backs of rams and goats, and 
equipped with arrows, they march down in 
lEipring-time all in a body to the sea, and destroy 
the eggs and the young of these birds. It takes 
them always three months to finish this yearly 
campaign, and were it not undertaken they 
could not defend themselves against the vast 
flocks of subsequent years . Their huts are made 
of clay and feathers and egg-shells. [Aristotle 
says that they live in caves, but otherwise ho 
gives the same account of them as others.]. . . . 

[*ft FromKt^sias we learn that there is a people 
belonging to this race, which is called P a n d o- 
r e and settled in the valleys, who live two hun- 
dred years, having in youth hoary hair, which 
in old age turns black. On the other hand, 
others do not live beyond the age of forty, — 
nearly related to the Macrobii, whose women 
bear offspring but once. Agatharchides says 
the same of them, adding that they subsist on 
locusts, and are swift of foot. ] * Clitarchns and 



Digitized by 



Google 



82 



Megasthends calUhem M a n d i,^ and reckon tHe 
number of their villages at tliree hundred. 
The females bear children at the age of seven, 
and are old women at forty.* 

Fragm. XXX.B. 
Solin. 52. 26-30. 

Near a mountain which is called Nulo there 
live men whose feet are turned backwards and 
have eight toes on each foot. Megasthenis writes 
that on different mountains in India there are 
tribes of men with dog- shaped heads, armed with 
claws, clothed with skins, who speak not in the 
accents of human language, but only bark, and 
have fierce grinning jaws. [In Ktesias we read 
that in some parts the females bear offspring but 
once, and that the children are white-haired from 
their birth, &c.] 

Those who live near the source of the Ganges, 
requiring nothing in the shape of food, subsist on 
the odour of wild apples, and when they go on a 
long journey they carry these with them for safety 
of their life, which they can support by inhaling 
their perfume. Should they inhale very foul air, 
death is inevitable. 

Fragm. XXXI. 

Plutarch, de facie in oYhe lunoe. (0pp. ed. Beisk, 

torn. ix. p. 701.) 

Of the race of men without mouths, ^ 

For how could one find growing there that 

% Possibly we should read Pftndai, unless perhaps 
Megaathen^s referred to the inhabitants of Mount M a n- 
dar a. 

• Conf . Fragm. L. 1, LI. 

t Conf. Fragm. XXIX. 6, XXX. 8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



83 



Indian root which MegasthenSs says a race 
of men who neither eat nor drink, and in fact 
have not even moaths, set on fire and burn 
like incense, in order to sustain their existence 
with its odorous fumes, unless it received mois- 
ture from the moon ? 

BOOK III. 
Fkagm. XXXJI. 

Arr. Ind. XI. 1..XII..9. Of. Epit. 40-58, and Plin. 

Hist. Nat. VI. xxii. 2, 3. 

(See the translation of Arrian's Indika,) 

Fkagm. XXXIII. 
Strab. XV. 1. 39-41, 46-49,— pp. 708-4, 707. 
Of the Seven Castes among the Indians. 
(39) According to him (Megasthenes) the popu- 
lation of Ilidia is divided into seven parts. The 
philosophers are first in rank, but form the 
smallest class in point of number. " Their services 
are employed privately by persons who wish to offer 
sacrifices or perform other sacred rites, and also 
pubhcly by the kings at what is called the Great 
Synod, wherein at the beginning of the new 
year all the philosophers are gathered together 
before the king at the gates, when any philoso- 
pher who may have committed any useful sug- 
gestion to writing, or observed any means for im- 
proving the crops and the cattle, or for promot- 
ing the public interests, declares it publicly. * If 
any one is detected giving false information thrice, 
the law condemns him to be silent for the rest of 
his life, but he who gives sound advice is ex- 
empted from paying any taxes or contributions^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



(40) The second caste consists of tbe husband- 
men, who form the bulk of the population, and are 
in disposition most mild and gentle. They are 
exempted from military service, and cultivate 
their lands undisturbed by fe^. They never go 
to town, either to take part in its tumxilts, or for 
any other purpose. ** It therefore not unfrequent- 
ly happens that at the same time, and in the 
same part of the country, men may be seen drawn 
up in array of battle, and fighting at risk of their 
lives, while other men close at hand are ploughing 
and digging inperfect security, having these soldiers 
to protect them. The whole of the land is the 
property of the king, and the husbandmen till it on 
condition of receiving one -fourth of the produce. 

(41) ° The ihirdc&Bte consists of herdsmen and 
h u n t e r s> who alone are allowed to hunt, and ta 
keep cattle, and to sell draught animals or let them 
out on hire. 1^ return for clearing the land of 
wild beasts and fowls which devour the seeds- 
sown in the fields, they receive an allowance of 
grain from the king. They lead a wandering life 
and live under tents. 

Fragm. XXXVI. follows here. 

[So much, then, on the subject of wild animals^ 
We shall now return to Megasthenes, and resume 
from where we digressed.] 

(46)' The fourth class, after herdsmen and hunters, 
consists of those who work at trades, of those who 
vend wares, and of those who are employed in 
bodily labour. Some of these pay tribute, and 
Tender to the state certain prescribed services. 
But the armour-makers and shipbuilders receive 
wages and their victuals from the king, for whom 



Digitized by 



Google 



85 



alone they work. The general in command of the 
army supplies the soldiers with weapons, and the 
admiral of the fleet lets out ships on hire for the 
transport both of passengers and merchandize. 

{47) The fifth class consists offightingmen, 
who, when not engaged in active service, pass their 
time in idleness and drinking. They are main- 
tained at the king's expense, and hence they are 
always ready, when occasion calls, to take the 
field, for they carry nothing of their own with 
them but their own bodies. 

(48) The sixth class consists of the overseers, 
to whom is assigned the duty of watching all that 
goes on, and making reports secretly to the king. 
Some are entrusted with the inspection of the 
city, and others with that of the army. The 
former employ as their coadjutors the courtezans 
of the city, and the latter the courtezans of the 
eamp. The ablest and most trustworthy men are 
appointed to fill these offices.. 

The seventh class consists of the councillors 
and assessors of the king. To them belong the 
highest posts of government, the tribunals of 
justice, and the general administration of public 
affairs. J *■ No one is allowed to marry out of his 

^ X The Greek writerg by confonndiiig some distiiic- 
tions occasioned by civil employment with those arising 
from that division nave increased the number (of classes) 
from five (inclnding the handicrafts-man or mixed class) 
to seven. This number is produced by their supposing the 
king's councillors and assessors to form a distinct clas» 
from the Br&hmans ; by splitting the class of Vaisya into 
two, consisting of shepherds and husbandmen ; by introduc- 
ing a caste of spies ; and by omitting the servile class alto- 
gether. With these exceptions the classes are in the state 
described by Menu, which is the groundwork of that still 
subsisting.— Elphinsione's History of India, p. 236. 



Digitized by 



Google 



86 



own caste, or to exchange one profession or 
trade for another, or to follow more than one 
business. An exception is made in favour of the 
philosopher, who for his virtue is allowed this pri- 
vilege. 

fragm. xxxrv. 

Strab. XV. 1. 50-52,— pp. 707-709. 
Of the administration of public affairs. 
Of the use of Horses and Elephants. 
(Fragm. XXXIII. has preceded this.) 
(50) Of the great officers 6f state, some have 
charge of the market, others of the city, others of 
the soldiers. Some superintend the rivers, mea- 
sure the land, as is done in Egypt, and inspect the 
sluices by which water is let out from the main 
canals into their branches, so that every one may 
have an equal supply of it. "The same persons 
have charge also of the huntsmen, and are en- 
trusted with the power of rewarding or punishing 
them accoiding to their deserts . They collect the 
taxes, and superintend the occupations connect- 
ed with land, as those of the woodcutters, the 
carpenters, the blacksmiths, and the miners. 
'They construct roads, and at every ten stadia§ 
set up a pillar to show the by-roads and dis- 
tances. *Those who have charge of the city are 



§ From this it would appear that ten stadia were eqnal 
to some Indian me&sore of distance, whicli mnst have been 
the Icfd^a or Icosa. If the stadium be taken at 202i yards, 
this would give 2022^ yards for the kos, agreeing with the 
shorter kos of 4,000 hUhs, in nse in the Pai\jdb, and till 
lately, if not still, in parts of Bengal.^ED. Ind, AnU 



Digitized by 



Google 



87 



divided into six bodies of five each. The niem- 
. bers of the. first look after everything relating to 
the indastrial arts. Those of the second attend 
to the entertainment of foreigners. To these 
they assign lodgings, and they keep watch over 
their modes of life by means of those persons 
whom they give to them for assistants. They escort 
them on the way when they leave the country, or, 
in the event of their dying, forward their pro- 
perty to their relatives. They take care of them 
when they are sick, and if they die bury them. 
•The third body consists of those who inquire 
when and how births and deaths occur, with 
the view not only of levying a tax, but also in 
order that births and deaths among both high 
and low may not escape the cognizance of Gov- 
ernment. "The fourth class superintends trade 
and commerce. Its members have charge of 
weights and measures, and see that the products 
in their season are sold by public notice. No 
one is allowed to deal in more than one kind of 
commodity unless he pays a double tax. ^The 
fifth class supervises manufactured articles, 
which they sell by public notice. What is new 
is sold separately from what is old, and there 
is a fine for mixing the two together, ^The 
sixth and last class consists of those who col- 
lect the tenths of the prices of the articles sold. 
Fraud in the payment of this tax is punished 
with death. 
*Such are the ftinctions which these bodies 



Digitized by 



Google 



88 



separately discharge. In their collective capa- 
city they have charge both of their special de- 
partments, and also of matters affecting the 
general interest, as the keeping of public build- 
ings in proper repair, the regulation of prices, 
the care of markets, harbours, and temples. 
*^Next to the city magistrates there is a third 
governing body, which directs military affairs. 
This also consists of six divisions, with five* 
m.embers to each. One division is appointed 
to cooperate with the admiral of the fleet, an- 
other with the superintendent of the bullock- 
trains which are used for transporting en- 
gines of war, food for the soldiers, provender 
for the cattle, and other military requisites. 
They supply servants who beat the drum, and 
others who carry gongs ; grooms also for the 
horses, and . mechanists and their assistants. 
To the sound of the gong they send out foragers 
to bring in grass, and by a system of rewards 
and punishments ensure the work being done 
with despatch and safety. *^The third division 
has charge of the foot-soldiers, the fourth of 
the horses, the fifth of the war-chariots, and the 
sixth of the elephants. ^"There are royal 
stables for the horses and elephants, and also 
a royal magazine for the arms, because the 
soldier has to return bis arms to the maga- 
zine, and his horse and his elephant to the 
stables. ^*They use the elephants without 
bridles. The chariotis are drawn on the march 



Digitized by 



Google 



89 



by oxen,** but the horses are led along by a 
halter, that their legs may not be galled and 
inflamed, nor their spirits damped by drawing 
chariots. ^*In addition to the charioteer, there 
are two fighting men who sit up in the chariot 
beside him. The war-elephant carries four 
men — three who shoot arrows, and the driver. || 
(Fragm. XXVII. follows.) 

Feagm. XXXV. 

-^lian, Hist Anim. XlII. 10. 
Of the use of Horses and UlepJianis, 
Cf. Fragm. XXXIV. 13-15. 
When it is said that an Indian by springing 
forward in front of a horse can check his speed 
and hold him back, this is not true of all Indians, 
but only of such as have been trained from boy- 
hood to manage horses ; for it is a practice with 
them to control their horses with bit and bridle, 
and to make them move at a measured pace and 
in a straight course. They neither, however, 
gall their tongue by the use of spiked muzzles, 
nor torture the roof of their mouth. The pro- 
fessional trainers break them in by forcing 
them to gallop round and round in a ring, es- 
pecially when they see them refractory. Such 
as undertake this work require to have a strong 
hand as well as a thorough knowledge of 



II" The fourfold division of the army (horse, foot, chariots, 
and elephants) was the same as that of Menu ; but Strabo 
makes a sextuple diviaion, by adding the commissariat and 
naval department." 



Digitized by 



Google 



90 



horses. The greatest proficients test their skill 
hj driving a chariot roand and round in a 
ring; and in trath it would be no trifling 
feat to control with ease a team of fonr high- 
mettled steeds when whirling round in a circle. 
The chariot carries two men who sit beside the 
charioteer. The war-elephant, either in what 
is called the tower, or on his bare back in sooth, 
carries three fighting men, of whom two shoot 
from the side, while one shoots from behind. 
There is also a fourth man, who carries in his 
hand the goad wherewith he guides the animal, 
much in the same way as the pilot and captain 
of a ship direct its course with the helm. 

Pragm. XXXVI. 
Strab. XV. 1. 41-43,— pp. 704-705. 
Of Elephants. 
Conf . Epit. 54-56. 
(Fragm. XXXIII. 6 has preceded ibis.) 
A private person is not allowed to keep either 
a horse or an elephant. These animals are held 
to be the special property of the king, and 
persons are appointed to take care of them. 
* The manner of hunting the elephant is this. 
Bound a bare patch of ground is dug a deep 
trench about five or six stadia in extent, and 
over this is thrown a very narrow bridge which 
gives access to the enclosure. ' Into this en- 
closure are introduced three or four of the best- 
trained female elephants. The men themselves 
lie in ambush in concealed huts. ^ The wild 



Digitized by 



Google 



91 



elephants do not approach this trap in the day- 
time, but they enter it at night, going in one 
by one. ^ When all have passed the entrance, 
the men secretly close it up ; then, introducing 
the strongest of the tame fighting elephants, 
they fight it out with the wild ones, whom at 
the same time they enfeeble with hunger. 
•When the latter are now overcome with fa- 
tigue, the boldest of the drivers dismount un- 
observed, and esich man creeps under his own 
elephant, and from this position creeps under 
the belly of the wild elephant and ties his 
feet together. ' When this is done they incite 
the tame ones to beat those whose feet are tied 
till they fall to the ground. They then bind 
the wild ones and the tame ones together neck 
to neck with thongs of raw ox-hide. * To pre- 
vent them shaking themselves in order to throw 
off those who attempt to mount them, they make 
cuts all round their neck and then put thongs 
of leather into the incisions, so that the pain 
obliges them to submit to their fetters and to 
remain quiet. From the number caught they 
reject such as are too old or too young to be 
serviceable, and the rest they lead away to the 
stables. Here they tie their feet one to another, 
and fasten their necks to a firmly fixed pillar, 
and tame them by hunger. ^° After this they 
restore their strength with green reeds and 
grass. They next teach them to be obedient, 
which they effect by soothing them, some by 



Digitized by 



Google 



92 



coaxing words, and ofcliers by songs and tlie 
music of the drnm. ^* Few of them are found 
difficult to tame, for they are naturally so mild 
and gentle in their disposition that they approx- 
imate to rational creatures. Some of them take 
up their drivers when fallen in battle, and 
carry them off in safety from the field. Others, 
when their masters have sought refuge between 
their forelegs, have fought in their defence and 
saved their lives. If in a fit of anger they 
kill either the man who feeds or the man who 
trains them, they pine so much for their ^ loss 
that they refuse to take food, and sometimes 
die of hunger. 

*• They copulate like horses, and the female 
casts her calf chiefly in spring. It is the season 
for the male, when he is in heat and becomes 
ferocious. At this time ho discharges a fatty 
snbstance through an orifice near the temples. 
It is also the season for the females, when the 
corresponding passage opens. ** They go with 
young for a period which varies from sixteen to 
eighteen months. The dam suckles her calf 
for six years. ** Most of them live as long as 
men who attain extreme longevity, and some live 
over two hundred years. They are liable to many 
distempers, and are not easily cured. ^' The 
remedy for diseases of the eye is to wash it with 
cows' milk. For most of their other diseases 
draughts of black wine are administered to them. 
For the cure of their wounds they are made to 



Digitized by 



Google 



93 



swallow butter, for this draws out iron. Their 
sores are fomented with swine's flesh. 

Fragm. XXXVII. 

Arr. Ind. ch. 13-14. 

(Pragm. XXXII. comes before this.) 

(See the translation of Arrian's Inddka.) 

[Fragm. XXXVII. B.] 
.^lian, Hist Anim, XII. 44. 
Of Elephants. 
(Cf. Pragm. XXXVI. 9-10 and XXXVII. 9-10 
init c. XIV.). 
In India an elephant if canght when full-grown is diffi- 
cult to tame, and longing for freedom thirsts for blood. 
Should it be bound in chains, this exasperates it still more, 
and it will not submit to a master. The Indians, however, 
coax it with food, and seek to pacify it with various things 
for which it has a liking, their aim being to fill its stomach 
and to soothe its temper. But it is still angry with them, 
and takes no notice of them. To what device do they then 
resort P They sing to it their native melodies, and soothe 
it with the music of an instrument in common use which 
has four strings and is called a sicindapsos. The creature 
now pricks up its cars, yields to the soothing strain, and its 
anger subsides. Then, though there is an occasional out- 
burst of its suppressed passion, it gradually turns its eye to 
its food. It is then freed from its bonds, but docs not seek 
to escape, being enthralled with the music. It even takes 
food eagerly, and, like a luxurious guest riveted to the 
festive board, has no wish to go, from its love of the music. 

Fragm. XXXVIH. 

^lian. Hist Anim, XIII. 7« " 

Of the diseases of Elephants, 

(Cf. Pragm. XXXVI. 15 and XXXVII. 15.) 

The Indians cure the wounds of the elephants 

which they catch, in the manner following : — 

They treat them in the way in which, as good old 



Digitized by 



Google 



94 



Homer tells us, Patroklos treated the wound of 
Eurypylos, — they foment them with lukewarm 
water.^ After this they rub them over with but- 
ter, and if they are deep allay the inflammation by 
applying and inserting pieces of pork, hot but 
still retaining the blood. They cure ophthalmia 
with cows' milk, which is first used as a foment- 
ation for the eye, and is then injected into it. 
The animals open their eyelids, and finding they 
can see better are delighted, and are sensible of 
the benefit like human beings. In proportion as 
their blindness diminishes their delight over- 
fiiows, and this is a token that the disease has 
been cured. The remedy for other distempers 
to which they are liable is black wine ; and if 
this potion fails to work a euro nothing else can 
save them. 

Fragm. XXXIX. 

Strab. XV. 1. 44,— p. 706. 

Of Oold'digging Ants,* 

Megasthenfe gives the following account of 

these ants. Among the Derdai, a great tribe 

of Indians, who inhabit the mountains on the 

f See Iliad, bk. XI. 845. 

• See Ind. Ant. vol. IV. pp. 225 seqq, where cogent argu- 
ments are addnoed to prove that the * gold-digging ants* 
were originally neither, as the ancients supposed, real ants, 
nor, as so many eminent men of learning have supposed, 
larger animals mistaken for ants on account of their ap- 
pearance and subterranean habits, but Tibetan miners, 
whose mode of life and dress was in the remotest antiquity 
exactly what they are at the present day. 



Digitized by 



Google 



95 



eafltern borders,t there is an elevated plateau j! 
about 3,000 stadia in circuit. Beneatli the 
surface there are mines of gold, and here ac- 
cordingly are found the ants which dig for that 
metal. They are not inferior in size to wild 
foxes. They run with amazing speed, and live 
by the produce of the chase. The time when 
they dig is winter. § They throw up heaps of 
earth, as moles doj at the mouth of the mines. 
The gold-dust has to be subjected to a little boil- 
ing. The people of the neighbourhood, coming 
secretly with beasts of burden, carry this off. If 
they came openly the ants would attack them, 
end pursue them if they fled, and would destroy 
both them and their cattle. So, to effect the rob- 
bery without being observed, they lay down in 
several different places pieces of the flesh of 
wild beasts, and when the ants are by this de- 
vice dispersed they carry off the gold-dust. 

t These are the Dardsa of Fliny, the Daradrai of 
Ptolemy, and the Daradasof Sanskrit literature. " The 
Dards are not an extinct race. According to the accounts 
of modem travellers, they consist -of several wild and pre- 
datory tribes dwelling among the mountains on the north- 
west frontier of KAsmir and by the banks of the Indus." 
Ind, Ant. loc. cit. 

X The table-land of Ghojotol, see Jour, B, Qeog. 8oc. 
vol. XXXIX. pp. 149 seqq.—^D. Ind» Ant. 

§ " The miners of Thok- Jalung, in spite of the cold, 
prefer working in winter ; and the number of their tents, 
which in summer amounts to three hundred, rises to 
nearly six hundred in winter. They prefer the winter, as 
the frozen soil then stands well, and is not likely to trouble 
them much by falling in."— Id. 



Digitized by 



Google 



96 



This they sell to any trader they meet witli|| 
while it is still in the state of ore, for the art of 
fusing metals is unknown to them.^ 

FftAGM. XL. 
Arr. Ind, XV..5.7. 
(See the tmnslatioii of Arrian's Indika.) 
[Fragm. XL. B.] 
Dio Chrysost. Or. 35,— p. 436, Morell. 
Of Ants which dig for gold, 
(Of. Fragm. XXXIV. and XL.) 
They get the gold from ants. These creatures are larger 
than foxes, bnt are in other respects like the ants of our 
own country. They dig holes in the earth like other ants. 
The heap which they throw up consists of gold the purest 
and brightest in all the world. The mounds are piled up 
close to each other in regular order like hillocks of gold 
dust, whereby all the plain is made effulgent. It is difficult, 
therefore, to look towards the sun, and many who have at- 
tempted to do this have thereby destroyed their eyesight. 
The people who are next neighbours to the ants, with a 
view to plunder these heaps, cross the intervening desert, 
which is of no great extent, mounted on wagons to which 
they have yoked their swiftest horses. They arrive at 
noon, a time when the ants have gone underground, and at 

II T© Tvx^vTi Totv c/Li7r<$po>p. If the different reading 
Tov Tvx6vTos Tols e/iTTopoif bo adopted, the rendering is, 
" They dispose of it to merchants at any price." 

f Cf. Herod. III. 102-105 ; Arrian, Anab. V.4. 7 ; -ffilian, 
Hist Arwm, III. 4; Clem. Alex. VcBd. II. p. 207; Tzetz. 
Chil. XII. 330-340 ; Plin. Hist. Nat. XI. 36, XXXIII. 21 ; . 
Propert. III. 13. 5 j Pomp. Mel. VII. 2 ; Isidor. Orig. XII. 3 ; 
Albert Mag. De Animal. T. VI. p. 678, ex subdititiis 
Alexandri epistolis; Anonym. De Monstris ct BelluiSt 269, 
ed. Berger de Xivroy ; Philostratus, Vit. Apollon. VI. 1 ; and 
Heliodorus, ^th. X. 26, p. 495 ; also Gildemcister, Script. 
Arab, de reh. Ind. p. 220-221, and 120; Busbequius, Lega* 
tionis TurcicoB Epist. IV. pp. 144, or Thaunua XXIV. 7, 
p. 809.— Schwanbeck, p. 72. 



Digitized by 



Google 



97 



once seicing the booty make off at fall speed. The ants, 
on learning what has been done, pursue the fugitives, and 
overtaking them fight with them till they conquer or die, 
for of all animals they are the most courageous. It hence 
appears that they understand the worth of gold, and that 
they will sacrifice their lives rather than part with it. 

Pragm. XLT. 

Strab. XV. 1. 58-60,— pp. 711-714. 
Of the Indian Philosophers. 
(Fragm. XXIX. has preceded this.) 
(58) Speaking of the philosophers, he (Megas- 
thenSs) says that such of them as live on the 
mountains are worshippers of Dionysos, show- 
ing as proofs that he had come among them the 
wild vine, which grows in their country only, 
and the ivy, and the laurel, and the myrtle, 
and the box-tree, and other evergreens, nono 
of which are found beyond the Euphrates, ex- 
cept a few in parks, which it requires great 
care to preserve. They observe idso certain 
customs which are Bacchanalian. Thus they 
dress in muslin, wear the turban, use per^uaes, 
array themselves in garments dyed of bright 
colours ; and their kings, when they appear in 
public, are preceded by the music of drums and 
gongs. But the philosophers who live on the 
plains worship Herakles. [These accounts are 
fjEbbulous, and are impugned by many writers, 
especially what is said about the vine and 
wine. For the greater part of Armenia, and 
the whole of Mesopotamia and Media, onwards 
to Persia and Karmania* lie beyond the Eu- 



Digitized by 



Google 



98 



phrates, and tlirongbont a great part of each of 
these countries good vines grow, and good 
wine is produced.] 

(59) Megasthenes makes a different division 
of the philosophers, saying that thejc^ are of two 
kinds — one of which he calls the Brachmanes, 
and the other the Sarmanes.* The Brach- 
manes are best esteemed, for they are more 
consistent in their opinions. From the time of 
their conception in the womb they are under 
the guardian care of learned men, who go to 
the mother and, under the pretence of using 
some incantations for the welfare of herself and 
her unborn babe, in reality give her prudent 
hints and counsels. The women who listen most 
willingly are thought to be the most fortunate in 
their children. After their birth the children are 
under the care of one person after another, and as 

* " Since the word ^apfiavas (the form used by Cle- 
mens of Alexandria) corresponds to the letter with the 
Sanskrit word ^ramuma (i.e. an ascetic), it ,is evident that 
the forms Tapfiavas and Tepfiavas, which are found in all 
the MSS. of Straboj are incorrect. The mistake need not 
surprise ns, since the 2A when closely written together 
differ little in form from the syllable FA. Jn the same 
way Clement's 'AXKdfiioi must be changed into Strabo's 
YXd^ioi, corresponding with the Sanskrit Vomapfasthxi-^ 
* the man of the first three castes who, after the term of 
his hooseholdership has expired, has entered the third 
&§ra/ma or order, and has proceeded (prastha) to a life in the 
woods (Fdwo).* "— Schwanbeck, p. 46 ; H. H. Wilson, Gloss. 
"It is a capital question," he adds, "who the Sarmanea 
were, some considering them to be Buddhists, and others 
denying them to be such. Weighty arguments are adduced 
on both sides, but the opinion of those seems to approach 
nearer the truth who contend that they were Buddhists.'' 



Digitized by 



Google 



99 



they advance in age each succeeding master is 
more accomplished than his predecessor. The 
philosophers have their abode in a grove in front 
of the city within a moderate- sized enclosure. 
They live in a simple style, and lie on beds of 
rushes or (deer) skins. They abstain from. 
animal food and sexual pleasures, and spend 
their time in listening to serious discourse, and 
in imparting their knowledge to such as will 
listen to them. The hearer is not allowed to 
speak, or even to cough, and much less to spit, 
and if he offends in any of these ways he is cast 
out from their society that very day, as being 
a mail who is wanting in self-restraint. After 
living in this manner for seven-and- thirty years, 
each individual retires to his own property, where 
he lives for the rest of his days in ease and secu- 
rity, f They then array themselves in fine muslin, 
and wear a few trinkets of gold on their fingers 
and in their ears. They eat flesh, but not that of 
animals employed in labour. They abstain from 
hot and highly seasoned food. They marry as 
many wives as they please, with a view to have 

t " A mistake (of the Greek writers) originates in their 
ignorance of the fourfold division of a BrShma^'s life. Thns 
' they speak of men who had been for many years sophists 
marrying and returning to common life (alluding probably 
to a student who, having completed the austerities of the 
first period, becomes a householder) :" Elphinstone's His- 
tory of India, p. 236, where it is also remarked that the 
writers erroneously prolong? the period during which students 
listen to their instructors m silence and respect, making it 
extend in all cases to thirty-seven, which is the greatest 
age to which Mann (chap. III. sec. 1) permits it in any 
case to be protracted. 



Digitized by 



Google 



100 

nmnerons ehildren, for by having many wivesF 
greater advantages are enjoyed, and, since they 
have no slaves, they have more need to have 
children around them to attend to their wants. 
The Brachmanes do not communicate a know- 
ledge of philosophy to their wives, lest they 
should divulge any of the forbidden mysteries 
to the profane if they became depraved, or lest 
they should desert them if they became good 
philosophers : for no one who despises pleasure 
and pain, as well as life and death, wishes to be 
in subjection to another, but this is characteris- 
tic both of a good man and of a good woman. 

Death is with them a very frequent subject 
of discourse. They regard this life as, so to 
speak, the time when the child within the 
womb becomes mature, and death as a birth 
into a real and happy life for the votaries of 
philosophy. On this account they undergo 
much discipline as a preparation for death. 
They consider nothing that befeills men to be 
either good or bad, to suppose otherwise being 
a dream-like illusioa, else how could some be 
affected with sorrow, and others with pleasure, 
by the very same things, and how could the 
same things affect the san^ individuals at dif- 
ferent times with these opposite emotions ? 

Their ideas abont physical phenomena, the 
same author tells us, are very crude, for they are 
better in their actions than in their reasonings, 
inasmuch as their belief is in great measure 



Digitized by 



Google 



101 

based npon fables; yet on many points their 
opinions coincide with those of the Greeks, for 
Hke them they say that the world had a begin- 
ning, and is liable to destmction, and is in shape 
spherical, and that the Deity who made it, and 
who goyems it, is diffused through all its parts. 
They hold that various first principles operate 
in the universe, and that water was the prin- 
ciple employed in the making of the world. In 
addition to the four elements there is a fifth 
agency, from which the heaven and the stars 
were produced 4 The earth is placed in the 
centre of the universe. Concerning generation, 
and the nature of the soul^ and many other 
subjects, they express views like those main- 
tained by the Greeks. They wrap up their 
doctrines about immortality and future judg- 
ment, and kindred topics, in allegories, after 
the manner of Plato. Such are his statements 
regarding the Brachmanes. 

(60) Of the Sarmanes§he tells us that 

1 AkASa, * the ether or sky.' 

§ Schwanbeck argaes irom. the distinct separation here 
made between the Brachmanes and the Sarmanes, as well as 
from the name iSrarruma being especially applied to Baad- 
dha teachers, that the latter are here meant. They are 
called 2afMvaioi by Bardesanes (ap. Porphyr. AbsUn, IV. 
17) and Alex. Polyhistor. (ap. Cyrill. contra JuUom, IV. p. 
133 E, ed. Paris, 1638). Gonf . also Hieronym. ad Jovinian, 
II. (ed. Paris, 1706, T. II. pt. ii. p. 206). And this is just the 
Pali name Sammana, the equivalent of the Sanskrit £^- 
mana. Bohlen in De Buddhmsmi origine et cetobte dejmi- 
€nd^ Bostaios this view, bnt Lassen {Bhein.Mus. fur Phil. 
I. 171 ff.) contends that the description agrees better with 
the Br&hman ascetics. See Schwanbeck, p. 45fr. and Las- 
sen, Ind. Alt&rth. (2nd ed). II. 705, or (1st ed.) II. 700. 




Google 



102 

those who are held in most honour are called 
the Hylobioi.|| They live in the woods, 
where they subsist on leaves of trees and wild 
fruits, and wear garments made from the bark 
of trees. They abstain from sexual intercourse 
and from wine. They communicate with the 
kings, who consult them by messengers regard- 
ing the causes of things, and who through them 
worship and supplicate the deity. Next in 
honour to the Hylobioi are the physicians, since 
they are engaged in the study of the nature of 
man. They are simple in their habits, but do not 
live in the fields. Their food consists of rice and 
barley-meal, which they can always get for the 
mere asking, or receive from those who enter- 
tain them as guests in their houses. By their 
knowledge of pharmacy they can make mar- 
riages fruitful, and determine the sex of the 
oflfepring. They effect cures rather by regulat- 
ing diet than by the use of medicines. The 
remedies most esteemed are ointments and plas- 
ters. All others they consider to be in a great 
measure pernicious in their nature.^ This class 
and the other class practise fortitude, both by 
undergoing active toil, and by the endurance of 
pain, so that they remain for a whole day mo- 
tionless in one fixed attitude.* 



11 ScMB note* |Mige^98. 



„ " The habits of the physicians," Elphinstone remarks, 
* seem to correspond with those of BrStunans of the fourth 
stage." 

• << It is indeed," says the same authority, " a remarlcable 



Digitized by 



Google 



103 

Besides these tbere are diviners and sorcerers, 
and adepts in the rites and customs relating to 
the dead, who go about begging both in villages 
and towns. 

Even snch of them as are of snperior culture 
and refinement inculcate such superstitions re- 
garding Hades as they consider favourable to 
piety and holiness of life. Women pursue phi- 
losophy with some of them, but abstain from 
sexual intercourse. 

Fragm. XLII. 

Clem. Alex. g^om. I. p. 305 D (ed. Colon. 1688). 

That the Jewish race is by far the oldest of 
all these, and that their philosophy, which has 
been committed to writing, preceded the philo- 
sophy of the Greeks, Philo the Pythagorean shows 
by many arguments, as does also Aristoboulos 
the Peripatetic, and many others whose names 
I need not waste time in enumerating. Megas- 
thenes, the author of a work on India, who lived 
with SeleukosNikator, writes most clearly 
on this point, and his words are these : — " All that 
has been said regarding nature by the ancients is 
asserted also by philosophers out of Greece, on the 
one pa/rt in India by the Brachmanes, and on the 
other in Syria by the people called the Jews." 



circnmstance that the religion, of Buddha should never have 
been expressly noticed by the Greek authors, though it had 
existed for two centuries before Alexander. The only ex- 
planation is that the appearance and manners of its fol- 
lowers were not so peculiar as to enable a foreigner to 
distinguish them from the mass of the people." 



Digitized by 



Google 



104 

Fkagm. XLII. B. 

Euaeb. Pr(pp. Ev. IX. 6,—pp. 410 0, D (ed. Colon. 1688). 

Ex Clem. Alex. 

Again, in addition to this, farther on he writes 
thus : — 

" Megasthenes, the writer who lived with Se- 
leukos Mkator, writes most clearly on this point 
and to this effect ; — * All that has been said,* " &c. 
Fbagm. XLII.O. 

CyriU. Coni/ra JuUan. IV. (0pp. ed. Paris, 1638, T. VI. 
p. 134 Al. Ex Clem. Alex.t 

Aristobonlos the Peripatetic somewhere writes 
to this effect : — " All that has been said," &c. 
Feagm. XLIII. • 

Clem. Alex. Strom. I. p. 305, A, B (ed. Colon. 1688). 
Of the Philosophers of India. 

[Philosophy, then, with all its blessed advantages to man, 
flourished long ages ago among the barbarians, diffasing its 
Ught among the Gentiles, and eventually penetrated into 
Greece. Its hierophants were the prophets among the Egyp- 
tians, theChaldssans among the Assyrians, the Druids among 
the Grauls, the Sarmansaans who were the philosophers 
of theBaktrians and the Kelts, the Magi among the 
Persians, who, as you know, announced beforehand the 
birth of the Saviour, being led by a star till they arrived 
in the land of Judssa, and among the Indians the Gymno- 
sophists, and other philosophers of barbarous nations.] 

There are two sects of these Indian philoso- 
phers — one called the Sarm&nai and the other 
the Brachmanai. Connected with the Sarm&nai 
are the philosophers called the H y 1 o b i o i, J who 

t " In this passage, though Cynl follows Clemens, he 
wrongly attributes the narrative of Megasthenes to Aristo- 
bouloB the Peripatetic, whom Clemens only praises."— 
Schwanbeck, p. 50. 

X The reading of the MSS is Allobioi. 



Digitized by 



Google 



105 

neither live in cities nor even in houses. They 
clothe themselves with the bark of trees, and sub- 
sist upon acorns, and drink water by lifting it to 
their mouth with their hands. They neither marry 
nor beget children [like those ascetics of our own 
day called the Enkrat^tai. Among the Indians are 
those philosophers also who follow the precepts 
of B o u 1 1 a,§ whom they honour as a god on ac- 
count of his extraordinary sanctity.] 



§ V. 1. Bovra. — ^The passage admits of a diflferent ren- 
dering : ** They (the Hylobioi) are those among the Indians 
who follow the precepts of Boutta." Colfebrooke in his Ob' 
servations on the Sect of the Jains, has quoted this passage 
from Clemens to controvert the opinion that the religion 
and institutions of the orthodox Hmdus are more modem 
than the doctrines of Jina and of Bnddha. " Here/' he 
says, " to luy apprehension, the followers of Buddha are 
clearly distinguished from the Brachmanes and Sarmanes. 
The latter, called Germanea b^ Strabo, and Samansaans 
by Porphyrins, ara the ascetics of a different religion, 
and may have belonged to the sect of Jina, or to another. 
The Brachmanes are apparently those who are described by 
Philostratus and Hierocles as worshipping the sun; and 
by Strabo and by Arrian as performing sacrifices for the 
common benefit of the nation, as well as for individuals ... 
They are expressly discriminated from the sect of Buddha 
. by one ancient author, and fromtibie Sarmanes (a) or Sama- 
nsaans (ascetics of various tribes) by others. They are de- 
scribed by more than one authority as worshipping the sun, 
as performing sacrifices, and as denying the eternity of the 
world, and maintaining other tenets incompatible with the 
supposition that the sects of Buddha or Jiaa could be 
meant. Their manners and doctrine, as described l»y 
these authors, are quite conformable with the notions and 
practice of the orthodox Hindus. It may therefore be 
confidently inferred that the followers of the Vedas flour- 
ished in India when it was \-isited by the Greeks under 
Alexander, and continued to flourish from the time of 
MegasthenSs, who described them in the fourth century 
before Christ, to that of Porphyrins, who speaks of them, on 
later authority, in the third century after Christ." 



(a) Samana is the Pali form of the older ^amana. 
N 



Digitized by 



Google 



106 
Feagm. XLIV. 

Strab. XV. 1. 68,— p. 718. 
Of Kalanos and Mandanis. 
Megasthen^s, however, says that self-destruc- 
tion is not a dogma of the philosophers, but 
that such as commit the act are regarded as 
foolhardy, those naturally of a severe tem- 
per stabbing themselves or casting themselves 
down a precipice, those averse to pain drown- 
ing themselves, those capable of enduring 
pain strangling themselves, and those of 
ardent temperaments throwing themselves into 
the fire. Kalanos was a man of this stamp. 
He was ruled by his passions, and became a 
slave to the table of Alexander. || He is on 
this account condemned by his countrymen, but 
Mandanis is applauded because when mes- 
sengers from Alexander invited him to go to the 
son of Zeus, with the promise of gifts if he com- 
plied, and threats of punishment if he refused, he 
did not go. Alexander, he said, was not the son 
of Zeus, for he was not so much as master of 
the larger half of the world. As for himself, 

II " Kalanos followed the Makedonian army from Tazila, 
and when afterwards taken ill bamt himself on a foneralpyre 
in the presence of the whole Makedonian army, without 
evincing any symptom of pain. His real name, according 
to Plntarch, was Sphines, and he received the name Kalanos 
among the Greeks because in saluting persons he used the 
form KoKe instead of the Greek X^^P^* What Plutarch 
here calls koKc is probabl3[ the Sanskrit form kalySuna, 
which is commonly used in addressing a person, and 
signifies * good; just, or distinguished.' "— Smitn's Classical 
Dictionary. 



Digitized by 



Google 



107 

he wanted none of the gifts of a man whose 
desires nothing conld satiate; and as for his 
threats he feared them not : for if he lived, India 
wonld supply him with food enough, and if he 
died, he would be delivered from the body of 
flesh now afiiicted with age, and would ba trans- 
lated to a better and a purer life. Alexander ex- 
pressed admiration of the man, and let him 
have his own way, 

Fbagm. XLV. 

Arr. VII. ii. 3-9. 
(See the translation of Arrian's Indika.) 

BOOK IV. 
Fragm. XLVI. 

Strab. XV. I. 6-8,— pp. 686-688. 

That the Indians had never been attacked hy 

others, nor had tJiemselves attacked others. 

(Cf. Epit. 23.) 

6. But what just reliance can we place on the 

accounts of Indiafrom such expeditions as those of 

Kyros and Semiramis ?% Megasthen^s concurs in 

this view, and recommends his readers to put no 

% " The expedition of Semiramis as described by Dio- 
dorufl Siculos (II. 16-19), who followed the Assyriaka 
of EtesiaS; has almost the character of a legend abounding 
with puerilities, and is entirely destitute of those geogra- 
phical details which stamp events with reality. If this 
expedition is real, as on other grounds we may believe it to 
be, some traces will assuredly be found of it in the cunei- 
form inscriptions of Nineveh, which are destined to throw 
so much unexpected light on the ancient histonr of Asia. 
It has already been believed possible to draw from these 
inscriptions the foundations of a positive chronology which 
will fully confirm the indications given by Heroootos aa 



Digitized by 



Google 



108 

faith in the ancient history of India. Its people, 
he says, never sent an expedition abroad, nor was 
their country ever invaded and conqnered except 
by H^rakles and Dionysos in old times, and by 
the Makedonians in onr own. Yet Ses6stris 
the Egyptian* and Tearkon the Ethiopian ad- 

to the epoch of Semiramis, in fixing the epoch of this 
celebrated qaeen in the 8th century of our era — an epoch 
which is qnite in harmony with the data which we possess 
from other sources regarding the condition of the North- 
West of India after the Vedic times. 

" Kyros, towards the middle of the 6th century of our 
era, must also have carried his arms even to the Indus. 
Historical tradition attributed to him the destruction of 
Kapisa, an important city in the upper region of the 
Kdph^s (Plin. YI. 23); and in the lower region the 
Assakenians and the Aftakenians, indigenous tribes of 
Gandara, are reckoned among his tributaries (Arrian, 
Indikdf I. 3). Tradition further recounted that, in return- 
ing from his expedition into India, Kyros had seen his 
whole army perish in the deserts of Gedrosia (Arr. Anah, 
VI. 24. 2). The Persian domination in these districts has 
left more than one trace in the geographical nomenclature. 
It is 8u£&cient to recall the name of the Khoaspds, one 
of the great affluents of the K6phes. 

** Whatever be the real historical character of the expedi- 
tions of Semiramis and Kyros, it is certain that their con- 
quests on the Indus were only temporary acquisitions, 
since at the epoch when Dareios HystaspSs mounted the 
throne the eastern frontier of the empire did not go 
beyond Arakhosia (the Haraqaiti of the Zend texts, t£e 
Haraouvatis of the cuneiform inscriptions, the Arrokluid^j 
of Musalm&n geography, the provinces of KomdahA/r and 
of Ghazni of existmg geography) — that is to say, the parts 
of Afgh^st&n which lie east of the Sulim&i chain of 
mountains. This fact is established by the great trilingual 
inscription of Bisoutoun, which indicates the last eastern 
countries to which Dareios had carried his arms at the 
epoch when the naonument was erected. This was before 
he had achieved his well-known conquest of the valley of 
the Indus." — St. Martin, E'tvde surla Q^ographieQrecque 
et Latine de VInde, pp. 14 seqq. 

* Sesostris (called Sespfisis by Diodorus) has generally 
been identified with Bamses the third king of the 19th 
dynasty of Manetho, the son of Seti, and the father of 



Digitized by 



Google 



109 

vanced as far as Europe. And Nabukodrosor,f 
who is more renowned among the Chaldseans 
than even Herakles among the Greieks, carried 
his arms to the Pillars, J which Tearkon also 
reached, while Sesostris penetrated from Iberia 
even into Thrace and Pontes. Besides these 
there was Idanthyrsos the Skythian, who over- 
ran Asia as far as Egypt.§ Bat not one 
of these great conqaerors approached India, 
and Semiramis, who meditated its conquest, 
died before the necessary preparations were 
undertaken. The Persians indeed summoned 
the Hydrakaijl from India to serve as mer- 
cenaries, but they did not lead an army into the 
country, and only approached its borders when 
Kyros marched against the Massagetai. 
Of Dionysos and Herakles, 
7. The accounts about Herakles and 

Menephthab the Pharaoh of the Sxodus. Lepsias, how- 
ever, from a study of the Tablet of Rameses II. found at 
Abydos in Egypt, and now in the British Museum, has 
been led to identify him with the Sesortasen or Osirtasen 
of the great 12th dynasty. — See Report of the Proceedings 
of the Second International Congress of OrientalistSf 
p. 4A. 

t V.l. 'SapoKoBpoa-opov, 

t Called by Ptolemy the " Pillars of Alexander," above 
Albania and Iberia at the commencement of the Asiatic 
Sarmatia. 

§ Herodotus mentions an invasion of Skythians which 
was led by Madyas. As Idanthyrsos may have been a 
common appellative of the Skythian kings, Strabo may 
here be referring to that invasion. 

II The Hydrakai are called also Oxydrakai. The name, 
according to Lassen, represents the Sanskrit Kshvdraka. 
It is variously written Sydrakai, Syrakusai, Sabagrae, and 
Sygambri. 



Digitized by 



Google 



110 

Dionysos, Megastheues and some few aa- 
tliors with him consider entitled to credit, "[but 
the majority, among whom is Eratosthenes, 
consider them incredible and fabnlous, like the 

stories current among the Ghreeks ] 

8. On snch grounds they called a particnlar 
race of people Nyssaians, and their city Nyssa,^ 
which Dionysos had founded, and the moun- 
tain which rose above the city M e r o n> assigning 
as their reason for bestowing these names that 
ivy grows there, and also the vine, although its 
fruit does not come to perfection, as the clusters, 
on account of the heaviness of the rains, fall off 
the trees before ripening. They further called 
the Oxydrakai descendants of Dionysos, be- 
cause the vine grew in their country, and their 
processions were conducted with great pomp, 
and their kings on going forth to war and on 
other occasions marched in Bacchic fashion, with 
drums beating, while they were dressed in gay- 
coloured robes, which is also a custom among 
other Indians. Again, when Alexander had 
captured at the first assault the rock called 
A o r u o s, the base of which is washed by the In- 
dus near its source, his followers, magnifying the 
affair, affirmed that Herakles had thrice assaulted 
the same rock and had been thrice repulsed. * They 

% V. U. Nucratovff, Nvcrav. 

* This celebrated rock has been identified by General 
Cunningham ^dth the mined fortress of B&^tgat, 
situated immediately above the small village of Nogrfim, 
which lies about sixteen miles north by west from 



Digitized by 



Google 



said also that the S i b a e were descended from 
those who accompanied HSrakles on his expedi- 
tion, and that they preserved badges of their de- 
scent, for they wore skins like H^rakles, and car- 
ried clubs, and branded the mark of a cudgel on 
their oxen and mules.f In support of this story 
they turn to account the legends regarding Kau- 
kasos and Prometheus by transferring them 
hither from Pontos, which they did on the slight 
pretext that they had seen a sacred cave among 
the Paropamisadae. This they declared 
was the prison of Prometheus, whither Hera- 
kles had come to effect his deliverance, and that 
this was the Kaukasos, to which the Greeks 
represent Prometheus as having been bound. J 

Ohind, which he takes to be the Embolima of the 
ancients. " RA^lgat," he says, " or the Qneen's rock, is a 
large upright block on the north edge of the fort, on which 
B&ja V a r a's rM is said to have seated herself daily. The 
fort itself is attributed to B^a Vara, and some ruins at the 
foot of the hill are called B&ja Yara's stables ... I think, 
therefore, that the hill-fort of Aomos most probably derived 
its name from Btna Yara, and that the ruined fortress of 
B&^igat has a better claim to be identified with the 
Aomos of Alexander than either the Mah&ban hill of Gren- 
eral Abbott, or the castle of B^a Hodi jiroposed by Greneral 
Court and Mr. Loewenthal." See Grote's History of India, 
vol. YIII. pp. 487-8, footnote. 

t According to Curtius, the Sibae, whom he calls Sobii, 
occupied the country between the Hydasp^s and the Ake- 
sinds. They may have derived their name from the god 
6vn,. 

t "No writer before Alexander's time mentions the 
Indian gods. The Makedonians, when they came into 
India, in accordance with the invariable practice of the 
Greeks, considered the gods of the country to be the same 
as their own. ^iva they were led to identify with Bacchus 
on their observing the unbridled license and somewhat 
Bacchic fashion of his worship, and because they traced 



Digitized by 



Google 



112 
Fbaqm. XLVII. 

Arr. Ind. V. 4-12. 
(See the translation of Arrian's Indilca.) 

Fragm. XL VIII. 
Josephus Contra Apion. I. 20 (T. II. p. 431, Haverc). 
Of Nahuckodrosor, 
(Cf. Fragm. XLVI. 2.) 
Megastbenes also expresses the same opinion 
in the Aili hooJc of his hidika, wbere lie endeavours 
to show that the aforesaid king of the Baby- 
lonians (Nabouchodonosor) surpassed Herakles 
in courage and the greatness of his achieve- 
ments, by telling us that he conquered even 
Iberia. 

Fragm. XLVIII. B. 

Joseph. Ant Jud. X. ii. 1 (T. I. p. 538, Haverc). 
[In this place (Nabouchodonosor) erected also 
of stone elevated places for walking about on, 

some slight resemblance between the attributes of the two 
deities, and between the names belonging to the mythic 
conception of each. Nor was anytiiing easier, after 
Euripides had originated the fiction that Dionysos had 
roamed over the East, than to suppose that the god of 
luxuriant fecundity had made Ins way to India, a country 
so remarkable for its fertility. To confirm this opinion 
they made use of a sHeht and accidental agreement in 
names. Thus Mount Meru seemed an indication of the 
god who sprang from the thigh of Zeus (ck 8i6s firfpov). 
Thus they thought the KydraksB (Oxydrukai) the offspring 
of Dionysos because the vine grew in their country, and they 
saw that their kings displayed great pomp in their proces- 
sions. On equally slight grounds they identified Kpshna, 
another god whom they saw worshipped, with Herakles ; 
and whenever, as among the Sibae, they saw the skins of 
wild beasts, or clubs, or the like, they assumed that Hera- 
kles had at some time or other dwelt there."— Schwanb. 
p. 43. 



Digitized by 



Google 



113 

wkicli had to the eye the appearance of moniitauis^ 
and were so contrived that they were planted 
with all sorts of trees, because his wife, who had 
been bred up in the land of Media, wished her 
surroundings to be like those of her early home.] 
Megasthen^s also, in the 4sth hook of his IndiJca^ 
makes mention of these things, and thereby 
endeavours to show that this king surpassed 
HSrakles in courage and the greatness of his 
achievements^ for he says that he conquered 
Libya and a great part of Ibdria. 

Fbaqm. XLVIII. C. 
Zonar. ed. Basil. 1557> T. L p. 87^ 
Among the many old historians who mention 
Nabouchodonosor, Jdsephos enumerates B^r6* 
80S, Megasthends, and Diokl&s. 

Fragm. XLVIII. D. 

G. Syncell. T. I. p. 419, ed. Benn. (p. 221 ed. Paris, p. 17^ 

edw Venet.). 

Megasthends, in his fourth booh of the Indika^ 
represents Nabouchodonosor as mightier than 
H^rakles, because with great courage and enter- 
prise he conquered the greater part of Libya 
and Iberia. 

Fragm. XLIX. 

Abyden. ap. Eikseh, Prcep, Ev. I. 41 (ed. Colon. 1688» 
p. 456 D). 

Of Nahouchodrosor. 

MegastJien^s says that Nahouchodrosor, who 

was mightier than H^rakles, undertook an ex« 



Digitized by 



Google 



114 

pedition against Libya and Iberia, and tha6 
having conquered them he planted a colony of 
these people in the parts lying to the right of 
Pontes. 

Fragm< L. 

Arr. Ind. 7-9. 

(See the translation of Arrian's Indika.) 

Feagm. L.B. 

Plin. Hist. Nat IX. 55. 

Of Pearls. 

Some writers allege that in swarms of oysters, 
as among bees, individuals distinguished for size 
and beauty act as leaders. These are of wonder- 
ful cunning in preventing themselves being 
caught, and are eagerly sought for by the divers. 
Should they be caught, the others are easily 
enclosed in the nets as they go wandering about. 
They are then put into earthen pots, where they 
are buried deep in salt. By this process the flesh 
is all eaten away, and the hard concretions, which 
are the pearls, drop down to the bottom. 

Fbagm. LI. 

Phlegon. Mirah, 33. 

Of the Pandaian Land. 

(Cf . Fragm. XXX. 6.) 

!^egasthenSs says that the women of the Pandaian 
realm bear children when they are six years of age. 



Digitized by 



Google 



115 

Fragm. L.O. 

Plin. Eist Nat. VI. m. 4-6. 

Of the Ancient History of the India/ns. 

For the Indians stand almost alone among the 
nations in never having migrated from their own 
■ country. From the days of Father Bacchus to 
Alexander the Great their kings are reckoned at 
164, whose reigns extend over 6451 years and 
3 months. 

Solin. 52. 5. 
Father Bacchus was the first who invaded 
India, and was the first of all who triumphed over 
the vanquished Indians. From him to Alexander 
the Great 6461 years are reckoned with 3 months 
additional, the calculation being made by counting 
the kings who reigned in the intermediate period, 
to the number of 163. . 

Fragm. XLV. 

Arr. VII. ii. 3.9.§ 
Of Kalanos and Mandanis, 
This shows that Alexander, notwithstanding 
the terrible ascendancy which the passion for 
glory had acquired over him, was not altogether 
without a perception of the things that are better ; 
for when he arrived at Taxila and saw the Indian 



§ TluB fragment is an extract from Arrian's Expedition 
of AlemandeTf and not his Indika as statM (by an over- 
sight) at p. 107. The translation is accordingly now in- 
sarted. 



Digitized by 



Google 



116 

gjmnosopbists, a desire seized him to have one 
of these men brought into his presence, because 
he admired their endurance. The eldest of these 
sophists, with whom the others lived as disciples 
^th a master, Dandamis by name, not only re- 
fased to go himself, but prevented the others 
going. He is said to have returned this for 
answer, that he also was the son of Zeus as much 
as Alexander himself was, and that he wanted 
nothing that was Alexander's (for he was well 
off in his present circumstances), whereas he saw 
those who were with him wandering over so 
much sea and land for no good got bj it, and 
without any end coming to their many wander- . 
ings. He coveted, therefore, nothing Alexander 
had it in his power to give, nor, on the other 
hand, feared aught he could do to coerce him : 
for if he lived, India would suffice for him, yield- 
ing him her fruits in due season, and if he died, 
he would be delivered from his ill-assorted com- 
panion the body. Alexander accordingly did 
not put forth his hand to violence, knowing the 
man to be of an independent spirit. He is said, 
however, to have won over Kalanos, one of the 
sophists of that place, whom MegasthenSs re- 
presents as a man utterly wanting in self-control, 
while the sophists themselves spoke opprobriously 
of Kalanos, because that, having left the happiness 
enjoyed among them, he went to serve another 
master than God. 



Digitized by 



Google 



117 

DOUBTFUL FRAGMENTS. 

Fragm. lit. 

^lian, Hist. Amm. XII. 8. 
0/ Elephants, 
(Couf. Fragm. zzxri. 10, xzxvii. 10.) 
The elephant when feeding at^ large ordinarily 
drinks water, but when undergoing the fatigues 
of war is allowed wine, — ^hot that sort, however, 
which comes from the grape, but another which 
is prepared from rice.|| The attendants eren go 
in advance of their elephants and gather them 
flowers ; for they are very fond of sweet per- 
fumes, and they are accordingly taken out to the 
meadows, there to be trained under the influence 
of the sweetest fragrance. The animal selects the 
flowers according to their smell, and throws 
them as they are gathered into a basket which is 
held out by the trainer. This being filled, and 
harvest-work, so to speak, completed, he then 
bathes, and enjoys his bath with all the zest of a 
consummate voluptuary. On returning from bath- 
ing he is impatient to have his flowers, and if 
there is delay in bringing them he begins roaring, 
and will not taste a morsel of food till all the 
flowers he gathered are placed before him. This 
done, he' takes the flowers out of the basket with 
his trunk and scatters them over the edge of his 



II Called araky (which, however, is also applied to tdd4) ; 
rum is now-a-days the beverage given it. 



Digitized by 



Google 



118 

manger, and makes by this device their fine scent 
be, as it were, a relish to his food. He strews 
also a good quantity of them as litter over his 
stall, for he loves to have his sleep made sweet 
and pleasant. 

The Indian elephants were nine cubits in height 
and five in breadth. The largest elephants in all 
the land were those called the Praisian, and next 
to these the Taxilan.^ 

Fragm. LIII. 

^lian, Hist. Anim. III. 46. 

0/a White Elephant. 

(Of. Fragm. xxxvi. 11, xxxvii. 11.) 

An Indian elephant-trainer fell in with a white 
elephant-calf, which he brought when still quite 
young to his home, where he reared it, and gra- 
dually made it quite tame and rode upon it. He 
became much attached to the creature, which 
loved him in return, and by its affection requited 
him for its maintenance. Now the king of the 
Indians, having heard of this elephant, wanted to 
take it ; but the owner, jealous of the love it had 
for him, and grieving much, no doubt, to think 
that another should become its master, refused 
to give it away, and made ofp at once to the 



% This fragment is ascribed to Megasthen^s both on 
account of the matter of it, and because it was undoubtedly 
from Megasthen^s thkt ^lian borrowed the narrative pre- 
ceding it (Fragm. xxxviii.) and that following it (Fragm. 
mr.).— Schwanbeck. 



Digitized by 



Google 



119 

desert mounted on his favourite. The king vrAi 
enraged at this, and sent men in pursuit, with 
orders to seize the elephant, and at the same 
time to hring hack the Indian for punishment. 
Overtaking the fugitive they attempted to exe- 
cute their purpose, but he resisted and attacked 
his assailants from the back of the elephant, 
which in the affray fought on the side of its 
injured master. Such was the state of matters at 
the first, but afterwards, when the Indian on being 
wounded slipped down to the ground, the ele- 
phant, true to his salt, bestrides him as soldiers 
in battle bestride a fallen comrade, whom they 
cover with their shields, kills many of the 
assailants, and puts the rest to flight. Then 
twining his trunk around his rearer he hfted 
him on to his back, and carried him home to the 
stall, and remained with him like a faithful friend 
with his friend, and showed him every kind atten- 
tion.* [O men ! how base are ye ! ever dancing 
merrily when ye hear the music of the frying-pan, 
ever revelling in the banquet, but traitors in the 
hour of danger, and vainly and for nought sul- 
lying the sacred name of friendship.] 

* Compare the account given in Plutarch's Life of 
AlexcmdeTj of the elephant of P6ros : — " This elephant during 
the whole battle gave extraordinary proofs of his sagacity 
and care of the ^g's person. As long as that prince was 
able to fight, he defended him vrith great courage, and re- 
pralsed all assailants ; and when he perceived him ready to 
sink under the multitude of darts, and the wounds vnth 
which he was covered, to prevent his falHng off he kneeled 
down in the softest manner, and vyith his proboscis gently 
drew every dart out of his body." 



Digitized by 



Google 



120 

Fragm* LIV. 

t^seudo-Origen, Philosoph, 24, ed. Delarue, Paris, 
1783, vol. I. p. 904. 

0/ the Brdhmana and their Philosophy, 

(Of. Fragm* xli., xliv., xlv.) 
Of the Brachhmoms in In^ia, 

There is among the Brachhmans in India a sect 
of philosophers who adopt an independent life» 
and ahstain from animal food and all victuals 
cooked by fire, being content to subsist upon 
fruits, which they do not so much as gather from 
the trees, but pick up when they have dropped to 
the ground, and their drink is the water of the river 
T a g a b e n a-t Throughout life they go about 
naked, saying that the body has been given by 
the Deity as a covering for the soul. J They hold 
that God is light, § but not such light as we see 

t Probably the Sanskpt Tnn^venfi, now the Tnnga^ 
bhadra, a large affluent of the Krishnft. 

% Vide Ind, Ant vol. V. p. 128, note f, A doctrine of the 
Ved&nta school of philosophy, according to which the soul 
is incased as in a sheath, or rather a succession of sheaths^ 
The first or inner case is the intellectual one, composed of 
the sheer and simple elements uncombined, and consisting 
of the intellect joined with the five senses. The second is 
the mental sheath, in which mind is joined with the pre- 
ceding, or, as some hold, with the organs of action. The 
third comprises these organs and the vital faculties, and is 
called the organic or vital case. These three sheaths {koSa) 
constitute the subtle frame which attends the soul in its 
transmigrations. The exterior case is composed of the coarse 
elements combined in certain proportions, and is called the 
gross body. See Golebrooke's Essa/y on the Philosophy of 
the Hivmus, Cowell's ed. pp. 395-6. 

§ The affinity between Grod and light is the burden of the 
OoMatri or hobest verse of the Veda. 



Digitized by 



Google 



121 

with the eye, nor such as the sun or fire, but 
God is with them the Word, — by which term they 
do not mean articulate speech, but the discourse 
of reason, whereby the hidden mysteries of know- 
ledge are discerned by the wise. This light, how- 
ever, which they call the Word, and think to be 
God, is, they say, known only by the Brachhmans 
themselves, because they alone have discarded 
vanity, li which is the outermost covering of the 
soul. The members of this sect regard death 
with contemptuous indifference, and, as we have 
seen already, they always pronounce the name of 
the Deity with a tone of peculiar reverence, and 
adore him with hymns. They neither have wives 
nor beget children. Persons who desire to lead 
a Ufe like theirs cross over from the other side of 
the river, and remain with them for good, never 
returning to their own country. These also arc 
called Brachhmans, although they do not follow 
the same mode of life, for there are women in the 
country, from whom the native inhabitants are 
sprung, and of these women they beget off- 
spring. With regard to the Word, which they 
call God, they hold that it is corporeal, and that 
it wears the body as its external covering, just as 

(I Kevobo^ia, which probably translates ahamMray literally 
' egotism/ and hence * self-conscionsness/ the peculiar and 
api>ropriate function of which is selfish conviction ; that is, a 
belief that in perception and meditation * V am concern- 
ed J that the objects of sense concern Me — in short, that 
I AM. The knowledge, however, which comes from com- 
prehending that Being which has self -existence completely 
destroys the ignorance which says * I am.' 



Digitized by 



Google 



122 

one wears the woollen surcoat, and that when it 
divests itself of the hody with which it is en- 
wrapped it becomes manifest to the eye. There 
is war, the Brachhmans bold, in the body where- 
with they are clothed, and they regard the 
body as being the fruitful source of wars, and, as 
we have already shown, fight against it like soldiers 
in battle contending against the enemy. They 
maintain, moreover, that all men are held in bond- 
age, like prisoners of war,^ to their own innate 
enemies, the sensual appetites, gluttony, anger, 
joy, grief, longing desire, and such like, while it 
is only the man who has triumphed over these 
enemies who goes to God. D a n d a m i s accord- 
higlyi to whom Alexander the Makedonian paid a 
visit, is spoken of by the Brachhmans as a god be- 
cause he conquered in the warfare against the 
body, and on the other hand they condemn K a 1 a- 
n o s as one who had impiously apostatized from 
their philosophy. The Brachhmans, therefore, 
when they have shuffled off the body, see the pure 
sunlight as fish see it when they spring up out of 
the water into the air. 



T Compare Plato, Phmdo, cap. 32, where Sokratf a 
speaks of the soul as at present confined in the body as in a 
species o£ prison. This was a doctrine of the Pythagoreans, 
whose philosophy, even in its most striking peculiarities, 
bears such a close resemblance to the Indian as greatly to 
favour the supposition that it was directly borrowed from 
it. There was even a tradition that Pythagoras had yisited 
India. 



Digitized by 



Google 



123 

Fragm. LV. 

Pallad. de Bragmambus, pp. 8, 20 et seq. ed. Londin. 1668. 
{Camera/r. Ubell. gnomolog. pp. 116, 124 et seq.) 

Of Kalanos and Mandanis, 
(Cf. Fragm. xli. 19, xliv., xlv.) 
They (the Bragmanes) subsist upon such fruits 
as they can find, and on wild herbs, which the 
earth spontaneously produces, and drink only water. 
They wander about in the woods, and sleep at 
night on pallets of the leayes of trees. . . . 

"Kalanos, then, your false friend, held this 
opinion, but he is despised and trodden upon 
by us. By you, however, accomplice as he was 
in causing many evils to you all, he is honoured 
and worshipped, while from our society be has been 
contemptuously cast out as unprofitable. And why 
not ? when everything which we trample under 
foot is an object of admiration to the lucre-loving 
Kalanos, your worthless friend, but no friend of 
ours, — a miserable creature, and more to be pitied 
than the unhappiest wretch, for by setting his heart 
on lucre be wrought the perdition of his soul ! 
Hence he seemed neither worthy of us, nor worthy 
of the friendship of God, and hence he neither 
was content to revel away life in the woods beyond 
all reach of care, nor was he cheered with the 
hope of a blessed hereafter : for by his love of 
money he slew the very life of his miserable soul. 

** We have, however, amongst us a sage called 
D a n d a m i s, whose home is the woods, where he 



Digitized by 



Google 



124 

lies on a pallet of leaves, and where he has nigh 
at hand the fountain of peace, whereof he drinks, 
sacking, as it were, the pure breast of a mother." 

King Alexander, accordingly, when he heard 
of all this, was desirous of learning the doctrines 
of the sect, and so he sent for this Dandamis, 
as heing their teacher and president 

Onesikrates was therefore despatched to fetch 
him, and when he found the great sage he said, 
** Hail to thee, thou teacher of the Bragmanes. 
The .son of the mighty god Zeus, king Alexander, 
who is the sovereign lord of all men, asks you 
to go to him, and if you comply, he will reward 
you with great and splendid gifts,, but if you 
refuse will cut off your head." 

Dandamis, with a complacent smile, heard him 
to the end, hut did not so much as lift up his head 
from his couch of leaves, and while still retaining 
his recumbent attitude returned this scornful 
answer: — ** God, the supreme king, is never the 
author of insolent wrong, but is the creator of light, 
of peace, of life, of water, of the body of man, and 
of souls, and these he receives when death sets them 
free, being in no way subject to evil desire. He 
alone is the god of my homage, who abhors slaughter 
and instigates no wars. But Alexander is not 
God, since he must taste of death ; and how can 
such as he be the world's master, who has not yet 
reached the further shore of the river Tiberoboas, 
and has not yet seated himself on a throne of 
universal dominion ? Moreover, Alexander has 



Digitized by 



Google 



125 

neither as yet entered living into Hades,* nor 
does he know the course of the sun through the 
central regions of the earth, while the nations on 
its boundaries have not so much as heard his 
name.f If his present dominions are not capacious 
enough for his desire, let him cross the Ganges 
river, and he will find a region able to sustain 
men if the country on our side be too narrow 
to hold him. Know this, however, that what 
Alexander offers me, and the gifts he pro- 
mises, are all things to me utterly useless; 
but the things which I prize, and find of real use 
and worth, are these leaves which are my house, 
these blooming plants which supply me with 
dainty food, and the water which is my drink, 
while all other possessions and things, which 
are amassed with anxious care, are wont to prove 
ruinous to those who amass them, and cause only 
sorrow and vexation, with which every poor mor« 
tal is fully fraught. But as for me, I lie 
upon the forest leaves, and, having nothing which 
requires guarding, close my eyes in tranquil 
slumber ; whereas had I gold to guard, that 
would banish sleep. The earth supplies me 
with everything, even as a mother her child with 
milk. I go wherever I please, and there are no 

• C&v €V dbov ovdcTTO) TTaprjXBev, The Latin version 
hsM non zonam Oadem transiit, * has not crossed the zone 
of Cadiz.' 

t The text here is so oormpt as to be almost untranslat- 
able. I have therefore rendered from the Latin, thongh not 
quite closely. 



Digitized by 



Google 



126 

cares with which I am forced to cumber myself, 
against my will. Should Alexander cut off my 
head, he cannot also destroy my soul. My head 
alone, now silent, will remain, but the soul will 
go away to its Master, leaving the body hke a torn 
garment upon the earth, whence also it was taken. 
I then, becoming spirit, shall ascend to my God, 
who enclosed us in flesh, and left us upon the 
earth to prove whether when here below we shall 
live obedient to his ordinances, and who also will 
require of us, when we depart hence to his pre- 
sence, an account of our life, since he is judge of all 
proud wrong-doing ; for the groans of the oppress- 
ed become the punishments of the oppressors. 

** Let Alexander, then, terrify with these threats 
those who wish for gold and for wealth, and who 
dread death, for against us these weapons are both 
alike powerless, since the Bragmanes neither love 
gold nor fear death. Go, then, and tell Alexander 
this : * Dandamis has no need of aught that is yours, 
and therefore will not go to you, but if you want 
anything from Dandamis come you to him.' "X 

Alexander, on receiving from Onesikrates a re- 
port of the interview, felt a stronger desire than 
ever to see Dandamis, who, though old and 
naked, was the only fintagonist in whom he, the 
conqueror of many nations, had found more than 
his match, &c. 

t " Others say Dandamis entered into no discourse with 
the messengers, bat only asked ' why Alexander had taken 
so long a journey ?' " — Plutarch's Alexander. 



Digitized by 



Google 



127 
Fragm. LV. B. 

Ambrosius, De Morihus Brachmanoirwm, pp. 62, 68 et 
seq. ed. Pallad. Londin. 1668. 

Of Calanus and Mandanis, 

They {the Brachmans) eat what they find on the 
ground, snch as leaves of trees and wild herbs, 
like cattle 

"Calanus is your friend, but he is despised 
and trodden upon by us. He, then, who was the 
author of many evils among you, is honoured and 
worshipped by you ; but since he is of no importance 
he is rejected by us, and those things we certainly do 
not seek, please Calanus because of his greediness 
for money. But he was not ours, a man such as 
has miserably injured and lost his soul, on which 
account he is plainly unworthy to be a friend 
either of God or of ours, nor has he deserved 
security among the woods in this world, nor can he 
hope for the glory which is promised in the future." 

When the emperor Alexander came to the 
forests, he was not able to see Dandamis as he 
passed through. . . . 

When, therefore, the above-mentioned messenger 
came to Dandamis, he addressed him thus : — " The 
emperor Alexander, the son of the great Jupiter, 
who is lord of the human race, has ordered that 
you should hasten to him, for if you come, he will 
give you many gifts, but if you refuse he will be- 
head you as a punishment for your contempt." 
When these words came to the ears of Dandamis, 
he rose not from his leaves whereon he lay, but re- 
clining and smiling he replied in this way : — " The 
greatest God," he said, *'can do injury to no one, but 



Digitized by 



Google 



128 

restores again the light of life to those who haVd 
departed. Accordingly he alone is my lord who 
forbids murder and excites no wars. But Alex- 
ander is no God, for he himself will have to die. 
How, then, can he be the lord of all, who has not 
yet crossed the river Tyberoboas, nor has 
made the whole world his abode, nor crossed the 
zone of G a d e s, nor has beheld the course of the 
sun in the centre of the world P Therefore many 
nations do not yet even know his name. If, how- 
ever, the country he possesses cannot contain him, 
let him cross our river and he will find a soil 
which is able to support men. All those things 
Alexander promises would be useless to me 
if he gave them: I have leaves for a house, 
live on the herbs at hand and water to drink ; other 
things collected with labour, and which perish 
and yield nothing but sorrow to those seeking 
them or possessing them, — these I despise. I there- 
fore now rest secure, and with closed eyes I care 
for nothing. If I wish to keep gold, I destroy 
my sleep ; Earth supplies me with everything, as 
a mother does to her child. Wherever I wish to 
go, I proceed, and wherever I do not wish to be, 
no necessity of care can force me to go. And if he 
wish to cut off my head, he cannot take my soul ; 
he will only take the fallen head, but the depart- 
ing soul will leave the head like a portion of some 
garment, and will restore it to whence it received 
it, namely, to the earth. But when I shall have 
become a spirit I shall ascend to God, who has 
enclosed it within this flesh. When he did this 
he wished to try us, how, after leaving him, we 
would live in this world. And afterwards, when 



Digitized by 



Google 



129 

we shall have returned to him, he will demand 
from as an account of this life. Standing by him 
I shall see my injury, and shall contemplate his 
judgment on those who injured me : for the sighs 
and groans of the injured become the punishments 
of the oppressors. 

*' Let Alexander threaten with this them that 
desire riches or fear death, both of which I de- 
spise. For Brachmans neither love gold nor dread 
death. Go, therefore, and tell Alexander this : — 
' Dandamis seeks nothing of yours, but if you think 
you need Something of his, disdain not to go to 
him.'" 

When Alexander heard these words through 
the interpreter, he wished the more to see such 
a man, since he, who had subdued many nations, 
was overcome by an old naked man, &o. 

Fragm. LVI. 

Plin. Hist. Nat, VI. 21. 8—23. 11. 
List of the Indian Races, ^ 
The other journeys made thence {from the 
Hyphasis) for Seleukos Nikator are as follows : — 
168 miles to the Hesidrus, and to the river 
Jomanes as many (some copies add 5 miles) ; 
from thence to the Ganges 112 miles. 119 miles 
to Rhodopha (others give 325 miles for this dis- 
tance). To the town Kalinipaxal 67 — 500. Others 
give 265 miles. Thence to the confluence of the 
Jomanes and Ganges 625 miles (many add 13 

§ This list Pliny has borrowed for the most part from 
Megasthenes. Cf. Schwanbeck, pp. 16 seq.y 57 seq. 



Digitized by 



Google 



130 

miles), and to the town Palimbothra 425. To 
the mouth of the Ganges 738 miles. || 

II According to the MSS. 638 or 637 miles. The places 
mentioned in this famous itinerary all lay on the Koyal 
Boad, which ran from the Indus to Faiibothra. The^ 
have been thus identified. The Hesidrus is now the Satlej, 
and the point of departure lay immediately below its 
junction with the Hyphasis (now the Bi&s). Hie direct 
route thence ('iHdLudluan&, Sirhind, and Amb&l&) conducted 
the traveller to the ferry of the Jomanes, now the Jamnd, 
in the neighbourhood of the present Bureah, whence the 
road led to the Ganges at a pomt which, to judge from the 
distance given (112 miles), must have beeb near the site of 
the far-famed Hastinapura. The next stage to be reached 
was Bhodopha, the position of which, both its name and its 
distance from the (ranges (119 miles) combine to fix at 
Dabhai, a small town about 12 miles to the south of 
Anupshahr. Kalinipaxa, the next stage, Mannert and 
Lassen would identify with Kanai:g (the Eany&kubja of 
Sanskrit); but M. de St.-Martin, objecting to this that 
Fliny was not likely to have designated so important and so 
celebrated a city by so obscure an appellation, finds a site 
for it in the neighbourhood on the banks of the Ikshumati, 
a river of Fanchfila mentioned in the great Indian poems. 
This river, he remarks, must also have been called the 
Kalinadi, as the names of it still in current use, Kalini and 
Kalindri, prove. Now, as ' paxa' transliterates the Sanskrit 
' paksha,' a side, Kalinipaxa, to judge from its name, must 
designate a town lying near the Kalinadi. 

The figures which represent the distances have given nse 
to much dispute, some of them being inconsistent either 
with others, or with the real distances. The text, accord- 
ingly, has generally been supposed to be corrupt, so far at 
least as tiie figures are concerned. M. de St.-Martin, 
however, accepting the figures nearly as they stand, shows 
them to be fairly correct. The first difficulty presents it- 
self in tiie words, " Others give 825 inilesfor this distance" 
By * this d/istance* cannot be meant the distance between 
the Ganges and Bhodopha, but between the Hesidrus and 
'Bhodopha, which the addition of the figures shows to be 
399 miles. The shorter estimate of others (326 miles) 
measures the length of a more direct route by way of 
PatiaiA, Thanesvara, Panipat, and Dehli. The next diffi- 
culty has probably been occasioned by a corruption of 
the text. It lies m the words " Ad Calinipaxa oppidum 
CLXVII. D. Alii CCLXV. mill." The numeral D has 
generally been taken to mean 500 pices, or half a Boman 
mile, making the translation run thus :— ^' To Kalinipaxa 



Digitized by 



Google 



131 

The races which we may enumerate without 
being tedious, from the chain of Emodus, of which 

167i miles. Others gire 265 miles." But M. de St.-Martm 
prefers to think that the D has, by some mangling of the 
text, been detached from the beginning of the second 
number, with which it formed the number DLXV., and 
been appended to the first, being led to this conclusion on 
finding that the number 565 sums up almost to a nicety the 
distance from the Hesidrus to Kalinipaxa, as thus : — 

From the Hesidrus to the Jomanes 168 miles. 

From the Jomanes to the Ganges 112 „ 

Prom the Ganges to Bhodopha 119 „ 

From Rhodopha to Kalinipaxa 167 „ 

Total.,. 566 miles. 
Pliny's carelessness in confounding total with partial dis- 
tances has created the next difficulty, which lies in his stat- 
ing that the distance from Kalinipaxa to the confluence of 
the Jomanes and the Ganges is 625 miles, while in reality 
it is only about 227. The figures may be corrupt, but it is 
much more probable that they represent the distance of 
some stage on the route remoter from the confluence of the 
rivers than Kalinipaxa. This must have been the passage 
of the Jomanes, for the distance — 

From the Jomanes to the Ganges is ... 112 miles. 

Thence to fihodopha 119 „ 

Thence to Kalinipaxa 167 „ 

Thence to the confluence of the rivers. 227 „ 

Total... 625 miles. 
This is exactly equal to 5000 stadia, the length of the 
Indian Mesopotamia or DoAb, the PanchSla of Sanskrit 
geography, and the AntarvSda of lexicographers. 

The foregoing conclusions M. de St. -Martin has summed 

up in the table annexed:— Roman miles. Stadia. 

From the Hesidrus to the Jomanes. 168 1344 

From the Jomanes to the Ganges... 112 896 

Thence to Rhodopha 119 952 

From the Hesidrus to Rhodopha by 

a more direct route 325 2600 

From Rhodopha to Kalinipaxa 167 ^ 1336 

Total distonce from the Hesidrus to 

Kalinipaxa 565 4520 

From Kalinipaxa to the confluence 

of the Jomanes and Ganges (227) (1816) 

Total distance from the passage of 
the Jomanes to its confluence 
with the Ganges 625 6000 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 

a spur is called I m a u s (meaning in the natiye 
language snotoy),^ are the Isari, Cosyri, 
I z g i, and on the hills the Chisiotosagi,'*' and 

FUny assigns 425 miles as the distance from the con- 
fluence of the rivers to Palibothra, but, as it is in reality 
only 248, the figures have probably been altered. He gives, 
lastiy, 638 miles as the cQstance from Palibothra to the 
mouth of the Granges, which agrees closely with the esti- 
mate of Megasthends, who makes it 5000 stadia— if that 
indeed was hi» estimate, and not 6000 stadia as Strabo in 
one passage alleges it was. The distance by land from 
P&tn& to Tamluk (Tamralipta, the old port of the Ganges' 
mouth) is 445 English or 480 Boman miles. The distance 
by the river, wMeh » sinuous, is of course much greater. 
See E*tvde swr le Qiogra/phie Orecque et Latine de VInde, 
par P. V. de Saint-Martm, pp. 271-278. 

^ By EmoduB was generally designated that part of the 
Himalayan range whicb extended along Nepfil and Bhi^tan 
and onward toward the ocean. Other forms of the name 
are Emoda, Emodon, Hemodes. Lassen derives the word 
fromthe Sanskrit haimavata,. in Prftkyit haimdta, * snowy.' 
If this be so, Hemodus is the more correct form. Another 
derivation refers the word to * H^m&dri' {hema, * gold,' 
and ad/ri, ' mountain')^ tbe *' golden mountains,' — so called 
either because they were thought to contain gold mines, or 
because of the aspect they presented when their snowy 
peaks reflected the golden effulgence of sunset. Imaus 
represents the Sanskrit himavata; 'snowy.' The name wa» 
applied at first by the Greeks to the Hindilk Kush and 
the Himftlayas, but was in course of time transferred to the 
Bolor range. This chain, which runs north and south, was 
regarded by the ancients as dividing^ Northern Asia into 
' Skythia mtra Imaum' and * Skythia extra Imaum,' and 
it has formed for ages the boundary between China and 
Turkestan. 

• These four tribes were located somewhere in Easmtr 
or its immediate neighbourhood. The Isari are unknown, 
but are probably the same as the Brysari previously men- 
tioned by Pliny. The Cosyri are easily to be identified 
with the KhasSra mentioned in the MahAohdrata as neigh- 
bonrs of the Daradas and Kasmiras. Their name, it has 
been conjectured, survives in KhAchar, one of the three great 
divisions of the Kfithis of Gujar&t, who appear to have come 
originally from the Panj&b. The Izgi are mentioned in 
Ptolemy, under the name of the Sizyges, as a people of 
S^rik^, This is, however, a mistake, as they inhabited the 
alpine region which extends above Kasmfr towards the 



Digitized by 



Google 



133 

the Brachmanse, a name comprising many 
tribes, among which are the Maccocaling ee.-f 

north and north-west. The Chisiotosagfi or Chirotosagi 
are perhaps identical with the Chiconss (whom Pliny else- 
where mentions), in spite of the addition to their name of 
' sagi/ which may have merely indicated them to be a branch 
of the ^ftkas, — that is, the Skythians, — ^by whom India was 
overran before the time of its conquest b^rthe Aryans. They 
are mentioned in Mann X. 44 together with the Pau^drakas, 
Odras, DrAvidas, K&mbojas, Yavanas, Paradas, Pahlavas, 
Chinas, Kiratas, Daradas, and Khasas. If Chirotosagi be 
the right reading of their name, there can be little doubt 
of their identity with the Ktratas. — See P. V. de St.- 
Martin's work already quoted, pp. 195-197. But for the 
KhAchars, see Ind, Ant. vol. IV. p. 323. 

t V. 1. Bracmanss. Pliny at once transports his readers 
from the mountains of Kasmir to the lower part of the valley 
of the Ganges. Here he places the Brachmanse, whom he 
takes to be, not what they actu^ly were, the leading caste 
of the population, but a powerful race composed of many 
tribes — ^the Maccooalingse being of the number. This tribe, 
as well as the Gangaridse-Ealingse, and the Modogalingse 
afterwards mentioned, are subdivisions of the ^lingse, 
a widely diffused race, which spread at one time from the 
delta of the Ganges all along the eastern coast of the pe- 
ninsula, though afterwards they did not extend southward 
beyond Orissa. In the MahdihhArata they are mentioned 
as occupying, along with the Yangas (from whom Bengal is 
named) and three other leading tribes, the region which 
lies between Magadha and the sea. The Maccocaling», 
then, are the Mag lux of the Kalingsd. ' * Magha," says M. de 
St.-Martin, " is the name of one of the non- Aryan tribes 
of greatest importance and widest division in the lower 
Crangetic region, where it is broken up into several special 
^oups extending from Arakan and Western Asam, where 
it is found under the name of Mogh (Anglic^ Mugs)^ as far 
as to the Mdghars of the central valleys of Nepftl, to the 
Maqhayas, Magahis, or Maghyas of Southern BaJiibr (the 
ancient Magadha), to the ancient Magra of Bengal, and to 
the Magora of Orissa. These last, by their position, may 
properly be taken to represent our Maccocalingsd." " The 
Modogalingse," continues the same author, '^lind equally 
their representatives in the ancient Mada, a colony which 
the Book of Manu mentions in his enumeration of the im- 
pure tribes of Ary&varta, and which he names by the side 
of the Andhra, another people of the lower Ganges. The 
Monghyr inscription, winch belongs to the earlier part of 



Digitized by 



Google 



134 

The river P r i n a s J and the C a i n a s (which flows 
into the Ganges) are both navigable. § The tribes 
called C a 1 i n g 86 are nearest the sea, and higher 
up are the M a n d e i, and the M a 1 1 i in whose 



the 8tli century of oar era, also names tbe Med/x, as a low 
tribe of this region {As. Res. vol. I. p. 126, Calcutta, 1788), 
and, what is remarkable, their name is found joined to that 
of the Andhra (Andbaraka), precisely as in the text of Ma- 
nu. Pliny assigns for their habitation a large island of 
the Granges ; and the word Galinga (for Kalinga), to which 
their name is attached, necessarily places this island to- 
wards the sea-board — ^perhaps in the Delta." 

The GrangaridfiB or Gangarides occupied the region cor- 
responding roughly with that now called Lower Bengal, 
and consisted of various indigenous tribes, which in the 
course of time became more or less Aryanized. As no word 
is found in Sanskrit to which their name corresponds, it has 
been supposed of Greek invention (Lassen, Ind. Alt. vol. II. 
p. 201), but erroneously, for it must have been current at 
the period of the Makedonian invasion : since Alexander, 
in reply to inquiries regarding the south country, was 
informed that the region of the Ganges was inhabited by 
two principal nations, the Prasii and the Gangartdsd. M. 
de ^.-Martin thinks that their name has been preserved 
almost identically in that of the Gonghrls of South Bah&r, 
whose traditions refer their origin to TirhAt ; and he would 
identify their royal city ParthaUs (or Portalis) with Vard- 
dhana (contraction of Varddham&na), now Bardwfin. 
Others, however, place it, as has been elsewhere stated, on the 
Mah&nadt. In Ptolemy their capital is Gangd, which must 
have been situated near where Calcutta now stands. The 
Gangarides are mentioned by Virgil, Qeorg. III. 27 : — 
In f oribus pugnam ex auro solidoque elephanto 
Gaugaridum faciam, victorisque arma Quirini. 
" High o'er the gate in elephant and gold 
The crowd shall Csesar's Indian war behold." 

(Dryden*s translation.) 

X V- 1- Pumas. The Prinas is probably the T&mas& or 
Tons a, which in the Purdnas is called the Parnftsfi. The 
Cainas, notwithstanding the objections of Schwanbeck, 
must be identified with the Cane, which is a tributary of 
tbe JamnA. 

§ For the identification of these and other afiHuents of the 
Granges see Notes on An'ian, c. iv., Ind. Ant. vol. V. 
p. 331. 



Digitized by 



Google 



135 

country is Mount M a 1 1 u s, the boundary of all 
that district being the Ganges. 

(22.) This river, according to some, rises from 
uncertain sources, like the Nile,|| and inundates 
similarly the countries lying along its course; 
others say that it rises on the Skythian mountains, 
and has nineteen tributaries, of which, besides 
those already mentioned, the Condochates, 
Erannoboa s,^ Cosoagus, and S o n u s are 
navigable. Others again assert that it issues forth 
at once with loud roar from its fountain, and 
after tumbling down a steep and rocky channel is 
received immediately on reaching the level plains 
into a lake, whence it flows out with a gentle 
current, being at the narrowest eight miles, and 
on the average a hundred stadia, in breadth, and 
never of less depth than twenty paces (one hun- 
dred feet) in the final part of its course, which is 
through the country of the Gangarides. The 
royal* city of the C a 1 i n g se is called P a r- 
t h a 1 i s. Over their king 60,000 foot-soldiers, 

II For an acconnt of the different theories regarding the 
source of the Granges see Smith's Diet, of Class, Oeog. 

^ Condochatem, Erannohoam. — v. 1. Canncham (Va- 
mam), Erranoboan. 

• regia. — v. 1. regio. The common reading, however — 
" Grangaridum Calingarum. Regia," &c., makes the Gan- 
garides a branch of the Kalingse. This is probably the cor- 
rect reading, for, as Greneral Cunningham states {Anc. Oeog. 
oflnd. pp. 518-519), certain inscriptions speak of * Tri-Ka- 
linga,' or * the Three Kalingas.* " The name of Tri-Ka- 
linga," he adds, " is probably old, as Pliny mentions the 
MaccO'CoblingcB and the Gangarides-Calingcc as separate 
peoples from the Calingse, while the Mahdhhdrata naines 
the Kalingas three separate times, and each time in con- 



Digitized by 



Google 



136 

lOOOf horsemen, 700 elephants keep watch and 
ward in ** procinct of war." 

For among the more civilized Indian com- 
munities life is spent in a great variety of separate 
occupations. Some till the soil, some are 
soldiers, some traders ; the noblest and richest 
take part in the direction of state affairs, adminis- 
ter justice, and sit in council with the kings. A 
fifth class devotes itself to the philosophy pre- 
valent in the country, which almost assumes the 
form of a religion, and the members always put 
an end to their life by a voluntary death on a 
burning funeral pile.;]; In addition to these 
classes there is one half-wild, which is constantly 
engaged in a task of immense labour, beyond the 
power of words to describe — that of hunting and 

junction with diJSerent peoples." (H. H. Wilson in VisivMi 
Furdna, Ist ed. pp.185, 187 note, and 188.) As Tri-Kalinga 
thus corresponds with the great province ofTeling&na, it 
seems probable that the name of Teling^a may be only a 
slightly contracted form of Tri-KalingAna, or ' the Three 



t LA. miU, — V. L LXX. mill. 

X Lncian, in his satirical piece on the death of Peregrines 
(cap. 25), refers to this practice : — " But what is the motive 
which prompts this man (Peregrines) to fling himself into 
the flames ? God knows it is simply that he may show off 
how he can endure pain as do the Brachmans, to whom it 
pleased Theagends to liken him, just as if India had not 
her own crop of fools and vain-glorious persons. But let 
him bjr all means imitate the Brachmans, for, as Onesi- 
kritos informs us, who was the pilot of Alexander's fleet 
and saw Kalanos burned, they do not immolate themselves 
by leaping into the flames, but when the pyre is made 
they stand close beside it perfectly motionless, and suffer 
themselves to be gently broiled; then decorously ascend- 
ing the pile thev are burned to death, and never swerve, 
even ever so little, from their recumbent position." 



Digitized by 



Google 



137 

taming elephants. They employ these animald 
in ploughing and for riding on, and regard them 
as forming the main part of their stock in cattle. 
They employ them in war and in fighting 
for their country. In choosing them for war, 
regard is had to their age, strength, and size. 

There is a very large island in the Ganges 
which is inhabited by a single tribe called M o d o- 
g a 1 i n g 8e.§ Beyond are situated the Mo d ub ae, 
M o 1 i n d 86, the U b e r ae with a handsome town 
of the same name, the Galmodroesi, Preti, 
C a 1 i s s 8e,|| Sasuri^ Passalae, Colubm, 
Orxulee, Abali, Taluct ae.^ The king of 

§ vv. 11. modo Gralingam, ModogaHcam^ 

II Calissae. — v. 1. Aclissse. 

•jf These tribes were ctiefly located in the regions between 
the left bank of the Ganges and the HiraAlayas. Of the 
Galmodroesi, Preti, Calissse, Sasuri, and OraralsB nothing 
is known, nor can their names be identified with any to 
be found in Sanskyit literature. The ModubsB represent 
beyond doubt the Moutiba, a people mentioned in the 
AitoiArSya BrAhmana along with other non- Aryan tribes 
which occupied the country north of the Ganges at the 
time when the Br&hmans established their first settlements 
in the country. The Molindse are mentioned as the Maladain 
the Pur&nic lists, but no further trace of them is met with. 
The UbersB must be referred to the Bhars, a numerous 
race spread over the central districts of the region spoken 
of, and extending as far as to Assam. The name is pro- 
nounced differently in diflferent districts, and 'variously 
written, as Bors or Bhors, Bhowris, Barriias and Bhftrhiyas, 
Bareyas, Baoris, Bharais, &c. The race, though formerly 
powerful, is now one of the lowest classes of the population. 
The Fa8sals9 are identified as the inhabitants of PanchSla, 
which, as already stated, was the old name of the Dodb. 
The ColubsB respond to the K&ultita or KolAta— men- 
tioned in the 4th book of the Rdmd|/ana, in the enumera- 
tion of the races of the west, also in the Vardha SaiiMIA 
in the list of the people of the north-west, and in the 
Indian drama called the Mud/ra Edkshasa, of which the 
hero is the well-known Chandragupta. They were set- 



Digitized by 



Google 



138 

thpse keeps under arms 50,000 foot- soldiers, 4000* 
cavalry, and 400 elephants. Next come the 
Andar8B,t a still more powerful race, which 
possesses numerous villages, and thirty towns de- 
fended hy walls and towers, and which supplies 
its king with an army of 100,000 infantry, 2000 
cavalry, and 1000 elephants. Gold is very 
abundant among the D a r d ee, and silver among 
theSetfie.J 

tied not far from the Upper Jamnft. About the middle 
of the 7th century they were visited by the famous Chinese 
traveller Hiwen-Thsfing, who writes their name as Kiu- 
In-to. Tule, however, places the Passalse in the south-west 
of Tirhut, and the Kolubsd on the Kondochates (Gandaki) 
in the north-east of Gorakhpur and north-west of S&ran. 
The Abali answer perhaps to the Gvallas or Halva'ls 
of South Bah&r and of the hills which covered the 
southern parts of the ancient Magadha. The Taluctsa 
are the people of the kingdom of Tamralipta mentioned 
in the Mah&bhdrata. In the writings of the Buddhists of 
Ceylon the name appears as Tamahtti, corresponding to 
the Tamluk of the present day. Between these two forma 
of the name that given by Pliny is evidently the connect- 
ing link. Tamluk lies to the south-west of Calcutta, from 
which it is distant in a direct line about 35 miles. It was 
in old times the main emx>orium of the trade carried on 
between Gangetic India and Ceylon. 

« IV. if.— V. 1. III. M. 

t The AndarsB are readily identified with the Andhra of 
Sanskrit — a great and powerful nation settled originally in 
the Dekhan between the middle part of the courses of the 
God&vari and the Krishi)i& rivers, but which, before the 
time of Megasthen^s, had spread their sway towards the 
north as far as the upper course of the Narmadfi (Ner- 
budda), and, as has been already indicated, the lower 
districts of the Gangetic basin. Vide hid. Ant. vol. V. 
p. 176. For a notice of Andhra (the modern TeUngSna) see 
General Cunningham's Anc. Oeog. oflnd. pp. 527-530. 

X Pliny here reverts to where he started from in his enu- 
meration of the tribes. The Setse are the S&ta or S&talnsi 
of Sanskrit geography, which locates them in the neighbour- 
hood of the Daradas. [According to Yule, however, they 
are the Sanskrit Sekas, and he places them on the Ban&s 
about Jhajpur, south-east from Ajmir. — Ed. Ind. Ant] 



Digitized by 



Google 



139 

But the P r a s i i surpass in power and glory 
every other people, not only in this quarter, but 
one may say in all India, their capital being 
Palibothra, a very large and wealthy city, 
after which some call the people itself the P a 1 i- 
b o t h r i, — nay, even the whole tract along the 
Ganges. Their king has in his pay a standing 
army of 600,000 foot-soldiers, 30,0a0 cavalry, 
and 9000 elephants : whence may be formed some 
conjecture as to the vastness of his resources. 

After these, but more inland, are the M o ne d e s 
and S u a r i, § in whose country is Mount M a 1 e u s, 
on which shadows fall towards the north in winter, 
and towards the south in summer, for six months 
alternately . II Baeton asserts that the north 
pole in these parts is seen but once in the year, 
and only for fifteen days ; while Megasthenes says 
that the same thing happens in many parts of 
India. The south pole is called by the Indians 
D r am as a. The river J o m a n e s flows through 
the Palibothri into the Ganges between the 
towns M e t h o r a and Carisobor a.^ In the 

§ The Monedes or Mandei are placed by Yule about 
Gangpur, on the upper waters of the BrShmanl, S.W. of 
Chlratia Nfigpur. Lassen places them S. of the Mah&nadi 
about Sonpur, where Yule has the Suari or Sabaraa, the 
^avara of Sanskrit authors, which Lassen places between 
Sonpur and Singhbhiim. See Ind. Ant vol. VI. note §, 
p. 127.— Edi Ind. Ant. 

II This, of course, can only occur at the equator, from 
which the southern extremity of India is about 500 miles 
distant. 

IT Palibothri must denote here the subjects x>f the realm 
of which Palibothra was the capital, and Jiot merely the 
inhabitants of that city, as Bennel and others supposed, 



Digitized by 



Google 



I 



140 

parts which He southward from the Ganges the in- 
habitants, already swarthy, are deeply coloured 
by the sun, though not scorched black like the 
Ethiopians. The nearer they approach the Indus 
the more plainly does their complexion betray 
the influence of the sun. 

The Indus skirts the frontiers of the Prasii, 
whose mountain tracts are said to be inhabited by 
the Pygmies.* Artemidorust sets down the 
distance between the two rivers at 121 miles. 

(23.) The Indus, called by the inhabitants 
S i n d u s, rising on that spur of Mount Caucasus 
which is called P a r o p a m i s u s, from sources 



mnd 80 fixed its site at the conflaence of the Ganges and 
Jamnn&. Methora is easily identified with Mathnrfi. 
Carisobora is read otherwise as Chrysobon, Cyrisoborcaj 
Cleisoboras. " This city," says General Cunningham, "has 
not yet been identified, but I feel satisfied that it must be 
Vrinddvcma, 16 miles to the north of MathurA. Vrindd- 
vana means 'the grove of the basil -trees,' which is 
famed all over India as the scene of Kjrishiia's sports with 
the milkmaids. But the earlier name of the place was 
KAUkavdrttaf or * Kalika's whirlpool.* . . . Now 
the Latin name of Clisobora is also written Carisobora 
and Cyrisohorica in different MSS., from which I infer 
tiiat the original spelling was Kalisohorka, or, by a slight 
change of two letters, Kalikohorta or K&likdbarta." 
Anc. Oeog. oflnd. p. 375. [Carisobora — w. 11. Chrysoban, 
Gyrisoborca. This is the Kleisobora of Arrian (ante, vol. 
"v. p. 89), which Yule places at Batesar, and Lassen at 
Agra, which he makes the Sanskrit Kpshnapura. Wilkins 
(As. Res. vol. V. p. 270) says Clisobora is now called 

Mugu-Nagar by the MusuLnans, and Kalisapuraby 
the Hindus." Vide Ind, Ant. vol. VI. p. 249, note 1.— Ed. 
Jnd. Anf] 

• Vide Ind, Ant vol. VI. p. 183, note f.— Ed. Ind. Ant. 

t A Greek geographer of Ephesus, whose date is about 
100 B.C. His valuable work on geography, called a Peri- 
«>li25, was much quoted by the ancient writers, but with 
the exception of some fragments is now lost. 



Digitized by 



Google 



141 

fronting the sunrise, J receives also itself nineteen 
rivers, of which the most famous are the H y d a s- 
pes, which has four tributaries; the Canta- 
b r a,§ which has three ; the Acesines and the 
H y p a s i s, which are both navigable ; but never- 
theless, having no very great supply of water, it 
is nowhere broader than fifty stadia, or deeper 
than fifteen paces, || It forms an extremely 
large island, which is called P r a s i a n e, and a 
smaller one, called P a t a 1 e.^ Its stream, which 
is navigable, by the lowest estimates, for 1240 
miles, turns westward as if following more or less 
closely the course of the sun, and then falls into 
the ocean. The measure of the coast line from 
the mouth of the Ganges to this river I shall set 
down as it is generally given, though none of 
the computations agree with each other. From 
the mouth of the Ganges to Cape C a 1 i n g o n 
and the town of Dandagula* 625 miles ;t 

X The real sources of the Indus were unknown to the 
Greeks. The principal stream rises to the north of the 
Kail&sa mountain (which figures in Hindu mythology as the 
mansion of the gods and Siva's paradise) in lat. 32°, long. 
810 30', at an elevation of about 20,000 feet. 

§ The Chandrabh&ga or Akesin^s, now the Chen&b. 

II For remarks on the tributaries of the Indus see Notes 
on Arrian, chap, iv., — Ind. Ant. vol. V. pp. 831-333. 

% See Ind. Ant. vol. Y. p. 330. Yule identifies the 
former of these with the area enclosed by the Nara from 
above Bohri to Haidar&b&d, and the delta of the Indus. — 
Ed. Ind, Ant, 

* V. 1. Dandaguda. Cape Kalingon is identified by Yule 
as Point Godftvarl.— Ed. iTid, Ant, 

t " Both the distance and the name point to the great 
port town of Ooringaj as the promontory of Coringon, 
which is situated on a projecting point of land at the 



Digitized by 



Google 



142 

to T r p i n a 1225 ; J to the cape of P e r i- 
Hi u la,§ where there is the greatest emporium of 
trade in India, 750 miles ; to the town . in the 
island of P a t a 1 a mentioned ahove, 620 miles. 

The hill-tribes between the Indus and the 
lomanes are the C e s i ; the C e t r i b o n i, 
who hve in the woods ; then the M e g a 1 1 ee, 
whose king is master of five hundred elephants 
and an army of horse and foot of unknown 
strength ; the Chrysei, the Parasangee, 
and the A s a n g 8e,|| where tigers abound, noted 
for their ferocity. The force under arms con- 
sists of 30,000 foot, 300 elephants, and 800 
horse. These are shut in by the Indus, and are 
surrounded by a circle of mountains and deserts 

mouth of the God&vari river. The town of Dandaguda 
or Dandagula I take to be the Dantapura of the Buddhist 
chronicles, which as the capital of Kalinga may with much 
probability be identified with R&ja Mahendri, which is 
only 30 miles to the north-east of Coringa. From the 
great similarity of the Greek F and H, I think it not 
improbable that the Greek name may have been Danda- 
pulaf which is almost the same as DAntapura. But in this 
case the DAnta or 'tooth-relic' of Buddha must have 
been enshrined in Kalinga as early as the time of Pliny, 
which is confirmed by the statement of the Buddhist 
chronicles that the *left canine tooth* of Buddha was 
brought to Kalinga immediately after his death, where it 
was enshrined by the reigning sovereign, Brahmadatta." — 
Cunningham, Qeog. p. 518. 

X [Tropina answers to Tripontari or Tirupanatara, 
opposite Kochin. — Ed. Ind. Ant] The distance given is 
measured from the mouth of the Ganges, and not from Cape 
Calingon. «. 

§ This cape is a projecting point of the island of Feri- 

lula or Perimuda, 



mula or Perimuda, now called the island of Salsette, near 
Bombay. 

{I V. 1. Asmagi. The Asangee, as placed doubtfully by 
Lassen about Jodhpur.— Ed. Irid. Ant, 



Digitized by 



Google 



143 

over a space of 625 miles. ^ Below the deserts 
are the D a r i, the S u r ae, then deserts again 
for 1 87 miles,* these deserts encircling the fertile 
tracts just as the sea encircles islands.f Below 
these deserts we find the Maltecorse, 
Singhae, Marohae, Rarungte, Moruni.j: 
These inhabit the hills which in an unbroken 



IT DCXXV,—Y. 1. DCXXXV. Pliny, having given a 
general account of the basins of the Indus and the 
Uanges, proceeds to enumerate here the tribes which 
peopled tiie north of India. The names are obscnre, 
bat Lassen has identified one or two of them, and de 
Saint-Martin a considerable nnmber more. The tribes 
first mentioned in the list occupied the country extending 
from the Jamun& to the western coast about the mouth of 
the Narmadfi. The Cesi probably answer to the Khosas 
or Khasyas, a great tribe which from time immemorial 
has led a wandering life between Gujar&t, the lower Indus, 
and the JamunS. The name of the Cetriboni would seem 
to be a transcript of Ketrivani (for Kshatrivaneya). They 
may therefore have been a branch of the Kshatn (KhAtri), 
one of the impure tribes of the list of Manu (1. x. 12). 
The Megallsd must be identified with the Mavelas of 
Sansknt books, a great tribe described as settled to the 
west of the Jamuna. The Chrysei probably correspond to 
the Karoncha of the Puranic lists {Vishnu Pur. pp. 177, 
186, note 13, and 351, &c.). The locality occupied by these 
and the two tribes mentioned after i^em must have lain to 
the north of the Ban, between the lower Indus and the 
chain of the Ar&vali mountains. 

* CLXXXVIL—Y. 1. CLXXXVni. 

t The Dhftrs inhabit still the banks of the lower Ghara 
and the parts contiguous to the valley of the Indus. Hiwen 
Thsang mentions, however, a land of Dara at the lower end 
of the gulf of Kachh, in a position which quite accords with 
that which Pliny assigns to them. The Surae, Sansk. ^lira, 
have their name preserved in " Saur," which designates a 
tribe settled along the Lower Indus — the mod^n repre- 
sentatives of the Saurabhira of the Harivamsa, They are 
placed with doubt by Lassen on the Lont about Sindri, 
but Yule places the Bolingao — Sanskrit, Bhaulingas — 
there. — Ed. hid. Ant. 

X Morunif &c. — v. 1. Moruntes, Masuse Pagungss, Lalii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



144 

chain run parallel to the shores of the ocean. 
They are free and have no kings, and occupy the 
mountain heights, whereon they have huilt many 
cities. § Next follow the N a r e ee, enclosed by 
the loftiest of Indian mountains, Capitalia.|| 

§ These tribes must have been located in Kachh, a 
moxmtainons tongue of land between the gnlf of that name 
and the Ran, where, and where only, in this region of 
India, a range of mountains is to be found running alonof 
the coast. The name of the MaltecorsB has attracted 
particular attention because of it^ resemblance to the name 
of the Martikhora {i. e, man-eater), a fabulous animal 
mentioned by Ktesias (Ctesice Indica, VII.) as found in 
India and subsisting upon human flesh. The Maltecorw 
were consequently supposed to have been a race of canni- 
bals. The identification is, however, regected by M. de 
St.-Martin. The Singhas are represented at the present 
day by the S&nghis of Omarkot (called the Song bv Mac- 
Murdo), descendants of an ancient R&jput tribe called the 
Singhfirs. The Marohsa are probably the Maruhas of the 
list of the Vardha SanhitA, which was later than Pliny's 
time by four and a half centuries. In the interval they were 
displaced, but the displacement of tribes was nothing 
unusual in those days. So the Rarungse may perhaps be 
the ancestors of the Bonghi or Bhanga now found on the 
banks of the Satl^ and in the neighbourhood of Dihli. 

II Capitalia is beyond doubfc the sacred Arbuda, or Mount 
A\)t.t which, attaining an elevation of 6500 feet, rises far 
above any other summit of the Ar&vali ranp^e. The name 
of the NaresB recalls that of the Na'ir, which the Eftjput 
chroniclers apply to the northern belt of the desert (Tod, 
EAjasth6,n, II. 211) ; so St..Martin ; but according to Ge- 
neral Cunningham they must be the people of Sarui, or 
* the country of reeds, as nar and ear are synonymoua 
terms for ' a reed,' and the country of Sarui is still fa- 
mous for its reed-arrows. The same author uses the 
statement that extensive gold and silver mines were work- 
ed on the other side of Mount Capitalia in support of his 
theory that this part of India was the Ophir of Scripture, 
from which the Tyrian navy in the days of Solomon 
carried alhiy gold, a great plenty of almug-trees (red 
sandalwood), and precious stones (I Kings xii.)* His 
argument runs thus: — " The last name in Pliny's list 
is VaretatsB, which I would change to Vataretas 
by the transposition of two letters. This spelling 
is countenanced by the termination of the various read- 



Digitized by 



Google 



145 

The inhabitants on the other side of this mountain 
work extensive mines of gold and silver. Next 
are the O r a t u r ee, whose king has only ten ele- 
phants, though he has a very strong force of in- 

ing of Svarataratad, which, is found in some editions. 
It is quite possible, however, that the SvarataratsB may be 
intended for the Sur^h^ras. The famous Yarfiha Mihira 
mentions the Sur&shtras and B&daras together, amongst 
the people of the south-west of India (Dr. Kern's Brihat 
SmihiiAj XIV. 19.) These B&daras must therefore be the 
people of Badari, or Vadari. I understand the name of 
Vaaari to denote a district abounding in the Badari, or 
Ber-tree (Jiyube), which is very common in Southern Rfij- 
putAnA. For the same reason I should look to this neigh- 
Dourhood for the ancient Sauvlra, which I take to be the 
true form of the famous Sophir, or Ophir, as Sauvira is 
only another name of the Vadari or Ber-tree, as well as 
of its juicy fruit. Now, Sofir is the Coptic name of India 
at the present day; but the name must have belonged 
originally to that part of the Indian coast which was tre- 
c^uented by the merchants of the West. There can be 
little doubt, I think, that this was in the Gulf of Khambay, 
which from time immemorial has been the chief seat of 
Indian trade with the West. During the whole period of 
Greek history this trade was almost monopolized by the 
famous city of Barygaza, or BhAroch, at the mouth of the 
Narmadft river. About the fourth century some portion of it 
was diverted to the new capital of Balabni, in the peninsula 
of Gi:garftt ; in the Middle Ages it was shared with Khambay 
at the head of the gulf, and in modem times with Surat, 
at the mouth of the Tapti. If the name of Sauvira was 
derived, as I suppose, from the prevalence of the Ber-tree, 
it is probable that it was only another appellation for the 
province of Badari, or Edar, at the head of the Gulf of 
Khambay. This, indeed, is the very position in which we 
should expect to find it, according to the ancient inscrip- 
tion of Rudra Dftma, which mentions Sindhu- Sauvira 
immediately after Surashtra and BhArukachha, and just 
before Kukura Aparanta, and Nishada {Jour. Bo. Br. R. 
As. Soc. VII. 120). According to this arrangement Sau- 
vira must have been to the north of Surfishtra and BhA- 
roch, and to the south of Nishada, or jus£' where I have 
placed it, in the neighbourhood of Mount Abd. Much the 
same locality is assigned to Sauvira in the Vishnu PurAna.** 
—Anc. Oeog. of Ind. pp. 496-497 •• see also pp. 660-562 of thji 
same work, where the subject is further discussed. 



Digitized by 



Google 



146 

fantry.^ Next again arc the Varetatee,* subject 
to a king, who keep no elephants, but trust entirely 
to their horse and foot. Then the Odo mboerse; 
theSalabastr8e;tthe Horat 8b, J who have 
a fine city, defended by marshes which serve as a 
ditch, wherein crocodiles are kept, which, having 
a great avidity for human flesh, prevent all access 
to the city except by a bridge. And another city 



if y. 1. Oratffi. The Oraturse find their representatives in 
thd BAthors, who played a great part in the history of India 
before the Musulm&n conquest, and who, though settled 
in the Gangetio proTinces, regard Ajmir, at the eastern 
point of the Arfivali, as their ancestral seat. 

* V. 1. Suarataratsd. The YaretatsB cannot with certainty 
be identified. 

t The OdomboerfiB, with hardljr a change in the form 
of their name, are mentioned in Sanskrit literature, for 
P&nini (IV. 1, 173, quoted by Lassen, Ind. Alt. 1st ed. I. p. 
614) speaks of the territory of Udumbari as that which was 
occupied by a tribe famous in the old legend, the Salva, who 
perhaps correspond to the SalabastrsB of Pliny, the addition 
which he has made to their name being explained by the 
Sanskrit word vasty a, which means an abode or habitation. 
The word udunibara means the glomerous fig-tree. The 
district so named lay in Kachh. [The ' Salabastrsa are 
located by Lassen between the mouth of the Sarasvatt 
and Jodhpur, and the Horatse at the head of the gulf 
of Khambh&t; Automela he places at KhambhAt. See 
Ind. Alterth. 2nd ed. I. 760. Yule has the Sandrabatis 
about Chandrfivati, in northern Gtnarlit, but these are placed 
by Lassen on the Bands about Tonk. — Ed. Ind. Ant.T 

X Horatm is an incorrect transcription of Sorath, 
the vulgar form of the Sanskrit SaurSishtra. The HoraW 
were therefore the inhabitants of the region called in the 
PertpMs, and in Ptolemy, Suraatr^ne — that is, Gxgar&t. 
Orrhoth (^Oppoda) is used by Kosmas as the name of a 
city in the west of India, which has been conjectured to be 
Surat, but Yule thinks it rather some place on the Pur- 
bandar coast. The capital, Automela, cannot be identified, 
but de St.-Martin conjectures it may have been the once 
famous Yalabh!, which was situated m the peninsular part 
of Ginarfit at about 24 miles' distance from the GoH of 
Khamoay. 



Digitized by 



Google 



147 

of theirs is much admired— A utomela,§ which, 
being seated on the coast at the confluence of five 
rivers, is a noble emporium of trade. The king is 
master of 1600 elephants, 150,000 foot, and 5000 
cavalry. The poorer king of the C h a r m ae 
has but sixty elephants, and his force otherwise 
is insignificant. Next come the P a n d ae, the 
only race in India ruled by women. || They say 
that Hercules having but one daughter, who was 
on that account all the more beloved, endowed 
her with a noble kingdom. Her descendants 
rule over 300 cities, and command an army of 
150,000 foot and 500 elephants. Next, with 
300 cities, the Syrieni, Derangse, Po- 
singse, Buzae, Gogiarei, Umbrae, Ne- 
reee, Brancosi, Nobundee, Cocondee, 
Nesei, Pedatrirse, Solobriasee, Olos- 
t r 8e,1[ who adjoin the island Patale, from the 

§ V. 1. Automula. See preceding note. 

II The CharmsB have been identified with the inhabitants 
of Charmamandala, a district of the west mentioned in 
iheMah&hMrata and also in the Vishnu Furdjtia, under 
the form Charmakhanda. They are now represented by 
the Charm&rs or GhamArs of Bundelkhand and the parts 
adjacent to the basin of the Granges. The Pandse, who 
were their next neighbonrs, most have occupied a con- 
siderable portion of the basin of the river Chambal, called 
in Sanskrit geography the Gharmanvatt. They were a 
branch of the famous race of P&ndu, which made for itself 
Idngdoms in several different parts of India. 

If The names in this list lead us to the desert lying be- 
tween the Indus and the Ar Avail range. Most of the bribes 
enumerated are mentioned in the lists of the clans given 
in the RAjput chronicles, and have been identified by M. 
de St.-Martin as follows : — The Syrieni are the Surivams, 
who under that name have at all times occupied the 
country near the Indus in the neighbourhood of Bakkar.. 



Digitized by 



Google 



148 

furthest shore of which to the Caspian gates the 
distance is said to he 1925 miles.* 

Then next to these towards the Indus come, 
in an order which is easy to follow, the A m a-> 
tse, Boling8&, Gallitalutse, Dimuri, 
Megari, Ordah 8B,t M e s » ; after these the 
U r i and S i 1 e n i.;]: Immediately beyond come 

Darangsd is the Latin transcription of the name of the 
great race of the Jh&dejds, a branch of the Bi^pnts which 
at the inresent day possesses Kachh. The Bozse represent 
the Bnddas, an ancient branch of the same Jhfidejfis (Tod, 
ArmaU omd Antiq, of the Rdj. vol. I. p. 86). The Gogiarei 
(other readings Gogarasi, GogarsB) are the Kokaris, who 
are now settled on the banks of the Ghara or Lower Satlej. 
The Umbrae are represented by the UmranSs, and the 
Nerei perhaps by the Nharonis, who, though belonging to 
Baluchist&nj had their ancestral seats in the regions to the 
east of the Indus. The Nub^teh, who figure in the old 
local traditions of Sindh, perhaps corresiwnd to the No- 
bund89> .while the Cocondsd certainly are the Kokonadas 
mentioned in the Malidhhdrata among the people of the 
north-west. (See Lassen, Zeitschrift fiir die Kwnde des 
Morgenl. t. II. 1839, p. 45.) Buchanan mentions a tribe 
called Kakamd as belonging to Grorakhpur. 

• There were two defiles, which went by the name of * the 
Easpian Gates.' One was in Albania, and was formed 
by the jutting out of a spur of the Kaukasos into the 
Kaspian Sea. The other, to which Pliny here refers, was 
a narrow pass leading from North-Westem Asia into the 
north-east provinces of Persia. According to Arrian {Anah. 
III. 20) the Kaspian Grates lay a few days' journey distant 
from the Median town of Ehagai, now represented by 
the ruins called Eha, found a mile or two to the south of 
Teherfin. This pass was one of the most important places 
in ancient geography, and from it many of the meridians 
were measured. Strabo, who frequently mentions it, states 
that its distance from the extreme promontories of India 
(Cape Comorin, &c.) was 14,000 stadia. 

t V. 1. ArdabsB. 

X Ib the grammatical apophthegms of Pfejini, Bhaulingi 
is mentioned as a territory occupied by a branch of the 
great tribe of the Sfilvas (Lassen, Ind. Alt. I. p. 613, note, • 
or 2nd ed. p. 760 n.), and from this indication M. de St.- 
Iklartin haa been led to place the Bolinge at the western 



Digitized by 



Google 



149 

deserts extending for 250 miles. These being pass- 
ed, we come to the O r g a n a g se, A b a o r t se, 
Sibarae, Suertse^ and after these to deserts 
as extensive as the former. Then come the 
Sarophages, Sorgee, Baraomatae, and 
the Umbritt8e,§ who consist of twelve tribes, 
each possessing two cities, and the A s e n i, who 
possess three cities. || Their capital is Buce- 
p h a 1 a, built where Alexander's famous horse 

declivity of the Arftvali mountains, where Ptolemy also 
places his Bolingse. The Madrabhujingha of the Faig'&h 
(see VisJvmi Pur, p. 187) were probably a branch of this 
tribe. The Gallitalutae are identified by the same author 
with the Gahalata or Grehlots ; the Dimuri with the Dumras, 
who, though belonging to the Gangetic valley, originally 
came from that of the Indus ; the Megan with the Mokars 
of the Bi^put chronicles, whose name is perhaps preserv- 
ed in that of the Mehars of the lower part of Sindh, and 
also in that of the Megh&ris of Eastern • Baluchistan ; the 
Messe with the Mazaiis, a considerable tribe between 
Shikfirpiir and Mitank6t on the western bank of the 
Indus ; and the TJri with the Hauras of the same locality 
— the Hurairas who figure in the B&jput lists of thirty-six 
royal tribes. The Sulalas of the same tribes perhaps 
represent the Sileni, whom Pliny mentions along with the 
Uri. 

§ w. 11. Paragomat89, UmbitrsB. — BaraomataB Gumbri- 
teeqae. 

if The tribes here enumerated must have occupied a tract 
of country lying above the confluence of the Indus with 
the stream of the combined rivers of the Panjfib. They are 
obscure-, and their names cannot with any certainty be 
identified if we except that of the Sibarse, who are un- 
doubtedly the Sauvlras of the MahAhhdrata, and who, as 
their name isalmostinvariably combined with' that of the 
Indus, must have dwelt not far from its banks. The 
Afghan tribe of the Afridis may perhaps represent the 
Abaortsa, and the Sarabh&n or Sarvanis, of the same stock, 
the Sarophages. The Umbrittee and the Aseni take us to 
the east of me river. The former are perhaps identical 
with the Ambastee of the historians of Alexander, and the 
Ambasthas of Sanskrit v^ritings, who dwelt in the neigh- 
bourhood of the lower Akesin^s. 



Digitized by 



Google 



150 

of that name was buried.^ Hillmen follow next, 
inhabiting the base of Caucasus, the S o 1 e a d se, 
and the S o n d r se ; and if we cross to the other 
side of the Indus and follow its course downward 
we meet the Samarabrise, Sambruceni, 
B,i s a m b r i t sd* Osii, Antixeni, and the 
T a X i 1 1 sef with a famous citj. Then succeeds 

% Alez^der, after ihe great battle on the banks of the 
Hydasp^ in which he defeated Pdros, founded two cities — 
Bokephala or Bakephalia, so named in honour of his cede- 
brated charger, and Nikaia, so named in honour of his vic- 
tory. Kikaia, it is known for certain, was built on the 
field of battle, and its position was therefore on the left 
side of tiie Hydasp^s— probably about where Mong now 
stands. The site of Bukephala it is not so easy to deter- 
mine. According to Plutarch and Pliny it was near the 
Hydaspes, in the place where Bukephalos was buried, and 
if that be so it must have been on the same side of the 
river as the sister city ; whereas Strabo ^nd all the other 
ancient authorities place it on the opposite side. Strabo 
again places it at the point where Alexander crossed the 
river, whereas Arrian states that it was built on the site 
of his camp. General Cunningham fixes this at Jal&lpur 
rather than at Jhelam, 30 miles higher up the river, the site 
which is favoured by Bumes and General Court and 
Greneral Abbott. Jalalpur is about ten miles distant from 
Dil&war, where, according to Cunningham, the crossing of 
the river was most probably effected. 

• V. 1. Bisabritse. 

t The SoleadsB and the SondrsB cannot be identified, and 
of the tribes which were seated tor the east of the IndxxB 
only the Taxillse are known. Their capital was the famous 
Taxila, which was visited by Alexander the Great. " The 
position of this city," says Cunningham, " has hitherto re- 
mained unknown, partly owing to the erroneous distance 
recorded by Pliny, and ^rtly to the want of information 
regarding the vast ruins which still exist in the vicinity of 
Sh&h-dheri. All the copies of Pliny agree in stating that 
Taxila was only 60 Boman, or 55 English, miles from Peuco- 
lalitis or Hashtnagar, which would fix its site somewhere on 
tiie Haro river to the west of Hasan Abdfil, or just two 
days' march from the Indus. But the itineraries of the 
Ghonese pilgrims agree in placing it at three days' journey 
to the east of the Indus, or in the immediate neighbourhood of 
K&la-ka-Sarfii. He therefore fixes its site near Sh&h-dheri 



Digitized by 



Google 



151 

a level tract of country known by the general 
name of A m a n d a,t whereof the tribes are 
four in number — the Peucolait8e,§ Arsa- 
galitse, Geretse, Asoi. 

Many writers, however, do not give the river 
Indus as the western boundary of India, but in- 
clude within it four satrapies, — the Q e d r o s i, 
Arachotse, Arii, Paropamisad 8e,|| 

(which is a mile to the north-east of that Sarai), in the 
extensive rnins of a fortified city abounding with stUpaSf 
monasteries, and temples. From this place to Hashtnagar 
the distance is 74 miles English, or 19 in excess of Pliny's 
estimate. Taxila represents the Sanstrit Takshasila, of 
which the Pali form is Takhasila, whence the Greek form was 
taken. The word means either * cut rock* or * severed 
head.* — Anc» Oeog. oflnd. pp. 104-121. 

J As the name Amanda is entirely unknown, M. de St.- 
Martin proposes without hesitation the correction Gandhftra, 
on the ground that the territory assigned to the Amanda 
corresponds exactly to Gandh&ra, of which the territory 
occupied by the Peucolitse (Peukela6tis), as we know from 
other writers, formed a part. The Geretse are beyond 
doubt no others than the Goursei of Arrian ; and the Asoi 
may perhaps be identical with the Aspasii, or, as Strabo 
gives the name, Hippasii or Pasii. The Arsagalitae are 
only mentioned by Plmy. Two tribes settled in the same 
locality are perhaps indicated by the name — the Arsa, men- 
tioned by Ptolemy, answering to the Sanskrit Uraaa j and 
the Ghilit or Ghilghit, the Ga>halata of Sanskrit, formerly 
mentioned. 

§ V. 1. PeucoUtae. 

H Gedrdsia comprehended probably nearly the same dis- 
trict which is now known by the name of Mekr&n. Alex- 
ander marched through it on returning from his Indian 
e^edition. Arachdsia extended from the chain of moun- 
tams now called the Suleim^ as far southward as Gedrdsia. 
Its capital, Arachotos, was situated somewhere in the direc- 
tion of Kandahar, the name of which, it has been thought, 
preserves that of Gandh^ra. According to Colonel Rawlinson 
the name of Arachdsia is derived from Harakhwati (Sans- 
krit 8a/irasvaU)j and is preserved in the Arabic Rakhaj. It 
is, as has already been noticed, the Harauvatas of the 
Bisutun inscription. Aria denoted the country lying 
between Meshed and Herfit ; Ari^a, of which it formed a 



Digitized by 



Google 



152 

making the rirer Cophe^s its furthest limit; 
though others prefer to consider all these as be- 
longing to the Arii. 

Many writers further include in India even the 
city N y s a and Mount M e r u s, sacred to Father 
Bacchus, whence the origin of the fable that he 
sprang from the thigh of Jupiter. They include 
also the A s t a c a n i,^ in whose country the vine 

part, and of whicli it is sometimes used as the equivalent, 
was a wider district, whicli comprehended nearly the whole 
of ancient Persia. In the Persian part of the Bisntun 
inscription Aria appears as Hariva, in the Babylonian part 
as Arevan. Regarding Paropamisos and the Cophes see 
Ind. Ant vol. V. pp. 329 and 330. 

% Other readings of the name are Aspagani and Aspa- 
gon89. M. de St.-Martin, whose work has so often 
been referred to, says : — " We have seen already that 
in an extract from old Hekataios preserved in Stephen 
of Byzantiom the city of Kaspapyros is called a Gandaric 
city, and that in Herodotos the same place is attributed 
to the Paktyi, and we have added that in onr opinion 
there is only an apparent contradiction, because the district 
of Paktyike and Grandara may very well be but one and 
the same country. It is not difficult, in fact, to recognize in 
the designation mentioned by Herodotos iJie indigenous 
name of the Afghfin people, Pakhtu (in the plural Pakh- 
tAn), the name which the greater part of the tribes us© 
among themselves, and the only one they apply to their 
national dialect. We have here, then, as Lassen has noticed, 
historical proof of the presence of the Afgh&ns in thear 
actual fatherland five centuries at least before the Christian 
era. Now, as the seat of the Af^h&n or Pakht national- 
ity is chiefly in the beudn of the Koph^s, to the west of the 
Indus, which forms its eastern boundary, this further 
confirms what we have already seen, that it is to the west 
of the great river we must seek for the site of the city of 
Kaspapyros or Kasyapapura, and consequently of the 
GandanS of Hekataios. The employment of two different 
names to designate the very same country is easily 
explained by this double fact, that one of the names 
was the Indian designation of the land, whilst the other was 
the indigenous name applied to it by its inhabitants. There 
was yet another name, of Sanskrit origin, used as a territorial 
appellation of GancUi&ra— that of Asvaka. This word, 



Digitized by 



Google 



153 

grows abundantly^ and the laui^I, and boxwood, 
and every kind of fruit-tree found in Greece. The 
remarkable and almost fabulous accounts which 
are current regarding the fertility of its soil, and 
the nature of its fruits and trees, its beasts and 
birds and other animals, will be set down each in 
its own place m other parts of this work, A little 
further on I shall speak of the satrapies, but the 
island ofTaprobaae§ requires my immediate 
attention. 

But before we come to this island there are 
others, one being P a t a 1 e, which, as we have 
indicated, lies at the mouth of the Indus, triangular 
in shape, and 220 |j miles in breadth. Beyond the 
mouth of the Indus are C h r y s e and A r g y r e,^ 

derived from a^va, a horse, signified merely the oa/valiers ; 
it was less an ethnic, in the rigorous acceptation of the 
word, than a general appellation applied by the Indians of 
the Paigftb to the tribes of the region of the Koph^B, 
renowned from antiquity for the exceUence of its horses. 
In the popular dialects the Sanskrit word took the nsnal 
form Assaka, which reappears scarcely modified in Assakani 
(*A(rcra*caj/oi) or Assak^niCAo-o-aKiywt ) in the Greek histori- 
ans of the expedition of Alexander and subsequent writers. 
It is impossible not to recognize here the name of Ayghftn 
or Afghfins. . . which is yery evidently nothing else than 
a contracted form of Assakui. . . Neither the 6andari4 of 
Hekataios nor the Paktyi of Herodotos are known to them 
[ Arrian and other Greek and Latin writers of the history 
of ALexanderl, but as it is the same territory [as that of 
the Assakani], and as in actual usage the names Afghfins and 
Pakhtiin are still synonymous, their identity is not a matter 
of doubt." — Ftude sv/r le Q^ographie Orecque et LtiUne de 
Vlnde, pp. 376-8. The name of the Gandhftra, it may 
here be added, remounts to the highest antiquity ; it is 
mentioned in one of the hymns of the Itig-Yeda, as old 
perhaps as the 15th century B.C. — Id. p. 864. 

§ Vide anU, p. 62, n. ». || CC&-Y. I OXXX. 

1 Burma and Arakan respectively, according to Yule,^ 
Ed. Ind. Ant, 



Digitized by 



Google 



154 

richi as I belieye, in metals. For I cannot readily 
believe, what is asserted by some writers, that their 
soil is impregnated with gold and silver. At a dis- 
tance of twenty miles from these lies C r o c a 1 a,* 
from which, at a distance of twelve miles, is 
Bibaga, which abounds with oysters and other 
shell-fish.f Next comes Toralliba,J nine 
miles distant from the last-named island, beside 
many others unworthy of note. 

Fbagm. LVI. B. 

Solin. 52. 6-17. 

Catalogus of Indicm Baces, 

The greatest rivers of India are the Ganges 
and Indus, and of these some assert that the 
Ganges rises from uncertain sources and inundates 
the country in the manner of the Nile, while others 
incline to think that it rises in the Scythian moun- 
tains . [The Hypanisis also there, a very noble 
river, which formed the limit of Alexander's 
march, as the altars erected on its hanks prove. §] 

* In the bay of Kar&cbi, identical with the Kolaka of 
Ptolemy. The district in which Karfichi is sitnated is called 
Karkalla to this day. 

t This is called Bibakta by Arrian, InMlta, cap. zxi. 

t V. 1. Coralliba. 

§ See Arrian's Atujh, Y. 29, where we read that Alexander 
having arranged his troops in separate divisions ordered 
them to bnild on the banks of the H3rpha8is twelve altars to 
be of equal height with the loftiest towers, while exceed- 
ing them in breadth. From Gurtins we learn that they 
were formed of sqnare blocks of stone. There has 
been much controversy regarding their site, but it mnst 



have been near the capital of Sopith^s, whose name 
) identified witxi the Sanskrit AivapaU, * lord of 



Lassen has i 



Digitizeckby 



Google 



155 

The least breadth of the Ganges is eight miles, and 
its greatest twenty. Its depth where it is shallow- 
est is fully a hundred feet; The people who live 
in the furthest-off part are the Gangarides, 
whose king possesses 1000 horse, 700 elephants, 
and 60,000 foot in apparatus of war. 

Of the Indians some cultivate the soil, very many 
follow war, and others trade. The noblest and 
richest manage public affairs, administer justice, 
and sit in council with the kings. There exists 
also a fifth class, consisting of those most eminent 
for their wisdom, who, when sated with life, seek 
death by mounting a burning funeral pile. Those, 
however, who have become the devotees of a sterner 
sect, and pass their life in the woods, hunt ele- 
phants, which, when made quite tame and docile, 
they use for ploughing and for riding on. 

In the Ganges there is an island extremely po- 
pulous, occupied by a very powerful nation whose 
king keeps under arms 50,000 foot and 4000 horse. 
In fact no one invested with kingly power ever 
keeps on foot a military force without a very great 
number of elephants and foot and cavalry. 

The P r a s i a n nation, which is extremely power- 
ful, inhabits a city called Palibotra, whence 
seme call the nation itself the Palibotri. Their 



horses.' These Asvapati were a line of princes whose terri- 
tory, according to the 12th book of the Rdmdt/cnia, lay on 
the right or north bank ef the Yipdsa (Hyphasis or Bi&s), 
in the monntainons part of the Dofib comprised between 
that riyer and the IJ^per IrAvati. Their capital is called 
in tiie poem of Y&lmiki Bftjagpha, which. still exists under 
the name of El^agiri. At some distance from this there 
is a chain of heights called Sekandor-giri, or ' Alexan- 
der's monntain.'-'See St.-Martin's E'tude, &c. pp. 108- 
111. 



Digitized by 



Google 



156 

king keeps in his pay at all times 60,000 fool 
30,000 horse, and 8000 elephants. 

Beyond Palibotra is Mount M a 1 e n s, || on which 
shadows in winter fall towards the north, in sum- 
mer towards the south, for six months alternately. 
In that region the Bears are seen but once a year, 
and not for more than fifteen days, as Beton in- 
forms ns, who allows that this ht^pens in many 
parts of India. Those liying near the riyer Indus 
in the regions tl^t turn southward are scorched 
more than others by the heat, and at last the com- 
plexion of the people is visibly affected by the 
great power of the sun. The mountains are in- 
habited by the Pygmies. 

But those who live near the sea haye no kings. 

The Pandas an nation is goyerned by fe- 
males, and their first queen is said to haye 
been the daughter of Hercules. The city N y s a 
is assigned to this region, as is also the moun- 
tain sacred to Jupiter, M e r o s by name, in a 
caye cm which the ancient Indians affirm Father 
Bacchus was nourished ; while the name has 
giyen rise to the well-known fantastic story that 
Bacchus was born from the thigh of his father. 
Beyond the inouth of the Indus are two islands, 
Chryse and Argyre, which yield such an 
abundant supply of metals that many writers 
allege their soils consist of gold and of silyer. 



H Possibly, fts stiggested by Yule, Mount PAravan&tha, 
near the Damndft, and not far from the Tropic; vide 
Ind, Ant vol. VI. p. 127, note §, and conf . vol. I. p. 46ff. 
The Malli (see above), in whose country it was, are not to 
be confounded with another tribe of the same name in the 
Pttnj&b, mentioned by Arrian ; see vol. V. pp. 87, 96, 388.— 
£d. Ind, Ant. 



Digitized by 



Google 



157 . 

Fragm. LVII. 

Polyeen. Strateg. 1. 1. 1-8. 
Of Dionysos. 
(Of. Bpit. 25 et aeq.) 

Dionysos, in his expedition against the Indians, 
in order that the cities might receive him will- 
ingly, disguised the arms with which he had 
equipped his troops, and made them wear soft 
raiment and fawn-skins. The spears were wrapped 
round with ivy, and the thyrsus had a sharp 
point. He gave the signal for hattle by cymbab 
and drums instead of the trumpet, and by regaling 
the enemy with wine diverted their thoughts from 
war to dancing. These and all other Bacchic 
orgies were employed in the system of warfare by 
which he subjugated the Indians and all the rest 
of Asia. 

Dionysos, iii the course of his Indian cam- 
paign, seeing that his army could not endure the 
fiery heat of the air, took forcible possession of the 
three-peaked mountain of India. Of these peaks 
one is called Korasibi^, another KondaskS, 
but to the third he himself gave the name of 
M d r s, in remembrance of his birth. Thereon 
were many fountains of water sweet to drink, game 
in great plenty, tree-fruits in unsparing profusion, 
and snows which gave new vigour to the frame. 
The troops quartered there made a sudden descent 
upon the barbarians of the plain, whom they easily 
routed, since they attacked them vdth missiles 
from a commanding position on the heights above. 



Digitized by 



Google 



158 

[Dionysos, after conquering the Indians, in- 
vaded Baktria, taking with him as auxiliaries 
the Indians and Amazons. That country has 
for its boundary the river S a r a n g 6 s.^ The 
Baktrians seized the mountains overhanging that 
river with a view to attack Dionysos, in cross- 
ing it, from a post of advantage. He, however, 
having encamped along the river, ordered the 
Amazons and the Bakkhai to cross it, in order 
that the Baktrians, in their contempt for women, 
might he induced to come down from the heights. 
The women then assayed to cross the stream, and 
the enemy came downhill, and advancing to the 
river endeavoured to beat them back. The women 
then retreated, and the Baktrians pursued them 
as far as the bank ; then Dionysos, coming to the 
rescue with his men, slew the Baktrians, who 
were impeded from fighting by the current, and he 
crossed the river in safety. 

Fragm. LVIII. 

Polyaen. Si/rateg, I. 3. 4. 
Of Hercules and Pandaa. 
(Of. Fragm. L. 15.) 
HeraklSs begat a daughter in India whom 
he called P a n d a i a. To her he assigned that 
portion of India which lies to southward and ex- 
tends to the sea, while he distributed the people 
subject to her rule into 365 villages, giving orders 
that one village should each day bring to the 
% See Ind. Ant^ Notes to Anrian in vol, V. p» 882. 



Digitized by 



Google 



159 

treasui^ the royal tribute, so that the queen 
might always have the assistance of those men 
whose turn it was to pay the tribute in coercing 
those who for the time being were defaulters in 
their payments. 

Fragm. LIX. 
Of the Beasts of India, 
iElian, Hist. Anim. XVI. 2-22 * 
(2) In India I learn that there are to be found 
the birds called parrots ; and though I have, no 
doubt, already mentioned them, yet what I omit- 
ted to state previously regarding them may now 
with great propriety be here set down. There 
are, I am informed, three species of them, and all 
these, if taught to speak, as children are taught, 
become as talkative as children, and speak with 
a human voice; but in the woods they utter 
a bird-like scream, and neither send out any 
distinct and musical notes, nor being wild and 
untaught are able to talk. There are also 
peacocks in India, the largest anywhere met with, 

* " In this extract not a few passages occur which appear 
to have been borrowed from Megasthen^s. This con- 
jecture, though it cannot by any means be placed beyond 
donbt by conclusive proofs, seems nevertheless, for various 
reasons, to attain a certain degree of probability. For 
in the first place the author knows with imusual ac- 
curacv the interior parts of India. Then again he makes 
very frequent mention of the Frasii and the Brfihmans. 
And lastly one can hardljr doubt that some chapters occur- 
ring in the middle of tms part have been extracted from 
Megasthen^s. I have, therefore, in this imcertainty taken 
care that the whole of this part should be printed at the 
end of the fragments of MegasthenSs."— Sohwanbeck. 



Digitized by 



Google 



160 

and pale-green ringdoves. One wLo is not 
well-versed in bird-lore, seeing these for the 
first time, would take them to be parrots, and 
not pigeons. In the colour of the bill and legs 
they resemble Greek partridges. There are also 
cocks, which are of extraordinary siie, and have 
their crests not red as elsewhere, or at least in 
our country, but have the flower-like coronals 
o/ which the crest is formed variously coloured. 
Their rump feathers, again, are neither curved 
nor wreathed, biit are of great* breadth, and they 
trail them in the way peacocks trail their 
tails, when they neither straighten nor erect 
them : the feathers of these Indian cocks are in 
colour golden, and also dark-blue like the sma- 
ragdus. 

(3) There is found in India also another re- 
markahle bird. This is of the size of a starling 
and is parti-coloured, and is trained to utter the 
sounds of human speech. It is even more talka- 
tive than the parrot, and of greater natural clever- 
ness. So far is it from submitting with pleasure 
to be fed by man, that it rather has such a pining 
for freedom, and such a longing to warble at will in 
the society of its mates, that it prefers starvation 
to slavery with sumptuous fare. It is called by 
the Makedonians who settled among the Indians 
in the city ofBoukephala and its neighbour- 
hood, and in the city called Europolis, and 
others which Alexander the son of Philip built, 
the Kerkv&n. This name had, I believe, its on- 



Digitized by 



Google 



161 

gia in the fact that the bird wags its tail in the 
same way as the water-ousels {oi KtyKkoi)* 

(4) I learn further that in India there is a bird 
called the Kelas, which is thrice the size of the 
bustard, and has a bill of prodigious size and 
long legs. It is furnished also with an immense 
crop resembling a leather pouch. The cry which 
it utters is peculiarly discordant. The plumage 
is ash- coloured, except that the feathers at their 
tips are tinted with a pale yellow. 

(5) I hear also that the Indian hoopoe ("(woTra) 
is double the size of ours, and more beautiful in 
appearance, and Homer says that while the bridle 
and trappings of a horse are the delight of a Hel- 
lenic king, this hoopoe is the fayourite plaything 
of the king of the Indians, who carries it on his 
hand, and toys with it, and never tires gazing in 
ecstasy on its splendour, and the beauty with which 
Nature has adorned it. The Brachmanes, there- 
fore, even make this particular bird the subject of 
a mythic story, and the tale told of it runs thus : — 
To the king of the Indians there was born a 
son. The child had elder brothers, who when they 
came to man's estate turned out to be very un- 
just and the greatest of reprobates. They despised 
their brother because he was the youngest ; and 
they scoffed also at their father and their mother, 
whom they despised because they were very old 
and grey-haired. The boy, accordingly, and his 
aged parents could at last no longer live with these 
wicked men, and away they fled from home, all 



Digitized by 



Google 



162 

three together. In the course of the protracted 
journey which they had then to undergo, the old 
people succumhed to fatigue and died, and the hoy 
showed them no light regard, hut huried them in 
. himself, having cutoff his head with a sword. Then, 
as the Brachmanes tell us, the all-seeing sun, 
in admiration of this surpassing act of piety, trans- 
formed the hoy into a hird which is most heauti- 
ful to hehold, and which lives to a very advanced 
age. So on his head there grew up a crest which 
was, as it were, a memorial of what he had 
done at the time of his flight. The Athenians 
have also related, in a fable, marvels somewhat 
similar of the crested lark ; and this fable Aristo- 
phanes, the comic poet, appears to me to have 
followed when he says in the Birdsy " For thou 
wert ignorant, and not always bustling, nor 
always thumbing iEsop, who spake of the crested 
lark, calling it the first of all birds, bom before 
ever the earth was ; and telling how afterwards 
her father became sick and died, and how that, $is 
the earth did not then exist, he lay unburied till the 
fifth day, when his daughter, unable to find a grave 
elsewhere, dug one for him in her own head."|| 

11 Lines 470-75:— 
" You're such a dull incurious lot, unread in ^sop's lore, 
Whose story says the lark was bom first of the feathered 

quire, 
Before the earth ; then came a cold and carried off his sire : 
Earth was not : five days lay the old bird untombed : at last 

the son 
Buried the father in his head, since other grave was 

none." 

Dr. Kennedy^s translation. 



Digitized by 



Google 



163 

It seems, accordingly, probable that the fable, 
though with a different bird for its subject, 
emanated from the Indians, and spread onward 
even to the Greeks. For the Brachmanes say 
that a prodigious time has elapsed since the 
Indian hoopoe, then in human form and young in 
years, performed that act of piety to its parents. 

(6.) In India there is an animal closely resem- 
bling in appearance the land crocodile, and some- 
where about the size of a little Maltese dog* It 
is covered all over with a scaly skin so rough 
altogether and compact that when flayed oif it is 
used by the Indians as a file. It cuts through 
brass and eats iron. They call it the phattagea 
(pangolin or scaly ant-eater) 

(8.) The Indian sea breeds sea-snakes which 
have broiid tails, and the lakes breed hydras of 
immense size, but these sea-snakes appear to 
inflict a bite more sharp than poisonous. 

(9.) In India there are herds of wild horses, 
and also of wild asses. They say that the mares 
submit to be covered by the asses, and enjoy 
such coition, and breed mules, which are of a 
reddish colour and very fleet, but impatient of 
the yoke and otherwise skittish. They say that 
they catch these mules with foot-traps, and then 
take them to the king of the Prasians, and that 
if they are caught when two years old they do 
not refuse to be broken in, but if caught when 
beyond that age they differ in no respect from 
sharp-toothed and carnivorous animals. 



Digitized by 



Google 



164 

(Fragm. XII. B follows here.) 

(11.) There is found in India a graminivorou s 
animal which is douhle the size of a horse, and 
which has a very hushy tail purely black in 
colour. The hair of this tail is finer than hu- 
man hair, and its possession is a point on which 
Indian women set great store, for therewith they 
make a charming coiffure, by binding and braid- 
ing it with the locks of their own natural hair« 
The length of a hair is two cubits, and from a 
single root there sprout out, in the form of a 
fringe, somewhere about thirty hairs. The ani- 
mal itself is the most timid that is known, for 
should it perceive that any one is looking at it, it 
starts off at its utmost speed, and runs right 
forward, — but its eagerness to escape is greater 
than the rapidity of its pace. It is hunted with 
horses and hounds good to run. When it sees 
that it is on the point of being caught, it hides its 
tail in some near thicket, while it stands at bay 
facing its pursuers, whom it watches narrowly. It 
even plucks up courage in a way, and thinks that 
since its tail is hid from yiew the hunters will not 
care to capture it, for it knows that its tail is the 
great object of attraction. But it finds this to 
be, of course, a vain delusion, for some one hits 
it with a poisoned dart, who then flays off the 
entire skin (for this is of value) and throws away 
the carcase, as the Indians make no use of any 
part of its flesh. 

(12.) But further: whales are to be found 



Digitized by 



Google 



165 

in the Indian Sea, and these five times larger 
than the largest elephant. A rib of this mon* 
strous fish measures as much as twenty cubits, 
and its lip fifteen cubits. The fins near the 
gills are each of them so much as seven cubits 
in breadth. The shell-fish called Kerukes are 
also met with, and the purple-fish of a size 
that would admit it easily into a gallon mea- 
sure, while on the other hand the shell of the 
sea-urchin is large enough to cover com- 
pletely a measure of that size. But fish in India 
attain enormous dimensions, especially the sea- 
wolves, the thunnies, and the golden-eyebrows. 
I hear also that at the season when the rivers are 
swollen, and with their fall and boisterous flood 
deluge all the land, the fish are carried into the 
fields, where they swim and wander to and fro, 
ejen in shallow water, and that when the rains 
which flood the rivers cease, and the waters re- 
tiring from the land resume their natural chan- 
nels, then in the low-lying tracts and in flat 
and marshy grounds, where we may be sure the 
so-called Nine are wont to have some watery re- 
cesses (KoXirovff), fish even of eight cubits' length 
are found, which the husbandmen themselves 
catch as they swim about languidly on the surface 
of the water, which is no longer of a depth they 
can freely move in, but in fact so very shallow 
that it is vdth the utmost difficulty they can 
live in it at all. 

(13.) The following fish are also indigenous 



Digitized by 



Google 



166 

to India:— -prickly roaches, which are never in 
any respect smaller than the asps of Argolis ; and 
shrimps, which in India are even larger than 
crahs. These, I must mention, finding their 
way from the sea up the Ganges, have claws 
which are very large, and which feel rough to 
the touch. I have ascertained that those shrimps 
which pass from the Persian Gulf into the river' 
Indus have their prickles smooth, and the feelers 
with which they are furnished elongated and 
curling, but this species has no claws. 

(14.) The tortoise is found in India, where it 
lives in the rivers. It is of immense size, and it has 
a shell not smaller than a full-sized skiff (cr/ca<^?;), 
and which is capable of holding ten medimni 
(120 gallons) of pulse. There are, however, also 
land-tortoises which may be about as big as the 
largfest clods turned up in a rich soil where the 
glebe is very yielding, and the plough sinks 
deep, and, cleaving the furrows with ease, piles 
the clods up high. These are said to cast their 
shell. Husbandmen, and all the hands engaged 
in field labour, turn them up with their mattocks, 
and take them out just in the way one extracts 
wood-worms fyom the plants they have eaten 
into. They are fat things and their flesh is 
sweet, having nothing of the sharp flavour of the 
sea-tortoise. 

(15.) Intelligent animals are to be met with 
among ourselves, but they are few, and not at all so 
common as they are in India. For there we find 



Digitized by 



Google 



167 

the elephant, which answers to this character, and 
the parrot^ and apes- of the sphinx kind, and 
the creatures called satyrs. Nor must we for- 
get the Indian ant, which is so noted for its 
wisdom. The ants of our own country do, no 
doubt, dig for themselves subterranean holes and 
burrows, and by boring provide themselves with 
lurking-places, and wear out all their strength in 
what may be called mining operations, which are 
indescribably toilsome and conducted with se- 
crecy ; but the Indian ants construct for them- 
selves a cluster of tiny dwelling-houses, seated 
not on sloping or level grounds where they could 
easily be inundated, but on steep and lofty 
eminences. And in these, by boring out. with 
untold skill certain circuitous passages which 
remind one of the Egyptian ^burial-vaults or 
Cretan labyrinths, they so contrive the structure 
of their houses that none of the Hues run 
straight, and it is difficult for anything to enter 
them or flow into them, the windings and per- 
forations being so tortuous. On the outside 
they leave only a single aperture to admit them- 
selves and the grain which they collect and 
carry to their store-chambers. Their object in 
selecting lofty sites for their mansions is, of 
course, to escape the high floods and inimdations 
of the rivers; and they derive this advantage 
from their foresight, that they live as it were in 
so many watch-towers or islands when the parts 
around the heights become all a lake. More- 



Digitized by 



Google 



168 

over, the mounds they hve in, though placed 
in contiguity, so far from heing loosened and 
torn asunder hy the deluge, are rather strength- 
ened, especially by the morning dew : for they 
put on, so to speak, a coat of ice formed from 
this dew — thin, no doubt, but still of strength ; 
while at the same time they are made more com- 
pact at their base by weeds and bark of trees 
adhering, which the silt of the river has carried 
down. Let so much about Indian ants be said 
by me now, as it was said by lobas long ago. 

(16) In the country of the Indian Areianoi 
there is a subterranean chasm down in which 
there are mysterious vaults, concealed ways, and 
thoroughfares invisible to men. These are deep 
withal, and stretch to a very great distance. How 
they came to exist, and how they were excavated, 
the Indians do not say, nor do I concern myself 
to inquire. Hither the Indians bring more than 
thrice ten thousand head of cattle of different 
kinds, sheep and goats, and oxen and horses ; and 
every person who has been terrified by an omin- 
ous dream, or a warning sound or prophetic voice, 
or who has seen a bird of evil augury, as a sub- 
stitute for his life casts into the chasm such a victim 
as his private means can afford, giving the animal 
as a ransom to save his soul alive. The victims 
conducted thither are not led in chains nor other- 
wise coerced, but they go along this road willing- 
ly, as if urged forward by some mysterious spell ; 
and as soon as they find themselves on the verge 



Digitized by 



Google 



169 

of the chasm they voluntarily leap in, and dis- 
appear for ever from human sight so soon as they 
fall into this mysterious and viewless cavern 
of the earth. But above there are heard the 
bellowings of oxen, the bleating of sheep, the 
neighing of horses, and the plaintive cries of 
goats, and if any one goes near enough to the 
edge and closely applies his ear he will hear afar 
off the sounds just mentioned. This commingled 
sound is one that never ceases, for every day that 
passes men bring new- victims to be their sub- 
stitutes. Whether the cries of the animals last 
brought only are heard, or the cries also of those 
brought before, I know not, — all I know is that 
the cries are heard. 

(17) In the sea which has been mentioned they 
say there is a very large island, of which, as I hear, 
the name is Taprobane. From what I can 
learn, it appears to be a very long and mountainous 
island, having a length of 7000 stadia and a breadth 
of 5000.^ It has not, however, any cities, but only 
villages, of which the numberamountsto750. The 
houses in which the inhabitants lodge themselves 
are made of wood, and sometimes also of reeds. 

(18.) In the sea which surrounds the islands, 
tortoises are bred of so vast a size that their shells 
are employed to make roofs for the houses : for a 
shell, being fifteen cubits in length, can hold a 

^ In tho classical writers the sizo of this island la always 
greatly exaggerated. Its actual length from north to 
south is 271a miles, and its breadth from east to west 1372, 
and its circuit about 660 miles. 



Digitized by 



Google 



170 

good many people under it, screening tliem from 
the scorching heat of the sun, besides affording 
them a welcome shade. But, more than this, it 
is a protection against the violence of storms of 
rain far more effective than tiles, for it at once 
shakes off the rain that dashes against it, while 
those under its shelter hear the rain rattling as 
on the roof of a house. At all events they do 
not require to shift their abode, like those whose 
tiling is shattered, for the shell is hard and like 
a hollowed rock and the vaulted roof of a natural 
cavern. 

The island, then, in the great sea, which they 
call Taproban^ has palm-groves, where the trees 
are planted with wonderful regularity all in a row, 
in the way we see the keepers of pleasure-parks 
plant out shady trees in the choicest spots. It 
has also herds of elephants, which are there very 
numerous and of the largest size. These island 
elephants are more powerful than those of the 
mainland, and in appearance larger, and may 
be pronounced to be in every possible way more 
intelligent. The islanders export them to the 
mainland opposite in boats, which they construct 
expressly for this traffic from wood supplied 
by the thickets of the island, and they dispose 
of their cargoes to the king of the Kalingai. 
On account of the great size of the island, the 
inhabitants of the interior have never seen the 
sea, but pass their lives as if resident on a con- 
tinent, though no doubt they learn from others 



Digitized by 



Google 



171 

that they' are all around enclosed hy the sea. 
The inhabitants, again, of the coast have no 
practical acquaintance with elephant-catching, 
and know of it only by report. All their energy 
is devoted to catching fish and the monsters of 
the deep ; for the sea encircling the island is 
reported to breed an incredible number of fish, 
both of the smaller fry and of the monstrous 
sort, among the latter being some which have the 
heads of lions and of panthers and of other wild 
beasts, and also of rams ; and, what is still a 
greater marvel, there are monsters which in all 
points of their shape resemble satyrs. Others 
are in appearance Uke women, but, instead of 
having locks of hair, are furnished with prickles. 
It is even solemnly alleged that this sea contains 
certain strangely formed creatures, to represent 
which in a picture would baffle all the skill of the 
artists of the country, even though, with a; view to 
make a profound sensation, they are wont to 
paint monsters which consist of difi'erent parts of 
different animals pieced together. These have 
their tails and the parts which are wreathed of 
great length, and have for feet either claws 
or fins. I learn further that they are amphibi- 
ous, and by night graze on the pasture-fields, for 
they eat grass like cattle and birds that pick 
up seeds. They have also a great liking for the 
date when ripe enough to drop from the palms, 
and accordingly they twist their coils, which are 
supple, and large enough for the purpose, around 



Digitized by 



Google 



172 

these trees, and shake them so violently that 
the dates come tumbling down, and afford them 
a welcome repast. Thereafter when the night 
begins gradually to wane, but before there is yet 
clear daylight, they disappear by plunging into 
the sea just as the first flush of morning faintly 
illumines its surface. They say whales also 
frequent this sea, though it is not true that 
they come near the shore lying in wait for 
thunnies. The dolphins are reported to be of 
two sorts — one fierce and armed with sharp- 
pointed teeth, which gives endless trouble to the 
fisherman, and is of a remorselessly cruel disposi- 
tion, while the other kind is naturally mild and 
tame, swims about in the friskiest way, and is 
quite like a fawning dog. It does not run away 
when any one tries to stroke it, and it takes with 
pleasure any food it is offered. 

(19.) The sea-hare, by which I now mean the 
kind found in the great sea (for of the kind found 
in the other sea I have already spoken), re- 
sembles in every particular the land hare ex- 
cept only the fur, which in the case of the 
land animal is soft and lies smoothly down, and 
does not resist the touch, whereas its brother 
of the sea has bristling hair which is prickly, and 
inflicts a wound on any one who touches it. It 
is said to swim atop of the sea- ripple without ever 
diving below, and to be very rapid in its move- 
ments. To catch it alive is no easy matter, as it 
never falls into the net, nor goes near the line and 



Digitized by 



Google 



173 

bait of the fishing-rod. "When it suffers, how- 
ever, from disease, and, being in consequence 
hardly able to swim, is cast out on shore, then if 
anyone touches it with his hand death ensues if he 
is not attended to, — ^nay, should one, were it only 
with a staff, touch this dead hare, he is affected in 
the same way as those who have touched a basi- 
lisk. But a root, it is said, grows along the coast 
of the island, well known to every one, which 
is a remedy for the swooning which ensues. It 
is brought close to the nostrils of the person who 
has fainted, who thereupon recovers conscious- 
ness. But should the remedy not be applied the 
injury proves fatal to life, so noxious is the 
vigour which this hare has at its command. 

Frag. XV. B. follows here.* 
(22.) There is also a race called the S k i r a- 
t a i,t whose country is beyond India. They are 

* This is the fragment in which <^1ia.Ti describes the 
one-homed animal which he calls the Kartaz6n. Bosen- 
muller, who has treated at large of the nnicom, which he 
identifies with the Indian rhinoceros, thinks that ^lian 
probably borrowed his account of it from Ktesias, who 
when in Persia may have heard exaggerated accounts of it, 
or may have seen it represented in sculpture with varia- 
tions ^om its actual appearance. Tychsen derives its name 
from Kerdf an old name, he says, of the rhinoceros itself, 
and taaan, i.e.j currens velox, irruens. Three animals 
were spoken of by the ancients as having a single horn — the 
African Oryx, the Indian Ass, and what is specially called 
the Unicom. Vide cmte, p. 59. 

t Vide cmte, Fragm. xxx. 3, p. 80, and p. 74, notefy where 
they are identified with the Kir&tas. In the R&mdyana 
there is a passage quoted by Lassen (Zeitschr. f. Kunde d. 
Morgenl. II. 40) where are mentioned "the KirAtas, some 
of whom dwell in Mount Mandara, others use their ears as a 
covering ; they are horrible, black-faced, with but one foot 



Digitized by 



Google 



174 

snub-nosed, either because in the tender years of 
infancy their nostrils are pressed down, and con- 
tinue to be so throughout their after-life, or 
because such is the natural shape of the organ. 
Serpents of enormous size are bred in their 
country, of which some kinds seize the cattle when 
at pasture and devour them, while other kinds only 
suck the blood, as do the Aigithelai in Greece, of 
which I have already spoken in the proper place. 

but very fleet, wbo cannot be exterminated, are brave 
men, and cannibals." (Schwanbeck, p. 66.) [Lassen places 
one branch of them on the south bank of the Eansi in 
Nipfil, and another in Tiperl— Ed. Iwd. Anf] 



Digitized by 



Google 



TRANSLATION 



OF THE 



FIRST PART OF THE INDIKA 
OF ARRIAN. 

Chaps. I. — ^XVII* inclubivb. 

FROM TEUBNBR'S EDITION, 
Leipzig, 1867. 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



Introduction* 



Arrian, who variously distinguished himself 
bs a philosopher, a statesman, a soldier, and an 
historian, was bom in Nikomedia, in Bithynia, 
towards the end of the first century. ' He became 
a pupil of the philosopher Epiktetbs, whose lectures 
he published. Having been appointed prefect of 
Kappadokia under the emperot- Hadrian, he acquired 
during his administration a practical knowledge 
of the tactics of war in repelling an attack made up- 
on his province by the Alani and Massagetas. His 
talents recommended him to the favour of the 
succeeding emperor^ Antoninus Pius, by whom he 
was raised to the consulship (a.d. 146). In his 
later years he retired to his native town, where he 
applied his leisure to the composition of works on 
history, to which he was led by his admiration of 
Xenophon. He died at an advanced age, in the 
reign of the emperor Marcus Aurelius. The work 
by which he is best known is his account of 
the Asiatic expedition of Alexander the Great, 
which is remarkable alike for the accuracy of its 
Narrative, and the Xenophontic ease and cleamess> 
if not the perfect purity, of its style. His work 
on India ('IvBiicrf or ra 'hfbiKo) may be regarded as 
a continuation of his Anabasis, though it is not 
written, like the Anabasis, in the Attic dialect, but 
in the Ionic. The reason may have been that he 



Digitized by 



Google 



178 

wished his work to supersede the old and less 
accurate account of India written in Ionic by KtS- 
sias of Knidos. 

The IndiTca consists of three parts :— the first 
gives a general description of India, based chiefly 
on the accounts of the country given by Megas- 
thenSs and Eratosthenes (chaps, i. — ^xvii.); the 
second gives an account of the voyage made by 
Kearchos the Kretan from the Indus to the 
Pasitigris, based entirely on the narrative of 
the voyage written by Nearchos himself (chaps. 
rTiii. — xlii.); the third contains a collection of 
proofs to show that the southern parts of the world 
are uninhabitable on account of the great heat 
(chap. xlii. to the end). 



Digitized by 



Google 



THE INDIKA OF ARRIAN. 



I. The regions beyond the river I n d u s on 
the west are inhabited, up to the river K 6 p h e n, 
by two Indian tribes, the Astakenoi and the 
Assakenoi, who are not men of great stature 
like the Indians on the other side of the Indus, 
nor so brave, nor yet so swarthy as most Indians. 
They were in old times subject to the Assyrians, 
then after a period of Median rule submitted to 
the Persians, and paid to K y r o s the son of 
Kambys^s the tribute from their land which 
Kyros had imposed. The N y s a i o i , however, 
are not an Indian race, but descendants of those 
who came into India with Dionysos , — perhaps 
not only of those Greeks who had been disabled 
for service in the course of the wars which 
Dionysos waged against the Indians, but perhaps 
also of natives of the ^country whom Dionysos, 
with their own consent, had settled along with the 
Greeks. The district in which he planted thia 
colony he named N y s a i a, after Mount N y s a, 
and the city itself N y s a.* But the mountain 

• Nyea, the birthplace of the wine-god, wss placed, 
accordmg to fancy, anywhere np and down the world 
wherever the vine was f oond to flourish. Now, as the 
region watered by the Kdph^s was in no ordinary measure 
feracious of the joyous tree, there was consequently a Nysa 
somewhere upon its banks. liassen doubted whether there 



Digitized by 



Google 



180 

close by the city, and on the lower slopes of which 
it is built, is designated M e r o s, from the accident 
which befell the god immediately after his birth. 
These stories about Dionysos are of course but 
fictions of the poets, and we leave them to the 
learned among the Greeks or barbarians to ex- 
plain as they may. In the dominions of the 
Assakenoi there is a great city called M a s- 
8 a k a, the seat of the sovereign power which 
controls the whole realm.f And there is an- 
other city, Peukelaitis, which is also of 
great size and not far from the Indus4 These 



was a city to the name ; bntM. de St.-Hartm is less sceptical, 
and would identify it with an existing village which pre- 
serves traces of its name, being called Nysatta. This, he says, 
is near the northern bank of the river of KabM at less 
than two leagues below Hashtnagar, and may suitably re- 
present the Nysa of the historians. This place, he adds, 
ought to be of Median or Persian foundation, since the 
nomenclature is Ir&nian, the name of Nysa or Nisaya which 
figures in the cosmogonic geography of the Zen&ivesia 
being one which is far-spread in the countries of ancient 
Ir&n. He refers his readers for remarks on this iraint to 
A. de Humboldt's Central Asia, I. pp. 116 seq. ed. 1843. 

t Massaka (other forms are Massaga, Masaga, and 
Mazaga.) — The Sanskrit M a s a k 6, a city situated near the 
Grauri. Curtius states that it was defended by a rapid 
river on its eastern side. When attacked by Alexander, it 
held out for four days against all his assaults. 

X PeukelaYtis (other forms— Peukelaetis, Peukolit», 
Peukelaotis). " The Greek name of Peukelaotis or Peuko- 
laitis was immediately derived from Pukkalaoti, which is 
the P&li or spoken form of the Sanskrit Pushkalavati. 
It is also called Peukelas by Arrian, and the people are 
named Peukalei by Dionysius Periegetes, which are 
bol^ close transcripts of the P&li P u k k a 1 a. The form of 
Froklais, which is found in Arrian's Periplus of the Ery-> 
thrcean Sea and also in Ptolemy's Geography, is perhaps 
only an attempt to give the Hindi name of Pokhar, 
instead of the Sanskrit P u s h k a r a." So General Cnn- 
oingham, who fixes its position at " the two large towns 



Digitized by 



Google 



181 

settlements lie on the other side of the river 
Indus, and extend in a westward direction as far 
as the K 6 p h e n. 

II. Now the countries which lie to the east 
of the Indus I take to be India Proper, and 
the people who inhabit them to be I n d i a n s.§ 
The northern boundaries of India so defined are 
formed by Mount T a u r o s, though the range 
does not retain that name in these parts. Tauros 
begins from the sea which washes the coasts 
of Pamphylia, Lykia, and Kilikia, and stretches 
away towards the Eastern Sea, intersecting the 
whole continent of Asia. The range bears dif- 
ferent names in the different countries which 
it traverses. In one place it is called Para- 
p a m i s s, in another E m o d o s, || and in a 

Tamng and Clifirsada, whicli form part of the well-known 
Hashtnagar, or * eight eities,' that are seated close to- 
gether on the eastern bank of the lower Swfit river." The 
position indicated is nearly, seventeen miles to tiie north* 
east of Pesh&war. Pnshkala, according to Prof. Wilson, 
is still represented by the modem Pekhely or Pakholi, 
in the neighbourhood of Pesh&war. 

§ In limiting India to the eastern side of the Indus, 
Arrian expresses the view generally held in antiqnity, 
which wonld appear to be also that of the Hindus tiiem* 
selves, since they are forbidden by one of their old tradi- 
tions to cross that river. Mnch, however, may be said for 
the theory which would extend India to the foot of the 
great mountain ranges of Hindu Kush and Parapamisos. 
There is, for instance, the fact that in the region lying 
between these mountains and the Indus many places either 
now bear, or have formerly borne, names which can with 
certainty be traced to Sanskrit sources. The subject is 
discussed at some length in Elphinstone's History of India, 
pp. 831-6, also hj de St. -Martin.— E'iwde, pp. 9-14. 

II Parapamisos (other forms — Paropamisos, Paro- 
pamissos, Paropanisos). This denotes the great moun- 
tain range now called Hind^ Kush, supposed to 



Digitized by 



Google 



182 

third I m a s , and it has perhaps other names 
hesides. The Makedonians, again, who served 
with Alexander called it Kaukasos, — this 
heing another Kaukasos and distinct from the 
Skythian, so that the story went that Alexander 
penetrated to the regions heyond Kaukasos. 

be a corrupted form of "Indicus Caacasus/' the name 
given to the range by the Makedonians, either to flatter 
Alexander, or because they regarded it as a continuation of 
Kaukasos. Arrian, however, and others held it to be a 
continuation of Tauros. The mountains belonging to 
the range which lie to the north of the K&bul river are 
called Nishadha, (see Lassen, Ind. Alt. I. p. 22, note), a 
Sanskrit word which appears perhaps in the form Paro- 
panisos, which is that given by Ptolemy. According to 
tliny, the Skythians called Mount Caucasus Graucasis, 
a word which represents the Indian name of Paropamisos, 
Gravakshas, which Eitter translates " splendentes 
rv/pium monies" According to General Cunningham, the 
Mount Paresh or Aparasin of the Zendavesixb cor- 
responds with the ParopamisoB of the Greeks. ParOf the 
first part of the word, St.-Martin says, represents un- 
doubtedly the Paruor Parutaof the local dialects 
(in Zend, Purouta meaning mountain). He acknow- 
ledges, however, that he cannot assign any reason why the 
Byl£tble pa has been intercalated between the vocables 
pai'u and TitaTiada to form the Paropanisadas of the 
Greek. The first Greek writer who mentions the range is 
Aristotle, who calls it Pamassos : see his Meteorol. I. 18. 
Hind^Kush generally designates now the eastern part 
of the range, and Paropamisos the western. Accord- 
ing to Sir Alexander Bumes, the name Hind^i Kush is 
unknown to the Af gh&ns, but there is a particular -peBk 
and also a pass bearing that name between Afgh&nist&n 
and Turkest&n. — Emodos (other forms— Emoda, Emo- 
don, Hemodes). The name generally designated that part 
of the Him&layan range which extended along NepAl and 
Bhutan and onward towards the ocean. Lassen derives 
the word from the Sanskrit hcmnavata, in PrAkyit havmota, 
* snowy.' If this be so, ' Hemodos' is the more correct 
form. Another derivation refers the word to " hSmddAri' 
(Tiema, gold, and adri, mountain), * the golden mountains,' 
— so called either because they were thought to contain " 
gold mines, or because of the aspect they presented when 
weir snowy peaks reflected the golden eflulgence of sunset. 



Digitized by 



Google 



183 

On the west the houndariea of India are 
marked by the river Indus all the way to the 
great ocean into which it pours its waters, which 
it does by two mouths. These mouths are not 
close to each other, like the five mouths of the 
I s t e r (Danube), but diverge hke those of the 
N i 1 e, by which the Egyptian delta is formed. 
The Indus in like manner makes an Indian delta, 
which is not inferior in area to the Egyptian, and 
is called in the Indian tongue Pattala.^ 

On the south-west, again, and on the souths 
India is bounded by the great ocean just men^ 
tioned, which also forms its boundary on the east. 
The parts toward the south about Pattala and 
the river Indus were seen by Alexander and many 
of the Greeks, but in an eastern direction Alex- 

% Pattala. — The name of the Delta was properly 
PAtalene, and F At a la was its capitaL This was 
ntoated at the head of the Delta, where the western stream 
of the Indns bifarcated. Thatha has generally been 
regarded as its modem representative, bat Genend Cnn« 
ningham would "almost certainly** identify it with 
Nirankol or Haidarftbdd, of which Pfitalpnr 
and P&ta^ila (' flat rock') were old appellations. With 
regard to the name P&tala he suggests that " it may have 
been derived from Pdtalay the trumpet flower" {Bignonia 
8uaveolen$), " in allusion to the trumpet shape of the pro- 
vince included between the eastern and western branches 
of the mouth of the Indus, as the two branches as they 
approach the sea curve outward like the mouth of a trum- 
pet." Bitter, however, says : — " P & t & 1 a is the designa- 
tion bestowed by the Brfthma98 on all the provinces in the 
west towards sunset, in antithesis to Prasiaka (the 
eastern reahn) in Ganges-land : for PAtAla is the mytholo- 
gical name in Sanskrit of the under-world, and conse- 
quently of the land of the west." Airian's estimate of the 
magnitude of the Delta is somewhat ezoessive. The length 
of its base, from the Pitti to the Eori mouth, was less than 
1000 stadia, while that of the Egyptian Delta was 1300. 



Digitized by 



Google 



184 

ftnder did not penetrate beyond the river It y- 
p h a s i s, though a few authors have described 
the country as far as the river Ganges and 
the parts near its mouths and the city of P a-^ 
I'i m b o t h r a, which is the greatest in India^ 
and situated near the Ganges. 

III. I shall now state the dimensions of India, 
and in doing so let me follow Eratosthenes 
of Kyrend as the safest authority, for this Era- 
tosthenes made its circuit a subject of special 
inquiry.* He states^ then, that if a line be drawn 
from Mount Tauros, where the Indus has its 
springs, along the course of that river and as faf 
as the great ocean and the mouths of the Indufl, 
this side of India will measure 13,000 stadia.f 
But the contrary side, which diverges from the 
same point of Tauros and runs along the Eastern 
Sea, he makes of a much different length, for 
there is a headland which projects far out into the 

• Scliinieder, from whose text I translate, has here 
altered (perhaps unnecessarily) the reading of the MSS. 
from T^s ircpidbov to yrjs ncpiobov* The measorements 
fliyen by Strabo are more accurate than those of Arrian. 
They are, howerer, not at all wide of the mark ; General 
Cunningham, indeed, remarks that their close agreement 
with the actual size of the country is very remarkable, and 
shows, he adds, that the Indians, even at that early date in 
their history, had a rer^ accurate knowledge of the form 
and extent of their native land. 

t The Olympic stadium, which was in general use 
throughout Greece, contained 600 Greek feet = 625 Roman 
feet, or 606| Engli^ feet. The Boman mile contained 
eight stadia, being about half a stadium less than an 
English nule. The schoinos (mentioned below) was = 2 
Persian parasangs = 60 stadia, but was generally taken at 
half that length. 



Digitized by 



Google 



185 

sea, and thid headland is in length about 3,000 
stadia. The eastern side of India would thus by 
his calculation measure 16,000 stadia, and this is 
what he assigns as the breadth of India. The 
length, again, from west to east as far as the city 
ofPalimbothrahe sets down, he says, as 
it had been measured by schceni, since there ex- 
isted a royal highway, and he gives it as 10,000 
stadia. But as for the parts beyond they were 
not measured with equal accuracy. Those, how- 
ever, who write from mere hearsay allege that 
the breadth of India, inclusive of the headland 
which projects into the sea, is about 10,000 stadia, 
while the length measured from the coast is about 
20,000 stadia. But K t e s i a s of Knidos says 
that India equals in size all the rest of Asia, which 
is absurd; while Onesikritos as absurdly 
declares that it is the third part of the whole 
earth. Nearchos, again, says that it takes 
a journey of four months to traverse even the 
plain of India ; while Megasthen^s, who 
calls the breadth of India its extent from east to 
west, though others call this its length, says that 
where shortest the breadth is 16,000 stadia, 
and that its length — by which he means its ex- 
tent from north to south— is, where narrowest, 
22,300 stadia. But, whatever be its dimensions, 
the rivers of India are certainly the largest to 
be found in all Asia. The mightiest are the 
Ganges and the Indus, from which the 
country receives its name. Both are greater than 
r 



Digitized by 



Google 



186 

the Egyptian Nile and the Skythian I s t e r 
even if their streams were united into one. I 
think, too, that even the Akesines is greater 
than either the Ister or the Nile where it joins 
the Indus after receiving its tributaries the H y- 
d a s p ^ s and the Hydraotes, since it is at 
that point so much as 300 stadia in breadth. It 
is also possible that there are even many other 
larger rivers which take their course through 
India. 

IV. But I am unable to give with assur- 
ance of being accurate any information regarding 
the regions beyond the H y p h a s i s, since the 
progress of Alexander was arrested by that river. 
But to recur to the two greatest rivers, the Gan- 
ges and the Indus. Megasthenes states 
that of the two the G a u g e s is much the larger, 
and other writers who mention the Ganges agree 
with him ; for, besides being of ample volume 
even where it issues from its springs, it receives 
as tributaries the river K a i n a s, and the E r a n- 
n b o a s, and the Kossoanos, which are all 
navigable. It receives, besides, the river S o n o s 
and the Sittokatis, and the Solomatis, 
which are also navigable, and also the K o n d o« 
c h a t e s, and the S a m b o s, and the M a g 6 n, 
and the Agoranis, and the O m a 1 i s. More- 
over there fall into it the K o m m e na s e s, a 
great river, and the Kakouthis, and the 
Andomatis, which flows from the dominions 
of the M a d y a n d i n o i, an Indian tribe. In 



Digitized by 



Google 



187 

addition to all these, the A m y s t i s, which flows 
past the city Katadupa, and the O x y m a- 
g i s from the dominions of a tribe called the 
P a z a 1 a i, and the Errenysis from the 
Ma t ha i, an Indian tribe, unite with the Ganges. J 



J Arrian here emunerateB seventeen tributaries of the 
Ganges. The number is given as nineteen by Pliny, who 
adds the Prinas and the Jomanes, which Arrian elsewhere 
(cap. viii.) mentions under the name of the Jobares. These 
tributaries have been nearly aU identified by the 
researches of such learned men as Eennel, Wilford, 
Schlegel, Lassen, and Schwanbeck. M. de St. -Martin, 
in reviewing their conclusions, clears up a few points 
which they had left in doubt, or wherein he thinks they 
had erred. I shall now show how each of the nineteen 
tributaries has been identified. 

K a Y n a s . — This has been identified with the Kan, or Kane, 
or Kena, which, however, is only indirectly a tributary of the 
Ganges, as it falls into the JamnS. The Sanskrit name of 
the Kan is ^ena, and Schwanbeck (p. 36) objects to the 
identification that the Greeks invariably represent the Sans- 
krit ^ by their V, and never by ai. St.-Martin attaches 
no importance to this objection, and gives the Sanskrit 
equivalent as Kaiana. 

Erranoboa s. — As Arrian informs us (cap. x.) that 
Palimbothra (Pdtaliputra, P&tnA) was situated 
at the confluence of this river with the Ganges, it must 
be identified with the river S 6 n, which formerly join- 
ed the Granges a little above Bankipur, the western 
suburb of Patnfi, from which its embouchure is now 
16 miles distant and higher up the Granges. The word no 
doubt represents the Sanskyit Hiranyavfiha(* carrying 
gold') or HiranyabShu (* having golden arms'), which are 
both x)oetical names of the S6n. Megasthenes, however, 
and Arrian, both make the Erannoboas and the S6n to be 
distinct rivers, and hence some would identify the former 
with the G a n d a k (Sanskrit G a n d a k i), which, accord- 
ing to Lassen, was called by the Buddhists Hiranyavati, 
or ' the golden.* It is, however, too small a stream to suit 
the description of the Erannoboas, that it was the largest 
river in India after the (ranges and Indus. The S6n may 
perhaps in the time of Megasthenes have joined the Granges 
by two channels, which he may have mista>ken for separate 



Digitized by 



Google 



188 

Regarding these streams Megasthenes as- 
serts that none of them is inferior to the Mai- 

Ko so an OS. — Cosoagus is the form of the name in 
Pliny, and hence it has been taken to be the representa- 
tive of the Sanskrit Kanshiki, the river now called the 
Kosi. Schwanbeck, however, thinks it represents the 
StLnBkjitKosdvdha (* treasure-bearing'), and that it is there- 
fore an epithet of the S 6 n, like Hiranyav&ha, which has 
the same meaning. It seems somewhat to favour this 
view that Arrian in his enumeration places the Kosoa- 
nos between the Erannoboas and the S6n. 

Son OS. — The S6n, which now joins the Ganges ten 
miles above Din&pnr. The word is considered to be a 
contraction of the Sanskrit Suvarna (Suvanna), 
* golden,' and may have been given as a name to the river 
either because its sands were yellow, or because they 
contained gold dust. 

Sittokati 8. — It has not been ascertained what river 
was denoted by this name, but St.-Martin thinks it may 
be the representative of the SadakftntA— a river now 
unknown, but mentioned in the Mahdhhdrata along 
with the Kousadhfira (the Kosi), the Sadanlra (the Kara- 
toyfi), and the Adhrichya (the Atreyi), from which it is 
evident that it belonged to the northern parts of Bengal. 

Solomati s. — It has not been ascertained what river 
was denoted by this name. General Cunningham in one 
of his maps gives the Solomatisas a name of the S a ra n j u 
or Saiju, a tributary of the Ghagr& ; while Benfey and 
others would identify it with the famous Sarasvatl or 
Sarsuti, which, according to the legends, after disappearing 
underground, joined the Ganges at Allah ab&d. There is 
more probability, however, in Lassen's suggestion, that 
the word somewhat erroneously transliterates Sar&vati, 
the name of a city of Kd^ala mentioned by K^id^a and 
in the Pur&nas, where it appears generally in the form 
iSravastt. This city stood on a river which, though nowhere 
mentioned by name, must also have been called SardruaU, 
since there is an obvious connexion between that name and 
the name by which the river of that district is now known — 
the Bapti. 

Kondochates. — Now the Gandak, — ^in Sanskrit, 
Gandaki or Gandakavati {pcvoKcpoeis), — because of its 
abounding in a kind of alligator having a horn-like 
TOpjection on its nose. It skirted the eastern border of 
A!6sala, joining the Ganges opposite Palibothra, 

Sambo s. — This has no Sanskrit equivalent. It perhaps 
designated the G u m 1 1, which is said to go by the name of 
the Sambouata part of its course below Lucknow. 



Digitized by 



Google 



189 

a n d r o s, even at the navigable part of its course ; 
and as for the Ganges, it has a breadth where 



M a g n. — According to Mannert the BSmgaiigfi, but 
much more probably the Mah&nada, now the M a h o n a, the 
principal river of Magadha, which joins the Ganges not far 
below P&tnfi. 

A g or an is. — According to Eennel the Ghagrft — a 
word derived from the Sanskrit Gharghara (*of 
gurgling sound'), but according to St. -Martin it must be 
some one or other of the Gaourisso abundant in the 
river nomenclature of Northern India. The vulgar form is 
Gaurana. 

m a 1 i s has not been identified, but Schwanbeck 
remarks that the word closely agrees with the Sanskrit 
V i m a 1 a (' stainless'), a common epithet of rivers. 

Kommenase s. — Rennel and Lassen identify this 
with the Karman&sa {honorum operum destructrix), a 
small river which joins the Ganges above Bax^. Accord- 
ing to a Hindu legend, whoever touches the water of this 
river loses all the merit of his good works, this being trans- 
ferred to the nymph of the stream. 

Kakonthi s. — Mannert erroneously takes this to be the 
G n m i 1. Lassen identifies it with the Kakouttha of the 
Buddhist chronicles, and hence with the Bagmatti, the 
Bhagavati of Sanskrit. 

Anddmati s. — Thought by Lassen to be connected with 
the Sanskrit Andhamati {tenehricosus), which he would 
identify, therefore, with the T & m a s &, (now the Tonsa) , 
the two names being identical in meaning ; but, as the river 
came from the country of the Madyandini (Sanskrit 
Madhyandina, meridionalis), — that is, the people of 
the South, — Wilford's conjecture that the Andomatis is the 
Dammuda, the river which flows by Baxdwfin, is more 
likely to be correct. The Sanskrit name or the Dammuda 
is Dharmadaya. 

A m y 8 1 i s. — The city Katadupa, which this river passes, 
Wilford would identify with Katwa or Cutwa, in Lower 
Bengal, which is situated on the western branch of the 
delta of the Ganges at the confluence of the Adji. As the 
Sanskrit form of the name of Katva should be Katadvlpa 
' (dvtpa, an island'), M. de St.-Martin thinks this coiyectnre 
has much probability in its favour. The Amystis may 
therefore be the Adjf, or Ajavati as it is called in 
Sanskrit. 

O X y m a g i ».— The Fazalai or Passalai, called in Sans- 
krit P a n ka 1 a, inhabited the DoSb, and through this or 
the region adjacent flowed the Ikshumati ('abounding 
in sugarcane'). Ozymagis very probably represented this 



Digitized by 



Google 



190 

narrowest of one hundred stadia, while in many 
places it spreads out into lakes, so that when the 
country happens to be flat and destitute of eleva- 
tions the opposite shores cannot be seen from 
each other. The Indus presents also, he says, 
similar characteristics. The Hydraotes, flow- 
ing from the dominions of the Kambistholi, 
falls into the Akesines after receiving the 
H y p h a s i s in its passage through the 
Astrybai, as well as the Saranges from 
the K e k i a n s, and the N e u d r o s from the 
Attakenoi. The H y d a s p ^ s again, rising 
in the dominions of the O x ydr ak ai, and bring- 
ing with it the Sinaros, received in the 
dominion of the A r i s p a i, falls itself into the 
Akesines, while the AkesinSs joins the 
Indus in the dominions of the M a 1 1 o i, but 
not until it has received the waters of a great 

name, since the letters r and T in Greek conld readily be 
confounded. The form of the name in Megasthenes may 
have been Oiymetis. 

Errenysif closely corresponds to V&r&nasi, the 
name of Banftras in Sanskrit, — so called from the rivera 
yfirlma and Asi, which join the Ganges in its neighbonrhood. 
The M a th a i, it has been thought, may be the people of 
Magadha. St.-Martin would fix their position in the tune of 
Megasthenes in the country between the lower part of the 
Gnmtt and the Ganges, adding that as the Journal of 
Hiwen Thsftng places their capital, M&tipura, ata little 
distance to the east of the upper Ganges near G a n g fi- 
dv&ra, now Hardwdr, they must have extended their 
name and dominion by the traveller's time far beyond 
their original bounds. The Prinas, which Arrian has 
omitted, St.-Martin would identify with the Tftmasft, which 
is otherwise called the Pamds&, and belongs to the same 
part of the country as the Ka'inas, in connexion with which 
Pliny mentions the Prinas. 



Digitized by 



Google 



]91 

tributary, the T o u t a p o s. Augmented by 
all these confluents the Akesines succeeds 
in imposmg its name on the combined waters, 
and still retains it till it unites with the Indus. 
The K 6 p h e n, too, falls into the I n d u s, rising 
inPeukelaitis, and bringing with it the M a- 
1 a n 1 s, and the S o a s t o s, and the G a r r o i a. 
Higher up than these, the P a r e n o s and S a- 
p a r n s, at no great distance from each other, 
empty themselves into the Indus, as does also 
the S a n o s, which comes without a tributary 
from the hill-country of the Abissareans.§ 



J Tributaries of the Indus : — Anian has here named 
y 13 tribntaries of the Indus (in Sanskrit Sindhu, in the 
Periplils of the Eryth/rcean Sea Sinthos), but in his Ana- 
hasis (v. 6) he states that the number was 15, which is also 
the number given by Strabo. Pliny reckons them at 19. 

Hydra6t6s. — Other forms are Bhouadis and Hy- 
arotis. It is now called the E^vi, the name being a 
contraction of the Sanskrit Air&vati, which means' 
'abounding in water/ or *the daughter of Air&vat/the 
elephant of Indra, who is said to have generated the river by 
striking his tusk against the rock whence it issues. His 
name has reference to his * ocean' origin. The name of the 
Kambistholai does not occur elsewhere. Schwanbeck 
(p. 33) coiyectures that it may represent the Sanskyit 
K ap i s t h a 1 a, * ape-land,' the letter m being inserted, as 
in *Palimbothra..* He rejects Wilson's suggestion tiiat 
the people may be identical with the Kambojsa. Arrian 
errs in making the Hvphasis a tributary of the Hydradt^s, 
for it falls into the A k e s i n ^ b below its junction with 
that river. See on this i>oint St.-Martin, E'tvde, p. 396. 

Hyphasis (other forms are Bibasis, Hyx>asis, and Hy- 
panis). — In Sanskrit the Vipfisa, and now the By as a or 
Bias. It lost its name on being joined by the ^atadm, 
* the hundred-channelled,* the Zaradros of Ptolemy, now 
the Satlej. The As trob a i are not mentioned by any 
writer except Arrian. 

Saranges. — According to Schwanbeck, this word 
represents the Sanskrit Saranga, * six-limbed.' It is 
not known what river it designated. The Kekians, through 



Digitized by 



Google 



192 

According to Megasthenes most of these 
rivers are navigable. We ought not, therefore, to 

whose country it flowed, were called in Sanskrit, according 
to Lassen, Sekaya. 

Nendrosis not known. The Attakenoi are like- 
wise unknown, nnless their name is another form of 
Assakenoi. 

H y d a 8 p ^ s. — Bidasp^s is the form in Ptolemy, which 
makes a nearer approach to its San skpt name — ^the Vitasta. 
It is now the Be hut or J helam; called also by the 
inhabitants on its banks tho B e d u s t a, * widely spread.' 
It is the "fabulosus Hydaspes" of Horace, and the " Medus 
{i.e. Eastern) Hydaspes" of Virgil. It formed the western 
boundary of the dominions of Poros. 

A. k e s i n 6 s. — Now the C h e n ft b : its Sanskpt name 
Asikni (* dark -coloured') is met with in the hymns of the 
V^da. It was called afterwards ChandrabhSga {portio 
lunoB). This would be represented in Greek by San- 
drophago s,— a word in sound so like Androphagos or 
Ale-xandrophagos (* devourer of Alexander') that the fol- 
lowers of the great conqueror changed the name to avoid 
the evil omen, — the more so, perhaps, on account of the 
disaster which befell the Makedonian fleet at the turbulent 
junction of the river with the Hydaspes. Ptolemy gives its 
name as Sandabaga (Sandahala by an error on the part of 
copyists), which is an exact transcription of the Prfikrit 
Chandahaga, of which word the Cantahra of Pliny is a 
greatly altered form. The Malli, in whose counti^ this 
river joins the Indus, are the Malava of Sanskrit, whose 
name is prescribed in the Multdn of the present day. 

T o u t a p o 8. — Probably the lower part of the ^atadm 
or Satlej. 

Kd p h e n. — Another form of the name, used by Stra- 
bo, Pliny, &c., is K o p h 6 s, -^tis. It is now^ the K H b u 1 
river. The three rivers here named as its tributaries pro- 
bably conespond to the Suv&stu, Gaurl, and K a m- 
pana mentioned in the 6th book of the MaMhhdrata. 
The Soastos is no doubt the Suvastu, and the Grarssa the 
Gaur!. Ourtius and Strabo call the Suastus the Cho- 
aspes. According to Mannert the Suastus and the 
Garsea or Guraeus were identical. Lassen, however (Ind. 
Alterthums. 2nd ed. II. 678 ff.), would identify the 
Suastus with the modem SuwadorSv&t, and the Gra- 
rsBus with its tributary the Panjkora; and this is the 
view adopted by Cunningham. The Malamantos some 
would identify with the h o e s (mentioned by Arrian, 
Anabasis iv. 25), which is probably represented by the 
Kameh or Khonar, the largest of the tributaries of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



193 

distrust what we are told regarding the Indus 
and the Ganges, that they are beyond com- 
parison greater than the I s t e r and the Nile. 
In the case of the Nile we know that 
it does not receive any tributary, but that, 
on the contrary, in its passage through Egypt 
its waters are drawn off to fill the canals. As 
for the I s t e r, it is but an insignificant stream 
at its sources, and though it no doubt receives 
many confluents, still these are neither equal 
in number to the confluents of the Indus and 

K&bnl; others, however, with the Panjkora, while Cun- 
ningham takes it to be the B&ra, a tributary which 
joins the K&bnl from the south. With regard to the name 
^ o p h e 8 this author remarks : — " The name of K o p h e a 
is as old as the time of the Vedas, in which the K ub h & 
river is mentioned [Both first pointed this out; — conf. 
Lassen, ut sup.'] as an affluent of the Indus; and, as it is 
not an Aryan word, I infer that the name must have been 
applie<^ to the E ft b u 1 river before the Aryan occupation, 
or at least as early as B.C. 2500. In the classical writers we 
find the Choes, Kophes, and Choaspes rivers to 
the west of the Indus ; and at the present day we have the 
K un a r, the K u ram, and the G o m a 1 rivers to the west, 
and the Kunihar river to the east of the Indus, — all 
of which are derived from the Skythian hu, 'water.' It 
is the guttural form of the Assyrian hu in ' Euphrates' 
and * EulsBus,' and of the Turki 3U and Tibetan chu, all 
of which mean * water' or * river.' Ptolemy the Geogra- 
pher mentions a city called Kabura, situated on the banks 
of the Kophen, and a people called K a b o 1 it 89. 

P a r e n s. — Probably the modem B u r i n d u. 

S a p a r n o s. — Probably the A b b a s i n. 

Soanns represents the Sanskrit Suvana, Hhe sun,' 
or * fire' — ^now the S v a n. The AbissarsBans, from whose 
country it comes, may be the Abisara of Sanskrit: 
Lassen, Iifid. Alt. II. 163. A king called Abisardi 
is mentioned by Arrian in his Anabasis (iy. 7). It may 
be here remarked that the names of the Indian kings, as 
given by the Greek writers, were in general the names 
slightly modified of the people over whom they ruled. 



Digitized by 



Google 



194 

Ganges, nor are they navigable like them, 
if we except a very few,— as, for instance, the 
Inn, and Save which I have myself seen. The 
Inn joins the I s t e r where the N oricans 
march with the Rhsetians, and the Save in 
the dominions of the Pannonians, at a place 
which is called T a u r u n u m. |1 Some one may 
perhaps know other navigable tributaries of the 
Danube, but the number certainly cannot be great. 
V. Now if anyone wishes to state a reason 
to account for the number and magnitude of the 
Indian rivers let him state it. As for myself I 
have written on this point, as on others, from 
hearsay ; for Megasthenes has given the 
names even of other rivers which beyond both 
the Ganges and the Indus pour their waters 
into the Eastern Ocean and the outer basin of 
the Southern Ocean, so that he asserts that 
there are eight-and-fifty Indian rivers which are 
all of them navigable. But even Megasthenes, 
so far as appears, did not travel over much of 
India, though no doubt he saw more of it than 
those who came with Alexander the son of Philip, 
for, as he tells us, he resided at the court of 
Sandrakottos, the greatest king in India, 
and also at the court of P 6 r o s, who was 
still greater than he. This same Megasthenes 
then informs us that the Indians neither 

invade other men, nor do other men invade the 

• 

II Taurunu m. — The modem S e m 1 i n. 



Digitized by 



Google 



19.^ 



Indians : for S e s o Sit r i s the Egyptian, after 
having overrun the greater part of Asia, and 
advanced with his army as far as Europe, re- 
turned home ; and Idanthyrsos the Skythian 
issuing from Skythia, subdued many nations of 
Asia, and carried his victorious arms even to the 
borders of Egypt ; and S e m i r a m i s, again, the 
Assyrian queen, took in hand an expedition 
against India, but died before she could execute 
her design : and thus Alexander was the only 
conqueror who actually invaded the country. 
And regarding Dionysos many traditions are 
current to the effect that he also made an ex- 
pedition into India, and subjugated the Indians 
before the days of Alexander . But ofHerakles 
tradition does not say much. Of the expedition, 
however, which Bakkhos led, the city of N y s a 
is no mean monument, while Mount M e r o s is 
yet another, and the ivy which grows thereon, 
and the practice observed by the Indians them- 
selves of marching to battle with drums and 
cymbals, and of wearing a spotted dress such as 
was worn by the Bacchanals of Dionysos. On 
the other hand, there are but few memorials of 
Herakl^s, and it may be doubted whether even 
these are genuine : for the assertion that Herakl^s 
was not able to take the rock A o r n o s, which 
Alexander seized by force of arms, seems to me 
all a Makedonian vaunt, quite of a piece with 
their calling Parapamiso s — K a u k a s o s, 
though it had no connexion at all with K a u k a- 



Digitized by 



Google 



196 

8 8. In the same spirit, when they noticed a care 
in the dominions of the Parapamisadai, 
they asserted that it was the cave of P r o m e- 
t h e u s the Titan, in which he had heen sus* 
pended for stealing the fire.^ So also when they 
came among the Sibai, an Indian tribe, and 
noticed that they wore skins, they declared that 
the Sibai were descended from those who be- 
longed to the expedition of HeraklSs and had been 
left behind : for, besides being dressed in skins, 
the Sibai carry a cudgel, and brand on the backs 
of their oxen the representation of a club, 
wherein the Makedonians recognized a memorial 
of the club of HeraklSs. But if any one believes 
all this, then this must be another Herakles, — 
not the Theban, but either the Tyrian or the Egyp- 
tian, or even some great king who belonged to 
the upper country which lies not far from India. 
YI. Let this be said by way of a digression to 
discredit the accounts which some writers have 
given of the Indians beyond the H y p h a s i s, 
for those writers who were in Alexander's ex- 
pedition are not altogether unworthy of our faith 
when they describe India as far as the Hyphasis. 
Beyond that limit we have no real knowledge 
of the country : since this is the sort of account 
which Megasthen^s gives us of an Indian river : — 
Its name is the Silas; it flows from a fountain. 



% The Cave of Promethen s. — Probably one of the 
Tast caves in the neighbourhood of B a m i a n. 



Digitized by 



Google 



197 

called after the river, through the dominions of 
the S i I ae a n s, who again are called after the 
river and the fountain; the water of the river 
manifests this singular property — that there is 
nothing which it can huoy up, nor anything which 
can swim or float in it, but everything sinks down 
to the bottom, so that there is nothing in the 
world so thin and unsubstantial as this water.* 
But to proceed. Rain falls in India during the 
summer, especially on the mountains P a r a p a- 
m i s o s and £ m o d o s and the range of I m a o s, 
and the rivers which issue from these are large 
and muddy. Rain during the same season falls 
also on the plains of India, so that much of the 
country is submerged : and indeed the army of 
Alexander was obliged at the time of midsum- 
mer to retreat in haste from the AkesinSs, 
because its waters overflowed the adjacent plains. 
So we may by analogy infer from these facts 
that as the N i 1 e is subject to similar inunda- 
tions, it is probable that rain falls during the 
summer on the mountains of Ethiopia, and 
that the Nile swollen with these rains overflows 
its banks and inundates Egypt. We find, at any 
rate, that this river, like those we have men- 
tioned, flows at the same season of the year 
with a muddy current, which could not be 
the case if it flowed from melting snows, nor 
yet if its waters were driven back from its 

* See note, p. 65. 



Digitized by 



Google 



198 

mouth by the force of the Etesian winds 
which blow throughout the hot season, f and 
that it should flow from melting snow is all the 
more unlikely as snow cannot fall upon the 
Ethiopian moimtains, on account of the burning 
heat ; but that rain should fall on them, as on 
the Indian mountains, is not beyond probability, 
since India in other respects besides is not 
unlike Ethiopia. Thus the Indian rivers, like 
the Nile in Ethiopia and Egypt, breed croco- 
diles, while some of them have fish and mon- 
strous creatures such as are found in the Nile, 
with the exception only of the hippopotamus, 
though Onesikritos asserts that they breed 
this animal also. With regard to the inhabit- 
ants, there is no great difference in type of 
figure between the Indians and the Ethiopians, 
though the Indians, no doubt, who hve in the 
south-west bear a somewhat closer resemblance 
to the Ethiopians, being of black complexion 
and black-haired, though they are not so 
snub-nosed nor have the hair so curly ; while 
the Indians who live further to the north are in 
person liker the Egyptians. 

VII. The Indian tribes, Megasthends tells 
us, number in all 118. [And I so far agree 
with him as to allow that they must be indeed 
numerous, but when he gives such a precise 
estimate I am at a loss to conjecture how he 

t Cf. Herodotus, II. 20-27. 



Digitized by 



Google 



199 

arrived at it, for the greater part of India he 
did not visit, nor is mutual intercourse main- 
tained between all the tribes.] He tells us further 
that the Indians were in old times nomadic, hke 
those Skythians who did not till the soil, but 
roamed about in their wagons, as the seasons 
varied, from one part of Skythia to another, 
neither dwelling in towns nor worshipping in 
temples ; and that the Indians likewise had nei- 
ther towns nor temples of the gods, but were so 
barbarous that they wore the skins of such wild 
animals as they could kill, and subsisted on the 
bark of trees ; that these trees were called in 
Indian speech tala, and that there grew on them, 
as there grows at the tops of the palm-trees, a 
fruit resembling balls of wool -,% that they subsisted 
also on such wild animals as they could catch, 
eating the flesh raw, — before, at least, the com- 
ing of D i o n y s o s into India. Dionysos, how- 
ever, when he came and had conquered the people, 
founded cities and gave laws to these cities, and 
introduced the use of wine among the Indians, as 
he had done among the Greeks, and taught them 
to sow the land, himself supplying seeds for the 
purpose, — either because Triptolemos, when 
he was sent byD^moter to sow all the earth, 
did not reach these parts, or this must have been 
some Dionysos who came to India before Trip- 
tolemos, and gave the people the seeds of 

X Tala. — The fan-palm, the Borassus JlahelUformis of 
botany. 



Digitized by 



Google 



200 

cultivated plants. It is also said that Dionysos 
first yoked oxen to the plough, and made many 
of the Indians hushandmen instead of nomads, 
and furnished them with the implements of agri- 
culture ; and that the Indians worship the other 
gods, and Dionysos himself in particular, with 
cymbals and drums, because he so taught them ; 
and that he also taught them the Satyric dance, 
or, as the Greeks call it, the Kordax ; and that he 
instructed the Indians to let their hair grow long 
in honour of the god, and to wear the turban ; 
and that he taught them to anoint themselyes 
with unguents, so that eyen up to the time of 
Alexander the Indians were marshalled for 
battle to the sound of cymbals and drums. 

VIII. But when he was leairing India, after 
haying established the new order of things, he 
appointed, it is said, Spatembas, one of his 
companions and the most conyersant with Bakkhic 
matters, to be the king of the country. When 
Spatembas died his son B o u d y a s succeeded 
to the sovereignty ; the father reigning over the 
Indians fifty-two years, and the son twenty ; the 
son of the latter, whose name was Kradeuas, 
duly inherited the kingdom, and thereafter the 
succession was generally hereditary, but that 
when a failure of heirs occurred in the royal house 
the Ii^dians elected their sovereigns on the prin- 
ciple of merit ;HSrakles, however, who is cur- 
rently reported to have come aa a stranger into 
the country, is said to have been in reality a native 



Digitized by 



Google 



201 

of India. This HSrakles is held in especial ho* 
nour by the Sourasenoi, an Indian tribe who 
possess two large cities, M e t h o r a and C 1 e i s o- 
bora, and through whose country flows a nayiga- 
ble river called the I o b a r e s. But the dress 
which this Hdrakles wore, Megasthen^ tells us, 
resembled that oftheTheban HSrakles, as 
the Indians themselves admit. It is further said 
that he had a very numerous progeny of male 
children bom to him in India (for, like his The* 
ban namesake, he married many wives), but that 
he had only one daughter. The name of this 
child was P a n d a i a, and the land in which she 
was bom, and with the sovereignty of which 
Herakles entrasted her, was called after her name, 
P a n d a i a, and she received from the hands 
of her father 500 elephants, a force of cavalry 
4000 strong, and another of infantry consisting 
of about 130,000 men. Some Indian writers say 
further of Herakles that when he was going over 
the world and ridding land and sea of whatever 
evil monsters infested them, he found in the sea 
an ornament for women, which even to this day 
the Indian traders who bring us their wares 
eagerly buy up and carry away to foreign markets, 
while it is even more eagerly bought up by 
the wealthy Romans of to-day, as it was wont to 
be by the wealthy Greeks long ago. This article 
is the sea-pearl, called in the Indian tongue 
margariia. But Herakles, it is said, appreciating 
its beauty as a wearing ornament, caused it to 
z 



v*'r^'"0(io"' Google 



202 

be brought from all the sea into India, that he • 
might adorn ¥rith it the person of his daughter. 

Megasthen^s informs us that the oyster which 
yields this pearl is there fished for with nets, 
and that in these same parts the oysters lire in 
the sea in shoals like bee-swarms : for oysters, like 
bees, have a king or a queen, and if any one is 
lucky enough to catch the king he readily en- 
closes in the net all the rest of the shoal, but if 
the king makes his escape there is no chance that 
the others can be caught. The fishermen allow 
the fleshy parts of such as they catch to rot 
away, and keep the bone, which forms the orna- 
ment : for the pearl in India is worth thrice its 
weight in refined gold, gold being a product of 
the Indian mines. 

IX. Now in that part of the country where 
the daughter of Hdrakles reigned as queen, it is 
said that the women when seven years old are of 
marriageable age, and that the men live at most 
forty years, and that on this subject there is 
a tradition current among the Indians to the 
effect that HSrakles, whose daughter was bom 
to him late in life, when he saw that his end 
was near, and he knew no man his equal in 
rank to whom he could give her in marriage, 
had incestuous intercourse with the girl when 
she was seven years of age, in order that 
a race of kings sprung from their common 
blood might be left to rule over India; that 
HSrakles therefore made her of suitable age for 



Digitized 



by Google 



203 

marriage, and that in conseqaence the whole 
nation over which P a n d a i a reigned obtained 
this same privilege from her father. Now to me 
it seems that, even if Herakles could have done 
a thing so marvellous, he could also have made 
himself longer-lived, in order to have intercourse 
with his daughter when she was of mature age. 
But in fact, if the age at which the women 
there are marriageable is correctly stated, this is 
quite consistent, it seems to me, with what is 
said of the men's age, — that those who live long- 
est die at forty ; for men who come so much 
sooner to old age, and with old age to death, must 
of course flower into full manhood as much earlier 
as their life ends earlier. It follows hence that 
men of thirty would there bc' in their green old 
age, and young men would at twenty be past 
puberty, while the stage of of full puberty would 
be reached about fifteen. And, quite compatibly 
with this, the women might be marriageable at 
the age of seven. And why not, when Megasthenes 
declares that the very fruits of the country ripen 
faster than fruits elsewhere, and decay faster ? 

From the time of Dionysos to Sandra- 
kottosthe Indians counted 153 kings and a 
period of 6042 years, but among these a republic 
was thrice established * * * * and another 
to 300 years, and another to 120 years. § The 

§ It is not known from wliat sources Meg^asthen^ deiiyed 
these figares, which are extremely modest when compared 
with those of Indian chronology, where, as in geology, 
years are hardly reckoned but in myriads. For a notice of 



Digitized by 



Google 



204 

Indians also tell ns that Dionysos was earlier 
than Hdraklesby fifteen generations, and 
that except him no one made a hostile invasion 
of India, — not even K y r o s the son of Eambyses, 
although he undertook an expedition against the 
Skythians, and otherwise showed himself the 
most enterprising monarch in all Asia ; but that 
Alexander indeed came and overthrew in 
war all whom he attacked, and would even have 
conquered the whole world had his army been 
willing to follow him. On the other hand, a 
sense of justice, they say, prevented any Indian 
king from attempting conquest beyond the limits 
of India. 

X. It is farther said that the Indians do not 
rear monuments to the dead, but consider the 
virtuesr which men have displayed in life, and 
the songs in which their praises are celebrated, 
sufficient to preserve their memory after death. 
But of their cities it is said that the number is 
so great that it cannot be stated with precision, 
but that such cities as are situated on the banks 
of rivers or on the sea-coast are built of wood, for 
were they built of brick they would not last long 
— so destructive are the rains, and also the rivers 
when they overflow their banks and inundate the 
plains ; those cities, however, which stand on com- 
manding situations and lofty eminences are built 
of brick and mud. The greatest city in India is 

the Magadha dynasties see Elphinstooe's History of 
India, bk. III. cap. iii. 



Digitized by 



Google 



205 

that which is called Palimbothra, in the 
dominions of the PraBians,|| where the streams 
of the Erannoboas and the Ganges unite, — 
the Ganges being the greatest of all rivers, and 
the Erannoboas being perhaps the third largest 
of Indian rivers, though greater than the great- 
est rivers elsewhere ; but it is smaller than the 
Ganges where it falls into it. Megasthends 
says further of this city that the inhabited part of 
it stretched on either side to an extreme length 
of eighty stadia, and that its breadth was fifteen 
stadia, and that a ditch encompassed it all round, 
which was six plethra in breadth and thirty cubits 
in depths and that the wall was crovmed vnth 
five hundred and seventy towers and had four-and- 
sixty gates.^ The same writer tells us further this 

il The P r a 8 i o i.— In the notes which the reader will 
find at pp. 9 and 57, the accepted explanation of the 
name Prasioi, by which the Greeks designated th« 
people of Magadha, has been stated. General Cunningham 
explains it d^erently: — "Strabo and PKny," he says, 
"agree with Arrian in calling the people of Palibo- 
thra by the name of Prasii, which modern writers have 
nnanimoosly referred to the Sanskrit P r d c h y a, or ' east- 
em.' But it seems to me that Prasii is only the Greek 
form of PalfisaorParfisa, which is an actual and 
well-known name of M a g a d h a, of which Palibothra was 
the capital. It obtained this name from the Paldsa, or 
Butea Jrovdosa, which still grows as luxuriantly in the 
province as in the time of Hi wen Thsfing. The common 
form of the name is P a r & s, or when quickly pronounced 
P r & s, which I take to be the true original of the Greek 
Prasii. This derivation is supported by the spelling of 
the name given by Curtius, who calls the people Pharrasii, 
which is an almost exact transcript of the Indian name 
Parasiya. The Praxiakos of ^lian is only the derivative 
from Palfisaka." 

% The more usual and the more accurate form of the name 
is Palibothra, a transcription of PAUputra, the spoken 



Digitized by 



Google 



206 

remarkable fact about India, that all the Indians 
are free, and not one of them is a slave. The 

form of PAtalvputray the name of tlie ancient capital of 
Magadha, and a name still occasionally applied to the 
city of P&tnA, which is its modem representative. The 
word, whict means the son of the i/rumpet-Jlower {Bigno- 
nia suaveolens), appears in several different forms. A pro- 
vincial form, Pdiatiputrika, is common in the popular 
tales. The form in the Pam^chatantra is P&talipntra, which 
Wilson (Introd. to the Dasa Kamara Charitra) considered 
to be the true original name of the city of which P&tali- 
putra was a mere corruption, — sanctioned, however, by com- 
mon usage. In a Sansknt treatise of geography of a 
somewhat recent date, called the Kshetra Samasa, the form 
of the name is PAUhhAttaf which is a near approach to 
PaUhotra, The Ceylon chroniclers invariably wrote the 
name as P&tiliputto, and in the inscription of A^ka at 
Gim&r it is vmtten Pfitaliputta. The earliest name of the 
place, according to the Rmidya/rMkf was Kausambi, as having 
been founded by Kusa, the father of the famous sage Visva- 
mitra. It was also called, espeoiallv by the poete, Pash- 
papura or Kusumapura, which has the same meaning — * the 
city ofjlowers/ This city, though the least ancient of all 
the greater capitals in Gfangetic India, was destined to 
become the most famous of them aU. The Vayu Pv/rdma, 
attributes its foundation to Udaya (called also iJdayasva), 
who mounted the throne of Magadha in the year 519 B.C., 
or 24 years after the Nirv&ftia {Vishnu Purdna, p. 467, n. 15 ; 
Lassen, Ind. Alt. II. p. 63 j. P&taliputra did not, however, 
according to the Cingalese chronicles, become the residence 
of tiie kijags of Magadha till the reign of E&ldsdka, ^ho 
ascended the throne 453 B. c. Under Chandragupta (the 
Sandrakottos of the Greeks), who founded the Buddhistic 
dynasty of the Mauriyas, the kingdom was extended from 
the mouths of the Ganges to the regions beyond the Indus, 
and became in fact the paramount power in India. Nor 
was P&taHputra — ^to judge from the account of its size and 
splendour given here by Arrian, and in Frag. XXV. by 
Strabo, who both copied it from Megasthen^s — ^unworthy ta 
be the capital of so great an empire. Its happy position at 
the confluence of the Sdn and Ganges, and opposite the 
junction of the Gandak with their united stream, naturally 
made it a great centre of commerce, which would no doubt 
greatly increase its wealth and prosperity. Asdka, who 
was tmrd in succession from Chandragupta, and who made 
Buddhism the state religion, in his inscription on the rock 
at DhftuH in Katak, gives it the title of Metropolis of the 
ReUgion, i.e. of i^uddhism. The wooden wall bv which, as 
Megastheuds tells us, it was surrounded, veas still standing 



Digitized by 



Google 



207 

Lakedaimonians and the Indians here so 
far agree. The Lakedaimonians, however, hold 

seven centtiries later than his time, for it was seen about 
the beginning of the 5th centnry after Christ by the Chi- 
nese traveller Fa-Hian, who thus writes of PMipntra, 
whidi he calls Fa-lian-fn : — " The city was the capitisil of 
kinsr A-yon (Asdka). The palaces of the king which are 
in the city have walls of wnich the stones have been col- 
lected by the genii. The carvings and the scnlptores which 
ornament the windows are such as this age conld not make ; 
they still actually exist." These * palaces of the king' are 
mentioned by Dioddros in his epitome of Megasthenes, as 
will be seen by a reference to p. 39. It was in the 
interval which separates the journey of Fa-Hian from that 
of his compatriot Hiwen Thsang — that is, between the year 
400 and the year 632 after Chnst— that the fall of P&tali- 
putra was accomplished, for where the splendid metro- 
polis had once stood Hiwen Ths&ng found nothing but 
ruins, and a village containing about two or three hundred 
houses. The cause of its downfall and decay is un- 
known. The ruins seen by the Chinese traveller are 
no longer visible, but lie buried deep below the foun- 
dations of modern P&tnft. An excavation quite recentlv 
made in that city for the construction of a public tank 
placed this fact beyond question ; for, when the workmen 
had dug down to a depl^ of 12 or 15 feet below the surface 
of the ground, some remains were discovered of what must 
have been the wooden wall spoken of by Megasthen^s. 
I have received from a friend who iuspected the excavation 
the following particulars of this interesting and remarkable 
discovery : — " During the cold season 1876, whilst digging 
a tank in Sheikh Mithia Ghari, a part of P&tn& almost 
equally distant from the chauk (market-place) and the 
railway station, the excavators, at a depth of some 12 or 15 
feet below the swampy surface, discovered the remains 
of a long brick wall running from N.W. to S.E. How far 
this wall extended beyond the limits of the excavation — 
probably more than a hundred yajcda — it is impossible to 
say. Not far from the wall, and almost parallel to it, was 
found a line of palisades ; the strong timber of which it was 
composed inclined slightly towards the wall. In one place 
there appeared to have been some sort of outlet, for two 
wooden pillaw rising to a height of some 8 or 9 feet above 
what had evidently been the ancient level of the place, and 
between which no trace of palisades could be discovered, 
had all the ai>pearance of door or gate posts. A number 
of wells and sinks were also found, their mouths being in 
each case indicated by heaps of fragments of broken mud 
vessels. From the best-preserved specimens of these, it 



Digitized by 



Google 



208 

the H e I o t s as slaves, and these Helots do servile 
labour; but the Indians do not even use aliens as 
slaves, and much less a countryman of their own. 
XI. But further : in India the whole people 



appeared that their shape mtist hare differed from that of 
those now in use. One of the wells having been cleared 
out, it was fonnd to yield capital drinking water, and 
among the rubbish taken out of it were discovered several 
iron spear-heads, a fragment of a large vessel, &c." The 
fact thus established — that old Palibothra, audits wall with 
it, are deep underground — takes away all probability from 
the supp6sition of Kavenshaw that the large mounds near 
PatnA (called Panch-Pahfiri, or * five hills'), consisting of 
ddhris and bricks, may be the remains of towers or bas- 
tions of the ancient city. The identity of P&taliputra with 
P&tn& was a question not settled without much p>reviouB 
controversy. D' Anville, as has been already stated, misled by 
the assertion of Pliny that the Jomanes ( Janm&) flows 
through the Palibothri into the Ganges, referred its site 
to the position of Allahlib^, where these two rivers unite. 
Bennel, again, thought it might be identical with Kanauj, 
though he afterwards abandoned this opinion ; while WiHom 
placed it on the left bank of the Ganges at some distance 
to tiie north of B&jmahAl, and Francklin at BhSgalpibr. 
The main objection to the claims of Pfitnft — its not being 
situated at the confluence of any river with the Ganges — 
was satisfactorily disposed of when in the course of research 
it was brought to light that the S6n was not only iden- 
tical with the Erranoboas, but that up to the year 1379, 
when it formed a new channel for itself, it had joined the 
Ganges in the neighbourhood of P&tn&. I may conclude 
this notice by quoting from Strabo a description of a pro- 
cession such as Megasthends (from whose work Strabo 
Very probably drew lus information) must have seen parad- 
ing thestreete of Palibothra : — "In processions at their fes- 
tivals many elephants are in the train, adorned with gold 
and silver, numerous carriages drawn by four horses and 
by several pairs of oxen ; then follows a body of attendants 
in full dress, (bearing) vessels of gold, large basins and gob- 
lets an orauia in breadth, tables, chairs of state, drinMng- 
cups, and lavers of Indian copper, most of which were set 
with precious stones, as emeralds, beryls, and Indian car- 
buncles ; garments .embroidered and interwoven with gold ; 
wild beasts, as buffiiloes, panthers, tame lions ; and a mul- 
titude of birds of variegated plumage and of fine song." — 
Bohn*8 Transl. of Strabo, III. p. 117. 



Digitized by 



Google 



209 

are divided into about seven castes. Among 
these are the Sophists, who are not so numerous 
as the others, but hold the supreme place of 
dignity and honour, — forthey are under no necessity 
of doing any bodily labour at all, or of contribut- 
ing from the produce of their labour anything 
to the common stock, nor indeed is any duty 
absolutely binding on them except to perform 
the sacrifices offered to the gods on behalf of the 
state. If any one, again, has a private sacrifice to 
offer, one of these sophists shows him the proper 
mode, as if he could not otherwise make an ac- 
ceptable offering to the gods. To this class the 
knowledge of divination among ,the Indians is 
exclusively restricted, and none but a sophist is 
allowed to practise that art. They predict about 
such matters as the seasons of the year, and any 
calamity which may befall the state; but the 
private fortunes of individuals they do not care to 
predict, — either because divination does not con- 
cern itself with trifling matters, or because to 
take any trouble about such is deemed unbecom- 
ing. But if any one fails thrice to predict truly, 
he incurs, it is said, no further penalty than being 
obUged to be silent for the future, and there is no 
power on earth able to compel that man to speak 
who has once been condemned to silence. These 
sages go naked, living during winter in the open 
air to enjoy the sunshine, and during summer, 
when the heat is too powerful, in meadows and 
low grounds under large trees, the shadow where- 



Digitized by 



Google 



210 

of Nearchos says extends to five plethra in circuit, 
adding that even ten thousand men* could be 
covered by the shadow of a single tree. They 
live upon the fruits which each season produces, 
and on the bark of trees, — the bark being no less 
sweet and nutritious than the fruit of the date- 
palm. 

After these, the second caste consists of the 
tillers of the soil, who form the most 
numerous class of the population. They are nei- 
ther furnished with arms, nor have any military 
duties to perform, but they cultivate the soil and 
pay tribute to the kings and the independent 
cities. In times of civil war the soldiers are 
not allowed to molest the husbandmen or ravage 
their lands : hence, while the former are fighting 
and killing each other as they can, the latter may 
be seen close at hand tranquilly pursuing their 
work, — perhaps ploughing, or gathering in their 
crops, pruning the trees, or reaping the harvest. 

The third caste among the Indians consists 
of the herdsmen, both shepherds and neat- 
herds ; and these neither live in cities nor in 

* Cf. the description of the same tree quoted from One- 
sikritos, Strabo XV. i. 21. Cf . also Milton's description of 
it in Pa/radise Lost, bk. ix., 11. 1100 et seqq. : — 
" There soon they chose 
The fig-tree, not that kind for fruit renowned, 
But such as at this day to Indians known 
In Malabar or Deccan spreads her arms 
Branching so broad and long that in the ground 
The bended twigs take root, and daughters grow 
About the mother tree, a pillared shade 
High overarched, and echoing walks between." 



Digitized by 



Google 



211 

villages, but they are nomadic and live on the 
hills. They too are subject to tribute, and this 
they pay in cattle. They scour the country in 
pursuit of fowl and wild beasts. 

KII. The fourth caste consists of h a n d i- 
craftmen and retail-dealers. They 
have to perform gratuitously certain public ser- 
vices, and to pay tribute from the products of 
their labour. An exception, however, is made 
in favour of those who fabricate the weapons of 
war, — ^and not only so, but they even draw 
pay from the state. In this class are included 
shipbuilders, and the sailors employed in t|ie 
navigation of the rivers. 

The fifth caste among the Indians consists 
of the warriors, who are second in point 
of numbers to the husbandmen, but lead a 
life of supreme freedom and enjoyment. They 
have only military duties to perform. Others 
make their arms, and others supply them with 
horses, and they have others to attend on them 
in the camp, who take care of their horses, clean 
their arms, drive their elephants, prepare their 
chariots, and act as their charioteers. As long as 
they are required to fight they fight, and when 
peace returns they abandon themselves to enjoy- 
ment, — the pay which they receive from the state 
being so liberal that they can with ease main- 
tain themselves and others besides. 

The sixth class consists of those called s u- 
perintendents. They spy out what goes 



Digitized by 



Google 



212 

on in country and town, and report everything 
to the king where the people have a king, and 
to the magistrates where the people are self- 
' governed,t and it is against use and wont for 
these to give in a false report ; — hut indeed no 
Indian is accused of lying. 

The seventh caste consists of the council- 
lors of state, who advise the king, or the 
magistrates of self-governed cities, in the man- 
agement of public affairs. In point of numbers 
this is a small class, but it is distinguished by 
superior wisdom and justice, and hence enjoys 
the prerogative of choosing governors, chiefs of 
provinces, deputy-governors, superintendents of 
the treasury, generals of the army, admirals 6f 
the navy, controllers, and commissioners wha 
superintend agriculture. 

The custom of the country prohibits inter- 
marriage between the castes : — for instance, the 
husbandman cannot take a wife from the artizan 
caste, nor the artizan a wife from the husband- 
man caste. Custom also prohibits any one from 
exercising two trades, or from changing from one 
caste to another. One cannot, for instance, 
become a husbandman if he is a herdsman, or 

f " There have always been extensive tracts without any 
common head, some nnder petty chiefs, and some formed 
of independent villages: in troubled times, also towns 
have often for a long period carried on their own govern- 
ment. All these would be called repiblics by the Greeks, 
who would naturally fancy their constitutions similar to 
what they had seen at home." — Elphinstone's History of 
India, p. 240. 



Digitized by 



Google 



213 

become a herdsman if he is an artizan. It is per- 
mitted that the sophist only be from any caste : 
for the Hfe of the sophist is not an easy one, but 
the hardest of all. 

XIII. The Indians hunt all wild animals in 
the same way as the Greeks, except the elephant, 
which is hunted in a mode altogether peculiar, 
since these animals are not like any others. 
The mode may be thus described : — The hunters 
having selected a level tract of arid ground dig a 
trench all round it, enclosing as much space as 
would suffice to encamp a large army. They 
make the trench with a breadth of five fathoms 
and a depth of four. But the earth which they 
ihrow out in the process of digging they heap up 
in mounds on both edges of the trench, and use 
it as a wall. Then they make huts for them- 
selves by excavating the wall on the outer edge of 
the trench, and in these they leave loopholes, 
both to admit light, and to enable them to see 
when their prey approaches and enters the enclo- 
sure. They next station some three or four of 
their best-trained she-elephants within the trap, to 
which they leave only a single passage by means 
of a bridge thrown across the trench, the frame- 
work of which they cover over with earth 
and a great quantity of straw, to conceal the 
bridge as much as possible from the wild animals, 
which might else suspect treachery. The hunters 
then go out of the way, retiring to the cells which 
they had made in the earthen wall. Now the 



Digitized by 



Google 



214 

wild elephants do not go near inhabited places 
in the day-time, but during the night-time they 
wander about everywhere, and feed in herds, 
following as leader the one who is biggest and 
boldest, just as cows follow bulls. As soon, then, 
as they approach the enclosure, and hear the cry 
and catch scent of the females, they rush at full 
speed in the direction of the fenced ground, and 
being arrested by the trench move round its edge 
until they fall in with the bridge, along which 
they force their way into the enclosure. The 
hunters meanwhile, perceiving the entrance of the 
wild elephants, hasten, some of them, to take 
away the bridge, while others, running off to the 
nearest villages, announce that the elephants 
are within the trap. The villagers, on hearing 
the news, mount their most spirited and best- 
trained, elephants, and as soon as mounted ride 
off to the trap ; but, though they ride up to it, 
they do not immediately engage in a conflict 
with the wild elephants, but wait till these are 
sorely pinched by hunger and tamed by thirst ; 
when they think their strength has been enough 
weakened, they set up the bridge anew and ride into 
the enclosure, when a fierce assault is made by the 
tame elephants upon those that have been en- 
trapped, and then, as might be expected, the wild 
elephants, through loss of spirit and faintness from 
hunger, are overpowered. On this the hunters, dis- 
mounting from their elephants, bind with fetters 
the feet of the wild ones, now by this time quite 



Digitized by 



Google 



215 

exhausted. Then they instigate the tame ones to 
beat them with repeated blows, until their suflPer- 
ings wear them out and they fall to the ground. 
The hunters meanwhile, standing near them, slip 
nooses over their necks and mount them while 
yet lying on the ground ; and, to prevent them 
shaking ofiF their riders, or douig mischief other- 
wise, make with a sharp knife an incision all round 
their neck, and fasten the noose round in the 
incision. By means of the wound thus made they 
keep their head and neck quite steady : for if 
they become restive and turn round, the wound is 
galled by the action of the rope. They shun, 
therefore, violent movements, and, knowing that 
they have been vanquished, suffer themselves to 
be led in fetters by the tame ones. 

XIV. But such as are too young, or through 
the weakness of their constitution not worth keep- 
^ing, their captors allow to escape to their old 
haunts ; while those which are retained they lead 
to the villages, where at first they give them 
green stalks of corn and grass to eat. The crea- 
tures, however, having lost all spirit, have no wish 
to eat ; but the Indians, standing round them in 
a circle, soothe and cheer them by chanting songs 
to the accompaniment of the music of drums and 
cymbals, for the elephant is of all brutes the 
most intelligent. Some of them, for instance, 
have taken up their riders when slain in battle 
and carried them away for burial; others have 
covered them, when lying on the ground, with a 



Digitized by 



Google 



216 

shield ; and others have borae the brunt of battle 
in their defence when fallen. There was one even 
that died of remorse and despair because it had 
killed its rider in a fit of rage. I have myself 
actually seen an elephant playing on cymbals, 
while other elephants were dancing to his strains: 
a cymbal had been attached to each foreleg of the 
performer, and a third to what is called his trunk, 
and while he beat in turn the cymbal on his trunk 
he beat in proper time those on his two legs. 
The dancing elephants all the while kept danc- 
ing in a circle, and as they raised and curved 
their forelegs in turn they too moved in proper 
time, following as the musician led. 

The elephant, like the bull and the horse, 
engenders in spring, when the females emit 
breath through the spiracles beside their tem- 
ples, which open at that season. The period of 
gestation is at shortest sixteen months, and 
never exceeds eighteen. The birth is single, as 
in the case of the mare, and is suckled till it 
reaches its eighth year. The elephants that live 
longest attain an age of two hundred years, but 
many of them die prematurely of disease. If 
they die of sheer old age, however, the term of 
life is what has been stated. Diseases of their 
eyes are cured by pouring cows' milk into them, 
and other distempers by administering draughts 
of black wine ; while their wounds are cured by 
the application of roasted pork. Such are the 
remedies used by the Indians. 



Digitized by 



Google 



217 

XV. But the tiger the Indians regard as a 
ranch more powerful animal than the elephant. 
Nearchos tells us that he had seen the skin 
of a tiger, though the tiger itself he had not 
seen. The Indians, however, informed him that 
the tiger equals in size the largest horse, but that 
for swiftness and strength no other animal can be 
compared with it : for that the tiger, when it 
encounters the elephant, leaps up upon the head 
of the elephant and strangles it with ease ; but 
that those animals which we ourselves see and 
call tigers are but jackals with spotted skins and 
larger than other jackals. J In the same way with 
regard to ants also, Nearchos says that he 
had not himself seen a specimen of the sort which 
other writers declared to exist in India, though 
he had seen many skins of them which had b^en 
brought into the Makedonian camp. But M e- 
gasthends avers that the tradition about the 
ants is strictly true, — that they are gold-diggers, 
not for the sake of the gold itself, but because by 
instinct they burrow holes in the earth to lie in, 
just as the tiny ants of our own country dig 
little holes for themselves, only those in India 
being larger than foxes make their burrows pro- 
portionately larger. But the ground is impreg- 
nated with gold, and the Indians thence obtain 
their gold. Now Megasthen^s writes what he 
had heard from hearsay, and as I have no ex- 

X Leopards are meant. 



Digitized by 



Google 



218 

acter infonnation to give I willingly dismiss the 
subject of the ant.§ But about parrots N e a r- 
chos writes as if they were a new curiosity, 
and tells us that they are indigenous to India, 
and what-like they are, and that they speak with 
a human voice ; but since I have myself seen 
many parrots, and know others who are acquaint- 
ed with the bird, I will say nothing about it as if 
it were still unfamiliar. || Nor will I say aught of 
the apes, either touching their size, or the beauty 
which distinguishes them in India, or the' mode 
in which they are hunted, for I should only be 
stating what is well known, except perhaps the 
fact that they are beautiful. Regarding snakes, 
too, Nearchos tells us that they are caught in 
the country, being spotted, and nimble in their 
movements, and that one which P e i t h o the 
son of AntigenSs caught measured about sixteen 
cubits, though the Indians allege that the largest 
snakes are much larger. But no cure of the bite 
of the Indian snake has been found out by any 
of the Greek physicians, though the Indians, it 
is certain, can cure those who have been bitten.^ 
And Nearchos adds this, that Alexander had 
all the most skilful of the Indians in the healing 
art collected around him, and had caused procla- 
mation to be made throughout the camp that if 

§ See notes to pp. 94 and 96. 

II Quia ezpedivit 2>stt<aco ewam XAIBE.—Persias, Frol. 
to Sat. 1. 8. 
1 Thu is, xmfortonately, one of Uie lost arts. 



Digitized by 



Google 



219 

any one were bitten he should repair to the royal 
tent ; but these very same men were able to cure 
other diseases and pains also. With many bodily 
pains, however, the Indians are not afflicted, be- 
cause in their country the seasons are genial. In 
the case of an attack of severe pain they consult 
the sophists, and these seemed to cure whatever 
diseases could be cured not without divine help.* 
XVI. The dress worn by the Indians is made 
of cotton, as Nearchos tells us, — cotton pro- 
duced from those trees of which mention has 
already been made.f But this cotton is either of 
a brighter white colour than any cotton found 
elsewhere, or the darkness of the Indian com- 
plexion makes their apparel look so much the 
whiter. They wear an under-garment of cotton 
which reaches below the knee halfway down to the 
ankles, and also an upper garment which they 
throw partly over their shoulders, and partly 
twist in folds round their head. J The Indians wear 

• That is, by the use of charms : see Strabo XV. i. 45. 

t A slip on the part of Arrian, as no previous mention 
has been made of the cotton-tree. 

X " The valuable properties of the cotton- wool produced 
from the cotton-shrub {Oossypium herbaceum) were early 
discovered. And we read in Rig-veda hymns of 'Day 
and Night' like * two famous female weavers' intertwining 

the extended thread Cotton in its manufactured state 

was new to the Greeks who accompanied Alexander the 
Great to India. They describe Hindus as clothed in gar- 
ments made from wool which grows on trees. One cloth, 
they say, reaches to the middle of the leg, whilst another 
is folded round the shoulders. Hindus still dress in the 
fashion thus described, which is also alluded to in old 
Sanskrit Hterature. In the frescoes on the caves of Ajanta 
this costume is carefully represented .... The cloth 
which Nearchus speaks of as reaching to the middle of the 



Digitized by 



Google 



220 

also earrings of iyotj, but only such of them do 
this as are yery wealthy, for all Indians do not 
wear them. Their beards, Nearchos tells US| 
they dye of one hue and another, according to 
taste. Some dye their white beards to make 
them look as white as possible, but others dye 
them blue ; while some again prefer a red tint, 
some a purple, and others a rank green. § Such 
Indians, he also says, as are thought anything of, 
use parasols as a screen from the heat. They 
wear shoes made of white leather, and these are 
elaborately trimmed, while the soles are yariegated, 
and made of great thickness, to make the wearer 
seem so much the taller. 

I proceed now to describe the mode in which 
the Indians equip themselves for war, premising 
that it is not to be regarded as the only one in 
yogue. The foot-soldiers carry a bow made of 
equal length with the man who bears it. This 
they rest upon the ground, and pressing against 
it with their left foot thus discharge the arrow, 
having drawn the string far backwards : for the 
shaft they use is little short of being three 

leg is the Dhoti. It is from 2^ to 3^ yards long by 2 to 

3 feet broad It is a costume much resembling that of a 

Greek statue, and the only change observable within 3,000 
years is, that the Dhoti may now be somewhat broader 
and longer." — Mrs. Manning's Ancient and MedUcBval 
India, vol. II. pp. 356-8. 

§ Perhaps some of these colours were but transition 
shades assumed by the dye before settling to its final hue. 
The readers of Warren's Ten Thousand a Yea/r will 
remember the plight of the hero of the tale when having 
dyed his hair he found it, chameleon-like, changing from 
hue to hue. This cuetom is mentioned also by Strabo. 



Digitized by 



Google 



221 

yards long, and there is nothing which can re- 
sist an Indian archer's shot, — neither shield 
nor breastplate, nor any stronger defence if such 
there be. In their left hand they carry bucklers 
made of undressed ox-hide, which are not so 
broad as those who carry them, but are about 
as long. Some are equipped with javelins in- 
stead of bows, but all wear a sword, which is 
broad in the blade, but not longer than three 
cubits ; and this, when they engage in close fight 
(which they do* with reluctance), they wield 
with both hands, to fetch down a lustier blow. 
The horsemen are equipped with two lances like 
the lances called aaunia, and with a shorter 
buckler than that carried by the foot- soldiers. 
But they do not put saddles on their horses, 
nor do they curb them with bits like the bits in 
use among the Greeks or the Kelts, but they fit 
on round the extremity of the horse's mouth 
a circular piece of stitched raw ox-hide studded 
with pricks of iron or brass pointing inwards, 
but not very sharp : if a man is rich he uses 
pricks made of ivory. Within the horse's mouth 
is put an iron prong Hke a skewer, to which 
the reins are attached. When the rider, then, 
pulls the reins, the prong controls the horse, and 
the pricks which are attached to this prong 
goad the mouth, so that it cannot but obey the 
reins. 

XVII. The Indians are in person slender and 
tall, and of much lighter weight than other men. 



Digitized by 



Google 



222 

The animals used by the common sort for riding 
on are camels and horses and asses, while the 
wealthy use elephants, — for it is the elephant 
which in India carries royalty. || The conveyance 
which ranks next in honour is the chariot and 
. four ; the camel ranks third ; while to be drawn 
by a single horse is considered no- distinction at 
all.^ But Indian women, if possessed of uncom- 
mon discretion, would not stray from virtue for 
any reward short of an elephant, but on receiv- 
ing this a lady lets the giver enjoy her person. 
Nor do the Indians consider it any disgrace to 
a woman to grant her favours for an elephant, 
but it is rather regarded as a high compUment 
to the sex that their charms should be deemed 
worth an elephant They marry without either 
giving or taking dowries, but the women, as 
soon as they are marriageable, are brought 
forward by their fathers and exposed in public, 
to be selected by the victor in wrestUng or 
boxing or running, or by some one who excels 
in any other manly exercise.* The people of 
India live upon grain, and are tillers of the soil ; 
but we must except the hillmen, who eat the 
flesh of beasts of chase. 



only < 



Hence one of his names is Y Arana, implying that he not 
r carries but protects his royal rider. 
^ The efcfea, so common in the north-west of India, is no 
doubt here indicated. ^ 

* Marriage customs appear to have varied, as a reference 
to the eifaract from Strabo pp. 70-71 will show. See 
Wheeler's History of Indiay pp. 167-8. 



Digitized by 



Google 



if 



223 

It is sufficient for me to have set forth these 
facts regarding the Indians, which, as the best 
known, both Nearchos and Mega s the- 
n S s, two men of approved character, have re- 
corded. And since my design in drawing up the 
present narrative was not to describe the manners 
and customs of the Indians, but to relate how 
Alexander conveyed his army from India 
to Persia, let this be taken as a mere episode. 



Digitized by 



Google 



.*- V 



UoXFORD*] 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google 



:^ 



Digitized by 



Google 



Digitized by 



Google
